6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
9
2

 

.

 
 
]
P
E
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
5
2
0
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–14 (2016)

Printed 2 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

Full-lifetime simulations of multiple unequal-mass planets
across all phases of stellar evolution

Dimitri Veras1⋆, Alexander J. Mustill2, Boris T. G¨ansicke1, Seth Redﬁeld3,
Nikolaos Georgakarakos4, Alex B. Bowler1, Maximillian J.S. Lloyd1
1Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
2Lund Observatory, Department of Astronomy and Theoretical Physics, Lund University, Box 43, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden
3Astronomy Department and Van Vleck Observatory, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459-0123, USA
4New York University Abu Dhabi, Saadiyat Island, P.O. Box 129188, Abu Dhabi, UAE

Accepted 2016 February 25. Received 2016 February 25; in original form 2016 January 27

ABSTRACT
We know that planetary systems are just as common around white dwarfs as around
main sequence stars. However, self-consistently linking a planetary system across these
two phases of stellar evolution through the violent giant branch poses computational
challenges, and previous studies restricted architectures to equal-mass planets. Here,
we remove this constraint and perform over 450 numerical integrations over a Hubble
time (14 Gyr) of packed planetary systems with unequal-mass planets. We character-
ize the resulting trends as a function of planet order and mass. We ﬁnd that intrusive
radial incursions in the vicinity of the white dwarf become less likely as the dispersion
amongst planet masses increases. The orbital meandering which may sustain a suf-
ﬁciently dynamic environment around a white dwarf to explain observations is more
dependent on the presence of terrestrial-mass planets than any variation in planetary
mass. Triggering unpacking or instability during the white dwarf phase is comparably
easy for systems of unequal-mass planets and systems of equal-mass planets; insta-
bilities during the giant branch phase remain rare and require ﬁne-tuning of initial
conditions. We list the key dynamical features of each simulation individually as a
potential guide for upcoming discoveries.

Key words: minor planets, asteroids: general – stars: white dwarfs – meth-
ods:numerical – celestial mechanics – planet and satellites: dynamical evolution and
stability – protoplanetary discs

1

INTRODUCTION

Nearly 100 planets are known to orbit giant stars 1,
and signatures of planetary systems have been detected
at over 1000 white dwarfs. This latter number is ob-
tained through observed planetary debris in white dwarf
atmospheres (Zuckerman et al. 2003; Dufour et al. 2007;
Zuckerman et al. 2010; Kleinman et al. 2013; Koester et al.
2014; Gentile Fusillo et al. 2015; Kepler et al. 2015, 2016).
About 40 of these white dwarfs contain compact (≈ 0.6 −
1.2R⊙) planetary debris discs (see Farihi 2016 for a re-
view), and one hosts at least six transiting planetesimals
(WD 1145+017: Vanderburg et al. 2015; Croll et al. 2016;
G¨ansicke et al. 2016; Rappaport et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2016).
Also, planets around two other white dwarfs have been
observed (WD 0806-661 b: Luhman et al. 2011, and PSR

⋆ E-mail: d.veras@warwick.ac.uk
1 www.lsw.uni-heidelberg.de/users/sreﬀert/giantplanets.html

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS

B1620-26AB b: Sigurdsson et al. 2003). Although the archi-
tectures of most white dwarf planetary systems remain un-
known, these statistics demonstrate that the study of post-
main-sequence planetary systems has entered a new era, one
where we can begin to investigate population-wide trends as
well as key individual systems. N -body simulations of multi-
planet systems represent a vital probe into their history and
future, revealing insights about their formation and fate.

However, accurately performing multi-body simulations
across diﬀerent phases of stellar evolution remains chal-
lenging. For bodies much smaller than planets, including
gravity alone is likely to be insuﬃcient (see Fig. 2 of
Veras 2016). Asteroids within about 7 au of a main se-
quence star could be spun up to ﬁssion during the gi-
ant branch phase of stellar evolution (Veras et al. 2014a)
due to intense radiation. Asteroids further away could have
their orbits changed due to another radiation-based ef-
fect: the Yarkovsky drift (Veras et al. 2015a). Further, the
stellar wind could induce drag on asteroids and pebbles

2

Veras et al.

(Dong et al. 2010; Veras et al. 2015a), and sublimation of
volatile substances on these objects could change their or-
bits (Veras et al. 2015b) and/or launch ejecta, as speculated
in WD 1145+017 (Vanderburg et al. 2015; Croll et al. 2016;
G¨ansicke et al. 2016; Rappaport et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2016).
Even restricting simulations to planets presents chal-
lenges: (i) Tidal eﬀects between planets and their parent
stars can destroy or alter the planets, but just how re-
mains an open question (see Sec. 5 of Veras 2016 for a
review). Giant branch (GB) stars harbour radii that ex-
tend to several au, and planets too close to their parent
stars may hence be engulfed on both the red giant branch
(RGB) phase (e.g. Villaver et al. 2014) and the asymptotic
giant branch (AGB) phase (Mustill & Villaver 2012). Nev-
ertheless, only about half of the currently known exoplan-
ets will likely be engulfed (Nordhaus & Spiegel 2013), and
observational biases against ﬁnding planets at large separa-
tions imply that the actual fraction is much less. (ii) Com-
putational limitations hinder explorations with long main-
sequence lifetimes or planets on close-in orbits. Only re-
cently (Veras & G¨ansicke 2015) have 14 Gyr (the current
age of the Universe) simulations with main sequence pro-
genitor masses under 3M⊙ (most white dwarf progenitors
had masses between about 1.5M⊙ and 2.5M⊙; Koester et al.
2014) been carried out for ensembles of multi-planet sys-
tems2, as previous attempts (Duncan & Lissauer 1998;
Debes & Sigurdsson 2002; Veras et al. 2013a; Mustill et al.
2014) did not achieve this coverage.

Nevertheless, up until now full-lifetime simulations of
multi-planet systems have been restricted to equal-mass
planets. Although this assumption signiﬁcantly helps con-
strain the available parameter space to explore, real sys-
tems exhibit a variance of planetary masses of a few
percent to many orders of magnitude. Further, previous
studies have predominately modelled Jupiter-mass planets,
which are rarer than terrestrial planets (Cassan et al. 2012;
Winn & Fabrycky 2015). Further, no published study has
simulated multiple planets with test particles.

Here, we break these barriers, and perform a suite of 14
Gyr simulations of unequal-mass planets, occasionally in-
cluding test particles, in order to explore the consequences
and resulting trends. In Section 2, we describe our setup.
Section 3 details the classiﬁcation scheme for our results,
and the results themselves. We discuss the implications in
Section 4, and conclude in Section 5.

Appendix A is our simulation database. Each row of
each table corresponds to one simulation, and within each
row we present the salient dynamical features.

2 SIMULATION SETUP

Simulations of planetary systems through multiple stages
of stellar evolution require both the star and planets to be
treated self-consistently as a function of time.

2 A few individual planetary systems, or putative planetary sys-
tems, have been modelled with simulations spanning multiple
phases of evolution: HU Aqr (Portegies Zwart 2013) and NN Ser
(Mustill et al. 2013).

2.1 Numerical codes

Here we have used an updated version of the code
from Veras et al. (2013a), Mustill et al. (2014), Veras et al.
(2014b) and Veras & G¨ansicke (2015), which combines plan-
etary and stellar evolution. The stellar evolution is com-
puted from SSE (Hurley et al. 2000), which is more than
suﬃciently accurate for our purposes. If we instead desired
to trace more detailed characteristics of a particular star,
like its chemical proﬁle, then perhaps a code like the in-
creasingly utilized MESA (Paxton et al. 2011, 2015) would
be more suitable. However, here we need only the mass and
radius evolution of the star, and did not model any partic-
ular known system; we ignored radiative eﬀects, which are
negligible for the types of planets we simulated.

The output from SSE was ported directly into a heavily
modiﬁed version of the Mercury planetary evolution code,
originally from Chambers (1999). Our version of Mercury
used the Bulirsch-Stoer integrator throughout the simula-
tion, ensuring accurate treatment of potential close encoun-
ters. We adopted a tolerance value of 10−13. Stellar mass
and radius changes were interpolated within each Bulirsch-
Stoer timestep, helping to ensure accuracy. Stars which en-
gulfed planets throughout the course of the simulations had
masses which were increased accordingly. Our output fre-
quency was 1 Myr; a shorter frequency would have pro-
hibitively slowed down our simulations. As is the Mercury
default, any collisions between planets were treated as purely
inelastic. Further, our modiﬁed code allowed for the tracking
of the minimum orbital pericentre of all surviving planets,
and adopted a standard Hill ellipsoid for the solar neighbour-
hood (Veras & Evans 2013; Veras et al. 2014c) to accurately
track ejections.

2.2 Stellar properties

The enormous parameter space of our computationally-
demanding simulations forced us to adopt a single type of
star for our simulations. Our star contained a physically-
motivated stellar mass of 2.0M⊙ on the main sequence. The
present-day population of white dwarfs, with average masses
ranging from about 0.60M⊙ to 0.65M⊙ (Liebert et al.
2005; Falcon et al. 2010; Tremblay et al. 2013) corresponds
to main sequence A- and F-star progenitors (see Fig.
3 of Veras 2016), from which 2.0M⊙ is an appropriate
value from the initial-to-ﬁnal mass relation (Catal´an et al.
2008; Kalirai et al. 2008; Casewell et al. 2009; Koester et al.
2014). This value coincidentally also marks (i) the point be-
yond which the planet occurrence rate falls oﬀ (Reﬀert et al.
2015) and (ii) a transition in evolutionary sequence due to
stellar mass; below 2.0M⊙ a star would continue ascend-
ing the RGB until it undergoes a core helium ﬂash, which
changes the amount of mass lost and radius along the RGB.
Lower-mass stars have larger radii and greater mass loss.
Regardless, the greatest mass loss (by several orders of mag-
nitude) and radius changes occur along the AGB even for
values within a few 0.1M⊙ of 2.0M⊙.

The evolution of the star is illustrated in Fig. 1, char-
acterized in Table 1 and described in this paragraph. Our
2.0M⊙ star was assumed to have Solar metallicity, and
remained on the main sequence for 1.1735 Gyr. Along

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

3

Figure 1. The mass (left panel) and radius (right panel) evolution of the star used in this study, during the tip of the AGB phase and
when the white dwarf is born (at the start of the EWD= “early white dwarf” phase). Marked on the right panel is the maximum AGB
radius (Rmax) and the white dwarf Roche radius (distance) adopted in this study (Rroche).

Table 1. Time at the beginning of each phase (MS = main se-
quence, GB = giant branch, EWD = early white dwarf, LWD =
late white dwarf) and the total mass lost during those phases.
The LWD phase lasts until the end of the simulations (14 Gyr).

Start Time (Gyr)
Mass Lost (M⊙)

MS

0.0
0.0

GB

EWD

LWD

1.1735
1.363

1.4958

1.5958

0.0

0.0

the RGB, the star lost mass according to the traditional3
Reimers mass loss prescription, with a numerical coeﬃcient
of 0.5. The star stayed on the RGB for 23 Myr and lost
0.002M⊙ during that time, while expanding its radius out
to 0.13 au. Afterwards, the star contracted to a radius of
0.04 au. The AGB phase began at 1.4894 Gyr, and lasted
for only 6.4 Myr. However, during this time, the star lost
1.338M⊙ and expanded its radius out to 1.82 au; see Fig. 1.
Finally, the star ended its evolution as a white dwarf formed
with a mass of 0.6365M⊙ and a radius of 5 × 10−5 au.

Varying the stellar mass within the code is nearly equiv-
alent to assuming that the star loses mass isotropically.
This assumption is excellent for orbiting bodies within a
few hundred au (Veras et al. 2013b). Because the planets
are assumed to be point masses, they do not accrete any
of the stellar mass and the isotropic assumption is main-
tained; see Sec. 4 of Veras (2016) for more details. This type
of stellar mass decrease, however, does not consider the lag
time between the ejecta passing beyond two diﬀerent orbits.
However, this eﬀect should be negligible; see section 2 of
Payne et al. (2016) for quantiﬁcation.

A planet that ventures into the vicinity of the white
dwarf might be disrupted or destroyed. This “vicinity” may
extend to a few hundred times the white dwarf radius. The
critical radius at which disruption occurs (known as the
Roche radius), however, is dependent on the planet’s shape,

3 Schr¨oder & Cuntz (2005) provided an improved, physically-
motivated version of this prescription, but one that requires
knowledge of further details (surface gravity, temperature) about
the star.

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

composition, spin state, orbital state, and whether one con-
siders disruption to mean cracking, deforming or dissoci-
ating. This ambiguity is compounded by the fact that no
study has yet modelled the disruption of a planet around
a white dwarf4. Although the disruption of rubble pile as-
teroids around white dwarfs has been numerically mod-
elled (Debes et al. 2012; Veras et al. 2014d), the situation
with planets is fundamentally diﬀerent. These uncertainties
prompted us to rescale the white dwarf radius within the
simulations to a value corresponding to its ﬁducial Roche,
or disruption, radius: 1.27R⊙ ≈ 0.0059 au, where R⊙ is the
Sun’s radius. This value roughly represents the outer extent
of the compact debris discs which surround white dwarfs
(see Farihi 2016 for a review). These discs are assumed to
be composed of disrupted fragments and particles.

2.3 Planet properties

is

to simulate planetary systems

Instability in planetary systems

that be-
Our goal
come unstable.
is
likely to be common, as demonstrated by the Grand
Tack model (Pierens & Raymond 2011; Walsh et al. 2011;
O’Brien et al. 2014; Izidoro et al. 2015) and the Nice model
(Gomes et al. 2005; Morbidelli et al. 2005; Tsiganis et al.
2005; Levison et al. 2011) for our solar system, and by the
potential future instability of packed exoplanetary systems,
which are prevalent (recent examples include Barclay et al.
2015 and Campante et al. 2015; see also Pu & Wu 2015)5.
Further, metal-polluted white dwarfs, which comprise be-
tween one-quarter and one-half of all Milky Way white
dwarfs (Zuckerman et al. 2003, 2010; Koester et al. 2014),

4 Main-sequence disruption investigations
(Guillochon et al.
2011; Liu et al. 2013) suggest that the assumed structure of the
planet plays a vital role, as well as how much mass is sheared oﬀ
during each close passage to the star.
5 Rarely has the future non-secular evolution of planetary sys-
tems throughout the entire main sequence been achieved with
N -body numerical integrations. Consequently, the prospects for
future instability of the currently-observed exoplanetary systems
is generally unknown.

4

Veras et al.

Table 2. Mass ratios of diﬀerent planets (J = Jupiter, S = Saturn,
N = Neptune, U = Uranus). These ratios are equivalent to those
of the planets which are scaled-down in mass (¯J, ¯S, ¯N, ¯U).

J

1

3.34
18.53
21.87

J

S

N

U

S

N

U

0.30

1

5.55
6.55

0.054
0.18

1

1.18

0.046
0.15
0.85

1

are thought to arise from planetary system instability after
the star has become a white dwarf.

We consider simulation suites of primarily 4-planet sys-
tems in order to facilitate comparison with the equal-mass
cases of Veras & G¨ansicke (2015), although we also ran
smaller samples of six- and eight-planet systems. We also
adopted simulations that each contained four planets and 12
test particles. Each test particle represents a planet or aster-
oid which is both (i) small enough relative to the nonzero-
mass planets to not aﬀect them, and (ii) large enough to not
be aﬀected by radiation, which is not modelled. One exam-
ple is four giant planets with test particles represented by
Earths. Large asteroids with radii above about 100 km may
also be represented as test particles, because the eﬀect of ra-
diation for objects of these sizes may be negligible (see eqs.
108 and 110 of Veras et al. 2015a and eq. 1 of Veras et al.
2014a).

For our nonzero-mass substellar bodies, we adopted
eight types of planets: Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune
(which we refer to as “giant planets”), and all of their ana-
logues scaled down in mass by a ratio of MJupiter/M⊕ ≈
317.8 (which we refer to as “terrestrial planets”). The mass
scaling eﬀectively transforms Jupiter into Earth, and the
other giant planets into three sub-Earth mass companions.
The scaled-down planets allow us to provide direct dynam-
ical comparisons while keeping the mass ratios amongst the
planets the same. These terrestrial planets also arguably
yielded the most interesting results. We adopted giant planet
densities which reﬂect those of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and
Neptune. The density of all the scaled-down planets was set
to the density of the Earth.

We henceforth denote the giant planets as J, S, U, N, and
the terrestrial planets as ¯J, ¯S, ¯U, and ¯N. All of the planetary
system combinations that we adopted per simulation are
presented in the Appendix. For perspective on the relative
mass values, see Table 2. Test particles are by deﬁntion mass-
less, and can reasonably represent objects (whether they be
planets, asteroids or pebbles) which are at least two or three
orders of magnitude less massive than the non-zero mass
bodies in the simulation. Also, MJupiter/M⊙ = 9.54 × 10−4
and M⊕/M⊙ = 3.00 × 10−6.

Our choices for initial orbital eccentricities, inclinations,
orbital angles, and innermost semimajor axis follow those
of previous studies (Mustill et al. 2014; Veras & G¨ansicke
2015) and their justiﬁcations are only brieﬂy repeated here.
All planets are assumed to be on initially circular orbits and
have small inclinations randomly selected from a uniform
distribution from −1◦ to 1◦. Adopting strictly non-coplanar
planets prevent an unnaturally high rate of planet-planet
collisions, which occurred in Veras et al. (2013a). Imposing
non-zero initial eccentricities would change (speed up) in-
stability timescales; we did not do so in order to facilitate

comparisons with previous studies. The innermost planet
semimajor axis was always set at 5 au to prevent AGB star-
planet tides from playing a role in the evolution (see Fig.
7 of Mustill & Villaver 2012) before any potential instabil-
ity occurs. Further, 5 au is a particularly appropriate value
considering that Jupiter lies at 5.2 au from the Sun and is
the closest of the four giant planets in our Solar system.

The much trickier initial parameter to determine was
the initial spacing of the planets. For equal-mass planets,
the link with initial spacing and instability timescales has a
now-substantial history (see Davies et al. 2014 for a review),
particularly with the application of the mutual Hill radius
as the separation unit. However, no widely-used formalism
exists with unequal-mass planets. Consequently, for lack of
better proven alternatives, we applied the mutual Hill radius
to our architectures here. Multiple deﬁnitions of this param-
eter exist: we adopted eq. (4) of Smith & Lissauer (2009) in
order to maintain consistency and provide meaningful com-
parisons with Veras & G¨ansicke (2015):

ai+1 = ai




1 +

β
2




mi + mi+1

3(cid:16)m⋆ + Pi−1

k=1 mk(cid:17)

1/3



1/3




−1

×


1 −


β
2




mi + mi+1

3(cid:16)m⋆ + Pi−1

k=1 mk(cid:17)

.

(1)

In this equation, a and m refer to mass and initial semi-
major axis, and the subscripts ascend in order of increas-
ing distance from the star. The important quantity β is the
number of mutual Hill radii. In order to determine meaning-
ful values of β for the diﬀerent architectures we considered,
we performed exploratory preliminary suites of simulations.
We found that a wide range (β = 6 − 14) was necessary to
implement depending on the architecture considered. The
speciﬁc values used for each architecture are listed in Tables
A1-A13.

Having established the planet locations, we then con-
sidered where potential test particles would reside. We dis-
tributed our 12 test particles uniformly in a ring at 2.5 au
from the star. This choice is in the spirit, if not the details, of
the asteroid belt. In our Solar system, the largest objects in
this belt (with sizes greater than 100 km) are unlikely to be
inﬂuenced by Solar giant branch radiation, and will neither
be engulfed by the Solar giant. Recall that these particles
could instead represent Mars, which also will survive the
Sun’s post-main-sequence evolution, despite being located
at about 1.5 au (Schr¨oder & Connon Smith 2008).

2.4 Additional physics

Besides radiation, other physics that could play a role in
planetary system evolution include star-planet tides and
general relativity. A planet which is perturbed on an orbit
with a pericentre that lies just outside of the Roche radius
may be tidally circularized. The particulars of this process
are highly dependent on the composition of the approaching
planet and the evolutionary stage of the star; all our bodies
are point-masses with no assumed composition. The vari-
ation in tidal circularization behaviour and timescale due

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

to composition is so great (Henning & Hurford 2014) that
any meaningful exploration would require a dedicated study,
which we do not perform here. Our simulations here illus-
trate preconditions for this tidal interaction to occur.

General relativity changes the rate of the argument of
periastron for close-in bodies, and hence can by itself trig-
ger instability in multi-planet systems (e.g. Veras & Ford
2010). Consequently, we have included the eﬀects of general
relativity in our simulations through our updated code.

2.5 Running time

We attempted to run all our simulations for 14 Gyr, which
represents a Hubble time and is the current age of the Uni-
verse. We succeeded in over 90% of cases, the exceptions
(which are all noted in the Appendix tables) being systems
where a planet or test particle was perturbed close enough
to the star to suﬃciently slow down the simulations. We only
report simulations which ran for at least 1.9 Gyr (recall that
our star becomes a white dwarf after about 1.5 Gyr), in or-
der to give a ﬂavour of what the evolution is like on all of the
main sequence, giant branch, and early white dwarf phases.

3 RESULTS

We present results for over 450 simulations, and have visu-
ally inspected the output and evolution of each one. They
are partitioned into groups of up to four simulations such
that each group member has the same (i) initial ordering
and type of masses (such as ¯N¯U¯J¯S in order of increasing dis-
tance from the star), and (ii) value of β. Within these groups
the initial orbital angles and inclinations are diﬀerent.

We report the results of every simulation in Tables A1-
A13, one per row, with particular attention to the stellar
phases at which various events occurred rather than the
speciﬁc times. This format allows one to determine qualita-
tive trends easily amongst the many-dimensional parameter
space, and acts as a handy reference for setting up future
simulations if one has a desired outcome or set of initial
conditions (perhaps based on a known exosystem) in mind.
In this section, we describe the data which is presented
in the tables (Subsection 3.1), illustrate some representative
and interesting examples (Subsection 3.2), list various sys-
tem outcomes and behaviours which our simulations show to
be possible (Subsection 3.3), and analyze the general trends
from the tables (Subsection 3.4).

3.1 Description of table columns

In all tables, the ﬁrst column (“Sim #”) provides a designa-
tion for each simulation for easy reference. The second col-
umn (“Setup”) provides the initial order and type of planets
in each simulation. We reiterate that J, S, U, N, ¯J, ¯S, ¯U, and
¯N, respectively refer to planets which have the same masses
of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and versions of those
planets with masses scaled down by a factor of about 318
(thereby transforming Jupiter into Earth). All simulations
in Tables A1-A11 contain four planets each. The last two
tables (A12-A13) contain systems with four, six and eight

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

5

planets. The third column (“β”) refers to the number of mu-
tual Hill radii between the planets, as deﬁned from eq. (4)
of Smith & Lissauer (2009).

Starting from the fourth column (“Unpack”) we charac-
terize the timing of events in the evolution of the planetary
system. We adopt designations for diﬀerent phases of stellar
evolution: MS (main sequence), GB (giant branch), EWD
(“early white dwarf” that corresponds to stars that have
become white dwarfs within the last 100 Myr), and LWD
(“late white dwarf” stars which became white dwarfs over
100 Myr ago). We split up the white dwarf phase because
the intense mass loss at the tip of the AGB phase often trig-
gers slightly-delayed instability, which commonly manifests
itself in white dwarfs whose cooling age (the time since be-
coming a white dwarf) is less than about 100 Myr. In eﬀect,
such systems are dynamically reseting themselves and hence
feature instability at “early” times, just as we would expect
from a planetary system recently born out of a Solar nebula.
Precisely then, the MS phase corresponds to times between 0
and 1173.576 Myr, while the GB phase corresponds to times
between 1173.576 Myr and 1495.783 Myr. At 1495.783 Myr,
the EWD phase begins and lasts until 1595.783 Myr. The
star then spends the remainder of its life on the LWD phase.
The fourth column itself (“Unpack”) displays the phase
during which the system became unpacked. If the system
never became unpacked, then the space is left blank. We de-
ﬁne “unpacked” as the moment that either (i) two non-zero
mass planets cross orbits, or (ii) an instability occurs. We de-
ﬁne instability as an occurrence when two bodies collide with
one another, or one body escapes the system. The collision
could come in the form of a star-planet collision (when the
planet is said to be engulfed in the star) or a planet-planet
collision. Note also that the moment of escape may occur
several Myr after the actual interaction which triggered the
movement, because the Hill ellipsoid of the system typically
lies at about 105 au from the star.

The ﬁfth column (“# Surv”) indicates the number of
non-zero mass planets which remained in the system by
the end of the simulation. Those planets which do not sur-
vive are characterized in the next three columns (“Engulf”,
“Eject” and “Collision”), which indicate respectively when
a planet intersects with the stellar radius, is ejected from
the system, or hits another planet. Recall that the white
dwarf stellar radius is enhanced from its true value. The
columns all indicate the phase in which an instability oc-
curred, along with the planet(s) involved in the instability
in the subscripts. The subscript numbers correspond to the
planet order from the “Setup” column. Each instability is
indicated by a single listed entry. The subscripts in each
“Collision” entry indicate the two planets involved in the
collision.

The column (“< Rmax”) lists any non-zero mass planet
that survived for the entire simulation and was perturbed
into an orbit along the EWD or LWD phase whose pericentre
was within the star’s maximum AGB radius (1.82 au). The
subscript indicates the smallest planet-white dwarf distance
achieved.

The column, labelled “TPs Eng”, does not exist in the
ﬁnal two tables (A12-A13). The column indicates when test
particles were included in the simulations (a blank space
means no test particles), and provides some information
about them. The ﬁrst and second numbers given are the

6

Veras et al.

Figure 2. A characteristic outcome for the full-lifetime evolu-
tion of four giant planets: unpacking and instability on the main
sequence, followed by stability. Note that the surviving two plan-
ets expand their orbits due to giant branch mass loss at 1.49 Gyr.
The values of Rmax and Rroche on the right axis indicate the max-
imum stellar AGB radius (1.82 au) and an approximate value of
the disruption radius of white dwarf (0.0059 au). Shown is JUUU
simulation #1-19 (Table A1).

amounts of test particles (out of 12) that were engulfed by
the star during the EWD and LWD phases, respectively.

The ﬁnal column lists relevant notes which are in the

table captions.

3.2 Speciﬁc cases

Now we present some speciﬁc examples of evolutionary se-
quences.

3.2.1 Standard giant planet evolution

Consider ﬁrst simulation #1-19 (in Table A1), whose evolu-
tion is shown in Fig. 2. The system initially consists of an
inner Jupiter-mass planet (blue, at 5 au) followed by three
Uranus-mass planets (JUUU), separated by β = 8. The sys-
tem unpacks on the main sequence, and both the second
and third planets (Uranuses) are ejected sometime during
this phase. The two remaining planets have their orbits ex-
panded due to mass loss at the end of the GB phase, remain-
ing stable through this process and for the remainder of the
simulation. Neither achieved an orbit that took it to within
1.82 au (= Rmax) of the white dwarf, and their pericentres
remain nearly constant.

3.2.2 Squeezed solar system analogue – giant planets

Next consider a Solar system analogue architecture (JSUN
and β = 7) from Table A7. Simulation #7-11, shown in Fig.
3, features Neptune and Uranus being ejected at 10.3 Myr
and 18.5 Myr (eﬀectively immediately), which is not discern-
able on the plot. The remaining Jupiter and Saturn mutually
perturb each other so that their pericentres vary signiﬁcantly
(over 1 au in each case) throughout the main sequence.

Figure 3. Evolution of a Solar-system analogue (JSUN) that
immediately ejects Uranus and Neptune and keeps Saturn bound
until the star is 2.2 Gyr old, which is 0.7 Gyr into the white dwarf
phase. Only Jupiter survives for this particular evolution, which
is simulation #7-11 (Table A7).

Figure 4. Unpacking of a set of terrestrial planets at the start
of the white dwarf phase. The planets (¯J¯S¯U¯N) are scaled-down
versions of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune, with the mass
reduced by a factor of about 318, which transforms Jupiter into
the Earth. All four planets remain stable, meander, and survive
until the end of the simulation. Shown is simulation #7-40 (Table
A7).

The orbital expansion causes the two-planet stability thresh-
old (see Debes & Sigurdsson 2002, Veras et al. 2013a and
Voyatzis et al. 2013) to be passed or at least skirted, lead-
ing to delayed instability on the white dwarf phase. The
result is that at 2.2 Gyr, Saturn is ejected. Jupiter remains
the lone survivor.

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

3.2.3 Solar system analogue – terrestrial planets

Alternatively, simulation #7-40 (β = 11, and Fig. 4) illus-
trates one evolutionary sequence for the scaled-down (by
a mass factor of 318) versions of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus
and Neptune (¯J¯S¯U¯N) – eﬀectively transforming them into
terrestrial-mass planets. The system does not unpack until
the EWD phase, but never becomes unstable. The result-
ing meandering causes the scaled-down Uranus (green) to
achieve an orbital pericentre of just 2.47 au (less than half
of any planet’s initial pericentre) at 6.67 Gyr.

3.2.4 Terrestrial planet pericentre repacking

Another example of a long-term stable terrestrial system,
but one that becomes unpacked immediately, is from simu-
lation #9-39 (¯U¯N¯J¯S – blue, orange, green, red – from Table
A9 and left panel of Fig. 5). This simulation contains two
notable features: (i) the inward radial incursion of ¯U to a few
au at around 8 Gyr (the ﬁrst such radial incursion during
the entire evolution), and (ii) the “re-packing” of the orbital
pericentres beyond 8 Gyr. At this time, the system becomes
orderly (but now in the order ¯U¯J¯S¯N) and henceforth secularly
evolves with well-deﬁned and periodic oscillations.

A second example of a repacked system, but one which
becomes unstable, is illustrated in the right panel of Fig. 5
(¯U¯J¯J¯J from simulation #2-24 of Table A2). Here, the un-
packing occurs on the LWD phase, the smallest-mass planet
is engulfed, and the two closest ¯J planets switch places.

3.2.5 Unpacked giant planets with test particles

In reality, the above systems likely harbour Mars-like plan-
ets or asteroids in regions like our Solar system’s asteroid
belt. Simulation #11-19 (JUNS and β = 9 from Table A11)
contains 12 test particles located in initially circular orbits
at 2.5 au. Figure 6 shows the resulting evolution. The four
giant planets remain packed and stable through the entire
simulation, and have a nondisruptive eﬀect on the test par-
ticles during the main sequence and giant branch phases of
evolution. However, on the white dwarf phase, eight of the
12 particles are lost. Seven are lost through ejections, all of
which can be individually discerned on the plot (at times
6.22, 7.49, 7.71, 8.20, 10.08, 10.66 and 12.19 Gyr). One par-
ticle is engulfed inside of the white dwarf (as indicated in
the table) at 10.29 Gyr.

3.2.6 Deep radial incursions for almost equal-mass

planets

Tables A12 and A13 give details of simulations which contain
almost equal-mass planets, and therefore serve as a useful
basis of comparison to both other simulations in this work
and previous simulations of strictly equal-mass planets. The
mass ratios of consecutive planet pairs in the tables are just
3.34 and 1.18, respectively.

In Fig. 7, we display four simulations which show ex-
amples of how small ranges in planet mass within the same
system can lead to deep radial incursions during the white
dwarf phase. Shown are four-, six- and eight-planet systems.
In three of the cases (simulations #12-8, #12-21 and #13-
12) the runs did not ﬁnish. Unpacking occurs on the WD

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

7

phase in all cases, and instability results. The eﬀects of tides
(not modelled) might aﬀect the green planets (which achieve
pericentres of . 0.1 au) on the bottom plots.

3.3 The variety of system behaviours

Having illustrated some speciﬁc examples, now we consider
the simulations in aggregate. Before inferring trends from
the data, we ﬁrst consider the rich variety of behaviours and
outcomes seen in the simulations and simply list what is
possible from full-lifetime evolution for clarity.

• Unpacking (deﬁned as crossing orbits or planet loss)
may occur during any phase of stellar evolution, or not at
all.

• Unpacking through crossing orbits does not necessarily
lead to instability (deﬁned as planet loss from collisions or
ejections)

• Unpacking during one phase can lead to instability at

a later phase.

• Planet engulfment into the star, planet-planet collisions

and ejections may all occur during any phase.

• Two systems with identical initial numbers, masses and
separations of planets can be unpacked at diﬀerent phases
and lose diﬀerent numbers of planets.

• Any total number of planets may be lost.
• Planets which are formed when the star arrives on the
main sequence at distances well outside of the maximum
asymptotic giant branch stellar radius can be perturbed on
the white dwarf phase to distances well within the maximum
asymptotic giant branch stellar radius.

• Test particles which initially reside within the orbits
of four giant planets can survive for the entire simulation
duration even when the giant planets unpack and/or become
unstable.

3.4 General trends

In this section we present the crux of our results and some
trends with applications beyond this work.

3.4.1 Relating to β

• Unpacking tends to occur at later stellar phases as β
is increased. This correlation is typically strong but by no
means monotonic. For example, consider simulations #8-1
through #8-32 (Table A8), where β is increased from 6.0 to
9.5. For a weaker correlation, instead see simulations #9-1
through #9-32 (Table A9), and for a better correlation, see
simulations #4-1 through #4-24 (Table A4). See Fig. 8 for a
visual representation of the correlation (although the tables
themselves might be clearer).

• Mapping a particlar value of β to the phase at which one
could expect unpacking is architecture-dependent. Compare
for example, the simulations with β = 7.0 across all of the
tables.

• Terrestrial-mass planets (eﬀectively, ¯J, ¯S, ¯U, and ¯N) at
a given β will unpack at an earlier phase than their giant-
planet counterparts (implied from Tables A1-A11 and Fig.
8) due to the additional dependence of stability timescale
on mass, which is not captured by the Hill radius (e.g.

8

Veras et al.

Figure 5. Two examples of unpacking then repacking, in both stable (left panel) and unstable (right panel) cases. Left Panel: Immediate
unpacking of a set of terrestrial planets, followed by a re-ordering and stable secular evolution from 8 Gyr onwards. The initial order of
the planets is ¯U¯N¯J¯S but their orbits end up in the order ¯U¯J¯S¯N. Shown is simulation #9-39 (Table A9). Right Panel: Unpacking of ¯U¯J¯J¯J
on the WD phase, where the least massive, innermost, planet becomes engulfed and two of the other planets (orange and green) switch
order. Shown is simulation #2-24 (Table A2).

• In-between these two regimes (giant planets and terres-
trial planets) are the low-mass giant planets, or ice giants,
with UNUN, UNUNUN and UNUNUNUN (Table A13). Only for these
systems do unstable events appear to be roughly evenly dis-
tributed amongst ejections, engulfments and planet-planet
collisions. For simulations #13-12 to #13-17, the lack of
planet-planet collisions might be due to the truncated du-
ration of those simulations and/or neglecting white dwarf-
planet tides.

• Physically, the trends in the above two bullet points
are understandable in terms of the Safronov number
(Safronov & Zvjagina 1969), which is the square of the ratio
of the surface escape speeds to the planetary orbital speeds.
As this ratio increases, the frequency of ejections increases.
This ratio is approximately unity for Earth-like planets at
20 au, but about 40 for Jupiters at the same separation.

• The commonality of planet-planet collisions in terrestial
planet systems implies that those systems should contain
more debris and newly-generated asteroids than giant planet
systems.

• The unpacking of systems with four giant planets pref-
erentially (80%) results in the survival of two planets. This
percentage would be 90% if not for the UNJS and NUJS ar-
chitectures (Tables A9 and A10), which do not follow this
trend. In these architectures, either the Uranus or Neptune
is typically ejected but the other survives.

• The unpacking of systems with four terrestrial planets
instead preferentially (55%) results in the survival of three
planets, and in 30% of cases retains all four planets. This
stark diﬀerence from the giant-planet case is likely related
to the inability for close encounters in terrestrial-planet sys-
tems to be strong enough to cause ejections.

• Unpacked terrestrial-planet architectures which retain
all planets are typically aperiodic in their resulting orbital
variations (see e.g. Fig. 4). This feature is particularly note-
worthy because these systems produce an ever-changing dy-

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Figure 6. A stable and unpacked set of giant planets JUNS with
12 test particles initially located at 2.5 au. Four particles survive,
seven are ejected, and one enters the white dwarf disruption ra-
dius at 10.29 Gyr. All these events are visible on the plot. Shown
is simulation #11-19 (Table A11).

Chambers et al. 1996; Faber & Quillen 2007; Mustill et al.
2014).

3.4.2 Relating to engulfments, ejections and collisions

• Instability manifests itself primarily through ejections
for giant planet systems and primarily through planet-planet
collisions for terrestrial-planet systems. The two stark excep-
tions are the architectures ¯U¯J¯J¯J and ¯J¯J¯J¯U (Tables A2 and
A1, where the lowest-mass terrestrial planet is engulfed into
the white dwarf in the majority of cases (see e.g. Fig. 5).

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

9

Figure 7. Deep radial incursions due to unpacking on the white dwarf phase of similar-mass giant planets in the systems JSJS (upper
left panel, simulation #12-8), JSJSJSJS (lower left panel, simulation #12-21), UNUN (upper right panel, simulation #13-5) and UNUNUN
(lower right panel, simulation #13-12). Tides are unlikely to play a role in the upper panels, but might aﬀect the evolution of the green
planets in the lower panels. The striking behaviour seen here is characteristic of the simulations from Tables A12 and A13.

namic environment, which may tap into diﬀerent reservoirs
of white dwarf pollutants at diﬀerent cooling ages.

• When architectures contain one most massive planet
(as opposed to two or more), as in Tables A1, A4, A7, A8,
A9, A10 and A11, that planet is never ejected nor engulfed
into the star. Physically, the reason is due to conservation
of angular momentum and energy, even though the system
energy is strictly not conserved during GB mass loss.

• For systems that contain exactly two most massive
planets, those planets rarely are ejected or engulfed into the
star. This tendency holds true for every single system sim-
ulated with Jupiters, Uranuses and their scaled equivalents
JUUJ, ¯J¯U¯U¯J, UJJU, ¯U¯J¯J¯U (Tables A5 and A6). For JSJS (Ta-
ble A12), where the diﬀerence in planet mass is much less
(ratio of 3 as opposed to 22), there is only one exception
(simulation #12-6). For UNUN (Table A13), there are two
exceptions.

• Rarely (6.6%) does unpacking of four-planet systems al-
low for at least one of the planets to eventually achieve an or-

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

bital pericentre within the maximum AGB radius of 1.8 au,
in contrast to the equal planet-mass case Veras & G¨ansicke
(2015).

• Deep radial

incursions are most common for the
unequal-mass systems which are closest to the equal-mass
case, namely the UJJJ, ¯U¯J¯J¯J, JJJU, ¯J¯J¯J¯U, JSJS and UNUN
cases (Tables A2, A3, A12 and A13). The reason for the
similarity is in the ﬁrst four cases when one ignores/ejects
the Uranus, and in the latter two cases because the range of
their masses is small. In that respect, the greatest incidence
of inward radial incursions occurs for the UNUN architecture,
because with a mass ratio of 1.18 between adjacent pairs of
planets, the system eﬀectively contains equal-mass planets.
• Increasing the number of planets in a system increases
the incidence for deep inward radial incursions, as well as
consistently changing dynamical architectures, similar to the
equal-planet mass case.

10

Veras et al.

Figure 8. The phases at which unpacking occurs with respect
to β for the eight architectures given in the legend. Each point
represents one simulation. Generally, as β is increased, unpack-
ing occurs during later phases, although the relationship is not
monotonic. The terrestrial-sized planets (open squares) generally
require higher values of β than giant planets (dots) to achieve the
same results. Unpacking during the giant branch is rare.

3.4.3 Relating to test particles

• Unpacking of the non-zero mass planets enhances
prospects for white dwarf engulfment of test particles, which
can reasonably represent Mars-like planets or large aster-
oids.

• Even with the tiny sample sizes adopted here (12 test
particles per simulation, as constrained by computational
limitations), enough are engulfed by white dwarfs (263 out
of a total 1024) to suggest both that this process is cru-
cial and that higher resolution studies are needed to detect
discernable trends.

4 DISCUSSION

In order to place our results in context, we will discuss the
consequences for polluted white dwarf systems and consider
the links to three outstanding observational constraints: (i)
pollution rate with white dwarf cooling age, (ii) accumu-
lated metal pollution in non-DA white dwarfs, and (iii) the
WD 1145+017 system. We will also discuss the implications
of so many ejections for the purported free-ﬂoating popula-
tion of planets within the Milky Way, and how are simula-
tions may be linked to chaos.

4.1 Consequences for polluted white dwarf

systems

Our simulations clearly demonstrate that planet engulfment
into white dwarfs is a rare phenomenon (8.8% across all
simulations), in line with the ﬁndings of the equal-planet
mass studies of Veras et al. (2013a), Mustill et al. (2014)
and Veras & G¨ansicke (2015). A much more likely pollu-
tion reservoir is the test particles, which we have shown can
easily be engulfed in the white dwarf, in line with the one-
planet studies of Bonsor et al. (2011), Debes et al. (2012)
and Frewen & Hansen (2014). The diﬀerence here is that
multiple planets provide the opportunity for a constantly
changing dynamic environment, which is not the case in
one-planet systems6. Consequently, multiple-planet systems
are much more likely to explain high rates of pollution at
diﬀerent cooling ages by accessing and perturbing diﬀerent
reservoirs of material (asteroids, fragments, dust) at diﬀer-
ent times and/or diﬀerent locations.

Here we have characterized this environment by sam-
pling systems of unequal-mass planets, where the planet
masses diﬀer by a factor of up to about 20. We found that
this inequality has clear but second-order eﬀects on the dy-
namics; the ﬁrst-order eﬀects are determined by what types
of planets are involved in the unpacking: terrestrial or giant.
For giant planets, crossing orbits trigger violent encounters
between giant planets, but still typically cause the system
to settle into a periodic secular state (see Fig. 2 and the
upper-left panel of Fig. 7). For terrestrial planets, fully 30%
of our simulations become unpacked (orbit-crossed) but never
unstable (featuring engulfments, ejections or collisions). The
result is a highly dynamic environment, where the planetary
orbits meander (see Fig. 4), which is much more conducive
to eﬀective scattering at late ages.

4.2 Correlation with cooling age

Our choice of dividing up the white dwarf phase into sepa-
rate EWD and LWD phases was partly motivated by our
simulation results, because a white dwarf cooling age of
100 Myr is a representative end value for the epoch of
rapid post-main-sequence planetary instability (see e.g. Fig.
9). However, this value is also sensible from an observa-
tional point-of-view. The cooling ages of the white dwarfs
in Koester et al. (2014) are all below 200 Myr, while white
dwarf atmospheric properties can signiﬁcantly change at
cooling ages of ∼ 500 Myr (see their Fig. 8, middle panel).
Therefore, a cut at cooling ages of a few 100 Myr is a natural
way to separate samples observationally.

However, observations obtained so far indicate that the
accretion rate of metals onto white dwarf atmospheres re-
mains a ﬂat function of white dwarf cooling age (Fig. 4
of Koester et al. 2014). Explaining pollution at late times
(after many Gyr of white dwarf evolution) is challenging
because instability on the white dwarf phase is partially
triggered by the increase in system stochasticity due to

6 Stellar ﬂybys can change the environment regardless of the
number of planets, but typically 10 Gyr needs to pass before
a ﬂyby achieves a close encounter within a few hundred au
(Zakamska & Tremaine 2004; Veras & Moeckel 2012).

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

RGB and AGB mass loss (Voyatzis et al. 2013), preferen-
tially leading to instabilities at early cooling ages. Fig. 9
emphasizes this tendency, even though this study does not
attempt to model a realistic population synthesis (which is
anyway beyond current computational means).

Recent and ongoing work is exploring potential ways
of polluting white dwarfs at late cooling ages. One possi-
bility is through the change in orbits of wide binary stel-
lar companions due to Galactic tides after, and only af-
ter, one of the components has become a white dwarf
(Bonsor & Veras 2015). However, the majority of known
polluted white dwarfs do not appear to harbour wide-orbit
companions. Another possibility is through Lidov-Kozai sec-
ular evolution amongst multiple planets, such that the close
encounters between planets and white dwarfs ﬁrst occur
only after cooling ages of several Gyr (C. Petrovich & D.
Mu˜noz, in preparation). Finally, an extant fragment ﬁeld
from planet-planet collisions may persist for several Gyr be-
fore being thrust towards the white dwarf (A. Shannon et
al., in preparation).

For the architectures we have explored here, there is a
similar spike in instabilities just after mass loss from the
tip of the AGB during the EWS phase. However, planetary
systems which remain stable through that epoch exhibit a
wide range of instability times, and instances when a planet
or test particle approaches the vicinity of the white dwarf.
Meandering of low-mass (terrestrial-like) planets provides
a dynamic environment with which extant debris or frag-
ments may be perturbed to the white dwarfs at all ages.
Our results show that mass equality amongst planets is not
a requirement for late-age pollution, and is not in fact even
preferential for producing instabilities at late ages.

4.3 Accumulated metals in convection zone

White dwarfs with deep convection zones (usually contain-
ing Helium-dominated atmospheres) retain a measurable
record of the accreted planetary debris over a span of time up
to a few Myr (see Fig. 1 of Wyatt et al. 2014). Fig. 6 of Veras
(2016) illustrates the amount of mass accreted for three dif-
ferent samples from Farihi et al. (2010), Girven et al. (2012)
and Xu & Jura (2012).

The accumulated mass ranges from the mass of Phobos
to that of Pluto, and may have been accrued by a single ob-
ject or a collection of bodies. Distinguishing these two possi-
bilities is not possible observationally. From theory, we may
determine the likelihood of a sequence of bodies impacting
the white dwarf or entering its Roche radius within 1 Myr.
However, the sample size of the test particles in our simu-
lations here (12 per simulation) was too small to determine
impact frequency for a given architecture.

The accretion itself might represent a combination of
a “continuous” stream of small particles from a surround-
ing disc and a “stochastic” agglomeration of larger particles
from elsewhere in the system. Wyatt et al. (2014) showed
that the size boundary between these two regimes is ap-
proximately 35 km, and further constrained the potential
size distribution of this accreted material, ruling out a mono-
mass distribution. Further, discs have been detected around
only a few percent of polluted white dwarfs (Farihi et al.
2009; Girven et al. 2011; Steele et al. 2011), although the
actual fraction is likely greater than half (Bergfors et al.

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

11

2014). Consequently, stochastic accretion is likely to play
a role in many of these systems. The mechanics of impact
into white dwarf atmospheres indicates that the parameter
space may be split into sublimation, fragmentation and ab-
lation regimes (J. C. Brown et al., in preparation) such that
the details of the deposition are complex, but the end result
is still metals in the convection zone.

4.4 WD 1145+017

The WD 1145+017 planetary system represents the only
example of a metal-polluted white dwarf with a surround-
ing debris disc composed of both dust and gas and disinte-
grating objects (asteroids, planets, or something in-between)
detected by transit photometry. In this respect, the system
provides a self-consistent snapshot of the disc formation and
accretion process that is likely to take place at other metal-
polluted white dwarfs, and conﬁrms long-standing theories
(Graham et al. 1990; Jura 2003; Bear & Soker 2013).

The system was announced by Vanderburg et al.
(2015), who presented transit curves that illustrated that
up to six objects with orbital periods of about 4.5-4.9 hours
are in the process of disintegrating and producing dust. They
found that the dominant orbital period is closer to 4.5 hours,
which places the objects near the white dwarf’s Roche ra-
dius, assuming that the objects are rubble-piles like the as-
teroids seen in the Solar system. The size of these objects are
poorly constrained, and could range anywhere from ∼ 1 to
1000 km. We will henceforth refer to them as planetesimals.
Follow-up observations came quickly (Croll et al. 2016;
G¨ansicke et al. 2016; Rappaport et al. 2016; Xu et al. 2016).
Xu et al. (2016) detected gas in the debris disc and showed
that the white dwarf atmosphere is polluted with 11 heavy
elements. Croll et al. (2016) performed multi-wavelength
observations that illustrated the number of planetesimals
disintegrating is likely more than one, and helped conﬁrm
that the planetesimals harbour an orbital period of about 4.5
hours rather than a value closer to 4.9 hours. Further follow-
up was provided by G¨ansicke et al. (2016), who used high-
speed photometry and observations of the system from Nov-
Dec 2015 to reveal that at least six planetesimals are break-
ing up, and that they share the same near-circular orbit
with orbital periods of about 4.4930 hours. Rappaport et al.
(2016) most recently detected drifting features which they
postulate are fragments that broke oﬀ from a single progen-
itor.

Our

results,

along with those

of Bonsor et al.
(2011), Debes et al. (2012), Frewen & Hansen (2014) and
Veras & G¨ansicke (2015), demonstrate that the progenitor
of the planetesimals in WD 1145+017 may be a large as-
teroid that was scattered in the vicinity of the WD. The
scattering may be caused by one planet (Bonsor et al. 2011;
Debes et al. 2012; Frewen & Hansen 2014) or multiple plan-
ets (this paper). Alternatively, the progenitor may be a
moon (Payne et al. 2016), or a small (terrestrial) planet,
as shown by both Veras & G¨ansicke (2015) and this paper.
Multiple planets can scatter a test particle into a transit-
detectable orbit, even if the planets themselves never un-
pack (Fig. 6). We note that a Solar system analogue, with
JSUN and asteroids or a Mars, can easily generate the pro-
genitor of the planetesimals in WD 1145+017. The mass of
the progenitor remains unconstrained (Veras et al. 2016).

12

Veras et al.

Figure 9. The white dwarf cooling age (time since becoming a white dwarf) at which test particles across all simulations entered the
white dwarf Roche radius (left panel) or were ejected from the system (right panel). The EWD phase corresponds to the ﬁrst bin, and
the LWD phase to all other bins. The histograms illustrate the pollution decay rate obtained from the simulations.

Our simulations suggest that WD 1145+017 is not
unique in hosting transiting planetesimals. Many possible
multi-planet scenarios can perturb test particles into the
Roche radius of the white dwarf; we have just scratched the
surface.

4.5 Free-ﬂoating planet population contribution

A brief inspection of the tables in the appendix reveal a pre-
ponderance of planetary ejections. This feature, just like for
the equal-mass planet case (Veras et al. 2013a; Mustill et al.
2014), and even the single-planet case (Veras et al. 2011;
Veras & Tout 2012; Veras et al. 2014c), help establish that
planetary ejection is an ubiquitous feature of post-main-
sequence systems. Consequently, these ejections make a con-
tribution to the free-ﬂoating planet population.

How this contribution compares to that due to the
dynamical activity which accompanies planetary forma-
tion and protoplanetary disc dissipation (e.g. Rasio & Ford
1996; Levison et al. 1998; Marzari & Weidenschilling 2002;
Veras & Armitage 2005, 2006; Raymond et al. 2011, 2012;
Matsumura et al. 2013) is not yet clear, primarily because
our observational knowledge of exoplanets beyond 5 au is
sparse. Nevertheless, we have an extraordinary observational
estimate on the total number of free-ﬂoating giant planets
in the Milky Way: nearly two for every main sequence star
(Sumi et al. 2011). If future observations aﬃrm this result,
then a major question in planetary science will remain iden-
tifying the origin of so many free-ﬂoaters. Planetary scatter-
ing alone with single stars on the main sequence cannot ex-
plain this population (Veras & Raymond 2012), and the con-
tribution from scattering in binary systems has not yet been
quantiﬁed, despite studies such as Sutherland & Fabrycky
(2015) and Smullen et al. (2016).

We caution that although ejections were perhaps com-
mon amongst the currently observed population of white
dwarfs (as illustrated by this study), the resulting contri-
bution to the currently observed free-ﬂoating planet pop-

ulation as reported by Sumi et al. (2011) would be on the
order of 1% (Veras & Raymond 2012). Each white dwarf
progenitor system would need to have harboured tens of gi-
ant planets to achieve the Sumi et al. (2011) result. This
number is thought to be too large, despite the likely posi-
tive correlation between stellar mass and planet multiplicity
(Kennedy & Kenyon 2008; Andrews et al. 2013), partly be-
cause of the extreme case HR 8799, which contains (just)
four giant and packed planets (Marois et al. 2010). HR 8799
also provides a representative glimpse into the past of white
dwarf planetary systems because of its A-star host.

4.6 Linking meandering with chaotic behaviour

The phenomenon we refer to as meandering is linked to the
stochasticity of the system. The vast literature on chaos in-
dicators in gravitational point-mass exoplanetary systems
utilizes a wide variety of techniques in order to character-
ize, in part, how close the system is to instability at diﬀer-
ent times. Linking these indicators to N -body integrations
– particularly long-term integrations – remains challenging
(e.g. Veras, Antoniadou & G¨ansicke, In Prep) but may pro-
vide key constraints.

Only two published dedicated post-main-sequence stud-
ies of which we are aware have attempted to link evolution
with stochasticity at the beginning and end of mass loss
(Adams et al. 2013; Voyatzis et al. 2013). Both studies use
the classical Lyapunov exponent as their chaos indicators,
and consider two planets. Their work brings attention to
subtleties which indicate that dedicated studies on chaos
would be beneﬁcial. We frame these subtleties as the follow-
ing questions: (i) What metric (e.g. Cartesian coordinate,
eccentricity), and corresponding reference frame or coor-
dinate system, would provide the most representative link
to instability?, (ii) How does one combine chaos indicators
for multi-planet systems, particularly after close encounters,
and after one or more of the planets is lost from the system?,
(iii) What chaos indicators are aﬀected by the Hamiltonian-

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

13

breaking physics of stellar mass loss, and how do diﬀerent
mass loss prescriptions aﬀect the usefulness of a particular
indicator?

Although these questions are too big to tackle here, our
simulations provide a template on which future dedicated
studies may make useful comparisons.

Bergfors, C., Farihi, J., Dufour, P., & Rocchetto, M. 2014,

MNRAS, 444, 2147

Bonsor, A., Mustill, A. J., & Wyatt, M. C. 2011, MNRAS,

414, 930

Bonsor, A., & Veras, D. 2015, MNRAS, 454, 53
Campante, T. L., Barclay, T., Swift, J. J., et al. 2015, ApJ,

5 CONCLUSIONS

We have performed over 450 full-lifetime simulations of
unequal-mass planets, which ﬁnally removes the long-
standing equal-mass constraint from previous studies. We
have also for the ﬁrst time simulated the post-main-sequence
evolution of multiple planets with test particles. Appendix
A displays the results and characteristics of all simulations.
The trends in the data are outlined in bulleted form in Sec-
tion 3.4, and are summarized here as

• Unlike in the giant planet case, terrestrial-planet un-
packing (orbit crossing) often does not trigger instability
(engulfments, ejections and collisions), and provides a more
dynamic, constantly shifting evolution throughout the white
dwarf phase; this result is independent of the mass variation
amongst planets.

• The smaller the dispersion in planetary mass, the closer

those planets may be perturbed towards the white dwarf.

• Giant planet systems preferentially feature ejections
whereas terrestrial-planet systems preferentially feature
planet-planet collisions. Consequently, we expect more po-
tentially polluting debris to exist in terrestrial-planet sys-
tems.

• Prospects for unpacking roughly increase as β increases,
although this relationship is not-monotonic and dependent
on the considered architecture.

Ultimately, how planets behave at diﬀerent phases of
evolution will crucially determine the subsequent evolution
of the smaller bodies in those systems, bodies which are most
likely the progenitors of white dwarf pollution and plan-
etesimals such as those observed disintegrating around WD
1145+017.

799, 170

Casewell, S. L., Dobbie, P. D., Napiwotzki, R., et al. 2009,

MNRAS, 395, 1795

Cassan, A., Kubas, D., Beaulieu, J.-P., et al. 2012, Nature,

481, 167

Catal´an, S., Isern, J., Garc´ıa-Berro, E., & Ribas, I. 2008,

MNRAS, 387, 1693

Chambers, J. E., Wetherill, G. W., & Boss, A. P. 1996,

Icarus, 119, 261

Chambers, J. E. 1999, MNRAS, 304, 793
Croll, B., Dalba, P. A., Vanderburg, A., et al. 2016, Sub-

mitted to ApJL, arXiv:1510.06434

Davies, M. B., Adams, F. C., Armitage, P., et al. 2014,

Protostars and Planets VI, 787

Debes, J. H., & Sigurdsson, S. 2002, ApJ, 572, 556
Debes, J. H., Walsh, K. J., & Stark, C. 2012, ApJ, 747, 148
Dong, R., Wang, Y., Lin, D. N. C., & Liu, X.-W. 2010,

ApJ, 715, 1036

Dufour, P., Bergeron, P., Liebert, J., et al. 2007, ApJ, 663,

1291

Duncan, M. J., & Lissauer, J. J. 1998, Icarus, 134, 303
Faber, P., & Quillen, A. C. 2007, MNRAS, 382, 1823
Falcon, R. E., Winget, D. E., Montgomery, M. H., &

Williams, K. A. 2010, ApJ, 712, 585

Farihi, J., Jura, M., & Zuckerman, B. 2009, ApJ, 694, 805
Farihi, J., Barstow, M. A., Redﬁeld, S., Dufour, P., & Ham-

bly, N. C. 2010, MNRAS, 404, 2123

Farihi, J. 2016 Submitted, New Astronomy Reviews.
Frewen, S. F. N., & Hansen, B. M. S. 2014, MNRAS, 439,

2442

G¨ansicke, B. T., Aungwerojwit, A., Marsh, T. R. et al.

2016, In Press ApJL, arXiv:1512.09150

Gentile Fusillo, N. P., G¨ansicke, B. T., & Greiss, S. 2015,

MNRAS, 448, 2260

Girven, J., G¨ansicke, B. T., Steeghs, D., & Koester, D.

2011, MNRAS, 417, 1210

Girven, J., Brinkworth, C. S., Farihi, J., et al. 2012, ApJ,

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

749, 154

DV and BTG have received funding from the European Re-
search Council under the European Union’s Seventh Frame-
work Programme (FP/2007-2013)/ERC Grant Agreement
n. 320964 (WDTracer). AJM acknowledges support from
grant number KAW 2012.0150 from the Knut and Alice
Wallenberg foundation and the Swedish Research Council
(grant 2011-3991).

REFERENCES

Adams, F. C., Anderson, K. R., & Bloch, A. M. 2013, MN-

RAS, 432, 438

Gomes, R., Levison, H. F., Tsiganis, K., & Morbidelli, A.

2005, Nature, 435, 466

Graham, J. R., Matthews, K., Neugebauer, G., & Soifer,

B. T. 1990, ApJ, 357, 216

Guillochon, J., Ramirez-Ruiz, E., & Lin, D. 2011, ApJ, 732,

74

Henning, W. G., & Hurford, T. 2014, ApJ, 789, 30
Hurley, J. R., Pols, O. R., & Tout, C. A. 2000, MNRAS,

315, 543

Izidoro, A., Raymond, S. N., Morbidelli, A., & Winter,

O. C. 2015, MNRAS, 453, 3619

Jura, M. 2003, ApJL, 584, L91
Kalirai, J. S., Hansen, B. M. S., Kelson, D. D., et al. 2008,

Andrews, S. M., Rosenfeld, K. A., Kraus, A. L., & Wilner,

ApJ, 676, 594

D. J. 2013, ApJ, 771, 129

Barclay, T., Quintana, E. V., Adams, F. C., et al. 2015,

Kennedy, G. M., & Kenyon, S. J. 2008, ApJ, 673, 502
Kepler, S. O., Pelisoli, I., Koester, D., et al. 2015, MNRAS,

ApJ, 809, 7

446, 4078

Bear, E., & Soker, N. 2013, New Astronomy, 19, 56

Kepler, S. O., Pelisoli, I., Koester, D., et al. 2016, MNRAS,

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

14

Veras et al.

455, 3413

ApJ, arXiv:1511.03274

Kleinman, S. J., Kepler, S. O., Koester, D., et al. 2013,

Tremblay, P.-E., Ludwig, H.-G., Steﬀen, M., & Freytag, B.

ApJS, 204, 5

2013, A&A, 559, A104

Koester, D., G¨ansicke, B. T., & Farihi, J. 2014, A&A, 566,

Tsiganis, K., Gomes, R., Morbidelli, A., & Levison, H. F.

A34

2005, Nature, 435, 459

Levison, H. F., Lissauer, J. J., & Duncan, M. J. 1998, AJ,

Vanderburg, A., Johnson, J. A., Rappaport, S., et al. 2015,

116, 1998

Levison, H. F., Morbidelli, A., Tsiganis, K., Nesvorn´y, D.,

& Gomes, R. 2011, AJ, 142, 152

Liebert, J., Bergeron, P., & Holberg, J. B. 2005, ApJS, 156,

47

Nature, 526, 546

Veras, D., & Armitage, P. J. 2005, ApJL, 620, L111
Veras, D., & Armitage, P. J. 2006, ApJ, 645, 1509
Veras, D., & Ford, E. B. 2010, ApJ, 715, 803
Veras, D., Wyatt, M. C., Mustill, A. J., Bonsor, A., & El-

Liu, S.-F., Guillochon, J., Lin, D. N. C., & Ramirez-Ruiz,

dridge, J. J. 2011, MNRAS, 417, 2104

E. 2013, ApJ, 762, 37

Luhman, K. L., Burgasser, A. J., & Bochanski, J. J. 2011,

ApJL, 730, L9

Marois, C., Zuckerman, B., Konopacky, Q. M., Macintosh,

B., & Barman, T. 2010, Nature, 468, 1080

Marzari, F., & Weidenschilling, S. J. 2002, Icarus, 156, 570
Matsumura, S., Ida, S., & Nagasawa, M. 2013, ApJ, 767,

129

Veras, D., & Moeckel, N. 2012, MNRAS, 425, 680
Veras, D., & Raymond, S. N. 2012, MNRAS, 421, L117
Veras, D., & Tout, C. A. 2012, MNRAS, 422, 1648
Veras, D., & Evans, N. W. 2013, MNRAS, 430, 403
Veras, D., Mustill, A. J., Bonsor, A., & Wyatt, M. C. 2013a,

MNRAS, 431, 1686

Veras, D., Hadjidemetriou, J. D., & Tout, C. A. 2013b,

MNRAS, 435, 2416

Morbidelli, A., Levison, H. F., Tsiganis, K., & Gomes, R.

Veras, D., Jacobson, S. A., G¨ansicke, B. T. 2014a, MNRAS,

2005, Nature, 435, 462

445, 2794

Mustill, A. J., & Villaver, E. 2012, ApJ, 761, 121
Mustill, A. J., Marshall, J. P., Villaver, E., et al. 2013,

MNRAS, 436, 2515

Veras, D., Shannon, A., G¨ansicke, B. T. 2014b, MNRAS,

445, 4175

Veras, D., Evans, N. W., Wyatt, M. C., & Tout, C. A.

Mustill, A. J., Veras, D., & Villaver, E. 2014, MNRAS, 437,

2014c, MNRAS, 437, 1127

1404

Nordhaus, J., & Spiegel, D. S. 2013, MNRAS, 432, 500
O’Brien, D. P., Walsh, K. J., Morbidelli, A., Raymond,

S. N., & Mandell, A. M. 2014, Icarus, 239, 74

Veras, D., Leinhardt, Z. M., Bonsor, A., G¨ansicke, B. T.

2014d, MNRAS, 445, 2244

Veras, D., Eggl, S., G¨ansicke, B. T. 2015a, MNRAS, 451,

2814

Paxton, B., Bildsten, L., Dotter, A., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192,

Veras, D., Eggl, S., G¨ansicke, B. T. 2015b, MNRAS, 452,

3

Paxton, B., Marchant, P., Schwab, J., et al. 2015, ApJS,

220, 15

Payne, M. J., Veras, D., Holman, M. J., et al. 2016, MN-

RAS, 457, 217

Pierens, A., & Raymond, S. N. 2011, A&A, 533, A131
Portegies Zwart, S. 2013, MNRAS, 429, L45
Pu, B., & Wu, Y. 2015, ApJ, 807, 44
Rappaport, S., Gary, B. L., Kaye, T., et al. 2016, Submitted

to MNRAS, arXiv:1602.00740

Rasio, F. A., & Ford, E. B. 1996, Science, 274, 954
Raymond, S. N., Armitage, P. J., Moro-Mart´ın, A., et al.

2011, A&A, 530, A62

1945

Veras, D., G¨ansicke, B. T. 2015, MNRAS, 447, 1049
Veras, D., 2016, Royal Society Open Science, 3:150571.
Veras, D., Marsh, T. R., G¨ansicke, B. T. 2016, Submitted

to MNRAS

Villaver, E., Livio, M., Mustill, A. J., & Siess, L. 2014, ApJ,

794, 3

Voyatzis, G., Hadjidemetriou, J. D., Veras, D., & Varvoglis,

H. 2013, MNRAS, 430, 3383

Walsh, K. J., Morbidelli, A., Raymond, S. N., O’Brien,

D. P., & Mandell, A. M. 2011, Nature, 475, 206

Winn, J. N., & Fabrycky, D. C. 2015, ARA&A, 53, 409
Wyatt, M. C., Farihi, J., Pringle, J. E., & Bonsor, A. 2014,

Raymond, S. N., Armitage, P. J., Moro-Mart´ın, A., et al.

MNRAS, 439, 3371

2012, A&A, 541, A11

Reﬀert, S., Bergmann, C., Quirrenbach, A., Trifonov, T.,

K¨unstler, A. 2015, A&A, 574, A116

Safronov, V. S., & Zvjagina, E. V. 1969, Icarus, 10, 109
Schr¨oder, K.-P., & Connon Smith, R. 2008, MNRAS, 386,

155

Schr¨oder, K.-P., & Cuntz, M. 2005, ApJL, 630, L73
Sigurdsson, S., Richer, H. B., Hansen, B. M., Stairs, I. H.,

& Thorsett, S. E. 2003, Science, 301, 193

Smith, A. W., & Lissauer, J. J. 2009, Icarus, 201, 381
Smullen, R. A., Kratter, K. M., Shannon, A. 2016, Submit-

ted to ApJ

Steele, P. R., Burleigh, M. R., Dobbie, P. D., et al. 2011,

MNRAS, 416, 2768

Sumi, T., Kamiya, K., Bennett, D. P., et al. 2011, Nature,

473, 349

Sutherland, A. P., & Fabrycky, D. C. 2015, Submitted to

Xu, S., & Jura, M. 2012, ApJ, 745, 88
Xu, S., Jura, M., Dufour, P., & Zuckerman, B. 2016, In

Press ApJL, arXiv:1511.05973

Zakamska, N. L., & Tremaine, S. 2004, AJ, 128, 869
Zuckerman, B., Koester, D., Reid, I. N., H¨unsch, M. 2003,

ApJ, 596, 477

Zuckerman, B., Melis, C., Klein, B., Koester, D., & Jura,

M. 2010, ApJ, 722, 725

APPENDIX A: SIMULATION DATA TABLES

In this appendix, we present characteristics of every simula-
tion, one per row. The simulation sets are split into tables
according to the masses and ordering of planets simulated.
See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the table columns.

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

15

Table A1. Summary of results for JUUU and ¯J¯U¯U¯U. We summarize the column deﬁnitions (see Sec. 3.1 for a full description) as: Sim #:
Simulation designation. Setup: Planet type and order from closest to furthest. Overbars denote a mass reduction by a factor of 318. β:
Number of mutual Hill radii. Unpack: Stellar phase during which unpacking occurs. # Surv: Number of surviving planets Engulf:
Planets (identiﬁed in subscripts in number order from closest to furthest) which intersect the star’s surface or Roche radius, and the phase
when the engulfment occurs. Eject: Planets (identiﬁed in subscripts in number order from closest to furthest) which are ejected from the
system, and the phase when the ejection occurs. Collision: Planets (identiﬁed in subscripts in number order from closest to furthest) which
collide with one another, and the phase when the collision occurs. < Rmax: Surviving planets (identiﬁed in number order from closest to
furthest) which acheive an orbital pericentre less than 1.82 au during the EWD or LWD phase; the minimum pericentre is provided in
the subscript. TPs Eng: Number of test particles out of 12 which are engulfed in the EWD/LWD phases. Phase abbreviations: MS =
main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
dA test particle which survived the entire integration acheived a minimum pericentre of 0.062 au at a WD cooling age of 1.983 Gyr.

Sim # Setup

1-1
1-2
1-3
1-4

1-5
1-6
1-7
1-8

1-9
1-10
1-11
1-12

1-13
1-14
1-15
1-16

1-17
1-18
1-19
1-20

1-21
1-22
1-23
1-24

1-25
1-26
1-27
1-28

1-29
1-30
1-31
1-32

1-33
1-34
1-35
1-36

1-37
1-38
1-39
1-40

1-41
1-42
1-43
1-44

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

JUUU

¯J¯U¯U¯U
¯J¯U¯U¯U
¯J¯U¯U¯U
¯J¯U¯U¯U

¯J¯U¯U¯U
¯J¯U¯U¯U
¯J¯U¯U¯U
¯J¯U¯U¯U

¯J¯U¯U¯U
¯J¯U¯U¯U
¯J¯U¯U¯U
¯J¯U¯U¯U

β

6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

8.5
8.5
8.5
8.5

9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0

9.5
9.5
9.5
9.5

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision

< Rmax? TPs Eng Notes

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS

EWD
EWD
EWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

EWD
LWD
LWD
LWD

LWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

4
4
4
4

3
2
3
2

3
2
2
4

2
4
3
3

MS1−2

MS1−4

MS3−4

MS2,MS3

MS3

MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3

MS3,MS4
MS3,MS4

MS3

MS2,MS3

MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3
MS3,MS4

MS2

MS2,MS4

EWD3,EWD4
EWD3,EWD4
EWD2,EWD4

MS3,EWD4

MS3,MS4
MS2,MS3
MS3,MS4

EWD3,EWD4
LWD2,LWD4
LWD2,LWD3
LWD2,LWD4

LWD2,LWD3
EWD3,EWD4
EWD3,EWD4
EWD3,EWD4

MS1−4

MS2−3,MS1−2

MS1−2

MS1−4,MS1−2

MS3−4

MS1−2,MS3−4
MS1−3,LWD1−2

MS1−3,LWD1−4

LWD3

MS1−2

d

(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/4)
(0/0)

(0/0)
(0/0)
(3/2)
(2/0)

(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

16

Veras et al.

Table A2. Summary of results for UJJJ and ¯U¯J¯J¯J. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
aSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the GB phase.

Sim # Setup

β

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision < Rmax? TPs Eng Notes

2-1
2-2
2-3

2-4
2-5
2-6
2-7

2-8
2-9
2-10
2-11

2-12
2-13
2-14
2-15

2-16
2-17
2-18
2-19

2-20
2-21
2-22
2-23

2-24
2-25
2-26
2-27

2-28
2-29
2-30
2-31

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

UJJJ

¯U¯J¯J¯J
¯U¯J¯J¯J
¯U¯J¯J¯J
¯U¯J¯J¯J

¯U¯J¯J¯J
¯U¯J¯J¯J
¯U¯J¯J¯J
¯U¯J¯J¯J

¯U¯J¯J¯J
¯U¯J¯J¯J
¯U¯J¯J¯J
¯U¯J¯J¯J

6.0
6.0
6.0

6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

EWD
EWD
EWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

LWD

LWD
LWD

EWD
EWD
EWD

GB

LWD
LWD
EWD
EWD

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
4
2
3

4
4
4
4

4
4
4
4

3
3
3
3

3
4
3
3

3
3
3
3

EWD3,EWD4

EWD1

LWD2

EWD1,EWD2

MS1

MS2

MS1,EWD4
MS1,LWD2

#21.449
#40.448

#31.114

MS1

MS3−4

LWD1,LWD3

LWD1,LWD3

LWD1

EWD1−3

#20.833

a

#40.989

LWD1
LWD1
LWD1

LWD1

LWD1
LWD1

LWD1
LWD1
LWD1
LWD1

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

17

Table A3. Summary of results for JJJU and ¯J¯J¯J¯U. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
aSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the GB phase.
bSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the MS phase.
cSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the WD phase.

Sim # Setup

3-1
3-2
3-3
3-4

3-5
3-6
3-7
3-8

3-9
3-10
3-11
3-12

3-13
3-14
3-15
3-16

3-17
3-18
3-19
3-20

3-21
3-22
3-23
3-24

3-25
3-26
3-27
3-28

3-29
3-30
3-31
3-32

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

JJJU

¯J¯J¯J¯U
¯J¯J¯J¯U
¯J¯J¯J¯U
¯J¯J¯J¯U

¯J¯J¯J¯U
¯J¯J¯J¯U
¯J¯J¯J¯U
¯J¯J¯J¯U

¯J¯J¯J¯U
¯J¯J¯J¯U
¯J¯J¯J¯U
¯J¯J¯J¯U

β

6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision

< Rmax?

TPs Eng Notes

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

LWD
EWD
LWD
LWD

EWD
EWD
LWD
EWD

LWD
LWD
LWD
LWD

EWD
EWD

MS
MS

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

3
3
3
3

4
4
4
4

4
4
4
4

3
3
3
3

4
3
3
3

3
3
2
3

#31.543
#30.743

#10.505

MS1

MS2
MS1

EWD3,EWD4
EWD1,EWD4
EWD2,EWD4
EWD1,EWD4

MS4

MS4,LWD3

MS4
MS4

LWD4
EWD4
LWD4
LWD4

LWD4
LWD4
LWD4
LWD4

LWD4
LWD4

LWD4
LWD4

LWD4

#20.515, #40.00838

LWD1−3

LWD4

MS1−2

a
a

b

c

b

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

18

Veras et al.

Table A4. Summary of results for UUUJ and ¯U¯U¯U¯J. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
dA test particle which survived the entire integration acheived a minimum pericentre of 0.0244 au at a WD cooling age of 1.844 Gyr.
eA test particle which survived the entire integration acheived a minimum pericentre of 0.5537 au at a WD cooling age of 4.446 Gyr.
f A test particle which survived the entire integration acheived a minimum pericentre of 0.2312 au at a WD cooling age of 6.671 Gyr.

Sim # Setup

4-1
4-2
4-3
4-4

4-5
4-6
4-7
4-8

4-9
4-10
4-11
4-12

4-13
4-14
4-15
4-16

4-17
4-18
4-19
4-20

4-21
4-22
4-23
4-24

4-25
4-26
4-27
4-28

4-29
4-30
4-31
4-32

4-33
4-34
4-35
4-36

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

UUUJ

¯U¯U¯U¯J
¯U¯U¯U¯J
¯U¯U¯U¯J
¯U¯U¯U¯J

¯U¯U¯U¯J
¯U¯U¯U¯J
¯U¯U¯U¯J
¯U¯U¯U¯J

¯U¯U¯U¯J
¯U¯U¯U¯J
¯U¯U¯U¯J
¯U¯U¯U¯J

β

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

8.5
8.5
8.5
8.5

9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0

9.5
9.5
9.5
9.5

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

14.0
14.0
14.0
14.0

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision

< Rmax? TPs Eng Notes

MS1,MS2
MS1,MS2

MS3

GB1

MS2,MS3

MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3

MS3
GB3

MS1,WD2
MS1,MS2
MS2,MS3
MS1,MS3

EWD2,EWD3
EWD2,EWD3
EWD2,EWD3

EWD2

LWD2,LWD3
LWD2,LWD3
LWD1,LWD3
LWD2,LWD3

LWD1,LWD2
LWD1,LWD2
LWD1,LWD3
LWD1,LWD3

MS1−2

MS1−4
MS1−2

EWD1−3

#10.464

(8/0)
(12/0)
(12/0)
(3/1)

(0/12)
(0/12)
(0/10)
(0/7)

(0/11)
(0/11)
(0/11)
(0/10)

d

e,f

MS2−4,LWD3−4

MS2−4,

MS1−4,MS2−3
MS1−4,MS2−4

MS1−4

MS2−4,MS3−4

MS2−4

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

LWD
LWD
LWD
LWD

LWD
LWD
LWD
LWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

LWD
LWD
LWD
LWD

2
2
2
1

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
3
2
2

4
3
2
3

4
4
4
4

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

19

Table A5. Summary of results for JUUJ and ¯J¯U¯U¯J. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
bSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the MS phase.
cSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the WD phase.
zUnpacking, ejections and engulfments all occur for WD cooling ages exceeding 10 Gyr.

Sim # Setup

β

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision < Rmax? TPs Eng Notes

MS2

MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3

MS3,EWD2

MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3

LWD2,LWD3

MS2,MS3

EWD2,EWD3

MS2,EWD3

MS2,MS3

MS2

MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3

MS2,MS3

MS3

MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3

EWD2,EWD3

MS2,MS3

EWD2,EWD3
EWD2,EWD3

EWD2,EWD3
EWD2,EWD3
EWD2,LWD3
EWD2,EWD3

LWD2,LWD3

LWD2,LWD3
LWD2,LWD3

LWD2

LWD2

5-1
5-2
5-3
5-4

5-5
5-6
5-7
5-8

5-9
5-10
5-11
5-12

5-13
5-14
5-15
5-16

5-17
5-18
5-19
5-20

5-21
5-22
5-23
5-24

5-25
5-26
5-27
5-28

5-29
5-30
5-31
5-32

5-33
5-34
5-35
5-36

5-37
5-38
5-39
5-40

5-41
5-42
5-43
5-44

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

JUUJ

¯J¯U¯U¯J
¯J¯U¯U¯J
¯J¯U¯U¯J
¯J¯U¯U¯J

¯J¯U¯U¯J
¯J¯U¯U¯J
¯J¯U¯U¯J
¯J¯U¯U¯J

¯J¯U¯U¯J
¯J¯U¯U¯J
¯J¯U¯U¯J
¯J¯U¯U¯J

6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

8.5
8.5
8.5
8.5

9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0

9.5
9.5
9.5
9.5

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

14.0
14.0
14.0
14.0

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

LWD
MS

EWD

MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

EWD

MS

EWD
EWD

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

LWD

LWD
LWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

LWD
MS
MS

EWD

LWD
LWD
LWD

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
4
2
2

3
3
2
4

3
3
3
4

3
4
4
4

MS1−3

#31.624

MS1−2
LWD1−4
LWD1−4

GB2−4
GB1−2

LWD1−2

(2/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)

(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/2)
(4/0)

(0/3)
(0/0)
(0/2)
(0/3)

z

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

20

Veras et al.

Table A6. Summary of results for UJJU and ¯U¯J¯J¯U. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.

Sim # Setup

β

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision < Rmax? TPs Eng Notes

6-1
6-2
6-3
6-4

6-5
6-6
6-7
6-8

6-9
6-10
6-11
6-12

6-13
6-14
6-15
6-16

6-17
6-18
6-19
6-20

6-21
6-22
6-23
6-24

6-25
6-26
6-27
6-28

6-29
6-30
6-31
6-32

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

UJJU

¯U¯J¯J¯U
¯U¯J¯J¯U
¯U¯J¯J¯U
¯U¯J¯J¯U

¯U¯J¯J¯U
¯U¯J¯J¯U
¯U¯J¯J¯U
¯U¯J¯J¯U

¯U¯J¯J¯U
¯U¯J¯J¯U
¯U¯J¯J¯U
¯U¯J¯J¯U

6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

LWD

EWD

MS
LWD
MS

LWD
LWD
LWD

LWD
LWD
EWD
LWD

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

4
2
4
4

4
4
4
4

4
4
4
4

3
3
3
2

4
4
4
4

4
3
4
4

EWD1,EWD4
EWD1,EWD4

EWD1

EWD4

EWD1,EWD4

MS1

MS1,MS4
MS1,MS4

MS4

MS1,MS4

LWD1,LWD4

LWD2−3
MS1−3
LWD2−3
MS2−4

LWD1

LWD4

#11.696

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Table A7. Summary of results for JSUN and ¯J¯S¯U¯N. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
aSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the GB phase.

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

21

Sim # Setup

β

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision

< Rmax?

TPs Eng Notes

MS4

MS3,MS4
MS3,WD4
MS3,MS4

EWD3,EWD4

MS3,MS4

EWD3,EWD4,LWD2

MS3,MS4
MS3,MS4

MS3

EWD4

MS3,MS4,LWD2

MS3,MS4

MS3,MS4

MS4

MS3,MS4
MS3,LWD4

EWD3,LWD4
EWD3,EWD4
LWD3,LWD4

EWD3,LWD2,LWD4

LWD3,LWD4

LWD3

MS3−4

MS1−3

(0/0)
(0/2)
(0/3)
(0/0)

(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)

(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)

MS3,LWD2

MS2−4

MS1−2,LWD1−4

MS2−4
MS2−4

LWD1−4
MS1−3
MS1−4

#30.914, #40.455

a

7-1
7-2
7-3
7-4

7-5
7-6
7-7
7-8

7-9
7-10
7-11
7-12

7-13
7-14
7-15
7-16

7-17
7-18
7-19
7-20

7-21
7-22
7-23
7-24

7-25
7-26
7-27
7-28

7-29
7-30
7-31
7-32

7-33
7-34
7-35
7-36

7-37
7-38
7-39
7-40

7-41
7-42
7-43
7-44

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

JSUN

¯J¯S¯U¯N
¯J¯S¯U¯N
¯J¯S¯U¯N
¯J¯S¯U¯N

¯J¯S¯U¯N
¯J¯S¯U¯N
¯J¯S¯U¯N
¯J¯S¯U¯N

¯J¯S¯U¯N
¯J¯S¯U¯N
¯J¯S¯U¯N
¯J¯S¯U¯N

6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

8.5
8.5
8.5
8.5

9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0

9.5
9.5
9.5
9.5

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

MS
MS
MS

EWD

MS

EWD

MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

EWD
EWD
LWD
EWD

LWD
LWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS

EWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

2
2
2
2

2
1
2
2

2
2
1
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
1

4
2
3
4

4
4
4
4

4
4
4
4

2
4
3
2

4
3
4
4

3
3
3
4

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

22

Veras et al.

Table A8. Summary of results for JSNU and ¯J¯S¯N¯U. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.

Sim # Setup

β

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision

< Rmax? TPs Eng Notes

8-1
8-2
8-3
8-4

8-5
8-6
8-7
8-8

8-9
8-10
8-11
8-12

8-13
8-14
8-15
8-16

8-17
8-18
8-19
8-20

8-21
8-22
8-23
8-24

8-25
8-26
8-27
8-28

8-29
8-30
8-31
8-32

8-33
8-34
8-35
8-36

8-37
8-38
8-39
8-40

8-41
8-42
8-43
8-44

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

JSNU

¯J¯S¯N¯U
¯J¯S¯N¯U
¯J¯S¯N¯U
¯J¯S¯N¯U

¯J¯S¯N¯U
¯J¯S¯N¯U
¯J¯S¯N¯U
¯J¯S¯N¯U

¯J¯S¯N¯U
¯J¯S¯N¯U
¯J¯S¯N¯U
¯J¯S¯N¯U

6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

8.5
8.5
8.5
8.5

9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0

9.5
9.5
9.5
9.5

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS

EWD
EWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

LWD
LWD
EWD
EWD

LWD
LWD
LWD
EWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS

EWD

MS

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
1

4
4
4
4

4
4
4
4

3
3
2
3

2
3
3
3

4
3
4
3

MS3,MS4
MS3,MS4
MS3,MS4
MS3,MS4

MS2,MS4
MS3,MS4

EWD3,EWD4
EWD3,EWD4

MS3,MS4
MS3,MS4

MS3,EWD4

MS3,MS4

MS3

MS3,MS4

MS3

MS3,MS4

LWD2,LWD4
LWD3,LWD4
LWD3,LWD4
EWD4,LWD3

LWD3,LWD4
LWD3,LWD4
LWD3,LWD4

LWD2,LWD3,LWD4

MS4

MS1−4

LWD4

LWD1−2
LWD1−2

MS1−2,MS1−3

MS2−4

MS1−2,MS1−3

MS1−3
MS1−2

GB1−2

MS1−2

#30.835

(0/0)
(0/8)
(0/1)
(4/2)

(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)

(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

23

Table A9. Summary of results for UNJS and ¯U¯N¯J¯S. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
aSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the GB phase.

Sim # Setup

β

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision

< Rmax? TPs Eng Notes

9-1
9-2
9-3
9-4

9-5
9-6
9-7
9-8

9-9
9-10
9-11
9-12

9-13
9-14
9-15
9-16

9-17
9-18
9-19
9-20

9-21
9-22
9-23
9-24

9-25
9-26
9-27
9-28

9-29
9-30
9-31
9-32

9-33
9-34
9-35
9-36

9-37
9-38
9-39
9-40

9-41
9-42
9-43
9-44

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

UNJS

¯U¯N¯J¯S
¯U¯N¯J¯S
¯U¯N¯J¯S
¯U¯N¯J¯S

¯U¯N¯J¯S
¯U¯N¯J¯S
¯U¯N¯J¯S
¯U¯N¯J¯S

¯U¯N¯J¯S
¯U¯N¯J¯S
¯U¯N¯J¯S
¯U¯N¯J¯S

6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

8.5
8.5
8.5
8.5

9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0

9.5
9.5
9.5
9.5

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

MS
MS
MS
MS

EWD

MS
MS

EWD

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS

EWD
LWD
EWD

2
2
2
3

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
3
2
1

3
3
3
1

3
3
3
3

3
3
3
3

4
4
4
4

2
3
3
4

3
4
4
4

3
3
4
4

MS3−4

MS1,LWD2
MS1,MS2
MS1,MS2

EWD1,EWD2

MS1,MS2
MS1,MS2

EWD1,LWD2

EWD1,EWD2
EWD1,EWD2
EWD1,EWD2
EWD2,LWD1

MS2,LWD4

MS1

MS1,LWD4

MS1,LWD2,LWD4

MS1

MS2

MS1,MS4

MS1−2
MS1−2

EWD1
EWD2
EWD1
EWD2

EWD2
EWD1
EWD1
EWD1

MS2−4,MS3−4

GB2−3
MS2−3

MS1−3

GB1−2
LWD3−4

(0/1)
(8/0)
(8/1)
(6/0)

(2/2)
(4/1)
(0/2)
(7/0)

(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)

a

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

24

Veras et al.

Table A10. Summary of results for NUJS and ¯N¯U¯J¯S. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
aSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the GB phase.

Sim # Setup

10-1
10-2
10-3
10-4

10-5
10-6
10-7
10-8

10-9
10-10
10-11
10-12

10-13
10-14
10-15
10-16

10-17
10-18
10-19
10-20

10-21
10-22
10-23
10-24

10-25
10-26
10-27
10-28

10-29
10-30
10-31
10-32

10-33
10-34
10-35
10-36

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

NUJS

¯N¯U¯J¯S
¯N¯U¯J¯S
¯N¯U¯J¯S
¯N¯U¯J¯S

¯N¯U¯J¯S
¯N¯U¯J¯S
¯N¯U¯J¯S
¯N¯U¯J¯S

¯N¯U¯J¯S
¯N¯U¯J¯S
¯N¯U¯J¯S
¯N¯U¯J¯S

β

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

8.5
8.5
8.5
8.5

9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0

9.5
9.5
9.5
9.5

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision < Rmax? TPs Eng Notes

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

EWD

MS
MS
MS

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

MS

EWD
EWD
EWD

EWD

MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

3
2
3
3

3
2
2
2

2
3
3
3

3
3
3
3

3
3
2
1

4
4
4
4

3
3
4
3

3
3
3
3

3
3
3
3

EWD2
MS2

MS1,MS2

MS2
MS1

MS2
MS1
MS1

MS2,LWD1

EWD1,EWD2

MS2
MS2
MS2

EWD2
EWD1
EWD2
EWD2

MS2

EWD2

EWD1,EWD2

EWD1,EWD2,LWD4

MS2−3

EWD2−3

MS1−2

MS3−4

MS1−4
MS3−4
MS1−3
MS2−3

LWD3−4
MS2−3
MS2−4
MS3−4

(6/0)
(5/0)
(1/3)
(2/1)

(0/0)
(0/4)
(5/0)
(4/1)

(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)
(0/0)

a

a

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

25

Table A11. Summary of results for JUNS and ¯J¯U¯N¯S. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
aSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the GB phase.
dA test particle which survived the entire integration acheived a minimum pericentre of 0.039 au at a WD cooling age of 10.091 Gyr.
zUnpacking, ejections and engulfments all occur for WD cooling ages exceeding 10 Gyr.

Sim # Setup

11-1
11-2
11-3
11-4

11-5
11-6
11-7
11-8

11-9
11-10
11-11
11-12

11-13
11-14
11-15
11-16

11-17
11-18
11-19
11-20

11-21
11-22
11-23
11-24

11-25
11-26
11-27
11-28

11-29
11-30
11-31
11-32

11-33
11-34
11-35
11-36

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

JUNS

¯J¯U¯N¯S
¯J¯U¯N¯S
¯J¯U¯N¯S
¯J¯U¯N¯S

¯J¯U¯N¯S
¯J¯U¯N¯S
¯J¯U¯N¯S
¯J¯U¯N¯S

¯J¯U¯N¯S
¯J¯U¯N¯S
¯J¯U¯N¯S
¯J¯U¯N¯S

β

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0

8.5
8.5
8.5
8.5

9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0

9.5
9.5
9.5
9.5

10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0

11.0
11.0
11.0
11.0

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision

< Rmax? TPs Eng Notes

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

EWD

MS
MS

EWD

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

LWD
LWD

LWD

LWD
LWD
LWD

MS
MS
MS
MS

MS
MS
MS
MS

EWD

MS
MS

EWD

2
2
1
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

2
3
4
2

3
2
2
4

4
4
3
4

4
3
2
3

4
2
4
3

MS3

MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3

MS3,EWD4

MS2,MS3

MS2,MS3
MS2,MS3

MS2

MS2,MS3

EWD3,LWD2

MS2,MS3

MS2,EWD3
EWD2,LWD3

EWD3

EWD2,LWD3
EWD2,EWD3
EWD2,LWD3

LWD2,LWD3

LWD2

LWD2,LWD3

LWD2,LWD3
LWD2,LWD3

MS1−2

EWD1−2

LWD1−3

#20.956

GB1−2

MS3−4

MS1−3,LWD1−4

GB1−4

MS1−2,LWD3−4

LWD1−4

#31.764

(0/0)
(4/0)
(2/0)
(1/0)

(0/3)
(0/4)
(0/1)
(0/1)

(0/2)
(0/0)
(0/4)
(0/0)

d,z

a

a

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

26

Veras et al.

Table A12. Summary of results for initially alternating Jupiters and Saturns. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table
A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
cSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the WD phase.
kThe simulation ran for just 2.534 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the fourth planet along the white dwarf phase.
lThe simulation ran for just 4.644 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the sixth planet along the white dwarf phase.
mThe simulation ran for just 2.994 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the ﬁfth planet along the white dwarf phase.
nThe simulation ran for just 3.823 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the ﬁfth planet along the white dwarf phase.
oThe simulation ran for just 8.433 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the third planet along the white dwarf phase.
pThe simulation ran for just 7.105 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the ﬁrst planet along the white dwarf phase.

Sim #

Setup

β

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision

< Rmax?

Notes

12-1
12-2
12-3
12-4

12-5
12-6
12-7
12-8

12-9
12-10
12-11

12-12
12-13
12-14
12-15

12-16
12-17
12-18
12-19

12-20
12-21
12-22
12-23

JSJS

JSJS

JSJS

JSJS

JSJS

JSJS

JSJS

JSJS

JSJSJS

JSJSJS

JSJSJS

JSJSJS

JSJSJS

JSJSJS

JSJSJS

JSJSJSJS

JSJSJSJS

JSJSJSJS

JSJSJSJS

JSJSJSJS

JSJSJSJS

JSJSJSJS

JSJSJSJS

6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

6.0
6.0
6.0

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

EWD

MS

EWD

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

EWD
EWD
EWD

MS

EWD
EWD
EWD
EWD

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
3

3
2
3

2
2
1
3

3
3
2
2

3
3
2
3

EWD4

EWD4

MS2,GB1

EWD2

EWD3
LWD3
EWD6

EWD1
EWD7

EWD2,EWD4
EWD2,EWD4

EWD2

EWD2,EWD4

EWD2,EWD4

EWD2,EWD4,LWD3

EWD2,EWD4

EWD2

EWD2,EWD6

MS4,MS6

EWD3,LWD4

EWD1,EWD2,EWD4,LWD6

EWD2,EWD4,EWD6

EWD2,EWD4,EWD6,LWD5

EWD2,EWD4

EWD4,EWD6,EWD8,LWD3
EWD3,EWD4,EWD6,EWD8

EWD1,EWD2,EWD5,EWD6,LWD3,LWD4

MS6,GB3

MS2,MS4,MS7,MS8

#10.428

#40.218

#60.917

k

l

#50.669

#10.473, #50.354

m
n

#70.381

EWD1,EWD4,EWD8,LWD7

EWD1−2

EWD4,EWD5,EWD6,EWD7,EWD8

EWD2,EWD3,EWD4,EWD8,LWD5,LWD6

EWD6

EWD2,EWD4,EWD5,LWD8

#21.566, #30.034

#10.171
#11.586

c,o
c
p

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

Full-life sims of unequal-mass planets

27

Table A13. Summary of results for initially alternating Uranuses and Neptunes. See Sec. 3.1 for a full description of the columns or Table
A1 for a summary.
MS = main sequence, GB = giant branch, EWD = white dwarf with 0-100 Myr cooling, LWD = white dwarf beyond 100 Myr cooling.
Notes:
bSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the MS phase.
cSubsequent evolution may have been aﬀected by tides on the WD phase.
qThe simulation ran for just 4.831 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the ﬁrst planet along the white dwarf phase.
rThe simulation ran for just 2.196 Gyr due to the very tight orbits of the ﬁrst and sixth planets along the white dwarf phase.
sThe simulation ran for just 7.368 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the fourth planet along the white dwarf phase.
tThe simulation ran for just 2.564 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the fourth planet along the white dwarf phase.
uThe simulation ran for just 2.078 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the ﬁrst planet along the white dwarf phase.
vThe simulation ran for just 1.926 Gyr due to the tight orbit of the eighth planet along the white dwarf phase.

Sim #

Setup

β

Unpack # Surv

Engulf

Eject

Collision

< Rmax?

Notes

13-1
13-2
13-3
13-4

13-5
13-6
13-7
13-8

13-9
13-10
13-11

13-12
13-13
13-14

13-15
13-16
13-17

UNUN

UNUN

UNUN

UNUN

UNUN

UNUN

UNUN

UNUN

UNUNUN

UNUNUN

UNUNUN

UNUNUN

UNUNUN

UNUNUN

UNUNUNUN

UNUNUNUN

UNUNUNUN

7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

9.0
9.0
9.0
9.0

7.0
7.0
7.0

9.0
9.0
9.0

9.0
9.0
9.0

EWD
EWD
EWD

GB

LWD
LWD
LWD
LWD

MS
MS
MS

EWD
EWD
EWD

EWD
EWD
EWD

3
2
3
3

2
2
2
3

1
3
3

4
5
4

5
7
7

EWD2

EWD2
GB2

LWD1
LWD3

MS1,GB6
MS5,GB6

MS1

LWD2
LWD2
LWD2

EWD3
LWD8
EWD1

EWD2

EWD1−3

LWD1−3

LWD1−2,LWD1−3

MS2−3
MS2−4

MS1−3,MS2−4

LWD2

LWD4

MS4,MS5

LWD6

LWD1

LWD1,LWD2

#11.769, #30.00731

#40.608
#10.797

#10.891

#20.00935

#20.906

#10.784, #30.0435

#10.0424, #50.667, #60.211
#30.238, #40.0170, #50.0187

#40.0889, #80.153
#10.0121, #70.133
#30.213, #80.293

c

c

b

c,q
c,r
c,s

c,t
c,u
v

c(cid:13) 2016 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–14

