Unique Fock quantization of a massive fermion ﬁeld in a

cosmological scenario

Jer´onimo Cortez,1, ∗ Beatriz Elizaga Navascu´es,2, † Mercedes

Mart´ın-Benito,3, ‡ Guillermo A. Mena Marug´an,2, § and Jos´e M. Velhinho4, ¶

1Departamento de F´ısica, Facultad de Ciencias,

Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico, M´exico D.F. 04510, M´exico.

2Instituto de Estructura de la Materia,

IEM-CSIC, Serrano 121, 28006 Madrid, Spain.

3Radboud University Nijmegen, Institute for Mathematics,
Astrophysics and Particle Physics, Heyendaalseweg 135,

NL-6525 AJ Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

4Dept. de F´ısica, Universidade da Beira Interior, 6201-001 Covilh˜a, Portugal.

It is well-known that the Fock quantization of ﬁeld theories in general spacetimes
suﬀers from an inﬁnite ambiguity, owing to the inequivalent possibilities in the selec-
tion of a representation of the canonical commutation or anticommutation relations,
but also owing to the freedom in the choice of variables to describe the ﬁeld among
all those related by linear time-dependent transformations, including the dependence
through functions of the background. In this work we remove this ambiguity (up to
unitary equivalence) in the case of a massive Dirac free ﬁeld propagating in a space-
time with homogeneous and isotropic spatial sections of spherical topology. Two
physically reasonable conditions are imposed in order to arrive to this result: a)
The invariance of the vacuum under the spatial isometries of the background, and
b) The unitary implementability of the dynamical evolution that dictates the Dirac
equation. We characterize the class of Fock quantizations with a non-trivial fermion
dynamics that satisfy these two conditions. Then, we provide a complete proof of
the unitary equivalence of the representations in this class under very mild require-
ments on the time variation of the background, once a criterion to discern between
particles and antiparticles has been set.

PACS numbers: 03.70.+k, 04.62.+v, 98.80.Qc, 04.60.-m

6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
9
2

 

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
7
3
0
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ jacq@ciencias.unam.mx
† beatriz.elizaga@iem.cfmac.csic.es
‡ m.martin@hef.ru.nl
§ mena@iem.cfmac.csic.es
¶ jvelhi@ubi.pt

I.

INTRODUCTION

2

Quantum Field Theory (QFT) has proven to provide highly accurate and successful pre-
dictions within the Standard Model of particle physics, in absence of gravity. Indeed, the
theoretical development of QFT in Minkowski spacetime has been crucial for explaining
the phenomena observed in particle accelerators or astroparticle detectors. This formalism
includes the assumption that the quantum theory incorporates the spacetime symmetries of
the corresponding classical ﬁeld theory, namely, the basic quantum structures are invariant
under the transformations of the Poincar´e group. However, ﬂat spacetime is quite a speciﬁc
background for the ﬁeld theory, and in more general situations (allowed e.g. by General
Relativity) no such a particular symmetry is present. Besides, and beyond any spacetime
symmetry considerations, it is a well-known fact that there exists an inﬁnite ambiguity
when it comes to quantizing a linear ﬁeld theory, ambiguity that is beyond the usual ones
also present in traditional Quantum Mechanics (QM). In this latter case, and owing to the
ﬁniteness of the number of degrees of freedom, the joint criteria of strong continuity, uni-
tarity, and irreducibility suﬃce to pick out a unique (up to unitary equivalence) quantum
representation of the Weyl algebra on a separable Hilbert space, as stated by the Stone-von
Neumann theorem [1]. However, ﬁeld theories do possess an inﬁnite number of degrees of
freedom. Owing to this diﬀerence with standard QM, and even when restricting to free-ﬁeld
linear theories and to Fock-like representations of the ﬁeld analogue of the Weyl algebra
(or the corresponding ﬁeld canonical commutation or anticommutation relations), one may
construct an inﬁnite number of inequivalent quantum theories [2]. This is a serious issue,
inasmuch as those inﬁnitely many possible quantum theories would provide diﬀerent phys-
ical predictions. Remarkably, in the experimentally contrasted case of QFT in Minkowski
spacetime, the mentioned symmetry requirements on the Fock representation of the canon-
ical commutation or anticommutation relations turn out to select a unique representation,
thus removing this serious ambiguity [3].

For linear ﬁeld theories, ﬂat spacetime is not the only globally hyperbolic scenario for
QFT where symmetry requirements have been put forward in order to select a privileged
Fock quantization of the canonical commutation or anticommutation relations. For instance,
in stationary (or static) spacetimes there is a well-established symmetry criterion to pick
out a speciﬁc Fock representation [2, 4, 5]. However, these results are not applicable if more
general situations are investigated, where there might be less spacetime symmetries, and
in particular not any time-translational symmetry at all. Specially relevant backgrounds of
such type, from the physical point of view, are the non-stationary cosmological spacetimes.
Luckily, recent investigations on the Fock quantization of real scalar ﬁelds propagating in
such globally hyperbolic scenarios have proven that, in many of those situations, there still
remain some physically meaningful criteria in order to select a unique class of unitarily equiv-
alent representations. On the one hand, such criteria include the requirement of attaining
a quantum theory that respects the spatial isometries of the considered spacetime, with
spatial sections that we take to have compact topology. On the other hand, the lack of any
time-translation invariance is overcome with the requirement that the quantum dynamics
be implementable as a unitary operator in the resulting Fock space (i.e., as a unitary endo-
morphism in that space), as it happens in traditional QM. This requirement allows us to use
a Schr¨odinger picture in the quantum theory which is unitarily equivalent to the Heisenberg
picture, commonly used in QFT. It therefore allows for a well-deﬁned notion of “particle cre-
ation” on the vacuum over time, as it actually imposes ultraviolet regularity conditions [6].

3

These uniqueness results for the selection of a preferred Fock quantization of real free scalar
ﬁelds in cosmological scenarios have been obtained in a variety of situations. The imposition
of symmetry invariance and unitary implementability of the dynamics was ﬁrst put forward
in order to prove the uniqueness of the Fock quantization of gravitational waves in the in-
homogeneous Gowdy cosmologies [7]. This proof has also been extended to the context of
(test) scalar ﬁelds propagating in homogeneous and isotropic backgrounds with any kind of
compact spatial sections, as long as the dimension of those sections is smaller than four [8].
A particularly interesting application of this result is the analysis of the Fock quantization
of scalar (or tensor) cosmological perturbations around a ﬂat Friedmann-Robertson-Walker
(FRW) type of background [9]. In fact, that analysis reveals that, in such contexts, a unitary
dynamics restricts the description of the ﬁeld-like system by means of a very speciﬁc choice
of ﬁeld variable, obtained through a time-dependent scaling that includes part of the ﬁeld
evolution into the time dependence of the spacetime. Such a scaling is precisely the one
employed in standard cosmology by the consideration of the Mukhanov-Sasaki variable [10].
Moreover, the restriction applies as well to the ﬁeld momentum, which is totally speciﬁed
without any ambiguity in the possible addition to it of terms that are linear in the ﬁeld
conﬁguration [8].

Our aim now is to extend the uniqueness theorems proven so far for the Fock quantization
of real scalar ﬁelds to the case of free fermion ﬁelds. The ﬁeld of interest will thus be the
Dirac spinor. Such an object describes half-spin particles that are, together with gauge
ﬁelds, the dominant type of matter in nature nowadays. The interest in investigating the
formalism underlying the description of fermion ﬁelds propagating in a curved spacetime
goes beyond analyzing the possible role of fermions in cosmology. Indeed, it may prove to
be useful in condensed matter systems such as graphene, where the low energy electronic
excitations behave as if they were relativistic fermion ﬁelds [11].

As a ﬁrst step towards removing the ambiguity in the Fock quantization of fermionic
matter, in Ref.
[12] we already considered the particular setting given by a massive Dirac
spinor propagating in an FRW cosmology with closed spatial sections. This system was ﬁrst
studied in Ref. [13], where a particular Fock representation for the Dirac ﬁeld, compatible
with the symmetries of the ﬁeld equations, was chosen. Concretely, the representation chosen
in Ref. [13] presents quite a speciﬁc structure with respect to the mode decomposition of the
fermion ﬁeld in terms of the eigenspinors of the Dirac operator on the spatial sections of the
cosmological model, which are three-spheres (S3). The main result of Ref. [12] is the proof
that this Fock quantization belongs to a family of equivalent representations that, being
compatible with the symmetries of the ﬁeld equations, also admit a unitary implementation
of the quantum dynamics. This family of symmetry invariant representations is characterized
by presenting a particular asymptotic behavior with respect to the eigenvalues of the Dirac
operator on S3. Such asymptotic behavior plays an important role in guaranteeing the
unitary implementability of the dynamics [12]. Within this family, in Ref.
[12] we took
as reference Fock representation the one obtained by considering the leading order in that
asymptotic expansion with respect to the eigenvalues of the Dirac operator. Therefore, this
quantization can be regarded as the simplest one that, while respecting the symmetries of
the Dirac ﬁeld equations under study, makes possible the unitary implementation of the
fermion dynamics [12].

In the present work, we generalize the previous results of Ref. [12] in two directions. First,
we clarify the requirement of compatibility of the representation with the symmetries of the
ﬁeld equations used in Ref.
[12], showing that it suﬃces to impose invariance of the Fock

4

quantization under the isometry group of S3 in order to arrive at the desired mode structure
for the representation. More importantly, we prove the uniqueness (up to unitary equiv-
alence) of the representation under the imposed criteria, without further assumptions on
the kind of asymptotic behavior. Indeed, we will demonstrate that any Fock representation
of the canonical anticommutation relations, invariant under the isometry group of S3, that
admits a non-trivial unitary implementation of the evolution, must be unitarily equivalent
to our reference one, regardless of any additional restriction on its asymptotics (with respect
to the eigenvalues of the Dirac operator) within the family of possible behaviors allowed by
the unitarity of the dynamics. Such a unitary equivalence is established under very mild
conditions on the time variation of the cosmological background, and once a convention on
the notions of particle and antiparticle has been set. Remarkably, our analysis about the
feasibility of a unitarily implementable and non-trivial evolution demonstrates as well the
uniqueness of the time-dependent scaling of the fermion ﬁelds in the privileged deﬁnition of
annihilation and creation-like variables selected by our criteria.

The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec. II we will introduce the mathematical
object that characterizes the Fock quantization of fermion ﬁelds and that then codiﬁes
the inﬁnite ambiguity in its choice: The complex structure. We allow this structure to be
explicitly time dependent, beyond the variation that is already due to its possible dynamical
evolution. Afterwards, focusing the attention on the cosmological model under consideration,
we will provide the general form of those complex structures that give rise to quantizations
with a vacuum that is invariant under the spatial isometries of the considered spacetime. Sec.
III will provide and analyze the necessary and suﬃcient conditions that a complex structure
must satisfy in order to admit a non-trivial unitary dynamics in the Fock space that it
deﬁnes. With these conditions at hand, the most simple of those complex structures will be
selected as a reference. Then, we will obtain a proof of the unitary equivalence of any other
admissible complex structure. In this demonstration, the role of particles and antiparticles
will be discussed. Finally, in Sec. IV we will summarize our results and comment on possible
applications and extensions of them.

II. FERMION COMPLEX STRUCTURES

A Fock representation of the canonical anticommutation relations of a fermion ﬁeld is
characterized by a complex structure. We will introduce this object in the framework of
a Dirac spinor Ψ propagating in a general globally hyperbolic spacetime. The dynamics
of the ﬁeld is dictated by the ﬁrst order Dirac equation in the corresponding spacetime.
Speciﬁcally, we denote by S = {Ψ} the complex linear space of solutions to that Dirac
equation. Given the hyperbolicity of the background, each of those solutions is in a one-
to-one correspondence with an initial value of the spinor ﬁeld on a certain Cauchy surface
[14]. Therefore, S is isomorphic to the space of initial data for the Dirac equation. It is
convenient to equip S with the following natural, positive deﬁnite inner product [14]:

(Ψ1, Ψ2)S =Z d˜µ Ψ+

1 nνea

νγaΨ2,

(2.1)

where the right-hand side is evaluated at a certain and arbitrary global time, and d˜µ is the
integration measure on the spatial sections. Here, γa (with a = 0, 1, 2, 3) are the constant

Dirac matrices, that provide a representation of the Dirac-Cliﬀord algebra

γaγb + γbγa = 2ηabI,

5

(2.2)

where I is the 4 × 4 identity matrix and ηab is the Minkowski metric, taken with signature
diag{−1, +1, +1, +1}. Also, we have used the notation Ψ+ = Ψ†γ0 to denote the adjoint
Dirac spinor, which satisﬁes the adjoint Dirac equation. Besides, nν are the spacetime com-
ponents of the (unit, timelike, future-directed Lorentzian) normal to the spatial sections
(with ν = 0, 1, 2, 3), and ea
ν denotes the tetrad. This inner product can be seen to be inde-
pendent of the spatial section on which it is evaluated, so it is conserved under the evolution
of the solutions of the Dirac equation [14]. In an analogous way, we may construct the space
¯S as the complex conjugate of S, with inner product given by the complex conjugate of
(2.1). In the following, we denote complex conjugation with an overbar.

A. General framework

J ⊕ S−

A complex structure J : S → S is deﬁned as a real linear map with the property J 2 = −I,
and such that it leaves the inner product invariant [15]. Any complex structure J deﬁnes
a splitting S = S+
J of S into two mutually complementary and orthogonal subspaces,
S±
J = (S∓iJS)/2. In this way, S±
J are the eigenspaces of J with eigenvalue ±i. Analogously,
we can deﬁne the complex structure J as a linear map on ¯S. It then induces the splitting
¯S = ( ¯SJ )+ ⊕ ( ¯SJ )−, with ( ¯SJ )± = ( ¯S ∓ iJ ¯S)/2 = (S∓
J ). With these decompositions at hand,
the Fock quantization associated with J is completely characterized by the assignation of
the one-particle Hilbert space of particles to the completion of S+
J in the inner product (2.1),
and the one-particle Hilbert space of antiparticles to the completion of (S−
J ). We denote
these Hilbert spaces by H +
J , respectively. The direct sum of these two Hilbert
spaces gives rise to the one-particle Hilbert space HJ of the quantum theory, from which the
antisymmetric Fock space is constructed. Therefore, diﬀerent choices of complex structures
provide diﬀerent one-particle Hilbert spaces for the quantum theories, that are in principle
inequivalent to each other. Here resides the inﬁnite ambiguity in the Fock representation of
the canonical anticommutation relations of the Dirac ﬁeld, ambiguity that we will remove
in this work.

J and H −

In practice, the choice of a complex structure for the Fock quantization can be understood
in terms of a speciﬁc choice of annihilation and creation-like variables for the classical ﬁeld,
to be quantized in terms of annihilation and creation operators. Indeed, the above decom-
position is equivalent to picking out a set of particle annihilation-like variables, and a set of
antiparticle creation-like ones, sets in terms of which the solutions of the Dirac equation are
expressed. The subspace S+
J would correspond to the particle annihilation-like part of the
solutions, whereas S−
J corresponds to the antiparticle creation-like part. Hence, we see that
the choice of a complex structure is equivalent to that of a particular notion of speciﬁc par-
ticles and speciﬁc antiparticles, in the sense of determining their annihilation and creation
operators (up to irrelevant linear transformations). Actually, the quantum theory can be
uniquely speciﬁed by the corresponding vacuum state, deﬁned as the normalized cyclic state
which vanishes under the action of all the annihilation operators. The inﬁnite ambiguity
can then be equivalently traced back to the existing freedom in the choice of vacuum.

From a geometrical point of view, the domain S of the complex structures can be described
by local representatives, together with their complex conjugates, of cross-sections of a spinor

6

bundle on the considered spacetime. Speciﬁcally, given the principal bundle of Lorentzian
frames on a globally hyperbolic spacetime [16], one may provide such a spacetime with a
spin structure [17]. This procedure gives rise to an SL(2, C)-principal bundle, which may
be regarded as the double covering of the bundle of Lorentzian frames, since SL(2, C) is
the double cover of the proper Lorentz subgroup. One may then associate a vector bundle
to such an SL(2, C)-principal bundle, obtaining a spinor bundle [17], which allows us to
consistently describe half spin particles via the local representatives of its cross-sections, that
are two-component objects. If the Weyl representation of the Dirac matrices is taken, each
Dirac spinor is then a pair formed by one of those local representatives and by the complex
conjugate of (the algebraic dual of) a diﬀerent one. We will call these local representatives
“two-component spinors”.

B.

Invariant complex structures

The system considered in this work consists of a massive Dirac ﬁeld minimally coupled
to an expanding FRW cosmology, with spatial sections that have the topology of S3. We
will call exp[α(η)] the scale factor of this cosmology, where η denotes conformal time. We
work with the Weyl representation of the Dirac matrices so that, as pointed out above,
each Dirac ﬁeld is described in terms of two-component spinors φA and ¯χA′. They describe
the two parts of the Dirac ﬁeld with well-deﬁned and opposite chirality. We are using the
index notation A, B, ... = 0, 1 and A′, B′, ... = 0′, 1′ to denote the variables forming these
two-component spinors, that we will take to be of Grassmann type [18]. We will follow the
spinor conventions of Ref. [13], summarized here in Appendix A.

Let us develop the framework needed to determine the general form that a complex
structure must have to commute with the action of the isometry group of S3 on the space
of two-component spinors. Such complex structures will naturally give rise to Fock repre-
sentations that are invariant under this group. As a ﬁrst step in this analysis, and in order
to rigorously deal with the spatial dependence of the spinors, together with their properties
under the action of the spatial isometry group, it is most convenient to perform a reduction
of the structure group of the principal bundle of Lorentzian frames [16]. This reduction is in
practice realized by imposing a partial gauge-ﬁxing on the existing freedom in the choice of
tetrads, such that all the attention is restricted to those that satisfy e0
j = 0, where j = 1, 2, 3
denotes a spatial index on S3. This gauge-ﬁxing condition is often known as time-gauge,
and it is commonly used in the study of fermion ﬁelds in globally hyperbolic spacetimes
[19]. After this partial gauge-ﬁxing has been imposed, the relevant objects for the bundle of
frames are the triads, and this fact translates into a reduction of the structure group of such
a bundle (the proper Lorentz subgroup) to SO(3). Its double cover is then a SU(2)-principal
bundle, to which the corresponding spinor bundle is associated. This spinor bundle turns
out to describe, via the local representatives of its cross-sections, two-component spinors
over S3, namely, over each of the spatial slices that foliate the considered cosmology. Once
this reduction has been performed, the spinor ﬁelds may be expanded as follows [12, 13]:

φA(x) =

¯χA′(x) =

e−3α(η)/2

e−3α(η)/2

2π Xnpq
2π Xnpq

n [mnp(η)ρnq
˘αpq

A (x) + ¯rnp(η)¯σnq

A (x)],

˘βpq
n [¯snp(η)¯ρnq

A′(x) + tnp(η)σnq

A′ (x)].

(2.3)

(2.4)

7

A (x), ¯σnp

The sum over p and q is from 1 to gn = (n + 1)(n + 2), while n is summed from zero
to inﬁnity. On the other hand, ρnp
A (x), and their complex conjugate ﬁelds are the
spinor harmonics, that form a complete set for the expansion of any spinor ﬁeld on S3 [13].
Analogous decompositions are performed for the complex conjugate ﬁelds ¯φA′ and χA. In all
of them, the anticommuting nature of the spinors is captured by the Grassmann variables
mnp, ¯rnp, tnp, ¯snp (and their complex conjugates). Furthermore, the constant coeﬃcients ˘αpq
n
and ˘βpq
n are included for convenience, in order to avoid couplings between diﬀerent values of
p when introducing the expansions in the Einstein-Dirac action. The speciﬁc values of these
constants can be found in Appendix A.

The spinor harmonics are solutions to the following equations [13]:

−inAA′ eBA′j (3)Djρnp

B =

ωn
2

ρnp
A ,

−inAA′ eBA′j (3)Dj ¯σnp

B = −

−inAA′ eAB ′j (3)Dj ¯ρnp

B ′ = −

ωn
2

¯ρnp
A′ ,

−inAA′ eAB ′j (3)Djσnp

B ′ =

ωn
2

ωn
2

¯σnp
A ,

σnp
A′ ,

(2.5)

(2.6)

where ωn = n + 3/2, with n ∈ N, and p = 1, ..., gn. Here, (3)Dj is the local representative
of the covariant derivative associated with the SU(2) Levi-Civita connection on S3, while
eAA′j and nAA′ denote, respectively, the spinor versions of the triad on S3 and of the (unit,
timelike, future-directed Lorentzian) normal to S3. Let us notice that, owing to the partial
gauge-ﬁxing, nAA′ is simply minus 2−1/2 times the identity. Thus, Eqs.
(2.5) and (2.6)
are just the eigenvalue equations for the Dirac operator on S3 with eigenvalues given by
±ωn. The spinor harmonics then form the eigenspaces of this operator, each of which has
dimension gn [20].
The isometry group of the three-sphere S3 is SO(4) or, equivalently, its double covering
Spin(4) = SU(2)×SU(2), where the action on the points of S3 is deﬁned by Cliﬀord multipli-
cation [20]. Speciﬁcally, S3 is characterized as the homogeneous space such that the orbit of
every of its points under the action of SO(4) covers the whole manifold. In other words, each
point of S3 is related to any other one via Cliﬀord multiplication by an element of Spin(4).
An active SO(4)-transformation on the points of S3, where the two-component spinors are
evaluated, gives rise to a passive transformation on those spinors, via a representation of
the isometry group Spin(4) on the space of cross-sections of the spinor bundle [20]. Let us
notice that, when considering the whole Dirac spinor, the action of this isometry group may
be seen as two-block diagonal, with one block being the mentioned representation on φA,
and the other block being the corresponding complex conjugate representation on ¯χA′. That
action is unitary in the inner product (2.1), so each of these two blocks decomposes as the
direct sum of irreducible representations of Spin(4).

We are now ready to characterize those complex structures that commute with the action
of Spin(4) on the space of Dirac spinors. First of all, given the decompositions (2.3) and
(2.4), any complex structure can be regarded as an inﬁnite-dimensional matrix in the basis
formed by the modes {mnp, ¯rnp, tnp, ¯snp}. Now, the properties of the eigenspaces of the
Dirac operator on S3 were thoroughly studied in Ref. [20]. In particular, that work analyzes
their relation with the irreducible decomposition of the isometry group when acting on
the two-component spinors. Let us ﬁrst restrict to the action of Spin(4) on the space of
two-component spinors with the quirality of φA. There, via Frobenius reciprocity theorem
[21], and as it was proven in Ref.
[20], each of the eigenspaces of the Dirac operator on
S3 provides in fact each of the irreducible representations in which the action of Spin(4)

8

decomposes. Moreover, each of these irreducible representations appears with a multiplicity
equal to one in the direct sum. This last fact, in particular, implies that the representation
spaces spanned by

{ρnp

A }p=1,...,gn

and

{¯σnp

A }p=1,...,gn,

(2.7)

for a given n, provide two inequivalent irreducible representations. Clearly, these repre-
sentation spaces are equivalently spanned by the alternate basis obtained with the linear
transformation ˘αn, used in the expansion (2.3). On the other hand, and following anal-
ogous arguments to those put forward in Ref.
[20], the irreducible decomposition of the
action of Spin(4) on the space of spinors with the quirality of ¯χA′ may be characterized in a
similar way. Indeed, Frobenius reciprocity theorem guarantees that such action of Spin(4)
decomposes as a direct sum of irreducible representations that is component-wise equiva-
lent to that in which its complex conjugate decomposed. More concretely, the irreducible
representations provided by

{¯ρnp

A′}p=1,...,gn

and

{σnp

A′}p=1,...,gn

(2.8)

for each n are respectively equivalent to those provided by (2.7). Again, these representation
spaces are spanned as well by the basis reached with the transformation ˘βn, introduced in
Eq. (2.4). Therefore, by applying Schur’s lemma [22] we can now state that any complex
structure that commutes with the action of the isometry group of S3 on the space of Dirac
spinors, cannot mix modes mnp, ¯rnp, tnp, and ¯snp corresponding to diﬀerent values of n.
Furthermore, within the subspace corresponding to a given n, it cannot mix the modes
{mnp, ¯snp} with {tnp, ¯rnp}, since, as we have seen, they provide inequivalent irreducible
representations of Spin(4). Let us consider, for a given value of n, the subspace spanned
by the modes {mnp, ¯snp}. The restriction of the complex structure to such a subspace can
then be characterized by four square maps between the two subspaces separately spanned
by {mnp} and {¯snp}. Since these two subspaces provide two irreducible representations of
Spin(4), Schur’s lemma guarantees again that each of such maps must be proportional to
the identity1. A completely analogous argument is applied to the restriction of the complex
structure to the subspace spanned by the modes {tnp, ¯rnp}. Therefore, those restrictions can
only relate modes that share the same value of the label p, and they cannot depend on that
value.

In summary, we arrive at the following generic form for the complex structures that lead
to invariant vacua of the Dirac ﬁeld under the action of the isometry group corresponding
to the spatial sections of the considered cosmology. In the basis provided by the tower of
modes {mnp, ¯rnp, tnp, ¯snp}, such complex structures can be regarded as block diagonal, with
2 × 2 blocks that can at most mix the pairs of modes (mnp, ¯snp) or (tnp, ¯rnp), for the same
value of n and p. Furthermore, the blocks that mix the pairs (mnp, ¯snp) are all equal for
a given n, as it happens as well with those that mix (tnp, ¯rnp). However, in principle, the
blocks involving (mnp, ¯snp) need not be equal to those involving (tnp, ¯rnp). From now on,
every complex structure with these properties will be called invariant complex structure.

1 To attain this result, notice that the constant linear transformations provided by ˘αn and ˘βn actually
guarantee that the two irreducible representations of Spin(4) on the subspaces spanned by {mnp} and
{¯snp} are the same. Such a property can be straightforwardly checked, e.g., by inspecting the Dirac
equations for those modes, since they only relate modes mnp and ¯snp with the same values of n and p
[12].

9

III. UNIQUENESS OF THE QUANTIZATION

In the remaining discussion,we will restrict our attention to Fock quantizations of the
Dirac ﬁeld that are determined by invariant complex structures. Within such a subset of
quantizations, Ref. [12] selected a particularly simple one that displays a physically appeal-
ing property: It admits an implementation of the fermion dynamics as a unitary operator on
the Fock space of the quantum theory. However, this reference quantization is not the only
invariant one that allows for such a unitarily implementable evolution. There exist inﬁnitely
many invariant vacua that satisfy these properties. Indeed, in Ref. [12] we already proved
that the reference quantization selected in that work belongs to a class of unitarily equivalent
Fock quantizations which, apart from being invariant under the group of spatial isometries
and allowing for a unitary implementation of the dynamics, are characterized by having
complex structures that admit a speciﬁc asymptotic behavior with respect to the eigenval-
ues of the Dirac operator on S3. However we did not demonstrate the uniqueness of the
quantization, in the sense that we did not prove that any other complex structure compatible
with the criteria of invariance under the isometry group and of unitary implementability of
the dynamics is necessarily equivalent to the class of complex structures studied in Ref. [12].
We still have the possibility of ﬁnding inequivalent quantizations among those that do not
possess the asymptotics of that class. At this point, then, our aim is to elucidate whether
all the Fock representations, selected by the symmetry and unitary dynamics requirements,
are indeed unitarily equivalent to our reference one. If this is the case, then the physics that
they describe, at the level of the canonical anticommutation relations, will all be the same,
and the inﬁnite ambiguity in the quantization will be removed.

A. Unitary dynamics

Given a speciﬁc invariant complex structure, we will call respectively a(x,y)

and b(x,y)
the particles and antiparticles annihilation-like variables that it selects. The creation-like
variables a(x,y)†
If we use the
notation {xnp, ynp} to describe either of the ordered sets {mnp, snp} or {tnp, rnp}, then, from
the discussion in Sec. II, it is clear that any invariant complex structure leads, at any time
η, to annihilation and creation-like variables of the form:

are their complex conjugates.

and b(x,y)†

= ¯a(x,y)

= ¯b(x,y)

np

np

np

np

np

np

a(x,y)
np
b(x,y)†
np
a(x,y)†
np
b(x,y)
np





η

f n
1 (η) f n
2 (η)
gn
1 (η) gn
2 (η)
0
0
0
0

=


0
0
0
0
¯f n
1 (η) ¯f n
2 (η)
¯gn
1 (η) ¯gn
2 (η)

xnp
¯ynp
¯xnp
ynp








η

.

(3.1)

Since we allow for complex structures that may depend explicitly on time, we have contem-
plated the possible time variation of the linear combinations that deﬁne the annihilation
and creation-like variables. Consequently, the coeﬃcients f n
l (with l = 1, 2) are, in
principle, time functions, as our notation indicates. Besides, we have used a subindex η in
column-vectors to denote evaluation at that value of the conformal time.

l and gn

Although not explicitly displayed here, in order not to complicate the notation, the time-
dependent coeﬃcients f n
l , may in
general diﬀer for the mode pairs (mnp, ¯snp) and (tnp, ¯rnp). However, in both cases they must

l , as well as their complex conjugates ¯f n

l and ¯gn

l and gn

obey the relations

|f n
1 |2 + |f n

2 |2 = 1,

|gn
1|2 + |gn

2|2 = 1,

f n
1 ¯gn

1 + f n

2 ¯gn

2 = 0,

10

(3.2)

so that the considered variables are indeed annihilation and creation-like, from the Hamil-
tonian point of view [12, 13]. In particular, these relations imply that

1 = ¯f n
gn

2 eiGn

,

2 = − ¯f n
gn

1 eiGn

,

(3.3)

with Gn a certain phase, possibly time dependent.

It can be seen that the Dirac equations for the fermion modes give rise to the following
Bogoliubov transformation that implements the dynamics on the annihilation and creation-
like variables, from a given initial time η0 to any other time η [12]:

with the block-diagonal form

a(x,y)
np
b(x,y)†
np
a(x,y)†
np
b(x,y)
np

a(x,y)
np
b(x,y)†
np
a(x,y)†
np
b(x,y)
np



η

Bn =(cid:18)Bn 0
¯Bn(cid:19) ,

= Bn(η, η0)

Bn =(cid:18)αf

0

,


η0
n(cid:19) ,

n βf
n
βg
n αg

(3.4)

(3.5)

n, αg

n, βf

where αf
can be found in Ref.
beta coeﬃcients:

n, and βg

n are coeﬃcients (dependent on η and η0) with an expression that
[12]. For future reference, we give here the explicit formula for the

βh
n(η, η0) =

1

hn,0
1 kn,0

2 kn,0

2 − hn,0
2(cid:18)hn,0

+(cid:20)hn

1 ((cid:20)−hn
1(cid:18)hn,0
2 (cid:19)e−i R ¯Λ1

1 − ¯Γnhn,0

n(cid:21) eiωn∆η

(3.6)

2 + Γnhn,0

n + ¯Γnhn

2 hn,0

2 e∆αei R ¯Λ2

1 (cid:19)ei R Λ1

n + Γnhn

1 hn,0

1 e∆αe−i R Λ2

n(cid:21) e−iωn∆η).

Here, {h, k} = {f, g} as a set, and we are using the notation ∆η = η − η0 and ∆α = α− α0,
with α0 = α(η0), and

Γn =

meα0

2ωn + iα′
0

,

(3.7)

where the prime stands for derivation with respect to the conformal time. The integrals in
the above expression are in conformal time, in the interval [η0, η], and Λj
n are some time-
dependent functions which are of order O(ω−1
n ) in the asymptotic limit of large values of ωn,
as long as α and its derivatives (up to third order) exist and are integrable in every closed
interval [η0, η] [12]. Besides, to simplify the notation, we have omitted the dependence of
the functions on η, and distinguished evaluation at η0 with the superscript 0 (preceded by
a comma).

Let us now provide the necessary and suﬃcient conditions that any complex structure
must satisfy in order to have a unitarily implementable dynamics in the quantum theory that

it deﬁnes. It is well known that any linear canonical transformation of a ﬁeld-like system is
implementable as a unitary operator in the Fock space if and only if its antilinear part is
of the Hilbert-Schmidt class [23]. For the dynamical Bogoliubov transformation deﬁned by
the sequence of matrices Bn(η, η0), such a condition is satisﬁed if and only if the sums

11

(3.8)

gn|βg

gn|βf

Xn

n(η, η0)|2

n(η, η0)|2

and Xn
are convergent for all times η in the evolution. Recall that the degeneracy of the eigenvalues
±ωn of the Dirac operator is gn = (n + 1)(n + 2) = ω2
n − 1/4. It is therefore clear that
conditions (3.8) imply in particular that, in the region of large ωn, the beta coeﬃcients
must be negligible e.g. compared to ω−1
for all times η. This necessary condition for a
n
Fock quantization to admit a unitary dynamics turns out to translate into a very speciﬁc
behavior of the coeﬃcients f n
l . Such a behavior aﬀects both their dependence on the
eigenvalues of the Dirac operator, as well as the time-dependent scaling that they introduce in
the diﬀerent parts of the fermion ﬁeld. In order to show this fact, let us denote {l, ˜l} = {1, 2}
as a set. Then, taking into account relations (3.2) and (3.3), the following scenarios can
be distinguished (at least in a suﬃciently short time interval beyond η0), in principle not
necessarily mutually exclusive:

l and gn

i) If ω−1
n

is negligible compared to hn
l

in the asymptotic limit of large ωn for an inﬁnite

subset of the natural numbers, n ∈ N↑

l . Since

˜l = eiH n
hn

˜l q1 − |hn
l |2,

(3.9)

some possibly time-dependent phase, we see that hn
˜l

with H n
is of the same order as hn
˜l
l
or either of unit order, whatever is the largest. The only possible exception happens
perhaps if hn
may be smaller; we will comment
l
on this exceptional case below.

is of the order of the unity, when hn
˜l

On the other hand, it is easy to check that the denominator in Eq. (3.6) has unit norm
[12]. Besides, we notice that Γn is of the order of ω−1
n(η, η0) has
to be negligible with respect to ω−1
for all times η, because the dynamics is assumed
n
to be unitarily implementable. Taking into account all these behaviors, it follows from
Eq. (3.6) that

n , and we recall that βh

hn
l
hn,0
l

=

hn
˜l
hn,0
˜l

ei(−1)l2ωn∆η,

(3.10)

, of hn

l and hn
˜l

n , for all η and all n ∈ N↑

up to terms negligible compared to ω−1
l bigger than a certain
nl ≥ 0. However, this is not possible unless the time dependence of the phases H n
l
and H n
respectively, are ﬁxed so as to absorb the dominant dynamical
˜l
contribution in the phases of the fermion modes, hence trivializing the dynamics and
rendering it equal to the identity evolution at the considered order. In more detail,
condition (3.10) would require that H n
+ (−1)l2ωn∆η + 2πkn,
with kn ∈ Z. We rule out this possibility (that leads to a trivial dynamics), e.g. by
demanding that the time dependence of the dominant contribution in our coeﬃcient
be mode independent.

˜l − H n,0

l − H n,0

l = H n

˜l

12

ii) If hn
l

is negligible compared to ω−1
n

in the asymptotic limit of large ωn for an inﬁnite
subset of the natural numbers, n ∈ N↓
l . In this case, one can check from Eq. (3.6) that
a unitarily implementable dynamics can never be reached, leading to a contradiction,
because the assumption that βh
implies the impossible
relation

n(η, η0) be negligible versus ω−1
n

e∆α+i(−1)l+12ωn∆η = 1,

(3.11)

up to negligible terms, for all times η and for all n ∈ N↓
We have used the mentioned fact that the functions Λj

l bigger than a certain nl ≥ 0.
n are O(ω−1
n ).

iii) If hn
l

is of order ω−1
n

in the regime of large ωn for an inﬁnite subset of the natural
n ) [and o(ω−1
l ∼ pn +o(ω−1
numbers, n ∈ Nl. We will then have hn
n )
denotes terms negligible compared to ω−1
n ]. Employing that Γn = m exp (α0)/(2ωn) at
dominant order, and following similar arguments as in the two other cases discussed
above, it is easy to conclude from Eq. (3.6) that, for all times η and all n ∈ Nl bigger
than a certain nl ≥ 0, we must have

n ), where pn = O(ω−1

pn = (−1)l+1 meα

2ωn

eiH n

˜l +(cid:20)pn,0 + (−1)l meα0

2ωn

eiH n,0

˜l (cid:21) ei(−1)l2ωn∆η+iH n

˜l

−iH n,0

˜l

,

(3.12)

is, again, the phase of hn
˜l

where H n
. Therefore, if we discard the possibility of absorbing
˜l
the dominant time variation of the phase of the fermions in a term of pn, asking instead,
e.g., that the time dependence of the norm of the leading contribution to hn
l factorizes,
the coeﬃcient hn

l must necessarily behave as

hn

l = (−1)l+1 meα

2ωn

eiH n

˜l + o(ω−1

n ),

(3.13)

for all n ∈ Nl, in the asymptotic limit of large ωn.
iv) Finally, let us comment on the case in which hn
l

is of smaller
order, let’s say for a subset of natural numbers n ∈ N˜l. In this situation, it is convenient
to reverse the roles of hn
and repeat the analysis above, this time applied to hn
˜l
(and with the ﬁrst scenario restricted to the subcase in which hn
is already negligible
˜l
compared to the unity). Then, one concludes that the only acceptable possibility is
displays a behavior like that in (3.13) (with l replaced with ˜l) for n ∈ N˜l, if
that hn
˜l
this set of numbers is unbounded.

is of unit order and hn
˜l

l and hn
˜l

Let us now discuss the behavior allowed by Eq. (3.13) in more detail. We will call ϑn
h,l
the term in that equation that is negligible compared to ω−1
n . A simple inspection of the
dynamical beta coeﬃcients (3.6) and the conditions (3.8), taking into account the asymptotic
behavior that we have already commented for the diﬀerent functions that appear in our
expressions, allows us to deduce that a non-trivial unitarily implementable dynamics in the
considered quantization with invariant complex structure is accomplished if and only if the
sequence

ϑn,0
h,l − ϑn

h,lei(−1)l+12ωn∆η−iH n

˜l

+iH n,0

˜l

,

(3.14)

13

with n ∈ Nl, is square summable at all studied times, including degeneracy. If the sequence
formed by the terms ϑn,0
h,l at the initial time is square summable, this is equivalent to demand
that the corresponding sequence formed by ϑn
h,l (with n ∈ Nl ) be square summable at all
the instants of time under consideration. Otherwise, if the sequence given by ϑn,0
h,l has a
part ˜ϑn,0
h,l that is not square summable, one would need to compensate it at every time with
the time-dependent factor in Eq. (3.14), something that completely ﬁxes the possible time
variation of the contribution in ϑn
h,l that is not square summable. If we call this contribution
˜ϑn,0
˜l −H n,0
h,l = H n
h,l), we should have θn
h,l exp (iθn
+(−1)l2ωn∆η+2πkn, with kn ∈ Z. Therefore,
the dominant phase in the dynamics of the fermion modes would be absorbed in the time
dependence of the complex structure (via θn
), trivializing the evolution at the level
of the terms that are not square summable. If we discard this possibility, e.g. by requiring
that the time dependence of the discussed contributions be given only by mode-independent
functions, we conclude that we must necessarily have that ϑn
h,l is square summable, with the
degeneracy included, over the subset n ∈ Nl.
functions, that can be called βk
[12]. Therefore, if the sequence βh
complex norm, with βh
square summable (with the known degeneracy), so is βk
n.

l , then, the other beta
n(η, η0) with our notation, can be checked to coincide, in
n is

Finally, let us notice that, once hn
l

is ﬁxed as either f n

l or gn

˜l

h,l and H n
˜l

n(η, η0), as we showed in Ref.

In summary, the necessary and suﬃcient conditions for a complex structure to deﬁne a
Fock quantization that is symmetry invariant and has a unitarily implementable dynamics is
that the corresponding functions hn
l be asymptotically of the form (3.13), and that the terms
n ) form a sequence {ϑn
of order o(ω−1
h,l}n∈Nl that is square summable, including degeneracy.
Here, we have split the natural numbers, up to a ﬁnite collection of them, into two inﬁnite
subsets N1 and N2, such that N = N1 ∪ N2, allowing for the possibility that one of these
subsets be empty. Our statement is true as long as the diﬀerent time-dependent phases
in the deﬁnition of the annihilation and creation-like variables that contribute to terms
that are not square summable are not ﬁxed so as to trivialize the dominant dynamical
contribution in the phases of the fermion modes, with respect to an asymptotic expansion
in terms of ωn. Actually, a subclass of complex structures of the kind which we have found
that satisfy the symmetry and unitary evolution criteria was the one contemplated in Ref.
[12], characterized by the additional requirement that the next-to-leading order in hn
l be
O(ω−2
n ). In this sense, the analysis performed here generalizes this subclass and uniquely
characterizes both the dominant asymptotic behavior and its time-dependent scaling for
any invariant Fock quantization of the Dirac ﬁeld that admits a non-trivial and unitarily
implementable fermion dynamics.

B. Uniqueness

We will now prove that there exists indeed only one equivalence class of complex structures
uniquely selected by the criteria of invariance under the spatial isometries of S3, and of
unitary implementability of a (non-trivial) quantum dynamics. We will see that this result
is valid once the convention for particles and antiparticles has been settled.

In the light of the results obtained in the previous section, it suﬃces to restrict our
attention to invariant complex structures that lead to Fock quantizations which allow for a
unitary dynamics, without trivializing it. Speciﬁcally, let us restrict to sets of annihilation
and creation-like variables of the type (3.1) with hn
l a function of the asymptotic form (3.13),

and such that the corresponding sequences formed by ϑn
h,l (for n ∈ Nl) are square summable.
Within this class of complex structures, we will ﬁx a reference structure JR: The one that
selects annihilation and creation-like variables with

14

f n
1 =

meα
2ωn

,

f n

2 =p1 − (f n

1 )2,

1 = f n
gn
2 ,

2 = −f n
gn
1 ,

(3.15)

both for the pairs (mnp, ¯snp) and for (tnp, ¯rnp). This choice is obviously the simplest one that
satisﬁes the necessary and suﬃcient conditions for admitting a non-trivial unitary quantum
dynamics.

Let us call ˜J any other complex structure that deﬁnes a Fock quantization with a non-
trivial and unitarily implementable dynamics. A complex structure of this kind is char-
acterized by some annihilation and creation-like variables {˜a(x,y)
} with
coeﬃcients ˜f n
l are of
the asymptotic form (3.13), and such that the corresponding sequences formed by ϑn
are
˜h,l
[12], the relation between ˜J and our reference
square summable. As we showed in Ref.
complex structure JR at a certain time η is given by

, ˜a(x,y)†
l , as those given in Eqs. (3.1)-(3.3), such that either ˜f n

, ˜b(x,y)†
l or ˜gn

l and ˜gn

, ˜b(x,y)

np

np

np

np

with2

and

a(x,y)
np
b(x,y)†
np
a(x,y)†
np
b(x,y)
np

˜a(x,y)
np
˜b(x,y)†
np
˜a(x,y)†
np
˜b(x,y)
np




η
Kn =(cid:18)Kn 0
¯Kn(cid:19) ,


= Kn(η)
η

Kn =(cid:18)κf

0

n λf
n
n κg
λg

n(cid:19) ,

κh
n =

1 − ˜hn
˜hn
2 kn
hn
2 kn
1 − hn

1 kn
2
1 kn
2

,

λh
n =

˜hn
1 hn
hn
2 kn

2 − ˜hn
1 − hn

2 hn
1
1 kn
2

,

(3.16)

(3.17)

,

(3.18)

where we recall that {h, k} = {f, g} as a set. Now, the Fock representations determined by
˜J and by JR will be unitarily equivalent if and only if the time-dependent transformation
determined by the sequence of matrices Kn can be implemented as a unitary operator in
the quantum theory, a fact that in turn is true if and only if its antilinear part is a Hilbert-
Schmidt operator [23], namely when

Xn

gn|λf

n(η)|2 < ∞ and Xn

gn|λg

n(η)|2 < ∞,

(3.19)

for all times η. We will show in what follows that any of the invariant complex structures
˜J, that deﬁnes a quantum theory for which a non-trivial unitary dynamics can be imple-
mented, is indeed unitarily equivalent to our reference one, once a convention of particles

2 Although not speciﬁed with our notation, the entries in the matrix Kn might be diﬀerent for the annihila-
np ). We will avoid this distinction in the subsequent analysis,

np , ˜b(t,r)

np

tion variables (˜a(m,s)
since both cases are dealt with in exactly the same way.

) and (˜a(t,r)

, ˜b(m,s)

np

and antiparticles has been set, thus proving the uniqueness of the quantization. Two possi-
ble cases can be distinguished in our analysis, given the two existing possibilities that either
the coeﬃcients ˜f n
l adopt the form (3.13). We will analyze only one of
them, because the other case can be dealt with in a completely parallel manner, owing to
relations (3.3).

l or the coeﬃcients ˜gn

15

nei ˜Gn

˜f ,1ei ˜Gn

(3.20)

n and λg

1 and ˜f n

λf
n = ϑn

˜f ,1 + O(ω−2
n ),

+ O(ω−2
n ),

Let us thus admit that the coeﬃcients ˜f n

2 are, respectively, of the asymptotic form
(3.13) for n ∈ N1 and for n ∈ N2. Recall that the union of these two subsets is the entire set
of the natural numbers (apart maybe from a ﬁnite subset, irrelevant for our considerations),
and that one of these subsets may be void. Then, from deﬁnition (3.18), one can check that,
for n ∈ N1 and in the asymptotic limit of large ωn,
n = −¯λf
λg

= − ¯ϑn
with ˜Gn a certain phase. Since the sequence formed by ϑn
for n ∈ N1 is square summable
˜f ,1
with our hypotheses (taking into account the degeneracy gn = ω2
n − 1/4), then, if N2 is
void or has a ﬁnite number of elements, we see that conditions (3.19) are immediately
satisﬁed, and the quantizations deﬁned by ˜J and JR are unitarily equivalent. Consider
the case in which N2 is not bounded from above, so that its cardinal is inﬁnite.
It is
easy to see that both λf
n are O(1), for n ∈ N2 in the asymptotic limit of large ωn.
Therefore, the sequences that they provide are not square summable, since the degeneracy gn
n. In this sense, the quantizations deﬁned by ˜J and JR would not be unitarily
increases as ω2
equivalent. However, such inequivalence can be understood as artiﬁcially arising from the
fact that the complex structure ˜J deﬁnes a convention for the concept of particles and
antiparticles which is completely reversed, for an inﬁnite number of modes, in comparison
with the convention corresponding to JR [12]. Once reconciled both conventions, the physical
phenomena described by both quantizations would be exactly the same. Indeed, suppose
that we had taken as reference complex structure not the one introduced above, JR, but
another one, that we call ˜JR, obtained from JR by switching the convention of particles-
antiparticles, discussed in Sec.II A, for all modes corresponding to N2 from some n2 ≥ 0
onwards. Such a change in the convention amounts in practice to the interchange f n
l ↔ gn
l
[12]. The lambda coeﬃcients relating ˜JR and ˜J would then be given asymptotically by Eq.
(3.20) for n ∈ N1, whereas

˜λf
n = ϑn

˜f ,2 + O(ω−2
n ),

˜λg
n =

¯˜λf
nei ˜Gn

= ¯ϑn

˜f ,2ei ˜Gn

+ O(ω−2
n ),

(3.21)

˜f ,2

for n ∈ N2. But now, according to our hypotheses, ϑn
is square summable, including
degeneracy, over n ∈ N2. Hence, conditions (3.19) are satisﬁed, and the unitary equivalence
between ˜JR and ˜J is conﬁrmed. Let us comment that, if N1 had a ﬁnite number of elements,
then the particle-antiparticle convention corresponding to the complex structure ˜J would
be, essentially, the opposite to that deﬁned by our reference structure JR, as was the case
for the complex structures investigated in Ref. [12].

Therefore, given a Fock representation with invariant complex structure ˜J that admits
a non-trivial unitary implementability of the dynamics, it is either unitarily equivalent to
the quantization deﬁned by our reference complex structure JR, or to an alternative one
deﬁned by ˜JR, obtained from JR by changing the convention in the notion of particles and
antiparticles for an inﬁnite number of modes. In this regard, and in the light of our discussion
above, we emphasize that this change in the convention is not necessary if the attention is

16

restricted to complex structures for which the discrepancy about the role of particle and
antiparticle with respect to JR occurs only for a ﬁnite subset of modes. In this sense, one
could argue that a further characterization of the possible invariant Fock representations for a
fermion ﬁeld would consist in distinguishing among the distinct conventions that diﬀer in the
assignation of what is a particle and what is an antiparticle for an inﬁnite collection of modes.
It is obvious that, without additional requirements, not all the complex structures that
correspond to the same convention lead to quantum theories that are unitarily equivalent,
but in fact there is an inﬁnite number of inequivalent families among them. Even when
restricting all the attention to invariant Fock representations with a given convention, the
problem of picking out a preferred quantization is still present. What we have shown is
that, in these circumstances, it suﬃces to impose the extra requirement of the existence of
a non-trivial unitarily implementable dynamics to indeed select a unique representation, up
to unitary equivalence.

In summary, we have proven that all the invariant complex structures that allow for a
non-trivial unitary implementation of the quantum dynamics in the Fock space that they
deﬁne, are unitarily equivalent, up to changes in the convention for the notion of particles
and antiparticles that aﬀect an inﬁnite collection of modes. Our criteria also select a unique
ﬁeld parameterization, understood as the necessary presence of a time-dependent and mode-
independent scaling at dominant asymptotic order, displayed in Eq. (3.13).

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this work we have provided a complete proof of the uniqueness of the Fock quanti-
zation of a massive Dirac ﬁeld propagating in a homogeneous and isotropic cosmological
background, with spatial sections that are topologically three-spheres, under the criteria of
vacuum invariance under the group of spatial isometries and unitary implementability of the
dynamics. For this result, the conditions imposed on the time dependence of the background
scale factor are very mild: Its third derivative must exist and must be integrable in every
closed time interval of the evolution. Our work extends the results of our previous reference
[12] in two directions. First of all, we have reviewed the relation between the irreducible
representations of the isometry group Spin(4) and the eigenspaces of the Dirac operator
on the three-sphere, and speciﬁed the form that a complex structure has to adopt in order
to be invariant under the action of such isometry group. Considering only these invariant
complex structures, we have then proven that the equivalence class constructed in Ref. [12]
is the only one selected by the extra criterion of admitting a non-trivial implementation of
the dynamics as a unitary operator on the Fock space, once a concrete convention for the
notion of particles and antiparticles has been settled. In other words, having ﬁxed such a
convention, if an invariant Fock representation is unitarily inequivalent to a representative of
the mentioned class, then it does not lead to a quantization where the dynamical evolution
is non-trivial and can be implemented by a unitary operator on the Fock space.

As we have said, the unitary equivalence within this class is found only after adopting
a convention of what is a particle and what is an antiparticle, except possibly for a ﬁnite
number of modes. The need for this additional ﬁxation can be regarded as a manifestation
of the fact that two theories with a contradictory notion for particles and antiparticles,
aﬀecting an inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom, will diﬀer in the physical interpretation
of the results if their conventions are not reconciled.

The uniqueness proof presented in this work strongly relies on the asymptotic behavior of

17

the solutions of the Dirac equations, in the regime of large absolute value of the eigenvalues
of the Dirac operator [12]. By analyzing all possible scenarios for an invariant complex
structure, we have seen that the non-trivial unitary implementability of the fermion dynamics
requires a very speciﬁc asymptotic behavior for the annihilation and creation-like variables.
Besides, it requires also a very speciﬁc description of the fermion modes in terms of which
the Dirac ﬁeld decomposes, via a mode-independent and time-dependent scaling of the
dominant term in the asymptotic limit of large eigenvalues, that involves the scale factor
of the cosmology under study. The leading order in the mentioned asymptotics deﬁnes
our reference complex structure, as given in Eq. (3.15). This asymptotic behavior of the
invariant complex structures, and the associated parameterization of the Dirac ﬁeld, are
in fact needed for the unitary dynamics, provided that the phases of each of the fermion
modes are not speciﬁcally modiﬁed (through a mode and time-dependent contribution) so
that their dominant dynamical component is trivialized.

l and gn

In consequence, our criteria not only ﬁx the Fock representation in a unique manner once
a suitable set of variables has been chosen to describe the ﬁeld, but they actually remove as
well the ambiguity in that choice arising from time-dependent linear reparameterizations.
Any other time-dependent description of the ﬁelds, diﬀerent at leading order from the one
displayed by our reference quantization, will necessarily prevent the implementability of
the dynamics in a unitary way. This aﬀects both the global scaling introduced in the
decomposition (2.3) and (2.4), and the scalings in the particle and antiparticle contributions
that are induced by the time dependence of the functions f n
l in Eq. (3.15). Therefore,
the fermion ﬁeld presents speciﬁc and diﬀerent time-dependent scalings in its particle and
antiparticle parts, scalings which are diﬀerent as well for each of the two chiralities [12].
This introduces a novelty with respect to the scalar ﬁeld analyses [8, 9]. In those cases, the
unitarity of a non-trivial dynamics imposes a global scaling of the original ﬁeld variable, such
that the scaled ﬁeld in practice behaves similarly to a conformally coupled ﬁeld. Moreover,
in the ultraviolet regime of large eigenvalues ωn, the mass contribution to the dynamics
becomes negligible, so in that regime the evolution of the ﬁeld is conformally invariant, owing
also to the fact that the background is conformally ﬂat. One might then wrongly believe
that the unitarity of the dynamics is possible just because of this conformal invariance in
the ultraviolet regime. Nevertheless, the present fermionic case shows that such belief is
false. Indeed, in this case the mass term couples the two chiralities of the Dirac ﬁeld, a fact
that translates into a non-negligible contribution in the ultraviolet regime of the dynamics.
Therefore, the evolution cannot be treated as asymptotically conformally invariant, but it is
yet implementable as a unitary quantum endomorphism. The unitary evolution is possible
only if one introduces the commented description of the Dirac ﬁeld through a partial and
time-dependent scaling at dominant order.

Beyond its interest from the point of view of QFT in curved backgrounds, the uniqueness
results demonstrated in this work can prove to be useful when applied to more general
physical systems.
Indeed, when approaching the deep Planck regime of a cosmological
scenario such as the one contemplated here, quantum gravity phenomena that exceed the
context of QFT are commonly expected to arise. In such situations, e.g. in the early universe,
a plausible option to describe the physics is to treat the zero modes of the geometry (namely,
in this case the homogeneous scale factor) with quantum gravity techniques, whereas the
possible inhomogeneous ﬁelds are treated within a QFT approach. This was actually done
in Ref. [13] for fermion perturbations in the Planck regime of the early universe, employing
a Schr¨odinger representation for the zero modes of the geometry. Recently, this strategy

18

has also been put forward in the context of Loop Quantum Cosmology [24], by means of
the so-called hybrid quantization [25], in order to describe scalar and tensor perturbations
in the Planck regime of the early universe [26, 27]. If a massive Dirac ﬁeld is to be put
in this equation, then our results provide a very speciﬁc and physically meaningful choice
for the description of the ﬁeld, together with its Fock quantization. This choice is relevant
inasmuch as the background geometry is being quantized at the same time as the ﬁeld,
so that a diﬀerent time-dependent parameterization of the ﬁeld may result in a diﬀerent
prescription for the quantization of the whole system. Another area of specialization in
which possible extensions of the present work might ﬁnd application is condensed matter
physics. Indeed, as commented in the Introduction, it has been shown, both theoretically
and experimentally, that low-energy excitations in graphene obey the dynamics of a massless
Dirac fermion, in 2 + 1 dimensions [11]. It would then be interesting to see whether a similar
criterion to that presented here could be found for a massless Dirac particle in such type of
scenarios.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially supported by the research grants MICINN/MINECO Project No.
FIS2014-54800-C2-2-P from Spain, DGAPA-UNAM IN113115 and CONACyT 237351 from
Mexico, and COST Action MP1405 QSPACE, supported by COST (European Cooperation
in Science and Technology).
In addition, M. M.-B. acknowledges ﬁnancial support from
the Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO) (Project No. 62001772). The
authors thank W.D. van Suijlekom for pointing out Ref. [20].

Appendix A: Spinor conventions

We summarize here the main conventions followed in this work for the treatment of
two-component spinors. First of all, the change between spinors (as well as their complex
conjugates) and their algebraic duals is mediated by the antisymmetric objects ǫAB, ǫAB,
ǫA′B ′, and ǫA′B ′, each of which is given by the matrix

(cid:18) 0 1
−1 0(cid:19) .

In practice, these objects raise and lower spinor indices. For example, φA = φBǫBA and
¯χA′ = ǫA′B ′ ¯χB ′. Besides, tetrad vectors are related to spinors via the soldering forms σAA′
,
given by

a

σ0 = −

1
√2

I,

σα =

1
√2

Σα,

(A1)

where I is the 2 × 2 identity matrix, and Σα (with α = 1, 2, 3) are the three standard Pauli
matrices. The spinor version of the tetrad is simply

eAA′
µ = ea

µσAA′

a

,

and then the spinor version of any spacetime tensor T µ1...µn is constructed as

T AA′...DD′

= eAA′

µ1 ...eDD′

µn T µ1...µn.

(A2)

(A3)

19

Let us also introduce in this appendix the constant coeﬃcients ˘αpq

n that are
included in the expansions (2.3) and (2.4) of the fermion ﬁelds, in order to avoid couplings
in the Einstein-Dirac action between diﬀerent values of p. They can be regarded as the
coeﬃcients of two real matrices ˘αn and ˘βn, each of dimension gn = (n + 1)(n + 2). These
matrices are block diagonal, with blocks given by

n and ˘βpq

(cid:18)1 1
1 −1(cid:19)

and

(cid:18) 1 −1
−1 −1(cid:19)

for ˘αn and ˘βn, respectively.

[1] B. Simon, Topics in Functional Analysis, edited by R.F. Streater (Academic Press, London,

England, 1972).

[2] R.M. Wald, Quantum Field Theory in Curved Spacetime and Black Hole Thermodynamics

(Chicago University Press, Chicago, 1994).

[3] J.C. Baez, I.V. Segal and Z. Zhou, Introduction to Algebraic and Constructive Quantum Field

Theory (Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1992).

[4] B. Kay, Commun. Math. Phys. 62, 55 (1978).
[5] A. Ashtekar and A. Magnon, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 346, 375 (1975); A. Ashtekar and A.

Magnon-Ashtekar, Pramana 15, 107 (1980).

[6] J. Cortez, G.A. Mena Marug´an, and J.M. Velhinho, Ann. Phys. (New York) 363, 36 (2015).
[7] J. Cortez and G.A. Mena Marug´an, Phys. Rev. D 72, 064020 (2005); A. Corichi, J. Cortez, and
G.A. Mena Marug´an, Phys. Rev. D 73, 041502 (2006); 084020 (2006); A. Corichi, J. Cortez,
G.A. Mena Marug´an, and J.M. Velhinho, Classical Quantum Gravity 23, 6301 (2006); Phys.
Rev. D 76, 124031 (2007); J. Cortez, G.A. Mena Marug´an, and J.M. Velhinho, Phys. Rev.
D 75, 084027 (2007); Classical Quantum Gravity 25, 105005 (2008); J.F. Barbero G., D.G.
Vergel, and E.J.S. Villase˜nor, Classical Quantum Gravity 25, 085002 (2008).

[8] J. Cortez, G.A. Mena Marug´an, and J.M. Velhinho, Phys. Rev. D 81, 044037 (2010); J.
Cortez, G.A. Mena Marug´an, J. Olmedo, and J.M. Velhinho, Classical Quantum Gravity 28,
172001 (2011); Phys. Rev. D 86, 104003 (2012).

[9] L. Castell´o Gomar, J. Cortez, D. Mart´ın-de Blas, G.A. Mena Marug´an, and J.M. Velhinho,

J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. 11, 001 (2012); EJTP 11, 43 (2014).

[10] V. Mukhanov, Physical Foundations of Cosmology, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,

England, 2005).

[11] K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M.I. Katsnelson, I.V. Grigorieva, S.V.

Dubonos, and A.A. Firsov, Nature 438, 197 (2005).

[12] J. Cortez, B. Elizaga Navascu´es, M. Mart´ın-Benito, G.A. Mena Marug´an, and J.M. Velhinho,

Phys. Rev. D 92 105013 (2015).

[13] P.D. D’Eath and J.J. Halliwell, Phys. Rev. D 35, 1100 (1987).
[14] J. Dimock, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 269, 133 (1982).
[15] R.M. Wald, Ann. Phys. (New York) 118, 490 (1979).
[16] C.J. Isham, Modern Diﬀerential Geometry for Physicists, 2nd ed. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,

1999).

[17] H.B. Lawson and M.L. Michelson, Spin Geometry (Princeton University Press, Princeton,

1989).

20

[18] F.A. Berezin, The Method of Second Quantization (Academic, New York, 1966).
[19] J.E. Nelson and C. Teitelboim, Ann. Phys. (New York) 116, 86 (1978).
[20] Y. Homma, Tokyo J. Math. 23, 2 (2000).
[21] N.R. Wallach, Harmonic Analysis on Homogeneous Spaces (Marcel Dekker, New York, 1973).
[22] A.A. Kirillov, Elements of Theory of Representations (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1976).
[23] D. Shale, Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 103, 149 (1962); J. Derezi´nski, Lect. Notes Phys. 695, 63

(2006).

[24] A. Ashtekar, M. Bojowald, and J. Lewandowski, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 7, 233 (2003); M.
Bojowald, Living Rev. Rel. 11, 4 (2008); G.A. Mena Marug´an, AIP Conf. Proc. 1130, 89
(2009).

[25] M. Mart´ın-Benito, L.J. Garay, and G.A. Mena Marug´an, Phys. Rev. D 78, 083516 (2008);
G.A. Mena Marug´an and M. Mart´ın-Benito, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 24, 2820 (2009); L.J. Garay,
M. Mart´ın-Benito, and G.A. Mena Marug´an, Phys. Rev. D 82, 044048 (2010).

[26] M. Fern´andez-M´endez, G.A. Mena Marug´an, and J. Olmedo, Phys. Rev. D 86, 024003 (2012);
Phys. Rev. D 88, 044013 (2013); Phys. Rev. D 89, 044041 (2014); L. Castell´o Gomar, M.
Fern´andez-M´endez, G.A. Mena Marug´an, and J. Olmedo, Phys. Rev. D 90, 064015 (2014);
L. Castell´o Gomar, M. Mart´ın-Benito, and G.A. Mena Marug´an, J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys.
06, 045 (2015).

[27] I. Agullo, A. Ashtekar, and W. Nelson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 251301 (2012); Phys. Rev. D
87, 043507 (2013); Classical Quantum Gravity 30, 085014 (2013); I. Agullo, Phys. Rev. D 92,
064038 (2015).

