6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
9
2

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
4
3
0
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–15 (xxxx)

Printed 2 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

The Aurora radiation-hydrodynamical simulations of
reionization: calibration and ﬁrst results.

Andreas H. Pawlik1(cid:63), Alireza Rahmati2, Joop Schaye3, Myoungwon Jeon4,
Claudio Dalla Vecchia5,6
1Max-Planck Institute for Astrophysics, Karl-Schwarzschild-Strasse 1, 85748 Garching, Germany
2Institute for Computational Science, University of Z¨urich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Z¨urich, Switzerland
3Leiden Observatory, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9513, 2300 RA Leiden,The Netherlands
4Department of Astronomy and Steward Observatory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0065, USA
5Instituto de Astrof´ısica de Canarias, C/ V´ıa L´actea s/n, 38205 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
6Departamento de Astrof´ısica, Universidad de La Laguna, Av. del Astrof´ısico Fracisco S´anchez s/n, 38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain

ABSTRACT
We introduce a new suite of radiation-hydrodynamical simulations of galaxy forma-
tion and reionization called Aurora. The Aurora simulations make use of a spatially
adaptive radiative transfer technique that lets us accurately capture the small-scale
structure in the gas at the resolution of the hydrodynamics, in cosmological volumes.
In addition to ionizing radiation, Aurora includes galactic winds driven by star for-
mation and the enrichment of the universe with metals synthesized in the stars. Our
reference simulation uses 2 × 5123 dark matter and gas particles in a box of size
25 h−1 comoving Mpc with a force softening scale of at most 0.28 h−1 kpc. It is
accompanied by simulations in larger and smaller boxes and at higher and lower reso-
lution, employing up to 2 × 10243 particles, to investigate numerical convergence. All
simulations are calibrated to yield simulated star formation rate (SFR) functions in
close agreement with observational constraints at redshift z = 7 and to achieve reion-
ization at z ≈ 8.3, which is consistent with the observed optical depth to reionization.
We focus on the design and calibration of the simulations and present some ﬁrst re-
sults. The median stellar metallicities of low-mass galaxies at z = 6 are consistent
with the metallicities of dwarf galaxies in the Local Group, which are believed to have
formed most of their stars at high redshifts. After reionization, the mean photoion-
ization rate decreases strongly with increasing resolution. This is mainly due to the
increased abundance of small-scale gaseous systems absorbing ionizing radiation.

Key words:
galaxies: high-redshift – intergalactic medium – HII regions

cosmology: reionization – methods: numerical – radiative transfer –

1 INTRODUCTION

Reionization is the transformation of the initially cold and
neutral gas that was present shortly after the Big Bang
into the hot and ionized plasma that we observe between
galaxies today. Measurements of the electron scattering op-
tical depth from observations of the cosmic microwave back-
ground (CMB; e.g., Planck Collaboration et al. 2015) and
the detection of extended Gunn-Peterson absorption troughs
in the spectra of high-redshift quasars (e.g., Becker et al.
2001; Fan, Carilli, & Keating 2006) have ﬁrmly established
that reionization took place in the ﬁrst billion years. This
is a key epoch in the history of the Universe that has also

(cid:63) E-mail:pawlik@mpa-garching.mpg.de

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS

seen the birth of the ﬁrst stars, the initial enrichment of
the cosmic gas with metals synthesized in the stars, and
the formation of galaxies, including the progenitors of more
massive galaxies like our own galaxy, the Milky Way (for re-
views see, e.g., Barkana & Loeb 2001; Ricotti 2010; Bromm
& Yoshida 2011; Zaroubi 2013; Lidz 2015, McQuinn 2015).

Understanding the physics of reionization is a primary
goal of modern astrophysics. One of the main open ques-
tions that drives research in the ﬁeld is whether the ionizing
radiation from stars was suﬃcient to accomplish reioniza-
tion, or if there were other, perhaps yet to be discovered,
sources at play (e.g., Volonteri & Gnedin 2009; Loeb 2009;
Madau & Haardt 2015). Estimates from observations of the
early Universe with the Hubble Space Telescope are consis-
tent with a picture in which reionization is driven mainly by

2

Pawlik et al.

star-forming galaxies (e.g., Pawlik, Schaye, & van Scherpen-
zeel 2009; Fontanot, Cristiani, & Vanzella 2012; Finkelstein
et al. 2015; Sharma et al. 2015). However, such estimates
still require assumptions about, e.g., the escape fraction of
ionizing radiation (e.g., Wise & Cen 2009; Yajima, Choi, &
Nagamine 2011; Paardekooper, Khochfar, & Dalla Vecchia
2015), absorption of ionizing photons at small scales (e.g.,
Finlator et al. 2012; Kaurov & Gnedin 2014; Pawlik, Schaye,
& Dalla Vecchia 2015, hereafter PSD15) and the abundance
of faint galaxies below the current detection threshold, all
of which are diﬃcult to test observationally (for a recent
review see Bouwens 2015).

Upcoming observations of galaxies with, e.g., ALMA
(e.g., Ota et al. 2014), MUSE (e.g., Wisotzki et al. 2015) and
JWST (e.g., Finkelstein et al. 2015), and of the intergalactic
medium (IGM) with, e.g., LOFAR (e.g., Zaroubi et al. 2012),
MWA (e.g., Lidz et al. 2008) and SKA (e.g., Mellema et al.
2013), promise to shed further light on these issues. Theoret-
ical models of the early Universe will be critical to help in-
terpret the data that these telescopes will collect. Cosmolog-
ical radiative transfer (RT) simulations of reionization have
emerged as some of the most powerful approaches to build-
ing such models. These simulations track the gravitational
growth of density ﬂuctuations in the expanding Universe
and the hydrodynamical evolution of the cosmic gas, include
recipes for star formation and the associated feedback, and
also follow the propagation of ionizing radiation (e.g., Cia-
rdi, Stoehr, & White 2003; Iliev et al. 2006; McQuinn et al.
2007; Petkova & Springel 2011; Hasegawa & Semelin 2013;
Gnedin 2014; PSD15; Aubert, Deparis, & Ocvirk 2015). The
main drawback of these simulations is the extreme compu-
tational challenge that they pose, in particular the accurate
transport of ionizing photons from multiple sources across
a large range of scales in cosmological volumes (for reviews
see, e.g., Trac & Gnedin 2011; Finlator 2012; Dale 2015).

In this work we introduce Aurora1, a new suite of cos-
mological radiation-hydrodynamical Smoothed Particle Hy-
drodynamics (SPH) simulations of reionization. The Aurora
simulations track the formation of stars and galaxies at high
resolution across cosmological scales, and also follow the hy-
drodynamically coupled transport of ionizing radiation from
stars, the explosion of stars as supernovae (SNe) and the en-
richment of the universe with metals.

Aurora addresses the computational challenges imposed
by the RT by using the spatially adaptive radiation trans-
port technique TRAPHIC (Pawlik & Schaye 2008) that
solves multi-scale problems eﬃciently and has a computa-
tional cost that is independent of the number of radiation
sources. Ionizing radiation is transported at the same high
spatially adaptive resolution at which the gas is evolved.
The ionizing radiation is coupled hydrodynamically to the
evolution of the gas, which lets us accurately account for
feedback from photoheating.

For comparison, in most previous reionization simula-
tions the radiation transport was carried out on a uniform
grid superimposed on the cosmological simulation (e.g., Iliev
et al. 2006; Finlator, Dav´e, ¨Ozel 2011; Ciardi et al. 2012; Iliev
et al. 2014). Because computational resources are ﬁnite, such

1 Aurora is the Latin word for dawn, and the goddess of dawn in
Roman mythology and Latin poetry. (source: Wikipedia)

a grid typically implies a substantial reduction in dynamic
range in comparison with the underlying spatially adaptive
gas simulation and impedes the coupling of the radiation
and the dynamics of the gas. In fact, the gas dynamics has
often been ignored altogether, assuming the gas traces the
dark matter, thus preventing an accurate treatment of the
feedback from photoionization heating. Only recently have
cosmological simulations started to approach the scales and
the high resolution needed to capture the relevant physics
(e.g., Gnedin 2014; Norman et al. 2015; PSD15; Bauer et al.
2015; Ocvirk et al. 2015).

Simulating the internal structure of galaxies in cosmo-
logical volumes from ﬁrst principles, is currently not com-
putationally feasible. This holds even for substantially less
expensive simulations in which the accurate transfer of ion-
izing radiation is ignored. For this reason, cosmological sim-
ulations like ours must make use of subresolution models
to incorporate processes that are not resolved but which
are known to impact the dynamics at resolved scales. Be-
cause the coupling between unresolved and resolved physics
is often not suﬃciently understood, this introduces free pa-
rameters. Two parameters that are especially relevant to
simulations of galaxy formation during reionization are the
eﬃciency of stellar feedback due to the injection of energy
by stellar winds and by SN explosions, and the subresolution
escape fraction of ionizing radiation.

In Aurora, we calibrate the eﬃciency of stellar feedback
and the subresolution escape fraction to match current ob-
servational constraints on the SFR function at z (cid:62) 6 and the
redshift of reionization. The calibration is carried out for a
set of simulations that cover a range of box sizes and resolu-
tions. This lets us investigate the numerical convergence of
our simulations at ﬁxed reionization redshift, which removes
a major variable that may complicate the interpretation of
convergence tests. Quantities that have not been calibrated,
such as the slope of the SFR function at SFRs that are
lower than currently observed, the time-dependent distribu-
tion of neutral gas, and the strength of the photoionizing
background that ﬁlls space after reionization, are direct pre-
dictions coming out of Aurora. Calibration is key to embed-
ding these predictions in observationally supported models
of reionization

Our approach follows that of Schaye et al. (2015), who
introduced the notions of strong and weak convergence. Sim-
ulations converge strongly if the simulation outcome does
not change signiﬁcantly when the resolution is increased
while holding all other parameters ﬁxed. Strong convergence
is computationally expensive to achieve and might still say
little about the quality of the simulations. This is because
subresolution models are typically only applicable within
a limited range of resolutions. Weak convergence acknowl-
edges these diﬃculties by demanding convergence only after
an appropriate adaption of the subresolution model. In other
words, model parameters that are critical for the outcome
but whose values cannot be predicted from ﬁrst principles
should be calibrated, using observations if possible.

Gnedin (2016) also investigated the weak and strong
convergence of the SFR in simulations of reionization. Our
approach diﬀers from that work because we calibrate subres-
olution model parameters to match the observed SFR func-
tion rather than the theoretically estimated SFR function,
which Gnedin (2016) determines by extrapolating the re-

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Aurora

3

Figure 1. The mass-weighted neutral hydrogen fraction at z ≈ 8, corresponding to a mean volume-weighted neutral hydrogen fraction
of about 0.4, in our highest resolution simulation L012N0512 that used 2 × 5123 dark matter and gas particles in a box of linear extent
12.5 h−1 comoving Mpc. The zoom into the selected region (right panel) reveals a network of self-shielded and shadowed neutral gaseous
objects inside the highly ionized regions and demonstrates a large dynamic range in the neutral density captured by our spatially adaptive
radiative transfer technique.

sults from a series of simulations of increasing resolution. In
addition, unlike Gnedin (2016), we calibrate also the subres-
olution escape fraction, which is needed for achieving weak
convergence in the reionization redshift, the other major ob-
servable of the epoch of reionization that currently cannot
be predicted from ﬁrst principles.

This paper focuses on the design of the Aurora simula-
tions and discusses results from the initial analysis of a sub-
set of the simulations carried out in the Aurora programme.
A more comprehensive and detailed analysis of the simula-
tions will be presented in future work. There we will also
discuss additional simulations, for which we have varied the
numerical parameters away from their calibrated values to
help gain further insight in the simulation results (similar to
what we did in PSD15).

The Aurora simulations start from the same initial con-
ditions as the spatially adaptive radiation-hydrodynamical
reionization simulations presented in PSD15. They comple-
ment the simulations in PSD15 by means of calibration,
which we use to remove the dependence on resolution of the
comparison between simulated and observed SFR functions
and of the redshift of reionization, two key observables of
the early Universe. They improve on them by the increased
physical realism, additionally including, e.g., absorption of
ionizing photons by helium and chemical enrichment, and
by the use of a larger range of box sizes and more particles.

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2 we
describe our numerical techniques and the set of simulations
that we investigate here. In Section 3 we describe the calibra-
tion of the eﬃciency of the stellar feedback and of the escape
fraction of ionizing photons. In Section 4 we describe a set of
initial results, including the star formation and reionization
history, the build-up of the ionizing background and metal
enrichment. We also discuss the properties of the ﬁrst galax-
ies. In Section 5 we conclude with a brief summary. Lengths
are expressed in physical units, unless noted otherwise.

2 SIMULATIONS

We use a modiﬁed version of the N-body/TreePM Smoothed
Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) code GADGET (last de-
scribed in Springel 2005) to perform a suite of cosmological
radiation-hydrodynamical simulations of galaxy formation
down to redshift z = 6 (see Table 1 and Figure 1). The sim-
ulations presented here start at z = 127 from the same initial
conditions as the simulations published in PSD15. However,
the two suites of simulations diﬀer substantially in a number
of points.

A major diﬀerence is that in the current work we cali-
brate the stellar feedback strength and the unresolved es-
cape fraction of ionizing radiation separately for each of

4

Pawlik et al.

Table 1. Simulation parameters: simulation name; comoving size of the simulation box, Lbox; number of DM particles, NDM; mass of
dark matter particles, mDM; initial mass of gas particles, mgas; gravitational softening, soft; stellar feedback eﬃciency, fSN; subresolution
ISM escape fraction of ionizing photons, f subres
; comment. The number of SPH particles initially equals NDM (and it decreases during the
simulation due to star formation). The mass of SPH particles is initially lower than the mass of DM particles by a factor ΩDM/Ωb ≈ 4.9.
The mass of SPH particles may increase above this initial value as stellar winds and SNe transfer stellar material to the gas.

esc

simulation

Lbox
[ h−1 comoving Mpc]

L025N0512
L012N0256
L012N0512
L025N0256
L050N0512
L100N1024

25.0
12.5
12.5
25.0
50.0
100.0

NDM

5123
2563
5123
2563
5123
10243

mDM
[ M(cid:12)]
1.00 × 107
1.00 × 107
1.25 × 106
8.20 × 107
8.20 × 107
8.20 × 107

mgas
[ M(cid:12)]
2.04 × 106
2.04 × 106
2.55 × 105
1.63 × 107
1.63 × 107
1.63 × 107

soft
[ h−1 comoving kpc]

fSN

f subres
esc

comment

1.95
1.95
0.98
3.91
3.91
3.91

0.8
0.8
0.6
1.0
1.0
1.0

0.6
0.6
0.5
1.3
1.3
1.3

reference
small box
high resolution
low resolution
large box
zcurrent = 8.4

the simulations. Consequently, all simulations of the current
suite yield nearly identical SFR functions and reionization
histories, independent of box size and numerical resolution
and consistent with observations. This is complementary to
our previous work, where the parameters were identical for
all simulations and the match between simulated and ob-
served SFR functions and the redshift of reionization both
depended on resolution.

Other diﬀerences include that in this work we follow the
chemistry and cooling of helium in addition to that of hydro-
gen, including ionization of helium by stellar radiation. New
is also that we track the enrichment with metals of the IGM.
Finally, the current work makes use of an improved imple-
mentation of stellar feedback and also puts stricter limits
on the size of the time steps over which the dynamics of the
SPH particles are integrated, which improves the accuracy
at which the hydrodynamics equations are solved.

In the following summary of our methodology we will
focus on the diﬀerences with respect to PSD15, to which we
refer the reader for details. We adopt the ΛCDM cosmolog-
ical model with parameters Ωm = 0.265, Ωb = 0.0448 and
ΩΛ = 0.735, ns = 0.963, σ8 = 0.801, and h = 0.71 (Komatsu
et al. 2011), consistent with the most recent constraints from
observations of the CMB by the Planck satellite (Planck Col-
laboration et al. 2015).

2.1 Hydrodynamics

As in PSD15, we adopt the entropy-conserving formulation
of SPH (Springel 2005) and average over 48 SPH neighbor
particles. New is that we use the time step limiter described
in Durier & Dalla Vecchia (2012) to keep the ratio of time
steps of neighboring SPH particles (cid:54) 4. This ensures an
accurate energy-conserving integration of the equations of
hydrodynamics (see also Saitoh & Makino 2009; Springel
2010).

2.2 Chemistry and cooling

We follow the non-equilibrium chemistry and radiative cool-
ing of the gas, assuming that the gas is of primordial compo-
sition with a hydrogen mass fraction X = 0.75 and a helium
mass fraction Y = 1− X. This is a substantial improvement

on PSD15, in which we neglected helium to speed up the
simulations. We achieve this improvement by replacing the
explicit chemistry solver described in PSD15 with the im-
plicit solver described in Pawlik, Milosavljevi´c, & Bromm
(2013), which is faster. As in PSD15, we impose a tempera-
ture ﬂoor above densities nH (cid:62) 0.1 cm−3 to prevent spurious
fragmentation in dense underresolved gas, following Schaye
& Dalla Vecchia (2008).

2.3 Star formation

Our implementation of star formation is identical to that
used in PSD15. This means that we use the pressure-
dependent stochastic recipe of Schaye & Dalla Vecchia
(2008) to sample from a Chabrier (2003) initial mass func-
tion (IMF) in the range 0.1− 100 M(cid:12) and turn gas particles
with densities above nH (cid:62) 0.1 cm−3 into star particles, at a
rate that reproduces the observed star formation law in sim-
ulations of isolated disk galaxies (see Schaye & Dalla Vecchia
2008 for a detailed discussion).

2.4 Chemical enrichment

Another major improvement on PSD15 is that we account
for the age-dependent release of hydrogen, helium, and met-
als by Type II core-collapse and Type Ia SNe, stellar winds
from massive stars, and AGB stars, following Schaye et al.
(2010) and Wiersma et al. (2009). We track both the to-
tal ejected metal mass, and, separately, the ejected mass
of 11 individual elements, including H, He, C, N, O, Ne,
Mg, Si, and Fe. Unlike Schaye et al. (2010), we use particle
metallicities, not SPH smoothed metallicities, and we ne-
glect metal-line cooling. Chemical enrichment thus impacts
our simulations solely by setting the metallicity-dependent
luminosities of the star particles (Schaerer 2003) and the
duration of the various phases of stellar evolution, deter-
mining the mass loss from stellar winds and the timing of
SN explosions (Wiersma et al. 2009).

2.5 Ionizing luminosities

We use the Schaerer (2003) models to compute ionizing lu-
minosities for the star particles in our simulations and adopt

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

a Chabrier IMF in the range 0.1 − 100 M(cid:12), consistent with
our implementation of star formation. Schaerer (2003) does
not tabulate models for the adopted IMF, but only for a
Salpeter (1955) IMF in the range 1 − 100 M(cid:12). We therefore
correct the tabulated luminosities by a factor 0.4 to account
for the diﬀerence in the mass range and by a factor 1.7 to ac-
count for the diﬀerence in the shape between the tabulated
and target IMFs.

New with respect to PSD15 is that we compute
metallicity-dependent luminosities, where we use the near-
est available model metallicity larger than or equal to the
metallicity of the gas particle from which the star particle
was born. We approximately account for the pre-enrichment
with metals by unresolved minihalos by adopting a metallic-
ity ﬂoor (only) for the computation of the ionizing luminosi-
ties, Zmin = 10−5 = 5 × 10−4 Z(cid:12) (e.g., Bromm & Yoshida
2011).

esc

esc

As in PSD15, we multiply the luminosities of star par-
ticles by the subresolution escape fraction f subres
to account
for the removal of photons due to absorption in the unre-
solved interstellar medium (ISM) and for uncertainties in the
intrinsic luminosities of the stars determined by the popu-
lation synthesis model. New is that we calibrate the sub-
resolution escape fraction f subres
separately for each simu-
lation. The calibration ensures that all simulations achieve
a volume-weighted hydrogen ionized fraction xV
HII = 0.5 at
nearly the same redshift z ≈ 8.3 (see Table 1). Note that
f res
the total escape fraction is the product fesc = f subres
esc ,
where 1 − f res
esc (cid:62) 0 is the fraction of photons absorbed by
the gas particles in the galaxy hosting the star particles. The
latter escape fraction is an outcome of the RT and is thus
not calibrated. The calibration of the subresolution escape
fraction will be discussed in more detail in Section 3 below.

esc

2.6 Ionizing radiative transfer

We use the RT code TRAPHIC (Pawlik & Schaye 2008;
Pawlik & Schaye 2011; Pawlik, Milosavljevi´c, & Bromm
2013; Raiˇcevi´c et al. 2014) to transport hydrogen and he-
lium ionizing photons. TRAPHIC transports radiation di-
rectly on the spatially adaptive, unstructured computational
grid traced by the SPH particles and hence exploits the full
dynamic range of the hydrodynamic simulation. Figure 1
shows that this lets us capture small-scale structure in the
ionized fraction in cosmological volumes.

TRAPHIC further employs directional averaging of the
radiation ﬁeld to render the computational cost of the RT
independent of the number of sources. This lets us cope ef-
ﬁciently with the large number of ionizing sources typical of
reionization simulations.

Photons are transported in the grey approximation us-
ing a single frequency bin. We compute grey photoioniza-
tion cross sections (cid:104)σHI(cid:105) = 2.93 × 10−18 cm−2, (cid:104)σHeI(cid:105) =
1.07×10−18 cm−2, (cid:104)σHeII(cid:105) = 1.00×10−21 cm−2 using the ﬁts
to the frequency-dependent photoionization cross sections
by Verner et al. (1996). The kinetic energy of the electron
freed upon photoionizations of an ion of HI, HeI and HeII
is (cid:104)εHI(cid:105) = 3.65 eV, (cid:104)εHeI(cid:105) = 4.44 eV, and (cid:104)εHeII(cid:105) = 4.10 eV.
All other parameters of the RT are as described in PSD15.

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Aurora

5

2.7 Stellar feedback

We account for the injection of mass and energy by both
core-collapse and Type Ia SNe as well as the mass loss due
to winds from massive stars and asymptotic giant branch
(AGB) stars. This gives rise to a collective feedback on the
properties of galaxies to which we refer as stellar feedback.
Most of that feedback is due to the energy released by mas-
sive stars.
For each core-collapse SN that occurs, fSN × 1051 erg
of thermal energy is stochastically injected among a subset
of the neighboring SPH particles, using the method of Dalla
Vecchia & Schaye (2012). The parameter fSN accounts for
radiative energy losses that our simulations may under- or
overestimate because they lack both the resolution and the
physics to accurately model the ISM. Our simulations also
lack the resolution to distinguish between diﬀerent types of
energy feedback, such as SNe and radiatively driven winds.
The factor fSN can hence also be thought to account for the
injection of energy by sources other than SNe. We improve
on PSD15 by calibrating fSN separately for each simula-
tion to bring simulated SFR functions in even better agree-
ment with each other and with observational constraints.
The feedback eﬃciency parameter therefore depends on res-
olution (see Table 1). The calibration of the stellar feedback
will be described below in Section 3 in more detail. New
is also that those gas particles that have been heated by
core-collapse SNe are immediately activated for the time in-
tegration so that they can react promptly to the change in
energy, as described in Durier & Dalla Vecchia (2012).

Our numerical implementation of the age-dependent in-
jection of energy by Type Ia SNe follows the deterministic
method described in Schaye et al. (2010). For each Type Ia
SN that occurs, 1051 erg of thermal energy is injected and
distributed among all neighboring gas particles. Unlike for
core-collapse SNe, we do not activate neighboring particles
for the prompt response to the change in their energy. The
less accurate treatment of Type Ia SNe is justiﬁed because
they contribute little to the total energy released by a stellar
population above z (cid:38) 6, the range of redshifts relevant in
this work (e.g., Wiersma et al. 2009).

Finally,

the implementation of mass

loss

follows

Wiersma et al. (2009).

2.8 Identiﬁcation of galaxies

To extract galaxies we post-process the simulations using
Subﬁnd (Springel et al. 2001; Dolag et al. 2009), as described
in PSD15.

3 CALIBRATION

We calibrate the two main parameters of our simulations,
the stellar feedback eﬃciency fSN and the subresolution es-
cape fraction of ionizing radiation f subres
, to yield agreement
between simulated and observed SFR functions at z = 7 in-
dependently of the resolution and to achieve a reionization
redshift that is independent of the resolution and box size
and in agreement with observational constraints on the op-
tical depth for electron scattering from measurements of the

esc

6

Pawlik et al.

Figure 2. The SFR functions at z = 6, 7, 8, and 9 for the full set of simulations listed in Table 1, as indicated in the legends. The
top axis shows the corresponding UV luminosity, computed as in Kennicutt (1998) and converted to the Chabrier IMF. Symbols show
recent observational constraints from Smit et al. (2012, diamonds, corrected for dust), Bouwens et al. (2015, squares, no dust correction),
Mashian, Oesch, & Loeb (2016, triangles, corrected for dust), and the grey curves show the corresponding Schechter ﬁts. Simulation
L100N1024 has been stopped at z = 8.4 and is therefore only included in the comparison at z = 9. The simulated SFR function is only
shown at SFRs larger than the median SFR of halos with mass larger than 100 DM particles. Where necessary, we have converted the
observed SFRs to the Chabrier IMF. We have calibrated the simulations at z = 7 by adopting a stellar feedback eﬃciency parameter
fSN that yields close agreement between the simulated SFR functions and those observationally inferred by Smit et al. (2012). The
simulations yield SFR functions in close agreement with the observational constraints over the range of observed SFRs at z (cid:38) 6.

CMB. The reionization redshift is thereby deﬁned as the red-
shift at which the mean volume-weighted neutral hydrogen
fraction reaches 0.5. Calibration is required, because cosmo-
logical simulations like ours lack both the physics and the
resolution to predict SFRs and reionization histories from

ﬁrst principles (e.g., Rahmati et al. 2013b). A similar cali-
bration was carried out in Gnedin (2014) and Schaye et al.
(2015).

Each of these two numerical parameters can impact
both the SFR functions and the redshift of reionization. This

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Aurora

7

Figure 3. Reionization histories. Diﬀerent curves correspond to diﬀerent simulations, as indicated in the legend in the right panel. The
gray dashed curves show a simulation at the resolution of our reference simulation but with a smaller subresolution escape fraction
f subres
= 0.3. Left: mean volume-weighted neutral hydrogen fraction. The (model-dependent) constraints on the neutral fraction are
esc
taken from measurements of QSO damping wings (Schroeder, Mesinger, & Haiman 2013), Ly-α clustering (Ouchi et al. 2010), GRB
damping wings (McQuinn et al. 2008), Dark Lyman-α forest pixels (McGreer, Mesinger, & D’Odorico 2015), Ly-α emitters (Ota et al.
2008, Ouchi et al. 2010), Ly-α emission fraction (Ono et al. 2012, Robertson et al. 2013, Tilvi et al. 2014, Pentericci et al. 2014, Schenker
et al. 2014) and the Ly-α forest (Fan et al. 2006), following the discussion of Figure 3 in Robertson et al. (2015). Thanks to calibration,
all simulations reach a neutral fraction of 0.5 (dotted line) at z ≈ 8.3, independently of resolution. The duration of reionization, here
deﬁned as the diﬀerence in redshifts at which the neutral fraction is between 0.95 and 0.05, increases slightly with increasing resolution.
Right: reionization optical depth. The simulated reionization histories are consistent with the observational constraint (dotted line and
grey 1-sigma error band; Planck Collaboration et al. 2015).

could potentially complicate the calibration, which might
need to proceed iteratively, calibrating each parameter at
a time, possibly converging slowly. However, reionization
does not signiﬁcantly impact the SFR function at the SFRs
at which it is observationally constrained, it only aﬀects
the SFR function at much lower SFRs. We can therefore
adopt the following two-step calibration procedure. First, we
choose for each simulation a stellar feedback eﬃciency that
yields agreement between observed and simulated SFRs.
Second, we choose for each simulation a subresolution es-
cape fraction such that the redshift of reionization, deﬁned
as the redshift at which half of the simulation volume is
ionized, equals z = 8.3. The latter implies an optical depth
to electron scattering in agreement with constraints from
observations of the CMB (τ = 0.066± 0.016; Planck Collab-
oration et al. 2015).

The calibrated values of the feedback eﬃciency and the
subresolution escape fraction will generally depend on box
size and resolution, for several reasons. First, the radiative
losses that are simulated explicitly may change if we better
resolve the structure of the ISM. Keeping the feedback ef-
ﬁciency parameter ﬁxed while changing the resolution may
therefore aﬀect the match between simulated and observed
SFR function. Second, the reionization redshift is sensitive
to resolution because resolution impacts the absorption of
photons in the simulation, and it is sensitive to box size

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

unless the box is much larger than the characteristic size
of individual ionized regions. Third, a change in resolution
impacts the SFR function at small, currently unobservable
SFRs, at which the SFR function is not ﬁxed by calibra-
tion. This, in turn, aﬀects the redshift of reionization, also
requiring us to adjust the subresolution escape fraction.

In the following, we discuss the calibration of each of the
parameters in more detail. In addition to the calibrated sim-
ulations, we have carried out simulations in which we have
varied the stellar feedback eﬃciency and the subresolution
escape fraction away from their calibrated values, including
simulations in which we have turned oﬀ SN explosions and
photoheating altogether. While this work focuses on the cal-
ibrated set of simulations, these additional simulations can
be used to gain further insight into the role of these pa-
rameters and the roles of galactic winds and photoheating,
similar to our approach in PSD15.

3.1 Stellar feedback eﬃciency
Figure 2 shows the SFR functions at redshifts z ≈ 6, 7, 8,
and 9. We calibrated the stellar feedback eﬃciency fSN at
z = 7 such that all simulations yield nearly identical SFR
functions when considering galaxies with SFRs that are ac-
cessible by current observations using the HST, i.e., galaxies
with SFRs (cid:38) 0.2 M(cid:12) yr−1. Where necessary, before carry-

8

Pawlik et al.

ing out the calibration, we have divided the observed SFRs,
which assume a Salpeter IMF, by 1.7 to enable comparisons
with our simulations, which assume a Chabrier IMF.

Figure 2 demonstrates generally good agreement be-
tween simulated and observationally inferred SFR functions
above z = 6. By construction, our results are very close to
the observational constraints by Smit et al. (2012) at z = 7,
which we used for our calibration. However, diﬀerences with
respect to more recent estimates of the SFR function and at
other redshifts are minor.

The good match was facilitated by our calibration of the
stellar feedback eﬃciency parameter, since stellar feedback
dominates over feedback from photoheating in the range of
SFRs at which the SFR function has been observationally in-
ferred (PSD15). Achieving this match required us to reduce
the stellar feedback eﬃciency parameter from fSN = 1.0 at
the lowest resolution to fSN = 0.6 at the highest resolution
(see Table 1). This implies that the cooling losses are smaller
at higher resolution, which is consistent with Dalla Vecchia
& Schaye (2012). The calibration does not depend on box
size because for our set of simulations, box size impacts the
SFR functions only at very large SFRs at which stellar feed-
back is ineﬃcient. At these large SFRs, additional processes
such as, e.g., dust corrections and black hole feedback may
need to be invoked to reduce any remaining mismatch with
the observations.

3.2 Escape fraction

esc

The left panel of Figure 3 shows the evolution of the mean
volume-weighted hydrogen neutral fraction. Because of our
calibration of the subresolution escape fraction, f subres
, all
simulations reach a neutral hydrogen fraction of 0.5 at z ≈
8.3, independently of the resolution (except for the dotted
curve which shows a simulation with a diﬀerent calibration
using a lower subresolution escape fraction of 0.3, which is
explained in Section 4.3). Furthermore, as the right panel
of Figure 3 shows, all simulated reionization histories are in
excellent agreement with the observational estimate of the
electron scattering optical depth (Planck Collaboration et
al. 2015).

esc

= 1.3 at the lowest resolution to f subres

Achieving this agreement required us to decrease the
subresolution escape fraction with increasing resolution,
from f subres
= 0.5
at the highest resolution (see Table 1). This points at an
increased contribution of low-mass galaxies as well as a
more leaky gas distribution, facilitating the escape of pho-
tons, at increased resolution. Box size does not impact the
choice of escape fraction, because in our simulations, the
reionization histories are converged with box size above
(cid:38) 10 h−1 comoving Mpc (PSD15).

esc

Simulations of reionization can also be calibrated
against the optical depth (e.g., Ciardi et al. 2012), but that
does not necessarily guarantee the same redshift of reioniza-
tion. Direct calibration against the redshift of reionization,
as done here, still results in an excellent match between sim-
ulated and observationally inferred optical depths, while also
rendering feedback from reionization insensitive to changes
in resolution and box size. Because of this, a ﬁxed redshift
of reionization facilitates the analysis of the impact of reso-
lution and box size on our simulations.

reionization occurs earlier than inferred from observations
of Lyman-α emitters and quasar damping wings at z ≈ 7.
However, as we discuss in Section 4.3 below, the observa-
tional constraints are strongly model-dependent, and there-
fore matching these constraints was not our primary aim.
Instead, the goal of the calibration was to yield a reioniza-
tion redshift that is approximately independent of resolu-
tion, that implies an electron optical depth consistent with
observations, and that is suﬃciently high such that we can
investigate the impact of the feedback from photoheating at
redshifts z (cid:38) 6.

esc

The subresolution escape fraction merely multiplies the
stellar luminosities and thus does not fully specify the es-
cape fraction of galaxies in our simulations. The fraction of
ionizing photons that escape a galaxy and are available to
f res
reionize the IGM is the product fesc = f subres
esc , where
1 − f res
esc (cid:62) 0 is the fraction of photons absorbed by simu-
lation gas particles on their way to the IGM. Because the
subresolution escape fraction is not a physical quantity, we
are free to set it to values larger than unity, as we did in our
low resolution simulations, as long as the number of ionizing
photons reaching the IGM remains consistent with expecta-
tions from population synthesis models. A value f subres
> 1
then implies that the RT simulation overestimates the frac-
tion of photons that are absorbed in the ISM, for example
because it does not resolve holes in the ISM, or that we
need to compensate for missing radiation from unresolved
low-mass galaxies. Finally, we note that the calibrated sub-
resolution escape fraction is chosen independently of the
properties of the galaxies, while in reality the escape frac-
tion may diﬀer strongly between galaxies (e.g., Wise & Cen
2009; Paardekooper, Khochfar, & Dalla Vecchia 2015).

esc

4 RESULTS

Here we discuss results from a ﬁrst analysis of the simula-
tions in Table 1. Because simulation L100N1024 was stopped
at z = 8.4, we will show the SFR function at z = 9 derived
from this simulation, but otherwise omit it from our analy-
sis.

4.1 Overview

Figure 4 shows images of the neutral hydrogen fractions, gas
temperatures and gas metallicities in our reference simula-
tion L025N0512 at three characteristic redshifts z ≈ 9, 8,
and 6, corresponding to volume-weighted ionized fractions
of xHII ≈ 0.3, 0.6, and 1, respectively. Stellar ionizing radi-
ation creates individual ionized regions that grow and over-
lap. While the mean ionized fraction of these regions is very
high, the neutral fraction can locally reach high values as
gas is shadowed or self-shields from the ionizing radiation
(see also Figure 1).

The reionization of the gas is accompanied by an in-
crease in its temperature to about 104 K, the characteristic
temperature of gas photoionized by stellar radiation. Locally
the gas reaches higher temperatures, up to 107 K, where it
is heated by structure formation shocks and explosive stellar
feedback. Galactic winds enrich the gas with metals synthe-
sized in the stars.

Figure 3 shows that in our calibrated set of simulations,

Photoheating raises the pressure in the galaxies and the

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Aurora

9

Figure 4. Snapshots of the reference simulation L025N0512 showing the neutral hydrogen fraction (top row), the temperature (middle
row), and the gas metal mass fraction (bottom row) at three characteristic redshifts z ≈ 9, 8, and 6, corresponding to the early,
middle and post-overlap phases of reionization, respectively. Each panel shows a thin central slice through the simulated cubical volume.
Photoionization heats the gas to a few 104 K, and our radiation-hydrodynamical simulations let us accurately account for the feedback
associated with this process. The localized regions of very high temperatures are caused by energetic feedback from massive stars, which
also enrich the gas with metals synthesized in the stars.

surrounding reionized regions, which impedes the gravita-
tional collapse of the gas in galaxies and in the IGM. As
a consequence, reionization is associated with a decrease in
the rates at which stars are formed and thus provides a
negative feedback on reionization (e.g., Shapiro, Giroux, &
Babul 1994; Gnedin 2000; Pawlik & Schaye 2009; Noh &
McQuinn 2014; PSD15). In the IGM, however, the dynam-
ical impact from photoheating reduces the recombination
rate, and this provides a positive feedback on reionization
(e.g., Wise & Abel 2005; Pawlik, Schaye, & van Scherpenzeel
2009; Sobacchi & Mesinger 2014). Both types of feedback,
negative and positive, are captured self-consistently by our
radiation-hydrodynamical simulations.

In the following, we will provide a more quantitative dis-

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

cussion of our simulations, and investigate the dependence
on box size and resolution.

4.2 Star formation history

Figure 2 shows that thanks in part to the calibration of
stellar feedback near z = 7, the simulated and observed SFR
functions at z (cid:38) 6 match very well near SFRs ∼ 1 M(cid:12) yr−1.
At lower and higher SFRs, the calibration is not as eﬀective
and the simulated SFRs depend still strongly on resolution
and box size.

Generally, higher resolution enables the formation of
lower-mass galaxies with lower SFRs, and also renders stel-
lar feedback more eﬀective. As a result, at low SFRs, despite

10

Pawlik et al.

Figure 5. Eﬀect of box size and resolution on the evolution of
the comoving SFR density. Curves correspond to diﬀerent sim-
ulations as indicated in the legend. Thin and thick curves show
the total SFR density and the SFR density including only the
contribution from galaxies with SFRs greater than 0.2 M(cid:12) yr−1,
approximately the current detection limit (assuming a Chabrier
IMF, corresponding to a limiting UV magnitude MAB ≈ 17, see
Figure 2). Where necessary, we have converted the observed SFRs
to the Chabrier IMF. Observational data is taken from Bouwens
et al. (2015), Bouwens et al. (2014, ﬁlled circle), Finkelstein et al.
(2015, triangles), Oesch et al. (2013, open diamond), Oesch et al.
(2014, ﬁlled diamond), Coe et al. (2013, asterisk), and Ellis et al.
(2013, cross; revised down by a factor of two following Oesch et al.
2013). All simulations yield similar SFR densities from galaxies
above the detection limit at z (cid:46) 10, independently of the box size
and resolution, and in agreement with observational constraints.

calibration, the simulations overpredict the SFR function,
and this eﬀect is strongest at the lowest simulated redshift
and for the simulations with the lowest resolution. On the
other hand, a larger box size reduces the bias on the esti-
mate of the abundance of massive galaxies that results from
missing large-scale power in the initial conditions. This im-
pacts the comparison at high SFRs, where the abundance
of star-forming galaxies is also aﬀected by cosmic variance.
The comparison of the simulated and observed SFR func-
tions at large SFRs may also be aﬀected by uncertain dust
corrections and by feedback from massive black holes (e.g.,
Feng et al. 2016), both of which our simulations ignore.

Negative feedback from photoheating reduces star for-
mation in low-mass galaxies, as discussed above. One may
expect this to imprint an observable change in the slope of
the SFR function at low SFRs, which correspond to low-
mass halos (e.g., Barkana & Loeb 2006; Mu˜noz & Loeb
2011; Mashian & Loeb 2013; Wise et al. 2014). However,
strong stellar feedback may mask the impact of photoheat-
ing on the SFR function, because it also strongly reduces the
normalization of the SFR function (PSD15; see Gnedin &
Kaurov 2014 for an alternative mechanism that reduces the
signature of photoheating). In our simulations, the turnover

in the slope of the SFR function at low SFRs is mostly a
numerical artifact caused by the lack of resolution and low-
temperature coolants, such as molecular hydrogen.

Figure 5 shows that the agreement between simulated
and observed SFR functions carries over to the comparison
between the evolution of the simulated SFR density con-
tributed by observationally accessible galaxies with SFRs
(cid:38) 0.2 M(cid:12) yr−1 and the corresponding observational con-
straints. The ﬁgure also shows explicitly that our simula-
tions predict a substantial population of faint star-forming
galaxies that are currently below the detection threshold.
These will be prime targets for upcoming observations with,
e.g., the JWST (e.g., Johnson et al. 2009; Pawlik, Milosavl-
jevi´c, & Bromm 2011; Zackrisson et al. 2011; Wise et al.
2014).

4.3 Reionization history

The left panel of Figure 3 shows that all simulations yield
mean neutral hydrogen fractions in agreement with esti-
mates from observations of the Lyman-α forest at z ≈ 6
(ﬁlled triangles). Our calibrations of the SFR function and
of the subresolution escape fraction implies that the gas is,
on average, ionized earlier than inferred from observations
of Lyman-α emitters (e.g., Tilvi et al. 2014, Pentericci et al.
2014, Schenker et al. 2014; see Robertson et al. 2015 for an
overview) and quasar damping wings (Schroeder, Mesinger,
& Haiman 2013) at z ≈ 7. However, the interpretation of
these observations is strongly model-dependent which makes
their constraining power unclear (e.g., Dijkstra 2014; Gnedin
& Kaurov 2014). Note that at higher resolution, reionization
is more extended. This is most likely because at higher res-
olution, the abundance of low-luminosity sources, as well
as that of absorbers of ionizing radiation, is increased. The
right panel of Figure 6 shows that the adopted calibration
of the subresolution escape fraction implies a reionization
optical depth in excellent agreement with observational con-
straints (Planck Collaboration et al. 2015).

One should keep in mind that our simulations do not
resolve any ionization by an early population of star-forming
minihaloes (e.g., Abel, Bryan, & Norman 2002; Bromm,
Coppi, & Larson 2002; Greif et al. 2008; Wise et al. 2014)
and also do not account for ionization by non-stellar sources,
such as, e.g., accreting black holes (e.g., Shull & Venkatesan
2008; Haiman 2011; Jeon et al. 2014a). A signiﬁcant con-
tribution from these sources to the total amount of ionizing
radiation during reionization will require us to reduce the
subresolution escape fraction in order to retain the match
between simulated and observed reionization optical depths
(e.g., Ahn et al. 2012; Wise et al. 2014). This might delay
reionization as these very low-mass sources are unlikely to
continue to contribute substantially during the later stages
of reionization, and thereby improve the match between sim-
ulated and observed neutral hydrogen fractions at z > 6. For
reference, a simulation at the resolution of our reference sim-
ulation but with subresolution escape fraction f subres
= 0.3
matches most observational constraints on the neutral frac-
tion, while retaining consistency with the observed electron
scattering optical depth (dotted curve in Figure 3; for com-
putational eﬃciency, this simulation was carried out in a
smaller box of size 12.5 h−1 Mpc).

esc

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Aurora

11

Figure 6. Left: Mean volume-weighted hydrogen photoionization rate. At z < 10, the simulations reveal a marked trend of decreasing
photoionization rate with increasing resolution. The observational estimates are from Wyithe & Bolton (2011, triangle) and Calverley
et al. (2011, square). The dashed curve show a simulation at the resolution of our reference simulation but with a smaller subresolution
escape fraction f subres
= 0.3 (see Figure 3). Right: Neutral hydrogen column density distribution function at z = 6. The abundance of
Lyman-limit systems, i.e., absorption systems with neutral hydrogen column densities NHI (cid:38) 1017 cm−2 increases systematically with
increasing resolution.

esc

4.4 Build-up of the ionizing background

The left panel of Figure 6 shows the build-up of the back-
ground of hydrogen ionizing radiation that accompanies the
reionization of the gas. Immediately apparent is that the
simulated volume-weighted mean photoionization rates at
z ≈ 6 are substantially larger than the photoionization rate
inferred from current observations (e.g., Wyithe & Bolton
2011; Calverley et al. 2011). This could indicate that our
adopted subresolution escape fractions are too high and re-
sult in reionization occuring too early. Indeed, a simulation
at the resolution of our reference simulation but with a lower
subresolution escape fraction f subres
= 0.3 yields a mean
photoionization rate in agreement with the observations,
while also matching the constraints on the neutral fraction
and the optical depth (dashed curves in Figure 3).

esc

However, additional factors may contribute to produce
a high mean photoionization rate, and these would need to
be considered upon any attempts to recalibrate the subreso-
lution escape fraction. For instance, in our simulations, there
is a large scatter around the mean photoionization rate at
ﬁxed density. This scatter causes the mean photoionization
rate to be much higher than the median photoionization
rate (PSD15), and this median might be more appropriate
for comparison with the observational estimates (Rahmati
et al. in prep.). Additionally, Figure 6 reveals a marked trend
of decreasing mean photoionization rates at increasing res-
olution near the end of reionization, which is not yet fully
converged in our reference simulation. If this trend continues
to higher resolution, this may further help bring simulated
and observed photoionization rates in agreement.

The trend of decreasing mean photoionization rates
with increasing resolution is interesting in itself. Thanks to

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

the calibration, the redshift of reionization in our simulations
is independent of resolution. If the redshift of reionization is
mostly set by the total amount of ionizing radiation escaping
into the IGM, which our calibration controls, the decrease
with increasing resolution in the mean photoionization rate,
which scales with the total amount of ionizing radiation es-
caping into the IGM and the mean free path, may be caused
primarily by the decrease in the mean free path of ionizing
photons. The mean free path is set by the abundance of
neutral hydrogen absorption systems with column densities
∼ 1017 cm−2 (e.g., Prochaska, Worseck, & O’Meara 2009).
The left panel of ﬁgure 6 shows the column density distribu-
tion of neutral hydrogen computed as described in Rahmati
et al. (2013a). The abundance of absorbers with column den-
sities NHI (cid:38) 1017 cm−2 grows signiﬁcantly with increasing
resolution between our low-resolution and reference simula-
tion. However, other factors may play a role, such as, e.g.,
the increased duration of reionization at higher resolution
seen in the left panel of Figure 3. We will analyze this in
more detail in subsequent work (Rahmati et al. in prep.).

4.5 Chemical enrichment history

The galaxies that reionize the IGM also enrich the cosmic
gas with metals due to mass loss from stellar winds and
explosions as SNe. Constraints on the metal enrichment his-
tory may therefore help in understanding how galaxies reion-
ized the universe (e.g., Oh 2002; Keating et al. 2014; Finlator
et al. 2015; Ferrara 2015). Note that the outﬂow of metals
into the IGM can be facilitated by a prior episode of photo-
heating that reduces the densities near the sites at which the

12

Pawlik et al.

Figure 7. Mean mass-weighted metallicity. Thin and thick curves
show the metallicities of the ISM (i.e., gas with densities nH (cid:62)
0.1 cm−3) and of all gas irrespective of density.

metals are produced (e.g., Pawlik & Schaye 2009; Finlator,
Dav´e, ¨Ozel 2011; Jeon et al. 2014b; Walch & Naab 2015).

Figure 7 shows the mean mass-weighted metallicity, de-
ﬁned as the ratio of metal mass and total mass, of all gas and
of gas in the ISM only (i.e., gas with nH > 0.1 cm−3). The
mean total gas metallicity is substantially smaller than the
metallicity of the ISM, consistent with the small fraction of
the volume ﬁlled with metals (Figure 4). The mean metal-
licity of the star particles (not shown here) is very similar
to that of the gas in the ISM. At z = 6, the mean mass-
weighted gas metallicity is nearly converged with resolution
in our reference simulation, reaching values Z m (cid:46) 5 × 10−5,
consistent with previous simulations (e.g., Wiersma et al.
2009; Salvaterra, Ferrara, & Dayal 2011; Pallottini et al.
2014).

4.6 Galaxy properties

Figure 8 shows select properties of the population of galax-
ies at z = 6 and explores their dependence on resolution in
our calibrated set of reionization simulations. The baryon
fraction (top left panel) is strongly reduced by photoheat-
ing and stellar feedback. At the reference resolution, stel-
lar feedback is eﬃcient only in galaxies more massive than
(cid:38) 109 M(cid:12). Because photoheating only removes gas from
galaxies (cid:46) 109 M(cid:12), the baryon fraction near 109 M(cid:12) is ar-
tiﬁcially increased (see Figure 6 in PSD15 for an explicit
demonstration). In the high resolution simulation, stellar
feedback is eﬃcient down to smaller masses, and the baryon
fraction is strongly suppressed across the range of masses.

The SFRs of the simulated galaxies (top right and bot-
tom left panels) are consistent with current observational
estimates (McLure et al. 2011). The simulations predict that
the currently observable galaxies with SFRs (cid:38) 0.2 M(cid:12) yr−1
are hosted by halos with virial masses (cid:38) 1010 M(cid:12). Stellar
feedback determines the overall normalization of the relation
between SFR and virial mass in halos with virial masses

(cid:38) 109 M(cid:12), while photoheating and the lack of resolution
and low temperature physics (such as molecular cooling) are
mainly responsible for the strong suppression of the SFRs in
halos with virial masses (cid:46) 109 M(cid:12) (see Figure 6 in PSD15
for an explicit demonstration).
By z = 6, the most massive galaxies with stellar masses
(cid:38) 109 M(cid:12) have metallicities (cid:38) 10−3 (bottom right panel).
The relationship between stellar metallicities and masses
of simulated galaxies is consistent with the stellar mass-
metallicity relation of Local Group dwarf galaxies (Kirby
et al. 2013). This is interesting because those galaxies are
believed to have formed most of their stars at high redshifts
(Weisz et al. 2014).

5 SUMMARY

We have introduced Aurora, a new suite of cosmological
radiation-hydrodynamical simulations of galaxy formation
and reionization. Aurora uses accurate radiative transfer
(RT) at the native, spatially adaptive resolution of the hy-
drodynamic simulation. The Aurora simulations track the
stellar feedback from the explosion of stars as supernovae
(SNe) and also account for the enrichment of the universe
with metals synthesized in the stars. The reference simula-
tion, which makes use of a box of size 25 h−1 comoving Mpc
and contains 5123 dark matter and 5123 baryonic particles
and therefore resolves atomically cooling haloes with virial
temperatures (cid:38) 104 K with (cid:38) 10 DM particles, is accompa-
nied by simulations in larger and smaller boxes, with, respec-
tively, lower and higher resolution to investigate numerical
convergence. While our most demanding simulation, which
uses 2 × 10243 particles in a 100 h−1 comoving Mpc box,
was stopped at z = 8.4, all other simulations were run down
to z = 6.

The Aurora simulations are designed to yield star for-
mation rate (SFR) functions in agreement with observations
of galaxies at z ≈ 7 and to complete reionization at z ≈ 8.3,
consistent with measurements of the electron scattering op-
tical depth, independently of the box size and the resolution.
We accomplished this by calibrating the stellar feedback eﬃ-
ciency, which is the main subresolution parameter impacting
the SFR function over the range of observed SFRs, and the
subresolution escape fraction, which is the main subresolu-
tion parameter impacting the redshift of reionization. The
calibration is motivated by the fact that current cosmologi-
cal simulations lack both the physics and the resolution to
reliably simulate the structure of the ISM in galaxies. The
latter determines how much of the energy injected by mas-
sive stars drives galactic outﬂows reducing the SFR, and
how many of the emitted ionizing photons escape into the
IGM.

While the main aim of this work was to describe the
design and calibration of the simulations, we have also re-
ported results from an initial analysis. An interesting ﬁnd-
ing coming out of Aurora is the strong decrease of the mean
photoionization rate after reionization with increasing res-
olution. Our initial analysis suggests that this dependence
is mainly caused by an increase in the abundance of small-
scale absorbers in the IGM, which impact the photoioniza-
tion rate because they set the mean free path of ionizing
photons in the ionized gas. The fact that the radiative trans-

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Aurora

13

Figure 8. Dependence on resolution of select properties of the simulated galaxies at z = 6. From top to bottom, left to right, the panels
show the median baryon fraction as a function of virial mass, the median stellar mass as a function of virial mass, the median SFR as a
function of stellar mass, and the mass-weighted mean stellar metallicity as a function of stellar mass. The vertical dotted lines indicate
the mass of 100 DM particles in the simulation of the corresponding color, and the vertical dashed line indicates the mass corresponding
to a virial temperature of 104 K. The horizontal dashed line in the top left panel marks the cosmic baryon fraction. The observational
estimates in the bottom left panel are from McLure et al. (2011, their sample with redshifts 6 (cid:46) z (cid:46) 6.5). The data points in the bottom
right panel show the compilation of Kirby et al. (2013) of the stellar mass-metallicity relation of Local Group dwarf galaxies.

fer technique used to carry out Aurora is spatially adaptive,
was critical for enabling us resolve the absorption of ion-
izing radiation on small scales in radiation-hydrodynamical
simulations of cosmological volumes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to Volker Springel for letting us use GAD-
GET and the halo ﬁnder Subﬁnd. We are grateful to Volker
Bromm for letting us use his chemistry solver. We thank
Milan Raicevic for his contributions in an early, prepara-
tory phase of this project, and we thank Gunjan Bansal for
helpful discussions. AHP thanks the Max Planck Institute
for Astrophysics (MPA) for its hospitality during the work

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

14

Pawlik et al.

on this paper. Computer resources for this project have been
provided by the Gauss Centre for Supercomputing/Leibniz
Supercomputing Centre under grant:pr83le (PI Pawlik). We
further acknowledge PRACE for awarding us access to re-
source SuperMUC based in Germany at LRZ Garching (pro-
posal number 2013091919, PI Pawlik). Some of the simula-
tions presented here were run on Odin at the Rechenzentrum
Garching (RZG) and the Max Planck Institute for Astro-
physics (MPA) and on Hydra at the Leibniz-Rechenzentrum
(LRZ) in Garching. This work was sponsored with ﬁnancial
support from the Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Re-
search (NWO). We also beneﬁted from funding from the Eu-
ropean Research Council under the European Unions Sev-
enth Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) / ERC Grant
agreement 278594-GasAroundGalaxies. AHP received fund-
ing from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement number
301096-proFeSsoR.

REFERENCES

Abel T., Bryan G. L., Norman M. L., 2002, Sci, 295, 93
Ahn K., Iliev I. T., Shapiro P. R., Mellema G., Koda J.,

Mao Y., 2012, ApJ, 756, L16

Alvarez M. A., Finlator K., Trenti M., 2012, ApJ, 759, L38
Aubert D., Deparis N., Ocvirk P., 2015, MNRAS, 454, 1012
Barkana R., Loeb A., 2001, PhR, 349, 125
Barkana R., Loeb A., 2006, MNRAS, 371, 395
Bauer A., Springel V., Vogelsberger M., Genel S., Torrey
P., Sijacki D., Nelson D., Hernquist L., 2015, MNRAS,
453, 3593

Becker R. H., et al., 2001, AJ, 122, 2850
Bouwens R. J., et al., 2014, ApJ, 795, 126
Bouwens R. J., et al., 2015, ApJ, 803, 34
Bouwens R. J., 2015, arXiv, arXiv:1511.01133
Bromm V., Coppi P. S., Larson R. B., 2002, ApJ, 564, 23
Bromm V., Yoshida N., 2011, ARA&A, 49, 373
Calverley A. P., Becker G. D., Haehnelt M. G., Bolton J. S.,

2011, MNRAS, 412, 2543

Chabrier G., 2003, PASP, 115, 763
Ciardi B., Stoehr F., White S. D. M., 2003, MNRAS, 343,

1101

Ciardi B., Bolton J. S., Maselli A., Graziani L., 2012, MN-

RAS, 423, 558

Coe D., et al., 2013, ApJ, 762, 32
Dale J. E., 2015, NewAR, 68, 1
Dalla Vecchia C., Schaye J., 2012, MNRAS, 426, 140
Dijkstra M., 2014, PASA, 31, e040
Dolag K., Borgani S., Murante G., Springel V., 2009, MN-

RAS, 399, 497

Duncan K., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 444, 2960
Durier F., Dalla Vecchia C., 2012, MNRAS, 419, 465
Ellis R. S., et al., 2013, ApJ, 763, L7
Fan X., et al., 2006, AJ, 132, 117
Fan X., Carilli C. L., Keating B., 2006, ARA&A, 44, 415
Feng Y., Di-Matteo T., Croft R. A., Bird S., Battaglia N.,

Wilkins S., 2016, MNRAS, 455, 2778

Ferrara A., 2015, arXiv, arXiv:1511.01120
Finkelstein S. L., et al., 2015, ApJ, 810, 71
Finkelstein S. L., Dunlop J., Le Fevre O., Wilkins S., 2015,

arXiv, arXiv:1512.04530

Finlator K., Dav´e R., ¨Ozel F., 2011, ApJ, 743, 169
Finlator K., 2012, arXiv, arXiv:1203.4862
Finlator K., Oh S. P., ¨Ozel F., Dav´e R., 2012, MNRAS,
427, 2464

Finlator K., Thompson R., Huang S., Dav´e R., Zackrisson

E., Oppenheimer B. D., 2015, MNRAS, 447, 2526

Fontanot F., Cristiani S., Vanzella E., 2012, MNRAS, 425,

1413

Gnedin N. Y., 2000, ApJ, 542, 535
Gnedin N. Y., 2014, ApJ, 793, 29
Gnedin N. Y., Kaurov A. A., 2014, ApJ, 793, 30
Gnedin N. Y., 2016, arXiv, arXiv:1601.05802
Greif T. H., Johnson J. L., Klessen R. S., Bromm V., 2008,

MNRAS, 387, 1021

Haiman Z., 2011, Natur, 472, 47
Hasegawa K., Semelin B., 2013, MNRAS, 428, 154
Iliev I. T., Mellema G., Pen U.-L., Merz H., Shapiro P. R.,

Alvarez M. A., 2006, MNRAS, 369, 1625

Iliev I. T., Mellema G., Ahn K., Shapiro P. R., Mao Y.,

Pen U.-L., 2014, MNRAS, 439, 725

Jeon M., Pawlik A. H., Bromm V., Milosavljevi´c M., 2014,

MNRAS, 440, 3778

Jeon M., Pawlik A. H., Bromm V., Milosavljevic M., 2014,

2014, MNRAS, 444,

Johnson J. L., Greif T. H., Bromm V., Klessen R. S., Ip-

polito J., 2009, MNRAS, 399, 37

Kaurov A. A., Gnedin N. Y., 2014, ApJ, 787, 146
Keating L. C., Haehnelt M. G., Becker G. D., Bolton J. S.,

2014, MNRAS, 438, 1820

Khakhaleva-Li

Z., Gnedin N. Y.,

2016,

arXiv,

arXiv:1601.00641

Kennicutt R. C., Jr., 1998, ApJ, 498, 541
Kirby, E. N., Cohen, J. G., Guhathakurta, P., et al. 2013,

ApJ, 779, 102

Komatsu E., et al., 2011, ApJS, 192, 18
Kuhlen M., Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., 2012, MNRAS, 423,

862

Lidz A., Zahn O., McQuinn M., Zaldarriaga M., Hernquist

L., 2008, ApJ, 680, 962

Lidz A., 2015, arXiv, arXiv:1511.01188
Loeb A., 2009, JCAP, 3, 22
Loeb A., 2010, hdfs.book,
Madau P., Haardt F., 2015, ApJ, 813, L8
Maio U., Ciardi B., Dolag K., Tornatore L., Khochfar S.,

2010, MNRAS, 407, 1003

Mashian N., Loeb A., 2013, JCAP, 12, 17
Mashian N., Oesch P. A., Loeb A., 2016, MNRAS, 455,

2101

McGreer I. D., Mesinger A., D’Odorico V., 2015, MNRAS,

447, 499

McLure R. J., et al., 2011, MNRAS, 418, 2074
McQuinn M., Lidz A., Zahn O., Dutta S., Hernquist L.,

Zaldarriaga M., 2007, MNRAS, 377, 1043

McQuinn M., Lidz A., Zaldarriaga M., Hernquist L., Dutta

S., 2008, MNRAS, 388, 1101

McQuinn M., 2015, arXiv, arXiv:1512.00086
Mellema G., et al., 2013, ExA, 36, 235
Mu˜noz J. A., Loeb A., 2011, ApJ, 729, 99
Noh Y., McQuinn M., 2014, MNRAS, 444, 503
Norman M. L., Reynolds D. R., So G. C., Harkness R. P.,

Wise J. H., 2015, ApJS, 216, 16

Ocvirk P., et al., 2015, arXiv, arXiv:1511.00011

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

Aurora

15

Oesch P. A., et al., 2013, ApJ, 773, 75
Oesch P. A., et al., 2014, ApJ, 786, 108
Ono Y., et al., 2012, ApJ, 744, 83
Ouchi M., et al., 2010, ApJ, 723, 869
Oh S. P., 2002, MNRAS, 336, 1021
Ota K., et al., 2008, ApJ, 677, 12
Ota K., et al., 2014, ApJ, 792, 34
Paardekooper J.-P., Khochfar S., Dalla Vecchia C., 2015,

Springel V., 2010, MNRAS, 401, 791
Tilvi V., et al., 2014, ApJ, 794, 5
Trac H. Y., Gnedin N. Y., 2011, ASL, 4, 228
Verner D. A., Ferland G. J., Korista K. T., Yakovlev D. G.,

1996, ApJ, 465, 487

Volonteri M., Gnedin N. Y., 2009, ApJ, 703, 2113
Walch S., Naab T., 2015, MNRAS, 451, 2757
Weisz, D. R., Dolphin, A. E., Skillman, E. D., et al. 2014,

MNRAS, 451, 2544

ApJ, 789, 147

Pallottini A., Ferrara A., Gallerani S., Salvadori S.,

Wiersma R. P. C., Schaye J., Theuns T., Dalla Vecchia C.,

D’Odorico V., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 2498

Tornatore L., 2009, MNRAS, 399, 574

Wise J. H., Abel T., 2005, ApJ, 629, 615
Wise J. H., Cen R., 2009, ApJ, 693, 984
Wise J. H., Turk M. J., Norman M. L., Abel T., 2012, ApJ,

745, 50

Wise J. H., Demchenko V. G., Halicek M. T., Norman
M. L., Turk M. J., Abel T., Smith B. D., 2014, MNRAS,
442, 2560

Wisotzki L., et al., 2015, arXiv, arXiv:1509.05143
Wyithe J. S. B., Bolton J. S., 2011, MNRAS, 412, 1926
Yajima H., Choi J.-H., Nagamine K., 2011, MNRAS, 412,

411
Zackrisson E., Rydberg C.-E., Schaerer D., ¨Ostlin G., Tuli
M., 2011, ApJ, 740, 13

Zaroubi S., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 425, 2964
Zaroubi S., 2013, ASSL, 396, 45

Pawlik A. H., Schaye J., 2008, MNRAS, 389, 651
Pawlik A. H., Schaye J., van Scherpenzeel E., 2009, MN-

RAS, 394, 1812

Pawlik A. H., Schaye J., 2009, MNRAS, 396, L46
Pawlik A. H., Schaye J., 2011, MNRAS, 412, 1943
Pawlik A. H., Milosavljevi´c M., Bromm V., 2011, ApJ, 731,

54

Pawlik A. H., Milosavljevi´c M., Bromm V., 2013, ApJ, 767,

59

Pawlik A. H., Schaye J., Dalla Vecchia C., 2015, MNRAS,

451, 1586 (PSD15)

Pentericci L., et al., 2014, ApJ, 793, 113
Petkova M., Springel V., 2011, MNRAS, 412, 935
Planck Collaboration, 2015, arXiv, arXiv:1502.01589
Prochaska J. X., Worseck G., O’Meara J. M., 2009, ApJ,

705, L113

Rahmati A., Pawlik A. H., Raiˇcevic M., Schaye J., 2013,

MNRAS, 430, 2427

Rahmati A., Schaye J., Pawlik A. H., Raiˇcevic M., 2013,

MNRAS, 431, 2261

Raiˇcevi´c M., Pawlik A. H., Schaye J., Rahmati A., 2014,

MNRAS, 437, 2816

Ricotti M., 2010, AdAst, 2010
Robertson B. E., et al., 2013, ApJ, 768, 71
Robertson B. E., Ellis R. S., Furlanetto S. R., Dunlop J. S.,

2015, ApJ, 802, L19

Saitoh T. R., Makino J., 2009, ApJ, 697, L99
Salpeter E. E., 1955, ApJ, 121, 161
Salvaterra R., Ferrara A., Dayal P., 2011, MNRAS, 414,

847

Scannapieco C., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 423, 1726
Schaerer D., 2003, A&A, 397, 527
Schaye J., 2004, ApJ, 609, 667
Schaye J., Dalla Vecchia C., 2008, MNRAS, 383, 1210
Schaye J., et al., 2010, MNRAS, 402, 1536
Schaye J., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 446, 521
Schenker M. A., Ellis R. S., Konidaris N. P., Stark D. P.,

2014, ApJ, 795, 20

Schroeder J., Mesinger A., Haiman Z., 2013, MNRAS, 428,

3058

Shapiro P. R., Giroux M. L., Babul A., 1994, ApJ, 427, 25
Sharma M., Theuns T., Frenk C. S., Bower R. G.,
Crain R. A., Schaller M., Schaye J., 2015, arXiv,
arXiv:1512.04537

Shull J. M., Venkatesan A., 2008, ApJ, 685, 1
Smit R., Bouwens R. J., Franx M., Illingworth G. D., Labb´e

I., Oesch P. A., van Dokkum P. G., 2012, ApJ, 756, 14

Sobacchi E., Mesinger A., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 1662
Springel V., White S. D. M., Tormen G., Kauﬀmann G.,

2001, MNRAS, 328, 726

Springel V., 2005, MNRAS, 364, 1105

c(cid:13) xxxx RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–15

