6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
9
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
4
0
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Model-Based Iterative Reconstruction

for Radial Fast Spin-Echo MRI

Kai Tobias Block, Martin Uecker, and Jens Frahm

Abstract

In radial fast spin-echo MRI, a set of overlapping spokes with an
inconsistent T2 weighting is acquired, which results in an averaged im-
age contrast when employing conventional image reconstruction tech-
niques. This work demonstrates that the problem may be overcome
with the use of a dedicated reconstruction method that further al-
lows for T2 quantiﬁcation by extracting the embedded relaxation in-
formation. Thus, the proposed reconstruction method directly yields
a spin-density and relaxivity map from only a single radial data set.
The method is based on an inverse formulation of the problem and
involves a modeling of the received MRI signal. Because the solution
is found by numerical optimization, the approach exploits all data ac-
quired. Further, it handles multi-coil data and optionally allows for
the incorporation of additional prior knowledge. Simulations and ex-
perimental results for a phantom and human brain in vivo demonstrate
that the method yields spin-density and relaxivity maps that are nei-
ther aﬀected by the typical artifacts from TE mixing, nor by streaking
artifacts from the incomplete k-space coverage at individual echo times.
turbo spin-echo, radial sampling, non-Cartesian MRI,

Keywords.
iterative reconstruction, inverse problems.

Copyright 2009 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, cre-
ating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse
of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

Published in ﬁnal form in:
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 28:1759-1769 (2009)
DOI: 10.1109/TMI.2009.2023119

1

Introduction

Fast spin-echo (FSE) MRI is one of the most frequently used MRI tech-
niques in today’s clinical practice. In the FSE technique, a train of multiple
spin-echoes is generated after each RF excitation. Therefore, it oﬀers images
with proton-density (PD) and T2 contrast at a signiﬁcantly reduced mea-
suring time compared to a spin-echo sequence with a single phase-encoding
step per excitation. Although the k-space lines that are sampled during
each train of spin echoes have diﬀerent echo times (TE) and, thus, increas-
ing T2 weighting, conventional Cartesian sampling strategies still allow for
a straightforward image reconstruction with only minor artifacts under vi-
sual inspection when grouping spin echoes with equal echo time around the
center of k-space. The underlying reason is the dominance of major image
features by the centrally located low spatial frequencies, while the periph-
ery of k-space rather deﬁnes edges which are less susceptible to changes in
the contrast weighting. Moreover, in the Cartesian case, the contrast of the
image can be adjusted by reordering the acquisition scheme such that the
central k-space lines are measured with the desired echo time. A noticeable
disadvantage of the T2 attenuation in k-space, however, is a certain degree of
image blurring. It arises because the signal decay can be formally written as
a multiplication of the true k-space data with some envelope function, which
yields a convolution in image space along the phase encoding direction.

In recent years, radial sampling, as originally proposed by Lauterbur [1],
has regained considerable interest as an alternative to Cartesian sampling.
In this technique, coverage of k-space is accomplished by sampling the data
along coinciding spokes instead of parallel lines. Radial sampling oﬀers sev-
eral promising advantages that include a lower sensitivity to object motion
[2, 3], the absence of any ghosting eﬀects, and eﬃcient undersampling prop-
erties. In principle, radial trajectories can be combined with almost all MRI
techniques including FSE sequences [2, 3, 4]. In this speciﬁc case, however,
the modiﬁed sampling scheme has major implications for the image recon-
struction procedure. Because all spokes pass through the center of k-space,
each spoke carries an equal amount of low spatial frequency information
which, for diﬀerent echo times, exhibits pronounced diﬀerences in T2 con-
trast. This situation is fundamentally diﬀerent to the Cartesian case and
poses complications when employing conventional reconstruction methods
such as ﬁltered backprojection or gridding [5]: (i) The merging of spokes
with diﬀerent echo times may cause streaking artifacts around areas with
pronounced T2 relaxation because the relative signal decay leads to jumps in
the corresponding point-spread-function [6]. (ii) The contrast of the image

2

always represents an average of the varying T2 weightings. (iii) Diﬀerently
ordered k-space acquisitions may no longer be used to alternate the image
contrast and, thus, to distinguish between PD and T2 relaxation. On the
other hand, because all spokes pass through the center of k-space and cap-
ture the low spatial frequencies at every echo time, a single radial FSE data
set implicitly contains information about the local signal decay. Therefore,
dedicated reconstruction methods have been developed that extract this em-
bedded temporal information in order to quantify the T2 relaxation within
a reduced measurement time relative to Cartesian-based T2 quantiﬁcation
approaches.

Most of the existing techniques, such as k-space weighted image contrast
(KWIC) [7, 8], attempt to calculate a series of echo time-resolved images
by mixing the low spatial frequencies from spokes measured at the desired
echo time with high frequency information from other spokes (measured at
diﬀerent echo times). A drawback of these techniques is that the TE mixing
tends to cause artifacts in the reconstructed images. Although their strength
can be attenuated to some degree with speciﬁc echo mixing schemes [8], these
artifacts limit the accuracy of the T2 estimates. In particular, the values
become dependent on the object size as the change in k-space is assumed to
be located only in the very central area that is densely covered by spokes
measured at an equal echo time [8].

To overcome the limitation, this work demonstrates an iterative concept
for the reconstruction from radially sampled FSE acquisitions. Instead of
calculating any intermediate images, the proposed method estimates a spin
density and a relaxivity map directly from the acquired k-space data using
a numerical optimization technique. Because the procedure involves a mod-
eling of the received MRI signal that accounts for the time dependency of
the acquired samples, the approach exploits the entire data for ﬁnding these
maps without assuming that the contrast changes are restricted to a very
central area of k-space. Related ideas have been presented by Graﬀ et al [9]
and Olafsson et al [10].

2 Theory

The method proposed here can be seen as an extension of a previous devel-
opment for the reconstruction from highly undersampled radial acquisitions
with multiple receive coils [11]. In this work, the reconstruction is achieved
by iteratively estimating an image that, on the one hand, is consistent with
the measured data and, on the other hand, complies with prior object knowl-

3

edge to compensate for the missing data. For multi-echo data from a FSE
sequence, this strategy is not appropriate because it is impossible to ﬁnd a
single image that matches the diﬀerent contrasts at the same time. There-
fore, it is necessary to include the relaxation process into the signal modeling
used to compare the image estimate to the measured k-space samples. As
the T2 relaxation time is a locally varying quantity, this requires that the
estimate consists of a spin-density and a relaxation component instead of
just an intensity component, which directly yields a quantiﬁcation of the
relaxation time. The objective of the present extended approach, therefore,
is to simultaneously ﬁnd a spin-density map and a relaxivity map such that
snapshots, calculated for each echo time from these maps, best match the
spokes measured at the respective echo times.

2.1 Cost Function

In order to compute the maps, a cost function is needed which quantiﬁes
the accuracy or quality of the match to the measured data, such that the
optimal solution can be identiﬁed by a minimum value of this function.
Because experimental MRI data is always contaminated by a certain degree
of Gaussian noise, the cost function of the proposed method uses the L2
norm and has the form

2

2

,

(1)

Φ(~ρ, ~r) =

1

2Xt Xc (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

~F (~ρ, ~r, t, c) − ~yt,c(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

where ~ρ is a vector containing the values of the spin-density map, and ~r is
a vector containing values of the relaxivity map. For a base resolution of
n×n pixels, both vectors have n2 entries. Further, ~yt,c is a vector containing
the raw data from channel c of all spokes measured at echo time t, where
c runs from 1 to the total number of receive channels and t runs over all
echo times. Finally, ~F is a vector function that calculates a snapshot from
the given spin-density and relaxivity map at echo time t, and translates it
to k-space using a Fourier transformation and subsequent evaluation at the
sampling positions of the spokes acquired at time t. Moreover, before Fourier
transformation, the mapping includes a multiplication with the sensitivity
proﬁle of coil c. These coil proﬁles are estimated from the same data set
in a preceding processing step using a sum-of-squares combination of the
channels, where it is assumed that the individual sensitivity proﬁles are
smooth functions. A detailed description of this procedure is given in [11].
The function ~F can be seen as the forward operation of the reconstruction
problem and comprises a model of the received MRI signal, which is used to

4

synthesize the corresponding k-space signal from the given maps. The jth
entry, i.e. the jth sample of the synthesized data with k-space position ~kj
at echo time t, is given by

Fj(~ρ, ~r, t, c) = X~x∈FOV

̺(~x) · e−R(~x)·t · Cc(~x) · e−i ~x·~kj ,

(2)

where ~x denotes a position in image space such that the sum runs over all
(discrete) elements of the image matrix, and Cc is the complex sensitivity
proﬁle of the cth coil. Further, ̺ denotes a function which evaluates the
spin-density vector ~ρ at image position ~x

̺(~x) =Xi

ρi · δ(~x − ~xi) ,

(3)

where ρi denotes the ith component of the spin-density vector with corre-
sponding position ~xi in image space. Accordingly, the function R evaluates
the relaxivity vector ~r

R(~x) = Xi

ri · δ(~x − ~xi) .

(4)

To reconstruct a set of measured data ~y, a pair of vectors (~ρ, ~r) has to be
found that minimizes the cost function Φ. This can be achieved by using a
numerical optimization method that is suited for large-scale problems, like
the non-linear conjugate-gradient (CG) method. Here, we employed the
CG-Descent algorithm recently presented by Hager and Zhang [12], which
can be used in a black box manner. Hence, it is only required to evaluate Φ
and its gradient at given positions (~ρ, ~r) in the parameter space.

2.2 Evaluation of Cost Function

Evaluation of the cost function at a given pair (~ρ, ~r) can be done in a straight-
forward manner. However, to calculate the value of Φ in a reasonable time,
a practical strategy is to perform a fast Fourier transformation (FFT) of the
snapshots and to interpolate the transforms onto the desired spoke positions
in k-space using a convolution with a radial Kaiser-Bessel kernel similar to
the gridding technique [5, 13]. Because the kernel is ﬁnite, it is further neces-
sary to pre-compensate for undesired intensity modulations by multiplying
the snapshots with an approximation of the kernel’s Fourier transform in
front of the FFT – commonly known as roll-oﬀ correction [14].

The same strategy can be used for evaluating the gradient, which is a
vector containing the derivative of the cost function with respect to each

5

component of the spin-density and relaxivity vector.
It is convenient to
decompose the problem into a separate derivation of Φ with respect to com-
ponents of ~ρ and ~r, respectively,

∇Φ =   ∇ρΦ

∇rΦ ! .

(5)

To simplify the notation, the calculation is only shown for a single time
point and a single coil (indicated by φ instead of Φ)

Derivation of Eq. (2) with respect to components of ~ρ gives

φ =

2

2

.

1

~F − ~y(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)
2 (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

∂Fj
∂ρv

= e−R(~xv )·t · Cc(~xv) · e−i ~xv ·~kj ,

(6)

(7)

where ~xv denotes the position of the vth component in image space. Using
the chain rule and inserting this equation then yields (see Appendix)

∂
∂ρv

φ = e−R(~xv )·t · ℜ
Cc(~xv) ·Xj


(Fj − yj) ei ~xv ·~kj


.

(8)

Hence, the gradient with respect to ~ρ can be obtained by evaluating the
cost function, calculating the residual, and performing an inverse Fourier
transformation, which is followed by a multiplication with the complex con-
jugate of the coil proﬁle and, ﬁnally, with the relaxation term. Derivation
of Eq. (2) with respect to components of ~r gives

∂Fj
∂rv

= −t · ̺(~xv) · e−R(~xv )·t · Cc(~xv) · e−i ~xv ·~kj

(9)

and, in a similar way to (8), this yields

∂
∂rv

φ = −t · ̺(~xv) · e−R(~xv )·t · ℜ


Cc(~xv) ·Xj

(Fj − yj) ei ~xv ·~kj


. (10)

Comparison with Eq. (8) shows that the gradient with respect to ~r can
be easily obtained by multiplying the gradient with respect to ~ρ with the
components of the given ~ρ and the echo time t. Of course, Eq. (8) and
Eq. (10) have to be summed over each channel and echo time occurring in
the complete cost function (1).

6

2.3 Regularization

Because the aforementioned strategy for fast evaluation of the cost function
involves an interpolation step that is imperfect in practice, and, further, be-
cause the measured values correspond to the continuous Fourier transform
whereas the estimated maps are discrete, it is necessary to introduce a regu-
larization of the estimate. If a regularization is not used, implausible values
arise after a certain number of iterations in ill-conditioned areas of the esti-
mate, i.e. in entries of the maps that are not well-deﬁned from the measured
k-space values. For instance, the edges of the maps’ Fourier transforms out-
side of the sampled disc are ill-conditioned due to a lack of measured samples
in these areas. Because the optimizer simply tries to reduce the total value
of the cost function, it employs such “degrees of freedom” to minimize the
residuum at neighboring sampling positions (it should be noted that the
interpolation strategy assumes that the true function can be locally approx-
imated by a weighted sum over the nearby grid points). This results in local
k-space peaks with high amplitude that translate into noise-alike image pat-
terns for high iteration numbers. The problem poses a general drawback
of the iterative reconstruction technique, which can be either adressed by
stopping the optimization procedure after some iterations or by regulariz-
ing the estimate to suppress implausible values. Advantages of the latter
approach are that the estimate converges to a well-deﬁned solution without
being sensitive to the total iteration number and that it allows for tuning
the solution by using diﬀerent regularization techniques. A regularization is
accomplished by complementing the cost function with a weighted penalty
function P (~ρ, ~r) which can act on both the spin-density and relaxivity map

Φ(~ρ, ~r) =

1

2 Xt Xc (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

~F (~ρ, ~r, t, c) − ~yt,c(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

2

2

+ λ · P (~ρ, ~r) .

(11)

Diﬀerent types of penalty functions can be used for the regularization.
For instance, constraining the total energy of the estimate by penalizing the
L2 norm of its components leads to the commonly known (simple) Tikhonov
regularization. In the present work, the L2 norms of the ﬁnite diﬀerences of
the maps’ Fourier transforms are penalized, which enforces certain smooth-
ness of the k-space information

P (~ρ, ~r) = kDxF ~ρk2

2 + kDyF ~ρk2

2 + kDxF ~rk2

2 + kDyF ~rk2

2 .

(12)

Here, F denotes the discrete Fourier transformation, and Dx is the ﬁnite
diﬀerence operator in x-direction

Dx I(x, y) = I(x, y) − I(x − 1, y) .

(13)

7

It turned out that this choice oﬀers robust suppression of local intensity
accumulations in the ill-conditioned areas, so that no artifacts appear even
for a high number of iterations (e.g., 1000 iterations).

A drawback of any regularization technique is that it introduces a weight-
ing factor λ, which has to be chosen properly. If selected too low, the regu-
lariation becomes ineﬀective, whereas if selected too high, the solution will
be biased towards the minimization of the penalty term (here leading to an
undesired image modulation). A method for automatically determining the
proper regularization weight would be highly desirable, but the establish-
ment of such a method is yet an open issue. However, with the penalty term
described in Eq. (12), the reconstruction appears to be rather insensible to
minor changes of the weighting factor λ. In fact, all images presented here
were obtained with a ﬁxed value of λ = 0.001, which yielded an eﬀective
artifact suppression without noticeably aﬀecting the results. Presumably,
the weight has to be adjusted for measured data with completely diﬀerent
scaling.
In this case, a reasonable adjustment strategy is to start with a
very small weight and to increase the value successively until the artifacts
visually disappear.

2.4

Initialization

In the single-echo reconstruction scenario, it is very eﬃcient to initialize the
optimizer with a properly scaled gridding solution. This choice signiﬁcantly
reduces the total number of iterations because the optimizer starts with a
reasonable guess. In the multi-echo case, however, it is more diﬃcult to ob-
tain reasonable initial guesses for the spin-density and relaxivity map, and
several options exist. For example, a curve ﬁtting of either strongly under-
sampled or low-resolution gridding solutions from single echo times could
be used to approximate the maps. Alternatively, an echo-sharing method
like KWIC could be employed. While preliminary analyses conﬁrmed that
these strategies may lead to a certain acceleration of convergence, they also
indicated complications if the initial guesses contain implausible values, for
example, in relaxation maps which are obviously undeﬁned in areas with
a void signal intensity. It is therefore necessary to remove respective val-
ues from the initial guesses. The present work simply used zero maps for
the initialization, which require a higher number of iterations but ensure a
straightforward convergence to a reasonable solution.

8

2.5 Scaling and Snapshot Calculation

Another factor with essential impact on the convergence rate is the scaling
of the time variable t. Although it intuitively makes sense to directly use
physical units, a proper rescaling of the time variable signiﬁcantly reduces
the number of iterations. Equation (10) shows that the gradient with re-
spect to the relaxivity depends linearly on t, while this is not the case with
respect to the spin density. If the values of t for the diﬀerent echoes are very
small, then the cost function is much more sensitive to changes in ~ρ and the
problem is said to be poorly scaled [15]. In contrast, large values of t lead to
a dominant sensitivity to perturbations in ~r. Because ﬁnding a reasonable
solution requires a matching of both maps at the same time, the optimiza-
tion procedure is especially eﬀective when the scaling of t is selected such
that there is a balanced inﬂuence on the cost function. In our experience,
a proper scaling, which depends on the range of the object’s spin-density
and relaxivity values, allows for reducing the number of required iterations
from over 1000 iterations to about only 80 iterations for a typical data set.
Of course, a rescaling of t is accompanied by a corresponding scaling of
the relaxivity values in ~r, which can be corrected afterwards to allow for
quantitative analyses. Noteworthy, the sensitivity to scaling is a property
of the speciﬁc optimization method used here (the non-linear CG method)
and not related to the reconstruction concept itself. Hence, exchanging the
CG method by an optimization technique that is scale invariant (like the
Newton’s method) might render a rescaling unnecessary but is accompanied
by other disadvantages like calculation of the Hessian [15].

Finally, after complete estimation of the spin-density map ~ρ and relax-
ivity map ~r, snapshot images can be calculated for an arbitrary echo time
with

It(~x) = ̺(~x) · e−R(~x)·t .

(14)

These images do not contain any additional information, but present the
estimated temporal information in a more familiar view.

3 Methods

3.1 Data Acquisition

For evaluation of the proposed reconstruction technique, simulated data and
experimental MRI data was used. The simulated data was created with a
numerical phantom which is composed of superimposed ellipses so that the

9

analytical Fourier transform of the phantom can be deduced from the well-
known Fourier transform of a circle. The numerical phantom mimics a wa-
ter phantom consisting of three compartments with diﬀerent T2 relaxation
times (200 ms, 100 ms, and 50 ms), which are surrounded by a compart-
ment with a relaxation time comparable to that of pure water (1000 ms).
All experiments were conducted at 2.9 T (Siemens Magnetom TIM Trio,
Erlangen, Germany) using a receive only 12-channel head coil in circularly
polarized (CP) mode, yielding four channels with diﬀerent combinations of
the coils. Measurements were performed for a water phantom doped with
MnCl2 as well as the human brain in vivo, where written informed consent
was obtained in all cases prior to each examination.

The simulated data and the experimental phantom data was acquired
with a base resolution of 160 pixels covering a FOV of 120 mm (bandwidth
568 Hz/pixel), while human brain data was acquired with a base resolution
of 224 pixels covering a FOV of 208 mm (bandwidth 360 Hz/pixel). A train
of 16 spin echoes with an echo spacing of 10 ms was recorded after a slice-
selective 90◦ excitation pulse (section thickness 3 mm). The spin echoes were
refocused using a conventional 180◦ RF pulse, enclosed by crusher gradients
to dephase spurious FID signals. The total number of spokes per data set
ranged from 128 to 512 spokes, which were acquired using 8 to 32 excitations
and measured with a repetition time of TR = 7000 ms to avoid saturation
eﬀects of the CSF. The ”angular bisection” view-ordering scheme was used
as described by Song and Dougherty [7], which ensures that spokes measured
at consecutive echo times have a maximum angular distance. Noteworthy,
this scheme is not required by the proposed method, but it was employed to
permit reconstructions with the KWIC approach for comparison. Further,
the sampling direction of every second repetition was altered in such a way
as to generate opposing neighboring spokes. The procedure yields more
tolerable artifacts in the presence of oﬀ-resonances. Fat suppression was
accomplished by a preceding CHESS pulse, and an isotropic compensation
mechanism was applied to avoid gradient timing errors and corresponding
smearing artifacts due to misalignment of the data in k-space [16]. For
comparison, a fully-sampled Cartesian data set of the human brain was
acquired with a multi-echo spin-echo sequence from the manufacturer (base
resolution 192 pixels, section thickness 4 mm, 16 echoes, echo spacing 10ms,
TR = 7000 ms).
In this case, k-space was fully sampled at all 16 echo
times so that the acquisition time was about 22.4 minutes for a single slice.
Moreover, simulations with diﬀerent degrees of undersampling as well as
simulations with added Gaussian noise were performed for appraising the
achievable reconstruction accuracy.

10

3.2 Reconstruction

All data processing was done oﬄine using an in-house software package
written in C/C++. In a ﬁrst step, phase oﬀsets were removed by aligning
the phase of all spokes at the center of k-space. Coil sensitivity proﬁles
were estimated from the data set using the procedure described in [11].
In addition, a thresholding mask was obtained from the smoothed sum-of-
squares image, so that areas with void signal intensity could be set to zero
by applying the mask to all reconstructed images. For the interpolation in
k-space from grid to spokes and vice versa, a Kaiser-Bessel window with
L = 6, β = 13.8551 and twofold oversampling was used [17]. To speed up
the iterations, the interpolation coeﬃcients were precalculated and stored in
a look-up table. The optimizer for estimating the spin-density and relaxivity
map was run for a ﬁxed number of 200 iterations to ensure that the estimate
has converged, although fewer iterations are usually suﬃcient for ﬁnding an
accurate solution. Hence, an automatic stopping criterion would be highly
desirable for routine use to avoid unnecessary computation time. The scaling
of the time variable was chosen heuristically such that t = 300 · n for the
phantom study and t = 150 · n for human brain data, where n is the echo
number. Because this factor is object-dependent and has signiﬁcant impact
on the optimization eﬃciency, it would be highly desirable to employ an
automatic mechanism for adjusting the scaling. Such development, however,
is outside the scope of this work.

For comparison, gridding reconstructions of the spokes measured at each
echo time were calculated using the same interpolation kernel. Here, the es-
timated coil sensitivity proﬁles were used to combine the diﬀerent channels
instead of taking a sum-of-squares. Further, time-resolved reconstructions
employing the KWIC method were calculated. In the initial KWIC work
[7], only 8 instead of 16 echoes were acquired per excitation. Therefore,
we implemented two variants: either high frequency information from all
spokes was used to ﬁll the outer k-space area (kwic 16), or (in a sliding
window manner) information from only the 8 neighboring echo times was
shared (kwic 8). Apart form that, our implementation followed the basic
KWIC approach described in [7]. To allow for a fair comparison, the same
interpolation kernel was used, and coil proﬁles were employed for channel
combination. Finally, spin-density and relaxivity maps were estimated from
the images by a pixelwise curve ﬁtting using the Levenberg-Marquardt al-
gorithm.

11

Figure 1: Spin-density maps (top) and relaxivity maps (bottom) estimated
for a phantom data set (base resolution 160 pixels, FOV 120 mm, bandwidth
568 Hz/pixel bandwidth) using the proposed iterative method (iter), KWIC
combining all 16 echoes (kwic 16), and KWIC combining only 8 neighboring
echoes (kwic 8). The images were acquired with a radial FSE sequence
using 32 repetitions and 16 echoes each, yielding a total of 512 spokes. PD
= proton density, R2 = T2 relaxivity.

4 Results

4.1 Experimental Data

Figure 1 compares spin-density and relaxivity maps for a phantom contain-
ing ﬁve water-ﬁlled tubes with diﬀerent concentrations of MnCl2, i.e. diﬀer-
ent T2 relaxation times, which were estimated using the proposed method,
the KWIC method sharing all echoes, and the KWIC method sharing 8
neighboring echoes. It can be seen that the sharing of k-space data in the
KWIC reconstructions leads to ring-like artifacts inside the tubes with fast
T2 relaxation, in line with the ﬁndings of Altbach et al [8]. The artifacts are
more pronounced in the KWIC variant sharing all echoes, while the vari-
ant sharing only 8 echoes suﬀers from streaking artifacts due to incomplete

12

coverage of the outer k-space. Such artifacts do not appear in the itera-
tively estimated maps. Here, the spin-density of the tube with the shortest
relaxation time is slightly underestimated, which is probably caused by a
higher amount of noise due to fast signal decay. Further, because the re-
laxivity is undeﬁned in areas with a void spin density, the relaxivity maps
are aﬀected by spurious values outside of the tubes in all cases. It should
be noted that this eﬀect is limited to a narrow surrounding of the object
due to the application of a thresholding mask. In general, these spurious
values are distinguishable from the object by a lack of intensity in either the
spin-density map or the gridding image from all spokes.

Figure 2 shows corresponding reconstructions for a transverse section of
the human brain in vivo. Again, the KWIC reconstruction using 8 echoes
suﬀers from streaking artifacts, while the maps involving all echoes appear
fuzzy and blurry. In the latter case, the spin-density map is further con-
taminated by sharp hyperintense structures. This results from padding the
high frequencies with data from late echoes which introduces components
with T2 weighting and poses a general problem when sharing data with
varying contrast. The iteratively calculated maps present without these ar-
tifacts. For comparison, maps from a fully-sampled Cartesian data set are
presented, which show good agreement with the maps obtained from the it-
erative approach. Noteworthy, because the slice thickness was higher in the
Cartesian acquisition, these maps show a slightly larger part of the frontal
ventricles, which, however, is not related to the reconstruction technique.

For the same radial data set, Fig. 3 compares snapshots of the ﬁrst, 6th,
and last echo reconstructed using the proposed method with Eq. (14), direct
gridding, and KWIC with sharing of 8 echoes. Corresponding images from
the Cartesian data set are shown as reference. The contrast of the Cartesian
and gridding images can be taken as ground truth due to the equal echo time
of all k-space data used. It can be seen that the snapshots calculated with
the proposed method show good match to the contrast of the Cartesian gold
standard while they are not aﬀected by streaking artifacts.

Finally, Fig. 4 shows iterative reconstructions of the human brain from
radial data with diﬀerent degrees of undersampling, ranging from a total of
512 spokes (32 repetitions) to only 128 spokes (8 repetitions). As expected,
the data reduction is accompanied by some loss of image quality, but even
for 128 spokes the iterative approach still oﬀers a relatively good separation
of proton density and relaxivity. For comparison, relaxivity maps obtained
by the KWIC approach are shown in the bottom row, and it can be seen
that the image quality breaks down for higher degrees of undersampling.

13

Figure 2: Spin-density maps (top) and relaxivity maps (bottom) estimated
for a transverse section of the human brain in vivo (base resolution 224 pix-
els, FOV 208 mm, bandwidth 360 Hz/pixel) using the proposed method
(iter), KWIC combining all 16 echoes (kwic 16), and KWIC combining only
8 neighboring echoes (kwic 8). Other parameters as in Fig. 1. For com-
parison, maps from a fully-sampled Cartesian reference data set are shown
in the right column (cart). The bottom row shows magniﬁcations of the
relaxivity maps.

4.2 Simulated Data

Figure 5 shows relaxivity maps from simulated data estimated with the pro-
posed method, the KWIC method, and direct gridding (the proton density
maps are not shown as the proton density was set to a constant value within
the phantom). As in the prior ﬁgures, an identical windowing function has
been used for all relaxivity maps within the ﬁgure, so that absolute relaxivity
values were equally mapped to grayscale values. The upper row corresponds
to a fully sampled data set (4032 spokes, 252 repetitions), and, hence, the
number of spokes for each echo time complies with the Nyquist theorem

14

Figure 3:
Snapshot reconstructions of the human brain (same data as
Fig. 2) at the time of the ﬁrst (ec1), 6th (ec6), and last echo (ec16) using
the proposed method (iter), KWIC combining 8 neighboring echoes (kwic
8), and direct gridding of the single echoes (regr). The right column shows
images from a fully-sampled Cartesian data set (cart).

in the sense that the angular distance between neighboring spokes is less or
equal to ∆k = 1/FOV. In this case, all three approaches yield maps without
any streaking artifacts. However, the maps created by KWIC and gridding
present with somewhat stronger Gibbs ringing artifacts, which are especially
visible within the smaller compartments. The middle row corresponds to
the degree of undersampling that was used in the experiments presented in
Fig. 1 – Fig. 3 (512 spokes, 32 repetitions). Here, streaking artifacts appear
for KWIC and gridding, whereas the iterative reconstruction is free from
these artifacts. The bottom row shows maps for a high degree of under-
sampling, corresponding to the highest undersampling factor presented in
Fig. 4 (128 spokes, 8 repetitions). For such an undersampling, minor streak-
ing artifacts arise also in the iterative reconstruction, while the KWIC and

15

Spin-density maps (PD) and relaxivity maps (R2) estimated
Figure 4:
using the iterative approach for a transverse section of the human brain
in vivo from (left) 512 spokes acquired with 32 repetitions, (middle) 256
spokes acquired with 16 repetitions, and (right) 128 spokes acquired with
8 repetitions (16 echoes each, base resolution 224 pixels, FOV 208 mm,
bandwidth 360 Hz/pixel). The bottom row shows relaxivity maps obtained
from the same data using the KWIC approach (kwic8).

gridding reconstructions exhibit severe streaking artifacts. Noteworthy, only
a single receive channel was generated in the simulations, and, thus, it clari-
ﬁes that the proposed method oﬀers an improvement also without exploiting
localized coil sensitivities, which is implicitly done for experimental multi-
coil data due to the better conditioning of the problem. Table 2 summarizes
a region-of-interest (ROI) analysis of the relaxivity maps from Fig. 5, where
identical regions were analyzed in all maps. In all cases, the iterative ap-
proach estimates the signal relaxivity with higher accuracy than gridding or
KWIC. Interestingly, even in the fully-sampled case, signiﬁcant deviations
occur for the KWIC and gridding reconstruction. These deviations result

16

Figure 5: Relaxivity maps estimated from simulated data with (top) 4032
spokes from 252 repetitions (all echoes fully sampled), (middle) 512 spokes
from 32 repetitions, and (bottom) 128 spokes from 8 repetitions using (iter)
the proposed iterative approach, (kwic8) the KWIC approach sharing 8
neigboring echoes, and (regr) direct gridding of the single echoes (16 echoes
each, base resolution 160 pixels). The numerical phantom consists of com-
partments with relaxations times of T2=200 ms, T2=100 ms, and T2=50 ms
which are surrounded by a compartment with T2=1000 ms.

from the strong ringing eﬀects that are apperent in Fig. 5, which appear to
be more pronounced for radial acquisitions than for Cartesian acquisitions.
Hence, the strong signal from the surrounding compartment smears into the
quickly decaying compartments, which causes a bias of the signal intensity
in the time-resolved images. The iterative approach seems to better cope
with this situation.

Finally, Fig. 6 shows relaxivity maps estimated from simulated data
with diﬀerent degrees of added Gaussian noise (512 spokes, 32 repetitions).
It demonstrates that the proposed approach works stable also under noisy

17

Figure 6: Relaxivity maps estimated from simulated data (top) without
noise, (middle) with a low level of Gaussian noise, and (bottom) with a high
level of Gaussian noise using (iter) the proposed iterative approach, (kwic8)
the KWIC approach sharing 8 neigboring echoes, and (regr) direct gridding
of the single echoes (512 spokes from 32 repetitions, 16 echoes each, base
resolution 160 pixels). Relaxation times of the numerical phantom as in
Fig. 5.

conditions, which is somewhat obvious as the matching of the maps to the
measured data is done in a least-squares way. The maps estimated with
KWIC and gridding present with a slightly higher noise level. The results
of a ROI analysis of the maps are summarized in Table 1.

5 Discussion

As demonstrated, existing reconstruction methods for radial FSE that share
data from diﬀerent echo times always require a trade-oﬀ between the accu-
racy of the image contrast and an undersampling of the outer k-space, which

18

Noise level
none

low

high

Compartment 1
Compartment 2
Compartment 3
Surrounding
Compartment 1
Compartment 2
Compartment 3
Surrounding
Compartment 1
Compartment 2
Compartment 3
Surrounding

True T2

50 ms
100 ms
200 ms
1000 ms
50 ms
100 ms
200 ms
1000 ms
50 ms
100 ms
200 ms
1000 ms

Iterative

KWIC8

Gridding

50.2 ± 0.1 ms
100.0 ± 0.2 ms
199.9 ± 0.6 ms
996.5 ± 11.9 ms
50.0 ± 0.3 ms
99.0 ± 0.7 ms
200.5 ± 1.8 ms

1012.7 ± 43.9 ms

43.9 ± 0.9 ms
76.6 ± 2.3 ms
156.7 ± 6.0 ms

733.4 ± 121.9 ms

60.1 ± 0.3 ms
110.3 ± 0.7 ms
210.9 ± 2.1 ms
922.3 ± 32.9 ms
59.5 ± 0.6 ms
109.7 ± 1.1 ms
211.9 ± 2.8 ms
901.8 ± 43.3 ms
48.6 ± 4.2 ms
76.4 ± 5.9 ms
155.2 ± 10.0 ms
257.9 ± 73.5 ms

59.8 ± 0.3 ms
109.8 ± 0.7 ms
210.5 ± 2.2 ms
930.4 ± 37.8 ms
58.5 ± 0.8 ms
108.8 ± 1.2 ms
210.9 ± 3.2 ms
938.6 ± 60.6 ms
15.2 ± 3.9 ms
28.9 ± 10.2 ms
38.7 ± 17.9 ms

143.6 ± 228.4 ms

Table 1: ROI analysis of the relaxivity maps shown in Fig. 6.

results in streaking artifacts. The main advantage of the proposed method
is that the use of a signal model allows for the combination of spokes mea-
sured at diﬀerent times. Thus, it exploits all sampled data without having
to assume that contrast changes are limited to some central part of k-space.

5.1 Computational Load

A disadvantage of the present implementation, however, is a signiﬁcantly
higher computational requirement than for conventional non-iterative meth-
ods. Because an individual Fourier transformation with subsequent gridding
is required for each echo time and receiver channel, a single evaluation of the
cost function for the examples analyzed here involves 64 FFT and gridding
steps. Evaluating the gradient requires even twice the number of operations,
and one full iteration of the algorithm often needs several evaluations of the
cost function and gradient.

However, many of the operations can be performed in parallel. In the
proof-of-principle implementation, we used the OpenMP interface to paral-
lelize the calculations for diﬀerent echo times. Hence, the evaluation of the
cost function and gradient is executed on diﬀerent cores at the same time.
Using a system equipped with two Intel Xeon E5345 quad core processors
running at 2.33 GHz, the 200 iterations took about two minutes per slice
(excluding the calculation of the look-up table, which takes additional 8 sec-
onds on a single core). Despite foreseeable progress in multi-core processor
technology which promises signiﬁcant acceleration, a use of the method in

19

512 spokes

Data set
4032 spokes Compartment 1
Compartment 2
Compartment 3
Surrounding
Compartment 1
Compartment 2
Compartment 3
Surrounding
Compartment 1
Compartment 2
Compartment 3
Surrounding

128 spokes

True T2

50 ms
100 ms
200 ms
1000 ms
50 ms
100 ms
200 ms
1000 ms
50 ms
100 ms
200 ms
1000 ms

Iterative

KWIC8

Gridding

49.9 ± 0.1 ms
100.0 ± 0.1 ms
199.9 ± 0.4 ms
1001.0 ± 4.7 ms
50.2 ± 0.1 ms
100.0 ± 0.2 ms
199.9 ± 0.6 ms
996.5 ± 11.9 ms
49.1 ± 0.1 ms
98.8 ± 0.2 ms
197.1 ± 0.7 ms

1032.3 ± 14.0 ms

59.7 ± 0.2 ms
109.9 ± 0.2 ms
209.9 ± 0.2 ms
930.6 ± 1.0 ms
60.1 ± 0.3 ms
110.3 ± 0.7 ms
210.9 ± 2.1 ms
922.3 ± 32.9 ms
57.6 ± 0.3 ms
105.7 ± 1.1 ms
205.4 ± 3.5 ms
901.7 ± 41.5 ms

59.8 ± 0.2 ms
109.9 ± 0.2 ms
209.9 ± 0.2 ms
930.6 ± 1.0 ms
59.8 ± 0.3 ms
109.8 ± 0.7 ms
210.5 ± 2.2 ms
930.4 ± 37.8 ms
60.0 ± 0.5 ms
108.9 ± 1.3 ms
213.7 ± 4.1 ms

1073.8 ± 106.5 ms

Table 2: ROI analysis of the relaxivity maps shown in Fig. 5.

near future is likely to be limited to applications where delayed reconstruc-
tions are tolerable. However, because preliminary gridding reconstructions
could be calculated to provide immediate feedback to the operator, this
limitation might be secondary in clinical practice.

5.2 Accuracy

From a theoretical point of view, the proposed method should make optimal
use of all data measured and, thus, deliver a high accuracy, which is con-
ﬁrmed by the results listed in Table 2 for a simulated phantom. Because the
solution is found in a least-squares sense, this should also hold true for data
contaminated by noise as veriﬁed in Fig. 6. In practice, however, there are
a number of factors that might aﬀect the achievable experimental accuracy.
First, the procedure used to determine the coil sensitivities is simple
and might introduce a bias due to inappropriate characterization of the pro-
ﬁles. In particular, the procedure fails in areas with no or very low signal
intensity, so that routine applications will probably require a more sophis-
ticated procedure. Second, the Fourier transform of the object, as encoded
by the MRI signal, is non-compact. Therefore, any ﬁnite sampling is in-
complete, which makes it impossible to invert the spatial encoding exactly.
Consequently, truncation artifacts arise when employing a discrete Fourier
transformation (DFT), which present as a convolution of the object with
a sinc function. Because DFTs are used to compare the snapshots to the
measured data and, further, because the truncation artifacts are diﬀerent for

20

each echo time, this eﬀect might interfere with the estimation of a solution
that is fully consistent with all measured data. In particular, ringing pat-
terns around high-intensity spots might lead to a bias of surrounding pixels
that possibly diverts the decay estimated in these areas. Noteworthy, this
eﬀect is an inherent problem of any MRI technique and not limited to the
proposed method, as evident from the deviations occuring in the gridding
reconstructions in Table 2.

Finally, if the relaxation process is so fast that the signal decay is insuf-
ﬁciently captured by the acquired echo train, inaccurate spin-density and
relaxivity values will be estimated. For example, if a signal intensity above
noise level is received only at the ﬁrst echo time, the algorithm will probably
assume a too low spin-density and a too low relaxivity, which would likewise
describe the observed signal intensities in a least-squares sense. However,
this is a general problem of any T2 estimation technique and can only be
overcome by a ﬁner temporal sampling. Also, inaccuracies that might oc-
cur when the actual relaxation process diﬀers from a pure mono-exponential
decay are not limited to the present method. In fact, any T2 estimation tech-
nique has to employ a simpliﬁed signal model at some stage for quantifying
the relaxation and, consequently, deviations from an assumed exponential
signal decay always impair the estimation accuracy.

5.3 Extensions

Although focused on the reconstruction of FSE data, the method can be used
for multi-echo data from other sequences as well. Depending on the contrast
mechanism of the individual sequence, it might be necessary to adapt the
signal model (2). Further, for non-refocused multi-echo sequences the data
can be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by oﬀ-resonance eﬀects due to the pronounced
sensitivity of radial trajectories. In this case, it might be possible to map
also the oﬀ-resonances by replacing the relaxivity with a complex-valued
parameter and adjusting the gradient of the cost function. However, due to
the extended parameter space it is expected that this strategy will be only
successful if suitable constraints for the estimates are incorporated. This can
be achieved by extending the cost function Eq. (11) by additional penalty
terms that imply certain prior knowledge about the solution. For example,
if it can be assumed that the object is piecewise-constant to some degree or
has a sparse transform representation, it is reasonable to penalize the total
variation of the maps [11] or to apply a constraint on the transform repre-
sentation [18]. Further, it might be beneﬁcial to penalize relaxation times
that obviously exceed the range of plausible values, e.g negative relaxation

21

times or relaxation times greater than the repetition time TR.

Moreover, the reconstruction concept is not only applicable to data with
diﬀerent contrast due to spin relaxation or saturation, but can be adapted to
completely diﬀerent imaging situations as well. In this regard, the current
work demonstrates the feasibility of extending the inverse reconstruction
scheme to more complex imaging problems that require a non-linear pro-
cessing. A prerequisite for the application to other problems, however, is
that a simple analytical signal model, comparable to Eq. (2), can be formu-
lated. Further, it is required that the derivative of the signal model with
respect to all components of the parameter space can be calculated, and
that the model allows for a relatively fast evaluation of the cost function
and its gradient.

6 Conclusion

This work presents a new concept for iterative reconstruction from radial
multi-echo data with a main focus on fast spin-echo acquisitions. Instead of
sharing k-space data with diﬀerent echo times to approximate time-resolved
images, the proposed method employs a signal model to account for the
time dependency of the data and directly estimates a spin-density and re-
laxivity map. Because the approach involves a numerical optimization for
ﬁnding a solution, it exploits all data sampled and allows for an eﬃcient T2
quantiﬁcation from a single radial data set. In comparison with Cartesian
quantiﬁcation techniques, such data can be acquired in a shorter time and
with less motion sensitivity. The method is computationally intensive and
presently limited to applications where a delayed reconstruction is accept-
able.

22

Appendix

The (simpliﬁed) cost function φ deﬁned in Eq. (6) can be written as

2

2

=

1

2Xj

(Fj − yj) (Fj − yj)

φ =

=

1

2 (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)
~F − ~y(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)
2 Xj

1

FjFj + yjyj − yjFj − yjFj ,

(15)

where ( · ) denotes the complex conjugate. The derivative of this function
with respect to any component u of the estimate vector is obtained using
the chain rule

∂
∂u

φ =

Fj

∂
∂u

Fj + Fj

∂
∂u

Fj − yj

∂
∂u

Fj − yj

∂
∂u

Fj

1

1

1

=

=

2Xj
2Xj
2Xj
= ℜ
Xj


(Fj − yj)

Fj +(cid:16)Fj − yj(cid:17) ∂

∂u

Fj

∂
∂u

∂
∂u

(Fj − yj)

Fj +

(Fj − yj)

∂
∂u

1

2Xj
Fj


.

(Fj − yj)

∂
∂u

Fj

(16)

Inserting Eq. (7) then yields the derivative of the cost function with respect
to a component of the spin-density map ρv

∂
∂ρv

∂
∂ρv

Fj


(Fj − yj)

φ = ℜ
Xj

= ℜ
Xj

= e−R(~xv )·t · ℜ


(Fj − yj) e−R(~xv )·t · Cc(~xv) · ei ~xv ·~kj

(Fj − yj) ei ~xv ·~kj


Cc(~xv) ·Xj

.

(17)

The derivative with respect to components of the relaxivity map can be
obtained accordingly.

23

References

[1] P.D. Lauterbur, “Image formation by induced local interactions: Exam-
ples employing nuclear magnetic resonance”, Nature, vol. 242, pp. 190–
191, 1973.

[2] G.H. Glover and J.M. Pauly, “Projection reconstruction techniques for
reduction of motion eﬀects in MRI”, Magn Reson Med, vol. 28, pp. 275–
289, 1992.

[3] M.I. Altbach, E.K. Outwater, T.P. Trouard, E.A. Krupinski, R.J. Theil-
mann, A.T. Stopeck, M. Kono, and A.F. Gmitro, “Radial fast spin-echo
method for T2-weighted imaging and T2 mapping of the liver”, J Magn
Reson, vol. 16, pp. 179–189, 2002.

[4] V. Rasche, D. Holz, and W. Schepper, “Radial Turbo Spin Echo Imag-

ing”, Magn Reson Med, vol. 32, pp. 629–638, 1994.

[5] J.D. O’Sullivan, “A fast sinc function gridding algorithm for Fourier
inversion in computer tomography”, IEEE Trans on Med Imaging, vol. 4,
pp. 200–207, 1985.

[6] R.J. Theilmann, A.F. Gmitro, M.I. Altbach, and T.P. Trouard, “View-
ordering in radial fast spin-echo imaging”, Magn Reson Med, vol. 51,
pp. 768–774, 2004.

[7] H.K. Song and L. Dougherty, “k-Space weighted image contrast (KWIC)
for contrast manipulation in projection reconstruction MRI”, Magn Re-
son Med, vol. 44, pp. 825–832, 2000.

[8] M.I. Altbach, A. Bilgin, Z. Li, E.W. Clarkson, T.P. Trouard, and
A.F. Gmitro, “Processing of radial fast spin-echo data for obtaining T2
estimates from a single k-space data set”, Magn Reson Med, vol. 54,
pp. 549–559, 2005.

[9] C. Graﬀ, Z. Li, A. Bilgin, M.I. Altbach, A.F. Gmitro and E.W. Clarkson,
“Iterative T2 Estimation from Highly Undersampled Radial Fast Spin-
Echo Data”, Proc Intl Soc Mag Reson Med, vol. 14, p. 925, 2006.

[10] Olafsson, V.T. and Noll, D.C. and Fessler, J.A., “Fast Joint Recon-
2 and Field Maps in Functional MRI”, IEEE

struction of Dynamic R∗
Trans on Med Imaging, vol. 27, pp. 1177–1188, 2008.

24

[11] K.T. Block, M. Uecker, and J.Frahm, “Undersampled radial MRI with
multiple coils. Iterative image reconstruction using a total variation con-
straint”, Magn Reson Med, vol. 57, pp. 1086-1098, 2007.

[12] W.W. Hager and H. Zhang, “A new conjugate gradient method with
guaranteed descent and an eﬃcient line search”, SIAM J Optimization,
vol. 16, pp. 170–192, 2005.

[13] J. Jackson, C.H. Meyer, D.G. Nishimura, and A. Macovski, “Selection
of a convolution function for Fourier inversion using gridding”, IEEE
Trans on Med Imaging, vol. 10, pp. 473–478, 1991.

[14] V. Rasche, R. Proksa, P. B¨ornert, and H. Eggers, “Resampling of data
between arbitrary grids using convolution interpolation”, IEEE Trans
on Med Imaging, vol. 18, pp. 385–392, 1999.

[15] J. Nocedal and S.J. Wright, Numerical Optimization, Springer, 2006.

[16] P. Speier and F. Trautwein, “Robust radial imaging with predeter-
mined isotropic gradient delay correction”, Proc Intl Soc Mag Reson
Med, vol. 14, p. 2379, 2006.

[17] P.J. Beatty, D.G. Nishimura, and J.M. Pauly, “Rapid gridding recon-
struction with a minimal oversampling ratio”, IEEE Trans on Med Imag-
ing, vol. 24, pp. 799–808, 2005.

[18] M. Lustig, D. Donoho, and J.M. Pauly, “Sparse MRI: The application
of compressed sensing for rapid MR imaging”, Magn Reson Med, vol. 58,
pp. 1182-1195, 2007.

25

