How to infer non-Abelian statistics and topological invariants from tunneling conductance

properties of realistic Majorana nanowires

S. Das Sarma,1 Amit Nag,1 and Jay D. Sau1

1Condensed Matter Theory Center and Joint Quantum Institute, Department of Physics,

University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742-4111, USA

(Dated: April 7, 2016)

6
1
0
2

 
r
p
A
6

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

2
v
1
4
0
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

We consider a simple conceptual question with respect to Majorana zero modes in semiconductor nanowires:
Can the measured non-ideal values of the zero-bias-conductance-peak in the tunneling experiments be used as
a characteristic to predict the underlying topological nature of the proximity induced nanowire superconduc-
tivity? In particular, we deﬁne and calculate the topological visibility, which is a variation of the topological
invariant associated with the scattering matrix of the system as well as the zero-bias-conductance-peak heights
in the tunneling measurements, in the presence of dissipative broadening, using realistic nanowire parameters
to connect the topological invariants with the zero bias tunneling conductance values. This dissipative broad-
ening is present in both (the existing) tunneling measurements and also (any future) braiding experiments as
an inevitable consequence of a ﬁnite braiding time. The connection between the topological visibility and the
conductance allows us to obtain the visibility of realistic braiding experiments in nanowires, and to conclude
that the current experimentally accessible systems with non-ideal zero bias conductance peaks may indeed man-
ifest (with rather low visibility) non-Abelian statistics for the Majorana zero modes. In general, we ﬁnd that
large (small) superconducting gap (Majorana peak splitting) is essential for the manifestation of the non-Abelian
braiding statistics, and in particular, a zero bias conductance value of around half the ideal quantized Majorana
value should be sufﬁcient for the manifestation of non-Abelian statistics in experimental nanowires.

I.

INTRODUCTION

In 2012, in an important experimental report [1] Mourik
et. al. presented evidence for the possible existence of non-
Abelian Majorana zero modes (MZMs) in InSb nanowires
subjected to an external magnetic (Zeeman) ﬁeld in proxim-
ity to an ordinary s-wave superconductor (NbTiN in Ref. [1]).
This experiment followed precisely earlier theoretical predic-
tions [2–6] on how to create, localize, and observe MZMs in
nanowires by judiciously combining Rashba spin-orbit cou-
pling, Zeeman spin splitting, and s-wave superconducting
proximity effect— the basic idea of the prediction, ﬁrst explic-
itly developed in Ref. [2], being that a combination of spin-
orbit coupling and spin splitting could, in principle, convert
ordinary s-wave superconductors into topological (effectively
spinless, although spin could play an important role in some
situations [7]) p-wave superconductors which would carry lo-
calized MZMs at suitable defect sites (including the bound-
aries) provided the Zeeman ﬁeld is large enough to overcome
the s-wave superconducting gap, thus inducing a chiral [2, 5]
(or helical [3, 6]) topological p-wave gap. The observation
by Mourik et. al.
received considerable support from sev-
eral other independent experiments [8–13] in semiconductor
nanowires (both InSb and InAs) where signatures for the ex-
istence of MZMs were reported by other groups. The fact
that a spinless p-wave superconducting wire would have lo-
calized MZMs (with non-Abelian anyonic braiding statistics)
at the wire ends was already pointed out by Kitaev almost 15
years ago [14], and Sengupta et. al. [15], also 15 years ago
by coincidence, established the possibility that these MZMs,
localized as zero-energy midgap interface states in topologi-
cal superconductors, could be experimentally detected using
differential tunneling spectroscopy where the perfect Andreev
reﬂection associated with the MZMs would produce a quan-
tized zero bias conductance (precisely at zero energy, i.e. at

midgap) which would be a signature of their existence. Such
zero bias conductance peaks (ZBCP), also predicted in the
speciﬁc context of the semiconductor nanowires by Sau et.
al. [5], are precisely the observations of most of the experi-
mental claims [1, 8–13] for the possible observation of MZMs
in semiconductor nanowires. The subject has created enor-
mous excitement in the community because of the novelty as-
sociated with topological superconductivity and non-Abelian
statistics as well as the possibility of carrying out fault-tolerant
topological quantum computation using MZMs [16], and has
been extensively reviewed in the recent literature [17–23].
The current work provides a link between the experimentally
observed ZBCP in the semiconductor nanowires and the pos-
sible topological properties of the underlying MZMs through
extensive numerical simulations calculating certain topologi-
cal invariants along with ZBCP values for the same nanowire
parameters.

Although the MZM interpretation (i.e.

the relevant semi-
conductor nanowires in these experiments carry non-Abelian
MZMs at the ends of the wires) is the most natural explanation
for the experimental observations [1, 8–13] in the semicon-
ductor nanowires, particularly in view of the existing theoret-
ical predictions [2–6] preceding the experiments, many ques-
tions remain, and the possibility that the ZBCPs arise from
some other non-topological mechanism cannot deﬁnitively be
ruled out. In this regard several mechanisms have been sug-
gested which do not necessitate the occurrence of a topolog-
ical phase transition (TPT) for the appearance of ZBCP [24–
30]. None of the these alternate non-topological mechanisms
requires the ZBCP to be canonically quantized to 2e2/h as
is the expected ideal value for the perfect Andreev reﬂec-
tion associated with MZMs [15, 31–33]. But the observed
ZBCP in the experiments is not quantized either and is, in
fact, typically well below 2e2/h, which has been explained
as arising from a number of physical mechanisms affecting

the experimental situation [34]. Several experimentally ob-
served features of the ZBCP fall short of the idealized the-
oretical expectations: 1) ZBCP height is much smaller than
the predicted perfect quantized value of 2e2/h; 2) ZBCP typ-
ically has a broadening much larger than the thermal value; 3)
ZBCP often does not manifest the expected oscillatory peak
splitting (with increasing Zeeman ﬁeld) predicted for MZMs
[35–38] in ﬁnite length wires where the MZMs at the two
wire ends should overlap with each other producing an en-
ergy splitting around zero bias. In spite of a large number of
theoretical investigations in the literature explaining the ob-
served non-ideal ZBCP properties as a result of underlying
Majorana modes and its interplay with disorder, temperature,
lead couplings and other non-idealities [32, 34, 39–44], it is
hard to discount alternate non-topological mechanisms con-
clusively yet, particularly since the experimentally observed
ZBCP remains well below the ideal quantized value of 2e2/h.
At best, the experiments seem to (weakly) satisfy the neces-
sary conditions for MZMs (i.e.
the observation of a ZBCP
under the predicted conditions), but not the sufﬁcient con-
ditions for claiming conclusive evidence supporting the ex-
istence of non-Abelian MZMs.
It is entirely possible, per-
haps even likely, that the invariable existence of ﬁnite disor-
der, ﬁnite temperature, ﬁnite wire length, ﬁnite coupling to
the tunneling leads, imperfect proximity coupling, and other
non-idealities in the realistic systems make it completely im-
possible to observe the predicted perfect ZBCP quantization
of 2e2/h in the experimental setups. It is encouraging that
recent materials improvements in making the nanowires have
led to a substantial enhancement in the observed value of the
ZBCP although it is still smaller than the perfect quantized
value of 2e2/h [45]. However, it should be noted that zero
bias tunneling conductance peaks could arise in superconduc-
tors from a multitude of reasons, and cannot by itself be taken
as compelling evidence for the existence of MZMs. We need
some direct evidence for the topological phase transition ac-
companying the emergence of MZMs [46, 47] and some mea-
surements for topological properties. Perhaps the controversy
regarding the existence or not of MZMs in nanowires would
not arise if every experimental detection of the ZBCP found
a value close to the expected universal quantized Majorana
value of 2e2/h, but the fact that the experimental ZBCP value
is both nonuniversal from experiment to experiment and is
always much lower than 2e2/h casts a dark shadow on the
MZM interpretation of the experimental tunneling transport
measurements.

Given that the deﬁning exclusive property of the MZMs is
their topological non-Abelian braiding characteristics [48, 49]
with the MZMs being subgap zero-energy non-Abelian any-
onic excitations, it would seem that an experiment conclu-
sively establishing their non-Abelian character would be the
decisive sufﬁcient condition for their existence. Indeed sev-
eral proposals have been put forth in the literature for probing
the non-Abelian braiding properties of MZMs [23, 50–64],
and experimental efforts are currently underway to carry out
MZM braiding to test their non-Abelian properties. An obser-
vation of the non-Abelian braiding properties would go a long
way in establishing the existence of true MZMs in nanowires.

2

The current work is a theoretical attempt to directly test what
such a non-Abelian braiding experiment is likely to observe
in realistic nanowires where the ZBCP is very far from be-
ing quantized and has large broadening. We establish in this
work a clear connection between the observation of imper-
fect ZBCP and underlying topological properties, showing
that the current experimental observations are indeed (but only
marginally so) consistent with the possibility of the nanowires
hosting non-Abelian Majorana zero modes purely from the
perspective of braiding-related topological properties.

To provide a context, we start by assuming that the exper-
imental observation in Ref. [1] (and other nanowire experi-
ments) of the ZBCP is indeed a signature of (highly) imperfect
MZMs which, because of various non-idealities in the system
(e.g. disorder, temperature, tunnel coupling to the environ-
ment, ﬁnite wire length, Majorana splitting, etc.), produce a
ZBCP which is highly suppressed (and broadened) compared
to the canonically quantized value of 2e2/h [32, 34, 39, 41,
43]. The immediate question then is whether (or perhaps, to
what extent) such imperfect almost-MZMs would have intrin-
sic non-Abelian braiding properties possibly showing up ex-
perimentally (or numerically in our study). In the absence of
a braiding experiment to directly observe non-Abelian statis-
tics for Majorana exchange at present, we are left to speculate
on the extent to which non-Abelian statistics would be ob-
served when nanowire MZMs are braided based on the only
available experimental signal for their existence, i.e., ZBCP.
It is then prudent to ask if we can relate the observed (non-
ideal) characteristics of the ZBCP, i.e. height and width of the
peak, to the topological content of the approximate MZMs.
Our work quantitatively establishes this connection and hence
sheds light on the possibility of observing the topological na-
ture of MZMs (in terms of non-Abelian exchange statistics)
in future braiding experiments carried out in the same (or
similar) samples as the ones currently manifesting non-ideal
ZBCPs. Thus, rather than simulating a future braiding ex-
periment, we look at the electron tunneling properties of the
nanowire close to zero energy to answer the extent to which
it might be possible to demonstrate the non-Abelian charac-
teristics of the Majorana modes for the given set of physical
quantities of the system viz. Majorana splitting, topological
gap, tunneling strength etc.

Kitaev suggested calculating a precisely deﬁned quantity—
topological invariant(TI)— to distinguish between trivial and
topological phases in a p-wave superconducting wire [14].
The invariant suggested by Kitaev is suitable for systems with
periodic boundary conditions. An appropriate generalization
of the TI suitable for a ﬁnite system with an open boundary
condition was introduced by Akhmerov et. al. [65] in terms
of the S-matrix of the associated system. Since we want to
relate features observed in tunneling experiments (which are
necessarily conducted on ﬁnite wires with open boundary con-
ditions) to the underlying topological nature of the MZMs, we
would use the proposed scattering matrix invariant to calculate
the TI of the realistic system in order to quantify the topologi-
cal nature of the semiconductor nanowire as we tune the phys-
ical parameters that are critical to the existence of MZMs, viz.,
wire length and Zeeman ﬁeld. In fact a variant of the scat-

tering matrix TI were recently used in part by Adagedeli et.
al. [66] to show the existence of topological phase for disor-
dered (mean free path Lmf shorter than the induced coherence
length ξ) semiconductor nanowires.

However, a subtlety of the usual deﬁnition of the TI Q0 =
sgn[det(r)], where r is the reﬂection matrix from the end is
that it requires us to ignore transmission of quasiparticles in-
between the ends of the wire [65–67]. Such transmission of
quasiparticles always exist for the ﬁnite wires we consider in
this work. In fact, as we will discuss in more detail in this
work, for ﬁnite wires the TI Q0 is always trivial when one
uses the exact reﬂection matrix (as opposed to the effectively
semi-inﬁnite approximation used in Refs. [65, 66]). In this
work, instead of ignoring transmission across the wire, we
circumvent this problem by introducing dissipation into the
system. While some form of dissipation has been important in
previous calculations of the scattering matrix TI [66, 67], dis-
sipation in our work represents the ﬁnite rate of braiding. As
pointed out in previous works [30, 68] dissipation can change
the qualitative behavior of Majorana modes and the TI.

The standard scattering TI Q0 is not sensitive to imperfec-
tions of the topological phase such as transmission of quasi-
particles through the wire. Such transmission through the
wire would interfere with topological signatures of Majorana
modes such as conductance quantization and non-Abelian
statistics. To remedy this, we deﬁne a variant of the TI,
Q = det(r), which we refer to as topological visibility (TV),
as a measure of the topological character of the system. From
the calculations presented here, it will become clear that the
TV is better suited to determining the visibility of signatures
of the Majorana fermion such as quantized conductance peak
and non-Abelian statistics than the TI, which is just the sign
of the TV. In the limit that we ignore transmission through
the wire so that r is unitary, which is the case considered in
Refs. [65–67], this quantity is identical to Q0. One might be
concerned that the topological visibility, Q, is not quantized
as Q0. However, Q is quantized as long as the system is prop-
erly gapped so that r is unitary. Whenever Q is not quantized,
which is near a topological phase transition, whether Q0 is
trivial or not depends on non-universal details of the system
which determine whether det(r) is slightly positive or slightly
negative. To keep our terminology consistent with previous
works [65–67], we will refer to Q < 0 to be topological (i.e.
Q0 = sgn(Q) = −1) and Q > 0 to be non-topological.
The presence of dissipation eliminates the discreteness of the
topological visibility Q by relaxing the unitarity of the the-
ory, leading to the possibility of the TV being any number
between +1 and -1 instead of having a magnitude precisely
equal to unity. Only when Q is close to it’s extreme values ±1
can Q0 be reliably determined to be topological or not. The
competition between the strength of dissipation and the ﬁnite
size splitting of Majorana modes in determining the TV is the
central focus of our work. In fact, our work establishes that
the emergence of MZMs in any ﬁnite length wires (i.e. in any
experimental system which must always use ﬁnite wires) is
always a ’topological quantum crossover’ rather than a ’topo-
logical quantum phase transition’ where dissipative broaden-
ing plays a fundamental role— rather trivially, there is no

3

topological phase in the absence of broadening in any ﬁnite
length wire since the MZMs are never precisely at zero en-
ergy in ﬁnite wires! The TV of the ﬁnite system taking on any
possible value between +/- 1 rather than being precisely equal
to +1 (non-topological) or -1 (topological) is a direct conse-
quence of the topological transition being a crossover in the
ﬁnite system with broadening– without any broadening, the
ﬁnite system must always by deﬁnition have a TV equal to
1 since the MZM is always displaced from the energy zero.
We identify the topological crossover point as the TV pass-
ing through zero in our calculation with the TV < (>) 0 be-
ing identiﬁed as the topological (non-topological) phase. We
also identify the deviation in the magnitude of the TV from
unity being the direct manifestation of ﬁnite ’visibility’ in the
braiding experiment– closer the TV is to unity in magnitude,
higher is the visibility for the corresponding phase (depending
on whether the TV is positive or negative).

We will relate the topological nature of MZMs calculated
in the tunneling conductance setup to the non-Abelian braid-
ing statistics of MZMs through the appropriate direct numer-
ical calculations of both the ZBCP and TV magnitudes in
realistic systems, establishing correlations among them.
If
the experimentally observed ZBCPs are indeed almost-MZMs
(and not spurious effects arising from totally distinct mecha-
nisms that have nothing to do with topological superconduc-
tivity), then our work would provide a useful guide for the ex-
pected visibility of a non-Abelian braiding experiment in real
samples since we start by numerically calculating ZBCPs in
the nanowires ensuring that the calculated ZBCP magnitudes
are approximately consistent with experimental observations.
Our work in fact encompasses two qualitatively distinct real-
istic aspects of the experimental situation. First, we establish
the quantitative connection between having a ZBCP strongly
suppressed from the quantized 2e2/h value and the topolog-
ical content of the associated almost-MZMs, i.e., we investi-
gate how suppressed the ZBCP could be from 2e2/h and still
manifest some topological character. Second, we investigate
the deleterious effects of MZM splitting, which must invari-
ably be present in all ﬁnite nanowires because of the overlap
of the MZMs from the two ends, on the braiding properties
(or more precisely, on the value of the TV which distinguishes
topological and trivial phases). The key concepts of dissipa-
tive broadening and realistic ﬁnite lengths of the nanowires
hosting MZMs play crucial conceptual as well as quantitative
roles in our theory.

We will study both the TV and the tunneling conductance
on an equal footing for the same nanowire to establish a
connection (or lack thereof) between them. The reason to
study the tunneling scenario is twofolds. First, Majorana
tunneling experiments have already been successfully con-
ducted whereas the braiding experiments with nanowire Ma-
jorana are proposed future works. This allows us to work
with known experimental parameters and check our tunnel-
ing conductance results against the existing data that is either
published or in principle should be under present experimen-
tal reach. Therefore, quantitative expectations about putative
non-Abelian Majorana braiding experiment of the future can
be drawn based upon the available data and present experi-

ments on the tunneling conductance by relating both sets of
results on the same system. Second, it is conceptually eas-
ier to characterize and computationally easier to numerically
simulate electron tunneling into Majorana nanowires than a
braiding operation. We point out that ramiﬁcations of braid-
ing operations on MZMs in an experiment have been stud-
ied theoretically and many detailed effects and subtleties have
been pointed out in Refs. [69–74]. However, since we are
focusing on the topological content of stationary Majorana
modes (probed numerically by simulating a tunneling con-
ductance measurement), our result would represent the best
possible outcome one may hope to get towards observing the
non-Abelian braiding statistics of MZMs. In particular, our
work speciﬁcally connects the outcome of a braiding exper-
iment (i.e.
the direct measurement of the TV in a system)
in relation to the measurement of the tunneling conductance
in the same sample, answering the question whether a given
value of a measured (in our case, numerically) ZBCP value
is consistent or not with a topological value for the (numer-
ically calculated) TV. In general, the non-Abelian character
in a Majorana braiding experiment will be observed for fast
enough braiding operation so that the energy uncertainty as-
sociated with the braiding time is larger than the Majorana
splitting, which will entail approximate Majorana modes to
appear to be roughly degenerate (as opposed to being well-
split). However the experiment must distinguish the Majo-
rana modes from the continuum set of (above-gap) bulk states.
Therefore, the the speed of the braiding must be slow enough
so that the associated energy uncertainty is not of the order of
the topological gap. Or in other words, the braiding operation
should be slow with respect to the inverse topological gap, but
fast compared with the Majorana splitting. We argue that this
is in complete analogy to how dissipative broadening, which
is likely present in a tunneling conductance set-up, must be
larger than Majorana splitting but smaller than the topological
gap to realize a nearly quantized conductance peak and also a
topologically non-trivial value for the TV. Our detailed numer-
ical simulations quantify these conceptual points. In fact, our
work clearly establishes that one can make quantitative state-
ments about ’how topological’ a particular system could be (at
least, the upper bound) based simply on a detailed knowledge
of the ZBCP peak height and broadening.

In this work we explore the connection between conduc-
tance and the TV and calculate their dependence on the Majo-
rana splitting and the energy gap. These effects are studied for
a speciﬁc Majorana hosting semiconductor Rashba nanowire
(e.g.
InSb or InAs nanowire with strong Rashba spin-orbit
coupling) model proposed by Lutchyn et. al. and Oreg et.
al. [3, 6]. This particular model beneﬁts from having been
studied extensively theoretically (esp. see Refs. [40, 75]) as
well as from being used as the theoretical guide to realize
MZMs experimentally [1]. The paper is organized as follows.
In Sec. II we introduce the model Hamiltonian and write it
in its discretized form to make it amenable to numerical tech-
niques. In Sec. III we investigate the effect of relevant energy
scales, namely Majorana splitting and broadening, on the be-
havior of the TV and conductance near the topological phase
transition as well as deep in the topological phase. Particular

4

FIG. 1: (Color Online) A schematic diagram for measuring the tun-
neling conductance. One end of the Rashba nanowire is shown at-
tached to a normal lead. The lead is connected to the nanowire
through a potential barrier. Magnetic ﬁeld is parallel to the nanowire.
Proximate s-wave superconductor is responsible for the supercon-
ducting order parameter in the nanowire.

emphasis is placed on possible correlations between the two
quantities in this general set-up. In Sec. IV we use the re-
lationship between braiding, tunneling conductance, and TV
to study how conductance measurements can be used to char-
acterize the outcomes of braiding experiments. Finally, we
conclude in Sec. V. Appendix A reviews the details of cal-
culating the conductance and TV from the scattering matrix
for the nanowire model obtained using KWANT [76]. In Ap-
pendix B we discuss some more technical subtleties that arise
in the numerical calculations using the S-matrix leading to the
TV.

II. MODEL HAMILTONIAN

A schematic representation for an experimental setup to
measure tunneling conductance is shown in Fig. 1. A semi-
conductor nanowire with Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC)
is attached to a normal lead through a potential barrier local-
ized at the end. A magnetic ﬁeld is applied parallel to the
wire (perpendicular to the SOC direction) and an s-wave su-
perconductor is placed in proximity to the nanowire to facili-
tate Cooper pair tunneling into the semiconductor effectively
endowing the nanowire with an s-wave superconducting or-
der parameter through proximity coupling. A voltage bias V
is applied to the lead and the tunneling current I is measured
to obtain the differential conductance

G = dI/dV.

(1)

As discussed in more detail in the appendix, the conductance
G can be computed from the normal reﬂection matrix ree and
the Andreev reﬂection matrix reh through the relation,

G = N − Tr(reer†

ee − rehr

†
eh)

(2)

5

absence of MZMs in the system. LDOS at a given energy 
and site i is given by

(cid:0)|un↑(i)|2 + |un↓(i)|2 + |vn↑(i)|2 + |vn↓(i)|2(cid:1) δ( − n),

LDOS(, i) =

(cid:88)

(6)

n

where ψn(i) = (un↑(i), un↓(i), vn↑(i), vn↓(i))T is the i-
th component of eigenvector ψn of the Hamiltonian matrix
sys with eigenvalue n. us and vs are eigenvector compo-
H dis
nents in particle and hole space respectively. To calculate the
tunneling conductance, we must attach leads to the Rashba
nanowire. We assume the leads to be translationally invariant
semi-inﬁnite normal leads. The lead Hamiltonian is given by

(cid:19)

τz

Hlead =

− 1
2m∗ ∂2

x + iαRσy∂x − µlead

τz + µ0Bleadσx.
(7)

and the TV can be computed from the zero-frequency reﬂec-
tion matrices [65] as

Q = Det[reer∗

ee − reerehr∗−1
ee r∗

(3)
The reﬂection matrices can be computed given the system and
lead Hamiltonian, which we discuss in the remainder of the
section.

eh].

Let us consider a particular

semiconductor Rashba
nanowire model introduced by Lutchyn et. al. [3]— see also
Refs. Sau et. al. [2] and Oreg et. al. [6]— which was shown
to support MZMs at the two ends in the clean limit. These the-
oretical works directly motivated the nanowire Majorana ex-
periments of Refs. [1, 8–13]. The BdG Hamiltonian describ-
ing the 1D nanowire in the presence of Rashba SOC, Zeeman
splitting, and superconducting proximity effect, is given by

(cid:18)

(cid:19)
x + iαRσy∂x − µ

Hsys =

− 1
2m∗ ∂2

+ µ0Bσx + ∆0τx,

(4)
where, m∗, αR, µ and ∆0 are the effective mass, the strength
of Rashba SOC, the chemical potential and the proximity in-
duced superconducting gap, respectively. Throughout this pa-
per we set  = 1. Here and henceforth τx,y,z and σx,y,z are
Pauli matrices acting on particle-hole and spin space, respec-
tively. µ0 = gµB is the usual gyromagnetic ratio times the
Bohr magneton deﬁning the Zeeman ﬁeld strength µ0B. To
make it amenable to numerical techniques we discretize the
continuum Hamiltonian as,

H dis

sys =

[−t (|n + 1 ↑(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↑ | + |n + 1 ↓(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↓ | + H.c.) τz

nnn

1

+ iα (|n + 1 ↑(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↓ | + |n + 1 ↓(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↑ | − H.c.) τz
+ (−µ + 2t) (|n ↑(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↑ | + |n ↓(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↓ |) τz
+ VZ (|n ↑(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↑ | − |n ↓(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↓ |)
+ ∆0 (|n ↑(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↑ | + |n ↓(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↓ |) τx],

(5)
where t =
2m∗a2 with a being the lattice constant for the
discretized tight-binding model in Eq. (5). Length of the
nanowire is given by L = aN where N is the number of
unit cells in the wire, the SOC strength is given by α = αR
2a ,
and we have deﬁned the Zeeman ﬁeld strength, VZ ≡ µ0B
giving the spin splitting. The nondiagonal terms in the site
index arise from nearest neighbor hopping. This system has
been shown to support MZMs [3, 6].
In fact, for a clean
nanowire it is now well-known that MZMs exist as stable lo-
calized zero energy excitations at the ends of the nanowire

whenever VZ >(cid:112)∆2

Before we describe the normal leads that attach to the
nanowire to create the normal-superconductor (NS) junction
(see Fig. 1) for tunneling measurements, we ﬁrst comment
on an important quantity that can be calculated from the sys-
tem Hamiltonian. It is known that MZMs contribute a local
density of states (LDOS) zero bias peak in the topological
phase [40]. LDOS not only probes the presence of zero en-
ergy modes, but also whether the zero energy mode is local-
ized close to the edge of the wire. In fact, computing or mea-
suring the LDOS is the simplest probe to test the presence or

0 + µ2.

(cid:88)

(cid:18)

NNN(cid:88)

The above lead Hamiltonian is discretized as

H dis

lead =

[−t (|n + 1 ↑(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↑ | + |n + 1 ↓(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↓ | + H.c.) τz

n=0n=0n=0

+ iα (|n + 1 ↑(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↓ | + |n + 1 ↓(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↑ | − H.c.) τz
(2t − µlead) (|n ↑(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↑ | + |n ↓(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↓ |) τz
+ µ0Blead (|n ↑(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↑ | − |n ↓(cid:105)(cid:104)n ↓ |) .

(8)

Following the Delft experiment [1], a ﬁnite applied mag-
netic ﬁeld Blead is assumed to exist so as to have two non-
degenerate conducting channels because of the spin splitting
induced by Blead. Having a ﬁnite magnetic ﬁeld in the lead
also helps us to avoid the numerical challenge to identify and
separate various channels to compute the S-matrix. We em-
phasize, however, that our keeping a ﬁnite Blead is actually
consistent with the experimental situation (and not just a mat-
ter of computational convenience).

The potential barrier deﬁning the NS junction at the lead-
nanowire interface (see Fig. 1) is simulated by modulating
the hopping amplitude t(cid:48) between the nanowire and the lead.
For higher(lower) tunnel barrier, the hopping amplitude t(cid:48) is
(cid:48)dis
lower(higher). The new system Hamiltonian H dis
sys
has the form,

sys −→ H

(cid:48)dis
sys =

H

[−t (|n + 1(cid:105)(cid:104)n| + H.c.) τz

nnn=2

+ iα (|n + 1(cid:105)(cid:104)n| − H.c.) σxτz
+ (−µ + 2t)|n(cid:105)(cid:104)n|τz
+ VZ|n(cid:105)(cid:104)n|σz + ∆0|n(cid:105)(cid:104)n|τx]
− (t(cid:48)|2(cid:105)(cid:104)1| + H.c.) τz + iα(cid:48) (|2(cid:105)(cid:104)1| − H.c.) σxτz
+ (2t − µlead) (|1(cid:105)(cid:104)1|) τz + µ0Blead (|1(cid:105)(cid:104)1|) σz. (9)
In this setup, t(cid:48) << t would correspond to a high tunnel bar-
rier or weak lead-nanowire coupling. When t(cid:48) ∼ t, the tun-
nel barrier is low or equivalently, the lead-nanowire coupling
is strong (i.e.
the barrier is almost transparent). The lead-
nanowire tunneling t(cid:48) introduces a broadening (ΓL) to be dis-
cussed later in the paper (c.f. Eq. (11)). A strongly coupled

NNN(cid:88)

6

(i.e. large t(cid:48)) lead-nanowire system will have strongly broad-
ened conductance peaks, whereas a weakly coupled lead-
nanowire system will have weakly broadened sharp peaks.
Narrow resonances appearing from states that are weakly cou-
pled to the lead (as a result of being localized far away from
the end) are removed by broadening the energy eigenstates by
introducing an on-site imaginary term in the Hamiltonian, i.e.,
sys −→ H
(cid:48)dis
H

(cid:48)dis
sys + b where

NNN(cid:88)

b =

(−Ji)|n(cid:105)(cid:104)n|τz.

(10)

nnn=2

Here J is the parameter controlling the intrinsic broadening,
Γ, in the conductance proﬁle. The two are related by, Γ = 2J.
We note that this intrinsic broadening is again incorporated
in the theory to be consistent with the experimental situa-
tion (and not just for computational efﬁcacy) since the mea-
sured tunneling conductance spectra do not reﬂect sharp res-
onant structures even at the lowest temperatures. Obviously,
an environment-induced dissipative broadening (parametrized
by Γ in our theory) plays a role in the experiment. We empha-
size that broadening plays a key role in our theory converting
the topological quantum phase transition into a crossover and
providing a visibility for the braiding measurements.

LDOS is calculated by numerically diagonalizing the sys-
tem Hamiltonian. Throughout all our calculations, the fol-
lowing set of parameters (unless speciﬁed otherwise) is used:
α = 0.3 eV- ˚A, µ = 0K, t = 12.5K, ∆0 = 3K, L = 1.5 µm,
a = 54 nm. For reasons motivating the choice of the param-
eter set, we refer the reader to Ref. [40]. We believe these
parameters to be a reasonably realistic description of the ex-
perimental situation in Ref. [1], at least at a qualitative level.
As discussed in Appendix A, the conductance and TV are
calculated from the scattering matrix that is obtained using
’KWANT’—a quantum transport and simulations package in
Python developed principally by Groth et. al. [76].

III. RESULTS: CONDUCTANCE AND TOPOLOGICAL

VISIBILITY

A. Role of broadening versus splitting

While the TV and conductance will be determined by all the
microscopic parameters discussed in the last section, we now
argue that the qualitative behavior can be understood in terms
of a few effective parameters, which in turn are determined by
the full set of microscopic parameters in a simple way. For
example, as seen from the calculated local density of states
plotted in Fig. 2, one of the relevant scales that affects the
topological properties, the splitting of the MZMs (δ), is rela-
tively independent of the other scales such as lead coupling,
but sensitively determined by small variations in the micro-
scopic Zeeman ﬁeld VZ in an oscillatory fashion [35–38]. We
note that δ is a key parameter determining the topological con-
tent of the system in the sense that when this quantity is (ex-
ponentially) small, the system is by deﬁnition non-Abelian,

FIG. 2: (Color Online) LDOS for clean nanowire with L = 1.5µm
and Zeeman ﬁeld strengths (a-d), VZ = 4.2, 4.3, 4.5 and 5.0 K. The
corresponding Majorana splitting (a-d) are δ = 0.012, 0.036, 0.094
and 0.18 K respectively clearly vary strongly with VZ.

whereas by contrast, when δ is comparable to the supercon-
ducting energy gap, the system is manifestly not topological.
The topological properties of a one dimensional supercon-
ductor such as a semiconductor nanowire crucially depend
on the various relevant sources of broadening, such as the
lead coupling and inelastic scattering, of the quasiparticle ex-
citations. The width of the ZBCP, which is a key signa-
ture of topological superconductivity, depends on the broad-
ening, ΓL, which is controlled by tuning the lead tunneling
t(cid:48) discussed in the previous section. Furthermore, the TV,
Q, [65], which characterizes the topology of nanowires with
open boundary conditions, is necessarily non-topological (i.e.
Q = 1) [65] because any calculation of TV in the presence of
ﬁnite δ (which must always be true in any ﬁnite wire) and no
broadening must necessarily give Q=1 (i.e. a non-topological
trivial system) since the MZM is not located precisely at zero
energy for any ﬁnite length wire! Typically, this is circum-
vented by computing the TI at an energy arbitrarily shifted
slightly away from zero by the splitting of the MZM, δ. A
similar behavior is noticed [34] in the low-bias conductance
G(V ) = dI/dV , which characterizes MZMs through a quan-
tized value G(V → 0) = G0 = 2e2/h [15, 31–33]. For
a ﬁnite system, the conductance G(V (cid:38) δ) approaches the
quantized value G(ΓL (cid:29) V (cid:38) δ) → G0. On the other hand,
as V truly approaches zero (i.e. |V | (cid:28) δ), the conductance
in the tunneling limit approaches zero [34], giving a vanish-
ing ZBCP (since the Majorana is not located precisely at zero
energy in a ﬁnite length wire).

Therefore, both the TV (Q) and the zero-bias conductance
(G) cannot be evaluated strictly at zero-energy for a ﬁnite wire
to determine the topological phase of the wire. In this work,
motivated by the goal of understanding ﬁnite rate dynamical
processes such as braiding, we avoid this problem by intro-

abcd7

so that the gap ∆ is well-deﬁned. We choose the nanowire to
be sufﬁciently long, in this subsection, so that the Majorana
splitting δ and the broadening of the MZMs from the lead are
much smaller than the gap (i.e. δ, ΓL (cid:28) ∆).

Since the topological gap ∆ is much larger than the param-
eters relevant to the MZMs namely, the splitting δ, the broad-
ening of the MZM due to coupling to the lead, ΓL, and the (in-
trinsic) broadening of the far end MZM (away from the lead),
Γ, both the zero-bias conductance G(V = 0) and the TV Q, is
a function only of δ, ΓL and Γ. Note that the broadening of the
MZM at the far end is the same as the intrinsic quasiparticle
broadening Γ, since it is not coupled to the lead. Since the ab-
solute energy scale cannot matter, the conductance G(V = 0)
and the TV, Q, can be studied as a function of dimensionless
parameters ΓL/Γ and δ/Γ (in this large ∆ limit).
Consider ﬁrst the limit where δ/Γ (cid:29) 1, i.e., the broad-
ening is much smaller than the Majorana splitting. As seen
from the conductance plot in Fig. 3(c,d) (red dashed curve),
if the lead coupling also weak i.e. ΓL (cid:28) δ, the conduc-
tance proﬁle G(V ) shows a pair of resonances at energies
E = ±δ with broadening of order (Γ + ΓL). The height
of these peaks would be substantially below the quantized
value. As seen from the solid blue curve in Fig. 3(c,d) and
consistent with previous work [34], increasing the lead cou-
pling so that ΓL (cid:29) δ, increases the height of the zero energy
peak so as to approach the quantized value G(V ∼ 0) ∼ G0.
However the splitting δ now appears as a dip in the conduc-
tance which reduces the conductance G(V = 0) at strictly
zero-bias. Thus, the zero-bias conductance G(V = 0) is sup-
pressed from the quantized value, and as expected from the
connection between conductance and TV [33] , we ﬁnd the
TV Q to be non-topological (i.e. positive in this parameter
regime).
The conductance G(V ) in the opposite limit, where δ/Γ (cid:28)
1, is shown in Fig. 3(a,b) and shows an unsplit ZBCP. The
conductance in the ΓL (cid:29) Γ (blue curve) shows a nearly quan-
tized conductance, while the conductance is suppressed in the
opposite limit. However, this limit (i.e. ΓL (cid:28) Γ) (red dashed
curve) still shows a ZBCP, albeit substantially smaller than the
quantized value even though the corresponding TV is non-
topological. On a technical note, varying the Zeeman ﬁeld
between the different panels in Fig. 3 changes ∆. To mitigate
any parametric dependence of the calculated ZBCP and TV
on ∆, in this subsection the broadening Γ is adjusted in each
case to hold ∆/Γ = 52 ﬁxed (remembering that the gap ∆
depends on the Zeeman ﬁeld). The lead broadening ΓL is var-
ied through varying t(cid:48) (see Eq. (11) below) to keep the ratio
ΓL/Γ ﬁxed.

The TV is strongly affected by the splitting of the MZMs
In Fig. 4, we ﬁnd that the
δ relative to the broadening Γ.
TV is an increasing function of δ/Γ. The nanowire effec-
tively becomes non-topological if the MZM splitting δ ex-
ceeds the broadening Γ, even when the wire parameters and
the strong lead coupling ΓL favor the topologically non-trivial
phase. Furthermore, consistent with the conclusion in Fig. 3,
the small values of ΓL/Γ lead to non-topological values for
the TV.

The combination of Figs. 3, 4 suggests a correlation be-

FIG. 3: (Color Online) Conductance plot corresponding to the LDOS
splittings for ΓL/Γ = 10 (blue solid curve) and ΓL/Γ = 0.25 (red
dashed curve). The parameter δ/Γ (a-d) = 0.27 , 0.71 , 1.74 and 3.27
respectively. The TV (Q) values (a-d) are (-0.80,-0.75,-0.46,0.12)
and (0.44,0.58,0.82,0.93) for blue solid curve and red dashed curve,
respectively. The conductance peaks split for large δ/Γ and the con-
ductance decreases for small ΓL/Γ.

ducing an intrinsic quasiparticle decay rate (i.e. dissipative
broadening), Γ, which we believe to be the realistic experi-
mental situation. The broadening Γ is controlled in our calcu-
lations by choosing the parameter J discussed in Sec. II. The
introduction of such a scale allows us to discuss the conduc-
tance (G) and TV (Q) in a meaningful way at exactly zero en-
ergy. The intrinsic decay rate, Γ, apart from representing the
uncertainty in energy resulting from the ﬁnite braiding rate,
likely also exists in semiconductor wires from interactions and
phonons (and unknown dissipative coupling to the environ-
ment invariably present in all solid state systems). Moreover,
since the conductance and the TV are determined by the scat-
tering properties of electrons from an external lead, the cou-
pling to the lead, which is parametrized by the broadening ΓL,
quantitatively affects these topological properties. Finally,
the superconducting gap ∆ that protects topological proper-
ties themselves must play a role in determining the topolog-
ical properties. In the following subsections, we will study
the inter-dependence of the conductance and the TV on these
energy-scales namely δ, Γ, ΓL and ∆. We emphasize that the
problem is highly complex because these are four completely
independent energy scales (and in real experimental systems
there are at least two additional energy scales associated with
ﬁnite temperature and disorder neglected in the current work).

B. Topological phase

We start by discussing the zero-bias conductance and TV
deep in the topological phase where the intrinsic quasiparticle
broadening Γ is much smaller than the topological gap ∆ (cid:29) Γ

abcd8

FIG. 4: (Color Online) TV for δ/Γ values corresponding to Fig. 3 for
coupling parameter ΓL/Γ = 10 (blue dots) and and ΓL/Γ = 0.25
(red plus). The TV is an increasing function of δ/Γ, i.e., the system
tends to become non-topological as δ/Γ increases.

tween the presence of a quantized ZBCP and a topologically
non-trivial value of the TV close to Q = −1. This correlation
between TV and conductance suggested by Figs. 3,4 is made
explicit in Fig. 5. We ﬁnd that TV is a decreasing function
of the ZBCP value. The TV approaches -1(+1) as ZBCP ap-
proaches 2e2/h(0). Note that the decreasing behavior of TV
with increasing ZBCP is independent of the tuning parame-
ter chosen to vary the zero bias conductance, evidenced by
the fact that both top and bottom plots in Fig. 5 manifest a
decreasing behavior for the TV as a function of ZBCP regard-
less of whether ΓL/Γ (top subﬁgure Fig. 5) or δ/Γ (bottom
subﬁgure Fig. 5) is tuned to vary ZBCP.

C. Topological phase transition

Let us now consider the behavior of conductance and TV as
we approach the TPT by tuning the Zeeman ﬁeld VZ. In this
case, when the intrinsic broadening Γ and the lead-induced
broadening ΓL are small, sufﬁciently close to the phase tran-
sition, the topological gap ∆ will become smaller than ∆ (cid:28) Γ
(since at the TPT, the gap must vanish). Therefore, for inﬁnite
length systems, the ratio ∆/Γ can be used to determine the
distance to the quantum critical point. For conventional quan-
tum critical points [77], there are two dimensionless parame-
ters that characterize the distance to a quantum critical point,
which are L/ξ and ∆/T characterizing spatial and imagi-
nary time correlations in the system. Here ξ is the coherence
length of the system, ∆ is an energy scale, T is the temper-
ature and L is the length of the system. In our discussion, Γ
is analogous to temperature T in the quantum critical phase
(although we are actually at T = 0 throughout). Since Γ is
always ﬁnite in our system, the TPT is always a crossover

FIG. 5: (Color Online) (Top) Plot of the TV as a function of ZBCP
for δ/Γ = 0.16 (blue dot) and δ/Γ = 2.43 (red plus). Conductance
is varied by varying ΓL/Γ. (Bottom) TV vs ZBCP for ΓL/Γ = 10
(blue dot) and ΓL/Γ = 0.25 (red plus). Conductance is varied by
varying δ/Γ. The TV is a decreasing function of the ZBCP.

even at zero temperature! The fact that our calculated TV
value in Figs. 4 and 5 is continuous between Q = +1 (triv-
ial phase) and Q = −1 (topological phase) is a clear indica-
tion that the presence of dissipative broadening in the theory
(and the associated non-unitarity) has rendered the TPT into a
crossover with Q > (<)0 deﬁning the non-topological (topo-
logical) phase with ﬁnite visibility. The presence of dissipa-
tion makes some additional changes to the topological transi-
tion that we mention in passing. Traditionally in disordered
systems the topological transition is often accompanied by a
Grifﬁths like phase populated by weakly split low-energy Ma-
jorana modes [78]. The presence of dissipation could change
some of these weakly split Majorana modes into poles of the
now non-unitary S-matrix with exactly zero energy but differ-
ent imaginary parts [30]. Such physics, which is exactly in-
cluded in our theory, would alter the nature of the low-energy
density of states near the transition.

The relationship between ΓL and ∆ is not straightforward

Topological VisibilityTopological Visibility9

because as the system approaches the TPT, the bound states
become delocalized away from the lead due to the diverging
coherence length ξ. In the limit of small lead-tunneling, t(cid:48), the
broadening ΓL induced by the lead is related to the imaginary
part of the lead self-energy [79] and can be written as

ΓL ∼ t(cid:48)2|ψ(0)|2,

(11)

where ψ(0) is the value of the nanowire wavefunction at the
lead-nanowire NS contact at the given tunneling energy. The
localized Majorana wavefunction can be approximated by,

ψ(x) ≈ 1√
ξ

e−x/ξ,

(12)

where ξ is the superconducting coherence length. This im-
plies,

ΓL ∼ t(cid:48)2∆.

(13)
Therefore, in the vicinity TPT, ∆/ΓL ∝ t(cid:48)2 (with the propor-
tionality factor related to the normal phase density of states)
approaches a constant and can be used as a parameter to char-
acterize the TPT. Note that although ΓL is in some sense pro-
portional to the gap ∆, the two quantities are still independent
parameters of the theory by virtue of the lead tunneling matrix
element t(cid:48).

As seen in Fig. 6, the TPT is approached by tuning the Zee-
man ﬁeld VZ, which leads to the variation of both the Ma-
jorana splitting δ (lowest Andreev bound state energy) in the
upper panel and the bulk gap ∆ (next highest Andreev bound-
state energy) in the lower panel. The minimum in the gap ∆
occurs at VZ = 3K indicating a transition at this value of the
Zeeman potential. For a ﬁnite system, the minimum gap is
determined by the length of the system L. In the case where
the wires are shorter than the dephasing length lφ ∼ v/Γ (for
the chosen Γ), where v is the Fermi velocity of the system,
the MZMs split before entering the TPT region ∆ (cid:46) Γ. As
a result, the system enters a non-topological phase with a TV
close to Q = 1 similar to the δ (cid:38) Γ case discussed in the last
subsection. Therefore in this section we focus on a broadening
Γ that is larger than the ﬁnite size gap i.e. Γ (cid:38) v/L.

Let us now consider the conductance shown in Fig. 7 as
the Zeeman ﬁeld is varied towards the topological transition.
Fig. 7(a) shows a nearly quantized peak (blue solid) deep in
the topological phase where the MZM splitting δ is also small
relative to the broadening Γ. The corresponding TV is also
seen to be nearly topological in Fig. 8 as expected. As the
Zeeman ﬁeld is decreased, the height of the ZBCP (above the
background) decreases as one approaches the topological tran-
sition where ∆/Γ → δ/Γ becomes small in Fig. 7(c). How-
ever, it should be noted that the peak remains unsplit in con-
trast to the short wire case with L (cid:46) lφ. Despite the presence
of a small zero bias peak in Fig. 8(b,c), the corresponding TV
values in Fig. 8 are positive (non-topological). This is consis-
tent with Figs. 3 and 4 from the previous subsection where a
small coupling ΓL (cid:28) Γ led to small non-topological ZBCP.
Finally, as one crosses over to the non-topological regime,
a non-topological gap appears in the conductance. As men-
tioned before, the TPT is parameterized by ΓL/∆, which re-
mains relatively constant near the phase transition. The red

FIG. 6:
(Color Online) Plot of Lowest Andreev bound state en-
ergy (top) and bulk quaisparticle energy gap (bottom) as a function
of Zeeman ﬁeld strength for different physical lengths of Majorana
nanowire. The bulk TPT is at VZ = 3K. In the topological phase,
(VZ > 3K), lowest Andreev bound state energy is the Majorana
splitting.

dashed plots in Fig. 7 show that the conductance is system-
atically suppressed in the regime of small ΓL/∆. The cor-
responding TVs are seen to be positive (non-topological) in
Fig. 8.

Before concluding this section, we comment on an obvi-
ous point which might confuse a non-alert reader. One may
think that the TV can have only unit magnitude with Q=-1
(+1) characterizing the topological (trivial) phase. This is in-
deed so in the inﬁnite system as originally introduced by Ki-
taev. But our ﬁnite system must have a broadening (other-
wise the TV calculated at zero energy is always +1 because
of Majorana splitting), and this broadening allows the TV (i.e.
Q) to be a continuous function of system parameters going
from +1 deep in the trivial phase to -1 deep in the topolog-
ical phase. This continuous evolution of Q between +1 and
-1 is the ﬁnite system crossover transition whereas the corre-
sponding inﬁnite system would have a sharp transition from

10

2 and γ2 are four localized Majorana modes and (γ(cid:48)

FIG. 9: (Color Online) A schematic diagram for braiding a pair of
Majoranas using a tri-junction. The system is initialized (a) such that
γ(cid:48)
1, γ1, γ(cid:48)
3,γ3)
Majorana pair is paired into a Dirac fermion. Paired Majorana modes
are depicted as green discs paired by enhanced wavefunction overlap
over the region depicted by pink oval. At every move an unpaired
Majorana mode is moved from one position to another. The move-
ment of the Majorana resulting from the move resulting in each con-
ﬁguration (b-d) is shown by a dashed arrow.

believe that our ﬁnding a negative (positive) value of Q corre-
sponds to the corresponding braiding experiment manifesting
(not manifesting) non-Abelian statistics.

IV. BRAIDING AND TUNNELING CONDUCTANCE

In a 1D system, MZMs appear as a pair of zero energy
modes (i.e. precisely at mid-gap assuming no Majorana split-
ting, i.e. no overlap between the two MZM wavefunctions)
localized spatially at the two wire ends. N such pairs of lo-
calized MZMs form a 2N dimensional degenerate zero en-
ergy subspace within the Hilbert space of the system. A pos-
sible braiding process involving two MZMs via a so called
tri-junction [63] is depicted in Fig. 9. Let ˆγ1,2 and ˆγ(cid:48)
1,2 rep-
resent the Majorana operators, associated with the localized
Majorana modes γ1,2 and γ(cid:48)
1,2 depicted in the Fig. 9a. The
ground state is initialized as a direct product state of left and
right Majorana pairs, |PL(cid:105)1|PR(cid:105)2, where ˆγ1 and ˆγ(cid:48)
1 operate
on kets with subscript 1 and ˆγ2 and ˆγ(cid:48)
2 operate on kets with
subscript 2. PL, PR denote the fermionic parity of the left
and right subsystem of the initial state, respectively. Majo-
rana modes represented by γ1 and γ2 are braided around each
other adiabatically via a sequence Majorana moves involving
a third Majorana pair as shown. For example, the conﬁgu-
ration in panel b is attained from conﬁguration in panel a by
adiabatically decreasing the tunneling strength between Ma-
jorana modes γ3 and γ(cid:48)
3 and at the same time increasing the
tunneling strength between γ3 and γ2, which effectively leads
to γ2 moving to the new position as shown by the arrow in (b).
Assuming the system remains in the ground state throughout
the braiding process, the braiding is accomplished by the uni-

FIG. 7: (Color Online) Conductance plot for ΓL/∆ = 0.20 (blue solid
curve) and ΓL/∆ = 0.005 (red dashed curve). Broadening Γ is chosen
so that δ/Γ= 0.16 is held ﬁxed for all panels with ∆/Γ (a-d) being
19.33, 0.90, 0.28, -12.1, respectively. The TV (Q) values (a-d) are
(-0.75,0.34,0.56,0.98) and (0.51,0.95,0.97,1.0) for blue solid curve
and red dashed curve, respectively.

FIG. 8: (Color Online) TV for ∆/Γ values corresponding to Fig. 7
for coupling parameters near TPT with ΓL/∆ = 0.20 (blue dots) and
0.005 (red plus), respectively. δ/Γ = 0.16 is held ﬁxed. The TV is
an decreasing function of ∆/Γ with Q −→ 1 as ∆/Γ −→ 0, i.e., the
system tends to become non-topological (topological) as the system
tends to small (large) topological gap and the TV tends to +1 as the
gap completely closes (system approaches TPT).

+1 to -1 precisely at the TPT (with the ZBCP value changing
from zero to 2e2/h sharply at the TPT too). The new idea
in the current work is to connect this crossover transition to
braiding experiments with the claim that our ﬁnding a value of
Q < 0 corresponds to a topological phase with the visibility
of the braiding measurements being large (small) depending
on whether the magnitude of Q is close to unity (zero). We

abcd−15−10−50510152025∆/Γ−1.0−0.50.00.51.0TopologicalInvariantTopological Visibilitybacdtary operator,

(cid:16)± π

4

(cid:17)

,

ˆγ1ˆγ2

U12 = exp

(14)

where +/- sign in the unitary operator depends on the micro-
scopic details of the system [63]. Considering a more com-
plicated setup one could imagine braiding any two Majoranas
independently of the other two. The unitary operators affect-
ing the braiding operation between any two Majoranas do not
form a commuting set. Hence, MZMs are said to have non-
Abelian braiding statistics which offers immense potential for
topological quantum computation [16, 23].

However, any realistic braiding experiment must take into
account a few prominent departures from the idealized set of
implicit assumptions made above in our schematic description
of perfect Majorana braiding. First, any ﬁnite system host-
ing MZMs will have a ﬁnite Majorana wavefunction overlap,
splitting the Majorana modes by an energy δ, away from zero
energy due to the hybridization between the two MZM wave-
functions from the two wire ends [34]. Obviously, a large
overlap (as would happen in shorter nanowires or in systems
with small superconducting gaps leading to large coherence
lengths) would completely destroy all non-Abelian topologi-
cal properties since the Majorana excitations in that situation
are simply the electron-hole quasiparticle excitations of the
superconducting nanowire with the Majorana splitting being
comparable to the superconducting energy gap. Including this
Majorana splitting in the formalism is an important ingredi-
ent of our theory. Second, “adiabatic” braiding process takes
place over a ﬁnite time scale δtB, which is associated with the
energy uncertainty of the system δEB by

δtBδEB ∼ .

(15)

We note that this braiding-induced energy uncertainty δEB
must be much larger (smaller) than the Majorana splitting (su-
perconducting gap) for the braiding operation to manifest any
topological non-Abelian behavior. One can loosely identify
this energy uncertainty as an effective dissipation term aris-
ing from the diabatic braiding process. Including an energy
broadening or a dissipative term is a key ingredient of our the-
ory. Such dissipation could arise from the energy uncertainty
associated with braiding as discussed above, but in the spe-
ciﬁc context of the tunneling conductance measurements, it
arises from intrinsic dissipation of strength Γ, which might be
present in the experimental situation.

While one might argue that braiding experiments differ fun-
damentally from conductance experiments since the latter de-
pends on ΓL and the former doesn’t, the braiding propos-
als [50–64] till date require the presence of Majorana fermion
tunneling in a key way. The Majorana tunneling enters the
through the tri-junctions in the Majorana braiding proposals.
In fact, the tunneling induced Majorana splitting at the tri-
junction limits the speed of braiding. Analogous to the tunnel-
ing case, the proper topological movement of MZMs requires
ΓL (cid:29) δ, Γ since any braiding must involve an actual physical
movement of MZMs around each other. Thus, inclusion of
energy broadening δEB ∼ Γ, tunneling broadening ΓL, and
Majorana splitting δ are essential ingredients of the braiding

11

process as much as they are in the tunnel conductance and the
TV calculations discussed in the last section. We therefore see
a one-to-one correspondence between braiding and tunneling
measurements with the TV showing up in both measurements
as the key quantity determining the topological behavior of
the circuit.

The success rate of non-Abelian braiding for a given braid-
ing speed in an experiment (Pbraid) is related to probability of
TV being −1, i.e.,

2

,

Pbraid(δEB + Γ(cid:48), δ, ∆) ∼ 1 − (cid:104)Q(Γ, ΓL, δ, ∆)(cid:105)

(16)
where (cid:104)Q(cid:105) is the average of TV over disorder realizations
for a given disorder strength, where Γ(cid:48) is the environment-
induced intrinsic broadening in the braiding experiment. The
probability of successful non-Abelian braiding, similar to the
conductance discussed in the last section, is a function of the
amount of non-universal broadening Γ present in the braid-
ing experiment (i.e.
the sum of the energy uncertainty δEB
and the intrinsic broadening due to coupling to the environ-
ment Γ(cid:48)), the Majorana splitting (δ), the lead coupling ΓL and
the topological gap (∆). From the previous section, we know
that whether the average TV (cid:104)Q(cid:105) is nearly topological, which
would correspond to successful braiding, is directly correlated
with the presence of a ZBCP value close to the topological
value G(V ∼ 0) ∼ G0. Such a nearly quantized ZBCP,
which can be tested for through existing experimental set-
ups [1, 8, 10–13], can only occur in much smaller parameter
regime ∆ (cid:29) ΓL (cid:29) Γ (cid:29) δ. Furthermore, temperature, which
provides a ﬁfth independent energy scale through the thermal
energy kBT (which we take to be zero— in principle, one
could assume that kBT is included in the intrinsic broadening
term Γ) must be small as well. It is only in this parameter
regime that one expects braiding to be reasonably successful.
We believe that this parameter regime can be diagnosed from
the much simpler conductance quantization measurements.
Our results (see Fig. 5) in section IV indicate that a ZBCP
value around half of the quantized value (i.e. ZBCP ∼ e2/h)
should be adequate to produce a negative TV value. The
negative TV would correpond to the topologically non-trivial
phase with a TI of -1. Based on this we conclude that braiding
experiments would succeed (perhaps with rather low visibil-
ity) as long as the corresponding ZBCP is around e2/h in the
same nanowire sample with identical system parameters. We
believe that for systems with ZBCP much lower than e2/h, the
braiding experiments are unlikely to succeed in manifesting a
purely topological phase with a TV value of -1. This is an
important predicted experimental consequence of our theory.

V. CONCLUSION

In this work, we ask whether a theoretical connection can be
established between the tunneling conductance and the topo-
logical visibility of realistic spin-orbit coupled semiconduc-
tor nanowires in the presence of proximity induced supercon-
ductivity and Zeeman splitting, assuming the system param-
eters (Zeeman splitting, chemical potential, superconducting

energy gap) to be in the topological phase so that the wire
carries Majorana zero modes localized at the wire ends. The
question takes on special signiﬁcance because of the puta-
tive non-Abelian braiding properties of MZMs enabling fault
tolerant quantum computation. In particular, direct braiding
experiments, which are typically very hard, establishing the
non-Abelian nature of MZMs have not yet been carried out in
semiconductor nanowires although many proposals to do so
exist in the theoretical literature. (Such experiments do exit in
the fractional quantum Hall context for the so-called 5/2 frac-
tional quantum Hall state, but the results are difﬁcult to inter-
pret and have remained controversial (see Ref. [80] and ref-
erences therein). On the other hand, several groups have car-
ried out tunneling conductance measurement in semiconduc-
tor nanowires following speciﬁc theoretical predictions that
MZMs should manifest as zero bias conductance peaks in
such experiments. The observation of such ZBCPs has so
far been hailed as the evidence for the predicted existence
of MZMs in these nanowires, but doubts remain about how
topological such systems are (even if the observed ZBCP sig-
nal indeed arises from MZM-related physics and is not some
spurious effect), particularly in view of the disturbing fact
that the measured ZBCP values are substantially lower than
the quantized conductance value (i.e. 2e2/h) expected from
the perfect Andreev reﬂection by the Majorana modes. Even
assuming that the system is in the topological phase as far
as parameter values go, serious issues arise from the ﬁnite
length of the wires, which, coupled with the expected long co-
herence length because of the small induced superconducting
gap [81], leads to questions regarding the overlap between the
MZMs localized at the two wire ends. Such MZM hybridiza-
tion would lead to large Majorana energy splittings, and the
MZMs would be shifted from zero-energy, becoming instead
ﬁnite energy resonances in the gap. If the Majorana energy
splitting is comparable to the energy gap itself, then obviously
there can be no non-Abelian braiding statistics since these
split Majorana modes are essentially electron-hole pairs. The
quantitative technical question now becomes whether such ap-
proximate (or almost)- MZMs, which are split and thus shifted
from zero energy, could still lead to non-Abelian statistics al-
though the ZBCP associated with them is below the quantized
conductance 2e2/h. We address this question in great detail
by calculating both the tunnel conductance and the TV of the
same realistic nanowire (i.e. using exactly the same parameter
values) and comparing them carefully.

The TV in the ideal situation is +/- 1 with the negative (posi-
tive) sign corresponding to the topological (trivial) phase, just
as the tunnel conductance in the ideal situation is 2e2/h (0)
for the topological (trivial) phase. But, in real measurements,
the existence of Majorana splitting in ﬁnite wires plus vari-
ous dissipative broadening mechanisms invariably present in
real systems could lead to a value of the TV with a magni-
tude less than unity, just as the ZBCP magnitude could be less
than 2e2/h from the same physics. Correlating the two quan-
tities in realistic wires would tell us whether braiding exper-
iments are likely to succeed in realistic nanowires currently
being studied in various laboratories. One aspect regarding
Majorana nanowires is that a naive calculation of the ZBCP in

12

the presence of Majorana splitting in ﬁnite wires always leads
to zero conductance at zero energy since the ﬁnite energy split
Majorana resonances have no spectral weight at zero energy.
This of course changes in the presence of any energy broaden-
ing which must invariably be present in real systems. This is
quite analogous to the situation of purely adiabatic braiding,
where braiding at a rate much smaller than the Majorana split-
ting δ would also produce purely non-topological results. Our
work explicitly includes this energy broadening effect in or-
der to comment on real systems of experimental interest. We
believe that our calculated TV in realistic systems provides
the actual visibility of future braiding measurements through
the inclusion of broadening processes, i.e., our ﬁnding a TV
differing in magnitude from unity has one to one correspon-
dence with the corresponding averaged braiding experiment
runs over many measurements (where the average will differ
from unity in magnitude although each run itself will give a
value of +/-1). We note that indeed the calculated TV is neg-
ative or positive (but always <1 in magnitude), depending on
whether the system is approximately topological or trivial, re-
spectively. The exact value of our calculated topological vis-
ibility predicts the outcome of braiding experiments— closer
our results are to -1 more non-Abelian is the system, but any
negative value for the topological visibility could be construed
as predicting the system to be in the non-Abelian topological
phase, albeit with a low visibility if the value of the topologi-
cal visibility is far from -1. On the other hand, our ﬁnding of a
positive topological visibility indicates that the corresponding
system is non-topological.

Our work shows that the topological quantum phase transi-
tion separating the trivial phase (a TV value of 1 and a ZBCP
value of zero) from the topological phase (a TV value of -
1 and a ZBCP value of 2e2/h) is a crossover in real sys-
tems (even at zero temperature) because of the presence of the
broadening terms Γ, tunneling ΓL and the Majorana splitting
(δ). The inclusion of the dissipative broadening processes,
which must invariably be present in real systems, is a key in-
gredient of our theory— in fact, without any broadening, the
ZBCP is always zero at zero energy by virtue of the Majorana
splitting in all ﬁnite wires. We ﬁnd that the ZBCP evolves
from a quantized peak deep in the topological phase into a
much smaller peak on a large background near the transition,
quite similar to some of the experimental results [1, 8, 10–
13]. Unfortunately, the corresponding TV in this case is in-
variably non-topological as long as the ZBCP value is small.
In braiding experiments the broadening is to be interpreted as
the energy uncertainly associated with the ﬁnite braiding time,
which should be large compared with the Majorana splitting
for braiding to succeed (i.e. Γ > δ must apply for the TV
to be negative). For braiding to succeed, of course, one must
always be deep in the topological gap so that the topological
gap is much larger than the Majorana splitting (δ), and in-
trinsic broadening (Γ). Furthermore, the Majorana coupling
energy ΓL must be large enough to overcome the splitting δ
to lead to a large conductance and also for the tri-junctions in
a braiding protocol to lead to non-Abelian statistics.

We ﬁnd that it is possible for the system to be topological
(i.e. negative value for the TV) even when the correspond-

ing zero bias conductance value is suppressed from 2e2/h—
in particular, a factor of 2 suppression of the ZBCP would
still lead to the existence of non-Abelian braiding statistics
(with somewhat low visibility). On the other hand, we be-
lieve that systems with ZBCP values factors of 10 (or more)
suppressed from 2e2/h are unlikely to ever manifest non-
Abelian statistics, and such systems are better considered as
non-topological systems because of the very large Majorana
splitting in spite of there being a small ZBCP peak. Our most
important qualitative conclusion is the ﬁnding that it is in-
deed possible for a ﬁnite wire with split MZMs (and a corre-
spondingly suppressed ZBCP value compared with 2e2/h) to
manifest non-Abelian braiding statistics with the visibility of
braiding (averaged over many runs) decreasing with decreas-
ing value of the corresponding ZBCP. How small the ZBCP
can be and still reﬂect an underlying non-Abelian braiding
statistics depends on many details (most importantly the ra-
tio of the Majorana splitting energy to the topological gap
which should typically be less than 0.2 for braiding to suc-
ceed) including the energy broadening in the system arising
from many non-universal mechanisms. One important con-
clusion following from our extensive numerical simulations is
that braiding experiments are perhaps likely (unlikely) to suc-
ceed in nanowires manifesting ZBCP values at least around
e2/h (much less than e2/h) since we ﬁnd that the calculated
topological visibility crosses over from being negative to posi-
tive for the corresponding tunneling ZBCP value crossing over
respectively from being > e2/h to being < e2/h. Of course,
real braiding experiments would obviously not be carried out
in the tunneling conﬁgurations with leads to normal contacts
for measuring tunneling currents, but our results indicate that
braiding should focus on nanowires manifesting ZBCP val-
ues not much less than e2/h for a reasonable chance of any
success in the observation of non-Abelian braiding statistics.
We mention that braiding experiments still involve aspects of
tunneling (i.e. a ﬁnite ΓL) which must arise from the ﬁnite
Majorana tunneling at wire junctions (in contrast to NS junc-
tions in the conductance measurements) necessary to make the
MZMs go around each other in order to accomplish braiding.
Finally, we note that we have neglected ﬁnite temperature
and disorder effects in our theory, assuming clean nanowires
at zero temperature. Including both effects is straightforward
and only increases the computational time substantially (with-
out introducing any theoretical complications), which is why
they are left out. We emphasize that our conclusion remains
completely unaffected by ﬁnite temperature and disorder. Fi-
nite temperature only reduces the visibility, thus further reduc-
ing the magnitude of the ZBCP and the TV, without affecting
the topological or not question at all. Thus, the braiding ex-
periment should be performed at the lowest possible tempera-
tures to maximize the visibility. Disorder complicates matters
only because it shifts the condition for obtaining the topolog-
ical phase (i.e.
the TPT point), but it cannot affect the ba-
sic physics at all since the induced topological superconduc-
tivity arises from an interplay among the s-wave supercon-
ductivity, spin-orbit coupling, and Zeeman splitting— all of
which are immune to disorder. The fact that disorder does
not suppress the topological phase (but does shift its location

13

on the phase diagram compared with the clean parameters) is
already well-known in the literature [66], and we therefore re-
frain from providing ﬁnite disorder results since this will only
complicate the presentation with no additional conceptual or
theoretical understanding. The situation with very strong dis-
order is, however, disastrous for the manifestation of topo-
logical properties since the strongly disordered nanowire will
manifest Grifﬁths phase physics with many MZMs localized
randomly along the wire [78, 82], and this situation must ob-
viously be avoided at all costs for all braiding experiments.
We have ensured numerically that all our conclusions in this
paper remain unaffected in the presence of ﬁnite temperature
and (weak) disorder as asserted above. Similarly, multisub-
band occupancy of the nanowire [83, 84] does not change
any of our conclusions either as long as an odd number of
spin-split subbands are occupied in the system, and the ap-
propriate microscopic parameters (i.e. δ, Γ, ΓL, ∆, chemical
potential) are all modiﬁed to take into account the multisub-
band occupancy in the nanowire. Of course, the relative values
of the various parameters may be modiﬁed by multi-subband
occupancy, which must be incorporated in the theory appro-
priately, but the theory itself remains exactly the same as long
as an odd number of subbands are occupied in the nanowire
and various parameters are appropriately modiﬁed to reﬂect
the multi-subband occupancy of the system.

This work is supported by Microsoft Q, LPS-MPO-CMTC,

and JQI-NSF-PFC.

Appendix A: Tunneling conductance and topological visibility

from S-matrix

Tunneling conductance is a local measurement at the nor-
mal lead -superconducting nanowire (see Fig. 1) junction, and
one may calculate it theoretically by assuming both the lead
and nanowire to extend semi-inﬁnitely and coupled together
at the so-called Normal metal-Superconductor (NS) junction
via a tunnel barrier.

The knowledge of the reﬂection matrix at the NS junction
is sufﬁcient to calculate the tunneling conductance. The re-
ﬂection matrix has the form

(cid:18)ree reh

(cid:19)

r =

rhe rhh

,

(A1)

where ree and reh are the normal and Andreev reﬂection am-
plitudes, respectively. Here, the reﬂection matrix is expressed
in the basis of electron and hole scattering channels, which is
called the particle-hole basis. Such a convenient decomposi-
tion in normal and Andreev reﬂection amplitudes is possible
whenever the lead Hamiltonian, Hlead (see Eq. (7)) is diago-
nal in the particle hole basis- i.e. [Hlead, τz] = 0. For a single
conducting channel, the tunneling conductance to a supercon-
ductor in the NS junction is given by the Blonder-Tinkham-
Klapwijk (BTK) formula [85] (in the units of 2e2/h)

G = 1 − |ree|2 + |reh|2.

(A2)

When ree and reh have a matrix structure due to spin degrees
of freedom or multiple conducting modes in the lead, the BTK

formula is generalized to,

G = N − Tr(reer†

ee − rehr

†
eh)

For a periodic translationally invariant spinless p-wave su-
perconductor described by a Hamiltonian H(k) in k-space,
Kitaev [14] deﬁned the TI as

QKitaev = sgn(Pf(iH(0))Pf(iH(π))),

(A3)

where Pf denotes Pfafﬁan operation on a matrix. QKitaev =
−1 implies that the system is in a topological phase i.e.
if
the same Hamiltonian were to describe a ﬁnite chain with
an open boundary condition, the system edges will host non-
Abelian Majorana zero modes. For an open ﬁnite wire geom-
etry, Akhmerov et. al. [65] provided the following generaliza-
tion for the TI in terms of the reﬂection matrix:

Q0 = sgn(det(r)).

(A4)

It was argued in the main body of the paper that in presence of
dissipation, a more useful quantity to characterize topological
properties of the system is TV– a quantity closely related to
scattering matrix TI (A4), deﬁned as

Q = det(r).

(A5)

To justify this expression for the TV, which we use in our
numerical work, consider the particle-hole symmetry of the
superconducting Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian
i.e.,

ΠHBdGΠ−1 = −HBdG,

(A6)

where Π = τxC with C being the complex conjugation op-
erator. This leads to the following constraint on the reﬂection
matrix,

which implies

τxrτx = r∗,

det(r) = det(r)∗.

(A7)

(A8)

Note that we have implicitly assumed the voltage bias, V ,
to be zero. For ﬁnite V ,
the particle-hole constraint on
the voltage-dependent reﬂection matrix r(V ) takes the form
τxr(V )τx = r(−V )∗. When the voltage bias is less than the
superconducting gap (eV < ∆), the transmission through the
nanowire is zero as there are no extended states. Therefore the
reﬂection matrix r is unitary i.e., rr† = 1. This implies

Tr(reer†

ee + rehr†

†
he) = N (A9)
and that the absolute value of the determinant of reﬂection
matrix satisﬁes

†
hh + rher

ee) = Tr(rhhr

| det(r)| = 1.

(A10)

Combined with the particle-hole symmetry constraint of r,
we get det(r) = ±1.
In other words we have shown that

14

whenever reﬂection matrix r respects unitarity and particle-
hole symmetry, the TI (deﬁned as sgn(det(r))) is equal to TV
(deﬁned as det(r)), i.e. Q0 = Q. An ideal system with MZMs
is characterized by det(r) = −1 (and non-topological trivial
phase is characterized by det(r) = 1) and also is associated
with quantized ZBCP at 2e2/h. The only way to change the
value of det(r) is to break the unitarity by closing the topo-
logical gap. Note that by substituting Eq. (A9) in Eq. (A3)
and using the unitarity of the reﬂection matrix one can show,

†
G = 2Tr(rehr
eh),
†
†
eh) = Tr(rher
he).

Tr(rehr

Moreover, particle-hole symmetry of r implies

reh(V ) = r

†
he(−V ).

Finally, using Eqs. (A13) and (A12) we arrive at

G(V ) = G(−V ).

(A11)
(A12)

(A13)

(A14)

So the unitarity and particle-hole symmetry of r guarantee that
the in-gap conductance is symmetric about zero bias. For a ﬁ-
nite system, any MZM would be split in energy by δ because
of the inevitable MZM overlap from the two ends (which
could be exponentially small, but never zero for a ﬁnite wire).
Strictly at zero energy there would be no BdG eigenstate in
the nanowire rendering an incoming electron to be totally re-
ﬂected with det(r) = 1. We would infer, based on this argu-
ment, that all ﬁnite systems irrespective of whether they host
MZMs or not are non-topological. This is similar to the state-
ment in an entirely different context that no ﬁnite system can
have a phase transition, which is only a property of the inﬁ-
nite volume thermodynamic limit. In reality, other (nonuni-
versal) cut-offs in energy and length scales of the problem be-
come important as the system size increases, and eventually
ﬁnite and inﬁnite systems behave in the same manner. For the
nanowire MZM problem, this arises from the energy broaden-
ing inherent in any realistic system, which renders the split hy-
bridized nonzero energy peaks into a broadened midgap peak
with a ﬁnite weight at zero energy. Thus, the split resonances
at sharp nonzero energies become a broad peak around zero
energy with a ﬁnite width. Without such a dissipative broad-
ening process, the splitting of the MZMs invariably present in
any real system with ﬁnite wire length will always lead to pre-
cisely zero conductance at zero energy since the MZMs are
now always shifted from zero energy due to Majorana split-
ting.

We account for ﬁnite lifetime of the quasiparticle due to
various inelastic scattering mechanisms such as phonons and
magnetic moments through an onsite imaginary term in the
Hamiltonian. We emphasize that without this broadening, a
ﬁnite wire can never have a true zero energy mode, and the
system is by deﬁnition always in the trivial phase! The resul-
tant broadening due to the onsite imaginary term in the Hamil-
tonian is given by Γ.

Appendix B: Numerical calculation of topological visibility

To calculate the TV, we numerically compute the real part
of the determinant of the reﬂection matrix r and discard the
small imaginary part of the determinant which is a numerical
artifact as can be seen from the fact that the particle-hole sym-
metry forces the determinant of the reﬂection matrix to be real
which was pointed out in Appendix A. For all calculations in-
volving the leads, the following set of parameters are chosen:
µoBlead = 2K and µlead = 6.9K.

Special care must be taken in calculating the TV. When the
submatrices of the reﬂection matrix (ree, reh, rhe and rhh) are
called in KWANT, the individual submatrix outputs do not
satisfy the particle-hole constraint given by Eq. (A7). The
particle-hole symmetry was restored in the following way in
our calculations. Since the lead parameters were chosen to
have two incoming and two outgoing modes at zero energy,
in every lead for each participating mode m1, m2 at zero en-
ergy, incoming and outgoing wavefunctions have a generic
two component structure

(cid:18)ψ1

(cid:19)

ψ2

.

Ψ =

15

We compute α = max(ψ1, ψ2) at the end site of the lead and
deﬁne the phase of the wavefunction to be φ = α/|α|. The
arbitrary phase of the reﬂection matrix is rectiﬁed by multi-
plying det(r) by following string of phases

in,eφm2
φm1

in,eφm1

in,hφm2

in,hφm1

out,eφm2

out,eφm1

out,hφm2

out,h,

(B1)

where in,out stand for incoming and outgoing modes, e,h
stand for electron and hole and m1,m2 are the two modes.
These subtle numerical manipulations are essential in ensur-
ing that the mode functions used by KWANT are particle-hole
symmetric. The particle-hole symmetry of the basis is key
to ensure particle-hole symmetry of the scattering matrix that
is required for the proper evaluation of the scattering matrix
topological visibility.

[3] Roman M. Lutchyn, Jay D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma., Phys. Rev.

[21] T D Stanescu and S Tewari., J. Phys. Condens. Matter 25,

[1] V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov, S. R. Plissard, E. P. A. M.

Bakkers and L. P. Kouwenhoven., Science 336, 1003 (2012).

[2] Jay D. Sau, Roman M. Lutchyn, Sumanta Tewari, and S. Das

Sarma., Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 040502 (2010).

Lett. 105, 077001 (2010).

[4] Jason Alicea, Phys. Rev. B 81, 125318 (2010).
[5] Jay D. Sau, Sumanta Tewari, Roman M. Lutchyn, Tudor D.
Stanescu, and S. Das Sarma., Phys. Rev. B 82, 214509 (2010).
[6] Yuval Oreg, Gil Refael and Felix von Oppen., Phys. Rev. Lett.

27, 124003 (2012).

(2015).

233201 (2013).

32 (2006).

105, 177002 (2010).

014513 (2015).

[7] X. Liu, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, Physical Review B 92,

227005 (2012).

[8] M. T. Deng, C. L. Yu, G. Y. Huang, M. Larsson, P. Caroff, and

Phys. 15, 055019 (2013).

[19] Martin Leijnse and Karsten Flensberg., Semicond. Sci. Technol.

[20] Steven R. Elliott and Marcel Franz, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 137

[22] S. Das Sarma, M. Freedman, and C. Nayak, Physics Today 59,

[23] S. Das Sarma, M. Freedman, and C. Nayak, Npj Quantum In-

formation 1, 15001 (2015).

[24] Dmitry Bagrets and Alexander Altland, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109,

[25] Patrick Neven, Dmitry Bagrets, and Alexander Altland., New J.

[26] Eduardo J. H. Lee, Xiaocheng Jiang, Manuel Houzet, Ramon
Aguado, Charles M. Lieber, and Silvano De Franceschi, Nat
Nano 9, 79 (2013).

[27] Falko Pientka, Graham Kells, Alessandro Romito, Piet W.
Brouwer and Felix von Oppen., Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 227006
(2012).

[28] G. Kells, D. Meidan, and P. W. Brouwer, Phys. Rev. B 85,

060507 (2012).

[29] Jie Liu, Andrew C. Potter, K. T. Law, and Patrick A. Lee., Phys.

Rev. Lett. 109, 267002 (2012).

[30] D. I. Pikulin, J. P. Dahlhaus, M. Wimmer, H. Schomerus, and
C. W. J. Beenakker, New Journal of Physics 14, 125011 (2012).

[31] K. Flensberg, Physical Review B 82, 180516 (2010).
[32] K. T. Law, P. A. Lee, and T. K. Ng, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 237001

(2009).

[33] M. Wimmer, A. R. Akhmerov, J. P. Dahlhaus, and C. W. J.

Beenakker, New Journal of Physics 13, 053016 (2011).

[34] C.-H. Lin, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 86,

224511 (2012).

[35] Meng Cheng, Roman M. Lutchyn, Victor Galitski and S. Das

H. Q. Xu., Nano Lett. 12, 6414 (2012).

[9] Leonid P Rokhinson, Xinyu Liu, and Jacek K Furdyna., Nat.

Phys. 8, 795 (2012).

[10] Anindya Das, Yuval Ronen, Yonatan Most, Yuval Oreg, Moty

Heiblum and Hadas Shtrikman., Nat. Phys. 8, 887 (2012).

[11] A. D. K. Finck, D. J. Van Harlingen, P. K. Mohseni, K. Jung,

and X. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett 110, 126406 (2013).

[12] H. O. H. Churchill, V. Fatemi, K. Grove-Rasmussen, M. T.
Deng, P. Caroff, H. Q. Xu, and C. M. Marcus., Phys. Rev. B
87, 241401 (2013).

[13] W. Chang, S. M. Albrecht, T. S. Jespersen, F. Kuemmeth, P.
Krogstrup, J. Nygrd and C. M. Marcus, Nature Nanotechnology
10, 232 (2015).

[14] Alexei Kitaev, arXiv:cond-mat/0010440 (2000).
[15] K. Sengupta, I. Zutic, H.-J. Kwon, V. M. Yakovenko, and S.

Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 63, 144531 (2001).

[16] Chetan Nayak, Steven H. Simon, Ady Stern, Michael Freed-

man, and S. Das Sarma., Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 1083 (2008).

[17] Jason Alicea, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, 076501 (2012).
[18] C. W. J. Beenakker, Annu. Rev. Con. Mat. Phys. 4, 113 (2013).

16

Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 107001 (2009).

[36] Meng Cheng, Roman M. Lutchyn, Victor Galitski, S. Das

Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 82, 094504 (2010).

[61] X.-J. Liu and A. M. Lobos, Phys. Rev. B 87, 060504 (2013).
[62] C.-K. Chiu, M. Vazifeh, and M. Franz, EPL (Europhysics Let-

ters) 110, 10001 (2015).

[37] Diego Rainis, Luka Trifunovic, Jelena Klinovaja and Daniel

[63] J. D. Sau, D. J. Clarke, and S. Tewari, Physical Review B 84,

[38] S. Das Sarma, Jay D Sau and Tudor D Stanescu, Phys. Rev. B

[64] J. D. Sau, S. Tewari, and S. Das Sarma, Physical Review A 82,

[39] S. Takei, B. M. Fregoso, H.-Y. Hui, A. M. Lobos, and

[65] A. R. Akhmerov, J. P. Dahlhaus, F. Hassler, M. Wimmer, and

Loss, Phys. Rev. B 87, 024515 (2013).

86, 220506 (2012).

S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 186803 (2013).

[40] Jay D. Sau, S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B. 88, 064506 (2013).
[41] P. W. Brouwer, M. Duckheim, A. Romito, and F. von Oppen,

Phys. Rev. B 84, 144526 (2011).

[42] Piet W. Brouwer, Mathias Duckheim, Alessandro Romito, and

Felix von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 196804 (2011).

[43] E. Prada, P. San-Jose, and R. Aguado, Phys. Rev. B 86, 180503

[44] D. Chevallier, P. Simon, and C. Bena, Phys. Rev. B 88, 165401

[70] T. Karzig, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. X 3, 041017

094505 (2011).

052322 (2010).

144506 (2014).

C. W. J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. Lett 106, 057001 (2011).

[66] ˙I. Adagideli, M. Wimmer, and A. Teker, Phys. Rev. B 89,

[67] I. C. Fulga, F. Hassler, A. R. Akhmerov and C. W. J. Beenakker

, Phys. Rev. B 83, 155429 (2011).

[68] D. I. Pikulin and Y. V. Nazarov, JETP letters 94, 693 (2012).
[69] F. L. Pedrocchi and D. P. DiVincenzo, arXiv preprint

arXiv:1505.03712 (2015).

(2013).

104529 (2011).

[71] M. Cheng, V. Galitski, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 84,

[72] M. S. Scheurer and A. Shnirman, Phys. Rev. B 88, 064515

[73] T. Karzig, A. Rahmani, F. von Oppen, and G. Refael, Phys. Rev.

B 91, 201404 (2015).

B 91, 201102 (2015).

[74] T. Karzig, F. Pientka, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev.

[75] J. D. Sau, S. Tewari, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 85, 064512

[76] C. W. Groth, M. Wimmer, A. R. Akhmerov, and X. Waintal,

[77] S. Sachdev, Quantum phase transitions (Cambridge University

Press, 2011).

[78] Olexei Motrunich, Kedar Damle, and David A. Huse, Phys.

Rev. B. 63, 224204 (2001).

[79] S. Datta, Electronic transport in mesoscopic systems (Cam-

bridge university press, 1997).

[80] R. Willet, Reports on Progress in Physics 76, 076501 (2013).
[81] S. Das Sarma, H.-Y. Hui, P. Brydon, and J. D. Sau, New Journal

of Physics 17, 075001 (2015).

[82] W. S. Cole, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, arXiv preprint

[83] R. M. Lutchyn, T. D. Stanescu, and S. Das Sarma, Physical

review letters 106, 127001 (2011).

[84] T. D. Stanescu, R. M. Lutchyn, and S. Das Sarma, Physical

[85] G. E. Blonder, M. Tinkham, and T. M. Klapwijk, Phys. Rev. B

[45] C. Marcus, unpublished.
[46] A. M. Lobos and S. Das Sarma, New Journal of Physics 17,

065010 (2015).

view B 88, 180507 (2013).

[47] B. M. Fregoso, A. M. Lobos, and S. Das Sarma, Physical Re-

(2013).

[48] N. Read and D. Green., Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267 (2000).
[49] D.A. Ivanov, Phys. Rev. Lett 86, 268 (2001).
[50] Jason Alicea, Yuval Oreg, Gil Refael, Felix von Oppen and

Matthew P. A. Fisher, Nat. Phys. 7, 412 (2011).

[51] J. D. Sau, S. Tewari, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 84, 085109

(2012).

(2012).

(2013).

(2011).

(2011).

[52] D. J. Clarke, J. D. Sau, and S. Tewari, Phys. Rev. B 84, 035120

New Journal of Physics 16, 063065 (2014).

[53] T. Hyart, B. van Heck, I. C. Fulga, M. Burrello, A. R.
Akhmerov, and C. W. J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. B 88, 035121
(2013).

[54] C. S. Amorim, K. Ebihara, A. Yamakage, Y. Tanaka, and

M. Sato, Phys. Rev. B 91, 174305 (2015).

[55] B. Van Heck, A. R. Akhmerov, F. Hassler, M. Burrello, and
C. W. J. Beenakker, New Journal of Physics 14, 035019 (2012).
[56] Q.-F. Liang, Z. Wang, and X. Hu, EPL (Europhysics Letters)

99, 50004 (2012).

Review B 85, 020502 (2012).

[57] A. Romito, J. Alicea, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen, Physical

arXiv:1603.03780 (2016).

[58] B. I. Halperin, Y. Oreg, A. Stern, G. Refael, J. Alicea, and F. von

Oppen, Physical Review B 85, 144501 (2012).

[59] P. Kotetes, G. Sch¨on, and A. Shnirman, Journal of the Korean

Review B 84, 144522 (2011).

[60] D. J. Clarke, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, arXiv preprint

25, 4515 (1982).

Physical Society 62, 1558 (2013).

arXiv:1510.00007 (2015).

