6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
9
2

 

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
2
5
0
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self-forces on static bodies in arbitrary dimensions

Abraham I. Harte1, ´Eanna ´E. Flanagan2,3 and Peter Taylor2,4

1Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute),

Am M¨uhlenberg 1, D-14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany

2Cornell Center for Astrophysics and Planetary Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853

3Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 and

4School of Mathematical Sciences and Complex & Adaptive Systems Laboratory,

University College Dublin, UCD, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland

We derive exact expressions for the scalar and electromagnetic self-forces and self-torques acting
on arbitrary static extended bodies in arbitrary static spacetimes with any number of dimensions.
Non-perturbatively, our results are identical in all dimensions. Meaningful point particle limits are
quite diﬀerent in diﬀerent dimensions, however. These limits are deﬁned and evaluated, resulting
in simple “regularization algorithms” which can be used in concrete calculations. In these limits,
self-interaction is shown to be progressively less important in higher numbers of dimensions; it
generically competes in magnitude with increasingly high-order extended-body eﬀects. Conversely,
we show that self-interaction eﬀects can be relatively large in 1 + 1 and 2 + 1 dimensions. Our
motivations for this work are twofold: First, no previous derivation of the self-force has been provided
in arbitrary dimensions, and heuristic arguments presented by diﬀerent authors have resulted in
conﬂicting conclusions. Second, the static self-force problem in arbitrary dimensions provides a
valuable testbed with which to continue the development of general, non-perturbative methods in
the theory of motion. Several new insights are obtained in this direction, including a signiﬁcantly
improved understanding of the renormalization process. We also show that there is considerable
freedom to use diﬀerent “eﬀective ﬁelds” in the laws of motion—a freedom which can be exploited
to optimally simplify speciﬁc problems. Diﬀerent choices give rise to diﬀerent inertias, gravitational
forces, and electromagnetic or scalar self-forces, but there is a sense in which none of these quantities
are individually accessible to experiment. Certain combinations are observable, however, and these
remain invariant under all possible ﬁeld redeﬁnitions.

I.

INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY

Originally prompted by the discovery of the electron
[1–3], the past century has seen considerable eﬀort de-
voted to understanding how the motions of charged par-
ticles might be aﬀected by “their own” ﬁelds: What, for
example, are the radiation-reaction forces? In what sense
does self-interaction impart an eﬀective inertia? While
much has been learned over the years, “self-force prob-
lems” such as these have been notoriously subtle, and
work on them continues to the present day.

Current interest has largely shifted to the gravitational
variant of the self-force problem: How do the metric per-
turbations sourced by small masses aﬀect their motion
in general relativity? This is relevant for the anticipated
observation of gravitational waves generated by extreme-
mass-ratio inspirals—neutron stars or stellar-mass black
holes orbiting and then falling into supermassive black
holes [4, 5]. The gravitational self-force is also relevant
more broadly in gravitational wave astronomy in that it
provides checks of, and inputs to, the post-Newtonian
and eﬀective-one-body approximation schemes [6, 7].

Motivated by these developments, theoretical under-
standing of the self-force has improved enormously in
the past two decades, and not only in gravitational con-
texts.
In four spacetime dimensions, it is now under-
stood how to rigorously formulate point particle limits,
and what the equations of motion are in those limits [8–
12]. Non-perturbative results are available as well, de-
scribing motion and self-interaction for extended bodies

in very general settings [12]. All of this has been accom-
plished in generic spacetimes and for objects coupled to
gravitational, electromagnetic, or scalar ﬁelds. Consider-
able eﬀort has also been devoted to developing practical
computational schemes with which to evaluate the phys-
ical consequences of the derived laws of motion [10, 13],
particularly for small (uncharged) masses in orbit around
nearly-Kerr black holes.

For spacetime dimensions not equal to four, the self-
force program is considerably less mature. Absent any
rigorous derivations, a number of ad hoc methods have
been suggested to compute (mostly higher-dimensional)
self-forces in various contexts [14–21]. Although it is not
possible to compare all of these methods directly, it is
known that at least some of them are inequivalent. For
example, the work of Beach, Poisson, and Nickel [15] sug-
gested that the self-force on a charged particle in ﬁve
spacetime dimensions might depend in an essential way
on the details of that particle’s internal structure, even
if it were spherically symmetric. An analysis of the same
system by Taylor and Flanagan [14] utilized a diﬀerent
method and found conﬂicting results. Unexplained am-
biguities arose in both cases, although these had very dif-
ferent characters. If the ambiguities in either approach
were in some sense correct, they would represent sur-
prising departures from the known behavior of the four-
dimensional self-force. One motivation for this paper is
to clarify these issues, and more generally to determine
if the self-force depends in any essential way on dimen-
sionality.

Besides matters of principle such as these, a more
direct reason for considering non-standard numbers of
dimensions is in connection with holographic dualities;
it has been claimed in this context that the 4 + 1 di-
mensional self-force problem can be used to understand
jet quenching in 3 + 1 dimensional quark-gluon plasmas
[17, 22].

Separately, lower-dimensional self-force eﬀects might
be directly accessible to experiment: There are, for ex-
ample, systems where liquid droplets bouncing on an oil
bath generate surface waves, and those waves in turn af-
fect the horizontal motion of the droplet [23]. This is
at least qualitatively a self-force problem in two spatial
dimensions. There are also a variety of condensed mat-
ter systems which act as though they are conﬁned to
one or two spatial dimensions (see e.g., [24, 25]), and if
this type of conﬁnement could be arranged for something
analogous to an isolated charge—as has recently been
suggested for deformed graphene [26]—it might be rela-
tively straightforward to measure self-interaction eﬀects
in a wide variety of geometries. Diﬀerent spatial metrics
and topologies could be explored by varying the conﬁn-
ing surface, and external accelerations might be used to
introduce nontrivial lapse functions.

We do not attempt to model any such systems here,
but instead consider as a ﬁrst step a “standard” self-
force system in arbitrary dimensions: isolated extended
bodies coupled to scalar or electromagnetic ﬁelds in ﬁxed
background spacetimes. Our treatment is exact except
for the neglect of gravitational backreaction. We also
assume that both the spacetime and the body of interest
are static.

Although the staticity constraint might appear to be
overly restrictive, it already allows for a number of in-
teresting statements. The aforementioned disagreements
in the existing literature [14, 15] appear, for example, in
the static regime. Focusing attention on the static prob-
lem can also highlight interesting features which are not
otherwise apparent—even in cases where the dynamical
equations are already known. Lastly, static systems pro-
vide a simple testing ground with which to develop new
insights into more general self-interaction problems.

Before describing our results in these directions, we
ﬁrst remark on the status of the dynamical self-force
problem in non-standard dimensions: Although it was
alluded to brieﬂy in [12],
it does not appear to have
been emphasized before that much of the existing non-
perturbative work developed to describe the 3 + 1 dimen-
sional self-force [27–31] generalizes immediately to other
dimensions. One of its implications is that a result known
as the Detweiler-Whiting prescription1 [9, 12, 32] gen-

1 The Detweiler-Whiting prescription originally arose as a regu-
larization procedure which succinctly describes the motions of
point particles in four spacetime dimensions. It was later shown
to be the limit of an exact, non-singular identity which holds for
generic extended bodies. Both the identity and its limit gener-
alize to all even-dimensional spacetimes.

2

eralizes and remains exact for fully-dynamical extended
bodies in all even-dimensional spacetimes. A problem
arises, however, if the number of spacetime dimensions
is odd; a construction known as the Detweiler-Whiting
Green function appears not to exist. While this does
not appear to be a fundamental obstacle, it does imply
that known results require some modiﬁcation before be-
ing extended to the odd-dimensional dynamical setting.
A possible solution to this problem is brieﬂy discussed in
VIII, although it is not our main theme.

We instead focus on the static self-force problem, in
both odd and even-dimensional spacetimes. Our ap-
proach uses and builds upon the aforementioned non-
perturbative techniques developed by Harte [27–31],
which themselves were inspired by the work of Mathisson
[33] and especially Dixon [34–37]. These techniques allow
the bulk properties of extended bodies to be understood
exactly in generic spacetimes, and automatically provide,
e.g., precise deﬁnitions for all quantities which appear in
the resulting laws of motion. One convenient feature of
this approach is that a body’s linear and angular mo-
menta are treated as two aspects of a single mathemat-
ical structure, and consequently, the self-torque emerges
“for free” with the self-force.

It is much more common in the self-force literature
to employ perturbative methods (see e.g., [8, 11, 38]),
which are perhaps more familiar. While these methods
could also be applied in the present context, they typi-
cally require calculations which must be repeated almost
from scratch in each new dimension, and the complex-
ity of those calculations grows rapidly with the num-
ber of dimensions. No such problems arise for the non-
perturbative approach adopted here. Our methods are
almost completely agnostic to the number of dimensions,
and are simpler than the perturbative approach even in
3 + 1 dimensions.

The essential diﬃculty of the self-force problem is that
the net force exerted on an object depends on the ﬁelds
inside of it, but these ﬁelds can be almost arbitrarily com-
plicated. In particular, the internal ﬁelds vary at least on
lengthscales comparable to the body’s size (and perhaps
on much smaller scales as well). This makes it diﬃcult to
transform integral expressions for the net force—whose
evaluation might appear to require detailed knowledge of
an object’s interior—into simple expressions which can
be used without that knowledge.

The main points can be illustrated even in Newtonian
gravity [12, 28, 36], although they are so simple in that
case as to rarely be emphasized. Very brieﬂy, consider a
compact extended body in three-dimensional Euclidean
space. If this body has mass density ρm, the Newtonian
gravitational potential φg satisﬁes ∇2φg = 4πρm and the
net gravitational force is

(cid:90)

F = −

ρm(x)∇φg(x)d3x.

(1.1)

The integrand here can be arbitrarily complicated, and
one might naively expect that the force depends in an es-

sential way on these complications. That this is not the
case follows from the observation that for any translation-
invariant “propagator” G(x, x(cid:48)), the net force F is invari-
ant under all ﬁeld replacements φg → ˆφg with the form

(cid:90)

ˆφg(x) ≡ φg(x) −

ρm(x(cid:48))G(x, x(cid:48))d3x(cid:48).

(1.2)

In practice, this result is typically applied in the spe-
cial case where G(x, x(cid:48)) = −1/|x − x(cid:48)|, which satisﬁes
∇2G(x, x(cid:48)) = 4πδ3(x− x(cid:48)) and is therefore a Green func-
tion for the Newtonian ﬁeld equation. Considering that
case, ˆφg satisﬁes the vacuum ﬁeld equation in a neigh-
borhood of the body and may thus be interpreted as an
eﬀective “external ﬁeld.” This is useful because external
ﬁelds typically behave much more simply than physical
ones: If all distances to other masses are suﬃciently large,
∇ ˆφg varies only slightly in the force integral (1.1), and
may therefore be pulled out of it to yield

F = −m∇ ˆφg.

(1.3)

This is the foundation for most of Newtonian celestial
mechanics. For our purposes, it is important to empha-
size that it is the “eﬀective ﬁeld” ˆφg which appears in
simple expressions for the force, not the physical ﬁeld
φg. Except in special cases such as spherical symmetry,
it is not correct to replace the right-hand side of (1.3)
by −m∇φg. In a point particle limit, the map φg (cid:55)→ ˆφg
becomes a type of regularization procedure; the “force on
a point particle” can be described as the monopole force
due to a point particle ﬁeld which has been regularized
in a particular way. This result should not be viewed as
“fundamental,” but rather as a corollary to the φg → ˆφg
invariance of F .

Such comments suggest that it can be essential also in
more complicated theories to express force laws in terms
of ﬁelds which are distinct from the physical ones. More-
over, those ﬁelds should remain regular even in point par-
ticle limits (as long as such limits exist). The steps out-
lined above which provide the appropriate prescription
in the Newtonian context also provide an outline for this
paper: We i) generalize (1.1) for static, charged bodies
in curved spacetimes with arbitrary dimension, ii) derive
a result analogous to the φg → ˆφg invariance of Newto-
nian theory, and iii) show that for appropriate choices of
eﬀective ﬁeld, the associated force integrals admit simple
approximations similar to (1.3). The result is a concrete
prescription for computing self-interaction eﬀects in ar-
bitrary dimensions.

There are, of course, considerable diﬀerences between
our problem and the Newtonian one. Perhaps the most
signiﬁcant of these is that forces do not necessarily remain
ﬁxed when replacing physical ﬁelds by eﬀective ﬁelds. We
nevertheless show that if the class of eﬀective ﬁelds is
chosen appropriately, the resulting changes have a spe-
cial form which allows them to be absorbed into ﬁnite
renormalizations of a body’s stress-energy tensor. The

3

Newtonian statement that forces remain invariant under
replacements φg → ˆφg is therefore replaced by a state-
ment that relativistic forces are preserved by simulta-
neous replacements involving both long-range ﬁelds and
stress-energy tensors (but not, e.g., charge distributions).
This considerably generalizes the mass renormalization
eﬀect which has been discussed since the earliest work
on electromagnetic self-interaction [1–3].

Although the result that stress-energy tensors are
renormalized by self-interaction has been recognized be-
fore [12, 30], we obtain several new features of this ef-
fect. In prior work on the dynamical self-force problem,
two mechanisms were identiﬁed by which renormaliza-
tions could occur. One of these depended on a kind of
“temporal boundary term,” and aﬀected only a body’s
linear and angular momenta—essentially the monopole
and dipole moments of its stress-energy tensor [28]. Al-
though we ﬁnd that monopole and dipole moments are
also renormalized in the static problem, the mathemat-
ical mechanism by which this occurs is diﬀerent and is
identiﬁed here for the ﬁrst time.

In dynamical settings, the quadrupole and higher mul-
tipole moments of a body’s stress-energy tensor—but not
its monopole and dipole—had previously been found to
be renormalized via the dependence of a particular prop-
agator on the background geometry [30]. We show that
this same mechanism also plays a role in static problems,
but make it more precise by providing the ﬁrst explicit,
non-perturbative formulae for its eﬀects.

Although the two renormalization mechanisms at work
here appear to aﬀect diﬀerent quantities and to have dif-
ferent origins, we show that they are nevertheless “com-
patible” in the sense that a single non-perturbative for-
mula can be obtained for a renormalized stress-energy
tensor ˆT ab
B . All stress-energy moments which appear in
the laws of motion, including the momenta, then follow
from Dixon’s integral deﬁnitions [35] applied to ˆT ab
B (in-
stead of their usual application to a body’s “bare” stress-
energy tensor T ab
B ). We also show that the diﬀerence be-
tween ˆT ab
B and T ab
B depends only on a body’s charge den-
sity and functional derivatives of an appropriate propaga-
tor with respect to the geometric ﬁelds. Even though this
diﬀerence at least roughly describes “the stress-energy of
the self-ﬁeld,” it is interesting to note that its support
cannot extend signiﬁcantly beyond that of T ab
B . Charac-
teristic magnitudes of the eﬀective moments can therefore
be estimated in the usual ways using only a body’s size
and eﬀective mass.

These kinds of stress-energy renormalizations arise
when replacing the true scalar or electromagnetic ﬁelds
by eﬀective equivalents which are related by equations
similar to the Newtonian φg (cid:55)→ ˆφg map (1.2). Given,
e.g., a relativistic scalar ﬁeld φ, an appropriate propa-
gator G may be introduced and used to construct an
eﬀective ﬁeld ˆφ. While the class of allowed propagators
is strongly constrained, it is far from unique. It is nei-
ther necessary nor suﬃcient, for example, that G be a
Green function.
In general, each allowable propagator

applied to the same physical system implies a diﬀerent ˆφ
and a diﬀerent ˆT ab
B . As a consequence, individual terms
which one might want to identity as the self-force or the
gravitational force involve some degree of choice—a fact
which seems to have been missed in the existing litera-
ture (even in four spacetime dimensions2). A key insight
of this paper is that in general, scalar or electromag-
netic self-forces cannot be divorced from inertial forces
or gravitational extended-body eﬀects; it is only particu-
lar combinations of these quantities which are physically
unambiguous. While these remarks imply that additional
care can be required when interpreting self-force results,
the freedom to choose diﬀerent propagators also opens
up new possibilities for practical computations: One can
choose whichever propagator is simplest for the problem
at hand. We illustrate the usefulness of this explicitly in
Rindler spacetimes, where diﬀerent propagator choices
result in very diﬀerent levels of computation.

Our conclusions on the general nature of the static self-
force may be stated as follows: Except for the methods
used in certain existence results presented in appendix B,
all of our non-perturbative arguments are independent of
dimension. The dimension of spacetime is therefore irrel-
evant to any foundational aspects of the problem. In par-
ticular, there is no more dependence on a body’s internal
structure in higher dimensions than there is in four space-
time dimensions. Nevertheless, there is a sense in which
dependence on internal structure does arise, in both four
spacetime dimensions and in higher and lower dimen-
sions, via renormalization of body parameters. This issue
is discussed in detail in section VII B.

Additionally, we ﬁnd no obstacle to constructing well-
behaved point particle limits. Dimension does, however,
aﬀect the details of the point particle limits which can be
meaningfully considered. This can be understood by not-
ing that the self-energy of a charge distribution depends
on its size in a dimension-dependent way. Noting that
a body’s self-energy cannot signiﬁcantly exceed its mass
without violating positive-energy conditions, dimension-
dependent bounds may be obtained which relate the rel-
ative magnitudes of diﬀerent types of forces. We show
more speciﬁcally that the leading-order electric or scalar
self-force in an n+1 dimensional spacetime can at most be
comparable in size to extended-body eﬀects which involve
a body’s 2(n−2)-pole moments (for n ≥ 2). In the usual
n = 3 case, it follows that the self-force is at most compa-
rable to ordinary dipole eﬀects. For larger n, quadrupole
or higher moments must be taken into account as well.
In lower dimensions, the self-force can instead compete
even with leading-order test-body eﬀects.

This paper is organized as follows: Section II describes
the overall setup for the problems we consider, includ-

2 The dominant eﬀect in the point particle limit in four spacetime
dimensions is a degeneracy between the inertia term (mass times
acceleration), and the piece of the self-force which is proportional
to acceleration.

4

ing the “holding ﬁeld” which we take to be a primary
observable. Our core non-perturbative results are de-
rived in section III, which deﬁnes generalized momenta
for extended bodies and obtains the associated forces.
A class of identities is derived there which allows self-
interaction to be taken into account in relatively simple
ways. Renormalization eﬀects are derived as well. Next,
section IV describes how to convert integral expressions
for the generalized force into series involving a body’s
multipole moments. A center-of-mass is deﬁned, as well
as a split of the generalized momentum into linear and
angular components. Forces and torques necessary to
hold an object ﬁxed are obtained to all multipole orders.
Approximations are ﬁrst considered in section V, which
discusses what could be meant by a point particle limit.
These limits are subsequently deﬁned and an associated
algorithm is derived which can be used to compute the
limiting force and torque. Renormalization of a body’s
mass and stress-energy quadrupole in the point particle
limit are explicitly computed in section VI. Section VII
compares the approach used here to others in the litera-
ture, and applies our ideas explicitly by giving examples
of calculations in Rindler and Schwarzschild-Tangherlini
spacetimes. Lastly, section VIII speculates on how to
generalize this work to dynamical settings.

Several additional results have been placed in appen-
dices. Notations and conventions used throughout this
paper are explained in appendix A. Appendix B discusses
Hadamard Green functions and parametrices, and shows
that the latter are explicit examples of the type of prop-
agator whose existence we require. Appendix C shows
that in even spacetime dimensions where the Detweiler-
Whiting prescription is valid for dynamical charges, spe-
cializing it to static systems results in a prescription
which is consistent with our a priori static results derived
in section III. Appendix D supplements section VII A
by providing an alternative derivation of the self-force
in Rindler spacetime. Finally, appendix E computes the
variational derivatives of the Hadamard parametrix, for
use in the renormalization computations of section VI.

II. THE SETTING: STATIC EXTENDED

BODIES IN STATIC SPACETIMES

The systems we consider consist of a spatially-compact
body B embedded in a static, n+1 dimensional spacetime
(with n ≥ 1). Rather than releasing this object and
letting it fall freely, we instead imagine that it is held
in place and is internally stationary: There must exist a
timelike vector ﬁeld τ a such that the spacetime metric
gab and the body’s stress-energy tensor T ab

B satisfy

Lτ gab = Lτ T ab

B = 0,

(2.1)
where Lτ denotes the Lie derivative with respect to τ a.
This generically requires the imposition of external forces
and torques, and it is these quantities which represent the
main physical unknowns.

A. General description of the goal

Forces exerted via direct mechanical contact with other
objects are diﬃcult to describe generically, so we instead
suppose that B is endowed with some kind of charge, and
that forces can be imposed by applying external “hold-
ing ﬁelds” which interact with that charge. The required
holding force can then be translated into a required hold-
ing ﬁeld. A central aim of this paper is to determine those
holding ﬁelds which are consistent with3 the staticity as-
sumption (2.1).

This type of computation is very simple if B is small
and its self-ﬁelds are weak: A precise limit may then
be found in which the worldtube of such a body can be
replaced by a single worldline. Staticity implies that the
unit velocity of this worldline is ua = τ a/N , where τ a is
the static Killing ﬁeld and

N ≡ √−τaτ a.

(2.2)

Diﬀerentiating ua using Killing’s equation, the body’s
acceleration is seen to be

ub∇bua = ∇a ln N,

(2.3)

which suggests that ln N is in some ways analogous to
an ordinary Newtonian potential. Applying the Lorentz
force law for a body with mass m and electric charge Q
ﬁnally shows that such an acceleration can be maintained
by imposing an electromagnetic holding ﬁeld F hold
ab which
satisﬁes

5

Our approach exactly describes the forces and torques
acting on arbitrarily-structured extended bodies, so all
such eﬀects are automatically taken into account. It is
only at the end of our discussion where speciﬁc approxi-
mations are adopted and the relative magnitudes of dif-
ferent terms can be examined.

B. Spacetime geometry

Before proceeding, it is useful to more precisely de-
scribe the geometry of our setup and to brieﬂy collect
some of its properties: The background spacetime is as-
sumed to have the form (Σ × I, gab), where Σ is an n-
dimensional manifold and I ⊆ R an open interval. In all
regions of interest, the timelike Killing ﬁeld τ a is assumed
to be static in the sense that it satisﬁes the Frobenius
condition τ[a∇bτc] = 0. Contracting this with τ a while
using (2.2) provides the useful identity
∇aτb = −2τ[a∇b] ln N.

(2.5)

We deﬁne a time coordinate t via τ a = ∂/∂t, so the
constant-t hypersurfaces Σt are orthogonal to τ a and dif-
feomorphic to Σ. If τ a is used to evolve between these
hypersurfaces, the associated shift vector vanishes and
N is the lapse. The intrinsic geometry on each Σt is
described by the spatial metric

hab ≡ gab + τaτb/N 2,

(2.6)

QF hold

ab ub = m∇a ln N.

(2.4)

and the spatial Ricci tensor R⊥⊥⊥
spacetime Ricci tensor Rab via

ab can be related to the

Our aim is to generalize this equation. In particular,
we would like to understand what happens when a body’s
self-ﬁeld can no longer be neglected. One complication
which then arises is that the Lorentz force law cannot be
applied as it was in (2.4). That would make sense only
if the ﬁeld were approximately constant throughout B,
which would be an unreasonably severe restriction.

Another potential obstacle to understanding self-
interaction is that it can strongly aﬀect internal stresses
while producing very little net force; interesting eﬀects
can thus depend on delicate cancellations. Moreover, if
the net self-force is small—as it is in many applications—
it can be understood only in combination with other
similarly-small eﬀects.
Indeed, we shall see in section
V that generalizing (2.4) to allow for nontrivial self-ﬁelds
generically requires that we also generalize it to allow for
ﬁnite-size eﬀects.

3 No externally-imposed ﬁeld can imply stationarity without a pre-
cise speciﬁcation for a body’s internal composition. Even in ele-
mentary Newtonian mechanics, it is only the behavior of certain
bulk degrees of freedom which can be described generically. We
nevertheless specialize to those cases where the internal degrees
of freedom are stationary whenever the bulk is stationary.

Rabτ aτ b = N D2N,
b Rcd = R⊥⊥⊥

hc
ahd

Rbchb

aτ c = 0,
ab − N−1DaDbN,

(2.7a)
(2.7b)

where Da denotes the covariant derivative associated
with hab and D2 ≡ habDaDb is the associated Laplacian.
We shall also have occasion to use a directed surface el-
ement on Σt, which can be written as
dSa = −N−1τa dV⊥⊥⊥

(2.8)

in terms of the n-dimensional volume element dV⊥⊥⊥ asso-
ciated with hab. If n spatial coordinates x are introduced
in addition to the time coordinate t, the coordinate com-
ponents of the metric take the form

gµνdxµdxν = −N 2(x)dt2 + hij(x)dxidxj.

(2.9)

in terms of xµ = (t, x).

Lastly, note the overall scale of τ a, and therefore t,
is at least locally irrelevant. Physical quantities must
therefore be invariant under all rescalings
N → α−1N

t → αt,

(2.10)

by positive constants α.

C. Stress energy conservation and the ﬁeld

equations

Embedded in the static spacetime (Σ×I, gab) is a body
B whose stress-energy tensor T ab
B is static in the sense of
(2.1), and is also contained in a worldtube whose spa-
tial sections have compact support. The gravitational
inﬂuence of B is ignored in the sense that no relation is
imposed between gab and T ab
B . It is also assumed that B
is locally isolated, meaning that there are neighborhoods
of it in which the total stress-energy tensor T ab
tot can be
split into three parts:

T ab
tot = T ab

B + T ab

ﬂd + T ab
bkg.

(2.11)

the

denotes

stress-energy

to B, while

T ab
tensor
associated
ﬂd
with any non-gravitational ﬁelds—either
scalar or
electromagnetic—which
couple
the
“background” stress-energy T ab
is assumed to be
bkg
non-interacting in the sense that ∇bT ab
bkg = 0. The
background stress-energy is included here for reasons of
generality, but plays no further role in our discussion
(except perhaps to act implicitly as a source for gab).
Forces and torques on B are instead derived using local
stress-energy conservation in the form

∇bT ab

tot = ∇b(T ab

B + T ab

ﬂd) = 0.

(2.12)

We specialize to cases where B generates an electro-
magnetic ﬁeld sourced by a current density J a, or a
massless linear scalar ﬁeld sourced by a charge density
ρ. These densities are assumed to be smooth and sta-
tionary, and also to have supports bounded by that of
T ab
B . The scalar ﬁelds we consider explicitly satisfy the
wave equation4

∇a∇aφ = −ωnρ

(2.13)

in a neighborhood of B, where ωn is the convenient con-
stant

2

ωn ≡ 2π n
Γ( n
2 )

,

(2.14)

equal to the area of a unit sphere in n-dimensional
Euclidean space.
If φ is stationary in the sense that
Lτ φ = 0, the hyperbolic equation (2.13) reduces to the
elliptic ﬁeld equation

Da(N Daφ) = −ωnρN.

(2.15)
The left-hand side here is equal to N∇a∇aφ acting on
a static ﬁeld; the overall factor of N is used to obtain

6

a diﬀerential operator which is spatially self-adjoint—a
property which is crucial for our later development.

An equation very similar to (2.15) can also be derived
for static electromagnetic ﬁelds Fab. Consider a vector
potential Aa which satisﬁes Fab = 2∇[aAb], and suppose
that there are some static ﬁelds J and Φ such that

J a = Jτ a,

Aa = N−2Φτa.

(2.16)

Although they can be weakened, these assumptions auto-
matically exclude, e.g., current loops and external mag-
netic ﬁelds. They nevertheless encompass most phys-
ical systems which are commonly considered, and also
provide a simple link between the electromagnetic and
scalar problems. Assuming them, local charge conserva-
tion ∇aJ a = 0 follows automatically from the station-
arity of J. The Maxwell equation ∇bF ab = ωnJ a also
reduces in this case to

Da(N−1DaΦ) = −ωnJN,

(2.17)

and it is easily veriﬁed that the resulting Aa satisﬁes the
Lorenz gauge condition ∇aAa = 0. Comparing (2.15)
and (2.17) shows that in this static context, the elec-
tric potential Φ and the scalar potential φ satisfy ﬁeld
equations whose diﬀerential operators diﬀer only in the
substitution N → N−1.

Allowing for the presence of both scalar and electro-
magnetic charge, the stress-energy conservation equation
(2.12) reduces to5

∇bT ab

B = ρ∇aφ − J∇aΦ.

(2.18)

The scalar ﬁeld and charge density remain invariant un-
der the time rescalings (2.10), while the electromagnetic
quantities instead rescale via
Φ → α−1Φ,

J → αJ.

(2.19)

D. Self-ﬁelds and holding ﬁelds

As stated above, one of the main goals of this paper
is to generalize (2.4), thus obtaining those external ﬁelds
which hold B ﬁxed. This is ambiguous, however, in the
absence of certain additional speciﬁcations. In the scalar
case, we require a functional which maps charge densi-
ties ρ onto “self-ﬁelds” φself [ρ]. These can reasonably be
called self-ﬁelds only if

Da(N Daφself [ρ]) = −ωnρN

(2.20)

in a neighborhood of the body, and also if φself [0] = 0.
Physically, φself [ρ] represents the ﬁeld which arises when

4 Our derivation easily generalizes for nonzero ﬁeld masses and
curvature couplings. We omit these possibilities for brevity and
also to minimize diﬀerences between the scalar and electromag-
netic problems.

5 Our normalization convention for the scalar and electromag-
netic ﬁelds is such that the Lagrangian density is ρφ + JaAa −
(∇φ)2/(2ωn) − FabF ab/(4ωn) + (matter terms).

B is added to the system.
In many applications, it is
most naturally described by supplementing (2.20) with
physically-appropriate boundary conditions—for exam-
ple decay at inﬁnity. More explicitly, there will usually
be some time-independent Green function Gself (x, x(cid:48)) for
which

φself [ρ](x) =

ρ(x(cid:48))N (x(cid:48))Gself (x, x(cid:48))dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥.

(2.21)

(cid:90)

Σt

Regardless, all that is needed at this point is that some
choice has been made for φself [ρ].

The “holding ﬁeld” φhold is now deﬁned to be every-

thing which is not contained in the self-ﬁeld,

φhold ≡ φ − φself [ρ],

(2.22)

and it is this quantity that our derivation eventually
constrains.
It follows from (2.15) and (2.20) that
Da(N Daφhold) = 0 in a neighborhood of B. An anal-
ogous splitting and choice of self-ﬁeld is also assumed
to have been made for the electromagnetic ﬁeld: Φ =
Φself [J] + Φhold.

III. MOMENTUM AND FORCE

Following standard practice in, e.g., Newtonian celes-
tial mechanics, we consider only the “bulk” degrees of
freedom associated with B—namely its “linear and an-
gular momenta.” The body’s remaining aspects are to
be ignored as much as possible. The particular notion
of momentum employed here is originally due to Dixon6
[34–37], who obtained it as a part of a comprehensive
theory of multipole moments for extended bodies in gen-
eral relativity. It was found in [27] and subsequent work
[12, 28–30, 39] to be useful to re-express Dixon’s linear
and angular momenta in terms of a single “generalized
momentum” which lives in a particular abstract vector
space (and not a tangent space anywhere in spacetime).
For the systems considered in this paper, it is conve-

nient to deﬁne the generalized momentum at time t by

Pt(ξ) ≡

T ab
B ξadSb,

(3.1)

(cid:90)

Σt

where the ξa are vector ﬁelds drawn from a particular
vector space KG of “generalized Killing ﬁelds” with di-
mension

dim KG =

1
2

(n + 1)(n + 2).

(3.2)

7
For each t, the generalized momentum Pt(·) is a linear
operator on KG, and can therefore be interpreted as a
vector in the dual space K∗
G. It follows from (3.2) that
this vector has 1
2 (n+1)(n+2) components, physically cor-
responding to n + 1 components of linear momentum and
1
2 n(n + 1) components of angular momentum. Explicit
decompositions into linear and angular momenta are de-
scribed in section IV C, although signiﬁcant conceptual
and calculational simpliﬁcations result by delaying this
for as long as possible.

The particular space of generalized Killing ﬁelds con-
sidered here is not immediately important.
Indeed, it
plays no role in our discussion until section IV, and even
there, only a few of its properties are needed: First,
KG includes all Killing vectors which may exist, and is
equal to the space of Killing vector ﬁelds in maximally-
symmetric spacetimes. More generally, KG also includes
vector ﬁelds which are not Killing.
In those cases, it
requires as part of its speciﬁcation a “frame.” This con-
sists of a timelike worldline Z and a foliation of the
spacetime—really only a foliation of a suﬃciently large
neighborhood of Z—into a family of hypersurfaces. All
ξa ∈ KG are then Killing on Z,

Lξgab|Z = ∇aLξgbc|Z = 0,

(3.3)

and this implies that the Killing transport equation

(cid:2)τ c∇c(∇aξb) = −Rabc

(cid:3)

dτ cξd

Z ,

(3.4)
is satisﬁed on Z. It is natural in the static systems con-
sidered here to let the foliation coincide with the Σt, and
also to let Z be an orbit of τ a. Precisely which orbit
is not immediately important, although a particularly
useful choice is discussed in section IV C wherein Z is
identiﬁed with the body’s “center-of-mass worldline.”

The ﬁnal property of the generalized Killing ﬁelds
which we require is that they “preserve separations from
Z.” Making this precise requires the concept of a separa-
tion vector X a(x, x(cid:48)) between two events x and x(cid:48), which
is naturally deﬁned via the exponential map7:

expx X a(x, x(cid:48)) = x(cid:48).

(3.5)
Letting zt ≡ Z ∩ Σt and choosing any x(cid:48) ∈ Σt which is
not too far from zt, it can now be shown [27] that

LξX a(zt, x(cid:48)) = 0

(3.6)
for all ξa ∈ KG, where the Lie derivative is understood
to act separately on both arguments: LξX a = ξb∇bX a−
X b∇bξa + ξb(cid:48)∇b(cid:48)X a. This provides a sense in which the

6 More precisely, Dixon considered extended objects potentially
coupled to electromagnetic ﬁelds in curved,
four-dimensional
spacetimes. The linear and angular momenta used here corre-
spond to his in a purely gravitational setting (and generalized
for arbitrary n). Including the missing electromagnetic terms is
straightforward, but omitted for simplicity.

7 Note that Xa(x, x(cid:48)) = −∇aX(x, x(cid:48)), where X(x, x(cid:48)) is the world
function on (Σ×I, gab), a biscalar equal to one half of the squared
geodesic distance between x and x(cid:48) as computed by gab [9, 40, 41].
We reserve the more conventional symbol σ(x, x(cid:48)) for the spatial
world function associated with (Σ, hab).

generalized Killing ﬁelds “preserve separations from Z.”
Further details may be found in [12, 27, 39].

Now that the generalized momentum Pt has been de-
ﬁned, our next task is to compute its time derivative.
This is most easily obtained by ﬁrst considering the dif-
ference in momentum between two discrete times t and
t(cid:48). If t(cid:48) > t, it follows from (3.1), Gauss’ theorem, and
the compact spatial support of T ab

B that

(cid:73)
(cid:90)
(cid:90) t(cid:48)

Pt(cid:48)(ξ) − Pt(ξ) =

=

=

T ab
B ξadSb

∂Ω(t,t(cid:48))

∇b(T ab

B ξa)dV

Ω(t,t(cid:48))

(cid:20)(cid:90)

dT

t

ΣT

∇b(T ab

B ξa)N dV⊥⊥⊥

(cid:21)

,

(3.7)

where dV is the spacetime volume element associated
with gab and Ω(t, t(cid:48)) denotes a worldtube which encloses
the body between Σt and Σt(cid:48). Applying stress-energy
conservation (2.18) while taking the limit t(cid:48) → t ﬁnally
shows that

(cid:19)

(cid:90)

(cid:18) 1

2

dPt(ξ)

dt

=

Σt

(3.8)
This describes the rate of change of generalized momen-
tum, and may therefore be interpreted as a “generalized
force.” The term involving Lξgab encodes gravitational
forces and torques, while those involving Lξφ and LξΦ re-
spectively encode scalar and electromagnetic forces and
torques. Although it is common to ignore the gravita-
tional component of this equation (which ﬁrst appears at
quadrupole order8) when n = 3, its relative importance
can change signiﬁcantly in diﬀerent numbers of dimen-
sions.

One result which may be deduced immediately from
(3.8) is that changes in Pt(ξ) measure the degree to
which ξa generates symmetries. In the static cases con-
sidered here, τ a generates an exact symmetry, and like
any Killing ﬁeld, it is also an element of KG. Hence,

E ≡ −Pt(τ )

(3.9)

must be independent of t. It is naturally interpreted as
the body’s total energy as seen by static observers. Simi-
lar conservation laws hold for every other Killing ﬁeld Ξa
which may exist where LΞφ = LΞΦ = 0. More generally
though, Pt(ξ) is not necessarily constant. Although the
physical system is assumed to be static, time dependence
can arise in the momentum via time dependence in ξa;
even in ﬂat spacetime, boost-type Killing ﬁelds depend
on t.

8 Gravitational dipole eﬀects are kinematical, arising via the trans-
lation from generalized momenta to ordinary linear and angular
momenta expressed as tensors on spacetime. See section IV C.

B Lξgab + ρLξφ − JLξΦ
T ab

N dV⊥⊥⊥.

Σt

8

Regardless of symmetry, the generalized force (3.8)
simpliﬁes signiﬁcantly if B is a small test body in the
sense that all ﬁelds gab, φ, and Φ vary slowly throughout
each of its spatial cross-sections. This assumption results
in multipole expansions for the force and torque in the
sense obtained by Dixon [34–36] (see also [12] and section
IV below). If self-interaction is signiﬁcant, however, ﬁelds
vary rapidly inside B and additional techniques must be
applied. We suppose in particular that the gravitational
self-interaction is negligible while the scalar and electro-
magnetic self-interaction is not. The latter two cases are
nearly identical, so the relevant steps are described in
section III A by temporarily assuming that J = 0. Those
changes which are required to understand the electro-
magnetic problem are then explained in section III B.

A. Scalar forces

Understanding self-interaction associated with φ is

equivalent to approximating the scalar portion

ρNLξφ dV⊥⊥⊥

(3.10)

(cid:90)

of the total force (3.8). The immediate diﬃculty with
simplifying this integral is that ρ could be arbitrarily
complicated, and the ﬁeld equation (2.15) implies that
φ necessarily inherits any such complications. The ap-
proach we take is to identify a speciﬁc ﬁeld φS which i)
includes most of the diﬃcult, small-scale structure which
might be present in φ, and ii) exerts a force which can be
computed directly and then subtracted out. We refer to
the result as an “S-ﬁeld9.” The class of possible S-ﬁelds
adopted below suggest that they are a kind of self-ﬁeld,
and in some cases, φS can indeed be equal to the φself
introduced in section II D. In other cases, however, the
two ﬁelds may be very diﬀerent. The S-ﬁeld should be
viewed more generally as a computational tool, while the
self-ﬁeld is instead a physical object.

The ﬁrst step to deﬁning φS is to demand that it be
a sum of “elementary self-ﬁelds” associated with each
inﬁnitesimal charge element in B. Mathematically, this
idea is expressed by introducing a two-point propagator
G(x, x(cid:48)) on Σ × Σ which generates the S-ﬁeld

φS(x) ≡

ρ(x(cid:48))N (x(cid:48))G(x, x(cid:48))dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥.

(3.11)

(cid:90)

Σ

While this prescribes φS only on the spatial manifold Σ,
we shall often use its natural (time-independent) exten-
sion to the spacetime manifold Σ × I. When convenient,

9 This terminology is inspired by Detweiler and Whiting [32], who
introduced what they called a “singular ﬁeld” for point particles.
Our φS plays a similar role both physically and mathematically,
although it is not singular for the extended objects considered
here. We therefore compromise by referring to it as an S-ﬁeld,
where the “S” no longer stands for “singular.”

similar extensions are also used for the propagator. Phys-
ically, G(x, x(cid:48)) might describe what could be meant by
“the ﬁeld at x as generated by charge at x(cid:48).” Most poten-
tial choices for this propagator are not beneﬁcial, how-
ever; they do not generate S-ﬁelds which simplify the
force integral (3.10).

In order to ﬁnd propagators which do simplify this inte-
gral, we ﬁrst demand that φS satisfy a reciprocity relation
in the sense that

G(x, x(cid:48)) = G(x(cid:48), x).

(3.12)

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

This implies that the total force “exerted by” φS can be
written as

Σt

Σt

Σt

1
2

dV⊥⊥⊥

dV (cid:48)

ρNLξφS dV⊥⊥⊥ =

⊥⊥⊥(ρN )(ρ(cid:48)N(cid:48))LξG.
(3.13)
The beneﬁt of this expression is that it relates the gen-
eralized force exerted by φS to the symmetries of G,
and these can be controlled independently of any speciﬁc
properties of B. Note in particular that if LΞG vanishes
for some Ξa ∈ KG, the Ξa-component of the generalized
force due to φS must also vanish. This observation can be
used to immediately see, e.g., that the spatial forces and
torques exerted by ordinary Newtonian self-ﬁelds must
vanish in Euclidean space [12, 28]: G in that context is
conventionally chosen to be a Green function which is
invariant under all translations and rotations.
Much less obviously, the generalized force due to φS
can be simpliﬁed even in generic cases where LξG (cid:54)= 0.
This occurs, for example, if G = G[N, hab] is restricted to
be a bidistribution which depends only on the spacetime
geometry on Σ, and if this dependence is quasilocal in
the sense that for ﬁxed x and x(cid:48), the functional deriva-
tives10 δG(x, x(cid:48))/δN (x(cid:48)(cid:48)) and δG(x, x(cid:48))/δha(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48)(x(cid:48)(cid:48)) have
compact support in x(cid:48)(cid:48). The invariance of φS under time
rescalings with the form (2.10) then implies that

G → αG

(3.14)

when N → α−1N .

More substantially, the deﬁnitions of the Lie and
functional derivatives together with diﬀeomorphism-
invariance imply that

(cid:90)

(cid:34)

LψG(x, x(cid:48)) =

dV (cid:48)(cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥

Σ

δG(x, x(cid:48))
δha(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48) (x(cid:48)(cid:48))

Lψha(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48) (x(cid:48)(cid:48))

(cid:35)

δG(x, x(cid:48))
δN (x(cid:48)(cid:48))

+

LψN (x(cid:48)(cid:48))

9

for any vector ﬁeld ψa on Σ. In this equation all quan-
tities are tensor ﬁelds on Σ, and in particular the in-
dices a(cid:48)(cid:48), b(cid:48)(cid:48) are spatial. However, the result (3.15) may
be used to compute Lie derivatives of G on spacetime
with respect to arbitrary spacetime vector ﬁelds ξa, as
If x and x(cid:48) are points on Σ × I which lie
follows.
on a single hypersurface Σt, the time-independence of
the spacetime extension of the propagator implies that
LξG(x, x(cid:48)) = LψG(x, x(cid:48)), where ψa = ha
bξb|Σt can be
translated into a vector ﬁeld on Σ. Hence LξG(x, x(cid:48)) is
given by the right hand side of (3.15) with this ψ. We
now reinterpret this right hand side in terms of tensor
ﬁelds on spacetime. First, N and hab can be extended to
tensor ﬁelds on spacetime in the natural way by demand-
ing that Lτ N = Lτ hab = 0 and habτ a = 0. We similarly
extend the functional derivatives, so that

δG(x, x(cid:48))
δha(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48) (x(cid:48)(cid:48))

τb(cid:48)(cid:48)(x(cid:48)(cid:48)) = 0.

(3.16)

With these conventions, the n-dimensional Lie deriva-
tives with respect to ψa coincide with n + 1-dimensional
Lie derivatives with respect to ξa, evaluated on Σt. The
ﬁnal result is

LξG(x, x(cid:48)) =

dV (cid:48)(cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥

Σt

δG(x, x(cid:48))
δha(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48)(x(cid:48)(cid:48))

Lξha(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48)(x(cid:48)(cid:48))

(cid:35)

δG(x, x(cid:48))
δN (x(cid:48)(cid:48))

+

LξN (x(cid:48)(cid:48))

(3.17)

(cid:90)

(cid:34)

for arbitrary vector ﬁelds ξa and for all x, x(cid:48) ∈ Σt. Here
all quantities are tensors on spacetime, and a(cid:48)(cid:48), b(cid:48)(cid:48) are
spacetime indices. This is the result we need to interpret
the generalized force exerted by φS.

Although it is clear from (3.13) and (3.17) that this
force cannot vanish in general, there is a sense in which it
is nevertheless “ignorable.” It can be removed by appro-
priately redeﬁning—or renormalizing—our description of
B. To see this, ﬁrst note that Lie derivatives of N and
hab can be translated in part into Lie derivatives of gab.
Using

N LξN = − 1

(ξaτa)

(3.18)

d
dt

2 τ aτ bLξgab +
(cid:32)

(cid:33)

(cid:90)

and (3.16), we obtain

τ b(cid:48)(cid:48)
− τ a(cid:48)(cid:48)
2N(cid:48)(cid:48)
− d
dt

(cid:90)

Σt

Lξga(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48)

δG
δN(cid:48)(cid:48)
dSa(cid:48)(cid:48) ξa(cid:48)(cid:48) δG
δN(cid:48)(cid:48) .

(3.19)

LξG =

(3.15)

dV (cid:48)(cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥

Σt

δG

δha(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48)

10 Functional derivatives are sometimes deﬁned with respect to par-
ticular coordinates xi so that, e.g., the variation of some func-

tional F [N ] is δF =(cid:82) (δF/δN(cid:48))δN(cid:48)dnx(cid:48). The deﬁnition adopted

here is slightly diﬀerent, avoiding coordinates by demanding a
similar integral but with dnx(cid:48) replaced by dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥.

The force due to φS therefore splits into two distinct com-
ponents. One of these is linear in Lξgab, and recalling
that the gravitational force in (3.8) is also linear in Lξgab,
that portion of the scalar force can be interpreted as just
another component of the gravitational force; it acts to

renormalize T ab
B . Physically, this might be interpreted as
a consequence of the “gravitational mass distribution” of
the S-ﬁeld.

The remaining portion of the force due to φS is a to-
tal time derivative. Noting that the generalized force is
itself a total time derivative of the generalized momen-
tum, time derivatives which are linear in ξa but otherwise
independent of t can always be “removed” by renormal-
izing Pt. This physically accounts for the inertia of the
body’s self-ﬁeld, but via a diﬀerent mathematical mech-
anism from the one [12, 28] which arises in dynamical
contexts.

Together, these observations imply that the general-
ized force due to φS can be entirely eliminated by chang-
ing the deﬁnitions of Pt and T ab
B . Doing so results in a
generalized force in which the S-ﬁeld does not explicitly
appear:

(cid:90)

(cid:18) 1

2

Σt

d ˆPt
dt

=

(cid:19)

This is identical in form to our original expression (3.8),
although the momentum, stress-energy tensor, and scalar
ﬁeld have all been shifted from their original deﬁnitions.
The physical scalar ﬁeld φ has been replaced by

ˆφ ≡ φ − φS,

(3.21)

and to compensate, a self-ﬁeld contribution has been
added to the momentum
ˆPt ≡ Pt +

dSaξa

×

dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥

dV (cid:48)(cid:48)

⊥⊥⊥ (ρ(cid:48)N(cid:48))(ρ(cid:48)(cid:48)N(cid:48)(cid:48))

Σt

Σt

,

(3.22)

(cid:90)
(cid:20)(cid:90)

1
2

Σt

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

and also to the stress-energy tensor

B ≡ T ab
ˆT ab

B +

1
N

dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥

Σt

dV (cid:48)(cid:48)

⊥⊥⊥ (ρ(cid:48)N(cid:48))(ρ(cid:48)(cid:48)N(cid:48)(cid:48))

(cid:21)

δG
δN

(cid:17)

− τ aτ b
2N

δG
δN

.

(3.23)

An approximate version of this renormalized stress-
energy tensor is computed explicitly in section VI. Re-
gardless, using (3.1) and (3.16), the renormalized mo-
mentum can be written exactly as

ˆPt =

ˆT ab
B ξadSb,

(3.24)

(cid:90)
×(cid:16) δG

Σt

δhab

(cid:90)

Σt

B Lξgab + ρLξ
ˆT ab

ˆφ

N dV⊥⊥⊥.

(3.20)

Da(N DaG) = −ωnδΣ(x, x(cid:48)),

it is implied by (2.15), (3.11), and (3.21) that

10

These results are exact. They represent a class of iden-
tities which hold for any S-ﬁelds φS which have been gen-
erated via (3.11) using geometrically-constructed, sym-
metric propagators G which satisfy (3.14). These con-
straints on the propagator are very weak—and may be
weakened even further—so many possibilities exist. The
problem is now to ﬁnd useful examples.
In particular,
the mapping φ (cid:55)→ ˆφ should remove those ﬁeld variations
which had initially made (3.10) so diﬃcult to approxi-
mate. Once an example with this property is identiﬁed,
simple point particle limits follow directly11.

Our selection criterion for G is that the associated ˆφ
should be easy to compute and largely independent of
the body’s internal structure. One way to enforce this
is to demand that ˆφ satisfy the vacuum ﬁeld equation
in a neighborhood of B, which follows if G is a Green
function. Letting

(3.25)

(3.26)

Da(N Da

ˆφ) = 0,

where the Dirac distribution here is understood to be the
natural one on (Σ, hab). The utility of this choice can
be motivated by considering point particles. Although
point particles properly arise only as limits of extended
objects, and are discussed more fully in section V, it suf-
ﬁces here to naively consider ﬁelds φ which are sourced
by pointlike, distributional charge densities. No matter
how singular such ﬁelds might be, it follows from the gen-
eral theory of elliptic partial diﬀerential equations—see
the remark following theorem 6.6 in [42]—that any ˆφ sat-
isfying (3.26) is everywhere smooth as long as N (x) and
hij(x) are themselves smooth with respect to some spa-
tial coordinates x. Variations in ˆφ therefore occur over
much larger scales than those associated with B, and all
force integrals simplify as they do for small test bodies.
The elliptic regularity result used to motivate (3.25)
may be generalized to obtain a somewhat larger class of
useful propagators: It is known that if a smooth elliptic
diﬀerential operator acting on a ﬁeld results in a smooth
(but not necessarily vanishing) source, that ﬁeld must
still be smooth [42]. Furthermore, convolving a singular
distribution with something smooth results in something
else which is also smooth. This suggests that point parti-
cle limits remain simple if S-ﬁelds are deﬁned more gen-
erally in terms of parametrices—bidistributions G which
satisfy

Da(N DaG) = −ωnδΣ(x, x(cid:48)) + S(x, x(cid:48))

(3.27)

B → ˆT ab

which is identical to the deﬁnition (3.1) for Pt except
for the replacement T ab
B . The same renormalized
stress-energy therefore controls both the eﬀective iner-
tia and the eﬀective gravitational force. Also note that
the quasilocality of the functional derivatives implies that
ˆT ab
B has compact support even though the stress-energy
tensor associated with φS does not.

11 Some eﬀort is still required to convert expressions involving gen-
eralized momenta into ordinary multipole approximations for the
force and torque. These same steps arise, however, even in test
body limits. The beneﬁt of (3.20) is that it allows the well-
understood manipulations associated with the test body regime
to be immediately generalized.

for some smooth S. The renormalized ﬁeld ˆφ which ap-
pears in (3.20) then satisﬁes

but not in any nearby geometries. It is then suﬃcient to
demand that G(x, x(cid:48)) = G(x(cid:48), x), and that

Da(N Da

ˆφ) = −

ρ(x(cid:48))N (x(cid:48))S(x, x(cid:48))dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥,

(3.28)

LψG(x, x(cid:48)) =

(cid:90)

Σt

the right-hand side of which is smooth even in a point
particle limit. The Green functions considered above now
correspond to special parametrices for which S = 0. It is
useful, however, to allow S (cid:54)= 0 in general; there are im-
portant cases for which such propagators are signiﬁcantly
simpler to construct.

To summarize, we have shown that the generalized
force acting on a static, extended scalar charge satisﬁes
(3.20), where ˆT ab
B is determined by (3.23), ˆPt by (3.24),
and ˆφ by (3.11) and (3.21). Each of these deﬁnitions
depends on a choice of propagator. This is not ﬁxed
uniquely, but is instead constrained to have the following
properties:

1. The propagator G[N, hab](x, x(cid:48)) is a bidistribution
on Σ × Σ which depends functionally only on the
lapse and the spatial metric.

2. It depends on N and hab only quasilocally in the
sense that for ﬁxed x, x(cid:48) ∈ Σ, the functional deriva-
tives

δG(x, x(cid:48))
δN (x(cid:48)(cid:48))

,

δG(x, x(cid:48))
δha(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48)(x(cid:48)(cid:48))

have compact support in x(cid:48)(cid:48).

3. It transforms appropriately under time rescalings
generated by any constant α > 0 and any spatial
diﬀeomorphism ϕ : Σ → Σ,

G[α−1N, hab] = αG[N, hab],
G[ϕ∗N, ϕ∗hab] = ϕ∗G[N, hab].

4. The propagator is symmetric, G(x, x(cid:48)) = G(x(cid:48), x).

5. It is a parametrix for the ﬁeld equation, meaning

that

Da(N DaG) + ωnδΣ(x, x(cid:48)),

is a smooth function on Σ × Σ.

While it is not obvious that propagators satisfying these
assumptions exist at all, we show in appendix B that they
do, and that one example is the well-known Hadamard
parametrix. Other examples exist as well, and the physi-
cal interpretation of the resulting ambiguities is discussed
in section III C.

Before proceeding further, it is important to note that
these assumptions can be weakened considerably. The
simplest such modiﬁcation is to remove the functional
dependence on N and hab, which is useful if, for example,
a particular parametrix is known in a given geometry,

11

(cid:90)

(cid:104)

dV (cid:48)(cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥

Σ

(cid:105)
(h) (x, x(cid:48); x(cid:48)(cid:48))Lψha(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48) (x(cid:48)(cid:48))
Ga(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48)
+ G(N )(x, x(cid:48); x(cid:48)(cid:48))LψN (x(cid:48)(cid:48))

(3.30)

for all ψa on Σ, where the three-point coeﬃcients12
(h) (x, x(cid:48); x(cid:48)(cid:48)) and G(N )(x, x(cid:48); x(cid:48)(cid:48)) have compact sup-
Ga(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48)
port in x(cid:48)(cid:48) for ﬁxed x and x(cid:48).
Although we do not exploit them in this paper, even
more general maps φ (cid:55)→ ˆφ can be considered. The
two-point propagators used to construct φS can easily
be replaced, for example, by symmetric, geometrically-
constructed p-point propagators for any p ≥ 2. The
simple subtraction (3.21) can also be replaced by cer-
tain nonlinear maps which continuously “ﬂow” from φ
through some family ˆφλ of eﬀective potentials—thus in-
ducing an associated ﬂow of multipole moments. Another
possibility is to consider propagators which depend on
non-geometrical ﬁelds. Allowing a two-point propaga-
tor to depend on N , hab, and φ would, for example, re-
sult in renormalizations of ρ as well as T ab
B . These types
of generalizations aren’t particularly interesting for the
problem considered here, but can be essential when dis-
cussing nonlinear theories or the coupled gravitoscalar or
gravitoelectromagnetic self-force problems.

B. Electromagnetic forces

(cid:90)

Σ

It is evident from the force (3.8) and the ﬁeld equations
(2.15) and (2.17) that the electromagnetic and scalar in-
teractions considered here are almost identical. All argu-
ments used in the scalar case may therefore be repeated
essentially verbatim. This results in an eﬀective electro-
magnetic potential

ˆΦ ≡ Φ − ΦS,

(3.31a)

ΦS(x) ≡

J(x(cid:48))N (x(cid:48))G(x, x(cid:48))dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥,

(3.31b)
where G[N, hab](x, x(cid:48)) is a symmetric propagator on Σ×Σ
which scales as

G → α−1G

(3.32)
under the time reparameterizations (2.10). If this G de-
pends only quasilocally on N and hab, the appropriate
modiﬁcation of (3.20) is

(cid:90)

(cid:18) 1

2

Σt

d ˆPt
dt

=

(cid:19)

B Lξgab − JLξ ˆΦ
ˆT ab

N dV⊥⊥⊥,

(3.33)

12 If these coeﬃcients exist, they are not unique. One possible
freedom is that divergence-free terms with compact support in
x(cid:48)(cid:48) can always be added to Ga(cid:48)(cid:48)b(cid:48)(cid:48)

(x, x(cid:48); x(cid:48)(cid:48)).

(h)

where the eﬀective momentum and stress-energy are

(cid:90)

ˆPt ≡

(cid:90)

dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥

Σt

ˆT ab
B ξadSb,

(3.34)

Σt

(cid:90)
×(cid:16) δG

dV (cid:48)(cid:48)

Σt

δhab

⊥⊥⊥ (J(cid:48)N(cid:48))(J(cid:48)(cid:48)N(cid:48)(cid:48))

− τ aτ b
2N

δG
δN

(cid:17)

.

(3.35)

and

B ≡ T ab
ˆT ab

B − 1
N

As in the scalar case, it can be convenient to narrow
down the class of propagators even further by demanding
that G be a parametrix for Maxwell’s equations in the
sense that [cf. (2.17)]

Da(N−1DaG) = −ωnδΣ(x, x(cid:48)) + S(x, x(cid:48))

(3.36)
for some smooth S(x, x(cid:48)). The eﬀective electromagnetic
ﬁeld

ˆFab ≡ 2∇[a

ˆAb] = 2∇[a(N−2 ˆΦτb])

(3.37)

then satisﬁes the vacuum Maxwell equation up to a
smooth source term:
Da(N−1Da ˆΦ) = −

J(x(cid:48))N (x(cid:48))S(x, x(cid:48))dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥.

(3.38)

(cid:90)

Σt

12

Although it can be useful to consider diﬀerent deﬁni-
tions for the eﬀective ﬁelds, the physical interpretations
of these ﬁelds must be considered with care.
In gen-
eral, diﬀerent choices for the propagators G and G give
rise to diﬀerent momenta ˆPt and diﬀerent stress-energy
tensors ˆT ab
B . Scalar, electromagnetic, inertial, and grav-
itational forces also individually depend on the choices
for G and G. This splitting of the force into components
is associated with unphysical aspects of our description,
and may be interpreted as a kind of gauge freedom13.
While the details of a particular problem sometimes pro-
vide selection principles which can reduce this freedom
“by convention,” it cannot be avoided in general.

A natural question is then to ask for observable quan-
tities which remain invariant under all possible propa-
gator transformations. As noted in section II D, a nat-
ural quantity to consider here is the total force which
is required to hold B in place. We assume for simplic-
ity that the space KG of generalized Killing ﬁelds does
not depend on propagator transformations14. Then, from
(2.22), (3.21) and (3.20) and their electrostatic analogs,
the generalized holding force is explicitly

Fhold ≡

(ρLξφhold − JLξΦhold) N dV⊥⊥⊥

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(cid:18) 1

2

Σt

Σt
d ˆPt
dt

−

=

(cid:19)
B Lξgab + ρLξ
ˆT ab

− JLξ ˆΦself

ˆφself

N dV⊥⊥⊥.

(3.39)

We have thus far considered the scalar and electromag-
netic cases separately. This has been only for notational
simplicity, and there is no obstacle to allowing both ρ and
J to be simultaneously nonzero. Their eﬀects merely add.

Here

C. Measurable quantities are independent of choice

of propagator

The identities (3.20) and (3.33) allow scalar and elec-
tromagnetic forces to be computed using eﬀective ﬁelds ˆφ
and ˆΦ which can be considerably simpler than their phys-
ical counterparts. These ﬁelds are obtained from φ and
Φ using two-point propagators G and G which satisfy the
ﬁve assumptions listed at the end of section III A [with
minor modiﬁcations in the electromagnetic case to be
consistent with (3.32) and (3.36)]. Many propagators can
be written down which satisfy these assumptions. They
might be Green functions or more general parametrices.
In some cases, assumption 5 can even be relaxed to allow
something else entirely. This lack of uniqueness provides
an interesting ﬂexibility which does not appear to have
been noted in other self-force contexts: It can allow one’s
computational methods to be tailored to the details of
whichever particular problem might be at hand. We pro-
vide an example of this in section VII A and appendix D,
where the force on a uniformly-accelerated charge in ﬂat
spacetime is obtained using two diﬀerent propagators—
one of which results in much less computation than the
other.

ˆφself ≡ φself − φS,

ˆΦself ≡ Φself − ΦS

(3.40)

involve the self-ﬁelds introduced in section II D. The ﬁrst
equality in (3.39) shows that Fhold cannot depend on
G or G. The second equality shows that the holding
force can nevertheless be written in terms of quantities
which do (individually) depend on these propagators. It
is sometimes convenient to discuss these latter quantities
on their own, in which case we call, e.g.,

(cid:90)
(cid:90)

Σt

1
2

Σt

ρNLξ

ˆφself dV⊥⊥⊥

B NLξgab dV⊥⊥⊥
ˆT ab

(3.41)

(3.42)

“the” scalar self-force, and

13 There are two diﬀerent components of this gauge freedom: First,
the choice of propagator in a given spacetime aﬀects the renor-
malized ﬁelds via (3.11) and (3.21), and thus the scalar and
electromagnetic self-forces. Second, the choice of propagator in
nearby spacetimes, as encoded in the variational derivatives in
(3.17), can aﬀect the renormalizations (3.22) and (3.23) of the
stress-energy tensor and the generalized momentum.
14 We relax this assumption slightly in section IV C, where the ref-
erence worldline Z used to construct KG is chosen to coincide
with the center-of-mass worldline determined by ˆT ab
B .

“the” gravitational force. We emphasize that such ex-
pressions are unique only in connection with speciﬁc
propagators, a lack of recognition of which has led to
some confusion in the literature—see section VII.

13

are known as tensor extensions [30, 35, 36] of ˆφ. These
extensions can be deﬁned explicitly via

(cid:34)

(cid:35)

ˆφ,a1···ap (y) ≡

∂p ˆφ(expy Y b)
∂Y a1 ··· ∂Y ap

.

(4.2)

Y c=0

IV. MULTIPOLE EXPANSIONS

The ﬁrst few examples are explicitly ˆφ, = ˆφ and

In the typical contexts where problems of motion are
considered, charge distributions and stress-energy ten-
sors are not known in detail. Nevertheless, our ﬁnal ex-
pression (3.39) for the generalized holding force Fhold is
an integral involving precisely these quantities. Follow-
ing standard practice in Newtonian gravity or elemen-
tary electrostatics, progress is made by introducing mul-
tipole moments. If, for example, the renormalized ﬁeld
ˆφ varies suﬃciently slowly throughout the body B, the
force (3.41) can be accurately approximated using only
a ﬁnite number of multipole moments qa1···ap . Retaining
these moments is signiﬁcantly simpler than retaining the
inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom associated with the
complete charge density ρ.

Except in very special cases, this type of multipole ap-
proximation cannot be applied directly to the bare force
(3.8)—φ and Φ inherit all lengthscales present in ρ and
J, and therefore do not vary slowly. If G and G are well-
chosen, however, the same comments do not apply to the
eﬀective ﬁelds ˆφ and ˆΦ appearing in (3.20) and (3.33).
We assume from now on that these hatted ﬁelds can
be approximated throughout B using an appropriately-
deﬁned low-order Taylor series.

A. Covariant Taylor series

The type of Taylor series adopted here is easily ex-
plained: If some quantity is to be expanded about an ori-
gin zt, use gab to construct Riemann normal coordinates
about zt, and then compute an elementary Taylor expan-
sion in these coordinates. With some additional work,
equivalent constructions can also be described without
any explicit reference to coordinates [12, 30]. Adopting
the second viewpoint, scalar ﬁelds have expansions with
the form15

ˆφ(x(cid:48)) =

X a1 ··· X ap ˆφ,a1···ap (zt),

1
p!

(4.1)

where X a = X a(zt, x(cid:48)) is the separation vector between
x(cid:48) and zt deﬁned by (3.5). The coeﬃcients ˆφ,a1···ak (zt)
are tensor ﬁelds which reduce to partial derivatives in a
Riemann normal coordinate system with origin zt, and

∞(cid:88)

p=0

ˆφ,a = ∇a

ˆφ,

ˆφ,ab = ∇b∇a

ˆφ,abc = ∇(a∇b∇c)

ˆφ.

ˆφ,

(4.3a)

(4.3b)

Higher-order extensions can be more complicated, involv-
d and its derivatives contracted into derivatives
ing Rabc
of ˆφ. Regardless, it is clear from (4.2) that

ˆφ,a1···ap = ˆφ,(a1···ap)

(4.4)

for all p.

We also need an expansion for gab. Again demanding
that this reduce to an elementary Taylor expansion in
Riemann normal coordinates, it may be shown that [30]

ga(cid:48)b(cid:48) = ∇a(cid:48)X a∇b(cid:48)X b

X c1 ··· X cp gab,c1···cp .

(4.5)

1
p!

∞(cid:88)

p=0

Noting that frame components of X a can be interpreted
as Riemann normal coordinate functions, ∇b(cid:48)X a reduces
(non-perturbatively) to the identity matrix δµ
ν in those
coordinates. The appearance of this gradient in (4.5)
therefore “corrects” the naive coordinate expansion by
appropriately transporting lowered indices at zt to low-
ered indices at x(cid:48). The metric extensions here require a
similar type of transport, but in the “opposite direction.”
This is accomplished by

H b(cid:48)

a(x(cid:48), zt) ≡ (∇b(cid:48)X a)−1,

(4.6)

which also reduces to the identity in Riemann normal
coordinates. Using it, extensions of the metric can be
computed from

gab,c1···cp ≡

∂p(H a(cid:48)

aH b(cid:48)

∂Y c1 ··· ∂Y cp

bga(cid:48)b(cid:48))

.

(4.7)

Y d=0

The resulting tensors have the symmetries gab,c1···cp =
g(ab),c1···cp = gab,(c1···cp) and, for all p ≥ 1 [30],
ga(b,c1···cp) = g(ab,c1···cp−1)cp = 0.

(4.8)

The zeroth extension is the metric itself, gab, = gab, and
the ﬁrst extension vanishes: gab,c = 0. All higher-order
metric extensions involve the curvature, which is evident
from the ﬁrst nontrivial examples [12]

(cid:34)

(cid:35)

gab,c1c2 =

2
3

Ra(c1c2)b,

gab,c1c2c3 = ∇(c1 R|a|c2c3)b,

15 The equality sign and inﬁnite upper limit here are formal. The
series doesn’t necessarily converge in practice, and we shall only
ever use a ﬁnite number of terms.

gab,c1c2c3c4 =

∇(c1c2R|a|c3c4)b +

6
5

16
15

Ra(c1c2

(4.9a)

dR|b|c3c4)d.
(4.9b)

Recalling that the holding force (3.39) does not involve
ˆφ and gab on their own, but rather their Lie derivatives
with respect to elements of KG, we now develop Taylor
series for these Lie derivatives.
If the origin zt about which a Taylor expansion is per-
formed lies on the worldline Z used to construct the space
KG of generalized Killing vectors, (3.6) and (4.1) imme-
diately imply that

Lξ

ˆφ(x(cid:48)) =

X a1 ··· X apLξ

ˆφ,a1···ap (zt)

(4.10)

1
p!

whenever x(cid:48) ∈ Σt. This is the ﬁrst point in our discussion
where any properties of the generalized Killing ﬁelds have
been used.

An analogous expansion for the metric is signiﬁcantly
more complicated to derive, but may be shown to be [30]

Lξga(cid:48)b(cid:48) =

(p)
A ab

a(cid:48)b(cid:48)X c1 ··· X cpLξgab,c1···cp

(4.11)

1
p!

when ξa ∈ KG and zt ∈ Z. The p-dependent transport
operator which appears here is explicitly

(p)
A ab

a(cid:48)b(cid:48) ≡ ∇(a(cid:48)X a∇b(cid:48))X b +

2
p − 1

(p)
Θ ab

df τ dH(a(cid:48) f∇b(cid:48))t,
(4.12)

∞(cid:88)

p=0

∞(cid:88)

p=2

where

(p)

Θ abcd ≡ (p − 1)

(cid:90) 1

sp−2∇f(cid:48)(cid:48)
× ∇f(cid:48)(cid:48) X (c

s ∇h(cid:48)(cid:48)
X a
s ∇h(cid:48)(cid:48) X d)

0

s ds.

X b
s

(4.13)

The integrand in this last expression is to be evaluated
along an aﬃnely-parameterized geodesic γ(cid:48)(cid:48)(s) satisfy-
ing16 γ(cid:48)(cid:48)(0) = zt and γ(cid:48)(cid:48)(1) = x(cid:48), and the X a
s are sep-
aration vectors between zt and γ(cid:48)(cid:48)(s). The integral is
normalized to match the notation in [35], and also so
that its ﬂat-spacetime limit,

(p)

Θ abcd → ga(cgd)b,

(4.14)

is independent of p.

Although complicated, the details of these expressions
are rarely needed in practice. The important point to
note in (4.11) is that the Taylor expansion for the metric
starts only at p = 2. This corresponds to quadrupole or-
der when evaluating a force, and follows from the fact
(3.3) that the generalized Killing ﬁelds can fail to be
Killing only for second and higher order deviations from
zt. There is no analogous symmetry which is guaranteed
to hold for ˆφ, so the scalar ﬁeld expansion (4.10) can be
nontrivial even at monopole order.

16 Primes and double primes here are not derivatives with respect
to s, but instead are attached to indices associated with diﬀerent
points in spacetime.

B. The multipole force

14

Multipole expansions for the generalized force now fol-
low immediately from the Taylor expansions just derived
and from the integral forces obtained in section III. Us-
ing (3.20) and (3.33) together with (4.10) and (4.11), we
obtain

∞(cid:88)

p=0

d ˆPt
dt

=

(N qa1···apLξ

1
p!

+

1
2

ˆφ,a1···ap − Qa1···apLξ ˆΦ,a1···ap )
∞(cid:88)

N ˆI a1···apbcLξgbc,a1···ap ,

1
p!

p=2

(4.15)

(cid:90)
(cid:90)

Σt

Σt

(cid:90)

where the 2p-pole scalar and electromagnetic moments
which appear here are explicitly

qa1···ap ≡ 1
N
Qa1···ap ≡

X a1 ··· X ap ρ(cid:48)N(cid:48)dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥,

X a1 ··· X ap J(cid:48)N(cid:48)dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥.

(4.16a)

(4.16b)

It is clear that these moments are purely spatial and also
symmetric in all indices. Their diﬀering normalizations
guarantee that they remain invariant under time rescal-
ings with the form (2.10) [cf. (2.19)].
While a relatively simple expression for the 2p-pole mo-
ments ˆI a1···apbc of ˆT ab
B is easily suggested by comparing
(3.20), (4.11), and (4.15), additional consideration of the
index symmetries (4.8) associated with the metric exten-
sions shows that some components of that expression do
not couple to the force [30, 35]. A less obvious deﬁnition
which takes this into account is obtained by ﬁrst deﬁning
the auxiliary 2p-pole moment

ˆJ a1···apbc ≡ 1
N

X a1 ··· X ap−2X [ap−1X [b

Σt

× (p)

A ap]c]

a(cid:48)b(cid:48) ˆT a(cid:48)b(cid:48)

B N(cid:48)dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥,

(4.17)

independent antisym-
where the notation indicates
metrizations on the index pairs (ap−1, ap) and (b, c). The
moments appearing in (4.15) can then be deﬁned by

ˆI a1···apbc ≡ 4

ˆJ (a1···ap−1|b|ap)c.

(4.18)

(cid:18) p − 1

(cid:19)

p + 1

These are separately symmetric in their ﬁrst p and ﬁnal
two indices, satisfy

(4.19)
for all p ≥ 2, and are partially spatial in the sense that

ˆI (a1···apb)c = 0

ˆI a1···ap−2[ap−1[apb]c] = 0

τa1

(4.20)
for all p ≥ 3. Except for the substitution T ab
B → ˆT ab
B
and the overall factor of 1/N inserted for convenience in

(4.17), these stress-energy moments are identical to those
originally derived by Dixon [35].

For both the charge and stress-energy multipole mo-
ments, there are important cases in which the given def-
initions result in tensors which are still “more compli-
cated” than necessary; some of their components decou-
ple from d ˆPt/dt for particular classes of ﬁelds. For ex-
ample, it follows from (3.3) and (4.9) that if the vacuum
Einstein equation Rab = 0 holds, traces of ˆI a1···apbc de-
couple at least for p = 2, 3. The stress-energy quadrupole
and octupole moments can therefore be replaced, in vac-
uum backgrounds, by their trace-free counterparts.
It
follows from (4.3) that similar comments also apply to
qab and qabc whenever ∇a∇a
ˆφ = 0. It is not clear, how-
ever, if these types of simpliﬁcations can be continued to
higher multipole orders.

C. Center of mass

The multipole expansion (4.15) for the generalized
force is useful only if it can be adequately approximated
by low-order truncations of the inﬁnite sums which ap-
pear there. Whether or not this is possible depends not
only on the nature of the physical system and the choice
of propagators, but also on the worldline Z about which
If a useful trun-
our expansions have been performed.
cation is obtained for one particular Z, the same cannot
necessarily be said for worldlines which diﬀer by distances
comparable to any lengthscales associated with gab or ˆφ.
It is therefore essential that Z be appropriately “cen-
tered” on B so that the higher multipole moments re-
main as small as possible. The interpretation we adopt
is more speciﬁcally that Z should be a “center-of-mass
worldline” for B.

Even for freely-falling, uncharged test bodies in spe-
cial relativity, the center-of-mass is a nontrivial concept.
The typical approach has the following ﬂavor: First, an
antisymmetric angular momentum tensor Sab(zt) is de-
ﬁned with respect to an arbitrary origin zt. Space-space
components of this tensor contain information physically
associated with an object’s “spin” and “orbital” angu-
lar momentum, while time-space components instead de-
scribe the “mass dipole vector.” A center of mass can
then be deﬁned roughly as that worldline for which the
dipole moment vanishes. Part of the subtlety with this
deﬁnition in generic (not necessarily static) contexts is
that it is unclear which frame should be used to split
the angular momentum tensor into spacelike and time-
like components. Diﬀerent possibilities—sometimes in-
terpreted as diﬀerent “observers” for whom the dipole
moment appears to vanish—result in diﬀerent worldlines.
These choices are often referred to as “spin supplemen-
tary conditions.” While some have nicer properties than
others, it is mainly a matter of convenience which par-
ticular worldline is used to represent an extended world-
tube. It is important, however, that all possibilities be
conﬁned to a suﬃciently small region. This has indeed

15

been established in very simple cases [43, 44], and recent
progress has been made on extending it [45], although
a general result using the deﬁnitions given here is not
known. We nevertheless adopt a center-of-mass deﬁni-
tion which broadly follows this tradition and assume that
the resulting Z remains near B in a suitable sense.

1
2

ˆPt(ξ) = pa(t)ξa(zt) +

The ﬁrst step in carrying out this procedure is to de-
ﬁne an angular momentum tensor. From the perspective
of the formalism discussed in section III, this is natu-
rally associated with certain components of the general-
ized momentum ˆPt. More precisely, an angular momen-
tum17 Sab = S[ab] and a linear momentum pa may be
introduced implicitly at zt by demanding that
Sab(t)∇aξb(zt)

(4.21)
for all ξa ∈ KG. The linear momenta are therefore those
components which are associated with generalized Killing
ﬁelds which appear to be purely translational at zt, mean-
ing that ∇aξb(zt) = 0. The remaining angular com-
ponents are instead associated with those vector ﬁelds
which appear to generate pure Lorentz transformations
at zt, in the sense that ξa(zt) = 0.
The left-hand side of (4.21) is well-deﬁned because any
ξa ∈ KG is uniquely determined by ξa(zt) and ∇aξb =
∇[aξb](zt) for any zt ∈ Z [27]. More explicitly, the X a
and H a(cid:48)
a deﬁned by (3.5) and (4.6) may be used to show
that

ξa(cid:48)

= H a(cid:48)

b(−∇aX bξa + X a∇aξb)

(4.22)
for any x(cid:48) ∈ Σt. This determines a generalized Killing
ﬁeld for each 1-form ξa(zt) and each 2-form ∇aξb(zt).
Varying over all such possibilities while using (3.24) and
(4.21) shows that the linear and angular momenta are
explicitly

pa = −

(Ha(cid:48)b∇aX b) ˆT a(cid:48)b(cid:48)

B dSb(cid:48),

Sab = 2

(X [aHa(cid:48) b]) ˆT a(cid:48)b(cid:48)

B dSb(cid:48).

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

Σt

Σt

(4.23a)

(4.23b)

These coincide with Dixon’s momenta [34, 35] up to the
replacement T ab
B . As in all other parts of our
discussion, explicit integrals such as (4.23) are included
for completeness but play no role in what follows.

B → ˆT ab

The next step is to understand how pa and Sab evolve
in time. One way to accomplish this is to deduce from the
assumed stationarity of the system that Lτ pa = Lτ Sab =
0, or equivalently

Dpa
dt

= pb∇bτ a,

DSab

dt

= −2Sc[a∇cτ b].

(4.24)

17 Even after a spin supplementary condition has been applied so
Sab is purely spatial, it is only when n = 3 that angular momen-
tum can be equivalently described as a vector quantity.

Dpa
dt

=

1
2

Rbcd

aSbcτ d + F a,

DSab

dt

= 2p[aτ b] + N ab,

a ≡
F hold

(N qb1···bp∇aφhold
,b1···bp

− Qb1···bp∇aΦhold
,b1···bp

),

(4.25)

p=0

while the holding forces and torques are

∞(cid:88)

1
p!

where the force F a and torque N ab = N [ab] are deﬁned
implicitly via

hold ≡
N ab

explicitly

∞(cid:88)
a ≡ 1
F grav
∞(cid:88)
2

grav ≡
N ab

p=2

16

ˆI b1···bpcd∇agcd,b1···bp ,

N
p!

(4.28a)

d,c1···cp

( ˆI c1···cpd[agb]

2N
p!
ˆI c1···cp−1[a|dh|gdh,c1···cp−1

p=2
p
2

+

b]),

(4.28b)

∞(cid:88)

p=1

(4.29a)

2

(p − 1)!

(N qc1···cp−1[aφhold

,c1···cp−1

b]

− Qc1···cp−1[aΦhold

,c1···cp−1

b]).

(4.29b)

a

and self-torque N ab

The self-force F self
self are identical
in form to the holding force and holding torque except
→
for the substitutions φhold
[where ˆφself and ˆΦself are deﬁned by (3.40)]. Each
ˆΦself
of these expressions scales like

→ ˆφself

and Φhold

,b1···bp

,b1···bp

,b1···bp

,b1···bp

a → α−1F ...
F ...
a ,

... → α−1N ab
N ab

...

(4.30)

under time reparameterizations with the form (2.10).
Equation (4.26) and the conservation of the renormal-
ized energy ˆE ≡ − ˆPt(τ ) [cf. (3.9)] imply that at least
one component of these equations always vanishes:

Faτ a +

N ab∇aτb = 0.

1
2

(4.31)

If any additional symmetries are present, similar con-
straints may be associated with them as well.

We now have two independent sets of evolution equa-
tions for pa and Sab, namely (4.24) and (4.25). Equating
them results in the consistency conditions

F a = pb∇bτ a − 1
aSbcτ d,
2
N ab = −2(p[aτ b] + Sc[a∇cτ b]).

Rbcd

(4.32a)

(4.32b)

Contracting the second of these equations with τb further
shows that the momentum must be related to the unit
velocity ua ≡ τ a/N via

pa = (−pbub)ua +

1
N

(ubSb

c∇cτ a + N a

bub)
+ Sab∇b ln N,

(4.33)

thus implying that pa need not be parallel to ua. If these
two vectors are indeed non-parallel, B is said to possess
a “hidden momentum” [39, 45].

The momenta can therefore be computed for all time
given only their initial values and ∇aτ b. These are not,
however, the interesting observables. As explained in sec-
tions II D and III C, we instead seek those holding ﬁelds
which must be applied in order to maintain (4.24).

Appropriate holding ﬁelds can be obtained by deriving
alternative evolution equations for the momenta in terms
of the previously-derived evolution equation (4.15) for ˆPt.
Recalling that generalized Killing ﬁelds satisfy the Killing
transport equation (3.4) on Z, direct diﬀerentiation of
(4.21) yields

d
dt

ˆPt(ξ) = Faξa +

N ab∇aξb.

1
2

(4.26)

2 Rbcd

Note that if d ˆPt/dt is negligible, (4.25) reduces to the
well-known Mathisson-Papapetrou equations tradition-
ally used to describe spinning particles in curved space-
times. One feature of the formalism described here
is that the Mathisson-Papapetrou terms 1
aSbcτ d
and 2p[aτ b] have a clear geometrical origin: They arise
because the decomposition of KG into “generators of
Lorentz transformations” ⊕ “generators of translations”
is meaningful only with respect to a preferred point.
Applying a time derivative varies the relevant point (in
time), and vector ﬁelds which appear purely translational
at, e.g., zt do not necessarily have the same character at
zt+dt. This change results in a mixing of the linear and
angular momenta over time18. Following [36], the force
Fa and torque N ab deﬁned here exclude kinematic eﬀects
such as these. They depend only on the dynamics of the
generalized momentum.

Combining (4.15) with (4.26) while varying over all
generalized Killing ﬁelds now results in explicit multipole
series for the force and torque. We ﬁnd it useful below
to split these series into “gravitational,” “holding,” and
“self” components in the sense that

Fa = F grav
N ab = N ab

a + F self
grav + N ab

a + F hold
a
self + N ab
hold.

,

(4.27a)

(4.27b)

The gravitational force and torque which appear here are

18 This interpretation of the Mathisson-Papapetrou terms is only
minimally related to the deﬁnition of KG, and applies also in
maximally-symmetric spacetimes where all relevant vector ﬁelds
are genuinely Killing. It extends even to some non-relativistic
settings [12].

The momentum-velocity relation (4.33) holds for any
Z which is an orbit of τ a; we have not yet imposed a
center-of-mass condition which would single out one par-
ticular orbit. A common spin supplementary condition
may nevertheless be imposed which does single out a par-
ticular worldline while also removing one component of
the hidden momentum: Let the “mass dipole moment”
vanish for static observers in the sense that

Sab(zt)τ b(zt) = 0.

(4.34)
We call those points Z = ∪tzt which are consistent with
this constraint the center-of-mass worldline. Applying it
from now on, the momentum and velocity are seen to be
related via

pa = mua + SabDb ln N +

1
N

N a

bub,

where we have introduced the mass
m ≡ −paua.

(4.35)

(4.36)

The consistency equations (4.32) can now be simpliﬁed

signiﬁcantly. First note from (2.5) that

aτ d = −2∇[b∇c]τ a = −2u[b∇c]∇aN,

Rbcd

(4.37)

so the Mathisson-Papapetrou “force” 1
aSbcτ d van-
ishes on account of (4.34). Use of (4.35) also shows that

2 Rbcd

pb∇bτa = mDaN − uaubNb

cDc ln N,

(4.38)

so (4.32a) reduces to

Fa = mDaN − uaubNb

cDc ln N.

(4.39)

The mixing here between forces and torques can be elim-
inated by recalling (4.31), which ﬁnally results in

hb

aFb = mDaN.

(4.40)

Our consistency condition for the body’s translational
degrees of freedom therefore reduces to the simple state-
ment that the total spatial force is what one would expect
for an uncharged monopole test particle with worldline
Z. The torque balance equation (4.32b) simpliﬁes simi-
larly; using (2.5), (4.34), and (4.35), it reduces to

hc

ahd

bNcd = 0.

(4.41)

That the spatial components of the net torque must van-
ish is again what might have been expected on elemen-
tary grounds. Such simplicity in exact equations might
be viewed as additional evidence that the deﬁnitions for
Fa and Nab are “physically appropriate.” Note in par-
ticular that even though the spin can cause pa to diﬀer
from mua, it plays no explicit role in (4.40) or (4.41).

17

D. Holding forces

We have emphasized in sections II A and III C that
the primary observable here is the generalized holding
force Fhold, as deﬁned by (3.39). Moreover, Fhold can
be decomposed into an (ordinary) holding force F hold
and a holding torque N ab
hold using an equation analogous
to (4.26). Doing so results in the multipole expansions
(4.29), which relate these quantities to φhold and Φhold.
Equations (4.40) and (4.41) further show that consistency
with the staticity assumption is maintained only if

a

hb
hc

aF hold
b
ahd

= mDaN − hb
cd = −hc
ahd

bN hold

b

a(F grav
b(N grav

+ F self
cd + N self

b
cd ).

),

(4.42a)

(4.42b)

Multipole expansions for the gravitational
force and
torque which appear here are given by (4.28), while the
self-force and self-torque are obtained by the replace-
ments φhold
in
(4.29). These are some of our main results. They apply
for essentially all static, extended charge distributions in
which the center-of-mass condition (4.34) has been ap-
plied.

→ ˆΦself

→ ˆφself

and Φhold

,b1···bp

,b1···bp

,b1···bp

,b1···bp

E. Monopole approximation

As a simple example of these equations, consider a
purely-electric charge (so ρ = 0) in an approximation
where all forces and torques are ignored except for those
which couple to the monopole moments m and Q.
It
then follows from (4.28) and (4.29) that all of Nab is
negligible and (4.42b) is trivially satisﬁed. The bal-
ance of forces associated with (4.42a) is more inter-
esting, implying that the electromagnetic holding ﬁeld
ab = 2∇[a(τb]N−2Φhold) must be related to the body’s
F hold
location and its eﬀective self-ﬁeld ˆF self
ab via

ab − F S

ab = F self
ab ub = mDa ln N − Q ˆF self

ab ub.

1
N

F hold
a = QF hold

(4.43)

This generalizes the elementary result (2.4) to allow for
nontrivial self-interaction. Recall that even if F self
is the
ab
self-ﬁeld of a point charge19, its hatted counterpart ˆF self
ab
remains smooth at the charge’s location—at least when
the G used to compute it is a parametrix (and also satis-
ﬁes the electromagnetic analogs of the remaining proper-
ties summarized at the end of section III A). Incidentally,
(4.35) implies that the momentum and velocity satisfy
the elementary relation pa = mua when the dipole and
higher-order moments are neglected.

19 As with any consistent discussion of Maxwell theory, the for-
malism here does not make sense for charges which are “truly”
pointlike. Distributional charge distributions nevertheless arise
as limits of smooth charge distributions. See section V.

The simple truncation used to obtain (4.43) is instruc-
tive, but is not necessarily physically appropriate. We
next discuss more carefully what a “point particle limit”
might mean and what its implications are. It is only at
this stage in our discussion where the number of dimen-
sions starts to play any explicit role20. The neglect of
gravitational multipole couplings in (4.43) will be seen,
e.g., to be generically consistent only for n < 4. Sim-
ilarly, neglecting the electromagnetic dipole moment is
generically consistent only for n < 3.

V. POINT PARTICLE LIMITS

The equations derived above are very general. In many
practical applications, however, one would like to special-
ize them to cases where the body B is suﬃciently small
that its internal structure—or equivalently its higher
multipole moments—can be eﬀectively ignored. Making
this statement precise requires an approximation which
strongly depends on the number of spatial dimensions
n. In fact we shall see that in higher dimensions, forces
associated with higher multipole moments can scale in
the same way as the leading-order self-force and there-
fore cannot be ignored (even for “spherically-symmetric”
bodies).

In this section, we describe a set of assumptions on
a one-parameter family of bodies Bλ which has the in-
terpretation that the limit λ → 0+ is a “point particle”
limit. These assumptions are detailed in section V A and
some of their consequences are derived in section V B.

A. Motivating and deﬁning an appropriate

one-parameter family

Fixing a particular static spacetime and a particular
center-of-mass worldline Z, a family of bodies Bλ can
describe a point particle limit if the spatial support of
each member “shrinks down” to Z as λ → 0+. Phys-
ically, the overall linear dimensions of Bλ are assumed
to be proportional to λ at least when this parameter is
suﬃciently small.

More precisely, ﬁx coordinates (t, x) so that the met-
ric components have the explicitly-static form (2.9) with
N (x) and hij(x) both smooth. We then assume that

ρ(x; λ) = λβ ˜ρ([x − z]/λ; λ),
J(x; λ) = λβ ˜J([x − z]/λ; λ),
B (x; λ) = λγ ˜T µν
T µν

B ([x − z]/λ; λ),

(5.1a)

(5.1b)

(5.1c)

18
where z is the coordinate location of Z (for all t). The
constants β and γ are to be ﬁxed below, while the func-
tions ˜ρ, ˜J, and ˜T µν
B are assumed to have compact support
in their ﬁrst argument and to be smooth in both argu-
ments. Also suppose that ˜ρ(˜x, 0), ˜J(˜x, 0), and ˜T µν
B (˜x, 0)
exist and are nonzero at least for some ˜x (cid:54)= 0. More
speciﬁcally, denote the largest |˜x| for which they are non-
vanishing by ˜R > 0. It then follows that Bλ is contained
in the ball |x−z| < R ≡ λ ˜R as λ → 0+, thus providing a
sense in which—as claimed—the family shrinks linearly
towards z. It can be shown that if assumptions like these
are valid in one static coordinate system with the form
(2.9), they are also valid in all other smoothly-related
static coordinate systems [38].

The nontrivial issue is now to choose the scaling pa-
rameters β and γ associated via (5.1) with the charge
densities and the stress-energy tensor. We can con-
strain these parameters by imposing three physical re-
quirements as λ → 0+:

1. The self-energy does not exceed the total mass.

2. The mass density remains ﬁnite.

3. The electromagnetic or

self-interactions
are more signiﬁcant than the gravitational self-
interaction.

scalar

The ﬁrst two of these assumptions are very mild, while
the last specializes our discussion to a particular physical
regime.

More speciﬁcally, requirement 1 is inspired by the need
to exclude negative energy densities and similar patholo-
gies. If a body’s dominant electric multipole moment is
its total charge Q, its self-energy is expected to be of or-
der Q2/Rn−2 [see, e.g., (6.6) at least for n > 2]. The
scalings (5.1) then imply that21

Q2

mRn−2 ∼ λ2(β+1)−γ,
which remains ﬁnite as λ → 0+ only if

(5.2)

γ ≤ 2(β + 1).

(5.3)
Requirement 2 additionally implies that m/Rn ∼ λγ can-
not diverge, so

γ ≥ 0,

β ≥ −1,

(5.4)

where the second of these inequalities results from com-
bining the ﬁrst with (5.3). Lastly, the ratio of the grav-
itational and electric self-energies is typically of order
(m/Q)2 ∼ λ2(γ−β), which tends to zero as λ → 0+ when

γ > β.

(5.5)

20 The number of dimensions has appeared implicitly via our
demonstration in appendix B that there exist propagators which
satisfy the constraints of section III. The ﬁnal conclusion of
that argument—that appropriate propagators do indeed exist—
is nevertheless independent of n.

21 This scaling law and others discussed in this section are valid up

to possible factors of ln λ.

Although relations (5.3), (5.4) and (5.5) do not deter-
mine β and γ uniquely, they do imply that the impor-
tance of the self-force relative to multipolar forces dimin-
ishes with increasing n. To see this, ﬁrst note that the in-
ertial force mDaN appearing in (4.42a) scales like λγ+n.
In many cases, it is this which the leading-order hold-
ing force must balance. If not, the leading-order holding
force instead counteracts the self-force, which scales like
Q2 ∼ λ2(β+n). Hence,

∇Φhold ∼ λmin(γ−β,β+n).

(5.6)
If β + n < γ − β for some n, the inequality must reverse
in higher dimensions—implying that the self-force is sub-
dominant for suﬃciently large n. In the latter cases, the
2p-pole gravitational force as well as the 2p-pole scalar
and electromagnetic holding forces are expected to gener-
ically scale like

(2p-pole force or torque) ∼ λγ+n+p.

(5.7)

These eﬀects are large compared to the leading-order self-
force for all multipole orders

p < pSF ≡ n + 2β − γ.

(5.8)

From (5.3) it follows that the critical multipole order sat-
isﬁes pSF ≥ n − 2. If n = 2, the monopole holding force
and the self-force can therefore appear at the same order;
the latter is not necessary small. If n = 3, the self-force
can no longer be quite this large, but is at most com-
parable to the dipole holding force. Moving to n = 4,
the leading-order self-force can be as large as ordinary
quadrupole eﬀects, but no larger22.

Similar comments also apply to the self-torque. This
ﬁrst arises from a monopole-dipole coupling, and there-
fore scales like Q2R ∼ λ2(β+n)+1. Spatial components of
self-torques can consequently be comparable to ordinary
2(pSF+1)-pole torques.

If a particular observable—say the holding force—is
to be understood up to some given accuracy, it follows
from (5.8) that the self-force can be ignored for suﬃ-
ciently large n. If, however, the self-force is considered
“interesting” on its own, its eﬀects can be meaningfully
interpreted only in combination with all extended-body
terms up to order pSF. These statements are actually
independent of conditions 2 and 3 above.

We now specialize the discussion further by considering
those families whose mass densities do not vary appre-
ciably as λ → 0+. This can be motivated by noting the

22 These conclusions can also be motivated using the language of
eﬀective ﬁeld theory: Consider for example the quadrupole cou-
pling of an object moving in a generic spacetime. The action

can then contain a term(cid:82) dτ cabcdRabcd, where Rabcd is the Rie-

mann tensor and cabcd are body parameters. Self-ﬁeld eﬀects will
renormalize cabcd by a term proportional to R4−nq2, where q is
the charge and R the size of the body, by dimensional analysis.
This term remains important as R → 0 for n ≥ 4.

19

density of solid matter does not change very much except
under severe conditions, and we do not want our limit to
implicitly impose those conditions or to strongly vary the
underlying material. Thus setting γ = 0, it follows from
(5.3) and (5.5) that β ∈ [−1, 0). It is convenient for the
development of simple Taylor expansions that the scaling
exponents be integers, so consider

β = −1,

γ = 0.

(5.9)
Fractional self-energies then have ﬁnite limits as λ → 0+.
If n ≥ 2, holding ﬁelds scale like λ1, 2p-pole forces scale
like λn+p, scalar and electromagnetic self-forces are of
order λ2(n−1), and gravitational self-forces are of order
λ2n. The self-interaction is also “as large as possible” in
the sense that

pSF = n − 2.

(5.10)

The minimum exponent in (5.6) reverses if n = 1, in
which case the leading-order holding force and self-force
both scale like λ0.

We note that our scaling exponents (5.9) diﬀer (in the
comparable n = 3 case) from those considered in [38];
their choices violate our conditions 2 and 3.

B. Evaluating the point particle limit

Assuming a one-parameter family of bodies Bλ which
satisfy (5.1) and (5.9), holding ﬁelds can be determined
by appropriate truncations of the multipole series (4.28),
(4.29), and (4.42). Self-force eﬀects ﬁrst arise at the scal-
ing order λ2(n−1), which corresponds when n (cid:54)= 1 to the
multipole order pSF = n − 2.
It follows, e.g., that the
monopole approximation is all that’s needed when n = 2,
in which case (4.43) holds for purely-electric charges up
to error terms of order λ3. Similarly, the ﬁrst inﬂuence
of the electric self-torque in 2 + 1 dimensions occurs via

Q[a(F hold

b]c + ˆF self

b]c )uc + O(λ4) = 0,

(5.11)

ab

which provides one algebraically-independent constraint
on F hold
. Analogous expressions for larger n are easily
obtained from the general multipole series, and involve
additional multipole moments of the body’s charge dis-
tribution. If n ≥ 4, the stress-energy multipole moments
ˆI c1···cpab must be taken into account as well as the charge
moments when including leading-order self-force eﬀects.
Understanding the leading-order self-torque generically
requires the consideration of quadrupole or higher stress-
energy moments for all n ≥ 3.

One complication which remains when evaluating a
holding force or holding torque is the computation of the
eﬀective self-ﬁelds ˆφself and ˆΦself . These are related via
(3.40) to the physical self-ﬁelds discussed in section II D,
so computing them requires knowledge of the S-ﬁelds de-
ﬁned by (3.11) and (3.31). These S-ﬁelds in turn depend
on spatial bidistributions G and G which must satisfy

properties 1-5 listed at the end of section III A (or their
electromagnetic analogs). Whatever these propagators
are—the Hadamard parametrices described in appendix
B provide one possibility—suppose that they are ﬁxed.
If λ is suﬃciently small that x (cid:54)= z lies outside of Bλ, it
then follows from (3.11) and (4.16) that the scalar S-ﬁeld
is

φS(x; λ) = qN (z)G(x, z) + O(λn),

(5.12)

where the net charge satisﬁes

q = λn−1 ˜q + O(λn)

(5.13)

for some λ-independent ˜q. If the physical self-ﬁeld φself
is associated with a Green function Gself as in (2.21), it
also follows that

ˆφself (x; λ) = λn−1(cid:8)˜qN (z)(cid:2)Gself (x, z) − G(x, z)(cid:3)(cid:9)

+ O(λn).

(5.14)

Similarly, the eﬀective electromagnetic self-ﬁeld is

ˆΦself (x; λ) = λn−1(cid:8) ˜Q(cid:2)Gself (x, z) − G(x, z)(cid:3)(cid:9) + O(λn).

(5.15)
Recalling that G and G are parametrices, the elliptic
regularity results discussed in section III A imply that
ˆφself (x; λ) and ˆΦself (x; λ) are smooth even in the point
particle limit, and even at the body’s limiting location.
More precisely, the quantities in braces in (5.14) and
(5.15) smoothly extend to x = z, and their derivatives do
so as well. It is these ﬁelds which determine the “point
particle self-force.”

Our discussion thus far has considered generic ex-
tended bodies, certain families of extended bodies, and
ﬁnally the forces and torques which apply to members of
those families whose sizes tend to zero. The results of
this ﬁnal step may be summarized as an algorithm which
can be applied to understand self-interaction for “eﬀec-
tive point particles”: Compute point particle self-ﬁelds in
the usual way and then regularize them by subtracting oﬀ
S-ﬁelds generated by appropriate propagators. The re-
sulting regularized ﬁelds evaluated at the particle’s loca-
tion then determine forces and torques via ordinary test
particle expressions. An inﬁnite regularization therefore
emerges as the limit of exact and ﬁnite results obeyed by
nonsingular extended bodies.

Similar diﬀerence-type regularizations have been con-
sidered in the n = 3 self-force literature at least since
the work of Dirac [46], eventually culminating in the
Detweiler-Whiting scheme heuristically proposed in [32]
and later derived and generalized in [28, 29, 31]. We have
provided a derivation—and not merely an assertion—for
the static analog of this type of scheme, shown that it
is valid in arbitrary dimensions, extended it to allow for
more general propagators, and provided precise deﬁni-
tions for all relevant parameters in terms of a body’s

internal properties. Our results are also valid to all mul-
tipole orders.

20

It is worth noting, however, that a superﬁcially-distinct
type of regularization has often been considered in the
prior literature on the point particle self-force: Instead
of subtracting oﬀ an appropriate ﬁeld from the physical
one, a type of averaging procedure is instead applied di-
rectly to the gradient of the physical ﬁeld. In practice,
most such schemes have actually been hybrids involving
both subtractions and surface averages. The clearest ex-
ample of this type is due to Quinn and Wald [47, 48],
although see also, e.g., [9, 15].
It does not appear to
be widely known that there are in fact correct regular-
izations which involve only averages, and that these are
completely equivalent to the diﬀerence-type regulariza-
tions discussed above. We now derive such a scheme for
static charges in arbitrary dimensions.
The notion of average considered here is that of an ap-
propriate integral over a closed n− 1 dimensional surface
which surrounds the body of interest. Consider again a ﬁ-
nite extended body B with nonsingular charge density ρ.
Our basic starting point is a generalization of the Kirch-
hoﬀ representation [9] for φself : Using (3.12) and (3.27)
to integrate [Da(N Daφself ) + ωnρN ]G = 0 by parts over
an n-volume B ⊂ Σ which encompasses a spatial section
of B,

(cid:73)

φself =

1
ωn

(cid:90)

(GDa(cid:48)φself − φ(cid:48)
1
ωn

B

∂B

+

self Da(cid:48)G)N(cid:48)dSa(cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥
selfS)dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥,

(ωnρ(cid:48)N(cid:48)G + φ(cid:48)

B

+

∂B

(cid:73)

1
ωn

ˆφself =

(5.16)
where dSa⊥⊥⊥ denotes the natural n − 1 dimensional sur-
face element on ∂B. Now applying (3.11) and (3.40), the
eﬀective self-ﬁeld is seen to satisfy
(cid:90)
[GDa(cid:48)φself − φ(cid:48)
self Da(cid:48)G]N(cid:48)dSa(cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥
selfSdV (cid:48)
φ(cid:48)
1
⊥⊥⊥.
ωn

(5.17)
This is exact for all B, all propagators satisfying the con-
ditions summarized at the end of section III A, and for
all extended objects. If G is a Green function and not
a more general parametrix, S = 0 and the eﬀective ﬁeld
reduces purely to an integral involving φself and Daφself
on the surrounding surface ∂B. It is therefore a kind of
averaging map φself (cid:55)→ ˆφself .
Now specializing to leading-order eﬀects in the point
particle limit, a similar average holds even if S (cid:54)= 0. This
follows because (5.13) and the discussion in appendix B
imply that for ˜q (cid:54)= 0, the interior self-ﬁeld is of order λ if
n (cid:54)= 2 or of order λ ln λ otherwise. The smoothness of S
therefore implies that the contribution of the body’s in-
terior to the volume integral in (5.17) scales like λn+1 or
λn+1 ln λ. Contributions to the volume integral arising
from the exterior of Bλ can be kept to a similar magni-
tude if the radius of ∂B scales like λ. In practice, it is
useful to impose a somewhat slower tendency to zero so

that ∂B is both very large compared to Bλ and very small
as seen by exterior observers whose scales don’t change
with λ. Regardless, these arguments imply that the vol-
ume integral can contribute only at orders higher than
the dominant terms in ˆφself . Self-forces and self-torques
can therefore be computed using
(GDa(cid:48)φ(cid:48)

self Da(cid:48)G)N(cid:48)dSa(cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥

self − φ(cid:48)

ˆφself =

(cid:73)

1
ωn

lim
∂B→0

∂B

(5.18)

through leading order, where φself is a point particle self-
ﬁeld and the limit implies that ∂B is an n − 1 sphere
whose radius is sent to zero. This is entirely equiva-
lent to (3.40), and therefore returns a nonsingular result.
Analogous expressions for the electromagnetic potential
are obtained by the obvious replacements ˆφself → ˆΦself
and G → G.

It is possible to obtain more explicit averaging integrals
for speciﬁc propagator choices—perhaps written in terms
of Riemann normal coordinates—although this can be
computationally challenging. Simpliﬁcations can some-
times be found by choosing ∂B to have special proper-
ties, although the complexity of (5.18) still grows rapidly
with increasing n. We therefore omit any such calcula-
tions here.

VI. EXPLICIT RENORMALIZATIONS OF

BODY PARAMETERS

It is shown in section III that the stress-energy tensor
which appears in the expressions for the holding force
and holding torque is not the usual stress-energy tensor
B , but is instead the renormalized ˆT ab
T ab
B . This renormal-
ization can aﬀect a body’s eﬀective mass m, its eﬀective
stress-energy quadrupole ˆJ abcd, and so on. In this sec-
tion, we compute the leading-order renormalizations of
the mass and quadrupole moment in the point particle
limit, extending previous renormalization computations
for n = 3 which were given in [30]. We assume that n > 2
and specialize to the scalar case for concreteness. We also
choose the propagator G to be the Hadamard parametrix
GH deﬁned in appendix B and summarized by (E1).

The explicit computations in this section have two pur-
poses. First, the detailed results serve to illustrate and
make concrete the rather formal theoretical framework
developed in this paper. Second, as discussed in sec-
tion III C, diﬀerent choices for the propagator G give rise
to diﬀerent scalar forces, diﬀerent gravitational forces,
and so on—it is only appropriate sums which remain in-
variant. The quadrupole renormalization computed here
gives an explicit illustration of this degeneracy. As noted
above, quadrupole forces can ﬁrst be competitive with
the “ordinary” self-force when n = 4, and in this number
of dimensions, one simple type of propagator freedom can
be parametrized by the arbitrary lengthscale (cid:96) which is
used to construct the Hadamard parametrix (E1). This
(cid:96) is associated with a non-uniqueness of the gravitational

21

force which exactly cancels similar (cid:96)-dependencies in the
scalar self-force and in the inertial force.

We assume a one-parameter family Bλ of matter con-
ﬁgurations satisfying the point particle scaling assump-
tions (5.1) and (5.9). For any well-behaved spatial coor-
dinates x such that the bodies’ mass centers are located
at x = 0, it follows that

ρ(x; λ) = λ−1 ˜ρ(x/λ; λ)
B (x; λ) = ˜T µν
T µν
B (x/λ; λ)

(6.1a)

(6.1b)

for some smooth ˜ρ and ˜T µν
B . We suppose in particular
that (t, x) are appropriately-centered Fermi normal co-
ordinates, so N (0) = 1 and hij(0) = δij. It is convenient
to introduce rescaled coordinates
˜x ≡ x/λ,

(6.2)

so that, for example, the function λρ is a smooth function
of ˜x and λ (but not necessarily of x and λ).

The renormalizations we compute depend linearly on
the renormalized stress-energy tensor, which may be ex-
panded in two parts:

ˆT µν
B (x; λ) = ˜T µν

B (x/λ; λ) + δ ˜T µν

B (x/λ; λ).

(6.3)

The ﬁrst term here is the bare (unrenormalized) body
stress-energy tensor which appears in the scaling as-
sumption (6.1b), while δ ˜T µν
B instead quantiﬁes the stress-
energy renormalization due to a body’s S-ﬁeld. We call
the mass and quadrupole components arising from δ ˜T µν
the mass and quadrupole renormalizations. Note that al-
though ˜T αβ
is smooth in its arguments, by assumption,
we will ﬁnd below that δ ˜T αβ
B can depend logarithmically
on λ for ﬁxed x/λ.

B

B

We can derive an expression for the stress-energy
renormalization δ ˜T αβ
B by writing the renormalization pre-
scription (3.23) in the Fermi normal coordinates (t, x),
changing to the rescaled radial coordinates (6.2), and us-
hdnx. The
ing the scaling assumption (6.1) and dV⊥⊥⊥ =
result is

√

dn ˜w(cid:112)h(λ ˜w)
(cid:21)

.

(6.4)

×N (λ˜v) N (λ ˜w) ˜ρ(˜v, λ) ˜ρ( ˜w, λ)

− uµuν
2N (λ˜x)

δGH(λ˜v, λ ˜w)

δN (λ˜x)

dn ˜v(cid:112)h(λ˜v)

(cid:90)

δ ˜T µν

B (˜x, λ) =

λ2n−2
N (λ˜x)

(cid:90)
(cid:20) δGH(λ˜v, λ ˜w)

δhµν(λ˜x)

×

Note that in this expression, the indices µ, ν refer to com-
ponents with respect to the original Fermi coordinates
(t, x), not to the rescaled coordinates (t, ˜x). To leading
order23 in λ, the expression (6.4) can be simpliﬁed: we

23 Note that the leading-order contributions to ˆT ab

B are not
necessarily suﬃcient to determine all corrections which might be
comparable to or larger than self-force eﬀects.

B − T ab

can replace ˜ρ(˜v, λ) and ˜ρ( ˜w, λ) by their λ → 0 limits,
which we write simply as ˜ρ(˜v) and ˜ρ( ˜w). Similarly we
can replace the instances of h and N with h(0) = 1 and
N (0) = 1.

The evaluation of the variational derivatives which ap-
pear on the third line of (6.4) is discussed in appendix E.
We show there that the variational derivatives formally
consist of inﬁnite series of line integrals of derivatives of
Dirac delta distributions, of successively higher deriva-
tive orders. Evaluating δ ˜T µν
B pointwise is therefore im-
practical24. Nevertheless, we are primarily interested in
the lowest moments of the stress-energy tensor, rather
than its pointwise values. For this purpose, truncated
versions of the series suﬃce. We argue in appendix E
that it suﬃces to compute δGH/δhµν and δGH/δN only
through terms involving second and fewer derivatives of
Dirac distributions. We also ignore all terms which enter
at subleading orders in λ. Those terms which remain are
given in (E9) and (E10).
B (˜x, λ) are found to
scale25 like λ0 if n (cid:54)= 4 and like ln λ if n = 4. The
logarithmic terms which appear at leading order in four
spatial dimensions can be written as two total derivatives
of a quantity with compact support, and therefore aﬀect
the quadrupole renormalization but not, e.g., the mass
renormalization. Although logarithmic terms aﬀect the
quadrupole renormalization for all even n, their eﬀects
are subleading when n > 4. We emphasize, however,
that four spatial dimensions are not special except with
regards to the quadrupole moment. Logarithmic terms
can appear at leading order in the renormalizations of
other multipole moments in other numbers of dimensions.

The associated components of δ ˜T µν

A. Mass renormalization

The eﬀective or renormalized mass m of a body is given

by, from (2.8), (4.23a) and (4.36),

m = −

Ha(cid:48)b∇aX buaub(cid:48) ˆT a(cid:48)b(cid:48)

B

dV (cid:48)
⊥⊥⊥.

(6.5)

(cid:90)

Σt

This can now be split via m = m0 + δm, where m0 de-
B instead of ˆT ab
notes the “bare” mass computed using T ab
B .
The mass renormalization δm then arises only from δ ˜T ab
B .
Using (6.3), (6.4), and (E10) for the renormalized stress-
energy tensor, and noting that ∇aX b = −δb
a + O(λ2) and
ubH a(cid:48)

+ O(λ2), the mass shift is therefore

b = ua(cid:48)

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(cid:18) ˜ρ(˜v)˜ρ( ˜w)

(cid:19)

˜rn−2

δm =

λn

2(n − 2)

dn ˜v

dn ˜w

22
where ˜r = ˜v − ˜w, ˜r = |r|, and higher-order terms in λ
have been omitted. It follows from (3.35) and (E11) that
the same formula also applies in the electromagnetic case
with the replacement ˜ρ → ˜J. The familiar formula26 for
the electrostatic self-energy is therefore recovered when
n = 3.

B. Stress-energy quadrupole renormalization

It follows from (4.9), (4.15), and (4.18) that the gen-

eralized gravitational quadrupole force is in general

Fquad = − 1
6

N ˆJ abcdLξRabcd.

(6.7)

The renormalized stress-energy quadrupole ˆJ abcd is given
by (4.17) specialized to p = 2. To compute this, ﬁrst note
from (4.12) that

(2)
A aba(cid:48)b(cid:48) = H c

a(cid:48) H d
b(cid:48)

3uaubucud − 4u(ahb)(cud) + ha(chd)b
(6.8)

(cid:105)

to leading order in λ. In terms of the rescaled coordinates
˜x, the spatial components of the quadrupole moment are
thus

ˆJ iklj = −λn+2

˜x[k( ˜T i][j

B + δ ˜T i][j

B )˜xl]dn ˜x,

(6.9)

(cid:104)

(cid:90)

where (6.3) has been used and terms which are higher
order in λ have again been dropped. The portion δJ iklj
of this which is due to δ ˜T ab
B now follows from (6.4) and
(E9), after integrating over ˜x and then over s. If n (cid:54)= 4,
we ﬁnd through leading nontrivial order that

(cid:90)

λn+2
4(n − 2)

(cid:18) ˜ρ(˜v)˜ρ( ˜w)
(cid:19)
(cid:90)
2(n − 2)˜v[i ˜wk]˜v[j ˜wl] − ˜r2(cid:0)˜v[iδk][l ˜wj]
+ ˜w[iδk][l˜vj](cid:1) − gn˜r4δ[i[jδk]l](cid:105)

dn ˜w

dn ˜v

˜rn

×(cid:104)

δJ iklj =

,

(6.10)

where gn is deﬁned by (E7) and δ[i[jδk]l] denotes separate
antisymmetrizations on the index pairs (i, k) and (j, l).
If n = 4, we have instead that

λ6 ln λ˜q2δ[i[jδk]l] + O(λ6),

(6.11)

δJ iklj = − 1
8

where

(cid:90)

,

(6.6)

˜q =

˜ρ(˜x)d4 ˜x

(6.12)

24 No such problems appear if G is identiﬁed with a propagator
obtained by truncating the Hadamard series at a suﬃciently high
ﬁnite order. Indeed, this is often more practical than attempting
to use the full Hadamard parametrix.

25 This scaling is not pointwise, but is instead associated with the
B on λ-independent test functions; see appendix E.

action of δ ˜T µν

26 Our mass shift (6.6) has the “conventional” self-energy sign in
the electrostatic case, and the opposite sign to the conventional
one in the scalar case. Our deﬁnition for δm can in the simplest
settings be written as an integral of the stress-energy tensor due
to φS or ΦS, which cannot be negative and can diﬀer from some
notions of self-energy.

describes the leading-order scaling of the total charge q =
λ3 ˜q + O(λ4); cf. (5.13).

A similar calculation shows that the leading-order

mixed components of the quadrupole moment are

23

The piece of the quadrupole shift which dominates in
the Newtonian limit is the piece which couples to the
electric component of the Weyl tensor. Explicitly, this
component of δJ abcd

is

TF

ˆJ tijt = − 3
4

λn+2

˜xi ˜xj( ˜T tt

B + δ ˜T tt

B )dn ˜x.

(6.13)

δJ tijt

TF =

1

n − 1

[(n − 2)δJ tijt + δklδJ iklj]TF,

(6.18)

(cid:90)
(cid:90)

Combining this with (6.4) and (E10) gives

(cid:18) ˜ρ(˜v)˜ρ( ˜w)

(cid:19)

(cid:90)
×(cid:0) ˜wi ˜wj − 1

dn ˜w

2

˜rn−2

gn˜r2δij(cid:1) (6.14)

dn ˜v

δJ tijt = − 3λn+2
8(n − 2)

when n (cid:54)= 4 and

δJ tijt =

3
32

λ6 ln λ˜q2δij + O(λ6)

(6.15)

otherwise.

Note that these expressions could not be obtained by
naively computing a quadrupole moment associated with
the stress-energy tensor of φS. Such attempts would
generically result in divergent integrals, and would also
depend on properties of the scalar ﬁeld (and the geome-
try) at large distances. None of these undesirable prop-
erties are shared by the quadrupole shift δJ abcd which
appears naturally in our formalism.

We also note that our leading-order quadrupole renor-
malizations enter the laws of motion at the same order
as subleading corrections to the mass, which we have not
computed explicitly.

1. Vacuum regions of spacetime

If the background spacetime satisﬁes the vacuum Ein-
stein equation Rab = 0, only the “trace-free components”
of ˆJ abcd can aﬀect the quadrupole force Fquad. To be
more precise, note that the quadrupole moment has the
same algebraic symmetries as the Riemann tensor, and
can therefore be decomposed into trace parts and trace-
free components just as Rabcd may be decomposed into
its Weyl and Ricci components. The analogous decom-
position results in

(cid:16)

ga[c ˆJ d]b − gb[c ˆJ d]a(cid:17)

ˆJ abcd = ˆJ abcd

TF +

2

n − 1

− 2ga[cgd]b
n(n − 1)

(gef ˆJef ),

(6.16)

where ˆJac ≡ gbd ˆJabcd and ˆJ abcd
is trace-free on all pairs
of indices. In vacuum regions, it follows from (3.3) that if
Cabcd denotes the spacetime Weyl tensor, the quadrupo-
lar gravitational force (6.7) reduces to

TF

Fquad = − N
6

(J abcd

TF + δJ abcd

TF )LξCabcd.

(6.17)

where “TF” denotes the trace-free component of the
quantity in brackets. Using (6.10) and (6.14), it explicitly
evaluates to

(cid:90)

(cid:18) ˜ρ(˜v)˜ρ( ˜w)
(cid:90)
×(cid:0)2|˜v|2˜r(i ˜wj) + 3˜r2 ˜wi ˜wj(cid:1)

dn ˜w

dn ˜v

˜rn

(cid:19)

(6.19)

TF

δJ tijt

TF = − λn+2
8(n − 1)

when n (cid:54)= 4. If n = 4, we have instead that δJ tijt
TF = 0
through leading O(λ6 ln λ) order. Indeed, all components
of δJ abcd
TF vanish at this order in four spatial dimensions.

2. Dependence on lengthscale (cid:96) in propagator.

As we have mentioned, the Hadamard parametrix
generically involves the arbitrary lengthscale (cid:96) for all even
n; see (E1). Changing (cid:96) implicitly changes the deﬁni-
tion of the quadrupole moment, and in particular the
quadrupole shift δJ abcd. Although this eﬀect occurs at
subleading order, it is easily computed using our exist-
ing expressions when n = 4: These shifts may be ob-
tained merely by replacing the ln λ in the quadrupole
shifts (6.11) and (6.15) by − ln (cid:96). To leading nontriv-
ial order, a change (cid:96) → e(cid:96) in lengthscale is therefore
accompanied by the quadrupole shifts

δJ tijt → δJ tijt − 3
32
λ6δ[i[jδk]l] ˜q2.

δJ iklj → δJ iklj +

λ6δij ˜q2,

1
8

(6.20a)

(6.20b)

Now the gravitational
force associated with the
quadrupole moment δJ abcd is given by (6.7). Shifting (cid:96)
(in a not-necessarily-vacuum n = 4 spacetime) therefore
shifts the quadrupole force via

Fquad → Fquad +
→ Fquad +

N
48
N
48

λ6 ˜q2(LξR − uaubLξRab)
λ6 ˜q2Lξ(R⊥⊥⊥ − 3N−1D2N )

(6.21)

to leading order, where R and Rab are the ﬁve-
dimensional (spacetime) Ricci scalar and tensor, R⊥⊥⊥ is
the four-dimensional spatial Ricci scalar, and we have
used (2.7) in the second line. This shift vanishes in
vacuum but not in general27, is canceled by similar (cid:96)-

27 A gravitational coupling via the trace of the quadrupole is fa-
miliar from Newtonian physics, for example it occurs for a star
moving in a cloud of non-interacting dark matter of nonuniform
density.

dependencies in the scalar self-force and in the subleading
mass renormalization.

Superﬁcially similar dependencies of the self-force on a
choice of lengthscale in a logarithm were previously en-
countered in the computations of Beach, Poisson, and
Nickel [15] and of Taylor and Flanagan [14] [although
those compututations were specialized to vacuum space-
times for which the force shift (6.21) vanishes]. The phys-
ical relevance of those dependencies is clariﬁed by the re-
sults of this paper: No physically measurable quantities
depend on the arbitrary choice of lengthscale (cid:96), because
of the renormalization of body parameters. However,
that renormalization also implies that there is a sense
in which the total force acting on the body for n = 4, at
the order at which the self-force ﬁrst appears, does in-
deed depend on the internal structure of the body, even
for spherically symmetric bodies, as originally suggested
by Beach, Poisson, and Nickel [15]. See section VII B
below for further discussion of these issues.

24

work by considering in detail two static problems which
have been discussed in the literature: point charges in
Schwarzschild-Tangherlini [14, 15] and Rindler [16] space-
times. We apply the formalism developed in this paper
to these problems and then contrast with earlier analy-
ses. This also serves to illustrate how our formalism can
be applied using concrete examples.

Separately, there has also been prior work on the non-
static self-force problem in various numbers of dimensions
[17–21]. We do not attempt to discuss this in any detail,
although see section VIII for other comments on the dy-
namical problem.

A. Rindler spacetime

Let τ a be a boost-type Killing ﬁeld in ﬂat space-
time with n ≥ 2.
Introducing Minkowski coordinates
(T, X1,··· , Xn) and a constant a > 0 with dimensions of
inverse length, suppose that τ a describes a boost in the
Xn direction so

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

VII. COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS WORK

AND APPLICATIONS TO SPECIFIC

SPACETIMES

τ a = a

Xn ∂
∂T

+ T

∂

∂Xn

.

(7.1)

a

for some regularization ∇aφself (cid:55)→ φreg

This paper provides the ﬁrst rigorous understanding of
the self-force in dimensions n (cid:54)= 3. We are not the ﬁrst,
however, to comment on this subject; see [14–21]. Pre-
vious work has approached it heuristically, restricting to
point particle contexts where the self-force is asserted to
be qφreg
a . We have
shown in section V that appropriate point particle reg-
ˆφself , where ˆφself is
ularizations have the form φreg
given by (5.14). Various other procedures have neverthe-
less been proposed. Unlike ours, these were not obtained
from ﬁrst principles. The reasoning used in much of the
prior literature is stated only in passing (if at all), so
it is diﬃcult for us to provide detailed comments on all
approaches.

a = ∇a

Nevertheless, one persistent theme is the inordinate
attention which has been paid to the detailed structure
of the point particle self-ﬁeld.
It has been common to
argue that certain terms in the gradients of these ﬁelds
should be discarded or “smoothed out” based largely on
the way they diverge. Even though the existence of an
appropriate regularization is perhaps necessary if a well-
behaved point particle limit is expected to exist, remov-
ing all singularities is far from suﬃcient: Given one reg-
ularization, it is trivial to build others which “predict”
any ﬁnite answer whatsoever. Although this is widely
acknowledged, it is often expected to be irrelevant in
practice; appropriate selection principles might be ex-
pected to arise from physical reasoning or analogies with
other, better-understood systems. What has actually oc-
curred, however, is that diﬀerent authors have drawn dif-
ferent conclusions from known cases, and thus suggested
inequivalent regularizations.

We now provide more detailed comments on prior

Restricting to the wedge Xn > |T| then recovers the
n + 1 dimensional Rindler spacetime together with the
everywhere-static Killing ﬁeld τ a. We introduce Rindler
coordinates (t, x) on this wedge such that Xi = xi for
i (cid:54)= n and

T = y sinh at,

(7.2)
where y ≡ xn > 0. Then τ a = ∂/∂t, so the lapse and
spatial metric are explicitly

Xn = y cosh at,

N = ay,

hij = δij.

(7.3)

It follows from (2.3) that that the acceleration of a
(static) worldline at ﬁxed x is y−1∂/∂y.

Now consider the ﬁelds which must be imposed so that
a charged object does not evolve with t. We suppose for
simplicity that it is only scalar, and not electric, charge
which is involved. The self-ﬁeld φself which is described
in section II D is then given by (2.21) for some Green
function Gself which satisﬁes Da(N DaGself ) = −ωnδΣ.
The particular Green function which is used depends on
which boundary conditions are physically appropriate.
One possibility has been computed by Frolov and Zel-
nikov [16], and is adopted here:

√

Gself =

πΓ( n−1
2 )
a Γ( n
2 )

P 1
(2yy(cid:48) sinh η) 1

2 (n−3)(coth η)
2 (n−1)

.

(7.4)

Here P 1
η is deﬁned to satisfy

2 (n−3) is a Legendre function of the ﬁrst kind and

cosh η = 1 +

|x − x(cid:48)|2

2yy(cid:48)

.

(7.5)

With this choice and any compact (not necessarily point-
like) charge density ρ(x), the self-ﬁeld goes to zero as
|x| → ∞ and is ﬁnite on the y = 0 boundary of the
Rindler wedge.

Computing a self-force now requires an appropriate
propagator G with which to compute φS and ˆφself =
φself − φS. We let

G = Gself ,

(7.6)

a choice which satisﬁes the generalized version of our
propagator assumptions discussed immediately after as-
sumption 5 in section III A. Those generalized assump-
tions allow the consideration of a single propagator G in
a single geometry—which is the case of interest here—
rather than a family of propagators which are speciﬁed
functionals of N and hab. It is then required only that G
be a parametrix, that it be symmetric in its arguments,
and that there exist some quasilocal three-point functions
for which all Lie derivatives take the form (3.30). That
Gself is a Green function immediately implies that it is
also a parametrix. That it is also symmetric in its argu-
ments follows immediately from inspection of (7.4) and
(7.5). Noting that Gself depends only on N N(cid:48) = a2yy(cid:48)
2|x−x(cid:48)|2, it fol-
and the spatial world function σ(x, x(cid:48)) = 1
lows that LψGself has the appropriate form for all spatial
vector ﬁelds ψa. The choice (7.6) is therefore justiﬁed28.
Using it, (2.21), (3.11), and (3.40) immediately imply

that

ˆφself = 0.

(7.7)

Self-forces and self-torques determined by (3.41) therefore
vanish to all orders and for all n ≥ 2. This statement
is true for any compact and static extended charge in
Rindler spacetime; it holds even without imposing a point
particle limit.

As we have emphasized in section III C, this self-force
is not particularly interesting on its own. What is much
more relevant is the external force which must be imposed
in order to hold a body “ﬁxed”—which in the Rindler
context corresponds to a uniform acceleration. Rindler
spacetime is ﬂat, so the generalized Killing ﬁelds ξa ∈ KG
are all genuine Killing ﬁelds and Lξgab = 0. Gravita-
tional forces and torques determined by (3.42) therefore
vanish identically29. The only remaining eﬀects which
must be considered are those associated with the holding
ﬁeld φhold.
It follows from (4.29a) and (4.40) that the

force exerted by this ﬁeld must be

∞(cid:88)
a = ma∇ay
F hold
ay
p!

=

p=0

qb1···bp∇a∇b1 ···∇bp φhold.

25

(7.8)

Similarly, (4.29b) and (4.41) show that a body’s rota-
tional degrees of freedom are constrained by

N hold

ab = 0

∞(cid:88)

p=1

=

2ay
(p − 1)!

qc1···cp−1

[a∇b]∇c1 ···∇cp−1φhold.

(7.9)

These relations are exact even without applying a point
particle limit.
In the monopole approximation, they
yield that the gradient of the holding ﬁeld is ∇aφhold =
(m/q)∇a ln y if q (cid:54)= 0.

The simplicity of the results (7.8) and (7.9) stems
largely from our ability to use the propagator freedom
outlined in section III C to impose (7.6). We have em-
phasized, however, that other choices for G are never-
theless possible. Although such transformations can re-
sult in nontrivial self-forces, these are implicitly com-
pensated by diﬀering values for m; the propagator free-
dom in this case corresponds to a physically-irrelevant
degeneracy between what one might label inertial ver-
sus self-interaction eﬀects. Appendix D considers an ex-
plicit example of this degeneracy by choosing G to be the
Hadamard parametrix described in appendix B (instead
of Gself ). The resulting calculation is considerably more
complicated in that case, underlining how the ﬂexibility
in our choice of propagator may be leveraged to simplify
calculations.

We now compare our results in Rindler spacetime with
those of Frolov and Zelnikov [16], who discussed the
self-force acting on static scalar and electric charges in
Rindler spacetimes with spatial dimensions ranging from
n = 3 to 8. The speciﬁc procedure which they advo-
cated was motivated by Lagrangian considerations30 and
analogies to quantum ﬁeld theory. A force was eventually
obtained by computing detailed point particle self-ﬁelds,
dropping some singular terms, absorbing others into the
mass, and also introducing an infrared cutoﬀ. Their ﬁnal
result was that the self-force depends on the logarithm
of the cutoﬀ parameter. Their suggested explanation for
this divergence was that the cutoﬀ might describe the
scale over which the eternal acceleration of the Rindler
model breaks down.

It is diﬃcult to compare the methods of Frolov and Zel-
nikov directly to our own. Their calculation nevertheless

28 Analogous identiﬁcations are not always possible. Depending on
boundary conditions and other factors, Gself might not satisfy
all conditions required of G.
29 Alternatively, the gravitational force and torque depend on the
metric extensions gab,c1···cp for all p ≥ 2, but these vanish in ﬂat
spacetime.

30 A point particle action was postulated, but as usual for such
methods, the corresponding Euler-Lagrange equations have no
solutions. Such arguments are therefore formal.

results in a very diﬀerent answer; in our approach, one
natural deﬁnition for the self-force vanishes and no auxil-
iary parameters appear. Other deﬁnitions are consistent,
however.

B. Schwarzschild-Tangherlini spacetime

In a recent article, Beach, Poisson, and Nickel [15]
discussed pointlike scalar and electric charges held ﬁxed
outside a 5-dimensional Schwarzschild-Tangherlini black
hole. They found a logarithmic dependence of the self-
force on a cutoﬀ parameter, which they interpreted as a
dependence on the charge’s internal structure.

The primary assumption underlying their calculation
was that the total force can be computed using a two-
step regularization: First, focusing on the scalar case for
concreteness, the ill-deﬁned gradient of the point parti-
cle ﬁeld is replaced by its surface average (cid:104)∇µφ(cid:105)r over a
sphere of radius r in Riemann normal coordinates xµ cen-
tered on the particle. The result is not ﬁnite as r → 0,
but some diverging terms31 were shown to be propor-
tional to the acceleration and were absorbed into the
mass. This was said to result in a “regularized average”
(cid:104)∇aφ(cid:105)reg
from which the force was claimed to follow. The
result still diverged, however, like ln r as r → 0.

r

The use of an average by Beach, Poisson, and Nickel
[15] was motivated by appealing to the Quinn-Wald ax-
ioms [47, 48]. These axioms provide a somewhat diﬀerent
prescription, however. Although it was not mentioned
explicitly in [15], the use of an average is sometimes also
motivated by the claim that it is (“mostly”) equivalent
to computing the force on a small spherical shell [9]. We
make two main comments: The ﬁrst is that while surface
averaging can be used to compute forces—see the end of
section V B—the version described in [15] has not been
justiﬁed.
In particular, simple averaging of point par-
ticle ﬁelds does not generically correspond to the force
on a shell. Second, it was not realized that the self-
force should renormalize not just the mass, but also the
stress-energy quadrupole moment for point particles in
four spatial dimensions.

Taylor and Flanagan [14] again considered the
Schwarzschild-Tangherlini spacetime, but using diﬀerent
methods. They did not employ a cutoﬀ, but instead con-
sidered a one-parameter family of regularizations. Each
of these resulted in a diﬀerent (but ﬁnite) force. The reg-
ularizations used were special cases of the ones derived
in this paper: Green functions were obtained and used to
deﬁne φS and ΦS, and these were subtracted away from φ

26

and Φ, respectively, to compute a force. The Green func-
tions used satisﬁed the assumptions of this paper, and so
the self-forces thus obtained ﬁt within the framework of
this paper.

However, the interpretation of the results given by Tay-
lor and Flanagan was incomplete. Diﬀerent choices for
the G and G which were considered there were noted to
result in diﬀerent self-forces, and the reason for this was
not understood32. The discussion of this paper shows
that non-uniqueness of the self-force is related to an in-
complete accounting of the forces involved. The self-force
is only one component, and the inertial and gravitational
quadrupole forces must be taken into account as well.
Diﬀerent choices for G and G result in diﬀerent eﬀec-
tive quadrupole moments—an example of which is illus-
trated explicitly in section VI B above—and also diﬀerent
masses.

Finally, we comment on the suggestion of Beach, Pois-
son, and Nickel that the point particle self-force depends
on internal structure when n = 4 [15]. This is not the
case for what we are calling the scalar self-force. How-
ever, it is the case for the sum of the scalar self-force
and the S-ﬁeld renormalization of the gravitational mul-
tipole couplings (which one might call a total self-force).
In this sense Beach, Poisson, and Nickel were correct.
On the other hand, an analogous result is true even in
ﬂat space and even when n = 3.
In that context, the
self-interaction contribution to the mass depends on the
details of a body’s internal structure. This dependence is
usually not considered to be physically signiﬁcant since
the ﬁnal equation of motion depends only on the renor-
malized mass and the bare mass is typically impractical
to measure. Similarly, when n = 4, the ﬁnal equation of
motion depends only on the renormalized mass and the
renormalized quadrupole, and these are not easily sepa-
rated from the bare equivalents.

VIII. GENERALIZATION TO DYNAMICAL

BODIES AND SPACETIMES

In this section, we discuss how our results on static
systems can be generalized to dynamical bodies and dy-
namical spacetimes. The general strategy used above,
where self-forces are obtained from identities analogous
to (3.20), can also be adopted in the dynamical case; see
Harte [12] for such an analysis when n = 3. We ﬁrst
note that those 3 + 1 dimensional results generalize im-
mediately for all odd n, resulting in S-ﬁelds generated
by generalizations of the Detweiler-Whiting Green func-
tion. For even n, Detweiler-Whiting Green functions do
not appear to exist. Modiﬁcations are therefore needed,
and we conjecture what those might be. Our discussion
is restricted for simplicity to scalar self-interaction.

31 It does not appear to have been noticed in [15] that all divergent
terms in (cid:104)∇µφ(cid:105)r were proportional to the acceleration. Indeed,
no other direction is possible given the symmetries of the prob-
lem. It is likely, however, that some divergent terms would not be
proportional to the acceleration in more complicated spacetimes.

32 It was incorrectly assumed that a more detailed analysis would
reveal the existence of a preferred, correct choice of propagator.

A. Odd number of spatial dimensions: The

Detweiler-Whiting prescription

In the usual case with four spacetime dimensions, it
is known that the self-force can generically—even in dy-
namical cases—be found by following what has come to
be known as the Detweiler-Whiting prescription. Gener-
alizing early ideas due to Dirac [46], Detweiler and Whit-
ing proposed [32] that the physical ﬁeld φ around a point
particle could be regularized via

ˆφ(x) = φ(x) −

GDW(x, x(cid:48))ρ(x(cid:48))dV (cid:48),

(8.1)

(cid:90)

in which case comparison with previously-obtained ex-
pressions [47–50] showed that the force on a point charge
reduces to q∇a
ˆφ (plus perhaps test-body type dipole
terms [29, 38]). The spacetime bidistribution GDW which
appears in this prescription is known as the (S-type)
Detweiler-Whiting Green function, and is uniquely char-
acterized [9] by the three properties
1. ∇a∇aGDW(x, x(cid:48)) = −4πδ(x, x(cid:48)),
2. GDW(x, x(cid:48)) = GDW(x(cid:48), x),
3. GDW(x, x(cid:48)) = 0 if x, x(cid:48) are timelike-separated.
That self-forces can be computed in this way was later
derived directly from ﬁrst principles, and also generalized
to hold non-perturbatively for arbitrary extended bodies
[12, 28–31]. Moreover, it was shown to hold for torques
as well as forces, and to remain valid to all multipole or-
ders. The methods used to establish these results are the
same as those used in this paper, so it is straightforward
to compare results even at the non-perturbative level.
Without going into details, it was shown that a fully
dynamical extended body with scalar charge in n = 3
spatial dimensions admits a renormalized momentum ˆPt
and a renormalized stress-energy ˆT ab

B such that

d ˆPt
dt

=

B Lξgab + ρLξ
ˆT ab

ˆφ

tadSa,

(8.2)

(cid:90)

(cid:18) 1

2

Σt

(cid:19)

where ta is a time evolution vector ﬁeld for a family Σt
of hypersurfaces which have been chosen to foliate the
body’s worldtube. The ﬁeld ˆφ which appears here is given
by (8.1).

As brieﬂy hinted at in [12], the derivation of the force
law (8.2) generalizes trivially to spacetimes with arbi-
trary n, at least if a GDW satisfying the above axioms is
assumed to exist (with the obvious rescaling 4π → ωn
on the right-hand side of the ﬁeld equation in property
1). It follows that the Detweiler-Whiting prescription is
valid for all dimensions in which there exists a Detweiler-
Whiting Green function.

Such Green functions do indeed exist for all odd n,
and so the Detweiler-Whiting prescription remains valid
in all such cases. Explicitly, GDW has the form

GDW = U δ( 1

2 (n−3))(X) + V Θ(X)

(8.3)

27
for odd n ≥ 3, where U and V are well-deﬁned smooth
bitensors and X is Synge’s world function on spacetime.
If n = 1, it is instead GDW = U Θ(X).

The renormalized force law (8.2) is very similar to our
static result (3.20), the only diﬀerences being that ˆPt,
B , and ˆφ are deﬁned somewhat diﬀerently. Comparing
ˆT ab
the last of these quantities, for example, (3.11), (3.21),
and (8.1) imply that all diﬀerences lie in the underlying
propagators as well as a time integral in the dynamical
setting. This suggests that in a static spacetime, a time
integral of the Detweiler-Whiting Green function should
result in a spatial propagator which is of the type con-
sidered in section III. It is shown in appendix C that this
is indeed the case; the time integral of GDW is a sym-
metric, geometrically-constructed Green function for the
static problem. The Detweiler-Whiting construction is
therefore consistent with the general framework we have
derived to understand the static self-force.

Indeed, the time integral of GDW has more speciﬁcally
been shown by Casals, Poisson, and Vega [51] to coincide
with the Hadamard parametrix GH discussed in appendix
B, at least for ultrastatic 3 + 1 dimensional spacetimes.
They also give evidence that it holds more generally in
this number of dimensions, and we suspect that it is true
in general static spacetimes with odd n.

Before moving to cases with even n, recall that we have
emphasized in this paper that diﬀerent propagators can
reasonably be chosen in the static regime. This remains
true in the dynamical setting—with a somewhat reduced
space of possibilities—so the Detweiler-Whiting prescrip-
tion is but one of many possibilities when n is odd. It is
nevertheless useful.

B. Even number of spatial dimensions

Detweiler-Whiting Green functions do not appear to
exist when n is even. Progress may nevertheless be made
by noting that the renormalized force law (8.2) remains
valid for a wide variety of propagators other than GDW.
Excluding integral convergence issues which can some-
times arise, it holds for any bidistribution which is sym-
metric in its arguments and is quasilocally constructed
only from gab.

The simplest such example is the sum of the re-
tarded and advanced Green functions: Considering scalar
charges in Minkowski spacetime for simplicity,

(Gret + Gadv) ∝ Θ(−X)
2 (n−1)

(−X) 1

1
2

.

(8.4)

This is indeed symmetric and geometrically-constructed.
It is also a Green function. It does not, however, vanish
when its arguments are timelike-separated. Applying the
renormalized force law with this propagator would result
in “eﬀective momenta” which depend on an object’s en-

28

tire past and future—a clearly unphysical situation33.
One might initially suspect that the problem could
be resolved by substituting X → −X, thus produc-
2 (n−1) which does
ing the symmetric propagator Θ(X)/X 1
vanish when its arguments are timelike-separated. Un-
fortunately, the result is no longer a Green function;
2 (n−1)] = 0
worse,
[52]. Although (8.2) is again valid in this case,
it is
again unhelpful; computing an associated S-ﬁeld results
in φS = (constant) for static point charges, so ˆφ = φ− φS
fails to admit a regular point particle limit.

it is homogeneous, ∇a∇a[Θ(X)/X 1

ﬁelds are generated by Gdyn, we do not know of an anal-
ogous statement. Finding one would likely be critical to
constructing a curved spacetime generalization, and we
leave both of these issues for future work.
Incidentally, Gdyn can be generated by performing the
X → −X substitution in Gret + Gadv and then adding a
multiple of this to its derivative with respect to n. The
variation with respect to dimension suggests that using
Gdyn in a point particle limit might be equivalent to a
kind of dimensional regularization. We do not attempt,
however, to make this precise.

Having rejected these two possibilities, we demand
that an acceptable propagator be symmetric and
geometrically-constructed, that it vanish when its argu-
ments are timelike-separated, and also that the associ-
ated ˆφ remain smooth even when ρ is not. It is only the
last of these constraints which is nontrivial to verify, and
we conjecture that

(cid:20) ln(X/(cid:96)2)

(cid:21)

Gdyn ≡ dn

2 (n−1)

X 1

Θ(X)

(8.5)

is an appropriate choice in ﬂat spacetime, where dn is a
normalization constant and (cid:96) is arbitrary. This is not a
Green function for ∇a∇a, nor even a parametrix. Never-
theless, it is compatible with the renormalized force law
and vanishes when its arguments are timelike-separated.
Integrating Gdyn against a Minkowski time coordinate
may be shown (for appropriate dn) to recover ordinary
static Green functions.
Indeed, this statement gener-
alizes also to the Rindler context. Well-behaved point
particle limits therefore result at least for uniformly-
accelerated charges in ﬂat spacetime.

It is unclear whether or not point particle limits associ-
ated with Gdyn remain regular more generally. While this
question could be decided by directly computing the rel-
evant point particle ﬁelds, it would be far less tedious to
instead ﬁnd a general principle which directly guaranteed
the desired result. Recall that the appropriate principle
in the static regime was elliptic regularity. This immedi-
ately implied that for propagators which were parametri-
ces, the relevant eﬀective ﬁelds must be well-behaved for
all ρ. For odd n where GDW exists, dynamical eﬀective
ﬁelds instead satisfy the hyperbolic equation ∇a∇a
ˆφ = 0.
Elliptic regularity does not apply in this case, and indeed,
singular solutions do exist—impulsive waves, for exam-
ple. General theorems on the propagation of singularities
[53] may nevertheless be used to show that any singular-
ities which might be present can propagate only in null
directions. They may therefore be viewed as ignorable
peculiarities which quickly pass through a body’s time-
like worldtube. For even n where dynamical eﬀective

33 This dependence is not unphysical in static systems, which ex-
plains in part why we have had no diﬃculty ﬁnding useful static
propagators for even n.

IX. DISCUSSION

An overview of some results of this paper is given in
table I, which summarizes some of the propagators con-
sidered in this paper and elsewhere, their properties and
interrelationships, and how they are used here.

Our main objective has been to understand static ex-
tended charges in static spacetimes. While forces and
torques can be directly computed using the spacetime
metric gab, the scalar and electromagnetic potentials φ
and Φ, a body’s charge densities ρ and J a, and its stress-
energy tensor T ab
B , complete knowledge of these quanti-
ties is often unavailable. One might instead have access
only to a body’s mass, net charge, and perhaps a handful
of additional multipole moments. It is well-known that
these parameters can accurately describe the forces and
torques which act on suﬃciently small test bodies, and a
similar result might be expected to hold more generally.
We show that this is indeed the case: Multipole expan-
sions for the force and torque are derived for strongly
self-interacting charges, and these are shown to be for-
mally identical to expansions which had previously been
known for extended test bodies. Our expressions diﬀer,
however, in that the deﬁnitions for the various multipole
moments and ﬁelds are renormalized with respect to their
test body counterparts.

These results follow from the identities (3.20) and
(3.33), which show that generalized forces can be com-
puted not only from the physical ﬁelds φ and Φ, but also
from appropriately-deﬁned “eﬀective ﬁelds” ˆφ and ˆΦ. In
many cases of physical interest—point particle limits, for
example—the eﬀective ﬁelds are simpler; forces due to
them can admit simple multipole expansions even when
those involving the physical ﬁelds do not. We use this
to show that the force and torque necessary to hold a
body ﬁxed must satisfy (4.28), (4.29), (4.40), (4.41), and
(4.42), expressions which are valid through all multipole
orders and in all dimensions.

More precisely, our expressions involve certain two-
point propagators which determine, via (3.11) and (3.31),
the diﬀerences between the physical and eﬀective ﬁelds.
Although the forces due to these ﬁelds are not necessarily
identical, all disagreements are of a special form which
can be absorbed into an eﬀective shift T ab
B in a
body’s stress-energy tensor—shown explicitly by (3.23)

B → ˆT ab

Odd number of spatial dimensions

Even number of spatial dimensions

Symbol Section

Description

Symbol Section

Description

Gself

II D

Green function used to compute a

body’s self-ﬁeld. Can be, e.g., the time
integral of the retarded Green function.

Gself

II D

Same as for odd n.

G

III A

Generic propagator used to compute
scalar S-ﬁelds in static spacetimes.

Aﬀects the self-force, eﬀective

momenta, and eﬀective stress-energy
moments. Appropriate choices must
satisfy the ﬁve assumptions listed at

the end of section III A: They are

geometrically and quasilocally
constructed, symmetric, and

parametrices.

G

III A

Same as for odd n.

29

(cid:17)(cid:21)

G

GH

GH

III B

Same as G but for electrostatic ﬁelds

Scalar Hadamard parametrix. A

VI

App. B
App. E

speciﬁc bidistribution obtained from
Hadamard’s procedure which satisﬁes
all properties required of G. Detailed

form diﬀers for odd and even n.

(cid:114) ∆

GH = cn

N N(cid:48)

Usc
2 −1
n

σ

App. B Same as GH but for electrostatic ﬁelds

G

GH

GH

(cid:90)

VIII,

GDW

App. C

Time integral of Detweiler-Whiting
Green function (see below). Satisﬁes
our ﬁve assumptions for G, coincides

with GH at least for ultrastatic
spacetimes when n = 3 [51], and

conjectured to coincide with GH for
general static spacetimes with odd n.

(cid:90)

Gdyn

III B

Same as for odd n.

VI

App. B
App. E

Scalar Hadamard parametrix.

(cid:114) ∆

(cid:20) Usc

GH = cn

N N(cid:48)

n

2 −1

σ

+ Vsc ln

(cid:16) σ

(cid:96)2

App. B Same as GH but for electrostatic ﬁelds

Time integral of our conjectured
spacetime propagator Gdyn in ﬂat

VIII

spacetime (see below). Coincides with

GH at least for static charges in

Minkowski and Rindler spacetimes.

c
i
t
a
t
S

l
a
c
i
m
a
n
y
D

GDW

VIII

Detweiler-Whiting Green function. For

all odd n ≥ 3,

GDW = U δ( 1

2 (n−3))(X) + V Θ(X)

Gdyn

VIII

Conjectured replacement for GDW
when n is even. Useful at least for

uniform acceleration in ﬂat spacetime;

the general case requires further

analysis.

(cid:20) ln(X/(cid:96)2)

(cid:21)

1

2 (n−1)

X

Gdyn = dn

Θ(X)

TABLE I. A key role in our analysis is played by propagators, by which we mean bidistributions on spacetime or on spatial slices
that can be integrated against charge densities to produce various kinds of self-ﬁelds. This table lists some of the propagators
we discuss, where in the paper they are located, their properties, and interrelationships. There is some dependence on the
parity of the number n of spatial dimensions.

and (3.35) to depend on functional derivatives of the
propagators with respect to the lapse N and the spatial
metric hab. A body’s linear and angular momenta are
thus renormalized, as well as its quadrupole and higher
couplings to the spacetime curvature. This mixes ef-
fects which might be labeled as “gravitational,” “iner-
tial,” “scalar,” or “electromagnetic.”

Such mixings are particularly relevant in light of our re-
sult that the propagators are not unique. Our formalism
applies for all G and G which satisfy the ﬁve properties
summarized at the end of section III A (or their electro-
magnetic analogs), and we have emphasized that many
possibilities exist. Diﬀerent choices generically results

in diﬀerent eﬀective ﬁelds, diﬀerent self-forces, diﬀerent
gravitational forces, and so on. While these ambiguities
could be “removed” by convention, perhaps by restrict-
ing only to Hadamard parametrices—table I summarizes
these and other propagators—we stress the importance
of observables which remain invariant under all allowable
transformations. In the static systems considered here,
the natural observables are the forces and torques which
must be supplied to maintain staticity.

Specializing our results to “point particles” corre-
sponds to considering appropriate one-parameter fami-
lies of extended charges. The properties of such a family
depend on the number of spatial dimensions n, and on a

scaling parameter λ. The point particle limit then cor-
responds to taking this parameter to zero, in which case
sizes scale like λ, charges like λn−1, and masses like λn.
Expanding our expressions in powers of λ shows that
the leading-order self-force scales like λ2(n−1), which is
comparable for all n ≥ 2 to test body forces which in-
volve a body’s 2(n−2)-pole moments. In this sense, the
relative magnitude of the self-interaction becomes pro-
gressively smaller as the number of dimensions increases;
if one is interested in self-force eﬀects in higher dimen-
sions, extended body eﬀects must also be taken into ac-
count.
In lower dimensions, the self-force can instead
be comparable to the monopole test body interaction,
and it would be interesting to understand if this type of
enhancement could have experimental consequences in
lower-dimensional condensed matter or ﬂuid systems.

Another possible direction for future work is to move
beyond the static regime, considering dynamical self-
force problems in diﬀerent numbers of dimensions. We
remark in section VIII that prior results in the litera-
ture immediately generalize to describe fully-generic self-
interaction eﬀects in all even-dimensional spacetimes. In
particular, the Detweiler-Whiting scheme remains valid
in those cases. The situation is less clear in odd-
dimensional spacetimes,
in which case there does not
appear to exist any “Detweiler-Whiting” Green func-
tion (or parametrix) which is symmetric, geometrically-
constructed, and quasi-local. Progress may nevertheless
be made by noting that our results allowing forces to
be computed using eﬀective instead of physical ﬁelds ap-
ply even if some of these constraints are weakened. The
parametrix constraint in particular may be dropped, and
we conjecture that the propagator (8.5) provides a use-
ful self-force prescription for dynamical bodies in all ﬂat,
odd-dimensional spacetimes. We note that the force law
(8.2) remains valid in this context, and also that the
expected results—including well-behaved point particle
limits—are recovered in the static limit. What remains to
be shown is whether this choice guarantees well-behaved
point particle limits for arbitrarily-accelerated bodies,
and also how it can be generalized to curved spacetimes.
We hope to address these issues in a future article.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We wish to thank Jordan Moxon for his suggestions
on the point particle limits used in this paper. PT is
supported by the Irish Research Council under the ELE-
VATE scheme which is co-funded by the European Com-
mission under the Marie Curie Actions program. EF ac-
knowledges support from NSF grant PHY-1404105.

Appendix A: NOTATION AND CONVENTIONS

Throughout this paper, units are chosen in which
G = c = 1, the metric signature is positive, abstract

30

indices are denoted by a, b, . . ., spacetime coordinate in-
dices by µ, ν, . . ., and spatial coordinate indices by i, j, . . ..
Covariant derivatives on the spacetime (Σ × I, gab) are
denoted by ∇a, and on its spatial sections (Σ, hab) by
Da. Riemann tensors on spacetime and on space are
d respectively, with similar conventions
Rabc
for Ricci tensors and Ricci scalars. Signs are such that
dωd = 2∇[a∇b]ωc for arbitrary
Rab = Racb
1-forms ωa.

d and R⊥⊥⊥

abc

c, and Rabc

We assume wherever necessary that for every pair of
points in appropriate regions, there exists exactly one
geodesic which passes through that pair. Although this
is generically false on large scales, we require it only in
ﬁnite regions, typically the interior of the body of inter-
est. Throughout, hatted symbols denote renormalized
versions of unhatted quantities (e.g., ˆφ is the renormal-
ized scalar ﬁeld). Certain renormalized quantities such
as the mass are nevertheless written without hats for
brevity.

Various propagators are used in this paper and sum-
marized in table I. For any propagator, a tilde above the
symbol, as in ˜G, indicates a version obtained by multi-
plying by powers of the lapse function, as in (B1) and
(B2). To aid the reader, we list other symbols that occur
throughout the paper in table II.

Appendix B: EXISTENCE OF AN APPROPRIATE

PROPAGATOR

It is convenient to have a two-point distribution
G[N, hab](x, x(cid:48)) on Σ × Σ which satisﬁes properties 1-
5 summarized at the end of section III A. This ap-
pendix shows that one possibility is to use the Hadamard
parametrix [41, 54]. We ﬁrst review what this is, and then
show that it possesses all required properties. Construct-
ing Hadamard parametrices is algorithmic, and there-
fore conceptually (but not necessarily calculationally)
straightforward.
As a matter of notation, all quantities in this appendix
are purely spatial. Events x, x(cid:48), . . . are to be interpreted
as elements of Σ, and all indices may be viewed as refer-
ring to n-dimensional tangent or cotangent spaces in this
manifold. For example, much of this appendix uses a spa-
tial version of Synge’s world function σ(x, x(cid:48)) = σ(x(cid:48), x)
[9, 40, 41], which returns one half of the squared geodesic
distance between its arguments as computed in (Σ, hab).

1. The Hadamard construction in general

Before describing the Hadamard parametrix, it is con-
venient to ﬁrst apply a transformation which places the
scalar and electromagnetic problems on the same footing.
This is accomplished by deﬁning the rescaled propagator

˜G(x, x(cid:48)) ≡ [N (x) N (x(cid:48))]1/2G(x, x(cid:48))

(B1)

31

a. The Hadamard proce-

expressions involving σ and ha(cid:48)
dure instead supposes that

∞(cid:88)

U(x, x(cid:48)) =

Up(x, x(cid:48))σp(x, x(cid:48)),

(B8)

p=0

along with similar ans¨atze for V and W. Note that
the “Hadamard coeﬃcients” Up appearing here are not
constants, but can themselves be nontrivial biscalars.
Hadamard’s construction demands that they be deter-
mined by substituting (B6) into (B3), equating explicit
powers of σ, and demanding regularity.

The result of this procedure is that each Hadamard
coeﬃcient must satisfy an ordinary diﬀerential equation
(or “transport equation”) between its arguments. These
equations have the general form

(σaDa + κ)f = F,

(B9)

where f (x, x(cid:48)) denotes
some Hadamard coeﬃcient,
F (x, x(cid:48)) is a regular biscalar, κ ≥ 1/2 is a constant,
and σa ≡ Daσ(x, x(cid:48)). That this is a transport equation
may be seen by considering the aﬃnely-parameterized
(spatial) geodesic γ(s) with endpoints x(cid:48) = γ(0) and
x = γ(1). In terms of this, the diﬀerential operator ap-
pearing in (B9) reduces to

σa(γ(s), x(cid:48))Daf (γ(s), x(cid:48)) = s

f (γ(s), x(cid:48)).

d
ds

(B10)

It follows that the only solution to (B9) which is well-
behaved as x → x(cid:48) is

(cid:90) 1

in the scalar case, and

˜G(x, x(cid:48)) ≡ [N (x) N (x(cid:48))]−1/2G(x, x(cid:48))

(B2)

in the electromagnetic case.
Substituting the ﬁrst
of these deﬁnitions into (3.27) shows that if G is a
parametrix, ˜G must satisfy

Lsc ˜G(x, x(cid:48)) = −ωn δΣ(x, x(cid:48)) + Ssc(x, x(cid:48)),

(B3)

where

Lsc ≡ D2 − Λsc,

Λsc ≡ N−1/2D2N 1/2

(B4)
and Ssc ≡ (N(cid:48)/N )1/2S. The rescaled electromagnetic
propagator ˜G satisﬁes analogous equations with Lem =
D2 − Λem, although the potential is then
Λem ≡ N 1/2D2N−1/2.

(B5)

For the purposes of this section, parametrices with the
form (B3) are considered with general potentials, so there
is no need to distinguish between the scalar and electro-
magnetic cases. We use sans serif font for the general
case, so, e.g., ˜G(x, x(cid:48)) is a parametrix of L ≡ D2 − Λ.
The ﬁrst step in building a Hadamard parametrix is to
isolate the most singular components of ˜G(x, x(cid:48)) in terms
of the distance between its arguments, as represented by
the world function σ(x, x(cid:48)). Introducing convenient con-
stants cn and (cid:96) together with certain non-singular bis-
calars34 ∆(x, x(cid:48)), U(x, x(cid:48)), V(x, x(cid:48)), and W(x, x(cid:48)), it may
be shown that35

(cid:20) U

2 n−1

σ 1

+ V ln(cid:0)σ/(cid:96)2(cid:1) + W

(cid:21)

˜G(x, x(cid:48)) = cn∆1/2

.

(B6)

f (x, x(cid:48)) =

sκ−1F (γ(s), x(cid:48))ds,

(B11)

The ﬁrst of the biscalars appearing here is known as the
van Vleck-Morette determinant, and is deﬁned by

∆(x, x(cid:48)) ≡ det[−ha(cid:48)

a(x, x(cid:48))DbDa(cid:48)σ(x, x(cid:48))],

(B7)

where ha(cid:48)
a denotes the parallel propagator on Σ. It is
included here to simplify the remaining terms, and has
a simple geometric interpretation in terms of the focus-
ing of geodesic congruences [9]. This determinant can
be shown to be symmetric in its arguments: ∆(x, x(cid:48)) =
∆(x(cid:48), x).

The remaining biscalars which appear in (B6) cannot
typically be written in terms of any simple, closed-form

34 We denote the scalar and electromagnetic versions of these

scalars by Usc, Vsc, Wsc and Uem, Vem and Wem.

35 The inverse powers of σ appearing here are not necessarily classi-
cally integrable, and must therefore be deﬁned properly as distri-
butions. The prescription we adopt may be described by starting
with the (unique) distribution which corresponds to an integrable
power of σ, and then reducing this power by iteratively applying
the coordinate Laplacian δij ∂i∂j [52] as a distributional operator
in Riemann normal coordinates.

0

showing explicitly that f (x, x(cid:48)) depends on F (x, x(cid:48)) only
along the geodesic connecting x to x(cid:48).

a. Odd spatial dimensions

If a Green function is desired [so S = 0 in (B3)] and
n ≥ 1 is odd, the right-hand side of (B6) is determined
as follows:

cn =

1

2 n−1(n − 2)
2 1

,

all Vp vanish, U0 = 1, and

(cid:0)σaDa + p + 1(cid:1)Up+1 = − L(∆1/2Up)
n(cid:1)Wp+1 = − L(∆1/2Wp)
(cid:0)σaDa + p +

(2p + 4 − n)∆1/2

2(p + 1)∆1/2

1
2

(B12)

(B13a)

(B13b)

for all p ≥ 0. These are transport equations with the
form (B10). Applying (B11), the appropriate solutions

are explicitly

Up+1 = −

Wp+1 = −

(cid:90) 1
(cid:90) 1

0

0

sp

2p + 4 − n
2 n+p−1
s 1
2(p + 1)

(cid:20) L(∆1/2Up)
(cid:20) L(∆1/2Wp)

∆1/2

(cid:21)
(cid:21)

∆1/2

ds,

(B14a)

ds.

(B14b)

vanishes and

˜G = − 1
2

∆1/2(cid:2)V ln(σ/(cid:96)2) + W(cid:3) .

32

(B18)

Here, V0 = 1, the higher-order Vp are determined by
(B16), W0 remains arbitrary, and the higher-order Wp
satisfy (B17).

U0 is given, so (B14a) can be iterated order by order to
obtain all Up. The same cannot be said for the Wp. These
coeﬃcients depend on W0, which is not constrained by
Hadamard’s procedure.
If a choice is made, however,
all higher Wp can be computed by iteratively applying
(B14b). The freedom to choose W0 corresponds to the
many distinct solutions which exist to L˜G = −ωnδΣ (in
the absence of any boundary conditions or other con-
straints).

It is a particular characteristic of the odd-dimensional
case that the W term in (B6) is a linear functional of
W0. Moreover, W describes a homogeneous solution in
the sense that L(∆1/2W) = 0. Neither of these properties
holds when n is even.

b. Even spatial dimensions greater than three

Now suppose that ˜G is a Green function and that n >
3 is even. The constant cn in these cases is still given
by (B12), U0 = 1, and the Up satisfy (B14a) for p =
2 n− 2. Unlike when n is odd, however, Up = 0 for
0, . . . , 1
2 n − 2. Additionally, V (cid:54)= 0 in general. Its ﬁrst
all p > 1
Hadamard coeﬃcient is

(cid:34) L(∆1/2U 1

2 n−2)

∆1/2

(cid:35)

V0 = − 1
2

1

2 n−2

s

ds,

(B15)

(cid:20) L(∆1/2Vp)

(cid:21)

while the remaining coeﬃcients follow by iteratively ap-
plying

2 n+p−1
s 1
2(p + 1)

Vp+1 = −

(B16)
for all p ≥ 0. W0 is again arbitrary, while the higher-
order Wp satisfy

∆1/2

ds

0

(cid:90) 1

0

(cid:90) 1

(cid:40)

(cid:90) 1

0

Wp+1 =

1

2 n+p−1

s

L[∆1/2(Vp − (p + 1)Wp)]

(cid:41)

2(p + 1)2∆1/2

− Vp+1

ds (B17)

for all p ≥ 0. Note that W is generically nonzero even if
W0 = 0.

c. Two spatial dimensions

The case n = 2 is slightly diﬀerent from the other even-
dimensional possibilities: The power law portion of (B6)

2. The Hadamard parametrix

The above discussion provides an algorithmic method
to construct Green functions for the diﬀerential operators
Lsc and Lem deﬁned by (B4) and (B5). The construction
is not unique, however. Diﬀerent choices for W0 lead to
diﬀerent Green functions, and the majority of these do
not satisfy the properties demanded in section III. In par-
ticular, it is diﬃcult to choose W0 so that the symmetry
condition (3.12) is satisﬁed when n is even; simple choices
such as W0 = 0 generically fail. While conditions may be
imposed which perturbatively guarantee symmetry up to
some given order—see section B 4—it is not clear how to
accomplish this more generally.

The simplest way to make progress36 is to ignore
W altogether. Removing it from (B6) deﬁnes the37
“Hadamard parametrix” ˜GH: It is explicitly

(cid:20) U

2 n−1

σ 1

˜GH ≡ cn∆1/2

if n (cid:54)= 2, and

+ V ln(σ/(cid:96)2)

(B19)

(cid:21)

˜GH ≡ − 1
2

∆1/2V ln(σ/(cid:96)2)

(B20)

otherwise. All biscalars here are the same as in the Green
function case. That ˜GH is indeed a parametrix follows
from noting that ∆1/2W is smooth and that it remains
smooth when acted on by L. If n is odd, L(∆1/2W) = 0
so ˜GH is actually a Green function in those cases.

3. Suitability of the Hadamard parametrix for

computing forces and torques

We now explain why the Hadamard parametrix is an
explicit example of a propagator which satisﬁes all con-

36 Similar issues arise in quantum ﬁeld theory in curved spacetime
in the point-splitting method of computing the renormalized ex-
pected stress-energy tensor [55]. There, as here, one needs to ﬁnd
a locally-constructed, bidistributional solution to the ﬁeld equa-
tion. In that context, one chooses W0 = 0 since it is possible to
accommodate a nonsymmetric Green function.
37 If V (cid:54)= 0, the lengthscale (cid:96) may be varied arbitrarily to produce a
one-parameter family of Hadamard parametrices. We neverthe-
less refer to “the” Hadamard parametrix for simplicity. Although
employing diﬀerent values of (cid:96) to describe the same system might
lead to, e.g., diﬀerent “self-forces,” observables remain invariant
as emphasized in section III C.

straints imposed in section III. More precisely, we con-
sider the scalar and electromagnetic bidistributions

4. Constructing a symmetric Green function

33

GH = (N N(cid:48))−1/2 ˜GH,

(B21)
where ˜GH and ˜GH are the Hadamard parametrices for
Lsc = D2 − Λsc and Lem = D2 − Λem, respectively.

GH = (N N(cid:48))1/2 ˜GH,

We ﬁrst remark that these propagators depend only
on N and hab. That this is so is intuitively clear given
that no non-geometric choices have been made38. It is
also clear that our propagators transform appropriately
under spatial diﬀeomorphisms. To see that they trans-
form correctly under time rescalings with the form (2.10),
ﬁrst note that the diﬀerential operator L is independent
of these scalings, and that ˜GH is as well. The required
transformation laws (3.14) and (3.32) are instead recov-
ered by the factors of N in (B21).

Next, we verify that our propagators are quasilocal in
N and hab. This follows from noting that the biten-
sors σ, ∆, U, and V from which ˜GH(x, x(cid:48)) is constructed
depend only on quantities along the geodesic which con-
nects x and x(cid:48): The deﬁnition of σ in terms of geodesic
distance implies this immediately for the world function.
The above integrals for the Hadamard coeﬃcients show
that it is also true for U and V. Similarly, the van Vleck-
Morette determinant satisﬁes the transport equation [9]

σaDa ln ∆ = (n − D2σ),

(B22)

together with ∆(x, x) = 1, and can therefore be written
as a similar integral with similar dependencies.
Lastly, it follows immediately from (B1), (B2), and
(B21) that GH and GH are parametrices for Da(N Da) and
Da(N−1Da), respectively. Properties 1-5 found at the
end of section III A are therefore satisﬁed for propagators
deﬁned in terms of Hadamard parametrices. This is true
for both odd and even n.

As discussed in the body of the paper, those ﬁve prop-
erties are satisﬁed by many diﬀerent choices of propaga-
tor; the Hadamard parametrix is just one example. Other
examples are straightforward to obtain. For example, in
the scalar case for even n, one may consider

GH + ζσn/2(DaDa + Da(cid:48)Da(cid:48)

)nσ,

(B23)

where ζ is a dimensionless constant. This example does
not work for odd n since the additional term is not
smooth. For odd n, an alternative propagator is

GH + ζσ(n−1)/2(DaDa + Da(cid:48)Da(cid:48)

)nσ,

(B24)

where ζ is now a constant with dimensions of length.
There do not seem to be any natural examples for odd
n that do not involve the speciﬁcation of a dimensionful
parameter.

While useful propagators can always be constructed
from Hadamard parametrices using (B21), other choices
are possible. In particular, it can sometimes be conve-
nient to consider Green functions instead of more gen-
eral parametrices. This would, e.g., allow eﬀective ﬁelds
to be computed exactly—and not only to leading order
in the point particle limit—using surface integrals exte-
rior to the body of interest [cf. (5.17)]. The Hadamard
parametrix is already a Green function for odd n, but
not in general for even n, so we now describe how to
systematically construct appropriate Green functions in
even spatial dimensions.

As alluded to at the beginning of section B 2, the dif-
ﬁculty when starting from the general Hadamard proce-
dure is to pick a W0 such that the resulting ˜G is sym-
metric in its arguments39. We do not know how to do
so non-perturbatively, but can derive appropriate con-
straints order by order in a Taylor expansion. These
constraints become increasingly complicated at higher or-
ders, so we illustrate the procedure only in the simplest
cases. Our method expands on a calculation by Brown
[56] which was in the context of quantum ﬁeld theory.
First, we note that W(x, x(cid:48)) is a regular biscalar and
suppose that it has a covariant Taylor expansion with the
form

W(x, x(cid:48)) = w(x) +

wa1···ap (x)σa1 ··· σap ,

(B25)

1
p!

∞(cid:88)

p=1

where w(x) = W(x, x) = W0(x, x) and the higher-order
coeﬃcients are ordinary tensors at x.
In the language
of section IV A, these coeﬃcients are, up to sign, tensor
extensions evaluated using hab: wa1···ap = (−1)pW,a1···ap .
They may be found by, e.g., diﬀerentiating both sides of
(B25) and applying the coincidence limit x(cid:48) → x.
If
we require W(x, x(cid:48)) to be symmetric in its arguments,
equating its Taylor series to that of W(x(cid:48), x) yields the
constraints

[(−1)p − 1]wa1···ap = D(a1 ··· Dap)w

D(a1 ··· Dap−mwap−m+1···ap),

(B26)

(cid:18) p

(cid:19)

p−1(cid:88)

+

m

m=1

which determine all odd-order coeﬃcients in terms of the
lower-order coeﬃcients.

Since all of the Wp are ﬁxed once W0 is speciﬁed, the
symmetry constraints on W can be translated into con-
straints on the Taylor coeﬃcients of W0. If we require
symmetry only through second order in σa, choices with

38 The lengthscale (cid:96) is not determined by the geometry, but is a

constant and therefore does not aﬀect our statement.

39 It is straightforward to ﬁnd symmetric Green functions as solu-
tions to boundary-value problems, although it is diﬃcult in those
contexts to enforce a quasilocal dependence only on N and hab.

34

the form
W0(x, x(cid:48)) = w(x) − 1
2

Daw(x)σa +

1
2

w0

ab(x)σaσb + . . .

(B27)

guarantee symmetry for any w(x) and any w0
ab(x). The
remaining propagator requirements are then satisﬁed if
these functions depend only on N and hab, and only
quasilocally. Although it is consistent here to simply let
both functions vanish, doing so can lead to inconsisten-
cies at third order in σa. Expanding through that order
requires the solution of a nontrivial constraint involving
Daw0
bc together with w and its ﬁrst three derivatives [56].
Although conceptually straightforward, some dedication
is required to ﬁnd analogous constraints at higher orders.
In most cases, it is far more eﬃcient to use the Hadamard
parametrices described above.

Detweiler-Whiting Green function is symmetric in its ar-
guments additionally implies the symmetry of G. Fur-
thermore, applying N∇a∇a to the left-hand side of
(C2) shows that G satisﬁes (3.25), and is therefore a
parametrix—really a Green function—for Da(N Da).

Lastly, it is clear by construction that G is functionally
dependent only on N and hab. That this dependence is
quasilocal follows from the fact that the GDW(x, x(cid:48)) can
be expanded in a Hadamard series in a fashion analogous
to what was described in appendix B, and arguments
similar to those used there show that it can depend on
the geometry only along the (spacetime) geodesic which
connects x to x(cid:48). It follows that G(x, x(cid:48)) can depend on N
and hab only along the spatial projections of all spacetime
geodesics connecting points (t, x) to (t(cid:48), x) which are not
timelike-separated. For ﬁxed x and x(cid:48), the set of all such
paths has ﬁnite size, so the dependence on the geometry
is indeed quasilocal.

Appendix C: TIME INTEGRAL OF

DETWEILER-WHITING GREEN FUNCTION IS

AN APPROPRIATE STATIC PROPAGATOR

Appendix D: SELF-FORCE IN RINDLER USING

HADAMARD PARAMETRICES

As discussed in section VIII, in even spacetime dimen-
sions, there exists a Detweiler-Whiting Green function.
In a static system, the Detweiler-Whiting prescription
would require that scalar forces and torques be computed
by removing the S-ﬁeld

(cid:90)

dt(cid:48)(cid:90)

I

Σt

φS(x) =

dV (cid:48)

⊥⊥⊥ρ(x(cid:48))N (x(cid:48))GDW(x, x(cid:48))

(C1)

(cid:90)

from the physical one. This equation is equivalent to
(3.11) if the static propagator G is identiﬁed with a
time integral of GDW. More precisely, we note that the
Detweiler-Whiting Green function depends only on gab
and set
G[N, hab](x, x(cid:48)) =

GDW[hab − N 2∇at∇bt](x, x(cid:48))dt(cid:48)
(C2)
for all static metrics gab = hab − N 2∇at∇bt on the mani-
fold Σ× I. The time coordinate t is assumed to be ﬁxed.
We now show that this propagator satisﬁes the ﬁve prop-
erties summarized at the end of section III A.

I

Our ﬁrst task is to show that G is spatial. To see this,
note that in all static spacetimes, the Detweiler-Whiting
Green function must satisfy Lτ GDW(x, x(cid:48)) = 0.
It can
therefore depend on t and t(cid:48) only in the combination
t − t(cid:48). For ﬁxed x and x(cid:48), it also vanishes for suﬃciently
large |t − t(cid:48)|. As long as t is not too close to a boundary
of I, the time integral in (C2) is independent of t and so
the left-hand side can be interpreted as a bidistribution
on Σ × Σ.

The propagator G is manifestly well-behaved un-
der spatial diﬀeomorphisms, and also transforms ap-
propriately under the time rescalings (2.10). That the

We showed in section VII A that in Rindler spacetime,
the Frolov-Zelnikov Green function (7.4) satisﬁes our cri-
teria to be a valid propagator with which to construct
eﬀective self-ﬁelds. If the boundary conditions are such
that this Green function generates the physical self-ﬁeld,
it immediately followed that the associated self-forces
and self-torques must vanish. In this appendix, we revisit
the problem of static scalar charges in Rindler spacetime
using a diﬀerent G. For all n > 2, we identify this with
the Hadamard parametrix discussed in appendix B. The
associated self-force no longer vanishes in this case, al-
though it is compensated by an appropriate shift in the
eﬀective mass.

2|x− x(cid:48)|2 and yy(cid:48): Employing the Whip-

We ﬁrst change the argument of the Legendre function
in (7.4) from coth η to cosh η, which, recalling that η is
deﬁned by (7.5), provides a much simpler representation
in terms of σ = 1
ple transformation for Legendre functions found in, e.g.,
3.3(14) of [57] shows that
e−iπm
√
Γ(m + 1)

(D1)
where m ≡ n/2 − 1 (which is not to be confused with a
mass).

Qm− 1
(cosh η)
(2yy(cid:48) sinh η)m ,

Gself =

N N(cid:48)

2

1. Odd spatial dimensions

If n is odd, Gself can be written in the form of a con-
vergent series by noting that for ν − µ a negative integer,
Qµ
ν (ζ) has the hypergeometric representation
e−i µπQµ

(cid:16) ζ + 1

(cid:17) µ

Γ(µ)

2

ν (ζ) =

F (−ν, 1 + ν, 1 − µ, 1−ζ
2 ),
(D2)

ζ − 1

2

so

Gself =

cn√
N N(cid:48)

∞(cid:88)

p=0

Γ(p + 1

2 )2Γ(m − p)

πp!Γ(m)(2yy(cid:48))p σp−m,

35
0 ≤ p ≤ m − 1, they are given by (D4). The Hadamard
function Vsc is nonzero in this context, and the associ-
ated Hadamard coeﬃcients V sc
p are determined by the
integrals (B15) and (B16). Evaluating these integrals
yields

(D3)

where cn is given by (B12).

Let us turn now to G, which we identify in this ap-
pendix with the Hadamard parametrix (B21). More
precisely, we let G = (N N(cid:48))−1/2 ˜GH, where ˜GH is the
Hadamard parametrix for the diﬀerential operator Lsc =
D2 + 1/4y2. This has the explicit form (B19), where Vsc
vanishes for all odd n and Usc is determined by the series
(B8) in terms of the Hadamard coeﬃcients U sc
p . These
coeﬃcients in turn satisfy (B14a), which can be evaluated
in closed form to yield

U sc

p =

Γ(p + 1

2 )2Γ(m − p)

πp!Γ(m)

1

(2yy(cid:48))p .

(D4)

This results in a series for G which is identical to the
series (D3) for Gself . The Hadamard parametrix is
therefore identical to the Frolov-Zelnikov Green function
we use to generate the self-ﬁeld, and the prescription
adopted here is identical to the one discussed in section
VII A.

Another potential approach to this problem could be
to identify G with the time integral of the Detweiler-
Whiting Green function GDW. A straightforward calcu-
lation shows that this too recovers Gself ; the Detweiler-
Whiting ﬁeld for a static charge in Rindler space-
time charge coincides with the ﬁeld obtained from our
Hadamard Green function. As remarked in section VIII,
we believe this agreement holds also in more general
spacetimes.

V sc
p =

(−1)p+1Γ(m + p + 1
2 )2
πp!(m − 1)!(m + p)!

1

(2yy(cid:48))m+p ,

(D5)

hypergeometric

which results in a Hadamard series for Vsc which
can summed in closed form by comparing with
the
for
P m−1/2(cosh η)/(2yy(cid:48) sinh η)m.
This representation is
identical, up to an overall constant, to our Hadamard
series for Vsc, and results in

representation

series

(−1)m−12mP m− 1
(cosh η)
(m − 1)!(2yy(cid:48) sinh η)m .

2

Vsc =

(D6)

Combining these results ﬁnally shows that the Hadamard
parametrix in Rindler spacetime is explicitly

G =

cn√
N N(cid:48)

Γ(p + 1

(cid:34) m−1(cid:88)
(m − 1)!(2yy(cid:48) sinh η)m ln(cid:0)σ/(cid:96)2(cid:1)(cid:35)
− (−1)m2mP m− 1

2 )2(m − p − 1)!
πp!(m − 1)!

σp−m
(2yy(cid:48))p

(cosh η)

p=0

2

. (D7)

2. Even spatial dimensions

If n is even, m = n/2 − 1 reduces to an integer. For
p coeﬃcients vanish identically, while for

p ≥ m, the U sc

We now use the fact that for m a non-negative integer,
the associated Legendre function of the second kind can
be expressed as (cf. 3.6(11) in [57])

2

ln

(cid:20) 1
2 (cid:34)m−1(cid:88)
(cid:19) m
(cid:40)(cid:20)

p=0

cn√
N N(cid:48)

Qm− 1

2

(ζ) = P m− 1

(ζ)

2

(cid:18) ζ + 1

ζ − 1

+

G = Gself +

which permits the representation

(cid:18) ζ + 1

(cid:19)

− γ − ψ(m + 1
2 )

ζ − 1
(−1)mΓ(p + 1

2 )2(m − p − 1)!

π2p+1p!

(cid:21)

+

(cid:18) ζ − 1
∞(cid:88)

ζ + 1

p=1

Γ( 1
Γ( 1

2 + m)
2 − m)
(ζ − 1)p +

(cid:19) m
2 ∞(cid:88)

p=0

(−1)pΓ(p + 1

2 )2Hm+p

π2p+1p!(m + p)!

(−1)m+pΓ(m + p + 1
π2m+p+1p!(m + p)!

2 )2Hp

(ζ − 1)m+p

(ζ − 1)p

(cid:35)

(cid:18) yy(cid:48)
(cid:19)
(cid:96)2 (2 + σ/yy(cid:48))

ln

(cid:21)

∞(cid:88)

p=1

Vsc −

Γ(m + p + 1
2 )2Hp
πp!(m − 1)!(m + p)!

2mΓ(m + 1

2 )2Γ(p + 1

2 )2Hp+m

π2p!(m − 1)!(m + p)!(1 + σ/yy(cid:48))m

(−σ)p

(cid:41)

(2yy(cid:48))p+m
(−σ)p

(2yy(cid:48))p+m

.

− 2γ − 2ψ(m + 1
2 )

∞(cid:88)

p=0

−

, (D8)

(D9)

function, and Hp ≡(cid:80)p

In these expressions, Vsc is given explicitly by (D6), γ
is Euler’s constant, ψ(ζ) ≡ Γ(cid:48)(ζ)/Γ(ζ) is the Digamma
j=1 j−1 is the pth Harmonic num-
ber. We have also used (D1) for Gself . The eﬀec-
tive self-ﬁeld ˆφself
is now generated by the propagator
Gself − G, which is nonsingular throughout the interior
of the Rindler wedge.
Recall that in the point particle limit, the self-force is
given by q∇a
ˆφself through leading nontrivial order. This
depends explicitly on Gself − G via (5.14), and is eas-
ily computed using (D6) and (D9). The result is not
particularly enlightening, although we do note that it is
nonzero in general. Moreover, it depends logarithmically
on the arbitrary parameter (cid:96). The various parametrices
deﬁned by diﬀerent values of (cid:96) (and the parametrix Gself
used for G in section VII A) are each associated with
diﬀerent deﬁnitions for the mass, and the holding force
remains invariant under these transformations even while
the self-force does not.

We also note that the results of section VII A can be
nonperturbatively recovered from the perspective of the
Hadamard construction. This is simplest to see by al-
lowing for a nontrivial Wsc in (B6), which can be chosen
in this context so that the resulting Green function coin-
cides with Gself . That Wsc is symmetric in its arguments
and quasilocally constructed from N and hab. It is not
clear, however, which W sc
0 would be associated with it.

Appendix E: VARIATIONAL DERIVATIVES OF

THE HADAMARD PARAMETRIX

The renormalization of a body’s stress-energy tensor as
derived in section III depends on the variational deriva-
tives of the propagator G[N, hab] with respect to the spa-
tial metric and the lapse function. In this appendix, we
compute those variational derivatives within a certain ap-
proximation which is suﬃcient to describe shifts in the
mass and the stress-energy quadrupole moment to lead-
ing order in a point particle limit—shifts which are com-
puted explicitly in section VI.

We specialize to the scalar case and to n > 2, and
also set the propagator to be the Hadamard parametrix
described in appendix B; hence, G = GH. Following (B1)
and (B19), the scalar Hadamard parametrix is explicitly

(cid:114)

(cid:20) Usc

(cid:21)

GH[N, hab] = cn

∆
N N(cid:48)

2 −1 + Vsc ln(σ/(cid:96)2)
σ n

,

(E1)

where cn is the constant (B12), ∆[hab] is the spatial van
Vleck-Morette determinant (B7), σ[hab] the spatial world
function, Usc[N, hab] and Vsc[N, hab] are appropriate bis-
calars, and (cid:96) is an arbitrary constant with dimensions of
length. Each choice of (cid:96) technically deﬁnes a diﬀerent
parametrix, and therefore a diﬀerent renormalization.

We now compute the variational derivatives of the
propagator (E1) using two simpliﬁcations. First, we spe-
cialize to linear perturbations about a ﬂat spatial geome-

36

try with a trivial lapse function, and we specialize the co-
ordinates so that the background quantities are hij = δij
and N = 1. At the end of the appendix we will discuss
variational derivatives about more general backgrounds,
and explain why the ﬂat space, unaccelerated variational
derivatives are suﬃcient for our renormalization compu-
tations.

p [N, hab] and V sc

The second simpliﬁcation involves a truncation of
the Hadamard series: The biscalars Usc[N, hab] and
Vsc[N, hab]
in (E1) have been deﬁned only via the
Hadamard series (B8), so the only clear way to compute
their variational derivatives is to vary the Hadamard co-
eﬃcients U sc
p [N, hab], and then to sum—
or to approximate the sum of—the resulting series. At-
tempting to formally carry this out results in a series
which involves arbitrarily-many derivatives of Dirac δ-
distributions. We truncate this series by omitting all
terms which involve more than two derivatives of Dirac
distributions. The justiﬁcation for this is discussed at
the end of the appendix.

Using static Minkowski coordinates (t, x), we denote
by v and w the spatial coordinates of the two arguments
of the propagator (E1). Varying with respect to the spa-
tial metric, hij → δij + δhij, shows that

(cid:20) δ(∆1/2)

2 −1 +

σ n

δGH(v, w) = cn

δUsc
σ n

2 −1 − (n − 2)δσ
(cid:21)

2σ n

2

+ δVsc ln(σ/(cid:96)2)

,

(E2)

where we have used the fact that the unvaried biscalars
are ∆[δij] = 1, Usc[1, δij] = 1, and Vsc[1, δij] = 0 in the
ﬂat, unaccelerated background which has been assumed.
We now evaluate these terms one by one.

The second-to-last term in (E2) is the simplest to com-

pute. The variation of Synge’s world function is

1
δσ =
2
where r ≡ v − w and

ds rirjδhij(xs),

(E3)

0

xs ≡ w + sr

(E4)

(cid:90) 1

is the aﬃnely-parametrized geodesic joining the points
w = x0 and v = x1 in the background space. Also note
that the unvaried world function is explicitly σ(v, w) =
r2/2, where r ≡ |r|. The formula (E3) can be obtained
by directly varying the deﬁnition of σ given by Eq. (3.1)
of Ref. [9], or by varying the identity Daσ[hcd]Daσ[hcd] =
2σ[hcd] [9] to obtain a transport equation for δσ.

Similarly, from the deﬁnition (B7) of the van Vleck-

Morette determinant we obtain

(cid:90) 1

(cid:20)

δ∆ =

δh(xs) + (2s − 1)rjDiδhij(xs)

ds

0

s(1 − s)rirjD2δhij(xs)

− 1
2

(cid:21)

− 1
2

[δh(v) + δh(w)],

(E5)

where D2 = δij∂i∂j and δh ≡ δijδhij.

Next we vary Usc with respect to the spatial metric.
Recalling (B14a) and our aforementioned criterion re-
garding the retained derivatives of Dirac distributions,
it follows that only the zeroth and ﬁrst-order terms in
the Hadamard series must be varied. The zeroth-order
term is U sc
0 [N, hab] = 1 for all N and all hab, so its vari-
ation trivially vanishes. Using (B13a), the variation of

the ﬁrst-order term is instead

δU sc

1 =

1

2(n − 4)

37

dsD2δ∆(xs, w)

(E6)

(cid:90) 1

0

if n (cid:54)= 4, where the Laplacian is understood to act on the
ﬁrst argument of δ∆. If n = 4 however, U sc
1 [N, hab] = 0
for all metrics and so δU sc

(cid:40)

gn =

1 = 0. Deﬁning
if n (cid:54)= 4,
if n = 4,

1/(4 − n)
0

(E7)

it follows from (E5) and (E6) that

(cid:90) 1

0

δUsc =

gnr2
16

ds{s2(1 − s)2rirjD4δhij(xs) + 4s(1 − s)(1 − 2s)riDjD2δhij(xs) + [2 − 4s(1 − s)]D2δh(xs)
− 8s(1 − s)DiDjδhij(xs)}.

(E8)

Terms involving second and higher-order terms in the Hadamard series have been omitted here.

If n (cid:54)= 4, these expressions are all that are needed to evaluate δGH/δhij in the approximation used in section VI.
The variation of Vsc is important only if n = 4, and approximating it in that case by δV sc
0 , it follows from (B15) that
δVsc is proportional to a line integral of D2δ∆. More precisely, it is given by the right-hand side of (E8) with the
gnr2 prefactor removed. Now inserting (B12), (E3), (E5), and (E8) into (E2) shows that for all n > 2,

δGH(v, w)

δhij(x)

= −

1

r2δij[δΣ(x, v) + δΣ(x, w)] − 2

ds

4(n − 2)rn
− (2s − 1)r2r(iDj)

x

(cid:17)

δΣ(x, w + sr) +

rn
4

rn−4 + δn,4 ln

(cid:90) 1
(cid:20) 2gn

0

(cid:16)
r2δij − rirj(cid:2)(n − 2) +
(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:90) 1
(cid:16)
(cid:17)
+(cid:2)2s(1 − s) − 1(cid:3)δijD2

(cid:18) r2

2(cid:96)2

ds

0

x

s(1 − s)r2D2

1
2
4s(1 − s)Di

xDj
x

δΣ(x, w + sr)

,

(E9)

(cid:26)

(cid:26)

x

(cid:3)
(cid:27)

(cid:27)

where again, r = v − w and third and higher derivatives of Dirac distributions have been omitted.

Next we turn to the variational derivative of GH with respect to the lapse function N , varied so that N → 1 + δN .
The Hadamard parametrix depends on the lapse through the explicit prefactors in (E1), and also through the potential
Λsc in (B4) that enters into the diﬀerential operator Lsc which aﬀects Usc[N, hab] and Vsc[N, hab] via (B14a) and (B15).
Taking this into account, a calculation similar to the one for δGH/δhij gives

δGH(v, w)

δN (x)

= −

1

2(n − 2)rn−2

δΣ(x, v) + δΣ(x, w) − rn−2

4

rn−4 + δn,4 ln

dsD2

xδΣ(x, w + sr)

, (E10)

(cid:20) 2gn

(cid:18) r2

(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:90) 1

2(cid:96)2

0

where higher-derivatives terms have again been omitted.
Although these calculations have all been performed
for scalar ﬁelds, they are easily adapted to the elec-
tromagnetic case: We note that the electromagnetic
Hadamard parametrix GH[N, hab], which is given by
(B19) and (B21), can be obtained from the scalar
parametrix GH[N, hab] using the substitution N → 1/N .
It follows that the electromagnetic variational derivatives
in the ﬂat, unaccelerated limit are just
δGH(v, w)
δGH(v, w)
δN (x)
δhij(x)

δGH(v, w)

δhij(x)

=

,

= − δGH(v, w)
(E11)

δN (x)

.

We now explain why the simpliﬁcations used in the
above computations—specialization to ﬂat, unacceler-
ated backgrounds and truncation at two derivatives—
are suﬃcient for the renormalization computations in the
body of the paper. For this explanation it is helpful
to consider variational derivatives about general back-
grounds (hij, N ). For each integer p ≥ 0, we deﬁne the
set Fp of functionals F = F [hij, N ] that are symmetric
bidistributions on Σ by the requirement that the varia-
tion of F under hij → hij + δhij, N → N + δN is given

by

δF (x, x(cid:48)) =

(cid:90) 1

p(cid:88)

q=0

0

(cid:20)

H K(cid:48)(cid:48)

(x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48)

ds

s , s)DK(cid:48)(cid:48)δN (x(cid:48)(cid:48)
(cid:21)
s )

.

(E12)

+ ˜H i(cid:48)(cid:48)j(cid:48)(cid:48)K(cid:48)(cid:48)

(x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48)

s , s)DK(cid:48)(cid:48)δhi(cid:48)(cid:48)j(cid:48)(cid:48) (x(cid:48)(cid:48)
s )

q

1

, x(cid:48)(cid:48)

. . . Dk(cid:48)(cid:48)

Here K(cid:48)(cid:48) means the sequence of indices k(cid:48)(cid:48)
1 . . . k(cid:48)(cid:48)
q , DK(cid:48)(cid:48) =
s for 0 ≤ s ≤ 1 is the aﬃnely parameter-
Dk(cid:48)(cid:48)
(x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48), s) and
ized geodesic joining x to x(cid:48), and H K(cid:48)(cid:48)
(x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48), s) are some smooth tritensors on Σ.
˜H i(cid:48)(cid:48)j(cid:48)(cid:48)K(cid:48)(cid:48)
In other words, functionals in Fp have variations which
consist of integrals along the geodesic joining x and x(cid:48) of
derivatives of the variations δhij and δN up to pth order.
One can show that Fp is closed under simple algebraic
operations, and taking covariant derivatives with respect
to x or x(cid:48) maps Fp to Fp+1. Finally one can show that
the type of operation on functionals given in (B14) (B15)
and (B16) maps Fp to Fp+2.

p lies in F2p+2 and V sc

The variation of Synge’s world function is still given
by (E3) (with ri replaced by dxi/ds), and so σ is an
element of F0. It follows using the deﬁnition (B7) that
∆ is an element of F2, and we obtain from the Hadamard
p lies in F2p+4.
construction that U sc
Consider now the evaluation of stress-energy moments
using the expression (6.4) for the renormalization of the
stress-energy tensor. We wish to consider the limit λ → 0
of such moments. Note that this involves a weak limit of
the distributional quantities which appear in the third
line of (6.4), not a pointwise limit. The explicit ex-
pression for a renormalized stress-energy moment will
be given by inserting a variational derivative obtained
from an expression of the form (E12) into (6.4) and then
into (4.17). The arguments of the tritensors H K(cid:48)(cid:48)
and
˜H i(cid:48)(cid:48)j(cid:48)(cid:48)K(cid:48)(cid:48)
in (E12) will then contain explicit factors of
λ. Therefore, by local ﬂatness and by smoothness of the
background lapse function, to leading order in λ (in a
weak limit sense) these tritensors can be replaced by their
ﬂat space, unaccelerated limits. Similarly the geodesic

38

x(cid:48)(cid:48)
In
s can be replaced by its ﬂat space version (E4).
other words, one can use the ﬂat space, unaccelerated
variational derivatives (E9) and (E10) computed above,
to leading order in λ, interpreting the coordinates (t, x)
in these expressions to be the Fermi normal coordinates
deﬁned after (6.1).

Finally, we can omit all terms in δGH/δhij or δGH/δN
which involve more than two derivatives of Dirac dis-
tributions. This is because integrations by parts with
respect to ˜x in multipole expressions obtained from (6.4)
show that such terms cannot contribute to renormaliza-
tions of the quadrupole and lower-order moments.

As a ﬁnal remark, we note that one might have
naively attempted to avoid Hadamard parametrices by
instead building a family G0[N, hab] of propagators us-
ing the methods of perturbation theory. Suppose that
G0[1, δij] = cnσ[δij]1− n
2 , so the usual propagator is recov-
ered in a ﬂat, unaccelerated background. Also suppose
that this family of propagators is more generally a sym-
metric Green function in the sense that it satisﬁes (3.25)
for all N and hab. Varying this equation with respect
to N oﬀ of a background in which N = 1 and hij = δij
shows that D2δG0 = ωnδΣ(x, x(cid:48))δN−DaδN DaG0. From
the viewpoint of perturbation theory, perhaps the most
natural solution this this equation treats the entire right-
hand side as a source and integrates it against the back-
ground G0[1, δij]. Using such a procedure to deﬁne
G0[1 + δN, δij], it follows that

δG0(v, w)

δN (x)

= − 1
ωn

δijDi

xG0(v, x)Dj

xG0(x, w)

(E13)

A similar expression may also be obtained for variations
with respect to hij. In either case, ﬁxing v and w results
in variations which do not have compact support in x.
The family of propagators which is obtained in this way
therefore fails to satisfy the constraints summarized at
the end of section III A, implying that the boundary con-
ditions implicit in such a construction are inappropriate
for our purposes. The Hadamard family of propagators
is diﬀerent and does not share this problem.

[1] W. Sutherland, Philosophical Magazine 269, 47 (1899).
[2] M. Abraham, Annalen der Physik 315, 105 (1902).
[3] H. A. Lorentz, The Theory of Electrons and its Applica-
tions to the Phenomena of Light and Radiant Heat, 2nd
ed. (Teubner, Leipzig, 1915).

[4] P. Amaro-Seoane, J. R. Gair, M. Freitag, M. C. Miller,
I. Mandel, C. J. Cutler, and S. Babak, Classical and
Quantum Gravity 24, R113 (2007).

[5] P. Amaro-Seoane, J. R. Gair, A. Pound, S. A. Hughes,
and C. F. Sopuerta, Journal of Physics Conference Series
610, 012002 (2015).

[6] L. Blanchet, S. Detweiler, A. Le Tiec, and B. F. Whiting,

Phys. Rev. D 81, 064004 (2010).

[7] N. Yunes, A. Buonanno, S. A. Hughes, Y. Pan, E. Ba-
rausse, M. C. Miller, and W. Throwe, Phys. Rev. D 83,

044044 (2011).

[8] S. E. Gralla and R. M. Wald, Classical and Quantum

Gravity 25, 205009 (2008).

[9] E. Poisson, A. Pound, and I. Vega, Living Reviews in

Relativity 14 (2011), 10.1007/lrr-2011-7.

[10] L. Barack, Classical and Quantum Gravity 26, 213001

(2009).

[11] A. Pound, in Equations of Motion in Relativistic Grav-
ity, Fundamental Theories of Physics, Vol. 179, edited by
D. Puetzfeld, C. L¨ammerzahl, and B. Schutz (Springer,
2015) pp. 399–486.

[12] A. I. Harte, in Equations of Motion in Relativistic Grav-
ity, Fundamental Theories of Physics, Vol. 179, edited by
D. Puetzfeld, C. L¨ammerzahl, and B. Schutz (Springer,
2015) pp. 327–398.

39

[13] B. Wardell, in Equations of Motion in Relativistic Grav-
ity, Fundamental Theories of Physics, Vol. 179, edited by
D. Puetzfeld, C. L¨ammerzahl, and B. Schutz (Springer,
2015) pp. 487–522.

[14] P. Taylor and E. E. Flanagan, Phys. Rev. D92, 084032

(2015), arXiv:1504.04622 [gr-qc].

dam, 1979).

[37] W. G. Dixon,

in Equations of Motion in Relativistic
Gravity, Fundamental Theories of Physics, Vol. 179,
edited by D. Puetzfeld, C. L¨ammerzahl, and B. Schutz
(Springer, 2015) pp. 1–66.

[38] S. E. Gralla, A. I. Harte, and R. M. Wald, Phys. Rev.

[15] M. J. S. Beach, E. Poisson, and B. G. Nickel, Phys. Rev.

D80, 024031 (2009), arXiv:0905.2391 [gr-qc].

D 89, 124014 (2014), arXiv:1404.1031 [gr-qc].

[39] S. E. Gralla, A. I. Harte, and R. M. Wald, Phys. Rev.

[16] V. P. Frolov and A. Zelnikov, Journal of High Energy

D 81, 104012 (2010).

Physics 2014, 68 (2014), 10.1007/JHEP10(2014)068.

[40] J. L. Synge, Relativity: The General Theory (New York,

[17] E. Shuryak, H.-U. Yee, and I. Zahed, Phys. Rev. D 85,

Interscience Publishers, 1960).

104007 (2012).

[41] F. G. Friedlander, The Wave Equation on a Curved

[18] B. P. Kosyakov, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A23, 4695 (2008),

Space-Time (Cambridge University Press, 2010).

arXiv:0803.3304 [hep-th].

[19] D. V. Gal’tsov, Phys. Rev. D 66, 025016 (2002).
[20] D. Galakhov, Soviet Journal of Experimental and The-
oretical Physics Letters 87, 452 (2008), arXiv:0710.5688
[hep-th].

[42] S. Agmon, Lectures on elliptic boundary value problems

(van Nostrand, Princeton, NJ, 1965).

[43] W. G. Dixon, “Special relativity: The foundations of

macroscopic physics,” (1978).

[44] L. F. Costa, C. Herdeiro, J. Nat´ario, and M. Zilh˜ao,

[21] P. O. Kazinski, S. L. Lyakhovich, and A. A. Sharapov,

Phys. Rev. D 85, 024001 (2012).

Phys. Rev. D 66, 025017 (2002).

[22] E. Shuryak, H.-U. Yee, and I. Zahed, Phys. Rev. D 85,

104006 (2012).

[23] J. W. M. Bush, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 47,

269 (2015).

[24] M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045

[45] L. F. O. Costa and J. Nat´ario, in quations of Motion in
Relativistic Gravity, Fundamental Theories of Physics,
Vol. 179, edited by D. Puetzfeld, C. L¨ammerzahl, and
B. Schutz (Springer, 2015) pp. 215–258.

[46] P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A167, 148 (1938).
[47] T. C. Quinn and R. M. Wald, Phys. Rev. D 56, 3381

(2010).

(1997).

[25] M. Fanuel and J. Govaerts, Journal of Physics A: Math-

ematical and Theoretical 47, 405401 (2014).

[48] T. C. Quinn, Phys. Rev. D 62, 064029 (2000).
[49] Y. Mino, M. Sasaki, and T. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. D55,

[26] T. Stegmann and N. Szpak,

(2015), arXiv:1512.06750

3457 (1997), gr-qc/9606018.

[cond-mat.mes-hall].

[50] B. S. DeWitt and R. W. Brehme, Annals of Physics 9,

[27] A. I. Harte, Classical and Quantum Gravity 25, 205008

220 (1960).

(2008).

[51] M. Casals, E. Poisson, and I. Vega, Phys. Rev. D 86,

[28] A. I. Harte, Classical and Quantum Gravity 25, 235020

064033 (2012).

(2008).

[29] A. I. Harte, Classical and Quantum Gravity 26, 155015

(2009).

[52] I. M. Gel’fand and G. E. Shilov, Generalized Functions,
Vol. I: Properties and Operations (Academic Press, New
York, 1964).

[30] A. I. Harte, Classical and Quantum Gravity 27, 135002

[53] L. H¨ormander, The Analysis of Linear Partial Diﬀeren-

(2010).

[31] A. I. Harte, Classical and Quantum Gravity 29, 055012

(2012).

[32] S. Detweiler and B. F. Whiting, Phys. Rev. D 67, 024025

(2003).

[33] M. Mathisson, General Relativity and Gravitation 42,

1011 (2010).

tial Operators IV (Springer, Berlin, 1985).

[54] J. Hadamard, Lectures on Cauchy’s problem in linear
partial diﬀerential equations (Yale University Press, New
Haven, CT, 1923).

[55] R. M. Wald, Quantum ﬁeld theory in curved spacetime
and black hole thermodynamics. (University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, IL (USA), 1994).

[34] W. G. Dixon, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London

[56] M. R. Brown, Journal of Mathematical Physics 25, 136

Series A 314, 499 (1970).

(1984).

[35] W. G. Dixon, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal

[57] H. Bateman, Higher transcendental functions, edited by

Society of London Series A 277, 59 (1974).

A. Erdelyi, Vol. 1 (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1953).

[36] W. G. Dixon, in Isolated Gravitating Systems in General
Relativity, edited by J. Ehlers (North-Holland, Amster-

40

Symbol

N (x), hab(x)
dV, dV⊥⊥⊥
B (x), ˆT ab
T ab

B (x)

φ(x), φself (x), φhold(x)

φS(x), ˆφ(x), ˆφself(x)

ρ(x), J(x)

ξa(x), ψa(x)

Z, zt

Pt(ξ), ˆPt(ξ)

pa(t), Sab(t)

F a(t), N ab(t)
X(x, x(cid:48)), σ(x, x(cid:48))
X a(x, x(cid:48))

gab,c1···cp (x), ˆφ,a1···ap (x)

ˆJ a1···apbc(zt), ˆI a1···apbc(zt)
Qa1···ap (zt), qa1···ap (zt)

λ

β, γ

L, Lsc, Lem

Meaning

Relevant equations

The lapse function and the spatial metric.

(2.2), (2.6)

Volume elements with respect to the spacetime and spatial metrics.

(2.8)

A body’s bare and renormalized stress-energy tensors.

(3.23), (3.35)

Total (physical) scalar ﬁeld, scalar self-ﬁeld, and the scalar holding
ﬁeld required to maintain staticity; related by φ = φself + φhold.
Electrostatic equivalents are denoted by Φ···.
The scalar S-ﬁeld and the eﬀective (or renormalized) physical and
self-ﬁelds, related by ˆφ = φ − φS and ˆφself = φself − φS. Electrostatic
equivalents are again denoted by Φ···.
Scalar and electrostatic charge densities, respectively.

A generalized Killing vector ﬁeld on spacetime and an arbitrary
spatial vector ﬁeld, respectively. (Sometimes ψa = ha
projection of a generalized Killing ﬁeld).

bξb is a

Timelike worldline used to construct the generalized Killing ﬁelds
and a point on that worldline at time t. Sometimes chosen to be a
body’s center of mass.

Bare and renormalized generalized momenta.

Linear and angular momenta, deﬁned to be components of the
renormalized generalized momentum.

Net force and torque, deﬁned to be components of the generalized
force.

Synge’s world function with respect to gab and hab, respectively.
Spacetime separation vector deﬁned via the exponential map. Also
related to X via X a = −∇aX (note the unconventional minus sign).
Tensor extensions for the metric and the eﬀective scalar ﬁeld
(usually evaluated on the central worldline Z).
Multipole moments of a body’s eﬀective stress-energy tensor. These
hold equivalent information but have diﬀerent index symmetries.

(2.15), (2.20), (2.22)

(3.11), (3.21), (3.40),

(2.15), (2.16)

(3.3), (3.4), (3.6)

(3.3), (4.34)

(3.1), (3.22)

(4.21)

(4.26)

(3.5)

(4.2), (4.3), (4.4),
(4.7), (4.8), (4.9)

(4.17), (4.18)

Electrostatic and scalar multipole moments, respectively.

Scaling parameter for one-parameter families used to deﬁne point
particle limits.

(4.16)

(5.1)

Scaling exponents for the one-parameter families of source densities
and stress-energy tensors used to deﬁne point particle limits.

(5.1), (5.9)

Diﬀerential operator for the static ﬁeld equations corresponding to,
respectively, an arbitrary potential, the potential for the rescaled
static scalar ﬁeld, and the potential for the rescaled electrostatic
ﬁeld.

(B3), (B4), (B5)

U(x, x(cid:48)), V(x, x(cid:48)), W(x, x(cid:48))

∆(x, x(cid:48))

Spatial biscalars appearing in the Hadamard Green function
associated with L − Λ. When the potential Λ is the scalar or
electrostatic one, we use Usc, Uem, etc.

(B8), (B14), (B15),
(B16), (B17)

The spatial van Vleck-Morette determinant.

(B7)

TABLE II. In this table, for the aid of the reader, we list some commonly occurring symbols that appear in the paper. We do
not list symbols whose meaning is very conventional, or symbols which are used only in the immediate vicinity of where they
are introduced. For each item listed, we give a brief description, and also a reference to the equation in the text where the
symbol is deﬁned, or after which the symbol is ﬁrst introduced. We do not include propagators (which are listed separately in
table I).

