t16/014

T-branes through 3d mirror symmetry

Andr´es Collinucci1, Simone Giacomelli1, Raﬀaele Savelli2, Roberto Valandro3,4,5

1Physique Th´eorique et Math´ematique and International Solvay Institutes,

Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, C.P. 231, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium

2Institut de Physique Th´eorique, CEA Saclay,

Orme de Merisiers, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

3Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Trieste,

Strada Costiera 11, 34151 Trieste, Italy

4INFN, Sezione di Trieste, Via Valerio 2, 34127 Trieste, Italy

5ICTP, Strada Costiera 11, 34151 Trieste, Italy

Abstract

T-branes are exotic bound states of D-branes, characterized by mutually non-commuting
vacuum expectation values for the worldvolume scalars. The M/F-theory geometry lifting
D6/D7-brane conﬁgurations is blind to the T-brane data.
In this paper, we make this
data manifest, by probing the geometry with an M2-brane. We ﬁnd that the eﬀect of a
T-brane is to deform the membrane worldvolume superpotential with monopole operators,
which partially break the three-dimensional ﬂavor symmetry, and reduce supersymmetry
from N = 4 to N = 2. Our main tool is 3d mirror symmetry. Through this language, a
very concrete framework is developed for understanding T-branes in M-theory. This leads
us to uncover a new class of N = 2 quiver gauge theories, whose Higgs branches mimic those
of membranes at ADE singularities, but whose Coulomb branches diﬀer from their N = 4
counterparts.

6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
9
2

 

 
 
]
h
t
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
2
6
0
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Abelian mirror symmetry: The A series

2.1 N = 2 theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 N = 4 theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Brane picture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 T-branes and their M-theory counterparts

3.1
IIA perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 M-theory perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 String theory interpretation of monopole operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 T-branes and mirror symmetry: The A series

4.1 T-branes as deformations by monopole operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Is the singularity frozen? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2

5 T-branes and mirror symmetry: The D series

5.1 Basic setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 T-branes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Local mirror symmetry

6.1 General strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Local mirror symmetry in the Abelian case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 Local mirror symmetry in the D and E series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7 Conclusions and outlook

A Mirror map for D4 theories

1 Introduction

1

3
3
6
7

8
8
9
10

13
13
16

18
18
21

23
23
24
26

28

30

Simple singularities of complex surfaces and semi-simple Lie algebras are both classiﬁed by
ADE Dynkin diagrams. This coincidence, originally known to mathematicians as the McKay
correspondence, has an extremely colorful incarnation in string theory, which not only reproduces
it, but gives it a clear meaning. If one compactiﬁes M-theory or IIA string theory on a K3 surface
with a canonical ADE-type singularity, the eﬀective ﬁeld theory will contain a gauge multiplet
for the corresponding Lie algebra. The Cartan components of this multiplet originate from the
KK zero modes of the supergravity three-form C3. The roots arise in a more interesting way
from the fact that the singularity has spheres of vanishing area that are interconnected in the
form of a Dynkin diagram. M2 or D2-branes wrapping such zero size spheres will give rise to
massless particles in the eﬀective theory that are charged under the Cartan U (1)’s thanks to the

minimal coupling RM 2/D2 C3.

The A series of singularities admits another interpretation. The geometry in this case has
a circle ﬁbration along which one can reduce M-theory to IIA. The AN −1 case gives rise to a
system of N coincident D6-branes, which are known to carry an SU (N ) gauge group.

1

This correspondence between singularities and Lie algebras can also be studied from the point
of view of a probe M2 or D2-brane that is point-like on the singular K3-surface, and extends
over three non-compact directions. In this case, the three-dimensional (3d) ﬁeld theory exhibits
a ﬂavor symmetry corresponding to the singularity in question. This symmetry is not visible in
a classical Lagrangian. It can be deduced by exploiting the 3d mirror symmetry discovered in
[1] and further understood in the context of string theory in [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. It can also be
deduced directly by introducing the notion of monopole operators, and studying their properties
as was done in [9, 10, 11].

All of these incarnations of the ADE classiﬁcation have been known for some twenty years.
Part of the IIA open string moduli space can be understood in this geometric language. For
instance, the IIA system with N coincident D6-branes carries three adjoint-valued Higgs ﬁelds
φ1,2,3
D6 . Switching on vevs hφi
D6i 6= 0 will break SU (N ) to some subgroup. Usually, such vevs are
interpreted as the act of separating the coincident branes, naturally making some of the gluons
massive. The M-theory counterpart to this is deforming or resolving the AN −1 singularity to a
milder singularity.

D6i,hφj

However, there is a class of vevs that does not admit such a geometric interpretation, vevs
such that [hφi
D6i] 6= 0 for some i, j. If we complexify two out of the three scalars, then
this corresponds to switching on nilpotent vevs for the complexiﬁed Higgs, i.e. hΦD6i 6= 0, with
hΦD6ip = 0, for some p ∈ Z. In this case, the D6-branes are still coincident, but carry only a
subgroup of the original SU (N ). In the M-theory uplift, the singularity is exactly the same, yet
some physical eﬀect is reducing the gauge group. Such vevs were ﬁrst considered in [12] and
[13]. They were later studied more systematically in [14, 15] in the context of 7-branes, where
they were dubbed ‘T-branes’. The ‘T’ stands for the fact that the Higgs has an upper triangular
vev. The eﬀect is to bind coincident branes together so that they behave as one, and the gauge
group is reduced. However, there is no clear proposal to date for their M-theory counterparts.
The problem has been analyzed in the related context of F-theory in [16, 17], but both these
studies need further developments.

Switching on an oﬀ-diagonal vev of ΦD6 corresponds in string theory to turning on a coherent
state of strings connecting diﬀerent branes of the stack. These very strings uplift to M2-branes
wrapping vanishing cycles of the singular geometry. Therefore, one is led to believe that the
uplift of a T-brane is a coherent state of vanishing M2-branes. However, in the absence of a
formulation for microscopic M2-branes, we will turn to the 3d perspective of a probe M2-brane
that witnesses this eﬀect. This approach will prove very powerful.

From the 3d perspective, a D2-probe in the presence of a stack of D6-branes sees hΦD6i as
a mass for the D2/D6 matter ﬁelds, ˜QhΦD6iQ. Mass deformations have been studied in the
literature, however, only in the case where the mass matrix is diagonalizable. The case of a
nilpotent vev (i.e. a T-brane), is very diﬀerent, and corresponds to a non-diagonalizable mass
matrix. This possibility has been pointed out in [18] for the case of two intersecting D6-branes.
It is our goal to study such deformations and their mirror descriptions in depth.

In this paper, we initiate the study of T-branes by probing them with D2-branes. By using
mirror symmetry, we learn what a T-brane looks like, when uplifted to M-theory. Switching on
a T-brane vev on a stack of N D6-branes corresponds to an oﬀ-diagonal mass term on a probe
D2-brane, in analogy to the 4d analysis of [14]. The mirror of this is a D2 probing and AN −1
singularity, with a superpotential deformed by monopole operators. By studying this case we
develop a technique that can be extrapolated to D2-branes at any ADE singularity, including the
exceptional ones which have no Lagrangian mirror. The main tool we develop for this is what we
will refer to as ‘local 3d mirror symmetry’. It consists in taking a quiver gauge theory, focusing

2

on a single node, ungauging all other nodes, and performing mirror symmetry. This allows us to
study the eﬀect of a monopole operator that deforms a single node in terms of an easier mirror
theory, ﬁnding the low energy eﬀective description, performing a mirror transformation back to
the original theory, and ﬁnally recoupling the node to the rest of the quiver.

The goal of this paper is to understand what a T-brane looks like in M-theory. By using mir-
ror symmetry, we see how T-brane data gets translated into information on a singular geometry,
which is then one simple uplift away from M-theory.

Conversely, this paper introduces a new class of 3d N = 2 theories of a very special kind.
These theories have each a natural N = 4 ‘parent’ quiver gauge theory with, as a Higgs branch,
a complex surface with an ADE singularity whose Dynkin diagram corresponds to the quiver
shape. The N = 2 theory is described by a quiver shape with less nodes than the parent, yet
the Higgs branch remains intact. From this, one deduces that the singularity has obstructed
blow-up modes, a phenomenon already observed in [16].

The paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we review the 3d mirror symmetry for the
simplest class of theories, those with SU (N ) ﬂavor symmetry. We start with its N = 2 version,
and build it up to N = 4. We also explain the string theory realization of the correspondence as a
‘9-11’ ﬂip in M-theory. In section 3, we review the concept of ‘T-branes’ adapted to D6-branes,
and present the issue of understanding their M-theory uplift. We also provide a microscopic
interpretation of monopole operators as membranes wrapping vanishing cycles. In section 4, we
study T-branes for the A series, through mirror symmetry, in the most straightforward way,
and ﬁnd that the eﬀective theories are described by a reduced quiver. In section 5, we introduce
an O6−-plane to the stack of D6-branes that we are probing: We summarize the mirror dual,
which has DN ﬂavor symmetry, and we discuss the eﬀect of T-branes on the Coulomb branch of
the quiver theory. In section 6, we introduce the technique of ‘local mirror symmetry’: We ﬁrst
test it for the A series, for which we already know the result, and then we apply it to the case
of minimal T-branes in the D and E series. In section 7, we present a summary and an outlook.
Finally, in appendix A, we provide several details of the N = 4 mirror map for the D4 theory.

2 Abelian mirror symmetry: The A series

2.1 N = 2 theory
Three-dimensional mirror symmetry without Chern Simons terms (the case of interest in this
paper) is reviewed in [8]. We will brieﬂy explain it here.

The original mirror symmetry is a strong/strong coupling correspondence between two d = 3,
N = 4 theories. However, it also exists for d = 3, N = 2 theories. For the purposes of this
article, it will be more useful to proceed anachronistically, by starting from d = 3, N = 2, and
building up to d = 3, N = 4 when necessary. Since d = 3, N = 2 is the dimensional reduction
of d = 4, N = 1, we will use the familiar language of the latter.

Theory A: The prototype Abelian mirror symmetry has on the one side, what we will call
‘theory A’, an N = 2 theory with the following ﬁeld content:

• A U (1) vector multiplet with, as its lowest components, one real scalar σ and one photon

Aµ. In three dimensions, one can Hodge dualize the photon to a scalar:

dA = ⋆dγ .

(2.1)

3

The supersymmetrization of this operation corresponds to converting the vector multiplet
into a (twisted) chiral multiplet by pairing γ with σ. It is useful to deﬁne the exponential
of this new complex scalar

V± ∼ e±(iγ+σ) .

(2.2)

V− and V+ are called monopole operators. Inserting a monopole operator V+ in the path
integral

Z D[ϕ] . . . V+(x) . . . e−S

(2.3)

is equivalent to cutting out a small sphere around the spacetime event x and imposing
boundary conditions on Aµ equivalent to having a magnetic monopole of unit charge.
Alternatively, in radial quantization on S2 × R, acting with V± on the vacuum creates a
solitonic state corresponding to a line bundle O(±1) over the sphere.
• N pairs of electrons and positrons (Qi, ˜Qi), with i = 1, . . . , N , each in a chiral multiplet.
The superpotential is zero, W = 0. This theory can be represented by the following simple
quiver:

V±

U (1)

˜Qi

Qi

N

There is a global U (N ) × U (N ) symmetry acting on the Q and ˜Q separately in the ( ¯N, 1) and
(1, N) respectively.
The moduli space of vacua splits into two mutually exclusive branches loosely referred to as
‘Coulomb’ and ‘Higgs’ branch. We will refer to these as CBA and HBA, respectively. They only
intersect at their respective origins. The Higgs branch has hσi = 0, and is parametrized by the
meson matrix
(2.4)

j = Qi ˜Qj .

HBA : Mi

The only constraint on this matrix is the rank-one condition rk(M ) = 1, i.e.

Mi

jMk

ℓ = Mi

ℓMk

j

∀ i, j, k, ℓ .

(2.5)

The Coulomb branch consists in vacua with hQi = h ˜Qi = 0, and (γ, σ) taking on vevs. The
most appropriate coordinates for this branch are the monopole operators V±. Na¨ıvely, it seems
redundant to keep both coordinates, since classically V+V− = 1. However, there is a one-loop
correction, yielding the quantum relation

CBA :

V+V− = 0 .

(2.6)

The correction comes from the fact that, at the origin of the Coulomb branch, the chiral matter
ﬁelds become massless, and the na¨ıve Wilsonian eﬀective action develops a singularity. It can
be derived via heuristic arguments, via a one-loop calculation of the metric of the moduli space,
via mirror symmetry, or via a monopole counting argument.

4

W2,±

U (1)

˜q2

˜q1

q1

q2

U (1)

W1,±

q3

˜q3

U (1)

W3,±

Figure 1: Example of the mirror of N = 2 SQED with N = 3 ﬂavors

Theory B: Now let us deﬁne ‘theory B’, which is mirror to theory A. It is described by an
Abelian quiver gauge theory, whereby the quiver is shaped like an aﬃne Dynkin diagram (see
Figure 1). The ﬁeld content is the following:

• A U (1)N gauge group, of which the diagonal subgroup decouples from the rest of the theory.
Each node comes with a vector multiplet, of which the lowest components are rewritten as
pairs of monopole operators Wi,± ∼ exp±(iγi + σi).

• N pairs of fundamental and antifundamental chirals (qi, ˜qi), connecting the nodes.
• N neutral chiral multiplets Si.

The N = 2 theory comes equipped with the superpotential

W =

N

Xi=1

Siqi ˜qi .

(2.7)

This theory also has a Coulomb and a Higgs branch (CBB and HBB), which are mutually

exclusive. The Higgs branch is parametrized by the following gauge invariant coordinates:

N mesons

zi = qi ˜qi ,

a baryon B =

N

Yi=1

qi ,

an anti-baryon

˜B =

N

Yi=1

˜qi .

(2.8)

The F-terms for the Si set all mesons to zero zi = 0. Hence, we ﬁnd that the Higgs branch is
given by

HBB : B ˜B = 0 ,

(2.9)

where this follows from the deﬁnition of the variables. An analysis of the Coulomb branch
reveals the following quantum relations:

CBB : Wi,+Wi,− = SiSi−1 .

(2.10)

By inspection, we see that HBB bears a striking resemblance to CBA in (2.6), and CBB to HBA
in (2.4) and (2.5). This prompts the following identiﬁcations:

V+ ←→ B
i ←→ Si
Mi

V− ←→ ˜B
Mi

i−1 ←→ Wi,−

Mi−1

i ←→ Wi,+

(2.11)

5

This correspondence is essentially the content of mirror symmetry. The branches get exchanged,
and quantum corrected relations (for the Coulomb branches) get rewritten in terms of quantum
exact classical F-terms (for the Higgs branches). The Higgs branch is protected from quantum
corrections in N = 4 theories, but also in Abelian N = 2 theories.
2.2 N = 4 theory
Having setup the N = 2 mirror symmetry, it is now easy to obtain a version with enhanced
N = 4 supersymmetry. We essentially keep the same theories ‘A’ and ‘B’, but making some
mild modiﬁcations.

Theory A:

• The Q and ˜Q are now paired up as hypermultiplets.
• The U (1) vector multiplet described by the monopole operators V± is completed to an N =
4 vector multiplet by pairing it up with an N = 2 chiral multiplet of lowest component Φ.

• Finally, the superpotential is ﬁxed by N = 4 supersymmetry to be

W =

N

Xi=1

˜QiΦQi .

(2.12)

This superpotential constrains the meson matrix to be traceless, TrM = 0. The new quiver is
the following:

Φ, V±

U (1)

˜Qi

Qi

U (N )

The equation for the Coulomb branch CBA is modiﬁed due to the fact that the ﬂavors can
acquire mass whenever Φ has a vev. It turns out that the quantum exact equation is

CBA :

V+V− = ΦN .

(2.13)

This is the equation of the AN −1 singularity.

Theory B: Here, we only make one change. A chiral ﬁeld Ψ is added, and the superpotential
is augmented to the following:

N

Xi=1

N

Si .

W =

Siqi ˜qi − Ψ

Xi=1
Ψ is massive, and its F-term imposes the constraint PN
i=1 Si = 0. Note that this matches the
tracelessness constraint for the meson matrix on the A-side, and alters the geometry of the
Coulomb branch CBB. After integrating out Ψ, we can solve for its F-term by rewriting the Si
as diﬀerences of chiral multiplets Si = ϕi − ϕi+1, giving rise to the quiver diagram in ﬁgure 2.

(2.14)

6

ϕ2, W2,±

˜q1

U (1)

˜q2

q1

q2

U (1)

ϕ1, W1,±

q3

˜q3

U (1)

ϕ3, W3,±

Figure 2: Example of the mirror of N = 4 SQED with N = 3 ﬂavors

The (qi, ˜qi) pairs now form hypers, and the ϕi are naturally combined with the vectors of each
node into N = 4 vector multiplets. Note, that if we keep Ψ in the Lagrangian, the F-terms for
the Si will impose
(2.15)

qi ˜qi = Ψ .

The new Higgs branch equation will then be

HBB : B ˜B = ΨN

i.e. the AN −1 singularity. It is therefore natural to postulate the correspondence:

2.3 Brane picture

Φ ↔ −Ψ .

(2.16)

(2.17)

Let us now brieﬂy review the M-theory embedding of the N = 4 theories, and the mirror
correspondence. The latter can be understood as a chain of dualities from IIA to itself, namely
a TST chain. But it is easiest to understand it as a ‘9-11’ ﬂip, i.e. starting form an M-theory
conﬁguration, and choosing two diﬀerent available circles to reduce to IIA. The following diagram
summarizes the idea:

M2 at C2/ZN × R3 × C2
S 1
S 1

D2, N × D6’s on R10

TST

D2, D6 on C2/ZN × R6

In M-theory, we have an M2-brane probing an AN −1 singularity, and ﬁlling out the R3. So both
the orbifold in blue and the C2 in red are transverse to it.

7

Theory A: The orbifold has a natural circle ﬁbration in it, it can be understood as a limiting
geometry in a family of N -centered Taub-NUT spaces. Reducing along this, the blue circle, we
get a D2 that probes N D6-branes in ﬂat spacetime. The setup is summarized by the following:

0

6
N × D6 × × × × × × ×

1

2

3

4

5

D2

× × ×

7 8 9

|
}
decoupled hyper |

{z

{z

vector m.

Φ, σ, Aµ

}

The theory has N = 4 supersymmetry, but we will use the N = 2 language to describe the

multiplets. The ﬁeld content is the following:

• A decoupled hypermultiplet (two chiral mutiplets) containing the scalars φI=3,...,6 that

represent movement along the D6-brane.

follows

• An N = 4 vector multiplet that breaks into an N = 2 chiral and a vector multiplet as
(2.18)
As explained before, we can construct monopole operators V± ∼ exp±(σ + iγ), where γ is
the dual photon.
• A hyper that breaks into two oppositely charged multiplets (Qi, ˜Qi), with i = 1, . . . , N ,

(Φ ≡ φ7 + iφ8);

(σ ≡ φ9, Aµ) .

coming from D2/D6 stretched strings.

Theory B: We can choose a diﬀerent M-theory circle along which to reduce to IIA, by making
a simple observation. The C2 in red, in our main diagram, can be written as a single-centered
Taub-NUT geometry. This is simply a circle ﬁbration over R3, where the ﬁber collapses over
one point. Reducing along that circle gives IIA with a single D6-brane. In this case, we are left
with a D2-brane probing C2/ZN , in the presence of a single D6-brane. The latter will not give
us any interesting information in our analysis, so we will drop it from now on. The theory of
a D2 probing an orbifold singularity is a well-understood one, and it gives rise exactly to the
quiver gauge theory we referred to as the ‘theory B’. We can now explain the theory as follows:
• The D2 breaks up into fractional branes, each represented by a node of the quiver. Each
fractional brane is actually a D4-brane wrapping a vanishing sphere of the singular geome-
try. It comes with its vector multiplet, here broken up into a chiral ϕi, and a vector Wi,±.
The ϕi can be thought of as the positions of the fractional branes along two non-compact
directions.

the (qi, ˜qi) ﬁelds.

• Two adjacent fractional branes have open strings stretched between them, giving rise to
• The superpotential W = P(ϕi − ϕi+1)qi ˜qi expresses the fact that, if two fractional branes

move apart along the remaining non-compact directions, the stretched strings acquire mass.

3 T-branes and their M-theory counterparts

3.1

IIA perspective

Here, we brieﬂy review the concept of the so-called ‘T-branes’, adapted to our case of interest
in IIA string theory.

8

D6i. Typical vevs for the φI

A stack of N D6-branes will naturally host a U (N ) gauge group, and its ﬁeld content will
carry three adjoint Higgs ﬁelds φI
D6, with I = 7, 8, 9, corresponding to the three transverse
directions. Whenever anyone of the latter acquires a vev, the gauge group will break to the
subgroup of U (N ) that commutes with the hφI
D6 are diagonalizable,
and the eigenvalues are interpreted as the positions of the constituent D6-branes. Naturally,
as branes are separated, the stretched strings that accounted for the non-Abelian gauge group
become massive, thereby explaining the breaking.
It could happen, however, that the vevs
for the three Higgses are not simultaneously diagonalizable.
In that case, one can no longer
interpret the Higgsing as separating the branes. For the purposes of this paper, we single out
one of the three transverse directions, say φ9
D6, and pair up the other two into a complex ﬁeld
ΦD6 ≡ φ7
We will deﬁne a T-brane as a stack of D6-branes where ΦD6 has a nilpotent vev, i.e. hΦD6ip =
0 for some p. This implies that all the eigenvalues of ΦD6 are zero, and the branes are still very
much coincident. Nevertheless, the gauge group is broken to a subgroup. For example, on a
stack of 4 D6-branes,

D6 + iφ8

D6.

(3.1)

hΦD6i = 


0 0 0 0
1 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0




the unbroken gauge group is U (1) × U (2). Physically, two of the four branes are forming a
bound state with a unique center of mass, and the other two are forming a U (2) sub-stack.
These bound states were ﬁrst studied in [12] and [13]. Later, in [14, 15] the scope of the analysis
was broadly expanded to cases of non-perturbative 7-branes.

The example given here (3.1) is what is known as a minimal nilpotent orbit. It corresponds to
the gauge orbit of this matrix under adjoint U (4) transformations. One could also have matrices
with two, and three ones in the superdiagonal. These correspond to higher nilpotent orbits. In
this paper, we will mostly focus on minimal orbits.

The fact that these non-trivial vevs have no geometric interpretation in terms of brane
positions has a counterpart in the M-theory uplift. As explained in the previous section, IIA in
the presence of several D6-branes uplifts to a purely geometric background known as the multi-
centered Taub-NUT space. Essentially, the M-theory circle is non-trivially ﬁbered over the
transverse R3, and it collapses above the locus of each D6-brane. When the D6-branes coincide,
these ‘centers’ where the ﬁber collapses coalesce, forming an orbifold C2/ZN singularity.1

3.2 M-theory perspective

Since switching on diagonalizable vevs for ΦD6 corresponds to moving the D6-branes apart, in
M-theory, this data translates into a deformation of the singularity. However, for T-branes,
the singularity remains intact, even though we expect the gauge group to break. How is this
breaking seen in M-theory?

This is a question that has barely been addressed, and to our knowledge there are only two
proposals for studying this phenomenon in the related context of F-theory [16, 17]. For the
time being, both proposals consist in sophisticated mathematical constructions that might ap-
propriately encode T-branes into the singular geometry in M/F-theory. However, their physical
meanings need further development.

1Strictly speaking, one gets an ALF space. By taking the limit where the asymptotic radius of the M-theory

circle goes to inﬁnity, one gets the C

2/Z N orbifold.

9

In principle, the uplift of a T-brane to M-theory can be characterized as follows: In general,
switching on a vev for a worldvolume ﬁeld ΦD6 on a D6-brane corresponds to turning on a
coherent state of strings in the spectrum corresponding to ΦD6. Strings that go from one brane
to itself will uplift to metric moduli in M-theory. However, strings stretched between diﬀerent
branes on the stack uplift to M2-branes wrapping an S2 that is a circle ﬁbration over the
interval connecting the two branes. When the branes coincide, the S2 shrinks to zero size, and
the membrane gives rise to an eﬀective massless particle. Therefore switching on a vev for an
oﬀ-diagonal Higgs corresponds precisely to a coherent state of M2-branes that wrap the sphere
corresponding to the root of the Lie algebra along which the vev points. This heuristic picture,
as convincing as it may be, requires a mathematical formalism in order to actually compute
things.

In this paper, we will approach T-branes by probing them with D2-branes. We will see that
we will gain a clear view on these phenomena, and most of all, computational power. We will
start with the case of coincident D6-branes, which uplift to C2/ZN singularities. But we will
learn enough from that simple class of examples to be able to study the rest of the ADE series.
What we will show is that, on the mirror side, a D2-brane probing the mirror of a T-brane
has a monopole operator deforming its Lagrangian. Schematically, this is summarized as follows:

hΦD6i = (cid:18) 0

m 0(cid:19)

0

⇒ ∆WD2 = mQ1 ˜Q2

mirror

←−−−−−−→ ∆WD2 = mW2,+ .

(3.2)

We claim that these deformations by monopole operators gives an M-theory deﬁnition of
what a T-brane is without reference to IIA string theory. The point is that, even though the
A-theory description of a T-brane as an oﬀ-diagonal mass is simple, and its infrared theory
does describe the M2-brane, it is only available in this form for the A and D series. On the
other hand, the mirror description of a T-brane as a superpotential deformation by a monopole
operator, although less straightforward, is more universal, and can be used to describe the E
series.

The core of this paper will therefore consist in studying quiver gauge theories deformed by

monopole operators.

3.3 String theory interpretation of monopole operators

So far we have deﬁned monopole operators in ﬁeld theory. It is however useful to gain some
intuition about them by ﬁnding their string theoretic interpretation. In this section, we ﬁnd
such an interpretation for magnetic monopoles on fractional D2-branes at singularities. We will
describe it in two ways.

Operator-state correspondence In this paragraph, we will use the operator-state corre-
spondence to show that monopole operators map to states of D2-branes wrapping vanishing
spheres.

One way to deﬁne a monopole operator W+(x) is as a disorder operator that enforces a singu-
larity on the 3d gauge ﬁeld at the space-time point x, such that, for any two-sphere surrounding
it, we have

ZS 2

F = 2π · 1 .

(3.3)

Since the theory of the M2-brane is the IR ﬁxed point of the D2 theory, we can apply the

operator state correspondence, and map

R3 7→ S2 × R .

10

(3.4)

From the perspective of radial quantization on R3, time is the radial direction, and the two-
spheres of equal radius correspond to spacelike slices. Placing a monopole operator at the origin

gets mapped to preparing a particle state at time τ = −∞, with magnetic charge RS 2 F = 2π.

Let us now think about our fractional D2, which is a D4-brane wrapping a vanishing P1. Its
Wess-Zumino worldvolume coupling to the C3 form now becomes a source for induced D2 charge:

SWZ = µD4ZS 2×R×P 1

F ∧ C3 = 2πµD4ZR×P 1

C3 .

(3.5)

Hence, inserting a monopole operator at the origin of R3 corresponds to creating a magnetic
D-particle at τ = −∞ from a D2 wrapping an exceptional cycle.

Open membranes
dence in order to see a D-particle. In this paragraph, we will see this even more directly.

In the previous paragraph, we appealed to the operator state correspon-

Let us consider a D4-brane, with an open D2-brane ending on it. The fact that this con-
ﬁguration is possible has been established in [19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. The argument is as follows:
The full IIA supergravity action plus worldvolume theories of the host D4 and open D2-branes
contains the Chern-Simons and Wess-Zumino terms

2 ZX 10(cid:16) ˜G4 ∧ ⋆ ˜G4 + B2 ∧ G4 ∧ G4(cid:17) + µ4ZD4

S = 1
˜G4 = dC3 − C1 ∧ H3 ,

with

(F2 + ı∗

4B2) ∧ ı∗

4C3 + µ2ZD2

ı∗
2C3 ,

(3.6)

where F is the DBI ﬁeld-strength on the D4-brane, and ı∗
p represents the pullback onto the
worldvolume of a p-brane.
In this setup, we will impose H3 = 0, so we can freely use the
‘unimproved’ ﬁeld strength G4 = dC3. The presence of the D4-brane implies a sourced Bianchi
identity

(3.7)
where, in general, by δk we mean the k-form that is Poincar´e dual to a (10 − k)-dimensional
object. We can write the equations of motion for C3 as follows:

dG4 = µ4δ5 ,

d (⋆G4 + G4 ∧ B2) = µ4δ5 ∧ (F2 + B2) + µ2δ7

⇒ d ⋆ G4 = µ4δ5 ∧ F2 + µ2δ7 .

(3.8)

Now we can integrate both sides of the equation on an S7 that intersects the D2-brane at one
point, and the D4-brane at the S2 that surrounds the boundary of the D2-brane:

0 = µ4ZS 2

F2 + µ2 .

(3.9)

This implies that F2 must take on the proﬁle of a codimension three defect on the D4-brane:

dF2 = −

µ2
µ4

δ(4)
3

,

(3.10)

where δ(4)
3
D2.

is a threeform deﬁned on the D4 that is Poincar´e dual to the boundary of the open

Now that we have analyzed the case in ﬂat ten dimensions, the analysis can be repeated in
the case where both the D4 and the D2 are wrapping an exceptional P1. The answer remains
the same: The insertion of a D2 ending on the D4 induces a 3d instanton on the 3d worldvolume

11

D4

D2

σ

Figure 3: When gs is turned on, a D2 ending on a D4 becomes a smooth funnel shape.

of the D4. In other words, we will have dF2 = µ2
δ3 in the 3d theory. Therefore, the insertion of
µ4
a D2-brane that ends on the point x in R3 has the same eﬀect as inserting W+(x) in the path
integral. Hence, we identify the open D2 with a monopole operator.

How is this related to the state-operator correspondence explained before? Or more directly,
can we see that this is equivalent to creating a D2-particle state? The answer is a resounding
‘yes’. It can be shown that the supersymmetric solution for the 3d instanton solution requires
the real scalar σ to acquire a proﬁle of the form

σ ∼

q
r

with q =

µ2
µ4

.

Since σ represents a transverse coordinate to the fractional D2-brane, (i.e. wrapped D4-brane),
this means that the open D2 is pulling on the D4, stretching it into a funnel shape, as depicted
in ﬁgure 3. The induced worldvolume metric of the D4-brane is now:

ds2 = (cid:18)1 +

1

r4(cid:19) dr2 + r2dΩ2

2 ,

(3.11)

which is conformally equivalent to both R3 and S2 × R. The point is that now we can alternate
between the two pictures that characterize a monopole operator, simply by changing the choice
of the direction we call ‘Euclidean time’:

• If we choose a Cartesian coordinate, say the vertical axis, then the funnel looks like a
disturbance localized in space and time, from the perspective of the D4. In other words, it
looks like an instanton created by the monopole operator.

• If we choose the direction r to be our Euclidean time, then the system looks like a D2-brane
wrapping a vanishing P1 that appears as a magnetic particle in 3d, whereby the spacelike
slices of spacetime grow with time.

This geometry allows us to see the operator-state correspondence fully embedded in string
theory. The point of view that a monopole operator creates a D2-particle state bolsters our claim
that oﬀ-diagonal strings stretched between D6-branes should uplift in M-theory to M2-branes
wrapping vanishing cycles, since such strings appear on the D2 as oﬀ-diagonal mass terms that
are mirror to monopole operators.

12

4 T-branes and mirror symmetry: The A series

4.1 T-branes as deformations by monopole operators

From the perspective of the worldvolume theory on a D2 probing D6-branes, the Higgs ﬁeld
on a stack of D6-branes appears as a background ﬁeld, or a coupling in three dimensions.
Starting with just N D6-branes, if we switch on a vev hΦD6i = diag(0, 0, . . . , 0, m,−m), this
will correspond to moving the last two branes apart symmetrically, leaving the D2 brane in the
middle. We therefore expect the two ﬂavors to gain equal and opposite masses

W = Φ

N

Xi=1

(Qi ˜Qi) + m(QN −1 ˜QN −1 − QN ˜QN ) .

(4.1)

In the infrared, we are left with N − 2 ﬂavors, and hence the new quantum corrected equation
for the Coulomb branch will be
(4.2)

V+V− = ΦN −2 .

This perfectly matches the fact that the M-theory singularity has been deformed to a milder
one. On the B-side, these mass terms are sent to the following terms

m(QN −1 ˜QN −1 − QN ˜QN ) −→ m(SN −1 − SN ) .

Now, the F-terms for the Higgs branch are modiﬁed as follows:

qi ˜qi = Ψ i 6= N − 1, N ,

qN −1 ˜qN −1 = Ψ − m ,

qN ˜qN = Ψ + m ,

from which we ﬁnd

B ˜B = ΨN −2(Ψ − m)(Ψ + m) .

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

Hence, the singularity has been deformed.

This takes care of diagonalizable masses. The main subject of this paper is to study what

happens when we turn on non-diagonalizable masses. For example, take

W = Φ

N

Xi=1

(Qi ˜Qi) + mQN −1 ˜QN .

(4.6)

Clearly, two chiral ﬂavors (that do not ﬁt into the same hyper) become massive. One might
suspect that the Coulomb branch equation would account for that by lowering the power of Φ
by two. However, the eﬀective theory after integrating out the massive ﬂavors is qualitatively
diﬀerent from the class of theories we have been considering:

Weﬀ = Φ

N −2

Xi=1

(Qi ˜Qi) −

Φ2
m

P ˜P ,

(4.7)

where P ≡ QN , ˜P ≡ ˜QN −1. This oﬀ-diagonal mass term breaks the N = 4 to N = 2. Now there
are less ﬂavors, but one of them has a coupling quadratic in Φ. We expect that the Coulomb
branch equation remains qualitatively unmodiﬁed as follows:

V+V− = ΦN −2 ×(cid:18)−

Φ2

m(cid:19) .

13

(4.8)

4

˜q4

q4

1

˜q3

q3

q1

˜q1

3

q2

˜q2

2

1

˜q3

q3

q1

˜q1

3

q2

˜q2

2

W = P4

i=1 Si(qi ˜qi − Ψ)

W = P3

i=1 Siqi ˜qi −P2

i=1 SiΨ − Ψ2

m S3

Figure 4: Example of the A3-theory with a minimal T-brane. The eﬀect of the T-brane on
the quiver is to remove the corresponding node and substitute the arrow ending and starting
from that node with new arrows that connect the adiacent nodes (by abuse of notation the new
quarks are also denoted as q3, ˜q3).

In order to conﬁrm this, one needs to repeat the calculations of [11] in this new context.

Let us now investigate what happens on the mirror side. The oﬀ-diagonal mass operator we

have introduced gets mapped to a monopole operator

m QN −1 ˜QN −→ mWN,+ .

(4.9)

Here, it becomes very diﬃcult to say what happens as a result of this deformation. WN,+ is
not a fundamental ﬁeld in the UV, where the theory is weakly coupled, so we cannot simply
diﬀerentiate the superpotential with respect to it. There are several strategies around this
problem. One of them is to make the mirror map of the eﬀective theory (4.7). We do this as
follows:

First, we start with the N = 2 mirror symmetry, as explained in section 2.1, but for a theory

with N − 1 ﬂavors.

WA = 0 −→ WB =

N −1

Xi=1

Si(qi ˜qi) .

(4.10)

Now we supplement the A-side with its superpotential (4.7), and map each term to the B-side,

WB =

N −1

Xi=1

Si(qi ˜qi) − Ψ

N −2

Xi=1

Ψ2
m

Si −

SN −1 .

(4.11)

This is an N = 2 theory described by a quiver diagram with N − 1 nodes instead of N with
bifundamentals and N − 1 neutral chiral multiplets which we again call qi, ˜qi and Si respectively
(see ﬁgure 4 for an example). We will recover this result again in section 6.2 via a more general
method. Let us analyze its Higgs branch to see what kind of singularity we get. The F-terms
for the Si give the following equations:

qi ˜qi = Ψ ,

i 6= N − 1 ,

qN −1 ˜qN −1 =

Ψ2
m

.

(4.12)

14

From this, we create again the following invariants:

for which we deduce the relation

B ≡

N −1

Yi=1

qi ,

˜B ≡

N −1

Yi=1

˜qi ,

B ˜B = ΨN −2(cid:18) Ψ2

m (cid:19) ∼ ΨN .

(4.13)

(4.14)

As expected from the M-theory picture, the AN −1 singularity stays undeformed!

In order to test this correspondence in a non-trivial way, we will match HBA with CBB.
On the A-side, the eﬀective superpotential (4.7) obtained by integrating out the massive ﬁelds,
gives the following F-term equation for Φ

N −2

Xi=1

Qi ˜Qi − 2

Φ
m

P ˜P = 0 .

(4.15)

The F-term equations for the various electrons and positrons tell us that the HB and CB are
still disjoint outside the origin. Hence, on HBA, the meson matrix gets a partial tracelessness
condition

N −2

Xi=1

Mi

i = 0 .

(4.16)

Otherwise, the full meson matrix still satisﬁes the rank one condition just as before, the main
diﬀerence being that it is smaller by one row and one column.

Let us now see what the B-side shows. We now have the Si satisfying a partial sum condition

on the Coulomb branch (hΨi = 0)

N −2

Xi=1

Si = 0 .

(4.17)

At each node, there is a pair of monopoles Wi,± like before, except that there is one node less.
In order to ﬁnd the equations governing the CB geometry, we repeat an argument in [8]: At each
node, there is a topological U (1) symmetry sending W± 7→ e±iαW±, which means that the CB
must be a circle ﬁbration over a space. However, since the Higgs branch of that Abelian theory
is invariant under this U (1), it must be the case that the CB and HB intersect at a ﬁxed point
of the U (1) group action. This means that the circle ﬁber collapses to a point. This implies a
geometry of the following form:

Wi,+Wi,− = SiSi−1 .

(4.18)

To understand this, note, that whenever either Si or Si−1 are zero, a part of the Higgs branch
becomes unobstructed. This equation tells us that we have a C∗-ﬁbration over the (Si, Si−1)-
plane that collapses over the origin. In conclusion, we see that HBA matches CBB.

The case of a general nilpotent mass term can be treated along the same lines. Let us
consider a mass matrix in Jordan form (with nonzero elements under the diagonal). A Jordan
block of size k corresponds to adding to the superpotential the following terms:

m

k−1

Xi=1

Qi ˜Qi+1.

15

(4.19)

The massless ﬁelds now are Qk, ˜Q1 and Qj, ˜Qj with j > k. Below the scale m we then get a
U (1) theory with N − k + 1 ﬂavors. Using the F-term equations

mQi + ΦQi+1 = 0; m ˜Qi + ˜Qi−1Φ = 0,

(4.20)

we can see that when we integrate out massive ﬁelds we generate the superpotential term

(−1)k−1 Φk

mk−1 Qk ˜Q1,

(4.21)

which is mapped in the mirror theory (a quiver with N − k + 1 nodes) to −ΨkSN −k+1/mk−1.
Repeating the analysis performed before for the case k = 2, we get to the conclusion that the
singularity is still AN −1. Notice that adding the mass terms (4.19) corresponds to turning on
superpotential terms involving monopole operators at k− 1 consecutive nodes in the mirror side.

4.2

Is the singularity frozen?

The fact that the eﬀective quiver for the mirror of a minimal T-brane looks like an AN −2 Dynkin
diagram, but its moduli space describes an AN −1 singularity has a very interesting consequence.
It implies that one vanishing sphere is obstructed from being blown up. More precisely, blowing
up a sphere would correspond to adding a real FI term to its corresponding node. The loss of
a node, however, implies the loss of a U (1) factor, which in turn means we have one less real
FI parameter at our disposal. This dovetails nicely with the observation of [16] that T-branes
obstruct blow-ups of singularities.

We would now like to make a comment about the complex FI terms on the B-side (super-
potential terms linear in the ﬁelds Si), which are related to deformations of the singularity as
was explained before. In the original N = 4 theory we have N gauge groups and hence N com-
plex FI terms. However, supersymmetry requires their sum to vanish so the truly independent
parameters are N − 1. One equivalent way to see this is as follows: The superpotential for the
N = 4 theory can be written in the form
Xi=1

Si(qi ˜qi) − Ψ

(4.22)

W =

N

N

Xi=1

Si .

We can now turn on linear superpotential terms for all the Si ﬁelds, Pi aiSi, and with a redef-

inition of the ﬁeld Ψ we can set the sum of the ai to zero. On the other hand, once we have
turned on the nilpotent mass term the superpotential becomes (4.11), and since the ﬁeld Ψ now
appears quadratically in the superpotential, we end up generating new superpotential terms by
shifting it. Consequently, we are no longer allowed to reabsorb a combination of the complex FI
parameters ai with a redeﬁnition of the ﬁelds. Since in the process we lost one gauge node, we
conclude that we still have N − 1 independent FI parameters, or equivalently N − 1 deformation
parameters.
A related observation is the following fact noticed in [14]: Given a nilpotent mass matrix m,
we can obtain a diagonalizable one by adding its hermitian conjugate m†. The sum of the two
mass terms does not break extended supersymmetry anymore, since m + m† trivially commutes
with its hermitian conjugate. We can imagine turning on the above mass deformation in two
steps: ﬁrst we consider the matrix m only, which breaks N = 4, and then turn on the second
mass term in the resulting theory. In the IR we expect to recover the N = 4 theory associated
with m + m†.

16

We are now in the position to explicitly check this: Let us consider again (4.6). By integrating
out the massive ﬁeld and extracting the mirror we get (4.11). The hermitian conjugate mass
matrix leads of course to the term m∗QN ˜QN −1 on the A side. Turning on this term corresponds,
on the B side, to adding in (4.11) the FI term m∗SN −1. The F-term equations can be solved
by setting to zero Ψ and all the mesons except qN −1 ˜qN −1, whose vev should be equal to −m∗.
This higgses the neighbouring gauge groups to the diagonal combination and by expanding the
superpotential around this vev we generate a mass term for SN −1. Integrating out massive ﬁelds
we are left with

W =

N −2

Xi=1

Si(qi ˜qi) − Ψ

N −2

Xi=1

Si,

(4.23)

which corresponds precisely to the N = 4 quiver of type AN −3. One can also see the deformation
of the AN −1 singularity explicitly. In fact the F-terms resulting from adding m∗SN −1 to (4.11)
are qi ˜qi = Ψ for i = 1, . . . , N − 2 and mqN −1 ˜qN −1 = Ψ2 − |m|2. After deﬁning the baryons as
usual, B = q1 . . . qN −1 and ˜B = ˜q1 . . . ˜qN −1, one obtains the relation

B ˜B ∼ ΨN −2(Ψ2 − |m|2).

(4.24)

The case of Jordan blocks of arbitrary size can be treated analogously. The only diﬀerence
is that the superpotential terms associated with the mass matrix m† now involve massive ﬁelds.
The case of a Jordan block of size three will be enough to illustrate this point. The superpotential
term related to m is

mQ1 ˜Q2 + mQ2 ˜Q3.

(4.25)

So Q1, Q2, ˜Q2 and ˜Q3 are all massive and we have the following F-term equations:

mQ1 + ΦQ2 = mQ2 + ΦQ3 = 0; m ˜Q2 + ˜Q1Φ = m ˜Q3 + ˜Q2Φ = 0.

(4.26)

As was explained in the previous section, when we integrate out massive ﬁelds we get an N = 2
eﬀective theory with the superpotential term

Φ3
m2 Q3 ˜Q1.

The superpotential related to m† is instead

m∗Q2 ˜Q1 + m∗Q3 ˜Q2

(4.27)

(4.28)

and both terms involve massive ﬁelds (Q2 and ˜Q2 respectively). Using the above F-term equa-
tions we can rewrite this as

m∗
m

− 2

ΦQ3 ˜Q1.

(4.29)

We conclude that turning on the superpotential term associated with m†, corresponds to turning
on (4.29) in the N = 2 eﬀective theory, which in turn is mapped to a term of the form ΨS1 in
the mirror theory.
We ﬁnd that in general, the mass term related to m† is mapped in the mirror to terms of
the form Ψk−2Si (where k is the size of the Jordan block). We could also consider mass terms
related to matrices of the form (m†)n, which turn out to be mapped in the mirror to the terms
Ψk−n−1Si (with n < k), or also terms related to diagonal mass matrices, which instead are
mapped to Ψk−1Si. Repeating the computation of the previous paragraphs, one immediately

17

sees that all these terms do deform the singularity. The outcome is that the superpotential
terms Si and ΨnSi (with n smaller than the size of the corresponding Jordan block), which are
all related to “diagonalizable” completions of the mass matrix, correspond to deformations of
the singularity. In total we always have N such terms but one of them can be removed with a
shift of Ψ. We conclude that we always have N − 1 deformation parameters.

5 T-branes and mirror symmetry: The D series

5.1 Basic setup

So far, we have only discussed the simplest case of 3d mirror symmetry. In this section, we will
introduce another simple class of mirror pairs. They are summarized with the following diagram

M2 at C2/ΓDN × R3 × C2
S 1
S 1

D2, 2 N × D6’s + O6 on R10

TST

D2, D6 on C2/ΓDN × R6

Here, ΓDN is the discrete subgroup of SU (2) of order 4(N − 2) that leads to a DN singularity.
On the A-side, we have an O6-plane with N D6-branes and N image-D6-branes on top of it.
There is a D2/image-D2-pair sitting on top of the O6-plane. The 3d gauge group is Sp(1). The
ﬂavor symmetry, corresponding to the gauge group of the D6-branes, is SO(2N ).

Theory A: The theory A is deﬁned as an SU (2) gauge theory with N ﬂavours (Qa
b), with
a = 1, 2 the gauge index and i, j = 1, ..., N the ﬂavor index. The associated quiver diagram is
the following:

i , ˜Qj

Φ, V±

Sp(1)

˜Qi

Qi

DN

The N = 4 theory has the following superpotential

W =

N

Xi=1

Qa

i Φb
a

˜Qi
b .

(5.1)

One can see this theory as the quotient of a U (2) gauge theory with 2N ﬂavors (i.e. where now
i, j = 1, ..., 2N ). The O6-plane imposes an orientifold projection through an involution that acts
as

˜Qi
a 7→ iγabQb

jΓji

18

i 7→ −iγab ˜Qj
Qa

bΓji ,

(5.2)

where γ = σ2 (the second Pauli matrix) and Γ is the 2N × 2N matrix that in block-form can
be written as

1N

0 (cid:19) .

Γ = (cid:18) 0

1N

Before the projection, the mesonic matrix is given by

Mi

j ≡ Qa

i

˜Qj

a .

(5.3)

(5.4)

After imposing the projection, the quarks with i, j = N + 1, ..., 2N can be written in terms of
the ones with i, j = 1, ..., N . The mesonic matrix parametrizing the Higgs branch becomes then
constrained. In particular it can be written in block form as

M = (cid:18) A

B

C −AT (cid:19) ,

(5.5)

where A is a generic N×N matrix, while B, C are antisymmetric N×N . Because of its deﬁnition
(5.4), this 2N × 2N matrix has rank 2. The three F-terms for Φ tell us that, in addition, M
must satisfy M 2 = 0. Counting also the three conditions coming from the D-terms, the complex
dimension of HBA is then 4N − 6. Even if it is not immediate, this form of the meson matrix
can be mapped by an isomorphism to an antisymmetric (rank 2) meson matrix.
Let us study the Coulomb branch, i.e. M = 0 and Φ 6= 0. The D-term condition [Φ, Φ†] = 0
imposes that Φ = ϕT 3, where T 3 is the Cartan generator of the Sp(1) algebra. A vev for such a
ﬁeld breaks Sp(1) to U (1). Along this branch we can deﬁne two monopole operators U± that are
charged under the topological symmetry corresponding to the Cartan U (1) photon. Analogously
to the AN −1 case, we can write down the following quantum relation (that takes into account
the fact that ϕ controls the mass of both charged hypermultiplets and vector multiplets):

U+U− = ϕ2N −4 .

(5.6)

Both U± and ϕ are not gauge invariant, since they transform under the Sp(1) Weyl symmetry:
U+ ↔ U− and ϕ → −ϕ. We then deﬁne the gauge invariant coordinates on CBA as u ≡
2 ϕ(U+ − U−), v ≡ 1
2 (U+ + U−) and w ≡ ϕ2. Plugging these relations into (5.6), the equation
deﬁning the (complex) two dimensional CBA becomes

i

u2 + wv2 = wN −1 ,

(5.7)

i.e. the DN singularity.

Theory B: Since the theory A has a DN ﬂavor symmetry, it should come as no surprize that,
for the theory B, we have a quiver gauge theory with the quiver shaped like a DN aﬃne Dynkin
diagram, with non-Abelian nodes in the middle line (see Figure 5).

The arrows of the quiver represent bifundamental chirals, as the diagram shows.2 In order
not to clutter the ﬁgure, we did not include the adjoint chiral multiplets, so we list them here.
• The four external, Abelian nodes have each a neutral chiral multiplet. Starting from the
upper left in clockwise orientation, these are φq, φx, φy, φp. In N = 2 language, each of
these chirals is accompanied by a vector multiplet.

2In our convention, the arrows that go from a non-Abelian node to an Abelian one represent column vectors.

19

U (1)

U (1)

q

˜p

˜q

p

U (2)

A1

B1

U (2)

U (2)

x

˜y

˜x

y

U (1)

U (1)

Figure 5: DN quiver.

• Similarly, each non-Abelian node in the middle horizontal line has an adjoint chiral super-

ﬁeld Ψ1 , . . . ΨN −3, accompanied by a U (2) gauge multiplet.

The N = 4 theory has the following superpotential

W = Tr(cid:0) (Ψ1 − 1φq) q ˜q + (ΨN −3 − 1φx) x˜x + (ΨN −3 − 1φy) y ˜y + (Ψ1 − 1φp) p˜p(cid:1)

N −4

(BiΨiAi − AiΨi+1Bi)

(5.8)

+

Xi=1

The Higgs branch HBB is described by gauge invariant combinations of the quark ﬁelds
subject to relations coming from the F-terms for the ﬁelds Ψi and φp,q,x,y [24, 25]. When N is
even, the three invariants

z ≡ −˜qp˜pq ,
y ≡ 2˜pA1 ··· AN −4x˜xBN −4 ··· B1p + (−z)N/2−1 ,
x ≡ 2˜qA1 ··· AN −4x˜xBN −4 ··· B1p˜pq

(5.9)

(5.10)

(5.11)

satisfy the equation

x2 + zy2 = zN −1 ,

(5.12)
that matches with the equation (5.7) deﬁning CBA under the map z ↔ w, y ↔ v and x ↔ u.
When N is odd, the invariants satisfying the equation (5.12) are deﬁned in a diﬀerent way [24].
The Coulomb branch CBB is described by Weyl invariant combinations of the ﬁelds Ψi,
φq, φx, φy, φp and monopole operators with deﬁnite charges under the topological symmetries
relative to each node of the DN quiver. They satisfy quantum relations due to the fact that
the quarks acquire mass when the Ψi, φq, φx, φy, φp get a non-zero vev (see equations (A.3)
in Appendix A [26]). The D-term conditions on the U (2) adjoint scalars Ψi allow only vev
proportional to the diagonal U (1) generator or to the Cartan generator of SU (2). Along the
Coulomb branch the gauge group is broken to U (1)2N −3 (where one U (1) has decoupled) and
hence its complex dimension is equal to 4N − 6 as expected from mirror symmetry.
The mirror map between HBA and CBB is quite involved (and will be described in Ap-
pendix A for the D4 case). Analogously to the AN −1 case, the diagonal mesons (when M has
the form (5.5)) are mapped into combination of the scalar ﬁelds Ψi, φq, φx, φy, φp,3 while the

3By a careful analysis, one can see that the only component of Ψi that appears in these combinations is the

one relative to the diagonal U (1) of the corresponding U (2) node.

20

oﬀ-diagonal mesons are mapped to monopole operators with R-charge equal to one.4 Both the
oﬀ-diagonal mesons and the monopole operators have deﬁnite charges with respect to the Cartan
generator of the SO(2N ) ﬂavor group. For each set of topological charges we have one monopole
operator (with R-charge equal to one), that will be sent to the meson matrix element with the
same charges. One can check that the rank 2 condition on the meson matrix M translates to
the quantum relations involving the monopole operators and the scalar ﬁelds that deﬁne CBB
(see Appendix A).

5.2 T-branes

Having introduced the mirror symmetry for the DN case, we can now set out to study the eﬀect
of T-branes. The problem is substantially complicated by the fact that both the A and B theory
are non-Abelian. In this section, we will examine the deformation induced on the F-terms of
theory A by a general T-brane. In this way, we can infer the consequences on the HBA, and
thus, by mirror symmetry, we can deduce how CBB looks like after the deformation. In section
6.3, instead, we will study the eﬀective ﬁeld theories on the B-side, and concentrate on HBB for
the simplest class of T-branes corresponding to minimal nilpotent orbits.

On the A-side, a T-brane is described by a deformation of the superpotential (5.1) by a term
of the form ∆W = Tr(mM ), where M is the meson matrix deﬁned in 5.4, and m is a nilpotent
2N × 2N mass matrix. For the present analysis, it is more convenient to choose a basis where
both m and M are antisymmetric. This is always possible, since both matrices are in the adjoint
of SO(2N ).

Since the ﬂavor symmetry is partially broken by the T-brane, it is natural to expect that
part of HBA is lifted, namely, the part that does not commute with m. In other words, one
might na¨ıvely expect conditions of the form [m, M ] = 0, which can be translated via mirror
symmetry to a statement about non-conserved currents in the adjoint of the quantum ﬂavor
group. However, the conditions [m, M ] = 0 are not suﬃcient to satisfy all of the supersymmetric
constraints for (the vev of) M . At least in theories with ﬂavor algebras in the A and D series,
supersymmetric vacua are such that mM = M m = 0.5 Let us see why this is the case.

Firstly, the fact that m commutes with M says that m|Im(M ) : Im(M ) → Im(M ). Since m

is nilpotent by hypothesis, m|Im(M ) has a non-trivial kernel, and therefore

rk (mM ) < rk (M ) .

(5.13)

For theories in the A series, the gauge invariant F-terms involving the T-brane deformation

read

(1N t + m)M = 0 ,
M (1N t + m) = 0 ,

(5.14)

where t should be thought of as the Φ (Ψ) ﬁeld of section 2, if we use theory A (B) to describe the
IR ﬁxed point. Clearly the diﬀerence of these two equations gives us [m, M ] = 0. Moreover, in
HBA/CBB, which are the branches we are interested in here, M is non-vanishing and rk(M ) = 1.
The latter condition, due to (5.13), immediately implies mM = 0. Then, equations (5.14) force
the vev of t to vanish as well in this branch.

4Since we are in a N = 4 3d theory, these operators sit in the same multiplet of conserved currents correspoding

to the roots of the non-Abelian ﬂavor symmetry.

5There are some other universal conditions on M , which do not depend on the T-brane speciﬁed by m. They

are trM = 0 for the A series and M 2 = 0 for the D series.

21

For theories in the D series, things are more tricky. In this case, the gauge invariant F-terms

involving the T-brane deformation read

P + mM = 0 ,

(5.15)

where P is a generator of the chiral ring, independent of the others, which has the property of
being a symmetric matrix in the basis where m and M are antisymmetric. While a description
of the operator P in theory B is unknown, and would require a formulation of mirror symmetry
for non-Abelian theories, we can still present it in theory A. Following [25], we package the N
ﬂavors {Q, ˜Q} into the following doublet of 2N -vectors
i[Qa + ǫab ˜Qb] (cid:19)

√2 (cid:18) Qa − ǫab ˜Qb

a, b = 1, 2 ,

ψa =

1

(5.16)

with ǫ12 = 1. In this basis, one has

Mij = ψa
Pij = ψa

i ǫabψb
j ,
cψc
i ǫabΦb
j ,

(5.17)

where P is symmetric in i, j because the Sp(1)-adjoint ﬁeld Φ satisﬁes ǫabΦb

c = ǫcbΦb
a.

Equations (5.15) imply [m, M ] = 0. However, here rk(M ) = 2, which does not necessar-
ily imply mM = 0. For any non-trivial T-brane m, indeed, there are choices of M such that
rk(mM ) = 1. Nevertheless, it turns out that all of them lead to vacua which break supersym-
metry. In the description of theory A, such breaking occurs through violation of the D-terms
for Φ:6

Indeed, using the D-terms for ψ, i.e. ψ†
condition on the restriction of m to Im(M ) = Span{ψ1, ψ2}:

[Φ, Φ†] = 0 .
(5.18)
I ψI = |ψ|212, equations (5.15) lead to the following

mijψa

j = Φa

b ψb
i .

(5.19)

Therefore, since Φ is traceless, the nilpotency of m determines a violation of the D-terms (5.18),
except when Φ = 0, which means m|Im(M ) = 0, or equivalently mM = 0.
We have seen that, upon any T-brane deformation of the theories in both the A and D
series, supersymmetry still rules out branches of the moduli space where both the mesons M
and Φ are non-vanishing, as was the case for the undeformed theories.

Now we can use the power of mirror symmetry to learn what happens to the Coulomb branch
on the dual quiver side. Mirror symmetry maps the diagonal elements of the meson matrix M to
appropriate linear combinations of the adjoint scalars along the U (1)’s, including the diagonal
U (1)’s of the various U (2) nodes. On the other hand, the oﬀ-diagonal terms of M are mapped
to various monopole operators charged under the appropriate topological U (1) symmetries of
the various quiver nodes. Roughly, when M has the form (5.5),

M −→ M ≡

i Φi W2,+


Pi c1
W2,− Pi c2

...
...

i Φi

···
···
. . .




.

(5.20)

6Recall that for the A series there are no D-terms for Φ.

22

The F-term conditions for M are now mapped to F-term conditions for this matrix M deﬁned
above:
(5.21)

mM = M m = 0 −→ mM = Mm = 0 .

Now the classical equations from the A-side have given us highly non-trivial quantum equations
on the B-side that relate Lagrangian variables to monopole operators, telling us how CBB is
partly lifted. For example, if we take M and m in the form (5.5), a minimal T-brane with
non-zero m1,2 = −mN +2,N +1 implies that all the monopole operators and scalar ﬁelds in the
rows 2 and N + 1 and columns 1 and N + 2 must vanish.
However, the lack of a detailed N = 2 mirror map for the D series, prevents us from deducing
what goes wrong in theory B with vacua where mM 6= 0. It would be interesting to ﬁll in this
gap, and thus be able to generalize the lesson to theories in the E series.

6 Local mirror symmetry

6.1 General strategy

We have learned from the previous sections that the mirror of a T-brane on the A-side (i.e. a
D2-brane probing stacks of D6-branes), is the quiver gauge theory of a D2-brane probing an
aﬃne ADE singularity, whereby the superpotential is deformed by monopole operators ∆W ∼
Pi miWi,+, where the mi are the ‘mass’ parameters on the A-side.
In the A and D series, there is a perturbative theory A to deﬁne the T-brane. However, in
the E series, the analog of the A-side corresponds to the dimensional reduction of the Minahan-
Nemenchansky theories, which are non-Lagrangian. Hence, for these cases, we will deﬁne a T-
brane directly on the B-side, as a deformation of the quiver gauge theory by monopole operators.
In order to study the eﬀect of such deformations, however, we need to develop a new strategy,
as we cannot simply study the theory A. In this section, we present this new strategy ﬁrst via
the examples of the A and D series, and ﬁnally apply it to the E series.

The idea we propose is the following: Given a quiver gauge theory with a deformation by
a monopole operator ∆W = miWi,+ corresponding to the i-th dual photon, we focus on this
i-th node by taking the gauge couplings at neighbouring nodes to be very small. In this way
we can ignore their dynamics and consider the i-th node as a theory with a single gauge group.
The bifundamental multiplets are now simply interpreted as fundamentals of this gauge group.
Then we consider the mirror of the i-th node “in isolation”, which is in general a linear quiver
with oﬀ-diagonal mass terms. We can then integrate out massive ﬁelds, attempt to extract the
mirror, and ﬁnally reinsert this resulting theory into the original quiver. The key fact is that
this theory and the original one are equivalent in the IR.

To summarize, this is our procedure for treating a T-brane:
1. Deﬁne a T-brane for a Dynkin quiver gauge theory, called the ‘theory B’, where the N = 4
superpotential is supplemented by a term ∆W = miWi,+, where mi is a parameter, and
Wi,+ is the monopole operator charged under the topological U (1) of the i-th node. In
other words, it corresponds to the i-th dual photon.

2. Ungauge the neighbouring nodes of the quiver. This results in a ‘local quiver theory’ with

a single gauge node. Let us call this theory Bloc.

3. Perform mirror symmetry on this ‘local quiver theory’ Bloc, calling the resulting theory
Aloc. The monopole deformation term will be mapped to an oﬀ-diagonal mass term for the
matter ﬁelds in Aloc.

23

4. Integrate out the massive ﬁelds in Aloc, leading to an eﬀective theory ˜Aloc.
5. Compute the mirror of ˜Aloc, which we call ˜Bloc.
6. Couple ˜Bloc back into the original quiver, by trading the i-th node for it.
Two comments are in order. A generic T-brane corresponds to turning on superpotential
terms involving monopole operators at multiple nodes. Our strategy is perfectly applicable in
this case as well, since we simply need to reiterate the above steps at each node. This method
is particularly eﬀective in the class of theories we are considering because every gauge node is
balanced (the number of ﬂavors is twice the number of colors).
Infact, only in this case the
mirror of a monopole operator is a mass term and this allows us to simplify the answer by
integrating out massive ﬁelds.

This should in principle be applicable for the whole ADE series and in the next section we
will see that indeed it does work for the A series. For the D series, we will focus on Abelian
nodes in this paper. This choice can always be made if we assume a T-brane along a minimal
nilpotent orbit in DN . We leave the study of more general orbits for future work.

6.2 Local mirror symmetry in the Abelian case

Let us discuss how our procedure of ‘local mirror symmetry’ works in the Abelian case. The
superpotential for the N = 4 theory with N U (1) gauge nodes is

W =

N

Xi=1

Siqi ˜qi,

(6.1)

where the Si multiplets satisfy the constraint Pi Si = 0. It is more convenient to work in terms

of unconstrained ﬁelds and introduce a dynamical lagrange multiplier. The superpotential is
then rewritten as follows:

W =

Siqi ˜qi − Ψ(

Si) .

(6.2)

N

Xi=1

N

Xi=1

As before, this sets qi ˜qi = Ψ for every i, which is the correct chiral ring relation.

If we turn on a T-brane with a Jordan block of size two, we should add to the superpotential
a term proportional to a monopole operator for one gauge node of the quiver. Our proposal
for understanding the eﬀect of this deformation is then to focus on this node, which is a U (1)
theory with two ﬂavors and superpotential

W = S1q1 ˜q1 + S2q2 ˜q2 − Ψ(S1 + S2) + mW2,+ ,

(6.3)

where the T-brane is along the node 2. For simplicity we do not include the other terms
Ψ(S3 + . . . ) since they play no role in what follows. We will reintroduce them at the end of the
computation. The mirror of an N = 2 U (1) theory with two ﬂavors and no superpotential is
well known: it is again an Abelian theory with two ﬂavors plus two neutral chiral multiplets A1,
A2 and superpotential

A1Q ˜Q + A2P ˜P .

(6.4)

Under the mirror map the diagonal components of the meson matrix qi ˜qi are identiﬁed with Ai
and W+ becomes an oﬀ-diagonal mass term. By looking at our gauge node as N = 2 SQED plus
three neutral chirals S1, S2 and Ψ with the above superpotential and exploiting the mirror map

24

dictionary, we can immediately ﬁnd the mirror theory which is again SQED with two ﬂavors
and superpotential

W = A1Q ˜Q + A2P ˜P + S1A1 + S2A2 − Ψ(S1 + S2) + mP ˜Q.

(6.5)

The ﬁelds Si, Ai, P and ˜Q are now massive and we can integrate them out. We keep instead Ψ
until the end since it is coupled to other ﬁelds in the quiver. The equations of motion identify
Si with the mesons and we are left with

W = −

Ψ2
m

Q ˜P .

(6.6)

The theory ˜Aloc in the case at hand is SQED with one ﬂavor and the above superpotential. In
order to complete our analysis, we now derive the mirror of this model and “reconnect” the
resulting theory to the quiver. Since the mirror of SQED with one ﬂavor is the XYZ model, we
get the theory

W = XY Z −

Ψ2
m

X.

(6.7)

Interpreting now the ﬁelds Y, Z as the bifundamentals of the U (1) × U (1) gauge symmetry of
the neighbouring nodes of the quiver, we obtain a circular quiver with N − 1 U (1) nodes and
superpotential

W = XY Z +

N −2

Xi=1

Siqi ˜qi − Ψ(

N −2

Xi=1

Si) −

Ψ2
m

X.

(6.8)

This is exactly the theory we have already found in (4.11), with X playing the role of the extra
S ﬁeld. An example is shown in ﬁgure 6.

2

˜q2

q2

3

˜q1

q1

q3

˜q3

1

q4

˜q4

4

3

Y

Z

q3

˜q3

1

q4

˜q4

4

W = P4

i=1 Si(qi ˜qi − Ψ)

W = P2

i=1 Si(qi ˜qi − Ψ) + XY Z − Ψ2
m X

Figure 6: Example of the mirror of SQED with N = 4 ﬂavors with minimal T-brane.

Let us now brieﬂy discuss the case of more general T-branes. In the case of a Jordan block of
size three, after this procedure one of the gauge nodes still has a superpotential term involving
monopole operators. We should then repeat the above process at that node as well. The mirror
is again SQED with two ﬂavors and superpotential

W = A1Q ˜Q + A2P ˜P + XA1 + SA2 −

Ψ2
m

X − ΨS + mP ˜Q.

(6.9)

25

By integrating out X, S, Ai, P and ˜Q we ﬁnd

Ψ3
m2

−

˜P Q.

(6.10)

Again we ﬁnd a theory with one ﬂavor whose mirror is a variant of the XYZ model. The ﬁnal
quiver we are left with is a circular quiver with N − 2 nodes and superpotential

W = XY Z +

N −3

Xi=1

Siqi ˜qi − Ψ(

N −3

Xi=1

Si) −

Ψ3
m2 X,

(6.11)

which is again in perfect agreement with our previous ﬁndings. Clearly this procedure can be
reiterated for Jordan blocks of arbitrary size.

6.3 Local mirror symmetry in the D and E series

The above ideas can be immediately applied to the D and E series as well, at least in the case
of minimal nilpotent orbits, which requires turning on superpotential terms involving monopole
operators at Abelian nodes only. The analysis just involves the knowledge of mirror symmetry
for N = 2 Abelian theories, about which already a lot is known. The general case requires
non-Abelian mirror symmetry, which will not be discussed in the present paper.
Let us consider the aﬃne DN quiver which has four Abelian tails coupled to a U (2) gauge
group. In the presence of a T-brane related to a minimal nilpotent orbit, we can focus on one of
the Abelian tails. If we choose to focus on the node q (see Figure 5), the relevant superpotential
terms are7

W = −φ(q1 ˜q1 + q2 ˜q2) +

2

Xa=1

Tr (Ψqa ˜qa) + mWq,+ .

(6.12)

In the above formula Ψ is the chiral multiplet in the adjoint of U (2). We now apply the ‘local
mirror symmetry’ procedure at this node: we have SQED with 2 ﬂavors, so its mirror is again the
same type of theory. The diagonal components of the meson matrix are mapped to fundamental
ﬁelds on the mirror side, which we call s1 and s2, whereas the oﬀ-diagonal components are
mapped to monopole operators w+ and w−. The ﬁelds φ and Ψ are gauge invariant ﬁelds
which will be merely spectators in what follows. They have a counterpart in the mirror theory
which we will again call φ and Ψ. Calling Q and P the ﬂavors on the mirror side, we get the
superpotential

W = −φ(s1 + s2) + Tr (ΨM ) + s1Q ˜Q + s2P ˜P + mP ˜Q,

(6.13)

where M is a matrix transforming in the adjoint of U (2), whose components are si and w±:

M ≡ (cid:18) s1 w+

w− s2 (cid:19) .

(6.14)

We now simply integrate out the massive ﬁelds P and ˜Q, getting an Abelian theory with one
ﬂavor. The ﬁelds w± are now interpreted as the monopole operators of the latter. The resulting
superpotential is

W = −φTr M + Tr (ΨM ) −

s1s2
m

Q ˜P .

(6.15)

7Here the indices of q and ˜q are gauge indices from the full DN point of view, but are ﬂavor indices if we focus

only on the node q.

26

As we have already explained, the mirror of SQED with one ﬂavor is the XYZ model, where X,
Y and Z are respectively the mirror of the meson and monopole operators. Mirroring again we
then ﬁnd8

W = −φTr M + Tr (ΨM ) −

s1s2
m

XY Z

m

X +

.

(6.16)

Since Y and Z are now identiﬁed with the oﬀ-diagonal components of the ﬁeld M , this can be
rewritten as

W = −φTr M + Tr (ΨM ) −

X
m

detM.

(6.17)

Notice that all the above terms are U (2) invariant. We now glue again our theory to the U (2)
gauge node. Since the gauge group has now disappeared, our quiver has lost one Abelian tail
and has now the shape of a DN (not aﬃne) Dynkin diagram. The previously trivalent vertex
now has two adjoint chiral multiplets and two neutral chirals (φ and X) coupled to them. The
rest of the quiver and superpotential terms are unaltered. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 7.

M

˜p

Ψ1

A1

B1

p

φp

Ψ2

ΨN +1

x

˜y

˜x

y

φx

φy

Figure 7: Eﬀective quiver for deformed DN +4 with W = −φ Tr M + Tr (Ψ1M ) − X

m det M + . . .

Armed with this result, we can now make an important observation: As in the AN −1 case
the Higgs branch is not modiﬁed by the T-brane. As we have already explained, the Higgs
branch of the N = 4 theory is the singularity of type DN . This can be shown by constructing
suitable gauge invariant operators out of the bifundamentals and using the F-term constraints
to show that they satisfy the desired relation [24]. The theory we are discussing diﬀers from
this more supersymmetric model only in one aspect: one of the U (1) × U (2) bifundamentals
is missing. However, all the gauge invariants considered in extracting the singularities are

8The unusual factor of 1/m in front of the XY Z term can be derived as follows: As was explained in [8], the
moduli space of an Abelian theory can be studied by treating the monopoles and mesons as elementary ﬁelds and
supplementing the superpotential with the term −Nf (w+w−detM)1/Nf . In the case at hand M is the meson
matrix built out of P and Q ﬁelds. The superpotential (6.13) becomes

where dots denotes the ﬁrst two terms in 6.13. Using just the Mab F-terms, we can rewrite it as

s1M11 + s2M22 + mM12 − 2pw+w−detM + . . .

−

M21

m

s1s2 +

M21

m

w+w− + . . .

The ﬁrst term is precisely what we get integrating out P and ˜Q and the second is the weighted XY Z term. In
our discussion X is the mirror of M21 whereas Y and Z are to be understood as the mirrors of w±, which are
the ﬁelds appearing in the matrix M .

27

constructed using the meson matrix built out of these bifundamentals, and our theory has a
perfectly good candidate to replace the missing meson: the ﬁeld M in the adjoint of U (2)
introduced above.

In the N = 4 case, the fact that the meson is bilinear in U (1) × U (2) bifundamentals
immediately implies that it has rank one (or equivalently the determinant is zero) and the F-
term equation associated with the chiral multiplet sitting in the N = 4 Abelian vectormultiplet
tells us that the meson is traceless. These are the only two properties needed in extracting
the singularities, together with the F-term equations of the various U (2) vectormultiplets which
are automatically included in our model as well since the relevant superpotential terms are the
same.

A priori, our ﬁeld M is a generic 2 × 2 matrix. However, the traceless and zero determinant
constraints are implemented by the F-term equations of φ and X, as it is clear from (6.17).
This guarantees that the vev of M can be written in the form M = q ˜q, with q and ˜q two
dimensional vectors satisfying the same constraints as the bifundamentals in the N = 4 theory.
Hence, we can straightforwardly repeat the argument valid for the more supersymmetric case
and conclude that our DN -shaped quiver reproduces the DN singularity. Clearly the procedure
can be repeated for other Abelian tails as well, with exactly the same conclusion. For example,
we could turn on monopole superpotential terms at all the Abelian nodes and get a linear quiver
(the gauge nodes at the two ends have two ﬂavors and three adjoints) which again reproduces
the DN singularity.

The same analysis can be repeated straightforwardly for the E series as well: the U (1) node is
replaced by an adjoint and two neutral chirals for the neighbouring U (2) node (the superpotential
is again as in (6.17)) and the EN singularity of the N = 4 theory will be preserved. In this way we
can e.g. ﬁnd a candidate for the mirror of the dimensional reduction of Minahan-Nemeshansky
theories, deformed by a minimal nilpotent orbit mass term. This is displayed for the E8 case
in Figure 8. Here, the minimal T-brane removes the U (1) node of the E8 quiver. This node is
associated to the highest root. By a diﬀerent choice of basis, this root can be mapped to any
(simple) root, proving that one can treat each element of the minimal nilpotent orbit.

U (3)

M

U (2)

U (3)

U (4)

U (5)

U (6)

U (4)

U (2)

Figure 8: Eﬀective ‘mutilated’ quiver for E8 with W = −φ Tr M + Tr (ΨU (2)M ) − X

m det M + . . .

7 Conclusions and outlook

In this paper, we ﬁnd the mirror theory for D2-branes probing a stack of T-branes. On the
A-side, this corresponds to an oﬀ-diagonal mass deformation. On the B-side, it corresponds to
deforming the superpotential via monopole operators. This provides us with a deﬁnition of a
T-brane directly in terms of a membrane probing a singularity, even for the E series. The uplift
from a D2 to an M2-brane probing the singularity means ﬂowing to the IR ﬁxed point.

28

By using a technique we dubbed ‘local mirror symmetry’, meaning performing mirror sym-
metry on a single node of the quiver at a time, we were able to study T-branes along minimal
nilpotent orbits, for any ADE singularity. The result is that the eﬀective theory is described by
a reduced quiver which has the same Higgs branch as the original quiver.

The problem of studying generic nilpotent orbits is more diﬃcult, as it requires understanding
non-Abelian N = 2 mirror symmetry, which is not only technically diﬃcult, but also prone to
instanton corrections. Nevertheless, it would be interesting to pursue this further.
A related puzzle is the following: Modulo a Weyl transformation the eﬀect of a minimal
T-brane is described by a monopole superpotential term at a single gauge node; any node is ﬁne
and the N = 2 theories obtained by diﬀerent choices are equivalent. In the case of the A series
this is obvious, since all the gauge nodes are equivalent. In the case of D and E theories on the
other hand, this leads to the prediction that by turning on a speciﬁc monopole deformation at a
non-Abelian node (the monopole should be the one paired by supersymmetry with the current
corresponding to the root associated with the node) we get a theory which is dual to those
described in the previous section. From the ﬁeld theory perspective this is a rather surprising
statement and it would certainly be interesting to elucidate this point. We hope to come back
to this issue in the future.

It would also be interesting to derive formulae for the modiﬁed Coulomb branches of our
deformed B-theories. Perhaps there might be a way to amend the Hilbert series constructions of
[18, 27, 28, 29] that proved so successful in constructing moduli spaces. Hilbert series may also
help to improve our knowledge of the N = 2 version of non-Abelian mirror symmetry, perhaps
providing a way of inferring the mirror dual of operators like ˜QΦQ, which, in contrast to the
N = 4 case, are non-trivial in the chiral ring.
Another open question is the following: In N = 4 theories, monopole operators come in
multiplets that contain (spin one) conserved currents. This yields a powerful method to derive
the quantum enhanced ﬂavor symmetry of quiver gauge theories by simply looking for monopole
operators of R-charge one via a zero-mode counting technique. For N = 2 theories the link
between monopole operators and conserved currents is in principle lost. Nevertheless, in the
class of theories we studied (in the A and D series), we can make predictions about the global
symmetries through mirror symmetry.
It would be a signiﬁcant step forward if techniques
were developed to ﬁnd these directly in N = 2 quiver gauge theories without resort to mirror
symmetry.

Acknowledgements

We would like to extend our gratitude to F. Benini, C. Closset, S. Cremonesi, M Fazzi, D. For-
cella, N. Mekareeya and A. Zaﬀaroni for useful discussions.

A.C. is a Research Associate of the Fonds de la Recherche Scientiﬁque F.N.R.S. (Belgium).
The work of A.C. is partially supported by IISN - Belgium (convention 4.4503.15). S.G. is
partially supported by the ERC Advanced Grant “SyDuGraM”, by FNRS-Belgium (convention
FRFC PDR T.1025.14 and convention IISN 4.4503.15) and by the “Communaut´e Fran¸caise de
Belgique” through the ARC program. The work of R.S. is supported by the ERC Starting
Independent Researcher Grant 259133- ObservableString. The work of A.C., R.S. and R.V. was
performed in part at the Aspen Center for Physics, which is supported by National Science
Foundation grant PHY-1066293.

29

q

p

q

˜p

˜q

p

t

x

˜y

˜x

y

x

y

Figure 9: D4 quiver. The quiver labels in boldface represent monopole charges.

A Mirror map for D4 theories

The mirror map acts on the meson matrix deﬁning HBA by sending it to a matrix whose elements
are coordinates on CBB, i.e. monopole operators and combinations of the scalar ﬁelds Ψ, φq,
φx, φy, φp, where we have only one U (2) node. We keep the form (5.5) for the meson matrix
M . We write Ψ = φt1 + ψ, where φt is the component along the diagonal U (1) of U (2) and
ψ = ψtσ3 + ψ1σ1 + ψ2σ2 is in the adjoint of SU (2) (σi are the Pauli matrices).

The diagonal elements of the meson matrix are mapped to some combinations of the scalars
that live in the U (1) vector multiplet. This is done by mapping diagonal mass terms to FI-terms.
The oﬀ-diagonal elements are mapped to monopoles operators with R-charge 1 on the B-side
(see [30]). To see which one maps to which, one needs to compute the charges of the oﬀ-diagonal
elements of the meson-matrix with respect to the mirror of topological U (1)’s relative to the
nodes of the DN quiver on the B-side. We call the charges of these topological symmetries
(t, q, x, y), following the diagram in ﬁgure 9. On the A-side one easily compute the charges of
the oﬀ-diagonal elements of M . So we can write down M by substituting oﬀ diagonal mesons
with the corresponding monopole operators vtqxy. Here a gauge ﬁxing has been done, such that
the charge with respect to the p-node is zero (p = 0) [30].

The mirror map can then be written as

M = 


Q · ˜Q

˜QT · ǫ−1 · ˜Q
l

Q · ǫ · QT
− ˜QT · QT




0

v2111

(A.1)





,

v0100
α2





α1

v0-100
v-1-100
v-1-1-10

0

v-2-1-1-1
v-1-1-1-1
v-1-10-1

0

−v2111
−v1111 −v1011
−v1101 −v1001 −v0001

0

v00-10

v-1000
v-10-10
−v-2-1-1-1 −v-1-1-1-1 −v-1-10-1 −α1 −v0-100 −v-1-100 −v-1-1-10
−v-1000 −v-10-10
−v00-10
−α3
v-10-1-1
−v1110 −v1010 −v0010
−α4
v-100-1

−v-10-1-1 −v-100-1 −v0100
v000-1

−α2
−v000-1 −v1100 −v1000

0

v1111
v1011

v1101
v1001
v0001

0

v1100
v1000
α3

0

v1110
v1010
v0010
α4

0

30

where we have implemented the orientifold conditions on Q, ˜Q to bring M in the form (5.5) (Q is
meant to be a N × 2 matrix, while ˜Q is a 2× N matrix; moreover ǫab ≡ iγab while ǫab ≡ −iγab).
The diagonal elements α1, α2, α3, α4 on the B side are9

(α1, α2, α3, α4) = (φp − φq, 2φt − φp − φq, 2φt − φx − φy, φy − φx) ,

(A.2)

where ~φ = (φt + ψt, φt − ψt, φq, φx, φy, φp) are the scalars in the vector multiplets on the corre-
sponding nodes (the ﬁrst ones correspond to the U (1) × U (1) inside U (2) of the central node).
We want to show that applying this map and the quantum relations between monopole
operators, one is able to ﬁnd on the B-side the vanishing of the 4 × 4 minors. This implies that
M has rank 2 and would verify the mirror map itself. The rules we need are [26]:

vAvB = vA+B

P hyp(~φ)
P W(~φ)

where10

P hyp(~φ) = i|tA+B | Yi=hyp
P W(~φ) = (−i)|tA|+|tB | Yj=roots

hµi, ~φihµi,Ai++hµi,Bi+−hµi,A+Bi+

hαj, ~φihαj ,Ai++hαj ,Bi+−hαj ,A+Bi+

(A.3)

(A.4)

(A.5)

A, B are the charge vectors that select the monopole operator in the Abelianized theory, i.e. in
the U (1)6 theory that lives along the Coulomb branch. In our case A, B = (t1, t2, q, x, y, p). µi
are the charge vector of the hypermultiples; in our case

µy−t1 = (1, 0, 0, 0,−1, 0)
µx−t1 = (1, 0, 0,−1, 0, 0)
µq−t1 = (1, 0,−1, 0, 0, 0)
µp−t1 = (1, 0, 0, 0, 0,−1)

µy−t2 = (0, 1, 0, 0,−1, 0)
µx−t2 = (0, 1, 0,−1, 0, 0)
µq−t2 = (0, 1,−1, 0, 0, 0)
µp−t2 = (0, 1, 0, 0, 0,−1)

αj are the charges of the roots

α+ = (1,−1, 0, 0, 0, 0)

α− = (−1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0) .

(A.6)

(A.7)

(A.8)

(A.9)

(A.10)

Finally hV1, V2i+ is deﬁned to be zero if hV1, V2i is negative and equal to hV1, V2i (the euclidean
scalar product of the two vectors) if it is positive. We start computing the masses hµ, ~φi of the
hypermultiplets:

hµℓ−t1, ~φi = φt + ψt − φℓ

hµℓ−t2, ~φi = φt − ψt − φℓ

with ℓ = p, q, x, y. The massess of the two roots are

hα+, ~φi = 2ψt

hα−, ~φi = −2ψt .

(A.11)

(A.12)

We now apply the formula (A.3) to the case of interest. The charges of the monopoles
operators in the Abelianized theory are (t1, t2, q, x, y, p) with p = 0 and t1 + t2 = t. Note that

9They can be found by mapping appropriately diagonal mass terms in theory A to FI-terms in theory B.
10We are using here a diﬀerent convention with respect to [26]: our monopole operators vA are multiplyed by

(−i)|tA| with respect to the ones appearing in [26].

31

the monopoles operators with t = 0 are easily deﬁned on the B-side, as they are charged only
under the U (1) nodes. We start from a minor that includes only these types of operators:

α3

v00-10

0

v000-1

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

v0010
α4

0

v0001

0

−v000-1 −α3 −v00-10
−α4

0

−v0001
−v0010

= (α3α4 + v0001v000-1 − v0010v00-10)2

(A.13)

By using (A.3), we can compute v0001v000-1 and v0010v00-10:

v0001v000-1 = (φt + ψt − φy)(φt − ψt − φy) = (φt − φy)2 − ψ2
v0010v00-10 = (φt + ψt − φx)(φt − ψt − φx) = (φt − φx)2 − ψ2

t

t

(A.14)

(A.15)

Hence

v0001v000-1 − v0010v00-10 = (φt − φy)2 − (φt − φx)2 = −(φy − φx)(2φt − φx − φy)

(A.16)

that is consistent with the vanishing of (A.13), since α3α4 = (2φt − φc − φd)(φd − φc).

Now, let us consider the minor

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

α1

v-1-100

0

v-1-1-1-1

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

v1100
α3

v1111

0

0

−v1111
−v1100

−v-1-1-1-1 −α1 −v-1-100
−α3

0

= (α1α3 + v1111v-1-1-1-1 − v1100v-1-100)2

(A.17)

We see that the monopole operators involved have t = 1. We associate to these monopoles the
gauge invariant sum of those with charges (t1, t2) = (1, 0) and (t1, t2) = (0, 1). For example:

v1100 ≡ v101000 + v011000

(A.18)

where on the right hand side we have written all the charges (A, B) with respect to the Abelian-
ized theory, i.e. (t1, t2, q, x, y, p). Let us start by computing v1100v-1-100:

v1100v-1-100 = (v101000 + v011000)(v-10-1000 + v0-1-1000)

(A.19)

= (v101000v-10-1000 + v011000v0-1-000) + (v011000v-10-1000 + v101000v0-1-1000)
≡ O000000 + O1-10000
Let us do it step by step by using (A.3)

(A.20)

v101000v-10-1000 =

v011000v0-1-1000 =

(φt + ψt − φy)(φt + ψt − φx)(φt − ψt − φq)(φt + ψt − φp)

4ψ2
t

(φt − ψt − φy)(φt − ψt − φx)(φt + ψt − φq)(φt − ψt − φp)

4ψ2
t

v011000v-10-1000 = v-110000
v101000v0-1-000 = v1-10000

Analogously

(A.21)

(A.22)

(A.23)

(A.24)

(A.25)

v1111v-1-1-1-1 = (v101110 + v011110)(v-10-1-1-10 + v0-1-1-1-10)

(A.26)
= (v101110v-10-1-1-10 + v011110v0-1-1-1-10) + (v011110v-10-1-1-10 + v101110v0-1-1-1-10)
≡ O′
(A.27)

000000 + O′

1-10000

32

Again, step by step:

v101110v-10-1-1-10 =

v011110v0-1-1-1-10 =

(φt − ψt − φy)(φt − ψt − φx)(φt − ψt − φq)(φt + ψt − φp)

4ψ2
t

(φt + ψt − φy)(φt + ψt − φx)(φt + ψt − φq)(φt − ψt − φp)

4ψ2
t

v011110v-10-1-1-10 = v-110000
v101110v0-1-1-1-10 = v1-10000

(A.28)

(A.29)

(A.30)

(A.31)

(A.32)

We now need to put everything together. First of all, we notice that O1-10000 = O′
means that these pieces cancel in the diﬀerence (A.17). We now concentrate on O000000−O′

1-10000. This
000000:

O000000 − O′

000000 = (v101000v-10-1000 − v101110v-10-1-1-10) + [ψt 7→ −ψt]

(φt − ψt − φq)(φt + ψt − φp)(2φt − φx − φy)

=

2ψt
= (φp − φx)(2φt − φx − φy)

+ [ψt 7→ −ψt]

(A.33)

This is consistent with the vanishing of (A.17) since α1α3 = (φp − φq)(2φt − φx − φy).
Finally, let us consider the minor

v-1000
v-10-10

0

v-10-1-1

α3

0

v0001

v00-10
−v-10-1-1 −v-1000 −v-10-10
−v00-10

−v0001
−α3

0

0

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

= (v-1000v00-10 + v0001v-10-1-1 − α3v-10-10)2

(A.34)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

Let us start by computing v-1000v00-10:

v-1000v00-10 = (v-100000 + v0-10000)v000-100

By using the relations (A.3), we obtain

v-100000v000-100 = v-100-100(φt + ψt − φx)
v0-10000v000-100 = v0-10-100(φt − ψt − φx) .

(A.35)

(A.36)

(A.37)

Analogously

and

v00001v-10-1-1 = v000010(v-100-1-10 + v0-10-1-10)

(A.38)

v000010v-100-1-10 = v-100-100(φt − ψt − φy)
v000010v0-10-1-10 = v0-10-100(φt + ψt − φy)

Putting everything together:

v-1000v00-10 + v0001v-10-1-1 = (2φt − φx − φy)(v-100-100 + v0-10-100)

= (2φt − φx − φy)v-10-10

33

(A.39)

(A.40)

(A.41)

Since α3 = (2φt − φc − φd), this is consistent with the vanishing of the minor.
If one continues along these lines, one can check that all the antisymmetric minors 4 × 4
vanish if we impose the quantum relations (A.3), implying that the dual of the meson matrix
has rank 2.

This whole precedure can be easily generalized to DN for generic N . The diagonal elements

of M will now include the diﬀerences φti − φti−1 of the U (2) adjacent nodes.

References

[1] K. A. Intriligator and N. Seiberg, “Mirror symmetry in three-dimensional gauge theories,”

Phys. Lett. B387 (1996) 513–519, arXiv:hep-th/9607207 [hep-th].

[2] A. Hanany and E. Witten, “Type IIB superstrings, BPS monopoles, and three-dimensional
gauge dynamics,” Nucl. Phys. B492 (1997) 152–190, arXiv:hep-th/9611230 [hep-th].

[3] J. de Boer, K. Hori, H. Ooguri, and Y. Oz, “Mirror symmetry in three-dimensional gauge

theories, quivers and D-branes,” Nucl. Phys. B493 (1997) 101–147,
arXiv:hep-th/9611063 [hep-th].

[4] M. Porrati and A. Zaﬀaroni, “M theory origin of mirror symmetry in three-dimensional
gauge theories,” Nucl. Phys. B490 (1997) 107–120, arXiv:hep-th/9611201 [hep-th].

[5] J. de Boer, K. Hori, H. Ooguri, Y. Oz, and Z. Yin, “Mirror symmetry in

three-dimensional theories, SL(2,Z) and D-brane moduli spaces,”
Nucl. Phys. B493 (1997) 148–176, arXiv:hep-th/9612131 [hep-th].

[6] J. de Boer, K. Hori, Y. Oz, and Z. Yin, “Branes and mirror symmetry in N=2

supersymmetric gauge theories in three-dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B502 (1997) 107–124,
arXiv:hep-th/9702154 [hep-th].

[7] J. de Boer, K. Hori, and Y. Oz, “Dynamics of N=2 supersymmetric gauge theories in

three-dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B500 (1997) 163–191, arXiv:hep-th/9703100 [hep-th].

[8] O. Aharony, A. Hanany, K. A. Intriligator, N. Seiberg, and M. J. Strassler, “Aspects of

N=2 supersymmetric gauge theories in three-dimensions,”
Nucl. Phys. B499 (1997) 67–99, arXiv:hep-th/9703110 [hep-th].

[9] A. Kapustin and M. J. Strassler, “On mirror symmetry in three-dimensional Abelian

gauge theories,” JHEP 04 (1999) 021, arXiv:hep-th/9902033 [hep-th].

[10] V. Borokhov, A. Kapustin, and X.-k. Wu, “Topological disorder operators in

three-dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory,” JHEP 11 (2002) 049,
arXiv:hep-th/0206054 [hep-th].

[11] V. Borokhov, A. Kapustin, and X.-k. Wu, “Monopole operators and mirror symmetry in

three-dimensions,” JHEP 12 (2002) 044, arXiv:hep-th/0207074 [hep-th].

[12] T. Gomez and E. R. Sharpe, “D-branes and scheme theory,”

arXiv:hep-th/0008150 [hep-th].

[13] R. Donagi, S. Katz, and E. Sharpe, “Spectra of D-branes with higgs vevs,”

Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 8 (2004) no. 5, 813–859, arXiv:hep-th/0309270 [hep-th].

[14] J. J. Heckman, Y. Tachikawa, C. Vafa, and B. Wecht, “N = 1 SCFTs from Brane

Monodromy,” JHEP 11 (2010) 132, arXiv:1009.0017 [hep-th].

[15] S. Cecotti, C. Cordova, J. J. Heckman, and C. Vafa, “T-Branes and Monodromy,”

JHEP 07 (2011) 030, arXiv:1010.5780 [hep-th].

34

[16] L. B. Anderson, J. J. Heckman, and S. Katz, “T-Branes and Geometry,”

JHEP 05 (2014) 080, arXiv:1310.1931 [hep-th].

[17] A. Collinucci and R. Savelli, “F-theory on singular spaces,” JHEP 09 (2015) 100,

arXiv:1410.4867 [hep-th].

[18] F. Benini, C. Closset, and S. Cremonesi, “Chiral ﬂavors and M2-branes at toric CY4

singularities,” JHEP 02 (2010) 036, arXiv:0911.4127 [hep-th].

[19] P. K. Townsend, “Brane surgery,” Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 58 (1997) 163–175,

arXiv:hep-th/9609217 [hep-th].

[20] R. Argurio, “Intersection rules and open branes,” in Strings, branes and dualities.

Proceedings, NATO Advanced Study Institute, Cargese, France, May 26-June 14, 1997.
1997. arXiv:hep-th/9712170 [hep-th].

[21] R. Argurio, F. Englert, and L. Houart, “Intersection rules for p-branes,”

Phys. Lett. B398 (1997) 61–68, arXiv:hep-th/9701042 [hep-th].

[22] R. Argurio, F. Englert, L. Houart, and P. Windey, “On the opening of branes,”

Phys. Lett. B408 (1997) 151–156, arXiv:hep-th/9704190 [hep-th].

[23] A. Strominger, “Open p-branes,” Phys. Lett. B383 (1996) 44–47,

arXiv:hep-th/9512059 [hep-th].

[24] U. Lindstrom, M. Rocek, and R. von Unge, “HyperKahler quotients and algebraic

curves,” JHEP 01 (2000) 022, arXiv:hep-th/9908082 [hep-th].

[25] V. Borokhov, “Monopole operators in three-dimensional N=4 SYM and mirror

symmetry,” JHEP 03 (2004) 008, arXiv:hep-th/0310254 [hep-th].

[26] M. Bullimore, T. Dimofte, and D. Gaiotto, “The Coulomb Branch of 3d N = 4 Theories,”

arXiv:1503.04817 [hep-th].

[27] S. Cremonesi, A. Hanany, N. Mekareeya, and A. Zaﬀaroni, “Coulomb branch Hilbert series

and Hall-Littlewood polynomials,” JHEP 09 (2014) 178, arXiv:1403.0585 [hep-th].

[28] S. Cremonesi, A. Hanany, and A. Zaﬀaroni, “Monopole operators and Hilbert series of

Coulomb branches of 3d N = 4 gauge theories,” JHEP 01 (2014) 005,
arXiv:1309.2657 [hep-th].

[29] S. Cremonesi, “The Hilbert series of 3d N = 2 Yang–Mills theories with vectorlike

matter,” J. Phys. A48 (2015) no. 45, 455401, arXiv:1505.02409 [hep-th].

[30] D. Bashkirov, “Examples of global symmetry enhancement by monopole operators,”

arXiv:1009.3477 [hep-th].

35

