6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
9
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
m
o
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
8
0
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Three-Dimensional Model for Electrospinning Processes in Controlled

Gas Counterﬂow

Marco Lauricella1, Dario Pisignano2,3, and Sauro Succi ∗1,4

1Istituto per le Applicazioni del Calcolo CNR, Via dei Taurini 19, 00185 Rome, Italy

2Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica "Ennio De Giorgi", University of Salento, via Arnesano,

73100 Lecce, Italy

3Istituto Nanoscienze-CNR, Euromediterranean Center for Nanomaterial Modelling and

Technology (ECMT), via Arnesano, 73100 Lecce, Italy

4Harvard Institute for Applied Computational Science, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA

Monday 29th February, 2016

This is an unoﬃcial adaptation of an article that appeared in an ACS publication. ACS has

not endorsed the content of this adaptation or the context of its use.

Abstract

We study the eﬀects of a controlled gas ﬂow on the dynamics of electriﬁed jets in the electrospinning
process. The main idea is to model the air drag eﬀects of the gas ﬂow by using a non-linear Langevin-like ap-
proach. The model is employed to investigate the dynamics of electriﬁed polymer jets at diﬀerent conditions
of air drag force, showing that a controlled gas counterﬂow can lead to a decrease of the average diameter
of electrospun ﬁbers, and potentially to an improvement of the quality of electrospun products. We probe
the inﬂuence of air drag eﬀects on the bending instabilities of the jet and on its angular ﬂuctuations during
the process. The insights provided by this study might prove useful for the design of future electrospinning
experiments and polymer nanoﬁber materials.

1 Introduction
The production of nano- and microﬁbers has gained increasing interest due to the large number of promising
applications, including ﬁltration, textiles, medical, protective, structural, electrical, and optical materials and
coatings. In particular, an intriguing feature of electrospun ﬁbers is the high surface-area, which is due to the
combination of small radius and extreme length of the ﬁber (in principle up to km when polymer solutions
with high degree of molecular entanglement are used to achieve stable electriﬁed jets). This oﬀers intriguing
perspectives for practical applications. As a consequence, several studies have been focused on the production
and characterization of such structures. [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
Following the pioneering works of Rayleigh [8] and, later, Zeleny,[9] the electrospinning process relies on a
strong electric ﬁeld (typically 105−106 V·m−1) in order to elongate and accelerate a polymeric ﬂuid body from a
nozzle towards a conductive collector. During the development of the jet path, the stream cross-section decreases
by orders of magnitude, providing a jet, and consequently solid ﬁbers, with transversal size potentially well below
the micrometer-scale. The dynamic evolution of the polymer nanojet involves two diﬀerent stages: in the ﬁrst,
the pendent polymeric droplet is stretched by the intense external electric ﬁeld, providing a straight path. In the
second, small perturbations induce bending instabilities, and a complex jet path is consequently observed. In
a typical electrospinning experiment, hydrodynamic perturbations, as well as mechanical vibrations nearby the
nozzle, might misalign the jet axis. According to the Earnshaw’s theorem,[10] an oﬀ-axis misalignment triggers
an electrostatic-driven bending instability, leading the ﬂuid into a region of spiral coils. As a consequence, the
jet travels a larger distance between the nozzle and the collector, and the ﬁber diameter undergoes a further
decrease along the way, leading to a reduction of the ﬁber diameter.

Several studies were focused on experimental parameters, such as applied electric voltage, liquid viscosity,
etc..[11, 12, 13, 14] Similarly, the use of complementary external forces was also investigated. For instance,
a gas stream provided by suitable distributers and surrounding the electrospinning nozzle can be used as
additional stretching force, providing ﬁbers with small diameter. [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20] This process is generally

∗Electronic address: s.succi@iac.cnr.it; Corresponding author

1

called gas-assisted electrospinning (sometimes electroblowing). Nonetheless, many of the eﬀects of gas ﬂows on
electrospinning still need to be investigated in a systematic way, particularly with regard to the relationship
between gas ﬂow speed and bending instabilities. Indeed, given the ubiquitous nature of intentional or stochastic
gas ﬂows in the process atmosphere, understanding in depth such points is very important for a correct design
of electrospinning experiments, when ﬁbers with very small diameters are to be produced with a given polymer
solution.

In this framework, simulation models can be useful for understanding the key processing parameters and
ultimately exerting a better control on the resulting ﬁber morphologies, better elucidating the phenomenology
of electriﬁed jets and providing valuable information for the development of new spinning experiments. For
these reasons, various models have been proposed for electrospinning in the recent years,[21, 22, 23, 24, 12, 13]
which can be categorized on based on the approach used for representing the jet. In the ﬁrst class of models, the
ﬁlament is treated as obeying the equations of continuum mechanics,[25, 26, 27, 23, 28] whereas in the second
the jet is described as a series of discrete elements obeying the equations of Newtonian mechanics,[21, 22] as it
is the case of the present work.

Recently, Lauricella et al. [29] developed a one-dimensional model for studying the air drag eﬀects on the
early stage of electrospinning process. In this approach, the liquid jet was represented as a series of charged
beads, connected by viscoelastic springs according to the original picture proposed by Reneker and Yarin.[21, 22]
The jet dynamics was the result of the combined action of viscoelastic Coulombic, external electrical forces,
and a dissipative term which models the air drag eﬀect. Based on experimental observations,[30] the dissipative
air drag term was taken as non-lineary dependent on the jet geometry. As consequence, the model included a
non-linear Langevin-like stochastic diﬀerential equation describing the ﬂuid motion. However, an investigation
of the air drag eﬀects on three-dimensional (3D) bending instabilities was still missing.

Here, we provide a 3D description of electriﬁed jets which includes air drag, and study its eﬀects in the
dynamics of the bending instabilities. In particular, our aim is to investigate the relation between the dissipative-
perturbing forces and the resulting deposition of electrospun ﬁbers. Furthermore, the extended model is used to
set up an ideal experiment of gas-assisted electrospinning, which involves a gas-injecting system located at the
collector and oriented towards the spinneret. In this context, we probe the eﬀects of a controlled gas counterﬂow
on the ﬁber diameter, which could be useful for designing new electrospinning experiments.

The article is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we present the 3D model for electrospinning, with the set of
stochastic diﬀerential equations of motion (EOM) which govern the dynamics of system. Results are reported
and discussed in Sec. 3. Finally, conclusions are outlined in Sec. 4.

2 Model of electrospinning in a gas ﬂow
In this paper, we modify the 3D model of electrospinning previously implemented in the software package
JETSPIN, a speciﬁcally-developed, open-source and freely-available code.[31, 32] We use a Lagrangian discrete
model which represents the polymer solution ﬁlament as a series of n beads (jet beads) at mutual distance l,
each pair of beads in the row being connected by viscoelastic elements, as proposed in Ref. [21] (Fig. 1). The
length l is taken to be larger than the radius of the ﬁlament. Each i − th bead has mass mi and charge qi,
assumed equal for all the beads for simplicity. The spinneret is represented by a single mass-less point of charge
q0 ﬁxed at x = 0, which we call nozzle bead. A typical simulation is started with a single jet bead inserted
at the nozzle, and placed at distance lstep from the nozzle along the x axis. The onset of the jet takes place
with a cross-sectional radius a0, deﬁned as the radius of the polymer solution ﬁlament at the nozzle, before the
stretching process occurs, leading to the elongation and cross-section reduction in the ﬂuid body. Furthermore,
the starting jet bead has an initial velocity υs along the x axis equal to the bulk ﬂuid velocity in the needle of
the extrusion syringe or reservoir. Once this traveling bead reaches a distance 2 · lstep away from the nozzle,
a new particle (third body) is placed at distance lstep from the nozzle along the straight line joining the two
previous bodies (nozzle and previous jet bead). Note that lstep deﬁnes the length step used to discretize the
liquid jet at the nozzle before the stretching process starts taking place. The procedure is then repeated, leading
to a series of n beads representing the jet. It is worth stressing that hereafter we indicate by i = 1 the particle
which is the closest to the collector.
The jet is therefore modelled as a body constituted by a viscoelastic Maxwell ﬂuid, and the stress σi on the
i − th dumbbell which connects the bead i with the bead i + 1 is given by the equation:

where li is the length of the element, G is the elastic modulus, µ the viscosity of the ﬂuid jet, and t the time
(see Fig. 1). The length li is computed as the mutual distance between the i − th bead and its previous bead.
Being ai the ﬁber radius at the bead i, the viscoelastic force, ~fυe, pulling the bead i back to i − 1 and towards
i + 1, reads as follows:

− G
µ

σi,

(1)

dσi
dt

= G
li

dli
dt

2

(cid:18) ai + ai−1

(cid:19)2

2

(2)
where ~ti is the unit vector pointing from bead i − 1 to bead i. The force ~fst due to the surface tension for the
i − th bead is given by:

i+1σi+1 · ~ti+1,

i σi · ~ti + πa2

~fυe,i = −πa2

~fst,i = α ki · π

· ~ci,

(3)

where α is the surface tension coeﬃcient, ki is the local curvature, and ~ci is the unit vector pointing the center
of the local curvature from bead i (see Fig. 1). The force ~fst tends to restore the rectilinear shape acting on
the bent part of the jet.
In electrospinning processes, the jet stretch is mainly due to an external electric potential V0 which is applied
between the spinneret and the conducting collector. Denoted by h the distance of the collector from the injection
point, each i − th bead undergoes the electric force:

(4)
where ~x is the unit vector pointing the collector from the spinneret (see Fig. 1). Note that whenever a jet bead
touches the collector, its position is frozen and its charge is set to zero.

~fel,i = ei

V0
h

· ~x,

The net Coulomb force ~fc on the i − th bead from all the other beads is given by:

nX

nX

~fc,i =

~fc,i,j =

j=1
j6=i

j=1
j6=i

· ~uij,

qiqj
R2
ij

(5)

where R2
j − th bead.

ij

= (xi − xj)2 + (yi − yj)2 + (zi − zj)2, and ~uij is the unit vector pointing the i − th bead from the

The force due to the gravity is also considered in the model, and it is computed by the usual expression

~fg,i = mig · ~x,

(6)

where g is the gravitational acceleration.
These features are implemented in the JETSPIN software package.[31] Next, we extend the 3D framework
in order to include the air drag terms, and reproduce aerodynamic eﬀects. Consequently, code modiﬁcations
have been implemented in JETSPIN. In particular, we model the air drag by adding a random term and a
dissipative term to the forces involved in the process. The dissipative air drag term is usually dependent on
the geometry of the jet, which changes in time, and it combines longitudinal and lateral components. Based on
experimental ﬁndings,[30, 33, 34] the longitudinal component of the air drag dissipative force term acting on a
jet segment of length l is given by the empirical formula:

~fair = l · 0.65πaρaυ2

t

· ~t,

(7)

where ρa denotes the air density, νa the kinematic viscosity, ~t the tangent unit vector, and υt = (~υ − ~υf low) · ~t
represents the tangent component of the total velocity with respect to the air ﬂow given as the diﬀerence between
jet velocity υ and air ﬂow velocity υf low. The gas ﬂow is assumed to be oriented along the x-axis with opposite
direction, but the choice is not mandatory. Following the approach introduced by Lauricella et al.
[29], we
rearrange the last Eq. as

(cid:18)2υta

(cid:19)−0.81

νa

i li = πa2

(8)
Rewriting Eq. 8 for the i − th bead representing a jet segment, and assuming a constant volume of the jet
πa2

~fair = l · 0.65πρa

a0.19υ1.19

· ~t.

0lstep , so that

(9)
with lstep and a0 respectively the length and the radius of the jet segment between at the nozzle before the
stretching, we obtain

ai = a0

lstep/li,

t

(cid:19)−0.81
(cid:18) 2
q

νa

~fair,i = −miγi l0.905

i

υ1+0.19

t,i

· ~ti−1

(10)

3

where we have collected several terms of the empirical relationship in γi which is equal to

(cid:18) 2

(cid:19)−0.81

γi = 0.65π

ρa
mi

νa

l0.095
step a0.19

0

,

(11)

in order to obtain the dissipation term of a non linear Langevin-like equation (for further details see Lauricella
et al. [29]). It is worth stressing that γi is derived by the empirical relationship of Eq. 7, so that also Eq. 11 is
a nondimensional combination of physical parameters.
In a 3D framework a lateral lift force should also be considered. Following the expression introduced by
Yarin,[35, 34] under a high-speed air drag the lateral component ~flif t,i of the aerodynamic dissipative force
related to the ﬂow speed is given in the linear approximation (for small bending perturbations) by:

(cid:18) ai + ai−1

(cid:19)2

2

~flif t,i = −li · kiρaυ2

t,iπ

· ~ci..

(12)

The combined action of such longitudinal and lateral components (Fig. 2) provide the dissipative force term
acting on the i − th bead

~fdiss,i = ~fair,i +~flif t,i .
Whereas, the random force term for the i − th bead has the form
i Dυ · ~ηi

~frand,i =q2m2

(14)
where Dυ denotes a generic diﬀusion coeﬃcient in velocity space (which is assumed constant and equal for all
the beads), and ~ηi
is a 3D vector, whereof each component η is an independent stochastic process, namely
a nowhere diﬀerentiable function with < η (t1) η (t2) >= δ (|t2 − t1|), and < η (t) >= 0. Note that, for the
sake of simplicity, we assume η = dς(t)/dt, where ς(t) is a Wiener process, namely a stochastic processes with
stationary independent increments (often called standard Brownian motion).[36]
The sum of these forces governs the jet dynamics according to the Newton’s equation providing the following

(t),

non-linear Langevin-like stochastic diﬀerential equation:

(13)

where ~υi is the velocity of the i − th bead. The velocity ~υi satisﬁes the kinematic relation:

mi

d~υi
dt

= ~fel,i +~fc,i +~fυe,i +~fst,i +~fg,i +~fdiss,i +~frand ,

(15)

d~ri
dt

= ~υi

(16)
where ~ri (xi, yi, zi) is the position vector of the i − th bead. The three Eqs 1, 15 and 16 form the set of EOM
governing the time evolution of the system. It is worth noting that Eq. 15 recovers a deterministic EOM in the
limit ρa and Dυ → 0 .
Furthermore, we deﬁne also the EOM of the nozzle bead located in order to model fast mechanical pertur-
= A · sin (ϕ)
bations at the spinneret.[21, 37] Given the initial position of the nozzle y0
where A and ϕ are the amplitude and the initial phase of the perturbation, respectively, the EOM for the nozzle
bead are:

= A · cos (ϕ) and z0

n

n

= −ω · zn

dyn
dt

(17a)

dzn
dt

= ω · yn,

(17b)
where ω denotes the perturbation frequency. The actual perturbation at the nozzle produces a characteristic
annular deposition of the ﬁber on the collector, as initially observed by Reneker et al. [21]. Altough the collected
ﬁbers observed in experimental ﬁndings show less regular ﬁber patterns, we ﬁnd it convenient to investigate
counterﬂow eﬀects avoiding extra perturbations not directly related to the gaseous counterﬂow. Thus, we focus
our investigation on the speciﬁc perturbation eﬀect due to a counterﬂow gas on the jet dynamics.
Following previous works,[38, 29] the EOM are integrated as follows. First, the time is discretized as a
uniform sequence ti = t0 + j∆t, j = 1, . . . , nsteps. At each time step and for each i − th jet bead, we ﬁrstly
integrate the stochastic Eq. 15 using the explicit integration scheme proposed by Platen, [39, 40] with order
of accuracy evaluated in literature equal to 1.5. Then, the Eqs. 16 and 1 are integrated via second order
Runge-Kutta integrator, where the ~υi (t + ∆t) value was previously obtained via the Platen scheme.

4

3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Simulations setup for PVP electriﬁed jets
Solutions of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) are largely used in electrospinning experiments. In this work, we use a
few simulation parameters developed by Lauricella et Al. [31] and based on the experimental data provided by
Montinaro et Al. [14]. The process makes use of a solution of PVP (molecular weight = 1300 kDa) prepared by
a mixture of ethanol and water (17:3 v:v), at a concentration ranging between 11 and 21 mg/mL. The relevant
parameters include mass, charge density, viscosity, elastic modulus, and surface tension, which were already
included in the model as implemented in JETSPIN.[31] The extra parameters related to the gas environment
are modeled on the air (density ρa = 1.21 kg/m3, and kinematic viscosity νa = 0.151 cm2/s). The parameter
Dυ,i for the i-th bead is set to be γi for all the simulations. All the γi have the same value, and, consequently,
Dυ,i is constant for all the beads. In addition, a perturbation is applied at the nozzle with frequency ω = 104s−1,
as proposed by Reneker et al.,[21] whereas its amplitude A is equal to 0.01 mm. The voltage bias between the
nozzle and the collector is 9 kV, and the collector is placed at 16 cm from the nozzle. The initial ﬂuid velocity υs
was estimated considering a solution pumped at constant ﬂow rate of 2 mL/h in a needle of radius 250 micron.
For convenience, all the simulation parameters are summarized in Table 1. We probe three diﬀerent conditions
of air ﬂow velocity, υf low. In the ﬁrst, we study the electrospinning process in absence of gas ﬂow, υf low = 0,
which will be use as a reference case (case I ). In the second and third, we take υf low = −10 m/s (case II ),
and υf low = −20 m/s (case III ), whose magnitudes are similar to the jet velocity measured at the collector
(about 20 m/s) in absence of gas streams. It is worth stressing that the gas ﬂow is oriented along the x-axis,
and the negative sign of υf low indicates its opposite direction (counterﬂow, from the collector towards the
nozzle). For each of the three conditions, we run ten independent trajectories in order to perform a statistical
analysis. All simulations were carried out by the modiﬁed version of the software package JETSPIN,[31] and
the corresponding EOM were integrated with a time step of 10−9 seconds over a simulation span of 0.5 seconds.
For the sake of convenience, we report below the deﬁnition of few observables, which will be used in the

following. We deﬁne the jet length as:

n−1X

λ (t) =

|~ri+1 − ~ri|

(18)

with ~ri the position vector, and n the number of jet beads. This observable takes note of the total length of
the jet from the collector up to the nozzle. Further, we introduce a suitable observable to assess the tortuosity
of the path, which is deﬁned as:

i=1

(19)
where |~r1| is the position vector modulus of the closest bead to the collector. Note that Λ tends to 1 for a
rectilinear jet, and it takes larger values depending on the complexity of the bending part of the jet. We also
deﬁne the instantaneous angular aperture of the instability cone as:

Λ (t) = λ
|~r1| ,

!

 py2

1 + z2
1
x1

Θ (t) = arctan

,

(20)

with x1, y1 and z1 the coordinates of the bead closest to the collector (see Fig. 1).
In all the simulations, we observed two diﬀerent regimes of the observables (λ, Λ, Θ, etc.) describing the
process. In the ﬁrst stage, the jet has not yet reached the collector, and we observe an initial transient of the
observables. After the jet touches the collector, the observables start to ﬂuctuate around a constant mean value,
providing a stationary regime. As a consequence, we discern two stages of the jet dynamics, hereafter denoted
as early and late dynamics, respectively.

3.2 Early dynamics
For each case, we compute the average values of observables describing the jet dynamics (see Fig. 3). The
averages are assessed at every step of the time integration, hence we obtain time dependent mean values of
observables along the jet evolution. In Table 2 we report the average ﬁrst-hitting-time, < tf irst > , deﬁned as
the time that the jet initially takes to touch the collector. In particular, we note that the presence of a gas
counterﬂow does not aﬀect signiﬁcantly the ﬁrst-hitting-time, and the velocity of the jet bead at the collector is
almost the same for all the three investigated cases (within the margin of error). For the sake of completeness,
we plot in Fig. 4 the time dependent mean velocity of the ﬁrst bead as a function of time. On the other hand,
a signiﬁcant increase of the jet length < λ (tf irst) > is found upon increasing the gas counterﬂow speed υf low.

5

This eﬀect might be relevant for improving the quality of the resulting ﬁbers, since longer jet lengths usually
correspond to smaller cross sections of the deposited polymer ﬁlaments. Such increment of < λ (tf irst) > is due
to the greater complexity of the jet path, where bending instabilities play a signiﬁcant role in determining the
distance traveled from the nozzle to the collector. This is well represented by the Λ parameter, which increases
by 20 % in the case III, when the gas ﬂow is set to υspeed = −20 m/s.
The dynamics of bending instabilities also deserves few comments: we show in Fig. 3 the time dependent
mean value of the jet length, < λ (t) >, and tortuosity degree, < Λ (t) >, for each case under investigation.
Here, we ﬁnd that bending instabilities start earlier for the case III, triggering a larger jet path in the subsequent
dynamics. This is well represented by the initial hump of < Λ (t) >, which is already equal to 5.0 after 0.002
seconds. The larger tortuosity degree is likely due to the lift force, which increases the local curvature of the jet,
as shown in Eq. 12. Hence, the synergic action of lift and Coulomb repulsive forces boost bending instabilities
at an earlier stage, and the case III shows a diﬀerent dynamics, which is clearly evident in the initial 0.005
seconds. This eﬀect substantially diﬀers from what is reported in literature for electrospinning models without
external gas ﬂows, where only Coulomb repulsive forces contribute to the jet misalignement.[21]

Furthermore, we note that < λ (t) > increases for all the cases both before and after the jet has touched
the collector for the ﬁrst time, indicating that bending instabilities reach a stationary regime of ﬂuctuation at
least after the time tlim ≈ 2· < tf irst >. We will consider this criteria in the following Subsection, in order to
discard the initial transient of dynamics for a correct statistical analysis of the stationary regime.

3.3 Late dynamics
We perform a statistical analysis of the positions of the jet beads over all the ten independent simulations
for each of the three cases under investigation.
In particular, we deﬁne an orthogonal box of dimensions
16cm × 8cm × 8cm along the x, y and z-axes, respectively. The orthogonal box is discretized in sub cubic cells
of side equal to 1 mm, and the normalized numerical density ﬁeld, denoted ˜ρi,j,k, is computed over all the box
for each case. By construction, ˜ρi,j,k provides the probability to ﬁnd a jet bead in the cubic cell identiﬁed by
the indices i, j, k. As above, we discard the initial part of each simulation, which corresponds to the early
dynamics, so that only the late dynamics describing the stationary regime is considered. Hence, the dynamics
of each trajectory is evolved in time for 0.5 seconds. Fig. 5 displays the isosurface of ρn representing points of
constant value 0.001. The jet paths statistically lie on an empty cone, whose aperture slightly increases upon
increasing the ﬂow speed υf low. In addition, the chaotic behavior of jets is found to be enhanced by high-speed
gas ﬂows. This is shown both by the larger statistical dispersion of the cone (thickness of cone wall) and by the
diﬀerent shape of the electrospun coatings deposited on the collector, which follow a fuzzier path (gray ﬁber
drawn in Fig. 5). The diﬀerent depositions of ﬁbers for the three cases are highlighted by the normalized 2D
maps in Fig. 6, where we show the probability of a jet bead hitting the collector at the coordinates y and z
(note that the plate is perpendicular to x by construction). Here, all the distributions are found to draw almost
regular circles, which subtend their relative instability cones of aperture angle Θ. The probability distribution
of hitting a speciﬁc point on the collector is remarkably peaked in the case I without gas ﬂow, whereas the
ﬁber deposition becomes less regular in the other cases. In particular, the distributions lie within two concentric
circles, whose inner radius decreases, while the outer increases, as the air gas ﬂow is enforced. The trend is a
consequence of the more complex paths with highest tortuosity degree Λ (see case III in Table 3) drawn by the
jets under the eﬀects of strong perturbation forces in presence of a high speed gas counterﬂow. The snapshot
related to the case III in Fig. 5 represents well the chaotic route followed by the viscoelastic jet under the
gas ﬂow eﬀects, which provides a longer jet path length λ, whose mean value < λ > increases by increasing
the ﬂow speed υf low, as reported in Table 3. On the other hand, the mean values of the aperture angle Θ are
not signiﬁcantly altered by the gas ﬂow (see Table 3), showing that the instability mainly alters the statistical
dispersion of the cone, but not in its mean value.

The high-speed gas ﬂow signiﬁcantly aﬀects the size distribution of the deposited ﬁbers.

In Fig. 7 we
report the probability of collecting ﬁbers with a given value of cross-sectional radius. Here, we observe a
nontrivial trend of the ﬁber radius as function of the air counterﬂow velocity. In particular, by applying an air
ﬂow velocity υf low of -10 m/s (case II ), we note a decrease in ﬁber radius by 10%-15%, and the ﬁber radius
probability distributions become broader. The latter eﬀect is even more evident for the case III (υf low =-20
m/s), where the distribution computed over all the trajectories is spread out from its mean with values of ﬁber
radius oscillating between 3 and 8 µm. Further, we observe a non-symmetric distribution of the ﬁber radius for
both the cases II and III, which may appear somehow counterintuitive. Nonetheless, we wish to point out that
skewed probability distributions are quite common in the statistical behavior of complex non-linear systems,
such as the one considered here. Fluid turbulence is a typical example in point [41, 42]. Although ﬁnding
the coarse-grained dynamic equations of motion with respect to the jet cross section is beyond the aim of the
present work, we investigate the phenomenon by computing the average distribution of the jet radius along the
curvilinear coordinate s, where s ∈ [0, 1] is introduced to parametrize the jet path, s = 0 identiﬁes the nozzle,
and s = 1 the ﬁlament at the collector. In Fig. 8 we report for all the three cases the median of the radius

6

conditional distributions computed along the curvilinear coordinate s (the condition is the given value of s). We
also report the amplitudes of the conditional distributions evaluated as interquartile range. Here, we observe
that all the radius ﬂuctuations are generated close to the nozzle. In particular, at s = 0.05 we already note
non-symmetric ﬂuctuations of the jet radius for the cases II and III. Further, we observe larger average values
of the curvature k when the counterﬂow is activated. For instance, the averaged curvature measured at s = 0.05
is 1.1, 1.6 and 1.9 for the cases I, II and III, respectively. This is likely due to lift perturbation forces acting
in junction with the Coulomb repulsive forces, which produce sharp bends along the jet path already close to
the nozzle, providing large ﬂuctuations in the jet cross section. Thus, the quality of the produced ﬁbers is less
controllable in presence of large counterﬂows (as already evidenced in Fig. 6 for the case III ), and the beneﬁcial
eﬀects of the gas stream in decreasing the ﬁber radius are largely counteracted. Therefore, with the aim of
producing thinner ﬁbers and at achieving narrower size distributions of the deposited polymer ﬁlaments, the
counterﬂow velocity υf low should be carefully tuned, in order to provide an optimal balance between dissipative
and perturbation forces as related to the gas stream.

4 Summary and Conclusions
Summarizing, we have investigated the dynamics of electriﬁed polymer jets under diﬀerent conditions of air
drag force. In particular, we have probed the eﬀects of a gas ﬂow oriented towards the nozzle on the viscoelastic
jet (counterﬂow) during the electrospinning process, analyzing both the early and the late dynamics. Several
observables have been employed to analyze the air drag eﬀects on the jet bending instabilities, showing that
the instability cone is altered in its shape and aperture by the presence of a gas stream. Further, the results in
terms of ﬁber deposition were also investigated by a statistical analysis of the late dynamics. We have observed
that a controlled gas counterﬂow might lead to a decrease of the mean value of the ﬁber cross sectional radius.
In particular, our data show a nontrivial trend of the ﬁber radius as function of the air ﬂow velocity applied
in electrospinning experiment. In fact, the gas ﬂow generates both dissipative and perturbation forces, which
provide opposite eﬀects on the resulting ﬁber cross section. Thinner ﬁbers are obtained by using a gas ﬂow
speed of -10 m/s. The complex interplay of eﬀects due to air drag forces deserves a deeper investigation, which
will be the subject of future work. However, further investigations will be needed and new terms have to be
introduced to describe properly the disordered ﬁber structure experimentally observed on the collector.
In
particular, the eﬀect of more complicated modeled perturbations of the nozzle in presence of air counterﬂow
could provide a more realistic pattern of the ﬁlament on the collector. Anyway, the released model represents
an important novelty and it might be used for designing a new generation of devices with novel experimental
components for gas-assisted electrospinning, in order to further investigate experimentally this process and to
ultimately produce polymeric ﬁlaments with ﬁnely controlled average diameters and size distribution.

Acknowledgments
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Research Council under the
European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013)/ERC Grant Agreement n. 306357 ("NANO-
JETS"). The authors are grateful to Dr. G. Pontrelli for several useful discussions.

References
[1] D. H. Reneker, I. Chun, Nanometre diameter ﬁbres of polymer, produced by electrospinning, Nanotechnol-

ogy 7 (3) (1996) 216–223.

[2] D. Li, Y. Xia, Electrospinning of nanoﬁbers: Reinventing the wheel?, Adv. Mater. 16 (14) (2004) 1151–1170.
[3] S. Ramakrishna, K. Fujihara, W.-E. Teo, T.-C. Lim, Z. Ma, An Introduction to Electrospinning and

Nanoﬁbers, Vol. 90, World Scientiﬁc, Hackensack, USA, 2005.

[4] C. Luo, S. D. Stoyanov, E. Stride, E. Pelan, M. Edirisinghe, Electrospinning versus ﬁbre production

methods: from speciﬁcs to technological convergence, Chem. Soc. Rev. 41 (13) (2012) 4708–4735.

[5] J. H. Wendorﬀ, S. Agarwal, A. Greiner, Electrospinning: Materials, Processing, and Applications, John

Wiley & Sons, West Sussex, UK, 2012.

[6] D. Pisignano, Polymer Nanoﬁbers: Building Blocks for Nanotechnology, Royal Society of Chemistry, Lon-

don, UK, 2013.

[7] L. Persano, A. Camposeo, D. Pisignano, Active polymer nanoﬁbers for photonics, electronics, energy

generation and micromechanics, Prog. Polym. Sci. 43 (2015) 48–95.

7

[8] L. Rayleigh, On the equilibrium of liquid conducting masses charged with electricity, Philos. Mag. Series 5

14 (87) (1882) 184–186.

[9] J. Zeleny, Instability of electriﬁed liquid surfaces, Phys. Rev. 10 (1917) 1–6.
[10] J. H. Jeans, The Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism, Cambridge University Press, Cam-

bridge, UK, 1908.

[11] H. Fong, I. Chun, D. Reneker, Beaded nanoﬁbers formed during electrospinning, Polymer 40 (16) (1999)

4585–4592.

[12] S. Theron, E. Zussman, A. Yarin, Experimental investigation of the governing parameters in the electro-

spinning of polymer solutions, Polymer 45 (6) (2004) 2017–2030.

[13] C. P. Carroll, Y. L. Joo, Electrospinning of viscoelastic boger ﬂuids: Modeling and experiments, Phys.

Fluids 18 (5) (2006) 053102.

[14] M. Montinaro, V. Fasano, M. Moﬀa, A. Camposeo, L. Persano, M. Lauricella, S. Succi, D. Pisignano,

Sub-ms dynamics of the instability onset of electrospinning, Soft Matter 11 (2015) 3424–3431.

[15] X. Wang, I. C. Um, D. Fang, A. Okamoto, B. S. Hsiao, B. Chu, Formation of water-resistant hyaluronic
acid nanoﬁbers by blowing-assisted electro-spinning and non-toxic post treatments, Polymer 46 (13) (2005)
4853–4867.

[16] Y. Yao, P. Zhu, H. Ye, A. Niu, X. Gao, D. Wu, Polysulfone nanoﬁbers prepared by electrospinning and

gas/jet-electrospinning, Front. Chem. Chin. 1 (3) (2006) 334–339.

[17] G. H. Kim, H. Yoon, A direct-electrospinning process by combined electric ﬁeld and air-blowing system for

nanoﬁbrous wound-dressings, Appl. Phys. A 90 (3) (2008) 389–394.

[18] Y. Lin, Y. Yao, X. Yang, N. Wei, X. Li, P. Gong, R. Li, D. Wu, Preparation of poly (ether sulfone)

nanoﬁbers by gas-jet/electrospinning, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 107 (2) (2008) 909–917.

[19] E. Zhmayev, D. Cho, Y. L. Joo, Nanoﬁbers from gas-assisted polymer melt electrospinning, Polymer 51 (18)

(2010) 4140–4144.

[20] H.-Y. Hsiao, C.-M. Huang, Y.-Y. Liu, Y.-C. Kuo, H. Chen, Eﬀect of air blowing on the morphology and
nanoﬁber properties of blowing-assisted electrospun polycarbonates, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 124 (6) (2012)
4904–4914.

[21] D. H. Reneker, A. L. Yarin, H. Fong, S. Koombhongse, Bending instability of electrically charged liquid

jets of polymer solutions in electrospinning, J. Appl. Phys. 87 (9) (2000) 4531–4547.

[22] A. L. Yarin, S. Koombhongse, D. H. Reneker, Taylor cone and jetting from liquid droplets in electrospinning

of nanoﬁbers, J. Appl. Phys. 90 (9) (2001) 4836–4846.

[23] M. M. Hohman, M. Shin, G. Rutledge, M. P. Brenner, Electrospinning and electrically forced jets. i.

stability theory, Phys. Fluids 13 (8) (2001) 2201–2220.

[24] S. V. Fridrikh, H. Y. Jian, M. P. Brenner, G. C. Rutledge, Controlling the ﬁber diameter during electro-

spinning, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (14) (2003) 144502.

[25] A. Spivak, Y. Dzenis, D. Reneker, A model of steady state jet in the electrospinning process, Mech. Res.

Commun. 27 (1) (2000) 37–42.

[26] J. Feng, The stretching of an electriﬁed non-newtonian jet: A model for electrospinning, Phys. Fluids

14 (11) (2002) 3912–3926.

[27] J. Feng, Stretching of a straight electrically charged viscoelastic jet, J. Non-Newtonian Fluid Mech. 116 (1)

(2003) 55–70.

[28] M. M. Hohman, M. Shin, G. Rutledge, M. P. Brenner, Electrospinning and electrically forced jets. ii.

applications, Phys. Fluids 13 (8) (2001) 2221–2236.

[29] M. Lauricella, G. Pontrelli, D. Pisignano, S. Succi, Nonlinear langevin model for the early-stage dynamics

of electrospinning jets, Mol. Phys. 113 (17-18) (2015) 2435–2441.

[30] A. Ziabicki, H. Kawai, High-Speed Fiber Spinning: Science and Engineering Aspects, Krieger Publishing

Co, Malabar, USA, 1991.

8

[31] M. Lauricella, G. Pontrelli, I. Coluzza, D. Pisignano, S. Succi, Jetspin: a speciﬁc-purpose open-source
software for simulations of nanoﬁber electrospinning, Comput. Phys. Commun. 197 (2015) 227–238. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2015.08.013.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010465515002994

[32] Jetspin is freeware, and it can be downloaded on the web site www.nanojets.eu.

URL http://www.nanojets.eu/downloads.html

[33] S. Sinha-Ray, A. L. Yarin, B. Pourdeyhimi, Meltblowing:

model, J. Appl. Phys. 108 (3) (2010) 034912.

I-basic physical mechanisms and threadline

[34] A. L. Yarin, B. Pourdeyhimi, S. Ramakrishna, Fundamentals and Applications of Micro and Nanoﬁbers,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2014.

[35] A. L. Yarin, Free Liquid Jets and Films: Hydrodynamics and Rheology, Longman Scientiﬁc & Technical

Harlow, Essex, UK, 1993.

[36] R. Durrett, Probability: Theory and Examples, Cambridge university press, Cambridge, UK, 2010.
[37] I. Coluzza, D. Pisignano, D. Gentili, G. Pontrelli, S. Succi, Ultrathin ﬁbers from electrospinning experiments

under driven fast-oscillating perturbations, Phys. Rev. Applied 2 (5) (2014) 054011.

[38] M. Lauricella, G. Pontrelli, I. Coluzza, D. Pisignano, S. Succi, Diﬀerent regimes of the uniaxial elongation
of electrically charged viscoelastic jets due to dissipative air drag, Mech. Res. Commun. 69 (2015) 97–102.
[39] E. Platen, Derivative free numerical methods for stochastic diﬀerential equations, in: Stochastic Diﬀerential

Systems, Springer, London, UK, 1987, pp. 187–193.

[40] P. E. Kloeden, E. Platen, Numerical Solution of Stochastic Diﬀerential Equations, Vol. 23, Springer, Lon-

don, UK, 1992.

[41] R. Benzi, R. Tripiccione, F. Massaioli, S. Succi, S. Ciliberto, On the scaling of the velocity and temperature

structure functions in rayleigh-bénard convection, EPL (Europhys. Lett.) 25 (5) (1994) 341.

[42] M. Ottaviani, F. Romanelli, R. Benzi, M. Briscolini, P. Santangelo, S. Succi, Numerical simulations of
ion temperature gradient-driven turbulence, Physics of Fluids B: Plasma Physics (1989-1993) 2 (1) (1990)
67–74.

9

Tables

ρ

(kg/m3)

840

ρq

(C/L)
2.8 · 10−7

G
(Pa)
5 · 104

V0
(kV)
9.0

υs

(cm/s)
0.28

a0
(cm)
5 · 10−3
ω

(s−1)
104

α

(N/m)
2.11 · 10−2
νa

µ

(Pa·s)
2.0

A
(cm)
10−3

ρa

(kg/m3)

1.21

(cm2/s)
0.151

Table 1: Simulation parameters for the simulations of electriﬁed jets by PVP solutions. The headings used are
as follows: ρ: density, ρq: charge density, a0: ﬁber radius at the nozzle, υs: initial ﬂuid velocity at the nozzle,
α: surface tension, µ: viscosity, G : elastic modulus, V0 : applied voltage bias, ω: frequency of perturbation, A
: amplitude of perturbation, ρa : air density, νa : air kinematic viscosity.

Observables

< tf irst > (s)

< υjet (tf irst) > (m/s)
< λ (tf irst) > (cm)

< Λ (tf irst) >

case I

υf low = 0 m/s

1.0385 · 10−2 ± 8 · 10−6

19.6 ± 0.2
172.8 ± 0.2
10.8 ± 0.1

case II

υf low = −10 m/s

1.058 · 10−2 ± 1 · 10−5

19.3 ± 0.3
194.4 ± 0.7
12.1 ± 0.3

case III

υf low = −20 m/s

1.101 · 10−2 ± 2 · 10−5

19.5 ± 0.4
214.8 ± 0.8
13.1 ± 0.4

Table 2: Mean values of the observables ﬁrst-hitting-time tf irst, and mean values of the following observables at
the ﬁrst-hitting-time: υjet (tf irst) jet velocity measured at the collector, jet path length λ (tf irst), and tortuosity
degree parameter Λ (tf irst). The averages were computed over all the ten trajectories for each of the three cases
of gas ﬂow speed υf low. We report also the error as standard deviation of distribution.

Observables

< Θ > (°)
< λ > (cm)
< Λ >

case I
υf low = 0 m/s
28.1 ± 1.2
213.8 ± 2.2
13.4 ± 0.1

υf low = −10 m/s

case II
30.1 ± 2.8
266 ± 12
16.7 ± 0.8

υf low = −20 m/s

case III
29.6 ± 2.9
279 ± 13
17.5 ± 0.9

Table 3: Mean values of the observables: aperture angle of instability cone Θ, jet path length λ, and tortuosity
degree parameter Λ. The averages were computed only in the stationary regime over all the ten trajectories for
each of the three cases of gas ﬂow speed υf low. We report also the error as standard deviation of distribution.

10

Figures

Figure 1: Diagram of the electrospinning model as implemented in the "vanilla" version of JETSPIN without
air drag and lift force terms (which are sketched in Fig 2). Each discrete element representing a jet segment
is drawn by a blue circle with a plus sign denoting the positive charge of segment. We represent the Maxwell
viscoelastic force, fυe, the gravitational force ~fg, the surface tension force, fst, pointing the center of curvature
to restore the rectilinear shape, and the Coulomb repulsive term, fc, which is the sum over all the repulsive
interactions between the beads. The external electric potential, V0, is indicated by the red arrow in ﬁgure, while
the upper cyan cone represents the nozzle. The dashed red line represents the ideal straight line to which the
ﬁlament tends under the surface tension force.

11

Figure 2: Diagram of the electrospinning model showing the dissipative force, which is the sum of air drag force,
~fair, (black arrows) and lift force, ~flif t, (green arrows), when a gas ﬂow of speed υf low is present (red arrows).

12

Figure 3: Time-dependent mean values of the observables jet length, < λ (t) > (denoted a) and tortuosity
degree, < Λ (t) > (denoted b) for the diﬀerent cases of ﬂow speed υf low. Stars: times corresponding to the mean
value of the ﬁrst-hitting-time, < tf irst >, for each case.

13

Figure 4: Time-dependent mean value of the jet velocity < υ (t) > (meter per second) as function of time
(second) for all the three cases. Stars: times corresponding to the mean value of the ﬁrst-hitting-time, < tf irst >,
for each case.

Figure 5: Simulation snapshots of the three diﬀerent cases. From left to right the snapshots correspond to the
case I, υf low = 0 m/s, case II, υf low = −10 m/s, and case III, υf low = −20 m/s, respectively. The jet between
the nozzle and the collector is drawn in blue, and the ﬁbers deposited on the collector are colored in gray. The
isosurfaces colored in cyan represent the normalized numerical density ﬁeld ˜ρ of constant value equal to 0.001.

14

Figure 6: Normalized 2D maps computed over the coordinates y and z of the collector for the three cases under
investigation. The color palettes deﬁne the probability that a jet bead hits the collector in coordinates y and z.

Figure 7: Normalized probability of depositing a ﬁber with a given radius.

15

Figure 8: Meadian values of the jet radius distributions, a (micrometer), computed along the curvilinear co-
ordinate s for all the three cases. The error bars provide the amplitudes of the distributions evaluated as
interquartile range.

16

