6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
7
1
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Evanescent optical trapping of nanoscale particles

using slotted tapered optical ﬁbres

Mark Daly, Viet Giang Truong, S´ıle Nic Chormaic

Light-Matter Interactions Unit, OIST Graduate University, Onna, Okinawa, 904-0495, Japan

Abstract

While conventional optical trapping techniques can trap objects with
submicron dimensions, the underlying limits imposed by the diﬀraction of
light generally restrict their use to larger, or higher refractive index par-
ticles. As the index and diameter decrease, the trapping diﬃculty rapidly
increases; hence, the power requirements for stable trapping become so
large as to quickly denature the trapped objects in such diﬀraction-limited
systems. Here, we present an evanescent ﬁeld-based device capable of con-
ﬁning low index nanoscale particles using modest optical powers as low as
1.2 mW, with additional applications in the ﬁeld of cold atom trapping.
Our experiment uses a nanostructured optical micro-nanoﬁbre to trap 200
nm, low-index, ﬂuorescent particles within the structured region, thereby
overcoming diﬀraction limitations. We analyse the trapping potential of
this device both experimentally and theoretically, and show how strong
optical traps are achieved with low input powers.

Introduction

The concept that light could impart forces to matter can be traced back to
early suggestions by Kepler in the 1600s. He observed that the tail of a comet
seemed to incongruously point in a direction retrograde to its motion. The tail
was seen to point away from the sun and hence the notion of radiation pressure
was born. With the advent of coherent light sources, many groups began to
make heavy use of optical forces experimentally. For example, Doppler cool-
ing, the precursor to many laser cooling techniques, gave way to the ﬁeld of
atom trapping 1. Ashkin—often considered to be a pioneer in the ﬁeld of optical
trapping—proposed that Gaussian beams could be used to trap silica micropar-
ticles using a technique that would later become known as optical tweezing
2. At this early stage, it was apparent that optical tweezers had fundamental
operational constraints due to the diﬀraction-limited spot size of the trapping
beam. Today, nano-optical techniques, such as near-ﬁeld optics and plasmon-
ics, provide primary solutions to this problem 3,4. Photonic crystal cavities 5,6,
plasmonic double nano-holes 7,8, slot waveguides 9,10, and micro-nanoﬁbres 11,12
are just some of the devices which can conﬁne light locally to regions smaller
than achievable using diﬀraction-limited systems. Aside from modifying how
the trapping ﬁelds are generated, it is also possible to change the material of
the particles to be trapped, thereby reducing the diﬃculties associated with
trapping submicron particles. For example, higher index particles, such as gold
nanoparticles 13,14 or nanodiamonds 15, are excellent candidates for nanoscale

1

trapping. However, biologically-relevant materials typically have low refractive
indices, thereby negating the trapping advantages associated with higher index
particles.

In this article, we discuss a nanostructured, evanescent optical trapping de-
vice based on the combination of a slot waveguide with a micro-nanoﬁbre (MNF)
16. MNFs are extremely versatile due to their compact size, enabling them to
be integrated noninvasively into many systems, such as optical tweezers 17,18,19
and cold atom clouds 20. When light propagates through an MNF, a signiﬁ-
cant portion of the electric ﬁeld exists outside the waveguide as an evanescent
component, allowing for easy interaction between the guided light ﬁeld and the
surrounding medium. Previously, unmodiﬁed MNFs have been used for various
experimental conﬁgurations such as (i) optical trapping of dielectric particles
21,22,23,24,25, (ii) cavity quantum electrodynamics (cQED) using single quantum
emitters 26, (iii) light coupling in and out of whispering gallery resonators 27, and
(iv) trapping and probing cold atomic systems 28,29,30,31 or atomic vapours 32,33.
More recently, MNFs have been modiﬁed to increase their versatility across a
range of ﬁelds, through, for example, the incorporation of SNOM tips 34 or ex-
traordinary transmission apertures 35. Evanescent ﬁeld trapping has also been
realised using what is known as a slot waveguide, as ﬁrst demonstrated by Yang
et al. 36 who trapped 75 nm dielectric nanoparticles. Laser powers of 250-300
mW provided stable trapping against a constant ﬂuid ﬂow. The high refractive
index contrast between the Si slot and the surrounding water, along with the
small slot separation (<100 nm), produced a quasi-TE mode with a large ﬁeld
discontinuity across the boundary that was used for trapping.

While other trapping techniques, such as self-induced back action 37 (SIBA),
can conﬁne particles in three dimensions with low optical powers, they lack
adequate control over the particle’s position. For optical ﬁbres, dynamic three
dimensional control over the position of trapped particles becomes diﬃcult,
but recent developments using orbital angular momentum carrying beams for
particle trapping 38 may soon allow for the spatial translation of particles, whilst
still maintaining strong trap stiﬀnesses.

The slotted tapered optical ﬁbre (STOF) used in this work is a device which
exploits the overlapping evanescent ﬁelds of a slot waveguide-like structure to
further enhance its trapping ability, both for atoms 16 and submicron particle
trapping. We sought to create an entirely ﬁbre-based trapping device using
evanescent ﬁelds to localise particles with a high degree of control in regimes
inaccessible to standard MNFs. A nanoscale slot is introduced at the waist of an
MNF using focussed ion beam (FIB) milling, thereby creating a slot waveguide-
like region where the optical forces are greatly enhanced. This provides three
dimensional conﬁnement within a small trapping volume, while also providing
the potential for one dimensional position control of the trapped particles along
the slot through the use of a sliding standing wave, i.e. a particle conveyor belt.
Here, we demonstrate trapping of 200 nm silica particles using a STOF. We also
show how light transmitted through the ﬁbre pigtails either side of the STOF
can be analysed to determine the trap characteristics. Finite element method
(FEM) and frequency domain time domain (FDTD) simulations are used to
simulate the STOF modes and these are subsequently used to model the forces
acting on the particles using perturbative and energy density methods.

2

Figure 1: (a): Representation of the slotted tapered optical ﬁbre (STOF) in a
solution of red ﬂuorescent silica nanoparticles. A 63x immersion lens is used to
image the system. (b): A schematic showing the STOF section of the optical
ﬁbre with the fundamental ﬁbre mode (i) seen at either side of the cavity region
and the fundamental STOF mode (ii) at the centre. (c) and (d) show the electric
ﬁeld norm along a line cutting through the centre of the ﬁbre perpendicularly
to the slot walls for polarisations parallel to and perpendicular to the slot wall,
respectively. The ﬁeld within the slot is up to 1.7 times higher than the ﬁeld at
the outer ﬁbre surfaces.

Micro-nanoﬁbres and slotted tapered optical ﬁbres

Commercial optical ﬁbres guide light in what is known as the weakly-guided
regime, wherein the refractive index contrast between the core of the ﬁbre and
the surrounding cladding is quite low (ncore − ncladding < 0.01). Most of the
light is contained within an area deﬁned by the mode ﬁeld diameter, which is
much smaller than the ﬁbre’s total cross-sectional area. When an optical ﬁbre
is tapered over a heat source such that its diameter is close to, or below, the
wavelength of the guided light, the distinction between the core and cladding

3

00.5100.51E-field norm (a.u.)E-field norm (a.u.)00.51-0.5-100.51-0.5-1Position (µm)Position (µm)cdabiiiregion is no longer valid. The surrounding medium (in our case, water) becomes
the new cladding and the original cladding is now viewed as the core material.
These MNFs operate in the strongly guided regime as the refractive index con-
trast becomes high. The evanescent ﬁelds produced in MNFs extend far —when
compared to the waveguide dimensions —into the surrounding medium and can
interact with particles located at several 100s of nm from the ﬁbre’s surface.
We work with optical ﬁbres which have been tapered using a heat-and-pull
method so that the waist diameter is typically of the order of the wavelength
39. The MNFs were fabricated using single-mode optical ﬁbre in the 980–1600
nm regime. Slotted tapered optical ﬁbres, or STOFs, are nanostructured MNFs
which have had a section of their waist removed. We produce STOFs by etch-
ing a cavity into the waist region of an MNF using focussed ion beam (FIB)
lithography. A more detailed discussion of the fabrication process is given in the
methods section. This new technique enables us to ’write’ high resolution struc-
tures directly onto the MNF in a transmission preserving, three-step process.
The STOF geometry is illustrated in Fig. 1.

Field distribution

As expected, the electric ﬁelds of a STOF diﬀer greatly from those of a typical
tapered ﬁbre. Due to the physical asymmetry introduced to the MNF at the
slot region, the polarisation of the guided light plays a larger role in the ﬁeld
distribution. To maximise the ﬁeld at the slot, the polarisation must be chosen
to be perpendicular to the walls of the slotted region. This removes the continu-
ity requirement of the electric ﬁeld at the dielectric boundary, thereby allowing
a large portion of the ﬁeld to exist outside of the waveguide (see Fig.1d). The
strength of the ﬁeld at the slotted region depends on a number of parameters:
the diameter, the slot width, the polarisation and the wavelength of the guided
light. We chose a 1.4 µm ﬁbre waist with a slot width of 300 nm. In general,
the ﬁeld strength increases with decreasing slot size, but, since we have an ad-
ditional requirement that the STOF opening must be large enough to facilitate
the entry of submicron particles, the slot width used was the minimal possible,
while still being practical for particle trapping.

When the slot region is excited by the fundamental mode of an MNF, as
illustrated in Fig. 1(b) inset (i), a ’fundamental’ type mode is excited in either
section, see Fig. 1(b) inset (ii). Slot waveguides can exhibit symmetric or
anti-symmetric modes depending on the phase diﬀerence between the upper
and lower sections. The fundamental mode of an MNF has an approximately
uniform phase front, so we neglect the possibility of anti-symmetric modes in
the following discussion.

Experimental outline

Optical trapping forces are typically divided into two categories in optical trap-
ping experiments. In the dipole approximation, where the particle size is smaller
than the wavelength of the trapping laser light, the force can be decomposed
into the gradient force (Fg ∝ 1
where α is the polarisability of the particle, E is the electric ﬁeld, and I (r) is
the optical intensity. This formalism is not necessarily accurate for all particle

2 α∇E2) and the scattering force (Fs ∝ I(r)ˆz) 38,

4

sizes, but gives a qualitative and intuitive picture of how the local electric ﬁelds
aﬀect particles placed within them.

For the case of unidirectional excitation of a STOF waveguide, the gradient
force, which seeks to pull particles towards regions of high intensity, draws
particles towards the walls at the centre of the slot, while the scattering force
propels particles in the direction of propagation of the trapping laser ﬁeld. To
produce a trap with longitudinal conﬁnement, a standing wave is necessary. This
provides an extra degree of conﬁnement for the particles, as well as increasing the
overall trap eﬃciency due to the cancellation of the scattering force components,
thereby improving the axial trapping strength. A more in-depth analysis of the
trap is made using a combination of FDTD/FEM models and various optical
trapping models.

Figure 2: Optical setup used to trap nanoparticles. 980 nm light from a
Ti:sapphire laser is passed through a polarising beam splitter to split the beam
while providing some initial control over the power balance. From here the
beams are passed through polarisation control optics and ﬁnally ﬁbre coupled
to the STOF. Transmission data is collected via a photodiode

We introduced a low density nanoparticle solution between the water im-
mersion 63x lens and the STOF, shown in Fig. 2. The low density solution was
used to prevent large numbers of particles occluding the slot. We used a particle
solution of approximately 109 particles ml−1, equivalent to an average particle
occupancy of < 1 over the volume of the slot. Fluorescent nanoparticles were
used to increase visibility of the system and we collected data visually, using a
high sensitivity, ﬂuorescence camera. Transmission and ﬂuorescence data were
also collected through the ﬁbre using either a photodiode (for transmission) or
a single photon counting module (for ﬂuorescence).

Polarisation preparation

Polarisation preparation of light in an MNF is often a source of contention as
temperature and pressure variations (i.e. stresses and strains) along the ﬁbre

5

PBCPolarizerMirrorFiber CouplerFiber CouplerOptical IsolatorTi:sapphire980nmHalf-wave PlateHalf-wave Plate63X objective99:1 BSPBC - polarizing beam cubeBS - beam splitterPD - photodiodePDVariable AttenuatorFree-spaceFibre CoupledBeam StopBeam Stopcan cause the polarisation to rotate, leading to little correlation between the
input and output polarisation states. Because of this behaviour, polarisation
measurement methods, such as the observation of Rayleigh scattering along the
ﬁbre waist, need to be used 40. In our experiment, we counter-propagated 980
nm light from a Ti:Saphire laser through the STOF to provide a 3-dimensional
trapping potential. The standing wave pattern that was set up within the wave
guiding structure extended to the evanescent ﬁeld, which then interacted with
nearby particles to produce a periodic potential within the cavity section of
the STOF. Two half-wave plates placed in the path of the two beams gave
us ﬁne control over the input polarisation states. By monitoring the output
at opposite ends of the STOF, we obtained an estimate for the polarisation
at the slot. However, by directly monitoring the slot region using a 63x water
immersion objective lens, we were better able to determine the polarisation state
at the STOF region via the intensity of the scattered light. When the light was
polarised perpendicular to the plane of the slot, scattering was further enhanced
due to the increased fraction of light contained within the small region. The slot
is viewed at an angle perpendicular to both the ﬁbre and the plane of the slot
face to ensure that maximum scattering is observed at the correct polarisation
state.

0.1 Optical force simulation

A thorough calculation of the electric ﬁelds, using both FDTD and FEM meth-
ods, provided us with reliable estimates for the optical forces in the STOF
system. Optical forces on small particles are often described using the dipole
approximation, where the size of the particle must be much less than the wave-
length of the trapping beams. For 200 nm particles this criterion is not quite
satisﬁed. To this end, we sought to make a comparison between the dipole gra-
dient and scattering forces, and the more standard methods of force calculation
for medium-sized particles. The total optical force in mid-sized optical trapping
systems, FM ST , is often calculated using a surface integral of the dot product
of the Maxwell stress tensor, T, with the surface normal, n, such that

˛

FM ST =

(T.n)da.

S

(1)

Here, da is the unit area element. While this is an accurate method, it can be
somewhat diﬃcult to implement when the boundary of the system is ill-deﬁned
due to the mesh shape and/or the step size of the FEM/FDTD method used.
As an alternative, we used an equivalent form derived from the Minkowski
formalism for calculating the force; this method relies on the gradient of the
electric permittivity, a value which can be easily extracted from the optical
force calculation 41, such that the force is given by

˚

Fmin = − 1
4

0

E.E∇rdV,

V

(2)

where 0 is the permittivity of free space, r is the relative permittivity, E is the
electric ﬁeld and dV is the unit volume element. Force measurements using data
from the FDTD and FEM methods give almost identical results for the trapping
forces within the slot except near the slot walls where a maximum discrepancy

6

(a): Results of FDTD analysis showing a cross-section of the STOF.
Figure 3:
The mode evolves from the fundamental mode of the MNF to the fundamental
mode of the STOF at the centre and back to the fundamental mode of the MNF
with little loss. (b): Electric ﬁeld intensity within the 10 µm × 300 nm slot in a
1.4 µm diameter MNF. The ﬁeld increases in strength near the slot walls. (c):
1D plot of the electric ﬁeld across the centre of the STOF to show the variation
in the ﬁeld as a function of the distance along the cavity. The ﬁeld stabilises at
the centre of the cavity.

of 7.6% was found. The dipole approximation for the force calculation proved
unreliable in regions where the local gradient was insigniﬁcant, but became
more accurate as this gradient increased. This method could be improved by
considering the particle as a distribute dipole, but this treatment is beyond the
scope of this work. FDTD images of the optical ﬁelds of the STOF are given in
Fig. 3, and a comparison of the trapping forces for diﬀerent particle locations
inside the slot are given in Fig. 4. Considering the close agreement between
the FDTD and FEM simulations, we chose to largely model the system using
the FDTD method due to the reduced memory requirements and regular grid
pattern.

At the ends of the slot, the local electric ﬁelds were found to increase due to
reﬂections oﬀ the walls. Proposed solutions to this problem involve the intro-
duction of a slot with tapered ends to allow the modes to evolve adiabatically
between the MNF and STOF modes. After ≈2 µm the ﬁeld within the cavity
stabilises (see Fig. 3c). The trapping forces along the directions which run

7

x position (µm)y position (µm)Electric field intensity cross-section of STOF(a)(b)2D intensity plot of slot field (along center axis)Position along cavity (µm)(c)1D plot of intensity vs. position along cavityPosition along cavity (µmIntensity (arb. u.)00.751.5-0.75-1.5-8-6-4-20246810-10075150225-4-3-2012345-5-10.30.40.50.6Intensity (arb. u.)Intensity (arb. u.)x10500.250.50.751.0-4-3-2012345-5-13000.7x10500.250.50.751.0Position along slot (nm)Figure 4:
(a): Forces on a 200 nm particle moving perpendicularly between the
upper and lower walls of a STOF as determined using optical ﬁelds from FDTD
and FEM calculations and equation 2, compared to a perturbative approach
using the optical ﬁelds of the cavity in the absence of a particle as modelled using
the FEM. 1 W of power was used in all simulations. (b): Longitudinal trapping
force for two orthogonal polarisation states showing the increased trapping forces
for the vertical polarisation state.

parallel to the STOF wall are considered to have normal restoring forces, but
the trap which runs perpendicularly between the upper and lower walls of the
STOF does not experience a standard restoring force. Here, the optical forces
seek to pull particles towards the wall, at which point any restoring character is
lost. Nevertheless, we determined a trap strength for this direction, indicated
by ˜kx in Table 1.

Trap analysis

The small dimensions of the STOF make it hard to image the slot adequately
without resorting to SEM imaging (Fig. 5a). This problem also applies to the
much smaller dimensions of the particles we wish to trap. Fluorescence imaging
(Fig. 5b), however, allows us to capture live video of the particles’ motion;
due to the low-light levels, exposure times of ≈ 70 ms are required to actually
image the particles. This limits our ability to perform Fourier analyses of the
visual data since the trap operates at relatively low trap frequencies, requiring
prohibitively long data collection times 42. We can, however, track the particles

8

Force (pN)Horizontal polarisationVertical polarisation860-4-6-8-80-60-40-20020406080-242Position (nm)Longitudinal force vs. position Transverse force vs. position PerturbationFDTDFEMForce (pN)Position (nm)0.60.40.200.20.40.6-40-30-20-1001020304050-50abFigure 5:
(a) SEM image of a STOF. (b): Microscope image of a trapped
ﬂuorescent particle with an outline of the STOF for clarity. (c): Particle position
versus time along the long axis of the STOF. The particle is seen to spend most
of its time near the centre of the slot. The pixel resolution of the image is
approximately 100 nm and Gaussian ﬁts to the particle centre allows for higher
resolution tracking. (d): Histogram of the particle positions given in (c) showing
bunching at regular intervals.

and bin their positions to observe interesting behaviour in their motion (Fig. 5c).
With an imaging resolution of 13.3 pixels per micron we were able to track the
particles’ positions to a high degree of accuracy. Gaussian ﬁtting of the positions
showed trapping occurs at regular intervals along the central axis of the STOF.
In the bright-ﬁeld it was diﬃcult to distinguish single particle trapping events
from multiple particle trapping, but ﬂuorescent imaging indicates that typically
more than one particle is trapped. The dynamics of multiple particle trapping
may shed some light on the larger spacing between ’stable’ trapping positions.
Simulations show that two particles in the trap have non-negligible interactions
over distances of approximately 1 µm and this may explain the observation
of stable trapping positions which are multiples of the approximately 350 nm
standing wave separation,
, where nef f is the eﬀective refractive index,

λ

2nef f

9

which is evident from the histogram in Fig. 5d.

The unrestricted motion of Brownian particles leads to a characteristic 1
f 2
In contrast, for a trapped particle, the power spectral den-
noise spectrum.
sity (PSD) follows a Lorentzian distribution,
, which is derived from the
Langevin equations of motion 43. Log-log plots of these data allows one to visu-
ally interpret this Lorenztian line-shape as the combination of two regimes which
overlap at the corner frequency, fc. Everything beyond fc can be viewed as the
unbound motion of free Brownian particles and behaves as 1
f 2 , while everything
below this represents the restricted motion of the trapped particles37.

f 2+f 2
c

A

Throughout the experiment we record the transmission through the STOF
during trapping and non-trapping events. Analysing the power spectral density
of this signal can be diﬃcult when low trap frequencies are considered (Fig. 6a).
Additionally, our detected signal is coupled to the three non-degenerate trap
stiﬀnesses and it is diﬃcult to distinguish between single-particle and multiple-
particle trapping; this adds more noise to our detected signal. To overcome some
of these issues, we opt for autocorrelation measurements which are analogous
to the PSD, but do not suﬀer from some of the associated PSD measurement
problems. The decay of the autocorrelation with respect to the delay time, given
in Fig. 6b, is not quite exponential (as would be expected for a clean optical
trap). The introduction of ’random’ forces, can alter the lineshape 44. We expect
the interactions of multiple particles as well as the motions of the slot walls in the
particle solution to be sources of these ’random’ forces. Despite these random
contributions, the trap stiﬀnesses are seen to increase proportionally to the input
powers, as determined by closest exponential ﬁts to the data. The increase is
directly proportional to the input laser power (Fig. 6c) and give values which
are of the same magnitude as the expected theoretical values (Table 1). If we
instead take the root mean square value for the power to adjust for the losses
along the ﬁbre and use this power to calculate kx,ky, and kz and then average
these contributions we arrive at an eﬀective spring constant:

√

kef f =

2
P

(kx + ky + kz)

3

,

(3)

where P is the power at the input of the STOF. Consideration of multiple par-
ticle interactions and surface-particle interactions such as the Faxen corrections
would reduce this value further. We assume that the longitudinal trap stiﬀness,
kz, may have a smaller contribution to the eﬀective trap strength and we note
that removing this value from our average signiﬁcantly bridges the gap between
the experimental and theoretical obtained values.

Discussion

Micro-nanoﬁbres have recently established themselves as very useful tools in
several ﬁelds, including optical trapping and cold atom physics 45. The STOF
used in the work reported here allowed us to further enhance the eﬀectiveness
of MNFs in both of these areas while somewhat bridging the size-gap between
the micron scale operation of MNFs in optical trapping, and the quantum di-
mensions of atomic physics. As a trapping device, the STOF shows promise
for particle sizes down to 200 nm with modest trapping powers, albeit with
low trap stiﬀnesses. Trapping of 100 nm polystyrene particles has also been

10

Figure 6:
(a) Power spectrum density of the tranmitted signal for 5 mW of
trapping power. A corner frequency of 0.6 Hz is measured.(b) Autocorrelation
signals at 2 mW, 5 mW and 10 mW. The observed decrease in the slope of
the autocorrelation signal at diﬀerent powers indicates a linear increase in trap
strength with power as is expected. (c) Plot of the Spring constant as determined
using the autocorrelation measurement vs. the power in the trapping beams.
The subsequent plot is linear with respect to power as predicted.

observed, but was not presented here. The ﬂexibility of the fabrication process
permits us to make structures with very high resolution, as well as providing
a means for in-situ scanning electron microscope (SEM) measurements of the
device prior to use. This ﬂexibility opens up many avenues of research as it
allows for arbitrary modiﬁcation of the MNF waist. The unique trapping geom-

11

 Lag time (s)Autocorrelation00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.910.450.40.350.30.250.20.150.10.05010 mW5 mW2 mWb10-12-1110-1010-910-810-71010-1100101Power spectrum V Hz 2-1Frequency (Hz)aSpring constant fN µm-1Power (mW)01234567891050101520253035c2 mW
6 fN µm−1
28 fN µm−1
102 fN µm−1
202 fN µm−1
78 fN µm−1

5 mW
18 fN µm−1
69 fN µm−1
255 fN µm−1
510 fN µm−1
124 fN µm−1

10 mW
30 fN µm−1
138 fN µm−1
510 fN µm−1
1020 fN µm−1
176 fN µm−1

kexp
˜kx
ky
kz
kef f

Table 1: Table showing the experimentally obtained values of kexp vs the three
trap stiﬀnesses determined using only the optical ﬁeld data from FDTD and
FEM calculation and ﬁnally an eﬀective trap stiﬀness kef f determined by av-
eraging the three trap stiﬀnesses and adjusting for the power that reaches the
STOF from the input optical ﬁbre pigtail.

etry which conﬁnes particles, and potentially atoms, within the slot leads us to
believe that spectroscopic measurements are possible by passing probe beams
of diﬀerent wavelengths through the MNF while simultaneously recording the
transmission or captured ﬂuorescence at the output ﬁbre pigtail. A substan-
tial improvement to earlier work, such as the self-organisation of atoms along
nanophotonic waveguides 46, should also be possible since light coupling into
the STOF is increased compared to for standard optical nanoﬁbres. This study
serves as a step towards the realisation of more complex applications involv-
ing the incorporation of diﬀerent slot geometries as well as custom MNF Bragg
gratings 30 to further enhance the ﬁelds of the STOF. Whether as a platform
for studying optical binding eﬀects, as an analytical tool, or as a trap for cold,
neutral atoms, the STOF has many exciting applications which remain to be
investigated.

Methods

Flame brushed heat-and-pull

The MNFs discussed in this paper were fabricated using a custom-built, ﬂame-
brushed, heat-and-pull rig. This consists of a hyrogen-oxygen ﬂame mixed in
a 2:1 ratio to provide a clean-burning source. The untapered optical ﬁbre is
stripped of its outer acrylic layer and clamped to the stages then placed into
the ﬂame. The stages pull both sides of the ﬁbre away from the ﬂame, causing
the ﬁbre, which is now in a molten state, to taper. By controlling the speed
of the stages, the length of the pull and the ﬂame size, MNFs with speciﬁed
diameters can be produced. Further control over the shape of the transition
region can be achieved by controlling the position of the ﬂame relative to the
waist region during the pull, a technique known as ﬂame brushing.

STOF fabrication

The slotted tapered optical ﬁbres were created using a three step process which
involved the initial MNF fabrication process using standard heat-and-pull tech-
niques, an indium tin oxide (ITO) sputter coating process, and ﬁnally a focussed
ion beam milling process to introduce a slot to the MNF. A 5 nm layer of ITO
is necessary to provide suﬃcient charge mitigation at the MNF surface as an

12

uncoated MNF would be subject to large dielectric charging eﬀects during the
FIB process, thereby making the subsequent etching of submicron features im-
possible.

Field calculations

The optical ﬁelds of the device were calculated both in the presence of, and
without, the particles to be trapped. 3D FDTD and FEM methods were used
to optimise our device parameters as well as characterise the trapping potentials.
Accepted values of the refractive indices of silica and polystyrene at a wavelength
of 980 nm were used in all calculations. The eﬀect of the 5 nm layer of indium tin
oxide was ignored due to its negligible inﬂuence on the MNF modes. COMSOL
and CrystalWave software packages were employed as the FEM and FDTD
solvers, respectively.

Optical force calculations

All force calculations were made using Matlab scripts, which relied on the input
ﬁelds, Ex, Eyand Ez, as well as the refractive index, n, taken from simulations.
Equation 2 was used to calculate the forces when a particle was present in the
ﬁeld, whereas the perturbative, dipole expression was used when no particle was
present:

Fdipole =

α∇E2,

1
2

(4)

where α is the polarisability of the particle and E is the electric ﬁeld. A better
estimate could be obtained by modelling the particle as an extended dipole,
but was not considered in this paper. Overall, the diﬀerence between the ﬁelds
produced by FDTD and FEM methods was insigniﬁcant, except near the upper
and lower slot surfaces. This may be, in part, due to the dynamic meshing used
in the FEM simulations.

Trap stiﬀness

The trap stiﬀness was determined by analysis of the power spectrum density
(PSD) of the STOF transmission. The low corner frequency makes analysis of
the PSD diﬃcult since long collection periods are required for accurate results.
Data was recorded for 50 s intervals at a rate of 2 kHz.

References

1. Ashkin, A. Trapping of atoms by resonance radiation pressure. Phys. Rev.

Lett. 40, 729–732 (1978).

2. Ashkin, A., Dziedzic, J. M., Bjorkholm, J. E. & Chu, S. Observation of
a single-beam gradient force optical trap for dielectric particles. Opt. Lett.
11, 288–290 (1986).

3. Marag´o, O. M., Jones, P. H., Gucciardi, P. G., Volpe, G. & Ferrari, A. C.
Optical trapping and manipulation of nanostructures. Nature Nanotech. 8,
807–819 (2013).

13

4. Daly, M., Sergides, M. & Nic Chormaic, S. Optical trapping and manip-
ulation of micrometer and submicrometer particles. Laser Photon. Rev. 9,
309–329 (2015).

5. Song, B.-S., Noda, S., Asano, T. & Akahane, Y. Ultra-high-q photonic

double-heterostructure nanocavity. Nature Mat. 4, 207–210 (2005).

6. Jing, P. et al. Photonic crystal optical tweezers with high eﬃciency for live
biological samples and viability characterization. Sci. Rep. 6, 19924 (2016).

7. Zehtabi-Oskuie, A., Bergeron, J. G. & Gordon, R. Flow-dependent double-
nanohole optical trapping of 20 nm polystyrene nanospheres. Sci. Rep. 2,
966 (2012).

8. Kotnala, A. & Gordon, R. Quantiﬁcation of high-eﬃciency trapping of
nanoparticles in a double nanohole optical tweezer. Nano Lett. 14, 853–856
(2014).

9. Anderson, P. A., Schmidt, B. S. & Lipson, M. High conﬁnement in silicon

slot waveguides with sharp bends. Opt. Exp. 14, 9197–9202 (2006).

10. Soltani, M. et al. Nanophotonic trapping for precise manipulation of

biomolecular arrays. Nature Nanotech. 9, 448–452 (2014).

11. Tong, L. et al. Subwavelength-diameter silica wires for low-loss optical wave

guiding. Nature 426, 816–819 (2003).

12. Hoﬀman, J. et al. Ultrahigh transmission optical nanoﬁbers. AIP Adv. 4,

067124 (2014).

13. Ploschner, M., Cizmar, T., Mazilu, M., Di Falco, A. & Dholakia, K. Bidi-
rectional optical sorting of gold nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 12, 1923–1927
(2012).

14. Brzobohat`y, O. et al. Three-dimensional optical trapping of a plasmonic
nanoparticle using low numerical aperture optical tweezers. Sci. Rep. 5,
8106 (2015).

15. Geiselmann, M. et al. Three-dimensional optical manipulation of a single

electron spin. Nature Nanotech. 8, 175–179 (2013).

16. Daly, M., Truong, V. G., Phelan, C., Deasy, K. & Nic Chormaic, S. Nanos-
tructured optical nanoﬁbres for atom trapping. New J. Phys. 16, 053052
(2014).

17. Xin, H. & Li, B. Targeted delivery and controllable release of nanoparti-
cles using a defect-decorated optical nanoﬁber. Opt. Exp. 19, 13285–13290
(2011).

18. Maimaiti, A., Truong, V. G., Sergides, M., Gusachenko, I. & Nic Chor-
maic, S. Higher order microﬁbre modes for dielectric particle trapping and
propulsion. Sci. Rep. 5, 9077 (2015).

19. Gusachenko, I., Truong, V. G., Frawley, M. C. & Nic Chormaic, S. Opti-
cal nanoﬁber integrated into optical tweezers for in situ ﬁber probing and
optical binding studies. Photonics 2, 795 (2015).

14

20. Nieddu, T., Gokhroo, V. & Nic Chormaic, S. Optical nanoﬁbres and neutral

atoms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.02753 (2015).

21. Skelton, S. et al. Evanescent wave optical trapping and transport of micro-
and nanoparticles on tapered optical ﬁbers. J. Quant Spectrosc. Radiat.
Transf. 113, 2512–2520 (2012).

22. Li, Y. et al. Giant resonant light forces in microspherical photonics. Light:

Sci. Appl. 2, e64 (2013).

23. Murugan, G. S. et al. An optical ﬁber optoﬂuidic particle aspirator. Appl.

Phys. Lett. 105, 101103 (2014).

24. Frawley, M. C., Gusachenko, I., Truong, V. G., Sergides, M. & Nic Chor-
maic, S. Selective particle trapping and optical binding in the evanescent
ﬁeld of an optical nanoﬁber. Opt. Exp. 22, 16322–16334 (2014).

25. Cheng, C., Xu, X., Lei, H. & Li, B. Plasmon-assisted trapping of nanoparti-
cles using a silver-nanowire-embedded pmma nanoﬁber. Sci. Rep. 6, 20433
(2016).

26. Yalla, R., Sadgrove, M., Nayak, K. P. & Hakuta, K. Cavity quantum
electrodynamics on a nanoﬁber using a composite photonic crystal cavity.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 143601 (2014).

27. Knight, J., Cheung, G., Jacques, F. & Birks, T. Phase-matched excitation
of whispering-gallery-mode resonances by a ﬁber taper. Opt. Lett. 22, 1129–
1131 (1997).

28. Mitsch, R., Sayrin, C., Albrecht, B., Schneeweiss, P. & Rauschenbeutel, A.
Quantum state-controlled directional spontaneous emission of photons into
a nanophotonic waveguide. Nature Commun. 5 (2014).

29. B´eguin, J.-B. et al. Generation and detection of a sub-poissonian atom
number distribution in a one-dimensional optical lattice. Phys. Rev. Lett.
113, 263603 (2014).

30. Kato, S. & Aoki, T. Strong coupling between a trapped single atom and an

all-ﬁber cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 093603 (2015).

31. Kumar, R., Gokhroo, V., Deasy, K. & Nic Chormaic, S. Autler-townes
splitting via frequency up-conversion at ultralow-power levels in cold rb 87
atoms using an optical nanoﬁber. Phys. Rev. A 91, 053842 (2015).

32. Watkins, A., Tiwari, V. B., Ward, J. M., Deasy, K. & Nic Chormaic, S. Ob-
servation of zeeman shift in the rubidium d2 line using an optical nanoﬁber
in vapor. In 8th Ibero American Optics Meeting/11th Latin American Meet-
ing on Optics, Lasers, and Applications, 87850S–87850S (International So-
ciety for Optics and Photonics, 2013).

33. Jones, D., Franson, J. & Pittman, T. Ladder-type electromagnetically in-
duced transparency using nanoﬁber-guided light in a warm atomic vapor.
Phys. Rev. A 92, 043806 (2015).

15

34. Xin, H., Xu, R. & Li, B. Optical trapping, driving, and arrangement of

particles using a tapered ﬁbre probe. Sci. Rep. 2, 818 (2012).

35. Neumann, L. et al. Extraordinary optical transmission brightens near-ﬁeld

ﬁber probe. Nano Lett. 11, 355–360 (2010).

36. Yang, A. H. et al. Optical manipulation of nanoparticles and biomolecules

in sub-wavelength slot waveguides. Nature 457, 71–75 (2009).

37. Juan, M. L., Gordon, R., Pang, Y., Eftekhari, F. & Quidant, R. Self-induced
back-action optical trapping of dielectric nanoparticles. Nature Phys. 5,
915–919 (2009).

38. Jones, P., Marag´o, O. & Volpe, G. Optical Tweezers: Principles and Appli-

cations (Cambridge University Press, 2015).

39. Ward, J., Maimaiti, A., Le, V. H. & Nic Chormaic, S. Contributed review:
Optical micro-and nanoﬁber pulling rig. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 85, 111501
(2014).

40. Szczurowski, M. et al. Diﬀerential rayleigh scattering method for measure-
ment of polarization and intermodal beat length in optical waveguides and
ﬁbers. Appl. Opt. 50, 2594–2600 (2011).

41. Brevik, I. Experiments in phenomenological electrodynamics and the elec-

tromagnetic energy-momentum tensor. Phys. Rep. 52, 133–201 (1979).

42. van der Horst, A. & Forde, N. R. Power spectral analysis for optical trap
stiﬀness calibration from high-speed camera position detection with limited
bandwidth. Opt. Exp. 18, 7670–7677 (2010).

43. Berg-Sørensen, K. & Flyvbjerg, H. Power spectrum analysis for optical

tweezers. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 75, 594–612 (2004).

44. Rold´an, ´E. Irreversibility and Dissipation in Microscopic Systems (Springer,

2014).

45. Kumar, R., Gokhroo, V. & Nic Chormaic, S. Multi-level cascaded electro-
magnetically induced transparency in cold atoms using an optical nanoﬁbre
interface. New J. Phys. 17, 123012 (2015).

46. Chang, D., Cirac, J. I. & Kimble, H. Self-organization of atoms along a

nanophotonic waveguide. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 113606 (2013).

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology
Graduate University. The authors would like to thank T. Sasaki and L. Szikszai
for invaluable technical assistance and V. Brulis for his insightful comments
regarding the FDTD simulations.

16

