IL NUOVO CIMENTO

Vol. ?, N. ?

?

The Hydrodynamics of Active Systems

Julia M. Yeomans

The Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, 1 Keble Road, Oxford, OX1 3NP, UK

Summary. —
This is a series of four lectures presented at the 2015 Enrico Fermi summer school
in Varenna. The aim of the lectures is to give an introduction to the hydrodynamics
of active matter concentrating on low Reynolds number examples such as cells and
molecular motors. Lecture 1 introduces the hydrodynamics of single active particles,
covering the Stokes equation and the Scallop Theorem, and stressing the link be-
tween autonomous activity and the dipolar symmetry of the far ﬂow ﬁeld. In lecture
2 I discuss applications of this mathematics to the behaviour of microswimmers at
surfaces and in external ﬂows, and describe our current understanding of how swim-
mers stir the surrounding ﬂuid. Lectures 3 concentrates on the collective behaviour
of active particles, modelled as an active nematic. I write down the equations of
motion and motivate the form of the active stress. The resulting hydrodynamic
instability leads to a state termed ‘active turbulence’ characterised by strong jets
and vortices in the ﬂow ﬁeld and the continual creation and annihilation of pairs of
topological defects. Lecture 4 compares simulations of active turbulence to experi-
ments on suspensions of microtubules and molecular motors. I introduce lyotropic
active nematics and discuss active anchoring at interfaces.

1. – Introduction

Active systems produce energy at the level of their individual components and nat-
urally exist out of thermodynamic equilibrium. The most obvious examples are living
matter, animals, plants and bacteria, but inanimate systems, such as vertically vibrated
granular layers, are also considered active, and there are many parallels between the
behaviour of active and driven matter. Active systems occur across length scales. Well
studied macroscopic examples include ﬂocks of birds and schools of ﬁsh. On a micron
length scale, swimming bacteria and crawling and dividing cells provide a rich testing
ground for the theories of active matter. Within cells there is a highly active environ-
ment, with molecular motors of size a few nanometres converting chemical to mechanical
energy to organise cellular processes and hence power life.

Why is active matter of interest to a physicist? We are dealing with energy, work
and motion, and often with ﬂuctuations, standard physical concepts. Describing the
motion of swimming bacteria has an august place in the history of ﬂuid mechanics. The
c(cid:13) Societ`a Italiana di Fisica

1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
9
1
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

JULIA M. YEOMANS

collective behaviour of active systems appears to have many similarities across length
scales, suggesting that understanding based on generic principles rather than individual
details might be useful. Moreover experiments on active matter provide a testing ground
for the theories of non-equilibrium statistical physics.

Scientists are also taking the ﬁrst steps towards an active technology. Active colloids
are autonomous micro-machines and miniature driven swimmers can carry payloads and
mix ﬂuids in microscopic channels. Bacteria are able to turn micron-scale ﬂywheels and
to sort passive colloids. Even more exciting is the future possibility of imitating cellular
transport and organisation, processes which have evolved over millennia to maximise
eﬃciency in the strongly ﬂuctuating environment of the cell.

These lectures concentrate on the hydrodynamics of active matter; the behaviour in
I shall ﬁrst consider single microswimmers, such as a swimming
a background ﬂuid.
bacterium. Because of their size, the motion of microswimmers is governed by the Stokes
equations, the low Reynolds number limit of the Navier-Stokes equations. This has two
far-reaching consequences, the Scallop Theorem which controls the form of the swimming
stroke, and the nematic symmetry of the swimmers’ far ﬂow ﬁeld. After explaining these
concepts and discussing the mathematics behind them I shall show how they impact
upon the interaction between swimmers and tracer particles, and how microswimmers
move near a surface and in Poiseuille ﬂow.

The second half of the lectures will deal with the hydrodynamics of dense suspen-
sions of active nematic particles. I shall show how a simple extension of the continuum
equations of motion of nematic liquid crystals describes active hydrodynamics and leads
to a state termed active turbulence characterised by a continually changing pattern of
jets and vortices in the velocity ﬁeld and by the creation and annihilations of walls and
topological defects in the director ﬁeld. Active turbulence has been observed in dense
swimmer suspensions, in conﬂuent cellular layers and in mixtures of microtubules and
molecular motors. I shall compare experiments with numerical solutions of the active
nematohydrodynamic equations and discuss the mechanisms behind active turbulence.

2. – Single swimmer hydrodynamics: background

Lecture 1 describes the hydrodynamics of a single microswimmer and starts by intro-
ducing the Stokes equations as the low Reynolds number limit of the Navier-Stokes equa-
tions. I motivate the Scallop Theorem, that a swimming stroke must be non-invariant
in time for a net swimmer motion, and show how this relates to bacterial swimming
strategies. I then introduce the multipole expansion and argue that, because swimmers
are force free, their far ﬂow ﬁeld is generically dipolar, with nematic symmetry [1, 2].

.
2

1. Swimming at low Reynolds number . – I write down the continuum equations of
motion of a simple ﬂuid and take the zero Reynolds number limit, appropriate to many
colloidal and active systems, to obtain the Stokes equations.

The Navier-Stokes equations, that provide a continuum description of the ﬂow of a New-
tonian, incompressible ﬂuid, are [3]

(1)

ρ(cid:26) ∂v

∂t

+ (v · ∇)v(cid:27) = −∇p + µ∇2v + f ,

∇ · v = 0,

THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

3

where v(r, t) is the velocity at position r and time t of a ﬂuid of density ρ and dynamic
viscosity µ driven by a pressure gradient ∇p and a body force (force per unit volume)
f . The terms on the left hand side of Eq. (1) are the inertial terms which describe the
transport of momentum and µ∇2v describes the viscous dissipation that results from
velocity gradients.
Dimensionless variables denoted by a tilde, can be deﬁned by choosing a length scale

L0 and a velocity scale V0

(2)

˜v =

v
V0

,

˜x =

x
L0

,

˜∇ = L0∇,

˜t =

V0
L0

t,

∂
∂˜t

=

L0
V0

∂
∂t

.

In terms of the dimensionless variables the Navier-Stokes equation becomes

(3)

(cid:26) ∂˜v

∂˜t

+ (˜v · ˜∇)˜v(cid:27) = −

L0
0 ρ∇p +
V 2

µ

L0V0ρ

˜∇2˜v +

L0
V 2
0 ρ

f .

Eq. (3) shows that relative magnitude of the inertial and viscous terms in the Navier-
Stokes equation is characterised by a dimensionless number, the Reynolds number

(4)

Re =

inertial response
viscous response ∼

ρL0V0

µ

.

For water ρ/µ ∼ 106, so colloids moving in microﬂows and micro-swimmers with length
scales ∼ 1 − 100µm and velocity scales ∼ 1 − 100µms−1 have Reynolds numbers (cid:28) 1.
Thus the inertial terms can be neglected, and the Navier-Stokes equations reduce to the
Stokes equations

(5)

∇p = µ∇2v + f ,

∇ · v = 0.

The zero Re limit has interesting physical consequences. Moreover the Stokes equations
are linear and hence more tractable mathematically.

.
2

2. The Scallop Theorem. – A far-reaching consequence of the Re = 0 limit is Pur-
cell’s Scallop Theorem: To achieve propulsion at zero Reynolds number in Newtonian
ﬂuids a swimmer must deform in a way that is not invariant under time reversal.

There is no explicit time dependence in the Stokes equations which implies kinematic
reversibility. A striking example of this is provided by a blob of dye suspended in a high
viscosity ﬂuid contained between two cylinders. When the ﬂuid is sheared by rotating
the outer cylinder the dyed blob can be stretched to wrap several times around the inner
cylinder. If the motion of the cylinders is reversed the dyed ﬂuid returns to its original
shape.

This is the physics behind the Scallop Theorem [4]. As a swimmer moves through
a low Re ﬂuid there is nothing in the equations of motion of the surrounding ﬂuid that
picks out a preferred direction.
If the boundary conditions, i.e. the swimmer’s stroke
cycle, is invariant under time reversal as well, its net displacement after each cycle must
be zero – otherwise reversing time would give the same physical system, but a diﬀerent
displacement. Therefore at zero Re the stroke must be non-invariant under time reversal
to allow swimming.

4

JULIA M. YEOMANS

Fig. 1. – Microscopic swimmers that have evolved to overcome the Scallop Theorem. A: E. coli,
B: sperm cells, C: Euglena metaboly, D: the 3-sphere swimmer (after Najaﬁ and Golestanian
[5]).

Microscopic swimmers have evolved several strategies to overcome the Scallop The-
orem (Fig. 1). Many move by using long, thin appendages called ﬂagella. Bacterial
ﬂagella (e.g. E. coli) are driven by rotary motors which induce helical waves to over-
come the Scallop Theorem. Eukaryotic ﬂagella tend to oscillate through bending waves.
Paramecium is covered by cilia, shorter but similar in structure to eukaryotic ﬂagella that
have distinct power and recovery strokes. Cilia also act as pumps in the body, clearing
mucus from the lungs and in the fallopian tubes to facilitate moving the ovum from the
ovary to the uterus. Euglena metaboly produces a suitable swimming stroke by altering
its body shape so that the relative motion of its ends is coupled to changes in their mass.
At least three degrees of freedom are needed to deﬁne a suitable stoke for zero Re
swimming. A simple model swimmer is the three-sphere swimmer, which comprises three
spheres coupled by rods [5]. The rods have no hydrodynamic coupling to the ﬂuid, but
specifying their lengths as a function of time serves to deﬁne the swimming stroke. The
stroke and the swimmer displacement as a function of time are shown in Fig. 1. The
advantage of building the swimmer out of spheres is that the ﬂow ﬁeld around a sphere
is known analytically in the Stokes limit [3]. Hence exact results can be obtained for the
swimming speed if the sphere radii are small compared to their separation.

Another widely used model swimmer is the squirmer [6, 7], useful because it admits
an exact solution and also because it is spherical which helps to disentangle steric and

2WillbeinsertedbytheeditorFig.1.LowReynoldsnumberswimmers:(a)aspermcell[13],thewavemovingalongtheﬂagellumdeﬁnesadirectionintimeandallowsmotionatzeroReynoldsnumber;(b)E.coli,anexampleofapusher,thefarﬂowcirculatesoutwardsfromtheheadandtailandinwardstothesides;(c)Chlamydomonas,the‘breast-stroke’oftheﬂagellaleadstoacontractile(puller)farﬂowwhichcirculatesfromthesidestothefrontandrear;(d)Euglenametaboly,shapechangesofthebodyresultinpropulsion;(e)Paramecium,thesurfaceiscoveredbybeatingcilia,thesesynchronise,andmetachronalwavesinthebeatingpatternmoveacrossthesurfaceoftheorganism;(f)afabricatedmicroswimmer,drivenbyarotatingmagneticﬁeld[11].bacteriaandalgae,andfabricatedmicroswimmers,swim.ForsuchtinyentitiesthegoverningequationsaretheStokesequations,thezeroReynoldsnumberlimitoftheNavier-Stokesequations.Thisimpliesthewell-knownScallopTheorem,thatswim-mingstrokesmustbenon-invariantundertimereversaltoallowanetmotion,ideasintroducedinSec.2.Then,inSec.3,wedeﬁnetwomodelmicroswimmersandshowhowtocalculatetheirswimmingspeeds.Aconceptthatwestressinthisreviewisthatbiologicalswimmersmoveau-tonomously,freefromanynetexternalforceortorque.Asaresulttheleadingorderterminthemultipole(farﬁeld)expansionoftheStokesequationsvanishesandmi-croswimmersgenericallyhavedipolarfarﬂowﬁelds.Sec.4isadiscussionofthemultipoleexpansion,anditsapplicationtomicroswimming,andweintroducethestressletandrotlet.Then,inSec5,wedescribephysicalexampleswherethedipolarnatureofthebacterialﬂowﬁeldhassigniﬁcantconsequences,velocitystatisticsinadilutebacterialsuspensionandtracerdi↵usioninaswimmersuspension.AdiscussionofopenquestionsinSec.6closesthepaper.Asthisisatutorialreviewwehaveaimedtocitereferenceswhichcanbeusedasentriestotheliterature.2WillbeinsertedbytheeditorFig.1.LowReynoldsnumberswimmers:(a)aspermcell[13],thewavemovingalongtheﬂagellumdeﬁnesadirectionintimeandallowsmotionatzeroReynoldsnumber;(b)E.coli,anexampleofapusher,thefarﬂowcirculatesoutwardsfromtheheadandtailandinwardstothesides;(c)Chlamydomonas,the‘breast-stroke’oftheﬂagellaleadstoacontractile(puller)farﬂowwhichcirculatesfromthesidestothefrontandrear;(d)Euglenametaboly,shapechangesofthebodyresultinpropulsion;(e)Paramecium,thesurfaceiscoveredbybeatingcilia,thesesynchronise,andmetachronalwavesinthebeatingpatternmoveacrossthesurfaceoftheorganism;(f)afabricatedmicroswimmer,drivenbyarotatingmagneticﬁeld[11].bacteriaandalgae,andfabricatedmicroswimmers,swim.ForsuchtinyentitiesthegoverningequationsaretheStokesequations,thezeroReynoldsnumberlimitoftheNavier-Stokesequations.Thisimpliesthewell-knownScallopTheorem,thatswim-mingstrokesmustbenon-invariantundertimereversaltoallowanetmotion,ideasintroducedinSec.2.Then,inSec.3,wedeﬁnetwomodelmicroswimmersandshowhowtocalculatetheirswimmingspeeds.Aconceptthatwestressinthisreviewisthatbiologicalswimmersmoveau-tonomously,freefromanynetexternalforceortorque.Asaresulttheleadingorderterminthemultipole(farﬁeld)expansionoftheStokesequationsvanishesandmi-croswimmersgenericallyhavedipolarfarﬂowﬁelds.Sec.4isadiscussionofthemultipoleexpansion,anditsapplicationtomicroswimming,andweintroducethestressletandrotlet.Then,inSec5,wedescribephysicalexampleswherethedipolarnatureofthebacterialﬂowﬁeldhassigniﬁcantconsequences,velocitystatisticsinadilutebacterialsuspensionandtracerdi↵usioninaswimmersuspension.AdiscussionofopenquestionsinSec.6closesthepaper.Asthisisatutorialreviewwehaveaimedtocitereferenceswhichcanbeusedasentriestotheliterature.II.METHODOLOGYA.ImmersedBoundary-LatticeBoltzmannMethod.Theswimmerandciliaresideinaﬂuiddomain.TheﬂuidﬂowiscomputedusingthelatticeBoltzmannmethod,7whichisaneﬃcientnumericalsolverfortheNavier−Stokesequations.ThesizeoftheﬂuiddomainisLx×Ly×Lz=60×40×60inlatticeBoltzmannunits,withperiodicboundaryconditionsinthexandzdirectionsandno-slipconditionsappliedontheboundariesy=0andy=Ly.Tomatchthescalesofrecentlyfabricatedsyntheticciliaandwell-studiedswimmingmicro-organisms,suchasthealgaChlamydomonasreinhardtii,wesetthelatticeBoltzmanngridspacingΔx=2.5μmandthetimestepΔt=1μs.Thisyieldsaciliumlengthandswimmerlengthof25μmandbiologicallyrelevantswimmerspeedsontheorderof102−103μm/s(seebelow).Inoursimulation,theupperandlowerwallslie100μmapart.Wewillfocusonswimmerdynamicsnearthelowerwall,wheretheciliaarelocated.Althoughthewallseparationisonly4timestheswimmerlength,weanticipatethatourconclusionsalsoapplyinthecasethattheupperwallisfurtherawayorevenabsent.Notably,bacterialcellscatteringexperimentshavesuggestedthatawallhasnegligiblehydrodynamiceﬀectuntiltheswimmercollideswithit,aligningwiththewallandremainingincloseproximity.14Onceourmodelswimmerreachestheciliatedlowerwall,theupperboundaryissuﬃcientlyfarawaytobeinconsequential.Theﬂowﬁeldgeneratedbytheciliaalsopotentiallydependsonthewallseparation.Performingsimulationswiththewallseparationdoubled,however,wefoundthattheﬂowproﬁlewithintheciliarylayerwasqualitativelyidentical.Themaindiﬀerencewasareducedshearrateintheﬂuidabovethecilia(seeFigureS1).Sinceforouranalysisweareprimarilyinterestedinthedynamicsofswimmersthatreachtheciliarylayer,thelocationoftheupperwallisnotcritical,providedthatitisatleastafewbodylengthsawayfromthelowerwall.TheLBmethodiscoupledtothedynamicsofsolidobjectsusingtheimmersedboundarymethodasfollows.10Anobjectintheﬂuidisdeﬁnedbyacollectionofmeshnodes.Ateachtimestep,internalforcesandtorquesactingoneachnodearecomputedusingaconstitutivemodelrelatingthestressestostrainswithintheobject.Theseforcesandtorquesaretransferredtotheﬂuidinaccordancewithlocalforceandtorquebalance.Theresultingﬂowﬁeldisthenusedtoadvecttheobjectnodes,therebysatisfyingano-slipconditionontheobject.AnadditionalfeaturenotpresentintraditionalIBMsisthatnodeshaveanassociatedorientation,whichisupdatedusingtheﬂuidvorticityﬁeld.15Thisisrequiredfortheelasticﬁlamentmodelofthecilia(seeSupportingInformationtext).Althoughthismethodofadvectingimmersedboundarieshelpstopreventinterpenetrationofbodies,15wereinforceexcludedvolumeeﬀectsaroundobjectsbyimposingashort-rangedrepulsiveforcebetweennodesofswimmersandthoseofcilia.TheformofthisforcecorrespondstotherepulsivepartofaMorsepotentialinteraction=−−−VrD()(1e)arrMorse()20(1)wherethemaximalinteractionrangeisr0=1.5Δx.Theprecisedetailsoftherepulsiveinteractionarenotexpectedtoqualitativelyinﬂuencetheoutcomesofthemodel.B.SwimmerModel.TheswimmerthatwesimulatehereinisbasedonatheoreticalmodelproposedbyNajaﬁandGolestanian.16Thebodyconsistsofthreelinkedsphericalbeadsarrangedalongaline.ThelengthsofthelinksbetweenneighboringbeadsoscillateasillustratedinFigure1A.Thestrokeisnonreciprocal,whichisawell-knownprerequisiteforgeneratinganetdisplacementfromacyclicsequenceofbodydeformationsinthezero-Reynolds-numberlimit.17Thismodelswimmerwaschosenbecauseitisoneofthesimplestthatcapturesthefundamentalcharacteristicofself-propulsioninaviscousﬂuidandis,asformanybiologicalswimmers,attractedtoasurfaceintheabsenceofthecilia.(However,theapproachdescribedhereissuﬃcientlygeneralthatwecanintroduceothertypesofswimmers,suchasaﬂagellatedorganism;18thiswillbethesubjectoffuturework.)Inourthree-dimensionalnumericalmodel,eachbeadoftheswimmerisadvectedwiththelocalﬂowvelocity.Linearelasticforcesandtorquesareemployedtomaintainaswimmerconﬁgurationthatisclosetorigidandcollinear.UsingoneimmersedboundarynodeforeachbeadgivesaneﬀectivehydrodynamicradiusR=Δx.WechoosethelinklengthstooscillatebetweenLminlink=4ΔxandLmaxlink=6ΔxsothattheaveragetotalswimmerlengthisLswim=10Δx=25μm.Weinvestigateswimmerswithtwodiﬀerentstrokeperiods,Tswim=200Δtand1000Δt.Inbothcases,wedeterminedthenetdisplacementafteronecycletobeabout1%oftheswimmerlength.Thisisconsistentwiththeanalyticalresultforthedisplacement,Δ,givenbyEarletal.:19εεΔ=+≈RLLL712[(/)(/)]0.009maxlink2maxlink3swimwhereε=(Lmaxlink−Lminlink).Convertingtophysicalunits,theaveragespeedsofthefastandslowswimmersarevswim=1250and250μm/s,respectively.Bycomparison,experimentshavefoundswimmingspeedsupto240μm/sforthe10μmlongC.reinhardtii,20whilebacteriaandcertainﬁshlarvaeareknowntoreachrelativespeedsof50bodylengthspersecond.21Oursimulatedswimmersarethereforerepresentativeofbiologicalexamplesintermsofspeed.Foraﬂuidwiththeviscosityofwater,thecorrespondingReynoldsnumbersareRefast=0.03andReslow=0.006,indicatingthedominanceofviscousoverinertialeﬀects.C.CiliumModel.EachciliumismodeledasanelasticrodoflengthLcil=10Δx=25μm,discretizedintoN=10segmentsofequallengths.Therodsegmentsarecharacterizedbypositionandorientationvectors.InternalmechanicsoftherodaregovernedbylinearelasticconstitutiverelationsFigure1.Simulationsetupanddetailsoftheindividualcomponents.(A)Aschematicoftheswimmingstrokecycleforthethree-linked-sphereswimmer.Thedarkersphereindicatestheleadingendoftheswimmer.Onefullcycleleadstoanetdisplacementofabout1%ofthebodylength.(B)Thesimulationdomaincontainingnineciliaandoneswimmer.(C)Asuperpositionofconﬁgurationsofasingleciliumshowingtheperiodicstrokeinducedbytheexternaldrivingforce.ThisstrokeisanimatedinMovieS1.LangmuirArticledx.doi.org/10.1021/la402783x|Langmuir2013,29,12770−1277612771A"""""""B""""""C"D"THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

5

hydrodynamic eﬀects in simulations. The squirmer is a sphere of radius a, and motion is
imposed by choosing suitable velocity boundary conditions on the surface of the sphere.
Deﬁning a spherical polar co-ordinate system with the squirmer velocity along z, the
radial velocity at the surface is taken to be zero and the tangential surface velocity is a
power series in the ﬁrst derivatives of the Legendre polynomials

(6)

vθ(a, θ) =

∞(cid:88)n=1

Bn

2

n(n + 1)

sin θP

(cid:48)
n(cos θ),

;l.. where the Bn can depend on time.

Consider the simplest non-trivial example, Bn = 0, n > 2. In the rest frame of the
3 B1 along the z-axis, it is easy check that the

squirmer, which is moving with velocity 2
solution to the Stokes equations that obeys these boundary conditions is

vr(r, θ) =

2
3

(7)

vθ(r, θ) = −

B1 cos θ −
2
3

B1 sin θ +

a2
r2

B2
2
B1
3

(3 cos2 θ − 1) +
r3 sin θ + O(cid:18) a4
r4(cid:19) .
a3

3

2B1

a3

r3 cos θ + O(cid:18) a4
r4(cid:19) ,

Note that there is no term in r−1 in the far ﬁeld expansion (7). This is a general feature
of active systems and in the next section we explain why.

.
2

3. Far ﬂow ﬁelds. – We introduce the multipole expansion, a far ﬁeld expansion for
the ﬂow ﬁeld around a localised force distribution. For active systems, with no applied
forces or torques, the far ﬁeld velocity has dipolar symmetry.

For a point force f acting at the origin the Stokes equations (5) can be solved exactly.
The resulting velocity ﬁeld, termed the Stokeslet, and the corresponding pressure ﬁeld,
at a relative position r from the swimmer are [8, 9]

(8)

v =

f

8πµ ·(cid:18) I

r

+

rr

r3(cid:19) ≡ G · f ,

p = p0 +

f · r
4πr3 .

In Eq. (8) I is the unit tensor, and p0 is a reference, constant pressure. G is the Greens
function of the Stokes equations, often called the Oseen tensor (and often deﬁned having
1
removed the factor
8πµ ). There are several ways of obtaining the Stokeslet, none of them
very simple. A clear and helpful list of the possible approaches is given by Maciej Lisicki
at http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6231.

We extend Eq. (8) to a force distribution f (ξ)

(9)

where

(10)

vi(r) =(cid:90) Gij(r − ξ)fj(ξ) dξ,

Gij(r − ξ) =

1

8πµ(cid:18) δij

| r − ξ |

+

(r − ξ)i(r − ξ)j

| r − ξ |3

(cid:19) .

6

JULIA M. YEOMANS

Taylor expanding about the origin

vi(r) =(cid:90) (cid:26)Gij(r) −

∂Gij
∂ξk

(r)ξk +

1
2

∂2Gij
∂ξk∂ξl

(r)ξkξl . . .(cid:27) fj(ξ) dξ

= Gij(r)(cid:90) fj(ξ) dξ −

∂Gij
∂ξk

(r)(cid:90) ξkfj(ξ) dξ +

1
2

∂2Gij
∂ξk∂ξl

(r)(cid:90) ξkξlfj(ξ) dξ + . . .

(11)

≡ Gij(r)Fj +

∂Gij
∂ξk

(r)Djk +

(r)Qjkl + . . .

1
2

∂2Gij
∂ξk∂ξl

The ﬁrst term in Eq. (11), Gij(r)Fj, is the monopole contribution to the ﬂow ﬁeld. It is
the Stokeslet ﬂow ﬁeld that results from the net force acting on the ﬂuid.

We now come to a key point in the argument: A swimmer that moves autonomously
can exert no net force or torque on the ﬂuid: all forces and torques must balance as
a consequence of Newton’s second law. Therefore the far ﬂow ﬁeld will, to leading order,
generically be given by the next term in the multipole expansion. This is the dipolar
term

(12)

where

(13)

∂Gij
∂ξk

(r)Djk,

Djk = −(cid:90) ξkfj dξ.

It is conventional to write

(14)

Djk −

1
3

Diiδjk ≡ Sjk + Tjk,

where Sjk is a traceless symmetric tensor, referred to as the stresslet, and Tjk is an
asymmetric tensor, the rotlet. Subtracting 1
3 Diiδjk is permissible because ∇ · G = 0 and
hence it can be shown that this term does not change the velocity ﬁeld.

The stresslet

(15)

Sjk = −

1

2(cid:90) (ξkfj + ξjfk) dξ +

1

3(cid:90) ξifi δjk dξ

is connected to straining ﬂows and, as we shall see below, it is responsible for additional
stress in a ﬂuid in the presence of colloids or swimmers. The rotlet term arises if the force
distribution has a net torque. It is zero for microswimmers because they are torque-free.
As a concrete example, to see what a dipolar ﬂow ﬁeld looks like, consider a pair
of equal and opposite co-linear forces of strength f acting at z = ±(cid:96)/2. The stresslet
corresponding to this force distribution is diagonal

(16)

Sxx = Syy = −Szz/2 = (cid:96)f /3.

Some lines of algebra show that the derivative of the Stokeslet is

(17)

∂Gij
∂ξk

(r) =

1

8πµ(cid:26)−

1
r3 δijξk +

1
r3 (δikξj + δjkξi) −

3

r5 ξiξjξk(cid:27) .

THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

7

Fig. 2. – A: Stokeslet, the ﬂow ﬁeld of a point force. B: Stresslet, the ﬂow ﬁeld of a force dipole.
Arrows indicate the ﬂow direction, colour shading the magnitude. C: Flow ﬁeld of E. coli, the
far ﬁeld is extensile and dipolar. D. Flow ﬁeld of Chlamydomonas, the far ﬁeld is contractile
and dipolar. E. The ﬂow ﬁeld of Volvox is a Stokeslet (after Drescher et al. [10, 11]).

A	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  B	  	  C	  D	  !E!8

JULIA M. YEOMANS

Using Eqs. (16) and (17) in the multipole expansion (11) shows that the dipolar term
corresponds to a radial ﬂow ﬁeld

(18)

vr =

1

8πµr2 (1 − 3 cos2 θ)(cid:96)f,

with the characteristic r−2 dipolar dependence.

Figs. 2A and 2B compare the ﬂow ﬁeld of a Stokeslet, due to a point force, and
a stresslet, due to equal and opposite forces. Note the diﬀerent symmetries. For the
Stokeslet there is a net velocity in the direction of the applied force whereas the dipolar
ﬁeld due to the stresslet has reﬂection symmetry about a line through the centre of
the swimmer. This nematic symmetry will be important later, both in understanding
the behaviour of tracer particles near a microswimmer and when I discuss the collective
behaviour of active systems. Comparing Eq. (18) to the ﬂow ﬁeld of a squirmer, Eq. (7)
shows that the leading order term is a dipole of strength (8πµ)B2a2/3. (The constant
term occurs because the velocity is written in the rest frame of the squirmer which is
moving with speed 2B1/3. Higher order, quadrupolar terms, ∼ r−3, also depend on B1,

a pathology of this simple model.) The symmetry of the three sphere swimmer means
that the dipole moment is zero for equal arm lengths, and the ﬂow ﬁeld is quadrupolar.
In Figs. 2(C–E) we compare experimental results for three microswimmers, E. coli,
chlamydomonas and Volvox [10, 11]. For E. coli and Chlamydomonas the far ﬂow ﬁeld
is indeed dipolar, but there are signiﬁcant deviations even rather far from the swimmers
due to higher order terms in the multipole expansion. For E. coli the dipolar component
of the ﬂow is directed out from the ends of the swimmer and ﬂows towards its sides. The
E. coli is acting as a pusher creating an extensile ﬂow ﬁeld. For Chlamydomonas the
sign of the dipole is reversed, the swimmer is acting as a puller, creating a contractile
ﬂow, pumping ﬂuid out from the sides and in to the ends of the body. The ﬂow ﬁeld
of Volvox, however, has a very diﬀerent symmetry. This is because it is a much bigger
organism, that swims upwards against gravity. This provides a net force on the swimmer
and hence a Stokeslet term which dominates in the far ﬁeld.

3. – Single swimmer hydrodynamics: applications

Lecture 2 considers physical situations where ﬂow ﬁelds are relevant to the behaviour
of biological systems. I ﬁrst discuss how a passing swimmer moves tracer particles in its
vicinity, leading to simple models for the enhancement of diﬀusion by active particles. I
then comment on the propensity of swimmers to accumulate at surfaces and on conse-
quences of -taxis, the ability of some microswimmers to prefer a given direction deﬁned
by, say, gravity or a concentration gradient.

.
3

1. Tracers:

loops and entrainment. – Several experiments and simulations have
shown that, as might be expected, bacteria enhance diﬀusion as a result of the ﬂow ﬁelds
they produce [12, 13, 14]. I present a discussion of model systems aiming to explain how
tracer particles move in a microswimmer suspension [15, 16, 17].

The instantaneous statistics of the velocity ﬁeld govern the initial rate of displacement
of a tracer particle. However at later times the path taken by a tracer will depend on
the detailed spatial and temporal correlations of the velocity. Comparing the ﬂow ﬁelds

THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

9

in Figs. 2A and B it seems likely that tracers move in a quantitatively diﬀerent way as
a force-free swimmer (stresslet) or as a colloid (Stokeslet) move past.

Fig. 3. – Typical motion of a sheet of tracer particles as a swimmer moves in an inﬁnite straight
trajectory from z = −∞ to z = +∞ perpendicular to the sheet. The initial position of the
tracer sheet is shown as a dotted line, and the envelope of the ﬁnal tracer positions in blue.
Examples of the loop like trajectories of the tracers are indicated as lighter, red lines (after
Pushkin, Shum and Yeomans [15]).

Consider a swimmer that moves in a straight line from −∞ to +∞ along the z-axis.
The resulting displacement of a material sheet, a plane of tracers initially perpendicular
to the swimmer path is shown in Fig. 3. In the ﬁgure the swimmer path is denoted by
a black line, and the initial tracer positions by faint black dots. The paths of selected
tracers are shown in red, and the ﬁnal position of the deformed sheet of tracers in blue.
These results were obtained from a numerical solution of the Stokes equations using
a boundary element method which determines the ﬂow ﬁeld and swimming velocity of
the swimmer subject to no-slip boundary conditions on the swimmer surface, and the
constraints that zero net force and torque act on the swimmer [18] .

The striking feature of the tracer trajectories is their loop-like character. This is a
consequence of the angular dependence of the ﬂow ﬁeld (see Fig. 2B). If the tracer is
suﬃciently far from the swimmer that its velocity is small compared to the swimmer
velocity the loops are closed. This can be inferred from the symmetry of the dipolar
ﬂow ﬁeld by considering how a tracer moves in the rest frame of the swimmer. The
mathematical justiﬁcation relies on noting that all terms except the Stokeslet in the
multipole expansion are exact derivatives [15].

Enhanced diﬀusion of the tracers in a swimmer suspension could not occur if the
tracers simply moved in closed loops. However the symmetry argument neglects the
Lagrangian contribution to the time derivative of the tracer velocity, which arises if the

12Willbeinsertedbytheeditor0⇢⇢=⇢0Swimmerpathz1Fig.4.Typicalmotionofasheetoftracerparticlesasaswimmermovesinaninﬁnitestraighttrajectoryfromz= 1toz=+1perpendiculartothesheet.Theinitialpositionofthetracersheetisshownasadottedline,andtheenvelopeoftheﬁnaltracerpositionsinblue.Examplesoftheloopliketrajectoriesofthetracersareindicatedaslighter,redlines.willdependonthedetailedspatialandtemporalcorrelationsofthevelocity.Thesymmetryofthevelocityﬁeldcorrespondingtomultipoleswithn>1meansthattracersmoveinaquantitativelydi↵erentwayasaforce-freeswimmer(stresslet)orasacolloid(Stokeslet)movepast.Consideraswimmerthatmovesinastraightlinefrom 1to+1alongthez-axis.Theresultingdisplacementofamaterialsheet,aplaneoftracersinitiallyperpendiculartotheswimmerpathisshowninFig.5.1.Tracersfarfromtheswimmerarepushedbackwards,thoseclosetotheswimmerpulledforwards.Thetracersmoveinloops,aconsequenceofthesymmetryoftheseﬂowﬁelds[23].Ifthetracerissu cientlyfarfromtheswimmerthatitsvelocitycanbeneglectedcomparedtotheswimmervelocitytheloopsareclosed.Theclosednatureoftheloopscanbeinferredfromthegeometryoftheﬂowﬁeld,butasimplemathematicalproofhelpstopinpointtheapproximationsunderwhichtheloopsareindeedfullyclosed[33].IntheabsenceoftheStokesletitfollowsfromEq.(23)thattheﬂowﬁeldproducedbytheswimmertakestheformu(r,k)=(ez·r)U0(r,k)⌘drTdt(45)whererTisthepositionofthetracerandU0isavelocityﬁeldwhoseLagrangianderivativeatthepositionofthetracerrTisdU0dt=(V·r)U0 ✓drTdt·r◆U0.(46)TakingtheswimmervelocityV=VezandkeepingjusttheEuleriantermdU0dt⇡V(ez·r)U0.(47)10

JULIA M. YEOMANS

tracer moves across stream lines of the ﬂow. As a result of the Lagrangian terms tracers
far from the swimmer gain a net backwards displacement, whereas those close to the
swimmer are displaced forwards. This eﬀect becomes increasingly important for the
fast-moving tracers closer to the swimmer. If a swimmer happens to pass so close to a
tracer that the latter gains a velocity comparable to that of the swimmer it moves with
the swimmer for a while and is said to be entrained along the swimming direction (see
Fig. 3).

Perhaps surprisingly, the total volume of ﬂuid displaced by the swimmer as it moves

along an inﬁnite, straight path takes a simple, universal form [19, 20, 15]

(19)

vD =

4πQ⊥

V − vs,

where vs is the volume of the swimmer, V is the swimming velocity, and Q⊥ = − 1
is a quadrupole moment with fz the z-component of any force on the surface of the swim-
mer and ρ the radial co-ordinate. vD is termed the Darwin drift: by comparison, for a
colloid at zero Reynolds number this quantity is inﬁnite.

2(cid:82) fzρ2 dS

The magnitude of the Darwin drift is of the order of the swimmer’s volume. Also, the
characteristic entrainment length is typically of the order of the swimmer’s size, a. These
considerations allow an order of magnitude estimate of the eﬀective tracer diﬀusion due
to entrainment, Dentr, based on a kinetic-theory approach,

(20)

Dentr ∼

1
6

a4nV,

where we assume a dilute, uncorrelated suspension of swimmers of number density n.

Bacteria do not move along inﬁnite straight paths because of signiﬁcant rotational
diﬀusion. Indeed some microorganisms, for example E. coli, have an explicit run and
tumble behaviour which allows them to exploit a biassed random walk to move up a
nutrient gradient. A ﬁnite swimmer path implies an open tracer loop and hence ﬁnite
swimmer run lengths provide another important contribution to tracer diﬀusion. This
can be estimated by using a model system introduced by Lin et al. [17]. Their model
assumes a uniform and isotropic ensemble of uncorrelated swimmers moving in straight
runs of length λ, followed by instantaneous random changes of swimming direction. The
consecutive runs are assumed to be statistically independent. Assuming a (cid:28) λ this
model can be solved exactly to give a contribution to the diﬀusion constant from random
reorientations [16]

(21)

Drr =

4π

3 (cid:16) κ
V(cid:17)2

nV

where κ is a measure of the swimmer dipole strength. That this result is, surprisingly,
independent of λ is due to a fortuitous cancellation for 3D dipolar swimmers.

In suspensions of swimmers both entrainment and random swimmer reorientations
will lead to enhanced mixing and it is reasonable to assume, as a ﬁrst approximation,
that their eﬀects add up. Therefore the total diﬀusion coeﬃcient may be written

(22)

D = Drr + Dentr + Dthermal

THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

11

where the thermal diﬀusion will depend on the size of the diﬀusing agents. Using values
for E. coli: a ∼ 1.4µm, κ/V ∼ 1.45µm2 in Eqs. (20) and (21) gives Dentr/(nV ) ∼ 0.6µm4
and Drr/(nV ) ∼ 8.8µm4 showing that random re-orientations dominate entrainment.
These numbers are in good agreement with the experimental value D/(nV ) = 7±0.4µm4
[21].
As an aside we note that generalisations of these arguments show that for quadrupolar
swimmers in 3D and for a 2D suspension of dipolar swimmers (but with full 3D hydro-
dynamics) it is the contribution from entrainment that dominates the diﬀusion constant.
I am not aware of any theoretical work on swimmers in 2D with 2D hydrodynamics
but experiments on bacteria swimming in a ﬁlm suggest a considerably larger diﬀusion
constant than in 3D [22].

.
3

2. Swimmers in Poiseuille ﬂow . – The interplay between external ﬂow ﬁelds and
the intrinsic swimming velocity of an active particle leads to a richness of swimming
trajectories and the possibility of swimmer focussing and sorting. I discuss recent results
for swimming in a Poiseuille ﬂow, and then an eﬀect of shear on swimmers that can sense
gravity and swim upwards.

Z¨ottl and Stark [23] have shown that a simple model swimmer in Poiseuille ﬂow can
be mapped onto the equation of a non-linear pendulum. The (ﬁrst) model they consider
is a point microswimmer in a 2D Poiseuille ﬂow. Even such a simple system has a sur-
prisingly rich phase space. Consider a swimmer at position r moving in direction ˆe with
speed v0. In an external ﬂow vf of vorticity Ωf = ∇ ∧ vf the swimmer equations of
motion are

(23)

d
dt

r = v0ˆe + vf ,

d
dt

ˆe =

1
2

Ωf ∧ ˆe.

Following Zottl and Stark [23] we consider a 2D channel in the x-z plane, inﬁnite along
z and bounded by walls at x = ±1, and a Poiseuille ﬂow given by
(24)

vf = vf (1 − x2)ˆz

where vf is the maximum ﬂow speed in the centre of the channel. Writing the swimmer
orientation in terms of a polar angle ψ, with the polar axis pointing upstream,

(25)

ˆe = − sin ψˆx − cos ψˆz,

the equations of motion in this 2D geometry become

(26)

˙x = − sin ψ,

˙ψ =

vf
v0

x

where I have rescaled time by v0/(channel width). Eliminating x gives the pendulum
equation

(27)

¨ψ +

vf
v0

sin ψ = 0.

Recall that the pendulum has two solutions, an oscillation about ψ = 0 and a circling
solution. The oscillation corresponds to the swimmer moving upstream against the ﬂow.

12

JULIA M. YEOMANS

Fig. 4. – Motion of a point swimmer in a Poiseuille ﬂow ﬁeld. The left-hand panels show the
phase plots (x,ψ), with the boundary between open and oscillatory orbits indicated in red. The
right hand panels show the trajectories of swimmers, starting at z = 0 with blue and green
corresponding to diﬀerent initial values of x and arrows indicating the instantaneous swimmer
direction of motion ˆe. ¯vf is the maximum ﬂow speed vf scaled by the swimmer speed v0. A:
upstream swimming, the swimmer oscillates about the centre line. B: intermediate case, the
vorticity of the ﬂow ﬁeld dominates the motion. C: downstream swimming (after Z¨ottl and
Stark [23]).

Any deviation for the centre line is subject to a restoring torque from the vorticity and
hence the swimmer trajectory oscillates around the centre of the channel. Swimming
downstream any perturbation about the centre line is ampliﬁed by the vorticity, and the
swimmer tumbles in the ﬂow. For suﬃciently large velocities it continues to tumble down-
stream, otherwise it reaches the walls and and the simple theory must be supplemented
by additional physics.

As a second example consider a point microswimmer in a shear ﬂow vx(z) such that
Ωf = (dvx/dz)ˆy. The swimmer will tumble in the ﬂow and trace out a cycloidal trajec-
tory. There is interesting behaviour if the cell also has the tendency to swim, on average,
in a particular direction because it can sense eg gravity (gravitaxis), light (phototaxis)

€	þvfsin	¼0;(3)whichistheequationofmotionofthemathematicalpendu-lum.Sinceinthisanalogyxplaystheroleofvelocity,wecanimmediatelywritedownthe2DHamiltonianH2D¼12vfx2þ1 cos	(4)asaconservedquantity.Figure2showsthex-	phasespaceandtypicaltrajectorieszðxÞforseveralﬂowstrengthsvf.Inanalogytothependulumtwoswimmingstatesexist.Theﬂowvorticityrotatestheupstreamorientedmicroswimmeralwaystowardsthecenter.Hence,theswimmerperformsaswingingmotionaroundthecenterlineofthechannelforH2D<2whichcorrespondstotheoscillatingsolutionofthependulum[e.g.,bluetrajectoryofFig.2(a)].Forsmallam-plitudes(	1)theswingingfrequencyis!0¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃvfp.Whentheupstreamorientedswimmermovesexactlyinthecenterofthechannel(stableﬁxedpoint),theHamiltonianiszero.Downstreamswimmingalongthecenterline(	¼)isanunstableﬁxedpoint.Afteraslightdisturbanceofx¼0,vorticityrotatestheswimmerawayfromthecenterline.Theswimmerperformsatumblingmotion(H2D>2)whichcorrespondstothecirclingsolutionofthependulum[greentrajectoryofFig.2(c)].AtH2D¼2,theseparatrixx2¼2ðcos	þ1Þ=vfdividestheswingingandtumblingregioninphasespace[redcurvesinthephaseportraitsofFig.2].SincethePoiseuilleﬂowisboundedbythechannelwalls,tumblingmotiononlyoccursforvf>4[Fig.2(c)].Sufﬁcientlystrongvorticitypreventstheswimmerfromcrossingthecenterline.Ifweonlyconsiderstericinteractionsoftheswimmerwiththechannelwall,theswimmercrashesintothewallatjxj¼1forH2D>vf=2,reorientsduetotheﬂowvorticitytowardstheupstreamorientation,andleavesthewallat	¼0withHmax2D¼vf=2.Theswimmerthenperformsaswingingmotionbetweenthewallswithmaximumampli-tudejxj¼1forvf<4[greentrajectoryinFig.2(a)].Soforvf<4theswimmeralwaysentersaswingingmotionorientedupstream,atthelatestaftercontactwiththewall,whereasittumblesclosetothewallforvf>4.Todeterminethefull2Dtrajectoryinthemicrochannel,wesolvethedynamicequationforzðtÞ,_z¼vf½1 xðtÞ2 cos	ðtÞ:(5)Acarefulanalysisrevealsthefollowing.Theswimmeralwaysmovesupstream(_z<0),whenvf<1 H2D,asshowninFig.2(a).Whentheﬂowisstrong(vf>1þ2H2D),theswimmeralwaysdriftsdownstream(_z>0),whileswingingortumbling[Fig.2(c)].Inbetween,mixedup-anddownstreamsegmentswithinonetrajectory[Fig.2(b)]existbutanet-upstreammotiononlyoccursforvf&1þH2D=2[bluelineinFig.2(b)].Foranonzeroazimuthalcomponent,e’¼sinÞ0,theswimmertrajectoryisthree-dimensional.UsingEqs.(1)and(2),weobtainthreecoupledequationsfor	,,and,_¼ cossin	;_	¼vf sintancos	=;_¼sinsin	=:(6)Becauseoftranslationalsymmetryinthezdirectionandrotationalsymmetryaboutthechannelaxis,Eqs.(6)donotdependonzand’.Weareabletoidentifytwoconstantsofmotion,Lz¼sin;H¼12vf2þ1 cos	cos;(7)whereLzisproportionaltotheangularmomentumoftheswimmerinthezdirection.BecauseofthisconstanttheFIG.2(coloronline).Phasespacesx-	(left)andtypicaltrajectorieszðxÞ(right)forseveralﬂowstrengthsvf.Alltrajec-toriesstartatz¼0.(a)upstreammotion,(b)intermediatemotionand(c)downstreammotion.Notethevariousscalesforthezaxis.Thearrowsindicatetheorientationvector^eoftheswimmer.FIG.3(coloronline).-	-phasespace.TheintersectionbetweenLz¼const(orange)andH¼const(green)givesthephasespacetrajectory.(a)helical-likeswingingmotion(blueintersectioncurve)forLz¼0:2,H¼1.Blackcurve:ﬁxed-pointlinecorrespondstohelicaltrajectories.(b)helical-liketumblingmotion(blueintersectioncurve)forLz¼0:2,H¼3.(c)–(e)sketchoftrajectoriesinthechannelforhelicalmotion(c),helical-likemotion(d)andtumblingmotion(e).PRL108,218104(2012)PHYSICALREVIEWLETTERSweekending25MAY2012218104-2THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

13

or a chemical gradient (chemotaxis) [24]. A simple mechanism for gravitaxis occurs if
the cells are bottom heavy due to an asymmetry in density or shape.

Putting together shear and gravitaxis (together often termed gyrotaxis) the two forces

lead to an equation of motion [25]

(28)

d
dt

ˆe =

1
2{Ωf ∧ ˆe +

1
β

(ˆz − (ˆz · ˆe)ˆe)}

where β is a characteristic time scale that measures the time the cell takes to relax
to orientation ˆz. At low shear rate the steady solution to Eq. (28) is migration at an
angle to ˆz given by sin θ = βΩ. For βΩ > 1 this solution is no longer stable, and the
microswimmer tumbles in the shear ﬂow.

Durham et al. [26] used these ideas to explain the formation of thin layers of phyto-
plankton in the oceans. The layers can be centimetres to metres thick and can extend
horizontally for kilometres. They argue that shear gradients can be generated in the
ocean by tides, wind or internal waves. As the phytoplankton swims towards the surface
they reach a position where βΩ = 1 where they start to tumble and remain trapped thus
forming a localised dense layer.

.
3

3. Surfaces. – I discuss why micro-organisms, such as sperm cells, E. coli and
Chlamydomonas often accumulate at surfaces. Many experiments on micro-swimmers
are performed in ﬁnite geometries, such as on microscope slides or at an interface, and
bacteria often move in conﬁned spaces in vivo or in the soil.

Several mechanisms have been proposed to account for the propensity of microswim-
mers to move near surfaces, and a combination of factors in likely to be relevant for a
given organism [27, 18, 28, 29]. Before considering hydrodynamic interactions it should
be appreciated that a simple self-propelled rod, and even a self-propelled sphere, will
eventually hit a surface and tend to move parallel to it [2]. Trapping on the substrate
will be broken only by rotational ﬂuctuations which allow the rod to change its swimming
direction to escape from the vicinity of the surface.

Hydrodynamic interactions with the wall can be taken into account by considering
an image swimmer at a position corresponding to the reﬂection of the swimmer in the
wall. For free boundaries this results in adding a term to each Stokeslet corresponding
to a Stokeslet of equal magnitude but pointing in the opposite direction

(29)

∗
Bij(r

) = −

1

8πµ(cid:18) δij

r∗ +

j

i r∗
r∗
r∗3 (cid:19) ,

where r∗ is the distance from the image to the point at which the ﬂow is calculated. For
a no-slip boundary a more complicated image system is required to preserve the no-slip
condition. The necessary additional terms in the Greens function, often called the Blake
tensor, are [30]

(30)

Bij(x, r

∗

) =

1

8πµ(cid:26)−(cid:18) δij

r∗ +

j

i r∗
r∗
r∗3 (cid:19) + 2HMjl

∂
∂r∗

l (cid:18) Hr∗

r∗3 −(cid:18) δix

i

r∗ +

x

r∗3 (cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:27) ,
i r∗
r∗

where H is the distance of the swimmer from the wall, and the mirror matrix is M =
diag(−1, 1, 1) for the boundary along x. For a Stokeslet oriented parallel (perpendicu-
lar) to the boundary the Blake image system comprises three parts. The ﬁrst is again

14

JULIA M. YEOMANS

a Stokeslet of equal magnitude but pointing in the opposite direction to the physical
Stokeslet. The second is quadrupolar, a source doublet oriented in the opposite (same)
direction with magnitude 2H 2. The third contribution is an asymmetric dipole, some-
times called the Stokes doublet with magnitude 2H.

However hydrodynamic interactions are not the only contribution and, following early
work by Berke et al. [27], a lot of eﬀort has been devoted to trying to unravel the way
in which swimmers interact with surfaces, e.g., Refs.[18, 28, 29]. The conclusion is that
details of the swimmer play an important role in determining its behaviour. Whether or
not a microswimmer tends to move towards or away from a wall depends on its aspect
ratio and on the details of its activity. Those swimmers that tend to move towards the
surface usually have suﬃciently small rotational diﬀusion that they will eventually hit
the wall and both high order terms in the multipole expansion and steric interactions
will become important.

For microswimmers such as E. coli the cell head and ﬂagella spin in diﬀerent directions
so that the system is torque free in an inﬁnite ﬂuid. However, individual cells are often
observed to swim in circles close to boundaries. This is because there is additional drag
on the side of the bacterium facing the wall if the bacterium approaches a wall leading
to a torque that moves the swimmer in a clockwise orbit for a no-slip boundary and an
anti-clockwise orbit for a slip boundary. More details of the behaviour of microswimmers
near boundaries are clearly explained and references are listed in the recent review by
Elgeti et al. [2].

4. – Collective hydrodynamics of active entities

In lecture 3 I will write down and motivate the continuum equations of motion that
describe the hydrodynamics of dense active nematics, such as suspensions of microtubules
driven by molecular motors and dense collections of microswimmers. The equations are
based on those of passive liquid crystals with an additional term in the stress resulting
from the activity. This term leads to a hydrodynamic instability which drives the nematic
state unstable and leads to active turbulence.

.
4

1. Nematic liquid crystals. – We introduce liquid crystals and summarise properties
that are relevant to the description of active systems. After describing the nematic state
we deﬁne an associated tensor order parameter Q. The elastic properties of the nematic
are considered, and we introduce the concept of topological defects.

Liquid crystals are ﬂuids where the constituent molecules are anisotropic, taking usu-
ally rod-like, but sometimes disc-like, shapes [31, 32]. At high temperatures there is no
long-range order, but as the temperature is lowered there is a weakly ﬁrst order tran-
sition to a nematic state. This is characterised by orientational long-range order with
the molecules lining up, on average, in a given direction but with no long-range order in
the molecular positions (Fig. 5A). The transition is driven by entropy: alignment means
that the molecules have more space to move around.

The direction of each molecule, called the director n, can be coarse grained to give
an order parameter describing the mean molecular orientation. Note that the director
is a ‘headless’ vector, with no distinction between its ends. A fuller description of the
nematic state which incorporates the magnitude of the orientational order (and allows
for the possibility of describing secondary ordering perpendicular to the director) is the

THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

15

Fig. 5. – A: Particles in the nematic state have long-range orientational order but no long-
range positional order. B: A 3D liquid crystal has three elastic constants which quantify the
energy associated with splay, twist and bend distortions (after de Gennes and Prost [31]). C:
Topological defects in 2D.

3-dimensional traceless tensor Q deﬁned by

(31)

Qij =

3q
2 (cid:104)ninj − δij/3(cid:105).

For example, for ordering of magnitude q along the z-axis, Qαβ is a diagonal matrix
with entries (−q/2,−q/2, q). The Landau-de Gennes expansion for the bulk free energy
density of a nematic liquid crystal is

(32)

Fbulk = AQijQji/2 + BQijQjkQki/3 + C(QijQji)2/4

where A, B, C are material parameters. This predicts a ﬁrst order transition to the
nematic state at AC/B2 = 1/27.

In the nematic state it is favourable for the directors to align parallel and any devia-
tions from this ordering results in an additional, elastic contribution to the free energy.
There are three distinct types of bulk distortion in three dimensions, splay, twist and
bend, illustrated in Fig. 5B. These are associated with elastic constants K1, K2 and K3

splay	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  twist	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  bend	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  A	  B	  C	  	  q=1/2	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  q=-­‐1/2	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  16

JULIA M. YEOMANS

respectively and can be written as gradient terms in the Landau expansion of the free
energy, most transparently in terms of the director ﬁeld n

(33)

Fel(n) =

K1
2

(∇ · n)2 +

K2
2

(∇ · curl n)2 +

K3
2

(∇ ∧ curl n)2

or, in terms of Q,

(34)

Fel(Q) =

L1
2

(∂kQij)2 +

L2
2

(∂jQij)(∂kQik) +

L3
2

Qij(∂iQkl)(∂jQkl).

In two dimensions there are only bend and splay distortions.

As an aside, Eqs. (33) and (34) illustrate the arbitrary nature of the Landau expansion.
Physically there are three long wavelength elastic distortions and there are three terms
in gradients of n squared in the expansion in n. However, there are only two terms in
gradients of Q squared in the expansion in Q and a term of higher order in Q must be
included to allow all three elastic constants to be varied independently.

A second consequence of the symmetry of the nematic state is the existence of topo-
logical defects, singular distortions of the director ﬁeld that cannot relax to equilibrium
without rearrangement of the molecules at inﬁnity. Topological defects in two dimen-
sions are shown in Fig. 5. A single defect has an inﬁnite energy in an inﬁnite system, so
can only exist due to a boundary or (real) defect. Therefore defects are usually formed
in pairs, typically following a quench from the isotropic to the nematic phase. In the
absence of pinning sites defects with opposite changes attract, approach each other and
annihilate.

.
4

2. Beris-Edwards equations. – We describe the continuum equations of motion of
a nematic liquid crystal, written in terms of the Q-tensor. These are more complicated
than the Navier-Stokes equations for a simple ﬂuid because of the shape of the molecules:
they both respond to ﬂow gradients, and their motion induces backﬂows.

The Beris-Edwards equations of nematohydrodynamics are [33]

(35)
(36)
(37)

∂tρ + ∂i(ρui) = 0,

ρ(∂t + uk∂k)ui = ∂jΠij,
(∂t + uk∂k)Qij − Sij = ΓHij.

Eq. (35) is the continuity equation, Eq. (36), the generalisation of the Navier-Stokes
equation to the liquid crystalline system, describes the evolution of the velocity ﬁeld and
Eq. (37) is a convection-diﬀusion equation for the dynamics of the order parameter ﬁeld.
The notation we use here allows us to write the equations in a compact way, but each
term encapsulates important details of the hydrodynamics of this viscoelastic ﬂuid.

Consider ﬁrst the evolution of the order parameter ﬁeld, Eq. (37). As a result of their
anisotropy, liquid crystal molecules rotate in velocity gradients. This is accounted for by
the generalised advection term

(38) Sij = (λEik + Ωik)(Qkj +

δkj
3

) + (Qik +

δik
3

)(λEkj − Ωkj)− 2λ(Qij +

δij
3

)(Qkl∂kul)

THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

17

where

(39)

Eij = (∂iuj + ∂jui)/2,

Ωij = (∂jui − ∂iuj)/2

are the strain rate and vorticity tensors. λ is the alignment parameter which determines
whether the collective response of the nematogens to a velocity gradient is dominated by
the strain or the vorticity. The director aligns at a given angle to a shear ﬂow, called the
Leslie angle, if

(40)

| λ | >

9q

3q + 4

.

If this equality is not satisﬁed the molecules rotate (tumble) in the ﬂow. λ depends on
the shape of the particles with λ > 0 and λ < 0 corresponding to rod-like and plate-like
particles respectively.

The molecular ﬁeld

(41)

Hij = −

δF
δQij

+(cid:18) δij

3 (cid:19) Tr(cid:18) δF
δQkl(cid:19)

ensures that the system relaxes diﬀusively to the minimum of a free energy, e.g., Fbulk +
Fel from Eqs. (32) and (34). The diﬀusion constant Γ controls the time scale over which
the relaxation occurs.
Turning now to the momentum equation (36), the inertial terms on the left-hand side
can be neglected at low Re. On the right-hand side Πij is the stress tensor. It is a sum
of the usual viscous stress

(42)

Πviscous

ij

= 2ηEij

and an elastic stress

Πpassive

ij

= −P δij + 2λ(Qij +

δij
3

)(QklHlk) − λHik(Qkj +

δkj
3

)

−λ(Qik +

δik
3

)Hkj − ∂iQkl

δF
δ∂jQlk

+ QikHkj − HikQkj.

(43)

The elastic stress is a second consequence of the anisotropic nature of the liquid crystal
molecules. It occurs because, as the molecules turn they induce a shear ﬂow, often called
the ‘back-ﬂow’.
In general back-ﬂows are small, and make a qualitative rather than
quantitative diﬀerence to the hydrodynamic ﬁelds of liquid crystals.

.
4

3. Adding activity. – We write down the continuum equations of motion for an active
nematic and motive the form of the active term. We show that vortical ﬂows destabilise
the nematic order whereas straining ﬂows can help to increase its magnitude.

A simple extension to the Beris-Edwards equations suﬃces to describe an active nematic
[34]. This is an additional term in the stress tensor

(44)

Πactive

ij

= −ζQij

18

JULIA M. YEOMANS

proportional to the Q tensor and a coeﬃcient ζ that measures the strength of the activity.
ζ > 0 describes an extensile system and ζ < 0 a contractile system.

The form of the active term can be motivated by realising that the contribution to the
continuum stress tensor from the dipole terms in the multipole expansion is the averaged
stresslet per unit volume [35] which, from Eq. (15), is

(45)

Πjk = (cid:104)−

1
2

(ξkfj + ξjfk) +

1
3

ξifiδjk(cid:105).

Assuming that each of the active particles produces forces along the director fj = ±f nj
at positions ξk = ±ank this becomes

(46)

Πjk = (cid:104)f a(−

1
2

(nknj + njnk) +

1
3

niniδjk)(cid:105) = (cid:104)f a(−njnk +

1
3

δjk)(cid:105) ≡ −ζQjk

averaging over a region where the dipole moment f a and the magnitude of the nematic
order q can be considered constant. The relation (46) makes it apparent that ζ is a
measure of the activity, and that the sign of the stress distinguishes extensile (positive)
and contractile (negative) particles.

Fig. 6. – An extensile active nematic is unstable to a bend instability. A: each nematogen in
the bent conﬁguration produces ﬂow shown in blue. The ﬂow is unbalanced giving a resultant
vortical ﬂow shown as large black arrows. B: The shear acts to increase the bend deformation
destabilising the ordered nematic state (courtesy of S. Thampi).

Many properties of active nematics can be interpreted by noting that the active term
appears in the stress, under a derivative, and therefore any change in the direction
or orientation of the nematic order induces a ﬂow. An immediate consequence

B	  A	  THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

19

is that the active nematic state is unstable to vortical ﬂow [36, 37]. The physics behind
the instability is illustrated in Fig. 6. For an extensile system a bend perturbation of
the nematic director leads to a ﬂow ﬁeld indicated by the blue arrows. These are closer
together on the concave side of the bend, a pictorial representation that the ﬂow is
stronger here, and thus the resultant ﬂow is as shown by the large black arrows. This
is a rotational ﬂow that tends to turn the director further from its equilibrium position
(Fig. 6B) thus destabilising the nematic state. In a similar way contractile systems are
unstable to splay instabilities [38].

Fig. 7. – Activity can act to stabilise nematic ordering in a suspension of rods. A: A ﬂuctuation
that results in local nematic order. B: There is a resulting extensile ﬂow ﬁeld (black) that
enhances the nematic order. C: In a contractile system the ﬂow ﬁeld acts to destroy the order
(after Thampi et al. [39]).

By contrast extensional ﬂow can tend to stabilise nematic ordering (Fig. 7) [39].
Recall that a rod (λ > 0) attains a stable position in an extensional ﬂow when it is
aligned along the extensional axis. Starting from an isotropic conﬁguration of elongated
particles consider a ﬂuctuation that induces a small ordering, along a given direction as
in Fig. 7A. If the particles are active they generate dipolar ﬂow ﬁelds, which enhance the
instantaneous order for an extensile system or destabilise it in the contractile case as is
apparent from Figs. 7B and C respectively. It can be shown that the response of the Q-
tensor to the extensional part of the ﬂow generates an eﬀective molecular potential and,
in extensile systems, the hydrodynamics acts as an eﬀective force favouring the alignment
of the active rods. For plate-like particles, λ < 0, however, the stable position is along
the compressional axis with plate orientation deﬁned normal to the plate. Therefore now
it is contractile stress that favours ordering. Since these mechanisms depends only on
the extensional part of the ﬂow ﬁeld, they hold for both aligning and tumbling particles.

5. – Collective hydrodynamics: applications

We have seen that the active nematic state is unstable to ﬂow and in Lecture 4 we
describe active turbulence, the non-equilibrium steady state that replaces the nematic
order. We ﬁrst use simulations to motivate our description of the mechanisms driving
active turbulence and then describe an experimental system, a mixture of microtubules
and molecular motors, where active turbulence is observed. We discuss active anchoring
at an active–passive interface.

401.0-1.0-0.50.5(a)  0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8(b)-0.015-0.01-0.00500.0050.010.015(c)FIG.2.Activeturbulenceobtainedbysolvingtheactivenematohydrodynamicequationswithzerobulkfreeenergy.Thesystemsizeis200×200.(a)Turbulent-likeﬂowﬁeld.Continuouslinesarestreamlinesandcolourshadingshowsthevorticitynormalisedbyitsmaximumvalue.(Blue,clockwise;red,anticlockwise.)(b)Directorﬁeld,colourshadingshowsthemagnitudeoftheorderparameter.Redandbluedotsrespectivelyrepresentthe±12topologicaldefects.Onlyleftbottomquarterofpanel(a)isshownhere.(c)Correspondingconcentrationﬁeld.(a)(b)(c)FIG.3.(a)Inanisotropicconﬁgurationofrodlikeparti-cles(dashedlines),ﬂuctuationsmayinducelocal,temporaryordering(continuouslines).(b)Extensileparticlesgenerateﬂowswithextensionalaxisalongtheinstantaneousorienta-tionwhichstabilisesthisordering.(d)Contractileparticlesgenerateﬂowswithcompressionalaxisalongtheinstanta-neousorientation,whichdestabilisestheordering.bothaligningandtumblingparticles.Theseargumentsagreewiththedependenceoftheef-fectivefreeenergytermsinEq.(16)ontheproductλζ.Simulationsshowed,asexpected,thatforλζ<0,asys-teminitialisedintheisotropicstatewithzerobulkfreeenergyremainedinthisstate,whereasforasystemwithλζ>0weobservedactiveturbulence(Fig.2).Thenematicallyorderedregionsinactivesystemsareknowntobehydrodynamicallyunstable[9,21].Thisisagainaconsequenceoftheresponseoftheactiveparticlestoself-generatedﬂowﬁelds.Whilewehavearguedthattheextensionalpartoftheactiveﬂow(thatispropor-tionaltoλinEq.5)canenhanceorientationalordering,thevorticalpartoftheactiveﬂowplaysthemajorroleindestabilisingthenematicstate[20,33].Wenowreintroducefreeenergytermsintotheequa-tionsofmotiontocomparetheirorderingeﬀecttothatActivity, ζTemperature, α=AC/B2  TIN<−− Contractile | Extensile −−><q>−0.02−0.0100.010.02−0.0200.020.040.060.080.100.10.20.30.4FIG.4.Averagevalueofthemagnitudeoftheorderparam-eter,⟨q⟩,inaplanespannedbytemperatureandactivityforrodlikeparticles(λ=0.7).αisvariedbychangingAkeepingB=−0.05,C=0.05.oftheactivityinatemperature–activityplot.Wewillrestrictourselvestosystemswhichhaveauniformcon-centration(φ=constant).Itisconvenienttointroduceasingleparameterα=AC/B2.Anincreaseinαcor-respondstoanincreaseintemperature.Forζ=0thenematicispassivewithanisotropic-nematictransitionatT=TIN,α=1/27.Wehavecapturedthecompetitionbetweenorderinginducedbythefreeenergyandbytheactivitybymeasuringtheaverageofthemagnitudeoforderparameter⟨q⟩,independentlychangingαandζinthesimulations.TheresultsareshowninFig.4.A	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  B	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  C	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  20

JULIA M. YEOMANS

.
5

1. Active turbulence. – We describe how an interplay between defects and walls in
the director ﬁeld and jets and vortical structures in the velocity ﬁeld leads to a turbulent-
like state in active nematics.

Active turbulence occurs in dense active nematics [40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47].

Fig. 8. – Examples of active turbulence. A: swimming bacteria. B: the corresponding vorticity
ﬁeld. Red (blue) colouring corresponds to regions of high positive (negative) vorticity. Vortices
are typically ∼ 5 bacteria lengths in diameter (after Wensink et al. [41]). C: swimming bacteria
in a liquid crystal (after Zhou et al. [48]). D: ﬁbroblast cells (courtesy of G. Duclos).

It is a state characterised by a ﬂow ﬁeld with continually changing regions of high vor-
ticity. Hence the name – active turbulence or mesoscale turbulence – that comes about
because of a superﬁcial visual resemblance to inertial turbulence. However the latter is
a consequence of high Reynolds number; here we are at low Reynolds number and the
physics is very diﬀerent. Active turbulence has been observed in a wide range of systems,
at diﬀerent length scales, examples of which are shown in Fig. 8.

Fig. 9A, obtained by numerically integrating Eqs. (35)–(37), shows an instantaneous
snapshot of the ﬂow ﬁeld in the active turbulent state. Black lines are streamlines of
the ﬂow, and red and blue indicate regions of high and low vorticity. This is a dynamic

minimizeoxygengradientsthatmaycauseanisotropicstreamingoftheoxytacticB.subtilisbacteria(2).Tostudytheeffectsofdimensionalityandboundaryconditions,experimentswereper-formedwithtwodifferentsetups:quasi-2DmicrofluidicchamberswithaverticalheightHlessorequaltotheindividualbodylengthofB.subtilis(approximately5μm)and3DchamberswithH≈80μm(SIAppendix,Figs.S6andS8andMoviesS7–S10).Tofocusonthecollectivedynamicsofthemicroorganismsratherthanthesolventflow(24,50),wedeterminedthemeanlocalmotionofB.subtilisdirectlyusingparticleimagingvelocimetry(PIV;seealsoSIAppendix).Atypicalsnapshotfromaquasi-2DexperimentisshowninFig.2A.Asevidentfromtheinset,localdensityfluctuationsthatareimportantintheswarming/flockingregime(48,49,51)becomesuppressedatveryhighfillingfractions(SIAppendix,Fig.S5).Thecorrespondingflowfields(Fig.2BandSIAppendix,Fig.S8)wereusedforthestatisticalanalysispre-sentedbelow.ContinuumTheory.Theanalyticalunderstandingofturbulencephenomenahingesontheavailabilityofsimpleyetsufficientlyaccuratecontinuummodels(27).Considerableeffortshavebeenmadetoconstructeffectivefieldtheoriesforactivesystems(15–17,19,31,32,52–54),butmostofthemhaveyettobetestedquantitativelyagainstexperiments.Manycontinuummodelsdis-tinguishsolventvelocity,bacterialvelocityand/ororientationalorderparameterfields,resultinginaprohibitivelylargenumberofphenomenologicalparametersandmakingcomparisonwithexperimentsverydifficult.Aimingtoidentifyaminimalhydro-dynamicmodelofself-sustainedmeso-scaleturbulence,westudyasimplifiedcontinuumtheoryforincompressibleactivefluids,byfocusingsolelyontheexperimentallyaccessiblevelocityfieldvðt;rÞ.Byconstruction,thetheorywillnotbeapplicabletore-gimeswheredensityfluctuationsarelarge(e.g.,swarmingorflocking),butitcanprovideausefulbasisforquantitativecomparisonswithparticlesimulationsandexperimentsathighconcentrations.Wenextsummarizethemodelequations;adetailedmotiva-tionisgiveninSIAppendix.Becauseourexperimentssuggestthatdensityfluctuationsarenegligible(Fig.2A)wepostulateincom-pressibility,∇·v¼0.Thedynamicsofvisgovernedbyanincom-pressibleToner–Tuequation(15–17),supplementedwithaSwift–Hohenberg-typefourth-orderterm(45),ð∂tþλ0v·∇Þv¼−∇pþλ1∇v2−ðαþβjvj2ÞvþΓ0∇2v−Γ2ð∇2Þ2v;[1]wherepdenotespressure,andgeneralhydrodynamicconsidera-tions(52)suggestthatλ0>1;λ1>0forpusher-swimmerslikeB.subtilis(seeSIAppendix).Theðα;βÞ-termsinEq.1correspondtoaquarticLandau-typevelocitypotential(15–17).Forα>0andβ>0,thefluidisdampedtoagloballydisorderedstatewithv¼0,whereasforα<0aglobalpolarorderingisinduced.How-ever,suchglobalpolarorderingisnotobservedinsuspensionsofswimmingbacteria,suggestingthatotherinstabilitymechanismsprevail(53).Adetailedstabilityanalysis(SIAppendix)ofEq.1impliesthattheSwift–Hohenberg-typeðΓ0;Γ2Þ-termsprovidethesimplestgenericdescriptionofself-sustainedmeso-scaleturbu-lenceinincompressibleactiveflow:ForΓ0<0andΓ2>0,themodelexhibitsarangeofunstablemodes,resultinginturbu-lentstatesasshowninFig.2D.Intuitively,theðΓ0;Γ2Þ-termsde-scribeintermediate-rangeinteractions,andtheirroleinFourierspaceissimilartothatoftheLandaupotentialinvelocityspace(SIAppendix).WethereforeexpectthatEq.1describesawideclassofquasi-incompressibleactivefluids.Tocomparethecon-tinuummodelwithexperimentsandSPRsimulations,wenextstudytraditionalturbulencemeasures.VelocityStructureFunctions.BuildingonKolmogorov’sseminalwork(55),alargepartoftheclassicalturbulenceliterature(27,34,36–38,40,41)focusesonidentifyingthedistributionoftheflowvelocityincrementsδvðt;r;RÞ¼vðt;rþRÞ−vðt;rÞ.Theirstatisticsiscommonlycharacterizedintermsofthelongitudinalandtransverseprojections,δv‖¼^R·δvandδv⊥¼^T·δv,where^T¼ðϵij^RjÞdenotesaunitvectorperpendiculartotheunitshiftvector^R¼R∕jRj.Theseparation-dependentstatisticalmomentsofδv‖andδv⊥definethelongitudinalandtransversevelocitystructurefunctionsSn‖;⊥ðRÞ≔hðδv‖;⊥Þni;n¼1;2;…:[2]Thesefunctionshavebeenintenselystudiedinturbulenthigh-Refluids(27,34,35,41)butareunknownforactiveflow.Forisotropicsteady-stateturbulence,spatialaveragesh·iasinEq.2becometime-independent,andthemomentsSn‖;⊥reducetofunc-tionsofthedistanceR¼jRj.Velocitydistributions,incrementdistributions,andstructurefunctionsforournumericalandexperimentaldataaresummar-izedinFig.3.FortheSPRmodel,thevelocitystatisticscanbecalculatedeitherfromtherawparticledataorfrompre-binnedflowfielddata.Thetwomethodsproducesimilarresults,andFig.3showsaveragesbasedonindividualparticlevelocities.Generally,wefindthatboththe2DSPRmodelandthe2Dcon-tinuumsimulationsarecapableofreproducingtheexperimen-tallymeasuredquasi-2Dflowhistograms(Fig.3AandB)andstructurefunctions(Fig.3C).ThemaximaoftheeventransversestructureS2n⊥signalatypicalvortexsizeRv,whichissubstantiallylargerin3Dbulkflowthaninquasi-2Dbacterialflow.Unliketheircounterpartsinhigh-ReNavier–Stokesflow(27,34),thestructurefunctionsofactiveturbulenceexhibitonlyasmallre-gionofpowerlawgrowthforℓ≲R≪Rvandflattenatlargerdistances(Fig.3C).Fig.2.Experimentalsnapshot(A)ofahighlyconcentrated,homogeneousquasi-2Dbacterialsuspension(seealsoMovieS7andSIAppendix,Fig.S8).Flowstreamlinesvðt;rÞandvorticityfieldsωðt;rÞintheturbulentregime,asobtainedfrom(B)quasi-2Dbacteriaexperiments,(C)simulationsofthedeterministicSPRmodel(a¼5,ϕ¼0.84),and(D)continuumtheory.TherangeofthesimulationdatainDwasadaptedtotheexperimentalfieldofview(217μm×217μm)bymatchingthetypicalvortexsize.(Scalebars,50μm.)SimulationparametersaresummarizedinSIAppendix.14310∣www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1202032109Wensinketal.D"C"THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

21

Fig. 9. – Active turbulence. A: Velocity ﬁeld showing the ﬂow lines and a colour plot of the
vorticity. Red indicates strong positive vorticity and blue strong negative vorticity. B: Close
up of a region of A showing the director ﬁeld to illustrate how velocity jets are driven by bend
instabilities. C: Director ﬁeld showing ±1/2 topological defects in red and blue. The lighter
lines are walls, linear regions of high bend. D: Close up of a wall (after Thampi et al. [44, 45]).
E: Schematic representation of the mechanism leading to active turbulence.

  −0.010.00 0.01      −0.01A"B"C	  D	  hydrodynamic	  instabili0es	  walls,	  that	  ﬂuctuate	  and	  decay	  into	  topological	  defects	  defects	  annihilate	  and	  restore	  nema0c	  order	  E	  22

JULIA M. YEOMANS

pattern which changes in time, but is a statistical steady state. Fig. 9B magniﬁes a
small region of this plot to show the director ﬁeld. Note the bend distortion of the
director which induces a stress, and hence a jet-like ﬂow, which creates areas of positive
and negative vorticity on either side of the jet. This and similar ﬂow ﬁelds distort the
director further, which in turn creates additional stresses and ﬂows.

Fig. 9C is the corresponding director ﬁeld, with positive and negative topological
defects indicated by red and blue dots. In a passive nematic topological defects annihilate
in pairs to reduce the elastic energy of the system. In an active nematic they are also
created in pairs, and they often move away from each other before they can annihilate
[49, 44, 45, 50]. This occurs because defects correspond to distortions in the director
ﬁeld and hence are sources of ﬂow. The symmetry of the −1/2 defect implies balanced
ﬂows and the defect hardly moves, whereas the +1/2 defect moves away from the point
at which it is created. Referring again to Fig. 9C note that defects are often associated
with lines in the director ﬁeld. These are bend walls; such a wall is shown at increased
magniﬁcation in Fig. 9D. They occur because any bend instability tends to localise to
give regions of nematic order separated by a narrow wall. The walls are regions of high
distortion energy and therefore defects form more easily here. When the defects separate
they preferentially move along the walls and in doing so they locally restore nematic
order.

The dynamics of the active nematic state is summarised by the cycle in Fig. 9E.
Hydrodynamic instabilities lead to the formation of walls, lines of high bend distortion
in the director ﬁeld. The elastic energy stored in the walls is released by the creation of
pairs of topological defects. The director distortions that deﬁne the defects correspond to
active stresses that move the +1/2 defect away from the −1/2 one. Defects preferentially
move along walls, but can escape from the walls at higher activities,and when oppositely
charged defects meet they annihilate. Both creation and annihilation events remove walls
and help to reinstate regions of nematic order which then undergo further hydrodynamic
instabilities.

The velocity-velocity correlation function in the active turbulent state is plotted in
Fig. 10A [44]. The right-hand inset shows that the magnitude of the velocity increases
with activity, as is expected. In the main ﬁgure the correlation functions are scaled so
that their value at R = 0 is unity. The curves collapse showing that the length scale
associated with decay of correlations is independent of the activity, a feature reproduced
in several experiments.

Although I have given a description of the physical mechanisms underlying active
turbulence a predictive theory is still needed. Moreover there is still much to understand
about which features of the active turbulent state are generic across diﬀerent systems.
For example simulations of self-propelled, non-overlapping rods with an aspect ratio ∼ 5
show a state resembling active turbulence [41] as do vertically vibrated granular layers
[51]. These are both systems where hydrodynamics is either absent or strongly screened.

.
5

2. Microtubules and molecular motors. – A suspension of microtubules driven by

molecular motors is an experimental system that displays active turbulence.

Molecular motors are the engines of the cell. They convert chemical energy, often in the
form of ATP, into mechanical work. Kinesins are a group of motor proteins that move
along microtubules through a ‘walking’ motion of two heads which are a few nanometres
in size. The heads are linked to a tether which can itself be connected to a cargo. The
motors are designed to move along the microtubule tracks to overcome the strong Brow-

THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

23

Fig. 10. – Scaled velocity-velocity correlation function in the active turbulent state from A:
[44]), B: experiments on suspensions of microtubules and
simulations (after Thampi et al.
molecular motors (after Sanchez et al.
[52]). Diﬀerent colours correspond to diﬀerent values
of the activity (ATP concentration). The inset, top-right, is the unscaled data. The inset,
bottom-left, is a measure of the vortex radius.

nian ﬂuctuations at these length scales. Kinesin takes an 8-nm step for every molecule
of ATP it hydrolyses, and it always walks towards the head of the microtubule.

Microtubules and kinesin molecular motors form the basis of beautiful recent exper-
iments demonstrating active turbulence [52, 53]. Microtubule ﬁlaments with average
length 1.5µm were mixed with kinesin motors connected in clusters. The kinesin heads
from a cluster form bridges between neighbouring ﬁlaments and, if the ﬁlaments have
opposite polarity, they slide relative to each other as the motors walk. This is shown
in Fig.11A; note the dipolar nature of the active forces produced by the motors. The
addition of PEG induces depletion interactions that result in the microtubules forming
bundles and hence the eﬀects of their relative sliding becomes much more pronounced.

A 2D active system was created by adsorbing the microtubule-kinesin mixture onto

A	  B	  24

JULIA M. YEOMANS

Fig. 11. – Active turbulence in suspensions of microtubules and kinesin motors. A: The motors
form bridges between the ﬁlaments which slide past each other as the motors walk. B: The
microtubule bundles bend forming defects of topological charge +1/2 (red) and −1/2 (blue)
(after Sanchez et al. [52]).

a water-oil interface. The cellular extract forms an active nematic phase characterised
by swirling ﬂows. The microtubule bundles are stretched by the motor activity and the
resulting extended ﬁlaments undergo bend instabilities. This leads to the formation of
±1/2 topological defects that unbind, restoring nematic regions, as shown in Fig. 11.
Fig. 10B shows the velocity-velocity correlation function of the microtubule-kinesin
suspension for diﬀerent ATP concentrations, corresponding to diﬀerent strengths of the
activity [52]. Just as in the simulations the normalised correlation functions collapse
onto a single curve, showing that the system has a length scale independent of the
activity. However, although the creation of topological defects and the behaviour of
the velocity correlation function agrees well with the model active nematic there are
obvious diﬀerences between the simulations and the experiments. For example, the
one elastic constant approximation should be relaxed as the microtubule bundles can
be bent much more easily than splayed, the microtubules are long and ﬂexible, and
the friction of the surrounding ﬂuid is likely to have an eﬀect. Very recent work has
unexpectedly shown that the +1/2 topological defects that are formed in the cellular
suspension can themselves have nematic order which is correlated with nematic ordering
of the microtubules [54]. The reason for this is currently unclear.

In another recent paper Kleber et al. [55] created lipid vesicles of diameter about 70
microns and encapsulated microtubules and kinesin which absorbed onto the surface of
the vesicle to form an active shell. Because of the curvature of the shell the nematic ﬁeld

A	  B	  THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

25

must include defects. Kleber et al. observed four persistent active defects. The coupling
between the velocity ﬁelds and the elastic defect-defect interactions led to the defects
moving on the surface, oscillating between two symmetric tetrahedral defect states by
way of a conﬁguration where all four defects lie in a plane. The pattern was distorted
but not destroyed by thermal ﬂuctuations. As the ﬂexibility of the encapsulating vesicle
was changed it became elliptical, ﬂuctuating in tune with the defect oscillations. It then,
on a time scale of minutes, grew four streaming, ﬁlopedia-like, protrusions, stemming
from the defect sites. These reached a length of tens of micrometres before the vesicle
re-swelled and the protrusions disappeared.

.
5

3. Lyotropic active nematics. – So far we have described an active ﬂuid at constant
concentration. Adding a concentration variable to the active nematohydrodynamic equa-
tions allows us to study the coexistence between an active nematic and a passive ﬂuid,
to look at the evolution of localised patches of active material, and to introduce active
anchoring.

We consider a binary mixture of active nematic and isotropic ﬂuid [56]. To distinguish
the active nematic from the isotropic ﬂuid, we deﬁne a scalar order parameter φ, which
measures the relative concentration of each component with φ = 1 for the active nematic
and φ = 0 for the isotropic ﬂuid. φ evolves according to the Cahn-Hilliard equation [57]

(47)

∂tφ + ∂i(uiφ) = Γφ∇2µ,

where Γφ is the mobility and µ = δF/δφ is the chemical potential. A suitable choice of
free energy is

(48)

F =

Aφ
2

φ2(1 − φ)2 +

A
2

(S2φ −

1
2

QijQji)2 +

Kφ
2

(∂kφ)2 +

K
2

(∂kQij)2

where Aφ and Kφ are material constants. An additional term Πij = (F − µφ)δij −
∂iφ(∂F/∂(∂jφ)) must be added to the stress components in Eq. (43), when the variable
φ is introduced. More details of the form of the free energy and the governing equations
of lyotropic active nematics can be found in [56].

When a band of active nematic is placed in an isotropic ﬂuid it is unstable to a bend
instability, and undulations develop, as shown in Fig. 12A. These are not symmetric,
but have a distinctive shape with rounded convex regions, and sharper convex cusps.
Topological defects of charge +1/2 form at the cusps, detach, and move into the bulk of
the nematic, leaving the interface with a distributed negative topological charge. Note
also that the director ﬁeld tends to lie parallel to the interface (Fig. 12B). There is no
term in the free energy that gives a preferential anchoring; rather the anchoring, which
we term active anchoring, is due to active stresses.

To show how active anchoring arises we consider the active stresses at the interface
which will result from gradients in both the magnitude and the direction of the nematic
order. In 2D the Q-tensor is

(49)

Qij = 2q(cid:104)ninj − δij/2(cid:105).

We recall from Eq. (44) the active force density

(50)

∂iΠactive

ij

= −ζ∂iQij.

26

JULIA M. YEOMANS

Fig. 12. – Behaviour of an interface between an active nematic (white) and a passive ﬂuid
(purple). Short black lines represent the director ﬁeld. A: Evolution with time (left to right) of an
active nematic–passive interface. The interface is unstable to bend. Yellow (blue) arrows indicate
the active stress induced by gradients in the magnitude (direction) of the order parameter. In
convex regions these partially cancel, in concave regions they act together to give the interface
its scalloped shape. B: magniﬁed view of the interface to illustrate planar active anchoring (after
Blow et al. [56]). C: similar planar anchoring in a dividing E. coli colony (after Stewart et al.
[58]).

Deﬁning m as the outwards unit normal to the surface the force density can be written

(51)

−ζ∂jQij = −ζ∂jq{2ninj − δij} − ζq{2ni(∂jnj) + 2(∂jni)nj}.

If we assume that contributions from gradients in the nematic orientation are small
compared to those from variations in the magnitude of the nematic order, the components
of the active force density tangential and normal to the interface are

(52)

Ftangential = ζ |∇q| {2(m · n)(l · n)},

A	  B	  CTHE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

27

(53)

Fnormal = ζ |∇q| {2(m · n)2 − 1},

where l is the unit vector tangent to the interface.

When the director does not lie along or perpendicular to the interface Ftangential
is non-zero and generates a ﬂow along the interface. For a ﬂow-tumbling nematic the
resulting velocity gradient between the interface and the bulk nematic has a tendency to
rotate the director as dictated by the corotational terms of Eq. (38). In the extensile case,
the director is in stable equilibrium when it lies along the interface. Conversely, in the
contractile case, the ﬂow direction is reversed, rotating the director to lie perpendicular
to the interface.

Fnormal acts to reinforce this eﬀect. From Eq. (53), we ﬁnd that the active force
density ∼ ζ when m and l are parallel and ∼ −ζ when they are perpendicular. Thus, for
extensile activity (ζ > 0), the drop is extended where the interfacial alignment is parallel
to the interface, and compressed where it is perpendicular to the interface, causing an
initially circular drop to be stretched along the nematic director. As a result, the director
ﬁeld is oriented parallel to the interface everywhere except at the ends of the elongated
structure. In the case of a contractile suspension, the forces are reversed, so that the
nematic drop extends perpendicular to the nematic director, corresponding to active
anchoring perpendicular to the interface.

To motivate the time evolution of the interface shape we now assume active anchoring
and take into account gradients of n. For the extensile system (m, n perpendicular) the
force normal to the interface becomes

(54)

Fnormal = ζ{−|∇q| −2q m · (n · ∇)n}.

The ﬁrst term represents the force arising from the gradient in nematic order, which
always acts inwards. The second term acts inwards on the concave portions of the
interface, but outwards where the interface is convex. Thus, in the concave parts, the
two force contributions combine to give a strong force that pulls the interface sharply
inwards to give high curvature, while in the convex parts, the two contributions are
opposed so the resultant force is weak leading to a lower curvature. For a contractile
active nematic, the interface shape is the same because the change of sign of ζ is cancelled
out by the change in active interface alignment from planar to homeotropic.

6. – Discussion

Inevitably a short lecture course contains a ﬁnite amount of material, and the choice
is somewhat arbitrary. Sections 2 and 4 of these lectures provide a general background,
hopefully useful in many contexts, but many other examples could have been covered in
sections 3 and 5. I therefore now give brief comments on some other areas that I ﬁnd
interesting. More details can be found in other lectures in this and related schools, and
in the review articles listed.

Active systems:
We have considered active nematics and concentrated primarily on cases where ﬂow pro-
vides the dominant physics. This is only one of many ‘active’ models that have been
studied since the early work of Viczek [59] and Toner and Tu [60]. We have not consid-
ered dry systems where any momentum correlations are short-range, the case for many
of the ﬂocking models in the literature. We have not considered polar symmetry, where

28

JULIA M. YEOMANS

additional terms appear in the continuum equations (although the active stress remains
dipolar). We have ignored density variations and compressibility which are very impor-
tant in the dry models, and we have neglected inertia which should be included if these
ideas are to be applied to macroscopic systems such as schools of ﬁsh or animal herds.
Understanding the similarities and diﬀerences between the various active models, and
linking them in turn to driven systems is an important goal [61, 43, 2].

Active machines and active self assembly:
Much research on active matter aims to exploit or imitate the ability of microswimmers
and molecular motors to act as eﬃcient machines. We have heard in this school about
active colloids which can be propelled by chemical interactions that take place over half
the colloid, by anisotropic interactions induced by light, or by electric or magnetic ﬁelds
[62]. More ‘swimmer-like’ micromachines taking the form of waving ﬁlaments and driven
by an external magnetic ﬁeld have also been constructed [63]. In an early, and appealing,
example of harnessing swimmers to do work Sokolov et al. [64] and Di Leonardo et al.
[65] showed that they could drive a microscopic gear. Colloids can be sorted into bins
in an active bath of bacteria [66] and active colloids have been shown to self-assemble [67].

Viscocelasticity:
Bacteria and molecular motors operate in in complex environments, characterised by
conﬁnement, crowding and strongly non-Newtonian host ﬂuids such as mucus, extracel-
lular matrix gels and blood. There are several results for microswimmers moving in a
viscoelastic continuum [68, 69], but often the host ﬂuid contains biopolymers or colloids
of similar size to the bacteria themselves. For example, recent experiments suggest that
E-coli motility in a polymer suspension is aﬀected by local shear-thinning induced by
the ﬂagella motion [70]. Living liquid crystals represent a novel system where bacteria
swim in a nematic ﬂuid and their motion in the direction perpendicular to the nematic
ordering is strongly suppressed [48].

Biological systems:
Many active systems are living systems and the physical theories of active matter are
starting to oﬀer useful insight into biological mechanisms. At a sub-cellular level the
active particles are molecular motors and we described in Sec 5.1 how these can drive
active turbulence in dense suspensions of microtubules in vitro. Within the cell there
are results showing how molecular motors walking along microtubules contribute to cell
division resulting from spindle mitosis [71], and the interaction of myosin motors with the
actin network has been well studied recently [72]. Plant cells in particular use cytoplasmic
streaming, ﬂow driven by the motion of motors along the cell walls, presumably to aid
the transport of nutrients around the cell [73]. The extent to which hydrodynamics
(even at nanometre scales) aﬀects motor motion [74], the way in which multiple motors
can combine to move cargo and mechanisms for cargo transport in the crowded cellular
environment remain largely unexplored.

At a cellular level there is increasing evidence that cell motility is linked to the phys-
ical environment [75]. For example, cells move up a stiﬀness gradient on a surface, and
their rate of division is linked to the local stress. Understanding the diﬀerent physical
properties of cancerous cells and the link between these and the motility of malignant
cells is a promising direction [76]. Interactions between cells, the spreading of cellular
layers and the possible role of ﬂow in morphogenesis are also of interest.

THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

29

To summarise, in these lectures we have emphasised two important features of active
swimming at low Reynolds number. Firstly at zero Reynolds number the Scallop The-
orem constrains the swimmer stroke to be non-invariant under time reversal. Secondly
the swimmers move autonomously and therefore can exert no net force or torque on the
ﬂuid. This means that the far ﬂow ﬁeld is generically dipolar, and its nematic symmetry
has far reaching consequences for both how microswimmers stir the surrounding ﬂuid
and for their collective behaviour.

As examples of microswimmer hydrodynamics we discussed how swimmers oscillate
about the centre line when swimming against a Poiseuille ﬂow, swimmer localisation
resulting from a competition between gravitaxis and shear, and the interaction of mi-
croswimmers with surfaces. The eﬀect of the dipolar ﬂow ﬁeld was clear when we consid-
ered the loop-like motion of tracer particles due to the ﬂow ﬁelds produced by a passing
swimmer and distinguished the contributions to tracer diﬀusion from tracer entrainment,
swimmer re-orientations and thermal ﬂuctuations.

In Section 4 we moved on to consider the collective behaviour of active nematics.
The equations of motion are the same as those for liquid crystals but with an additional
term of dipolar symmetry in the stress tensor. The active stress results in instabilities
which lead to a state termed ‘active turbulence’ characterised by high ﬂow vorticity, and
walls and topological defects in the director ﬁeld. Numerical solutions to the equations of
motion were compared to recent experiments on mixtures of microtubules and molecular
motors. Considering an interface between an active and passive ﬂuid, we discussed the
interface instability and active anchoring, alignment of the liquid crystal at the active-
passive interface that is driven by ﬂow.

∗ ∗ ∗

It is a pleasure to thank Gareth Alexander, Anna Balazs, Matthew Blow, Amin
Doostmohammadi, J¨orn Dunkel, Ramin Golestanian, Rodrigo Ledesma-Aguilar, Arnold
Mathijssen, Mitya Pushkin, Victor Putz, Miha Ravnik, Tyler Shendruk, Henry Shum
and Sumesh Thampi for many helpful and enjoyable discussions.

REFERENCES

[1] Lauga E. and Powers T.R., Reports on Progress in Physics, 72 (2009) 096601.
[2] Elgeti J., Winkler R.G. and Gompper G., Reports on Progress in Physics, 78 (2015)

056601.

[3] Landau L.D. and Lifshitz E.M., Fluid Mechanics, Course of Theoretical Physics, Vol. 6

(Butterworth-Heinemann) 2000.

[4] Purcell E.M., American J. of Phys., 20 (1977) 193.
[5] Najafi A. and Golestanian R., Phys. Rev. E, 69 (2004) 062901.
[6] Lighthill M.J., Commun. Pure Appl. Maths, 5 (1952) 109.
[7] Blake J.R., J. Fluid Mech., 46 (1971) 199.
[8] Pozrikidis C., Boundary integral and singularity methods for linearized viscous ﬂow

(Cambridge University Press) 1992.

[9] Kim S. and Karrila S.J., Microhydrodynamics: Principles and Selected Applications

(Dover Publications Inc. Mineola, New York) 2005.

[10] Drescher K., Goldstein R.E., Michel N., Polin M. and Tuval I., Phys. Rev. Lett.,

105 (168101) 2010.

[11] Drescher K., Dunkel J., Cisneros L.H., Gangulya, S. and Goldstein R.E., Proc.

Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 108 (2011) 10940.

30

JULIA M. YEOMANS

[12] Leptos K.C., Guasto J.S., Gollub J.P., Pesci A.I. and Goldstein R.E., Phys. Rev.

Lett., 103 (2009) 198103.

[13] Underhill P.T., Hernandez-Ortiz J.P. and Graham M.D., Phys. Rev. Lett., 100

(2008) 248101.

[14] Chen D.T.N., Lau A.W.C., Hough L.A., Islam M.F., Goulian M., Lubensky T.C.

and Yodh A.G., Phys. Rev. Lett., 99 (2007) 148302.

[15] Pushkin D.O., Shum H. and Yeomans J.M., J. Fluid Mech., 726 (2013) 5.
[16] Pushkin D.O. and Yeomans J.M., Phys. Rev. Lett., 111 (2013) 188101.
[17] Lin Z., Thiffeault J.-L. and Childress S., J. Fluid Mech., 669 (2011) 167.
[18] Shum H., Gaffney E.A. and Smith D.J., Proc. Royal Soc. A, 466 (2010) 1725.
[19] Darwin C., Math. Proc. Cambridge Philosophical Society, 49 (1953) 342.
[20] Leshansky A.M. and Pismen L.M., Phys. Rev. E, 82 (2010) 025301.
[21] Jepson A., Martinez V.A., Schwarz-Linek J., Morozov A. and Poon W.C.K., Phys.

Rev. E, 88 (2013) 041002(R).

[22] Kurtuldu H., Guasto J.S., Johnson K.A. and Gollub J.P., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.

USA, 108 (2011) 10391.

[23] A. Z¨ottl and H. Stark, Phys. Rev. Lett., 108 (2012) 218104.
[24] Pedley T.J. and Kessler J.O., Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 24 (1992) 313.
[25] Kessler J.O., Nature, 313 (1985) 218.
[26] Durham W.M., Kessler J.O. and Stocker R., Science, 323 (2009) 1067.
[27] Berke A.P., Turner L., Berg H.C. and Lauga E., Phys. Rev. Lett., 101 (2008) 038102.
[28] Spagnolie S.E. and Lauga E., J. Fluid Mech., 700 (2012) 105.
[29] Kantsler V., Dunkel J., Polin M. and Goldstein R.E., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA,

110 (2013) 1187.

[30] Blake J.R., Proc. of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 70 (1971) 303.
[31] de Gennes P.G. and Prost J., The Physics of Liquid Crystals (Oxford University Press)

1995.

[32] Chandrasekhar S., Liquid Crystals (Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed.) 1993.
[33] Beris A.N. and Edwards B.J., Thermodynamics of Flowing Systems (Oxford University

Press) 1994.

[34] Hatwalne Y., Ramaswamy S., Rao M. and Simha R.A., Phys. Rev. Lett., 92 (2004)

118101.

[35] Batchelor G.K., J. Fluid Mech., 41 (1970) 545.
[36] Simha R.A. and Ramaswamy S., Phys. Rev. Lett., 89 (2002) 058101.
[37] Voituriez R., Joanny J.F. and Prost J., EPL, 70 (2005) 404.
[38] Edwards S. and Yeomans J.M., EPL, 85 (2009) 18008.
[39] Thampi S.P., Doostmohammadi A., Golestanian R. and Yeomans J.M., preprint.
[40] Dombrowski C., Cisneros L., Chatkaew S., Goldstein R.E. and Kessler J.O.,

Phys. Rev. Lett, 93 (2004) 098103.

[41] Wensink H.H., Dunkel J., Heidenreich S., Drescher K., Goldstein R.E., Lowen

H. and Yeomans J.M., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 109 (2012) 14308.
[42] Saintillan D. and Shelley M.J., J. R. Soc. Interface, 9 (2012) 571.
[43] Marchetti M.C., Joanny J.F., Ramaswamy S., Liverpool T.B., Prost J., Rao M.

and Simha R.A., Rev. Mod. Phys., 85 (2013) 1143.

[44] Thampi S. P., Golestanian R. and Yeomans J.M., Phys. Rev. Lett., 111 (2013) 118101.
[45] Thampi S. P., Golestanian R. and Yeomans J.M., EPL, 105 (2014) 18001.
[46] Thampi S., Golestanian R. and Yeomans J.M., Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, 372 (2014)

20130366.

[47] Giomi L., Phys. Rev. X, 5 (2015) 031003.
[48] Zhou S., Sokolov A., Lavrentovich O.D. and Aranson I.S., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.

USA, 111 (2014) 1265.

[49] Giomi L., Bowick M. J., Ma X. and Marchetti M.C., Phys. Rev. Lett., 110 (2013)

228101.

[50] Giomi L., Bowick M.J., Mishra P., Sknepnek R. and Marchetti M.C., Phil. Trans.

R. Soc. A, 372 (2014) 2029.

THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF ACTIVE SYSTEMS

31

[51] Narayan V., Ramaswamy S. and Menon N., Science, 317 (2007) 105.
[52] Sanchez T., Chen D.T.N., DeCamp S.J., Heymann M. and Dogic Z., Nature, 491

(2012) 431.

[53] Henkin G., DeCamp S.J., Chen D.T.N., Sanchez T. and Dogic Z., Phil. Trans. R.

Soc. A, 372 (2014) 20140142.

[54] Z. Dogic, private communication
[55] Keber F.C., Loiseau E., Sanchez T., DeCamp S.J., Giomi L., Bowick M.J.,

Marchetti C., Dogic Z. and Bausch A.R., Science, 345 (2014) 1135.

[56] Blow M.L., Thampi S.P. and Yeomans J.M., Phys. Rev. Lett, 113 (2014) 24830.
[57] Cahn J.W. and Hilliard J.E., J. Chem. Phys., 28 (1958) 258.
[58] Stewart E.J., Madden R., Paul G. and Taddei F., PLOS Biology, 3 (2005) 0295.
[59] Vicsek T., Czirok A., Benjacob E., Cohen I. and Shochet O, Phys. Rev. Lett., 75

(1995) 1226.

[60] Toner J. and Tu Y., Phys. Rev. E, 58 (1998) 4828.
[61] S. Ramaswamy, Annu. Rev. Cond. Mat. Phys., 1 (2010) 323.
[62] Ebbens, S.J. and Howse, J.R., Soft Matter, 6 (2010) 726.
[63] Zhang L., Peyer K.E. and Nelson B.J., Lab on a Chip, 10 (2010) 2203.
[64] Sokolov A., Apodaca M.M, Grzybowski B.A. and Aranson I.S., Proc. Nat. Acad.

Sci. USA, 107 (2010) 969.

[65] Di Leonardo R., Angelani L., Dell’Arciprete D., Ruocco G., Lebba V., Schippa
S., Conte M.P., Mecarini F., De Angelis F. and Di Fabrizio E., Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA, 107 (2010) 9541.

[66] Koumakis N., Lepore A., Maggi C. and Di Leonardo R., Nature Comms., 4 (2013)

2588.

[67] Soto R. and Golestanian R., Phys. Rev. Lett., 112 (2014) 068301.
[68] Lauga E., Phys. of Fluids, 19 (2007) 083104.
[69] Spagnolie S.E., Liu B. and Powers T.R., Phys. Rev. Lett., 111 (2013) 068101.
[70] Martinez V.A, Schwarz-Linek J., Reufer M., Wilson L.G., Morozov A.N. and

Poon W.C.K., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 111 (2014) 17771.

[71] Brugues J. and Needleman D., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 111 (2014) 18496
[72] Broedersz C.P. and MacKintosh F.C., Rev. Mod. Phys., 86 (2014) 995.
[73] Goldstein R.E., and van de Meent J-W., Interface Focus, 5 (2015) 20150030.
[74] Malgaretti P., Pagonabarraga I. and Frenkel D., Phys. Rev. Lett., 109 (2012)

168101.

[75] Vedula S.R.K., Ravasio A., Lim C.T. and Ladoux B., Physiology (Bethesda), 28 (2013)

370.

[76] Gonzalez-Rodriguez D., Guevorkian K., Douezan S. and Brochard-Wyart F.,

Science, 338 (2012) 910.

