6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
 
 
]
n
n
-
s
i
d
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
1
2
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Graphene with vacancies: supernumerary zero modes

Norman Weik,1, 2, ∗ Johannes Schindler,1, 2, † Soumya Bera,3 Gemma C. Solomon,4, 5 and Ferdinand Evers6

1Institute of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Campus North, D-76344 Karlsruhe, Germany

2Institut f¨ur Theorie der Kondensierten Materie,

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Campus South, D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
3Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Physik komplexer Systeme, 01187 Dresden, Germany

4Nano-Science Center, University of Copenhagen, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark

5Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark

6Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of Regensburg, D-93050 Regensburg, Germany

(Dated: March 2, 2016)

The density of states, (E), of graphene is investigated within the tight binding (H¨uckel) approx-
imation in the presence of vacancies. They induce a non-vanishing density of zero modes, nzm, that
act as midgap states: (E) = nzmδ(E) + smooth. As is well known, the actual number of zero
modes per sample can in principle exceed the sublattice imbalance: Nzm ≥ |NA − NB|, where NA,
NB denote the number of carbon atoms in each sublattice. In this work, we establish a stronger
relation that is valid in the thermodynamic limit and that involves the concentration of zero-modes:
nzm > |cA − cB|, where cA and cB denote the concentration of vacancies per sublattice; in particular,
nzm is non-vanishing even in the case of balanced disorder, NA/NB = 1. Adopting terminology
from benzoid graph theory, the excess modes associated with the current carrying backbone (perco-
lation cluster) are called supernumerary. In the simplest cases such modes can be associated with
structural elements of internal boundaries like dangling bonds. Our result suggest that the contin-
uum limit of bipartite hopping models supports nontrivial “supernumerary” terms that escape the
present continuum descriptions.

PACS numbers: 73.22.Pr, 61.48.Gh, 71.23.-k

Introduction. As is well known, Dirac-particles are re-
alized, e.g., in clean graphene, which exhibits two Dirac-
cones at the K and K(cid:48) points of the Brillouin zone.
[1]
Another important incarnation is met in energy-spectra
of quasi-particles over (two dimensional, 2D) condensates
of fermions with p−type pairing. [2, 3] In three dimen-
sion the Dirac dispersion is realized recently in materials
such as Weyl semimetal and its time reversal symmetric
partner Dirac semimetals. [4, 5]

One out of many interesting aspects of Dirac-fermions
relates to their topological properties. [1, 6] When punch-
ing a hole (“defect”, “vortex”) into such Dirac-gases a
zero-energy state can form at its boundary. Such zero-
modes indicate a demarcation line that separates two
topologically distinct phases (e.g. condensate and trivial
vacuum) from each other. The number of zero modes
relates via the Atiyah-Singer index theorem[7] to topo-
logical charges of certain gauge ﬁeld conﬁgurations that
represent the holes (vortices) in continuum descriptions.

The graphene-version of such a topological defect is a
vacancy. It carries a zero-energy mode that exhibits the
characteristic 1/(x + iy) decay away from the defect.[8]
We can associate with every vacancy a unit of topological
charge with a sign that is positive for one and negative
for the other sublattice. Then, a ﬁrst expectation based
on the index theorem familiar from the continuum theory
could be that a mismatch of vacancy concentrations in
the two sublattices, cA, cB, would induce a density nzm =
|cA−cB| of zero modes. Moreover, in the limit of balanced
sublattices, cA=cB, one would expect a cancellation of

topological charges and therefore nzm=0.

In this work we are interested in a tight-binding repre-
sentation of graphene ﬂakes (ﬁnite size systems). In this
case a kind of lattice analog of the continuum version of
the Atiyah-Singer index theorem applies,

ζ ≥ |NA − NB|,

(1)

where NA, NB denote the number of carbon atoms in the
respective sublattices and ζ is the number of zero modes.
It has been derived for general bipartite lattices by Inue,
Trugman and Abrahams and assumes a connected lattice
graph.[9] Since (1) is an inequality, the index theorem can
deliver only a lower bound and in the perfectly balanced
situation, NA/NB = 1, it does not give any information
at all, strictly speaking. As we will demonstrate in the
following, the tight-binding model for graphene ﬂakes ex-
hibits a ﬁnite density of zero modes even in the situation
of balanced sublattices.

A few preparatory remarks are in place. There are
two reasons why the estimate based on “=” as adopted
in the continuum index theorem, tends to be a very crude
one, when considering a graphene sample decorated with
vacancies. (i) At every non-zero concentration of vacan-
cies, cA, cB > 0, there is a non-vanishing probability that
a sequence of vacancies punched into pristine graphene
forms a closed line, i.e. a loop. This loop cuts the sam-
ple into two separate fragments (”cluster”). The esti-
mate Eq. (1) applies to each fragment (indices 1,2) sep-
arately, Nzm ≥ |NA1−NB1| + |NA2−NB2|, Nzm=ζ1+ζ2,
which, in general, gives a non-vanishing result for the

2

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 2. Edge motifs. From left to right: Dangling bond.
Double dangling bond that is associated with a zero-energy
state, as can be seen from the fact that one site without double
bonds is identiﬁed. Double-dangling chain. “U -structure”.

ning”) cluster only; smaller fragments are irrelevant.
Analogous to the thermodynamic DoS, also the transport
DoS associated with this cluster exhibits a singular be-
havior. Like any other fragment also the spanning cluster
is unbalanced, in general. Therefore, it supports a num-
p ≥|NAp−NBp|, even
ber of predictable zero modes, ζ pre
with (global) compensation NA=NB.
(‘p’ denotes the
spanning/percolation cluster.) Interestingly, our results
indicate that the fraction of supernumerary zero modes
contained in ζp always dominates over the predictable
modes at large enough cluster sizes. Therefore, supernu-
merary zero modes should leave a signature in transport
calculations, which may not have been identiﬁed as of
yet.

Lattice animals, edge motifs and topological modes. To
illustrate the eﬃciency of the equality Eq. (2) we have
investigated all clusters (“lattice animals”) up to 7 sites,
i.e. mass s=7, and their associated spectra. In Fig. 1 we
show as an example the smallest animal that supports
extra zero modes, ζ = 2, in this case. This result is
veriﬁed from the associated connectivity matrix.

 1

1
1 1 1

 .

Figure 1. Simplest example of a balanced lattice animal,
NA=NB=3 that carries extra zero modes. here are no pre-
dictable zero modes because NA = NB. However, two double
bonds can be placed and therefore we have (ζ=6−4=2).

total number of zero modes, Nzm, per sample even if
|NA1+NA2−NB1−NB2| = 0. Generic continuum treat-
ments do not incorporate eﬀects of correlated disorder
and therefore fragmentation escapes their scope.
Despite being conceptually trivial, the “excess modes”
resulting from unbalanced fragments (NAi(cid:54)=NBi) can
make an important contribution to the thermodynamic
density of states (DoS). Therefore, they enter generic
thermodynamic properties of the sample, and thus may
be relevant, e.g, for magnetism. [10, 11]

(ii) Inue et al. were interested in localization prop-
erties of fermions on connected bipartite lattices (sin-
gle cluster, no fragments) as representatives of the chiral
universality class.
[9, 12] Their result is, in fact, a spe-
cial case of a stronger inequality that has been proven
earlier. Longuet-Higgins [13] has shown in 1949, that
the number of zero modes is bounded from below by
ζ ≥ N − 2Ndb where Ndb denotes the maximum number
of double bonds, that can be placed on a given graphene
cluster (“ﬂake”) with N = NA + NB sites. This latter
result, though derived for graphene ﬂakes, is valid for
the much more general situation of hopping on bipartite
graphs.
[14] Recent research on benzoidal graph theory
sharpens the statement further: on the honeycomb lat-
tice the equality sign holds true, so that we have the exact
statement[15]

As a consequence and as we further exemplify below,
even a single balanced cluster, NAi=NBi, (cluster index
i) exhibits in general a number of “extra” modes due to
the mismatch Ndb < NA, NB. These modes are called
“supernumerary”, while the conventional ones (due to
sublattice imbalance) are called “predictable”.
[13, 16]
Only in the simplest cases the extra modes can be traced
back to particular structural elements, such as dangling
bonds.
In the present communication using numerical
simulations we establish that supernumerary zero modes
on large isolated clusters come with macroscopic abun-
dance; the concentration of supernumerary zero modes
on the percolation cluster is ﬁnite. These modes domi-
nate the DoS for compensated disorder and large enough
system sizes at any non-vanishing vacancy concentration.
[17–19]

In contrast to the thermodynamic properties, the
transport current is carried by the percolating (“span-

ζ = N − 2Ndb.

(2)

h =

(3)

It displays two identical pairs of columns, hence ζ = 2

The example of small animals reminds that the proper
placing of double bonds requires the knowledge of the
topology of the full cluster. To ﬁnd Ndb for very large
clusters therefore is not a trivial task. However, the struc-
ture of matrix (3) suggests a recipe for generating struc-
tural elements of much larger clusters that carry a type
of zero modes, that do not require scrutinizing the full
object in order to be predicted. Such elements are shown
in Fig. 2, dangling bonds (left), double dangling bonds
(right).
It is easy to see directly from placing double
bonds that double dangling bonds are associated with an
extra zero mode. By inspecting the connectivity matrix
the conclusion is conﬁrmed immediately. Double dan-
gling bonds come with two sites, that connect to a single
common site, only.

Hence, one has a structure

H =

 1 1 (cid:63) . . . (cid:63)

0 0 (cid:63) . . . (cid:63)
...
...
0 0 (cid:63) . . . (cid:63)

. . .

...

...



(4)

3

The two linearly dependent column vectors reﬂect the
occurrence of a zero-energy state.

Analogous arguments can be given for more complex
edge structures involving motifs similar to double dan-
gling bonds, Fig. 2, right panels. For instance it can be
shown that all double dangling bonds where both arms
consist of an odd number of sites lead to linearly depen-
dent column vectors and consequently cause zero modes.
Another edge motif associated with zero-modes, the ‘U -
structure’, is depicted in Fig. 2, right. It consists of a site
of degree 2 in the center which is connected to two sites
adjacent to dangling bonds.
In this case the dangling
bonds can also be prolonged to arms leading to a whole
class of structures. Like for the double dangling bonds,
structures having odd-numbered arms also produce zero
modes.

The examples discussed thus far suggest the follow-
ing picture: Eq. (2) predicts zero modes of two diﬀerent
kinds. There are modes that can be detected only after
the full cluster has been covered with double bonds. Such
modes might be called “topological”. A lower bound
for the number of these modes is certainly given by
|NA − NB|. It counts the predictable modes. There is
an additional number of zero modes that come in pairs.
They exist even in the balanced case, NA = NB. Those
might or might not be topological. [20]

Percolation cluster. We discuss implications of our
ﬁndings for the spectrum of a spanning cluster. In the
limit of vanishing vacancy concentration, nvac → 0, the
percolation cluster is dense exhibiting mostly isolated va-
cancies; correlated formations of vacancies that would in-
duce pairs of extra zero modes, e.g. due to edge motifs,
are rare:

(5)

ζ(s, nvac) = ζ pre

p + ζ sup
p = |NAp − NBp| and ζ sup

p

p = F[nvac]s, and
where ζ pre
F[nvac] ∝ nα
vac in the limit of vanishing concentration,
nvac → 0. Here the exponent α is a positive number and
s=NAp + NBp is the cluster mass. To estimate α, we
recall that the leading corrections are due to correlated
disorder conﬁgurations. If the structures dominating the
extra modes are given by double-dangling bonds we have
a scaling with n4
vac. Hence, one expects an inequality
α ≤ 4.
Now, consider the limit of very large clusters for which
we expect a scaling |NAp−NBp| ∝ s1/2. Therefore, the
second term in Eq. (5) dominates for large enough sys-
tems: s (cid:29) ξ2. The crossover length ξ exhibits a scaling
with vacancy concentration: ξ ∝ n−α
vac.

Figure 3. Balanced graphene sheet, size 10 × 20, in torus ge-
ometry with four vacancies. It exhibits two extra zero modes.
As one can see by inspection, these modes are predicted by the
bond-placing rule, Nzm = N − 2Ndb, if a cylinder geometry
is used (periodic boundary conditions in horizontal direction)
but not with double periodic boundary conditions (torus ge-
ometry). The sensitivity to boundary conditions reﬂects the
topological nature of these states.

Motivated by investigation of the example shown in
Fig. 3 we propose that α is smaller than four. It shows
a balanced sheet with two vacancies per sublattice that
exhibits two zero modes, ζp = 2. They are brought about
by the combined eﬀect of a dangling bond and two single
vacancies. There is no condition for the placement of
the isolated vacancies except that the sheet be balanced.
This example suggest therefore that α=2.

Zero-modes on percolation clusters: numerical simu-
lation. We conﬁrm our analytical considerations and
demonstrate numerically that for compensated disorder
the largest fraction of zero modes is not predictable. Our
focus is on percolating clusters that we obtain in the fol-
lowing way: A pristine ﬂake of size L2 × L2 is generated
with periodic boundary conditions. Vacancies are added
at a given concentration keeping NA = NB. The percola-
tion cluster is the biggest fragment that remains from the
original ﬂake. We identify it by employing the Hoshen-
Kopelman algorithm (see supplementary information [14]
for details).

Results. Fig. 4 displays an ensemble averaged num-
ber of zero modes on the percolation cluster as a func-
tion of the cluster size at ﬁxed vacancy concentration
expected scaling ∼ √
nvac = 20%. We make three basic observations: (i) The
s for the predictable modes is con-
ﬁrmed. (ii) The total number of zero modes scales with
∼ s, as expected. (iii) A considerable fraction of these
modes is due to the simple (non-topological) edge mo-
tifs (dangling bonds and ‘U ’-type structures, see Fig. 3;
for additional details see Ref. 21) that we discussed be-
fore. The probability of ﬁnd such structures scales with
a power in nvac of order 4 or higher. Therefore, we do
not expect edge motifs, like Fig. 2 (a,b,c) to give the
dominant contribution in the low concentration regime.
In Fig. 5 we display how the number of supernumer-

4

p

Figure 4.
Average number of zero modes associated
with the percolation cluster obtained in systems of size
L=20, 22, . . . 128 over its (average) mass s. The number of
zero modes ζ pre
based on sublattice imbalance and based on
the combined eﬀects of sublattice imbalance and edge struc-
tures are compared. (nvac=20%; average of 1000 realizations
for systems up to 10000 sites and over 100 realizations for
systems exceeding that size.) In order to highlight the domi-
nating eﬀect of edge motifs (Fig. 3) at large concentrations, we
also show a curve ((cid:77)), where there eﬀect has been subtracted.

Figure 5. Average number of supernumerary zero modes asso-
ciated with the percolation cluster obtained in systems of size
L=100, 110, . . . 140 over the vacancy concentration nvac. The
dashed line is a guide indicating a conservative lower bound
for the power after ﬁnite size extrapolation. The analytical
estimate α = 0 would here correspond to a horizontal line.

ary zero modes associated with the percolation clus-
ter disappears with decreasing vacancy concentration.
Percolation clusters have been drawn from systems of
sizes L = 100, ..., 140. At vacancy densities exceeding
∼ 7% the data can safely be extrapolated into the macro-
scopic limit. However, at smaller concentrations ﬁnite
size eﬀects are substantial. As a consequence, the asymp-
totic limit of low nvac, which would allow for a numerical
determination of α is not readily observable. Still, it can
be conﬁrmed that indeed α < 4 and a value α ≈ 2 would
at least not be inconsistent with our numerical data at
intermediate vacancy concentration.

Fig. 6 shows once again an overview over a large range

Figure 6. Zero modes on percolation cluster. The total num-
ber of modes (◦) and the fraction assigned to sublattice imbal-
ance, ((cid:79)) is shown. Data is normalized to the total number
of zero modes in the graphene sample (size: L = 100; average
over 500 disorder realizations).

of vacancy concentrations. The fraction of zero modes
that one ﬁnds on average on the percolation cluster is
p = |NAp−NBp|,
compared with the number of modes, ζ pre
predictable from the sublattice imbalance (at given sys-
In the clean limit, nvac → 0, the
tem size, L = 100).
crossover length exceeds our system size, ξ (cid:29) L, and
all zero modes are seen to be predictable. Towards larger
concentrations the crossover length ξ decreases and even-
tually in the range nvac≈1÷3% ξ exceeds the system size
L = 100. In that regime, the extra zero modes dominate
and at concentrations above 7% they contribute more
than 80%.

Discussion. The implications of the existence of ex-
tra zero modes for our understanding of graphene lattice
models with vacancy disorder have not been analyzed
for macroscopic systems, before. The main ﬁnding of
the present work is that topological zero modes exist in
macroscopic abundance even in compensated graphene
samples. These modes are not incorporated in present
days continuum theories of this material. Therefore, the
question can be raised whether the hydrodynamic the-
ory of bipartite lattice models, generally coincides with
the present continuum theories, as they have been stud-
ied, e.g., by Gade and Wegener[22, 23] and many others.
[12, 24–28]

Our recent research has identiﬁed a low energy regime
in which Gade-Wegner scaling of the DoS is violated.
[17] The similarity of the numerical data with concur-
rent ﬁeld theoretical results was interpreted as evidence
that local imbalances of the vacancy distribution produce
very strong disorder eﬀects that drive the Gade-Wegner
ﬁxed-point unstable. [17, 18] Supernumerary zero modes,
however, have not been considered in this work.

One would expect, that the spectral properties away
from zero energy should feel a certain impact of the
(topological) zero modes. We give two obvious reasons.
First, the concentration of spectral weight at zero en-

102103104s10-410-310-210-1ζp/s∼s−0.5ζtotpζprepζpre+edgep0.030.050.100.150.25nvac10-210-1100ζsupp/s/n2vac∼n4vacL=100L=110L=120L=130L=1400.00.10.20.30.40.5nvac0.000.250.500.751.00ζprep/ζtotpζpre+edgep/ζtotpergy must lead to a depletion of spectral weight in other
spectral regions. Second, eigenvectors at non-vanishing
energies must be orthogonal to the (macroscopic) degen-
erate subspace at E=0. What this implies for physical
observables and whether a new energy regime at very low
energies is introduced remains to be seen.

Discussions with P. Ostrovsky, I. Gornyi and Ch.
Staﬀord are gratefully acknowledged. We are also grate-
ful to Victor Haefner for contribution at the early stages
of this work. We thank I. Kondov and the J¨ulich Super-
computer Center (JUROPA, project HKA12) for compu-
tational assistance and resources.

Note added: After the completion of this manuscript
we became aware of the study performed by S. Sanyal,
K. Damle and O. I. Motrunich [29] which also reports a
ﬁnite density of zero modes in graphene with vacancies.

∗ Current aﬃliation:
Institute of Transport Science,
† Current aﬃliation: Institut f¨ur Technische Optik, Pfaf-

RWTH Aachen University, D-52056 Aachen, Germany

fenwaldring 9, 70569 Stuttgart.

[1] A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S.
Novoselov, and A. K. Geim, “The electronic properties
of graphene,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 109–162 (2009).

[2] N. Read and D. Green, “Paired states of fermions in
two dimensions with breaking of parity and time-reversal
symmetries and the fractional quantum hall eﬀect,”
Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267–10297 (2000).

[3] G.E. Volovik, The Universe in a Helium Droplet, Inter-
national series of monographs on physics (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2009).

[4] X. Wan, A. M. Turner, A. Vishwanath,

and S. Y.
Savrasov, “Topological semimetal and fermi-arc surface
states in the electronic structure of pyrochlore iridates,”
Phys. Rev. B 83, 205101 (2011).

[5] P. Hosur and X. Qi, “Recent developments in trans-
port phenomena in weyl semimetals,” Comptes Rendus
Physique 14, 857 – 870 (2013), topological insulators
/ Isolants topologiquesTopological insulators / Isolants
topologiques.

[6] S. Das Sarma, S. Adam, E. H. Hwang, and E. Rossi,
“Electronic transport in two-dimensional graphene,”
Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 407–470 (2011).

[7] Y. Aharonov and A. Casher, “Ground state of a spin-
1
2 charged particle in a two-dimensional magnetic ﬁeld,”
Phys. Rev. A 19, 2461–2462 (1979).

[8] V. M. Pereira, J. M. B. Lopes dos Santos, and A. H. Cas-
tro Neto, “Modeling disorder in graphene,” Phys. Rev. B
77, 115109 (2008).

[9] M. Inui, S. A. Trugman, and E. Abrahams, “Unusual
properties of midband states in systems with oﬀ-diagonal
disorder,” Phys. Rev. B 49, 3190–3196 (1994).

[10] M. Bonfanti, S. Casolo, G. F. Tantardini, A. Ponti,
and R. Martinazzo, “A few simple rules govern-
ing hydrogenation of graphene dots,” The Jour-
nal
(2011),
135,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3650693.

of Chemical Physics

164701

[11] O. V. Yazyev, “Emergence of magnetism in graphene

5

materials and nanostructures,” Reports on Progress in
Physics 73, 056501 (2010).

[12] F. Evers and A. D. Mirlin, “Anderson transitions,” Rev.

Mod. Phys. 80, 1355–1417 (2008).

[13] H. C. Longuet Higgins, “Some Studies in Molecular Or-
bital Theory I. Resonance Structures and Molecular Or-
bitals in Unsaturated Hydrocarbons,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics 18, 265–274 (1950).

[14] See Supplemental Material

for the derivation of the
Longuet-Higgins law and also for further numerical de-
tails, which includes Refs. [30–34].

[15] S. Fajtlowicz, PE John,

and H. Sachs, “On maxi-
mum matchings and eigenvalues of benzenoid graphs,”
CROATICA CHEMICA ACTA 78, 195–201 (2005).

[16] M. J. Rigby and R. B. Mallion, “On the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors of certain ﬁnite, vertex-weighted, bipartite
graphs,” Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 27,
122 – 129 (1979).

[17] V. H¨afner, J. Schindler, N. Weik, T. Mayer, S. Balakr-
ishnan, R. Narayanan, S. Bera, and F. Evers, “Density
of states in graphene with vacancies: Midgap power law
and frozen multifractality,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 186802
(2014).

[18] P. M. Ostrovsky, I. V. Protopopov, E. J. K¨onig, I. V.
Gornyi, A. D. Mirlin, and M. A. Skvortsov, “Density of
states in a two-dimensional chiral metal with vacancies,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 186803 (2014).

[19] A. Ferreira and E. R. Mucciolo, “Critical delocalization of
chiral zero energy modes in graphene,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
115, 106601 (2015).

[20] The Stone-Wales defect is an example for a topological
mode in the balanced case. One easily convinces oneself
that bond placing predicts two zero modes.

[21] N. Weik, Diploma Thesis, Karlsruhe Institute of Tech-

nology (2013).

[22] R. Gade and F. Wegner, “The n = 0 replica limit of U(n)
and U(n)SO(n) models,” Nuclear Physics B 360, 213 –
218 (1991).

[23] R. Gade, “Anderson localization for sublattice models,”

Nuclear Physics B 398, 499 – 515 (1993).

[24] S. Ryu, C. Mudry, C. Hou, and C. Chamon, “Masses in
graphenelike two-dimensional electronic systems: Topo-
logical defects in order parameters and their fractional
exchange statistics,” Phys. Rev. B 80, 205319 (2009).

[25] A. D. Mirlin, F. Evers, I. V. Gornyi, and P. M. Ostro-
vsky, “Anderson transitions: Criticality, symmetries and
topologies,” International Journal of Modern Physics B
24, 1577–1620 (2010).

[26] P. M. Ostrovsky, M. Titov, S. Bera, I. V. Gornyi,
and A. D. Mirlin, “Diﬀusion and criticality in undoped
graphene with resonant scatterers,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
105, 266803 (2010).

[27] E. J. K¨onig, P. M. Ostrovsky,

I. V. Protopopov,
and A. D. Mirlin, “Metal-insulator transition in two-
dimensional random fermion systems of chiral symmetry
classes,” Phys. Rev. B 85, 195130 (2012).

[28] S. Ryu, C. Mudry, A. W. W. Ludwig, and A. Furusaki,
“Global phase diagram of two-dimensional dirac fermions
in random potentials,” Phys. Rev. B 85, 235115 (2012).
[29] S. Sanyal, K. Damle, and O. I. Motrunich, “Vacancy-
induced low-energy states in undoped graphene,” ArXiv
e-prints (2016), arXiv:1602.09085 [cond-mat.str-el].

[30] M. B. Isichenko, “Percolation, statistical topography, and
transport in random media,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 961–

1043 (1992).

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

6

[31] D. Stauﬀer and A. Aharony, Introduction To Percolation

Theory (Taylor & Francis, 1994).

[32] J. Hoshen and R. Kopelman, “Percolation and cluster
distribution. I. Cluster multiple labeling technique and
critical concentration algorithm,” Phys. Rev. B 14, 3438–
3445 (1976).

[33] J. M. Hammersley, D. C. Handscomb, and G. Weiss,
“Monte Carlo methods,” Physics Today 18, 55–56
(1965).

[34] K. Nakada, M. Fujita, G. Dresselhaus, and M. S. Dressel-
haus, “Edge state in graphene ribbons: Nanometer size
eﬀect and edge shape dependence,” Phys. Rev. B 54,
17954–17961 (1996).

ZERO MODES OF ISOLATED CLUSTERS:

ANALYTICAL RESULTS

We consider the following representation of all zero-

energy modes in a graphene sample

Nzm =

ζ(GC) NC(cA, cB)

(6)

(cid:88)

C

where the sum is over all types of clusters C (“lattice
animals”) within the sample (including the percolating
cluster) and NC denotes the number of clusters of a cer-
tain type. We have introduced here the number of zero
modes associated with each cluster, ζ, that is determined
by the cluster’s graph, G. The graph of a cluster is de-
ﬁned via the connectivity matrix, which may be thought
of as the piece of the tight-binding Hamiltonian, HC, as-
sociated with the cluster subspace. All clusters sharing
the same HC (up to rotations) are representatives of the
same graph G.

The cluster numbers NC and their dependency on the
vacancy concentrations is a typical object of percola-
tion theory.
[30] It incorporates all statistical aspects
of vacancy disorder in (6) and, in particular, a classiﬁca-
tion of clusters according to their mass (total number of
sites) and perimeter (number of sites forming the exter-
nal boundary).
[30, 31] Quantum-mechanics enters (6)
via the weight-factor, ζ, that is an intrinsic property of a
given graph.

Inequalities and double bonds

In order to reveal the connection between zero modes
and placing of double bonds, we follow the original argu-
ment by Longuet-Higgins and reproduce his proof. To be
speciﬁc, we consider a cluster of carbon atoms that form
a graphene ﬂake. Call the sublattice with the majority
number of sites the A-sublattice, so NA > NB. The goal
is to show that

ζ ≥ NA + NB − 2Ndb

(7)

for the number of zero modes associated with this cluster.
Proof: The tight binding Hamiltonian, H, associated
with the cluster can be represented as a matrix of the
dimension dim H = NA+NB that takes the special block-
oﬀ diagonal form

(cid:18) 0 h

(cid:19)

H =

(8)
where h is a NA × NB-matrix that connects the A/B-
sublattices with each other. We start by recalling that

h† 0

ζ = dim H − rank H.

(9)

The rank of H can be deﬁned in several equivalent ways.
One deﬁnition is to say that rank H is given by the
largest order of any non-zero minor of H. The use of
this deﬁnition will in the end connect the proof to the
concept of double-bonds.

Namely, consider any term that arises when calculating

a minor of H; it has the structure:

P(cid:89) ¯h¯a¯b

Q(cid:89)

hab.

(10)

(For notational simplicity, we deﬁne here the matrix ele-
ments [h†]ab = ¯hab, a = 1, . . . , NA, b = 1, . . . , NB.) To vi-
sualize this term, we can imagine the set of lattice points
{a},{b} that represent the sublattice A and B respec-
tively. Let ¯h¯a¯b denote a double bond that connects the
pair of sites (¯a, ¯b). Similarly hab connects the pair of lat-
tice points (a, b) via a single bond.
Importantly, since
the minor is a determinant (of a submatrix of H) it is
guaranteed that there cannot be a site which attaches to
more than one double bond or to more than one single
bond.

Here, we have attributed a covering of the lattice sites
with a bond pattern that follows a simple rule. We can
also work the other way round and convert a lattice cov-
ering with single and double bonds, that follows these
rules, into a term that appears when evaluating minors
of H. This is what we will do, now. The goal is to ﬁnd a
covering such that the number of factors appearing in Eq.
(10), P + Q, becomes as large as possible. This largest
possible value coincides with rank H.

The covering we are after is identiﬁed as follows: We
cover the set of points a, b with the maximum number of
double bonds that we can place, so P = Ndb. The single
bonds we place along the same pairs, Q=Ndb. Therefore
rank H ≤ 2Ndb and the proof is complete. Note, that
the proof holds for any bipartite lattice, not only for the
honeycomb one.

NUMERICAL METHOD

The quantitative analysis combines two numerical ap-
proaches. On the one hand, a brute force diagonalization
of the TB-Hamiltonian with vacancies based on Lapack’s
SVD routine is performed. On the other hand the mi-
croscopic structure of the sample is investigated by per-
forming a cluster analysis based on a modiﬁed Hoshen-
Kopelman cluster labeling algorithm[32]. By combining
the two approaches the spectral properties of single clus-
ters and microscopic structures on these clusters can be
analyzed. Our present analysis is limited to O(104) sites
due to the vanishing level spacing making the identiﬁca-
tion of exact zero modes challenging in larger systems.

7

Figure 7. Cluster labeling. Left: A exemplary graphene sam-
ple with vacancies (black). Right: Schematics of the Hoshen-
Kopelman algorithm. The sites are labeled line wise: A given
site is attributed the label of the sites to the left or the line
above if one of them is non-vacant or they both have the same
label. The marked site points out a conﬂict where the label
to the left and to the top do not match and the clusters with
label 2 and 3 get merged.

Figure 8. The ﬁnal labeling after the Hoshen-Kopelman al-
gorithm has been performed.

The Hoshen-Kopelman algorithm

For the microscopic analysis of the generation of zero
modes, a modiﬁed Hoshen-Kopelman cluster labeling al-
gorithm for honeycomb structures [32] is employed.
It
allows to identify and label all clusters and to determine
their sublattice imbalance.

The lattice algorithm scans line wise for non-vacant
sites from the upper left to the lower right corner. (See
Figure 7, left.) If a given non-vacant site is connected to
an already labeled site it is given the same label. It is
given a new label in case the adjacent sites known so far
are vacancies. However, a diﬃculty arises if the site is
adjacent to two labeled sites having diﬀerent labels (see
Fig. 7 right). In this case two formerly independent clus-
ters are merged requiring backward relabeling of sites,
which is numerically very expensive. This problem was
a major concern in the early days of percolation theory
in the 50es and it was common belief that ”the direct
simulation of percolation is out of the question” [33] at
that time.

The problem was solved in the middle of the 1970s with
the development of the very eﬃcient Hoshen-Kopelman
algorithm [32] which allows to label all clusters with a sin-
gle sweep through the lattice. It avoids backward label-
ing by introducing an additional array of cluster markers

32?2312112222232222224341222611522527228

which

Identiﬁcation of edge motifs

1. counts the number of sites belonging to a given clus-

ter and

2. keeps track of the relabeling of clusters which have
been merged with other (larger) clusters by storing
a pointer to the larger cluster it has gotten merged
with.
In particular, the labels of clusters which
have become merged with larger ones are not at-
tributed to new sites any more (see Figure 8). The
sample may be cleaned by adding a second sweep
through the lattice and replacing ”antiquated la-
bels” (like 3 and 4 in Fig. 8). However, it is not
required since all the information is stored in the
Marker array.

For more detail on the Hoshen-Kopelman algorithm the
reader is referred to the original paper by Hoshen and
Kopelman [32].

Modiﬁcations to the Hoshen-Kopelman algorithm

For the identiﬁcation of edge motifs generating zero
modes such as double dangling bonds an additional anal-
ysis is required once all clusters have been identiﬁed using
the Hoshen-Kopelman algorithm. Our analysis of edge
structures includes all structures up to double dangling
bonds with one arm of length 1 and one of length 3 and
U -structures with arms of length 1 (see Fig. 2). These
structures all involve corner sites being connected to only
one other carbon atom.

Starting with these sites, the algorithm consists of

three steps:

• All corner sites are colored red.

• The sites connected to red sites are colored blue.
In case a site has already been colored blue, it is
colored green.

In this work some minor modiﬁcations were made to

the Hoshen-Kopelman algorithm.

• Sites adjacent to two blue- (or green-)colored sites

and a vacancy are colored yellow.

• Periodic boundary conditions (PBC) are used in-
stead of ﬁxed ones in order to avoid zero modes due
to zig-zag edges already discussed in the context of
carbon nanoribbons [34]. They are integrated by
adding an additional sweep along the sample’s left
and bottom edge once all sites have been labeled.
• In addition to the storage of each cluster’s number
of sites in the marker array, its number of carbon
atoms in the two sublattice are also kept s.t. the
sublattice imbalance of each cluster can be deter-
mined.

• For investigating the properties of speciﬁc clusters
such as the largest (spanning) one a second scan
of the sample is added removing all but the de-
sired cluster(s) from the sample. This clusters spec-
trum can then be determined by treating all other
sites as vacant and diagonalizing the resulting TB-
Hamiltonian. Hence we can directly determine the
spectral properties of single clusters in the sample.

Obviously, the green sites mark the position of double
dangling bonds with arms of length 1 since they are adja-
cent to two (red) corner sites. The yellow sites mark the
positions of double dangling bonds with arms of length
1 and 3 or U -structures (see Fig. 9).

Figure 9. Illustration of the algorithm for the identiﬁcation of
edge motifs using a coloring scheme. First step (red): Iden-
tiﬁcation of corner sites. Second step (Blue):Coloring of sites
adjacent to corner sites. In case an already blue site is to be
colored this site is colored green. Third step (yellow): Color-
ing of sites which are adjacent to one vacancy and two blue
(or green) sites.

