6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

.

 
 
]
E
H
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
1
3
2
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

UNIVERSITÀ DEGLI STUDI DI PAVIA DOTTORATO DI RICERCA IN FISICA – XXVI CICLO    Classifying Unidentified Gamma-ray Sources   David Salvetti         Supervisor: Dr. Patrizia A. Caraveo  Tesi per il conseguimento del titolo   Picture         DOTTORATO DI RICERCA IN FISICA – XXVI CICLO  Classifying Unidentified Gamma-Ray Sources  By  David Salvetti   Submitted to the Graduate School in Physics in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of  DOTTORE DI RICERCA IN FISICA  DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN PHYSICS  at the  University of Pavia  Supervisor: Dr. Patrizia A. Caraveo               Università degli Studi di Pavia        INAF/IASF, Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica Università degli Studi di Pavia Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare                Cover: Fermi-LAT image of five-year exposure of gamma rays with energies greater than 1 GeV. The image identifies several blazars and one pulsar (PSR J1312+00) in a 20-degree-wide patch in the constellation Virgo. Brighter colors indicate brighter gamma-ray sources. The view is centered at R.A. 13h 00m, Dec. -2d 00m. Image credit: NASA/DOE/Fermi LAT Collaboration         Classifying Unidentified Gamma-Ray Sources David Salvetti PhD thesis – University of Pavia Printed in Pavia, Italy, November 2013 ISBN: 978-88-95767-74-1   A Chiara e alla mia famiglia

Contents

Table of contents

Introduction

i

1

1 The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

1.1 Gamma-ray astronomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.1.1 Explorers of the gamma-ray sky . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5
6
7
1.2 Gamma rays from the sky . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
1.2.1 Diﬀuse gamma-ray emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
1.2.2 Active Galactic Nuclei and Blazars . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
1.2.3 Gamma-ray Pulsars and Pulsar Wind Nebulae . . . . . . 21
1.2.4
Supernova Remnants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
1.2.5 Gamma-Ray Bursts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
1.2.6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
1.2.7 Dark Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
1.2.8 Unidentiﬁed Sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
1.3 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

Solar ﬂares

2 The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

2.1 The First Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (1FGL)

35
. . . . . . . . . . 36
2.1.1 Construction of the catalog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
2.1.2
Source identiﬁcation and association . . . . . . . . . . . 42
2.1.3 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
. . . . . . . . . 46
Improvements with respect to the 1FGL and results . . . 47
2.3 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

2.2 The Second Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (2FGL)

2.2.1

i

CONTENTS

3 Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the

1FGL Source Catalog
3.1 Properties of the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources
3.2 Multi-wavelength observations and blind searches

55
. . . . . . . . . . . 56
. . . . . . . . 59
3.2.1 Radio and IR searches for pulsars and AGNs . . . . . . . 60
3.2.2 X-ray observations of unidentiﬁed source ﬁelds . . . . . . 61
3.2.3 TeV observations of unidentiﬁed sources
. . . . . . . . . 62
3.2.4 The Blind Search technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
3.3 Classiﬁcation of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
3.3.1 Machine Learning methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
3.3.2 Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression . . . . . . . . . . 67
3.3.3 Combining Logistic Regression with Classiﬁcation Trees . 73
3.4 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

4 Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

4.3 Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

77
4.1 Properties of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources
. . . . . . . . . . . 78
4.2 Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
4.2.1 Construction of the Logistic Regression model
. . . . . . 84
4.2.2 Results and their validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
. . . . . 97
4.3.1
Selection of the training sample and the predictor variables 99
4.3.2 Architecture of the ANN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
4.3.3 Training session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
4.3.4 Deﬁning thresholds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
4.3.5 Results and their validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
. . . . . . . . . . . . 117

4.4 Comparing the two classiﬁcation methods
4.5 Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish young pulsars from

MSPs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
4.5.1 Architecture of the ANN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
4.5.2 Training session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
4.5.3 Deﬁning thresholds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
4.5.4 Results and their validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
4.6 Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish AGN subclasses . . . . 132
4.6.1 Architecture of the ANN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
4.6.2 Training session and classiﬁcation thresholds . . . . . . . 136
4.6.3 Results and their validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
4.7 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143

5 Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources 147

5.1 Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed

sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
. . . . . . . . . . . 150
5.1.1 Multi-wavelength analysis procedure

ii

CONTENTS

5.1.2
5.1.3
5.1.4

2FGL J1036.1–6722 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
2FGL J1539.2–3325 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
2FGL J1744.1–7620 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184

5.2 PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar with a very unusual

X-ray trail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
5.2.1 Measurement of the pulsar proper motion . . . . . . . . 196
5.2.2 Gemini Hα observations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
5.2.3 Trail characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
5.2.4 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
5.2.5 The ﬁrst example of a thermally-emitting trail? . . . . . 208
5.3 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210

Conclusions and future perspectives

213

A The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope

217
A.1 Overview of the Large Area Telescope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
A.1.1 The Tracker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
A.1.2 The Calorimeter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
A.1.3 The AntiCoincidence Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
A.1.4 The Data Acquisition System and Trigger
. . . . . . . . 227
. . . . . . . . . . . 228

A.2 Overview of the Gamma-ray Burst Monitor

B Classiﬁcation algorithms

231
B.1 Logistic Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
B.1.1 Fitting the logistic regression model . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
B.1.2 Testing for the signiﬁcance of the model
. . . . . . . . . 234
B.2 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
B.2.1 The multilayer perceptron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236
B.2.2 The propagation rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
B.2.3 Back-propagation of the error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
B.2.4 The training technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240

C Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed

sources

243

D Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

267
The isolated neutron star RXJ0822–4300 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
The magnetar SGR 0418+5729 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275

Bibliography

Acknowledgements

289

327

iii

CONTENTS

iv

Introduction

The study of cosmic γ-ray sources is one of the most recent and exciting ﬁelds
of research of modern astrophysics. The emission of γ rays is related to the
most violent and powerful phenomena in the Universe and provides a unique
way to probe extreme physical environments.

Astrophysical sources of high-energy γ rays (photons with energies above 10
MeV) have long been hard to identify. Only four of the 25 γ-ray sources in the
second COS-B catalog (1981) had identiﬁcations, and over half the 271 sources
in the third EGRET catalog (1999) had no associations with known objects
at other wavelengths. The diﬃculty of ﬁnding counterparts of high-energy
γ-ray sources was due the large positional errors in their measured locations,
a result of the limited photon statistics and of poor angular resolution of the
γ-ray instruments as well as the bright diﬀuse γ-ray emission from the Milky
Way.

A major step forward for detection and identiﬁcation of high-energy γ-
ray sources came when the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope was launched
on 2008 June 11. Fermi is an international space mission that is studying
the γ-ray sky covering the energy range from 10 keV to more than 300 GeV.
It carries on board two instruments, the Gamma-ray Burst Monitor, that is
mainly devoted to the study of the Gamma-Ray Bursts, powerful explosions
in the cosmos that originate intense ﬂashes of high-energy photons, and the
Large Area Telescope (LAT), a pair conversion telescope based on advanced
detectors for High Energy Physics that is the main Fermi instrument.

The optimal performances of the Fermi-LAT in terms of angular resolu-
tion and sensitivity allow studying the 100 MeV to ∼300 GeV γ-ray sky with
unprecedented detail. During the ﬁrst 2 years of mission it discovered a num-
ber of γ-ray sources one order of magnitude larger than those detected by
EGRET during its 9 years of activity. Almost 70% of detected sources were
associated with objects known in other wavelengths. By now, the Fermi-LAT
instrument has discovered about one thousand of extragalactic objects (Active

1

Introduction

Galactic Nuclei – AGN – of diﬀerent classes), more then one hundred γ-ray
pulsars (evenly divided between young radio-loud pulsars, young radio-quiet
pulsars and radio-loud MSPs), and a handful of other Galactic sources, such
as SNRs, HMXBs and globular clusters.
In spite of the application of ad-
vanced techniques of identiﬁcation and association of the LAT sources with
counterparts at other wavelengths, the source uncertainty (ranging from 1 to
3 arcmin) prevents the association of ∼40% of the LAT sources. While greatly
improved over the degree-scale uncertainties of previous instruments, these po-
sition uncertainties are still inadequate to allow identiﬁcations based solely on
positional coincidence.
Thus, understanding the nature of the γ-ray unidentiﬁed sources is one of the
most important open questions in high energy astrophysics.

The purpose of my Ph.D. work has been to pursue a statistical approach
to identify unassociated γ-ray sources. To this aim, we implemented advanced
machine learning techniques in order to classify sources, based on all the avail-
able γ-ray information about locations, energy spectra and time variability.
The results from our analyses have been used for selecting targets for AGN and
pulsar searches and planning multi-wavelength follow-up observations. In par-
ticular we have focused on the search of possible radio-quiet millisecond pulsar
(MSP) candidates in the sample of the Fermi-LAT unidentiﬁed sources. These
objects have not yet been detected but their discovery would have a formidable
impact for our understanding of the MSP γ-ray emission mechanism.

The thesis is organized as follows.

In Chapter 1 we give a brief review of the main issues regarding γ-ray astro-
physics, focusing on our knowledge on the γ-ray Universe before the launch of
Fermi.
In Chapter 2 we give an overview of the procedure developed by the LAT col-
laboration to construct the Fermi-LAT source catalogs.
In Chapter 3 we discuss my ﬁrst personal contribution within the Fermi-LAT
collaboration to determine likely source classiﬁcations for the unidentiﬁed γ-ray
sources in the ﬁrst Fermi-LAT catalog using the Logistic Regression algorithm.
This is a machine learning technique that uses identiﬁed objects to build up
a classiﬁcation analysis, yielding the probability for an unidentiﬁed source to
belong to a given class based on its γ-ray properties.
In Chapter 4 we describe in detail our analysis devoted to the classiﬁcation of
sources in the second Fermi-LAT catalog. First, using the most recent γ-ray
source catalog, we implemented a reﬁned Logistic Regression analysis aimed
at discriminating γ-ray pulsars and AGNs, the two most numerous classes
of γ-ray sources. Second, we developed a more advanced machine learning
technique, the Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs). These two classiﬁcation
techniques have never been applied for this purpose in astronomy. Finally, af-

2

Introduction

ter comparing the results obtained by our classiﬁcation algorithms, we present
the development of a complex neural network architecture in order to distin-
guish the pulsar and AGN subclasses.
In Chapter 5 we describe our multi-wavelength analyses of three radio-quiet
MSP candidates selected by our classiﬁcation algorithms. Multi-wavelength
studies allow us to select the most probable counterparts of the putative radio-
quiet MSP. Blind frequency searches for γ-ray pulsations from these unidenti-
ﬁed sources can be eﬃciently run on much smaller sky area of the precise posi-
tions of their probable counterparts. Moreover, we describe a multi-wavelength
study of an interesting fast-moving radio-quiet γ-ray pulsar, PSR J0357+3205,
and its unusual “trail”.
The Conclusions section summarizes the main results and provides perspec-
tives future developments.
Appendix A is dedicated to an overview of the Fermi mission and to its main
instruments, in particular to the Large Area Telescope, which is compared to
its predecessor EGRET.
In Appendix B we describe in detail the theory of machine learning algorithms
we have implemented and applied to classify γ-ray unidentiﬁed sources.
Appendix C contains likely source classiﬁcation for the unidentiﬁed sources in
the second Fermi-LAT source catalog on the basis of their γ-ray observables
using the advanced artiﬁcial neural network developed and discussed in the
Chapter 4.
Appendix D contains two papers we have published on astrophysical journals
about the analyses of the X-ray emission from two isolated neutron stars, the
Central Compact Object RX J0822-4300 and the Magnetar SGR 0418+5729.

3

Chapter 1

The gamma-ray Universe before
Fermi

Gamma-ray astrophysics is presently one of the most interesting and exciting
ﬁelds of research for several reason. The emission of γ rays is related to the most
violent and powerful phenomena in the Universe and provides a unique way to
probe extreme physical environment characterized by the presence of intense
magnetic ﬁelds and high energy particles. The γ-ray energy band extends from
100 keV up to multi TeV energies, making it the most energetic portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Because Earth’s atmosphere absorbs γ rays it is
necessary to put detectors at high altitude using balloons or satellites such as
Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope (Fermi). At energies above 100 GeV it is
possible to use the atmosphere itself as a detector to study the electromagnetic
showers of the Very High Energy (VHE) γ rays from the ground. This is the
basic concept of the ground γ-ray ˇCherenkov telescopes like MAGIC, HESS,
VERITAS or CANGAROO or large arrays like MILAGRO.

Gamma rays are extremely useful messengers since they are neutral, so
that they are not deﬂected by cosmic magnetic ﬁelds (as happens e.g.
for
cosmic rays), and extremely energetic, so that they are unlikely absorbed by
cosmic matter (as happens for photons of lower energy). The Universe is
largely transparent to γ rays and each γ-ray points directly back to its source.
Thanks to these characteristic γ rays permit to observe and study high energy
cosmic sources extremely distant, up to z ∼ 5, that act as natural engines
accelerating particles up to extremely high energy.

The study of cosmic γ rays is extremely important for diﬀerent research
ﬁelds, including Cosmology, Particle Physics and the search for Dark Matter.
In this Chapter a review of the status of our knowledge about the γ-ray sky
in the energy range of Fermi is presented, with an overview of the classes of
γ-ray objects known before the launch of Fermi happened on June 11, 2008.

5

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

1.1 Gamma-ray astronomy

The development of the γ-ray astronomy have been carried mainly in the
last decades, when the techniques to observe the high-energy Universe was
developed. Three important facts explain why it was so hard develop speciﬁc
techniques to observe the γ-ray sky:

Figure 1.1: Representation of the atmosphere opacity for diﬀerent wavelengths.

• As shown in Figure 1.1, the Earth’s atmosphere is opaque to high-energy
photons. At sea level, the atmosphere is 1033 g/cm2 thick, this im-
plies that an high-energy photon incident from the zenith can reach
ground level without interacting electromagnetically with a probability
of ∼ 10−10. Even at mountain altitudes, where the atmosphere is thin-
ner, the probability that an high-energy photon can survive to ground is
negligible. Only a detector above the atmosphere (satellite or balloon)
can detect primary cosmic γ rays.

• The ﬂux of γ rays from astrophysical sources is quite low and decrease
rapidly with increasing energy. For example, the Vela pulsar, a very
bright γ-ray object, has a ﬂux equal to ∼ 10−5 photons cm−2 s−1 inte-
grated above 100 MeV, i.e. about 1 photon cm2 each day. This implies
that a critical problem to detect a γ-ray source is the sensitivity, we need

6

1.1. Gamma-ray astronomy

detectors with a large eﬀective area. A satellite-based detector is too
small to detect enough photons above about 100 GeV, this implies VHE
γ-ray astronomy can be performed using only ground-based detectors,
which reconstruct the energy and the direction of γ rays from the study
of their electromagnetic showers in the atmosphere.

• The ﬂux of high-energy charged cosmic rays is much larger (a factor 3
higher in the energy range 100 GeV - 400 TeV) than the ﬂux of γ rays.
This large cosmic-ray background has to be rejected in order to study
the γ-ray sources. Therefore, detectors have to be able to distinguish
eﬃciently cosmic rays from γ rays.

There are two detector techniques, the satellite-based techniques and the ground-
based techniques, this is the detection strategy of the Air ˇCerenkov Telescopes
(ACTs) and of the Extended Arraw Shower Detectors (EASDs). Satellite ex-
periments can operate until ∼300 GeV, otherwise ground-based experiments
until ∼50 TeV.

1.1.1 Explorers of the gamma-ray sky

In the 1950s, works by Hayakawa [95], Hutchinson [106] and especially by Mor-
rison [152] had led scientists to believe that a number of processes occurring in
the Universe would result in γ-ray emission. These processes included cosmic
ray interactions with interstellar medium, supernova explosions and interac-
tions of energetic charged particles with intense magnetic ﬁelds. However, only
in the 1960s the ﬁrst cosmic γ rays were detected.

Since the interaction of photons with an energy above 10 MeV is domi-
nated by the pair production, all satellite-based telescope use a spark chamber
or layers of tracker/converter made with high Z foil to estimate the incoming
direction of the photons, a calorimeter to measure their energy and an antico-
incidence shield to reduce the background due to charged particles. The results
obtained with the ﬁrst γ-ray space telescopes were aﬀected by low statistics
and large systematic errors.

The ﬁrst γ-ray space mission was Explorer XI in 1961 [117] and it detected
less than 100 photons uniformly distributed in the sky implying the presence of
a sort of uniform “γ-ray background”. Such a background would be expected
from the interaction of cosmic rays with the interstellar medium. The next
important step was the NASA Orbiting Space Observatory III (OSO III) mis-
sion in 1968 [118]. It detected about 600 photons concentrated on the Galactic
plane attributable to the γ-ray production in the Milky Way. The main detec-
tor used scintillators and ˇCerenkov detectors and was able to detect photons
above 50 MeV.

7

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

In 1969 and 1970 United States launched the Vela series spacecraft to detect
X rays and γ rays coming from the Earth or the Moon in order to determine
if Soviets were complying with the nuclear test ban treaty. While no atmo-
spheric γ rays were detected, they serendipitously discovered transient ﬂashes
of radiation lasting in average of 10 ms to 10 s in random direction on the sky
named Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs) [115].

The SAS-2 observatory. The ﬁrst satellite exclusively designed for a γ-
ray mission was the second Small Astronomy Satellite (SAS-2), launched in the
1972 [116]. SAS-2 carried a single telescope with a 32-level wire spark-chamber
covering the energy range from 20 MeV to 1 GeV and with an eﬀective area
of 100 cm2. SAS-2 provided the ﬁrst detailed information about the γ-ray
sky revealing a strong correlation between the diﬀuse radiation coming from
the Galactic plane and and the Galactic structural features and it was the
ﬁrst satellite to detect the isotropic, apparently extragalactic, γ-ray emission.
Moreover, SAS-2 resolved the ﬁrst point sources detecting a pulsed γ-ray emis-
sion from 3 sources, the Crab and Vela pulsars and Geminga, identiﬁed as a
pulsar more years later. A map proﬁle along the Galactic plane obtained by
SAS-2 is displayed in Figure 1.2.

Figure 1.2: Distribution of high-energy (E>100 MeV) γ rays along the Galactic
plane observed by SAS-2. The SAS-2 data are summed from b=–10◦ to b=10◦.
The diﬀuse background level is shown by a dashed line [77].

The COS-B observatory. In 1975 the European Space Agency (ESA)
launched COS-B [195]. As SAS-2, COS-B carried a wire spark-chamber that
recorded the direction of the electron-positron pair created in thin Tungsten
plates and a CsI calorimeter that measured the energy of the charged parti-

8

1.1. Gamma-ray astronomy

cles. The upper part of the instrument was surrounded by an anticoincidence
counter to assure that only neutral particles triggered the instrument. COS-B
was able to detect photons in the energy range between 30 MeV and 5 GeV.
The major result of the COS-B experiment was the creation of the ﬁrst γ-ray
catalog [35] that contained about 25 γ-ray sources from the observation made
during the ﬁrst three years of activity. The catalog included the Crab and
Vela pulsars, the molecular cloud ρ-Oph and the ﬁrst extragalactic γ-ray ob-
ject, the Active Galactic Nucleus (AGN) 3C 273. The ﬁrst full γ-ray map of
the Galactic plane obtained by COS-B is shown in Figure 1.3.

Figure 1.3: Gamma-ray map of the Galactic plane observed by COS-B in the
energy range between 30 MeV and 5 GeV [35].

The CGRO observatory. After a stop of about 15 years because of the
Space Shuttle Challenger disaster occurred in 1986, the NASA mission Comp-
ton Gamma Ray Observatory (CGRO) revolutionized our understanding of
the γ-ray sky because of the improved sensitivity with respect to previous
missions. The CGRO satellite was launched in 1991 and it carried four in-
struments, OSSE, COMPTEL, BATSE and EGRET, that covered an energy
range between 20 MeV and 30 GeV. The Oriented Scintillation Spectrometer
Experiment (OSSE) consisted of four NaI scintillation crystals and its main
objective was spectroscopy of cosmic γ-ray sources and solar ﬂares in the en-
ergy range from 50 keV to about 10 MeV. OSSE measured the distribution
of the energy emitted from a number of γ-ray objects, studied nuclear lines
in solar ﬂares, radioactive decay of nuclei in supernova remnants and matter-
antimatter annihilation taking place near the center of our Galaxy [109]. The
imaging COMpton TELescope (COMPTEL) was an imaging detector, its main
objective was to study active galaxies, supernova remnants and diﬀuse γ-ray
emission from giant molecular clouds in the energy range between 1 and 30
MeV [109]. The Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) was the
smallest instrument onboard CGRO. It was dedicated to monitor the full celes-
tial sphere for transient γ-ray phenomena such as Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs)

9

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

and bursts from other cosmic sources (including solar ﬂares from the sun) all
over the sky in the energy range from 20 keV to 1 GeV [109].

The EGRET observatory

The Energetic Gamma-Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET) was the main in-
strument onboard CGRO and it was devoted to the highest energy ever ob-
served from the space, reaching the upper limit of E ∼30 GeV. EGRET was
a pair-conversion telescope, the conversion of the high-energy photons into
electron-positron pairs occurred in an upper stack of 28 Tantalum conversion
foils of an average thickness of 90 µm interleaved with spark chamber modules.
The spark chambers were ﬁlled with a gas mixture of neon, argon and ethane.
The direction of the radiation was determined by a time of ﬂight coincidence
below the conversion chamber. The Total Absorption Spectrometer Calorime-
ter (TASC) was made of NaI, its thickness corresponded to about 8 radiation
lengths and enabled to determine photon energies from 20 MeV up to about 30
GeV [109]. An anti-coincidence scintillation dome surrounded the instrument
and it was able to distinguish a photon from a cosmic charged particle with
an eﬃciency of about 0.9999. EGRET had a solid angle acceptance of ∼0.15π
and an eﬀective area of 0.12 m2 at 1 GeV. The eﬀective area decreased at
higher energies, partly because backsplash from the calorimeter could trigger
the anti-coincidence veto. The energy resolution was 9–12%, depending on
energy. The angular resolution was 3.5◦ at 100 MeV and it improved to 0.8◦
at 1 GeV and 0.35◦ at 10 GeV. The instrument was extremely sensitive, about
5 × 10−8 photons cm−2 s−1 with E > 100 MeV after 106 s of exposure. The
mission lasted for nine years and it revolutionized our understanding of the
γ-ray sky because of its better performances with respect to the previous ones.
During all the mission EGRET detected about 2 millions of photon with E >
100 MeV, allowing a detailed study of the Galactic and extragalactic diﬀuse
emission and of the point-like γ-ray sources.

As shown in Figure 1.4, the Third EGRET Catalog (3EG) [93] consists
of 271 sources (with E > 100 MeV): 6 pulsars (high-energy pulsed emission
from Geminga was detected [44]), 93 blazars (a subclass of AGNs discovered
to be a new class of γ-ray emitters [93]), one normal galaxy (the Large Mag-
ellanic Cloud) and a solar ﬂare (the single 1991 solar ﬂare). 170 γ-ray sources
detected by EGRET, about 60%, had not a clear association with a class of
objects known in a diﬀerent wavelength and for this reason these “unknown”
objects were called unidentiﬁed sources. Since the association of a γ-ray object
with a source known in other wavelengths is primarily based on a positional
coincidence, the large number of unidentiﬁed sources in the 3EG is related to
the bad angular resolution of the γ-ray telescopes. Most of these objects may
be members of existing γ-ray source classes, such as pulsars or blazars, but

10

1.1. Gamma-ray astronomy

Figure 1.4: Third EGRET source catalog, shown in Galactic coordinates.
The size of the symbol represents the highest intensity seen for this source
by EGRET [93].

some of them may be represent discovery space for new source classes. A map
of the γ-ray emission above 100 MeV obtained by EGRET is shown in Figure
1.5.

The AGILE observatory

On April 23, 2007 it has been launched the AGILE mission by the Indian
PSLV-C8 rocket from the Satish Dhawan Space Center SHAR, Sriharikota.
AGILE (Astrorivelatore Gamma ad Immagini LEggero) is a completely italian
high-energy astrophysics mission supported by the Italian Space Agency (ASI)
with scientiﬁc and programmatic participation by INAF (Istituto Nazionale di
AstroFisica), INFN (Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare) and several italian
universities. The main scientiﬁc goal of AGILE is to explore the γ-ray Universe
with a very innovative instrument combining a γ-ray imager (sensitive in the
energy range of 30 MeV and 50 GeV) and a hard X-ray imager (sensitive in
a energy range between 15 and 45 keV) [197]. The AGILE scientiﬁc payload

11

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

Figure 1.5: Distribution of γ-ray photons above 100 MeV obtained by EGRET
telescope aboard the NASA Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. Credit:
EGRET Team.

is a small satellite composed by three detectors combined into one integrated
instrument, as shown in Figure 1.6. The ﬁrst detector is the Gamma-Ray
Imaging Detector (GRID) that is sensitive in the energy range between 30
MeV and 50 GeV and it has a sensitivity compared to EGRET. The detector
consists of a Silicon Tracker (ST) providing the γ-ray imager that is based
on photon conversion into electron-positron pair and is composed by a total
of 12 trays. The ﬁrst 10 trays are capable of converting γ rays into charged
particles by means of Tungsten converter layer positioned in the lower part of
the tray. Tracking of charged particles is ensured by high resolution Silicon
microstrip detectors positioned at the very top and bottom of the trays. Two
more trays are inserted at the bottom of the Tracker without the Tungsten lay-
ers. The energy of the particles produced in the Silicon Tracker is deposited in
the 30 CsI bars of the Cesium-Iodide Mini-Calorimeter (MCAL) and therefore
it contributes to the determination of the total photon energy. All the AG-
ILE detectors are completely surrounded by an AntiCoincidence (AC) System
with the aim of rejecting charged particles. It is constitutes by three plastic
scintillator layers and the signal is read by photomultiplier placed externally

12

1.1. Gamma-ray astronomy

Figure 1.6: Scheme of AGILE detectors. Credit: AGILE Team

.

to the AC System.

The second detector of AGILE is the hard X-ray Imager (Super-AGILE )
placed on the top of the GRID and it is sensitive in the energy range between
15 keV and 45 keV. The Super-AGILE (SA) detector is a coded-mask system
made of a Silicon detector plane and a thin Tungsten mask positioned above
it. This detector is aimed at simultaneous X-ray and γ-ray detection of high
energy cosmic sources with excellent imaging capabilities.

The third detector is the Cesium-Iodide Mini-Calorimeter (MCAL). The
MCAL is part of the GRID but it is also capable of independently detecting
GRBs and other transient sources in the energy range between 300 keV and
100 MeV with optimal time capabilities [197].

The very innovative technology of the AGILE instrument allows it to have
an excellent imaging capability in the energy range of 100 MeV and 50 GeV,
a large Field-of-View (FoV) for both the GRID (FOV ∼2.5 sr) and the Super
AGILE (FoV ∼1 sr), larger by a factor of ∼6 than the EGRET ones, a good
sensitivity in the energy range of 30 MeV and 100 MeV, a very rapid response
to γ-ray transients and a good localization accuracy (∼15 arcmin at 400 MeV
for GRID). To date, AGILE has been detecting more than ten million of pho-
tons giving the opportunity to study in detail a lot of Active Galactic Nuclei,
Gamma-Ray Bursts and other transient objects on the Galactic plane, more
than 20 γ-ray pulsars and some Pulsar Wind Nebulae. One of the main impor-
tant results of the AGILE mission is the discovery of the γ-ray emission from

13

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

Figure 1.7: Total AGILE-GRID count map in Aitoﬀ projection and Galactic
coordinates, for energy above 100 MeV, accumulated during the period July
9, 2007-October 15, 2010. Credit: AGILE Team.

accreting binary systems, which was already supposed but never observed. Fi-
nally, despite the better performance of AGILE instrument with respect to the
previous ones, about 20% of the γ-ray sources in the ﬁrst AGILE catalog [166]
have not a clear association with a source known in other wavelengths. A map
of the γ-ray emission above 100 MeV obtained by AGILE is shown in Figure
1.7.

Ground-Based Telescopes

The upper part of the γ-ray spectrum is presently investigated from the ground
by looking at the electromagnetic showers created when a high-energy γ ray (E
> 100 GeV) enters the atmosphere. The predominant radiation-matter inter-
action at these energies is pair production, when a high-energy γ ray enters the
atmosphere it produces a pair formed by an electron and a positron, they prop-
agate and produce photons via Bremsstrahlung initiating an electromagnetic
shower. The resulting electromagnetic cascade grows nearly exponentially as it
propagates through the atmosphere. The primary photon energy is distributed
among more and more particles until electrons and positron approach to their

14

1.2. Gamma rays from the sky

critical energy (∼80 MeV in air). At this point the ionization energy-loss
mechanism, that does not produce additional particles, becomes more impor-
tant then Bremsstrahlung. As a consequence, energy is lost from the shower
and the number of particles decreases as the shower continue to propagate.

The Extensive Air Shower Detectors (EADs) are large arrays that directly
detect the secondary particles from the showers induced in the atmosphere by
the interaction between high-energy γ rays and air molecules. Examples of
EADs are CYGNUS, CASA or MILAGRO.

The Air ˇCerenkov Telescopes (ACTs) detect the ˇCerenkov radiation pro-
duced by the secondary particles during their crossing of the atmosphere. Ex-
amples of ACTs are CANGAROO, HEGRA, STACEE, CELESTE, VERITAS,
MAGIC or HESS. In order to improve imaging capability and background re-
jection more telescope are arranged in arrays working in stereoscopic mode.
This is for example the case of HESS, CANGAROO, VERITAS and MAGIC.
The future of the ATCs is the ˇCerenkov Telescope Array (CTA), its exact
design is being studied and not yet precisely deﬁned. The idea is to have a
large of number of mid-size telescopes, in order to achieve full sky coverage
it is planned to install two stations of several telescopes, one in the southern
hemisphere and the other in the northern one.

Ground-Based Telescopes can detect only the upper part of the γ-ray spec-
trum (E > 100 GeV). To date, it has been discovered more than 100 high
energy sources, belonging to the classes of pulsars and their nebulae, super-
nova remnants, γ-ray binary systems, star forming regions, starbursts and
active galaxies. Moreover, about 18% of the detected high-energy sources have
not a clear association with objects known in other wavelengths. A connection
between the results obtained by satellite-based and ground-based telescopes is
very important to study in detail the nature of the high-energy emission of the
most energetic sources in the Universe.

1.2 Gamma rays from the sky

The knowledge of γ-ray sources before the launch of the Fermi Gamma-Ray
Space Telescope (2008) came mainly from the experience of the CGRO exper-
iment and in particular from the results of the Third EGRET Catalog [93]. It
contained 271 sources (with E > 100 MeV) that can be divided into Galactic
and extragalactic objects with a signiﬁcant contribution due to the Galactic
and extragalactic diﬀuse emission. The remaining 60% was not associated with
an astrophysical object known at other wavelengths. Since 2000, several au-
thors revisited the data of EGRET instrument because of the new discoveries
in the ﬁeld of γ-ray astronomy. One of the main results of this re-analysis was
the production of a new catalog after a modiﬁed diﬀuse background subtrac-

15

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

tion. The new 3EG (new Third EGRET Catalog) contained 23 new sources
and 121 3EG objects was not detected during the new analysis [101].

Galactic γ-ray sources are mainly compact objects, such as neutron stars
and their nebula or accreting black holes [184]. Supernova remnants (SNRs) are
cosmic objects which may be related to the cosmic ray acceleration. Structures
like shells that interact with Interstellar Medium (ISM) have been observed
with high resolution telescopes in the X-ray band and these sites have been
associated with shocks.

The main sources of extragalactic radiation are the Active Galactic Nuclei
(AGN), and in particular blazars, a subclass of AGN whose jet is aligned with
the line of sight. In the extragalactic Universe an important role is played by
transient sources like GRBs, that are shining ﬂashes of radiation.

In addition, a diﬀuse γ-ray emission given by the contribution of two diﬀer-
ent components, Galactic and extragalactic, dominates the entire high-energy
Universe. The Galactic one is thought to be related to the interaction between
cosmic rays and the matter in the Galactic disk; other side the extragalactic
one is probably given by the contribution of thousands unresolved extragalac-
tic point-like sources. Moreover, part of the extragalactic component may be
related with the decay of exotic particles in the Primordial Universe.

In the following, a review of the celestial γ-ray sources known before the

launch of the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope is given.

1.2.1 Diﬀuse gamma-ray emission

In Figure 1.5 is shown the map of the γ-ray sky (E > 100 MeV) based on
data taken by the EGRET instrument. It is evident that the diﬀuse emission
dominates the entire γ-ray sky with the highest intensity coming from the plane
of our Galaxy. The diﬀuse γ-ray emission can be divided in two components,
the Galactic diﬀuse emission, placed along the Galactic plane and coming
from our Galaxy, and the extragalactic diﬀuse emission, characterized by an
isotropic distribution in the sky.

Galactic diﬀuse emission

In 1968 was detected for the ﬁrst time an emission of high-energy photons
coming from our Galaxy and not attributable to point-like sources. A detailed
map of the Galactic diﬀuse γ-ray emission was accomplished after the SAS-2
and COS-B observations between 1972 and 1982. About 90% of γ rays with
energies above 100 MeV detected by EGRET came from the Milky Way galaxy.
The Galactic diﬀuse γ-ray emission can be explained through the energetic
interactions between cosmic rays and the interstellar medium. Cosmic Rays
(CRs) are very high-energy particles, composed primarily of protons, atomic

16

1.2. Gamma rays from the sky

nuclei and leptons, and their origin is still a mystery. Once they are accelerated
up to relativistic velocities through not well known mechanisms, they move
through the interstellar medium where are trapped by the Galactic magnetic
ﬁeld. The Galactic diﬀuse γ-ray emission is then produced via Bremsstrahlung,
if a high-energy electron is deﬂected by nuclei of the ISM, Inverse Compton
(IC), if a high-energy electron transfers part of its energy to a soft photon
coming from the stellar radiation, and π0 decay, if a high-energy proton or
atomic nucleus collides an interstellar proton creating a neutral pion [153].
All these three type of interactions product γ rays and their spectra are very
diﬀerent.

Detection of this diﬀuse γ-ray emission should give information about the
production and propagation of cosmic rays in the Milky Way galaxy. After
removal of identiﬁed galactic point-like sources, the Galactic diﬀuse emission
shows a structure that reﬂects the main features of the mass distribution in the
Galaxy known in other wavelengths. The study of the diﬀuse emission gives
information about spectra and intensities of CR species at distant locations and
allows to study CR acceleration in Supernova Remnants (SNRs) and other
sources and their propagation in the ISM. On the other hand, the Galactic
diﬀuse emission is a structured background source for point-like sources and
its accurate determination is essential in order to understand if an excess of
photon emission in a speciﬁc region of the sky is related to the existence of
a γ-ray source or to statistical ﬂuctuation of the background and it is also
important for accurate localization of such source and its spectrum [102].

Extragalactic diﬀuse emission

An apparently isotropic, presumably extragalactic, component of the diﬀuse
γ-ray ﬂux above 30 MeV was discovered by the SAS-2 satellite and conﬁrmed
with EGRET. The low sensitivity and the poor angular resolution of EGRET
did not allow an identiﬁcation of this emission as the contribution of many
point-like sources.

The hypothesis on the origin of the extragalactic γ-ray background emission
were various, from the most conservative, such as the summed contribution of
thousands of unresolved AGNs, to more exotic, such as the contribution of the
annihilation from exciting particles which came from some unknown processes
that took place in the primordial Universe. Other explanations involve parti-
cles deriving from extension of the Standard Model to supersymmetric particles
(SUSY), which can contribute substantially to the Dark Matter content of the
Universe and that can be found in the Galactic halos.
The extragalactic diﬀuse γ-ray emission is well described by a power law
with index 2.1 ± 0.3 over EGRET energies and it is consistent with the aver-
age index for blazars detected by EGRET, which lends some support to the

17

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

hypothesis that the isotropic ﬂux is from unresolved AGN sources [190].

Diﬀuse emission has also been observed from the Large Magellanic Cloud

(LMC), characterized by a ﬂux consistent with production by cosmic rays.

1.2.2 Active Galactic Nuclei and Blazars

In the Universe there are billions of galaxies, which diﬀer basically from their
morphology in the Hubble diagram. Galaxies are composed of stars and ISM
(gas and dust), which contribute in the total luminosity of the galaxy (for
Milky Way L ∼ 1011 L(cid:12)).

In the Forties, the American astronomer C. Seyfert discovered a new class of
galaxies, with intense emission from a star-like nuclei and with broad emission
lines, that are more than 103 km/s wide. This kind of objects are now called
Seyfert galaxies and later, together with other extragalactic sources such as
Quasars and BL Lac objects, they were associated with a new class of galaxies,
the Active Galactic Nuclei (AGNs) [185]. The observed luminosity of these
objects is extremely high (L ∼ 2 × 1046 erg/s), which corresponds to more than
about twenty Milky Way galaxies. Before CGRO telescope had been launched
in 1991, we observed the γ-ray emission of only one extragalactic objects,
the quasar 3C 273, detected by COS-B about thirty years ago [196]. Among
the high-energy objects detected by EGRET, a large fraction was associated
with AGNs and in particular with blazars [126]. Blazars are very powerful
objects characterized by variability, non-thermal emission at γ rays and a broad
multiwavelength emission that extend from radio to TeV.

According to current models, blazars are a class of AGN where the colli-
mated jet points directly toward the observer. The radiation is boosted by
the bulk Lorentz Factor and photons have been observed up to TeV energies.
Blazars are also characterized by high degree of polarization and by a variabil-
ity up to a factor of 100% on the order of a day. The emission above 100 MeV
is a signiﬁcant fraction of the total luminosity and in ﬂaring state the γ-ray
luminosity can exceed the luminosity in all other the energy bands by a factor
of ∼10 or more. The Spectral Energy Distribution (SED) is characterized by
a two peak component, one between radio and X rays, probably caused by
Synchrotron emission in the jet, and the other one in the γ-ray band, peaked
in the GeV energies. In Figure 1.8 is shown the SED of the blazars 3C 273
and 3C 279 containing also the EGRET observation [94].

In order to explain the diﬀerent phenomenology among AGNs, we resort
to the current Uniﬁed Model of AGNs. According to the model, the engine
that powers the AGN emission is a supermassive black hole (M ∼ 108 M(cid:12))
surrounded by an accreting disk that extends up to about 100 A.U. from the
central black hole [204]. The size of the accretion disk can also be inferred from
causality arguments by observing the typical variability timescale of an AGN.

18

1.2. Gamma rays from the sky

Figure 1.8: Spectral Energy Distribution of the quasar 3C 279 (left) and 3C
273 (right) [74].

Assuming a variability timescale of about 1 day and a redshift of about 0.1
this leads to an estimate of R ∼ 1010 km, i.e. about 100 A.U.. The accretion is
also connected to the presence of large jets where particles are accelerated up
to high energies. According to this model at greater distance from the center
there is a torus of matter extending from about 1.5 pc to 30 pc.

Between the accretion disk and the torus there are some fast-moving clouds
(v > 2000 km/s), that are illuminated by the central engine and originate the
emission lines observed in the AGNs spectra, that are widened because of
Doppler eﬀect (Broad Line Regions) due to their motion around the central
supermassive black hole.

At greater distance from the supermassive black hole the model includes
some slow moving clouds which emit emission lines with narrower widening due
to lower speed (v < 2000 km/s). These clouds are the origin of the narrower
emission lines (Narrow Line Regions) observed in some class of AGN, e.g. the
Seyfert of type I.

According to the Uniﬁed Model we observe various classes of AGNs because
of the diﬀerent angle under the AGN is seen as shown in Figure 1.9. Current
models for the γ-ray emission in blazars can be divided in two main classes,
the leptonic models and the hadronic models.

According to the leptonic models γ-ray emission is produced from the inter-
action of the accelerated electrons and positrons with the environmental soft
photons. The origin of these photons depends on the adopted scenario. The
Synchrotron Self Compton (SSC) scenario assumes the soft photons are emitted
directly by the same electrons and positrons in the jet via Synchrotron radia-
tion [133] . The External Compton Scattering (ECS) assumes the soft photons

19

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

Figure 1.9: Scheme of the Uniﬁed Model for AGNs [204]. The observational
diﬀerence between AGN classes is due to a geometric eﬀect.

originate in the thermal emission of the accretion disk and are injected into
the jet [72].

The hadronic models assume γ rays are created as a consequence of the
presence of accelerated protons, which do not radiate Synchrotron and can
be accelerated up to E = 1020 eV. At these extremely high energies become
possible processes of photoproduction of pions and electron-positron pairs. The
pions can decay into γ rays and leptons can cool via Inverse Compton and
produce γ rays [132].

Probably a realistic scenario contains both sets of processes and observing
γ-ray emission during ﬂares can help to determine which contribution domi-
nates in each type of source.

Blazars compose the largest fraction of identiﬁed γ-ray sources detected
by EGRET, with 66 high-conﬁdence and 27 lower conﬁdence identiﬁcations

20

1.2. Gamma rays from the sky

according to the criteria adopted using the maximum likelihood method in
the Third EGRET Catalog [93]. For this reason we expect a large fraction of
EGRET unidentiﬁed sources, especially at high latitude (|b| > 30◦), may be
associated with blazars.

1.2.3 Gamma-ray Pulsars and Pulsar Wind Nebulae

A pulsar (PULSating StAR) is a rapidly-rotating neutron star, i.e. the stellar
remnant of a massive star (M > 8M(cid:12)) after its gravitational collapse, with a
very intense dipole magnetic ﬁeld, which emits a beam of detectable electro-
magnetic radiation with observed periods ranging from about 1 ms to 10 s.
The period is observed increase in time. The radiation can only be observed
when the beam of emission is pointing toward the Earth. From timing mea-
surements, it is possible to estimate the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld on the
surface of the star, the age of the pulsar and other physical parameters [198].
Pulsars were generally discovered in radio wavelengths, but they can emit
in all wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum, in particular the ﬁrst two
γ-ray emissions from point-like sources were observed from the Crab and Vela
pulsars by SAS-2 [77]. The ﬁrst radio pulsar was discovered in August 1967
by A. Hewish and J. Bell during a radio astronomy project [99]. By the end
of 2004 there were about 1500 radio pulsars detected, but only a few pulsars
have been observed to emit in optical wavelength essentially because of the
interstellar medium absorption, some tens of pulsars are known to emit in X-
ray band and seven pulsars were observed to emit in γ-ray energy band by
EGRET [93]. In Figure 1.10 the light curves of the seven γ-ray pulsars are
shown in diﬀerent energy bands of the electromagnetic spectrum.

The γ-ray spectrum of pulsars are extremely ﬂat showing a peak of emission
in the GeV (cut-oﬀ energy), above this energy the spectrum decreases very
quickly. Light curves of γ-ray pulsars are extremely regular showing one or
two peaks not always in phase among energy bands.

A neutron star has a radius of about 15 km, a mass of about 1.4 M(cid:12) (this
means an average density of about 1015 g/cm3) and a very intense magnetic
ﬁeld with a strength at poles of order of 1012 – 1013 Gauss. There are other
classes of isolated neutron stars characterized by the lack of a steady radio
band emission and a very diﬀerent strength of the magnetic ﬁeld, with a value
of about 1010 Gauss for the CCO (Central Compact Object) [67] up to 1015
Gauss for the Magnetars [144]. Because of these objects do not emit γ rays
they will not be a matter of this thesis but, since we worked on these objects
during the Ph.D., the results of our analyses are explained in the Appendix D.
In describing the emission from pulsars, an analogy has been drawn with a
lighthouse. The light in the lighthouse is always on, but we can only see it when
the beam points in our direction. In this model of neutron stars, there is some

21

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

Figure 1.10: Light curves in diﬀerent energy bands of the seven γ-ray pulsars
detected by EGRET [93].

emission point on the surface of the star, producing a beam of radiation, like a
lighthouse beam. We can only see the radiation when the beam is pointed in
our direction. If we stay in one place, we will see the radiation appear to ﬂash
on brieﬂy once per cycle. The lighthouse nature of the pulsar mechanism has
an important consequence. The beam only traces out a cone on the sky. If the
observer is not on that cone, the pulsar will never be visible. Any given pulsar
will only be seen by about some per cent of the potential observers, depending
on the size of the light cone. This means that our galaxy contains many more
pulsars than we actually observe.

The emission mechanism may be related to the strong magnetic ﬁeld that
neutron stars must have. Current models assume the magnetic axis of the
star is probably not aligned with the rotation axis. If the beam of radiation
is somehow collimated along the magnetic axis, we only see it when the beam
points in our direction. We may even see two pulsed as opposite magnetic
poles pass by.

The details of the emission mechanism are not clear. One possibility is
that the spinning magnetic ﬁeld generate electric ﬁelds strong enough to re-
move electrons and positrons from the surface of the neutron star. These
charged particles are anchored to the magnetic ﬁeld lines into a region called
magnetosphere where the plasma is forced to spin with the star inside a region
called light cylinder arranging themselves in order to have (cid:126)E · (cid:126)B = 0. The
previous condition prohibits particle acceleration, acceleration can occur only
in region near the magnetic poles, called vacuum gaps, in which (cid:126)E · (cid:126)B (cid:54)= 0 and

22

1.2. Gamma rays from the sky

the ﬁeld lines are opened [102].

There are currently two types of theoretical models proposed to explain the
γ-ray emission of pulsars. The two models, Polar Cap and Outer Gap, diﬀer
essentially for the diﬀerent production regions of γ rays, as shown in Figure
1.11.

Figure 1.11: Schematic view of a pulsar with the polar cap and outer gap
beams.

According to the Polar Cap model, particles are accelerated at the magnetic
poles along open magnetic ﬁeld lines near the neutron star surface by parallel
electric ﬁelds and induce pair cascades by either curvature radiation or Inverse
Compton (IC) radiation [64].

According to the Outer Gap model, primary particles are accelerated in
vacuum gaps in the outer magnetosphere and induce pair cascades through
γ–γ pair production [177].

The γ-ray observations of pulsars shown they can be divided in two cat-
egories, radio-loud pulsars, such as the Crab and the Vela pulsar, if also a
radio emission is detected, and the radio-quiet pulsars, such as Geminga, if
the radio emission is not detected. The radio emission mechanism of pulsars is

23

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

still poorly understood, this is probably related to some coherent emission pro-
cesses. The detection of γ-ray pulsars those do not emit in the radio band tells
us that the γ-ray light cone is probably wider than the radio one. Because of
the identiﬁcation of a γ-ray pulsar is primarily based on the periodicity and be-
cause of the little number of detected radio pulsar, we expect some unidentiﬁed
EGRET sources, especially those along the Galactic plane, may be associated
with pulsars and particularly to radio-quiet pulsars.

We know a diﬀerent type of pulsar, the Millisecond Pulsars (MSPs). A
MSP is a pulsar with a rotational period in the range of about 1 and 10
milliseconds (this is the origin of their name), a weaker magnetic ﬁeld (less
than 1010 Gauss) and their frequency decreases much slower in time. The
origin of millisecond pulsars is still unknown. The leading theory is that they
begin life as longer period pulsars but are spun up through accretion. For this
reason, millisecond pulsars are sometimes called “recycled” pulsars. MSPs are
very old pulsars (about 109 years) and are thought to be related to low-mass
X-ray binary systems. In these systems, X-rays are emitted by the accretion
disk of a neutron star produced by the outer layers of a companion star that
has overﬂowed its Roche lobe. The transfer of angular momentum from this
accretion event can increase the rotation rate of the pulsar to hundreds of times
a second, as is observed in MSPs.

MSPs are found near from us, because they are fainter than normal pulsars,
or in globular clusters, in according with the spin-up theory of their formation,
as the extremely high stellar density of these clusters implies a much higher
likelihood of a pulsar having a giant companion star. MSPs have been detected
in the radio and X-ray portions of the electromagnetic spectrum but one of
the γ-ray sources detected by EGRET has an high probability to be associated
with a MSP, this object would be the ﬁrst MSP detected in the γ-ray band
[119].

The properties of MSPs are very diﬀerent from those of normal pulsars, and
high-energy emission processes of MSPs are still unclear, but similar Outer Gap
[219] and Polar Cap [192] models have been proposed also for MSPs to explain
the non-thermal γ-ray emission. Both models predict that a large number of
MSPs may emit γ rays, this opens an interesting perspective for future γ-ray
missions, discover a new class of γ-ray emitters.

Pulsed emission represents only a little fraction of the total energy emitted
by a pulsar. The rapidly rotating, superstrong magnetic ﬁeld of the spinning
pulsars accelerates charged particles of the magnetosphere to ultrarelativistic
speed, creating the pulsar wind. About 90% of the total energy emitted by a
pulsar is through the wind of high energy charged particles. The pulsar wind
streams into the interstellar medium, creating a standing shock wave, where it
is decelerated to sub-relativistic speed. In this region, ultrarelativistic charged

24

1.2. Gamma rays from the sky

particles interact and are conﬁned by the ram pressure of the ambient medium
and by the magnetic ﬁeld of the pulsar, setting up the Pulsar Wind Nebula
(PWN). Beyond this radius Synchrotron emission increases in the magnetized
ﬂow.

The only PWN detected by EGRET was the Crab nebula [66] as an un-
pulsed component up to 10-20 GeV. The spectrum showed a Synchrotron emis-
sion with cut-oﬀ at around 100 MeV and an Inverse Compton emission above
100 MeV, its emission has been detected also at TeV energies. According to the
current models, lower energy emission in γ rays is due mainly to Synchrotron
emission from leptons from the pulsar relativistic wind, and the higher emis-
sion is due to Inverse Compton scattering produced by leptons and lower en-
ergy Synchrotron photons, Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) or infrared
photons coming from the pulsar. Leptons are accelerated as results from in-
teraction between the pulsar wind and the nebula. It is also possible that γ
rays can be produced by interaction of hadrons in the pulsar wind with the
ambient matter can contribute to the observed spectrum, probably for younger
nebulae.

1.2.4 Supernova Remnants

Supernova remnants (SNRs) represent the relics of a supernova explosion, that
cause a burst of radiation that often brieﬂy outshines an entire galaxy. They
are important because connected to the study of the late stages of stellar
evolution of high-mass stars (M > 8 M(cid:12)), of the properties of the explosive
nucleosynthesis and because of their interaction with the surrounding space,
that is contaminated and energized by the products of the supernova explosion.
The importance of SNRs in astroparticles physics is related to the origin
of the Cosmic Rays (CRs). Cosmic Rays, relativistic cosmic particle from
the space, have been studied since early in the twentieth century. To date, the
question about the origin of cosmic rays nuclei remains only partially answered,
with widely accepted theoretical expectations but incomplete observational
conﬁrmation.
Theoretical models and indirect observational evidence support the idea
that CRs with energy below ∼1015 eV are produced and accelerated in the
Galaxy by SNRs. The main mechanism which is believed to be responsible for
the CR production is the shock acceleration, happening when the Supernovae
shell shocks interact with the interstellar medium. The shock mechanism is
an eﬃcient particle accelerator up to very high energy (TeV energies) and in
the case of SNe on time scales of 103 – 104 years. The accelerated CR escape
from the SNR remaining trapped in the Galactic magnetic ﬁeld. It has been
calculated that roughly 10% of kinetic energy of a SNR must be transferred
to CRs [101]. Observing charged particles, there is no possibility to directly

25

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

observe the sites of their production, due to chaotic magnetic deviation. Cos-
mic rays interact with the interstellar gas and dust and photons, producing
γ rays. Photons are not deviated by the Galactic magnetic ﬁeld and a direct
observation of the accelerator sites is then possible.

The low angular resolution of EGRET did not permit to resolve the SNR
structure and the study of diﬀerent acceleration sites, for this reason many
questions are still opened.

During their explosion supernovae can accelerate protons and heavy ions to
high energies. The protons can interact in the interstellar medium, producing
cascades of secondary particles, such as neutral pions (π0) that decay quickly
into γ rays. The heavy ions are radioactive and they decay, emitting γ rays.
Moreover, the electrons accelerated by the shock wave during the supernova
explosion can interact with the photons of the Galactic background radiation
and the radiation ﬁelds of the SNR (this process is responsible also for the X-
ray emission from the SNR) by the Bremsstrahlung and the Inverse Compton.
To date, it is not clear the leptonic and hadronic contribution by the various
spectral components observed for the γ-ray SNRs because of the not precise
measure of their spectra by EGRET.

1.2.5 Gamma-Ray Bursts

Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs) are the most powerful and most distant known
sources of γ rays. The brightest GRB at GeV energy is about 104 times brighter
than the brightest AGN. GRBs are intense ﬂashes of γ rays, lasting from some
milliseconds up to hundreds of seconds and they are detected with a frequency
of about one GRB per day.

GRBs were discovered serendipitously in the late 1960s by VELA satellites,
a series of U.S. military satellites designed to detect covert nuclear weapons
tests, but their discovery was ﬁrst reported in 1973. An advance in understand-
ing these mysterious objects occurred in 1991 with the launch of the Compton
Gamma-Ray Observatory (CGRO). The all-sky survey from BATSE onboard
CGRO, which measured about 3000 bursts, showed that they are isotropi-
cally distributed, as shown in Figure 1.12, suggesting a cosmological origin for
these objects [146]. Analysis of the distribution of the observed duration for
a large number of GRBs showed a clear bimodality, suggesting the existence
of two separate populations: a “short” population with an average duration of
about 0.3 seconds and a “long” population with an average duration of about
30 seconds [161]. Both distributions are very broad with a signiﬁcant overlap
region in which the identity of a given event is not clear from duration alone.
Their spectra are very hard, with a peak of emission at some hundreds of keV,
they follow a power law characterized by a spectral index that vary during the
explosion.

26

1.2. Gamma rays from the sky

Figure 1.12: Angular distribution of 2704 GRBs detected from 1991 to 2000 by
BATSE. The colors diﬀerentiate the brightness of the bursts. Credit: NASA

The prompt γ-ray emission from a GRB is sometimes followed by a second
transient event called afterglow at energies with longer lasting emission in the
X rays, optical and radio. The ﬁrst X-ray GRB afterglow was measured by the
BeppoSax mission (1996 - 2002). BeppoSax was a program of the Italian Space
Agency (ASI) with participation of the Netherlands Agency for Aerospace pro-
grams (NIVR). On 28 February 1997 BeppoSax detected the X-ray afterglow
from GRB 970228 [209]. This was the ﬁrst accurate determination of the dis-
tance to a GRB and, together with the discovery of the host galaxy of 970228,
it proved that GRBs occur in extremely distant galaxies.

The questions about which type of celestial object can emit GRBs is still
unsolved. GRBs show an extraordinary degree of diversity. The near complete
lack of observational constraint led to a profusion of theories, including evap-
orating black holes, magnetic ﬂares on white dwarfs, accretion of matter onto
neutron stars, hypernovae, rapid extraction of rotational energy from super-
massive black holes and fusion of two neutron stars or one neutron star and
one black hole of a binary system. There are at least two diﬀerent types of pro-
genitors of GRBs: one responsible for the long-duration, soft-spectrum bursts
and one responsible for short duration, hard-spectrum bursts. The progeni-
tors of long GRBs are believed to be massive, low-metallicity stars exploding
due to the collapse of their cores (collapsar model ) [142]. The progenitors of
short GRBs are still unknown but mergers of neutron stars is probably the
most plausible model (merger model ). Both models suggest the ﬁnal creation
of a black hole, surrounded by an accretion torus which realizes gravitational

27

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

energy that feeds the explosion.

Figure 1.13: Schematic view of the ﬁreball model for GRBs.

Several models have been developed in order to explain the γ-ray emis-
sion from GRBs. Probably the Fireball model (FBM), introduced by Piran in
1999 [165], is the most plausible one. The term “ﬁreball” refers to an opaque
radiation-plasma ball (composed by electrons, positrons and γ rays) which
would expand relativistically. Two diﬀerent types of shocks may arise in this
scenario. In the ﬁrst case, the expanding ﬁreball runs into external medium,
the ISM or a pre-ejected stellar wind. The second possibility is that even
before external shocks occur, internal shocks develop in the relativistic wind
itself. The model hypothesis is that γ-ray burst is due to internal shocks, while
afterglow is due to the relativistic expanding wind, which decelerates produc-
ing radiation of lower energy, going from X rays to optical and radio, as time
goes on [145]. A schematic view of the ﬁreball model for GRBs is shown in
Figure 1.13.

1.2.6 Solar ﬂares

The Sun, the star of our planetary system, has been known to produce γ rays
during its ﬂaring period with energies greater than several MeV. This emission
was detected for the ﬁrst time by the American satellite OSO-VII between
August 4 and 7, 1972. Subsequently, other missions were dedicated to the
study of the γ-ray emission by the solar ﬂares but important results came

28

1.2. Gamma rays from the sky

from EGRET and COMPTEL telescopes onboard of the CGRO observatory,
which discovered that the Sun is a source of GeV γ rays.

Accelerated charged particles interact with the ambient solar atmosphere,
radiating high-energy γ rays via Bremsstrahlung (see. e.g., [170], [156]). Sec-
ondary π± are produced by nuclear interaction and yield to γ rays with a
spectrum that extends to the energies of the primary particles. Protons and
heavy ions interactions also produce γ rays through π0 decay, resulting in a
spectrum that has a maximum at 68 MeV and is distinctly diﬀerent from the
Bremsstrahlung spectrum. The processes that accelerate the primary particles
are not well known, but stochastic acceleration through MagnetoHydroDy-
namics (MHD) turbulence or shocks ([79], [179]) are though to be the most
creditable mechanisms. Particles are accelerated in large magnetic loops that
are energized by ﬂares, and they get trapped due to magnetic ﬁeld, generating
γ rays ([130], [131]). However, it is not clear where the acceleration takes place
and whether protons are accelerated along with the electrons.

Figure 1.14 shows the extraordinary ﬂare of June 11, 1991, detected by
the EGRET telescope. The contribution from electron Bremsstrahlung and π0
decay are separately shown.

Figure 1.14: The extraordinary ﬂare of June 11, 1991 detected by EGRET
telescope, which produces γ rays up to GeV energies. The contribution from
electron bremsstrahlung and from pion decay are displayed separately [74].

29

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

Some models are proposed for production of γ rays from the Sun also in
from nuclear gamma decay of nuclei like 58Co, or from

quiescent state, e.g.
microﬂares, already observed in UV and X rays but never seen in γ rays.

1.2.7 Dark Matter

To date, it is not known if dark matter can be a source of γ rays. As discussed
in Section 1.2.1, EGRET identiﬁed about 70 AGNs but probably an important
fraction of the extragalactic diﬀuse γ-ray emission is related to the emission
of unresolved AGNs. However, any remaining extragalactic diﬀuse emission
would be of great interest. It is thought that a fraction of the extragalactic
γ-ray diﬀuse emission could originate from the decay of exotic particles in
the primordial Universe. The energy spectrum of this component should be
diﬀerent from the AGNs contribution. The diﬃculty in detecting γ rays from
dark matter is distinguishing which are produced by dark matter annihilations
from those generated by numerous other sources in the Universe.

This contribution could be related to the possible decay of supersymmetric
particles. Current models assumes the existence of the Dark Matter (DM) in
the halo of our Galaxy, this hypothesis is also sustained by the comparison
between the rotational curves of the spiral galaxies and the baryonic visible
matter, which tell us that the visible mass is not suﬃcient to explain the
rotational velocities of the stars in the spiral galaxies. Current theory sug-
gests that DM is composed by WIMPs (Weakly Interacting Massive Particles)
which are massive particles that do not emit or absorb light. Such particles
are predicted by supersymmetry, a theory that extends the Standard Model
of particle physics. According to supersymmetry, WIMPs act as their own
antimatter particles. When two WIMPs interact, they annihilate each other
and release secondary particles such as γ rays. Dark matter interacts much
more weakly than ordinary matter, but it is not spread out evenly through
space and should form clumps in and around galaxies.

The lightest supersymmetric particle is the Neutralino (χ) and it is per-
haps the most promising candidate for the WIMPs ([214], [87]). Although the
highest energy accelerators have begun to probe regions of supersymmetric
parameter space, the limits set at this time are not very restrictive. The mass
of the Neutralino particle can be constrained, in order to make up the overall
dark matter in the Universe. The required mass is in the range 30 GeV <
Mχ < 10 TeV, depending on the model chosen. If Neutralinos make up the
dark matter of the Milky Way, they can annihilate into the γγ ﬁnal state giv-
ing rise to photons with unique energies, which are γ-ray lines depending on
the preferred channel. The signature would be spatially diﬀuse, narrow line
emission peaked toward the Galactic center. Figure 1.15 shows the predicted
signal from Neutralino annihilation into γγ, with an assumed mass of about 47

30

1.2. Gamma rays from the sky

Figure 1.15: Simulation of the signature of a galactic Neutralino annihilation
into γγ. The red line is the contribution from an AGN while the blue line is
the contribution of the particle relic [74].

GeV. While the signal would be the most spectacular of all possible indirect
signals, its rates are suppressed with respect to other Neutralino annihilation
channels. On the other hand, photons may also be produced in the cascade
decays of other primary annihilation products. In contrast to the line signal,
cascade decays produce a large ﬂux of photons with a continuum of energies
detectable as an excess in the γ-ray ﬂux.

1.2.8 Unidentiﬁed Sources

Only four of the 25 sources in the second COS-B catalog had identiﬁcations
[195], and over half the 271 sources in the third EGRET catalog had no as-
sociations with known objects in other wavelengths [93]. Since association is
primarily based on positional coincidence of possible counterparts known at
other wavelengths with a γ-ray source, a principal reason for the diﬃculty of
ﬁnding counterparts to high-energy γ-ray sources has been the large positional
errors in their measured locations, which are related to the limited photon
statistics, associated with a relatively small eﬀective area, and poor angular
resolution of the γ-ray observations, e.g. EGRET detector had an angular
resolution of ∼ 5.8◦. Also the bright diﬀuse γ-ray emission from the Milky
Way is a limit in the procedure of association of γ-ray sources, only a very
detail knowledge of the model of the γ-ray emission of our Galaxy can help in

31

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

distinguishing if an excess of γ-ray photons in a speciﬁc region in the Galactic
plane is related to a statistical ﬂuctuation of the background or to the presence
of a γ-ray source.

Gamma-ray sources are tracers of the most energetic processes in the Uni-
verse, they are very exotic objects, characterized by very intense magnetic ﬁelds
and the presence of very high energy particles. For this reason, understand-
ing the nature of the γ-ray unidentiﬁed sources is one of the most important
open questions in high energy astrophysics. Gamma-ray unidentiﬁed sources
represent discovery space for new members of existing γ-ray source classes,
or new source classes. These sources should have an high value of the ratio
Lγ/Lλ, where Lγ is the γ-ray luminosity of the source and Lλ is the luminosity
of the source at lower energy. This makes them possible powerful accelerator
of particles.

Since pulsars and blazars represent the two most numerous γ-ray source
classes, the ﬁrst suggested hypothesis was to associate the EGRET unidentiﬁed
sources with these two classes [140]. In particular, less than one third of these
are far from the Galactic plane, probably associated with blazars because extra-
galactic, with the remaining most likely within the Milky Way. Further works
suggest that many of these unidentiﬁed sources are associated with nearby
Gould Belt of star-forming regions that surrounds the solar neighborhood [85],
while apparently-steady sources are likely to be radio-quiet pulsars [92].

Among new γ-ray source classes, some of the unidentiﬁed EGRET sources
may be associated with Galactic microquasars. Microquasars are a subclass of
X-ray Binaries (XRBs) that show a jet of mild relativistic accelerated particles.
They are believed to be a binary system made up of a compact object, perhaps
a neutron star or a black hole, orbiting around a massive star. The jet of parti-
cles should be the basic of γ-ray emission both leptonic or hadronic scenarios.
The name microquasar have been proposed since they mimic on smaller scales
the phenomenology of the quasars, their investigation is believed to be much
important for the understanding of the AGN physics. Recently two micro-
quasars have been observed by the AGILE detector and some ground-based
satellites, the LS I +61 303 by MAGIC [18] and LS 5039 by HESS [17] both
shown in Figure 1.16. In both cases the orbital modulation of the γ-ray ﬂux
have been observed.

To identify γ-ray sources, the study of the emission at other wavelengths
is crucial. One of the most signiﬁcant example was the Geminga pulsar. In
that case, a search for pulsed emission using X-ray data led to ﬁnd the charac-
teristic spin period of a neutron star. Gamma-ray observations conﬁrmed this
pulsation and so Geminga was found to be a γ-ray pulsar.

The progress in ﬁnding the identity of all γ-ray sources are correlated to
the ability of new generation γ-ray experiments to localize γ-ray objects with

32

1.2. Gamma rays from the sky

Figure 1.16: Top: the microquasar LS I +61 303 observed by MAGIC [18]
in two states. Bottom: the orbital modulation of the LS 5039 microquasar
observed by HESS [17].

higher precision in order to ﬁnd exactly the other wavelength counterparts.

In the end, the spatial, spectral and variability properties may provide
a framework that could allow to predict the expected source classes for the
sources that remain unassociated. Because of the limits of the EGRET detec-
tor, these information were not enough accurate to compare intrinsic properties
of the EGRET sources for both associated and unassociated populations, po-
tentially providing insight into the likely classes of the unidentiﬁed sources. An
increase of the performances of new generation γ-ray experiments will allow
to do it by using the properties of the associated sources to deﬁne a model
that describes the distributions and correlations between measured properties
of the γ-ray behavior of each source class. This model will be able to be then
compared to the γ-ray properties of each unidentiﬁed source in order to classify
some of them as likely members of one of these source types on the basic of
their γ-ray properties.

33

1. The gamma-ray Universe before Fermi

1.3 Summary

In this Chapter the main issues regarding γ-ray astrophysics have been re-
viewed. The development of γ-ray astronomy have been carried mainly from
space and the last important mission was the CGRO observatory. It has rev-
olutionized and improved our knowledge about γ-ray Universe. A discussion
about the results found by EGRET and a review of the discovered γ-ray sources
have been presented.

Although the EGRET mission has allowed to improve our knowledge of
the γ-ray sky, many questions are still open. The Fermi Gamma-Ray Space
Telescope is a member of the new generation of γ-ray telescopes together with
AGILE, it was launched on 2008 and it is contributing in a decisive way in
several topics of modern understanding of the γ-ray Universe, from the study
of Galactic and extragalactic cosmic accelerators to the detailed investigation
of the diﬀuse emission and the nature of the unidentiﬁed sources.

The energy range of Fermi is guaranteeing the exploration of the energy
range between the EGRET upper limit and the lower limit of the ground-
based telescopes, a spectral window that would contain a lot of new high-
energy sources. Fermi is also complementary to the ground-based VHE γ-ray
instruments, so that inter calibration is possible and a more complete multi-
wavelength investigation is accomplished.

34

Chapter 2

The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope (a detailed description of the telescope
is reported in Appendix A) has been routinely surveying the sky with the Large
Area Telescope (LAT) since the mission began in 2008 August. The excellent
performances of the LAT in terms of deep and fairly uniform exposure, good
per-photon angular resolution and stable response, provide the best resolved
survey of the sky in the 100 MeV to 100 GeV energy range. For this rea-
son the LAT survey data provide a detailed characterizations for each γ-ray
source detected as for as localization, time variability and spectral shape are
concerned.

In this Chapter an overview of the procedure to construct the Fermi-LAT
catalogs will be given, we describe how it is established if an excess of γ-ray
photons in a region of the sky is related to a point-like source emission and how
this γ-ray source can be associated with an object known in other wavelengths.
The subject of this thesis is based on the study of the γ-ray point-like sources
presented in the Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs.

We will present the list of γ-ray sources detected by the LAT instrument
with a threshold likelihood Test Statistic (TS) greater than 25, corresponding
to a signiﬁcance of just over 4σ, in the energy range between 100 MeV and
100 GeV, and their detailed characterization. This means that we will not
discuss the Bright Source List (BLS, [7]), that listed sources detected by the
LAT during the ﬁrst 3 months of mission and characterized by a TS > 100,
nor the First Fermi-LAT Catalog of Sources above 10 GeV (1FHL, [199]), that
listed γ-ray objects with an energy greater than 10 GeV detected by the LAT.

35

2. The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

2.1 The First Fermi-LAT Source Catalog

(1FGL)

The data analyzed for the First Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (1FGL) were ob-
tained during the ﬁrst 11 months of mission, between 2008 August 4 and 2009
July 4 [3]. Fermi is currently in an almost circular orbit at an altitude of
565 km, an inclination of 25.6◦ and an orbital period of 96 minutes. After an
initial period of engineering data taking and on-orbit calibration [5], the ob-
servatory was put into sky-scanning survey mode in which the normal to the
front of the instrument (z -axis) is ±35◦ above and below the rocking orbital
plane on alternate orbits. In this way, after 2 orbits, corresponding about 3
hours, the sky exposure is almost uniform. For particularly interesting targets
of opportunity, the observatory can be inertially pointed.

In order to limit the contamination from albedo γ rays from interactions of
cosmic rays with the upper atmosphere of the Earth, which is a very bright γ-
ray source [202], a cut on zenith angle (angle between the foresight of the LAT
and the local zenith) at 105◦ was applied for the construction of the catalog.
During the survey, observations are nearly continuous, although a few data
gaps are present due to operational issues, special calibration runs, or in rare
cases, data loss in transmission. This results in a total live time of satellite dur-
ing this period of about 245.6 days, which corresponds to an absolute eﬃciency
of 73.5%. Most of the ineﬃciency is due to readout dead time (9.2%) and to
time lost during passages through the South Atlantic Anomaly (∼13%), which
is responsible for the nonuniformity of the exposure (about 30% diﬀerence
between minimum and maximum).

Onboard the satellite there is a ﬁrst analysis of the data. Immediately the
data are ﬁltered and analyzed reconstructioning and classifying each detected
event [22]. In reconstructing the events from the hits in the LAT, various cuts
are made classifying the events on the basis of probability that they result
from photons and the quality of the reconstruction. The events are then sep-
arated into various event classes, each class is characterized by its own set of
instrument response functions1. For the construction of the catalog, the class
with the least residual contamination from charged particle background events
is chosen.

The instrument response functions (IRFs) – eﬀective area, energy redis-
tribution, and point-spread function (PSF) – use the analyses derived from
Monte Carlo simulations of the LAT, which were calibrated before [22] and
after [171] the launch using the event-selection criteria corresponding to the
chosen event classes. After these analyses, only the events with energy above

1see http://fermi.gsfc.nasa.gov/ssc/data/analysis/documentation/Cicerone/

Cicerone_Data/LAT_DP.html

36

2.1. The First Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (1FGL)

100 MeV were selected for the construction of the catalog because below 100
MeV the eﬀective area is relatively small and strongly dependent on energy and
because at low energy the width of the PSF increases (scaling approximately
as 0.8◦(E/1GeV)−0.8).
After these cuts, the data set contains 1.1 × 107 events with energies above
100 MeV. The Figure 2.1 summarizes the data set used for the construction
of the catalog: it shows the γ-ray intensity map for energies above 300 MeV.
The map is dominated by a dramatic increase of the brightness of the γ-ray
sky at low Galactic latitudes.

Figure 2.1: Aitoﬀ projection in Galactic coordinates of the sky map of the
LAT data detected during the ﬁrst 11 months of mission. The image shows
γ-ray intensity for energies above 300 MeV, in units of photons m−2 s−1 sr−1
[3].

2.1.1 Construction of the catalog

A fundamental input to the construction of the catalog is a detailed model
for the diﬀuse γ-ray emission. As explained in the Section 1.2.1, the diﬀuse
emission can be divided in two components: the Galactic diﬀuse emission,
related to the interaction between cosmic rays and interstellar gas and pho-
tons, and the extragalactic diﬀuse emission, related to the isotropic unresolved
emission of extragalactic sources. In addition, also residual charged particle
background, i.e. cosmic rays, misclassiﬁed as γ rays from the LAT, provides

37

2. The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

another approximately isotropic background. The models for the Galactic dif-
fuse emission and isotropic backgrounds were developed by the LAT team and
are available, along with descriptions of their derivation, from the Fermi Sci-
ence Support Center2. A detailed model of the γ-ray emission is essential for
assessing if an excess of photons is related to the presence of a γ-ray source and
for characterizing it. Unfortunately it is extremely diﬃcult to develop a very
accurate model, especially for the Galactic diﬀuse emission, because of a lot of
parameters, such as the distribution of interstellar gas in Galactocentric rings
and the propagation of the cosmic rays in our Galaxy [193], are not completely
known. New information about these parameters can be used to update the
models. This can change signiﬁcantly all the results.

In constructing the catalog, the source detection step was applied only to
the data from the full 11 month period as a whole. This means that a γ-ray
source can be included in the catalog only if it was detected on the basis of
its average ﬂux. In this way, bright ﬂaring sources detected only on shorter
timescales, as GRBs, are not included in the catalog. The procedure used to
build the 1FGL catalog follows three important steps applied in sequence: the
detection, the localization and the signiﬁcance estimation. In this scheme the
threshold for inclusion in 1FGL is deﬁned at the last step, but the completeness
is controlled by the ﬁrst one. After the list is deﬁned, the source characteristics
are determined (ﬂux in 5 energy bands, spectral shape and time variability).
Hereafter ﬂux F means photon ﬂux and spectral index Γ is for power law
photon spectra (i.e. F ∝ E −Γ )

Detection

The detection is based on three energy bands, combining Front and Back
events to preserve spatial resolution [3]. The detection does not use events
below 200 MeV, which have poor angular resolution, and it uses events up to
100 GeV. The soft band starts at 200 MeV for Front and 400 MeV for Back
events. The medium band starts at 1 GeV for Front and 2 GeV for Back events.
The hard band starts at 5 GeV for Front and 10 GeV for Back events. The sky
is then partitioned into 24 planar projections and the methods used to look for
sources on top of the diﬀuse emission model are Point ﬁnd [89], the Minimum
Spanning Tree algorithm [43] and wavelet-based algorithms, as mr ﬁlter [191]
and PGWave [63] [54]. The “seed” positions from those four methods were
then combined in order to minimize the number of missed sources. After this
source detection analysis the total number of seeds was 2433.

2http://fermi.gsfc.nasa.gov/ssc/data/access/lat/BackgroundModels.html

38

2.1. The First Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (1FGL)

Localization

The image-based detection algorithms provide estimates of the source posi-
tions, but the positions are not optimal because no information about the en-
ergy is taken into account. These methods also do not provide error estimates
on the positions. At this point an advanced statistical method is introduced
to localize each detected source.

The method used to localize the sources is an iterative binned likelihood
technique [3]. Each source is treated independently in descending order such
that brighter sources are included in the background model for fainter sources.
The photons are assigned to 12 energy bands (four per decade from 100 MeV
to 100 GeV) and HEALpix-based spatial bins for which the size is selected to
be small compared with the scale set by the PSF. For each band, the likelihood
is deﬁned as a function of the position and ﬂux of the assumed point source,
while the background is the sum of Galactic diﬀuse, isotropic diﬀuse and any
nearby, i.e. within 5◦, other point sources in the catalog. The function of the
position (p) is deﬁned as 2(log(Lmax)-log(L(p)), where L is the product of the
band likelihoods. According to Wilks’ theorem [216], this is the probability
distribution for the coordinates of the point source consistent with the observed
data. The width of this distribution is a measure of the uncertainty, and
it scales directly with the width of the PSF. The distribution is ﬁtted by a
two-dimensional quadratic form with ﬁve parameters describing the expected
elliptical shape: the coordinates (R.A. and dec.) of the center of the ellipse,
semimajor and semiminor axis extents (α and β), and the position angle φ of
the ellipse.

Signiﬁcance and Thresholding

Although the detection and localization steps provide estimates of source sig-
niﬁcances, these estimates are not suﬃciently accurate since the detection step
does not use the energy information and the localization step ﬁts only one
source at a time. To better estimate the source signiﬁcances the LAT team
used a 3-dimensional maximum likelihood algorithm in unbinned mode (i.e.,
the position and energy of each event is considered individually) applied on the
full energy range from 100 MeV to 100 GeV [3]. This is part of the standard
Science Tools software package. The tool does not vary the source position,
but does adjust the source spectrum. The tool provides the best-ﬁt parameters
for each source and the Test Statistic TS = 2∆log(likelihood) between models
with and without the source. The TS associated to each source is a measure
of the source signiﬁcance. For this stage the sources are modelled with simple
power-law spectra.

The sky is split into 445 overlapping circular Regions-of-Interest (RoIs)

39

2. The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

with radii ranging between 9◦ and 15◦ to cover the 2433 seed positions. The
RoI sizes are set so that not more than 8 sources are free at a time. The
parameters for the sources in the central part of each RoI (RoI radius minus
7◦) are free and the value of the best-ﬁt parameters for each one are found
iteratively. Considering a threshold of TS = 25, out of 2433 starting “seeds”
the procedure selects 1451 sources.

The TS of each source can be related to the probability that such an excess
can be obtained from background ﬂuctuations alone. The probability distribu-
tion in such a situation (source over background) is not known precisely [169].
However, since only positive ﬂuctuations are considered, and each ﬁt involves
four degrees of freedom (two for position, plus ﬂux and spectral index), the
probability to get at least TS at a given position in the sky is close to half
of the χ2 distribution with four degrees of freedom [139], so that TS = 25
corresponds to a false detection probability of about 4σ.

Flux determination, spectral shape and time variability

Since the spectra of most sources do not follow a single power law over the
considered energy range, the maximum likelihood method described earlier
does not provide very accurate estimates of the ﬂuxes of the sources detected
with TS > 25. Within the two most populous categories, the AGNs often
have broken power-law spectra and the pulsars have power-law spectra with
an exponential cutoﬀ. In both cases ﬁtting a single power law over the entire
range overpredicts the ﬂux in the low-energy region of the spectrum, which
contains the majority of the photons from the source, biasing the ﬂuxes to
higher values.

To provide better estimates of the source ﬂuxes, the LAT team split the
range into ﬁve energy bands from 100 to 300 MeV, 300 MeV to 1 GeV, 1 to
3 GeV, 3 to 10 GeV, and 10 to 100 GeV [3]. Since it is generally not possible
to ﬁt the spectral index in each of those energy bands (and the ﬂux estimate
does not depend very much on the index), the spectral index of each source
was frozen to the best ﬁt over the full interval.

The ﬁve ﬂuxes provide a rough spectrum, allowing departures from a power
law to be quantiﬁed. Examples of those rough spectra are given in Figure 2.2,
on the left is shown a bright pulsar (Vela) and on the right a bright blazar
(3C 454.3 ). In order to quantify departures from a power-law shape, it was
introduced a Curvature Index :

(2.1)

(cid:88)

(cid:0)Fi − F P L
i +(cid:0)f rel

i
i Fi

(cid:1)2
(cid:1)2

C =

σ2

i

where i runs over all bands and F P L
the global power-law ﬁt.

is the ﬂux predicted in that band from
reﬂects the relative systematic uncertainty on

i

f rel
i

40

2.1. The First Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (1FGL)

Figure 2.2: On the left is shown the spectrum of the Vela pulsar while on the
right the spectrum of the bright blazar 3C 454.3. The dashed lines quantify
the uncertainties on index of the power-law ﬁt to the full energy range [3].

eﬀective area and its values are 0.1, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15 and 0.2 in each energy
band [3]. C follows a χ2 distribution with 5- - 2 = 3 degrees of freedom
if the power-law hypothesis is true because the ﬁt involves two parameters,
the normalization and the spectral index. At the 99% conﬁdence level, the
spectral shape is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from a power law if C > 11.34. Only
225 1FGL sources met that condition. The curvature index is not an estimate
of curvature itself, just a statistical indicator. A faint source with a strongly
curved spectrum can have the same curvature index as a bright source with
a slightly curved spectrum. Moreover, any kind of deviation from the best-ﬁt
power law can trigger that index, thus the curvature index is not exclusively
an indicator of curvature.

Moreover, in order to estimate the time variability for each source it was also
introduced a Variability Index computed by splitting the full 11 month interval
into N int = 11 intervals of about 1 month each freezing the spectral index of
each source to the best ﬁt over the full interval. In this way, it is possible to
detect if a source varies above a speciﬁc threshold, but not to characterize such
variation [3]. The variability index is deﬁned as a χ2 criterion:

i + (frelFi)2
σ2

1

(cid:80)
i wiFi(cid:80)

i wi

V =

wi (Fi − Fwt)2

wi =

Fwt =

(cid:88)

i

41

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

2. The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

where i runs over the 11 intervals and σi is the statistical uncertainty in F i.
f rel = 3% of the ﬂux for each interval F i, related to the time scale where the
instrument and the event classiﬁcation are stable. Since the weighted average
ﬂux F wt is not known a priori, V is expected, in the absence of variability, to
follow a χ2 distribution with Nint – 1 = 10 degrees of freedom. At the 99%
conﬁdence level, the light curve is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from a ﬂat one if V
> 23.21. That condition is met by 241 sources. Examples of light curves are
given in Figure 2.3 for a bright constant source (the Vela pulsar) and a bright
variable source (the blazar 3C 454.3 ). With a 3% systematic uncertainty no
pulsar is found to be variable.

Figure 2.3: On the left is shown the light curve of the Vela pulsar while on
the right the light curve of the bright blazar 3C 454.3. The gray band shows
the time-averaged ﬂux with the 3% systematic error that was adopted for
evaluating the variability index. [3].

2.1.2 Source identiﬁcation and association

Even with the good angular resolution of LAT, source location accuracy is
typically not precise enough to make a ﬁrm identiﬁcation based on positional
coincidence alone. A typical LAT error region contains numerous stars, galax-
ies, X-ray sources, infrared sources and radio sources. Determining the nature
of a given LAT source must therefore rely on more information than simply
location, including time variability, spectral information and availability of
suﬃcient energy at the source and a plausible physical process to produce γ
rays.

The LAT team introduced a distinction between a source identiﬁcation and
an association with an object known at other wavelengths. A ﬁrm identiﬁca-

42

2.1. The First Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (1FGL)

tion of a source is based on a periodicity for a pulsar or a binary system or on
a variability correlated with observations at another wavelength, in the case
of a blazar, or on measurement of ﬁnite angular extent, which is the case for
some Galactic sources, e.g., SNRs. Otherwise, an association is deﬁned as a
positional coincidence that is statistically unlikely to have occurred by chance
between a plausible γ-ray-producing object and a LAT source [3].

In order to associate the LAT sources with a plausible γ-ray emitter an
automated source association algorithm is used. The approach to automated
source association of the LAT team is based on a list of 32 catalogs containing
potential counterparts of LAT sources on the basis either of a priori knowl-
edge about classes of high-energy γ-ray emitters or on theoretical expectations.
The selected catalogs contain AGNs, nearby and starburst galaxies, pulsars
and their nebulae, massive stars and star clusters, X-ray binaries and MSPs.
The complete list of catalogs, the numbers of objects they contain, and the
references are presented in [3]. This approach follows the ideas developed by
Mattox [141] for the identiﬁcation of EGRET sources with ﬂat-spectrum radio
sources. It is easy to show that for each catalog in the list, the a posteriori
probabilities P ik that an object i from the catalog is the correct association of
the LAT source k can be computed using the Bayes’ theorem:

(cid:18)

Pik =

1 +

1 − Pprior
Pprior

2πρkakbke∆k

(cid:19)−1

(2.5)

(2.6)

where P prior is the prior probability that a counterpart i is detectable by the
LAT and it is determined through Monte Carlo simulations, a k and bk are the
axes of the ellipse at 1σ, ρk is the local counterpart density around source k
and

(cid:18)cos2 (φ − φk)

(cid:19)

∆k =

r2
2

sin2 (φ − φk)

+

b2
k

a2
k

for a given position angle φ between LAT source k and the counterpart i, φk
being the position angle of the error ellipse, and r being the angular separation
between LAT source k and counterpart i. For the automated association of
the 1FGL catalog a LAT source is associated with an objects in the selected
catalogs if the a posteriori probability is greater than a threshold set as P thr =
0.8, which means that each individual association has ≤ 20% chance of being
spurious.

2.1.3 Results

Out of 1451 sources in the 1FGL catalog 821 (56%) were associated with a least
one non-γ-ray counterpart by the automated procedure at the 80% conﬁdence
level. Sources without ﬁrm identiﬁcations that are in regions of enhanced

43

2. The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

diﬀuse γ-ray emission along the Galactic plane or are near local interstellar
cloud complexes (like Orion), sources that lie along the Galactic ridge (300◦ <
l < 60◦, |b| < 1◦), and sources that are in regions with source densities great
enough that their position error estimates overlap in the γ-ray data are called
c-sources to indicate “caution” or “confused region”. In Figure 2.4 the locations
on the sky of the 1451 1FGL catalog sources is shown. Each γ-ray source class
is coded with a diﬀerent symbol.

Figure 2.4: Aitoﬀ projection in Galactic coordinates of the distribution on the
sky of the 1451 1FGL catalog sources. Each associated source class is coded
according to the legend [3].

The automated association results of the LAT for each source class are

discussed in some detail in the following:

AGNs:

689 1FGL sources were associated with blazars, they represent the
most numerous γ-ray source class, as already observed by the EGRET in-
strument. Out of them, 282 have also been observed to be radio sources
and only 4 were identiﬁed through a correlation with variability seen
at another wavelength because the procedure of ﬁrm identiﬁcation was
not yet carried out systematically for the LAT data. The blazar cata-
logs selected for the procedure of association are typically incomplete at

44

2.1. The First Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (1FGL)

low Galactic latitudes because of the presence of the Milky Way galaxy
that absorbs eﬃciently a large fraction of low energy photons emitted
by extraGalactic objects. Since the γ-ray photons are not particularly
absorbed by our Galaxy we expect that a large fraction of 1FGL uniden-
tiﬁed sources situated close to the Galactic plane may be associated with
blazars. Moreover, we do not expect an observed isotropical distribution
of γ-ray blazars but a depression of their distribution close to the Galac-
tic plane owing to the higher detection threshold.
Most of the 1FGL non-blazar AGN associations seem to be associated
only with non-blazar Seyfert galaxies.

Normal galaxies:

2 1FGL sources were associated to nearby starburst galax-
ies (NGC 253 and M 82) and seven coincide with the Large Magellanic
Cloud (LMC) and the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) probably corre-
sponding to local maxima of extended emission features.

Pulsars, PWNe and globular clusters:

56 1FGL sources have been iden-
tiﬁed as pulsars through their high-conﬁdence (statistical probability of
chance occurrence less than 10−6) γ-ray pulsations caused by the rotation
of the neutron star. Regarding the PWNe is important to understand
whether the LAT indeed detects these objects, or whether the γ-ray
emission arises from the yet unknown pulsars that power the nebulae, or
potentially from an associated SNR. Finally, 8 1FGL sources were asso-
ciated with globular clusters. None of those have alternative associations
diﬀerent from MSPs or low-mass X-ray binaries (LMXBs; which both are
known source populations residing in globular clusters).

Supernova Remnants:

41 1FGL sources were associated with SNRs through
the automated association procedure. Of those, ﬁve are associated with
small angular size (diameter less than 20’) SNRs. Except for two of 1FGL
SNRs, the presence of alternative associations with PWNe or an LMXB
inside the error radius, makes the physical association of these sources
with SNRs questionable. Only 3 1FGL sources were identiﬁed as SNRs
on the basis of morphology analyses.

X-ray binaries: Three 1FGL sources were identiﬁed by their orbital mod-
ulations as high-mass X-ray binaries (HMXB), they are LS I61 303, LS
5039 and CygX-3. None of the LMXB associations gives strong evidence
that this class can emit γ rays. All of them are situated in globular
clusters, where a combined emission from MSPs appears to be the more
plausible counterpart of the 1FGL sources detected.

45

2. The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

Despite the application of advanced techniques of identiﬁcation and associ-
ation of the LAT sources with counterparts at other wavelengths, 630 (∼40%)
1FGL objects remain without a clear association. These sources are deﬁned
as “unassociated” γ-ray sources by the Fermi-LAT team [3] but in this Ph.D.
thesis we will mainly refer to these astrophysical objects as “unidentiﬁed” γ-ray
sources because their nature is unknown. In order to determine the plausible
counterparts of each 1FGL unidentiﬁed source multi-wavelength campaigns,
mainly radio and X-rays, are in process. Moreover, the excellent performances
of the LAT with respect to the previous γ-ray missions allowed to character-
ized in great detail the 1FGL sources in terms of location, spectral shape and
variability. All the primary γ-ray information of the unidentiﬁed sources can
be correlated with the γ-ray properties of known source classes to try to clas-
sify them by speciﬁc statistical analyses as explained in Section 3. The results
of the source classiﬁcation can then be used for planning multi-wavelength
follow-up observations.

2.2 The Second Fermi-LAT Source Catalog

(2FGL)

The Second Fermi-LAT source Catalog (2FGL) [158] is the most recent high-
energy γ-ray (energy range 100 MeV - 100 GeV) source catalog, it is the
successor to the 1FGL catalog [3] and it is based on 2 years of ﬂight data.
Since the work explained in the next chapters is based on the data coming
from the 2FGL catalog, in this section the procedure to produce the catalog
will be described. This procedure follows the same principles used to produce
the 1FGL catalog (see the Section 2.1), for this reason only the important
improvements compared to the 1FGL catalog will be explained. A ﬁrst impor-
tant improvement is that the 2FGL catalog is based on data from 24 months
of observations, this means an increase of γ-ray photons detected allowing a
better characterization of the 2FGL sources. Moreover, the data and instru-
ment response functions (IRFs) use the newer and updated event selection,
this increases the performances of the analyses. The catalog employs a new,
higher-resolution model of the diﬀuse Galactic and isotropic emissions allowing
to distinguish more exactly if an excess of photon in a particular region of the
sky is related to the presence of a γ-ray emitter or to a statistical ﬂuctuation
of the background. Moreover, a speciﬁc analysis for the spatially extended
sources is introduced. The sources detected are analyzed using spectra other
than simple power laws (PL) and spectral shapes and variability are charac-
terized in a more reﬁned manner. In the end, the source association process
described in the Section 2.1 has been reﬁned and expanded.

46

2.2. The Second Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (2FGL)

2.2.1 Improvements with respect to the 1FGL and re-

sults

The data analyzed for the 2FGL catalog were taken during the period 2008
August 4 and 2010 August 1. During this time the observing eﬃciency was
very high and limited primarily by interruptions of data taking during the
passage of Fermi through the South Atlantic Anomaly (SAA; ∼ 13%) and
trigger dead time fraction (∼ 9%). Thanks to the experience with the data the
process of selection of the probable γ-ray events to use for the construction of
the catalog was improved decreasing the instrumental background at energies
above 10 GeV and increasing the eﬀective area at energies below 200 MeV. The
new class event selections3 are accompanied by a corresponding revised set of
IRFs, including an energy-dependent PSF calibrated using known celestial
point sources. These improvements mean the 2FGL catalog is not simply
derived from an extension of the 1FGL data set but from a new data set [158].
Other changes were applied for the selection of the events in order to increase
the performances of the analysis, e.g. it was applied a more conservative cut
on the zenith angles of the γ-rays, 100◦ instead of the 105◦ used for the 1FGL
catalog, because of a larger rocking angle for survey-mode observations (50◦
instead of 35◦).

Diﬀuse γ-ray background model

The ﬁrst step to construct a γ-ray catalog is modelling in detail the diﬀuse
γ-ray emission. An accurate model is essential to understand if an excess of
photons in a speciﬁc region on the sky is related to the presence of a γ-ray
source. Since our Galaxy is the brightest γ-ray emitter and the emission is
particularly structured, the detection of high-energy sources is extremely dif-
ﬁcult if they are close to the Galactic plane. For these reasons a lot of eﬀorts
went into improving the modeling of the diﬀuse emission [158]. Recent studies
helped to model in great detail the Galactic diﬀuse emission, a template for
the emission from the Earth limb not completely removed was created and
also the isotropic background emission was modelled in a more sophisticated
manner. The models for the Galactic diﬀuse emission and the isotropic back-
ground spectrum, along with more detailed descriptions of their derivation, are
available from the Fermi Science Support Center4.

3see http://www.slac.stanford.edu/exp/glast/groups/canda/archive/pass7v6

/lat_Performance.htm

4http://fermi.gsfc.nasa.gov/ssc/data/access/lat/BackgroundModels.html

47

2. The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

Construction of the catalog

The procedure used to construct the 2FGL catalog has a number of improve-
ments with respect to what was done for the 1FGL catalog. As for the 1FGL
catalog, the basic analysis steps are source detection, localization (position re-
ﬁnement), and signiﬁcance estimate. Once the ﬁnal source list was determined,
by applying a signiﬁcance threshold, the ﬂux in ﬁve bands, the spectral shape
and the variability are evaluated for each source. As for the 1FGL analysis,
the source detection step was applied only to the data from the full 24 month
time interval of the data set. No transient sources that may have been bright
for only a small fraction of the 24 month interval are included.

The procedure to built the 2FGL catalog does have a number of important
diﬀerences with respect to 1FGL. The analysis is based on a binned likelihood
algorithm for diﬀerent reasons, such as the computing time, which increases
linearly with observing time in unbinned likelihood, and then because the scale
factors for the diﬀuse emission models terms returned by binned likelihood are
not biased as for unbinned one.
Moreover, many bright sources are ﬁtted with curved spectra instead of simple
PL. This provides more detailed descriptions of bright sources and improves
the reliability of the procedure for neighboring sources, since it greatly reduces
the spectral residuals, which otherwise might have been picked up by neigh-
boring sources. A good representation of pulsar spectra is discovered to be an
exponentially cutoﬀ PL [9], i.e. the combination of a PL and an exponential:

(cid:18) E

(cid:19)−Γ

E0

(cid:18)
−E − E0

(cid:19)

Ec

exp

dN
dE

= K

(2.7)

(2.8)

where K and Γ are the same parameters used for a simple PL, E c is the
cutoﬀ energy and E 0 is the reference energy arbitrarily chosen [158]. All the
detected γ-ray pulsars with signiﬁcant LAT pulsations were ﬁtted using this
model. Moreover, analysis of the bright blazars [12] indicated that a broken
PL was the best spectral representation. Since this model would add two
free parameters making it not stable enough for moderately bright sources,
the LAT team chosen to use a log-normal representation, called LogParabola,
which adds only one parameter while decreasing more smoothly at high energy
than the PLExpCutoﬀ form:

(cid:19)−α−β log(E/E0)

(cid:18) E

E0

dN
dE

= K

where K is the normalization, α the spectral slope at E 0 (the reference energy
arbitrarily chosen) and β is the curvature. Other bright sources are also well
represented by LogParabola spectra, but to limit the number of parameters

48

2.2. The Second Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (2FGL)

only those in which the curvature was signiﬁcant are ﬁtted with this model
[158].
Another important diﬀerence from the construction of the 1FGL catalog is to
include as extended sources the 12 objects that have been shown to be extended
in the LAT data. The extended sources include seven SNRs, two PWNe, the
LMC and the SMC, and the radio galaxy Centaurus A. For these extended
sources a dedicated analysis was developed and applied to characterize their
spatial template and spectral form [122]. Since this thesis is based on the study
of the point-like LAT sources, these extended objects will never be taken into
account in the next chapters.
For a more detailed description about the improvements with respect to the
1FGL catalog refer to [158].

Flux determination, spectral shape and variability

As in 1FGL, the source photon ﬂuxes reported in the 2FGL catalog are split
into ﬁve energy bands: 100–300 MeV, 300 MeV to 1 GeV, 1–3 GeV, 3–10 GeV,
10–100 GeV. The ﬂuxes were obtained by freezing the spectral index to that
obtained in the ﬁt over the full range and adjusting the normalization in each
spectral band. The spectral index in a band of the curved spectra was set
to the local spectral slope at the logarithmic mid-point of the band
EnEn+1
[158].
For the 1FGL sources the spectral departure from a power-law shape was
quantiﬁed introducing the curvature index (Equation 2.1). In the 2FGL catalog
this parameter was reﬁned. An improved estimator of how much the spectrum
deviates from a PL based on a likelihood ratio test was introduced as follow:

√

T Scurve = 2(log L(SpectralModel) − log L(PL))

(2.9)
where L represents the likelihood function, changing only the spectral represen-
tation of that source, this means that TS curve is a measure of the signiﬁcance
of the spectral model selected. In order to take into account how much the sys-
tematic uncertainties inﬂuence the spectrum, in the 2FGL the departure of the
spectrum from a PL is quantiﬁed by the curvature signiﬁcance (Signif Curve)
deﬁned as follow:

(cid:115)

(cid:18) C P L

syst

(cid:19)

Signif Curve =

T Scurve

C P L

nosyst

(2.10)

syst is the curvature index deﬁned in the Equation 2.1 and C P L

where C P L
is the same with no f rel
spectrum of a LAT source is signiﬁcantly curved if Signif Curve > 4 [158].
As for the 1FGL sources, for each 2FGL source a light curve was produced

nosyst
term. The Signif Curve is deﬁned in σ units. The

i

49

2. The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

dividing the data into 24 time bins of about 1 month each and applying the
likelihood procedure to each. As in 1FGL, the spectral shape of each source
is frozen to the best ﬁt over the full interval in the light curve analysis. To
test for variability in each source a reﬁned variability index was constructed,
combining the value of the likelihood in the null hypothesis, that the source ﬂux
is constant across the full two-year period, and the value under the alternate
hypothesis where the ﬂux in each bin is optimized. Moreover, in 1FGL the
brightest pulsars detected by the LAT were ﬂagged as being variable because
of systematic errors in the calculation of the source exposure. In order to take
into account these eﬀects a correction factor which combines the error on the
ﬂux in each time bin in quadrature with a ﬁxed fraction of the overall ﬂux was
introduced, so that the bright pulsars are steady. The reﬁned Variability Index
(TS var) was introduced as follow:

(cid:88)

T Svar = 2

∆F 2
i

∆F 2

i + f 2F 2

Const

i

V 2
i

(2.11)

where f = 0.02, i.e. a 2% systematic correction factor, smaller than the 3%
correction required in 1FGL and:

i = log Li(Fi) − log Li(FConst)
V 2
where Li is the likelihood for the individual time bands.

(2.12)

Results

After the procedure of detection, localization and signiﬁcance evaluations, the
2FGL catalog lists 1873 γ-ray sources. In order to associate the LAT sources
with a plausible γ-ray emitter, an improved automated source association is
used (see [158]). The improved automated source association of the LAT team
is based on a list of 35 catalogs that contain potential counterparts of LAT
sources. The designations of the classes that were used to categorize the 2FGL
sources are listed in Table 2.1 along with the numbers of sources assigned to
each class. As for the 1FGL objects, distinction between associated and iden-
tiﬁed sources is used, with associations depending primarily on close positional
correspondence and identiﬁcations requiring measurement of correlated vari-
ability at other wavelengths or characterization of each 2FGL source by its
angular extent. Sources associated with SNRs are often also associated with
PWNe and pulsars, and the SNRs themselves are often not pointlike. Figure
2.5 illustrates where the diﬀerent classes of sources are located in the sky. At
this point it is interesting analyzing how many sources of the 1451 listed in the
1FGL catalog can be associated with a 2FGL object. Associations between

50

2.2. The Second Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (2FGL)

Description
Pulsar, identiﬁed by pulsation
Pulsar, no pulsations seen in LAT yet
Pulsar wind nebula
Supernova remnant
Supernova remnant/ pulsar wind nebula
Globular cluster
Nova
BL Lac object type of blazar
FSRQ type of blazar
Non-blazar active galaxy
Radio galaxy
Seyfert galaxy
Active galaxy of uncertain type
Normal galaxy
Starburst galaxy
Class uncertain
Unassociated
Total

Associated Identiﬁed

83
...
0
4
58
11
0
429
353
10
10
5
257
4
4
1
575
1746

...
25
3
6
...
0
1
7
17
1
2
1
0
2
0
...
..
127

Table 2.1: LAT 2FGL Source Classes [158].

2FGL and 1FGL sources can based on the following relation:

(cid:113)

∆ ≤ dx =

θ2
x1F GL

+ θ2

x2F GL

(2.13)

where ∆ is the angular distance between the sources and d x is deﬁned in terms
of the semimajor axis of the x % conﬁdence error ellipse for the position of each
source, e.g., the 95% conﬁdence error for the automatic source association
procedure. In total, 1099 2FGL sources were automatically associated with
entries in the 1FGL catalog. Using 95% source location conﬁdence contours
the 2FGL catalog contains 774 (out of 1873) new γ-ray sources, while 352
sources previously listed in 1FGL do not have a counterpart in the 2FGL
catalog [158]. These results show clearly how the 2FGL catalog is diﬀerent
from the 1FGL one, this diﬀerence is not simply related to the number of γ-
ray source detected but to the improvements developed by the LAT team for
each step in the catalog construction.

The automated association results of the LAT for each source class are

discussed in some detail in the following:

Active Galactic Nuclei: AGNs, and in particular blazars, are the most
prominent class of associated sources in 2FGL. In total, the automatic

51

2. The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

Figure 2.5: Full sky map showing sources by source class (see Table 2.1).
Identiﬁed sources are shown with a red symbol, associated sources in blue.
[158].

association procedure ﬁnds 917 2FGL sources that are associated with
AGNs, of which 894 are blazars, 9 are radio galaxies, 5 are Seyfert galax-
ies and 9 are other AGNs. One of the most interesting results is that
among the ﬁve Seyfert galaxies, four are narrow-line Seyfert 1 galaxies
that have been established as a new class of γ-ray active AGNs [15].
AGNs observed by the LAT are also sources of radio (and X-ray) emis-
sion, and a clear trend that AGNs associated with 2FGL sources have
larger radio ﬂuxes than the average object in the counterpart catalogs
was observed. For the AGN associations presented in the 2FGL catalog,
the results of the sophisticated 2LAC procedure [83] combined with the
results of the automatic association pipeline were adopted in order to in-
crease the number of AGNs associated reducing considerably the chance
coincidence probabilities.

Normal Galaxies: Normal galaxies are now established as a class of high-
energy γ-ray emitters [4] and seven 2FGL sources were associated with

52

2.2. The Second Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (2FGL)

such objects. Of those, the SMC and the LMC are treated as extended
sources and analyzed with a dedicated analysis. From the remaining ﬁve,
four are classiﬁed as starburst galaxies (M82, NGC 253, NGC 4945 and
NGC 1068) and the ﬁfth is the Andromeda galaxy M31. An interesting
result is that the γ-ray ﬂuxes of Local Group and starburst galaxies were
found correlate well with star formation rates [4], which in turn correlate
with infrared luminosity.

Pulsars:

4 of the 87 pulsars ﬁrmly identiﬁed by the LAT through the detec-
tion of γ-ray pulsations did not pass TS > 25 in the catalog analysis and
therefore they were excluded from the 2FGL catalog. Moreover, 3 of the
remaining 83 were found to be close to 2FGL sources, but their angular
separation from these sources exceeds their eﬀective 99.9% location er-
ror radius. In addition to the identiﬁed pulsars, four 2FGL sources were
associated with radio pulsars but no γ-ray pulsation has been detected.
The automatic association procedure also found 21 2FGL sources to be
associated with MSPs. Nineteen of those have unassociated counterparts
in the 1FGL catalog and have been discovered in radio pulsar searches of
unassociated 1FGL sources ([172], [55], [114], [98], the other two MSPs
have no 1FGL counterparts.

Pulsar Wind Nebulae:

69 2FGL sources were associated with PWNe, but
except for three, all of them are also associated with known pulsars.
Among those are three sources for which a dedicated analysis allowed
to identify both the pulsar and the PWN [158] and the 2FGL catalog
contains both the pulsar and the PWN as separate associated.

Globular Clusters: Eleven 2FGL sources are associated with globular clus-
ters. Among those, nine have been published previously: 47 Tuc, NGC
6266, NGC 6388, Terzan 5, NGC 6440, NGC 6626, NGC 6652, Omega
Cen and M 80. The two new associations are IC 1257 and 2MS-GC01.

Supernova Remnants:

6 2FGL sources were associated with point-like SNR,

of which two are also associated with ﬁrmly identiﬁed pulsars. Other six
of the 2FGL sources correspond to SNRs that were ﬁrmly identiﬁed as
γ-ray sources based on their spatial extensions (IC 443, W28, W30, W44,
W51C, and the Cygnus Loop). Moreover, 59 2FGL sources may be asso-
ciated with an extended SNR on the basis of the overlapping of the 95%
conﬁdence error radius of the 2FGL source with the circular extension of
the SNR. Since the high chance coincidence rate of these objects, they
are considered potential SNRs.

Binaries: The 2FGL catalog includes four HMB systems, all of which have
been ﬁrmly identiﬁed by their orbital modulation. They are LSI +61 303

53

2. The Fermi-LAT Source Catalogs

[10], LS5039 [11], Cygnus X-3 [76] and 2FGL J1019.0-5856 [58], recently
discovered in a blind search using the LAT data.

Despite the application of advanced techniques of identiﬁcation and asso-
ciation of the LAT sources with counterparts at other wavelengths, among the
1873 sources in the 2FGL catalog, 575 (31%) have not a clear association, this
fraction is diminished with respect to the 1FGL one but is still considerable.
In order to determine the plausible counterparts of each 2FGL unidentiﬁed
source multi-wavelength campaigns, mainly radio and X-rays, are in process.
Moreover, the improvements in the 2FGL catalog with respect to the 1FGL
one allow to characterized in major detail the 2FGL sources in terms of loca-
tion, spectral shape and time variability. All the primary γ-ray information of
the unidentiﬁed sources can be correlated with the γ-ray properties of known
source classes to try to classify them by advanced statistical analyses as ex-
plained in the next Chapter. The results of the source classiﬁcation can then
be used for planning multi-wavelength follow-up observations.

2.3 Summary

In this Chapter an overview of the procedure to construct the Fermi-LAT cat-
alogs have been given. The high sensitivity, improved angular resolution, and
nearly uniform sky coverage of the LAT made it a powerful tool for detecting
and characterizing large numbers of γ-ray sources. A plausible counterpart is
a member of a known or likely γ-ray emitting class located close to the 95%
uncertainty radius of a given 1FGL source, with an association conﬁdence of
80% or higher. A diﬀerent technique of association was introduced by the
LAT team, the ﬁrm identiﬁcation, based on a periodicity or on a variability
correlated with observations at another wavelength or on measurement of ﬁnite
angular extent.

Moreover, an overview of the construction of the 2FGL catalog, the most
recent γ-ray source catalog, including the diﬀerences and the improvements
with respect to the previous 1FGL catalog has been presented. 2FGL catalog
is not simply derived from an extension of the 1FGL data set but from a
new data set on the basis of the improvements developed. The 2FGL catalog
lists 1873 high-conﬁdence sources and the information about location, spectral
shape and variability have been reﬁned. Despite the improvements developed
for the construction of the 2FGL catalog, approximately 30% of these sources
remain unidentiﬁed.

54

Chapter 3

Classifying unidentiﬁed
gamma-ray sources: the case of
the 1FGL Source Catalog

In this Chapter we will present a brief report of the ongoing eﬀorts to ob-
serve the unidentiﬁed γ-ray source ﬁelds in other wavebands and to analyze
in more detail LAT data in order to ﬁnd the most plausible counterpart of
each unidentiﬁed source. A particular attention will be given to my personal
contribution within the Fermi-LAT collaboration to determine likely source
classiﬁcations for the unidentiﬁed γ-ray sources using the Logistic Regression
algorithm. This is a machine learning technique that uses identiﬁed objects to
build up a classiﬁcation analysis, yielding the probability for an unidentiﬁed
source to belong to a given class based on its γ-ray properties. We will de-
scribe the automated method we have developed: this was the starting point
of my Ph.D. work. Classiﬁcation methods can provide important guidance on
what types of follow-up observations are likely to be fruitful for many of these
unidentiﬁed sources.

The high sensitivity, improved angular resolution, and nearly uniform sky
coverage of the LAT made it a powerful tool for detecting and characteriz-
ing large numbers of γ-ray sources. 630 of the 1451 1FGL sources remain
unassociated with plausible counterparts at other wavelengths. A plausible
counterpart is a member of a known or likely γ-ray emitting class located close
to the 95% uncertainty radius of a given 1FGL source, with an association con-
ﬁdence of 80% or higher as explained in Section 2.1.2. The 95% uncertainty
radii for 1FGL source locations are typically 10’. While greatly improved over
the degree-scale uncertainties of previous instruments, these position measure-
ments are still inadequate to make ﬁrm identiﬁcations based solely on loca-

55

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

tion. The ﬁrst step of the thesis was to take a statistical approach toward
understanding these unassociated 1FGL sources, using all the available infor-
mation about the γ-ray sources.
Information about locations, spectra, and
time variability has been combined with properties of the established γ-ray
source classes and multi-wavelength counterpart searches.

3.1 Properties of the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources

The positions, time variability, and spectral information given in the 1FGL
catalog provide an important starting point for the characterization of LAT
unidentiﬁed sources. Intrinsic properties of the 1FGL sources such as spec-
tral index, curvature index, and ﬂux in diﬀerent energy bands can be easily
compared for both associated and unassociated populations, potentially pro-
viding insight into the likely classes of the unidentiﬁed sources. For the 1FGL
catalog, the limiting ﬂux for detecting a source with photon spectral index Γ
= 2.2 and Test Statistic of 25 varied across the sky by about a factor of ﬁve
[3]. This non-uniform ﬂux limit is due to the non-uniform Galactic diﬀuse
background and non-uniform exposure (mostly arising from the passage of the
Fermi observatory through the South Atlantic Anomaly).
The spatial distribution of the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources (see the Figure
2.4) is characterized by a signiﬁcant excess at low Galactic latitudes (|b| < 10◦)
where 64% of the γ-ray detected sources have no formal counterparts, com-
pared with only 36% unassociated at |b| > 10◦ [16]. As for the EGRET (3EG)
catalog sources [93], the distribution of the unidentiﬁed sources is clearly not
isotropic. One consideration when interpreting the distribution of unassociated
1FGL sources is that a number of the remaining unidentiﬁed sources are in low
Galactic latitude regions where catalogs of AGNs have limited or no coverage,
reducing the fraction of AGN associations. If we bin the diﬀerent source types
by Galactic latitude (Figure 3.1), we see a clear absence of AGN associations
in the central 10◦ of the Galaxy (|b| < 5◦), while in the same region there is a
spike in the number of unidentiﬁed sources. The absence of AGNs associations
is also related to the fact that in the Galactic plane a γ-ray source must be
brighter than at high latitudes in order to be detected above the strong Galac-
tic diﬀuse emission. Moreover, as was the case for COS-B and EGRET, we
expect that probably a subset of the unidentiﬁed sources situated close to the
Galactic plane may be spurious, resulting from an imperfect Galactic diﬀuse
model.

During the 1FGL analysis all sources were ﬁt with a power-law spectral
form and the spectral indices were included in the catalog. In addition, the
catalog includes a curvature index, which for each source measures the devia-
tion of the spectrum from the simple power law. Indeed, the curvature index is

56

3.1. Properties of the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 3.1: Distribution of 1FGL source types by Galactic latitude. The
sources associated with AGNs (blue line) show a clear deﬁcit at low latitudes,
while the same region hosts a large number of unidentiﬁed sources (yellow line)
and identiﬁed pulsars (red line) [16].

more a measure of the quality of the power-law spectral ﬁt than of the intrinsic
spectral shape. Moreover, in the 1FGL catalog a variability index was intro-
duced for each source to measure the χ2 of the deviations of eleven monthly
(30 day) source ﬂux measurements from the average source ﬂux. Now we look
in detail the distribution of these parameters as a function of the ﬂux to try to
understand which are the best parameters that distinguish pulsars from AGNs.
Analyzing the top and the middle panels of the Figure 3.2 we can assert the
spectral index and the curvature index do not appear to discriminate well the
AGNs from the pulsars. In addition, the relationship is nearly linear for the
curvature index, indicating that this parameter is strongly correlated with ﬂux.
That is, fainter sources have relatively poorly measured spectra that cannot
be measured to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from power laws. This means that
faint γ-ray sources provide less discriminating information than bright sources.
AGN spectra are well described by a broken power law, while pulsar spectra
are not well described by a simple power law, this means the spectral index of
a power-law ﬁt do not describe the intrinsic spectral properties of AGNs and

57

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

Figure 3.2: Distributions with respect to ﬂux of the spectral index (top), cur-
vature index (middle), and variability index (bottom) for the 1FGL sources.
It is clear that the curvature index is dependent on source ﬂux for both AGN
(blue crosses) and pulsar (red diamonds) populations.

58

3.2. Multi-wavelength observations and blind searches

pulsar and it cannot be a good discriminator between these two source classes
[16]. Examining the bottom panel of the Figure 3.2 it is clear that while the
variability index increases with ﬂux for AGNs, it does not do so for the pulsars,
making variability a much better discriminator between the two major classes.
This trend reﬂects what we know about these source classes (see Chapter 1),
AGNs are frequently signiﬁcantly variable in γ-rays, their ﬂuxes can vary up
to a factor of ﬁve on timescales of a few hours and by a factor of 50 or more
over several months. On the other hand pulsars are generally steady sources
making pulsars extremely diﬀerent from AGNs in the γ-ray regime.

As shown in Figure 3.3, when the variability and spectral curvature prop-
erties of 1FGL sources are compared against each other, a clear separation
is visible between bright sources with AGN associations and those with pul-
sar associations. We are analyzing the distribution of only these two classes
because we expect that a large fraction of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources may be
associated with AGNs and pulsars since they represent the two most numerous
object classes detected in γ rays. Pulsars lie in the lower right-hand quadrant
and AGNs lie in the upper half. However, the two classes mix in the lower
left-hand quadrant, making it diﬃcult to distinguish between them. This re-
gion of parameter space is home to much of the unidentiﬁed source population.
These and other properties of the known sources may give clues to statistical
methods of separating the two major types, allowing to classify some of the
unidentiﬁed sources as likely members of one of these two source types on the
basis of their γ-ray observables (Section 3.3).

This preliminary rough analysis gives us some important information about
which are the best discriminator between AGNs and pulsars, these results can
be used to predict the most probable classiﬁcation of each 1FGL unidentiﬁed
object on the basis of its γ-ray characteristics. The introduction of new γ-
ray parameters which do not depend too much on the ﬂux, and the use of an
accurate statistical approach based on a multivariate analysis would improve
the performances of this rough analysis.

3.2 Multi-wavelength observations and blind

searches

Even with the improved source locations provided by the Fermi-LAT with re-
spect to the previous γ-ray detectors, positional coincidence with a particular
object is not enough to claim an association. If potential candidates can be
found, then additional tests, based on spatial morphology, correlated variabil-
ity, or physical modeling of multi-wavelength properties oﬀer the opportunity
to expand the list of associations. X-ray, optical, or radio candidate counter-

59

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

Figure 3.3: Variability index plotted as a function of curvature index. The
horizontal dashed line shows where we set the variable source limit, at V >
23.21. The vertical dashed line shows where the spectra start deviating from
a power law, at C > 11.34.

parts all have better localizations than the γ-ray sources, so that a candidate in
one of these wavelength bands can be matched with those in others. Moreover,
most of the catalogs and observations used to ﬁnd new associations are not
complete surveys of the sky. Therefore the lack of an association for a 1FGL
source does not mean that the source cannot be associated.

3.2.1 Radio and IR searches for pulsars and AGNs

Of the 56 γ-ray emitting pulsars identiﬁed in 1FGL, 32 were detected by fold-
ing the γ-ray data using timing solutions from observations of known radio
pulsars. The pulsars’ ephemerides were collected by a global consortium of
radio astronomers who devote a portion of their observing time to this task
[189]. These 32 pulsars (23 young γ-ray pulsars and nine MSPs) had all been
discovered in the radio band prior to their detection by the LAT. In addition
to folding data using the properties of known radio pulsars, a promising tech-
nique for identifying unidentiﬁed sources is searching for previously unknown
radio pulsars that might be powering the γ-ray emission. This technique was
used on many of the EGRET unidentiﬁed sources ([48], [60], [113], for ex-
ample) with modest success, because the error boxes were many times larger
than a typical radio telescope beam. With the LAT, the unidentiﬁed source

60

3.2. Multi-wavelength observations and blind searches

localizations are a much better match to radio telescope beam widths and,
generally, each LAT source can be covered with a single pointing. So far, over
450 unassociated LAT sources, mostly at high Galactic latitudes, have been
searched by the Fermi Pulsar Search Consortium (PSC; [172]) at 350, 820, or
1400 MHz with preference for those that displayed low variability and a spec-
trum consistent with an exponential cutoﬀ in the few GeV range, as seen in the
identiﬁed γ-ray pulsar population [9]. Members of the PSC have used the fol-
lowing radio telescopes for these observations: Green Bank Telescope (GBT),
Parkes, Eﬀelsberg, Nancay Radio Telescope (NRT), Arecibo Telescope, the
Lovell Telescope at Jodrell Bank and the Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope
(GMRT). Searches by the PSC are ongoing. In the Galactic plane, high dis-
persion measures and sky temperatures demand higher frequency observations
with smaller beam sizes. Young, energetic pulsars can be very faint in the
radio ([40], [42]). Nevertheless, we expect that deep observations will continue
to turn up more discoveries of radio pulsars in unassociated 1FGL sources in
the near future.

The ﬁrst step in searching for (or excluding) AGN counterparts of Fermi-
LAT unidentiﬁed sources is to consult catalogs of radio sources because they
are also radio emitters with compact, ﬂat-spectrum cores [3]. Almost all radio
AGN candidates of possible interest are detected either in the NRAO VLA Sky
Survey (NVSS; [57]) or the Sydney University Molonglo Sky Survey (SUMSS;
[33]). NVSS covers the entire δ > –40◦ sky and provides interferometric ﬂux
density measurements at 1.4 GHz. SUMSS covers the remainder of the sky
and oﬀers interferometric measurements at 0.843 GHz. Diﬀerent radio follow-
up programs are ongoing in order to discover radio counterpart of the blazar
candidates, e.g. VLA programs [96]. Moreover, serendipitous radio identiﬁca-
tion surveys of 1FGL sources have been independently carried out using the
recently released Australia Telescope 20 GHz radio source catalog [157], which
contains entries for 5890 sources observed at δ < 0◦. Recently, using the Wide-
ﬁeld Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) survey, it was discovered that blazars
can be recognized also on the basis of their infrared (IR) colors, the analysis of
these data are very useful to discover if the counterpart of 1FGL unidentiﬁed
sources is a blazar [138].

3.2.2 X-ray observations of unidentiﬁed source ﬁelds

To look for additional possible counterparts the list of unassociated 1FGL
sources was cross-correlated with existing X-ray source catalogs. The result-
ing compilation has no claim of completeness since the match with cataloged
X-ray sources depends on the serendipitous sky coverage provided by the X-ray
observations and the integration time of the observation. While it is possible
that candidate X-ray counterparts to the LAT unidentiﬁed sources may be

61

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

singled out on the basis of, e.g., their brightness and/or spectral properties,
most are recognized only through a coordinated multi-wavelength identiﬁcation
approach. In order to ﬁnd X-ray counterparts of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources
diﬀerent X-ray catalogs were considered cross-correlating the 95% conﬁdence
ellipse of the LAT source with the positional uncertainty for the X-ray source
in the speciﬁc catalog. The catalogs considered are the 2XMM source catalog
derived from pointed XMM-Newton observations [213], in particular the fourth
incremental release of the catalog (2XMMi), the ROSAT ALL Sky Survey cat-
alogs ([211], [212]), the Swift-BAT source catalog [61] and the 4th IBIS/SGRI
Soft γ-ray Survey Catalog [30]. Recently, a Swift program to perform follow-up
observation of Fermi unidentiﬁed sources was performed in an attempt to ﬁnd
X-ray counterparts to the unidentiﬁed γ-ray sources1.

3.2.3 TeV observations of unidentiﬁed sources

Fermi-LAT spectra have been shown to be good predictors of TeV emission,
with 55 1FGL sources having very high energy (VHE) counterparts ([8], [14]).
The energy range from ∼50 GeV to ∼300 GeV is the only range where the
LAT data directly overlap with other instruments. The 1FGL unidentiﬁed
sources were cross-checked with the list of TeV sources from TeVCat2 and
current publications. A TeV source is considered coincident with a LAT source
if its extension overlaps with the 95% conﬁdence ellipse of the LAT source.
Note that the 1FGL association procedure did not assign an association to
a coincident TeV source if that TeV source had no identiﬁcation in another
waveband [16].

3.2.4 The Blind Search technique

A small number of sources have been associated or identiﬁed since the release
of the 1FGL catalog by using LAT data alone. The improved sensitivity of
the LAT has resulted in the detection of an order of magnitude more γ-ray
pulsars than were previously known. In addition to detecting γ-ray pulsations
from known radio pulsars, the LAT is the ﬁrst γ-ray telescope to independently
discover pulsars through blind searches in γ-ray data. Searching for pulsars
in γ-ray data poses signiﬁcant challenges, the main one being the scarcity of
photons. Despite its huge improvement in sensitivity, the LAT still only detects
a relatively small number of γ-ray photons from a given source. Typical γ-ray
pulsars result in tens or at most hundreds of photons per day. The detection of
γ-ray pulsations therefore requires observations spanning long periods of time

1Swift-XRT Survey of Fermi unidentiﬁed sources:

http://www.swift.psu.edu/unassociated/

2http://tevcat.uchicago.edu

62

3.3. Classiﬁcation of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources

(up to years), during which the pulsars not only slow down, but often also
experience signiﬁcant timing irregularities, such as timing noise or glitches.

In order to lessen the impact of the long integrations required for blind
searches of γ-ray pulsars, a new technique, known as ”time-diﬀerencing”, was
developed, in which FFTs are computed on the time diﬀerences of events,
rather than the times themselves. By limiting the maximum time window up
to which diﬀerences are computed to ∼ days, rather than months or years,
the required number of FFT bins is greatly reduced. The reduced frequency
˙f , thus
resolution results in a larger step size required in frequency derivative,
greatly reducing the number of ˙f trials needed to cover the requisite parameter
space, with the added bonus of making such searches less sensitive to timing
irregularities than a traditional coherent search. The net result is a signiﬁcant
reduction in the computational and memory costs, relative to the standard
FFT methods, with only a modest eﬀect on the overall sensitivity [183].

Recently, a new blind search technique was developed and applied to dis-
covery pulsars using only the γ-ray data coming from regions of the 1FGL
unidentiﬁed sources. The new method, designed to ﬁnd isolated pulsars spin-
ning at up to kHz frequencies, is computationally eﬃcient and incorporates
several advances, including a metric-based gridding of the search parameter
space (frequency, frequency derivative, and sky location) and the use of pho-
ton probability weights [167]. From the summer 2011, Einstein@Home, an
on-going distributed computing project3, is used to search for isolated γ-ray
pulsars in data from Fermi satellite’s LAT using the previous algorithm in-
creasing of some order of magnitude the number of CPUs and so the computing
power.

In the end, regarding the AGNs, the ﬁrst LAT catalog of AGNs (1LAC; [2])
listed high-conﬁdence AGN associations for 671 high Galactic latitude 1FGL
sources, with an additional 155 LAT sources included in the low-latitude and
lower conﬁdence association lists. The 1LAC association method was the same
as for 1FGL, but the acceptance threshold for association was lower than for
1FGL, thus it included more AGNs than the 1FGL catalog.

3.3 Classiﬁcation of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources

The spatial, spectral, and time variability properties are a framework that
allows us to try to predict the expected source classes for the sources that
remain unassociated. This is done by using the properties of the associated
sources to deﬁne a model that describes the distributions and correlations
between measured properties of the γ-ray behavior of each source class. This

3See http://einstein.phys.uwm.edu

63

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

model is then compared to the γ-ray properties of each unidentiﬁed source.
Generating the model requires an associated source parent population with
enough members to describe its behavior well. For this reason, we have focused
only on AGNs and pulsars as the input source populations.

To create a model, it is necessary to use γ-ray properties that are clearly
diﬀerent between the parent populations. In addition, it is important that the
properties used to generate the model not be related to source signiﬁcance,
as this will bias the results. To generate valid classiﬁcations, we must ﬁrst
deﬁne new parameters that allow intrinsic properties to be compared rather
than relative ﬂuxes. With the new parameters in hand, we can generate classi-
ﬁcation predictions using multiple methods and compare these predictions to
each other.

To mitigate the eﬀect of low ﬂuxes on the determination of the band spectra,
it is necessary to deﬁne additional comparative parameters that remove the
signiﬁcance dependency. In this case, the 1FGL catalog provides a set of ﬂuxes
in ﬁve bands for each source from which we can ﬁnd hardness ratios [16]. To
get a normalized quantity the hardness ratios are constructed as:

HRij =

EnergyF luxj − EnergyF luxi
EnergyF luxj + EnergyF luxi

(3.1)

This quantity is always between –1 and 1, –1 for a very soft source and +1 for a
very hard source. Here, energy ﬂux in log(E) units (i.e., νFν ) is used instead
of photon ﬂux because the deﬁnition works well only when the quantities are
of the same order. This is true for the energy ﬂuxes (because the spectra are
not too far from an E−2 power law) but not for photon ﬂuxes [16].

To remove the source signiﬁcance dependency for variability, we use the
Fractional Variability (as deﬁned in [3]) instead of the variability index. The
fractional variability is:

(cid:115)(cid:80)

F racV ar =

(cid:80)

i (F luxi − F luxav)2
(Nint − 1)F lux2

av

−

i σ2
i

− frel

(3.2)

NintF lux2
av

where N int is the number of time intervals (11 in 1FGL), σi is the statistical
uncertainty in F i, and f rel is an estimate of the systematic uncertainty on the
ﬂux for each interval. For some 1FGL sources the quantity inside the square
root is negative. Those sources are assigned a fractional variability of 2% [3].

3.3.1 Machine Learning methods

Machine learning concerns the construction and study of systems that can learn
from data [128]. For example, a machine learning system could be trained on
associated γ-ray sources to learn to distinguish between the diﬀerent source

64

3.3. Classiﬁcation of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources

classes, e.g. AGNs and pulsars, on the basis of some parameters. After learn-
ing, it can then be used to classify unknown objects, such as unidentiﬁed
sources, into AGN or pulsar candidates. The core of machine learning deals
with representation and generalization. Representation of data instances and
functions evaluated on these instances are part of all machine learning sys-
tems. Generalization is the property that the system will perform accurately
on new, unseen data instances after having experienced a learning data set.
The training examples come from some generally unknown probability distri-
bution (considered representative of the space of occurrences) and the learner
has to build a general model about this space that enables it to produce suﬃ-
ciently accurate predictions in new cases. There is a wide variety of machine
learning tasks and successful applications.

Machine learning is commonly confused with data mining, as they often
employ the same methods and overlap signiﬁcantly [128]. Machine learning fo-
cuses on prediction, based on known properties learned from the training data,
while data mining focuses on the discovery of (previously) unknown properties
in the data. The two areas overlap in many ways, data mining uses many
machine learning methods, but often with a slightly diﬀerent goal in mind. On
the other hand, machine learning also employs data mining methods as “unsu-
pervised learning” or as a preprocessing step to improve learner accuracy.

Machine learning algorithms can be organized into a taxonomy based on
the desired outcome of the algorithm or the type of input available during
training the machine [128]. Supervised learning algorithms are trained on la-
belled examples, i.e. input where the desired output is known. The supervised
learning algorithm attempts to generalize a function or mapping from inputs
to outputs which can then be used to speculatively generate an output for pre-
viously unseen inputs. Unsupervised learning algorithms operate on unlabeled
examples, i.e. input where the desired output is unknown. Here the objective
is to discover structure in the data (e.g. through a cluster analysis), not to
generalize a mapping from inputs to outputs.

In the followings we show the list of the most common machine learning

methods [128]:

Artiﬁcial neural networks: an artiﬁcial neural network algorithm, is a learn-
ing algorithm that is inspired by the structure and functional aspects of
biological neural networks. Computations are structured in terms of
an interconnected group of artiﬁcial neurons, processing information us-
ing a connectionist approach to computation. Modern neural networks
are non-linear statistical data modeling tools. They are usually used to
model complex relationships between inputs and outputs, to ﬁnd pat-
terns in data, or to capture the statistical structure in an unknown joint
probability distribution between observed variables (see Section 4.3).

65

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

Bayesian networks: a Bayesian network is a probabilistic graphical model
that represents a set of random variables and their conditional inde-
pendencies via a directed acyclic graph. Formally, Bayesian networks
are directed acyclic graphs whose nodes represent random variables in
the Bayesian sense: they may be observable quantities, latent variables,
unknown parameters or hypotheses. Edges represent conditional depen-
dencies; nodes that are not connected represent variables that are con-
ditionally independent of each other. Each node is associated with a
probability function that takes as input a particular set of values for the
node’s parent variables and gives the probability of the variable repre-
sented by the node. Eﬃcient algorithms exist that perform inference and
learning in Bayesian networks.

Classiﬁcation trees: classiﬁcation trees are classiﬁcation tools that have a
tree structure in which each internal (non-leaf) node is labeled with an
input feature. The arcs coming from a node labeled with a feature are
labeled with each of the possible values of the feature. Each leaf of the
tree is labeled with a class or a probability distribution over the classes.
A tree can be “learned” by splitting the source set into subsets based on
an attribute value test. This process is repeated on each derived subset
in a recursive manner called recursive partitioning. The recursion is
completed when the subset at a node has all the same value of the target
variable, or when splitting no longer adds value to the predictions.

Clustering: cluster analysis is the assignment of a set of observations into
subsets (called clusters) so that observations within the same cluster are
similar according to some predesignated criterion or criteria, while obser-
vations drawn from diﬀerent clusters are dissimilar. Diﬀerent clustering
techniques make diﬀerent assumptions on the structure of the data, often
deﬁned by some similarity metric and evaluated for example by internal
compactness (similarity between members of the same cluster) and sepa-
ration between diﬀerent clusters. Clustering is a method of unsupervised
learning, and a common technique for statistical data analysis.

Logistic regression: logistic regression is part of a class of generalized linear
models. Binary logistic regression forms a multivariate relation between
a dependent variable that can only take values from “0” to “1” and several
independent variables. Logistic regression is used to predict the probabil-
ity of being a speciﬁc source class based on the values of the independent
variables (see Section 3.3.2).

Support vector machines: a support vector machine constructs a hyper-
plane or set of hyperplanes in a high- or inﬁnite-dimensional space, which

66

3.3. Classiﬁcation of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources

can be used for classiﬁcation, regression, or other tasks. Intuitively, a
good separation is achieved by the hyperplane that has the largest dis-
tance to the nearest training data point of any class (so-called functional
margin), since in general the larger the margin the lower the generaliza-
tion error of the classiﬁer.

Random forest: random forest is an ensemble classiﬁer that grows a large
forest of classiﬁcation trees. To classify a new object, each tree in the
forest votes on the class. The proportion of votes that agree on a decision
provides a measure of the accuracy of the classiﬁcation.

In this thesis we will use the logistic regression algorithm because it is one
of simplest machine learning method, it discriminates each object class using
a linear separation, and the artiﬁcial neural networks because are the natural
extension of the logistic regression as we will explain in the next Chapter, they
discriminate each object class using a more complex non-linear separation.

3.3.2 Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression

Two diﬀerent machine learning techniques were implemented to determine
likely source classiﬁcations for the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources: Logistic Re-
gression (LR) and Classiﬁcation Trees (CT). Both techniques use identiﬁed
objects to build up a classiﬁcation analysis which provides the probability for
an unidentiﬁed source to belong to a given class. We applied these techniques
to the sources in 1FGL to provide a set of classiﬁcation probabilities for each
unidentiﬁed source.

The approach to assign likely classiﬁcations for the 1FGL unidentiﬁed
sources we have developed is the Logistic Regression (LR) analysis method
[103]. LR allows us to quantify the probability of correct classiﬁcation based
on ﬁtting a model form to the data (a more detailed description of this method
is explained in the next Chapter and in Appendix B.1). We do not describe
the CT technique that was developed by the LAT team, the application of this
method is very similar to the LR, for a detailed description of this technique
see [16]. In this Section we will explain in detail only the LR technique be-
cause this was the ﬁrst step of my thesis. I started to develop and apply this
advanced statistical method to classify 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources on the basis
of their γ-ray observables. At the end of this Section the LR and CT results
will be compared in order to obtain more robust results.

LR is part of a class of generalized linear models and is one of the simplest
machine learning techniques. LR forms a multivariate relation between a de-
pendent variable that can only take values from 0 to 1 and several independent
variables. When the dependent variable has only two possible assignment cate-

67

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

gories, the simplicity of the LR method can be a beneﬁt over other discriminant
analyses.

In our case, the dependent variable is a binary variable that represents
the classiﬁcation of a given 1FGL unidentiﬁed source. Quantitatively, the
relationship between the classiﬁcation and its dependence on several variables
can be expressed as:

P =

1

(1 + e−z)

(3.3)

where P is the probability of the classiﬁcation, and z can be deﬁned as a linear
combination:

z = b0 + b1x1 + b2x2 + ... + bnxn

(3.4)

where b0 is the intercept of the model, the bi (i = 0, 1, 2, ..., n) are the
slope coeﬃcients of the LR model and the xi (i = 0, 1, 2, ..., n) are the
independent variables. Therefore, LR evaluates the probability of association
with a particular class of sources as a function of the independent variables
(e.g. spectral shape or time variability).

Similarly to linear regression, LR ﬁnds a “best ﬁtting” equation. How-
ever, the principles on which the two methods are based are rather diﬀerent.
Instead of using a least-squared deviations criterion for the best ﬁt, it uses a
maximum-likelihood method, which maximizes the probability of matching the
associations in the training sample by optimizing the regression coeﬃcients. As
a result, the goodness of ﬁt and overall signiﬁcance statistics used in LR are
diﬀerent from those used in linear regression.

Selection of the training sample and the predictor variables

Since LR is a supervised machine learning technique, it must be trained on
known objects in order to predict the membership of a new object to a given
class on the basis of its observables. We trained the predictor using the pulsar
and AGN associated sources in the 1FGL catalog [3] because, as we have seen,
they represent the two most numerous γ-ray classes and because they can
be well distinguished by their γ-ray observables. The output of this training
process is the probability that an unidentiﬁed source has characteristics more
similar to an AGN than to a pulsar.

To evaluate the best predictor variables for the LR analysis, we used the
likelihood ratio test, comparing the likelihoods of the models not including
(null hypothesis) and including (alternative hypothesis) the predictor variable
under examination. We started by using the fractional variability, the spectral
index, the hardness ratios for the 5 energy bands in the catalog and the sky
position (i.e. the Galactic latitude and longitude). The value of the likelihood
ratio test is the p-value, and is useful in determining if a predictor variable is

68

3.3. Classiﬁcation of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources

signiﬁcant in distinguishing an AGN from a pulsar. If the p-value for a given
predictor variable is smaller than the signiﬁcance threshold α (0.05) then the
predictor variable is included in the multivariate LR model. We do not include
the curvature value (HR23 − HR34) in this evaluation because the LR analysis
does not work well with predictor variables that are linearly dependent on
other predictor values.

We then calculated the signiﬁcance of each predictor variable to ﬁnd the
resulting LR coeﬃcients. The list of the LR predictor variables with the relative
values of the maximum likelihood ratios can be found in Table 3.1.

Variable
Intercept
Fractional Variability
Spectral Index
Hardness23
Hardness34
Hardness45
Hardness12
glat
glon

Coeﬃcient Standard Error p-value
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.002
<0.001
<0.001
0.242
0.333
0.144

-22.17
10.61
11.30
-3.84
8.14
3.72
...
...
...

4.97
1.49
2.47
1.27
1.53
0.76
...
...
...

Table 3.1: List of the Predictor Variables for the LR Model. Variables selected
for the Logistic Regression analysis are listed at top. Those rejected are listed
below the line [16].

While AGNs are isotropically distributed and pulsars are concentrated
along the Galactic plane, we wanted to see whether our multivariate LR model
was able to recognize this eﬀect. The results indicate that Galactic latitude
and longitude are not signiﬁcant at the α = 0.05 (5% signiﬁcance) level. More-
over we ﬁnd that also HR12 is not highly signiﬁcant in the LR analysis. It is
interesting to note that HR12, in the univariate LR model, is quite signiﬁcant
(p-value=0.02) to distinguish between AGNs and pulsars but in a multivari-
ate LR analysis it loses its signiﬁcance. In Table 3.1 those predictor variables
selected for the LR model are above the line and those we did not select lie
below the line.

Deﬁning thresholds

Next we derive the predictor variable for 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources by applying
the trained classiﬁcation analysis to those sources. Since the LR analysis uses
AGNs as primary source type, the output parameter (A) listed in Table 4

69

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

of [16] describes the probability that an unidentiﬁed source is an AGN. The
probability that an unidentiﬁed source is a pulsar is P = 1 − A (because we
are modeling the behavior of AGNs as “opposite” of the behavior of the pulsars
based on the predictor variables).

In principle, the dependent variable is a binary variable that represents the
presence or absence of a particular class of objects. We could have selected
“pulsars” and “non-pulsars” (e.g. all other 1FGL associated sources) to teach
the model to recognize the new pulsars, and done similarly for the AGNs. We
did not follow this approach because there are no source populations in 1FGL
other than AGNs and pulsars with suﬃcient numbers to signiﬁcantly aﬀect the
results. By focusing on “opposing” characteristics, we improve the eﬃciency of
classifying new AGN or pulsar candidates.

Later, we deﬁned two threshold values, one to classify an AGN candi-
date (CA) and one to classify a pulsar candidate (CP ). We chose these two
thresholds by analyzing the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves
by plotting all combinations of true positives and the proportion of false neg-
atives generated by varying the decision threshold so that 80% of the AGN
associations in 1FGL would have a predictor value greater than CA and 80%
of the pulsars would have a predictor value smaller than CP , and to result in
very low contamination. Using this principle we set CA to 0.98 and CP to 0.62.
With these thresholds, only 1% of AGNs are misclassiﬁed as pulsars, while 3%
of pulsars are classiﬁed as AGN.

To estimate how accurately our predictive model performs in practice, we
cross-validated using only the 756 pulsars and AGNs in the 1FGL catalog. We
held out 75 sources to be the testing data set, and we used the remaining 681
for training. We repeated this procedure 10 times, using a diﬀerent set of 75
test sources in each data set. At the end, this 10-fold cross-validation showed
that the average testing eﬃciency rates for these threshold values are 75%
for pulsars and 80% for AGNs, and that the average testing error rates (false
positives) are very low, 0.05% for pulsars and 0.02% for AGNs. The 5% lower
success rate for the pulsars is likely due to low statistics in the test samples.

It must also be noted that the sources associated with a diﬀerent class than
AGN or pulsar have been excluded from this training procedure, for a total
of 24 sources. We cannot treat these 24 sources uniformly as “background”,
because of the smallness of their sample and the diversity of their spectral
properties. However, it is possible to estimate the contamination to the candi-
date AGN and pulsar samples deriving from the likely presence of these “other”
sources in the unassociated sample.

70

3.3. Classiﬁcation of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Results

If we apply the model to the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources we ﬁnd that 368 are
classiﬁed as AGN candidates (P > 0.98), 122 are classiﬁed as pulsar can-
didates (P < 0.62) and 140 remain unclassiﬁed after the LR analysis. The
distributions of 1FGL associated and unidentiﬁed sources as a function of the
probability of being AGNs are shown in the Figure 4.5. The thresholds for
assigning pulsar candidates and AGN candidates are indicated in the ﬁgure.
It is important to note that in order to meet the acceptance threshold of 80%
of the known pulsars, we are including a large range of predictor values with
very few pulsars. This may result in over-predicting the number of pulsars in
unidentiﬁed sources.

Figure 3.4: Distribution of the Logistic Regression predictor. Vertical lines
indicate the value of the thresholds we set to identify pulsar candidates (Pre-
dictor < 0.62) and AGN candidates (Predictor > 0.98). Left: sources of the
1FGL catalog identiﬁed as pulsars (red) and AGNs (blue). Right: for 1FGL
unidentiﬁed sources [16].

The predictor distribution for the 24 sources that were not used during
the training procedure can be used to estimate the contamination from these
sources to the AGN and pulsar candidate distributions. According to the LR
analysis, those 24 sources are equally distributed between AGN-like objects,
pulsar-like objects, and still unclassiﬁed objects. Moreover, it is reasonable
to assume that those sources will not be overrepresented in the unassociated
population compared with the associated one. Therefore, we expect that up
to 2% of the newly classiﬁed AGN candidates and up to 5% of the newly
classiﬁed pulsar candidates will indeed belong to one of the “other” classes
(galaxies, globular clusters, supernova remnants, etc.).

71

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

Validating the results

To test the capability of the LR algorithm for identifying the diﬀerent source
classes, we applied the LR analysis to the new sources identiﬁed after the re-
lease of the 1FLG catalog [3]. Of the 177 newly associated AGNs, 142 were
correctly classiﬁed as AGN candidates by the LR analysis (eﬃciency: 80%),
only 7 were classiﬁed as pulsar candidates (4%), while the other 28 sources
remained unclassiﬁed (16%). For the 37 newly pulsars, we noticed a diﬀerent
performance between “new pulsar detections”, for which pulsations detected
in the LAT data, and “new pulsar candidates”, i.e. pulsars found at another
wavelength in the unidentiﬁed source ﬁeld for which pulsations have been de-
tected only in the radio. For the 20 objects detected as pulsars by the LAT, we
correctly classify 11 pulsars (eﬃciency: 55%), we misclassify only one source
(5%) and we leave the remaining sources as unclassiﬁed (eﬃciency: 40%). On
the other hand, for the 17 sources that are considered pulsar candidates (as
opposed to detections), the classiﬁcation rate was much worse. We correctly
classiﬁed only 4 objects as pulsars (eﬃciency: 23.5%), we misclassiﬁed 4 ob-
jects as AGN (23.5% of the new pulsar candidates) and left the 9 remaining
objects as still unassociated (53%). These results are interesting, as the deﬁni-
tion of the pulsar ﬁducial threshold in the LR analysis appeared that it might
overestimate the pulsar candidates. However, the LR actually has a somewhat
poorer success rate for ﬁnding new pulsars and pulsar candidates than for ﬁnd-
ing new AGN candidates. Looking more closely at the 1FGL properties of the
misclassiﬁed pulsar candidates, we ﬁnd that 12 of the 17 new pulsar candidates
have only upper limits for the 0.3 – 1 GeV band, a prime portion of the typi-
cal spectrum in the LAT. In contrast, 80% of the new pulsar detections were
signiﬁcantly detected in this portion of the LAT spectrum. This diﬀerence in
characteristics for the two pulsar groups may indicate the need for additional
criteria when selecting sources for follow-up observations.

The sky distribution (left) and the latitude (right) distribution of the newly
classiﬁed sources are shown in Figure 4.24. Note that both the AGN and pul-
sar distributions are as expected, even though we have not used the Galactic
latitude as an input to either classiﬁcation method. The pulsar candidates
are mainly distributed along the Galactic plane, with a few high-latitude ex-
ceptions that suggest additional nearby MSPs, while the AGN candidates are
nearly isotropically distributed over the sky. From this we can conclude that,
using only the γ-ray properties of the Fermi-LAT sources, and the ﬁrm asso-
ciations of the 1FGL, we were able to develop a predictive method for AGN
and pulsar classiﬁcation that nearly matches our expectations (i.e., pulsar can-
didates are not variable, have a curved spectrum, and are mainly distributed
along the Galactic plane, while AGN candidates are mostly extraGalactic,
variable sources).

72

3.3. Classiﬁcation of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 3.5: Distribution of the newly classiﬁed sources. Left: spatial distribu-
tion in galactic coordinates. Right: latitude distribution. In red are shown the
pulsar candidates, in blue the AGN candidates and in green the unclassiﬁed
sources.

3.3.3 Combining Logistic Regression with Classiﬁcation

Trees

The LAT team implemented another machine learning technique to determine
likely source classiﬁcations for the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources: the Classiﬁcation
Trees (CT), which iteratively split the original sample trying to maximize
the separation at each cut4. The LR results were then combined with those
found using the CT. In this way the combined classiﬁer would have a higher
performance in the classiﬁcation of 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources. For this reason,
since the purpose of this analysis is to provide candidate sources for follow-up
multi-wavelength studies, the positive results from both techniques are used to
generate our candidate lists. It was noticed the two classiﬁcation techniques
gave somewhat diﬀerent results. Of the 630 unidentiﬁed sources in 1FGL, both
techniques agreed on the appropriate classiﬁcation for 57.6% of the sources
(363), while they gave conﬂicting classiﬁcations for 5.4% (34 sources). The
remaining 253 sources were left unclassiﬁed by one or both techniques (see
[16]). We can now synthesize a ﬁnal set of classiﬁcations of 1FGL unidentiﬁed
sources as follow: AGN candidates must be classiﬁed by at least one method,
and the other method must not disagree (that is, not classify it as a pulsar);
pulsar candidates must be classiﬁed by at least one method, and the other
method must not disagree (that is, not classify it as an AGN); unclassiﬁed
sources are not classiﬁed by either method; “Conﬂicting” sources are those
that have been assigned opposite classiﬁcations (one AGN and one pulsar) by
the two diﬀerent methods. Based on these deﬁnitions, in the 1FGL unidentiﬁed
source list there are 396 AGN candidates (269 are classiﬁed as AGNs by both

4Details on the analysis and the results using Classiﬁcation Trees can be found in [16]

73

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

methods), 159 pulsar candidates (72 classiﬁed as pulsars by both methods), 41
unclassiﬁed sources, and 34 conﬂicting sources. Figure 3.6 shows on the left
the curvature-variability distribution of the newly classiﬁed AGN and pulsar
candidates based on this synthesis of the two methods and on the right their
spatial distribution [16].

Figure 3.6: (left) Variability index vs. curvature index for 1FGL unidentiﬁed
sources classiﬁed as AGN (blue crosses) and pulsar candidates (red circles).
(right) Spatial distribution of the combined classiﬁcation sample, in Galactic
coordinates. Sources are classiﬁed as AGN candidates (blue diamond), pul-
sar candidates (red circles), unclassiﬁed (green crosses), or in conﬂict (black
squares) [16].

Now we can compare the new associations to the combined classiﬁcations.
Of the 214 newly associated AGNs and pulsars, 171 sources (151 new AGNs,
16 new pulsar detections, and 4 new pulsar candidates) match the classiﬁcation
given by the combined analysis, and 26 sources (15 new AGNs, only one new
pulsar detection, and 10 new pulsar candidates) are in direct conﬂict with the
classiﬁcation source type. This gives an eﬃciency of 85% for AGN classiﬁcation
and 80% for classiﬁcation of new pulsar detections, but only 59% for new pulsar
candidates. Seventeen of the newly associated sources are unclassiﬁed by either
method, and only one source has conﬂicting source classiﬁcation. The one
conﬂicting source turns out to be a new pulsar candidate that also has an AGN
association, suggesting the LAT source could be the sum of these two objects.
The overall eﬃciency for this combined sample is ∼ 80%, comparable to the
value we were seeking when we set the ﬁducial values for the two methods.
The combined sample has a false negative rate of ∼ 12%.

Discussion

The results of the classiﬁcation analyses demonstrate that source properties
measured with the Fermi-LAT can provide important guidance on what types

74

3.4. Summary

of follow-up observations are likely to be fruitful for many of these unidentiﬁed
sources. The emphasis in follow-up observations of LAT sources has been on
radio imaging and timing observations for a large number of sources, as well as
targets X-ray observations for sources of interest (e.g., ﬂaring sources or new
radio pulsar candidates). In addition, there is an on-going program to observe
all the bright, well-localized Fermi-LAT unidentiﬁed sources with Swift with
the aim to add important new insights into these sources as a group. The list
containing what follow-up observations are recommended in several wavebands
on the basis of these analyses is shown in [16].

The eﬃciency of the LR method at classifying new AGN is high, with
a low rate of false negatives, while the eﬃciency for new pulsar candidates
is much lower than expected. The main reason is related to the number of
objects in the two training classes, AGN class includes an order of magnitude
of objects larger than pulsar class, for this reason our classiﬁcation method
tends to classify better AGNs than pulsars. Moreover, its performances may
improve with diﬀerent criteria selection of input parameters and classiﬁcation
thresholds. In the ﬁrst section of the next Chapter we will describe the results
of a reﬁned LR analysis, in which we will use diﬀerent criteria selection. In the
end, the eﬃciency of the combined classiﬁcation methods at classifying new
AGN and pulsar candidates is higher as we expect. These results suggest us
to combine more classiﬁcation methods in order to obtain a stronger classiﬁer.

3.4 Summary

The Fermi-LAT source catalogs list a number of γ-ray sources one order of
magnitude greater with respect to the previous γ-ray catalogs. The fraction
of sources without a ﬁrm association is decreasing but is still signiﬁcant. The
association of γ-ray sources is primarily based on positional coincidence, corre-
lated variability, and pulsation. The low statistics and poor localization (>1’)
of γ-ray instruments hamper the association process. Other γ-ray information
can be used to investigate the nature of unidentiﬁed sources. We have re-
ported the study and the classiﬁcation of the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources: this
was the starting point of my Ph.D. work. The predictions from these statistical
analyses are useful for planning multi-wavelength follow-up observations and
selecting targets for pulsar and blazars searches.

630 of the 1451 1FGL sources remain unassociated with plausible coun-
terparts at other wavelengths. The 95% uncertainty radii for 1FGL source
locations are typically 10’. While greatly improved over the degree-scale un-
certainties of previous instruments, these position measurements are still in-
adequate to make ﬁrm identiﬁcation based solely on location. The ﬁrst step of
the thesis was to develop and apply an advanced statistical approach based on

75

3. Classifying unidentiﬁed gamma-ray sources: the case of the 1FGL Source Catalog

the Logistic Regression toward understanding the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources,
using all the available information about the γ-ray sources. Information about
locations, spectra, and time variability has been combined with properties of
the established γ-ray source classes. These results, combined with those found
using other machine learning techniques (e.g. Classiﬁcation Trees), are useful
for planning multi-wavelength follow-up observations and selecting targets for
pulsar and AGN searches.

76

Chapter 4

Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL
unidentiﬁed sources

The Second Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (2FGL) is the most recent γ-ray source
catalog.
It lists 1873 sources detected during the ﬁrst 24 months of opera-
tion by the LAT in the 100 MeV to 300 GeV energy range. For each LAT
source, the proposed associations with sources in other astronomical catalogs
is based primarily on positional coincidence, correlated variability and pulsa-
tion. In particular, a plausible counterpart is a member of a known or likely
γ-ray emitting class located close to the 95% uncertainty radius of given 2FGL
source, with an association conﬁdence of 80% or higher. The procedure used
to construct the 2FGL catalog was improved with respect to that used for
the 1FGL catalog. Moreover, since the 2FGL catalog is based on data from
2 years of observations, the number of detected γ-ray photons is considerably
increased, allowing for a better characterization of each 2FGL source. All this
allowed to improve the localization of each γ-ray source and to reﬁne the pa-
rameters that describe its spectral shape and time variability. Despite all these
improvements, 575 (∼ 30%) 2FGL sources remain unassociated. As shown in
Figure 4.1, the fraction of unidentiﬁed sources is lower than of the previous
γ-ray source catalogs but, because of the low statistics and poor localization
(> 1’) of γ-ray instruments, is still signiﬁcant. Other γ-ray information can
be used to investigate the nature of unidentiﬁed sources. Understanding the
nature of these sources is very important for diﬀerent reasons, these objects
represent discovery space for new source classes, or new members of existing
source classes and their study can help us to better characterize the γ-ray
Universe.

Advanced statistical techniques will be applied to assign the probability
of a γ-ray source to belong to a speciﬁc source class on the basis of its γ-ray
observables. Two machine learning techniques will be used for this purpose,

77

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.1: Number of detected γ-ray sources (blue) and fraction of unidentiﬁed
sources (red).

a Logistic Regression (LR) reﬁned with respect to that used for the study of
1FGL unidentiﬁed sources and an Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN), which
represents the natural extension of the LR method. The results of these two
techniques will be compared and from the outcomes multi-wavelength follow-
up observations will be planned.

4.1 Properties of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

As for the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources, the position, time variability and spectral
information given in the 2FGL catalog provide an important starting point for
the characterization of the LAT unidentiﬁed sources. Since the procedure
to build the 2FGL catalog is based on a reﬁned deﬁnition of the parameters
which are used to describe the spectral shape and the time variability for each
source, it is necessary to analyze the “reﬁned” intrinsic properties distribution
of the associated sources in order to compare them with the distribution of the
unidentiﬁed sources.

Figure 4.2 shows on the left the distribution on the sky of the 2FGL sources
color coded on the basis of their classiﬁcations while on the right the distribu-
tion of the diﬀerent classes as a function of the Galactic latitude. From these
ﬁgures it is clear that AGNs and pulsars represent the two most numerous
source classes in the γ-ray catalogs and they are characterized by a diﬀerent
distribution. AGNs are characterized by a nearly isotropical distribution that
reﬂects the extragalactic nature of these objects. Inspecting their distribution

78

4.1. Properties of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.2: Distribution of the 2FGL sources color coded on the basis of their
classiﬁcations. Left: spatial distribution in Galactic coordinates. Right: lati-
tude distribution.

near Galactic latitude, the absence of AGN associations close to the Galactic
plane is striking. As explained in the previous Chapter this absence is related
to two facts, ﬁrst the AGN catalogs used for the procedure of association are
not complete at low Galactic latitude, moreover in the Galactic plane, a γ-ray
source must be brighter than at high latitudes in order to be detected above the
Galactic diﬀuse emission. On the contrary, pulsars are primarily situated along
the Galactic plane to witness the Galactic nature of these objects. However,
a few number of γ-ray sources associated with pulsars are located at higher
latitudes. These objects are primary MSPs, they are fainter than young γ-ray
pulsars and only the nearer ones can be detected by the LAT. They are in
our Galaxy but they are located at high latitudes only for a projection eﬀect.
The distribution of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources is clearly not isotropic, as
was observed for the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources. There is a signiﬁcant excess
of unidentiﬁed sources at low Galactic latitudes (|b| < 10◦) where 55% of the
detected sources have no formal counterparts, compared with only 21% unas-
sociated at |b| > 10◦. This distribution is probably the sum of a Galactic
and extragalactic component. Almost all the objects at high latitude (|b| >
10◦) may be associated with extragalactic objects, primarily with AGNs and
in particular blazars, the most abundant γ-ray source class. Likely a small
fraction of these unidentiﬁed sources may be associated with Galactic objects
such as MSP. Probably, as was the case for COS-B and EGRET, a subset of
the unidentiﬁed sources situated close to the Galactic plane may be spurious,
resulting from an imperfect Galactic diﬀuse model, this fact may explain a frac-
tion of the spike in their Galactic latitude distribution. Almost all the “real”
unidentiﬁed sources located close to the Galactic plane may be associated with
Galactic objects, primarily pulsars, because they are the most numerous γ-ray
Galactic source class, the others may be associated to SNRs or other Galactic
sources. Owing to the limitation of the AGNs catalogs used during the pro-

79

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

cedure of association we expect that a small fraction of unidentiﬁed sources
located along the Galactic plane may be associated with AGNs. In Figure 4.2
the objects called “psr ” represent the LAT sources associated with a pulsar by
the automated source association procedure although no signiﬁcant pulsation
has been found analyzing LAT data. This means that the association of some
of these objects may be spurious and we decide not to consider these objects as
pulsars but as “potential” pulsars. Otherwise, the objects called “spp” are LAT
sources for which the 95% conﬁdence error radius overlaps with an extended
SNR but their association is not clear, they may be associated with a pulsar
or a PWN. Since the high-chance coincidence rate of these objects, we do not
consider them as SNRs but as “potential” SNRs.

During the construction of the 2FGL catalog, the brighter sources were
ﬁtted with curved spectra instead with a simple power law. For example, all the
γ-ray pulsars with signiﬁcant LAT pulsations were ﬁtted with an exponential
cutoﬀ power law (PLExpCutoﬀ, see Equation 2.7), while bright blazars and
other bright LAT sources were ﬁtted with a log-normal model (LogParabola,
see equation 2.8). In order to compare the properties of the 2FGL sources with
those of unidentiﬁed sources we need an homogeneous parameters sample. For
this reason all sources were also ﬁtted with a simple power-law spectral form
and the spectral indices were included in the 2FGL catalog. This index is
called PowerLaw Index and it is diﬀerent from the spectral index that in the
2FGL catalog represents the best-ﬁt photon number power-law index for power
law spectra, while for LogParabola spectra is the index at pivot energy and
for PLExpCutoﬀ spectra is the low-energy index [158]. In addition, the 2FGL
catalog includes an estimate of the curvature signiﬁcance based on a likelihood
ratio test, which measures the signiﬁcance of the spectral model selected for
a speciﬁc LAT source with respect to a simple power-law form. This is an
improvement of the 1FGL curvature index deﬁnition. In the 2FGL catalog a
reﬁned variability index was introduced for each source. It derives from the
value of the likelihood in the null hypothesis, that the source ﬂux is constant
across the full 24-month period, and the value under the alternative hypothesis
where the ﬂux in each bin is optimized. Now we inspect the distribution of
these parameters as a function of the ﬂux detected with energy above 100
MeV (F100 ) with the aim to understand which are the best parameters in
distinguishing pulsars from AGNs.

Analyzing the top panel of the Figure 4.3 we can see that, as done for the
1FGL sources, the PowerLaw index does not appear to discriminate well the
AGNs from the pulsars. While AGN spectra are well described by a broken
power law, which is very similar to a power law, pulsar spectra are not well de-
scribed by a simple power law, implying that the spectral index of a power-law
ﬁt cannot be a good discriminator between pulsar and AGN classes. Moreover,

80

4.1. Properties of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.3: Distributions as a function of the photon ﬂux (E > 100 MeV)
in units of cm−2 sec−1 of the PowerLaw index (top), curvature signiﬁcance
(middle), and variability index (bottom) for the 2FGL sources.

81

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

an instrumental bias is limiting the value of the PowerLaw index since a very
faint γ-ray object cannot be ﬁtted by an hard power-law model because of the
low statistics which masks any spectral peculiarity.

Observing the middle panel of the Figure 4.3 it is clear that, diﬀerently from
the 1FGL curvature index, the relationship between the curvature signiﬁcance
and the ﬂux is not linear, this indicates that the reﬁned curvature parameter
is not tightly correlated with ﬂux. Moreover, the curvature signiﬁcance is a
good discriminator to distinguish pulsars and AGNs. This is what we expect
on the basis of the typical spectral shape of these two source classes. The
broken power-law model describes very well the spectral shape of the AGNs,
this model is not very diﬀerent from a simple power law and thus the value of
the curvature signiﬁcance for these objects is quite low. Conversely the pulsar
spectra follow an exponential cutoﬀ power-law model that is very diﬀerent
from a simple power law, especially at energies greater then the cutoﬀ energy,
thus their curvature signiﬁcance is rather high.

An inspection of the bottom panel of the Figure 4.3 shows clearly that,
while for AGNs the reﬁned variability index increases with ﬂux, this does not
happen for pulsars, making variability index a very good discriminator between
the two major classes of 2FGL sources.

If we plot for all source classes the reﬁned variability index and the cur-
vature signiﬁcance, a clear separation is visible between bright sources with
AGNs and those with pulsars (see Figure 4.4). Pulsars lie in the lower right-
hand quadrant while AGNs lie in the upper half. These two γ-ray parameters
seem to split the two source classes more eﬃciently than in the 1FGL catalog.
Indeed, the two classes do not mix too much in the lower left-hand quadrant,
making it easier to distinguish between them.

This simple analysis allows us to understand which γ-ray observables sep-
arate more eﬃciently the two major γ-ray source classes, AGNs and pulsars.
In this way we can classify some of the unidentiﬁed sources as likely members
of one of these two source types on the basis of these γ-ray observables. How-
ever, the analysis performed is characterized by two important limits. First,
we can compare by eye against each at most 3 parameters at a time. This
is an human limit, our eyes cannot assess if adding new parameters result in
a more eﬃcient splitting of AGNs and pulsars. Second, in order to establish
if a speciﬁc parameter is signiﬁcant above a certain threshold to distinguish
between pulsars and AGNs and in order to assign a probability to each 2FGL
unidentiﬁed source to be more similar to one of these γ-ray objects, we need
to introduce some statistical rules. As a result we need to develop a statistical
method that combines the input parameters, processes the result and assigns
the probability of the LAT source to belong to a speciﬁc source class, here
pulsar or AGN class. The main input parameters will be the PowerLaw index,

82

4.2. Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression

Figure 4.4: Variability index plotted as a function of the curvature signiﬁcance
for diﬀerent sources classes. The horizontal dashed line mask a variability index
of 41.6, above which sources are likely to be variable. The vertical dashed line
is set to a curvature signiﬁcance of 4.0, above which curved spectra are needed.

the curvature signiﬁcance and the reﬁned variability index but other observ-
ables must be tested in order to understand if they can be used to distinguish
the two main γ-ray source classes. To do so we will test all the γ-ray parame-
ters included in the 2FGL catalog that do not depend too much on the source
signiﬁcance.

4.2 Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression

We have implemented two diﬀerent machine learning techniques to determine
likely source classiﬁcations for the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources: Logistic Re-
gression (LR) and Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN). The advantage of these
statistical methods is, in addition to evaluating the probability that an uniden-
tiﬁed source is more similar to an AGN or a pulsar on the basis of its γ-ray
observables, to be able to establish which are the parameters useful to distin-
guish the two major source classes testing for their signiﬁcance. Following up
on the previous section we expect the curvature signiﬁcance and the variability
index to be good discriminators between pulsars and AGNs.

The Logistic Regression method analysis has already been used to classify
the 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources but the method we will describe here has a

83

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

number of improvements with respect to the previous LR analysis and they will
highlight during the description of the construction and the relative application
of the model. The theoretical foundations about the Logistic Regression are
reported in Appendix B.1.

4.2.1 Construction of the Logistic Regression model

The Logistic Regression model is part of a class of generalized linear models and
it is based on the logistic function deﬁned in Equation 3.3. The construction
of the LR model to classify LAT objects is based on a number of steps:

1. Selection of the training sample. This step must be based on speciﬁc
considerations, e.g. the number of objects in each known LAT class or
which are the classes characterized by a marked diﬀerent phenomenology.

2. Selection of the predictor variables. This step consists in determining
which are the observables that signiﬁcantly distinguish the classes se-
lected during the previous step. During this step the regression coeﬃ-
cients are estimated by the maximum likelihood method.

3. Deﬁning thresholds. This step sets a number of classiﬁcation thresholds
to single out each LAT class selected during the ﬁrst step. The classiﬁ-
cation thresholds must be set in order to optimize accuracy minimizing
contamination and misclassiﬁcation.

4. Validating. This step consists in evaluating the performances of the
classiﬁcation rules set during the previous step on the basis of a 10-fold
cross-validation test.

Once the LR model is built we can apply it to determine likely source
classiﬁcations for the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources. At this point an additional
validation test can be implemented analyzing the performances of the Logistic
Regression algorithm in classifying LAT objects associated after the publica-
tion of the 2FGL catalog through multi-wavelength studies or blind searches.

Selection of the training sample

As LR is a supervised machine learning technique, it must be trained on known
objects in order to predict the membership of a new object to a given class on
the basis of its observables. We decide to train the predictor using the 83 ﬁrmly
identiﬁed pulsars and all the 1096 AGNs (blazars, non-blazar active galaxies,
Seyfert galaxies and active galaxies of uncertain type) listed in the 2FGL cat-
alog [158] because, as we have seen in the previous section, they represent the

84

4.2. Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression

two most abundant γ-ray source classes and because they can be well distin-
guished using their γ-ray observables. We set the predictor value P , deﬁned
in the Equation 3.3, equal to 1 for the identiﬁed pulsars and equal to 0 for all
the AGNs. In such a way the output of this training process is the probability
that an unidentiﬁed source has characteristics more similar to a pulsar than to
an AGN. Moreover, we do not include in the training sample categories other
than pulsars and AGNs because of the smallness of their samples. Since we
are primarily interested in searching for pulsar candidates in the unidentiﬁed
sample, we do not include the 25 “potential” pulsars in the training sample.

Selection of the predictor variables

The criteria for including a variable in a model is a key point for statistical
model building. The approach we use for building the LR model involves
seeking the most parsimonious model that explains the data. The rationale for
minimizing the number of variables is that the resultant model is more likely
to be numerically stable, and is more easy generalized. The more variables
included in a model, the greater the estimated standard errors become, and
the more dependent the model becomes on the observed data [103].

The several steps we follow to select the variables for the Logistic Regression

model are presented in the following:

1. The selection process begins with a careful univariate analysis of each
γ-ray observables. This involves ﬁtting an univariate logistic regression
model to obtain the estimated coeﬃcient, the estimated standard error
and the likelihood ratio test for the signiﬁcance of each coeﬃcient (see
Appendix B.1).

2. Upon completion of the univariate analyses, we select variables for the
multivariable analysis. Any variable whose univariate test obtained dur-
ing the ﬁrst step has a p-value < 0.25 is a candidate for the multivariate
model. Once the variable has been identiﬁed, we begin with a model
containing all of the selected parameters. Our choice to use 0.25 level as
a screening criterion for variable selection is based on the detailed studies
on Logistic Regression [103]. These studies show that use of a more tradi-
tional level of 0.05 often fails to identify variables known to be important.
This is related to the fact that any univariate approach has the problem
that it ignores the possibility that a collection of variables, each weakly
associated with the outcome, can become an important predictor when
taken together. Use of such higher level has the disadvantage of includ-
ing variables that are of questionable importance at the model building
stage. For this reason, we will critically review all variables added to a
model before deciding on the ﬁnal model.

85

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

3. At this point, following the ﬁt of the multivariate model, the importance
of each variable included in the model is veriﬁed. This includes an ex-
amination of the likelihood ratio for each variable and a comparison of
each coeﬃcient estimated from the model containing only that variable.
Variables that do not contribute to the model based on these criteria are
eliminated and a new model is built. The new model is then compared
to the full one by the maximum likelihood test. This process of deleting,
reﬁtting and verifying continues until it appears that all of the important
variables are included in the model.

4. At this point, any variable not selected in the step 2 for the original
multivariable model are added back into the model. This step is helpful
in identifying variables that, by themselves, are not signiﬁcantly related
to the outcome but make an important contribution in the presence of
other variables. We refer to the model at the conclusion of this step as
ﬁnal Logistic Regression model.

To evaluate the best predictor variables for the LR analysis, we follow the
procedure previously explained. We start by using the curvature signiﬁcance,
the variability index, the PowerLaw index, the ﬂuxes and the hardness ratios
for the 5 energy bands in the catalog and the position on the sky (i.e. the
Galactic latitude and longitude). As for the LR model applied to the 1FGL
sources, we do not include the curvature value (HR23 − HR34) in this evalua-
tion. We decide to include the reﬁned variability index instead of the fractional
variability because the ﬁrst one does not depend too much on signiﬁcance of
2FGL sources as for the variability index deﬁned in the 1FGL catalog [3]. Dur-
ing the procedure of construction of the LR model we use linearly normalized
variables in the range [0, 1] in order to stabilize and improve the eﬃciency of
the procedure.

The Table 4.1 shows the results of the univariate analysis applied to pulsars
and AGNs of the training sample. In this table, for each observable listed in the
ﬁrst column, the following are shown. (1) The estimated coeﬃcient obtained
by our univariate logistic regression ﬁtting. (2) The relative standard error.
(3) The p-value as the value of the likelihood ratio test for the parameters
signiﬁcance.

At this point, following step 2 of the selection procedure, only predictor
variables with a p-value smaller than the signiﬁcance threshold α = 0.25 are
included in the multivariate LR model. The excluded predictor variables are
the PowerLaw index and the Galactic latitude and longitude. They will be
added back into the multivariate model after the importance of each variable
is veriﬁed.

We then calculate the signiﬁcance of each predictor variable to ﬁnd the
resulting LR coeﬃcients. The list of the LR predictor variables with the relative

86

4.2. Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression

Variable
Curvature Signiﬁcance
Variability Index
PowerLaw Index
Flux0.1−0.3GeV
Flux0.3−1GeV
Flux1−3GeV
Flux3−10GeV
Flux10−100GeV
Hardness12
Hardness23
Hardness34
Hardness45
glat
glon

17.08
-11.52
0.74
-35.28
-109.73
191.82
-126.68
-6.91
-1.65
1.56
1.62
7.85
-0.73
0.32

Coeﬃcient Standard Error p-value
<0.001
<0.001

1.48
2.31
1.40
7.48
14.60
23.25
16.54
2.34
0.45
0.62
0.68
0.97
0.48
0.41

0.60

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.003
<0.01
0.013
0.019
<0.001
0.331
0.427

Table 4.1: List of the Predictor Variables for the univariate LR Model. Vari-
ables selected for the multivariate Logistic Regression model has a p-value <
0.25.

values of the maximum likelihood ratios can be found in Table 4.2. If the p-
value for a given predictor variable is smaller than the signiﬁcance threshold
α = 0.05 then the predictor variable is included in the ﬁnal multivariate LR
model, the others are rejected. In the table predictor variables selected for the
LR model are above the line and those we did not select lie below the line.

While AGNs are isotropically distributed and pulsars are concentrated
along the Galactic plane, we want to verify whether our ﬁnal multivariate
LR model is able to recognize this eﬀect. The results indicate that Galactic
latitude and longitude are not signiﬁcant at the α = 0.05 (5% signiﬁcance) level
as we expect. Moreover, we ﬁnd that also HR12, HR23, HR45, F lux0.1−0.3 and
F lux10−100 are not signiﬁcant in the multivariate LR analysis. It is interesting
to notice that all these predictor variables, in the univariate LR model, are
quite signiﬁcant (p-value < 0.02) to distinguish between AGNs and pulsars
but in a multivariate LR analysis they loose their signiﬁcance. PowerLaw in-
dex is not signiﬁcant to distinguish between AGNs and pulsars in a univariate
LR analysis, it becomes signiﬁcant in the multivariate LR model making an
important contribution in the presence of other variables. The positive sign of
a predictor coeﬃcient reveals that the source is likely to be pulsar-like. The
signs of each predictor coeﬃcient shown in Table 4.2 reveal that a pulsar-like
object must be characterized by low variability and by a very curved spectral

87

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

shape as we expect on the basis of the previous section. The diﬀerent spectral
shapes of pulsars and AGNs are clearly seen in the signs of the ﬂuxes and the
HR34. The pulsar ﬂuxes are lower than those of AGNs in the energy bands 0.3
– 1 GeV and 3 – 10 GeV, while are higher in the energy band 1 – 3 GeV, where
typical cutoﬀ energies of pulsar spectra are found [200]. Above the cutoﬀ en-
ergy the pulsar spectrum decreases exponentially becoming very diﬀerent from
a typical AGN spectrum. This may explain the signiﬁcance of the HR34, be-
cause in such energy bands the pulsar spectrum change signiﬁcantly its shape.

Variable
Intercept
Curvature Signiﬁcance
Variability Index
PowerLaw Index
Flux0.3−1GeV
Flux1−3GeV
Flux3−10GeV
Hardness34
Flux0.1−0.3GeV
Flux10−100GeV
Hardness12
Hardness23
Hardness45
glat
glon

Coeﬃcient Standard Error p-value
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.016
<0.001
<0.001
0.008
0.010
0.122
0.454
0.971
0.456
0.850
0.977
0.473

2.68
2.68
11.13
5.74
200.06
567.03
281.07
2.17
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

-13.40
20.97
-42.64
13.88
-743.01
2005.48
-738.68

5.60
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Table 4.2: List of the Predictor Variables for the LR Model. Variables selected
for the ﬁnal Logistic Regression model are listed at top. Those rejected are
listed below the line.

Deﬁning thresholds

We deﬁne two threshold values, one to classify an AGN candidate (CA) and one
to classify a pulsar candidate (CP ). We chose these two thresholds in order to
optimize the accuracy, that measures the proportion of actual positives which
are correctly identiﬁed as such (it is also called sensitivity), and minimize the
misclassiﬁcation and the contamination by plotting these values by varying
the decision threshold as shown in Figure 4.5. On the left are shown the
distribution of the parameters we analyzed to set the threshold (indicated as a

88

4.2. Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression

red vertical line) to single out pulsars, conversely on the right those we analyzed
to set the threshold (indicated as a blue line) to single out AGNs. Using this

Figure 4.5: Distribution of the accuracy (here called sensitivity), misclassiﬁca-
tion and contamination by varying the decision threshold. (left) Distribution
related to pulsars: false positives represent the contamination given by AGNs
and misclassiﬁcation is related to AGNs classiﬁed as pulsars. (right ) Distri-
bution related to AGNs: false negatives represent the contamination given by
pulsars and misclassiﬁcation is related to pulsars classiﬁed as AGNs. Vertical
lines indicate the value of the thresholds we set to single out pulsars (red) and
AGNs (blue).

principle we set CA to 0.05 and CP to 0.65. With these thresholds, 82% of
pulsars are correctly classiﬁed as a pulsar while only 3.6% are misclassiﬁed as
an AGN, conversely 95% of AGNs are correctly classiﬁed as an AGN while
only 0.3% are misclassiﬁed as a pulsar. Regarding the contamination, only
4.2% of the objects classiﬁed as a pulsar are indeed AGNs and only 0.3%
classiﬁed as an AGN are indeed pulsars. These results are shown in the table
of classiﬁcation in Figure 4.6. If we analyze in detail the pulsars misclassiﬁed
we ﬁnd 3 objects: PSR J1357–6429, PSR J1823-3021A and PSR J2240+5832.
The ﬁrst one is a young and energetic pulsar (τc=7.3 ks and ˙E ∼ 1036 erg
s−1) [41] surrounded by a bright PWN observed in X-ray and at TeV energies
[50] [97]. Thus, if the PWN is contributing signiﬁcantly, this may explain
the misclassiﬁcation. The second one is an energetic MSP located 8.4 kpc
away in the core of the cluster NGC 6624 [80]. This object is very peculiar,
characterized by the highest γ-ray luminosity observed for any MSP with an
unusually large rate of change of its period. Their peculiarities may be the
reason of the misclassiﬁcation of these objects. The last one seems to be
a typical young radio-loud pulsar [188] with no peculiar behaviour. The 3
AGNs misclassiﬁed are an associated FSRQ blazar (2FGL J2206.6+6500) and
two active galaxies of uncertain type, associated through statistical methods

89

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.6: Table of classiﬁcation based on the classiﬁcation rules described
in the text. The objects called observed represent the sources in the training
sample, otherwise the objects called predicted represent the results of the LR
algorithm applied to the observed sources using our classiﬁcation rules.
In
green are represented the correct classiﬁcations and in red the incorrect ones.

diﬀerent from those in the 2FGL catalog [83]. Recently, 1 of the active galaxies
of uncertain type (2FGL J0621.9+3750) has been associated with the pulsar
J0622+3749 found in a blind search analyzing LAT data [167]. Probably also
the misclassiﬁcation of the other AGNs is related to an incorrect association.
The distribution of the LR predictor for the sources of the 2FGL catalog

identiﬁed as pulsars and AGNs is shown in Figure 4.7.

It must be noted that the sources associated with a diﬀerent class than
AGN or pulsar, for a total of 35 sources, have been excluded from this training
procedure. They are composed by Galactic objects, such as SNRs, HMBs,
globular clusters and a nova, and extragalactic objects, such as normal galaxies,
SMC and LMC. Here we have not considered the “potential” pulsars nor the
“potential” SNRs because their association is uncertain. We cannot treat the
“other” 35 sources uniformly as “background”, because of the smallness of their
sample and the diversity of their spectral properties. However, it is possible
to estimate the contamination to the candidate AGN and pulsar samples due
to the likely presence of these “other” sources in the unassociated sample. In
Figure 4.8 is shown how we can use the predictor distribution for the 35 “other”
sources to estimate the further contamination from these sources to the AGN
and pulsar candidate distributions.

According to the LR analysis, the 35 sources are nearly equally distributed
between AGN-like objects, pulsar-like objects, and still unclassiﬁed objects.
In particular, 46% (6) are classiﬁed as pulsar candidates, while 23% (8) as

90

4.2. Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression

Figure 4.7: Distribution of the LR predictor for sources of the 2FGL catalog
identiﬁed as pulsars (red) and AGNs (blue). Vertical lines indicate the value
of the thresholds we set to identify pulsar candidates (Predictor > 0.65) and
AGN candidates (Predictor < 0.05).

Figure 4.8: Distribution of the LR predictor for the “other” 2FGL sources
deﬁned in the text. Vertical lines indicate the value of the thresholds we set to
identify pulsar candidates (Predictor > 0.65) and AGN candidates (Predictor
< 0.05)

AGN candidates. Note that the contamination due to these sources does not
change the accuracy and the misclassiﬁcation of the LR model but contributes
only to the contamination. The pulsar candidates are all the 6 SNRs ﬁrmly

91

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

identiﬁed as γ-ray sources on the basis of their spatial extensions (IC 443,
W28, W30, W44, W51C ad Cygnus Loop), 2 associated point-like SNRs (with
angular diameters < 20’), 3 HMBs (LS I+61 303, 1FGL J1018.6–5856 and LS
5039) whose γ-ray observables seem very similar to those of a young pulsar
[90] [19], and 5 globular clusters, whose γ-ray emission may be related to the
contribution of a number of MSPs in the cluster as explained in Chapter 2. The
AGN candidates are associated with the source Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC),
2 objects in the ﬁeld of the LMC, the Andromeda galaxy M31, 3 PWNe, 1 HMB
(Cygnus X-3, which is diﬀerent from the other 3 γ-ray HMBs detected by the
LAT because this is a microquasar, 2 globular clusters (M80 and NGC 6440)
and the nova (V407 Cyg), whose γ-ray emission lasted only 2 weeks [13]. From
this analysis it is clear that only Galactic pulsar-like objects are classiﬁed as
a pulsar, otherwise only extragalactic or AGN-like objects are classiﬁed as an
AGN. This means that our algorithm is able to distinguish pulsar-like from
AGN-like objects and not only pulsars from AGNs. Moreover, it is reasonable
to assume that those sources will not be overrepresented in the unassociated
population compared with the associated one. We expect that up to 0.7% of
the newly classiﬁed AGN candidates and up to 18% of the newly classiﬁed
pulsar candidates will indeed belong to one of the “other” classes (galaxies,
globular clusters, supernova remnants, etc.). The higher contamination rate
for the pulsars is likely due to low statistics in the test samples and is primarily
associated with a Galactic contamination. These results are shown in the table
of classiﬁcation in Figure 4.9.

Figure 4.9: Table of classiﬁcation based on the classiﬁcation rules described
in the text where the contamination given by the “other” 2FGL sources is
included. In green are represented the correct classiﬁcations and in red the
incorrect ones. Note that the inclusion of the “other” 2FGL sources does not
change the accuracy and the misclassiﬁcation of the LR model.

92

4.2. Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression

To estimate how accurately our predictive model performs, we cross-validate
it using all the 1179 pulsars and AGNs in the 2FGL catalog. We randomly
selected 118 sources containing both pulsars and AGNs to be the testing data
set, and we used the remaining 1061 sources for training. We repeated this
procedure 10 times, using diﬀerent sets of 118 test sources. At each step the
“other” sources are used to evaluate the total contamination. At the end, this
10-fold cross-validation shows that the average testing accuracy rates for these
threshold values are 81% for pulsars and 95.5% for AGNs, that the average
misclassiﬁcation rates are 6% for pulsars and 1% for AGNs and that the av-
erage total contamination rates are 24% for pulsars (7.5% AGNs and 16.5%
“other” sources) and 1.5% for AGNs (1% pulsars and 0.5% “other” sources).
These results are consistent with those found including all pulsars and AGNs
in the training sample.

4.2.2 Results and their validation

Applying the model to the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources we ﬁnd that 325 are
classiﬁed as AGN candidates (P < 0.05), 108 are classiﬁed as pulsar candidates
(P > 0.65) and 143 remain unclassiﬁed after the LR analysis. The distribution
of 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources as a function of the probability of being pulsars
is shown in the Figure 4.10. The thresholds for assigning pulsar candidates
and AGN candidates are indicated in the ﬁgure. It is important to notice that
in order to meet the threshold of ∼80% of the known pulsars, we are including
a large range of predictor values with very few pulsars. This may result in
over-predicting the number of pulsars in unidentiﬁed sources. As a result, if
we take into account the estimated contamination and misclassiﬁcation rates
related to our classiﬁcation rules we expect up to 100 γ-ray pulsars and up to
350 AGNs to be discovered in 2FGL catalog .

The spatial (top) and the latitude (bottom) distribution of the newly clas-
siﬁed sources are shown in Figure 4.11. Their distributions give us the op-
portunity to cross check our results. Note that both the AGN and pulsar
distributions are as expected, even though we have not used the Galactic lat-
itude as an input to either classiﬁcation method. The pulsar candidates are
mainly distributed along the Galactic plane (85% are situated in |b| < 10◦),
with a few high-latitude exceptions that suggest additional nearby MSPs, while
the AGN candidates are nearly isotropically distributed on the sky.

If we combine the AGN candidate population with the 2FGL sources that
already have AGN associations (Figure 4.12, left panel), we ﬁnd that the shape
of the AGN distribution matches reasonably well with a nearly isotropical
distribution that we expect, at low Galactic latitudes there is still a lack of
AGNs primarily because of the bright Galactic diﬀuse γ-ray emission. On the
contrary, if we combine the pulsar candidate population with the 2FGL sources

93

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.10: Distribution of the Logistic Regression predictor for 2FGL uniden-
tiﬁed sources. Vertical lines indicate the value of the thresholds we set to iden-
tify pulsar candidates (Predictor > 0.65) and AGN candidates (Predictor <
0.05).

that already have pulsar associations (Figure 4.12, right panel), we ﬁnd that
their distribution is characterized by an evident peak at low Galactic latitudes.
Since our studies about the contamination in the pulsar candidate sample, we
expect that a fraction of these objects may be associated with another Galactic
source classes, e.g. SNRs or HMBs, but probably a certain fraction of these
sources can be spurious.

In Figure 4.13 is shown curvature-variability distribution of the newly clas-
siﬁed AGN and pulsar candidates on the basis of the LR method. We see that
the unidentiﬁed sources have been separated into two populations with some
overlap between them. Comparing this distribution to Figure 4.4, we see it
follows the separation between the associated AGNs and pulsars.

From these examples we can conclude that using only the γ-ray proper-
ties of the Fermi-LAT sources, and the ﬁrm associations of the 2FGL, we
are able to develop a predictive model for AGN and pulsar classiﬁcation that
nearly matches our expectations (i.e., pulsar candidates are not variable, have
a curved spectrum, and are mainly distributed along the Galactic plane, while
AGN candidates are mostly extragalactic, variable sources).

In order to test the capability of the LR algorithm for identifying the dif-
ferent source classes, we must apply the LR analysis to an independent set
of associations from those used to train the LR model. For this, we look to
association eﬀorts that have taken place since the release of the 2FGL cata-

94

4.2. Classiﬁcation using Logistic Regression

Figure 4.11: Distribution of the newly classiﬁed sources. Top: spatial dis-
tribution in galactic coordinates. Bottom:
latitude distribution. In red are
shown the pulsar candidates, in blue the AGN candidates and in yellow the
unclassiﬁed sources.

log. Regarding the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources, the follow-up multi-wavelength
association eﬀorts and speciﬁc analyses of the LAT data discussed in Section
3.2 have resulted in 46 new Galactic source associations (18 young pulsars and
28 MSPs), and 47 new AGN associations (2 were unidentiﬁed in 2FGL, 1 was
a “potential” SNR and 41 were active galaxies of uncertain type). We cannot
consider the 41 objects classiﬁed as active galaxies of uncertain type because
they were a component of the training sample. Of the 3 newly associated
AGNs, 2 are correctly classiﬁed as AGN candidates by the LR analysis, no one
is classiﬁed as pulsar candidates, while the other sources remain unclassiﬁed.

95

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.12: Left: distribution of AGN candidates binned by Galactic latitude.
The yellow line is the sum of the 2FGL AGN associations (blue line) plus the
sources classiﬁed as AGN candidates (green line). The dashed line is the
distribution for all 2FGL sources. Right: distribution of pulsar candidates
binned by Galactic latitude. The yellow line is the sum of the 2FGL pulsar
associations (red line) plus the sources classiﬁed as pulsar candidates (green
line). The dashed line is the distribution for all 2FGL sources. Note that the
latitude bins of the two ﬁgures are diﬀerent, AGN distribution covers the entire
sky while the pulsar distribution is just ±10◦ around the plane of our Galaxy.

Figure 4.13: Variability index vs. curvature signiﬁcance for 2FGL unidentiﬁed
sources classiﬁed as AGN (blue triangles) and pulsar candidates (red diamonds)
and unclassiﬁed (yellow crosses).

96

4.3. Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

For pulsars, 21 are correctly classiﬁed as pulsar candidates by the LR analy-
sis (eﬃciency: 46%), only 6 are classiﬁed as AGN candidates (false negative:
13%), while the other 19 sources remain unclassiﬁed (41%).
We cannot assess the eﬃciency of the algorithm at classifying new AGNs owing
to the smallness of the sample. We notice that source signiﬁcance of all the
unclassiﬁed new AGNs is very low (TS < 100), this means that their γ-ray ob-
servables cannot be well characterized hampering the source classiﬁcation. For
new pulsars, we noticed a diﬀerent performance between new young pulsars
and new MSPs. For new objects identiﬁed as young pulsars, we correctly clas-
sify 14 pulsars (eﬃciency: 79%), we misclassify only 1 source (false negative:
5%) and we leave the remaining sources as unclassiﬁed (eﬃciency: 16%). The
misclassiﬁed new young pulsar is 2FGL J1112–6103, for which an extended
emission in the oﬀ-peak phase was detected, possibly pointing to an associated
PWN [200]. On the other hand, for new sources identiﬁed as MSPs, the clas-
siﬁcation rate is much worse. We correctly classify only 7 objects as pulsars
(eﬃciency: 25%), we misclassify 5 objects as AGN (false negative: 18%) and
left the 16 remaining objects as still unassociated (57% of the new MSPs).
These misclassiﬁcations are mainly due to low source signiﬁcance (TS < 100),
so that only upper limits are available in many energy bands making a spectral
characterization very diﬃcult.

In conclusion, the eﬃciency of the algorithm at classifying new relatively
bright young pulsars is very high (almost 80%), which is consistent with the
eﬃciency we obtained for the pulsars in the training sample. Also, the low rate
of false negative is a very encouraging result, that makes us conﬁdent in using
the results from the LR analysis while planning multi-wavelength observation
of unidentiﬁed sources. We cannot conclude anything about the eﬃciency of
the algorithm at classifying new AGNs or new MSPs because these results are
aﬀected by low statistics and bad characterization related to their low source
signiﬁcance.

4.3 Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Net-

works (ANNs)

In this section we describe the use of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) as a
very promising method for understanding the nature of Fermi-LAT unidenti-
ﬁed sources, this is the ﬁrst time this machine learning technique is used for
this purpose. This technique uses identiﬁed objects as a training sample, learn-
ing to distinguish each source class on the basis of parameters that describe its
γ-ray properties. By applying the algorithm to unknown objects, such as the
unidentiﬁed sources, it is possible to quantify their probability of belonging

97

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

to a speciﬁc class. There are diﬀerent packages available to perform an ANN
analysis (e.g. MATLAB Neural Network Toolbox 1 or PyBrain 2) but we de-
cided to develop our own algorithms to address our speciﬁc problem because,
although ANNs exist in many diﬀerent models and architectures, the relatively
low complexity of astronomical data does not pose special constrains in all the
steps of the method which will be discussed below. We used a very simple neu-
ral model known as MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP; see Appendix B.2), which is
probably the most widely used architecture for practical applications of neural
networks. We wrote our algorithms in Python programming language3, our
choice gives us a number of advantages, ﬁrst of all our ANN does not work
as a “black box ”, this is a typical problem of any available ANN package for
which the learning process is always unknown. Since we have implemented
our algorithms, we can examine step by step how our network is learning to
distinguish 2FGL source classes. Another important advantage is that our
ANN is easy-to-use because we have implemented the algorithms and we have
a clear idea on how they operate. Moreover, our package is very ﬂexible and, if
we need a new speciﬁc analysis, we can easily implement it. Before using our
algorithms to understand the nature of 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources we carefully
tested them in very simple situations.

Neural networks were originally conceived as simple models for the behav-
ior of the brain, but have since found many real world applications in ﬁelds as
diverse as medicine, linguistics, or high-energy physics. Multilayer perceptrons
[127] are well suited to many situations where one is searching for a functional
relationship between a set of input variables and response variables. Artiﬁ-
cial neural networks can be considered as an extension of generalized linear
models (e.g. logistic regression), and are applied to approximate complicated
functional relationships. At variance with generalized linear models, it is not
necessary to specify a priori the type of relationship between the input and out-
put variables. This often leads to superior results, compared to simple logistic
regression analyses [206] (see Figure 4.14). The use of ANNs in astronomy goes
back over 20 years (e.g. Odewahn et al. 1992 [160] applied it to the problem of
star/galaxy discrimination or [24], [210], [23], [45], [75]). In γ-ray astronomy,
ANNs are often used for such applications as background rejection, though
other techniques (e.g. classiﬁcation trees) are also used for such purposes. In
[16] and in the previous section we have explored the application of logistic re-
gression to source classiﬁcation, based on some γ-ray observables, and shown
that it is very eﬃcient at sorting sources into pulsar-like and AGN-like classes
showing that there is much to be gained in developing an automated system of

1http://www.mathworks.com/products/neural-network/
2http://pybrain.org
3http://www.python.org

98

4.3. Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

sorting (and ranking) sources according to their probability of being a pulsar
or an AGN. Our goal is to extend our studies of source classiﬁcation using
ANNs, aiming at improving on the results already obtained.

Figure 4.14: Simple classiﬁcation test comparing logistic regression (LR) and
a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with only 2 input parameters. The green and
black lines represent the thresholds to single out AGNs and pulsars using the
LR and the MLP respectively. The full sample containing all AGNs and pulsars
has been split in “Training”, “Validation” and“Testing” subsamples as described
in Appendix B.2 in order to train and optimize the ANN. LR has been trained
using all sources in the Training and Validation subsamples. Applying the
optimized models to the Testing subsample we estimate an higher eﬃciency of
MLP in classifying new sources.

4.3.1 Selection of the training sample and the predictor

variables

The ﬁrst step of the ANN analysis is to select a sample of data to build the
predictor variable. We decide to focus on the 83 ﬁrmly identiﬁed pulsars and
the 834 associated AGNs. This choice derives from what we have learned
through the Logistic Regression analysis discussed in the previous section. We
do not include in the training sample the 25 “potential” pulsars for the same
reason explained for the LR analysis. Moreover, we decide not to include the
active galaxies of uncertain type for which, as we have seen in the previous
section, the association is not certain. Indeed, some of them may be spurious
while others may be associated with pulsars or other Galactic objects. We

99

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

intend to apply the optimized ANN to these uncertain associations in order
to classify them. We exclude from the training procedure also the sources
associated with a class diﬀerent than AGNs or pulsars because of the smallness
of their sample. However, we use them to estimate the contamination to the
candidate AGN and pulsar samples due to the likely presence of these “other”
source classes in the unassociated sample.

The second important step is to select the most appropriate set of vari-
ables for training the ANN. This choice must follow some criteria, the selected
variables must not depend too much on ﬂux and signiﬁcance of the source
otherwise the ANN would tend to classify the 2FGL objects in the training
sample on the basis of these parameters and not on the basis of their intrinsic
features losing eﬃciency in the classiﬁcation. Moreover, physical considera-
tions about the γ-ray properties of each source class can guide us in the choice
of the most eﬀective variables for discriminating AGNs from pulsars. After ex-
ploring most of the parameters in the 2FGL catalog, we select a set of variables
that includes the curvature signiﬁcance, the variability index, the PowerLaw
index, the ﬂuxes and the hardness ratios for the 5 energy bands in the 2FGL
catalog. We decide not to use the Galactic latitude and longitude as input to
the ANN in order to avoid biasing our selection against AGNs situated close
to the Galactic plane and pulsars (especially MSPs) situated at high Galactic
latitudes. Furthermore, this choice gives us the opportunity to use the position
on the sky of the diﬀerent populations as a cross check of our result. The new
pulsar candidates should be mainly distributed along the Galactic plane, while
the AGN candidates should be isotropically distributed.

4.3.2 Architecture of the ANN

The basic building block of an ANN is the neuron. Information is passed as
inputs to the neuron, which processes them and produces an output. The out-
put is typically a simple mathematical function of the inputs. The power of
the ANN comes from assembling many neurons into a network. The network
is able to model very complex behavior from input to output. Since the rela-
tively low complexity of our data, we decide to use a very simple neural model
known as Feed Forward MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP; see Appendix B.2) and
in particular a two-layer feed-forward network (2LP). It consists of a layer of
input neurons, a layer of “hidden” neurons and a layer of output neurons. In
such an arrangement each neuron is referred to as a node. Figure B.2 shows a
schematic design of such a network. We use this simple architecture because
the Weierstrass’ theorem ascertains that for a multilayer perceptron a single
hidden layer is suﬃcient to approximate a given continuous correlation func-
tion to any precision, provided that a suﬃciently large numbers of nodes is
used in the hidden layer. An important corollary of this result is that, in the

100

4.3. Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

context of a classiﬁcation problem, networks with two layers can approximate
any decision boundary to arbitrary accuracy. Thus, such networks also pro-
vide universal nonlinear discriminant functions. More generally, the capability
of such networks of approximating general smooth functions allows them to
model a posteriori probabilities of class membership.

The output of the hidden layer and the output layer are related to their

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

i

;

;

f (1)
j =

f (2)
k =

w(1)
ji xi + b(1)

j

,

(4.1)

w(2)
kj hj + b(2)
k ,

(4.2)

inputs as follows:

hidden layer:

output layer:

hj = g(1)(cid:16)
yk = g(2)(cid:16)

f (1)
j

f (2)
k

(cid:17)
(cid:17)

j

where the output of the hidden layer h and output layer y are given for each
hidden node j and each output node k. The index i runs over all input nodes.
The functions g(1) and g(2) are called activation functions. The non-linear
nature of g(1) and g(2) is a key ingredient in constructing a viable and practi-
cally useful network. This non-linear function must be bounded, smooth and
monotonic; we use g(1)(x) = g(2)(x) = tanh(x) where tanh(x) is the hyperbolic
tangent. The layout and number of nodes are collectively termed the architec-
ture of the network (see Appendix B.2). For a given architecture, the weights
w and biases b deﬁne the operation of the network and are the quantities we
will determine by a speciﬁc training algorithm explained in Section 4.3.3. Fol-
lowing the usual approach for starting the learning algorithm we initialize the
weights randomly in the range [−1, 1] and moreover we decide to not include
biases in our network (b = 0). As weights vary during training, a very wide
range of non-linear mappings between inputs and outputs is possible.

In our application, we will construct a classiﬁcation network. The aim
of any classiﬁcation method is to place members of a set into groups based
on inherent properties or features of the individuals, given some pre-classiﬁed
training data. Formally, classiﬁcation can be summarized as ﬁnding a classi-
ﬁer C : x → C which maps an object from some (typically multi-dimensional)
feature space x to its classiﬁcation label C, which is typically taken as one
of 1, ..., N where N is the number of distinct classes, in our case AGNs and
pulsars. Thus the problem of classiﬁcation is to partition feature space into
regions, assigning each region a label corresponding to the appropriate classi-
ﬁcation.

In building a classiﬁer using a neural network, it is convenient to view
the problem probabilistically. To this end we consider a 2LP consisting of an
input layer (xi), a hidden layer (hj), and an output layer (yi). In classiﬁcation
networks, however, the outputs must be post-processed in order to have a

101

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

probability that tells us the input feature vector x belongs to the kth class.
We decide to transform the outputs with the following procedure:

(cid:80)

(4.3)

pk =

ym + 1
k(yk + 1)

such that they are all non-negative and sum to unity. In this way the network
produces an output vector for each 2FGL sources. The kth component of this
vector can be viewed as the probability for k given the the input parameters
P (Ck|x). In fact, it can be proved theoretically ([86], [176]) that the output of
an ANN is indeed a Bayesian a posteriori probability. The advantage of this
probabilistic approach is that we gain the ability to make statistical decisions
on the appropriate classiﬁcation in very large feature spaces where a direct
linear partition would not be feasible.

In order to deﬁne the architecture of our network we must determine the
number of nodes in each layer. The number of input and output nodes is
strictly related to the problem we are analyzing. The number of input nodes
is given by the number of selected predictor variables, in our case 12. During
the ANN analysis a pre-processing is performed normalizing each variable to
the range [0, 1]. All the variables are normalized logarithmically except for
the hardness ratios, the curvature signiﬁcance and the PowerLaw index which
are linearly normalized. The number of output nodes is given by the num-
ber of source classes we want to classify:
in our case 2 (pulsars and AGNs).
To the lth source in the training sample are associated two vectors (x(l), t(l))
in which the target vector t(l) for the network outputs has unity in the ele-
ment corresponding to the true class of the l th feature vector x(l) and minus
ones elsewhere. Thus for pulsars t = [1,−1] while for AGNs t = [−1, 1].
Determining the number of hidden nodes is crucial, especially for its practical
implications in learning and generalization. Theory and experience ([71], [125],
[52]) show that networks with few hidden nodes exhibit a better generaliza-
tion performance. Moreover, knowledge embedded in small trained networks
is presumably easier to interpret and thus the extraction of simple rules can
hopefully be facilitated. Lastly, from an implementation stand point, small
networks only require limited resources in any physical computational envi-
ronment. To solve the problem of choosing the right number of hidden nodes
we pursue an incremental approach known as pruning [175]. Pruning starts
with a relatively large number of hidden nodes and excise those unnecessary
so as to arrive at an optimal network architecture. We use the following proce-
dure, ﬁrst we train the network with a large number of hidden nodes, we start
with 20, using a standard training algorithms (see Section 4.3.3 for details),
then we examine the value of the mean squared error (mse, deﬁned as in the
Equation 4.4) and we remove one of the nodes in the hidden layer. At this point
we retrain the pruned network and we re-examine the value of the mse, then

102

4.3. Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

we remove another hidden nodes and we continue until an additional pruning
process results in increasing signiﬁcantly the mse decreasing the performances
of our network. Using these procedure combined to a detailed analysis we
decide to use 12 hidden nodes. In Figure 4.15 in blue is shown the value of
the mean squared error deﬁned in Equation 4.4 as a function of the number
of hidden nodes while in red the performance of our network in terms of the
fraction of correct classiﬁcations of the validation sample (deﬁned below) as a
function of the number of hidden nodes.

Figure 4.15: (blue) Value of the mean squared error (mse) deﬁned in Equation
4.4 as a function of the number of hidden nodes. (red) Performance of the
network in terms of fraction of correct classiﬁcations of the validation sample
(deﬁned in the text) as a function of the number of hidden nodes.

As a result our feed-forward 2LP is built up of 12 input nodes, 12 hidden
nodes and 2 output nodes, each node in a layer is linked to all the nodes of
the next layer and to each link is associated a weight randomly initialized in
the range [−1, 1].

4.3.3 Training session

For a given network architecture the ﬁrst step is the “training” of the ANN.
In this step the weights w (the “free parameters”) are determined by a spe-
ciﬁc learning algorithm. The basic learning algorithm for 2LP is the so-called
back-propagation (see Appendix B.2.3) which is based on the error-correction
learning rule. In essence, back-propagation consists of two passes through the

103

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

diﬀerent layers of the network: a forward pass and a backward pass. In the for-
ward pass an input vector is applied to the input nodes of the network, and its
eﬀect propagates through the network layer by layer. Finally, a set of outputs
is produced as the actual response of the network. During the backward pass,
on the other hand, the weights are all adjusted in accordance with the error
correction rule. Speciﬁcally, the actual response of the network is subtracted
from a desired (target) response which we denote as a vector t = (t1, t2, ..., tc)
to produce an error signal. This error signal is then propagated backward
through the network. There are several choices for the form of the error sig-
nal and this choice still depends on the nature of the problem, we choose the
sum-squared error (E) deﬁned in the Equation B.14. Moreover, we deﬁne the
mean square error (mse) as the sum of the errors given by each object in the
training sample:

mse =

E(n)

(4.4)

(cid:88)

n

1
N

where E(n) is the error related to the nth source in the training sample and N
is the number of sources in the training sample. The weights are adjusted to
make the actual response of the network move closer to the desired response
in a statistical sense. The set of weights that minimizes the error function are
found using the method of gradient descendent. Starting from a random set
of weights w the weights are updated by moving a small distance in w-space
into the direction −∇wE where E decreases most rapidly:

wnew = wold − η

∂E
∂w

(4.5)

where the positive number η is the learning rate and we set it to 0.2. The algo-
rithm is stopped when the value of the error function has become suﬃciently
small. We analyzed also the possibility to use the “heavy ball method” deﬁned
in the Equation B.17 adding a momentum α = 0.9 in the Equation 4.5 but
without a signiﬁcant improvement in the performance of the network thus we
decided to not use this learning algorithm.

We use the learning algorithm in the online version, in which the weights of
the connections are updated after each example are processed by the network.
One epoch corresponds to the processing of all examples one time and the
value of the mse can be obtained.

In order to avoid under- and overﬁtting, and obtain a good generalization of
our network we split the training sample in 3 subsamples, the training sample,
the validation sample and the testing sample as explained in Appendix B.2.
The ﬁrst one is used to optimize the weights and classify correctly the 2FGL
sources; the second one is used to avoid over-ﬁtting during the training, this
is not used for updating the weights but during the training it monitors the

104

4.3. Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

generalization error. The best epoch corresponds to the lowest validation error,
and the training is stopped when the validation error rate “starts to go up”.
The last one is independent both of the training and validation subsample and
is used to monitor the accuracy of the 2LP, after each training the network is
applied to this subsample and the error on the testing subsample provides an
unbiased estimate of the generalization error. We choose a training sample as
large as possible (∼ 70% of the full sample) while keeping the other independent
samples homogeneous (∼ 15% each one). Since we use an “online” version of
the learning algorithm, we decide to shuﬄe the training sample after each
epoch, this choice allows us to maintain a good generalization of our network.
Moreover, in order to rank the relative importance of the diﬀerent variables
at distinguishing AGNs from pulsars we implemented a variable ranking that
uses the sum of the weights-squared of the connection between the variable’s
nodes in the input layer and the hidden layer. The importance Ii of the input
variable i is given by:

Ii = ¯x2
i

w(1)
ij

,

i = 1, ..., Nvar

(4.6)

j=1

where ¯xi is the sample mean of input variable i.

Table 2.3 ranks the relative importance of the diﬀerent variables at dis-
tinguishing AGNs from pulsars according to the Equation 4.6. As we expect
variability index is the most important variable, here HR12 seems very impor-
tant, a result very diﬀerent from what we obtained from the LR analysis. The
others hardness ratios as well as the curvature signiﬁcance and the PowerLaw
index are relatively important, indicating that the spectral shapes associated
to pulsars and AGNs are rather diﬀerent, for the ﬁrst ones the spectrum is de-
scribed by a power law with exponential cutoﬀ, the others by a broken power
law. The ﬂuxes in each energy bands are the least important parameters at
distinguishing AGNs from pulsars.

In Figure 4.16 the correlation matrix of the variables selected for our anal-
ysis is shown. The i, j element of the matrix is the correlation coeﬃcient ρij
deﬁned as:

Nh(cid:88)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)2

Cij(cid:112)Cii × Cjj

ρij =

(4.7)

where Cij is the covariance of the variables xi and xj while Cii is the variance
of the variable xi. The values of ρ are between –1 and 1, inclusive, and in
Figure 4.16 to each correlation coeﬃcient is associated a color on the basis of
its value.

The performance of our neural network is shown in Figure 4.17. At the
top panel the mean squared error for training, validation and testing samples
during the learning process is shown as a function of the epoch. We have

105

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Variable
(0) Curvature Signiﬁcance
(1) Variability Index
(2) PowerLaw Index
(3) Flux0.1−0.3GeV
(4) Flux0.3−1GeV
(5) Flux1−3GeV
(6) Flux3−10GeV
(7) Flux10−100GeV
(8) Hardness12
(9) Hardness23
(10) Hardness34
(11) Hardness45

Importance
2.89 (3.81%)
26.05 (34.29%)
4.88 (6.43%)
2.53 (3.34%)
1.34 (1.77%)
1.62 (2.14%)
1.04 (1.37%)
1.50 (1.98%)
17.38 (22.89%)
3.44 (4.54%)
6.75 (8.88%)
6.51 (8.57%)

Table 4.3: List of the training variables for the ANN: each variable is ranked
according to its relevance in the discrimination process (see Equation 4.6), as
computed by the ANN algorithm.

Figure 4.16: Correlation matrix of the variables selected for our analysis. The
number of each parameter is expressed in Table 4.3 and to each correlation
coeﬃcient is associated a color on the basis of its value.

stopped the learning process and consider that the ANN is optimized when the
mean squared error of the validation sample “starts to go up” and in the ﬁgure is

106

4.3. Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

speciﬁed by a dotted vertical line. Our ANN algorithm is not very fast because
the neural network is optimized after ∼150 epochs but it works well because it
is able to reach the minimum of the error function for the validation sample.
After the epoch we have stopped the learning process, the error function of the
training sample continues to decrease as we expect, while the error function
of the testing sample increases similarly to the error of the validation sample.
The sawtooth trend of the error function is related to the learning algorithm
we use, that is an “online” version of the learning algorithm where after each
epoch the training sample is shuﬄed, this causes a statistical ﬂuctuation of the
mean squared error during the learning process. In the middle panel is shown
the classiﬁcation table, pulsars are indicated as class 1 while AGN as class 2.
Since the output of our neural network is a vector with two components, the
ﬁrst one deﬁnes the probability that the object is a pulsar and the other one
the probability that it is an AGN, at this step an object is classiﬁed as a pulsar
if the value of the ﬁrst component of the output vector is greater of those of
the second one. This table tells us that our trained neural networks works very
well at distinguish between pulsars and AGNs because the accuracy and the
precision are very high, the total performance of our ANN is given by the total
accuracy in the block blue and it is > 99%. In this case we are considering
that all the 2FGL sources are pulsars and AGNs but there are other source
classes, for this reason we must deﬁne some classiﬁcation thresholds in order
to classify pulsar and AGN candidates more eﬃciently (see Section 4.3.4). On
the bottom panel the distribution of the ANN predictor for the 2FGL pulsars
(Class 1) and AGNs (Class 2) is shown, this corresponds to the value of the
ﬁrst element of the post-processed output vector shown in the Equation 4.3.
Such predictor (P) describes the probability that a 2FGL source is a pulsar, the
k pk = 1
(k is the source class) since we are considering only two source classes, thus in
this case we are modelling the behavior of pulsars as “opposite” of the behavior
of AGNs. Also this distribution tells us the optimized neural network works
very well because almost all the pulsars are characterized by an high predictor
value, while almost all AGNs by a low predictor value.

probability that the same object is an AGN is A = 1 − P because(cid:80)

4.3.4 Deﬁning thresholds

The distribution of the predictor value of the associated sources (at the bot-
tom of the Figure 4.17) clearly shows that we can select a set of AGN and
pulsar candidates with high conﬁdence, when choosing the appropriate ﬁdu-
cial regions. We deﬁne two threshold values, one to classify a pulsar candidate
(CP ) and one to classify an AGN candidate (CA) so that all the sources with
a predictor greater than 0.9962 are classiﬁed as pulsar candidates while all the
sources with a predictor smaller than 3.4× 10−7 are classiﬁed as AGN candida-

107

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.17: Performance of our ANN. Top: mean squared error for training,
validation and testing samples during the learning process as a function of
the epoch. The vertical dotted line speciﬁes the epoch the learning process is
stopped (optimized network). Middle: classiﬁcation table. Bottom: distribu-
tion of the ANN predictor for the 2FGL pulsars (indicated as “Class 1”) and
AGNs (indicated as “Class 2”). Violet indicates pulsars which are put on top
of AGNs.

108

4.3. Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

tes. All the sources with an intermediate value of the predictor remain unclas-
siﬁed after the ANN analysis. The choice of these boundaries is optimized for
an accuracy of 80% for the two source classes in order to keep the misclassi-
ﬁcation fraction under 2%. Here, 80% of pulsar associations in 2FGL have a
predictor greater than CP and 80% of AGNs have a predictor smaller than CA.
We use these thresholds in order to maintain the same level of accuracy for
AGNs and pulsars. The results are shown in the table of classiﬁcation in Figure
4.18. The only pulsar misclassiﬁed is PSR J1823–3021A, this is an energetic
MSP located in the core of the cluster NGC 6624, 8.4 kpc away. This object
was one of the pulsars misclassiﬁed after the application of the LR algorithm
and this may be related to the peculiarities of this source. Otherwise the only
AGN misclassiﬁed (2FGL J2206.6+6500) is associated with a FSRQ blazar.
Also this object was misclassiﬁed by the LR algorithm and the reason may be
related to an incorrect association.

Figure 4.18: Table of classiﬁcation based on the classiﬁcation rules described
in the text. In green are represented the correct classiﬁcations and in red the
incorrect ones.

As for the LR analysis, the sources associated with a diﬀerent class than
AGN or pulsar have been excluded from this training procedure. They are
composed by Galactic objects, such as SNRs, HMBs, globular clusters and a
nova, and extragalactic objects, such as normal galaxies, SMC and LMC. We
do not include in this sample the 6 SNRs identiﬁed on the basis of their spatial
extensions and the 3 PWNe because they are extended sources and diﬀerent
speciﬁc analyses were applied to their in the 2FGL catalog [158]. We decide to
use the “other” sources to estimate the contamination to the candidate AGN
and pulsar samples from the likely presence of these objects in the unassociated
sample. In Figure 4.19 is shown how we can use the predictor distribution for

109

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

the 28 “other” sources to estimate the further contamination from these sources
to the AGN and pulsar candidate distributions.

Figure 4.19: Distribution of the predictor value for the “other” 28 2FGL sources
deﬁned in the text.

According to the ANN analysis, those 28 sources are nearly equally dis-
tributed between AGN-like objects, pulsar-like objects, and still unclassiﬁed
objects. In particular, 32% (9) are classify as a pulsar candidate, while 25% (7)
as an AGN candidate. Notice that the contamination due to these sources does
not change the accuracy and the misclassiﬁcation of the ANN model but only
the contamination. The pulsar candidates are 2 associated point-like SNRs
(with angular diameters < 20’), 2 HMBs (1FGL J1018.6–5856 and LS 5039)
whose γ-ray observables seem very similar to those of a young pulsar [19], and
5 globular clusters, whose γ-ray emission is probably due to the contribution
of a number of MSPs. The AGN candidates are 2 objects in the ﬁeld of the
LMC, the Andromeda galaxy M31, 3 starburst galaxies and the nova (V407
Cyg). From this analysis it is clear that only Galactic pulsar-like objects are
classiﬁed as a pulsar candidate, otherwise only extragalactic or AGN-like ob-
jects are classiﬁed as an AGN candidate. We expect that up to 0.1% of the
newly classiﬁed AGN candidates and up to 11.5% of the newly classiﬁed pulsar
candidates will indeed belong to one of the “other” classes (galaxies, globular
clusters, supernova remnants, etc.). The higher contamination rate for the

110

4.3. Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

pulsars is likely due to low statistics in the 2FGL source sample but it is pri-
marily associated with a Galactic contamination. These results are shown in
the table of classiﬁcation in Figure 4.20.

Figure 4.20: Table of classiﬁcation based on the classiﬁcation rules described
in the text where the contamination given by the “other” 2FGL sources is
assessed.
In green are represented the correct classiﬁcations and in red the
incorrect ones. Note that the inclusion of the “other” 2FGL sources does not
change the accuracy and the misclassiﬁcation of the ANN model.

Figure 4.21 shows on the left the distribution of the accuracy, misclassiﬁ-
cation and contamination by varying the decision threshold related to pulsars
while on the right the same distribution related to AGNs.

4.3.5 Results and their validation

Applying the trained neural network to the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources we ﬁnd
that 131 are classiﬁed as pulsar candidates (P > CP ), 176 are classiﬁed as
AGN candidates (P < CA) and 269 remain unclassiﬁed. The distribution of
2FGL unidentiﬁed sources as a function of the probability of being pulsars
is shown in the Figure 4.22.
It is important to note that we deﬁned more
restrictive thresholds with respect to LR analysis, this produces a decrease of
the contamination and an increase of the eﬃciency of the classiﬁcation, only
the objects characterized by a very high value of ANN predictor are classiﬁed as
pulsar candidates, conversely for AGN candidates. In this way we avoid to over-
predict the number of pulsars and AGNs in unidentiﬁed sources. As a result, if
we take into account the estimated contamination and misclassiﬁcation rates
related to our classiﬁcation rules we expect about 100 γ-ray pulsars and up to
250 AGNs to be discovered in 2FGL catalog .

111

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.21: Distribution of the accuracy, misclassiﬁcation and contamination
as a function of the varying decision threshold.
(Left) Distribution related
to pulsars, the contamination is given by AGNs and “other” sources and mis-
classiﬁcation is related to AGNs classiﬁed as a pulsar. (Right ) Distribution
related to AGNs, the contamination given by pulsars and “other” sources and
misclassiﬁcation is related to pulsars classiﬁed as an AGN.

Figure 4.22: Distribution of the ANN predictor for the 576 2FGL unidentiﬁed
sources.

112

4.3. Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

The spatial distribution of the newly classiﬁed sources, shown in Figure
4.23, gives us the opportunity to cross check our results. Notice that both
the AGN and pulsar distributions are as expected, even though we have not
used the Galactic latitude as an input to either classiﬁcation method. The
pulsar candidates are mainly distributed along the Galactic plane, with a few
high-latitude exceptions that suggest additional nearby MSPs, while the AGN
candidates are nearly isotropically distributed on the sky.

Figure 4.23: Spatial distribution in galactic coordinates of the newly classiﬁed
sources. In blue are shown the pulsar candidates, in red the AGN candidates
and in yellow the unclassiﬁed sources

In the top left panel of Figure 4.24 the distribution in Galactic latitude
of the associated pulsars and AGNs is shown, while on the top right panel
the distribution of the pulsar and AGN candidates derived by the ANN is
presented.
It is evident that these two distributions are very similar when
comparing pulsars with pulsar candidates while they are quite diﬀerent when
comparing AGNs and AGN candidates. This diﬀerence may be related to the
selected thresholds, our choice seems to be too conservative to single out AGNs
resulting in under-predicting the number of AGN candidates in the unidenti-
ﬁed sources.
If we combine the AGN candidate population with the 2FGL
sources that already have AGN associations (Figure 4.24, bottom left panel),
we ﬁnd that the shape of the AGN distribution matches reasonably well the
nearly isotropical distribution that we expect, at low Galactic latitudes there
is still an important lack of AGNs because of the bright Galactic diﬀuse γ-ray
emission and our conservative choice regarding CA. Otherwise, if we combine

113

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.24: (Top) Latitude distribution of associated pulsars and AGNs (left)
and of pulsar and AGN candidates (right). (Bottom) Left: distribution of AGN
candidates binned by Galactic latitude. Black line is the sum of the 2FGL AGN
associations (red line) plus the sources classiﬁed as AGN candidates (magenta
line). Right: distribution of pulsar candidates binned by Galactic latitude.
Black line is the sum of the 2FGL pulsar associations (blue line) plus the
sources classiﬁed as pulsar candidates (cyan line).

the pulsar candidate population with the 2FGL sources that already have pul-

114

4.3. Classiﬁcation using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)

sar associations (Figure 4.24, bottom right panel), we ﬁnd their distribution
is characterized by an evident peak at low Galactic latitudes. In viewing of
our studies on the contamination in the pulsar candidate sample, we expect
that a fraction of these objects may be associated with other Galactic source
classes, e.g. SNRs or HMBs, but probably a certain fraction of these sources
may also be spurious related to a bad model describing the Galactic diﬀuse
γ-ray emission

In Figure 4.25 curvature-variability distribution of the newly classiﬁed AGN
and pulsar candidates on the basis of the ANN analysis is shown. We see
that the unidentiﬁed sources have been separated into two populations with
few overlap between them because of our conservative choice on thresholds.
Comparing this distribution to Figure 4.4, we see that this separation follows
the separation seen between the associated AGNs and pulsars.

These results allow us to assert that our ANN algorithms work as well as
we expect, i.e., pulsar candidates are not variable, have a curved spectrum,
and are mainly distributed along the Galactic plane, while AGN candidates
are mostly extragalactic, variable sources.

In order to test the capability of the ANN algorithms for identifying the
diﬀerent source classes, we must apply the neural network analysis to an inde-
pendent set of associations from those used to train the ANN. To this purpose,
as for the logistic regression analysis, we consider 46 new Galactic source as-
sociations (18 young pulsars and 28 MSPs), and 41 new AGN associations
yielded after the publication of the 2FGL catalog [158]. Of the 41 newly as-
sociated AGNs, 28 are correctly classiﬁed as AGN candidates by the ANN
analysis (eﬃciency: 68%), no one is classiﬁed as pulsar candidates (false neg-
ative: 0%), while the other 17 sources remain unclassiﬁed (32%). For pulsars,
24 are correctly classiﬁed as pulsar candidates by the ANN analysis (eﬃciency:
52%), only 3 are classiﬁed as AGN candidates (false negative: 7%), while the
other 19 sources remain unclassiﬁed (41%). The eﬃciency of the algorithm
at classifying new AGNs is good (eﬃciency: ∼70%) and no newly AGN is
classiﬁed as a pulsar candidate. We notice that 12 of the 17 unclassiﬁed newly
AGNs have a predictor value < 5× 10−5, this means that a little change of the
classiﬁcation threshold to single out AGN would lead to a signiﬁcant increase
of the eﬃciency at classifying new AGNs.
For newly pulsars, we notice the same diﬀerence in performance between young
pulsars and MSPs observed using the LR analysis. For newly objects identiﬁed
as young pulsars, we correctly classify 15 pulsars (eﬃciency: 84%), no source
is misclassiﬁed (false negative: 0%) and we leave the remaining sources as un-
classiﬁed (eﬃciency: 16%). On the other hand, for newly sources identiﬁed
as MSPs, the classiﬁcation rate is much worse. We correctly classify only 9
objects as pulsars (eﬃciency: 32%), we misclassify 3 objects as AGN (false

115

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.25: Variability index vs. curvature signiﬁcance for 2FGL unidentiﬁed
sources classiﬁed as AGN (red) and pulsar candidates (blue) and unclassiﬁed
(yellow).

negative: 17%) and left the remaining objects as still unassociated (51% of
the new MSPs). As was noticed after the logistic regression analysis, these
misclassiﬁcations are mainly due to the fact that, in contrast to the new young
pulsars, almost all the new MSPs have a very low source signiﬁcance (TS <
100), thus they have only upper limits in many energy bands making very
diﬃcult an accurate spectral characterization.

As a result, the eﬃciency of the algorithm at classifying new young pulsar
detections is very high (more than 80%), which is consistent with the eﬃciency
we obtained for the pulsars in the training sample. Also the eﬃciency of our
neural network at classifying new AGNs is rather high (∼ 70%). Moreover, the
absence of false negative is a very encouraging result, that makes us conﬁdent

116

4.4. Comparing the two classiﬁcation methods

in using the results from the ANN analysis while planning multi-wavelength ob-
servation of unidentiﬁed sources. Otherwise, we cannot assert anything about
the eﬃciency of the algorithm at classifying new MSPs because these results
are aﬀected by low statistics and bad characterization related to the low source
signiﬁcance.

Diﬀerently from the LR analysis, we did not include the active galaxies
of uncertain type in the training sample because their association may be
uncertain and it is based on diﬀerent techniques with respect to those applied
in the construction of the 2FGL catalog ([158], [83]). Applying the trained
ANN to these sources we ﬁnd that 162 (63%) are classiﬁed as AGN candidates
(P < CA), 3 (1%) are classiﬁed as pulsar candidates (P > CP ) and 92 (37%)
remain unclassiﬁed. Among the misclassiﬁed active galaxies of uncertain type,
1 is now associated with a young γ-ray pulsar (PSR J0622+3749 [167]) and
the other two have a “c” appended to indicate “caution” because these objects
has an high probability to be spurious [158]. Moreover, in the preliminary
construction of the new Fermi-LAT catalog developed by the LAT team, where
the most recent diﬀuse γ-ray Galactic emission model and 5 years of data are
used, these two objects disappear. The distribution of 2FGL active galaxies
of uncertain type as a function of the probability of being pulsars is shown
in the Figure 4.26. If we compare this distribution with those of associated
AGNs (see the bottom panel of Figure 4.17) we notice that active galaxies of
uncertain type are characterized by a broader distribution with some of them
with an high probability to be a pulsar, indicating that probably some of these
objects are spurious or associated with another source class. Active galaxies
of uncertain type are typically characterized by a low source signiﬁcance (TS
< 100) thus their features are not well detected, this is particularly true for
time variability, making these objects a bit diﬀerent from a “standard” γ-ray
AGN.

4.4 Comparing the two classiﬁcation methods

We have implemented two diﬀerent machine learning techniques to determine
likely source classiﬁcations for the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources: Logistic Regres-
sion and Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. Both techniques use identiﬁed objects to
build up a classiﬁcation analysis which compute the probability for an uniden-
tiﬁed source to belong to a given class. We applied these techniques to the
sources in 2FGL and obtained a set of classiﬁcation probabilities. LR is a
generalized linear model and it classiﬁes the 2FGL sources through a linear
distinction in the predictor variables space, while ANNs can be considered an
extension of this simple linear model classifying the 2FGL sources through a
more complex non-linear separation, this is evident in Figure 4.14. We cannot

117

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.26: Distribution of the ANN predictor for the 257 2FGL active galax-
ies of uncertain type.

directly compare the results obtained by the logistic regression and the neural
networks because we used two diﬀerent training samples (for the ANN analysis
we do not include active galaxies of uncertain type), we selected classiﬁcation
thresholds based on diﬀerent assumptions and we used a diﬀerent set of pre-
dictor variables. However, we can compare their performance at classifying
pulsars from AGNs.

Comparing the LR and ANN predictor distributions shown in Figure 4.7
and at the bottom of Figure 4.17 it is clear they are very diﬀerent. ANN seems
to separate pulsars from AGNs better than LR, in fact these objects are pri-
marily situated near to the extreme values of the predictor (P=1 and P=0). A
signiﬁcant comparison between these two classiﬁcation techniques can be done
analyzing the relative eﬃciency at classifying pulsars and AGNs associated af-
ter the publication of the 2FGL catalog. The more conservative classiﬁcation
thresholds selected for the ANN analysis misclassify very few newly associ-
ated sources (only a total of 3 objects) with respect to the LR analysis but
the signiﬁcant improvement given by the ANN is related to the fraction of
correct classiﬁcations. Since the conservative classiﬁcation thresholds selected,

118

4.5. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish young pulsars from MSPs

we would expect the rate of correct classiﬁcations is higher using the LR anal-
ysis but ANN algorithm correctly classify a larger fraction of young pulsars,
MSPs and AGNs. This means that the eﬃciency to determine likely source
classiﬁcation for the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources is considerably higher if it is
performed by ANN analysis independently from our assumptions. This is a
general result, we must apply a non-linear analysis to eﬃciently classify the
2FGL sources.

In the end, the number of pulsar candidates in 2FGL unassociated sample
is similar for the LR and ANN analysis because their accuracy at classifying
pulsar is comparable (see Figures 4.6 and 4.18)), while the number of AGN
candidates is lower using an ANN analysis because using an acceptance thresh-
old of 80% of the known AGNs, we are not including a large number of AGN
candidates.

4.5 Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish

young pulsars from MSPs

One of the early surprising and mostly unexpected results from the LAT, was
the fact that MSPs are strong γ-ray emitters. A MSP is a very old pulsar
(about 109 years) with a rotational period in the range of about 1 and 10
ms, a magnetic ﬁeld (cid:46) 1010 Gauss and a spindown rate (cid:46) 10−17 s/s. These
characteristics are very diﬀerent from those of LAT young pulsars, which have
a rotational period in the range of about 0.03 and 1 s a very intense magnetic
ﬁeld of order of 1012 − 1013 Gauss and a spindown rate in the range of about
10−14 and 10−12 s/s. Pulsar period-spindown rate distribution is shown in
Figure 4.27.

Out of 83 2FGL identiﬁed pulsars, 57 are young pulsars and 26 are MSPs
and their distribution on the sky is shown in Figure 4.28. Young pulsars are
primarily located along the Galactic plane which reﬂects the Galactic nature
of these objects, while MSPs are seen at higher latitudes. MSPs are typically
fainter in γ rays than young pulsars and only the near ones can be detected
by the LAT, they are in our Galaxy but they are very local, thus distributed
all over the sky.

Despite their intrinsic diﬀerences, which are evident in Figure 4.27, after
light curves and spectra) of
detailed inspections, the γ-ray properties (e.g.
MSPs appear to be very similar to those of young γ-ray pulsars [200]. Their
γ-ray similarity is evident observing the curvature-variability distribution of
the young pulsar and the MSPs shown in Figure 4.29. We see that these two
populations overlap in the lower right-hand quadrant making impossible their
distinction on the basis of only these γ-ray observables.

119

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.27: Pulsar spindown rate versus rotation period [200].

Figure 4.28: Spatial distribution in Galactic coordinates of 2FGL young pulsars
and MSPs.

The current sample of 83 2FGL pulsars and a reﬁned deﬁnition of γ-ray pa-
rameters in 2FGL catalog allow us to perform detailed statistical comparisons
between the properties of these two types of pulsars. The excellent results

120

4.5. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish young pulsars from MSPs

Figure 4.29: Variability index plotted as a function of curvature signiﬁcance.

obtained by ANNs to classify 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources as pulsar or AGN
candidates on the basis of their γ-ray observables prompted us to build a dif-
ferent neural network to try to distinguish young pulsars from MSPs. Our goal
is to explore all the parameter space of these γ-ray sources and search for a
set of input variables that might lead to some discriminating power between
these sources.

It is important to assert that if we want to classify 2FGL unidentiﬁed
sources as young pulsar and MSP candidates we cannot directly apply a neural
network trained with these two source classes because in this way almost all
non-pulsar objects (e.g. AGNs) in the unassociated sample will be erroneously
classiﬁed as MSP or young pulsar candidates. For this reason we must use a
more complex architecture and we decide to use a hierarchical neural network
model composed by two simple neural networks. The ﬁrst one (deﬁned as
ANN1 ) is constructed to distinguish pulsars from AGNs (we use the ANN
described in Section 4.3) and the second one (deﬁned as ANN2 ) to distinguish
young pulsars from MSPs. In this way each 2FGL source “enters” the ANN1
and if it is classiﬁed as a pulsar candidate can “enter” the ANN2, which decides
if such object is a young pulsar or a MSP candidate.

121

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

In order to perform an ANN analysis to try to discriminate young pulsars
from MSPs in the γ-ray observables space we follow the procedure explained
in Section 4.3. The ﬁrst step consists of selecting a sample of data to build
the predictor value P, to this aim we focus on the 57 young pulsars an the
26 MSPs. Then, we must select the most appropriate set of variables for
training the ANN2, variability index and curvature signiﬁcance are not useful
at distinguish young pulsars from MSPs as shown in Figure 4.29. One of the
advantages of ANN is that we can use all γ-ray parameters included in 2FGL
catalog which do not depend too much on ﬂux and signiﬁcance of the source.
The trained ANN will decide which parameters are not important on the basis
of the weights associated to them (see Equation 4.6). In particular, weights
associated to an unimportant parameters will tend to zero making irrelevant
its presence in the network. According to the previous consideration, we select
a set of variables that includes the curvature signiﬁcance, the variability index,
the PowerLaw index, the ﬂuxes and the hardness ratios for the 5 energy bands
in the catalog. Also for the ANN2 we do not choose to use the Galactic
latitude and longitude as input to the neural network because we want to use
the position on the sky of the diﬀerent populations as a cross check of our
result. The new young pulsar candidates should be mainly distributed along
the Galactic plane, while the MSP candidates should be located at higher
latitudes.

4.5.1 Architecture of the ANN

In order to deﬁne the architecture of ANN2 we must determine the number
of nodes in each layer. The number of input nodes is given by the number of
selected predictor variables, in our case 12. During the ANN analysis a pre-
processing is performed normalizing each variable to the range [0, 1]. All the
variables are normalized as explained in Section 4.3. The number of output
nodes is given by the number of source classes we want to classify, in our case
2 (young pulsars and MSPs). Since for ANN2 we use an hyperbolic tangent
activation function both for hidden and output nodes, the target vector for
the network outputs associated to the lth source in the training sample (t(l))
has 1 in the element corresponding to the true class and minus ones elsewhere.
Thus for young pulsars t = [1,−1] while for MSPs t = [−1, 1]. The number of
hidden nodes is determined by the pruning procedure as explained is Section
4.3.2. In Figure 4.30 in blue is shown the value of the mean square error deﬁned
in Equation 4.4 as a function of the number of hidden nodes while in red the
performance of our network in terms of the fraction of correct classiﬁcations
of the validation as a function of the number of hidden nodes. Using these
procedure we decide to use 8 hidden nodes.

As a result our feed-forward 2LP is built up of 12 input nodes, 8 hidden

122

4.5. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish young pulsars from MSPs

Figure 4.30: (blue) Value of the mean square error (mse) deﬁned in Equa-
tion 4.4 as a function of the number of hidden nodes. (red) Performance of
the ANN2 in terms of fraction of correct classiﬁcations of the objects in the
validation sample as a function of the number of hidden nodes.

nodes and 2 output nodes, each node in a layer is linked to all the nodes of
the next layer and to each link is associated a weight randomly initialized in
the range [−1, 1].

4.5.2 Training session

Given the network architecture, we must train the ANN2 to distinguish young
pulsars from MSPs. We follow the procedure described in the Section 4.3.3 and
we use the back-propagation learning algorithm, which is based on the error-
correction learning rule. We use this learning algorithm in the “online” version,
in which the weights of the connections are updated after each example are
processed by the network (see Equation 4.5). We set the learning rate η to 0.2.
Table 4.4 ranks the relative importance of the diﬀerent variables at distin-

123

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

guishing MSPs from young pulsars according to the Equation 4.6. As expected,
variability index and curvature signiﬁcance are not very important at distin-
guishing the two source classes, the same for the ﬂuxes at energies greater than
300 MeV. HR45 and PowerLaw index are the two less important γ-ray parame-
ters. The most relevant result is that the ﬂux in the lower energy band and the
hardness ratios (except for HR45) are the most important γ-ray observables
to distinguish MSPs from young pulsars. Young pulsars are typically brighter
than MSPs in the energy range between 100 and 300 MeV, this may explain the
importance of the ﬂux in this energy range. Although curvature signiﬁcance
and PowerLaw index, which are related to spectral shape, are not very signif-
icant parameters at discriminating young pulsars from MSPs, hardness ratios
(except for HR45) seem very important. This means that spectra of these two
source classes are very diﬀerent from a simple pawer law but, because curva-
ture signiﬁcance does not say anything about spectral shape, probably these
two pulsar types are characterized by a diﬀerent spectral shape, this result is
very interesting and it must be analyzed in more detail.

Variable
(0) curvature signiﬁcance
(1) Variability Index
(2) PowerLaw Index
(3) Flux0.1−0.3GeV
(4) Flux0.3−1GeV
(5) Flux1−3GeV
(6) Flux3−10GeV
(7) Flux10−100GeV
(8) Hardness12
(9) Hardness23
(10) Hardness34
(11) Hardness45

Importance
1.63 (2.37%)
1.73 (2.51%)
0.61 (0.89%)
20.47 (29.79%)
2.39 (3.48%)
1.61 (2.35%)
1.51 (2.2%)
0.64 (0.93%)
11.27 (16.39%)
15.30 (22.27%)
11.51 (16.75%)
0.04 (0.06%)

Table 4.4: List of the training variables for the ANN: each variable is ranked
according to its relevance in the discrimination process (see Equation 4.6), as
computed by the ANN algorithm.

Figure 4.31 shows the correlation matrix of the variables selected for our

analysis as described by the Equation 4.7.

Figure 4.32 shows the results of the learning process and the performance
of our trained neural network. The top panel shows the mean squared error
for training, validation and testing samples during the learning process as a
function of the epoch. In the middle panel is shown the classiﬁcation table.

124

4.5. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish young pulsars from MSPs

Figure 4.31: Correlation matrix of the variables selected for our analysis. The
number of each parameter is expressed in Table 4.4 and to each correlation
coeﬃcient is associated a color on the basis of its value.

This table suggests that our trained neural network is able to distinguish young
pulsars from MSPs on the basis of their γ-ray observables because the accuracy
and the precision are very high. The total performance of our ANN is given
by the total accuracy in the block blue and it is > 93%. In order to eﬃciently
classify 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources as young pulsar or MSP candidates we must
select some classiﬁcation thresholds as we will explain in the next section. In
the bottom panel the distribution of the ANN2 predictor for the 2FGL young
pulsars (Class 1) and MSPs (Class 2) is shown. This distribution shows our
algorithm is able to discriminate very well young pulsars from MSPs because
almost all the MSPs are characterized by a low predictor value, while almost
all young pulsars by an high predictor value, with few misclassiﬁcations with
very low predictor value.

125

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.32: Performance of ANN2. Top: mean squared error for training,
validation and testing samples during the learning process as a function of
the epoch. The vertical dotted line speciﬁes the epoch the learning process is
stopped (optimized network). Middle: classiﬁcation table. Bottom: distribu-
tion of the ANN2 predictor for the 2FGL young pulsars (indicated as “Class
1”) and MSPs (indicated as “Class 2”). Violet indicates young pulsars which
are put on top of MSPs.

126

4.5. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish young pulsars from MSPs

4.5.3 Deﬁning thresholds

Now we set two classiﬁcation thresholds, one to classify a young pulsar candi-
date (CY P ) and one to classify a MSP candidate (CM SP ) so that all the sources
with a predictor greater than 0.984 are classiﬁed as young pulsar candidates
while all the sources with a predictor smaller than 0.085 are classiﬁed as MSPs
candidates. All the sources with an intermediate value of the predictor remain
unclassiﬁed after the ANN analysis. As a result of this choice, 80% of young
pulsars in 2FGL have a predictor greater than CY P while 80% of MSPs have a
predictor smaller than CM SP . The results are shown in the table of classiﬁca-
tion in Figure 4.33. The misclassiﬁed young pulsars are 4: PSR J0631+1036,
PSR J1846+0919, PSR J2030+3641 and PSR J2043+2740, while no MSP was
misclassiﬁed as a young pulsar by our trained neural network. PSR J0631 is
a bright young γ-ray pulsars and it was one of the ﬁrst pulsars detected by
the LAT [215]. This young pulsar, located in the direction of the Galactic
anticenter, could be inside the dark cloud LDN 1605, which is part of the ac-
tive star-forming region 3 Mon, and could be interacting with it [9]. These
peculiarities make this pulsar very diﬀerent from a “standard” young pulsar
and this may be the reason of its misclassiﬁcation. PSR J1846+0919 is lo-
cated oﬀ the plane and is not as energetic as other young pulsars, moreover
it has a low magnetic ﬁeld and a rather large characteristic age [183]. Thus,
also this pulsar is diﬀerent from a “standard” young pulsars and this may be
the reason of its misclassiﬁcation. PSR J2030+3641 is a middle-aged pulsar
located in the Cygnus region [39]. The reason of its misclassiﬁcation is not
clear, it may be related to a bad model of the Galactic diﬀuse emission in that
diﬃcult region. PSR J2043+2740 is one of the oldest non-recycled γ-ray pul-
sar (characteristic age of 1.2 Myr) with a very short period but with a relative
high spin-down luminosity [159]. These anomalous features may be the reason
of its misclassiﬁcation.

Since we use a hierarchical neural network, we cannot estimate the contami-
nation to the candidate young pulsar and MSP samples from the likely presence
in the unassociated sample of the other 2FGL associated objects excluded from
the training procedure (e.g. AGNs, SNRs, HMBs, etc.). In order to estimate
their contamination, we must follow the hierarchical structure of our ANN.
First, each source associated with a diﬀerent class than MSP or young pulsar
“enters” the ANN1 optimized at distinguishing pulsars from AGNs (see Sec-
tion 4.3) and if an object is classiﬁed as a pulsar-like source can “enter” the
ANN2 just constructed and trained to distinguish young pulsars and MSPs.
At this point the contamination of the “other” 2FGL associated sources can be
estimated.

127

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.33: Table of classiﬁcation based on the rules described in the text. In
green are represented the correct classiﬁcations and in red the incorrect ones.

4.5.4 Results and their validation

First of all we apply the trained hierarchical neural network to 83 2FGL pulsars
in order to determine the total eﬃciency and accuracy at distinguishing young
pulsars from MSPs. Of 46 young pulsars classiﬁed as pulsar candidates by the
ANN1 (see Section 4.3), 41 are correctly classiﬁed as young pulsar candidates
by the ANN2 (eﬃciency: 89%) and only 1 is classiﬁed as MSP candidates
(false negative: 2%), while the other source remains unclassiﬁed (9%). For
21 MSPs classiﬁed as pulsar candidates, 18 are correctly classiﬁed as MSP
candidates by the ANN2 (eﬃciency: 86%), no one is classiﬁed as young pulsar
candidates (false negative: 0%), while the other 3 sources remain unclassiﬁed
(14%). These results are encouraging because applying a hierarchical neural
network the eﬃciency and the accuracy at distinguishing young pulsars from
MSPs is higher than those found using a single neural network.

Applying the optimized hierarchical neural network to the “other” 2FGL
associated sources we can estimate their contamination to the candidate MSP
and young pulsar samples from the likely presence of these objects in the
unassociated sample. The ANN1 has classiﬁed 13 non-pulsar objects as pulsar
candidates, they are 1 AGN, 3 active galaxies of uncertain type, 2 HMBs, 2
point-like SNRs and 5 globular clusters. Of these, 6 are classiﬁed as young
pulsar candidates by the ANN2 (2 SNRs, 2 HMBs and the globular clus-
ters Terzan 5 and 2MS-GC01), 3 are classiﬁed as MSP candidates (3 globular
clusters) while the other 4 sources remain unclassiﬁed (1 AGN and 3 active
galaxies of uncertain type). This result is very encouraging because all AGN-
like objects remain unclassiﬁed, almost all globular clusters are classiﬁed as

128

4.5. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish young pulsars from MSPs

MSP candidates, a reasonable choice since their γ-ray emission is related to
the contribution of a number of MSPs, and all the objects whose emission may
be related to a young pulsar are classiﬁed as young pulsar candidates. Here
we observe that the contamination to the candidate MSP and young pulsar
samples is very low, thus irrelevant.

Applying the trained hierarchical neural network to the 2FGL unidentiﬁed
sources we ﬁnd that, out of 131 classiﬁed as pulsar candidates by the ANN1, 75
are classiﬁed as young pulsar candidates (P > CY P ), 34 are classiﬁed as MSP
candidates (P < CM SP ) and 26 are pulsars of uncertain type. In Figure 4.34
is shown the distribution of the 131 unidentiﬁed sources classiﬁed as pulsar
candidates by the ANN1 as a function of the probability of being young pul-
sars. The ANN2 predictor distribution of 131 pulsar-like unidentiﬁed sources
is characterized by two noticeable peaks close to P = 1 and P = 0, these ob-
jects are very similar to 2FGL young pulsars and MSPs respectively, between
these two values the pulsar-like unidentiﬁed sources are uniformly distributed.

Figure 4.34: Distribution of young pulsar candidates vs. MSP candidates on
the basis of the hierarchical ANN predictor for the 131 unidentiﬁed sources
classiﬁed as pulsar candidates by the ANN1.

129

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

The spatial distribution of the sources newly classiﬁed by our hierarchical
neural network model is shown in Figure 4.23. Comparing this distribution
with those in Figure 4.28 we have the opportunity to cross check our results.
Note that both the MSP and young pulsar distributions are as expected, even
though we have not used the Galactic latitude as an input to either classiﬁ-
cation method. The young pulsar candidates are primarily distributed along
the Galactic plane, while MSP candidates are mainly distributed at higher
latitudes.

Figure 4.35: Spatial distribution in galactic coordinates of the newly classiﬁed
sources by our hierarchical neural network model. In blue are shown the young
pulsar candidates, in red the MSP candidates and in yellow the pulsars of
uncertain type

In Figure 4.36 we show the curvature-variability distribution of the newly
classiﬁed MSP and young pulsar candidates on the basis of the hierarchical
ANN analysis. Comparing this distribution to Figure 4.29, we see that these
γ-ray parameters are not able to separate the associated young pulsars and
MSPs (see Table 4.31).

In order to test the capability of the hierarchical neural network model
for identifying young pulsar and MSP candidates, we apply the trained ANN
model to 24 new pulsars detected (15 young pulsars and 9 MSPs) after the
publication of the 2FGL catalog which were classiﬁed as pulsar candidates by
the ANN1 (see Section 4.3). Of the 15 newly associated young pulsars, 9 are
correctly classiﬁed as young pulsar candidates by the ANN analysis (eﬃciency:
60%) and 4 are classiﬁed as MSP candidates (false negative: 27%), while the
other source remains unclassiﬁed (13%). For MSPs, 7 are correctly classiﬁed

130

4.5. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish young pulsars from MSPs

Figure 4.36: Variability index vs. curvature signiﬁcance for 131 pulsar-like
2FGL unidentiﬁed sources classiﬁed as MSP (red) and young pulsar candidates
(blue) and unclassiﬁed (yellow).

as MSP candidates by the ANN analysis (eﬃciency: 78%), no one is classiﬁed
as young pulsar candidates (false negative: 0%), while the other 2 sources re-
main unclassiﬁed (22%). The young pulsars classiﬁed as MSP candidates are
PSR J0106+4855, PSR J1422-6138, PSR J2111+4606 and PSR J2139+4716.
The association of the second object with that young pulsar has not already
been conﬁrmed, further speciﬁc analysis will determine its correctness. The
other 3 objects were associated with a young pulsar by blind searches [167],
PSR J2111+4606 is a young and energetic Galactic-plane pulsar, the other 2
are older and less energetic. PSR J2139+4716 has one of the lowest spin down
power among non-recycled pulsars and PSR J0106+4855 has a large charac-
teristic age (3 Myr) and a small surface magnetic ﬁeld. All these peculiarities
may be the origin of their misclassiﬁcation which keeps occurring in the ANN
classiﬁcation.

As a result, the eﬃciency of the hierarchical algorithm at classifying new
MSP detections is very high (nearby 80%), which is consistent with the eﬃ-
ciency we obtained for the MSPs in the training sample, in spite of the small-
ness of the sample. Moreover, the absence of false negative is a very encour-
aging result. Conversely, the eﬃciency of our hierarchical neural network at

131

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

classifying new young pulsars is not extremely high (60%) and misclassiﬁed
objects may be related to some peculiarities which make them “non-standard”
young pulsars.

4.6 Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish

AGN subclasses

The purpose of my Ph.D. thesis is to develop an advanced classiﬁcation tech-
nique to ﬁnd good radio-quiet MSP candidates in the sample of 2FGL uniden-
tiﬁed sources but our hierarchical neural networks can be used to discriminate
and classify AGN subclasses. Since non-blazar AGN sources represent only ∼
3% of the entire 2FGL AGN sample, we assume that all AGN-like candidates
classiﬁed by ANN1 deﬁned in the Section 4.3 are blazars. For this reason we
will develop an ANN to distinguish the two blazar subclasses, which are BL
Lacertae (BL Lacs) and ﬂat-spectrum radio quasars (FSRQs), on the basis of
their γ-ray observables.

Blazars are jet-dominated extragalactic objects characterized by the emis-
sion of strongly variable and polarized non-thermal radiation across the entire
electromagnetic spectrum, from radio waves to γ-rays [204]. As the extreme
properties of these sources are due to the relativistic ampliﬁcation of radi-
ation emitted along a jet pointing very close to the line of sight [32, 205].
Blazars can be categorized by their optical properties and the shape of their
broad-band spectral energy distributions (SEDs). Blazar SEDs always show
two broad bumps in the log ν − log νFν space; the lower energy one is usually
attributed to synchrotron radiation, while the more energetic one is attributed
to inverse Compton scattering. Blazars displaying strong and broad optical
emission lines are usually called ﬂat-spectrum radio quasars (FSRQs), while
objects with no broad emission lines (i.e., rest-frame equivalent width, EW, <
5) are called BL Lac objects. In [163] the terms LBL and HBL was introduced
to distinguish between BL Lacs with low and high values of the peak frequency
of the synchrotron bump (νs
peak). Recently this deﬁnition was extended to all
types of blazars and deﬁned the terms LSP, ISP, and HSP (corresponding to
low, intermediate, and high synchrotron peaked blazars) for the cases where
νs
peak < 1014 Hz, 1014 Hz < νs
peak > 1015 Hz, respectively
[1]. In the same paper authors showed that the synchrotron peak frequency is
positioned between 1012.5 and 1014.5 Hz in FSRQs and between 1013 and 1017
Hz in featureless BL Lacertae objects. In the rest of this section, we use only
the BL Lac and FSRQ nomenclature.

peak < 1015 Hz, and νs

Out of 806 2FGL associated blazars, 436 are BL Lacs and 370 are FSRQs
and their distribution on the sky is shown in Figure 4.37. The distribution

132

4.6. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish AGN subclasses

reﬂects the extragalactic nature of these objects, while the lack of blazars at
low latitude is the eﬀect of diﬀuse radio emission, Galactic point sources and
heavy optical extinction which make the low-latitude sky a diﬃcult region for
blazar studies, and catalogs of blazars and blazar candidates often avoid it
partially or entirely.

Figure 4.37: Distribution on the sky of 2FGL BL Lacs (indicated as “BZB”)
and FSRQs (indicated as “BZQ”).

Figure 4.38 shows the curvature-variability distribution of BL Lacs FSRQs.
Curvature signiﬁcance does not seem signiﬁcant to distinguish the two blazar
subclasses while FSRQs are typically more variable than BL Lacs as discussed
in [83]. Diﬀerences between variability properties between BL Lac objects and
FSRQs at GeV energies are important for understanding the jet location and
jet radiation mechanisms, considering that rapid variability is more likely to
be related to emission sites near the central nucleus, whereas extended ((cid:38) kpc)
jets can only make weakly variable or quiescent emission.

Figure 4.39 shows the PowerLaw index distribution for the two diﬀerent
classes of blazars, BL Lacs and FSRQs.
In the LAT energy range FSRQ
spectra are softer than BL Lac ones with a moderate overlap as discussed
in [83]. Fitting a Gaussian model we obtain that the resulting PowerLaw
index distribution mean values and rms are 1.99 ± 0.25 and 2.4 ± 0.19 for
FSRQs and BL Lac objects making this γ-ray observable a good parameter to
distinguish the two blazar subclasses. This feature shows a strong correlation
between the γ-ray spectral slope and the synchrotron peak energy as expected
in synchrotron-inverse Compton scenarios [83].

133

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.38: Variability index plotted as a function of curvature signiﬁcance.
BZB indicates BL Lac objects while BZQ FSRQs.

In order to perform an ANN analysis to discriminate 2FGL BL Lacs from
FSRQs in the γ-ray observables space we follow the procedure explained in
Section 4.3. The ﬁrst step consists of selecting a sample of data to build the
predictor value (P ), to this aim we focus on the 436 BL Lacs an the 370 FSRQs.
The full sample is split in three subsamples used for training, validation and
testing. Then we must select the most appropriate set of variables for training
the ANN3. We select a set of variables that includes the curvature signiﬁcance,
the variability index, the PowerLaw index, the ﬂuxes and the hardness ratios
for the 5 energy bands in the catalog. We do not use the Galactic latitude
and longitude as input because blazars are extragalactic objects and their
distribution on the sky is rather isotropical.

4.6.1 Architecture of the ANN

The architecture of ANN3 is deﬁned by the number of nodes in each layer.
The number of input nodes is given by the number of selected predictor vari-
ables, in our case 12. During the ANN analysis a pre-processing is performed

134

4.6. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish AGN subclasses

Figure 4.39: PowerLaw Index distribution for 2FGL blazar subclasses.

normalizing each variable to the range [0, 1] as explained in Section 4.3. The
number of output nodes is given by the number of source classes we want to
classify, in our case 2 (BL Lacs and FSRQs). For ANN3 we use an hyperbolic
tangent activation function both for hidden and output nodes and the target
vector for BL Lacs is t = [1,−1] while for FSRQs is t = [−1, 1]. The number
of hidden nodes is determined by the pruning procedure as explained is Sec-
tion 4.3.2. In Figure 4.40 in blue is shown the value of the mean square error
deﬁned in Equation 4.4 as a function of the number of hidden nodes while in
red the performance of our network in terms of the fraction of correct classiﬁ-
cations of the validation as a function of the number of hidden nodes. Using
this procedure we decide to use 8 hidden nodes.

As a result the ANN3 is built up of 12 input nodes, 8 hidden nodes and 2
output nodes, each node in a layer is linked to all the nodes of the next layer
and to each link is associated a weight randomly initialized in the range [−1, 1].

135

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.40: (blue) Value of the mean square error (mse) deﬁned in Equation
4.4 as a function of the number of hidden nodes. (red) Performance of the
network in terms of fraction of correct classiﬁcations of the objects in the
validation sample as a function of the number of hidden nodes.

4.6.2 Training session and classiﬁcation thresholds

Given the network architecture, we can train the ANN3 to distinguish BL Lacs
from FSRQs. We follow the procedure described in the Section 4.3.3 and we
use the back-propagation learning algorithm, which is applied in the “online”
version (see Equation 4.5).

Table 4.5 ranks the relative importance of the diﬀerent variables at distin-
guishing BL Lacs from FSRQs according to the Equation 4.6. As expected,
PowerLaw index is the most signiﬁcant γ-ray parameter at distinguishing FS-
RQs from BL Lacs, also variability index is relatively important, while curva-
ture signiﬁcance is the less important. An interesting result is that also HR23
and HR34 are rather signiﬁcance at distinguishing the two blazar subclasses,
this means that, despite their spectral shape can be described very well from a
broken power law, their spectra are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in the energy range
between 0.3 and 10 GeV, i.e. where there is the “break” energy. This result is
very important because can be useful to constrain any γ-ray emission model
for FSRQs and BL Lacs, they are typically characterized by the same spec-
tral model (i.e. broken power law), but the break energy is diﬀerent for the
two blazar subclasses. All other γ-ray parameters, ﬂuxes in the ﬁve energy
range, HR12 and HR45, are not important at distinguishing FSRQs from BL
Lacs. These results are very encouraging because conﬁrm what we expect in
synchrotron-inverse Compton scenarios. Moreover, the result suggesting a dif-
ferent brake energy for FSRQs and BL Lac is very interesting and it must be

136

4.6. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish AGN subclasses

analyzed in more detail to improve the relative γ-ray emission models.

Variable
(0) curvature signiﬁcance
(1) Variability Index
(2) PowerLaw Index
(3) Flux0.1−0.3GeV
(4) Flux0.3−1GeV
(5) Flux1−3GeV
(6) Flux3−10GeV
(7) Flux10−100GeV
(8) Hardness12
(9) Hardness23
(10) Hardness34
(11) Hardness45

Importance
0.16 (0.37%)
6.90 (16.05%)
17.36 (40.39%)
0.60 (1.39%)
0.25 (0.59%)
1.04 (2.42%)
0.26 (0.6%)
0.44 (1.03%)
1.58 (3.68%)
6.52 (15.17%)
6.57 (15.3%)
1.29 (3.0%)

Table 4.5: List of the training variables for the ANN3 : each variable is ranked
according to its relevance in the discrimination process (see Equation 4.6), as
computed by the ANN3 algorithm.

Figure 4.41 shows the correlation matrix of the variables selected for our

analysis as desribed by the Equation 4.7.

Figure 4.42 shows the results of the learning process and the performance
of ANN3. The top panel shows the mean squared error for training, validation
and testing samples during the learning process as a function of the epoch.
In the middle panel is shown the classiﬁcation table. This table suggests that
the optimized ANN3 is able to distinguish BL Lacs from FSRQs on the basis
of their γ-ray observables because the accuracy and the precision are rather
high. The total performance of ANN3 is given by the total accuracy in the
block blue and it is > 86%. In the bottom panel the distribution of the ANN
predictor for the 2FGL BL Lacs (Class 1) and FSRQs (Class 2) is shown.
This distribution shows that BL Lacs are typically characterized by an high
predictor value, while FSRQs by a lower one.

In order to eﬃciently classify 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources as BL Lac or FSRQ
candidates we select two classiﬁcation thresholds, one to classify a BL Lac
candidate (CBL) and one to classify a FSRQ candidate (CF SRQ) so that 2FGL
sources with a predictor greater than 0.758 are classiﬁed as BL Lac candidates
while the sources with a predictor smaller than 0.429 are classiﬁed as FSRQ
candidates. Sources with an intermediate value of the predictor remain blazar
of uncertain type. As a result of this choice, 80% of BL Lacs in 2FGL have a
predictor greater than CBL while 80% of FSRQs have a predictor smaller than

137

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.41: Correlation matrix of the variables selected for our analysis. The
number of each parameter is expressed in Table 4.5 and to each correlation
coeﬃcient is associated a color on the basis of its value.

CF SRQ. The results are shown in the table of classiﬁcation in Figure 4.43.

4.6.3 Results and their validation

At this point we apply the trained hierarchical neural network to 806 2FGL
blazars in order to determine the total eﬃciency and accuracy at distinguishing
BL Lacs from FSRQs. Of 327 BL Lacs classiﬁed as AGN candidates by the
ANN1 (see Section 4.3), 251 are correctly classiﬁed as BL Lac candidates by
the ANN3 analysis (eﬃciency: 77%) and 29 are classiﬁed as FSRQ candidates
(false negative: 9%), while the other sources remain unclassiﬁed (14%). For
321 FSRQs classiﬁed as AGN candidates, 263 are correctly classiﬁed as FSRQ
candidates by the ANN3 analysis (eﬃciency: 82%), 19 are classiﬁed as BL Lac
candidates (false negative: 6%), while the other sources remain unclassiﬁed
(12%). These results are encouraging because the eﬃciency and accuracy of
the hierarchical neural network at distinguishing BL Lacs from FSRQs are
compatible with those found using a single neural network (ANN3 ).

138

4.6. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish AGN subclasses

Figure 4.42: Performance of ANN3. Top: mean squared error for training,
validation and testing samples during the learning process as a function of
the epoch. The vertical dotted line speciﬁes the epoch the learning process
is stopped (optimized network). Middle: classiﬁcation table. Bottom: distri-
bution of the ANN2 predictor for the 2FGL BL Lacs (indicated as “Class 1”)
and FSRQs (indicated as “Class 2”). Violet indicates a superimposition of the
distribution of BL Lacs and FSRQs.

139

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.43: Table of classiﬁcation based on the rules described in the text. In
green are represented the correct classiﬁcations and in red the incorrect ones.

Applying the optimized hierarchical neural network to the 2FGL sources
associated with a class diﬀerent from blazar we can estimate their contamina-
tion to the candidate BL Lac and FSRQ samples from the likely presence of
these objects in the unassociated sample. The ANN1 has classiﬁed 23 non-
blazar objects as AGN candidates, they are 1 pulsar (2FGL J1823.4-3014), 3
starburst galaxies, 7 radio galaxies, 8 AGNs, 2 objects in the ﬁeld of the LMC,
the Andromeda galaxy M31 and the nova. Of these, 13 are classiﬁed as BL
Lac candidates by the ANN3 analysis (the pulsar, 2 starburst galaxies, 4 radio
galaxies, 4 AGNs and the 2 objects in the ﬁeld of the LMC), 6 are classiﬁed
as FSRQ candidate (the nova, 3 AGNs and 2 radio galaxies) while 4 sources
remain unclassiﬁed (1 starburst galaxy, 1 radio galaxy, 1 AGN and the galaxy
M31). We observe that the contamination to the candidate BL Lac and FSRQ
samples is very low, thus irrelevant.

Applying the trained hierarchical neural network to the 2FGL unidentiﬁed
sources we ﬁnd that, out of 176 classiﬁed as AGN candidates by the ANN1, 84
are classiﬁed as BL Lac candidates (P > CBL), 66 are classiﬁed as FSRQ can-
didates (P < CF SRQ) and 26 remain unclassiﬁed. In Figure 4.44 is shown the
distribution of the 176 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources classiﬁed as AGN candidates
by the ANN1 as a function of the probability of being BL Lacs.

The PowerLaw index distribution of the sources newly classiﬁed by our
hierarchical neural network model is shown in Figure 4.45. Comparing this
distribution with those in Figure 4.39 we have the opportunity to cross check
our results. Fitting a Gaussian model we obtain that the resulting Power-
Law index distribution mean values and rms are 2.02 ± 0.21, 2.56 ± 0.16 and
2.33 ± 0.2 for FSRQs and BL Lac candidates and blazars of uncertain type.
These results are very encouraging because are compatible with those found for

140

4.6. Applying an ANN analysis to distinguish AGN subclasses

Figure 4.44: Distribution of BL Lac candidates vs. FSRQ candidates on the
basis of the hierarchical ANN predictor for the 176 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources
classiﬁed as AGN candidates by the ANN1. Sources with P > 0.758 are
classiﬁed as BL Lac candidates, while sources with P < 0.429 are classiﬁed as
FSRQ candidates, the others are AGNs of uncertain type.

associated blazars, FSRQ candidates are characterized by softer specra than
BL Lac candidates ones, while blazars of uncertain type have an intermediate
value as we expect.

In order to test the capability of the hierarchical neural network model for
identifying BL Lac and FSRQ candidates, we apply the trained hierarchical
ANN model to 28 new blazars associated (23 BL Lacs and 5 FSRQs) after
the publication of the 2FGL catalog which were classiﬁed as AGN candidates
by the ANN1 (see Section 4.3). Of the 23 newly associated BL Lacs, 17 are
correctly classiﬁed as BL Lac candidates by the ANN analysis (eﬃciency: 74%)
and 3 are classiﬁed as FSRQ candidates (false negative: 13%), while the other
sources remain unclassiﬁed (13%). For FSRQs, 4 are correctly classiﬁed as
FSRQ candidates by our analysis (eﬃciency: 80%), one is classiﬁed as BL Lac
candidate (false negative: 20%), while no one remains unclassiﬁed (0%). The
eﬃciency of the hierarchical algorithm at classifying new BL Lacs and FSRQs

141

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 4.45: Distribution of the PowerLaw Index of the newly classiﬁed sources
by our hierarchical neural network model. In red are shown BL Lac candidates,
in blue FSRQ candidates and in yellow the blazars of uncertain type.

is very high (nearby 80%), which is consistent with the eﬃciency we obtained
for them in the training sample, in spite of the smallness of the sample.

We have not included active galaxies of uncertain type in the “contamina-
tion” sample because they are associated with AGNs on the basis of advanced
techniques described in [83] which are diﬀerent from those applied in the 2FGL
catalog ([158]), their counterparts are without a good optical spectrum or an
optical spectrum at all making impossible their classiﬁcation as blazar. We
can apply our hierarchical neural network to classify them as BL Lac or FSRQ
candidates. Applying the trained ANN3 to these sources we ﬁnd that, out of
162 classiﬁed as AGN-like sources by the ANN1, 84 (52%) are classiﬁed as BL
Lac candidates (P < CBL), 59 (36%) as FSRQ candidates (P > CF SRQ) and
19 (12%) remain blazar of uncertain type. The distribution of 2FGL active
galaxies of uncertain type as a function of the probability of being BL Lacs is
shown in the Figure 4.46.

142

4.7. Summary

Figure 4.46: Distribution of the ANN3 predictor for the 162 2FGL active
galaxies of uncertain type classiﬁed as AGN-like sources using ANN1.

4.7 Summary

Gamma-ray sources are tracers of the most energetic processes in the Universe,
they are exotic objects, characterized by very intense magnetic and electric
ﬁelds and very high-energy particles. For this reason, understanding the nature
of the γ-ray unidentiﬁed sources is one of the most important open question
in high-energy astrophysics. These sources represent an important discovery
space for new members of existing γ-ray source classes (e.g. AGNs or pulsars),
or new source classes. In this Chapter the development and the application of
two diﬀerent machine learning techniques aimed at determining likely source
classiﬁcations for the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources on the basis of their γ-ray
observables has been presented. The algorithms presented are the starting
point for selecting targets for multi-wavelengths pulsar searches as shown in
the next Chapter.

Encouraged by the results obtained through the application of the logistic
regression at classifying 1FGL unidentiﬁed sources, we have started to imple-

143

4. Classiﬁcation of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

ment a reﬁned logistic regression to discriminate 2FGL pulsars and AGNs,
the two most numerous source classes in the 2FGL source catalog. The larger
sample and the reﬁnement of the γ-ray parameters in the 2FGL catalog have
allowed us to signiﬁcantly increase the performance of our classiﬁcation tech-
nique at classifying 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources. Logistic regression is a general-
ized linear classiﬁer and it classiﬁes 2FGL sources through a linear distinction
in the γ-ray variable space, this is a limit of this technique. Performance in
classifying pulsar and AGN candidates in 2FGL source sample increases con-
siderably using a neural network techniques, which classiﬁes 2FGL sources
through a more complex non-linear separation. In order to control each step
of the procedure, we have developed our own code. This has been the ﬁrst
time that ANN technique is applied for this purpose.

Encouraged by ANN results we have implemented a more complex neural
network architecture to distinguish the two pulsar subsamples, young pulsars
and MSPs. For this purpose we have used a hierarchical neural network model.
Although γ-ray properties of young pulsars seems very similar to MSPs, our
model is able to eﬃciently discriminate these two source classes showing that
source properties measured with the Fermi-LAT can provide important guid-
ance on target selections as well as the types of follow-up observations. Our
results has shown some diﬀerences in the γ-ray emission between young pulsars
and MSPs, they should be used to develop a theory that explains these diﬀer-
ences in order to better understand the emission mechanisms of these exotic
objects.

In the end, we have modiﬁed the hierarchical neural network previously
developed in order to discriminate also the two blazar subclasses, BL Lacs
and FSRQs. Our results are very stimulating because conﬁrm what we expect
from synchrotron-inverse Compton scenarios validating the accuracy of our
approach. Moreover, our results provide some indications to improve and
better understand the γ-ray emission models of blazar subclasses.

The complete list of our hierarchical neural network predictions unassoci-
ated Fermi-LAT sources in the 2FGL catalog is shown in the Table C.1 in
Appendix C.1.

After the publication of the 2FGL catalog diﬀerent association methods
were applied in order to classify the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources. Some of them
use only γ-ray information (e.g.
in [148] the authors assign a probability to
each 2FGL unidentiﬁed source to be more similar to a pulsar or an AGN on
the basis of a Random Forest algorithm, an extension of the Classiﬁcation Tree
described in [16]), while others include also multi-wavelength information (e.g.
in [138] the authors use IR information to recognize γ-ray blazar candidates in
the sample of 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources). Combining our results with those
found by other association techniques it is possible to build a classiﬁer char-

144

4.7. Summary

acterized by a higher performance in the classiﬁcation of 2FGL unidentiﬁed
sources. The positive results from all techniques could be used to generate a
new candidate list aimed at providing “stronger” candidate sources for followup
multi-wavelength studies.

145

Chapter 5

Multi-wavelength analysis of
some interesting 2FGL sources

After only 24 months of mission the Fermi-LAT has detected a number of γ-ray
sources that is about an order of magnitude larger than those detected by its
predecessor EGRET during its entire mission. About 70% of the sources in the
2FGL catalog have been associated with an object known at other wavelengths
through an objective procedure. Some of the counterparts was known before
detecting their high-energy emission by the LAT while others were discovered
by multi-wavelength observations in the ﬁeld of the 2FGL sources or by using
LAT data alone. Many pulsars were discovered using blind frequency searches
for γ-ray pulsations from the bright unidentiﬁed sources. These are typically
young pulsars, for which the solid angle of the radio beam is likely to be much
smaller than the γ-ray one [9]. By now, no radio-quiet millisecond γ-ray pulsar
was discovered using blind search algorithms. A limit of these algorithms is
that they cannot be performed scanning the entire 2FGL error circle to search
for a possible periodicity of some millisecond directly in γ rays because of
the prohibitive request for computing power. To increase the eﬃciency of the
algorithm it is possible to perform deep X-ray observations of the most probable
candidates MSPs so that a blind search can be run on much smaller sky area
covered by the error regions of the detected X-ray sources, with a large gain
in computer time. In Section 5.1 we will describe multi-wavelength analysis of
the counterparts of 3 MSP candidates. We have selected these targets on the
basis of the results of the hierarchical neural network analysis described in the
previous chapter, their position in the sky and the unsuccessful radio searches
within their error circle.

Fermi-LAT is changing our knowledge of γ-ray Universe, it is giving us
the opportunity to understand which astrophysical objects are able to emit γ
rays and which models are able to explain their γ-ray emission mechanisms.

147

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

We are understanding that not all members of the same source class are able
to generate and emit γ rays, multi-wavelength studies are necessary to dis-
cover which are the causes and the diﬀerences among these sources. Moreover,
since γ-ray sources are tracers of the most energetic processes in the Universe,
multi-wavelength studies are very important to understand the physics of these
exotic objects characterizing their and exploring their environment. Regard-
ing pulsars, the most important objects to constrain their high-energy emission
models are the “extreme” ones, accounting for the trails of the population dis-
tribution in energy, age and magnetic ﬁeld. In this respect, in Section 5.2 we
will describe X-ray studies on pulsar J0357+3205. Its X-ray counterpart [69]
has been identiﬁed after that the Fermi-LAT detected its γ-ray emission. In
the same X-ray investigation, it has also been identiﬁed a very peculiar elon-
gated structure of diﬀuse X-ray emission, originating at the pulsar position
and extending for 9 arcminutes in the sky. PSR J0357+3205 is a middle-aged
radio-quiet γ-ray pulsar and it was discovered with a blind search algorithm in
the ﬁrst three months of Fermi-LAT scanning [7]. PSR J0357+3205 is not the
oldest rotation-powered pulsar, it is the slowest rotator among Fermi pulsars,
with a spin-down luminosity very low, which makes it one of the not-recycled
γ-ray pulsar with the smallest rotational energy loss detected so far. This sug-
gests that PSR J0357+3205 is quite close to us, making PSR J0357+3205 a
natural target for X-ray observations.

5.1 Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the

2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

The Fermi Large Area Telescope (LAT) revolutionized pulsar astronomy by
discovering pulsed γ-ray emission from more than 100 rotation-powered pulsars
[200]. Approximately a third are radio-loud young pulsars, a third are radio-
quiet young pulsars (discovered in blind searches of LAT data) and a third
are radio-loud, MilliSecond PSRs (MSP). Such samples opened the possibility
to understand the physics of pulsar magnetospheres (the “pulsar engine”) and
the evolution of the pulsar population with age. It is now apparent that the γ
rays in young pulsars come from the outer magnetosphere, leading to a much
broader beam than what is observed in radio.

MSPs are - so far - the least understood objects. The emitting regions and
beaming pattern of such extremely fast-rotating sources seem rather diﬀerent
with respect to the ones of normal young pulsars, possibly due to the compact-
ness of their magnetospheres. All γ-ray MSPs seen by the LAT were detected
by folding the γ-ray event times using a radio ephemeredid. One key question
remains to be answered, and that is whether, like the case of young pulsars,

148

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

there exist a population of radio-quiet millisecond γ-ray pulsars. Discovering
a radio-quiet MSP would have a formidable impact for our understanding of
the conﬁguration of MSP magnetospheres. However, this is a very challenging
task, and requires the help of X-ray astronomy, as explained in the followings.

While for radio-loud pulsars an accurate, contemporaneous radio ephemeris
eases the γ-ray pulsation search, since γ-ray photon time of arrivals can be
directly folded according to the known radio timing solution, for a radio-quiet
pulsar the periodicity has to be searched directly in γ-ray data, using a “blind
search” algorithm (see Chapter 3). LAT blind frequency searches have been
very successful in discovering normal young pulsars. However, blind search
algorithms are very sensitive to positional oﬀsets, and the higher the frequency
of the pulsar, the more sensitive the search is to incorrect starting positions.
For a MSP, a positional error as small as 0.5 arcsec can completely wash out the
pulsed signal. Thus, a very ﬁne step have to be used to scan the error region
of the γ-ray source, repeating the search for each position of the grid. Using
a ∼ 0.2(cid:48)(cid:48) step to scan a LAT source error region with a radius of (typically)
∼ 5 arcmin results in a prohibitive request for computing power, which has
hampered any search for a radio-quiet MSP so far. A possible solution is to
explore the error region with a deep X-ray observation that could detect the
X-ray counterpart of the putative pulsar. Any blind search could be run on
the much smaller sky area covered by the error regions of the detected X-ray
sources, with a large gain in computer time, assuming an X-ray error circle of
3(cid:48)(cid:48), the gain in computer time would be of order 103, making the detection of
the ﬁrst radio-quiet MSP a distinct possibility.

We have based the selection of our targets on both their probability of
being a MSP (as measured by P) based on the hierarchical neural network
analysis described in the Section 4.5, and their Galactic latitude, in order to
avoid the confused region of the Galactic plane, and because we expect nearby
MSPs to be preferentially located oﬀ the plane. Our targets must have already
been the object of deep unsuccessful radio searches, so that the discovery of a
MSP would ensure that it is at least extremely radio faint, if not radio-quiet.
The blind frequency search for pulsars with LAT data has been very successful
during the ﬁrst years. However, most of the pulsars discovered so far have been
very bright, and fairly high spin-down luminosity pulsars. Pushing down the
sensitivity of the blind searches to lower ﬂuxes and weaker pulsars will require
improvements in the current search techniques. As longer integration times
become necessary, further complications arise. We have selected our targets
so that their source signiﬁcance is high (TS>100). Also positional uncertain-
ties are important. While the LAT represents a signiﬁcant improvement over
EGRET, the typical 95% error radii of LAT sources are still on the order
of several arcminutes, in the best of cases. An error in the position of  (in

149

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Target
2FGL J

1036.1–6722
1539.2–3325
1744.1–7620

b
(◦)
-7.84
17.53
-22.48

r95%
((cid:48))
3.7
4.3
3.3

Flux

erg cm−2 s−1
1.99 × 10−11
1.05 × 10−11
2 × 10−11

TS

P
(%)
330 >99.9
130 >99.9
450 >99.9

X-ray

observation

XMM
Swift
XMM

time
ks
25
85
25

Table 5.1: List of requested and analyzed targets.

radians), leads to a Doppler shift form the Earth’s orbital motion as well as
to a shift in the frequency derivative [49]. Since this shift is proportional to
frequency, they are particularly important for MSP searches.
Indeed, given
a position accurate to one arcsecond, blind search codes are able to detect
known isolated γ-ray MSPs and young pulsars in blind searches of LAT data.
However, such task becomes daunting when the entire LAT error region of
several square arcminutes must be searched on this ﬁne step grid, considering
that it currently takes us ∼10–15 minutes to search each position. Even X-ray
observations result in ∼10 possible counterparts, the gain in computer time
make possible the detection of the ﬁrst radio-quiet γ-ray MSP.

On the basis of criteria explained above we have selected and observed in
X-ray the 3 most promising MSP radio-quiet candidates. These 2FGL uniden-
tiﬁed sources and some relative information are shown in Table 5.1. Column
(1) LAT 2FGL catalog source name; (2) Galactic latitude; (3) positional un-
certainty (in arcmin); (4) energy ﬂux at energies above 100 MeV; (5) source
signiﬁcance (Test Statistic); (6) probability that the source is a MSP, accord-
ing to the hierarchical neural network analysis; (4) X-ray satellite requested
for the observations; (5) X-ray observation exposure time.

5.1.1 Multi-wavelength analysis procedure

In this section we describe the procedure to select the most probable multi-
wavelength counterparts for each selected 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources. X-ray
observations are used to detect X-ray sources within the 99% error circle of
the Fermi-LAT source, for these objects we produce X-ray spectra and light
curve and we search for optical/IR counterparts in order to classify the X-ray
sources.

XMM-Newton data analysis

For each XMM-Newton observation we have analyzed data collected by the
EPIC instruments, the PN camera [194] and the two MOS detectors [203].
All the data reduction are performed using the most recent release of the
XMM-Newton Science Analysis Software (SAS) v13.0. First of all we perform

150

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

standard data processing, using the epproc and emproc tools, and screening
for high particle background time intervals following [70].

Source detection using maximum likelihood ﬁtting is done simultaneously
on each of the EPIC-PN, MOS1, and MOS2 using the SAS tool edetect_chain.
This tool runs on the event lists and invokes several other SAS tools to produce
background, sensitivity, and vignetting-corrected exposure maps. A likelihood
threshold of 10 is used for source detection, corresponding to a signiﬁcance
level of 3.6σ. We focus on the X-ray analysis of the sources within the 99%
error circle of the Fermi-LAT source in order to produce X-ray spectra, light
curves and ﬁnd optical/IR counterparts.

We accumulate the source spectra by selecting only events within a circle
of 20(cid:48)(cid:48) radius containing the source detected with PATTERN = 0–4 for the PN
and PATTERN = 0–12 for the two MOS detectors and the standard selection
ﬁlter FLAG = 0 and we generate ad hoc response matrices and ancillary ﬁles
using the SAS tasks rmfgen and arfgen. Background photons are extracted
within a circle of 45(cid:48)(cid:48) radius from suitable regions on the same CCD chip
containing the source counts. Before spectral ﬁtting, all spectra are binned
with grppha with a minimum of 25 counts per bin in order to be able to
apply the χ2 minimization technique. In this process, the background count
rate is rescaled using the ratio of the source and background areas. Then we
ﬁt the source spectra with three spectral models: power-law, well-suited for
AGNs as well as pulsars, apec, well-suited for stellar coronae, and black-body,
well-suited for pulsars1.
In all cases we also include the absorption by the
interstellar medium, we try to both leave it as a free parameter and ﬁx it to
the value of the hydrogen column density along the line of sight [73]. For
each emission model, we calculate the 90% conﬁdence level error on both the
hydrogen column density and the temperature/photon-index.

The X-ray spectral parameters are used to compute the sources’ X-ray
ﬂux values, to be compared to the γ-ray one in the framework of the fγ/fX
identiﬁcation tool in order to identify the probable pulsar subclass for the γ-ray
unidentiﬁed source [135].

Finally, we produce the light curves for each X-ray source in the 99% radius
error-circle of the γ-ray source using the standard SAS procedure in order to
detect any time variability. We extract a source+background light curve, using
the selection region containing the source (see above) detected with PATTERN
= 0–4 for the PN and PATTERN = 0–12 for the two MOS detectors and bin
size = 100 s. We then extract a background light curve, using all the selection
deﬁned for the source+background light curve. At this point we subtract the
background light curve to the source+background light curve with the FTOOL
task lcmath. In this process, the background count rate is rescaled using the

1Power-law, apec and black-body are respectively pow, apec and bbody in XSPEC

151

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

ratio of the source and background areas. We test the signiﬁcant of the null
hypothesis (non variability - ﬂat light curve) on a binned light curve generated
by the FTOOL task lcurve. Light curves are generated using bin times of
1000 s, 2500 s and 5000 s in order to have at least 25 counts per bin to apply
the χ2 test. All error bars are reported at the 1σ.

Swift data analysis

For each Swift [84] observation we analyze data collected by the X-Ray Tele-
scope (XRT) [38]. XRT uses a CCD detector sensitive to photons with energies
between 0.2 and 10 keV. Two types of XRT archival data can be obtained from
the Swift Data Center, Level 1 and Level 2. Level 1 data can be calibrated by
yourselves in a way recommended by Swift team2, while Level 2 cleaned data
have gone through the standard pipeline process. We decide to use Level 2
cleaned data. All of the observations were obtained in Photon Counting (PC)
mode [100]. The data are processed with standard procedures using FTOOLS3
tasks under the Heasoft package v6.13.

In the XRT image analysis, we try to detect the X-ray counterparts of the
2FGL unidentiﬁed source, and localize each source. First, we extract X-ray im-
ages in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV, where the PC response matrices is well
calibrated, using xselect. Next by using ximage, we searched for “possible”
X-ray sources which are > 3σ conﬁdence level in photon statistics against back-
ground. The position of these sources are determined with a typical accuracy
of ∼ 5(cid:48)(cid:48) using xrtcentroid.

We analyze the spectra of the most likely X-ray counterparts, which are sit-
uated within the 99% error circle of the Fermi-LAT source and have XRT data
with a signal-to-noise ratio above 3σ, in order to perform a reliable spectral
analysis. Events for spectral analysis are extracted within a circular region of
radius 20(cid:48)(cid:48), centered on the source position; this region encloses about 90% of
the PSF at 1.5 keV [151]. The background is taken from a source-free region,
using a circular region of radius 150(cid:48)(cid:48). Since the data show a maximum count
rate <0.3 counts s−1, no pile-up correction is necessary.

A total Swift observation of a speciﬁc target is always performed splitting
it in a large number of short observations. Our individual data sets have too
few counts for a meaningful spectral analysis. Therefore, we extract a cumu-
lative spectrum using the task mathpha rescaling the total count rate with
those of a single observation. However, the total count statistics of the de-
tected sources is too low, some tens of counts, to bin the spectra with grppha
with a minimum of 25 counts per bin in order to be able to apply the χ2

2The SWIFT XRT Data Reduction Guide:http://heasarc.nasa.gov/docs/swift

/analysis/xrt swguide_v1_2.pdf

3See http://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/software/

152

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

minimization technique. We decide to perform an unbinned analysis adopt-
ing the Cash statistics (c-stat) [47]. The goodness-of-ﬁt is calculated using
the task goodness4 implemented in XSPEC. The source spectrum of a sin-
gle observation is extracted from the corresponding event ﬁle using the task
xselect. The relative ancillary response ﬁle arf is generated with xrtmkarf
and it accounts for diﬀerent extraction regions, vignetting and point-spread
function corrections, while we used the current spectral redistribution matrix
ﬁles (RMFs) in CALDB (swxpc0to12s6_20010101v013.rmf). The cumula-
tive ancillary response ﬁle is extracted by the task addarf. The energy band
used for the spectral analysis, performed with XSPEC v.12.8.0 [21], depends
on the statistical quality of the data and typically ranges from 0.3 to 10 keV.
As for EPIC, we ﬁt the source spectra with three spectral models: power-law,
apec, and black-body. In all cases we include the absorption by the interstellar
medium, we try to to both leave it as a free parameter and ﬁx it to the value
of the hydrogen column density along the line of sight [73]. All quoted errors
correspond to 90% conﬁdence level for a single parameter of interest.

We identify the probable pulsar subclass for the γ-ray unidentiﬁed source
[135] comparing the the sources’ X-ray ﬂux values with the γ-ray one in the
framework of the fγ/fX identiﬁcation tool

Finally, we produce the light curves for each X-ray source in the 99% radius
error-circle of the γ-ray source in order to detect a timing variability. We
cannot produce light curves to each observation and not even full light curves
with a bin size of one observation per bin because the statistics is too poor. We
decide to produce full light curves using bin size minimum of 20 counts bin−1 in
order to apply the χ2 test (we use only 5 and 10 bins). From the observations in
each bin time we extract a cumulative spectrum for the source and background
and we generate the relative ancillary response ﬁle as explained above. At this
point we ﬁt the source spectra with three spectral models: power-law, apec
and black-body. The ﬂux we obtain from the best ﬁt is so the ﬂux in each bin
time. All error bars are reported at the 1σ.

X-ray source hardness ratios analysis

Since the count statistics (usually a few tens of photons) of the detected sources
is too low to produce signiﬁcant spectra, we perform a qualitative spectral anal-
ysis using the count rate (CR) measured in the three energy ranges (soft: 0.3–1
keV; medium: 1–2 keV; hard : 2–10 keV) to compute two diﬀerent Hardness
Ratios (HRs):

HR12 = [CR(1 − 2) − CR(0.3 − 1)]/[CR(1 − 2) + CR(0.3 − 1)]
HR23 = [CR(2 − 10) − CR(1 − 2)]/[CR(2 − 10) + CR(1 − 2)]

4http://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/xanadu/xspec/manual/XSgoodness.html

153

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Adopting the above deﬁnition, sources with a small/large HR12 value are lit-
tle/very absorbed, while sources with a small/large HR23 value are character-
ized by a soft/hard spectrum. All error bars of the distribution of the HRs of
the X-ray sources are reported at the 1σ.

To obtain a further indication on the sources spectra, we compare the
measured HRs with the expected ones computed for three diﬀerent template
spectral models, namely: a black-body, with temperatures kT increasing from
0.1 to 1.1 keV, a power-law, with photon indexes Γ increasing from 1.5 to
2.5 and an apec, with temperatures kT increasing from 0.5 to 5.5 keV. Each
spectral model is computed using the interstellar medium absorption given by
[73] and one third of that value. In such a way we can identify the spectral
model more appropriate for a given source and tentatively assign its most likely
spectral parameters.

Optical/IR candidate counterparts analysis

In order to identify the plausible X-ray counterparts, we cross-correlate their
positions with two optical catalogues, the United States Naval Observatory
(USNO B1.0) catalogue [149], with limiting magnitudes V ∼ 21, 0.2(cid:48)(cid:48) astro-
metric accuracy and ∼0.3 mag photometric accuracy, and the last version of the
Guide Star Catalogue (GSC) version 2.3 [53]; and two infrared (IR) catalogues,
Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS) [187] and Wide-ﬁeld Infrared Survey
Explorer (WISE) [217] from the preliminary data release (WISEP) [62]. More-
over, we have also analyzed the NASA/IPAC extragalactic Database (NED5)
and the NRAO VLA Sky Survey (NVSS) [57] radio catalog but we have not
found any plausible counterparts in the radius error-circle of each X-ray source.
The search for optical or IR counterparts is performed by selecting candidates
at < 5(cid:48)(cid:48) from the X-ray position.

The possibility to ﬁnd more than one optical or IR source within the rather
conservative 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius error-circle suggests that we cannot ignore the possible
foreground contamination, which could aﬀect our cross-correlation. The proba-
bility of chance coincidence between a X-ray and an optical source is calculated
by P = 1 − e−πµr2, where r is the X-ray error-circle radius and µ the surface
density of the optical sources [186].

Each measured magnitude values are de-absorbed as follows: deﬁning mi
as the measured magnitude in the i ﬁlter and m(cid:48)
i as the absorbed one then
i−Ai, where Ai is the extinction given by the interstellar medium in the
mi = m(cid:48)
i ﬁlter. From [168], the visual extinction can be derived by the X-ray Galactic
hydrogen column density as NH = AV (1.87 × 1021) cm−2. i extinction can be
obtained by the simple relation Ai = f (λ)AV [46], where f (λ) is a function

5http://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/

154

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

depending on the wavelength. We then determine the stellar spectral classes
which are compatible with the optical/IR candidate counterpart on the basis
of its optical colors [220] (B-V, V-R, V-I, V-J, V-H and V-K), and infrared
colors [78]( J-H, H-K, R-K and J-K). If the visual magnitude of a candidate
counterpart is not reported we extrapolate its value as the average between
absorbed B and R magnitudes.

The X-ray spectral parameters are used to compute the sources’ X-ray ﬂux
values, to be compared to the optical ones in the framework of the fX/fopt
identiﬁcation tool [121]. The optical ﬂux of the candidate counterpart is based
on B magnitude or V magnitude if reported. B and V magnitudes are converted
to the ﬂux in the B or V ﬁlter assuming the standard values fB(mB = 0) =
6.39 × 10−6 erg s−1 cm−2 and fV (mV = 0) = 4.27 × 10−6 erg s−1 cm−2.

We use the V magnitude to calculate the source ﬂux and if the source in
the optical catalogue has not the value for V we use the B magnitude, while
for the X-ray sources with no counterpart, we use V=21 as the optical upper
limit.

5.1.2 2FGL J1036.1–6722

The ﬁrst object we analyze is the unidentiﬁed source 2FGL J1036.1–6722 (see
Table 5.1). This object was discovered for the ﬁrst time by the Fermi -LAT and
it was included in the 1FGL source catalog as 1FGL J1036.2–6719 [3]. 2FGL
J1036.1–6722 is a rather bright γ-ray source, situated far from the Galactic
plane (b=-7◦.84, l=290◦.45) and it is characterized by low variability (vari-
ability index=35.50) and high curvature signiﬁcance (sign curv = 6.51). The
variability and spectral curvature properties of this source are very similar to
those of a typical γ-ray pulsars as shown in the bottom of Figure 5.1. 2FGL
J1036.1–6722 γ-ray spectrum and light curve are shown at the top of Figure
5.1.

In this Section we report on recent monitoring data taken with XMM-
Newton with the aim of detecting the X-ray counterpart of the putative γ-ray
millisecond pulsar radio-quiet.

Observation and X-ray analysis

Our deep XMM-Newton observation 2FGL J1036.1–6722 started on 2012 June
16 at 12:17:48 UT and lasted 24.9 ks. The PN camera [194] of the EPIC
instrument was operating in Extended Full Frame mode (time resolution of
200 ms over a 26(cid:48) × 27(cid:48) ﬁeld of view (FoV)), while the MOS detectors [203]
were set in Full Frame mode (2.6 s time resolution on a 15(cid:48) radius FoV). The
thin optical ﬁlter was used for the PN camera while we chose to use the medium
ﬁlter for the MOS detectors. After standard data processing explained in the

155

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.1: Top: 2FGL J1036.1–6722 γ-ray spectrum (left) and light curve
(right). Bottom: variability index plotted as a function of the curvature sig-
niﬁcance for 2FGL source classes. Red dot represents the position of 2FGL
J1036.1–6722 in this parameters space. This object is not variable and the
spectrum is curved.

previous section, the good, dead-time corrected exposure time is 14.4 ks for
the PN, 20.6 ks for the MOS1 and 21.4 ks for the MOS2 detector.

We detect 26 X-ray sources in the PN FoV with a source signiﬁcance
greater than 3.6σ. Of these, only 3 are located within the 99% error circle
of the Fermi-LAT source, for these we produce X-ray spectra, light curves and
ﬁnd optical counterparts. Figure 5.2 shows the 0.3–10 keV exposure-corrected
XMM-Newton PN FoV image. We applied a Gaussian ﬁlter with a kernel
radius of 5”.

156

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.2: 0.3–10 keV exposure-corrected XMM-Newton PN FoV image . A
gaussian ﬁlter with a kernel radius of 3(cid:48)(cid:48) is applied. 2FGL J1036.1–6722 with
95% conﬁdence error ellipse is plotted in cyan. Each X-ray source detected
by the PN is plotted with a circle of 10(cid:48)(cid:48) radius. Colors represent the source
signiﬁcance: in red sources with TS<25, in magenta sources with 25<TS<50,
in yellow sources with 50<TS<100 and in green sources with TS>100.

In Figure 5.3 is shown the Digital Sky Survey image in the ﬁeld of 2FGL
J1036.1–6722 with the distribution of the X-ray sources detected by XMM-
Newton. Within the 15 arcmin radius image area, the USNO B1.0 catalogue
provides a total of ∼16000 sources, corresponding to a surface density µ ∼
6.4×10−3 sources arcsec−2. Since the X-ray error-circle is 5 arcsec, we estimate
that the probability of chance coincidence between a X-ray and an optical
source is ∼ 0.4. Therefore up to 40% of the selected counterparts could be
spurious candidates.

Notes on individual X-ray sources

In the following, we present results on the most likely candidate X-ray coun-
terparts to the unidentiﬁed γ-ray source.

Source #3: The X-ray analysis yields 110 counts in the energy band 0.3–10
keV, with a source signiﬁcance TS(cid:39)140 in the PN data and TS(cid:39)85 in the

157

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.3: Digital Sky Survey 2 image with red ﬁlter of the ﬁeld of unidentiﬁed
source 2FGL J1036.1–6722, for which 95% conﬁdence error ellipse is plotted
in cyan. Each X-ray source detected by the PN is overplotted with a circle of
10(cid:48)(cid:48) radius colored as described in Figure 5.2. White dashed line represents the
FoV of the XMM-Newton observation.

two MOS data; its count rate in the total energy band is 1.2 × 10−2 cts
s−1. This object is situated within the 2FGL 95% conﬁdence error ellipse
at (RA, Dec)=(158◦.94, -67◦.42). In Figure 5.4 is shown the spectrum of
this X-ray sources.

The X-ray spectral ﬁtting results are summarized in Table 5.2. We notice
that we ﬁnd physical plausible best-ﬁt spectral parameter values only if
we ﬁx the interstellar medium absorption to NH = 0.2 × 1022 cm−2 [73].

In Figure 5.5 is shown the light curved with a bin time of 2500 s.
Within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle there is only an optical candidate
counterpart of the source #3, its properties are shown in Table 5.3.
If the optical counterpart of the X-ray source is not detected because
too faint, above the limiting magnitude of USNO B1.0 (V > 21), then
log(fX/fV ) > (−0.27÷0.03), using an unabsorbed visual ﬂux fV = 5.47×

158

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.4: Spectrum of the X-ray source #3 binned with a minimum of 25
counts per bin. The spectrum shows that the X-ray object is rather absorbed
at low energies and that the PN detected photons until (cid:39)7 keV.

a

0.2 (ﬁxed)

0.2 (ﬁxed)

0.2 (ﬁxed)
1.58+0.31−0.30

Parameter Power-law model Apec model Black body model
NH
Γ
kT (keV)
d.o.f.
χ2
ν
Fluxunabs
ain units of 1022 cm−2
bin units of 10−14 erg cm−2 s−1 and in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV

-
6.50+26.58
−2.96
9

0.177
5.27

-
9

0.602
5.80

b

0.59+0.17−0.13

-

9

1.04
2.91

Table 5.2: Spectral parameters for the X-ray source #3 within the 95% error
ellipse of 2FGL J1036.1–6722. F luxunabs corresponds to the unabsorbed ﬂux.
We cannot assert if this X-ray source is a pulsar, a star or an AGN because
no spectral model can be rejected by the χ2 test. The γ-ray (E>100 MeV) to
soft X-ray (0.3–10 keV) ﬂux ratio is Fγ/FX (cid:39) (300 ÷ 700), this ﬂux ratio is
compatible with the value of a typical γ-ray MSP and radio-loud pulsar [135].

10−14. This value does not exclude any source class as counterpart of the
X-ray source, notice that a pulsar is characterized by log(fX/fopt) > 2
[121].

159

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.5: Light curve for the X-ray source #3 in the energy range between
0.3 keV and 10 keV within the ∼ 15 ks observation span. The red line depicts
the best ﬁt assuming a ﬂat light curve. No signiﬁcant X-ray variability is
detected on the basis of the χ2 test.

Source #4: The X-ray analysis yields 129 counts in the energy band 0.3—
10 keV, with a source signiﬁcance TS(cid:39)150 in the PN data and TS(cid:39)125
in the two MOS data; its count rate in the total energy band is 1.5×10−2
cts s−1. This object is situated in the limit of the 2FGL 99% conﬁdence
error ellipse at (RA, Dec)=(159◦.03, -67◦.47). In Figure 5.6 is shown the
spectrum of this X-ray sources.

The X-ray spectral ﬁtting results are summarized in Table 5.4. We notice
that we ﬁnd physical plausible best ﬁt spectral parameter values only if
we ﬁx the interstellar medium absorption to NH = 0.2 × 1022 cm−2
[73]. Only the black-body model is signiﬁcant and has plausible best-ﬁt
parameters. However, we cannot assert if this X-ray source is a pulsar
or an AGN because the black-body model is well-suited for both source
classes.

In Figure 5.7 is shown the light curved with a bin time of 2500 s.
Within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle there are three optical/IR candidate
counterparts of the source #4, their properties are shown in Table 5.5.
If the optical counterpart of the X-ray source is not detected because
too faint, above the limiting magnitude of USNO B1.0 (V > 21), then
log(fX/fV ) > (0.24÷ 0.42), using an unabsorbed visual ﬂux fV = 5.47×

160

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Source #3 – optical/IR analysis

Optical counterpart
IR counterpart
Detection year
Distance
De-absorbed magnitude (mag)
Stellar spectral class
fopt (erg cm−2 s−1)
fX/fopt (log10)
Suggested class

GSC

-

1978
2.2”

-

B=19.98
6.51 × 10−14
-0.37÷-0.12

star, CV or galaxy

Table 5.3: Properties of the optical candidate counterpart of the X-ray source
#3. Rows (1) and (2): optical and IR catalogs where the candidate counter-
part of the X-ray source is listed. Row (3): Detection year of the candidate
counterpart. Row (4): distance between the X-ray source and its candidate
counterpart. Row (5): de-absorbed magnitudes of the candidate counterpart.
Row (6): Stellar spectral class of the candidate counterpart based on [220] and
[78]; optical colors are B-V, V-R, V-I , V-J, V-H and V-K while IR colors are
J-H, H-K, R-K and J-K; the symbol “?” indicates that colors are not compat-
ible with any stellar class. Row (7): optical ﬂux of the candidate counterpart
based on the B magnitude or V magnitude if measured. Row (8): logarithmic
values of the X-ray-to-optical ﬂux ratio; the X-ray ﬂux is based on all accept-
able models. Row (9): proposed X-ray source classiﬁcation based on [121];
“CV” indicates cataclysmic variable.

10−14. This value does not exclude any source class as counterpart of the
X-ray source, remember that a pulsar is characterized by log(fX/fopt) > 2
[121].

Source #10: The X-ray analysis yields 78 counts in the energy band 0.3—
10 keV, with a low source signiﬁcance TSsimeq40 in the PN data and
TS(cid:39)20 in the two MOS data; its count rate in the total energy band is
0.6 × 10−2 cts s−1. This object is situated in the limit of the 2FGL 99%
conﬁdence error ellipse at (RA, Dec)=(158◦.87, -67◦.34). In Figure 5.8 is
shown the spectrum of this X-ray sources.

The X-ray spectral ﬁtting results are summarized in Table 5.6. We notice
that we ﬁnd physical plausible best-ﬁt spectral parameter values only if
we ﬁx the interstellar medium absorption to NH = 0.2 × 1022 cm−2 [73].

In Figure 5.9 is shown the light curved with a bin time of 2500 s.

161

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.6: Spectrum of the X-ray source #4 binned with a minimum of 25
counts per bin. The spectrum shows that the X-ray object is rather absorbed
at low energies and that the PN detected photons until (cid:39)6 keV.

a

0.2 (ﬁxed)

0.2 (ﬁxed)

0.2 (ﬁxed)
0.40+0.31−0.32

Parameter Power-law model Apec model Black body model
NH
Γ
kT (keV)
d.o.f.
χ2
ν
Fluxunabs
ain units of 1022 cm−2
bin units of 10−14 erg cm−2 s−1 and in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV

-
64+46.58
−37.07
8

3.835
6.94

-
8

0.998
14.3

b

1.51+0.52−0.35

-

8

1.30
9.57

Table 5.4: Spectral parameters for the X-ray source #4 within the 2FGL 95%
error ellipse of 2FGL J1036.1–6722. F luxunabs corresponds to the unabsorbed
ﬂux. Only the black-body model is signiﬁcant and has plausible best-ﬁt pa-
rameters. The γ-ray (E>100 MeV) to soft X-ray (0.3–10 keV) ﬂux ratio is
Fγ/FX (cid:39) 200 considering a black-body spectral model, which is compatible
with the value of a typical γ-ray MSP [135]

Within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle there is no optical or IR candidate
counterpart for the source #10. If the optical counterpart for the X-ray source
has not detected because too faint, above the limiting magnitude of USNO
B1.0 (V>21), then log(fX/fV ) > (−0.57 ÷ −0.25), adopting the unabsorbed
visual ﬂux fV = 5.47 × 10−14. This value does not exclude any source class as

162

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.7: Light curve for the X-ray source #4 in the energy range between
0.3 keV and 10 keV within the ∼ 15 ks observation span. The red line depicts
the best ﬁt assuming a ﬂat light curve. No signiﬁcant X-ray variability is
detected on the basis of the χ2 test.

Figure 5.8: Spectrum of the X-ray source #10 binned with a minimum of 25
counts per bin. The spectrum shows that the X-ray object is not signiﬁcantly
absorbed at low energies and that the PN detected photons only until (cid:39)3 keV.

163

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Source #4 – optical/IR analysis

USNO B1.0

USNO B1.0 USNO B1.0

Optical counterpart
IR counterpart
Detection year
Distance

De-absorbed
magnitudes
(mag)

2MASS

1985
1(cid:48)(cid:48)

B=19.99
V=18.44a
R=17.77
J=16.27
H=15.44
K=15.1

-

1985
4(cid:48)(cid:48)

-

1989
4.8(cid:48)(cid:48)

B=16.46
V=17.57a
R =18.47

B=17.14
V=17.94a
R=18.63

-
-
-
?

-
-
-
?

Stellar spectral class
fopt (erg cm−2 s−1)
fX/fopt (log10)
Suggested class
avalue extrapolated as the average between absorbed B and R magnitudes

F, G, M or K
1.62 × 10−13
-023÷-0.05

1.66 × 10−12
-1.24÷-1.06

star, CV or galaxy

star

8.9 × 10−13
-1.24÷-0.97

star

Table 5.5: Properties of the optical/IR candidate counterparts of the X-ray
source #4. For a description of each row see Table 5.5. Last two optical can-
didate counterparts are classiﬁed as stars but these results are not compatible
with their colors, this may be related to the simple extrapolation of the visual
magnitude or to the NH value we have assumed, or maybe because they are
not the optical counterpart of the X-ray source.

a

b

0.2 (ﬁxed)

0.2 (ﬁxed)

0.2 (ﬁxed)
2.91+0.82−0.65

Parameter Power-law model Apec model Black body model
NH
Γ
kT (keV)
d.o.f.
χ2
ν
Fluxunabs
ain units of 1022 cm−2
bin units of 10−14 erg cm−2 s−1 and in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV

0.092
1.47

0.726
3.06

0.28+0.08−0.07

1.44+0.62−0.30

0.12
1.5

-

5

-

5

-
5

Table 5.6: Spectral parameters for the X-ray source #10 within the 2FGL 95%
error ellipse of 2FGL J1036.1–6722. F luxunabs corresponds to the unabsorbed
ﬂux. We cannot assert if this X-ray source is a pulsar a star or an AGN because
no spectral model can be rejected by the χ2 test. The γ-ray (E>100 MeV) to
soft X-ray (0.3–10 keV) ﬂux ratio is Fγ/FX (cid:39) (650÷1330), which is compatible
with the value of those a typical γ-ray MSP and radio-loud pulsar [135].

164

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.9: Light curve for the X-ray source #10 in the energy range between
0.3 keV and 10 keV within the ∼ 15 ks observation span. The red line depicts
the best ﬁt assuming a ﬂat light curve. No signiﬁcant X-ray variability within
the ∼ 15 ks observation span on the basis of the χ2 test.

counterpart of the X-ray source [121].

Source hardness ratios distribution

In Figure 5.10 is shown the distribution of the HRs of the X-ray sources de-
tected by the XMM-Newton within the 99% error circle of the Fermi-LAT
source. All error bars are reported at the 1σ. Source #10 is little absorbed
and is characterized by a soft spectrum (HR12 (cid:39) 0 and HR23 (cid:39) −1), probably
it is a nearby star. The other two sources are very absorbed and character-
ized by a rather hard spectrum (HR12 > 0 and HR23 ≥ 0), one of these
two objects may be the counterpart of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed source. The
values of the expected HRs are overplotted in Figure 5.10. As can be seen,
the distributions are compatible with a rather wide range of temperatures
and photon indexes, thus suggesting that we are probably sampling diﬀerent
types of sources. This conclusion is not surprising, since the area is far from
the Galactic plane and therefore are expected to contain both Galactic and
extragalactic X-ray sources.

165

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.10: Distribution of HR12 vs. HR23 of the X-ray sources detected
by the XMM-Newton within the 99% error circle of the Fermi-LAT source.
Error bars are reported at 1σ. Crosses indicate the expected HR12 vs. HR23
computed for power law spectra with Γ from 1.5 and 2.5. Stars indicate the
expected HR12 vs. HR23 computed for apec spectra with kT from 0.5 to 5.5
keV. Triangles indicate the expected HR12 vs. HR23 computed for black body
spectra with kT from 0.1 to 1.1 keV. Each spectral model is computed using
the interstellar medium absorption given by [73] (red) and one third of this
value (blue).

Discussion

In the XMM-Newton FoV of the γ-ray unidentiﬁed source 2FGL J1036.1–6722
we have detected 26 X-ray sources between 0.3 and 10 keV, only 3 of them are
situated within the 99% error circle of the Fermi-LAT source, we can consider
them as plausible counterparts of the putative MSPs. For each plausible X-ray
counterpart we have not detected any signiﬁcant X-ray variability and by an
analysis of fγ/fX each one seems to be a plausible counterpart of the 2FGL
unidentiﬁed source. No optical or IR candidate counterpart was found for
the source #10 but analyzing its X-ray spectrum it seems a nearby star. On
the basis of the characteristics of 3 optical/IR candidate counterparts and the
spectrum of the source #4, we may identify this X-ray object as a likely AGN.

166

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Source #3 is the most interesting plausible counterpart of the putative MSP.
The optical object detected within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle does not seem
the counterpart of source #3 and from its HRs we can classify it as a pulsar
or at least an AGN.

If we hypothesize that the “real” counterpart of the unidentiﬁed source
has not been detected above 3σ inside the 2FGL 99% error ellipse, we can
derive the upper limit assuming an absorbed power law spectral model for the
putative counterpart with NH = 0.2 × 1022 cm2 and Γ = 2. This means the
putative counterpart should have an unabsorbed ﬂux of fX ∼ 9 × 10−15 erg
cm−2 s−1 in the energy range between 0.3 and 10 keV to be detected above 3σ
with our observation. In this way we obtain the inferior limit of the γ-ray ﬂux
to X-ray ﬂux ratio as fγ/fX (cid:38) 2200.

5.1.3 2FGL J1539.2–3325

Now we analyze the unidentiﬁed source 2FGL J1539.2–3325 (see Table 5.1).
This object was discovered for the ﬁrst time by the Fermi-LAT and included
in the 1FGL source catalog as 1FGL J1539.0-3328 [3]. 2FGL J1539.2–3325
is a rather bright γ-ray source, situated at high Galactic latitude (b=17◦.53,
l=338◦.74) and it is characterized by low variability (variability index=29.53)
and high curvature signiﬁcance (sign curv = 5.54). The variability and spectral
curvature properties of this source are very similar to those of a typical γ-ray
pulsar as shown in the bottom of Figure 5.11. The γ-ray spectrum and the
light curve of 2FGL J1539.2–3325 are shown at the top of Figure 5.11.

In this Section we report on recent monitoring data taken with Swift X-
ray Telescope (XRT) with the aim of detecting the X-ray counterpart of the
putative γ-ray millisecond pulsar radio-quiet.

Observations and X-ray analysis

The set of XRT observations are 27 and each one was typically taken as 0.5–15
ks exposures with various sampling intervals. The total Swift-XRT data set in-
cludes 84 ks of observations extending from 2010 October 1 to 2012 September
29.

We detect 31 X-ray sources which are > 3σ conﬁdence level in photon
statistics against background in the XRT FoV. 5 of these X-ray detected sources
are situated within the 99% error circle of the Fermi-LAT source, for these we
produce X-ray spectra, light curves and ﬁnd optical counterparts. Figure 5.12
shows the 0.3–10 keV exposure-corrected Swift-XRT FoV image.

We have noticed that in the Field-of-View of 2FGL J1539.2–3325 there is
a dark cloud named Lupus1, a component of the Lupus dark-cloud complex
[20, 91, 56]. Its mass is estimated to be ∼150 M(cid:12), this is the most massive

167

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.11: Top: γ-ray spectrum (left) and light curve (right) of the uniden-
tiﬁed source 2FGL J1539.2–3325. Bottom: variability index plotted as a func-
tion of the curvature signiﬁcance for diﬀerent broad classes of sources. Red
dot represents the position of 2FGL J1539.2–3325 in this space. This object is
not variable and the spectrum is curved.

region in the Lupus complex, and the distance is determinate to be between
140 pc and 240 pc. This is a star forming site in which a large number of T-
Tauri stars were discovered. Lupus1 is a very dense dark cloud, characterized
by an average visual extinction of AV = 4.5, which can be converted to column
density using the relation suggested in [168]: NH = AV (1.87 × 1021) = 0.85 ×
1022 cm−2. In Figure 5.13 is shown the Digital Sky Survey image in the ﬁeld
of 2FGL J1539.2–3325 with the distribution of the X-ray sources detected by
Swift-XRT. Within the 15 arcmin radius image area, the USNO B1.0 catalogue

168

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.12: 0.3–10 keV exposure-corrected Swift-XRT FoV image. A gaussian
ﬁlter with a kernel radius of 3(cid:48)(cid:48) is applied. 2FGL J1539.2–3325 with 95%
conﬁdence error ellipse is plotted in cyan. Each X-ray source detected by the
XRT is plotted with a circle of 10(cid:48)(cid:48) radius. Colors represent the signal-to-noise
(SN) ratio of each source: in red sources with SN<3, in magenta sources with
3<TS<4, in yellow sources with 4<TS<5 and in green sources with TS>5.

provides a total of ∼3800 sources, corresponding to a surface density µ ∼
1.5× 10−3sources arcsec−2. Since the X-ray error-circle is 5 arcsec, we estimate
that the probability of chance coincidence between a X-ray and an optical
source is ∼ 0.1. Therefore up to 10% of the selected counterparts could be
spurious candidates, in the dark cloud region this value decreases.

Notes on individual X-ray sources

In the following, we present results on the most likely candidate X-ray coun-
terparts to the unidentiﬁed γ-ray source.

Source #1: The X-ray analysis yields only 42 counts in the energy band
0.3–10 keV, with a signal-to-noise ratio of 4.7; its count rate in the total
energy band is 5.02 × 10−4 cts s−1. This object is situated within the
2FGL 95% conﬁdence error ellipse at (RA, Dec)=(234◦.75, −33◦.46). In
Figure 5.14 is shown the spectrum of this X-ray sources.

169

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.13: Digital Sky Survey 2 image with red ﬁlter of the ﬁeld of uniden-
tiﬁed source 2FGL J1539.2–3325, for which 95% conﬁdence error ellipse is
plotted in cyan. Each X-ray source detected by the XRT is overplotted with
a circle of 10(cid:48)(cid:48) radius colored as described in Figure 5.12. White dashed line
represents the FoV of the Swift-XRT observation. It is evident the presence of
the dense dark cloud Lupus1 in the central region of the image.

The X-ray spectral ﬁtting results are summarized in Table 5.7. We notice
that only if we ﬁx the interstellar medium absorption to NH = 0.09×1022
cm−2 we ﬁnd physical plausible best-ﬁt spectral parameter values, this
means the X-ray source is closer to us than the dark cloud, thus it cannot
be an extragalactic object.

In Figure 5.15 is shown the light curve with 5 bins.
Within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle there are three optical/IR candidate
counterparts of the source #1, their properties are shown in Table 5.8.
If the optical counterpart of the X-ray source is not detected because
too faint, above the limiting magnitude of USNO B1.0 (V>21), then
log(fX/fV ) > (0.02÷ 0.32), using an unabsorbed visual ﬂux fV = 1.07×
10−14. This value does not exclude any source class as counterpart of the
X-ray source.

170

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.14: Spectrum of the X-ray source #1 binned with a minimum of 5
counts per bin. The binned spectrum shows that the X-ray object is rather
absorbed at low energies and that the XRT detected photons until (cid:39)5 keV.

a

-

-

0.28+0.12−0.07

-

967

0.09 (ﬁxed)

0.09 (ﬁxed)

0.09 (ﬁxed)
2.05+0.65−0.55

Parameter Power-law model Apec model Black body model
NH
Γ
kT (keV)
d.o.f.
c-stat
goodnessb
c
Fluxunabs
ain units of 1022 cm−2
bfraction of 104 Monte Carlo simulations with ﬁt statistic less then c-stat
cin units of 10−14 erg cm−2 s−1 and in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV

184.71
40.9%
2.16

183.29
88.7%
1.26

967

183.87
95.3%
1.12

1.59+3.48−0.48

967

Table 5.7: Spectral parameters for the X-ray source #1 within the 95% error
ellipse of 2FGL J1539.2–3325. F luxunabs corresponds to the unabsorbed ﬂux.
We cannot assert if this X-ray source is a pulsar or star because no spectral
model can be rejected by the C-statistic value. The γ-ray (E>100 MeV) to
soft X-ray (0.3–10 keV) ﬂux ratio is Fγ/FX (cid:39) (500÷ 950), which is compatible
with the value of a typical γ-ray MSP and radio-loud pulsar [135].

Source #2: The X-ray analysis yields only 36 counts in the energy band
0.3–10 keV, with a signal-to-noise ratio of 4.3; its count rate in the total
energy band is 4.33 × 10−4 cts s−1. This object is situated within the

171

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.15: Light curve with 5 bins for the X-ray source #1 in the energy range
between 0.3 keV and 10 keV within the ∼ 84 ks observation span assuming
a spectral power law model. The red line depicts the best ﬁt assuming a ﬂat
light curve. Error bars for the ﬂux are reported at 1σ. No signiﬁcant X-ray
variability within the ∼ 84 ks observation span is detected on the basis of the
χ2 test

2FGL 99% conﬁdence error ellipse at (RA, Dec)=(234◦.79, −33◦.51). In
Figure 5.16 is shown the spectrum of this X-ray sources.

The X-ray spectral ﬁtting results are summarized in Table 5.9. We notice
that only if we ﬁx the interstellar medium absorption to NH = 0.85×1022
cm−2 we ﬁnd physical plausible best-ﬁt spectral parameter values, this
means the X-ray source is in the dark cloud or farther than it.

In Figure 5.17 is shown the light curve with 5 bins.
Within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle there is no optical or IR candidate
counterpart of the source #2.
If the optical counterpart of the X-ray
source is not detected because too faint, above the limiting magnitude
of USNO B1.0 (V>21), then log(fX/fV ) > (−1.78 ÷ −1.49), using an
unabsorbed visual ﬂux fV = 1.17 × 10−12. This value does not exclude
any source class as counterpart of the X-ray source.

Source #3: The X-ray analysis yields only 135 counts in the energy band
0.3–10 keV, with a signal-to-noise ratio of 8.9; its count rate in the total
energy band is 1.6 × 10−3 cts s−1. This object is situated within the

172

Optical counterpart
IR counterpart
Detection year
Distance

De-absorbed
magnitudes
(mag)

GSC

-

1990
2.4(cid:48)(cid:48)

B=16.51
V=16.01a
R=14.59
I=12.94
J=16.27
H=15.44
K=15.1

-

1968
3.2(cid:48)(cid:48)

B=16.32
V=15.37a
R=13.99

-
-
-
-
M

2MASS

1990
2.7(cid:48)(cid:48)
-
-

R =18.47

-

J=11.52
H=11.01
K=10.72
K or M

-
-
-

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Source #1 – optical/IR analysis

USNO B1.0 USNO B1.0

Stellar spectral class G, K or M
1.59 × 10−12
fopt (erg cm−2 s−1)
-2.15÷-1.86
fX/fopt (log10)
Suggested class
avalue extrapolated as the average between absorbed B and R magnitudes

1.89 × 10−12
-2.23÷-1.94

star

star

Table 5.8: Properties of the optical/IR candidate counterparts of the X-ray
source #1. For a description of each row see Table 5.5. We assert that the
three candidate counterparts are probably the same object because of the value
of their proper motion and their magnitudes.

2FGL 95% conﬁdence error ellipse at (RA, Dec)=(234◦.85, −33◦.48). In
Figure 5.18 is shown the spectrum of this X-ray sources.

The X-ray spectral ﬁtting results are summarized in Table 5.10. We
notice that only if we ﬁx the interstellar medium absorption to NH =
0.85 × 1022 cm−2 we ﬁnd physical plausible best-ﬁt spectral parameter
values, this means the X-ray source is in the dark cloud or farther than
it.

In Figure 5.19 is shown the light curve with 5 bins.
Within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle there are two optical/IR candidate
counterparts of the source #3, their properties are shown in Table 5.11.

If the optical counterpart of the X-ray source is not detected because
too faint, above the limiting magnitude of USNO B1.0 (V>21), then
log(fX/fV ) > (−1.11 ÷ −0.75), using an unabsorbed visual ﬂux fV =
1.17× 10−12. This value does not exclude any source class as counterpart
of the X-ray source.

Source #6: The X-ray analysis yields only 35 counts in the energy band

173

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.16: Spectrum of the X-ray source #2 binned with a minimum of 5
counts per bin. The binned spectrum shows that the X-ray object is very
absorbed at low energies and that the XRT detected photons until (cid:39)7 keV.

a

-

967

-

0.65+0.39−0.20

0.85 (ﬁxed)

0.85 (ﬁxed)

0.85 (ﬁxed)
1.66+1.01−0.86

-
5.45+23.12
−3.33
967

Parameter Power-law model Apec model Black body model
NH
Γ
kT (keV)
d.o.f.
c-stat
goodnessb
c
Fluxunabs
ain units of 1022 cm−2
bfraction of 104 Monte Carlo simulations with ﬁt statistic less then c-stat
cin units of 10−14 erg cm−2 s−1 and in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV

207.45
68.1%
3.76

967

205.06
92.3%
1.93

206.38
70.3%
3.40

Table 5.9: Spectral parameters for the X-ray source #2 within the 2FGL 99%
error ellipse of 2FGL J1539.2–3325. F luxunabs corresponds to the unabsorbed
ﬂux. We cannot assert if this X-ray source is a pulsar a star or an AGN because
no spectral model can be rejected by the C-statistic value. The γ-ray (E>100
MeV) to soft X-ray (0.3–10 keV) ﬂux ratio is Fγ/FX (cid:39) (280 ÷ 550), which is
compatible with the value of a typical γ-ray MSP and radio-loud pulsar [135].

0.3–10 keV, with a signal-to-noise ratio of 3.8; its count rate in the total
energy band is 4.1 × 10−4 cts s−1. This object is situated within the
2FGL 99% conﬁdence error ellipse at (RA, Dec)=(234◦.91, −33◦.41). In

174

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.17: Light curve with 5 bins for the X-ray source #2 in the energy range
between 0.3 keV and 10 keV within the ∼ 84 ks observation span assuming
a spectral power law model. The red line depicts the best ﬁt assuming a ﬂat
light curve. Error bars for the ﬂux are reported at 1σ. No signiﬁcant X-ray
variability within the observation span is detected on the basis of the χ2 test

a

-

-

0.54+0.08−0.07

-

967

0.85 (ﬁxed)

0.85 (ﬁxed)

0.85 (ﬁxed)
2.45+0.38−0.36

Parameter Power-law model Apec model Black body model
NH
Γ
kT (keV)
d.o.f.
c-stat
goodnessb
c
Fluxunabs
ain units of 1022 cm−2
bfraction of 104 Monte Carlo simulations with ﬁt statistic less then c-stat
cin units of 10−14 erg cm−2 s−1 and in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV

346.44
48.2%
20.5

348.19
56.9%
13.2

967

344.85
93.7%
9.13

2.64+1.02−0.59

967

Table 5.10: Spectral parameters for the X-ray source #3 within the 95% error
ellipse of 2FGL J1539.2–3325. F luxunabs corresponds to the unabsorbed ﬂux.
We cannot assert if this X-ray source is a pulsar, a star or an AGN because
no spectral model can be rejected by the C-statistic value. The γ-ray (E>100
MeV) to soft X-ray (0.3–10 keV) ﬂux ratio is Fγ/FX (cid:39) (50 ÷ 100), which is
compatible only with the value of a typical γ-ray MSP [135].

175

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.18: Spectrum of the X-ray source #3 binned with a minimum of 5
counts per bin. The binned spectrum shows that the X-ray object is very
absorbed at low energies and that the XRT detected photons until (cid:39)8 keV.

Figure 5.20 is shown the spectrum of this X-ray sources.

The X-ray spectral ﬁtting results are summarized in Table 5.12. We
notice that only if we ﬁx the interstellar medium absorption to NH =
0.85 × 1022 cm−2 we ﬁnd physical plausible best-ﬁt spectral parameter
values, this means the X-ray source is in the dark cloud or farther than
it.

In Figure 5.21 is shown the light curve with 5 bins.
Within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle there is only an IR candidate counter-
part of the source #6 detected by WISE but with no magnitude values.
If the optical counterpart of the X-ray source is not detected because
too faint, above the limiting magnitude of USNO B1.0 (V>21), then
log(fX/fV ) > (−1.79 ÷ −1.43), using an unabsorbed visual ﬂux fV =
1.17× 10−12. This value does not exclude any source class as counterpart
of the X-ray source.

Source #7: The X-ray analysis yields only 54 counts in the energy band
0.3–10 keV, with a signal-to-noise ratio of 5.1; its count rate in the total
energy band is 6.4 × 10−4 cts s−1. This object is situated within the
2FGL 99% conﬁdence error ellipse at (RA, Dec)=(234◦.91, −33◦.42). In
Figure 5.22 is shown the spectrum of this X-ray sources. The X-ray
spectral ﬁtting results are summarized in Table 5.13. We notice that

176

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.19: Light curve with 5 bins for the X-ray source #3 in the energy range
between 0.3 keV and 10 keV within the ∼ 84 ks observation span assuming
a spectral power law model. The red line depicts the best ﬁt assuming a ﬂat
light curve. Error bars for the ﬂux are reported at 1σ. No signiﬁcant X-ray
variability within the observation span is detected on the basis of the χ2 test

only if we ﬁx the interstellar medium absorption to NH = 0.09 × 1022
cm−2 we ﬁnd physical plausible best-ﬁt spectral parameter values, this
means the X-ray source is closer to us than the dark cloud, it cannot be
an extragalactic object.

In Figure 5.23 is shown the light curve with 5 bins.
Within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle there are two optical/IR candidate
counterparts of the source #7, their properties are shown in Table 5.14.

If the optical counterpart of the X-ray source is not detected because
too faint, above the limiting magnitude of USNO B1.0 (V>21), then
log(fX/fV ) > (−0.14 ÷ 0.08), using an unabsorbed visual ﬂux fV =
2.69× 10−14. This value does not exclude any source class as counterpart
of the X-ray source.

Source hardness ratios distribution

In Figure 5.24 is shown the distribution of the HRs of the X-ray sources de-
tected by the Swift-XRT within the 99% error circle of the Fermi-LAT source.

177

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Source #3 – optical/IR analysis

Optical counterpart
IR counterpart
Detection year
Distance

De-absorbed
magnitudes
(mag)

USNO B1.0

2MASS

1986
2.7(cid:48)(cid:48)
B=13.6
V=14.64a
R=15.3

-

GSC

-

1990
3.6(cid:48)(cid:48)

B=15.57
V=16.25a
R=16.54
I=16.68

-
-
-
?

J=15.05
H=14.42
K=14.56
2.3 × 10−11
-2.4÷-2.05

?

star

Stellar Stellar spectral class
fopt (erg cm−2 s−1)
fX/fopt (log10)
Suggested class
avalue extrapolated as the average between absorbed B and R magnitudes

3.78 × 10−12
-1.62÷-1.27

star

Table 5.11: Properties of the optical/IR candidate counterparts of the X-
ray source #3. For a description of each row see Table 5.5. The candidate
counterparts are classiﬁed as stars but these results are not compatible with
their colors, this means either that these objects may be not the candidate
counterpart of the X-ray source or that they may be two interacting objects
in a binary system (e.g. a star and a pulsar) making this X-ray source very
interesting. Since the X-ray source is probably located in the dark cloud, the
identiﬁcation is uncertain because of the NH value we have assumed, thus this
object may also be a star in formation.

Sources #1 and#7 are little absorbed and are characterized by a rather soft
spectrum (HR12 (cid:39) 0 and HR23 < 0), probably they are nearby stars. Source
#6 is probably located at the limit of the dark cloud because is rather ab-
sorbed. The other two sources are very absorbed, they are probably situated
in the dark cloud or farther, and source #2 is characterized by a very hard
spectrum (HR12 (cid:39) 1 and HR23 (cid:39) 0.5). Source #2 and #3 are very inter-
esting and probably one of these two objects may be the counterpart of the
2FGL unidentiﬁed source.

The values of the expected HRs are overplotted in Figure 5.24. As can be
seen, the distributions are compatible with a rather wide range of temperatures
and photon indexes.

178

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.20: Spectrum of the X-ray source #6 binned with a minimum of 5
counts per bin. The binned spectrum shows that the X-ray object is not very
absorbed at low energies and that the XRT detected photons until (cid:39)5 keV.

a

-

967

-

0.36+0.24−0.11

0.85 (ﬁxed)

0.85 (ﬁxed)

0.85 (ﬁxed)
2.43+1.56−1.09

-
9.71+28.47
−7.80
967

Parameter Power-law model Apec model Black body model
NH
Γ
kT (keV)
d.o.f.
c-stat
goodnessb
c
Fluxunabs
ain units of 1022 cm−2
bfraction of 104 Monte Carlo simulations with ﬁt statistic less then c-stat
cin units of 10−14 erg cm−2 s−1 and in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV

195.64
85.2%
4.34

967

193.73
99.4%
1.89

197.91
64.4%
3.54

Table 5.12: Spectral parameters for the X-ray source #6 within the 2FGL 99%
error ellipse of 2FGL J1539.2–3325. F luxunabs corresponds to the unabsorbed
ﬂux. We cannot assert if this X-ray source is a pulsar, a star or an AGN
because no spectral model can be rejected by the C-statistic value. The γ-ray
(E>100 MeV) to soft X-ray (0.3–10 keV) ﬂux ratio is Fγ/FX (cid:39) (240 ÷ 560),
which is compatible with the value of a typical γ-ray MSP and radio-loud
pulsar [135].

179

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.21: Light curve with 5 bins for the X-ray source #6 in the energy range
between 0.3 keV and 10 keV within the ∼ 84 ks observation span assuming
a spectral power law model. The red line depicts the best ﬁt assuming a ﬂat
light curve. Error bars for the ﬂux are reported at 1σ. No signiﬁcant X-ray
variability within the observation span is detected on the basis of the χ2 test

a

-

-

0.26+0.06−0.05

-

967

0.09 (ﬁxed)

0.09 (ﬁxed)

0.09 (ﬁxed)
2.47+0.46−0.43

Parameter Power-law model Apec model Black body model
NH
Γ
kT (keV)
d.o.f.
c-stat
goodnessb
c
Fluxunabs
ain units of 1022 cm−2
bfraction of 104 Monte Carlo simulations with ﬁt statistic less then c-stat
cin units of 10−14 erg cm−2 s−1 and in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV

197.52
24%
3.29

204.27
90%
1.93

967

194.44
84.3%
1.99

1.33+1.36−1.04

967

Table 5.13: Spectral parameters for the X-ray source #7 within the 2FGL 99%
error ellipse of 2FGL J1539.2–3325. F luxunabs corresponds to the unabsorbed
ﬂux. We cannot assert if this X-ray source is a pulsar or a star because no
spectral model can be rejected by the C-statistic value. The γ-ray (E>100
MeV) to soft X-ray (0.3–10 keV) ﬂux ratio is Fγ/FX (cid:39) (320 ÷ 530), which is
compatible with the value of a typical γ-ray MSP and radio-loud pulsar [135].

180

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.22: Spectrum of the X-ray source #7 binned with a minimum of 5
counts per bin. The binned spectrum shows that the X-ray object is not very
absorbed at low energies and that the XRT detected photons only until (cid:39)2.5
keV.

Figure 5.23: Light curve with 5 bins for the X-ray source #7 in the energy range
between 0.3 keV and 10 keV within the ∼ 84 ks observation span assuming
a spectral power law model. The red line depicts the best ﬁt assuming a ﬂat
light curve. Error bars for the ﬂux are reported at 1σ. No signiﬁcant X-ray
variability within the observation span is detected on the basis of the χ2 test

181

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Source #7 – optical/IR analysis

Optical counterpart USNO B1.0
IR counterpart
Detection year
Distance

1975
0.8(cid:48)(cid:48)

2MASS

De-absorbed
magnitudes
(mag)

B=17.74

V=17

R=16.36

-

J=12.85
H=12.28
K=12.01
M or K
6.77 × 10−13
-1.53÷-1.31
star or CV

GSC

-

1990
1.4(cid:48)(cid:48)

B=17.92
V=17.13a
R=16.23
I=14.15

-
-
-

Stellar spectral class
fopt (erg cm−2 s−1)
fX/fopt (log10)
Suggested class
avalue extrapolated as the average between absorbed B and R magnitudes

G, K or M
4.34 × 10−13
-1.34÷-1.12

star

Table 5.14: Properties of the optical/IR candidate counterparts of the X-ray
source #7. For a description of each row see Table 5.5. We assert that the two
candidate counterparts may be the same object on the basis of their proper
motion and their magnitudes.

182

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.24: Distribution of HR12 vs. HR23 of the X-ray sources detected by
the Swift-XRT within the 99% error circle of the Fermi-LAT source. Error bars
are reported at 1σ. Crosses indicate the expected HR12 vs. HR23 computed for
power law spectra with Γ from 1.5 and 2.5. Stars indicate the expected HR12
vs. HR23 computed for apec spectra with kT from 0.5 to 5.5 keV. Triangles
indicate the expected HR12 vs. HR23 computed for black body spectra with
kT from 0.1 to 1.1 keV. Each spectral model is computed using the interstellar
medium absorption given by its value in the dark cloud (red) and one third of
this value (blue).

183

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Discussion

In the Swift-XRT FoV of 2FGL J1539.2–3325 we have detected 31 X-ray
sources between 0.3 and 10 keV, only 5 of them are situated within the 99%
error circle of the Fermi-LAT source, we can consider them as plausible coun-
terparts of the putative MSPs. For each candidate X-ray counterpart we have
not detected any signiﬁcant X-ray variability and by an analysis of fγ/fX
each one seems to be a plausible counterpart of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed source.
Sources #1 and #7 can be associated with nearby stars, located closer to us
than the Lupus1 dark cloud, for each one we have identiﬁed the optical/IR
counterpart. Source #6 has an IR candidate counterpart within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-
ray error circle detected by WISE but without any magnitude value. It is likely
situated at the edge of the dark cloud, analyzing its spectrum we observe that
this X-ray object may be the counterpart of the putative MSP. In the end,
sources #2 and #3 are situated inside or farther than the dark cloud because
their spectra are very absorbed. Probably the source #3 is situated inside the
dark cloud and it may be a star in formation (e.g. a T-Tauri star). Source
#2 has not any optical/IR candidate counterpart within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error
circle and probably it is located farther than the dark cloud and analyzing its
spectrum the X-ray source may be a pulsar or an AGN.

If we hypothesize that the “real” counterpart of the unidentiﬁed source
has not been detected above 3σ inside the 2FGL 99% error ellipse, we can
derive the upper limit assuming an absorbed power law spectral model for the
putative counterpart with NH = 0.09 × 1022 cm2 and Γ = 2. This means the
putative counterpart should have an unabsorbed ﬂux of fX ∼ 8.2 × 10−15 erg
cm−2 s−1 in the energy range between 0.3 and 10 keV to be detected above 3σ
with our observation. In this way we obtain the inferior limit of the γ-ray ﬂux
to X-ray ﬂux ratio as fγ/fX (cid:38) 1300.

5.1.4 2FGL J1744.1–7620

Finally, we have analyzed the unidentiﬁed source 2FGL J1744.1–7620 (see
Table 5.1). This object was discovered for the ﬁrst time by the Fermi-LAT and
included in the 1FGL source catalog as 1FGL J1743.8-7620 [3]. 2FGL J1744.1–
7620 is a rather bright γ-ray source, situated oﬀ the Galactic plane (b=-22◦.48,
l=317◦.09) and it is characterized by low variability (variability index=27.14)
and high curvature signiﬁcance (sign curv=5.66). The variability and spectral
curvature properties of this source are very similar to those of a typical γ-ray
pulsars as shown in the bottom of Figure 5.25. γ-ray spectrum and light curve
of 2FGL J1744.1–7620 are shown on the top of Figure 5.25.

In this Section we report on recent monitoring data taken with XMMNewton
with the aim of detecting the X-ray counterpart of the putative γ-ray millisec-

184

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure 5.25: Top: γ-ray spectrum (left) and light curve (right) of the uniden-
tiﬁed source 2FGL J1744.1–7620. Bottom: variability index plotted as a func-
tion of the curvature signiﬁcance for diﬀerent broad classes of sources. Red
dot represents the position of 2FGL J1744.1–7620 in this space. This object is
not variable and the spectrum is curved.

ond pulsar radio-quiet.

Observation and X-ray analysis

Our deep XMM-Newton observation 2FGL J1744.1–7620 started on 2012 Au-
gust 21 at 03:13:20 UT and lasted 25.9 ks. The PN camera [194] of the EPIC
instrument was operating in Extended Full Frame mode (time resolution of 200
ms over a 26(cid:48) × 27(cid:48) Field-of-View), while the MOS detectors [203] were set in

185

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Full Frame mode (2.6 s time resolution on a 15(cid:48) radius FoV). The thin optical
ﬁlter was used for the PN camera while we chose to use the medium ﬁlter
for the MOS detectors. After standard data processing , the good, dead-time
corrected exposure time is 18.7 ks for the PN, 25.4 ks for the MOS1 and the
MOS2 detectors.

We detect 31 sources with a source signiﬁcance greater than 3.6σ in the
PN FoV. Of these sources, only 3 are situated within the 99% error circle of
the Fermi-LAT source, for these we produce X-ray spectra, light curves and
ﬁnd optical counterparts. We decide to exclude source #21 from our analysis
because X-ray spectral and time variability study can be performed only for
sources with a source signiﬁcance level TS > 25.

Figure 5.26 shows the 0.3–10 keV exposure-corrected XMM-Newton PN

FoV image.

Figure 5.26: 0.3–10 keV exposure-corrected XMM-Newton PN FoV image . A
gaussian ﬁlter with a kernel radius of 3(cid:48)(cid:48) is applied. 2FGL J744.1-7620 with
95% conﬁdence error ellipse is plotted in cyan. Each X-ray source detected
by the PN is plotted with a circle of 10(cid:48)(cid:48) radius. Colors represent the source
signiﬁcance: in red sources with TS<25, in magenta sources with 25<TS<50,
in yellow sources with 50<TS<100 and in green sources with TS>100.

In Figure 5.27 is shown the Digital Sky Survey image in the ﬁeld of 2FGL

186

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

J1744.1–7620 with the distribution of the X-ray sources detected by XMM-
Newton. Within the 15 arcmin radius imaged area, the USNO B1.0 catalogue

Figure 5.27: Digital Sky Survey 2 image with red ﬁlter of the ﬁeld of uniden-
tiﬁed source 2FGL J1744.1–7620, for which 95% conﬁdence error ellipse is
plotted in cyan. Each X-ray source detected by the PN is overplotted with
a circle of 10(cid:48)(cid:48) radius colored as described in Figure 5.26. White dashed line
represents the FoV of the PN.

provides a total of ∼3500 sources, corresponding to a surface density µ ∼
1.4×10−3 sources arcsec−2. Since the X-ray error-circle is 5 arcsec, we estimate
that the probability of chance coincidence between a X-ray and an optical
source is ∼ 0.1. Therefore up to 10% of the selected counterparts could be
spurious candidates.

Notes on individual X-ray sources

In the following, we present results on the most likely candidate X-ray coun-
terparts to the unidentiﬁed γ-ray source.

Source #4: The X-ray analysis yields 74 counts in the energy band 0.3–10
keV, with a source signiﬁcance TS=105 in the PN and TS(cid:39)60 in the two

187

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

MOS; its count rate in the total energy band is 0.6 × 10−2 cts s−1. This
object is situated within the 2FGL 95% conﬁdence error ellipse at (RA,
Dec)=(265◦.87, -76◦.33). In Figure 5.28 is shown the spectrum of this
X-ray sources.

Figure 5.28: Spectrum of the X-ray source #4 binned with a minimum of 15
counts per bin. The spectrum shows that the X-ray object is rather absorbed
at low energies and that the PN detected photons until (cid:39)5 keV.

The X-ray spectral ﬁtting results are summarized in Table 5.17. We
notice that only if we ﬁx the interstellar medium absorption to NH =
0.08×1022 cm−2 [73] we ﬁnd physical plausible best-ﬁt spectral parameter
values.
If we consider that this X-ray source is the counterpart of the
2FGL unidentiﬁed sources then the γ-ray (E>100 MeV) to soft X-ray
(0.3–10 keV) ﬂux ratio is Fγ/FX (cid:39) (800 ÷ 1500) on the basis of the
X-ray spectral model we assume.
In addition, if 2FGL J1744.1–7620
have been a pulsar then the γ-ray to X-ray ﬂux ratio would have been
compatible with the value of a typical γ-ray MSP and radio-loud pulsar
[135].

In Figure 5.29 is shown the light curved with a bin time of 2500 s.
Within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle there is only an optical candidate
counterpart of the source #4, its properties are shown in Table 5.16.
If the optical counterpart of the X-ray source is not detected because
too faint, above the limiting magnitude of USNO B1.0 (V>21), then
log(fX/fV ) > (−0.27 ÷ −0.03), using an unabsorbed visual ﬂux fV =

188

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

a

0.08 (ﬁxed)

0.08 (ﬁxed)

0.08 (ﬁxed)
1.69+0.51−0.45

Parameter Power-law model Apec model Black body model
NH
Γ
kT (keV)
d.o.f.
χ2
ν
Fluxunabs
ain units of 1022 cm−2
bin units of 10−14 erg cm−2 s−1 and in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV

-
6.78+38.45
−6.37
9

0.744
2.31

-
9

0.717
2.31

b

0.58+0.19−0.16

-

9

1.12
1.34

Table 5.15: Spectral parameters for the X-ray source #4 within the 2FGL 95%
error ellipse of 2FGL J1744.1–7620. F luxunabs corresponds to the unabsorbed
ﬂux. We cannot assert if this X-ray source is a pulsar a star or an AGN because
no spectral model can be rejected by the χ2 test.

Figure 5.29: Light curve for the X-ray source #4 in the energy range between
0.3 keV and 10 keV within the ∼ 19 ks observation span. The black line depicts
the best ﬁt assuming a ﬂat light curve. No signiﬁcant X-ray variability within
the observation span is detected on the basis of the χ2 test.

1.75 × 10−12. This value does not exclude any source class as counter-
part of the X-ray source, remember that a pulsar is characterized by
log(fX/fopt) > 2 [121].

Source #5: The X-ray analysis yields 64 counts in the energy band 0.3–10
keV, with a source signiﬁcance TS=75 in the PN and TS(cid:39)30 in the two

189

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Source #4 – optical/IR analysis

Optical counterpart
Detection year
Distance
De-absorbed magnitudes (mag)

USNO B1.0

1990
2.2”

Stellar spectral class
fopt (erg cm−2 s−1)
fX/fopt (log10)
Suggested class
avalue extrapolated as the average between absorbed B and R magnitudes

star

B=19.84
V=19.68a
R=19.49
7.4 × 10−14
-0.74÷-0.51

A

Table 5.16: Properties of the optical candidate counterpart of the X-ray source
#4. For a description of each row see Table 5.5.

MOS; its count rate in the total energy band is 0.5 × 10−2 cts s−1. This
object is situated within the 2FGL 95% conﬁdence error ellipse at (RA,
Dec)=(266◦.00, -76◦.32). In Figure 5.30 is shown the spectrum of this
X-ray sources.

Figure 5.30: Spectrum of the X-ray source #5 binned with a minimum of 15
counts per bin. The spectrum shows that the X-ray object is rather absorbed
at low energies and that the PN detected photons only until (cid:39)2 keV.

The X-ray spectral ﬁtting results are summarized in Table 5.17. We

190

5.1. Searching for radio-quiet MSPs among the 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

notice that only if we ﬁx the interstellar medium absorption to NH =
0.08×1022 cm−2 [73] we ﬁnd physical plausible best-ﬁt spectral parameter
values.

a

b

-
2

0.08 (ﬁxed)

0.08 (ﬁxed)

0.08 (ﬁxed)
2.71+0.69−0.64

Parameter Power-law model Apec model Black body model
NH
Γ
kT (keV)
d.o.f.
χ2
ν
Fluxunabs
ain units of 1022 cm−2
bin units of 10−14 erg cm−2 s−1 and in the energy range of 0.3–10 keV

-
3.61+14.24
−1.73
2

0.717
1.92

0.744
1.63

0.23+0.08−0.05

-

2

1.12
1.01

Table 5.17: Spectral parameters for the X-ray source #5 within the 2FGL 95%
error ellipse of 2FGL J1744.1–7620. F luxunabs corresponds to the unabsorbed
ﬂux. We cannot assert if this X-ray source is a pulsar a star or an AGN because
no spectral model can be rejected by the χ2 test especially because of the low
statistics available (only 2 d.o.f). The γ-ray (E>100 MeV) to soft X-ray (0.3–
10 keV) ﬂux ratio is Fγ/FX (cid:39) (1000 ÷ 1900), which is compatible with the
value of a typical γ-ray MSP and radio-loud pulsar [135].

Figure 5.31: Light curve for the X-ray source #5 in the energy range between
0.3 keV and 10 keV within the ∼ 19 ks observation span. The black line depicts
the best ﬁt assuming a ﬂat light curve. No signiﬁcant X-ray variability within
the observation span is detected on the basis of the χ2 test.

191

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

In Figure 5.31 is shown the light curved with a bin time of 2500 s.

Within 5(cid:48)(cid:48) radius X-ray error circle there is no optical/IR candidate coun-
terpart of the source #10. If the optical counterpart of the X-ray source is
not detected because too faint, above the limiting magnitude of USNO B1.0
(V>21), then log(fX/fV ) > (−0.4 ÷ −0.12), using an unabsorbed visual ﬂux
fV = 1.75× 10−12. This value does not exclude any source class as counterpart
of the X-ray source.

Source hardness ratios distribution

Figure 5.32: Distribution of HR12 vs. HR23 of the X-ray sources detected
by the XMM-Newton within the 99% error circle of the Fermi-LAT source.
Error bars are reported at 1σ. Crosses indicate the expected HR12 vs. HR23
computed for power law spectra with Γ from 1.5 and 2.5. Stars indicate the
expected HR12 vs. HR23 computed for apec spectra with kT from 0.5 to 5.5
keV. Triangles indicate the expected HR12 vs. HR23 computed for black body
spectra with kT from 0.1 to 1.1 keV. Each spectral model is computed using
the interstellar medium absorption given by [73] (red) and one third of this
value (blue)

In Figure 5.32 is shown the distribution of the HRs of the X-ray sources
detected by the XMM-Newton within the 99% error circle of the Fermi-LAT

192

5.2. PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar with a very unusual X-ray trail

source. Sources #4 is little absorbed and is characterized by a not very hard
spectrum (HR12 (cid:39) 0 and HR23 (cid:39) 0). Source #5 is little absorbed and
characterized by a very soft spectrum (HR12 (cid:39) −0.3 and HR23 (cid:39) −1),
probably it is a nearby star. Source #4 is an interesting candidate counterpart
of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed source.

The values of the expected HRs are overplotted in Figure 5.32. As can be
seen, the distributions are compatible with a rather wide range of temperatures
and photon indexes.

Discussion

In the XMM-Newton FoV of 2FGL J1744.1–7620 we have detected 31 X-ray
sources between 0.3 and 10 keV, only 2 of them are situated within the 99%
error circle of the Fermi-LAT source and have a source signiﬁcance greater
than 25, we can consider them as plausible counterparts of the putative MSPs.
For each plausible X-ray counterpart we have not detected any signiﬁcant X-
ray variability and by an analysis of fγ/fX each one seems to be a plausible
counterpart of the 2FGL unidentiﬁed source. No optical or IR candidate coun-
terpart was found for the source #5 but analyzing its X-ray spectrum it seems
a nearby star. Source #4 is very interesting, it has an optical counterpart that
may be identify as a star but analyzing the HRs it is evident that its spectrum
is too hard in order to be associated with a star. This means that source #4
may be part of a binary system where the optical object is its companion. This
means that 2FGL unidentiﬁed source may be an HMB or a “black-widow-type”
millisecond pulsar as e.g. 2FGL J1311.7-3429 [178]. All these considerations
make source #4 the most interesting plausible counterpart of the putative
MSP.

If we hypothesize that the “real” counterpart of the unidentiﬁed source
has not been detected above 3σ inside the 2FGL 99% error ellipse, we can
derive the upper limit assuming an absorbed power law spectral model for the
putative counterpart with NH = 0.08 × 1022 cm2 and Γ = 2. This means the
putative counterpart should have an unabsorbed ﬂux of fX ∼ 3.6 × 10−15 erg
cm−2 s−1 in the energy range between 0.3 and 10 keV to be detected above 3σ
in our observation. In this way we can obtain the inferior limit of the γ-ray
ﬂux to X-ray ﬂux ratio as fγ/fX (cid:38) 5500.

5.2 PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar

with a very unusual X-ray trail

The Large Area Telescope onboard the Fermi satellite [22] has opened a new
era for pulsar astronomy, by detecting γ-ray pulsations (at E > 100 MeV)

193

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

from more than 120 pulsars6, about 30% of which are not detected at radio
wavelengths. The middle-aged PSR J0357+3205 (characteristic age τC ∼ 0.54
Myr) is one of the most interesting radio-quiet pulsars discovered in blind
periodicity searches in Fermi-LAT data [6]. Its high γ-ray ﬂux (it is included in
the Fermi-LAT bright source list [7]), low spin-down luminosity ( ˙Erot = 5×1033
erg s−1) and oﬀ-plane position (Galactic latitude b ∼ −16◦) point to a small
distance of about 500 pc. The investigation of the ﬁeld of PSR J0357+3205
with a joint X-ray and optical program with Chandra and the NOAO Mayall
4m telescope at Kitt Peak allowed to identify the soft X-ray counterpart of
the pulsar as an unremarkable source, looking fainter (and colder) than other
well known middle-aged pulsars [69]. More interestingly, the deep Chandra
observation unveiled the existence of a very large, elongated feature of diﬀuse
X-ray emission, apparently originating at the pulsar position and extending for
more than 9(cid:48) (corresponding to ∼ 1.3 pc at the distance of 500 pc, assuming
no inclination with respect to the plane of the sky), with a hard spectrum
consistent both with a power law and with a hot thermal bremsstrahlung [69].
Elongated “trails” of diﬀuse emission have been associated with several
rotation-powered pulsars [112] and explained as bow-shock pulsar wind nebulae
(see [81] for a review), where their elongated morphology is “velocity-driven”.
Indeed, if the pulsar moves supersonically through the interstellar medium,
the termination shock of the pulsar wind assumes a “bullet” morphology, due
to ram pressure. Particles accelerated at the shock emit synchrotron radia-
tion and cool down, conﬁned by ram pressure in an elongated region aligned
with the pulsar space velocity. However, explaining the nature of the nebula
associated with PSR J0357+3205 turned out to be very challenging. As dis-
cussed in [69], the standard picture cannot apply here since the morphology is
very diﬀerent from the “cometary” shape which characterizes all other X-ray
bow-shock nebulae. There is no emission in the surroundings of the pulsar,
where the brightest portion (the termination shock) should be – indeed, the
surface brightness grows as a function of the distance from PSR J0357+3205.
Moreover, there are no evidences for spectral evolution as a function of the
position, at odds with expectations for a population of particles injected at
the shock and cooling via synchrotron radiation.

Other pictures could be explored. For instance, PSR B2224+65, the fast
moving pulsar powering the well known “Guitar nebula” seen in Hα [59], dis-
plays an elongated X-ray feature which is reminiscent of the one of our target
and cannot be a bow-shock nebula because it is misaligned by ∼ 118◦ with
respect to the direction of the proper motion [104]. Thus, the possibility of a
ballistic jet (similar to Active Galactic Nuclei), or the hypothesis of a nebula

6See https://confluence.slac.stanford.edu/display/GLAMCOG/Public+List+of+LAT-

Detected+Gamma-Ray+Pulsars/

194

5.2. PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar with a very unusual X-ray trail

conﬁned by a pre-existing, large scale magnetic ﬁeld in the interstellar medium
have been proposed [26, 108, 105].

Indeed, a crucial piece of information in order to understand the physics of
the huge elongated feature associated with PSR J0357+3205 is the direction
of the pulsar proper motion. Detecting a pulsar angular displacement aligned
with the nebula’s main axis would link the morphology of the diﬀuse structure
to the pulsar velocity. Conversely, if it were misaligned, the case of PSR
J0357+3205 would become very similar to the one of PSR B2224+65 and
would require a diﬀerent explanation for the nature of the nebula.

Usually, a pulsar proper motion is measured in the radio band, or, more
rarely, in the optical domani. Unfortunately, our target is radio-quiet and
has no optical counterpart; moreover, timing analysis of γ-ray photons is not
particularly sensitive to the proper motion (positional accuracy based on 5 yr of
Fermi-LAT timing is estimated to be ∼ 2(cid:48)(cid:48) [174]). The only way to search for a
possible proper motion rests on the comparison of multi-epoch, high-resolution
X-ray images. To this aim, we have obtained a multi-cycle observing campaign
with Chandra, consisting of two observations to be performed at the end of
2011 and at the end of 2013. We will report here on the ﬁrst observation of our
program, as well as on a very recent observation of the ﬁeld in the Hα band
performed with GMOS instrument at the Gemini North telescope.
Indeed,
pulsars moving supersonically into warm interstellar gas can generate optical
emission in the Hα line, due to collisional excitation of neutral hydrogen and
charge exchange occurring at (and behind) the forward shock (see e.g.
[59]),
yielding a limb-brightened, arc-shaped bow-shock nebula, located at the apex
of the forward shock, in the direction of the proper motion.

Moreover, the mere existence of the trail is problematic for a pulsar with
such a low ˙Erot as J0357+3205 [65]. In order to assess the nature of the trail
and its relationship with the pulsar, as well as to better constrain the pulsar
emission properties and physics, we also obtained a deep observation of the
pulsar and its peculiar trail with XMM-Newton. We studied the properties of
the trail, in order to characterize the mechanisms responsible for its emission.
Regarding the pulsar, XMM-Newton’s high spectral resolution allowed us to
disentangle the components of the pulsar spectrum and to constrain its distance
based on the absorption column density. Finally, a complete study of the
timing behavior of PSR J0357+3205 in X-rays was carried out as well7.

7In this thesis we will not discuss our studies on pulsar, the results are reported in the

paper we have published on 2013 [137]

195

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

5.2.1 Measurement of the pulsar proper motion

The superb angular resolution of the Chandra optics makes it possible to mea-
sure tiny angular displacements of an X-ray source by performing relative as-
trometry on multi-epoch images. Indeed, such an approach has already been
used to measure the proper motion of a few isolated neutron stars. See e.g.
the work by [68], [154], [155], [110], [27], [208].

Chandra observations and data reduction

Our new observation of PSR J0357+3205 with Chandra was performed on
2011, December 24 (Obs.Id. 14007, 29.4 ks exposure time – hereafter tagged
as “2011”). Previous observations were performed on 2009 October 25 (obs. id.
12008, 29.5 ks – hereafter “2009a”) and on 2009 October 26 (obs.
id. 11239,
47.1 ks – hereafter “2009b”). All data were collected using the Advanced CCD
Imaging Spectrometer (ACIS) instrument in Timed Exposure mode with the
VFAINT telemetry mode. We retrieve “Level 1” data from the Chandra Science
Archive and reprocess them with the chandra_repro8 script of the Chandra
Interactive Analysis of Observation Software (CIAO v4.4)9.

√

For each observation, we generate an image in the 0.3–8 keV energy range
using the original ACIS pixel size (0(cid:48)(cid:48).492 pixel−1). We perform a source detec-
tion using the wavdetect10 task with wavelet scales ranging from 1 to 16 pixels
2 step size, setting a detection threshold of 10−6. In all observations,
with a
the target was imaged close to the aimpoint, on the backside-illuminated chip
S3 of the ACIS-S array.

We cross-correlate the resulting source lists using a correlation radius of 3(cid:48)(cid:48)
and we extract a catalogue of common sources for each pair of observations.
In view of the density of sources in each image, the possibility of a chance
alignment of two false detections is < 10−5. As a further step, we select sources
within 4(cid:48) of the aimpoint since the telescope point spread function deteriorates
as a function of oﬀaxis angle, hampering source localization accuracy (see
discussion in [68]). Such an exercise yield 12 common sources (2011 vs. 2009a),
10 sources (2011 vs. 2009b) and 16 sources (2009a vs. 2009b), in addition to
the target pulsar. The uncertainty on the source localization on each image
depends on the signal to noise as well as on the oﬀaxis angle and ranges from
∼ 0.08 to ∼ 0.7 pixel per coordinate.

8http://cxc.harvard.edu/ciao/ahelp/chandra_repro.html
9http://cxc.harvard.edu/ciao/index.html
10http://cxc.harvard.edu/ciao/threads/wavdetect/

196

5.2. PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar with a very unusual X-ray trail

2011 vs. 2009a

2011 vs. 2009b 2009a vs. 2009b

Time baseline
Number of ref.srcs
uncertainty on Xshif t (pixels)
χ2 (dof)
uncertainty on Yshif t (pixels)
χ2 (d.o.f.)
PSR X displacement (pixels)
PSR Y displacement (pixels)
aA reference source yielding high residuals was rejected.

8.1 (10)
0.53 ± 0.12
0.54 ± 0.11

13.6 (10)

2.16 yr

11a
0.09

0.08

2.16 yr

10
0.08

15.6 (9)

0.07

13.0 (9)
0.50 ± 0.11
0.50 ± 0.10

1 day

16
0.06

7.8 (15)

0.06

13.8 (15)
0.10 ± 0.10
0.04 ± 0.10

Table 5.18: Results of X-ray relative astrometry.

Relative astrometry

The positions of the selected, common sources (excluding the pulsar counter-
part) are adopted as a reference grid to perform relative astrometry. We use the
ACIS SKY reference system11 (pixel coordinates with axes aligned along Right
Ascension and Declination). Taking into account the corresponding uncertain-
ties, we compute the best geometric transformation needed to superimpose the
reference frames of two images collected at diﬀerent epochs.

We superimpose the most recent 2011 data to ﬁrst-epoch 2009a and (sep-
arately) 2009b data in order to measure the possible pulsar displacement over
a baseline of ∼ 2.2 yr. We also superimpose 2009a data to 2009b data (no
displacement is expected on a 1-day baseline) in order to check for systematics
aﬀecting our analysis. A simple translation yields a good superposition in all
cases (see Table 5.18). The uncertainty on the frame registration turns out to
be smaller than 50 mas per coordinate. Adding a further free parameter to the
transformation (a rotation angle) does not result in a statistically compelling
improvement of the ﬁt.

We apply the best-ﬁt transformation to the coordinates of the pulsar coun-
terpart and we compute its displacement between diﬀerent epochs. The error
budget for the overall pulsar displacement includes the uncertainty on the pul-
sar position in each image as well as the uncertainty on the multi-epoch frame
registration. Results are shown in Table 5.18. Displacement of the pulsar as
well as residuals on the positions of the reference sources after frame registra-
tion are also shown in Figure 5.33. A signiﬁcant and consistent displacement
of the pulsar is apparent both in the 2011 vs. 2009a and in the 2011 vs. 2009b
comparison, while no displacement is seen for the pulsar in the 2009a vs. 2009b
one.

11http://cxc.harvard.edu/ciao/ahelp/coords.html

197

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.33: Results of relative astrometry. Two independent, ﬁrst-epoch im-
ages (2009 October 25 and 2009 October 26) are compared to a second-epoch
image (2011 December 24) in the upper and middle panels, respectively. Co-
ordinate residuals after image superposition are shown for reference sources
(blue dots) as well as for the pulsar counterpart (red star), in units of sta-
tistical errors. The displacement of the pulsar is apparent. The bottom box
displays the comparison of the two ﬁrst-epoch images showing, as expected,
no displacements for any source.

198

05Displ. along Dec. (σ)2011−12−24vs.2009−10−2505Displ. along Dec. (σ)2011−12−24vs.2009−10−260505Displ. along Dec. (σ)Displ. along R.A. (σ)2009−10−26vs.2009−10−255.2. PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar with a very unusual X-ray trail

Using the relative positions of the pulsar in the 2011 frame, we compute
a best-ﬁt proper motion µαcos(δ) = 117 ± 20 mas yr−1 and µδ = 115 ± 20
mas yr−1. This corresponds to a total proper motion of 165 ± 30 mas yr−1,
translating to a (projected) space velocity of ∼ 390 d500 km s−1 (where d500 is
the distance to the pulsar in units of 500 pc). The position angle (P.A.) of the
proper motion is 314◦ ± 10◦ (north to east; see Figure 5.34).

The position angle of the nebula

In order to measure the sky orientation of the main axis of the nebula, we select
nine contiguous rectangular images slices (see Figure 5.34, inset), aligned along
R.A. and decl., having a width of 25(cid:48)(cid:48)–40(cid:48)(cid:48) along R.A. and a height of 8(cid:48).5 along
decl. (excluding the two bright sources located close to the southeastern end of
the nebula). For each slice, we extract the image brightness proﬁle in the north-
south direction and, ﬁtting a Gaussian+constant function to such proﬁle, we
evaluate the centroid of the nebular emission. A linear function describes very
well (χ2 = 7.5, 7 dof) the nine resulting positions in R.A.–decl. plane, yielding
a P.A. of 315◦.5 ± 1◦.5 (see Figure 5.34). Repeating the exercise using nine
image slices oriented from east to west yields fully consistent results. Thus,
the proper motion direction (P.A. = 314◦ ± 8◦) is very well aligned with the
main axis of the nebula, which is indeed an “X-ray trail”.

5.2.2 Gemini Hα observations.

We observed the ﬁeld of PSR J0357+3205 in the Hα band on September 23,
2012 with the Gemini North telescope on the Mauna Kea Observatory. We
used the Gemini Multi-Object Spectrograph (GMOS) in its imaging mode,
equipped with the interim upgrade e2v deep depletion (DD) detector, with
enhanced response in the blue and red arm of the spectrum with respect to
the original EEV detector. The e2v DD detector is an array of three chips,
with an unbinned pixel size of 0(cid:48)(cid:48).072 and covers an unvignetted Field–of–View
of 5(cid:48).5×5(cid:48).5. We used the Ha G0310 ﬁlter (λ = 656 nm; ∆λ = 7 nm), centered
on the Hα rest wavelength. The e2v DD detector was set in the 2 × 2 binning
mode and read through the standard slow read-out/low gain mode with the
six ampliﬁers. Observations were performed with an average airmass of 1.24,
image quality of ∼ 0(cid:48).8, and grey time. Two sets of six 500 s exposures were
obtained, for a total integration time of 6000 s. Exposures were dithered in
steps of ± 5 pixels to achieve a better Signal–to–Noise (S/N).

We process the GMOS images using the dedicated gmos image reduction
package available in IRAF. After downloading the closest bias and sky ﬂat-ﬁeld
frames from the Gemini science archive12, we use the tasks gbias and giflat

12http://cadcwww.dao.nrc.ca/gsa/

199

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.34: Field of PSR J0357+3205 as seen by Chandra in the 0.3–8 keV
energy range. Data from the two observations performed in 2009 have been
used (77 ks exposure time). The image has been rebinned to a pixel size of 8(cid:48)(cid:48) in
order to ease visibility of faint diﬀuse structures. The large, elongated nebula
is apparent. The direction of the main axis of the nebula and its 1σ uncertainty
(P.A. of 315◦.5 ± 1◦.5) are overplotted in blue. The pulsar counterpart is also
marked, together with the direction of the proper motion (white arrow) and
the 1σ errors (dashed lines), corresponding to a P.A. of 314◦ ± 8◦. The inset
shows the region used to evaluate the position angle of the nebula (see the
text).

to process and combine the bias and ﬂat-ﬁeld frames, respectively. We then
reduce the single science frames using the task gireduce for bias subtraction,
overscan correction, image trimming and ﬂat-ﬁeld normalization. From the
reduced science images, we produce a mosaic of the three GMOS chips using
the task gmosaic and we use the task imcoadd to average-stack the reduced
image mosaics and ﬁlter out cosmic ray hits.

We compute the astrometry calibration using the wcstools13 suite of pro-
grams, matching the sky coordinates of stars selected from the Two Micron All
Sky Survey (2MASS) All-Sky Catalog of Point Sources [187] with their pixel
coordinates computed by Sextractor [28]. After iterating the matching process
applying a σ-clipping selection to ﬁlter out obvious mismatches, high-proper

13http://tdc-www.harvard.edu/wcstools/

200

5.2. PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar with a very unusual X-ray trail

motion stars, and false detections, we obtained mean residuals of ∼ 0(cid:48)(cid:48).2 in the
radial direction, using up to 30 bright, but non-saturated, 2MASS stars. To
this value we add in quadrature the uncertainty σtr = 0(cid:48)(cid:48).08 of the image reg-

istration on the 2MASS reference frame. This is given by σtr=(cid:112)n/NSσS (e.g.

[124]), where NS is the number of stars used to compute the astrometric solu-
tion, n=5 is the number of free parameters in the sky–to–image transformation
model, σS ∼ 0(cid:48)(cid:48).2 is the mean absolute position error of 2MASS [187]for stars
in the magnitude range 15.5 ≤ K ≤ 13. After accounting for the 0(cid:48)(cid:48).015 un-
certainty on the link of 2MASS to the International Celestial Reference Frame
[187], we evaluate with the overall accuracy on our absolute astrometry to be
of ∼ 0(cid:48)(cid:48).22.

Unfortunately, no observations of spectro-photometric standards stars are
available for the ﬂux calibration of our Hα image. Thus, we cross-correlate
instrumental magnitudes of more than 150 non-saturated stars in the Gemini
image to their RF magnitudes listed in the Guide Star Catalogue v2.3.2 (GSC2,
[123]), which yields a rather good ﬁt with a r.m.s. of 0.16 mag. To assess
the GSC2 ﬂux zeropoint, we cross-correlate the GSC2 RF magnitude of more
than 500 stars with their R magnitude as tabulated in the Stetson Standard
photometric star archive14. We evaluate the transformation as RF =0.97R–0.32
(χ2 = 617, 520 d.o.f.). Then, we compute the Hα ﬂuxes of the 150 selected
stars on our Gemini image using speciﬁc ﬂuxes corresponding to their RF
magnitudes and assuming a ﬂat spectrum within the R ﬁlter bandpass. This
yields a ﬂux calibration of the Hα image with an uncertainty of ∼0.2 mag.

No structures of diﬀuse emission unambiguously related to the fast motion
of PSR J0357+3205 can be discerned on our Gemini image – in particular, no
arc-shaped “bow-shock” nebula is seen at the expected position in the direction
of the pulsar proper motion (see Figure 5.35). We measure the background
properties in the region surrounding the pulsar position. Considering a region
of 10 square arcsec as a reference and taking into account the uncertainty in
the ﬂux calibration of our Hα image, we compute the 5σ upper limit to the
surface brightness of an unseen bow-shock nebula to be of 5 × 10−18 erg cm−2
s−1 arcsec−2.

5.2.3 Trail characterization

Our result points to a direct link between the nebula morphology (and physics)
and the space velocity of the pulsar – supersonic for any reasonable condition of
the interstellar medium (typical values are of ∼ 1, ∼ 10 and ∼ 100 km s−1 for
the cold, warm and hot components, respectively, see e.g. [120]). As already
mentioned, “velocity-driven” pulsar wind nebulae are a well-known astrophysi-

14http://www3.cadc-ccda.hia-iha.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/community/STETSON/archive/

201

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Figure 5.35: Inner portion of the ﬁeld of PSR J0357+3205 as seen by the
Gemini/GMOS instrument in the Hα band. The position of the pulsar is
marked by a circle (0(cid:48)(cid:48).6 radius). No diﬀuse emission is seen, related to the
proper motion direction of the pulsar, marked by an arrow. The upper limit
to an undetected bow-shock nebula is 5 × 10−18 erg cm−2 s−1 arcsec−2.

−1/2
1,ISM and 2(cid:48)(cid:48)n

cal reality. Explaining the X-ray trail of PSR J0357+3205 as a bow-shock PWN
has many problems. As discussed by [69], the lack of any evidence of the pulsar
wind termination shock could be due to its confusion with the pulsar emission.
Assuming a velocity of 390 d500 km s−1 and no inclination with respect to the
plane of the sky, the expected angular separation between the pulsar and the
−1/2
forward and backward termination shock is 0(cid:48)(cid:48).3n
1,ISM , respec-
tively [69], where n1,ISM is the density of the interstellar medium in units of 1
particle cm−1. Thus, high inclination of the pulsar velocity and/or high den-
sity of the ISM, and/or a distance larger than expected should be assumed;
any of these hypotheses could be possible (though rather unlikely).
In any
case, other peculiarities of the trail phenomenology cannot be accounted for
in the standard scenario of synchrotron emission from shocked pulsar wind.
We should explain why the maximum luminosity is generated at a distance as
large as ∼ 3 light years from the parent neutron star. This would require an
increase of the density of the radiating particles on the same distance scale, or
an increase of the magnetic ﬁeld intensity, or a change of the angle between
the magnetic ﬁeld and the particle ﬂow. Moreover, the lack of any spectral

202

NE10 arcsec5.2. PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar with a very unusual X-ray trail

steepening across the trail [69] clashes with the expected, severe synchrotron
energy losses of particles radiating in the keV range. Thus, either some very
peculiar phenomenon is occurring in the magnetized pulsar particle outﬂow or
the nature of the nebula is diﬀerent (but linked to the pulsar velocity).

In order to study and characterize in detail the mechanisms responsible for
the X-ray trail of PSR J0357+32 emission we obtained a deep observation of
the pulsar and its unusual trail with XMM-Newton.

XMM-Newton observation and data reduction

Our deep XMM-Newton observation of PSR J0357+3205 started on 2011
September 15 at 02:37:18 UT and lasted 111.3 ks. The PN camera [194] of
the EPIC instrument was operating in Large Window mode (time resolution
of 47.7 ms over a 14(cid:48) × 27(cid:48) Field–of–View (FoV)), while the MOS detectors
[203] were set in full frame mode (2.6 s time resolution on a 15’ radius FoV).
The thin optical ﬁlter was used for the PN camera while we chose to use the
medium ﬁlter for the MOS detectors due to the presence of moderately bright
(mR ∼ 9) stars. We used the XMM-Newton Science Analysis Software (SAS)
v11.0. After standard data processing, using the epproc and emproc tools,
and screening for high particle background time intervals (following [70]), the
good, dead-time corrected exposure time was 98.5 ks for the PN and 108.3 ks
for the two MOS detectors.

Spatial and spectral features

The extended feature of the bright nebula protruding from the pulsar and
extending ∼ 9(cid:48) in length can be easily studied in our XMM-Newton observation
due to its lower particle background and higher spectral resolution, compared
to the Chandra one. The worse spatial resolution of XMM-Newton prevented
us from signiﬁcantly constraining the properties of the nebula near the pulsar.
We therefore concentrated on a higher-scale analysis of the extended feature.
Producing brightness proﬁles of the nebula along the pulsar motion and
orthogonal to it as described in [137], we do not detect any spatial variations
in the trail in the available observations. Along the direction of the pulsar
motion, the trail emerges from the background within 50(cid:48)(cid:48) of the pulsar and
its ﬂux increases gradually, reaching a ﬂat maximum between 4(cid:48) and 7(cid:48). Its
decrease is faster fading below the background level at about 9(cid:48) from PSR
J0357+3205. In the direction orthogonal to the main axis, the trail proﬁle is
clearly asymmetric, showing a fast increase in the northeast direction (rising
to the maximum within 30(cid:48)(cid:48)), reaching a sharp maximum, in broad agreement
with the neutron star proper motion direction. The further decrease is slower,
fading at about 1(cid:48)–1(cid:48).5 in the nearest part of the nebula and 2(cid:48) in the furthest.

203

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

Such a behavior recalls the projection of a cone, with the apex corresponding
to the pulsar position (or somewhere in the vicinity of the pulsar).

After a detailed spectral analysis described in [137], we ﬁnd that the spec-
trum of the nebula is well described (χ2
ν = 1.06, 162 dof) by a power-law model
with a photon index Γ = 2.07±0.08), absorbed by a column NH = (2.61±0.23)
× 1021 cm−2 as well as a thermal bremsstrahlung model with a temperature
kT = 3.75+0.48−0.40 keV and absorbed by a column density NH = (1.72±0.16) ×
1021 cm−2. The thermal bremsstrahlung is the only model for which the value
of NH obtained for the trail is not in conﬂict (at the ∼ 3σ level) with both the
one obtained for the pulsar, as well as with the Galactic value. Finally, divid-
ing the elliptical extraction region of the nebula in for semi-elliptical regions
using the two axes, we do not detect any signiﬁcant (3σ) variation of spectral
parameters

5.2.4 Discussion
The morphology of the trail, its spatial extension – ∼ 1.3 pc at 500 pc assum-
ing no inclination with respect to the plane of the sky (i) – and the lack of any
other related Galactic source led [69] to associate unambiguously the nebular
emission with the pulsar. Elongated X-ray trails coupled with pulsars are quite
common (e.g. [111]) and are usually interpreted within the framework of bow-
shock, ram-pressure-dominated pulsar wind nebulae (e.g. [81]). When a pulsar
moves supersonically, the shocked pulsar wind is expected to ﬂow in a region
downstream of the termination shock (the cavity in the interstellar medium
created by the moving Neutron Star and its wind), conﬁned by ram pressure.
X-rays are produced by synchrotron emission from the wind particles acceler-
ated at the termination shock, which is typically seen (if it can be resolved) as
the brightest part of the extended structure (see, e.g., [111]), according to the
expectations from magnetohydrodynamic simulations [36, 207, 37]. We have
detected and measured a very large proper motion for the pulsar: 165 ± 30
mas yr−1 – 390 km s−1 across the plane of the sky, at 500 pc – in the direction
opposite to the trail, thus compatible with such a scenario.

The trail shows no other similarities with other, synchrotron-emitting neb-
ulae (for a complete discussion about PSR J0357+3205’s synchrotron-emitting
model see [69]). The ﬁrst problem arises from energetic requirements for the
emitting particles. According to [88], the maximum potential drop between the
pole and the light cylinder (in an aligned pulsar) is ∆Φ = (3 ˙Erot/2c)1/2. In the
PSR J0357+3205 case, the electrons are accelerated up to a maximum Lorentz
factor γmax ∼108, which can be considered as an upper limit for the electrons
injected in the pulsar wind nebula. The low ˙Erot of PSR J0357+3205 requires
an ambient magnetic ﬁeld as high as ∼50 µG – while the mean Galactic value
is ∼1 µG ([107] and references therein). However, one must also take into ac-

204

5.2. PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar with a very unusual X-ray trail

count the magnetic ﬁeld carried by the particles themselves. An independent
estimate of the magnetic ﬁeld in the trail can be obtained from the measured
synchrotron surface brightness [164]. Taking into account the uncertainty on
the parameters we can conclude that a reasonable value of the magnetic ﬁeld
in the trail is in the range 20 − 100 µG, consistent with the value of ∼50 µG
obtained before.

The second problem is the lack of diﬀuse emission surrounding the pulsar,
where the emission from the wind termination shock should be brightest, as
observed in all the other known cases (e.g. [82, 143, 111]). Such a shock can be
unresolved by Chandra only in the case of an extremely large ambient density
(several hundred atoms per cm3) and/or a pulsar speed higher than some
thousands km s−1. Taking into account the measure of the proper motion, the
distance of the pulsar should be larger than 1.3 kpc or the inclination of the
motion should be higher than 70◦. Such conditions imply a trail at least 3.5
pc long, so that it becomes even more diﬃcult to account for the energy of the
particles. This picture implies also that a signiﬁcant fraction of the point-like
ﬂux comes from a non-thermal termination shock, reducing dramatically the
power-law component of the pulsar [137]. While it is acceptable for the non-
thermal component of the pulsar to be a factor of some smaller than the value
we obtained [136, 134], the lack of nebular emission around the pulsar, where
the synchrotron emission should be stronger, remains unexplained.

The brightness proﬁle along the main axis of the trail is consistent with no
emission within 30(cid:48)(cid:48)–50(cid:48)(cid:48) of the pulsar, then it slowly increases to reach a broad
peak at ∼4(cid:48). This behavior is remarkably diﬀerent from that observed in all
the known synchrotron nebulae that show peaks close to the position of their
parent pulsar (e.g.
[111]), where the acceleration of the wind particles is the
most important. It is very hard to explain in this scenario why the emission
peaks at ∼1 pc from the pulsar.
The asymmetric brightness proﬁle of the trail in the direction perpendicular to
its main axis is characterized by a sharp northeastern edge and a slow decay
toward the south-west direction. The synchrotron emission from the nebula
is only marginally dependent on the ISM density, so that ad-hoc and large
variations in the ISM are demanded, in order to explain this strange proﬁle.
Even if possible, such a case is hardly believable.
Furthermore, the inferred synchrotron cooling time implies a signiﬁcant spatial-
spectral evolution with respect to the distance from the pulsar, as observed in
all synchrotron nebulae [111]. Thanks to the unique throughput of XMM-
Newton, we could perform a deep spatial-spectral study of the trail, analyzing
separately the furthest and the nearest parts of the nebula. No signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in the spectral index are detected (see the previous section). The lack
of variation cannot be easily explained in terms of a synchrotron nebula. The

205

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

lack of such a softening would require some particle re-acceleration mechanism
within the trail itself.
The excellent throughput of the XMM-Newton instruments has revealed an-
other problem of the synchrotron nebula scenario, connected to the value of the
column density (NH) obtained by ﬁtting the non-thermal model of the nebula.
While it is marginally compatible with the value obtained for the pulsar, the
inferred NH appears to be larger than the Galactic one in that direction.

A thermal bremsstrahlung model ﬁts equally well the spectrum of the trail
and produces an estimate of NH in agreement with that of the pulsar and the
Galactic one. In the bremsstrahlung scenario, the trail emission arises from the
shocked ISM material heated up to X-ray temperatures. Under the assumption
of a strong shock-wave and from the junction conditions at the shock front,
we can estimate the speed of the pulsar directly from the temperature of the

shocked ISM material at the head of the bow shock: vpsr =(cid:112)16kT /(3µmp),

where µ is the molecular weight of the ISM gas and we assumed an adiabatic
index γad = 5/3. The temperature obtained by ﬁtting the trail spectrum
with a thermal bremsstrahlung model, kT ≈ 3.75 keV, implies a pulsar speed
vpsr (cid:39) 1376µ−1/2 km s−1. From the values of the abundances resulting from
the spectral ﬁt, we can assume that µ (cid:39) 0.54, so the speed of the pulsar is
about 1900 km s−1, which would make it the largest ever observed in a pulsar.
If we combine this result with the pulsar proper motion we can estimate the
inclination angle i of the pulsar motion (and thus of its trail), i ≈ acos(0.2 ×
d500). Moreover, through the value of the photon ﬂux measured using a thermal
bremsstrahlung model, it is possible to estimate the number density of the
shocked ISM gas as n (cid:39) 0.86d

−1/2
500 atoms cm−3.

Thermal bremsstrahlung emission acts as a cooling mechanism. The time
scale for cooling can be estimated as tcool (cid:39) (Ethermal/J), where Ethermal (cid:39) nkT
is the thermal energy per unit volume and J is the volume emissivity. This
approximation gives tcool (cid:39) 6 × 103T 1/2(n¯gB)−1 yr, where ¯gB is the frequency-
averaged Gaunt factor that typically ranges between 1.1 and 1.5, depending
on the plasma temperature [162]. From our estimates of the temperature and
number density of the shocked ISM gas we expect tcool (cid:39) 107 yr. Considering
a pulsar proper motion of 165 ± 30 mas yr−1 and an extension of the nebula
of about 9(cid:48), then the age of the trail (∼ 3300 yr) is much lower than its cooling
time. This result can explain why we have not measured a signiﬁcant evolution
of the temperature of the trail as a function of the distance from the pulsar. On
the other hand, the shorter than expected length of the trail can be explained
assuming an ad-hoc decrease of a ∼3 factor in the number density n beyond
the end of the trail - the volume emissivity of the thermal bremsstrahlung
emission is J ∝ n2T 1/2. Such a strong dependence on the ISM density can
explain the asymmetrical shape of the nebula in the direction orthogonal to

206

5.2. PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar with a very unusual X-ray trail

its main axis: this could be a consequence of an inhomogeneity of the number
density in the nebula, quite typical in the ISM.

From the conservation of mass, energy, and momentum on the two sides of
the shock front and from the values measured in the trail (e.g. the pre-shock
temperature T0 and number density n0), we can calculate the same physical
quantities outside the nebula:

n
n0

=

(γ + 1)M 2

(γ + 1) + (γ − 1)(M 2 − 1)

[(γ + 1) + 2γ(M 2 − 1)] [(γ + 1) + (γ − 1)(M 2 − 1)]

(γ + 1)2M 2

T
T0

=

(5.1)

(5.2)

−1/2
500

where M = 1/ sin(α) is the Mach number and depends on the cone angle
of the trail (α) and an adiabatic index γad = 5/3 is assumed for the ISM
gas. In the strong shock-wave limit (M (cid:29) 1) n0 = n/4 (cid:39) 0.22d
atoms
cm−3 while T0 depends on the Mach number and thus on the inclination angle
i. From the geometry of the cone angle of the nebula, a plausible value of
T0 is in the range of 105–106 K, for i (cid:38) 60◦. The pre-shock temperature is
consistent with that of the hot phase of the ISM, which ﬁlls a large fraction
of the Galaxy (e.g.
[31]). Such a scenario is also in full agreement with the
requirement of a fully ionized ISM by the lack of detection of a Hα nebula.
In fact, using the scaling law proposed by [59] and [51], we estimated that
for any reasonable value of the distance to PSR J0357+3205 (ranging from
∼ 200 pc, as suggested by the non negligible X-ray absorbing column, to
∼ 900 pc, where γ-ray luminosity would exceed the spin-down luminosity)
and in a broad range of possible space velocities for the pulsar (assuming the
inclination angle with respect to the plane of the sky in the ±75◦ range), the
lack of detection of a Hα nebula can only be ascribed to a neutral fraction
XISM <0.01. We note that the density required by our model is slightly higher
than expected for the hot ISM: this may result from the concerted action of
massive stellar winds and supernova explosions.
[218] report the presence of
dense (10−3–10−1 atoms cm−3), hot (∼106 K) envelopes of gas in our Galaxy.
On the other hand, thermal models such as mekal (hot diﬀuse gas [147]), nei
(collisional plasma, non-equilibrium, constant temperature [34]), and pshock
(plane-parallel shocked plasma, constant temperature [34]) with redshift 0 ﬁt
equally well the spectrum of the trail but point to a very low metallicity of the
ISM around the pulsar, making more diﬃcult to explain this dense envelope as
the result of a supernova explosion or stellar winds. Future multi-wavelength
observations of the ﬁeld and more detailed Galactic gas models could better
constrain and explain the ISM composition around PSR J0357+3205.

A shock-wave scenario can easily explain the lack of diﬀuse emission sur-
rounding the pulsar. Most of the energy in the pre-shock ﬂow is carried by the

207

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

ions – the kinetic energy in the streaming of the electrons is less than 1/2000
of the total – but the electrons are generally responsible for the cooling of the
plasma: this means that the electron temperature (Te) is responsible for the
dynamics of the shock and its emitted spectrum. The electrons must be heated
by the ions before the emission becomes detectable and this process takes some
time. Coulomb heating of the electrons behind the shock proceeds at a rate

dTe
dt

=

Ti − Te

teq

(5.3)

e /n) s ∼70 kyr is the equipar-
where Ti is the ion temperature and teq = 7.7(T 3/2
tition time for a fully ionized plasma with a Coulomb logarithm of 30 (where
Te is in units of K and n in cm−3).
If all the post-shock energy is in the
ions (Te (cid:28) Ti), then the increase in Te due to collisional heating follows:
Te(coll) = 1.7 × 107(n0t3v2
psr8)2/5 K, where t3 is the age of the trail in units
of 103 yr, n0 is the pre-shock number density and vpsr8 is the pulsar speed
in units of 108 cm s−1. Thus Te(coll) (cid:46) 6.6 × 107d
−1/5
500 K, not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the value observed in the trail. Moreover, Te(coll) (cid:46) 5.5 × 106
K within ∼ 30(cid:48)(cid:48) of the pulsar (corresponding to ∼ 200 – 300 years, from the
measure of the proper motion). This fully explains the lack of diﬀuse emission
surrounding the pulsar.

So far, no evidence of other pulsars characterized by a thermal bremsstrahlung

emitting trail has been reported. This could be explained by the peculiar con-
ditions it requires, e.g. very fast pulsars and an hot and dense ISM. With its
estimated velocity of 1900 km s−1, J0357+3205 is the fastest moving pulsar
known. Among all the pulsars listed in the ATNF Pulsar Catalogue [129],
only 2 have a very high velocity ((cid:38) 700 km/s), reliably measured through an
estimate of the distance obtained by other methods than the dispersion mea-
sure. These two pulsars do not emit through thermal bremsstrahlung probably
because of the ISM characteristics as described in detail in [137].

5.2.5 The ﬁrst example of a thermally-emitting trail?

Relative astrometry on our multi-epoch Chandra images unveiled a signiﬁcant
proper motion of 165 ± 30 mas yr−1 for PSR J0357+3205, corresponding to
a velocity of ∼ 390d500 km s−1, along a direction almost coincident with the
main axis of the elongated X-ray nebula.

The measure of the pulsar space velocity can be used, together with the
upper limit to the surface brightness of any undetected diﬀuse structure in our
Gemini Hα image, to constrain the conditions of the medium in which PSR
J0357+3205 is moving. The expected ﬂux of the narrow-line component of
a pulsar Hα bow-shock nebula depends on the pulsar spin-down luminosity

208

5.2. PSR J0357+3205: a fast-moving pulsar with a very unusual X-ray trail

˙Erot, the pulsar space velocity vpsr, the distance to the source Dpsr, and the
neutral fraction of the medium XISM . Using the scaling law proposed by [59]
and [51], we estimate that for any reasonable value of the distance to PSR
J0357+3205 and in a broad range of possible space velocities for the pulsar
the lack of detection of a Hα nebula can only be ascribed to a neutral fraction
XISM <0.01, i.e. the gas surrounding the pulsar is fully ionized. Thus, PSR
J0357+3205 could be traveling across a region ﬁlled with ISM in the hot phase.
Some contribution to the ionization of the medium from the pulsar itself is also
possible, although its thermal emission is not particularly prominent [69].

Our XMM-Newton observation has allowed us to conﬁrm the presence of a
diﬀuse emission ∼ 9(cid:48) long, the largest trail of X-ray emission associated with
any rotation-powered pulsar. Such an extended emission cannot be explained
in terms of the usual bow-shock ram-pressure-dominated pulsar wind nebula.
In fact, the following problems arise:
- the existence of the trail is problematic for a pulsar with such a low ˙E as
PSR J0357+3205;
- no bow shock has been resolved around the pulsar;
- the lack of any nebular emission around the pulsar, where the particle accel-
eration is maximum, cannot be explained;
- the nebular spectrum lacks any spatial evolution, a necessary signature of the
radiative cooling of the electrons accelerated at the wind termination shock;
- the very asymmetric brightness proﬁle in the direction perpendicular to the
main axis of the trail requires a large ad-hoc inhomogeneity of the ISM around
the pulsar;
- ﬁtting the XMM-Newton nebular spectra with a power law, the nebular NH
has to be higher than the Galactic value and only marginally in agreement
with the NH of the pulsar [137].

We propose a thermal bremsstrahlung model as an alternative explanation
of the trail emission. In this scenario, the emission comes from the shocked
ISM material heated up to X-ray temperatures. This model gives full account
of the peculiar features of the trail:
- the lack of any detectable spatial evolution in the trail spectrum is due to
the long bremsstrahlung cool-down time;
- the peculiar asymmetries of the brightness proﬁle can be interpreted in terms
of small changes in the ISM density that strongly aﬀect the bremsstrahlung
emissivity;
- most of the energy in the pre-shock ﬂow is carried by the ions, while the elec-
tron temperature is responsible for the X-ray emission; the Coulomb heating
time of the electrons behind the shock is fully in agreement with the lack of
any detected nebular emission near the pulsar;
- the value of NH measured in the trail agrees both with the value obtained

209

5. Multi-wavelength analysis of some interesting 2FGL sources

for the pulsar and the Galactic value.

This scenario allows us to estimate some parameters of the pulsar and of
the ISM around it. For a bremsstrahlung-emitting trail we estimate a pulsar
velocity of ∼1900 km s−1, in agreement with the pulsar proper motion for
distances of some hundreds parsecs and a high inclination. The mean density
of the ISM is required to be ∼0.2 atoms cm−3 and the temperature of some
105 K. This type of hot gas usually presents lower densities, but a denser
phase (possibly detected by [218]) is predicted to be the result of the action of
massive stellar winds and supernova explosions. However, the low metallicity
we obtained from the spectral ﬁt makes the explanation of this gas envelope
more diﬃcult.

For all these reasons, we believe PSR J0357+3205’s nebula to be the ﬁrst
example of a new type of thermally-emitting trails. Until now we have no
clear evidence of other pulsars characterized by a trail emitting via thermal
bremsstrahlung, possibly for the requirements of a very fast pulsar and a hot,
dense ISM. Moreover, energetic pulsars can also generate classic synchrotron
nebulae, that may outshine a bremsstrahlung component.

5.3 Summary

In this Chapter a detailed description and results of multi-wavelength studies
of three MSP radio-quiet candidates and of a middle-aged radio-quiet γ-ray
pulsar are reported.

Blind search algorithm cannot be performed scanning the entire 2FGL 95%
or 99% error circle because of the prohibitive request for computing power
to search for a possible periodicity of some ms directly in γ-ray data. To
increase the eﬃciency of the algorithm we have decided to perform a deep
X-ray observation of the error box of three 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources which
are very interesting MSP radio-quiet candidate. We have based the targets
selection on their probability of being MSP by a hierarchical neural network
analysis. Moreover, since MSPs are nearby objects, we have selected only
sources situated far from the Galactic plane (b>5◦).
In the end they must
have been the object of deep unsuccessful radio searches and they must be
bright (TS>100) in order to run eﬃciently blind search. We have found that
each 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources has some X-ray plausible counterparts within
the 99% error circle. For these X-ray counterparts we have produced X-ray
spectra, light curves and found optical counterparts. These analyses have
brought us to identify and characterize some X-ray sources and to select only
the best counterpart candidates of the putative MSPs. For each unidentiﬁed
sources we have found at least one excellent X-ray counterpart candidates and
we recommend to run blind search on much small sky area covered by the error

210

5.3. Summary

regions of these detected X-ray sources.
Our multi-wavelength studies on PSR J0357+3205 have unveiled a sig-
niﬁcant proper motion of 165 ± 30 mas yr−1, corresponding to a velocity of
∼ 390d500 km s−1, along a direction almost coincident with the main axis of
the elongated X-ray nebula. The measure of the pulsar space velocity can
be used, together with the upper limit to the surface brightness of any unde-
tected diﬀuse structure in our Gemini Hα image, to constrain the conditions
of the medium in which PSR J0357+3205 is moving. The study of the trail
conﬁrmed the lack of any extended emission near the pulsar itself. The trail
shows a very asymmetric brightness proﬁle and its spectrum does not vary
as a function of the position. We have found such a nebular emission not to
be consistent with a classical bow-shock, ram-pressure dominated pulsar wind
nebulae. We proposed a thermal bremsstrahlung as an alternative model for
the PSR J0357+3205’s trail emission. In this scenario, the trail emission would
come from the shocked interstellar medium (ISM) material heated up to X-ray
temperature. This can fully explain the peculiar features of the trail in the
case of a hot, moderately dense ISM around the pulsar. For a bremsstrahlung-
emitting trail, we estimated the pulsar distance to be between 0.3 and 2 kpc
and the trail length about 2 pc. A pulsar velocity of ∼ 1900 km s−1 is required,
making PSR J0357+3205 the fastest pulsar known. Since the unique features
of the pulsar’s trail, we proposed pulsar’s nebula to be the ﬁrst example of a
new class of thermally-emitting nebulae associated to fast pulsars.

211

Conclusions and future
perspectives

Gamma-ray sources are tracers of the most energetic processes in the Universe,
they are very exotic objects, characterized by very intense magnetic ﬁelds and
the presence of very high energy particles. For this reason, understanding the
nature of the γ-ray unidentiﬁed sources is one of the most important open
questions in high-energy astrophysics.

The purpose of my Ph.D. thesis has been to develop techniques comple-
mentary to those implemented by the LAT team during the construction of the
γ-ray source catalogs in order to asses the likely association for each uniden-
tiﬁed source, taking advantage of the large γ-ray source sample available and
of the quality of the information about source locations, spectra, and timing
variability. We have developed, applied, tested and compared two diﬀerent
classiﬁcation algorithms, Logistic Regression (LR), which is characterized by a
simple approach, and Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN), the natural extension
of the LR approach.

As a ﬁrst step we have implemented a LR analysis method. This technique
uses identiﬁed objects to build up a classiﬁcation analysis which provides the
probability for an unidentiﬁed source to belong to a given class based on its
γ-ray properties. We have tested this technique with the sources in the First
Fermi-LAT Source Catalog (1FGL) providing classiﬁcation probabilities for
each unidentiﬁed source. Logistic Regression has been trained on known ob-
jects in order to predict the membership of a new object to a given class on the
basis of its observables. We have trained the model using pulsars and AGNs
identiﬁed in the 1FGL catalog because they are abundant and have diﬀerent
phenomenologies. Then, we have chosen the variables which distinguish more
eﬃciently a pulsar from an AGN and the two classiﬁcation thresholds to single
out AGN and pulsar candidates in the 1FGL unassociated sample. The main
input parameters were spectral and temporal information. The training sam-

213

Conclusions and future perspectives

ple included 693 AGN and 63 pulsars. The spatial distribution has been used
to conﬁrm the accuracy of our classiﬁcation. Applying the LR model to 1FGL
unidentiﬁed sources we have been able to classify them as pulsar candidates
or AGN candidates. We have tested the capability of the Logistic Regression
algorithm for identifying the diﬀerent source classes applying the LR analysis
to the newly sources identiﬁed after the release of the 1FGL catalog. The LR
eﬃciency at classifying new AGNs is very high (∼80%) while it has a some-
what poorer success rate for ﬁnding new pulsars (eﬃciency ∼55%), this may
be related to the bad characterization of some of new pulsars in the energy
range of 0.3–10 GeV where ∼20% of them have only upper limits. Combining
these results with those found by the LAT team using Classiﬁcation Trees ma-
chine learning technique, the eﬃciency at classifying new sources signiﬁcantly
increases, ∼ 85% for new AGNs and ∼ 80% for new pulsars with a low rate of
false negatives.

Encouraged by the results obtained by the application of the Logistic Re-
gression, we have implemented a reﬁned logistic regression aimed at discrimi-
nating pulsars and AGNs. In the newly released Second Fermi Catalog (2FGL),
the larger sample, the richer statistics resulting from the use of two years of
data, and the reﬁnement of the γ-ray parameters of the sources in the 2FGL
catalog have allowed us to signiﬁcantly improve the performance of our clas-
siﬁcation technique in classifying 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources. The reﬁned LR
eﬃciency in classifying AGNs and pulsars identiﬁed after the release of the
2FGL is very high, especially for new bright young pulsars for which the eﬃ-
ciency is ∼80%. Performances of the upgraded LR method are poorer for low
signal-to-noise sources.

Logistic regression is a generalized linear classiﬁer and it classiﬁes 2FGL
sources through a linear distinction in the γ-ray variable space, this is a limit
of this technique. Performances at classifying pulsar and AGN candidates in
2FGL source sample have been improved considerably using a neural network
technique, which classiﬁes 2FGL sources through a more complex non-linear
separation with respect to the LR (a linear classiﬁer). This has been the ﬁrst
time this technique has been applied for this purpose. The ANN eﬃciency in
classifying new AGNs and pulsars is signiﬁcantly higher and the false negative
rate is lower with respect to those of the reﬁned LR, this means that only a
non-linear analysis is able to eﬃciently classify the 2FGL sources.

In view of the performances of the ANN algorithm and of its ﬂexibility,
we have implemented a more complex neural network architecture aimed at
distinguishing the two pulsar subsamples, young pulsars and MSPs, and the
two blazar subclasses, BL Lacs and FSRQs. For this purpose we have used a
hierarchical neural network model. The eﬃciency of the hierarchical algorithm
at classifying new MSP detections is very high (nearby 80%) and the absence of

214

Conclusions and future perspectives

false negative is a very encouraging result. Conversely, eﬃciency at classifying
new young pulsars is not extremely high (∼60%), possibly owing to some pecu-
liarities which make such pulsars somewhat diﬀerent with respect to “standard”
young pulsars. Although γ-ray properties of young pulsars seem very similar
to MSPs, our model is able to eﬃciently discriminate these two source classes,
this is a very important and exciting result because it gives us the opportunity
to select targets for young pulsar and millisecond pulsar searches and because
it tells us that γ-ray properties of these two pulsar subsamples are diﬀerent (in
particular, in spectral shape and ﬂux distributions). This result needs further
analysis because the results of the classiﬁcation analysis can provide important
guidance to plain follow-up observations. Regarding blazars, the eﬃciency of
the hierarchical algorithm at classifying new BL Lacs and FSRQs is very high
(nearby 80%), we have obtained that γ-ray observables which better discrim-
inate the two blazar subclasses are those we expect from synchrotron-inverse
Compton scenarios validating the accuracy of our approach. Our results give
us the opportunity to improve the γ-ray emission models of blazar subclasses
and to develop a theory aimed explaining the diﬀerences in the γ-ray emission
from the two pulsar subclasses.

We have used the results of the hierarchical neural networks to select tar-
gets for radio-quiet millisecond (MSP) pulsar searches. Such sources are pre-
dicted by recent models but they have not yet been detected, their discovery
will improve our knowledge of γ-ray emission mechanism and of γ-ray pulsar
population. Multi-wavelength studies of the unidentiﬁed sources give us the
opportunity to select the most probable counterparts of the γ-ray sources. This
reduces by a factor 102–103 the sky area to be considered for a blind periodic-
ity search in γ-ray data, making such a search feasible . To this aim we have
performed a deep X-ray observation of the error box of three radio-quiet MSP
candidates: 2FGL J1036.1–6722, 2FGL J1539.2–3325 and 2FGL J1744.1–7620.
For each 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources we have found some plausible X-ray coun-
terparts within the γ-ray error circle. For each X-ray counterpart we have ob-
tained an X-ray spectrum, assessed its variability and searched for optical/IR
counterparts. These analyses have allowed us to select the best counterpart
candidates of the putative radio-quiet MSPs. A blind search algorithm will be
run as a future step.

The machine learning techniques we have developed, in particular ANNs,
will be used as a standard analysis to be applied during the construction of
future γ-ray source catalogs to provide the most probable association for each
unidentiﬁed γ-ray on the basis of its properties. As a ﬁrst application, the
Fermi-LAT collaboration is developing the Third Fermi-LAT Source Catalog
(3FGL) using ﬁve years of data and our statistical methods will be able to
provide an additional information about the nature of the 3FGL unidentiﬁed

215

Conclusions and future perspectives

sources. Our ANN tool will be upgraded and reﬁned in future, for example
adding other γ-ray parameters or multi-wavelength information from catalogs
and follow-up programs, or incorporating the uncertainties in the input param-
eters. The eﬃciency at classifying unidentiﬁed sources will possibly increase
combining the results obtained with diﬀerent machine learning techniques.

In parallel to the work devoted to unidentiﬁed sources, I took part to the
analysis and interpretation of multi-wavelength observations of isolated neu-
tron stars. Multi-wavelength studies are very important to understand the
physics of γ-ray pulsars characterizing and exploring their environment.
In
particular, the most important objects to constrain pulsar models are the “ex-
treme” ones, accounting for the tails of the population distribution in energy,
age and magnetic ﬁeld.
In this respect, we have studied the middle-aged
PSR J0357+32051, a nearby, radio-quiet, bright γ-ray pulsar discovered by
the Fermi mission. PSR J0357+32051 is one of the most interesting pulsars
discovered by the LAT because it is one of the non-recycled γ-ray pulsars with
the smallest rotational energy loss detected so far ( ˙Erot = 5.9 × 1033 erg s−1).
X-ray observations revealed a huge, very peculiar structure of diﬀuse X-ray
emission originating at the pulsar position and extending for > 9(cid:48) on the plane
of the sky. To better understand the nature of such a nebula, we have studied
the proper motion of the parent pulsar. We performed relative astrometry on
Chandra images of the ﬁeld spanning a time baseline of 2.2 yr, unveiling a
signiﬁcant angular displacement of the pulsar counterpart, corresponding to
a proper motion of 0(cid:48)(cid:48).165 ± 0(cid:48)(cid:48).030 yr−1. The direction of the pulsar proper
motion is aligned very well with the main axis of the X-ray nebula, pointing to
a physical, yet elusive, link between the nebula and the pulsar space velocity.
No optical emission in the Hα line is seen in a deep image collected at the
Gemini telescope, which implies that the interstellar medium into which the
pulsar is moving is fully ionized. Analyzing our XMM-Newton observation we
have found pulsar’s trail emission is consistent with a thermal bremsstrahlung.
For a bremsstrahlung-emitting trail a pulsar velocity of ∼ 1900 km s−1 is re-
quired, making PSR J0357+32051 the fastest pulsar known. Because of the
unique features of the pulsar’s trail, we have proposed pulsar’s nebula to be
the ﬁrst example of a new class of thermally-emitting nebulae associated to
fast pulsars.

216

Appendix A

The Fermi Gamma-ray Space
Telescope

The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope is an international and multi-agency
observatory class mission that is exploring the Universe in the energy range
from 10 keV up to more than 300 GeV, an energy band that has never been
observed by a space telescope. Fermi is a product of a collaboration between
NASA, the Department of Energy of the United Sates and other institutions
in Italy, France, Germany, Sweden, Japan and United States. Fermi, whose

Figure A.1: Schematic view of the Fermi spacecraft and its two instruments.

original name before the launch was GLAST (Gamma-ray Large Area Space
Telescope), was successfully launched on June 11, 2008 from the launch pad
17-B at Kennedy Space Flight Center (Florida, USA), into an initial orbit at
about 565 km altitude with a 25.3◦ inclination and an eccentricity lower than
0.01. During its normal operations Fermi orbits around Earth with a period

217

A. The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope

of 95 minutes and scans the sky with a rocking angle of about 35◦. Figure
A.1 shows a schematic view of the Fermi spacecraft with its two instruments:
the Large Area Telescope (LAT) and the Gamma-ray Burst Monitor (GBM;
formerly GLAST Burst Monitor ).

The LAT, the main Fermi instrument, is a pair-conversion telescope based
on high-precision detectors from High Energy Physics technology [22]. The
LAT operates in an energy range from about 20 MeV to more than 300 GeV.
The LAT is the successor of the EGRET telescope aboard the CGRO but its
excellent performances in terms of eﬀective area, angular resolution, energy
resolution, Field-of-View (FoV) and dead-time provide a factor greater than
50 in sensitivity compared to EGRET [201].

The GBM is entirely devoted to the study of the transient γ-ray sources,
It is made up by two kind of
such as Gamma-Ray Bursts and solar ﬂares.
detectors based on scintilling materials, which together cover an energy range
from 8 keV up to about 30 MeV. This energy range guarantee an energy overlap
with the LAT.

Fermi represents the new generation of γ-ray telescopes, its performances
are much better than those of the previous missions, such as EGRET onboard
the CGRO. The Fermi mission is contributing in a decisive way in several topics
of modern understanding of the γ-ray Universe, from the study of Galactic
objects, such as pulsars, PWNe and SNRs, and extragalactic objects, such
as blazars, to the detailed investigation on the nature of diﬀuse emission and
transient sources, e.g. GRBs, answering the questions left open by the previous
γ-ray missions.

A.1 Overview of the Large Area Telescope

Pair production is the dominant mechanism of interaction between radiation
and matter at the energies studied by the Fermi Large Area Telescope [22].
This process is the basis to measure the directions, the energies and the arrival
times of the γ-ray photons entering the detector, while rejecting background
from charged particles. For this reason a pair conversion telescope is made
basically by a tracking system, a calorimeter and an anticoincidence system,
as shown in Figure A.2. The EGRET experiment aboard CGRO and previous
instruments aboard SAS-2 and COS-B missions shared the same detecting
strategy. A γ ray entering the LAT creates an electron-positron pair, whose
energies and directions are reconstructed by the LAT subsystems. From these
information it is possible to determine the energy, the arrival time and direction
of the incoming photon using the conservation of four-momentum.

The tracks of the electrons and the positrons produced by a γ ray are mea-
sured by the tracking system. In order to maximize the conversion probability

218

A.1. Overview of the Large Area Telescope

Figure A.2: Schematic view of a pair conversion telescope like the LAT. Credit:
Fermi-LAT Team.

in the detector, detecting planes are interleaved with conversion foils of par-
ticular thickness. Since the conversion probability increases with the atomic
number (Z ) as Z 2, the conversion foils are usually made by high Z material,
EGRET used Tantalum (Ta) foils while LAT uses Tungsten (W) foils.
In
the calorimeter the electron-positron pair creates an electromagnetic shower,
from the measurement of the shower the calorimeter determines the energy
of the pair. The measurements gathered by the tracking system and by the
calorimeter are then used to reconstruct the energy of the incoming γ ray.

The orbit environment is extremely rich of charged particles that enter the
detector with rates of the order of about 105 times the rate of γ rays. For
this reason an anticoincidence detector is used to reject the charged particles
background. The anticoincidence shield surrounds the detector and it is usually
made by plastic scintillator. Since charged particles give a signal when crossing
the scintillators while γ rays do not, the anticoincidence shield reduce the
charged particles background with high eﬃciency.

The Fermi Large Area Telescope (LAT) follows the same base principles
but is based on a new generation γ-ray detectors developed for High Energy
Physics. The main LAT subsystems are the Tracker (TKR), the Calorimeter
(CAL), the AntiCoincidence Detector (ACD) and the Data Acquisition System
(DAQ). The TKR is made up of alternated layers of converters, made up of
Tungsten foils that allows the conversion of γ rays, and trackers, made up

219

A. The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope

of silicon microstrip detectors that allow the reconstruction of the electron
positron tracks. The CAL is located below the TKR and measures the energy
of the pair. The ACD covers the LAT in order to reduce the background due
to charged particles discriminating their from γ-rays. The DAQ manages the
main subsystems function, e.g. the reading procedure and the trigger control.

Figure A.3: Schematic diagram of the Large Area Telescope. The telescope’s
dimensions are 1.8 m × 1.8 m × 0.72 m. The power required and the mass
are 650 W and 2,789 kg, respectively. Credit: Fermi-LAT Team.

The LAT is made of an array of 4 × 4 identical towers (see Figure A.3), each
one made by a Tracker module, a Calorimeter module and a DAQ module; the
16 towers are surrounded by an outer segmented AntiCoincidence Detector.
The main mechanical structure is a 16 cell aluminum grid that hold both the
trackers towers and the calorimeter modules and all the electronic boxes are
placed below the grid. The outside dimensions of the LAT are approximately
1.8 m × 1.8 m × 1 m and its mass is ∼3000 kg. The overall aspect ratio
of the LAT tracker (height/width) is 0.4, allowing a large Field-of-View and
ensuring that nearly all pair-conversion events initiated in the tracker pass into
the calorimeter for energy measurement.

The LAT oﬀer higher performances with respect to its predecessor EGRET

220

A.1. Overview of the Large Area Telescope

thanks to the new design strategy and the new detecting technologies.

The main innovation of the LAT is the introduction of the TKR based on
solid-state detectors instead of spark chambers used for the EGRET tracker.
These detectors have many advantages. First of all they provide a spatial
resolution about 10 times better than spark chambers without many compli-
cations during fabrication. Additionally they oﬀer a lower dead time of about
20 µs, with respect to the dead time of 100 ms of the EGRET spark chambers.
Moreover, the silicon detectors used for the LAT Tracker are radiation hard
and does not contain consumables, while EGRET used spark chambers for the
tracking system and the gas deteriorated with time.

The LAT CAL is made by scintillation bars, in order to better reconstruct
the electromagnetic shower development, while the EGRET calorimeter was
based on a monolithic scintillating detector.

The segmented ACD detector is also another big LAT innovation, since the
EGRET anticoincidence detector was made by a single scintillator panel. This
segmentation will provide an higher detecting eﬃciency at energies greater
than 10 GeV. At these energies the self-veto problem becomes important, be-
cause a particle from the electromagnetic shower can backscatter in the ACD
producing a spurious signal. For this reason in the LAT the ACD is seg-
mented, making possible to know roughly which ACD panel gave a signal, in
order to determine if the panel has undergone a backsplash or not. In this way
it is possible to avoid eﬃciency loss at high energies as was for the EGRET
telescope.

In order to achieve its scientiﬁc goals the LAT must reject most of the back-
ground due to various contributions. The main contribution is due to cosmic
rays that enter the detectors producing spurious signals. Another contribution
comes from the albedo γ rays from the Earth, that can be removed mainly by
considering the position of the spacecraft with respect to our planet.

A comparison between the LAT performances and those of EGRET is

shown in Table A.1.

A.1.1 The Tracker

The TKR subsystem is the central detector of the LAT and serves to convert
γ rays into electron-positron pairs and to track the pair in order to measure
the direction of the incoming γ ray. The TKR consists of 16 modules, each one
composed by planes of high Z material (Tungsten) in which γ rays incident on
the LAT can convert into an electron-positron pair, interleaved with position-
sensitive detectors (silicon strip detectors) that record the passage of charged
particles measuring the tracks of the particles resulting from pair conversion.
The LAT tracker uses conversion foils of Tungsten (Z =74) because the pair
production cross section is proportional to Z 2, then using an high Z conversion

221

A. The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope

LAT

EGRET

20 MeV - 300 GeV

10 MeV - 30 GeV

∼ 8000 cm2
∼ 2.4 sr

Quantity
Energy Range
Peak Eﬀective Area
Field Of View
Angular Resolution
(single photon)
(68% containment)
Energy Resolution
Deadtime per Event
Source Localization
Point Source Sensitivity < 6 × 10−9 cm−2 sec−1 ∼ 10−7 cm−2 sec−1

< 3◦.5 (100 MeV)
∼ 0◦.6 (1 GeV)

5◦.8 (100 MeV)
∼ 1◦.7 (1 GeV)

< 0◦.15 (> 10 GeV)

1500 cm2

0.5 sr

< 10%

< 100 µsec

< 0(cid:48).5

100 msec

10%

15(cid:48)

Table A.1: LAT speciﬁcations and performances compared with EGRET.
Quoted sensitivity for the LAT is referred to sources out of the Galactic plane
and E > 100 MeV.

foils the conversion probability is maximized. The technology employed in past
years in High Energy Physics has been fundamental to choose the tracking
detectors, since the alternatives were gas-ﬁlled trackers and scintillating ﬁbers
detectors. The silicon-based detectors were chosen for the LAT because of
their higher sensitivity and angular resolution. The total silicon surface of the
LAT tracker is of about 82 m2. A scheme of the LAT TKR is displayed in
Figure A.4. As for the other part of the LAT, carefully studies have produced
the parameters for the Tracker in order to satisfy all the requirements and
maintain the basic constraints as low consumed power, low detector noise and
low computation power required.

The basic unit of the TKR is a square Silicon Strip Detector (SSD) with
the size of 8.95 cm × 8.95 cm, where are implanted 384 parallel microstrips
spaced by 228 µm. Four SSDs, each of them is 400 µm thick, are assembled
in a ladder. In a ladder the end of each microstrip of a SSD can be connected
to the end of the correspondent microstrip on the adjacent SSD in order to
form a single longer microstrip. At this point 4 ladders are assembled to form
a sensitive silicon microstrip layer, which is then inserted in a tray. A tray is
a composite structure with a mechanical structure in carbon ﬁber that bring
at both faces a sensitive silicon plane. The main components of a tray are a
detecting silicon layer on the top face, an aluminum core, a Tungsten foil for
the conversion of γ rays and another silicon layer on the bottom face of the
tray. The two silicon layers are mounted in a tray with parallel orientation of
the microstrips. Each tray is then connected to the reading electronics. Trays
are then piled up with a separation of 2 mm and each tray is rotated of 90◦

222

A.1. Overview of the Large Area Telescope

Figure A.4: Schematic view of the Large Area Telescope silicon tracker. Each
tower includes 19 tray structures constituting the basic mechanical framework
and housing both the silicon detection planes and the converter foils [22].

with respect to the adjacent tray. In this way the resulting system is made
by a conversion foil followed by a couple of silicon layers with perpendicular
microstrips in order to have XY detection capability. The resulting module
form tower and it is made by 19 trays with 18 XY detection layers.

The layout of the converters (in terms of thickness) is organized into two
diﬀerent sections: a Front section, composed of 12 layers of 0.03 radiation
length converter, and a Back section with 4 layers of 0.18 radiation length
converters. The last two XY planes have no converter at all since the main
Fermi trigger primitive requires three silicon layers in a row hit, so that a
photon converted right above the last two planes would never trigger and the
Tungsten would only introduce further useless multiple scattering. The two
section provide measurements in a complementary manner: while the front has
an excellent Point Spread Function (PSF), the back section greatly enhances

223

A. The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope

the photon statistics, in such a way that a large eﬀective area and a good
angular resolution can be achieved, on average, at the same time.

A.1.2 The Calorimeter

The Calorimeter [22] measures the energy of the electron-positron pair and
gives information about the high-energy photons that have not converted in
the Tracker. From the measure of the electron-positron energy it is possible
to determine the energy of the primary photon using the conservations of the
energy and momentum. A schematic view of the LAT Calorimeter is in Figure
A.5.

Figure A.5: LAT calorimeter module. The 96 CsI(Tl) scintillator crystal de-
tector elements are arranged in 8 layers, with the orientation of the crystals
in adjacent layers rotated by 90◦. The total calorimeter depth (at normal
incidence) is 8.6 radiation lengths [22].

The LAT calorimeter is composed of a set of CsI(Tl) crystals read by pho-
todiodes. As the energy resolution strongly depends on depth, sampling and
longitudinal segmentation, each CAL module is ﬁnely segmented both in depth
and lateral directions. Each CAL tower will contain eight layers, each consti-
tuted by 12 crystals (27 × 20 × 326 mm3), wrapped in reﬂective foils, for
a total of 8.6 radiation lengths. As with the silicon detection planes in the
tracker, each layer will be rotated by 90◦ with respect to the previous one
(hodoscopic conﬁguration), in order to achieve XY imaging capabilities. The

224

A.1. Overview of the Large Area Telescope

lateral segmentation provides the necessary imaging capability to correlate the
events in the tracker with the energy depositions in the calorimeter and derive
loose (at the level of few degrees) directional information for those photons
not converting in the tracker. On the other side the longitudinal segmentation
allows to derive an estimate of the initial energy of the pair from the longitu-
dinal shower proﬁle by ﬁtting the measurements to an analytical description
of the energy-dependent mean longitudinal the showers and the subsequent
leakage correction which highly enhance the response at high energy (up to
several hundreds GeV) with respect to EGRET.

At both ends of each bar is placed a PIN photo diode used for reading, and
the measurement of the relative intensity at both ends helps to determine the
position where the energy deposition has taken place. The precision that can
be obtained varies from some mm at low energies (about 10 MeV), up to less
than a mm for energies above 1 GeV.

A.1.3 The AntiCoincidence Detector

The purpose of the ACD is to detect incident charged cosmic ray particles that
outnumber cosmic γ rays by more than 5 orders of magnitude. When a γ-ray
photon enter the LAT, it does not produce any signal in the ACD, but gives
a signal in the TKR and in the CAL due to the produced pair. A charged
particle behaves diﬀerently, since during the passage a signal also in the ACD
is produced, then it is possible to recognize a γ ray from a charged particle
thanks to the diﬀerent signature in the subsystems and in particular in the
ACD. The events that give a signal in the TKR and in the CAL but not in
the ACD can start the trigger, the other are refused as background events.

The LAT AntiCoincidence Detector (ACD) is made by a set of plastic
scintillators coupled to Photo-Multipliers Tubes (PMTs) that use Wavelength-
Shifting Fibers (WSFs) in order to increase the reading eﬃciency. With respect
to the EGRET anticoincidence system, that was made by a single module, the
LAT ACD is ﬁne segmented. A scheme of the ACD assembly is displayed in
Figure A.6.

The eﬃciency of background rejection, in particular for high-energy γ rays,
is increased thanks to the ACD segmentation. In EGRET it was necessary
to reduce the triggers frequency in order to avoid gas consuming in the spark
chambers. The EGRET ACD was implemented in the Level 1 trigger (see
Section A.1.4). This reduced the working eﬃciency, mainly at GeV energies,
where the self-veto becomes important. The self-veto happens when a mem-
ber of the electromagnetic shower produced by the electron-positron pair is
deﬂected and give a signal in the ACD (backsplash). The event has a signature
of a cosmic ray and then it is rejected since it is confused with a background
event. The segmentation helps to know exactly which scintillator has been hit,

225

A. The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope

Figure A.6: Schematic view of the LAT ACD assembly [22].

and it is then possible to compare the track direction with the position of the
hit scintillator. In case of backsplash the position of the hit scintillator panel
does not correspond exactly with the intersection of the track and the ACD,
then a self-veto is recognized and avoided.

Thanks to the lower dead time and to the absence of consumables in the
TKR, the LAT can undergo a much higher Level 1 trigger frequency, then the
ACD can be inserted in the Level 2 trigger. In this way each event can be
analyzed with more care (as explained in the Section A.1.4) and the self-veto
can be avoided in a very eﬃcient way.
A total of 89 panels constitute the ACD, some of them are disposed in a 5
× 5 array on top of the TKR and the others are at the sides of the LAT. The
assembling scheme of these panels has been designed with overlap in one di-
mension and scintillating ﬁbers covering the gaps in the other dimension. Each
scintillator is read out by an interleaved set of Wavelength Shifting (WS) ﬁbers,
with bundles connected to two phototubes, in order to guarantee redundancy.
The ACD is the ﬁrst step in the background rejection scheme. The esti-
mated Monte Carlo eﬃciency, conﬁrmed by the beam tests, is greater then

226

A.1. Overview of the Large Area Telescope

0.9997.

A.1.4 The Data Acquisition System and Trigger

The LAT Data Acquisition System (DAQ) has three main functions. It controls
the trigger, it guides the event reading sequence and stores it in a temporary
memory. The DAQ also manages the data elaboration and transfers to the
ground. This system is also responsible for other functions, among others
the control, monitoring and housekeeping of the instrument and the power
management of the whole LAT.

The DAQ is made by 16 Tower Electronic Modules (TEM) located below
each tower and two TEM speciﬁc for the ACD. Also two Spacecraft Interface
Unit TEM are in this system and are located in the spacecraft below the LAT.

Trigger and background rejection

The LAT trigger must be very eﬃcient on γ rays and at the same time provide
a high rejection power for the charged particles background. Because of the
large uncertainties in cosmic ray ﬂuxes the system ﬂexibility is a particularly
important feature.

The LAT trigger has a multi-level structure, in a similar way of the trig-
gers employed in High Energy Physics experiments. The hardware trigger is
based on special signals, called primitives, that originate from LAT subsys-
tems. Primitives from Tracker, Calorimeter and Anticoincidence Detector are
combined to decide if an event is recorded or not. The trigger of the LAT
is very ﬂexible in order to allow change of conﬁguration to optimize trigger
eﬃciency and versatile in order to accommodate various signatures of events.
The LAT trigger is organized in two levels. The ﬁrst level, Level 1 Trigger
(L1T), is a hardware trigger, based on special combinations of signals at the
level of a single tower. The workhorse γ-ray trigger is the so called three
in a row, consisting into 3 XY consecutive tracker planes sending a trigger
request. There are also two diﬀerent calorimeter based trigger primitives with
diﬀerent adjustable thresholds (nominally set at 100 MeV and 1 GeV of energy
deposition in a crystal log). The ACD adds two other trigger signals: a veto
signal and CNO signal. The latter has a threshold of several MIPs and is used
to identify cosmic ions with Z > 2 for CAL on orbit calibration. In addition
there are three other trigger sources: the Periodic trigger to sample detector
noise and pedestals at regular interval, the Solicited trigger for special software
trigger request and the External trigger for ground testing. An electronic
module (the TEM) combines these signal in a 600 ns coincidence window and
then “decides” if the event must be recorded and how to read out the detector:
using or not the zero suppression, read all the four calorimeter ranges or just

227

A. The Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope

the “best” one, pre-scale this kind of events. The correspondence between
trigger primitives coincidence and readout mode is conﬁgurable with a look-up
table that allows up to 16 combinations (engines).

With exception of speciﬁc calibration event the typical read out time is
about 26 µs allowing to trigger on almost all the particles that cross the LAT
(whose rate is estimated of the order of few kHz). The fact that cosmic rays
can be included in the trigger actually constitutes a sort of revolution with
respect to the trigger scheme implemented in EGRET, in which that would
not have been possible due to the high instrumental dead time in the spark
chambers.
In fact the only reason why further levels of data reduction are
required onboard is the limited bandwidth of the telemetry.

The second trigger level, Level 2 Trigger (L2T), is software, two Event
Processing Unit (EPUs) work in parallel to process LAT events. Multiple
ﬁlters in succession are applied to each event, each ﬁlter optimized to select
a diﬀerent class of event (i.e. γ rays or heavy ions for calibration). Within
each ﬁlter events are accepted or rejected based on a sequence of test each
one with tunable parameters. Together with the Gamma Filter, designed to
accept γ rays with high eﬃciency during normal operation, other ﬁlters are
implemented to identify MIPs and heavy ions for instrument calibration.

A.2 Overview of the Gamma-ray Burst

Monitor

The Gamma-ray Burst Monitor (GBM), the successor of BATSE onboard the
CGRO, is designed to detect transient objects, such as GRBs. The develop-
ment of the GBM and the analysis of its observational data is a collaborative
eﬀort between the National Space Science and Technology Center in the U.S.
and the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics (MPE) in Germany.
The GBM consists of 12 detectors made of Sodium Iodide (NaI) for catching
X rays and low energy γ rays, and other two detectors made of Bismuth Ger-
manate (BGO) for high-energy γ rays placed as shown in Figure A.7. The two
detectors together detect X rays and γ rays in the energy range between 8 keV
to 30MeV, overlapping with the lower energy limit of the LAT. Together the
NaI and BGO detectors have similar characteristics to the combination of the
BATSE large area and spectroscopy detectors but cover a wider energy range
and have a smaller collection area.

The detectors do not block any part of the Large Area Telescope (LAT)
Field-of-View nor interfere with the solar panels. They easily ﬁt between the
LAT and the shroud envelope on two sides of the spacecraft. The mounting
arrangement is ﬂexible with the two BGO detectors mounted on opposite sides

228

A.2. Overview of the Gamma-ray Burst Monitor

Figure A.7: Schematic view of the GBM in the Fermi spacecraft. Credit:
Fermi-GBM Team

of the spacecraft, and the NaI detectors mounted in 4 banks of 3 detectors in
such a way that they sample a wide range of azimuth and elevation angles1.

1A more speciﬁc description of the Gamma-ray Burst Monitor can be found in the fol-

lowing link: http://fermi.gsfc.nasa.gov/science/instruments/gbm.html

229

Appendix B

Classiﬁcation algorithms

In this appendix we describe in detail the theory of machine learning algorithms
we have implemented and applied to classify γ-ray unidentiﬁed sources.

B.1 Logistic Regression

Regression methods have become an integral component of any data analysis
describing the relationship between a response variable and one or more ex-
planatory variables. It is often the case that the outcome variable is discrete,
taking two or more possible values. Over the last decades the logistic regres-
sion model has become, in many ﬁeld, the standard method of analysis in this
situation.

Logistic regression (LR) is part of a class of generalized linear models and
is one of the simplest machine learning techniques. LR forms a multivariate
relation between a dependent variable that can only take values from 0 to
1 and several independent variables. When the dependent variable has only
two possible assignment categories, the simplicity of the LR method can be a
beneﬁt over other discriminant analyses.

Consider a collection of p independent variables denoted by the vector
x = [x1, x2, ...xp]. Let the conditional probability that the outcome is present
be denoted by P (Y = 1|x) = π(x). The conditional probability can be deﬁned
by a multivariate logistic regression model:

We deﬁne the logit transformation of π(x) as:

π(x) =

(cid:20) π(x)

1 − π(x)

z(x) = log

eβ0+β1x1+...+βpxp

1 + eβ0+β1x1+...+βpxp

(cid:21)

(B.1)

= β0 + β1x1 + ... + βpxp

(B.2)

231

B. Classiﬁcation algorithms

which shows that logistic regression is a standard linear regression model, once
the dichotomous outcome is transformed by the logistic regression. The impor-
tance of this transformation is that z(x) has many of the desirable properties
of a linear regression model. The logit, z(x), is linear in its parameters, may
be continuous, and may range from −∞ to +∞, depending on the range of x.
The above equations are for mean probabilities, and each data point will
have an error term (). We may express the value of the outcome variable
given x as y = π(x) + . Since the dichotomous outcome variable,  may
assume one of two possible values. If y = 1 then  = 1− π(x) with probability
π(x), and if y = 0 then  = −π(x) with probability 1 − π(x). Thus,  has a
distribution with mean zero and variance equal to π(x)[1− π(x)]. That is, the
conditional distribution of the outcome variable follows a binomial distribution
with probability given by the conditional mean, π(x).

Figure B.1: Logistic regression function.

B.1.1 Fitting the logistic regression model

Assume that we have a sample of n independent observations (xi, yi), i =
1, 2, ..., n. where yi denotes the value of a dichotomous outcome variable and
xi is the value of the independent variable for the ith observation. Furthermore,
assume that the outcome variables has been coded as 0 or 1, representing the
absence or presence of the characteristic, respectively. To ﬁt the logistic re-
gression model in Equation B.1 to a set of data requires that we estimate
the values of β = (β0, β1, ..., βp), the unknown parameters. The method of
estimation used for the logistic regression model is the maximum likelihood,

232

B.1. Logistic Regression

that yields values for the unknown parameters which maximize the probabil-
ity of obtaining the observed set of data. In order to apply this method we
must ﬁrst construct the likelihood function, which expresses the probability of
the observed data as a function of the unknown parameters. The maximum
likelihood estimators of these parameters are chosen to be those values that
maximize this function. Thus, the resulting estimators are those which agree
most closely with the observed data. We now describe how to ﬁnd these values
from the logistic regression model.

It is easy to show that, if the observations are assumed to be independent,

the likelihood function for the logistic regression model can be expressed as:

L(β) =

πi(xi)yi [1 − πi(xi)]1−yi

(B.3)

i=1

where the ﬁrst term represents the probability that the outcome is equal to 1
for a given x and the second the probability that the outcome is equal to 0 for
a given x [103].

The principle of maximum likelihood states that we use as our estimate of
β the value which maximizes the expression in Equation B.3. However, it is
easier mathematically to work with the log of Equation B.3. This expression,
the log likelihood, is deﬁned as:

n(cid:89)

n(cid:88)

i=1

log[L(β)] =

{yi log [πi(xi)] + (1 − yi) log [1 − πi(xi)]}

(B.4)

n(cid:88)

n(cid:88)

To ﬁnd the value of β that maximizes B.4 we must diﬀerentiate B.4 with re-
spect β0, ..., βp and set the resulting expressions equal to zero. These equations,
called likelihood equations, are:

[yi − π(xi)] = 0

xij [yi − π(xi)] = 0

(B.5)

i=1

i=1

for j = 1, 2, ..., p. The system of equation B.5 contains p + 1 likelihood equa-
tions non linear in β0, ..., βp and thus requires special methods for their solu-
tion. These methods are iterative in nature and have been programmed into
available logistic regression software. For example, we use the tool glm 1 (Gen-
eralized Linear Model), implemented in free software programming language
R2, a software environment for statistical computing and graphics, which ﬁt
generalized linear models as logistic regression. The value of β given by the
solution to Equation B.5 is called the maximum likelihood estimate and will

1http://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-patched/library/stats/html/glm.html
2http://www.r-project.org

233

B. Classiﬁcation algorithms

be denoted as ˆβ. In general, the use of the symbolˆdenotes the maximum like-
lihood estimate of the respective quantity. For example, ˆπ(xi) is the maximum
likelihood estimate of π(xi).

The method of estimating the variances of the estimated coeﬃcients follows
from theory of maximum likelihood estimation [173]. This theory states that
the estimators are obtained from the matrix of second partial derivate of the
log likelihood function. These partial derivate have the following general form:

ijπi(1 − πi)
x2

(B.6)

∂2 log(L(β))

∂β2
j

∂2 log(L(β))

= − n(cid:88)
= − n(cid:88)

i=1

and:

xijxjlπi(1 − πi)

∂βj∂βl

(B.7)
for j, l = 0, 1, 2, ..., p where πi denotes π(xi). Let the (p + 1) × (p + 1) matrix
containing the negative of the terms given in equations B.6 and B.7 be denoted
as I(β). The matrix is called the observed information matrix. The variances of
the estimated coeﬃcients are obtained from the inverse of this matrix which is
denoted as V ar(β) = I−1(β). The estimated standard errors of the estimated

i=1

coeﬃcients are denoted as:(cid:99)SE

(cid:17)

(cid:16) ˆβj

=

(cid:104)(cid:100)V ar

(cid:16) ˆβj

(cid:17)(cid:105)1/2

(B.8)

for j = 0, 1, 2, ..., p.

B.1.2 Testing for the signiﬁcance of the model

Once we have ﬁt a particular multivariable logistic regression model, the pro-
cess of assessment of the signiﬁcance of the variables in the model begins. This
usually involves formulation and testing of a statistical hypothesis to determine
whether the independent variables in the model are signiﬁcantly related to the
outcome variable.

One approach to testing for the signiﬁcance of the coeﬃcient of a variable
in any model consists in comparing observed values of the response variable
to predicted values obtained from models with and without the variable in
question. In logistic regression, comparison of observed to predicted values is
based on the log likelihood function deﬁned in Equation B.4:

(cid:20) likelihood of the ﬁtted model

(cid:21)

D = −2 log

(B.9)

likelihood of the saturated model

where the saturated model is one that contains as many parameters as there are
data points. The quantity inside the large brackets in the Equation B.9 is called

234

B.2. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks

the likelihood ratio. Using minus twice its log is necessary to obtain a quantity
whose di distribution is known and can therefore be used for hypothesis testing
purpose. Such a test is called the likelihood ratio test. Using Equation B.4,
Equation B.9 becomes:

(cid:20)

n(cid:88)

i=1

(cid:18) ˆπi

(cid:19)

yi

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:18)1 − ˆπi

1 − yi

D = −2

yi log

+ (1 − yi) log

(B.10)

where ˆπi = ˆπ(xi) It easy to prove that in a setting of data where the values
are either 0 or 1 the likelihood of the saturated model is 1.

For the purpose of assessing the signiﬁcance of an independent variable we
compare the the value of D with and without the independent variable in the
equation. The change in D due to the inclusion of the independent variable in
the model is obtained as:

G = D(model without the variable) − D(model with the variable)

(B.11)

Because the likelihood of the saturated model is common on both values of D,
it can be expressed as:

(cid:20)likelihood without the variable

(cid:21)

G = −2 log

(B.12)

likelihood with variable

(cid:41)

Thus, it is easy to prove that [103]:

(cid:40) n(cid:88)

G = 2

[yi log(ˆπi) + (1 − yi) log(1 − ˆπi)] − [n1 log(n1) + n0 log(n0) − n log(n)]

where n0 =(cid:80)(1 − yi) and n1 =(cid:80) yi. If under the null hypothesis that the

(B.13)

i=1

p coeﬃcients in the model are equal to zero and that the size of the sample n
is suﬃciently large, the distribution of G will be chi-square with p degrees-of-
freedom [216]. The p-value associated with this test is P (χ2 > G).

B.2 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks

An artiﬁcial neural network is a system composed of many simple processing
elements operating in parallel whose function is determined by the network
structure, connection strengths, and the processing performed at the comput-
ing elements or nodes.

An artiﬁcial neural network has a natural proclivity for storing experimen-
tal knowledge and making it available for use. The knowledge is acquired
by the network through a learning process and the interneuron connection
strengths – known as synaptic weights – are used to store the knowledge.

235

B. Classiﬁcation algorithms

There are numerous types of artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) for address-
ing many diﬀerent types of problems, such as modelling memory, performing
pattern recognition, and predicting the evolution of dynamical systems. Most
networks therefore perform some kind of data modelling.

The two main kinds of learning algorithms are: supervised and unsuper-
vised. In the former the correct results (target values) are known and given to
the ANN during the training so that the ANN can adjust its weights to try to
match its outputs to the target values. In the latter, the ANN is not provided
with the correct results during training. Unsupervised ANNs usually perform
some kind of data compression, such as dimensionality reduction or clustering.
The two main kinds of network topology are feed-forward and feed-back.
In feed-forward ANN, the connections between units do not form cycles and
usually produce a relatively quick response to an input. Most feed-forward
ANNs can be trained using a wide variety of eﬃcient conventional numerical
methods (e.g. conjugate gradients, Levenberg-Marquardt, etc.) in addition to
algorithms invented by ANN researchers. In a feed-back or recurrent ANN,
there are cycles in the connections. In some feed-back ANNs, each time an
input is presented, the ANN must iterate for a potentially long time before
producing a response.

B.2.1 The multilayer perceptron

In the present work we have used one of the most important types of supervised
neural networks, the feed-forward multilayer perceptron (MLP), in order to un-
derstand the nature of Fermi-LAT unidentiﬁed sources. The term perceptron
is historical, and refers to the function performed by the nodes. An intro-
duction on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks is provided by Sarle (1994) [181], and
on multilayer Perceptron by Bailer-Jones et al. (2001) [25] and Sarle (1994)
[180]. A comprehensive treatment of feed-forward neural networks is provided
by Bishop (1995) [127].

In Figure B.2 the general architecture of a network is shown. The network
is made up of nodes (analogous to human neurons) arranged in a series of
layers. The nodes in a given layer are fully connected to the nodes in the
next layer by links. The input layer consists of the input parameters, and
the output layer consists of the classes. Any layer between the input and the
output layers is called a “hidden layer”. The complexity (and non-linearity) of
the ANN depends on the number of inputs, hidden nodes, layers, outputs and
connections.

For each input pattern, the network produces an output pattern through
the propagation rule, compares the actual output with the desired one and
computes an error. The learning algorithm adjusts the weights of the connec-
tions by an appropriate quantity to reduce the error (sliding down the slope).

236

B.2. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks

Figure B.2: Schematic view of a Two Layer Perceptron (2LP), the type of
Artiﬁcial Neural Network we use. The data enter the 2LP through the Nodes
in the Input Layer. The information travels from left to right across the Links
and is processed in the Nodes. Each Node in the Output Layer returns the
probability that a source belongs to a speciﬁc class.

This process continues until the error produced by the network is low, accord-
ing to a given criterion.

B.2.2 The propagation rule

i

ij o(s−1)

i w(s)

i

j =(cid:80)

) and the weights of the corresponding links (w(s)

The network operates as follows. Except for the nodes in the input layer,
an input of a node at layer s (I (s)
j ) is the combination of the output of the
previous nodes (o(s−1)
ij ), the
combination is linear: I (s)
. Each node has a transform function
(or activation function), which provides the output of the node as a function
of the I (s)
. Nonlinear activation functions are needed to introduce nonlinearity
into the network. We have used the logistic (or sigmoid) function: out =
1/[1 + exp(−I)] (in the interval [0, 1]) and the tanh function out = tanh(I)
(in the interval [−1, 1]), for all nodes. For the input nodes we decide to use a
linear activation function. The propagation rule, from the input layer to the
output layer, is a combination of activation functions.

j

No signiﬁcant diﬀerence has been found in the training process between
using the logistic and tanh functions, only that the training process is faster if
we use the tanh function.

237

B. Classiﬁcation algorithms

B.2.3 Back-propagation of the error

The weights, w, are randomly initialized, they are the free parameters of the
network and the goal is to minimize the total error function with respect to w
(maintaining a good generalization power, see below).

The error function in the weight space deﬁnes the multidimensional error
surface and the objective is to ﬁnd the global (or acceptable local) minima
on this surface. The solution implemented in the present work is the gradient
descent, within which the weights are adjusted (from small initial random
values) in order to follow the steepest downhill slope. The error surface is not
known in advance, so it is necessary to explore it in a suitable way.

The error function typically used is the sum-of-squares error, which for a

single input vector, n, is:

E(n) =

1
2

(cid:88)

(cid:16)

i

(cid:17)2

i − t(n)
y(n)

i

(B.14)

(B.15)

(B.16)

where yi is the output of the ANN and ti is the target output value for the ith
output node and n runs form 1 to the total number of examples in the training
set. In the present work i = 2, two output nodes are used to understand the
nature of 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources. In the gradient descent process the weight
vector is adjusted in the negative direction of the gradient vector backwards
from the output layer to one ore more hidden layers by a small change in each
time-step:

∆w = −η

∂E
∂w

and the new generic weight is:

wnew = wold + ∆w

The amplitude of the step on the error surface is set by the η-learning param-
eter: large values of η mean large steps. Typically η belongs to the interval [0,
1] (where the opening bracket means that the lower value is excluded). In our
application a small value has been used (0.2). If η is too small the training
time becomes very long, while a large value can produce oscillations around
a minimum or even lead to miss the optimal minimum in the error surface.
The algorithm is stopped when the value of the error function has become
suﬃciently small.

The learning algorithm used in the present work is the standard back-
propagation. It refers to the method for computing the gradient of the case-
wise error function with respect to the weights for a feed-forward network.
“Standard backprop” is a deﬁnition of the generalized delta rule, the training
algorithm that remains one of the most widely used supervised training meth-
ods for neural network.

238

B.2. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks

This learning algorithm implies that the error function is continuous and
derivable, so that it is possible to calculate the gradient. For this reason the
activation functions (and their ﬁnal combination through the propagation rule)
must be continuous and derivable. From the computational point of view, the
derivative of the activation functions adopted in the present work is easily
related to the value of the function out = F(net) itself (see Section B.2.2: F’
∝ out(1-out) in the case F = sigmoid or F’ ∝ (1-out2) if F = tanh).

When the network weights approach a minimum solution, the gradient
becomes small and the step size diminishes too, giving origin to a very slow
convergence. Adding a momentum (a residual of the previous weight variation)
to the equations of the weight update, the minimization improves [127]:

wnew = wold + ∆w + α∆wold

(B.17)

where α is the momentum factor (set to 0.9 in our applications). This can
reduce the decay in learning updates and cause the learning to proceed through
the weight space in a fairly constant direction. Besides a faster convergence to
the minimum, this method makes it possible to escape from a local minimum
if there is enough momentum to travel through it and over the following hill
(see Figure B.3). The generalized delta rule including the momentum is called
the “heavy ball method ” in the numerical analysis literature [29].

Figure B.3: A simpliﬁed representation of the error surface: the behavior of
the error as a function of 2 weights.

The learning algorithm has been used in the so called online (or incremen-
tal ) version, in which the weights of the connections are updated after each

239

B. Classiﬁcation algorithms

example is processed by the network. One epoch corresponds to the process-
ing of all examples one time. The other possibility is to compute the training
in the so called batch learning (or epoch learning), in which the weights are
updated only at the end of each epoch (not used in the present application).

B.2.4 The training technique

During the learning process, the output of a supervised neural network comes
to approximate the target values given the inputs in the training set. This
ability may be useful in itself, but more often the purpose of using a neural
network is to generalize, i.e. to get some output from inputs that are not in
the training set (generalization). ANNs, like other ﬂexible nonlinear estimation
methods such as kernel regression and smoothing splines, can suﬀer from either
under ﬁtting or over ﬁtting. A network that is not suﬃciently complex3 can
fail to fully detect the signal in a complicated data set, leading to under ﬁtting:
an inﬂexible model will have a large bias. On the other hand a network that
is too complex may ﬁt the noise, not just the signal, leading to over-ﬁtting:
a model that is too ﬂexible in relation to the particular data set will produce
a large variance [182]. The best generalization is obtained when the best
compromise between these two conﬂicting quantities (bias and variance) is
reached. There are several approaches to avoid under- and overﬁtting, and
obtain a good generalization. Part of them aim to regularize the complexity of
the network during the training phase, such as the Early Stopping and weight-
decay methods (the size of the weights are tuned in order to produce a mapping
function with small curvature, the large weights are penalized. Reducing the
size of the weights reduces also the “eﬀective” number of weights [150]).

Generalize error

The most commonly used method for estimating the generalization error in
neural networks is to reserve part of the data as a testing set, which must
not be used in any way during the training. After the training, the network is
applied to the testing set, and the error on the testing set provides an unbiased
estimate of the generalization error, provided that the testing set was chosen
in a random way.

In order to avoid (possible) over-ﬁtting during the training, another part of
the data can be reserved as a validation set (independent both of the training
and testing sets, not used for updating the weights), and used during the

3The complexity of a network is related to both the number of weights and the amplitude
of the weights (the mapping produced by a ANN is an interpolation of the training data, a
high order ﬁt to data is characterized by large curvature of the mapping function, which in
turn corresponds to large weights).

240

B.2. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks

training to monitor the generalization error. The best epoch corresponds to
the lowest validation error, and the training is stopped when the validation
error rate “starts to go up” (early stopping method). The disadvantage of this
technique is that it reduces the amount of data available for both training and
validation, which is particularly undesirable if the available data set is small.
Moreover, neither the training nor the validation make use of the entire sample.

241

Appendix C

Hierarchical neural network
predictions for 2FGL
unidentiﬁed sources

In this appendix we show the results obtained by the hierarchical ANN dis-
cussed in the Chapter 4 to classify each 2FGL unidentiﬁed source as a pulsar
or AGN subclass on the basis of its γ-ray observables. Our hierarchical neu-
ral network model is composed by three simple neural networks. The ﬁrst
one (deﬁned as ANN1 and described in Section 4.3) is constructed to distin-
guish pulsars from AGNs, the second one (deﬁned as ANN2 ) to distinguish
young pulsars from MSPs and the third one (deﬁned as ANN3 ) to distinguish
BL Lacertae from FSRQs.
In this way each 2FGL unidentiﬁed source “en-
ters” the ANN1, if the ANN1 predictor (PAN N 1) is greater than the threshold
CP SR = 0.9962 then the unidentiﬁed source is classiﬁed as a pulsar candidate
and “enter” the ANN2, which decides if such object is a young pulsar candi-
date (PAN N 2 > 0.984), a MSP candidate (PAN N 2 < 0.085) or a γ-ray pulsar
of uncertain type (0.085 < PAN N 2 < 0.984). If PAN N 1 is less than the thresh-
old CAGN = 3.4 × 10−7 then the unidentiﬁed source is classiﬁed as an AGN
candidate and “enter” the ANN3, which decides if such object is a BL Lac can-
didate (PAN N 3 > 0.758), a FSRQ candidate (PAN N 3 < 0.429) or an AGN of
uncertain type (0.429 < PAN N 3 < 0.758). If 3.4 × 10−7 < PAN N 1 < 0.9962 the
source remains unclassiﬁed. In Figure C.1 a schematic view of our optimized
hierarchical ANN is shown.

Applying the optimized hierarchical neural network described in the Chap-
ter 4 to the 576 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources we ﬁnd that 75 (13%) are classiﬁed
as young pulsar candidates, 34 (6%) as MSP candidates, 26 (4.5%) as pulsars
of uncertain type, 84 (14.5%) as BL Lac candidates, 66 (11.5%) as FSRQ can-

243

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

Figure C.1: Schematic view of our hierarchical ANN optimized to classify each
2FGL unidentiﬁed source as a speciﬁc pulsar or AGN subclass as described in
the text.

didates and 26 (4.5%) as blazars of uncertain type, while 269 (46%) remain
unclassiﬁed. The number of sources unclassiﬁed and of uncertain type depends
on the deﬁnition of the classiﬁcation thresholds for each ANN.

In the Table C.1 we show the complete list of predictions and voting per-
centages for unidentiﬁed Fermi-LAT sources in the 2FGL catalog obtained
using the hierarchical ANN technique described in the Chapter 4. Column
(1): 2FGL unidentiﬁed source name. Col. (2) and (3): Galactic latitude and
longitude. Col. (4): source signiﬁcance in σ units. Col. (5): energy ﬂux at en-
ergies above 100 MeV. Col. (6): results of the ANN1 network described in the
Section 4.3 and optimized to distinguish pulsars from AGNs. Col. (7): results
of the ANN2 network described in the Section 4.5 and optimized to distinguish
young pulsars from MSPs. Col. (8): results of the ANN3 network described in
the Section 4.6 and optimized to distinguish BL Lacertae from FSRQs. Col.
(9): hierarchical ANN predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources.

244

ANN3	  ANN2	  ANN1	  Young	  pulsar	  Uncertain	  pulsar	  MSP	  BL	  Lac	  Uncertain	  AGN	  FSRQ	  Unclassiﬁed	  2FGL	  Unassociated	  Source	  PANN1>0.9962PANN1<3.4E−07PANN2>0.984PANN2<0.085PANN3>0.758PANN3<0.429P
S
M

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

L
B

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

L
B

P
S
M

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

3
7
2
2
.
0

5
4
1
3
.
0

6
4
5
9
.
0

9
0
4
1
.
0

–

–

4
9
6
8
.
0

8
9
5
9
.
0

–

–

2
8
9
.
0

4
2
8
7
.
0

–

5
2
4
8
.
0

2
3
8
9
.
0

5
6
4
4
.
0

8
6
1
9
0
.
0

8
7
9
.
0

7
4
3
2
0
.
0

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

6
0
-
e
8
8
3
.
1

7
0
-
e
5
7
4
.
2

1
1
-
e
9
6
6
.
3

1
1
-
e
4
0
8
.
4

4
1
-
e
4
7
.
5

9
8
7
1
.
0

5
0
-
e
1
6
2
.
4

8
0
-
e
7
6
6
.
3

9
0
-
e
5
0
1
.
3

5
0
-
e
1
3
3
.
1

1
7
9
8
0
0
.
0

9
9
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

0
1
-
e
9
7
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
6
6
.
1

6
4
3
1
0
.
0

9
0
-
e
1
8
8
.
3

0
1
-
e
4
9
2
.
6

2
1
-
e
7
3
0
.
4

0
1
-
e
7
1
2
.
4

1
1
-
e
7
5
2
.
9

9
9
9
9
.
0

5
0
-
e
6
7
.
4

5
9
0
9
0
0
0
.
0

7
0
-
e
2
7
7
.
3

1

6
0
-
e
3
6
1
.
8

–

–

–

–

–

–

3
3
0
1
0
0
.
0

–

–

–

4
8
9
.
0

–

n
o
i
t
c
i
d
e
r
P

3
N
N
A
P

2
N
N
A
P

1
N
N
A
P

)
1
−

s

2
−
m
c

x
u
ﬂ

y
g
r
e
n
E

g
r
e
(

1
1
-
e
7
1
5
.
2

2
1
-
e
7
3
3
.
6

1
1
-
e
9
4
7
.
1

2
1
-
e
3
0
1
.
7

2
1
-
e
5
3
0
.
4

1
1
-
e
6
1
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
3
4
.
1

2
1
-
e
7
0
7
.
4

2
1
-
e
5
0
9
.
3

2
1
-
e
3
4
0
.
6

2
1
-
e
5
6
8
.
4

1
1
-
e
3
6
0
.
2

2
1
-
e
2
2
5
.
4

2
1
-
e
7
5
0
.
8

2
1
-
e
5
6
4
.
7

2
1
-
e
7
9
.
4

1
1
-
e
3
1
6
.
1

2
1
-
e
5
9
7
.
5

2
1
-
e
8
2
5
.
5

2
1
-
e
1
6
0
.
4

1
1
-
e
5
9
4
.
1

2
1
-
e
8
1
1
.
5

1
1
-
e
6
2
7
.
1

2
1
-
e
9
4
4
.
8

1
1
-
e
3
2
9
.
5

1
1
-
e
6
0
1
.
2

.

n
g
i
s

e
c
r
u
o
S

)
σ
(

7
.
3
1

4
.
5

2
.
6

2
.
4

4
.
4

6
.
7
1

6
.
5

8
.
4

1
.
4

5
.
5

9
.
4

3
.
7
1

5
.
5

5
.
7

9
.
4

6
.
5

2
.
4
1

8
.
4

2
.
4

4
.
4

1
.
5
1

4
.
4

6
.
4

1
.
5

4
.
4
1

9
.
4

)

l

◦

(

b

◦

)

(

1
3
.
7
1
1

3
7
.
8
0
1

1
9
.
8
1
1

7
3
.
9
9

0
1
.
4
1
1

2
5
.
8
0
3

1
5
.
1
2
1

7
5
.
0
2
1

1
4
.
3
0
3

5
3
.
7
2
1

6
5
.
7
2
1

9
4
.
5
2
1

5
7
.
7
9
2

4
1
.
8
8
1

5
4
.
3
3
1

3
2
.
9
7
2

7
4
.
0
9
2

3
3
.
5
5
1

0
2
.
4
2
1

1
9
.
1
6
2

4
9
.
4
3
1

5
3
.
7
4
1

1
8
.
3
3
1

3
2
.
1
3
1

5
5
.
3
3
1

2
8
.
3
3
1

0
0
.
0

3
4
.
9
3
-

9
8
.
5

1
3
.
6
6
-

1
1
.
5
5
-

7
5
.
1
6
-

6
1
.
0

9
2
.
9
1
-

3
3
.
3
5
-

5
0
.
3
5
-

6
3
.
9
4
-

8
8
.
3
1
-

9
9
.
4
5
-

1
6
.
1
8
-

8
7
.
5
3
-

0
0
.
1
7
-

0
1
.
7
5
-

7
4
.
7
5
-

6
2
.
3
2

0
1
.
0
7
-

7
6
.
7
-

1
3
.
3
3
-

3
5
.
0
-

6
9
.
6

3
1
.
1

5
0
.
1

0
2
2
6
+
7
.
2
0
0
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
0
2
2
+
2
.
4
0
0
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
2
8
6
+
7
.
7
0
0
0
J

L
G
F
2

e
c
r
u
o
s

d
e
ﬁ
i
t
n
e
d
n
U

i

9
0
5
0
–
3
.
4
1
0
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
2
7
0
+
0
.
1
3
0
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
5
5
–
7
.
2
3
0
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
5
2
6
+
8
.
8
3
0
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
3
3
4
+
1
.
9
3
0
0
J

L
G
F
2

7
4
3
6
–
8
.
8
4
0
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
4
9
0
+
2
.
2
0
1
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
2
3
1
+
8
.
3
0
1
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
8
4
+
5
.
6
0
1
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
1
6
–
6
.
6
1
1
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
2
3
2
–
6
.
4
2
1
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
1
6
2
+
4
.
9
2
1
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
0
4
4
–
4
.
3
3
1
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
4
8
5
–
6
.
3
4
1
0
J

L
G
F
2

7
0
1
0
+
4
.
8
5
1
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
5
5
8
+
6
.
8
5
1
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
0
1
4
–
4
.
0
0
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
1
3
5
+
1
.
2
1
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

6
1
5
2
+
2
.
1
2
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
2
0
6
+
3
.
1
2
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

0
2
8
6
+
7
.
2
2
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
2
6
+
0
.
4
2
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
4
5
1
6
+
9
.
5
2
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

245

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

5
3
9
7
.
0

–

–

6
2
4
2
.
0

–

7
2
4
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

3
5
6
9
.
0

–

–

2
8
9
.
0

6
1
7
9
.
0

–

–

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

L
B

P
S
M

Q
R
S
F

Q
R
S
F

Q
R
S
F

–

–

–

4
4
0
9
.
0

–

2
1
3
7
0
.
0

9
7
8
8
.
0

–

1
9
1
2
.
0

4
5
1
4
.
0

9
2
3
3
.
0

c
a
L

L
B

3
0
4
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

9
6
5
8
.
0

–

–

–

1

–

–

–

–

1
1
-
e
6
9
9
.
1

5
0
-
e
1
8
0
.
2

7
0
-
e
6
7
9
.
4

2
1
-
e
7
7
3
.
7

5
0
-
e
9
3
2
.
8

0
1
-
e
7
9
7
.
3

5
0
-
e
3
1
3
.
6

6
0
-
e
2
7
1
.
1

7
0
-
e
6
.
7

7
0
-
e
8
3
4
.
5

0
1
-
e
7
3
1
.
2

4
1
0
3
0
0
.
0

6
0
-
e
8
5
3
.
1

0
1
-
e
1
1
.
1

9
0
-
e
3
9
7
.
1

3
7
1
4
0
.
0

9
9
9
9
.
0

9
0
-
e
1
1
4
.
3

5
0
-
e
3
8
0
.
3

6
0
-
e
8
4
3
.
1

1

0
1
-
e
3
9
3
.
2

7
0
-
e
9
1
2
.
4

8
0
-
e
2
4
5
.
2

9
0
-
e
5
6
2
.
3

5
2
7
7
0
.
0

1

–

–

–

2
1
-
e
3
0
5
.
2

8
0
-
e
7
6
1
.
6

0
1
-
e
5
0
5
.
1

2
1
-
e
7
1
6
.
7

1
1
-
e
8
7
0
.
2

2
1
-
e
3
2
.
8

1
1
-
e
4
9
7
.
2

1
1
-
e
6
4
2
.
1

2
1
-
e
1
6
0
.
8

1
1
-
e
7
1
0
.
1

2
1
-
e
6
7
4
.
6

1
1
-
e
5
8
4
.
1

2
1
-
e
9
7
5
.
5

1
1
-
e
3
8
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
9
1
.
1

2
1
-
e
8
6
5
.
7

2
1
-
e
2
3
6
.
5

2
1
-
e
9
2
1
.
8

2
1
-
e
6
1
2
.
9

1
1
-
e
8
6
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
4
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
2
0
2
.
1

2
1
-
e
5
3
6
.
9

1
1
-
e
6
0
0
.
4

2
1
-
e
2
9
6
.
4

1
1
-
e
5
5
9
.
1

1
1
-
e
3
4
1
.
1

2
1
-
e
3
9
3
.
9

1
1
-
e
1
8
5
.
2

1
1
-
e
7
6
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
6
0
.
1

2
1
-
e
5
5
4
.
9

5
.
6

1
.
6

5
.
6

9
.
8

5
.
7

1
.
6

5
.
6

5
.
4

0
.
5

3
.
5

4
.
9

4
.
4

8
.
5

4
.
4

9
.
7

8
.
6

7
.
6

5
.
5

2
.
9

8
.
5

3
.
6
1

2
.
4

6
.
7

6
.
9

6
.
4

5
.
3
1

5
.
4

5
.
4

4
.
5

0
1
.
8
5
1

7
4
.
4
3
1

3
2
.
0
5
1

0
4
.
4
3
1

4
8
.
8
3
1

4
2
.
9
5
1

9
7
.
0
4
1

6
9
.
3
5
1

8
0
.
8
3
1

5
1
.
0
0
2

5
5
.
4
4
1

6
3
.
9
3
1

5
4
.
1
9
1

1
5
.
2
6
1

0
5
.
1
8
2

6
3
.
8
7
1

8
5
.
2
4
1

6
9
.
9
3
1

6
0
.
3
3
1

7
4
.
3
7
1

5
7
.
6
4
1

1
5
.
8
1
2

7
2
.
0
6
1

7
2
.
8
1
2

7
8
.
5
4
1

9
2
.
8
4
1

4
1
.
9
5
1

7
0
.
6
4
1

1
6
.
6
8
1

8
5
.
6
4
-

2
2
.
0
-

9
8
.
4
3
-

7
0
.
2

1
9
.
6
-

1
7
.
1
4
-

4
2
.
7
-

0
6
.
9
2
-

9
0
.
0
-

5
1
.
7
5
-

2
8
.
7
-

0
5
.
1

2
2
.
2
5
-

7
5
.
1
3
-

8
0
.
6
4
-

2
6
.
3
4
-

0
6
.
1

3
7
.
5

5
5
.
5
1

3
9
.
2
3
-

3
7
.
1
-

5
9
.
1
5
-

4
4
.
8
1
-

5
8
.
0
5
-

5
3
.
2

4
8
.
0

5
2
.
0
1
-

6
4
.
4

0
3
.
2
3
-

c
9
2
0
6
+
2
.
7
2
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
4
9
0
+
1
.
6
2
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
4
2
2
+
7
.
7
2
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
3
2
6
+
9
.
3
3
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
3
2
5
+
9
.
7
3
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
2
3
1
+
5
.
9
3
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
3
1
5
+
5
.
8
4
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

7
5
5
2
+
0
.
1
5
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
0
9
5
+
9
.
3
5
2
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
0
6
1
–
0
.
5
0
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
1
9
4
+
4
.
7
0
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
9
5
+
7
.
8
0
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
1
9
0
–
5
.
2
1
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
1
0
2
+
8
.
2
1
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
3
4
6
–
1
.
6
1
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
5
2
0
+
0
.
8
1
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
1
8
5
+
3
.
0
3
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
0
3
6
+
1
.
2
3
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
5
7
+
0
.
6
3
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

6
0
3
1
+
2
.
8
3
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

7
0
3
5
+
5
.
0
4
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
4
2
–
7
.
0
4
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
4
1
3
+
8
.
1
4
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

6
5
3
2
–
2
.
5
4
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
6
5
+
2
.
3
5
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

0
1
4
5
+
5
.
9
5
3
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
4
8
3
+
0
.
4
0
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
2
8
5
+
6
.
4
0
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
0
5
0
+
5
.
9
0
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

246

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

Q
R
S
F

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

3
3
4
8
.
0

–

6
2
4
7
.
0

4
7
0
1
.
0

–

7
5
5
5
.
0

7
2
8
9
.
0

–

4
0
8
9
0
.
0

1
3
6
3
0
.
0

–

4
6
4
8
.
0

8
8
9
.
0

2
3
8
9
.
0

–

7
7
5
1
.
0

4
5
4
3
0
.
0

–

–

7
7
6
8
.
0

9
7
9
8
0
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

6
9
8
9
.
0

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

2
1
-
e
8
7
9
.
1

6
0
-
e
3
3
.
5

8
0
-
e
1
7
1
.
5

8
0
-
e
5
8
2
.
4

6
0
-
e
8
8
3
.
3

2
1
-
e
3
8
3
.
1

7
0
-
e
4
2
.
1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

7
0
-
e
2
9
0
.
1

8
0
-
e
3
4
6
.
2

8
6
9
2
.
0

7
0
-
e
7
8
1
.
2

7
0
-
e
6
1
1
.
1

9
0
-
e
1
2
1
.
6

5
2
7
9
.
0

3
1
-
e
9
6
2
.
5

8
0
-
e
2
5
3
.
5

7
0
-
e
8
7
4
.
3

4
2
5
4
.
0

8
0
-
e
5
2
1
.
1

8
0
-
e
7
2
8
.
9

3
6
4
1
0
0
0
.
0

2
4
2
6
0
.
0

2
0
9
5
0
0
.
0

8
9
4
8
.
0

9
9
9
9
.
0

1

–

–

8
5
9
1
.
0

4
0
0
2
0
0
.
0

4
0
1
6
0
0
0
.
0

9
9
9
9
.
0

2
1
-
e
9
8
.
8

2
1
-
e
7
0
8
.
5

1
1
-
e
7
1
3
.
1

2
1
-
e
9
5
.
5

1
1
-
e
8
6
5
.
1

2
1
-
e
9
6
6
.
7

2
1
-
e
6
7
3
.
8

1
1
-
e
5
6
4
.
3

2
1
-
e
9
2
8
.
6

1
1
-
e
3
5
1
.
2

1
1
-
e
6
7
6
.
1

2
1
-
e
7
2
7
.
9

2
1
-
e
7
1
4
.
7

2
1
-
e
2
1
0
.
8

1
1
-
e
6
3
.
1

2
1
-
e
3
9
3
.
8

2
1
-
e
2
3
1
.
7

1
1
-
e
9
1
0
.
2

1
1
-
e
1
8
1
.
2

1
1
-
e
6
1
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
2
6
.
2

1
1
-
e
7
1
1
.
1

2
1
-
e
2
4
4
.
8

1
1
-
e
7
7
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
8
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
8
9
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
0
.
1

2
1
-
e
4
6
1
.
5

1
1
-
e
9
6
4
.
2

6
.
7

1
.
4

4
.
5

4
.
5

1
.
9

8
.
5

5
.
4

0
.
7
1

2
.
6

6
.
6

0
.
7

5
.
4

1
.
6

3
.
8

9
.
4

5
.
5

4
.
5

1
.
8

5
.
8
1

1
.
6

1
.
7

6
.
4

1
.
1
1

0
.
6

9
.
4

3
.
9

0
.
5

1
.
4

4
.
1
1

7
8
.
5
9
1

3
1
.
2
0
2

1
2
.
9
4
1

0
2
.
9
4
2

3
5
.
1
4
1

0
3
.
0
4
2

0
4
.
9
4
1

0
9
.
0
5
1

9
1
.
9
7
2

4
8
.
1
4
2

5
4
.
5
6
1

2
7
.
4
6
1

9
0
.
6
8
2

2
9
.
6
1
2

4
0
.
4
7
1

6
7
.
2
9
1

9
5
.
9
4
2

9
4
.
8
7
1

3
2
.
8
2
2

4
6
.
7
7
1

9
8
.
2
8
1

4
2
.
0
7
1

7
7
.
4
4
1

6
3
.
9
0
2

5
4
.
8
0
2

8
5
.
9
0
2

3
6
.
7
0
2

1
3
.
7
8
2

6
5
.
3
7
1

7
3
.
7
3
-

2
7
.
8
3
-

9
1
.
3

2
9
.
5
4
-

6
5
.
1
1

4
1
.
5
4
-

5
6
.
4

5
8
.
3

9
5
.
8
3
-

8
7
.
3
4
-

9
0
.
9
-

6
0
.
8
-

7
1
.
5
3
-

5
2
.
7
3
-

0
5
.
3
1
-

1
3
.
1
2
-

4
3
.
5
3
-

3
6
.
6
-

4
8
.
9
2
-

8
0
.
4
-

9
8
.
6
-

0
2
.
2

9
1
.
8
1

6
6
.
9
1
-

2
2
.
9
1
-

3
7
.
8
1
-

8
5
.
7
1
-

7
5
.
0
3
-

7
6
.
2

7
5
3
0
–
8
.
9
0
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
5
8
0
–
9
.
4
1
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
1
5
5
+
2
.
5
1
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
5
3
4
–
0
.
6
1
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
6
6
+
9
.
8
1
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
4
7
3
–
9
.
0
2
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
6
5
+
4
.
3
2
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
3
4
5
+
7
.
6
2
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
0
7
6
–
2
.
7
2
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
4
8
3
–
0
.
8
2
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
0
5
3
+
2
.
0
3
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
2
6
3
+
5
.
1
3
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
3
3
7
–
0
.
8
3
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
5
8
1
–
8
.
9
3
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
4
5
5
2
+
5
.
0
4
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
6
0
+
4
.
8
5
4
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
4
4
–
0
.
5
1
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
3
6
2
+
7
.
6
1
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

0
3
5
2
–
3
.
3
2
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
4
8
2
+
1
.
4
2
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
4
2
2
+
6
.
6
2
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
8
3
+
3
.
9
2
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
5
7
6
+
9
.
3
3
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
4
5
0
–
8
.
4
3
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
5
4
0
–
9
.
4
3
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
4
3
5
0
–
5
.
8
3
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
2
3
0
–
3
.
9
3
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
5
7
–
1
.
0
4
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
9
4
5
3
+
3
.
0
4
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

247

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

–

5
0
2
9
.
0

–

9
4
5
9
.
0

5
4
3
9
.
0

–

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

5
1
0
7
.
0

c
a
L

L
B

1
4
1
8
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

9
0
4
4
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

1
3
1
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

6
7
4
.
0

5
3
3
8
.
0

1

–

–

–

4
6
9
2
.
0

2
2
2
2
0
0
0
.
0

5
0
-
e
6
7
5
.
2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

4
7
0
4
0
0
.
0

8
8
0
7
.
0

0
1
-
e
7
6
4
.
2

7
0
-
e
4
0
0
.
6

9
0
-
e
4
4
.
1

7
0
-
e
9
2
5
.
2

8
4
7
5
.
0

8
0
-
e
6
5
1
.
3

8
4
8
.
0

1

–

–

–

5
3
6
3
.
0

–

9
6
1
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

4
4
1
1
0
0
0
.
0

0
1
-
e
4
4
6
.
4

8
3
0
6
.
0

1

7
8
7
2
.
0

6
9
9
9
.
0

4
9
6
6
.
0

2
1
-
e
2
7
6
.
2

1
2
4
6
.
0

2
1
-
e
2
0
6
.
5

5
5
0
3
0
.
0

5
0
-
e
2
6
4
.
5

2
0
4
1
0
.
0

3
4
0
1
.
0

6
5
5
1
.
0

7
0
-
e
5
9
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
.
1

1
1
-
e
3
5
5
.
1

2
1
-
e
7
0
8
.
9

1
1
-
e
5
9
2
.
2

1
1
-
e
1
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
1
3
.
1

2
1
-
e
8
3
3
.
6

2
1
-
e
6
8
9
.
6

2
1
-
e
4
5
3
.
7

1
1
-
e
2
4
2
.
1

2
1
-
e
4
1
.
7

1
1
-
e
4
9
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
8
.
2

1
1
-
e
1
9
0
.
1

2
1
-
e
9
7
2
.
8

1
1
-
e
3
1
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
6
.
2

1
1
-
e
1
4
2
.
2

1
1
-
e
7
2
0
.
2

1
1
-
e
7
7
3
.
2

2
1
-
e
7
7
0
.
9

1
1
-
e
7
7
7
.
1

2
1
-
e
2
6
9
.
9

1
1
-
e
3
2
9
.
1

2
1
-
e
8
3
0
.
8

1
1
-
e
3
6
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
5
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
7
7
.
1

2
1
-
e
9
2
6
.
8

5
.
9

5
.
5

9
.
7

3
.
1
1

4
.
4

1
.
6

0
.
5

1
.
5

1
.
5

6
.
9

6
.
7

6
.
7

5
.
2
1

1
.
4

4
.
6

4
.
5

2
.
0
1

4
.
5

8
.
7

9
.
9

8
.
7

7
.
7

3
.
9

8
.
9

4
.
4

1
.
4

2
.
6

1
.
7

3
.
6

9
6
.
6
0
2

0
2
.
6
0
2

0
5
.
2
5
1

5
1
.
5
0
2

7
9
.
2
7
1

3
0
.
7
0
2

1
4
.
0
5
2

0
7
.
5
2
2

9
1
.
3
7
1

8
7
.
6
4
2

0
2
.
4
7
1

0
6
.
3
1
2

7
7
.
9
8
1

5
3
.
7
8
1

2
5
.
3
3
2

1
2
.
7
8
1

0
7
.
6
0
2

7
4
.
7
0
2

9
4
.
7
0
2

7
7
.
2
0
2

8
4
.
1
4
1

0
0
.
9
0
2

7
0
.
5
5
1

3
0
.
2
1
2

8
8
.
7
0
2

5
0
.
4
2
2

8
0
.
4
2
2

3
2
.
4
2
2

9
2
.
1
6
2

1
4
.
6
1
-

5
7
.
5
1
-

4
7
.
5
1

0
1
.
4
1
-

1
7
.
4

7
9
.
4
1
-

2
0
.
8
2
-

5
7
.
9
1
-

4
6
.
7

6
9
.
5
2
-

8
0
.
8

c
3
0
2
0
–
8
.
1
4
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
2
1
0
–
2
.
3
4
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
1
0
6
+
6
.
5
4
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
2
0
0
+
1
.
7
4
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
2
7
3
+
4
.
7
4
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
1
4
1
0
–
5
.
7
4
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
4
3
4
–
9
.
5
5
5
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
4
9
1
–
8
.
0
0
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
3
8
3
+
9
.
0
0
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
0
4
–
7
.
2
0
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
5
7
3
+
3
.
5
0
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
6
.
2
1
-

c
8
1
6
0
–
5
.
7
0
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
2
.
0

7
7
.
3

7
3
0
2
+
3
.
8
0
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
2
4
2
+
6
.
6
1
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
8
.
7
1
-

6
5
5
2
–
8
.
0
2
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
.
5

2
3
.
2
-

9
9
.
1
-

4
2
.
1
-

4
3
.
2

7
1
.
5
2

7
3
.
0
-

0
6
.
2
2

8
5
.
0
-

4
5
.
4

1
8
.
1
-

6
9
.
0
-

6
3
.
0

8
0
5
2
+
2
.
1
2
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
2
4
0
+
7
.
1
3
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
5
3
0
+
3
.
4
3
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
1
4
0
+
0
.
7
3
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
0
0
1
+
1
.
1
4
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
1
3
7
+
2
.
1
4
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
1
3
0
+
9
.
2
4
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
3
0
6
+
6
.
4
4
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
0
0
+
7
.
7
4
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
3
6
0
+
4
.
8
5
6
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
4
0
1
–
3
.
5
0
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
2
0
1
–
5
.
8
0
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
5
9
0
–
5
.
3
1
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

7
2
.
6
1
-

0
0
0
5
–
2
.
9
1
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

248

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

P
S
M

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

Q
R
S
F

Q
R
S
F

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

2
5
1
.
0

2
9
7
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

1
6
6
4
.
0

–

–

9
8
3
0
.
0

–

6
2
4
9
.
0

–

–

5
6
5
9
.
0

3
3
0
1
0
.
0

1

–

–

–

–

–

3
1
-
e
6
5
.
1

0
1
-
e
9
2
0
.
9

6
0
-
e
9
7
3
.
1

5
0
-
e
7
9
5
.
1

6
0
-
e
6
2
4
.
3

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

8
0
-
e
2
9
2
.
1

7
0
-
e
1
6
8
.
9

7
0
-
e
1
6
2
.
6

3
1
-
e
4
8
7
.
1

7
0
-
e
6
3
.
5

8
0
-
e
7
9
6
.
2

5
6
2
3
.
0

7
0
-
e
8
9
5
.
6

9
0
-
e
9
3
8
.
1

3
4
5
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

7
4
6
3
.
0

4
9
5
3
.
0

2
6
6
2
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

9
9
9
9
.
0

–

–

1

9
9
9
9
.
0

1
1
-
e
7
2
5
.
3

6
0
-
e
7
7
1
.
2

1
4
0
2
0
0
.
0

6
2
8
2
0
0
.
0

8
0
3
6
0
.
0

0
1
-
e
6
6
4
.
6

3
1
-
e
1
.
5

8
0
-
e
2
2
3
.
2

1

7
7
4
2
.
0

4
4
6
2
0
.
0

1

1

–

2
6
3
2
0
0
0
.
0

4
9
9
9
.
0

2
1
-
e
7
5
.
9

2
1
-
e
9
9
2
.
5

1
1
-
e
2
6
6
.
1

2
1
-
e
8
5
9
.
5

1
1
-
e
2
7
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
0
2
.
2

2
1
-
e
3
4
7
.
4

2
1
-
e
2
8
6
.
9

1
1
-
e
4
0
3
.
1

2
1
-
e
5
6
9
.
6

2
1
-
e
6
5
4
.
6

2
1
-
e
9
5
3
.
4

1
1
-
e
6
4
1
.
1

2
1
-
e
1
7
2
.
8

2
1
-
e
5
9
8
.
5

2
1
-
e
6
7
7
.
8

1
1
-
e
2
8
3
.
1

2
1
-
e
9
7
7
.
5

1
1
-
e
6
1
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
2
6
3
.
2

2
1
-
e
2
1
6
.
6

2
1
-
e
7
3
8
.
4

2
1
-
e
3
7
0
.
5

1
1
-
e
4
9
9
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
3
4
.
5

1
1
-
e
5
4
4
.
2

1
1
-
e
2
3
1
.
4

1
1
-
e
6
6
8
.
4

1
1
-
e
2
2
4
.
4

0
.
8

1
.
4

9
.
6

4
.
4

2
.
5

4
.
2
1

5
.
5

3
.
7

2
.
5

5
.
4

3
.
4

5
.
4

1
.
5

8
.
5

2
.
5

3
.
5

5
.
1
1

4
.
4

2
.
8

2
.
2
1

4
.
7

1
.
4

1
.
4

3
.
5

5
.
5
1

6
.
7

6
.
3
1

1
.
4
1

1
.
4
1

8
4
.
9
8
1

6
0
.
2
2
2

6
8
.
6
4
2

9
0
.
5
9
2

4
2
.
6
4
2

4
3
.
1
4
2

0
0
.
5
3
1

9
3
.
1
2
2

7
9
.
8
3
2

5
4
.
1
0
2

8
7
.
4
3
2

7
2
.
7
7
2

6
6
.
3
4
2

4
9
.
3
3
2

3
9
.
9
2
2

4
0
.
0
7
2

5
6
.
4
2
2

0
4
.
8
7
2

0
6
.
0
5
2

9
8
.
6
5
2

5
7
.
7
4
1

5
7
.
3
5
1

4
3
.
6
9
1

5
4
.
1
6
2

3
6
.
3
6
2

5
9
.
7
6
2

7
5
.
5
6
2

9
3
.
8
6
2

7
8
.
4
6
2

6
3
.
9
1

3
9
.
4

6
5
.
5
-

7
4
.
5
2
-

7
8
.
3
-

0
7
.
0
-

4
1
.
9
2

2
0
.
1
1

4
8
.
1

2
1
.
2
2

8
5
.
5

1
0
9
2
+
9
.
3
2
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
4
5
0
–
8
.
5
2
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
3
2
3
–
1
.
7
3
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

6
4
2
8
–
5
.
7
3
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
1
1
3
–
7
.
2
4
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
2
5
2
–
1
.
4
4
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

0
1
9
7
+
5
.
5
4
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
2
2
0
–
0
.
6
4
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
2
2
–
5
.
8
4
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

7
3
9
1
+
2
.
3
5
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
3
6
1
–
2
.
3
5
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

6
7
.
7
1
-

3
3
4
6
–
3
.
6
5
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
.
1

5
6
.
7

5
0
.
1
1

7
1
.
3
1
-

6
1
.
4
1

3
0
.
7
1
-

2
8
.
7

2
7
.
3

1
6
.
5
3

0
9
.
6
3

0
3
.
6
3

9
4
.
1

9
1
.
0

1
0
.
3
-

1
0
.
0
-

8
6
.
1
-

3
4
.
1

c
5
1
6
2
–
0
.
8
5
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
4
4
1
–
8
.
8
5
7
0
J

L
G
F
2

0
4
9
0
–
6
.
2
0
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
1
6
5
–
7
.
2
0
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
3
3
0
–
2
.
3
0
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
5
6
–
0
.
7
0
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
2
8
2
–
8
.
8
3
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

6
5
5
3
–
3
.
1
4
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
1
7
6
+
6
.
3
4
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
1
2
6
+
9
.
4
4
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

0
2
8
2
+
0
.
6
4
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
0
4
–
7
.
6
4
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
2
3
4
–
7
.
8
4
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

6
4
8
4
–
1
.
0
5
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
0
5
4
–
7
.
4
5
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
1
8
4
–
0
.
8
5
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

3
3
3
4
–
3
.
8
5
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

249

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

1
8
9
8
.
0

–

6
0
6
9
0
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1

–

6
3
9
9
.
0

8
9
9
9
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

9
3
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

Q
R
S
F

1
5
5
1
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

1
0
6
9
.
0

–

c
a
L

L
B

Q
R
S
F

9
6
9
8
.
0

6
1
0
2
0
.
0

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

6
0
5
7
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

1

–

–

–

–

8
6
8
5
0
0
0
.
0

7
9
9
.
0

2
1
-
e
5
4
3
.
3

3
4
4
6
0
.
0

0
1
-
e
1
4
0
.
3

5
9
8
9
.
0

6
3
3
3
.
0

1

4
0
6
2
0
.
0

1

5
9
9
9
.
0

0
1
-
e
1
4
6
.
5

6
1
5
8
.
0

3
9
6
9
.
0

7
0
-
e
9
1
.
1

9
5
7
2
0
0
.
0

5
0
-
e
9
5
1
.
4

5
9
2
2
.
0

1

3
0
8
9
.
0

7
0
-
e
5
5
3
.
2

9
0
-
e
6
6
6
.
5

7
0
-
e
6
4
1
.
4

4
2
7
5
.
0

9
5
9
9
.
0

1

0
1
-
e
1
5
5
.
4

9
3
3
5
0
0
0
.
0

8
0
-
e
5
1
6
.
1

5
0
-
e
5
3
3
.
2

2
1
-
e
1
4
5
.
6

1
1
-
e
7
2
5
.
2

2
1
-
e
7
7
8
.
6

1
1
-
e
3
1
0
.
4

1
1
-
e
9
6
3
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
4
2
.
2

1
1
-
e
4
9
0
.
3

1
1
-
e
6
7
6
.
3

1
1
-
e
5
4
2
.
2

2
1
-
e
3
8
6
.
4

2
1
-
e
1
0
3
.
6

1
1
-
e
4
5
2
.
1

2
1
-
e
2
4
6
.
4

2
1
-
e
1
0
3
.
8

2
1
-
e
8
7
9
.
8

1
1
-
e
9
8
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
4
3
.
3

2
1
-
e
4
9
7
.
6

2
1
-
e
2
7
8
.
3

2
1
-
e
8
8
9
.
4

2
1
-
e
4
0
8
.
6

1
1
-
e
4
5
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
0
5
.
7

1
1
-
e
5
7
3
.
6

2
1
-
e
1
0
1
.
5

1
1
-
e
6
4
1
.
2

2
1
-
e
8
2
3
.
6

2
1
-
e
2
9
3
.
8

1
1
-
e
5
8
9
.
1

6
.
4

7
.
5

3
.
6

5
.
2
1

0
.
7

1
.
4

5
.
7

2
.
1
1

3
.
9

2
.
4

4
.
4

0
.
3
1

1
.
4

9
.
4

7
.
6

4
.
1
1

7
.
8

2
.
4

1
.
4

6
.
4

3
.
4

7
.
5

4
.
7

5
.
2
1

3
.
4

1
.
6

2
.
4

8
.
5

8
.
7
1

2
1
.
1
5
2

8
9
.
5
6
2

1
7
.
6
4
1

9
7
.
7
6
2

0
5
.
8
6
2

5
1
.
9
6
2

6
7
.
8
6
2

6
9
.
9
6
2

4
9
.
3
7
2

5
8
.
5
1
2

2
0
.
3
6
2

4
2
.
2
8
2

9
4
.
8
4
2

8
8
.
7
6
2

4
8
.
1
5
2

8
8
.
9
6
2

1
2
.
2
8
2

2
2
.
4
7
2

8
5
.
0
9
1

6
9
.
5
5
1

6
9
.
4
7
2

2
3
.
5
8
2

5
2
.
4
8
2

3
5
.
4
8
2

4
3
.
3
6
2

8
2
.
6
8
2

7
2
.
9
9
2

0
7
.
1
8
2

5
4
.
0
9
2

5
2
.
3
1

9
9
.
0

0
1
.
7
3

3
3
.
0
-

0
7
.
0
-

2
0
.
1
-

2
2
.
0

3
5
.
0

6
5
.
1
-

2
4
.
0
4

3
2
.
1
1

8
8
.
7
-

1
2
.
7
2

3
1
.
3
1

6
6
.
9
2

7
4
.
1
1

6
4
.
0
-

2
2
.
1
1

4
5
.
5
5

7
9
.
9
4

6
5
.
1
1

1
9
.
2
-

3
4
.
0
-

2
1
.
0

8
3
.
1
3

2
0
.
2
-

6
1
.
2
2
-

5
5
.
6

4
8
.
7
-

c
1
4
4
4
–
5
.
0
0
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
7
6
+
9
.
0
0
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
5
2
–
4
.
9
5
8
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
1
4
7
4
–
8
.
2
0
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
2
8
4
–
0
.
4
0
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
1
7
4
–
9
.
7
0
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

5
5
6
4
–
7
.
1
0
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
4
1
2
5
–
2
.
2
2
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

8
0
5
1
+
5
.
3
2
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

6
5
7
4
–
1
.
4
1
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

0
3
5
3
–
8
.
8
2
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

1
3
2
6
–
0
.
4
3
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
3
4
1
–
9
.
7
3
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

7
1
7
3
–
7
.
2
5
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
5
1
–
6
.
3
5
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

9
4
9
3
–
0
.
5
5
9
0
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
4
6
5
–
7
.
0
1
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
2
4
–
1
.
2
1
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
3
4
3
+
6
.
3
1
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
0
6
5
+
1
.
6
1
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
4
2
4
–
4
.
6
1
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
2
0
6
–
0
.
0
2
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
9
4
7
5
–
5
.
3
2
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
3
7
5
–
4
.
7
2
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
2
0
2
–
5
.
9
2
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
1
0
6
–
4
.
0
3
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
0
4
8
–
9
.
2
3
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
0
5
–
5
.
3
3
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
2
7
6
–
1
.
6
3
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

250

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

8
9
6
6
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

P
S
M

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

2
3
2
3
0
.
0

9
5
1
5
.
0

–

5
9
3
.
0

–

–

–

9
7
6
1
.
0

–

c
a
L

L
B

4
7
8
8
.
0

–

–

–

1

–

4
1
1
1
0
0
0
.
0

1

9
4
8
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

8
9
8
9
.
0

–

7
9
9
9
.
0

–

–

1

2
1
2
8
.
0

2
1
-
e
7
4
.
8

5
0
-
e
6
5
.
4

1

8
0
0
6
.
0

6
9
9
9
.
0

1

9
9
9
9
.
0

7
0
-
e
3
0
5
.
6

3
5
2
3
0
0
.
0

2
1
-
e
6
1
3
.
4

5
1
4
2
.
0

1

6
0
-
e
4
0
.
1

1

7
0
-
e
2
6
7
.
5

6
0
-
e
5
1
2
.
3

1

4
6
4
2
0
0
0
.
0

8
9
9
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

8
9
9
9
.
0

–

2
8
9
9
.
0

–

–

5
0
-
e
7
2
.
4

2
1
-
e
7
0
3
.
2

8
0
-
e
9
2
0
.
1

9
3
8
9
.
0

2
1
-
e
7
8
3
.
9

1

7
0
-
e
1
6
1
.
8

3
6
9
9
.
0

2
1
-
e
9
7
9
.
1

5
0
-
e
6
4
8
.
7

1
1
-
e
9
4
6
.
2

2
1
-
e
9
6
2
.
7

1
1
-
e
1
0
7
.
2

0
1
-
e
7
8
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
0
6
.
2

1
1
-
e
2
0
7
.
2

1
1
-
e
2
0
7
.
3

1
1
-
e
6
8
6
.
4

1
1
-
e
1
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
7
4
.
2

2
1
-
e
6
5
9
.
4

1
1
-
e
1
4
1
.
2

1
1
-
e
9
9
3
.
6

2
1
-
e
8
2
7
.
9

1
1
-
e
8
7
3
.
4

2
1
-
e
8
6
6
.
4

2
1
-
e
3
3
2
.
7

1
1
-
e
1
7
7
.
2

1
1
-
e
8
9
7
.
1

2
1
-
e
3
2
5
.
5

1
1
-
e
2
4
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
8
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
6
2
.
2

2
1
-
e
8
2
6
.
6

1
1
-
e
6
9
1
.
4

2
1
-
e
8
9
4
.
9

1
1
-
e
7
6
2
.
5

2
1
-
e
6
0
1
.
7

2
1
-
e
3
8
0
.
9

5
.
4

9
.
5

4
.
5

1
.
6
3

9
.
4

3
.
7

0
.
2
1

5
.
2
1

6
.
5

4
.
4

2
.
4

1
.
5

9
.
6
1

1
.
5

0
.
0
1

6
.
4

8
.
4

6
.
8

5
.
0
2

5
.
4

1
.
8

1
.
1
1

9
.
4

3
.
4

8
.
9

8
.
5

7
.
1
1

4
.
4

0
.
6

5
0
.
6
8
2

5
9
.
7
6
2

7
4
.
6
8
2

9
5
.
7
8
2

8
9
.
7
8
2

5
0
.
8
8
2

9
4
.
8
8
2

5
1
.
9
8
2

6
9
.
1
9
2

9
8
.
9
8
2

3
7
.
0
7
2

6
9
.
0
9
2

1
2
.
0
9
2

9
6
.
6
9
2

5
5
.
0
9
2

1
1
.
5
6
2

6
1
.
9
8
2

7
7
.
1
9
2

0
5
.
6
7
2

4
0
.
9
7
2

1
5
.
8
6
2

4
5
.
5
7
1

7
6
.
4
9
2

6
2
.
0
8
2

9
4
.
7
9
2

7
8
.
5
9
2

3
0
.
8
9
2

5
2
.
0
9
2

0
9
.
5
9
2

1
1
.
0
-

9
2
.
9
2

8
2
.
0
-

4
6
.
0
-

8
8
.
0
-

4
0
.
0
-

1
7
.
0

1
6
.
0
-

3
9
.
5
-

1
3
.
1
-

4
9
.
4
3

5
8
.
2
-

0
4
.
0
-

0
8
.
4
1
-

3
9
.
0
-

4
6
.
8
4

4
6
.
6

9
3
.
0

5
0
.
6
3

9
2
.
3
3

4
7
.
1
5

9
6
.
9
6

6
8
.
0
-

0
6
.
2
5

5
3
.
0
-

4
3
.
1
1

1
2
.
0
-

6
8
.
8
3

9
1
.
8
1

c
8
2
8
5
–
4
.
6
3
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
2
4
2
–
2
.
8
3
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
5
8
5
–
6
.
8
3
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
0
0
6
–
8
.
6
4
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
2
2
9
5
–
3
.
0
5
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
4
9
5
–
0
.
5
4
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
8
5
–
0
.
6
5
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
0
6
–
2
.
6
5
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
6
6
–
7
.
8
5
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
1
1
6
–
3
.
9
5
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
5
0
2
–
9
.
9
5
0
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
0
3
6
–
1
.
2
0
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
0
6
–
7
.
4
0
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
2
6
7
–
4
.
5
0
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
1
1
6
–
6
.
5
0
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
0
7
0
–
0
.
5
1
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
4
3
5
–
2
.
7
1
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
7
2
0
6
–
9
.
8
1
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
2
2
–
0
.
0
2
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
2
5
2
–
3
.
3
2
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
5
0
–
0
.
9
2
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
5
7
3
+
5
.
9
2
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
3
2
6
–
8
.
8
3
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
5
7
0
–
7
.
6
5
1
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
4
2
6
–
6
.
3
0
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
5
0
5
–
3
.
7
0
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
4
2
6
–
5
.
8
0
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
5
2
2
–
6
.
8
0
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
1
4
4
–
1
.
4
1
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

251

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

L
B

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

5
2
8
9
.
0

–

1
1
1
4
.
0

4
7
5
9
.
0

8
8
7
.
0

–

2
2
8
9
.
0

7
2
5
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

1
3
8
9
.
0

7
9
6
9
.
0

–

–

3
9
0
4
.
0

5
8
8
9
.
0

3
9
1
7
.
0

–

–

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

L
B

6
9
7
2
.
0

8
8
8
9
.
0

–

–

–

4
1
1
9
.
0

2
0
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1
8
8
.
0

–

–

–

9
0
-
e
1
8
3
.
9

1
1
-
e
9
8
9
.
8

5
4
1
1
.
0

1

9
9
9
9
.
0

9
5
4
3
0
0
0
.
0

6
0
-
e
2
1
1
.
3

8
0
-
e
3
0
7
.
3

5
0
4
4
.
0

0
1
-
e
3
6
0
.
2

8
0
-
e
1
9
7
.
4

1
1
-
e
6
1
6
.
7

6
8
8
9
.
0

9
0
-
e
5
7
3
.
2

7
0
-
e
2
1
2
.
1

5
0
-
e
4
7
2
.
1

4
1
9
9
.
0

3
9
8
9
.
0

1

9
6
9
4
0
0
.
0

8
0
-
e
3
9
3
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
6
2
.
1

1
5
9
9
.
0

1

–

–

–

–

4
6
3
9
.
0

–

7
0
3
1
0
0
0
.
0

0
1
-
e
1
4
6
.
1

8
0
-
e
7
2
5
.
2

1
1
-
e
1
7
0
.
8

7
9
9
9
.
0

6
0
-
e
9
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
5
0
.
1

2
1
-
e
5
3
3
.
3

2
1
-
e
5
2
1
.
9

1
1
-
e
8
3
3
.
3

1
1
-
e
3
5
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
5
3
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
8
3
.
2

1
1
-
e
7
1
3
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
5
6
.
2

1
1
-
e
5
3
1
.
1

2
1
-
e
9
4
9
.
5

2
1
-
e
6
2
3
.
8

1
1
-
e
6
3
2
.
1

2
1
-
e
7
5
3
.
7

1
1
-
e
6
3
7
.
2

2
1
-
e
3
5
2
.
6

1
1
-
e
4
3
8
.
3

1
1
-
e
5
5
5
.
3

1
1
-
e
8
6
1
.
6

1
1
-
e
6
1
7
.
1

2
1
-
e
3
2
7
.
8

2
1
-
e
8
8
1
.
7

1
1
-
e
3
3
5
.
4

1
1
-
e
9
4
4
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
1
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
6
5
.
1

2
1
-
e
1
5
9
.
5

1
1
-
e
6
6
0
.
2

2
1
-
e
5
9
0
.
7

3
.
8

2
.
4

9
.
2
1

3
.
4
2

1
.
8

1
.
0
1

1
.
5

2
.
8

3
.
5

2
.
5

4
.
5

4
.
5

5
.
4

5
.
5

8
.
5

0
.
5

5
.
5
1

1
.
6

1
.
3
4

5
.
4

7
.
5

1
.
6

6
.
1
1

6
.
5

9
.
4

4
.
9

2
.
4

7
.
5

6
.
4

8
6
.
9
8
2

7
4
.
4
2
1

2
0
.
5
8
1

2
9
.
8
9
2

1
8
.
0
0
3

2
7
.
9
9
2

4
1
.
1
0
3

8
0
.
2
0
3

7
0
.
2
0
3

3
5
.
2
0
3

2
4
.
2
0
3

0
8
.
3
0
3

1
5
.
3
0
3

7
7
.
4
0
3

2
3
.
4
0
3

5
4
.
5
1
3

4
7
.
4
0
3

3
0
.
5
0
3

9
6
.
7
0
3

1
1
.
5
0
3

5
2
.
9
0
3

0
4
.
3
1
3

5
8
.
5
0
3

5
7
.
6
0
3

1
8
.
7
0
3

2
4
.
9
0
3

5
7
.
1
1
3

4
5
.
7
0
3

0
8
.
1
1
3

4
5
.
5
5

3
1
.
7
3

8
7
.
3
8

0
8
.
3
1

2
4
.
2
-

4
5
.
1
1

0
9
.
0

1
0
.
9
-

2
3
.
0

0
7
.
7

9
6
.
4
3

1
8
.
0
4

0
4
.
4

1
0
.
5
2

3
4
.
0
-

1
4
.
4
7

8
0
.
2

8
2
.
0

0
2
.
8
2

9
1
.
2
-

5
7
.
8
3

7
8
.
4
5

5
3
.
0
-

2
7
.
4

6
3
.
8

3
9
.
4
1

2
4
.
7
2

9
3
.
1

3
1
.
1
2

3
3
6
0
–
4
.
1
2
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
9
7
+
3
.
3
2
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
9
2
+
0
.
6
2
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
8
4
–
7
.
7
2
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
5
6
–
1
.
1
3
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
1
5
–
3
.
1
3
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
5
1
6
–
1
.
6
3
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
5
1
7
–
6
.
0
4
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
2
6
–
9
.
3
4
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
1
5
5
–
6
.
8
4
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
8
2
–
5
.
9
4
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
0
2
2
–
2
.
4
5
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
2
8
5
–
8
.
5
5
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
4
7
3
–
8
.
9
5
2
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
1
3
6
–
7
.
3
0
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
5
1
1
+
0
.
5
0
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
4
0
6
–
2
.
6
0
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
3
2
6
–
6
.
9
0
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
2
4
3
–
7
.
1
1
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
5
4
6
–
0
.
2
1
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
5
3
2
–
9
.
2
1
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
3
7
0
–
6
.
5
1
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
3
6
–
2
.
7
1
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
5
7
5
–
1
.
0
2
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
4
5
–
4
.
4
2
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
2
7
4
–
5
.
8
2
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
4
4
3
–
5
.
9
2
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
0
1
6
–
7
.
9
2
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
5
0
4
–
3
.
5
3
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

252

Q
R
S
F

4
8
2
2
.
0

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

–

2
1
8
9
.
0

1

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

2
6
2
.
0

4
0
8
.
0

2
9
3
9
.
0

4
8
8
8
.
0

–

2
6
8
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

7
0
-
e
4
2
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
2
2
8
.
8

9
0
-
e
9
0
4
.
2

9
0
-
e
4
0
6
.
3

7
0
5
1
0
0
0
.
0

7
0
-
e
6
2
0
.
1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

4
0
8
9
.
0

–

8
5
1
8
.
0

–

2
9
6
8
.
0

7
7
4
3
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

2
1
-
e
8
6
7
.
3

5
0
-
e
9
2
3
.
1

8
8
8
8
.
0

6
0
-
e
5
0
6
.
1

3
8
0
6
.
0

8
5
0
9
.
0

1

1
1
5
0
0
.
0

6
0
-
e
7
8
6
.
1

9
0
-
e
6
8
9
.
9

4
1
3
5
0
.
0

0
1
-
e
7
7
6
.
5

7
0
-
e
5
8
1
.
4

0
1
-
e
8
3
8
.
3

0
1
-
e
5
3
2
.
1

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

Q
R
S
F

P
S
M

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

P
S
M

5
5
2
8
.
0

4
6
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

4
8
9
9
.
0

6
0
-
e
5
5
1
.
8

8
0
-
e
2
8
9
.
3

7
0
-
e
8
1
2
.
3

3
1
3
3
0
.
0

5
0
-
e
1
3
4
.
3

9
9
9
9
.
0

9
9
9
9
.
0

–

8
0
-
e
9
6
8
.
3

6
9
9
9
.
0

1
1
-
e
1
7
6
.
1

2
1
-
e
9
3
3
.
7

2
1
-
e
5
8
7
.
4

2
1
-
e
1
8
1
.
7

2
1
-
e
3
5
6
.
6

2
1
-
e
8
9
4
.
7

1
1
-
e
1
5
4
.
5

2
1
-
e
3
7
3
.
6

1
1
-
e
4
7
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
5
7
.
2

2
1
-
e
5
3
5
.
5

2
1
-
e
8
2
.
8

1
1
-
e
6
0
0
.
1

0
1
-
e
9
5
0
.
1

2
1
-
e
5
3
8
.
7

1
1
-
e
6
6
0
.
2

2
1
-
e
9
7
3
.
7

1
1
-
e
2
1
4
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
9
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
3
9
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
3
0
.
3

2
1
-
e
2
0
.
7

2
1
-
e
7
0
.
8

1
1
-
e
3
5
2
.
3

1
1
-
e
3
1
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
0
2
.
3

1
1
-
e
1
9
2
.
1

0
.
6

6
.
5

3
.
4

4
.
5

0
.
5

0
.
5

4
.
1
1

4
.
4

0
.
7

5
.
5

3
.
4

6
.
5

3
.
4

8
.
5
1

3
.
5

8
.
4

1
.
9

3
.
5

5
.
4

6
.
6

0
.
5

0
.
7

2
.
2
1

9
.
4

5
.
6

9
.
5

9
.
4

8
.
0
1

2
.
7

4
9
.
8
0
3

9
7
.
6
1
3

1
5
.
5
2
3

5
6
.
5
1
3

6
9
.
7
1
3

5
0
.
7
1
3

5
6
.
9
0
3

3
7
.
8
1
3

3
0
.
9
0
3

5
1
.
1
1
3

3
4
.
2
2
3

6
9
.
6
2
3

3
9
.
3
1
3

9
6
.
1
1
3

1
0
.
2
2
3

4
4
.
2
1
3

4
8
.
5
1
1

4
7
.
4
1
3

8
5
.
1
1
3

5
8
.
8
1
3

8
6
.
6
1
3

6
0
.
1
1
3

4
5
.
3
1
3

3
5
.
7
0
3

8
0
.
2
3
3

0
4
.
4
1
3

1
9
.
8
1
3

8
7
.
7
1
3

3
5
.
2
2
3

9
3
.
5

7
7
.
7
3

0
5
.
6
5

8
5
.
7
2

8
1
.
5
3

0
4
.
1
3

7
2
.
0
-

0
2
.
3
3

5
5
.
4
-

3
3
.
1

4
0
.
6
3

6
9
.
4
4

7
5
.
8

4
2
.
0

2
2
.
0
3

3
8
.
1

3
8
.
1
4

3
1
.
6

9
8
.
3
-

2
1
.
6
1

8
0
.
0
1

7
2
.
7
-

4
6
.
0
-

8
6
.
6
1
-

8
6
.
9
3

9
0
.
0
-

7
3
.
7

2
6
.
1

0
4
.
1
1

8
5
6
5
–
4
.
5
3
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
4
3
2
–
2
.
9
3
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
4
0
–
5
.
0
4
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
5
3
3
–
8
.
5
4
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
0
6
2
–
0
.
6
4
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
5
9
2
–
0
.
7
4
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
2
2
6
–
9
.
9
4
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
4
7
2
–
1
.
1
5
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
4
6
6
–
5
.
3
5
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
7
2
0
6
–
8
.
8
5
3
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
4
2
–
2
.
0
0
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
3
4
1
–
7
.
0
0
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
4
2
5
–
0
.
4
0
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
1
6
–
5
.
5
0
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
4
9
2
–
4
.
7
0
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
7
3
9
5
–
6
.
7
0
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
4
7
+
4
.
0
1
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
5
4
5
–
1
.
4
1
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
2
5
6
–
7
.
5
1
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
4
4
–
5
.
7
1
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
2
0
5
–
7
.
7
1
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
4
8
6
–
3
.
2
2
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
7
3
1
6
–
5
.
2
2
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
4
8
7
–
9
.
3
2
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
5
7
1
–
2
.
4
2
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
4
0
6
–
6
.
7
2
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
2
5
–
2
.
7
3
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
7
5
–
6
.
6
4
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
0
7
4
–
8
.
6
4
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

253

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

c
a
L

L
B

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

Q
R
S
F

8
8
0
8
.
0

7
6
6
.
0

4
6
2
5
0
.
0

7
1
4
5
0
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

Q
R
S
F

4
0
3
7
0
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

P
S
M

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

–

–

9
0
7
8
.
0

–

–

9
8
6
9
.
0

9
5
0
2
.
0

–

–

–

–

7
9
6
2
.
0

–

–

–

7
1
0
9
.
0

8
9
1
6
.
0

–

–

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

c
a
L

L
B

1
5
3
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

9
5
2
5
.
0

6
0
-
e
6
6
4
.
2

–

–

–

–

–

–

4
1
4
1
.
0

9
9
9
.
0

–

8
9
9
9
.
0

–

–

8
0
-
e
1
5
9
.
1

9
0
-
e
6
1
0
.
3

9
0
-
e
3
4
5
.
1

4
1
-
e
3
3
2
.
7

9
9
2
4
.
0

0
1
-
e
3
0
.
1

7
0
-
e
1
7
2
.
5

5
7
6
2
0
.
0

9
0
-
e
5
0
4
.
3

3
5
9
9
.
0

6
0
-
e
2
0
7
.
8

0
1
-
e
3
6
6
.
4

9
0
-
e
1
3
4
.
9

6
8
2
4
0
0
.
0

2
7
3
9
.
0

1
7
9
9
.
0

1

8
0
-
e
6
0
6
.
2

5
0
-
e
7
0
7
.
3

8
5
3
3
0
0
.
0

6
0
-
e
3
5
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
3
.
4

8
0
-
e
1
8
6
.
6

1

1

8
0
-
e
5
5
3
.
1

9
9
9
9
.
0

6
0
-
e
9
0
6
.
1

6
0
-
e
5
8
4
.
2

1
1
-
e
1
9
4
.
1

2
1
-
e
2
7
4
.
6

2
1
-
e
6
2
7
.
7

1
1
-
e
5
1
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
8
5
.
3

1
1
-
e
5
7
7
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
1
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
7
3
.
3

1
1
-
e
2
4
.
1

1
1
-
e
3
5
2
.
2

2
1
-
e
6
4
3
.
7

2
1
-
e
1
0
6
.
6

2
1
-
e
6
5
8
.
3

1
1
-
e
1
2
4
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
7
1
.
3

1
1
-
e
3
6
4
.
9

1
1
-
e
6
5
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
8
7
.
1

2
1
-
e
7
8
0
.
8

1
1
-
e
1
0
6
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
0
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
0
3
.
1

1
1
-
e
2
6
6
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
6
3
.
3

1
1
-
e
4
3
9
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
4
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
1
6
.
5

1
1
-
e
3
5
0
.
2

2
1
-
e
3
9
2
.
6

4
.
4

1
.
4

8
.
6

5
.
9

2
.
6

1
.
4

6
.
4

4
.
4

8
.
7

4
.
7

4
.
4

3
.
4

1
.
4

6
.
5

3
.
7

3
.
0
4

8
.
0
1

9
.
6

3
.
4

5
.
8

8
.
5

4
.
0
1

1
.
7

7
.
5

6
.
6

2
.
5

9
.
7

3
.
7

2
.
5

2
7
.
6
1
3

3
5
.
8
3
3

0
7
.
2
9

5
2
.
1
8

7
7
.
9
1
3

1
5
.
2
1

4
9
.
7
1
3

0
5
.
0
2
3

2
6
.
4
5
3

9
2
.
8
1
3

0
9
.
8
3
3

6
8
.
0
4
3

8
5
.
9
5

2
3
.
4
2
3

9
0
.
2
2
3

0
2
.
8
2
3

4
7
.
8
3
3

1
5
.
0
3
3

7
1
.
4

5
7
.
4
4
3

7
1
.
6
5
3

9
5
.
5
2

1
1
.
2
3
3

6
7
.
7
2
3

0
2
.
1
3
3

8
3
.
5

9
2
.
8
2
3

7
2
.
6
3
3

3
6
.
8
3

2
3
.
3
-

8
5
.
2
3

5
9
.
2
5

7
0
.
7
5

6
4
.
0

4
2
.
4
5

4
5
.
3
-

1
1
.
0
-

2
1
.
3
4

0
2
.
4
-

1
0
.
7
2

4
2
.
9
2

2
8
.
7
5

9
0
.
4

7
7
.
1
-

7
7
.
4

3
5
.
7
1

7
0
.
7

0
9
.
8
3

1
6
.
2
2

9
9
.
2
3

8
1
.
7
4

3
8
.
5

1
4
.
0

5
2
.
4

3
5
.
6
3

2
3
.
0

4
9
.
7

3
8
.
6
4

c
7
4
2
6
–
7
.
6
5
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
1
2
–
5
.
8
5
4
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
4
5
5
+
1
.
2
0
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
8
4
+
4
.
2
0
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
0
8
5
–
9
.
3
0
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
5
0
1
+
9
.
6
0
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
2
2
6
–
0
.
7
0
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
0
8
5
–
9
.
0
1
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
1
5
0
–
8
.
1
1
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
7
4
2
6
–
5
.
2
1
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
4
5
2
–
5
.
3
1
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
5
2
2
–
9
.
3
1
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
4
6
3
+
2
.
7
1
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
3
2
5
–
4
.
8
1
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
4
8
5
–
0
.
8
2
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
4
9
4
–
4
.
6
3
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
2
3
3
–
2
.
9
3
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
6
4
–
3
.
9
3
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
4
2
0
–
7
.
3
4
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
5
2
–
1
.
4
4
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
2
1
1
–
5
.
4
4
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
4
1
+
3
.
8
4
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
6
4
–
0
.
1
5
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
3
3
5
–
3
.
1
5
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
2
8
4
–
8
.
2
5
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
2
3
0
–
5
.
3
5
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
7
1
3
5
–
4
.
4
5
5
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
2
2
4
–
1
.
1
0
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
0
3
2
+
4
.
2
0
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

254

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

Q
R
S
F

5
5
9
3
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

P
S
M

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

Q
R
S
F

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

–

–

–

–

3
3
7
7
0
.
0

1
5
7
3
.
0

–

3
6
0
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

4
3
1
7
.
0

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

Q
R
S
F

P
S
M

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

P
S
M

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

9
7
1
3
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

3
9
9
9
.
0

5
0
-
e
1
7
3
.
3

–

–

–

1

–

–

–

3
5
9
9
.
0

1

–

7
7
9
9
.
0

–

9
1
9
2
0
0
0
.
0

8
2
3
.
0

1

6
0
-
e
9
1
8
.
1

2
6
9
.
0

–

9
9
9
9
.
0

–

6
0
-
e
6
5
.
2

–

–

4
5
5
9
.
0

7
6
6
1
0
0
.
0

1
1
-
e
6
8
5
.
1

1
4
7
1
0
0
0
.
0

5
8
9
9
.
0

7
9
9
9
.
0

5
4
4
1
0
0
.
0

8
0
-
e
9
0
6
.
7

1
1
-
e
9
5
3
.
6

1

0
1
-
e
5
1
9
.
2

5
4
9
4
.
0

3
7
7
9
.
0

8
9
9
9
.
0

1

7
0
-
e
5
1
3
.
2

1

0
1
-
e
1
2
0
.
2

1

1

5
9
9
9
.
0

1

2
9
9
9
.
0

6
0
-
e
5
7
2
.
3

1

4
5
5
7
0
0
.
0

9
9
9
9
.
0

2
8
9
.
0

6
7
4
.
0

1
1
-
e
6
4
0
.
4

2
1
-
e
2
7
3
.
6

2
1
-
e
5
7
.
4

1
1
-
e
7
2
5
.
2

1
1
-
e
2
4
1
.
9

1
1
-
e
9
6
1
.
2

1
1
-
e
2
0
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
2
9
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
3
4
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
5
8
.
3

1
1
-
e
4
6
9
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
4
3
.
6

1
1
-
e
2
7
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
4
8
.
6

0
1
-
e
7
0
8
.
1

2
1
-
e
3
5
9
.
9

1
1
-
e
6
8
4
.
5

2
1
-
e
4
6
0
.
5

1
1
-
e
1
6
8
.
2

1
1
-
e
8
8
7
.
3

1
1
-
e
6
3
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
1
6
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
2
9
.
3

2
1
-
e
3
1
2
.
8

1
1
-
e
3
1
9
.
4

1
1
-
e
8
7
5
.
3

2
1
-
e
3
2
.
5

1
1
-
e
3
0
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
8
2
.
1

5
.
9

7
.
4

6
.
4

4
.
4

7
.
4
1

8
.
4

2
.
4

8
.
5

8
.
5

6
.
0
1

5
.
5

4
.
6

6
.
4

9
.
9

0
.
8
2

0
.
6

2
.
1
1

7
.
4

5
.
5

8
.
6
1

2
.
8

5
.
0
2

8
.
9

7
.
7

3
.
1
1

1
.
5

4
.
0
1

4
.
4

6
.
4

4
5
.
3
3
3

7
7
.
7
2

9
6
.
3
7

3
3
.
1
3
3

5
7
.
1
3
3

1
6
.
0
3
3

9
6
.
9
4
3

3
5
.
8
3
3

0
3
.
7
2
3

3
5
.
5
3
3

0
8
.
6
3
3

2
9
.
2
3
3

5
9
.
2
5
3

6
6
.
2
3
3

9
8
.
3
3
3

1
7
.
0
1

8
6
.
3
3
3

1
4
.
8
6

1
1
.
4
3
3

7
5
.
0
4
3

0
1
.
5
5
3

2
9
.
3
1

7
3
.
8
3
3

9
9
.
2
5

9
2
.
7
3
3

3
1
.
6
3
3

0
2
.
0
6

6
0
.
5

2
8
.
0
5
3

5
5
.
2

1
6
.
1
4

7
7
.
5
4

3
9
.
0
-

4
5
.
0
-

9
1
.
2
-

6
6
.
6
1

5
8
.
5

0
7
.
5
-

6
4
.
2

9
5
.
3

5
3
.
0
-

2
6
.
8
1

2
8
.
0
-

8
3
.
0

1
7
.
0
3

0
3
.
0
-

5
6
.
4
4

4
1
.
0
-

6
1
.
6

5
2
.
9
1

3
8
.
1
3

4
4
.
3

1
2
.
3
4

1
5
.
1

9
3
.
0

6
2
.
3
4

4
6
.
4
2

5
4
.
3
1

8
0
8
4
–
1
.
0
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
0
4
1
+
0
.
2
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
0
7
4
+
8
.
4
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
2
5
–
9
.
4
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
3
1
5
–
2
.
5
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
3
5
–
3
.
7
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
5
6
2
–
5
.
7
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
1
2
4
–
6
.
7
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
2
8
5
–
0
.
8
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
5
6
4
–
0
.
9
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
0
5
4
–
6
.
9
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
4
0
5
–
7
.
9
1
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
2
3
2
–
5
.
0
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
1
1
1
5
–
6
.
0
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
2
9
4
–
8
.
0
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
1
3
0
–
8
.
2
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
0
0
5
–
8
.
2
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
2
3
4
+
2
.
3
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
1
4
9
4
–
0
.
4
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
4
0
4
–
1
.
4
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
2
1
2
–
2
.
4
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
2
0
0
–
2
.
5
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
0
4
4
–
4
.
6
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
1
2
3
+
8
.
7
2
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
1
6
4
–
1
.
0
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
5
7
4
–
2
.
0
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
7
3
+
3
.
0
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
5
0
1
–
0
.
1
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
1
8
2
–
6
.
1
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

255

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

c
a
L

L
B

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

5
5
9
7
.
0

–

9
7
6
1
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

3
1
4
9
.
0

–

–

4
7
0
9
.
0

–

Q
R
S
F

6
1
7
2
.
0

c
a
L

L
B

Q
R
S
F

7
1
8
9
.
0

2
2
2
.
0

6
0
-
e
5
2
3
.
1

2
9
9
9
.
0

5
9
9
.
0

1

1

–

1

9
0
-
e
5
0
1
.
1

–

–

8
0
7
7
.
0

9
5
9
9
0
0
0
.
0

–

–

–

2
9
5
7
.
0

–

8
6
8
6
.
0

–

–

–

–

9
7
9
9
.
0

1
5
8
6
.
0

2
0
3
6
.
0

5
2
3
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

7
0
-
e
8
5
1
.
1

5
0
-
e
3
5
5
.
6

5
0
-
e
6
6
4
.
9

1

9
1
7
9
.
0

8
9
9
.
0

8
0
-
e
9
9
7
.
7

9
0
-
e
2
1
6
.
3

6
0
-
e
8
0
2
.
3

2
0
9
1
0
0
0
.
0

1

9
9
9
9
.
0

9
9
9
9
.
0

1

4
0
6
9
.
0

8
0
-
e
7
9
8
.
3

6
1
7
1
0
0
0
.
0

2
1
1
7
0
0
.
0

8
0
-
e
8
0
2
.
2

6
0
-
e
7
2
.
1

7
6
4
7
.
0

1

–

–

8
0
-
e
6
9
4
.
9

6
0
-
e
2
9
7
.
4

1
1
-
e
5
8
0
.
9

1
1
-
e
9
5
7
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
7
2
.
5

0
1
-
e
8
3
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
2
0
.
1

0
1
-
e
8
2
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
4
7
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
0
5
.
2

1
1
-
e
2
4
5
.
4

1
1
-
e
1
6
9
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
4
3
.
3

1
1
-
e
9
5
2
.
1

2
1
-
e
2
1
9
.
6

2
1
-
e
4
1
5
.
4

1
1
-
e
4
1
6
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
4
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
3
0
4
.
7

1
1
-
e
4
8
2
.
4

1
1
-
e
5
9
6
.
3

1
1
-
e
3
4
.
3

1
1
-
e
7
2
5
.
3

1
1
-
e
9
7
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
2
5
5
.
3

1
1
-
e
1
6
8
.
2

1
1
-
e
7
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
1
6
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
7
4
.
3

2
1
-
e
6
8
6
.
6

1
1
-
e
3
1
7
.
1

8
.
8

2
.
6

1
.
8

3
.
3
1

8
.
4

6
.
3
1

9
.
5

4
.
4

8
.
2
1

2
.
6

9
.
5

3
.
7

3
.
4

4
.
4

6
.
4

2
.
5

8
.
1
1

5
.
6

8
.
7

5
.
2
2

5
.
6

7
.
4

3
.
7

1
.
6

7
.
5

3
.
4

0
.
1
2

3
.
5

9
.
7

7
3
.
6
3
3

7
7
.
4
5
3

1
7
.
6
3
3

6
9
.
6
3
3

7
8
.
7

2
6
.
7
3
3

1
8
.
1
3
3

0
1
.
6
3
3

0
3
.
4
3
3

3
3
.
3
3
3

0
4
.
6
3
3

9
0
.
8
5
3

6
1
.
5

2
8
.
8
6

8
8
.
6
3
3

9
9
.
1
5
3

9
7
.
9
3
3

0
0
.
1
4
3

0
7
.
1
4
3

9
5
.
6
1

4
8
.
9
3
3

1
8
.
1
1

1
9
.
9
3
3

0
3
.
9
3
3

6
6
.
7
1

1
4
.
8
3
3

9
3
.
2
3
3

1
5
.
2
3

2
9
.
4
1

0
1
.
0

5
4
.
6
1

3
0
.
0
-

4
2
.
0
-

9
7
.
4
2

3
0
.
0
-

6
5
.
5
-

9
7
.
1
-

8
3
.
3
-

4
6
.
4
-

9
2
.
2
-

5
1
.
5
1

4
9
.
9
1

4
3
.
0
4

1
9
.
2
-

8
3
.
9

1
0
.
1
-

8
2
.
0
-

3
1
.
0

3
9
.
4
2

1
7
.
1
-

1
3
.
1
2

5
4
.
2
-

7
0
.
3
-

6
8
.
3
2

3
3
.
4
-

0
2
.
9
-

9
3
.
9
2

5
7
.
0
2

c
3
5
7
4
–
4
.
2
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
2
3
2
–
6
.
2
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
4
7
4
–
4
.
4
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
4
7
4
–
3
.
6
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
4
8
0
–
6
.
6
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
0
7
4
–
0
.
8
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
1
2
9
4
–
8
.
9
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
5
5
–
7
.
9
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
4
1
5
–
8
.
9
3
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
1
3
5
–
8
.
1
4
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
2
9
4
–
3
.
3
4
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
4
1
2
–
7
.
5
4
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
3
3
1
–
7
.
6
4
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
5
3
4
+
0
.
7
4
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
3
9
4
–
1
.
8
4
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
0
3
–
2
.
9
4
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
0
6
4
–
6
.
0
5
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
9
3
4
4
–
8
.
1
5
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
1
5
3
4
–
5
.
2
5
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
5
1
0
–
6
.
3
5
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
7
2
6
4
–
9
.
3
5
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
3
7
0
–
4
.
6
5
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
5
6
4
–
5
.
7
5
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
4
7
4
–
1
.
8
5
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
4
1
0
–
2
.
9
5
6
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
9
4
–
8
.
0
0
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
6
5
–
5
.
2
0
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
3
2
1
+
3
.
4
0
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
2
5
0
–
6
.
4
0
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

256

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

c
a
L

L
B

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

–

7
9
8
1
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

2
1
9
8
.
0

–

1
6
6
1
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

8
0
1
5
.
0

c
a
L

L
B

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

6
4
7
9
.
0

1
4
2
9
0
.
0

–

–

7
9
9
9
.
0

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

5
2
5
2
0
.
0

–

9
9
9
.
0

–

–

–

4
8
9
9
.
0

–

9
8
2
.
0

–

–

–

–

8
9
9
9
.
0

–

1
0
4
9
.
0

–

–

–

0
1
-
e
6
3
4
.
4

3
5
7
1
.
0

4
0
7
9
.
0

7
1
4
0
0
.
0

5
5
1
.
0

7
0
-
e
6
8
6
.
3

5
0
-
e
4
3
4
.
2

2
4
5
1
.
0

1

7
0
-
e
1
4
6
.
1

8
9
9
9
.
0

0
1
-
e
6
2
.
2

7
0
-
e
8
9
8
.
3

3
9
7
5
0
0
.
0

1

2
7
2
8
.
0

9
9
9
9
.
0

5
0
-
e
2
5
0
.
1

2
5
8
1
0
0
.
0

5
0
-
e
1
2
2
.
3

5
2
0
1
0
0
0
.
0

1

3
1
-
e
4
1
.
1

1

7
0
-
e
5
6
7
.
2

7
0
-
e
4
1
.
1

5
0
6
1
0
0
0
.
0

3
3
9
9
.
0

1

1
1
-
e
3
3
.
3

2
1
-
e
4
9
9
.
7

1
1
-
e
1
2
4
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
9
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
3
8
6
.
1

1
1
-
e
2
1
3
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
3
7
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
1
3
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
6
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
8
6
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
3
2
2
.
4

2
1
-
e
3
4
2
.
9

1
1
-
e
2
4
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
2
6
.
2

1
1
-
e
3
3
9
.
1

2
1
-
e
2
7
2
.
8

1
1
-
e
3
8
0
.
2

2
1
-
e
8
4
4
.
5

1
1
-
e
8
0
2
.
3

1
1
-
e
2
4
9
.
2

1
1
-
e
9
5
0
.
3

1
1
-
e
2
9
2
.
3

1
1
-
e
4
6
3
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
6
.
5

2
1
-
e
8
2
7
.
5

2
1
-
e
9
4
5
.
7

1
1
-
e
6
6
.
2

1
1
-
e
2
7
5
.
3

3
.
9

7
.
4

4
.
5

9
.
6

3
.
8

8
.
6

1
.
5

3
.
7

0
.
6

0
.
9

4
.
4

4
.
8

8
.
4

8
.
5

4
.
5

2
.
0
1

1
.
7

7
.
8

6
.
4

0
.
7

6
.
5

2
.
6

4
.
0
1

3
.
2
1

2
.
5
1

1
.
4

0
.
5

1
.
6

5
.
0
1

4
1
.
1
4
3

7
3
.
0
3

6
9
.
2
1

9
5
.
7
1

4
4
.
8
3
3

2
6
.
6
1

5
2
.
7
5
3

3
0
.
9
2

0
6
.
5
1

0
4
.
8
1

9
9
.
7
1

0
1
.
2
5
3

4
4
.
9
2

6
7
.
2

2
0
.
9
5
3

3
2
.
5
1

5
8
.
9
1

5
2
.
2

7
1
.
2
8

8
9
.
9
5
3

1
3
.
8
5
3

0
2
.
9
5
3

8
5
.
1

0
0
.
0
2
1

9
5
.
0

6
7
.
7
3

4
2
.
5
2
3

6
3
.
2

6
8
.
5
5
3

1
1
.
3
-

2
4
.
7
2

2
3
.
8
1

8
6
.
0
2

6
2
.
6
-

2
2
.
8
1

2
6
.
5

6
3
.
3
2

3
2
.
6
1

2
5
.
7
1

0
6
.
6
1

1
3
.
0
-

0
7
.
1
2

7
4
.
6

7
9
.
3

1
7
.
3
1

0
0
.
6
1

8
3
.
5

1
3
.
3
3

5
5
.
3

4
1
.
2

5
6
.
2

4
8
.
3

5
9
.
7
2

1
9
.
1

3
7
.
1
2

2
7
.
8
1
-

9
3
.
2

8
7
.
1
-

c
3
0
0
1
+
4
.
8
0
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
1
6
4
–
9
.
4
0
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
8
0
–
0
.
9
0
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
2
3
0
–
0
.
0
1
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
2
0
5
–
5
.
0
1
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
2
5
0
–
6
.
6
1
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
7
0
+
0
.
1
2
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
1
7
0
–
5
.
1
2
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
0
8
2
–
3
.
7
1
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
0
5
0
–
9
.
4
2
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
2
4
0
–
5
.
2
2
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
4
5
3
–
6
.
6
2
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
4
6
0
+
6
.
7
2
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
0
3
2
–
8
.
7
2
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
7
3
7
2
–
0
.
8
2
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
8
0
–
5
.
9
2
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
3
0
–
6
.
0
3
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
0
4
2
–
6
.
0
3
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
2
4
5
+
8
.
0
3
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
0
7
2
–
9
.
1
3
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
1
9
2
–
2
.
3
3
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
2
1
8
2
–
4
.
3
3
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
3
5
2
–
7
.
4
3
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
1
7
8
+
9
.
8
3
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
2
7
2
–
6
.
9
3
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
4
3
1
+
0
.
1
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
5
7
6
–
1
.
1
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
4
5
2
–
0
.
2
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
2
3
3
–
5
.
2
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

257

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

L
B

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1
1
1
8
.
0

–

9
3
2
4
.
0

1
4
9
.
0

4
3
0
4
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

4
5
9
5
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

5
0
-
e
7
6
5
.
1

1

–

–

5
1
2
3
0
0
.
0

2
4
5
6
0
.
0

–

5
9
9
9
.
0

2
9
9
.
0

–

2
8
9
.
0

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

6
2
1
2
0
0
.
0

1

1
7
9
9
.
0

5
0
-
e
3
7
7
.
1

1

8
0
-
e
8
7
0
.
1

1

2
1
-
e
7
1
2
.
1

7
0
-
e
4
0
4
.
1

9
0
-
e
8
0
1
.
5

4
0
2
7
.
0

7
0
-
e
6
3
6
.
4

7
9
9
9
.
0

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1
3
9
9
.
0

3
3
6
3
0
0
.
0

3
6
6
5
.
0

2
2
1
5
0
0
0
.
0

8
0
-
e
1
3
3
.
8

6
0
-
e
8
0
4
.
1

8
0
6
8
.
0

6
0
-
e
7
6
8
.
3

2
8
9
9
.
0

1

–

–

–

–

6
0
-
e
2
7
1
.
1

8
0
5
1
.
0

2
5
3
2
0
0
0
.
0

2
1
9
9
.
0

1
1
-
e
2
2
7
.
2

1
1
-
e
6
1
.
4

1
1
-
e
1
0
0
.
2

2
1
-
e
8
2
8
.
9

1
1
-
e
2
1
.
8

1
1
-
e
6
2
3
.
7

1
1
-
e
8
3
3
.
2

1
1
-
e
6
2
9
.
6

1
1
-
e
2
.
1

0
1
-
e
7
9
0
.
1

2
1
-
e
1
5
7
.
7

1
1
-
e
9
8
1
.
1

2
1
-
e
9
0
9
.
9

1
1
-
e
2
7
7
.
2

1
1
-
e
4
7
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
3
3
8
.
3

1
1
-
e
5
9
6
.
1

2
1
-
e
3
4
2
.
7

1
1
-
e
5
0
3
.
5

1
1
-
e
3
9
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
9
2
.
2

1
1
-
e
8
2
6
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
3
1
.
7

2
1
-
e
9
7
8
.
5

0
1
-
e
7
8
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
5
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
4
4
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
5
9
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
1
7
.
1

2
.
7

8
.
4

8
.
0
2

2
.
4

4
.
0
2

9
.
5

9
.
5

6
.
0
1

8
.
5

4
.
4
1

7
.
6

3
.
4

6
.
4

7
.
4

8
.
5

1
.
9

3
.
4

8
.
5

5
.
8

3
.
4

3
.
5

7
.
4

8
.
8

3
.
4

5
.
5
1

9
.
5

9
.
7

7
.
6

8
.
6

2
7
.
4

5
3
.
8
5
3

9
0
.
7
1
3

6
1
.
7
2

4
9
.
6
5
3

9
1
.
0

9
8
.
4
5
3

3
6
.
0

3
6
.
8
2

9
0
.
0

3
6
.
9
5

8
3
.
1
5
3

3
5
.
0
3

0
2
.
8
5
3

2
1
.
7
4
3

6
4
.
0

3
8
.
3

3
5
.
3

9
5
.
0
-

8
4
.
2
2
-

6
5
.
5
1

0
1
.
2
-

6
1
.
0
-

1
5
.
3
-

7
0
.
0
-

2
7
.
5
1

2
7
.
0
-

8
0
.
7
2

8
9
.
5
-

4
2
.
6
1

3
1
.
2
-

5
4
.
9
-

9
8
.
1
-

0
0
.
0

c
9
3
0
3
–
9
.
3
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
3
2
–
2
.
3
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
2
6
7
–
1
.
4
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
0
2
0
+
6
.
5
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
3
2
3
–
5
.
6
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
1
5
8
2
–
6
.
6
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
0
5
3
–
2
.
7
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
2
8
2
–
3
.
7
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
2
3
0
+
6
.
7
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
1
9
2
–
6
.
8
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
1
4
3
+
8
.
8
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
2
9
3
–
9
.
8
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
1
5
0
+
1
.
9
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
4
3
1
3
–
7
.
9
4
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
4
4
4
–
8
.
3
5
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
3
9
2
–
1
.
4
5
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
3
5
2
–
4
.
4
5
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
0
.
3
3
3

3
1
.
7
1
-

8
2
0
6
–
5
.
7
5
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
7
.
5

1
8
.
2
5
3

9
6
.
0

4
1
.
2
2

7
9
.
5

6
0
.
0
-

7
4
.
7
-

9
0
.
3
-

9
9
.
8

3
4
.
0
-

c
2
0
4
2
–
8
.
8
5
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
8
3
–
2
.
9
5
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
9
2
–
4
.
9
5
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
5
0
–
5
.
9
5
7
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
0
4
2
–
8
.
0
0
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
8
.
6
2
3

2
3
.
0
2
-

6
0
7
6
–
8
.
2
0
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
1
.
8

0
8
.
9
1

3
3
.
3
3

3
0
.
4
2

8
0
.
8
5
3

6
1
.
0

6
1
.
6

5
9
.
2
1

8
6
.
7

0
7
.
6
-

8
4
1
2
–
3
.
3
0
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
4
8
0
–
0
.
5
0
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
6
0
+
8
.
5
0
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
1
4
0
–
7
.
7
0
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
5
3
3
–
3
.
8
0
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

258

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

Q
R
S
F

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

–

–

–

–

–

1
2
7
3
.
0

9
5
4
6
.
0

–

–

Q
R
S
F

7
2
4
2
.
0

Q
R
S
F

1
4
3
7
0
.
0

6
5
4
9
.
0

3
6
9
9
.
0

–

3
7
9
9
.
0

5
9
9
9
.
0

–

7
1
0
9
.
0

9
9
9
9
.
0

–

–

3
8
9
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

2
5
4
1
0
0
.
0

–

–

–

3
9
9
9
.
0

–

1

1

4
5
3
7
0
0
.
0

1

1

5
0
-
e
5
0
7
.
1

3
9
9
9
.
0

1

6
3
3
0
0
0
.
0

7
0
-
e
5
7
6
.
8

9
9
9
9
.
0

8
6
7
9
0
.
0

7
8
7
6
.
0

3
6
6
8
0
.
0

2
7
3
7
0
0
0
.
0

4
7
6
2
0
.
0

2
6
9
.
0

9
2
9
9
.
0

7
0
-
e
7
9
1
.
3

2
1
6
.
0

5
0
-
e
2
7
2
.
2

7
2
0
8
.
0

8
5
4
9
.
0

2
8
9
9
.
0

0
1
-
e
9
7
.
6

9
0
-
e
6
9
5
.
6

8
0
1
8
0
0
0
.
0

6
8
9
9
.
0

8
0
-
e
3
4
5
.
7

1
1
-
e
4
7
6
.
7

1
1
-
e
4
2
8
.
2

1
1
-
e
6
1
3
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
8
7
.
3

1
1
-
e
3
2
4
.
8

1
1
-
e
1
3
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
3
6
3
.
4

0
1
-
e
1
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
4
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
2
2
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
5
1
.
9

2
1
-
e
1
1
7
.
7

1
1
-
e
1
8
.
2

1
1
-
e
3
4
1
.
3

1
1
-
e
6
0
.
1

2
1
-
e
1
9
6
.
7

1
1
-
e
5
6
1
.
2

1
1
-
e
3
0
.
2

1
1
-
e
1
1
8
.
3

2
1
-
e
9
5
3
.
8

1
1
-
e
3
1
3
.
3

1
1
-
e
7
5
5
.
4

2
1
-
e
5
2
9
.
6

1
1
-
e
1
5
9
.
3

2
1
-
e
6
8
.
9

1
1
-
e
2
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
9
5
.
4

1
1
-
e
9
8
0
.
6

2
1
-
e
4
0
7
.
6

8
.
8

4
.
6

4
.
4

5
.
9

1
.
3
1

0
.
3
1

2
.
6

3
.
9
1

5
.
4

6
.
4

4
.
0
1

6
.
4

3
.
6

6
.
4

1
.
5

5
.
5

2
.
4

6
.
6

3
.
8

1
.
4

9
.
4

2
.
9

2
.
5

9
.
7

2
.
4

3
.
5

2
.
5

2
.
8

8
.
4

0
8
.
9

3
8
.
6

6
5
.
3

6
2
.
8
1

9
0
.
3
1

5
8
.
2
7

3
1
.
4
1

2
6
.
5
1

3
7
.
0

2
2
.
7
3

0
6
.
7
1

9
0
.
9
3

9
3
.
2
2

0
1
.
7
1

9
8
.
0
4

3
6
.
0
6

2
1
.
7
2

1
6
.
8
2

2
8
.
5
1

2
4
.
2

4
0
.
7
1

2
9
.
8
2

2
3
.
0
-

9
6
.
2
-

4
0
.
5
-

0
9
.
2

2
0
.
0
-

4
7
.
4
2

1
4
.
0
-

7
0
.
0
-

3
2
.
8
-

2
4
.
0
1

6
0
.
0
-

6
5
.
0
1

8
2
.
1

1
5
.
1
-

8
5
.
0
1

3
6
.
8
1

6
2
.
3

6
8
.
3

8
9
.
2
-

4
8
.
9
-

7
5
.
2
-

0
4
.
3

c
7
3
0
2
–
5
.
8
0
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
4
2
–
3
.
1
1
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
8
2
–
6
.
3
1
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
9
3
1
1
–
7
.
3
1
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
3
7
1
–
1
.
4
1
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
5
4
+
5
.
6
1
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
1
5
6
1
–
6
.
7
1
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
2
5
1
–
3
.
9
1
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
1
2
3
–
6
.
0
2
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
3
8
0
+
8
.
1
2
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
3
3
1
–
1
.
3
2
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
1
0
1
+
5
.
4
2
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
4
4
1
–
4
.
7
2
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
4
1
1
+
6
.
7
2
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
3
2
3
+
7
.
8
2
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
4
3
0
–
1
.
9
2
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
4
0
2
0
–
8
.
9
2
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
4
8
0
–
4
.
7
2
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
3
6
1
–
4
.
0
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
1
3
–
9
.
0
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
1
5
1
–
2
.
1
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
0
2
0
–
0
.
2
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
0
.
0
3
3

6
4
.
2
2
-

2
0
5
6
–
2
.
2
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
7
.
6
2

3
6
.
0
4

6
5
.
3
4

5
0
.
5
2

0
1
.
5
2

9
0
.
7
6

3
9
.
1

4
3
.
8

4
7
.
9

9
3
.
0

9
0
.
0
-

1
9
.
8
1

c
7
3
4
0
–
1
.
3
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
0
1
+
4
.
5
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
4
3
1
+
4
.
5
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
4
6
0
–
5
.
5
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
0
7
0
–
3
.
7
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
2
8
3
+
9
.
7
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

259

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

3
2
3
7
.
0

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

3
5
1
2
.
0

8
4
8
.
0

–

–

–

–

8
7
3
4
.
0

8
9
9
9
.
0

1

9
9
9
9
.
0

–

–

1
8
9
9
.
0

1

–

1

1

6
9
3
8
0
0
.
0

7
0
-
e
9
1
4
.
5

1

1

8
0
-
e
9
5
8
.
2

6
3
9
9
.
0

1

–

–

9
9
9
9
.
0

9
9
9
9
.
0

1

1

1

9
7
9
9
.
0

9
9
9
9
.
0

3
5
3
9
.
0

–

8
9
9
9
.
0

–

8
8
9
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

9
9
9
9
.
0

–

9
3
5
4
0
.
0

5
0
-
e
1
5
5
.
9

1

9
9
9
9
.
0

1

1

1

9
9
9
9
.
0

1

1

4
3
5
3
0
.
0

1

7
9
4
6
0
0
0
.
0

1

8
0
-
e
9
8
7
.
1

7
0
-
e
8
1
2
.
1

6
4
3
9
0
.
0

9
8
8
7
.
0

1

6
0
-
e
6
2
1
.
6

1
1
-
e
9
6
6
.
3

0
1
-
e
3
5
3
.
2

1
1
-
e
4
2
9
.
9

2
1
-
e
7
1
6
.
7

2
1
-
e
3
8
5
.
7

1
1
-
e
5
4
5
.
3

1
1
-
e
7
1
8
.
5

1
1
-
e
1
2
6
.
2

1
1
-
e
5
8
6
.
5

1
1
-
e
1
2
3
.
2

1
1
-
e
3
6
6
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
6
1
.
9

0
1
-
e
6
0
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
2
0
.
6

1
1
-
e
1
1
8
.
3

1
1
-
e
2
3
5
.
6

1
1
-
e
5
0
0
.
6

1
1
-
e
9
6
8
.
9

1
1
-
e
1
2
3
.
5

1
1
-
e
7
5
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
2
6
.
3

1
1
-
e
3
1
8
.
3

1
1
-
e
8
5
0
.
9

1
1
-
e
9
4
5
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
8
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
3
6
7
.
2

1
1
-
e
5
1
0
.
1

0
1
-
e
6
9
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
9
2
.
2

6
.
9

6
.
3
2

4
.
9

9
.
4

0
.
6

0
.
6

3
.
8

5
.
2
1

6
.
8

4
.
8

2
.
7

8
.
3
1

4
.
1
1

5
.
7

3
.
7

3
.
2
1

2
.
2
1

8
.
7
1

6
.
1
1

2
.
6

0
.
7

3
.
6

3
.
6
1

6
.
5

9
.
9

3
.
0
1

4
.
8

0
.
4
2

4
.
7

0
6
.
0
3

9
4
.
6
2

3
2
.
6
2

1
1
.
7
5

8
2
.
2

6
1
.
0

4
0
.
0
-

7
0
.
4
1

2
0
1
0
–
0
.
9
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
3
5
0
–
0
.
9
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
8
5
5
0
–
3
.
9
3
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
4
7
2
+
3
.
2
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
9
.
6
3
3

8
7
.
1
2
-

9
3
8
5
–
3
.
2
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
4
.
8
2

9
1
.
9
2

2
3
.
6
4

1
8
.
8
2

5
1
.
2
2

3
6
.
9

3
1
.
0
3

0
1
.
1
3

0
5
.
1
3

1
8
.
4
3

9
7
.
7
3

2
4
.
4
3

9
5
.
5
3

6
1
.
7
3

6
5
.
3
1

7
0
.
5
3

9
6
.
6
3

1
0
.
8
3

3
2
.
4
2

8
0
.
0

5
2
.
0

8
6
.
8

4
1
.
0
-

0
7
.
3
-

c
9
5
3
0
–
8
.
2
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
2
1
3
0
–
7
.
3
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
4
5
1
+
3
.
4
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
4
3
0
–
3
.
4
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
1
1
1
–
9
.
4
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
2
.
0
1
-

9
1
5
2
–
6
.
6
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
2
.
0
-

5
0
.
0
-

2
3
.
0
-

7
5
.
0

4
1
.
1

7
8
.
0
-

9
3
.
0
-

6
3
.
0

c
9
3
1
0
–
2
.
8
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
2
1
0
–
9
.
9
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
2
0
–
2
.
7
4
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
5
1
0
+
8
.
2
5
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
0
5
4
0
+
2
.
6
5
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
5
0
0
+
2
.
7
5
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
2
0
+
6
.
7
5
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
5
3
0
+
8
.
7
5
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
4
.
1
1
-

8
1
2
2
–
3
.
8
5
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
8
.
0
-

0
3
.
0
-

3
1
.
0
-

3
4
.
7
-

c
9
2
1
0
+
5
.
8
5
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
2
1
3
0
+
3
.
9
5
8
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
2
4
0
+
1
.
1
0
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
0
1
1
–
3
.
2
0
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
3
.
4
2
3

4
4
.
6
2
-

3
5
0
7
–
7
.
2
0
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
.
8
2

1
2
.
6
-

5
0
7
0
–
8
.
4
0
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
7
.
9
5
3

5
5
.
8
1
-

c
0
2
7
3
–
9
.
4
0
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
1
.
1
4

3
5
.
3
3

0
0
.
0
-

7
5
.
4
-

0
2
7
0
+
5
.
6
0
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
1
0
–
8
.
8
0
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

260

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

Q
R
S
F

9
7
8
2
0
.
0

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

9
0
4
6
.
0

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

3
3
2
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

1
6
3
7
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

–

6
9
4
8
.
0

–

2
6
6
9
.
0

9
6
6
1
.
0

1

–

–

5
5
1
2
0
0
0
.
0

7
8
3
8
.
0

–

–

9
0
5
3
0
0
0
.
0

9
0
-
e
9
1
8
.
7

9
9
9
9
.
0

1

–

–

5
3
9
9
.
0

–

–

1
6
2
2
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

5
0
-
e
4
4
3
.
5

5
4
4
1
.
0

8
9
9
9
.
0

5
0
-
e
3
9
0
.
5

9
0
-
e
2
8
0
.
6

3
9
9
9
.
0

5
1
0
0
.
0

5
0
-
e
1
9
.
1

8
0
-
e
3
3
8
.
2

7
0
-
e
8
6
8
.
3

8
9
8
9
.
0

4
9
7
2
0
.
0

5
2
9
2
0
0
.
0

5
0
-
e
2
6
4
.
2

2
5
4
6
0
0
.
0

5
0
-
e
3
1
3
.
2

6
0
-
e
6
9
3
.
1

6
0
-
e
7
8
6
.
4

9
0
-
e
4
8
6
.
2

5
7
6
1
0
0
.
0

7
0
-
e
9
7
0
.
3

2
9
6
0
.
0

9
0
-
e
5
4
8
.
5

1
1
-
e
7
5
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
2
1
8
.
2

1
1
-
e
6
5
9
.
2

2
1
-
e
6
7
7
.
9

2
1
-
e
6
0
6
.
7

1
1
-
e
1
3
0
.
5

1
1
-
e
9
5
0
.
2

1
1
-
e
7
4
3
.
2

1
1
-
e
9
3
6
.
2

1
1
-
e
9
5
7
.
1

2
1
-
e
6
7
4
.
9

1
1
-
e
4
1
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
1
0
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
3
3
.
1

2
1
-
e
3
9
7
.
8

2
1
-
e
2
0
9
.
6

2
1
-
e
1
5
8
.
9

2
1
-
e
9
8
5
.
9

1
1
-
e
4
6
2
.
1

2
1
-
e
6
8
2
.
9

1
1
-
e
9
5
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
6
1
.
2

2
1
-
e
2
5
1
.
8

1
1
-
e
6
6
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
9
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
9
9
0
.
2

2
1
-
e
4
4
0
.
6

1
1
-
e
7
1
2
.
3

1
1
-
e
3
1
3
.
1

2
.
4

4
.
7

5
.
5

1
.
6

4
.
4

2
.
8

6
.
7

7
.
5

5
.
7

8
.
8

0
.
6

8
.
5

8
.
4

3
.
7

8
.
4

5
.
4

2
.
2
1

8
.
4

5
.
6

2
.
5

9
.
6

5
.
9

4
.
4

7
.
5

5
.
5

5
.
7

1
.
4

1
.
9

5
.
9

8
0
.
4
2

8
4
.
8
4

1
3
.
4
4

1
5
.
7

4
6
.
1
2
3

8
2
.
9
4

1
7
.
7
3

0
5
.
4
5

8
1
.
2
5

4
1
.
7
2

5
7
.
5
1
3

8
4
.
9
4

7
9
.
9
2

6
1
.
3
1
3

8
2
.
4

7
4
.
5
0
1

0
9
.
3
4
3

6
8
.
8
2

3
4
.
2
3

6
6
.
5
2

4
8
.
0
6

8
7
.
0
5

9
6
.
7

7
9
.
7
3

7
7
.
5
7

4
1
.
0
7

9
0
.
0
2

9
6
.
0
7

6
8
.
2
0
1

2
6
.
0
1
-

2
7
.
1

7
5
.
0
-

7
4
.
8
1
-

1
9
.
7
2
-

0
2
.
0

5
9
.
5
-

7
3
.
2

5
7
.
0

0
2
.
2
1
-

5
2
.
8
2
-

3
6
.
2
-

6
0
.
4
1
-

9
7
.
8
2
-

3
2
.
5
2
-

7
2
.
2
2

5
5
.
9
2
-

3
3
.
7
1
-

1
0
.
6
1
-

6
4
.
9
1
-

6
0
.
1
-

6
0
.
7
-

0
4
.
6
2
-

7
5
.
5
1
-

0
7
.
5

5
9
.
1

2
0
.
5
2
-

8
1
.
1

7
4
.
9
1

7
3
2
1
–
8
.
3
1
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
4
1
+
0
.
4
1
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
1
5
9
0
+
4
.
4
1
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
2
0
3
–
0
.
7
1
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

4
2
3
7
–
5
.
9
1
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
3
4
1
+
1
.
1
2
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
3
1
0
+
3
.
1
2
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
1
0
2
+
4
.
3
2
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
4
2
7
1
+
8
.
4
2
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
3
8
7
–
7
.
5
2
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
2
3
1
+
8
.
1
3
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
9
4
0
8
–
7
.
2
4
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
2
5
3
–
9
.
2
4
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
2
3
7
+
3
.
4
4
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
5
8
0
–
5
.
6
3
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

6
3
0
1
–
9
.
4
2
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
0
4
5
–
4
.
6
4
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

8
1
1
1
–
7
.
6
4
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

9
3
7
0
–
8
.
7
4
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

7
5
4
1
–
4
.
9
4
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

5
0
4
2
+
7
.
9
4
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

3
2
2
1
+
3
.
0
5
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

2
5
2
3
–
6
.
2
5
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

1
4
2
0
–
9
.
5
5
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
3
3
3
+
9
.
9
5
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

0
2
0
4
+
6
.
8
5
9
1
J

L
G
F
2

c
9
3
3
3
+
4
.
4
0
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

4
0
0
7
+
6
.
4
0
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

0
5
1
2
–
8
.
2
0
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

261

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

Q
R
S
F

7
2
2
4
0
.
0

Q
R
S
F

9
1
0
2
.
0

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

–

–

–

Q
R
S
F

8
1
9
1
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

P
S
M

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

r
a
s
l
u
p

g
n
u
o
Y

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

–

–

–

3
2
6
4
0
.
0

–

5
8
4
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

9
6
1
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

8
9
9
9
.
0

1
8
9
9
.
0

4
9
9
9
.
0

–

–

8
9
9
9
.
0

–

–

1
5
7
7
0
.
0

1
8
8
9
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

1

4
6
6
3
0
0
.
0

–

5
7
1
8
.
0

1

–

–

–

–

5
0
-
e
7
1
6
.
7

1
1
-
e
4
7
9
.
2

9
3
1
4
0
.
0

9
4
4
1
0
.
0

1
1
-
e
8
2
8
.
2

7
9
9
9
.
0

1

6
9
9
9
.
0

2
1
-
e
2
5
3
.
5

6
9
2
8
.
0

1

1
5
1
7
.
0

9
0
5
2
0
.
0

1

1

2
1
-
e
5
0
9
.
2

3
9
5
5
.
0

9
0
-
e
2
9
1
.
3

9
6
6
9
.
0

5
0
5
2
0
.
0

1

1

7
5
6
1
0
0
.
0

1

1

8
0
-
e
1
1
3
.
5

6
2
9
7
.
0

7
0
-
e
3
6
6
.
4

7
5
7
9
.
0

2
1
-
e
1
5
6
.
8

1
1
-
e
8
1
1
.
1

2
1
-
e
1
7
5
.
9

1
1
-
e
2
8
0
.
1

2
1
-
e
1
5
9
.
8

1
1
-
e
1
7
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
4
3
3
.
2

1
1
-
e
9
3
6
.
2

2
1
-
e
9
4
3
.
9

1
1
-
e
5
8
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
0
5
.
7

1
1
-
e
6
9
9
.
3

2
1
-
e
7
0
3
.
8

1
1
-
e
4
8
0
.
6

1
1
-
e
2
6
.
5

2
1
-
e
3
4
6
.
6

1
1
-
e
4
1
1
.
6

2
1
-
e
3
3
.
5

1
1
-
e
9
9
6
.
1

1
1
-
e
5
8
9
.
3

1
1
-
e
1
2
4
.
5

1
1
-
e
7
8
4
.
2

1
1
-
e
1
1
0
.
3

1
1
-
e
4
8
8
.
2

1
1
-
e
5
0
7
.
4

2
1
-
e
3
9
6
.
5

2
1
-
e
7
6
5
.
9

2
1
-
e
7
0
9
.
4

1
1
-
e
7
1
.
2

8
.
4

4
.
6

7
.
4

9
.
5

5
.
6

6
.
4

6
.
8

6
.
8

4
.
5

2
.
9

5
.
8
1

4
.
9

2
.
5

8
.
5
2

6
.
8
1

1
.
4

0
.
3
1

7
.
4

5
.
5

1
.
6

8
.
8

6
.
7
1

5
.
4

7
.
1
1

9
.
9

1
.
5

3
.
7

1
.
4

7
.
6

8
7
.
2
3

7
2
.
9
1

4
8
.
4
2

7
6
.
8
3

0
6
.
7
2

7
3
.
6
6

3
8
.
6
7

9
0
.
8
7

4
9
.
9

2
2
.
7
2

4
5
.
4
7

5
3
.
9
7

1
6
.
9
4

7
3
.
3
7

4
3
.
2
8

0
1
.
6
2

7
7
.
8
7

0
9
.
0
2
-

1
2
.
6
2
-

4
3
.
4
2
-

3
9
.
8
1
-

9
8
.
3
2
-

5
9
.
2
-

3
2
.
3

5
7
.
3

7
2
.
1
3
-

1
2
.
6
2
-

9
3
.
0

9
1
.
3

9
2
9
0
–
2
.
6
0
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

6
5
2
2
–
5
.
6
0
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

4
3
7
1
–
9
.
6
0
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

9
3
3
0
–
1
.
9
0
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

5
0
5
1
–
2
.
9
0
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
5
9
3
+
4
.
2
1
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
1
1
4
+
8
.
3
1
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

7
4
7
2
+
8
.
9
0
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

5
1
2
3
–
4
.
7
1
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

8
1
6
1
–
5
.
7
1
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

6
2
6
3
+
0
.
8
1
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

9
5
1
4
+
0
.
0
2
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

7
6
.
6
1
-

2
3
6
0
+
5
.
1
2
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

1
0
.
3
-

2
9
.
2

7
1
.
0
3
-

8
3
.
0
-

2
3
3
3
+
3
.
8
2
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

7
1
4
4
+
7
.
0
3
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
4
8
1
–
4
.
1
3
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

7
2
9
3
+
6
.
3
3
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

9
0
.
9
5
3

9
3
.
6
3
-

1
0
2
4
–
7
.
4
3
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

9
5
.
6
7

2
4
.
1
8

2
1
.
1
8

3
3
.
2
-

2
0
.
1

3
3
.
0

c
4
2
2
4
+
0
.
6
3
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

c
5
4
1
4
+
0
.
8
3
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
6
3
+
9
.
4
3
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

9
1
.
1
4
3

8
1
.
7
3
-

0
2
6
5
–
8
.
9
3
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

3
8
.
0
8

0
1
.
6
8

5
4
.
2
8

3
7
.
0
2
3

3
7
.
1
5
3

9
0
.
8
5
3

6
2
.
5
8

9
3
.
0
-

3
4
.
3

3
4
.
0

0
8
.
3
3
-

8
3
.
8
3
-

8
5
.
8
3
-

0
3
.
1

c
5
0
1
4
+
1
.
0
4
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

5
3
7
4
+
2
.
1
4
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

c
2
5
2
4
+
0
.
2
4
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

7
1
3
7
–
8
.
2
4
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

7
5
7
4
–
4
.
4
4
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

9
5
2
4
–
2
.
6
4
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

c
6
3
5
4
+
9
.
7
4
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

262

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

8
5
9
4
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

–

–

9
8
8
8
.
0

8
9
9
4
.
0

–

9
7
7
9
.
0

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

–

c
a
L

L
B

P
S
M

Q
R
S
F

P
S
M

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

2
2
5
9
.
0

–

4
3
1
.
0

–

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

2
5
1
6
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

Q
R
S
F

Q
R
S
F

9
4
7
5
0
.
0

7
3
8
7
0
.
0

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

–

6
8
6
9
.
0

Q
R
S
F

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

c
a
L

L
B

L
B

P
S
M

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

8
7
0
3
0
.
0

9
8
5
8
.
0

–

7
0
8
9
.
0

7
4
7
8
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

4
4
0
4
0
0
.
0

1

2
4
5
3
0
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1
1
-
e
7
3
3
.
4

5
0
-
e
1
7
3
.
2

7
9
1
0
0
0
.
0

7
9
5
6
0
0
0
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

7
2
8
2
.
0

–

2
5
9
9
.
0

1
1
-
e
6
4
4
.
3

6
0
-
e
3
7
9
.
3

6
4
2
4
.
0

8
0
-
e
4
8
3
.
8

0
1
-
e
9
3
.
5

6
0
-
e
2
8
0
.
3

9
0
-
e
6
3
6
.
5

1

9
0
-
e
7
6
3
.
4

1
8
2
1
0
0
0
.
0

1

5
0
-
e
7
8
5
.
2

1

–

2
1
-
e
7
1
5
.
3

–

–

–

–

–

6
0
-
e
8
3
2
.
1

9
0
-
e
5
5
6
.
7

5
2
0
2
0
.
0

3
1
-
e
8
0
5
.
1

0
1
-
e
5
1
5
.
3

6
9
9
9
.
0

3
1
-
e
1
3
2
.
1

0
1
-
e
4
8
1
.
2

8
6
8
1
0
0
.
0

7
0
-
e
9
4
2
.
1

9
0
-
e
3
3
0
.
2

1
1
-
e
3
1
1
.
2

2
1
-
e
5
2
.
7

1
1
-
e
7
9
1
.
1

1
1
-
e
2
2
5
.
2

2
1
-
e
1
8
6
.
6

2
1
-
e
7
8
4
.
9

2
1
-
e
9
1
1
.
7

2
1
-
e
5
5
.
6

1
1
-
e
5
9
5
.
3

2
1
-
e
4
6
3
.
7

1
1
-
e
2
8
8
.
3

2
1
-
e
7
6
6
.
7

1
1
-
e
9
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
5
3
.
1

2
1
-
e
1
5
7
.
6

1
1
-
e
1
8
0
.
1

2
1
-
e
3
4
.
6

2
1
-
e
2
2
0
.
9

1
1
-
e
3
7
.
1

1
1
-
e
1
7
1
.
1

2
1
-
e
2
5
6
.
7

2
1
-
e
8
7
5
.
8

1
1
-
e
3
2
1
.
1

2
1
-
e
8
0
5
.
8

1
1
-
e
4
2
2
.
2

2
1
-
e
7
9
8
.
8

1
1
-
e
5
1
4
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
7
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
6
1
.
1

4
.
6

2
.
5

4
.
4

0
.
8

0
.
5

4
.
5

2
.
4

0
.
5

9
.
2
1

6
.
4

2
.
2
2

6
.
5

7
.
9
1

3
.
4

1
.
5

5
.
0
1

2
.
4

9
.
6

4
.
8

0
.
9

8
.
5

2
.
6

7
.
6

2
.
7

5
.
5
1

6
.
7

6
.
4

8
.
5

1
.
9

7
7
.
9
8

1
1
.
9
5

9
8
.
7
8

6
7
.
5
8

6
8
.
7
3

4
9
.
9
7

9
9
.
1
7

5
0
.
1
8

3
3
.
2
9

0
5
.
2
8

9
2
.
8
8

9
5
.
0
5
3

3
9
.
4
1

4
8
.
4
9

0
6
.
2
6

4
8
.
2
8

1
8
.
5
3

9
9
.
2
5
3

1
9
.
8
9

8
9
.
1
4
3

9
6
.
6
7

3
7
.
8
2
3

7
1
.
5
0
1

5
9
.
8
2

0
6
.
2
9

8
2
.
1
2
3

9
7
.
2
0
1

9
5
.
3
0
1

4
7
.
8
6

5
1
.
0
2
-

c
2
1
2
1
+
2
.
3
5
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

6
1
.
4

4
5
0
5
+
8
.
1
5
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

3
7
.
1

4
8
.
1
-

7
3
.
4
3
-

1
4
.
7
-

4
9
.
4
1
-

1
2
.
7
-

6
0
.
3

7
5
.
6
-

5
4
.
1
-

7
9
.
2
4
-

5
4
.
2
4
-

2
1
.
4

0
5
.
4
2
-

9
1
.
8
-

7
5
.
0
4
-

4
3
.
5
4
-

3
3
.
5

1
7
.
4
4
-

4
4
.
8
1
-

2
3
.
1
4
-

6
9
.
0
1

8
0
.
5
4
-

3
0
.
4
-

6
9
.
0
4
-

0
4
.
3

6
5
.
2

c
7
5
3
4
+
3
.
3
0
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
7
4
+
8
.
5
5
0
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
1
1
–
5
.
3
0
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

5
5
5
3
+
9
.
4
0
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

6
0
5
2
+
6
.
7
0
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
5
6
3
+
8
.
7
0
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

c
7
0
2
5
+
9
.
7
0
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
2
8
3
+
3
.
0
1
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

5
0
6
4
+
3
.
1
1
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
8
4
–
3
.
2
1
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
4
0
3
–
5
.
2
1
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

0
4
4
5
+
1
.
4
1
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

3
1
2
1
+
4
.
5
1
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

0
3
7
3
+
5
.
7
1
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

3
1
5
1
–
0
.
4
2
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
6
4
–
0
.
5
2
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

4
2
8
5
+
7
.
8
2
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

7
1
4
5
–
0
.
1
3
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

5
0
6
2
+
5
.
2
3
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

1
3
4
6
–
5
.
3
3
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

5
4
6
6
+
9
.
3
3
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

0
3
1
2
–
6
.
4
3
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

4
1
7
4
+
8
.
9
3
1
2
J

L
G
F
2

1
3
9
6
–
1
.
0
0
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

6
2
9
5
+
2
.
1
0
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

3
1
9
5
+
1
.
0
1
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

8
5
.
8
3
-

2
0
7
0
+
6
.
2
1
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

263

C. Hierarchical neural network predictions for 2FGL unidentiﬁed sources

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

R
S
P
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

8
7
1
9
.
0

–

–

c
a
L

L
B

8
8
1
9
.
0

Q
R
S
F

5
9
6
1
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

P
S
M

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

4
4
4
1
.
0

–

3
0
7
9
.
0

–

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

5
7
5
4
.
0

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

P
S
M

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

c
a
L

L
B

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

r
a
z
a
l
b

n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

Q
R
S
F

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

d
e
ﬁ
i
s
s
a
l
c
n
U

–

–

–

3
6
7
5
.
0

6
6
5
9
.
0

–

–

6
1
0
7
.
0

5
8
5
5
0
.
0

–

–

–

1
4
1
5
.
0

1

–

–

9
0
-
e
3
2
6
.
4

8
3
3
6
0
.
0

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

7
0
-
e
8
8
0
.
5

1
1
-
e
7
2
3
.
1

6
0
-
e
3
6
2
.
3

5
0
-
e
2
1
1
.
5

1
1
-
e
5
9
3
.
5

1
6
8
9
.
0

5
0
-
e
3
2
6
.
5

7
0
-
e
5
2
7
.
7

1
1
-
e
6
2
2
.
1

2
3
5
1
0
.
0

1

–

–

–

–

–

6
0
-
e
6
5
5
.
2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

9
0
-
e
1
8
.
3

9
9
8
9
.
0

3
1
-
e
7
5
7
.
4

6
0
-
e
9
5
3
.
2

8
8
4
0
.
0

6
9
9
9
.
0

2
1
-
e
4
2
5
.
2

7
0
-
e
9
4
9
.
1

6
0
-
e
9
2
2
.
1

9
2
2
.
0

8
0
-
e
5
2
6
.
3

3
1
-
e
2
1
9
.
3

4
1
7
5
0
0
.
0

2
7
3
7
.
0

4
5
5
8
0
.
0

2
1
-
e
5
0
9
.
4

1
1
-
e
5
1
.
2

1
1
-
e
4
3
3
.
2

2
1
-
e
7
3
5
.
5

2
1
-
e
1
8
2
.
6

1
1
-
e
9
2
0
.
2

1
1
-
e
7
7
7
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
3
8
.
1

1
1
-
e
6
2
2
.
1

1
1
-
e
8
7
6
.
1

2
1
-
e
2
3
0
.
6

2
1
-
e
8
3
0
.
8

1
1
-
e
8
3
4
.
1

2
1
-
e
4
1
9
.
4

2
1
-
e
4
1
1
.
8

2
1
-
e
7
8
2
.
5

2
1
-
e
8
9
7
.
4

2
1
-
e
5
3
1
.
7

1
1
-
e
7
4
0
.
3

2
1
-
e
9
1
8
.
6

2
1
-
e
5
4
4
.
8

2
1
-
e
4
0
6
.
4

1
1
-
e
1
1
5
.
1

2
1
-
e
6
8
9
.
4

1
1
-
e
1
3
.
1

2
1
-
e
1
2
3
.
4

1
1
-
e
4
4
7
.
1

1
1
-
e
7
1
2
.
2

9
.
4

6
.
6

3
.
1
1

2
.
4

2
.
6

3
.
8

3
.
6

2
.
8

3
.
5

7
.
5

9
.
5

6
.
4

4
.
7

3
.
5

5
.
5

6
.
4

5
.
4

2
.
7

2
.
2
3

8
.
6

2
.
7

1
.
4

4
.
5

9
.
4

7
.
1
1

1
.
4

7
.
7

7
.
7

1
0
.
8
4
3

7
3
.
4
0
1

6
8
.
6
0
1

7
0
.
6
6

2
2
.
3
4

0
9
.
8
0
1

0
5
.
8
0
1

7
9
.
3
8

9
2
.
7
0
1

6
7
.
9
0
1

3
7
.
0
4
3

0
4
.
0
0
1

5
1
.
0
1
1

0
9
.
3

2
9
.
6
0
3

5
6
.
5

1
5
.
6
5
3

3
1
.
4
2
3

6
3
.
1
8

5
0
.
1
3
3

2
2
.
6
9

5
6
.
7
0
3

3
2
.
7
1
1

0
8
.
1
1
3

4
9
.
0
2
3

7
3
.
6
6

5
0
.
8
1
1

4
6
.
7
1
1

5
0
.
3
5
-

4
5
7
4
–
7
.
3
1
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

5
5
.
1

5
0
.
5

6
5
.
5
4
-

6
3
.
5
5
-

3
2
.
6

2
2
.
4

0
5
8
5
+
6
.
9
1
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

7
0
3
6
+
0
.
1
2
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

1
5
0
0
+
8
.
7
2
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

3
3
6
1
–
6
.
8
2
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
1
5
6
+
0
.
1
3
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

6
1
3
6
+
2
.
7
3
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

1
4
.
7
3
-

9
4
5
1
+
3
.
6
4
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

3
1
.
1
-

5
3
.
3

0
9
.
7
5
-

9
3
.
5
1
-

7
3
.
2

9
1
.
4
6
-

3
3
.
3
3
-

0
8
.
4
6
-

4
6
.
7
6
-

8
1
.
8
5
-

7
4
.
2
6
-

7
3
.
5
6
-

9
3
.
2
5
-

0
6
.
0
4
-

9
4
.
4

7
8
.
9
4
-

1
2
.
2
6
-

8
8
.
4
7
-

9
4
.
5

9
3
.
3

c
5
0
3
6
+
7
.
0
5
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

8
5
7
5
+
1
.
9
4
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

7
2
9
4
–
1
.
1
5
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
2
4
+
8
.
1
5
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

c
2
2
2
6
+
5
.
7
5
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

6
4
6
3
–
9
.
7
5
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

4
5
2
8
–
0
.
9
5
2
2
J

L
G
F
2

3
5
5
3
–
0
.
0
0
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

0
3
8
3
–
3
.
9
1
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

5
3
5
5
–
5
.
2
3
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
3
5
0
–
6
.
9
3
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

2
5
7
4
–
3
.
3
4
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

7
0
7
0
+
2
.
7
4
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

8
5
5
7
–
6
.
1
5
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
4
6
6
+
3
.
3
5
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

5
1
6
6
–
2
.
4
5
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

6
5
2
5
–
0
.
6
5
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

1
1
8
1
–
4
.
8
5
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

c
1
5
7
6
+
4
.
9
5
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

c
3
4
5
6
+
6
.
9
5
3
2
J

L
G
F
2

264

.
t
x
e
t

e
h
t

n

i

d
e
s
s
u
c
s
i
d

s
a

s
e
c
r
u
o
s

d
e
ﬁ
i
t
n
e
d
n
u

i

L
G
F
2

r
o
f

s
n
o
i
t
c
i
d
e
r
p
N
N
A

l
a
c
i
h
c
r
a
r
e
i
H

:
1
.
C
e
l
b
a
T

265

Appendix D

Study of two peculiar X-ray
galactic objects

As mentioned in this Ph.D. thesis, n parallel to the work devoted to unidenti-
ﬁed sources, I took part to the analysis and interpretation of multi-wavelength
observations of isolated neutron stars. This appendix contains two papers we
have published on astrophysical journals about the analyses of the X-ray emis-
sion from two interesting isolated neutron stars, the Central Compact Object
(CCO) RX J0822–4300 and the Magnetar SGR 0418+5729.

CCOs are supposed to be young, isolated, radio-quiet neutron stars lo-
cated to the geometrical centers of non-plerionic supernova remnants (SNRs)
with no counterparts at any other wavelength. RX J0822–4300 is the CCO
in the Puppis A SNR. We performed a very deep (130-ks) observation with
XMM–Newton, which allowed us to study in detail the phase-resolved proper-
ties of RXJ0822–4300. Our data conﬁrm the existence of an emission line at
0.8 keV, best modelled as an emission line, only seen in the ‘soft’-phase interval
– when the cooler region is best aligned to the line of sight. Surprisingly, we
detect an evident variation in the emission line component, which can be mod-
elled as a decrease in the central energy from ∼ 0.80 keV in 2001 to ∼ 0.73 keV
in 2009–10. The line could be generated via cyclotron scattering of thermal
photons in an optically-thin layer of gas, or, alternatively, it could originate in
low-rate accretion by a debris disc. In any case, a variation in energy, pointing
to a variation of the magnetic ﬁeld in the line-emitting region, cannot be easily
accounted for.

A magnetar is a type of neutron star with a relatively slow spin rate and
an extremely powerful magnetic ﬁeld (1012–1015 Gauss), the decay of which
generates occasional large blasts of X-rays. Our long-term X-ray monitoring
of the outburst decay of the low magnetic ﬁeld magnetar SGR 0418+5729

267

D. Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

from the discovery of the source in 2009 June up to 2012 August allowed us
to obtain the ﬁrst measurement of the period derivative of SGR 0418+5729:
˙P = 4(1) × 10−15 s s−1, signiﬁcant at a ∼ 3.5σ conﬁdence level. This leads to
a surface dipolar magnetic ﬁeld of Bdip (cid:39) 6 × 1012 Gauss. This measurement
conﬁrms SGR 0418+5729 as the lowest magnetic ﬁeld magnetar. Following
the ﬂux and spectral evolution from the beginning of the outburst up to ∼
1200 days, we observe a gradual cooling of the tiny hot spot responsible for
the X-ray emission, from a temperature of ∼ 0.9 to 0.3 keV. Simultaneously,
the X-ray ﬂux decreased by about three orders of magnitude: from about 1.4×
10−11 to 1.2 × 10−14 erg s1 cm−2. By modeling the magneto-thermal secular
evolution of SGR 0418+5729, we infer a realistic age of ∼ 550 kyr, and a dipolar
magnetic ﬁeld at birth of ∼ 1014 Gauss. The outburst characteristics suggest
the presence of a thin twisted bundle with a small heated spot at its base.
The bundle untwisted in the ﬁrst few months following the outburst, while the
hot spot decreases in temperature and size. We estimate the outburst rate
of low magnetic ﬁeld magnetars to be about one per year per galaxy, and we
brieﬂy discuss the consequences of such a result in several other astrophysical
contexts.

268

The isolated neutron star RXJ0822–4300

269

Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc.421,L72–L76(2012)doi:10.1111/j.1745-3933.2011.01209.xAtime-variable,phase-dependentemissionlineintheX-rayspectrumoftheisolatedneutronstarRXJ0822−4300A.DeLuca,1,2,3(cid:2)D.Salvetti,1,3,4A.Sartori,1,3,4P.Esposito,5A.Tiengo,1,2S.Zane,6R.Turolla,6,7F.Pizzolato,1R.P.Mignani,6,8P.A.Caraveo,1,3S.Mereghetti1andG.F.Bignami1,21INAF–IstitutodiAstroﬁsicaSpazialeeFisicaCosmica-Milano,viaE.Bassini15,I-20133Milano,Italy2IstitutoUniversitariodiStudiSuperiori,VialeLungoTicinoSforza56,I-27100Pavia,Italy3IstitutoNazionalediFisicaNucleare,SezionediPavia,ViaBassi6,I-27100Pavia,Italy4DipartimentodiFisicaNucleareeTeorica,Universit`adegliStudidiPavia,ViaBassi6,I-27100Pavia,Italy5INAF–OsservatorioAstronomicodiCagliari,localit`aPoggiodeiPini,strada54,I-09012Capoterra,Italy6MullardSpaceScienceLaboratory,UniversityCollegeLondon,HolmburySt.Mary,Dorking,SurreyRH56NT7DipartimentodiFisicaeAstronomia,Universit`adegliStudidiPadova,ViaMarzolo8,I-35131Padova,Italy8KeplerInstituteofAstronomy,UniversityofZielonaG´ora,Lubuska2,65-265ZielonaG´ora,PolandAccepted2011December14.Received2011December6;inoriginalform2011August12ABSTRACTRXJ0822−4300isthecentralcompactobjectassociatedwiththePuppisAsupernovaremnant.PreviousX-rayobservationssuggestedRXJ0822−4300tobeayoungneutronstarwithaweakdipoleﬁeldandapeculiarsurfacetemperaturedistributiondominatedbytwoantipodalspotswithdifferenttemperaturesandsizes.Anemissionlineat0.8keVwasalsodetected.Weperformedaverydeep(130-ks)observationwithXMM–Newton,whichallowedustostudyindetailthephase-resolvedpropertiesofRXJ0822−4300.Ournewdataconﬁrmtheexistenceofanarrowspectralfeature,bestmodelledasanemissionline,onlyseeninthe‘soft’-phaseinterval–whenthecoolerregionisbestalignedtothelineofsight.Surprisingly,comparisonofourrecentobservationstotheolderonesyieldsevidenceforavariationintheemission-linecomponent,whichcanbemodelledasadecreaseinthecentralenergyfrom∼0.80keVin2001to∼0.73keVin2009–10.Thelinecouldbegeneratedviacyclotronscatteringofthermalphotonsinanoptically-thinlayerofgas,or,alternatively,itcouldoriginateinlow-rateaccretionbyadebrisdisc.Inanycase,avariationinenergy,pointingtoavariationofthemagneticﬁeldintheline-emittingregion,cannotbeeasilyaccountedfor.Keywords:stars:neutron–pulsars:general–X-rays:individual:RXJ0822−4300.1INTRODUCTIONCentralcompactobjects(CCOs)insupernovaremnants(SNRs)areahandfulofabout10point-like,thermallyemittingX-raysourceslocatedclosetothegeometricalcentresofnon-plerionicSNRs,withnocounterpartsatanyotherwavelength.CCOsaresupposedtobeyoung,isolated,radio-quietneutronstars(seeDeLuca2008,forareview).WhiletheﬁrstdiscoveredCCO(theoneintheRCW103SNR)turnedouttobeauniqueobject(DeLucaetal.2006),resultsofX-raytimingonasubsampleofsourceswithfastperiodicitieshaverecentlysetveryusefulconstraintsforageneralpictureofCCOsasaclass.Analysisofmulti-epochXMM–NewtonandChandraob-(cid:2)E-mail:deluca@iasf-milano.inaf.itservationsof1E1207.4−5209insideG296.5+10.0andofCXOUJ185238.6+004020atthecentreofKes79(P=424and105ms,respectively)yieldedunambiguousevidenceforverysmallperiodderivatives(Halpern&Gotthelf2010,2011).Thisimplies,understandardrotatingdipoleassumptions,characteristicagesexceedingtheageofthehostSNRsbymorethanthreeordersofmagnitude,aswellasverysmall((cid:2)1011G)dipolemagneticﬁelds.Thispointstoaninterpretationofsuchsourcesas‘anti-magnetars’–weaklymagnetizedisolatedneutronstars–bornwithaspinperiodalmostidenticaltothecurrentlyobservedone.Suchapicturehasbeenrecentlystrengthenedbythediscoveryof112-mspulsationsfromRXJ0822−4300,theCCOinthePuppisASNR(Gotthelf&Halpern2009),intwoarchivalXMM–Newtondatasetscollectedin2001,previouslyusedbyHui&Becker(2006)foracomprehensivespectralanalysisoftheneutronstarandofthesurroundingSNR.Gotthelf,Perna&Halpern(2010),usinga2010C(cid:3)2012TheAuthorsMonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSocietyC(cid:3)2012RAS by guest on February 29, 2016http://mnrasl.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from D. Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

270

Time-variableemissionlineinRXJ0822−4300L73Chandraobservation,seta2σupperlimitof3.5×10−16ss−1totheperiodderivative,correspondingtoadipolemagneticﬁeldB<2×1011G,andtoacharacteristicageτc>5Myr,muchlargerthantheageofthehostSNR(3.7kyr,Winkleretal.1988).Thus,RXJ0822−4300canbeincludedintheantimagnetarfamily.TheX-rayemissionpropertiesofRXJ0822−4300areverype-culiar.Gotthelf&Halpern(2009)reportona180◦shiftinthephaseofthepulsepeaksoccurringabruptlyat∼1.2keV.Thishasbeeninterpretedasduetotheexistenceoftwoantipodalspotsonthestarsurface,withtwodifferenttemperatures(‘warm’and‘hot’)–indeedseenintheemissionspectrumastwodifferentblackbodycomponents.Thestarrotationbringingintovieworhidingsuchregionsmakestheobservedspectrumtochangefromasoftphase(maximumalignmentofthewarmspotwiththelineofsight)toahardphase(maximumalignmentofthehotspot).Evenmorein-triguing,Gotthelf&Halpern(2009)reportontheevidenceforanemissionlineat∼0.8keV,possiblyassociatedwiththewarmspot.HerewereportonaverydeepXMM–NewtonobservationofRXJ0822−4300,performedin2009and2010,whichallowsustostudyindetailthephase-resolvedemissionpropertiesoftheneutronstarandtocheckforanytime-variability.2OBSERVATIONSANDDATAREDUCTIONOurstudyisbasedonaverydeep(∼130ks)observationwithXMM–Newton,originallyscheduledtoﬁtintoasinglesatelliteorbit(revolutionnumber1836),startedon2009December17.However,thelaunchoftheHelios2BspacecraftrequiredsupportfromXMM–Newtongroundstations,whichresultedinan∼50ksdatagapinthemiddleoftheorbit.Theobservationwascompletedon2010April5.Wealsoincludedinourstudythetwoarchival,shorterdatasets,obtainedon2001April15(∼29ks)and2001November8(∼24ks),usedbyGotthelf&Halpern(2009)intheirpreviousinvestigations.AsummaryoftheobservationsisreportedinTable1.Wefocusondataobtainedbythepndetector(Str¨uderetal.2001)oftheEuropeanPhotonImagingCamera(EPIC).Thedetectorwasoperatedinthesmall-windowmode(time-resolutionof5.7ms,ﬁeldofviewof4.3×4.3arcmin2).Thethinopticalﬁlterwasusedinallobservations.EPIC/pnobservationdataﬁleswereprocessedwiththeXMM–NewtonSASv11(ScienceAnalysisSoftware)usingstandardpipelines.3TIMINGANALYSISForourtiminganalysis,weselectedthepnsourceeventsfromacircularregionof30arcsecradius,includingonly1-and2-pixelTable1.JournaloftheXMM–Newtonobservations.DatasetObservationIDDateaDurationbPulseperiodc(MJDTBD)(ks)(ms)A011302010152014.47125.1112.79942(5)dB011302030152221.89823.0112.79944(4)dC55183.06441.90606280101e112.799453(2)D55184.06543.0E060628020155291.62242.2112.79945(1)aMid-pointoftheobservation.bTimebetweentheﬁrstandlastevents.c1σerrorsinthelastdigitarequotedinparentheses.dGotthelf&Halpern(2009).eThisobservationwasbrokenintotwosegments(seetext).events(PATTERN0to4)withthedefaultﬂagmask.PhotonarrivaltimeswereconvertedtotheSolarsystembarycentreTBDtimeusingtheChandraposition(Gotthelf&Halpern2009).BeforetheanalysispresentedinGotthelf&Halpern(2009),thepulsationsinRXJ0822−4300eludeddetectionformanyyears,be-causeofaphaseshiftofabouthalfacyclebetweenthenearlysinu-soidalproﬁlesinthesoft(<1.2keV)andhardbands.BycomputingZ21periodograms(Buccherietal.1983),wefoundthattheenergybandsthatmaximizethepulsedsignalare0.46–1.17and1.25–5.12keV.TheresultingsoftandhardpulseproﬁlesoftheindividualXMM–Newtonobservations(Table1)werecross-correlated,shiftedandsummedtocreatetwodistinctpulseproﬁletemplates.Owingtothehighersignal-to-noiseratioofthe1.25–5.12keVproﬁles,wecarriedouttheanalysisinthehardband,butwecheckedthattheresultsarefullyconsistentwiththoseobtainedinthesoftband.ThehardpulseproﬁlesfromtemporalsegmentsoftheXMM–Newtonobservationswerecross-correlatedwiththetemplatetodeterminetimesofarrivalateachepoch.Bymeansofaphase-ﬁttinganaly-sis(e.g.Dall’Ossoetal.2003),wemeasuredtheperiodsgiveninTable1(wealsoconﬁrmthemeasurementsbyGotthelf&Halpern2009forobservationsAandB).Weattemptedtoobtainafullphase-connectedtimingsolution(i.e.asolutionthataccountsforallthespincyclesofthepulsar)forthelongestpossibletime.Unfortunately,itwasnotpossibletounivocallyphase-connectthesolutionfoundforthetwoadjacentdatasetsCandDtootherobservations(theuncertaintyonthephase–propagatedalongthelargetime-spantootherobservations–largelyexceeds1cycle).AlinearﬁtoftheperiodsinTable1givesfortheperiodderivative(9±12)×10−17ss−1,whichtranslatesinto3σlim-its−2.7×10−16<˙P<4.5×10−16ss−1(inagreementwiththelimitsrecentlypublishedinGotthelfetal.2010).TheperiodderivativeattheSolarsystembarycentreresultsfromtheintrinsicpulsarspin-up/spin-downplusthecontributionsduetoanyexternalgravitationalﬁeldandthepulsarpropermotion(e.g.Phinney1992).InthecaseofRXJ0822−4300,foranassumeddistanceof2.2kpc(Reynosoetal.1995),theGalacticcontributionisnegativeandneg-ligible(∼−2×10−20ss−1)andthatproducedbythepropermotion(165±25masyr−1;Winkler&Petre2007)is1.6+0.6−0.4×10−17ss−1.Whilethetotal(Galactic+propermotion)contributiondoesnotimpactsigniﬁcantlythecurrentlimitsonthe˙PofRXJ0822−4300,wenotethatitislargerthantheperiodderivativemeasuredfortheCCOinKes79(∼8.7×10−18ss−1;Halpern&Gotthelf2010).Thephaseofthepulsepeakisenergy-dependent(seeFig.1),withanoffsetof0.44±0.02betweentheproﬁlesseenatlower(E<1.17keV)andhigherenergy(E>1.25keV),thetransitionoccurringquiteabruptlyat∼1.2keV,consistentwiththeﬁndingsofGotthelf&Halpern(2009).AsshowninFig.2,thepulsedfraction(PF)decreasesfrom∼15percentinthe0.4–0.6keVenergyrangeto<2percentinthe1.1–1.3keVrange,thengrowsagainto∼15percentatE>2keV,ingoodagreementwiththemodelbyGotthelfetal.(2010).4PHASE-RESOLVEDSPECTROSCOPYThoroughphase-integratedspectroscopyofRXJ0822−4300hasbeenpublishedbyHui&Becker(2006).Wewillfocushereonphase-resolvedspectroscopy.RXJ0822−4300liesinaverycomplexenvironment,whichmakesbackgroundsubtractionacriticaltask.Usingphase-integrateddata,weevaluatedanoptimalselectionofsourceeventsbymaximizingthesignal-to-noiseratiointhe0.3–10keVrangeasC(cid:3)2012TheAuthors,MNRAS421,L72–L76MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSocietyC(cid:3)2012RAS by guest on February 29, 2016http://mnrasl.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from The isolated neutron star RXJ0822–4300

271

L74A.DeLucaetal.Figure1.Background-subtractedfoldedlightcurvesforRXJ0822–4300inthesoftenergyrange(0.46–1.17keV,upperpanel)andinthehardenergyrange(1.25–5.12keV,middlepanel).Thelowerpanelshowsthehardnessratio(hardtosoft),normalizedtoitsaveragevalue.Phaseintervalsusedforphase-resolvedspectroscopyarealsomarked.Figure2.EnergydependenceofPF.ThePFwasevaluatedinoverlapping0.2keVenergybins,incrementedin0.1keVsteps,astheratiobetweenthenumberofcountsabovetheminimumandthetotalnumberofcounts.Backgroundhasbeensubtracted.Acleartrendisapparent,withaminimuminthe1.1–1.3keVenergyrange.afunctionofsourceextractionradius.Thebestchoiceturnedouttobeacircleofradius17.5arcseccentredattheChandraposition.Weextractedthebackgroundspectrumfromanannularregionwithradiiof28and35arcseccentredonthesource.Differentsourcesand/orbackgroundregionsyieldconsistentresultswithin∼2σ.Wealignedthephotonphasesforeachobservationbycross-correlatingthepulseproﬁles(seeSection3).Wegeneratedacom-binedeventlistforﬁrst-epochobservations(i.e.datacollectedin2001andusedbyGotthelf&Halpern2009)andoneforsecond-epochobservations(i.e.ournewdata,collectedin2009–10),inviewofthelargeintercurringtime-span.Weextractedfourphase-resolvedspectrafrombothﬁrst-epochandsecond-epochdata,basedontheintervalsmarkedas‘Hardphase’,‘Softphase’,‘Hardening’and‘Softening’inFig.1.Phase-resolvedspectrawererebinnedwithatleast100countsperbinandsothattheenergyresolutionwasnotoversampledbymorethanafactorof3.Responsematricesandeffectiveareaﬁlesforeachepochweregeneratedbycombin-ing(weightedbyexposuretime)thecorrespondingﬁlesgeneratedusingtheSAStoolsRMFGENandARFGEN.SpectralmodellingwasperformedwiththeXSPECv12.6.0packageinthe0.3–4.0keVFigure3.Residuals(incountss−1)oftwo-blackbodyﬁtstothesoft-phasespectra(seeFig.1).Astructureinthe0.6–0.9keVrangeisseeninbothepochs,althoughwithdifferentshapeandintensity.energyrange.Toaccountfortheeffectsofinterstellarabsorption,weusedthetbabsmodelinXSPEC,withtheabundancesbyWilms,Allen&McCray(2000).Wequoteerrorsat90percentconﬁdencelevelforasingleinterestingparameter,unlessotherwisespeciﬁed.First,werepeatedtheexerciseperformedbyGotthelf&Halpern(2009),ﬁttingadouble-blackbodymodeltoourdata.Asimultane-ousﬁttothefourphase-resolvedspectrawasperformedforeachepoch.Theblackbodynormalizationswereallowedtovaryasafunctionofphase,whilethetemperaturesandNHwereheldﬁxedinordertoconstrainasinglevalueforallphaseranges.Thismodelyieldsareducedχ2of1.20for298degreesoffreedom(d.o.f.)andof1.23for389d.o.ffortheﬁrst-andsecond-epochdata,respectively.Althoughmodulationoftheemittingradiiaccountsforthebulkofthespectralvariation,structuredresidualsinthe0.6–0.9keVrangeareapparentinthesoftphasebothinthe2001dataset(asalreadyreportedbyGotthelf&Halpern2009)andinourdeeper2009–10dataset,whichconﬁrmstheexistenceofaphase-dependentspectralfeature.Veryinterestingly,whilethephase-resolvedbest-ﬁttingparame-tersdonotchangeasafunctionofepoch–theycanbelinkedinasimultaneoustwo-epochﬁt(moredetailsbelow)–thedeviationfromthecontinuuminthesoftphasehasasomewhatdifferentshapein2001withrespectto2009–10(seeFig.3),suggestingapossibletime-variabilityofthespectralfeature.Indeed,suchvariationisfullyapparentwhenplottingtogetherthetwosoft-phasespectra(seeFig.4).Toquantifythesigniﬁcanceofthespectralchangeinamodel-independentway,wecomparedthedistributionsofthesourceevents’energiesobservedinthetwoepochsusingtheKolmogorov–Smirnovtest.Theprobabilityofastatisticalﬂuctuationproducingtheapparentdifferenceintheenergyrangewherethefeatureisseen(∼0.6–0.9keV)turnedouttobe3×10−6.Asasecondstep,inordertomodelthefeature,wefocusedonthetwosoft-phasespectra.FollowingGotthelf&Halpern(2009),weaddedaGaussianemissionlinetothetwo-blackbodymodel.Indeed,thisyieldsamuchbetterﬁtwithnostructuredresidualsinthe0.6–0.9keVrange.Asexpected,thelinecomponentvariesasafunctionoftime,itscentralenergybeinghigherintheﬁrstepoch(∼0.80keV)thaninthesecondepoch(∼0.73keV).Thesig-niﬁcanceofsuchlinecomponentswasstudiedbycalibratingtheF-statisticsusingsimulationsofthenullmodel(thedouble-blackbodyC(cid:3)2012TheAuthors,MNRAS421,L72–L76MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSocietyC(cid:3)2012RAS by guest on February 29, 2016http://mnrasl.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from D. Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

272

Time-variableemissionlineinRXJ0822−4300L75Figure4.Upperpanel:soft-phasespectraforthetwoepochs.Firstepoch:blue.Secondepoch:green.Thevariationinthe0.6–0.9keVrangeisap-parent.Thebest-ﬁttingmodel,twoblackbodycomponentsandavariableGaussianemissionline,issuperimposed.Thelinecomponentatbothepochsisalsoshown.Thecontinuumcomponentsdonotchangeasafunctionoftime.Lowerpanel:residualstothebest-ﬁttingmodel.Themodelyieldsaverygooddescriptionofthetwospectra(χ2ν=1.02,154d.o.f.).model)assuggestedbyProtassovetal.(2002).Eachepochwasstudiedindividually.Running104MonteCarlosimulations,wees-timatedthatthesigniﬁcanceofthelineisgreaterthan99.99percentinthesecond-epochspectrum,andgreaterthan99.97percentintheﬁrst-epochspectrum.Performingasimultaneousﬁttothetwospectra,thetwo-blackbodyplusemission-linemodelyieldsareducedχ2of1.17(155d.o.f.)whenallparameters(bothcontin-uumandline)arelinked,whilebyallowingthelinecentralenergytovarybetweentheﬁrstandsecondepochs,theﬁtimprovestoareducedχ2of1.02(154d.o.f.)(seeFig.4).Thechanceoccurrenceprobabilityofsuchanimprovementis∼3×10−6,asevaluatedbyanF-test.SucharesultisconﬁrmedbyMonteCarlosimulations:assumingthebest-ﬁttingmodelofsecond-epochdata,alinecen-troidasobservedinﬁrst-epochdatacouldbeobtainedbychancewithaprobabilityaslowas∼5×10−6.Theﬁtdoesnotimprovesigniﬁcantlybyallowingfurtherlineparameterstovary.Thereisnoevidenceforanyvariationinthecontinuumparametersbetweenthetwoepochs.Wealsotriedtomodelthetwosoft-phasespectrausingvariableabsorptionfeatures.AddingasingleGaussianabsorptionline(gabsinXSPEC)atahigherenergythantheonerequiredbytheemission-linemodel(∼1.00and∼0.89keVintheﬁrstandsecondepochs,respectively)yieldsamuchworseﬁtthantheemission-linemodel(reducedχ2of1.20for154d.o.f.).Addingtwolinesat∼0.97and∼0.63keVintheﬁrstepochandat∼0.88and∼0.55keVinthesecondepochstillyieldsaremarkablyworsedescriptionofthedata(reducedχ2=1.15for150d.o.f.).Asafurthertest,wetriedlow-Bneutronstaratmospheremodelsforthecontinuum(nsa,Zavlin,Pavlov&Shibanov1996;nsatmos,Heinkeetal.2006).Asfortheblackbodycase,twocomponentswithdifferenttemperaturesareneeded.AdditionofavariableGaussianemissionlineisstillfavoured(χ2=1.05for154d.o.f.)withrespecttoasinglevariableabsorptionline,aswellastotwovariableabsorptionlines(χ2=1.23for150d.o.f.forthelattermodel).Then,thewholeanalysiswasrepeatedfortheotherphaseinter-vals(hard,softeningandhardening).Nosigniﬁcantimprovementintheﬁtwasobtainedbyaddinganemissionlinetothetwo-blackbodymodel(thesameistrueusingabsorptionfeatures).Weassessedthat,ineachphaseinterval,thecontinuumdidnotchangeasafunctionofepochandthattherearenosystematicvariationsbetweentheﬁrstandsecondepochsinthe0.5–1keVenergyrange(suchresultsindicatethatthelong-termvariabilityofthefeaturecannothaveaninstrumentalorigin).Asaﬁnalstep,weperformedasimultaneousﬁttoallthespectrabasedontheresultsdescribedabove.Weusedthetwo-blackbodyplusemission-linemodel.Theblackbodynormalizationsarephase-dependent,butnotepoch-dependent;thelinenormaliza-tionisphase-dependentanditscentralenergyisepoch-dependent.Thisyieldsareducedχ2=1.13for691d.o.f.Insuchmodels,NHis(5.0±0.1)×1021cm−2,thewarmblackbodyhasatemperaturekTW=265±15eVandaradiusrangingfrom2.27km(softphase)to2.04km(hardphase),andthehotblackbodyhasatemperaturekTH=455±20eVandaradiusrangingfrom0.53km(softphase)to0.65km(hardphase).Thelinecomponentisnarrow(σ<40eV).In2001,thelineenergyis0.80±0.01keVandtheequivalentwidth(EW)rangesfrom∼53eVinthesoftphaseto<10–15eVinotherintervals(wherethelineisnotsigniﬁcant).In2009–10,thelineen-ergyis0.73+0.01−0.02keVandtheEWrangesfrom∼45eV(softphase)to<12–18eVinotherintervals.Theunabsorbedﬂuxofthelinebetween0.3and10keVis∼3percentoftheﬂuxofthecontinuuminthesameenergyrange.5DISCUSSIONOurmulti-epochXMM–Newtonanalysisshowsaphase-dependent,time-variablespectralfeature,bestmodelledasanemissionlinewithavariablecentralenergy,intheX-rayspectrumofthe‘anti-magnetar’candidateRXJ0822−4300.Toputsuchapeculiarresultincontext,weﬁrstnotethatourobservationsconﬁrmthepictureofRXJ0822−4300asaweaklymagnetizedneutronstar.Indeed,weimprovedtheupperlimiton˙P,bringingthedipolecomponentofthemagneticﬁelddownto<2.3×1011Gat3σlevel.Basedonlargerstatistics,wealsoconﬁrmthegeometricmodelbyGotthelfetal.(2010),explainingthephase-resolvedthermalemissionwithtwoantipodalspotsofdifferenttemperature(comparee.g.ourFig.2totheirﬁg.6).Lackofanymeasurabletime-variationinthecontinuumpropertiessuggeststhatthewarmandhotregionsareintrinsic,persistentfeaturesinthethermalmapofthestar.ToexplainsuchalargesurfaceanisotropyforRXJ0822−4300(andforCCOsingeneral),wemayconsiderthatalargedifferenceinintensitycouldexistbetweentheinternalandtheexternalmagneticﬁeldsoftheneutronstar,asproposedbyTurollaetal.(2011)toexplainthepropertiesofthelowmagneticﬁeldsoftgammarepeaterSGR0418+5729(Reaetal.2010).Inourcase,aninternal(toroidal+poloidal)ﬁeldofafew1013Gwouldbelargeenoughtoeffectivelychanneltheheatﬂuxfromthecore(Geppert,K¨uker&Page2004,2006),butwouldnotinducecrustalfractureswithconsequentmagnetar-likeburstingactivity.Themostnaturalinterpretationofthevariableemissionlineisthatofacyclotronfeatureproducedbyelectrons.Ifitscentralenergyisassociatedwiththefundamentale−cyclotronfrequency,themagneticﬁeldintheline-emittingregionwouldbe(6–7)×1010(1+z)G(wherez∼0.25isthegravitationalredshift).Thisisquitecompatiblewiththeupperlimitfromthespin-downrate.C(cid:3)2012TheAuthors,MNRAS421,L72–L76MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSocietyC(cid:3)2012RAS by guest on February 29, 2016http://mnrasl.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from The isolated neutron star RXJ0822–4300

273

L76A.DeLucaetal.Thelineisverynarrow(σ≤40eV).Ifitisacyclotronline,thenE/E=B/BandtherelativevariationofBovertheemittingregion(conservatively)needstobe≤10percent.Thus,thelineshouldbeproducedinaverycompactregion.Avariationofthecentralenergyofthefeaturewouldrequireachangeeitherinthepositionoftheemittingplasmawithinanon-variablemagneticﬁeld,orintheintensityofthemagneticﬁelditself.Lackofchangesinthephase-resolvedcontinuumemissionrulesoutsimpler,purelygeometricexplanationssuchasprecessionoftheneutronstar.Toexplainthegenerationofanemissionlineinthespectrumofanisolatedneutronstar,thepossibilityofcyclotronscatteringofsurfacethermalphotonsbyageometrically-thin,optically-thinlayerofplasmacouldbeconsidered.However,undersimpleas-sumptions(emissionfromtheentirestarsurface;plane-parallelgeometry;pure,conservativescattering),ascatteringlayerwouldproduceanabsorptionline.Onemightinvokeaspatiallylimitedscatteringmedium,possiblysomedistanceawayfromthestarsur-face.Photonscomingfromthepartofthesurfacenotcoveredbythelayercouldbescatteredalongthelineofsightgivingrisetoanemissionfeature.ThevalueofBderivedfromthelineenergyissomehowsmallerthantheupperlimitonthesurfaceﬁeld,sothelinecouldindeedformatsomeheightinthemagnetosphere.Aconﬁnedmediumseemsalsotoberequiredbytheresultsofphase-resolvedspectroscopywhichshowsthattheemissionlineisseenmostlywhenthecoolerspotisintoview.Still,suchapictureseemsrathercontrived,sincethenatureofthelayerandthemechanismkeepingtheplasmasuspendedandconﬁnedinacompactblobremainstobeunderstood.Toeasetheproblem,anenergysourceunrelatedtothesurfacethermalemissionshouldbeinvokedtoexcitee−tohigherLan-daulevelsintheline-emittingregion.Indeed,Nelson,Salpeter&Wasserman(1993)predictedthatforneutronstarsaccretingatalowrate(Laccr<1034ergs−1),andendowedwithmagneticﬁeldsof1011–1013G,accretingionsmayloseenergytoatmosphericelec-tronsviamagneticCoulombcollisions.Electrons,excitedtohighLandaulevels,radiativelydecayandpartofthecyclotronphotonsareexpectedtoescapeproducinganemissionline.AccordingtoNelsonetal.(1993),atB<1012G,thefractionoftheaccretion-poweredﬂuxescapinginthelineisexpectedtobeverysmall((cid:6)5percent),thelargestpartbeingreprocessedandemittedinathermalcontinuum.Thus,oneshouldpostulatethatthebulkoftheX-rayluminosityofRXJ0822−4300isaccretionpowered,atvari-ancewithobservations.Itwouldrequireanaccretionrateof∼2×1013gs−1implying–understandardrelationsforpropellerspin-down(Menouetal.1999)–a˙Pvaluemorethan10timeslargerthanourupperlimit.AlthoughthemodelbyNelsonetal.(1993)doesnotﬁttoourcase,low-levelaccretionofsupernovafallbackmaterial(whichcannotberuledout,basedonX-raytiming,aswellasontheopticalupperlimitssetbyMignanietal.2009)couldplaysomeroleingeneratinganemissionlineinalow-Batmosphere.AdetailedinvestigationofsuchpossibilityisbeyondthescopeofthisLetter.Wewillnotgointofurtherspeculationsabouttheline-emittingmechanism.Westressthattheevidencefortime-evolutionofthespectralfeatureismodel-independentandrepresentstodatetheﬁrstevidenceforvariabilityinan‘antimagnetar’candidate.Likely,such‘activity’isrelatedtoavariationinthemagneticﬁeldofthestar.An∼10percentdecreasein∼8yrseemsvastlytoosteeptobeattributedtothelarge-scaledipoleﬁeld.Possibly,wearewitnessingevolutionofalocalizedmultipolecomponent,dominatingclosetothestarsurface.Thiswouldhintatthepresenceofalargeinternalﬁeld,asproposedtoexplaintheanisotropicthermalmapofthestar.PreciseX-raytiming,assessingthe˙Pandmeasuringthestardipoleﬁeldwilladdacrucialpieceofinformation.Coupledwithfurthersensitivephase-resolvedspectroscopytomonitorspectralvariability,thiscouldhelptosolvethepuzzlessetbyourresultsonRXJ0822−4300whichwouldhaveimportantimplicationsfortheunderstandingofthenatureofCCOsandoftheirrelationswithotherfamiliesofneutronstars.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThisstudywasbasedonobservationsobtainedwithXMM–Newton,anESAsciencemissionwithinstrumentsandcontributionsdi-rectlyfundedbyESAMemberStatesandNASA.WethankF.GastaldelloforusefuladviceaboutstatisticsandA.Possentifordiscussions.ThisworkwaspartiallysupportedbytheASI-INAFI/009/10/0agreement.PEacknowledgesﬁnancialsupportfromtheAutonomousRegionofSardiniathrougharesearchgrantundertheprogrammePOSardegnaFSE2007–2013,L.R.7/2007.REFERENCESBuccheriR.etal.,1983,A&A,128,245Dall’OssoS.,IsraelG.L.,StellaL.,PossentiA.,PerozziE.,2003,ApJ,599,485DeLucaA.,2008,inBassaC.G.,WangZ.,CummingA.,KaspiV.M.,eds,AIPConf.Ser.Vol.983,40YearsofPulsars:MillisecondPulsars,MagnetarsandMore.Am.Inst.Phys.,NewYork,p.311DeLucaA.,CaraveoP.A.,MereghettiS.,TiengoA.,BignamiG.F.,2006,Sci,313,814GeppertU.,K¨ukerM.,PageD.,2004,A&A,426,267GeppertU.,K¨ukerM.,PageD.,2006,A&A,457,937GotthelfE.V.,HalpernJ.P.,2009,ApJ,695,L35GotthelfE.V.,PernaR.,HalpernJ.P.,2010,ApJ,724,1316HalpernJ.P.,GotthelfE.V.,2010,ApJ,709,436HalpernJ.P.,GotthelfE.V.,2011,ApJ,733,L28HeinkeC.O.,RybickiG.B.,NarayanR.,GrindlayJ.E.,2006,ApJ,644,1090HuiC.Y.,BeckerW.,2006,A&A,454,543MenouK.,EsinA.A.,NarayanR.,GarciaM.R.,LasotaJ.-P.,McClintockJ.E.,1999,ApJ,520,276MignaniR.P.,DeLucaA.,MereghettiS.,CaraveoP.A.,2009,A&A,500,1211NelsonR.W.,SalpeterE.E.,WassermanI.,1993,ApJ,418,874PhinneyE.S.,1992,Phil.Trans.R.Soc.A,341,39ProtassovR.,vanDykD.A.,ConnorsA.,KashyapV.L.,SiemiginowskaA.,2002,ApJ,571,545ReaN.etal.,2010,Sci,330,944ReynosoE.M.,DubnerG.M.,GossW.M.,ArnalE.M.,1995,AJ,110,318Str¨uderL.etal.,2001,A&A,365,L18TurollaR.,ZaneS.,PonsJ.A.,EspositoP.,ReaN.,2011,ApJ,740,105WilmsJ.,AllenA.,McCrayR.,2000,ApJ,542,914WinklerP.F.,PetreR.,2007,ApJ,670,635WinklerP.F.,TuttleJ.H.,KirshnerR.P.,IrwinM.J.,1988,inRogerR.S.,LandeckerT.L.eds,Proc.IAUColloq.101,SupernovaRemnantsandtheInterstellarMedium.CambridgeUniv.Press,Cambridge,p.65ZavlinV.E.,PavlovG.G.,ShibanovY.A.,1996,A&A,315,141ThispaperhasbeentypesetfromaTEX/LATEXﬁlepreparedbytheauthor.C(cid:3)2012TheAuthors,MNRAS421,L72–L76MonthlyNoticesoftheRoyalAstronomicalSocietyC(cid:3)2012RAS by guest on February 29, 2016http://mnrasl.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from The magnetar SGR 0418+5729

275

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10doi:10.1088/0004-637X/770/1/65C(cid:2)2013.TheAmericanAstronomicalSociety.Allrightsreserved.PrintedintheU.S.A.THEOUTBURSTDECAYOFTHELOWMAGNETICFIELDMAGNETARSGR0418+5729N.Rea1,G.L.Israel2,J.A.Pons3,R.Turolla4,5,D.Vigan`o3,S.Zane5,P.Esposito6,R.Perna7,A.Papitto1,G.Terreran1,4,A.Tiengo6,8,9,D.Salvetti6,9,10,J.M.Girart1,AinaPalau1,A.Possenti11,M.Burgay11,E.G¨oˇg¨u¸s12,G.A.Caliandro1,C.Kouveliotou13,D.G¨otz14,R.P.Mignani5,6,15,E.Ratti16,andL.Stella21InstituteofSpaceSciences(CSIC–IEEC),CampusUAB,FacultyofScience,TorreC5-parell,E-08193Barcelona,Spain2INAF/OsservatorioAstronomicodiRoma,viaFrascati33,I-00040MonteporzioCatone,Italy3DepartmentdeFisicaAplicada,Universitatd’Alacant,Ap.Correus99,E-03080Alacant,Spain4DipartimentodiFisicaeAstronomia,Universit`adiPadova,viaF.Marzolo8,I-35131Padova,Italy5MullardSpaceScienceLaboratory,UniversityCollegeLondon,HolmburySt.Mary,Dorking,SurreyRH56NT,UK6INAF/IstitutodiAstroﬁsicaSpazialeeFisicaCosmica-Milano,viaE.Bassini15,I-20133Milano,Italy7JILAandDepartmentofAstrophysicalandPlanetarySciences,UniversityofColorado,Boulder,CO80309,USA8IUSS-IstitutoUniversitariodiStudiSuperiori,PiazzadellaVittoria15,I-27100Pavia,Italy9INFNIstitutoNazionalediFisicaNucleare,SezionediPavia,ViaBassi6,I-27100Pavia,Italy10DipartimentodiFisicaNucleareeTeorica,Universit`adegliStudidiPavia,viaBassi6,I-27100Pavia,Italy11INAF/OsservatorioAstronomicodiCagliari,localit`aPoggiodeiPini,strada54,I-09012Capoterra,Italy12SabancıUniversity,Orhanlı-Tuzla,34956˙Istanbul,Turkey13NASAMarshallSpaceFlightCenter,Huntsville,AL35812,USA14AIM(UMR7158CEA/DSM-CNRS-Universit´eParisDiderot)Irfu/Serviced’Astrophysique,Saclay,F-91191Gif-sur-YvetteCedex,France15KeplerInstituteofAstronomy,UniversityofZielonaG´ora,Lubuska2,65-265ZielonaG´ora,Poland16SRON-NetherlandsInstituteforSpaceResearch,Sorbonnelaan2,3584CAUtrecht,TheNetherlandsReceived2013January23;accepted2013April16;published2013May24ABSTRACTWereportonthelong-termX-raymonitoringoftheoutburstdecayofthelowmagneticﬁeldmagnetarSGR0418+5729usingalltheavailableX-raydataobtainedwithRXTE,Swift,Chandra,andXMM-Newtonobservationsfromthediscoveryofthesourcein2009Juneupto2012August.ThetiminganalysisallowedustoobtaintheﬁrstmeasurementoftheperiodderivativeofSGR0418+5729:˙P=4(1)×10−15ss−1,signiﬁcantata∼3.5σconﬁdencelevel.ThisleadstoasurfacedipolarmagneticﬁeldofBdip(cid:4)6×1012G.ThismeasurementconﬁrmsSGR0418+5729asthelowestmagneticﬁeldmagnetar.Followingtheﬂuxandspectralevolutionfromthebeginningoftheoutburstupto∼1200days,weobserveagradualcoolingofthetinyhotspotresponsiblefortheX-rayemission,fromatemperatureof∼0.9to0.3keV.Simultaneously,theX-rayﬂuxdecreasedbyaboutthreeordersofmagnitude:fromabout1.4×10−11to1.2×10−14ergs−1cm−2.Deepradio,millimeter,optical,andgamma-rayobservationsdidnotdetectthesourcecounterpart,implyingstringentlimitsonitsmulti-bandemission,aswellasconstraintsonthepresenceofafossildisk.Bymodelingthemagneto-thermalsecularevolutionofSGR0418+5729,weinferarealisticageof∼550kyr,andadipolarmagneticﬁeldatbirthof∼1014G.Theoutburstcharacteristicssuggestthepresenceofathintwistedbundlewithasmallheatedspotatitsbase.Thebundleuntwistedintheﬁrstfewmonthsfollowingtheoutburst,whilethehotspotdecreasesintemperatureandsize.Weestimatetheoutburstrateoflowmagneticﬁeldmagnetarstobeaboutoneperyearpergalaxy,andwebrieﬂydiscusstheconsequencesofsucharesultinseveralotherastrophysicalcontexts.Keywords:stars:individual(SGR0418+5729)–stars:magneticﬁeld–stars:neutronOnline-onlymaterial:colorﬁgures1.INTRODUCTIONNeutronstarsshowingmagnetar-likeactivity(comprisingtheanomalousX-raypulsars,softgammarepeaters,andahighmag-neticﬁeldpulsar)areasmallgroupofX-raypulsars(about20objects)withspinperiodsbetween0.3–12s,whosestrongper-sistentand/orﬂaringemissionarehardtoexplainusingthecommonscenariosforrotation-poweredpulsarsoraccretingpulsars.Infact,theverystrongX-rayemissionoftheseob-jects(LX∼1035ergs−1)istoohighand/orvariabletobefedbytherotationalenergyalone(asintheradiopulsars),andnoevidenceforacompanionstarhasbeenfound,hencerulingoutaccretioninabinary.Accretionfromafossildiskremnantofthesupernovaexplosionmightberesponsibleforpartoftheobservationalpropertiesoftheseobjects,butitfailstoex-plainsomeoftheircharacteristics,suchastheﬂaringX-rayactivity.Theirinferredmagneticﬁelds,underthetypicalassumptionofmagneticdipolarlossesalone,appeartobeashighasBdip(cid:4)3.2×1019√P˙P∼1014–1015G(seeMereghetti2008forareview).Thesestrongﬁeldsarebelievedtoei-therformviaadynamoactioninarapidlyrotatingproto-neutronstar(<3ms;Thompson&Duncan1995)orbefos-silﬁeldremnantsofahighlymagneticmassivestar(∼1kG;Ferrario&Wickramasinghe2006).BecauseofthesehighBﬁelds,theemissionof“magnetars”isthoughttobepoweredbythedecayandtheinstabilityoftheirstrongﬁelds(Duncan&Thompson1992;Thompson&Duncan1993;Thompsonetal.2002).TheirpowerfulX-rayoutputisusuallywellmodeledbythermalemissionfromtheneutronstarhotsurface,repro-cessedinatwistedmagnetospherethroughresonantcyclotronscattering(Thompsonetal.2002;Nobilietal.2008;Reaetal.2008;Zaneetal.2009),aprocessfavoredundertheseextrememagneticconditions.OntopoftheirpersistentX-rayemis-sion,magnetarsemitverypeculiarﬂaresandoutburstsonsev-eraltimescales,fromfractionsofasecondtoyearsreachingveryhigh,super-Eddingtonluminosities(1038–1046ergs−1).Theseﬂaresaremostprobablycausedbyrearrangementsofthetwistedmagneticﬁeldlines,eitheraccompaniedortriggeredby1D. Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

276

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.fracturesoftheneutron-starcrust(Thompson&Duncan1995;Perna&Pons2011).Transienteventsareacharacteristicsignatureofmagnetaremission,andareoneofthemainwaystodiscovernewsourcesofthisclassandstudyitsphysics.Fromthediscoveryoftheﬁrsttransientlessthanadecadeago,wenowcountaboutadozenoutbursts,whichincreasedthenumberofknownmagnetarsbyathirdinsixyears(seeRea&Esposito2011;Rea2013forrecentreviews).Magnetaroutburstsmightinvolvetheirmulti-bandemissionresultinginanincreasedactivityfromtheradiotohardX-ray,usuallywithasoftX-rayﬂuxincreaseofafactorof10–1000withrespecttothequiescentlevel.AnassociatedX-rayspectralevolutionisoftenobserved,withaspectralsofteningduringtheoutburstdecay(Reaetal.2009).Theﬂuxdecaytimescalevariessubstantiallyfromsourcetosource,rangingfromafewweekstoseveralyears(Rea&Esposito2011;Pons&Rea2012).Theextensivefollow-upofmagnetarsundergoinganoutburstyieldedthemostunexpecteddiscoveryofrecentyearsinthemagnetarﬁeld.Promptedbythedetectionoftypicalmagnetar-likeburstsandapowerfuloutburst,anewtransientmagnetarwithaspinperiodof∼9swasdiscoveredin2009,namelySGR0418+5729(vanderHorstetal.2010;Espositoetal.2010).However,aftermorethantwoyearsofextensivemoni-toring,noperiodderivativewasdetected.ThisledtoanupperlimitonthesourcesurfacedipolarﬁeldofBdip<7.5×1012G(Reaetal.2010).Fortheﬁrsttime,wedetectedamagnetarwithalowdipolarmagneticﬁeld,showingthatacriticalmag-neticﬁeldisnotnecessaryforaneutronstarinordertodisplaymagnetar-likeactivity.Inturn,thismeansthatmanyseeminglynormalpulsarscouldturnouttobemagnetarsatanytime(thiswassupportedbythediscoveryofasecondlow-Bmagnetarfollowingsoonafterthatoftheﬁrst;Reaetal.2012;Scholzetal.2012).Afterthediscoveryofthislowdipolarmagneticﬁeldsoftgammarepeater,severalmodelswereputforwardtoexplainitspuzzlingemission.Theyinvolvethepossiblepres-enceofafallbackdiskslowingdownthepulsaruptothecurrentspinperiod(Alparetal.2011),atinyinclinationanglebetweenthemagneticandrotationalaxisresultinginahigherinferredmagneticﬁeld(Tong&Xu2012),apulsarwithastronglymag-netizedcore(Soni2012),anoldquarknova(Ouyedetal.2011),oramassivehighlymagnetized,rotatingwhitedwarf(Malheiroetal.2012).InReaetal.(2010)andTurollaetal.(2011),wesuggestedthatanon-dipolarcomponentoftheﬁeld,largerthanthemeasureddipolarone,canberesponsibleforthebehaviorofthismagnetar,ifithasarelativelyoldage((cid:4)1Myr).InthispaperwepresentthecompletestudyoftheoutburstofthelowdipolarmagneticﬁeldmagnetarSGR0418+5729,fromtheﬁrstoutburstphasesuntilaboutthreeyearsafteritson-set.Thislong-termmonitoringcampaignusingseveralX-raysatellites,allowedustoestimateSGR0418+5729’speriodderivative,andfollowthecoolingofitssurfacetemperatureduringtheoutburstdecayuptothe(probable)quiescentlevel.Furthermore,weinferredlimitsonitsemissionintheradio,millimeter,optical,andgamma-raybands.Wediscussourﬁnd-ingsintermsofthemagneto-thermalhistoryofthismagnetar,discussthecurrentlimitsonthepresenceofafossildisk,andpresentsomediscussiononthebroaderconsequencesofthediscoveryoflowmagneticﬁeldmagnetars.2.X-RAYOBSERVATIONSANDDATAREDUCTIONInthisstudy,weuseddataobtainedfromseveraldifferentsatellites(seeTable1andFigure1forasummary).Wedescribebelowtheobservationsanddataanalysis.PartsofthedataweusedinthispaperwerealreadypublishedbyvanderHorstetal.(2010),Espositoetal.(2010),andReaetal.(2010).2.1.SwiftDataTheX-RayTelescope(XRT;Burrowsetal.2005)onboardSwiftusesafront-illuminatedCCDdetectorsensitivetophotonsbetween0.2and10keV.Twomainreadoutmodesareavailable:photoncounting(PC)andwindowedtiming(WT).PCmodeprovidestwo-dimensionalimaginginformationanda2.5073stimeresolution;inWTmodeonlyone-dimensionalimagingispreserved,achievingatimeresolutionof1.766ms.TheXRTdatawereuniformlyprocessedwithxrtpipeline(version12,intheheasoftsoftwarepackageversion6.11),andﬁlteredandscreenedwithstandardcriteria,correctingforeffectivearea,deadcolumns,etc.Thesourcecountswereextractedwithina20pixelradius(oneXRTpixelcorrespondstoabout2.(cid:6)(cid:6)36).Forthespectroscopy,weusedthespectralredistributionmatricesincaldb(20091130;matricesversionv013andv014forthePCandWTdata,respectively),whiletheancillaryresponseﬁlesweregeneratedwithxrtmkarf,andtheyaccountfordifferentextractionregions,vignetting,andpoint-spreadfunction(PSF)corrections.2.2.RXTEDataTheProportionalCounterArray(PCA;Jahodaetal.1996)onboardRXTEconsistsofﬁvecollimatedxenon/methanemulti-anodeProportionalCounterUnits(PCUs)operatinginthe2–60keVenergyrange.Rawdatawerereducedusingtheftoolspackage(version6.11).TostudythetimingpropertiesofSGR0418+5729,werestrictedouranalysistothedatainGoodXenonmode,withatimeresolutionof1μsand256energybins.Theevent-modedatawereextractedinthe2–10keVenergyrangefromallactivedetectors(inagivenobservation)andalllayers,andbinnedintolightcurvesof0.1sresolution.Weusehere46RXTE/PCAobservationsofSGR0418+5729,spanningtheﬁrstsixmonthsoftheoutburst,untilthesourceﬂuxdecayedbelowtheinstrumentdetectionlevel.Thetotal194.2ksexposuretimeisdividedinobservationsof0.6to13.6ksexposureeach.SeeEspositoetal.(2010)forfurtherdetailsontheSwiftandRXTEobservations.2.3.ChandraDataTheChandraX-RayObservatorymonitoredSGR0418+5729ﬁvetimesduringthepastthreeyears.TheﬁrstobservationwaswiththeHighResolutionImagingCamera(HRC-I;Zombecketal.1995)andthefollowingfourobservationswerewiththeAdvancedCCDImagingSpectrometer(ACIS-S;Garmireetal.2003).Datawereanalyzedusingstandardcleaningprocedures17andCIAOversion4.4.TheHRC-Icameradoesnothaveasufﬁcientspectralresolution,anditwasusedonlyforthetiminganalysis;ithasatimingresolutionof∼16μs.AllACIS-SobservationswereperformedinVERYFAINTmode,withonlytheS7CCDon,resultinginatimingresolutionof0.44s.Photonswereextractedfromacircularregionwitharadiusof3(cid:6)(cid:6)aroundthesourceposition,includingmorethan90%ofthesourcephotons,andbackgroundwasextractedfromasimilarregionfarfromthesourceposition.17http://asc.harvard.edu/ciao/threads/index.html2The magnetar SGR 0418+5729

277

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.Table1JournalofAlltheX-RayObservationsofSGR0418+5729InstrumentObsIDStartingDateExp.Countss−1FluxckTBBdBBNorm.e(ks)(keV)RXTE/PCAa94048200906-11/11-24194.2.........Swift/XRT000314220012009-07-0820:48:012.90.229±0.00813.4±1.00.88±0.052.2±0.2Swift/XRT(PC)000314220022009-07-0900:04:0110.60.245±0.00313.8±0.70.94±0.031.7±0.1Swift/XRT(PC)000314220032009-07-1000:15:015.60.179±0.00511.0±0.70.95±0.051.33±0.13Swift/XRT(WT)000314220042009-07-1200:27:017.10.218±0.00611.5±0.70.91±0.041.68±0.14Chandra/HRC-Ia101682009-07-1206:06:4324.10.317±0.005.........Swift/XRT(WT)000314220062009-07-1500:48:397.70.252±0.00612.7±1.00.93±0.031.69±0.12Swift/XRT(WT)000314220072009-07-1600:53:0116.40.217±0.00411.7±0.80.93±0.021.57±0.08XMM-Newton/EPIC∗06100006012009-08-1221:09:1267.11.281±0.0056.75±0.070.897±0.0071.038±0.018Swift/XRT(PC)000314220082009-09-2021:09:009.40.066±0.0023.66±0.300.82±0.050.79±0.09Swift/XRT(PC)000314220092009-09-2200:43:007.60.072±0.0033.58±0.400.82±0.050.79±0.11Swift/XRT(PC)000314220102009-11-0800:36:0115.10.043±0.0022.14±0.200.82±0.050.47±0.05Swift/XRT(PC)00031422011b12010-01-1408:06:013.60.019±0.001b1.05±0.100.75±0.070.32±0.06Swift/XRT(PC)00031422012b12010-01-1513:08:013.70.019±0.001b”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422013b12010-01-1608:14:014.00.019±0.001b”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422014b12010-01-1706:47:013.80.019±0.001b”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422015b22010-02-1417:33:014.50.0172±0.0008c0.76±0.110.74±0.040.25±0.03Swift/XRT(PC)00031422016b22010-02-1517:37:014.50.0172±0.0008c”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422017b22010-02-1601:38:014.60.0172±0.0008c”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422018b22010-02-1709:49:014.60.0172±0.0008c”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422019b22010-02-1816:14:013.90.0172±0.0008c”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422020b22010-02-1900:23:013.20.0172±0.0008c”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422021b32010-07-0906:50:013.60.0023±0.0003d0.10±0.040.47±0.130.23±0.13Swift/XRT(PC)00031422022b32010-07-1018:11:005.20.0023±0.0003d”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422023b32010-07-1105:19:015.00.0023±0.0003d”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422024b32010-07-1123:06:015.40.0023±0.0003d”””Swift/XRT(PC)00031422025b32010-07-1300:47:014.90.0023±0.0003d”””Chandra/ACIS-S123122010-07-2315:04:0930.00.0017±0.00080.13±0.020.68±0.040.061±0.008XMM-Newton/EPIC06058522012010-09-2401:54:5634.20.0370±0.00200.16±0.020.69±0.050.07±0.01Chandra/ACIS-S131482010-11-2905:59:5730.00.0038±0.00040.021±0.0020.38±0.110.12±0.06XMM-Newton/EPIC06726702012011-03-1003:15:5335.00.0071±0.00070.015±0.0020.32±0.050.21±0.08Chandra/ACIS-S132352011-07-2002:26:1277.00.0033±0.00020.015±0.0030.37±0.040.11±0.02XMM-Newton/EPICb406726704012011-09-0915:27:2333.00.0071±0.0006e0.016±0.0020.28±0.050.34±0.13XMM-Newton/EPICb406726705012011-09-1121:47:4148.50.0071±0.0006e”””Chandra/ACIS-S132362011-11-2611:48:0275.00.0026±0.00020.015±0.0020.35±0.070.13±0.05XMM-Newton/EPIC∗06931001012012-08-2514:18:0878.20.0058±0.00040.012±0.0010.32±0.050.16±0.05Notes.aTheRXTE-PCAandtheChandraHRC-Iwereusedonlyforthetiminganalysis.bTheseobservationsweremergedinthetimingandspectralanalysistoimprovestatistics.cAbsorbedﬂuxinthe0.5–10keVenergyrange,andinunitsof10−12ergs−1cm−2.Errorsinthetableareat90%conﬁdencelevel.dFittedmodelisphabs*bbodyrad;NH=(1.15±0.06)×1021cm−2andχ2ν=1.19(for940dof).eTheBBradiusinkmisthesquarerootofthisBBnormalization,timesthedistanceinunitsof10kpc.∗SeeSection3.1fordetailsonthemodelingoftheseobservations.2.4.XMM-NewtonDataSGR0418+5729wasobservedsixtimeswithXMM-Newton(Jansenetal.2001).DatahavebeenprocessedusingSASversion12,andwehaveemployedthemostup-to-datecali-brationﬁlesavailableatthetimethereductionwasperformed(2012August).Standarddatascreeningcriteriaareappliedintheextractionofscientiﬁcproducts.ForourspectralanalysisweusedonlytheEPIC-pncamera(Turneretal.2001)whichprovidesthespectrawiththebeststatistics,whiletheMOScam-eras(Str¨uderetal.2001)wereaddedinthetiminganalysis.TheEPIC-pncamerawassetinSmallWindow(timingresolutionof6ms)andFullFrame(73ms)modesintheﬁrsttwoobservations,respectively,andinLargeWindowmodeforallthefollowingones(48ms),withthesourceattheaim-pointofthecamera,andtheMOScamerasinSmallWindowmode(0.3s).Weextractedthesourcephotonsfromacircularregionof30(cid:6)(cid:6)radius,andasimilarregionwaschosenforthebackgroundinthesameCCD.WerestrictedourspectralanalysistophotonshavingPATTERN(cid:2)4andFLAG=0fortheEPIC-pndata.3.RESULTSOFTHEX-RAYMONITORING3.1.X-RaySpectralModelingForthespectralanalysisweusedsourceandbackgroundphotonsfromtheSwift,Chandra,andXMM-Newtonobserva-tionsextractedasdescribedintheprevioussection(wealsocheckedourresultsusingalargerextractionregionforthebackgroundspectra).Theresponsematriceswerebuiltusingadhocbad-pixelﬁlesbuiltforeachobservation.WeusedtheXSPECpackage(version12.4)forallﬁttings,andthephabsab-sorptionmodelwiththeAnders&Grevesse(1989)abundances,andtheBalucinska-Church&McCammon(1992)photoelectric3D. Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

278

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.Figure1.Leftpanel:evolutionofthepulsephaseswithtime(upperpanel).Thesolidlinesrepresentthetimingsolutionwithout(linear)andwitha˙Pcomponent(quadratic).Thetimeresiduals(lowerpanel)arerelativetothequadraticﬁt.Rightpanel:pulsedfractionevolutioninthe0.5–10keVbandfortheSwift(red),Chandra(green),andXMM-Newton(blue)observations.(Acolorversionofthisﬁgureisavailableintheonlinejournal.)cross-sections.Werestrictedourspectralmodelingtothe0.7–10keVenergyband,excludingbadchannelswhenneeded.TheSwiftspectrawerebinnedinordertohaveatleast30countsperspectralbin.XMM-Newtonspectraweregroupedsuchtohaveatleast100,50,and40photonsperbinintheﬁrstthreeobservations,respectively,andaminimumof30countsinthesubsequentobservations.Ontheotherhand,allChandraspectrahaveatleast25countsperbin.Westartedthespectralanalysisbyﬁttingallthespectratogether(seeTable1)withasinglecomponentmodel:anabsorbedblackbodyorapower-lawmodel.Whiletheformergaveagoodﬁt,asinglepowerlawcouldnotreproduceallthespectraatthesametime.Fixingtheabsorptionvaluetobethesameforallspectra,forasingleblackbodymodel(phabs*bbodyrad)weﬁndanacceptableﬁtwithNH=(1.15±0.06)×1021cm−2andχ2ν=1.19(940dof;errorsonthespectralparametersareallreportedat90%conﬁdencelevel).However,notunexpectedly,thebestcollectedspectrum(theﬁrstXMM-Newtonobservationon2009-08-12;seeTable1)gavebadresidualsatlowerandhigherenergies(seeFigure2,leftpanel).Wetriedtomodelthisobservationalone,andindeedasingleabsorbedblackbodyorpower-lawcomponentswerenotreproducingthisspectrumproperly(χ2ν>2).Wethenusedacompositemodel.Goodﬁtswerefoundusingbothanabsorbedblackbodyplusapowerlaw(phabs*(bbodyrad+power);NH=(6.32±0.04)×1021cm−2,kT=0.91±0.07keV,Γ=2.82±0.16,andχ2ν=0.97for392dof)andanabsorbedresonantcyclotronscatteringmodel(RCS:Reaetal.2007,2008,orNTZ:Zaneetal.2009).Twoblackbodieswerealsoproducingacceptablereducedchi-squarevalues(χ2ν=1.01for392dof)butwithworseresidualsathigherenergies(thisiscompatiblewithwhatwasfoundinEspositoetal.2011andTurollaetal.2011).TheparameterswefoundfortheresonantcyclotronscatteringmodelsareNH=(1.9±0.3)×1021cm−2,τ=8.8±1.2,β=0.21±0.08,andkT=0.63±0.11keV(χ2ν=1.08for392dof)fortheRCSmodel;andNH=(1.8±0.2)×1021cm−2,Δφ=1.9±1.0,βbulk=0.13±0.05,andkT=0.88±0.07keV(χ2ν=1.11for392dof)fortheNTZmodel.Wethencontinuedourspectralmodelingofallspectratogetherbyaddingafurthercomponentonlyforthisobservation(addingafurthercomponentforallspectradidnotsigniﬁcantlychangethegoodnessoftheﬁt;χ2ν=1.13(938dof);seeFigure2,middleandrightpanels).InTable1wereportthevaluesofthesingleabsorbedblackbodymodel(seealsoFigure2,leftpanel,andFigures3and4),sincewhenﬁttingallthespectrabyusingacompositemodelonlyfortheﬁrstXMM-Newtonobservation,weﬁndnochangeintheparametersoftheotherspectrawithrespecttothesingleblackbodyﬁt.However,althoughablackbodypluspower-lawmodelgivesagoodﬁtwhenﬁttingtheﬁrstXMM-Newtonobservationalone,itisnotsowhenﬁttingalldatatogether.Thisisbecausethepower-lawcomponentproducesanunrealisticNHincrease,whichdoesnotmatchthevaluerequiredbyalltheotherobservationsmodeledbyasingleblackbody.Wethenuseoneoftheresonantcyclotronscatteringmodels,theRCSmodel,forthejointﬁtasanempiricalmodelfortheﬁrstXMM-Newtonobservation.18Inadditiontothejointspectralmodeling,wealsoﬁttedallthespectraindividually.BesidetheﬁrstXMM-Newtonobservationdiscussedabove,thelastXMM-Newtonobservation,whenﬁttedalonewithasingleblackbodymodel,didnotgiveagoodchi-square(χ2ν=2.2for16dof).Giventhelownumberofcountsinthespectrumofthisobservation(∼400background-subtractedcounts),thisdeviationfromtheblackbodymodelhadonlyamarginaleffectonthejointﬁt.Abetterﬁtwasfoundaddingasecondblackbody(χ2ν=1.2for14dof)or(withaslightlyworsechi-square)apower-lawcomponent(χ2ν=1.5for14dof).However,giventhereducednumberofcountscollectedinthis18NotethatboththeRCSandNTZmodelsarebuiltforhighersurfacedipolarﬁelds,hencethefactthattheyprovideaverygoodﬁttothedataisprobablyjustanindicationofthepresenceofsomemagnetosphericdistortion.However,norealphysicalinformationcanbederivedfromtheresultingmagnetosphericparameters.Forthepurposeofthiswork,wearemainlyinterestedinthesurfacethermalcoolingofthesource.4The magnetar SGR 0418+5729

279

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.10−510−410−30.010.1111052−4−2024Energy (keV) Normalized counts/s/keVResiduals (σ)10−510−410−30.010.1111052−4−2024Energy (keV) Normalized counts/s/keVResiduals (σ)52110−610−510−410−3keV (Photons cm−2 s−1 keV−1)Energy (keV)Figure2.SpectralmodelingofallobservationslistedinTable1.Leftandmiddlepanels:spectraandresidualsforallobservations(Swift(red),Chandra(green),andXMM-Newton(blue))ﬁttedsimultaneouslywithasingleblackbodymodel(left)andusinganRCSmodelonlyfortheﬁrstXMM-Newtonobservation(center).Rightpanel:unfoldedspectrumrelativetothemodelingshowninthecentralpanel.(Acolorversionofthisﬁgureisavailableintheonlinejournal.)observation,adetailedmodelingofthequiescentspectrumofSGR0418+5729willbepossibleonlywhenmoredataisaccumulated.Wealsotriedto(1)modelallthespectrawithtwoblackbodiesleavingoneoftheblackbodieswithaﬁxedareamimickingthewholesurfaceemission,and(2)ﬁxoneblackbodytothevalueobservedinthelastobservation(seeTable1)andleavethesecondblackbodyfreetovary.Inneitherofthosetwocasescouldweﬁndanyimprovementinthemodelingofthedata.Notethatalthoughajointtwoblackbodymodelcanﬁttheﬁrstfewobservations(Turollaetal.2011),thisisnolongerthecasewhenmodelingtogetherallthedatacollectedintheentire1200daytimespan.3.2.X-RayTimingAnalysisAlltheChandraandXMM-Newtoneventﬁlescollectedbetween2010Novemberand2012AugustwereusedinordertoextendthecoherenttimingsolutionwederivedinReaetal.(2010):P=9.07838827(4)s90%c.l.,and3σﬁrstperiodderivativeupperlimitof|˙P|<6.0×10−15ss−1atepoch54993.0MJD.Photonarrivaltimeswerecorrectedtothebarycenterofthesolarsystem.19Timinganalysiswascarriedoutbymeansofaphase-ﬁttingtechnique(detailsonthistechniquearegiveninDall’Ossoetal.2003;seealsoEspositoetal.2010forfurtherdetailsonthissource).Giventheintrinsicvariabilityofthepulseshapeasafunctionoftime(seeFigure6),weinferredthephaseofthemodulationbyﬁttingtheaveragepulseshapeofeachobservationwithanumberofharmonics,theexactnumberofwhichisvariableanddeterminedbyrequestingthattheinclusionofanyhigherharmonicisstatisticallysigniﬁcant(bymeansofanFtest).AlldatareportedinTable1werefoldedusingareferenceperiod9.07838880562798satepoch54993MJD,andﬁttedwithoneormoreharmonics.InFigure1weplotthephasesatwhichthefundamentalsinefunctionisequaltozeroinitsascendingpart(positivederivative).Theﬁtoftheresultingpulsephaseswithalinearcomponentgivesareducedχ2r∼3.2for26degreesoffreedom(dofhereafter).Theinclusionofaquadraticterm,correspondingtoaﬁrstperiodderivativecomponent,wasfoundtobesigniﬁcantataconﬁdencelevelof3.5σ(bymeansofanFtest).Theresultingbest-ﬁtsolutioncorrespondstoP=9.07838822(5)s19WehavecorrectedthearrivaltimesofthelastXMM-Newtonobservationforthe2012June30leapsecond(seehttp://xmm.esa.int/sas/current/watchout/12.0.0/leapsec_2012.shtmlforfurtherdetails).(1σc.l.,twoparametersofinterest;epoch54993.0MJD)and˙P=4(1)×10−15ss−1withareducedχ2r∼2.1(for25dof;seealsoFigure1).Thenewtimingsolutionimpliesanrmsvariabilityofonly0.2s.Asdepictedabove,thetimeevolutionofthephasecanbedescribedbyarelationoftheformφ=φ0+2π(t−t0)/P−π(t−t0)2˙P/P2.Tofurtherassessthesigniﬁcanceofthequadraticcomponent,reﬂectingtheperiodderivative,weperformeddetailedMonteCarlo(MC)simulationsassumingasthenullmodelasimplelinearrelation(seeProtassovetal.2002forfurtherdetails).Byrunning105MCsimulationsweveriﬁedthatthequadraticcomponentissigniﬁcantat>99.96%conﬁdencelevel,whichisinverygoodagreementwithwhatwasestimatedbymeansoftheFtest.Wenoticethatexaminingthesimulateddatawithdifferentsamplingdistributionsdoesnotsigniﬁcantlychangetheresults.Furthermore,weperformedthesameMCsimulationsusingthewholesetofobservationsbutwithoutconsideringthelastXMM-Newtonobservation.Weﬁndachanceprobabilityfortheadditionofaquadraticcomponentof0.65%(<3σ).Giventhestronginﬂuenceofthelastofourobservationsinthedeterminationoftheperiodderivative,wewillperformfurtherX-rayobservationsinthenextfewyearsinordertoincreasethesigniﬁcanceofthecurrent˙Pmeasurement.Usingthis˙Pmeasurement,weinferasurfacedipolarmag-neticﬁeldstrengthofBdip=(6±2)×1012G,calculatedattheneutronstarequator.Thisvalueisfullyconsistentwiththe3σupperlimitreportedinReaetal.(2010).Wealsoestimateacharacteristicageofτc(cid:4)P/2˙P∼35Myr,andarotationalpowerof˙E(cid:4)3.9×1046˙P/P3∼2×1029ergs−1.Basedontheabovephasecoherenttimingsolution,wealsostudiedthepulseshapeandpulsedfractionevolution.Figure1showsthepulsedfractionevolutionasafunctionoftime.Thereisanevidentincreasestartingsoonaftertheburstdetectionwitharecoverytowardanasymptoticquiescentvaluewhichappearstobeataboutthe70%–80%level.InFigures1,5,and6westudyindetailtheshapeofthepulseproﬁleasitevolvesintimeandinenergy.BylookingattheproﬁleshapesofallX-rayobservationsperformedsofar,thesourceappearstobeswitchingamongatriple/double/singlepeakshapeduringtheearlyoutburstphases,withnocleartrendintime(Figure1).Thepulseproﬁlestabilizestoasinglepeakaboutthreemonthsaftertheoutburstonset.However,studyingindetailtheﬁrstandthelastXMM-Newtonobservations,afewkeypiecesofinformationcanbeextracted:(1)atlowerenergies(<1keV),thepulseproﬁleismainlysinglepeaked,5D. Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

280

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.0001005010−1410−1310−1210−11Flux (erg s−1 cm−2)Time (days − TJD 14993.0)0001005015.02.0BB temperature (keV)Time (days − TJD 14993.0)000100500.10.020.050.2BB radius (km)Time (days − TJD 14993.0)Figure3.Spectralevolutionwithtime.Toppanel:ﬂuxevolutionfortheabsorbed0.5–10keVﬂux(black),andforthebolometricunabsorbedﬂux(red).Middleandbottompanels:evolutionoftheblackbodytemperatureandradius,calculatedatinﬁnity(thelatterassuminga2kpcdistance).(Acolorversionofthisﬁgureisavailableintheonlinejournal.)whileasecond,andpossiblyalsoathirdpeak,appearsathigherenergies(seeFigure5);(2)themaincomponentofthepulseproﬁlecontinuestobeatthesamephaseoverthewholeoutburstdecay(seeFigure7).3.3.PulsePhaseSpectroscopyWeperformedapulsephasespectroscopyoftheﬁrstXMM-Newtonobservation.Aclearpulsephasedependenceofthespectrumisalreadyobservedbysimplylookingatthepulseproﬁlechangesasafunctionoftheenergy(seeFigure5).Inordertoquantifythespectralvariabilityasafunctionoftherotationalphase,weperformedapulsephasespectroscopyextractingthespectrafromphases0–0.4,0.4–0.6,and0.6–1.ThesephaseintervalswerechosenbylookingatFigure5inordertoisolatethedipinthe1–4keVpulseproﬁlesatphase∼0.55.InTable2wereporttheresultsofourmodeling.Thephase-averagedspectrumisnotwellﬁtbyeitherasingleblack-bodynorapowerlaw.Wethenusedanabsorbedblackbody0.010.111010−510−410−3keV (Photons cm−2 s−1 keV−1)Energy (keV)Figure4.Fittedblackbodymodels(seeTable1),withtheﬁrstandlastobservationslabeledasredsquares(seeFigure3andtextfordetails).(Acolorversionofthisﬁgureisavailableintheonlinejournal.)Table2PulsePhaseSpectroscopyoftheFirstXMM-NewtonObservationofSGR0418+5729PhaseCountss−1FluxaPhotonIndexb0.0–0.41.46±0.017.5±0.1(1.71±0.02)2.86±0.150.4–0.61.00±0.015.5±0.1(1.20±0.02)4.08±0.440.6–1.01.26±0.016.6±0.1(1.47±0.02)3.11±0.21Notes.aAbsorbedﬂuxinthe0.5–10keVenergyrange,andinunitsof10−12ergs−1(10−3photonscm−2s−1).SeealsoSection3.3.bFittedmodelisphabs*(bbodyrad+power);NH=(6.9±0.5)×1021cm−2,kTBB=0.91±0.01keV,BBnorm=0.82±0.05,andχ2ν=0.96(for680dof).pluspower-lawmodeling(notethattheRCSandNTZmodelsarenotsuitedforphaseresolvedanalysissincetheyareintrin-sicallyphase-average),usingforthephotoelectricabsorptionmodelthesamecross-sectionandabundancesasforthephase-averagespectrum(seeSection3.1).Theblackbodytemperatureandradiuswereconsistentinallthreespectra,henceweﬁxedthemtobethesameforallspectra(kTBB=0.91±0.01keV,BBnorm=0.82±0.05),whileavariability>3σhasbeenobservedinthephotonindex(itchangedfromabout2.9to4.1betweenthespectraoftheﬁrstpeakandthedip).However,fromFigure7itisclearthatthemaindifferenceinthespectraisatlowerenergies.Inparticular,above5keVthethreespectraareverysimilar,whilethe0.4–0.6phase-resolvedspectrumseemstohavelesscountsthantheotherbelowsuchenergy.4.GREENBANKTELESCOPERADIOOBSERVATIONSWeobservedSGR0418+5729usingthe101mGreenBankTelescope(GBT)on2012October4,duringthereturntoquiescence.DatawereacquiredwiththeGreenBankUltimatePulsarProcessingInstrument(GUPPI;DuPlainetal.2008)atacentralfrequencyof2.0GHz(withabandwidthof800MHz,integrationtimeof∼5400sandsamplingtimeof655μs)and820MHz(withabandwidthof200MHz,integrationtimeof∼5600s,andsamplingtimeof655μs).Tominimizethedispersiveeffectsoftheinterstellarmedium,thebandwidthsweresplitinto2048and512channels,respectively.TheworkingofthesystemwascheckedlookingatthepulsarPSRB0450+55.AmaskwasﬁrstappliedtothefullresolutiondataforreducingtheeffectsofimpulsiveRFIandofbadchannels.Thenthe6The magnetar SGR 0418+5729

281

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.00.511.520.911.1Normalized counts/sPhaseRXTE00.511.520.90.9511.05Normalized counts/sPhaseRXTE00.511.520.9511.05Normalized counts/sPhaseRXTE00.511.520.60.811.21.4Normalized counts/sPhaseSwift00.511.525.115.0Normalized counts/sPhaseSwift00.511.520.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseChandra00.511.520.60.811.21.4Normalized counts/sPhaseSwift00.511.5250.1159.0Normalized counts/sPhaseRXTE00.511.520.9511.05Normalized counts/sPhaseRXTE00.511.520.960.9811.021.04Normalized counts/sPhaseRXTE00.511.525.115.0Normalized counts/sPhaseXMM−Newton00.511.520.960.9811.021.04Normalized counts/sPhaseRXTE00.511.520.960.9811.021.04Normalized counts/sPhaseRXTE00.511.520.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseSwift00.511.520.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseSwift00.511.520.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseSwift00.511.5200.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseSwift00.511.520.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseChandra00.511.520.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseXMM−Newton00.511.5200.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseChandra00.511.520.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseXMM−Newton00.511.5200.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseChandra00.511.520.511.5Normalized counts/sPhaseXMM−Newton00.511.5200.511.52Normalized counts/sPhaseChandra00.511.525.115.0Normalized counts/sPhaseXMM−NewtonFigure5.Pulseproﬁle(normalizedcountss−1vs.phase)asafunctionofenergy,relativetotheﬁrstXMM-Newtonobservation(seeTable1).(Acolorversionofthisﬁgureisavailableintheonlinejournal.)cleaneddataweredownsampledafactortwoinsamplingtime,matchingthefrequencyresolutioninordertohaveamaximumdispersionsmearingoforder1.3msineachchannelforapulsarwithdispersionmeasure(DM)∼100pccm−3.TheephemeridesacquiredfromtheX-rayobservations(seeSection3.2),wereusedtofoldtheresultingdatain∼3minuteslongsub-integrationsattheknownmagnetarperiod.Wealsofoldedthedataathalf,one-third,andaquarterofthenominalperiodinordertodetectputativehigherharmonicscomponentsoftheintrinsicsignal,incasethelatterweredeeplycontami-natedbyinterference(RFI).Foldingwasdoneusingdspsr(vanStraten&Bailes2010).Thesub-integrationsandthefrequencychannels,cleanedfromRFI,werethensearchedaroundthepulsarperiodPandoverawiderangeofDMvalues(from0to1000pccm−3)toﬁndtheP–DMcombinationmaximizingthesignal-to-noiseratio.Nodispersedsignalwasfoundinthedatadowntoasignal-to-noiselimitof10inbothdatasets.Giventheparametersoftheantennaandofthereceivers,20andassumingapulsarwithadutycycleof10%,thattrans-latestoﬂuxdensitiesof∼0.02mJyand∼0.05mJy,forthe2GHzand820MHzobservations,respectively.DatawerealsoblindlysearchedforaperiodicsignalintheFourierdomain,andforsinglede-dispersedpulses(withinaDMrangefrom0to200pccm−3).NosignalwasfoundineithertheFourierdomain(downtoaspectralsignal-to-noiseratioof4)orinthesinglepulsesearches(downtoasignal-to-noiseratioof5fortheindividualpulses).Noprevioussearchforpulsedradioemissionhadbeenperformedat2GHz,whereastheﬂuxdensityvalueat820MHz20http://www.gb.nrao.edu/gbtprops/man/GBTpg.pdf7D. Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

282

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.improvesby∼15%thelimitoftheobservationat820MHzperformedon2009July19(Lorimeretal.2009,ATel2096),whenthesourcewasinthephaseofoutburst.Assumingatypicalpulsarspectralindexof1.7,atypicaldutycycle∼10%andadistanceof2kpc(vanderHorstetal.2010),theobservationsat820MHzsampledmorethan97%oftheluminositydistributionofthepopulationofknownordinarypulsarswithrotationalperiodlongerthan100ms,asderivedfromtheATNFpulsarcatalog.215.PLATEAUDEBUREMMOBSERVATIONSSGR0418+5729wasobservedwiththePlateaudeBureInterferometer(PdBI)at1.8mm(166.50GHz)intheDconﬁgurationbetween2011JuneandJuly(June27,andJuly9,10,15,and16).Thisconﬁgurationprovidesbaselinesbetween22.1and95.6m.Thephasecenteroftheobservationswas04:18:33.867,+57:32:22.910.ThedominanttrackwasJuly15(eight-hourtrackandexcellentweatherconditions).Thesystemtemperaturesweretypicallyinthe150to200Krange,andtheaveragedatmosphericprecipitablewatervaporwas2mm.ThegaincalibrationwasperformedobservingthequasarsB0552+398andJ0512+294.Aftercalibration,thephasermswas20◦–60◦.ThebandpasscalibratorusedwasB0851+202.Theadoptedﬂuxdensityfortheﬂuxcalibrator3C273was16.57Jy.CalibrationandimagingwereperformedusingthestandardproceduresintheCLICandMAPPINGpackagesoftheGILDAS22software.Theresultingﬁnalmap,obtainedcombiningallthedata,yieldsasynthesizedbeamsizeof3.(cid:6)(cid:6)95×3.(cid:6)(cid:6)16withapositionangleofP.A.=0.◦0.Thermsnoiseachievedusingthefull3.6GHzprovidedbytheWideXcorrelatoris60μJybeam−1.TheprimarybeamofthePdBIat166.50GHzis30.(cid:6)(cid:6)3.WedidnotdetectcontinuumemissionwithinthePdBIprimarybeamtowardSGR0418+5729,andobtainedanupperlimitof0.24mJybeam−1ata4σlevel(seeFigure8).TheonlydetectedsourceisatR.A.=04:18:30.077,decl.=57:32:52.00,whichcorrespondstoanoffsetof(30.(cid:6)(cid:6)5,29.(cid:6)(cid:6)1)withrespecttothephasecenter,oratotaloffsetof42.(cid:6)(cid:6)1.Theﬂuxdensityofthismillimetersourceis0.34±0.06mJy(fromaGaussianﬁtintheuvplaneandwithoutcorrectingfortheprimarybeamresponse).Inaddition,welookedforpossible“pulses”ofemissionat1.8mm.Inordertodothat,wecheckedthecalibratedamplitudeversustimeforthelongesttrack(July15).Byaveragingthevisibilitiesinintervalsof1minute,wefoundnohintsofvariableemissionatanupperlimitofroughly∼10mJy.WealsosearchedtheNRAOVeryLargeArraySkySurveyat21cmandfoundnosourcewithin15(cid:6)ofthemillimetersource(Condonetal.1998;limitingbrightness:2.0mJybeam−1).6.WILLIAMHERSCHELTELESCOPEOPTICALOBSERVATIONSWeacquiredfour300sr-bandimagesoftheﬁeldcontainingSGR0418+5729on2009August16,usingtheACAMimagermountedatthe4.2mWilliamHerschelTelescope(WHT)onLaPalma.Theaverageseeingwas1(cid:6)(cid:6)andairmass1.26.Obser-vationsofanearbyﬁeldcontainingSloanDigitalSkySurveycalibratedstarswereobtainedfortheabsolutephotometriccal-ibration,whileastrometrywasperformedagainstTwoMicron21http://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/psrcat/22TheGILDASdatareductionpackageisavailableathttp://www.iram.fr/IRAMFR/GILDAS.AllSkySurveysources,resultinginanaccuracyof∼0.(cid:6)(cid:6)1onbothR.A.anddecl.Nosourcewasdetectedwithinthe95%conﬁdencedowntoalimitofr=24.PSFphotometryrevealsthatthenearestobjectisdetectedatamagnituder=22.7±0.1andcentercoordinatesR.A.=04:18:34.0,decl.=57:32:23.5.Thissourceisconsistentwiththenear-infraredsourcereportedbyWachteretal.(2009),butitsdistancefromtheSGR0418+5729position(∼1.(cid:6)(cid:6)4),makestheassociationwiththemagnetarratherunlikely.7.FERMI-LATGAMMA-RAYOBSERVATIONSWeuseddatafromtheLargeAreaTelescope(LAT)onboardFermi(Atwoodetal.2009)from2008August4until2012October24.TheFermisciencetoolssc09-28-00packagewasusedtoanalyzethe“source”eventclassdata.Weselectedeventswithinacircularregionofinterest(ROI)of10◦radiuscenteredonthepositionofSGR0418+5729,andintheenergyrange100MeV–100GeV.ThegoodtimeintervalsaredeﬁnedsothattheROIdoesnotfallbelowthegamma-ray-brightEarthlimb(deﬁnedat100◦fromthezenithangle),andthesourceisalwaysinsidetheLATﬁeldofview,namelyinaconeangleof66◦.The“P7SOURCE_V6”instrumentresponsefunctions(IRFs)areappliedintheanalysis.ThelikelihoodanalysisofSGR0418+5729wasperformedbymeansofthebinnedmaximum-likelihoodmethod(Mattoxetal.1996),usingtheofﬁcialtoolgtlikereleasedbytheFermi-LATcollaboration.Thespectral-spatialmodelcreatedforthelikelihoodanalysisincludestheGalactic,andtheisotropicdiffuseemissionmodels,aswellasallthe2FGLsourceswithinaradiusof15◦fromSGR0418+5729.Sincethereisno2FGLsourcethatispositionallyassociatedtothemagnetar,weaddedinthespectra-spatialmodelapoint-likesourcemodeledwithasimplepower-lawwiththecoordinatesofSGR0418+5729.The2FGLsourceswithin3◦ofSGR0418+5729(3sources)aremodeledwiththeﬂuxparameterallowedtovary,whiletheothers34sourceshadalltheirparametersﬁxedtothevaluefromthe2FGLcatalog.Figure8showsthediffusesubtractedTSmapofthe7◦×7◦regioncenteredonSGR0418+5729.Itwasobtainedassociatingtoeachpixel(ofsize0.◦1×0.◦1)theTSvaluecalculatedassumingapoint-liketestingsourceinitscenter.DiffusesubtractedTSmapmeansthatthespectral-spatialmodelforthenullhypothesisincludesonlytheGalacticandisotropicemissionmodels,sothatthepoint-likesourcesshouldbevisibleinthemap.Asnosigniﬁcantgamma-raycounterparttoSGR0418+5729isidentiﬁed,95%ﬂuxupperlimitisderivedusingtheBayesianmethoddevelopedbyAbdoetal.(2010).The95%ﬂuxupperlimitforE>100MeVisF<1.3×10−8photonscm−2s−1,includingsystematics.Thenon-detectionofSGR0418+5729atenergies>100MeVisnotsurprising,givenasimilarnon-detectionofallotherknownmagnetars(Abdoetal.2010).8.DISCUSSIONWehavepresentedhereadetailedX-raystudyoftheoutburstofthelowmagneticﬁeldsoftgammarepeaterSGR0418+5729.Thelong-termmonitoringweperformedover1200daysallowedustomeasuretheperiodderivativeofthispulsar(˙P=4(1)×10−15ss−1)witha3.5σsigniﬁcance(Figure1).ThisyieldsanestimateofitsdipolarmagneticﬁeldofBdip∼6×1012G,andconﬁrmsthisobjectasthemagnetarwiththelowestdipolarmagneticﬁeldeverdiscovered.8The magnetar SGR 0418+5729

283

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.AssumingthatSGR0418+5729attaineditsquiescentstateinthelastfewobservations,theX-rayquiescentemissionappearstobedominatedbyaverysmallspotatkT∼0.3keVandofradius∼0.16km(assuminga2kpcdistance),whichcorrespondstoacapofsemi-aperture∼1◦–2◦,similartowhatobservedinoldradiopulsars.However,inthepresentcasetherotationpower(˙E≈1029ergs−1)isabouttwoordersofmagnitudesmallerthantheobservedX-rayluminosity(≈1031ergs−1),thusindicatingadifferentoriginfortheemission,mostlikelymagnetic.Actually,itisquitelikelythatmostofthesurfaceisatamuchlowertemperatureandisthereforeinvisibleatenergiesbetween0.5–10keV.Thisimpliesthatthequiescentbolometricﬂuxmaybeseverelyunderestimated(seealsobelow).Thestudyofthespectralevolutionduringtheoutburstshowsthepresenceofanon-thermalcomponent(probablymagnetospherical)atthebeginningoftheoutburst,whichfadesawayafterafewhundreddays.Ontheotherhand,thetemperatureofthesmallregionresponsibleforthesurfaceanisotropyfadesfrom0.9to0.3keVwithinatimescaleofafewyears(seeTable1andFigure3).Thepulseproﬁleevolutionduringtheoutburstdecayshowssomeinterestingfeatures.AsFigure6shows,thereisanoveralltrendtowardasimpliﬁcationofthepulse,whichstartswithacomplex,three-peakedshapeandendswithafairlysinusoidalpattern.Furthermore,thestudyofthepulseproﬁlesasafunctionofenergy(Figure5)intheﬁrstoutburststages,showsagreatvariabilitytoo.Alargedipinanotherwiserathersinusoidalproﬁleisobservedatenergiesbetween1–4keV.Thelargepulsedfractionof40%–70%(Figure1),theevidenceofnearlyphasealignedspotsresponsibleforthe0.9keVthermalemissionintheearlyoutburstphases,aswellasthe0.3keVemissionatlatetimes,disfavorthepresenceoftwospotsatdifferenttemperatures,whilefavoringthepresenceofasingletinyspotcoolingdown(from0.9to0.3keV)andreducingitssize(from0.21to0.16km)duringthereturntoquiescence.Thismeansthatthemulti-peakedpulseproﬁleisprobablyduetoanisotropiesinthemagnetosphericelectronsdistribution(ontopofanon-isotropicsurfacethermalemission).8.1.SGR0418+5729asanEvolvedMagnetarInTurollaetal.(2011)itwasshownthattherotationalpropertiesofSGR0418+5729canbereproducedifthesourceisanagedmagnetar,whichexperiencedsubstantialﬁelddecaybutstillretainsastrongenoughinternaltoroidalﬁeld.Themostupdatedmagneto-thermalevolutionarymodelsdiscussedinVigan`oetal.(2013;butseealsoPonsetal.2009andAguileraetal.2008),conﬁrmthisscenario.TheevolutionofaninitialdipolarmagneticﬁeldofB0dip∼1.5×1014G(surfacevalueatthepole)correctlyprovidestheobservedPand˙Patanageof∼550kyr,whichisprobablytherealageofthissource.Althoughdifferentcombinationsoftheinitialcomponentsofthemagneticﬁeldarepossible,inallthemodelsthemagneticﬁeldmusthavebeenlargeinthepast((cid:3)1014G)toexplainatthesametimethelongspinperiod,thebrightX-rayemissionatthisoldage,andtheﬂaringactivityofthesource.Thecharacteristicageoverestimatestherealonebyalmosttwoordersofmagnitude.InFigure9,weshowtheevolutionofperiod,periodderivative,thesourcetrackintheP–˙Pdiagram,andthebolometricthermalluminosity.InthisscenarioweestimatethatSGR0418+5729’smeansurfacetemperatureshouldnowbe∼0.05keV,unfortunatelyundetectablebycurrent0.511.50.31 keV0.511.512 keV0.511.524 keV00.511.520.511.5410keVPhaseFigure6.Pulseproﬁlesevolutioninthe2–10keV(RXTE)and0.5–10keV(ChandraandXMM-Newton)energyranges,formostoftheobservationsreportedinTable1.Epochincreasesfromlefttoright,andtoptobottom.(Acolorversionofthisﬁgureisavailableintheonlinejournal.)X-rayobservations(whichareobservingonlyahottinyregiononthestarsurface).Fortheevolutionofthetimingproperties,weassumethemagneto-dipolebrakingformulagivenbySpitkovsky(2006):IΩ˙Ω≈(B2dR6Ω4/4c3)(1+sinχ2),whereRistheNSradius,χistheanglebetweentherotationalandthemagneticaxis,cisthespeedoflight,Ω=2π/Pistheangularvelocity,andIisthemomentofinertiaofthestar.Analternativepossibilityisthattheneutronstarwasbornwithanexternalmagneticﬁeldclosetothepresentone,butitslargecorepoloidalﬁeldslowlydiffusesout,i.e.,byambipolardiffusion(Soni2012).Althoughfromthetimingpropertiesaloneitishardtodiscriminatebetweenahiddenstrongcrustalmagneticﬁeld,ahiddenstrongcoreﬁeldoranintrinsicallylow-Bneutronstar,themagnitudeoftheX-rayluminosity,andthespectralpropertiesandlightcurvesmaybeusedtodistinguishthedifferentscenarios.Inparticular,thelowmagneticﬁeldscenariocannotexplainthehighluminosity,largepulsedfraction,andtheﬂaringactivityofthesource.Asamatteroffact,ifthereislittleﬁelddecayand9D. Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

284

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.Figure7.Leftpanel:pulseproﬁleoftheﬁrst(blue)andlast(black)XMM-Newtonobservationsinthe0.5–10keVenergyband.Rightpanel:phase-resolvedunfoldedspectrafortheﬁrstXMM-Newtonobservation.Thespectraarerelativetophases0.0–0.4(black),0.4–0.6(red),and0.6–1(green).Thephaserangesarerelativetothebluepulseproﬁleintheleftpanel.(Acolorversionofthisﬁgureisavailableintheonlinejournal.)Figure8.Leftpanel:contoursofthe1.8mmPlateaudeBureemissionoftheﬁeldofSGR0418+5729.Contoursare−4,−2(dashedgray),2,and4(white)timesthermsnoiseofthemap,60μJybeam−1,andtheyareover-plottedontheWide-ﬁeldInfraredSurveyExplorerimageat4.6μm.ThestarsymbolindicatesthepositionofSGR0418+5729,anditssizecorrespondstoitspositionaluncertainty(∼1.(cid:6)(cid:6)2indiameter).Thesynthesizedbeam,of3.(cid:6)(cid:6)95×3.(cid:6)(cid:6)16,atP.A.=0◦,isshowninthebottomrightcorner.Thesquareindicatestheﬁeldofviewofther-mapacquiredwiththeWilliamHerschelTelescope(centralpanel).Centralpanel:WilliamHerschelTelescoper-bandﬁeldofSGR0418+5729.Rightpanel:Fermi-LAT(0.1–100GeV).DiffusesubtractedTSmapofthe7◦×7◦skyregioncenteredonthemagnetarposition.ThemapiscalculatedforE>300MeV.The2FGLsourcesarelabeledingreen,whileSGR0418+5729inmagenta.(Acolorversionofthisﬁgureisavailableintheonlinejournal.)therealagecorrespondstothecharacteristicage(whichinthisscenariowouldbeneededtoreachthepresentperiodof9s),noexistingnon-magneticcoolingmodelcanaccountforanX-rayluminosityof≈1031ergs−1atacharacteristicageof≈35Myr.Thescenarioinwhichalargecoreﬁelddiffusesouthasthesameproblem:iftherealageofthestarissimilartoitsoldcharacteristicage,nocoolingmodelintheliteraturepredictssuchhighquiescentluminosity.Inaddition,whilethetimescalesusedinSoni(2012)arecorrectfornormal,non-superﬂuidnuclearmatter,recentwork(Glampedakisetal.2011)showsthatinthepresenceofsuperﬂuidityintheneutronstarcore,thetimescalesforambipolardiffusionaremanyordersofmagnitudelonger,andthereforeambipolardiffusiondoesnotplayanyroleduringtheactiveageofthestar.8.2.SGR0418+5729OutburstRateAnimportantquestioniswhetherarelativelylowdipolarﬁeldisconsistentwiththestar-quakemodelinwhichtheprimarycauseoftheoutburstisaninternaldepositionofenergyfollowingacrustfracture.Itisoftenoverlookedthatthemagneticstressneededtobreakthecrustisstronglydependentondensity(itismucheasiertobreaktheoutercrustthantheinnercrust)andthatthecrustthicknessgrowsasthetemperaturedropswithage.InFigure10weshowanestimateoftheminimummagneticﬁeldvariationrequiredtoinduceafracture.AsassumedinPerna&Pons(2011),thisestimateisobtainedassumingthatthecrustmovesthroughaseriesofequilibriumstatesinwhichitselasticstressbalancesthe(time-dependent)magneticstress.Thedeviationofthemagneticﬁeldwithrespecttothelastunstressedconﬁguration(δBc)maybelargeenoughtobreakthecrustwhenδBc≈(cid:2)4πσmaxb(cid:3)1/2(1)whereσmaxbisthemaximumstressthataneutronstarcrustcansustain.Foryoung,relativelyhotmagnetars(crustaltempera-turesof5×108K),onlytheinnercrustissolid,andstrong10The magnetar SGR 0418+5729

285

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.Figure9.Magneto-thermalevolutionofaneutronstarwithaninitialpoloidalﬁeldofBdip=1.5×1014G:period(left-top),periodderivative(right-top),evolutionintheP−˙Pdiagram(left-bottom),andbolometricthermalluminosity(right-bottom).Thegraybandcorrespondstotheuncertaintyoftheangle-dependentspin-downformula.!"!!#!!!#!#$#!#%#!#&#!##452-+,6780++49:+#$;;%<!3Figure10.Leftpanel:minimumvariationofthemagneticﬁeldrequiredtobreakthecrustbymagneticstressesasafunctionofdensity.Theverticaldashedlinesdelimitthetransitionfromsolidtoliquidforthreedifferenttemperatures.Rightpanel:outburstmodelingfollowingPons&Rea(2012).Blackdataarethe0.5–10keVunabsorbedﬂux,whileredsquaresarethebolometricunabsorbedﬂuxwiththeadditionoftheﬂuxofathermalcomponentatkT=0.05keVfromtheentireneutronstar.Solidanddashedlinesrefertotheoutburstmodelforthebolometricand0.5–10keVthermalﬂux,respectively(seetextfordetails).(Acolorversionofthisﬁgureisavailableintheonlinejournal.)11D. Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

286

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.ﬁeldvariationsδBc(cid:3)1014Garerequiredtofracturethecrust.However,forold,coldneutronstars(crustaltemperaturesof108K),thesolidcrustextendsdownto108gcm−3,andismucheasiertobreak,evenwithvariationsofthemagneticﬁeldoftheorderofδBc(cid:3)1012G.Notealsothatfracturesclosetotheinnercrustaremuchmoreenergetic(becauseofboththehigheravailableelasticenergyandlargervolumeinvolved)thanfrac-turesinthelowdensityregion.Intheﬁrstcase,onecanreachupto1044erg,whileinthesecondcase,eventsof≈1041ergareexpected.Aroughpredictionoftheexpectedoutburstrate(Perna&Pons2011;Pons&Perna2011)forthesolutionmodelmentionedabovegives(cid:4)10−3star-quakesyr−1foranobjectasSGR0418+5729.Assumingthatthereareabout104neutronstarsintheGalaxywithsimilarage,andthat(approximatively)10%ofthemarebornasmagnetars,anaiveextrapolationofthiseventratetothewholeneutronstarpopulationleadstoanexpectedlow-Bmagnetaroutburstrateof(cid:4)1peryear.There-fore,weexpectthatmoreandmoreobjectsofthisclasswillbediscoveredintheupcomingyears(as,e.g.,Swift1822.3–1606;Reaetal.2012;Scholzetal.2012).8.3.SGR0418+5729OutburstDecayBymodelingtheﬂuxevolutionintimewetestedifthecrustalcoolingmodelpresentedinPons&Rea(2012)canﬁttheﬂuxdecayofSGR0418+5729,onthewaveofwhatdoneforSwiftJ1822.3–1606(Reaetal.2012).Weassumeadipolarﬁeldof6×1012G(equatorial),aninternaltoroidalﬁeldof1014G(atmaximum)asinferredinSection8.1,andanaveragesurfacetemperatureof0.05keV,whichisthetemperatureweexpectforthesurfaceofsuchanoldmagnetar(notethatinthe0.5–10keVbandweareonlyseeingatinyhotspot).Thebestmodelingwasfoundbyinjecting2.5×1026ergcm−3inathinlayerintheoutercrustbetween4.5×109and1010gcm−3,andintheregioncontainedwithinaconewithaxisinthedirectionofthemagneticpole,andaperturea≈0.4rad,foratotalenergydepositionof2.5×1041erg(compatiblewithtypicalmagnetaroutbursts;Pons&Rea2012).Theevolutionofthebolometric,andofthe0.5–10keVﬂuxisshowninFigure10(solidanddashedlines,respectively).Wehaveshownwithredsquareshowtheobservedﬂuxdecaywouldappearwhenaddingthecontributionofablackbodycomponentat0.05keV,mimickingtheentireneutronstarsurface.Itisclearthatcrustalcoolingcaneasilyexplainthedecayonlyifthisfurthercomponentistakenintoaccount.Inparticular,thesolidlineisﬁttingtheredpointsbecausetheentireneutronstarsurfaceistakenintoaccount,whileitisnotintheobservedblackdata,whichinfactcannotbereproducedbythedashedline.Thisisindicativeofthedifﬁcultyofcomparingtheoreticalcoolingcurveswithdataobtainedinacertainenergyband.Wealsonotethatnotheoreticalmodelpredictsasurfacetemperatureashighas0.3keVonatimescaleofyears,unlessacontinuousenergyreleaseisassumed(e.g.,bylong-livedinternalcurrents).Weﬁnallymentionthatallthepreviousconsiderationsarebasedonthe(implicit)assumptionthattheblackbodytemperatureisameasureofthephysicaltemperatureoftheemittingregion.Ifthisturnedoutnottobethecase,e.g.,becausethespectrumisthermalbutnotPlanckiansothatacolorcorrectionisrequired,thephysicalsurfacetemperaturemaybesmallerthanthemeasuredblackbodytemperature.Analternativemodeltothecrustalcoolingscenarioconsistsinthepresenceofcurrentsﬂowingintothemagnetospherethroughagraduallyshrinkingmagneticbundleheatingtheneutronstarsurfacefromthetop.Inparticular,thedeepestavailableXMM-NewtonobservationofSGR0418+5729,performedtwoFigure11.X-rayluminosityevolutionasafunctionoftheblackbodyemittingareaandtemperature(seealsoTable1;weassumea2kpcdistance).(Acolorversionofthisﬁgureisavailableintheonlinejournal.)monthsaftertheoutburstonset,revealedthatthe0.5–10keVspectrumofSGR0418+5729isbestreproducedbyablackbodycomponentplusanadditionalnon-thermalcomponent,orbyaresonantcyclotronscatteringmodel.Thissuggeststhepresenceoftwistedmagneticﬁeldlines,atleastintheﬁrstoutburststages.Furthermore,thelimitedspatialextentoftheheatedregion(<1km)issuggestiveofascenarioinwhichthetwistisconﬁnedwithinasmallpartofthemagnetosphere,athincurrent-carryingbundle,orj-bundle(Beloborodov2009).Asthej-bundleuntwistsduringtheoutburstdecay,thespectrumbecomesmoreandmoreblackbody-like,asindeedobserved.Resonantcyclotronscatteringfromathin,decayingj-bundleappearsalsocapableofexplaining(qualitatively)thespectrumanditsevolutionduringtheﬁrstoutburststages,butwhetheritcanexplainthedouble-peakedpulseproﬁlesisunclear.However,thisscenariohassomefurtherdifﬁculties:(1)thetotalluminosityproducedbycurrentsinthebundleis,forsuchalow-Bandasmallthermalspot,wellbelowtheoneobservedatearlytimes,atleastifthespotisatthepolarcap(seeagainBeloborodov2009andalsoTurollaetal.2011),(2)thetimescaleforthetwistdecayismuchshorter(<1yr)thanthatimpliedbythelongoutburstofSGR0418+5729,and(3)anapproximaterelationbetweentheemittingareaandtheluminosityexists(A∼L2;Beloborodov2009)ifmostoftheluminosityisproducedbycurrentdissipation,butSGR0418+5729datashowasomewhatﬂatterdependencewhentheﬁrststagesoftheoutburstareﬁtted(seeFigure11).Insummary,thecrustalcoolingmodel,whenincludingalsoapossiblehiddencontributionfromtheentireneutronstarsurface,appearsfavorableinexplainingtheoutburstdecayof12The magnetar SGR 0418+5729

287

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.SGR0418+5729.However,itislikelythatacombinationofcrustalcoolingandmagnetosphericuntwistingbundlecanbeoperatingattheﬁrststagesoftheoutburst.8.4.ConstraintsonthePresenceofaFossilDiskSurroundingSGR0418+5729AfallbackdiskaroundSGR0418+5729wassuggestedbyAlparetal.(2011)asawaytoaidthespin-downofthepulsarandexplainthe9speriodicityofthissource.Asanalternative,ourresultsshow(seeSection8.1)thatboththethermalandthetimingpropertiesofthissourcecanbereproducedforapulsarageof∼550kyrbyproperlyaccountingformagneticﬁeldevolutionanddissipation,whichalsoimplythattheneutronstarwasbornwithamuchhigherdipolarﬁeldthantheonemeasuredtoday(seeSection8.1).Hence,inprinciple,thetimingpropertiesofthissourcewouldnotnecessarilyrequireanadditionalspindowntorquebyadisk.However,giventhesuggestionthatfallbackdisksaroundisolatedneutronstarsmightbecommon(Michel1988;Chevalier1989;Linetal.1991),itisworthwhiletousethecurrentmulti-bandupperlimitstosetconstraintsonthepresenceofafallbackdiskaroundSGR0418+5729.Sincethepulsariscurrentlyspinningdown,anydisk-magnetosphereinteractionmustprobablyoccurinthepropellerregime,withthepulsartransferringangularmomentumtothedisk.Forthisconditiontobesatisﬁed,theinnerboundaryofthedisk,locatedataboutthemagnetosphericradiusRm=2.5×108[˙M/(1016gs−1)]−2/7(MNS/M(cid:10))−1/7[B/(1012G)]4/7,mustbeequaltoorlargerthanthecorotationradiusRco=(GMNS)1/3Ω2/3.Thestrongestconstraintonthediskemissionisobtainedwhentheinnerradiusofthediskobtainsitsminimumvalue,i.e.,Rin=Rm=Rco.Fortheouterradius,weassumeRout=1014cm.Wefoundthatlargervaluesdonotresultinappreciablylargeremissionatthefrequencyofinterest,andhencethisvalueallowstosetthetightestconstraintonthediskemission.Withtheinnerandouterdiskradiiﬁxedasdiscussedabove,theemissionspectrafromthefallbackdiskiscomputedusingthemodelofPernaetal.(2000).Thediskisassumedtobeopticallythickandgeometricallythin,andtheanisotropyintheX-rayluminosityfromthesource(whichirradiatesthedisk)isneglected,sinceitisfoundtobeofsecondorder(Perna&Hernquist2000).Thediskisassumedtobestill“active,”i.e.,viscouslyaccreting(seeMenouetal.2001).Thediskemissionistheresultofbothviscousdissipationandre-radiationofthepulsarX-rayluminosity.Inorderforthemagnetosphericradiusnottoexceedthecorotationradius,theaccretionratemustbelimitedto˙M<∼1015gs−1.Withthisvalue,thediskluminosityinthemillimeterbandisdominatedbyreprocessingofthepulsarX-rayluminosity.At166GHz,thepredictedﬂuxisabout0.01mJyforaface-ondisk,belowthemeasuredlimitof0.24mJy.Hencethepresenceofafossildiskcannotberuledoutbythecurrentmillimetermeasurements.Evenaddingthecontributionfromthewholesurfaceofthestarbyaputativethermalcomponentat0.05keV,wouldbringthepredictedmillimeterﬂuxjustaroundthemeasuredﬂuxlimitforaface-ondisk.TheﬁeldaroundSGR0418+5729wasalsoobservedwiththeGrantecanandHubbletelescopes(Espositoetal.2010;Durantetal.2011).Inparticular,thelatterobservationswereperformedintwowideﬁlters,theoptical,withapivotwave-lengthof5921Å,andintheNIR,withpivotwavelengthof11534Å.ThesourcewasnotdetecteddowntotheﬂuxoffO<2.3×10−31ergs−1cm−2Hz−1andfNIR<4.4×10−31ergs−1cm−2Hz−1,respectively.Wefoundthatthisop-ticallimit(northeGrantecanorWHTlimit)isnotsufﬁcientlyconstrainingforadiskwiththepropertiesdescribedabove(thepredictedemissionforaface-ondiskisaboutafactoroffourbelowthelimit).Ontheotherhand,intheNIR,theobserva-tionallimitisalreadyabletoruleoutaface-ondisk,whichwouldyieldanemissionabouttwicelargerthanthemeasuredﬂuxlimit.However,adiskinclinedwithrespecttotheobserverbyananglecosθ<∼0.5wouldstillbeallowedbytheobserva-tions(althoughfallingshortinexplainingtheX-rayburstsofthisobject).8.5.ConclusionsAtthetimeofthiswriting,intheATNFpulsarcatalogue(Manchesteretal.2005)138isolatedradiopulsarshaveadipolarmagneticﬁeldlargerthanthatinferredforSGR0418+5729.Ourresultsimplythatsomeoftheseobjectsmighthideastrongtoroidalcomponentoftheinternalﬁeld,notmeasurableviathepulsartimingproperties.Ahintforsuchstrongﬁeldsmightbeahighsurfacetemperature,hotterthanwhatwouldbepredictedbystandardcoolingmodelsatthepulsarage.However,onlyafewofthosepulsarshavehaddedicatedX-rayobservations,andtheshallowsurveysdonotsufﬁcetodetectsuchemission(expectedtobeasluminousasLX∼1031ergs−1).Furthermore,ourcalculationoftheoutburstrateofalowmagneticﬁeldmagnetaralsosuggeststhatroughlyonceayearaquietneutronstarmightturnonwithmagnetar-likeactivity.Ontheotherhand,ifindeedalargenumberofneutronstarsishidingastrongmagneticﬁeldcomponent,therewouldbeimportantconsequencesalsoforotherbranchesofastrophysics.Inparticular,itwouldimplythatsupernovaexplosionsshouldgenerallyproducestrongmagneticﬁelds,andthatmostmassivestarsareeitherproducingfastrotatingcoresduringtheexplo-siontoactivateadynamo,orarestronglymagnetizedthem-selves.Furthermore,inthisscenarioanon-negligiblefractionofgamma-rayburstsmightbeduetotheformationofmagnetars,andthegravitationalwavebackgroundproducedbymagnetarbirthsshouldthenbelargerthanpredictedsofar(importantforfutureinstrumentsastheAdvanced-LIGO).WeareindebtedtotheChandra,Swift,XMM-Newton,GBT,WHT,andPdBIsupportteams,withaspecialthanktoMichaelBremer,fortheextraordinaryjobinplanningthePdBobser-vationspresentedinthispaper.WethankS.MereghettiandH.Tongfortheirvaluablecommentsonthemanuscript.N.R.issupportedbyaRamonyCajalResearchFellowship,andbygrantsAYA2009-07391,AYA2012-39303,SGR2009-811,TW2010005,andiLINK2011-0303.J.A.P.andD.V.acknowl-edgesupportfromthegrantsAYA2010-21097-C03-02andPrometeo/2009/103.R.T.andS.M.arepartiallyfundedthroughanINAF2011PRINgrant.A.P.issupportedbyaJAE-DocCSICfellowshipco-fundedwiththeEuropeanSocialFundun-dertheprogram“JuntaparalaAmpliaci´ondeEstudios,”bytheSpanishMICINNgrantAYA2011-30228-C03-02(co-fundedwithFEDERfunds),andbytheAGAURgrant2009SGR1172(Catalonia).REFERENCESAbdo,A.A.,Ackermann,M.,Ajello,M.,etal.2010,ApJL,725,L73Aguilera,D.N.,Pons,J.A.,&Miralles,J.A.2008,A&A,486,255Alpar,M.A.,Ertan,¨U.,&¸Calı¸skan,¸S.2011,ApJL,732,L413D. Study of two peculiar X-ray galactic objects

288

TheAstrophysicalJournal,770:65(14pp),2013June10Reaetal.Anders,E.,&Grevesse,N.1989,GeCoA,53,197Atwood,W.B.,Abdo,A.A.,Ackermann,M.,etal.2009,ApJ,697,1071Balucinska-Church,M.,&McCammon,D.1992,ApJ,400,699Beloborodov,A.M.2009,ApJ,703,1044Burrows,D.N.,Hill,J.E.,Nousek,J.A.,etal.2005,SSRv,120,165Chevalier,R.A.1989,ApJ,346,847Condon,J.J.,Cotton,W.D.,Greisen,E.W.,etal.1998,AJ,115,1693Dall’Osso,S.,Israel,G.L.,Stella,L.,Possenti,A.,&Perozzi,E.2003,ApJ,599,485Duncan,R.C.,&Thompson,C.1992,ApJL,392,L9DuPlain,R.,Ransom,S.,Demorest,P.,etal.2008,Proc.SPIE,7019,45Durant,M.,Kargaltsev,O.,&Pavlov,G.G.2011,ApJ,742,77Esposito,P.,Israel,G.L.,Turolla,R.,etal.2010,MNRAS,405,1787Esposito,P.,Israel,G.L.,Turolla,R.,etal.2011,MNRAS,416,205Ferrario,L.,&Wickramasinghe,D.2006,MNRAS,367,1323Garmire,G.P.,Bautz,M.W.,Ford,P.G.,etal.2003,Proc.SPIE,4851,28Glampedakis,K.,Jones,D.I.,&Samuelsson,L.2011,MNRAS,413,2021Jahoda,K.,Swank,J.H.,Giles,A.B.,etal.1996,Proc.SPIE,2808,59Jansen,F.,Lumb,D.,Altieri,B.,etal.2001,A&A,365,L1Lin,D.N.C.,Woosley,S.E.,&Bodenheimer,P.H.1991,Natur,353,827Lorimer,D.R.,Edel,S.,Kondratiev,V.I.,etal.2009,ATel,2096,1Malheiro,M.,Rueda,J.A.,&Rufﬁni,R.2012,PASJ,64,56Manchester,R.N.,Hobbs,G.B.,Teoh,A.,&Hobbs,M.2005,AJ,129,1993Mattox,J.R.,Bertsch,D.L.,Chiang,J.,etal.1996,ApJ,461,396Menou,K.,Perna,R.,&Hernquist,L.2001,ApJ,559,1032Mereghetti,S.2008,A&ARv,15,225Michel,F.C.1988,Natur,333,644Nobili,L.,Turolla,R.,&Zane,S.2008,MNRAS,386,1527Ouyed,R.,Leahy,D.,&Niebergal,B.2011,MNRAS,415,1590Perna,R.,&Hernquist,L.2000,ApJL,544,L57Perna,R.,Hernquist,L.,&Narayan,R.2000,ApJ,541,344Perna,R.,&Pons,J.A.2011,ApJL,727,L51Pons,J.A.,Miralles,J.A.,&Geppert,U.2009,A&A,496,207Pons,J.A.,&Perna,R.2011,ApJ,741,123Pons,J.A.,&Rea,N.2012,ApJL,750,L6Protassov,R.,vanDyk,D.A.,Connors,A.,Kashyap,V.L.,&Siemiginowska,A.2002,ApJ,571,545Rea,N.2013,inIAUSymp.291,NeutronStarsandPulsars:ChallengesandOpportunitiesafter80Years,ed.J.vanLeeuwen(Cambridge:CambridgeUniv.Press),11Rea,N.,&Esposito,P.2011,inAstrophysicsandSpaceScienceProceedings,High-energyEmissionfromPulsarsandTheirSystems,ed.D.F.Torres&N.Rea(Berlin:Springer),247Rea,N.,Esposito,P.,Turolla,R.,etal.2010,Sci,330,944Rea,N.,Israel,G.L.,Esposito,P.,etal.2012,ApJ,754,27Rea,N.,Israel,G.L.,Turolla,R.,etal.2009,MNRAS,396,2419Rea,N.,Zane,S.,Lyutikov,M.,&Turolla,R.2007,Ap&SS,308,61Rea,N.,Zane,S.,Turolla,R.,Lyutikov,M.,&G¨otz,D.2008,ApJ,686,1245Scholz,P.,Ng,C.-Y.,Livingstone,M.A.,etal.2012,ApJ,761,66Soni,V.2012,MNRAS,425,L15Spitkovsky,A.2006,ApJL,648,L51Str¨uder,L.,Briel,U.,Dennerl,K.,etal.2001,A&A,365,L18Thompson,C.,&Duncan,R.C.1993,ApJ,408,194Thompson,C.,&Duncan,R.C.1995,MNRAS,275,255Thompson,C.,Lyutikov,M.,&Kulkarni,S.R.2002,ApJ,574,332Tong,H.,&Xu,R.X.2012,ApJL,757,L10Turner,M.J.L.,Abbey,A.,Arnaud,M.,etal.2001,A&A,365,L27Turolla,R.,Zane,S.,Pons,J.A.,Esposito,P.,&Rea,N.2011,ApJ,740,105vanderHorst,A.J.,Connaughton,V.,Kouveliotou,C.,etal.2010,ApJL,711,L1vanStraten,W.,&Bailes,M.2010,inAstrophysicsSourceCodeLibrary,record:ascl1010.006Vigan`o,D.,Rea,N.,Pons,J.A.,etal.2013,MNRAS,submittedWachter,S.,Gelino,C.R.,Gelino,D.M.,etal.2009,ATel,2164Zane,S.,Rea,N.,Turolla,R.,&Nobili,L.2009,MNRAS,398,1403Zombeck,M.V.,Chappell,J.H.,Kenter,A.T.,etal.1995,Proc.SPIE,2518,9614Bibliography

[1] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, I. Agudo, M. Ajello, H. D. Aller, M. F.
Aller, E. Angelakis, A. A. Arkharov, M. Axelsson, U. Bach, and et al.
The Spectral Energy Distribution of Fermi Bright Blazars. ApJ, 716:30–
70, June 2010.

[2] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, A. Allafort, E. Antolini, W. B.
Atwood, M. Axelsson, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, D. Bastieri,
B. M. Baughman, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji, R. D. Blandford,
E. D. Bloom, J. R. Bogart, E. Bonamente, A. W. Borgland, A. Bouvier,
J. Bregeon, A. Brez, M. Brigida, P. Bruel, R. Buehler, T. H. Burnett,
S. Buson, G. A. Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, A. Cannon, P. A. Car-
aveo, S. Carrigan, J. M. Casandjian, E. Cavazzuti, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Ce-
lik, A. Celotti, E. Charles, A. Chekhtman, A. W. Chen, C. C. Cheung,
J. Chiang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus, J. Cohen-Tanugi, J. Conrad, L. Costa-
mante, G. Cotter, S. Cutini, V. D’Elia, C. D. Dermer, A. de Angelis,
F. de Palma, A. De Rosa, S. W. Digel, E. d. C. e. Silva, P. S. Drell,
R. Dubois, D. Dumora, L. Escande, C. Farnier, C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fe-
gan, E. C. Ferrara, W. B. Focke, P. Fortin, M. Frailis, Y. Fukazawa,
S. Funk, P. Fusco, F. Gargano, D. Gasparrini, N. Gehrels, S. Germani,
B. Giebels, N. Giglietto, P. Giommi, F. Giordano, M. Giroletti, T. Glanz-
man, G. Godfrey, P. Grandi, I. A. Grenier, M.-H. Grondin, J. E. Grove,
S. Guiriec, D. Hadasch, A. K. Harding, M. Hayashida, E. Hays, S. E.
Healey, A. B. Hill, D. Horan, R. E. Hughes, G. Iafrate, R. Itoh, G. J´ohan-
nesson, A. S. Johnson, R. P. Johnson, T. J. Johnson, W. N. Johnson,
T. Kamae, H. Katagiri, J. Kataoka, N. Kawai, M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder,
M. Kuss, J. Lande, L. Latronico, C. Lavalley, M. Lemoine-Goumard,
M. Llena Garde, F. Longo, F. Loparco, B. Lott, M. N. Lovellette, P. Lu-
brano, G. M. Madejski, A. Makeev, G. Malaguti, E. Massaro, M. N.
Mazziotta, W. McConville, J. E. McEnery, S. McGlynn, P. F. Michel-
son, W. Mitthumsiri, T. Mizuno, A. A. Moiseev, C. Monte, M. E. Mon-

289

BIBLIOGRAPHY

zani, A. Morselli, I. V. Moskalenko, S. Murgia, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris,
E. Nuss, M. Ohno, T. Ohsugi, N. Omodei, E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes,
M. Ozaki, D. Paneque, J. H. Panetta, D. Parent, V. Pelassa, M. Pepe,
M. Pesce-Rollins, S. Piranomonte, F. Piron, T. A. Porter, S. Rain`o,
R. Rando, M. Razzano, A. Reimer, O. Reimer, T. Reposeur, J. Ripken,
S. Ritz, A. Y. Rodriguez, R. W. Romani, M. Roth, F. Ryde, H. F.-W.
Sadrozinski, D. Sanchez, A. Sander, P. M. Saz Parkinson, J. D. Scargle,
C. Sgr`o, M. S. Shaw, E. J. Siskind, P. D. Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli,
J.-L. Starck,
(cid:32)L. Stawarz, M. S. Strickman, D. J. Suson, H. Tajima,
H. Takahashi, T. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, G. B. Taylor, J. B. Thayer,
J. G. Thayer, D. J. Thompson, L. Tibaldo, D. F. Torres, G. Tosti, A. Tra-
macere, P. Ubertini, Y. Uchiyama, T. L. Usher, V. Vasileiou, N. Vilchez,
M. Villata, V. Vitale, A. P. Waite, E. Wallace, P. Wang, B. L. Winer,
K. S. Wood, Z. Yang, T. Ylinen, and M. Ziegler. The First Catalog
of Active Galactic Nuclei Detected by the Fermi Large Area Telescope.
ApJ, 715:429–457, May 2010.

[3] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, A. Allafort, E. Antolini, W. B.
Atwood, M. Axelsson, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, and et al.
Fermi Large Area Telescope First Source Catalog. ApJS, 188:405–436,
June 2010.

[4] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, A. Allafort, W. B. Atwood,
L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, D. Bastieri, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazz-
ini, B. Berenji, R. D. Blandford, E. D. Bloom, E. Bonamente, A. W.
Borgland, A. Bouvier, T. J. Brandt, J. Bregeon, M. Brigida, P. Bruel,
R. Buehler, T. H. Burnett, S. Buson, G. A. Caliandro, R. A. Cameron,
A. Cannon, P. A. Caraveo, J. M. Casandjian, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik,
E. Charles, A. Chekhtman, J. Chiang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus, J. Cohen-
Tanugi, J. Conrad, C. D. Dermer, A. de Angelis, F. de Palma, S. W.
Digel, E. D. C. E. Silva, P. S. Drell, A. Drlica-Wagner, R. Dubois,
C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fegan, P. Fortin, M. Frailis, Y. Fukazawa, S. Funk,
P. Fusco, F. Gargano, S. Germani, N. Giglietto, F. Giordano, M. Giro-
letti, T. Glanzman, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier, M.-H. Grondin, S. Guiriec,
M. Gustafsson, D. Hadasch, A. K. Harding, K. Hayashi, M. Hayashida,
E. Hays, S. E. Healey, P. Jean, G. J´ohannesson, A. S. Johnson, R. P.
Johnson, T. J. Johnson, T. Kamae, H. Katagiri, J. Kataoka, M. Kerr,
J. Kn¨odlseder, M. Kuss, J. Lande, L. Latronico, S.-H. Lee, M. Lemoine-
Goumard, F. Longo, F. Loparco, B. Lott, M. N. Lovellette, P. Lubrano,
G. M. Madejski, A. Makeev, P. Martin, M. N. Mazziotta, J. Mehault,
P. F. Michelson, W. Mitthumsiri, T. Mizuno, A. A. Moiseev, C. Monte,
M. E. Monzani, A. Morselli, I. V. Moskalenko, S. Murgia, M. Naumann-

290

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Godo, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris, E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi, A. Okumura,
N. Omodei, E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes, M. Ozaki, D. Paneque, J. H.
Panetta, D. Parent, M. Pepe, M. Persic, M. Pesce-Rollins, F. Piron,
T. A. Porter, S. Rain`o, R. Rando, M. Razzano, A. Reimer, O. Reimer,
S. Ritz, R. W. Romani, H. F.-W. Sadrozinski, P. M. Saz Parkinson,
C. Sgr`o, E. J. Siskind, D. A. Smith, P. D. Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli,
M. S. Strickman, L. Strigari, A. W. Strong, D. J. Suson, H. Takahashi,
T. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, J. B. Thayer, D. J. Thompson, L. Tibaldo,
D. F. Torres, G. Tosti, A. Tramacere, Y. Uchiyama, T. L. Usher, J. Van-
denbroucke, G. Vianello, N. Vilchez, V. Vitale, A. P. Waite, P. Wang,
B. L. Winer, K. S. Wood, Z. Yang, and M. Ziegler. Fermi Large Area
Telescope observations of Local Group galaxies: detection of M 31 and
search for M 33. A&A, 523:L2, November 2010.

[5] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, J. Ampe, B. Anderson, W. B.
Atwood, M. Axelsson, R. Bagagli, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, and et al. The
on-orbit calibration of the Fermi Large Area Telescope. Astroparticle
Physics, 32:193–219, October 2009.

[6] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, B. Anderson, W. B. At-
wood, M. Axelsson, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, M. G. Bar-
ing, D. Bastieri, B. M. Baughman, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji,
G. F. Bignami, R. D. Blandford, E. D. Bloom, E. Bonamente, A. W. Bor-
gland, J. Bregeon, A. Brez, M. Brigida, P. Bruel, T. H. Burnett, G. A.
Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, P. A. Caraveo, J. M. Casandjian, C. Cecchi,
¨O. ¸Celik, A. Chekhtman, C. C. Cheung, J. Chiang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus,
J. Cohen-Tanugi, J. Conrad, S. Cutini, C. D. Dermer, A. de Angelis,
A. de Luca, F. de Palma, S. W. Digel, M. Dormody, E. do Couto e Silva,
P. S. Drell, R. Dubois, D. Dumora, C. Farnier, C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fegan,
Y. Fukazawa, S. Funk, P. Fusco, F. Gargano, D. Gasparrini, N. Gehrels,
S. Germani, B. Giebels, N. Giglietto, P. Giommi, F. Giordano, T. Glanz-
man, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier, M.-H. Grondin, J. E. Grove, L. Guille-
mot, S. Guiriec, C. Gwon, Y. Hanabata, A. K. Harding, M. Hayashida,
E. Hays, R. E. Hughes, G. J´ohannesson, R. P. Johnson, T. J. John-
son, W. N. Johnson, T. Kamae, H. Katagiri, J. Kataoka, N. Kawai,
M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. L. Kocian, M. Kuss, J. Lande, L. La-
tronico, M. Lemoine-Goumard, F. Longo, F. Loparco, B. Lott, M. N.
Lovellette, P. Lubrano, G. M. Madejski, A. Makeev, M. Marelli, M. N.
Mazziotta, W. McConville, J. E. McEnery, C. Meurer, P. F. Michelson,
W. Mitthumsiri, T. Mizuno, C. Monte, M. E. Monzani, A. Morselli, I. V.
Moskalenko, S. Murgia, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris, E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi,
N. Omodei, E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes, D. Paneque, D. Parent, V. Pelassa,

291

BIBLIOGRAPHY

M. Pepe, M. Pesce-Rollins, M. Pierbattista, F. Piron, T. A. Porter, J. R.
Primack, S. Rain`o, R. Rando, P. S. Ray, M. Razzano, N. Rea, A. Reimer,
O. Reimer, T. Reposeur, S. Ritz, L. S. Rochester, A. Y. Rodriguez,
R. W. Romani, F. Ryde, H. F.-W. Sadrozinski, D. Sanchez, A. Sander,
P. M. S. Parkinson, J. D. Scargle, C. Sgr`o, E. J. Siskind, D. A. Smith,
P. D. Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli, J.-L. Starck, M. S. Strickman,
D. J. Suson, H. Tajima, H. Takahashi, T. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, J. G.
Thayer, D. J. Thompson, L. Tibaldo, O. Tibolla, D. F. Torres, G. Tosti,
A. Tramacere, Y. Uchiyama, T. L. Usher, A. Van Etten, V. Vasileiou,
N. Vilchez, V. Vitale, A. P. Waite, P. Wang, K. Watters, B. L. Winer,
M. T. Wolﬀ, K. S. Wood, T. Ylinen, M. Ziegler, and Fermi LAT Collab-
oration. Detection of 16 Gamma-Ray Pulsars Through Blind Frequency
Searches Using the Fermi LAT. Science, 325:840–, August 2009.

[7] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, W. B. Atwood, M. Axelsson,
L. Baldini, J. Ballet, D. L. Band, G. Barbiellini, D. Bastieri, and et al.
Fermi/Large Area Telescope Bright Gamma-Ray Source List. ApJS,
183:46–66, July 2009.

[8] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, W. B. Atwood, M. Axelsson,
L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, M. G. Baring, D. Bastieri, K. Bech-
tol, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji, E. D. Bloom, E. Bonamente, A. W. Bor-
gland, J. Bregeon, A. Brez, M. Brigida, P. Bruel, T. H. Burnett, G. A.
Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, P. A. Caraveo, J. M. Casandjian, E. Cavaz-
zuti, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik, A. Chekhtman, C. C. Cheung, J. Chiang,
S. Ciprini, R. Claus, J. Cohen-Tanugi, L. R. Cominsky, J. Conrad,
S. Cutini, A. de Angelis, F. de Palma, G. Di Bernardo, E. d. C. e.
Silva, P. S. Drell, A. Drlica-Wagner, R. Dubois, D. Dumora, C. Farnier,
C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fegan, J. Finke, W. B. Focke, P. Fortin, L. Foschini,
M. Frailis, Y. Fukazawa, S. Funk, P. Fusco, F. Gargano, D. Gasparrini,
N. Gehrels, S. Germani, G. Giavitto, B. Giebels, N. Giglietto, P. Giommi,
F. Giordano, T. Glanzman, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier, M.-H. Grondin,
J. E. Grove, L. Guillemot, S. Guiriec, Y. Hanabata, M. Hayashida,
E. Hays, D. Horan, R. E. Hughes, M. S. Jackson, G. J´ohannesson,
A. S. Johnson, R. P. Johnson, W. N. Johnson, T. Kamae, H. Kata-
giri, J. Kataoka, N. Kawai, M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. L. Kocian,
M. Kuss, J. Lande, L. Latronico, M. Lemoine-Goumard, F. Longo,
F. Loparco, B. Lott, M. N. Lovellette, P. Lubrano, G. M. Madejski,
A. Makeev, M. N. Mazziotta, W. McConville, J. E. McEnery, C. Meurer,
P. F. Michelson, W. Mitthumsiri, T. Mizuno, A. A. Moiseev, C. Monte,
M. E. Monzani, A. Morselli, I. V. Moskalenko, S. Murgia, P. L. Nolan,
J. P. Norris, E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi, N. Omodei, E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes,

292

BIBLIOGRAPHY

M. Ozaki, D. Paneque, J. H. Panetta, D. Parent, V. Pelassa, M. Pepe,
M. Pesce-Rollins, F. Piron, T. A. Porter, S. Rain`o, R. Rando, M. Raz-
zano, A. Reimer, O. Reimer, T. Reposeur, L. C. Reyes, S. Ritz, L. S.
Rochester, A. Y. Rodriguez, M. Roth, F. Ryde, H. F.-W. Sadrozinski,
D. Sanchez, A. Sander, P. M. Saz Parkinson, J. D. Scargle, T. L. Schalk,
A. Sellerholm, C. Sgr`o, M. S. Shaw, E. J. Siskind, D. A. Smith, P. D.
Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli, M. S. Strickman, D. J. Suson, H. Tajima,
H. Takahashi, T. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, Y. Tanaka, J. B. Thayer, J. G.
Thayer, D. J. Thompson, L. Tibaldo, D. F. Torres, G. Tosti, A. Tra-
macere, Y. Uchiyama, T. L. Usher, V. Vasileiou, N. Vilchez, V. Vi-
tale, A. P. Waite, P. Wang, B. L. Winer, K. S. Wood, T. Ylinen, and
M. Ziegler. Fermi Observations of TeV-Selected Active Galactic Nuclei.
ApJ, 707:1310–1333, December 2009.

[9] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, W. B. Atwood, M. Axelsson,
L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, M. G. Baring, D. Bastieri, and et al.
The First Fermi Large Area Telescope Catalog of Gamma-ray Pulsars.
ApJS, 187:460–494, April 2010.

[10] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, W. B. Atwood, M. Axels-
son, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, D. Bastieri, B. M. Baugh-
man, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji, R. Blandford, E. D. Bloom,
E. Bonamente, A. W. Borgland, J. Bregeon, A. Brez, M. Brigida,
P. Bruel, T. H. Burnett, G. A. Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, P. A. Car-
aveo, J. M. Casandjian, E. Cavazzuti, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik, E. Charles,
S. Chaty, A. Chekhtman, C. C. Cheung, J. Chiang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus,
J. Cohen-Tanugi, L. R. Cominsky, J. Conrad, S. Corbel, R. Corbet,
S. Cutini, C. D. Dermer, A. de Angelis, A. de Luca, F. de Palma,
S. W. Digel, M. Dormody, E. do Couto e Silva, P. S. Drell, R. Dubois,
G. Dubus, D. Dumora, C. Farnier, C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fegan, W. B. Focke,
M. Frailis, Y. Fukazawa, S. Funk, P. Fusco, F. Gargano, D. Gaspar-
rini, N. Gehrels, S. Germani, B. Giebels, N. Giglietto, F. Giordano,
T. Glanzman, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier, M.-H. Grondin, J. E. Grove,
L. Guillemot, S. Guiriec, Y. Hanabata, A. K. Harding, M. Hayashida,
E. Hays, A. B. Hill, R. E. Hughes, G. J´ohannesson, A. S. Johnson,
R. P. Johnson, T. J. Johnson, W. N. Johnson, T. Kamae, H. Katagiri,
J. Kataoka, N. Kawai, M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. L. Kocian, F. Kuehn,
M. Kuss, J. Lande, S. Larsson, L. Latronico, F. Longo, F. Loparco,
B. Lott, M. N. Lovellette, P. Lubrano, G. M. Madejski, A. Makeev,
M. Marelli, M. N. Mazziotta, J. E. McEnery, C. Meurer, P. F. Michel-
son, W. Mitthumsiri, T. Mizuno, C. Monte, M. E. Monzani, A. Morselli,
I. V. Moskalenko, S. Murgia, P. L. Nolan, E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi, A. Oku-

293

BIBLIOGRAPHY

mura, N. Omodei, E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes, D. Paneque, J. H. Panetta,
D. Parent, V. Pelassa, M. Pepe, M. Pesce-Rollins, F. Piron, T. A.
Porter, S. Rain`o, R. Rando, P. S. Ray, M. Razzano, N. Rea, A. Reimer,
O. Reimer, T. Reposeur, S. Ritz, L. S. Rochester, A. Y. Rodriguez,
R. W. Romani, F. Ryde, H. F.-W. Sadrozinski, D. Sanchez, A. Sander,
P. M. Saz Parkinson, J. D. Scargle, C. Sgr`o, M. S. Shaw, A. Sierpowska-
Bartosik, E. J. Siskind, D. A. Smith, P. D. Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli,
E. Striani, M. S. Strickman, D. J. Suson, H. Tajima, H. Takahashi,
T. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, J. B. Thayer, J. G. Thayer, D. J. Thomp-
son, L. Tibaldo, D. F. Torres, G. Tosti, A. Tramacere, Y. Uchiyama,
T. L. Usher, V. Vasileiou, N. Vilchez, V. Vitale, A. P. Waite, P. Wang,
B. L. Winer, K. S. Wood, T. Ylinen, and M. Ziegler. Fermi LAT Ob-
servations of LS I +61◦303: First Detection of an Orbital Modulation in
GeV Gamma Rays. ApJL, 701:L123–L128, August 2009.

[11] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, W. B. Atwood, M. Axels-
son, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, D. Bastieri, B. M. Baugh-
man, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji, R. D. Blandford, E. D.
Bloom, E. Bonamente, A. W. Borgland, J. Bregeon, A. Brez, M. Brigida,
P. Bruel, T. H. Burnett, S. Buson, G. A. Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, P. A.
Caraveo, J. M. Casandjian, E. Cavazzuti, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik, S. Chaty,
A. Chekhtman, C. C. Cheung, J. Chiang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus, J. Cohen-
Tanugi, L. R. Cominsky, J. Conrad, S. Corbel, R. Corbet, S. Cutini,
C. D. Dermer, A. de Angelis, F. de Palma, S. W. Digel, E. d. C. e. Silva,
P. S. Drell, R. Dubois, G. Dubus, D. Dumora, C. Farnier, C. Favuzzi,
S. J. Fegan, W. B. Focke, P. Fortin, M. Frailis, Y. Fukazawa, S. Funk,
P. Fusco, F. Gargano, D. Gasparrini, N. Gehrels, S. Germani, B. Giebels,
N. Giglietto, F. Giordano, T. Glanzman, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier, M.-H.
Grondin, J. E. Grove, L. Guillemot, S. Guiriec, Y. Hanabata, A. K. Hard-
ing, M. Hayashida, E. Hays, A. B. Hill, D. Horan, R. E. Hughes, M. S.
Jackson, G. J´ohannesson, A. S. Johnson, T. J. Johnson, W. N. Johnson,
T. Kamae, H. Katagiri, J. Kataoka, N. Kawai, M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder,
M. L. Kocian, F. Kuehn, M. Kuss, J. Lande, S. Larsson, L. Latronico,
M. Lemoine-Goumard, F. Longo, F. Loparco, B. Lott, M. N. Lovellette,
P. Lubrano, G. M. Madejski, A. Makeev, M. Marelli, M. N. Mazziotta,
J. E. McEnery, C. Meurer, P. F. Michelson, W. Mitthumsiri, T. Mizuno,
A. A. Moiseev, C. Monte, M. E. Monzani, A. Morselli, I. V. Moskalenko,
S. Murgia, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris, E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi, N. Omodei,
E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes, M. Ozaki, D. Paneque, J. H. Panetta, D. Parent,
V. Pelassa, M. Pepe, M. Pesce-Rollins, F. Piron, T. A. Porter, S. Rain`o,
R. Rando, P. S. Ray, M. Razzano, N. Rea, A. Reimer, O. Reimer,
T. Reposeur, S. Ritz, L. S. Rochester, A. Y. Rodriguez, R. W. Romani,

294

BIBLIOGRAPHY

M. Roth, F. Ryde, H. F.-W. Sadrozinski, D. Sanchez, A. Sander, P. M.
Saz Parkinson, J. D. Scargle, C. Sgr`o, A. Sierpowska-Bartosik, E. J.
Siskind, D. A. Smith, P. D. Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli, M. S. Strick-
man, D. J. Suson, H. Tajima, H. Takahashi, T. Takahashi, T. Tanaka,
Y. Tanaka, J. B. Thayer, D. J. Thompson, L. Tibaldo, D. F. Torres,
G. Tosti, A. Tramacere, Y. Uchiyama, T. L. Usher, V. Vasileiou, C. Ven-
ter, N. Vilchez, V. Vitale, A. P. Waite, E. Wallace, P. Wang, B. L. Winer,
K. S. Wood, T. Ylinen, and M. Ziegler. Fermi/LAT observations of LS
5039. ApJL, 706:L56–L61, November 2009.

[12] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, W. B. Atwood, M. Axelsson,
L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, D. Bastieri, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazz-
ini, B. Berenji, R. D. Blandford, E. D. Bloom, E. Bonamente, A. W. Bor-
gland, A. Bouvier, J. Bregeon, A. Brez, M. Brigida, P. Bruel, T. H. Bur-
nett, S. Buson, G. A. Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, P. A. Caraveo, S. Car-
rigan, J. M. Casandjian, E. Cavazzuti, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik, E. Charles,
A. Chekhtman, C. C. Cheung, J. Chiang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus, J. Cohen-
Tanugi, J. Conrad, S. Cutini, C. D. Dermer, A. de Angelis, F. de Palma,
S. W. Digel, E. d. C. e. Silva, P. S. Drell, R. Dubois, D. Dumora,
C. Farnier, C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fegan, W. B. Focke, P. Fortin, M. Frailis,
Y. Fukazawa, S. Funk, P. Fusco, F. Gargano, D. Gasparrini, N. Gehrels,
S. Germani, B. Giebels, N. Giglietto, P. Giommi, F. Giordano, T. Glanz-
man, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier, M.-H. Grondin, J. E. Grove, L. Guille-
mot, S. Guiriec, A. K. Harding, R. C. Hartman, M. Hayashida, E. Hays,
S. E. Healey, D. Horan, R. E. Hughes, M. S. Jackson, G. J´ohannes-
son, A. S. Johnson, W. N. Johnson, T. Kamae, H. Katagiri, J. Kataoka,
N. Kawai, M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. Kuss, J. Lande, L. Latronico,
M. Lemoine-Goumard, F. Longo, F. Loparco, B. Lott, M. N. Lovellette,
P. Lubrano, G. M. Madejski, A. Makeev, M. N. Mazziotta, W. Mc-
Conville, J. E. McEnery, C. Meurer, P. F. Michelson, W. Mitthumsiri,
T. Mizuno, A. A. Moiseev, C. Monte, M. E. Monzani, A. Morselli, I. V.
Moskalenko, S. Murgia, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris, E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi,
N. Omodei, E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes, D. Paneque, J. H. Panetta, D. Par-
ent, V. Pelassa, M. Pepe, M. Persic, M. Pesce-Rollins, F. Piron, T. A.
Porter, S. Rain`o, R. Rando, M. Razzano, A. Reimer, O. Reimer, T. Re-
poseur, S. Ritz, L. S. Rochester, A. Y. Rodriguez, R. W. Romani,
M. Roth, F. Ryde, H. F.-W. Sadrozinski, D. Sanchez, A. Sander, P. M.
Saz Parkinson, J. D. Scargle, C. Sgr`o, E. J. Siskind, D. A. Smith, P. D.
Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli, M. S. Strickman, D. J. Suson, H. Tajima,
H. Takahashi, T. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, J. B. Thayer, J. G. Thayer,
D. J. Thompson, L. Tibaldo, D. F. Torres, G. Tosti, A. Tramacere,
Y. Uchiyama, T. L. Usher, V. Vasileiou, N. Vilchez, M. Villata, V. Vi-

295

BIBLIOGRAPHY

tale, A. P. Waite, P. Wang, B. L. Winer, K. S. Wood, T. Ylinen, and
M. Ziegler. Spectral Properties of Bright Fermi-Detected Blazars in the
Gamma-Ray Band. ApJ, 710:1271–1285, February 2010.

[13] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, W. B. Atwood, L. Baldini, J. Bal-
let, G. Barbiellini, D. Bastieri, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, and et al.
Gamma-Ray Emission Concurrent with the Nova in the Symbiotic Bi-
nary V407 Cygni. Science, 329:817–821, August 2010.

[14] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbi-
ellini, D. Bastieri, B. M. Baughman, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji,
R. D. Blandford, E. D. Bloom, E. Bonamente, A. W. Borgland, J. Bre-
geon, A. Brez, M. Brigida, P. Bruel, T. H. Burnett, S. Buson, G. A.
Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, F. Camilo, P. A. Caraveo, J. M. Casand-
jian, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik, A. Chekhtman, C. C. Cheung, J. Chiang,
S. Ciprini, R. Claus, I. Cognard, J. Cohen-Tanugi, L. R. Cominsky,
J. Conrad, S. Cutini, A. de Angelis, F. de Palma, S. W. Digel, B. L. Din-
gus, M. Dormody, E. d. C. e. Silva, P. S. Drell, R. Dubois, D. Dumora,
C. Farnier, C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fegan, W. B. Focke, P. Fortin, M. Frailis,
P. C. C. Freire, Y. Fukazawa, S. Funk, P. Fusco, F. Gargano, D. Gas-
parrini, N. Gehrels, S. Germani, G. Giavitto, B. Giebels, N. Giglietto,
F. Giordano, T. Glanzman, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier, M.-H. Grondin,
J. E. Grove, L. Guillemot, S. Guiriec, Y. Hanabata, A. K. Harding,
E. Hays, R. E. Hughes, M. S. Jackson, G. J´ohannesson, A. S. Johnson,
T. J. Johnson, W. N. Johnson, S. Johnston, T. Kamae, H. Katagiri,
J. Kataoka, N. Kawai, M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. L. Kocian, M. Kuss,
J. Lande, L. Latronico, M. Lemoine-Goumard, F. Longo, F. Loparco,
B. Lott, M. N. Lovellette, P. Lubrano, A. Makeev, M. Marelli, M. N.
Mazziotta, J. E. McEnery, C. Meurer, P. F. Michelson, W. Mitthumsiri,
T. Mizuno, A. A. Moiseev, C. Monte, M. E. Monzani, A. Morselli, I. V.
Moskalenko, S. Murgia, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris, E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi,
N. Omodei, E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes, D. Paneque, D. Parent, V. Pelassa,
M. Pepe, M. Pesce-Rollins, F. Piron, T. A. Porter, S. Rain`o, R. Rando,
P. S. Ray, M. Razzano, A. Reimer, O. Reimer, T. Reposeur, S. Ritz,
M. S. E. Roberts, L. S. Rochester, A. Y. Rodriguez, R. W. Ro’mani,
M. Roth, F. Ryde, H. F.-W. Sadrozinski, D. Sanchez, A. Sander, P. M.
Saz Parkinson, J. D. Scargle, C. Sgr`o, E. J. Siskind, D. A. Smith, P. D.
Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli, M. S. Strickman, D. J. Suson, H. Tajima,
H. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, J. B. Thayer, J. G. Thayer, G. Theureau,
D. J. Thompson, L. Tibaldo, O. Tibolla, D. F. Torres, G. Tosti, A. Tra-
macere, Y. Uchiyama, T. L. Usher, A. Van Etten, V. Vasileiou, C. Venter,
N. Vilchez, V. Vitale, A. P. Waite, P. Wang, K. Watters, B. L. Winer,

296

BIBLIOGRAPHY

M. T. Wolﬀ, K. S. Wood, T. Ylinen, and M. Ziegler. PSR J1907+0602:
A Radio-Faint Gamma-Ray Pulsar Powering a Bright TeV Pulsar Wind
Nebula. ApJ, 711:64–74, March 2010.

[15] A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbi-
ellini, D. Bastieri, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji, E. D. Bloom,
E. Bonamente, A. W. Borgland, J. Bregeon, A. Brez, M. Brigida,
P. Bruel, T. H. Burnett, G. A. Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, P. A. Caraveo,
J. M. Casandjian, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik, A. Chekhtman, C. C. Cheung,
J. Chiang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus, J. Cohen-Tanugi, J. Conrad, S. Cutini,
C. D. Dermer, F. de Palma, E. d. C. e. Silva, P. S. Drell, R. Dubois,
D. Dumora, C. Farnier, C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fegan, W. B. Focke, L. Fos-
chini, M. Frailis, Y. Fukazawa, P. Fusco, F. Gargano, N. Gehrels, S. Ger-
mani, B. Giebels, N. Giglietto, F. Giordano, M. Giroletti, T. Glanz-
man, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier, J. E. Grove, L. Guillemot, S. Guiriec,
M. Hayashida, E. Hays, D. Horan, R. E. Hughes, G. J´ohannesson,
A. S. Johnson, W. N. Johnson, M. Kadler, T. Kamae, H. Katagiri,
J. Kataoka, M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. Kuss, J. Lande, L. Latronico,
F. Longo, F. Loparco, B. Lott, M. N. Lovellette, P. Lubrano, A. Ma-
keev, M. N. Mazziotta, W. McConville, J. E. McEnery, C. Meurer,
P. F. Michelson, W. Mitthumsiri, T. Mizuno, C. Monte, M. E. Mon-
zani, A. Morselli, I. V. Moskalenko, S. Murgia, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris,
E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi, N. Omodei, E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes, V. Pelassa,
M. Pepe, M. Persic, M. Pesce-Rollins, F. Piron, T. A. Porter, S. Rain`o,
R. Rando, M. Razzano, L. S. Rochester, A. Y. Rodriguez, F. Ryde,
H. F.-W. Sadrozinski, R. Sambruna, A. Sander, P. M. Saz Parkinson,
J. D. Scargle, C. Sgr`o, P. D. Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli, M. S.
Strickman, D. J. Suson, G. Tagliaferri, H. Takahashi, T. Takahashi,
T. Tanaka, J. B. Thayer, J. G. Thayer, D. J. Thompson, L. Tibaldo,
O. Tibolla, D. F. Torres, G. Tosti, A. Tramacere, Y. Uchiyama, T. L.
Usher, V. Vasileiou, N. Vilchez, V. Vitale, A. P. Waite, P. Wang, B. L.
Winer, K. S. Wood, T. Ylinen, M. Ziegler, Fermi/LAT Collaboration,
G. Ghisellini, L. Maraschi, and F. Tavecchio. Radio-Loud Narrow-Line
Seyfert 1 as a New Class of Gamma-Ray Active Galactic Nuclei. ApJL,
707:L142–L147, December 2009.

[16] M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, A. Allafort, E. Antolini, L. Baldini, J. Ballet,
G. Barbiellini, D. Bastieri, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji, R. D. Blandford,
E. D. Bloom, E. Bonamente, A. W. Borgland, A. Bouvier, T. J. Brandt,
J. Bregeon, M. Brigida, P. Bruel, R. Buehler, T. H. Burnett, S. Bu-
son, G. A. Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, P. A. Caraveo, J. M. Casandjian,
E. Cavazzuti, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik, E. Charles, A. Chekhtman, A. W.

297

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Chen, C. C. Cheung, J. Chiang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus, J. Cohen-Tanugi,
J. Conrad, S. Cutini, A. de Angelis, M. E. DeCesar, A. De Luca, F. de
Palma, C. D. Dermer, E. d. C. e. Silva, P. S. Drell, A. Drlica-Wagner,
R. Dubois, T. Enoto, C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fegan, E. C. Ferrara, W. B.
Focke, P. Fortin, Y. Fukazawa, S. Funk, P. Fusco, F. Gargano, D. Gas-
parrini, N. Gehrels, S. Germani, N. Giglietto, F. Giordano, M. Giro-
letti, T. Glanzman, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier, M.-H. Grondin, J. E.
Grove, L. Guillemot, S. Guiriec, M. Gustafsson, D. Hadasch, Y. Han-
abata, A. K. Harding, M. Hayashida, E. Hays, S. E. Healey, A. B. Hill,
D. Horan, X. Hou, G. J´ohannesson, A. S. Johnson, T. J. Johnson, T. Ka-
mae, H. Katagiri, J. Kataoka, M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. Kuss, J. Lande,
L. Latronico, S.-H. Lee, M. Lemoine-Goumard, F. Longo, F. Loparco,
B. Lott, M. N. Lovellette, P. Lubrano, G. M. Madejski, M. N. Mazziotta,
J. E. McEnery, J. Mehault, P. F. Michelson, R. P. Mignani, W. Mitthum-
siri, T. Mizuno, C. Monte, M. E. Monzani, A. Morselli, I. V. Moskalenko,
S. Murgia, T. Nakamori, M. Naumann-Godo, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris,
E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi, A. Okumura, N. Omodei, E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes,
M. Ozaki, D. Paneque, J. H. Panetta, D. Parent, V. Pelassa, M. Pesce-
Rollins, M. Pierbattista, F. Piron, G. Pivato, T. A. Porter, S. Rain`o,
R. Rando, P. S. Ray, M. Razzano, A. Reimer, O. Reimer, T. Reposeur,
R. W. Romani, H. F.-W. Sadrozinski, D. Salvetti, P. M. Saz Parkin-
son, T. L. Schalk, C. Sgr`o, M. S. Shaw, E. J. Siskind, P. D. Smith,
G. Spandre, P. Spinelli, D. J. Suson, H. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, J. G.
Thayer, J. B. Thayer, D. J. Thompson, L. Tibaldo, O. Tibolla, D. F.
Torres, G. Tosti, A. Tramacere, E. Troja, T. L. Usher, J. Vandenbroucke,
V. Vasileiou, G. Vianello, N. Vilchez, V. Vitale, A. P. Waite, E. Wallace,
P. Wang, B. L. Winer, M. T. Wolﬀ, D. L. Wood, K. S. Wood, Z. Yang,
and S. Zimmer. A Statistical Approach to Recognizing Source Classes
for Unassociated Sources in the First Fermi-LAT Catalog. ApJ, 753:83,
July 2012.

[17] F. Aharonian, A. G. Akhperjanian, A. R. Bazer-Bachi, M. Beilicke,
W. Benbow, D. Berge, K. Bernl¨ohr, C. Boisson, O. Bolz, V. Borrel,
I. Braun, A. M. Brown, R. B¨uhler, I. B¨usching, S. Carrigan, P. M.
Chadwick, L.-M. Chounet, R. Cornils, L. Costamante, B. Degrange,
H. J. Dickinson, A. Djannati-Ata¨ı, L. O’C. Drury, G. Dubus, K. Egberts,
D. Emmanoulopoulos, P. Espigat, F. Feinstein, E. Ferrero, A. Fiasson,
G. Fontaine, S. Funk, S. Funk, M. F¨ußling, Y. A. Gallant, B. Giebels,
J. F. Glicenstein, P. Goret, C. Hadjichristidis, D. Hauser, M. Hauser,
G. Heinzelmann, G. Henri, G. Hermann, J. A. Hinton, A. Hoﬀmann,
W. Hofmann, M. Holleran, D. Horns, A. Jacholkowska, O. C. de Jager,
E. Kendziorra, B. Kh´eliﬁ, N. Komin, A. Konopelko, K. Kosack, I. J.

298

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Latham, R. Le Gallou, A. Lemi`ere, M. Lemoine-Goumard, T. Lohse,
J. M. Martin, O. Martineau-Huynh, A. Marcowith, C. Masterson,
G. Maurin, T. J. L. McComb, E. Moulin, M. de Naurois, D. Ned-
bal, S. J. Nolan, A. Noutsos, K. J. Orford, J. L. Osborne, M. Ouchrif,
M. Panter, G. Pelletier, S. Pita, G. P¨uhlhofer, M. Punch, B. C. Rauben-
heimer, M. Raue, S. M. Rayner, A. Reimer, O. Reimer, J. Ripken,
L. Rob, L. Rolland, G. Rowell, V. Sahakian, A. Santangelo, L. Saug´e,
S. Schlenker, R. Schlickeiser, R. Schr¨oder, U. Schwanke, S. Schwarzburg,
A. Shalchi, H. Sol, D. Spangler, F. Spanier, R. Steenkamp, C. Stegmann,
G. Superina, J.-P. Tavernet, R. Terrier, M. Tluczykont, C. van Eldik,
G. Vasileiadis, C. Venter, P. Vincent, H. J. V¨olk, S. J. Wagner, and
M. Ward. 3.9 day orbital modulation in the TeV γ-ray ﬂux and spec-
trum from the X-ray binary LS 5039. A&A, 460:743–749, December
2006.

[18] J. Albert, E. Aliu, H. Anderhub, P. Antoranz, A. Armada, M. Asen-
sio, C. Baixeras, J. A. Barrio, M. Bartelt, H. Bartko, D. Bastieri, S. R.
Bavikadi, W. Bednarek, K. Berger, C. Bigongiari, A. Biland, E. Bisesi,
R. K. Bock, P. Bordas, V. Bosch-Ramon, T. Bretz, I. Britvitch, M. Ca-
mara, E. Carmona, A. Chilingarian, S. Ciprini, J. A. Coarasa, S. Com-
michau, J. L. Contreras, J. Cortina, V. Curtef, V. Danielyan, F. Dazzi,
A. De Angelis, R. de los Reyes, B. De Lotto, E. Domingo-Santamar´ıa,
D. Dorner, M. Doro, M. Errando, M. Fagiolini, D. Ferenc, E. Fern´andez,
R. Firpo, J. Flix, M. V. Fonseca, L. Font, M. Fuchs, N. Galante, M. Gar-
czarczyk, M. Gaug, M. Giller, F. Goebel, D. Hakobyan, M. Hayashida,
T. Hengstebeck, D. H¨ohne, J. Hose, C. C. Hsu, P. G. Isar, P. Jacon,
O. Kalekin, R. Kosyra, D. Kranich, M. Laatiaoui, A. Laille, T. Lenisa,
P. Liebing, E. Lindfors, S. Lombardi, F. Longo, J. L´opez, M. L´opez,
E. Lorenz, F. Lucarelli, P. Majumdar, G. Maneva, K. Mannheim,
O. Mansutti, M. Mariotti, M. Mart´ınez, K. Mase, D. Mazin, C. Merck,
M. Meucci, M. Meyer, J. M. Miranda, R. Mirzoyan, S. Mizobuchi,
A. Moralejo, K. Nilsson, E. O˜na-Wilhelmi, R. Ordu˜na, N. Otte, I. Oya,
D. Paneque, R. Paoletti, J. M. Paredes, M. Pasanen, D. Pascoli, F. Pauss,
N. Pavel, R. Pegna, M. Persic, L. Peruzzo, A. Piccioli, M. Poller, G. Poo-
ley, E. Prandini, A. Raymers, W. Rhode, M. Rib´o, J. Rico, B. Riegel,
M. Rissi, A. Robert, G. E. Romero, S. R¨ugamer, A. Saggion, A. S´anchez,
P. Sartori, V. Scalzotto, V. Scapin, R. Schmitt, T. Schweizer, M. Shay-
duk, K. Shinozaki, S. N. Shore, N. Sidro, A. Sillanp¨a¨a, D. Sobczyn-
ska, A. Stamerra, L. S. Stark, L. Takalo, P. Temnikov, D. Tescaro,
M. Teshima, N. Tonello, A. Torres, D. F. Torres, N. Turini, H. Vankov,
V. Vitale, R. M. Wagner, T. Wibig, W. Wittek, R. Zanin, and J. Zapa-
tero. Variable Very-High-Energy Gamma-Ray Emission from the Micro-

299

BIBLIOGRAPHY

quasar LS I +61 303. Science, 312:1771–1773, June 2006.

[19] H. An, F. Dufour, V. M. Kaspi, and F. A. Harrison. Swift observations

of 1FGL J1018.6-5856. ArXiv e-prints, August 2013.

[20] C. M. Andreazza and J. W. S. Vilas-Boas. Star counts in southern dark

clouds: Corona Australis and Lupus. A&AS, 116:21–30, March 1996.

[21] K. A. Arnaud. XSPEC: The First Ten Years.

In G. H. Jacoby and
J. Barnes, editors, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems
V, volume 101 of Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series,
page 17, 1996.

[22] W. B. Atwood, A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, W. Althouse, B. Anderson,
M. Axelsson, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, D. L. Band, G. Barbiellini, and et al.
The Large Area Telescope on the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope
Mission. ApJ, 697:1071–1102, June 2009.

[23] T. Auld, M. Bridges, M. P. Hobson, and S. F. Gull. Fast cosmologi-
cal parameter estimation using neural networks. MNRAS, 376:L11–L15,
March 2007.

[24] C. Baccigalupi, L. Bedini, C. Burigana, G. De Zotti, A. Farusi, D. Maino,
M. Maris, F. Perrotta, E. Salerno, L. Toﬀolatti, and A. Tonazzini. Neural
networks and the separation of cosmic microwave background and astro-
physical signals in sky maps. MNRAS, 318:769–780, November 2000.

[25] C. A. L. Bailer-Jones, R. Gupta, and H. T. Singh. An introduction to
artiﬁcial neural networks. Proc. of the Workshop on Automated Data
Analysis in Astronomy, IUCAA, Pune, India, page 2000, October 2001.

[26] R. Bandiera. On the X-ray feature associated with the Guitar nebula.

A&A, 490:L3–L6, October 2008.

[27] W. Becker, T. Prinz, P. F. Winkler, and R. Petre. The Proper Motion of
the Central Compact Object RX J0822-4300 in the Supernova Remnant
Puppis A. ApJ, 755:141, August 2012.

[28] E. Bertin and S. Arnouts. SExtractor: Software for source extraction.

A&AS, 117:393–404, June 1996.

[29] D. P. Bertsekas. Non Linear Programming. Belmont,MA: Athena Sci-

entiﬁc, pages ISBN 1–886529–14–0, 1995.

300

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[30] A. J. Bird, A. Bazzano, L. Bassani, F. Capitanio, M. Fiocchi, A. B.
Hill, A. Malizia, V. A. McBride, S. Scaringi, V. Sguera, J. B. Stephen,
P. Ubertini, A. J. Dean, F. Lebrun, R. Terrier, M. Renaud, F. Mattana,
D. G¨otz, J. Rodriguez, G. Belanger, R. Walter, and C. Winkler. The
Fourth IBIS/ISGRI Soft Gamma-ray Survey Catalog. ApJS, 186:1–9,
January 2010.

[31] J. Bland-Hawthorn and R. Reynolds. Gas in Galaxies. November 2000.

[32] R. D. Blandford and M. J. Rees. Some comments on radiation mech-
In A. M. Wolfe, editor, BL Lac Objects, pages

anisms in Lacertids.
328–341, 1978.

[33] D. C.-J. Bock, M. I. Large, and E. M. Sadler. SUMSS: A Wide-Field
Radio Imaging Survey of the Southern Sky. I. Science Goals, Survey De-
sign, and Instrumentation. Astronomical Journal, 117:1578–1593, March
1999.

[34] K. J. Borkowski, W. J. Lyerly, and S. P. Reynolds. Supernova Remnants
in the Sedov Expansion Phase: Thermal X-Ray Emission. ApJ, 548:820–
835, February 2001.

[35] R. Buccheri, M. Morini, and B. Sacco. On the nature of the galactic 2CG
gamma-ray sources. Royal Society of London Philosophical Transactions
Series A, 301:495–504, June 1981.

[36] N. Bucciantini. Pulsar bow-shock nebulae. II. Hydrodynamical simula-

tion. A&A, 387:1066–1073, June 2002.

[37] N. Bucciantini, L. del Zanna, E. Amato, and D. Volpi. Polarization in
the inner region of pulsar wind nebulae. A&A, 443:519–524, November
2005.

[38] D. N. Burrows, J. E. Hill, J. A. Nousek, J. A. Kennea, A. Wells, J. P.
Osborne, A. F. Abbey, A. Beardmore, K. Mukerjee, A. D. T. Short,
G. Chincarini, S. Campana, O. Citterio, A. Moretti, C. Pagani, G. Tagli-
aferri, P. Giommi, M. Capalbi, F. Tamburelli, L. Angelini, G. Cusumano,
H. W. Br¨auninger, W. Burkert, and G. D. Hartner. The Swift X-Ray
Telescope. Space Science Reviews, 120:165–195, October 2005.

[39] F. Camilo, M. Kerr, P. S. Ray, S. M. Ransom, S. Johnston, R. W.
Romani, D. Parent, M. E. DeCesar, A. K. Harding, D. Donato, P. M.
Saz Parkinson, E. C. Ferrara, P. C. C. Freire, L. Guillemot, M. Keith,
M. Kramer, and K. S. Wood. PSR J2030+3641: Radio Discovery and

301

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gamma-Ray Study of a Middle-aged Pulsar in the Now Identiﬁed Fermi-
LAT Source 1FGL J2030.0+3641. ApJ, 746:39, February 2012.

[40] F. Camilo, D. R. Lorimer, N. D. R. Bhat, E. V. Gotthelf, J. P. Halpern,
Q. D. Wang, F. J. Lu, and N. Mirabal. Discovery of a 136 Millisec-
ond Radio and X-Ray Pulsar in Supernova Remnant G54.1+0.3. ApJL,
574:L71–L74, July 2002.

[41] F. Camilo, R. N. Manchester, A. G. Lyne, B. M. Gaensler, A. Possenti,
N. D’Amico, I. H. Stairs, A. J. Faulkner, M. Kramer, D. R. Lorimer,
M. A. McLaughlin, and G. Hobbs. The Very Young Radio Pulsar J1357-
6429. ApJL, 611:L25–L28, August 2004.

[42] F. Camilo, I. H. Stairs, D. R. Lorimer, D. C. Backer, S. M. Ransom,
B. Klein, R. Wielebinski, M. Kramer, M. A. McLaughlin, Z. Arzouma-
nian, and P. M¨uller. Discovery of Radio Pulsations from the X-Ray
Pulsar J0205+6449 in Supernova Remnant 3C 58 with the Green Bank
Telescope. ApJL, 571:L41–L44, May 2002.

[43] R. Campana, E. Massaro, D. Gasparrini, S. Cutini, and A. Tramacere. A
Minimal Spanning Tree algorithm for source detection in γ-ray images.
MNRAS, 383:1166–1174, January 2008.

[44] P. A. Caraveo, G. F. Bignami, and J. E. Tr¨umper. Radio-silent isolated
neutron stars as a new astronomical reality. A&A Rev., 7:209–216, 1996.

[45] R. Carballo, J. I. Gonz´alez-Serrano, C. R. Benn, and F. Jim´enez-Luj´an.
Use of neural networks for the identiﬁcation of new z ≥ 3.6 QSOs from
FIRST-SDSS DR5. MNRAS, 391:369–382, November 2008.

[46] J. A. Cardelli, G. C. Clayton, and J. S. Mathis. The relationship between
infrared, optical, and ultraviolet extinction. ApJ, 345:245–256, October
1989.

[47] W. Cash. Parameter estimation in astronomy through application of the

likelihood ratio. ApJ, 228:939–947, March 1979.

[48] D. J. Champion, M. A. McLaughlin, and D. R. Lorimer. A survey for
pulsars in EGRET error boxes. MNRAS, 364:1011–1014, December 2005.

[49] A. M. Chandler, D. T. Koh, R. C. Lamb, D. J. Macomb, J. R. Mattox,
T. A. Prince, and P. S. Ray. A Search for Radio-quiet Gamma-Ray
Pulsars. ApJ, 556:59–69, July 2001.

302

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[50] C. Chang, G. G. Pavlov, O. Kargaltsev, and Y. A. Shibanov. The Young
Pulsar J1357-6429 and Its Pulsar Wind Nebula. ArXiv e-prints, July
2011.

[51] S. Chatterjee and J. M. Cordes. Bow Shocks from Neutron Stars: Scaling
Laws and Hubble Space Telescope Observations of the Guitar Nebula.
ApJ, 575:407–418, August 2002.

[52] Y. Chauvin, B. Almeida, and C. J. Wellekens. Generalization perfor-
mance of overtrained backpropagation networks. Neural Networks - Proc.
EURASIP Wkshp, pages 46–55, 1990.

[53] M. Chieregato, S. Campana, A. Treves, A. Moretti, R. P. Mignani, and
G. Tagliaferri. Blank ﬁeld sources in the ROSAT HRI Brera multiscale
wavelet catalog. A&A, 444:69–77, December 2005.

[54] S. Ciprini, G. Tosti, F. Marcucci, C. Cecchi, G. Discepoli, E. Bonamente,
S. Germani, D. Impiombato, P. Lubrano, and M. Pepe. 1D, 2D, 3D
wavelet methods for gamma-ray source analysis. In S. Ritz, P. Michelson,
and C. A. Meegan, editors, The First GLAST Symposium, volume 921
of American Institute of Physics Conference Series, pages 546–547, July
2007.

[55] I. Cognard, L. Guillemot, T. J. Johnson, D. A. Smith, C. Venter, A. K.
Harding, M. T. Wolﬀ, C. C. Cheung, D. Donato, A. A. Abdo, J. Ballet,
F. Camilo, G. Desvignes, D. Dumora, E. C. Ferrara, P. C. C. Freire, J. E.
Grove, S. Johnston, M. Keith, M. Kramer, A. G. Lyne, P. F. Michelson,
D. Parent, S. M. Ransom, P. S. Ray, R. W. Romani, P. M. Saz Parkinson,
B. W. Stappers, G. Theureau, D. J. Thompson, P. Weltevrede, and K. S.
Wood. Discovery of Two Millisecond Pulsars in Fermi Sources with the
Nan¸cay Radio Telescope. ApJ, 732:47, May 2011.

[56] F. Comer´on. The Lupus Clouds, page 295. December 2008.

[57] J. J. Condon, W. D. Cotton, E. W. Greisen, Q. F. Yin, R. A. Perley, G. B.
Taylor, and J. J. Broderick. The NRAO VLA Sky Survey. Astronomical
Journal, 115:1693–1716, May 1998.

[58] R. H. D. Corbet, C. C. Cheung, M. Kerr, R. Dubois, D. Donato, G. A.
Caliandro, M. J. Coe, P. G. Edwards, M. D. Filipovic, J. L. Payne,
and J. Stevens. 1FGL J1018.6-5856: a New Gamma-ray Binary. The
Astronomer’s Telegram, 3221:1, March 2011.

303

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[59] J. M. Cordes, R. W. Romani, and S. C. Lundgren. The Guitar nebula
- A bow shock from a slow-spin, high-velocity neutron star. Nature,
362:133–135, March 1993.

[60] F. Crawford, M. S. E. Roberts, J. W. T. Hessels, S. M. Ransom, M. Liv-
ingstone, C. R. Tam, and V. M. Kaspi. A Survey of 56 Midlatitude
EGRET Error Boxes for Radio Pulsars. ApJ, 652:1499–1507, December
2006.

[61] G. Cusumano, V. La Parola, A. Segreto, C. Ferrigno, A. Maselli, B. Sbar-
ufatti, P. Romano, G. Chincarini, P. Giommi, N. Masetti, A. Moretti,
P. Parisi, and G. Tagliaferri. The Palermo Swift-BAT hard X-ray cat-
alogue. III. Results after 54 months of sky survey. A&A, 524:A64, De-
cember 2010.

[62] R. M. Cutri, E. L. Wright, T. Conrow, J. Bauer, D. Benford, H. Bran-
denburg, J. Dailey, P. R. M. Eisenhardt, T. Evans, S. Fajardo-Acosta,
J. Fowler, C. Gelino, C. Grillmair, M. Harbut, D. Hoﬀman, T. Jarrett,
J. D. Kirkpatrick, D. Leisawitz, W. Liu, A. Mainzer, K. Marsh, F. Masci,
H. McCallon, D. Padgett, M. E. Ressler, D. Royer, M. F. Skrutskie, S. A.
Stanford, P. L. Wyatt, D. Tholen, C. W. Tsai, S. Wachter, S. L. Whee-
lock, L. Yan, R. Alles, R. Beck, T. Grav, J. Masiero, B. McCollum,
P. McGehee, M. Papin, and M. Wittman. Explanatory Supplement to
the WISE All-Sky Data Release Products. Technical report, March 2012.

[63] F. Damiani, A. Maggio, G. Micela, and S. Sciortino. A Method Based on
Wavelet Transforms for Source Detection in Photon-counting Detector
Images. II. Application to ROSAT PSPC Images. ApJ, 483:370, July
1997.

[64] J. K. Daugherty and A. K. Harding. Gamma-Ray Pulsars: Emission

from Extended Polar CAP Cascades. ApJ, 458:278, February 1996.

[65] O. C. de Jager and A. Djannati-Ata¨ı. Implications of HESS Observations
of Pulsar Wind Nebulae. In W. Becker, editor, Astrophysics and Space
Science Library, volume 357 of Astrophysics and Space Science Library,
page 451, 2009.

[66] O. C. de Jager and A. K. Harding. The expected high-energy to ultra-
high-energy gamma-ray spectrum of the Crab Nebula. ApJ, 396:161–172,
September 1992.

[67] A. de Luca. Central Compact Objects in Supernova Remnants.

In
C. Bassa, Z. Wang, A. Cumming, and V. M. Kaspi, editors, 40 Years

304

BIBLIOGRAPHY

of Pulsars: Millisecond Pulsars, Magnetars and More, volume 983 of
American Institute of Physics Conference Series, pages 311–319, Febru-
ary 2008.

[68] A. de Luca, P. A. Caraveo, P. Esposito, and K. Hurley. Chandra Astrom-
etry Sets a Tight Upper Limit to the Proper Motion of SGR 1900+14.
ApJ, 692:158–161, February 2009.

[69] A. De Luca, M. Marelli, R. P. Mignani, P. A. Caraveo, W. Hummel,
S. Collins, A. Shearer, P. M. Saz Parkinson, A. Belﬁore, and G. F. Big-
nami. Discovery of a Faint X-Ray Counterpart and a Parsec-long X-Ray
Tail for the Middle-aged, γ-Ray-only Pulsar PSR J0357+3205. ApJ,
733:104, June 2011.

[70] A. De Luca and S. Molendi. The 2-8 keV cosmic X-ray background spec-

trum as observed with XMM-Newton. A&A, 419:837–848, June 2004.

[71] J. Denker, D. Schwartz, B. Wittner, S. Solla, R. Howard, L. Jackel, and
J. Hopﬁeld. Large automatic learning, rule extraction, and generaliza-
tion. Complex Syst., 1:877–922, 1987.

[72] C. D. Dermer, R. Schlickeiser, and A. Mastichiadis. High-energy gamma
radiation from extragalactic radio sources. A&A, 256:L27–L30, March
1992.

[73] J. M. Dickey and F. J. Lockman. H I in the Galaxy. Annu. Rev. Astro.

Astrophys., 28:215–261, 1990.

[74] S. Digel and J. D. Myers. GLAST: Exploring Nature’s Highest En-
ergy Processes with the Gamma-ray Large Area Space Telescope. NASA
STI/Recon Technical Report N, 1:70358, February 2001.

[75] R. P. Eatough, N. Molkenthin, M. Kramer, A. Noutsos, M. J. Keith,
B. W. Stappers, and A. G. Lyne. Selection of radio pulsar candidates
using artiﬁcial neural networks. MNRAS, 407:2443–2450, October 2010.

[76] Fermi LAT Collaboration, A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, M. Ax-
elsson, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, D. Bastieri, B. M. Baughman,
K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji, R. D. Blandford, E. D. Bloom,
E. Bonamente, A. W. Borgland, A. Brez, M. Brigida, P. Bruel, T. H.
Burnett, S. Buson, G. A. Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, P. A. Caraveo,
J. M. Casandjian, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik, S. Chaty, C. C. Cheung, J. Chi-
ang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus, J. Cohen-Tanugi, L. R. Cominsky, J. Con-
rad, S. Corbel, R. Corbet, C. D. Dermer, F. de Palma, S. W. Digel,
E. do Couto e Silva, P. S. Drell, R. Dubois, G. Dubus, D. Dumora,

305

BIBLIOGRAPHY

C. Farnier, C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fegan, W. B. Focke, P. Fortin, M. Frailis,
P. Fusco, F. Gargano, N. Gehrels, S. Germani, G. Giavitto, B. Giebels,
N. Giglietto, F. Giordano, T. Glanzman, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier,
M.-H. Grondin, J. E. Grove, L. Guillemot, S. Guiriec, Y. Hanabata,
A. K. Harding, M. Hayashida, E. Hays, A. B. Hill, L. Hjalmarsdotter,
D. Horan, R. E. Hughes, M. S. Jackson, G. J´ohannesson, A. S. John-
son, T. J. Johnson, W. N. Johnson, T. Kamae, H. Katagiri, N. Kawai,
M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. L. Kocian, E. Koerding, M. Kuss, J. Lande,
J. Latronico, M. Lemoine-Goumard, F. Longo, F. Loparco, B. Lott,
M. N. Lovellette, P. Lubrano, G. M. Madejski, A. Makeev, L. Marc-
hand, M. Marelli, W. Max-Moerbeck, M. N. Mazziotta, N. McColl,
J. E. McEnery, C. Meurer, P. F. Michelson, S. Migliari, W. Mitthumsiri,
T. Mizuno, C. Monte, M. E. Monzani, A. Morselli, I. V. Moskalenko,
S. Murgia, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris, E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi, N. Omodei,
R. A. Ong, J. F. Ormes, D. Paneque, D. Parent, V. Pelassa, M. Pepe,
M. Pesce-Rollins, F. Piron, G. Pooley, T. A. Porter, K. Pottschmidt,
S. Rain`o, R. Rando, P. S. Ray, M. Razzano, N. Rea, A. Readhead,
A. Reimer, O. Reimer, J. L. Richards, L. S. Rochester, J. Rodriguez,
A. Y. Rodriguez, R. W. Romani, F. Ryde, H. F.-W. Sadrozinski,
A. Sander, P. M. Saz Parkinson, C. Sgr`o, E. J. Siskind, D. A. Smith,
P. D. Smith, P. Spinelli, J.-L. Starck, M. Stevenson, M. S. Strickman,
D. J. Suson, H. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, J. B. Thayer, D. J. Thomp-
son, L. Tibaldo, J. A. Tomsick, D. F. Torres, G. Tosti, A. Tramacere,
Y. Uchiyama, T. L. Usher, V. Vasileiou, N. Vilchez, V. Vitale, A. P.
Waite, P. Wang, J. Wilms, B. L. Winer, K. W. Wood, T. Ylinen, and
M. Ziegler. Modulated High-Energy Gamma-Ray Emission from the Mi-
croquasar Cygnus X-3. Science, 326:1512–, December 2009.

[77] C. E. Fichtel, R. C. Hartman, D. A. Kniﬀen, D. J. Thompson, H. Ogel-
man, M. E. Ozel, T. Tumer, and G. F. Bignami. High-energy gamma-ray
results from the second small astronomy satellite. ApJ, 198:163–182, May
1975.

[78] K. Finlator, ˇZ. Ivezi´c, X. Fan, M. A. Strauss, G. R. Knapp, R. H. Lupton,
J. E. Gunn, C. M. Rockosi, J. E. Anderson, I. Csabai, G. S. Hennessy,
R. B. Hindsley, T. A. McKay, R. C. Nichol, D. P. Schneider, J. A. Smith,
D. G. York, and SDSS Collaboration. Optical and Infrared Colors of
Stars Observed by the Two Micron All Sky Survey and the Sloan Digital
Sky Survey. Astronomical Journal, 120:2615–2626, November 2000.

[79] M. A. Forman, R. Ramaty, and E. G. Zweibel. The acceleration and
propagation of solar ﬂare energetic particles. In P. A. Sturrock, T. E.

306

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Holzer, D. M. Mihalas, and R. K. Ulrich, editors, Physics of the Sun.
Volume 2, volume 2, pages 249–289, 1986.

[80] P. C. C. Freire, A. A. Abdo, M. Ajello, A. Allafort, J. Ballet, G. Bar-
biellini, D. Bastieri, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, R. D. Blandford, E. D.
Bloom, E. Bonamente, A. W. Borgland, M. Brigida, P. Bruel, R. Buehler,
S. Buson, G. Caliandro, R. Cameron, F. Camilo, P. A. Caraveo, C. Cec-
chi, ¨O. ¸Celik, E. Charles, A. Chekhtman, C. C. Cheung, J. Chiang,
S. Ciprini, R. Claus, I. Cognard, J. Cohen-Tanugi, L. R. Cominsky,
F. de Palma, C. D. Dermer, E. do Couto e Silva, M. Dormody, P. S.
Drell, R. Dubois, D. Dumora, C. M. Espinoza, C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fe-
gan, E. C. Ferrara, W. B. Focke, P. Fortin, Y. Fukazawa, P. Fusco,
F. Gargano, D. Gasparrini, N. Gehrels, S. Germani, N. Giglietto, F. Gior-
dano, M. Giroletti, T. Glanzman, G. Godfrey, I. A. Grenier, M.-H.
Grondin, J. E. Grove, L. Guillemot, S. Guiriec, D. Hadasch, A. K. Hard-
ing, G. J´ohannesson, A. S. Johnson, T. J. Johnson, S. Johnston, H. Kata-
giri, J. Kataoka, M. Keith, M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. Kramer, M. Kuss,
J. Lande, L. Latronico, S.-H. Lee, M. Lemoine-Goumard, F. Longo,
F. Loparco, M. N. Lovellette, P. Lubrano, A. G. Lyne, R. N. Manchester,
M. Marelli, M. N. Mazziotta, J. E. McEnery, P. F. Michelson, T. Mizuno,
A. A. Moiseev, C. Monte, M. E. Monzani, A. Morselli, I. V. Moskalenko,
S. Murgia, T. Nakamori, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris, E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi,
A. Okumura, N. Omodei, E. Orlando, M. Ozaki, D. Paneque, D. Par-
ent, M. Pesce-Rollins, M. Pierbattista, F. Piron, T. A. Porter, S. Rain`o,
S. M. Ransom, P. S. Ray, A. Reimer, O. Reimer, T. Reposeur, S. Ritz,
R. W. Romani, M. Roth, H. F.-W. Sadrozinski, P. M. S. Saz Parkinson,
C., R. Shannon, E. J. S. Siskind, D. A., P. D. Smith, P. Spinelli, B. W.
Stappers, D. J. Suson, H. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, T. M. Tauris, J. B.
Thayer, G. Theureau, D. J. Thompson, S. E. Thorsett, L. Tibaldo, D. F.
Torres, G. Tosti, E. Troja, J. Vandenbroucke, A. Van Etten, V. Vasileiou,
C. Venter, G. Vianello, N. Vilchez, V. Vitale, A. P. Waite, P. Wang, K. S.
Wood, Z. Yang, M. Ziegler, and S. Zimmer. Fermi Detection of a Lumi-
nous γ-Ray Pulsar in a Globular Cluster. Science, 334:1107–, November
2011.

[81] B. M. Gaensler and P. O. Slane. The Evolution and Structure of Pulsar
Wind Nebulae. Annu. Rev. Astro. Astrophys., 44:17–47, September 2006.

[82] B. M. Gaensler, E. van der Swaluw, F. Camilo, V. M. Kaspi, F. K.
Baganoﬀ, F. Yusef-Zadeh, and R. N. Manchester. The Mouse that
Soared: High-Resolution X-Ray Imaging of the Pulsar-powered Bow
Shock G359.23-0.82. ApJ, 616:383–402, November 2004.

307

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[83] D. Gasparrini, E. Cavazzuti, S. Cutini, C. D. Dermer, B. Lott, and
Fermi-LAT Collaboration. The second Fermi-LAT AGN catalogue. In
F. A. Aharonian, W. Hofmann, and F. M. Rieger, editors, American In-
stitute of Physics Conference Series, volume 1505 of American Institute
of Physics Conference Series, pages 478–481, December 2012.

[84] N. Gehrels, G. Chincarini, P. Giommi, K. O. Mason, J. A. Nousek, A. A.
Wells, N. E. White, S. D. Barthelmy, D. N. Burrows, L. R. Cominsky,
K. C. Hurley, F. E. Marshall, P. M´esz´aros, P. W. A. Roming, L. An-
gelini, L. M. Barbier, T. Belloni, S. Campana, P. A. Caraveo, M. M.
Chester, O. Citterio, T. L. Cline, M. S. Cropper, J. R. Cummings, A. J.
Dean, E. D. Feigelson, E. E. Fenimore, D. A. Frail, A. S. Fruchter, G. P.
Garmire, K. Gendreau, G. Ghisellini, J. Greiner, J. E. Hill, S. D. Huns-
berger, H. A. Krimm, S. R. Kulkarni, P. Kumar, F. Lebrun, N. M. Lloyd-
Ronning, C. B. Markwardt, B. J. Mattson, R. F. Mushotzky, J. P. Nor-
ris, J. Osborne, B. Paczynski, D. M. Palmer, H.-S. Park, A. M. Parsons,
J. Paul, M. J. Rees, C. S. Reynolds, J. E. Rhoads, T. P. Sasseen, B. E.
Schaefer, A. T. Short, A. P. Smale, I. A. Smith, L. Stella, G. Tagliaferri,
T. Takahashi, M. Tashiro, L. K. Townsley, J. Tueller, M. J. L. Turner,
M. Vietri, W. Voges, M. J. Ward, R. Willingale, F. M. Zerbi, and W. W.
Zhang. The Swift Gamma-Ray Burst Mission. ApJ, 611:1005–1020, Au-
gust 2004.

[85] N. Gehrels and P. Michelson. GLAST: the next-generation high energy
gamma-ray astronomy mission. Astroparticle Physics, 11:277–282, June
1999.

[86] H. Gish. A probabilistic approach to the understanding and training of
neural network classiﬁers. Proc. on Acoustic Speech and Signal Process-
ing, page 1361, 1990.

[87] H. Goldberg. Constraint on the photino mass from cosmology. Physical

Review Letters, 50:1419–1422, May 1983.

[88] P. Goldreich and W. H. Julian. Pulsar Electrodynamics. ApJ, 157:869,

August 1969.

[89] K. M. G´orski, E. Hivon, A. J. Banday, B. D. Wandelt, F. K. Hansen,
M. Reinecke, and M. Bartelmann. HEALPix: A Framework for High-
Resolution Discretization and Fast Analysis of Data Distributed on the
Sphere. ApJ, 622:759–771, April 2005.

[90] D. Hadasch. Results from the Binaries LS i +61◦ 303 and LS 5039 after
2.5 Years of Fermi Monitoring. International Journal of Modern Physics
Conference Series, 8:61–66, 2012.

308

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[91] A. Hara, K. Tachihara, A. Mizuno, T. Onishi, A. Kawamura,
A. Obayashi, and Y. Fukui. A Study of Dense Cloud Cores and Star
Formation in Lupus: C18O J = 1-0 Observations with NANTEN. PASJ,
51:895–910, December 1999.

[92] A. K. Harding, P. L. Gonthier, I. A. Grenier, and C. A. Perrot. Pulsar
populations and unidentiﬁed γ-ray sources. Advances in Space Research,
33:571–576, 2004.

[93] R. C. Hartman, D. L. Bertsch, S. D. Bloom, A. W. Chen, P. Deines-
Jones, J. A. Esposito, C. E. Fichtel, D. P. Friedlander, S. D. Hunter,
L. M. McDonald, P. Sreekumar, D. J. Thompson, B. B. Jones, Y. C.
Lin, P. F. Michelson, P. L. Nolan, W. F. Tompkins, G. Kanbach, H. A.
Mayer-Hasselwander, A. M¨ucke, M. Pohl, O. Reimer, D. A. Kniﬀen, E. J.
Schneid, C. von Montigny, R. Mukherjee, and B. L. Dingus. The Third
EGRET Catalog of High-Energy Gamma-Ray Sources. ApJS, 123:79–
202, July 1999.

[94] R. C. Hartman, D. L. Bertsch, C. E. Fichtel, S. D. Hunter, G. Kanbach,
D. A. Kniﬀen, P. W. Kwok, Y. C. Lin, J. R. Mattox, H. A. Mayer-
Hasselwander, P. F. Michelson, C. von Montigny, H. I. Nel, P. L. Nolan,
K. Pinkau, H. Rothermel, E. Schneid, M. Sommer, P. Sreekumar, and
D. J. Thompson. Detection of high-energy gamma radiation from quasar
3C 279 by the EGRET telescope on the Compton Gamma Ray Obser-
vatory. ApJL, 385:L1–L4, January 1992.

[95] S. Hayakawa. Propagation of the Cosmic Radiation through Intersteller

Space. Progress of Theoretical Physics, 8:571–572, November 1952.

[96] S. E. Healey, R. W. Romani, G. B. Taylor, E. M. Sadler, R. Ricci,
T. Murphy, J. S. Ulvestad, and J. N. Winn. All-Sky Survey of Flat-
Spectrum Radio Sources (Healey+, 2007). VizieR Online Data Catalog,
217:10061, April 2009.

[97] H.E.S.S. Collaboration, A. Abramowski, F. Acero, F. Aharonian, A. G.
Akhperjanian, G. Anton, A. Balzer, A. Barnacka, U. Barres de Almeida,
Y. Becherini, J. Becker, B. Behera, K. Bernl¨ohr, A. Bochow, C. Bois-
son, J. Bolmont, P. Bordas, J. Brucker, F. Brun, P. Brun, T. Bulik,
I. B¨usching, S. Carrigan, S. Casanova, M. Cerruti, P. M. Chadwick,
A. Charbonnier, R. C. G. Chaves, A. Cheesebrough, L.-M. Chounet,
A. C. Clapson, G. Coignet, G. Cologna, J. Conrad, M. Dalton, M. K.
Daniel, I. D. Davids, B. Degrange, C. Deil, H. J. Dickinson, A. Djannati-
Ata¨ı, W. Domainko, L. O’C. Drury, F. Dubois, G. Dubus, K. Dut-
son, J. Dyks, M. Dyrda, K. Egberts, P. Eger, P. Espigat, L. Fal-

309

BIBLIOGRAPHY

lon, C. Farnier, S. Fegan, F. Feinstein, M. V. Fernandes, A. Fiasson,
G. Fontaine, A. F¨orster, M. F¨ussling, Y. A. Gallant, H. Gast, L. G´erard,
D. Gerbig, B. Giebels, J. F. Glicenstein, B. Gl¨uck, P. Goret, D. G¨oring,
S. H¨aﬀner, J. D. Hague, D. Hampf, M. Hauser, S. Heinz, G. Heinzel-
mann, G. Henri, G. Hermann, J. A. Hinton, A. Hoﬀmann, W. Hof-
mann, P. Hofverberg, M. Holler, D. Horns, A. Jacholkowska, O. C. de
Jager, C. Jahn, M. Jamrozy, I. Jung, M. A. Kastendieck, K. Katarzyn-
ski, U. Katz, S. Kaufmann, D. Keogh, D. Khangulyan, B. Kh´eliﬁ,
D. Klochkov, W. Kluzniak, T. Kneiske, N. Komin, K. Kosack, R. Kos-
sakowski, H. Laﬀon, G. Lamanna, D. Lennarz, T. Lohse, A. Lopatin, C.-
C. Lu, V. Marandon, A. Marcowith, J. Masbou, D. Maurin, N. Maxted,
M. Mayer, T. J. L. McComb, M. C. Medina, J. M´ehault, R. Moder-
ski, E. Moulin, C. L. Naumann, M. Naumann-Godo, M. de Naurois,
D. Nedbal, D. Nekrassov, N. Nguyen, B. Nicholas, J. Niemiec, S. J.
Nolan, S. Ohm, E. de Ona Wilhelmi, B. Opitz, M. Ostrowski, I. Oya,
M. Panter, M. Paz Arribas, G. Pedaletti, G. Pelletier, P.-O. Petrucci,
S. Pita, G. P¨uhlhofer, M. Punch, A. Quirrenbach, M. Raue, S. M.
Rayner, A. Reimer, O. Reimer, M. Renaud, R. de Los Reyes, F. Rieger,
J. Ripken, L. Rob, S. Rosier-Lees, G. Rowell, B. Rudak, C. B. Rul-
ten, J. Ruppel, V. Sahakian, D. Sanchez, A. Santangelo, R. Schlickeiser,
F. M. Sch¨ock, A. Schulz, U. Schwanke, S. Schwarzburg, S. Schwemmer,
M. Sikora, J. L. Skilton, H. Sol, G. Spengler, L. Stawarz, R. Steenkamp,
C. Stegmann, F. Stinzing, K. Stycz, I. Sushch, A. Szostek, J.-P. Taver-
net, R. Terrier, M. Tluczykont, K. Valerius, C. van Eldik, G. Vasileiadis,
C. Venter, J. P. Vialle, A. Viana, P. Vincent, H. J. V¨olk, F. Volpe,
S. Vorobiov, M. Vorster, S. J. Wagner, M. Ward, R. White, A. Wierz-
cholska, M. Zacharias, A. Zajczyk, A. A. Zdziarski, A. Zech, and H.-S.
Zechlin. Discovery of the source HESS J1356-645 associated with the
young and energetic PSR J1357-6429. A&A, 533:A103, September 2011.

[98] J. W. T. Hessels, M. S. E. Roberts, M. A. McLaughlin, P. S. Ray, P. Ban-
gale, S. M. Ransom, M. Kerr, F. Camilo, and M. E. Decesar. A 350-MHz
GBT Survey of 50 Faint Fermi γ-ray Sources for Radio Millisecond Pul-
sars. In M. Burgay, N. D’Amico, P. Esposito, A. Pellizzoni, and A. Pos-
senti, editors, American Institute of Physics Conference Series, volume
1357 of American Institute of Physics Conference Series, pages 40–43,
August 2011.

[99] A. Hewish, S. J. Bell, J. D. H. Pilkington, P. F. Scott, and R. A. Collins.
Observation of a Rapidly Pulsating Radio Source. Nature, 217:709–713,
February 1968.

310

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[100] J. E. Hill, D. N. Burrows, J. A. Nousek, A. F. Abbey, R. M. Ambrosi,
H. W. Br¨auninger, W. Burkert, S. Campana, C. Cheruvu, G. Cusumano,
M. J. Freyberg, G. D. Hartner, R. Klar, C. Mangels, A. Moretti, K. Mori,
D. C. Morris, A. D. T. Short, G. Tagliaferri, D. J. Watson, P. Wood, and
A. A. Wells. Readout modes and automated operation of the Swift X-ray
Telescope. In K. A. Flanagan and O. H. W. Siegmund, editors, Society of
Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, vol-
ume 5165 of Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE)
Conference Series, pages 217–231, February 2004.

[101] J. Hinton. Gamma-ray Astronomy. ArXiv e-prints, December 2007.

[102] C. M. Hoﬀman, C. Sinnis, P. Fleury, and M. Punch. Gamma-ray as-
tronomy at high energies. Reviews of Modern Physics, 71:897–936, July
1999.

[103] Hosmer, W. D. and Lemeshow, S. Applied Logistic Regression, 2nd ed.

John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 2000.

[104] C. Y. Hui and W. Becker. X-ray emission properties of the old pulsar

PSR B2224+65. A&A, 467:1209–1214, June 2007.

[105] C. Y. Hui, R. H. H. Huang, L. Trepl, N. Tetzlaﬀ, J. Takata, E. M. H.
Wu, and K. S. Cheng. XMM-Newton Observation of PSR B2224+65
and Its Jet. ApJ, 747:74, March 2012.

[106] D. R. Hutchinson and M. L. Wiedenbeck. Reinvestigation of the Ra-

dioactivity of Sb124. Physical Review, 88:699–700, 1952.

[107] R. Jansson and G. R. Farrar. A New Model of the Galactic Magnetic

Field. ApJ, 757:14, September 2012.

[108] S. P. Johnson and Q. D. Wang. The pulsar B2224+65 and its jets: a two

epoch X-ray analysis. MNRAS, 408:1216–1224, October 2010.

[109] G. Kanbach, D. L. Bertsch, C. E. Fichtel, R. C. Hartman, S. D. Hunter,
D. A. Kniﬀen, B. W. Hughlock, A. Favale, R. Hofstadter, and E. B.
Hughes. The project EGRET (Energetic Gamma-Ray Experiment Tele-
scope) on NASA’s Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO). Space Science Re-
views, 49:69–84, 1988.

[110] D. L. Kaplan, S. Chatterjee, C. A. Hales, B. M. Gaensler, and P. O.
Slane. Constraining the Proper Motions of Two Magnetars. Astronomical
Journal, 137:354–366, January 2009.

311

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[111] O. Kargaltsev, Z. Misanovic, G. G. Pavlov, J. A. Wong, and G. P.
Garmire. X-Ray Observations of Parsec-scale Tails behind Two Middle-
Aged Pulsars. ApJ, 684:542–557, September 2008.

[112] O. Kargaltsev and G. G. Pavlov. Pulsar Wind Nebulae in the Chandra
In C. Bassa, Z. Wang, A. Cumming, and V. M. Kaspi, editors,
Era.
40 Years of Pulsars: Millisecond Pulsars, Magnetars and More, volume
983 of American Institute of Physics Conference Series, pages 171–185,
February 2008.

[113] M. J. Keith, S. Johnston, M. Kramer, P. Weltevrede, K. P. Watters,
and B. W. Stappers. A high-frequency search for radio pulsars in three
EGRET error boxes. MNRAS, 389:1881–1884, October 2008.

[114] M. J. Keith, S. Johnston, P. S. Ray, E. C. Ferrara, P. M. Saz Parkinson,
¨O. ¸Celik, A. Belﬁore, D. Donato, C. C. Cheung, A. A. Abdo, F. Camilo,
P. C. C. Freire, L. Guillemot, A. K. Harding, M. Kramer, P. F. Michel-
son, S. M. Ransom, R. W. Romani, D. A. Smith, D. J. Thompson,
P. Weltevrede, and K. S. Wood. Discovery of millisecond pulsars in ra-
dio searches of southern Fermi Large Area Telescope sources. MNRAS,
414:1292–1300, June 2011.

[115] R. W. Klebesadel, I. B. Strong, and R. A. Olson. Observations of
Gamma-Ray Bursts of Cosmic Origin. In Bulletin of the American As-
tronomical Society, volume 5 of Bulletin of the American Astronomical
Society, page 322, June 1973.

[116] D. A. Kniﬀen, R. C. Hartman, D. J. Thompson, and C. E. Fichtel. SAS-2
Observations of Gamma Rays from the Galactic Plane. ApJL, 186:L105,
December 1973.

[117] W. Kraushaar, G. W. Clark, G. Garmire, H. Helmken, P. Higbie, and
M. Agogino. Explorer XI Experiment on Cosmic Gamma Rays. ApJ,
141:845, April 1965.

[118] W. L. Kraushaar, G. W. Clark, G. P. Garmire, R. Borken, P. Higbie,
V. Leong, and T. Thorsos. High-Energy Cosmic Gamma-Ray Observa-
tions from the OSO-3 Satellite. ApJ, 177:341, November 1972.

[119] L. Kuiper, W. Hermsen, F. Verbunt, D. J. Thompson, I. H. Stairs, A. G.
Lyne, M. S. Strickman, and G. Cusumano. The likely detection of
pulsed high-energy gamma -ray emission from millisecond pulsar PSR
J0218+4232. A&A, 359:615–626, July 2000.

312

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[120] S. R. Kulkarni and C. Heiles. Neutral hydrogen and the diﬀuse interstellar

medium, pages 95–153. 1988.

[121] N. La Palombara, R. P. Mignani, E. Hatziminaoglou, M. Schirmer, G. F.
Bignami, and P. Caraveo. XMM-Newton and ESO observations of the
two unidentiﬁed γ-ray sources 3EG J0616-3310 and 3EG J1249-8330.
A&A, 458:245–257, October 2006.

[122] J. Lande, M. Ackermann, A. Allafort, J. Ballet, K. Bechtol, T. H. Bur-
nett, J. Cohen-Tanugi, A. Drlica-Wagner, S. Funk, F. Giordano, M.-H.
Grondin, M. Kerr, and M. Lemoine-Goumard. Search for Spatially Ex-
tended Fermi Large Area Telescope Sources Using Two Years of Data.
ApJ, 756:5, September 2012.

[123] B. M. Lasker, M. G. Lattanzi, B. J. McLean, B. Bucciarelli, R. Drimmel,
J. Garcia, G. Greene, F. Guglielmetti, C. Hanley, G. Hawkins, V. G.
Laidler, C. Loomis, M. Meakes, R. Mignani, R. Morbidelli, J. Morri-
son, R. Pannunzio, A. Rosenberg, M. Sarasso, R. L. Smart, A. Spagna,
C. R. Sturch, A. Volpicelli, R. L. White, D. Wolfe, and A. Zacchei. The
Second-Generation Guide Star Catalog: Description and Properties. As-
tronomical Journal, 136:735–766, August 2008.

[124] M. G. Lattanzi, A. Capetti, and F. D. Macchetto. Accurate optical-to-
radio registration of Seyfert galaxies with HST images. Absolute astrom-
etry of HST images. A&A, 318:997–1002, February 1997.

[125] Y. Le Cun, R. Pfeifer, Z. Schreter, F. Fogelman-Soulie, and L Steels.
Generalization and network design strategies. Connectionism in Per-
spective, pages 143–155, 1989.

[126] Y. C. Lin, D. L. Bertsch, J. Chiang, C. E. Fichtel, R. C. Hartman, S. D.
Hunter, G. Kanbach, D. A. Kniﬀen, P. W. Kwok, J. R. Mattox, H. A.
Mayer-Hasselwander, P. F. Michelson, C. von Montigny, P. L. Nolan,
K. Pinkau, E. Schneid, P. Sreekumar, and D. J. Thompson. Detection of
high-energy gamma-ray emission from the BL Lacertae object Markar-
ian 421 by the EGRET telescope on the Compton Observatory. ApJL,
401:L61–L64, December 1992.

[127] Bishop C. M. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. 1995.

[128] Mitchell T. M. Machine Learning. 1997.

[129] R. N. Manchester, G. B. Hobbs, A. Teoh, and M. Hobbs. The Australia
Telescope National Facility Pulsar Catalogue. Astronomical Journal,
129:1993–2006, April 2005.

313

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[130] N. Mandzhavidze and R. Ramaty. Gamma Rays from Pion Decay: Ev-
idence for Long Term Particle Trapping in Solar Flares. In American
Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts #180, volume 24 of Bulletin of
the American Astronomical Society, page 802, May 1992.

[131] N. Mandzhavidze and R. Ramaty. High-energy gamma-ray emission from
pion decay in a solar ﬂare magnetic loop. ApJ, 389:739–755, April 1992.

[132] K. Mannheim and P. L. Biermann. Gamma-ray ﬂaring of 3C 279 - A
proton-initiated cascade in the jet? A&A, 253:L21–L24, January 1992.

[133] L. Maraschi, G. Ghisellini, and A. Celotti. A jet model for the gamma-ray

emitting blazar 3C 279. ApJL, 397:L5–L9, September 1992.

[134] M. Marelli. The X-ray behaviour of Fermi/LAT pulsars. ArXiv e-prints,

May 2012.

[135] M. Marelli, A. De Luca, and P. A. Caraveo. A Multiwavelength Study
on the High-energy Behavior of the Fermi/LAT Pulsars. ApJ, 733:82,
June 2011.

[136] M. Marelli, A. De Luca, and P. A. Caraveo. A Multiwavelength Study
on the High-energy Behavior of the Fermi/LAT Pulsars. ApJ, 733:82,
June 2011.

[137] M. Marelli, A. De Luca, D. Salvetti, N. Sartore, A. Sartori, P. Caraveo,
F. Pizzolato, P. M. Saz Parkinson, and A. Belﬁore. PSR J0357+3205:
The Tail of the Turtle. ApJ, 765:36, March 2013.

[138] F. Massaro, R. D’Abrusco, G. Tosti, M. Ajello, A. Paggi, and D. Gaspar-
rini. Unidentiﬁed γ-Ray Sources: Hunting γ-Ray Blazars. ApJ, 752:61,
June 2012.

[139] J. R. Mattox, D. L. Bertsch, J. Chiang, B. L. Dingus, S. W. Digel,
J. A. Esposito, J. M. Fierro, R. C. Hartman, S. D. Hunter, G. Kanbach,
D. A. Kniﬀen, Y. C. Lin, D. J. Macomb, H. A. Mayer-Hasselwander,
P. F. Michelson, C. von Montigny, R. Mukherjee, P. L. Nolan, P. V.
Ramanamurthy, E. Schneid, P. Sreekumar, D. J. Thompson, and T. D.
Willis. The Likelihood Analysis of EGRET Data. ApJ, 461:396, April
1996.

[140] J. R. Mattox, J. Schachter, L. Molnar, R. C. Hartman, and A. R. Patnaik.
The Idenﬁcation of EGRET Sources with Flat-Spectrum Radio Sources.
ApJ, 481:95, May 1997.

314

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[141] J. R. Mattox, J. Schachter, L. Molnar, R. C. Hartman, and A. R. Patnaik.
The Idenﬁcation of EGRET Sources with Flat-Spectrum Radio Sources.
ApJ, 481:95, May 1997.

[142] P. A. Mazzali, J. Deng, N. Tominaga, K. Maeda, K. Nomoto, T. Math-
eson, K. S. Kawabata, K. Z. Stanek, and P. M. Garnavich. The Type
Ic Hypernova SN 2003dh/GRB 030329. ApJL, 599:L95–L98, December
2003.

[143] K. E. McGowan, W. T. Vestrand, J. A. Kennea, S. Zane, M. Cropper,
and F. A. C´ordova. Probing the Pulsar Wind Nebula of PSR B0355+54.
ApJ, 647:1300–1308, August 2006.

[144] S. Mereghetti. Recent results on magnetars. ArXiv e-prints, April 2009.

[145] P. M´esz´aros. The ﬁreball shock model of gamma ray bursts. In S. S. Holt
and W. W. Zhang, editors, American Institute of Physics Conference
Series, volume 522 of American Institute of Physics Conference Series,
pages 213–225, June 2000.

[146] P. M´esz´aros. Gamma-Ray Bursts: Accumulating Afterglow Implications,

Progenitor Clues, and Prospects. Science, 291:79–84, January 2001.

[147] R. Mewe, E. H. B. M. Gronenschild, and G. H. J. van den Oord. Cal-
culated X-radiation from optically thin plasmas. V. A&AS, 62:197–254,
November 1985.

[148] N. Mirabal, V. Fr´ıas-Martinez, T. Hassan, and E. Fr´ıas-Martinez. Fermi’s
SIBYL: mining the gamma-ray sky for dark matter subhaloes. MNRAS,
424:L64–L68, July 2012.

[149] D. G. Monet, S. E. Levine, B. Canzian, H. D. Ables, A. R. Bird, C. C.
Dahn, H. H. Guetter, H. C. Harris, A. A. Henden, S. K. Leggett, H. F.
Levison, C. B. Luginbuhl, J. Martini, A. K. B. Monet, J. A. Munn,
J. R. Pier, A. R. Rhodes, B. Riepe, S. Sell, R. C. Stone, F. J. Vrba,
R. L. Walker, G. Westerhout, R. J. Brucato, I. N. Reid, W. Schoening,
M. Hartley, M. A. Read, and S. B. Tritton. The USNO-B Catalog.
Astronomical Journal, 125:984–993, February 2003.

[150] J. E. Moody, S. J. Hanson, and R. P. Lippmann. The Eﬀective number of
parameters: An analysis of generalization and regularization in nonlinear
learning systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
4:847–854, 1992.

315

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[151] A. Moretti, S. Campana, G. Tagliaferri, A. F. Abbey, R. M. Ambrosi,
L. Angelini, A. P. Beardmore, H. W. Br¨auninger, W. Burkert, D. N.
Burrows, M. Capalbi, G. Chincarini, O. Citterio, G. Cusumano, M. J.
Freyberg, P. Giommi, G. D. Hartner, J. E. Hill, K. Mori, D. C. Morris,
K. Mukerjee, J. A. Nousek, J. P. Osborne, A. D. T. Short, F. Tambu-
relli, D. J. Watson, and A. A. Wells. SWIFT XRT point spread func-
tion measured at the Panter end-to-end tests. In K. A. Flanagan and
O. H. W. Siegmund, editors, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, volume 5165 of Society of Photo-
Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, pages 232–
240, February 2004.

[152] P. Morrison. On gamma-ray astronomy. Il Nuovo Cimento, 7:858–865,

1958.

[153] I. V. Moskalenko and A. W. Strong. Diﬀuse γ-ray emission:

lessons
and perspectives.
In T. Bulik, B. Rudak, and G. Madejski, editors,
Astrophysical Sources of High Energy Particles and Radiation, volume
801 of American Institute of Physics Conference Series, pages 57–62,
November 2005.

[154] C. Motch, A. M. Pires, F. Haberl, and A. Schwope. Measuring proper
motions of isolated neutron stars with Chandra. Ap&SS, 308:217–224,
April 2007.

[155] C. Motch, A. M. Pires, F. Haberl, A. Schwope, and V. E. Zavlin. Proper
motions of ROSAT discovered isolated neutron stars measured with
Chandra: First X-ray measurement of the large proper motion of RX
J1308.6+2127/RBS 1223.
In C. Bassa, Z. Wang, A. Cumming, and
V. M. Kaspi, editors, 40 Years of Pulsars: Millisecond Pulsars, Magne-
tars and More, volume 983 of American Institute of Physics Conference
Series, pages 354–356, February 2008.

[156] R. J. Murphy, C. D. Dermer, and R. Ramaty. High-energy processes in

solar ﬂares. ApJS, 63:721–748, March 1987.

[157] T. Murphy, E. M. Sadler, R. D. Ekers, M. Massardi, P. J. Hancock,
E. Mahony, R. Ricci, S. Burke-Spolaor, M. Calabretta, R. Chhetri, G. de
Zotti, P. G. Edwards, J. A. Ekers, C. A. Jackson, M. J. Kesteven,
E. Lindley, K. Newton-McGee, C. Phillips, P. Roberts, R. J. Sault,
L. Staveley-Smith, R. Subrahmanyan, M. A. Walker, and W. E. Wil-
son. The Australia Telescope 20 GHz Survey: the source catalogue.
MNRAS, 402:2403–2423, March 2010.

316

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[158] P. L. Nolan, A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, A. Allafort, E. An-
tolini, W. B. Atwood, M. Axelsson, L. Baldini, J. Ballet, and et al. Fermi
Large Area Telescope Second Source Catalog. ApJS, 199:31, April 2012.

[159] A. Noutsos, A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, J. Ballet, G. Barbi-
ellini, M. G. Baring, D. Bastieri, K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji,
E. Bonamente, A. W. Borgland, J. Bregeon, A. Brez, M. Brigida,
P. Bruel, R. Buehler, G. Busetto, G. A. Caliandro, R. A. Cameron,
F. Camilo, P. A. Caraveo, J. M. Casandjian, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik,
S. Chaty, A. Chekhtman, J. Chiang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus, I. Cognard,
J. Cohen-Tanugi, S. Colafrancesco, S. Cutini, C. D. Dermer, F. de
Palma, P. S. Drell, D. Dumora, C. M. Ea, C. Favuzzi, E. C. Fer-
rara, W. B. Focke, M. Frailis, P. C. C. Freire, Y. Fukazawa, S. Funk,
P. Fusco, F. Gargano, S. Germani, N. Giglietto, F. Giordano, M. Giro-
letti, G. Godfrey, P. Grandi, I. A. Grenier, J. E. Grove, L. Guillemot,
S. Guiriec, A. K. Harding, R. E. Hughes, M. S. Jackson, G. J´ohannes-
son, A. S. Johnson, T. J. Johnson, W. N. Johnson, S. Johnston, T. Ka-
mae, H. Katagiri, J. Kataoka, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. Kramer, M. Kuss,
J. Lande, S.-H. Lee, F. Longo, F. Loparco, M. N. Lovellette, P. Lu-
brano, A. G. Lyne, A. Makeev, M. Marelli, M. N. Mazziotta, J. E.
McEnery, J. Mehault, P. F. Michelson, T. Mizuno, C. Monte, M. E.
Monzani, A. Morselli, I. V. Moskalenko, S. Murgia, M. Naumann-Godo,
P. L. Nolan, E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi, A. Okumura, N. Omodei, E. Orlando,
J. F. Ormes, J. H. Panetta, D. Parent, V. Pelassa, M. Pepe, M. Persic,
M. Pesce-Rollins, F. Piron, T. A. Porter, S. Rain`o, P. S. Ray, M. Raz-
zano, A. Reimer, O. Reimer, T. Reposeur, R. W. Romani, H. F.-W.
Sadrozinski, A. Sander, P. M. Saz Parkinson, C. Sgr`o, E. J. Siskind,
D. A. Smith, P. D. Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli, B. W. Stappers, M. S.
Strickman, D. J. Suson, H. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, G. Theureau, D. J.
Thompson, S. E. Thorsett, O. Tibolla, D. F. Torres, A. Tramacere, T. L.
Usher, J. Vandenbroucke, G. Vianello, N. Vilchez, M. Villata, V. Vitale,
A. von Kienlin, A. P. Waite, P. Wang, K. Watters, P. Weltevrede, B. L.
Winer, K. S. Wood, and M. Ziegler. Radio and γ-ray Constraints on the
Emission Geometry and Birthplace of PSR J2043+2740. ApJ, 728:77,
February 2011.

[160] S. C. Odewahn, E. B. Stockwell, R. L. Pennington, R. M. Humphreys,
and W. A. Zumach. Automated star/galaxy discrimination with neural
networks. Astronomical Journal, 103:318–331, January 1992.

[161] W. S. Paciesas, C. A. Meegan, G. N. Pendleton, M. S. Briggs, C. Kouve-
liotou, T. M. Koshut, J. P. Lestrade, M. L. McCollough, J. J. Brainerd,
J. Hakkila, W. Henze, R. D. Preece, V. Connaughton, R. M. Kippen,

317

BIBLIOGRAPHY

R. S. Mallozzi, G. J. Fishman, G. A. Richardson, and M. Sahi. The
Fourth BATSE Gamma-Ray Burst Catalog (Revised). ApJS, 122:465–
495, June 1999.

[162] T. Padmanabhan. Theoretical Astrophysics - vol 1. 2000.

[163] P. Padovani and P. Giommi. The connection between x-ray- and radio-

selected BL Lacertae objects. ApJ, 444:567–581, May 1995.

[164] G. G. Pavlov, M. A. Teter, O. Kargaltsev, and D. Sanwal. The Variable

Jet of the Vela Pulsar. ApJ, 591:1157–1171, July 2003.

[165] T. Piran. Gamma-ray bursts and the ﬁreball model. Phys. Rep., 314:575–

667, June 1999.

[166] C. Pittori, F. Verrecchia, A. W. Chen, A. Bulgarelli, A. Pellizzoni,
A. Giuliani, S. Vercellone, F. Longo, M. Tavani, P. Giommi, G. Bar-
biellini, M. Trifoglio, F. Gianotti, A. Argan, A. Antonelli, F. Boﬀelli,
P. Caraveo, P. W. Cattaneo, V. Cocco, S. Colafrancesco, T. Con-
tessi, E. Costa, S. Cutini, F. D’Ammando, E. Del Monte, G. de Paris,
G. Di Cocco, G. di Persio, I. Donnarumma, Y. Evangelista, G. Fanari,
M. Feroci, A. Ferrari, M. Fiorini, F. Fornari, F. Fuschino, T. Froys-
land, M. Frutti, M. Galli, D. Gasparrini, C. Labanti, I. Lapshov,
F. Lazzarotto, F. Liello, P. Lipari, E. Mattaini, M. Marisaldi, M. Mas-
tropietro, A. Mauri, F. Mauri, S. Mereghetti, E. Morelli, E. Moretti,
A. Morselli, L. Pacciani, F. Perotti, G. Piano, P. Picozza, M. Pilia,
C. Pontoni, G. Porrovecchio, B. Preger, M. Prest, R. Primavera, G. Pu-
cella, M. Rapisarda, A. Rappoldi, E. Rossi, A. Rubini, S. Sabatini,
P. Santolamazza, E. Scalise, P. Soﬃtta, S. Stellato, E. Striani, F. Tambu-
relli, A. Traci, A. Trois, E. Vallazza, V. Vittorini, A. Zambra, D. Zanello,
and L. Salotti. First AGILE catalog of high-conﬁdence gamma-ray
sources. A&A, 506:1563–1574, November 2009.

[167] H. J. Pletsch, L. Guillemot, B. Allen, M. Kramer, C. Aulbert,
H. Fehrmann, P. S. Ray, E. D. Barr, A. Belﬁore, F. Camilo, P. A. Car-
aveo, ¨O. ¸Celik, D. J. Champion, M. Dormody, R. P. Eatough, E. C.
Ferrara, P. C. C. Freire, J. W. T. Hessels, M. Keith, M. Kerr, A. de
Luca, A. G. Lyne, M. Marelli, M. A. McLaughlin, D. Parent, S. M.
Ransom, M. Razzano, W. Reich, P. M. Saz Parkinson, B. W. Stappers,
and M. T. Wolﬀ. Discovery of Nine Gamma-Ray Pulsars in Fermi Large
Area Telescope Data Using a New Blind Search Method. ApJ, 744:105,
January 2012.

318

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[168] P. Predehl and J. H. M. M. Schmitt. X-raying the interstellar medium:
ROSAT observations of dust scattering halos. A&A, 293:889–905, Jan-
uary 1995.

[169] R. Protassov, D. A. van Dyk, A. Connors, V. L. Kashyap, and A. Siemigi-
nowska. Statistics, Handle with Care: Detecting Multiple Model Com-
ponents with the Likelihood Ratio Test. ApJ, 571:545–559, May 2002.

[170] R. Ramaty and R. J. Murphy. Nuclear processes and accelerated particles

in solar ﬂares. Space Science Reviews, 45:213–268, 1987.

[171] R. Rando and for the Fermi LAT Collaboration. Post-launch perfor-

mance of the Fermi Large Area Telescope. ArXiv e-prints, July 2009.

[172] S. M. Ransom, P. S. Ray, F. Camilo, M. S. E. Roberts, ¨O. ¸Celik, M. T.
Wolﬀ, C. C. Cheung, M. Kerr, T. Pennucci, M. E. DeCesar, I. Cog-
nard, A. G. Lyne, B. W. Stappers, P. C. C. Freire, J. E. Grove, A. A.
Abdo, G. Desvignes, D. Donato, E. C. Ferrara, N. Gehrels, L. Guille-
mot, C. Gwon, A. K. Harding, S. Johnston, M. Keith, M. Kramer,
P. F. Michelson, D. Parent, P. M. Saz Parkinson, R. W. Romani, D. A.
Smith, G. Theureau, D. J. Thompson, P. Weltevrede, K. S. Wood, and
M. Ziegler. Three Millisecond Pulsars in Fermi LAT Unassociated Bright
Sources. ApJL, 727:L16, January 2011.

[173] Rao, C. R. Linear Statistical Inference and Its Application, 2nd ed. John

Wiley, Inc., New York, 1973.

[174] P. S. Ray, M. Kerr, D. Parent, A. A. Abdo, L. Guillemot, S. M. Ran-
som, N. Rea, M. T. Wolﬀ, A. Makeev, M. S. E. Roberts, F. Camilo,
M. Dormody, P. C. C. Freire, J. E. Grove, C. Gwon, A. K. Harding,
S. Johnston, M. Keith, M. Kramer, P. F. Michelson, R. W. Romani,
P. M. Saz Parkinson, D. J. Thompson, P. Weltevrede, K. S. Wood, and
M. Ziegler. Precise γ-ray Timing and Radio Observations of 17 Fermi
γ-ray Pulsars. ApJS, 194:17, June 2011.

[175] R. Reed. Pruning algorithms - A review. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks,

4:740–747, 1993.

[176] M. P. Richard and R. P. Lippman. Neural Network Classiﬁers Estimate

Bayesian a posteriori Probabilities. Neural Computation, 3:461, 1991.

[177] R. W. Romani. Gamma-Ray Pulsars: Radiation Processes in the Outer

Magnetosphere. ApJ, 470:469, October 1996.

319

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[178] R. W. Romani. 2FGL J1311.7-3429 Joins the Black Widow Club. ApJL,

754:L25, August 2012.

[179] J. M. Ryan and M. A. Lee. On the transport and acceleration of solar

ﬂare particles in a coronal loop. ApJ, 368:316–324, February 1991.

[180] W. S. Sarle. Neural Network Implementation in SAS Software, SAS
Institute Inc. Proc. of Nineteenth Annual SAS User Group International
Conf., Cary, NC: SAS Institute, page 1551, 1994.

[181] W. S. Sarle. Neural Networks and Statistical Models. Proc. of Nineteenth
Annual SAS User Group International Conf., Cary, NC: SAS Institute,
page 1538, 1994.

[182] W. S. Sarle. Stopped training and other remedies for over-ﬁtting. Proc.
of the 27th Symp. on the interface of computing science and statistics,
page 352, 1995.

[183] P. M. Saz Parkinson, M. Dormody, M. Ziegler, P. S. Ray, A. A. Abdo,
J. Ballet, M. G. Baring, A. Belﬁore, T. H. Burnett, G. A. Caliandro,
F. Camilo, P. A. Caraveo, A. de Luca, E. C. Ferrara, P. C. C. Freire,
J. E. Grove, C. Gwon, A. K. Harding, R. P. Johnson, T. J. Johnson,
S. Johnston, M. Keith, M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, A. Makeev, M. Marelli,
P. F. Michelson, D. Parent, S. M. Ransom, O. Reimer, R. W. Romani,
D. A. Smith, D. J. Thompson, K. Watters, P. Weltevrede, M. T. Wolﬀ,
and K. S. Wood. Eight γ-ray Pulsars Discovered in Blind Frequency
Searches of Fermi LAT Data. ApJ, 725:571–584, December 2010.

[184] V. Sch¨onfelder. The Universe in Gamma Rays. 2001.

[185] V. Sch¨onfelder. The Universe in Gamma Rays. 2001.

[186] P. Severgnini, R. Della Ceca, V. Braito, P. Saracco, M. Longhetti,
R. Bender, N. Drory, G. Feulner, U. Hopp, F. Mannucci, and C. Maras-
ton. Looking for obscured QSOs in the X-ray emitting ERO population.
A&A, 431:87–95, February 2005.

[187] M. F. Skrutskie, R. M. Cutri, R. Stiening, M. D. Weinberg, S. Schneider,
J. M. Carpenter, C. Beichman, R. Capps, T. Chester, J. Elias, J. Huchra,
J. Liebert, C. Lonsdale, D. G. Monet, S. Price, P. Seitzer, T. Jarrett, J. D.
Kirkpatrick, J. E. Gizis, E. Howard, T. Evans, J. Fowler, L. Fullmer,
R. Hurt, R. Light, E. L. Kopan, K. A. Marsh, H. L. McCallon, R. Tam,
S. Van Dyk, and S. Wheelock. The Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS).
Astronomical Journal, 131:1163–1183, February 2006.

320

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[188] D. A. Smith and Fermi LAT Collaboration. Garden-variety Gamma-
ray Pulsars J0248+6021 and J2240+5832. In D. F. Torres and N. Rea,
editors, High-Energy Emission from Pulsars and their Systems, page 63,
2011.

[189] D. A. Smith, L. Guillemot, F. Camilo, I. Cognard, D. Dumora, C. Es-
pinoza, P. C. C. Freire, E. V. Gotthelf, A. K. Harding, G. B. Hobbs,
S. Johnston, V. M. Kaspi, M. Kramer, M. A. Livingstone, A. G. Lyne,
R. N. Manchester, F. E. Marshall, M. A. McLaughlin, A. Noutsos, S. M.
Ransom, M. S. E. Roberts, R. W. Romani, B. W. Stappers, G. Theureau,
D. J. Thompson, S. E. Thorsett, N. Wang, and P. Weltevrede. Pulsar
timing for the Fermi gamma-ray space telescope. A&A, 492:923–931,
December 2008.

[190] P. Sreekumar, D. L. Bertsch, B. L. Dingus, J. A. Esposito, C. E. Fich-
tel, R. C. Hartman, S. D. Hunter, G. Kanbach, D. A. Kniﬀen, Y. C.
Lin, H. A. Mayer-Hasselwander, P. F. Michelson, C. von Montigny,
A. Muecke, R. Mukherjee, P. L. Nolan, M. Pohl, O. Reimer, E. Schneid,
J. G. Stacy, F. W. Stecker, D. J. Thompson, and T. D. Willis. EGRET
Observations of the Extragalactic Gamma-Ray Emission. ApJ, 494:523,
February 1998.

[191] J.-L. Starck and M. Pierre. Structure detection in low intensity X-ray

images. A&AS, 128:397–407, March 1998.

[192] S. A. Story, P. L. Gonthier, and A. K. Harding. Population Synthesis
of Radio and γ-Ray Millisecond Pulsars from the Galactic Disk. ApJ,
671:713–726, December 2007.

[193] A. W. Strong, I. V. Moskalenko, and O. Reimer. Diﬀuse Galactic Con-
tinuum Gamma Rays: A Model Compatible with EGRET Data and
Cosmic-Ray Measurements. ApJ, 613:962–976, October 2004.

[194] L. Str¨uder, U. Briel, K. Dennerl, R. Hartmann, E. Kendziorra, N. Mei-
dinger, E. Pfeﬀermann, C. Reppin, B. Aschenbach, W. Bornemann,
H. Br¨auninger, W. Burkert, M. Elender, M. Freyberg, F. Haberl,
G. Hartner, F. Heuschmann, H. Hippmann, E. Kastelic, S. Kemmer,
G. Kettenring, W. Kink, N. Krause, S. M¨uller, A. Oppitz, W. Pietsch,
M. Popp, P. Predehl, A. Read, K. H. Stephan, D. St¨otter, J. Tr¨umper,
P. Holl, J. Kemmer, H. Soltau, R. St¨otter, U. Weber, U. Weichert, C. von
Zanthier, D. Carathanassis, G. Lutz, R. H. Richter, P. Solc, H. B¨ottcher,
M. Kuster, R. Staubert, A. Abbey, A. Holland, M. Turner, M. Bal-
asini, G. F. Bignami, N. La Palombara, G. Villa, W. Buttler, F. Gianini,
R. Lain´e, D. Lumb, and P. Dhez. The European Photon Imaging Camera

321

BIBLIOGRAPHY

on XMM-Newton: The pn-CCD camera. A&A, 365:L18–L26, January
2001.

[195] B. N. Swanenburg, K. Bennett, G. F. Bignami, R. Buccheri, P. Caraveo,
W. Hermsen, G. Kanbach, G. G. Lichti, J. L. Masnou, H. A. Mayer-
Hasselwander, J. A. Paul, B. Sacco, L. Scarsi, and R. D. Wills. Second
COS B catalog of high-energy gamma-ray sources. ApJL, 243:L69–L73,
January 1981.

[196] B. N. Swanenburg, W. Hermsen, K. Bennett, G. F. Bignami, P. Caraveo,
G. Kanbach, H. A. Mayer-Hasselwander, J. L. Masnou, J. A. Paul, and
B. Sacco. COS B observation of high-energy gamma radiation from
3C273. Nature, 275:298, September 1978.

[197] M. Tavani, G. Barbiellini, A. Argan, M. Basset, F. Boﬀelli, A. Bulgar-
elli, P. Caraveo, A. Chen, E. Costa, G. De Paris, E. Del Monte, G. Di
Cocco, I. Donnarumma, M. Feroci, M. Fiorini, L. Foggetta, T. Froysland,
M. Frutti, F. Fuschino, M. Galli, F. Gianotti, A. Giuliani, C. Labanti,
I. Lapshov, F. Lazzarotto, F. Liello, P. Lipari, F. Longo, M. Marisaldi,
M. Mastropietro, E. Mattaini, F. Mauri, S. Mereghetti, E. Morelli,
A. Morselli, L. Pacciani, A. Pellizzoni, F. Perotti, P. Picozza, C. Pit-
tori, C. Pontoni, G. Porrovecchio, M. Prest, G. Pucella, M. Rapisarda,
E. Rossi, A. Rubini, P. Soﬃtta, A. Traci, M. Trifoglio, A. Trois, E. Val-
lazza, S. Vercellone, A. Zambra, and D. Zanello. The AGILE mission
and its scientiﬁc instrument. In Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, volume 6266 of Society of Photo-
Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, July 2006.

[198] J. H. Taylor, R. N. Manchester, and A. G. Lyne. Catalog of 558 pulsars.

ApJS, 88:529–568, October 1993.

[199] The Fermi-LAT Collaboration. The First Fermi-LAT Catalog of Sources

Above 10 GeV. ArXiv e-prints, June 2013.

[200] The Fermi-LAT collaboration. The Second Fermi Large Area Telescope

Catalog of Gamma-ray Pulsars. ArXiv e-prints, May 2013.

[201] D. J. Thompson, D. L. Bertsch, C. E. Fichtel, R. C. Hartman, R. Hofs-
tadter, E. B. Hughes, S. D. Hunter, B. W. Hughlock, G. Kanbach, D. A.
Kniﬀen, Y. C. Lin, J. R. Mattox, H. A. Mayer-Hasselwander, C. von
Montigny, P. L. Nolan, H. I. Nel, K. Pinkau, H. Rothermel, E. J. Schneid,
M. Sommer, P. Sreekumar, D. Tieger, and A. H. Walker. Calibration
of the Energetic Gamma-Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET) for the
Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory. ApJS, 86:629–656, June 1993.

322

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[202] D. J. Thompson, G. A. Simpson, and M. E. Ozel. SAS 2 observations of
the earth albedo gamma radiation above 35 MeV. Journal of Geophysical
Research, 86:1265–1270, March 1981.

[203] M. J. L. Turner, A. Abbey, M. Arnaud, M. Balasini, M. Barbera,
E. Belsole, P. J. Bennie, J. P. Bernard, G. F. Bignami, M. Boer,
U. Briel, I. Butler, C. Cara, C. Chabaud, R. Cole, A. Collura, M. Conte,
A. Cros, M. Denby, P. Dhez, G. Di Coco, J. Dowson, P. Ferrando,
S. Ghizzardi, F. Gianotti, C. V. Goodall, L. Gretton, R. G. Griﬃths,
O. Hainaut, J. F. Hochedez, A. D. Holland, E. Jourdain, E. Kendziorra,
A. Lagostina, R. Laine, N. La Palombara, M. Lortholary, D. Lumb,
P. Marty, S. Molendi, C. Pigot, E. Poindron, K. A. Pounds, J. N. Reeves,
C. Reppin, R. Rothenﬂug, P. Salvetat, J. L. Sauvageot, D. Schmitt,
S. Sembay, A. D. T. Short, J. Spragg, J. Stephen, L. Str¨uder, A. Tiengo,
M. Trifoglio, J. Tr¨umper, S. Vercellone, L. Vigroux, G. Villa, M. J. Ward,
S. Whitehead, and E. Zonca. The European Photon Imaging Camera on
XMM-Newton: The MOS cameras : The MOS cameras. A&A, 365:L27–
L35, January 2001.

[204] C. M. Urry and P. Padovani. Uniﬁed Schemes for Radio-Loud Active

Galactic Nuclei. PASP, 107:803, September 1995.

[205] C. M. Urry, R. Scarpa, M. O’Dowd, R. Falomo, J. E. Pesce, and
A. Treves. The Hubble Space Telescope Survey of BL Lacertae Objects.
II. Host Galaxies. ApJ, 532:816–829, April 2000.

[206] Bourdes V. Advances in Artiﬁcial Neural Systems. Article ID 309841,

1995.

[207] E. van der Swaluw.

Interaction of a magnetized pulsar wind with its
surroundings. MHD simulations of pulsar wind nebulae. A&A, 404:939–
947, June 2003.

[208] A. Van Etten, R. W. Romani, and C.-Y. Ng. A Chandra Proper Motion

for PSR J1809-2332. ApJ, 755:151, August 2012.

[209] J. van Paradijs, P. J. Groot, T. Galama, C. Kouveliotou, R. G. Strom,
J. Telting, R. G. M. Rutten, G. J. Fishman, C. A. Meegan, M. Pettini,
N. Tanvir, J. Bloom, H. Pedersen, H. U. Nørdgaard-Nielsen, M. Linden-
Vørnle, J. Melnick, G. van der Steene, M. Bremer, R. Naber, J. Heise,
J. in’t Zand, E. Costa, M. Feroci, L. Piro, F. Frontera, G. Zavattini,
L. Nicastro, E. Palazzi, K. Bennett, L. Hanlon, and A. Parmar. Transient
optical emission from the error box of the γ-ray burst of 28 February
1997. Nature, 386:686–689, April 1997.

323

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[210] E. Vanzella, S. Cristiani, A. Fontana, M. Nonino, S. Arnouts, E. Gial-
longo, A. Grazian, G. Fasano, P. Popesso, P. Saracco, and S. Zaggia.
Photometric redshifts with the Multilayer Perceptron Neural Network:
Application to the HDF-S and SDSS. A&A, 423:761–776, August 2004.

[211] W. Voges, B. Aschenbach, T. Boller, H. Br¨auninger, U. Briel, W. Burk-
ert, K. Dennerl, J. Englhauser, R. Gruber, F. Haberl, G. Hartner,
G. Hasinger, M. K¨urster, E. Pfeﬀermann, W. Pietsch, P. Predehl,
C. Rosso, J. H. M. M. Schmitt, J. Tr¨umper, and H. U. Zimmermann.
The ROSAT all-sky survey bright source catalogue. A&A, 349:389–405,
September 1999.

[212] W. Voges, B. Aschenbach, T. Boller, H. Brauninger, U. Briel, W. Burk-
ert, K. Dennerl, J. Englhauser, R. Gruber, F. Haberl, G. Hartner,
G. Hasinger, E. Pfeﬀermann, W. Pietsch, P. Predehl, J. Schmitt,
J. Trumper, and U. Zimmermann. ROSAT All-Sky Survey Faint Source
Catalog (Voges+ 2000). VizieR Online Data Catalog, 9029:0, May 2000.

[213] M. G. Watson, A. C. Schroder, D. Fyfe, C. G. Page, G. Lamer, S. Ma-
teos, J. Pye, M. Sakano, S. Rosen, J. Ballet, X. Barcons, D. Barret,
T. Boller, H. Brunner, M. Brusa, A. Caccianiga, F. J. Carrera, M. Ce-
ballos, R. Della Ceca, M. Denby, G. Denkinson, S. Dupuy, S. Farrell,
F. Fraschetti, M. J. Freyberg, P. Guillout, V. Hambaryan, T. Maccac-
aro, B. Mathiesen, R. McMahon, L. Michel, C. Motch, J. P. Osborne,
M. Page, M. W. Pakull, W. Pietsch, R. Saxton, A. Schwope, P. Sev-
ergnini, M. Simpson, G. Sironi, G. Stewart, I. M. Stewart, A.-M. Stob-
bart, J. Tedds, R. Warwick, N. Webb, R. West, D. Worrall, and W. Yuan.
XMM-Newton serendipitous Survey. V. (Watson+, 2009). VizieR Online
Data Catalog, 349:30339, October 2008.

[214] S. Weinberg. Upper bound on gauge-fermion masses. Physical Review

Letters, 50:387–389, February 1983.

[215] P. Weltevrede, A. A. Abdo, M. Ackermann, M. Ajello, M. Axelsson,
L. Baldini, J. Ballet, G. Barbiellini, D. Bastieri, B. M. Baughman,
K. Bechtol, R. Bellazzini, B. Berenji, E. D. Bloom, E. Bonamente, A. W.
Borgland, J. Bregeon, A. Brez, M. Brigida, P. Bruel, T. H. Burnett,
S. Buson, G. A. Caliandro, R. A. Cameron, F. Camilo, P. A. Car-
aveo, J. M. Casandjian, C. Cecchi, ¨O. ¸Celik, E. Charles, A. Chekhtman,
C. C. Cheung, J. Chiang, S. Ciprini, R. Claus, I. Cognard, J. Cohen-
Tanugi, L. R. Cominsky, J. Conrad, S. Cutini, C. D. Dermer, G. Desvi-
gnes, A. de Angelis, A. de Luca, F. de Palma, S. W. Digel, M. Dor-
mody, E. d. C. e. Silva, P. S. Drell, R. Dubois, D. Dumora, C. Farnier,

324

BIBLIOGRAPHY

C. Favuzzi, S. J. Fegan, W. B. Focke, P. Fortin, M. Frailis, P. C. C. Freire,
P. Fusco, F. Gargano, D. Gasparrini, N. Gehrels, S. Germani, G. Gi-
avitto, B. Giebels, N. Giglietto, F. Giordano, T. Glanzman, G. Godfrey,
I. A. Grenier, M.-H. Grondin, J. E. Grove, L. Guillemot, S. Guiriec,
Y. Hanabata, A. K. Harding, E. Hays, G. Hobbs, R. E. Hughes, M. S.
Jackson, G. J´ohannesson, A. S. Johnson, T. J. Johnson, W. N. Johnson,
S. Johnston, T. Kamae, H. Katagiri, J. Kataoka, N. Kawai, M. Keith,
M. Kerr, J. Kn¨odlseder, M. L. Kocian, M. Kramer, M. Kuss, J. Lande,
L. Latronico, M. Lemoine-Goumard, F. Longo, F. Loparco, B. Lott,
M. N. Lovellette, P. Lubrano, A. G. Lyne, A. Makeev, R. N. Manchester,
M. N. Mazziotta, J. E. McEnery, S. McGlynn, C. Meurer, P. F. Michel-
son, W. Mitthumsiri, T. Mizuno, A. A. Moiseev, C. Monte, M. E. Mon-
zani, A. Morselli, I. V. Moskalenko, S. Murgia, P. L. Nolan, J. P. Norris,
E. Nuss, T. Ohsugi, N. Omodei, E. Orlando, J. F. Ormes, D. Paneque,
J. H. Panetta, D. Parent, V. Pelassa, M. Pepe, M. Pesce-Rollins,
F. Piron, T. A. Porter, S. Rain`o, R. Rando, S. M. Ransom, M. Raz-
zano, N. Rea, A. Reimer, O. Reimer, T. Reposeur, L. S. Rochester,
A. Y. Rodriguez, R. W. Romani, M. Roth, F. Ryde, H. F.-W. Sadrozin-
ski, D. Sanchez, A. Sander, P. M. Saz Parkinson, C. Sgr`o, E. J. Siskind,
D. A. Smith, P. D. Smith, G. Spandre, P. Spinelli, B. W. Stappers, M. S.
Strickman, D. J. Suson, H. Tajima, H. Takahashi, T. Tanaka, J. B.
Thayer, J. G. Thayer, G. Theureau, D. J. Thompson, S. E. Thorsett,
L. Tibaldo, D. F. Torres, G. Tosti, A. Tramacere, Y. Uchiyama, T. L.
Usher, A. Van Etten, V. Vasileiou, C. Venter, N. Vilchez, V. Vitale,
A. P. Waite, P. Wang, N. Wang, K. Watters, B. L. Winer, K. S. Wood,
T. Ylinen, and M. Ziegler. Gamma-ray and Radio Properties of Six Pul-
sars Detected by the Fermi Large Area Telescope. ApJ, 708:1426–1441,
January 2010.

[216] Wilks, S. S. The Large-Sample Distribution of the Likelihood Ratio
for Testing Composite Hypotheses. Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
9:60–62, 1938.

[217] E. L. Wright, P. R. M. Eisenhardt, A. K. Mainzer, M. E. Ressler,
R. M. Cutri, T. Jarrett, J. D. Kirkpatrick, D. Padgett, R. S. McMillan,
M. Skrutskie, S. A. Stanford, M. Cohen, R. G. Walker, J. C. Mather,
D. Leisawitz, T. N. Gautier, III, I. McLean, D. Benford, C. J. Lonsdale,
A. Blain, B. Mendez, W. R. Irace, V. Duval, F. Liu, D. Royer, I. Hein-
richsen, J. Howard, M. Shannon, M. Kendall, A. L. Walsh, M. Larsen,
J. G. Cardon, S. Schick, M. Schwalm, M. Abid, B. Fabinsky, L. Naes, and
C.-W. Tsai. The Wide-ﬁeld Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE): Mission

325

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Description and Initial On-orbit Performance. Astronomical Journal,
140:1868–1881, December 2010.

[218] Y. Yao and Q. D. Wang. X-Ray Absorption Line Spectroscopy of the

Galactic Hot Interstellar Medium. ApJ, 624:751–764, May 2005.

[219] L. Zhang, J. Fang, and S. B. Chen. High-Energy Properties of Pulsed
Emission from Millisecond Pulsars. ApJ, 666:1165–1173, September
2007.

[220] M. V. Zombeck. Handbook of Space Astronomy and Astrophysics.

November 2006.

326

Acknowledgements

Desidero ringraziare la Dott.ssa Patrizia A. Caraveo per la ﬁducia, l’aiuto
concreto e per avermi inserito nella collaborazione Fermi-LAT, tutto questo ha
permesso lo sviluppo ed il completamento di questo lavoro. Un grazie speciale
ad Andrea De Luca che mi ha insegnato cosa vuol dire essere un ricercatore,
come pormi di fronte ad un problema astroﬁsico e le innumerevoli tecniche per
cercare di risolverlo, tutto questo sar`a mio bagaglio per tutta la vita.

Un grazie speciale a Martino Marelli che mi ha insegnato tutto quello che
c’`e da sapere, e anche di pi`u, sull’analisi dati degli strumenti X quali XMM-
Newton, Swift e Chandra. Ringrazio inoltre Pablo Saz Parkinson per avermi
ospitato alla University of California, Santa Cruz per diversi mesi, questa es-
perienza mi ha permesso di capire come viene fatta la ricerca all’estero. Un
grazie sentito ad Andrea (“Marietto”) Belﬁore senza il quale non sarebbe stato
possibile lo sviluppo del codice di reti neurali.

Tutta la collaborazione Fermi-LAT per la possibilit`a di sfruttare appieno i
risultati ottenuti dallo strumento LAT e per i suggerimenti, pi`u o meno utili,
e per gli scambi di opinione.

Tra gli astroﬁsici dell’INAF-IASF di Milano ringrazio in particolar modo
Nicola (“Nik”) Sartore per i suggerimenti riguardanti la programmazione e
i confronti a riguardo di diverse problematiche astroﬁsiche, Fabio Gastaldello
(“Gasta”) per gli innumerevoli consigli e lo scambio di opinioni riguardo le ster-
minate tecniche statistiche, Nicola La Palombara per gli ottimi suggerimenti
riguardanti l’analisi a multilunghezza d’onda e Paolo Esposito per avermi dato
la possibilit`a di ampliare la mia conoscenza di oggetti astroﬁsici estremamente
energetici.

Un grazie al Prof. Matteo Matteucci, al Prof. Giuseppe De Nicolao, al Dr.
Pablo Genova e al Dr. Daniele Loiacono per lo scambio di opinioni a riguaro
dell’applicazione delle reti neurali.

Ringrazio inoltre la famiglia, tutti gli amici e, di cuore, Chiara, senza la

quale non avrei mai concluso questo lavoro in tempo.

327

