Cost Optimisation of an Instrument Suite at an Accelerator-Driven Spallation Source

P.M. Bentley,1, 2 C.S. Zendler,1 and O. Kirstein1, 2, 3

1European Spallation Source ESS AB, P.O. Box 176, 221 00 Lund, Sweden

2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 256, 751 05 Uppsala, Sweden∗

3School of Mechanical Engineering, University of Newcastle, Australia

(Dated: March 21, 2016)

This artcile presents an optimisation of performance and cost of neutron scattering instrumen-
tation at the European Spallation Source. This is done by trading detailed cost functions against
beam transmission functions in a multi-dimensional, yet simple, parameter space. On the one hand,
the neutron guide cost increases as a power of the desired beam divergence, and inversely with the
minimum wavelength, due to the supermirror coating needed. On the other hand, the more neutrons
are transported to the instrument the greater are the shielding costs to deal with the gamma rays
that result from the eventual absorption of the neutrons. There are additional factors in that many
of the parameters deﬁning the neutron guide geometry are continuous variables, and the straight-
ness of the guide increases the transmission of high energy spallation products, which aﬀect the
speciﬁcations of particularly heavy hardware, such as heavy shutters and additional shielding, beam
stops etc. Over the suite of 16 instruments, a maximum potential cost saving is identiﬁed in the
vicinity of 20 Me , with negligible penalties on instrument performance and bandwidth, by trading
minimum neutron wavelength λ against total optical costs and shielding costs. Finally, these cost
calculations are shown to be consistent with those at real world, existing spallation source facilities.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Modern neutron scattering instruments at spallation
sources are expensive, costing in the region of 12-20 Me.
Typically, an instrument has a working lifetime of ap-
proximately 10-20 years. At the time of writing, the
budget for the instrument suite of 16 instruments at the
ESS, including ramping up all of the suport functions, is
around 211 Me, from a total facility budget of 1 843 Me.
It is imperative that facilities of this scale strike the ap-
propriate balance of cost and performance, to maximise
the return on investment and create as large a beneﬁt as
possible from the available resources.

It will be shown later in this report that a signiﬁcant
fraction of the cost of each instrument, around 30-50%,
is spent on shielding and neutron optical components [1].
Indeed, shielding is the main cost driver, costing around
30% of the total budget. Shielding is directly linked with
instrument background noise — and hence instrument
user quality — along with safety and regulatory factors.
As such, one might expect that this area of expertise
would receive more attention in the neutron scattering
community than it does.

In the past, shielding and optics tended to be opti-
mised somewhat independently. We show in this article
that successful cost optimisation and instrument back-
ground reduction is considerably easier if the whole sys-
tem is designed and optimised together as a single task
for an expert team.
Indeed, at the European Spalla-
tion Source (ESS), Sweden, and the Paul Scherrer Insti-
tut (PSI), Switzerland, a core risk and cost minimisation
strategy is to design the optics and shielding systems to-

∗phil.m.bentley@gmail.com

gether by co-located personnel using a common set of
tools and with thorough cross-checking in place.

In this article, an initial stage of this work is sum-
marised. Preliminary speciﬁcations and requirements are
identiﬁed for the instrument suite beamline systems, and
the cost of those systems is minimised to a critical per-
formance metric value to be deﬁned shortly. Systems
exceeding this metric value could be deﬁned as being
over-engineered, and systems below this value as under-
performing. This allows us to deﬁne an optimum cost for
the instrument suite.

Finally, it will be shown that by strategically select-
ing a subset of “primary” instruments, which are fully
optimised, and reducing the speciﬁcations of the remain-
der into the under-engineered category, a further set of
cost savings are possible with a viable suite, with a small
decrease in performance.

II.

INPUT DATA AND COST ESTIMATES

There are two beam scenarios to consider in this initial
study. The ﬁrst evaluates the shielding costs for a direct
beam with line of sight back to the source, and the latter
is with part of the beam line curved out of line of sight.

A. Line of Sight Option

This shielding is thick, since it must protect against
scattered high energy (MeV - GeV) neutrons and gamma
rays. We use a rough cost estimate for an enhanced con-
crete instrument cave for straight beamlines, based on the
PSI instrument “BOA”, increased in thickness to 2 me-
tres, and accomodating 5× 5× 5 m3 of instrument space.
These speciﬁcations were for a generic instrument, based

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
8
1

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

2
v
2
3
2
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

partly on calculations of minimum thickness for a MW
spallation source with a GeV proton beam, and partly
on measurements at PSI and SNS on fast neutron trans-
mission and prompt pulse backgrounds, which usually
adversely aﬀects instrument performance.

A completely straight beamline also requires a heavy
chopper — commonly known as “T 0”, “t-zero”, or
“Prompt Pulse Suppression” (PPS) choppers: these are
heavy choppers that attenuate the high-energy particles
during proton illumination of the spallation target. The
cost of these T0 choppers was estimated roughly and
somewhat optimistically by the ESS Chopper group, as-
suming some economy of scale by manufacturing multiple
units and minimising development costs.

The instrument also requires a heavy shutter, capable
of blocking the high energy beam and allowing access
to the sample area. A study performed by the ESS en-
gineering department for an SNS-style cylindrical drum
shutter was completed in 2013, which provided the cost
estimates for this item. Note that a guillotine-style shut-
ter outside the monolith is not recommended due to the
vertical streaming paths this would generate next to the
short instruments.

B. Out of Line of Sight

This option has a similar cost of guide shielding as
that of an instrument at a reactor source. A thickness
of 60 cm of regular concrete was found via preliminary
Monte-Carlo calculations to attenuate the radiation suﬃ-
ciently to safe levels (1.5 µSv/h total simulated dose rate
[11]). 60 cm of concrete is slightly thicker than other
lower power facilities but not excessive. For example, on
TS2 at ISIS, 35 cm of concrete shielding is suﬃcient, al-
though in that case a heavy shutter can be closed if there
is a safety hazard on a beamline.

C. Concept Neutral Costs

For the instrument cave, we assume an enclosure sim-
ilar to those at the LET and OFFSPEC instruments on
TS2 at ISIS, in the UK. These are hollow steel cans ﬁlled
with borated paraﬃn wax.

The cost of concrete comes from ESS Conventional Fa-
cilities Department, and is the price for reinforced con-
crete, cut and shaped and installed.

The cost of raw metals come from the London Metal

Exchange.

In all beamlines, it is anticipated to use at least three
laminate collimation blocks within the shielding bunker
and/or curved sections, to reduce the streaming of fast
neutrons into the guide system downstream. These may
be conceptually similar to the collimator on the CHIPIR
beamline at ISIS, or indeed much smaller, and spread
between multiple units. Other names for these devices
could include “horse-collars” or “fast neutron scrapers”.

2

For the purposes of this study, we assume these to be
three units of 1 m3 of copper with a small channel cut
through the centre.

A summary of the items can be constructed as follows:

ISIS-TS2 Wax Cave based on LET and OFFSPEC,
for thermal beams out of line of sight. Cost: 950
kGBP several years ago, rounded to 1.5 Me.

PSI Concrete Cave based on BOA, for beams with di-

rect line of sight: 2 Me.

Heavy beam shielding for beam areas within line of

sight: approx. 7770 e/m.

Light beam shielding for thermal beams out of line of

sight: approx. 2600 e/m.

Laminate collimation blocks initially costed as 100%

copper: 47 keper unit, 3 units per beam.

T0/PPS Chopper : only necessary for straight beam-

lines with line of sight of source, 750 ke.

Heavy shutter : only necessary for straight beamlines

with line of sight of source, 750 ke.

Not included in this budget estimate are the ESS guide
bunker and target shielding, which absorb a large frac-
tion of the radiation dose. We only include shielding
items outside the common shielding areas. This has a
potential cost-saving from the perspective of the instru-
ment project, since — if the geometry loses line of sight
within the bunker — the instrument only needs thermal
beam shielding in its budget.

The optical system costs are evaluated for the full
length of the beamline. However, curving out of line
of sight quickly, with a radius of 1.5 km for example, in-
creases the optical cost compared to a gentle curvature
of several km, because the neutron supermirrors need to
be engineered to reﬂect at larger grazing angles. At still
tighter radii, of a few hundred metres, the neutron guides
are normally divided into several thin channels known as
“multi-channel benders”. These require more precision
manufacturing, with a greater surface that needs to be
coated with supermirrors. It should be clear that, whilst
curving out of line of sight quickly can reduce the shield-
ing cost, the optical cost is increasing against the shield-
ing cost saving. These two costs are traded against each
other in our optimisation.

Optical component cost equations were provided to
ESS as part of a market survey, and these are commercial-
in-conﬁdence details that cannot be widely shared. How-
ever, they are comparable to costs of items at similar
facilities, as nothing in the market has changed signiﬁ-
cantly in recent years.

III. REQUIREMENTS AND MATCHED

OPTICAL SOLUTIONS

Instrument requirements were extracted initially from
the ESS Technical Design Report (TDR) [2] and gradu-
ally reﬁned with requirements described in the respective
instrument proposals. The minimum wavelength band of
the instrument suite is shown in ﬁgure 1. Here we can see
that there are three categories of instrument: those who
are interested in wavelengths at and just below 1 ˚A and
above; those interested in 2 ˚A neutrons and above, and
those interested only in cold neutrons of 4 ˚A wavelength
and longer.

Subdividing into long (150 m) and medium (60 m)
instruments is informative. The minimum wavelength
band of the long instruments is shown in ﬁgure 2, where
we see that the long instruments are split almost 50:50
into 2˚A and ∼1˚A instruments.

For the medium-length instruments, the wavelength
bands are shown in ﬁgure 3.
In that subset, there are
two instruments requiring wavelengths around 1 ˚A, and
a third requiring 5 ˚A.

The shorter instruments follow a similar process, ex-
cept with the 15 m instruments who are considered to
be so short that they are either straight or use a multi-
channel bender.

We can now begin to construct a critical perfor-
mance/cost ratio transport system as a standard, to
compare with the baseline systems from the instrument
teams. There are four curved guide systems to consider:
two sets of curved guides for the 150 metre instruments
for the two wavelength ranges; two sets of curved guides
for the 60 metre instruments for the two wavelength
ranges. Similarly, there are four types of benders for the
two lengths and two wavelength ranges. The 150 metre
instruments can have a 20 metre long bender within the
bunker, and the 60 metre instruments can have a 15 me-
tre long bender, and each of these is designed for diﬀerent
wavelength bands.

A. Standard Guide Concept

To compare with the proposed optical systems, a more
minimalist neutron guide concept was developed at ESS
for these kinds of studies. In this “ESS Standard Guide”,
elliptic geometries are replaced with constant cross sec-
tion geometries or ballistic geometries. Supermirror m
values are capped at m = 4 for 12 m long ballistic fo-
cussing sections, and m = 1.5 everywhere else. Note
that this concept still provides more than 50% of the
neutron ﬂux at 1 ˚A if the guides are curved, due to the
large radii involved with such long guides. The maximum
dimensions of the guide are limited to below 4 cm in the
curved sections.

3

FIG. 1: Wavelengths requested by each instrument on the
reference suite at ESS.

B. Curved Guides

A number of curved guide options will be considered.
The performance estimates follow the work of Mildner [3]
which is reliable for the low-divergence parts of the guide
systems with low-m values, which is the strategy in this
case.

All the guides in the low cost options will be considered
to have a maximum size of 200 mm in horizontal and
vertical extent. The curved guides have an additional
constraint that the curved parts have a width of 4 cm.

The parallel section of the guides is capped at m=1.5.
If we restrict ourselves to guarantee the phase space
homogeneity at 1.5 ˚A then, with 12 m long compres-
sion/expansion sections at the ends of the ballistic guides,
we only require m=4 coatings. This still provides a max-
imum beam divergence of 1◦. The transmission of this
guide system is shown in ﬁgure 2. For the 60 metre
guides, a higher m is required to get out of line of sight in
a shorter distance. The transmission of this guide system
is shown in ﬁgure 3.

C. Multi-Channel Bender Options

These items are necessary to get out of line of sight
quickly in the bunker. The ﬁrst solution matches the re-
quirements of transmitting 1 ˚A neutrons, and is described
in table I.

The second version of this item is designed to transmit

2 ˚A neutrons, and is described in table II.

IV. SUITE COST TOTALS

The cost per instrument as a function of instrument
length is shown for the standard instrument options in
ﬁgure 4 on page 5. There it is clear that a general strategy

TABLE I: 150 metre bender speciﬁcations for eﬃcient trans-
mission of 1 ˚A neutrons.

Parameter
150 m bender width
150 m bender length
150 m channel width
150 m bender m
150 m nchannels
150 m bender radius
150 m transmission at 1 ˚A
150 m Cost

Value
4.0 cm
20 m
0.5 cm
3.0
8.0
1250.0 m
80%
1.444 Me

TABLE II: 150 metre bender speciﬁcations for eﬃcient trans-
mission of 2 ˚A neutrons.

Parameter
150 m bender width
150 m bender length
150 m channel width
150 m bender m
150 m nchannels
150 m bender radius
150 m transmission at 2˚A
150 m Cost

Value
4.0 cm
20 m
2 cm
2.5
2
1250.0 m
88%
341 ke

TABLE III: 60 m bender for 1 ˚A neutrons.

Parameter
60 m bender width
60 m bender length
60 m channel width
60 m bender m
60 m nchannels
60 m bender radius
60 m transmission at 1˚A
60 m Cost

TABLE IV: 60 m bender for 4 ˚A neutrons.

Parameter
60 m bender width
60 m bender length
60 m channel width
60 m bender m
60 m nchannels
60 m bender radius
60 m transmission at 4˚A
60 m Cost

Value
3.0 cm
15 m
0.5 cm
3.0
6.0
937.5 m
73%
742 ke

Value
4.0 cm
15 m
2 cm
1.5
2
703.0 m
85%
193 ke

4

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 2:
(a) Wavelengths requested by the 150 m long instruments at
ESS.
(b) Transmission of a multi-channel bender designed to trans-
mit 1 ˚A neutrons to the 150 m long instruments at ESS. The
specifcations of this bender are given in table I
(c) Transmission of a multi-channel bender designed to trans-
mit 2 ˚A neutrons to the 150 m long instruments at ESS. The
specifcations of this bender are given in table II

.

of curving all the guides is cheaper overall. The cheap-
est possible method is using simple curved guides, since
the additional cost of multi-channel benders is not oﬀset
by the cost savings in shielding outside the bunker. On
the other hand, these marginal diﬀerences between the
curved guides and benders are a small increment to pay

5

FIG. 4: Cost of each instrument using the standard ESS guide
concept, to isolate the cost delta for the diﬀerent curving op-
tions (therefore omitting the baseline suite).

strument cave.

The total instrument suite cost for the full suite is
shown in ﬁgure 5 on page 5 for each option, and the
potential savings in ﬁgure 6 on page 6.
In these ﬁgures,

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 3:
(a) Wavelengths requested by the 60 m medium length in-
struments at ESS. “Fund” corresponding to “Fundamental
physics” requests 5 ˚A.
(b) (b) Transmission of a multi-channel bender designed to
transmit 1 ˚A neutrons to the 60 m long instruments at ESS.
The specifcations of this bender are given in table III.
(c) Transmission of a multi-channel bender designed to trans-
mit 4 ˚A neutrons to the 60 m long instruments at ESS. The
specifcations of this bender are given in table IV.

for likely improvements in the instrument backgrounds.
Furthermore, we also see that the total cost delta for
a straight guide vs a curved guide is 1-2 Me per in-
strument, on average. This seems approximately cor-
rect, considering the main cost drivers in the cost delta,
namely a T 0 chopper, heavy shutter, and enhanced in-

FIG. 5: Total cost for the instrument suite considered.

the following options are costed:

• “Baseline” which is the total of the instrument pro-
posal costs, corrected where necessary (explanation
in next paragraph)

• “Standard” which is a reduction of the optical spec-

iﬁcations towards a standard ESS guide

• “Std Curved” which forces all beamlines to be
curved out of line of sight, losing line of sight 50%
of the way down the beamline, in addition to fol-
lowing the ESS standard guide design

• “Std Bender” which follows the ESS standard guide
design and has a multi-channel bender to lose line
of sight in the bunker.

6

2. To gradually reﬁne costs as instrument concepts

became better deﬁned, and

3. To independently assess costs to obtain the best
“value-for-money” for all the partner countries in-
volved in the instrument build programme, and
consequently the tax payers within the partner
countries.

From [1], a cost distribution for instruments as shown
in ﬁg. 7 can be obtained. While — for good reason — a

FIG. 6: Total cost saving for the instrument suite considered,
for each of the options, relative to the baseline of as-proposed
optics geometry.

One can see that, relative to the baseline, the standard
curved guide concept is likely to save 24 Me across the
suite, with minimal impact on the instrument perfor-
mance.

V. COSTING VALIDATION

FIG. 7: Approximate cost distribution of components for neu-
tron scattering instruments considered to be built at the ESS.

For any publicly funded project it is important to get
an as good as possible cost indication early and reﬁne es-
timations as soon as more detailed information becomes
available. The instruments described in [2] allowed for
an indicative cost, which is part of the total ESS con-
struction cost of 1.843 Be established in 2013.

Over the last 3 years, the instrument concepts were
reﬁned primarily in terms of scientiﬁc requirements but
not so much in terms of costs. On the other hand it is
the central facilitys responsibility to manage the available
budgets as eﬃciently as possible to maximise the scope
for and involvement of in-kind partners throughout Eu-
rope. In order reﬁne the cost of neutron instrument com-
ponents (aka beamline components or instrument com-
ponents or simply components), a workshop was held in
early 2014, which involved partners from ISIS in the UK,
PSI from Switzerland, and JCNS from Germany, all of
which have an extensive and excellent track record of
building world-class neutron instruments .

During the workshop, a list of around 20 components
with indicative costs — based on recent projects such
as ISIS TS-II [4] or the JCNS spin-echo instrument BL-
15 at SNS [8] — was established, which included e.g.
shutters, benders, instrument caves but also services for
installation or staﬀ/labour costs [1]. Although the scope
of the instrument programme was not deﬁned at that
time, the components were used to

1. Better estimate the costs of the TDR reference

suite,

lot of focus is currently on e.g. detector systems for ESS
instruments due to the diﬃculty to acquire large quanti-
ties of 3He gas [9], it may come as a surprise that around
47% of the total costs fall into the categories “Shield-
ing” and “Optics”, with 31% and 16%, respectively. For
the instruments described in the TDR — with adjust-
ments to consider improvements in the scientiﬁc require-
ments/speciﬁcations — one would arrive at an overall
cost of around 290 Me. While the reference suite com-
prises 22 instruments, the current scope of the instrument
build programme is 16 (it is worthwhile noting that the
16 instruments are part of the ESS Construction Pro-
gramme; plans have been developed and will be reﬁned
over the next 2-3 years to arrive at 22 public instruments
described in [2]).

For a suite of 16 instruments one would estimate costs
of 211 Me. As indicated by ﬁg. 7 the majority of the
costs are associated with shielding/optical components,
and amongst those components the main cost drivers are
instrument caves (initially valued at 2.5 Me) and neu-
tron guides (initially valued at 30ke/m; including not
only the glass components but also required shielding).
A simplistic approach ignoring any cost-beneﬁt analy-
sis would require for only instrument caves and guide
systems of 16 instruments a budget of around 83 Me,
which is consistent within an error of around 10% with
the baseline cost indicated in ﬁg. 6. The arguments pro-
vided earlier in terms of optimising e.g. instrument caves
as a function of ‘curved/straight’ immediately changes

cost requirements for only instrument caves from around
40 Me to 26 Me thus giving a potential cost saving of
14 Me. Similar arguments can be applied for diﬀerent
guide geometries, curvatures resulting in approx. 1 Me
per instrument, and a total of 16 Me + 14 Me= 30 Me,
which is — again within a 10% error — consistent with
results discussed in the context of ﬁg. 6.

In terms of project management one could also use the
results indicated in ﬁg. 6 to perform an indicative PERT
(e.g. [10]) estimation with

• the Std Curved option saving being the optimistic

estimation

• the Standard option being the pessimistic estima-

tion

• the Std Bender option being the best guess estima-

tion

Usually, a PERT analysis is used to regulate optimism
and pessimism in schedule estimates, but we can also ap-
ply the same logic here for cost option extrema, resulting
in a potential saving of 17 Me.

A. Approximate Benchmarking

For the moment it is assumed that the cost per instru-
ment can be reduced from 14.5 Me to 13.5 Me using the
more conservative PERT estimation. At ESS the aver-
age length of an instrument is 90 m due to the long pulse
design. At short pulse spallation sources such as SNS or
ISIS instruments are on average around 50 m long, re-
sulting in an average cost of around 12.2 Me2015.

ISIS’ recent TS2 project was established with an bud-
get of 145 M£, out of which 100.5 M£ were allocated to
the core project and 27 M£ for the instrument project
with the remaining 17.5 M£ for instruments coming from
the EU and collaborating European countries [5], a sim-
ilar model that is used for the phase 2 upgrade of TS2
[4]. The initial scope of TS2 included 7 instruments or an
average cost of 6.4 M£. A conservative estimation of in-
ﬂation would assume a cost increase of around 20% since
2005 [6] resulting in 7.7 M£2015. Over the last years the
average exchange ration between e and £ was 1:1.28 [7]
giving 9.8 Me2015 for an average instrument of around 50
m length. The main diﬀerence between the 12.2 Me2015
and the 9.8 Me2015 can easily be explained by a slightly
higher-level of complexity of ESS instruments due to the
diﬀerent source characteristics, but also due to the fact
that ESS is a green ﬁeld site. Also, it can be assumed
that additional eﬀort, in particular with regard to instal-
lation, is required to due to the in-kind nature of the
project.

While all the numbers are only indicative — details
matter after all — they nevertheless show that proper
strategies and analyses such as benchmarking, compo-
nent breakdown, cost-beneﬁt analysis or eﬃcient stan-
dardised technical solutions via optimised non-recurrent

7

engineering designs have the potential to optimise costs,
which is not a surprise in itself. Although the focus here
is on optical and shielding components any cost optimi-
sation has two major consequences: obviously, it reduces
overall costs, which is in the interest of the project gov-
ernance and the funding agencies; but secondly, because
standardised systems are proposed with almost no or
minimal impact on performance, costs related to instal-
lation, maintenance and spare parts are being reduced,
which in turn will lower the operational costs. As the op-
erational costs are estimated to be typically 4 times the
initial investment cost in case of a scientiﬁc facility, this
has a signiﬁcant eﬀect over the lifetime of the facility.

It may actually be more appropriate to refer to a cost
optimisation of x Me because the aim is not to minimise
the costs by all means but to rather use the available
budget more intelligently and focused by e.g. redistribut-
ing costs into areas such as computing, installation or
contingency if required, but also to compensate for any
shortfalls of the initial assumptions when creating the
list of components.
It is also worthwhile noting that
at this point no signiﬁcant de-scoping of instruments in
terms of their scientiﬁc performance or functionality is
discussed. This is an alternative project management
tool that, whilst popular and utilised in large scale scien-
tiﬁc projects, nonetheless can have a devastating impact
on the scientiﬁc output of a facility, and the methodology
presented here should probably be used before removing
scope from the instrument projects themselves.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

We have used neutron optics geometry combined with
a cost-beneﬁt analysis balancing shielding costs, to pro-
pose an optimisation of the ESS instrument suite budget.
Cost savings in the order of 20 Me are identiﬁed com-
pared to the baseline budget as deﬁned in the adjusted
instrument proposal costs. This cost saving has been
compared with instrument costs at existing facilities, and
found to be within reasonable agreement. While this ap-
proach is common in industry, it is perhaps less widely
used in scientiﬁc projects, and the management challenge
to unlock these savings, at any facility, is to establish a
strong central coordination mechanism: to supply stan-
dard concepts and systems such as the ones described
here; to provide a core team to manage the suite op-
timisation; and to intervene when deviations from the
standards are being pursued, particularly in the cases
where small performance increases are accompanied by
large cost impacts.

Acknowledgments

The information and support given by our partners and
colleagues from ISIS, PSI and JCNS, in particular with
regard to establishing a cost baseline for instrument com-

ponents, is greatly appreciated. We are also extremely
grateful for the feedback given at various ESS project re-
views on this work, particularly K. Herwig, D. Mildner,
E. Iverson, M. Fitzsimmons, S. Kennedy, T. Sato and T.

Krist. Useful discussions with the rest of the Neutron
Optics and Shielding Group during 2013-2014 were in-
valuable, particularly C. Zendler, D. Martin Rodriguez,
D. DiJulio, N. Cherkashyna, and C. Cooper Jensen.

8

[1] ESS Internal Technical Report ESS-0010809; 2014
[2] ESS Technical Design Report; ESS-2013-001; 2013
[3] D. Mildner, “Acceptance Diagrams for Curved Neutron
Guides”, Nuc. Inst. Meth. Phys. Res. A 290 (1990) 189

[4] http://www.isis.stfc.ac.uk/about-isis/target-station-

2/phase-two-instruments8150.html

[5] “ISIS TS2 Business Case”, ISIS-TS2-PhII-PM-Pa-0001

Rev 1.2 (2009), http://goo.gl/149UEg

[6] “Historic harmonised inﬂation Europe — HICP inﬂa-

tion”, http://goo.gl/t1pnnP

[7] “Currency Converter”, http://fxtop.com/en/currency-

converter-past.php

[8] “Neutron

Spin

Echo

Spectrometer”,

https://neutrons.ornl.gov/nse

[9] O. Kirstein, R. Hall-Wilton et. al., “Neutron Position
Sensitive Detectors for the ESS”, arXiv:1411.6194v1,
2014

[10] “PERT Estimation Technique”, http://goo.gl/ppthl
[11] The requirement is actually 3µSv/h. A factor of 2 be-
tween simulated dose rate and actual requirement is used
to compensate for discrepancies between computer mod-
els and engineering designs.

