6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
5
2
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dopant-controlled single-electron pumping through a metallic island

Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), Bundesallee 100, 38116 Braunschweig, Germany

Tobias Wenz∗ and Frank Hohls†

University Grenoble Alpes and CEA-INAC, F-38000 Grenoble, France

Xavier Jehl and Marc Sanquer

University Grenoble Alpes and CEA-Leti-Minatec, F-38000 Grenoble, France

Sylvain Barraud

Jevgeny Klochan, Girts Barinovs, and Vyacheslavs Kashcheyevs

Faculty of Physics and Mathematics, University of Latvia, Zellu street 25, LV 1002 Riga, Latvia

(Dated: March 2, 2016)

We investigate a hybrid metallic island / single dopant electron pump based on fully-depleted
silicon on insulator technology. Electron transfer between the central metallic island and the leads
is controlled by resonant tunneling through single phosphorus dopants in the barriers. Top gates
above the barriers are used to control the resonance conditions. Applying radio frequency signals
to the gates, non-adiabatic quantized electron pumping is achieved. A simple deterministic model
is presented and conﬁrmed by comparing measurements with simulations.

Accurate clocked control and transport of single elec-
trons (SE) is a prerequisite for both the emerging ﬁeld
of electron quantum optics1 and the upcoming introduc-
tion of the quantum ampere by ﬁxing the elementary
charge e.2 Transferring an integer number of electrons N
in each cycle of a drive with frequency f generates a cur-
rent I = N ef . Several approaches to clocked SE trans-
port have been made3 of which tunable-barrier SE pumps
are especially promising to reach suﬃciently large cur-
rents at high accuracy for metrological needs.4 So far,
GaAs based devices achieved the highest veriﬁed accu-
racy at large output currents,5–7 however a high mag-
netic ﬁeld and sub-kelvin temperature are required for
accurate operation.

SE pumps made from silicon are promising candi-
dates for less demanding operation requirements and
even higher operation frequency8 and have been real-
ized using both adiabatic9 and non-adiabatic8,10 pump-
ing schemes. They beneﬁt from mature CMOS technol-
ogy with the potential of circuit integration, e.g. on chip
drive electronics11 or the charge detectors12,13 needed
for a self-referenced quantized current source.14,15 Ad-
ditionally, CMOS technology oﬀers excellent control of
doping, opening the possibility to utilize the large addi-
tion energies of single dopants for single-electron control
with a potential of increased accuracy. Up to now, the
dopant or trap was used as the main quantum dot of a
SE pump.16–19 In this letter a new device scheme is ex-
amined: Single dopant states located in the barriers are
used to control the tunnel coupling of a small metallic
island to source and drain. While in other works similar
states in barriers were an unwanted side-eﬀect,20 here we
actively utilize these states to perform SE pumping.

The investigated device is produced in a fully CMOS-
compatible process using both deep UV and electron
beam lithography. It is based on a silicon on insulator
wafer with 145 nm of SiO2, where the bulk silicon layer

FIG. 1. (a) Schematic cross section along the nanowire axis.
Inset: SEM image of a similar device after gate and spacer
patterning (scalebar 100 nm). (b) Schematic band structure
of the investigated device. The central island is metallic. Un-
der each of the gates, single dopants dominate the transport.

can be used as a back gate.21 The 20 nm thick Si-layer is
n-doped with phosphorus (2 · 1018 cm−3). A 60 nm wide
nanowire is etched out of the Si-layer. Two top gates
(consisting of dielectrics and doped poly Si) are patterned
around the nanowire with a length of 60 nm and a sep-
aration of 60 nm. The gates and a set of 15 nm wide
self-aligned silicon nitride spacers act as a mask for the
following doping and silicidation. Consequently, all re-
gions of the nanowire not covered by gate or spacers will
be metallic, including a central island formed between
the two gates with a width of 30 nm. A schematic cross
section of the device along the nanowire axis is shown in
Fig. 1(a).

The simpliﬁed band structure of the device along the
length of the nanowire is as follows [Fig. 1(b)]: Source
and drain are metallic. By tuning the top gates to a neg-
ative voltage, barriers are formed below the top gates and
isolate the metallic region in between the gates from the
leads, causing discrete charge states to be formed. Under
the gates, the average interdopant distance is approxi-

Vg1Vg2SDSiO2Sisemiconductingwith dopantsmetallicpoly Sidielectricsspacer(b)Efµg1µg2µncentral island(a)SDG2G12

FIG. 2. Conductance through the device as a function of top
gate voltages. Anti-diagonal lines correspond to resonances
of the central island. Horizontal and vertical lines are res-
onances of the states in the barriers. For Vg1 < −650 mV
and Vg2 < −890 mV, transport through and from the central
island is only possible via dopant states (extended with red
dashed lines). Plot has been extended beyond measured val-
ues to show the line along which the measurement in Fig. 3(a)
has been taken (red line) and RF amplitude used in that mea-
surement (blue line).

mately 8 nm, larger than the Bohr radius rB ≈ 3 nm for
P dopants in Si, making these regions semiconducting.22
By choosing the back gate voltage appropriately the de-
vice can be tuned such that for each gate only the energy
level of a single dopant lies in the transport window and
is suﬃciently separated from any other state.23,24 The
states in the barrier under a single gate can be inves-
tigated individually by tuning the gate voltage of the
other gate to +1 V, well above the threshold value. From
Coulomb diamond measurements (not shown) the energy
separations of the lowest state to the next state are found
to be approximately 40 meV, comparable to the charging
energy commonly found for single phosphorus dopants in
Si nanostructures.25,26 States at higher energies are more
densely spaced.

Fig. 2 shows the measured conductance as a function
of top gate voltages Vg1 and Vg2. All measurements were
taken at a base temperature of T < 100 mK. The top
gates couple to the energy levels of the states in the bar-
riers as well as to the energy levels of the central island.
Multiple anti-diagonal lines indicate resonance of the cen-
tral island with source and drain. They are visible for
more positive gate voltages at which the barriers have
suﬃcient transparency. Horizontal (vertical) lines of in-
creased conductance appear, whenever a dopant’s state
in the barrier under gate 1 (gate 2) is resonant.27 When-
ever the anti-diagonal lines intersect a horizontal or ver-
tical resonance line anti-crossings appear, indicating that
the central island is capacitively coupled to the states in
both barriers. In the absence of these anti-crossings, res-
onance lines of the central island are evenly spaced as

FIG. 3.
(a) Pumped current as a function of gate voltage
along the path indicated in red in Fig. 2. (b) Stability di-
agram in the region where transport through the barriers is
only possible via the lowest dopant states. Resonance lines
of the central island (black) and the dopant states (red) are
shown. The path followed by RF voltages is shown in blue
(corresponds to blue path indicated in Fig. 2). This situa-
tion corresponds to the case marked with the red dot in (a),
where N = 1 electron is pumped.
(c) Positions of energy
levels during one cycle of RF modulation.

expected for a metallic dot.9 The negligible slope of the
horizontal and vertical resonances of the states under the
gates demonstrate very small cross-coupling from gate 1
on states located under gate 2 and vice versa, caused by
the strong screening provided by the gates and the central
island. For more negative gate voltages, conductance is
only appreciable in a small region at Vg1 = −697 mV and
Vg2 = −947 mV, where the ﬁrst relevant28 energy level
of gate 1 and gate 2 (µg1 and µg2, respectively) are both
aligned with the Fermi level EF, i.e. µg1 = µg2 = EF.
These resonances are highlighted with dashed red lines
in Fig. 2.

We will now demonstrate that using the dopant states
in the barriers this new type of device allows to generate
a quantized current I = N ef . Sinusoidal radio frequency
(RF) signals with 180 degree phase shift are applied to
both gates to follow a certain path in the Vg1-Vg2-plane
as indicated by the blue line in Fig. 2 (f = 20 MHz for all
shown measurements). When shifting the center of the
blue path (red dot) along the solid red line, the produced
current changes, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Starting at the
most negative voltages, the current increases from I =
0ef to 3ef in steps of 1ef , clearly showing quantization
of current. Subsequently, more steps between 2ef and
3ef follow.

To explain the structure of the current quantization
steps we consider a simple deterministic model which
treats the discrete charge states on the central island and
under the barriers as energetically sharp at all times and
allows transport only through the resonant states high-
lighted with red dashed lines in Fig. 2. The model as-
sumes that the charge of the central island switches if and

µ(a)(b)(c)f = 20 MHz2SD3SD1SDµg1= EFµg2 = EFµn = EFµn+1 = EFµn+2 = EFVg1Vg2123only if sequential tunneling through a dopant state under
the barrier is energetically allowed. Further neglecting
the dopant-island capacitive coupling we can reduce the
model to the following simple rules. The nth electron can
only tunnel onto the metallic central island with electro-
chemical potential µn if a gate’s energy level µgi (i = 1, 2)
is in the energy window of the Fermi energy EF and the
dots potential: EF > µgi > µn. Similarly, the nth elec-
tron can only leave the island, if EF < µgi < µn. The
deterministic model is justiﬁed for large amplitude and
intermediate frequency of modulation, such that on the
one hand there is enough time for charge equilibration
as the resonance energy passes through the bias window
across a dot-lead barrier while on the other hand any
oﬀ-resonance hopping events remain negligibly rare.

Using these assumptions, we will demonstrate how a
quantized current of N = 1 electron per cycle can be pro-
duced; equivalent to the red dot in Fig. 3(a). Figure 3(b)
shows the resonances of energy levels with source and
drain as a function of top gate voltages. Red dashed
lines represent resonances of the states in the barriers
(µg1, µg2 = EF). Black lines represent resonances of
the central island’s electrochemical potential (µn = EF),
which are at an angle of δ ≈ 38◦ to the Vg2-axis. For clar-
ity, the n electron resonance is highlighted in cyan. By
applying the RF signals to the top gates, the path shown
in blue is produced (angle to Vg2-axis γ = 50◦). The
RF signals on the gates are π-shifted, therefore no area
is enclosed in the Vg1-Vg2-plane. Therefore, this single-
parameter pumping process is non-adiabatic.4

In Fig. 3(c) positions of the energy levels are sketched
for certain points along the path. Starting at frame 1,
µg1 ≤ EF, allowing the central island to be ﬁlled from
the source to an occupancy of n electrons. Next, frame 2
highlights the non-adiabaticity of the process:4 Even
though EF < µn, the occupancy of the central island
remains unchanged, as no state in any barrier is in the
appropriate energy window (µn < µg1, µg2). Finally, in
frame 3, µg2 < µn, allowing one electron to exit the
central island to the drain. Following the path back to
frame 1, no electrons enter or leave the dot, as none of
the requirements for transport are met. During one cy-
cle, N = 1 electron has been transported from source to
drain in this example.

To change the number N of electrons transported per
cycle, the top gate DC voltages can be changed. Fig-
ure 4(a) shows a pump current measurement as a func-
tion of both top gate voltages, applying the same RF sig-
nals as before. The path along which the measurement
in Fig. 3(a) has been taken is indicated by the solid red
line. The situation described in Fig. 3(b) is highlighted
by the red dot, where a current of I = 1ef is measured.
Positions in gate voltage of the dopant resonances are
marked with red dashed lines. The observed pattern fea-
tures two main structures: Towards more negative Vg2,
a set of diamonds with quantized current is visible. The
ﬁrst column has a value of 1ef , the second column a value
of 2ef . Going towards more positive Vg2, the diamond

3

shape is replaced with a set of anti-diagonal stripes on
which the produced current stays constant. Their slope
is found to be equal to the angle γ of the gate voltage
path (blue line in Fig. 2).

To compare the measurement with the described model
and explain the observed changes in the transferred num-
ber of electrons per cycle N , a simple simulation has been
made counting the number of electrons transferred dur-
ing one pump cycle following the above assumptions for
transport to and from the central island. The following
experimentally gained parameters are used for the simu-
lation (lever arms α = dµ/edV ): The resonance positions
of the states in the barriers as function of gate voltages
(from Fig. 2), the lever arms of gate voltage to the bar-
rier state’s energy, α1 ≈ 0.26 and α2 ≈ 0.42, and to the
central island’s potential, α1c ≈ 0.45 and α2c ≈ 0.35, and
the charging energy of the central island Ec ≈ 4.3 meV
(all from Coulomb diamond measurements, not shown).
As the tunneling rates are assumed to be inﬁnite, electron
transfer takes place whenever possible, and the simula-
tion yields only integer values for N = I/ef .

The simulation is shown in Fig. 4(b). Red dashed lines
indicate the resonances of the relevant states under each
barrier. The produced pattern is almost point symmetric
around the crossing point of those resonances, with the
sign of the produced current being ﬂipped for one side of
the pattern. First, we will describe the region with pos-
itive current which ﬁts well with the measurement. The
other half will be discussed later. Point A is equivalent
to the situation depicted in Figs. 3(b) and 3(c), where
N = 1 electron is transmitted. Moving towards more
positive Vg1, point B is reached, where no electrons are
transported. Here, the ejection of the electron in frame 3
can not take place, as the condition for ejection µn > µg2
is not reached. Going from A into the opposite direction
towards C the current increases to N = 2 electrons. Here,
an additional electron can tunnel out during frame 3, as
µn−1 > µg1. When Vg1 is decreased further (point D),
no more electrons are transported. Here, the time de-
pendent gate voltage path does not cross the µg1 = EF
resonance any more, so no electrons are loaded into the
central island during frame 1. When going from point C
to E, an additional electron is loaded onto the central
island, as µn+2 < µg1 = EF during frame 1, leading to
a total current of 3ef . Going further towards point F,
the current switches between 4ef and 3ef several times
while the diamond shape is lost. In this region, additional
electrons tunnel onto the island during frame 1, but the
number of electrons emitted does not increase further, as
the µg2 = EF resonance is crossed before frame 3. Ac-
cording to the model, the nth electron can not be emitted
if µn > EF > µg2, which gives the anti-diagonal stripes
of constant current.

Comparing the simulation in the region where positive
current is expected with the measurement, one ﬁnds gen-
erally good agreement. While the maximum current in
the measurement is 3ef , it is 4ef in the simulation. Fur-
ther, the positive slope of the diamond shapes as well as

4

FIG. 4. (a) Measurement of pumped current as a function of DC gate voltages. Dashed red lines correspond to resonances
of states in the barriers under the gates. Solid red line corresponds to the cross section shown in Fig. 3(a). (b) Simulation of
the produced current using the same parameters as for the measurement in (a) [y-axis shared with (a)]. (c) Measurement of
pumped current for smaller amplitude and γ closer to δ. Reversal of current can be observed. (d) Simulation corresponding to
(c).

the slope of the column of diamonds diﬀer. The maxi-
mum current and both slopes depend on the lever arms
used for the simulation. We have used the values of the
latter measured in DC transport with either one of the
barriers removed and the potential of the island ﬁxed or
both barriers suﬃciently transparent even oﬀ dopant res-
onance, which is diﬀerent from the conditions for pump-
ing. A diﬀerence in screening conditions and the ne-
glected capacitive coupling of the central island to the
states in the barriers are possible sources of the discrep-
ancy. Capacitive coupling is also likely to cause the zig-
zag pattern at the bottom of the measured current map.
These eﬀects are subject to further investigation.

When the rules for electron transport are applied to
the whole gate range, the simulation suggests that the
pattern should be repeated with negative current in the
region of more positive gate voltages. This reversal of
current is not observed in the data in Fig. 4(a) due to
the presence of additional transport channels that were
neglected in the model. These transport channels become
more eﬀective at more positive gate voltages. Their eﬀect
can be minimized using RF signals with smaller ampli-
tude and γ = 40◦ closer to δ ≈ 38◦, yielding a pump cur-
rent that shows the expected reversal [Fig. 4(c)], although
the produced current is now limited to I = 1ef . A simu-
lation with a corresponding path shows good agreement

[Fig. 4(d)]. The inﬂuence of additional transport chan-
nels is subject to further research.

In summary, we have investigated a hybrid quantum
dot system consisting of a metallic island, whose tun-
nel coupling to source and drain is dominated by sin-
gle dopant states located in the barriers under the top
gates. A non-adiabatic pumping scheme using π-shifted
sinusoidal RF signals can be implemented to produce a
quantized current which is strongly dependent on the DC
gate voltages. With basic assumptions about the system
the process can be explained and modeled. A predicted
reversal of current, though obscured by additional trans-
port channels at large RF amplitude, is observed for small
RF amplitudes. This demonstrates the possibility of gate
controlled current reversal for metrological applications.
Future work will focus on the reduction of additional res-
onances in the barriers and on improving the model by
including additional transport channels, ﬁnite rates and
capacitive coupling between dopants and central island
in order to investigate the dynamics of coupled single
dopant-quantum dot systems.

We are grateful to R. Haug for fruitful discussions.
We acknowledge ﬁnancial support through the EC FP7-
ICT initiative under Project SiAM No 610637 and from
the Nanosciences foundation through the excellence chair
program.

∗ tobias.wenz@ptb.de
† frank.hohls@ptb.de
1 C. Grenier, R. Herv´e, G. F`eve, and P. Degiovanni, Mod.

Phys. Lett. B 25, 1053 (2011).

2 I. M. Mills, P. J. Mohr, T. J. Quinn, B. N. Taylor, and
E. R. Williams, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 369, 3907 (2011).

3 J. P. Pekola, O.-P. Saira, V. F. Maisi, A. Kemppinen,
and D. V. Averin, Rev.

M. M¨ott¨onen, Y. A. Pashkin,
Mod. Phys. 85, 1421 (2013).

4 B. Kaestner and V. Kashcheyevs, Rep. Prog. Phys. 78,

103901 (2015).

5 F. Stein, D. Drung, L. Fricke, H. Scherer, F. Hohls, C. Le-

(a)(b)(c)(d)ABCDFEicht, M. G¨otz, C. Krause, R. Behr, E. Pesel, K. Pierz,
U. Siegner, F. J. Ahlers, and H. W. Schumacher, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 107, 103501 (2015).

6 S. Giblin, M. Kataoka, J. Fletcher, P. See, T. Janssen,
J. Griﬃths, G. Jones, I. Farrer, and D. Ritchie, Nat. Com-
mun. 3, 930 (2012).

7 M.-H. Bae, Y.-H. Ahn, M. Seo, Y. Chung, J. D. Fletcher,
S. P. Giblin, M. Kataoka, and N. Kim, Metrologia 52, 195
(2015).

8 A. Fujiwara, K. Nishiguchi, and Y. Ono, Appl. Phys. Lett.

92, 042102 (2008).

9 X. Jehl, B. Voisin, T. Charron, P. Clapera, S. Ray,
B. Roche, M. Sanquer, S. Djordjevic, L. Devoille, R. Wac-
quez, and M. Vinet, Phys. Rev. X 3, 021012 (2013).

10 A. Rossi, T. Tanttu, K. Y. Tan, I. Iisakka, R. Zhao, K. W.
Chan, G. C. Tettamanzi, S. Rogge, A. S. Dzurak, and
M. M¨ott¨onen, Nano Lett. 14, 3405 (2014).

11 P. Clapera, S. Ray, X. Jehl, M. Sanquer, A. Valentian, and

S. Barraud, Phys. Rev. Applied 4, 044009 (2015).

12 G. Yamahata, K. Nishiguchi, and A. Fujiwara, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 98, 222104 (2011).

13 T. Tanttu, A. Rossi, K. Y. Tan, K.-E. Huhtinen, K. W.
Chan, M. M¨ott¨onen, and A. S. Dzurak, New J. Phys. 17,
103030 (2015).

14 L. Fricke, M. Wulf, B. Kaestner, V. Kashcheyevs, J. Tim-
oshenko, P. Nazarov, F. Hohls, P. Mirovsky, B. Mackrodt,
R. Dolata, T. Weimann, K. Pierz, and H. W. Schumacher,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 126803 (2013).

15 L. Fricke, M. Wulf, B. Kaestner, F. Hohls, P. Mirovsky,
B. Mackrodt, R. Dolata, T. Weimann, K. Pierz, U. Sieg-
ner, and H. W. Schumacher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 226803
(2014).

16 G. P. Lansbergen, Y. Ono, and A. Fujiwara, Nano Lett.

12, 763 (2012).

5

17 B. Roche, R.-P. Riwar, B. Voisin, E. Dupont-Ferrier,
R. Wacquez, M. Vinet, M. Sanquer, J. Splettstoesser, and
X. Jehl, Nat. Commun. 4, 1581 (2013).

18 G. C. Tettamanzi, R. Wacquez, and S. Rogge, New J.

Phys. 16, 063036 (2014).

19 G. Yamahata, K. Nishiguchi, and A. Fujiwara, Nat. Com-

mun. 5, (2014).

20 K. W. Chan, M. M¨ott¨onen, A. Kemppinen, N. S. Lai, K. Y.
Tan, W. H. Lim, and A. S. Dzurak, Appl. Phys. Lett. 98,
212103 (2011).

21 B. Roche, B. Voisin, X. Jehl, R. Wacquez, M. Sanquer,
M. Vinet, V. Deshpande, and B. Previtali, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 100, 032107 (2012).

22 M. Tabe, D. Moraru, M. Ligowski, M. Anwar, R. Jablonski,
Y. Ono, and T. Mizuno, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 016803
(2010).

23 B. Voisin, M. Cobian, X. Jehl, M. Vinet, Y.-M. Niquet,
C. Delerue, S. de Franceschi, and M. Sanquer, Phys. Rev.
B 89, 161404 (2014).

24 J. Verduijn, G. C. Tettamanzi, and S. Rogge, Nano Lett.

13, 1476 (2013).

25 K. Y. Tan, K. W. Chan, M. M¨ott¨onen, A. Morello,
C. Yang, J. van Donkelaar, A. Alves, J.-M. Pirkkalainen,
D. N. Jamieson, R. G. Clark, and A. S. Dzurak, Nano
Lett. 10, 11 (2010).

26 G. P. Lansbergen, R. Rahman, C. J. Wellard, I. Woo,
J. Caro, N. Collaert, S. Biesemans, G. Klimeck, L. C. L.
Hollenberg, and S. Rogge, Nat. Phys. 4, 656 (2008).

27 V. N. Golovach, X. Jehl, M. Houzet, M. Pierre, B. Roche,
M. Sanquer, and L. I. Glazman, Phys. Rev. B 83, 075401
(2011).
28 The resonance of the lowest state under gate 1 (found at
Vg1 = −835 mV) is very weakly coupled and cannot be
resolved in this measurement.

