Efﬁcient 3-D Placement of an Aerial Base Station

in Next Generation Cellular Networks

R. Irem Bor Yaliniz, Amr El-Keyi, and Halim Yanikomeroglu

Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada

6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
6
2

 

 
 
]

.

C
O
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
0
0
3
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Agility and resilience requirements of future cellular
networks may not be fully satisﬁed by terrestrial base stations in
cases of unexpected or temporary events. A promising solution is
assisting the cellular network via low-altitude unmanned aerial
vehicles equipped with base stations, i.e., drone-cells. Although
drone-cells provide a quick deployment opportunity as aerial
base stations, efﬁcient placement becomes one of the key issues.
In addition to mobility of the drone-cells in the vertical dimension
as well as the horizontal dimension, the differences between the
air-to-ground and terrestrial channels cause the placement of the
drone-cells to diverge from placement of terrestrial base stations.
In this paper, we ﬁrst highlight the properties of the drone-
cell placement problem, and formulate it as a 3-D placement
problem with the objective of maximizing the revenue of the
network. After some mathematical manipulations, we formulate
an equivalent quadratically-constrained mixed integer non-linear
optimization problem and propose a computationally efﬁcient
numerical solution for this problem. We verify our analytical
derivations with numerical simulations and enrich them with
discussions which could serve as guidelines for researchers,
mobile network operators, and policy makers.

I. INTRODUCTION

Next generation cellular networks have high reliability and
availability demands [1]. Be it a natural disaster, extreme
densities of users in an area, or providing connectivity in
rural areas, the cellular network needs to meet certain quality
of service (QoS) requirements. However, these situations are
either unexpected, or temporary. As a result, it is not feasible
to invest in an infrastructure that will provide revenue for a
relatively short time. A potential solution to these problems is
assisting the cellular network via low-altitude unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAV) that can serve as aerial base stations with a
quick deployment opportunity, i.e. drone-cells. However, one
of the biggest challenges is to determine the optimal placement
of the drone-cell so that the network can beneﬁt the most.

Although there has been signiﬁcant amount of work on
using UAVs in surveillance and reconnaissance networks [2],
[3], using UAVs to assist future cellular networks is still at its
infancy. In [4] and [5], the positioning of aerial relays is dis-
cussed. However, both works have a ﬁxed altitude assumption
and place the UAV on a line segment without considering
the relation between the coverage area and the altitude of
the UAV. Moreover, the effects of urban environment on the

This work was supported in part by Huawei Canada Co., Ltd., in part
by the Ontario Ministry of Economic Development and Innovations ORF-
RE (Ontario Research FundResearch Excellence) program, and in part by
the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)
Discovery Grants program.

performance of communications is not considered. Both issues
are addressed in [6], which provides fundamental results on
the optimal altitude of a drone-cell, and the channel model
to be utilized in urban environments. Accordingly, the authors
of [7] investigate the coverage of two drone-cells positioned
at a ﬁxed altitude, and interfering with each other over a
given area. The effects of interference is further studied in the
presence of underlaid device-to-device (D2D) communications
in [8]. In this work, there is no other base station except the
drone-cell, which comes with the assumption that the area
to be covered is known. A similar approach in [9] shows
the improvement in the coverage by assisting the network
with drone-cells at a certain altitude, in case of failure of
Evolved Node Bs (eNBs). However, these studies neither cover
all potential scenarios, nor show the optimal results for all
possible selections of altitude, location, and coverage area.
For instance, in case of a congested cell, neither the size of
the area to be covered, nor the location of that area within
the cell is known. These parameters need to be determined
according to the target revenue, and the QoS requirements.
Moreover, determining the altitude of the UAV is intertwined
in this problem because of the characteristics of the channel
between the UAV and the terrestrial users, namely the air-to-
ground channel.

The work presented so far either considers the altitude,
which is 1-D, or placement in the horizontal space, which
is 2-D. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst
to propose an efﬁcient 3-D placement algorithm for drone-
cells in cellular networks by jointly determining the area to
be covered, and the altitude of the drone-cell. We begin by
discussing the characteristics of the air-to-ground channel. The
discussion on how the placement of a drone-cell is different
than the placement of terrestrial base stations leads us to the 3-
D placement formulation. Our objective in this formulation is
to maximize the revenue of the network, which is proportional
to the number of users covered by the drone-cell.

Due to the complexity of the channel model, the solution
of the 3-D placement problem formulation cannot be directly
found. In order to solve this problem, we introduce a new
variable relating the altitude of the drone-cell to the radius
of its coverage area. Although there is not an analytical
expression for the optimal value of this variable, it can be
efﬁciently obtained by using one dimensional bisection search.
Afterwards, the 3-D placement problem reduces to a mixed-
integer non-linear problem (MINLP), which can be solved by
using the interior point optimizer of the MOSEK solver.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We present
the system model, and discuss the channel model in detail
in Section II. Next, the description of the 3-D placement
problem, and the solution method are presented in Section III.
Numerical results validating our derivations are presented in
Section IV. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section V.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

Consider a macrocell where the location of each user i is
known and represented by (xi, yi). We assume that for a user
to be served, the QoS measured by the received signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) should be above a certain threshold. In case
of an extreme event, such as congestion within the cell, or
malfunction of the infrastructure, the terrestrial base station
may become unable to serve all users. Hence,
it will be
assisted by a drone-cell with ﬁxed transmission power. We
consider a low-altitude quasi-stationary UAV for this purpose,
and would like to determine the altitude h, and location,
(xD, yD), providing the maximum revenue. Assuming a ﬁxed
QoS for all users, the maximum revenue can be obtained by
ofﬂoading the maximum amount of users to the drone-cell.
The placement of the drone-cell affects both the number of
users enclosed by the its coverage region, and the quality of
the air-to-ground links. Utilization of air-to-ground links is a
characteristic of aerial base stations. There has been several
studies on air-to-ground channel models, which we discuss
next.

The air-to-ground channel differs from the terrestrial chan-
nel due to its higher chance of line-of-sight (LoS) connectivity.
As a result, Rician [2], large scale Rayleigh [3], and free
space fading [4] models are widely utilized in the literature for
air-to-ground channels. However, none of them considers the
effect of the environment on the occurrence of LoS. One of
the most complete models on the effects of building blockage
on radio propagation is proposed by ITU in [10]. With the
help of the results in [10], a channel model for air-to-ground
communication in urban environments is presented in [6]
and [11], and adopted here.

The probability of having LoS for user i depends on
the altitude of the drone-cell, h, and the horizontal dis-
tance between the drone-cell and ith user, which is ri =

(cid:112)(xD − xi)2 + (yD − yi)2 for the ith user located at (xi, yi)

and the drone-cell at (xD, yD). The LoS probability is given
by [6]

P (h, ri) =

1 + a exp

(cid:16)

(cid:16)−b

1

arctan

(cid:16) h

ri

(cid:17) − a
(cid:17)(cid:17) ,

(1)

where a and b are constant values that depend on the environ-
ment. In this setting, the altitude of the user, and the antenna
heights of both the users and the drone-cell are neglected.
Then the pathloss expression becomes [6]

(cid:18) 4πfc

(cid:19)

(cid:18)(cid:113)

(cid:19)

L(h, ri) = 20 log

c

+ 20 log

+
P (h, ri)ηLoS + (1 − P (h, ri))ηNLoS,

h2 + r2
i

(2)

Fig. 1: A possible scenario showing the users that are not
covered by the eNB. Three potential placements of a drone-
cell is highlighted.

where fc is the carrier frequency (Hz), c is the speed of light
(m/s), ηLoS and ηN LoS (in dB) are respectively the losses
corresponding to the LoS and non-LoS connections depending
on the environment. Equivalently, (2) can be written as

(cid:18)(cid:113)

(cid:19)

h2 + r2
i

L(h, ri) = 20 log

+ AP (h, ri) + B,

(3)
where A and B are constants such that A = ηLoS − ηNLoS,
and B = 20 log( 4πfc
c ) + ηNLoS. Note that the pathloss model
presented here is a function of both h and ri. In other words,
the pathloss of the air-to-ground link depends on the altitude
in the vertical dimension, and the distance in the horizontal
dimension. Thus, we have a 3-D placement problem.

III. EFFICIENT 3-D PLACEMENT OF A UAV

Placement of a drone-cell is different than terrestrial cell

placement because of the following reasons:

1) In addition to choosing the drone-cell’s location in the
horizontal space (xD, yD), we need to determine its
altitude, h, as well.

2) The coverage area of a terrestrial cell is known a priori.
However, the coverage area of a drone-cell depends on
its altitude, and is unknown before solving the placement
problem.

3) The mobility of the drone-cell allows it to move wher-
ever the demand is, rather than terrestrial cells waiting
for the demand to come towards them. As a result, the
coverage region providing the maximum revenue to the
network should be found.

The ﬁrst item indicates that the placement of the drone-cell
is a 3-D problem. In addition, the last two items, which are
determining the size of the coverage area, and identifying the
location of the coverage area must be considered jointly.

A possible placement problem is shown in Fig. 1. Assume
that the macrocell is congested, where only the users that
cannot be served by the eNB are shown. Three potential areas
to be covered by deploying a drone-cell at different altitudes
and locations are highlighted. Note that in each case, as well as
the altitude of the drone-cell, the size of the area to be covered
is changing, which in turn, affects the number of users served

by the drone-cell. In this section, we will formulate and solve
the 3-D placement problem efﬁciently to serve the maximum
number of users with the minimum required area.

We assume that a user is in the coverage region of the drone-
cell if the air-to-ground link satisﬁes its QoS requirement. For
a given transmission power of the drone-cell, let γ represent
the pathloss corresponding to the QoS requirement. Hence,
user i is served by the drone-cell, if L(h, ri) ≤ γ. Using (3),
we can re-write this condition as

i ≤ 10

γ−(AP (h,ri)+B)

10

h2 + r2

(4)
Let ui ∈ {0, 1} denote a binary variable that indicates whether
user i is served by the drone-cell, or not. Using the variable
ui, which is equal to 1, only if the user i is served by the
drone-cell, and equal to 0 otherwise, the following constraint,

.

ui(h2 + r2

i ) ≤ 10

γ−(AP (h,ri)+B)

10

,

(5)

determines whether user i is covered, or not. This constraint
can be further manipulated to

h2 + r2

i ≤ 10

γ−(AP (h,ri)+B)

10

+ M1(1 − ui),

(6)

where M1 is a constant that is slightly larger than the max-
imum possible value of the distance between a user and the
drone-cell. Observe that when ui = 1, (6) is equivalent to (5).
If ui = 0, since M1 is large enough, this constraint is released.
Now, we can continue by determining the objective function.
Assuming a ﬁxed QoS for all users, the best region to
be served by the drone-cell is identiﬁed with the maximum
number of users covered. By using (6), the placement problem
for a set of users, U that are not covered by the macrocell can
be written as

(cid:88)

i∈U

ui

maximize
xD,yD,h,{ui}
subject to

i ≤ 10
h2 + r2
xl ≤ xD ≤ xu,
yl ≤ yD ≤ yu,
hl ≤ h ≤ hu,
ui ∈ {0, 1},

γ−(AP (h,ri)+B)

10

+ M1(1 − ui), ∀i = 1, ...,|U|,

(7)

∀i = 1, ...,|U|,
where |·| represents the cardinality of a set, subscripts (·)l and
(·)u denote respectively the minimum and maximum allowed
values for xD, yD, and h of the drone-cell. Note that there
are quadratic, exponential and binary terms in this problem,
which makes it a MINLP. We will show that this problem can
be solved efﬁciently by using a combination of the interior-
point optimizer of MOSEK solver and bisection search.

Observe that if P (h, r) was a constant, then this optimiza-
tion problem would be quadratically constrained MINLP. Let
us denote the radius of the area to be covered by R and
introduce the variable α as

α =

h
R

.

(8)

Then, if user i is covered, R ≥ ri must be satisﬁed, i.e., the
served user must be located within the coverage region. This
conditional expression is similar to (5), and consequently is
equivalent to

R ≥ ri − M2(1 − ui),

(9)

as in (6), where M2 is a constant value which is slightly
larger than the maximum possible value of R. Also, the ﬁrst
constraint in (7) becomes

where

R2 ≤ Γ(α),

Γ(α) =

γ−(AP (α)+B)

10

10

(1 + α2)

,

(10)

(11)

which enables us to omit the variable h from (7), since P (α)
is

P (α) =

1 + a exp (−b (arctan (α) − a))

(12)

1

by (1). Thus, (7) becomes

(cid:88)

ui

maximize

xD,yD,{ui},R,α
subject to R2 ≤ Γ(α) + M1(1 − ui),

i∈U

R ≥ ri − M2(1 − ui),
xl ≤ xD ≤ xu,
yl ≤ yD ≤ yu,
R ≥ 0,
ui ∈ {0, 1},

∀i = 1, ...,|U|,
∀i = 1, ...,|U|,

(13)

∀i = 1, ...,|U|.

Note that if α and R are known, h can be evaluated by
using (8). Since the variable α appears only in the right-hand-
side of the ﬁrst constraint of (13), the optimum value of α,
which maximizes Γ(α), maximizes the size of the feasible
set of (13). Next, we numerically show that Γ(α) has only
one local maxima. Hence, there exists a certain value, α∗ that
maximizes Γ(α).
Conjecture 1. For any QoS requirement, γ, and for any
operating frequency, fc, if a local maxima exists in the function
Γ(α) deﬁned in (11), then it is the only local maxima of
the function for α ∈ [0,∞] for the propagation environments
whose parameters are listed in Table I.

Observation. Observe that γ and B in (11) only scale the
value of Γ(α). Since B = 20 log( 4πfc
c )+ηNLoS, it also follows
that the behaviour of Γ(α) does not depend on fc. In other
words, the maximum point, α∗, does not change for different
γ and fc, but the value of Γ(α∗) is scaled.

The behaviour of Γ(α) is only determined by the environ-
ment parameters in A and P (α). By numerically plotting (11)
in Fig. 2, we show that for all environments there exists only
one maximum value, which occurs at α∗. Moreover, it is
observed that the local maximas marked in Fig. 2 are the only
maximas for all environments.

Algorithm 1 Bisection Search Algorithm
1: N ← 0, α1 = 0, α2 = tan(89.9◦)
2: while N ≤ Nu do
3:

(cid:16) dΓ(α)

α3 ← α1+α2
if

2

dα

α∗ = α3
break

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)α=α3
(cid:17)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)α=α3
(cid:16) dΓ(α)

end if
N ← N + 1
if sign

dα
α1 = α3

4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
end if
13:
14: end while

else

α2 = α3

= 0 or (α2 − α1) ≤  then

(cid:17)

= sign

(cid:16) dΓ(α)

dα

(cid:17)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)α=α1

then

Fig. 2: Γ(α) versus α for various environments.

TABLE II: Simulation Parameters

TABLE I: RF Propagation Parameters of different environ-
ments

Environment

Suburban

Urban

Dense Urban

High-rise Urban

Parameters (a, b, ηLoS, ηNLoS)

(4.88, 0.43, 0.1, 21)
(9.61, 0.16, 1, 20)

(12.08, 0.11, 1.6, 23)
(27.23, 0.08, 2.3, 34)

Parameter
(xl, xu)
(yl, yu)

(γ1, γ2, γ3)

fc
Nu


Monte Carlo Runs

Value

(-1450, 1450) m
(-1258, 1258) m
(90, 100, 125) dB

2.5 GHz
100
10−5
100

We can use the derivative of Γ(α) to ﬁnd α∗, which is the

root of dΓ(α)

dα , that can be calculated as
dΓ(α)

where K = 18 log(10)

10 log(e), and ∆, Λ and Ω are

= − 10Λ
Ω∆2

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

dα

(cid:18)

∆ =

a exp

b

Λ =

(cid:0)2α∆2 + AbK (∆ − 1)(cid:1) ,
(cid:19)

+ 1

,

(cid:19)(cid:19)
(cid:19)

,

arctan(α)

a − 180
π
γ − B − A
∆

(cid:18)
Ω =(cid:0)α2 + 1(cid:1)2

1
10

.

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

Finally, we proceed with the bisection search to ﬁnd the root
dα , which is α∗. Note that, ∆ yields that the maximum
of dΓ(α)
value of α∗ can be tan(90◦). Also, the minimum value of α∗
is 0, because α∗ is a ratio of positive quantities. The bisection
search algorithm with a maximum number of iterations, Nu,
and tolerance, , can be summarized in Algorithm 1.
After evaluating α∗ using Algorithm 1, the problem given
by (13) becomes MINLP, and can be solved to ﬁnd xD, yD,
{ui}, and R by interior point optimizer of MOSEK solver.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

The numerical values of the parameters of the air-to-ground
channels for different environments are calculated based on [6]
and [10], and presented in Table I. Also, all simulation
parameters are provided in Table II. It is assumed that the

drone-cell have enough capacity to serve all the users in the
coverage region. The effect of different environments is shown
in Fig. 3 for 25 users by using γ2. After ﬁnding α∗ by using
Algorithm 1, the solution of the optimization problem in (13)
yields R, which determines the size of the circular coverage
region, and the location of the drone-cell in 2-D space, as
shown with an asterisk in the corresponding color for each
environment in Fig. 3. Note that not only the size of the region,
but also the location of the drone-cell changes. Observe that
there are users (some of them are pointed by arrows) right on
the edge of the coverage region, which means that the altitude
is determined efﬁciently such that there is no area wasted.
As expected, the area covered by the suburban environment
has the largest size, due to the reduced blockage compared
to other environments. On the other hand, the high-rise urban
environment has the worst coverage.

To elaborate more on the effect of environment param-
eters and the performance of the algorithm, we show the
average revenue for varying QoS requirements in different
environments together with 95% conﬁdence interval for the
revenue in Fig. 4. The results are obtained by using 100 Monte
Carlo simulations. In each simulation, 40 users are generated
randomly in the cell according to a uniform probability distri-
bution. The results show that the number of served users varies
by at most 1 user. Hence, the performance of the proposed
method is consistent. The parameter γ3 provides the maximum
revenue by enabling a coverage area larger than the size of
the macrocell, because we are allowing a pathloss of 125 dB
for the user to be served. Note that the average revenue for

100101101102103104αΓ(α)  SuburbanUrbanDense UrbanHighrise UrbanLocal MaximaV. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have studied the 3-D placement problem
of a drone-cell. First, we discussed the characteristics of the
air-to-ground channel, and observed that they can be captured
only by considering both the altitude of the drone-cell, and
locations of the drone-cell and the users in the horizontal
dimension. This yielded a 3-D placement problem with the
objective of maximizing the revenue, which is measured by
the maximum number of users covered by the drone-cell. We
have formulated an equivalent problem which can be solved
efﬁciently to ﬁnd the location and size of the coverage region,
and the altitude of the drone-cell.

Our model can be used for many possible communication
scenarios, including failure and congestion. The results pre-
sented here can be used by proper authorities to manage and
regulate drone-cells assisting cellular networks to meet high
demands of the future wireless cellular networks. The effect
of interference, and using several drone-cells are interesting
future research directions.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Osseiran, F. Boccardi, V. Braun, K. Kusume, P. Marsch, M. Maternia,
O. Queseth, M. Schellmann, H. Schotten, H. Taoka, H. Tullberg,
M. Uusitalo, B. Timus, and M. Fallgren, “Scenarios for 5G mobile
and wireless communications: The vision of the METIS project,” IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 26–35, May 2014.

[2] S. Kandeepan, K. Gomez, L. Reynaud, and T. Rasheed, “Aerial-
terrestrial communications: Terrestrial cooperation and energy-efﬁcient
transmissions to aerial base stations,” IEEE Trans. on Aerosp. and
Electron. Syst., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 2715–2735, Oct. 2014.

[3] P. Zhan, K. Yu, and A. Swindlehurst, “Wireless relay communications
with unmanned aerial vehicles: Performance and optimization,” IEEE
Trans. on Aerosp. and Electron. Syst., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 2068–2085,
Jul. 2011.

[4] S. Rohde, M. Putzke, and C. Wietfeld, “Ad-hoc self-healing of
OFDMA networks using UAV-based relays,” Ad Hoc Networks,
vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 1893–1906, Sep. 2013.
[Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S157087051200131X

[5] X. Li, D. Guo, H. Yin, and G. Wei, “Drone-assisted public safety
wireless broadband network,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. and
Netw. Conf. Workshops (WCNCW), Mar. 2015, pp. 323–328.

[6] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and S. Lardner, “Optimal LAP altitude
for maximum coverage,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Letters, vol. 3, no. 6,
pp. 569–572, Dec. 2014.

[7] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah, “Drone small
cells in the clouds: Design, deployment and performance analysis,”
arXiv:1509.01655 [cs, math], Sep. 2015, arXiv: 1509.01655. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.01655

[8] ——, “Unmanned aerial vehicle with underlaid device-to-device
communications: Performance and tradeoffs,” arXiv:1509.01187 [cs,
math], Sep. 2015. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.01187
[9] A. Merwaday and I. Guvenc, “UAV assisted heterogeneous networks for
public safety communications,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. and
Netw. Conf. Workshops (WCNCW), Mar. 2015, pp. 329–334.

[10] “Propagation data and prediction methods required for the design of
terrestrial broadband radio access systems operating in a frequency
range from 3 to 60 GHz,” International Telecommunication Union
Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R), Recommendation ITU-R P.1410-
5, Feb. 2012.

[11] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and A. Jamalipour, “Modeling air-to-
ground path loss for low altitude platforms in urban environments,”
in IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2014, pp. 2898–
2904.

[12] M. Mirahsan, R. Schoenen, and H. Yanikomeroglu, “HetHetNets:
Heterogeneous trafﬁc distribution in heterogeneous wireless cellular
networks,” IEEE J. on Sel. Areas in Commun., vol. 33, no. 10, October
2015.

Fig. 3: Effect of environment on the location and size of the
coverage area (circles in the ﬁgure) is shown.

Fig. 4: Mean number of users covered in different environ-
ments with 95% conﬁdence interval. 40 users are distributed
uniformly in one macrocell.

the high-rise urban environment is signiﬁcantly worse than
the other environments for this sparse user distribution. The
dramatic drop of revenue can be understood by comparing
the parameters of suburban and high-rise urban environments.
For instance, ηNLoS increases by 13 dB for the high-rise
environment, which alone can reduce the coverage area by
more than 100 times. Considering the changes in the other
parameters,
the signiﬁcant reduction in the coverage area,
and accordingly revenue, is not surprising. However, more
users could be covered if the users were in proximity to each
other, i.e., clustered. Hence, measuring trafﬁc characteristics
in space, such as the amount of clustering as shown in [12],
can be of signiﬁcant importance for determining the efﬁciency
of drone-cell assistance for cellular networks.

−1000−50005001000−1000−50005001000Sux-dimension(m)y-dimension(m)U DUHU  User LocationsSuburban (Su)Urban (U)Dense Urban (DU)Highrise Urban (HU)SuburbanUrbanDense UrbanHigh−rise Urban0510152025303540EnvironmentMeannumberofuserscovered  γ1γ2γ3