EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Complexity Methods Applied to Turbulence in
Plasma Astrophysics

Loukas Vlahos and Heinz Isliker

Department of Physics, Aristotle University, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece

Abstract. In this review many of the well known tools for the analy-
sis of Complex systems are used in order to study the global coupling
of the turbulent convection zone with the solar atmosphere where the
magnetic energy is dissipated explosively. Several well documented ob-
servations are not easy to interpret with the use of Magnetohydrody-
namic (MHD) and/or Kinetic numerical codes. Such observations are:
(1) The size distribution of the Active Regions (AR) on the solar sur-
face, (2) The fractal and multi fractal characteristics of the observed
magnetograms, (3) The Self-Organised characteristics of the explosive
magnetic energy release and (4) the very eﬃcient acceleration of par-
ticles during the ﬂaring periods in the solar corona. We review brieﬂy
the work published the last twenty ﬁve years on the above issues and
propose solutions by using methods borrowed from the analysis of com-
plex systems. The scenario which emerged is as follows: (a) The fully
developed turbulence in the convection zone generates and transports
magnetic ﬂux tubes to the solar surface. Using probabilistic percola-
tion models we were able to reproduce the size distribution and the
fractal properties of the emerged and randomly moving magnetic ﬂux
tubes. (b) Using a Non Linear Force Free (NLFF) magnetic extrapo-
lation numerical code we can explore how the emerged magnetic ﬂux
tubes interact nonlinearly and form thin and Unstable Current Sheets
(UCS) inside the coronal part of the AR. (c) The fragmentation of the
UCS and the redistribution of the magnetic ﬁeld locally, when the lo-
cal current exceeds a Critical threshold, is a key process which drives
avalanches and forms coherent structures. This local reorganization of
the magnetic ﬁeld, enhances the energy dissipation and inﬂuences the
global evolution of the complex magnetic topology. Using a Cellular
Automaton and follow the simple rules of Self Organized Criticality
(SOC), we were able to reproduce the statistical characteristics of the
observed time series of the explosive events, (d) ﬁnally, when the AR
reaches the turbulently reconnecting state (in the language of the
SOC theory this is called SOC state) it is densely populated by UCS
which can act as local scatterers replacing the (magnetic clouds) in
the Fermi scenario and enhance dramatically the heating and acceler-
ation of charged particles.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
4
9
3
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

Will be inserted by the editor

1 Introduction

A rapidly growing area of scientiﬁc inquiry is the exploration of the dynamics of com-
plex systems. A deﬁning characteristic of complex systems is their tendency to self-
organize globally as a result of many local interactions. In other words, organization
occurs without any central organizing structure or entity. Such self-organization has
been observed in systems at scales from neurons to ecosystems. A complex adaptive
system has the following characteristics: it persists in spite of changes in the diverse
individual components of which it is comprised; the interactions between those com-
ponents are responsible for the persistence of the system; and the system itself engages
in adaptation or learning ([55], pp.4). To say that a system is complex is to say that
it moves between order and disorder without becoming ﬁxed in either state. To say
that such a system adapts is to say that it responds to information by changing.

There are systems that persist in spite of the continual changes of individual com-
ponents, maintaining coherence and adapting in response to a phenomenal amount
of information throughout the lifetime of the organism in which they function ([55],
pp. 2-3).

The process by which a complex system achieves adaption results in self-organization

by the system, that is, agents acting locally, unaware of the extent of the larger sys-
tem of which they are a part, generate larger patterns which result in the organization
of the system as a whole. Not every system is a complex adaptive system; certain con-
ditions must be met in order for a system to self-organize. First of all, the system
must include a large number of agents. In addition, the agents must interact in a
nonlinear fashion (see [67,68]).

Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence is a very common phenomenon in many
astrophysical and laboratory plasma systems. Although the driver which is responsible
for the ﬂuctuations may be diﬀerent, the end product is always the same and depends
on the energy carried by the possibly unstable magnetic ﬂuctuations. When the level
of the unstable ﬂuctuations (δB) is small in comparison with the the ambient magnetic
ﬁled B (δB/B << 1) the turbulence is called weak turbulence and systems driven
to large amplitude magnetic ﬂuctuations (δB/B ≥ 1) are called strong turbulence
(or fully developed turbulence). The main diﬀerence between weak and strong
turbulence is the formation of coherent structures (Eddies and/or Unstable Current
Sheets) which play a crucial role in the dissipation of the magnetic energy in strong
turbulence. In weak turbulence the unstable waves loose energy by interacting quasi-
linearly with the plasma particles. In this article, we will be addressing phenomena
related mostly with strong turbulence, which will be called simply turbulence.

Many astrophysical and laboratory systems are in the turbulent state. Such well
known systems are: e.g. the convection zone of the Sun and stars, the solar wind,
Earth’s magnetotail, Earth’s Bow shock, the supernova remnants, the accretion discs
and the relativistic jets around compact objects, super clusters of galaxies, edge tur-
bulence in laboratory plasmas, etc. The driver which brings all the above systems
into a turbulent state is diﬀerent but the systems they share several properties which
will be discussed in this review.

The formation of coherent structures (Eddies and Unstable Current Sheets) inside
turbulent systems, has been investigated with many diﬀerent numerical and analytical
tools. In this article we will concentrate on numerical tools which are used extensively
in the analysis of complex systems. The most popular numerical tool used to analyse
complex systems is the Cellular Automaton (CA) [24]. The set up for the CA depends
strongly on the qualitative analysis of the physical system under study, which deﬁnes
the rules of the CA. The succes of the outcome of the CA is tested with the direct
comparison with the data and parallel MHD simulations. So complex systems, like
turbulent plasmas, can be explored by CA models (on the global astrophysical scales)

Will be inserted by the editor

3

and MHD or kinetic simulations for the local scales. The MHD and Kinetic simulations
can serve as tools for testing the rules of the CA.

In this review we will focus on phenomena related to the strong coupling of the
turbulent convection zone with the atmosphere of the Sun, and more precisely the
regions on the solar surface which host strong magnetic ﬁeld patterns and are called
Active Regions (AR). The convection zone is the outer-most layer of the solar interior.
It extends from a depth of 200,000 km up to the visible surface of the Sun. The co-
herent structures (eddies) inside the convection zone generate and transport towards
the surface numerous thin loops (also called threads, ﬁbrils and etc.) The thin loops
are analogous to the agents mentioned earlier. The thin loops generated in the tur-
bulent convection zone are numerous and they interact nonlinearly to form coherent
magnetic patterns in the solar photosphere (analogous to the coherent structures in
ecosystems) and drive the heating and acceleration of particles in the complex mag-
netic topology above the photosphere by forming current sheets at diﬀerent scales.

In this review we address three important questions wich are closely related to

the nonlinear magnetic coupling of the turbulent convection zone with the AR.

– How the thin magnetic loops form the observed coherent magnetic patterns in the

solar photosphere?

– How the driven complex magnetic topology above the photosphere is forming
numerous thin current sheets (some of them unstable) and drive the observed
Self-Organized explosive phenomena?

– How the the Self-Organised turbulent current sheets heat and accelerate the

plasma inside the AR?

In section 2 we apply the percolation theory to simulate the formation of the pho-
tospheric part of the AR, in section 3 we discuss brieﬂy the role of Self Organized
Criticality (SOC) in solar physics and the interpretation of the explosive patterns,
in section 4 we discuss the heating and acceleration of particles in turbulently recon-
necting astrophysical systems and in section 5 we discuss our main conclusions.

2 Percolation theory in astrophysics: Formation of solar active
regions

2.1 Statistical analysis of the solar magnetograms

In Fig. 1 we present a typical magnetogram. Magnetograms reproduce the strength
and location of the magnetic ﬁelds on the Sun. In a magnetogram, grey areas indicate
that there is no magnetic ﬁeld, while black and white areas indicate regions where
there is a strong magnetic ﬁeld.

Numerous observational studies have investigated the statistical properties of ac-
tive regions, using full-disc magnetograms. These studies have examined among other
parameters the Probability Distribution Function (PDF) of the size distribution of
ARs, and their fractal dimension: The size distribution function of the newly
formed ARs exhibits a well deﬁned power law with index ≈ −1.94 (see Figure 2a),
and ARs cover only a small fraction of the solar surface (around ∼ 8%) [54]. The frac-
tal dimension and the multifractal structure function spectrum of the active regions
has been studied using high-resolution magnetograms [14,81,51]. These authors found,
using not always the same method, a fractal dimension D0 in the range 1.2 < D0 < 1.7
(see Fig. 2b). The fractal dimensions for the solar magnetic ﬁelds are typically calcu-
lated using the box-counting technique. The values of the fractal dimension also de-
pends on whether the structures themselves or just their boundaries are box counted.

4

Will be inserted by the editor

Fig. 1. (a) A full disk magnetogram. Several AR are present in the solar surface (b)
Zoom on the details of one AR.

Fig. 2. (a) The size distribution of young active regions [54] (b) The fractal Dimension
D0 from a typical active region magnetogram, where ǫ is a dimensional variable related
with the size of the boxes covering the AR.[51]

The analysis has been pursued even further using the concepts of multi-fractality
[82,1,70]. It is well known that an AR includes multiple types of structures such as
diﬀerent classes of sunspots, plages, emerging ﬂux sub-regions, etc. The physics be-
hind the formation and evolution of each of these structures is not believed to be the
same, so the impact and the ﬁnal outcome of the convection zone turbulence in each
of these structures should not be the same. Numerous other tools have been used to
uncover aspects of the complex behavior “mapped” by the convection zone onto the
photospheric boundary, e.g. generalized correlation dimension, structure formations,
wavelet power spectrum (see [50]).

2.2 Formation of Active Regions through the turbulent diﬀusion of magnetic ﬂux
tubes

The evolution of a single ﬂux tube from the overshoot layer, where it is generated
till it reaches the photosphere, is a very diﬃcult and challenging problem. Studies
of the dynamics of a 1-D (slender) ﬂux tube are useful since they permit calculation
of the evolution as the ﬂux-tube propagates through the convection zone. The 2-D
and 3-D characteristics of the rise of magnetic ﬂux tubes allow us to understand the

Will be inserted by the editor

5

role of the twist in the properties of a rising ﬂux-tube [2,100,6,5,7,39,12,46,45]. A
review of the main results on the evolution of 1-D, 2-D and 3-D ﬂux tubes was given
by Moreno-Insertis [84,40]. It is well documented from numerical simulations that
twisted ﬂux tubes can rise almost without change through the convection zone, if the
azimuthal magnetic ﬁeld is strong. Two very important questions should be addressed:
(1) How are ﬂux-tubes formed from a large scale magnetic ﬁeld, and (2) which is the
origin of the twist in the ﬂux tubes. Hughes et al. [58] address this problem, their main
conclusion is that the non-linear evolution of the magnetic Rayleigh-Taylor instability
is responsible for the formation of magnetic ﬂux tubes. The origin of the twist is a
much more complex problem. There are several possibilities: (1) the ﬂux-tubes are
formed with a large twist in the overshoot layer, (2) the twist is built-up during the
propagation inside the convection zone. It is still an open question if the required
twist can be there from “birth” or is added later. We are far from understanding the
details both of the formation and the origin of the twist. Large scale 3-D simulations
of the formation and evolution of magnetic ﬂux tubes will solve many of the open
problems that still exist.

We move from the single ﬂux-tube scenario to the idea that magnetic ﬂux-tubes
of all sizes and twists are generated in the overshoot layer and propagate towards
the photosphere. The idea to study the formation of active regions as the outcome of
the statistical evolution of N randomly moving ﬂux-tubes was proposed by Bogdan
[18] and developed further in [19,20]. Similar studies on the statistical mechanics of
a gas of vortices, embedded in a two-dimensional inviscid ﬂuid, were performed by
Fr¨ohlich & Ruelle [42]. The evolution of a collection of N ﬂux-tubes has the potential
to address the statistical properties of the observed data but it has remained in the
deﬁnition stage since there are several free parameters which cannot be controled by
observations.

We just noted that also several models have been developed using the anomalous
diﬀusion of magnetic ﬂux in the solar photosphere in order to explain the fractal
geometry of the active regions [94,71,72,83].

2.3 Models based on Percolation theory

Almost forty years ago, Seiden and Wentzel [95,117] developed a percolation model
to simulate the formation and evolution of active regions. In this model, the evo-
lution of active regions is followed by reducing all the complicated solar MHD and
turbulence to three dimensionless parameters. This percolation model explained the
observed size distribution of active regions and their fractal characteristics [81]. Vlahos
et al. [111] developed further the percolation model for the emergence and evolution
of magnetic ﬂux on the solar surface using a 2-D cellular automaton (CA), follow-
ing techniques developed initially by Seiden and Wentzel [95]. The dynamics of this
automaton is probabilistic and is based on the competition between two “ﬁghting”
tendencies: stimulated or spontaneous emergence of new magnetic ﬂux, and the
disappearance of ﬂux due to diﬀusion (i.e. dilution below observable limits), together
with random motion of the ﬂux tubes on the solar surface. The basic new element
they added to the initial model [95] was that they kept track of the energy release
through ﬂux cancellation (reconnection) if ﬂux tubes of opposite polarities collide.
They concentrated their analysis only on the newly formed active regions, since the
old active regions undergo more complicated behavior.

Following Vlahos et al. [111] the main physical properties of active regions, as
derived from the observations of the evolving active regions, can be summarized in
simple CA rules: A 2-D quadratic grid with 200×1000 cells (grid sites) is constructed,
in which each cell has four nearest neighbors. The grid is assumed to represent a large

6

Will be inserted by the editor

fraction of the solar surface. Initially, a small, randomly chosen percentage (1%) of
the cells is magnetized (loaded with ﬂux) in the form of positively (+1) and negatively
(-1) magnetized pairs (dipoles), the rest of the grid points are set to zero. Positive
and negative cells evolve independently after their formation, but their percentage
remains statistically equal. The dynamical evolution of the model is controlled by the
following probabilities:

P: The probability that a magnetized cell is stimulating the appearance of new ﬂux
at one of its nearest neighbors. Each magnetized cell can stimulate its neighbors only
the ﬁrst time step of its life. This procedure simulates the stimulated emergence of
ﬂux which occurs due to the observed tendency of magnetic ﬂux to emerge in regions
of the solar surface in which magnetic ﬂux had previously emerged.
Dm: The ﬂux of each magnetized cell has a probability Dm to move to a random
neighboring cell, simulating motions forced by the turbulent dynamics of the un-
derlying convection zone. If the moving ﬂux meets oppositely polarized ﬂux in a
neighboring cell, the ﬂuxes cancel (through reconnection), giving rise to a “ﬂare”. If
equal polarities meet in a motion event, the ﬂuxes simply add up.

%

Fig. 3. A small portion of the modeled grid is presented. The dark areas represent
negative and the white ones positive magnetic ﬂux. The explosions (“ﬂares”) appear
randomly at the interface of regions of oppositely polarized magnetic ﬂux. The circles
represent the positions of the “ﬂares”, with their radius being proportional to the
logarithm of the released energy [111]

Dd: The probability that a magnetized cell is turned into non-magnetized in one
time-step if it is next to a non-magnetized cell. This rule simulates two eﬀects, the
direct submersion of magnetic ﬂux and the disappearing of ﬂux below observational
limits due to dilution caused by diﬀusion into the empty neighborhood.
E: The probability that a non-magnetized cell is turned into magnetized sponta-
neously, independently of its neighbors, simulating the observed spontaneous emer-
gence of new ﬂux. Every newly appearing ﬂux tube is accompanied by an oppositely
polarized mate, taking into account the fact that ﬂux appears always in the form of
dipoles.

Will be inserted by the editor

7

A detailed discussion of the connection between the parameters P, Dd, E and the
physical mechanisms acting in the evolution of active regions was established [95,117].
Vlahos et al. [111] performed a series of numerical experiments using the above model.
The parameters used for the results reported here are P = 0.185, Dd = 0.005, Dm =
0.05 and E = 10−6. They are chosen such that, when following the evolution
of our model and recording the percentage of magnetized cells, we ﬁnd
that it takes around 1000 time steps before the percentage of active cells
is stabilized to a value which is close to the observed one (around 8%). In
Fig. 3, we present a small portion of the grid. Dark areas correspond to negative and
bright ones to positive polarity. The spatial location of the “ﬂares” is marked with
circles, with the size of the circles proportional to the logarithm of the locally released
energy.

The size distribution of the simulated active regions is estimated and is approxi-
mated by a power law ﬁt of the form N (s) ∼ s−k, with k = 1.93 ± 0.08. Finally, we
estimate the fractal dimension D0 of the set of magnetized cells with the box counting
algorithm [38], ﬁnding D0 = 1.42 ± 0.12. Both these results are well in accordance
with the observations.

The cancellation of magnetic ﬂux due to collisions of oppositely polarized magnetic
ﬂux tubes leads to the release of energy, whose amount we assume to be proportional
to the diﬀerence in the square of the magnetic ﬂux before and after the event (as an
approximation of the diﬀerences in magnetic energy).

%

%

Fig. 4. (a) The energy released in the cancellation of magnetic ﬂux as a function of
time, using the parameters P = 1.185, Dd = 0.005, Dm = 0.05, E = 10−6. (b) The
energy distribution of the recorded “ﬂares”. The power-law index is 2.5 ± 0.13. [111]

In Fig. 4a, we plot the released energy E(t) as a function of time. Fig. 4b shows the
energy distribution of the recorded “explosions”: It follows a power law, f (E) ∼ E−a,
with a = 2.5 ± 0.13, for energies E > 20. For energies E < 20 ﬁnite resolution eﬀects
must be expected to bias the distribution, so we do not draw conclusions for the small
energies. It is important to note also that the power law in the distribution of energy
is extended over three decades.

A variation of the parameters P, Dd, Dm does not alter the power law behaviours
and the fractality, they seem to be generic properties of the model. The exact val-
ues of the parameters, k, a, D0 depend though on the free parameters but remain
inside the observed limits even for a large variation of P, Dd, Dm. The results are also
independent of E as long as it remains small enough.

It has been pointed out [51] that the global statistical properties of the ARs dis-
cussed above cannot serve as a tool for predicting ﬂaring or non ﬂaring activity on
the Sun, since the multiscale AR properties underline the self-organization driven by

8

Will be inserted by the editor

turbulence, means intermittency in the systems response, hence lack of predictability.
In other words, it is not possible to use multiscale measures that exemplify intermit-
tency, or stochasticity, for prediction purposes.

3 Explosive phenomena in solar active regions: The role of the
turbulent driver and Self-Organized Criticality

3.1 Preliminaries and the statistical properties of explosive phenomena

ARs are non linear and open dynamical astrophysical systems, where the turbulent
driver (convection zone) forces the magnetic ﬁled topology constantly away from
the equilibrium since new magnetic threads or loops emerge from the convection
zone and are subject to surface diﬀusive random motion, which leads to magnetic
shears and cancellation of magnetic energy when they collide with other magnetic
structures and form current sheets (see Fig. 5). Since the magnetic Reynolds number
is very large in the solar corona, MHD theory states that magnetic energy can
only be released in localized regions where the magnetic ﬁeld generally
creates very steep local gradients with the adjusted strong-ﬁeld regions,
i.e. in unstable current sheets (UCS). Observations of the solar X-ray corona

%

%

Fig. 5. (a) A Full disk picture of the Sun with a dozen active regions over a ﬁve-day
period (May 14-18, 2015), (b) The turbulent convection zone generates new magnetic
ﬂux. Magnetic buoyancy forces the magnetic ﬁeld towards the solar surface, therefore
it acts as the driver for the emerged magnetic topology. The nonlinear coupling of
two dynamical systems is behind many well known astrophysical phenomena.

have been reported in the literature since the early seventies. In the early eighties
several authors showed that the peak-luminosity distribution of ﬂares displays a well-
deﬁned, extended power law with an index −1.8 ± 0.05 (see [76,25]). Deviations from
the power law behaviour appear in the lowest energies. It has been pointed out that
these deviations are due to instrumental limitations.

Will be inserted by the editor

9

Fig. 6. (a) A typical time series of solar ﬂares, (b) The frequency distribution of the
peak count rate

3.2 Non Linear Magnetic extrapolation of the AR and the formation of magnetic
discontinuities

Numerous articles (see recent reviews [29,77]) are devoted to the analysis of magnetic
topologies which can host UCSs. The main trend of current research in this area
is to ﬁnd ways to realistically reconstruct the 3-D magnetic ﬁeld topology in the
corona based on the available magnetograms and large-scale plasma motions at the
photosphere. A realistic magnetic ﬁeld incorporates many “poles and sources” [77] and
naturally has a relatively large number of UCSs. We feel that simple representation
of the UCS’s inside the 3D AR (dipoles, quadrupoles, symmetric magnetic arcades),
while mathematically appealing [12] cannot be realistic since such simple topologies
are broken by the photospheric driver, for example due to large-scale sub-Alfv´enic
photospheric motions or the emergence of new magnetic ﬂux that disturbs the corona.
All these constraints restrict our ability to reconstruct fully the dynamically evolving
magnetic ﬁeld of an active region (and it is not clear that an exact reconstruction will
ever be possible).

Dimitropoulou et al. [30,31,32] and Toutountzi et al. [101] used a model for the
3D reconstruction of the magnetic ﬁeld in the corona under the force-free assumption.
Hence, meaning that the electrical currents ﬂow strictly along the magnetic ﬁeld lines
together with the absence of magnetic monopoles in the bounded volume. In vector
notation:

∇ × B = α B ; ∇ · B = 0

(1)

where α is the force-free parameter, which in general is a function of position but
is conserved along each ﬁeld line. This is the case of Non-Linear Force-Free (NLFF)
ﬁelds, which has generally advanced our understanding of the overall morphology of
ARs (see [119] and references therein). A special case is the linear force-free ﬁeld, in
which α is assumed to be constant, but when the extrapolated magnetic ﬁeld lines are
compared to structures from EUV images [119], it is seen to fail to recover the overall
magnetic ﬁeld topology. For our investigations we used an optimization technique [118]
for computing the NLFF ﬁeld in the corona. Using appropriate boundary conditions,
this numerical method yields a NLFF ﬁeld solution by minimizing a penalty function,
L, in the computational volume, V , as

L = Z

V

w(x, y, z)[B−2|(∇ × B) × B|2 + |∇ · B|2] dV

(2)

10

Will be inserted by the editor

where w(x, y, z) is a scalar function with a value of 1 in the physical domain of the
volume that drops smoothly to zero when approaching the top and lateral boundaries.
When L = 0, both the Lorentz force is zero and the solenoidal condition is satisﬁed
in the entire computational volume, which then contains the NLFF ﬁeld.

An example of the resulting 3D NLFF ﬁeld is shown in Fig. 7a. In 7b the isosurfaces
of the current density ( ∇ × B correspond to the red cube of the 7a. It is important
to notice that the UCS are concentrated in the low corona in the quiet AR.

Fig. 7. (a)Original magnetogram for the eruptive NOAA AR 11158 on February 14,
2011 at 21:58 UT together with the NLFF ﬁeld lines. (b) Spontaneous formation of
UCS in the low corona due to the twist of magnetic ﬁelds in a complex magnetic
topology [101]

Dimitropoulou at al. [30] studied the corelation of the fractal structures in the
photosphere and the coronal magnetic ﬁeld. They conclude that there is no correlation
between the 2D fractal dimension in the photosphere and the 3D fractal dimension
in the NLFF reconstructed magnetic topology. Photospheric turbulence remains the
driver for the coronal instabilities, but the strong nonlinearity of the system in the
lower coronal layers destroys any kind of direct relation between the photospheric
structures and their coronal counterparts. The photospheric driver forces the system
to accumulate a large number of magnetic discontinuities that store enough energy
to explain the statistical properties of the solar activity in case of release. These
discontinuities form patterns that do not follow the morphological properties of the
photospheric magnetic ﬂux concentrations, but have a strong impact on the expected
dynamical activity of the system as we will see next.

The spatial distribution of the UCS with height shows that 80% of the magnetic
discontinuities are accumulated in the lower corona (within 20 Mm from the photo-
sphere). The system is evidently highly unstable at these heights, due to processes
that are clearly nonlinear. It is this strong nonlinearity at lower layers that does not
allow the corona to respond proportionally to changes imposed by the photospheric
driver.

Will be inserted by the editor

11

3.3 The local and global evolution of UCS

3.3.1 Local evolution of an isolated or a small number of UCS

Research on reconnecting magnetic ﬁelds has undergone a dramatic evolution recently
due mostly to the development of the numerical simulation techniques. Long current
sheets or multiple interactig current sheets will form on a short time scale a new collec-
tion of current sheets which are the results of the current fragmentation[36,87,88,57,53,69,15,16,85,120],
(see also recent reviews [114,22,74]). On the other hand, Alfven waves and large scale
disturbances travelling along complex magnetic topologies will drive magnetic discon-
tinuities by reinforcing existing current sheets or form new unstable current sheets
(see [80,17,3,49,34,35,27,37,8,21,9,102] ). The interplay between turbulence and mag-
netic reconnection has been studied recently in several publications [73,115,65] and
the statistical properties of the magnetic reconnection sites [49,33,96,97]

The most important point reported in many studies is the fragmentation of the
UCS and the redistribution of magnetic ﬂux [88,28,57,120] (see Fig. 8a) which is
closely related with one of the basic rules of Self-Organised Criticality reported in
the next section. Hood at al. [56] moved one step further and demonstrated for the
ﬁrst time how an MHD avalanche might occur in a multi thread coronal loop system
(see Fig. 8b). They showed how once one stable thread is disrupted, it coalesces with
neighboring threads and this process continues disrupting more and more threads and
an avalanche will occur [56].

3.3.2 Global evolution of UCS, Self-Organized Criticality and Turbulent Reconection

The existence of power laws in the frequency distribution of the explosive activity
(see Fig. 6) may suggest that explosions are a self-organization phenomenon in the
AR. Lu and Hamilton [78] were the ﬁrst to realize that ARs may be in the Self-
Organized Critical state and proposed that explosions ultimately are caused by small
magnetic perturbations (δB) (Loading) which gradually force the CS become UCS
when a critical threshold is passed. The local fragmentation of the UCS causes
a re-organization of the unstable magnetic topology which may cause avalanches
of all sizes (nano-ﬂares, micro-ﬂares, ﬂares) (the basic ideas of SOC were initially
proposed by Bak et al. [13] twenty ﬁve years ago). This model opened the way for a
series of similar models developed during the last twenty ﬁve years (see reviews by
[64,23,11,10]).

There are many ways to develop CA models to represent SOC [11], one of them
based its rules on the MHD equations [60,61]. The proposed set-up can be super-
imposed onto each classical solar ﬂare CA model, and which makes the latter in-
terpretable in a MHD-consistent way (by classical CA models we mean the mod-
els of [78] (LH91) and their modiﬁcations, which are based on the sand-pile anal-
ogy [110,47,48,43]). The set-up thus speciﬁes the physical interpretation of the grid-
variables and allows the derivation of quantities such as currents etc. It does not
interfere with the dynamics of the CA (unless wished): loading, redistributing (burst-
ing), and the appearance of avalanches and Self-Organized Criticality (SOC), if the
latter are implied by the evolution rules, remain unchanged. The result is therefore
still a CA model, with all the advantages of CA, namely that they are fast, that
they model large spatial regions (and large events), and therewith that they yield
good statistics. Since the set-up introduces all the relevant physical variables into the
context of the CA models, it automatically leads to a better physical understanding
of the CA models. It reveals which relevant plasma processes and in what form are
actually implemented, and what the global ﬂare scenario is the CA models imply. All

12

Will be inserted by the editor

Fig. 8. (a) surface of Jz at tci = 50. The isosurface level is 60% of the maximum
current density (a 2D slice of the same quantity is shown on the bottom) [28] (b)
Twenty three threads are used in the avalanche simulation. The twisted ﬁeld lines
outline just three of the threads. The contours of the axial current density are shown
in the mid-plane. The gaps between the threads are ﬁlled with a uniform axial ﬁeld.
(c) Contours of the axial current at the mid plane (z = 0) during the later stages
when the avalanche ocurred. Here the background resistivity is zero. Red corresponds
to positive current, blue to negative and white to zero. [56]

this was more or less hidden so far in the abstract evolution rules. It leads also to
the possibility to change the CA models (the rules) at the guide-line of MHD, if this
should become desirable. Not least, the set-up opens a way for further comparison of
the CA models to observations.

The speciﬁcations the set-up meets are : The vector Aijk at the grid sites xijk
denotes the local vector-ﬁeld, A(xijk). Note that this was not speciﬁed in the classical
CA models. Lu et al. [79] for instance discuss this point: it might also have been
thought of as a mean local ﬁeld, i.e. the average over an elementary cell in the grid.
Guided by the idea that we want to assure ∇·B = 0 for the magnetic ﬁeld B, which
is most easily achieved by having the vector-potential A as the primary variable and
letting B be the corresponding derivative of A (B = ∇ × A), we furthermore assume
that the grid variable A of the CA model is identical with the vector-potential.

The remaining and actually most basic problem then is to ﬁnd an adequate way to
calculate derivatives in the grid. In general, CA models assume that the grid-spacing
is ﬁnite, which also holds for the CA model of [78] (as shown in detail by [59], so
that the most straightforward way of replacing diﬀerential expressions with diﬀerence

Will be inserted by the editor

13

expressions is not adequate. Consequently, one has to ﬁnd a way of continuing the
vector-ﬁeld into the space in-between the grid-sites, which will allow to calculate
derivatives. For this purpose we use spline interpolation, where the 3D interpolation
is performed as three subsequent 1D interpolations in the three spatial directions
([92]). For the 1D splines, we assume natural boundaries (the second derivatives are
zero at the boundaries).

With the help of this interpolation, the magnetic ﬁeld B and the current J are

calculated as derivatives of A, according to the MHD prescription:

B = ∇ × A,

J =

c
4π

∇ × B.

(3)

(4)

According to MHD, the electric ﬁeld is given by Ohm’s law, E = ηJ − 1

c v × B,
with η the diﬀusivity and v the ﬂuid velocity. Since the classical CA models use no
velocity-ﬁeld, our set-up can yield only the resistive part,

E = ηJ.

(5)

In applications such as to solar explosions, where the interest is in current dissipation
events, i.e. in events where η and J are strongly increased, Eq. 5 can be expected to
be a good approximation to the electric ﬁeld. Theoretically, the convective term in
Ohm’s law would in general yield just a low-intensity, background electric ﬁeld.

Eq. 5 needs to be supplemented with a speciﬁcation of the diﬀusivity η: [59] have
shown that in the classical CA models the diﬀusivity adopts the values η = 1 at the
unstable (bursting) sites, and η = 0 everywhere else. This speciﬁes Eq.5 completely.
This set-up of Isliker et al. [60,61] for classical solar ﬂare CA models yields, among
others, consistency with Maxwell’s equations (e.g. divergence-free magnetic ﬁeld), and
availability of secondary variables such as currents and electric ﬁelds in accordance
with MHD.

The main aim in [60,61] with the introduced set-up was to demonstrate that the
set-up truly extends the classical CA models and makes them richer in the sense that
they contain much more information, now. The main features we revealed about the
CA models, extended with this set-up, are:
1. Large-scale organization of the vector-potential and the magnetic ﬁeld:
The ﬁeld topology during SOC state is bound to characteristic large-scale structures
which span the whole grid, very pronounced for the primary grid variable, the vector-
potential, but also for the magnetic ﬁeld . Bursts and ﬂares are just slight disturbances
propagating over the large-scale structures, which are always maintained, also in the
largest events.
2. Increased current at unstable grid-sites: Unstable sites are characterized by
an enhanced current, which is reduced after a burst has taken place, as a result of
which the current at a grid-site in the neighbourhood may be increased.
3. Availability of the electric ﬁeld: The electric ﬁeld is calculated with the re-
sistive part of Ohm’s law, which can be expected to be a good approximation in
applications where the interest is in current-dissipation events, e.g. in the case of
solar ﬂares.
4. Energy release in terms of Ohmic dissipation: We replaced the some-what
ad hoc formula in the CA models to estimate the energy released in a burst with the
expression for Ohmic dissipation in terms of the current. The distributions yielded in
this way are very similar to the ones based on the ad hoc formula, so that the results
of the CA models remain basically unchanged.
5. CA as models for current dissipations: As a consequence of point 2 and 4
in this list, and of the fact that there is an approximate linear relation between the

14

Will be inserted by the editor

Fig. 9. (a) Three dimensional isosurfaces of electric current density derived from the
CA model ([61]) (b) Isosurfaces of electric current density, from 3D MHD experiments
with boundary driven magnetic dissipation ([86,44])

current and the stress measure of the CA, we can conclude that the extended CA
models can be considered as models for energy release through current dissipation.

It is important to mention here another attempt made by [86,43,44] to simulate,
using a 3-D MHD code, the sporadic development and evolution of current sheets of
all sizes inside an active region. They used periodic “y-z” boundaries and perfectly
conducting rigid x-boundaries with sinusoidal shear with randomly changing direction
and phase, acting on an initial magnetic ﬁeld with straight ﬁeld lines. It is remarkable
to note the appearance of non-steady current surfaces as it is the case with the CA
model presented above (see Fig. 9). The boundary motion used in these studies is still
very simple and has no direct inﬂuence on the characteristics of the energy release.
Fragos et al. [41] used the “magnetograms” developed with the percolation method
and a linear extrapolation to search for the statistical properties of the reconstructed
AR and Vlahos and Georgoulis [113] did the same using observations, noticed that the
re-organization of the magnetic ﬁelds is a potential way to identify UCS in the coronal
part of the AR. Dimitropoulou et al. [32] use a series of observed magnetogarms to
drive the SOC model proposed by Isliker et al. [60,61]. They obtain robust power laws
in the distribution functions of the modeled ﬂaring events with scaling law indices
that agree well with the observations.

Models along these lines have been proposed ([107,108,109,4] see also Fig. 10) in
the mid 80’s and the beginning of the 90’s and remain undeveloped due to the lack of
tools for the global analysis of the active regions till recently. The nonlinear coupling
of the turbulent convection zone with the AR and the consistency of the results
obtained by the SOC theory with those expected by turbulence has been studied
intensively by several authors [104,105,106]. Uritsky et al. [104] examined in depth
the question of the relation of SOC with turbulence in the solar Corona and agree
with the suggestion made by Dahlburg et al. [26] that UCS and their fragmentation
can serve as the driver for the avalanches in the SOC scenario. Uritsky &
Devila [105] also suggested by studying an AR in a quiescent non-ﬂaring period that
(1) there is formation of non-potential magnetic structures with complex polarity
separation lines inside the active region, and (2) there are statistical signatures of
canceling bipolar magnetic structures coinciding with ﬂaring activity in the active
region. Each of these eﬀects can represent an unstable magnetic conﬁguration acting
as an energy source for coronal dissipation and heating. The development of a parallel
use of models based on the Complexity theory and the well established 3D MHD or
Kinetic codes is the only way to explore the interplay between global and local scales
in turbulent systems.

Will be inserted by the editor

15

Fig. 10. (a) Sketches of UCS developed intermittently at random positions [4] , (b)
3D MHD simulations and visualization of the turbulent electric ﬁeld | E | in the
simulation box (left). High values are in yellow (light) and low values in blue (dark)
and cross section of the current density Jz along the external magnetic ﬁeld in color
tones (right). Yellow (light) is positive Jz, blue (dark) is negative, and the superposed
arrows represent the velocity ﬁeld [35]

.

4 Anomalous energy transport in turbulently reconnecting Active
Regions

4.1 Systems far from equilibrium: The rotating annulus

The simple experiment of the rotating annulus, shown in Fig. 11a, allows to illustrate
the diﬀerences between normal and anomalous diﬀusion [98,116]. Water is pumped
into the annulus through a ring of holes marked with I and pumped out through a
second ring of holes marked with O. The annulus is completely ﬁlled with water and
rotates as a rigid body (the inner and outer walls rotate together). The pumping of
the ﬂuid generates a turbulent ﬂow in the annulus. A camera on top of the annulus
records the formation of the turbulent eddies inside the rotating annulus and allows
to track seeds of diﬀerent tracer particles injected into the ﬂuid and to monitor their
orbits (see Fig. 11).

In the case of normal diﬀusion, which occurs mainly in ﬂuids close to equilibrium,
the particle trajectories are characterized by irregular, but small steps, which makes
trajectories look irregular but still homogeneous. The trajectories shown in Fig. 11
for the highly turbulent rotating annulus, which is far away from equilibrium, show
diﬀerent types of orbits, with two basic new characteristic, there is “trapping” of
particles inside the eddies, where particles stay for ’unusually’ long times in a relatively
small spatial area, and there are “long ﬂights” of particles, where particles are carried
in a short time step over large distances, in some cases almost through th entire
system (for details on normal and anomalous diﬀusion of particles see [63]).

16

Will be inserted by the editor

Fig. 11. (a) Rotating annulus(b) The formation of eddies inside the rotating annulus,
as recorded by the camera (left panel), and (b) typical orbits of tracer particles inside
the annulus (right panel).

4.2 Charged particle diﬀusion in a fractal distribution of UCS

It has been suggested already that the coronal part of the complex magnetic topology
above the AR is densely populated by UCS. Their spatial population is fractal [30] and
their overall statistical characteristics e.g Probability Distribution Functions (PDF)
of Volumes (P (V )) and Currents (P (J)) can be estimated from the extrapolated
magnetic topologies or the SOC models when they reach the SOC state [60,32,101].
Vlahos et al. [112] performed a Monte Carlo simulation of the extended Continuous
Time Random Walk [63], in position and momentum space, in application to ﬂares in
the solar corona, with particular interest in the heating and acceleration of ions and
electrons.

The motion of charged particles inside an environment of randomly distributed
UCS (see Fig. 12) can be analyzed with the use of the two PDFs P (V ), P (J) and the
fractal dimension DF , following methods developed by Vlahos et al. [112]. The charged
particle (electron or ion) starts at a random point inside the AR with a random
velocity along the magnetic ﬁeld ui. The initial velocity distribution of the particles
is a Maxwellian with initial temperature T . The ambient density of the particles in
the low corona is approximately constant n0. The charged particle moves freely along
a distance si estimated from the fractal dimension DF (see details below) until it
reaches a current sheet where it is energized by the electric ﬁeld. This is estimated
by Ohm’s law E = ηJ, where η is the local resistivity and J is estimated from the
probability distribution P (J). In the case that the free travel of particles is longer
than the collisional mean free path we include the collisional losses in our analysis.
We follow the evolution of the particle distribution in successive time intervals. Let us

Will be inserted by the editor

17

E
i+1
   

   

   


s
i+1

   

   


s
i

  

  


E i

Fig. 12. (a) The basic elements of the random walk in a fractal collection of UCS
[112], (b) Contour plots of the total electric ﬁeld contribution from 2D MHD turbu-
lence [97]

discuss brieﬂy below the way we reconstruct the dynamic evolution of a distribution
of particles inside a fractal distribution of current sheets.

Free travel distance.− As it was pointed out by [62], the probability of a particle,
starting at an UCS in the AR, to travel freely a distance s before meeting again an
UCS is

DF − 2

sDF −2
max − sDF −2

min

P (s) =

sDF −3

smin < s < smax

(6)

if the UCSs are fractally distributed. This formula is an approximation that applies if
DF is strictly smaller than 2, as for the case examined here, where the distribution is
of power-law shape (the corresponding expressions for the cases DF = 2 and DF > 2
are diﬀerent and not cited here). Using the distribution P (s), we generate sequences
of random free travel distances si.

Collisional losses.− The electron and ion Coulomb collision frequency is given by

νe =

4πne4 ln Λ

m2

j V 3
j

(7)

where e is the elementary charge, me the electron mass, mi the ion mass and Λ the
Coulomb logarithm (see [66]) n the number density, j = e, i and Vj the thermal
velocity. The particles thus loose energy as they travel between current sheets located
at distances si, that are much larger than the mean free path.

Acceleration length.− Assuming that the particles interact with a current sheet with
volume Vj = ℓ2
j × d, where d is the width of the UCS , we estimate easily the length
ℓj of the current sheet,

ℓj = r Vj

d

where the volume Vj follows the probability distribution

P (Vj ) = AV −a

j

, V min

j

< Vj < V max

j

,

(8)

(9)

18

Will be inserted by the editor

where A is the normalization constant, Combining Eqs. 8 and 9 we can estimate the
UCSs’ random length ℓj.

Electric ﬁeld strength.− The electric ﬁeld along the magnetic ﬁeld, as we mentioned
already, inside the current sheet is

E = ηJ

(10)

where J is the current given by the probability distribution P (J). The resistivity is
assumed close to zero when J < jth and η ≈ ¯η ηS when J > jth, where ηS is the
Spitzer resistivity

ηS =

meνe
ne2

(11)

and ¯η is a free parameter. By including ¯η, we implicitly assume that due to the
relatively strong currents (J > jth) low frequency electrostatic waves are excited
and the particles interact with the waves much more eﬃciently than via Coulomb
collisions, so the resistivity is enhanced by several orders of magnitude and is called
‘anomalous’ [93,89,103,91]. According to the literature stated above, ¯η is proportional
to (J − jth). The choices for ¯η can be very diﬀerent for ﬂux emergence and explosive
events, thus aﬀecting dramatically both the time scale of energy release and the
heating and acceleration of particles.

Equations of Motion.− We assume that the motion is one dimensional along the
magnetic ﬁeld lines and the velocity of the particles generally is relativistic. The
motion of the particle is divided into two parts:

(a) Free travel along a distance si, suﬀering only collisional losses, where we apply
the simpliﬁed model of [75] for the Coulomb collisions of charged particles with a
background plasma population of temperature Tb,

ds
dt

= u

du
dt

= −νeu +(cid:18)q2νekBTb/mj(cid:19) Wt

(12)

(13)

where kB is the Boltzmann constant, mj the particle (ion/electron) mass, and Wt
is an independent Gaussian random variable with mean value zero and variance the
integration time-step ∆t. Equations (12) and (13) are solved by directly using the
analytical solution sa(τ ; s0, u0) and ua(τ ; u0) (with s0 and u0 the values of the position
and velocity at τ = 0) (see [52]). For a prescribed free travel distance si, we ﬁrst
calculate the total free travel time τi by solving the nonlinear equation sa(τi; s0 =
0, u0 = u(t)) = si, and then determine the new velocity as u(t+τi) = ua(τi; u0 = u(t))
in one step. This method has the additional beneﬁt that it allows to make the collision
model to be more realistic in that the collision frequency can be made proportional
to 1/u3, with the characteristic reduced collisionality at high velocities.

(b) The particle is energized by the UCS of length ℓj (Eq. 8)

ds
dt

= u

du
dt

= (e/mj) cos(α)E

(14)

(15)

Will be inserted by the editor

19

with α a random angle between the magnetic and the electric ﬁeld, in order to take
into account the arbitrary directionality of the electric ﬁeld.

The particle motion inside a turbulent reconnecting volume, with a large number
of UCS present (Fig. 12) has many similarities with the ﬁrst order Fermi acceleration
and it is a very eﬃcient accelerator (see [28]).

5 Summary and Discussion

The last twenty ﬁve years several attempts have been made to explore the links
between the convection zone and the AR as a multiscale turbulent laboratory. These
attempts started some time ago, when the 3D MHD simulations were in their infancy
(see for example Fig. 1 in [4] and Fig. 1 in [112]). We have returned to this theme
in this review with a new and improved synthesis which now relies more on MHD
simulations and less on CA models as it was the case several years ago. We are
analysing in this review a turbulent multi-scale system:

1. The global scale under study in this review is the solar AR and it has a scale of
thousands of Mm (see Fig. 5b). This global interaction of the convection zone with
the AR is responsible for the formation of the thin magnetic ﬂux tubes and their
transport to the solar surface where the photosheric part of the AR is formed.

2. Using the NLFF techniques for the reconstruction of the complex topology above
the AR we explore the formation of the UCS (see Fig. 10b). With the help of the
3D MHD codes we can explore the formation and evolution of the UCS inside a
box with a scale of several Mm [34].

3. Dropping the scale to thousands of Km, we can simulate the collection of UCS

which are in close proximity (see Fig. 9b) and can interact nonlinearly [43]

4. Moving down to tens of meters we observe the evolution and fragmentation of the

isolated UCS (see Fig. 8a) [28].

We thus here perform the analysis of the complex topology of the 3D magnetic
ﬁeld above the AR using methods borrowed from the complexity theory and 3D MHD
and/or Kinetc simulations. The main steps followed in our review are:

1. Formation of AR: On the largest scales (Fig. 5b) the convection zone played
the main role in forming (dynamo) and injecting and randomly perturbing the
magnetic ﬂux tubes once they have been emerged above the photosphere. The
use of the percolation theory in conjunction with the 3D MHD is an obvious step
to explore the statistical characteristics of this interaction but the progress in the
cross talking of the 3D MHD models with models based on the percolation theory
has been very slow. In the language of SOC this step is called the driver.

2. Formation of magnetic discontinuities and UCS: The reconstruction of the
AR with the use of NLFF and the identiﬁcation of UCS inside the 3D coronal
part of the AR (Fig. 10b) has been explored by many numerical models. Parker
in his famous conjecture [90] suggested that the random motion of the magnetic
ﬂux tubes will be responsible for the formation of the UCS. The formation of the
UCS has also been explored by several 3D MHD simulations the last ten years
[34]. In the language of SOC this step is one of the rules of the CA model and is
called Loading.

3. Multiple UCS as a host of avalanches Reducing our resolution even further to
tens of Km we can observe the presence of many UCS. The simulations of many
interacting UCS and their evolution approaching asymptotically avalanches it
have been analysed by Hood et al. [56] recently.

20

Will be inserted by the editor

4. Fragmentation of UCS and magnetic energy redistribution: On the small-
est scale (tens of meters) the fragmentation of a UCS has been established (see
the 3D MHD and kinetic simulations in [88,28]). Translating this step into the CA
rules means redistribution of magnetic energy and potentially drives avalanches
on the larger scales, as we pointed out before.

5. Turbulent reconnection and particle acceleration Once the system reaches
the SOC state a collection of UCS will have a fractal distribution inside the AR.
This state is analogous to the turbulently reconnecting state reported in many
turbulent systems in astrophysics [74] and has been explored with several 3D nu-
merical codes. This stage is strongly coupled with the current fragmentation and
the appearance of avalanches in the evolution of the UCS. In the language of SOC
this is called SOC state. It has been proposed that the interaction of charged
particles with the UCS [112] is an eﬃcient accelerator. This approach to energy
transport from the UCS to the plasma has many similarities and important diﬀer-
ences with the well known Fermi type accelerators with the role of the magnetic
clouds being taken by the UCS.
Reducing all the above analysis into the rules of the CA model:

– Driver Convection zone turbulence and very large scales (thousands of Mm)
– Loading Fractal photospheric patterns formed by the emergence and random
motion of the magnetic ﬂux tubes are driving the formation of UCS ( a few Mm
scale)

– Local redistribution of energy Fragmentation of UCS on local scales of tens

of meters

– Avalanches from the interaction of UCS on all scale from several Kms to several

Mms.

– The system reaches a SOC state asymptotically The turbulent reconnection

on the Mm scales.

– First order Fermi type heating and acceleration The interaction of the

particles with UCS in the turbulent reconnection stage.
It is important to stress in this review that the connection of the turbulent
driver (convection zone) with the turbulent reconnection state of the complex
magnetic topology in the coronal part of the AR is not simple and the transfer of
energy from the large scales to the small scales U
CS where it is dissipated is not
¯
analogous to the simple Kolmogoroﬀ ideas presented in the 40s. We are dealing with
a diﬀerent type of coupled system and the transfer of energy from the large scales to
the dissipation scales which may be much more common in large scale astrophysical
systems.

Unfortunately the research groups working with the MHD and kinetic codes have
not established yet a familiarity with the methods of complexity presented in this
review and the transfer of knowledge between the two communities is relatively slow.
We belive that this gap will close in the coming years.

Acknowledgements: We thank Drs A. Anastasiadis and M. Georgoulis for read-
ing the article and making valuable suggestions. authors acknowledge support by the
European Union (European Social Fund -ESF) and Greek national funds through
the Operational Program Education and Lifelong Learning of the National Strate-
gic Reference Framework (NSRF) -Research Funding Program: Thales: Investing in
knowledge society through the European Social Fund.

References

1. V. Abramenko, Sol. Phys., 228, 29 (2005)

Will be inserted by the editor

21

2. T. Amari, J.F. Luciani, J.J. Aly, Z. Mikic, J. Linker, ApJ , 595, 1231 (2003)
3. J. Ambrosiano, W.H. Matthaeus, M.L. Goldstein, D. Plante, J. Geoph. Res., 93, 14383

(1988)

4. A. Anastasiadis, L. Vlahos, M.K. Georgoulis, ApJ, 428, 819 (1994)
5. V. Archontis, F. Moreno-Insertis, K. Galsgaard, A. Hood, E. O’ Shea, A& A, 426, 1047

(2004)

6. V. Archontis, A.W. Hood, C. Brady, A&A, 46, 367 (2007)
7. V. Archontis, A. W. Hood, A. Savcheva, L. Golub, E. DeLuca, ApJ, 691, 1291 (2009)
8. K. Arzner, L. Vlahos, L., ApJ, 605, L69 (2004)
9. K. Arzner, B. Knaepen, D. Carati, N. Denewet, L. Vlahos, ApJ, 637, 322 (2006)
10. M. Aschwanden, et al., SSRv, 198, 47, 2014
11. Aschwanden, M., Self-Organized Criticality in Astrophysics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,

2011)

12. G. Aulanier, E. Pariat, P. Demoulin, A&A, 444, 961 (2005)
13. P. Bak, C. Tang, K. Wiesenfeld, Phys. Rev. Lett., 59, 381 (1987)
14. A.C. Balke, C. J. Schrijver, C. Zwaan, T.D. Tarbell, Sol. Phys., 143, 215 (1993)
15. M. Barta, J. Br¨uchner, M. Karlicky, P. Kotrc, ApJ, 730, 47 (2011)
16. G. Baumann, ˚A. Nordlund, ApJ, 759, 5 (2012)
17. D. Biskamp, H. Welter, 1989, Phys. Fluids B, 1, 1964 (1989)
18. J. T. Bogdan, Phys. Fluids, 27, 994 (1984)
19. J. T. Bogdan, ApJ, 299, 510 (1985)
20. J. T. Bogdan, I. Lerche, I., ApJ, 296, 719 (1985)
21. E. Buchin, M. Velli, ApJ, 662, 701 (2007)
22. P. J. Cargill, L. Vlahos, G. Baumann, J. F. Drake, ˚A. Nordlund, SSRev, 173, 223 (2012)
23. P. Charbonneau, S.W. McIntosh, H.L. Liu, T.J. Bogdan, Sol. Phys., 203, 321 (2002)
24. B. Chopard, M. Droz, Celular Automata Modelling of Physical Systems (Cambridge

University Press, Oxford, 2005)

25. N. B. Crosby, M. J. Aschwanden, B. R. Dennis, Sol. Phys., bf 143, 257 (1992)
26. R. B. Dahlburg et al., Ap.J., bf 622, 1191 (2005)
27. R. B. Dahlburg, G. Eunaudi, A. F. Rappazzo , M. Valli, A& A, 544, L20 (2012)
28. J. T. Dahlin, J. F. Drake, M. Swisdak, Phys. Plasmas, 22, 100704 (2015)
29. P. D´emoulin, Adv. Space Res., 39, 1367 (2007)
30. M. Dimitropoulou, M. Georgoulis, H. Isliker, L. Vlahos, A. Anastasisadis, D. Strintzi,

X. Mousas, A&A, 505, 1245 (2009)

31. M. Dimitropoulou, H. Isliker, L. Vlahos, M. Georgoulis, A&A, 529, 101 (2011)
32. M. Dimitropoulou, H. Isliker, L. Vlahos, M. Georgoulis, A&A, 553, 65 (2013)
33. P. Dmitruk, D. O. Gomez, E. E. DeLuca, ApJ, 505, 974 (1998)
34. P. Dmitruk, W.H. Matthaeus, N. Seenu, M.R. Brown, ApJ, 597, L81 (2003)
35. P. Dmitruk, W.H. Matthaeus, N. Seenu, ApJ., 617, 667 (2004)
36. J.D. Drake, M. Swisdak, H. Che, M. A. Shay, Nature, 443, 553 (2006)
37. G. Eunaudi, M. Velli, Phys. Plasmas, 6, 4146 (1999)
38. K. Falconer, Fractal Geometry, (John Wiley, Chichester, 1990).
39. Y.Fan, ApJ , 697, 1529, (2009)
40. Y.Fan, Living Rev. Solar Phys., 6, 4, (2009)
41. T. Fragos, M. Rantziou, L. Vlahos, A& A, 420, 719 (2003)
42. J. Fr¨ohlich, D. Ruelle, Comm. Math. Phys., 87, 1 (1982)
43. K. Galsgaard, A&A , 315, 312 (1996)
44. K. Galsgaard, ˚A. Nordlund, J. Geoph. Res., 102, 231 (1997)
45. K. Galsgaard, F. Moreno-Insertis, V. Archontis, A. Hood, ApJ, 618, L153 (2005)
46. K. Galsgaard, V. Archontis, F. Moreno-Insertis, A.W. Hood, ApJ., 666, 516 (2007)
47. M. K. Georgoulis, L. Vlahos, ApJ, 469, L135 (1996)
48. M. K. Georgoulis, L. Vlahos, A&A, 336, 721 (1998)
49. M. K. Georgoulis, M., Velli, G. Eunaudi, ApJ, 497, 957 (1998)
50. M.K. Georgoulis, Sol. Phys., 228, 5 (2005)
51. M.K. Georgoulis, M.K., Solar Phys., 276, 161 (2012)
52. D. T. Gillespie, Phys. Rev. E 54, 2084 (1996).

22

Will be inserted by the editor

53. M. Gordovsyy, P. K. Browning, ApJ, 729, 101 (2011)
54. K. L. Harvey, C. Zwaan, Sol. Phys., 148, 85 (1993)
55. J. Holland, Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity (Perseus, Cambridge, M,

1995)

56. A. W. Hood, P. J. Cargill, P. Browning, P.K. K. V. Tam, Ap.J., in press. (2016)
57. M. Hoshino, Phys. Rev. Lett. , 108, 135003 (2012)
58. D. W. Hughes, J. G. Wissink, P. C. Matthews, M.R. E. Proctor, in Advances in the
Physics of sunspots, 2005, eds. B. Schmieder, J.C. del Toro Iniesta and M. Vazquez, p. 66

59. H. Isliker, A. Anastasiadis, D. Vassiliadis, L. Vlahos: A& A, 363, 1134 (1998)
60. H. Isliker, A. Anastasiadis, L. Vlahos, A&A, 363, 1134 (2000)
61. H. Isliker, A. Anastasiadis, L. Vlahos, A&A, 377, 1068 (2001)
62. H. Isliker, L. Vlahos: Phys. Rev. E, 67, 026413 (2003)
63. H. Isliker, L. Vlahos, Y. Kominis, K. Hizanidis, eprint arXiv:0805.0419 (2008)
64. H. J. Jensen, Self-Organizsd Criticality: Emergent Complex Behaviour in Physical and

Biological Systems, (Campridge University Press, Oxford 1998)

65. H. Karimabadi, et al., Phys. Plasmas, 20, 012303 (2013)
66. C. F. Karney, Comput. Phys. Rep., 4, 183 (1986)
67. J. A. S. Kauﬀman, At home in the universe (Oxford, New York, 1995)
68. J.A.S. Kelso, Dynamic Paterns: The self-organization of brain and behavior (MIT Press,

Cambridge, M, 1995)

69. G. Kowal, E. M. de Gouveia Dal Pino, & A. Lazarian, Ap.J., 735, 102 (2011)
70. J. K. Lawrence, A.A. Ruzmaikin, A. C. Cadavid, ApJ, 417, 805 (1993)
71. J. K. Lawrence, Sol. Phys. 135, 249 (1991)
72. J. K. Lawrence, C. J. Schrijver, ApJ, 411, 402 (1993)
73. A. Lazarian, E. Vishniac, Ap J, 5
¯
74. A. Lazarian, L. Vlahos, G. Kowal, H. Yan, A. Beresnyak, E. M. Gouveia Dal Pinto,

17, 700 (1999)

SSRev, 173, 557 (2012)

75. A. Lenard, J. B. Bernstein, Phys. Rev. 112, 1456 (1958)
76. R. P. Lin, R.P., R. A. Schwartz, S. R. Kane, R. M. Pelling, C.C. Hurly, ApJ, 285, 421

(1984)

77. D.W. Longcope, Living Rev. Solar Phys. 2, 7 (2005)
78. E.T. Lu, R.J. Hamilton, ApJ, 380, L89. (1991)
79. E.T. Lu, R.J. Hamilton, J.M. McTiernan, K.R. Bromund: ApJ., 412, 841 (1993)
80. W. H. Matthaeus, S.L. Lamkin, Phys. Fluids, 29, 2513 (1986)
81. N. Meunier, ApJ, 515, 801 (1999)
82. R.T. J. McAteer, P. T. Gallagher, J. Ireland, ApJ, 631, 628 (2005)
83. A. V. Milovanov, L. M. Zelenyi, Phys. Fluids. B, Vol. 5(7), 2609. (1993)
84. F. Moreno-Insertis, 1997, in Advances in Physics of Sunspots, eds. B. Schminder, J.C.

del Toro Iniesta and M. Vazquez, p. 45

85. N. Nishizuka, K. Shibata, Phys. Rev. Lett., 110, 051101, (2013)
86. A. Nordlund, K. Galsgaard, in Solar and heliospheric plasma physics, Eds G.M.Simnett,

C.A. Allisandrakis, L. Vlahos, (Springer Verlag, Berlin 1997).

87. M. Onofri, L. Primavera, F. Malara, P. Veltri, Phys. Plasmas, 11, 4837 (2004)
88. M. Onofri, H. Isliker, L. Vlahos, Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 151102 (2006)
89. K. Papadopoulos: Rev. Geophys. Space Phys., 15, 113 (1977)
90. E. N. Parker, ApJ, 330, 474 (1988)
91. P. Petkaki, M. P. Freeman, Ap J, 686, 686 (2008)
92. W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, B. P. Flannery, Numerical Recipes in

Fortran, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1992)

93. R. Z. Sagdeev, in Proceedings in Applied Mathematics 18, ed. H. Grad (Providence: Am.

Math. Soc.), 28 (1967)

94. C. J. Schrijver, C. Zwaan, A.C. Balke, T.D. Tarbell, T.D., J.K. Lawrence, A&A, 253,

L1 (1992)

95. P.E. Seiden, D.G. Wentzel, ApJ, 460, 522 (1996)
96. S. Servidio, W. H. Matthaeus, M. A. Shay, P. A. Cassak, P. Dmitruk, Phys. Rev. Lett.,

102, 115003 (2009)

Will be inserted by the editor

23

97. S. Servidio, W. H. Matthaeus, M. A. Shay, P. Dmitruk, P. A. Cassak and M. Wan, Phys.

Plasmas, 17, 032315 (2010)

98. T. H. Solomon, E. R. Weeks, H.L. Swinney, Physica D, 76, 70 (1994).
99. K. V. Tam, A. W. Hood, P. K. Browning, P. J. Cargill, A& A , 580, 122 (2015)
100. T. T¨or¨ok, B. Kliem: ApJ, 630, L97 (2005)
101. A. Toutountzi, L. Vlahos, H. Isliker, K. Moraitis, M. Georgoulis, G. Chintzoglou, A&

A, submitted, (2016)

102. R. Turkmani, P. J. Cargill, K. Galsgaard, L. Vlahos, H. Isliker, A& A, 449, 749 (2006)
103. M. Ugai, Phys. Fluids B, 4, 2953 (1992)
104. V. Uritsky, M. Paxzuski, J. M. Devila, S. I. Jones, Phys. Rev. Lett., 99, 025001 (2007)
105. V. Uritsky, J. M. Devila, ApJ., 748, 60 (2012)
106. V. Uritsky, J. M. Devila, L. Ofman, O. Coyner, ApJ, 769, 62 (2013)
107. L. Vlahos, et al., 1984, in Energetic phenomena on the Sun, Eds. Kundu,M., Woodgate,

B., NASA Conference Publication 2439.

108. L. Vlahos, in Statistical Description of Transport in Plasmas, Astro- and Nuclear
Physics, Eds J. Misquich, G. Pelletier, P.Schuck, (Nova Science Publishers, New York,
1993)

109. L. Vlahos, L., Space Scien. Rev., 68,39, (1994)
110. L. Vlahos, M. Georgoulis, R. Kluiving, P. Paschos, A&A, 299,897 (1995)
111. L. Vlahos, T. Fragos, H. Isliker, M. Gergoulis: ApJ, 575, L87. (2002)
112. L. Vlahos, H. Isliker, F. Lepreti, ApJ, 608, 540 (2004).
113. L. Vlahos, M. Georgoulis: ApJ, 603, L61 (2004)
114.

 L. Vlahos, S. Krucker, P. Cargill: in Turbulence in Space Plasmas eds L. Vlahos and

P. Cargill, (Lecture Notes in Physics, Springer Verlag, 2008)

115. M. Wan, W. H. Matthaeus, V. Roytershteyn, H. Karimabadi, T. Parashar, P. Wu, M.

Shay, Phys. Rev. Lett. , 114, 175002 (2015)

116. E.R. Weeks, J.S. Urbach, H. L. Swinney, Physica D, 97, 291 (1996).
117. D.G. Wentzel, P.E. Seiden: ApJ, 390, 280 (1992)
118. T. Wiegelmann, Sol. Phys., 219, 87 (2004)
119. T. Wiegelmann, T. Sakurai, Living Rev. in Sol. Phys., 9, 5 (2012)
120. V. Zhdankin, S. Boldyrev, J.C. Perez, S.M. Tobias, ApJ, 795, 8 (2015)

