6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
0
4
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Multi-pass oscillator layout for

high-energy mode-locked thin-disk lasers

K. Schuhmann1,2,∗, K. Kirch1,2 and A. Antognini1,2

1 Institute for Particle Physics, ETH, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland

2 Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen-PSI, Switzerland

∗ skarsten@phys.ethz.ch

Abstract:
A novel optical layout for a multi-pass resonator is presented paving the way
for pulse energy scaling of mode-locked thin-disk lasers. The multi-pass
resonator we are proposing consists of a concatenation of nearly identical
optical segments. Each segment corresponds to a round-trip in an optically
stable cavity containing an active medium exhibiting soft aperture effects.
This scheme is apt for energy and power scaling because the stability region
of this multi-pass resonator contrarily to the 4f-based schemes does not
shrink with the number of passes. We conclude proposing a simple way to
double the stability region of the state-of-the-art layouts used in the industry
achievable by a minimal rearrangement of the used optical components.

© 2016 Optical Society of America

OCIS codes: (140.3280) Laser ampliﬁers, (140.3410) Laser resonators, (140.3615) Lasers,
ytterbium, (140.4050) Mode-locked lasers, (140.4780) Optical resonators, (140.4480) Optical
ampliﬁers, (140.6810) Thermal effects, (140.7090) Ultrafast lasers

References and links

1. U. Keller, “Ultrafast solid-state laser oscillators: a success story for the last 20 years with no end in sight,” Applied

Physics B 100, 15–28 (2010).

2. F. Krausz and M. Ivanov, “Attosecond physics,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 163–234 (2009).
3. T. S¨udmeyer, S. V. Marchese, S. Hashimoto, C. R. E. Baer, G. Gingras, B. Witzel, and U. Keller, “Femtosecond

laser oscillators for high-ﬁeld science,” Nat. Photon. 2, 599–604 (2008).

4. http://www.trumpf.com
5. T. Gottwald, C. Stolzenburg, D. Bauer, J. Kleinbauer, V. Kuhn, T. Metzger, S. Schad, D. Sutter, and A. Killi, “Re-
cent disk laser development at TRUMPF,” Proc. SPIE 8547, High-Power Lasers 2012: Technology and Systems,
85470C (2012).

6. S. Piehler, B. Weichelt, A. Voss, M. Abdou Ahmed and T. Graf, “Power scaling of fundamental-mode thin-disk

lasers using intracavity deformable mirrors”, Opt. Lett. 37, 5033–5035 (2012).

7. J. Mende, E. Schmid, J. Speiser, G. Spindler and A. Giesen, “Thin disk laser: power scaling to the kW regime
in fundamental mode operation”, Proc. SPIE 7193, Solid State Lasers XVIII: Technology and Devices, 71931V
(2009).

8. H. Fattahi, H.G. Barros, M. Gorjan et al., “Third-generation femtosecond technology”, Optica 1, 45–63 (2014).
9. M. Larionov and J. Neuhaus “Regenerative thin disk ampliﬁer with a pulse energy of 120 mJ at 1 kHz”, Advanced

Solid State Lasers, ATh2A.51 (2014).

10. C. Saraceno, F. Emaury, C. Schriber, A. Diebold, M. Hoffmann, M. Golling, T. S¨udmeyer, and U. Keller, “Toward
millijoule-level high-power ultrafast thin-disk oscillators,” Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, IEEE Journal
of 21, 106–123 (2015).

11. J. Brons, V. Pervak, E. Fedulova, D. Bauer, D. Sutter, V. Kalashnikov, A. Apolonskiy, O. Pronin, and F. Krausz,

“Energy scaling of Kerr-lens mode-locked thin-disk oscillators,” Opt. Lett. 39, 6442–6445 (2014).

12. J. T¨ummler, R. Jung, H. Stiel, P. V. Nickles, and W. Sandner, “High-repetition-rate chirped-pulse-ampliﬁcation

thin-disk laser system with joule-level pulse energy,” Opt. Lett. 34, 1378–1380 (2009).

1

13. J. Negel, A. Loescher, A. Voss, D. Bauer, D. Sutter, A. Killi, M. Abdou Ahmed and T. Graf, ”Ultrafast thin-disk
multipass laser ampliﬁer delivering 1.4 kW (4.7 mJ, 1030 nm) average power converted to 820 W at 515 nm and
234 W at 343 nm,” Opt. Express 23, 21064–21077 (2015)

14. M. Richardson and A. Zoubir, “High intensity MHz mode-locked,” USA Patent US 7590156 B1 (2009).
15. C. J. Saraceno, F. Emaury, C. Schriber, M. Hoffmann, M. Golling, T. S¨udmeyer, and U. Keller, “Ultrafast thin-

disk laser with 80 m J pulse energy and 242 W of average power,” Opt. Lett. 39, 9–12 (2014).

16. D. Bauer, I. Zawischa, D. H. Sutter, A. Killi, and T. Dekorsy, “Mode-locked Yb:Yag thin-disk oscillator with
41 µJ pulse energy at 145 W average infrared power and high power frequency conversion,” Opt. Express 20,
9698–9704 (2012).

17. C. H¨onninger, R. Paschotta, F. Morier-Genoud, M. Moser, and U. Keller, “Q-switching stability limits of

continuous-wave passive mode locking,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 16, 46–56 (1999).

18. B. Dannecker, X. D´elen, K. S. Wentsch, B. Weichelt, C. H¨onninger, A. Voss, M. A. Ahmed, and T. Graf, “Pas-

sively mode-locked Yb:CaF2 thin-disk laser,” Opt. Express 22, 22278–22284 (2014).

19. V. Magni, “Resonators for solid-state lasers with large-volume fundamental mode and high alignment stability,”

Appl. Opt. 25, 107–117 (1986).

20. C. R. E. Baer, O. H. Heckl, C. J. Saraceno, C. Schriber, C. Kr¨ankel, T. S¨udmeyer, and U. Keller, “Frontiers in

passively mode-locked high-power thin disk laser oscillators,” Opt. Express 20, 70547065 (2012).

21. A. Giesen, H. H¨ugel, A. Voss, K. Wittig, U. Brauch, and H. Opower, “Scalable concept for diode-pumped high-

power solid-state lasers,” Applied Physics B 58, 365–372 (1994).

22. A. Giesen, J. Speiser, R. Peters, C. Kr¨ankel, and K. Petermann, “Thin-disk lasers come of age”, Photonics Spectra

41, 52–58 (2007).

23. J. Speiser, “Thin disk laser-energy scaling”, Laser Physics 19, 274–280 (2009).
24. A. Siegman, Lasers (University Science Books, 1986).
25. M. Pich´e and F. Salin, ”Self-mode locking of solid-state lasers without apertures,” Opt. Lett. 18, 1041–1043

(1993).

26. O. Pronin, J. Brons, C. Grasse, V. Pervak, G. Boehm, M.-C. Amann, A. Apolonski, V. L. Kalashnikov, and F.
Krausz, ”High-power Kerr-lens mode-locked Yb:YAG thin-disk oscillator in the positive dispersion regime,”
Opt. Lett. 37, 3543–3545 (2012).

27. A. Antognini, K. Schuhmann, F. Amaro, F. Biraben, A. Dax, A. Giesen, T. Graf, T. H¨ansch, P. Indelicato,
L. Julien, C.-Y. Kao, P. Knowles, F. Kottmann, E. Le Bigot, Y.-W. Liu, L. Ludhova, N. Moschuring, F. Mulhauser,
T. Nebel, F. Nez, P. Rabinowitz, C. Schwob, D. Taqqu, and R. Pohl, “Thin-disk Yb:Yag oscillator-ampliﬁer laser,
ASE, and effective Yb:Yag lifetime,” Quantum Electronics, IEEE Journal of 45, 993–1005 (2009).

28. K. Schuhmann, M. A. Ahmed, A. Antognini, T. Graf, T. W. H¨ansch, K. Kirch, F. Kottmann, R. Pohl, D. Taqqu,
A. Voss, and B. Weichelt, “Thin-disk laser multi-pass ampliﬁer,” Proc. SPIE 9342, Solid State Lasers XXIV:
Technology and Devices, 93420U (2015).

29. R. Pohl, A. Antognini, F. Nez, F. D. Amaro, F. Biraben, J. M. R. Cardoso, D. S. Covita, A. Dax, S. Dhawan,
L. M. P. Fernandes, A. Giesen, T. Graf, T. W. H¨ansch, P. Indelicato, L. Julien, C.-Y. Kao, P. Knowles, E.-O.
Le Bigot, Y.-W. Liu, J. A. M. Lopes, L. Ludhova, C. M. B. Monteiro, F. Mulhauser, T. Nebel, P. Rabinowitz,
J. M. F. dos Santos, L. A. Schaller, K. Schuhmann, C. Schwob, D. Taqqu, J. F. C. A. Veloso, and F. Kottmann,
“The size of the proton,” Nature 466, 213–216 (2010).

30. A. Antognini, F. Nez, K. Schuhmann, F. D. Amaro, F. Biraben, J. M. R. Cardoso, D. S. Covita, A. Dax,
S. Dhawan, M. Diepold, L. M. P. Fernandes, A. Giesen, A. L. Gouvea, T. Graf, T. W. H¨ansch, P. Indelicato,
L. Julien, C.-Y. Kao, P. Knowles, F. Kottmann, E.-O. Le Bigot, Y.-W. Liu, J. A. M. Lopes, L. Ludhova, C. M. B.
Monteiro, F. Mulhauser, T. Nebel, P. Rabinowitz, J. M. F. dos Santos, L. A. Schaller, C. Schwob, D. Taqqu, J. F.
C. A. Veloso, J. Vogelsang, and R. Pohl, “Proton structure from the measurement of 2s-2p transition frequencies
of muonic hydrogen,” Science 339, 417–420 (2013).

31. M. Kumkar, “Laser amplifying system”, Germany Patent DE 10140254 A1 (2003).
32. P. B. Lundquist, S. Sarkisyan, E. A. Wilson, R. M. Copenhaver, H. Martin and S. McCahon, “Off axis walk off

multi-pass ampliﬁers”, US Patent US 8605355 (2013).

33. K. Schuhmann, T. W. H¨ansch, K. Kirch, A. Knecht, F. Kottmann, F. Nez, R. Pohl, D. Taqqu and A. Antognini,
“Thin-disk laser pump schemes for large number of passes and moderate pump source quality,” Appl. Opt. 54,
9400-9408 (2015).

1.

Introduction to multi-pass thin-disk oscillators

Ultra-short laser pulse sources [1, 2] enable a large variety of fundamental physics investiga-
tions, as well as technological and industrial applications. Many applications in industry and
strong-ﬁeld physics will tremendously beneﬁt from the increase of the pulse energy in the mJ
regime at few MHz repetition rates [3]: on one hand production throughput and material com-
pendium extension especially for materials where non-linear multi-photon absorption is re-

2

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. (Color online) Resonator stability plots. Plotted is the cavity eigen-mode waist w at
the thin-disk position for variations of the thin-disk dioptric power D V and various eigen-
mode size central values w(0). The shrinking of the stability region for increasing w(0)
is demontrated in (a). The shrinking of the stability region with the number of passes that
occurs in a 4f-based multi-pass oscillator is demonstrated in (b).

quired, and on the other hand, reduced measurement times, increased signal to noise, and new
scientiﬁc possibilities. In this paper we present a novel resonator scheme overcoming power and
energy limitations of state-of-the-art multi-pass mode-locked laser oscillators. In particular we
apply this scheme to thin-disk lasers which represent one of the work horses in the high-power
laser sector [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].

The output pulse energy E of a mode-locked laser can be increased, at a given average output
power Pavg, by reducing the laser repetition rate frep, given the simple relation E = Pavg/ frep
from energy conservation. Smaller repetition rates can be achieved simply by increasing the
oscillator cavity length. One successful way to increment the resonator length was obtained by
inserting into the cavity a Herriott multi-pass passive cell [14, 15]. However, the elevated intra-
cavity pulse energy achieved in this way required operation of the oscillator in an evacuated
environment to avoid detrimental non-linear effects in air [15].

The cavity length can be also increased by folding the laser beam on the active medium (thin-
disk) several times per round-trip [5, 16]. The large gain per round-trip achievable with such an
active multi-pass cell enables large output coupling, which brings along a reduction of the intra-
cavity power. Hence, this scheme providing a long cavity and decreased intra-cavity intensity
is twofold advantageous and is qualiﬁed for industrial applications as it allows operation in
air. Another important feature of a multi-pass resonator scheme is the reduction of Q-switching
instabilities due to a linear decrease of the gain saturation ﬂuence with the number of reﬂections
at the thin-disk [17, 18].

The multi-pass active cells realized to date [5, 16] are based on relay 4f-imaging: 4f optical
segments are used to image the thin-disk from pass to pass so that the beam propagation in
the active multi-pass cell proceeds following the scheme disk-4f-disk-4f-disk-4f· · · . The 4f
propagation from the optical point of view corresponds to a zero effective length propagation
and it does not provide stability for misalignment or variation of the thin-disk focal strength.
Hence, to realize a stable laser operation, the 4f-multi-pass-cell has to be embedded in a stable
optical resonator [5]. The 4f multi-pass cell with N number of passes can be described as a
single-pass having a total optical length of Lmulti−pass = (N − 1)L, a gain of gmulti−pass = gN,
and an active medium dioptric power of Vmulti−pass = NV , where L = 4 f represents the length
of a single 4f imaging, g the single-pass gain, and V the thin-disk dioptric power. Due to these
cumulative effects, the resonator stability zones [19] of an oscillator containing such a multi-
pass 4f-based cell shrink linearly with the number of passes [20] as visible in Fig. 1 (b) limiting
energy and power scaling.

Using the thin-disk laser technology [21, 22], the thermal problems occurring in conven-

3

Fig. 2. (Color online) Comparison between thermal properties of rod and thin-disk active
media. (a) 3D view of the temperature distribution inside a rod which is cooled in radial
direction. (b) 3D view of the temperature distribution inside a thin-disk/heat-sink assembly
which is cooled along the disk axis. (c, d) Corresponding 1D temperature proﬁles in rod and
thin-disk, respectively, given for two pumped region diameters assuming same pump power
density. (e) Bending of the thin-disk arising from the larger expansion occurring at the front
side of the thin-disk relative to the rear side which is cooled. (f) Space resolved Optical
Phase Delay (OPD) for a laser beam transversing axially the rod originating from the radial
temperature dependence of the active medium refraction index (dn/dT > 0). (g) Space
resolved OPD acquired by a laser beam reﬂecting at the thin-disk (HR at the rear side)
originating mainly from the bending of the active medium caused by the inhomogeneous
thermal expansion. The blue and red curves are for two pumped region diameters assuming
same pump power density.

tional high-power lasers have been signiﬁcantly mitigated. A comparison between the cooling
geometries and resulting temperature distributions in the active medium of rod and a thin-disk
lasers is sketched in Fig. 2 (a,b,c,d). The radial (relative to the laser propagation) heat removal
in a rod brings about a radial temperature proﬁle with maximum on the rod axis whose value
quadratically increase with the diameter of the rod (assuming constant and homogeneous heat
generation in the rod volume) and minimum at the rod surface. While heat removal from the
rod central region is hindered by the necessity to cross a distance of several mm corresponding
to the rod radius, heat removal in the thin-disk is very efﬁcient as heat transport occurs over a
distance of only about 100 m m corresponding to the thin-disk thickness. In fact, one end-face
of the thin-disk is directly contacted to a water-cooled heat sink resulting in efﬁcient cooling
due to the large surface to volume ratio. As visible in Fig 2 (d) this cooling geometry allows for
power/energy scaling as the maximal temperature at a given homogeneous pump power density
does not depend on the diameter of the pumped region [23].

Through the temperature dependence of the refraction index (dn/dT > 0) the radial tempera-
ture distribution in the rod leads to a strong focusing lens effect. This lens effect shown in Fig. 2
(f) is expressed as the space-resolved optical phase delay (OPD) experienced by a laser beam
when transversing axially the rod. In the thin-disk this effect is small as in transverse direction
the temperature proﬁle is almost homogeneous as visible in Fig. 2 (d). However, the tempera-
ture gradient along the thin-disk axis induces an overall bending of the thin-disk which gives
rise to a residual thermal lens. As sketched in Fig. 2 (e) the rear side of the thin-disk being at

4

(b)

(a)

(c)

Fig. 3. (Color online) (a) Standard thin-disk laser resonator layout given (from left to right)
by a ﬂat end-mirrors M2a, a convex mirror, a concave thin-disk (red) and a ﬂat end-mirror
M1b. The position of these optical elements are indicated by the vertical lines. The eigen-
mode waist w evolution in this cavity is also given. (b) Corresponding stability plot. Plotted
is the eigen-mode waist at the M1b and M2a mirror positions for variations of the thin-
disk dioptric power D V . (c) Multi-pass oscillator layout and eigen-mode waist resulting
by concatenating 4 segments each of which represents a round-trip in the cavity given in
(a). The corresponding stability plot for the multi-pass oscillator is identical to the single-
segment stability plot shown in (b).

colder temperature expands less than the front size causing a bending of the thin-disk/heat-sink
assembly which issues a defocusing lens effect for a laser beam reﬂecting at the thin-disk again
expressed as space-dependent OPD in Fig. 2 (g).

To have stable laser operation the thermally induced dioptric power D V at the active medium
has to be smaller than the stability region D Vstab. The stability region as shown in Fig. 1 (a)
shrinks with the resonator eigen-mode waist w as D Vstab ∼ 1/w2. The thermally induced dioptric
power also scales as D V ∼ 1/w2 as it is linearly proportional with the pump power density
which on his turn, scales inversely proportional with the eigen-mode transverse area. In other
words, the laser stability associated with the thermal lens does not depend on the eigen-mode
waist but only on the laser power. The thermal lens could be reduced by decreasing the pump
power density, but as a consequence the eigen-mode waist has to be increased which leads to a
larger sensitivity to the thermal lens. Oppositely, the laser eigen-mode waist could be decreased
to reduce the sensitivity to thermal lens variations but, given a pump power, the pump power
density is increased which results in a larger thermal lens.

Summarizing, energy and power scaling of thin-disk lasers are also limited by thermal lens
effects. These limitations are encountered at lower average power in a 4f-based multi-pass res-
onator as its stability region scales with the number of passes N as D Vstab ∼ 1/(Nw2). Thus
both maximal pump power density and maximal output average power decrease as 1/N. The
4f-based multi-pass oscillators show thus a limited energy scaling (capitalizing only on the
advantages related to the long cavity length and the reduction of the intracavity circulating in-
tensity) but suffer for the decrease of the stability region which reduces the maximal achievable
output power. The scheme proposed in this paper overcomes these limitations.

5

Fig. 4. (Color online) (a) Possible realization of a multi-pass oscillator with 16 reﬂections at
the thin-disk per round-trip achieved by concatenating 8 identical segments. The beam rout-
ing requires a mirror-array of 16 ﬂat mirrors which can be individually adjusted. The two
end-mirrors M2a and M2b could be used as out-coupler and as SESAM. (b) Mirror-array
working principle. The beam routing at the mirror-array plane follows the given numbering
and is achieved by successive reﬂections at the thin-disk, mirror M1 and mirror(s) M2. The
projection of these elements are indicated.

In Sec. 2 we present a multi-pass scheme leading to stability regions which do not shrink with
the number of passes opening thus the way for further energy and power scaling. A preliminary
proof of principle of this new scheme is given in Sec. 3. We conclude with Sec. 4 where a design
merging the to date 4f-based industrial scheme with our scheme is presented. As this design
halves the shrinking of the stability region with the number of passes, it can ﬁnd immediate
industrial application given the fact that it can be realized by a simple rearrangement of the
optical components of the to-date industrial layout.

2. New multi-pass resonator design

The multi-pass resonator we are proposing is based on a concatenation of identical (or nearly
identical) segments as shown in Fig. 3. Each segment corresponds to a round-trip in an optically
stable resonator containing at least one pass at the active medium. Hence, when describing the
beam propagation in the segment using the ABCD-matrix formalism the condition |A + D| < 2
must be fulﬁlled.

Since the multi-pass oscillator is inheriting the eigen-mode properties of the segment we
design the segment to be insensitive to thermal lens variations. An example of a stable resonator
whose round-trip propagations give rise to a segment is shown in Fig. 3 (a). It is formed by a
plane end-mirror M2a, a convex mirror, the thin-disk acting as concave mirror, and a ﬂat end-
mirror M1b. The eigen-mode waist w evolution along this cavity is also shown. This cavity
[19] is widely used as it provides an out-coupling mirror M2 with out-coupled beam waist
(and divergence) insensitive to variations of the thin-disk thermal lens as demonstrated by the
corresponding stability plots in Fig. 3 (b). Moreover this design allows for simple adjustments
of the mode properties: the distance between thin-disk and the convex mirror can be adapted to
shift the stability region of the cavity, while the beam waist in the center of the stability region
can be adjusted by adapting the distance between the M1 and the convex mirrors.

As already mentioned the multi-pass oscillator is obtained by concatenating multiple times
the same optically stable segment: each segment corresponding to a round-trip propagation in
a stable cavity. An example of such a concatenation is shown in Fig. 3 (c) where 4 segments
based on the cavity shown in panel (a) enables 16 reﬂections at the thin-disk per round-trip.

6

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig. 5. (Color online) (a) Optical layout and eigen-mode waist of the segment where a
small asymmetry has been introduced: d1 = 1495 mm and d2 = 1505 mm. (b) Correspond-
ing stability plot. Plotted is the eigen-mode waist at the two end-mirrors for variations of
the thin-disk dioptric power D V . (c+d) Similar as in (a) and (b) but in this case soft-aperture
effects occurring at the thin-disk have been considered. The aperture effects damp the pole
to a bump as visible in (d) and also slightly affect the mode size for back and forth propa-
gation in the cavity (compare solid and dotted lines in (c)). The vertical lines represent the
various optical elements, the thin-disk positions are given in red.

The stability regions of this multi-pass oscillator coincide with the stability regions of a single
segment (see panel (b)) provided all segments are identical.

The beam routing in such a multi-pass oscillator can be realized as shown for example in
Fig. 4 using only one mirror M1, a convex mirror, a thin-disk, 3 mirrors of type M2 (two of
them used as end-mirrors) and an array of ﬂat mirrors. Starting from the out-coupler M2a the
beam is reﬂected at the array-mirror 1 towards the thin-disk. From here, it proceeds towards the
array-mirror 2 and the convex mirror until it reaches M1. From M1 the beam travels back to the
array at array-mirror 3, then to the thin-disk and the array-mirror 4 until it reaches the mirror
M2. This scheme is iterated until the beam passes the array-mirror 16 and is back-reﬂected
at the second end-mirror M2b. From here the beam propagates the same path in backwards
direction until it reaches again mirror M2a closing the round-trip. The beam routing at the
mirror-array position given by the numbering as shown in Fig. 4 (b) can be thus understood as
alternating point-reﬂections at the thin-disk, M1 and M2 mirrors projections.

As visible by considering Fig. 4 (a), small differences between segments are unavoidable
when practically realizing a multi-segment oscillator, in particular because of small varia-
tions of propagation lengths, incident angles and mirror curvatures. These small segment-to-
segment deviations prompt the formation of poles which divide the stability region as graphi-
cally demonstrated for a particular example in Fig. 5 (b). At the poles the oscillator eigen-mode
waist shows an inﬁnite deviation from the waist obtained in a single segment (compare with
Fig. 3 (b) ) such that at the pole location and in its vicinity practically no laser operation can be
achieved.

For several segments and various segment-to-segment deviations, a multitude of poles arises
which would fragment the original stability region of the single segment impeding stable laser

7

Fig. 6. (Color online) Stability plots for the single-segment resonator (2 passes, 1 segment),
for our multi-segment oscillator (16 passes, 8 segments), for the state-of-the-art 4f-based
multi-pass oscillator (16 passes, 1 segment), and for a merged scheme as described in Sec. 4
(16 passes, 2 segments). Plotted are the eigen-mode waists w of a pass at the thin-disk
position for variations of the thin-disk dioptric power D V .

operation. Therefore the practical realization of multi-pass oscillator seems to be unattainable
as small asymmetries are unavoidable in a multi-pass system.

The implementation of tight apertures in each segment could be used to solve this problem
as the aperture would deﬁne the eigen-mode waist, but given the small gain per pass the imple-
mentation of tight apertures does not represent a practical solution. However, the soft aperture
effects [24, 25, 26] “naturally” present in the active medium caused by the gain/absorption pro-
ﬁle in the pumped/unpumped regions [27] of the thin-disk are sufﬁcient to suppress these poles
reducing them to bumps as demonstrated in the Fig. 5 (d), so that energy losses related with
such ﬂuctuations are practically negligible. Thus, the soft aperture effects occurring in the active
medium grant the realization of a multi-pass oscillator as a concatenation of nearly-identical op-
tical segments. The resulting stability region and mode waist of the multi-pass oscillator turn
out to be practically identical with the stability region and mode waist of the underlying seg-
ment as shown in Fig. 6. In other words, contrarily to the 4f-based multi-pass resonator the
stability region of our multi-pass resonator design does not shrink with the number of segments
resulting in pulse energy scaling.

This multi-pass resonator layout is particularly suited for ultrafast lasers where the mode-
locking mechanism is based on SESAM technologies [10]. For example a placement of the
SESAM at the location of the M2b mirror in Fig. 4 would be advantageous because at this po-
sition there is minimal intracavity intensity. Moreover the SESAM mirror would be intersected
only once per round-trip.

3. Proof of principle

For a proof of principle we transformed the multi-pass ampliﬁer [27, 28] that we developed
for spectroscopy of muonic atoms [29, 30] into a multi-pass oscillator by adding two end-
mirrors. The resulting multi-pass oscillator (with 16 reﬂections at the thin-disk per round-trip)
which is based on the segment layout given in Fig. 1 (a) has been tested in cw mode using
a ﬂat out-coupler with 50% transmission. As active medium, a 345 m m thick Yb:YAG thin-
disk with 5% nominal doping concentration contacted by TRUMPF to a water-cooled CVD-
diamond heat sink having a 4 m radius of curvature has been used. Even though the choice

8

Fig. 7. (Color online) Input-output characteristics of the multi-pass resonator based on our
design with 16 reﬂections per round-trip. The measurements have been accomplished in
a cw operation for a disk of 345 m m thickness, a 940 nm pump wavelength, and an out-
coupling mirror reﬂectivity of 50%. The inset shows the measured output beam proﬁle.

of the thin-disk parameters (optimized for low repetition rate Q-switched operation) and the
out-coupler transmittivity were sub-optimal, encouraging output power and a slope efﬁciency
(40% in fundamental mode operation) have been observed as shown in Fig. 7. This represents
the ﬁrst preliminary demonstration of the applicability of our multi-pass oscillator concept,
in particular showing that the soft aperture effects “naturally” present in the pumped active
medium are sufﬁcient to guarantee stable laser operation.

4. A simple way to improve the multi-pass resonator based on 4f imaging

The multi-pass oscillators based on a succession of 4f-imaging stages show an enhanced sen-
sitivity to thermal lens effects as illustrated by the shrinking of the stability region with the
number of passes. However, a major advantage of the 4f-scheme is that a sequence of several
4f-imaging stages can be realized using only few optical elements as shown in Fig. 8 (a) whose
working principle is illustrated in [31, 32, 33]. On the other hand, our multi-pass oscillator con-
cept has a superior stability for variations of the thermal lens, but it requires an array of mirrors
which increases the mechanical complexity.

In Fig. 8 (b) we present an optical layout which results from merging the two concepts. It
consists of a concatenation of two optically stable segments (according to our scheme) each
containing a multi-pass sequence based on 4f-propagations. As this merging can be achieved
by a simple rearrangement of the optics used in the 4f-based system, it inherits a similar beam
waist evolution (see Fig. 8 (c) and (d)) and its simplicity qualiﬁes this scheme for industrial
applications. At the same time this merged scheme shows improved stability because the sta-
bility region of our concept does not shrink with the number of segments. The resulting stability
region of this merged scheme is a factor of two larger compared to the standard 4f-schemes as
shown in Fig. 6 provided both multi-pass oscillators have the same number of passes. Thus a
factor of two larger output pulse energies can be obtained by increasing either the pump power
density or by doubling the number of passes.

9

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 8. (Color online) (a) Multi-pass oscillator based on 4f-relay imaging stages. Multiple
4f-imaging stages can be implemented using the same optical elements which simpliﬁes
the mechanical realization and decreases the production costs. TFP: thin-ﬁlm polarizer.
(b) Multi-pass oscillator obtained by merging our concept with the 4f-based layout. (c+d)
Optical layouts and eigen-mode waist evolution for the multi-pass resonators given in (a)
and (b), respectively. The vertical red lines represent the position of the thin-disk. Due to
soft aperture effects the back (dotted line) and forth (continuous line) propagations have
different waists.

5. Conclusions

We have presented a multi-pass resonator scheme formed by a sequence of optically stable
segments each of them containing at least one pass on the active medium. The stability region
of such a multi-pass resonator does not decrease with the number of segments and thus with
the number of passes. Even though small segment-to-segment deviations could disrupt laser
operation, stable operation in such multi-pass resonator is provided by the soft aperture effects
which naturally occur in the pumped gain medium.

This active multi-pass scheme enables the realization of several passes on the active medium
and large cavity lengths which paves the way for the energy and power scaling of mode-locked
lasers, enabling ultrashort pulses in the mJ pulse energy and in the kW average power regime.
The range of applications for the ultrashort pulses delivered directly by a laser oscillator can
be thus greatly expanded. This laser concept, delivering high-energy pulses with temporal du-
ration between 100 fs and 10 ps, is particularly appropriate also as a pump-laser for optical
parametric chirped pulse ampliﬁcation (OPCA) [8] extending sub-fs sources to kilowatt-scale
average power and terawatt-scale peak power.

The stability properties of this scheme, the high wall-plug efﬁciency achievable with thin-
disk lasers, and possible operation in air (due to the decrease of the intracavity intensity related
with the active multi-pass) qualiﬁes the above presented thin-disk multi-pass resonator concept
for industrial applications and enables energy scaling of mode-locked lasers.

6. Acknowledgments

We would like to thank R. Pohl and F. Kottmann. We acknowledge the supports from the Swiss
National Science Foundation: Projects SNF 200021L-138175 and SNF 200020 159755

10

