Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 000–000 (0000)

Printed 3 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v1.4)

Stochastic reacceleration of relativistic electrons by
turbulent reconnection: a mechanism for cluster-scale radio
emission ?

G. Brunetti,1 A. Lazarian2
1 INAF/Istituto di Radioastronomia, via Gobetti 101, I–40129 Bologna, Italy
2 Department of Astronomy, University of Wisconsin at Madison, 5534 Sterling Hall, 475 North Charter Street, Madison, WI 53706, USA

3 March 2016

ABSTRACT
In this paper we investigate a situation where relativistic particles are reaccelerated
diﬀusing across regions of reconnection and magnetic dynamo in super-Alfvenic, in-
compressible large-scale turbulence. We present an exploratory study of this mecha-
nism in the intra-cluster-medium (ICM). In view of large-scale turbulence in the ICM
we adopt a reconnection scheme that is based on turbulent reconnection and MHD
turbulence. In this case particles are accelerated and decelerated in a systematic way in
reconnecting and magnetic-dynamo regions, respectively, and on longer time-scales un-
dergo a stochastic process diﬀusing across these sites (similar to second-order Fermi).
Our study extends on larger scales numerical studies that focused on the acceleration
in and around turbulent reconnecting regions. We suggest that this mechanism may
play a role in the reacceleration of relativistic electrons in galaxy clusters providing
a new physical scenario to explain the origin of cluster-scale diﬀuse radio emission.
Indeed diﬀerently from current turbulent reacceleration models proposed for exam-
ple for radio halos this mechanism is based on the eﬀect of large-scale incompressible
and super-Alfvenic turbulence. In this new model turbulence governs the interaction
between relativistic particles and magnetic ﬁeld lines that diﬀuse, reconnect and are
stretched in the turbulent ICM.

Key words: acceleration of particles - turbulence - magnetic reconnection - radiation
mechanisms: non–thermal - galaxies: clusters: general

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

.

 
 
]
E
H
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
8
5
4
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

INTRODUCTION

Magnetic reconnection is a long-standing problem in astro-
physics and plasma physics.
The traditional Sweet-Parker model of reconnection (Parker,
1957; Sweet, 1958) is very slow in all the astrophysical
settings, which induced to searches of faster reconnection
schemes. Petschek (1964) or X point reconnection for years
has been the major contender for the mechanism for fast
astrophysical reconnection. With plasma eﬀects, e.g. Hall
eﬀect, included, the Petschek scheme looked promising to
many researchers in the ﬁeld (eg. Shay et al 1998, Birn et al
2001, Bhattacharjee 2004).
In parallel a scheme that invokes 3D Alfvenic turbulence was
suggested in Lazarian & Vishniac (1999, henceforth LV99).
The process appealed to MHD turbulence properties and
predicted the independence of the reconnection rates on mi-
crophysics. Numerical simulations with externally induced
turbulence supported analytical predictions in LV99 (eg.
Kowal et al. 2011, 2012).

More recently, the Petschek scheme evolved into tearing re-
connection, which presents much more chaotic state of the
magnetic ﬁeld evolution (Loureiro et al 2007, Uzdensky et al.
2010). Numerical simulations of tearing reconnection show
a transition to turbulent state, although the role of turbu-
lence for the reconnection in these simulations is debated
(e.g., Karimabadi & Lazarian 2013 for review). Other simu-
lations are suggestive of fast, i.e. independent of resistivity,
magnetic reconnection even in the case when turbulence is
not induced externally, but is generated by reconnection it-
self (Beresnyak 2013, Oishi et al. 2015, Lazarian et al. 2015).

These two schemes, the turbulent and tearing one, present at
the moment two competing reconnection processes, which,
as we discuss further in the paper, can be complemen-
tary and synergetic. In view of large-scale turbulence being
present in the intra-cluster medium (ICM) (e.g., Brunetti &
Jones 2014 (henceforth BJ14), Brueggen & Vazza 2015 for
reviews), within this paper we mostly focus on the turbulent
magnetic reconnection scheme.

2 G. Brunetti, A. Lazarian

The main aim of this paper is to explore a scenario
of particle acceleration in the ICM where relativistic elec-
trons are reaccelerated by the combined eﬀect of super-
Alfvenic turbulence and magnetic reconnection. As already
mentioned turbulence and magnetic reconnection are inter-
connected aspects and reconnection can be fast in the pres-
ence of turbulence (LV99, Lazarian et al 2015 for review).
In the presence of super-Alfvenic turbulence relativistic par-
ticles can diﬀuse across a complex network of regions of re-
connection and magnetic ﬁeld dynamo, where they are sys-
tematically accelerated or decelerated. This situation can be
described as a combination of a ﬁrst-order Fermi accelera-
tion and a second order Fermi acceleration due to spatial
random-walk across accelerating and decelerating regions.
Under the assumption of fast diﬀusion from reconnection
regions this chain of mechanisms becomes a second-order
acceleration process and is the main focus of this paper.

Galaxy clusters are potential sites for this mechanism
because super-Alfvenic turbulence is generated in the ICM.
Evidence for relativistic electrons and magnetic ﬁelds in the
ICM is routinely obtained from a variety of radio obser-
vations that detect diﬀuse synchrotron radiation from the
ICM in the form of radio halos and relics (Feretti et al 2012,
BJ14 for reviews). Giant radio halos and relics are found in
disturbed clusters, suggesting that large scale motions that
are generated during mergers provide the energy reservoir
for the mechanisms of in situ particle acceleration (BJ14 for
review on acceleration mechanisms in the ICM).

A popular scenario for the origin of radio halos is based
on reacceleration induced by merger-driven turbulence
(Brunetti et al 2001, Petrosian 2001, Fujita et al. 2003,
Brunetti et al. 2004, BJ14 for review). In this model it
is usually assumed that large-scale compressive turbulence
generated during cluster mergers is transported at smaller
scales via turbulent cascade and reaccelerates seed electrons
(Cassano & Brunetti 2005, Brunetti & Lazarian 2007). This
scenario has the potential to explain the observed proper-
ties of radio halos and it naturally explains their connec-
tion with mergers, still several challenges exist. Primarily
the challenge is to determine the eﬃciency of particle ac-
celeration that depends on the complex hierarchy of mech-
anisms that transport energy from large scale motions to
collisionless particle-wave interactions at small-scales in the
ICM (eg. Brunetti 2016 for a recent discussion). An addi-
tional challenge is that turbulent acceleration in the ICM
is a slow process that cannot accelerate particles directly
from the thermal pool (eg. Petrosian & East 2008). For
this reason turbulent acceleration models require a popula-
tion of seed electrons that are already ultra-relativistic (e.g.,
γ ≥ 100) and that are spatially distributed on cluster scales
(eg. Brunetti et al 2001, Brunetti & Lazarian 2011a, Pinzke
et al 2015).

More recently numerical (ﬂuid) simulations suggested that
the compressive part of turbulence in the ICM is partially
dissipated into weak shocks (see Miniati 2015, Porter et al
2015), implying that less energy is available for the mecha-
nisms that are generally invoked in turbulent reacceleration
models.

In order to overcome this last challenge we exploit our mech-
anism that is based on incompressible turbulence. We show
that this mechanism may play a role in the reacceleration of

relativistic electrons in the ICM under reasonable assump-
tions on the eﬀective particle mean-free path.

In Sect.2 we discuss turbulent reconnection in super-
Alfvenic turbulence. In Sect.3 we explain the acceleration
mechanism and in Sect.4 we apply it to the case of cluster-
scale radio emission in galaxy clusters. In Sect.5 we provide
a discussion on CRs acceleration in the ICM and on the
comparison between our model and other turbulent reaccel-
eration models. We summarize results in Sect.6.

2 TURBULENCE AND MAGNETIC

RECONNECTION

The ICM is a weakly collisional high-beta plasma and is
expected to be turbulent at some level (BJ14, Bruggen &
Vazza 2015 for reviews), the presence of instabilities in this
plasma would make turbulence similar to MHD one (Santos-
Lima et al 2015 and references therein). Natural drivers of
ICM turbulence are the motions gravitationally driven by
dark matter substructures that are generated in the ICM
as a consequence of the hierarchical process of formation of
galaxy clusters. As a consequence of these motions super-
Alfvenic and sub-sonic turbulence should be driven in the
ICM, although the way this turbulence is transported from
large scale to small scale depends on details of ICM micro-
physics that are still poorly understood. It is believed that a
hierarchy of processes in the ICM convert turbulent energy
into non-linear ampliﬁcation of magnetic ﬁelds, and particle
heating and acceleration (eg. Ryu et al 2008, BJ14, Miniati
& Beresnyak 2015).
Magnetic reconnection and dynamo are part of the turbu-
lent cascade (eg. Lalescu et al 2015) and play a role in this
complex hierarchy of mechanisms. Speciﬁcally, the model of
turbulent reconnection by LV99 provides a natural exten-
sion of the classical Sweet-Parker model in the presence of
turbulent motions.
Macroscopically the reconnection speed is constrained by
the possibility to eject the plasma from the reconnection
layer. It gives a maximum reconnection speed on macro-
scopic scales :

∆
lX

(1)

Vrec ≈ VA
where ∆ is the thickness of the reconnection region (current
sheet) and lX is the astrophysical scale of the inﬂow asso-
ciated with a reconnection region. In the classical Sweet-
Parker model two regions with uniform laminar magnetic
ﬁelds are separated by a thin current sheet, which is deter-
mined by microscopic resistivity. Over the thickness of this
thin current sheet, ∆, the resistivity is important and the
magnetic ﬁelds reconnect. However in astrophysical situa-
tions the disparity of scales between the inﬂow, lX , and the
outﬂow, ∆, strongly limit the reconnection rate (from Eq.1),
implying Vrec ≪ VA.
One possibility to overcome this bottleneck is turbulence.
Turbulence changes the direction of magnetic ﬁeld lines that
are subject to turbulent diﬀusivity. Under these conditions
the outﬂow ∆ gets much thicker, being determined not by
microphysics of resistivity, but by macroscopic ﬁeld wander-
ing in 3D (LV99). LV99 derived the reconnection rate for
sub-Alfvenic turbulence, this is Vrec ∼ (lX /Lo)1/2M 2
AVA,

Stochastic reacceleration of relativistic electrons by turbulent reconnection: a mechanism for cluster-scale radio emission

where Lo and MA are the turbulent injection scale and
Alfven Mach number, respectively.
Results can be easily extended into the super-Alfvenic
regime (Lazarian et al 2015) that is typical of the ICM.
An intuitive way to estimate ∆ in super-Alfvenic turbulence
is to use the diﬀusion properties of magnetic ﬁeld lines. In
this approach ∆ is essentially the diﬀusion scale covered by
magnetic ﬁeld lines within the time-period necessary to ex-
pel the plasma from the reconnection region, τA ∼ lX /VA.
It has been shown that ﬁeld diﬀusion in these conditions
is similar to Richardson diﬀusion in hydro- motions (Eyink
et al 2013). It implies ∆2 ≈ ǫτ 3
A, where ǫ ∼ δV 3/Lo is the
speciﬁc turbulent energy rate, from which one immediately
gets ∆ ∼ lA.
The other ingredient to determine a macroscopic constraint
to the reconnection speed in Eq.1 is the inﬂow, astrophysical,
scale of reconnection regions lX . Super-Alfvenic turbulence
naturally generates regions of magnetic ﬁeld reversals every-
where in the plasma with minimum scale of the order of the
MHD scale lA = LoM −3
A . At scales l > lA kinetic energy is
in excess of magnetic energy inducing a continuous change
of magnetic ﬁeld topology, due to advection of ﬁeld lines by
hydro- motions, and consequently quenching the reconnec-
tion process. Under these conditions the dominant scale for
the inﬂow in reconnection regions is expected to be lX ∼ lA.
As a consequence we may think of a situation of fat reconnec-
tion regions in super-Alfvenic turbulence, with ∆ ∼ lX ∼ lA,
where the macroscopic reconnection speed can approach the
Alfven speed (Eq.1).
In the following we shall adopt this conﬁguration to calculate
particle acceleration.

3 ACCELERATION OF RELATIVISTIC

PARTICLES IN RECONNECTION

3.1 Brief Overview on acceleration in turbulent

reconnection

Particle acceleration in reconnection regions has been inves-
tigated in diﬀerent environments and considering diﬀerent
mechanisms (e.g., Lyutikov & Blandford 2003, Lyubarsky
2003, Drake et al 2006, 2010, 2013, Lazarian & Opher 2009,
Lazarian & Desiati 2010, Kowal et al 2011, Giannios 2013,
Sironi & Spitkovsky 2014, Zank et al 2014).
One mechanism has been proposed within turbulent recon-
necting regions. Turbulent reconnection results in shrinking
of 3D magnetic bundles and the charged particles entrained
over magnetic loops can be accelerated by ﬁrts-order Fermi
mechanism (de Gouveia dal Pino & Lazarian 2005). This
mechanism has been used to model particle acceleration in
several environments, including gamma-ray bursts (Zhang &
Yan 2011), low luminosity AGNs (Kadowaki et al 2015), mi-
croquasars (Khiali et al 2015) and in the heliosphere (Lazar-
ian & Desiati 2010). Interestingly, the compressibility is not
necessary in this mechanism ⋆. The physics of the acceler-
ation is easy to understand. Magnetic reconnection induces
systematic shrinking of magnetic ﬁeld lines on scales ≤ lA

and particles entrained on these ﬁeld lines are getting energy
as the consequence of the Liouville theorem.
Particle acceleration in turbulent reconnection sites has also
been investigated by numerical studies that combine MHD
simulations and tracer particles (eg., Kowal et al 2011,12).
The acceleration of particles trapped within converging re-
connection regions is consistent with ﬁrst-order Fermi mech-
anisms.
In a general situation presumably particles interact with
multiple reconnection layers and turbulence experiencing a
hierarchy of processes at diﬀerent scales and energies. An
exploratory investigation of this situation is the main fo-
cus of this Section (Sect.3.2). However we anticipate that
the basic picture deriving from our study does not depend
critically on the speciﬁc mechanism of particle acceleration
within reconnecting regions (see Sect.3.3).

3.2 Our approach

Here we follow a simple approach to explore the general situ-
ation where relativistic particles are reaccelerated diﬀusing
on large-scale super-Alfvenic turbulence and reconnection
regions. We proceed with the following assumptions:

i) large-scale turbulence in the ICM behaves collisional
and MHD provides a good guide as far as reconnection is
considered;

ii) ultra-relativistic CRe are collisionless components in-

teracting with ﬂuctuations in the MHD ﬂuid;
iii) we assume a scenario based on turbulent reconnection,
where diﬀusion of magnetic ﬁeld lines governs the process of
scattering of CRs;
iv) we expressly investigate only the collisionless eﬀects
that involve the interactions between large-scale magnetic
ﬁeld lines and CRe.

It is diﬃcult to establish to what extent these assumptions
allow a solid description of the ICM. The main point here is
that we need reconnection events in terms of (belonging to)
MHD cascade. However it is worth to note that even if tur-
bulence in the ICM is collisionless we may still expect that
the dynamics of the magnetic ﬁeld lines can be described ac-
cording to Alfvenic turbulence (Eyink et al 2011, Makwana
et al 2015), thus supporting our basic assumptions.

We start considering particles within reconnecting re-
gions. The increment in momentum of particles after the
interaction with shrinking magnetic ﬁeld lines can be esti-
mated as :

dp
dt

∆p ≃ ∆t ×
where the time-scale spent by particles in a reconnecting
region is :

(2)

∆t = min(cid:26) lA

VA

,

l2
A

D(cid:27)

(3)

where lA
VA

is the turn-over time of eddies (corresponding to

l2
D is the particle diﬀusion time on
slow diﬀusion limit) and
scale lA (corresponding to fast diﬀusion, D is the spatial
diﬀusion coeﬃcient of CRe), and

A

⋆ a generalised version of the mechanism in the presence of com-
pression is discussed in Drury (2012)

dp
dt ∼ φ

VA
λmf p

p

(4)

4 G. Brunetti, A. Lazarian

where λmf p is the particles mean free path (mfp) and φ ∼ 1
accounts for pitch angle distribution and geometry of scat-
terings.
However, in a turbulent ﬂuid with stationary turbulence the
reconnection process should be accompanied by the oppo-
site process of magnetic ﬁeld generation, i.e. by turbulent
dynamo. Naturally, this process results in a stretching of
the magnetic ﬁeld lines that on scale lA occurs on a time-
scale lA/VA and that statistically compensates ﬁeld diﬀusion
on the same scale (Beresnyak & Lazarian 2015). It results in
a situation where energetic particles within dynamo regions
cool by an amount that is similar (in absolute value) to that
of the acceleration in reconnection regions.
Therefore if particles can diﬀuse across these regions, we ex-
pect that they will undergo cycles of ﬁrst order acceleration
in reconnection regions and cycles of cooling in dynamo re-
gions. This is the theoretical picture that we use to describe
the acceleration of particles diﬀusing in a turbulent ﬂuid
on scales larger than lA. It diﬀers from the traditional sec-
ond order Fermi acceleration because the increments of the
momentum of the CR in the acceleration and deceleration
regions in principle can be comparable with the momentum
of the CR.

In order to estimate the acceleration rate resulting
from this complex mechanism we make the educated guess
that reconnecting and dynamo regions are statistically dis-
tributed everywhere in the astrophysical volume on typical
scales ∼ lA. This can be motivated by the fact that the
generation of magnetic ﬁelds and ﬁeld reconnection occur
indeed everywhere in the volume, although this assumption
needs to be evaluated more carefully in follow up studies.
For ∆p ≪ p in Eq.2, particles interacting with these re-
gions will undergo a random-walk process in the momen-
tum space resembling a second-order Fermi mechanism.
From Eqs.2–4 this condition implies λmf p ≫ φlA (in the
slow diﬀusion) or λmf p > lA(3φVA/c)1/2 (fast diﬀusion,
assuming D ∼ 1
3 cλmf p). This also tells us that the con-
dition ∆p ≪ p in the ICM is possible only in the case
of fast diﬀusion, because slow diﬀusion (Eq. 3) occurs for
λmf p ≤ 3VAlA/c ≪ lA.
In the following we will restrict to the case of fast dif-
fusion and to situations where ∆p ≪ p. Under these condi-
tions particles undergo a diﬀusion process in the momentum
space and retain a isotropic distribution of pitch angles, pro-
vided that the pitch-angle scattering rate, τsc ∼ λmf p/c, is
fast enough. The distribution function of particles in the mo-
mentum space, f (p), evolves according to a isotropic Fokker-
Planck equation (e.g., Schlickeiser 2002):

∂f (p, t)

∂t

=

1
p2

∂

∂p(cid:18)p2Dpp

∂f

∂p − p2X(cid:12)(cid:12)

dp

dt(cid:12)(cid:12)loss

+Q(p, t) −

f (p, t)(cid:19)

f (p, t)
Tesc

(5)

where the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the particle momentum
space is (Eqs.2–4) :

Dpp = h

∆p∆p

2∆t i ∼ 3(cid:18) lA

λmf p(cid:19)2

V 2
A

λmf pc

p2

implying a reacceleration time τacc ∼ p2/(4Dpp), and where
accounts for the energy losses in the ICM (syn-

dp

P(cid:12)(cid:12)

dt(cid:12)(cid:12)loss

Dpp ≃ 3r 5

6

and

c2
s

c pβpl

Lo

M 3

t ψ−3p2

(6)

lA = LoM −3

A =

(6/5)3/2Lo

(pβplMt)3

Note that the condition ∆p ≪ p is satisﬁed for:

chrotron, ICS, Coulomb, ..), Q accounts for injection of new
particles, and f /Tesc accounts for diﬀusion/escape of parti-
cles from the region (Tesc is the escaping time).
Solutions of Eq.5 in the case Dpp ∝ p2 are calculated in nu-
merous papers (eg Schlickeiser 1984, Mertsch 2011, for nu-
merical solutions Donnert & Brunetti 2014 and references
therein). We anticipated that Dpp ∝ p2 also results from
reacceleration by compressible turbulence (both Transit-
Time-Damping and stochastic compressions) in the ICM
and consequently the properties of the spectra of reaccel-
erated electrons expected in our model will be similar to
those calculated in other studies (BL07, Brunetti & Lazar-
ian 2011a, ZuHone et al 2013, Donnert & Brunetti 2014; see
Sects. 4 and 5).

The acceleration rate from Eq.6 depends on the parti-
cles mfp that however is poorly known. In super-Alfvenic
turbulence hydro- motions change directions of magnetic
ﬁeld lines on scales ≥ lA. This conﬁguration automatically
deﬁnes a maximum eﬀective mfp of particles, λmf p ∼ lA, be-
cause particles travelling in tangled ﬁelds change directions
on this scale preserving the adiabatic invariant. In addition
magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations in MHD turbulence induce parti-
cles pitch-angle scattering via resonant interaction and aﬀect
the motion of particles. This is diﬀerent from the previous
interaction because in this case particles experience pitch-
angle scattering with respect to the local ﬁeld direction and
do not preserve adiabatic invariant. The parallel mfp from
this process is :

λmf p =

3c

4 Z 1

0

dµ(cid:0)1 − µ2(cid:1)2

Dµµ

(7)

lA

where Dµµ is the pitch-angle diﬀusion coeﬃcient. In the case
of incompressible MHD turbulence on scales < lA resonant
pitch-angle scattering is dominated by transit-time-damping
with pseudo-Alfven modes (Yan & Lazarian 2008, Beresnyak
et al 2011). In the super-Alfvenic case the interaction is dom-
inated by the largest moving mirrors with l ∼ lA, and from
Eqs 8-9 in Yan & Lazarian (2008) (in the limit MA → 1 and
L → lA) we ﬁnd Dµµ ∼ c
F (µ), where F (µ) ∼ 1 for trans-
verse propagation and F ≪ 1 in the quasi-parallel case. In
this case Eq.7 gives λmf p ∼ lA.
In conclusion particles interacting with large-scale incom-
pressible and super-Alfvenic MHD turbulence will change
direction on time scales ∼ lA/c due to magnetic ﬁeld tan-
gling and at the same time will experience pitch-angle scat-
tering on time scale ∼ F (µ)−1lA/c. It basically implies an
average eﬀective mfp that is a fraction of lA, λmf p = ψlA,
where ψ < 1; additional mechanisms of pitch-angle scat-
tering from kinetic/plasma eﬀects will further reduce λmf p
(Sect. 3.3).
It is thus convenient to re-write relevant quantities in terms
of βpl = 2Γ−1c2
A (Γ = 5/3) and the particles mfp in
terms of the Alfv´en scale, lA :

s/V 2

(8)

(9)

Stochastic reacceleration of relativistic electrons by turbulent reconnection: a mechanism for cluster-scale radio emission

ψ >s (3csp6/5)
(cpβpl)

(10)

3.3 A note on the role of kinetic eﬀects

The role of kinetic eﬀects on small scales is diﬀerent for the
turbulent reconnection (see LV99, Kowal et al. 2009, Eyink
et al. 2011, 2013, Eyink 2015, Lazarian et al. 2015) and tear-
ing reconnection (see Loureiro et al. 2007, Uzdensky et al.
2010, Ng et al. 2015). Kinetic eﬀects in the latter process ac-
celerate the reconnection rate inducing tearing of the current
sheet. On the contrary, turbulent reconnection is indepen-
dent of the detailed kinetic physics, as follows from theory
(LV99, Eyink 2015) and conﬁrmed in numerical simulations
where plasma physics eﬀects were introduced using anoma-
lous resistivity (see Kowal et al. 2009). Both approaches can
be complementary with tearing destabilizing the reconnec-
tion sheet if the level of turbulence in the system is low.
The outﬂow from the reconnection layer for extended cur-
rent sheets has the thickness ∆ and the Reynolds number
Re ∼ VA∆/ν, where ν is viscosity, which for the ICM should
be taken the perpendicular Braginsky viscosity. With tear-
ing inducing Vrec > 0.01VA, which in turn is of the order of
VA∆/lx (eq.1), ∆ gets to be > 0.01 lx, making the Reynolds
numbers of the outﬂow suﬃciently large. This should make
the outﬂow turbulent and is likely to transfer the reconnec-
tion into a regime similar to turbulent reconnection.

The physics of acceleration in turbulent and tearing re-
connection in 3D is very similar. The diﬀerence initially were
due to the fact that acceleration in turbulent reconnection
was considered in 3D (de Gouveia dal Pino & Lazarian 2005)
while acceleration in tearing was considered in 2D (Drake et
al 2006). As the actual 3D geometry of astrophysical re-
connection is being acknowledged and tearing reconnection
layers demonstrate more turbulence as the numerical reso-
lution increases, strong similarities emerge between the two
mechanisms with the acceleration being essentially related
to the shrinking of 3D loops†.
It is also true that particle acceleration and transport in
reconnection regions are potentially sensitive to details of
the physics of reconnection (eg., Daughton et al 2011). More
recently the controversy on whether the tearing reconnection
is second or ﬁrst order has emerged. For example Drake
et al (2013) ﬁnd a shortening of magnetic island ﬁeld line
length because of adjacent islands merging. This causes an
increase in the parallel particle velocity and a decrease in
perpendicular energy suggesting second order rather than
ﬁrst order Fermi mechanisms. In fact attempts to model
second order Fermi acceleration of particles diﬀusing across
multiple reconnecting regions have been developed in the
case of collisionless tearing reconnection mediated by quasi
2D magnetic islands (eg. Le Roux et al 2015).
In Sect.3.2 we have assumed ﬁrst order acceleration in re-
connection regions because this mechanism has been clearly
demonstrated in numerical simulations of turbulent recon-
nection (Kowal et al 2012). We would believe that a similar
eﬀect should be present also in tearing reconnection. While

† a comparison of particle acceleration rates in 2D and 3D con-
ﬁgurations is discussed in Kowal et al. (2011)

the relative importance of the second and ﬁrst order Fermi
acceleration in tearing reconnection may need to be settled
in future, for our treatment of the acceleration this is not so
vital and in principle our picture can be extended also to the
case of tearing reconnection. In fact, we only require that a
particle leaving the reconnection region gained the momen-
tum ∆p whatever is the cause of the acceleration ‡. Once
CRe leave reconnecting regions they will interact with the
dynamics of magnetic ﬁeld lines on very large scales, lA ∼
100 pc – kpc. On these large scales reconnection events are
part of the turbulent cascade and we can use transport prop-
erties that follow from MHD turbulence (Sect. 3.2).

The microphysics of the plasma may still be important
for particle acceleration and reacceleration even if the re-
connection rates are determined by the LV99 mechanism. In
fact kinetic/plasma eﬀects on small scales may induce pitch-
angle scattering events in addition to those due to the MHD
ﬂuctuations on large scales considered in Sect.3.2. Overall
the combined eﬀects of scatterings on small and large scales
can be parameterized in the form of the particles mfp, λmf p,
and in general scatterings on small scales are expected to re-
duce λmf p with respect to that in Sect.3.2 and increase the
acceleration rate. We note that the small-scale physics is
likely to be important when we consider the acceleration of
particles from the thermal pool. In this rescpect, potentially
kinetic/plasma eﬀects might provide also a solution to the
problem of seed particles in reacceleration models (Sect.1),
however we do not address the issue of the acceleration of
energetic particles from the thermal pool in this paper.

4 DIFFUSE RADIO EMISSION IN GALAXY

CLUSTERS

4.1 Current view

Turbulence and shocks are generally invoked to play a role
for the origin of radio halos and radio relics in galaxy clusters
(BJ14 for review). Nevertheless recent observations of the
radio relic in A2256 unveiled a complex/ﬁlamentary mor-
phology of the radio emission and no clear evidence for a
direct connection with a shock, hinting a possible role of
magnetic reconnection (Owen et al 2014). A role of mag-
netic reconnection for the origin of non-thermal components
in galaxy clusters was also envisaged on theoretical grounds
by Lazarian & Brunetti (2011).

Radio halos are the most prominent non-thermal
sources in galaxy clusters. A popular scenario for their origin
is based on the hypothesis that turbulence generated during
cluster mergers (re)accelerates seeds electrons on Mpc scales
(Brunetti et al 2001, Petrosian 2001, BJ14 for review). Cru-
cial ingredients of this scenario are however poorly known.
Primarily the challenge is to understand the chain of mech-
anisms that allow to drain energy from large scale motions
into mechanisms acting on smaller scales and that in turn

‡ In the case of second order acceleration the term dp/dt in our
eq.4 can be seen as the systematic part of a second order process
occurring within reconnection regions, i.e. dp/dt ∼ ˜Dpp/4p where
˜Dpp is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the particles’ momentum space
due to such a hypothetical second-order mechanism on smaller
scales

6 G. Brunetti, A. Lazarian

determines the eﬃciency of acceleration (see Brunetti 2016
for a recent discussion).
Presumably several turbulent components are generated in
the ICM, both at large and very small scales,and all these
components should jointly contribute to the scattering and
(re)acceleration of relativistic particles. In the last years
much attention has been devoted to the role of compress-
ible turbulence that is driven at large scales in the ICM from
cluster mergers and that cascades at smaller scales (Cassano
& Brunetti 2005, Brunetti & Lazarian 2007, 2011a). This is
the simplest scenario that can be thought, nevertheless it
predicts a straightforward connection between cluster merg-
ers and radio halos in agreement with observations. This is
also the scenario adopted in follow-up numerical simulations
that aim at investigating the origin of diﬀuse radio emission
in galaxy clusters (Donnert et al 2013, Beresnyak et al 2013,
Donnert & Brunetti 2014, Miniati 2015, Pinzke et al 2015).
On the other hand, recent numerical simulations of clus-
ter formation have shown that most of the turbulence in
galaxy clusters is solenoidal (see Miniati 2015). Although
these simulations show that compressive turbulence is also
generated in connection with clusters mergers, this compo-
nent is found fairly short living (≤Gyr) and with a kinetic
spectrum that is steeper than that previously assumed in
calculations of turbulent acceleration. The consequence is
a reduction of both the reacceleration period and the ac-
celeration rate. In reality these simulations do not tell us
much about the microphysics (eg. particles collision fre-
quency) and power spectrum of electromagnetic ﬂuctuations
that both govern the acceleration eﬃciency and di per se
do not challenge acceleration models based on compressive
turbulence generated at large-scale (Miniati 2015, Brunetti
2016). However these are clearly thought-provoking results
that motivate us to investigate possible mechanisms that
drain a fraction of the solenoidal turbulence in the ICM into
particle acceleration.

4.2 A new mechanism ?

In this respect the mechanism described in Sect.3 is partic-
ularly attractive as it is based on super-Alfvenic solenoidal
turbulence. If we restrict to the situation of fast diﬀusion
regime, the acceleration time is (Eq.8) :

M −3

t ψ3

(11)

τacc =

p2

4Dpp ≃ p6/5

12

c
c2
s

Lo

pβpl

and the acceleration rate (or eﬃciency, throughout this pa-
per) = τ −1
acc. The acceleration time is reported in Fig.1 as
a function of the CRe mfp, ψ = λmf p/lA, assuming typical
conditions in the ICM; the acceleration eﬃciency rapidly
increases with decreasing CRe mfp. Fig.2 shows the eﬀect
induced on the acceleration time by increasing the turbu-
lent Mach number and βpl: for given values of ψ and of the
turbulent injection scale, Lo, the acceleration rate increases
with both Mach number and βpl. Calculations in Fig.2 are
obtained for typical conditions in the ICM, speciﬁcally we
assume a range of βpl ∼ 30 − 120 that is inferred using
values of magnetic ﬁeld derived from Faraday rotation mea-
sures (eg., Carilli & Taylor 2002, Feretti et al 2012) and
turbulent injection scales Lo ≥ 100 kpc (BJ14, Br¨uggen &
Vazza 2015).

Figure 1. Acceleration time-scales as a function of ψ. Horizon-
tal dashed lines are the maximum reacceleration times, τmax,
requested for the radio halos in the Coma and Bullet clusters
(Eq.14, see text). Diﬀusion time on LRH = 1 Mpc (eq.12) and
scattering time-scale, λmf p/c (multiplied by 1000 for display pro-
posal), are also reported. Calculations are obtained assuming
M 2

t = 0.25, Lo = 300 kpc, βpl = 60, cs = 1500 km/s.

In our model the mfp is a free parameter that is diﬃcult to
calculate from ﬁrst principles due to our ignorance of kinetic
eﬀects on small scales (see Sect.3 for constraints based on
MHD and 3.3 for a discussion on kinetic eﬀects). However
we can also infer independent constraints on that. Statistics
of radio halos suggests that they are generated in massive
mergers for a signiﬁcant fraction of the duration of these
events (eg., Brunetti et al 2009, Cassano et al 2013, Cuciti
et al 2015). It implies that CRe should be trapped within the
emitting, Mpc-scale, volume for ≥ few Gyr. This provides a
limit to the diﬀusion time of CRe on these scales and thus
on their maximum mfp. The time needed by CRe to diﬀuse
on the scale of a radio halo, LRH , is :

RH

3

(12)

1

5

8r 5

6

ψ−1

RH
Lo

L2
4D ∼

c (cid:16)pβplMt(cid:17)3 L2

τesc ∼
that is reported in Fig.1. The minimal condition τesc ≥
few Gyrs implies λmf p ≪ kpc, or in terms of MHD scale,
2 (Mt/0.5)3(Lo/300kpc)−1 (Fig.1, Eq.12),
ψ < 0.5(βpl/60)
i.e. larger values of the turbulent Mach number and of the
βpl constrain larger values of ψ. We note that the ratio of ac-
celeration and diﬀusion time, τacc/τesc ∝ ψ4L2
, rapidly
decreases with increasing the turbulent Mach number for a
given value of ψ and of the injection scale Lo (Fig.2).
Finally, we note that very small values of the mfp, that im-
ply faster acceleration (Eq.11), are also ruled out from the
condition ∆p ≪ p (Eq.10).
Given these constraints on λmf p and ψ, the following
point is to understand whether our mechanism can explain
the diﬀuse radio emission observed in galaxy clusters. To
fully address this point Fokker-Planck time-dependent cal-
culations are necessary (Eq.5). However, as we anticipated

oM −6

t

Stochastic reacceleration of relativistic electrons by turbulent reconnection: a mechanism for cluster-scale radio emission

the turbulent spectrum reducing with time the energy ﬂux
that becomes available for the reacceleration of CRs. In this
respect the most obvious process is the damping (via colli-
sionless dampings) of turbulence due to the same CRs that
are reaccelerated. This mechanism may aﬀect (reduce) the
acceleration rate on longer timescales (BJ14 for review and
references therein).
In this Section we consider only the ﬁrst damping mecha-
nism, due to radiative losses of CRe, whereas in Sect.5.2 we
will discuss the turbulence damping.
In practice, the most relevant point here is to check whether
our mechanism allows reacceleration of CRe to the ener-
gies that are necessary to produce the synchrotron radia-
tion observed in galaxy clusters. In Figs.1 and 2 the accel-
eration time is compared with the acceleration time that is
requested for radio halos. This is not necessarily equivalent
to the radiative cooling time of the CRe emitting at the
observed radio frequencies, because radio halos have very
steep synchrotron spectra, α ∼ 1 − 2 (ﬂux ∝ ν −α). In this
respect we use results from Cassano et al.(2010) that calcu-
lated synchrotron spectra in homogeneous models of com-
pressive turbulent reacceleration (with Dpp ∝ p2) assum-
ing reacceleration periods in the range ∆t/τacc ∼ 2 − 4.
They found that the spectra become steeper than those of
typical radio halos at frequencies greater than νs ∼ ξνb,
where ξ ∼ 6− 8, and νb is the critical synchrotron frequency
emitted by electrons having acceleration time equal to the
time-scale of radiative losses, i.e. CRe with Lorentz factor
γb = 6πmec
cmb). The highest frequency is gen-

acc/(B2 + B2
τ −1

erated in a magnetic ﬁeld B ∼ Bcmb/√3, since this is the

ﬁeld where CRe emitting at a given frequency have maxi-
mum lifetime. It leads to a minimal request for a mechanism
being suﬃcient to reaccelerate CRe emitting at the observed
frequency νo = νs/(1 + z). This condition corresponds to a
maximum reacceleration time, τmax :

σT

τacc ≤ τmax = 156(cid:18)

ξ

νo(GHz)(cid:19)

1
2

(1 + z)−7/2

(Myr)

(14)

In Figs.1 and 2 we report relevant values of τmax derived
from Eq.14. These values are derived for the radio halos in
the Coma and Bullet clusters, τmax = 400 and = 150 Myr,
respectively, by considering observed steepening frequencies
νo ≃ 1 GHz for Coma (eg. Brunetti et al 2013 and refer-
ences therein) and ≃ 5 GHz for the Bullet cluster (a hint of
steepening is observed in this cluster at ∼ 8 GHz, Liang et
al 2000, Shimwell et al 2014, Marchegiani & Colafrancesco
2015).
The comparison between τmax and the reacceleration time
predicted by our model selects the parameters space (Mt,
ψ, Lo) that allows to explain radio halos. Speciﬁcally, the
acceleration time predicted by our model (Eq.11) leads to a
steepening frequency :

νs(GHz) ≃ 2.45(cid:18) cs

103 km

s (cid:19)4

βpl
102

Lo (cid:19)2(cid:18) Mt

0.5

0.5

ψ (cid:19)6

ξ

7(cid:18) 102kpc
×(cid:18)

(B2

BµG
µG + B2

cmb)2(cid:19) /0.01 (15)

implying that an emitting synchrotron frequency 10 times
larger is produced by increasing the turbulent Mach number

Figure 2. Ratio of model acceleration time and the τmax =150
Myrs for the Bullet radio halo (solid lines), and ratio of model
acceleration time and diﬀusion time on 1 Mpc (dotted lines) as
a function of the turbulent Mach number. Calculations assume
a reference value ψ = 0.5, and βpl =30 and 120 (from top to
bottom); other parameters being equal to Fig.1. Dashed lines are
the diﬀusion times in Gyr (from top to bottom with decreasing
βpl). Dependences on ψ and Lo are shown in the panels.

in Sect.3.2, numerous papers carry out Fokker-Planck cal-
culations of particle reacceleration in galaxy clusters in the
case Dpp ∝ p2. These results can be automatically extended
to our model and for this reason in this exploratory paper
we do not focus on Fokker-Planck analysis.
In practice two main processes oppose to the reacceleration
of CRe.
Synchrotron and inverse Compton losses balance the acceler-
ation of CRe channelling an increasing fraction of the energy
gained by CRe into radiation. The time-scale of radiative
losses (radiative life-time) of CRe is :

τrad(γ) = γ/

dγ
dt

=

6πmec

σT

γ−1
B2 + B2

cmb

(13)

where Bcmb ≃ 3.25(1 + z)2µG is the equivalent ﬁeld due
to inverse Compton scattering with photons of the Cosmic
Microwave Background. In the ICM the CRe that produce
synchrotron radiation in the radio band have energies ∼ few
GeV and radiative life-times τrad ∼ 100 Myrs (BJ14 for
review). The acceleration mechanisms that generate steep
spectrum radio emission in galaxy clusters should have an
eﬃciency that is comparable to that of the radiative losses
of the CRe that emit the observed radio emission. Conse-
quently, due to the balance between acceleration and losses,
after a reacceleration period of about 100 Myrs the spec-
trum of radio emitting CRe evolves slowly with time and
approaches quasi-stationary conditions, provided that the
acceleration rate is constant (BJ14 for review and references
therein).
The second process that opposes to reacceleration is more
subtle and is due to physical mechanisms that may damp

8 G. Brunetti, A. Lazarian

(or reducing the CRe mfp) by about 50 percent, or by assum-
ing a turbulent-injection scale that is 3 times smaller. For

B ≃ Bcmb/√3, the Mach number and the observed steepen-

ing frequency in our model are connected via (from Eq.15)
:

Mt ≃ 0.8

103 km
s

cs (cid:18) νo(GHz)

35

7

ξ(cid:19)

1

6 (cid:18) Lo

102kpc(cid:19)

1

3 (1 + z)
( nICM

10−3 )

7

6 ψ
0.5
1
6

(16)

that allows us to conclude that turbulent Mach numbers
M 2
t ∼ 0.2−0.5(ψ/0.5)2 (Lo/300 kpc)2/3 are suﬃcient to reac-
celerate CRe that generate synchrotron radio emission in
hot, kT ∼ 5 − 15 keV, clusters. Note that under these con-
ditions the model satisﬁes also the additional requirements
that are necessary to explain radio halos and cluster-scale
radio emission, speciﬁcally the acceleration time is shorter
than the diﬀusion time of CRe (τacc < τesc) and CRe are
eﬃciently trapped within Mpc-scale emitting regions, i.e.
τesc > few Gyrs (Figs.1 and 2). We note that the above
amount of turbulent energy/Mach numbers is consistent
with that found in high-resolution cosmological (ﬂuid) sim-
ulations (eg., Vazza et al 2011, Miniati 2015).
Interestingly the same turbulent motions that are used in
our model to reaccelerate particles will induce a broadening
of the X-ray lines (for example the FeXXV lines at 6.7 keV)
that can be tested by the forthcoming ASTRO-H satellite
(Kitayama et al 2014) and, in the not too distant future,
by ATHENA (Ettori et al. 2013). In particular, assuming a
typical electron number density = 10−3cm−3, from Eq.16 we
get minimum turbulent velocities at the scale Lo, δVo ∼ 700
and 450(ψ/0.5)(Lo/100kpc)1/3 km/s for the halo in the Bul-
let and Coma clusters, respectively (corresponding to Mach
numbers ≃ 0.35 and 0.3, respectively) (see also Sect. 5).
At this point it is worth to comment that our conclu-
sions are based on results from compressive turbulent accel-
eration models in the homogeneous case and on their scaling
to our model. Follow up Fokker-Planck time-dependent cal-
culations combined with numerical simulations are required
to account for non-homogeneous distributions of the physi-
cal parameters in the turbulent ICM (see discussion in Sect.
4.3) and to model the time evolution of the synchrotron spec-
trum of cluster-scale emission. For example, with regard to
this latter point, the parameter ξ ∼ 6 − 8 in Eqs.14–16 is
derived for acceleration periods ∆t/τacc ∼ 2− 4 (Cassano et
al 2010) (i.e. ∆t ∼ 0.3−1 Gyr for typical values of τacc), cor-
responding to a situation where radio spectra evolve slowly
with time (quasi-stationary) because reacceleration is bal-
anced by the energy losses of the CRe emitting in the radio
band. On the other hand the shape of the spectrum of radio
halos may be diﬀerent during earlier and/or later phases.
During earlier phases reacceleration is not balanced yet by
losses and the spectrum rapidly evolves with time being very
steep (implying smaller ξ) at the beginning of the reaccel-
eration phase (∆t/τacc < 2). Similarly, at later stages the
evolution of CRe spectrum is potentially aﬀected by satura-
tion eﬀects due to turbulence damping (see Sect. 5).

4.3 A note on the spectrum of radio halos

The spectral shape of radio halos provides information that
go beyond simple arguments based on acceleration time-
scales. Unfortunately due to observational
limitations a

spectrum with at least three measurements is available only
for a few halos, and signiﬁcant scatter of measurements is
seen in the cases where the data-points cover at least 1 or-
der of magnitude in frequency range (e.g. Macario et al 2013,
Shimwell et al 2014). Current studies suggest that the spec-
tra of radio halos are quite diﬀerent. Assuming a simple
power-law shape (in the form ﬂux ∝ ν −α) the spectral slopes
measured between two typical frequencies (0.3 – 1.4 GHz)
are currently found in the range α ∼ 1−2 (eg Venturi 2011).
The Coma radio halo is a unique case with several spectral
measurements covering about 2 orders of magnitude in fre-
quency. Despite the scatter that is observed between the
diﬀerent measurements a spectral steepening is observed at
higher frequencies, suggesting a corresponding break in the
spectrum of the emitting electrons (Brunetti et al 2013 and
references therein).

We still lack a comprehensive understanding of the spec-
trum of radio halos predicted in reacceleration models. In
the context of our model and in the other turbulent reaccel-
eration models, the spectrum of radio halos results from the
interplay between the CRe spectrum and the probability dis-
tribution function (PDF) of magnetic ﬁeld strengths in the
emitting volume. Simple homogeneous reacceleration mod-
els, where both the magnetic ﬁeld and acceleration rate are
constant in the emitting volume, predict a curved spectrum
due to the interplay between energy losses and diﬀusion in
the particle’s momentum space (e.g. Cassano & Brunetti
2005). More realistic turbulent models account (at least) for
the decline of the magnetic ﬁeld strength with radius in clus-
ters. The eﬀect is a stretching in frequency of the volume-
integrated synchrotron spectrum of the halos that allows to
successfully explain observed spectra (BL07, Brunetti et al
2008, Brunetti & Lazarian 2011a, Macario et al 2013, Don-
nert et al 2013). In the real case of a turbulent ICM the mag-
netic PDF is expected to be broad, and the turbulent and
plasma-collisional properties can vary in the emitting, Mpc,
volume. This, combined with the possibility of CRe diﬀu-
sion across diﬀerent turbulent regions, is expected to stretch
considerably the synchrotron spectrum in frequency. Exam-
ples of synchrotron spectra from non-homogeneous turbu-
lent reacceleration can be found in ZuHone et al (2013),
where turbulent acceleration with Dpp ∝ p2 and synchrotron
emission from mini-halos (cluster’s core) are calculated us-
ing high-resolution (kpc) MHD simulations combined with
tracer particles to follow the dynamics and evolution of CRe.

5 DISCUSSION ON CRS REACCELERATION

IN THE ICM

5.1 A comparison with reacceleration by

compressive turbulence

In this Section we compare our model with stochastic reac-
celeration models by compressible turbulence in the ICM.

We start from the the momentum-diﬀusion coeﬃcient
that is expected in the classical Fermi theory. This is (e.g.,
Longair 2011):

Dpp ∼ p2 δV 2

cl ∼ p2 V 2

ph
cl

l

(δB)2
l

B2
0

(17)

where l is the minimum scale of eddies, Vph is the phase

Stochastic reacceleration of relativistic electrons by turbulent reconnection: a mechanism for cluster-scale radio emission

velocity of waves and in high-beta plasma conditions it is
δB/B0 ∼ δV /Vph. It follows that Dpp/p2 is simply c/δVl
times the turn-over time of turbulent eddies at the dissipa-
tion scale.

These dependences basically apply also to the case
of the interaction between compressible turbulence (essen-
tially fast modes) and particles via Transit-Time-Damping
(TTD). TTD interacts through the n = 0 Landau resonance
(eg. Fisk 1976, Schlickeiser & Miller 1998). This interaction
is essentially the coupling between the magnetic moment of
particles and the parallel magnetic ﬁeld gradients and it uses
the turbulent energy that is available on a broad range of
scales, in principle between the dissipation and the injection
scales. The diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the particles momentum
space due to TTD in the ICM is derived in BL07 :

Dpp =

π2
2c

p2c2
s
B2

0 Z 1

cs/c

dµ

µ (cid:18)1 − (
1 − µ2
Z kcut

k0

cs
cµ

)2(cid:19)2

×

dkWB(k)k

(18)

Similarly to the classical second order Fermi mechanism, the
acceleration depends on the minimum/dissipation scale of
the electromagnetic ﬂuctuations and on the energy density

of these ﬂuctuations, being R dkWBk ∼ kcutδB2

The dissipation scale is set by the competition between tur-
bulent cascade and collisionless damping. Two situations are
considered in the literature:

kcut /8π.

(i) the collision frequency of thermal particles is ωii < ω =
kcs. In this case the damping of the waves is dominated by
TTD with thermal particles (electrons) and kcut ∼ 104koM 4
t
(BL07, Miniati 2015, Brunetti 2016). We stress that under
these conditions most of the turbulent energy is dissipated
into the heating of the thermal ICM (see BL07). Assuming
a Kraichnan spectrum, this leads to a reacceleration time
for CRe :

τacc =

p2
4Dpp ≃ 125(

Mt
1/2

)−4(cid:18) Lo/300 kpc

cs/1500 km s−1(cid:19) (Myr) (19)

(ii) the collisions between thermal particles in the ICM
are fast, ωii > ω = kcs. This is the case where scatter-
ings are mediated by magnetic ﬁeld perturbations driven
by plasma instabilities (eg., Lazarian & Beresnyak 2006,
Brunetti & Lazarian 2011b, Santos-Lima et al 2014 and ref-
erences therein). Contrary to case (i), here the damping of
the waves is due to TTD with relativistic particles (CR pro-
tons and CRe), turbulence reaches smaller scales and the
reacceleration time (for Kraichnan spectrum) is (Brunetti
& Lazarian 2011b) :

τacc ≃ 6(

Mt
1/2

where

RCR = Xi=e,p

)−4(cid:18) Lo/300 kpc

cs/1500 km s−1(cid:19)(cid:16)RCR

25 (cid:17) (Myr)

cR p4dp ∂fi(p)

ρICM c2
s

∂p

(20)

(21)

ρICM is the thermal density of the ICM, and fi(p) is the
distribution function of CRs (CRe and CR protons) in the
momentum space.

The two acceleration schemes have been used estensively
to explain radio halos and mini radio halos in galaxy clus-
ters (BL07, Brunetti & Lazarian 2011a,b, Beresnyak et al
2013, ZuHone et al 2013, Donnert et al 2013, Donnert &
Brunetti 2014, Miniati 2015, Pinzke et al. 2015). The main
assumptions in these studies is that compressible turbulence
is a relevant part of turbulence in the ICM. Challenges of
these models due to our poor understanding of the ICM
microphysics have been extensively discussed in Brunetti
(2016). In particular, it has been shown that an increasingly
steeper spectrum of the electromagnetic ﬂuctuations induces
a slower acceleration rate essentially because ﬂuctuations are
dissipated at larger scales. Recent cosmological simulations
suggest that compressive turbulence in the ICM is Burgers-
like (W ∝ k−2). In this case (assuming that velocities and
electromagnetic ﬂuctuations follow the same scalings), for
typical velocities of the turbulent eddies δV ∼ 500− 800 km
s−1 on large scales (L0 = 300 kpc), the eﬃciency of TTD
acceleration drops by about 10 times with respect to that
predicted adopting a Kraichnan spectrum (Brunetti 2016,
their Fig.1). Under these unfavourable conditions in the col-
lisionless scenario (case (i), Eq.19) TTD would become in-
eﬃcient and would not provide a valuable scenario for the
origin of cluster-scale radio emission. In this case explain-
ing radio halos would require that the ICM behaves mostly
collisional (i.e. case (ii), Eq.20) (see Miniati 2015).

As already mentioned the main motivation for the
present paper is that large-scale turbulence in the ICM is
mainly solenoidal (Miniati 2014). This incompressible tur-
bulence is dissipated into the thermal ICM at a much smaller
rate than the compressible part and consequently it pro-
vides a previously unexplored, natural energy reservoir for
stochastic particle acceleration in the ICM. In this paper
we essentially suggest that part of this energy drains into
relativistic particles via the interaction with magnetic ﬁeld
lines diﬀusing in turbulent reconnection. Note that the ac-
celeration mechanism explained in Sect.3.2 do not drain
turbulent energy into thermal ICM as these particles do
not diﬀuse on suﬃciently large scales. Our mechanism also
diﬀers from other models for diﬀuse radio emission from
galaxy clusters that are based on particles-waves interaction
via gyro-resonance, where the non-linear coupling between
particles and Alfv´en waves at very small, resonant, scales
k ∼ eBE−1/(µ ± VA/c) is used (Ohno et al 2002, Fujita et
al 2003, Brunetti et al 2004, Fujita et al 2015). In fact it is
unlikely that gyro-resonant acceleration is driven directly by
the cascade of incompressible turbulence from large-scales to
very small scales because the scale-dependent anisotropies
that are developed in the Alfv´enic cascade at MHD scales
quench the acceleration (Chandran 2000, Yan & Lazarian
2004).

In our model the acceleration drains energy essentially from
the Alfv´enic motions at the Alfv´en scale, lA. In princi-
ple this energy reservoir is large and of the order of the
energy ﬂux associated to the turbulence at larger scales,
V 3
A/lA ∼ δV 3/L0 for Kolmogorov spectrum. As a refer-
ence, by considering ψ ∼ 0.2 − 0.5 and typical conditions
for the solenoidal turbulence in the ICM, M 2
t ∼ 0.3 − 0.8
and Lo = 100 − 500 kpc (consistent with numerical simula-
tions), the acceleration rates (Sect. 4.2) are similar to those
expected in the case of collisionless TTD with compressive

10 G. Brunetti, A. Lazarian

turbulence for Kraichnan spectrum (case (i), Eq. 19)§. Since
collisionless TTD has been successfully applied to radio ha-
los, we conclude that our mechanism may provide a valuable
alternative to the mechanisms based on compressible turbu-
lence or that it may play a role in combination with these
other mechanisms.

5.2 Dampings and saturation eﬀects

TTD reacceleration by compressible turbulence in the ICM
has been calculated considering self-consistently acceleration
and turbulent-damping rates (BL07, Brunetti & Lazarian
2011a,b). On the other hand in Sect.3 we have calculated
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the particles’ momentum space in
the test particle regime. If a large fraction of the turbulent
energy ﬂux in our model is channelled into CRs, satura-
tion eﬀects become important. Acceleration and turbulent
damping, Γ, are connected through detailed balancing :

Xi=e,pZ d3pE

∂fi
∂t

=Z d3kW (~k)Γ(~k)

(22)

where the left-hand side of Eq.22 accounts for the energy
channelled into CRs and the right-hand side accounts for
the energy that is extracted from turbulence via damping;
W (~k) is the 3D turbulent spectrum (W (~k) = 4πk2W (k) in
the isotropic case). Assuming pitch-angle isotropy of CRs,
the time-evolution of the CRs momentum distribution in
Eq.22 depends on the momentum-diﬀusion coeﬃcient via :

∂fi
∂t

=

1
p2

∂

∂p(cid:18)p2Dpp

∂f

∂p(cid:19)

(23)

and the evolution of the turbulent spectrum is given by (eg.
BL07 and references therein) :

∂W
∂t

=

∂

∂k (cid:18)k2Dkk

∂
∂k

(

W (k)

k2

)(cid:19) − ΓW (k) + I(k)

(24)

where the ﬁrst and second terms in the right-hand side
account for turbulent cascade and damping, respectively,
Dkk ∼ k2/τkk is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the wavenumber
space¶, τkk is the turbulent cascading-time at scale k−1, and
I(k) accounts for the process of injection of turbulence at
large scales.
Eqs.22–24 connect acceleration rate, CR energy densities
and turbulent damping and cascading. They essentially im-
ply that the increase of the energy density of CRs with time
produces a stronger damping, with the consequence that the
turbulent spectrum is gradually suppressed and that accel-
eration is reduced. In this regime full Fokker-Planck time-
dependent calculations, combined with the modeling of the
evolution of the turbulent spectrum, are necessary for a cor-
rect evaluation of the acceleration process (see e.g. Brunetti
et al 2004, Brunetti & Lazarian 2011b for examples of calcu-
lations in the ICM). These saturation eﬀects also limit the
applicability of the approach used in Sect.4.2, that is based

§ this is also equivalent to acceleration rates expected in the case
of collisional TTD ((ii), eq.20) assuming Burgers–like spectrum
of turbulence, or in the case of Kraichnan spectrum assuming
smaller values of the turbulent Mach number, M 2
¶ more speciﬁcally it is τkk = k3/ ∂

t ∼ 0.05 − 0.1

∂k (Dkkk2)

on the scaling of the (spectral) analysis in compressive tur-
bulent acceleration to the case of (incompressible) turbulent
reconnection.
In our acceleration model the turbulent eddies on scale ∼ lA
are the most important ones. Consequently the importance
of saturation eﬀects can be evaluated by comparing damping
and turbulent cascade at these scales: if damping rate is
lAlA ∼ VAl−1
smaller than the rate of turbulent cascade, τ −1
A ,
the turbulent spectrum is not modiﬁed and saturation eﬀects
are not important. This is the case when the energy ﬂux
of turbulent cascade at the Alfv´en scale, ∼ ρICM V 3
A , is
much larger than the energy ﬂux that is channeled into CRs.
The two quantities can be connected via :

Al−1

ρICM V 3

Al−1

A ηCR ∼ cZ d3p

1
p

∂

∂p(cid:18)p2Dpp

∂f

∂p(cid:19)

(25)

where ηCR is the fraction of turbulent energy ﬂux that is
transferred into CRs by our mechanism, and Dpp is given
in Eq.8. The limit ηCR → 1 corresponds to strong damping.
In fact this limit constrains the minimum value of ψ that is
allowed in test-particle calculations (i.e. neglecting satura-
tion/damping eﬀects) of our model. From Eqs.8 and 25 this
is :

ψmin ∼(cid:18) 5

2

βpl

VA
c

where we deﬁne :

ǫCRSCR
ρICM c2

s (cid:19)1/3

∂

∂p (p4 ∂fi
∂p )

(26)

(27)

SCR = Pi=e,pR d3p 1

p

Pi=e,pR d3pfi(p)p

As expected, limits on ψ depend on the energy density of
CRs in the ICM. Theoretical reasons suggest that CR pro-
tons are the most important CR component in galaxy clus-
ters (BJ14 for review). In the recent years gamma-ray and
radio observations allowed to constrain the energy density
that is associated to CR protons in the central Mpc-regions
of galaxy clusters, ǫCR < few 0.01 × ǫICM (eg., Ackermann
et al 2010, 2014, Zandanel & Ando 2014, Brunetti et al 2007,
2008, BJ14 for review). If we use these reference values,
Eq.26 basically implies ψ > 0.1.k This limit on ψ is fully
consistent with the values used/derived in Sect.4.2 to ex-
plain cluster-scale radio emission.

Interestingly for ψ ∼ 0.1 the turbulent velocities
that are necessary to explain radio halos are still sig-
niﬁcant δVo > 100 km/s (for example > 90 and >
140(Lo/100)1/3(nICM /10−3)−1/6 km/s for the radio halos
in Coma and Bullet clusters, respectively, see Sect.4). This
essentially sets the level of the minimum turbulent broad-
ening of the proﬁle of X-ray lines that is expected in our
model. Non detection of such a broadening with future X-ray
spectrometers, for example with ATHENA, will rule out our
model under the conditions explored in this paper (namely

fast diﬀusion approximation and ∆p ≪ p, Sect.3.2)⋆⋆.

k On the other hand, if we consider only CRe in the ICM, or
an ad hoc situation where CR protons are not accelerated by our
mechanism, it is SCReǫCRe ∼ 10−5−10−4ρICM c2
s and essentially
ψ > 0.02.
⋆⋆ alternatively it will require an ad hoc situation where CRp are
not accelerated eﬃciently by our mechanism

Stochastic reacceleration of relativistic electrons by turbulent reconnection: a mechanism for cluster-scale radio emission

5.3 Reacceleration of CR protons

As a ﬁnal remark we point out that in principle our mecha-
nism reaccelerate also CR protons that will accumulate their
energy more eﬃciently than CRe (because CRp are subject
to less eﬃcient energy losses, see BJ14 for a review). The en-
ergy density accumulated by CR protons in a reacceleration
time ∆t will be :

ρICM V 3

Al−1

A hηCRi∆t

∆t ≈ ∆tZ d3pE

∂fp
∂t ∼ δǫCR

(28)

0

ηCR(t)dt.

∆t =R ∆t

where hηCRi∆t
In practice CR protons will release part of this energy due
to losses in Gyr-time scales. In a few Gyrs CR protons
will be also advected and transported by large-scale mo-
tions on scales larger than the relevant turbulent scales and
thus energy will be redistributed on large-scales decreasing
δǫCR. Nevertheless we can use Eq.28 under the condition
δǫCR < ǫCR to derive a (order of magnitude) limit on ∆t; it
is useful also to check if our calculations in the case of radio
halos are self-consistent. This is (from Eqs.25, 8 and 28) :

∆t ∼

c
3

lA
V 2
A

ǫCR(δǫCR/ǫCR)
hǫCR(t)Si∆t

ψ3

(29)

1
2

7

3
2

(Gyr)(30)

3

16) :

(1+z)−

ξ(cid:19)−

where lA = M −3
t Lo(VA/cs)3. At this point Eq.29 can be
combined with the Mach number that is requested to gen-
erate radio halos with observed synchrotron steepening fre-

ǫCR(δǫCR/ǫCR)
hǫCR(t)Si∆t
>
∼ 1. We thus conclude

quency νo (under the minimal condition B ∼ Bcmb/√3, Eq.
∆t ∼(cid:18) νo(GHz)
where typically ǫCR/hǫCR(t)Si∆t
that radio halos observed at GHz frequencies can be gen-
erated by our mechanism for Gyrs. These time-scales are
comparable to the life-times of radio halos evaluated from
statistical analysis (eg. Brunetti et al 2009, BJ14) suggesting
that the exploratory (test-particle) calculations in Sect.3.2
and 4 provide a good approximation. A reliable modeling of
the acceleration process for longer acceleration periods (or
for radio halos with spectra extending to νo ≫ few GHz) re-
quires full Fokker-Planck time-dependent calculations com-
bined with numerical simulations of clusters (including CRs
transport).

6 SUMMARY

We suggest that relativistic particles diﬀusing in super-
Alfvenic incompressible turbulence gain energy due to the
statistical interaction with ﬁeld lines in regions of magnetic
reconnection and turbulent dynamo. In view of large-scale
turbulence being present in the ICM we assume a scheme
based on turbulent reconnection and assume that MHD tur-
bulence provides a good guide as far as reconnection is con-
sidered. We calculate the acceleration rate in the fast diﬀu-
sion regime and in the limit ∆p ≪ p. Under these conditions
the mechanism is essentially a second-order Fermi.
In this exploratory paper we account for the interaction be-
tween magnetic ﬁeld lines and CRe on large scales, ∼0.1-1
kpc, assuming transport properties and turbulent scalings
that follow from MHD turbulence. Additional kinetic eﬀects

on smaller-scales may aﬀect the physics of reconnection and
CRe transport and acceleration. For this reason we consider
CRe mfp as a free parameter that is however bounded by
the combination of basic constraints, including the conﬁne-
ment of CRe (Sect.3.2), the interaction with large-scale ﬁelds
(Sect. 3.2) and indirect considerations on the turbulent en-
ergy ﬂux that is available (Sect.5).
We propose that the mechanism may play a role for the ori-
gin of radio halos and large-scale diﬀuse emission in galaxy
clusters. In fact, assuming reliable conditions in the ICM we
have shown that the expected reacceleration rate is similar
to that of classical reacceleration models proposed for radio
halos, provided that the CRe mfp is a fraction ∼ 0.1− 0.5 of
the MHD scale. Smaller values of the mfp would make the
mechanism even more eﬃcient, however in this case satura-
tion/damping eﬀects (Sect. 5.2) should become important
invalidating the test-particle approach adopted in our paper
and deserve future studies.
Similarly to previous reacceleration models the diﬀusion co-
eﬃcient in the momentum space is Dpp ∝ p2 and thus, in
principle all previous results based on solutions of Fokker-
Planck equations can be easily extended to our case. How-
ever our approach diﬀers from these previous models because
it is based on the incompressible part of the turbulence and
because it is mediated by turbulent reconnection and dy-
namo. According to current numerical cosmological simula-
tions incompressible turbulence in the ICM is found to be
dominant, super-Alfvenic and quasi–sonic and thus the new
mechanism explored in our paper appears particularly ap-
pealing. Interestingly in our mechanism the conditions that
are necessary to generate radio halos have unavoidable con-
sequences on the broadening of the proﬁle of X-ray lines,
allowing a test of model assumptions with forthcoming X-
ray calorimeters (ASTRO-H, ATHENA).
This is an exploratory paper.
One of the critical points is the particles mfp. The combined
eﬀect of super-Alfvenic motions and resonant mirroring with
pseudo Alfven modes constrains the mfp ∼ a fraction of the
MHD scale. However in a more general situation additional
scattering agents induced by additional turbulent compo-
nents may reduce the mfp; this might have the potential to
increase the acceleration rate.
Another critical point is the assumption of turbulent recon-
nection scheme. The basic assumption here is that reconnec-
tion is part of the MHD cascade. This appears quite natural
in the ICM given the presence of large-scale turbulence that
can be driven at large scales in merging clusters and given
the observed connection between mergers and non-thermal
emission from galaxy clusters. Other schemes, such as tear-
ing reconnection, do not invalidate per se our reacceleration
scheme, provided that reconnection and dynamo are still
triggered by large-scale motions. This however requires an
extension of our modelling.
Calculations in this paper focus on the hypothesis of fast-
diﬀusion regime and ∆p ≪ p (Sect. 3.2). Numerical simu-
lations can be used to extend this exploratory study to the
situation ∆p ∼ p, in which case the mechanism is expected
to diﬀer signiﬁcantly from a second order Fermi. Simulations
will also allow to calculate the acceleration rate under more
realistic conﬁgurations of reconnection and dynamo regions.
Finally it is worth to mention that in our model we focus on
the reacceleration of CRe. Also CR protons, if present, will

12 G. Brunetti, A. Lazarian

be reaccelerated by our mechanism. As a sanity-check we
have shown that, assuming the physical parameters that are
requested to explain radio halos, the energy budget of CR
protons resulting from a reacceleration period comparable to
the life-time of halos is consistent with current limits from
γ-ray observations. At this point, since reacceleration rates
and diﬀusion coeﬃcient, Dpp ∝ p2, in our model are equiva-
lent/similar to those in lepto-hadronic reacceleration models
where CR protons and their secondary particles have been
explicitly taken into account (eg. Brunetti & Lazarian 2011a,
Brunetti et al 2012, Pinzke et al 2015), also the conclusions
of these previous works can be extended to our picture.

7 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the referee for useful comments that have im-
proved the presentation of the paper. GB and AL acknowl-
edge support from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation
and discussions with Prof. R. Schlickeiser. GB acknowledges
support from PRIN-INAF 2014, AL acknowledges support
from NASA grant NNX14AJ53G.

REFERENCES

de Gouveia dal Pino, E. M., & Lazarian, A. 2005, A&A, 441, 845
Donnert, J., Dolag, K., Brunetti, G., & Cassano, R. 2013, MN-

RAS, 429, 3564

Donnert, J., Brunetti, G., 2014, MNRAS, 443, 3564
Drake, J. F., Swisdak, M., Che, H., & Shay, M. A. 2006, Nature,

443, 553

Drake, J. F., Opher, M., Swisdak, M., & Chamoun, J. N. 2010,

ApJ, 709, 963

Drake, J. F., Swisdak, M., & Fermo, R. 2013, ApJ, 763, L5
Drury, L. O’C., 2012, MNRAS, 422, 2474
Eyink, G. L. 2011, Physical Review E, 83, 056405
Eyink, G., Vishniac, E., Lalescu, C., et al. 2013, Nature, 497, 466
Eyink, G. L. 2015, ApJ, 807, 137
Ettori, S., Pratt, G.W., de Plaa, J., et al. 2013, arXiv:1306.2322
Feretti, L., Giovannini, G., Govoni, F., & Murgia, M. 2012, As-

tronomy & Astrophysics Rev., 20, 54

Fisk, L. A. 1976, Journal of Geophysical Research, 81, 4633
Fujita, Y., Takizawa, M., & Sarazin, C. L. 2003, ApJ, 584, 190
Fujita, Y., Takizawa, M., Yamazaki, R., Akamatsu, H., Ohno, H.

2015, ApJ, 815, 116

Giannios, D. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 355
Kadowaki, L. H. S., de Gouveia Dal Pino, E. M., & Singh, C. B.

2015, ApJ, 802, 113

Karimabadi, H., & Lazarian, A. 2013, Physics of Plasmas, 20,

112102

Khiali, B., de Gouveia Dal Pino, E. M., & del Valle, M. V. 2015,

MNRAS, 449, 34

Kitayama, T., Bauts, M., Markevitch, M.,

et al. 2014,

Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Allafort, A., et al. 2010, ApJ, 717,

arXiv:1412.1176

L71

Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Albert, A., et al. 2014, ApJ, 787, 18
Beresnyak, A. 2013, arXiv:1301.7424
Beresnyak, A., Yan, H., & Lazarian, A. 2011, ApJ, 728, 60
Beresnyak, A., Xu, H., Li, H., & Schlickeiser, R. 2013, ApJ, 771,

131

Kowal, G., Lazarian, A., Vishniac, E. T., & Otmianowska-Mazur,

K. 2009, ApJ, 700, 63

Kowal, G., de Gouveia Dal Pino, E. M., & Lazarian, A. 2011,

ApJ, 735, 102

Kowal, G., de Gouveia Dal Pino, E. M., & Lazarian, A. 2012,

Physical Review Letters, 108, 241102

Bhattacharjee, A. 2004, Annual Rev. of Astronomy & Astro-

Lalescu, C. C., Shi, Y.-K., Eyink, G. L., et al. 2015, Physical

physics, 42, 365

Br¨uggen, M., & Vazza, F. 2015, ASSL, 407, 599
Birn, J., Drake, J. F., Shay, M. A., et al. 2001, Journal of Geo-

physical Research, 106, 3715

Brunetti, G. 2016, Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, 58,

014011

Brunetti, G., Setti, G., Feretti, L., & Giovannini, G. 2001, MN-

RAS, 320, 365

Review Letters, 115, 025001

Lazarian A., Vishniac E.T., 1999, ApJ, 517, 700 (LV99)
Lazarian, A., & Beresnyak, A. 2006, MNRAS, 373, 1195
Lazarian, A., & Opher, M. 2009, ApJ, 703, 8
Lazarian, A., & Desiati, P. 2010, ApJ, 722, 188
Lazarian, A., & Brunetti, G. 2011, MmSAIt, 82, 636
Lazarian, A., Eyink, G. L., Vishniac, E. T., & Kowal, G. 2015,

ASSL, 407, 311

Brunetti, G., Blasi, P., Cassano, R., & Gabici, S. 2004, MNRAS,

Le Roux, J.A, Zank G.P, Webb G.M., Khabarova O. 2015, ApJ,

350, 1174

801, 112

Brunetti, G., Venturi, T., Dallacasa, D., et al. 2007, ApJ, 670, L5
Brunetti, G., Lazarian A., 2007, MNRAS, 378, 245
Brunetti, G., Cassano, R., Dolag, K., Setti, G. 2009, A&A, 507,

661

Brunetti, G., & Lazarian, A. 2011a, MNRAS, 410, 127
Brunetti, G., & Lazarian, A. 2011b, MNRAS, 412, 817
Brunetti, G., Blasi, P., Reimer, O., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 426, 956
Brunetti, G., Rudnick, L., Cassano, R., et al. 2013, A&A, 558,

A52

Liang, H., Hunstead, R. W., Birkinshaw, M., & Andreani, P. 2000,

ApJ, 544, 686

Longair, M. S. 2011, High Energy Astrophysics, Cambridge, UK:

Cambridge University Press, 2011

Loureiro, N. F., Schekochihin, A. A., & Cowley, S. C. 2007,

Physics of Plasmas, 14, 100703

Lyubarsky, Y. E. 2003, MNRAS, 345, 153
Lyutikov, M., & Blandford, R. 2003, arXiv:astro-ph/0312347
Macario, G., Venturi, T., Intema, H. T., et al. 2013, A&A, 551,

Brunetti, G., & Jones, T. W. 2014, International Journal of Mod-

A141

ern Physics D, 23, 1430007

Makwana, K.D, Zhdankin V., Li, H., Daughton, W., Cattaneo,

Carilli, C.L., Taylor, G.B. 2002, Annual Rev. of Astronomy &

F. 2015, Physics of Plasmas, 22, 042902

Astrophysics, 40, 319

Cassano, R., & Brunetti, G. 2005, MNRAS, 357, 1313
Cassano, R., Brunetti, G., R¨ottgering, H.J.A, Br¨uggen, M. 2010,

A&A, 509, A68

Cassano, R., Ettori, S., Brunetti, G., et al. 2013, ApJ, 777, 141
Chandran, B. D. G. 2000, Physical Review Letters, 85, 4656
Cuciti, V., Cassano, R., Brunetti, G., Dallacasa, D., Kale. R.,

Ettori, S., Venturi, T. 2015, arXiv:1506.03209

Daughton, W., Roytershteyn, V., Karimabadi, H., et al. 2011,

Marchegiani, P., & Colafrancesco, S. 2015, MNRAS, 452, 1328
Mertsch , P.

2011, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle

Physics, 12, 010

Miniati, F. 2014, ApJ, 782, 21
Miniati, F. 2015, ApJ, 800, 60
Miniati, F., & Beresnyak, A. 2015, Nature, 523, 59
Ng, J., Huang, Y.-M., Hakim, A., et al. 2015, arXiv:1511.00741
Ohno, H., Takizawa, M., & Shibata, S. 2002, ApJ, 577, 658
Oishi, J. S., Mac Low, M.-M., Collins, D. C., & Tamura, M. 2015,

Nature Physics, 7, 539

ApJ, 806, L12

Stochastic reacceleration of relativistic electrons by turbulent reconnection: a mechanism for cluster-scale radio emission

Owen, F. N., Rudnick, L., Eilek, J., et al. 2014, ApJ, 794, 24
Parker, E. N. 1957, Journal of Geophysical Research, 62, 509
Petrosian, V. 2001, ApJ, 557, 560
Petrosian, V., & East, W. E. 2008, ApJ, 682, 175
Petschek, H. E. 1964, NASA Special Publication, 50, 425
Pinzke, A., Oh, S. P., & Pfrommer, C. 2015, arXiv:1503.07870
Porter, D. H., Jones, T. W., & Ryu, D. 2015, ApJ, 810, 93
Ryu, D., Kang, H., Cho, J., & Das, S. 2008, Science, 320, 909
Santos-Lima, R., de Gouveia Dal Pino, E. M., Kowal, G., et al.

2014, ApJ, 781, 84

Schlickeiser, R., Cosmic ray astrophysics, Springer (2002)
Schlickeiser, R. 1984, A&A, 136, 227
Schlickeiser, R., & Miller, J. A. 1998, ApJ, 492, 352
Shay, M. A., Drake, J. F., Denton, R. E., & Biskamp, D. 1998,

Journal of Geophysical Research, 103, 9165

Shimwell, T. W., Brown, S., Feain, I. J., et al. 2014, MNRAS,

440, 2901

Sironi, L., & Spitkovsky, A. 2014, ApJ, 783, L21
Sweet, P. A. 1958, Electromagnetic Phenomena in Cosmical

Physics, 6, 123

Uzdensky, D. A., Loureiro, N. F., & Schekochihin, A. A. 2010,

Physical Review Letters, 105, 235002

Vazza F., Brunetti G., Gheller C., Brunino C., Br¨uggen M. 2011,

A&A, 529, A17

Venturi, T. 2011, MmSAIt, 82, 499
Yan, H., & Lazarian, A. 2004, ApJ, 614, 757
Yan, H., & Lazarian, A. 2008, ApJ, 673, 942
Zandanel, F., & Ando, S. 2014, MNRAS, 440, 663
Zhang, B., & Yan, H. 2011, ApJ, 726, 90
Zank, G. P.,

le Roux, J. A., Webb, G. M., Dosch, A., &

Khabarova, O. 2014, ApJ, 797, 28

ZuHone, J. A., Markevitch, M., Brunetti, G., & Giacintucci, S.

2013, ApJ, 762, 78

