MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

Preprint 3 March 2016

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style ﬁle v3.0

Nitrogen and oxygen abundances in the Local Universe

F. Vincenzo1,2(cid:63), F. Belﬁore3,4, R. Maiolino3,4, F. Matteucci1,2,5, P. Ventura6
1Dipartimento di Fisica, Sezione di Astronomia, Universit`a di Trieste, via G.B. Tiepolo 11, 34100, Trieste, Italy
2INAF, Osservatorio Astronomico di Trieste, via G.B. Tiepolo 11, 34100, Trieste, Italy
3Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, 19 J. J. Thomson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK
4Kavli Institute for Cosmology, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA, UK
5INFN, Sezione di Trieste, Via Valerio 2, 34100, Trieste, Italy
6INAF, Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma, via Frascati 33, I-0004, Monte Porzio Catone (RM), Italy

Accepted 2016 March 1. Received 2016 March 1; in original form 2015 November 19

ABSTRACT
We present chemical evolution models aimed at reproducing the observed (N/O) vs.
(O/H) abundance pattern of star forming galaxies in the Local Universe. We derive
gas-phase abundances from SDSS spectroscopy and a complementary sample of low-
metallicity dwarf galaxies, making use of a consistent set of abundance calibrations.
This collection of data clearly conﬁrms the existence of a plateau in the (N/O) ratio
at very low metallicity, followed by an increase of this ratio up to high values as the
metallicity increases. This trend can be interpreted as due to two main sources of
nitrogen in galaxies: i) massive stars, which produce small amounts of pure primary
nitrogen and are responsible for the (N/O) ratio in the low metallicity plateau; ii) low-
and intermediate-mass stars, which produce both secondary and primary nitrogen and
enrich the interstellar medium with a time delay relative to massive stars, and cause
the increase of the (N/O) ratio. We ﬁnd that the length of the low-metallicity plateau
is almost solely determined by the star formation eﬃciency, which regulates the rate
of oxygen production by massive stars. We show that, to reproduce the high observed
(N/O) ratios at high (O/H), as well as the right slope of the (N/O) vs. (O/H) curve,
a diﬀerential galactic wind – where oxygen is assumed to be lost more easily than
nitrogen – is necessary. No existing set of stellar yields can reproduce the observed
trend without assuming diﬀerential galactic winds. Finally, considering the current
best set of stellar yields, a bottom-heavy initial mass function is favoured to reproduce
the data.

Key words: galaxies: abundances – galaxies: evolution – galaxies: ISM – ISM: abun-
dances – ISM: evolution – stars: abundances

1 INTRODUCTION

The self-regulation of star formation in galaxies by gas ac-
cretion and galactic outﬂows is a fundamental ingredient in
the modern framework of galaxy evolution. Both the anal-
ysis of large galaxy surveys and the direct observation of
high-velocity clouds (e.g. Fraternali et al. 2002; Oosterloo
et al. 2007; Heald et al. 2011; Gentile et al. 2013), as well
as hydrodynamical simulations (Prochaska & Wolfe 2009;
Faucher-Gigu`ere et al. 2011; van de Voort et al. 2011; Dekel
et al. 2013; Fraternali et al. 2015) point towards the need for
continuous accretion of pristine gas onto galaxies (see also
Fraternali & Binney 2008; Putman et al. 2012). Moreover,
historically, the so-called ‘G-dwarf problem’ (van den Bergh
1962; Schmidt 1963; Tinsley 1980) was solved by relaxing

(cid:63) E-mail: vincenzo@oats.inaf.it

c(cid:13) 2015 The Authors

the hypothesis of a closed-box evolution of the solar neigh-
borhood and allowing the accretion of pristine gas onto the
disk, which acts in diluting the abundances; in this way, one
can reconcile the predicted frequency of metal-poor Galac-
tic disk stars (which are too many in the framework of the
simple closed-box model) with the observed one. Large scale
galactic winds and outﬂows are also necessary to reproduce
the overall properties of the observed galaxy population and
to match the observed chemical enrichment of the intergalac-
tic medium (IGM; see, for example, Finlator & Dav´e 2008;
Erb 2008; Fabian 2012; Hopkins et al. 2012). Several observa-
tions of galactic outﬂows in the literature have demonstrated
the ubiquity of the outﬂow phenomenon, both locally and
at high redshift (see, for example, Pettini et al. 2001; Bo-
latto et al. 2013; Geach et al. 2014; Erb 2015; Cicone et al.
2014, 2015), however understanding their impact on galaxy
properties over cosmic time remains a daunting task.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
0
6
4
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

F. Vincenzo et al.

Since metals are a direct product of star formation in
galaxies, chemical abundances are a powerful probe of the
feedback processes driving the evolution of galaxies. Oxygen
occupies a key role in this type of studies, since its gas phase
abundance can be inferred from strong nebular lines easily
observed in the optical wavelength range in the low redshift
Universe. Since oxygen is the most common metal by mass,
its abundance is also an excellent proxy for the total metal-
licity of the gas. Moreover, since oxygen is mostly produced
by massive stars, dying as core-collapse supernovae (SNe),
its enrichment is relatively simple to model and does not
require, to ﬁrst approximation, taking into account the ef-
fect of stellar lifetimes (under the so-called instantaneous
recycling approximation, IRA).

The study of the relation between oxygen abundance
and other fundamental galaxy parameters like stellar mass
(Lequeux et al. 1979; Tremonti et al. 2004), star formation
rate (SFR, Mannucci et al. 2010; Andrews & Martini 2013),
gas content (Hughes et al. 2013; Bothwell et al. 2013) and
environment (Pasquali et al. 2010; Peng & Maiolino 2014)
has paved the way to the development of a new generation
of chemical evolution models (Dav´e et al. 2012; Lilly et al.
2013; Peng & Maiolino 2014; Lu et al. 2015; Belﬁore et al.
2016), which succeed, to various extents, at reproducing the
general trends observed in the data with cosmological inﬂow
rates and various simple outﬂow prescriptions.

Since diﬀerent chemical elements are released in the in-
terstellar medium (ISM) on diﬀerent time-scales, the study
of abundance ratios of some key elements can provide tighter
constraints on the star formation and gas ﬂow history of
a system. For example, large galaxy surveys have demon-
strated that the [O/Fe] ratios in elliptical galaxies are con-
sistent with the paradigm requiring these objects to form
stars vigorously over a short timescale at high redshift (Mat-
teucci 1994; Bernardi et al. 2003; Pipino & Matteucci 2004;
Thomas et al. 2005, 2010). Moreover, detailed analysis of
chemical abundance ratios of n-capture, α− and iron-peak
elements in individual stars in the Milky Way (MW) have
been instrumental in showing that the various components
of our Galaxy (halo, bulge, thick and thin disk) have had
diﬀerent chemical evolution histories with respect to each
other (see, for example, Pagel 2009; Matteucci 2001, 2012).
In the context of star forming galaxies, strong nebular
lines in the optical range allow reliable measurement of the
(N/O) abundance ratio when both the [OII]λ3726,3729 and
[NII]λ6548,6584 doublets are measured. The (N/O) abun-
dance ratio has been studied by several authors (Vila-Costas
& Edmunds 1992; Thuan et al. 1995; Henry et al. 2000;
Chiappini et al. 2003, 2005; P´erez-Montero & Contini 2009;
P´erez-Montero et al. 2013; Belﬁore et al. 2015) since it is a
promising tool to shed light on the relative role of pristine
gas inﬂows and outﬂows, which appear degenerate when only
the abundance of one chemical element is traced (see K¨op-
pen & Hensler 2005, but also the discussion in the Appendix
of Belﬁore et al. 2016).

Unlike oxygen, nitrogen is a chemical element mostly
produced by low- and intermediate-mass stars (LIMS), with
the nucleosynthetic yields depending on metallicity in a com-
plex fashion. In particular, a stellar generation can release
into the galaxy ISM both primary and secondary N. The
secondary N component increases with metallicity, being a
product of the CNO cycle and formed at expenses of the C

and O already present in the star. Concerning LIMS, the pri-
mary N component is produced during the third dredge-up,
occurring along the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) phase,
if nuclear burning at the base of the convective envelope
is eﬃcient (Renzini & Voli 1981). The latter is particularly
important for very metal-poor LIMS, which would not be
capable otherwise of synthesizing signiﬁcant amounts of sec-
ondary N. On the other hand, the computation of the N
stellar yields for massive stars still suﬀers of large uncer-
tainty, especially at very low metallicity, and none of the
current existing stellar evolutionary codes is able to provide
the right amount of primary N which is needed to reproduce
the observed (N/O) plateau at very low metallicities.

All the aforementioned complications prevent one from
using IRA and a constant yield for the study of nitrogen
abundances in galaxies, and have prevented the commu-
nity so far from taking full advantage of the large nitrogen
abundance datasets now available both through large spec-
troscopic surveys of local (like SDSS, York et al. 2000, or
GAMA, Driver et al. 2011) and high-redshift (e.g. zCOS-
MOS, Lilly et al. 2009) galaxies.

In this work we critically revise the diﬀerent assump-
tions aﬀecting the interpretation of the (N/O) versus (O/H)
abundance patterns, making use of a large dataset of star
forming galaxies from the SDSS, complemented by data from
metal-poor dwarf galaxies to explore the low-metallicity
regime. While considerable uncertainties still persist in some
of the basic model parameters (nitrogen yields, stellar initial
mass function, IMF) we aim here at setting new constraints
on pristine gas inﬂows and the models of outﬂows.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we
present the dataset used in this work for the (N/O) vs.
(O/H) abundance diagram. In Section 3, we summarize the
current knowledge about the nucleosynthetic origin of nitro-
gen in stars. In Section 4, we describe the basic equations
and the assumptions of the numerical model of chemical
evolution adopted in this work. Our results are presented in
Section 5 and 6; in particular, in Section 5, we focus on the
results of our models for the (N/O) vs. (O/H) abundance
pattern of the ensemble of the SDSS galaxies; in Section 6,
we present the results of our models for the low metallicity
plateau, which a complementary sample of metal-poor, dif-
fuse and star-forming dwarf galaxies exhibit in the (N/O)
vs. (O/H) diagram. Finally, in Section 7, we end with our
conclusions.

2 OVERVIEW OF THE DATA

In order to study the characteristic gas-phase oxygen and ni-
trogen abundances in local galaxies, we make use of the data
from SDSS Data Release 7 (Abazajian et al. 2009, DR7) and
the emission line ﬂuxes, stellar masses and SFR estimates
presented in the MPA-JHU catalogue1 (Brinchmann et al.
2004; Tremonti et al. 2004; Kauﬀmann et al. 2003) released
as part of DR 8 (Aihara et al. 2011).

We select galaxies to have 0.023 < z < 0.3 and S/N>3
on the following emission lines: [OII]λλ3726,28; [OIII]λ5007;

1 The MPA-JHU catalogue is available online at https://www.
sdss3.org/dr8/spectro/galspec.php

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

(N/O) ratios in the Local Universe

3

Figure 1.
In this ﬁgure, the SDSS data sample for the (N/O) vs. (O/H) abundance pattern (density plot in greyscale) is compared
with a data sample which includes the (N/O) and (O/H) abundances as observed in blue, diﬀuse star forming dwarf galaxies by Berg et
al. (2012, red data), Izotov et al. (2012, black data) and James et al. (2015, blue data).

Hβ; Hα; [NII]λ6584, and [SII]λλ6717,31. We use the stan-
dard Baldwin-Philipps-Terlevich (BPT) diagram (Baldwin
et al. 1981; Veilleux & Osterbrock 1987; Kauﬀmann et al.
2003) to exclude sources where the gas ionisation is not dom-
inated by star formation, since available metallicity calibra-
tions are only tailored to star forming regions. In this work
we use the [OIII]/Hβ versus [SII]/Hα diagnostic diagram
and the demarcation curve of Kewley et al. (2001). We do
not make use of the popular [OIII]/Hβ versus [NII]/Hα to
avoid a bias against nitrogen enriched Hii regions (S´anchez
et al. 2015; Belﬁore et al. 2015).

Emission line ﬂuxes are then corrected for dust extinc-
tion using the Balmer decrement and the Calzetti (2001)
reddening curve with RV = 4.05. The theoretical value for
the Balmer line ratio is taken from Osterbrock & Ferland
(2006), assuming case B recombination (Hα/Hβ = 2.87). We
note that the use of extinction curves of Cardelli et al. (1989)
or Charlot & Fall (2000) yield very similar results for the
wavelength range considered in this work.

Inferring gas phase oxygen abundance from strong neb-
ular line ratios is a diﬃcult problem, since the line ratios
depend not only on ionic abundances, but also on other pa-
rameters, such as ionisation parameter, density and hardness
of ionisation ﬁeld. It is well known in the literature that dif-
ferent oxygen abundance calibrations based on strong nebu-
lar lines can lead to systematic discrepancies of up to 0.6 dex
(Kewley & Ellison 2008; L´opez-S´anchez et al. 2012; Blanc et
al. 2015). In particular, strong line calibrations based on an
extrapolation to high metallicity of abundances measured
with the τe method (which makes use of the faint oxygen
auroral line [OIII]λ4363 to directly infer the electron tem-

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

perature of the nebula) generally lead to lower abundances
than calibrations based on photoionisation models.

Moreover, several metallicity calibrators make use of
the nitrogen line ﬂuxes, thus implicitly assuming that the
relationship between the (N/O) ratio and metallicity varies
monotonically with oxygen abundance.

In this work, we infer the oxygen and nitrogen abun-
dances using the self-consistent framework presented in Pi-
lyugin et al. (2010), which calibrates various strong line ra-
tios through the electron temperature method. An alterna-
tive calibration taking both oxygen and nitrogen abundance
into account has been recently presented in P´erez-Montero
(2014).

In order to sample the low metallicity regime, which is
poorly populated in SDSS, we make use of the data from
Izotov et al. (2012); Berg et al. (2012); James et al. (2015)
for a collection of blue, diﬀuse and star forming dwarf galax-
ies. We note that the abundances reported by Izotov et al.
(2012); Berg et al. (2012); James et al. (2015) correspond
to the chemical abundances as measured using the direct
method and hence should fall onto the same scale of chem-
ical abundances we inferred from the SDSS data with the
adopted calibration.

In Fig. 1 we show the trend of the observed (N/O) ratios
as a function of the (O/H) abundances. The density plot in
greyscale represents the abundance pattern as observed in
the ensemble of the SDSS galaxies, whereas the data with
error bars represent the compilation of star forming dwarf
galaxies from Berg et al. (2012); Izotov et al. (2012); James
et al. (2015). The latter data extend towards lower (O/H)
abundances than the SDSS data and clearly exhibits the
well-known low metallicity plateau. The SDSS data show

4

F. Vincenzo et al.

an abrupt change of the slope at oxygen abundances higher
than 12 + log(O/H) ∼ 8.4 dex .

2.1 Estimating the dust depletion

Oxygen abundance calibrations based on nebular lines only
trace the oxygen abundance of the gaseous phase of the ISM.
However, chemical elements in real galaxies are partially de-
pleted on to dust grains. Since chemical evolution models
only predict the total metallicity, depletion onto dust grains
must be taken into account when comparing models with our
data. From an observational point of view, the dust con-
tent can diﬀer among galaxies of diﬀerent metallicity and
SFR (da Cunha et al. 2010; Fisher et al. 2014; Hjorth et al.
2014). In the framework of chemical evolution studies, the
most important physical process aﬀecting the dust cycle in
galaxies is the star formation history, which regulates the
main feedback processes responsible for the dust production
and destruction and hence the run of the galaxy dust-to-gas
ratio with metallicity (Wang 1991; Dwek 1998; Lisenfeld &
Ferrara 1998; Edmunds 2001; Calura et al. 2008; Dwek &
Cherchneﬀ 2011; Feldmann 2015).
In the literature a mean oxygen depletion2 of D(O) ≈
−0.1 dex is often assumed (see also Whittet 2003; Jenkins
2009; Whittet 2010). Although oxygen depletion is likely
to have a dependance on metallicity (diﬀerential depletion),
for simplicity we do not consider this eﬀect in this work.
Although Jenkins (2009) suggests an average nitrogen de-
pletion of ∼ −0.1 dex, the large uncertainty in this estimate
means that nitrogen is also consistent with zero depletion.
Indeed most of the studies indicate that nitrogen is not a
refractory element and does not deplete onto grains even in
the densest molecular clouds (e.g. Meyer et al. 1997; Caselli
et al. 2002). In light of this, in our work, we do not consider
any nitrogen depletion onto dust. While the depletion cor-
rections applied in this work are rather arbitrary, none of
our conclusions depend on the exact values of the depletion
factors.

3 THE NUCLEOSYNTHETIC ORIGIN OF

NITROGEN

According to its mass and initial chemical composition, each
star pollutes the ISM with diﬀerent amounts of a given chem-
ical element. Since stellar lifetimes primarily depend upon
the stellar mass, each chemical element is expected to enrich
the ISM of galaxies on diﬀerent typical timescales.

3.1 Primary and secondary nucleosynthetic

products

A fundamental aspect to take into account in chemical evo-
lution models is the nature of the physical processes which
give rise to the production of the various chemical elements
in stars. In particular:

2 The depletion factor D(X) is the logarithmic decrement
between the observed abundance of a chemical
element
and its predicted total abundance, A(X), namely D(X) ≡
log(NX /NH )obs − A(X).

(i) If a sequence of nuclear reactions involves as initial
seed only the H and He present in the gas mixture of the
star at its birth, then the nucleosynthetic products of that
sequence do not depend upon the initial stellar metallicity.
The chemical products of these reactions are then named
primary elements.

(ii) If the presence of metals in the initial gas mixture of
the star is necessary for some nuclear reactions to occur, then
the nucleosynthetic products of those nuclear reactions de-
pend on the metallicity. These chemical products are named
secondary elements.

In modern chemical evolution studies, the importance of dis-
tinguishing between the secondary and primary nature has
been simpliﬁed for most of the chemical elements, since their
yields are computed as a function of the initial metallicity.
Nevertheless, for chemical elements like nitrogen, which have
both a primary and secondary origin (see, for example, Ed-
munds & Pagel 1978; Alloin et al. 1979; Renzini & Voli 1981;
Matteucci 1986; Gavil´an et al. 2006; Moll´a et al. 2006), it can
be conceptually useful to separate the two components, even
in the presence of yields computed for diﬀerent metallicities.

3.2 The production of nitrogen in the CNO cycle

Nitrogen is mainly produced during the CNO cycle, whose
main branch consists in a series of p-captures and β+ decays
starting from an atom of 12C and converting four protons
into a nucleus of He (with two e+ and two νe as byprod-
ucts). Since the inner reaction 14N(p, γ)15O proceeds with
the slowest rate among the other in the sequence, when the
equilibrium condition is reached (namely, when the rate of
production of each CNO nucleus equals its rate of destruc-
tion), the ultimate eﬀect of the CNO cycle is to convert most
of the CNO isotopes into 14N. The origin of the initial 12C
seed in the CNO cycle is a discriminating factor. In fact,
if the atom of 12C was initially present in the gas mixture
from which the star originated, then the synthesized nitro-
gen behaves as a secondary element. On the other hand, if
some physical mechanism is able to carry the C and O nu-
clei produced in the He-burning zones out to the H-burning
zones, then the synthesized nitrogen behaves like a primary
element.

3.3 Nitrogen yields in low- and intermediate-mass

stars

Low- and intermediate-mass (LIM) stars during the AGB
phase eject into the ISM signiﬁcant amounts of He, C and
N. The ejected masses reﬂect important abundance varia-
tions. The main physical mechanism for the transport of the
C and O nuclei to the outer zones of the star is given by the
so-called third dredge-up, which is the transfer of the nu-
cleosynthetic products of the triple-α process by the surface
convection which proceeds after each thermal pulse. Primary
nitrogen can then be produced when the hot-bottom burn-
ing (CNO burning at the base of the convective envelope)
occurs in combination with the third dredge-up (see, for ex-
ample, Ventura et al. 2013).

In Fig. 2.1, we show how the stellar yields of Ventura
et al. (2013) for C, O, and primary and secondary N vary

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

(N/O) ratios in the Local Universe

5

Figure 2. In this ﬁgure, we show the Ventura et al. (2013) stellar yields of LIMS for carbon (dashed blue line), oxygen (dashed-dotted red
line), primary nitrogen (dotted black line) and secondary nitrogen (solid black line), as computed at Z = 0.0003, 0.001, 0.004, 0.008, 0.018,
and 0.04. The various quantities do not include the amount of ejected mass which was initially present in the star and has not been
nuclearly processed; so the ﬁnding of negative values for the stellar yields means that the ﬁnal total ejected amount of the generic element
X is smaller than the one which was initially present in the star at its birth and has been later ejected into the ISM without any nuclear
processing.

as a function of the initial stellar mass, for diﬀerent metal-
liticities. The stellar yield of a given chemical element X is
deﬁned as the ejected amount of mass of the newly formed
X. By looking at the ﬁgure, the stellar yields of secondary
N increase with metallicity, by means of the consumption
of the C and O nuclei originally present in the star. In fact,
during the CNO cycle, the global abundance of the CNO nu-
clei remains constant, while the relative abundances of each
CNO element can signiﬁcantly vary. By looking at Fig. 2.1,
the stellar producers of primary N have masses in the range
between ∼ 3 M(cid:12) and 6 M(cid:12). Furthermore, the production of
primary N does not show any correlation with the consump-
tion of the original C and O in the star, as expected.

3.4 Nitrogen yields in massive stars

In order to reproduce the observed plateau in the (N/O) ra-
tio for the MW halo stars, Matteucci (1986) proposed that
massive stars should produce only primary N at all metallic-
ities, at variance with standard nucleosynthesis models pre-
dicting only secondary N from massive stars. This plateau
was also later observed in damped Lyα (DLA) systems (Pet-
tini et al. 2002, 2008) and blue, low metallicity star forming
dwarf galaxies (Thuan et al. 1995; Izotov et al. 2012; Berg

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

et al. 2012; James et al. 2015, see Fig. 1), thus conﬁrming
that there should be primary N production in massive stars.

Maeder & Meynet (2000) and Meynet & Maeder
(2002b) found that primary N can be produced in rapidly ro-
tating massive stars, but only at very low metallicity. Their
proposed main physical mechanism is given by the so-called
rotational mixing, particularly eﬃcient at very low metal-
licity, where stars are expected to rotate faster and to be
much more compact than their metal-rich counterparts. Ro-
tational mixing allows the nucleosynthetic products of the
triple-α reaction (mainly C and O nuclei) to eﬃciently dif-
fuse towards the outer CNO burning zone, where a pure
primary nitrogen can then be synthesized (Chiappini et al.
2008; Maeder 2009).

This unfortunately cannot solve the problem of the ob-
served (N/O) plateau, which extends all over the metallicity
range of MW halo stars. In fact, Geneva stellar evolutionary
models predict fast rotating massive stars to produce pri-
mary N only in a narrow range at very low metallicity; as
the metallicity Z > 10−8, these stars resume producing only
secondary N. Therefore, by assuming the theoretical stellar
yields of the Geneva group, chemical evolution models pre-
dicted a ‘dip’ in the (N/O) ratio at low (O/H) abundances,
which is never observed (see, for example, Chiappini et al.

6

F. Vincenzo et al.

Table 1. In this Table, the various columns report the following quantities: i) Z, metallicity; ii) M O,R10, the IMF-averaged stellar yield
of oxygen in the mass range M = 11-100 M(cid:12), by assuming the stellar yields of Romano et al. (2010, R10) and the Kroupa et al. (1993)
IMF; iii) M N,R10, the IMF-averaged stellar yield of nitrogen, deﬁned as in the previous column; iv) predicted average log(N/O) ratios,
when considering only the contributions of massive stars; v) average stellar yield of primary N which should be provided by massive
stars to reproduce the observed low-metallicity plateau with log(N/O) ≈ −1.6 dex. This empirically-derived yield is used as the reference
stellar yield for primary nitrogen at low metallicity in this work.

Z

M O,R10 [M(cid:12)] M N,R10 [M(cid:12)]

log(N/O)R10 M N,prim [M(cid:12)]

1.0 × 10−10
1.0 × 10−8
1.0 × 10−5
1.0 × 10−3
4.0 × 10−3

3.025
3.105
1.995
1.999
2.013

0.014
0.082
0.0005
0.005
0.018

−2.27
−1.52
−3.53
−2.55
−1.99

0.066
0.068
0.043
0.044
0.044

2005, and the further discussion in Section 3.5 and 6). To
solve this discrepancy and be able to explain the observed
trends in the data, all previous chemical evolution models
(Matteucci 1986; Chiappini et al. 2005) had to assume arti-
ﬁcially a pure primary N yield from massive stars.

massive stars, with the stellar yields at the various metal-
licities being the quantity M N,prim(Z), as given in Eq. (1)
and reported in the last column of Table 1. We remark on
the fact that, because of the way we have deﬁned it, this
quantity depends on the assumed IMF and stellar yields of
oxygen.

3.5 Empirically ﬁxing the nitrogen yield from

massive stars at low metallicity

4 THE CHEMICAL EVOLUTION

In order to re-assess the problem of primary nitrogen pro-
duction in massive stars, we suggest a revised primary N
stellar yield at low metallicity.

In Table 1 we report the IMF-averaged stellar yields
of N and O from massive stars, M N,R10 and M O,R10, re-
spectively, as computed by using the Romano et al. (2010)
compilation of stellar yields and assuming the Kroupa et al.
(1993) IMF. We also report how the values of log(N/O) are
predicted to vary for diﬀerent metallicities, when consider-
ing only the contributions of massive stars to the nitrogen
and oxygen chemical enrichment of the ISM. We observe
that the Geneva stellar models predict a dip in the (N/O)
ratios for Z > 10−8. This dip is never observed and it stems
from the lack of primary N production by massive stars for
Z > 10−8.

In order to reproduce the low-metallicity plateau, we
therefore calculate the average amount of primary N that
massive stars should provide to reproduce the observed
(N/O) plateau at very low metallicities. We assume that
the oxygen yields in this regime are reliable and we re-
quire the predicted (N/O) ratios to match the observed
log(N/O) ≈ −1.6 dex at low metallicity. In particular, we
empirically derive the needed average stellar yield of pri-
mary nitrogen by massive stars as
M N,prim(Z) = M O,R10(Z) × 10

(1)

,

−1.6 × AN
AO

where AN and AO represent the atomic weight of N and
O, respectively. The calculated values of M N,prim(Z) are re-
ported in the last column of Table 1. Interestingly, at ex-
tremely low Z, the latter are of the same order of magnitude
as the value of 0.065 M(cid:12) originally adopted in chemical evo-
lution models to reproduce the low-metallicity plateau (see
also Chiappini et al. 2005, and references therein).

For the rest of this work, in our reference chemical evo-
lution models, we assume a pure primary N production by

FRAMEWORK

In this work, we study the nitrogen and oxygen evolution in
the ISM of galaxies by adopting a chemical evolution model
in which the galaxy is assumed to be composed of a sin-
gle zone within which the various chemical elements are as-
sumed to mix instantaneously and uniformly. The basic in-
gredients of the model are described in detail in Matteucci
(2012). In summary, the model is capable of following the
temporal evolution of the abundances of various chemical
elements within the ISM of galaxies, by taking into account
the main physical processes driving chemical evolution, such
as star formation, inﬂows and outﬂows of gas.

4.1 Star formation and chemical evolution

By deﬁning Mg,i(t) as the gas mass in the galaxy which is in
the form of the i-th chemical element at time t, its temporal
evolution follows:

(cid:124)

(cid:125)

+ Ri(t)

dMg,i(t)

dt

(cid:123)(cid:122)

SF

− Ψi(t)

(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)

= −Xi(t) SFR(t)

(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)
the i-th chemical element, deﬁned such that (cid:80)

where Xi(t) = Mg,i(t)/Mg(t) is the abundance by mass of
i Xi(t) = 1,
and Mg(t) is the total gas mass in the galaxy at time t. In
our models, we assume the stellar lifetimes of Padovani &
Matteucci (1993).

(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)

infall

+ Φi(t)

,

(2)

yields

outﬂow

We assume a star formation law of the form SFR(t) =
νMg(t), with ν being the star formation eﬃciency (SFE), a
free parameter of our models.

The term Ri(t) in equation 2 represents the rate at
which stars return the i-th chemical element back to the
ISM at their death. This term subsumes all our prescriptions
about the stellar yields as well as the assumptions concerning
SN progenitors. In particular, for Type Ia SNe, we assume

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

the ‘single degenerate scenario’ with the same prescriptions
as in Matteucci & Recchi (2001); Matteucci (2001, 2012),
however the details of the treatment of Type Ia SNe are
largely irrelevant to this work, since they only have a very
minor eﬀect in the enrichment of oxygen and nitrogen.

4.2 The infall rate

In our model, the galaxy is assumed to assemble by means of
accretion of gas from an external reservoir into the potential
well of an underlying dark matter (DM) halo.

The gas infall rate, Φi(t), follows an exponential form

with time given by

Φi(t) =

Xinf,i Minf e−t/τinf
τinf (1 − e−tG/τinf )

, with

(cid:90) tG

(cid:88)

i

0

Φi(t)dt = Minf,

(3)

where tG is the age of the galaxy and Xinf,i is the abun-
dance by mass of the i-th chemical element in the infalling
gas (Minf), whose chemical composition is assumed to be
primordial.

4.3 The outﬂow model

In equation 2 the outﬂow rate is modelled by Ψi(t) =
ωi SFR(t), where ωi is the so-called mass loading factor. Ob-
servations generally suggest that star-forming galaxies expe-
rience time-averaged outﬂow loading factors of order unity
(Lilly et al. 2013; Peng et al. 2015; Belﬁore et al. 2015; Lu et
al. 2015) at stellar masses around log(M(cid:63)/M(cid:12)) ∼ 10, close
to the knee of the luminosity function. It is, however, likely
that less massive galaxies experience much higher loading
factors.

In this work, we assume the galactic wind to be diﬀer-
ential ; namely, the outﬂow carries only the main nucleosyn-
thetic products of core-collapse SNe (mainly α-elements), for
which ωi is a constant value. For chemical elements such as
nitrogen and carbon, which have a very minor contribution
from SNe, we assume a null mass loading factor, i.e. ωi = 0.
The assumption of a diﬀerential outﬂow is justiﬁed by the
fact that massive stars (the progenitors of core-collapse SNe
and the most important oxygen producers in the Universe)
are observed to be highly clustered and so, as they explode,
they create a region of the ISM in which the ﬁlling factor
closely approaches to unity (see Marconi et al. 1994; Recchi
et al. 2001).

Interestingly, the ﬁrst works suggesting a diﬀerential
metal-enhanced galactic wind in the context of the study of
chemical evolution of galaxies were those of Pilyugin (1993)
and Marconi et al. (1994), which addressed also the issue
of explaining the (N/O) vs. (O/H) abundance pattern ob-
served in dwarf irregular galaxies (see Recchi et al. 2008 for
a detailed study and references). We are aware that our as-
sumption of a diﬀerential galactic wind is highly uncertain
and it does not rely on ﬁrm theoretical and observational
ﬁndings; further detailed investigations are needed, by look-
ing – for example – at the chemical abundances in the halo
of the MW or in quasar absorption lines, which were also
related in the past to galactic winds.

Following the formalism of Bradamante et al. (1998),
the time for the onset of the galactic outﬂow is calculated

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

(N/O) ratios in the Local Universe

7

by requiring the thermal energy of the gas (supplied by SNe
and stellar winds to the galaxy ISM) to be larger than the
binding energy of the gas to the galaxy potential well.

4.4 Summary of the stellar yields for O and N

In this work we assume for oxygen and nitrogen the following
set of stellar yields.

(i) For massive

stars, we assume

the metallicity-
dependent compilation of stellar yields of Romano et al.
(2010), in which the nitrogen and oxygen yields have been
computed by the Geneva group, by including the combined
eﬀect of rotation and mass loss (see, for more details, Meynet
& Maeder 2002; Hirschi et al. 2005; Hirschi 2007; Ekstr¨om
et al. 2008). For Z < 10−3 we make use of the empirically-
motivated nitrogen yield of massive stars derived in Sec. 3.5.
(ii) For low- and intermediate-mass (LIM) stars, we as-
sume the stellar yields at the various metallicities computed
by means of the ATON numerical code of stellar evolution
(see, for a detailed description, Mazzitelli 1989; Ventura et
al. 1998; Ventura & D’Antona 2009; Ventura et al. 2013).
We have chosen the Ventura et al. (2013) stellar yields be-
cause they provide separately the primary and secondary
components of the nitrogen stellar yield for a large range of
metallicities (3.0 × 10−4 ≤ Z ≤ 0.04; see the discussion in
Sec 3.1). Other works which also separate the two compo-
nents are those of Gavil´an et al. (2005, 2006), however they
span a too narrow metallicity range for the purpose of our
work.

5 MODELLING THE SDSS DATA

In this section, we compare the predictions of our chemical
evolution models with the set of data discussed in Sec. 2 (see
Fig. 1) focusing on reproducing the high-metallicity regime
of the (N/O) versus (O/H) diagram. We will address the
question of reproducing the low metallicity tail of the (N/O)
distribution in the next section.

5.1 The reference model

Given the relatively large number of free parameters in our
detailed chemical evolution model, we take a qualitative,
staged approach. We ﬁrst choose a set of reference parame-
ters. We then investigate the eﬀect of changing each of them,
while keeping the other ones ﬁxed. Our reference model as-
sumes:

(i) ﬁxed SFE ν = 1.5 Gyr−1,
(ii) ﬁxed mass loading factor ω = 0.8 for oxygen,
(iii) diﬀerential galactic outﬂow, with ω = 0.0 for nitro-

gen,

(iv) infall mass log(Minf/M(cid:12)) = 10.25,
(v) infall time-scale τinf = 1 Gyr,
(vi) Kroupa et al. (1993) IMF,

and the star formation history is assumed to be extended
over all the galaxy lifetime (i.e. we do not introduce a
quenching phase). In Fig. 3 we plot this reference model in

8

F. Vincenzo et al.

Figure 3. The reference chemical evolution model used in this work to reproduce the abundance pattern in the (N/O) vs (O/H) plane
(black solid line). The distribution of SDSS galaxies is shown as a 2D histogram, with the bin size in both the (N/O) and (O/H)
dimensions being 0.025 dex, and the colour-coding represents the number of galaxies in each bin. The changes in slope of the observed
(N/O) vs (O/H) relation are linked to diﬀerent physical properties of the model. The plateau at low metallicity is due to the pure primary
N production by massive stars. The slope of the (N/O) vs (O/H) relation increases when LIMS start dying, producing both primary and
secondary nitrogen. A further steepening of the relation is obtained after the onset of a diﬀerential galactic wind, which here is assumed
to expel oxygen preferentially.

the (N/O) versus (O/H) plane, together with the distribu-
tion of SDSS galaxies. The observed (N/O) vs. (O/H) abun-
dance pattern is shown as a density plot, with the bin size
in both the (N/O) and (O/H) dimensions being 0.025 dex;
we show only the bins which contain more than ten galax-
ies and the colour-coding represents the number of galaxies
within each bin.

It is remarkable to note that our simple reference model
in Fig. 3 can well reproduce the main features of the data.
The predicted low-metallicity plateau is the eﬀect of our as-
sumption of a pure primary N production by massive stars.
The increase of the (N/O) ratios from 12 + log(O/H) ∼
8.0 dex is due to the delayed chemical feedback of LIMS,
which pollute the ISM with primary and secondary nitrogen;
we will refer to this change in slope as the ‘ﬁrst break point’.
By deﬁnition, the production of secondary nitrogen by LIMS
increases as the metallicity increases. Although the produc-
tion of primary N is smaller than the one of secondary N (see
Fig. 2.1), the main primary N producers turns out to be, on
average, less massive and hence more long-living than the
bulk of the secondary N producers. In this way, the pollution
of the ISM with primary N by LIMS mimics and ampliﬁes
the secondary N component. At 12+log(O/H) ∼ 8.6 dex, we
see in Fig. 3 a new change in slope (‘second break point’),
which is caused by the onset of the galactic wind. Since we
assume a diﬀerential outﬂow, the loss of oxygen per unit
time is more eﬃcient than the loss of nitrogen (which is set
to zero). In this way, the accumulation of oxygen within the

galaxy ISM slows down and the net eﬀect of the galactic
wind is to steepen the (N/O) ratios as the chemical evo-
lution proceeds. We remark that the increase of the (N/O)
ratios after the second break point is also crucially bolstered
by the larger amounts of secondary N which LIMS are able
to synthesize at higher Z.

5.2 Exploring the parameter space

In this section we discuss the eﬀect of varying the free pa-
rameters in the reference model. In particular, we show that
the main parameters inﬂuencing the shape of the (N/O) vs
(O/H) relation are the star formation eﬃciency, the outﬂow
loading factor and the assumptions regarding the diﬀerential
outﬂow loading for N and O. Other parameters, such as the
infall mass and the infall timescale do not have a signiﬁcant
eﬀect on the abundance trends studied.

5.2.1 The infall mass

In Fig. 4.4a), we explore the eﬀect of varying the infall mass,
in the range log(Minf/M(cid:12)) = 9.75-11.0. The common evolu-
tion of all the galaxies before the onset of the galactic wind
stems from the fact that all these models assume a ﬁxed
SFE (ν = 1.5 Gyr−1). The models developing the galactic
wind ﬁrst are the ones with the smallest infall mass, which
depart from the common track at the lowest (O/H) abun-
dances; in fact, such models are characterized by a lower

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

(N/O) ratios in the Local Universe

9

Figure 4. Chemical evolution model track in the (N/O) vs (O/H) plane. Abundances for SDSS galaxies are shown as a 2D histogram,
with the colour-coding corresponding to the number of galaxies in each bin, with the bin size in both the (N/O) and (O/H) dimensions
being 0.025 dex. The reference model is always plotted in black solid line. In diﬀerent panels we vary diﬀerent free parameters of the
chemical evolution model. In panel a) we change the infall mass Minf , in panel b) the infall timescale τinf , in panel c) the SFE ν and
in panel d) the outﬂow loading factor ω. In panel d) the dashed lines correspond to a non-diﬀerential outﬂow (where both N and O are
expelled with the same eﬃciency) while the solid lines refer to the reference assumption of a diﬀerential outﬂow where N is not expelled
(with ωN = 0).

galaxy potential well, and hence they develop the outﬂow at
earlier times. Overall the infall mass in our models does not
play a key role in deﬁning the shape of the (N/O) vs (O/H)
relation.

5.2.2 The infall timescale

The infall time-scale regulates the rate of accretion of the
gas into the system. In particular, by ﬁxing the values of
the other parameters, models with longer infall time-scales
predict the galactic wind to develop at earlier times, since
the binding energy of the gas to the whole galaxy is lower, at
any time of the galaxy evolution. This can be appreciated by
looking at Fig. 4.4b), where models assuming diﬀerent infall
time-scales are compared. Before the onset of the galactic

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

wind, all the models evolve on the same track in the (N/O)
vs. (O/H) diagram because the SFE is kept ﬁxed.

5.2.3 The star formation eﬃciency

The SFE (ν) is a key parameter in driving the star formation
history of the system and has a complex eﬀect on the balance
of the diﬀerent stellar populations that contribute to the
nitrogen and oxygen abundance in galaxies. Increasing the
SFE speeds up the production of oxygen per unit time by
massive stars in the earliest stages of the galaxy chemical
evolution. Since we assume that nitrogen is synthesized by
massive stars as a pure primary element, the increasing of
the SFE does not aﬀect much the (N/O) ratio in the low
metallicity regime.

In Fig. 4.4c), we explore the eﬀect of varying the SFE

10

F. Vincenzo et al.

Figure 5.
In this ﬁgure, in panel a) and b), we show how the
(O/H) abundances and the (N/O) ratios, respectively, are pre-
dicted to vary as functions of the galaxy time. The various curves
correspond to models with diﬀerent star formation eﬃciency, with
the reference model being the blue solid line.

in the range ν = 0.5 − 3 Gyr−1. The ﬁrst large eﬀect in
the (N/O) vs (O/H) diagram can be seen at the ﬁrst break
point; in particular, the higher the SFE, the larger is the
metal content within the galaxy as ﬁrst LIMS die, causing
the (N/O) ratios to increase. In conclusion, an increase of
the SFE determines a wider range in metallicity of the initial
(N/O) plateau due to the chemical enrichment of massive
stars. This is a sort of application of the so-called ‘time-
delay model’(Tinsley 1979; Greggio & Renzini 1983; Mat-
teucci & Greggio 1986) to the (N/O) vs. (O/H) diagram.
We remind the reader that by time-delay model we mean
the classical way of interpreting the trend of the observed
[α/Fe] vs. [Fe/H] abundance patterns in galaxies, where key
roles are played by the assumed SFE and the delayed chem-
ical enrichment by Type Ia SNe; in particular, the higher
the SFE in galaxies, the larger is the [Fe/H] abundance of
the ISM as ﬁrst Type Ia SNe explode and hence the [α/Fe]
ratios steeply decrease.

In Fig. 5a), we show the relations between the age of
the galaxy and the metallicity of the ISM, as predicted by
our models with varying SFEs. Galaxies with very low SFEs
struggle to reach high (O/H) abundances, spending most
of their evolutionary time at low metallicities. Conversely,
models with higher SFEs predict galaxies to reach the (O/H)
abundances of the SDSS data at earlier times. Once the
galactic wind develops, there is an interplay between the
rate of restitution of oxygen into the galaxy ISM by dying
stars and the rate of removal of oxygen by galactic wind
and star formation; this causes the (O/H) abundances to
increase more gradually with time than before the onset of
the galactic wind.

Figure 6.
In this ﬁgure, we explore the eﬀect of changing the
IMF on the predicted (N/O) vs. (O/H) diagram. The black solid
curve corresponds to our reference model with the Kroupa et al.
(1993) IMF, the dashed curve in dark red to the Salpeter (1955)
IMF, and the dotted curve in blue to the Chabrier (2003) and
Kroupa (2001) IMFs, which provide very similar ﬁnal results.

In Fig. 5b), we show how the predicted (N/O) ratios
vary as a function of the time, when varying the SFE. In
the earliest stages of the galaxy evolution, all the models
tend towards log(N/O) ∼ −1.6 dex, which corresponds to
the nitrogen-to-oxygen ratio of the low metallicity plateau.
As ﬁrst LIMS die, the (N/O) ratio is predicted to suddenly
increase, because of the large amounts of both primary and
secondary N which LIMS are capable of synthesize. In sum-
mary, the higher the SFE, the earlier and the higher are the
metallicities (as discussed above) when LIMS start dying,
causing the (N/O) ratio to increase. The eﬀect of the onset
of the galactic wind is less visible in this ﬁgure, and it corre-
sponds to the gradual change in the slope of the (N/O) vs.
time relation occurring at later times.

5.2.4 The outﬂow loading factor

Our reference model assumes a diﬀerential outﬂow, which
carries only the nucleosynthetic products of core-collapse
SNe (mainly α-elements) out of the galaxy potential well.
Hence the mass loading factor, ω, quoted in the reference
model only refers to oxygen, since nitrogen is assumed not
to be expelled. Obviously, in reality, some nitrogen would be
lost to the IGM, but here we consider its mass loading factor
to be much lower than the one of oxygen, since core-collapse
SNe are minor contributors of N in galaxies and the galac-
tic wind (mainly triggered by SN explosions) develops when
LIMS have already heavily polluted the ISM with nitrogen,
overcoming the N enrichment from massive stars.

In Fig. 4.4d), we show the eﬀect of almost doubling
the mass loading factor on the (N/O) vs. (O/H) abun-
dance pattern. By deﬁnition this parameter only has an
eﬀect after the galactic wind has started; this occurs at
12 + log(O/H) ∼ 8.6 dex in our reference model. The re-
quirement of a diﬀerential outﬂow to reproduce the observed
trend of the (N/O) vs. (O/H) abundance pattern can be ap-
preciated by comparing the solid and dashed curves in Fig.

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

(N/O) ratios in the Local Universe

11

In this ﬁgure, we show chemical evolution models for dwarf galaxies. We assume Minf = 109 M(cid:12), varying SFEs, an infall
Figure 7.
timescale τinf = 0.1 Gyr and the IMF of Kroupa et al. (1993). The grey points correspond to the SDSS galaxies with M(cid:63) ≤ 109 M(cid:12), in
the same range of stellar mass as the metal-poor, star forming dwarf galaxies from Berg et al. (2012); Izotov et al. (2012); James et al.
(2015), which are represented by the data with error bars.

4.4d), corresponding to models with diﬀerential and non-
diﬀerential outﬂow, respectively. Concerning the model with
a diﬀerential outﬂow, ω has the clear eﬀect of changing the
slope of the (N/O) vs (O/H) relation at high metallicity. Im-
portantly, even in the case of the reference model, this slope
is much steeper than unity, which is the naive prediction
for the secondary nitrogen enrichment. By looking at Eq.
2, the slope is crucially determined by the balance between
the loss of oxygen via galactic winds (and star formation)
and the restitution of oxygen by massive stars. If the lat-
ter exceeds the former, the slope is positive, otherwise it is
negative. Concerning the model with a non-diﬀerential out-
ﬂow, the transition between the SF-dominated regime and
the outﬂow-dominated regime is smooth, since both oxygen
and nitrogen are lost from the galaxy potential well with the
same eﬃciency ω.

5.2.5 The IMF

In Fig. 6, we explore the eﬀect of changing the IMF on the
(N/O) vs. (O/H) abundance diagram. Our reference IMF,
which is Kroupa et al. (1993, the best IMF for the MW disk;
see Romano et al. 2010), hosts a large number of LIMS and
a much smaller number of massive stars than the Salpeter
(1955) IMF, and it provides the best agreement with the
observed dataset among the classical IMFs considered in this
work. IMFs like Chabrier (2003) and Kroupa (2001), which
are very similar among each other, host a larger number of
massive stars and hence an enhanced oxygen-production is
predicted at the early stages of galaxy evolution; so the ﬁrst
break point occurs at higher metallicities when the Chabrier

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

(2003) or the Kroupa (2001) IMF are assumed. The main
eﬀect of the IMF is to shift the chemical evolution tracks
along the (O/H) axis. In fact, the main role of the IMF is
to assign diﬀerent weights to stars in diﬀerent mass ranges.

6 MODELLING THE LOW METALLICITY

TAIL

In this subsection, we present chemical evolution models for
star forming, metal-poor dwarf galaxies, in order to repro-
duce the observed low metallicity tail of the (N/O) ratios.
The data of Berg et al. (2012); Izotov et al. (2012); James
et al. (2015) clearly exhibit a plateau in the (N/O) ratios,
which extends towards low (O/H) abundances. None of the
models developed in the past has been capable of reproduc-
ing this trend (see Chiappini et al. 2005).

In Fig. 7, we show the predictions of models with
Minf = 109 M(cid:12), τinf = 0.1 Gyr and SFEs in the range
ν = 0.05 − 5 Gyr−1, with the purpose of reproducing the
trend of the (N/O) vs. (O/H) abundances which are ob-
served in metal-poor star forming dwarf galaxies (data with
error bars) and in the SDSS galaxies with stellar mass
M(cid:63) ≤ 109 M(cid:12). The other parameters are the reference ones,
as described at the beginning of Section 5. In these mod-
els, we assume that massive stars produce pure primary N;
our stellar yields for N are summarized in Table 1, and they
have been computed as a function of the metallicity, start-
ing from the observational constraint that metal-poor dwarf
galaxies share a common nitrogen-to-oxygen ratio which is
log(N/O) ≈ −1.6 dex.

12

F. Vincenzo et al.

The trend of the various models in Fig. 7 can be ex-
plained by means of the same mechanism which has been
mentioned throughout all the text: very low SFEs cause a
slow production of oxygen by massive stars; this fact allows
the ISM to be quite metal-poor when LIMS begin to highly
pollute the ISM with nitrogen. Therefore, lowering the SFEs
causes the plateau of the (N/O) ratios to be less extended in
metallicity and hence the ﬁrst break to occur at lower Z. This
explanation is a sort of application of the time-delay model
to the (N/O) vs. (O/H) diagram. By comparing models and
data, we can obtain a good qualitative agreement, clearly
suggesting that a pure primary N production by massive
stars is needed to explain and reproduce the low-metallicity
plateau.

By assuming the N stellar yields of massive stars col-
lected by Romano et al. (2010), which include the results
of the stellar evolutionary code of the Geneva group taking
into account the eﬀects of mass loss and rotation, all our
chemical evolution models predict a dip in the (N/O) ratios
when going towards low (O/H) abundances (see also Table
1), at variance with observations.

This can be appreciated by looking at Fig. 8, where
the predictions of a model with pure primary N production
by massive stars is compared with a similar model assum-
ing the Geneva stellar yields for massive stars, as given in
Romano et al. (2010, their model 15). Both models assume
ν = 1.5 Gyr−1, Minf = 109 M(cid:12) and τinf = 0.1 Gyr. Fig. 8
clearly points out the still open problem of standard stellar
nucleosynthesis calculations as well as of stellar evolution-
ary models to predict the right amount of pure primary N
which massive stars should provide to reproduce the ob-
served (N/O) plateau at very low metallicity.

7 CONCLUSIONS

In this article, we have presented a set of chemical evolu-
tion models with the purpose of reproducing the (N/O) vs.
(O/H) abundance pattern, as observed in a sample of SDSS
galaxies (Abazajian et al. 2009) and metal-poor, star form-
ing dwarf galaxies (Izotov et al. 2012; Berg et al. 2012; James
et al. 2015). Our collection of data spans a wide metallic-
ity range (7.1 dex <∼ log(O/H) + 12 <∼ 8.9 dex), enabling us
to recover the trend of the observed (N/O) vs. (O/H) re-
lation with a precision never reached before. At very low
metallicity, the data clearly demonstrate the existence of a
plateau in the (N/O) ratio, followed by an increase of this
ratio which steepens as the metallicity increases. We sum-
marize our main conclusions in what follows.

(i) The low metallicity plateau in the nitrogen-to-oxygen
ratio represents the imprint of pure primary N from mas-
sive stars, as originally suggested by Matteucci (1986). Such
plateau is also observed all over the metallicity range of MW
halo stars and in low metallicity DLAs. From a theoreti-
cal point of view, standard nucleosynthesis calculations have
shown that the rotational mixing in very-metal poor massive
stars can allow a pure primary N production (see Maeder
& Meynet 2000, and subsequent papers from the Geneva
group); nevertheless, as the metallicity becomes Z > 10−8,
massive stars resume producing only secondary N. This still
represents an open problem in stellar nucleosynthesis cal-
culations, since all the chemical evolution models with the

Figure 8. In this ﬁgure, we compare the predictions of a model
with pure primary N production by massive stars with a simi-
lar model assuming the Geneva stellar yields for massive stars,
as given in Romano et al. (2010, their model 15). Both models
assume ν = 1.5 Gyr−1, Minf = 109 M(cid:12) and τinf = 0.1 Gyr. The
data are same as in Fig. 7.

current stellar yields of massive stars, including standard
mass loss and rotation, predict a “dip” in the (N/O) ratios
for Z > 10−8, at variance with observations (see, for exam-
ple, Chiappini et al. 2005; Romano et al. 2010).

(ii) In this work, we have computed the primary N stel-
lar yields of massive stars which are needed, as functions
of the metallicity, to reproduce the observational constraint
suggesting that log(N/O) ≈ −1.6 dex in metal-poor, star
forming dwarf galaxies. Our results are given in the last col-
umn of Table 1. In this way, we have been able to reproduce
the observed ﬂat trend of the data.

(iii) A fundamental aspect to take into account for ex-
plaining the trend of the observed (N/O) vs. (O/H) abun-
dance pattern is the time-delay with which LIMS start en-
riching the ISM with both primary and secondary N. In fact,
before the ﬁrst LIMS die, massive stars are the only nitrogen
and oxygen producers in galaxies. When LIMS start dying,
the N abundance within the galaxy ISM steeply increases.
Since the stellar yields of the secondary N component by
LIMS increase with metallicity, then the (N/O) ratios con-
tinuously grow as a function of the (O/H) abundance.

(iv) The range in metallicity of the initial (N/O) plateau
in the (N/O) vs. (O/H) abundance diagram is determined
by the SFE; in particular, the higher the SFE, the larger is
the extension in metallicity of the plateau. In fact, the SFE
is the main parameter driving the rate of metal production
from massive stars, hence regulating the metallicity of the
system when LIMS begin to heavily pollute the ISM with
nitrogen. Therefore, if the SFE is high, the change in slope of
the (N/O) ratio occurs at higher metallicity than in the case
with low SFE. This is a consequence of the so-called time-
delay model on the (N/O) vs. (O/H) diagram. In conclusion,
the position of the galaxies along the observed (N/O) vs.
(O/H) sequence is mostly determined by the SFE.

(v) Only by assuming diﬀerential galactic winds, remov-
ing exclusively chemical elements produced in core-collapse
SNe, we have been able to reproduce the steep increasing

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

trend of (N/O) ratios at high metallicity. Nevertheless, the
larger amounts of secondary N provided by LIMS as the
metallicity increases is necessary to reach the high observed
(N/O) ratios at high metallicity. In our reference model, we
have assumed a mass loading factor of the order of the unity;
the variation of this parameter crucially determines the slope
with which the (N/O) ratios are observed to increase at high
metallicity. On the other hand, all our models with normal
galactic wind – in which all the chemical elements are carried
out of the galaxy potential well with the same eﬃciency –
fail in explaining the observed trend of the (N/O) vs. (O/H)
abundance pattern.

(vi) The role of the IMF consists in giving diﬀerent
weights to stars as functions of their mass, when the star
formation process takes place. If the IMF is rich in massive
stars, then an enhanced O production is predicted (see also
Vincenzo et al. 2016), letting the (N/O) ratios start to in-
crease at high (O/H) abundances. So the main eﬀect of the
IMF is to shift the (N/O) vs. (O/H) relations over the (O/H)
axis. Our chemical evolution models with the Kroupa et al.
(1993) IMF provide the best agreement with the observed
dataset.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

FV thanks the Cavendish Astrophysics Group at the Uni-
versity of Cambridge for kindly supporting his visit dur-
ing September 2014. FB acknowledges funding from the
United Kingdom Science and Technology Facilities Council
(STFC). RM acknowledges funding from the United King-
dom STFC through grant ST/M001172/1. FM acknowl-
edges ﬁnancial support from PRIN-MIUR 2010-2011 project
‘The Chemical and Dynamical Evolution of the Milky Way
and Local Group Galaxies’, prot. 2010LY5N2T. We thank
an anonymous referee for his/her constructive comments,
which have improved the clarity of the paper. The data used
in this paper can be retrieved at the MPA-JHU DR7 re-
lease of spectrum measurements web page: http://wwwmpa.
mpa-garching.mpg.de/SDSS/DR7/.

REFERENCES

Abazajian K. N., Adelman-McCarthy J. K., Ag¨ueros M. A., et

al., 2009, ApJ, 182, 543

Aihara H., Allende Prieto C., An D., et al., 2011, ApJ, 193, 29
Alloin D., Collin-Souﬀrin S., Joly M., Vigroux L.,1979, A&A, 78,

200

Andrews B. H., Martini P., 2013, ApJ, 765, 140
Arimoto N., Yoshii Y., 1987, A&A, 173, 23
Baldwin J. A., Phillips M. M., Terlevich R., 1981, PASP, 93, 5
Belﬁore F., Maiolino R., Bundy K., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 449,

867

Belﬁore F., Maiolino R., Bothwell M., 2016, MNRAS, 455, 1218
Berg D. A., Skillman E. D., Marble A. R., et al., 2012, ApJ, 754,

98

Bernardi M., Sheth R. K., Annis J., et al., 2003, AJ, 125, 1882
Bertin G., Saglia R. P., Stiavelli M., 1992, ApJ, 384, 423
Blanc G. A., Kewley L., Vogt F. P. A., Dopita M. A., 2015, ApJ,

798, 99

(N/O) ratios in the Local Universe

13

Bothwell M. S., Maiolino R., Kennicutt R., et al., 2013, MNRAS,

433, 1425

Bradamante F., Matteucci F., D’Ercole A., 1998, A&A, 337, 338
Brinchmann J., Charlot S., White S. D. M., et al., 2004, MNRAS,

351, 1151

Calura F., Pipino A., Matteucci F., 2008, A&A, 479, 669
Calura F., Gilli R., Vignali C., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 438, 2765
Calzetti D., 2001, PASP, 113, 1449
Cardelli J. A., Clayton G. C., Mathis J. S., 1989, ApJ, 345, 245
Caselli P., Walmsley C. M., Zucconi A., et al., 2002, ApJ, 565,

344

Chabrier G., 2003, PASP, 115, 763
Charlot S., Fall S. M., 2000, ApJ, 539, 718
Chiappini C., Romano D., Matteucci F., 2003, MNRAS, 339, 63
Chiappini C., Matteucci F., Ballero S. K., 2005, A&A, 437, 429
Chiappini C., Ekstr¨om S., Meynet G., et al., 2008, A&A, 479, L9
Cicone C., Maiolino R., Sturm E., et al., 2014, A&A, 562, A21
Cicone C., Maiolino R., Gallerani S., et al., 2015, A&A, 574, A14
da Cunha E., Eminian C., Charlot S., Blaizot J., 2010, MNRAS,

403, 1894

Dav´e R., Finlator K., Oppenheimer B. D., 2012, MNRAS, 421,

98

de Blok W. J. G., Keating K. M., Pisano D. J., et al., 2014, A&A,

569, A68

Dekel A., Zolotov A., Tweed D., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 435, 999
Driver S. P., Hill D. T., Kelvin L. S., et al., 2011, MNRAS, 413,

971

Dwek E., 1998, ApJ, 501, 643
Dwek E., Cherchneﬀ I., 2011, ApJ, 727, 63
Edmunds M. G., Pagel B. E. J., 1978, MNRAS, 185, 77P
Edmunds M. G., 2001, MNRAS, 328, 223
Ekstr¨om S., Meynet G., Chiappini C., Hirschi R., Maeder A.,

2008, A&A, 489, 685

Erb D. K., 2008, ApJ, 674, 151
Erb D. K., 2015, Nature, 523, 169
Fabian A. C., 2012, ARA&A, 50, 455
Faucher-Gigu`ere C.-A., Kereˇs D., Ma C.-P., 2011, MNRAS, 417,

2982

Feldmann R., 2015, MNRAS, 449, 3274
Finlator K., Dav´e R., 2008, MNRAS, 385, 2181
Fisher D. B., Bolatto A. D., Herrera-Camus R., et al., 2014, Na-

ture, 505, 186

Fraternali F., van Moorsel G., Sancisi R., Oosterloo T., 2002, AJ,

123, 3124

Fraternali F., Binney J. J., 2008, MNRAS, 386, 935
Fraternali F., Marasco A., Armillotta L., Marinacci F., 2015, MN-

RAS, 447, L70

Gavil´an M., Buell J. F., Moll´a M., 2005, A&A, 432, 861
Gavil´an M., Moll´a M., Buell J. F., 2006, A&A, 450, 509
Geach J. E., Hickox R. C., Diamond-Stanic A. M., et al., 2014,

Nature, 516, 68

Gentile G., J´ozsa G. I. G., Serra P., et al., 2013, A&A, 554, A125
Gibson B. K., 1994, J. R. Astron. Soc. Can., 88, 383
Gibson B. K. 1994, MNRAS, 271, L35
Greggio L., Renzini A., 1983, Mem. Soc. Astron. Ital., 54, 311
Heald G., J´ozsa G., Serra P., et al., 2011, A&A, 526, A118
Henry R. B. C., Edmunds M. G., K¨oppen J., 2000, ApJ, 541, 660
Hopkins P. F., Quataert E., Murray N., 2012, MNRAS, 421, 3522
Hirschi R., Meynet G., Maeder A., 2005, A&A, 433, 1013
Hirschi R., 2007, A&A, 461, 571
Hjorth J., Gall C., Micha(cid:32)lowski M. J., 2014, ApJL, 782, L23
Hughes T. M., Cortese L., Boselli A., Gavazzi G., Davies J. I.,

2013, A&A, 550, A115

Izotov Y. I., Thuan T. X., Guseva N. G., 2012, A&A, 546, A122
James B. L., Koposov S., Stark D. P., et al., 2015, MNRAS, 448,

Bolatto A. D., Warren S. R., Leroy A. K., et al., 2013, Nature,

2687

499, 450

Boselli A., Gavazzi G., 2014, A&AR, 22, 74

Jenkins E. B., 2009, ApJ, 700, 1299
Jenkins E. B., 2014, preprint (arXiv:1402.4765)

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

14

F. Vincenzo et al.

Karakas A. I., 2010, MNRAS, 403, 1413
Kauﬀmann G., Heckman T. M., White S. D. M., et al., 2003,

MNRAS, 341, 33

Kewley L. J., Dopita M. A., Sutherland R. S., Heisler C. A.,

Putman M. E., Peek J. E. G., Joung M. R., 2012, ARA&A, 50,

491

Recchi S., Matteucci F., D’Ercole A., 2001, MNRAS, 322, 800
Recchi S., Spitoni E., Matteucci F., Lanfranchi G. A., 2008, A&A,

Trevena J. 2001, ApJ, 556, 121

489, 555

Kewley L. J., Ellison S. L., 2008, ApJ, 681, 1183
K¨oppen J., Hensler G., 2005, A&A, 434, 531
Kroupa P., Tout C. A., Gilmore G., 1993, MNRAS, 262, 545
Kroupa P., 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231
Lequeux J., Peimbert M., Rayo J. F., Serrano A., Torres-Peimbert

S., 1979, A&A, 80, 155

Lilly S. J., Le Brun V., Maier C., et al., 2009, ApJS, 184, 218
Lilly S. J., Carollo C. M., Pipino A., Renzini A., Peng Y., 2013,

ApJ, 772, 119

Lisenfeld U., Ferrara A., 1998, ApJ, 496, 145
L´opez-S´anchez ´A. R., Dopita M. A., Kewley L. J., et al., 2012,

Renzini A., Voli M., 1981, A&A, 94, 175
Romano D., Karakas A. I., Tosi M., Matteucci F., 2010, A&A,

522, A32

S´anchez S. F., P´erez E., Rosales-Ortega F. F., et al., 2015, A&A,

574, A47

Saito M., 1979, Publ. Astron. Soc. Japan, 31, 181
Salpeter E. E., 1955, ApJ, 121, 161
Schmidt M., 1963, ApJ, 137, 758
Talbot R. J., Jr., Arnett W. D., 1973, ApJ, 186, 51
Thomas D., Maraston C., Bender R., Mendes de Oliveira C., 2005,

ApJ, 621, 673

MNRAS, 426, 2630

Thomas D., Maraston C., Schawinski K., Sarzi M., Silk J., 2010,

Lu Y., Blanc G. A., Benson A., 2015, ApJ, 808, 129
Maeder A., Meynet G. 2000, A&A, 361, 159
Maeder A., 2009, Physics, Formation and Evolution of Rotating
Stars, Astronomy and Astrophysics Library. ISBN 978-3-540-
76948-4. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009

Mannucci F., Cresci G., Maiolino R., Marconi A., Gnerucci A.,

2010, MNRAS, 408, 2115

Marconi G., Matteucci F., Tosi M., 1994, MNRAS, 270, 35
Matteucci F., 1986, MNRAS, 221, 911
Matteucci F., Greggio L., 1986, A&A, 154, 279
Matteucci F., Brocato E., 1990, ApJ, 365, 539
Matteucci F., 1992, ApJ, 397, 32
Matteucci F., 1994, A&A, 288, 57
Matteucci F., 2001, Astrophysics and Space Science Library, 253
Matteucci F., Recchi S., 2001, ApJ, 558, 351
Matteucci F., 2012, Chemical Evolution of Galaxies: , Astronomy
and Astrophysics Library. ISBN 978-3-642-22490-4. Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2012,

Mazzitelli I.,1989, ApJ, 340, 249
Meynet G., Maeder A., 2002, A&A, 390, 561
Meynet G., Maeder A., 2002, A&A, 381, L25
Meyer D. M., Cardelli J. A., Soﬁa U. J., 1997, ApJL, 490, L103
Moll´a M., V´ılchez J. M., Gavil´an M., & D´ıaz A. I. 2006, MNRAS,

372, 1069

O’Donnell J. E., 1994, ApJ, 422, 158
Osterbrock D. E., Ferland G. J., 2006, Astrophysics of gaseous
nebulae and active galactic nuclei, 2006, 2nd edn. University
Science Books, Mill Valley, California

Oosterloo T., Fraternali F., Sancisi R., 2007, AJ, 134, 1019
Pasquali A., Gallazzi A., Fontanot F., et al., 2010, MNRAS, 407,

937

Padovani P., Matteucci F., 1993, ApJ, 416, 26
Pagel B. E. J., 2009, Nucleosynthesis and Chemical Evolution of
Galaxies, Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press, 2009

Peng Y.-j., Maiolino R., 2014, MNRAS, 443, 3643
Peng Y., Maiolino R., Cochrane R., 2015, Nature, 521, 192
P´erez-Montero E., Contini T., 2009, MNRAS, 398, 949
P´erez-Montero E., Contini T., Lamareille F., et al., 2013, A&A,

549, A25

P´erez-Montero E., 2014, MNRAS, 441, 2663
Pettini M., Shapley A. E., Steidel C. C., et al., 2001, ApJ, 554,

981

Pettini M., Ellison S. L., Bergeron J., Petitjean P., 2002, A&A,

391, 21

Pettini M., Zych B. J., Steidel C. C., Chaﬀee F. H., 2008, MN-

RAS, 385, 2011

Pilyugin L. S., 1993, A&A, 277, 42
Pilyugin L. S., V´ılchez J. M., Thuan T. X., 2010, ApJ, 720, 1738
Pipino A., Matteucci F., 2004, MNRAS, 347, 968
Pipino A., Calura F., & Matteucci F., 2013, MNRAS, 432, 2541
Prochaska J. X., Wolfe A. M., 2009, ApJ, 696, 1543

MNRAS, 404, 1775

Tinsley B. M., 1979, ApJ, 229, 1046
Tinsley, B. M. 1980, Fundamentals of Cosmic Physics, 5, 287
Thuan T. X., Izotov Y. I., Lipovetsky V. A., 1995, ApJ, 445, 108
Tremonti C. A., Heckman T. M., Kauﬀmann G., et al., 2004, ApJ,

613, 898

van den Bergh S., 1962, AJ, 67, 486
van den Hoek L. B., Groenewegen M. A. T., 1997, A&AS, 123,

305

van de Voort F., Schaye J., Booth C. M., Haas M. R., Dalla

Vecchia C., 2011, MNRAS, 414, 2458

Veilleux S., Osterbrock D. E., 1987, ApJ, 63, 295
Ventura P., Zeppieri A., Mazzitelli I., D’Antona F., 1998, A&A,

334, 953

Ventura P., D’Antona F., 2009, A&A, 499, 835
Ventura P., Di Criscienzo M., Carini R., D’Antona F., 2013, MN-

RAS, 431, 3642

Vila-Costas M. B., Edmunds M. G., 1992, MNRAS, 259, 121
Vincenzo F., Matteucci F., Belﬁore F., Maiolino R., 2016, MN-

RAS, 455, 4183

Wang B., 1991, ApJ, 374, 456
Whittet D. C. B., 2003, Dust in the galactic environment (2nd

ed.; Institute of Physics Publishing: Bristol)

Whittet D. C. B., 2010, ApJ, 710, 1009
Woosley S. E., Weaver T. A., 1995, ApJ, 101, 181
York D. G., Adelman J., Anderson J. E., Jr., et al., 2000, AJ,

120, 1579

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX ﬁle prepared by
the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–14 (2015)

