manuscript no. xxx.xxx
March 3, 2016

The Göttingen Solar Radial Velocity Project

Sub-m s−1 Doppler precision from FTS observations of the Sun as a star

U. Lemke1,⋆ and A. Reiners1

Institut für Astrophysik, Friedrich-Hund-Platz 1, 37077 Göttingen, Germany

Received; accepted

ABSTRACT

Radial velocity observations of stars are entering the sub-m s−1 domain revealing fundamental barriers for Doppler precision exper-
iments. Observations of the Sun as a star can easily overcome the m s−1 photon limit but face other obstacles. We introduce the
Göttingen Solar Radial Velocity Project with the goal to obtain high precision (cm s−1) radial velocity measurements of the Sun as a
star with a Fourier Transform Spectrograph. In this ﬁrst paper, we present the project and ﬁrst results. The photon limit of our 2 min
observations is at the 2 cm s−1 level but currently limited by strong instrumental systematics. A drift of a few m s−1 h−1 is visible
in all observing days probably caused by vignetting of the solar disk in our ﬁbre coupled setup, and imperfections of our guiding
system adds further oﬀsets in our data. Binning the data into 30 min groups shows m s−1 stability after correcting for a daily and linear
instrumental trend. Our results show the potential of Sun-as-a-star radial velocity measurements that can possibly be achieved after a
substantial upgrade of our spectrograph coupling strategy. Sun-as-a-star observations can provide crucial empirical information about
the radial velocity signal of convective motion and stellar activity, and on the wavelength dependence of radial velocity signals caused
by stellar line proﬁle variations.

instrumentation: spectrographs — methods: observational — techniques: radial velocities — spectroscopic — Sun:

Key words.
photosphere

1. Introduction

High precision radial velocity observations of the Sun as a star
are important for many astronomical applications. Being the
brighest object on the sky, the Sun provides enough light for
very high-resolution spectroscopy that can serve as a benchmark
for stellar observations. In particular, the high signal-to-noise ra-
tio (SNR) allows high precision Doppler experiments that emu-
late measuring stellar radial velocities (RVs). To break the m s−1
barrier, solar observations are identiﬁed as important contribu-
tor for understanding the role of convection and magnetic activ-
ity in the search for extrasolar planets (e.g., Meunier et al. 2010;
Dumusque et al. 2014; Marchwinski et al. 2015).

The radial velocity of the integrated Sun has been measured
for many decades. Jimenez et al. (1986) used a resonance scat-
ter spectrometer (Brookes et al. 1978) to monitor solar RVs rel-
ative to the K i 769.9 nm absorption line achieving a precision
on the order of m s−1. Data from this experiment can be taken
at very high cadence and is mainly used to study oscillations of
the Sun but also to see variations of the solar RV over the so-
lar cycle (Roca Cortés & Pallé 2014). High resolution spectra of
the Sun as a star were obtained by Deming et al. (1987). The
authors derived apparent velocities of the integrated Sun taken
with the McMath Fourier Transform Spectrometer (FTS) at Kitt
Peak. They found an increase in blueshift amounting to 30 m s−1
over three years in selected spectral lines, and they identiﬁed
vignetting by the telescope optics and diﬀerential transmission
as principal source of these systematic shifts. After correction,
they report absolute velocities with an uncertainty of <∼ 5 m s−1.

⋆ ulemke@astro.physik.uni-goettingen.de

Wallace et al. (1988) investigated integrated light spectra from
the Kitt Peak FTS taken 1976–1986. They compared spectral
lines that respond diﬀerently to convective blueshift and reported
upper limits of 5 m s−1 for secular variations of blueshift. A few
years later, Deming & Plymate (1994) showed additional results
from their integrated sunlight measurements reporting temporal
dependence of the solar apparent radial velocity but at about half
the amplitude they inferred in their earlier paper.

Another method to observe the Sun as a star is to collect its
light reﬂected from another body, for example the Moon (e.g.,
Molaro et al. 2013) or moons of other planets (e.g., Molaro et al.
2015). McMillan et al. (1993) obtained solar spectra from obser-
vations of the Moon achieving Doppler precision of 8 m s−1 over
5 years. The advantage of this strategy is that systematic eﬀects
from vignetting are avoided. On the other hand, signiﬁcantly less
light can be collected so that the spectra are of lower resolution
and SNR than spectra taken from direct observations of the Sun.
A similar approach by Dumusque et al. (2015) uses an integrat-
ing sphere to avoid vignetting eﬀects. They achieve a precision
of 0.5 m s−1 for a 5 min integration time.

Sun-as-a-star observations yield high ﬂux rates and thus en-
able the use of unconventional, less photon eﬃcient techniques
such as the Fourier Transform Spectroscopy. These spectro-
graphs easily achieve spectral resolving powers at the order of
0.5 −1.0 ×106 while realizing a large spectral coverage spanning
more than an octave. We argue that the instrument’s frequency
scale is steady and largely linear, thus facilitating wavelength
calibration of our raw spectra (cf. Section 2.3).

At the Institut für Astrophysik Göttingen (IAG), we operate
a new instrument which serves as a test-bench facility dedicated

Article number, page 1 of 7

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

 
 
]

M

I
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
0
7
4
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

to investigate RV instrumentation and analysis methods to ulti-
mately achieve 10 cm/s precision. We started a project to collect
FTS spectra from the Sun as a star with facilities installed in
our faculty building (see Reiners et al. 2015). We discuss here
the potential of this new instrument concept to address the chal-
lenges of Sun-as-a star measurements while making best use of
the available photon ﬂux rates.

We aim to obtain a long-term database of spectra that can
be used for a variety of applications. One of the main drivers is
monitoring the solar radial velocity as initiated in the projects
mentioned above. Wide wavelength coverage allows an in-depth
investigation of the correlation between RV-trends and magneto-
convection as a function of wavelength.

In this paper, we introduce the project reporting ﬁrst results
on our RV performance together with current instrument limita-
tions.

We provide a description of our instrument and observing
strategy in Section 2. We explain our data reduction and analy-
sis scheme in Section 3 and present the ﬁrst results of our RV
observations in Section 4. A summary is given in Section 5.

2. Instrument description

On the roof of our institute building at IAG, we are operating
a 50 cm siderostat that is normally used for spatially resolved
solar observation. We utilize this setup to track the Sun and feed
light into a ﬁber to transport it into our optics laboratory where
the spectrum is recorded with our FTS. The instrument consists
of three main parts depicted in Fig. 1: (A) the siderostat, (B) an
iodine cell, and (C) the Fourier-Transform Spectrograph.

A main concern with sun as a star observations is homoge-
neous coupling eﬃciency over the extended solar disk. We there-
fore decided for a near ﬁeld ﬁber-coupling strategy where the
solar disk is imaged directly on the ﬁber core. In this conﬁgura-
tion we can make use of the ﬁber’s homogenization capabilities
to ‘scramble’ the input light distribution (see Hunter & Ramsey
1992; Avila et al. 2006). This has the advantage that the risk of
vignetting can be conﬁned to a very short section of the beam,
i.e. the focal plane of the focussing mirror PM1. The risk re-
mains, however, that this setup produces spurious RV-signals if
we do not succeed in coupling all points of the solar disk with
equal eﬃciency over the entire ﬁber core. In fact, we encountered
some systematic eﬀects which are discussed in Section 4. The
alternative of a free beam feed to the FTS on the other hand is
prone to vignetting throughout a long optical path and thus more
diﬃcult to control. For a corresponding in-depth discussion the
reader is referred to Deming et al. (1987); Deming & Plymate
(1994).

Further design decisions include the employment of reﬂec-
tive mirrors for beam conversion to achieve a broad wavelength
coverage of 0.5 – 1.0 µm. Aperture diameters were chosen to
avoid beam vignetting along the optical assembly to reduce risk
of performance loss caused by ﬁber modal noise (Lemke et al.
2011).

2.1. Siderostat

The siderostat consists of two ﬂat mirrors guiding sunlight into
a 55 cm entrance window of the Vacuum Vertical Telescope
(VTT1). We place the parabolic focussing mirror (PM1) after the
second siderostat mirror (M2). In this conﬁguration the pointing

1 https://www.uni-goettingen.de/en/217813.html

Article number, page 2 of 7

Table 1. Technical data of the siderostat coupling. See Fig. 1 for the
positions of M1, M2, and PM1.

Siderostat mirrors (ﬂat) M1, M2

Diameter

0.5 m

Focussing mirror, Thorlabs RC12FC-P01, PM1

Reﬂective surface
Eﬀective focal length
Free aperture
Image scaling factor
Beam f-ratio

Protective silver coating
50.8 mm
22.0 mm (reduced to 13.5 mm)
490 µm ∼ 32’ on sky
F/4.2

Fiber link to telescope, CeramOptec WF 880

Diameter, core
Fiber numerical aperture

800 µm
0.22

Fiber core

Solar disk

Fig. 2. Depiction of the relative dimensions of the solar disk image
(490 µm inner circle) and the ﬁber core (800 µm outer circle) at the im-
age plane of PM1. The dashed line signiﬁes the area that needs to be
coupled to ensure radial velocity precision (explanation see text).

of PM1 is determined by the pointing of the VVT such that we
can use its automated guiding facility for solar tracking.

The two siderostat mirrors were equipped with an automated
guiding mechanism in alt-azimuth mounting. During our ob-
servations, the setup performed only a coarse guiding accuracy
with a drift of ≈ 1-3 arcmin h−1 requiring manual intervention.
Manual tracking correction was implemented as follows: PM1
was placed in the telescope pupil and only masked a small
fraction of the collimated beam, the main fraction of light was
passed to the VVT. In the Coudé focus of the VVT a screen
was placed for projection of the solar disk. The position of this
re-imaged disk with respect to the screen was used as a measure
for the pointing of the siderostat and as reference for the manual
tracking correction.

PM1 creates an image of the solar disk with an average size
of 490 µm on the ﬁber entrance that has a diameter of 800 µm
(Fig. 2). Due to the parabolic geometry of PM1 we need to con-
sider that non-paraxial rays originating from the edge of the so-
lar disk will encounter strong optical aberrations. We simulated
the optical performance and found that a larger circular area of
40’ width (620 µm) needs to be coupled to ensure 30 cm s−1 RV-
precision, leaving a margin for manual guiding of approx. 6’ in
each direction. We estimated our tracking accuracy to be better
than 2’ and therefore did not expect signiﬁcant RV-errors from
guiding inaccuracies.

If, however, homogeneous coupling over the solar disk is not
achieved, systematic vignetting can occur. This produces trends
in the RV-signal which correlates to the manual tracking correc-
tion. Moreover, the RV-signal becomes a function of the hour-

U. Lemke and A. Reiners: The Göttingen Solar Radial Velocity Project

Fig. 1. Overview of the instrument: (A) Siderostat unit, consisting of plane mirrors M1, M2 and parabolic mirror PM1 to focus light onto a ﬁber
which links the telescope to an iodine cell; (B) a set of two parabolic mirrors, PM2 and PM3 create a collimated beam and focus again to a ﬁber
that connects the setup with the Fourier Transform Spectrograph (FTS); (C) ﬁber feed into the FTS.

FIBER FROM 
TELESCOPE

A

TEMPERATURE 
SENSOR

FIBER 
TO FTS

and PM3) to create a collimated beam in which we place an io-
dine cell; a photograph of the setup is shown in Fig. 3. The setup
can accommodate other cells, e.g., for wavelength calibration in
the near infrared. We operated the cell at ambient temperature
of the laboratory. Variations of temperature were on the order of
±1◦, and the absorption cell provides enough RV information for
m s−1 accuracy in our FTS spectra.

Fig. 3. Iodine cell setup in the optics laboratory. Light from the tele-
scope is collimated (left), passes through the cell with two wedged and
tilted windows to then be reimaged onto a second ﬁber that guides the
light to the FTS. Temperature is recorded during measurement.

2.3. FourierTransformSpectrograph

angle, because the solar disk apparent axis changes with respect
to the instrument axis. Likewise, we would also expect oﬀsets
between individual dates due to the inclination of the ecliptic
with respect to the solar rotation axis (cf. Section 4).

After our ﬁrst experiments we realized that the amount of
sunlight collected in the 22 mm free aperture substantially heats
the ﬁber entrance. We reduced the free aperture diameter of PM1
to 13.5 mm in order to avoid damage from heating. Furthermore,
a 0.5◦ wedged BK-7 protective window was placed in front of
the parabolic mirror to prevent dust and reduce transmission of
UV and infrared radiation.

2.2. Iodinecell

Our FTS provides internal wavelength calibration based on a
stabilized HeNe laser. The accuracy of this wavelength scale is
limited to several 10 m s−1 by the laser itself and by the opti-
cal properties of the FTS. For precision RV measurements at the
m s−1 level, this calibration is not suﬃcient. In our experiment
we therefore applied the absorption cell method (Butler et al.
1996) to provide a high-accuracy wavelength reference super-
imposed on the solar spectrum. Only the relative drift of the in-
strument is corrected with reference to the iodine spectrum. This
creates an uncertainty in the absolute oﬀset of the solar RV-signal
at the order of few m/s. We used two parabolic mirrors (PM2

The IAG operates the IFS 125, a Fourier Transform Spec-
trometer (FTS) from Bruker Optics. For a discussion on
Fourier transform spectroscopy the reader is referred to e.g.
Griﬃths & De Haseth (2007). The principle of operation is that
of a two-beam Michelson interferometer with one of the mirror
arms moving to introduce a controllable path diﬀerence. The in-
tensity of the interference signal is measured by a detector as
a function of path diﬀerence from which the spectrum is deter-
mined by applying the Fourier transform.

An advantage of Fourier transform spectroscopy is that
it allows simultaneous coverage of a large spectral range at
high spectral resolution. In particular, the instrument wave-
length solution is linear across the entire wavelength range
(see Reiners et al. 2015). A disadvantage with large wavelength
ranges in Fourier spectroscopy is that all frequencies contribute
to the photon noise. For this reason, the wavelength range is of-
ten restricted with ﬁlters. In this work we are using a very large
spectral range for RV evaluation. The large number of spectral
lines contributing to the RV-calculation outweighs the additional
photon noise.

In order to reduce radial velocity drifts of the spectrograph,
the FTS vacuum pump was under constant operation during ob-
servations to keep the pressure between 0.2 to 0.3 hPa. This
further stabilizes the wavelength solution which is permanently
monitored by our iodine cell.

Article number, page 3 of 7

3. Observations and Data analysis

3.1. Observations

We observed the integrated Sun during several days between
Mar and Oct 2015. For this introductory paper, we only con-
sidered three days, Apr 20, Apr 23 and Jun 05, during which the
Sun could be observed for about six to eight hours each.

Other dates show similar quality in terms of RV-scatter.
However, we rejected data taken under cloudy observing con-
ditions. They can be subsequently identiﬁed by signiﬁcant de-
crease of ﬂux levels and are occassionally accompanied by an
increase in RV-scatter because clouds passing in front of the solar
disk induce a Rossiter-McLaughlin eﬀect. It becomes signiﬁcant
when the characteristic time of such a cloud-passage matches
our integration time of 2 min. We expect that (slowly moving)
cirrus clouds have such an eﬀect on our data.

We operated the FTS in symmetric mode with a maximum
path diﬀerence of 33 cm, which realizes a nominal resolving
power of 0.03 cm−1, i.e. R = 670, 000 at λ = 5000 Å and
R = 370, 000 at λ = 8900 Å, respectively. The duration of one
scan was 1.6 min (2.0 min for Jun 05). Interferograms are Fourier
transformed with the FTS standard software.

3.2. Instrumentwavelengthsolution

A preliminary frequency calibration is provided by the FTS in-
ternal HeNe reference-laser. However, the frequency scale re-
quires some correction mainly because of the beam divergence
and the deviation of optical paths between the science light
beam and the reference laser. It is therefore standard in Fourier-
Transform Spectroscopy to correct for this with a factor (see e.g.,
Griﬃths & De Haseth 2007):

ν = (1 + k)ν′,

(1)

with ν being the corrected frequency and ν′ the frequency so-
lution provided by the internal laser. In our observations we
used iodine absorption lines to determine the wavenumber cor-
rection k. The correction was incorporated in our ﬁtting proce-
dure by utilizing the fact that k has the form of a Doppler shift,
k ≈ −e f f /c, with e f f an eﬀective Doppler velocity and c the
speed of light (see Section 3.4).

3.3. Atmosphericcontamination

Telluric absorption can be a problem for high-precision RV mea-
surements (see e.g. Bean et al. 2010; Cunha et al. 2014). We paid
attention to the inﬂuence of atmospheric lines and incorporated
masks to minimize the eﬀects of telluric line contamination.
To achieve this, we simply exclude frequencies at which atmo-
spheric lines show signiﬁcant absorption. Using a binary mask
based on the HIgh-resolution TRANsmission molecular absorp-
tion database (HITRAN2). Frequency positions with telluric line
intensities > Imin = 1 × 10−26 cm−1 /(molecule cm−2) are masked
out.

We also excluded other regions of strong telluric contami-
nation completely from the analysis in order to ensure a stable
continuum ﬁt for our spectra:

1. λc = 8230 Å – a 200 Å region, H2O contamination
2. λc = 7660 Å (130 Å width, O2)
3. λc = 7140 Å (540 Å width, H2O)

2 http://hitran.org/lbl/

Article number, page 4 of 7

Fig. 4. Normalized spectra over wavelength in vacuum. The template
spectra of iodine (blue) and the Sun (green) are multiplied to calcu-
late the model (dashed) of the observation (red). Residuals between ob-
served spectrum (O) and our model (C) are shown in the lower panel.
Model and observation match within an rms of 0.5%. The locations of
three solar absorption lines are indicated.

4. λc = 5930 Å (35 Å width, H2O)

We further excluded a region between 6280 Å and 6430 Å
where features caused by the FTS reference laser as well as O2
and H2O-absorption bands aﬀect the spectrum.

3.4. Dopplersignalextraction

The spectrum of the Sun observed through an iodine cell can be
modeled as

Imodel(ν′) = p(ν′) (cid:2)TI2((1 + k)ν′) · I⊙((1 + ⊙/c)ν′)(cid:3) ,

(2)

with p(ν′) a normalization function, TI2 a spectral template
containing only the iodine spectrum, and I⊙ an iodine free solar
template spectrum. For the solar template we use observations of
the Sun (iodine cell removed) collected on Mar 20 and Doppler
corrected the individual spectra prior to averaging. The iodine
template was recorded during the night after the solar template
spectrum was taken. To do this we replaced the telescope ﬁber by
a ﬁber that guides light from a tungsten lamp and co-added 100
scans with this setup. Solar and iodine template as well as the
observed spectrum were normalized prior to the minimization
process and therefore are not aﬀected by the diﬀerent energy
distributions of both radiation sources.

In addition to a smooth polynomial that describes the contin-
uum, p(ν′), the only two free parameters in Eq. 2 are the Doppler
correction k and the solar radial velocity ⊙. To determine these
parameters, we minimize χ2 from the residual between our ob-
served spectra and Imodel. TI2 and I⊙ are interpolated with a
quadratic spline in order to determine the respective ﬂux of Imodel
for the frequency grid of the observed spectrum. An example of
the ﬁt quality is shown in Fig. 4, the root-mean-square (rms) de-
viation between our model and an observed spectrum is 0.5% in
this case.

U. Lemke and A. Reiners: The Göttingen Solar Radial Velocity Project

computed the weighted mean of the RV-signal for the rotating
Sun by disk-integrating over the solar surface taking into account
the eﬀects of solar (diﬀerential) rotation and limb darkening.

In addition, we calculated the eﬀects of diﬀerential transmis-
sion which occur because individual points of the extended solar
disk are observed at diﬀerent elevation, and thus diﬀerent air-
mass, on sky. The resulting diﬀerential attenuation across the
disk causes a net RV-signal. We determined the extinction coef-
ﬁcient for individual dates by ﬁtting the observed ﬂux at 6700 Å
to the predicted trend for an observing day. An example of air-
mass and relative ﬂux during observations on Jun 05, 2015 in
Fig. 5. From the extinction coeﬃcient we can determine weights
for each point on the solar disk and derive the disk-integrated net
RV-eﬀect which is subsequently subtracted from our RV-results.
Diﬀerential transmission becomes particularly important for ob-
servations at high airmass and results in an integrated radial ve-
locity signal that deviates 1 m s−1 for observations at airmass 2
compared to zenith observations. We note that this approach is
diﬀerent to Deming et al. (1987), whose method of ﬁtting a lin-
ear trend to the airmass-dependent RV can be sensitive to other
systematic eﬀects.

3.6. Photonnoiselimit

The great potential of our instrument setup is the high RV preci-
sion that can be attained. We estimate the RV precision following
the calculations in Butler et al. (1996) and Bouchy et al. (2001).
For the Sun, we assume the quality factor Q ≈ 15, 000 and in
our spectra we reach an SNR of 100–200 per frequency bin of
∆ν = 0.015 cm−1 width. Using information from between 5000
and 8900 Å (excluding H2O-bands and HeNe laser region), we
estimate that the photon limit for our RV precision is approxi-
mately 2 cm s−1 per 1.6 min exposure.

4. Results

We have taken observations of integrated sunlight with an iodine
cell on some 20 days between Mar and Oct 2015. In Fig. 6 we
show as example three days during which continuous observa-
tions were possible under local weather conditions and without
major problems during observation.

In the upper panel we show our RV measurements as de-
rived from χ2-minimization (Eq. 2). We overplot the modelled
barycentric velocity as calculated for the time of each observa-
tion and discussed in Section 3.5 (solid line).

In the second row of each panel in Fig. 6, we show the resid-
uals between our RV measurements and the model. We can see
a slope in all three days with a gradient of approximately 2–
5 m s−1 h−1. In addition, there are clear systematic variations, for
example a dip shortly before 14:00 on Apr 20, and sawtooth
patterns with periods of a few 10 min on Apr 23 and June 05.
These discontinuities occurred when the guiding had to be ad-
justed manually. This points to a systematic vignetting of the so-
lar disk. A subsequent inspection of the telescope-ﬁber revealed
slight damage at the edge of the ﬁber core, probably related to
intense radiation and despite our eﬀorts to reduce radiation to
tolerable levels. Nevertheless, in the following we analyze the
statistical quality of our daily RV measurements knowing that
an improvement of our instrument setup is required to remedy
the systematic problems.

The oﬀsets in panel (b) are the relative RV-signal with
respect to the barycentric corrected template and amount to
≈65 m s−1, 20 m s−1 and 40 m s−1 for each individual date. We in-

Article number, page 5 of 7

Fig. 5. Airmass (upper panel) and observed continuum ﬂux at 670 nm
(lower panel; green crosses) for June 05 together with the attenuation
calculated from airmass assuming an extinction coeﬃcient of 0.21.

The radial velocities presented in this paper are calculated in
the wavelength range 5000 – 8900 Å. The spectrum was divided
into approximately equally sized sections of 350 cm−1, corre-
sponding to 80 Å in the blue and 200 Å in the red part of the
spectrum. We performed a simultaneous ﬁt of iodine and solar
spectra for λ < λHeNe (Eq. 2). For λ > λHeNe the iodine absorp-
tion is weak, therefore we performed χ2-minimization with ⊙ as
a single free parameter. The ⊙ and e f f of all regions are equally
weighted to obtain the raw solar RV-signal obs.

We also tested weighing the sections according to their RV
information content (Bouchy et al. 2001, cf.) which reduced the
ﬁnal rms at the few percent level. This points to other dominant
sources of noise: We assume that e.g. towards the red part of the
spectrum the iodine saturation is very temperature sensitive and
therefore severely distorts the ⊙-signal. Likewise, for the faint
blue end of the spectrum, the iodine RV-information becomes
dominant over the solar RV-information and thus is aﬀected by
the ﬁtting uncertainty of the solar lines. While this list of eﬀects
is not exhaustive, we feel that a complex treatment of all these
inﬂuences is required when ultimately aiming at sub 10 cm/s
precision. At this stage of instrument development, however, the
most dominant source of error is caused by imperfect coupling.
We therefore concluded that the equal-weights approach is ade-
quate for now.

3.5. Radialvelocitiesinobservationsofintegratedsunlight

Radial velocities expected for our integrated sunlight observa-
tions, obs, can be written as follows:

obs = orb + spin + grs + cb,

(3)

with orb the orbital velocity of Earth around the Sun, spin the
velocity of the observatory caused by the rotation of Earth,
grs the solar gravitational redshift, and cb the mean convective
blueshift. Other components like solar pulsations can be relevant
but are not considered here.

For the two components orb and spin, we started with the
values provided by the NASA Horizon’s project webpage3. We

3 horizons.jpl.nasa.gov

Fig. 6. Radial velocity signal for observations on April 20th, April 23rd and June 5th, 2015. Shown are (a) the initial RV-signal, compared to the
theoretical values expected from barycentric correction and taking disk integrated eﬀects into into account (solid line); (b) shows the residuals
between observed and predicted values; (c) displays residuals after correcting for inhomogeneous coupling eﬃciency; The last panel (d) shows the
remaining scatter after binning of individual data points (∼ 30 minutes exposure time).

terprete these as being caused by the systematic vignetting (see
section 2.1). While we consider this the main contribution to
the observed oﬀsets, it should be noted that the solar spectral
line shape is inﬂuenced by occurence of sunspots which cre-
ates an RV-signal of a few m s−1 that evolves on time scales
related to the synodic period, typically at the order of several
days (Dumusque et al. 2014). However, this eﬀect is currently
not observable due to the systematic vignetting eﬀect.

We assume that systematic vignetting causes a slowly vary-
ing RV-response and remove the slope that occurs in the residu-
als (second row in Fig. 6) for each day by applying a linear ﬁt.
The standard deviation of the RV residuals corrected this way are
reported together with the data in panel (c). Standard deviations
are at the order of 2 m s−1 for all days but still clearly dominated
by systematic eﬀects occurring on timescales of a few 10 min,
signiﬁcantly longer than the sampling of our data.

We refrain from a deeper analysis of the RV scatter around
the most probably systematic trends, but note how low the rms
around the strong systematic eﬀects on our high cadence data.
Taking a subset of June 5 as example (solid red line in panel (c))
the rms around this linear ﬁt is 70 cm s−1.

In the bottom row of Fig. 6, we grouped the data from the
third row into bins of 30 min each. This smoothes out some of
the systematic eﬀects that do not occur on regular timescales.
The rms of these data indicates that observations taken during
one day, and corrected for a systematic linear trend, are on the
level of 1 m s−1.

5. Summary

We have presented the ﬁrst Sun-as-a-star RV-measurements us-
ing our ﬁber-fed Fourier Transform Spectrograph at IAG. The
high spectral resolution of the instrument can potentially provide
extreme RV precision of ≈ 2 cm s−1 at high cadence. Further-

Article number, page 6 of 7

more, the validity of the wavelength solution across the entire
FTS wavelength range (including areas void of calibration lines)
allows investigation of RV signals across a large spectral range.
Our ﬁrst results demonstrate the potential of the FTS RV-
measurements, but they also reveal a number of diﬃculties. Cur-
rently the limiting factor in our setup is the way the extended
solar disk is coupled into the ﬁber. Inhomogeneous coupling of
the extended solar disk causes systematic eﬀects that are as large
as several m s −1 h−1. After correction for these daily trends, our
data reveal further jumps on the order of a few m s−1 but remain
under 1 m s−1 if we group the data into bins corresponding to
30 min exposure time. We showed that the rms between individ-
ual data points is at the level of sub m s−1 but this high precision
is not yet useful for scientiﬁc analysis because of the strong sys-
tematics.

The most dominant feature in our data is induced by the guid-
ing and coupling of solar light. Our method involves direct imag-
ing of the solar disk on the ﬁber end-face. On inspection the ﬁber
surface revealed irregularities which are most probably linked
to the vignetting eﬀect that causes the instrument systematic be-
haviour. Diﬃculties related to inhomogenous coupling eﬃciency
are not new, Deming & Plymate (1994) encountered a problem
of similar nature, describing it as one of the aspects of ‘The perils
of integrated light’, noticing a RV drift that appears to be a func-
tion of the the hour angle that is consistent with beam-vignetting
in their FTS. Their approach is diﬀerent in the regard that they
couple the solar light directly into the FTS whereas in this work
we use a ﬁber optical cable.

The observation of Sun-as-a-star radial velocities at very
high precision can provide crucial information on the nature of
short- and long-term RV variability connected to convection, ac-
tivity, and other mechanisms related to stellar phenomena, in-
strument components (e.g. modal noise in optical ﬁbers) as well
as analysis (e.g. masking or modelling of atmospheric lines) and

U. Lemke and A. Reiners: The Göttingen Solar Radial Velocity Project

so is identiﬁed as an important step towards cm s−1 precision
observations of stars other than the Sun. We are currently revis-
ing our coupling strategy, but already now our results show the
great potential of FTS solar observations for our understanding
of high-precision RV measurements.
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Sandra V. Jeﬀers and Mathias Zech-
meister for valuable scientiﬁc discussions. UL acknowledges research funding
from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under the SFB Astrophysi-
cal Flow Instabilities and Turbulence, SFB 963/1, and from the Starting Grant
Wavelength Standards, Grant Agreement Number 279347. AR acknowledges re-
search funding from DFG grant RE 1664/9-1. The FTS was funded by the DFG
and the State of Lower Saxony through the Großgeräteprogramm Fourier Trans-
form Spectrograph.

References
Avila, G., Singh, P., & Albertsen, M. 2006, in Society of Photo-Optical Instru-
mentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 6269, Society of Photo-
Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, 5

Bean, J. L., Seifahrt, A., Hartman, H., et al. 2010, ApJ, 713, 410
Bouchy, F., Pepe, F., & Queloz, D. 2001, A&A, 374, 733
Brookes, J. R., Isaak, G. R., & van der Raay, H. B. 1978, MNRAS, 185, 1
Butler, R. P., Marcy, G. W., Williams, E., et al. 1996, PASP, 108, 500
Cunha, D., Santos, N. C., Figueira, P., et al. 2014, A&A, 568, A35
Deming, D., Espenak, F., Jennings, D. E., Brault, J. W., & Wagner, J. 1987, ApJ,

316, 771

Deming, D. & Plymate, C. 1994, ApJ, 426, 382
Dumusque, X., Boisse, I., & Santos, N. C. 2014, ApJ, 796, 132
Dumusque, X., Glenday, A., Phillips, D. F., et al. 2015, ArXiv e-prints
Griﬃths, P. R. & De Haseth, J. A. 2007, Fourier transform infrared spectrometry,

Vol. 171 (John Wiley & Sons)

Hunter, T. R. & Ramsey, L. W. 1992, PASP, 104, 1244
Jimenez, A., Palle, P. L., Regulo, C., Roca Cortes, T., & Isaak, G. R. 1986, Ad-

vances in Space Research, 6, 89

Lemke, U., Corbett, J., Allington-Smith, J., & Murray, G. 2011, MNRAS, 417,

689

Marchwinski, R. C., Mahadevan, S., Robertson, P., Ramsey, L., & Harder, J.

2015, ApJ, 798, 63

McMillan, R. S., Moore, T. L., Perry, M. L., & Smith, P. H. 1993, ApJ, 403, 801
Meunier, N., Desort, M., & Lagrange, A.-M. 2010, A&A, 512, A39
Molaro, P., Esposito, M., Monai, S., et al. 2013, A&A, 560, A61
Molaro, P., Monaco, L., Barbieri, M., Zaggia, S., & Lovis, C. 2015, The Mes-

senger, 161, 20

Reiners, A., Mrotzek, N., Lemke, U., Hinrichs, J., & Reinsch, K. 2015, ArXiv

e-prints, 1511.03014

Roca Cortés, T. & Pallé, P. L. 2014, MNRAS, 443, 1837
Wallace, L., Huang, Y. R., & Livingston, W. 1988, ApJ, 327, 399

Article number, page 7 of 7

