6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
9
4
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Environment-dependent swimming strategy of Magnetococcus marinus under

magnetic ﬁeld

Nicolas Waisbord,1 Christopher T. Lef`evre,2 Lyd´eric Bocquet,3 Christophe Ybert,1 and C´ecile Cottin-Bizonne1

1Institut Lumi`ere Mati`ere, CNRS UMR 5306, Universit´e Claude Bernard Lyon1, Universit´e de Lyon, France

2CNRS/CEA/Aix-Marseille University, Biosciences and Biotechnologies Institute, 13108 Saint Paul lez Durance, France

3Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, Ecole Normale Suprieure, UMR CNRS 8535, 75005 Paris, France

Magnetotactic bacteria (MTB) are fascinating micro-organisms which possess embodied biomin-
eralized nanomagnets providing them the ability to orient with the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. This
property is presumably related to an evolutionary advantage in ﬁnding the oxic-anoxic interface
along the up and down direction in aquatic environments. So far the magnetic ﬁeld response by
MTB, called magnetotaxis, has been well described by a paramagnetic model where bacteria orient
passively along the ﬁeld lines according to a purely physical mechanism where magnetic torque and
orientational Brownian noise compete. Here we demonstrate using Magnetococcus marinus strain
MC-1 as MTB model that magnetotaxis shows more complex behaviors, which are aﬀected by envi-
ronmental conditions of diﬀerent types. Indeed while MC-1 swimmers are found to essentially obey
the paramagnetic paradigm when swimming in their growth medium, they exhibit a run-and-tumble
dynamics in a medium devoid of energy source. Tumbling events are found to provide isotropic reori-
entation capabilities causing the cells to escape from their prescribed ﬁeld direction. This behavior
has a major inﬂuence on the capabilities of the cells to explore their environment across ﬁeld lines and
represents an alternative search strategy to the back-and-forth motion along ﬁeld-imposed tracks.
Moreover, we show that aside chemical conditions, steric/geometrical constraints are also able to
trigger tumbling events through obstacle encountering. Overall, physico-chemical environmental
conditions appear to be important parameters involved in the swimming properties of MTB. De-
pending on environmental conditions, the run-and-tumble mobility may provide advantages in the
search for nutrient or ecological niche, in complement to classical magnetotaxis.

Many micro-organisms have the ability to move in
their environment in order to respond to their needs,
looking for instance for nutrients or for an optimum of
oxygen concentration [1]. Among these micro-organisms
magneto-aerotactic bacteria (MTB) are aquatic prokary-
otes that show the speciﬁcity of a magnetically-assisted
aerotaxis: they passively orient with magnetic ﬁeld lines
along which they actively swim, the so-called magneto-
aerotaxis [2, 3]. Combined with the fact that –except
at the equator– magnetic ﬁeld lines are indicative of the
top to bottom location, this constitutes the basis of the
magneto-aerotaxis paradigm. Indeed, by switching their
motions from 3-dimensional to 1-dimensional (1D), MTB
ﬁnd more eﬃciently their ecological niche, that is anaero-
bic or micro-aerobic conditions [4]. Thus, in the Northern
Hemisphere, the local magnetic ﬁeld is antiparallel to the
oxygen gradient and MTB are north-seeking while in the
Southern Hemisphere, the local magnetic ﬁeld is parallel
to the oxygen gradient and MTB are south-seeking. The
1D motility of the cells is regulated back and forth to
remain in the vicinity of the oxic-anoxic interface.

Magneto-aerotaxis is a common feature shared by a
large number of bacterial species disseminated all around
the globe in almost each and every freshwater and marine
environment [5]. MTB have in common the biomineral-
ization of magnetosomes, a prokaryotic organelle, gen-
erally aligned in the cell and responsible for their mag-
netic orientation [3]. Our study is focused on the model
magnetotactic bacterium Magnetococcus marinus strain
MC-1[6]. This bacterium has a polar magneto-aerotaxis:
in a homogenous chemical environment it swims towards

the magnetic north (or south) for north-seekers in the
Northern Hemisphere (respectively south-seekers) [2, 7].
Since the early studies on the motility of MTB, the re-
sponse to magnetic ﬁeld alone has been well described
by a paramagnetic model. In this framework, the bac-
terium direction results from a competition between (i)
a passive orientation of the bacterium along the mag-
netic ﬁeld lines associated to the torque exerted by the
ﬁeld on the magnetic moment of the bacterium and (ii)
thermal energy that tends to disorient the bacterium [8].
Within this description, MTB have no active control on
their swimming orientation apart from back and forth
switches.

Magneto-aerotaxis could be seen as a limitation in the
ability of MTB for optimizing their chemical environment
and thus one may wonder if MTB can override this para-
magnetic swimming behavior to let emerge other swim-
ming strategies [9]. This interrogation is legitimated by
the fact that i) MTB are found around the equator [10]
where the ﬁeld lines no longer provide a relevant direction
for exploring the oxygen gradient and ii) south-seeking
MTB are sometimes found in the Northen Hemisphere
[11] suggesting that alternate search mechanisms may be
possible.
In this contribution we explore the behavior
of strain MC-1 under various environmental and mag-
netic ﬁeld conditions. Starting with a canonical exper-
iment of chemical waves and bacterial aerotactic band,
we ﬁrst show that the ﬁeld-mediated 1D motion strategy
encompassed in the classical paramagnetic model cannot
always account for the observed response of MC-1. Turn-
ing to model situations of dilute bacteria in homogeneous

2

lar [7]). Unlike classical experiments however, where the
magnetic ﬁeld is pointing in the opposite direction of the
oxygen gradients, we explored diﬀerent ﬁeld conﬁgura-
tions. In the present experiments, MC-1 cells are intro-
duced in a glass capillary ﬁlled with medium-rich solution
(see Materials and Methods) that is subsequently sealed.
Prior to introduction in the capillary, North seeking cells
were selected using a magnet. Thus placing the capillary
axis along the converging ﬁeld direction obtained from
Helmholtz coils leads to the formation of a high concen-
tration of bacteria ”droplet” at the center of the capillary
(see ﬁgure 1 A). Few minutes after, a band of bacte-
ria that spontaneously propagates at a velocity around
3µm/s is formed. Due to the high concentration of bac-
teria in the initial droplet and in the aerotactic band,
chemical gradients develop and give rise to a propaga-
tion of the band (ﬁgure 1 A) as observed and described
for other systems [2, 12, 13].

Once the band is formed, it is possible to rotate the
capillary axis and to use the Helmholtz coils to see how
the band propagation responds to a uniform magnetic
ﬁeld. Most strikingly, we have measured the band veloc-
ity for magnetic ﬁelds perpendicular to the propagation
direction (the capillary axis). As shown in ﬁgure 1 B,
the remarkable observation is that the front propagation
(i) persists and (ii) exhibits a velocity which is indepen-
dent of the ﬁeld magnitude. This observation is diﬀerent
from what was previously observed for Magnetospirillum
gryphiswaldense strain MSR-1 [13] where the tilt of 90◦
of the magnetic ﬁeld drastically reduced the magneto-
aerotaxis eﬃciency. This diﬀerence likely comes from the
diﬀerent magnetotactic behaviors displayed by these two
strains. Indeed, strain MSR-1 has an axial magnetotac-
tic behavior where aerotaxis is prioritized over magne-
totaxis, while strain MC-1 is a dipolar MTB where the
cells give priority to following the direction indicated by
the magnetic ﬁeld.

Very clearly, such a motion associated to magneto-
chemotaxis cannot ﬁt into the existing framework of
chemically-activated back and forth motion along the
magnetic ﬁeld lines. Note that few experiments have also
been conducted where the ﬁeld (i) was set homogeneous
and parallel to the band propagation direction, or (ii)
was stopped.
In all cases, band propagation persisted
with velocities not much aﬀected. For instance ﬁgure
1 B shows the propagation speed along or against the
magnetic ﬁeld direction. While the ﬁeld magnitude in-
deed either accelerates or decelerates the band, the ﬁeld-
assited contribution never exceeds the propagation veloc-
ity found for perpendicular ﬁeld.

Somehow, such an observation is coherent with the fact
that magnetotactic cocci related to strain MC-1 can be
found in most aquatic environments on Earth, includ-
ing at the equator, where the magnetic ﬁeld is horizontal
and thus perpendicular to the oxygen concentration gra-
dient in water [10]. However, it requires extending the
magneto-aerotactic paradigm to incorporate alternative
swimming strategies which could overcome the constraint

FIG. 1. A: Set up of the chemical wave experiment. Up: ini-
tial stage, the glass capillary aligned on the axis of a Helmoltz
Coils set-up and MC-1 bacteria are concentrated in a central
“droplet” using focusing magnetic ﬁelds from each Coil. After
a few minute, a front grows from the droplet and a propagat-
ing chemical wave develops along the capillary. Down: 1D
propagation stage, the magnetic ﬁeld is set homogeneous by
reversing one of the coils’ current and the capillary is either
oriented perpendicular or along (not shown) the ﬁeld direc-
tion. Remarkably, bacteria band keep moving driven by the
chemical gradient even when the magnetic ﬁeld is perpendic-
ular to the propagation direction. B: Speed of the chemical
wave band with the magnetic ﬁeld intensity for: perpendicu-
lar ﬁeld (blue ◦), and parallel ﬁeld towards propagation (green
♦) or against it (red ×). C: Example of tumbling tracks in the
propagating front region, showing distinct tumbling events.

chemical environments, we evidence the existence of a
swimming strategy alternative to the paramagnetic re-
sponse. This strategy takes the form of a run-and-tumble
swimming pattern by analogy to the well-known behav-
ior exempliﬁed by Escherichia coli and more generally
by a large variety of chemotactic bacteria. This strat-
egy, which can override the magnetically-set orientation,
is found to be promoted by the chemical composition of
the surrounding environment but also by the geometry
of the surrounding environment through collisions with
obstacles.

Overall, our results provide a clear evidence that some
MTB do not rely on the sole magnetically-assisted aero-
taxis while swimming toward the North or South but are
also capable of supplementary strategies that deﬂect from
their prescribed ﬁeld direction.

I. CHEMICAL WAVES UNDER MAGNETIC

FIELD

We performed the benchmark aerotactic band ex-
periment commonly used to characterize the magneto-
aerotactic behavior of MTB (axial, (di)polar, or unipo-

0s30s60s0.5 mmA90°IIIIBSpeed (μm/s)B (mT)VVVVVVVC300 micronsBBB00.20.40.60.8101234563

pears closer to environmental conditions. Under these
experimental conﬁgurations, single individuals dynamics
could be followed under magnetic ﬁeld, with no evolution
of the properties over 20 min.

A. No ﬁeld

We start by examining the swimming behavior in the
absence of –added– magnetic ﬁeld. Note that the earth
magnetic ﬁeld at our latitude is around 17µT, for which
our cultured strains showed no biased directional motion.
Figure 2 A shows a typical set of individuals tracks cap-
tured for MC-1 in the rich medium. Each track has been
analyzed in search for tumbling events, here deﬁned as
locations along the tracks which combine high angular
and low translational velocities ([15] and Materials and
Methods). The detected events are indicated as red po-
sitions on the experimental tracks. In the rich medium,
most trajectories were found to be smooth with only a
minority containing tumbling events as can be seen in
Figure 2 A. On the contrary, when considering tracks
recorded in the poor (thiosulfate-free) medium (ﬁgure 2
C), tumbling trajectories were found to be dominant with
only a minority of remaining smooth trajectories. More
quantitatively, ﬁgure 2 B gathers the overall percentage
of trajectories showing tumbling events in the two diﬀer-
ent media. The amount of tumbling trajectories evolves
markedly from 26±9% in a homogeneous rich medium up
to 67 ± 9% in the poor medium (calculated respectively
over 1000 and 1500 trajectories). This is consistent with
our observation for chemical waves under perpendicularly
oriented magnetic ﬁeld, i.e. strong reorientation events
–tumbling– can be promoted by the chemical environ-
ment.

Concentrating on either smooth or tumbling trajec-
tories alone, we have characterized the auto-correlation
function of the swimming orientation. Figure 2 D shows
the normalized experimental correlation functions to-
gether with their adjustment with an exponential de-
cay (cid:104)cos θ(t) cos θ(t + τ )(cid:105) = exp(−t/τ ). The eﬀect of
the tumbling events on the persistence time of the swim-
ming orientation is evident, with decorrelation times of,
respectively, τ = 3.6 ± 0.4 s for smooth trajectories and
τ = 1.0 ± 0.2 s for tumbling trajectories. More precisely
in the case of the so-called smooth trajectories, we ex-
pect the dynamics to correspond to persistent random
walk [16, 17]. Within this conﬁguration, we expect the
decorrelation time for orientation to read τ = τR/2 with
τR the random noise orientation time scale of expres-
sion 8πηR3/kT , with η the surrounding viscosity, k the
Boltzmann constant, T the temperature and R the bac-
terium radius. With a typical radius around 1 µm [6, 18]
this would predict a decorrelation around 3.0 s in per-
fect agreement with the measured value. Now turning
to the tumbling trajectories, beyond the decrease of the
correlation time already reported, it is possible to look
at the distribution of running times, which separate each

FIG. 2.
A: Tracks in rich media without magnetic ﬁeld:
few tumbles (in red) are observed B: Percentage of tumblers
for rich and poor media. C: Tracks in poor media without
magnetic ﬁeld: more tumbles (in red) are observed. D: Cor-
relation function of the orientation for tumblers (red (cid:3)) and
Smooth Swimmers (blue ◦) in the poor media without mag-
netic ﬁeld. E: log of the probability density function of the
running time between the detected Tumbles. The ﬁt gives a
running time of 0.6 ± 0.2 seconds

of the ﬁeld direction. To collect clues of the underlying
mechanism responsible for the cross ﬁeld-direction prop-
agation, ﬁgure 1 C provides a zoom on the front region,
where a few individual bacteria trajectories have been
superimposed in colors. As marked by the arrow sym-
bols along trajectories, it is possible to distinguish very
clearly events of dramatic reorientation –showing up as
kinks– which allow the bacteria to swim across ﬁeld lines.
These events are reminiscent of a well-known chemotactic
strategy of run-and-tumble performed by numerous bac-
teria among which E. coli. Such run-and-tumble motil-
ity was observed in Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum
strain AMB-1 swimming in homogeneous chemical con-
ditions [14]. In the following, we perform complementary
experiments to verify this hypothesis of a run-and-tumble
strategy which can take over classical magneto-aerotaxis
depending on environmental conditions.

II. CHEMICALLY-INDUCED TUMBLING OF

MAGNETOCOCCUS MARINUS

In order to get some insight into the MC-1 swim-
ming strategy, and to characterize the proposed run-and-
tumble mechanism, we used dilute suspensions of bacte-
ria introduced into a PDMS (polydomthylsiloxane) chan-
nel (see Materials and Methods) that had been ﬁlled with
homogeneous medium, either denoted as rich (contain-
ing thiosulfate, the energy source used by MC-1) or poor
(without thiosulfate). Note that this poor medium ap-

00.511.522.533.50123456 τ (s)Run Time (s)))t(fdp(golD250 microns020406080ABCE<cos(θ(t) -θ(t+τ))> rich mediapoor mediaΦ (%)250 microns00.250.50.7511.251.51.600.20.40.60.814

with increasing directionality as the magnetic ﬁeld in-
creases. Under the classical description, we expect the
bacteria orientations to be passively set by the magnetic
torque exerted on magnetosomes, with the ﬁnite width
of the distribution arising from the orientation noise at-
tributed to rotational Brownian motion. Indeed the ﬁg-
ure 3 B shows that the PDF of smooth swimmers is per-
fectly ﬁtted by a Langevin paramagnetic prescription of
the form PDF∝ exp([M B/kT ] cos θ). Moreover, the ﬁt-
ted distribution yields the value of the reduced energy
M B/kT = 8 ± 1. Assuming that the only source of ori-
entational noise comes from thermal Brownian motion,
this provides a value of the magnetic momentum carried
by each bacterium of M ≈ 1.7 ± 0.2 10−16 S.I., consis-
tent with direct measurements of the momentum (see
Materials and Methods). Accordingly, the average axial
velocity (along the ﬁeld direction) is perfectly ﬁtted by
the prediction for paramagnetic orientating swimmers as
can be seen in ﬁgure 3 D. Note that the magnetic ﬁeld
dependency was also checked and found to agree quanti-
tatively with the paramagnetic approach [3]. Therefore,
the smooth swimmers, which dominate the observed dy-
namics in rich medium, are corresponding to the previ-
ously reported response of MTB under ﬁeld. It further
ensures the coherence of our observations with previous
reports [20].

Concerning the run-and-tumble dynamics, we ﬁrst
compare the velocity PDFs of smooth and tumbling
swimmers in ﬁgure 3 C. As can be seen, the swim-
ming activity appears unmodiﬁed in tumbling condi-
tions, with a mean velocity essentially unchanged around
100 ± 25 µm/s and marginal changes in the distribution.
Indeed, the tumbling PDF diﬀers only by a little skew
towards low velocities which is coherent with the fact
that tumbling events are associated to locally high rota-
tional velocities and low translational ones. An “active
magnetotaxis” model was proposed for Magnetospiril-
lum magneticum strain AMB-1, where the magnetotactic
cells would sense the magnetic ﬁeld thanks to a chemo-
taxis protein that would interact with the magnetosome
chain and transfer the magnetic signal to the ﬂagella [21].
We have measured the tumbling rate as a function of the
magnetic ﬁeld and have seen no dependency which leaves
the question of the challenging model of “active magento-
taxie” not consistent with our observation in strain MC-
1.

The ability of bacteria to escape the direction set by
the external magnetic ﬁeld can be quantiﬁed through the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient D⊥ in the direction perpendicular to
the imposed ﬁeld. In practice, this is measured from the
correlation function according to the Green-Kubo rela-

tionship: D⊥ =(cid:82) ∞

0 (cid:104)v⊥(t)v⊥(0)(cid:105) dt. Figure 4 shows the

cross-diﬀusivity for smooth and tumbling swimmers as a
function of the external ﬁeld, the two appearing markedly
diﬀerent. Under low ﬁelds, smooth swimmers explore
unexpectedly more space around the magnetic ﬁeld line
than tumblers. Indeed the bacteria have an eﬀective dif-
fusion coeﬃcient that is proportional to V 2τr where τr

FIG. 3.
A: Tracks under magnetic ﬁeld magnetic ﬁeld
(poor medium). B: PDF p(θ) of the swimmers orientation
under ﬁeld (B = 0.21 mT) for smooth (blue ◦) and tumbling
(red (cid:3)) swimmers.
Inset: polar diagram for smooth swim-
mers ﬁtted by paramagnetic Langevin model. The ﬁt for
the smooth swimmers by p(θ) ∝ exp(M Bcos(θ)/kT ) gives
M = 1.7× 10−16A.m2 C: Same as in B, for the PDF of veloc-
ity magnitude; dashed lines corresponds to the mean veloci-
ties (respectively 91± 25 µm/s and 104 µm/s). D: Normalized
averaged axial velocity as a function of the magnetic ﬁeld for
smooth (blue ◦) and tumbling (red (cid:3)) swimmers. The blue
line is the ﬁt of this orientation of the smooth swimmers by

the Langevin function coth(cid:0) M B

(cid:1) − kT

kT

M B .

tumbling event. As shown in ﬁgure 2 E, the measured
density probability function is found to be exponential,
with a characteristic decay time of 0.6±0.2 s in agreement
with the orientation decorrelation time. This is reminis-
cent of the characteristic Poisson distribution of the run
times as found for E.coli [16], and further legitimates the
suggested analogy with run-and-tumble trajectories. In
some aspects, it echoes recent work on another magne-
totactic bacterium, Magnetospirillum magneticum strain
AMB-1, which showed that the response to the magnetic
ﬁeld of MTB can incorporate active pathways [19]. Here
we do also identify an active response into the magneto-
aerotactic bacteria dynamics; however not related to the
magnetic ﬁeld action but to the chemical environment.

B. Under homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld

Under magnetic ﬁeld, as shown in ﬁgure 3 A, cell’s
trajectories continue to exhibit two distinct behaviors:
smooth and run-and-tumble.

For the smooth swimmers, in ﬁgure 3 B we see the po-
lar orientation diagram (inset) together with the proba-
bility distribution function (PDF) of orientations. Start-
ing from an isotropic distribution without ﬁeld, the swim-
ming direction gets peaked around the ﬁeld direction,

AC200 micronsBSpeed (μm/s) PDFDPDFθ (rad)00.20.40.60.811.200.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91<cos(θ)>B (mT) B5

constraints can induce changes in their swimming behav-
ior under the form of tumbling events. These constraints
are of steric or geometrical type as can be encountered
in natural environment such as sediments.

Experimentally, these eﬀects have been probed in a
model geometry made up from a straight microﬂuidic
channel which posseses “rough” structured walls. Di-
lute MC-1 cells (volume fraction less than 0.1%) are sus-
pended in the rich medium in order to minimize the in-
trinsic amount of tumbling. Again, north-seekers have
been selected upon ﬁlling with a magnet, and we here-
after consider all swimmers as smooth swimmers. Bacte-
ria are then submitted to a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld
along the channel axis and their (swimming) motion in-
side the micro-channel is analyzed (ﬁgure 5 A). Note that
for comparison purposes, channel walls have been made
asymmetric with one ﬂat wall and one sawtooth textured
wall. As evidenced in ﬁgure 5 B-C, a bacterium that col-
lides with the wall will eventually reorient itself until it
swims again away from the wall. This major reorienta-
tion in trajectories can again be assimilated to a tum-
bling event, now occuring in response to a mechanical
constraint rather than a chemical one. Interestingly, re-
cent studies have demonstrated close behaviors triggered
by wall encounters. For instance Magnetospirillum mag-
neticum strain AMB-1 has been shown to switch from
north-seeking swim to south-seeking swim when meeting
an interface [24] while cells of strain MO-1 (a magne-
totactic cocci related to MC-1) was demonstrated to be
able of making U-turns when encountering obstacles [25].
We now look at the magnetic ﬁeld inﬂuence on wall-
tumblers. We observe that, when the ﬁeld increases, the
magnetic reorientation –that follows the tumbling event–
is more eﬀective yielding to shorter re-injection length
into the main bacteria stream (ﬁgure 5 B-C). Increasing
the bacteria concentration up to ≈ 1%, we can run Par-
ticule Images Velocimetry algorithms to access the veloc-
ity proﬁles of bacteria within the microchannel. Figure 5
D shows the asymmetry of the velocity proﬁles obtained,
which matches the asymmetry of the walls structuring.
Indeed the eﬀect of the walls is related to the previously
called re-injection length –that is the average exploration
length towards the channel center– that the bacteria are
able to travel before being reoriented. Experimentally,
the length is deﬁned from velocity proﬁles by ﬁtting them
with an exponential relaxation and deﬁning the inﬂuence
length L as the decay length (ﬁgure 5 E).

In Figure 5 F, we represent the evolution of the inﬂu-
ence length L associated to sawtooth-shaped walls on the
velocity proﬁle of the suspension. Starting from a ﬁnite
length at vanishing magnetic ﬁeld, this inﬂuence length
decreases with increasing ﬁeld. Plotting LB rather than
L reveals the existence of a plateau value at high ﬁelds,
thus suggesting that the inﬂuence length decreases as
1/B in this limit. Concentrating ﬁrst on the small ﬁeld
limit, once a bacterium has tumbled at the wall and is
re-injected into the main stream, the wall inﬂuence is
bounded by the persistence orientation time in dilute-

FIG. 4. A: Perpendicular diﬀusion coeﬃcient for smooth (blue
◦) and tumbling (red (cid:3)) swimmers as a function of the mag-
netic ﬁeld. B: Same as in A for correlation function of per-
pendicular velocities under no ﬁeld. C: Same as in B under
0.7mT magnetic ﬁeld.

is the rotational diﬀusion time [22]. Tumbling can be
seen as a reduction in τr which implies a reduction in
cross-direction explored and thus in the eﬀective diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcient D⊥ (ﬁgure 4 B). However, the situation
gets reversed at higher ﬁelds (ﬁgure 4 C) where tumbling
swimmers become the most eﬃcient at exploring the en-
vironment. By allowing initial conditions spanning the
all directions, tumbling events allow excursions in the
transverse direction which are statistically hardly possi-
ble for the smooth trajectories that get more and more
conﬁned along the ﬁeld direction. The range of spatial
exploration by the tumbling swimmers does not depend
on the applied magnetic ﬁeld (inset ﬁgure 4 A)

Overall, we have evidenced that depending on the
chemical environment, MC-1 can show very diﬀerent
swimming behaviors. When studied in the rich medium,
bacteria display smooth trajectories oriented on average
by the magnetic ﬁeld. These trajectories are illustrative
of persistent random walks in external ﬁelds, which com-
bine (i) constant velocity swimming, (ii) random noise
and (iii) external torques which compete for the swim-
mers’ orientation. Indeed, the classical paradigm for pas-
sive magnetotaxis is well recovered under these circum-
stances, even quantitatively. However, as already pointed
out, growth media used in the lab are generally much
more concentrated in energy source than what bacteria
usually found in their environment [23].

While most studies that sought to decipher the mag-
netotactic behavior analize bacteria in their growth con-
ditions [7], here we show that the use of a poor medium
–arguably closer to environmental conditions– conduct to
the switch into a run-and-tumble dominated swimming.
This newly discovered strategy has a deep impact on the
cross-direction diﬀusivity of bacteria and could thus be
an advantage in poor conditions for eﬃciently ﬁnding the
ecological niche.

III. CONFINEMENT-INDUCED TUMBLING

Besides the chemical composition of the environment
surrounding the MTB, we show that other environmental

ABD0B (mT)0.350.71.0500.511.500.511.5102103104105    <V(t)V(t+τ)> (μm /s )  (μm /s)22τ (s)τ (s)2C1600120080040001000200030004000500060007000D /D (B=0)B (mT)6

FIG. 5. A: Force-free rheological experiment: bacteria in structured micro-channels. B: Bacteria tumbles upon wall-collision,
followed by trajectories during orientation relaxation at 140 µT. C: Same as B for a ﬁeld of 490 µT. D: Velocity Proﬁle averaged
alongside the channel (from tooth extremities up to ﬂat saturated velocity); Solid line correspond to an exponential proﬁle
A exp(−x/L), thus yielding the wall inﬂuence length L. E Velocity proﬁles for various magnetic ﬁelds. F: Variations of L under
various magnetic ﬁeld B. Inset: LB vs B.

regime and so is the inﬂuence length L ∝ V0τR.

In the high ﬁeld limit, the relaxation time towards the
ﬁeld direction becomes shorter than the Brownian persis-
tent time and thus dominates the extent to which wall in-
ﬂuence propagates. The ratio between both times writes

(cid:18) 8πηR3

(cid:19)−1

τR
τB

=

8πηR3
kB.T

M.B

=

M
kB.T

× B.

(1)

According to the orientation distribution (Fig. 3), this
ratio is around 4 for B = 0.1 mT, for which we do ob-
serve the plateau in LB (ﬁgure 5 F). This conﬁrms the
domination of the magnetic alignment relaxation time
in this regime, for which we then expect the L ∝ 1/B
dependency according to

L ∝ V0τB = V0

8πηR3
M.B

.

(2)

Overall, ﬂow proﬁles close to sawtooth-shaped walls
suggest that the eﬀect of an obstacle on bacteria dynam-
ics can be summed up by a wall tumbling followed by
an orientation relaxation over a length scale either domi-
nated by a persistent random walk exploration (low ﬁeld)
or a deterministic trajectory under magnetic ﬁeld. In the
environment, obstacles are many and the probability to
meet a particle is high particularly in sediment where
MC-1 and other MTB are generally found. Such tum-
bling behavior allows the cells to avoid obstacles and to
continue swimming toward their preferred oxygen con-
centration.

IV. CONCLUSION.

Our results show that the motility of strain MC-1 is af-
fected by the environment. The magneto-aerotaxis model
is not just a passive alignment of the cells while they are
swimming. Indeed, whereas the cells are constrained to

swim in one direction due to the magnetic forces they
are still able to sense their environment and to swim
in other directions if the chemotactic machinery of the
cells detects the need to do so. In a rich medium bac-
teria exhibit a smooth motility perfectly described by a
Langevin paramagnetic model. In a poor medium, closer
to environmental conditions, we show that MC-1 cells can
exhibit a run-and-tumble motion outstripping the sim-
ple paramagnetic behavior. By changing their direction
of motility in poor media bacteria increase the chance
to meet their energy source while swimming around the
oxic-anoxic interface. Furthermore we show that that
tumbling can also occur under geometrical constrains as
encountered in crowded environments of sediments for
instance.

Finally, in a wider perspective, let us note that when
under the conditions for a paramagnetic swimming re-
sponse, magnetotactic bacteria form a remarkable ac-
tive system of extremely eﬃcient self-propeled individu-
als whose orientation can be quantitatively controlled by
a physical magnetic ﬁeld [26]. In the blooming context
of biological active matter or in the perspective of driv-
able in-body micro-swimmers for medical applications,
this system forms a very appealing model of controllable
active system.

V. MATERIALS

Bacterial strain. Cells of Magnetococcus marinus
strain MC-1 were grown in a slightly modiﬁed semi-solid
medium described in [6].The medium consisted of an arti-
ﬁcial seawater (ASW) containing (per litre): NaCl, 16.43
g; MgCl2.6H2O, 3.49 g; Na2SO4, 2.74 g; KCl, 0.465
g; and CaCl2.2H2O, 0.386 g. To this was added (per
litre) the following prior to autoclaving: 5 mL modiﬁed
Wolfe’s mineral elixir [2], 0.25 g NH4Cl, 2.4 g HEPES,
100 µL0.2% (w/v) aqueous resazurin and 2.0 g agar noble

CBBCL (m)B (mT)L.B (m.mT)00.10.20.30.40.50.60.705101520253035404500.10.20.30.40.50.60.70123456B (mT)(Difco). The medium was then adjusted to pH 7.0, boiled
to dissolve the agar and autoclaved. After the medium
had cooled to about 45C, the following solutions were
added (per liter) from stock solutions (except for the cys-
teine, which was made fresh and ﬁlter-sterilized directly
into the medium): 2.8 mL 0.5 M potassium phosphate
buﬀer, pH 6.9; L-cysteine, to give a ﬁnal concentration
of 0.4 g.L−1; 0.5 mL vitamin solution [2]; 3 mL 0.01 M
FeSO4 dissolved in 0.2 M HCl; 3 mL 40% sodium thiosul-
fate pentahydrate solution (i.e., 10mM of energy source);
and 2.7 mL 0.8 M NaHCO3 (autoclaved dry; sterile water
added after autoclaving to make the fresh stock solution).
The medium (10 mL) was dispensed into sterile, 15 x 125
mm screw-capped test tubes. All cultures were incubated
at 28◦C and, after approximately 1 week, a microaero-
bic band of bacteria formed at the oxic-anoxic interface
(pink-colorless interface) of the tubes. This band con-
tains a majority of north-seeking cells; the rare south-
seeking cells were eliminated via a magnetic separation
that consists in transferring the cells from their semi-solid
medium to a liquid “swimming medium”.

Swimming media. The medium referred as rich
medium consisted of ASW to which was added (per litre)
the following: 5 mL modiﬁed Wolfe’s mineral elixir, 0.25
g NH4Cl, 2.4 g HEPES. The medium referred as poor
medium consisted of the same medium as the rich one
devoid of thiosulfate. Both media have a pH adjusted to
7.

Microfabrication. Microchannels were fabricated by
standard “soft lithography” technique: a mold made
of negative photoresist (SU8 3100 Microchem) is ob-
tained by conventional photolithography. Channels are
then made of PDMS poured on these molds, at 70 ◦C
for 3 hours, with a typical thickness of 1mm. After
cross-linking, the PDMS imprint is pealed of its mold.
The channels are cut, the entrance and the outlet are
punched, and are ﬁnally bonded with a glass slide after
an air plasma treatment. The obtained channels are then
ﬁlled with swimming media by capillarity. The outlet is
then sealed with capillary wax. A bacteria drop is then
taken from its growing medium and then guided inside
the channels with a magnet. Once bacteria are inside,
the entrance is sealed with the wax.

Coils control. Coils are controlled directly from the
computer, with a Labjack U12 device and an homemade
current source. They can be set in diﬀerent conﬁgura-
tions, generating Magnetic ﬁeld parallel or anti-parallel.
We use the anti-parallel conﬁguration to concentrate bac-
teria, and at the same time sort the south seekers from
the north seekers. The parallel conﬁguration allows ﬁelds
ranging from 0 to 2.8mT, considered homogeneous in the
observation zone of 1.2 mm. Alignment of channels with
the coils is made as follows: coils are designed with a
rectangular hole where a Nikon Mir Glass Slide ﬁts ex-
actly: the ﬁeld and the line of the mir are perpendicular.
The camera observation is then aligned on the mir. Then
the micro channel is aligned with a ROI crop selection on

7

the screen on the acquisition system.

Preparation of the experiment. We used linear
silicone polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) micro-channels
(1200µm × 70µm × 5mm). The channels were ﬁlled
with the swimming medium by capillary suction, then
sealed on one side. A drop of a culture of strain MC-1
was disposed at the extremity of the channel and steered
inside the micro-channel with a simple stirring magnet.
Once the bacteria inside the channel, this latter is sealed
on the former entrance. Using a computer controlled
Helmholtz coils system we control the magnetic ﬁeld in-
side the channel. We concentrate the north seeking bac-
teria inside the channel by using a conﬁguration where
coils generate ﬁelds that face one another and then we
set the magnetic ﬁeld to zero.

Microscopy and data acquisition. To acquire im-
ages we use a Leica DMI 4000B Microscope in transmit-
ted light with a Zeiss 5X long working distance objective,
equipped with a Baumer HXC40 4Mpx CCD camera con-
trolled by custom Labview codes, covering a 1200µm×
1200 µm area. We run both rheology and single par-
ticle experiments at 35 fps. The long-working distance
objective allows a depth of ﬁeld of ≈100 µm, making
possible to follow bacteria and acquire the projection of
their trajectories. In single particle experiment, we as-
sume that the problem is axially symmetric, which allows
several calculus tricks for the relationships between pro-
jected observables and 3D ones.

Tracking and trajectory analysis.

Image treat-
ment and tracking was performed using standard track-
ing routine written with Matlab software (Mathworks).
The selection of the trajectories was based on duration
(¿1.5 s) exploration radius (¿ 50µm) and average instant
speed (¿ 40µm.s−1). To avoid taking into account the He-
lical Motion of the bacteria, we smoothed the positions
by a gaussian ﬁlter on a width of 4 positions, so that the
projected orientation of motion we consider in this study
is the one of the main component of the motion. The pro-
jected observed speed is assumed to be the real one. The
Transverse projected MSD is assumed to be half of the
real one. The correlation function of the projected mo-
tion is assumed to be the same as the one in 3D. Finally,
the projection of the Orientation Distribution function
are ﬁtted by the I1(ξ.cos(α))+L−1(ξ.cos(α))
, which is the
statistics of the orientation expected of the Langevin Dis-
tribution, projected in the focal plane. Motivated by the
large persistence lengths of the trajectories (over 200µm
for smooth swimmers), we computed D⊥(B), the diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcient perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld, from
the Green-Kubo formula, which reads:

4ξ−1 sinh(ξ)

(cid:90) ∞

2D⊥(B) =

(cid:104)V⊥(τ )V⊥(τ + t)(cid:105)τ dt.

(3)

0

We obtain D⊥(B) from the correlation functions of the
speed in the transverse directions, which necessitates to
follow bacteria during a shorter period of time and can be

ﬁtted with exponential functions both for the tumblers
and the smooth swimmers.

|ω(t)|α
|V (t)|β

Tumble detection. Inspired from the method of [15],
we deﬁne a function which combines the variation of the
speed of the bacteria and their rotational acceleration,
both characteristic of tumbling event where a bacteria
stops and turns:

fα,β(t) =
For a smooth swimmer, this quantity cannot increase
a lot more than 4 times its median value computed along
a trajectory, as the disorientation is well described by a
White Gaussian Noise. For a tumbler, the median reﬂects
its smooth swimming behavior as, for a clear majority of
its time it is indeed smooth swimming, and the tumbling
events are not visible in the computation of the median.
These aredetected, and we compare it to 10 times the
median of fα,β(t) for each trajectory. This threshold and
the exponents (α, β) are adjusted and for our data, a
threshold of 10 and (α, β) = (2, 2) are satisfactory.

PIV analysis. PIV analysis was performed using the
PIVlab OpenSource Matlab toolbox. Images had their
background subtracted before PIV was run. The average
velocity was done over 400 images, along 15 periods of the
waved wall. We have also shown, in a force free rhoelogy
experiment, that tumbling at the wall can be induced
by roughness which modiﬁes the shape of the velocity
proﬁle.

Paramagnetic behavior in rich medium. An im-
portant physical parameter to estimate for a magnetic
bacterium is its magnetic moment. For this we have car-

8

ried out an experiment where non swimming bacteria are
submitted to a gradient of magnetic ﬁeld: living bacteria
are suspended in a liquid rich medium with 0.5% BSA
and buﬀered at pH 10. This high pH kills the bacteria
while preserving the cell integrity and the BSA prevents
them from sticking to the glass capillary in which the
suspension is sucked. The capillary is then disposed in
the middle of two facing magnets (Supermagnets W-03-N
Gottmadingen, Germany) creating a magnetic gradient

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13) = 80T.m−1. Bacteria are dragged across the

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:126)∇ (cid:126)B

of
channel under the magnetic force created by such a gra-
dient of ﬁeld and the magnetic momentum is estimated
by measuring the average velocities of the bacteria:

.

M = 6πηR.Vdrag
(cid:107) (cid:126)∇ (cid:126)B(cid:107)
We measure a magnetic momentum M = 1.3 ×
10−16A.m2 with a standard error 0.5× 10−16A.m2. This
value is obtained by an overage over 500 trajectories of
bacteria coming from three diﬀerent batches and it is
within the range of magnetic momentum obtained for
other magnetotactic bacteria [20].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Eleonora Secchi for her help with the data
analysis. We thank Veroniquie Utzinger, Guy Condemine
and Nicole Cotte-Pattat for their help with the bacterial
cultures. We thank INL for access to their clean room
facilities and AXA research fund for its ﬁnancial support.
C.T.L. was supported by the French National Research
Agency (GROMA: ANR-14-CE35-0018-01)

[1] Wadhams GH, Armitage JP (2004) Making sense of it
all: bacterial chemotaxis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5:1024–
1037.

[2] Frankel RB, Bazylinski DA, Johnson MS, Taylor BL
(1997) Magneto-aerotaxis in marine coccoid bacteria.
Biophysj 73:994–1000.

[3] Blakemore R (1975) Magnetotactic bacteria. Science

190:377–379.

[4] Frankel RB, Bazylinski DA (2009) Magnetosomes and

magneto-aerotaxis. Contrib Microbiol 16:182–193.

[5] Lefevre CT, Bazylinski DA (2013) Ecology, Diversity,
and Evolution of Magnetotactic Bacteria. Microbiology
and Molecular Biology Reviews 77:497–526.

[6] Bazylinski DA, et al. (2013) Magnetococcus marinus gen.
nov., sp. nov., a marine, magnetotactic bacterium that
represents a novel lineage (Magnetococcaceae fam. nov.,
Magnetococcales ord. nov.) at the base of the Alphapro-
teobacteria. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 63:801–808.

[7] Lef`evre CT, et al. (2014) Diversity of Magneto-Aerotactic
Behaviors and Oxygen Sensing Mechanisms in Cultured
Magnetotactic Bacteria. Biophysj 107:527–538.

[10] Frankel RB, Blakemore RP, De Araujo F (1981) Mag-
netotactic bacteria at the geomagnetic equator. Science
212:1269–1270.

[11] Simmons SL, Bazylinski DA, Edwards KJ (2006) South-
seeking magnetotactic bacteria in the Northern Hemi-
sphere. Science 311:371–374.

[12] Saragosti J, et al. (2011) Directional persistence of
chemotactic bacteria in a traveling concentration wave.
P Natl Acad Sci Usa 108:16235–16240.

[13] Bennet M, et al. (2014) Inﬂuence of Magnetic Fields on

Magneto-Aerotaxis. PLoS ONE 9:e101150.

[14] Zhu X, et al. (2014) Angle sensing in magnetotaxis of
Magnetospirillum magneticum AMB-1. Integrative Biol-
ogy 6:706–18.

[15] Masson JB, Voisinne G, Wong-Ng J, Celani A, Vergassola
M (2012) Noninvasive inference of the molecular chemo-
tactic response using bacterial trajectories. P Natl Acad
Sci Usa 109:1802–1807.

[16] Berg HC, Brown DA (1972) Chemotaxis in Escherichia
coli analysed by three-dimensional tracking. Nature
239:500–504.

[8] Frankel RB (1984) Magnetic guidance of organisms.

[17] (1993) Random Walks in Biology (Princeton University

Annu Rev Biophys Bioeng 13:85–103.

Press).

[9] Simmons SL (2006) South-Seeking Magnetotactic Bacte-

ria in the Northern Hemisphere. Science 311:371–374.

[18] Meldrum FC, Mann S, Heywood BR, Frankel RB,
Bazylinski DA (1993) Electron Microscopy Study of Mag-

9

netosomes in a Cultured Coccoid Magnetotactic Bac-
terium. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B:
Biological Sciences 251:231–236.

[19] Zhu X, et al. (2014) Angle sensing in magnetotaxis
Integr Biol

of Magnetospirillum magneticum AMB-1.
6:706–8.

[20] Nadkarni R, Barkley S, Fradin C (2013) A Comparison
of Methods to Measure the Magnetic Moment of Magne-
totactic Bacteria through Analysis of Their Trajectories
in External Magnetic Fields. PLoS ONE 8:e82064–12.

[21] Philippe N, Wu LF (2010) An MCP-Like Protein Inter-
acts with the MamK Cytoskeleton and Is Involved in
Magnetotaxis in Magnetospirillum magneticum AMB-1.

Journal of Molecular Biology 400:309–322.

[22] Palacci J, Cottin-Bizonne C, Ybert C, Bocquet L (2010)
Sedimentation and Eﬀective Temperature of Active Col-
loidal Suspensions. Phys Rev Lett 105:088304.

[23] Stocker R (2012) Marine Microbes See a Sea of Gradients.

Science 338:628–633.

[24] Reufer M, et al. (2014) Switching of Swimming Modes in
Magnetospirillium gryphiswaldense. Biophysj 106:37–46.
[25] Zhang SD, et al. (2013) Swimming behaviour and mag-
netotaxis function of the marine bacterium strain MO-1.
Environmental Microbiology Reports 6:14–20.

[26] Bazylinski DA, Frankel RB (2004) Magnetosome forma-

tion in prokaryotes. Nat Rev Micro 2:217–230.

