Eﬀective Transparency: A Test of Atomistic Laser-Cluster Models

Rishi Pandit1, Kasey Barrington1, Thomas Teague1,

Zachary Hartwick1, Nicolas Bigaouette2, Lora Ramunno2, Edward Ackad1

1Department of Physics, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Edwardsville, Illinois 62026, USA

2Department of Physics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, Canada

(Dated: March 3, 2016)

The eﬀective transparency of rare-gas clusters, post-interaction with an extreme ultraviolet (XUV)
pump pulse, is studied by using an atomistic hybrid quantum-classical molecular dynamics model.
We ﬁnd there is an intensity range in which an XUV probe pulse has no lasting eﬀect on the average
charge state of a cluster after being saturated by an XUV pump pulse: the cluster is eﬀectively
transparent to the probe pulse. The range of this phenomena increases with the size of the cluster
and thus provides an excellent candidate for an experimental test of the eﬀective transparency eﬀect.
We present predictions for the clusters at the peak of the laser pulse as well as the experimental
time-of-ﬂight signal expected along with trends which can be compared with. Signiﬁcant deviations
from these predictions would provide evidence for enhanced photoionization mechanism(s).

The extreme ultraviolet (XUV) regime has the sim-
plest communication between ultra-intense laser pulses
and matter, primarily through photoionization. When
a nanoscopic dense clump of matter (cluster) is irradi-
ated, secondary eﬀects then take place such as collisional
ionization. Clusters have solid density but their inter-
cluster distance is so large that individual clusters do
not interact, thus they bridge the gap between solid and
gas phases of matter.

Results in this regime are much simpler to inter-
pret and it is thus an ideal regime to further test de-
tailed, atomistic models of laser-cluster interactions. At
longer wavelengths, even low intensity pulses have ef-
ﬁcient processes to transfer energy from the pulse to
the electrons, heating the electron plasma (termed in-
verse bremsstrahlung heating, IBH) along the axis of the
laser’s polarization [1]. At much shorter wavelengths,
there is still photoionization which occurs, but the pho-
toionization is of the inner shell electrons which leads to
subsequent Auger ionization [2–4]. Thus, XUV pulses,
which only access valance shell electrons and whose in-
tensity is insuﬃcient to cause a noticeable amount of IBH
(< 1016 W/cm2), present the ideal conditions for experi-
ments which can probe enhanced photoionization mech-
anisms [5–8].

In this letter, we report that the ionization channels
become eﬀectively saturated when a cluster is irradiated
with an XUV pulse above and beyond a saturation in-
tensity. Additional pulses irradiating the cluster leave
no net eﬀect on the ionization or total energy; eﬀective
transparency.

Multiple models of laser-cluster interaction exist, and
new experiments are needed to allow the community to
distinguish between the diﬀerent models. Atomistic clus-
ter models to date fall into two primary categories: those
with collisional processes beyond single step collisional
ionization from the valence shell (atomistic augmented
collisional model, AACM) and those with enhanced pho-
toionization processes permitting additional photoioniza-
tion beyond what would be found under the same con-
ditions in a gas (atomistic augmented photoionization

model, AAPM). We propose an experiment to determine
if any signiﬁcant enhancement to photoionization beyond
the atomic process due to the nanoplasma environment
exist. The successful comparison of the presented AACM
(which contains only well establish atomic phenomena)
with experimental results would place a strong upper
bound on the role of enhanced photoionization mecha-
nisms. The failure of the AACM would be strong evi-
dence for some type of enhanced photoionization mecha-
nism (such as electron screening or barrier suppression).
Our implementation of an AACM is a hybrid approach
to the laser-cluster interaction in which the particles
are treated as classical charge distributions whose mo-
tion is determined by the classical equations of motion.
The ionization is evaluated from a mix of experimen-
tal (when available) and theoretical cross-sections [9].
The model has been successful in reproducing the laser-
cluster experimental signals [10], including experiments
where Auger ionization is dominant [11]. The pertur-
bation on the ions due to the cluster environment (the
nanoplasma) has been shown to be well represented by
our Local Ionization Threshold (LIT) model [12]. Using
the LIT model we include single- and multi-photon ion-
ization, collisional ionization, augmented collisional ion-
ization (ACI) [9], and many-body recombination [11].

In non-AACMs, collisional ionization is treated as a
single step process.
In AACM the standard ionization
channels are augmented to include the possibility of col-
lisional excitation, so called augmented collisional ioniza-
tion (ACI) [9]. A bound electron can ﬁrst be promoted
from the ground state to an electronic excited state by
a collision of an already ionized electron. Subsequently,
this excited electron can be ionized by being promoted
from the excited state to the continuum. While the whole
trip can be energetically the same, breaking the process
up into two steps reduces the energy required for each
transition. This allows an electron with less kinetic en-
ergy (compared with single-step ionization) to execute
the process. In a cluster nanoplasma, the energy distribu-
tion is, on average, Maxwellian and thus there are many
more electrons with enough energy to excite an atom

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
1

 

 
 
]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
1
5
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

than there are who can ionize an atom directly [10]. This
ionization pathway leads to higher charge states in the
cluster and collisionally reduced photoabsorption (CRP)
[10].

The current work includes multiphoton ionization via

the second term of the rate equation,

(cid:18) I

(cid:19)

Eph

(cid:18) I

(cid:19)2

Eph

R =

σ(1) +

σ(2)

(1)

where I is the intensity of the laser, Eph is the photon
energy and σ(n) is the n-th order photoionization process
(n = 1 for single-photon, n = 2 for multiphoton with two
photons). Higher order terms (three photon and up) are
neglected. The values of σ(1) = 5.0 × 10−18 cm2 [13] and
σ(2) = 1 × 10−50 cm4/s (taken as an upper limit from
reference [14]) were used. The higher σ(2) is, the smaller
the range of intensities in which eﬀective saturation will
occur, and thus taking an upper limit gives a conservative
estimate of the saturation eﬀect.

We solved the interaction of argon (Ar147) clusters ex-
posed to two XUV pulses at λ = 33 nm (37.6 eV). Ini-
tially, the cluster is irradiated by the pump pulse. Then,
after 25 fs, a probe pulse irradiates the cluster. For both
pulses, we use a pulse with a full-width-at-half-maximum
of 10 fs. Although a shorter pulse increases the probabil-
ity of multiphoton ionization (which undermines our sig-
nal), the short pulses allow the probe pulse to irradiate
the cluster while the density is still high (which enhances
the likelihood of collective plasma eﬀects which must de-
pend on the plasma density). The number density of the
ions at the peak of the pump pulse is 3.99× 10−3 bohr−3
(where the distance of the furthest ion is used as the ra-
dius of the spherical volume) while at the peak of the
probe pulse the density is 3.84× 10−3 bohr−3 , a percent
diﬀerence of about 3.85%. Further, the plasma number-
density of the cluster at the same radius is 1.27 × 10−3
bohr−3 at the peak of the pump and 1.58× 10−3 bohr−3
at the peak of the probe. Thus, if any enhanced pho-
toionization mechanism exists, its eﬀects will be most
pronounced during the probe pulse.

To determine the role of IBH and separate it from the
eﬀect of photoionization (the process we seek to deter-
mine if any enhancement is needed) we selected whether
to turn IBH on or oﬀ in the code. This leads to two
diﬀerent pump-probe experiments. When the IBH is
turned oﬀ, the laser is in photons-only mode (pulse will
only cause photoionization, depicted in the ﬁrst row of
the inset of Fig. 1 as the leftmost pulse along the green
line). When IBH is turned on, the laser is in complete-
mode (both processes are included, depicted in the sec-
ond row of the inset of Fig. 1 as the pulses along the blue
line). The XUV-wavelength chosen is above the singly
ionized ionization potential for argon (27.6 eV) and be-
low any signiﬁcant inner-ionization thresholds. An inten-
sity scan was then performed using the complete-mode
for the pump pulse. The average charge state (ACS) of
the cluster after 300 fs at the focus of the pulse is used
as a measure of the overall ionization of the cluster.

2

As the intensity of the pulse is increased from
1011 W/cm2 to 5 × 1016 W/cm2, the ACS starts to in-
crease when the pump pulse alone irradiates the cluster.
At around 4 × 1013 W/cm2 the ACS increases dramat-
ically until, at an intensity of about 6.6 × 1013 W/cm2
(the saturation intensity, Isat), the ACS becomes satu-
rated around 3.3 (solid red curve in Fig. 1). Further in-
creasing the intensity, only marginally increases the ACS
until after the plateau between about 6.6 × 1013 W/cm2
to around 1.4×1015 W/cm2, which is due to mulitphoton
ionization and IBH. At an intensity of 5 × 1016 W/cm2
ACS reaches about 4.4.

FIG. 1.
(Color online) The average ﬁnal charge state of a
single 10 fs, λ = 33 nm pump pulse as a function of the inten-
sity irradiating an argon cluster (N = 147) is shown as the
solid (red) curve (depicted in the lower left illustration). The
long-dashed (green) curve shows the average ﬁnal charge state
for the pump pulse with a ﬁxed intensity of 7 × 1013 W/cm2
followed by (25 fs delay) a probe pulse, which can only pho-
toionize, as a function of the probe-pulse’s intensity (depicted
by the top illustration which denotes the probe laser pulse as
a group of photons with no electric-ﬁeld resulting in no in-
verse bremsstrahlung heating). The long-dashed (blue) curve
compares the average charge state for a pump pulse ﬁxed at
an intensity of 7× 1013 W/cm2 and subsequently (25 fs delay)
irradiated by complete-mode pulse (allowing for photoioniza-
tion and inverse bremsstrahlung heating) as a function of the
probe-pulse’s intensity (depicted by the lower illustration at
the top right corner).

The ACS for a cluster at the focus of the 10 fs
pump pulse with an intensity of 7 × 1013 W/cm2 and
a probe pulse 25 fs later with an intensity ranging from
1011 W/cm2 to 5 × 1016 W/cm2 in photons-only mode
(depicted as the top illustration of Fig. 1) is ﬂat until
I > 5 × 1013 W/cm2 when it starts to increase slowly.
This small increase is due solely to multiphoton ioniza-
tion (which uses an upper estimate so our results show
a minimum eﬀective transparency range which would be
even larger if σ(2) is smaller than our estimate).

Why is there a plateau in the ACS? An analysis of the
transient charge states of the cluster at the peak of the
pulse(s) show that the probe pulse does result in addi-
tional photoionization (both single and multiphoton pho-
toionization). However, this increased photoionization is

ameliorated by increased collisional ionization in systems
which are only irradiated by a pump pulse. The result
is the same total ACS (at saturation), both with and
without the probe pulse. Conceptually, this is where any
enhanced photoionization mechanisms would play a sig-
niﬁcant role. The probe pulse irradiates a dense plasma
and will allow for the photoionization of ions beyond the
Ar1+ and thus change the ﬁnal ACS signiﬁcantly [5, 8].
The oscillating electric ﬁeld of the pulse will also con-
tribute to imbuing the cluster with energy. Thus, an
increase in the ACS occurs when the probe pulse is used
in complete-mode (as depicted in the lower illustration
of Fig. 1), due to IBH (shown as the short-dashed blue
curve in Fig. 1). Very little change to the ACS occurs be-
fore the probe pulse signiﬁcantly surpasses the intensity
of the pump pulse (> 1 × 1015 W/cm2). Once it does,
the IBH from the probe pulse only slightly increases the
ACS (above the pump pulse’s level) but now almost en-
tirely due to IBH (evidenced by the photon-only mode re-
sults). Speciﬁcally, the diﬀerence in the ACS between the
photon-only mode probe pulse (long-dashed green curve
in Fig. 1) and the complete-mode probe pulse (short-
dashed blue curve in Fig. 1) is entirely due to IBH. In-
terestingly, during the probe pulse the ionization is in-
creased (over the pump-only ionization during the same
time and over the probe in photons-only mode) and yet
the ﬁnal ACS remains unchanged [15]. Around satura-
tion (during the ACS plateau), the probe pulse’s eﬀect
amounts to speeding up the collisional ionization and
many-body recombination by around 20 fs (compared
with the pump-only results), but in the end yielding the
same ACS.

It is important to know that the ACS results (presented
in Fig. 1) are relatively insensitive to the time-delay be-
tween the pump and probe pulse. Other time-delays were
tested (15 fs and 50 fs) and no signiﬁcant diﬀerence was
observed. This insensitivity would be a veriﬁable trend
in the experimental data if no enhanced photoionization
mechanism is at work. However, if an enhanced pho-
toionization mechanism is present, then it will be sen-
sitive to the time delay. This is due to the mechanism
being a function of the plasma density as no mechanism
has been observed in gas [5, 7, 16–18]. As the density of
the cluster decreases with the cluster’s disintegration, the
enhanced mechanism must also decrease. Lack of sensi-
tivity to the delay time (within the 15-50 fs range for the
aforementioned parameters) would place constraints on
how strong the augmented photoionization mechanism
could be.

We now consider what an experiment would detect due
to the spatial distribution of the pulse. While a small
subset of clusters will be irradiated by both pulses at the
peak intensities, many clusters spatially located in the
wings of the pulse, will be irradiated by a pump pulse of
insuﬃcient intensity to saturate the ionization channel.
The probe laser will then increase their ionization.
In
the pump-probe setup, clusters were assumed to interact
with the same intensity section of both pulses, i.e., the

3

pulses were assumed to be spatially identical and focused
to the same point. The resulting time-of-ﬂight (TOF)
signal for the pump pulse alone at I = 7 × 1013 W/cm2
(shown as the dashed blue line in Fig. 2 using the method-
ology from reference [11], where the signal is integrated
over the intensities of the pulse for a single cluster size
and using the TOF setup described in reference [3]) shows
that the signal will contain primarily singly charged ions
with an almost equal mix of doubly and triply charged
ions and a small number of quadruply charged ions. The
signal changes signiﬁcantly when the probe pulse is in-
cluded (at the same intensity) decreasing the relative
amount of single charged ions while increasing the rela-
tive amount of all higher charges (shown as the red boxes
in Fig. 2). If the probe pulse is below the saturation in-
tensity (but with the same spatiotemporal proﬁle) the
TOF is very close to the pump-only signal (dashed blue
line in ﬁgure 2). However, increasing the probe pulse to
beyond the saturation intensity (but with the same spa-
tiotemporal proﬁle) results in a signiﬁcant increase in the
signal from the multiply-charged states. This is to be ex-
pected as now more clusters will fall into a spatial region
where they will be saturated by the probe pulse.

FIG. 2. Time-of-ﬂight signal for Ar147 irradiated only by a
10 fs pump pulse of I = 7× 1013 W/cm2 at λ = 33 nm shown
as the dashed blue line. The red boxes show the time-of-ﬂight
signal when the pump pulse is followed by an identical probe
pulse.

Finally, we present results for how the size of the clus-
ter aﬀects the eﬀective saturation. In the range of param-
eters examined, the saturation intensity Isat decreases as
the cluster size increases (shown as the red plus signs
in Fig. 3 where the line is drawn to aid the eye). This
makes intuitive sense since the larger clusters absorb the
same amount of energy per ion as the smaller clusters.
However, the amount of energy needed for an electron to
escape the cluster remains the same [19]. Thus, larger
clusters absorb more total energy (than smaller clusters)
at the same intensity. It thus takes less intensity to sat-
urate the ionization channel.
It should be noted that
the trend will end once the cluster’s size becomes large
enough that the pulse is signiﬁcantly depleted by the pho-
toabsorption.

The range of intensities over which the cluster is eﬀec-
tively transparent to the probe pulse also increases with
the size of the cluster (shown as the blue x’s in Fig. 3).
This indicates that the eﬀective saturation eﬀect is more
pronounced in all measures in larger clusters.

4

In conclusion, we have shown that AACMs predict that
it is possible to induce eﬀective ionization transparency
in the XUV using a pump-pulse setup. The prediction
is augmented by the insensitivity of the eﬀect to the
delay between the pulses. Veriﬁcation of these predic-
tions would place strict limits on the role an enhanced
photoionization mechanism could play. Lastly we have
shown that the eﬀect increases with cluster size over at
least an order of magnitude. Both invalidation or valida-
tion would provide the ﬁeld with valuable data to reﬁne
its models of laser-cluster interactions in the XUV.

FIG. 3. The saturation intensity (minimum intensity needed
to saturate the cluster) Isat as a function of the cluster size
is shown as the (red) pluses for pump pulse duration of 10 fs
at λ = 33 nm. The intensity range (right vertical axis) as
a function of cluster size over which the probe pulse has a
negligible eﬀect is shown as the (blue) x’s.

This work was supported by Air Force Oﬃce of Sci-
entiﬁc Research under AFOSR Award No. FA9550-14-1-
0247.

[1] Bernd Sch¨utte, Mathias Arbeiter, Alexandre Mermillod-
Blondin, Marc J. J. Vrakking, Arnaud Rouz´ee, and
Thomas Fennel.
Ionization Avalanching in Clusters
Ignited by Extreme-Ultraviolet Driven Seed Electrons.
Physical Review Letters, 116(3):033001, 2016.

[2] M Hoener, C Bostedt, H Thomas, L Landt, E Eremina,
H Wabnitz, T Laarmann, R Treusch, a R B De Castro,
and T M¨oller. Charge recombination in soft x-ray laser
produced nanoplasmas. Journal of Physics B: Atomic,
Molecular and Optical Physics, 41(18):181001, Septem-
ber 2008.

[3] H Thomas, C Bostedt, M Hoener, E Eremina, H Wab-
nitz, T Laarmann, E Pl¨onjes, R Treusch, A R B de Cas-
tro, and T M¨oller. Shell explosion and core expansion of
xenon clusters irradiated with intense femtosecond soft
x-ray pulses. Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular
and Optical Physics, 42(13):134018, 2009.

[4] Th. Fennel, K.-H. Meiwes-Broer, J. Tiggesb¨aumker,
P. M. Dinh, and E. Suraud. Laser-driven nonlinear clus-
ter dynamics. Reviews of Modern Physics, 82(2):1793–
1842, June 2010.

[5] Christian Siedschlag and Jan-Michael Rost. Small rare-
gas clusters in soft x-ray pulses. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
93(4):043402, 2004.

[6] Ionu t¸ Georgescu, Ulf Saalmann, and Jan M. Rost. Clus-
ters under strong vuv pulses: A quantum-classical hybrid
description incorporating plasma eﬀects. Phys. Rev. A,
76(4):043203, Oct 2007.

[7] B. Ziaja, Z. Jurek, N. Medvedev, R. Thiele, and
S. Toleikis. A review of environment-dependent pro-
cesses within {FEL} excited matter. High Energy Density
Physics, 9(3):462 – 472, 2013.

[8] Mathias Arbeiter and Thomas Fennel. Ionization heating

in rare-gas clusters under intense xuv laser pulses. Phys.
Rev. A, 82(1):013201, 2010.

[9] Edward Ackad, Nicolas Bigaouette, and Lora Ramunno.
Augmented collisional ionization via excited states in xuv
cluster interaction. J. Phys. B, 44:165102, 2011.

[10] Edward Ackad, Nicolas Bigaouette, Kyle Briggs, and
Lora Ramunno. Clusters in intense xuv pulses: eﬀects of
cluster size on expansion dynamics and ionization. Phys.
Rev. A, 83:063201, Jun 2011.

[11] Edward Ackad, Nicolas Bigaouette, Stephanie Mack,
Konstatin Popov, and Lora Ramunno. Recombination
eﬀects in soft-x-ray cluster interactions at the xenon gi-
ant resonance. New Journal of Physics, 15(5):053047,
2013.

[12] Jeﬀ White and Edward Ackad. A validation of a simple
model for the calculation of the ionization energies in x-
ray laser-cluster interactions. Physics of Plasmas (1994-
present), 22(2):–, 2015.

[13] G. V. Marr and J. B. West. Absolute photoionization
cross-section tables for helium, neon, argon, and krypton
in the vuv spectral regions. Atomic Data Nucl. Data
Tables, (18):497, 1976.

[14] Claire McKenna and Hugo W van der Hart. Multipho-
ton ionization cross sections of neon and argon. Jour-
nal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics,
37(2):457–470, jan 2004.

[15] Rishi Pandit, Kasey Barrington, Nicolas Bigaouette,
Lora Ramunno, and Edward Ackad. upcoming publi-
cation.

[16] Ionut¸ Georgescu, Ulf Saalmann, and Jan M. Rost. Clus-
ters under strong vuv pulses: A quantum-classical hy-
brid description incorporating plasma eﬀects. Physi-
cal Review A (Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics),

76(4):043203, 2007.

[17] B. F. Murphy, K. Hoﬀmann, A. Belolipetski, J. Keto,
and T. Ditmire. Explosion of xenon clusters driven by
intense femtosecond pulses of extreme ultraviolet light.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 101(20):203401, 2008.

[18] K. Hoﬀmann, B. Murphy, N. Kandadai, B. Erk, A. Helal,
J. Keto, and T. Ditmire. Rare-gas-cluster explosions un-

der irradiation by intense short xuv pulses. Phys. Rev.
A, 83:043203, Apr 2011.

[19] Mathias Arbeiter and Thomas Fennel. Rare-gas clusters
in intense VUV, XUV and soft x-ray pulses: signatures of
the transition from nanoplasma-driven cluster expansion
to Coulomb explosion in ion and electron spectra. New
Journal of Physics, 13(5):053022, may 2011.

5

