6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

.

 
 
]
E
H
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

2
v
4
2
5
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 000–000 (0000)

Printed 4 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

Thermal conduction in a mirror-unstable plasma

S. V. Komarov1,2⋆, E. M. Churazov1,2, M. W. Kunz3 and A. A. Schekochihin4,5
1Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics, Karl-Schwarzschild-Strasse 1, 85741 Garching, Germany
2Space Research Institute (IKI), Profsouznaya 84/32, Moscow 117997, Russia
3Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, United States
4The Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Oxford, 1 Keble Road, Oxford OX1 3NP, United Kingdom
5Merton College, Oxford OX1 4JD, United Kingdom

4 March 2016

ABSTRACT
The ICM plasma is subject to ﬁrehose and mirror instabilities at scales of order the ion
Larmor radius. The mirror instability generates ﬂuctuations of magnetic-ﬁeld strength
δB/B ∼ 1. These ﬂuctuations act as magnetic traps for the heat-conducting electrons,
suppressing their transport. We calculate the eﬀective parallel thermal conductivity in
the ICM in the presence of the mirror ﬂuctuations for diﬀerent stages of the evolution
of the instability. The mirror ﬂuctuations are limited in amplitude by the maximum
and minimum values of the ﬁeld strength, with no large deviations from the mean
value. This key property leads to a ﬁnite suppression of thermal conduction at large
scales. We ﬁnd suppression down to ≈ 0.2 of the Spitzer value for the secular phase
of the perturbations’ growth, and ≈ 0.3 for their saturated phase. The eﬀect operates
in addition to other suppression mechanisms and independently of them. Globally,
ﬂuctuations δB/B ∼ 1 can be present on much larger scales, of the order of the
scale of turbulent motions. However, we do not expect large suppression of thermal
conduction by these, because their scale is considerably larger than the collisional
mean free path of the ICM electrons. The obtained suppression of thermal conduction
by a factor of ∼ 5 appears to be characteristic and potentially universal for a weakly
collisional mirror-unstable plasma.

Key words: plasmas, conduction, magnetic ﬁelds, instabilities

1

INTRODUCTION

Thermal conduction in a magnetized plasma is a long-
standing problem in astrophysics, dating back to the real-
ization that virtually all astrophysical plasmas possess mag-
netic ﬁelds (based on both theoretical considerations and
observations of synchrotron emission and the Faraday rota-
tion). Although these ﬁelds are relatively weak (∼ 1−10 µG
in the bulk of the ICM, see, e.g., Carilli & Taylor 2002 or
Feretti et al. 2012 for reviews), they constrain the motion
of charged particles to spiraling along the ﬁeld lines with
Larmor radii typically very small compared to other phys-
ically relevant scales, namely, to the collisional mean free
path and the correlation length of the plasma ﬂows. In such
a plasma, the electrons predominantly transfer heat along
the ﬁeld lines.

In the ICM, the quest for a theory of eﬀective
heat conductivity is strongly motivated by the observa-
tions of apparently long-lived temperature substructures
(e.g., Markevitch et al. 2003) and sharp gradients (cold

⋆ E-mail: komarov@mpa-garching.mpg.de

fronts, e.g., Markevitch et al. 2000; Ettori & Fabian 2000;
Vikhlinin et al. 2001; Markevitch & Vikhlinin 2007) that
would not have survived had the electron conductivity been
determined by the classic Spitzer expression for an unmag-
netized plasma (Spitzer 1962). Another puzzling topic is the
stability of cluster cool cores, in which the role of thermal
conduction is still unclear (e.g., Ruszkowski & Begelman
2002; Zakamska & Narayan 2003; Voigt & Fabian 2004;
Dennis & Chandran 2005).

likely turbulent

(for

the medium is

The general problem of thermal conduction in an
astrophysical plasma is greatly complicated by the fact
that
the ICM,
see, e.g., Inogamov & Sunyaev 2003; Schuecker et al. 2004;
Schekochihin & Cowley 2006; Subramanian et al. 2006;
Zhuravleva et al. 2014), and so the magnetic-ﬁeld lines are
randomly tangled. It is practical to subdivide the prob-
lem into more narrowly formulated questions and study
them separately. First, parallel conduction in a static mag-
netic ﬁeld of a given structure can be investigated (e.g.,
Chandran & Cowley 1998). The static approximation is
reasonable because electrons stream along magnetic ﬁelds
faster than these ﬁelds are evolved by turbulence. Next,

2

S. V. Komarov, E. M. Churazov, M. W. Kunz and A. A. Schekochihin

one can study the eﬀective boost of the transverse conduc-
tion across the ﬁeld lines due to their exponential diver-
gence (Skilling et al. 1974; Rechester & Rosenbluth 1978;
Chandran & Cowley 1998; Narayan & Medvedev 2001;
Malyshkin 2001; Chandran & Maron 2004). Finally, local
heat ﬂuxes at the scale of turbulent eddies are aﬀected by
the correlation between temperature gradients and the mag-
netic ﬁeld as they evolve in the same turbulent velocity ﬁeld
(Komarov et al. 2014; this process occurs on longer time
scales than the other two). In this work, we only address
the ﬁrst part of the problem, parallel thermal conduction,
as applied to the ICM.

Parallel conduction can be aﬀected by magnetic trap-
ping of electrons by ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld strength along
a ﬁeld line (Klepach & Ptuskin 1995; Chandran & Cowley
1998; Chandran et al. 1999; Malyshkin & Kulsrud 2001;
Albright et al. 2001). These ﬂuctuations might be produced
by various mechanisms. At the scale of turbulent motions,
they can be generated by the small-scale turbulent MHD
dynamo as a result of a series of random stretchings and
compressions by the velocity ﬁeld (e.g., Schekochihin et al.
2002, 2004; Schekochihin & Cowley 2006, and references
therein). At microscales of the order of the ion Larmor
radius, the ICM plasma is subject to kinetic instabilities
(Schekochihin et al. 2005; Schekochihin & Cowley 2006). As
the ion Larmor radius is many orders of magnitude smaller
than the collisional mean free path, the plasma is weakly col-
lisional, which results in conservation of adiabatic invariants,
the ﬁrst of them being the magnetic moment of a particle
µ = v2
⊥/(2B), where v⊥ is the component of the particle
velocity perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld. Consequently,
the magnetic-ﬁeld strength changes are correlated with
changes in the perpendicular pressure, giving rise to pres-
sure anisotropy. In turn, pressure anisotropy triggers ﬁrehose
and mirror instabilities (Chandrasekhar et al. 1958; Parker
1958; Hasegawa 1969) that hold the degree of anisotropy
∆ = (p⊥ − pk)/p⊥ at marginal levels |∆| ∼ 1/β, where β
is the plasma beta, the ratio of thermal to magnetic energy
density (for observational evidence in the solar wind, see
Kasper et al. 2002; Hellinger et al. 2006; Bale et al. 2009;
for theoretical discussion of possible mechanisms of main-
taining marginality, see Melville et al. 2015 and references
therein). The ﬁrehose instability occurs when ∆ < −2/β,
which happens in regions where the ﬁeld strength is de-
creasing, near the reversal points of the ﬁeld lines, and typi-
cally generates small (δB⊥/B ≪ 1) transverse Alfv´enic ﬂuc-
tuations of the ﬁeld direction. The mirror instability (or
the ’mirror mode’) is a resonant instability set oﬀ when
∆ > 1/β, which is the case where the ﬁeld is ampliﬁed
along the stretches of the ﬁeld lines. The mirror mode pro-
duces ﬂuctuations of magnetic-ﬁeld strength of order unity
(δB/B ∼ 1), which form magnetic traps and may, in prin-
ciple, inhibit electron transport along the ﬁeld lines. While
ﬁeld-strength ﬂuctuations δB/B ∼ 1 can also be generated
by turbulent motions, we will argue in Section 4 that the
resulting suppression of transport is very moderate, because
the electron mean free path λ is smaller than the parallel cor-
relation length of the magnetic ﬁeld lB, and the electrons can
escape from magnetic traps relatively easily. Illustratively,
the presumed combined spectrum of magnetic-ﬁeld strength
ﬂuctuations in the ICM is sketched in Fig. 1: the magnetic

Figure 1. A sketch of the spectrum of the ﬂuctuations of
magnetic-ﬁeld strength in the ICM. The perturbations δB/B ∼ 1
(relevant for magnetic trapping) generated by turbulence occupy
the region λ . lB , where magnetic trapping is ineﬀective. The
mirror ﬂuctuations, in contrast, are at the scales comparable to
the ion Larmor radius ρi, λ ∼ 1013ρi, where magnetic mirrors
can suppress electron transport considerably.

mirrors capable of eﬃcient suppression of electron transport
reside in the region λ ≫ lB.
The mirror magnetic ﬂuctuations are impossible to ob-
serve directly in the ICM due to their extremely small scales,
but they can be modeled by numerical simulations. The re-
cent hybrid PIC simulations of the ﬁrehose and mirror in-
stabilities in a shearing box done by Kunz et al. (2014) suit
this task well in providing the typical statistical properties
of the magnetic mirror ﬂuctuations. In this paper, we use the
mirror ﬂuctuations produced by their simulations to model
the electron motion along the resulting perturbed ﬁeld lines
and estimate the conductivity.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we de-
scribe a model for parallel electron diﬀusion and its Monte
Carlo equivalent for numerical calculations. Then, in Sec-
tion 3, we apply this model to the mirror magnetic ﬂuc-
tuations taken from the simulations of Kunz et al. (2014)
to infer the suppression of parallel electron diﬀusivity (Sec-
tion 3.2) and thermal conductivity (Section 3.3). Next, in
Section 4, we argue that large-scale turbulent magnetic ﬂuc-
tuations in the ICM, modeled by an isotropic MHD simula-
tion, do not cause a sizable suppression. Finally, in Section 5,
we summarize our results and their relevance to the problem
of thermal conduction in the ICM and in turbulent weakly
collisional plasmas in general.

2 A MODEL FOR PARALLEL ELECTRON

DIFFUSION IN A STATIC MAGNETIC
FIELD

For our calculations, we assume the electron diﬀusion
timescale to be smaller than the characteristic times of ﬂuid
motions and of the magnetic-ﬁeld evolution, so that the mag-
netic ﬁeld can be viewed as static. We will assess the validity
of this assumption in Section 5.

If magnetic ﬂuctuations occur at parallel scales lB much
larger than the electron Larmor radius ρe, which is in-
deed true for turbulent magnetic ﬂuctuations, as well as
for the mirror-mode perturbations produced at the scale of
1− 100 ρi, where ρi = (mi/me)1/2ρe ∼ 40 ρe is the ion Lar-
mor radius, and if all ﬂuid motions are neglected, we may
use the drift-kinetic equation

Suppression of thermal conduction in a mirror-unstable plasma

3

∂f
∂t

+ vξ∇kf − ∇kB

B

v

1 − ξ2

2

∂f
∂ξ

= ν(v)

∂
∂ξ

1 − ξ2

2

∂f
∂ξ

,

(1)

to evolve the electron distribution function f = f (t, x, v, ξ)
(Kulsrud 1964). Here ∇k = ˆb · ∇ is the derivative taken
along the local magnetic ﬁeld and ξ = ˆb · v/v = cos θ,
where θ is the pitch angle. The unit vector ˆb = B/B
points in the local magnetic-ﬁeld direction. The last term
on the left-hand side of equation (1) represents the mir-
ror force, which guarantees conservation of the magnetic
moment µ = v2
⊥/(2B) = v2(1 − ξ2)/(2B) in the absence
of collisions. Isotropic collisions with collision frequency ν
are described by the Lorenz pitch-angle scattering opera-
tor on the right-hand side of equation (1). In this section,
we restrict our analysis to monoenergetic electrons, so there
is no energy exchange between the particles. We also ne-
glect the electric ﬁeld because, close to marginal stability
(∆ ∼ 1/β), the mirror instability generates an electric ﬁeld
of order Ek ∼ (T /e)(∇kB/B)(1/β), where T is the electron
temperature, e the absolute electron charge. In astrophysi-
cal plasmas, β is typically large (e.g., ∼ 100 in the ICM), so
the electric ﬁeld can be safely neglected.
The problem is eﬀectively one-dimensional with respect
to the arc length ℓ along a ﬁeld line, because all spatial
derivatives in equation (1) are taken along the local magnetic
ﬁeld. Thus, we can rewrite equation (1) in ﬁeld-aligned co-
ordinates by normalizing the distribution function using the

Jacobian of this coordinate transformation, ef (t, ℓ, ξ) = f /B:
∂ef

∂ef
∂ℓ − M (ℓ)

1 − ξ2

1 − ξ2

∂ef

∂
∂ξ

∂
∂ξ

+ ξ

1
λ

(2)

∂ξ

∂t

2

where M (ℓ) = ∂ ln B/∂ℓ is the mirror force, λ = v/ν is
the electron mean free path1, and time has been rescaled as
vt → t. Using ξ = cos θ, the distribution function F (t, ℓ, θ) =
ef sin θ satisﬁes

∂2F
∂θ2 .(3)
A convenient way to solve this equation by the Monte Carlo
method is to treat it as the Fokker-Planck equation for par-
ticles whose equations of motions are

2λ (cid:21) F =

∂θ (cid:20) 1

M (ℓ) sin θ +

+ cos θ

∂F
∂ℓ

∂F
∂t

1
2λ

cot θ

+

∂

2

ef =

,

2

˙ℓ = cos θ,

˙θ =

1
2

M (ℓ) sin θ +

cot θ
2λ

+

1
√λ

η(t),

(4)

where η(t) is a unit Gaussian white noise, hη(t)η(t′)i =
δ(t − t′). As clearly seen from these equations, a particle
experiences the mirror force M (ℓ) deﬁned by the static mag-
netic ﬁeld and isotropizing collisions represented by the last
two terms on the right-hand side. Equations (4) can be easily
solved numerically.

Without collisions, only the particles in the loss cone
deﬁned by |ξ| > (1 − 2µB/v2)1/2 can travel freely. The rest
are reﬂected by regions of strong ﬁeld (magnetic mirrors).
Collisions allow trapped particles to get scattered into the
loss cone and escape from magnetic traps. Oppositely, a free

1 Electron collisionality may be anomalous due to, e.g., scattering
oﬀ magnetic ﬂuctuations generated by electron microinstabilities.
This could reduce the eﬀective electron mean free path, but our
main results would remain valid as long as the eﬀective mean free
path is much larger than the ion Larmor scale.

particle can be knocked out of the loss cone by collisions and
become trapped. The key parameter that deﬁnes the regime
of diﬀusion is the ratio of the collisional mean free path λ
to the parallel correlation length of the magnetic ﬁeld lB.
If λ/lB ≪ 1, collisions make magnetic trapping ineﬀective,
and the electrons undergo ordinary diﬀusion with diﬀusion
coeﬃcient D ∼ λv. In the opposite limit λ/lB ≫ 1, colli-
sions are very rare, so the pitch angle changes only slightly
over the correlation length of the ﬁeld. In this regime, the
suppression of diﬀusion is greatest because a certain frac-
tion of the particles is trapped and, in addition, the passing
particles have their mean free paths eﬀectively reduced as
small-angle collisions cause leakage from the loss cone so
that a free particle travels only a fraction of its mean free
path before it is scattered out of the loss cone and becomes
trapped (Chandran & Cowley 1998; Chandran et al. 1999).

3 ELECTRON DIFFUSION IN A MAGNETIC

MIRROR FIELD

3.1 Properties of the mirror ﬁeld

A description of the numerical code and set-up used to
generate the mirror magnetic ﬂuctuations can be found in
Kunz et al. (2014). The code (Kunz et al. 2014a) is a hybrid-
kinetic particle-in-cell code, in which the electrons are ﬂuid
while the ions are treated kinetically as quasi-particles. To
trigger the mirror instability, a square 2D region of plasma
of spatial extent L = 1152di0, where di0 is the initial ion skin
depth, is threaded by a magnetic ﬁeld directed at an angle
to the y-direction direction and subjected to a linear shear
u0 = −Sx ˆy, which stretches the ﬁeld lines and, by adiabatic
invariance, produces pressure anisotropy. The initial mag-
netic ﬁeld strength is B0, the initial plasma beta of the ions is
taken to be β0 = 200, and the shear is S = 3×10−4Ωi, where
Ωi is the ion gyrofrequency. The ion Larmor radius is ρi =
√βdi. Once the (ion) pressure anisotropy ∆ = p⊥/pk − 1

reaches 1/β, the plasma becomes mirror-unstable. Magnetic
perturbations grow exponentially until they become large
enough to drive the anisotropy back to the marginal level,
∆ → 1/β. Persistent large-scale driving of the pressure
anisotropy, coupled with the requirement for the plasma to
remain marginally stable, leads to a long phase of secular
growth of the mirror perturbations. The spatial structure
of the perturbations during this phase is shown in Fig. 2.
The mirror ﬂuctuations are elongated in the direction of the
mean magnetic ﬁeld and have δBk ≫ δB⊥. During this sec-
ular phase, the ﬁeld grows as δB ∝ t4/3 and the dominant
modes shift towards longer wavelengths (kkρi ∼ 10−2) as
the pressure anisotropy asymptotically approaches marginal
stability. The marginal stability is achieved and maintained
during the secular phase by the trapping of ions in mag-
netic mirrors (see Rincon et al. 2015; Melville et al. 2015).
The ﬁnal saturation sets in when δB/B0 ∼ 1 at St & 1,
and is caused by the enhanced scattering of ions oﬀ sharp
(δBk/B0 ∼ 1, kkρi ∼ 1) bends in the magnetic ﬁeld at the
edges of the mirrors.
We note that the electrons in the code are isother-
mal with Te = Ti, so we are not attempting to solve the
problem of the electron heat transfer self-consistently (no
thermal gradients and heat ﬂuxes are present). We have

4

S. V. Komarov, E. M. Churazov, M. W. Kunz and A. A. Schekochihin

S t = 1

5 0 0

2 5 0

0
i

d
/
y

0

− 2 5 0

− 5 0 0

− 5 0 0 − 25 0

0

2 5 0

5 0 0

x/di 0

2. 0

1. 8

1. 6

1. 4

1. 2

1. 0

0. 8

0. 6

0. 4

0. 2

Figure 2. Spatial structure of the mirror instability (Kunz et al.
2014) during the secular phase of the perturbations’ growth, after
one shear time. The magnetic-ﬁeld strength B/hBi is shown by
color, the ﬁeld lines are shown by contours. Length is in the units
of the ion skin depth di0 = ρi(St = 0)/√β0. At time St = 1, the
ion Larmor radius is ρi ≈ 8.7di0.

extracted two representative magnetic-ﬁeld lines from the
simulation domain, one during the secular phase (St = 1),
and one during the saturated phase (St ≈ 1.8). Each of
these crosses the box 8 times (note that, although the box is
shearing-periodic, a ﬁeld line does not bite its tail and hence
can be followed over several crossings) and has a length of
≈ 18000di0 (we adopt di0 as our unit of length because di
is practically constant in time, while ρi is a function of the
ﬁeld strength). The variation of the magnetic-ﬁeld strength
B along the lines is shown in Fig. 3. From the analysis of
the probability density functions (PDF) of B for the two
ﬁeld lines (Fig. 4), it is clear that in both cases, the PDFs
have abrupt cut-oﬀs at large B ∼ several B0, as well as
at small B. Therefore, the ﬁeld is bounded with no large
deviations from the mean value, in contrast to, e.g., a log-
normal stochastic magnetic ﬁeld with the same rms (shown
by the dotted line in Fig. 4 for comparison) with a tail in its
PDF, for which there is always a non-zero probability to ﬁnd
a large deviation at a large enough scale. This also means
that the extracted ﬁeld lines fully represent the statistics of
B (a longer ﬁeld line would not contain more statistical in-
formation). The bounded PDF(B) is a key property of the
mirror magnetic ﬁeld, which leads to a ﬁnite value of sup-
pression of electron transport at large λ/lB, unlike in the
case of stochastic magnetic ﬁelds (lognormal, Gaussian, ex-
ponential) that can completely inhibit particle transport in
this limit (Malyshkin & Kulsrud 2001; Albright et al. 2001).

Figure 3. Variation of the magnetic-ﬁeld strength along a ﬁeld
line during the two diﬀerent phases of evolution of the mirror
ﬂuctuations (solid: secularly growing ﬂuctuations at time St = 1;
dashed: saturated ﬂuctuations at time St ≈ 1.8). B0 is the initial
magnetic-ﬁeld strength in the simulation. For convenience, 4000-
di0 line segments are shown. The ion Larmor radii are ρi(St =
1) ≈ 8.7di0 and ρi(St ≈ 1.8) ≈ 6.2di0.

Figure 4. PDFs of the magnetic-ﬁeld-strength ﬂuctuations gen-
erated by the mirror instability. A lognormal distribution with
rms equal to the rms of the logarithm of the saturated mirror
ﬂuctuations is shown by the dotted line for comparison.

along a ﬁeld line set to ∝ 1/B, which is a uniform density
distribution in real space [recall the Jacobian of the coor-
dinate transformation to ﬁeld-aligned coordinates in equa-
tion (2)]. Then we trace the evolution of the particles over
time t1 = 20 tcoll, where tcoll = 1/ν is the collision time.
The monoenergetic diﬀusion coeﬃcient D is calculated as
D = h[ℓi(t1) − ℓi(t0)]2i

(5)

,

2(t1 − t0)

3.2 Suppression of electron diﬀusivity in the limit

λ/lB ≫ 1

3.2.1 Results of the Monte Carlo simulations

For the two extracted ﬁeld lines, we integrate the particles’
trajectories deﬁned by equations (4) numerically. Initially,
the particle distribution is isotropic with the particle density

where ℓi are the particles’ displacements. We choose t0 =
5 tcoll in order to allow the particles to collide a few times un-
til the ballistic regime gives way to diﬀusion at t & tcoll. The
same procedure is carried out for several diﬀerent ratios λ/lB
in the range 2 · 10−4 − 5 · 104. The correlation lengths of the
ﬁeld strength along the lines are lB ≈ 850di0 ≈ 100ρi(St =
1) for the secular phase and lB ≈ 1430di0 ≈ 230ρi(St ≈ 1.8)
for the saturated phase.

Suppression of thermal conduction in a mirror-unstable plasma

5

Figure 5. Suppression factor of the electron diﬀusivity SD =
D/D0 in the secularly growing (solid line) and saturated (dashed
line) magnetic mirror ﬂuctuations. The correlation lengths of the
ﬁeld strength along the ﬁeld lines are lB ≈ 850di0 ≈ 100ρi(St =
1) during the secular phase and lB ≈ 1430di0 ≈ 230ρi(St ≈
1.8) for the saturated mirrors. For comparison, the dotted line
shows suppression in a synthetic lognormal magnetic ﬁeld with
the same rms value of log B as during the phase of secular growth
of the mirror ﬂuctuations, correlation length lB = 850di0 and a
Kolmogorov spectrum in space (see its PDF in Fig. 4).

Deﬁning D0 = (1/3)λv, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in the
absence of the magnetic ﬁelds, we thus obtain the monoener-
getic diﬀusion suppression factor SD = D/D0 as a function
of λ/lB (Fig. 5). Averaging the monoenergetic diﬀusivity
D over a thermal distribution of the electron speeds v in-
troduces only a slight change in the shape of the function
SD(λ/lB), so we only present the monoenergetic diﬀusion
suppression in what follows.

For magnetic mirror ﬂuctuations in the ICM, the limit
λ/lB ≫ 1 is the relevant one, because the ion Larmor radius
is many orders of magnitude smaller than the mean free
path:

λ ≈ 20 kpc(cid:18) T
8 KeV(cid:19)2(cid:16)
ρi ≈ 5 × 10−12 kpc(cid:18) T

10−3 cm−3(cid:17)−1
8 KeV(cid:19)1/2(cid:18) B

n

,

1 µG(cid:19)−1

(6)

(7)

.

In this limit, the suppression factor asymptotically ap-
proaches SD ≈ 0.12 during the secular phase, and SD ≈ 0.19
for the saturated mirrors. The absence of the mean-free-path
dependence at large λ/lB is due to the fact that the mirror
ﬂuctuations are bounded, as we have seen by analyzing their
PDF (Fig. 4). This is very diﬀerent from the case of stochas-
tic magnetic mirrors (see Malyshkin & Kulsrud 2001; we will
discuss stochastic magnetic mirrors in more detail in Sec-
tion 4.1).

Figure 6. Equivalent representation of the mirror magnetic ﬂuc-
tuations along the ﬁeld lines in the case λ/lB ≫ 1. Reorder-
ing the magnetic-ﬁeld strength values over length L ∼ 2Lbox,
lB . L ≪ λ, does not change the PDF(B) and, therefore, the
amount of diﬀusion suppression.

ters regions of diﬀerent B plays no role. Therefore, one can
rearrange the mirror magnetic ﬂuctuations (Fig. 3) by sort-
ing the array elements in ascending order over some length
L, lB . L ≪ λ, and making the resulting array periodic
with period L (Fig. 6). Since the ﬁeld is bounded, we do
not lose statistical information if L is set to just a few lB.
Clearly, this procedure keeps the PDF(B) unchanged, and
the resulting magnetic ﬁeld produces the same amount of
suppression, while having a much simpler shape. By com-
paring such simpliﬁed shapes of magnetic ﬂuctuations for
diﬀerent ﬁeld lines, one can determine which line causes
more suppression. The loss cone for a particle is deﬁned
as |ξ| > (1 − B/Bmax)1/2, where B is the magnetic-ﬁeld
strength at the location of the particle and Bmax is the global
maximum of the ﬁeld strength. The more concave (or less
convex in our case of the mirror ﬂuctuations) the shape is,
the more suppression is produced by magnetic mirroring,
because the loss cones of most of the particles become nar-
rower. The extreme case of this is a ﬁeld that consists of nar-
row periodic peaks of height Bmax − Bmin. This ﬁeld causes
maximum suppression of diﬀusion for given values of Bmin
and Bmax, because the loss cone for almost all the particles,
|ξ| > (1 − Bmin/Bmax)1/2, is the narrowest it can be for
all possible PDF(B). Based on this argument, and noticing
that, in Fig. 4, the PDF of the saturated mirror ﬁeld is more
concentrated around the maximum ﬁeld strength, one can
predict more suppression of electron diﬀusion by secularly
growing mirrors than by saturated ones, even though Bmax
is smaller for the former than for the latter. Indeed, we see
in Fig. 5 that the eﬀect of the ﬁeld shape prevails over the
diﬀerence in Bmax, and the diﬀusion suppression is stronger
for the secular phase.

3.2.2 The role of the PDF(B)

3.2.3 The physical mechanism of the suppression of

The limiting values of SD in Fig. 5 depend only on the
PDF(B) along the ﬁeld lines. This fact is intuitive because
the change in the pitch angle of a passing particle due to
collisions as it travels the correlation length lB of the ﬁeld
is very small, and the order in which the particle encoun-

electron diﬀusion at large λ/lB

In the limit λ/lB ≫ 1, Chandran et al. (1999) derived an
analytic expression for the suppression of diﬀusivity of mo-
noenergetic electrons by periodic magnetic mirrors [their
equation (95)]:

6

S. V. Komarov, E. M. Churazov, M. W. Kunz and A. A. Schekochihin

SD =

3

h1/B′iZ 1

0

dµ′

1Z 1

µ′
1

dµ′
2

1
h|ξ(µ′
2)|/B′i

,

(8)

where B′ = B/Bmax is the magnetic-ﬁeld strength normal-
ized to its global maximum value, µ′ = µ/µcrit is the mag-
netic moment of a particle µ = v2(1 − ξ2)/(2B) normalized
to µcrit = v2/(2Bmax), the averaging is performed over the
period of the magnetic ﬁeld, and the integration is carried
over the passing particles in the loss cone. As we have dis-
cussed in Section 3.2.2, bounded mirror ﬂuctuations can be
replaced by periodic variations with the same PDF(B) with-
out aﬀecting the suppression factor. This means that equa-
tion (8), where the averaging in the angle brackets is done
over PDF(B), can be readily applied to the simulated mir-
ror ﬂuctuations. The asymptotic values of SD calculated by
equation (8), SD ≈ 0.117 for the secularly growing mirrors
and SD ≈ 0.187 for the saturated ones, agree extremely well
with the results of our Monte Carlo simulation (see Fig. 5).
We can break down the suppression eﬀect encoded in

equation (8) into two physical eﬀects:

SD = Sp

λeﬀ
λ

,

(9)

where Sp is the suppression of diﬀusivity due to the fact that
only the passing particles contribute to electron transport,
λeﬀ is the eﬀective mean free path of the passing particles,
reduced because a passing particle is scattered out of the
loss cone, becomes trapped and randomizes its direction of
motion in only a fraction of its collision time. The parame-
ters Sp and λeﬀ have a very clear physical interpretation in
terms of the particle velocity autocorrelation function.

The electron diﬀusion coeﬃcient D can be expressed as
the integral of the parallel-velocity autocorrelation function
C(t):

D =Z ∞

0

hvk(0)vk(t)idt ≡Z ∞

0

C(t)dt.

(10)

Using the results of our Monte Carlo simulations of mo-
noenergetic diﬀusion in magnetic ﬂuctuations generated by
the mirror instability, we can calculate the parallel-velocity
autocorrelation function, which is, for monoenergetic elec-
trons, the autocorrelation function of the cosine of the pitch
angle ξ = cos θ, namely C(t) = v2hξ(0)ξ(t)i. It is plotted in
Fig. 7 for diﬀusion with no magnetic mirrors (dashed line)
and diﬀusion in the mirror magnetic ﬁeld with λ/lB = 100
(solid line). With no mirrors,

C0(t) =

v2e−νt,

1
3

(11)

where ν = v/λ. Both with or without mirrors, the autocor-
relation function is equal to 1/3 at t = 0 due to isotropy
(even in the presence of magnetic mirrors, collisions restore
isotropy over times ≫ ν −1). In the mirror ﬁeld, C(t) has a
narrow peak of width ∼ lB/v at small t, while the rest of
the autocorrelation function is an exponential that is well
ﬁtted by

C(t > lB/v) =

Spv2e−νeff t,

1
3

where Sp < 1 and νeﬀ > ν.

(12)

The narrow peak of C(t) at small t is caused by the
contribution to C(t) of the population of trapped particles,
which bounce inside magnetic traps at a typical time scale
∼ lB/v. The physical meaning of the reduction factor Sp <

Figure 7. The parallel velocity autocorrelation functions C(t)/v2
for electron diﬀusion in a constant magnetic ﬁeld (dashed) and
in the magnetic ﬁeld of secularly growing mirrors (solid), based
on the results of the Monte Carlo simulation. The ratio of the
electron mean free path to the correlation length of the magnetic
ﬁeld λ/lB = 100. The narrow peak at t < lB /v is caused by the
bouncing trapped particles, which do not contribute to electron
transport.

1 is that only the passing articles contribute to transport
processes. This factor can be calculated as

Sp = fpass hξ2ipass
hξ2i

,

(13)

where fpass is the fraction of the passing particles, the aver-
aging is performed over the passing particles in the numer-
ator, and over all particles in the denominator. The value of
Sp is greater than simply the fraction of the passing parti-
cles, because they travel in their loss cones and, therefore,
have parallel velocities greater than the mean square parallel
velocity v2hξ2i = v2/3 averaged over all particles.
The physical interpretation of the fact that νeﬀ > ν in
equation (12) is the reduced eﬀective mean free path of the
passing particles: recall that a passing particle travels only
a fraction of λ before it becomes trapped and, obviously,
νeﬀ /ν = λ/λeﬀ . Since the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is the integral
of C(t) [equation (10)], we obtain equation (9).

From the above arguments, it follows that a system with
magnetic mirrors and λ/lB ≫ 1 can be translated into a sys-
tem with no mirrors, but with a lower mean square parallel
velocity and an enhanced scattering rate. The lower paral-
lel velocity is related to the fact that the passing particles
become trapped now and then, and while they are trapped,
their eﬀective parallel velocity is zero.

Using the results of our Monte Carlo simulations and
the velocity autocorrelation function analysis described
above, we can measure Sp and λeﬀ/λ. For the secularly grow-
ing mirrors, we get Sp ≈ 0.63, λeﬀ /λ ≈ 0.19; for the satu-
rated mirrors, Sp ≈ 0.74, λeﬀ /λ ≈ 0.26. Substituting these
into equation (9), we recover SD ≈ 0.12 and SD ≈ 0.19, the
same as was obtained in direct measurement [equation (5)]
and from equation (8).

Suppression of thermal conduction in a mirror-unstable plasma

7

3.3 Suppression of electron thermal conductivity

in the limit λ/lB ≫ 1

As we have shown above, the eﬀect of magnetic mirrors on
scales much larger than the electron mean free path is the
suppression of spatial diﬀusion via two eﬀects: reduced frac-
tion and reduced eﬀective mean free path (or, equivalently,
an enhanced scattering rate) of the passing particles partic-
ipating in transport [see equation (9)]. In a plasma with a
temperature gradient and no mirrors, heat transport is gov-
erned not only by pitch-angle diﬀusion, but by diﬀusion in
the energy space as well. Magnetic mirrors do not change
a particle’s energy, therefore, one can model their eﬀect on
large scales by enhancing the pitch-angle scattering rate (but
not the energy diﬀusion rate) and, simultaneously, reducing
the eﬀective density of particles carrying energy in order to
subtract the trapped population.

The rates of pitch-angle scattering (perpendicular veloc-
ity diﬀusion) ν⊥ and energy exchange νε for a test electron
in a hydrogen plasma are (Spitzer 1962)
ν⊥,es = 2[(1 − 1/2x)ψ(x) + ψ′(x)]ν0,
νε,es = 2[(me/ms)ψ(x) − ψ′(x)]ν0,
where

(15)

(14)

4πe4 ln Λne

ν0 =

x = v2/v2

th,e,

(16)

(17)

,
dt√te−t,

ev2

m2
2

√π Z x

0

ψ(x) =

ψ′(x) =

dψ
dx

,

s = e, i is the species of the background particles, vth,e =
(2kTe/me)1/2 is the electron thermal speed, and ln Λ ∼ 40
is the Coulomb logarithm. Heat is transferred by slightly
superthermal electrons with v ≈ 2.5 vth,e (this rough esti-
mate is based on a simple calculation of thermal conduc-
tivity for a Lorenz gas, when electrons interact only with
ions). At this velocity, ν⊥,ei ≈ 1.5 ν0, ν⊥,ee ≈ 1.8 ν0,
νε = νε,ei + νε,ee ≈ νε,ee ≈ 2 ν0. Thus, the electron energy
exchange rate νε is close to the total perpendicular electron
diﬀusion rate ν⊥ ≈ 3.3 ν0 for the heat-conducting electrons.
At this point, we make a qualitative assumption that
the total rate of spatial energy transfer can be reasonably ap-
proximated by the sum of the energy exchange rate and the
pitch-angle scattering rate. This assumption is corroborated
by the mathematical fact that in a plasma with a gradient of
a diﬀusing passive scalar, the ﬂux of the scalar is inversely
proportional to the sum of the rate of spatial diﬀusion of
the particles (or pitch-angle scattering) and the collisional
exchange rate of the passive scalar [see Appendix A, equa-
tion (A11)]. The passive scalar in this calculations models
temperature, as if every particle carried an averaged value
of thermal energy that did not depend on the particle’s ve-
locity. Then for the thermal conductivity κ, we use the ap-
proximation

v2
th,e

νε + ν⊥

.

κ ∼

(18)

The reduction of the eﬀective density of the heat-
conducting electrons aﬀects both pitch-angle and energy dif-
fusion, while the enhanced scattering rate only aﬀects pitch-
angle diﬀusion. Thus, the suppression of thermal conduction
is smaller than the suppression of spatial diﬀusion. A quali-

,

2Sp

(19)

ν⊥ + νε

1 + λ/λeﬀ

(λ/λeﬀ )ν⊥ + νε ∼

tative expression for the suppression of thermal conductivity
Sκ = κ/κ0 in the limit λ/lB ≫ 1 is then
Sκ ∼ Sp
where Sp and λeﬀ are the parameters in equation (9): Sp
is related to the fraction of the passing particles, λeﬀ is the
eﬀective mean free path of the passing particles. For a pas-
sive scalar in the limit λ/lB ≫ 1, equation (19) is exact
and derived in Appendix A by establishing a simple rela-
tionship between the amount of suppression of the scalar
ﬂux and the parallel-velocity autocorrelation function. Sub-
stituting the values of Sp and λeﬀ /λ calculated at the end of
Section 3.2.3 into equation (19), we obtain the suppression
factor of thermal conductivity: Sκ ∼ 0.2 for the secularly
growing mirrors and Sκ ∼ 0.3 for the saturated ones. We
see that heat transport is suppressed by a factor of ∼ 2 less
than spatial diﬀusion, because the diﬀusion in energy space
is suppressed much less than the spatial (pitch-angle) diﬀu-
sion. Equation (19) can only be used when Sp and λeﬀ do
not depend on the electron velocity (or, equivalently, on the
electron mean free path λ), which is indeed the case in the
limit λ/lB ≫ 1 (see Fig. 5).

4 ELECTRON TRANSPORT IN MHD

TURBULENCE

As mentioned in Section 1, another source of ﬂuctuations
of magnetic-ﬁeld strength in the ICM is turbulent stretch-
ing/compression of the ﬁeld lines. The turbulent dynamo
produces a stochastic distribution of the ﬁeld strength along
a ﬁeld line: lognormal during the kinematic phase, exponen-
tial in saturation (see Schekochihin et al. 2004). However,
as we have also noted in Section 1, we do not expect much
suppression of thermal conduction by these ﬁelds, because
the electron mean free path is smaller than the parallel cor-
relation length of turbulent magnetic ﬂuctuations, and so
magnetic mirrors are rare and not very eﬀective. In this sec-
tion, we demonstrate this explicitly by means of an isotropic
MHD simulation of turbulent dynamo.

4.1 Suppression of electron transport in a system

of stochastic magnetic mirrors

Before we consider the magnetic ﬁelds produced by the tur-
bulent MHD dynamo, let us ﬁrst illustrate how diﬀerent
diﬀusion in a stochastic magnetic ﬁeld is from the case of a
periodic ﬁeld (characteristic of the mirror ﬂuctuations) by
the example of a lognormally distributed ﬁeld. A stochas-
tic magnetic ﬁeld with a long tail in its PDF produces a
larger amount of suppression compared to periodic magnetic
ﬂuctuations, because the dominant suppression is caused by
the so-called ’principal magnetic mirrors’ of strength mp =
Bp/hBi ≫ 1 separated from each other by a distance of or-
der the eﬀective mean free path (characteristic length that a
passing particle travels before it gets scattered out of the loss
cone and becomes trapped) λ/mp (Malyshkin & Kulsrud
2001). Because λ/mp ≫ lB (see Malyshkin & Kulsrud 2001
for a calculation of mp), the principal mirrors arise at scales
much larger than lB and therefore are strong deviations of

8

S. V. Komarov, E. M. Churazov, M. W. Kunz and A. A. Schekochihin

the ﬁeld strength from the mean value found in the tail of
the PDF.

We generate a lognormal magnetic ﬁeld with a Kol-
mogorov spectrum and the same rms value of the logarithm
of the ﬁeld strength and the same correlation length lB as the
secularly growing mirror ﬂuctuations analyzed in Section 3
(the dotted PDF in Figure 4). The diﬀusivity suppression
factor is obtained by a Monte Carlo simulation and shown
in Figure 5 by the dash-dotted line. Its dependence on λ/lB
is much steeper than for the mirror ﬁelds, with no constant
asymptotic value at large λ/lB. Qualitatively, it is quite sim-
ilar to the eﬀective suppression of conductivity obtained for
stochastic distributions by Malyshkin & Kulsrud (2001, see
their Fig. 3).

4.2 Suppression of electron transport in a

saturated magnetic ﬁeld produced by MHD
dynamo.

We have demonstrated that the suppression of electron dif-
fusion in a stochastic ﬁeld may be considerably larger than
in a mirror-like periodic ﬁeld, most notably if λ ≫ lB. How-
ever, this regime is inapplicable to the magnetic ﬂuctuations
generated by MHD turbulence in the ICM, because there
λ . lν < Linj ∼ lB, where lν is the viscous scale of tur-
bulent eddies, Linj the outer (injection) scale of turbulence,
and lB is the parallel correlation length of the magnetic ﬁeld.
While MHD-dynamo-produced magnetic ﬂuctuations decor-
relate at small (resistive) scales, it is the ﬁeld’s variation per-
pendicular to itself (direction reversals) that occurs at those
scales, whereas the parallel variation is on scales lB of order
the ﬂow scale Linj ≫ λ (Schekochihin et al. 2002, 2004). In
the cool cores of galaxy clusters, λ ∼ 0.05 kpc, lν ∼ 0.4 kpc,
Linj ∼ 10 kpc (based on the parameters for the Hydra
A cluster given by Enßlin & Vogt 2006); in the hot ICM,
λ ∼ 20 kpc, lν ∼ 100 kpc, Linj ∼ 200 kpc. Schematically,
the spectrum of magnetic-ﬁeld-strength ﬂuctuations in the
ICM is shown in Figure 1. In order for magnetic trapping to
be eﬀective, magnetic-ﬁeld-strength ﬂuctuations δB/B ∼ 1
need to exist at spatial scales below the electron mean free
path. While mirror ﬂuctuations easily satisfy this condition,
MHD turbulence capable of creating parallel magnetic ﬂuc-
tuations occupies scales above λ, so large suppression is not
expected in this case.

In order to estimate an upper limit on the suppression
of electron diﬀusion by MHD magnetic ﬂuctuations, we use
simulations of a turbulent MHD dynamo at diﬀerent mag-
netic Prandtl numbers Pm = ν/η, where ν is the ﬂuid vis-
cosity, η the magnetic diﬀusivity. Our code solves the full set
of compressible MHD equations in 3D, and is based on the
unsplit van Leer integrator combined with the constrained
transport (CT) method, similar to the one implemented in
AT HEN A (Stone & Gardiner 2009). We initiate a 3D 2563
periodic box of MHD plasma with magnetic ﬂuctuations at
the level β = 2000, and stir it by a random white-in-time
nonhelical body force applied at the largest scales (Linj ∼
the box size). As we noted earlier in this section, the smaller
the ratio λ/Linj is, the less eﬀective magnetic trapping is. In
terms of the Reynolds number Re ∼ Linju/λvth,i, it means
that for small Ma/Re, where Ma is the Mach number of the
turbulent motions, conduction suppression should be negli-
gible. In the cores of galaxy clusters, Re ∼ 100 (Hydra A),

B

v

Figure 8. Central snapshot of cross-sections of a dynamo-
generated magnetic-ﬁeld (left) and velocity (right) magnitudes
during the saturated turbulent MHD state for Pm = 1000,
Re = 3.

Figure 9. Variation of the magnetic-ﬁeld strength along a ﬁeld
line segment that spans 8 boxes (box size = energy injection sale
Linj), taken from an MHD simulation of the saturated state of
turbulent dynamo at Pm = 1000, Re = 3.

while in the bulk of the ICM, Re ∼ 1− 10 (ignoring the pos-
sible eﬀects of microinstabilities on the gas viscosity). The
typical Mach number in galaxy clusters is believed to be
Ma ∼ 0.1 (e.g., Zhuravleva et al. 2015). Because we seek to
obtain an upper limit on suppression, we restrict our anal-
ysis to low Re, corresponding to the hot ICM (at such low
Re, turbulence will not have a wide inertial range, but that
is irrelevant because turbulent MHD dynamo only requires
a stochastic velocity ﬁeld, not necessarily a fully developed
Kolmogorov turbulence). Namely, in our simulation, we use
Re = 3, and Pm = 1000. The simulation lasts until the mag-
netic ﬁeld becomes saturated: hB2i/(8π) ∼ hρv2i/2, where
ρ is the mass density, v the turbulent plasma ﬂow velocity
(in saturation, β ∼ 50 and Ma ∼ 0.1). The structure of the
magnetic and velocity ﬁelds in the saturated state is shown
in Figure 8: magnetic folds are clearly seen at the scale of
the box, while the velocity is stochastic but smooth, due to
low Re. This simulation setup and the properties of the sat-
urated magnetic ﬁeld are similar to those of the run ”S4-sat”
in Schekochihin et al. (2004).

Following the same strategy as in the case of the mirror
ﬁelds, we have extracted a magnetic-ﬁeld line from the box
in the saturated state. The extracted ﬁeld line spans 100
box sizes (again, a ﬁeld line does not bite its tail, although
the box is periodic). This is necessary to make it statisti-

Suppression of thermal conduction in a mirror-unstable plasma

9

Figure 10. Solid line: the 3D PDF of the magnetic-ﬁeld strength
in saturated state for Pm = 1000, Re = 3. Dashed line: the PDF
of B along the ﬁeld line (the 3D PDF multiplied by B).

Figure 11. The suppression factor SD = D/D0 of the electron
diﬀusivity by turbulent-dynamo-produced magnetic ﬁelds. The
cross indicates the largest possible suppression for the ﬁducial
parameters of the hot ICM: Linj ∼ 200 kpc, λ ∼ 20 kpc.

cally representative, because the PDF of the ﬁeld now has
an exponential tail. A line segment that spans 8 boxes is
shown in Figure 9. The PDF of the magnetic-ﬁeld strength
calculated over the whole 3D simulation domain and one
calculated along the ﬁeld (by multiplying the 3D PDF by
the magnetic-ﬁeld strength) are shown in Figure 10. They
clearly exhibit an exponential shape. We calculate the sup-
pression of electron diﬀusion in the same way as we did for
the mirror ﬁelds in Section 3.2.1. The suppression factor is
shown in Figure 11 as a function of the ratio of the the mean
2. For the ﬁducial pa-
free path λ to the injection scale Linj
rameters of the hot ICM with the largest value of λ, we
choose Linj ∼ 200 kpc and λ ∼ 20 kpc. These parameters
provide maximum suppression factor of electron diﬀusion
SD ∼ 0.9. It is shown in Figure 11 by the cross, the solid
line corresponds to the suppression factor at lower λ, while
the dashed line shows this factor for test monoenergetic elec-
trons at higher λ to better exhibit the shape of the function
SD(λ/lB) for the dynamo-generated magnetic ﬁeld. Though
in this case, there is no simple connection between diﬀusiv-
ity and thermal conductivity [like equation (19)], because
SD now strongly depends on the mean free path (or veloc-
ity), the suppression of thermal conduction for λ . 20 kpc
should be essentially insigniﬁcant.

5 DISCUSSION

It is well recognized that thermal conduction in the ICM is
anisotropic in the presence of even an extremely weak mag-
netic ﬁeld. A popular assumption, adopted in many theoret-
ical and numerical studies, is that conduction is suppressed
across the ﬁeld, while along the ﬁeld, it is equal to the
isotropic thermal conduction in an unmagnetized plasma.
This assumption is typically applied to large-scale ﬁelds in
the ICM, e.g., to scales of order 10 kpc, which correspond to
the characteristic ﬁeld correlation length inferred from Fara-
day rotation measurements (e.g., Kuchar & Enßlin 2011).

2 Note that this is a somewhat artiﬁcial parameter scan as we
do not vary the ion mean free path, i.e., the viscosity, in a manner
consistent with the electron mean free path.

However, the ICM is likely to be susceptible to microin-
stabilities on much smaller scales comparable with the ion
Larmor radius. In particular, the mirror instability can gen-
erate ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld strength of large amplitude
δB/B ∼ 1, which can partially suppress electron transport
along the ﬁeld lines. Given that the ion Larmor radius is
some 13 orders of magnitude smaller than the typical macro-
scopic scales, small-scale magnetic mirrors could potentially
modify thermal conduction in a signiﬁcant way, provided
that mirrors can trap the electrons.

To address this question, we have examined the proper-
ties of the ﬁeld-strength ﬂuctuations in the recent shearing-
box simulations of the mirror instability by Kunz et al.
(2014). The striking diﬀerence between the magnetic ﬂuctu-
ations produced in these simulations and a generic random
ﬁeld is that their PDF(B) has sharp cutoﬀs at both low and
high B, with the ratio of the maximal and minimal ﬁeld
strengths over the ﬁeld lines Bmax/Bmin ∼6-7. Since the ra-
tio Bmax/B(ℓ) determines the loss cone for a particle at the
location ℓ along the line, the modest values of Bmax/Bmin
already suggest a limited amount of suppression, although
it depends also on the exact shape of the PDF(B) (see Sec-
tion 3.2.2).

Indeed, in our Monte Carlo simulations, we have found
that the electron diﬀusivity is suppressed by a factor of ∼ 8
for secularly growing mirrors and by a factor of ∼ 5 for sat-
urated ones. A lognormal magnetic ﬁeld with the same rms
would produce a much stronger suppression. We further ar-
gue that the suppression of thermal conduction relative to
an unmagnetized plasma is a factor of ∼2 less strong due
to the fact that mirrors primarily aﬀect spatial transport of
the electrons, and much less the energy equilibration time.
We conclude that microscale magnetic mirrors give rise to a
factor of ∼ 5 suppression of the parallel thermal conductiv-
ity.
In this work, we assumed a static magnetic ﬁeld taken
from a region of a plasma where the ﬁeld lines are stretched
by a linear shear. Though at a given location in the ICM
plasma, the ﬁeld lines are not constantly stretched, the
turbulent dynamo produces a magnetic-ﬁeld-line conﬁgura-
tion that consists of long folds (regions of ampliﬁed ﬁeld)

10

S. V. Komarov, E. M. Churazov, M. W. Kunz and A. A. Schekochihin

and short reversals (regions of decreasing/weak ﬁeld). This
means that mirror ﬂuctuations may develop almost ev-
erywhere along the ﬁeld lines in a turbulent ICM (see
Rincon et al. 2015 for the ﬁrst numerical evidence of this).
We note that it is not yet known how the mirror and ﬁre-
hose instabilities evolve over multiple correlation times of
a turbulent velocity ﬁeld. However, the recent results by
Melville et al. (2015) indicate that at the values of β typi-
cal for the ICM, the relaxation of pressure anisotropy in a
changing macroscale velocity shear is almost insantaneous
compared to the shear time. This may therefore suggest
that the mirror instability does not have time to ever reach
the saturated state (at St & 2 according to Kunz et al.
2014), because the turbulent shear decorrelates earlier (at
St ∼ 1). Thus, secularly growing mirrors are expected to be
more common. In any case, since the results for both phases
are similar up to a factor of order unity, we do not expect
large deviations from the described above behavior. We may
then argue that the amount of suppression found using the
shearing-box simulations is characteristic for the ICM or any
other turbulent weakly collisional high-β plasma.

When the parallel scale of the ﬁeld is larger than the
particles’ mean free path, the suppression of conductivity
is not strong because collisions are frequent enough to stop
particle trapping. This means that even though macroscopic
MHD turbulence can produce large-scale variations of B,
the resulting suppression of parallel conduction should be
negligible. We illustrate this point by carrying out MHD
simulations of saturated turbulent dynamo and explicitly
calculating the suppression factor (Section 4.2).

Parallel thermal conduction can also be reduced by
anomalous pitch-angle scattering of electrons oﬀ magnetic
perturbations. Such perturbations can be produced at the
scale of the electron Larmor radius by the whistler instability
triggered by electron pressure anisotropy (Riquelme et al.
2016). In the ICM, Riquelme et al. (2016) estimate the re-
sulting eﬀective electron mean free path to be at most a few
times smaller than the Coulomb mean free path, so our re-
sults remain valid (the mean free path is still much larger
than the ion Larmor scale). The additional electron scatter-
ing will cause additional suppression of thermal conduction.
The suppression by the mirror instability should then be
our factor of SD ∼ 1/5 relative to this whistler-modiﬁed
conductivity.

In addition to the suppression of parallel thermal con-
duction, the stochastic topology of the magnetic-ﬁeld lines
contributes to the total suppression of the global
large-
scale thermal conductivity by making the path travelled
by an electron longer. When studying this eﬀect, the ef-
fective increase of transverse diﬀusion due to the expo-
nential divergence of the stochastic ﬁeld lines should be
taken into account (e.g., Rechester & Rosenbluth 1978),
because it restores the diﬀusive regime of spatial par-
ticle transport. If magnetic turbulence develops over a
range of scales, the suppression eﬀect is quite modest,
∼ 1/5 of the Spitzer value (Narayan & Medvedev 2001;
Chandran & Maron 2004). Since we have shown that the
parallel conductivity is suppressed by another factor of ∼ 5,

we argue that the global large-scale thermal conduction in
the ICM is roughly ∼ 1/20 − 1/30 of the Spitzer value. 3

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank S. C. Cowley for helpful discussions. The authors
are grateful to W. Pauli Institute, Vienna, for its hospitality.

REFERENCES

Albright B. J., Chandran B. D. G., Cowley S. C., Loh M.,

2001, Phys. Plasmas, 8, 777

Bale S. D., Kasper J. C., Howes G. G., Quataert E., Salem

C., Sundkvist D., 2009, Phys. Rev. Lett., 103, 211101

Carilli C. L., Taylor G. B., 2002, A&A, 40, 319
Chandran B. D. G., Cowley S. C., 1998, Phys. Rev. Lett.,

80, 3077

Chandran B. D. G., Cowley S. C., Ivanushkina M., Sydora

R., 1999, ApJ, 525, 638

Chandran B. D. G., Maron J. L., 2004, ApJ, 602, 170
Chandrasekhar S., Kaufman A. N., Watson K. M., 1958,

Proc. R. Soc. London A, 245, 435

Dennis T. J., Chandran B. D. G., 2005, ApJ, 622, 205
Enßlin T. A., Vogt C., 2006, A&A, 453, 447
Ettori S., Fabian A. C., 2000, MNRAS, 317, L57
Feretti L., Giovannini G., Govoni F., Murgia M., 2012,

A&A Rev., 20, 54

Hasegawa A., 1969, Phys. Fluids, 12, 2642
Hellinger P., Tr´avn´ıˇcek P., Kasper J. C., Lazarus A. J.,

2006, Geophys. Res. Lett., 33, 9101

Inogamov N. A., Sunyaev R. A., 2003, Astron. Lett., 29,

791

Kasper J. C., Lazarus A. J., Gary S. P., 2002, Geo-

phys. Res. Lett., 29, 1839

Klepach E. G., Ptuskin V. S., 1995, Astron. Letters, 21,

411

Komarov S. V., Churazov E. M., Schekochihin A. A.,

ZuHone J. A., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 1153

Kuchar P., Enßlin T. A., 2011, A&A, 529, A13
Kulsrud R., 1964, in Rosenbluth M. N., ed., Advanced
Plasma Theory General stability theory in plasma physics.
Academic Press, p. 54

Kunz M. W., Schekochihin A. A., Stone J. M., 2014, Phys.

Rev. Lett., 112, 205003

Kunz M. W., Stone J. M., Bai X.-N., 2014, J. Comp. Phys.,

259, 154

Malyshkin L., 2001, ApJ, 554, 561
Malyshkin L., Kulsrud R., 2001, ApJ, 549, 402
Markevitch M., Mazzotta P., Vikhlinin A., Burke D., Butt
Y., David L., Donnelly H., Forman W. R., Harris D., Kim
D.-W., Virani S., Vrtilek J., 2003, ApJ, 586, L19

Markevitch M., Ponman T. J., Nulsen P. E. J., Bautz
M. W., Burke D. J., David L. P., Davis 2000, ApJ, 541,
542

Markevitch M., Vikhlinin A., 2007, Phys. Rep., 443, 1
Melville S., Schekochihin A. A., Kunz M. W., 2015, ArXiv:

1512.08131

3 And perhaps down by another factor of a few if whistlers are
triggered and have the eﬀect predicted by Riquelme et al. (2016).

Suppression of thermal conduction in a mirror-unstable plasma

11

Narayan R., Medvedev M. V., 2001, ApJ, 562, L129
Parker E. N., 1958, Phys. Rev., 109, 1874
Rechester A. B., Rosenbluth M. N., 1978, Phys. Rev. Lett.,

40, 38

Rincon F., Califano F., Schekochihin A. A., Valentini F.,

2015, ArXiv: 1512.06455

Riquelme M., Quataert E., Verscharen D., 2016, ArXiv:

1602.03126

Ruszkowski M., Begelman M. C., 2002, ApJ, 581, 223
Schekochihin A., Cowley S., Maron J., Malyshkin L., 2002,

Phys. Rev. E, 65, 016305

Schekochihin A. A., Cowley S. C., 2006, Phys. Plasmas, 13,

056501

Schekochihin A. A., Cowley S. C., Kulsrud R. M., Hammett

G. W., Sharma P., 2005, ApJ, 629, 139

Schekochihin A. A., Cowley S. C., Taylor S. F., Maron J. L.,

McWilliams J. C., 2004, ApJ, 612, 276

Schuecker P., Finoguenov A., Miniati F., B¨ohringer H.,

Briel U. G., 2004, A&A, 426, 387

Skilling J., McIvor I., Holmes J. A., 1974, MNRAS, 167,

87P

Spitzer L., 1962, Physics of Fully Ionized Gases. New York:

Interscience

Stone J. M., Gardiner T., 2009, New Astron., 14, 139
Subramanian K., Shukurov A., Haugen N. E. L., 2006, MN-

RAS, 366, 1437

Vikhlinin A., Markevitch M., Murray S. S., 2001, ApJ, 549,

L47

Voigt L. M., Fabian A. C., 2004, MNRAS, 347, 1130
Zakamska N. L., Narayan R., 2003, ApJ, 582, 162
Zhuravleva I., Churazov E., Ar´evalo P., Schekochihin A. A.,
Allen S. W., Fabian A. C., Forman W. R., Sanders J. S.,
Simionescu A., Sunyaev R., Vikhlinin A., Werner N., 2015,
MNRAS, 450, 4184

Zhuravleva I., Churazov E., Schekochihin A. A., Allen
S. W., Ar´evalo P., Fabian A. C., Forman W. R., Sanders
J. S., Simionescu A., Sunyaev R., Vikhlinin A., Werner
N., 2014, Nature, 515, 85

APPENDIX A: TRANSPORT OF A PASSIVE
SCALAR

(A1)

Assume a collisional 1D gas with a linear mean gradient of
a scalar quantity a transferred by the gas particles:
ha(x)i = const + αx.
Here and below, the angle brackets denote averaging over
the particles’ distribution. The gradient is sustained by ﬁxed
boundary conditions (e.g., walls kept at constant a). The
particles can exchange a via collisions. Our goal is to evalu-
ate the ﬂux of a given by
qa = havki,
where vk is particle velocity (that is the parallel electron
velocity along a ﬁeld line in application to our problem).

(A2)

Let us ﬁrst write the Langevin equation for a particle’s

velocity:
˙vk = −ν1vk + η1(t),
where ν1 is the particle-scattering collision rate, and η1(t) is
a Gaussian white noise with zero mean. Solving for vk gives

(A3)

vk = vk(0)e−ν1t +Z t

0

dt′eν1(t′−t)η1(t′),

(A4)

and, integrating again,

x = x(0) +

vk(0)

ν1

+Z t

0

dt′Z t′

0

(1 − e−ν1t)
dt′′eν1(t′′−t′)η1(t′′).

(A5)

The Langevin equation for the evolution of a of a given
particle due to collisions reads:
˙a = −ν2(a − hai) + η2(t),
where ν2 is the a-exchange collision rate, and η2 is a Gaus-
sian white noise with zero mean. Solving for a, we get

(A6)

a = a(0)e−ν2t + ν2Z t

0

dt′eν2(t′−t)ha[x(t′)]i

+Z t

0

dt′eν2(t′−t)η2(t′).

(A7)

Combining equations (A1), (A2) and (A7), we can cal-

culate the scalar ﬂux qa at time t:

qa = ha(t)vk(t)i = ν2Z t
= αν2Z t

0

0

dt′eν2(t′−t)hx(t′)vk(t)i.

dt′eν2(t′−t)hha[x(t′)]ivk(t)i

(A8)

The noise terms do not contribute to the ﬂux because they
all have zero mean value. We can express x(t′) similar to
equation (A5) as

x(t′) = x(t) −
+Z t′

t

vk(t)

ν1

dt′′Z t′′

t

[1 − eν1(t′−t)]

dt′′′eν1(t′′′−t′′)η1(t′′′).

(A9)

Substituting x(t′) into equation (A8), we get

ν2

ν1 Z t
as t → ∞,

0

k(t)i
hv2i
ν1 + ν2

qa = −αhv2

dt′eν2(t′−t)[1 − eν1(t′−t)]

α
→ −
3
where hv2
k(t)i = (1/3)hv2i. We see that the ﬂux of the passive
scalar a is inversely proportional to the sum of the scattering
rate of the particles ν1 and the a-exchange rate ν2. Then the
scalar conductivity κa0 is

(A10)

κa0 =

1
3

hv2i
ν1 + ν2

.

(A11)

If the particles only exchange a and do not exchange energy,
hv2i = v2.
It is also useful to derive the connection between the
scalar ﬂux qa and the velocity autocorrelation function. Let
us ﬁrst write x(t′) as

x(t′) = x(t) −Z t

t′

vk(t′′)dt′′

and substitute this into equation (A8):

(A12)

qa = −αν2Z t
= −αν2Z t

0

0

dt′eν2(t′−t)Z t
dt′eν2(t′−t)Z 0

t′

dt′′hvk(t′′)vk(t)i

dτhvk(t + τ )vk(t)i

t′−t

12

S. V. Komarov, E. M. Churazov, M. W. Kunz and A. A. Schekochihin

0

dτ C(τ ) as t → ∞,

0

dt′e−ν2t′Z t′

→ −αν2Z ∞
where C(τ ) = hvk(0)vk(τ )i is the parallel-velocity autocor-
relation function. For the conductivity κa of the scalar a, we
infer

(A13)

κa = ν2Z ∞

0

dt′e−ν2t′Z t′

0

dτ C(τ ).

(A14)

With no magnetic mirrors, C0(τ ) = (1/3)v2e−ν1τ , and after
substitution of C0 into equation (A14), we recover equa-
tion (A11).

In Section 3.2.3, we demonstrated that in the limit
λ/lB ≫ 1, the parallel velocity autocorrelation function of
the monoenergetic electrons in the presence of mirror ﬂuc-
tuations has the form

C(t) =

1
3

Spv2e−νeff t.

(A15)

The coeﬃcients Sp and νeﬀ are determined by the Monte
Carlo simulations. Now we can express κa in terms of these
two coeﬃcients and the a-exchange rate ν2 by substituting
C(t) into equation (A14):

κa =

1
3

Spv2

νeﬀ + ν2

=

1
3

Spv2

(λ/λeﬀ)ν1 + ν2

.

(A16)

By combining equations (A11) and (A16), we obtain the
suppression factor of the scalar conductivity κa/κa0:

κa
κa0

= Sp

ν1 + ν2

(λ/λeﬀ )ν1 + ν2

.

(A17)

We apply the above formula to relate the suppression of
diﬀusion with the suppression of thermal conduction quali-
tatively, by taking a to be the electron temperature.

