TOPICAL REVIEW

Open Heavy Flavor in QCD Matter and in Nuclear
Collisions

Francesco Prino
INFN Torino, Via Pietro Giuria 1, I-10125 Torino, Italy

E-mail: prino@to.infn.it

Ralf Rapp
Cyclotron Institute and Department of Physics and Astronomy, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX 77843-3366, USA

E-mail: rapp@comp.tamu.edu

Abstract. We review the experimental and theoretical status of open heavy-ﬂavor
(HF) production in high-energy nuclear collisions at RHIC and LHC. We ﬁrst overview
the theoretical concepts and pertinent calculations of HF transport in QCD matter,
including perturbative and non-perturbative approaches in the quark-gluon plasma,
eﬀective models in hadronic matter, as well as implementations of heavy-quark (HQ)
hadronization. This is followed by a brief discussion of bulk evolution models for
heavy-ion collisions and initial conditions for the HQ distributions which are needed
to calculate HF spectra in comparison to observables. We then turn to a discussion of
experimental data that have been collected to date at RHIC and LHC, speciﬁcally for
the nuclear suppression factor and elliptic ﬂow of semileptonic HF decays, D mesons,
non-prompt J/ψ from B-meson decays, and b-jets. Model comparisons to HF data are
conducted with regards to extracting the magnitude, temperature and momentum-
dependence of HF transport coeﬃcients from experiment.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
x
e
-
l
c
u
n
[
 
 

1
v
9
2
5
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

CONTENTS

Contents

1 Introduction

1.1 QCD Matter and Heavy-Ion Collisions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Diagnostic Potential of Heavy-Flavor Particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 Brief Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

2
2
4
5

2 Theoretical Descriptions of Heavy Flavor in Medium

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6
2.1 Frameworks for Heavy-Flavor Transport
7
2.2 Calculations of Heavy-Flavor Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
. . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2.1 Quark-Gluon Plasma I: Elastic Interactions
. . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2.2 Quark-Gluon Plasma II: Radiative Interactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.2.3 Hadronic Matter
2.2.4 Lattice QCD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2.5 Comparison of Spatial Diﬀusion Coeﬃcients . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.2.6 Hadronization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.2.7 Pre-Equilibrium and Mean-Field Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.3 Bulk Medium Evolution Models for URHICs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

3 Experimental Results and Comparison to Models

3.2 Open Heavy-Flavor Data in pp and p-A (d-A) Collisions

26
3.1 Experimental Facilities and Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.1.1 Accelerators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.1.2 Open Heavy-Flavor Production Measurement Techniques . . . . . 28
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.1.3 Experimental observables
. . . . . . . . . 35
3.2.1 Production in pp and Comparison to pQCD Calculations . . . . . 35
3.2.2 Results from p-A (d-A) collisions and Cold-Nuclear-Matter Eﬀects 44
. . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.3.1 Heavy-ﬂavor decay leptons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
3.3.2 Charm hadrons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
3.3.3 Beauty production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71

3.3 Results from A-A Collisions and Model Comparisons

3.4 Summary of Model-to-Data Comparisons and Implications for HF

Transport

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

4 Conclusions and Outlook

79

1. Introduction

1.1. QCD Matter and Heavy-Ion Collisions

The investigation of
strongly interacting matter under extreme conditions of
temperature and energy density is at the forefront of modern nuclear physics research.
On the one hand, this research improves our understanding of the hot medium that

CONTENTS

3

prevailed in the ﬁrst few microseconds of the early universe, as well as of the interior
of neutron stars where a compression of several times normal nuclear matter density is
realized at small temperatures. On the other hand, it remains a formidable challenge
to map out the phase structure of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) as part of the
standard model of elementary particle physics, based on the many-body physics of
quarks and gluons and/or suitable eﬀective degrees of freedom.
In particular, the
asymptotic freedom of the QCD coupling strength suggests that hadronic matter, which
prevails at low temperatures and densities, will change into a quark-gluon plasma (QGP)
at high temperatures.

Collision experiments of heavy atomic nuclei at high energies provide the unique
opportunity to create and study the properties of QCD matter in the laboratory. Due
to the transient nature of the medium produced in these reactions, which explodes with
large collective velocities, its systematic investigation is not easy. Nevertheless, progress
has been made over about 30 years of ultrarelativistic heavy-ion collisions (URHICs) due
to a concerted eﬀort of experiment and theory. The basic picture that has emerged for
the reaction dynamics is that of an expanding ﬁreball which rapidly reaches near local
equilibrium within about 1 fm/c after the initial collision, a pressure-driven expansion for
about 10-15 fm/c and a subsequent rather sudden freezeout into free-streaming hadrons
which are observed in the detectors, cf. Refs. [1–3] for recent overviews. Analyses of
bulk-hadron momentum distributions provide a snapshot of the ﬁreball at its break-
up stage, revealing a “thermal freezeout” at a temperature, Tfo (cid:39) 100 MeV, and an
average collective expansion velocity of more than half the speed of light [4, 5]. The
analysis of abundances of diﬀerent hadron species, the so-called hadro-chemistry, reveals
a higher temperature, Tch (cid:39) 160 MeV, characterizing the “chemical freezeout” of the
hadronic system. This temperature is close to the pseudo-critical temperature of the
chiral transition computed in lattice-QCD, Tpc = 155 ± 10 MeV [6, 7], although the
transition from partons to hadrons probably occurs over an extended temperature
window. Electromagnetic radiation from the medium further supports the formation
of matter at and above the transition; in particular, dilepton invariant-mass spectra
show that the ρ-meson, as a “prototype” light hadron, strongly broadens in hadronic
matter and dissolves in the vicinity of Tpc [8].

A fundamental question that remains open thus far is how the quark-hadron
transition emerges from the underlying in-medium QCD force, and how the latter
determines the transport properties of the QGP. The heavy charm and bottom quarks
(Q = c, b) play a special role in this context. In the present review we will elaborate
on the physics of open heavy-ﬂavor (HF) probes in URHICs,
focusing on recent
developments pertaining to theoretical modeling, the ﬁrst round of LHC data as well as
the most recent RHIC data (see, e.g., Ref. [9–11] for recent reviews). While the physics
of the open HF sector bears intimate connetions to the hidden HF (quarkonium) sector,
which are increasingly exploited, we will here concentrate on the former and refer to
recent overviews on in-medium quarkonium physics in Refs. [11–15].

CONTENTS

4

1.2. Diagnostic Potential of Heavy-Flavor Particles

The masses of charm and bottom quarks (as well as hadrons containing them) are much
larger than both the QCD scale parameter and the pseudo-critical temperature of the
QCD phase transition, mc,b (cid:29) ΛQCD, Tpc. In the vacuum, this has long been recognized
as an eﬀective expansion tool to formulate a potential theory of the fundamental
QCD force. The potential approach was originally motivated by phenomenological
descriptions of quarkonium spectroscopy in vacuum, but is now accurately conﬁrmed
by lattice QCD (lQCD) calculations [16].

Q (cid:39) (cid:113)

In the context of QCD matter studies in heavy-ion collisions, the large heavy-quark
(HQ) mass, mQ, together with ﬂavor conservation in strong interactions, has several
important implications:
(a) Q ¯Q production is essentially restricted to the primordial nucleon-nucleon collisions
in the reaction, since the production threshold is much higher than the typical medium
temperatures.
(b) Since the HQ mass is much larger than the pseudo-critical temperature, charm
and bottom quarks retain their “identity” through the hadronization transition in
URHICs; this renders them an excellent probe of hadronization mechanisms down to
small momenta, i.e., whether they pick up a light anti-/quark from the surrounding
medium or fragment independently.
(c) The typical momentum exchange of HF particles with the heat bath, (cid:126)q 2 (cid:39) T 2,
is parametrically small compared to the thermal HF momentum, pth
2mQT ; HF
particles thus execute a “Brownian motion” with many, relatively small momentum
kicks from the medium.
(d) The typical thermal energy transfer on the HF particle is parametrically small
Q (cid:28) (cid:126)q 2; therefore, the 4-momentum
compared to the momentum transfer, q2
0 − (cid:126)q 2 is essentially spacelike, which is characteristic of potential-type
transfer q2 = q2
interactions.
(e) The thermal relaxation time of HF particles, τQ (cid:39) τthmQ/T , is much longer than
the thermalization time, τth, of the bulk medium; thus, in connection with item (a) and
the possibility that τQ is comparable to (or longer than) the ﬁreball lifetime, τFB, HF
spectra in heavy-ion collisions retain a memory of their interaction history. If so, their
ﬁnally observed modiﬁcations can serve as a gauge of the HF coupling strength to the
medium.
As a further beneﬁt for phenomenology, various quantities which characterize the
interactions of heavy ﬂavor in medium can be computed in thermal lattice QCD, e.g.,
the HF diﬀusion coeﬃcient [17, 18], HQ susceptibilities [19] and mesonic correlation
functions [20]. Even if these quantities are not directly applicable to experiment,
they can serve as valuable constraints for model calculations which provide a bridge
to experimental observables [21]. The above features provide for a promising framework
to determine the basic QCD force in the medium and its emergent phenomena of
HF transport in QCD matter, by combining lattice QCD, model calculations and the

0 ∼ (cid:126)q 4/m2

CONTENTS

5

phenomenological analysis of experimental data in a controllable way.

For suﬃciently high momenta, pQ (cid:29) mQ, heavy quarks will behave as light
particles, transitioning into the regime of energy loss dominated by gluon radiation.
It currently remains an open question at which momenta this transition occurs,
whether it coincides with a transition from non-perturbative to perturbatively calculable
mechanisms, and how the quark mass eﬀect establishes itself prior to reaching the
ultrarelativistic regime.

1.3. Brief Outline

The remainder of this review is organized as follows.

In Sec. 2 we review general frameworks for the theoretical description of HF
propagation through QCD matter and their implementations into the phenomenology
of heavy-ion collisions. We start by recalling the basic elements of HF transport
approaches, in particular simulations based on the Boltzmann and relativistic Langevin
equations, and critically discuss their virtues and limitations as well as respective regimes
of applicability (Sec. 2.1). We then survey and compare diﬀerent mechanisms of HF
transport through QCD matter including perturbative and non-perturbative elastic HQ
interactions in the QGP, perturbative radiative HQ energy loss, heavy-meson scattering
in hadronic matter, analyses using thermal lQCD, as well as transport through the
quark-hadron transition and pre-equilibrium phases of heavy-ion collisions (Sec. 2.2).
This is followed by a discussion of further ingredients needed to make realistic contact
with data (Sec. 2.3), pertaining to the initial conditions for the HQ spectra and the
space-time evolution of the bulk medium formed in heavy-ion collisions.

In Sec. 3 we summarize the current status of experimental HF measurements
in light- and heavy-ion collisions and their theoretical interpretation through model
comparisons. We ﬁrst survey the relevant accelerator facilities, experimental tools and
types of HF observables (Sec. 3.1), followed by a presentation of the current data
on HF production in pp collisions and their modiﬁcation in proton/deuteron-nucleus
(pA/dA) collisions (Sec. 3.2). The compilation of HF data in nucleus-nucleus (AA)
systems (Sec. 3.3) is organized into three parts, dedicated to HF decay lepton, charmed-
hadron, and beauty production, each of them reviewing the results on the modiﬁcation of
transverse-momentum (pT ) spectra and the elliptic ﬂow in Au-Au and Cu-Cu collisions
at RHIC and Pb-Pb collisions at the LHC. The discussion of the data is accompanied
by model comparisons which we attempt to translate into qualitative and quantitative
information about the mechanisms and magnitudes of HF interactions and transport
coeﬃcients in QCD matter (Sec. 3.4).

We summarize and give an outlook in Sec. 4.

CONTENTS

6

2. Theoretical Descriptions of Heavy Flavor in Medium

As alluded to in the introduction, the motion of HF particles (both quarks and hadrons)
through the QCD medium at temperatures relevant for URHICs is akin to a Brownian
motion, where a heavy probe is injected into a background medium of light particles.
The subsequent diﬀusion process of the probe particle is governed by its coupling to the
medium, schematically given by an average displacement squared,

(cid:104)(cid:126)r 2(cid:105) = (2d)Dst

(1)

(t: time). The transport properties of the medium are encoded in the spatial diﬀusion
coeﬃcient, Ds (the prefactor 2d, where d is the number of spatial dimensions, is a
convention). A small value of Ds characterizes a strong coupling: frequent rescattering
limits the spatial dispersion of the Brownian particle. The spatial diﬀusion coeﬃcient
is directly related to the thermal relaxation (or equilibration) time, τeq, of the heavy
particle via

τQ =

mQ
T

Ds .

(2)

This relation makes explicit the “time delay” in the HF thermalization process by the
HQ mass to temperature ratio, mQ/T , and further suggests that Ds is a generic medium
property. When scaling Ds by the thermal wavelength of the medium, λth = 1/2πT ,
one obtains a dimensionless quantity which has been suggested to be proportional to
the widely discussed ratio of viscosity to entropy density of the medium [9, 22],

Ds(2πT ) ∝ η
s

(4π) .

(3)
The numerical coeﬃcient in this relation is, however, not unique, varying, e.g., from ∼1
in strongly-coupled conformal ﬁeld theory (CFT) [23–25] to 2/5 in kinetic theory for a
weakly coupled ultrarelativistic gas [26].

In the remainder of this section we ﬁrst discuss two of the most commonly employed
transport approaches to HF propagation in QCD matter, namely relativistic Langevin
processes and Boltzmann simulations (Sec. 2.1). In particular, we revisit their regimes
of applicability in relation to both the large mass limit of the HF particle and the nature
of the background medium. We then turn to microscopic calculations of HF transport
coeﬃcients in QCD matter (Sec. 2.2), encompassing elastic and inelastic interactions
in both perturbative and nonperturbative approaches,
for both QGP (Secs. 2.2.1
and 2.2.2) and hadronic matter (Sec. 2.2.3). This will be followed by a discussion
of lQCD computations (Sec. 2.2.4), the spatial HF diﬀusion coeﬃcient (Sec. 2.2.5),
hadronization mechanisms and their relation to diﬀusion processes (Sec. 2.2.6), and
pre-equilibrium as well as mean-ﬁeld eﬀects on HQ propagation (Sec. 2.2.7). Finally, we
discuss further model components needed for quantitative phenomenology of HF data
in URHICs (Sec. 2.3), focusing on properties of the bulk medium evolution pertinent to
HF transport. Another component, namely initial conditions for the HQ spectra, will
be discussed in more detail in connection with pp and pA data in Sec. 3.2. Throughout
Sec. 2 we will adopt natural units with ¯h = c = 1.

CONTENTS

7

2.1. Frameworks for Heavy-Flavor Transport

In kinetic theory, the starting point for describing the motion of HF particles through
QCD matter is the Boltzmann equation. Since there is no principal diﬀerence between
HF hadrons in hadronic matter and heavy quarks in QGP, we focus our formal discussion
in this section on the latter. The space-time evolution of the HQ phase space distribution
function, fQ, is then governed by the integro-diﬀerential equation

fQ(t, (cid:126)x, (cid:126)p) = C[fQ] ,

(4)

(cid:35)

+

(cid:126)p
Ep

∂
∂(cid:126)x

+ (cid:126)F

∂
∂(cid:126)p

(cid:34) ∂

∂t

(cid:113)

m2

Q + (cid:126)p 2 denotes the HQ on-shell energy (reﬂecting the inherently classical
where Ep =
nature of the Boltzmann equation). In a static medium in equilibrium the distribution
function approaches the Boltzmann distribution, fQ = dQ exp(−Ep/T ), where T is the
temperature and dQ=6 the HQ degeneracy.

The space-time evolution of fQ is generated by the ﬁrst two terms on the left-hand
side (lhs) of Eq. (4). The third term represents the eﬀects due to a force (cid:126)F induced by
an external (or mean) ﬁeld, e.g., (chromo-) electric and/or magnetic ﬁelds as could be
relevant in the early phases of a heavy-ion collision. Examples of those will be discussed
in Sec. 2.2.7.

The right-hand side (rhs) of the Boltzmann equation is the collision integral. For

2 → 2 scattering of a heavy quark oﬀ thermal partons it takes the form

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

˜dp(cid:48)(cid:90)

C[fQ] =

1
2Ep

˜dk

(cid:88)

|MQm|2(2π)4δ(4)(p + k − p(cid:48) − k(cid:48))

˜dk(cid:48) 1
dQ
× [fQ(Ep(cid:48))fm(ωk(cid:48)) − fQ(Ep)fm(ωk)] .

m=q,¯q,g

(5)
where ˜dk ≡ d3k/(2ωk(2π)3) are the standard Lorentz-invariant phase space diﬀerentials
and MQm is the HQ-parton scattering amplitude with (cid:126)p ((cid:126)p(cid:48)) and (cid:126)k ((cid:126)k(cid:48)) the 3-momenta
of the incoming (outgoing) heavy quark Q and medium parton m (quark, antiquark
or gluon), respectively; the fm are the latter’s thermal distribution functions and
ωk,k(cid:48) their on-shell energies (quantum eﬀects can be included through the use of
Fermi/Bose distribution functions and ﬁnal-state blocking/enhancement factors, and
are implicit in ﬁeld-theoretical evaluations of the scattering amplitude).
In a dilute
medium, the collision integral can be approximated by using particle cross sections. For
large scattering rates the deﬁnition of asymptotic states becomes problematic and a
formulation in terms of scattering probabilities is preferable. The inclusion of radiative
processes is more challenging, especially if interference eﬀects for subsequent scatterings
become signiﬁcant, due to the inherent oﬀ-shell nature of these processes, see, e.g.,
Refs. [27, 28] for recent work in the HQ context. As is well known, electromagnetic
Bremsstrahlung oﬀ heavy fermions is suppressed by the fourth power of their mass. It
is currently an open question at which HQ momenta and QGP temperatures radiative
processes take over from elastic ones. We will return to this question below.

As discussed in the introduction,

large quark masses and moderate
temperatures, the typical momentum transfer from the heat bath to the heavy quark

for

(cid:40)

8
CONTENTS
= (cid:126)k(cid:48) − (cid:126)k. In addition, the energy
is parametrically small, (cid:126)q 2 (cid:28) (cid:126)p 2 where (cid:126)q = (cid:126)p − (cid:126)p
0 (cid:28) (cid:126)q 2. These conditions imply that the heavy quark
transfer is further suppressed, q2
is undergoing soft but incoherent collisions characteristic for Brownian motion. The
scattering rate in the collision integral can then be expanded in powers of the momentum
transfer. Carrying this out to second order, the Boltzmann equation can be transformed
into the Fokker-Planck equation,

(cid:48)

∂
∂t

fQ(t, (cid:126)p) =

∂
∂pi

Ai((cid:126)p )fQ(t, (cid:126)p ) +

∂
∂pj

[Bij((cid:126)p )fQ(t, (cid:126)p )]

,

(6)

which now is only a diﬀerential equation for the HQ phase space distribution function.
Its key ingredients are the transport parameters A and B.
In a medium in (local)
thermal equilibrium they simplify to three a priori independent coeﬃcients,

Ai((cid:126)p ) = A(p)pi ,
Bij((cid:126)p ) = B0(p)P ⊥

ij ((cid:126)p ) + B1(p)P

(cid:107)
ij((cid:126)p ) ,

(7)

(8)

characterizing momentum friction and diﬀusion, respectively, of the propagating heavy
(cid:107)
quark (P ⊥
ij = pipj/(cid:126)p 2 are the standard 3D transverse and
longitudinal projectors, respectively). They correspond to the ﬁrst and second moments
of the thermally weighted scattering amplitude,

ij = δij − pipj/(cid:126)p 2 and P
(cid:43)

(cid:48)

(cid:41)

(cid:43)

,

(cid:48) · (cid:126)p + (cid:126)p 2

(cid:43)

,

(9)

(10)

(11)

A(p) =

B0(p) =

B1(p) =

,

(cid:126)p

(cid:48) · (cid:126)p )2
(cid:126)p 2

(cid:42)
1 − (cid:126)p · (cid:126)p
(cid:42)
(cid:126)p 2
(cid:48)2 − ((cid:126)p
(cid:42)((cid:126)p
(cid:48) · (cid:126)p )2
(cid:126)p 2 − 2(cid:126)p
(cid:90)

1
4
1
2

(cid:104)X((cid:126)p(cid:48))(cid:105) =

(2π)4
2EpdQ

˜dk ˜dk(cid:48) ˜dp(cid:48)

×(cid:88)

where the deﬁnition of the brackets follows from the collision term in the Boltzmann
equation,

|MQm|2δ(4)(p + k − p(cid:48) − k(cid:48))fm(ωk)X((cid:126)p(cid:48)) . (12)
In the non-relativistic limit of 3-momentum independent transport coeﬃcients, γ ≡
A(p) = const and Dp ≡ B0(p) = B1(p) = const, the Fokker-Planck equation takes the
simpler form

m

fQ(t, p) = γ

[pifQ(t, p)] + Dp∆(cid:126)p fQ(t, p)

(13)

(∆(cid:126)p : 3-momentum Laplace operator). For large times, this equation has the solution

∂
∂t

∂
∂pi

(cid:32)2πDp

(cid:33)3/2

γ

(cid:33)

(cid:32)
− γ(cid:126)p 2
2Dp

fQ(t, p) =

exp

.

(14)

Matching this to the non-relativistic equilibrium limit one obtains the Einstein relation
(or dissipation-ﬂuctuation theorem),

Dp = mQγT ,

(15)

dpj = − Γ(p, T )pjdt +
dxj =

dt .

dtCjkρk

pj
E

(cid:113)

√

(cid:113)

CONTENTS

9

highlighting the intimate relation between momentum friction and diﬀusion, and their
role in imprinting the temperature of the heat bath on the HQ distribution.

In URHICs, the Fokker-Planck equation can be implemented to simulate HF motion
through QCD matter via a Langevin process. The latter consists of a “deterministic”
drag and “stochastic” diﬀusion part, deﬁned via momentum and position updates as

(16)

(17)

The C’s are uniquely related to the diﬀusion coeﬃcients,

(cid:107)
jk((cid:126)p ) ,

Cjk =

jk((cid:126)p ) +

2B1(p)P

2B0(p)P ⊥
and are weighted with a
random Gaussian noise distribution, P ((cid:126)ρ ) =
exp(−(cid:126)ρ 2/2)/(2π)3/2. The precise relation of Γ to the friction coeﬃcient, Γ(p) =
A(p, T ) + O(T /mQ), depends on the numerical scheme to carry out the Langevin pro-
cess [29, 30]. In the so-called post-point scheme, the relativistic version of the Einstein
relation takes the form B0(p) = B1(p) = T EpΓ(p). The latter is not automatically
satisﬁed for microscopically calculated transport coeﬃcients, but rather becomes an im-
portant tool to ensure their consistency [22,31] and, consequently, the proper equilibrium
limit when implementing them into Langevin simulations. In both perturbative [22] and
non-perturbative approaches [31] for calculating the transport coeﬃcients from underly-
ing microscopic interactions, the Einstein relation was found to be rather well satisﬁed
for the friction and transverse diﬀusion coeﬃcient. Signiﬁcant deviations were found
to develop for the longitudinal coeﬃcient toward higher momenta, presumably due to
the speciﬁc kinematics of the scattering processes (e.g., pQCD scattering is typically
strongly peaked at forward angles). To ensure the correct equilibrium limit in Langevin
simulations of the Fokker-Planck equation, B1 is then corrected for by its value obtained
from the Einstein relation [32–34] in terms of the friction coeﬃcient; alternatively, the
latter is readjusted by the diﬀusion coeﬃcients B0,1 [22, 35, 36].

One may wonder how accurate the Fokker-Planck approximation due to the
expansion in the momentum transfer is, especially for charm quarks at high
temperatures. This question has recently been revisited by comparing the results of HQ
Boltzmann and Langevin simulations using leading-order pQCD cross section for heavy-
light parton scattering [37]. It was found that for charm quarks with mc = 1.3 GeV in
a heat bath of T = 0.4 GeV, appreciable deviations of several 10’s of percent develop
in the momentum spectra after an evolution time of ∆t = 2 fm. For bottom quarks
with mb = 4.2 GeV, the deviations are below ∼5% even after ∆t = 6 fm, and also for c
quarks at T = 0.2 GeV the agreement is much improved. This suggests that for ratios
MQ/T >∼ 6 the Langevin approximation is quite reliable.
In fact, if the dissipation-
ﬂuctuation theorem is enforced for the pQCD transport coeﬃcients in the Langevin
simulation, the discrepancies with the Boltzmann results are further reduced by up to
a factor of ∼2 [37].

Another feature of the Boltzmann equation that is not easily implemented in
Langevin simulations is that of oﬀ-equilibrium eﬀects in the surrounding medium. In the

CONTENTS

10

Boltzmann equation, such eﬀects on the medium parton distribution functions can be
treated on the same footing as for the HQ distribution, as done, e.g., in Refs. [38–40].
On the other hand, the simulations of the bulk medium in the Boltzmann approach
usually rely on quasi-particles with vanishing widths. In the Langevin approach, the
underlying transport coeﬃcients can be calculated with ﬁnite-temperature ﬁeld theory
techniques, where the inclusion of quantum eﬀects through the use of broad spectral
functions for the bulk medium constituents is in principal straightforward. The Langevin
approach is thus better suited for situations where the medium is strongly coupled (as
implicit in hydrodynamic medium evolutions), as long as the “Brownian” particle is still
a reasonably well-deﬁned quasi-particle, i.e., with an energy much larger than its width,
Ep (cid:29) ΓQ(p) (here, ΓQ denotes the scattering rate, not equilibration rate, characterizing
the width of the quasi-particle peak in the HQ spectral function).

2.2. Calculations of Heavy-Flavor Transport

2.2.1. Quark-Gluon Plasma I: Elastic Interactions

Early evaluations of HQ transport coeﬃcients in deconﬁned matter were carried
out using perturbative Born diagrams for cross sections oﬀ thermal partons, with a
Debye screening mass mD = gT introduced as an infrared regulator into the (dominant)
t-channel gluon exchange propagator [41],

Dg =

1

(t − m2
D)

,

(18)

where t is the 4-momentum transfer in the scattering. Subsequently, these calculations
have been routinely repeated to serve as a benchmark, and will be referred to as
“schematic LO pQCD” in the following. Even for a coupling constant as large as
αs = g2/4π = 0.4, which produces appreciable total cross sections of a few millibarns,
the predominantly forward scattering results in friction coeﬃcients for charm (bottom)
quarks reaching about A(p=0) (cid:39) 12(5) MeV, with a weak momentum dependence. The
corresponding thermal relaxation times, τQ (cid:39) 15-20(40) fm/c (translating into a spatial
diﬀusion coeﬃcient Ds(2πT ) (cid:39) 30), are quite a bit longer than the typical QGP lifetime
of about 5–10 fm/c in central heavy-ion collisions at RHIC and LHC energies [42]. When
ﬁrst RHIC data on HF spectra and elliptic ﬂow in Au-Au collisions at
sNN=200 GeV
were published [43, 44], it became clear that much shorter thermalization times are
required to account for the strong medium modiﬁcations implied by these data (and
subsequently by LHC data). A non-perturbative resonance model [31, 32], which gave a
fair description of these ﬁrst data, led to an initial estimate of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
of Ds(2πT ) (cid:39) 4-6.

√

Several developments in the perturbative framework have been carried out since
then. In Refs. [45, 46], the schematic screening in eq. (18) has been improved following
the methods of Ref. [47] by matching a hard-thermal loop calculation of the gluon self-
energy for small momentum transfers, t, to a perturbative (unscreened) calculation at
large t. This eﬀectively leads to a reduction in the screening of the gluon exchange

CONTENTS

11

propagator, which may be represented as

1

.

D

Dg =

t − rm2

(19)
Numerically, the eﬀective reduction parameter turns out to be quite small, r (cid:39) 0.2,
which produces a substantial increase (by about a factor of 2) of the energy loss of
a heavy quark for a typical strong coupling constant of αs(cid:39)0.2.
It has furthermore
been argued [45, 46] that the running of the QCD coupling constant ought to be
accounted for down to soft scales, rising up to values of αs(cid:39)1 for small |t|. When
combining the running coupling with the reduced Debye screening, the charm-quark
friction coeﬃcient (or thermalization rate) increases by a factor of 5-10 over the
schematic ﬁxed-coupling/-Debye mass scheme at small charm-quark momenta [46]. A
matching of the HTL calculations at low |t| to pQCD scattering at high |t| has also
been utilized in the calculations of the transport coeﬃcients by the Torino group (or
POWLANG approach) [36, 48], but with a ﬁxed Debye mass as obtained from weak-
coupling calculations and a coupling constant running with temperature (not with
momentum transfer) [49]; in particular, the calculated longitudinal diﬀusion coeﬃcient
has been used to ﬁx the friction coeﬃcient via the Einstein relation. This leads to a
signiﬁcantly smaller thermalization rate at zero charm-quark momentum, but also to a
diﬀerent momentum dependence which is initialy rising with p.

In a spirit similar to the implementation of Refs.

[45, 46], the HQ-medium
interactions have been calculated in the dynamical quasiparticle model using elastic
Born cross sections with infrared enhanced coupling constant [50]. In this calculation
the HQ transport is coupled to a bulk medium whose equation of state is consistent with
lQCD. The results for the charm-quark relaxation rate in this approach are smaller by
about a factor of ∼2-3 compared to the HTL-inspired scheme with running coupling and
reduced Debye mass. These transport coeﬃcients have been subsequently employed in
the PHSD tranport model [40, 51].

A large increase in the HQ thermalization rate raises the question of higher order
corrections.
In Ref. [52] the convergence of the perturbative expansion for the HQ
transport coeﬃcient has been scrutinized. It was found that even for a strong coupling
constant as small as αs=0.03 (corresponding to gs=0.6) the NLO correction is around
a factor of 2 (and further growing for larger values of αs). This gives little hope for a
rigorous perturbative evaluation of HQ transport, but rather calls for non-perturbative
methods. For example, it would be of interest to carry out a ladder resummation of
the infrared-augmented one-gluon exchange interaction and check for the appearance of
bound-state solutions.

A large running coupling toward small momentum transfers in the one-gluon
exchange interaction corresponds to a strong Coulomb force on the heavy quark at
large distances. However, in the QCD vacuum, the long-distance part of the potential
between a static color charge and its anti-charge is characterized by a linearly increasing
“string” interaction, presumably induced by gluonic condensates. The pertinent Cornell

CONTENTS

potential,

V (r) = −4
3

αs
r

+ σr ,

12

(20)

was originally inferred from a successful description of the vacuum charmonium and
bottomonium spectra [53] and is now well established from lQCD [16]. A key question
in QGP research is how this fundamental force changes in the medium. Lattice-QCD
computations of the free energy at ﬁnite temperature indicate that remnants of the
conﬁning force survive in the QGP, possibly up to 2 Tc [54]. Thus, string-like interactions
are likely to play an important role for HQ interactions when approaching Tc from above.
As elaborated in Sec. 1.2, an extension of the potential model to ﬁnite temperature may
provide an opportunity to include non-perturbative interactions in the description of
open and hidden HF particles in QCD matter at moderate temperatures. This can be
realized in the thermodynamic T -matrix formalism, which has been widely used in other
contexts, such as the nuclear many-body problem [55], electromagnetic plasmas [56],
or cold atomic gases [57]. In Ref. [58] the T -matrix formalism has been deployed to
selfconsistently evaluate HQ and quarkonium properties in the QGP. With additional
relativistic (magnetic) corrections to the static potential [59], and an approximate
description of vacuum spectroscopy, a comprehensive treatment of HF properties in the
QGP can be carried out. Euclidean correlators, susceptibilities and spectral functions
can be calculated and tested against lQCD results, as well as transport properties
which can be implemented into URHIC phenomenology. In particular, the in-medium
T -matrix for heavy-light parton scattering can be straightforwardly implemented to
calculate HQ transport coeﬃcients using eq. (12) [58, 60, 61]. A critical input to this
approach is the two-body interaction kernel, i.e., the HQ potential. Ideally, one could
take it directly from lQCD. However, lQCD computations rather provide the free (FQ ¯Q)
and internal (UQ ¯Q) energies, which strictly speaking are not potentials. However, they
have been used to bracket the uncertainty in the potential deﬁnition; the internal energy
leads to much stronger interactions and is clearly preferred over the free energy when
carrying out quarkonium [62–64] and open HF phenomenology [65] at RHIC and LHC
energies. Most notably, when using the free energy, the calculated suppression of the
Y (1S) state is larger than observed [66, 67], and, pertinent to the present topic, the
calculated elliptic ﬂow of open HF observables is much too small [68]. Recent progress
in determining the underlying HQ potential has been made by directly calculating
the static free and internal energies from the T -matrix [70].
It turns out that large
imaginary parts in the single HQ selfenergies as well as in the potential induce substantial
deviations from the free energy (the latter emerges as potential in the limit of small
imaginary parts, e.g., in the weak-coupling limit). Remarkably, the in-medium potential,
V , gives rise to a long-range (non-Coulombic) force which is neither present in F nor in
U , cf. Fig. 1. This has important consequences for the HQ transport coeﬃcient, which
for low momenta turns out to be larger than when U is assumed as potential. These
results are not unlike the ones found in Ref. [54] where a 2-parameter ansatz for the
spectral function with a functional form adopted from HTL perturbation theory was

CONTENTS

13

Figure 1. Fit of a T -matrix calculation of the free energy (blue line) to lQCD data [69]
(black points) at T =240 MeV, and the resulting internal energy (green line) and in-
medium input potential (red line). Figure taken from Ref. [70].

used for the extraction of the potential. On the other hand, in Ref. [71] the (real part
of the) potential turns out to be close to the free energy. More work is needed to clarify
the diﬀerences in these ﬁndings.

An in-medium Cornell potential

is also underlying the collisional dissociation
approach for HF propagation in the QGP adopted in the model by Vitev et al. [72]: the
propagating heavy quarks can form in-medium D- and B-meson bound states which
subsequently dissociate again, and so on. As in Refs. [31, 60], the presence of such
mesonic correlations in the QGP has been found to be instrumental in generating
suﬃcient suppression of the HF spectra at RHIC, and later LHC [72].

The momentum dependence of the charm-quark friction coeﬃcient (or thermaliza-
tion rate) is summarized in Fig. 2 for several of the above discussed approaches, as
a function of 3-momentum and for several temperatures. The schematic LO pQCD
approach [41] with ﬁxed coupling (αs=0.4) and Debye mass gives relatively small val-
ues of around 0.05/fm, with a weak momentum dependence.
In the HTL approach
of the Torino group (as implemented in the POWLANG HF transport approach for
URHICs) [36, 48], much larger values are found (by factor of ∼3-4 at low p), which is
in part due the improved treatment of the screening and in part due to the procedure
of inferring A(p) from the longitudinal momentum diﬀusion coeﬃcient, B1(p) (also, the
charm-quark mass is mc=1.3 GeV). In particular, the latter produces a momentum de-
pendence of the friction coeﬃcient which increases with p before approximately leveling
oﬀ. On the contrary, the increase in soft HQ interactions due to a reduced screening
mass and running coupling constant at low momentum transfers [45,46] (as implemented
in the MC@sHQ+EPOS [73, 74] and BAMPS [38, 75] HF transport approach) leads to
a marked enhancement of the friction coeﬃcient at low charm-quark momenta, by up
to an order of magnitude over the schematic LO pQCD benchmark, while at high mo-

CONTENTS

14

Figure 2. Charm-quark friction coeﬃcient calculated from diﬀerent underlying elastic
interactions in the QGP. Left panel: schematic LO pQCD calculations with ﬁxed Debye
mass and coupling constant (thin lines), pQCD Born calculations with reduced Debye
mass (from HTL/pQCD matching) and running coupling constant [46] (thick lines),
and in-medium T -matrix calculations for HQ-parton scattering using internal energies
from thermal lQCD as potential [58, 61] (bands with a 20% uncertainty range due to
diﬀerent lQCD inputs). Right panel: pQCD calculations in the HTL-pQCD matched
approach (Torino) used in POWLANG where the friction coeﬃcient has been inferred
from the longitudinal diﬀusion coeﬃcient [36, 48] (shaded bands with uncertainty due
to diﬀerent matching scales), compared to the same T -matrix results as in the left
panel.

menta it falls below the HTL approach of Refs. [36,48]. The T -matrix approach (as used
in the TAMU HF transport approach [65, 76]) also predicts a marked low-momentum
enhancement of the thermalization rate, but generated by near-threshold resonances
as a consequence of the ladder resummation. At high momenta it tends toward the
schematic pQCD results. The T -matrix results have a slightly diﬀerent temperature
dependence [58, 60] than the pQCD-like approaches, with a relatively larger interaction
strength near Tc, falling oﬀ at higher T as the resonances dissolve. This is even more
pronounced with the newly derived potential [70] where the low-momentum friction
coeﬃcient decreases with temperature.

2.2.2. Quark-Gluon Plasma II: Radiative Interactions

Radiative (2 → 3) scattering processes are suppressed compared to elastic scattering
with increasing mass of the incoming particle(s). For example, in electrodynamics, the
radiative energy loss of a muon is parametrically suppressed relative to an electron
by the fourth power of the mass ratio, (me/mµ)4. The reason is the suppression of
Q (cid:28) (cid:126)q 2 (as discussed in
the energy relative to the momentum transfer, q2
the introduction), which renders the emission of an on-shell gluon (or photon) with
q2 = 0 unfavorable, at least as long as the 3-momentum transfer is small. Within QCD,
the pertinent suppression of forward-angle gluon emission was termed the “dead cone”

0 ∼ (cid:126)q 4/m2

0123456789100.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8charm quark relaxation rateTAMU vs Nantes vs LO pQCD (s=0.4)   T=200 MeV T=300 MeV T=400 MeVA(1/fm)p (GeV)0123456789100.00.10.20.30.40.5TAMU vs Torino charm quark relaxation rate   T=200 MeV T=300 MeV T=400 MeVA(1/fm)p (GeV)CONTENTS

15

eﬀect [77]; subsequently, it was aruged that medium-induced gluon radiation can ﬁll
this dead cone, while a depletion persists for large energies of the emitted gluon [78,79].
For suﬃciently energetic heavy quarks, the mass eﬀect is expected ‘ to cease and the
radiative energy loss to take over from the elastic one, since the energy tends to be
radiated in large quantities per scattering event. On the other hand, at the level of the
nuclear modiﬁcation factor in URHICs, also elastic scatterings with typically smaller
energy loss can lead to a signiﬁcant suppression eﬀect due to the rather steeply falling
initial spectra. Even for light-parton jet quenching, the quantitative role of elastic
scattering has not been settled yet; e.g., in a pQCD thermal-ﬁeld theory framework,
the elastic contribution to the nuclear modiﬁcation factor, RAA (see Sec. 3.1.3 for its
deﬁnition), of pions remains signiﬁcant at high pT , despite the much smaller energy
loss [80].

Heavy-ﬂavor observables at intermediate and high pT thus provide an excellent tool
to map out the transition from a predominantly elastic- to radiative-scattering regime
(and, in principle, as a function of temperature). The availability of two diﬀerent HQ
masses (charm and bottom) adds a further handle to determine this transition and test
underlying mechanisms. Toward this end, several strategies have been pursued thus far.
In Refs. [32, 36, 40, 48, 60, 76, 81] (UrQMD, POWLANG, PHSD and TAMU models),
an absolute determination of the elastic contribution is attempted to infer the onset of
radiative contributions by deviations from the experimental data beyond a certain pT .
Alternatively, in the MC@sHQ+EPOS [46, 73], Vitev et al. [72], BAMPS [28, 38], and
Cao et al./Duke [82,83] models, both elastic and radiative contributions are included in
a simultaneous best ﬁt to data. Early on it was already realized that radiative energy
loss alone, which was able to describe light-hadron suppression at RHIC, is insuﬃcient
to account for the suppression of HF decay electrons at RHIC [84].

The evaluation of HQ radiative energy loss has thus far been mostly based on pQCD.
One starts from the elastic heavy-light parton scattering diagrams, augmented with the
radiation of a gluon, albeit in diﬀerent approximation schemes. In Ref. [85], within the
HTL framework, the radiative energy loss rate for a heavy quark has been expanded
in the number of HQ scattering events, i.e., in its inverse mean-free path. This is also
known as an opacity expansion which, in particular, accounts for a ﬁnite size of the QCD
medium, as originally developed for light-parton jet quenching [86]. The extension to
heavy quarks [85] includes recoil eﬀects of the plasma partons and the possibility that
the initial heavy quark is produced oﬀ its mass shell and goes on-shell by radiating a
gluon. The approach used in MC@sHQ+EPOS [73, 87] and BAMPS [28] utilizes the
Born diagrams for elastic parton scattering with a radiated gluon [88] extended to a
heavy quark in a regime of “intermediate” energies where the mass eﬀect can be argued
to largely suppress coherence eﬀects known to be important for light partons. In this
framework the radiative 2 → 3 cross section can be approximately cast into a factorized
form of an elastic cross section times a probability of radiating an extra gluon (Pg ∝ αs),
schematically given as

dσ(Qp → Qpg) (cid:39) dσ(Qp → Qp) Pg

(p = q, ¯q, g) .

(21)

CONTENTS

16

To account for interference eﬀects, in particular for a suppression of gluon emission if the
latter is characterized by a formation time longer than the time between subsequent HQ
scatterings, a practical prescription has been implemented in the BAMPS model [28].
It amounts to vetoing the gluon emission process if the HQ mean-free path, λ, is shorter
than a fraction xLPM of the gluon formation time, τform, i.e., λ < xLPMτform, with
0 < xLPM < 1 a free parameter. A diﬀerent implementation of coherence eﬀects is
used in the MC@sHQ+EPOS model [89], where a suppression factor has been deduced
assuming that multiple scatterings during the formation time can be represented by a
single “eﬀective” scattering center with modiﬁed formation length. Further quantitative
diﬀerences in these two implementations include the choice of charm-quark mass,
mc=1.5 GeV [89] vs. 1.3 GeV [28], and the use of ﬁnite vs. zero mass for the radiated
gluons, respectively.

2.2.3. Hadronic Matter

Investigations of D-meson properties in hadronic matter have been carried out in
several approaches to date, e.g., QCD sum rules [90, 91] and many-body theory [92–94].
Until rather recently, their focus was mostly on D-meson spectral properties, including
mass shifts and in-medium broadening, while transport properties did not receive much
attention. In the year 2011 a series of works were conducted to investigate the latter.

In Ref. [95] heavy-meson chiral perturbation theory was used to calculate the
D-meson diﬀusion constant in a low-temperature pion gas using the π-D scattering
amplitude to lowest order in the couplings (Born amplitudes). When extrapolated
up to a temperature of T =100 MeV (which might be beyond the applicability of the
approximations), a relaxation rate of γD(cid:39)0.05/fm for zero-momentum D mesons was
found. In Ref. [96] scattering amplitudes of D mesons oﬀ pseudoscalar (π, K, η) and
vector mesons (ρ, ω, K∗) as well as baryons and anti-baryons (N , ¯N , ∆, ¯∆) were
adopted from existing calculations based on eﬀective lagrangians. The resummation
(unitarization) underlying these amplitudes led to signiﬁcantly smaller values for the
p=0 relaxation rate, by about a factor of 10 at T =100 MeV (where essentially only
pions contribute). However, when extrapolated to temperatures around Tc, the D-
meson relaxation rate increases to ∼0.08/fm, or a relaxation time of ∼12 fm/c, which is
comparable to the ﬁreball lifetime in URHICs. The pertinent spatial diﬀusion coeﬃcient
amounts to Ds(2πT ) (cid:39) 6, not far from estimates on the QGP side within the T -
In Ref. [97] a similar set of hadronic scattering partners was
matrix formalism [58].
employed with the amplitudes treated in Born approximation. At T =100 MeV the
relaxation rate was calculated to be rather large, γD(cid:39)0.08/fm, although the temperature
dependence is more mild than in Ref. [95], cf. Fig. 3. Furthermore, using unitarized
amplitudes with interaction vertices from HQ chiral perturbation theory, a pion gas
result of γD(cid:39)0.005/fm was found in Ref. [98], consistent with Ref. [96]. A more complete
calculation [99] including scattering oﬀ the light pseudoscalar octet as well as nucleons
and ∆’s led to good agreement with the full results of Ref. [96], cf. Fig. 3. This suggests
that the use of resummed amplitudes, as well as excited states in hadronic matter, is

CONTENTS

17

Figure 3. Thermal relaxation rate of low-momentum D-mesons in hadronic matter
in chemical equilibrium, computed in the approaches of Refs. [96] (dashed line), [97]
(dash-double-dotted line), [99] (dash-dotted line) and [100] (solid line). Figure taken
from Ref. [100].

critical to arrive at reliable results.

The eﬀects of higher excited hadronic states were estimated in Ref. [100] using the
idea [96] that D-meson cross sections for scattering oﬀ light mesons (m) and baryons (b)
can be approximated by σDm=7-10 mb and σDb=10-15 mb, respectively. These values,
motivated by constituent light-quark counting arguments, were found to reproduce
the results of the microscopic calculations for γD in Ref. [96] reasonably well. Up to
T =130 MeV the contribution of excited states is found to be negligible, but it increases
the D-meson relaxation rate by up to ∼60% at T =170 MeV, cf. Fig. 3.

The transport of B mesons in hadronic matter was also studied in due course.
In Ref.
[101] Born amplitudes oﬀ pseudoscalar mesons from heavy-meson chiral
perturbation theory where employed, leading to a small relaxation rate of γB(cid:39)0.001/fm
at T =100 MeV (the D-meson rate was found to be only slightly larger in this framework).
In the unitarized calculation of Ref. [102], a signiﬁcantly larger value was obtained,
close to γB=0.003/fm, almost a factor of 2 smaller than for D-mesons in the same
including B∗ resonances and
framework [98]. A more complete calculation [103]
scattering oﬀ N and ∆’s gave similar results at T =100 MeV, but a signiﬁcant increase

of >∼ 50% for T≥140 MeV.

2.2.4. Lattice QCD

The extraction of transport coeﬃcients in lQCD is rather challenging, but progress
is being made. For the HF case one usually computes the euclidean Q ¯Q correlation
function in the vector channel, transforms it to the spectral function in Minkowski
space (requiring an inverse integral transform), and then takes the zero-energy limit
to extract the friction coeﬃcient and from it the spatial diﬀusion coeﬃcient, Ds. This

0.100.120.140.160.180.000.050.100.150.200.25 p = 0.1 GeV   This work  He et al.  Ghosh et al.  Tolos et al. without effective chemical potentials    [fm-1]T [GeV]CONTENTS
18
has been carried out in quenched QCD [104], yielding a result of Ds(2πT ) (cid:39) 2 ± 1
without a signiﬁcant temperature dependence over the range T =1.4-3 Tc. Alternatively,
in the static limit the diﬀusion coeﬃcient can be extracted from the color-electric ﬁeld
correlator which has been simulated in quenched QCD in Ref. [17]. Here the computed
diﬀusion coeﬃcient turned out to be Ds(2πT ) (cid:39) 6 ± 2 for T =1.1-1.5 Tc and possibly
increasing at higher T . A more recent quenched lQCD extraction based on the electric-
ﬁeld correlator method gives Ds(2πT ) (cid:39) 3.7-7 for T =1.5 Tc [105], consistent with the
previous analysis [17].

Important questions remain about the microscopic mechanisms underlying the
rather small values of the spatial HF diﬀusion coeﬃcient, Ds. Detailed comparisons
to model calculations are one way to gain insights, which will be done in Sec. 2.2.5
in connection with Fig. 4. Alternatively, within lQCD, information about the eﬀective
degrees of freedom of the QGP at given temperature can be obtained from generalized
susceptibilities. These can be used to correlate the (conserved) charm quantum number
with other conserved quantum numbers (e.g., baryon charge or strangeness), to test
whether the prevalent degrees of freedom carrying charm are mesonic/diquark-like, or
if they are quark-like. This has been scrutinized in a recent work [107], and it was
found that hadronic degrees of freedom play a signiﬁcant role in contributing to the
partial charm-generated pressure above Tc, up to at least T (cid:39) 1.2Tc (cid:39) 200 MeV. This
ﬁnding is quite consistent with the picture that broad D-meson resonances gradually
dissolve with increasing temperature of the QGP, as predicted within the T -matrix
approach [58, 60, 108].
It is furthermore quite intriguing that the corresponding T -
matrix calculations of the HQ diﬀusion coeﬃcient [58, 60] are comparable to the lQCD
results discussed above.

2.2.5. Comparison of Spatial Diﬀusion Coeﬃcients

In Fig. 4 we present a summary of results for the spatial diﬀusion coeﬃcient,
Ds, scaled by the thermal wavelength. We compare the quenched lQCD results from
Sec. 2.2.4 to various model calulations of elastic charm-quark scattering in the QGP
as discussed in Sec. 2.2.1, corresponding to the p → 0 limit of the friction coeﬃcients
displayed in Fig. 2. The schematic LO pQCD calculations with ﬁxed coupling constant
(αs=0.4) and Debye mass (mD=gT ), as well as the T -matrix calculations with the
free energy as potential, are signiﬁcantly above the lQCD values. On the other hand,
the T -matrix results with the internal energy as potential, the Torino and Nantes
HTL/pQCD calculations, as well as the infrared-enhanced pQCD implementation into
the dynamical quasiparticle model [50] (not shown), are largely within the range of the
quenched lQCD data. The T -matrix and Torino results show a signiﬁcant temperature
dependence, while the lQCD results are currently inconclusive on this aspect. Also
shown is the calculation of the D-meson diﬀusion coeﬃcient in hadronic matter based on
eﬀective interactions [96]. As mentioned earlier, its temperature dependence and values
extrapolated to the pseudo-critical region are suggestive for a continuous transition
into the quark-based calculations, together with a shallow minimun structure around

CONTENTS

19

Figure 4. Charm-quark diﬀusion coeﬃcients from quenched lQCD (circles [17],
squares [104], and triangle [105]) compared to model calculations based on diﬀerent
elastic interactions in the QGP (corresponding to the A(p=0) limit in Fig. 2): T -
matrix calculations with either free (green band) or internal energy (red band) as
potential [58,61], pQCD Born calculations from HTL/pQCD matching using a reduced
Debye mass and running coupling (Nantes [45, 46], pink dash-dotted line) or with
perturbative Debye mass and ﬁxed coupling (Torino [36, 48], cyan band), as well as
schematic LO pQCD with ﬁxed coupling and Debye mass mD=gT (purple dash-dotted
line). The blue-dashed line below Tc is a calculation of D-meson diﬀusion in hadronic
matter from elastic scattering oﬀ various mesons and anti-/baryons [96].

Tpc [96, 106]. We also note that calculations of Ds based on the bottom-quark friction
coeﬃcients [31, 36, 46, 58, 61] give similar results to the charm-quark ones, within 20%
for most of the approaches;
in other words, the charm- and bottom-quark friction
coeﬃcients, A(p=0), diﬀer by approximately the mass ratio mb/mc. Since the masses
are divided out in converting A(p=0) to Ds, the latter can indeed serve as a reasonably
universal measure of the (HQ) interaction strength in the QGP.

The diﬀusion coeﬃcient has also been computed in the strong-coupling limit of
conformal ﬁeld theories (CFTs) by using the AdS/CFT correspondence principle. The
result for the HQ drag (or friction) coeﬃcient in a Super-Yang Mills (SYM) plasma with
Nc fundamental charges has been worked out as [23–25]

√

π

γSYM
Q =

SYM

λT 2
2mQ

,

(22)

SYMNc, highlighting its nonperturbative nature.

which turns out to be proportional to the square root of the ’t Hooft coupling,
λ = g2
Interestingly, the AdS/CFT
friction coeﬃcient (thermalization rate) exhibits the factor T /mQ characteristic for
the time delay in the thermalization of a Brownian particle. Several caveats arise in
converting this result into an estimate for the QCD plasma [109]. When rescaling the

0.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.00510152025303540455055 D-meson, HRG c-quark, T-matrix, U-pot. c-quark, T-matrix, F-pot.   c-quark, LO pQCD, s=0.4  c-quark, Torino c-quark, Nantes   c-quark, quenched lattice QCD  Ds (2T)T/TcCONTENTS

20

temperature of the SYM plasma to match the degrees of freedom (energy density) of
the QCD plasma, and matching the coupling constant to an αs estimated from the
lQCD HQ free energies, one obtains γQ = CT 2/mQ with C (cid:39) 1.5-2.5, yielding γQ (cid:39) 0.3-
0.5 /fm at T =250 MeV. The pertinent diﬀusion coeﬃcient (not shown in Fig. 4) turns
out to be rather similar to the pQCD results with running coupling and reduced Debye
mass [45, 46] (Nantes, pink dash-dotted line in Fig. 4).

2.2.6. Hadronization

The diﬀusion of heavy ﬂavor in the QGP and hadronic phase of URHICs needs
to be interfaced by a transition of the degrees of freedom, from charm and bottom
quarks to HF hadrons. Unlike in a macroscopic modeling of the bulk evolution, e.g.,
with hydrodynamics, where this transition is encoded in the equation of state, the
hadronization mechanism for HF transport requires a microscopic treatment. This is
both a challenge and an opportunity to learn about this fundamental process in QCD.
In the vacuum, the common procedure to hadronize quarks at high momentum is
the use of an empirical fragmentation function, Dh
q (z), which describes the probability
distribution of producing a hadron of momentum ph from a parent quark of momentum
pq, with the momentum fraction z = ph/pq. Diﬀerent quark species (as well as gluons)
are modeled with diﬀerent distributions which, once ﬁxed (say, in e+e− annihilation),
are assumed to be universal for other collision systems. For HQ fragmentation a widely
adopted form is the Peterson fragmentation function [110],

DH

Q (z; Q) =

N

z[1 − (1/z) − Q/(1 − z)]2 ,

where N is a normalization factor to ensure (cid:82) D(z)dz = 1. The parameter Q controls
the hardness of the distribution, with a maximum at z (cid:39) 1 − 2Q and a width of ∼Q.
A standard choice is c=0.04 and b = 0.005, in line with the expected behavior of
Q ∝ 1/m2
Q [110]. An alternative, more involved modeling of the HQ fragmentation
function has been developed in connection with ﬁxed-order-next-to-leading-logarithm
(FONLL) calculations of HQ production [111, 112], where the Peterson framework does
not straightforwardly apply.

(23)

At low momentum, the fragmentation picture breaks down, and other mechanisms
must set in. In particular, a recombination of heavy quarks with surrounding light anti-
/quarks has been suggested [113, 114] and found to account for ﬂavor asymmetries in
D-meson production in elementary hadronic reactions, especially at forward rapidities
through recombination with valence anti-/quarks of the projectile [115, 116]. The
recombination picture is even more compelling within a QGP cooling through the
transition temperature, where an ample abundance of thermal light quarks and anti-
quarks provides a natural source to color-neutralize heavy quarks. Initial works have
implemented this idea using an instantaneous approximation using 3D space-momentum
Wigner functions to convert charm quarks into D-mesons (or charmonia) with comoving
light quarks [117, 118]. Despite the fact that the major momentum fraction is carried
by the heavy quark, a large eﬀect on the D-meson elliptic ﬂow in URHICs at low

CONTENTS

21

and intermediate momenta was found, as being imprinted by recombination with light
quarks. One expects this mechanism to reach out to higher transverse momenta
than for light hadrons since, at comparable momenta, the velocity of heavy quarks
is smaller than for light quarks thus facilitating recombination with comoving thermal
partons. A more rigorous implementation of the recombination mechanism at low and
intermediate pT should account for energy conservation (i.e., be formulated as a rate)
and satisfy thermal equilibrium as the correct long-time limit. This is particularly
important in situations with signiﬁcant space-momentum correlations as is the case
in non-central heavy-ion collisions with a collectively expanding partonic source with
elliptic ﬂow [119]. Such correlations are not accounted for in coalescence formalisms
with global (momentum-space only) or factorized momentum- and coordinate-space
distribution functions (such as usually done with 3D Wigner distributions).
In the
“resonance recombination model” (RRM) the hadronization of heavy quarks is described
by scattering oﬀ thermal light quarks into broad D-meson like resonances [120, 121],
which by construction conserves 4-momentum and recovers the thermal-equilibrium
limit. In the HF context the RRM was implemented on a hydrodynamic hypersurface
with elliptic ﬂow [76]; it was shown that a HQ distribution in local equilibrium, with
an elliptic ﬂow as dictated by the hydrodynamic velocity ﬁelds, indeed maps into a D-
meson distribution in local equilibrium with the correct mesonic elliptic ﬂow‡. Utilizing
the heavy-light quark T -matrix interactions, which generate resonances close to Tc,
to compute the HQ recombination rates within RRM [76, 106] puts the hadronization
process on the same footing as the non-perturbative HQ diﬀusion processes (we recall
in passing that the conﬁning force plays an essential role in these interactions).
In
this picture, hadronization is simply a manifestation of the increasing strength of HQ
interactions with the partonic medium as Tc is approached from above.

A quantitative treatment of HQ recombination processes needs to allow for the
possibility of forming higher excited hadrons, in particular D∗ mesons, Λc baryons and
Ds mesons in the charm sector (and likewise for bottom). Even if these particles
are not measured, they can have a signiﬁcant impact on the D-meson abundance
through depleting the charm quarks available for D-meson recombination, the so-called
“chemistry eﬀect” (hadrons containing more than one anti-/charm quark, including
double-charm baryons and charmonia, give small corrections in this context as their
abundance only constitutes up to a few percent of the total charm yield). For example,
the fraction of Ds and Λc could be signiﬁcantly enhanced in URHICs relative to pp
collisions in the presence of coalescence processes.

A “hybrid” in-medium hadronization scheme, which embeds fragmentation into an
environment of thermal partons, has recently been implemented into the POWLANG
transport approach [122]. Here, the hadronization of a heavy quark propagating in a
hydrodynamic background is carried out once it enters a ﬂuid cell which has cooled down
‡ For example, for suﬃciently large radial ﬂow, a single charm-quark distribution with strictly positive
2(pt) implemented into RRM gives rise to a charmonium distribution with vψ
vc
2 (pT ) dipping into negative
values at small pT , reﬂecting the well-known mass eﬀect in the v2 behavior of heavy particles.

CONTENTS

22

to a pseudo-critical temperature of Tpc=155 MeV. The thermal light- and strange-quark
distributions in the rest frame of the ﬂuid cell are sampled and boosted into the lab
frame where a string is constructed by joining the endpoints of the heavy- and light-
quark positions. These conﬁgurations are then passed to PYTHIA 6.4 [123] to simulate
the fragmentation of the string into hadrons. In this way the HF fragmentation process
inherits collective ﬂow of the expanding medium. By the nature of the fragmentation
process, where the strings, once formed, are hadronized as in vacuum, the HF hadro-
chemistry remains rather similar to that in the vacuum; in particular, it does not induce
a sizeable enhancement of the D+

c /D ratios relative to pp collisions.

s /D or Λ+

In practice, the question arises how to disentangle the eﬀects of the QGP phase,
hadronization (via coalescence) and hadronic phase from HF observables in URHICs. In
Ref. [106] it has been suggested that heavy-strange mesons (Ds and Bs) can help in this
respect, based on two main ideas. First, the suppression of strangeness in elementary
(pp) collisions is lifted in heavy-ion collisions reﬂected in the near-equilibrium level of
strange-particle production (quantiﬁed by a strangeness fugacity γs(cid:39) 1). Consequently,
if HF recombination is eﬀective, it would manifest itself as an increase in the Ds/D
(or Bs/B) ratio in AA relative to pp collisions. Moreover, the pT dependence of this
ratio could reveal how far out coalescence mechanisms are operative, especially since
the small mass diﬀerence between strange and non-strange mesons renders a splitting
in their RAA due to collective ﬂow a small eﬀect. Second, it is expected that hadronic
rescattering is much weaker for Ds than for D mesons, based on the picture that the
coupling to the heat bath is mostly driven by the light-quark content of the hadron
(the approximate constituent light-quark scaling of the D-meson interactions with light
hadrons referred to in Sec. 2.2.3 is one indication thereof; another one is the apparent
earlier kinetic decoupling of multi-strange hadrons in the hadronic phase of URHICs,
see, e.g., Refs. [124, 125] for recent works on this issue). This implies that the diﬀerence
between the v2 of D and Ds mesons can serve as a measure of the elliptic ﬂow imprinted
on the D during the hadronic phase, and thus serve as a measure of its hadronic transport
coeﬃcient. It furthermore turns out that the hadronic interactions do not have a large
eﬀect on the RAA of the D-mesons, presumably due to a compensation between the
dropping temperature and increasing ﬂow of the medium. This would be fortunate as
to conserve the comparison of the D- and Ds-meson RAA’s as a measure of coalescence
processes.

We ﬁnish this section by illustrating the results for the coalescence probabilities of
charm quarks as a function of their (transverse) momentum in URHICs for some of the
implementations employed in the literature, cf. Fig. 5. The three examples are based on
rather diﬀerent ingredients. The TAMU model [65, 76] (left panel) utilizes RRM [120]
with mesonic resonance rates for charm quarks of mass mc=1.7-1.8 GeV interacting with
constituent thermal light quarks on a hydro hypersurface at T =170 MeV, assuming
a thermal hadro-chemistry. The Duke model [82] employs an instantaneous Wigner
function approach [126] for charm quarks of mass mc=1.27 GeV with constituent thermal
light quarks at T =165 MeV where transverse-ﬂow eﬀects are simulated through an

CONTENTS

23

Figure 5. Coalescence probabilities of charm quarks in heavy-ion collisions as a
function of their (transverse) momentum in the lab frame using (a) the resonance
recombination model [120] within the TAMU transport approach [76] at RHIC (left
panel, for c and b quarks), (b) an instantaneous coalescence model with Wigner
functions [126] within the Duke transport approach [82] (middle panel), and (c) a
stochastic sampling of Wigner functions within the PHSD transport approach [40, 51]
(right panel).

eﬀective medium temperature; a hadro-chemistry is accounted for by coalescence into
the ground and ﬁrst excited states of D mesons and charmed baryons. In the PHSD
transport model [40, 51], a Wigner function coalescence is implemented by a stochastic
sampling of the local environment with charm quarks of mass mc=1.5 GeV, as given by
the light-parton phase space distributions; the sampling is carried out when the PHSD
bulk medium evolves through energy densities around pc(cid:39)0.5 GeV/fm3, representing
the pseudo-transition region; also here the hadro-chemistry is accounted for through the
inclusion of higher charm resonance states. The calculated coalescence probabilites in
all three approaches share basic features, such as a maximum at low momentum and
decreasing over a momentum range of a few times the HQ mass. The normalization of
Pcoal(pt → 0) has been put to one in the TAMU and Duke models, while in the PHSD
model it is below one and signiﬁcantly depends on the assumed hadron radius in the
Wigner function. A more rigorous way to determine the absolute normalization remains
to be developed. The drop of Pcoal(pt) with increasing momentum is strongest in the
Duke model, while it is weaker for PHSD and TAMU, possibly caused (at least in part)
by the larger charm-quark masses used in the latter two models. We also note that other
features of the coalescence process have signiﬁcant impact on experimental observables,
e.g., how the HQ momentum translates into a hadron momentum. In the Duke model,
the net eﬀect of heavy-light coalescence on D-meson observables turns out to be quite
small, while is noticeable in PHSD, and still larger in the TAMU model. More detailed
studies are needed to unravel the origin of these diﬀerences.

2.2.7. Pre-Equilibrium and Mean-Field Transport

In this section we return to the role that a “mean-ﬁeld” induced force could
play in the propagation of heavy quarks in URHICs. The canonical environment
for such a formulation are the earliest, oﬀ-equilibrium phases in the collision, where
a high occupancy of gluonic modes is suggestive for a ﬁeld description, or, from a

024680.00.20.40.60.81.0Au+Au, sqrt(sNN)=200 GeV, b=7 fm   Pcoalpt (GeV) charm quark  bottom quark02468pHQ (GeV)0.00.20.40.60.81.0Pcoal.165 MeV ~ 0 c185 MeV ~ 0.79 c205 MeV ~ 0.91 cc -> any hadronc -> D0 D+024680.00.20.40.60.81.0coalescence probabilitypT (GeV/c)|y|<0.5 0-10 % central  30-50 % centralCONTENTS

24

slightly diﬀerent viewpoint, a description in terms of a strongly coupled ﬂuid without
quasipaticle structure.

The latter approach has been adopted in Ref. [127], by employing the AdS/CFT
duality to study the force needed to drag a heavy quark at constant velocity through an
environment of two colliding (longitudinally Gaussian and transversely uniform) sheets
of energy. When comparing the required force in this highly oﬀ-equilibrium medium to
that of the equilibrium limit in the N =4 super-Yang-Mills plasma, it was found that
the results are quite similar (within a few 10’s of percent) if evaluated at the same
energy densities (or, equivalently, at the same “pseudo”-temperatures extracted from
diﬀerent diagonal elements of the oﬀ-equilibrium stress-energy tensor). This suggests
that the eﬀects of the initial oﬀ-equilibrium phases on HQ diﬀusion in URHICs can
be reasonably well approximated by the standard transport approach with coeﬃcients
extrapolated from the equilibrium theory at corresponding energy densities. In addition,
a characteristic time delay in the impact of the initial medium on the HQ motion was
found, on the order of 0.1-0.2 fm/c, which could serve as the absolute starting time for
the transport simulation.

The gluon saturation approach has been followed in Ref. [128], by converting
the gluonic ﬁeld conﬁgurations obtained within the IP-glasma model [129] into oﬀ-
equilibrium quantum-statistical gluon distribution functions, associated with a typical
timescale of the inverse saturation momentum, τglasma ∼ 1/Qs ∼ 0.1-0.2 fm/c (not unlike
the delay time found in the AdS/CFT approach discussed in the previous paragraph).
This distribution has then been inserted into eq. (12) to evaluate the HQ transport
coeﬃcients using the schematic LO pQCD matrix elements. The ﬁndings parallel those
of the AdS/CFT approach, in that the HQ drag coeﬃcient turns out to be very similar
to the one in equilibrium provided the same total gluon density is enforced. It turns
out to be larger than for a chemically equilibrated QGP at the same parton number
(or energy) density, primarily due to the larger color factor in the pQCD HQ-gluon
scattering amplitude relative to HQ-quark scattering.

A genuine mean-ﬁeld contribution can also occur in later stages of the ﬁreball
evolution, e.g., due to an eﬀective in-medium quark mass, m∗
Q(T ), when the quark
propagates through regions with non-zero temperature gradient. The HQ mass is
generally expected to increase with decreasing temperature of the QGP, as borne out
of both perturbative and non-perturbative calculations (see, e.g., Ref. [15]). Thus, for a
heavy quark propagating through an expanding ﬁreball where the temperature decreases
both with time and in outward direction, its 3-momentum is reduced due the pertinent
mean-ﬁeld force. This eﬀect has been studied in relativistic Langevin simulations using
the transport coeﬃcients of Ref. [58] and found to soften the momentum spectrum while
slightly reducing the elliptic ﬂow, although both eﬀects are quantitatively small (a few
percent) [130]. Generally speaking, for large HQ scattering rates, corresponding to large
imaginary parts in the self-energy, real parts tend to be rather structureless (by means
of a dispersion integral) and the corresponding mean-ﬁeld forces small. Repulsive forces
on heavy quarks due to a vector mean-ﬁeld in the QGP have been studied in the PHSD

CONTENTS

25

approach [51] and found to induce a hardening of the ﬁnal D-meson spectra, enhancing
the “ﬂow bump” in their RAA and shifting it to slightly higher pT.

2.3. Bulk Medium Evolution Models for URHICs

To implement the HF transport properties as discussed in the preceding section into
the phenomenology of URHICs, two additional ingredients are required. The ﬁrst one
concerns the initial conditions for the HQ phase space distribution. Here one usually
adopts pQCD calculations ﬁt to experimental pT spectra of HF particles in elementary
pp collisions (augmented with suitable fragmentation functions).
In an AA collision,
their spatial distribution is usually assumed to follow the N N collision proﬁle, while
the pT distributions are possibly modiﬁed due to nuclear modiﬁcations in the parton
distribution functions (and constrained by pA data). A more detailed discussion of these
issues will be given in Sec. 3.2 below.

The second ingredient beyond the HQ interactions with the medium is the space-
time evolution of the latter. The Fokker-Planck/Langevin framework, with transport
coeﬃcients depending on temperature (possibly chemical potentials) and 3-momentum
in the rest frame of the medium,
is naturally implemented into hydrodynamic (or
ﬁreball) models based on local thermal equilibrium. A minimal requirement for state-
of-the-art evolution models for HF transport simulations is the description of light-
hadron (π, K, p) multiplicities, pT spectra and their elliptic-ﬂow coeﬃcient, v2(pT ),
at least approximately and up to a typical transverse momentum of pT (cid:39) 2 GeV,
which encompasses ∼90% or more of the produced bulk particles. However, even
within this constraint, an appreciable uncertainty in the space-time evolution of the
temperature and the collective ﬂow ﬁeld (in particular the elliptic ﬂow) remains.
For example, an initial study of this issue [131], comparing charm-quark Langevin
simulations within the original Kolb-Heinz (KH) 2+1D hydrodynamic model [132] and a
parameterized expanding thermal ﬁreball model, revealed signiﬁcant deviations between
the results for the charm-quark v2 at the end of the quark-hadron mixed phase (using
the same transport coeﬃcients). A large part of the discrepancy originated from the
diﬀerent build-up of the radial and elliptic ﬂow in the two evolution models, proceeding
signiﬁcantly slower (“softer”) in the KH hydro. Retuning the ﬁreball to agree with the
inclusive light-quark v2 of the KH hydro at the end of the mixed phase leads to much
closer agreement for the resulting charm-quark v2 [76] (see also Ref. [36] for a comparison
of HF spectra from diﬀerent hydro evolutions). Typical components of a “soft” hydro
evolution include a standard initial participant proﬁle for the entropy density, vanishing
initial-ﬂow velocity at the thermalization time, and an equation-of-state (EoS) with a
quark-hadron mixed-phase. Among the consequences of a “soft” expansion are that
the bulk-v2 builds up rather slowly and receives sizable contributions from the hadronic
phase (30-40%), that multi-strange particles need to freeze out well inside the hadronic
phase, and that the pion HBT radii disagree with experiment. All of these features are
modiﬁed if the medium evolution is made more explosive, by introducing pre-equilibrium

CONTENTS

26

ﬂow [133–136], a realistic lQCD EoS with cross-over transition, a more compact initial-
density proﬁle and a ﬁnite shear viscosity. This resolves the HBT puzzle [137,138], makes
the bulk-v2 saturate close to the hadronization transition, and generates suﬃcient radial
ﬂow to allow multi-strange hadrons to kinetically decouple at chemical freezeout [124].
A “harder” hydro evolution has signiﬁcant consequences for HF observables. Most
notably, the ﬂow bump in the charm-quark (and subsequent D-meson) RAA is shifted
to higher pT , and the pertinent v2(pT ) tends to be larger for pT >∼ 2 GeV, both because
the bulk-v2 is available from earlier times on (giving charm quarks more time to pick it
up) and the collectivity of the charm quarks is pushed out to higher pT . It is interesting
to note that an “explosive” medium evolution is an important ingredient to understand
the rather large v2 observed for direct photons at RHIC (and possibly LHC) [139, 140].
A harder hydro evolution with improved initial conditions and lQCD-based EoS was
also implemented in Refs. [74, 89]. Also here the ﬂow bump in the D-meson RAA at
RHIC showed a notable shift to higher pT [141] over previous results with the same HQ
transport coeﬃcients [73].

Alternative to macroscopic bulk evolutions based on local thermal equilibrium,
semi-classical microscopic transport simulations have been employed [28, 38–40, 51, 75,
142,143], or combinations thereof within so-called “hybrid” models [81]. In the BAMPS
model [38], for example, the evolution of the partonic system is terminated at the
transition temperature, where quarks and gluons are fragmented into hadrons. This
model approximately describes the measured bulk-hadron v2, suggestive for a rather
explosive QGP expansion, but it predicts a much softer ﬂow bump in the D-meson RAA
at RHIC than the simulations based on a “hard-hydro” evolution (cf. upper left panel
in Fig. 25). In the PHSD transport simulations [40], the D-meson RAA at RHIC turns
out to be rather close to the results from “hard-hydro” evolutions.

3. Experimental Results and Comparison to Models

3.1. Experimental Facilities and Techniques

3.1.1. Accelerators

Heavy-ion collisions are a unique way to explore the phase diagram of QCD matter
in the laboratory and study the properties of the QGP. The ﬁrst ﬁxed-target experiments
with collisions of light nuclei at ultra-relativistic energies started in 1986 at the BNL
AGS and at the CERN SPS. Heavy nuclei (Au and Pb) became available in the 90’s at
both facilities. Since the year 2000, heavy-ion colliders are in operation, ﬁrst at BNL
(Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider, RHIC, ﬁrst Au–Au collisions in 2000) and ten years
later at CERN (LHC, ﬁrst Pb–Pb collisions in 2010).

The AGS and SPS ﬁxed-target programs enabled the study of heavy-ion reactions
In the
at center-of-mass (CM ) energies of
heavy-ion program at the CERN SPS, open HF production was not measured directly.
Indirect measurements based on the contribution of simultaneous semi-muonic decays of

sNN = 1-20 GeV per nucleon pair.

√

CONTENTS

27

√

correlated DD pairs to the dimuon invariant-mass spectra were carried out in Pb–Pb and
In–In collisions at
sNN = 17.2 GeV by the NA50 and NA60 collaborations [144, 145].
The Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) began operation in 2000 with the
capability of colliding nuclei from deuterons to Au at CM energies of up to 200 GeV
per nucleon pair. Over the 15 years of data taking to date, several collision systems
were studied at diﬀerent collision energies. The luminosity for full energy Au–Au
collisions was increased over the years from the design value of 2 · 1026 cm−2 s−1 to
about 5 · 1027 cm−2 s−1 in the 2014 run. During years 2010, 2011 and 2014 a Beam
Energy Scan (BES) campaign was conducted, taking data for Au–Au collisions at CM
energies per nucleon pair of 62.4, 39, 27, 19.6, 14.5, 11.5 and 7.7 GeV. A summary
of the data samples of heavy-ion collisions collected over this period is reported in
Tab. 1. Heavy-ﬂavor results were reported by the PHENIX and STAR collaborations
√
sNN of 39, 62.4, 130 and 200 GeV, for Cu-Cu collisions at
for Au-Au collisions at
sNN = 200 GeV. Also proton-proton (pp)

√
s = 200 GeV were studied as a reference for heavy-ion collisions.

sNN = 200 GeV, and for dAu collisions at

√

√

collisions at
√

The LHC accelerator started operation at the end of year 2009 with pp collisions at
s = 0.9 TeV. Subsequently, protons were collided at CM energies of 7 TeV (in years
2010-2011), 8 TeV (in 2012), and 13 TeV (in 2015). Heavy-ion (AA) and proton-nucleus
(pA) collisions are an integral part of the LHC physics program. The ﬁrst two samples
√
of Pb–Pb collisions were collected in years 2010 and 2011 at a CM energy per nucleon-
sNN = 2.76 TeV. About 10 µb−1 of integrated luminosity were
nucleon collision of
delivered in 2010 and 166 µb−1 in 2011 to the three LHC experiments that took part in
the heavy-ion program, namely ALICE (a detector dedicated to heavy-ion collisions),
ATLAS and CMS. The next LHC run with Pb beams was conducted at the end of
√
2015 at
sNN = 5.02 TeV. In year 2013, pPb collisions were performed at the LHC at
sNN = 5.02 TeV. All four main LHC experiments (ALICE, ATLAS, CMS and LHCb)
took data. The delivered integrated luminosity was of about 30 nb−1.

√

√

sNN = 19 GeV to about 5 GeV/fm3 at

The increase of the CM energy from ﬁxed-target experiments to the colliders RHIC
and LHC is reﬂected in a larger number of produced particles, a higher temperature of
the created medium and a longer lifetime of the possible QGP phase. For example, the
energy density of the medium estimated with the Bjorken formula for central Au–Au
collisions at a nominal formation time of 1 fm/c increases from about 2 GeV/fm3 at
√
sNN = 200 GeV [156] and reaches about
14 GeV/fm3 in central Pb–Pb collisions at the LHC [157]. The decoupling time for
hadrons at midrapidity increases by about 40% from top RHIC to top LHC energy,
signaling that at higher collision energies the system lives longer and expands to a larger
size at freeze-out [42]. Concerning HF hadron production, the cross section for c¯c and
b¯b production in nucleon-nucleon collisions increases dramatically with increasing
sNN.
A compilation of the measurements of pT-integrated charm and beauty production
cross section in pp (p¯p) and pA collisions as a function of
sNN is reported in Fig. 6
(taken from [11,154]). As will be discussed in the next section, the experimental results
are described within uncertainties by calculations within perturbative QCD. The cross

√

√

28

CONTENTS

Year

Collision system

√

sNN Delivered int. lumi

Run-1

2000

Run-2

2001/02

Run-3

2002/03

Run-4

2003/04

Run-5

2004/05

Au–Au

Au–Au
Au–Au

d–Au

Au–Au
Au–Au

Cu–Cu
Cu–Cu
Cu–Cu

Run-7

2006/07

Au–Au

Run-8

2007/08

d–Au

Run-10

2009/10

Run-11

2010/11

Run-12

2011/12

Run-14

2013/14

Run-15

2014/15

Au–Au
Au–Au
Au–Au
Au–Au
Au–Au

Au–Au
Au–Au
Au–Au

U–U

Cu–Au

Au–Au
Au–Au
3He–Au

p–Au
p–Al

(GeV)

130

200
19.6

200

200
62.4

200
62.4
22.4

200

200

200
62.4
39
11.5
7.7

200
27
19.6

193
200

200
14.5

204

200
200

(nb−1)
0.02

0.258
0.4 · 10−3

73

3.53
0.067

42.1
1.5
0.02

7.25

437

10.3
0.544
0.206
7.8 · 10−3
4.23 · 10−3

9.79
0.063
0.033

0.736
27.0

43.9
0.044

134

1270
3970

Summary of heavy-ion data taking periods at RHIC:

Table 1.
colli-
sion systems, CM energies and total delivered integrated luminosity (from
http://www.rhichome.bnl.gov/RHIC/Runs/).

section for charm (beauty) production increases by about a factor of 10 (50) from RHIC
to LHC energies.

3.1.2. Open Heavy-Flavor Production Measurement Techniques

Open HF production is measured experimentally in proton–proton, proton–nucleus
and nucleus–nucleus collisions exploiting various techniques. Charm and beauty hadrons
can be fully reconstructed from their hadronic decays, or, alternatively, they can be
studied inclusively by measuring electrons or muons from their semi-leptonic decays.

CONTENTS

29

√

√

Left:

total inclusive charm production cross section as a function
Figure 6.
s [146–150]. Data from pA and deuteron–nucleus (dA) collisions were scaled
of
inclusive beauty production
assuming no nuclear eﬀects (taken from [11]). Right:
cross section per rapidity unit measured at mid-rapidity as a function of
s in pp and
p¯p collisions [151–155] (taken from [154]). Results from perturbative QCD calculations
and their uncertainties are shown as solid and dashed lines.

Beauty production is also accessed via the inclusive B → J/ψ + X decay mode and by
reconstructing jets of hadrons produced in the fragmentation of a beauty quark (b-jets).
Experiments featuring vertex detectors with high spatial resolution, which are available
at all four main LHC experiments, as well as at STAR and PHENIX at RHIC after their
recent upgrades, can exploit the relatively long lifetime of D and B mesons to resolve
their decay vertex from the interaction point. D0, D+ and D+
s mesons decay weakly with
mean proper decay lengths cτ of approximately 120, 310 and 150 µm, respectively [158].
Beauty mesons have longer lifetimes than charmed hadrons: cτ ≈ 500 µm for B0, B+
and B0
s [158], which makes it possible to disentangle the charm and beauty contributions
in the sample of HF decay leptons. Most of the beauty-hadron decay channels proceed
via b → c hadron cascades, giving rise to a topology that contains both a secondary and
a tertiary decay vertex. In the remainder of this section the key points of the diﬀerent
experimental approaches to open HF reconstruction are brieﬂy summarized.

Inclusive measurements of heavy-ﬂavor decay leptons. Open HF production is
studied inclusively by measuring electrons and muons from semi-leptonic decays of
charm and beauty hadrons, which are characterized by branching ratios (BRs) of the
order of 5–15% depending on the hadron species [158]. The crucial aspects are the
lepton (electron, muon) identiﬁcation and the subtraction of the background due to
leptons not coming from HF hadron decays.
Electrons: For HF decay electrons, the various experimental collaborations have
exploited diﬀerent combinations of identiﬁcation techniques, which are eﬀective in

 (GeV)s10210310410b)µ (ccσ10210310410ALICE (total unc.)ALICE extr. unc.LHCb (total unc.)PHENIXSTARHERA(cid:173)B (pA)E653 (pA)E743 (pA)NA27 (pA)NA16 (pA)E769 (pA)NLO (MNR) (GeV)s210310410b)µ/dy (bbσd110210= 2.76 TeV,  |y|<0.8s ALICE, pp   = 7 TeV,  |y|<0.9s ALICE, pp   = 1.96 TeV,  |y|<0.6s   p CDF, p= 0.63 TeV,  |y|<1.5s   p UA1, p= 0.2 TeV,  |y|<0.35s PHENIX, pp    FONLLALICE extr. unc.ALICE extr. unc.CONTENTS

30

diﬀerent momentum ranges.
The STAR [159] and ALICE [160] collaborations
used speciﬁc energy loss (dE/dx) measurements in combination with time-of-ﬂight
information at low momenta and with energy and shower shape from electromagnetic
calorimeters at high momenta. In addition, in ALICE the signal from the Transition
Radiation Detector was used in pp collisions [160]. In PHENIX, electron identiﬁcation
was performed using a Ring Imaging Cherenkov detector together with the information
from an electromagnetic calorimeter [147]. ATLAS performed a measurement of
HF decay electrons in pp collisions utilizing clusters in electromagnetic calorimeters
matched to charged tracks [161]. The background electrons are dominated by photon
conversions in the detector material and by Dalitz decays of π0 and η mesons. Their
contribution can be estimated using diﬀerent techniques and subtracted statistically.
Three main approaches to background estimation have been used:
i) low-invariant-
mass e+e− pairs (invariant-mass method, utilized by the STAR [162] and ALICE [154]
collaborations); ii) Monte Carlo simulation of background electrons from hadron decays
(cocktail method, used in PHENIX [147] and ALICE [160]); iii) special data taking with
additional converter material of well deﬁned thickness (converter method exploited in
PHENIX [147]).
Muons: Muons are tracked and identiﬁed using spectrometers located downstream of
absorbers that stop the majority of the hadrons. The main background contribution
is due to the decay in ﬂight of pions and kaons and to hadrons punching through the
absorber. It can be estimated via cocktail calculations, as done in PHENIX [163] and
ALICE [164]. In ATLAS, the background is discriminated statistically based on a Monte
Carlo template ﬁt to the distribution of the diﬀerence between the track momentum
measured in the muon spectrometer and that measured in the inner tracker, after
accounting for energy loss in the calorimeters located in between the inner tracker and
the muon spectrometer [161].
Cocktail subtraction methods use as input the yields and momentum/rapidity
distributions of all relevant sources of background leptons, which are mainly pions,
kaons and η mesons. Ideally, to reduce the uncertainties, this input should be taken
from data measured with the same apparatus.

Dilepton invariant-mass analysis. Heavy-ﬂavor production can be studied via the
contribution of simultaneous semi-leptonic decays of DD and BB pairs in the dilepton
invariant-mass distribution. In particular, the open HF contribution is extracted from
the intermediate-mass region, i.e., the region between the φ and the J/ψ peaks, where
the main contributions to the dilepton spectrum are expected to be open HF decays,
thermal radiation from the QGP and (at SPS energies) Drell-Yan dileptons. This
technique was used in Pb–Pb collisions at the SPS with the NA50 [144] and NA60 [145]
experiments to measure open-charm and thermal-dimuon production in Pb–Pb and In–
In collisions. At RHIC, the PHENIX collaboration measured the di-electron production
double diﬀerentially in mass and pT which allowed the separation of regions dominated
by charm from those dominated by beauty decays and the extraction of the c¯c and b¯b
production cross sections in pp and dAu collisions [165, 166].

CONTENTS

31

Beauty measurements from partially reconstructed decays

Beauty-decay leptons: the beauty contribution to the sample of HF decay leptons can be
extracted by exploiting additional information. In particular, charm and beauty decay
leptons can be separated based on the longer lifetime of beauty hadrons, which results
in a larger separation of the production point of their decay leptons from the interaction
vertex [155]. This approach requires high resolution (of the order or better than 100
µm) on the track impact parameter, which is the distance of closest approach of a track
(i.e., the reconstructed particle trajectory) to the interaction vertex. Alternatively, the
fraction of beauty-decay electrons has been estimated from the azimuthal correlations
between HF decay electrons and charged hadrons [153, 154, 167]. This method exploits
the fact that the width of the near-side peak is larger for beauty than for charm hadron
decays, thus allowing one to disentangle the corresponding relative contribution to the
yield of HF decay electrons. The main limitation of the beauty measurement via single
electrons (muons) is that the correlation between the measured momentum of the lepton
and that of the parent B meson is very broad, especially at low momentum.
Non-prompt J/ψ: the contribution of beauty-hadron decays to the yield of J/ψ mesons
can be measured inclusively by decomposing the J/ψ yield into its prompt (i.e., J/ψ
produced at the interaction point) and non-prompt (displaced) components. This is
achieved via ﬁts to the distribution of the measured distances between the interaction
vertex and the J/ψ decay vertex. This approach has been used in pp, pPb and
Pb–Pb collisions at the LHC by ALICE [168, 169], CMS [170] and LHCb [171, 172].
The branching ratio of inclusive beauty-hadron decays into J/ψ measured at LEP is
1.16% [173–175], lower than that into single leptons. However, as compared to the
measurement of beauty-decay leptons, this channel provides a more direct measurement
of the beauty-hadron kinematics due to the narrower correlation between the momentum
of the J/ψ and that of the parent beauty hadron.

Fully reconstructed decays of charm and beauty hadrons

This approach allows the reconstruction of HF hadrons exploiting hadronic decays of D
mesons (and in the future of Λc baryons), and J/ψ+hadron (with the J/ψ reconstructed
from dileptonic decays) decays of B mesons. The branching ratios are smaller than those
in semi-leptonic channels, but this technique has the advantage of providing access to
the kinematics of the heavy-ﬂavor hadron.
Charm mesons: D-meson production has been measured down to low transverse
momentum by STAR [148] and ALICE [176, 177] in Au–Au and Pb–Pb collisions
at RHIC and LHC, respectively. The measurement is based on the invariant-mass
analysis of fully reconstructed decay topologies of the following hadronic decay channels:
D0 → K−π+ (BR=3.88%), D+ → K−π+π+ (BR=9.13%), D∗+ → D0π+ (BR=67.7%),
+ → φπ+ → K−K +π+ (BR=2.24%) and their charge conjugates [158]. The huge
and Ds
combinatorial background is reduced by selections on the dE/dx and time-of-ﬂight that
provide kaon and pion identiﬁcation. In addition, the spatial resolution of the ALICE
silicon tracker makes it possible to reconstruct the D-meson decay vertex and to apply
geometrical selections on its separation from the interaction vertex [176]. A technique

CONTENTS

32

based on geometrical selections on displaced decay-vertex topologies was used also for
the preliminary results on D0-meson production in Pb–Pb collisions recently reported
by CMS [178].
Beauty mesons: CMS Collaboration recently published results of the production of
B mesons in pPb collisions at the LHC in the transverse momentum range 10 <
pT < 60 GeV/c [179]. The following decays were reconstructed: B+ → J/ψ + K +,
+ → J/ψ + φ, all having branching ratios of about
B0 → J/ψ + K∗0(892) and Bs
0.1% [158]. Kinematic selections on the displaced decay vertex topologies were applied
to reduce the combinatorial background.
b-jets: Reconstructed jets associated with beauty hadrons (“b-jets”) can be identiﬁed
based on kinematic variables related to the relatively long lifetime and large mass of
beauty hadrons (“b-tagging”). The ﬁrst measurement of b-jets in heavy-ion collisions
was performed by the CMS collaboration at the LHC [180]. Measurements of b-jets are
complementary to those of beauty hadrons, because they are typically performed in a
diﬀerent momentum range and because the reconstructed jet energy is closely related
to that of the b quark.

3.1.3. Experimental observables

Interactions of heavy quarks with the constituents of the hot and dense medium
created in nucleus–nucleus collisions are expected to modify the momentum and angular
distribution of HF hadrons as compared to pp collisions. The main experimental
observables used up to now to study these eﬀects are the nuclear modiﬁcation factor
RAA and the elliptic ﬂow v2, which is the coeﬃcient of the second harmonic in the
Fourier expansion of the particle azimuthal distributions. Further insight into the
interaction mechanisms of heavy quarks with the medium and the properties of the
medium can be provided by measurements of angular correlations involving HF particles
and/or their decay products, and by measuring the higher harmonics in the Fourier
expansion of the particle azimuthal distributions. However, with the currently available
experimental samples, these more diﬀerential observables could only be accessed with
limited statistical precision in nucleus–nucleus collisions.

The nuclear modiﬁcation factor RAA is commonly used to study the modiﬁcation
of the production yield and the momentum distribution of particles originating from
hard (i.e., high-Q2) partonic scattering processes in nucleus–nucleus collisions relative
to pp collisions. Since the rate of hard processes is expected to scale with the average
number of binary nucleon–nucleon collisions occurring in the nucleus–nucleus collision,
(cid:104)Ncoll(cid:105), the nuclear modiﬁcation factor of the transverse momentum (pT) distributions
is expressed as:

RAA(pT) =

1

(cid:104)Ncoll(cid:105) · dNAA/dpT

dNpp/dpT

=

1

(cid:104)TAA(cid:105) · dNAA/dpT

dσpp/dpT

,

(24)

where dNAA/dpT is the pT spectrum measured in A–A collisions, dNpp/dpT (dσpp/dpT)
is the pT-diﬀerential yield (cross section) in pp collisions and (cid:104)TAA(cid:105) is the average nuclear
overlap function. The nuclear overlap function is deﬁned as the convolution of the

CONTENTS

33

√

NN · TAA, where σinel

nuclear density proﬁles of the colliding ions in the Glauber model [181, 182] and is
related to the number of nucleon–nucleon collisions as Ncoll = σinel
NN is
s. In absence of nuclear eﬀects,
the inelastic nucleon–nucleon cross section at given
a value of RAA = 1 is expected for HF particles in the whole pT range, because, due
to their large mass, charm and beauty quarks are produced predominantly in hard
partonic scattering processes. Thermal production in the QGP, which does not scale
with Ncoll, is expected to be negligible at the medium temperatures reached in heavy-
ion collisions at RHIC and at the LHC [183, 184]. Parton in-medium energy loss causes
a suppression, RAA < 1, of hadrons at high transverse momenta (pT >∼ 5 GeV/c), and
is expected to be the dominant eﬀect in the nuclear modiﬁcation factor. The RAA
can therefore be used to characterize HQ in-medium energy loss and to infer from it the
corresponding transport coeﬃcients. At low and intermediate pT (pT <∼ 5 GeV/c), eﬀects
other than in-medium energy loss are expected to modify the HF hadron production
yield, leading to values of RAA diﬀerent from unity. These eﬀects are related both
to the formation of a hot and dense medium and to nuclear eﬀects in the initial
state of the collision. Among the initial-state eﬀects, nuclear modiﬁcation of the
parton distribution functions, kT-broadening and cold-nuclear-matter energy loss due
to multiple scatterings of the initial partons could modify the production yield and
pT distribution of HF hadrons, as discussed in Section 3.2.2. Final-state eﬀects which
could modify the hadron spectra in addition to energy loss are the collective “radial”
ﬂow of the medium and the modiﬁcation of hadronization in the presence of a medium.
Low-momentum heavy quarks, including those shifted to low momentum by parton
energy loss, could participate in the collective expansion of the system and possibly
reach thermalization with the medium as a consequence of multiple interactions with
the medium constituents [118, 185]. In elementary collisions heavy quarks are expected
to hadronize mainly through fragmentation, while the ample presence of quarks and
antiquarks in the medium makes the coalescence of charm and beauty quarks with
light quarks a plausible hadronization mechanism (as discussed in Sec. 2.2.6). This will
impart (part of) the large radial and elliptic ﬂow of the quarks from the medium on
the heavy quarks and introduce a pT-dependent modiﬁcation to the observed charmed
hadron spectrum compared to a pure fragmentation scenario (even in the limit where
heavy quarks do not take part in the collective expansion of the medium) [73,76,118,122].
Furthermore, hadronization via coalescence may lead to a modiﬁcation of the relative
abundance of the diﬀerent HF hadron species. In particular, a baryon-to-meson and
strange-to-non-strange enhancement for charmed hadrons, similar to that observed for
light-ﬂavor hadrons, is predicted [106, 126, 186–189].

An observable complementary to the nuclear modiﬁcation factor RAA to study
the interaction of heavy quarks with the medium is the anisotropy in the azimuthal
distribution of HF hadrons. Anisotropy in particle momentum distributions originates
from the initial anisotropy in the spatial distribution of the nucleons participating in
the collision. The anisotropy of the azimuthal distribution of the particles produced in

CONTENTS

the collision is usually characterized with the Fourier coeﬃcients:

vn = (cid:104)cos[n(ϕ − Ψn)](cid:105),

34

(25)

where ϕ is the azimuthal angle of the particle, and Ψn is the azimuthal angle of the
initial state symmetry plane for the n-th harmonic. If nuclei were spherically symmetric
with a matter density depending only on the distance from the centre of the nucleus,
the symmetry planes Ψn for all harmonics would coincide with the reaction plane,
i.e., the plane deﬁned by the beam direction and the impact parameter of the two
colliding nuclei. For non-central collisions the overlap region of the colliding nuclei
has an “almond” shape, and the largest contribution to the anisotropy is given by
the second coeﬃcient v2, which is called elliptic ﬂow. At RHIC and LHC energies,
a positive v2 is observed for many diﬀerent hadron species [190–192] and is commonly
ascribed to the combination of two mechanisms. The ﬁrst one, which is dominant at low
and intermediate momenta (pT < 6 GeV/c), is the build-up of a collective expansion
through interactions among the medium constituents, which convert the initial-state
geometrical anisotropy into a momentum anisotropy of the ﬁnal-state particles [193].
The second mechanism is the path length dependence of in-medium parton energy loss,
which is predicted to give rise to a positive v2 for hadrons up to large pT [194, 195].
This path length dependence is expected to be diﬀerent for the diﬀerent energy-loss
mechanisms: linear for collisional processes [47,196] and close to quadratic for radiative
processes [197]. Hence, the measurement of v2 at high pT can constrain the path length
dependence of parton energy loss. At low pT, HF hadron v2 oﬀers a unique opportunity
to test whether also heavy quarks take part in the collective expansion and possibly
thermalize in the medium. In addition, at low and intermediate pT, the D and B meson
elliptic ﬂow (as well as that of their decay leptons) is expected to be sensitive to the
role of hadronization via recombination, which is predicted to augment the v2 of HF
hadrons with respect to that of charm and beauty quarks [118, 198].

The measurement of higher-order ﬂow coeﬃcients of HF hadrons was proposed in
Ref. [199] as a sensitive probe of the degree of charm- and beauty-quark thermalization.
In particular,
in this model, the triangular-ﬂow coeﬃcient v3 is likely to show an
incomplete coupling of the heavy quarks to the bulk medium as well as the expected
mass hierarchy.

The study of angular correlations between HF hadrons could further constrain
the models of interactions of heavy quarks with the medium, possibly providing
valuable information on the path length dependence of energy loss and on the relative
contributions of collisional and radiative processes [89,122,200–202]. The medium eﬀects
on the angular (de)correlation and momentum imbalance of heavy quark-antiquark pairs
can be studied via the correlations of two HF hadrons, DD and BB. However, this
measurement is extremely challenging because of the huge data samples required to
cope with the small branching ratios of the hadronic channels through which D and
B mesons can be fully reconstructed. In the beauty sector, angular correlations and
energy imbalance of b-jets, the latter quantiﬁed, e.g., by measuring the asymmetry

CONTENTS
35
AJ = (ET 1 − ET 2)/(ET 1 + ET 2) of di-jets emitted in opposite hemispheres [203, 204],
could become accessible in Pb–Pb collisions with the integrated luminosities that will
be recorded during the LHC Run-2,
i.e., the 2015–2018 data taking period. As
an alternative, correlations involving electrons and muons from HF hadron decays
can be studied, such as D − e, e+ − e−, µ+ − µ−, e − µ. The interpretation of the
results from these observables is, however, less straightforward than that of DD or
b-jet correlations, because they contain also angular decorrelation eﬀects due to the
HF hadron decay kinematics, and because the lepton carries only a fraction of the
parent-hadron momentum. With the currently available data samples, a measurement
of e − µ correlations could be carried out in dAu collisions [205].
In addition, two-
particle correlations involving heavy ﬂavors were measured utilizing a D meson or a HF
decay lepton as trigger particle and the hadrons produced in the collision as associated
particles. Such observables have also sensitivity to the HQ production and fragmentation
process, as well as to the presence of collective eﬀects that induce correlations between
the HF particles and the bulk of hadrons produced in the collision. Measurements of e–
hadron correlations in Au–Au collisions at RHIC were published by PHENIX [206], but
with the current level of statistical uncertainties no quantitative conclusion can be drawn
on the modiﬁcation of the azimuthal-correlation shape as compared to pp collisions.
Preliminary results for e–hadron correlations were also reported by STAR for Au–Au
collisions at RHIC [207] and by ALICE for Pb–Pb collisions at the LHC [208]. The larger
data samples of Au–Au and Pb–Pb collisions that will be collected in the coming years
at RHIC and at the LHC will make it possible to fully exploit the potential of e–hadron
and D–hadron correlations, to provide further constraints for the characterization of
HQ interactions with the medium.

3.2. Open Heavy-Flavor Data in pp and p-A (d-A) Collisions

3.2.1. Production in pp and Comparison to pQCD Calculations

In the context of the study of HQ production in heavy-ion collisions, measurements
in pp reactions provide a crucial reference to establish a baseline that allows the
identiﬁcation of modiﬁcations in AA reactions, which can be related to the formation
of a hot and dense medium.
In particular, a pp reference is needed to quantify the
modiﬁcation of the momentum distribution of HF particles in AA collisions through the
nuclear modiﬁcation factor RAA. Also in the studies of two-particle angular correlations,
comparisons to pp results are mandatory to interpret the measurements in heavy-ion
collisions.

A key aspect of open HF studies is that their production in elementary hadronic
collisions can be calculated in the framework of perturbative QCD (pQCD) down
to low pT with the HQ mass, mQ, acting as a long distance cutoﬀ [209, 210]. The
diﬀerential cross section for the inclusive production of HF hadrons in nucleon–nucleon
collisions can be computed using the collinear factorization approach as a convolution
of three factors: (i) the parton distribution functions of the incoming nucleons, (ii) the

CONTENTS

36

partonic hard scattering cross section calculated as a perturbative series in the strong
coupling constant, and (iii) the fragmentation process describing the non-perturbative
transition of a charm (beauty) quark into a heavy hadron. The latter is modeled by a
fragmentation function, which parametrizes the fraction of quark energy transferred to
the produced hadron, as discussed in Sec. 2.2.6. This formalism is implemented at next-
to-leading order (NLO) accuracy in the general-mass variable-ﬂavor-number scheme,
GM-VFNS [211, 212] and in the ﬁxed order next-to-leading-log (FONLL) resummation
approach [111]. Both of these frameworks are based on the matching of “massive”
NLO calculations in the Fixed-Flavor Number Scheme (FFNS, valid at low pT), where
heavy quarks are not active partons in the nucleon appearing only in the partonic
hard scattering process, with “massless” calculations in the Zero-Mass Variable Flavor
Number Scheme (ZM-VFNS, valid for pT (cid:29) mQ), where charm and beauty quarks
appear also as active partons in the nucleon PDFs and their mass can be neglected in
the partonic hard scattering cross section.

Calculations of inclusive production cross section of HF hadrons in hadronic
collisions are also performed in the leading order (LO) approximation within the
framework of kT-factorization with unintegrated gluon distribution functions (UGDFs)
to account for the transverse momenta of the initial partons [213–215].

These theoretical frameworks allow for a mostly analytic calculation of inclusive
pT and y diﬀerential cross section of heavy quarks, HF hadrons and their decay
leptons at NLO+NLL (or LO) accuracy. However, for some particular studies, such
as those of HF jets or correlations of HF hadrons with other particles produced in the
interaction, a more complete description of the hadronic ﬁnal state is needed, which
can be obtained using Monte Carlo (MC) generators. General-purpose MC generators,
such as PYTHIA [123,216] or HERWIG [217], can serve this purpose, but are limited to
LO accuracy. A more versatile description of hard processes can be achieved with the
MC@NLO [218] and POWHEG [219] generators, where a consistent matching of NLO
pQCD calculations with parton showers is implemented, thus combining the strength
of MC generators (i.e., a complete modelling of the hadronic ﬁnal state) with NLO
accuracy in the hard scattering process and leading-logarithm resummation in the
soft/collinear regimes.

These pQCD-based approaches are used in the models of HQ production and in-
medium energy loss to compute the initial HQ distributions in heavy-ion collisions.
In particular, HQ distributions calculated with FONLL are used in WHDG [84, 220],
MC@sHQ+EPOS [89], TAMU [65], Djordjevic et al. [221], and CUJET 3.0 [222, 223].
Other models make use of MC generators, e.g., MC@NLO in BAMPS [75], POWHEG
in POWLANG [36], and PYTHIA (tuned to ﬁt FONLL predictions for heavy quarks) in
PHSD [40,51]. In the model of Cao et al., a LO pQCD calculation was originally used to
compute the initial HQ distributions [82], while in recent studies of angular correlations
an improved initialization based on MC@NLO was adopted [201].

Since the above-mentioned pQCD calculations and MC generators provide a
fundamental input for the studies of HQ interactions in the QGP, it is crucial to verify

CONTENTS

37

Figure 7. Transverse-momentum diﬀerential production cross sections of HF decay
s = 200 GeV from PHENIX [226]. Right:
electrons at mid-rapidity. Left: results at
results at
s = 7 TeV from ALICE [160] and ATLAS [161]. Data are compared to
FONLL calculations [111, 227].

√

√

that they can describe the data from pp collisions at RHIC and LHC energies. This data-
to-theory comparison consistutes also an important test of our understanding of QCD in
its perturbative regime. Furthermore, a solid understanding of open-charm production is
important also for cosmic-ray and neutrino astrophysics, because ‘prompt’ neutrino ﬂux
from charm decays is the dominant background for astrophysical neutrinos at energies
of the order of 1 PeV [224, 225]. In the following, a selection of measurements of pT and
y diﬀerential inclusive production cross sections of open HF in pp collisions at RHIC
and at the LHC will be presented and compared to the results of the pQCD calculations
and MC generators presented above. Note that HF production was also measured at
the Tevatron collider [152] at CM energies in between the RHIC and LHC ones. They
are not reported in this review, which focuses on the accelerators and energies at which
heavy-ion collisions have been studied.

In Fig. 7 the pT-diﬀerential production cross section of electrons from HF hadron
√
decays at mid-rapidity measured by the PHENIX collaboration in pp collisions at
√
s = 200 GeV (left panel) [226] and by the ALICE [160] and ATLAS [161] collaborations
at
s = 7 TeV (right panel) is shown. The data are compared to FONLL pQCD
calculations [227], which at both energies can describe the measurements within
uncertainties. The central values of FONLL calculations are obtained using CTEQ-
6.6 parton distribution functions [228], mc = 1.5 GeV/c2 and mb = 4.75 GeV/c2 for the

)3c-2 (mb GeV3/dpσ3E d-1010-910-810-710-610-510-410-310-210-110(a)=200 GeVs)/2 + X at - + e+ (e→ p+p PHENIX dataFONLL(total) e)→FONLL(c  e)→FONLL(b  e)→ c →FONLL(b  (GeV/c)Tp0123456789100.511.522.53DATA/FONLL(b) )2dy) (mb/(GeV/c)t/(dpσ2) dtpπ 1/(2-910-810-710-610-510-410-310-210-110 e→ALICE c, b  e→ATLAS c, b  e, |y| < 0.5→FONLL c, b  e, |y| < 2 excl. 1.37 < |y| < 1.52→FONLL c, b  = 7 TeVspp,  (GeV/c)t p-110×4123456789102030 Data/FONLL00.511.522.533.544.5CONTENTS

38

Figure 8. Transverse-momentum diﬀerential production cross section of heavy-ﬂavor
decay muons. Left: results at
s = 2.76 TeV at forward rapidity from ALICE [164].
Right: results at
s = 7 TeV at mid-rapidity from ATLAS [161]. Data are compared
to FONLL [111, 227], POWHEG [219] and PYTHIA [123] predictions.

√

√

(cid:113)

p2
T + m2

charm and beauty quark masses, and QCD renormalization (µR) and factorization (µF)
scales of µR = µF =
q. The theoretical uncertainty band is deﬁned by varying
the charm and beauty quark masses in the ranges 1.3 < mc < 1.7 GeV/c2 and 4.5 <
mb < 5.0 GeV/c2, and the QCD scales in the ranges 0.5 < µR/µ0 < 2 and 0.5 < µF/µ0 <
2 with the constraint 0.5 < µF/µR < 2. The outcomes of GM-VFNS and POWHEG,
not shown in this ﬁgure, agree with the FONLL predictions within uncertainties (see
Ref. [229] for a systematic comparison of FONLL, GM-VFNS and FONLL at LHC
energies). A similar agreement between HF decay electron measurements and pQCD-
based calculations is found for pp collisions at

s = 2.76 TeV [230].
√
Heavy-ﬂavor decay muon production has been measured in pp collisions at the LHC
√
s = 7 TeV [161] and by the ALICE
by the ATLAS collaboration at mid-rapidity at
s = 2.76 and 7 TeV [164, 231]. The
collaboration at forward rapidity (2.5 < y < 4) at
s = 2.76 TeV and at mid-
measured pT-diﬀerential cross sections at forward rapidity at
rapidity at
s = 7 TeV are shown in the left and right panels of Fig. 8, respectively. In
both rapidity intervals, the predictions from FONLL calculations are compatible within
uncertainties with the measured cross sections.
In the forward-rapidity interval, the
results of FONLL calculations are also shown separately for muons from charm and
beauty decays. The predictions for beauty-decay muons include the contributions of
muons coming directly from beauty-hadron decays (B → µ) and of muons from decays
of charmed hadrons produced in beauty-hadron decays (B → D → µ). According to

√

√

√

b/GeV]µ [T / dpσd(cid:173)610(cid:173)510(cid:173)410(cid:173)310(cid:173)210(cid:173)1101 = 7 TeVs(cid:173)1 L dt = 1.4 pb∫| < 2.5η|Muon data 2010FONLL (NLO+NLL)FONLL (NLO) 0.45 norm.×Pythia PowHeg+PythiaPowHeg+Herwig [GeV]Tp102030405060708090100FONLLσ/σ012ATLASCONTENTS

39

Figure 9. Transverse-momentum diﬀerential production cross section of beauty-decay
electrons in pp collisions. Left: results at
s = 200 GeV from STAR [162]. Right:
results at
s = 2.76 TeV from ALICE [154]. Data are compared to FONLL [111,227],
GM-VFNS [232] and LO kT-factorization [214] calculations.

√

√

FONLL, the yield of HF decay muons is dominated by muons from charm decays for
pT < 4 − 5 GeV/c, while at higher pT the main contribution is from beauty decays.
The mid-rapidity results in the right panel of Fig. 8 are also compared to predictions
obtained with the POWHEG Monte Carlo generator, interfaced to either PYTHIA or
HERWIG for the parton shower simulation. POWHEG+PYTHIA agrees well with the
FONLL calculations, while POWHEG+HERWIG predicts a signiﬁcantly lower total
cross-section. As pointed out in Ref. [161], less than half of this diﬀerence may be
accounted for by the diﬀerent HF hadron decay models implemented in PYTHIA and
HERWIG. Also shown in the right panel of Fig. 8 is the outcome of the PYTHIA event
generator (LO plus parton shower), which describes well the measured pT dependence,
but overestimates the total cross section by a factor of about two. The FONLL(NLO)
curve displayed in Fig. 8 is the central value of a FONLL calculation in which the next-
to-leading-log resummation part was disabled in the pQCD calculation. Such a NLO
calculation deviates signiﬁcantly from the measured cross section, showing sensitivity
to the NLL resummation term in the pQCD calculation. A very good description of the
data is also provided by GM-VFNS, as can be seen in Fig. 3 of Ref [232].

Electrons from open-charm and -beauty decays could be statistically separated at
RHIC using the ratio eB/(eB + eD) measured from e-hadron azimuthal correlations [167]
and the measured HF decay electron cross section. The invariant cross section of
√
electrons from beauty and charm decays measured by the STAR Collaboration in pp
collisions at
s = 200 GeV is shown in the left panel of Fig. 9 [162], together with
FONLL predictions, which describe the data within uncertainties. At the LHC, in
addition to the studies of azimuthal correlations, a selection on the electron impact

)3c(cid:173)2 (mb GeV3/dpσ3Ed(cid:173)1010(cid:173)910(cid:173)810(cid:173)710(cid:173)610(cid:173)510e)→D→e)+(B→measured (Be)→D→e)+(B→FONLL (Be) uncertainty→D→e)+(B→FONLL (Be→D→FONLL Be uncertainty→D→FONLL B (GeV/c)Tp468Data/FONLL024e→measured De→FONLL De uncertainty→FONLL D (GeV/c)Tp468 )2)cdy) (mb/(GeV/Tp/(dσ2) dTpπ1/(2-810-710-610-510-410-310-210 = 2.76 TeVsALICE pp, 1.9% normalization uncertainty not shown(a) e→ c) →b ( data FONLL factorizationT k GM-VFNSData/Theory0.511.522.53FONLL(b)Data/Theory0.511.522.53(c) -factorizationTk)c (GeV/Tp 0246810Data/Theory0.511.522.53(d)GM-VFNSCONTENTS

40

parameter was applied to disentangle charm and beauty contributions to the measured
√
HF decay electrons [154, 155]. The ALICE results for beauty-decay electron pT-
s = 2.76 GeV [154] are reported in the right panel of
diﬀerential cross section at
Fig. 9. They are compared to the predictions from FONLL, GM-VFNS [232] and LO
kT-factorization [214] calculations. The data and the pQCD calculations are consistent
within the experimental and theoretical uncertainties.

√

√

√

Open-charm production was measured at RHIC and at the LHC by reconstructing
hadronic D-meson decays. A selection of results on D-meson pT-diﬀerential cross
sections in pp collisions is presented in Fig. 10. In the top left panel, Fig. 10(a), the
D0 and D∗+ cross sections (scaled by the respective branching fractions f (c → D0)
and f (c → D∗+) ) measured in pp collisions at
s = 200 GeV at mid-rapidity by the
STAR collaboration [148] are shown along with FONLL predictions. This production
cross section is measured for “inclusive” D-meson yields, including both the “prompt”
contribution coming from charm-quark fragmentation and decays of excited charmed-
hadron states and the feeddown contribution due to beauty-hadron decays. The LHCb
results on prompt D0 production at forward rapidity at
s = 7 TeV [150] are shown
in Fig. 10(b). The diﬀerential cross section is reported as a function of pT for diﬀerent
rapidity intervals and is compared to pQCD calculations with the FONLL and GM-
VFNS [233] approaches. Also shown is the outcome of GM-VFNS calculations using
the the CTEQ-6.5c2 parton densities with intrinsic charm [234], showing that the eﬀect
of intrinsic charm is expected to be small in the phase space region of the LHCb
measurement. The LHCb collaboration recently reported results on the pT-diﬀerential
production cross section of D mesons at
s = 13 TeV and found them to be in agreement
with NLO predictions from FONLL, POWHEG, and GM-VFNS [235]. The measured
ratios of the cross sections at 13 and 7 TeV are also found to be described within
uncertainties by FONLL and POWHEG, even though the data are consistently above
the central values of the ratios of pQCD predictions in all the considered pT and y
intervals. As argued in Refs. [225, 236, 237], ratios of cross sections at diﬀerent CM
energies can be predicted through pQCD calculations with an accuracy of a few percent
because some theoretical parameters (factorization and renormalization scales, quark
mass, fragmentation fractions) are correlated at diﬀerent energies and their uncertainties
cancel almost completely in the ratio. On the other hand, PDF uncertainties do not
cancel completely, because of the diﬀerent Bjorken-x range of initial-state partons
covered by the measurements at the two CM energies, making these ratios sensitive
to the PDFs, and in particular to gluon PDFs at small x, where they are not yet
√
In the bottom panels, (c) and (d), of Fig. 10 the ALICE
well constrained by data.
results on D+ and D+
s = 7 TeV are
reported together with predictions from FONLL, GM-VFNS and LO kT-factorization.
The NLO pQCD calculations provide also a good description of the D+, D∗+, and D+
s
cross sections measured by the ATLAS collaboration in pp collisions at
s = 7 TeV
in the intervals 3.5 < pT < 100 GeV/c and |η| < 2.1 [238]. A similar conclusion
about the ability of pQCD calculations to describe the measurements at LHC energies is

s pT-diﬀerential cross sections at mid-rapidity at

√

CONTENTS

41

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 10. Transverse-momentum diﬀerential production cross section of prompt D
(a) D0 and D∗+ at
√
mesons in pp collisions.
s = 200 GeV at mid-rapidity from
√
s = 7 TeV at forward rapidity from LHCb [150]; (c) D+ at
STAR [148]; (b) D0 at
s = 7 TeV at mid-rapidity
from ALICE [177]. Data are compared to FONLL [111, 227], GM-VFNS [233] and LO
kT-factorization [214] calculations.

s = 7 TeV at mid-rapidity from ALICE [176]; (d) D+

√

√

s at

 (GeV/c)Tp0123456]2dy) [mb/(GeV/c)TdpTpπ)/(2ccσ2(d(cid:173)610(cid:173)410(cid:173)2101 / 0.5650DD* / 0.224FONLLpower(cid:173)law fitp+p 200 GeV]c [GeV/Tp012345678)]cb/(GeV/µ [Tp/dσ d× (cid:173)m 10(cid:173)410(cid:173)310(cid:173)210(cid:173)110110210 = 7 TeVsLHCbGMVFNS intr. charmGMVFNSFONLLLHCb data 2.0 <y<  2.5, m=0 2.5 <y<  3.0, m=1 3.0 <y<  3.5, m=2 3.5 <y<  4.0, m=3 4.0 <y<  4.5, m=4GeV/c  tp0510152025b/GeV/c)µ   (|y|<0.5 |t / dpσd(cid:173)210(cid:173)110110210310ALICE(cid:173)1 = 5 nbint = 7 TeV, Ls, pp +D 2.1% BR norm. unc. (not shown)± 3.5% lumi, ±stat. unc.syst. unc.FONLL GM(cid:173)VFNS  (GeV/c)tp0510152025FONLLData00.511.522.533.5  (GeV/c)  tp0510152025GM(cid:173)VFNSData00.511.522.533.502468101214c)(cid:173)1b GeVµ   (|y|<0.5 |T / dpσd(cid:173)110110210310ALICE(cid:173)1 = 4.8 nbint = 7 TeV, Ls, pp s+D 5.3% BR norm. unc. (not shown)± 3.5% lumi, ±ALICE data pointsstat. unc.syst. unc.Theory predictionsGM(cid:173)VFNS fact.TLO k02468101214Theory0.511.522.5GM(cid:173)VFNSData  (GeV/c)Tp02468101214Data  /00.511.522.5(cid:173)fact.TLO kDataCONTENTS

42

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

√

√

Figure 11. Transverse-momentum diﬀerential measurements of beauty production at
the LHC. (a) non-prompt J/ψ at
s = 8 TeV at forward rapidity from LHCb [240];
√
(b) B+ meson at
s = 7 TeV at mid-rapidity from CMS [241]; (c) b-jets at
s = 7 TeV in four rapidity intervals from ATLAS [242]; (d) ratio of b-jet to
inclusive-jet cross section in four rapidity intervals from CMS [243]. Data are
compared to FONLL [111, 227] calculations and to MC@NLO [218], POWHEG [219]
and PYTHIA [123] MC generators.

obtained. At all energies and rapidities the pQCD calculations agree with the measured
cross sections within uncertainties. Yet, the FONLL predictions obtained with the
central values of the calculation parameters tend to underestimate the data, with the
measured cross sections lying close to the upper edge of the theoretical uncertainty
band. The tendency of FONLL to underestimate the charm data was also observed at
the Tevatron [239]. On the other hand, the central value of the GM-VFNS predictions
lies systematically above the data.

Figure 11 displays a selection of results on beauty production as a function of

]c [GeV/Tp05101520]c [nb/(GeV/Tpd )ψ(J/σd (cid:173)110110210310 <  4.5y, 2.0 < b from ψLHCb J/ <  4.5yFONLL, 2.0 <  = 8 TeVs(a) [GeV]T p+B51015202530b/GeV]µX; |y | < 2.4) [+ B→ (pp T/dpσd(cid:173)210(cid:173)110110PYTHIA (MSEL 1, CTEQ6L1) = 4.75 GeV)bMC@NLO (CTEQ6M, mMC@NLO total uncertaintyCMS Data = 7 TeVsCMS  (cid:173)1L = 5.8 pbBF (3.5%) and Lumi (11%) uncertainties not shown00.020.040.060.080.1|y| < 0.5MC@NLO/FastNLOPythiaExp. uncertainty00.020.040.5 < |y| < 100.020.041 < |y| < 1.500.020.041.5 < |y| < 2 (GeV)Tb-jet p2030405010020000.020.042 < |y| < 2.2 = 7 TeVs-1CMS  L = 34 pbb-jet / inclusive jetCONTENTS

43

√

√

√

pT at the LHC. In particular, the non-prompt J/ψ cross section at forward rapidity,
s = 8 TeV [240] is shown in panel (a);
measured by the LHCb collaboration at
the B+-meson cross section at mid-rapidity measured by CMS at
s = 7 TeV [241]
is shown in panel (b); and panel (c) depicts the cross section of b-jets measured by
s = 7 TeV in diﬀerent rapidity intervals [242]. Furthermore, in Fig. 11(d),
ATLAS at
the ratios of b-jet to inclusive-jet cross sections measured by CMS [243] in diﬀerent
rapidity intervals are shown as a function of pT. The data are compared to diﬀerent
theoretical predictions. FONLL provides a good description of the non-prompt J/ψ
√
data. A similar agreement with FONLL is observed for the recent measurements of non-
s = 13 TeV [244]. However, the measured ratios of the
prompt J/ψ cross section at
production cross sections of J/ψ from beauty-hadron decays at CM energies of 13 and 8
TeV are found to lie systematically above the predictions from FONLL calculations. As
pointed out above, in the calculations of ratios of cross sections at diﬀerent energies, the
sensitivity to the pQCD scale variation is substantially reduced, thus providing some
sensitivity to the (mostly gluon) PDFs in regions where they are not yet well constrained
by data [225, 237]. PYTHIA, which has LO+LL accuracy, does not provide a good
description of the measured B-meson cross section, which is instead correctly predicted
by MC@NLO. The measurements of b-jet cross section can be compared to predictions
from MC event generators featuring a complete description of the hadronic ﬁnal state.
The NLO generators POWHEG (matched to PYTHIA parton shower) and MC@NLO
(interfaced to HERWIG for the parton shower) are found to describe the data reasonably
well, with POWHEG+PYTHIA providing a slightly better agreement with the data
across the diﬀerent rapidity regions (see [242] for details). The LO+LL predictions
from PYTHIA do not predict the correct normalization, overestimating the measured
integrated cross section by a factor of about 1.5, but they can describe reasonably well
the pT dependence of the b-jet production cross section.

Additional insight into HQ production and fragmentation can be obtained from
measurements of HF azimuthal correlations, which help to constrain MC models
and to disentangle diﬀerent production processes for HF particles. For example,
measurements of azimuthal correlations between B and B hadrons from CMS show
a substantial contribution from production at small opening angles (∆ϕ ≈ 0), which
is not reproduced by PYTHIA [245]. This result points to the importance of the
“near”’ production (via the gluon splitting mechanism) in addition to the “back-to-back”
production (mostly via ﬂavor creation). Preliminary results of D-hadron azimuthal
correlations from ALICE [246] show that PYTHIA and POWHEG+PYTHIA provide a
reasonable description of the data for this observable, which is sensitive to charm-quark
fragmentation and jet structure. The production of D mesons, prompt and non-prompt
J/ψ, and Υ was also measured by ALICE and CMS as a function of the multiplicity of
particles produced in the collision [247–249]. The per-event yields of open charm and
beauty hadrons and quarkonia are found to increase with increasing multiplicity. This
trend can be described by models including multiple parton interactions (MPI), thus
providing sensitivity to the role of MPIs at the hard momentum scales relevant for c¯c

CONTENTS

and b¯b pair production.

44

3.2.2. Results from p-A (d-A) collisions and Cold-Nuclear-Matter Eﬀects

The study of the properties of the hot and dense medium created in heavy-ion
reactions requires a quantitative understanding of the eﬀects induced by the presence
of nuclei in the initial-state of the collisions, as well as, possibly, by the relatively high
multiplicities of particles in the ﬁnal state. Such eﬀects are commonly referred to as
cold-nuclear-matter (CNM) eﬀects and are assessed experimentally by studying particle
production in proton–nucleus (pA) or deuteron–nucleus (dA) collisions.

Heavy-ﬂavor production can be aﬀected by a variety of CNM eﬀects, which include

the following.

i < 1) at small x (x < 10−2); (ii) Anti-shadowing, an enhancement (RA

• Modiﬁcation of the Parton Distribution Functions. The nuclear environment aﬀects
the quark and gluon distributions, which are modiﬁed in bound nucleons compared
to those of free nucleons. The modiﬁcation depends on the fractional parton mo-
mentum (x), on the scale of the parton–parton interaction (Q2), and on the atomic
mass number (A) of the nucleus [250, 251]. This eﬀect is commonly studied exper-
imentally via the ratio between the PDF of nucleons in nuclei (nPDF) and those
i (x, Q2), where i is the parton ﬂavor. Four regions, de-
of the proton (deuteron), RA
pending on the value of x, are usually identiﬁed: (i) Shadowing, which is a depletion
(RA
i > 1)
at intermediate x (10−2 < x < 10−1); (iii) EMC eﬀect, a depletion (RA
i < 1) in
the valence quark region (x ∼ 10−1); and (iv) an enhancement (RA
i > 1) at large
x (0.8 < x < 1) associated with the Fermi motion of nucleons inside the nucleus.
There is no comprehensive theoretical understanding of the observed pattern over
i (x, Q2) values can be calculated using phenomenological
the entire x range. The RA
parameterizations based on global ﬁt analyses of lepton–nucleus and proton–nucleus
data, such as EPS09 [252], HKN07 [253] and nDS [254]. The depletion in the low-x
region (shadowing) can be understood as due to gluon phase-space saturation, and
it can be described within the Colour Glass Condensate (CGC) eﬀective theory,
where an initial high-energy nucleus is treated as a coherent and dense (saturated)
gluonic system [255]. The modiﬁcation of the PDFs results in a modiﬁcation of the
eﬀective partonic luminosity (and consequently of the HQ production cross section)
in collisions involving nuclei relative to pp collisions.

• Multiple scattering of partons in the nucleus before and/or after the hard scattering
aﬀects the kinematic distribution of the produced heavy quarks and/or hadrons.
These multiple collisions lead to transverse-momentum broadening (usually denoted
Cronin eﬀect) [256–258] and parton energy loss [259–262].

• On top of initial-state CNM eﬀects, also eﬀects in the ﬁnal state, due to the high
multiplicity of particles produced in pA (dA) collisions, may be responsible for a

CONTENTS

45

modiﬁcation of the HF hadron yields and momentum distributions. The presence
of ﬁnal-state eﬀects in small collision systems is suggested by measurements of
long-range correlations of charged hadrons in pPb collisions at the LHC [263–266].
These observations can be described by hydrodynamic calculations assuming the
formation of a medium with some degree of collectivity. It is still highly debated
if such a collective ﬂow is established, and alternative explanations, based, e.g., on
the CGC eﬀective theory [267] have been proposed. It should be pointed out that
if a collective motion of the ﬁnal-state particles is established, the medium could
also impart a ﬂow on HF particles. Additional indications for the importance of
ﬁnal-state eﬀects in small collision systems are provided by the larger suppression of
the ψ(2S) meson with respect to the J/ψ in dAu collisions at RHIC [268] and pPb
collisions at the LHC [269], see, e.g., Refs. [270,271] for pertinent model calculations.

√

Heavy-ﬂavor production was studied at RHIC and at the LHC in dAu and pPb
sNN = 200 GeV and 5.02 TeV, respectively. At RHIC, the measurements
collisions at
were carried out by STAR [159] and PHENIX [272,273] in the semi-leptonic channel. In
particular, HF decay electrons were measured at mid-rapidity (|η| < 0.35 for PHENIX
and 0 < η < 7 for STAR) and HF decay muons at forward (deuteron-going direction)
and backward (Au-going) rapidity with PHENIX. The PHENIX collaboration also
reported results for peripheral and central collisions. The resulting nuclear modiﬁcation
factor, RdAu, of HF decay leptons is shown in Fig. 12 as a function of pT for
multiplicity integrated (bottom panels), central (middle panels) and peripheral (top
panels) collisions. The mid-rapidity results (left panels) show a slight enhancement
of the production with respect to binary-scaled pp collisions, with a mild dependence
on collision centrality. The data can be described in terms of nuclear PDFs (anti-
shadowing) and kT-broadening (Cronin enhancement). The possible development of
a collective ﬂow in the HQ sector is also expected to lead to values of RdAu larger
than unity in the pT range covered by the measurements. An approximate description
of the measured values of nuclear modiﬁcation factor can be obtained employing a
blast-wave function, with parameters extracted from ﬁts to the light-hadron spectra, to
determine the momentum distribution of HF hadrons in dAu collisions [275]. Recently,
the outcome of calculations in the POWLANG transport setup at RHIC energies were
published [276]. In this model, it is assumed that in pA and dA collisions a hot and
deconﬁned medium is formed. The relativistic Langevin equation is used to follow the
propagation of charm and beauty quarks in the hydrodynamically expanding medium
until hadronization, which is modeled by combining each heavy quark with a light parton
from the medium to form color-singlet objects (strings), which are fragmented with
PYTHIA to produce the ﬁnal-state hadrons. The model can describe the midrapidity
data within uncertainties, suggesting that, within such a framework, the enhancement
of RdAu of HF decay electrons observed at RHIC reﬂects the radial ﬂow acquired by the
parent-D and -B mesons.

In the right panels of Fig. 12 the results on the HF muon RdAu at forward and

CONTENTS

46

√

Figure 12. Nuclear modiﬁcation factor of heavy-ﬂavor decay leptons as a function
of pT in dAu collisions at
sNN = 200 GeV. Left: heavy-ﬂavor decay electrons
at mid-rapidity from PHENIX [272] and STAR [159]. Right: heavy-ﬂavor decay
muons at backward (Au-going side) and forward (d-going side) rapidity from
PHENIX [273]. PHENIX results are shown for the centrality-integrated sample (0–
100%) and for peripheral (60-88%) and central (0–20%) collisions separately. Muon
data are compared to predictions based on nuclear modiﬁcation of the PDF (EPS09s
nPDF [274]); and to a theoretical calculation including shadowing, kT-broadening and
cold-nuclear-matter energy loss eﬀects [261].

backward rapidities are reported. They show a pronounced centrality dependence,
with similar RdAu values in peripheral collisions at forward and backward rapidity, but
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in central collisions, namely a suppression at forward rapidity (d-
going direction) and an enhancement at backward rapidity (Au-going direction). The
data at forward rapidity are described both by the model of Vitev et al. [261], which
includes shadowing, kT broadening and CNM energy loss, and by pQCD calculations
including EPS09 nPDFs [274]. The results at backward rapidity cannot be described
by only considering nPDF eﬀects, suggesting that other mechanisms are at work.

The b¯b production cross section was determined at mid-rapidity by the PHENIX
collaboration from the invariant-mass and pT distributions of e+e− pairs. The result,
b¯b = 1.37 ± 0.28(stat) ± 0.46(syst) mb,
σdAu
is consistent with binary scaling of the

0246810dAuR0.511.522.5=200 GeVNNsd+Au @ Heavy(cid:173)flavour decay electrons(a) 60(cid:173)88%02468100.511.522.5(b) 0(cid:173)20% (GeV/c)Tp02468100.511.522.5(c) 0(cid:173)100%|<0.35ηPHENIX, |<0.7ηSTAR, 0<01234567    dAR0.511.522.5(a) 60(cid:173)88%(cid:173)2.0 < y < (cid:173)1.41.4 < y < 2.0=200 GeVNNsd+Au @ 012345670.511.522.5(b) 0(cid:173)20%µ→PYTHIA + EPS09s LO, Dµ→PYTHIA + EPS09s LO, D (GeV/c)Tp012345670.511.522.5(c) 0(cid:173)100% broadening, CNM E(cid:173)loss)TI. Vitev (shadowing, kCONTENTS

47

Figure 13. Nuclear modiﬁcation factor of D mesons [278] (left) and HF decay
electrons [277] (right) as a function of pT in pPb collisions at
sNN = 5.02 TeV.
Data are compared to calculations including CNM eﬀects: NLO pQCD calculations
with EPS09 nPDF [252], Color Glass Condensate [281], shadowing, kT-broadening and
CNM energy loss [72], incoherent multiple scatterings [282] and a blast-wave ansatz
for a collectively expanding medium [275].

√

cross section measured in pp collisions [166]. The modiﬁcation due to CNM eﬀects
on HF production at mid-rapidity is expected to be small as compared to the quoted
uncertainties of the measurement.

At LHC energies, charm and beauty production was studied by measuring HF
decay electrons (ALICE [277]), D mesons (ALICE [278]), B mesons (CMS [179]),
and b-jets (CMS [279]) at mid-rapidity; at forward (p-going side) and backward (Pb-
going) rapidity, beauty was studied via measurements of non-prompt J/ψ by the LHCb
collaboration [172]. Preliminary results were also reported by the ALICE collaboration
for HF decay muons at forward and backward rapidity [280] and beauty-decay electrons
at mid-rapidity [280].

√

The nuclear modiﬁcation factor RpPb of prompt D mesons [278] and HF decay
electrons [277] measured by the ALICE collaboration as a function of pT at mid-rapidity
is shown in Fig. 13. The reference pp cross sections at
s = 5.02 TeV were obtained
√
with a pQCD-based energy scaling of the pT-diﬀerential cross sections measured at
s = 7 TeV [283]. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence among diﬀerent D-meson species (D0,
D+, D∗+ and D+
s ) is observed [278]. The average RpPb of D0, D+ and D∗+ mesons is
reported in the left panel of Fig. 13. Within uncertainties, the measured D-meson RpPb
is compatible with unity, indicating small (< 10− 20%) CNM eﬀects for pT > 2 GeV/c.
The D-meson RpPb is compared to model calculations including CNM eﬀects, namely
NLO pQCD calculations with ESP09 nPDF [252], calculations based on CGC eﬀective
theory [281] and predictions including shadowing, kT broadening and CNM energy

)c (GeV/Tp0510152025pPbR00.20.40.60.811.21.41.6*+, D+, D0Average D<0.04cmsy(cid:173)0.96<CGC (Fujii(cid:173)Watanabe)pQCD NLO (MNR) with CTEQ6M+EPS09 PDF broad + CNM ElossTVitev: power corr. + kALICE=5.02 TeVNNsp(cid:173)Pb, )c (GeV/Tp024681012  pPbR 0.511.522.5Kang et al.: incoherent multiple scatteringSharma et al.: coherent scattering + CNMFONLL + EPS09NLO shad.Blast wave calculationNormalisation uncertaintyKang et al.: incoherent multiple scatteringSharma et al.: coherent scattering + CNMFONLL + EPS09NLO shad.Blast wave calculationNormalisation uncertaintyALICE = 5.02 TeVNNsPb, −p < 0.14cmsy1.06 < −)/2, (cid:173) + e+ (e→c,b CONTENTS

48

loss [72]. The data are fairly well described by the above mentioned models, which
consider only initial-state eﬀects. The eﬀect of the possible formation of a collectively
expanding medium, as calculated with the blast-wave approach of [275], is expected
to be small for D mesons in multiplicity-integrated collisions. The ﬁrst results from
two diﬀerent transport models assuming the formation of a hot and deconﬁned medium
in pPb collisions at the LHC, which modiﬁes the propagation and hadronization of
heavy quarks, were recently published [276, 284] In these frameworks, a small bump in
the RpPb at low/intermediate pT due to radial ﬂow is predicted, possibly accompanied
by a moderate (< 20 − 30%) suppression at high pT, due to in-medium energy
loss. The models describe the data within uncertainties, even though the measured
RpPb disfavors a suppression larger than 15–20% in the transverse momentum interval
5 < pT < 10 GeV/c. However, the current uncertainties on the experimental and
theoretical side do not allow us to discriminate between scenarios with only CNM eﬀects
or with CNM and hot medium eﬀects.

√

The HF decay electron result, shown in the right panel of Fig. 13, is also consistent
with unity within uncertainties over the whole pT range of the measurement. Given
the large systematic uncertainties, the measured RpPb is also compatible with an
enhancement in the transverse-momentum interval 1 < pT < 6 GeV/c, as observed
sNN = 200 GeV (see Fig. 12). Similarly to
at midrapidity in dAu collisions at
what is observed for D mesons, the data are described within uncertainties by pQCD
calculations with nPDFs [252], and by a model including shadowing, kT broadening
and CNM energy loss [72], both of them predicting a small suppression at low pT.
Calculations based on incoherent multiple scatterings [282] or on a blast-wave modeling
of the possible establishment of collective ﬂow [275] predict an enhancement in the
nuclear modiﬁcation factor at low pT. The uncertainties of the current measurements
do not allow a discrimination among these diﬀerent theoretical approaches.

Results on D-meson production as a function of the pPb collision centrality
were recently published [285].
In Fig. 14, the nuclear modiﬁcation factor, QpPb, of
prompt D mesons (average of D0, D+ and D∗+) is shown as a function of pT for
four diﬀerent centrality classes, deﬁned from the energy deposited in the neutron zero-
degree calorimeters. This selection provides the least biased estimation of the collision
geometry, as discussed in detail in Ref. [286]. The results indicate that charm-hadron
production is compatible with binary scaling of the pp reference in all the considered
centrality classes. In particular, no evidence of a substantial modiﬁcation of D-meson
production with respect to pp collisions is observed in the 20% most central collisions,
in which the multiplicity of produced particles is comparable to that in peripheral
nucleus-nucleus collisions at RHIC/LHC energies. Nevertheless, considering the current
statistical and systematic uncertainties, centrality-dependent eﬀects of the order of 10%
cannot be excluded.

The production of beauty mesons, namely B0, B+ and B0

s , was measured by the
CMS collaboration [179] in pPb collisions as a function of transverse momentum in
the range 10 < pT < 60 GeV/c. The production of B+ mesons was also studied as

CONTENTS

49

Figure 14. Nuclear modiﬁcation factor of D mesons (average of D0, D+ and D∗+) as a
function of pT in diﬀerent centrality classes for pPb collisions at
sNN = 5.02 TeV [285].
The notation QpPb is used for the nuclear modiﬁcation factor in centrality classes to
emphasize the possible presence of potential biases in the centrality estimation (see
Ref. [286])

√

.

a function of rapidity. The B+ nuclear modiﬁcation factor, computed using FONLL
pQCD calculations as the pp reference, is shown in Fig. 15 as a function of pT (left
panel) and rapidity (right panel). No signiﬁcant modiﬁcation of B-meson production
is observed in pPb collisions compared to the binary-scaled FONLL reference over the
measured pT range.

√

The CMS collaboration recently reported measurements of b-jet pT-diﬀerential cross
sNN = 5.02 TeV in the
section and nuclear modiﬁcation factor in pPb collisions at
jet transverse-momentum and pseudorapidity intervals 55 < pT < 400 GeV/c and
2.5 < ηCMS < 1.5 [279]. As there are no pp data available at the CM energy of
pPb collisions, the pp reference for the RpPb calculation was obtained from PYTHIA
simulations. The discrepancies between PYTHIA and data observed at
s = 2.76 and
7 TeV were accounted for in the systematic uncertainty. The resulting RPYTHIA
as a
function of pT is shown in the left panel of Fig. 16; it is compatible with unity within
uncertainties, especially considering the 22% uncertainty on the PYTHIA reference.
The data are described within uncertainties by a pQCD model that includes modest
initial-state energy-loss eﬀects [287]. Overall, the conclusions from the b-jet studies
agree with those drawn from the measurements of B meson production reported above.
Future measurements of B mesons and b-jets in pp collisions at
s = 5.02 TeV are
expected to provide a substantial reduction of the uncertainties on the pp reference,
thus enabling a more deﬁnite assessment of possible modiﬁcations of beauty production
in pPb collisions.

√

√

pPb

) c (GeV/Tp 051015202530 prompt DpPbQ 00.511.522.50(cid:173)20%20(cid:173)40%40(cid:173)60%60(cid:173)100%ALICE = 5.02 TeVNNsp(cid:173)Pb, +, D*+, D0Average D < 0.04 cmsy(cid:173)0.96 < ZN Energy ClassesCONTENTS

50

Figure 15. Nuclear modiﬁcation factor of B+ mesons as a function of pT (left) and
rapidity (right) in pPb collisions at
sNN = 5.02 TeV [179]. The pp reference is taken
from FONLL pQCD calculations.

√

√

Beauty production in pPb collisions at the LHC was also studied by the LHCb
√
collaboration by measuring non-prompt J/ψ at large rapidities (2 < ylab < 4.5) down to
pT = 0 [172]. The pp reference at
s = 5.02 TeV was obtained via an interpolation of the
s values of 2.76, 7 and 8 TeV. The pT-integrated RpPb as a function
measurements at
of rapidity is shown in the right panel of Fig. 16 together with theoretical calculations.
The nuclear modiﬁcation factor is compatible with unity at backward rapidity (Pb-going
side). In the forward rapidity region the data show a modest suppression relative to the
binary-scaled pp reference. Perturbative QCD calculations at LO including EPS09 or
nDSg nPDF parameterizations [288] describe the data well at forward rapidity, while in
the backward region the agreement is not as good.

As pointed out in Ref. [289], the nuclear modiﬁcation of the PDFs at small x can
be better constrained by means of a data-to-theory comparison of the pT-diﬀerential
D-meson forward-to-backward ratio,
i.e., the ratio of the D-meson cross sections
in symmetric intervals at backward and forward rapidity, in the kinematical region
accessible with the LHCb apparatus. In this ratio, the theoretical uncertainties due to
pQCD scales and quark mass partially cancel, as well as some of the contributions to
the experimental systematic uncertainties, thus providing improved sensitivity to CNM
eﬀects on the PDFs.

Further insight into possible modiﬁcations of HF production in dAu and pPb
collisions can be obtained from measurements of azimuthal correlations. The angular
correlation between HF hadrons reﬂects the correlation between HQ pairs and is
therefore sensitive to their production mechanisms.
In proton(deuteron)–nucleus
collisions, the CGC eﬀective theory predicts, in addition to a reduction of the overall
particle yield, a broadening and suppression of the away-side peak (at ∆ϕ = π) in the

 (GeV/c)Tp102030405060pAFONLLR00.511.522.53pAFONLLRSyst. pPb dataSyst. FONLL pp ref.Syst. int. lumi + BCMS (pPb 5.02 TeV)-134.6 nb| < 2.4lab|y+BCMy-3-2-1012)+  (BpAFONLLR00.511.522.533.54pAFONLLRSyst. pPb dataSyst. FONLL pp ref.Syst. int. lumi + BCMS (pPb 5.02 TeV)-134.6 nb+B < 60 GeV/cT10 < pCONTENTS

51

Figure 16. Nuclear modiﬁcation of beauty production in pPb collisions at
sNN =
5.02 TeV. Left: RpPb of b-jets as a function of pT measured by CMS [279], compared
to predictions of a model including initial-state energy loss [287]. Right: RpPb of J/ψ
from beauty-hadron decays as a function of y measured by LHCb [172], compared to
predictions of models with nuclear modiﬁcation of the PDFs [288].

√

two-particle azimuthal correlations [255, 290, 291]. A depletion of the away-side yields
in two-particle azimuthal correlations is also expected to be induced by CNM energy
loss and multiple scattering processes in the initial and ﬁnal state [292]. These eﬀects
could also aﬀect HF angular correlations. The azimuthal correlation between HF decay
electrons at mid-rapidity (pT > 0.5 GeV/c, |η| < 0.35) and HF decay muons at forward
rapidity (pT > 1 GeV/c, 1.4 < η < 2.1) were measured by the PHENIX collaboration
in pp and dAu collisions at
s = 200 GeV [205]. The selection of a muon at forward
rapidity allows to probe a low-x range in the Au nucleus, where saturation eﬀects are
predicted to occur. A suppression of the away-side peak (∆ϕ = π) is observed in dAu
collisions compared to pp, indicating that the charm-quark pair kinematics is modiﬁed
in the cold nuclear medium. Preliminary results of D-hadron azimuthal correlations in
pPb collisions at the LHC were reported by the ALICE collaboration [246]. With the
current level of uncertainties, no conclusion can be drawn on a possible modiﬁcation of
D-hadron correlations with respect to pp collisions.

√

Measurements of two-particle angular correlations in pA collisions can also be
exploited to study whether also charm and beauty show v2-like double-ridge long-
range angular correlations in “small systems”, as observed for light hadrons [263–266].
An intriguing possible hint for a non-zero HF v2 in high-multiplicity pPb collisions
is provided by the ALICE measurements of angular correlations between a muon at
forward rapidity and hadrons at midrapidity [293]. A positive v2 is observed in the 20%
highest-multiplicity pPb interactions for muon tracks up to pT ≈ 4 GeV/c. Therefore,
in the transverse momentum interval pT > 2 GeV/c, where the inclusive muon yield is
expected to be dominated by HF hadron decays, the data may support a ﬁnite value of

 [GeV/c]Tjet p050100150200250300350400PYTHIApAR00.511.522.5 < 1.5CMη, -2.5 < PYTHIApAb jet RPLB 726 (2013) 251-256pPb luminosity uncert.pp reference uncert.CMS  (5.02 TeV)-1pPb 35 nby-4-2024pPbR00.20.40.60.811.21.41.6 < 14 GeV/cTpEPS09 LOnDSg LO from b ψLHCb, J/ = 5 TeVNNspPb LHCb(b)CONTENTS

HF v2.

52

In summary of this section,

the measurements in proton(deuteron)–nucleus
collisions show small to moderate modiﬁcations of HF production as compared to
the binary-scaled pp references. The magnitude of this modiﬁcation depends on
rapidity, pT, and (at least at RHIC energy) collision centrality. The measured
values of charm and beauty nuclear modiﬁcation factors can be described by models
including CNM eﬀects: nuclear modiﬁcation of the PDFs, (gluon) saturation, transverse-
momentum broadening, and initial-parton energy loss. The uncertainties on the current
experimental results, together with the large uncertainties on the parameterized nuclear
PDFs at small Bjorken-x prevent a more conclusive theoretical interpretation of the
data, making it diﬃcult to address in a more quantitative way the role of the various
CNM eﬀects in the initial and ﬁnal state.

3.3. Results from A-A Collisions and Model Comparisons

Charm and beauty quarks are sensitive probes of the properties of the hot and
dense medium created in heavy-ion collisions at ultra-relativistic energies. They are
predominantly produced in hard-scattering processes occurring in the early stages of
the collision, characterized by time scales shorter than the expected formation times
of the QGP medium. Thermal production in the medium is expected to be small
or negligible at the temperatures attained in heavy-ion collisions at RHIC and at the
LHC [183, 184]. Their total yield is therefore essentially set by the yield in pp collisions,
which, as discussed in Section 3.2.1, is described by pQCD calculations within current
uncertainties, further modiﬁed by nuclear corrections to the PDFs (see Section 3.2.2)
and scaled by the number of binary nucleon–nucleon collisions (Ncoll) occurring in
the nucleus–nucleus interaction. The initially produced heavy quarks interact with
the constituents of the medium through the exchange of energy and momentum. At
suﬃciently high pT (pT >∼ 5(15) GeV/c for charm (bottom)), the main eﬀect is that heavy
quarks lose energy while traversing the medium (although the precise characterization
of the transition to the energy-loss regime is still an open question and is expected to
depend on collision energy, centrality, quark ﬂavor, etc.). The energy loss can occur via
both inelastic (radiative) and elastic (collisional) processes, resulting in a suppression
of the yield of HF hadrons (and their decay leptons) at high pT as compared to the
binary-scaled pp reference (recall Secs. 2.2.1 and 2.2.2). The interest in HF studies
in the high-pT regime is mostly related to the predicted color-charge and quark-mass
dependence of in-medium parton energy loss, expected to lead to a hierarchy where
beauty quarks lose less energy than charm quarks, and the latter less energy than light
quarks and gluons. At lower pT (pT <∼ 5(15) GeV/c for charm (bottom)), measurements
of HF particles are sensitive to other aspects of the interactions of charm and beauty
quarks with the medium. Low-momentum heavy quarks, including those shifted to low
momentum by energy loss, are expected to couple to the collective expansion (ﬂow)
of the system and approach local thermal equilibrium with the medium [118, 185]. It

CONTENTS

53

Figure 17. Centrality dependence of the nuclear modiﬁcation factor RAA of HF decay
electrons (left, from PHENIX [44]) and D0 mesons (right, from STAR [294]) at mid-
rapidity in diﬀerent pT intervals. Also shown in the left panel is the RAA of π0 with
pT > 4 GeV/c.

is also predicted that a signiﬁcant fraction of low- and intermediate-momentum heavy
quarks hadronizes via recombination with other quarks from the medium [118, 186] (as
discussed in Sec. 2.2.6). These questions can be addressed via the study of the nuclear
modiﬁcation factor, RAA, and of the azimuthal anisotropy, in particular the elliptic ﬂow
v2, of HF hadrons and their decay leptons at low and intermediate pT (smaller than
roughly ﬁve times the HQ mass).

All ﬁnal-state eﬀects described above, which are a consequence of the interactions of
the heavy quarks with the hot and dense medium, inﬂuence the momentum distribution
of charm (beauty) quarks, but they have little or no eﬀect on the total yield of HF
hadrons. For this reason, the pT-integrated yield is expected to be consistent with
Ncoll scaling of the yield measured in pp reactions, apart from eﬀects due to nuclear
modiﬁcations of the PDFs aﬀecting the production process. This is conﬁrmed by the
√
results shown in Fig. 17 where the nuclear modiﬁcation factor of HF decay electrons [44]
and D0 mesons [294] measured in Au–Au collisions at a CM energy of
sNN = 200 GeV
per nucleon pair, are shown as a function of the collision centrality, expressed in terms
of the number of participant nucleons Npart, for diﬀerent pT intervals. The production
of HF decay electrons with pT > 0.3 GeV/c, which measures a large part of the total
charm production yield, and of D0 mesons with 0 < pT < 8 GeV/c, are consistent
with a scaling with the number of binary collisions (corresponding to RAA = 1) within
experimental uncertainties, as expected for initial HQ production from hard-scattering
processes. In contrast, the yield at high pT shows a clear suppression (RAA < 1), which
increases from peripheral to central collisions, following the qualitative expectation from
in-medium charm (and beauty) quark energy loss.

At present, HF production has not been measured down to pT = 0 in Pb–Pb
collisions at the LHC. Hence, no results of total charm (beauty) production in heavy-
ion collisions at LHC energies are currently available to check the binary scaling. It is

partN050100150200250300350AAR00.20.40.60.811.21.4 = 200 GeVNNsAu+Au @  > 0.3 GeV/cT : p±e > 3.0 GeV/cT : p±e > 4.0 GeV/cT : p0π〉partN〈0100200300400AA R0Integrated D00.511.52p+pnorm. + X @ 200 GeV,  |y|<10 D→STAR Au+Au  < 8.0 GeV/cT3.0 < p < 2.2 GeV/cT0.7 < p < 8.0 GeV/cT0 < p0(cid:173)80% MBCONTENTS

54

worth to point out that the nuclear modiﬁcation of the PDF, which has a small eﬀect on
the total charm production at RHIC energies, is expected to induce a ∼20% reduction
√
sNN = 2.76 TeV,, according to NLO calculations [210]
of initial charm production at
with the EPS09 parameterization of nPDFs [252]. This is due to the smaller values of
Bjorken-x probed at the LHC, i.e., a larger expected shadowing, as compared to lower
collision energies. Hence, the pT-integrated RAA of charm hadrons is expected to be
lower than unity at LHC energies.

In the remainder of this section, the results from measurements at RHIC and at
the LHC will be brieﬂy summarized, focusing on the pT dependence of the nuclear
modiﬁcation factor RAA and the elliptic ﬂow v2. The overview of the experimental
results is organized as follows. In the ﬁrst subsection, the results from measurements
of HF decay leptons at diﬀerent collision energies are reviewed. Then, the D-meson
measurements at RHIC and at the LHC are discussed and compared to results for
light-ﬂavor hadrons. Finally, the experimental results in the beauty sector from the
LHC experiments are reported together with a comparison of the nuclear modiﬁcation
factors of charm and beauty hadrons. The presentation of the experimental results
is accompanied by a discussion of their consequences for the characterization of the
produced QCD matter and the estimation of its transport coeﬃcients. The main
ingredients of the diﬀerent theoretical model calculations utilized in this discussion are
summarized in Table 3.3.

3.3.1. Heavy-ﬂavor decay leptons

Measurements of HF decay leptons in heavy-ion collisions have been carried out at
RHIC and at the LHC by the STAR, PHENIX, ALICE and ATLAS collaborations at
mid- and forward rapidity, exploiting both semi-electronic and the semi-muonic decay
modes.

√

The ﬁrst measurements of HF decay electron spectra in Au–Au reactions at RHIC
were performed by PHENIX on the data sample recorded during the ﬁrst RHIC run
sNN = 130 GeV per nucleon pair [300]. The limited precision
at a CM energy of
of the measurement prevented from drawing conclusions about possible modiﬁcations
√
of charm production in heavy-ion collisions relative to a binary-scaled pp reference.
The larger data sample of Au–Au collisions at
sNN = 200 GeV collected in year
2001 allowed the measurement of the centrality and pT dependence of the yield of
electrons from HF hadron decays at mid-rapidity [43, 301]. The measurements of the
nuclear modiﬁcation factor of HF decay electrons, reported in [43], showed a substantial
suppression for pT > 2GeV/c in central Au–Au collisions relative to the expectation
based on binary scaling of the yields measured in pp collisions. The magnitude of
the observed suppression turned out to be compatible with that measured for neutral
pions and was larger than expected in radiative-energy loss calculations, posing a
challenge to this class of models. More precise measurements were carried out by the
PHENIX [44, 147] and STAR [159] collaborations utilizing the larger data samples of
Au–Au collisions at
sNN = 200 GeV collected during the RHIC run-4. In addition,

√

CONTENTS

Model

Heavy-quark
production

nPDFs

Medium
modelling
Transport models
Boltzmann

55

Quark-medium Hadroni- Hadron
phase

interactions

zation

Boltzmann

frag

no

BAMPS
[28, 38, 75]

MC@NLO

No

parton 3+1D

pQCD coll+rad

Cao et al./Duke

MC@NLO

EPS09

Hydro 2+1D

Langevin

[82, 83, 201]

viscous

coll+pQCD rad

MC@sHQ+EPOS

FONLL

EPS09

Hydro 3+1D

Boltzmann

[46, 73, 74]

PHSD
[40, 51]

POWLANG
[36, 48, 122]

TAMU

[65, 76, 124]

(EPOS)

pQCD coll+rad

PYTHIA

EPS09

oﬀ-shell parton

oﬀ-shell trans

transport

pQCD coll

POWHEG

EPS09

Hydro 2+1D

viscous

FONLL

EPS09

Hydro 2+1D

ideal

Langevin
pQCD coll

Langevin
T-mat coll

frag+
reco

frag+
reco

frag+
reco

string-

reco

frag+
reco

AdS/CFT (HG)

FONLL

No

Energy-loss models

Glauber
no hydro

AdS/CFT

drag

frag

yes

no

yes

no

yes

no

no

no

no

no

[295, 296]

CUJET 3.0

[222, 223]

[297, 298]

Vitev et al.

[72, 299]

WHDG
[84, 220]

Djordjevic et al.

FONLL

No

FONLL

No

Hydro 2+1D

rad+coll

frag

viscous

Glauber
no hydro

rad+coll+
magn. mass

frag

frag

non-zero mass

No

Glauber+

rad+

VFNS

1D Bjorken exp

in-med dissoc

FONLL

No

Glauber
no hydro

rad+coll

frag

Table 2. Overview of the main features of models of heavy-quark in-medium
energy loss and transport; see Sec. 2 for more details. The non-standard acronyms
are:
reco=recombination,
dissoc=dissociation, exp=expansion.

frag=fragmentation,

coll=collisional,

rad=radiative,

√

√

sNN = 200 GeV
PHENIX published results from a sample of Cu–Cu collisions at
sNN = 62.4 GeV from run-10 [302].
collected in run-5 [163] and in Au–Au collisions at
The STAR collaboration published a study of v2 in Au–Au collisions at diﬀerent energies
utilizing the run-10 data samples. Recently, the PHENIX collaboration reported ﬁrst
results of separated yields of single electrons from charm- and beauty-hadron decays
from the sample of Au–Au collisions at
sNN = 200 GeV collected in run-11 after the
installation and commissioning of the vertex detector [303]. During the ﬁrst run at the
LHC (years 2009-2013), HF decay muon RAA and v2 were measured at forward rapidity
by the ALICE collaboration [164, 304]. Preliminary results for HF decay electrons and
muons at mid-rapidity were reported by ALICE [305] and ATLAS [306].

√

A selection of results on the pT dependence of the nuclear modiﬁcation factor of
HF decay leptons for diﬀerent colliding systems and collision energies and centralities
is collected in Fig. 18.
In the top-left panel, the results on HF decay electron RAA
at midrapidity in central Au–Au, Cu–Cu and dAu collisions at
sNN = 200 GeV are

√

CONTENTS

56

Figure 18. Nuclear modiﬁcation factor of HF decay leptons as a function of pT
at RHIC and at the LHC. Top left: Heavy-ﬂavor decay electrons at mid-rapidity in
sNN = 200 GeV. Top
central dAu [272], Cu–Cu [307] and Au–Au collisions [147] at
right: Heavy-ﬂavor decay leptons at mid- (electrons) and forward (muons) rapidity in
central Cu–Cu collisions at
sNN = 200 GeV [163] compared to model calculations [72].
Bottom left: Heavy-ﬂavor decay electrons at mid-rapidity in central Au–Au collisions
at
sNN = 62.4 GeV [302], compared to the TAMU model calculation [308]. Bottom
right: Heavy-ﬂavor decay muons at forward rapidity in central and peripheral Pb–Pb
collisions at

sNN = 2.76 TeV [164].

√

√

√

√

compared [307]. A substantial suppression of the yield of electrons with pT > 1.5 GeV/c
is observed in the 10% most central Au–Au collisions [147]. The suppression increases
with increasing pT, reaching a factor of about four at pT = 4 GeV/c. The results from
dAu collisions [272], showing a nuclear modiﬁcation factor consistent or larger than
unity, provide clear evidence that the high-pT suppression observed in central Au–Au
collisions is a ﬁnal-state eﬀect due to the formation of a hot and dense medium. In the
10% most central Cu–Cu collisions a moderate suppression of the HF decay electron
yield is observed for pT > 3 GeV/c. The magnitude of the suppression is smaller than
that observed in central Au–Au collisions, as expected from the smaller size of the
system created in the collisions of the lighter Cu nuclei.

In Cu–Cu collisions at

sNN = 200 GeV, HF decay muons were measured at forward
rapidity (1.4 < y < 1.9) [163]. The results are reported in the top-right panel of

√

[GeV/c]Tp0246810AAR00.511.52d+AuCu+CuAu+Au0(cid:173)20%0(cid:173)10%0(cid:173)10% 9.9%±Global error:  [GeV/c]Tp01234567CuCuR00.511.5 |y|<0.35±0(cid:173)10%   e 1.4<|y|<1.9(cid:173)µ0(cid:173)20%    9.9%±Global error:  01234560.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5 electrons, 0-20% Au+Au, 62 AGeV  RAApte (GeV) (GeV/c)Tp024681012AAR00.20.40.60.811.2HF, 2.5<y<4← ±µ=2.76 TeVNNsALICE, Pb(cid:173)Pb, Centrality0(cid:173)10%40(cid:173)80%CONTENTS

57

The HF decay electron RAA in the 20% most central Au–Au collisions at

Fig. 18 and compared to the mid-rapidity results. Open HF production is found to be
signiﬁcantly more suppressed at forward rapidity than at midrapidity. The magnitude of
the suppression observed in Cu–Cu collisions at forward rapidity is comparable to that
in central Au–Au collisions at midrapidity. This observation suggests that in-medium
energy loss is not the only mechanism responsible for the observed suppression, as the
medium size and density are larger in Au–Au than in Cu–Cu collisions. Other nuclear
eﬀects, such as gluon shadowing at small Bjorken-x or partonic energy loss in cold
nuclear matter, can be relevant for the description of the forward-rapidity results. The
gross features of the data are caught by the Vitev et al. model calculations [72], shown
in the top-right panel of Fig. 18, which includes in-medium energy loss due to gluon
radiation and in-medium hadron formation and dissociation, as well as cold-nuclear
matter eﬀects such as shadowing and kT-broadening.

√
sNN =
62.4 GeV is shown in the bottom-left panel of Fig. 18 [302]. Since a sample of pp collisions
at RHIC is not available for this CM energy, the pp reference was taken from ISR data.
The RAA is found to be consistently larger than unity and no suppression is observed
In contrast to the HF results, the π0 measurements
in the measurement pT range.
at this lower collision energy show a suppression that increases with centrality [309].
Measurements at this lower collision energy oﬀer the possibility to study HF production
in a situation in which the initial temperature of the medium is reduced as compared
to top RHIC energy, while still encompassing the transition region. This could shed
light on the question whether the HQ coupling to the medium is primarily driven by
an increasing temperature (or energy density), or by an increase in coupling strength in
the pseudo-critical region of the chiral/deconﬁnement transition [308]. The measured
HF decay electron nuclear modiﬁcation factor can be described within uncertainties by
the TAMU model [308], shown as a red band in the bottom-left panel of Fig. 18. In this
approach, the RAA pattern at
sNN = 62.4 GeV emerges from the interplay of initial-
and ﬁnal-state eﬀects, in particular the partial thermalization of heavy quarks in the hot
medium (starting from a softer initial-production spectrum than at
sNN = 200 GeV)
and a Cronin enhancement, which is known to become more pronounced toward lower
collision energies.

√

√

√

In the bottom-right panel of Fig. 18, the RAA of HF decay muons at forward
rapidity (2.5 < y < 4) is shown for central and peripheral Pb–Pb collisions at the LHC
energy of
sNN = 2.76 TeV. A strong suppression, by a factor of 3-4, is observed in
the 10% most central collisions in the measurement pT range (4 < pT < 10 GeV/c),
without a signiﬁcant pT dependence within uncertainties. A smaller suppression is
observed for peripheral (40–80%) collisions. The higher collision energy allowed a
precise determination of the nuclear modiﬁcation factor in the momentum interval
pT > 6 GeV/c, which was accessible with limited statistical precision at RHIC energies.
In this high-pT interval, according to the central value of FONLL pQCD calculations,
the dominant contribution to the HF muon yield is due to beauty-hadron decays.

The system size dependence of the nuclear modiﬁcation factor can be investigated

CONTENTS

58

Figure 19. System size dependence of HF decay lepton RAA. Left: Heavy-ﬂavor
decay electrons in 1 < pT < 3 GeV/c in dAu, Cu–Cu and Au–Au collisions at RHIC
energies as a function of the average number of nucleon–nucleon collisions [302, 307].
Right: Heavy-ﬂavor decay muons in 6 < pT < 10 GeV/c in Pb–Pb collisions at the
LHC as a function of the average number of participant nucleons [164].

by comparing results at diﬀerent centralities and in diﬀerent colliding systems. It was
observed in Ref.
[307] that when results from dAu, Cu–Cu and Au–Au collisions are
compared in centrality intervals of comparable system size (i.e., similar average number
of participant nucleons or binary collisions), similar trends and magnitudes are found
for the RAA as a function of pT. This is illustrated in the left panel of Fig. 19, where the
√
HF decay electron RAA in the range 1 < pT < 3 GeV/c from dAu, Cu–Cu and Au–Au
collisions is compiled as a function of (cid:104)Ncoll(cid:105). The data at
sNN = 200 GeV indicate
a common trend among the three diﬀerent systems, showing an enhancement which
increases with increasing system size at low (cid:104)Ncoll(cid:105), followed by suppression for larger
system sizes. This common trend suggests that the enhancement and suppression eﬀects
are dependent on the size of the colliding system and the produced medium and are the
result of the interplay between CNM (nPDF, Cronin enhancement) and hot-medium
(energy-loss, radial ﬂow) eﬀects. The results at
sNN = 62.4 GeV, also shown in the
left panel of Fig. 19, suggest that at this lower collision energy the competition among
diﬀerent eﬀects (Cronin enhancement, ﬂow and energy loss) favors HF enhancement over
suppression, consistently with previous observations of an increased Cronin enhancement
with decreasing collision energy [310]. Studies of the system size dependence in Pb–Pb
collisions at the LHC are shown in the right panel of Fig. 19, which reports the RAA of
HF decay muons for 2.5 < y < 4 and 6 < pT < 10 GeV/c, where, according to FONLL
calculations, the beauty contribution is expected to be dominant. A trend of increasing
suppression with increasing centrality is observed, qualitatively similar to that found in
Au–Au collisions at RHIC, suggesting that HQ in-medium energy loss dominates over
other cold and hot medium eﬀects.

√

The nuclear modiﬁcation factor of electrons from HF hadron decays cannot be
compared directly to that of light hadrons at the same pT, because of the kinematics of

collN10210310<3 GeV/cT1<p>AA<R0123d+Au, 200 GeVCu+Cu, 200 GeVAu+Au, 200 GeVAu+Au, 62 GeVCONTENTS

59

Figure 20. Heavy-ﬂavor decay electron v2 in Au–Au collisions as function of pT.
Left: PHENIX results for diﬀerent centrality intervals at
sNN = 200 GeV [147].
Right: STAR results at three diﬀerent collision energies [311].

√

the semi-leptonic decay. According to PYTHIA simulations [123], HF decay electrons
with pT > 3 GeV/c originate to a large extent from the decay of D mesons with
pT > 4 GeV/c, with the beauty contribution expected to be small at low pT according
to FONLL calculations. For this reason, in the left panel of Fig. 17, the RAA of HF
decay electrons with pT > 3 GeV/c is compared to that of π0 for pT > 4 GeV/c.
In this intermediate pT range, the data suggest a smaller suppression of HF hadrons
as compared to light-ﬂavor mesons. In addition, in order to draw conclusions on the
parton energy loss starting from the measurements of charm and light-ﬂavor hadron
RAA, one should also consider the eﬀects of the diﬀerent momentum distributions of the
initially produced charm quarks as compared to light quarks and gluons, their diﬀerent
fragmentation functions into hadrons, as well as the diﬀerent initial-state eﬀects on
light and heavy quarks (e.g., the diﬀerent Cronin enhancement of hadrons with diﬀerent
mass [272,310]). This will be discussed in more detail in the next sub-section where the
D-meson measurements are presented and discussed.

Further insight into the interaction of heavy quarks with the medium is provided
by the measurements of elliptic ﬂow and their comparison to model calculations. The
results of the measurements of HF decay electron v2 at mid-rapidity as a function of
pT in Au–Au collisions at RHIC are shown in Fig. 20. The left panel reports the
results of the PHENIX collaboration for collisions at
sNN = 200 GeV in diﬀerent
centrality intervals [147]. The largest v2 is observed in semi-peripheral collisions (20–40%
shown in the plot and 40-60% not shown in the plot), for which the initial geometrical
anisotropy is largest. The elliptic ﬂow is found to be larger than zero in the interval
0.5 < pT < 2.5 GeV/c, with a maximum value of about 0.1 at pT ≈ 1.5 GeV/c.
Note that a non-zero v2 of HF decay electrons does not necessarily imply a non-zero
v2 of charm (beauty) quarks usually associated with heavy quarks taking part in the
collective expansion of the medium. A signiﬁcant contribution to HF electrons at low
and intermediate pT may arise from the decays of charm (and beauty) hadrons produced

√

 (GeV/c)Tp00.511.522.533.544.552HF decay electron v0.05−00.050.10.150.2=200 GeV, |y|<0.35NNsPHENIX, Au(cid:173)Au, Min bias0(cid:173)10%20(cid:173)40% [GeV/c]Tp00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82{2}2v-0.1-0.0500.050.10.150.2200 GeV62.4 GeV39 GeV(b)0-60% centralityCONTENTS

60

Figure 21. Heavy-ﬂavor decay electron RAA in central and v2 in minimum-bias Au–
Au collisions at RHIC from PHENIX [147] and STAR [147, 159] compared to model
predictions: MC@sHQ+EPOS [46, 74], TAMU [65, 76], BAMPS [28, 38, 75], Vitev et
al [72] and Djordjevic et al. [298] (taken from [11]).

√

via the recombination of a heavy quark with a light quark from the medium. Due to the
light-quark collective ﬂow, HF hadrons produced with this recombination mechanism
can acquire a non-zero v2 also in the case in which charm quarks have vanishing elliptic
ﬂow [118]§. In the right panel of Fig. 20 the STAR measurements of HF decay electron
v2 at three diﬀerent collision energies are compared for the 0–60% centrality class [311].
The results at
sNN = 200 GeV are compatible with the measurement by the PHENIX
√
collaboration in the same centrality class (see Ref. [311] for the comparison). At lower
collision energies,
sNN = 39 and 62.4 GeV, the v2 values are smaller and consistent with
zero within uncertainties. Also the PHENIX collaboration reported a measurement of
HF decay electron v2 at
sNN = 62.4 GeV in the interval 1 < pT < 4 GeV/c . The central
values are non-zero but lower than at 200 GeV, and consistent with the STAR results
at lower pT. However, the large uncertainties prevent from drawing ﬁrm conclusions on
the dependence of v2 on the collision energy.

√

A number of theoretical model calculations are available for the elliptic ﬂow
coeﬃcient and the nuclear modiﬁcation factor of HF decay electrons at RHIC energies.
In Fig. 21, taken from [11], a comprehensive comparison of the outcome of model
calculations to the measurements is shown. Overall, the HF decay electron RAA in
central Au–Au collisions measured by the PHENIX [147] and STAR [159] collaborations
and the v2 measured by PHENIX [147] in minimum-bias (MB) collisions are fairly well
described by available model calculations.
In some of the models the quark-medium
coupling (represented by the medium density/temperature and interaction cross section)
is tuned to describe the RAA of pions (Djordjevic et al., WHDG, Vitev et al.) or electrons
(BAMPS) at RHIC energies.

The ALICE Collaboration recently published results on the elliptic ﬂow of HF decay
§ Recall, however, that a sharp separation between diﬀusion and coalescence eﬀects is somewhat
academic since hadronization should smoothly emerge from the interactions that a heavy quark
undergoes when approaching Tpc from above (cf. the discussion in Sec. 2.2.6).

 (GeV/c)Tp012345678910AAR00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.822.2 = 200 GeVNNsAu(cid:173)Au at  STAR HF electrons (0<y<0.7), centr. 0(cid:173)5% PHENIX HF electrons (|y|<0.35), centr. 0(cid:173)10%TAMUBAMPS el.MC@sHQ+EPOS2+rad.+LPMVitev et al.Djordjevic et al. (GeV/c)Tp00.511.522.533.544.552v0.05−00.050.10.150.2 = 200 GeVNNsAu(cid:173)Au at PHENIX HF electrons (|y|<0.35), Min.BiasTAMUBAMPS el.MC@sHQ+EPOS2+rad.+LPMCONTENTS

61

Figure 22. Heavy-ﬂavor decay muon RAA in central and v2 in semi-central Pb–Pb
collisions at the LHC [304] as a function of pT compared to transport model predictions:
MC@sHQ+EPOS [74], TAMU [65] and BAMPS [28, 38, 75].

muons at forward rapidity in the interval 3 < pT < 10 GeV/c for three diﬀerent centrality
classes of Pb–Pb collisions at the LHC [304]. The pT dependence of v2 in the 20–40%
class is shown in the right panel of Fig. 22. A positive v2 is observed with a signiﬁcance
larger than 3 σ. The data are compared to the predictions of the MC@sHQ+EPOS [74],
TAMU [65] and BAMPS [38, 75] models. All the three models predict a substantial
suppression of the high-pT yield (left panel of Fig. 22) and a positive v2 (right panel
of Fig. 22), approximately consistent with what is observed in the data. However, the
BAMPS and MC@sHQ+EPOS models, which give a good description of the measured
v2, tend to underestimate and overestimate the RAA, respectively, while the TAMU
model describes the RAA, but slightly underestimates the elliptic ﬂow. This indicates
that it is challenging to simultaneously describe the strong suppression of HF decay
muons at high-pT in central collisions and their azimuthal anisotropy in semi-central
collisions.

√

A major progress in the HF decay lepton studies can be provided by the separation
of the contributions of charm and beauty hadron decays. The PHENIX collaboration
recently published the measurements performed on a sample of MB Au–Au collisions
at
sNN = 200 GeV/c recorded in 2011 with their new vertex detectors (VTX) [303].
The enhanced vertexing capabilities allow the separation of beauty and charm decay
electrons based on the shape of the measured distributions of the distance of closest
approach (DCA) of the tracks to the interaction vertex. An unfolding procedure was
utilized to infer the parent charm- and beauty-hadron yields as a function of pT starting
from the measured electron yield as a function of pT and DCA. The extracted fraction of
beauty-decay electrons in the HF electron yield (
c→e+b→e) as a function of pT is shown as
a red band in Fig. 23 and compared to the expectation from theoretical calculations. In
particular, predictions from FONLL pQCD calculations (corresponding to no medium
eﬀects) and from three transport models, namely POWLANG [122], Duke (also denoted
as Cao, Qin, Bass or Cao et al.) for two diﬀerent values of the Ds(2πT ) parameter

b→e

)c (GeV/Tp012345678910HF←µAAR00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82 in 0(cid:173)10%HF←µAARMC@sHQ+EPOS 0(cid:173)10%TAMU elastic 0(cid:173)10%BAMPS 0(cid:173)10%ALICE=2.76 TeVNNsPb(cid:173)Pb, HF in 2.5<y<4←µ)c (GeV/Tp012345678910HF←µ2v(cid:173)0.3(cid:173)0.2(cid:173)0.100.10.20.3 in 20(cid:173)40%{2}HF←µ2vMC@sHQ+EPOS 20(cid:173)40%TAMU elastic 20(cid:173)40%BAMPS 30(cid:173)50%ALICE=2.76 TeVNNsPb(cid:173)Pb, HF in 2.5<y<4←µCONTENTS

62

Figure 23. Fraction of elec-
trons from beauty-hadron de-
cays in MB Au–Au collisions
as a function of pT from the
DCA-based unfolding analy-
sis by the PHENIX collabora-
tion [303] compared to model
calculations.

Figure 24. Nuclear modiﬁcation
factor of electrons from charm
and beauty hadron decays in MB
Au–Au collisions from the DCA-
based unfolding analysis by the
PHENIX collaboration [303]

governing the HQ-medium coupling [312], and TAMU [65] are displayed. Comparisons
to other model calculations, not shown in Fig. 23, can be found in Ref. [303]. The
models are in reasonable agreement with the extracted bottom electron fraction within
the relatively large uncertainties. From these results on the beauty-fraction in Au–Au
collisions, the nuclear modiﬁcation factors of electrons from charm and beauty hadron
decays were disentangled using (i) the additional information on the beauty-electron
fraction in pp collisions extracted from the the angular correlation analysis performed
by the STAR collaboration [167] and (ii) the measured RAA of HF decay electrons in
Au–Au collisions. The resulting RAA’s are reported in Fig. 24 together with the ratio
Rb→e
AA /Rc→e
AA . The electrons from beauty-hadron decays are found to be less suppressed
than those from charm-hadron decays at a 1 σ level in the range 3 < pT < 4 GeV/c.

Preliminary results on beauty-decay electron RAA in central Pb–Pb collisions at the
LHC, also exploiting the diﬀerent DCA shapes of charm and beauty decay electrons,

0.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.6RAA(a)c→eb→e(c+b)→ePhys. Rev. C 84, 044905 (2011)123456789peT [GeV/c]0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Rb→eAA/Rc→eAA|y|<0.35Au+Au MB psNN=200 GeVPHENIX Run 4 + Run 11Au+Au from Unfoldp+p from e-h correlationsPhys.Rev.Lett. 105 (2010)(b)CONTENTS

63

were reported by the ALICE Collaboration [313]. A suppression of the yield relative
to the binary-scaled pp cross section (RAA < 1), albeit with sizeable uncertainties, is
observed for pT > 3 GeV/c, consistent with in-medium energy loss of beauty quarks.

3.3.2. Charm hadrons

√

The production of D mesons was measured pT diﬀerentially in Au–Au collisions
at RHIC by the STAR collaboration [294] and in Pb–Pb collisions at the LHC with
ALICE [314–319]. Preliminary results on D0-meson nuclear modiﬁcation factor in Pb–
Pb collisions at the LHC were recently reported by CMS [178] and they are consistent
with the ALICE results. All these measurements were carried out at midrapidity (|y| < 1
in the case of STAR and CMS and |η| < 0.8 for ALICE). The STAR collaboration
measured the D0-meson yield in the transverse-momentum range 0 < pT < 8 GeV/c
using a data sample of ∼ 8.2 · 108 MB-triggered events and ∼ 2.4 · 108 events in the
0-10% centrality interval recorded during run-10 and run-11 [294]. Preliminary results
were reported on D0 production in U–U collisions at
sNN = 193 GeV [320]. Recently,
STAR reported preliminary results on D+
s -meson RAA and v2 in Au–Au collisions at top
RHIC energy [344], which, although limited by statistics, show similar features as the
ALICE measurements at the LHC [319]. ALICE obtained the ﬁrst results on D0-, D+-
√
and D∗+-meson nuclear modiﬁcation factors in Pb–Pb collisions at
sNN = 2.76 TeV by
analyzing a sample of 13 × 106 collisions in the centrality range of 0–80% collected
in 2010 [314]. This sample allowed the measurement of the D-meson RAA in the
momentum interval 2 < pT < 16 GeV/c in the 0–20% and 40–80% centrality classes.
Using the larger data sample of 16.4 · 106 central (0–10%) and 9.0 · 106 semi-peripheral
(30–50%) Pb–Pb collisions recorded in year 2011, the RAA of D0, D+, and D∗+ mesons
could be measured with improved precision in a wider transverse-momentum interval
(1 < pT < 36 GeV/c for the 10% most central collisions) [317, 318]. In addition, the
D-meson elliptic ﬂow [315,316] and the D+
s -meson nuclear modiﬁcation factor [319] were
measured for the ﬁrst time. Due to the small size of the data sample of pp collisions
√
collected at
s = 2.76 TeV, the pp reference for the RAA at the LHC was obtained via a
s = 7 TeV. The scaling factor and its uncertainty
√
were obtained from FONLL calculations of the D-meson pT diﬀerential cross section at

s-scaling of the measurements at

√

√

s = 2.76 and 7 TeV [283].

A selection of results on the D-meson nuclear modiﬁcation factor and elliptic ﬂow
√
is shown in Fig. 25. In the top-left panel, the transverse-momentum dependence of the
RAA of D0 mesons in the 10% most central Au-Au collisions at
sNN = 200 GeV
from the STAR experiment [294]
is compared to the outcome of various model
calculations [28, 72, 73, 76, 82, 122]. The data show a structure in transverse-momentum
which is characterized by an increase of RAA with increasing pT for pT < 1.5 GeV/c,
a maximum at pT around 1.5 GeV/c, where a value RAA > 1 is measured, followed
by a decrease. For pT > 3 GeV/c, a clear suppression relative to the binary-scaled pp
cross section is observed. A similar trend is observed in the preliminary results from
U–U collisions [320]. The RAA measured by the STAR collaboration in the interval

CONTENTS

64

Figure 25. D-meson nuclear modiﬁcation factor and elliptic ﬂow as a function
of pT compared to model calculations [28, 40, 51, 65, 72–74, 76, 82, 122, 220, 296, 321]
Top left: D0-meson RAA in central Au–Au collisions at
sNN = 200 GeV [294]
(taken from Ref. [11]). Top Right: D-meson (average of D0, D+ and D∗+) RAA
sNN = 2.76 TeV [318] (taken from
in the 10% most central Pb–Pb collisions at
√
Ref. [322]). Bottom left: D-meson RAA in semi-central (30–50%) Pb–Pb collisions at
sNN = 2.76 TeV [318]. Bottom right: D-meson v2 in semi-central (30–50%) Pb–Pb

√

√

√

collisions at

sNN = 2.76 TeV [315, 316] (taken from Ref. [322]).

 (GeV/c)Tp012345678AAR00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82 = 200 GeVNNsAu(cid:173)Au at Centrality: 0(cid:173)10% meson (|y|<1)0STAR DTAMUPOWLANG (HTL)BAMPS el.MC@sHQ+EPOS2+rad.+LPMVitev et al.Cao,Qin,Bass: with shadowingPHSD) c (GeV/Tp 0510152025303540AAR00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82ALICE = 2.76 TeVNNs0(cid:173)10% Pb(cid:173)Pb, |<0.5y |+, D*+, D0Average D(cid:173)extrap. referenceTpwith pp TAMU elasticCao, Qin, BassWHDG rad+collMC@sHQ+EPOSPOWLANGBAMPS el.BAMPS el.+radPHSDNLO(MNR) with EPS09 shad.) c (GeV/Tp 02468101214161820AAR00.20.40.60.811.21.4ALICE = 2.76 TeVNNs30(cid:173)50% Pb(cid:173)Pb, |<0.5y, |+, D*+, D0Average DTAMU elasticCao, Qin, BassMC@sHQ+EPOSPOWLANGBAMPS el.BAMPS el.+radPHSD (GeV/c)Tp02468101214162v0.1−00.10.20.30.4 average*+, D+,D0ALICE DSyst. from dataSyst. from B feed(cid:173)downWHDG rad+collPOWLANG in(cid:173)medium had.MC@sHQ+EPOSPHSDCao, Qin, BassBAMPS el.TAMU elasticBAMPS el.+rad. = 2.76 TeVNNs30(cid:173)50%, Pb(cid:173)PbCONTENTS

65

0 < pT < 3 GeV/c is described qualitatively, and to some extent also quantitatively, by
the models that include interactions in an expanding ﬂuid-dynamical medium, causing
energy loss and radial ﬂow (TAMU [76], BAMPS [28], Cao et al. [82], MC@sHQ [73],
POWLANG [122], and PHSD [40]). In these models, the RAA shape at low pT is the
eﬀect of the collective ﬂow on the light and charm quarks and of the contribution of
the recombination mechanism to charm-quark hadronization. In some of this models,
e.g., TAMU [76], POWLANG [122] and Duke [83], the eﬀect of hadronization via
recombination, which converts low- and intermediate-pT charm quarks into D mesons, is
rather crucial to describe the data at low and intermediate pT. In the TAMU [124] and
PHSD models [40] the contribution to the v2 due to D-meson rescattering in the hadronic
phase is found to be signiﬁcant (also for the RAA in the PHSD model). The model by
Vitev et. al. [72], which includes CNM and hot QGP (in-medium energy loss and
meson dissociation) eﬀects, is consistent with the data in the region of its applicability,
pT > 3 GeV/c (since the medium’s transverse collective expansion is neglected).
The prompt D-meson RAA (average of D0, D+, and D∗+ nuclear modiﬁcation
√
sNN =
factors) measured with ALICE [318] in central (0–10%) Pb–Pb collisions at
2.76 TeV is shown in the top-right panel of Fig. 25 together with a selection of model
predictions [28, 65, 74, 82, 122, 220, 296, 321].
In particular, only models for which
simultaneous predictions for v2 are available were included in this plot (other predictions
compared to data are deferred to the left panel of Fig. 28). The prompt D-meson yield at
high pT is found to be strongly suppressed with respect to the binary-scaled pp reference.
In the interval 3 < pT < 10 GeV/c, the suppression increases (RAA decreases) with
increasing pT. The maximal suppression is observed around pT = 10 GeV/c, where the
yields are reduced by a factor of 5–6 relative to the binary-scaling expectation value. For
pT > 10 GeV/c, the RAA appears to increase (decreasing suppression) with increasing
pT, even though the large uncertainties prevent a conclusion on the trend of the nuclear
modiﬁcation factor at high pT. A signiﬁcant suppression, RAA < 0.5, is observed for
D mesons with pT > 25 GeV/c. Since no signiﬁcant modiﬁcation of the D-meson
production is observed in pPb collisions for pT > 2 GeV/c, the strong suppression of
the D-meson yields observed for pT > 3 GeV/c cannot be explained in terms of CNM
eﬀects and therefore is predominantly due to ﬁnal-state eﬀects induced by the hot and
dense medium created in the collisions. This is also supported by the fact that the data
cannot be described by the the outcome of a NLO pQCD calculation [210] including only
the initial-state eﬀects related to the nuclear modiﬁcation of the PDF [252] (“NLO with
EPS09” curve in Fig. 25), which instead was able to reproduce the measured D-meson
nuclear modiﬁcation factor in pPb collisions (see Fig. 13). On the other hand, all the
models including interactions of charm quarks with an hot and dense partonic medium
provide in general a reasonable description of the observed RAA.

√
√
To illustrate the evolution of the nuclear modiﬁcation factor with
s, the D-meson
RAA measured in the 10% most central Au–Au and Pb–Pb collisions at
sNN = 200 and
2.76 TeV are compared in the left panel of Fig. 26. At high pT (pT > 3 GeV/c), where
the nuclear modiﬁcation factor is expected to be dominated by the eﬀect of in-medium

CONTENTS

66

√

√

Figure 26.
Au–Au collisions at
D∗+) in central Pb–Pb collisions at
average D-meson [318] RAA in central Pb–Pb collisions at
to predictions from the TAMU model [65].

Left: comparison between the RAA of D0 mesons in central (0–10%)
sNN = 200 GeV [294] and of D mesons (average of D0, D+ and
s [319] and
sNN = 2.76 TeV compared

sNN = 2.76 TeV [318]. Right: D+

√

√

parton energy loss, the RAA values measured at the two energies are compatible within
uncertainties. However, as pointed out in [318], this does not necessarily imply a similar
charm-quark energy loss and medium density at the two collision energies, since the
nuclear modiﬁcation factor is also sensitive to the slope of the pT spectra of the hard-
scattered partons. Therefore, the combined eﬀect of a denser medium and harder initial
pT spectra at the LHC could result in similar values of RAA as at RHIC energies (see, e.g.,
√
Ref. [323]). At lower pT, the RAA measured at
sNN = 2.76 TeV is lower than the one at
sNN = 200 GeV and does not show a ‘bump-like’ trend with a rise, a maximum and a
successive decrease with increasing pT. However, due to the large uncertainties and the
coarser binning at low pT, no ﬁrm conclusion can be drawn. In this comparison, it has
to be considered that the RAA at low and intermediate pT is the result of the interplay of
diﬀerent eﬀects occurring in the initial and ﬁnal state. Therefore, a diﬀerent RAA trend
√
at diﬀerent CM energies could arise from a diﬀerent role of initial-state eﬀects and radial
ﬂow. As far as initial-state eﬀects are concerned, with increasing
sNN one expects a
stronger reduction of the HQ production yields at low pT due to nuclear shadowing (due
to the smaller values of Bjorken-x being probed [252]) and a less pronounced Cronin peak
at intermediate pT [257,324]. On the other hand, the radial ﬂow of the medium at LHC
energies is about 10-20% larger than at RHIC [4, 5]. However, this does not necessarily
imply that the bump-like structure observed in the RAA trend at low pT at RHIC energy
should become more pronounced with increasing collision energy. The stronger radial
ﬂow eﬀect could be counter-balanced in the RAA by the diﬀerent shape of the reference
spectra in pp collisions at diﬀerent
s. In this respect, is interesting to notice in the

√

) c (GeV/Tp 0510152025303540AAR 00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82 = 2.76 TeVNNsALICE, 0(cid:173)10% Pb(cid:173)Pb, |<0.5y, |+, D*+, D0Average D(cid:173)extrapolated referenceTpwith pp   = 200 GeVNNsSTAR, 0(cid:173)10% Au(cid:173)Au, |<1y, |0DPRL 113 (2014) 142301) c (GeV/Tp 012345678AAR 00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82)c (GeV/Tp0510152025303540AAR00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82 = 2.76 TeVNNs0(cid:173)10% Pb(cid:173)Pb, |<0.5y , |+, D*+, D0Average D(cid:173)extrapolated pp referenceTpwith  |<0.5y , |+sD    TAMU, PLB 735 (2014) 445Non(cid:173)strange D+sDALICECONTENTS

67

top-left and top-right panels of Fig. 25 that a reasonable description of the low and
intermediate pT data at both the collision energies is obtained with the models that
include nuclear modiﬁcation of the PDF, charm-quark interactions with the medium
constituents, hydrodynamical medium expansion and hadronization via recombination,
such as TAMU [65,76], POWLANG [122], Duke [82] and MC@sHQ+EPOS [73,74]. The
BAMPS model [28], which does not include nuclear modiﬁcation of the PDFs, predicts
for LHC energies at low pT (where shadowing is relevant) a value of RAA larger than
that observed in the data.

√
In the bottom panels of Fig. 25 the RAA (left) and v2 (right) of prompt D mesons
(average of D0, D+, and D∗+) in semi-central (30–50%) Pb–Pb collisions at
sNN =
2.76 TeV are shown and compared to model predictions. The nuclear modiﬁcation
factor indicates that the D-meson yield is suppressed in the 30–50% centrality class
in the measured pT range with respect to the binary-scaled pp reference [318]. This
reduction of the yield in Pb–Pb collisions is smaller, by a factor of about two, than in
the 10% most central collisions, as expected due to the decreasing medium density, size
and lifetime from central to peripheral collisions. A positive elliptic ﬂow is measured
for prompt D mesons in the centrality class 30–50% [315]. In particular, in the interval
2 < pT < 6 GeV/c the measured v2 is found to be larger than zero with 5.7 σ signiﬁcance.
A positive v2 of D0 mesons was also observed in the 10–30% centrality class [316]. These
results indicate that the interactions with the medium constituents transfer information
on the azimuthal anisotropy of the system to the charmed particles [315]. It also suggests
that low-momentum charm quarks take part in the collective expansion of the medium,
even though, with the current uncertainties, the possibility that the observed D-meson
v2 is completely due to the light-quark contribution in a scenario with hadronization via
recombination cannot be ruled out. A positive v2 is also observed for pT > 6 GeV/c,
which is likely to originate from the path-length dependence of the partonic energy loss,
although the large uncertainties do not allow for a ﬁrm conclusion.

As already pointed out in the discussion of the HF decay lepton results, the
simultaneous comparison of the measured RAA and v2 to theoretical model calculations
constrains the description of the interactions of heavy quarks with the medium, possibly
providing sensitivity to the relative contributions of elastic (collisional) and inelastic
(radiative) processes, and to the path length dependence of in-medium parton energy
loss. Overall, the observed elliptic ﬂow is qualitatively described by the models that
include both charm-quark energy loss in a spatially anisotropic medium and momentum
gain processes transferring elliptic ﬂow produced through the system expansion to
charmed particles. The WHDG model does not include a hydrodynamical description of
the medium expansion, so that the anisotropy results only from path length dependent
energy loss (the models of Djordjevic et al. and Vitev et al. do not provide a calculation
for v2; their RAA is compared to the data in Fig. 28 below). The models that include
only collisional energy loss (TAMU, POWLANG, BAMPS-elastic and PHSD) provide in
general a good description of the v2, but tend to overestimate (TAMU) or underestimate
(POWLANG, BAMPS-elastic) the RAA in central and/or semi-peripheral collisions.

CONTENTS

68

On the other hand, models including both radiative and collisional energy loss (Cao
et al., BAMPS rad+el and WHDG) describe the RAA in central collisions well, but
tend to underestimate the elliptic ﬂow at low pT. This may be a consequence of the
fact that the inclusion of radiative processes reduces the weight of elastic interactions,
which are more eﬀective in building up the azimuthal momentum anisotropy. The
MC@sHQ+EPOS model, which also includes both collisional and radiative processes,
can describe the measured RAA and v2 within uncertainties at low (pT < 2 GeV/c) and
high (pT > 6−8 GeV/c) transverse momenta at diﬀerent collision energies and centrality,
but it tends to overestimate RAA and underestimate v2 in the intermediate pT region.
From this discussion, it emerges that the role of the diﬀerent interaction mechanisms,
in particular radiative and collisional energy loss, is not yet completely clariﬁed, even
though the data-to-theory comparison suggests that both of these contributions are
relevant. Finally, models including hadronization of charm quarks from recombination
with light quarks from the medium (TAMU, Cao et al., MC@sHQ+EPOS, POWLANG
and PHSD) predict a more pronounced radial ﬂow peak in the low-pT RAA and a larger
v2, due to the light-quark contribution, thus providing a better description of the data
at low pT (see, e.g., the discussion in Ref. [122]).
In summary, this comprehensive
data-to-theory comparison comparison reiterates the challenges for theoretical models to
simultaneously describe the measured D-meson RAA and v2 at diﬀerent collision energies
and centralities. This indicates that the current data from RHIC and LHC have the
potential to better constrain the description of the interactions of charm quarks with
the medium constituents and their hadronization mechanism.

√

In the right panel of Fig. 26, the nuclear modiﬁcation factor of D mesons (average of
D0, D+ and D∗+) in central (0–10%) Pb–Pb collisions at
sNN = 2.76 TeV is compared
to that of D+
s mesons [319] and to the corresponding predictions from the TAMU
model [65,106]. This comparison is meant to address the expected eﬀect of hadronization
via quark recombination in the partonic medium on the relative abundances of strange
+ yield relative to that of
and non-strange D-meson species. An enhancement of the Ds
non-strange D mesons at low and intermediate momenta is expected in nucleus–nucleus
collisions as compared to pp interactions, if the dominant process for D-meson formation
is in-medium hadronization of charm quarks via recombination with light quarks, due to
the large abundance of strange quarks in the QGP [106,186,187,325,326]. In particular,
the pT dependence of this comparison has been suggested as a tool to map out the
relative importance of recombination processes [106]. In the three pT intervals, in which
+ yield could be measured in Pb–Pb collisions, the central values of its RAA are
the Ds
found to be higher than those of non-strange D mesons, although compatible within
uncertainties. Even though part of the systematic uncertainty is correlated between
strange and non-strange D mesons [319], the current uncertainties prevent a conclusion
on the expected modiﬁcation of the relative abundance of charm-hadron species due to
hadronization via recombination. Among the various models of open-charm production
in heavy-ion collisions, TAMU is the only one providing a quantitative prediction for
+-meson nuclear modiﬁcation factor. The measured RAA is described within
the Ds

CONTENTS

69

√

Figure 27. D-meson RAA in central [318] and v2 in semi-peripheral [315] Pb–Pb
collisions at
sNN = 2.76 TeV compared to results for charged pions [327] and charged
particles [328, 329].

+ mesons
uncertainties by this prediction, where the pT dependent enhancement of Ds
relative to that of non-strange D mesons is a consequence of the recombination of
charm quarks with thermally equilibrated strange quarks in the QGP. As discussed in
+ mesons (as well as Λc baryons, etc.) in heavy-
Sec. 2.2.6, an enhanced production of Ds
ion collisions due to recombination entails a reduction of charm quarks available for
hadronization into non-strange meson species. This “chemistry eﬀect” should therefore
be considered in the interpretation of the comparison of the nuclear modiﬁcation factors
of non-strange D mesons and light-ﬂavor hadrons (e.g., pions), which is discussed in the
next paragraphs.

It is interesting to compare both the nuclear modiﬁcation factor and the elliptic ﬂow
of D mesons with those of light-ﬂavor particles, as done in Fig. 27. This could provide
some additional insight into the interactions of partons with the medium constituents
and on the degree of equilibration of charm quarks in the collectively expanding system.
In the right panel of Fig. 27, the elliptic ﬂow coeﬃcients of D mesons [315] and
charged particles [329] measured in Pb–Pb collisions at
sNN = 2.76 TeV in the 30–
50% centrality class are compared. The magnitude and pT trend of v2 are observed to
be similar (within uncertainties of about 30%) for charmed and light-ﬂavor hadrons,
which dominate the charged-particle sample. A similar observation was made for the
D0-meson and charged-particle v2 in the 0–10% and 10–30% centrality classes [316]. The
current uncertainties do not allow a conclusion on whether the D-meson elliptic ﬂow
follows the mass dependence predicted by hydrodynamical calculations, which would
suggest a full thermalization of charm quarks with the medium. The comparison of
the nuclear modiﬁcation factor of D mesons and light-ﬂavor particles (pions), mostly
originating from gluon fragmentation at LHC energies, was long proposed as a test

√

) c (GeV/Tp 0510152025303540AAR 00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82|<0.5y, |+, D*+, D0Average D(cid:173)extrapolated referenceTpwith pp |<0.8ηCharged particles, ||<0.8ηCharged pions, |ALICE = 2.76 TeVNNs0(cid:173)10% Pb(cid:173)Pb,  (GeV/c)Tp0246810121416182v(cid:173)0.200.20.4|>2}η∆{EP,|2vCharged particles, {EP}2v average, |y|<0.8, *+, D+,D0Prompt DSyst. from dataSyst. from B feed(cid:173)down = 2.76 TeVNNsPb(cid:173)Pb, Centrality 30(cid:173)50%ALICECONTENTS

70

√

D > RAA

for the expected color-charge and quark mass dependence of in-medium parton energy
loss [77, 78, 197, 330]. This comparison is shown in the left panel of Fig. 27 for
sNN = 2.76 TeV, where the RAA of D
the 10% most central Pb–Pb collisions at
mesons, pions (in the interval 1 < pT < 20 GeV/c) [327] and charged particles (in
16 < pT < 40 GeV/c) [328] are collected. At high pT (pT > 8 − 10 GeV/c) all light-
ﬂavor hadron species are found to be equally suppressed in Pb–Pb collisions and the
particle ratios are compatible with those in vacuum [327], so that the charged particle
RAA can be used in this comparison in place of the pion RAA at high pT. The nuclear
modiﬁcation factors of D mesons and light-ﬂavor hadrons are found to be consistent for
pT > 6 GeV/c. At lower pT (pT < 6 GeV/c), the RAA of D mesons tends to be slightly
higher than that of pions. Since, as pointed out in [318], the systematic uncertainties of
D-meson yields are mainly correlated across pT intervals, the current data provide a hint
π (at about a 1 σ level) at intermediate and low pT. An interpretation
for RAA
of this potential diﬀerence between the D-meson and pion RAA at in terms of diﬀerent
in-medium parton energy loss of charm quarks, light quarks and gluons is, however, not
straightforward because in this pT range the RAA is sensitive to other initial- and ﬁnal-
state eﬀects, which could have rather diﬀerent weights in the light and charm sectors.
As pointed out in Ref. [297], similar values of the D-meson and pion RAA could originate
from the interplay of the color-charge and quark-mass dependent energy loss with the
diﬀerent pT distributions in the pp reference and diﬀerent fragmentation functions of
charm quarks as compared to light quarks and gluons. In addition, at LHC energies
the pion yield at pT ∼ 3 − 4 GeV/c could still have a signiﬁcant component from soft
production (due to the strong radial ﬂow) which does not scale with the number of
binary nucleon–nucleon collisions (contrary to the D-meson yield, modulo shadowing).
A priori, initial-state eﬀects, radial ﬂow and hadronization via recombination (see the
above remark about the hadro-chemistry in the charm sector) can aﬀect the RAA of D
mesons and pions quite diﬀerently.

Four models provide a calculation for the nuclear modiﬁcation factors of D mesons
and pions (charged particles) namely Djordjevic et al. [298], CUJET3.0 [222, 223],
WHDG [220, 296, 321] and Vitev et al. [72].
In Fig. 28, the outcome of these model
calculations is compared to the measured RAA of D mesons (left) and pions/charged
particles (right) in central Pb–Pb collisions at the LHC. The models Djordjevic et
al., WHDG and CUJET3.0 include both radiative and collisional energy loss. The
WHDG calculations tend to overpredict the measured suppression of the pion RAA
while describing the D-meson one within experimental and theoretical uncertainties.
For the Vitev et al. model, two diﬀerent implementations are considered: the ﬁrst one
(labelled as ’Vitev rad’) includes only radiative energy loss; the second one (’rad+dissoc’)
considers in addition the eﬀect of in-medium formation and dissociation of HF hadrons.
The in-medium formation and dissociation process is not considered as being relevant
for pions due to their much longer formation time. These model calculations can
describe the measured light-ﬂavor RAA within uncertainties, while for D mesons a better
agreement with the data is obtained when the in-medium dissociation mechanism is

CONTENTS

71

Figure 28. D-meson [318], pion [327] and charged-particle [328] RAA as a function
of pT in the 10% most central Pb–Pb collisions at
sNN = 2.76 TeV, compared to
predictions from pQCD energy loss models: Djordjevic [298], CUJET 3.0 [222, 223],
WHDG with radiative and collisional energy loss [220,296,321] and Vitev with radiative
and dissociation processes [72].

√

included in the calculation, indicating the relevance of this eﬀect in the Vitev et al.
approach. However, within this model an overestimation of the measured D-meson
RAA toward lower momenta, pT <∼ 12 GeV/c, persists. The Djordjevic et al.
and
CUJET3.0 models can describe both the pion and D-meson RAA results (as well as
their ratio, see Ref. [318]) over the full pT interval of the calculations (pT > 5 and
8 GeV/c, respectively). In these models, which include collisional and radiative energy
loss, the nuclear modiﬁcation factors of D mesons and light-ﬂavor hadrons turn out to
be similar as a consequence of the interplay among (i) the larger energy loss of gluons
with respect to that of charm quarks (mainly due to the larger color coupling factor),
(ii) the diﬀerent amount of gluon and light-quark contributions to the observed pion
yield in pp and Pb–Pb collisions, and (iii) the harder pT distribution and fragmentation
of charm quarks with respect to those of gluons and light quarks.

3.3.3. Beauty production

Besides the measurements of leptons from beauty-hadron decays described above,
beauty production in Pb–Pb collisions at the LHC was studied at mid-rapidity through
the measurements of non-prompt J/ψ carried out by the ALICE [169] and CMS [331]
collaborations. These measurements cover the low- and intermediate-pT regions, 1.5 <
pJ/ψ
T < 30 GeV/c, although with large uncertainties at low pT. At higher momenta,
pT > 80 GeV/c, beauty production could be studied by CMS via the measurement of
b-jets [180].

√
sNN = 2.76 TeV is shown in

The RAA of non-prompt J/ψ in Pb–Pb collisions at

) c (GeV/Tp 0510152025303540AAR00.20.40.60.811.21.4ALICE = 2.76 TeVNNs0(cid:173)10% Pb(cid:173)Pb, |<0.5y |+, D*+, D0Average D(cid:173)extrap. referenceTpwith pp DjordjevicWHDG rad+collVitev, Rad+dissocVitev, RadCUJET3.0)c (GeV/Tp0510152025303540AAR00.20.40.60.811.2ALICE = 2.76 TeVNNs0(cid:173)10% Pb(cid:173)Pb, |<0.8ηCharged pions, ||<0.8ηCharged particles, |CUJET 3.0DjordjevicVitev radWHDG rad+collCONTENTS

72

√

Figure 29. Left: non-prompt J/ψ RAA as a function of pT at mid-rapidity in Pb–Pb
sNN = 2.76 TeV compared to the prompt D-meson RAA [318]. Results
collisions at
from ALICE [169] at low pT in the 0–50% centrality class and CMS [331] at high
pT in the 0–20% centrality class are reported. Right: non-prompt J/ψ [331] and
prompt D-meson [317] RAA as a function of centrality compared to model predictions
including radiative and collisional energy loss [298]. For non-prompt J/ψ additional
model calculations are shown in which the beauty-quark interactions are calculated
using the charm-quark mass [11].

the left panel of Fig. 29 as a function of pT. The ALICE results (at low pT, 1.5 < pJ/ψ
T <
10 GeV/c) are obtained for the centrality class 0–50% [169], while the CMS results at
higher pT (6.5 < pJ/ψ
T < 30 GeV/c) are for the 20% most central collisions [331]. A clear
suppression as compared to the binary-scaled pp reference is observed in central collisions
T > 6.5 GeV/c, with RAA = 0.37 ± 0.08(stat) ± 0.02(syst). A suppression is also
for pJ/ψ
observed in the intermediate pT interval, covering the range 4.5 < pJ/ψ
T < 10 GeV/c,
albeit with larger uncertainties. A larger data sample is needed at lower pT, where the
uncertainties on the current result do not allow to draw any conclusion. Nevertheless, the
results at intermediate and high pT indicate that the beauty quarks are substantially
aﬀected by interactions with the constituents of the hot and dense medium, which
induce a signiﬁcant modiﬁcation of their momentum distributions in heavy-ion collisions
as compared to those observed in pp interactions. The nuclear modiﬁcation factor of
non-prompt J/ψ is compared to that measured for prompt D mesons (average of D0,
D+ and D∗+) in central (0–10%) Pb–Pb collisions [318]. This comparison is meant
to test the expected quark-mass dependence of in-medium energy loss [77–79]. The
suppression of non-prompt J/ψ seems to be weaker than that of D mesons at high and
intermediate pT, although the uncertainties on the measurements reported in Fig. 29
prevent from drawing strong conclusions. In the discussion of this comparison of RAA
magnitudes, it is worth noting that the pT of the J/ψ is shifted to lower momenta with

)c (GeV/Tp0510152025303540AAR00.20.40.60.811.21.4=2.76 TeVNNsPb(cid:173)Pb, |<2.4,  0(cid:173)20%y,  |ψCMS,  non(cid:173)prompt J/|<0.8,  0(cid:173)50%y,  |ψALICE,  non(cid:173)prompt J/|<0.5,  0(cid:173)10%yALICE,  prompt D mesons,  |(cid:173)extrapolated pp referenceTpwith 〉partN〈050100150200250300350400AAR00.20.40.60.811.21.4(empty) filled boxes: (un)correlated syst. uncert.|<0.5y, |c<16 GeV/TpD mesons (ALICE) 8< = 2.76 TeVNNsPb(cid:173)Pb, |<2.4y, |c<30 GeV/Tp (CMS) 6.5<ψ Non(cid:173)prompt J/JHEP 05 (2012) 06350(cid:173)80%20(cid:173)100%40(cid:173)50%30(cid:173)40%20(cid:173)30%10(cid:173)20%0(cid:173)10%0(cid:173)20%Phys.Lett.B 737 (2014) 298Djordjevic et al.D mesonsψNon(cid:173)prompt J/ with c quark energy lossψNon(cid:173)prompt J/CONTENTS

73

respect to that of the parent B meson, due to the decay kinematics. The average pT
of the parent B mesons in the highest J/ψ transverse momentum interval measured
by CMS is about 11 GeV/c. For a more direct comparison of D and B nuclear
modiﬁcation, the D-meson RAA was measured by the ALICE Collaboration [317] in
the interval 8 < pT < 16 GeV/c, which provides a signiﬁcant overlap with the pT
distribution of B mesons decaying to J/ψ particles with 6.5 < pJ/ψ
T < 30 GeV/c (for
which 70% of the parent B mesons are estimated to have transverse momenta in the
range 8 < pT < 16 GeV/c). In the right panel of Fig. 29, the centrality dependence
of the nuclear modiﬁcation factors of D mesons and non-prompt J/ψ in the chosen pT
intervals are compared. The D-meson RAA values in the centrality classes 0–10% and
10–20% are lower than that of non-prompt J/ψ mesons in the centrality class 0–20%.
The signiﬁcance of this diﬀerence is, however, smaller than 3 σ considering the statistical
and systematic uncertainties [317]. A preliminary measurement of non-prompt J/ψ
production performed on the larger data sample of Pb–Pb collisions recorded in 2011 was
reported by the CMS Collaboration [332]. The non-prompt J/ψ nuclear modiﬁcation
factor in |y| < 1.2 is measured as a function of centrality using ﬁner centrality intervals
and the same pT interval (6.5 < pJ/ψ
T < 30 GeV/c) of the published result. Considering
this measurement, the RAA of non-prompt J/ψ is larger than that of D mesons in the
0–10% and 10–20% centrality classes with a signiﬁcance of about 3.5 σ [317].

D < RAA

D < RAA

The experimental observation of RAA

J/ψ←B alone does not allow to
conclude on the predicted diﬀerence between the in-medium energy loss of charm and
beauty quarks. In analogy to the comparison of charm and light-ﬂavor hadron nuclear
modiﬁcations discussed above, eﬀects other than quark-mass dependent parton energy
loss could contribute to diﬀerences in the RAA: (i) the diﬀerent pT distributions of
the initially produced charm and beauty quarks (which are steeper for charm than
for beauty), and (ii) the diﬀerent shapes of the fragmentation functions (which is
harder for beauty than for charm quarks) as well as (iii) recombination contributions.
Therefore,
for a proper interpretation of the experimental results, the measured
RAA of D and B mesons (via non-prompt J/ψ) should be compared with the
outcome of model calculations including HQ production, in-medium propagation and
B in the momentum
hadronization. Essentially all available models predict RAA
range pT < 20 GeV/c, where the quark masses are not negligible with respect to their
momenta [38,48,65,72,79,81,82,220,296,299,321,333–335]. In the right panel of Fig. 29,
the data are compared to the calculations by Djordjevic et al. [298], which include
both radiative and collisional processes and consider dynamical scattering centers in
the medium. Note that, as discussed above, this model can describe the similarity of
the D-meson and pion RAA. The model describes well the centrality dependence of
the D-meson nuclear modiﬁcation factor in the high-pT range considered in Fig. 29 and
predicts a smaller suppression of non-prompt J/ψ mesons as compared to D mesons,
in qualitative agreement with the CMS result for the most central collisions. Care has
to be taken in the data-to-model comparison for the 20–100% class, as the centrality
interval is very broad. The preliminary CMS results in ﬁner centrality intervals from

CONTENTS

74

Figure 30. Nuclear modiﬁcation factor of b-jets in Pb–Pb collisions at
sNN =
2.76 TeV [180]. Left: centrality-integrated RAA as a function of jet pT compared
to pQCD energy-loss calculations [287]. Right: RAA as a function of centrality for two
diﬀerent jet pT intervals.

√

the 2011 Pb–Pb sample [332], are well described by the calculations of Djordjevic et al.
(see Fig. 4 in Ref. [298]). In order to study the origin of the diﬀerence in the nuclear
modiﬁcation factors of D and B mesons in this model, the RAA of non-prompt J/ψ was
also computed using the charm-quark mass value in the calculation of the in-medium
interactions of beauty quarks. The outcome of this test case, depicted as dotted lines
in the right panel of Fig. 29, shows a substantially lower RAA of non-prompt J/ψ, close
to that of D mesons, as compared to the case in which the beauty-quark mass is used
in the calculation (dotted lines in Fig. 29). This indicates that, in this model, the large
diﬀerence in the RAA of D mesons and non-prompt J/ψ arises predominantly from
the mass dependence of quark-medium interactions and is only moderately aﬀected by
the diﬀerent production and fragmentation kinematics of charm and beauty quarks.
Similar conclusions are derived by performing the same test with the MC@sHQ+EPOS
and TAMU models (see Refs. [11, 317]).

A complementary approach to study beauty-quark interactions with the medium
is provided by measurements of b-jets. Assuming that the quark hadronizes outside the
medium, the jet energy should be, in ﬁrst approximation, the sum of the energy of the
beauty quark after its interaction with the medium and of the energy transferred by
the quark to the medium that remains inside the jet cone. The nuclear modiﬁcation
factor of b-jets is shown in Fig. 30.
In the left panel, the centrality-integrated RAA
is displayed as a function of pT and compared to the pQCD-based calculations by
Vitev et al.
including radiative and collisional energy loss [287]. The data show a
signiﬁcant suppression, almost independent of pT in the measured range, of the b-jet
yield relative to the pp expectation, indicating parton energy loss in the hot and dense

 (GeV/c)Tb-jet p100150200250AAb-jet R00.20.40.60.811.2pQCD: PLB 726 (2013) 251-256 = 1.8medg = 2.0medg = 2.2medgCMS-1pp, 5.3 pb-1bµPbPb, 150  = 2.76 TeVNNs0-100%| < 2η|partN050100150200250300350400AAb-Jet R00.20.40.60.811.2 < 90 GeV/cT80 < p < 110 GeV/cT90 < pCMS-1pp, 5.3 pb-1bµPbPb, 150  = 2.76 TeVNNs| < 2η|0-10%10-30%30-50%50-100%CONTENTS

75

medium. The measured RAA is described by the Vitev et al. model using values of
the jet-medium coupling parameter in the range gmed = 1.8 − 2, similar to the value
In the right panel of Fig. 30, the b-jet RAA is shown as a
found for inclusive jets.
function of centrality, expressed in terms of the number of participant nucleons, Npart,
for two pT intervals. A smooth decrease of RAA with increasing centrality is observed,
reaching a suppression of a factor of about 2.5 in the most central collisions. In the pT
range covered by these measurements the nuclear modiﬁcation of the b-jet yield is found
to be compatible, within the sizeable systematic uncertainties, with that of inclusive
jets [336, 337]. This observation challenges models based on the strong-coupling limit,
e.g., within the AdS/CFT correspondence [295], in which quark-mass dependent eﬀects
persist up to large pT. On the other hand, in pQCD-based models the quark mass eﬀects
are expected to be small at large pT [287]. Nevertheless, even though quark mass related
eﬀects may not play a role in the high-momentum interval where the measurement was
carried out, a diﬀerence between the RAA’s of b-jets and inclusive jets could have been
expected due to the color charge dependence of energy loss, since inclusive jets at LHC
energies should be dominated by gluon jets up to very large pT. In this respect, it should
be considered that at LHC energies a sizeable fraction of beauty quarks are produced by
splitting of gluons into b¯b pairs (gluon splitting) [338]. As pointed out in Ref. [11], in the
case of b-jets at very high pT, a signiﬁcant part of the in-medium path length is likely to
be covered by the parent gluon. For example, the formation (coherence) time of beauty
quarks with an energy of 150 GeV is of about 1 fm/c, implicating that the very early
(hot and dense) stages of the medium evolution are probed by the parent gluon, and
not by the beauty quark. Note that, following the arguments of coherence time for HQ
pairs from gluon splitting [11], the fact that the medium could be probed by the parent
gluon is relevant only for beauty quarks at high pT. In the case of charm (for which
the contribution of gluon splitting is smaller, ≈ 10-20%, than for beauty [339,340]), and
for beauty at not-too-high pT (pT <∼ 50 GeV/c, for which the coherence time is small
because it is not increased by a large Lorentz boost) it is reasonable to assume that HF
hadrons (and jets) probe the interactions of the heavy quarks with the medium.

3.4. Summary of Model-to-Data Comparisons and Implications for HF Transport

In this section we summarize and discuss the current experimental results in light
of their theoretical
interpretations, organized into two regimes of high and low
transverse momentum following the expectation of diﬀerent prevailing processes. We
augment this discussion with an attempt to identify a transverse-momentum scale
which possibly delineates the predominantly elastic and radiative interaction regimes,
accompanied by schematic estimates of the pertinent HF transport coeﬃcients. Since
theoretical calculations of HF transport predict appreciable momentum depedencies of
the coeﬃcients (recall Fig. 2), a separation into regions of “low” and “high” pT may be
considered a minimal accounting procedure of this aspect, while keeping in mind that
the dominant eﬀects may also arise from rather diﬀerent temperatures (e.g., around Tpc

CONTENTS

vs. the early hottest phases).

76

Qp

At high pT, the initial HQ spectra are far above the equilibrium limit of the medium
in heavy-ion collisions, and thus the interactions chieﬂy probe energy loss mechanisms
of charm and beauty particles. This can also be gleaned from the Langevin process,
eq. (16), where the dominant mechanism becomes a momentum degradation by a force
dpj/dt = −Γ(p, T )pj. In a simpliﬁed form, the friction coeﬃcient, Γ (cid:39) A ∼ npσtrans
, is
a product of medium density and HQ-parton transport cross section, where the latter
is expected to be in the perturbative regime with a mild temperature dependence.
Since np ∝ T 3, the energy loss is presumably dominated by the hottest phases in a
heavy-ion collision. The RHIC and LHC data on the nuclear modiﬁcation factor of
D mesons, non-prompt J/ψ and HF decay leptons all show a strong suppression of
the high-pT HF yield in semi-/central heavy-ion collisions relative to binary scaled pp
cross sections, clearly associated with ﬁnal-state eﬀects. For high-pT D-mesons in central
Pb–Pb collisions at the LHC, the BAMPS, Duke and MC@sHQ+EPOS models describe
the ALICE data well, while the elastic approaches of POWLANG and TAMU over- and
under-predict the suppression, respectively. Taking Fig. 2 around p(cid:39)10 GeV and for
T(cid:39)0.3-0.4 GeV as guidance (with MC@sHQ+EPOS typically requiring a moderate K
factor for elastic-only calculations), we estimate an “average” high-pT friction coeﬃcient
of A (cid:39) 0.2± 0.08/fm to describe the data (this probably includes part of the systematic
uncertainty due to, e.g., the diﬀerent medium evolutions employed in the transport
models). The POWLANG and TAMU coeﬃcients with A(p=10 GeV)(cid:39)0.25-0.3/fm and
0.07-0.1/fm, respectively, roughly bracket the estimated uncertainty. A conversion of
the HQ transport coeﬃcients into a jet-quenching parameter, ˆq, as commonly adopted
for light-parton energy loss, has been suggested in Ref. [341] in terms of the transverse-
momentum broadening per unit path length, leading to ˆq ≡ ˆq⊥ = 4T E2
pA/p (Ep: HQ
energy). This translates into an estimate of ˆq (cid:39) 2.8 ± 1.1 GeV2/fm at T(cid:39)0.35 GeV,
or ˆq/T 3 (cid:39) 13 ± 5, which is more stable in temperature. This result tends to be larger
than the values extracted from light-parton jet quenching [342], possibly indicative of
non-perturbative physics (and/or larger contributions from elastic interactions) which
could still play a role for a charm quark at pT (cid:39) 10 GeV.

The measurements of the azimuthal momentum anisotropy suggest a positive v2 at
high pT, but they do not have enough precision yet to yield meaningful constraints on
transport coeﬃcients or the path length dependence of parton energy loss.

The beauty sector, currently accessed via non-prompt J/ψ mesons and b-jets at the
LHC, shows less suppression in the RAA than charm in a pT interval around 10 GeV/c.
This observation is consistent with the expectation of quark-mass dependent energy
loss (gluon Bremsstrahlung oﬀ the heavier beauty quarks is suppressed). However, the
measured RAA and v2 of HF decay leptons at both RHIC and the LHC also show fair
agreement with the BAMPS, MC@sHQ+EPOS and TAMU transport calculations, up
to pt (cid:39) 10 GeV. Since TAMU does not inlcude radiative contributions, this suggests
that the pT(cid:39)10 GeV regime for beauty is still in the realm of elastically dominated

CONTENTS

77

interactions. The generic expectation for the transition from elastic to radiative regimes
is a scaling with mass. Thus, based on an estimate for the transition regime around
T (cid:39)5 GeV for charm. The latter value
T (cid:39)15 GeV for beauty, one would deduce ptrans
ptrans
is supported in the discussion of the low-pT regime below.

The color-charge dependence of parton energy loss has been one of the original
motivations for high-pT HF measurements. The measured RAA’s of D mesons and
pions, which are expected to be sensitive to the diﬀerent coupling of gluons and quarks
with the medium, agree within current uncertainties at RHIC and LHC energies. The
RAA’s of b-jets and inclusive jets are also observed to be compatible within uncertainties
at very high momenta, pT > 80 GeV. Hence, an experimental evidence of the color-
charge dependence of energy loss remains elusive from the current data. According to
model calculations, the similarity of the RAA’s for D mesons and pions could result
from the combined eﬀect of a color-charge dependent energy loss and the softer pT
distribution and fragmentation function of gluons relative to charm quarks. To scrutinize
this question, comparisons of B-, D- and π-meson data over a larger range in pT will be
needed, at both RHIC and the LHC. However, care has to taken when going down to
pT’s where eﬀects of radial ﬂow and/or recombination set in. In the beauty sector these
could become relavant at transverse momenta as high as 15 GeV. Likewise, at very high
pT , the gluon splitting contribution to b-quarks is expected to become sizable (implying
that part of the energy loss is suﬀered by the parent gluon).

The low-pT region is particularly interesting because of its sensitivity to a low-
momentum transport coeﬃcient of the QCD medium, i.e., the HF diﬀusion coeﬃcient
Ds. In addition, the approach toward equilibrium does not merely induce a suppression
of the spectra, but is expected to produce non-monotonic structures (like a “ﬂow bump”
in the HF hadron RAA’s) whose quantitative features (such as the ﬂow bump’s height
and location in pT) are especially revealing for both medium evolution and the transport
properties of the embedded HF particles. Measurements of RAA and v2 of diﬀerent HF
hadron species are expected to quantify the degree to which charm and beauty particles
participate in the collective expansion of the system, thus directly reﬂecting their
coupling strength to the medium. This includes the eﬀects of in-medium hadronization,
which is a manifestation of the HQ-medium coupling in the vicinity of Tpc (through
hadronic pre-/resonant states). Experimentally, the D-meson RAA at RHIC energy
shows a pronounced maximum around pT(cid:39)1-2 GeV, which was predicted by models
including strong elastic interactions of charm quarks in an expanding QGP, together
with hadronization via in-medium heavy-light quark recombination. The same models
also describe the low-pT D-meson RAA measured at the LHC, where the “radial-ﬂow
bump” is less pronounced (e.g., due to the harder initial spectra and stronger shadowing)
and/or not yet resolved. The approximate agreement of these models extends to the
RAA of the HF decay leptons at both accelerators. Importantly, a fair description also
emerges of the low-pT elliptic ﬂow, which is measured to be at the ∼10-15% level for D
mesons (slightly smaller for HF leptons) in non-central collisions at RHIC and the LHC,

CONTENTS

78

with still rather signiﬁcant uncertainties. The data favor scenarios in which the heavy
quarks pick up substantial collectivity from the expanding QGP, which is then further
augmented by hadronization through recombination (by several tens of percent), and
by another 10-20% in the hadronic phase. The relative importance of the hadronization
process in generating v2 is another reﬂection of a strong HQ-medium coupling in the
vicinty of Tpc. At ﬁrst sight, the underlying HF transport coeﬃcients appear to be
quite diﬀerent among current models. For example, comparing the low-momentum
region of the MC@sHQ+EPOS (or Nantes) and TAMU models from Fig. 2 left, an
appreciable discrepancy is found. The discrepancy is, however, smallest at the lowest
temperatures, less than a factor of 2.
It is further mitigated if one recalls that the
charm-quark mass close to Tpc in the MC@sHQ+EPOS model (mc=1.5 GeV) is smaller
than in the TAMU model (where the in-medium mass grows as Tpc is approached from
above, reaching up to mc(cid:39)1.8 GeV). In the conversion from A to the spatial diﬀusion
coeﬃcient Ds, the mQ dependence of the former is approximately divided out, cf. eq. (2),
which can be recast as Ds (cid:39) T /mQA(p = 0). This suggests that the coupling strength
around Tpc is most important in building up the HF v2, which is not surprising since
the bulk v2 is largest from this stage on [39, 343] (the importance of recombination
processes in the hadronization of the heavy quarks further corroborates this point). More
quantitatively from Fig. 2, taking T =0.2 GeV, one ﬁnds Ds(2πT )(cid:39) 2-3 for the Nantes
coeﬃcients and Ds(2πT )(cid:39) 3-4 for the TAMU one. For the PHSD model, which also
reproduces the D-meson RAA and v2 at the LHC reasonably well, the underlying spatial
diﬀusion constant is somewhat larger, Ds(2πT )(cid:39) 5-6 (with mc=1.5 GeV). However,
the concrete implementation of heavy-light quark recombination diﬀers signiﬁcantly
in the current models, both technically as well as in its impact on observables (the
TAMU implementation tends to give larger eﬀects from recombination than the one in
MC@sHQ+EPOS, Duke and PHSD). This contributes signiﬁcantly to the uncertainty
in the model interpretations of the experimental data (such as the extraction of the
transport coeﬃcient).

s and B0

s ) and of baryons (Λ+

Promising tools to discern diﬀerent types of hadronization mechanisms and the
nature of the interactions near Tpc are the RAA and v2 of HF hadrons with diﬀerent
quark composition and diﬀerent mass. In particular, the production of mesons carrying
a strange quark (D+
b) at low and intermediate
pT has been suggested to encode pertinent information. The ﬁrst measurement of the
D+
s RAA at the LHC and a subsequent preliminary result at RHIC provide a hint for the
relevance of recombination of charm with thermal strange quarks, although the current
uncertainties do not allow for deﬁnite conclusions. A stronger signal for recombination
of charm quarks, with anti-charm quarks, comes from the observed J/ψ RAA [345, 346]
and v2 [347] at the LHC. The larger data samples that will be collected in the next years
will be most valuable to shed further light on the relevance heavy-light and heavy-heavy
recombination processes.

c , Ξ+

c , Ξ0

c, Λ0

Let us ﬁnally return to question of elastic vs. radiative HQ interactions in the
QGP. The TAMU transport approach with non-perturbative elastic interactions only

CONTENTS
79
approximately describes the RAA and v2 of D-mesons up to pT(cid:39)5 GeV (with signiﬁcant
deviations above), and the HF lepton observables, with a substantial beauty component,
out to pT(cid:39)10 GeV. This may serve as an initial estimate of the regime where elastic
interactions dominate the HQ coupling to the QCD medium. Interestingly, the BAMPS
and MC@sHQ+EPOS approaches seem to do best in a simultaneous description of RAA
and v2 toward higher pT when the elastic HQ interactions in the QGP are maximized
relative to the radiative ones. The former appear to be more eﬀective in transfering
collectivity from the expanding medium on heavy quarks than path length diﬀerences
probed by energy loss mechanisms. On the other hand, theoretical calculations suggest
that radiative contributions are important at high pT, e.g., for the observed mass
dependence of energy loss. Hence, future measurements of the high-pT v2 will provide
crucial information. Scattering processes of 2→3 and 3↔3 type [348] may also play a
role in future improvements of the theoretical models.

4. Conclusions and Outlook

The measurements of open heavy-ﬂavor production in heavy-ion collisions at RHIC and
the LHC have remarkably progressed in recent years. The pioneering measurements of
semi-leptonic HF decays at RHIC are now augmented by D-meson measurements at both
colliders, as well as beauty particles through their J/ψ decay products and b-jets. The
nuclear modiﬁcation factor exhibits large deviations from unity, and the accompanying
elliptic ﬂow substantial non-zero values, for all measured HF particles (data on beauty v2
are not available yet), while control experiments in small systems yield RpA (cid:39) RdA (cid:39) 1.
The main features of the data are in general understood and corroborate that HF
particles acquire a substantial collective ﬂow at low and intermediate momenta which
requires a strong coupling to the QCD medium including recombination as hadronization
mechanism. At the same time, high-pT HF particles are signiﬁcantly degraded in energy
(beauty particles less than charm particles), which is most naturally associated with
parton energy loss in the QGP.

Detailed comparisons of the experimental observations with various theoretical
model calculations have been instrumental in deducing the above qualitative insights.
Here, we have attempted to take the next step by extracting semi-quantitative estimates
for the HF transport coeﬃcients.
In the low-pT regime, the heavy-quark diﬀusion
coeﬃcient appears to lie in the range of Ds(2πT )(cid:39) 2-5 at temperatures of around
T(cid:39)0.2 GeV, which are arguably the most relevant ones to obtain the experimentally
measured large charm-v2 values. This result is not far from current estimates within
quenched lattice QCD. The pertinent thermalization timescale of 3-6 fm/c suggests that
low-pT charm particles are close to being thermalized in central AA collisions at RHIC
and the LHC, and probably decouple slighlty below Tpc. High-pT suppression suggests
an energy loss transport coeﬃcient of approximately ˆq/T 3 (cid:39) 10-15 for a 10 GeV charm
quark at temperatures of T(cid:39)0.35 GeV, which tends to be larger than for light partons.

CONTENTS

80

We also deduced that elastic scattering dominates the transport of charm (beauty)
particles for pT <∼ 5(15) GeV, and may remain important until much larger momenta.

The above estimates call for a more rigorous quantiﬁcation of their uncertainties,
including those caused by the medium evolution, hadronization process, and initial
conditions. However, given that the current (statistical and systematic) uncertainties
of the experimental data are still rather large in many cases, and that some observables
(like beauty v2 and heavy-baryon spectra) are not available yet, we see an excellent
potential to further narrow down the latitude in the phenomenological modeling of HF
transport in AA collisions at RHIC and the LHC. A base set of precision data on the
RAA and v2 of D and B mesons, charm-strange mesons and charm baryons down to low
pT would go a long way toward disentangling diﬀerent mechanisms, identifying their
microscopic origin and obtaining reliable and accurate results for the temperature and
momentum dependence of the charm and beauty transport coeﬃcients in QCD matter.
Accurate low-pT measurements, including heavy baryons, are also essential to assess the
total production yields of charm and beauty in URHICs, which are, e.g., crucial for
quantifying regeneration contributions in the quarkonium sector; current electron and
D-meson measurements at RHIC show consistency with binary scaling within a ∼30%
accuracy. The experimental requirements for the above measurements are very likely
to be met in the coming years through the larger data samples that, augmented with
advanced detection methods, will become available at RHIC and the LHC.

Continued theoretical eﬀorts will be required to ﬁrmly root the phenomenological
analyses in ﬁnite-temperature QCD. Lattice results for the HF diﬀusion coeﬃcient in full
QCD are much anticipated and can serve as a benchmark for eﬀective-theory calculations
of this quantity. Such calculations provide a natural bridge between lattice-QCD and
experiment, and can, in fact, draw constraints from a broad class of quantities that can
be computed with good precision on the lattice, including heavy-quark free energies,
correlation functions and susceptibilities. The latter, e.g., are a well-known diagnostic
tool for the prevalent degrees of freedom in the QCD medium, i.e., whether charm
propagates as individual quarks or as part of hadronic states. One is then automatically
led into the quarkonium sector, which we did not discuss in the present review, but
which obviously bears close connections to open heavy ﬂavor, both theoretically and
phenomenologically.

Future issues on the experimental side also include the role of HF transport in
small colliding systems, at smaller (and higher) colliding energies, as well as correlation
observables. For the former, pA collisions at the LHC found possible indications for a
non-zero v2, while the RAA appears to be only mildly modiﬁed, paralleling the more
accurate observations for light-ﬂavor hadrons. This could develop into quite a challenge
s=62 GeV,
for model calculations. At lower collision energies, in Au-Au reactions at
√
evidence has been found that the RAA of semileptonic decay electrons is larger than at
s=200 GeV and 2.76 TeV, where the high-pT suppression is comparable. In how far this
ﬁnding is due to initial-state eﬀects (e.g., softer initial spectra and/or stronger Cronin
eﬀect) or ﬁnal-state eﬀects needs to be clariﬁed, thereby providing further insights into

√

CONTENTS

81

the impact of the QCD transition region on HF transport. High-pT HF correlations hold,
in principle, the potential for disentagling diﬀerent mechanisms of energy loss, i.e., how
the energy dissipated by a heavy quark migrates into the medium. Current model
calculations suggest that the discrimination power between, e.g., elastic and radiative
mechanisms requires a rather high experimental precision, which may be achievable with
future LHC runs.

In conclusion, heavy-ﬂavor physics in heavy-ion collisions remains one of the
most promising areas in QCD matter research.
it simultaneously
incorporates two critical aspects, namely (i) taking advantage of upcoming precision
data to quantitatively extract transport properties of the QCD medium while, (ii) taking
advantage of controlled theoretical approaches to illuminate the in-medium properties
of the fundamental QCD force in a non-perturbative regime. We believe that this
opportunity will enable decisive progress in understanding the inner workings of the
medium that ﬁlled the Universe in the ﬁrst ∼10 microseconds of its existence.

In particular,

Acknowledgments
We thank Andrea Beraudo, Andrea Dainese and Min He for helpful comments on the
ms., and Min He, Davide Caﬀarri and Diego Stocco for help with the ﬁgures. This
work has been supported by the US National Science Foundation under grant no. PHY-
1306359.

References

[1] R. Stock (editor) et al., Relativistic Heavy-Ion Physics, Landolt B¨ornstein I-23, Springer Verlag

(Heidelberg 2010).

[2] Y. Akiba et al., arXiv:1502.02730 [nucl-ex].
[3] P. Braun-Munzinger, V. Koch, T. Schaefer and J. Stachel, arXiv:1510.00442 [nucl-th].
[4] B. I. Abelev et al. [STAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 79 (2009) 034909.
[5] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 252301.
[6] S. Borsanyi, Z. Fodor, C. Hoelbling, S.D. Katz, S. Krieg, C. Ratti, K.K. Szabo [Wuppertal-

Budapest Collaboration], JHEP 1009 (2010) 073.

[7] T. Bhattacharya et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 082001.
[8] R. Rapp, Adv. High Energy Phys. 2013 (2013) 148253.
[9] R. Rapp and H. van Hees, R. C. Hwa, X.-N. Wang (Ed.), Quark Gluon Plasma 4, World Scientiﬁc

(2010) 111.

[10] R. Averbeck, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 70 (2013) 159.
[11] A. Andronic et al., arXiv:1506.03981 [nucl-ex].
[12] P. Braun-Munzinger and J. Stachel, Landolt-Bornstein 23 (2010) 424.
[13] L. Kluberg and H. Satz, Landolt-Bornstein 23 (2010) 372.
[14] R. Rapp, D. Blaschke and P. Crochet, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 65 (2010) 209.
[15] A. Mocsy, P. Petreczky and M. Strickland, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 28 (2013) 1340012.
[16] G. S. Bali et al. [TXL and T(X)L Collaborations], Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 054503.
[17] D. Banerjee, S. Datta, R. Gavai and P. Majumdar, Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 014510.
[18] O. Kaczmarek, Nucl. Phys. A 931 (2014) 633.
[19] P. Petreczky, Eur. Phys. J. C 62 (2009) 85.

CONTENTS

82

[20] A. Bazavov, F. Karsch, Y. Maezawa, S. Mukherjee and P. Petreczky, Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015)

054503.

[21] F. Riek and R. Rapp, New J. Phys. 13 (2011) 045007.
[22] G. D. Moore and D. Teaney, Phys. Rev. C 71 (2005) 064904.
[23] C. P. Herzog, A. Karch, P. Kovtun, C. Kozcaz and L. G. Yaﬀe, JHEP 0607 (2006) 013.
[24] S. S. Gubser, Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 126005.
[25] J. Casalderrey-Solana and D. Teaney, Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 085012.
[26] P. Danielewicz and M. Gyulassy, Phys. Rev. D 31 (1985) 53.
[27] P. B. Gossiaux, Nucl. Phys. A 910-911 (2013) 301.
[28] J. Uphoﬀ, O. Fochler, Z. Xu and C. Greiner, J. Phys. G 42 (2015) 115106.
[29] T. Koide and T. Kodama, Phys. Rev. E 83 (2011) 061111.
[30] M. He, H. van Hees, P. B. Gossiaux, R. J. Fries and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. E 88 (2013) 032138.
[31] H. van Hees and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 71 (2005) 034907.
[32] H. van Hees, V. Greco and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 73 (2006) 034913.
[33] P. B. Gossiaux, V. Guiho and J. Aichelin, J. Phys. G 32 (2006) S359.
[34] S. K. Das, J. e. Alam and P. Mohanty, Phys. Rev. C 82 (2010) 014908.
[35] Y. Akamatsu, T. Hatsuda and T. Hirano, Phys. Rev. C 79 (2009) 054907.
[36] W. M. Alberico, A. Beraudo, A. De Pace, A. Molinari, M. Monteno, M. Nardi and F. Prino, Eur.

Phys. J. C 71 (2011) 1666.

[37] F. Scardina, D. Perricone, S. Plumari, M. Ruggieri and V. Greco, Phys. Rev. C 90 (2014) 054904.
[38] J. Uphoﬀ, O. Fochler, Z. Xu and C. Greiner, Phys. Lett. B 717 (2012) 430.
[39] S. K. Das, F. Scardina, S. Plumari and V. Greco, Phys. Lett. B 747 (2015) 260.
[40] T. Song, H. Berrehrah, D. Cabrera, J. M. Torres-Rincon, L. Tolos, W. Cassing and

E. Bratkovskaya, Phys. Rev. C 92 (2015) 014910.

[41] B. Svetitsky, Phys. Rev. D 37 (1988) 2484.
[42] K. Aamodt et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 696 (2011) 328.
[43] S. S. Adler et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 032301.
[44] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (2007) 172301.
[45] A. Peshier, Nucl. Phys. A 888 (2012) 7.
[46] P. B. Gossiaux and J. Aichelin, Phys. Rev. C 78 (2008) 014904.
[47] E. Braaten and M. H. Thoma, Phys. Rev. D 44 (1991) 2625.
[48] W. M. Alberico, A. Beraudo, A. De Pace, A. Molinari, M. Monteno, M. Nardi, F. Prino and

M. Sitta, Eur. Phys. J. C 73 (2013) 2481.

[49] O. Kaczmarek and F. Zantow, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 114510.
[50] H. Berrehrah, E. Bratkovskaya, W. Cassing, P. B. Gossiaux, J. Aichelin and M. Bleicher, Phys.

Rev. C 89 (2014) 054901.

[51] T. Song, H. Berrehrah, D. Cabrera, W. Cassing and E. Bratkovskaya, arXiv:1512.00891 [nucl-th].
[52] S. Caron-Huot and G. D. Moore, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2008) 052301.
[53] E. Eichten, K. Gottfried, T. Kinoshita, K. D. Lane and T. M. Yan, Phys. Rev. D 21 (1980) 203.
[54] A. Bazavov, Y. Burnier and P. Petreczky, Nucl. Phys. A 932 (2014) 117.
[55] R. Brockmann and R. Machleidt, Phys. Rev. C 42 (1990) 1965.
[56] R. Redmer, Phys. Rep. 282 (1997) 35.
[57] P. A. Pantel, D. Davesne and M. Urban, Phys. Rev. A 91 (2015) 013627.
[58] F. Riek and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 82 (2010) 035201.
[59] N. Brambilla, D. Gromes and A. Vairo, Phys. Lett. B 576 (2003) 314.
[60] H. van Hees, M. Mannarelli, V. Greco and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2008) 192301.
[61] K. Huggins and R. Rapp, Nucl. Phys. A 896 (2012) 24.
[62] X. Zhao and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 82 (2010) 064905.
[63] Y. Liu, B. Chen, N. Xu and P. Zhuang, Phys. Lett. B 697 (2011) 32.
[64] X. Zhao and R. Rapp, Nucl. Phys. A 859 (2011) 114.
[65] M. He, R. J. Fries and R. Rapp, Phys. Lett. B 735 (2014) 445.

CONTENTS

83

[66] A. Emerick, X. Zhao and R. Rapp, Eur. Phys. J. A 48 (2012) 72.
[67] M. Strickland and D. Bazow, Nucl. Phys. A 879 (2012) 25.
[68] M. He, S.Y.F. Liu and R. Rapp, in preparation.
[69] O. Kaczmarek, PoS CPOD 07 (2007) 043.
[70] S. Y. F. Liu and R. Rapp, Nucl. Phys. A 941 (2015) 179.
[71] Y. Burnier, O. Kaczmarek and A. Rothkopf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 082001.
[72] R. Sharma, I. Vitev and B. W. Zhang, Phys. Rev. C 80 (2009) 054902.
[73] P. B. Gossiaux, J. Aichelin, T. Gousset and V. Guiho, J. Phys. G 37 (2010) 094019.
[74] M. Nahrgang, J. Aichelin, P. B. Gossiaux and K. Werner, Phys. Rev. C 89 (2014) 014905.
[75] J. Uphoﬀ, O. Fochler, Z. Xu and C. Greiner, Phys. Rev. C 84 (2011) 024908.
[76] M. He, R. J. Fries and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 86 (2012) 014903.
[77] Y. L. Dokshitzer and D. E. Kharzeev, Phys. Lett. B 519 (2001) 199.
[78] N. Armesto, C. A. Salgado and U. A. Wiedemann, Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004) 114003.
[79] N. Armesto, A. Dainese, C. A. Salgado and U. A. Wiedemann, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 054027.
[80] G. Y. Qin, J. Ruppert, C. Gale, S. Jeon, G. D. Moore and M. G. Mustafa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100

(2008) 072301.

[81] T. Lang, H. van Hees, J. Steinheimer, G. Inghirami and M. Bleicher, Phys. Rev. C 93 (2016)

014901.

[82] S. Cao, G. Y. Qin and S. A. Bass, Phys. Rev. C 88 (2013) 044907.
[83] S. Cao, G. Y. Qin and S. A. Bass, Phys. Rev. C 92 (2015) 024907.
[84] S. Wicks, W. Horowitz, M. Djordjevic and M. Gyulassy, Nucl. Phys. A 783 (2007) 493.
[85] M. Djordjevic, Phys. Rev. C 80 (2009) 064909.
[86] M. Gyulassy, P. Levai and I. Vitev, Nucl. Phys. B 594 (2001) 371.
[87] J. Aichelin, P. B. Gossiaux and T. Gousset, Phys. Rev. D 89 (2014) 074018.
[88] J. F. Gunion and G. Bertsch, Phys. Rev. D 25 (1982) 746.
[89] M. Nahrgang, J. Aichelin, P. B. Gossiaux and K. Werner, Phys. Rev. C 90 (2014) 024907.
[90] T. Hilger, R. Thomas and B. Kampfer, Phys. Rev. C 79 (2009) 025202.
[91] K. Suzuki, P. Gubler and M. Oka, arXiv:1511.04513 [hep-ph].
[92] C. Fuchs, B. V. Martemyanov, A. Faessler and M. I. Krivoruchenko, Phys. Rev. C 73 (2006)

035204.

[93] M. F. M. Lutz and C. L. Korpa, Phys. Lett. B 633 (2006) 43.
[94] L. Tolos, A. Ramos and T. Mizutani, Phys. Rev. C 77 (2008) 015207.
[95] M. Laine, JHEP 1104 (2011) 124.
[96] M. He, R. J. Fries and R. Rapp, Phys. Lett. B 701 (2011) 445.
[97] S. Ghosh, S. K. Das, S. Sarkar and J. e. Alam, Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011) 011503.
[98] L. M. Abreu, D. Cabrera, F. J. Llanes-Estrada and J. M. Torres-Rincon, Annals Phys. 326 (2011)

2737.

[99] L. Tolos and J. M. Torres-Rincon, Phys. Rev. D 88 (2013) 074019.
[100] V. Ozvenchuk, J. M. Torres-Rincon, P. B. Gossiaux, L. Tolos and J. Aichelin, Phys. Rev. C 90

(2014) 054909.

[101] S. K. Das, S. Ghosh, S. Sarkar and J. e. Alam, Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 074017.
[102] L. M. Abreu, D. Cabrera and J. M. Torres-Rincon, Phys. Rev. D 87 (2013) 034019.
[103] J. M. Torres-Rincon, L. Tolos and O. Romanets, Phys. Rev. D 89 (2014) 074042.
[104] H. T. Ding, A. Francis, O. Kaczmarek, F. Karsch, H. Satz and W. Soeldner, Phys. Rev. D 86

(2012) 014509.

[105] A. Francis, O. Kaczmarek, M. Laine, T. Neuhaus and H. Ohno, Phys. Rev. D 92 (2015) 116003.
[106] M. He, R. J. Fries and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013) 112301.
[107] S. Mukherjee, P. Petreczky and S. Sharma, Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016) 014502.
[108] M. Mannarelli and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 72 (2005) 064905.
[109] S.S. Gubser, Phys. Rev. D 76 (2007) 126003.
[110] C. Peterson, D. Schlatter, I. Schmitt and P. M. Zerwas, Phys. Rev. D 27 (1983) 105.

CONTENTS

84

[111] M. Cacciari, M. Greco and P. Nason, JHEP 9805 (1998) 007.
[112] M. Cacciari, P. Nason and R. Vogt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005) 122001.
[113] V. G. Kartvelishvili, A. K. Likhoded and S. R. Slabospitsky, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 33 (1981) 434

[Yad. Fiz. 33 (1981) 832].

[114] R. C. Hwa, Phys. Rev. D 51 (1995) 85.
[115] E. Braaten, Y. Jia and T. Mehen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002) 122002.
[116] R. Rapp and E. V. Shuryak, Phys. Rev. D 67 (2003) 074036.
[117] Z. w. Lin and D. Molnar, Phys. Rev. C 68 (2003) 044901.
[118] V. Greco, C. M. Ko and R. Rapp, Phys. Lett. B 595 (2004) 202.
[119] D. Molnar, Acta Phys. Hung. A 22 (2005) 271.
[120] L. Ravagli and R. Rapp, Phys. Lett. B 655 (2007) 126.
[121] L. Ravagli, H. van Hees and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 79 (2009) 064902.
[122] A. Beraudo, A. De Pace, M. Monteno, M. Nardi and F. Prino, Eur. Phys. J. C 75 (2015) 121.
[123] T. Sjostrand, S. Mrenna and P. Z. Skands, JHEP 0605 (2006) 026.
[124] M. He, R. J. Fries and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 85 (2012) 044911.
[125] S. Takeuchi, K. Murase, T. Hirano, P. Huovinen and Y. Nara, Phys. Rev. C 92 (2015) 044907.
[126] Y. Oh, C. M. Ko, S. H. Lee and S. Yasui, Phys. Rev. C 79 (2009) 044905.
[127] P. M. Chesler, M. Lekaveckas and K. Rajagopal, JHEP 1310 (2013) 013.
[128] S. K. Das, M. Ruggieri, S. Mazumder, V. Greco and J. e. Alam, J. Phys. G 42 (2015) 095108.
[129] B. Schenke, P. Tribedy and R. Venugopalan, Phys. Rev. C 89 (2014) 024901.
[130] M. He, unpublished (2014).
[131] P. B. Gossiaux, S. Vogel, H. van Hees, J. Aichelin, R. Rapp, M. He and M. Bluhm, arXiv:1102.1114

[hep-ph].

[132] P. F. Kolb and U. W. Heinz, In *Hwa, R.C. (ed.) et al.: Quark gluon plasma* 634-714 [nucl-

th/0305084].

[133] P. F. Kolb and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 67 (2003) 044903.
[134] W. Broniowski, W. Florkowski, M. Chojnacki and A. Kisiel, Phys. Rev. C 80 (2009) 034902.
[135] C. Gale, S. Jeon, B. Schenke, P. Tribedy and R. Venugopalan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013)

012302.

[136] W. van der Schee, P. Romatschke and S. Pratt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 22, 222302.
[137] S. Pratt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009) 232301.
[138] S. Pratt, Nucl. Phys. A 830 (2009) 51C.
[139] H. van Hees, C. Gale and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 84 (2011) 054906.
[140] H. van Hees, M. He and R. Rapp, Nucl. Phys. A 933 (2015) 256.
[141] M. Nahrgang, J. Aichelin, S. Bass, P. B. Gossiaux and K. Werner, Nucl. Phys. A 931 (2014) 575.
[142] B. Zhang, L. W. Chen and C. M. Ko, Phys. Rev. C 72 (2005) 024906.
[143] D. Molnar, Eur. Phys. J. C 49 (2007) 181.
[144] M. C. Abreu et al. [NA38 and NA50 Collaborations], Eur. Phys. J. C 14 (2000) 443.
[145] R. Arnaldi et al. [NA60 Collaboration], Eur. Phys. J. C 59 (2009) 607.
[146] C. Lourenco and H. K. W¨ohri, Phys. Rept. 433 (2006) 127.
[147] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 84 (2011) 044905.
[148] L. Adamczyk et al. [STAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 072013.
[149] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], JHEP 1207 (2012) 191.
[150] R. Aaij et al. [LHCb Collaboration], Nucl. Phys. B 871 (2013) 1.
[151] C. Albajar et al. [UA1 Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 256 (1991) 121 [Phys. Lett. B 262 (1991)

497].

[152] D. Acosta et al. [CDF Collaboration], Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 032001.
[153] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009) 082002.
[154] B. B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 738 (2014) 97.
[155] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 721 (2013) 13.
[156] S. S. Adler et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 71 (2005) 034908 [Phys. Rev. C 71

CONTENTS

(2005) 049901].

85

[157] S. Chatrchyan et al. [CMS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 152303.
[158] K. A. Olive et al. [Particle Data Group Collaboration], Chin. Phys. C 38 (2014) 090001.
[159] B. I. Abelev et al. [STAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (2007) 192301 [Phys. Rev. Lett.

106 (2011) 159902].

[160] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 112007.
[161] G. Aad et al. [ATLAS Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 707 (2012) 438.
[162] H. Agakishiev et al. [STAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. D 83 (2011) 052006.
[163] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 86 (2012) 024909.
[164] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 112301.
[165] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 670 (2009) 313.
[166] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 91 (2015) 014907.
[167] M. M. Aggarwal et al. [STAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (2010) 202301.
[168] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], JHEP 1211 (2012) 065.
[169] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], JHEP 1507 (2015) 051.
[170] V. Khachatryan et al. [CMS Collaboration], Eur. Phys. J. C 71 (2011) 1575.
[171] R. Aaij et al. [LHCb Collaboration], Eur. Phys. J. C 71 (2011) 1645.
[172] R. Aaij et al. [LHCb Collaboration], JHEP 1402 (2014) 072.
[173] D. Buskulic et al. [ALEPH Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 295 (1992) 396.
[174] O. Adriani et al. [L3 Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 317 (1993) 467.
[175] P. Abreu et al. [DELPHI Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 341 (1994) 109.
[176] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], JHEP 1201 (2012) 128.
[177] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 718 (2012) 279.
[178] CMS Collaboration [CMS Collaboration], CMS-PAS-HIN-15-005.
[179] V. Khachatryan et al. [CMS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 (2016) 032301.
[180] S. Chatrchyan et al. [CMS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 132301 [Phys. Rev. Lett.

115 (2015) 029903].

[181] R. J. Glauber in Lectures in Theoretical Physics, NY, 1959, Vol. 1, 315.
[182] M. L. Miller, K. Reygers, S. J. Sanders and P. Steinberg, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 57 (2007)

205.

[183] P. Braun-Munzinger and K. Redlich, Eur. Phys. J. C 16 (2000) 519.
[184] B. W. Zhang, C. M. Ko and W. Liu, Phys. Rev. C 77 (2008) 024901.
[185] S. Batsouli, S. Kelly, M. Gyulassy and J. L. Nagle, Phys. Lett. B 557 (2003) 26.
[186] A. Andronic, P. Braun-Munzinger, K. Redlich and J. Stachel, Phys. Lett. B 571 (2003) 36.
[187] I. Kuznetsova and J. Rafelski, Eur. Phys. J. C 51 (2007) 113.
[188] P. R. Sorensen and X. Dong, Phys. Rev. C 74 (2006) 024902.
[189] G. Martinez-Garcia, S. Gadrat and P. Crochet, Phys. Lett. B 663 (2008) 55 [Phys. Lett. B 666

(2008) 533].

[190] J. Adams et al. [STAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 72 (2005) 014904.
[191] S. S. Adler et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (2003) 182301.
[192] B. B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], JHEP 1506 (2015) 190.
[193] J. Y. Ollitrault, Phys. Rev. D 46 (1992) 229.
[194] M. Gyulassy, I. Vitev and X. N. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 2537.
[195] E. V. Shuryak, Phys. Rev. C 66 (2002) 027902.
[196] M. H. Thoma and M. Gyulassy, Nucl. Phys. B 351 (1991) 491.
[197] R. Baier, Y. L. Dokshitzer, A. H. Mueller, S. Peigne and D. Schiﬀ, Nucl. Phys. B 484 (1997) 265.
[198] D. Molnar and S. A. Voloshin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (2003) 092301.
[199] M. Nahrgang, J. Aichelin, S. Bass, P. B. Gossiaux and K. Werner, Phys. Rev. C 91 (2015) 1,

014904.

[200] J. Uphoﬀ, F. Senzel, Z. Xu and C. Greiner, Phys. Rev. C 89 (2014) 064906.
[201] S. Cao, G. Y. Qin and S. A. Bass, Nucl. Phys. A 932 (2014) 38.

CONTENTS

86

[202] T. Renk, Phys. Rev. C 89 (2014) 054906.
[203] G. Aad et al. [ATLAS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (2010) 252303.
[204] S. Chatrchyan et al. [CMS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 84 (2011) 024906.
[205] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 89 (2014) 034915.
[206] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 83 (2011) 044912.
[207] G. Wang [STAR Collaboration], J. Phys. G 35 (2008) 104107.
[208] D. Thomas [ALICE Collaboration], J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 509 (2014) 012079.
[209] B. L. Combridge, Nucl. Phys. B 151 (1979) 429.
[210] M. L. Mangano, P. Nason and G. Ridolﬁ, Nucl. Phys. B 373 (1992) 295.
[211] B. A. Kniehl, G. Kramer, I. Schienbein and H. Spiesberger, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 014018.
[212] B. A. Kniehl, G. Kramer, I. Schienbein and H. Spiesberger, Eur. Phys. J. C 41 (2005) 199.
[213] M. Luszczak, R. Maciula and A. Szczurek, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 034009.
[214] R. Maciula and A. Szczurek, Phys. Rev. D 87 (2013) 094022.
[215] S. Catani, M. Ciafaloni and F. Hautmann, Nucl. Phys. B 366 (1991) 135.
[216] T. Sjostrand, S. Mrenna and P. Z. Skands, Comput. Phys. Commun. 178 (2008) 852.
[217] G. Corcella, I. G. Knowles, G. Marchesini, S. Moretti, K. Odagiri, P. Richardson, M. H. Seymour

and B. R. Webber, JHEP 0101 (2001) 010.

[218] S. Frixione, P. Nason and B. R. Webber, JHEP 0308 (2003) 007.
[219] S. Frixione, P. Nason and G. Ridolﬁ, JHEP 0709 (2007) 126.
[220] S. Wicks, W. Horowitz, M. Djordjevic and M. Gyulassy, Nucl. Phys. A 784 (2007) 426.
[221] M. Djordjevic and M. Djordjevic, Phys. Lett. B 734 (2014) 286.
[222] J. Xu, J. Liao and M. Gyulassy, Chin. Phys. Lett. 32 (2015) 092501.
[223] J. Xu, J. Liao and M. Gyulassy, arXiv:1508.00552 [hep-ph].
[224] A. Bhattacharya, R. Enberg, M. H. Reno, I. Sarcevic and A. Stasto, JHEP 1506 (2015) 110.
[225] R. Gauld, J. Rojo, L. Rottoli and J. Talbert, JHEP 1511 (2015) 009.
[226] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (2006) 252002.
[227] M. Cacciari, S. Frixione, N. Houdeau, M. L. Mangano, P. Nason and G. Ridolﬁ, JHEP 1210

(2012) 137.

[228] P. M. Nadolsky, H. L. Lai, Q. H. Cao, J. Huston, J. Pumplin, D. Stump, W. K. Tung and

C.-P. Yuan, Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 013004.

[229] M. Klasen, C. Klein-Bsing, K. Kovarik, G. Kramer, M. Topp and J. Wessels, JHEP 1408 (2014)

109.

[230] B. B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) 012001.
[231] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 708 (2012) 265.
[232] P. Bolzoni and G. Kramer, Nucl. Phys. B 872 (2013) 253 [Nucl. Phys. B 876 (2013) 334].
[233] B. A. Kniehl, G. Kramer, I. Schienbein and H. Spiesberger, Eur. Phys. J. C 72 (2012) 2082.
[234] J. Pumplin, H. L. Lai and W. K. Tung, Phys. Rev. D 75 (2007) 054029.
[235] R. Aaij et al. [LHCb Collaboration], arXiv:1510.01707 [hep-ex].
[236] M. L. Mangano and J. Rojo, JHEP 1208 (2012) 010.
[237] M. Cacciari, M. L. Mangano and P. Nason, Eur. Phys. J. C 75 (2015) 610.
[238] G. Aad et al. [ATLAS Collaboration], arXiv:1512.02913 [hep-ex].
[239] D. Acosta et al. [CDF Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (2003) 241804.
[240] R. Aaij et al. [LHCb Collaboration], JHEP 1306 (2013) 064.
[241] V. Khachatryan et al. [CMS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 (2011) 112001.
[242] G. Aad et al. [ATLAS Collaboration], Eur. Phys. J. C 71 (2011) 1846.
[243] S. Chatrchyan et al. [CMS Collaboration], JHEP 1204 (2012) 084.
[244] R. Aaij et al. [LHCb Collaboration], JHEP 1510 (2015) 172.
[245] V. Khachatryan et al. [CMS Collaboration], JHEP 1103 (2011) 136.
[246] S. Bjelogrli´c [ALICE Collaboration], Nucl. Phys. A 931 (2014) 563.
[247] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 712 (2012) 165.
[248] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], JHEP 1509 (2015) 148.

CONTENTS

87

[249] S. Chatrchyan et al. [CMS Collaboration], JHEP 1404 (2014) 103.
[250] M. Arneodo, Phys. Rept. 240 (1994) 301.
[251] S. Malace, D. Gaskell, D. W. Higinbotham and I. Cloet, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 23 (2014) 1430013.
[252] K. J. Eskola, H. Paukkunen and C. A. Salgado, JHEP 0904 (2009) 065.
[253] M. Hirai, S. Kumano and T.-H. Nagai, Phys. Rev. C 76 (2007) 065207.
[254] D. de Florian and R. Sassot, Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004) 074028.
[255] F. Gelis, E. Iancu, J. Jalilian-Marian and R. Venugopalan, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 60 (2010)

463.

[256] M. Lev and B. Petersson, Z. Phys. C 21 (1983) 155.
[257] X. N. Wang, Phys. Rev. C 61 (2000) 064910.
[258] B. Z. Kopeliovich, J. Nemchik, A. Schafer and A. V. Tarasov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 232303.
[259] S. Gavin and J. Milana, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 (1992) 1834.
[260] S. J. Brodsky and P. Hoyer, Phys. Lett. B 298 (1993) 165.
[261] I. Vitev, Phys. Rev. C 75 (2007) 064906.
[262] F. Arleo and S. Peigne, JHEP 1303 (2013) 122.
[263] S. Chatrchyan et al. [CMS Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 718 (2013) 795.
[264] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 719 (2013) 29.
[265] B. B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 726 (2013) 164.
[266] G. Aad et al. [ATLAS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013) 182302.
[267] K. Dusling and R. Venugopalan, Phys. Rev. D 87 (2013) 051502.
[268] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 202301.
[269] B. B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], JHEP 1412 (2014) 073.
[270] E. G. Ferreiro, Phys. Lett. B 749 (2015) 98.
[271] X. Du and R. Rapp, Nucl. Phys. A 943 (2015) 147.
[272] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 24, 242301.
[273] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014) 252301.
[274] I. Helenius, K. J. Eskola, H. Honkanen and C. A. Salgado, JHEP 1207 (2012) 073.
[275] A. M. Sickles, Phys. Lett. B 731 (2014) 51.
[276] A. Beraudo, A. De Pace, M. Monteno, M. Nardi and F. Prino, arXiv:1512.05186 [hep-ph].
[277] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 754 (2016) 81.
[278] B. B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 23, 232301.
[279] V. Khachatryan et al. [CMS Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 754 (2016) 59.
[280] S. Li [ALICE Collaboration], Nucl. Phys. A 931 (2014) 546.
[281] H. Fujii and K. Watanabe, Nucl. Phys. A 920 (2013) 78.
[282] Z. B. Kang, I. Vitev, E. Wang, H. Xing and C. Zhang, Phys. Lett. B 740 (2015) 23.
[283] R. Averbeck, N. Bastid, Z. C. del Valle, P. Crochet, A. Dainese and X. Zhang, arXiv:1107.3243

[hep-ph].

[284] Y. Xu, S. Cao, G. Y. Qin, W. Ke, M. Nahrgang, J. Auvinen and S. A. Bass, arXiv:1510.07520

[nucl-th].

[285] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], arXiv:1602.07240 [nucl-ex].
[286] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 91 (2015) 6, 064905.
[287] J. Huang, Z. B. Kang and I. Vitev, Phys. Lett. B 726 (2013) 251.
[288] Z. Conesa del Valle, E. G. Ferreiro, F. Fleuret, J. P. Lansberg and A. Rakotozaﬁndrabe, Nucl.

Phys. A 926 (2014) 236.

[289] R. Gauld, Phys. Rev. D 93 (2016) 1, 014001.
[290] C. Marquet, Nucl. Phys. A 796 (2007) 41.
[291] T. Lappi and H. Mantysaari, Nucl. Phys. A 908 (2013) 51.
[292] Z. B. Kang, I. Vitev and H. Xing, Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 054024.
[293] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 753 (2016) 126.
[294] L. Adamczyk et al. [STAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 14, 142301.
[295] W. A. Horowitz and M. Gyulassy, Phys. Lett. B 666 (2008) 320.

CONTENTS

88

[296] W. A. Horowitz, AIP Conf. Proc. 1441 (2012) 889.
[297] M. Djordjevic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014) 042302.
[298] M. Djordjevic, M. Djordjevic and B. Blagojevic, Phys. Lett. B 737 (2014) 298.
[299] A. Adil and I. Vitev, Phys. Lett. B 649 (2007) 139.
[300] K. Adcox et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 192303.
[301] S. S. Adler et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 082301.
[302] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 91 (2015) 044907.
[303] A. Adare et al., arXiv:1509.04662 [nucl-ex].
[304] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 753 (2016) 41.
[305] S. Sakai [ALICE Collaboration], Nucl. Phys. A 904-905 (2013) 661c.
[306] The ATLAS collaboration, ATLAS-CONF-2015-053.
[307] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 90 (2014) 3, 034903.
[308] M. He, R. J. Fries and R. Rapp, Phys. Rev. C 91 (2015) 2, 024904.
[309] A. Adare et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 152301.
[310] S. S. Adler et al. [PHENIX Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 74 (2006) 024904.
[311] L. Adamczyk et al. [STAR Collaboration], arXiv:1405.6348 [hep-ex].
[312] S. Cao, G. Y. Qin and S. A. Bass, J. Phys. G 40 (2013) 085103.
[313] M. Volkl [ALICE Collaboration], arXiv:1412.2670 [nucl-ex].
[314] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], JHEP 1209 (2012) 112.
[315] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 102301.
[316] B. B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 90 (2014) 034904.
[317] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], JHEP 1511 (2015) 205.
[318] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], arXiv:1509.06888 [nucl-ex].
[319] J. Adam et al. [ALICE Collaboration], arXiv:1509.07287 [nucl-ex].
[320] Z. Ye [STAR Collaboration], Nucl. Phys. A 931 (2014) 520.
[321] W. A. Horowitz and M. Gyulassy, Nucl. Phys. A 872 (2011) 265.
[322] A. Dainese et al., arXiv:1602.04120 [nucl-ex].
[323] R. Baier, Nucl. Phys. A 715 (2003) 209.
[324] R. Vogt [Hard Probes Collaboration], Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 12 (2003) 211.
[325] J. Rafelski and B. Muller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48 (1982) 1066 [Phys. Rev. Lett. 56 (1986) 2334].
[326] P. Koch, B. Muller and J. Rafelski, Phys. Rept. 142 (1986) 167.
[327] B. B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 736 (2014) 196.
[328] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 720 (2013) 52.
[329] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 719 (2013) 18.
[330] M. Gyulassy and M. Plumer, Phys. Lett. B 243 (1990) 432.
[331] S. Chatrchyan et al. [CMS Collaboration], JHEP 1205 (2012) 063.
[332] CMS Collaboration [CMS Collaboration], CMS-PAS-HIN-12-014.
[333] A. Buzzatti and M. Gyulassy, Nucl. Phys. A 904-905 (2013) 779c.
[334] M. He, R. J. Fries and R. Rapp, Nucl. Phys. A 910-911 (2013) 409.
[335] P. B. Gossiaux, M. Nahrgang, M. Bluhm, T. Gousset and J. Aichelin, Nucl. Phys. A 904-905

(2013) 992c.

[336] G. Aad et al. [ATLAS Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 719 (2013) 220.
[337] CMS Collaboration [CMS Collaboration], CMS-PAS-HIN-12-004.
[338] A. Banﬁ, G. P. Salam and G. Zanderighi, JHEP 0707 (2007) 026.
[339] A. H. Mueller and P. Nason, Phys. Lett. B 157 (1985) 226.
[340] M. L. Mangano and P. Nason, Phys. Lett. B 285 (1992) 160.
[341] S. S. Gubser, Nucl. Phys. B 790 (2008) 175.
[342] K. M. Burke et al. [JET Collaboration], Phys. Rev. C 90 (2014) 1, 014909.
[343] R. Rapp, J. Phys. G 36 (2009) 064014.
[344] M. Nasim [STAR Collaboration], arXiv:1512.09352 [nucl-ex].
[345] B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 072301.

CONTENTS

89

[346] B. B. Abelev et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Lett. B 734 (2014) 314.
[347] E. Abbas et al. [ALICE Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 162301.
[348] W. Liu and C. M. Ko, arXiv:nucl-th/0603004.

