6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
9
4
5
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Common Origin of Kinetic Scale Turbulence and the

Electron Halo in the Solar Wind – Connection to Nanoﬂares

Haihong Che

1University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742

2Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA, Greenbelt, MD, 20771

Abstract. We summarize our recent studies on the origin of solar wind kinetic scale turbulence and electron halo in the electron
velocity distribution function. Increasing observations of nanoﬂares and microscopic type III radio bursts strongly suggest that
nanoﬂares and accelerated electron beams are common in the corona. Based on particle-in-cell simulations, we show that both the
core-halo feature and kinetic scale turbulence observed in the solar wind can be produced by the nonlinear evolution of electron
two-stream instability driven by nanoﬂare accelerated electron beams. The energy exchange between waves and particles reaches
equilibrium in the inner corona and the key features of the turbulence and velocity distribution are preserved as the solar wind
escapes into interplanetary space along open magnetic ﬁeld lines. Observational tests of the model and future theoretical work are
discussed.

Introduction

There are two long standing puzzles regarding kinetic properties of the solar wind: 1) the origin and nature of kinetic
scale turbulence, and 2) the origin of a nearly isotropic electron halo in the electron velocity distribution function
(VDF). Observations from 0.3-1 AU show that kinetic scale turbulence and electron halo are prevalent in the solar
wind, implying these properties probably have their origins very close to the surface of the Sun. The two puzzles are
thought to be closely related to the heating and acceleration of the solar wind[1, 2].

Observations of solar wind turbulence have shown that as scales approaching the ion inertial length where wave-
particle interactions become important, the power-spectrum of magnetic ﬂuctuations, which in the inertial range fol-
lows the Kolmogorov scaling ∝ k−5/3, is replaced by a steeper anisotropic scaling law B2
k⊥ ∝ k−α⊥ , where α > 5/3.
Spectral index α ∼ 2.7 is found in observations but can vary between 2 and 4. Magnetic ﬂuctuations with frequen-
cies much smaller than ion gyro-frequency propagating nearly perpendicularly to the solar wind magnetic ﬁeld are
identiﬁed as kinetic Alfv´en waves (KAWs) [3, 4] and the break frequencies of the magnetic power-spectra suggest the
break likely corresponds to the ion inertial length [5]. In the past decades, extensive studies of solar wind kinetic scale
turbulence have focused on the idea that solar wind kinetic turbulence is due to cascade of large-scale turbulence.
However, there are concerns that the energy in the solar wind large-scale turbulence may not be enough to cascade to
support the observed kinetic scale turbulence and heating (e.g. [6]).

Observations of electron VDFs at heliocentric distances from 0.3 to 1 AU show a prominent “break” or a sudden
change of slope at a kinetic energy of a few tens of electron volts. The electron VDF below the break is dominated
by a Maxwellian known as the “core” while the ﬂatter wing above the break is called the “halo”[7, 8]. So far no
model can naturally produce the nearly isotropic halo population which can be described by a kappa function[9]. The
isotropic nature of the halo suggests that halo formation needs strong turbulence scattering and is likely related to the
kinetic turbulence in the solar wind[9]. In addition, “strahl” – an anisotropic tail-like feature skewed with respect to
the magnetic ﬁeld direction is found in the electron VDF of solar wind with speed >∼ 400 km s−1. In the solar wind
coming from the sector boundary with speed ∼ 400 km s−1, the strahl is nearly invisible and the isotropic core-halo
feature dominates. Existing kinetic models based on magnetic focusing eﬀect with input of diﬀerent modes of kinetic
turbulence, while successful in producing the strahl-like tail at a minimum heliocentric distance of 10 R(cid:12)[10, 11],
are unable to produce the halo[9, 12, 13]. This suggests that extra energy dissipation, probably by plasma kinetic
instabilities, is required [9, 12]. At large heliocentric distances (0.3 - 1 AU), observations found the electrons are

scattered from strahl[14, 15, 16], and theories suggest that the scattering might be caused by the unstable processes
related to the strahl[17, 18].

Clearly to generate the observed isotropic halo and possibly the observed turbulent ﬂuctuations on kinetic scales,
some form of “extra free energy” and instabilities on kinetic scales are needed. What is the source of this free energy?

Nanoﬂares and a Uniﬁed Model for the Origin of Kinetic Turbulence and The Electron Halo

High spatial and spectral resolution observations of the Sun from SOHO/SUMER and TRACE together with Extreme
Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (EIT) have revolutionized our view of the origin of solar wind. Diﬀerent from the steady
ﬂuid solar wind model[19], new observations[20, 21] found that the solar wind originates from impulsive events close
to the surface of the Sun. The correlation between the Doppler-velocity and maps of radiance of spectral lines emitted
by ions of various charge states in the solar atmosphere suggests that the solar wind originates from small magnetic
loops rooted in the photosphere and escapes along open ﬁeld lines caused by the merging of loops through granular
convection[22, 20, 23].

The emerging dynamic picture of solar wind strongly suggests nanoﬂares 1 contribute signiﬁcantly to the solar
wind. Recent high resolution observation of the Sun from rockets and IRIS are providing increasing detailed pictures
of nanoﬂares[25, 26]. Similar to ﬂares, nanoﬂares can accelerate particles and the characteristic energy of nanoﬂare-
accelerated electrons is in keV range[27]. The accelerated electron beams can trigger the electron two-stream insta-
bility (ETSI), generate Langmuir waves, and produce type III radio bursts. Indeed, observations[28] have found in the
solar corona a new type of radio III burst whose brightness temperatures are about 9 orders of magnitude lower than
ﬂare-associated Type III bursts and are far more abundant, implying the bursts very possibly originate from nanoﬂares.
The high occurrence rate of these “nano type III bursts” indicates that electron streams and streaming instabilities are
common in the solar corona, and the instabilities can contribute to the kinetic properties of the solar wind. The ener-
getic charged particle streams produced by nanoﬂares and subsequent streaming instabilities are very likely source of
the free energy that generates both the solar wind kinetic turbulence and the isotropic electron halo[29].

√

How does the ETSI driven by nanoﬂares shape the kinetic properties of the solar wind? In two recent papers[30,
29], we showed that the nanoﬂare-driven ETSI can produce the observed kinetic turbulence and electron halo can
form in about 10 gyro-periods Ωit ∼ 10 or ωpet ∼ 10c/vA
mi/me electron plasma oscillation periods via nonlinear
evolution of ETSI in the solar inner corona. The coexistence of wave turbulence and electron halo is a turbulence
equilibrium stage in which the energy loss and gain between waves and particles are statistically equal. The heated
particles are diﬀused into the solar corona from the magnetic loops. Both electric and magnetic ﬂuctuations and the
non-Maxwellian VDFs are advected away from the corona with the wind along open magnetic ﬁeld lines produced by
the reconnection of loops due to the convective granulation of plasma in photosphere[31, 32]. Because in our model
kinetic turbulence is generated in the corona, properties of the solar wind can be aﬀected by local kinetic processes
when the wind travels to 1AU and beyond. However, the kinetic turbulence advected from the solar corona is less
aﬀected in the slow wind (with velocity < 400 km s−1) since the electron VDF of slow wind is nearly isotropic
and hence is least prone to unstable processes that can be triggered by the anisotropic electron VDF of fast wind
(> 500 km s−1)[29].

PIC simulations have been performed to investigate the nonlinear evolution of ETSI. The code is a massive paral-
lel explicit PIC code. The simulations fully resolve the physical processes spanning from Debye length to ion inertial
length and electron plasma frequency to ion cyclotron frequency. The simulations use high spatial and time resolution
that eﬀectively reduce the simulation noise, in particular, numerical heating on electron scales. The simulation box
has dimensions of 32× 32d2
i , and the particle number is up to 1011. The mass ratio is mi/me = 100 and the speed ratio
of light and Alfv´en wave is c/vA = 100. β = 0.25 and electron and ion temperature is equal. The density of electron
beam is 10% of the core electrons. The total grid number is 10420 × 10420 and the particle number per cell is 100.
Simulations show that the evolution of ETSI have four distinctive stages (Fig. 1) : (a) ETSI rapidly (on electron
plasma oscillation time-scale ∼ 1/ωpe) converts ∼ 90% of the kinetic energy of the electron stream into the heat of
ambient electrons and converts ∼ 10% into magnetic energy due to the fast growth of electric ﬁeld, and then gradually
evolves to full saturation; (b) At ωpet ∼ 200, ETSI generates electron holes which trap electrons and cause localized
currents. The currents in turn generate an electromagnetic Weibel-like instability which reaches its peak at ωpet ∼ 500.
This is the stage when electrostatic wave is converted to electromagnetic waves; (c) The Weibel-like electromagnetic

1By nanoﬂare we refer to small scale explosive events that occur everywhere in the quiet Sun, including corona holes. The estimated occurrence

rate of such events is ∼ 106 s−1 for the whole Sun. Our use of the term is an extension of Parker’s original deﬁnition[24]

FIGURE 1. Left Panel The ﬂowchart showing the generation of waves during the nonlinear evolution of ETSI. Right panel
Images of Bz/B0 at ωpet = 24, (panel a) fast growth of electric ﬁeld induced magnetic ﬁeld, ωpet = 480 (panel b) Weibel-like
instability is triggered, ωpet = 2424 (panel c) irregular wave-wave interactions, and ωpet = 10560 (panel d) parallel propagating
whistler wave and perpendicular propagating KAWs are produced.

waves break up into small pieces, and propagate randomly (Panel (c) in Fig.1), accompanied by strong wave-wave
interactions at ωpet ∼ 2000. (d) Eventually at ωpet ∼ 10000 waves interact to produce both perpendicular propagating
KAWs and parallel propagating whistler waves relative to the background magnetic ﬁeld and the turbulence fully
saturates, i.e. the energy exchanges between waves and particles reaches balance. Inverse energy cascade produces
KAWs and stops at inertial length while forward energy cascade produces whistler waves that starts at ion gyro-
radius. The wave scattering leads to a nearly isotropic hot electron tail, i.e. the electron halo. The simulation show
that Langmuir waves and emissions with electron plasma frequency are generated in Stage (b) and continue to grow
beyond stage (d) when the kinetic turbulence reaches turbulent equilibrium with the electron halo(Che et al. 2015, to
be submitted to Proceedings of the National Academy Science of the United States of America).

The model produces properties of the electron halo [29] and the power-spectrum of KAWs which are consistent
with observations, and the model predicts the existence of both KAWs and whistler waves in the solar wind turbulence.
In addition, production of Langmuir waves and plasma emissions in our simulation lends support for the nanoﬂare
origin of the low brightness temperature Type III radio bursts. Enhanced electrostatic ﬂuctuations are seen in our
simulations, which could explain what has been observed in [33]. We brieﬂy summarize these results below:

Turbulence on kinetic scales: In Fig.2, we show the simulated power spectra of (δB)2 in directions both parallel
and perpendicular to the background magnetic ﬁeld (In our simulation the background magnetic ﬁeld is in x-direction).
With 1 < kydi < 2, which corresponds to the range of wave lengths current instruments can probe, both KAWs and
whistler waves are important. The perpendicular power spectrum is ﬁtted with a power-law with an index of -2.2. The
power-law indices from solar wind observations have large variations, and the spectral index from our simulation falls
within the observed range. The perpendicular power spectrum terminates at the ion inertial length, also consistent
with observations[6, 34, 5]. A unique feature of our model is the spectral break at the electron scale caused by energy
injection. This model also predicts the existence of whistler waves, and the parallel power spectrum terminates at the
ion gyro-radius[30].

Core-halo structure of the electron VDF: A major result of the model is the core-halo structure of solar wind
electron VDF which forms in the inner corona and the solar wind advects the features into interplanetary medium
along open ﬁeld lines. In Fig. 2 we show two simulated electron VDFs which are plotted in the same manner as in
Pilipp et al. (1987). The temperatures of core and halo are deﬁned by their corresponding best-ﬁt Maxwellians. Our
model predicts that the core-halo temperature ratio Th/Tc of the solar wind is insensitive to the initial conditions in

	  FIGURE 2. Left Panel The two 1D spectra of δB2(k) vs. kxdi (parallel to B0) and kydi (perpendicular to B0). The blue short-dashed
line is used to highlight the energy injection that breaks the continuity of the spectrum and produces random ﬂuctuations. The
coordinate system is the same as in Fig. 1. Right Panel The 1D electron VDFs f (vx, vy = 0) (parallel to B0) and f (vx = 0, vy)
(perpendicular to B0) at ωpet = 10560. The dot-dashed lines delineate the core Maxwellian distribution functions with Tc = 1miv2
and the dashed lines represent the halo distribution functions with Th ∼ 6miv2
A
A.

the corona and is related to the core-halo density ratio of the solar wind nc/nh:

Th
Tc

≈ nc
nh

1 − CT
CT

+ 4,

CT

(1)
where CT is the rate at which kinetic energy of electron beams converts to heat, and CT ∼ 0.9 in our simulation. This
relation can be extended to the more general core-halo-strahl feature in the solar wind because the energy is conserved
during the formation of strahl caused by magnetic focusing eﬀect:
nc
nhot

∼ (1 − CT )

Thot
Tc

+ 4,

(2)

where Thot = (nhTh + nsTs)/(nh + ns) is the mean hot component temperature, and subscript s represents the strahl.
If we assume the core and halo experience similar temperature evolutions when traveling from the Sun to 1AU, the
temperature ratio can be approximately preserved.

The break point dividing the core and halo in electron VDF, which is a useful quantity in observations, satisﬁes:

vbrk ≈ [ln(Th/Tc) − ln(nh/nc)2]1/2vte,c.

(3)

In addition, the relative drift between the core and halo is close to the core thermal velocity – a relic of ETSI saturation.
Langmuir Waves and Type III Radio Bursts Associated with Nanoﬂares: Our simulations show that both
Langmuir waves and electromagnetic emissions are produced during the development of ETSI. In the solar corona
these high frequency electromagnetic emissions are in the radio band. Since the density of corona decreases with
the radial distance from the Sun, the corresponding wave frequency decreases too when Langmuir waves propagate
outward in the corona, resulting in the frequency drift, characteristic of Type III radio bursts. These are qualitatively
consistent with the expectation that the “nano Type III radio bursts” occurring in the solar corona with very low tem-
perature brightness ∼ 106 − 108 K[28] compared to 1015 K for normal Type IIIs are associated with ﬂares accelerated
electron beams.
Enhanced electrostatic ﬂuctuations on kinetic scales: Our simulations[30] show that when the kinetic turbu-
lence fully saturates, the ratio of parallel to perpendicular electric ﬁeld ﬂuctuations (cid:104)|δE(cid:107)|/|δE⊥|(cid:105) is enhanced by the
relic parallel electric ﬁeld by a factor of ∼ 2 − 3, consistent with observations that the parallel turbulent electric ﬁeld
is larger than the perpendicular turbulent electric ﬁeld, contrary to what is expected if the turbulent ﬂuctuations are
dominated by KAWs [33]. The enhanced electric ﬁeld might be caused by electrostatic whistler wave and Langmuir
wave.

	  Conclusions and Future Work

The nanoﬂare-accelerated electron beams are the possible “free energy” source responsible for the generation of
kinetic turbulence and the electron halo observed in the solar wind. As we have shown the model can produce existing
observed solar wind kinetic properties and makes predictions that are testable by utilizing archival solar wind data as
well as data from future space missions. One major attraction of our model is that it solves both puzzles of the electron
VDF and kinetic turbulence in a uniﬁed manner, while past studies of these two phenomena treat them as unrelated.
The link between the solar wind and nanoﬂares directly relates solar wind properties to photosphere dynamics, putting
useful constraints on kinetic processes in both solar corona and the solar wind.

While our model predictions are consistent with existing observations, there are predictions unique to this model

and can be observationally tested:

1) In our model, the electron halo forms in the inner corona. On the other hand, if the electron halo is produced
by the scattering of strahl electrons as some models suggest, the halo would be much weaker at heliocentric distances
∼ 10R(cid:12) than our model predicts. This is because it takes at least ∼ 10R(cid:12) for the strahl to develop and become unstable
by magnetic focusing eﬀect to produce electron scattering[10]. Future mission such as Solar Probe Plus (SPP) will be
able to observe electron VDF at 10 R(cid:12) and settle the issue.

2) The energy injection on electron scale produces a plateau in the magnetic ﬂuctuation power spectrum, and
parallel whistler wave turbulence terminates at the ion gyro-radius, in contrast to KAW turbulence which terminates
at ion inertial length. Such features may only be testable at small heliocentric distances because at 1 AU the spectrum
might be aﬀected by the various events when the solar wind travels in the interplanetary space. In-situ observations of
SPP at 10 R(cid:12) should be more suitable for detecting the plateau and spectral breaks.

3) Parallel propagating whistler waves, Langmuir wave and the subsequent enhanced parallel electric ﬁeld are
features of our model. In particular, parallel whistler wave is a sign if the energy exchange between wave and electron
halo reaches equilibrium. If the electron halo becomes anisotropic along magnetic ﬁeld line (strahl), the oblique
whistler wave will be generated which produces electron scattering until the electron halo becomes isotropic again.
Thus in the solar wind, it is more likely that both the parallel and oblique whistler waves can be observed. Such
features could be observable by current and future space observations.

4) The nanoﬂare-produced type III bursts are about 9 orders of magnitudes weaker than the ﬂare associated
type III bursts. Both the SPP and Solar Orbiter (Zouganelis, in these proceedings) plasma wave detectors have the
capability to observe these bursts (Maksimovic and Bale, private communications). Electron beams can also aﬀect
Balmer line emission and produce X-ray and EUV emissions.

In addition, nanoﬂares are also likely to be responsible for the so called “super-halo” observed in the solar wind
electron VDF by WIND and STEREO space crafts[35]. Such feature can be a natural consequence of the energy
distribution function of the nanoﬂare accelerated electron beams which should have a high energy tail. The “tail
electrons” could be scattered by the kinetic waves generated by the bulk of the beam electrons to produce the observed
super-halo. Such a possibility needs further investigation with large PIC simulations.

So far we have only studied the electron dynamics in the solar wind. Since nanoﬂares also accelerate ions, and
ion dynamics is critically important to the formation and accelerations of solar wind. This requires us to incorporate
ion beams into our model to understand the dynamics of ions as well as how ion and electron waves interact.

Our current simulations are 2.5D since the system we are studying is symmetric in the third dimension. We will
investigate 3D eﬀects in the near future to study if the waves propagating perpendicular to magnetic ﬁeld develop in
the third dimensions and enhance the wave-wave and wave-particle interactions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was partially supported by the NASA Postdoctoral Program and NASA research grant. The work is in
collaboration with Drs. M. L. Goldstein and A. F. Vi˜nas. The simulations and analysis were carried out at the NASA
Advanced Supercomputing (NAS) facility at the NASA Ames Research Center.

[1]
[2]

J. D. Scudder, Astrophysical Journal 398, 299–318 (1992).
M. Maksimovic, V. Pierrard, and J. F. Lemaire, Astronomy and Astrophysics 324, 725–734 (1997).

REFERENCES

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]

F. Sahraoui, M. L. Goldstein, P. Robert, and Y. V. Khotyaintsev, Physical Review Letters 102, 231102 (2009).
C. S. Salem, G. G. Howes, D. Sundkvist, S. D. Bale, C. C. Chaston, C. H. K. Chen, and F. S. Mozer,
Astrophysical Journal Letters 745, L9 (2012).
S. Bourouaine, O. Alexandrova, E. Marsch, and M. Maksimovic, Astrophysical Journal 749, 102 (2012).
R. J. Leamon, C. W. Smith, N. F. Ness, and H. K. Wong, J. Geophys. Res. 104, 22,331–22,344 (1999).
W. G. Pilipp, K.-H. Muehlhaeuser, H. Miggenrieder, M. D. Montgomery, and H. Rosenbauer, J. Geophys.
Res. 92, 1075–1092 (1987).
W. G. Pilipp, K.-H. Muehlhaeuser, H. Miggenrieder, H. Rosenbauer, and R. Schwenn, J. Geophys. Res. 92,
1103–1118 (1987).
E. Marsch, Living Reviews in Solar Physics 3, 1 (2006).
H. M. Smith, E. Marsch, and P. Helander, Astrophysical Journal 753, 31 (2012).
S. Landi, L. Matteini, and F. Pantellini, Astrophysical Journal 760, 143 (2012).
E. Marsch, Space Sci. Rev. 172, 23–39 (2012).
C. Vocks, Space Sci. Rev. 172, 303–314 (2012).
M. Maksimovic, I. Zouganelis, J.-Y. Chaufray, K. Issautier, E. E. Scime, J. E. Littleton, E. Marsch, D. J.
McComas, C. Salem, R. P. Lin, and H. Elliott, J. Geophys. Res. 110, 9104 (2005).
ˇS. ˇStver´ak, M. Maksimovic, P. M. Tr´avn´ıˇcek, E. Marsch, A. N. Fazakerley, and E. E. Scime, J. Geophys. Res.
114, 5104 (2009).
C. Gurgiolo, M. L. Goldstein, A. F. Vi˜nas, and A. N. Fazakerley, Annales Geophysicae 30, 163–175 (2012).
C. Vocks, C. Salem, R. P. Lin, and G. Mann, Astrophysical Journal 627, 540–549 (2005).
M. Mithaiwala, L. Rudakov, C. Crabtree, and G. Ganguli, Phys. Plasma 19, 102902 (2012).
E. N. Parker, Astrophysical Journal 128, 664 (1958).
U. Feldman, E. Landi, and N. A. Schwadron, J. Geophys. Res. 110, 7109 (2005).
E. Marsch, “Status Of Knowledge After Helios, Ulysses And SOHO Of The Microstate Of The Coronal And
Solar-Wind Plasma,” in ESA Special Publication, 2007, vol. 641 of ESA Special Publication.
L. D. Xia, E. Marsch, and W. Curdt, Astronomy and Astrophysics 399, L5–L9 (2003).
C.-Y. Tu, C. Zhou, E. Marsch, L.-D. Xia, L. Zhao, J.-X. Wang, and K. Wilhelm, Science 308, 519–523
(2005).
E. N. Parker, Astrophysical Journal 330, 474–479 (1988).
A. R. Winebarger, R. W. Walsh, R. Moore, B. De Pontieu, V. Hansteen, J. Cirtain, L. Golub, K. Kobayashi,
K. Korreck, C. DeForest, M. Weber, A. Title, and S. Kuzin, Astrophysical Journal 771, 21 (2013).
P. Testa, B. De Pontieu, J. Allred, M. Carlsson, F. Reale, A. Daw, V. Hansteen, J. Martinez-Sykora, W. Liu,
E. E. DeLuca, L. Golub, S. McKillop, K. Reeves, S. Saar, H. Tian, J. Lemen, A. Title, P. Boerner, N. Hurlburt,
T. D. Tarbell, J. P. Wuelser, L. Kleint, C. Kankelborg, and S. Jaeggli, Science 346, B315 (2014).
C. Gontikakis, S. Patsourakos, C. Efthymiopoulos, A. Anastasiadis, and M. K. Georgoulis, Astrophysical
Journal 771, 126 (2013).
P. Saint-Hilaire, N. Vilmer, and A. Kerdraon, Astrophysical Journal 762, 60 (2013).
H. Che, and M. L. Goldstein, Astrophysical Journal Letters 795, L38 (2014).
H. Che, M. L. Goldstein, and A. F. Vi˜nas, Physical Review Letters 112, 061101 (2014), 1307.2615.
G. Gloeckler, T. H. Zurbuchen, and J. Geiss, J. Geophys. Res. 108, 1158 (2003).
L. A. Fisk, J. Geophys. Res. 108, 1157 (2003).
F. S. Mozer, and C. H. K. Chen, Astrophysical Journal Letters 768, L10 (2013).
S. Perri, V. Carbone, and P. Veltri, Astrophysical Journal Letters 725, L52–L55 (2010).
L. Wang, R. P. Lin, C. Salem, M. Pulupa, D. E. Larson, P. H. Yoon, and J. G. Luhmann, Astrophysical Journal
Letters 753, L23 (2012).

