6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
2

 
 
]

M

I
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
7
0
6
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

MNRAS 000, 1–9 (2016)

Preprint 4 March 2016

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style ﬁle v3.0

Calibration Requirements for Detecting the 21 cm Epoch of
Reionization Power Spectrum and Implications for the SKA

N. Barry,1(cid:63) B. Hazelton,2,1 I. Sullivan,3 M. F. Morales,1 J. C. Pober 4
1University of Washington, Department of Physics
2University of Washington, eScience Institute
3University of Washington, Department of Astronomy
4Brown University, Department of Physics

ABSTRACT

21 cm Epoch of Reionization observations promise to transform our understanding of
galaxy formation, but these observations are impossible without unprecedented levels of in-
strument calibration. We present end-to-end simulations of a full EoR power spectrum anal-
ysis including all of the major components of a real data processing pipeline: models of as-
trophysical foregrounds and EoR signal, frequency-dependent instrument eﬀects, sky-based
antenna calibration, and the full PS analysis. This study reveals that traditional sky-based
per-frequency antenna calibration can only be implemented in EoR measurement analyses if
the calibration model is unrealistically accurate. For reasonable levels of catalog complete-
ness, the calibration introduces contamination in otherwise foreground-free power spectrum
modes, precluding a PS measurement. We explore the origin of this contamination and po-
tential mitigation techniques. We show that there is a strong joint constraint on the precision
of the calibration catalog and the inherent spectral smoothness of antennae, and that this has
signiﬁcant implications for the instrumental design of the SKA and other future EoR obser-
vatories.
Key words: dark ages, reionization, ﬁrst stars; techniques: interferometric; methods: data
analysis; instrumentation: interferometers

1

INTRODUCTION

Observations of the Epoch of Reionization (EoR) promise to re-
veal a wealth of information about the dynamics and evolution of
the universe. The 21 cm hyperﬁne transition line of neutral hydro-
gen is one of the best probes of the EoR (see Furlanetto, Peng Oh
& Briggs (2006); Morales & Wyithe (2010) for reviews) and sev-
eral experiments are currently seeking or will seek a power spec-
trum (PS) measurement of this faint cosmological signal. The low-
frequency interferometers attempting to make these measurements
include the Donald C. Backer Precision Array for Probing the
Epoch of Reionization (PAPER; Parsons et al. 2010)1, the LOw
Frequency ARray (LOFAR; Yatawatta et al. 2013; van Haarlem
et al. 2013)2, the Murchison Wideﬁeld Array (MWA; Lonsdale
et al. 2009; Tingay et al. 2013; Bowman et al. 2013)3, the Hydrogen
Epoch of Reionization Array (HERA; Pober et al. 2014, DeBoer et.

(cid:63) Contact e-mail: nbarry@uw.edu
1 http://eor.berkeley.edu
2 http://www.lofar.org
3 http://www.mwatelescope.org
c(cid:13) 2016 The Authors

al. in prep)4, and the Square Kilometre Array (SKA; Mellema et al.
2013; Koopmans et al. 2015)5.

However, astrophysical foregrounds are 4–5 orders of magni-
tude brighter than the expected cosmological signal. Suppressing
this foreground contamination in the PS requires unprecedented
precision in instrumental calibration. We simulate sky-based cal-
ibration on the EoR PS signal to explore the techniques necessary
to suppress the foreground contamination. Our end–to–end simu-
lations include chromatic instrumental eﬀects common to current
EoR experiments and realistic diﬀerences between the true sky
and the calibration catalogue. We show traditional per-frequency
antenna calibration techniques contaminate the EoR PS signal,
demonstrate how to improve the calibration procedure for EoR
measurements, and place joint constraints on the spectral smooth-
ness of the antennas and the precision of the calibration catalogues
needed to reveal the EoR.

Variance and convergence statistics of calibration in image
space have been studied in detail, including the application of iono-
spheric changes (van der Tol et al. 2007; Mitchell et al. 2008; Wi-
jnholds & van der Veen 2009; Datta et al. 2009), variation of dif-

4 http://reionization.org
5 https://www.skatelescope.org

2

N. Barry et. al.

fuse structure scales (Mitchell et al. 2008), addition of polarized
components (Mitchell et al. 2008), inclusion of small source po-
sition oﬀsets (Ng & See 1996; Wijnholds & van der Veen 2009;
Datta et al. 2009), and the imperfection of source models (Datta
et al. 2009, 2010). This includes the approach that we label as tra-
ditional, where calibration solutions are solved for each antenna
and each frequency from a least squares analysis of the visibili-
ties (Salvini & Wijnholds 2014). Calibration techniques and eﬀects
have been rigorously tested via variance statistics. However, the
EoR measurement is to occur in PS space, so the standard of the
eﬀectiveness for calibration should also be established in PS space.
In addition, it is imperative to use a realistically imperfect cali-
bration catalog for sky-based calibration when simulating resultant
eﬀects. Models of sources generated from knowledge of the sky are
used to calibrate the instrument (Mitchell et al. 2008), but no cata-
logue is perfect. There will always be unmodelled faint sources, ei-
ther due to confusion limits or the inability to resolve morphology,
and catalogues will always include small errors in ﬂux, position, or
compactness of sources. These imperfections in the sky model will
aﬀect calibration, and subsequently the EoR PS.

This study explores the impact of calibrating against an in-
complete source model on the EoR PS measurement. We show
that unmodelled, faint sources can interact with calibration to mix
foregrounds into unrelated modes. Spectral structure due to the in-
complete source model propagated via traditional per-frequency
antenna calibration couples bright foreground power from unim-
portant Fourier modes into the most sensitive EoR modes. Conse-
quently, the EoR measurement is impossible without the develop-
ment of new calibration techniques beyond traditional methods.

Descriptions of the simulations, software packages, catalogue
data, and PS space are given in §2. The eﬀects on the PS of us-
ing traditional per-frequency calibration techniques are shown in
§3. Mitigation techniques to avoid ﬁtting spectral structure from
faint sources are demonstrated in §4, which also highlights the im-
portance of a spectrally smooth instrumental response. Approaches
to faithfully reconstruct true instrumental spectral structure, while
minimizing the eﬀect of unmodelled faint sources, are described in
§5 and the implications for the SKA and other future EoR machines
are discussed in §6.

We note that this work concentrates on the “imaging” EoR
PS analysis approach, and the calibration requirements for “delay”
PS analyses with redundant arrays may be diﬀerent (Parsons et al.
2012a, Morales et al. in prep.). A full study of the calibration re-
quirements of delay spectra is left for future work.

2 METHODS AND MEASUREMENT SPACE

Our calibration simulations employ a suite of packages designed
for MWA EoR analysis (Jacobs et al. in review). These full end–
to–end simulations demonstrate the eﬀect of calibration errors in
the two-dimensional power spectrum (2D PS) — a primary ﬁgure
of merit for the EoR measurement. In this section, we describe the
2D EoR PS ﬁgure of merit and our simulation methods.

2.1 The 2D power spectrum

The 21 cm hyperﬁne transition of neutral hydrogen is a narrow
emission line. This allows the measured frequency of the emission
to map closely to its line-of-sight distance. Measurements of the
EoR are inherently three dimensional, with two angular dimensions
and one frequency dimension represented in the volume {θx, θy, ν}.

Figure 1. A schematic representation of an expected 2D PS. “Intrinsic fore-
grounds” dominate low k(cid:107) (modes along the line-of-sight) for all k⊥ (modes
perpendicular to the line-of-sight) due to their relatively smooth spectral
structure. Chromaticity of the instrument mixes foreground modes up into
the “foreground wedge”. The “primary ﬁeld of view” line and the “hori-
zon” line are contamination limits dependent on how far oﬀ-axis sources
are on the sky. The most sensitive, foreground-free measurement modes are
expected to be in the lower, left-hand corner of the “EoR window.”

Using the angular diameter and line-of-sight distances, the obser-
vations can be mapped to cosmological coordinates {x, y, z} in co-
moving Mpc (Hogg 1999). Statistical measurements of the EoR
show the most promise for a robust detection in wavenumber space
(Morales & Hewitt 2004), represented by {kx, ky, kz} and accessible
through Fourier transforms.

The distribution of hydrogen in the universe is isotropic and
homogeneous to ﬁrst order. This spherical symmetry can be har-
nessed to achieve greater sensitivity. Averaging the squared mea-
surements in spherical shells within the volume {kx, ky, kz} allows
a transformation into a one-dimensional power spectrum (1D PS).
While this aids in the measurement of the EoR, it removes the abil-
ity to view the k-space distributions of foreground and calibration
eﬀects. We will therefore present results in the 2D PS, achieved
through averaging squared measurements along only the angular
wavenumbers {kx, ky}. This creates the PS as a function of modes
perpendicular to the line-of-sight (k⊥) and modes parallel to the
line-of-sight (k(cid:107)) as shown in Figure 1.

Wavenumber space is crucial for statistical measurements due

MNRAS 000, 1–9 (2016)

Intrinsic ForegroundsEoR WindowForeground Wedgehorizonprimary ﬁeld of viewto the spectral characteristics of the foregrounds. Diﬀuse syn-
chrotron emission and bright radio sources, while distributed across
the sky, vary smoothly in frequency (e.g. Matteo et al. 2002;
Peng Oh & Mack 2003). Only small k(cid:107) values are theoretically con-
taminated by bright, spectrally smooth astrophysical foregrounds.
Since the foreground power is restricted to only a few low k(cid:107)
modes, larger k(cid:107) values tend to be free of “intrinsic foregrounds”
in wavenumber space.

However, interferometers are naturally chromatic. This chro-
maticity distributes foreground power into a distinctive “foreground
wedge” due to the mode-mixing of power from small k(cid:107) values
into larger k(cid:107) values as demonstrated in Figure 1 (Datta et al. 2010;
Morales et al. 2012; Vedantham et al. 2012; Parsons et al. 2012b;
Trott et al. 2012; Hazelton et al. 2013; Thyagarajan et al. 2013;
Pober et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2014). The “primary ﬁeld of view” line
and the “horizon” line are the expected contamination limits caused
by measured sources in the primary ﬁeld of view and the sidelobes,
respectively. The remaining region, called the “EoR window,” is ex-
pected to be contaminant-free. Because the power of the EoR signal
decreases with increasing |k|, the most sensitive measurements are
expected to be in the lower, left-hand corner of the EoR window.

PS from our end–to–end simulation in Figure 2 show the stan-
dard features described in the Figure 1 schematic. The left plot is
the 2D PS of the calibrated simulation containing foregrounds and
EoR signal. The middle plot, which looks nearly identical, shows
the instrument calibration model. This contains a subset of the fore-
grounds to simulate an incomplete knowledge of the sky. We can
decrease the contamination in the PS by subtracting this model
from calibrated data to possibly reveal the EoR signal in a wider
range of modes, depending on completeness of the model. Tak-
ing the diﬀerence yields the “residual” 2D PS in the right plot of
Figure 2, which reveals unmodelled foregrounds with their instru-
mental eﬀects and the EoR signal. This subtraction is implemented
in the three dimensional measurement cube before constructing the
PS. In addition to the typical 2D PS eﬀects, foregrounds also con-
taminate higher k⊥ as a consequence of decreased baseline cover-
age of the instrument at those scales, which is speciﬁc and intrinsic
to each array. For the remainder of this paper, we will use the resid-
ual 2D PS space to explore the eﬀects of calibration.

2.2 Simulation methods

All of the calibration simulations in this paper utilize the MWA an-
tennas and positions in the frequency band 167–198 MHz. We use
a precursor to the KGS catalogue (Carroll et al. in collaboration
review) as our foreground model and the Fast Holographic Decon-
volution6 (FHD) software package to implement our simulations,
calibration, and imaging (Sullivan et al. 2012). To create PS, we
use the Error Propagated Power Spectrum with InterLeaved Ob-
served Noise7 (εppsilon) software package. This simulates the full
end-to-end MWA PS analysis detailed in Jacobs et al. (in review).
A model of 6950 compact sources seen by the MWA and com-
piled in the KGS catalogue were used as simulated input data, along
with the addition of a simulated Gaussian EoR signal in the visibil-
ities. This approach is completely noiseless, and contains no infor-
mation about ionospheric eﬀects or diﬀuse galactic emission.

6 FHD software package
miguelfmorales/FHD
7 εppsilon software package is available at https://github.com/
miguelfmorales/eppsilon

at https://github.com/

is

available

MNRAS 000, 1–9 (2016)

EoR Calibration Requirements

3

In addition to the simulated input data, a model of the sky
is generated for sky-based calibration. Antenna gain solutions that
minimize the diﬀerences in visibilities between the input data and
the calibration model are calculated through an iterative, least-
squares approach (Salvini & Wijnholds 2014). The ﬁnal result con-
stitutes our calibration solutions.

When we allow the simulation to use all of the input catalogue
sources as a model from which to calibrate and subtract, all fore-
ground sources are removed perfectly. This reveals the simulated
EoR signal in the residual PS with no foregrounds or chromatic-
ity eﬀects, as seen in Figure 3. The color scale has been ﬁxed to
highlight the order of magnitude diﬀerence between the EoR sig-
nal peaked at 106 mK2 h−3 Mpc3 and the intrinsic and mode-mixed
foregrounds peaked at 1014 mK2 h−3 Mpc3 in Figures 1 & 2. Re-
trieving the EoR PS demonstrates consistency within the simula-
tion, and will provide a magnitude scale for simulation outputs with
unmodelled, faint sources. This also demonstrates that the pipeline
eﬀectively recovers the EoR signal with very little contamination or
signal loss if the foreground model is perfect, regardless of speciﬁc
calibration techniques.

To test the eﬀects of an incomplete source model in the anal-
ysis pipeline, we then build a new catalogue with only the 4000
brightest sources as seen by the instrument from our KGS catalog.
The new catalogue is used for both calibration and subtraction. This
left 2950 of the faintest sources unmodelled and unsubtracted, clus-
tered about the edge of the primary beam with an average ﬂux of
0.7 Jy and minimum ﬂux of 0.15 Jy. While catalogues are becoming
more precise and the errors are decreasing, this level of accuracy il-
lustrates the types of errors that will arise in any measurement with
an imperfect calibration sky catalogue. This provides an investiga-
tion into the contribution of an incomplete source model to the EoR
PS measurement through calibration.

All eﬀects resulting from the calibration simulations can be
purely attributable to which sources from the input catalogue are
calibrated and subtracted. There are no position, ﬂux, morphol-
ogy, or beam errors. Iterative calibration techniques such as self-
calibration (Pearson & Readhead 1984) will have very similar er-
rors due to the mismatch between the ﬁnal model and true sky, and
can be simulated using the same technique used here.

3 CALIBRATION ERRORS DUE TO FAINT,

UNMODELLED SOURCES

Traditional radio astronomy calibration techniques involve calcu-
lating the gain at every frequency for every antenna from the visi-
bilities using an iterative least squares solver. Historically, this ap-
proach was an extension from single-frequency radio astronomy
to small-bandwidth multi-frequency instrumentation (Fomalont &
Perley 1999; Sullivan 2009). While this method involves solving
for many variables, the number of degrees of freedom in the data
from the MWA is orders of magnitude larger than the number of
parameters used and thus theoretically constrained. This calibra-
tion method has remained a stalwart in the community as the ﬁeld
has advanced. Our calibration simulations ﬁrst examine the tradi-
tional radio astronomy calibration technique and how it eﬀects the
EoR PS measurement.

To capture realistic diﬀerences between the true sky and the
calibration catalogue, we simulate the sky as 6950 sources but only
use the brightest 4000 to predict the visibilities for use in calibra-
tion. This introduces small diﬀerences between the sky and calibra-
tion visibilities that can aﬀect the per-frequency antenna calibration

4

N. Barry et. al.

Figure 2. From left to right: the calibrated data from a calibration simulation, the model given known foregrounds and instrumental eﬀects, and the residual
after the model is subtracted from the calibrated data. The residual 2D PS has the potential to reveal more modes to the EoR PS measurement given the
accuracy and completeness of the model.

ure 4 (which is also the same residual 2D PS shown in the right-
hand panel of Figure 2). Unmodelled faint sources also populate
the foreground wedge; however, it is apparent that the 2D PS us-
ing traditional per-frequency antenna calibration has relatively high
amounts of power in the EoR window.

The calibration simulation can be used to quantify the shape
and amount of excess power in PS space. Direct subtraction be-
tween the traditional calibration simulation 2D PS (the left plot
of Figure 4) and the reference 2D PS (the middle plot of Fig-
ure 4) provides this information. The result is a diﬀerence 2D PS,
where red indicates relative excess power and blue indicates rel-
ative depressed power. Evident in the diﬀerence 2D PS is the ex-
cess power contamination of the entire EoR window by more than
107 mK2 h−3 Mpc3. It is important to note that this level of cali-
bration error would make the EoR measurement impossible. Using
traditional per-frequency antenna calibration in a PS measurement
would require a highly accurate calibration catalogue.

Qualitatively, allowing independent calibration parameters for
each frequency channel and antenna allows small deviations from
the true solutions on small spectral scales. These amplitude and
phase deviations are caused by the point spread functions (PSF)
of unmodelled sources which modify the observed ﬂuxes of true
sources, as seen in real data by Oﬀringa et al. (2016). This eﬀect is
frequency dependent and its magnitude depends on the complete-
ness of the sky model and the natural PSF of the array. The resulting
calibration errors are only on the order of 1 part in 103 in this sim-
ulation. However, this varied spectral structure in the calibration
solutions is enough to couple power from the bright, intrinsic fore-
grounds to the Fourier modes in the EoR window. This ﬁlls every
possible EoR measurement mode with foreground power.

Not only are sensitive regions of the EoR window dominated
by coupled power from intrinsic foregrounds, but there is a cor-
responding depression of power in the foreground wedge as well.
This is also the result of small spectral deviations captured in the
calibration solutions. The measured ﬂuxes of modelled sources do
not accurately reﬂect the true ﬂuxes due to the residual PSF of un-
modelled sources. Allowing calibration solutions to be modiﬁed by
this residual structure results in overﬁtting and over-subtraction.

Using the modulation theorem, we can quantitatively associate
the level of contamination seen in the PS with the observed calibra-

MNRAS 000, 1–9 (2016)

Figure 3. The result of the calibration simulation pipeline with a perfect sky
model. Modeling, calibrating, and subtracting all of the 6950 KGS sources
using FHD and εppsilon recovers the added simulated EoR signal. The EoR
signal that we recover does not experience signal loss regardless of calibra-
tion technique used. The color scale has been ﬁxed throughout this paper to
provide order of magnitude reference.

solutions. We apply the antenna calibration solutions to the input
sky visibilities, and then subtract the brightest 4000 sources used
in the calibration model. This residual 2D PS is shown as the left
plot of Figure 4. The 2950 unmodelled faint sources populate the
foreground wedge as expected.

We can also calculate a residual 2D PS with a perfect cali-
bration and with the same 4000 source foreground subtraction to
provide a reference. This is shown in the middle panel of Fig-

EoR Calibration Requirements

5

Figure 4. The subtraction of a residual 2D PS with traditional per-frequency antenna calibration methods (left) and a reference residual 2D PS without
simulated calibration eﬀects (middle) to create a diﬀerence 2D PS (right). Red indicates a relative excess of power, and blue indicates a relative depression of
power. Spectral contamination power at all modes in the EoR window is evident. The most sensitive, theoretically contaminant-free EoR modes have excess
power on levels over 107 mK2 h−3 Mpc3, making the measurement impossible with reasonable calibration catalog errors and traditional per-frequency antenna
calibration.

tion errors. Data that is modiﬁed by spectrally variant calibration
solutions is Fourier transformed into PS space, and the modula-
tion theorem of Fourier transforms results in mode-mixing between
the modes of the unmodelled spectral structure and the bright fore-
ground wedge. This couples the response of foregrounds with cali-
bration deviations along the frequency axis.

Excess power can be estimated given a modulated signal

h(ν) = f (ν) (1 + ∆g cos η0ν) ,
where h(ν) is the modulated instrumental response as a function of
frequency, f (ν) is the original instrumental response as a function
of frequency, η0 is the Fourier dual of a mode in the amplitude
deviations of the calibration gain, and ∆g is the amplitude deviation
associated with the frequency mode η0. The modulation theorem
results in the Fourier transform

(1)

H(η) =

F(η − η0) +

∆g
2

∆g
2

F(η + η0) + F(η).

(2)

Fourier transforms of the original signal f constructs signal at η,
η− η0, and η + η0. Equation 2 is squared to obtain the PS, and cross-
terms between F(η) and F(η± η0) can be neglected since overlap is
small for an η0 in the EoR window. An order of magnitude estimate
of the positive power spectrum of this modiﬁed signal is
O(|H(η)|2) ≈ O(|F(η)|2) + O
(3)
As a result, the modulated power response O(|H(η)|2) has power
contributions as a function of η and, to a lesser extent, η± η0. When
all η and η0 values are considered, the result is equivalent to the
convolution of the foregrounds with the Fourier transform of the
calibration deviations.

(cid:32)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ∆g

F(η ± η0)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2(cid:33)

.

2

For small η values, intrinsic foregrounds dominate. Power
will be modulated from these intrinsic foregrounds into any fre-
quency mode η0 captured in the amplitude deviations in calibra-
tion. Given simulation values of the intrinsic foregrounds (O(Pk0) ≈
1014 mK2 h−3 Mpc3) and the amplitude deviations (O(| ∆g
2 |2) ≈ 10−7,
or a ∆g of order 1 part in 103), the excess contamination in fre-
quency mode η0 of the PS is estimated to be 107 mK2 h−3 Mpc3.
This agrees with the level of contaminated power in Figure 4 gen-
erated by calibration simulations.

MNRAS 000, 1–9 (2016)

The satisfactory performance of traditional per-frequency an-
tenna calibration depends on a highly accurate calibration cata-
logue. When we use the same sources to generate the sky and cal-
ibration models — even with an added EoR signal — the result-
ing calibration and foreground suppression in the PS is excellent,
as seen in Figure 3. However, this is not a realistic situation for
current and planned EoR observatories. When the calibration cat-
alogue is not perfect, traditional per-frequency antenna calibration
distributes spectral power and overwhelms the faint cosmological
signal as seen in Figure 4. This sets very strong constraints on the
accuracy of the calibration catalogue if the traditional calibration
approach is to be used for EoR measurements.

4 MITIGATION BY SMOOTH CALIBRATION

SOLUTIONS

Spectral contamination in the EoR window from traditional cal-
ibration techniques necessitates mitigation. If the instrument is
spectrally-smooth across the frequency band, we can use this as
a prior that must be met in our calibration solutions. We explore
constraining the spectral variation of the calibration to be smooth
relative to the band size to avoid contamination of the EoR window.
However, non-smooth spectral features of the instrument must be
incorporated into the calibration, and therefore we also investigate
the consequences of ﬁtting speciﬁc instrumental features.

4.1 Constraining smooth instrumental response

If an antenna has a naturally smooth bandpass, its response can be
modeled with low-order polynomials or other slowly varying func-
tions. With this restriction, we avoid the ﬁne-scale spectral struc-
ture in the calibration solutions that causes the contamination of
the EoR window seen in Section 3. Perfect calibration solutions
are ﬂat in our simulation, so polynomials applied to the frequency
band would only model the level of error expected with polynomial
ﬁtting.

We calculate best-ﬁt polynomials over the whole frequency
band from the traditional calibration solutions generated in Sec-
tion 3 with a calibration catalogue of the brightest 4000 of the 6950

6

N. Barry et. al.

input sources. Five calibration parameters for the frequency band
are allowed and are chosen to represent typical instrumental varia-
tion. Three amplitude parameters create a second-order bandpass-
like polynomial, and two phase parameters create a smooth ramp
in frequency.

Figure 5 shows the diﬀerence 2D PS between the smooth cal-
ibration solution PS and the reference PS. The EoR window from
the smooth mitigation technique and the reference are strikingly
similar, leading to very little diﬀerence. The level of the diﬀerence
is also noise-like and far below the EoR signal. This will neither af-
fect an EoR measurement to a signiﬁcant degree nor bias the result.
Power from intrinsic foregrounds is not coupled to the EoR
window due to the restriction of smoothness relative to EoR spec-
tral modes. Spectral contamination on the scale of the polynomi-
als still occurs; however, this contamination only occurs within the
foreground wedge and will not hinder the EoR measurement. The
bold line in Figure 5 highlights the highest k(cid:107) with signiﬁcant con-
tamination caused by the low-order polynomial ﬁtting, which is be-
low the EoR window.

Diﬀerences in power in the region of high k⊥ and high k(cid:107)
in Figure 5 are also apparent. Poor baseline coverage couples the
foreground wedge to this region as described in Section 2.1. Since
spectral contamination did occur in the foreground wedge, power
changes occur in the region aﬀected by poor baseline coverage.
EoR measurements will not be made in k-space areas with poor
baseline coverage, so power changes in this area are not a large
concern. The dotted line in Figure 5 indicates the largest k⊥ with
high baseline coverage. A signiﬁcant foreground-free EoR window
to the upper left remains.

By restricting the instrumental response to be smooth with re-
spect to EoR spectral modes, we signiﬁcantly reduced the excess
power in the EoR window caused by spectral contamination. Now,
the EoR window has no power bias and what little contamination
there is appears noise-like. Measuring the EoR signal in a 2D PS
that utilizes the smooth mitigation technique in the calibration so-
lutions will be essentially unaﬀected by an imperfect catalogue. In-
strumentation that is spectrally smooth can avoid contaminating the
EoR window using this technique.

4.2 Calibration parameters in spectral modes

Instrumental responses are not always smooth across the frequency
band. Any spectral features in the instrument need to be ﬁt so that
the calibration is physically true. We simulate the eﬀect of calibrat-
ing cable reﬂections as an example of the consequences of ﬁtting
for instrumental structure on a per-antenna basis.
Receiver-to-beamformer cable reﬂections with amplitudes of
∼1% of the signal are apparent in MWA data, creating a character-
istic frequency ripple in the antenna gain at the corresponding light
travel time (Dillon et al. 2015; Beardsley 2015; Ewall-Wice et. al.
in review; Jacobs et. al. in review). Cable reﬂections can vary dra-
matically from antenna to antenna, and must be ﬁt individually. Our
calibration simulation uses three parameters (mode, amplitude, and
phase) to describe the spectral ripple from a hypothetical 150 m ca-
ble reﬂection in a subset of the antennas. The 150 m cable reﬂection
does not actually exist in the simulated data, thus the ﬁt responds to
only unmodelled spectral structure from faint sources. For clarity,
no other calibration parameters are included. The observed error in
the reﬂection calibration parameters is again at the level of 1 part
in 103.

The eﬀect of coupling the intrinsic foregrounds and the im-
perfect ﬁtted mode is shown in Figure 6. The diﬀerence 2D PS

Figure 5. The diﬀerence 2D PS between a reference 2D PS and a 2D PS
where calibration solutions were modelled with a second-order polynomial
in amplitude and a linear ﬁt in phase. Red indicates an excess of power,
and blue indicates a depression of power. The bold line indicates the largest
k(cid:107) aﬀected by power spectral contamination from low-order polynomial ﬁt-
ting. The dotted line indicates the largest k⊥ not aﬀected by the coupling
of poor baseline coverage to the foreground wedge. The EoR window is
noise-like and unbiased since smooth mitigation techniques did not capture
ﬁne-scale spectral structure caused by unmodelled sources.

between the reference PS and the PS with a cable reﬂection cali-
bration shows a clear excess of power at k(cid:107) ∼ 0.7 h Mpc−1, or the k(cid:107)
associated with a 150 m spectral ripple.
The amount of excess power, about 107 mK2 h−3 Mpc3, is not
a coincidence. The accuracy levels of the ﬁt and the amplitude de-
viations in traditional per-frequency calibration in §3 were simi-
lar. Whether the calibration is described per-frequency (§3) or per-
spectral-mode (∝ k(cid:107)), the same number of calibration terms are re-
quired to cover the bandwidth and the same level of contamination
results.

Fitting for instrumental spectral structure necessarily removes
those modes from potential measurement of the EoR. If the number
of instrumental spectral features that must be calibrated ﬁlls much
of the EoR window, measurement of the signal will be infeasible.
This necessitates a smooth instrumental response in the modes as-
sociated with the EoR window.

As an example of how this aﬀects instrument design, the
MWA has chosen to only have a few diﬀerent cable lengths in the
array. This limits the regions of contamination within the the EoR
window — having many diﬀerent cable lengths would contaminate
the entire measurement region. This has also lead to a hard limit of
all analog signal paths being <35 m in HERA.

MNRAS 000, 1–9 (2016)

EoR Calibration Requirements

7

Figure 6. The diﬀerence 2D PS between the reference 2D PS and a 2D PS
where a 150 m cable reﬂection is ﬁt to within 1 part in 103. Red indicates
an excess of power, and blue indicates a depression of power. Spectral con-
tamination occurs when there is error in the ﬁt, and mode-mixing occurs
between bright, intrinsic foregrounds and the mode associated with the ﬁt
error. Excess power at k(cid:107) ∼ 0.7 h Mpc−1 is over 107 mK2 h−3 Mpc3. This
essentially removes that mode from EoR measurements.

Figure 7. The diﬀerence 2D PS between a reference 2D PS and a 2D PS
with an averaged calibration. Red indicates an excess of power, and blue
indicates a depression of power. Calibration parameters per frequency were
averaged across all antennae and over 30 minutes of observations for max-
imal LST coverage, excluding outliers beyond 2σ. Excess power levels are
much lower in the EoR window than with traditional calibration in Fig-
ure 4, but still higher than with smooth mitigation calibration techniques in
Figure 5.

5 MITIGATION BY AVERAGING CALIBRATION

SOLUTIONS

Calibrating ﬁne-scale instrumental frequency structure requires ac-
curately modelling the antenna response while avoiding spurious
spectral structure from unmodelled sources. This faint, unmod-
elled structure can be largely incoherent between antennas and can
change quickly with Local Sidereal Time (LST) (due to an eﬀect
known as uv rotation). We explore calibration techniques that av-
erage over antenna responses and over sidereal time to reduce the
spectral contamination identiﬁed in the previous sections.

Each antenna calibration solution is calculated from the sub-
set of visibilities which include that antenna. The associated “an-
tenna PSF” captures the eﬀect of unmodelled sources on that spe-
ciﬁc calibration solution. Since each antenna’s baseline coverage is
largely independent for non-redundant arrays, the spurious spectral
structure from unmodelled sources varies from antenna to antenna.
If the antennae are identical in manufacture, then averaging their
calibration solutions to form a common bandpass can reduce the
calibration amplitude and phase deviations that cause spectral con-
tamination. This may not be true for arrays with redundant layouts
or layouts with strong symmetries, where the antenna PSFs can be
very similar.

Additionally, if the antenna calibrations are very stable in
time, subsequent calibration solutions can be averaged eﬀectively.
This relies on rotation of the antenna PSFs with LST to provide
semi-independent contamination from unmodelled sources.

We simulate a hypothetical array with the MWA layout (very
random distribution, Beardsley et al. 2012, 2013; Tingay et al.

MNRAS 000, 1–9 (2016)

2013) with mechanically identical and stable antennas. Using tradi-
tional calibration techniques, we calculate solutions per frequency
channel for each of the 128 antennas in the MWA every 2 minutes
for a 30 minute observation traversing zenith. The resulting 1920
solutions per frequency (128 x 15) are then averaged, excluding
outliers beyond 2σ. The ﬁnal averaged per-frequency calibration
solution is then applied to all antennas for the full observation.

Figure 7 presents the diﬀerence 2D PS between a reference
PS and the averaged calibration solution PS. The amount of ex-
cess power in the EoR window has decreased by over four orders
of magnitude compared to Figure 4 with traditional per-frequency
and per-antenna calibration. However, relative excess power still
remains and lines of constant k(cid:107) contaminate the EoR window, in-
dicating that spectral structure from unmodelled faint sources is
still present in the average bandpass solution.

The excess power level is similar to the expected power of the
EoR. Whether or not an EoR measurement is feasible with averaged
calibration will depend on the completeness of the sky model and
the similarity of the antennae across elements and time. Current
eﬀorts to calibrate MWA EoR data use antenna and time averaging
in conjunction with the smooth characteristics of the antenna to
reduce the level of calibration contamination (Beardsley 2015).

In practice, thermal noise will also eﬀect the PS and the cal-
ibration solutions. An additional set of simulations explored the
eﬀect of thermal noise on the calibration solutions, and showed
the expected additional spectral contamination in the EoR window.
The thermal noise contribution is uncorrelated in time, and averag-
ing calibration solutions night to night proves eﬀective in removing

8

N. Barry et. al.

this contribution (see Trott & Waythe, in preparation, for detailed
analysis). However, spectral contamination from faint, unmodelled
sources still remains as a systematic error due to the limited number
of antennae and observing LSTs. The systematic contribution to the
calibration due to an imperfect calibration catalog, rather than ther-
mal noise, has the potential to hinder long integrations in search for
the EoR.

6 DISCUSSION

This work explores the impact of instrumental calibration on EoR
PS measurements using a precision end-to-end simulation. Our
simulation framework includes a precise frequency-dependent in-
strument model, a foreground model based on the observed com-
pact sources in the MWA EoR0 ﬁeld, and the full FHD and εppsilon
calibration, imaging, and PS estimation pipeline used in EoR anal-
ysis (Beardsley 2015, Jacobs et. al in review). We found that it was
crucial to include a calibration catalog that does not exactly match
the simulated sky and to propagate all of the calibration eﬀects to
the PS where the EoR measurement will be performed.

In §2, we introduced the simulation pipeline and in Figure 3
showed that the EoR is perfectly recovered if the calibration model
is identical to the foreground sources in the sky model. However,
it is impossible to have a perfect calibration model — any catalog
will miss faint sources and have small errors in the ﬂux, position,
and spatial morphology of the included sources. In §3, we simu-
lated the eﬀect of an imperfect calibration catalog by using only the
brightest 4,000 sources for calibrating and a deeper 6,950 sources
in the foreground sky simulation. Using a traditional per-frequency
antenna calibration, we showed that the resulting power spectrum
has contamination throughout the EoR window — precluding EoR
observations.

§3 explored the source of this contamination, identifying the
PSFs of the faint, unmodelled sources as the root cause. The chro-
matic PSFs of the unmodelled sources lead to small calibration er-
rors on the order of 10−3 that couple to the bright foregrounds and
distribute spectral contamination throughout the EoR window (Fig-
ure 4). §4 & §5 then explored more advanced calibration techniques
that could mitigate this contamination.

The lesson for SKA, HERA, MWA II, and other future EoR
instruments is that any spectral features of the antennae that are
calibrated will lead to contamination at the corresponding location
in the EoR window. This is most clearly seen in Figure 6. This
source of contamination via calibration errors places strong con-
straints on the instruments and planned observational programmes.
To avoid the contamination identiﬁed in this paper, we identify four
potential solutions:

(1) Create a nearly perfect calibration catalogue. As the qual-
ity of the calibration catalogue improves, the amplitude of the as-
sociated calibration errors and modulated PS contamination both
decrease. The necessary precision of the catalogue depends on the
details of the array (in particular the PSF over the calibration pe-
riod), and can be simulated using the techniques developed in §2.
This solution requires that a high ﬁdelity foreground catalogue be
created before EoR analysis can start, and for some arrays creating
a catalogue to the necessary precision may not be possible.

(2) Use antennae with very smooth spectral responses. It is pos-
sible to design an analog and digital system that is naturally very
spectrally smooth, with no calibration of features within the EoR
window needed. The PS of such a hypothetical antenna is shown in
Figure 4. In practice, this means there can be no spectral features

larger than ∼ 10−5 in the antenna or receiver system with spectral
scales faster than ∼8 MHz (125 ns). This thinking is driving the
spectrally smooth antenna and receiver designs of HERA and the
MWA II (Neben et. al. in review, Ewall-Wice et. al. in review, Petra
et. al. in prep, Thyagarajan et. al. in prep).

(3) Manufacture physically identical antennae. If all the anten-
nae have the same spectral features and their response is very sta-
ble in time, then the antenna-time averaging explored in §5 can
be used to reduce the spectral smoothness and catalog precision
requirements. While this work focuses on sky-based calibration,
redundant calibration techniques explicitly depend on the antenna
responses being identical (Wieringa 1992; Liu et al. 2010; Parsons
et al. 2012a; Noorishad et al. 2012; Zheng et al. 2014).

(4) Develop an external calibration system. The coupling to an
incomplete sky catalogue can be entirely avoided by using an ex-
ternal calibrator such as a drone, satellite, pulsar, or pulse injection
system. It is still a challenge to reach the ∼ 10−5 calibration preci-
sion needed, but several groups have been pursuing this path (New-
burgh et al. 2014; Patra et al. 2015, Neben et. al. in review, Jacobs
et. al. in review).

Which combinations of these four approaches will work the best is
unclear and an active area of research.

In general, we cannot advise the maximum level of calibration
deviations for an instrument. The EoR PS contamination is jointly
dependent on the instrument-speciﬁc antenna PSFs and the preci-
sion and depth of the calibration catalogue. Calibration simulations
following the techniques developed in §2 must be explored for each
instrument to calculate the necessary instrument speciﬁcations.

It has long been recognized that precision calibration is neces-
sary to perform EoR PS observations. In this work, we have iden-
tiﬁed that traditional per-frequency calibration techniques with an
imperfect calibration catalogue can lead to signiﬁcant contamina-
tion of the EoR PS window. We feel this insight and the associated
simulation techniques can help guide the design of the SKA and
other future EoR machines.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank Cathryn Trott and Aaron Ewall-Wice for
their insightful remarks and guidance. This work was supported
by National Science Foundation grants AST-1410484 and AST-
1506024.

REFERENCES

Beardsley A., 2015, PhD thesis, University of Washington
Beardsley A. P., et al., 2012, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

Society, 425, 1781

Beardsley A. P., et al., 2013, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

Society: Letters, 429, L5

Bowman J. D., et al., 2013, PASA - Publications of the Astronomical Soci-

ety of Australia, 30

Datta A., Bhatnagar S., Carilli C. L., 2009, The Astrophysical Journal, 703,

1851

Datta A., Bowman J. D., Carilli C. L., 2010, The Astrophysical Journal,

724, 526

Dillon J. S., et al., 2015, Physical Review D, 91, 123011
Fomalont E. B., Perley R. A., 1999, in Taylor G. B., Carilli C. L., Perley
R. A., eds, Synthesis Imaging in Radio Astronomy II. ASP Conference
series, pp 79–110

Furlanetto S. R., Peng Oh S., Briggs F. H., 2006, Physics Reports, 433, 181

MNRAS 000, 1–9 (2016)

EoR Calibration Requirements

9

Hazelton B. J., Morales M. F., Sullivan I. S., 2013, Astrophysical Journal,

770, 156

Hogg D. W., 1999, arXiv:astro-ph/9905116
Koopmans L., et al., 2015, in Bourke T. L., et al., eds, Advancing Astro-

physics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14). SISSA

Liu A., Tegmark M., Morrison S., Lutomirski A., Zaldarriaga M., 2010,

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 408, 1029

Liu A., Parsons A. R., Trott C. M., 2014, Physical Review D, 90, 023018
Lonsdale C., et al., 2009, Proceedings of the IEEE, 97, 1497
Matteo T. D., Perna R., Abel T., Rees M. J., 2002, The Astrophysical Jour-

nal, 564, 576

Mellema G., et al., 2013, Experimental Astronomy, 36, 235
Mitchell D., Greenhill L., Wayth R., Sault R., Lonsdale C., Cappallo R.,
Morales M., Ord S., 2008, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal
Processing, 2, 707

Morales M. F., Hewitt J., 2004, The Astrophysical Journal, 615, 7
Morales M. F., Wyithe J. S. B., 2010, Annual Review of Astronomy and

Astrophysics, 48, 127

Morales M. F., Hazelton B., Sullivan I., Beardsley A., 2012, The Astrophys-

ical Journal, 752, 137

Newburgh L. B., et al., 2014, in Ground-based and Airborne Telescopes V.

Proc. SPIE 9145, pp 91454V–91454V–18, doi:10.1117/12.2056962

Ng B. C., See C. M. S., 1996, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propa-

gation, 44, 827

Noorishad P., Wijnholds S. J., van Ardenne A., van der Hulst J. M., 2012,

Astronomy & Astrophysics, 545, A108

Oﬀringa A. R., et al., 2016, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

Society, p. stw310

Parsons A. R., et al., 2010, The Astronomical Journal, 139, 1468
Parsons A., Pober J., McQuinn M., Jacobs D., Aguirre J., 2012a, The As-

trophysical Journal, 753, 81

Parsons A. R., Pober J. C., Aguirre J. E., Carilli C. L., Jacobs D. C., Moore

D. F., 2012b, The Astrophysical Journal, 756, 165

Patra N., Bray J., Ekers R., Roberts P., 2015, arXiv:1502.05862 [astro-ph]
Pearson T. J., Readhead A. C. S., 1984, Annual Review of Astronomy and

Astrophysics, 22, 97

Peng Oh S., Mack K. J., 2003, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical

Society, 346, 871

Pober J. C., et al., 2013, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 768, L36
Pober J. C., et al., 2014, The Astrophysical Journal, 782, 66
Salvini S., Wijnholds S. J., 2014, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 571, A97
Sullivan III W. T., 2009, Cosmic Noise: A History of Early Radio Astron-

omy. Cambridge University Press

Sullivan I. S., et al., 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 759, 17
Thyagarajan N., et al., 2013, The Astrophysical Journal, 776, 6
Tingay S. J., et al., 2013, PASA - Publications of the Astronomical Society

of Australia, 30

Trott C. M., Wayth R. B., Tingay S. J., 2012, The Astrophysical Journal,

757, 101

Vedantham H., Shankar N. U., Subrahmanyan R., 2012, The Astrophysical

Journal, 745, 176

Wieringa M. H., 1992, Experimental Astronomy, 2, 203
Wijnholds S. J., van der Veen A.-J., 2009, IEEE Transactions on Signal

Processing, 57, 3512

Yatawatta S., et al., 2013, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 550, A136
Zheng H., et al., 2014, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,

445, 1084

van Haarlem M. P., et al., 2013, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 556, A2
van der Tol S., Jeﬀs B., van der Veen A., 2007, IEEE Transactions on Signal

Processing, 55, 4497

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX ﬁle prepared by the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–9 (2016)

