Decentralized Detection in Energy Harvesting

Wireless Sensor Networks

∗ACCESS Linnaeus Centre, Department of Signal Processing, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden

Email: {allat, jalden}@kth.se

Alla Tarighati∗, James Gross† and Joakim Jald´en∗

†ACCESS Linnaeus Centre, Department of Communication Theory, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden

Email: james.gross@ee.kth.se

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
T
I
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
0
6
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—We consider a decentralized hypothesis testing prob-
lem in which several peripheral energy harvesting sensors are
arranged in parallel. Each sensor makes a noisy observation of a
time varying phenomenon, and sends a message about the present
hypothesis towards a fusion center at each time instance t. The
fusion center, using the aggregate of the received messages during
the time instance t, makes a decision about the state of the present
hypothesis. We assume that each sensor is an energy harvesting
device and is capable of harvesting all the energy it needs
to communicate from its environment. Our contribution is to
formulate and analyze the decentralized detection problem when
the energy harvesting sensors are allowed to form a long term
energy usage policy. Our analysis is based on a queuing-theoretic
model for the battery. Then, by using numerical simulations, we
show how the resulting performance differs from the energy-
unconstrained case.

I. INTRODUCTION

Decentralized signal processing systems have received sig-
niﬁcant interests during the past decades. Because of their use
in wireless sensor networks this interest has been renewed
during the past years, see [1], [2] and references therein. In
wireless sensor networks a large number of simple sensors
are used. Each sensor is equipped with a small battery with
limited lifetime, which in effect limits the lifetime of the sensor
network. When the battery of a sensor runs out it will usually
not be replaced and the sensor dies. The overall sensor network
dies if a sufﬁcient number of sensors die. To increase the
lifetime of the battery-powered sensors, many solutions have
been proposed [3], e.g., reducing the number of transmission
bits or choosing the best modulation strategy. However, in all
of these methods the sensors eventually die. To overcome this
problem, an alternative is to use energy harvesting sensors
that acquire their energy needed from nature or man-made
sources [4], [5].

Energy harvesting technology in wireless sensor networks
promises a self-sustainable, maintenance free and perpetually
communicating system with a lifetime that is not limited by
the lifetime of individual sensors’ batteries [6]. While using
energy harvesting devices makes it possible to deploy wireless
sensor networks in hard-to-reach places, and provides poten-
tially perpetual operation, it poses new challenges relating to
the management of harvested energy because energy sources
are usually sporadic and limited. For example, the source of
energy might be such that energy can not be harvested all the

times while we may want to use the sensors continually.

In this paper we address the problem of decentralized
detection in a network of energy harvesting sensors arranged
in parallel. At each time instance t = 1, 2, . . . the sensors send
a message towards the fusion center (FC) about the perceived
state of a time dependent hypothesis Ht which is drawn from
a binary set H (cid:44) {0, 1}. For tractability, we assume that
the noisy observations at the sensors are independent and
identically distributed (iid), conditioned on the true hypothesis
Ht. The sensors communicate with the FC through a parallel
network using energy asymmetric on-off keying (OOK) where
a positive message can be sent at the cost of one unit of
energy, and a negative message can be conveyed though a non-
transmission at no cost in energy. The sensors are allowed to
use a long term energy conservation policy managed together
with an internal battery.

The problem is structurally similar to the classical decen-
tralized binary hypothesis testing problem over parallel one
bit channels, and we consider the optimization of network
performance in terms of the Bhattacharyya distance [7] be-
tween the two hypotheses at the input of the FC [8], [9]. Our
ﬁrst contribution is to show how the Bhattacharyya distance
depends jointly on the sensor transmission rule and the battery
depletion probability. We then illustrate the usefulness of this
result by showing how to optimize the sensor transmission
rule under the assumption of an unlimited-capacity battery,
where we model the battery state using a birth-death pro-
cess and obtain the steady state depletion probability. We
then numerically compare the performance of a network of
energy harvesting sensors and the performance of a network
of optimally designed sensors for the unconstrained case,
where energy is always available at the sensors, in terms of
Bhattacharyya distance and error probability.

The outline of this paper is as follows: In Section II we
deﬁne the system model and formulate the problem. In Section
III we analyze the performance of an inﬁnite capacity energy
harvesting sensor by modeling its battery as a birth-death
process. In Section IV we illustrate the beneﬁts of the results
by numerical simulations, and in Section V we conclude the
paper.

Ht ∈ {0, 1}

more easily illustrate the consequences of our results. The
inﬁnite battery assumption is also a good approximation in
practice for commercially available batteries, see [3].

x1,t

S1

e1,t

w1,t

en,t

xn,t

···

Sn

wn,t

xN,t

SN

eN,t

···

wN,t

u1,t

un,t

uN,t

Fusion Center

ˆHt

Fig. 1. Decentralized detection in energy harvesting parallel network.

II. PRELIMINARIES

We consider a problem of decentralized hypothesis testing
in which several peripheral nodes are arranged in parallel
according to Fig. 1. During time interval t, accounting for
the time passed during [t, t + 1), sensor Sn, n = 1, . . . , N
makes an observation xn,t of the phenomenon Ht ∈ {0, 1}
and sends a message un,t towards the FC. Using the aggregate
(cid:44) (u1,t, . . . , uN,t) the FC makes a
received messages ut
decision ˆHt about the state of the present hypothesis at that
time interval. We assume that
the present hypothesis Ht
changes over time, while it is ﬁxed during each time interval.
There is therefore no value in the FC aggregating received
messages over time to make a more reliable decision. Sensor
Sn consumes wn,t = wn,t(ut) packets of energy to send the
message un,t towards the FC. After sending a message, it
harvests en,t packets of energy from its environment and saves
in its energy buffer (if possible).
We assume that en,t ∈ {0, 1}, and energy packets arrive
stochastically according to a stationary and ergodic process
during time interval t [4]. In other words, during a time
interval sensor Sn is capable of harvesting at most one packet
of energy. We further assume en,t is drawn from the set
{1, 0}, with probabilities pe, 1 − pe and independently for
each n and t. Concretely, sensor Sn harvests a packet of
energy with probability pe during time interval t and does
not with probability 1 − pe. Let all the sensors have the same
energy buffer (battery) size bmax. For sensor Sn, the amount
of available energy in the battery at the transmission time t+1
can not exceed bmax and is equal to [3]

bn,t+1 = min(cid:8)bn,t − wn,t + en,t, bmax

(cid:9),

(1)

where bn,t is the amount of energy available at sensor Sn
at transmission time t. While our initial results regarding the
Bhattacharyya distance hold for this general battery model,
we will in this paper assume the energy storage buffer is
inﬁnite, i.e., the battery capacity is bmax = ∞, in order to

As shown in Fig. 1, the sensors communicate with the
FC through one-way parallel access channels using energy
asymmetric on-off keying (OOK), where a positive message is
sent at the cost of one packet of energy and a negative message
is conveyed through a non-transmission at no energetic cost. It
was shown in [10] that under Rayleigh fading scenario OOK is
the most energy efﬁcient modulation scheme, though here we
do not consider fading channels between the sensors and the
FC. In this paper, a positive message and a negative message
sent by sensor Sn at time t are labeled by un,t = 1 and
un,t = 0, respectively, with the corresponding energy costs

(cid:40)

wn,t = wn,t(ut) =

1 un,t = 1 ,
0 un,t = 0 .

For this binary hypothesis testing problem, we assume that
at each time interval t the phenomenon Ht is modeled as
a random variable drawn from the set {0, 1} with a-prior
probabilities π0 and π1, respectively. We also assume that ob-
servations xn,t at the sensors are continuous and iid over time
and space, i.e., xn,t is viewed as an independent realization of
a common random variable X over some observation space
X with a conditional probability distribution fX|Ht(xn,t|ht).
Sensor Sn is a decision maker which maps its observation
xn,t to the output message un,t. Ideally, when there is no
energy constraint, the sensor uses a (likelihood ratio) threshold
test and sends un,t = 1 when its observation xn,t is above
a threshold Θn, and un,t = 0 otherwise [11]. However,
in an energy harvesting sensor network the action of each
sensor is also limited by the battery charge bn,t at each
transmission time t. Concretely, we will assume that sensor
Sn at transmission time t sends a message un,t = 1 towards
the FC at the cost of one unit of energy if its observation xn,t
is above a threshold Θn and its battery is not empty, bn,t > 0,
i.e.,

(cid:40)

un,t =

1 xn,t ≥ Θn , bn,t > 0 ,
0 Otherwise .

(2)

(cid:88)

(cid:113)

Our goal is to ﬁnd optimum thresholds Θ1, . . . , ΘN which
maximize the total Bhattacharyya distance at the input of the
FC at every time t. The total Bhattacharyya distance at the FC
at time t is given by

BTot,t (cid:44) − log

PU|Ht(ut|0)PU|Ht(ut|1)

ut∈{0,1}N

(3)
where PU|Ht(ut|ht) is the conditional PMF associated with
the aggregate message vector U (cid:44) (U1, . . . , UN ) that models
(cid:44) (u1,t, . . . , uN,t),
the randomness of the message vector ut
and is because of the independence of observations given by

PU|Ht (ut|ht) =

PUn|Ht (un,t|ht) .

Due to the independence of the observations, the total Bhat-

n=1

N(cid:89)

tacharyya distance at the FC becomes

N(cid:88)

BTot,t =

Bn,t ,

(4)

0

where
Bn,t = − log

(cid:88)

un,t∈{0,1}

(cid:113)

n=1

PUn|Ht(un,t|0)PUn|Ht(un,t|1) (5)

λ0

µ1

1

λ1

µ2

2

λ2

µ3

Fig. 2. A birth-death process.

. . .

is the Bhattacharyya distance at the FC resulting from sensor
Sn. The motivation of using the Bhattacharyya distance as
performance metric is that using the probability of error at the
FC makes the design procedure intractable. Also when the FC
is a maximum a-posteriori (MAP) detector, it is possible to
upperbound the minimum probability of error at the FC using
the Bhattacharyya distance according to [8]
π0π1 e−BTot,t.

PE,t ≤ √

According to (4) the total Bhattacharyya distance at the
FC is the summation of the delivered Bhattacharyya distances
from individual sensors. This greatly simpliﬁes the problem
of jointly designing the sensor decisions to the problem of
designing a set of individual and identical sensor decision
rules (thresholds). Therefore, in what follows, we drop the
subscript n and focus on ﬁnding optimum threshold Θ(cid:63) which
maximizes the Bhattacharyya distance of a single sensor S.

III. ANALYZING AN ENERGY HARVESTING SENSOR
In this section we will be considering the Bhattacharyya
distance of a single energy harvesting sensor. We will show
how this can be formulated in terms of its threshold Θ and
the depletion probability of its battery. Let Bt be a random
variable corresponding to the battery charge bt. By (2), the
conditional mass probabilities of the sensor decision are
PU|Ht (ut = 1|ht) = Pr (X ≥ Θ ∩ Bt > 0|Ht = ht)

= Pr (X ≥ Θ|Ht = ht) Pr (Bt > 0)
= Pr (X ≥ Θ|Ht = ht) [1 − Pr (Bt = 0)] ,
since the available energy Bt at transmission time t is inde-
pendent of the true hypothesis Ht and the observation X at
the same time.

(6)

Under the assumptions that the energy harvesting proba-
bility is uncorrelated in time and has a ﬁxed probability pe,
and the observations at the sensor are iid in time, the battery
has a Markovian behavior in the sense that its state at the
transmission time t + 1 (i.e., Bt+1), conditioned on Et and
Wt, only depends on its state at transmission time t (i.e.,
Bt) and not the sequence of previous states, {Bt(cid:48)}t−1
t(cid:48)=0, where
Et and Wt are the random variables corresponding to et and
wt, respectively. This can also be seen from (1). Under the
Markovian assumption and the time invariant transmission
policy, the battery state will have a stationary distribution,
which allows us to consider the steady state performance of an
energy harvesting sensor. To this end, we drop the subscript
t from (6), and deﬁne pk for k = 0, 1, . . . as the steady state
probability that the battery is in state k. In other words, pk

is the long-term fraction of time that the battery charge at
an arbitrary transmission time is k packets of energy, and
accordingly p0 = Pr (Bt = 0) is the steady-state depletion
probability of the battery. Then (6) reduces to

PU|H (u = 1|h) = Ph(X; Θ) (1 − p0) ,

(7)

where Ph(X; Θ) (cid:44) Pr (X ≥ Θ|Ht = h). Using (7),
the
Bhattacharyya distance of a single energy harvesting sensor
in steady state can be expressed as
B = − log

(cid:20)
(1 − p0)(cid:112)P0(X; Θ) P1(X; Θ) +
(cid:113)(cid:2)1 − P0(X; Θ) (1 − p0)(cid:3)(cid:2)1 − P1(X; Θ) (1 − p0)(cid:3)(cid:21)

(8)

.

We observe from (8) that the Bhattacharyya distance of an
energy harvesting sensor not only depends on the choice of the
threshold Θ, but it also depends on the depletion probability
p0. The depletion probability of the battery is itself a function
of energy features, battery size, and the threshold Θ itself.

We will next model the battery state as a birth-death process
and ﬁnd a closed-form expression for the depletion probability
of the battery. This gives us a tool for ﬁnding an optimum
threshold Θ(cid:63) of an energy harvesting sensor. To this end, let
S be an energy harvesting sensor with an unlimited-capacity
battery. In this case there always exists space for harvested
energy. Let at transmission time t the battery be at state k,
k > 0. Then at transmission time t + 1 its state will be either
k − 1, k, or k + 1. This is due to the fact that during each
time interval at most one packet of energy can be harvested
or be consumed. Note that if the battery at transmission time
t is at state zero, bt = 0, its state at time t + 1 would be either
zero or one, since the battery charge can not be negative. The
transition probabilities in steady state can be written as

p0 = p0,0p0 + p1,0p1,
pk = pk−1,kpk−1 + pk,kpk + pk+1,kpk+1,

(9)
where pi,j (cid:44) Pr (Bt+1 = j|Bt = i) and where according to
the structure of the problem we ﬁnd
p0,0 = 1 − pe ,
p0,1 = pe ,
where P (X; Θ) (cid:44) π0P0(X; Θ) + π1P1(X; Θ), and for k ≥ 1

p1,0 = P (X; Θ) (1 − pe) ,

k ≥ 1,

pk,k+1 = (1 − P (X; Θ))pe ,
pk+1,k = P (X; Θ) (1 − pe) ,

pk,k = P (X; Θ)pe + (1 − P (X; Θ)) (1 − pe) .

The above steady state equations represent a birth-death pro-
cess [12], as shown in Fig. 2, with parameters

λ0 = pe ,
λk = (1 − P (X; Θ))pe ,
µk = P (X; Θ)(1 − pe)

k ≥ 1,
k ≥ 1.

According to the ﬂow balance [12], the rate of transitions
out of a given state k must be equal to the rate of transitions
into that state, or

λ0p0 = µ1p1

(λk + µk)pk = λk−1pk−1 + µk+1pk+1,

k ≥ 1.

(10)

In (10), the left hand side is the long term transitions out of
state k, and the right hand side is the long term transitions
into that state. Comparing (9) and (10), and with slight
mathematical manipulations, we can obtain desired values for
λ0, λ1, . . . and µ1, µ2, . . ..

Modeling the state of the unlimited-capacity battery as a
birth-death process, makes it possible to ﬁnd a closed-form
expression for its depletion probability (and Bhattacharyya
distance). For a birth-death process, in equilibrium, the prob-
ability ﬂows across each cut are balanced [12], and we have

λk pk = µk+1 pk+1 ,

k ≥ 0 .

This means that all the state probabilities pk can be expressed
in terms of that of the state zero, p0. By noting that the state
probabilities should sum to one, i.e.,

∞(cid:88)

k=1

pk = 1

the depletion probability in the steady state is obtained as p0 =
1+Λ , where [12]

1

The depletion probability is zero if λ1 ≥ µ1 (or Λ = ∞),
which is equivalent to pe ≥ P (X; Θ). Else if λ1 < µ1 (or Λ <
∞), the summation above converges. The overall depletion
probability is

0

pe ≥ P (X; Θ) ,

P (X;Θ)

p0 =

1 − pe

Otherwise .

(11)
Note that the condition pe ≥ P (X; Θ), which results in
zero depletion probability, follows intuition in the sense that,
when the probability of energy arrival pe is more than the
probability of energy consumption (or the probability that the
sensor decides to send a message P (X; Θ)), the battery will
asymptotically accumulate energy and will with probability
one not be empty. In this situation the distributed detection
problem will be the same as in the unconstrained setup.

The depletion probability in (11) can be used to ﬁnd the
Bhattacharyya distance in (8). From (11) we observe that
the depletion probability, and consequently the Bhattacharyya
distance, depends only on the harvesting probability pe and

Λ (cid:44)

λ0 . . . λk−1
µ1 . . . µk

=

λ0
µ1

∞(cid:88)

(cid:18) λ1

(cid:19)k−1

µ1

k=1

.

∞(cid:88)

k=1

(cid:26)

the unconstrained transmission probability P (X; Θ) though
the threshold Θ. Though the energy harvesting probability is
assumed ﬁxed and out of our control, we can maximize the
Bhattacharyya distance by choosing an optimal threshold Θ(cid:63).
In the next section, we will exemplify these results by
considering the optimal Bhattacharyya distance of a single
energy harvesting sensor and the error probability performance
of a network of such energy harvesting sensors.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

For the purpose of the numerical illustrations, we consider
the case where each real valued observation xn,t is either
from a Rayleigh distribution with scale parameter σ0 or a
Rician distribution with scale parameter σ1 and non-centrality
parameter s. We assume σ0 = σ1 = 1, and the conditional
distributions at the sensor are therefore as

fX|Ht (x|0) = xe− x2
fX|Ht (x|1) = xe− x2+s2

2

2

(12)

I0(xs) ,

where I0(z) is the modiﬁed Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind
with order zero. This observation model corresponds to an
energy harvesting sensor applied to detect the presence of a
known signal in Gaussian noise by received power, a relevant
case for low complexity sensors in a wireless sensor networks.
For energy unconstrained sensors, the optimal threshold is

(cid:20)(cid:112)P0(X; Θ) P1(X; Θ) +
(cid:112)(1 − P0(X; Θ))(1 − P1(X; Θ))

(cid:21)(cid:27)

.

Θ(cid:63)

u = arg max

Θ

− log

(cid:26)

We use this threshold as a benchmark and compare the Bhat-
tacharyya performance of a single energy harvesting sensor
applying Θ(cid:63)
u and a sensor that uses the energy optimal thresh-
old Θ(cid:63) which maximizes (8). Fig. 3 illustrates this comparison
for different pairs of (π1, pe). To ﬁnd an optimal threshold we
sweep the threshold Θ and ﬁnd a threshold which maximizes
the Bhattacharyya distance for both the constrained and the
unconstrained cases. We observe, as expected, from Fig. 3
that the resulting Bhattacharyya distance using the energy
optimal threshold Θ(cid:63) outperforms that of using unconstrained
threshold Θ(cid:63)
u.

We further compare the performance of a network of N = 4
energy harvesting sensors arranged as in Fig. 1, and with
the observation model given by (12). By maximizing the
Bhattacharyya distance of single sensors (as in (8)) we ﬁnd the
optimal threshold for each sensor and then compare the error
probability performance of the network with the case where
the sensors use threshold Θ(cid:63)
u. We assume that the FC using
the MAP rule makes the ﬁnal decision about the state of the
true hypothesis at each time t. The error probability at time t
at the FC is found using

PE,t = 1 −(cid:88)

max
h=0,1

ut

(cid:8)πhPU|Ht (ut|h)(cid:9) .

This can be computed numerically, without

the need for

Fig. 3. Evolution of Bhattacharyya distance of an unlimited-capacity battery
u and adapted Θ(cid:63)
energy harvesting sensor while using unconstrained Θ(cid:63)
thresholds and for different (π1, pe).

Fig. 4.
capacity battery energy harvesting sensors while using unconstrained Θ(cid:63)
adapted Θ(cid:63) thresholds and for different (π1, pe).

Error probability performance of a network of N = 4 unlimited-
u and

Monte-Carlo simulations, see [9]. Fig. 4 shows the error
probability performance of a network of unlimited-capacity
battery sensors for different sets of (π1, pe1 ). The results
parallel those obtained for the Bhattacharyya distance, and
show that the energy optimal threshold Θ(cid:63) results in better
error probability performance.

From the numerical results, we observe that Bhattacharyya
distance (error probability), as the noncentrality parameter
grows, for some cases grows (decreases) unboundedly and for
some cases converges to an asymptote. This can be understood
as follows: As the noncentrality parameter s goes to inﬁnity,
the sensor will detect the signal without error wherever Ht = 1
for any reasonable choice of threshold Θ, and π1 becomes
the ideal energy consumption rate. When π1 increases it is
more probable that Ht = 1 and consequently the sensor S
will consume more energy to notify the FC of the presence
of the signal. When pe < π1, the sensor will ultimately
be limited by battery depletion events. When pe ≥ π1, the
sensor shows the same behavior as an unconstrained sensor,
i.e.,
its Bhattacharyya distance grows unboundedly as the
noncentrality parameter increases. The conditions under which
the Bhattacharyya distance (error probability), as the noncen-
trality parameter (or SNR in general) increases (decreases)
unboundedly will be studied extensively in [13], where also
the asymptotes are found under a range of different battery
capacities.

V. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we considered the performance a network of
unlimited-capacity battery energy harvesting sensors. Using
the Bhattacharyya distance, we formulated the problem of de-
signing energy harvesting sensors in wireless sensor networks.
We analyzed the performance of the sensors using a queuing-
theoretic model for each sensor battery. In this paper the
depletion probability and the Bhattacharyya distance perfor-

mance of an unlimited-capacity battery sensor were obtained.
An extended analysis can be completed by considering the
performance of an arbitrary capacity battery energy harvesting
sensor.

REFERENCES

[1] J.-F. Chamberland and V. Veeravalli, “Decentralized detection in sensor
networks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 407–416,
Feb 2003.

[2] V. Veeravalli and P. Varshney, “Distributed inference in wireless sensor
networks,” Phil. Trans. A, Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 370, no. 1958, pp.
100–117, 2012.

[3] V. Sharma, U. Mukherji, V. Joseph, and S. Gupta, “Optimal energy
management policies for energy harvesting sensor nodes,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1326–1336, April 2010.

[4] S. Ulukus, A. Yener, E. Erkip, O. Simeone, M. Zorzi, P. Grover, and
K. Huang, “Energy harvesting wireless communications: A review of
recent advances,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., 2015.

[5] S. Sudevalayam and P. Kulkarni, “Energy harvesting sensor nodes:
Survey and implications,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,,
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 443–461, 2011.

[6] D. Gunduz, K. Stamatiou, N. Michelusi, and M. Zorzi, “Designing
intelligent energy harvesting communication systems,” IEEE Commun.
Magazine, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 210–216, 2014.

[7] T. Kailath, “The divergence and bhattacharyya distance measures in
signal selection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 52 –60,
Feb. 1967.

[8] M. Longo, T. Lookabaugh, and R. Gray, “Quantization for decentralized
hypothesis testing under communication constraints,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 241 –255, Mar. 1990.

[9] A. Tarighati and J. Jald´en, “Bayesian design of decentralized hypothesis
testing under communication constraints,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), May 2014, pp.
7624–7628.

[10] F. Li, J. S. Evans, and S. Dey, “Decision fusion over noncoherent fading
multiaccess channels,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 9, pp.
4367–4380, 2011.

[11] P. Varshney, Distributed Detection and Data Fusion. Springer-Verlag

New York, Inc., 1996.

[12] D. Gross, J. F. Shortie, J. M. Thompson, and C. M. Harris, Fundamentals

of Queueing Theory.

John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2008.

[13] A. Tarighati, J. Gross, and J. Jald´en, “Decentralized hypothesis testing
using energy harvesting sensors,” to be submitted to IEEE Trans. Signal
Process.

1234567891000.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82noncentralityparametersBhattacharyyadistancerSrSrSrSrSrSrSrSrSrSrSbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCUsingΘ⋆,(0.2,0.2)UsingΘ⋆u,(0.2,0.2)UsingΘ⋆,(0.2,0.15)UsingΘ⋆u,(0.2,0.15)rSrSbCbC12345678910−5−4.5−4−3.5−3−2.5−2−1.5−1−0.5noncentralityparameterslog10PEbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCbCrSrSrSrSrSrSrSrSrSrSrSrSUsingΘ⋆u,(0.2,0.15)UsingΘ⋆,(0.2,0.15)UsingΘ⋆u,(0.2,0.2)UsingΘ⋆,(0.2,0.2)bCbCrSrS