6
1
0
2

 
r
p
A
3

 

 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

3
v
6
2
6
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Energy ﬁltering enhancement of thermoelectric performance of nanocrystalline

Cr1=xSix composites

A. T. Burkov and S. V. Novikov

A.F. Ioﬀe Physical-Technical Institute, Saint Petersburg, 194021, Russia

and ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, 197101, Russia.

Department of Functional Nanosystems and High-temperature Materials,

National University of Science and Technology MISiS, Moscow, 119049, Russia

V. V. Khovaylo

Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research, Dresden, Germany.

(Dated: April 5, 2016)

J. Schumann

We report on thermoelectric properties of nanocrystalline Cr1−xSix composite ﬁlms. As-deposited
amorphous ﬁlms were transformed into a nanocrystalline state with average grain size of 10–20 nm
by annealing during in-situ thermopower and electrical resistivity measurements. The partially
crystallized ﬁlms, i.e. the ﬁlms consisting of crystalline grains dispersed in the amorphous matrix, are
a new type of the heterogeneous material where the nanocrystalline phase plays the role of scattering
centers giving rise to a large contribution to the thermopower. We show that the thermopower
enhancement is related to the energy dependent scattering (energy ﬁltering) of the charge carriers
on the nanograin interfaces.

Nanocrystalline composite, thermoelectric properties,

electronic transport

I.

INTRODUCTION

Nanocrystallization, or - more generally, nanostrucr-
turing has been considered as a promising way for es-
sential improvement of conversion eﬃciency of thermo-
electric devices [1, 2]. There are several approaches
for preparing nanocrystalline (NC) thermoelectric com-
pounds. Among them, crystallization from the amor-
phous state features low level of contamination of NC
composite by environmental impurities, which may have
a decisive impact on thermoelectric performance of NC
material. In our recent article [3] we have demonstrated
that NC CrSi2 and MnSi2 compounds, prepared by crys-
tallization from the amorphous state, have a higher ther-
moelectric power factor P = S2σ ( S is thermopower, or
Seebeck coeﬃcient, σ is electrical conductivity) in com-
parison with the polycrystalline counterparts. This result
implies a considerable increase of thermoelectric perfor-
mance in NC materials. Understanding mechanisms un-
derlying nanocrystallization process and transport prop-
erties in diﬀerent structural states is of a crucial impor-
tance for the development of practically useful nanos-
tructured thermoelectrics.
It has been suggested that
the observed in [3] power factor enhancement arising due
to increasing thermopower in NC composites can be con-
nected to the energy ﬁltering eﬀect due to scattering at
nanograin interfaces (see also [4, 5]).

It has been shown theoretically that scattering on
metal/semiconductor interfaces in layered structures or
on metallic nanoinclusions in a semiconducting host can
lead to a signiﬁcant increase of thermopower due to the

energy ﬁltering eﬀect [6, 7]. Later on this idea has been
utilized for the interpretation of experimental results ob-
tained for nanocomposites based on Sb2Te3 matrix with
nanoinclusions of Pt [8] or γ-SbTe [9], Bi2Te3 thin ﬁlms
with native defects [10], nanocrystalline silicon with in-
clusion of a secondary phase [11], and nano-porous silicon
[12].

In this article we report on experimental investigation
of conduction mechanism in the nanocrystalline Cr1−xSix
(0.65 < x < 90) composites, particularly on the investi-
gation of the contribution of the charge carrier scatter-
ing at nanograin interfaces to thermopower and electri-
cal resistivity. We give a direct experimental evidence
that scattering of the charge carriers at nanograins of the
semiconducting CrSi2 diluted in an amorphous metallic-
like Cr-Si matrix gives rise to a strong increase of ther-
mopower due to the energy ﬁltering eﬀect.

II. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Amorphous ﬁlms were prepared by magnetron sput-
tering from composite targets onto unheated substrates.
The ﬁlms thickness was about 100 nm. Si wafers, ther-
mally oxidized to form a 1 µm layer of SiO2, were used as
the substrates. The SiO2 layer provides electrical insu-
lation of the ﬁlms from Si substrate and prevents chem-
ical reactions of the ﬁlms with the substrate during an-
nealing and transport property measurement procedures.
The ﬁlm composition was determined with Rutherford
Backscattering Spectroscopy (RBS) and Energy Disper-
sive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX). The composite ﬁlms
were produced by crystallization from the amorphous
state in the course of annealing of the ﬁlms in a high-
purity helium atmosphere during in-situ transport mea-

surements. The state of the ﬁlm composite in the course
of its transformation from amorphous to NC composite
was controlled by means of the in-situ transport measure-
ments – simultaneous measurements of electrical resistiv-
ity (ρ = 1/σ) and S. Standard DC 4 points conﬁguration
was used in the resistivity measurements, while diﬀeren-
tial method was utilized for thermopower [13]. Transmis-
sion Electron Microscopy and X-Ray Diﬀraction were uti-
lized for structural characterization of the samples [14].

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND

DISCUSSION

According to X-ray data (Fig. 1, upper panel), the as-
deposited ﬁlms are amorphous. The X-ray data indicate
that the onset of crystallization takes place after anneal-
ing above 500 K [15]. The crystallization has a dramatic
impact on electronic transport (see Fig 1, lower panel),
therefore the transport properties can be used as sen-
sitive probes to detect and monitor structural transfor-
mations in the ﬁlms. As another example of such ef-
fect, Figure 2 presents temperature dependences of ther-
mopower and electrical resistivity of a Cr0.13Si0.87 ﬁlm.
There are well deﬁned temperatures at which both prop-
erties undergo sudden changes as temperature increases.
Comparing with x-ray data one can conclude that the
sharp increase of both, ρ and S at T2 reﬂects the onset
of the crystallization. It has been shown that amorphous
Cr1−xSix ﬁlms crystallize into nanocrystalline compos-
ite with average grain size about 10–20 nm, this state
is stable to about 1000 K [16]. When comparing the
XRD data (Fig. 1) and temperature-dependent trans-
port properties results (Figs. 1, 2), one has to remem-
ber that, while the XRD experiment involves about 30
min annealing of the sample at the temperature of each
XRD scan, the transport measurements were made with
continuously varying temperature with a rate of about
5 K/min. Since the crystallization is characterized by an
incubation time, tinc (see Fig. 3), which is strongly de-
pendent on annealing temperature [14], the peculiarity in
the ρ(T ) and S(T ) dependences are observed at a higher
temperature in comparison with XRD.

Another clear peculiarity at T3 is observable in ﬁlms
with excess of silicon in comparison with CrSi2 composi-
tion. As it was shown earlier for Re-Si and for Cr-Si ﬁlm
composites [5, 17], this reﬂects formation of percolation
cluster of NC stoichiometric chromium disilicide.

One can make the in-situ annealing in two modes:

1. As temperature-dependent measurements of ρ(T )

and S(T ), as is shown in Fig. 2;

2. As isothermal annealing, with measurement of ρ(t)
and S(t) as a function of annealing time (t), Fig. 3.

In the temperature-dependent measurements the experi-
mental ρ(T ) and S(T ) result from a combination of two
principle contributions:

2

FIG. 1: Upper panel shows in-situ XRD spectra of Cr0.28Si0.72
thin ﬁlm composite at diﬀerent annealing stages. Annealing
temperature in Kelvin is indicated next to each XRD scan.
At each scan, the sample was annealed for about 30 min.
The lower panel presents temperature dependences of elec-
trical resistivity (ρ) and thermopower (S) of Cr0.28Si0.72 ﬁlm
measured at a constant heating rate of 5 K/min.

• Intrinsic temperature dependence of the material

properties.

• Modiﬁcations of the intrinsic temperature depen-
dences due to structural transformations in the
course of the annealing. These modiﬁcations de-
velop in time with the rate which depends on tem-
perature.

Isothermal annealing apparently gives direct informa-
tion about ρ(t) and S(t) dependences due to structural
modiﬁcations. However, this is true only for structural
transformations with comparatively long incubation time
tinc (for terminology see, for example,
i.e., the
time span between the moment when sample tempera-
ture reaches the target annealing temperature and the
apparent beginning of transformation (nucleation stage
followed by grain growth). An example of such situa-
tion is shown in Fig. 3, where temperature proﬁle and
resistivity of a Cr0.33Si0.67 ﬁlm composite are given as a

[18]),

100

80

60

1
-

 

K
V
µ

 
,

S

40

20

0
300

 S
 ρ

T2

T1

100

m
c
 
Ω
m

 
 
,
ρ

10

T3

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

T, K

FIG. 2: Temperature dependences of electrical resistivity ρ(T )
and thermopower S(T ) of Cr0.13Si0.87 ﬁlm. T1, T2 and T3 in-
dicate temperature of structural relaxation in the amorphous
state, crystallization temperature, and temperature of forma-
tion of percolating cluster of NC phase, respectively.

 ρ
 T

0.9

0.6

m
c
 
Ω
m

 
,
ρ

t2

t1

0.48

0.47

0.46

0.45

0.44

10

100

time, min

500

450

400

350

t1

t2

100

200

1000

K

 

 
,

T

3

the temperature of the formation of percolating clus-
ter of the crystalline phase T3, the NC grains do not
contribute directly to conduction process, being isolated
within the amorphous matrix [5, 17]. Between T2 and
T3 the ﬁlm represents a composite consisting of CrSi2
nanograins dispersed in the amorphous Cr-Si matrix. At
early crystallization stage, when the amount of the NC
phase is small, the individual nanograins represent non-
interacting scattering centers for the charge carriers. To
a ﬁrst approximation, such composite can be considered
as a binary diluted alloy of nanograins in the amorphous
Cr-Si matrix. Accordingly, the well known Matthiessen
and Nordheim-Gorter rules [19, 20] can be applied for
analysis of the electrical resistivity (ρ) and thermopower
(S) of the composite:

ρ = ρa + ρb

S = (Sa − Sb)

ρa

ρa + ρb

+ Sb,

(1)

(2)

where ρa and Sa are resistivity and thermopower of
“pure” amorphous matrix, ρb and Sb are the contri-
butions to the resistivity and thermopower of the ma-
trix due to the scattering of charge carriers at nanograin
boundaries. If the made above assumption is valid, the
plot of total thermopower of the partially crystallized
composite against reciprocal total resistivity should be a
straight line. Fig. 4 shows such plot for Cr1−xSix ﬁlms
measured during isothermal annealing (see Fig 3).

FIG. 3: Resistivity of Cr0.33Si0.67 ﬁlm composite and temper-
ature of the sample as functions of time. The inset shows the
resistivity dependence during incubation period tinc = t2 − t1
at extended scale.

function of annealing time. The sample temperature was
stabilized at t = t1. At earlier times, t < t1, the resistiv-
ity variation with time results from increase of the sample
temperature and is governed by the intrinsic temperature
dependence of the resistivity ρ(T ). It is seen from Fig. 3
that the resistivity is almost constant during some period
of time, from t1 to t2, and starts to increase drastically
at t > t2. Since at t > t1 temperature is stable, the
observed resistivity variation at t > t2 is related only to
annealing eﬀects. The time interval tinc = t2 − t1 can
be regarded as an incubation time. When the incubation
time is short on the time-scale of annealing temperature
stabilization, ρ(t) and S(t) dependences at the beginning
of transformation in isothermal annealing procedure will
be distorted by the combining eﬀects of temperature vari-
ation and the structural transformation.

It has been shown that at temperatures well below

FIG. 4: The Nordheim-Gorter plot for Cr1−xSix ﬁlms (x =
0.72, 0.67 and 0.65). The solid straight lines show the
Nordheim-Gorter relation (2), ﬁtted to the experimental data.
The inset presents dependence of the power factor S 2/ρ of
Cr0.33Si0.67 composite against resistivity.

We observed a good linear dependence in a broad range
of the variation of ρ = ρa + ρb. From the plot one can
determine the thermopower of “pure” amorphous matrix

4

FIG. 5: Grain boundary contribution to thermopower and
resistivity as a function of the ﬁlm composition.

FIG. 6:
nanocrystalline Cr-Si junction.

Schematic energy diagram of the amorphous-

Sa and the grain boundary contribution Sb. Applying
this procedure to the ﬁlms of diﬀerent compositions, the
dependence of Sa, Sb and ρa on the Si/Cr ratio was deter-
mined and is presented in Fig. 5. Two important points
is necessary to emphasize: (i) the grain boundary contri-
bution has the largest value for the ﬁlms of nearly sto-
ichiometric CrSi2 composition; (ii) the grain boundary
contribution is large, in its maximum it is about 4 times
larger than the intrinsic thermopower of the amorphous
compound. The latter observation means that the grain
boundary scattering is highly selective, i.e., its scattering
magnitude strongly depends on the charge carrier energy.
The resistivity of the composites also increases upon crys-
tallization due to additional scattering on the interfaces.
However, the increase of thermopower outweighs the rise
of the resistivity so that the power factor S2/ρ also in-
creases in the NC composites, see inset in Fig. 4. The
large magnitude of Sb and its strong dependence on the
composition have important implications for the on-going
development of the nanocrystalline thermoelectrics. It is
therefore important to understand the underlying phys-
ical mechanisms. Clearly, properties of the interface be-
tween the amorphous matrix and the nanograin play an
important role.

According to the behavior of the transport properties,
the amorphous matrix can be described as an amorphous
metal, whereas the crystalline phase is a p-type semicon-
ductor with a band gap of about 0.4 eV [21, 22]. There-
fore, to a ﬁrst approximation, one can model the interface
as a metal-semiconductor junction. The energy diagram
of the model junction is shown in Fig. 6.

Due to the band bending at the interface there is a
depletion region located mainly in the NC grains (due to
a lower carrier concentration). The depth of the depletion

layer (Zd) can be estimated with expression [23]:

Zd =s 2εε0V0

eNp

,

where ε is the relative permittivity of CrSi2, ε0 = 8.854
10−12 F/m is the permittivity of vacuum, V0 is a magni-
tude of the band bending, e is electron charge, and Np is
the charge (hole) carrier concentration. The band bend-
ing magnitude V0 is typically of order of half band gap
Eg. Taking for the estimation the following parameters:
Eg = 0.4 eV (V0 ≈ 0.2 eV), ε ≈ 30 [24], Np ≈ 1024 -
1025 m−3 [25], one obtains Zd in the range from 10 nm
to 30 nm. Considering that the average grain size in the
partially crystallized ﬁlm is of about 20 nm, this indi-
cates that the whole volume of majority of nanograins
will be strongly aﬀected by the band bending eﬀects at
the interfaces.

Eﬀectively, at moderate temperatures the nanograins
represent the strongly scattering centers for holes: only
high energy holes can penetrate the barrier at the
amorphous-crystalline interface. This energy-ﬁltering
mechanism results in a large positive contribution to the
thermopower. At the same time the contribution of the
crystallized phase to the total conductivity is small in the
dilute regime since the conduction in the nanograins is
ballistic due to a small size of the grains. Rough estimate
of the mean free path in crystalline CrSi2 from electrical
conductivity (assuming average hole velocity 105 m/s)
yields l ≈ 10−7 m, i.e., about 100 nm, which is much
larger than the mean size of the nanograins. That means
that the main scattering channel for the charge carriers
in the nanograins is the scattering on the amorphous-
crystalline interfaces.

An opposite situation of metallic nanoinclusions
in a semiconducting host (PbTe) has been consid-
ered theoretically by Faleev and Leonard [7]. They
demonstrated that scattering of charge carriers on the

metal/semiconductor interfaces signiﬁcantly enhances
thermopower due to energy ﬁltering. Similar mechanism
was proposed for Pt nano-inclusions in Sb2Te3 nanocom-
posite [8].

Obviously, there is an optimum eﬀective barrier height
resulting in the maximal contribution to the ther-
mopower [26]. When the barrier height is large in com-
parison with the thermal energy of the charge carriers
kBT (where kB is Boltzmann constant), all carriers are
scattered uniformly and there is no energy ﬁltering and,
as a consequence, no additional contribution to ther-
mopower. The upper limit for the thermal energy, set
at about 1000 K by the band gap of CrSi2, is related to
the onset of intrinsic conductivity. On the other hand,
for a very small barrier height, only a small fraction of
the charge carriers will be ﬁltered out by the scatter-
ing at the nanograin interfaces with corresponding small
contribution to the thermopower. The barrier height de-
pends on the ﬁlm composition:
in stoichiometric ﬁlms
both NC and amorphous phases have the same chemical
composition, therefore no segregation takes place dur-
ing crystallization. However, in non-stoichiometric ﬁlms
the excess element should diﬀuse to the grain boundary
during crystallization. Therefore, in ﬁlms with excess of
silicon the amorphous-crystalline interface should be en-
riched by silicon. This shall increase the eﬀective barrier
height. The eﬀect of Cr excess is not so obvious, it can
lead to a decrease as well as to an increase of the eﬀective
barrier height. Nevertheless, the experimental results in-
dicate (Fig.5) that optimum barrier height is realized in
nearly stoichiometric ﬁlms with small silicon excess.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

The nanocrystalline Cr1−xSix composites with the av-
erage grain size of 10–20 nm were prepared by crystalliza-

tion of amorphous ﬁlms deposited by magnetron sputter-
ing on unheated Si/SiO2 substrates.

5

Electrical resistivity and thermopower of the ﬁlm com-
posites at diﬀerent stages of crystallization were mea-
sured from 100 K to 1000 K. We show experimentally
that the partially crystallized ﬁlm, i.e., the ﬁlms consist-
ing of crystalline grains dispersed in amorphous matrix,
is a new type of the heterogeneous material, where the
nanocrystalline phase plays role of the scattering centers
giving rise to a large contribution to both thermopower
and electrical resistivity. The increase of thermopower,
however, outweighs the enhancement of the resistivity so
that the power factor is also increased upon crystalliza-
tion. The thermopower enhancement is related to energy
dependent scattering (energy ﬁltering) of the charge car-
riers at the nanograin interfaces. The maximum enhance-
ment was observed for the nearly stoichiometric CrSi2
composites, where the scattering contribution is more
than four times larger than the intrinsic thermopower
of the amorphous compound.

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work in a part was supported by the Ministry
of Education and Science of the Russian Federation in
the framework of Increase Competitiveness Program of
NUST MISiS and by grant Ministry of Education and
Science of the Russian Federation RFMEFI58415X0013-
14.584.21.0013. SVN gratefully acknowledges ﬁnancial
support by Stipendium of the President of the Russian
Federation SP-543.2012.1.

[1] M. Rowe, Thermoelectrics Handbook: Macro to Nano

(CRC Press, Boca Raton, London, New York, 2006).

[2] M. Kanatzidis, Chemistry of Materials 22, 648 (2010).
[3] S. Novikov, A. Burkov, and J. Schumann, Journal of Al-

Smith, Y.-H. Zhang, J. K. Furdyna, C. Dames, et al.,
Advanced Materials 27, 3681 (2015).

[11] D. Narducci, S. Frabboni, and X. Zianni, Journal of Ma-

terials Chemistry C 3, 12176 (2015).

loys and Compounds 557, 239 (2013).

[12] T. Zhang, S. Wu, J. Xu, R. Zheng, and G. Cheng, Nano

[4] A. Burkov, A. Heinrich, C. Gladun, W. Pitschke, and
J. Schumann, in 15 International Conference on Thermo-
electrics (Pasadena, California, USA, 1996), p. 484490.

[5] A. Burkov, A. Heinrich, C. Gladun, W. Pitschke, and

J. Schumann, Physical Review B 58, 9644 (1998).

[6] B. Moyzhes and V. Nemchinsky, Applied Physics Letters

73, 1895 (1998).

[7] S. V. Faleev and F. L´eonard, Physical Review B 77,

214304 (2008).

[8] D.-K. Ko, Y. Kang, and C. B. Murray, Nano letters 11,

2841 (2011).

[9] J. Kim, M. Zhang, W. Bosze, S.-D. Park, J.-H. Lim, and

N. V. Myung, Nano Energy 13, 727 (2015).

Energy 13, 433 (2015).

[13] A. T. Burkov, A. Heinrich, P. P. Konstantinov,
T. Nakama, and K. Yagasaki, Measurement Science and
Technology 12, 264 (2001).

[14] W. Pitschke, D. Hofman, J. Schumann, C. A. Kleint,
A. Heinrich, and A. T. Burkov, Journal of Applied
Physics 89, 3229 (2001).

[15] J. Schumann, C. Gladun, J.-I. Monch, A. Heinrich,
J. Thomas, and W. Pitschke, Thin Solid Films 246, 24
(1994).

[16] C. Gladun, A. Heinrich, J. Schumann, W. Pitshke, and
H. Vinzelberg, International Journal of Electronics 77,
301 (1994).

[10] J. Suh, K. M. Yu, D. Fu, X. Liu, F. Yang, J. Fan, D. J.

[17] A. Burkov, J. Schumann, H. Vinzelberg, T. Nakama, and

6

K. Yagasaki, Journal of Applied Physics 95, 7903 (2004).
[18] G. Ruitenberg, A. K. Petford-Long, and R. C. Doole,

Journal of Applied Physics 92, 31163123 (2002).

[19] P. Rossiter, The electrical resistivity of metals and alloys

(Cambridge University Press, 1987).

[20] R. Barnard, Thermoelectricity in metals and alloys (Tay-
lor & Francis LTD, 10–14 Macklin Street, London WC2B
5NF, 1972).

[23] H. Kroezen, G. Eising, G. ten Brink, G. Palasantzas,
B. Kooi, and A. Pauza, Applied Physics Letters 100,
094106 (2012).

[24] V. Bellani, G. Guizzetti, F. Marabelli, A. Piaggi,
A. Borghesi, F. Nava, V. Antonov, V. N. Antonov,
O. Jepsen, O. Andersen, et al., Physical Review B 46,
9380 (1992).

[25] F. Nava, T. Tien, and K. Tu, Journal of applied physics

[21] S. Novikov, A. Burkov, and J. Schumann, Journal of

57, 2018 (1985).

Electronic Materials 43, 2420 (2014).

[22] C. B. Vining, CRC Handbook of Thermoelectrics (CRC
Press, Boca Raton, Fl., 1995), chap. Thermoelectric
properties of silicides, pp. 277 – 285.

[26] Y. Ravich, CRC Handbook of Thermoelectrics (CRC
Press, Boca Raton, Fl., 1995), chap. Selective carrier
scattering in thermoelectric materials, pp. 67–73.

