Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable
cavity

Christina Pöltl1, Aleksey Kozikov2‡, Klaus Ensslin2, Thomas Ihn2,
Rodolfo A. Jalabert1, Christian Reichl2, Werner Wegscheider2, and
Dietmar Weinmann1
1 Institut de Physique et Chimie des Matériaux de Strasbourg, Université de Strasbourg,
CNRS UMR 7504, 23 rue du Loess, BP 43, F-67034 Strasbourg, France
2 Solid State Physics Laboratory, ETH Zürich, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract. We investigate the quantum conductance through a circular ballistic cavity
subjected to an additional repulsive potential arising from a capacitively coupled tip.
Experimentally, such a scanning gate microscopy setup leads to a conductance that varies
non-monotonically with the strength of a tip that is placed in the centre of the cavity.
Numerical quantum calculations, consistent with the experimental ﬁnding, yield large-
amplitude conductance oscillations as a function of the tip strength. At zero temperature, these
oscillations are superposed with ballistic conductance ﬂuctuations. An analytical approach,
based on the properties of relatively short classical trajectories through the cavity, shows that
the large-amplitude oscillations are of classical origin. A statistical analysis of the ensemble of
trajectories and their dependence on tip strength and potential shape, leads to the understanding
of the oscillations in terms of classical mechanics.

PACS numbers: 72.10.-d, 73.23.Ad, 07.79.-v,

Keywords: scanning gate microscopy, quantum transport, ballistic cavities

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
0
7
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

‡ Present address: School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
M13 9PL, UK.

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

2

1. Introduction

The Scanning Gate Microscopy (SGM) technique [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] has been developed
and applied to study two-dimensional electron gases (2DEG) surrounding a Quantum Point
Contact (QPC) and other mesoscopic systems [7, 9].
Initially, the goal was to obtain
additional information on quantum transport by measuring the effect of a local potential on the
sample conductance. However, the interpretation of the measurements remains challenging
[10, 8, 11, 7], in particular because most of the experiments operate in a regime where the
potential induced by the SGM tip strongly perturbs the 2DEG. Performing SGM with tunable
geometries indicated that the presence of conﬁnement affects the interpretation of the data
[12, 13].

A more recent purpose of SGM is the usage of the tip to control and modify the potential
landscape, and thus the sample geometry, thus allowing systematic studies of the effect of
sample shape on coherent electron transport. For the example of a circular cavity connected
to leads by QPCs [14], the tip has been used to control and study magnetoelectric subbands.
Another example along these lines is the electronic analog of the Braess paradox [15, 16],
where the tip is used to cut one out of several routes of electron transport through the sample.
While the signatures of an underlying classically chaotic electron dynamics have been
clearly established [17, 18], the situation with integrable geometries is less conclusive due to
the lack of global stability of the dynamics and the unavoidable effect of smooth disorder in
the samples.

In particular, the conductance ﬂuctuations and weak localization in circular cavities
have been experimentally studied and compared with other geometries [19, 20, 21, 22, 23].
Intriguingly, the observed behaviour did not always correspond to what was expected for an
integrable geometry. Controlling the potential landscape of a ballistic cavity with an SGM
tip allows one to alter the underlying classical dynamics within a given sample, and thus the
comparison between different classical dynamics can be made with the same sample.

In this paper, we present experimental and numerical evidence that the strength of a tip
placed over the centre of a circular cavity has an unexpected non-monotonic effect on the
conductance through the cavity, leading to large-amplitude conductance oscillations with tip
strength. We unambiguously demonstrate that the modiﬁcation of classical trajectories by the
tip potential explains these large-amplitude oscillations as a function of the tip strength. The
statistical analysis of the ensemble of classical trajectories leads to a detailed understanding
of the underlying mechanism.

In section 2 we present the experiment using the scanning gate microscopy technique
and in particular the measured non-monotonic dependence of the conductance on tip strength.
The numerical simulation of the conductance as a function of the strength of a tip placed in the
centre of the cavity is shown in section 3 for a realistic model. In section 4 we present a model
with only the essential ingredients to yield the conductance oscillations, and section 5 contains
the evaluation of the conductance based on classical trajectories. The statistical analysis of
the ensemble of trajectories in section 6 provides a classical understanding of the conductance
oscillations, and a simpliﬁed treatment presented in section 7 highlights the basic mechanism

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

3

Figure 1.
(a) AFM image of the cavity used in the experiment. The black area corresponds
to the surface of GaAs. Yellow contacts are top gates. The tip-induced depleted region is
indicated by the green circle for VTip ≈ −8 V. The current ﬂows between source and drain
contacts. (b)-(c) Conductance G as a function of tip position at a tip voltage of −3 and −6 V,
respectively. Black lines outline biased top gates (the grounded gates are not shown). (d) Tip
voltage dependence of the conductance when the tip is at the centre of the cavity [marked by
an arrow in (b) and (c)].

at stake.

2. Experimental observation

We consider the SGM response of a circular ballistic cavity with a diameter of about 3 µm,
electrostatically deﬁned in a GaAs-GaAlAs heterostructure. The chosen setup is such that the
cavity is connected to source and drain by wide openings having a width of about 1 µm. The
2DEG is 120 nm below the surface, with a transport mean free path of 49 µm. The Fermi
energy is EF = 4.3 meV and the Fermi wavelength is about λF = 72 nm. The size of the
structure, being much smaller than the elastic mean free path, and the low temperatures used
in the experiment, set the present study in the coherent ballistic regime.

Figure 1 (a) shows an AFM image of the sample where top gates (yellow) are placed on
the surface of the structure. The effect of the SGM tip is controlled by the tip voltage VTip.
For VTip (cid:46) −3.5 V the tip potential creates a depletion disk in the 2DEG whose size increases

with increasingly negative tip voltages. The green circle indicates the approximate size of

201510520151052G (x,y) (2e/h)2G (x,y) (2e/h)V = -3 VTipV = -6 VTip1 mm1 mm(a)(b)(c)(d)-10-8-6-4-2V (V)Tip2G  (2e/h)11131517SourceDrainTip-depleted           region1 mmClassical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

4

Figure 2. Dimensionless conductance as a function of the tip strength ut for (a) the realistic
model described in section 3 and (b) the minimal model treated in section 4. Grey solid
lines are for the coherent zero-temperature conductance. In (b), the black line represents the
quantum conductance at T = 300 mK. The light blue and dark blue (dashed) lines are the
classical results at T = 0 and T = 300 mK, respectively. Inset: Sketch of the considered
setup. A circular cavity with radius R0 is connected to quasi-one-dimensional leads of width
W , ϕ measures the angles from the origin and 2ϕop is the opening angle of the contacts seen
from the center of the cavity.

the depletion disk at VTip ≈ −8 V. Figure 1 (b) and (c) show the conductance through the
cavity as a function of tip position for ﬁxed values of VTip. The circular cavity is deﬁned by
sufﬁciently negative voltages applied to the top gates indicated by the black lines. The other
gates visible in (a) are grounded, leading to a very open cavity. When the tip is placed close
to the entrances of the cavity, there is a suppression of the conductance that becomes more
pronounced for more negative tip voltages.

A special situation arises when the tip is close to the centre. For the less negative tip
voltage (b), the conductance is suppressed by the effect of the tip, while for the more negative
VTip (c), we observe an enhancement of the conductance. Figure 1 (d) shows the conductance
as a function of VTip with the position of the tip ﬁxed at the centre of the cavity.

Surprisingly, a non-monotonic dependence of the conductance on the tip strength is
observed. In order to achieve a theoretical understanding of the intriguing behaviour of the
conductance in the experiment (Figure 1), we focus on the situation with the tip in the centre
of the cavity and model the behaviour of the experimentally investigated structure.

04812162000.20.40.60.8gtipstrengthutQMT=0KQMT=300mKclaT=0KclaT=300mK(b)048121620g(a)WϕopxyR0ϕClassical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

5

3. Numerical simulation of the experiment

We start the theoretical study of the conductance through a disorder-free circular cavity with a
tip in its centre by a numerical simulation of the setup using parameters and conditions that are
as close as possible to the ones of the real sample. The electrostatic conﬁnement potential of
the cavity due to the charged top gates is calculated using COMSOL with the exact geometry
parameters of the sample shown in ﬁgure 1, and the SGM tip is modelled by the Lorentzian
potential

US((cid:126)r) =

(1)

utA

w2 + [(cid:126)r − (cid:126)rT]2 ,

with ut the dimensionless tip strength parameter and A = EFR2
0, where R0 = 1500 nm is the
radius of the cavity. The width w = 200 nm leads to a realistic tip size, of the order of the
tip-2DEG distance. In our analysis, the tip position (cid:126)rT is ﬁxed at the centre of the cavity.

The coherent zero-temperature conductance was computed with KWANT [24], a package
that implements a recursive Green function algorithm. A tight-binding square lattice is used
with lattice parameter a = 5 nm, much smaller than λF. The dimensionless conductance
g = G/(2e2/h) is presented and discussed henceforth. The corresponding numerical results
are shown in ﬁgure 2 (a). Superposed to the small-scale ballistic conductance ﬂuctuations,
one observes a large-scale oscillation of the conductance with tip strengths for weak and
moderately strong tips. Such a behaviour is consistent with the experimentally measured non-
monotonic SGM response. Though it is difﬁcult to quantitatively relate the tip strength ut to
the voltage VTip, one can remark that the estimated size of the depletion disk at VTip ≈ −8 V
(green circle in ﬁgure 1 (a)) is reached by the model potential at ut ≈ 0.12. We then expect
that the conductance maximum obtained in the simulations around ut = 0.27 is beyond the
available experimental data.
In the regime of very strong tip potentials the conductance
exhibits plateaus at conductance values that are multiples of 2 × (2e2/h), and decreases
with increasing tip strength. Such a behaviour occurs in the regime where the depletion disc
generated by the tip becomes so large that the device is reminiscent of two parallel quantum
wires having the same quantized conductance.

The local current density in the cavity strongly depends on the tip strength. In ﬁgure 3,
the current density is shown as a function of the position within the cavity, for a tip placed in
the centre with strength ut = 0.128 (close to the ﬁrst maximum of the large-scale oscillations
seen in ﬁgure 2 (a)). The central (blue) area of vanishing current density reﬂects the tip-
depleted area. The diamond-like pattern observed in the current ﬂow around the tip suggests
the signature of classical electron trajectories following these lines.

Given the agreement between the experimentally observed and the numerically simulated
behaviour, the next step towards a theoretical understanding that will be made in the following
section consists in elaborating a simple model that produces the conductance oscillations and
allows us to identify the classical trajectories.

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

6

Figure 3.
Local current density through the realistic cavity of ﬁgure 2 (a), with a tip of
strength ut = 0.128 in the centre. The color scale gives the absolute value of the local current,
and thin black arrows reﬂect the current direction. The thick grey lines indicate the region
where the conﬁnement potential depletes the 2DEG.

4. Conductance oscillation in a model system

In order to understand the mechanisms underlying the non-monotonic tip-dependence of the
conductance and to ﬁnd the key ingredients for the occurrence of the phenomenon, we reduced
the complexity of the model. Though it is tempting to assume hard wall boundaries for the
cavity and for the tip potential, no signiﬁcant large-scale conductance oscillations occur within
such a model and we later provide the reason for such a behaviour.

We found that a hard wall cavity of radius R0 = 1500 nm attached to semi-inﬁnite leads
of width W = 1000 nm as sketched in the inset of ﬁgure 2 (b), perturbed by a tip-potential of
the form

(2)

UM((cid:126)r) =

utA

((cid:126)r − (cid:126)rT)2

is a simpliﬁed, minimal model that reproduces all the features observed in the realistic
simulation [25]. An important advantage of this model is that the classical trajectories can
be found analytically.

Figure 2 (b) shows the conductance as a function of tip strength ut for the minimal model.
The grey solid line shows the coherent quantum conductance at zero temperature. The black
line is the coherent conductance at T = 300 mK, obtained from a convolution of the energy-
dependent zero-temperature conductance with the derivative of the Fermi distribution, while
the light blue and dark blue (dashed) lines represent the results obtained from our analysis
based on classical trajectories (see section 5 for details). The main features of the zero-
temperature quantum conductance are the same in the realistic and in the minimal model.

−1.5−1−0.500.511.5−101y[µm]x[µm]00.010.020.030.040.05|~j1|[−|e|¯h/m∗a]Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

7
For large tip strength the conductance decreases in quantized steps of height 2× (2e2/h)
as in the realistic model. In the regime of weaker tip strength, large scale oscillations with an
amplitude of about 6× (2e2/h) dominate the tip-dependence. Strikingly, and even though the
tip potential is a repulsive obstacle for the electrons, at some tip strengths the conductance
even exceeds that of the unperturbed cavity.
In addition, there are ballistic conductance
ﬂuctuations of the zero-temperature conductance with an amplitude of about 2 × (2e2/h).
Those conductance ﬂuctuations are expected to decay with temperature on a scale that
corresponds to the correlation energy of the ﬂuctuations. The latter can be estimated within a
semi-classical approach [26, 27] to be of the order of /τ = vF/(cid:104)L(cid:105), where τ is the average
time an electron spends in the cavity, (cid:104)L(cid:105) the average length of classical trajectories through
the cavity and vF the Fermi velocity. Assuming (cid:104)L(cid:105) ≈ W/πR0 and using the parameters of
our system yields a temperature scale of about 75 mK. Consistent with such an estimate, we
ﬁnd numerically that the ﬂuctuations are indeed suppressed at the temperature of T = 300 mK
that is used in the experiment, thereby conﬁrming their quantum origin.
In contrast, the
larger scale oscillations remain robust, pointing to a different mechanism determining their
occurrence. We show in the following section that they are of classical origin.

5. Analysis in terms of classical trajectories
In the ballistic regime, the conductance in the classical limit of  → 0 (where quantum
interference is suppressed) can be expressed in terms of classical trajectories travelling
between entrance and exit of the structure as [28, 17, 18]

gclass =

mv0W
π T ,

(3)

(4)

up to a constant whose value is not accessible by the semiclassical approach leading to eq.
(3) and which we will ignore. The quantities m and v0 are, respectively, the mass and initial
velocity of the electrons at the Fermi energy. The factor mv0W/(π) stands for the incoming
electron ﬂux and its integer part is the number of propagating channels in the leads. For the
case of GaAs, we use m = 0.067 m0, with m0 the free electron mass. The transmission
probability is given by

(cid:90) π/2

(cid:90) W/2

T =

1
2

dθ cos θ

−π/2

−W/2

dy f (y, θ) ,

where f (y, θ) = 1 (0) if the trajectory entering the cavity at a cross-section in the left contact
at y and with momentum direction characterized by the angle θ with respect to the x-axis is
transmitted (reﬂected) [29]. In quantum billiards, where the electrostatic potential is either
zero or inﬁnity, the trajectories depend on the geometry but not on the electron energy.
Therefore T is independent of the energy and can be obtained from the asymptotic values
of the quantum conductance in the limit of inﬁnite energy. In the case under study, we do not
have a quantum billiard, due to the smooth character of the tip potential, and therefore T is
energy-dependent.
Equation (3) for a ballistic system is the equivalent of the Drude conductance for the
disordered case. In ballistic structures, the smooth disorder only weakly affects trajectories

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

8

Figure 4.
(a) Deﬁnition of the coordinate system and the angles used to characterize
individual trajectories. ϕ0 is the angle of the initial position with respect to the x-axis, Ω
denotes the angle between the initial momentum of the trajectory and the diameter of the
circle, and ∆ϕ the angular distance between two subsequent collisions with the cavity wall.
Two examples of classical trajectories are shown in (b) for tip strength ut = 0.03 and in (c) for
ut = 0.06, three trajectories are shown in (d) for a rather strong tip characterized by ut = 0.43.

that are considerably shorter than the transport mean free path. Therefore, if the properties
under study are dominated by the contribution of short trajectories, it is possible to ignore the
disorder altogether and to include only the trajectories of the clean (disorder-free) geometry.
The function f (y, θ) is in general difﬁcult to determine, and the integrals in eq. (4) are
typically calculated by randomly sampling the initial conditions. However, the case of a hard-
wall circular cavity with a central tip represented by the potential (2) is considerably simpler
due to the conservation of angular momentum within the cavity and the availability of an
analytical expression describing the trajectories.

A trajectory is determined by the initial conditions of a particle in the left contact,
described by its energy, position, and momentum orientation. The analytical expression
of trajectories in the potential (2) and specular reﬂection laws allow us to determine the
subsequent points where the electron hits the circle of radius R0 representing the cavity wall
(see inset of ﬁgure 2 (b) and ﬁgure 4). As soon as such a point lies in one of the contacts
between the cavity and the leads (i.e. |y| < W/2), the trajectory is completed and contributes
to the transmission (reﬂection) probability if it reaches the right (left) exit. Figure 4 shows
a few examples of transmitted and reﬂected trajectories at different tip strength, which are
discussed below.

The description of a trajectory can be reduced to an equidistant series of position angles
ϕn = ϕ0 ± n∆ϕ where the trajectories hit the cavity edge at r = R0, for trajectories turning
counterclockwise (clockwise) around the cavity centre. We denote by ϕ0 the initial angle
with respect to the x-axis describing the starting point in the left contact (see ﬁgure 4 (a) for
a sketch), which is taken on the dashed line at radius r = R0 [30], and ∆ϕ the (positive)
rotation angle, which is a characteristic parameter of the trajectory.

The classical results shown in ﬁgure 2 (b) are based on the application of eq. (3) in
the framework of the minimal model. For each value of ut, we sampled a ﬁnite ensemble
of trajectories M corresponding to different initial conditions (at ﬁxed energy) in the left
contact. The prescription [28] to calculate the classical transmission using eqs. (3) and (4)

xyΩ∆ϕϕ0(a)(b)(c)(d)Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

9

is implemented adopting an equidistant selection of transverse starting points and, since
dθ cos θ = d(sin θ), a sampling of initial angles θ such that the values of sin θ are equally
spaced. Such a sampling yields the expression

gclass =

mv0W
π

#MT
#M

(5)

for the classical conductance in terms of the cardinalities (denoted by #) of the subset of
transmitted trajectories MT and that of the total set M.
The classical conductance (light and dark blue dashed lines in ﬁgure 2 (b)) has only a very
weak temperature dependence (at least up to T = 300 mK). Its behaviour is remarkably close
to the ﬁnite-temperature quantum conductance in the regime of not too strong tip strength.
The small offset of our classical conductance with respect to the quantum can be attributed to
the ignored constant in eq. (3). In particular, the classical results nicely exhibit the tip-strength
dependent oscillations. Their ability to describe the behaviour of the numerically calculated
quantum conductance demonstrates that the large scale oscillations are of classical origin. In
contrast, the conductance ﬂuctuations and the conductance quantization for strong tip strength
are quantum effects and therefore not present in the classical results. We conclude that the
experimentally observed behaviour at T = 300 mK is very well described by the classical
treatment of our minimal model, except for the conductance quantization at large tip strength.
In the sequel of the paper, we present a detailed analysis in order to understand why the
rich variety of classical trajectories (some of them shown in ﬁgure 4) results in the simple
structure of gclass presented in ﬁgure 2. The properties of the classical trajectories through the
sample and their dependence on tip strength will be analysed towards an understanding of the
mechanism that leads to the large conductance oscillations.

6. Mechanism leading to conductance oscillations

In order to understand the origin of the large-scale conductance oscillations at low tip strength
we investigate the dependence of the contributing trajectories on the strength of the tip
potential. We characterize each trajectory s by two parameters: The number of bounces at
the cavity edge Nb(s), and the number of windings around the cavity centre Nw(s). We
distinguish transmitted (α = T) and reﬂected (α = R) trajectories and describe the ensemble
M = MT ∪ MR of sampled trajectories by the probabilities Pb,α(N ) and Pw,α(N ) of
The probability that a trajectory is reﬂected or transmitted after N bounces with the

obtaining those parameters. We also introduce the sums Pb(w) =(cid:80)

α Pb(w),α.

cavity edge can be calculated as

Pb,α(N ) =

.

(6)

The calculation of the probabilities of having N windings Pw,α(N ) is analogous to eq. (6).

Due to the relatively wide openings of the cavity, most of the features in the dependence
of the conductance on tip strength can be explained by considering only relatively short
trajectories having few bounces with the cavity wall (Nb ≤ 8) and very few windings around

(cid:80)

s∈Mα δN,Nb(s)

#M

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

10

b,8, g>

w,1 and g<

Figure 5.
Inﬂuence of tip strength on (a) the classical conductance and conductance bounds
w,1. (b) Probabilities Pb,R of an electron to be reﬂected after
obtained with g>
Nb = {0, 2, 4, 6, 8} bounces with the cavity wall. (c) Probabilities Pw of trajectories without
(solid) and one winding (dashed) around the centre of the cavity (black) and its reﬂected Pw,R
(green, light) and transmitted Pw,T (red, medium) parts. The leftmost vertical line indicates
the tip strength above which transmitted trajectories without bounces are impossible and the
following vertical lines indicate values above which reﬂected trajectories with 2, 4, 6, and 8
bounces are impossible.

the cavity centre (Nw ≤ 1). This assumption is conﬁrmed by the comparison shown in ﬁgure 5
(a) between the full classical conductance (5) and estimates obtained from short trajectories
only. These are an upper limit for the transmission calculated from the reﬂected trajectories
as

(cid:33)

(7)

(8)

g>
γ,Nmax =

mv0W
π

1 −

Pγ,R(N )

and a lower limit based on transmitted trajectories

g<
γ,Nmax =

mv0W
π

Pγ,T(N ),

Nmax(cid:88)

N =0

(cid:32)

Nmax(cid:88)

N =0

γ ∈ {b, w} labelling the distribution used. One clearly sees that the upper and lower limits
w,1 contain already the most important features of the total conductance and
b,8, g>
g>

w,1 and g<

00.20.40.60.800.10.20.30.40.5PwtipstrengthutPw(0)Pw(1)Pw,T(0)Pw,T(1)Pw,R(0)Pw,R(1)(c)(b)(a)00.10.2Pb,RPb,R(0)Pb,R(2)Pb,R(4)Pb,R(6)Pb,R(8)141618202224gg>b,8g>w,1g<w,1classicClassical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

11

get closer and closer with increasing tip strength. This approach indicates that the effect of
long trajectories is suppressed by strong tips.

Along with the conductance estimates, we show in ﬁgure 5 (b) and (c) the probabilities
for some contributing categories of trajectories. The probabilities for reﬂected trajectories
Pb,R evaluated for an even number of bounces Nb = {0, 2, 4, 6, 8} is presented in ﬁgure 5 (b).
The symmetry of the system, with equal width openings exactly opposite to each other, makes
reﬂection after an odd number of bounces impossible, such that Pb,R vanishes for all odd Nb,
independent of the tip strength.

The case of Nb = 0 is particularly simple as it concerns the direct reﬂection from the tip
without touching the cavity edge. The weight of this class of trajectories Pb,R(0) increases
monotonically with increasing tip strength. The dashed curve in ﬁgure 4 (d) is an example
of such a trajectory. The increasing average bending of the trajectories with increasing tip
strength leads to smaller values of ∆ϕ. As a consequence, direct reﬂection without bounces
becomes more probable. For the trajectories that enter the cavity, the probability to be
transmitted increases, and hence the reﬂected trajectories with a ﬁnite number of bounces
are suppressed. The lower the (non-zero) number Nb of bounces, the lower the tip strength
that is necessary to suppress the contribution of the corresponding reﬂected trajectories. The
vertical lines in ﬁgure 5 indicate these tip strengths for Nb = {2, 4, 6} which are very close
to the conductance maxima. We thus conclude that the disappearance of such a category of
reﬂected trajectories is related to a maximum in the transmission. This is an important element
of the mechanism underlying the observed large-scale conductance oscillations. Consistent
with our previous ﬁndings, trajectories with Nb ≥ 8 have little effect on the behaviour of the
conductance.
In order to illustrate the effect of the tip on those classes of trajectories and their
transmitted or reﬂected character, we present the example of trajectories with Nb = 2 in
more detail. For the reﬂected trajectories ∆ϕ must satisfy 2π − 2ϕop < 3∆ϕ < 2π + 2ϕop,
where ϕop = arcsin(W/2R0) is the opening angle of the contacts (see inset of ﬁgure 2 (b)).
An example of such a trajectory is the dashed curve at ut = 0.03 shown in ﬁgure 4 (b)
together with a longer trajectory (dark line). Around this tip strength the probability to ﬁnd
these trajectories reaches its maximum (see ﬁgure 5 (b)). With increasing tip strength ∆ϕ
decreases and beyond a certain value the reﬂected trajectories with Nb = 2 no longer exist.
Concomitantly, the transmitted trajectories with Nb = 1 where π − 2ϕop < 2∆ϕ < π + 2ϕop
gain importance. The dark line in ﬁgure 4 (c) is an example of such a trajectory at
ut = 0.06. The structure of the current density for this regime of tip strength shown in
ﬁgure 3 demonstrates that the quantum current ﬂow is closely related to the shape of those
transmitted trajectories. Reﬂection after a full winding is now only possible for trajectories
with at least four bounces with the cavity wall (see dashed line in ﬁgure 4 (c)). This scenario is
conﬁrmed by the data shown in ﬁgure 5 (c) where the probabilities for zero and one windings
Pw(0) and Pw(1) and their separation into reﬂected and transmitted parts are presented. The
number of transmitted trajectories with no winding around the centre Pw,T(0) is increasing
while the probability to ﬁnd a reﬂected trajectory with one winding Pw,R(1) assumes minima
close to the vertical lines. Hence, the decrease of the weight of longer trajectories (a very long

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

12

one is shown by the dark curve in ﬁgure 4 (b)) with tip strength, and the alternation in the
suppression of reﬂected and transmitted families explains the oscillations of the conductance.
In general, the reduced ∆ϕ increases the probabilities to be either reﬂected without
collision or to be transmitted after an increasing number of bounces but without a full winding
around the cavity centre. Once the tip strength imposes ∆ϕ < 2ϕop, those two possibilities
are the only remaining options. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 4 (d) showing three trajectories
at tip strength ut = 0.43, where reﬂected trajectories with one winding are still possible (see
light dotted line). When the reﬂected trajectories with Nb = 8 bounces become impossible,
the bending of the trajectories becomes so strong that all trajectories are either immediately
reﬂected, as the dashed curve in ﬁgure 4 (d)), or transmitted after Nb ≥ 3 collisions, as the
dark curve in ﬁgure 4 (d). Trajectories with a non-zero winding number become impossible
and Pw(0) = 1. This explains why there is no conductance maximum at the tip strength where
reﬂection after Nb = 8 bounces becomes impossible.

With a further increase of tip strength, there is a monotonic increase of direct reﬂection
Pw,R(0) and a corresponding decrease of the transmissions Pw,T(0), and the conductance
decreases monotonically with tip strength, reaching zero when the tip-induced depletion is so
strong that electrons cannot enter the cavity any more. The numerically obtained quantum
conductance exhibits in this regime quantized values that are due to the two parallel quantum
wires which are formed between the cavity wall and the tip depleted zone. Our classical
analysis is clearly not able to account for such a behaviour.

The initial decrease and the ﬁrst minimum of the conductance at ut ≈ 0.01 is a
consequence of the suppression of trajectories that are transmitted through the cavity without
ever touching the cavity edge. The value of the tip strength above which those direct
trajectories cease to exist is indicated by the leftmost vertical line in ﬁgure 5. It is important
to remark that beyond the previous value the effect of the tip is no longer perturbative in the
quantum mechanical sense. First-order perturbation theory of SGM [10, 11] can only predict
the initial slope in the curve of the conductance versus tip strength.

The statistical analysis of the ensemble of trajectories presented above points to the
crucial importance of the parameter ∆ϕ that characterizes the angular distance between
subsequent points where the trajectory hits the cavity boundary.
In the following we
investigate the distribution of ∆ϕ at a given tip strength, and provide a basic recipe to predict
the main conductance maxima and minima. Moreover, an estimate of the width of those
features shows the inﬂuence of the cavity opening angle ϕop on the conductance oscillations.

7. Simpliﬁed analysis of the classical trajectories

A remarkable aspect of the analysis carried out in the last section is the fact that a very reduced
subensemble of classical trajectories sufﬁces to explain the dependence of the conductance
on tip strength.
In this section we present a simpliﬁed analysis based on the dominating
trajectories that allows us to extract the essence of the mechanism underlying the classical
conductance oscillations discussed above. We establish rough estimates for the behaviour at a
given tip strength ut by considering only those classical trajectories that are characterized by

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

13

Figure 6.
(a) Density plot of the probability distribution P (∆ϕ) as a function of ut. (b)
Dependence of ∆ϕ on the injection angle Ω, for different values of ut.
(c) Conductance
estimates (9) and (10) based on the shortest trajectories with maximum ∆ϕ (blue line). The
classical conductance (black line) is shown for comparison.

the most probable value of ∆ϕ.

Figure 6 (a) shows a density plot of the probability distribution of the rotation angle
P (∆ϕ) within our ensemble of trajectories for values of ut between 0 and 1. For a given ut
the rotation angle ∆ϕ is solely a function of the angle Ω (due to the circular symmetry of
the problem, ∆ϕ does not depend on the initial position ϕ0) that presents a maximum value
∆ϕm (see ﬁgure 6 (b)). Due to the stronger bending of the trajectories, ∆ϕm decreases with
increasing tip strength. Figure 6 (a) shows that the probability density is highly concentrated
for values of ∆ϕ close to ∆ϕm, and actually it diverges when the maximum value of ∆ϕm
is approached from below. The reason for this behaviour is the fact that the long tails of
the tip potential (2) lead to a smooth dependence of ∆ϕ on the injection angle Ω deﬁned
with respect to the cavity diameter (see ﬁgure 4 (a)). Trajectories injected with Ω = 0 are
reﬂected in a head-on collision with the tip and have ∆ϕ = 0. Then, ∆ϕ increases with Ω,
reaches its maximum value ∆ϕm at an intermediate value of Ω, and decreases upon a further
increase of Ω back to 0 when Ω = π/2. Examples of this behaviour are shown in ﬁgure 6 (b).
In contrast to the unperturbed cavity (ut = 0), where ∆ϕ = π − 2|Ω| results in a constant
P (∆ϕ) = 1/π, the ﬂat maximum occurring in the dependence of ∆ϕ on Ω at ﬁnite tip strength
ut leads to the divergence of P (∆ϕ) at the maximum value ∆ϕm. The resulting dominance
of trajectories with ∆ϕ close to the maximum value ∆ϕm becomes more pronounced with
increasing values of ut (and thus decreasing ∆ϕm), and motivates the characterization of the
ensemble of classical trajectories at a given tip strength by the dominant angular distance
between bounces ∆ϕm. We restrict in the sequel the analysis to only those trajectories having
∆ϕ = ∆ϕm and derive rough estimates for the conductance within such an assumption.

In the regime where the tip is so strong that ∆ϕm < 2ϕop, all trajectories are either
reﬂected immediately without ever hitting the cavity wall, or they are transmitted to the

014π12π34ππ00.250.50.751∆ϕut00.511.52P(∆ϕ)(a)051015202500.250.50.751gutClassicEstimate012ππ0π/4π/2∆ϕΩut=0.001ut=0.1ut=0.6(b)(c)Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

14

other lead after a number of bounces, but without winding around the centre. The classical
conductance is then given by
mv0W
π

gclass ≈

∆ϕm
2ϕop

(9)

and and its decrease with ut is a direct consequence of the increasing number of directly
reﬂected trajectories when ∆ϕm is suppressed by an increasing tip strength.

For weaker tip strength, when ∆ϕm > 2ϕop, the distance between subsequent bounces is
larger than the openings of the cavity, and a direct reﬂection is impossible. For simplicity,
though trajectories can now have more windings, we neglect the longer trajectories and
concentrate on the ones with no winding and transmitted after Nb bounces. The existence
of such trajectories requires that the total rotation angle (Nb + 1)∆ϕ lies in the interval
[π − 2ϕop, π + 2ϕop]. Within this interval, a straightforward evaluation of the amount of
such a class of trajectories allows us to estimate the conductance contribution arising from
trajectories with Nb bounces as

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

gclass(Nb) ≈

mv0W
π

1 − |π − (Nb + 1)∆ϕm|

2ϕop

.

(10)

Thus, maxima of the total conductance, obtained by summing over Nb, can be expected when
∆ϕm = π/(Nb + 1). The conductance maxima occurring when ∆ϕm varies are of triangular
shape with a width of 4ϕop/(Nb + 1).

For the minimal model with the tip potential (2), the above criterion for expecting a
transmission maximum translates into conductance peaks at ut ≈ {0, 0.111, 0.278, 0.403}
(peaks of the blue curve in ﬁgure 6 (c)). Close to these values maxima arise in the
probability of having a transmitted trajectory with zero winding (red line in ﬁgure 5 (c)).
The estimates of the conductance (9) and (10) that are based on the shortest transmitted
trajectories are represented by the blue line in ﬁgure 6 (c) that can be compared to the classical
conductance (black line). The qualitative agreement of the main peak structure conﬁrms the
dominance of those trajectories. However, at small tip strength ut the quantitative comparison
becomes rather poor, pointing to the increased importance of longer trajectories and a broader
distribution of the values of ∆ϕ in that regime.

The geometric argument from above can be extended to longer trajectories. The class
of trajectories that are reﬂected after one winding around the cavity lead to a minimum in
conductance at the values ∆ϕm = 2π/(Nb + 1) with the width 4ϕop/(Nb + 1), for even Nb.
The corresponding conductance minima are expected at ut ≈ {0.031, 0.199, 0.345, 0.425}.
These values are close to the minima in the classical conductance (ﬁgure 6 (c)), as well as to
the maxima in the probability of having reﬂected trajectories with one winding (green dashed
line in ﬁgure 5 (c)). Also the probabilities Pb,R(Nb) of being reﬂected after Nb bounces in
Fig. 5 (b) assume minima close to the corresponding values of ut.

Due to the relatively wide openings of the cavity, most trajectories encounter an opening
after not more than one winding, and longer trajectories are of minor importance, especially
at large ut when the bending of the trajectories leads to small values of ∆ϕ. Only at small ut,
when the short trajectories do not fulﬁl the conditions above, the longer trajectories can be of
importance.

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

15

The long range tip potential is a crucial ingredient of the mechanism presented above
since it leads to an inhomogeneous distribution of ∆ϕ and in particular to the dominance of
trajectories at ∆ϕm. In contrast, when the tip is modelled by a hard wall disc, the dependence
of ∆ϕ on the injection angle has a cusp at the maximum ∆ϕ. The resulting probability density
does not exhibit a signiﬁcant preferential value such that the behaviour of very different values
of ∆ϕ is mixed and the conductance oscillations are smeared, consistent with our numerical
observations.

8. Conclusions

We presented SGM experiments on circular cavities in which an intriguing non-monotonic
dependence of the conductance on the tip voltage is observed when the tip is placed in the
centre of the cavity. Our theoretical analysis explains the unexpected behaviour and traces it
back to classical dynamics in the device.

Our numerical simulation of quantum transport through the experimental setup with a
long-range tip potential in the centre obtained large conductance oscillations as a function of
tip strength that are consistent with the experimental ﬁndings. At low temperature, additional
ballistic conductance ﬂuctuations appear in the calculated conductance. We found that a
simpliﬁed model system with hard wall cavity boundaries and a soft electrostatic potential
induced by the tip reproduces all the features of the realistic model and allows for an analytical
calculation of the classical trajectories.

We conﬁrmed numerically that the ballistic conductance ﬂuctuations are of quantum
origin since they are suppressed at the temperature of the experiment and absent when the
conductance is calculated from classical trajectories. In contrast, the classical conductance is
not signiﬁcantly affected by temperature, it contains the large scale conductance oscillations,
and it reproduces very well the behaviour of the quantum conductance at the experimental
temperature, except for conductance steps that arise in the regime of very strong tips. We
therefore conclude that the oscillations of the conductance as a function of tip strength and
the resulting non-monotonic behaviour of the conductance when the tip is in the centre of the
cavity is of classical origin.

A statistical analysis of the ensemble of trajectories, possible in the model system,
shows that relatively short trajectories with few bounces with the cavity wall or few windings
around the cavity centre allow to understand the conductance oscillations. The evolution
of the contributing trajectories with tip strength provides the mechanism for the observed
conductance oscillations.

Having observed that trajectories with a particular angular distance between bounces at
the cavity wall dominate in the case of long range tip potentials, we provided a simpliﬁed
analysis restricted to this class of dominating trajectories, leading to a basic understanding of
the main conductance maxima. We found that the long range character of the tip potential
is a crucial ingredient for the classical mechanism. When the tip is modelled as a hard disc
of increasing size, the experimentally and numerically observed non-monotonic behaviour of
the conductance cannot be reproduced.

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

16

It is remarkable that a simple modelling based on relatively short classical trajectories,
completely ignoring disorder and electron-electron interaction, was capable of rendering the
explanation of the measured conductance through a cavity within an SGM setup. While the
signature of classical trajectories in transport through circular billiards had been identiﬁed
[20, 31, 18] by the Fourier transform of the energy and magnetic ﬁeld-dependent conductance,
our experimental and theoretical results provided a direct evidence of the almost exclusive role
of a small set of trajectories.

Even if most of the modelling of ballistic transport has been done for quantum billiards,
the role of the smoothness of the electrostatic conﬁnement potential has been discussed
[32]. In our work we have shown that the electrostatic conﬁnement deﬁning the structure
is sufﬁciently sharp as not giving rise to important departures from the hard-wall case.
However, the smooth character of the electrostatic potential created by the tip imprints a
crucial signature for the electric transport with an SGM setup.

Experiments carried out in small cavities (diameter 1.0-1.5 µm) do not show signiﬁcant
traces of the classical oscillations as compared to those of the large cavity of ﬁgure 1. The
small cavities do not have perfect circular symmetry, which might explain the different
behaviour. Moreover, numerical simulations indicate a stronger difference between the
Lorentzian and the simpliﬁed tip potential for the case of the smaller cavities and point to
a modiﬁcation of the mechanisms in the case where the width of the Lorentzian tip potential
is not much smaller than the cavity.

In the small cavities it is possible to achieve the regime in which the size of the tip-
induced disk becomes comparable with the size of the cavity [33, 34]. SGM measurements in
this regime show fringes that extend to the centre of the cavity and a conductance suppression
with increasing negative tip voltage exhibiting steps. Such a behaviour is consistent with
the conductance quantization at large tip strength that can be observed in the result for the
quantum conductance presented in ﬁgure 2.

It will be interesting to generalize the classical analysis to the situation when the tip is
outside the centre of the cavity, breaking the circular symmetry and thus the integrability of
the cavity. In principle, such a setup should allow for a detailed investigation of the transition
between the integrable and the chaotic case, within a given sample, using the SGM technique.

Acknowledgments

Financial support from the French National Research Agency ANR (Projects Labex NIE,
ANR-14-CE36-0070-01) and from the Swiss National Science Foundation SNSF is gratefully
acknowledged.

References

[1] Topinka M A, LeRoy B J, Shaw S E J, Heller E J, Westervelt R M, Maranowski K D and Gossard A C 2000
Science 289 2323–2326 URL http://www.sciencemag.org/content/289/5488/2323.
abstract

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

17

[2] Topinka M A, LeRoy B J, Westervelt R M, Shaw S E J, Fleischmann R, Heller E J, Maranowski K D and

Gossard A C 2001 Nature 410 183 URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/35065553

[3] LeRoy B J, Bleszynski A C, Aidala K E, Westervelt R M, Kalben A, Heller E J, Shaw S E J, Maranowski
K D and Gossard A C 2005 Phys. Rev. Lett. 94(12) 126801 URL http://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.126801

[4] Heller E J, Aidala K E, LeRoy B J, Bleszynsky A C, Kalben A, Westervelt R M, Maranowski K D and

Gossard A C 2005 Nano Lett. 5 1285

[5] Jura M P, Topinka M A, Grobis M, Pfeiffer L N, West K W and Goldhaber-Gordon D 2009 Phys. Rev. B

80(4) 041303 URL http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.80.041303

[6] Jura M P, Grobis M, Topinka M A, Pfeiffer L N, West K W and Goldhaber-Gordon D 2010 Phys. Rev. B

82(15) 155328 URL http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.82.155328

[7] Schnez S, Güttinger J, Stampfer C, Ensslin K and Ihn T 2011 New J. Phys. 13 053013 URL http:

//stacks.iop.org/1367-2630/13/i=5/a=053013

[8] Sellier H, Hackens B, Pala M G, Martins F, Baltazar S, Wallart X, Desplanque L, Bayot V and Huant S
2011 Semicond. Sci. Tech. 26 064008 URL http://stacks.iop.org/0268-1242/26/i=6/
a=064008

[9] Martins F, Hackens B, Pala M G, Ouisse T, Sellier H, Wallart X, Bollaert S, Cappy A, Chevrier J, Bayot V
and Huant S 2007 Phys. Rev. Lett. 99(13) 136807 URL http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.99.136807

[10] Jalabert R A, Szewc W, Tomsovic S and Weinmann D 2010 Phys. Rev. Lett. 105(16) 166802 URL

http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.166802

[11] Gorini C, Jalabert R A, Szewc W, Tomsovic S and Weinmann D 2013 Phys. Rev. B 88(3) 035406 URL

http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.88.035406

[12] Steinacher R, Kozikov A A, Rössler C, Reichl C, Wegscheider W, Ensslin K and Ihn T 2016 Phys. Rev. B

93(8) 085303 URL http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.93.085303

[13] Kozikov A A, Weinmann D, Rössler C, Ihn T, Ensslin K, Reichl C and Wegscheider W 2016 submitted to

New J. Phys.

[14] Kozikov A A, Weinmann D, Rössler C, Ihn T, Ensslin K, Reichl C and Wegscheider W 2013 New J. Phys.

15 083005 URL http://stacks.iop.org/1367-2630/15/i=8/a=083005

[15] Pala M G, Baltazar S, Liu P, Sellier H, Hackens B, Martins F, Bayot V, Wallart X, Desplanque L and
Huant S 2012 Phys. Rev. Lett. 108(7) 076802 URL http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.108.076802

[16] Sousa A A, Chaves A, Farias G A and Peeters F M 2013 Phys. Rev. B 88(24) 245417 URL http:

//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.88.245417

[17] Jalabert R A 2000 The semiclassical tool in mesoscopic physics New Directions in Quantum Chaos
Proceedings of the International School of Physics "Enrico Fermi" ed Casati G, Guarneri I and Smilansky
U (Amsterdam: IOS Press) pp 145 – 222

[18] Jalabert R A 2016 Scholarpedia 11 30946 URL http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/

Mesoscopic_transport_and_quantum_chaos

[19] Marcus C M, Rimberg A J, Westervelt R M, Hopkins P F and Gossard A C 1992 Phys. Rev. Lett. 69(3)

506–509 URL http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.69.506

[20] Berry M J, Katine J A, Westervelt R M and Gossard A C 1994 Phys. Rev. B 50(23) 17721–17724 URL

http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.50.17721

[21] Persson M, Pettersson J, von Sydow B, Lindelof P E, Kristensen A and Berggren K F 1995 Phys. Rev. B

52(12) 8921–8933 URL http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.52.8921

[22] Chang A M, Baranger H U, Pfeiffer L N and West K W 1994 Phys. Rev. Lett. 73(15) 2111–2114 URL

http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.73.2111

[23] Lee Y, Faini G and Mailly D 1997 Phys. Rev. B 56(15) 9805–9812 URL http://link.aps.org/

doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.56.9805

[24] Groth C W, Wimmer M, Akhmerov A R and Waintal X 2014 New J. Phys. 16 063065 URL http:

//stacks.iop.org/1367-2630/16/i=6/a=063065

Classical origin of conductance oscillations in an integrable cavity

18

[25] A harmonic tip potential fails to produce large scale oscillations with a sufﬁcient amplitude, and assuming

[26] Blümel R and Smilansky U 1988 Phys. Rev. Lett. 60(6) 477–480 URL http://link.aps.org/doi/

a Coulomb-like tip potential Ut((cid:126)r) ∝ ut/((cid:126)r − (cid:126)rT) leads to qualitatively different oscillations.
10.1103/PhysRevLett.60.477

[27] Jalabert R A, Baranger H U and Stone A D 1990 Phys. Rev. Lett. 65(19) 2442–2445 URL http:

//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.65.2442

[28] Baranger H U, DiVincenzo D P, Jalabert R A and Stone A D 1991 Phys. Rev. B 44(19) 10637–10675 URL

http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.44.10637

[29] Spatial symmetries induce action degeneracies among the trajectories contributing to (4), which result
in quantum corrections to the classical transmission probability [18]. For chaotic geometries these
corrections are typically of the order 2× e2/h [35]. In particular, the reﬂection symmetry with respect to
the x-axis does not alter the prescription (4) [28]. The case of integrable geometries is more complicated
due to the quasi-degeneracy of actions within families of trajectories. In our problem, we do not expect
the corresponding corrections to be relevant since long trajectories are of minor importance. Moreover,
changing tip strength does not affect the symmetries.

[30] Choosing the starting points on the circle of radius R0 leads to a small deviation from the prescription of
eq. (4). Moreover, the tip potential affects the initial velocities [28]. Though it is in principle possible to
take those modiﬁcations into account, we have checked that in the regime of not too strong tip strength
the effect of both corrections on the conductance and the statistics of the trajectories is very small and
can be neglected in the regime we are interested in.

[31] Ishio H and Burgdörfer J 1995 Phys. Rev. B 51(3) 2013–2016 URL http://link.aps.org/doi/

10.1103/PhysRevB.51.2013

[32] Ouchterlony, T, Zozoulenko, I V, Wang, C-K, Berggren, K-F, Gould, C and Sachrajda, A S 1999 Eur. Phys.

J. B 10 361–370 URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s100510050865

[33] Kozikov A A, Steinacher R, Rössler C, Ihn T, Ensslin K, Reichl C and Wegscheider W 2014 New J. Phys.

16 053031 URL http://stacks.iop.org/1367-2630/16/i=5/a=053031

[34] Steinacher R, Kozikov A A, Rössler C, Reichl C, Wegscheider W, Ihn T and Ensslin K 2015 New J. Phys.

17 043043 URL http://stacks.iop.org/1367-2630/17/i=4/a=043043

[35] Whitney R S, Schomerus H and Kopp M 2009 Phys. Rev. E 80(5) 056209 URL http://link.aps.

org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.80.056209

