Insights from a minimal model of dislocation-assisted rafting in single crystal

Nickel-based superalloys

Ronghai Wua, Stefan Sandfelda,∗

aInstitute of Materials Simulation, Department of Materials Science, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-N¨urnberg (FAU), Dr.-Mack-Str.

77, 90762 F¨urth, Germany

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
2
7
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract
Nickel-based superalloys play a major role in many technologically relevant high temperature applications. Understand-
ing and predicting the evolution of the phase microstructure during high temperature creep together with the evolution of
the dislocation microstructure is a challenge that up to date has not yet been fully accomplished. Our two-dimensional
coupled phase-ﬁeld/continuum dislocation dynamics model explains microstructural mechanisms which are important
during the early stage of rafting in a single crystal system. It shows how γ/γ(cid:48) phases and dislocations interact giving
rise to realistic creep behavior; no phenomenological ﬁt parameters are required.

Keywords: superalloy; rafting, phase-ﬁeld model; continuum dislocation dynamics; microstructure

Superalloy development has been mainly driven by im-
proved control of the phase microstructure, which in Ni-
base superalloys essentially consists of cube-shaped pre-
cipitates of an ordered phase (termed γ(cid:48) phase) embedded
in a face-centred cubic, solution hardened matrix (termed
γ phase). The L12 structure of the precipitates renders
them strong obstacles to dislocation motion even at el-
evated temperatures, and optimizing the precipitate mi-
crostructure has played a major role for improving the
thermo-mechanical properties of single crystal Ni-based
superalloys. Due to their remarkable resistance to thermo-
mechanical and chemical degradation in extreme service
environments this class of materials became a common
choice for components which require good creep resis-
tance at high-temperatures [1]. One example for the
demanding service conditions are turbine blades in the
combustion chamber of jet engines where blade temper-
atures can be up to ≈1000◦C. Additionally, centrifugal
forces in the blades cause sustained tensile stresses, giv-
ing rise to creep deformation at high-temperatures [2, 3].
A problematic aspect for the life time of superalloy-
based components under these conditions is rafting (direc-
tional coarsening) of the precipitate microstructure which
leads to degradation of material properties. Understand-
ing the mechanisms which control the coupled evolution
of precipitate and dislocation microstructure under stress,

∗Corresponding author
Email address: stefan.sandfeld@fau.de (Stefan Sandfeld )

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

and understanding how this evolution controls the macro-
scopic creep behavior, is therefore an important step to-
wards improving superalloys.

Experimentally exploring the eﬀect of process parame-
ters, temperature and loading conditions, and at the same
time collecting detailed information about the phase and
dislocation microstructure and the mechanical response, is
a complex task. Identifying and understanding all mecha-
nisms that are responsible for the microstructure-property
relationship is even more challenging and is until today
not fully accomplished. As a naturally arising question
one therefore may ask:
is there a predictive modeling
approach which can simultaneously provide information
about the γ/γ(cid:48) evolution, the ﬂow and interactions of dis-
locations, and the macroscopic creep properties? The
most promising approach may be to couple two diﬀer-
ent methods to describe the stress-driven evolution of the
dislocation microstructure and the concomitant plastic de-
formation on the one hand, and the phase microstructure
(γ/γ(cid:48)) on the other hand.

The phase-ﬁeld (PF) method has become the most suc-
cessful mesoscale simulation approach for predicting the
γ/γ(cid:48) pattern evolution (see e.g. [4, 5]). Pioneering steps
for coupling continuum plasticity to PF models have been
undertaken in [6, 7] where a phenomenological viscoplas-
ticity model was used (which has no information about
dislocations) to show that plastic activity accelerates raft-
ing and allows misalignments of rafts with respect to the

March 3, 2016

cubic direction. An alternative is to use PF models not
only for the phase microstructure but also to indirectly
represent dislocations (governed by order parameters for
the plastic strain) [8], where the relevant shear compo-
nent of the plastic strain tensor of every crystallographic
slip system is an additional phase variable. For a high
spatial resolution within the slip system (i.e. a resolution
signiﬁcantly ﬁner than the mean dislocation spacing) this
approach is able to handle dislocation interactions. For
practical purposes, however, the high resolution is a lim-
iting factor due to a high computational cost.

In the present work, we show an alternative approach
by coupling a PF model and a 2D model of continuum
dislocation dynamics (CDD) [9, 10]. The PF model
governs the γ/γ(cid:48) evolution, while the CDD model is used
to represent ﬂuxes of positive and negative edge disloca-
tions, from which geometrically necessary dislocations
(GNDs) and statistically stored dislocations (SSDs) can
be computed. By superposition of dislocation-associated
and phase-associated eigenstrains one can in a straightfor-
ward manner formulate the elastic energy which accounts
for dislocation stresses, coherency stresses associated
with γ/γ(cid:48) misﬁt strain, and the mutual interaction be-
tween γ/γ(cid:48) and dislocations.

In the following we consider a plane strain geometry
with periodic boundary conditions and one γ(cid:48) precipitate
in the center with an initially quadratic cross section. γ
channels are populated by edge dislocations on two dif-
ferent slip systems, i = {1, 2}, which are characterized by
Burgers vector bi and slip plane normal ni (see Fig. 1a).
We consider a Ni-Al binary system with no distinction of
γ(cid:48) variants. A simple phase ﬁeld model with a compo-
sition ﬁeld c governed by the Cahn-Hilliard equation is
suﬃcient in this case, where c = cγ represents the γ phase
and c = cγ(cid:48) the γ(cid:48) phase, respectively. The total energy
functional

F =

( f bulk + f grad + f el) dV

(1)
results from the bulk energy density f bulk = f0(c−cγ(cid:48))2(c−
2 |∇c|2 and the
cγ)2, the gradient energy density f grad = kc
elastic strain energy density f el = 1
2 σ : el. Therein,
f0 is the energy density scale and kc is the gradient en-
ergy density coeﬃcient determined by ﬁtting the calcu-
lated interface energy to an experimentally obtained in-
terface energy. The stress tensor σ results from fulﬁll-
ing mechanical equilibrium, ∇ · σ = 0, in the absence of
body forces. The stiﬀness tensor C links elastic strains
and stresses through the constitutive equation σ = C : el

(cid:90)

V

and is in general diﬀerent for γ and γ(cid:48). However, the goal
of this work is not an utmost realistic simulation but rather
a minimal model with which relevant mechanisms can be
identiﬁed. Elastic inhomogeneities due to diﬀerent stiﬀ-
ness tensors as well as plastic inhomogeneities from dis-
locations both would contribute to rafting. To identify
the inﬂuence of the latter we will therefore completely
neglect diﬀerent elastic properties and assume the same
stiﬀness tensor for the γ as well as for the γ(cid:48) phase. In
a small strain context one can additively decompose the
total strain  into an elastic elastic strain el and two in-
elastic contributions, which are: (i) the γ/γ(cid:48) misﬁt strain
c)I with αc = (c−cγ)/(cγ(cid:48)−cγ)
mis = ¯misα3
and the identity tensor I, and (ii) the dislocation eigen-
strains dis which are obtained from the respective strains
i ηiMi. There, the
transformation of dislocation strains ηi from the local sys-
tem into the global coordinate system is done by the pro-
jection tensor Mi = 1
The γ/γ(cid:48) evolution is governed by the Cahn-Hilliard
equation, which, for a homogeneous and isotropic inter-
face mobility coeﬃcient Mc, is given by

ηi in each slip system i by dis = (cid:80)
2bi (bi ⊗ ni + bi ⊗ ni).

c(10−15αc+6α2

∂c
∂t

= Mc∇2 δF
δc .

(2)

The dislocation microstructure evolution for each slip sys-
tem is governed by a continuum dislocation dynamics
model in which positive (ρ+) and negative (ρ−) edge dis-
location densities can be distinguished [9]. Within this
model one can easily obtain the total density ρ = ρ+ + ρ−
or the excess (i.e signed GND) density κ = ρ+ − ρ−. The
evolution equations for ρ+, ρ− and the plastic strain η are
given by

∂tρ+ = −∂x(vρ+),

− = ∂x(vρ

−),

∂tρ

∂tη = ρvb,

(3)

where x denotes the local coordinate in glide directions
and v is the dislocation velocity (the superscript i indicat-
ing the slip system was dropped for brevity). Assuming a
linear relationship between stresses and dislocation veloc-
ity, one can write

(cid:40) b
B(τl + τb − τy)
0

if |τl + τb| > τy,
else

v =

(4)
where B is the drag coeﬃcient. τl = σ : M is the
long range shear stress resulting from external mechani-
cal loading, heterogeneous plastic strain (i.e. dislocation
eigenstrain) as well as from γ/γ(cid:48) misﬁt. τb = −DGb∂xκ/ρ
is the back stress governing the repulsion of like-oriented
dislocations within a slip plane with the dimensionless pa-
rameter ([9]) D = 0.6 and G the shear modulus. τy =

2

(cid:112)

[(cγ(cid:48) − cγ)/(cγ(cid:48) − c)]aGb
ρ1 + ρ2 is the yield stress with
a = 0.4. Since here the early stage of high tempera-
ture/low stress creep is considered, dislocations hardly cut
through the γ(cid:48) phase, which is reﬂected by the bracketed
factor in τy: inside the precipitate τy → ∞ results in zero
velocity, while outside the precipitate τy is just the com-
monly used Taylor-type yield stress, with a smooth tran-
sition in between.

In our simulation the elastic eigenstrain problem is
solved by a ﬁnite element method, the PF and CDD evo-
lution equations are solved by the ﬁnite volume method.
The quadratic simulation domain is periodic in both di-
rection and has a size of 512 × 512 nm; the mesh for
all numerical methods consists of 64 × 64 quadratic el-
ements. Since the velocity of γ(cid:48) evolution is much slower
than that of dislocation ﬂow, for each PF time step the
CDD problem is solved with a number of smaller sub-
time steps until a quasi-stationary dislocation conﬁgura-
tion is reached. As initial condition, dislocations of both
signs (represented by Gaussian density distributions) are
randomly distributed in the γ channels resulting in an av-
erage density of ¯ρ = 6 × 1012 m−2 for each slip sys-
tem, which is in the same order of magnitude as experi-
mentally measured data [11, 12]. The initial γ(cid:48) contour
is shown as dashed line in Fig. 1b. Material parame-
ters correspond to a temperature of 1253 . . . 1293 K with
¯mis=−0.003, C11=198 GPa, C12=138 GPa, C44=97 GPa,
cγ=0.160, b=0.25 nm, B = 10−13GPa s, cγ(cid:48) =0.229, Mc
=5×10−17 J−1mol2m−1s−1 and kc=5×10−7 Jm−1 [13, 14].

(a) Schematic of the system (not to scale); (b) initial γ/γ(cid:48)
Figure 1:
morphology (dashed line) and at t = 5.4×104 s; (c) total and (d) excess
dislocation density at t = 5.4 × 104 s.

The simulated system is subjected to an applied ten-

3

sile stress 200 MPa in the vertical direction. After a creep
time of t = 5.4 × 104 s, the γ(cid:48) precipitate is rafted in hor-
izontal direction with an aspect ratio of 1.35 (Fig. 1b).
This ‘N-type rafting’ (i.e. the rafting direction is normal
to the external loading direction), is commonly observed
in Nickel-based superalloys with negative γ/γ(cid:48) misﬁt. At
this stage the precipitate still has a roughly rectangular
shape, the strip-like morphology has not occurred yet,
in agreement with experimental observation for the early
stage of rafting at high temperature and low stress [15].
The corresponding total and excess dislocation densities
are shown in Fig. 1c,d. It can be seen that dislocations pre-
dominantly accumulate at the horizontal γ/γ(cid:48) interfaces.
The γ(cid:48) ”polarizes” the dislocation structure such that pos-
itive edge dislocations are blocked at the lower horizon-
tal interface, while negative dislocations accumulate at the
upper interface. However, in the vertical channels no such
GND accumulation occurs. Comparing total and GND
density in the vertical channels one ﬁnds that there dislo-
cations must be SSDs. For this creep regime, the interface
dislocation density typically increases from about 1×1013
m−2 up to 3 . . . 30 × 1013 m−2 [11, 12] (accurate measure-
ment of interface dislocation densities is diﬃcult and the
‘thickness’ of the interface layer is not well deﬁned). The
simulated interface density of around 5 × 1013 m−2 is in
good agreement with the experimental data.

In order to reveal the role of dislocations during raft-
ing, we do simulations with and without dislocations and
compare them at an intermediate time step, t = 2 × 104 s.
Fig.2c shows the long range stress, which in the case with-
out CDD, consists of contributions from applied stress and
the misﬁt. There, shear stresses in the horizontal channels
are signiﬁcantly higher than those in the vertical channels.
Thus, dislocation activity (if present) would be suppressed
in the latter. Fig.2a shows the evolved system with dislo-
cations: in comparison to the system without CDD it can
be seen that the maximum long range shear stress is re-
duced. The reason are dislocation pileups which develop
as follows: τl is positive in the horizontal channels and
negative in the vertical channels. According to (3) and
(4), positive stress drives positive dislocations into pos-
itive direction (accumulating at the lower horizontal in-
terface), while negative dislocations move into negative
direction (accumulating at the upper horizontal interface).
This interface dislocation structure alters the stress ﬁeld
due to a combination of backstress (from pile-ups) and
the mean ﬁeld stress (from heterogeneous plastic strains).
Ultimately, dislocation activity then also changes the elas-
tic energy potential, which determines the evolution of the
γ/γ(cid:48) composition ﬁeld in (2). In Fig.2b one can see posi-

tive values for ˙c at the vertical interfaces and negative val-
ues at the horizontal interfaces, resulting in N-type raft-
ing. Without dislocations (Fig.2d), the shape of ˙c always
stays approximately quadratic, and the values are nearly
zero and do not show a sign change. Fig.3 compares the

Figure 2: Simulation results at t = 2 × 104 s: long range shear stress
with CDD (a) and without CDD (c); evolution ˙c of γ/γ(cid:48) composition
ﬁeld with CDD (b) and without CDD (d).

plastic strain and the plastic strain rate with experimen-
tal data at 1253 K and 200 MPa [16]. The plastic strain
increases fast in the beginning, which is due to fast mo-
tion of dislocations until an increasing number is slowed
down within the γ/γ(cid:48) interface.
’Interface dislocations’
only move slowly as the phase boundary evolves. This
causes the plastic strain to slowly saturate, as opposed to
the experiment where it increases linearly due to threading
dislocations. This discrepancy is due to the fact that dislo-
cation line length increase is not contained in our idealized
model. The strain rate constantly decreases with time,
i.e. strain hardening dominates the early stage of rafting.
Thermally activated eﬀects (e.g. dislocation climb) are
not considered in the present work. Therefore, after 104
s the simulated strain rate is lower than the experimental
data.

Figure 3: Comparison of simulation and experiment results: (a) plastic
strain versus time; (b) strain rate versus time.

4

We presented a minimal model of dislocation-assisted
rafting, which can already explain how dislocation and
phase microstructure interact during rafting and how this
determines the macroscopic creep properties. The ability
to represent ﬂuxes of dislocations was identiﬁed as one of
the most key aspects of a suitable plasticity model. In or-
der to have a more accurate prediction of microstructure
and creep properties, future work will consider a more so-
phisticated PF model which is able to represent multiple
γ(cid:48) variants. For a more realistic dislocation model, it will
be necessary to include in particular climb processes and
switch to a more advanced CDD model (as e.g. the one
used in [17]) which is able to represent curved disloca-
tions.

Acknowledgment

Financial support from the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft
through Research Unit FOR1650
’Dislocation-based Plasticity’ (DFG grants SA2292/1-2
and ZA171/7-1 ) is gratefully acknowledged.

(DFG)

References

References

[1] T. Pollock, A. Argon, Acta. Metall. et. Mater. 40 (1992) 1–30.
[2] H. Mughrabi, U. Tetzlaﬀ, Adv. Eng. Mater. 2 (2000) 319–326.
[3] R. Reed, T. Tao, N. Warnken, Acta. Mater. 57 (2009) 5898–5913.
[4] I. Steinbach, Model. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 17 (2009) 073001.
[5] H. Emmerich, Adv. Phys. 57 (2008) 1–87.
[6] M. Cottura, Y. Le Bouar, A. Finel, B. Appolaire, K. Ammar,

S. Forest, J. Mech. Phys. Solids. 60 (2012) 1243–1256.

[7] A. Gaubert, Y. Le Bouar, A. Finel, Philos. Mag. 90 (2010) 375–

404.

[8] N. Zhou, C. Shen, M. Mills, Y. Wang, Philos. Mag. 90 (2010)

405–436.

[9] I. Groma, F. F. Csikor, M. Zaiser, Acta. Mater. 51 (2003) 1271–

1281.

[10] S. Sandfeld, M. Monavari, M. Zaiser, Model. Simul. Mater. Sci.

Eng. 21 (2013) 1–22.

[11] Y. Kondo, Y. Kubo, N. Miura, Y. Murata, A. Yoshinari, in:

MATEC Web of Conferences, volume 14, p. 20003.

[12] L. A. J´acome, P. N¨ortersh¨auser, J.-K. Heyer, A. Lahni, J. Frenzel,
A. Dlouhy, C. Somsen, G. Eggeler, Acta. Mater. 61 (2013) 2926–
2943.

[13] N. Zhou, C. Shen, M. Mills, Y. Wang, Acta. Mater. 56 (2008)

6156–6173.

[14] N. Zhou, C. Shen, M. Mills, Y. Wang, Acta. Mater. 55 (2007)

5369–5381.

[15] N. Miura, K. Kurita, Y. Hayashi, Y. Kondo, ISIJ International 51

(2011) 663–668.

[16] T. Link, A. Epishin, U. Br¨uckner, P. Portella, Acta. Mater. 48

(2000) 1981–1994.

[17] S. Sandfeld, G. Po, Modelling and Simulation in Materials Sci-

ence and Engineering 23 (2015) 085003.

