6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
S
D
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
4
5
7
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

MATRIX CHARACTERIZATION OF MULTI-DIMENSIONAL

SUBSHIFTS OF FINITE TYPE

PUNEET SHARMA AND DILEEP KUMAR

Abstract. Let X ⊂ AZd
be a 2-dimensional subshift of ﬁnite type.
We prove that any 2-dimensional multidimensional subshift of
ﬁnite type can be characterized by a square matrix of inﬁnite di-
mension. We extend our result to a general d-dimensional case. We
prove that the multidimensional shift space is non-empty if and
only if the matrix obtained is of positive dimension. In the process,
we give an alternative view of the necessary and suﬃcient con-
ditions obtained for the non-emptiness of the multidimensional
shift space. We also give suﬃcient conditions for the shift space X
to exhibit periodic points.

1. INTRODUCTION

The study of dynamical systems originated to facilitate the study
of natural processes and phenomenon. Many natural phenomenon
can be modeled as discrete dynamical systems and their long term
behavior can be approximated using the modeled system. How-
ever, investigating a general discrete dynamical system is complex
in nature and the long term behavior of the system cannot always be
determined accurately. The uncertainty in predicting long term be-
havior introduces dynamical complexity in the system which in turn
results in erroneous behavior of the modeled system. Thus, there is
a need to develop tools to facilitate the study of a general dynamical
system which are not erroneous and can model the physical system
with the suﬃcient accuracy. Symbolic dynamics is one of such tools
which are structurally simpler and can be used to model the physical
system with desired accuracy. In one of the early studies, Jacques
Hadamard used symbolic dynamics to study the geodesic ﬂows on
surfaces of negative curvature[4]. Claude Shennon applied symbolic
dynamics to the ﬁeld of communication to develop the mathemat-
ical theory of communication systems[6]. Since then the topic has

1991 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. 37B10, 37B20, 37B50.
Key words and phrases. multidimensional shift spaces, shifts of ﬁnite type, peri-

odicity in multidimensional shifts of ﬁnite type.

1

2

PUNEET SHARMA AND DILEEP KUMAR

found applications in areas like data storage, data transmission and
planetary motion to name a few. The area has also found signiﬁcant
applications in various branches of science and engineering[2, 3]. Its
simpler structure and easy computability can be used to investigate
any general dynamical system. Infact, it is known that every discrete
dynamical system can be embedded in a symbolic dynamical sys-
tem with appropriate number of symbols [13]. Thus, to investigate
a general discrete dynamical system, it is suﬃcient to study the shift
spaces and its subsystems.

Multidimensional shift spaces has been a topic of interest to many
researchers. In one of the early works, Schmidt investigated multidi-
mensional subshifts of ﬁnite type over ﬁnite number of symbols. He
proved that for a multidimensional subshift, it is algorithmically un-
decidable whether an allowed partial conﬁguration can be extended
to a point in the multidimensional shift space. He also observed
that it is algorithmically undecidable to verify the non-emptiness of
a multidimensional shift deﬁned by a set of ﬁnite forbidden pat-
terns. He also gave an example to show that a multidimensional
shift space may not contain any periodic points[7]. These results
unraveled the uncertainty associated with a multidimensional shift
space and attracted attention of several researchers around the globe.
As a result, several researchers have explored the ﬁeld and a lot of
work has been done[1, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In [1], authors proved
that multidimensional shifts of ﬁnite type with positive topological
entropy cannot be minimal. Infact, if X is subshift of ﬁnite type with
positive topological entropy, then X contains a subshift which is not
of ﬁnite type, and hence contains inﬁnitely many subshifts of ﬁnite
type. Quas and Trow in the same paper proved that every shift space
X contains an entropy minimal subshift Y, i.e., a subshift Y of X such
that h(Y) = h(X) [1]. While [5] investigated mixing properties of mul-
tidimensional shift of ﬁnite type, [8] investigated minimal forbidden
patterns for multidimensional shift spaces.
In [9], authors exhibit
mixing Zd shifts of ﬁnite type and soﬁc shifts with large entropy.
However, they establish that such systems exhibit poorly separated
subsystems. They give examples to show that while there exists Zd
mixing systems such that no non-trivial full shift is a factor for such
systems, they provide examples of soﬁc systems where the only min-
imal subsystem is a single point. In [10], for multidimensional shifts
with d ≥ 2, authors proved that a real number h ≥ 0 is the entropy of
a Zd shift of ﬁnite type if and only if it is the inﬁmum of a recursive

MATRIX CHARACTERIZATION OF MULTI-DIMENSIONAL SUBSHIFTS OF FINITE TYPE3

sequence of rational numbers. In [11], Hochman improved the result
and showed that h ≥ 0 is the entropy of a Zd eﬀective dynamical sys-
tem if and only if it is the lim inf of a recursive sequence of rational
numbers. The problem of determining which class of shifts have a
dense set of periodic points is still open. For two-dimensional shifts,
Lightwood proved that strongly irreducible shifts of ﬁnite type have
dense set of periodic points [12]. However, the problem is still open
for shifts of dimension greater than two.

Let A = {ai : i ∈ I} be the a ﬁnite set and let d be a positive in-
teger. Let the set A be equipped with the discrete metric and let
AZd, the collection of all functions c : Zd → A be equipped with the
product topology. The function D : AZd × AZd → R+ be deﬁned as
D(x, y) = 1
n+1, where n is the least natural number such that x , y in
Rn = [−n, n]d, is a metric on AZd and generates the product topology.
For any a ∈ Zd, the map σa : AZd → AZd deﬁned as (σa(x))k = xk+a is
a d-dimensional shift and is a homeomorphism. For any a, b ∈ Zd,
σa ◦ σb = σb ◦ σa and hence Zd acts on AZd through commuting home-
omorphisms. A set X ⊆ AZd is σa-invariant if σa(X) ⊆ X. Any set
X ⊆ AZd is shift-invariant if it is invariant under σa for all a ∈ Zd. A
non-empty, closed shift invariant subset of AZd is called a shift space.
If Y ⊆ X is a closed, nonempty shift invariant subset of X, then Y
is called a subshift of X. For any nonempty S ⊂ Zd, the projection
map πS : AZd → AS deﬁned as πS = AZd|S projects the elements of
AZd to S. Any element in AS is called a pattern over S. A pattern is
said to be ﬁnite if it is deﬁned over a ﬁnite subset of Zd. A pattern
q over S is said to be extension of the pattern p over T if T ⊂ S and
q|T = p. The extension q is said to be proper extension if S∩Bd(T) = φ,
where Bd(T) denotes the boundary of T. For a shift space X and any
set S ⊂ Zd, the set AS = {x ∈ AS : x = πS(y), for some y ∈ X} is
AS is

called the set of allowed patterns(in X) over S. The set A = SS⊂Zd

called the set of allowed patterns or language for the shift space
X. Given a set S ⊂ Zd and a set of patterns P in AS, the set
X = X(S, P) = {x ∈ AZd
: πS ◦ σn(x) ∈ P for every n ∈ Zd} is a
subshift generated by the patterns P. If the set S is ﬁnite, the subshift
generated is a subshift of ﬁnite type. Refer [1, 7, 8] for details.

Although the deﬁnition of a multidimensional shift is given in
terms of the allowed patterns, an equivalent deﬁnition can be given

4

PUNEET SHARMA AND DILEEP KUMAR

in terms of forbidden patterns. Such a deﬁnition provides an alter-
nate view of the subshifts of ﬁnite type and in some cases can be more
beneﬁcial for further investigations. For the sake of completion, we
provide the equivalent deﬁnition below.

For a shift space X and any set S ⊂ Zd, the set FS = {x ∈ AS : x ,
πS(y) for any y ∈ X} is called the set of forbidden patterns(in X) over
FS is called the set of forbidden patterns for the

S. The set F = SS⊂Zd

shift space X. For a given set of patterns F (possibly over diﬀerent
subsets of Zd), deﬁne,

X = {x ∈ AZd : any pattern in F does not appear in x}

It can be seen that the set deﬁned above is a shift space. If F con-
tains ﬁnitely many patterns deﬁned over ﬁnite subsets of Zd, then
the shift generated is a shift of ﬁnite type. We denote the shift space
generated by the set of forbidden patterns F by XF . Two forbidden
sets F1 and F2 are said to be equivalent if they generate the same shift
space, i.e. XF1 = XF2. A forbidden set F of patterns is called minimal
for the shift space X if F is the set with least cardinality such that
X = XF . It is worth mentioning that a shift space X is of ﬁnite type if
its minimal forbidden set is a ﬁnite set of ﬁnite patterns.

Let M be a square matrix (possibly inﬁnite) with indices {i : i ∈ I}.
We say that the index i is u-related to j if Mji = 1. Let the collection
of indices u-related to j be denoted by Ru
j . We say that the indices j is
d-related to i if Mji = 1. Let the collection of indices d-related to i be
denoted by Rd
i . It may be noted that i is u-related to j if and only if j is
d-related to i. The set I is said to be complementary if for each i ∈ I,
there exists j, k ∈ I such that j is u-related to i and k is d-related to i.

In this paper we investigate some of the questions raised in [7]. In
the process we address the problem of non-emptiness and existence
of periodic points for a multidimensional shift of ﬁnite type. We
prove that the any 2-dimensional shift of ﬁnite type can be charac-
terized by an inﬁnite square matrix of uncountable dimension. We
extend our results to a general d-dimensional case. We provide nec-
essary and suﬃcient conditions for a multidimensional subshift of
ﬁnite type to be non-empty. In the end, we also give suﬃcient con-
dition for the subshift to contain periodic points.

MATRIX CHARACTERIZATION OF MULTI-DIMENSIONAL SUBSHIFTS OF FINITE TYPE5

2. Main Results

Proposition 1. X is a d-dimensional shift of ﬁnite type =⇒ there exists a
set C of d-dimensional cubes such that X = XC.

Proof. Let X be a shift of ﬁnite type and let F be the minimal forbidden
set of patterns for the shift space X. It may be noted that F contains
ﬁnitely many patterns deﬁned over ﬁnite subsets of Zd. For any
pattern p in F , let li
p be the length of the pattern p in the i-th direction.
Let lp = max{li
P : i = 1, 2, . . . , d} denote the width of the pattern p and
let l = max{lp : p ∈ F }. Let Cl be the collection of d-dimensional cubes
of length l and let EF denote the set of extensions of patterns in F .
Let C = Cl ∩ EF . It may be observed that if p is a pattern with width l,
forbidding a pattern p for X is equivalent to forbidding all extensions
q of p in Cl. Thus, each pattern in the forbidden set of width l can
be replaced by an equivalent forbidden set of cubes of length l and
C is an equivalent forbidden set for the shift space X. Consequently,
X = XC and the proof is complete.
(cid:3)

Remark 1. The above result proves that every d-dimensional shift of
ﬁnite type is generated by a set of cubes of ﬁxed ﬁnite length. Such a
consideration leads to an equivalent forbidden set which in general
is not minimal. The above result constructs an equivalent forbidden
set by considering all the cubes which are extension of the set of pat-
terns in F . However, the cardinality of the new set can be reduced
by considering only those cubes which are not proper extensions of
patterns in F (but are of same size l). Such a construction reduces the
cardinality of the forbidden set considerably and hence reduces the
complexity of the system. It may be noted that the forbidden set ob-
tained on reduction is still not minimal. However, the d-dimensional
cubes generating the elements of X are of same size and can be used
advantageously for constructing elements of X. We say that a shift
of ﬁnite type X is generated by cubes of length l if there exists a set
of cubes C of length l such that X = XC.

Proposition 2. Every 2-dimensional shift of ﬁnite type X can be charac-
terized by an inﬁnite square matrix.

Proof. Let X be a 2-dimensional shift of ﬁnite type and let F be the
equivalent set of forbidden cubes (of ﬁxed length, say l) for the space
X. Let A be the generating set of cubes (of length l) for the space X.
It may be noted that as cubes of length l form a generating set for
the shift space X, to verify whether any x ∈ AZd belongs to X, it is

6

PUNEET SHARMA AND DILEEP KUMAR

suﬃcient to examine strips of height l in x.

Let A2 = {  A

B ! : A, B ∈ A,  A

B ! is allowed in X}.

By construction, A2 is a ﬁnite set of 2n × n allowed rectangles, say

{a1, a2, . . . , ak}, generating the shift space X.

Deﬁne a k × k matrix M as

Mij = ( 0,

1

(aia j) is forbidden in X;
(aia j) is allowed in X;

Then, the sequence space corresponding to the matrix M, ΣM =
{(xn) : Mxixi+1 = 1, ∀i} generates all allowed inﬁnite strips(of height 2l)
in X. It may be noted that any element in ΣM is element of the form

  A
B !, where A and B are allowed inﬁnite strips of height l.

Generate an inﬁnite matrix M, indexed by allowed inﬁnite strips

of height l, using the following algorithm:

(1) Pick any  A
(2) For each  A

B ! ∈ ΣM and index ﬁrst two rows and columns of
B ! ∈ ΣM, if the rows and columns indexed A and

the matrix by A and B. Set mBA = 1.

B exist, set mBA = 1. Else, label next row and/or column as A
and/or B (whichever required) and set mBA = 1.

(3) In the inﬁnite matrix generated in step 2, set mBA = 0, if mBA

has so far not been assigned a value.

(4) In the inﬁnite matrix obtained, if there exists an index A such
that the A-th row or column is zero, delete the A-th row and
column from the matrix generated.

The above algorithm generates an inﬁnite 0-1 matrix where mBA = 1

if and only if  A

B ! is allowed in X, where A and B are allowed inﬁnite

strips (of height l) in X. Let ΣM be the sequence space associated with
the matrix M. Consequently, any sequence in ΣM gives a vertical
arrangement of inﬁnite allowed strips (of height l) such that the
arrangement is allowed in X and hence generates an element in X.
Conversely, any element in X is a sequential (vertical) arrangement
of inﬁnite strips of height l and hence is generated by a sequence in
ΣM. Consequently, X = ΣM and the proof is complete.
(cid:3)

MATRIX CHARACTERIZATION OF MULTI-DIMENSIONAL SUBSHIFTS OF FINITE TYPE7

Remark 2. The above result characterizes elements of the shift space
X by a inﬁnite square matrix M. It may be noted that if row/column
for an index A is zero, the algorithm deletes the row and column with
index A. Such a criteria reduces the size of the matrix and will result
in a matrix of dimension 0, if the shift space is empty. Further, the
characterization of the space yields a matrix of inﬁnite (uncountable)
dimension. Consequently, it is undecidable whether a shift of ﬁnite
type generated by set of cubes A is non-empty. It may be noted that
although the algorithm does not guarantee a positive dimensional
matrix, if the shift space X is non-empty the matrix generated is
deﬁnitely of positive dimension and characterizes the elements in X.
Further, as each row/column of the matrix generated has atleast one
non-zero entry, each block indexing the matrix can be extended to an
element of X. Consequently, any submatrix of the matrix M cannot
generate the shift space X. In light of the remark stated, we get the
following result.

Corollary 1. A 2-dimensional shift of ﬁnite type is non-empty if and only
if the characterizing matrix M is of positive dimension. Further, any proper
submatrix of the matrix M generates a proper subshift and hence the matrix
M is minimal.

Remark 3. Although, in general it is undecidable whether a mul-
tidimensional shift of ﬁnite type is non-empty, the non-emptiness
problem can be addressed using submatrices of the matrix M.
In
particular, if there exists a submatrix N of M (say generated after
ﬁnite/countable steps of algorithm) such that the space ΣN is non-
empty, the shift space X is non-empty. As any non-empty shift space
characterized by a ﬁnite dimensional matrix contains periodic points,
such a veriﬁcation (in ﬁnite time) cannot be conducted for a shift
space without periodic points. Further, such a veriﬁcation addresses
only the non-emptiness problem and does not characterize the ele-
ments in the shift space.

Remark 4. For a shift space X, with generating set of cubes of height
l, let L denote set of all allowed inﬁnite strips of height l. Recalling
the notions of u-related indices for a square matrix M, for any two
inﬁnite strips A, B of height l, we say that A is u-related (d-related)
to B if A and B are indices of M such that MBA = 1 (MAB = 1).
Further, generalizing the deﬁnition, a family of allowed inﬁnite strips
of height l is complementary if for each A in L there exists inﬁnite
strips B, C ∈ L such that B is u-related to A and C is d-related to A.
Thus, the algorithm generates u-related (d-related) inﬁnite strips for
the shift space X which in turn generates an arbitrary element of X.

8

PUNEET SHARMA AND DILEEP KUMAR

As any element of the shift space is a sequential arrangement of u-
related (d-related) inﬁnite strips, the characterization of the elements
of the space X by a matrix M is equivalent to ﬁnding all the u-related
(d-related) pairs of inﬁnite strips for the space X. As any inﬁnite
strip of height l (say A) can be extended to an element of X only if
there exists inﬁnite strips B, C of height l such that B is u-related to A
and C is d-related to A, only members of complementary family can
form the building blocks for an element of X. As a result, we get the
following corollary.

Corollary 2. Let X be a multidimensional shift space generated by cubes
of length l and let B be the inﬁnite strips of height l allowed in X. Then,
the shift space X is non-empty if and only if there exists non-empty set of
indices B0 ⊆ B such that B0 is complementary.

Remark 5. The above result provides an alternate view of the criteria
established for the non-emptiness of the space X. The result does
not require the matrix M for establishing the non-emptiness for the
shift space. The set of indices during construction of the matrix
may be observed at each iteration and existence of a complementary
subfamily can be used to establish the non-emptiness of the space X.
However, as the algorithm does not provide any optimal technique

for picking the block  A

B ! at each iteration, such a consideration does

not reduce the time complexity and the problem of non-emptiness is
still undecidable. However, algorithms for optimal selection of the

inﬁnite blocks  A

B ! may be proposed which in turn may reduce the

time complexity of the algorithm. As any multidimensional shift can
be realized as an extension of a 2-dimensional shift, similar results
are true for a general d-dimensional shift of ﬁnite type. For the sake
of completion, we include the proof of main result below.

Proposition 3. If X is a d-dimensional shift of ﬁnite type, then the elements
of X can be determined by an inﬁnite square matrix.

Proof. Let X be a d-dimensional shift of ﬁnite type and let F be the
equivalent set of forbidden cubes (of ﬁxed length, say l) for the space
×l for
X. Let A be the generating set of cuboids of size 2l × 2l × . . . 2l

|          {z          }

d−1times

the space X.

Deﬁne a k × k matrix M0 as

By construction, A is a ﬁnite set of allowed rectangles, say {a1, a2, . . . , ak}.

MATRIX CHARACTERIZATION OF MULTI-DIMENSIONAL SUBSHIFTS OF FINITE TYPE9

M0
ij

=( 0,

1

(aia j) is forbidden in X;
(aia j) is allowed in X;

where (aia j) denotes adjacent placement of a j with ai in the positive

d-th direction.

Then, the sequence space corresponding to the matrix M0, ΣM0 =
= 1, ∀i} generates all allowed one directional (in d-th

{(xn) : M0
direction) inﬁnite strips in X.

xixi+1

It may be noted that any element in ΣM0 is element of the form

, where A and B are allowed inﬁnite strips (in direction d) of di-

  A
B !0

mension 2l × 2l × . . . 2l

|          {z          }

d−2times

×l × ∞ and  A
B !0

denotes adjacent placement

of B with A in the negative d − 1-th direction.

Generate an inﬁnite matrix M1, indexed by allowed inﬁnite strips

of dimension 2l × 2l × . . . 2l

×l × ∞ , using the following algorithm:

|          {z          }

d−2times

(1) Pick any  A
B !0
(2) For each  A
B !0

∈ ΣM0 and index ﬁrst two rows and columns

of the matrix by A and B. Set mBA = 1.

∈ ΣM0, if the rows and columns indexed A and

B exist, set mBA = 1. Else, label next row and/or column as A
and/or B (whichever required) and set mBA = 1.

(3) In the inﬁnite matrix generated in step 2, set mBA = 0, if mBA

has so far not been assigned a value.

(4) In the inﬁnite matrix obtained, if there exists an index A such
that the A-th row or column is zero, delete the A-th row and
column from the matrix.

The above algorithm generates an inﬁnite 0-1 matrix where mBA = 1

2l × 2l × . . . 2l

is allowed in X, where A and B are of dimension

×l × ∞. Let ΣM1 denote the sequence space correspond-

if and only if  A
B !0
|          {z          }
B !1
and d − 1). Further, as any element in ΣM1 is of the form  A

ing to the matrix generated above. It can be seen that the space ΣM1
precisely is the collection of allowed bi-inﬁnite strips (in direction d

, where

d−2times

10

PUNEET SHARMA AND DILEEP KUMAR

A and B are allowed inﬁnite strips (in direction d and d − 1) of dimen-

sion 2l × 2l × . . . 2l

|          {z          }

d−3times

B !1
×l × ∞ × ∞ and  A

denotes adjacent placement

of B with A in the negative d − 2-th direction, a repeated application
of the algorithm generates a matrix M2 which extends the inﬁnite
patterns in ΣM1 along the direction d − 3 to generate the space ΣM2.
Consequently, repeated application of the above algorithm extends
the allowed patterns inﬁnitely in all the d directions (one direction at
each step) to obtain a point in X. Further, as any point in X can be
visualized as such an extension of allowed cubes in the d directions,
the matrix obtained (at the ﬁnal step) characterizes the elements of
the space X.

(cid:3)

Remark 6. The above result characterizes the multidimensional shift
space by a matrix M. The result is a repeated application of the
2-dimensional case, extending the allowed block in each of the d
directions. In the process, at each step i we obtain an inﬁnite matrix
characterizing the extension of an allowed block in the i-th direction.
Although the rows and columns of the characterizing matrix M are
indexed by inﬁnite blocks allowed in X, their existence/verﬁcation is
beyond any ambiguity as they are algorithmically generated. It may
be noted that extension in any of the directions (at step i) does not
guarantee an extension to the element of X. In particular, a block
extendable in a direction i (or in a few directions i1, i2, . . . , ir) need not
necessarily extend to an element in X. In particular if the shift space
is empty, although we may obtain matrices of positive dimension in
initial few steps, the ﬁnal matrix obtained characterizing the elements
of X is 0-dimensional. Consequently, once again, the shift space is
non-empty if and only if the matrix generated (at the ﬁnal step) is of
positive dimension. As the algorithm is an extension of the algorithm
for the 2-dimensional case, results similar to the 2-dimensional case
also hold good for any general dimension d ≥ 3. For the sake of
completion, we mention the generalizations below.

Corollary 3. A multidimensional shift of ﬁnite type is non-empty if and
only if the characterizing matrix M is of positive dimension. Further, any
proper submatrix of the matrix M generates a proper subshift and hence the
matrix M is minimal.

Corollary 4. Let X be a multidimensional shift space and let B be the
inﬁnite strips of height l allowed in X. Then, the shift space X is non-empty
if and only if there exists B0 ⊆ B such that B0 is complementary.

MATRIX CHARACTERIZATION OF MULTI-DIMENSIONAL SUBSHIFTS OF FINITE TYPE11

We now give some results relating the matrix ”M and the dynam-

ical behavior of the shift space X.

Proposition 4. Let X be a multidimensional shift space and let B be the
inﬁnite strips of height l allowed in X. If there exists a ﬁnite complementary
set B0 ⊂ B, then the set of periodic points is non-empty.

Proof. Let B be the inﬁnite strips of height l allowed in X and let
B0 ⊂ B be a ﬁnite complementary set. By deﬁnition, elements of B0
form indices (not all) for the matrix M. Let N be the submatrix of M
indexed by elements of B0. As the set B0 is complementary, the shift
generated by B0 (say ΣB0) is non-empty. Further, as shift deﬁned
by a ﬁnite dimensional matrix contains periodic points, there exists
periodic points for ΣB0 (and hence for the shift space X).
(cid:3)

3. Conclusion

In this paper, we investigate the non-emptiness problem for a mul-
tidimensional shift space of ﬁnite type. In the process, we prove that
any multidimensional shift of ﬁnite type can be characterized by an
inﬁnite square matrix of uncountable dimension. We prove that the
multidimensional shift space is non-empty if and only if the matrix
M is of positive dimension. We also prove that any submatrix of
the matrix obtained generates a proper subshift of X and hence the
matrix M minimally generates the elements of X. We further observe
that non-emptiness of such a shift may be examined using comple-
mentary set of indices. However, construction of such a family of
indices is non-trivial and may not be possible in ﬁnite time. Conse-
quently, the non-emptiness problem for such a space is undecidable.
We also provide a suﬃcient condition for a multidimensional shift of
ﬁnite type to exhibit periodic points.

References

[1] A. Quas, P. Trow, Subshifts of Multidimensional shifts of ﬁnite type, Ergodic

Theory and Dynamical Systems, 20 (03), 2000, 859 - 874.

[2] Bruce P.Kitchens, Symbolic Dynamics: One-Sided, Two-Sided and Countable

State Markov Shifts, Universitext. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1998.

[3] D. Lind, B. Marcus An introduction to symbolic dynamics and coding, Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995.

[4] J. Hadamard, Les surfaces a coubures opposes et leurs lignes godesiques, J.

Math. Pures Appi., 5) IV(1898), 27-74.

[5] J.C.Ban, W.G.Hu, S.S.Lin and Y.H.Lin Veriﬁcation of mixing properties in

two-dimensional shifts of ﬁnite type, preprint arXiv:1112.2471.

12

PUNEET SHARMA AND DILEEP KUMAR

[6] C.E. Shannon A mathematical theory of communication, Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27

(1948), 379423, 623656.

[7] K. Schmidt, Multi-dimensional symbolic dynamical systems, Codes, Systems
and graphical models, (Minneapolis, MN, 1999), Springer, New York, 2001, pp.
67-82.

[8] Marie-Pierre Beal, Francesca Fiorenzi, Filippo Mignosi, Minimal Forbidden
Patterns of Multi-dimensional Shifts, Int. J. Algebra Comput., 15, 73 (2005), DOI:
10.1142/S0218196705002165.

[9] Mike Boyle, Ronnie Pavlov, and Michael Cchraudner, Multidimensional
Soﬁc Shifts without Separation and their Factors, Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, Volume 362, Number 9, September 2010, Pages 46174653.
[10] Michael Hochman, Tom Meyerovitch, A Characterization of the Entropies of
Multidimensional Shifts of Fnite type, Annals of Mathematics, Vol. 171 (2010),
No. 3, 2011-2038.

[11] Michael Hochman, On Dynamics and Recursive Properties of Multidimen-
sional Symbolic Dynamics, Inventiones Mathematica, Volume 176, Number 1,
April, 2009.

[12] S.Lightwood, Morphisms from non-periodic Z2-subshifts I: Constructing em-
beddings from homomorphisms, Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems, 23 (2003), no.
2, 587-609.

[13] Xin-Chu Fu, WeiPing Lu, Peter Ashwin, Jinqiao Duan, Symbolic Represen-
tations of Iterated Maps, Topological Methods in Nonlinear Analysis, Journal of
the Juliusz Schauder Center Volume 18, 2001, 119-147.

Department of Mathematics, I.I.T. Jodhpur, Old Residency Road, Ratanada,

Jodhpur-342011, INDIA

E-mail address: puneet.iitd@yahoo.com

