impact on the structural and mechanical properties of agar gels

Overcooked agar solutions:

Bosi Mao,1 Ahmed Bentaleb,1 Fr´ed´eric Louerat,1 Thibaut Divoux,1, ∗ and Patrick Snabre1, †

1Universit´e Bordeaux, Centre de Recherche Paul Pascal,

UPR 8641, 115 av. Dr. Schweitzer, 33600 Pessac, France

(Dated: March 3, 2016)

Thermoreversible hydrogels are commonly prepared by cooling down to ambient temperature,
aqueous polymer solutions ﬁrst brought to a boil. The incubation time of the polymer solution
at such a high temperature is traditionally kept to a minimum to minimize its impact on the
subsequent gelation. Here we study the eﬀect of a prolonged heating of a 1.5% w/w agar solution at
T = 80◦C, well above the gelling temperature. The incubation time T of the polysaccharide solution
is varied from a few hours up to ﬁve days. We show that the agar solution ages as the result of
both the hydrolysis and the intramolecular oxidation of the polysaccharides. As a consequence,
both the viscosity and the pH of the solution decrease continuously during the incubation period.
Furthermore, samples withdrew at diﬀerent incubation times are cooled down to form gels which
structure and mechanical properties are systematically determined. Cryoelectron microscopy and X-
ray diﬀraction experiments reveal that agar gels formed from solutions of increasing incubation times,
display a coarser microstructure composed of micron-sized foils which result from the condensation
of the polysaccharides and contrast with the ﬁbrous-like microstructure of gels prepared from a fresh
agar solution. Along with structural changes, a prolonged incubation time of the polymer solution at
T = 80◦C leads to weaker agar gels of signiﬁcantly lower shear elastic modulus. Moreover, extensive
macro-indentation experiments coupled to direct visualization show that increasing the incubation
time of the agar solution up to a few days decreases the yield strain of the gel by a factor of three,
while the rupture scenario turns continuously from brittle to ductile-like. Our study suggests that
the incubation time of agar solutions at high temperature could be used as an external control
parameter to ﬁnely tune the mechanical properties of agar-based gels.

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

Biopolymer gels encompass a wide array of soft mate-
rials currently used in countless application ﬁelds ranging
from biomedical domains, e.g. cell encapsulation [1], tis-
sue engineering [2, 3], etc. to food science [4] and molec-
ular gastronomy [5]. Such gels are made of proteins such
as casein, albumine, β-lactoglobilin, etc. and/or polysac-
charides such as alginate, carrageenan and agarose, etc.
The gelation scenario of these materials is induced by
the addition of co-solutes such as salts, by changes in pH
or ionic strength, or by physical or thermal means lead-
ing to a conformational change of the polymer chains
during their self-assembly [6]. By tuning the gel compo-
nents and/or the gelation path, one can build soft solids
with a wide array of mechanical properties in view of
speciﬁc applications [7, 8]. The search for improving
hydrogels mechanical strength, and develop tough and
highly stretchable materials has produced a wealth of
crosslinking methods mainly based on the use of a dou-
ble networks, or fancy crosslinkers [9–13]. However, such
methods may not always be adapted for biomedical ap-
plications for which the use of natural polymers alone
in water is often preferred to modify the gel properties.

∗divoux@crpp-bordeaux.cnrs.fr
†snabre@crpp-bordeaux.cnrs.fr

Here we discuss an alternate route for engineering specif-
ically the mechanical properties of polysaccharide-based
hydrogels without external crosslinkers. The method is
based on the intermolecular condensation of the polysac-
charide chains, which can be controlled by the incubation
time of the polymer solution above the gelation temper-
ature. Intermolecular condensation makes it possible to
coarsen the hydrogel microstructure and soften the me-
chanical properties as extensively illustrated on agar gels
in the present article.

Agar is a mixture of marine algal polysaccharides
among which the gelling component agarose is used as
a thickener in food products, and once gelled, plays a
key role in numerous biotechnological applications rang-
ing from growth medium for microorganisms to substi-
tute for biological tissues [7, 14, 15]. Agarose is only
soluble in boiling water and the gelation occurs via hy-
drogen bonds [16, 17] upon cooling the sol below about
40◦C, leading to a thermoreversible gel which, in turn,
only melts above 80◦C [18]. If agar gels have attracted a
lot of attention over the passed 30 years, especially the
sol-gel transition scenario which involves a subtle inter-
play between spinodal demixing and direct gelation [19–
22], paradoxically enough, the role of the incubation time
of the agar sol at high temperature prior to the gel for-
mation has been poorly investigated. Furthermore, the
quantitative inﬂuence of an extended heating of the agar
sol on the mechanical properties of the subsequent gel
remains unknown. Although increasing the incubation

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
7
7
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

FIG. 1: (Left) Illustration of the disaccharide unit (AB)n composing the agarose molecule. (Right) Product of the hydrolysis
and oxidation of the agarose molecule as discussed in section III.

time of the agar sol up to a few hours has shown no im-
pact on the gel mechanical properties [23], agar sols are
maintained at large temperatures for hours if not days in
numerous industrial applications which motivates a thor-
ough study of the impact of the incubation time on agar
gels over long durations.

The goal of the present manuscript is twofold. First we
report the evolution of the properties of an agar sol that
is maintained at T = 80◦C from a few hours up to 5 days.
The decrease of both the pH and the sol intrinsic viscos-
ity leads us to conclude to the hydrolysis and the oxida-
tion of the polysaccharides in solution. Second, samples
drawn at regular time intervals are used to prepare gels
which structure and mechanical properties are systemati-
cally investigated. Cryo-SEM and X-ray diﬀraction spec-
troscopy reveal that gels formed after prolonged incuba-
tion time of the agar sol display a coarser microstructure
composed of micron-sized foils. Small amplitude oscil-
latory shear experiments and time resolved monitoring
of crack growth during macro-indentation tests further
show that the latter gels display weaker elastic prop-
erties, a smaller yield strain and a more ductile failure
scenario than gels formed from a fresh agar sol. The
present work oﬀers an extensive description of the evolu-
tion of the gel mechanical properties associated with the
prolonged heating of agar sol and shows that incubation
of agar sol at large temperature could be used to tune
the mechanical properties of agar gels in a reproducible
fashion.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

A. Preparation of agar solutions

Samples of 200 mL are prepared by mixing 1.5%
w/w of agar powder for molecular biology composed at
70% of agarose and 30% of agaropectin (CAS 9002-18-0,
ref. A5306 Sigma-Aldrich) with milli-Q water (17 MΩ.cm
at 25◦C) brought to a boil. The temperature is kept at
100◦C for 10 min before being decreased to 80◦C. The
agar sol is then introduced in a programmable testing
chamber (Binder MK53) and maintained a constant tem-
perature of (80 ± 1)◦C. That moment sets the origin of
time T = 0 and all the experiments performed later on

with the solution are timestamped with respect to that
date. Samples are extracted every day up to T = 5 days
to monitor the evolution of the sol properties, which are
summarized in section III. Moreover, gels are prepared
from the agar sol at regular time intervals following dif-
ferent protocols detailed in the remainder of section II.
Gels mechanical properties are determined as a function
of the incubation time T , as detailed below in section IV.
We shall emphasize that the experiments reported in the
manuscript have been repeated at least three times and
tested on other brands of agar than Sigma-Aldrich, as
discussed in the appendix.

Let us recall here that agarose is a polymer composed
of alternating disaccharide units (AB)n, where A and
B respectively denotes β-1,3 linked D-galactose and α-
1,4 linked 3,6-anhydro-L-galactose residues [6, 24, 25]
[Fig. 1 (Left)]. Gels made of agar exhibit a porous mi-
crostruture ﬁlled with water and composed of bundles of
about 0.1 nm diameter [26] consisting of non-covalently
crosslinked polysaccharides. The pores show a broad size
distribution, up to a few hundred nanometers [27–31]. As
a consequence, agar gels behave as viscoelastic soft solids
which mechanical properties are mainly governed by the
amount of agarose introduced: both the shear and com-
pression elastic modulus G(cid:48) of agar gels scale as power
laws of the agarose concentration [32, 33]. The thermal
history upon cooling only impacts the mechanical proper-
ties of the gel for agarose concentrations larger than 2%
w/w [34, 35], while the detailed nature of the polymer
backbone, and especially the ester sulphate content, af-
fects the water holding capacity of the gel [25]. Moreover,
being mainly composed of water, agar gels are sensitive
to water evaporation which leads, over long duration, to
the gel shrinkage and results in a delayed detachment
dynamics when the gel is casted in a Petri dish [36]. Fi-
nally, agar gels display a brittle-like failure scenario [37]
that can be delayed when explored under external stress
[38, 39]: fractures grow perpendicularly to shear beyond a
critical yield strain which value is governed by the molec-
ular weight of the polymer [33].

HydrolysisOxidationOOHOOHOOOHOHOOHOOHOOOOHOHOOHHnOOHOOHOOOHOHOOOHOOOOHOHOHOHCO2HnOOHOHOHOOOHOHOHOHOHOOHOOHOOOHOHOOHHn3

FIG. 2: (a)-(d) Pictures of the agar sol after diﬀerent incubation times T , respectively from left to right: T = a few hours, 3
days, 6 days and 12 days. The scale is ﬁxed by the 4.5 cm diameter of the glass bottle. (e) Evolution of the pH measured at
T = 80◦C vs. the incubation time T of the agar sol when the latter is either in contact with ambient air ((cid:4)) or in contact with
a nitrogen atmosphere ((cid:52)). The black lines correspond in both cases to the best linear ﬁt of the data: pH = 6.5 − 0.15T and
pH = 6.4 − 0.37T .

B. Experimental techniques

1. Rheology and macro-indentation

The viscosity η of the agar sol is measured at regular
time intervals T in a cone-and-plate geometry driven by
a stress-controlled rheometer (DHR-2, TA instruments).
The cone (diameter 60 mm, angle 2◦) is made of stainless
steel and the bottom plate consists in a Teﬂon coated
Peltier unit which allows us to control the temperature
of the sample. Viscosity measurements are performed at
T = 50◦C and the geometry is pre-heated before being
ﬁlled by the agar liquid solution.

Gelation experiments are also performed at regular
time intervals T in a parallel-plate geometry driven by
a stress controlled rheometer (DHR-2, TA instruments).
The upper plate (diameter 2r = 40 mm) is made of pas-
sivated duralumin and displays a surface roughness of
(4 ± 2) µm as determined by Atomic Force Microscopy.
The bottom plate consists in a smooth Teﬂon coated
Peltier unit which allows us to impose a decreasing
ramp of temperature from T = 70◦C down to 20◦C, at
˙T = 1◦C/min, leading to the gelation of the agar solution
below about 36◦C. Evaporation is minimized by using a
solvent trap ﬁlled with deionized water. Gelation experi-
ments are performed under controlled normal force equals
to zero (and not at constant gap width) to prevent any
strain hardening of the gel, as explained in detail in the
following reference [35]. The decrease of the gap width
compensates for the small and yet non-negligible contrac-
tion of the sample during the gelation. The elastic and
viscous moduli G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48), are measured through small
amplitude oscillations with a frequency f = 1 Hz. To op-
timize the linear measurements, the strain amplitude γ
is adapted to the physical state of the sample: we apply
γ = 1 % for G(cid:48) < 1 Pa, γ = 0.1% for 1 < G(cid:48) ≤ 10 Pa and

γ = 0.01% for G(cid:48) > 10 Pa. Imposing a large strain am-
plitude while the sample is still liquid provides a better
resolution to determine the viscoelastic moduli [40], and
decreasing the strain amplitude as the sample becomes
a gel allows us to remain within the linear regime and
further prevents any debonding between the gel and the
plates [35].

Finally, macro-indentation experiments are conducted
on agar gels prepared after diﬀerent incubation times T
of the agar sol. Agar gels shaped as ﬂat cylinders of
(3.9± 0.2) mm thick are prepared in glass Petri dishes of
50 mm diameter and left to gelify at room temperature,
i.e. T = (22 ± 2)◦C. The latter temperature does not
play a key role since the cooling rate has no inﬂuence
upon neither the structure nor on the elastic properties
of a 1.5% agar gel [35]. Once the gel is formed, a disk
of 2R = 34 mm diameter is prepared by stamping the
center of the dish with a circular punch tool, and remov-
ing the gel surrounding the disk. The untouched disk
together with the original glass plate are placed on a
transparent base in PMMA for the observation of the gel
disk from below, during the subsequent indentation. The
latter test is performed by means of a duralumin cylin-
der connected at one end to a stress-controlled rheometer
(DHR-2, TA instruments) and ending with a circular ﬂat
surface on the other side (diameter 10 mm). The normal
force sensor of the rheometer is used as a force gauge
to determine the stress-strain σN () relation during the
sample indentation. In practice, the indenter is lowered
towards the center of the gel disk at a continuous ve-
locity v=100 µm/s, down to a position corresponding to
a strain  = 50%. A camera (Logitech HD C920) and
a ﬂat mirror placed at an angle of 45◦ with respect to
the transparent PMMA plate are used to monitor the gel
from below, which allows us to record the formation and
the propagation of cracks that may occur at large enough
strains as detailed in section V B.

01234564567(e)(d)(c)(b)(a)  pH T  (day)2. Cryo scanning electron microscopy

A. Color change and polysaccharides oxidation

4

The microstructure of agar gels prepared from sam-
ples extracted of the same solution after diﬀerent incu-
bation times T at 80◦C is investigated by cryo-Scanning
Electron Microscopy (cryo-SEM). Agar gels are prepared
in Petri dishes left to cool at room temperature,
i.e.
T = (22±2)◦C. A sample is taken with a scalpel and ﬁxed
to a metallic pin stub. Both are immersed in a liquid ni-
trogen bath for about 5 min. The sample is then placed
in the preparation chamber of a SEM microscope (JEOL
6700F) which is cooled down to T = −90◦C. The sample
is beheaded in situ and the temperature is increased at
about 5◦C/min up to T = −50◦C to allow the sublima-
tion of the water enclosed inside the sample. After 5 min,
the temperature is decreased back to T = −85◦C and the
sample is coated with a nanolayer of gold-palladium. Fi-
nally, the sample is cooled down to T = −160◦C and
introduced inside the observation chamber of the micro-
scope. Images are taken in SEI mode at 5 kV.

3. X-ray experiments

X-ray diﬀraction spectra are obtained from dried gels
prepared as follows: agar gels are casted in Crystal
Polystyrene Petri dishes (diameter 55 mm), using sam-
ples extracted at diﬀerent ages T from the solution main-
tained at 80◦C. Gels are then left to dry for 3 days
i.e. T = (22 ± 2)◦C.
at ambient room temperature,
A beam of wavelength λ = 1.5418˚A and energy 8 keV
is produced by a microsource generator (Rigaku Micro-
Max 007HF) with a 1200 W rotating anode coupled to a
confocal Max-Flux Osmic mirror (Applied Rigaku Tech-
nologies, Austin, USA). The dried gel is left for 1 hour
in the beam path and diﬀraction patterns are recorded
through a MAR345 image plate detector (MARResearch,
Norderstedt, Germany) placed at 152 mm from the sam-
ple. The numerical aperture of the detector allows us
to probe wavenumbers q from 0.7 nm−1 up to 30 nm−1.
Raw data are processed with the software c(cid:13)Fit2D: the
background intensity diﬀracted by the surrounding air
is ﬁrst substracted to the raw intensity, which is then
normalized by the exposure time and the X-ray beam
intensity.

III. HEAT-INDUCED AGEING OF THE AGAR

SOL

The present section is devoted to the agar solution,
maintained for 5 days at T = 80◦C in a testing chamber.
The aging of the agar sol is characterized by a series of
observations regarding the chemical aging of the polysac-
charides.

A fresh solution is prepared in an Erlenmeyer ﬂask
as described in section II A, then sealed and stored in a
thermal chamber maintained at 80◦C. The color of the
solution turns from transparent color to yellow in a few
days, and the color change goes on at least over 12 days
[Fig. 2(a)-(d)]. Samples are withdrawn every day dur-
ing the ﬁrst 5 days to monitor the evolution of the sol
pH, which is measured at 80◦C with a silver electrode
(N6000 BNC, Schoot instruments) connected to a con-
troller (C333, Consort). The pH decreases for increas-
ing sample age T [Fig. 2(e)] which gives evidence of a
chemical evolution of the polysaccharide molecules that
we attribute to the oxidation of the hydroxyl functional

FIG. 3: (a) Shear viscosity η of a 1.5% w/w agar solution
vs. applied shear rate ˙γ. Colors from black to yellow cor-
respond to diﬀerent incubation time of the solution at 80◦C:
T =1 hour, 1 day, 2, 3, 4 and 5 days. Measurements are
performed in a cone and plate geometry at T = 50◦C. The
shear rate is decreased by step and maintained at each value
for 20s. (b) Left: intrinsic viscosity [η] ((cid:4)) as determined by
extrapolating viscosity measurements of agar solutions of dif-
ferent concentrations (see text) vs. the incubation time T of
the solution. Error bars result from the average of η over the
range [1;100]s−1 and from the data extrapolation in the limit
of vanishing concentrations (see text and Fig. 12 in the ap-
pendix). Right: average molecular weight M w ((cid:13)) computed
from the Mark-Houwink formula vs. the incubation time T .
The typical error bar is indicated only on the ﬁrst point for
both [η] and M w.

1101003690123450100200300       050100150(b)(a) (Mw) (kDa)T  (day)[h] (ml/g)h (mPa.s) (s-1 )5

FIG. 4: (a) Evolution of the elastic (G(cid:48), (cid:4)) and viscous (G(cid:48)(cid:48), (cid:52)) moduli vs. time t during the cooling of a fresh agar sol (T (cid:39)
1 hour) from T = 70◦C down to 20◦C, conducted at ˙T = 1◦C/min. The crossing of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) deﬁnes a gelation temperature
Tg = 35.5◦C, and for t ≥ 1.75 h the viscoelastic moduli reach steady state values which are respectively G(cid:48)
0 = 19.2 kPa and
0 = 310 Pa. (b) Imposed normal force FN = (0.0 ± 0.1) N and gap width e vs. time. The gap width, which initial value is
G(cid:48)(cid:48)
e0 = 500 µm, decreases by 1% due to the sample contraction during the gelation. (c) and (d): same as in (a) and (b) for a gel
prepared from an agar sol which has been incubated T = 5 days at 80◦C. (e)–(h) Evolution of the visco-elastic moduli G(cid:48)
0 (e)
0 (f), the gelation temperature Tg (g) and the relative gap decrease ∆e/e (h) vs. the incubation times T of the agar sol
and G(cid:48)(cid:48)
prior to the preparation of gels.

group of the polymers. Indeed, when repeating the ex-
periment on a fresh solution that is stored in contact
with an atmosphere continuously enriched in neutral ni-
trogen instead of ambient air, we observe that the color
change and the pH decrease are both strongly reduced
[Fig. 2(d)]. The latter experiment proves the key role
of oxygen in the ageing process and strongly suggests
that the pH decrease can be attributed to the slow ox-
idation into carboxyl functions of the hydroxyl groups
connected to primary carbon atoms in the agar chain
[Fig. 1(Right)].

timate the intrinsic viscosity of the solution deﬁned as
[η] = limc→0 (η − ηs)/ηsc, where ηs denotes the viscos-
ity of the solvent, here water at T = 50◦C [see Fig. 12
in the appendix]. The intrinsic viscosity decreases lin-
early with T [Fig. 3(b)]. Moreover, the average molecu-
lar weight M w of the polymer chains, which can be es-
timated from [η] using the Mark-Houwink formula [41],
goes from 120 kDa for a fresh solution down to 8 kDa
after 5 days of incubation at 80◦C which proves the pro-
gressive hydrolysis of the polysaccharides.

B. Viscosity change and chain hydrolysis

Concomitantly with the pH measurements, the vis-
cosity of the solution is determined every day through
rheological experiments performed in a cone and plate
geometry at T =50◦C (see section II B 1 for technical
details). The polysaccharide solution shows an almost
Newtonian behavior between 1 and 100 s−1 from an hour
after being prepared up to T =5 days of incubation at
80◦C [Fig. 3(a)]. The viscosity of the 1.5% w/w agar
solution decreases for increasing incubation times, which
strongly suggests that the polymer chains are becoming
shorter due to hydrolysis. To determine the evolution
of the molecular weight of the polysaccharides, the same
incubation experiment is repeated on agar solutions of
diﬀerent concentrations: c = 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2% w/w.
The viscosity of each of the three solutions kept all to-
gether in the same thermal chamber at T = 80◦C is mea-
sured every day. A linear extrapolation of the viscosity
in the limit of vanishing concentrations allows us to es-

In conclusion, the color change of the agar sol that
goes with an extended heating is due to the oxidation of
the primary alcohol functions and the hydrolysis of the
polymer chains. The rest of the manuscript is focused
on the impact of the sol ageing on the subsequent gels
prepared after diﬀerent incubation times of the agar so-
lution. We will ﬁrst discuss the evolution of the gelation
dynamics and the structural properties of the gel with
the incubation time T of the agar sol, in respectively
subsection IV A and IV B. Furthermore, the impact of an
extended incubation time of the agar sol on both the gel
adhesion properties to the metallic plates and the rup-
ture scenario of the gel during macro-indentation tests
will be the topic of section V.

10-11011031050510152032333435360.00.51.01.5-2-101210-11011031050.00.51.01.5-2-101201234560.00.51.01.501234560.00.10.20.3De/e (%)FN (N)t (h)T  (day)(f)(b)(h)   G', G'' (Pa)(a)Tg (°C)10305070494496498500t (h)T  (day)(g)(e)10305070e (µm)T (°C)FN (N)G', G'' (Pa)e (µm)T (°C)(c)494496498500(d)G'0 (kPa)  G''0 (kPa)  6

FIG. 5: (a)–(c) Cryo-SEM images of gels prepared with samples drawn after diﬀerent incubation times T = 1 hour, 3 days
and 5 days from a mother solution maintained at T = 80◦C. (d) X-ray diﬀraction spectra I(q), where q stands for the wave
number. Colors from black to yellow correspond to gels prepared after diﬀerent incubation times T at T = 80◦C of the same
agar solution: T = 1 hour, 1 day, 2, 4 and 5 days.

IV. GELATION DYNAMICS AND GELS

MICROSTRUCTURE

A. Evolution of the gelation dynamics with T

Every day, a sample withdrawn from the agar solution
maintained at T = 80◦C is poured into the pre-heated
gap of a parallel-plate geometry (see section II B 1 for
technical details). The sample is submitted to a decreas-
ing ramp of temperature at a constant rate ˙T = 1◦C/min
down to 20◦C to induce gelation, while the elastic and
viscous moduli are measured through small amplitude os-
cillations. Results obtained with a fresh solution (T = 0)
after only a few hours of incubation of the agar solution
at 80◦C are pictured in Fig. 4(a)–(b). During the ﬁrst
half hour of cooling, G(cid:48) remains negligible while G(cid:48)(cid:48) in-
creases continuously. The crossing of G(cid:48) and G(cid:48)(cid:48) provides
an estimate of the gelation temperature, here refered to
as Tg. Since the gelation experiment is performed under
controlled normal force (FN = 0.0 ± 0.1 N) instead of
constant gap width, the decrease of the gap width (of
about 1%) compensates for the sample contraction asso-
ciated with the sol/gel transition [35]. Finally, the elastic
and viscous moduli both reach a steady state value after
t = 1.5 h, which are respectively labeled G(cid:48)

0 and G(cid:48)(cid:48)
0 .

The same experiment is repeated every day and the
gelation of the agar sol after T = 5 days of incubation
is reported in Fig. 4(c)–(d). The gelation occurs later,
at a lower temperature (Tg =32.5◦C) compared with the
case of a fresh agar sol (Tg =35.5◦C for T (cid:39) 1 hour).
Moreover, the terminal values of the elastic and viscous
modulus of the gel are signiﬁcantly smaller and the sam-
ple is observed to contract only by ∆e/e = 0.6% during
the gel formation, compared to the 1% contraction of
the sample prepared from a fresh solution. To go one
step further, the systematic evolution of G(cid:48)
0 , Tg and
∆e/e with the incubation time T are reported in ﬁg-
ures 4(e)–(h). Gels prepared from a solution younger

0, G(cid:48)(cid:48)

than 3 days show the same gelation temperature and
the same steady-state elastic constants within error bars.
However, for T ≥ 3 days, the gelation occurs later, i.e. at
a lower gelation temperature, and the gel becomes weaker
as T increases: after 5 days of incubation at 80◦C, the
agar sol leads to a gel that is 75% weaker than a gel
prepared from a fresh solution, which is remarkable. We
shall emphasize that, although the sol ageing starts from
the very moment the sol is stored at 80◦C in the ther-
mal chamber as observed after one day of incubation in
Fig. 3(b), the gelation dynamics and the gel mechanical
properties undergo no detectable change before the third
day of incubation.

B. Evolution of the gel microstructure with T

To provide supplemental structural information in ad-
dition to the evolution of the bulk mechanical properties,
we have performed systematic cryo-SEM observations of
gels prepared from samples extracted after diﬀerent incu-
bation time T of the solution (see section II B 2 for tech-
nical details). The results are pictured in ﬁgure 5(a)–(c).
First, gels formed from a freshly prepared solution show
a ﬁbrous-like microstructure composed of interconnected
strands delimiting pores with a broad size distribution
up to a few micrometers, in agreement with cryo-SEM
data reported in the literature [31, 42]. Second, gels pre-
pared after intermediate incubation times of the solution
show a coarser microstructure: for T = 3 days, gels dis-
play a network that is structurally similar to that of a gel
prepared from a fresh solution, except for thicker ﬁbers
and the formation of some foils [Fig. 5(b)]. Last, gels
made after an incubation time T = 5 days of the solu-
tion only show a few ﬁbers of comparable size to those
of the gel prepared from a fresh solution. Most of the
gel structure now consists in foils larger than a few mi-
crons [Fig. 5(c)]. We attribute such evolution of the gel
structure for increasing incubation times of the solution,

10152002468Intensity(c)(b)(a)(d)q (nm-1)7

FIG. 6: Illustration of the intermolecular condensation of the
polysaccharides taking place for intermediate and large incu-
bation times of the agar solution at 80◦C. The latter conden-
sation leads to the formation of a foil-like microstructure in
gels pictured in Fig. 5(b) and (c).

to the condensation of the polysaccharides in solution as
the heated solution slightly scatters the incident light af-
ter 5 days incubation [Fig. 6]. Indeed, the intermolecular
condensation between polysaccharides is favored by the
acidiﬁcation of the solution that goes with increasing in-
cubation times [Fig. 2(e)] and accounts for the growth of
a large scale microstructure.

To probe smaller scales, and determine whether or
not the ﬁbrous and foil-like microstructures are made
from the same elementary components, we perform X-
ray diﬀraction experiments on gels prepared after dif-
ferent incubation times T of the agar sol. Experiments
are performed on dried samples to avoid the diﬀraction
spectra associated with water (see section II B 3 for tech-
nical details and Fig. 13 in the appendix). Results are
reported in Fig. 5(d). The spectra associated with a gel
obtained from a fresh solution (T of a few hours) shows 3
maxima at the following wavenumbers: q1 = 9.45 nm−1,
q2 = 13.86 nm−1 and q3 = 19.3 nm−1 which correspond
respectively to: d1 ≡ 2π/q1 = 0.66 nm, d2 = 0.45 nm and
d3 = 0.32 nm, in quantitative agreement with the seminal
work of Foord and Atkins [43]. The agarose chains are
associated into 3-fold double helices, and q1 and q3 corre-
spond respectively to the distance between two diﬀerent
and two identical saccharides, while q2 stands for the
helix diameter. For increasing incubation times T , the
shape of the diﬀraction spectra and the positions of the
maxima remain identical, which proves that the building
blocs of the gel remain the same despite the slow heat-
induced ageing of the agar sol. The decay of the maxima
amplitude for increasing incubation times T further indi-
cates that an increasing fraction of polymer chains is not
involved in double helix formation during the gelation
process, which is compatible with an increasing amount
of intermolecular condensation.

FIG. 7: (a) Elastic modulus G(cid:48) vs. strain γ monitored dur-
ing a strain sweep experiment performed at f = 1 Hz. The
strain increases logarithmically from γ = 0.01% to 100% over
a duration of 2160s (9s/point). Colors from black to yellow
correspond to gels obtained after diﬀerent incubation times of
the same agar solution at 80◦C: T =1 hour, 1 day, 2, 3, 4 and
5 days. (b) Normalized elastic modulus (G(cid:48) − G(cid:48)
m − G(cid:48)
0)
where G(cid:48)
0 = G(cid:48)(γ = 0.1%) vs. normalized strain γ/γc, where
γc denotes the critical strain at which G(cid:48) is maximum. Inset:
Evolution of γc ((cid:4)) and σc = σ(γc) ((cid:4)) vs. the incubation
time T of the agar sol. The black line corresponds to the
best linear ﬁt of the data: γc = 7.8 + 1.7T . Error bars were
determined by repeating the experiments on three diﬀerent
samples.

0)/(G(cid:48)

V. GEL DEBONDING AND FAILURE

DYNAMICS

This last section is dedicated to the impact of the incu-
bation time T of the agar sol on the non-linear rheologi-
cal properties and the yielding scenario of the agar gels.
First, we quantify the evolution of the gel adhesion prop-
erties to the metallic plates by performing strain sweep
experiments. Second, we report the spatially resolved
scenario of the gel failure through benchmark macro-
indentation experiments, and we discuss the evolution
of the latter scenario with T .

OOHOOHOOOHOHOOHOOHOOOOHOHOOHHnOOHOOHOOOHOHOOHOOHOOOOHOHOOHHmCondensationnOOHOOHOOOHOHOOOOHOOOOHOHOOHOOHOOHOOOHOHOOOHOOOOHOHOHm10-310-210-11000.00.30.60.91.201234571013160.010.111005101520sc (kPa)g c (%)T  (day) (b)(a)(G'-G'0) / (G'm-G'0)g / gc G' (kPa)g (%)    1.01.52.02.58

FIG. 8: (a) Normal stress σN vs. strain  during the indentation experiment with a ﬂat-ended cylinder, of a gel disk prepared
from a fresh solution (T of a few hours). (b)–(g) Images taken during the indentation of the disk at  = 0%, 32.7% (stress
maximum), 34.2% (nucleation of the ﬁrst macroscopic crack), 39.1%, 41.9% (the ﬁrst crack reaches the outer edge of the agar
disk) and 48%. These deformations are emphasized by open squares in (a). The spatial scale is set by the disk diameter of
34 mm. (h)–(j) Spatio-temporal diagrams obtained from the orthoradial projection of the grey levels within the three radial
sections that encompass the fractures [yellow rectangles in (b)]. For all the diagrams, the ﬁrst image is substracted from the
stack of images to improve the contrast and better visualize the crack propagation. The upper and lower limits of each diagram
correspond respectively to the center and the peripheral region of the gel disk, so that the height of each diagram represents
the gel disk radius of 17 mm. The horizontal red line refers to the outer region of the indenter. The white vertical dashed
line marks the time for which the stress reaches the maximum value observed on the mechanical response reported in (a). The
slope of the yellow arrows in (h)–(j) gives an estimate of the crack front velocity.

A. Gel debonding from the plates

The gelation experiments which are reported in Fig. 4
and conducted in a parallel-plate geometry under con-
trolled zero normal force, end after two hours when both
the gel elastic modulus G(cid:48) and the gel thickness e reach
steady state values. The rheometer is then switched from
controlled normal force to constant gap width, maintain-
ing the latest value of e, after which a strain sweep ex-
periment is performed to quantify the gel adhesion to
the metallic geometry. Strain controlled oscillations of
frequency 1 Hz and increasing amplitude from γ =0.01%
up to 100% are imposed to the gel over a total dura-
tion of 2160 s. Gels prepared after diﬀerent incubation
times display a similar response pictured in Fig. 7(a):
the elastic modulus remains constant at low strain val-
ues, whereas it increases at larger strain amplitudes to
reach a maximum value G(cid:48)
m at γ = γc which depends
on the incubation time. Finally, G(cid:48) decreases sharply
above γc. The increase of G(cid:48) under external stress corre-
sponds to the strain hardening of the agar gel, classically
observed for biopolymer gels [44–49] including agar(ose)
gels [50]. The subsequent and abrupt decay of G(cid:48) for
strains larger than γc can be interpreted as the sudden
debonding of the gel from the upper plate. The latter
conclusion is supported by the fact that the gel remains
intact and shows no macroscopic crack when raising the
upper plate after the strain sweep test. Therefore γc pro-
vides an estimate of the critical deformation above which

0)/(G(cid:48)

the gel detaches from the metallic walls of the shear cell
as a result of interfacial debonding and water release, al-
though we cannot rule out the presence of microscopic
failure inside the gel. Furthermore, the strain responses
G(cid:48)(γ) of gels prepared for increasing incubation times
m − G(cid:48)
can be superimposed by plotting (G(cid:48) − G(cid:48)
0)
vs. γ/γc, where G(cid:48)
0 denotes the steady-state elastic mod-
ulus determined in the linear regime [Fig. 7(b)]. Such
a rescaling suggests that the same debonding scenario is
at stake for all the strain sweep experiments, and since
the critical strain γc increases linearly with the incuba-
tion time T [inset in Fig. 7(b)], one can conclude that
gels prepared from sol heated over longer durations stick
better to the plates and release water less easily under
shear. The ability of weaker gels to dissipate energy and
undergo plastic deformations leads for increasing T to
larger deformations before debonding.
In other words,
the transition from elastic friction to hydrodynamic lu-
brication under shear occurs at a larger critical strain
for gels prepared after prolonged incubation of the agar
solution. Nonetheless, we shall emphasize that γc is char-
acteristic of the boundary conditions, and that the use
of other materials for the upper and lower plates would
lead to diﬀerent values and/or dependence of γc with T ,
which extensive study is out of scope of the present work.
Finally, we note that contrary to the critical strain γc, the
critical stress deﬁned as σc = σ(γc) bears the signature
of the aging of the agar sol, as do the gel elastic moduli
[Fig. 4(e)-(f)]. Indeed, for incubation time shorter than

01020304050015304560(i)(j)(h)(g)(f)(e)(d)(c)t (s)0      5      10      15      20(a)e (%)sN (kPa)  (b)3 days, the stress at debonding σc is constant indepen-
dent of T , whereas it decreases for gels prepared from a
solution incubated for more than 3 days [inset Fig. 7(b)].

B. Macro-indentation experiments

To characterize the bulk mechanical properties of the
gel in the non-linear regime, macro-indentation tests are
performed with a ﬂat-ended cylinder on agar gels disks
that are prepared after diﬀerent incubation times T of
the same solution. The deformation and the rupture of
the gel are monitored from below through a transpar-
ent bottom plate by means of a high resolution webcam,
while the normal force sensor of the rheometer is used to
record the stress-strain curve σ() (see section II B 1 for
technical details).
Results for a gel prepared from a fresh solution (T (cid:39)
1 h) are reported in Fig. 8 and in the supplemental
movie 1 in the appendix. The stress increases linearly
with the strain up to a few percents, followed by a faster
than linear increase associated with the strain hardening
of the gel, up to a maximum value σ(m)
N at  = (m).
Meanwhile, the gel does not show any damage visible by
the naked eye neither in the linear regime, nor in the
strain hardening regime [Fig. 8(b)] and remains intact
up to the stress maximum [Fig. 8(c)]. The ﬁrst fracture
becomes visible right after the stress maximum, and nu-
cleates at a ﬁnite distance from the indenter [Fig. 8(d)].
As the strain increases beyond (m), the stress rapidly
decays towards a low plateau value, while two other frac-
tures nucleate at an angle of about 120◦ of the ﬁrst frac-
ture [Fig. 8(e) and (f)]. The three fractures grow along
the disk radius and propagate towards the edge of the
gel [Fig. 8(g)]. A spatio-temporal plot consisting in an
orthoradial projection of the grey levels within a thin ra-
dial section of the gel disk pictured in yellow in Fig. 8(b),
conﬁrms that the ﬁrst fracture indeed nucleates at a ﬁnite
distance from the indenter [Fig. 8(h)]. Furthermore, the
former representation shows that the tip of the ﬁrst frac-
ture grows at a constant speed u1 = (4.7± 0.4) mm/s up
to about 3 mm from the edge of the disk, where the frac-
ture opening suddenly accelerates. The second and third
fractures grow at lower velocities than u1, which both
decrease as the fractures propagate towards the edge of
the disk [Fig. 8(i) and (j)].
The linear low-strain regime allows us to deﬁne an ap-
parent compression modulus E∗ = ∂σ/∂ as the initial
slope of the stress-strain curve. Taking into account the
cylindrical shape of the indenter, the ﬁnite thickness H
of the gel disk and the stress singularity at the sharp
edge of the indenter, the true compression modulus E
of the material obeys the following relation derived from
previous analysis [51, 52]:

E = (1 − ν2)

r
H

π
2κ

E∗

(1)

where ν denotes the Poisson coeﬃcient of the gel, r =

9

FIG. 9: (a) Normal stress σN vs. strain  monitored during
macro-indentation experiments. Colors from black to yellow
stand for gels prepared from the same solution which is left
at T = 80◦C for diﬀerent incubation times: T = 1 hour, 1
day, 2, 3, 4 and 5 days. (b) Compression modulus E of the
gel vs. the incubation time T of the agar sol when consid-
ering a Poisson coeﬃcient of ν = 0.3. (c) Stress maximum
N reached during the indentation vs. T . (d) Strain (m)
σ(m)
associated with the stress maximum vs. T . Error bars were
determined by repeating the experiments on three diﬀerent
samples.

5 mm is the radius of the indenter, H = 3.9 mm stands
for the thickness of the gel disk and κ is a numerical
correction related to the ﬁnite size of the system which
depends on r, H and ν. The only unknown is the Pois-
son coeﬃcient ν that is otherwise carefully determined
through indentation experiments performed on gel disks
of diﬀerent thicknesses [see Fig. 14 and the correspond-
ing discussion in the appendix]. We ﬁnd 0.1 ≤ ν ≤ 0.3
which leads to a coeﬃcient κ such as 2.6 ≤ κ ≤ 3 us-
[52] and therefore
ing the expression provided in ref.
to E = (60 ± 10) kPa for a gel prepared from a fresh
agar sol. Note that the latter value is in quantitative
agreement with the shear modulus G(cid:48) = (20 ± 2) kPa
measured through small amplitude oscillations [Fig. 4]
since 2G(cid:48)(1 + ν) = (48 ± 10) kPa is compatible with E
within error bars, showing that the agar disk behaves as
an isotropic material [53].

Building upon this ﬁrst test, the exact same indenta-
tion experiment is repeated on agar gels prepared after
diﬀerent incubation times T of the agar solution. Data
are reported in Fig. 9(a). All the gels display a stress
response of similar shape to the one discussed above for
T = 0: the stress ﬁrst increases linearly for small strain
values ( ≤ 5%), then the sample shows some strain hard-
ening before reaching a rupture point which coordinates
((m), σ(m)
N ) strongly depends on the incubation time.
Beyond the stress maximum, a ﬁrst fracture nucleates in

010203040500102030405060(c)(d)(a)  (b)0204060 E (kPa)0123455152535 e (%)e(m) (%) T  (day)0204060sN (kPa) sN(m) (kPa)10

FIG. 10:
(Color online) Normal stress σN vs. strain  during a macro-indentation experiment of a gel disk made from a
solution incubated during T = 5 days. (b)–(g) Images taken during the indentation of the disk at respectively  = 0,  =9.8%
(stress maximum),  = 15.1%, 26.2%, 39.1% and 48.6%. These deformations are emphasized by open squares in (a). The
spatial scale is set by the disk diameter of 34 mm. (h)–(j) Spatio-temporal diagrams obtained from the orthoradial projection
of the grey levels within the three radial sections that encompass the ﬁrst three fractures that grow during the test [yellow
rectangles in (b)]. For all the diagrams, the ﬁrst image is subtracted from the stack of images to improve the contrast and
better visualize the crack propagation. The upper and lower limits of each diagram correspond respectively to the center and
the peripheral region of the gel disk, so that the height of each diagram represents the gel disk radius of 17 mm. The horizontal
red line refers to the outer edge of the indenter. The white vertical dashed line marks the time at which the stress reaches the
maximum value observed on the mechanical response reported in (a). The slope of the yellow arrows in (h)-(j) gives estimate
of the crack front velocity.

the vicinity of the indenter, and the stress shows a rapid
decay towards a plateau value concomitantly to the nu-
cleation and growth from the intender of two or three
supplemental radial fractures. Systematic evolution of E
N and (m) with the incubation time T of the
as well as σ(m)
agar sol are reported in Fig. 9(b)–(d). For T ≤ 2 days,
the three parameters show consistent values within error
bars, illustrating that the compression modulus and the
rupture point remain the same despite some chemical
degradation of the polysaccharides has already started
(Fig. 3). For T ≥ 3 days, the compression modulus de-
creases linearly to reach one tenth of its initial value for
a gel prepared from a sol incubated for T = 5 days. Fur-
thermore, gels fail at smaller strain values for increasing
incubation times T : from (m) (cid:39)30% for a gel prepared
after T = 1 day of incubation of the agar sol, down to
(m) (cid:39)10% for T = 5 days [Fig. 10(a)]. The failure sce-
nario of the latter gel shows quantitative diﬀerences with
that reported for a fresh gel in Fig. 8. Indeed, for a gel
prepared after T = 5 days of incubation of the agar sol,
the stress maximum is associated with the formation of
a plastic region in the vicinity of the indenter [see the
left side of the indenter in Fig. 10(d)], and fractures only
grow at strain values much larger (m) [Fig. 10(e)-(g) and
see also movie 2 in the appendix].

As a characteristic observable of the diﬀerence in the
rupture process of gels prepared after diﬀerent incuba-
tion times T , we consider the nucleation time τ of the
ﬁrst fracture, as visible by eye. The ﬁrst fracture ap-

pears sooner for increasing values of the incubation time,
as clearly observed in the spatio-temporal diagrams of
the gel radial section which encompass the ﬁrst fracture
for gels prepared after T =1, 3 and 5 days [Fig. 11(a)–
(c)]. More quantitatively, the nucleation time of the ﬁrst
fracture starts decreasing for T ≥ 2 days [Fig. 11(d)], in
a similar fashion to the behavior of the strain (m) associ-
ated with the stress maximum, which also decreases after
two days of incubation, as discussed above [Fig. 9(d)].
Furthermore, although the ﬁrst fracture appears sooner
for increasing incubation times, fractures become less vis-
ible and propagate more slowly as illustrated by the slope
of the yellow arrows in Fig. 11(a)-(c). Finally, the crack
propagation becomes much more localized in the radial
direction, for gels prepared from a solution incubated for
more than two days [Fig. 10(b)-(g) and see also movie 2
in the appendix]. Indeed, for increasing incubation times
T , agar gels exhibit a more ductile behavior compared
to the brittle-like rupture scenario reported in Figure 8
for gels prepared from a fresh agar sol. Such a brittle
to ductile transition is clearly visible in the post-mortem
images of the gel disks [compare Fig. 8(g) to Fig. 10(g)].
In brief, a prolonged incubation of the agar solution pro-
duces weaker gel through which fractures propagate more
slowly because of the gel ductile behavior. The latter be-
havior is also responsible for the increase of the critical
strain γc above which the gel detaches from the plates
under shear, as reported above in Fig. 7(b).

010203040500123450      5      10      15      20(i)(j)(h)(g)(f)(e)(d)(c)t (s)(a)e (%)sN (kPa)  (b)11

coarser as the result of intermolecular condensation of
the agarose molecules. The growth of micron-sized foils
during the gelation, give rise to larger pores in the mi-
crostructure of the gels leading to both weaker shear and
compression modulus. A few days of incubation of the
agar sol allow us to lower the elastic properties by 80%
which illustrates how the incubation could be used to
modify the gel mechanical properties. Concomitantly to
the decrease of the elastic properties, gels made from
overcooked agar sol exhibit smaller yield strains in com-
pression and a more ductile behavior as fractures created
by macro-indentation remain localized close from the in-
denter. This ductile behavior also results in an increase
of the critical strain above which the gel debonds from
the plate-plate geometry during oscillatory shear exper-
iments of increasing strain amplitude. Such a change
of both the structure and the mechanical properties is
strongly reminiscent of that observed in gels prepared
from a fresh solution and loaded with sucrose [54]. In-
deed the sucrose is easily oxidized at high temperature,
quickly leading to a pH decrease which in turn favors
the intermolecular condensation responsible for the for-
mation of micron-sized foils.

Finally, aside of macro-indentation experiments and
oscillatory shear tests, we have shown that a 1.5% w/w
agar gel prepared from a fresh agar solution exhibits a
Poisson coeﬃcient such as 0.1 ≤ ν ≤ 0.3. That value
is quantitatively smaller than the value of 0.5 commonly
admitted in the literature [55–57] and shows that 1.5%
w/w agar gels are somewhat compressible. Experimen-
tally, the main uncertainty on ν comes from the determi-
nation of G(cid:48) which is extremely delicate. Only the zero
normal force protocol that we use here allows to com-
pensate for the gel contraction that otherwise strongly
aﬀects the values G(cid:48) determined with a constant gap ge-
ometry [35]. Indeed, the shear elastic modulus reported
in ref.
[57] and measured at constant gap, shows either
a drift at long times associated with strain hardening or
abrupt drops during the gelation that both result from
the contraction of the sample [35], and may lead to a sys-
tematic error on G(cid:48). Systematic measurements of Poisson
coeﬃcients for agar gels of various shapes and polymer
contents are out of the scope of the present publication
and will be reported in detail elsewhere.

VII. CONCLUSION

We have shown that the structural and mechanical
properties of agar gels can be tuned via the incubation
time of the agar solution at high temperature. Modiﬁca-
tions of the gel properties result from the intramolecular
oxidation and the hydrolysis of the polysaccharides in so-
lution that lead to a pH decrease, which in turn favors
the intermolecular condensation of the polysaccharides
during the gelation. Gels prepared from overcooked so-
lutions show an increasingly coarser microstructure as-
sociated with softer elastic properties, and a ductile-like

FIG. 11: (a)-(c) Spatio-temporal diagrams of the radial sec-
tion of the gel disk that encompass the ﬁrst fracture, for gels
prepared at diﬀerent incubation times. From top to bottom:
T = 1, 3 and 5 days. For each diagram, the ﬁrst image is
substracted from the stack of images for a better contrast.
The horizontal red line refers to the outer edge of the inden-
ter while the height of each diagram represents the gel disk
radius of 17mm. The white vertical dashed lines mark the
time at which the stress reaches the maximum observed in
Fig. 9(a). The slope of the yellow arrows in (a)-(c) illustrate
the velocity of the crack front. (d) Nucleation time τ of the
ﬁrst fracture observed during macro-indentation experiments
of gels obtained after diﬀerent incubation time T of the same
agar solution at T = 80◦C.

VI. DISCUSSION

We can conclude from section III that the agarose
molecules of an agar solution stored at T = 80◦C expe-
rience hydrolysis and intramolecular oxidation less than
a day after starting the incubation. Yet, the impact on
the gelation of the solution ageing is only visible after
three days of incubation, at pH(cid:39) 5. Indeed, the inter-
molecular oxidation of the agarose molecules, which is
responsible for the change in structural and mechanical
properties of the agar gels only occurs above three days
of incubation. We shall emphasize that the exact value
of three days depends on the temperature at which the
agar solution is stored, and also on the quality of the
agar that is used which will aﬀect the evolution of the
pH. Indeed, we have repeated the same test as the one
reported in Fig. 4 on a diﬀerent agar brand (BioM´erieux
instead of Sigma-Aldrich). In the latter case, the elas-
tic shear modulus starts decreasing for incubation times
longer than ﬁve days [See Fig. 15 in the appendix] instead
of three [Fig. 4]. Therefore, any estimate of the critical
duration Tc below which the incubation period of an agar
sol has no eﬀect on the corresponding agar gels should be
determined anew for every agar-based sample of interest,
especially if that sample contains additional components
which may impact the pH and thus the oxidation and the
hydrolysis of the agarose.
For T > Tc, the agar gel microstructure becomes

0123454681012 (d) (c) (b)t (s)t (s)T  (day)   0          6          12          18 (a)12

(Color online) Reduced viscosity (η − ηs)/ηsc vs.
FIG. 12:
the polymer concentration c, where ηs denotes the viscosity of
the solvent (water at T = 50◦C). Colors from black to yellow
correspond to diﬀerent incubation times of the solutions at
T = 80◦C: T =1 hour, 1 day, 2 days, 3 days, 4 days and
5 days. Measurements are performed in a cone and plate
geometry at T = 50◦C. Each point corresponds to an average
over the following range of shear rate: 1 ≤ ˙γ ≤ 100 s−1. Lines
denote the best linear ﬁt of the data and the intercept provides
an estimate of the intrinsic viscosity [η] of the solution as a
function of the incubation time T .

behavior that makes the gel less resistant in compression
and delays the gel debonding from the plates when un-
dergoing a shear deformation. The present study ratio-
nalizes pioneering observations [23] and provides a quan-
titative estimate for the critical duration below which an
agar solution can be stored at high temperature without
aﬀecting the properties of the subsequent gels. As such,
our result should serve in the future as a guideline for the
design of eﬃcient manufacturing processes of agar-based
materials.

Acknowledgments

This work received funding from BioM´erieux and
the ANRT under the CIFRE program, Grant Agree-
ment No. 112972. The authors gratefully acknowledge
H. Saadaoui for AFM measurements of the plates sur-
face roughness, P. Legros for his help with the cryo-SEM
experiments, as well as T. Gibaud and F. Villeval for
stimulating discussions.

Appendix A: Supplemental movies

Supplemental movie 1 shows the failure of an agar
gel prepared from a fresh agar sol (T (cid:39) 1 hour) together
with the simultaneous evolution of the normal stress dur-
ing a macro-indentation experiment. The corresponding
data are pictured in Fig. 8 in the main text. Supple-

FIG. 13:
(Color online) X-ray diﬀraction spectra I(q), where
q stands for the wavenumber. Colors from black to yellow
correspond to gels prepared after diﬀerent incubation times
at T = 80◦C of the same agar solution: T = 1 hour, 1 day, 2
days, 3 days, 4 days and 5 days. Experiments are performed
on the hydrated gels.

mental movie 2 shows the result for a similar inden-
tation experiment performed on a gel prepared from the
same agar sol which has been submitted to T = 5 days
of incubation at T = 80◦C. The corresponding data are
pictured in Fig. 10 in the main text.

Appendix B: Supplemental ﬁgures

Supplemental Fig. 12 shows the viscosity of three
solutions of diﬀerent agar concentrations: c = 0.5, 1 and
2 mg/mL, determined after diﬀerent incubation times T
ranging from a few hours to 5 days (colors from black to
yellow). The three solutions are stored together in the
same thermal chamber to ensure the same thermal his-
tory. The viscosity of samples drawn at regular time in-
tervals are determined by steady shear experiments over
the following range of shear rates 1 ≤ ˙γ ≤ 100 s−1 (see
subsection 2.2.1 in the main text for technical details).

Supplemental Fig. 13 shows the diﬀraction spec-
tra of hydrated gels prepared after diﬀerent incubation
times T of the same agar solution, for T ranging from of
a few hours to 5 days. Contrarily to the data reported in
Fig. 5(d) in the main text of the manuscript which con-
cern dried gels, the present experiments were conducted
on fully hydrated gels enclosed in sealed glass capillaries.
The diﬀraction spectra show mainly a single maximum
at q3 = 19.3 nm−1 also visible on dry gels, and which am-
plitude decreases for increasing incubation times T . The
two other maxima visible on dry gels at q1 = 9.45 nm−1
and q2 = 13.86 nm−1 [see Fig. 5(d) in the main text] are
barely visible here.
Indeed water molecules in the gel,
linked to the polymer network through hydrogen bonds
are responsible for a modulation of the scattered peaks,
thus degrading the angular spectrum resolution.

 1015200102030q (nm-1)Intensity 13

FIG. 14: (a) Evolution of the apparent compression modulus E∗ = ∂σ/∂ as determined during indentation experiments vs
the gel thickness H. The two types of symbols correspond to experiments performed at diﬀerent indentation velocities: (◦)
v = 50 µm/s and (•) v = 100 µm/s. Each point corresponds to a gel prepared from a fresh agar sol, i.e.
from an agar
solution incubated at T = 80◦C for less than a day. (b)–(d) Compression modulus E derived from E∗ shown in (a) using the
expression (B1) with a Poisson coeﬃcient ν = 0.0 in (b), ν = 0.3 in (c) and ν = 0.5 in (d). The black horizontal dashed line in
(c) corresponds to the best linear ﬁt of the data, leading to E = 70 ± 7kPa

Supplemental Fig. 14(a) shows the apparent elas-
tic modulus E∗ as determined by the slope of the stress-
strain relation σ() at strains lower than a few percents
for various gel thicknesses H. The former physical quan-
tity is measured by macro-indentation experiments sim-
ilar to the one reported in Fig. 8 in the main text, and
performed at constant indentation velocity using a ﬂat-
ended cylinder (see subsection 2.2.1 in the main text for
technical details). To convert the apparent compression
modulus E∗ which increases with the gel thickness, into
a true compression modulus E, we take into account the
cylindrical shape of the indenter, the ﬁnite thickness H
of the gel disk which is of comparable size to the inden-
ter diameter 2r = 10 mm and the stress singularity at
the sharp edge of the indenter. The true compression
modulus reads as follows [51]:
E = (1 − ν2)

E∗

(B1)

r
H

π
2κ

where ν denotes the Poisson coeﬃcient of the gel, and
κ is a numerical correction related to the ﬁnite size of
the sample which depends on r, H and ν. The Pois-
son coeﬃcient ν is unknown and necessary to determine
the value of κ. We report in Fig 14(b)-(d) the compres-
sion modulus computed for three diﬀerent values of ν,
namely ν = 0.0, 0.3 and 0.5. In each case, the value of
κ is determined using the integral expression proposed
in ref.
[51] for ν > 0. Rely-
ing on the assumption that the true compression mod-
ulus E should neither depend on the gel thickness H,
nor on the indentation speed, we can rule out the value

[52] for ν = 0, and in ref.

(Color online) Gelation experiments performed on
FIG. 15:
a 1.5% wt. agar sol, which agar is provided by BioM´erieux
instead of Sigma-Aldrich. (a) Elastic modulus G(cid:48) vs time t
during the cooling from T = 70◦C down to 20◦C, at ˙T =
1◦C/min of various samples extracted from the same agar
sol after various incubation times T = 1 hour, 2 days, 4, 6
and 7 days coded in color from black to yellow. (b) Steady-
state values of the elastic (G(cid:48), (cid:3)) and viscous (G(cid:48)(cid:48), (cid:52)) moduli
reached at the end of the gelation process vs T . (c) Gelation
temperature Tg deﬁned as the crossing temperature of G(cid:48) and
G(cid:48)(cid:48), vs the incubation time T . Error bars in (b) and (c)
are only indicated on the ﬁrst point and were determined by
repeating the experiment with three diﬀerent agar solutions.

05010015002468100501001500246810(a)E* (kPa)    (b)    E (kPa)E (kPa)(c)H (mm)E (kPa)    (d)H (mm)    0.00.51.01.52.005101520250.00.21015202501234567313233343536 (c)(b)(a)Tg (°C)G'0, G''0 (kPa)G' (kPa)T  (day)t (h)ν = 0.5 [Fig. 14(d)]. Moreover the data obtained with
ν = 0.0 also exhibit a non-negligible dependence with H
[Fig. 14(b)]. Finally, the lowest dependence of E with
the gel height is obtained with the following interval ν:

14
0.1 ≤ ν ≤ 0.3, as illustrated in Fig. 14(c) for ν = 0.3.
The latter range of values is considered in the main part
of the manuscript.

[1] N. Hunt and L. Grover, Biotechnol. Lett., 2010, 32, 733–

[28] M. Chui, R. Philips and M. McCarthy, Journal of Colloid

742.

and Interface Science, 1995, 174, 336–344.

[2] K.-Y. Lee and D. Mooney, Chemical Reviews, 2001, 101,

[29] N. Pernodet, M. Maaloum and B. Tinland,

1869–1879.

[3] S. Van Vlierberghe, P. Dubruel and E. Schacht,

BioMacromolecules, 2011, 12, 1387–1408.

[4] R. Mezzenga, P. Schurtenberger, A. Burbidge and

M. Michel, Nature Materials, 2005, 4, 729–740.

[5] P. Barham, L. Skibsted, W. Bredie, M. Først, P. Møller,
J. Risbo, P. Snitkjær and M. Mortensen, Chem. Rev.,
2010, 110, 2313–2365.

Electrophoresis, 1997, 18, 55–58.

[30] J.-Y. Xiong, J. Narayanan, X.-Y. Liu, T. Chong, S. Chen
and T.-S. Chung, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5638–
5643.

[31] J. Rahbani, A. Behzad, N. Khashab and M. Al-Ghoul,

Electrophoresis, 2013, 34, 405–408.

[32] M. Ramzi, C. Rochas and J.-M. Guenet, Macromolecules,

1998, 31, 6106–6111.

[6] A. Clark and S. Ross-Murphy, Advances in Polymer

[33] V. Normand, D. Lootens, E. Amici, K. Plucknett and

Science, 1987, 83, 57–192.

[7] M. Rinaudo, Polymer International, 2008, 57, 397–430.
[8] P. Calvert, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 743–756.
[9] J. Gong and Y. Katsuyama, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1155–

1158.

[10] J.-Y. Sun, X. Zhao, W. Illeperuma, O. Chaudhuri, K. Oh,
D. Mooney, J. Vlassak and Z. Suo, Nature, 2012, 489,
133–136.

[11] X. Zhao, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 672–687.
[12] S. Lin, C. Cao, Q. Wang, M. Gonzalez, J. Dolbow and

P. Aymard, Biomacromolecules, 2000, 1, 730–738.

[34] P. Aymard, D. Martin, K. Plucknett, T. Foster, A. Clark

and I. Norton, Biopolymers, 2001, 59, 131–144.

[35] B. Mao, T. Divoux and P. Snabre, arXiv:1508.01689.
[36] T. Divoux, B. Mao and P. Snabre, Soft Matter, 2015, 11,

3677–3685.

[37] C. Oates, P. Lucas and W. Lee, Carbohydrate Polymers,

1993, 20, 189–194.

[38] D. Bonn, H. Kellay, M. Prochnow, K. Ben-Djemiaa and

J. Meunier, Science, 1998, 280, 265–267.

X. Zhao, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 7519–7527.

[39] J. Bostwick and K. Daniels, Physical Review E, 2013, 88,

[13] S. Grindy, R. Learsch, D. Mozhdehi, J. Cheng, D. Bar-
rett, Z. Guan, P. Messersmith and N. Holten-Andersen,
Nature Materials, 2015, 14, 1210–1217.

[14] M. Beruto, D. Beruto and P. Debergh, In Vitro Cellular

and Developmental Biology, 1999, 35, 86—98.

042410.

[40] R. Ewoldt, M. Johnston and L. Caretta,

in Complex
Fluids in Biological Systems, Springer New York, 2015,
ch. 6: Experimental Challenges of Shear Rheology: How
to Avoid Bad Data, pp. 207–241.

[15] M. Culjat, D. Goldenberg, P. Tewari and R. Singh,

[41] C. Rochas and M. Lahaye, Carbohydrate Polymers, 1989,

Ultrasound in Med. & Biol., 2010, 36, 861–873.

10, 289–298.

[16] M. Tako and S. Nakamura, Carbohydrate Research, 1988,

[42] R. Charlionet, L. Levasseur and J.-J. Malandrin,

180, 277–284.

[17] E. Braudo, Food Hydrocolloids, 1992, 6, 25–43.
[18] K.

networks:
viscoelastic properties and structure of gels, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1997, ch. 11, pp. 194–202.

te Nijenhuis,

in Thermoreversible

[19] G. Feke and W. Prins, Macromolecules, 1974, 7, 527–530.
[20] P. San Biagio, D. Bulone, A. Emanuele, M. Palma-
Vittorelli and M. Palma, Food Hydrocolloids, 1996, 10,
91–97.

[21] M. Manno, E. Emanuele, V. Martorana, D. Bulone,
P. San Biagio, M. Palma-Vittorelli and M. Palma, Phys.
Rev. E, 1999, 59, 2222–2230.

Electrophoresis, 1996, 17, 58–66.

[43] S. Foord and E. Atkins, Biopolymers, 1989, 28, 1345–

1365.

[44] R. Groot, A. Bot and W. Agterof, The Journal of

Chemical Physics, 1996, 104, 9202–9219.

[45] C. Storm, J. Pastore, F. MacKintosh, T. C. Lubensky

and P. Janmey, Nature, 2005, 435, 191–194.

[46] M. Pouzot, T. Nicolai, L. Benyahia and D. Durand,
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 2006, 293, 376–
383.

[47] J. Zhang, C. Daubert and E. Foegeding, Journal of Food

Engineering, 2007, 80, 157–165.

[22] M. Matsuo, T. Tanaka and L. Ma, Polymer, 2002, 43,

[48] T. Brenner, T. Nicolai and R. Johannsson, Food

5299–5309.

Research International, 2009, 42, 915–924.

[23] J. Whyte, J. Englar and S. Hosford, Botanica Marina,

[49] J.-M. Carrillo, F. MacKintosh and A. Dobrynin,

1984, 27, 63–69.

[24] C. Araki, Bulletin of the Chemical Society of Japan,

1956, 29, 543–544.

[25] T. Matsuhashi, in Food gels, ed. P. Harris, Elsevier Sci-

Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 3679–3692.

[50] M. Nakauma, S. Ishihara, T. Funami, T. Yamamoto and
M. Higashimori, Food Hydrocolloids, 2014, 36, 301–307.
[51] W. Hayes, L. Keer, G. Herrmann and L. Mockros, J.

ence Publishers LTD, 1990, ch. 1, pp. 1–51.

Biomechanics, 1972, 5, 541–551.

[26] S. Whytock and J. Finch, Biopolymers, 1991, 31, 1025–

[52] M. Haider and M. Holmes, J. Biomechanics, 1997, 7,

1028.

747–751.

[27] J. Brigham, M. G. G. Hoﬀmann and C. Smith, Food

[53] L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, Theory of Elasticity, Perga-

Hydrocolloids, 1994, 8, 331–344.

mon Press, 1970.

[54] M. Deszczynski,

S. Kasapis

and

J. Mitchell,

Carbohydrate Polymers, 2003, 53, 85–93.

Materials Research Part B: Applied Biomaterials, 2006,
78B, 347–357.

[55] Y. Chen, M.-L. Liao, D. Boger and D. Dunstan,

[57] M. Norziah, S. Foo and A. Karim, Food Hydrocolloids,

Carbohydrate Polymers, 2001, 46, 117–124.

2006, 20, 206–217.

[56] P. Scandiucci de Freitas, D. Wirtz, M. Stolz, B. G¨opfert,
N.-F. Friederich and A.-U. Daniels, Journal of Biomedical

15

