6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
9
7
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Lighting the Landscape: Molecular Events Under Dynamic Stark Shifts

Bo Y. Chang,1 Ignacio R. Sola,2 and Seokmin Shin1

1School of Chemistry (BK21), Seoul National University, Seoul 151-747, Republic of Korea

2Departamento de Qu´ımica F´ısica, Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain∗

A new perspective on how to manipulate molecules by means of very strong laser pulses is emerg-
ing with insights from the so-called light-induced potentials, which are the adiabatic potential energy
surfaces of molecules severely distorted by the eﬀect of the strong ﬁeld. Diﬀerent eﬀects appear de-
pending on how the laser frequency is tuned, to a certain electronic transition, creating light-induced
avoided crossings, or very oﬀ-resonant, generating Stark shifts. In the former case it is possible to
induce dramatic changes in the geometry and redistribution of charges in the molecule while the
lasers are acting and to fully control photodissociation reactions as well as other photochemical pro-
cesses. Several theoretical proposals taken from the work of the authors are reviewed and analyzed
showing the unique features that the strong-laser chemistry opens to control the transient properties
and the dynamics of molecules.

INTRODUCTION

In the last few years, many techniques were developed
to manipulate and control molecular processes by means
of ultrashort laser pulses[1–5]. Initially, ultrashort pulses
were used because they provided the means to act on the
time-scale of fast molecular events[6]. At a later stage,
it was the broad pulse spectrum of the pulses that by
phase modulation and learning algorithms, opened great
opportunities to control the dynamics[7]. More recently,
the non-resonant strong-ﬁeld interaction of the pulse pro-
vided a means to alter the potential energy surface of the
molecule via dynamic Stark eﬀect, ”catalyzing” many
photochemical processes[8–11]. While all the previous
roles remain useful for diﬀerent purposes, one can ar-
guably follow this sequence of events as one in which the
laser is promoted from the role of a non-speciﬁc exciter
(and probe of the chemical process), to a reactant and
then to a catalyst, using the chemical terminology.
In
this review we will outline some of our contributions in
the control of molecules in the strong-ﬁeld regime from
a theoretical perspective. For a broader perspective the
interested reader is referred to the following work and
references therein[12–14].

The application of strong pulses to atoms has a long
history[15–25]. Here we are interested in non-ionizing ef-
fects, which require the use of moderately-strong pulses,
typically within tens of TW/cm2. Thomas George and
Andre Bandrauk developed a very useful ”chemical” pic-
ture of light-induced events[26, 27]. In this picture, the
slow eﬀects of the ﬁeld on the nuclei (averaged over the
radiation cycles) are incorporated in the ”dressed” (en-
ergy shifted) molecular potentials. Then, in the adia-
batic representation, the dynamics of photodissociation
or multiphoton processes are recast in terms of predis-
sociation, avoided crossings, or other topological fea-
tures. The adiabatic potentials that incorporate these
laser-molecule coupling eﬀects are called light-induced
potentials[28] (LIPs), while the avoided crossings in the
LIPs are called light-induced avoided crossings[29, 30]

(LIACs). In polyatomic molecules, or taking into account
the vectorial nature of the coupling, the LIACs can be
seen as light-induced conical intersections[31–39] (LICIs).
Considerable theoretical eﬀort has been put recently at
characterizing the LICIs.

One of the ﬁrst and most obvious applications of strong
pulses is to enhance the yield of electronic absorption.
However, because Raman transitions can compete with
absorption and the Stark eﬀect can decouple the elec-
tronic states, strong and ultrashort transformed-limited
pulses do not lead to eﬃcient population transfer[40–43].
One needs to resort to adiabatic rapid passage (ARP)
by means of chirped pulses, or to schemes that use more
than one pulse[44–48]. Simple theoretical models, such
as the Landau-Zener model, were often used to explain
the high yields of electronic excitation in ARP[49]. On
the other hand, several schemes for population trans-
fer with sequences of strong pulses could be designed as
strong-ﬁeld analogs in electronic potentials of adiabatic
passage between quantum levels[50]. Adiabatic passage
by light-induced potentials[51–58] (APLIP), chirped adi-
abatic rapid passage[59–61] (CARP), selective popula-
tion of dressed states[62–65] (SPODS), rapid vibrational
inversion via time-gating[29] or Raman chirped adiabatic
passage[66–71] (RCAP) serve as examples.

The LIPs are not only useful as a convenient explana-
tory device to understand the remarkable features of pop-
ulation transfer under strong pulses (e.g., its robutness);
they truly are potential energy surfaces that determine,
for instance, the geometrical features of the molecule and
their related properties. Particularly interesting are LIPs
formed by coupling a bound and a dissociative molecu-
lar potential. The eﬀect of a strong ﬁeld is to mix their
electronic character. The ﬁrst evidence of these proper-
ties was found out after observing bond softening in the
ground electronic state[72–77] and bond hardening in a
dissociative potential[78–82]. Varying the intensity and
frequency of the dressing ﬁeld one can eﬃciently control
the geometry of the ”previously-dissociating” potential.
However, in order to change the molecular properties,

it is necessary to adiabatically prepare the system on this
potential. One can then externally control the bond dis-
tance of a diatomic molecule over a very large range of
values, as in the laser adiabatic manipulation of the bond
(LAMB) scheme. Several two-pulse schemes and single
pulses with modulated frequencies were proposed for this
purpose[83–90]. If the preparation is not fully adiabatic,
one can still control the transition to create oscillating nu-
clear wave packets of diﬀerent amplitudes in the LIP, that
is, to create molecular analogs of ”classical-like” coherent
vibrations[88, 90]. It is also possible to correct the non-
adiabaticity by absorbing the excess of vibrational energy
as a zero-energy of a modiﬁed LIP, via time-asymmetric
pulses[91]. In addition to controlling the molecular ge-
ometry, other LIPs can be prepared to change the width
of the nuclear wave packet, achieving molecular squeez-
ing either adiabatically or dynamically[92–96]. The adia-
batic methods in principle can be used to create artiﬁcial
bond lengths and vibrations with parameters that are
fully externally controlled by the laser. However, these
properties are transient. They only exist as long as the
laser is acting and no strong measurement is performed
on the system.

In correspondence to the geometrical changes induced
by the LIP, there are changes in the electronic properties
associated to the electronic superposition state[97–100].
These properties, for example the permanent or transi-
tion dipole, reﬂect the underlying changes in the redis-
tribution of charges.
It was recently shown that some
superpositions manifested a clear classical picture of an
electron oscillating between the protons, whereas in a
dressed electronic state the electron was moving along
with the proton[99].

The electronic character of the LIP plays important
roles in other processes as well. For instance, in the con-
trol of the spin state of the molecule, we have shown how
electric pulses or electromagnetic ﬁelds can be used to
avoid a singlet-triplet transition, by suitably modifying
the singlet and triplet LIPs such that there is no cross-
ing between them[101–103]. However, under usual cir-
cumstances very strong ﬁelds are needed, such that the
rate of ionization at the required laser intensity is faster
than the rate of inter-system conversion[104, 105]. Under
certain conditions, the schemes can only operate when
the spin-orbit coupling is weak, reverting to a few-level
problem[105, 106].

Other intramolecular or non-adiabatic couplings can
be controlled in a similar manner. For instance, one
can generate LIACs that prevent the initial nuclear wave
packet to reach a certain conical intersection in order
to avoid energy deactivation[30]. However, most works
have been done to create the LIAC or LICI in order to

2

control the output of a photochemical process. In par-
ticular, there have been several theoretical proposals to
control the yield of a photodissociation reaction[110], as
well as the branching ratio over possible fragmentation
channels[35, 107, 109, 110] and the kinetic energy distri-
bution of the fragments[111]. Although most proposals
remain experimentally untested, owing to the diﬃculty
of ﬁnding good molecular systems where the strong ﬁeld
interaction is strong enough to generate LIPs, yet not too
strong that the ionization is predominant, recent experi-
ments have shown that indeed such control is possible[8–
10].

In this work we will review some of our ﬁndings. In Sec.
2 we will provide a simpliﬁed analysis of the geometrical
and dynamical features of LIPs, outlining the role of the
Stark-shift and of laser-induced potential energy shaping
in several control scenarios. In Sec. 3 we present several
works of our group for the control of the bond length in
diatomic molecules, by using LIPs that imply contribu-
tions of bound and dissociative electronic states. In Sec.
4 we analyze the electronic character of the LIPs and the
interesting views that it provides to control electronic
properties such as the dipole moment. In Sec. 5 we show
how one can control diﬀerent observables of photodissoci-
ation reactions, such as the photodissociation spectrum,
the branching ratios and the kinetic energy distribution
of the fragments, by using strong nonresonant ﬁelds that
couple two dissociating electronic states. Finally, Sec. 6
provides some of the relevant Conclusions.

LIGHT-INDUCED POTENTIALS:

GEOMETRICAL AND DYNAMICAL FEATURES

The goal of this section is to set the stage where all
the subsequent control schemes reviewed in this article
operate, clarifying the relation between certain topologi-
cal features of the LIPs and the quantum processes that
they convey. To simplify the analysis we start by consid-
ering diatomic molecules oriented with respect to a single
external ﬁeld E(t). We use the rotating wave approxima-
tion (RWA), such that E(t) ≈ (t)e±iϕ(t)/2, where (t) is
a slowly varying envelope function, compared to the rate
of change of the dynamical phase ϕ(t). The negative sign
is used to describe absorption, while the positive sign is
used for the stimulated emission. In general, for chirped

pulses, ϕ(t) = (cid:82) ω(t(cid:48))dt(cid:48) where ω(t) is the time-varying

frequency. If we assume that only two electronic states
participate in the dynamics, the following very general
eﬀective Hamiltonian can be used to describe the evo-
lution of the nuclear wave functions in each electronic
state,

(cid:18) T K

(cid:19)

K T

+

H =

(cid:18) V1(R) − 1

4 α11(R)2(t)

− 1

2 µ12(R)(t)

(cid:19)

3

(1)

− 1

2 µ12(R)(t)

V2(R) − ω(t) − 1

4 α22(R)2(t)

where T is the kinetic energy, K takes into account non-
adiabatic couplings and Vj(R) are the electronic poten-
tial energy curves. The dynamical phases in the coupling
(oﬀ-diagonal term in the Hamiltonian) are moved by a
unitary transformation to the energies, showing photon-
shifted potentials. In Eq.(1) we have assumed that the
ﬁeld may be resonant or quasi-resonant between the two
electronic states, coupled via the dipole moment µ12,
and nonresonant with respect to the remaining states
of the molecule. The eﬀect of the remaining states on
the two selected states is described in terms of the quasi-
polarizabilities (α11 and α22) up to the next leading or-
der in the ﬁeld, 2. They account for the Stark shifts.
In principle, two very diﬀerent ﬁelds (with very diﬀer-
ent frequencies) could be responsible for the electronic
coupling and the Stark-shifts.
In more general scenar-
ios, the quasi-resonant electronic transition could require
multiphoton absorption instead of the single photon ab-
sorption used in Eq.(1).

We consider now two diﬀerent regimes depending on
whether the eﬀect of the laser on the potentials renders a
”soft” or ”hard” shaping. The ﬁrst one is characterized
by the lack of a resonant or quasi-resonant excitation
so that the oﬀ-diagonal terms are negligible. Then the
initially populated LIP can be written as

1 (R, ) ≈ V1(R) − 1
V a
4

α11(R)2(t)

in which α is the dynamic polarizability, taking into ac-
count the eﬀect of all the remaining states.
In some
cases the polarizability is dominated by a single elec-
tronic state, closer in energy to V1(R) + ω.
In other
cases, the frequency is much smaller (e.g. an infrared
laser or an electric pulse) and the static polarizability
can be used instead. Unless α11(R) changes drastically
around the equilibrium geometry of V1(R) (or the regions
where the probability of ﬁnding the nuclear wave func-
tion are larger), the topological changes in V1(R) induced
by the ﬁeld will be small, hence the ”soft” character of
the shaping. The control is mainly exerted by (t), in-
ducing energy variations (Stark shifts) of the potential.
It is often the case that the ground LIP is very similar
to the ground molecular potential. Most interesting ef-
fects occur in excited LIPs. One ﬁrst needs to move the
population to an excited potential such that the events
happen in V a
2 .

On the other hand, when the interaction is quasi-
resonant, as a ﬁrst approximation one can typically ne-
glect the polarizability and concentrate on the two cross-
ing potentials. The LIPs are obtained by diagonalizing

the potential energy operator, including the ﬁeld cou-
pling. They are the instantaneous eingenstates of the
electronic Hamiltonian. Applying the rotation matrix

(cid:18) cos θ(R; )

sin θ(R; )
− sin θ(R; ) cos θ(R; )

(cid:19)

where θ(R; ) is the rotation or mixing angle that diago-
nalizes the matrix, we obtain

(cid:19)

(cid:18) T K(cid:48)

K(cid:48) T

+

(cid:18) V a

HDS =

(cid:19)

1 (R; )

−i ˙θ cos 2θ V a

i ˙θ cos 2θ
2 (R; )

(2)

The oﬀ-diagonal terms in the kinetic operator, K(cid:48) are of-
ten referred to as spatial non-adiabatic terms, while those
in the potential operator are dynamical non-adiabatic
terms. They depend on the time-derivative in the mix-
ing angle, ˙θ, which reﬂects the time-variation of the ﬁeld,
˙(t). When the pulses are strong enough and their time
evolution is slow enough (in comparison with the motion
of the nuclear wave functions) the oﬀ-diagonal terms can
be neglected. Then, if at initial time (when (0) = 0) the
initial potential correlates with a single LIP, V a
1 (R; (0)),
all the dynamics will occur in this LIP and the ﬁnal elec-
tronic state as well as all the properties of the system
during all times, will solely depend on V a
1 (R; (t)). In or-
der to characterize the LIP we need to know the structure
of the strongly coupled electronic potentials, V1 and V2.
It is most important to localize the LIAC, Rc, deﬁned by
the condition

∆(Rc, t) = V2(Rc) − V1(Rc) − ω(t) = 0 .

(3)

The populated LIP can be expressed as a function of the
original molecular potentials, as

V a
1 (R, ) = cos θ(R, ) V1(R) + sin θ(R, ) V2(R)

(4)

where the mixing angle θ changes from 0 to π/2 at both
sides of the avoided crossing, Rc. The ﬁrst important
eﬀect that such an avoided crossing has in the LIPs is to
completely deform the molecular potential energy curves
and thus to change the structure of the molecule. For
V a
1 (R) the LIP looks like V1(R < Rc) before the crossing
and like V2(R > Rc) after it. Through the LIAC, the nu-
clear wave packet can transfer part of the population. It
operates in analogous way to a molecular (beyond Born-
Oppenheimer-like) internal conversion, induced by K. In
the adiabatic limit, which requires a large energy gap be-
tween the LIPs in the LIAC and slow changes in the pulse
envelope (t), the population in the initial electronic state

is given by cos2 θ(R, ), while the population in the other
coupled electronic state is given by sin2 θ(R, ). There-
fore, the motion of a nuclear wave packet across Rc in
V a
1 (R, ) represents full population transfer from V1 to
V2.

We will now brieﬂy mention some features of popula-
tion transfer analyzed from the perspective of LIPs. As
noticed, one of the most important steps in the design
of laser control schemes is to localize the LIAC of the
LIP, as this topological point is an indication of possible
population inversion. In order to fully transfer the pop-
ulation from V1 to V2 one needs to modulate θ via the
control ﬁeld (t). However, depending on the structure of
the LIP and the initial kinetic energy, the nuclear wave
function will be able or not to cross the region of the po-
tential that correlates with V2. In the most simple cases,
as e.g. in population transfer from a bound to a dissoci-
ating electronic state, a chirped pulse where the pulse fre-
quency ω(t) sweeps through the Franck-Condon region is
often enough to allow the mixing angle θ(R, ) to change
from 0 to π/2 for all values of R where the wave packet
is located. Therefore, most LAMB schemes use chirped
pulses.
In other cases, one needs to ﬁnd a more diﬃ-
cult adiabatic path that connects V1 to V2 via the LIP,
requiring a more elaborate trajectory of θ(R, ). Typi-
cally, when the equilibrium geometries of V1 and V2 are
very separated and the energy gap between the LIPs at
the LIAC is large, one needs to ﬁnd additional electronic
states that allow to modulate the LIP from V1 to V2 adi-
abatically. The APLIP scheme using time-delayed pulse
sequences, or the CARP scheme, using chirped pulses,
control the population inversion to a higher excited state
by means of two-photon absorption. This requires the
use of more than one control pulse, therefore adding chal-
lenges to the experimental implementation of the scheme.
If the population transfer is fully adiabatic, there is no
internal barrier in the adiabatic pathway at the bottom of
the LIP connecting the initial equilibrium geometry cor-
responding to V1 and the ﬁnal equilibrium geometry cor-
responding to V2. Under these circumstances the transfer
preserves the form of the nuclear wave function. In par-
ticular, the dynamics conserves the vibrational quanta.
In APLIP, this is possible by using two control pulses,
one called the pump pulse p(t), the second one called the
Stokes pulse S(t). For instance, consider that we want
to invert the population in Na2 from the ground X1Σ+
g
state (V1) to a second excited 21Πg state (V2), using a
resonant two-photon transition through the intermediate
A1Σ+
u state (Vb), whose equilibrium geometry lies in be-
tween that of the initial and the ﬁnal state (although
this is not an essential requirement for the intermediate
state, it typically reduces the pulse intensities needed for
the APLIP scheme). Garraway and Suominen[51] showed
that a counter-intuitive pulse sequence with S(t) preced-
ing p(t) could lead to full population inversion without
populating the intermediate state at all. This is possi-

4

ble because such pulse sequence prepares a LIP called
d = cos θV1 − sin θV2, that never correlates with
V a
d , V a
the intermediate potential Vb. Also interestingly, in this
LIP the Stark eﬀects induced by both control pulses are
minimal regardless of the pulse strength. With diﬀer-
ent properties, other APLIP pulse sequences allow full
adiabatic passage[54, 55].

In the following subsections we will analyze several ex-
amples of theoretically proposed schemes of control ex-
erted via Stark eﬀect (that is, when the coupling is far
oﬀ-resonant and at least as a ﬁrst approximation one can
use the polarization), and control exerted by LIP shap-
ing (when the coupling is resonant or quasi-resonant and
one has to take into consideration substantial population
transfer). In the latter, the geometrical factors are obvi-
ous, as the population transfer is typically encoded in the
reshaping of the LIP, but the dynamics play also a very
important role on the creation, passage or destruction of
the LIPs.

CONTROL OF MOLECULAR GEOMETRY BY

SHAPING BOUND WITH DISSOCIATIVE

POTENTIALS

In this section we will review several schemes based on
LIPs that were designed to control the bond length of
diatomic molecules. In general, a molecule has diﬀerent
equilibrium geometries in each electronic state. Typi-
cally, the bonds are more relaxed in the excited states.
Therefore, by electronic absorption with strong ultra-
short pulses, it is possible to transfer all the initial wave
function to the excited state, creating a wave packet of vi-
brational eigenstates after the pulse is switched oﬀ. This
vibrational wave packet oscillates around the excited-
state equilibrium geometry of V2 for a few periods so
that the bond length of the molecule will be well deﬁned
until dispersion occurs. As the dynamics is driven by the
molecular potential, there is little control over the period
or amplitude of the motion.

Alternatively, the electronic absorption may proceed
adiabatically, as in APLIP. Then the nuclear wave func-
tion will be slowly transferred to the equilibrium geom-
etry of the second excited electronic state. During this
process, at every intermediate time the bond length is
well deﬁned, as the wave function sits in the bottom of
a single LIP. The idea behind the LAMB scheme is pre-
cisely to stop or freeze the transport process at the de-
sired intermediate bond length. As long as the pulses
remain constant, so will the bond length. However, the
potential range for the control is much larger when the
ﬁnal electronic state is dissociative, since then its equi-
librium geometry is at R → ∞. Hence, in principle, one
can prepare the molecule at any bond length larger than
the initial one. However, the adiabaticity of the process
deteriorates for very large bond distances, and the disso-

5

On the other hand,

ceed rapidly, using an ultrashort transform-limited pulse
that generates a nuclear wave packet moving in the LIP.
In this case we talk of a vertical wave function trans-
fer (VWT). Or it can be quasi-static, using a chirped
pulse, in which we talk of an adiabatic transfer. In both
cases full population inversion requires pulse bandwidths
∆ω1, at least as large as the absorption band, ∆ωF C. In
fact, in the quasi-static case, the chirp typically needs to
span an even larger bandwidth. Fig.1 (a) and (b) show
how the shape of V a
2 is inﬂuenced by the choice of ω2,
blue-shifted or red-shifted with respect to the V2 → V3
transition. In the ﬁrst case there is properly a LIAC and
the bond length in V a
2 is better deﬁned. In the second
case there is no proper LIAC and the control is mostly
done by Stark eﬀect. Then the LIP is much ﬂatter and it
is more diﬃcult to achieve adiabatic population transfer.
it is possible to use a single
chirped pulse, (t), responsible for both roles: the adi-
abatic transfer and the formation of the LIP. The basic
mechanism is explained in Fig.1 (c) and (d). At ini-
tial times ω(0) must be blue-shifted from the the ab-
sorption spectrum to the dissociative state Ve. Slowly
sweeping through the photodissociation band the popu-
lation is transferred in a quasi-static way, with the wave
packet always located at the bottom of the LIP. Then
the chirp must sweep through all the emission spectra.
The ﬁnal value of the frequency, ω0, deﬁnes the LIAC
and the bond length[87].
If ω0 is not small enough,
Ve(Rc) − Vg(Rc) − ω0 will sit at short Rc. On the other
hand, when ω0 ∼ De (where De is the bond energy in
Vg), the LIAC is at inﬁnite distance. One can therefore
measure the required bandwidth scaled with respect to
De. Using a single pulse, ∆ω must be of the order of De.
In comparison with a VWT process a typical LAMB
process requires 10 to 100 more energy (integrated pulse
amplitude or peak amplitude times duration) from the
pulses. The extra energy is mainly used to deform the
potential. This pays oﬀ in the fact that the molecular
properties associated to the wave packet dynamics, is en-
tirely governed by the ﬁeld parameters.
In particular,
any trajectory in the ”chirp function” ω(t) entails dif-
ferent excursions of the average internuclear distance, or
bond length. For instance, any time-symmetric function
ω(t) leads to fully reversible bond elongations that mimic
a single period of a classical molecular vibration, with
both the amplitude and frequency of the vibration being
externally controlled[89]. If ω(t) is periodic, the inverse of
its period will be the ”frequency” of this LIP-supported
vibration[88].

In Fig.2 we show a numerical example of the reversible
control of the bond elongation. It can be observed that
the nuclear wave function is always in the ground state of
the LIP. The exchange of kinetic energy into zero energy
of the LIP needs time to allow the nuclear wave func-
tion to adjust its width to the width of the potential.
Hence, only ”slow” vibrations can be adiabatically con-

FIG. 1: Diﬀerent scenarios of the LAMB scheme using one
and two pulses. Dotted lines are the molecular potentials
and solid lines are the potentials in the presence of the ﬁeld
(the LIPs plus the uncoupled V1 potential). In (a) and (b)
we show LAMB schemes using a chirped and a transform-
limited pulse, blue-shifted or red-shifted with respect to the
V2 → V3 transition, respectively. In (c) and (d) the mecha-
nism of LAMB with a single chirped pulse is represented. At
initial times the pulse frequency must be blue-shifted from the
photodissociation band, while at later times, the red shifted
frequency, after sweeping all the photodissociation band, sets
the new ”equilibrium” bond distance. (From J. Chem. Phys.
134, 144303, ﬁg.1)

ciation probability becomes non-negligible.

The ﬁrst proposed implementation of LAMB assumed
that the initial potential V1 and the intermediate poten-
tial V3, where both bound potentials, coupled via a pump
pulse 1(t), while the target electronic state V2 was dis-
sociative, coupled to the intermediate one via 2(t). Fol-
lowing one possible APLIP sequence but shaping 2(t)
such that instead of switching it oﬀ, the pulse remains at
a plateau amplitude 0 for a certain time, it was possible
to elongate the bond[83].

More natural LAMB implementations are possible
when V2 is coupled directly to the initial state V1[84, 85].
Fig.1 outlines both two-pulse as well as one-pulse sce-
narios. In the ﬁrst case the LAMB process implies the
following mechanism: Initially 2(t) is switched on, with
an oﬀ-resonant frequency that prepares the LIP V a
2 with
a LIAC between V3 and V2 at the desired bond length.
Then, while 2(t) = 0 remains constant, another pulse,
1(t), moves all the population from V1 to V2, which in the
presence of 0 is V a
2 . This electronic absorption can pro-

0246r (bohr)01234energy (in units of De)V2V1 + h_ ω1V3 - h_ ω2V2aV3a(a)0246r (bohr)V1 + h_ ω1V2V3 - h_ ω2V3aV2a(b)0369r (bohr)0.40.81.21.6energy (in units of De )VeVg+ h_ ωmax(c)0369r (bohr)VeaVgaVg+ h_ ω0(d)6

FIG. 3: Bond dynamics as a function of time scaled with
In the strong adiabatic regime (τ ≥
the pulse duration τ .
6T ), the time-scaled bond dynamics are similar and follow
the same curve. Before fully adiabatic conditions (τ = 4.5T ),
the dynamics is still time-symmetrical but the bond stretches
more at half the pulse duration. For shorter pulses the bond
dynamics is anharmonic. The wave packet gains momentum,
and it is no longer attached to the bottom of the LIP. The
bond can be further stretched, and as the chirp is reversed
(t/τ > 0.5), the wave function returns to the initial potential
as a vibrationally excited wave packet.
If the pulse is too
short, however, the wave packet has not time to reach the
classical turning point before the chirp reverses and the LIP
converges to the initial potential. (From J. Phys. Chem. A
116, 2691, Fig. 3.)

tance, one can rely on VWT processes to excite the wave
function from V1 to the LIP. Some control on the am-
plitude of the vibration can be achieved by selecting the
timing and frequency of the ultrashort transform-limited
pulse[86], as shown in the next section.

THE ROLE OF THE ELECTRONIC CHARGE

While the nuclear wave function encodes the molecular
structure, given by the shape or the geometry, the elec-
tronic distribution is responsible for the chemical prop-
erties.
In particular, the dipole moment typically pro-
vides simpliﬁed information regarding the distribution of
charges. Based on the Born-Oppenheimer approxima-
tion, in the previous section we have focused on the con-
trol of the nuclear wave function by means of LIPs. Here,
we analyze the role of the electronic wave function and
of electron-nuclear dynamics[97, 99, 100].

In a LAMB process, the total wave function of the
system is a coherent superposition of both nuclear and
electronic wave functions[87],

Ψ(R, q, t) = φg(R, t)Ξg(q; R) + φe(R, t)Ξe(q; R)

(5)

However, in a fully adiabatic evolution, the nuclear wave

FIG. 2: Dynamics of the system under a parabolic chirped
pulse in adiabatic conditions. Time units are scaled with re-
spect to the fundamental vibrational period in the ground
potential, T , whereas the pulse duration is τ = 6.5T . (top)
The dynamics of electronic populations and bond length. In-
sets show the pulse shape (upper inset) and the laser detun-
ing (lower inset). (bottom) Snapshots of the adiabatic wave
function, remaining in the bottom of the LIP at all times. By
chirped induced population inversion, V a
e correlates at initial
and late times with the initial potential, Vg.
(From Phys.
Rev. A 82, 063414, Fig.2.)

trolled, where the period of the vibration is much larger
(typically 5 or more times larger) than the characteristic
vibrational period of the ground state, T . For a Morse
oscillator V = D0(1 − e−β(R−R0))2 of reduced mass m,

T =(cid:112)2mπ2/D0β2. If ω(t) changes faster than this char-

acteristic period of time the process is not fully adiabatic.
As Fig.3 shows, the breakdown of adiabaticity implies
that the nuclear wave function receives some kinetic en-
ergy, such that the motion of the bond length depends
partially on the LIP equilibrium geometry determined by
ω(t), and partially on the vibrational motion of the nu-
clear energy on this LIP[90]. When the chirp is reverted
one prepares a highly excited vibrational wave packet in
the ground potential. However, if ω(t) varies too fast,
the wave packet has little time to move from its initial
position and the gained vibrational energy is small.

The simplest procedure to prepare large amplitude vi-
brations (albeit with uncontrollable periods) is to use a
two-pulse LAMB scheme. While the control pulse pre-
pares the LIAC and determines the equilibrium bond dis-

0246012E (10-3 a.u.)0246-0.40∆ω(units of De)00.20.40.60.81populationVeVg0246time (T)012<r> (bohr)00.81.6energy (units of De)T = 01.5 T3.25 T036r (bohr)00.81.6energy (units of De)6.5 T036r (bohr)036r (bohr)4.5 T5.5 TVgψeaVeaVgaVeaψgVeaψeaVgψgVeaVgaVgaψeaψea00.511.52time (in units of τ)-101234bond elongation (bohr)6.5 Tτ = 0.85 T4.5 T2.6 T7

packet in Vg and Ve have the same shape, φg(R, t) ∝
φe(R, t) ∝ φa(R, t), so that we can write

Ψ(R, q, t) = φa(R, t) [ag(t)Ξg(q; R) + ae(t)Ξe(q; R)]

= φaΞa(q, t; R)

(6)

where Ξa(q, t; R) is the dressed electronic wave function
that gives the LIP force ﬁeld. The total wave function
is thus separable and not an entangled state of nuclear
and electronic states. Since the total wave function in
the LIP is a single Born-Oppenheimer product, there
is perfect correlation between the electronic and nuclear
motion. Notice that the changes of the electronic wave
function are externally controlled: they do not rely on
dynamical phases as in superpositions of diﬀerent elec-

tronic states. Adiabaticity is required for the single prod-
uct wave function to faithfully represent the dynamics.
Hence the changes in the LIP must be slower than the
typical time-scale of the nuclear dynamics. The perfect
correlation of electronic and nuclear motion in the LIP
is only possible because the electron dynamics occurs in
the time-scale of the nuclear dynamics.

In order to analyze the type of electron changes con-
veyed by the transformation of the LIP and the possi-
ble eﬀects of electron-nuclear motion, one needs to use
a model that allows integrating the full time-dependent
Schr¨odinger equation beyond the Born-Oppenheimer ap-
proximation. In the following, we use a well-known 1+1D
Hamiltonian often employed to characterize the dynamics
of the molecular Hydrogen cation under strong ﬁelds[97–
100],

H = − 2

2µe

∂2

∂z2 − 2

M

∂2

∂R2 −

(cid:113)(cid:0)z − R

1

2

(cid:1)2

−

+ 1

(cid:113)(cid:0)z + R

1

2

(cid:1)2

+

1
R

+ 1

+ qez(t)

(7)

where z is the electron coordinate, R is the internu-
clear distance, M is the mass of the proton, µe =
2meM/(2M + me) is the reduced mass of the elec-
tron, which is approximately the electron mass me, and
qe = (2M + 2me)/(2M + me) ≈ 1. It should be noted
that this Hamiltonian includes all non-adiabatic cou-
plings (i.e., the Born-Oppenheimer approximation is not
used) although the electron is forced to move along a line
deﬁned by the bond axis through the approximated soft-
core Coulomb potential[112–114]. More elaborate Hamil-
tonians and calculations exist[115, 116].

1

In Fig.4 we show results of the actual dynamics ob-
tained by solving Eq.(7) under a strong constant ﬁeld
0. As the initial state, Ψ(z, R, 0) = ϕ(R, 0)ψBO
(z; R),
we consider a nuclear wave function with the same prob-
ability density as the ground state of H2 in the ground
electronic state of the ion H+
2 , essentially assuming an in-
stantaneous ionization process[97]. Since the bond length
in H2 is shorter than in H+
2 , the ground state of the for-
mer is a nuclear wave packet moving in the ground elec-
tronic state of the cation, 1σg. An ultrashort pump pulse
of τ = 1 fs duration and carrier frequency ωp = 5.4 eV,
with peak amplitude p = 0.05 a.u. at t0 = 6 fs is then
switched on. The duration, frequency, and intensity are
chosen to maximize population transfer from 1σg to the
ﬁrst excited electronic state 1σu (henceforth in the sec-
tion, V1 and V2). The envelope of the pulse is chosen
as a cosine square pulse, p(t) = p cos2(π(t − t0)/τ ) for
−τ /2 ≤ t − t0 ≤ τ /2.

As in a typical two-pulse LAMB scenario, during all

times the control ﬁeld is present. In this calculation we
use a DC electric ﬁeld 0 = 0.015 a.u. Then the dynamics
proceeds in the so-called ﬁeld-induced potentials (FIPs)
U1 and U2, which are analogous to the LIPs but using
constant ﬁelds. U1 shows bond softening. For large ﬁelds
(0 ≥ 0.03 a.u.) the wave packet kinetic energy can be
above the ground state bond energy. On the other hand
U2 shows bond hardening. Indeed, in the presence of an
external ﬁeld, H+
2 (or any other symmetrical molecular
cation) has charge resonance states[117, 118]. The tran-
sient dipole increases with distance and it is possible to
stabilize the molecule at very large bond lengths. For the
chosen parameters, the population in V2 is ∼ 0.7 after the
pump pulse, while the ionization and dissociation prob-
abilities are both below 10%. Using more intense DC
ﬁelds (0 > 0.04 a.u.), the ionization and dissociation
probabilities increase.

Fig.4 shows how the motion of the electron and protons
is clearly correlated, with the electron departing from be-
tween the two protons, to the right proton (the one at
positive z) as the protons move apart. The period of both
motions is practically the same. The mechanism under
this correlation is shown in Fig.5, where we show diﬀerent
snapshots of the soft-core Coulomb potential sliced at the
internuclear distance where the probability of ﬁnding the
nuclear wave function is larger. Also shown is the elec-
tronic wave function. As the bond enlarges the electron
follows the right nuclei. With the chosen ﬁeld param-
eters, the average internuclear distance reaches 14 a.u.
[Fig.4(b)] while the electron average distance and hence

8

FIG. 4: (a) Average electron position and (b) average inter-
nuclear distance as functions of time.
(c) Probability as a
function of time for dissociation (D), ionization (I) and the
population remaining in the U1 and U2 FIPs, P1 and P2, re-
spectively. (J. Chem. Phys. 139, 084306, Fig.2.)

FIG. 5: Sketch of the success of the mechanism for the cre-
ation of the dipole starting from the excited FIP. We show
slices of the wave function and the soft-core Coulomb poten-
tial coupled with the ﬁeld for two diﬀerent internuclear dis-
tances which correspond to the initial state and at maximum
bond stretch. Initially the electron is mainly localized on the
right atomic well. As the protons separate, as long as the
energy of the wave function is below the ionization barrier,
the electron remains with the right proton and moves in the
time scale of the vibrational motion. (From J. Phys. B 48,
043001, Fig.7.)

the electric dipole reaches 6 a.u. [Fig.4(a)]. In fact, the
wave packet reaches quite longer distances in z and R
than those indicated by the average. Since the FIP is very
anharmonic the dephasing makes the wave packet spread
quickly. The maxima and minima of (cid:104)R(t)(cid:105) and (cid:104)z(t)(cid:105) be-
come less pronounced after a few periods, until the wave
packet fully disperses and the average internuclear dis-
tance remains constant. This is the so-called collapsed
state. For weak DC ﬁelds (and weaker bonds), there
can be as few as 2 periods before the system reaches the
collapsed state, whereas for stronger ﬁelds one can easily
observe 10 periods of motion. In principle, at larger times

FIG. 6: (a) Amplitude of the dipole, (b) bond elongation,
(c) dipole period, and (d) probabilities of dissociation and
ionization as functions of the amplitude of the ﬁeld 0 for
diﬀerent time-delays of the pump pulse t0. (From J. Chem.
Phys. 139, 084306, Fig.3.)

one could expect the revival of the periodic motion[99].
The maximum dipole that can be achieved is also limited
by imperfections in the population transfer between the
FIPs, since the electron remaining in U1 moves in the
opposite direction (with the left proton) making the av-
erage smaller. This eﬀect can be observed in the averages
calculated on each FIP, (cid:104)z(cid:105)j and (cid:104)R(cid:105)j (j = 1, 2) shown
in Fig.4.

Still, extremely large electronic dipoles and bond elon-
gations can be achieved. Deﬁning ∆z as the range of the
dipole motion, ∆z ≡ (cid:104)z(tmax)(cid:105) − (cid:104)z(tmin)(cid:105), where tmax
is the time at which (cid:104)z(cid:105) reaches its ﬁrst maximum and
tmin is the time at which (cid:104)z(cid:105) is at a minimum during
the ﬁrst period, and similarly for the bond elongation
∆R, in Fig.6 we show how ∆z, ∆R, and the period of
the dipole T change as functions of 0 and t0, together
with the probabilities of dissociation and ionization. For
the range of parameters where the ionization and disso-
ciation probabilities are small, one can generate dipoles
that reach as large as 40 Debye, oscillating at slow vibra-
tional motion. The period of these dipoles varies from
∼ 300 fs down to 25 fs, i.e., over an order of magnitude.
These correspond to frequencies in the far infrared, from
3 to 40 THz approximately.

It is possible to use a low frequency laser pulse in-
stead of a constant ﬁeld, but then the pulse must meet
very speciﬁc conditions[100]. In particular, its frequency
must be approximately equal to the frequency of the vi-
brational motion in the LIP. Otherwise, the correlation
between the motion of the electron driven by the ﬁeld,
and that of the protons, oscillating in the potential, is not
perfect. In this scenario, the LAMB dynamics is that of
an electron moving along with one proton as the bond
stretches, and hopping to the other proton as the bond

0369<z(t)> (a.u.)<z><z>2<z>1(a)050100150200time (fs)00.20.40.60.81populationPtotP2P1ID(c)050100150time (fs)0481216<R(t)> (a.u.)<R><R>2<R>1(b)-8-4048z (a.u.)-8-4048z (a.u.)slowR = 10 a.u.R = 3.8 a.u.061218∆z (a.u.)t0 = 9 fst0 = 6 fs(a)0.010.020.030.04ε (a.u.)0122436∆R (a.u.)(b)0100200300T (fs)(c)0.010.020.030.04ε (a.u.)00.10.2probabilityI (t0=9fs)I (t0=6fs)D (t0=6fs)D (t0=9fs)(d)compresses. Basically, we have a proton loosely attached
to an Hydrogen. Depending on the phase of the electric
ﬁeld, the Hydrogen and proton exchange their role. It is
crucial that the bond is maximally compressed when the
amplitude of the oscillating electric ﬁeld is zero as oth-
erwise the electron cannot hop from one proton to the
other, leading to dissociation.

2

1

√

(z; R) + ψBO

(z; R)(cid:1) /

Ψ(z, R, 0) = ϕ(R, 0)(cid:0)ψBO

We have shown that the electron-nuclear correlation
is an essential condition to create large-amplitude os-
cillating dipoles. Although in principle any superpo-
sition of electronic states of diﬀerent parity, such as
2, in-
duces an oscillating dipole, the dipole in this case quickly
decays due to the dephasing of the nuclear and electron
motion[99]. Alternatively, a high frequency laser pulse
can be used to drive the electron in the ground state cre-
ating a fast oscillating dipole, but this dipole can only
be small as the excursion length of the electron in the
ﬁeld (the displacement that the electron can reach be-
fore the electric ﬁeld changes its sign) is necessary small
in the ground potential under optical driving frequen-
cies. For lower frequencies the excursion length and the
induced dipole could be larger, but tunneling ionization
dominates[100].

In summary, we have shown that in order to create
an oscillating electric dipole in a homonuclear diatomic
cation without an oscillating driver one needs (i) to break
the symmetry of the system and (ii) to sustain highly cor-
related electronic and nuclear motion, which are guaran-
teed by the LAMB dynamics.

CONTROL OF PHOTODISSOCIATION BY

SHAPING TWO DISSOCIATIVE POTENTIALS

Strong ﬁelds can also be used to control photodisso-
ciation reactions in the adiabatic regime. The ﬁrst ob-
vious eﬀect is the Stark shift of the photodissociation
bands, thus changing the spectrum[119]. If several disso-
ciation channels are present, one can use a pump pulse in
combination with a strong nonresonant pulse to separate
the diﬀerent channels[110]. However, the ﬁeld also cou-
ples the diﬀerent excited states so that the dissociation
occurs on a ”mixed” channel, that is, on a superposi-
tion of excited electronic states correlating to diﬀerent
channels[110, 111]. In this section we review some pro-
posals that we have presented to achieve control over
diﬀerent reaction observables, such as the yield and the
kinetic energy distribution of the fragments[111], by us-
ing strong nonresonant pulses. In the chosen examples
the LIPs are formed between two dissociative potentials
that never cross. Since there are no LIACs and no pop-
ulation inversion, the LIPs only show ”soft” shaping.

Control of photodissociation spectra

9

Using an ultrashort pump pulse with carrier frequency
ωp, the absorption probability in a photodissociation
band quickly decays when the absorption is nonresonant.
Taking into account the pulse bandwidth ∆ωp, in the ab-
sence of competing dissociating channels, the photodis-
sociation probability is roughly given by [120]

(cid:34)

(cid:18) Dj0 − ωp

(cid:19)2(cid:35)

Pj(ωp) ∼ exp

−

∆ωp

(8)

where Dj0 = Vj(R) − V0(R) is the energy gap at the
Franck-Condon (FC) region. However, using a strong
non-resonant ﬁeld S in addition to the pump pulse, the
electronic states are Stark-shifted. Under the same ap-
proximations we obtain a similar expression where in-
stead of Dj0 one needs to use the Stark-shifted energy
gap

Dp

j0(S) = V a

j (R)−V a

0 (R) ≈ Dj0− 1
4

(αjj − α00) 2

S (9)

The position of the photodissociation bands correspond-
ing to diﬀerent electronic channels can therefore be con-
trolled. The control can be more eﬀective when the polar-
izabilities αjj have diﬀerent signs for diﬀerent electronic
states, such that S can both blue-shift and red-shift the
diﬀerent bands of the spectra.
As a numerical example we consider control on the
photodissociation of the molecular ion ICl−[121] shown in
Fig.7. Assuming the molecule is aligned with S (thus the
symmetry rules associated to parity can be violated), the
ﬁrst two excited states, 2Π1/2 (henceforth V1) and 22Π1/2
(henceforth V2), are dipole allowed from the ground state
2Σ1/2 (V0) and are the only accessible states below 3eV
or 400nm. The two excited states, on the other hand,
are too far apart to be reached by a single pulse (unless
it is an attosecond pulse) and do not cross at diﬀerent
internuclear distances, so that internal conversion is neg-
ligible.

In Fig.8 we show the photodissociation spectra when
the pump pulse is a 400 fs pulse of a TW/cm2 in the range
where the two bands are observed. The spectra barely
depends on the parameters of the pump pulse. However,
it changes considerably when a very strong nonresonant
S pulse is included. For the results of Fig.8 we have
assumed that its frequency is negligible, that is, we have
employed half-cycle pulses. The full width at half maxi-
mum (FWHM) of S was chosen as 400 fs, which implies
that the control pulse lasts about twice the duration of
the pump pulse.

Interestingly, although for the chosen parameters α22
and α33 are both positive and of similar value, the spec-
tral bands after S are not only blue shifted. Indeed the
high frequency edge of the band is blue shifted so that,
for instance, with S = 0.03 a.u. the band for V1 overlaps

10

FIG. 7: Potential energy curves for ICl−. The ground state
is 2Σ1/2. Up to 3.0 eV, the only two excited states that are
coupled to the ground state by transition dipole moment are
2Π1/2 and 22Π1/2.
(Adapted from J. Chem. Phys. 130,
124320, Fig.1.)

the spectral window of the band for V2 in the absence of
the pulse. However, the low-frequency edge of the bands
remain practically the same as without the Stark-shift.
This is because the pump pulse is also acting when S is
small (either at the head or trail of the pulse, depend-
ing on the time delay between the pulses), so that in the
spectra one essentially records the yield of photodisso-
ciation for all possible Stark-shifts, obtained with S(t)
ranging from zero to its peak amplitude. A simple Stark-
shift of the whole band would be observed for much larger
control pulses when S(t) straddles p(t), such that p(t)
is switched on after and switched oﬀ before the control
pulse.

Control of photodissociation yields.

In Fig.8 we showed the photodissociation spectra, with
the expected band shifts. However, as indicated in Sec.2,
when a strong pulse couples two states, the nature of the
states change by virtue of the polarizability. In partic-
ular, there will be some probability that a nuclear wave
packet dissociating at the band corresponding to V1 will
actually be in the excited V2 state and viceverse. For an
approximately constant ΩS = µ12(R)S(t) the probabili-

FIG. 8: Photodissociation spectra in the presence of the con-
trol pulse using the counterintuitive sequence with (a) S(t) >
0 and (b) S(t) < 0. The keys of the symbols are the follow-
ing: Circles are results with peak amplitudes S = ±0.02e/a2
0,
triangles are results with Fig S = ±0.03e/a2
0, and lines with
no symbols are results with S = 0. The solid line gives dis-
sociation in V1 and the dotted lines dissociation in V2. The
pulse parameters are given in the text.
(Adapted from J.
Chem. Phys. 130, 124320, Fig.6.)

ties are roughly given by

χ =

∼

P2
P1

(cid:18) Ω

(cid:19)2

2∆

.

(10)

where ∆ is the energy gap between the electronic states.
The ﬁrst question, then, is why in Fig.8 we observe only
one product, the electronic channel corresponding ﬁrst to
V1 and then to V2, at the two photodissociation bands.
The reason is because we used a constant µ23(R) and
the control pulse was switched oﬀ slowly. Then the ef-
fect of the polarizability that occurred as S(t) raised was
reverted when the pulse decayed. Eq.(10) was only op-
erative when the control pulse was switched on leading
to transient eﬀects, but it does not aﬀect the asymptotic
results.

However, when either µ12(R) or S(t) decay abruptly
(such that ΩS(t) decays abruptly) then the eﬀect of the
polarizability is no longer time-symmetrical and there are
interesting eﬀects that depend on the dynamics, that is,
on the choice of the pulse sequence. We considered two
cases: the PS sequence where p(t) overlaps the head
of S(t) and the SP sequence, where p(t) overlaps the
trail of S(t). In the results shown in Fig.9 we assumed

46810121416r (a0)-1-0.500.511.5energy (eV)2Σ1/22Π1/222Π1/22Π3/222Π3/200.20.40.60.81population1.622.42.83.23.6Energy (eV)00.20.40.60.81population(a)(b)instance, if we initially excite V1,
ψ0(R, t) P−→ ψ1(R, t) S−→ ψa

1 (R, t) ∝(cid:112)χ(S)ψ1(R, t)+ψ2(R, t)

11

(12)
where χ is roughly given by Eq.(10). The labels 2 and
1 should be exchanged if we initially excite the system
in the second photodissociation band, V2.
In Fig.9 we
show results of the photodissociation spectra using this
sequence. In this case, the dynamics in the LIP mixes
both dissociation channels. Fig.9(a) shows the overall
yield of dissociation while Fig.9(b) shows the branching
ratio. Quite naturally, the band at lower frequency cor-
responds to excitation in the V a
1 and leads to maximal
dissociation in V1, while the band at higher frequency
corresponds to excitation in V a
2 and leads to maximal
dissociation in V2.

Clearly, regardless of the pump pulse, the timing of
the control pulse with respect to the pump pulse aﬀects
the yield of the photodissociation reaction. However, one
needs to work on resonance to create LIACs and fully in-
vert the electronic populations to have more ample con-
trol over the branching ratios.

FIG. 9: (a) Photodissociation spectra in the presence of the
control pulse using the intuitive sequence for diﬀerent control
peak amplitudes and (b) the resulting branching ratio χ =
P2/P1.
In (a) we give the total yield of dissociation (P1 +
P2). The peak amplitude of the control ﬁeld for the diﬀerent
results is the following: In dashed line S = 0; in black line
with squares S = 0.01; in red line with circles S = 0.02; in
blue line with solid triangles S = 0.03 and in blue line with
empty triangles S = 0.03e/a2
0. All other parameters in the
simulations are given in the text. (Adapted from J. Chem.
Phys. 130, 124320, Fig.7.)

that µ12(R) decayed abruptly. Similar results would be
obtained using S(t) with fast decay.

In the SP sequence the Franck-Condon excitation pro-
ceeds between V0 and the spectrally chosen (by ωp) ex-
cited molecular state Ve (e = 1, 2) but the dissociation
occurs in the asymptotic region of the molecular poten-
tial, leading to selective dissociation. If the chosen po-
tential V a
2 , then one collects all the fragments
in the molecular state that correlates with that potential,
that is, V2,

e is e.g. V a

ψ0(R, t) S−→ ψa

2 (R, t) P−→ ψ2(R, t)

(11)

where ψa
j is the wave function initially in state j but of
mixed electronic character by virtue of the Stark pulse.
The SP sequence leads to the results shown in Fig.8.
Conversely, in the PS sequence the Franck-Condon ex-
citation occurs mainly in the excited molecular state e,
selected by ωp, but the dissociation occurs in the asymp-
totic region of V a
j , leading to mixed dissociation. For

Control of the kinetic energy distribution.

The use of a strong nonresonant control ﬁeld can lead
to an important shift of the kinetic energy distribution
(KED) of the fragments. At ﬁnal time the wave pack-
ets move in either V1 or V2 and the maximum relative
speed will be given by the energy diﬀerence between the
FC window of the chosen excited LIP, V a
e (R), and the
asymptotic value of the molecular potential to which it
correlates, Ve(∞). If S is large, then V a
e is largely blue
shifted. As the carrier frequency of the pump ωp, is con-
stant, the energy diﬀerence between the Franck-Condon
region and the asymptotic threshold, which is ﬁxed as
Ve(∞), is smaller. Therefore, for constant S one can
achieve red-shifting of the KED.

In addition, using control pulses S(t), the Stark-
shifted KED will be very broad, like the photodissocia-
tion bands shown in Fig.10. Since during the absorption
S(t) is varying with time, the KED comprises energies
available when S(t) = 0 (that is, in the absence of con-
trol pulse) to energies available when S(t) is at its peak
value, which are greatly red shifted.

A most interesting eﬀect is the ability to detect a simi-
lar KED in both excited electronic states in the same ex-
periment. The previous protocol of a PS sequence that
allows to control the yield of the direct photochemical
reaction enables this possibility. In the results shown in
this section we will use half cycle control pulses S(t)
(ωS = 0) with very fast (∼ 5 fs) switch oﬀ times, imply-
ing the sudden change of the wave packet from ψa
e (t) to
ψ1(t) and ψ2(t), both initially opened, and the initially
closed electronic channels. Instead of changing the peak

00.20.40.60.81total yield1.21.622.42.8energy (eV)012345branching ratio(a)(b)12

potential at the Franck-Condon region.
In most cases,
under reasonable pulse intensities, the expected eﬀect
will be small, as the Franck-Condon window typically
lies in the fast-exponential repulsive wall of the poten-
tial and cannot be largely shifted in the same way that
the absorption spectra cannot be greatly altered. How-
ever, using resonant control pulses between V1 and V2
leads to a full reshaping of the LIP. The key then for
being able to change the asymptotic KEDs relies on non-
adiabatically disrupting ΩS(t) during the wave packet
evolution through the reaction coordinate. Then the en-
ergy diﬀerences between V a
e (R) and the molecular poten-
tials V1(R) and V2(R) at the time of the sudden switch
oﬀ of S(t) will be imprinted in the ﬁnal KEDs [10].

CONCLUSIONS

In this review we have provided an overview of the
theoretical framework that allows to describe and inter-
pret many dynamical processes of diatomic molecules un-
der the inﬂuence of strong laser ﬁelds, acting below the
threshold of ionization. We have analyzed several theo-
retical proposals using laser schemes that allow to enlarge
the bond length of molecules, to fabricate slow coherent
vibrations, to generate huge transient dipole moments
and to control the yield, branching ratio and kinetic en-
ergy distribution of the fragments after a direct photodis-
sociation reaction. We have illustrated these proposals
with results taken from some of our contributions in the
ﬁeld.

The experimental realization of some of these propos-
als is still lacking. It is typically diﬃcult to ﬁnd systems
where the eﬀect of the ﬁeld is strong enough to deform the
molecular potentials, yet not as strong as to completely
ionize the molecule. Some of the proposed schemes also
rely on frequency modulation over a bandwidth larger
than what is possible with currently technology. More
tests are needed, particularly in polyatomic molecules,
to assess the validity of the approximations involved and
to discover new ways to minimize the impact of ioniza-
tion. However, recent experiments have shown that it
is possible to achieve unprecedented control over pho-
todissociation reactions[8–10]. The LIPs provide a new
playground where essentially new electronic states are
created and these new chemical species are an open door
to control the chemistry of simple molecules or to increase
our understanding of the molecular dynamics in excited
states.

Acknowledgments

This work was

funded by the Korean government
the

International

supported by the NRF Grant
(2007-0056343),
program (NRF-

cooperation

FIG. 10: Kinetic energy distributions of the relative motion
of the fragments as a function of the time-delay between the
pump and control pulses. The pulse sequences are shown in
insets. The control pulse provokes broadening in the KED
with diﬀerent asymmetries for the PS and the SP sequences.
In the PS sequence the solid-line curve shows the KED in the
electronic state V2, and a dashed-line curve shows the KED
in the electronic state V1. The distributions for the diﬀerent
electronic channels almost overlap owing to the dynamics in
the same Stark-shifted potential. Because the control pulse is
very intense the probabilities on both channels are not very
diﬀerent. The peaks of the distributions are always red-shifted
with respect to the control free case, owing the the blue-Stark
shift of the V2 excited potential. (From J. Chem. Phys.131,
204314, Fig.4.)

amplitude of S, the control will be exerted by changing
the time-delay between the pulses. Using the same ICl−
model introduced before, in Fig.10 we show the control
exerted on both KEDs, which are practically identical for
both products.

All the KEDs using the PS sequence exhibit a kind
of asymmetry to the red, with the low-energy tail much
larger than the high-energy tail. This is because in the PS
sequence the absorption induced by p(t) occurs mainly
when S(t) is small, and thus the potentials are only
slightly blue-shifted. Blue-shifted asymmetries occur us-
ing the SP sequence. Then the bulk of the wave packet
is excited when S(t) is large, so that the peak of the
KED is now much more red shifted. As explained in
the previous section, in this case the photodissociation is
selective and only one ﬁnal state is observed. In the ex-
ample shown in Fig.10 the peak of the KED is now close
to 0.4 eV implying a larger deviation (> 30%) of the
relative speed of the fragments. We observe additional
features, like the characteristic structure of interference
due to excitation of the wave packet to the dissociative
potential at diﬀerent times [122].

In very nonresonant conditions, the manipulation of
the KED relies solely on the ability to Stark-shift the

0.40.60.8kinetic energy (eV)00.20.40.60.81amplitude (arb. units)εS = 0τ = 0 fsτ = 50 fsτ = -50 fsτ = -50 fs00.2time (ps)00.010.02pulse (e/a02)εSεp00.200.010.02εSεp00.200.010.02εSεp00.200.010.02εSεpthe Basic Science Research
2013K2A1A2054518),
program (NRF-2013R1A1A2061898),
the EDISON
project (2012M3C1A6035358), and the MICINN project
CTQ2012-36184.

∗ Electronic address: isola@quim.ucm.es
[1] S. A. Rice, M. Zhao, Optical Control of Molecular Dy-

namics, Wiley-Interscience, 2000.

[2] P. W. Brumer, M. Shapiro, Principles of the Quan-
tum Control of Molecular Processes, Wiley-Interscience,
2003.

[3] M. Wollenhaupt, V. Engel, T. Baumert, Annu. Rev.

Phys. Chem. 2005, 56, 25.

[4] C. Brif, R. Chakrabarti, H. Rabitz, Adv. Chem. Phys.

2012, 148, 1.

[5] G. A. Worth, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem. Sect. C: Phys.

Chem. 2013, 109, 113.

[6] A. H. Zewail, Phys. Today 1980, 33, 27.
[7] H. Rabitz, R. de Vivie-Riedle, K. Kompa, Science 2000,

288, 824.

[8] B. J. Sussman, D. Townsend, M. Y. Ivanov, A. Stolow,

Science 2006, 314, 278.

[9] J. Kim, H. Tao, J. L. White, V. S. Petrovic, T. J. Mar-
tinez, P. H. Bucksbaum, J. Phys. Chem. A 2012, 116,
2758.

[10] M. E. Corrales, J. Gonz´alez-V´azquez, G. Balerdi, I. R.
Sola, R. de Nalda, L. Ban˜ares, Nat. Chem. 2014, 6, 785.

[11] B. J. Sussman, Am. J. Phys. 2011, 79, 477.
[12] G. Nuernberger, G. Vogt, T. Briner, G. Gerber, Phys.

Chem. Chem. Phys. 2007, 9, 2470.

[13] D. Townsend, B. J. Sussman, A. Stolow, J. Phys. Chem.

A 2011, 115, 357.

[14] I. R. Sola, J. Gonz´alez-V´azquez, R. de Nalda, L.

Ba˜nares, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2015, 17, 13183.

[15] P. Agostini, F. Fabre, G. Mainfray, G. Petite, N. K.

Rahman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1979, 42, 1127.

[16] L. V. Keldysh, Sov. Phys.-JETP. 1964, 20, 1307.
[17] F. H. M. Faisal, J. Phys. B 1973, 6, L89.
[18] H. R. Reiss, Phys. Rev. A 1980, 22, 1786.
[19] P. Kruit, J. Kimman, H. G. Muller, M. J. van der Wiel,

Phys. Rev. A 1983 28, 248.

[20] M. Pont, M. Gavrila, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1990, 65, 2362.
[21] M. Lewenstein, Ph. Balcau, M. Yu. Ivanov, A. LHuillier,

P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. A 1994, 49, 2117.

[22] Atoms in Intense Laser Fields; M. Gavrila, Eds.; Aca-

demic Press: San Diego, 1992.

[23] N. B. Delone, V. P. Krainov, Multiphoton Processes in

Atoms, 2nd Ed.; Springer: Heidelberg, 2000.

[24] Lectures on Ultrafast Intense Laser Science, K. Ya-

manouchi, Eds.; Springer: Heidelberg, 2006.

[25] C. J. Joachain, N. J. Kylstra, R. M. Potvliege, Atoms in
Intense Laser Fields, Cambridge University Press: Cam-
bridge, 2012.

[26] J.-M. Yuan, T. F. George, J. Chem. Phys. 1978, 68,

3040.

[27] A. D. Bandrauk, M. L. Sink, J. Chem. Phys. 1981, 74,

1110.

[28] A. D. Bandrauk, E. E. Aubanel, J.-M. Gauthier,

in
Molecules in Laser Fields; A. D. Bandrauk, Eds.; Marcel
Dekker: New York, 1994, Chapter 3, pp 109-180.

13

[29] E. E. Aubanel, A. D. Bandrauk, J. Phys. Chem. 1993,

97, 12620.

[30] J. Gonz´alez-V´azquez, L. Gonz´alez, I. R. Sola, J. Santa-

maria, J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 131, 104302.

[31] N. Moiseyev, M. Sindelka, L. S. Cederbaum, J. Phys. B:

At., Mol. Opt. Phys. 2008, 41, 221001.

[32] M. Sindelka, N. Moiseyev, L. S. Cederbaum, J. Phys. B:

At., Mol. Opt. Phys. 2011, 44, 045603.

[33] G. J. Hal´asz, M. Sindelka, N. Moiseyev, L. S. Ceder-

baum, A. Vibok, J. Phys. Chem. A 2011, 116, 2636.

[34] G. J. Hal´asz, ´A. Vib´ok, M. Sindelka, L. S. Cederbaum,

N. Moiseyev, Chem. Phys. 2012, 399, 146.

[35] P. V. Demekhin, L. S. Cederbaum, J. Chem. Phys.

2013, 139, 154314.

[36] G. J. Hal´asz, ´A. Vib´ok, N. Moiseyev, L. S. Cederbaum,

Phys. Rev. A 2013, 88, 043413.

[37] G. J. Hal´asz, A. Csehi, ´A. Vib´ok, L. S. Cederbaum, J.

Phys. Chem. A 2014, 118, 11908.

[38] G. J. Hal´asz, ´A. Vib´ok, L. S. Cederbaum, J. Phys.

Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 348.

[39] A. Natan, M. R. Ware, P. H Bucksbaum, In Ultra-
fast Phenomena XIX; K. Yamanouchi, S. Cundiﬀ, R. de
Vivie-Riedle, M. Kuwata-Gonokami, L. Dimauro, Eds.;
Springer: New York, 2015; Vol. 162, pp. 122-125.

[40] I. R. Sola, V. S. Malinovsky, Phys. Rev. A 2003, 68,

013412.

[41] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, I. R. Sola, J. Phys. Chem. Lett.

2015, 6, 1724.

[42] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, I. R. Sola, J. Chem. Theor. Com-

put. 2015, 11, 4005.

[43] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, I. R. Sola, J. Phys. Chem. A

2015, 119, 9091.

[44] J. S. Melinger, S. R. Gandhi, A. Hariharan, J. X. Tull,

W. S. Warren, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992, 68, 2000.

[45] Y. B. Band, O. Magnes, Phys. Rev. A 1994, 50, 584.
[46] J. Cao, C. J. Bardeen, K. R. Wilson, Phys. Rev. Lett.

1998, 80, 1406.

[47] V. S. Malinovsky, J. L. Krause, Eur. Phys. J. D 2001,

14, 14.

[48] K. Bergmann, H. Theuer, B. W. Shore, Rev. Mod. Phys.

1998, 70, 1003.

[49] B. M. Garraway, K.-A. Suominen, Rep. Prog. Phys.

1995, 58, 365.

[50] N. V. Vitanov, T. Halfmann, B. W. Shore, K.

Bergmann, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2001, 52, 763.

[51] B. Garraway, K.-A. Suominen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1998,

80, 932.

[52] M. Rodriguez, K.-A. Suominen, B. Garraway, Phys.

Rev. A 2000, 62, 053413.

[53] I. R. Sola, J. Santamaria, V. Malinovsky, Phys. Rev. A

2000, 61, 043413.

[54] I. R. Sola, B. Y. Chang, J. Santamaria, V. Malinovsky,

J. Krause, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2000, 85, 4241.

[55] V. S. Malinovsky, J. Santamaria, I. R. Sola, J. Phys.

Chem. A 2003, 107, 8259.

[56] J. Gonz´alez-V´azquez, I. R. Sola and J. Santamaria, J.

Phys. Chem. A 2006, 110, 1586.

[57] J. J. Bajo, J. Gonz´alez-V´azquez, I. R. Sola, J. San-
tamaria, M. Richter, P. Marquetand, L. Gonz´alez, J.
Phys. Chem. A 2011, 116, 2800.

[58] K.-A. Suominen, J. Mod. Opt. 2014, 61, 851.
[59] S. Kallush, Y. Band, Phys. Rev. A 2000, 61, 041401.
[60] B. Y. Chang, I. R. Sola, V. S. Malinovsky, J. Santamara,

J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113, 4901.

[61] B. Y. Chang, B. Kim, I. R. Sola, J. Chem. Phys. 2003,

[94] B. Y. Chang, I. R. Sola, S. Lee, J. Santamaria, Phys.

14

118, 6270.

[62] M. Wollenhaupt, D. Liese, A. Prakelt, C. Sarpe-
Tudoran, T. Baumert, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 419,
184.

[63] M. Wollenhaupt, T. Baumert, J. Photochem. Photobiol.

A 2006, 180, 248.

[64] T. Bayer, M. Wollenhaupt, T. Baumert, J. Phys. B: At.,

Mol. Opt. Phys. 2008, 41, 074007.

[65] M. Wollenhaupt, T. Bayer, N. V. Vitanov, T. Baumert,
Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 2010, 81, 053422.
[66] S. Chelkowski, G. N. Gibson, Phys. Rev. A 1995, 52,

R3417.

[67] S. Chelkowski, A. D. Bandrauk, Raman Spectrosc.

1997, 28, 459.

[68] J. C. Davis, W. S. Warren, J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 110,

4229.

[69] F. Legare, S. Chelkowski, A. D. Bandrauk, Chem. Phys.

Lett. 2000, 329, 469.

[70] B. Y. Chang, I. R. Sola, J. Santamaria, J. Phys. Chem.

A 2001, 105, 8864.

[71] B. Y. Chang, I. R. Sola, J. Santamaria, Chem. Phys.

Lett. 2001, 341, 373.

[72] P. H. Bucksbaum, A. Zavriyev, H. B. Muller, D. W.

Schumacher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1990, 64, 1883.

[73] A. Zavriyev, P. H. Bucksbaum, H. B. Muller, D. W.

Schumacher, Phys. Rev. A 1990, 42, 5500.

[74] B. Yang, M. Saeed, L. F. DiMauro, A. Zavriyev, P. H.

Bucksbaum, Phys. Rev. A 1991, 44, R1458.

[75] S. W. Allendorf, A. Szoke, Phys. Rev. A 1991, 44, 518.
[76] G. Jolicard, O. Atabek, Phys. Rev. A 1992, 46, 5845.
[77] A. Giusti-Suzor, F. H. Mies, L. F. Dimauro, E. Charron,
B. Yang, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 1995, 28, 309.
[78] A. Giusti-Suzor, F. H. Mies, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992, 68,

3869.

[79] G. Yao, S. I. Chu, Chem. Phys. Lett. 1992, 197, 413.
[80] A. Zavriyev, P. H. Bucksbaum, J. Squier, F. Saline,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 70, 1077.

[81] E. E. Aubanel, J. M. Gauthier, A. D. Bandrauk, Phys.

Rev. A 1993, 48, 2145.

[82] E. E. Aubanel, A. Conjusteau, A. D. Bandrauk, Phys.

Rev. A 1993, 48, R4011.

[83] B. Y. Chang, B. Kim, I.R. Sola, J. Chem. Phys. 2003,

118, 6270.

[84] B. Y. Chang, H. Rabitz, I. R. Sola, Phys. Rev. A 2003,

68, 031402.

[85] B. Y. Chang, S. Lee, I. R. Sola, J. Chem. Phys. 2004,

121, 11118.

[86] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, A. Palacios, F. Martin, I. R. Sola,

ChemPhysChem 2013, 14, 1405.

[87] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, I. R. Sola, Phys. Rev. A 2010,

82, 063414.

[88] I. R. Sola, S. Shin, B.Y. Chang, J. Chem. Phys. 2011

134, 104301.

[89] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, J. Santamaria, I. R. Sola, J.

Chem. Phys. 2011 134, 144303.

[90] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, J. Santamaria, I. R. Sola, J. Phys.

Chem. A 2012, 116, 2691.

[91] I. R. Sola, Phys. Rev. A 2004, 69, 033401.
[92] B. Y. Chang, S. Lee, I. R. Sola, J. Santamaria, J. Chem.

Phys. 2005, 122, 204316.

[93] B. Y. Chang, I. R. Sola, J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 123,

244101.

Rev. A 2006, 73, 023407.

[95] B. Y. Chang, S. Lee, I.R. Sola, J. Santamaria, Phys.

Rev. A 2006 73, 013404.

[96] B. Y. Chang, S. Lee, I. R. Sola, J. Santamaria, J. Pho-

tochem. Photobiol. A 2006, 180, 241.

[97] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, A. Palacios, F. Martin, I. R. Sola,

J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 139, 084306.

[98] E. Persson, J. Burgd¨orfer, S. Gr¨afe, New. J. Phys. 2009,

11, 105035.

[99] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, A. Palacios, F. Martin, I. R. Sola,

J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2015, 48, 043001.

[100] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, V. Malinovsky, I. R. Sola, J. Phys.

B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 2015, 48, 174005.

[101] J. Gonz´alez-V´azquez, I. R. Sola, J. Santamaria, V. S.

Malinovsky, Chem. Phys. Lett. 2006, 431, 231.

[102] J. Gonz´alez-V´azquez, I. R. Sola, J. Santamaria, V. S.

Malinovsky, J. Chem. Phys. 2006, 125, 124315.

[103] J. Gonz´alez-V´azquez, I.R. Sola, J. Santamaria, V. S.

Malinovsky, J. Phys. Chem. A 2007, 111, 2670.

[104] M. Falge, V. Engel, M. Lein, P. Vindel-Zandbergen, B.
Y. Chang, I. R. Sola, J. Phys. Chem. A 2012, 116,
11427.

[105] M. Falge, P. Vindel-Zandbergen, V. Engel, M. Lein, B.
Y. Chang, I. R. Sola, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys.
2014, 47, 124027.

[106] I. R. Sola, J. Gonz´alez-V´azquez, V. S. Malinovsky, Phys.

Rev. A 2006, 74, 043418.

[107] B. J. Sussman, M. Y. Ivanov, A. Stolow, Phys. Rev. A

2005, 71, 051401.

[108] H. Choi, W. J. Son, S. Shin, B. Y. Chang, I. R. Sola, J.

Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 104315.

[109] B. Y. Chang, H. Choi, S. Shin, I. Sola, J. Modern Opt.

2009, 56, 811.

[110] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, J. Santamaria, I. R. Sola, J.

Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 124320.

[111] B. Y. Chang, S. Shin, I. R. Sola, J. Chem. Phys., 2009,

131, 204314.

[112] J. Javanainen, J. Eberly, Q. Su, Phys. Rev. A 1988, 38,

3430.

[113] Q. Su, J. Eberly, Phys. Rev. A 1991, 44, 5997.
[114] K. C. Kulander, F. H. Mies, K. J. Schafer, Phys. Rev.

A 1996, 53, 2562.

[115] A. D. Bandrauk, H. Kono, in Advances in Multi-Photon
Processes and Spectroscopy; S.H. Lin, A. Villaeys, Y.
Fujimura, Eds.; World Scientiﬁc: Singapore, 2003 vol.
15, pp 149-214.

[116] H. Kono, Y. Sato, M. Kanno, K. Nakai, T. Kato, Bull.

Chem. Soc. Jpn. 2006, 79, 196.

[117] T. Zuo, A. D. Bandrauk, Phys. Rev. A 1995, 52, R2511.
[118] H. Niikura, D. M. Villeneuve, P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 2004, 92, 133002.

[119] G. Balerdi, M. E. Corrales, G. Gitzinger, J. Gonz´alez-
V´azquez, I. R. Sola, V. Loriot, R. de Nalda, L. Ba˜nares,
EPJ Web Conf. 2013, 41, 02035.

[120] S. Meyer, C. Meier, V. Engel, J. Chem. Phys. 1998,

108, 7631.

[121] P. E. Maslen, J. Faeder, R. Parson, Chem. Phys. Lett.

1996, 263, 63.

[122] M. Lein, M. Erdmann, V. Engel, J. Chem. Phys. 2009,

113, 3609.

