6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
S
D
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
8
0
8
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS: NEW INVARIANTS AND

EIGENFORM LOCI IN THE STRATUM Hp1, 1q

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Abstract. We study dynamics of the horocycle ﬂow on strata
of translation surfaces, introduce new invariants for ergodic mea-
sures, and analyze the interaction of the horocycle ﬂow and real
Rel surgeries. We use this analysis to complete and extend results
of Calta and Wortman classifying horocycle-invariant measures in
the eigenform loci. We classify the orbit-closures and prove that
every orbit is equidistributed in its orbit-closure. We also prove
equidistribution statements regarding limits of sequences of mea-
sures, some of which have applications to counting problems.

1. Introduction

Translation surfaces arise naturally in many diﬀerent mathematical
contexts, e.g. complex analysis, geometric group theory, geometry and
billiards. See [MaTa, Zo] for surveys. A stratum is a moduli space of
translation surfaces of a given topological type (detailed deﬁnitions will
be given below). Ideas from renormalization theory have been useful in
the study of translation surfaces, and these are encoded in the action
of the group G “ SL2pRq, and its subgroups, on strata. The study of
the dynamics of these actions has led to signiﬁcant advances in the un-
derstanding of the geometry of translation surfaces and the dynamics
of ﬂows on individual translation surfaces, and hence has been under
intensive study for over 30 years. A fruitful analogy for understanding
the dynamics, is an analogy between strata of translation surfaces and
homogeneous spaces of Lie groups (in fact the simplest stratum, namely
the stratum of tori with one marked point, is the homogeneous space
G{ SL2pZq, but other strata are not homogeneous). A celebrated set
of results in the homogeneous setting, due to Ratner, Margulis, Dani,
and others, is the classiﬁcation of invariant measures, orbit-closures,
equidistribution of orbits, and additional equidistribution results. We
refer to [KSS] for a detailed survey of results and methods of homoge-
neous dynamics. These results, and the techniques employed in their

Date: March 3, 2016.

1

2

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

proof, have been inspirational for many developments in the study of
dynamics on strata.

A central problem is to classify the invariant measures and orbit-
closures for the actions of G, and its subgroup U of unipotent matri-
ces, on strata. For the G-action, measure and orbit-closure classiﬁ-
cation results were obtained by McMullen [McM3] in the genus two
strata Hp2q and Hp1, 1q. In arbitrary genus, Eskin, Mirzakhani and
Mohammadi [EMi, EMiMo] showed that invariant measures and orbit-
closures are of a geometrical nature, sharing many of the features of
the strata themselves, and subsequent and ongoing work of many au-
thors (see e.g.
[F, W2]) has revealed a rich connection to arithmetic
and algebraic geometry. These results could be regarded as an ana-
logue of Ratner’s results for the action of G, and this analogy raises
the question of whether similar phenomena are also valid for the U -
action. However the U -action is not as well understood. The purpose
of this paper is to make a contribution to the study of the U -action,
building on previous work of Eskin, Marklof and Morris [EMaMo], and
Calta and Wortman [CW], who adapted some of Ratner’s arguments
to the non-homogeneous setting.

In the ﬁrst part of this paper we discuss general features of the U -
action and in the second part, we give a complete picture in a restricted
setting, namely in the eigenform loci. These spaces are G-invariant loci
within the genus 2 stratum Hp1, 1q, which were discovered by Calta and
McMullen [C, McM2, McM3]. In these loci we extend the analogy with
homogeneous spaces by proving analogues of results proved by Ratner,
Dani, Margulis, and Shah.

First we describe our dynamical invariants for the U -action. Several
of these involve the real Rel vector ﬁelds, which correspond to local
motion in a direction in a stratum which moves one singularity hori-
zontally with respect to another, while ﬁxing absolute periods of the
surface. As observed by Calta [C], these vector ﬁelds commute with
the U -action, and in particular send U -orbits to U -orbits, preserving
their parameterization. Combining these vector ﬁelds with the geo-
desic ﬂow provides directions of motion which normalize the U -action,
sending U -orbits to U -orbits, while inducing a time-change on the or-
bits. Thus the centralizer and normalizer of the U -action are locally
modeled respectively on an abelian Lie group Z and a nilpotent Lie
group N .

There is a fundamental diﬀerence between homogeneous spaces and
strata of translation surfaces, in connection with these vector ﬁelds.
On homogeneous spaces, natural vector ﬁelds can be integrated to de-
ﬁne group actions on the space, and the centralizer and the normalizer

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

3

subgroups of the U -action play an important role in studying the dy-
namics. In the case of strata, motion in the real Rel directions is not
globally deﬁned; i.e. the solution curves for the diﬀerential equation
deﬁned by these vector ﬁelds may not be deﬁned for all times. This
implies that the centralizer and normalizer of the horocycle ﬂow make
sense locally but do not correspond to globally deﬁned actions of Lie
groups (in [EMaMo] this is discussed using the terminology of “pseudo
group-actions”, which we will avoid favoring the language of geometric
structures and vector ﬁelds). The domain of well-deﬁned motion in
the Z and N directions are invariants of a U -invariant ergodic mea-
sure µ, which we denote by Zpµq, Npµq (see §4). Moreover within these
domain of well-deﬁned motion, are Lie groups Zµ, Nµ which do act on
supp µ and are the stabilizer subgroups of µ within the centralizer and
normalizer (see §4.1).
An additional invariant is a “horizontal data diagram” Ξpµq (see
§5), recording topological and geometric structure left invariant by the
U -action. This includes the number and length of horizontal saddle
connections, the topology of the complements, and the incidence of
these saddle connections at singularities.
Rigorous deﬁnitions of the invariants listed above require passing to
certain ﬁnite covering spaces of strata. To this end we begin in §2 with
a detailed discussion of “blow ups of translations surfaces” along with
their corresponding moduli spaces and mapping class groups. These
notions are useful throughout our discussion: for marking singularities,
marking distinguished horizontal prongs, distinguishing horizontal data
diagrams, resolving orbifold issues for both the stratum and for the
structure of individual rel leaves, and for discussing surgeries involving
a stratum and nearby boundary strata obtained from it as limits of rel
operations. An interesting novelty of our approach is that certain ﬁnite
covers ˆG of G appear as the groups which acts naturally on our covers
(see §2.10). The ﬁnite covers we consider have arisen in topological
contexts (see [Boi]), in the study of interval exchange transformations
(see [Y]) and in computations of monodromy representations (see e.g.
[MYZ]), as well as in our forthcoming [SmWe3]. We believe that the
terminology we introduce will be useful in future work on translation
surfaces.

Recall that a surface M is generic for µ if for any continuous com-
pactly supported function f on supp µ, limTÑ8 1
f dµ,
where U “ tus : s P Ru. The analysis of generic points plays a major
T
role in the analysis of ergodic measures on homogeneous spaces. The
Rel surgery depends on a parameter T and as remarked above, the Rel

T

ş
0 fpusMq ds “

ş

4

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

surgery is not globally deﬁned. As a consequence, the set of surfaces for
which it is deﬁned for all T is not locally compact and it is not a-priori
clear that the centralizer of the U -action should map U -generic points
to U -generic points. We clarify this in §4.2. In §6 we explicitly identify
the domain of deﬁnition of real Rel surgeries, continuing work done in
[MW2, McM8, B2].
In the second part of the paper we specialize to eigenform loci.
Namely, let D ě 4 be an integer congruent to either 0 or 1 mod 4,
and let EDp1, 1q be the space of translation surfaces in Hp1, 1q which
are eigenforms for real multiplication by a quadratic order of discrimi-
nant D. The following is our measure classiﬁcation result.

Theorem 1.1. Let D be as above and let µ be a U -invariant U -ergodic
Borel probability measure on EDp1, 1q. Then one of the following holds:
(1) Every surface in supp µ has a horizontal cylinder decomposition

and µ is the length measure on a periodic U -orbit.

(2) Every surface in supp µ has a horizontal cylinder decomposi-
tion into three cylinders and µ is the area measure on a 2-
In this case µ is
dimensional minimal set for the U -action.
invariant under the real Rel operation.
(3) For every M P supp µ, the horizontal data diagram ΞpMq con-
tains two saddle connections, joining distinct singularities, whose
union divides M into two isogenous tori glued along a slit. In
this case µ is the image of the G-invariant measure on a quo-
tient G{Γ for some lattice Γ, via a Borel U -equivariant map.
(4) For every M P supp µ, ΞpMq contains one saddle connection

joining distinct singularities, and µ is the image of the pG-invariant
measure on a quotient pG{Γ for some lattice Γ in the 3-fold con-
nected cover pG of G, via a Borel U -equivariant map.

(5) The set of surfaces with horizontal saddle connections has µ
measure zero and µ is the image of the G-invariant measure on
a closed G-orbit in Hp1, 1q via a Borel U -equivariant map. In
this case D is either a square or is equal to 5.
(6) For every M P supp µ, ΞpMq contains two saddle connections
joining distinct singularities, whose complement in M is a torus
with two parallel slits of equal length, which are images of each
other under a translation by an exactly d-torsion element of the
torus. In this case D “ d2 is a square and µ is the image, via
a Borel U -equivariant map, of the G-invariant measure on the
space of tori.
(7) µ is the canonical ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q obtained from period

coordinates.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

5

We describe these measures in detail in §8. The construction of most
of the measures in this list involves the real Rel operation on Hp1, 1q.
Any U -invariant measure µ, which is not preserved by real Rel, gives
rise to a one-parameter family of U -invariant translates of µ by real
Rel. This observation of Calta [C, CW] is crucial to our analysis, and
the measures (3)–(6) all arise in this way as real Rel translates of G-
invariant measures. The measures (5) are the real Rel translates of the
natural measures on closed G-orbits in Hp1, 1q. Loosely speaking, the
measures (3),(4), and (6) are all pushforwards of measures on closed G-
orbits in a suitable boundary component in a bordiﬁcation of Hp1, 1q,
where the maps pushing the measure consist of the composition of
real Rel with a map passing from the boundary component to Hp1, 1q.
In (4), the closed G-orbit belongs to the stratum Hp2q, while in (3)
it belongs to Hp0q ˆ Hp0q, and in (6) it belongs to Hp0, 0q (where
Hp0q and Hp0, 0q denote respectively the moduli spaces of genus one
translation surfaces with one or two marked points).
The equivariant maps in cases (3)–(6) arise from the real Rel opera-
tion and are not deﬁned for every point in G{Γ. They deﬁne Borel iso-
morphisms between the supports of these measures and homogeneous
spaces (that is, quotients G{Γ for lattices Γ Ă G). We emphasize how-
ever that these maps are not everywhere deﬁned, but rather on a dense
open set of full measure, and thus their existence does not imply the
existence of homeomorphisms of the supports of these measures with
homogeneous spaces of G. In fact such homeomorphisms do not exist
in general; in a forthcoming paper [SmWe3], we show that the supports
of these measures are not homeomorphic to homogeneous spaces. In
particular the supports of the measures appearing in case (5) above are
manifolds with nonempty boundaries and inﬁnitely generated funda-
mental groups. It is likely that the same is true in cases (3), (4) and
(6).

Theorem 1.1 extends a theorem of Calta and Wortman [CW].

In
[CW] it was assumed that D is not a square, and thus case (6) did
not arise. Also [CW] assumed that µ is not invariant under the real
Rel operation, and case (2) did not arise. Theorem 1.1 is proved in
a more general form in §9. The statement is inspired by Ratner’s
measure classiﬁcation theorem [KSS, Thm. 3.3.2], and its proof is
inspired by [EMaMo, CW], which in turn employs arguments of Ratner.
We provide some technical shortcuts and clarify some delicate steps.
Our treatment relies on the general results worked out in §4.1, §4.2 and
§6.

The measures in cases (1)–(6) of Theorem 1.1 are naturally organized
in continuous families depending on some real parameters (e.g. in case

6

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

(5) the continuous parameter involves a real Rel perturbation, and in
case (2) there is a natural two parameter family of perturbations). We
call such continuous families of U -invariant measures “beds”. Within
them, the invariants Ξpµq, Zpµq and Zµ are constant, while Npµq and
Nµ vary in a natural way with respect to the real Rel action. In §11,
we develop an analogue of the “linearization technique” developed for
homogeneous spaces (see [KSS, §3.4]) to analyze the behavior of U -
orbits which are near beds. Using these ideas we classify all orbit-
closures for the U -action on EDp1, 1q.

In fact we prove a stronger statement. The assertion that M is
generic for µ constitutes a quantitative strengthening of the assertion
that U M “ supp µ. The following statement is an analogue of Ratner’s
genericity theorem [KSS, Thm. 3.3.10]:
Theorem 1.2. For any D as above and any M P EDp1, 1q, there is a
measure µ as in Theorem 1.1 such that M is generic for µ, and belongs
to the support of µ.

In §11 we deduce Theorem 1.2 from a more explicit result which
explains, given M , how to construct the measure µ for which M is
generic.

Continuing the analogy with related results for homogeneous ﬂows,
we prove several equidistribution results. We mention three of our
results of this type here, and refer the reader to §12 for more results
along these lines.

Theorem 1.3. Let µ be the length measure on a periodic U -orbit in
EDp1, 1q, let tgtu denote the geodesic ﬂow, and suppose supp µ is not
contained in a closed G-orbit. Then the measures gt˚µ converge to the
ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q as t Ñ 8.

This could be viewed as a non-homogeneous analogue of a theorem
that Shah proves in a homogeneous setting [KSS, Thm. 3.7.6]. The
following result also has an analogue in the homogeneous setting (see
[KSS, §3.7]):
Theorem 1.4. Let µ be the G-invariant measure on a closed G-orbit
in EDp1, 1q. Let t P R and let µt be the measure obtained by applying
the real Rel operation to surfaces in supp µ, with rel parameter t. Then
as t Ñ 8 or t Ñ ´8, µt converges to the ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q.

In response to a question of Giovanni Forni, we prove:

Theorem 1.5. Let µ be any ergodic U -invariant measure on EDp1, 1q,
then as t Ñ `8, gt˚µ converges to a G-invariant measure, and as

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

7

t Ñ ´8, either gt˚µ converges to a G-invariant measure or gt˚µ is
divergent in the space of probability measures on Hp1, 1q.

We also prove an equidistribution result for large circles in Theorem
12.7. Following a strategy of Eskin and Masur [EM], we use this result
to solve a counting problem. We obtain:
Theorem 1.6. For any M P EDp1, 1q, the limit

#tsaddle connections on M of length ď Tu

CD “ lim
TÑ8

exists.

T 2

Theorem 1.6 was proved in [EMS] for the case that D is a square,
and in [B2] for the case that D is not a square. In both of these papers
precise formulae for the constants CD were given. In fact, when D is
not square, CD “ 4π, which agrees with the value of this constant for
a generic surface in Hp1, 1q. The proof given in [B2] contained a gap
in the case D “ 5 which our results bridge.
We expect that the results obtained in §8–§12 for the eigenform loci
in genus 2, can be extended to the Prym loci in genera 3, 4, 5 (see
[McM6]), and more generally, to the rank-one loci deﬁned by Wright
[W1]. We hope to return to this topic in future work.

1.1. Acknowledgements. The authors are grateful to Uri Bader, Elon
Lindenstrauss and Saul Schleimer for useful conversations. This work
is supported by BSF grant 2010428, Royal Society Wolfson Research
Merit Award, and ERC starter grant DLGAPS 279893.

2. Basics

In this section we deﬁne our objects of study: translation surfaces,
moduli spaces of translation surfaces and dynamics on moduli spaces.
For background and alternate treatments we refer the reader to [EMZ,
MaTa, MaSm, Zo]. Our treatment expands on previous work by dis-
cussing in detail blow-ups of translation surfaces and associated orbifold
covering spaces of strata, which are needed in later sections. Our dis-
cussion also has interesting consequences of indendent interest about
fundamental groups of strata (see §2.11).

2.1. Translation surfaces. A translation surface, or a surface with
translation structure can be deﬁned in several equivalent ways. We will
describe it by gluing polygons, in terms of an atlas using the language
of pG, Xq structures, or as a holomorphic diﬀerential.

8

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Let M be a surface obtained from a collection of polygons in R2
which are glued together by isometries of the edges which are restric-
tions of translations. Each polygon edge receives an orientation when
viewed as part of the boundary of a polygon and we assume that the
gluing isometries reverse these boundary orientations. This construc-
tion typically produces a ﬁnite set of singular points corresponding to
the vertices of the polygons at which the cone angle is larger than 2π.
The cone angle at a singularity is 2πpn ` 1q for some natural number
n. We call n the order of the singularity. In addition to the singular
points that we have deﬁned it is often useful to mark a ﬁnite set of
points at which the cone angles are 2π. Let Σ be a ﬁnite subset of M
which contains all of the singular points and possibly some additional
“marked” points.

A translation structure on a surface determines an atlas of charts for
the surface M (cid:114) Σ taking values in R2 where the transition maps are
restrictions of translations. A translation structure can be determined
by specifying this atlas. If we have a space X equipped with an action
of a group G, a pG, Xq-structure is an atlas of charts with overlap func-
tions in G. Thus a translation surface produces a pG, Xq “ pR2, R2q
structure on M where the ﬁrst R2 represents a Lie group acting on
the second R2 by translation. See [Th] for more information about
pG, Xq-structures.

We can use the atlas of charts on M to deﬁne geometric structures on
M which are naturally associated with the translation structure. Since
the one-forms dx and dy are translation invariant on R2 these charts
allow us to build globally deﬁned one-forms dx and dy on M . Similarly
we can use the planar charts to deﬁne a metric, an area form, and an
orientation on M . A saddle connection on M is a path with endpoints
in Σ, which is a straight line in each chart of this atlas, and does not
contain singularities in its interior. The one-forms dx and dy are closed
and represent cohomology classes in H 1pM, Σ; Rq. For an oriented
path γ connecting points in Σ write holpM, γq for
. We
can think of holpM,¨q as giving a homomorphism from π1pMq to R2
or as determining an element of H 1pM, Σ; R2q. This is the holonomy
R2 with derivative equal to the identity is a developing map. Developing
maps exist and are unique up to translation. The developing map is
equivariant with respect to the holonomy homomorphism. This is an
instance of the general principle that for any pG, Xq-structure on a
homomorphism π1pMq Ñ G.

homomorphism. IfĂM is the universal cover of M then a map fromĂM to
manifold M , there is a developing map dev : ĂM Ñ X and a holonomy

´ş

γ dx,

γ dy

ş

¯

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

9

The atlas for a translation surface gives a trivialization of the tangent
bundle at non-singular points. Let us say that f : M Ñ N is a smooth
map between translation surfaces if it preserves singular sets, and is
smooth away from the singular set of M . Using the trivialization of
the tangent space, we can view the derivative of a smooth map f as a
2 ˆ 2 real matrix-valued function. We say that a smooth map f is a
translation equivalence if it is a homeomorphism and its derivative is the
identity matrix. The notion of translation equivalence gives a natural
equivalence relation on translation surfaces. We say that M and N are
aﬃnely equivalent if there is an orientation-preserving smooth map f
between them which is a homeomorphism and for which Df is constant
but not necessarily equal to the identity. The aﬃne equivalence classes
are orbits of a GL˝
If we identify R2 with C then the coordinate charts of a translation
structure induce a conformal structure on M (cid:114) Σ. This conformal
structure extends to M so that the points in Σ correspond to punctures.
We can deﬁne the complex-valued one-form dz “ dx ` i dy. This is a
holomorphic one-form or Abelian diﬀerential with zeros at the singular
points where the order of the zero is the order of the singular point.
If we are given a surface with a conformal structure X and we wish
to deﬁne a compatible translation surface then this is determined by a
nonzero holomorphic one-form ω. We use the notation pX, ωq to denote
this pair. For the relations between these three points of view, see [Zo]
and the references cited there.

2pRq-action we will discuss shortly.

2.2. Strata as sets. Strata are moduli spaces of translation surfaces.
In this section we describe the set of surfaces corresponding to a given
stratum and the relevant notion of equivalence. In section 2.4 we will
show that the set of these equivalence classes of surfaces can be given
natural orbifold structures. Let k P N and let a1, . . . , ak be a sequence
of non-negative integers. Let M be a translation surface and let Σ be
a ﬁnite subset of M which consists of k points labeled ξ1, . . . , ξk and
contains all singular points of M . (Note that our conventions imply
that Σ has at least one point.) We say that M is a translation surface
of type pa1, . . . , akq if the cone angle at ξj is 2πpaj ` 1q. We refer to
aj as the order of ξj. The points ξj with order zero are not singular
and we will refer to them as marked points. We want to construct a
version of the stratum in which singular points have well deﬁned la-
bels. To this end we say that two surfaces of type pa1, . . . , akq are label
preserving translation equivalent if they are translation equivalent by

10

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

means of a translation equivalence preserving the labelling of the singu-
lar points. (When no confusion will result we will drop the expression
“label preserving”.)
Let H “ Hpa1, . . . , akq denote the stratum of translation surfaces of
type pa1, . . . , akq, considered up to label preserving translation equiv-
alence. The surfaces in H have genus g where 2g ´ 2 “
It
is sometimes convenient to denote this stratum as Hgpa1, . . . , akq. In
particular note that g ě 1 since the aj are non-negative.

ř

aj.

Caution should be exercised in dealing with surfaces with non-trivial
translation automorphisms. Since there is no canonical equivalence
between two equivalent surfaces with non-trivial translation automor-
phisms it is dangerous to think of them as being ‘the same’. When we
build the stratum as a topological space these surfaces will correspond
to orbifold points.

2.3. Strata of marked surfaces. Let S be an oriented surface of
genus g and let Σ be a subset consisting of k points labeled ξ1, . . . , ξk.
The pair pS, Σq will serve as a topological model for a translation sur-
face. A marked translation surface is a translation surface M of type
pa1, . . . , akq, equipped with an orientation-preserving homeomorphism
f : S Ñ M where Σ maps to the appropriate distinguished points of
the translation structure, respecting the labels. We will consider S as
ﬁxed and sometimes write maps f : S Ñ M as pairs pf, Mq. Two
marked translation surfaces pf1, M1q and pf2, M2q are considered to be
equivalent as marked translation surfaces if there is a label preserving
translation equivalence g : M1 Ñ M2 so that g ˝ f1 and f2 are isotopic
via an isotopy that ﬁxes the points in Σ.
Let Hm “ Hmpa1, . . . , akq denote the set of marked translation sur-
faces, up to the equivalence relation described above. As discussed
above, a surface M P H determines a cohomology class holpM,¨q P
H 1pM, Σ; R2q. A marked translation surface f : S Ñ M in Hm deter-
mines a pullback cohomology class f˚pholpM,¨qq P H 1pS, Σ; R2q where
f˚pholpM, γqq “ holpM, f˚pγqq. We denote by
dev : Hm Ñ H 1pS, Σ; R2q

(1)

the map which takes a marked translation surface to the corresponding
element of H 1pS, Σ; R2q. This map is often called the period map.
2.4. Strata as spaces. We now deﬁne a topology on Hm using an atlas
of charts which is deﬁned via triangulations of translation surfaces.
Let τ be a triangulation of S so that the vertices are points in Σ.
We do not require that edges have distinct endpoints in S though we
do require that they have distinct endpoints in the universal cover of

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

11

S or equivalently that no two edges are homotopic relative to their
endpoints. This triangulation gives S the structure of a ∆-complex
(for a deﬁnition see [H, p. 102]). Let Uτ Ă Hm be the set of marked
translation surfaces containing a representative f : S Ñ M which takes
the edges of τ to saddle connections in M .

The function that maps an oriented edge to its holonomy vector is
a 1-cochain in the cochain complex associated to the triangulation τ .
The condition that the sums of vectors on the boundary of a triangle is
zero means that this 1-cochain is a cocycle. Using the fact that τ is a
∆-complex we can identify the space of such cocycles with H 1pS, Σ; R2q
(see [H]).
Using the triangulation τ allows us to deﬁne comparison maps be-
tween two marked translation surfaces lying in a given chart Uτ . Namely,
suppose pf, Mq and pf1, M1q are two representatives of marked trans-
lation surfaces in the same Uτ . Then f1 ˝ f´1 : M Ñ M1 is a homeo-
morphism but it is only well deﬁned up to isotopy. We deﬁne a map
F in this isotopy class by requiring that for each triangle ∆ in τ , F
is an aﬃne map when restricted to fp∆q. This requirement and the
triangulation τ determine F “ Fpτ, M, M1q uniquely, and we call it the
comparison map between M and M1.
Proposition 2.1. The map dev|Uτ
and its image is open.
Proof. Suppose pf, Mq and pf1, M1q are in Uτ and have the same image
under dev. The comparison map Fpτ, M, M1q : M Ñ M1 is a transla-
tion equivalence since the holonomy of corresponding edges are equal.
By changing f and f1 by isotopies we can assume that the image fpτq
and f1pτq are geodesic triangulations. So the maps F ˝ f and f1 are
equal. We conclude that pf, Mq and pf1, M1q are equivalent and the
developing map is injective on Uτ .
A cohomology class φ is in the image of dev|Uτ if the values of φ on
the sides of every triangle ∆ in τ correspond to the coordinates of a
non-degenerate triangle in R2 with the appropriate orientation — an
open condition in H 1pS, Σ; R2q. If this condition is satisﬁed then an
appropriate translation surface can be built by gluing together triangles
in R2 with edge coordinates given by φ. In particular the image devpUτq
is open in H 1pS, Σ; R2q.
(cid:3)

: Uτ Ñ H 1pS, Σ; R2q is injective

It was shown in [MaSm] that every translation surface M with Σ
nonempty admits a triangulation of this type. Thus the charts Uτ cover
Hm as τ ranges over triangulations of S. The change of coordinate maps
for this system of charts are linear. These charts on the sets Uτ give

12

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Hm an aﬃne manifold structure. This aﬃne manifold structure can be
discussed using the terminology of pG, Xq-structures. Speciﬁcally we
can take X to be H 1pS, Σ; R2q and the structure group G can be taken
to be the group of linear automorphisms of H 1pS, Σ; R2q. Our choice
of dev as notation for the map in (1) is motivated by the fact that this
map is the developing map for the aﬃne structure.
We have described triangulations of pS, Σq in terms of a homeomor-
phism with a ∆-complex. We note that such a homeomorphism is
determined up to isotopy by knowing the relative homotopy classes of
the edges of the triangulation (see [FaMa, Lemma 2.9]). Furthermore
distinct edges are not homotopic to each other relative to their end-
points. In the sequel we will use τ to denote the homotopy classes of
edges of a triangulation.

We now make use of the marked stratum to put a topology on the
stratum. Consider the group of isotopy classes of orientation-preserving
homeomorphisms of S ﬁxing Σ pointwise. This is sometimes called the
pure mapping class group (see e.g.
[I]). We will simply refer to it as
the mapping class group and we will denote it by ModpS, Σq. Up to
the action of ModpS, Σq there are ﬁnitely many charts Uτ . It can be
checked that the ModpS, Σq-action on Hm is properly discontinuous.
This equips the quotient H “ Hm{ ModpS, Σq with the structure of
an aﬃne orbifold, with respect to which the map Hm Ñ H is an orb-
ifold covering map (see [Th] for the deﬁnition and basic properties of
properly discontinuous actions and orbifolds).

2.5. Blow ups of translation surfaces. We now discuss a “blow-up”
construction that replaces a singularity ξ by a boundary circle. This is
a special case of a more general construction of a “real oriented blow-
up” (see e.g. [HPV]). The real oriented blowup of a point ξ in R2 is a
new space BloξpR2q together with a collapsing map c : BloξpR2q Ñ R2
with the property that the inverse image of any point other than ξ is
a single point while the inverse image of ξ is the circle of directions at
ξ which we can identify with pR2 (cid:114) t0uq{R` (or with the unit circle)
and denote by S1. The space BloξpR2q has the property that a smooth
path in R2 landing at ξ and with non-zero derivative at ξ has a lift to
the space BloξpR2q which takes the endpoint of the path to a point in
the circle of directions.
If we blow up the vertex ψ of a polygon P in R2 then we obtain
the space BloψpPq which is the result of replacing the vertex ψ in P
by an interval. We describe this construction explicitly. Applying a
translation, assume ψ is at the origin. Say that the two edges of the
polygon incident to ψ are in directions θ1, θ2 with 0 ă θ2 ´ θ1 ă 2π,

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

13

and there is ε ą 0 such that

trpcos θ, sin θq : θ P rθ1, θ2s, r P r0, εqu

parametrizes a neighborhood of ψ in P . The blow-up of this neighbor-
hood in BloψpPq corresponds to the rectangle

tpr, θq : θ P rθ1, θ2s, r P r0, εsu

and the collapsing map c from BloψpPq to P takes pr, θq to rpcos θ, sin θq.
In particular the interval tp0, θq : θ P rθ1, θ2su is collapsed to the point
ψ. Note that this interval has a natural “angular coordinate” with
values in the unit circle.

ˇM Ñ S1. The total angular measure of Bj

Given a translation surface M with singular points Σ we construct
a surface with boundary ˇM by blowing up all of the points of Σ. We
can do this as follows. Choose a triangulation of M . Blow up each
vertex of each triangle thereby creating a family of hexagons where
each hexagon contains edges of two types: those corresponding to edges
of triangles and those corresponding to vertices of triangles. Glue the
(triangle edge) sides of the hexagons together according to the gluing
pattern of the original triangles. The result is the surface ˇM which is in
fact independent of the particular choice of triangulation. At a singular
point ξj of the surface the intervals mapping to ξj glue together to form
a circle which we call Bj
ˇM . The angular coordinates glue together to
give us a map pj : Bj
ˇM is
2πpaj`1q which is the cone angle at ξj. We can choose an identiﬁcation
of the circle Bj
ˇM with the circle R{p2πpaj ` 1qqZ so that the angular
coordinate of a point is equal to its circle coordinate modulo 2π. This
identiﬁcation of Bj
ˇM with the circle is well-deﬁned up to translation
by 2π while the map pj is deﬁned independently of any choices.
If we associate a point ν in the j-th boundary component Bj
ˇM with
a short ray heading away from ξj, then pjpνq is the direction of the ray.
We deﬁne the prongs to be points on boundary circles corresponding to
horizontal rays, i.e. points whose angular parameter is πk with k P Z.
We will call a prong right- or left-pointing, if k is even (resp. odd), that
is, according to the orientation that the prong inherits from the plane.
A particular choice of an identiﬁcation of Bj
ˇM with R{2πpaj ` 1qZ
is equivalent to the choice of a right-pointing prong. The boundary
circles of ˇM inherit boundary orientations as boundary components of
the oriented manifold M . With respect to the boundary orientation
the maps pj are covering maps of degree ´paj ` 1q where the negative
sign reﬂects the fact that moving in the direction of the boundary
orientation corresponds to decreasing the angular coordinate.

14

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

ˇS, . . . ,Bk

2.6. Strata of boundary marked surfaces. In this subsection we
deﬁne a notion of marked surface appropriate to surfaces with bound-
ř
ary and a corresponding mapping class group. To this end we deﬁne a
“model surface” ˇS, which will capture some of the structure common
to the surfaces ˇM for M P Hpa1, . . . , akq. Let ˇS be a surface with
boundary which has genus g where 2g ´ 2 “
aj and k boundary
components labeled B1
ˇS. The circles inherit a boundary ori-
entation from S. We equip each boundary circle Bj
ˇS with orientation
ˇS Ñ R{p2πpaj ` 1qZq which give
: Bj
reversing homeomorphisms qj
angular coordinates on the boundaries. A marked translation surface
rel boundary is a surface ˇM which is a blow up of a translation sur-
face M of type pa1, . . . , akq, equipped with an orientation preserving
homeomorphism ˇf : ˇS Ñ ˇM respecting the labels, and such that on
each boundary circle Bj
ˇS we have pj ˝ ˇf ” qj mod 2π. Note that a
boundary marking of M induces an explicit coordinate on B ˇM and an
explicit choice of a prong, namely the image under ˇf of the prong on
Bj
ˇS corresponding to angular parameter zero.
We say that two boundary marked translation surfaces rel boundary
p ˇf1, ˇM1q and p ˇf2, ˇM2q are equivalent if there is a translation equivalence
g : M1 Ñ M2 such that ˇg ˝ ˇf1 and ˇf2 are equal on B ˇS and are isotopic

via an isotopy that ﬁxes the boundary. Let rH “ rHpa1, . . . , akq denote
call rH a stratum of boundary marked translation surfaces.

the set of boundary marked translation surfaces, up to equivalence. We
There is a natural collapsing map c : ˇM Ñ M which collapses each
boundary component to a single point. A map ˇf : ˇS Ñ ˇM induces
a map f : S Ñ M , where c ˝ ˇf “ f ˝ c. If ˇf1 and ˇf2 are equivalent
(in the sense of §2.6), then so are f1 and f2 (in the sense of §2.2). We
say that f is obtained from ˇf by projection. The forgetful map which
takes p ˇf , ˇMq to the pair pf, Mq where f is obtained by projection gives

a map pr : rH Ñ Hm.

We now deﬁne a mapping class group rel boundary. We say a home-
omorphism ˇf : ˇS Ñ ˇS is admissible if ˇf takes each boundary circle Bj
ˇS
to itself and the restriction of ˇf to Bj
ˇS is a rotation by a multiple of
2π with respect to the circle coordinate given by qj. We say that two
admissible homeomorphisms are isotopic rel boundary if they agree on
B ˇS and if the are isotopic by an isotopy which is the identity when
restricted to B ˇS. We denote by Modp ˇS, a1, . . . , akq the group of isotopy
classes rel boundary of admissible homeomorphisms of ˇS. When there
is no chance of confusion we will abbreviate this to Modp ˇS,B ˇSq. There
is a natural right action of the mapping class group Modp ˇS, a1, . . . , akq
on the stratum ˜Hpa1, . . . , akq by precomposition.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

15

2.7. Relative homotopy classes of paths. A useful tool in the
study of mapping class groups is the study of their action on curves. In

order to analyze rH and Modp ˇS,B ˇSq we will consider the action on ho-

motopy classes of paths with endpoints in the boundary. We consider
paths in ˇS with endpoints in B ˇS. We say that two paths are homotopic
if there is a homotopy between them that keeps the endpoints in B ˇS.
We say that two homotopic paths are relatively homotopic if the homo-
topy can be chosen to ﬁx the endpoints of the path. The collection of
relative homotopy classes of paths is a natural set to consider but, un-
like homotopy classes of paths in pM, Σq, it is not discrete. We analyze
its topology below. There is a well-deﬁned action of Modp ˇS,B ˇSq on rel-
ative homotopy classes of paths. We say that a path α is peripheral if
both endpoints lie in the same boundary component and α is homotopic
to a path contained in that boundary component. Let σ : r0, 1s Ñ ˇS
be a non-peripheral oriented path with σp0q P B ˇSj and σp1q P B ˇSk. Let
Cσp ˇSq be the set of relative homotopy classes of oriented paths in ˇS
which are homotopic to σ.
Deﬁnition 2.2. . Let ˇσ and ˇσ1 be elements of Cσp ˇSq going from Bj
ˇS to
Bk
ˇS, and let ε ą 0. We say that ˇσ1 is ε-close to ˇσ if there are intervals
I1 Ă Bj
ˇS of length ε, containing the endpoints of ˇσ and
ˇσ1, such that ˇσ1 is homotopic to ˇσ through a family of paths each of
which has one endpoint in I1 and one endpoint in I2.

ˇS and I2 Ă Bk

Sets of ε-close homotopy classes of curves for given intervals I1 and
I2 form the basis for a topology on Cσp ˇSq. We have an endpoint map
 : Cσp ˇSq Ñ Bj
ˇS which takes a relative homotopy class of curves
to its endpoints. With respect to the topology on Cσp ˇSq the endpoint
map is continuous.

ˇS ˆ Bk

Lemma 2.3. Say that S is a surface with boundary with negative Euler
characteristic. The endpoint map  : Cσp ˇSq Ñ Bj
ˇS ˆ Bk
ˇS is a covering
map and Cσp ˇSq is the universal cover of Bj
ˇS ˆ Bk
ˇS. It follows that the
space of relative homotopy classes of paths in this homotopy class is
homeomorphic to the product of the universal covers

ĄBk

ĄBj

ˇS and

ˇS.

We will apply this result to the surfaces with boundary ˇS arising as
‘model surfaces’ corresponding to some family of translation surfaces.
According to our conventions these surfaces always have negative Eu-
ler characteristic. This result captures the idea that the distinction
between homotopy and relative homotopy for paths is measured by the
amount of twisting around each boundary component.

16

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

rˇS is isometric to a convex subset of the hyperbolic plane
rˇS cor-
rˇS starting in B1. The other endpoint of ˜σ lands in a component

Proof. Since the Euler characteristic of ˇS is negative we can give ˇS a
hyperbolic structure so that the boundaries are geodesics. The uni-
versal cover
with geodesic boundary. Choose a boundary component B1 of
responding to Bj
˜σ in
B2 which maps to Bk
ˇS. Since the path is non-
peripheral, B1 and B2 are distinct. Any path homotopic to σ has a lift
to a path from B1 to B2 and this lift is unique since the subgroup of the
deck group that stabilizes B1 and B2 is trivial. This follows from the
fact that a hyperbolic isometry that ﬁxes four points is the identity.

ˇS. Choose a lift of σ to a path

ˇS. Identify B2 with

ˇS. Identify B1 with

ĄBk

ĄBj

ˇS and

ˇS ˆ ĄBk
ĄBk

homotopic to σ to B1 ˆ B2 “ ĄBj
ĄBj

We get a map from the space of relative homotopy classes of paths
ˇS as follows. Given a path
homotopic to σ we lift to a path from B1 ˆ B2 and we associate this
path to its endpoints. Given a pair of points pp1, p2q P B1 ˆ B2 we
associate the projection to ˇS of the unique geodesic from p1 to p2. The
ˇS is relatively homotopic to a
fact that any path between
unique geodesic implies that these maps are inverses. This map is a
continuous bijection with respect to the natural topology on Cσp ˇSq. (cid:3)
We now describe explicitly some elements of Modp ˇS,B ˇSq which cor-
respond to partial Dehn twists around boundary components. Let
Aj be an annular neighborhood of Bj
ˇS where we choose coordinates
tpt, θq : t P r0, 1s, θ P R{2πpaj ` 1qZu. Here t “ 0 corresponds to the
boundary circle Bj
ˇS, and the θ coordinate of Aj is compatible at t “ 0
with the θ coordinate of the boundary circle. We will deﬁne a par-
ticular homeomorphism τj P Modp ˇS,B ˇSq as follows. On Aj we deﬁne
τjpt, θq “ pt, θ` 2πp1´ tqq so that τj rotates Bj
ˇS by 2π and is the iden-
tity on the other boundary of Aj. We extend τj to a map τj : ˇS Ñ ˇS by
setting it to be the identity outside of Aj. The map τj represents an el-
ement of Modp ˇS,B ˇSq which we call a fractional Dehn twist by angle 2π.
In particular τ aj`1
ˇS.
Note that τ aj`1
is a right Dehn twist and that it also makes sense to
describe τj as a right fractional Dehn twist (see [FaMa]). The collapsing
map c : ˇS Ñ S induces a map c˚ : Modp ˇS,B ˇSq Ñ ModpS, Σq. Denote
by F T the group generated by the fractional Dehn twists τ1, . . . , τk.
Note that F T depends on pa1, . . . , akq.
Lemma 2.4. We have a short exact sequence

is a full Dehn twist around the boundary curve Bj

j

j

1 Ñ F T Ñ Modp ˇS,B ˇSq c˚ÝÑ ModpS, Σq Ñ 1,

(2)

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

17

where the group F T is the free Abelian group generated by the τj and
is central in Modp ˇS,B ˇSq.
Proof. We can see from the deﬁnition of a fractional Dehn twist that
an element of F T is isotopic to the identity by an isotopy which moves
points in the boundary of S. These isotopies descend to isotopies of
pS, Σq. It follows that F T belongs to the kernel of c˚. The fact that the
kernel of c˚ is exactly F T follows from the arguments used in [FaMa,
Prop. 3.20].

To see the surjectivity of c˚, let h be a homeomorphism of S ﬁxing
points of Σ. The homeomorphism h is isotopic to a diﬀeomorphism (see
[FaMa, Thm. 1.13]) which, using the properties of the real blow-up, has
a lift to a homeomorphism h1 from ˇS to itself. This homeomorphism
induces a homeomorphism of Bj
ˇS for each j. By applying an isotopy in
the annular neighborhood Aj of each BjS as above, we can replace h1 by
a map h2, which is the identity on Aj. In particular h and h2 represent
the same element of ModpS, Σq, and h2 ﬁxes each point of B ˇS. This
shows that the equivalence class of h contains a representative which
is in the image of c˚, proving surjectivity.
Since h2 is the identity on each Aj and τj is the identity on the
complement of Aj we see that h2 and τj have disjoint support so they
commute which implies that F T is central.

1

j

k

We now show that there are no relations between elements of F T .
Consider a word in the collection of twists that represents a relation.
Since F T is abelian we can write it as w “ τ m1
. Now
since ˇS has negative Euler characteristic we can ﬁnd a non-peripheral
path from a boundary component Bj
ˇS to itself. The eﬀect of w on this
path is to shift both endpoints by 2πmj. By Lemma 2.3, since w acts
trivially, mj “ 0. Since j was arbitrary, w “ 1.
(cid:3)

¨¨¨ τ mk

¨¨¨ τ mj

2.8. Strata of boundary marked surfaces as topological spaces.
analogous to the method used for deﬁning the topology on Hm. We
injection into H 1pS, Σ; R2q and then we use these maps to endow each
such set with the topology induced by the developing map. We show
that with respect to this topology the map pr is a covering map, thus

In this subsection we deﬁne a topology on rH in a manner somewhat
construct a cover of rH by sets on which the developing map is an
we conclude that these charts give not only a topology on rH but a
To construct these charts ﬁx a point p ˇf , ˇMq P rH and a geodesic tri-

compatible aﬃne structure.
angulation τ of M . We caution the reader that in contrast to §2.4,
here τ denotes a geodesic triangulation of M rather than a topological

18

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

triangulation of S. We have canonical lifts of the edges σ of the trian-
gulation τ to edges ˇσ in ˇM so that the endpoints of ˇσ lie in B ˇM . Let
ˇτ be the collection of paths in ˇS of the form ˇf´1pˇσq for σ an edge of τ .
These paths are embedded and we refer to them as arcs. These arcs
of ˇτ decompose ˇS into hexagons where edges of the hexagons consist
alternately of arcs and intervals in boundary circles.

We now deﬁne what it means for two hexagon decompositions to be
ε-close. Firstly we require that the arcs in the two decompositions are
pairwise homotopic. Secondly we require that these pairs of homotopic
arcs are ε-close in the sense of Deﬁnition 2.2. Note that any triangu-
lation of a translation surface has the property that distinct edges lie
in distinct homotopy classes, thus there is no ambiguity in comparing
homotopy classes of arcs in the two decompositions.
Given a geodesic triangulation τ of M , let ˇτ be its pullback under a
marking of blown up translation surfaces ˇS Ñ ˇM , and let Uˇτ ,ε consist
lifts to a hexagon decomposition of ˇσ of ˇM1 so that the pullback of ˇσ
under ˇf1 is ε-close to ˇτ .
Lemma 2.5. The developing map is injective on the set Uˇτ ,π{2.

of p ˇf , ˇM1q P rH for which there is a geodesic triangulation σ of M1 which
Remark: The developing map for rH is most naturally deﬁned to take

values in H 1pS,B ˇS; R2q but the the collapsing map c : ˇS Ñ S induces
a map c˚ : H 1pS, Σ; R2q Ñ H 1p ˇS,B ˇS; R2q which is an isomorphism. In
the sequel we will make use of this isomorphism to identify the two
spaces.
Proof. Assume that p ˇf1, ˇM1q and p ˇf2, ˇM2q map to the same point in
H 1pS, Σ; R2q and both lie in Uˇτ ,π{2. Let τ1 and τ2 be triangulations
˚p ˇτ2q are π{2-close to
of M1 and M2 so that ˇτ1 “ f˚
ˇτ , and hence π-close to each other. Since M1 and M2 have geodesic
triangulations such that corresponding edges have the same image in
H 1pS, Σ; R2q, the comparison map Fpτ, M1, M2q is a translation equiva-
lence, and we denote it by g : M1 Ñ M2. In order to show that p ˇf1, ˇM1q
ˇg˝ ˇf1 and ˇf2 agree on B ˇS and that they are isotopic via an isotopy which
ﬁxes B ˇS. Both ˇτ1 and ˇτ2 produce collections of arcs in ˇS. There is a
unique correspondence between these collections of arcs so that cor-
responding arcs are homotopic. We want to show that corresponding
arcs are not just homotopic but in fact relatively homotopic.

and p ˇf2, ˇM2q represent the same element of rH we need to show that

1 p ˇτ1q and ˇτ2 “ f2

We begin by working with a single edge. Let σ be an edge of ˇτ
and let σ1 and σ2 be corresponding oriented edges of ˇτ1 and ˇτ2. Our
ﬁrst objective is to show that σ1 and σ2 have the same endpoints and

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

19

Say that σ1 and σ2 run from Bi

ˇSˆBj

ˇS and J Ă Bj

are relatively homotopic. The relative homotopy classes of σ1 and σ2
determine points rσ1s and rσ2s in Cσp ˇSq. It suﬃces to show that these
two points are the same.
ˇS to Bj
ˇS. We have the endpoint map
 : Cσp ˇSq Ñ Bi
ˇS. According to Lemma 2.3 this is a covering map.
We also have projection maps pk : Bk
ˇS Ñ R{2πZ which are covering
maps (in either S or M ). Consider the composition Π “ ppi ˆ pjq ˝  :
Cσp ˇSq Ñ R{2πZ ˆ R{2πZ. This is a covering map. The oriented
segments σ1 and σ2 have the same holonomy so they point in the same
direction in R2 hence Πprσ1sq “ Πprσ2sq. Since both triangulations lie
in Uˇτ ,π{2 there are intervals I Ă Bi
ˇS of length π and a
homotopy from σ1 to σ2 for which the endpoints of the paths remain
in I and J. This homotopy gives a path ρ from rσ1s to rσ2s in Cσp ˇSq
which projects to I ˆ J Ă R{2πZ ˆ R{2πZ under the covering map Π.
The image of ρ is a loop, which is contractible since it is contained in
the contractible set IˆJ. Covering theory implies that ρ itself must be
a loop so rσ1s “ rσ2s. It follows that ˇg˝ ˇf1pσ1q and ˇf2pσ2q are relatively
homotopic.
Proposition 2.1 shows that g ˝ ˇf1 and ˇf2 induce the isotopic maps
It remains to show that they agree as maps on p ˇS,B ˇSq.
on pS, Σq.
According to Lemma 2.4 this means that there is no boundary twisting
but boundary twisting is detected by the eﬀect on relative homotopy
classes of the paths σ. We conclude that g ˝ ˇf1 and ˇf2 are isotopic
(cid:3)
relative to their boundaries.
We can use the injectivity of the developing maps on the sets Uˇτ ,π{2
to deﬁne a topology on ˜H. With respect to this topology the developing
map becomes a local homeomorphism. The next proposition refers to
this topology.

Proposition 2.6. The projection map pr from rH to Hm has the path

lifting property.

Recall that the path lifting property for the map pr means that if we
are given a path f : I Ñ Hm and a lift ˜x0 of the endpoint fp0q “ x0
then there is a unique path ˜f : I Ñ ˜X with ˜fp0q “ ˜x0 which satisﬁes
pr ˝ ˜f “ f (see [H, p. 60] for more information).

Proof. It suﬃces to construct lifts of paths locally. Consider an open
set Uτ Ă Hm corresponding to a triangulation τ as in §2.4. Let φt “
pft, Mtq for t P r0, 1s be a path taking values in Uτ and let p ˇf0, ˇM0q

represent a point in rH such that prp ˇf0, ˇM0q “ pf0, M0q. We deﬁne a

20

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

path ˇφt “ p ˇft, ˇMtq for t P r0, 1s, satisfying

ˇφ0 “ p ˇf0, ˇM0q and prp ˇφtq “ φt,

(3)

as follows.

Let Fpτ, M0, Mtq : M0 Ñ Mt be the comparison maps deﬁned in §2.4.
These maps are piecewise linear and hence they have unique exten-
sions to the blow-ups, that is there are homeomorphisms ˇFpτ, M0, Mtq :
ˇM0 Ñ ˇMt of the blown-up surfaces, satisfying

c ˝ ˇFpτ, M0, Mtq “ Fpτ, M0, Mtq ˝ c.

ˇS by Bj

We deﬁne ˇFt “ ˇFpτ, M0, Mtq ˝ ˇf0 : ˇS Ñ ˇMt, and denote the restriction
of ˇFt to Bj
ˇFt. We would like to set ˇφt “ p ˇFt, ˇMtq but there
is a problem in that the maps ˇFt need not preserve the boundary co-
ordinates given by the maps pj : Bj
ˇMt Ñ S1. In other words, it will
not generally be the case that pj ˝ Bj
ˇFt “ pj. We claim that there is
a unique (up to isotopy) way to modify the maps ˇFt by precomposi-
tion with a continuous family of maps of ˇS, so that they do satisfy
the boundary coordinate condition, and so that (3) holds. We will do
this by precomposing the maps ˇFt with homeomorphisms Ht : ˇS Ñ ˇS
supported in a neighborhood of the boundary and then set ˇft “ ˇFt˝Ht.
In order to prove the existence of the required homeomorphisms Ht,
we consider the condition that they will need to satisfy. For each
boundary component Bj
pj ˝ Bj
We rewrite this as

ˇS the restriction BjHt should satisfy
ˇFt ˝ BjHt “ pj and BjH0 “ Id.

(4)

Setting (cid:96)j,t “ pBjHtq´1, we see that (cid:96)j,t : Bj
homotopy lifting problem

pj ˝ Bj

ˇFt “ pj ˝ pBjHtq´1.
ˇS Ñ Bj

pj ˝ (cid:96)j,t “ pj ˝ Bj

ˇFt

and (cid:96)j,0 “ Id,

(5)
ˇS is a solution to the

see Figure 1.
Since pj is a covering map the Homotopy Lifting Theorem [H, Prop
1.30] asserts that lifts (cid:96)j,t exist and are unique. Thus Ht “ p(cid:96)j,tq´1
is deﬁned on the boundary of ˇS. It remains to extend Ht to annular
neighborhoods of the boundaries. As in §2.6 we have a family of disjoint
annuli Aj in ˇS parametrized by tpr, θq : r P r0, 1s, θ P R{2πpaj ` 1qZu
where in these coordinates, tr “ 0u is the j-th boundary component of
ˇS. Then we deﬁne Ht to be the identity outside the union of annuli, to
be equal to the prescribed map BjHt on tr “ 0u, and be given by the
formula Htpr, θq “ pr, ψp1´rqtpθqq for 0 ď r ď 1.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

21

(cid:96)j,t
pj ˝ Bj

ˇFt

Bj

ˇS

Bj

ˇS

pj

S1

Figure 1. The boundary map (cid:96)j,t “ pBjHtq´1 rectiﬁes
the discrepancies of Bj

ˆFt along boundary circles.

It is clear that with these deﬁnitions, the path ˇφt “ p ˇft, ˇMtq with

ˇft “ ˇFt ˝ Ht satisﬁes (3).
if we have two homotopic paths φt and φ1
the homotopy to obtain a one-parameter family of maps ˇf1
which gives us an isotopy from ˇf 0

It is not hard to verify the homotopy invariance of the lift, that is,
t (for t P r0, 1s), one can lift
: ˇS Ñ ˇM1,
1 , ﬁxing the boundary. That is,

1 to ˇf 1

s

The uniqueness (up to isotopy) of the maps Ht (where H0 is the
identity and (4) holds), follows from the uniqueness of the lifts (cid:96)j,t and
(cid:3)
standard properties of annuli, and is left as an exercise.

the lifts of homotopic paths have the same endpoint in rH.
Corollary 2.7. The map pr : rH Ñ Hm is a covering map and rH has
The group Modp ˇS,B ˇSq acts on rH by precomposition. It acts con-
tinuously and properly discontinuously on rH, the quotient is H and

Proof. A local homeomorphism to a semilocally simply connected space
(cid:3)
with the path lifting property is a covering map.

an aﬃne structure given by period coordinates.

according to Lemma 2.4 the subgroup F T acts simply transitively on
each ﬁber of pr. We warn the reader that the spaces ˜H and Hm are not
in general connected. Typically they have inﬁnitely many components.

2.9. The space of framed surfaces. Our next objective is to deﬁne
and analyze the covering space of framed surfaces. Since Hm is an aﬃne
with the structure of an aﬃne manifold. Since the action of Modp ˇS,B ˇSq
is properly discontinuous, for each subgroup Γ of Modp ˇS,B ˇSq, we can

manifold and pr : rH Ñ Hm is a covering map, we have equipped rH
form the quotient rH{Γ. By Lemma 2.4 we have H “ H{ Modp ˇS,B ˇSq
and Hm “ H{F T . Moreover each rH{Γ is an orbifold cover of H. Note

that this is not the Galois correspondence relating connected covers to

22

subgroups of the fundamental group, since rH is not connected. Never-

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

theless we can deﬁne the space of framed surfaces via a group-theoretic
approach.
We start with a discussion of subgroups of Modp ˇS,B ˇSq. While an
element of the group Modp ˇS,B ˇSq is only deﬁned up to isotopy on the
interior of ˇS, it is well-deﬁned on the boundary circles and acts on
each circle Bj
ˇS by rotations which are multiples of 2π. Let Modp ˇSq be
the subgroup of Modp ˇS,B ˇSq represented by homeomorphisms that ﬁx
the boundary pointwise. Let P R be the prong rotation group, consist-
ing of homeomorphisms of the boundary B ˇS which, on each boundary
ś
ˇS, are rotations by an integral multiple of 2π. Since Bj
component Bj
ˇS
is parametrized by a circle of length 2πpaj ` 1q, as a group P R is
isomorphic to

Z{paj ` 1qZ. We have a short exact sequence

k
j“1
1 Ñ Modp ˇSq Ñ Modp ˇS,B ˇSq Ñ P R Ñ 1.

(6)
Surjectivity in (6) follows from the fact that the fractional twists τj P
Modp ˇS,B ˇSq map to a collection of generators for P R.

A framed translation surface is a translation surface M equipped
with a right-pointing horizontal prong at each singular point. We will
call this prong (considered as an element of Bj
ˇM ) the selected prong.
Equivalently a framed surface is equipped with a choice of boundary
coordinate on Cj taking values in the circle R{2πpaj ` 1qZ so that the
map pj is reduction modulo 2π and the selected prong corresponds to
the angle 0.
The space of framed translation surfaces is naturally a ﬁnite cover
of H and we will denote it by Hf. The connected components of Hf
the group Modp ˇSq in (6):

were classiﬁed by Boissy [Boi]. We recover Hf as the quotient of rH by
Proposition 2.8. We have rH{ Modp ˇSq “ Hf.
Proof. We deﬁne a map from rH to Hf as follows. For each boundary

ˇS, let 0j denote the point in Bj

component Bj
ˇS with angular coordinate
0. Given a marked blown-up surface p ˇf , ˇMq, deﬁne a framed surface
by letting the point ˇfp0jq P Bj
ˇM be the selected prong. Say that two
surfaces p ˇf1, ˇM1q and p ˇf2, ˇM2q map to the same surface in Hf. Thus
there is a translation equivalence h : M1 Ñ M2 so that ˇh takes selected
prongs in each Bj
ˇM1 to selected prongs in Bj
ˇM2. This means that the
restriction of the map p ˇf2q´1 ˝ ˇh ˝ ˇf1 to Bj
ˇS ﬁxes 0j. Since this map
is a rotation of the circle with a ﬁxed point it is the identity map.
Thus p ˇf2q´1 ˝ ˇh ˝ ˇf1 P Modp ˇSq so p ˇf1, ˇM1q and p ˇf2, ˇM2q are Modp ˇSq-
(cid:3)
equivalent.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

23

We summarize our constructions in Figure 2.

rH

Hm

Hf

H

Figure 2. The vertical arrow corresponds to factoring
by the action of Modp ˇS,B ˇSq, and the pair of arrows on
the left and right correspond to factoring by the groups
appearing in the sequences (2) and (6) respectively.

2pRq and

Č
2.10. Action of G and its covers on covering spaces of H. The
aﬃne equivalence classes of translation structures are orbits of a group
2pRq denote
actions which we now deﬁne. Recall that GL˝
GL˝
respectively the group of orientation preserving invertible 2 ˆ 2 real
matrices, and its universal cover group. Given g P GL˝
2pRq and a
translation surface M we construct a new surface gM as follows. As
discussed in §2.1, in the language of pG, Xq-structures, a translation
surface can be given by an atlas of charts on M with overlap functions
taking values in the group of translations R2. The element g is a linear
map R2 Ñ R2, and postcomposing each chart in an atlas, we obtain a
new translation atlas. Let gM be this new translation surface and let
φg be the identity map from M to gM . The map φg is an aﬃne map
with derivative g.
deﬁne gpf, Mq to be pφg ˝ f, gMq. The condition that g P GL˝
2pRq in-
sures that φg˝f is orientation preserving. Since the action of ModpS, Σq
on marked surfaces is by pre-composition, this action induces a well-
2pRq act on H 1pS, Σ; R2q by acting
deﬁned action on Hm. If we let GL˝
on the coeﬃcients via the linear action on the plane, then the map
dev : Hm Ñ H 1pS, Σ; R2q will be equivariant.

2pRq acts on rHm as follows. If pf, Mq P rHm then

The group g P GL˝

It is a general principle that if a connected topological group acts
on a topological space X, then its universal cover acts on any cover
2pRq and its subgroup G “ SL2pRq act on Hm, and
of X. Since GL˝

rH Ñ Hm is a covering map, we conclude that their universal covering

24

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

strata of meromorphic quadratic diﬀerentials see [BS] and [HKK].

groups ĄGL˝
2pRq and rG act on rH. For related discussions in the case of
have an explicit description of the action. An element ofrg P ĄGL˝
to their endpoints. Given an element of rH, p ˇf , ˇMq and an element
rg “ pρ, gq of ĄGL˝
lift of the initial point of this path pf, Mq to p ˇf , ˇMq P rH. According to
Proposition 2.6 this path lifts uniquely to a path ˜αptq P rH and we set

It will be useful for us to not only know that this action exists but to
2pRq
2pRq and ρ : r0, 1s Ñ
can be represented by a pair pρ, gq where g P GL˝
2pRq is a path with ρp0q “ Id and ρp1q “ g. Two such representa-
GL˝
tions are equivalent if the corresponding paths are homotopic relative
2pRq we have a path αptq “ ρptqpf, Mq in Hm and a

˜gp ˇf , ˇMq “ ˜αp1q. The resulting element is independent of the choice of
path ρ.

ˆ

˙

ˆ

˙

ˆ

Let
def“

us

1 s
0 1

def“

, gt

et{2
0

0
e´t{2

and rθ

def“

cos θ ´ sin θ
cos θ
sin θ

.

(7)

We will refer to the action of us as the horocycle ﬂow and gt as the
geodesic ﬂow and write
U “ tus : s P Ru, A “ tgt : t P Ru, SO2pRq “ trθ : θ P Ru, B “ AU.
Note that B is the connected component of the identity in the group
of upper-triangular matrices and it normalizes U . Since U is simply
connected, the connected component of the identity in the pre-image

of U in rG is a subgroup isomorphic to U . Thus we can identify U with
a subgroup of rG, and the same is true for the groups B and A. The
2pRq are both homotopy equivalent to ĂSO2pRq – R.
and rG and ĂGL
As we have seen the fundamental groups of both groups rG and
ĂGL

2pRq are both homotopy equivalent to SO2pRq – S1,

˝
2pRq are isomorphic to Z. Since SO2pRq Ă G Ă GL˝

2pRq and the
induced maps on fundamental groups are isomorphisms it will cause
no confusion to identify the fundamental groups of these three groups.
This group is inﬁnite cyclic and we denote it by C. We have three
short exact sequences:

groups G and GL˝

˝

˙

1 Ñ C Ñ ĄGL˝
1 Ñ C Ñ ĄSO2pRq Ñ SO2pRq Ñ 1.

1 Ñ C Ñ rG Ñ G Ñ 1

2pRq Ñ GL˝

2pRq Ñ 1

We will write the element of ĄSO2pRq corresponding to θ P R as ˜rθ,
so that ˜rθ ÞÑ rθ mod 2π is the projection ĄSO2pRq Ñ SO2pRq. The group

(8)

25

t˜r2πn : n P Zu.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

2pRq and in these coordinates it is identiﬁed with

C is central in ĄGL˝
We will explicitly describe the action of ĂSO2pRq on rH.
Proposition 2.9. The left action of ˜r2π on rH is equal to the right
action of τ´1 where τ “ τ1 ¨¨¨ τk P F T. That is, for p ˇf , ˇMq P rH we
2pRq on rH given above. Let
follow the deﬁnition of the action of ĂGL

have ˜r2πp ˇf , ˇMq “ p ˇf ˝ τ´1, ˇMq.
Proof. Given a marked translation surface rel boundary ˇf : ˇS Ñ ˇM we

Dθ be the map supported in annuli around boundary components of
ˇS that performs a Dehn twist by θ P R on each boundary component.
Let θ0 P R, and assume for concreteness that θ0 ą 0. We will describe
the action of ˜rθ0 by explicitly lifting the action of trθ : θ P r0, θ0su using
the procedure described in Proposition 2.6.
Let pf, Mq P Hm be a marked translation surface, and let p ˇf , ˇMq

be an element of rH projecting to pf, Mq. We want to lift the path
θ ÞÑ rθpM, fq “ pf, rθMq to rH. As in §2.8, ﬁx a triangulation τ of S.

By a compactness argument it suﬃces to analyze the lift of the path
θ ÞÑ rθpM, fq, for the subset

˝

tθ P r0, θ0s : rθpM, fq P Uτu,

to rH.

and we can assume with no loss of generality that pf, Mq P Uτ .

Let Fpτ, M, rθMq be the comparison map deﬁned in §2.4. An impor-
tant observation, which follows immediately from the deﬁnition of the
comparison maps, is that the derivative of Fpτ, M, rθMq is everywhere
equal to the matrix rθ, and hence the comparison map is in fact inde-
pendent of the triangulation τ . Let ˇFpτ, M, rθMq denote the extension
of Fpτ, M, rθMq to blown-up surfaces, and let ˇFθ “ ˇFpτ, M, rθMq ˝ f .
Then as discussed in §2.8, ˇFθ does not preserve boundary coordinates,
but the composition D´θ˝ ˇFθ does. Thus the path θ ÞÑ p ˇFθ˝ D´θ, rθ
ˇMq
satisﬁes (3), so by uniqueness, is the desired lift of the path pf, rθMq
In particular, setting θ0 “ 2π and using the fact that rθ0 “ Id, we
(cid:3)

get p ˇf ˝ D´2π, ˇMq and D´2π “ τ´1 with τ “ τ1 ¨¨¨ τk.
2.11. Consequences. We note some consequences of the above dis-
cussion. These will not be needed in this paper but are of independent
interest.
Corollary 2.10. Every path component of Hm has an inﬁnite funda-
mental group. In particular it is never the case that the space of marked
surfaces is the universal cover of the stratum.

26

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Proof. Let C be a path component of Hm and let M P C. Proposition

2.9 shows that lifting the closed path trθM : θ P r0, 2πsu to rH, we

get a non-closed path whose endpoints diﬀer by an application of the
element τ´1 P F T . This element has inﬁnite order in F T . Since the
group F T acts freely on the ﬁber pr´1pMq, none of the lifted paths are
closed. It follows that C has an inﬁnite fundamental group.
(cid:3)

group of GL˝

2pRq acts by a boundary Dehn twist on ˇS.

An instructive example is the case H “ Hp0q (where the model
surface S is the torus with one marked point and ˇS is the torus with
an open disk removed). The covering space Hm can be identiﬁed with
2pRq (the connected component of the identity in GL2pRq), and is
GL˝
2pRq and is simply connected. A generator of the fundamental

not simply connected, whereas rH is identiﬁed with its universal cover
group ĄGL˝
rH{Γ0, let C be a path component of HΓ0 and let p P C and q P rH such

We present another useful consequence of our lifting construction.
Let Γ0 be a subgroup of Modp ˇS,B ˇSq, let HΓ0 denote the quotient
that q projects to p. We deﬁne a homomorphism ρq : π1pC, pq Ñ Γ0 as
follows. Let φ be a loop based at p. Let rφs be the element of π1 that
it represents. We can lift φ to a path starting at q. The endpoint of
this lifted path maps to p so it has the form pγ for some γ P Γ0 (where
our notation reﬂects the fact that Modp ˇS,B ˇSq acts by precomposition,
so deﬁnes a right-action). Deﬁne ρqprφsq to be γ. The homotopy lifting
property shows that ρqprφsq depends only on q and on the homotopy
class rφs, and not the particular loop φ chosen to represent it.
The construction of ρq depends on the choice of the point q. If we
were to choose a diﬀerent point q1 mapping to p then q1 “ qα for some
α P Γ0. In this case the lift of φ starting at pα is the path φα and the
other endpoint is pγα “ pαpα´1γαq. Thus ρq1pφq “ α´1ρqαpφq so ρq1
diﬀers from ρq by an inner automorphism of Γ0. In other words we have
constructed a preferred homomorphism ρ : π1pCq Ñ Γ0, well-deﬁned up
to a choice of an inner automorphism of Γ0.
Let n P N and let Cn denote the subgroup of C generated by r2πn.

Then Cn is central in G and ˆGn “ rG{Cn is the unique connected n-fold
on rH{Γ0 if and only if τ n P Γ0. In particular, suppose n is the least

cover of G.
Corollary 2.11. Let Γ0 be a subgroup of Modp ˇS,B ˇSq. Then ˆGn acts
common multiple of the numbers tai ` 1 : i “ 1, . . . , ku. Then ˆGn acts
on Hf, but ˆGm does not act when m ă n.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

Proof. Let HΓ0 “ rH{Γ0, and let p ˇf , ˇMq P rH. If the action of ˜r2πn is

well-deﬁned on HΓ0 then ˜r2πnp ˇf , ˇMq and p ˇf , ˇMq are equivalent in HΓ0
so by Proposition 2.9,

27

p ˇf , ˇMqτ´n “ ˜r2πnp ˇf , ˇMq “ p ˇf , ˇMqγ

for some γ P Γ0. That is, ˇf˝γ and ˇf˝τ´n are isotopic via an isotopy ﬁx-
ing B ˇS. In particular they represent the same elements in Modp ˇS,B ˇSq
and τ´n P Γ0. Conversely if τ´n P Γ0 then p ˇf , ˇMq and ˜r2πnp ˇf , ˇMq
represent the same surface in HΓ0.
(cid:3)

2.12. Area form. Let rHp1q and Hp1q denote the subset of area-one
surfaces in rH and H respectively. With respect to the charts aﬀorded
by the map dev, rHp1q is a submanifold cut out by a quadratic equation.

We can give these quadratic equations explicitly. Identify the coeﬃ-

cients R2 with C and deﬁne a Hermitian form on H 1pS, Σ; R2q by

ż

α ^ ¯β.
The area of M is xω, ωy, where ω “ devpMq.

xα, βy “ 1
2i

M

(9)

We now explain how this Hermitian form can be obtained in more
topological terms, from the cup product and a particular choice of coef-
ﬁcient pairing. First note that if we take z and w to represent two sides
of a triangle, then the signed area of the triangle is equal to (cid:60)pz ¯w{2iq.
Now recall that the cup product of two R-valued simplicial cochains is
deﬁned on a simplex by taking the product of values of the cochains
on the simplex, and is then extended by linearity to chains. If we have
coeﬃcients which are not in R, we can replace the operation of multi-
plying values of cochains by a bilinear pairing of the values of cochains.
Motivated by the above observation, we will use the coeﬃcient pairing

C Q pz, wq ÞÑ z ¯w{2i P C.

(10)

If we interpret the 1-forms in (9) as complex valued cohomology classes,
interpret integration as evaluation on the fundamental class of M , and
use evaluation on the fundamental class to identify H 2pS, Σ; Cq with
C, then our Hermitian form is the cup product

H 1pS, Σ; Cq b H 1pS, Σ; Cq Ñ H 2pS, Σ; Cq – C,

and the particular choice of coeﬃcient pairing (10) is responsible for
the connection with the area of translation surfaces.

Since the Hermitian form on rH was deﬁned purely topologically, it is
preserved by the ModpS, Σq-action. Thus rHp1q and Hp1q have pG, Xq-

structures where X is a quadric in H 1pS, Σ; Cq and G can be taken

28

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

to be the subgroup of the general linear group which preserves this
quadric.

3. Rel foliation and Rel vector-fields

It is a general principle that geometric structures on H 1pS, Σ; R2q
which are invariant under the action of the mapping class group induce
geometric structures on the stratum. We will now see an example of
this principle. Consider the following exact sequence:
0 ÝÑ H 0pSq ÝÑ H 0pΣq ÝÑ H 1pS, Σq ResÝÑ H 1pSq ÝÑ 0 (11)
Let us take the coeﬃcients in cohomology groups to be R2. Let R de-
note the image of H 0pΣ; R2q in H 1pS, Σ; R2q which we can also identify
with the kernel of the restriction map Res : H 1pS, Σ; R2q Ñ H 1pS; R2q.
We can identify H 0pΣ; R2q with the set of functions from Σ to R2 and
we can identify the image of H 0pS; R2q in H 0pΣ; R2q with the subspace
of constant functions. Thus R can be seen as R2-valued functions on
If k is the cardinality of Σ then the
Σ modulo constant functions.
real dimension of R is 2pk ´ 1q. In the second part of this paper we
will be concerned with the case when Σ consists of two points, so that
dimR R “ 2.
We will explicitly describe the action of R on H 1pS, Σ; R2q. Pick
v P R and let γ P H 1pS, Σ; R2q. We will deﬁne γ ` v P H 1pS, Σ; R2q.
Explicitly, the elements γ, γ ` v are determined by their values on
oriented paths in S with endpoints in Σ. Let σ be one such oriented
path starting at ξi and ending at ξj. Since R – H 0pΣ; R2q{H 0pS; R2q,
are equivalent if they diﬀer by a constant. We deﬁne pγ ` vqpσq “

v is an equivalence class of functions rv : Σ Ñ R2, where functions
γpσq `rvpξjq ´rvpξiq. Since representatives of v diﬀer by constants, the
preceding formula does not depend on the choice ofrv. Also vpσq gives

the same value for any σ from ξi to ξj.
The group G acts equivariantly on the terms of the exact sequence
(11). If we think of the terms as vector spaces of R2-valued functions
then G acts on these functions by acting on their values. In particular
there is a natural action of G on R since it is the quotient of the ﬁrst
two terms.

A subspace W of a vector space V deﬁnes a linear foliation of V where
the leaves are the translates of W . In this way the subspace R deﬁnes
a foliation of H 1pS, Σq. Since the mapping class group ModpS, Σq pre-
serves the short exact sequence it preserves this foliation and thus the
foliation descends to a well-deﬁned foliation on H. We call this the Rel

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

29

foliation. The names ‘kernel foliation’ and ‘absolute period foliation’
have also been used in the study of this foliation, see [Zo, Sch, McM7].

Proposition 3.1. Two surfaces in the same Rel leaf have the same
area.

Proof. As we have seen in (9) the area of a surface M can be written as
xω, ωy where ω “ devpMq and the bilinear form is the cup product with
a certain choice of coeﬃcient pairing. So it suﬃces to show that the cup
product of two classes in H 1pS, Σq depends only on the image of the
classes in absolute cohomology H 1pSq; the latter statement follows from
the fact that the cup product is natural with respect to the inclusion
pM,Hq Ñ pM, Σq, i.e. diagram (12) below commutes. We refer to [H]
for the deﬁnition of the cup product in the relative case, and to [H,
Prop. 3.10] for a proof of naturality.
H 1pS, Σq ˆ H 1pS, Σq

/ H 2pS, Σq

Y /

(12)

H 1pSq ˆ H 1pSq

Y

»
/ H 2pSq

(cid:3)

We will deﬁne a notion of parallel translation on the leaves of the Rel
foliation. We can identify the elements of R with constant vector ﬁelds
on the vector space H 1pS, Σ; R2q. Recall that we have insisted on label-
ing the points in Σ, and that the mapping class group ﬁxes Σ pointwise.
With these conventions, ModpS, Σq acts trivially on R. Thus the vec-
tor ﬁelds corresponding to R are invariant under ModpS, Σq and induce
well-deﬁned vector ﬁelds on Hm and H. The leaves of the Rel foliation
have natural translation structures and these are the coordinate vector
ﬁelds.
The constant vector ﬁeld associated with v P R can be integrated on
the vector space H 1pS, Σ; R2q to give a one-parameter ﬂow. Our next
objective is to lift this ﬂow, to the extent possible, to Hm.
Deﬁnition 3.2. Let M0 be point in H and let v P R. Let (cid:126)v denote
the rel vector ﬁeld on H corresponding to v. We say that RelvpM0q
is deﬁned and equal to M1 if there is a smooth path φptq in H with
φp0q “ M0, d

dt φptq “ (cid:126)vpφptqq and φp1q “ M1.

The translation structures on the leaves of the Rel foliation are not
complete in general and this means that the trajectories of the vector
ﬁelds cannot always be deﬁned for all time.





/
30

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Proposition 3.3. Let Ω Ă H ˆ R be the set of pairs pM, vq for which
RelvpMq is deﬁned. Then Ω is open and the map pM, vq ÞÑ RelvpMq is
continuous when viewed as a map from Ω to H.
Proof. This follows from properties of solutions of ﬁrst order ordinary
(cid:3)
diﬀerential equations.

d

dt gpφptqq “ gp d

Our next result deals with the interaction between the natural ac-

tions of G on H and R, and the partially deﬁned maps Relv.
Proposition 3.4. Let M P H and v P R. If RelvpMq is deﬁned and
g P G then RelgvpgMq is deﬁned and gpRelvpMqq “ RelgvpgMq.
Proof. Let (cid:126)v denote the vector ﬁeld corresponding to v P R. To
say that RelvpMq is deﬁned means that there is a smooth path φptq
with φp0q “ M , d
dt φptq “ (cid:126)vpφptqq, and in this case φp1q “ RelvpMq.
Consider the path t ÞÑ gpφptqq.
It has the property that gpφp0qq “
dt φptqq “ g(cid:126)vpφptqq “ (cid:126)pgvqpφptqq and gpφp1qq “
gM ,
gpRelvpMqq. The existence of this path shows that RelgvpgMq is de-
ﬁned and gpRelvpMqq “ RelgvpgMq.
(cid:3)
We can think of R as a Lie group acting on H 1pS, Σ; R2q. The fact
that we can lift elements of the Lie group action on H 1pS, Σ; R2q to
Hm does not imply that the relations in the Lie group necessarily lift.
For example the transformations Relv and Relw acting on H 1pS, Σ; R2q
commute but the corresponding lifted transformations of Hm need not
commute where they are deﬁned. The following result gives criteria for
a composition law and for commutation.

Proposition 3.5. Let

and let v, w P R. Then:

l “ r0, 1s2 and (cid:52) “ tps, tq P R2 : 0 ď s ď t ď 1u,

(i) If Relsv`twpMq exists for all ps, tq P (cid:52) then
Relv ˝ RelwpMq “ Relv`wpMq.
(ii) If Relsv`twpMq exists for all ps, tq P l then

Relv ˝ RelwpMq “ Relw ˝ RelvpMq “ Relv`wpMq.

(14)
Proof. It suﬃces to prove the result in Hm, since the maps Relu are
ModpS, Σq-equivariant. Note that (ii) follows immediately from (i), so
we prove (i). Deﬁne

σ : (cid:52) Ñ H 1pS, Σ; R2q by σps, tq “ devpMq ` sv ` tw.

Recall that we have a developing map dev : Hm Ñ H 1pS, Σ; R2q. The
developing map is a local homeomorphism. This does not imply that

(13)

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

31

paths can be lifted but it does mean that when paths can be lifted
the lifts are unique (see [E] for more information). The hypothesis
that Relsv`twpMq is deﬁned for all ps, tq P (cid:52) means that every path
r ÞÑ σprs, rtq for 0 ď r ď 1 lifts to Hm. Let ˜σps, tq “ Relsv`twpMq be
the lift of σ to Hm. Arguing as in Proposition 1.11 in [E] we see that ˜σ
is a continuous map. By construction ˜σp0, 1q “ RelwpMq and ˜σp1, 1q “
Relv`wpMq. The path ρ0prq “ ˜σpr, 1q satisﬁes ρ0p0q “ RelwpMq and
0 “ v, so by the deﬁnition of Rel, ρ0p1q “ RelvpRelwpMqq. Also
ρ1
ρ0p1q “ ˜σp1, 1q “ Relv`wpMq, and (13) follows.
(cid:3)
3.1. Real Rel. Let us write R2 as Rx ‘ Ry. We then write

H 1pS, Σ; R2q – H 1pS, Σ; Rxq ‘ H 1pS, Σ; Ryq.

(15)
and we refer to H 1pS, Σ; Rxq as the horizontal space. Let Z denote the
intersection of R and the horizontal space. We will refer to Z as real
Rel. Since the subgroup B of Z preserves the horizontal directions Rx,
its action on R leaves Z invariant.

A special case which will concern us here are strata with two sin-
In this case R can be identiﬁed with R2, and we make
gularities.
the identiﬁcation explicit. Label the singularities of the model sur-
face S by ξ1 and ξ2, we will identify R with R2 as follows: a cochain
v : H1pS, Σq Ñ R2 which vanishes on cycles represented by closed
curves is identiﬁed with the vector vpδq for some (any) directed path δ
from ξ1 to ξ2. In this case Z is one dimensional, and we write ReltpMq
for RelvpMq, where v “ pt, 0q P R2 – R via the identiﬁcation above.

Figures 3 and 4 show the eﬀect of ﬂowing along the real Rel vector
ﬁeld on a decagon with opposite sides identiﬁed. In Figure 3 the ﬂow
has the eﬀect of shortening the top saddle connection. The ﬂow cannot
be continued past the point at which the length of the top saddle con-
nection shrinks to zero. In Figure 4 the lengths of saddle connections
are preserved since they connect vertices of the same color, and hence
represent a saddle connection from a singularity to itself. In this case
the ﬂow can be continued for all time.
Deﬁnition 3.6. Let v P R. We denote by H1
which RelvpMq is deﬁned.

v be the set of M P H for
Proposition 3.5(i), with w “ ´v, implies Rel´v ˝ RelvpMq “ M for

v, and this yields a useful equivariance property:

M P H1

RelvpH1

vq “ H1

´v.

(16)

In the case of two singularities keeping in mind our convention regard-
ing the identiﬁcation R – R2, we will continue to use the notation H1
for v P R2. Then Proposition 3.4 implies that for v P R2 and g P G

v

32

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Figure 3. Applying Relt (with t ă 0) to the decagon.
When t ă ´a or t ą b then Relt fails to be deﬁned, where
a is the length of the top segment and b is the length of
the second segment from the top.

Figure 4. Applying Relt (with t ą 0) to the tipped decagon.

vq “ H1

we have gpH1
gv, where gv is the image of v under the linear ac-
tion of g on R2. We now introduce some more notation for discussing
directions belonging to Z.

Ş
Deﬁnition 3.7. Let H18 “
zPZ H1
Relz is deﬁned for all z P Z).
In the case of two singularities, for a real number t let H1
set H1
For a ﬁxed M P H, let

t denote the
v with v “ pt, 0q (i.e. the subset of M on which Relt is deﬁned).

z (i.e.

the subset of M on which

ZpMq “ tz P Z : M P H1
zu

(i.e., the subset of Z corresponding to surgeries which are deﬁned on

M ). Thus H18 “ tM P H : ZpMq “ Zu.

!2!2!2!2!2!1!1!1!1!1HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

33

Recall that if V is a vector space and V0 Ă V , we will say that V0 is

a star body if

v P V0, s P r0, 1s ùñ sv P V0.

We denote the convex hull of a subset W Ă V by conv W .
Proposition 3.8. The set ZpMq has the following properties:

(i) It is an open star body in Z.
(ii) If b P B then ZpbMq “ bpZpMqq.
(iii) If z P ZpMq then ´z P ZpRelzpMqq.
(iv) If z, z1 P Z and convt0, z, z ` z1u Ă ZpMq, then RelzpMq and
Relz1pRelzpMqq are deﬁned and Relz1pRelzpMqq “ Relz`z1pMq.
Proof. The fact that ZpMq is open follows from Proposition 3.3. The
fact that it is a star body is immediate from Deﬁnition 3.2. This proves
(i). Assertions (ii), (iii), (iv) follow respectively from Propositions 3.4,
(cid:3)
(16), and 3.5(i).

We will need a signiﬁcant strengthening of Proposition 3.8:

Proposition 3.9. For any M , ZpMq is convex.

Whereas the proof of Proposition 3.8 relies only on general principles,
Proposition 3.9 relies on additional information about Rel and will be
proved in §6.

4. The centralizer and normalizer of the horocycle flow
Recall that G acts on H 1pS, Σ; R2q via its linear action on R2. Since
the linear action of U on R2 preserves horizontal vectors, it ﬁxes ele-
ments of Rx. This implies that real Rel commutes with the horocycle
ﬂow. Namely, by Proposition 3.4, if z P Z and u P U then uz “ z, and
hence upH1

zq “ H1

z, and

upRelzpMqq “ RelupzqpuMq “ RelzpuMq,

for M P H1
z.

Now deﬁne

N def“ tpb, zq : b P B, z P Zu and L “ tpg, vq : g P G, v P Ru.

We equip N and L with the natural group structures as semi-direct
products N “ B ˙ Z and L “ G˙ R, which are compatible with their
actions on period coordinates. For the action of the ﬁrst factor on the
second in this semi-direct product, we take the natural action of G on
R, and its restriction to the B-invariant subspace Z. In particular in
the case of two singularities, G acts on R – R2 via its standard linear
action, and B acts on Z – Rx via the restriction of its linear action on

34

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

R2, to the horizontal axis. We will write this semidirect product group
law explicitly as

pg1, v1q ¨ pg2, v2q “ pg1g2, v1 ` g1v2q for (cid:96)i “ pgi, viq P L, i “ 1, 2,

where in the expression g1v2 we mean the action of G on R described
above. We can associate a partially deﬁned transformation of H to
each element of L as follows:

gM ¯ v “ RelvpgMq when pg, vq P L and gM P H1
v.

(17)

We will use a diﬀerent notation for the restriction to N . Namely we
write

nM “ RelzpbMq when n “ pb, zq P N and bM P H1
z.

(18)

Note that (17) and (18) give two diﬀerent notations for the same
transformations. The reason for this is a fundamental diﬀerence be-
tween the behavior of the same operation on N and on L. When
dealing with all of L, these operations do not obey a group action law.
Indeed, it may happen that pM ¯ vq ¯ w ‰ pM ¯ wq ¯ v. However, for
N we have the following:
Proposition 4.1. Let n1 “ pb1, z1q, n2 “ pb2, z2q be two elements of
N . Suppose that n2M and n1pn2Mq are deﬁned. Then pn1n2qM is
deﬁned, and n1pn2Mq “ pn1n2qM .
Proof. Let n1 “ pb1, z1q and n2 “ pb2, z2q. Since n2M “ Relz2pb2Mq
is deﬁned we have z2 P Zpb2Mq, and since n1pn2Mq is deﬁned, we have
z1 P Zpb1n2Mq. Using Proposition 3.8 we ﬁnd that Zpn2Mq contains ´z2
and b´1

1 z1. By Proposition 3.9 we see that

convt0,´z2, b´1

1 z1u Ă Zpn2Mq.

Then

n1pn2pMqq “Relz1pb1n2pMqq
1 z1pn2pMqq
“Relb´1
1 z1`z2 ˝ Rel´z2pn2pMqq
“Relb´1
“Relb´1
1 z1`z2pb2pMqq
“Relz1`b1z2pb1b2pMqq
“pn1n2qpMq.

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

Here Proposition 3.4 is used to derive (21) from (20) and to derive
(24) from (23), and (22) is obtained from (21) by Proposition 3.8 and
(cid:3)
(19).

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

35

The following is immediate from Propositions 3.3, 3.8 and 4.1 (and

was proved previously in [MW2]):

Corollary 4.2. The set H18 is N -invariant. The map N ˆH18 Ñ H18
deﬁned by p(cid:96), Mq ÞÑ (cid:96)M deﬁnes a continuous action of N on H18. The
Z-orbits in this action are the real Rel leaves in H18.
The following will be useful. For u P U and n “ pbn, znq P N , write
upbnq “ bub´1, so that nu “ upbnqn as elements of N . Then we have:
Corollary 4.3. For any u P U , n P N and M P H, if npuMq is deﬁned
then nM is deﬁned and npuMq “ upbnqpnMq.
Proof. We apply Proposition 4.1 with b2 “ u and z2 “ 0.
4.1. The stabilizer group of a measure. Proposition 3.8 implies
the invariance property ZpuMq “ ZpMq. We now extend this to semi-
direct products and use it to deﬁne the stabilizer of a measure, within
a collection of partially deﬁned transformations.

(cid:3)

For ﬁxed M P H we write
NpMq “

(cid:32)

pb, zq P N : z P ZpbMq(

.

(i.e. the set of n P N for which nM is deﬁned). Then it follows from
Proposition 3.3 that NpMq is open for each M , and Corollary 4.3 implies
NpuMq “ NpMq.
Proposition 4.4. Suppose M is in the U orbit-closure of M1. Then
NpMq Ă NpM1q.
Proof. If n P NpMq then by Proposition 3.3 there is a neighborhood W
of M in H such that n P NpM1q for any M1 P W. Let u P U such that
uM1 P W. Then z P NpuM1q “ NpM1q.
(cid:3)

We also need the following:

Proposition 4.5. Given an ergodic U -invariant measure µ there is a
subset Ω Ă H such that µpΩq “ 1 and for any M1, M2 P Ω, ZpM1q “
ZpM2q and NpM1q “ NpM2q.
Proof. To explain the idea, we ﬁrst prove the assertion for ZpMq in case
dim Z “ 1. In this case, ZpMq is an open interval for every M P H,
which we can write as

ZpMq “ paM , bMq, for some ´ 8 ď aM ă 0 ă bM ď 8.

The maps M ÞÑ aM , M ÞÑ bM are measurable maps with values in
the extended real line so by ergodicity, are constant µ-a.e., and the
statement follows.

36

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

In the general case the proofs for ZpMq and NpMq are identical, so we
discuss the case of ZpMq. The map M ÞÑ ZpMq is a map from H to the
collection of open subsets of Z. Rather than worry about measurability
issues, we proceed as follows. Let Z0 be a dense countable subset of Z.
For each z P Z0, the set

(cid:32)
M P H : z P ZpMq(
č
ď

Ωz (cid:114)

Ωz1,

µpΩzq“1

µpΩz1q“0

Ωz “

Ω “

is a measurable invariant set, so has measure 0 or 1 by ergodicity. We
deﬁne

where z, z1 range over the countable set Z0. Then µpΩq “ 1, and for
any M P Ω,

ZpMq X Z0 “ tz P Z0 : µpΩzq “ 1u.

Since an open set is the interior of the closure of its intersection with
a dense set, we see that ZpM1q “ ZpM2q for any M1, M2 P Ω.
(cid:3)
We will denote by Zpµq and Npµq the sets ZpMq, NpMq which appear

in Proposition 4.5 for M P Ω. If z P Zpµq we deﬁne a pushforward
´zqq, for all measurable X Ă H.

Relz˚µpXq “ µpRel´zpX X H1

zq “ 1, and now it follows from (16) that Relz˚µ is a
Note that µpH1
probability measure. Moreover, the partially deﬁned map Relz is a
measurable conjugacy between pH, µq and pH, Relz˚µq, thought of as
dynamical systems for the U -action. Thus Relz˚µ is again an ergodic
U -invariant measure. The same observations are valid for n P Npµq.
Namely, if we denote

(cid:32)

M P H : z P ZpbMq(

n “ tM P H : npMq is deﬁnedu “
H1

(where n “ pb, zq), then we have an equivariance property

(25)

(26)

npH1

nq “ H1

n´1

and we can deﬁne an ergodic U -invariant measure

n˚µpXq “ µpn´1pX X H1

n´1qq, for all measurable X Ă H.

Corollary 4.3 now implies that n˚µ is a U -invariant measure, and the
partially deﬁned map M ÞÑ npMq is equivariant for the action of U on
pH, µq and the “time-changed” action of U on pH, n˚µq via

u ¨ M “ upnqM, for n˚µ a.e. M

(where upnq “ nun´1).
The collection of Borel probability measures on a locally compact
space X can be given the weak-˚ topology by embedding it in the

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

37

dual space of the space CcpXq of continuous functions with compact
support.

Proposition 4.6. Let µ be an ergodic U -invariant probability measure.
The map which takes n P Npµq to n˚µ is a continuous with respect to
the weak-˚ topology.
Proof. Let nj be a sequence of elements of Npµq converging to n8 P
Npµq. In order to show that nj˚µ converges to n8˚µ we need to show
that for any continuous compactly supported function ϕ on H, we have

ż

ϕ dpnj˚µq “
H
has full µ-measure, and hence so does H1

ϕ dpn8˚µq.

H

Ş

lim
jÑ8
For each j, the set H1
1ďjď8 H1

nj

nj

. Now we have:

ż

lim
jÑ8

H

ż

ż
ż

ϕ dpnj˚µq

0

H1

njpH1
0q
ϕ ˝ nj dµ
jÑ8 ϕ ˝ nj dµ
ϕ ˝ n8 dµ

lim

ϕ dpnj˚µq “ lim
jÑ8
ż
“ lim
jÑ8
ż
ż
ż

“

“

“

H1

H1

0

0

ϕ dpn8˚µq

n8pH1
0q
ϕ dpn8˚µq.

H

“

0 “

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

The equalities (27) and (32) follow from the fact that each nj˚µ assigns
0q respectively. The lines (28) and (31) follow
full measure to njpH1
from the deﬁnition of the pushforward of a measure. Line (29) follows
from Lebesgue’s Dominated Convergence Theorem using the fact that,
since f has compact support, it is bounded and hence the family of
functions f ˝ nj is uniformly bounded and also using the fact that
constant functions are in L1pµq since µ is a probability measure. Line
(cid:3)
(30) follows from Proposition 3.3 and the continuity of ϕ.

Deﬁnition 4.7. For any ergodic U -invariant measure µ we deﬁne

(cid:32)

(

def“

Nµ

n P Npµq : n˚µ “ µ

.

38

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Corollary 4.8. Nµ is a closed subgroup of N .
Proof. The fact that Nµ is closed follows from Proposition 4.6, and in
order to prove that Nµ is closed under compositions, it suﬃces to show
that for µ-almost every M , n1pn2Mq “ pn1n2qM . This follows from
(cid:3)
Proposition 4.1.
Proposition 4.9. If Nµ contains a non-unipotent element (i.e. an el-
ement in N (cid:114) U Z) and dim Z “ 1 then Nµ X Z is connected. In par-
ticular, if Nµ contains a non-unipotent element of N and a nontrivial
element of Z then it contains all of Z.
Proof. Write Z1 “ U Z – R2 and N1 “ Nµ X Z1, and let a P Nµ (cid:114) N1.
By Corollary 4.8, Nµ is a closed subgroup of N , and hence N1 is a
closed subgroup of Z1 containing U . If it is not connected then there is
a minimal positive distance between two distinct cosets for N1 in Z1.
However N1 is invariant under conjugation by the elements a and a´1,
and one of these acts on Z1 by contractions. This contradiction proves
(cid:3)
the claim.

4.2. Generic points and real Rel. Recall that if µ is a U -invariant
ergodic probability measure on a closed subset L of a stratum H, then
M P L is said to be generic for µ if for any continuous compactly
supported function f on L, we have

T

fpusMq ds “

(33)
Deﬁnition 4.10. Let µ be an invariant U -ergodic measure on H. Then
Ωµ denotes the set of generic points for µ.

lim
TÑ8

f dµ.

ż

1
T

0

ż

We collect some well-known facts about generic points.

Proposition 4.11. If µ is ergodic then Ωµ has full µ measure.
If
µ ‰ ν then Ωµ and Ων are disjoint. If M P Ωµ then the support of µ is
contained in the orbit closure of M .

In light of Proposition 4.4, this implies:

Corollary 4.12. If M P Ωµ then Npµq Ă NpMq.

It will prove useful to reformulate the notion of genericity in terms of
convergence of measures. It is important to keep in mind that we are
dealing with spaces which are locally compact but not compact. The
weak-˚ topology on the space of Borel measures is deﬁned in terms of
integrals of continuous functions of compact support. In this topology
the total mass of a measure need not be a continuous function on the
space of measures since the constant function 1 need not have compact
support.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

39

Deﬁnition 4.13. Let νpM, Tq be the probability measure deﬁned by

ż

ż

0

ϕ dνpM, Tq “ 1
T

T

ϕpusMq ds,

for all ϕ P CcpHq.

Then M is generic for µ if

TÑ8 νpM, Tq “ µ

lim

(34)
where the limit is taken with respect to the weak-˚ topology on mea-
sures on H.

In preparation for Proposition 4.15 below, we collect some results
about integrals of continuous bounded functions along orbits. The
space of probability measures on a locally compact space can be given
another topology by embedding it in the dual space of CbpXq, the
space of continuous bounded functions on X. This topology is called
the strict topology (see [Bo] for more information). Clearly convergence
in the strict topology implies convergence in the weak-˚ topology. The
following result gives a simple criterion for showing that weak-˚ con-
vergence implies strict convergence.

Proposition 4.14 ([Bo] Prop. 9, p. 61). Suppose X is a locally
compact space, µj is a sequence of probability measures on X, and µ is
also a measure on X. If µj Ñ µ with respect to the weak-˚ topology,
and if µ is a probability measure, then µj Ñ µ with respect to the strict
topology.

If the limit measure µ is not a probability measure then it has total
mass less than one. This phenomenon is referred to as “loss of mass”.
In §10 we will give conditions that establish that loss of mass does not
occur for measures νpM, Tq.

We will repeatedly use the following:

Proposition 4.15. Let µ be an ergodic U -invariant measure. If n P
Npµq then npΩµq is the set of generic points for n˚µ.
Proof. Let M P Ωµ. According to Corollary 4.12, nM is deﬁned. We
use the reformulation of genericity in terms of weak-˚ convergence of
measures given above. Thus we are given that limTÑ8 νpM, Tq “ µ
with respect to the weak-˚ topology on measures on H and we want to
show that limTÑ8 νpnM, Tq “ n˚µ with respect to the same topology.
Since N normalizes U , there is c ą 0 such that nus “ ucsn. We have
n˚νpM, Tq “ νpnM, cTq. Thus it suﬃces to show:

TÑ8 n˚νpM, Tq “ n˚µ.

lim

ż
ż

ż
ż

40

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

2 “ npH1

1q “ H1

Let H1

1 “ H1

n as in (25) and let H1

1 and H1

2. By Proposition 3.3, H1

Since n is a homeomorphism from H1

n´1. Let M denote
the set of probability measures on H which assign mass 1 to H1
1, and
let N denote the set of probability measures on H which assign mass
2 are open subsets of H, and
1 to H1
in particular are locally compact. Moreover any continuous compactly
supported function on H1
1 extends to a continuous function on H by
1. It follows that limTÑ8 νpM, Tq “ µ
setting it equal to zero on H (cid:114)H1
with respect to the weak-˚ topology on M.
2, the map n˚ : M Ñ N
is continuous and limTÑ8 n˚νpM, Tq “ n˚µ with respect to the weak-˚
topology on N. Since n˚µ is a probability measures which assigns full
measure to H1
2 is locally compact, we can use Proposition
4.14 to conclude that limTÑ8 n˚νpM, Tq “ n˚µ in the strict topology
on measures on H1
2.
We need to show that convergence also holds with respect to the
weak-˚ topology on measures on H. Given a function ϕ on H which is
continuous and compactly supported, its restriction to H1
2 is a bounded
continuous function. Therefore

2, and since H1

1 to H1

ϕ dn˚νpM, Tq “

lim
TÑ8

H1

2

ϕ dn˚µ

H1

2

by strict convergence which gives

ϕ dn˚νpM, Tq “

lim
TÑ8

H

ϕ dn˚µ,

H

and establishes convergence with respect to the weak-˚ topology on
measures on H.
(cid:3)
Corollary 4.16. If µ is an ergodic U -invariant probability measure
and if M1 and M2 are in Ωµ and there is an element n P Npµq of N
such that M2 “ nM1, then n P Nµ.
Proof. Let M1 and M2 be generic for µ and M2 “ nM1 where n P N .
According to Proposition 4.15, µ and n˚µ share a generic point and
(cid:3)
hence, by Proposition 4.11, they must coincide.

5. Horizontal equivalence of surfaces

Given M P H with singularity set Σ, we denote by ΞpMq the set
of horizontal saddle connections for M . We would like to use ΞpMq
to deﬁne two equivalence relations on surfaces: topological horizontal
equivalence and geometrical horizontal equivalence. Analogously to the
sets Zpµq, Npµq appearing in Proposition 4.5, they will serve as invariants
of ergodic U -invariant measures.

Let ˇM be the blowup of M and let p ˇf , ˇMq P rH be a marking of ˇM

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

41

rel boundary. Then ˇf´1pΞpMqq is a subset of ˇS, which we denote by
ˇf˚pΞq. We take ΞpMq to include all of the points of Σ and hence ˇf˚pΞq
contains the boundary B ˇS. In addition, for each edge of ΞpMq, ˇf˚pΞq
contains an edge in the interior of S, which intersects the boundary B ˇS
at points with angular parameters which are multiples of π, even or
odd according as the point is the initial or terminal point of the edge.

2 pΞq and ˇf˚

Deﬁnition 5.1. We will say that M1 and M2 are topologically hor-
izontally equivalent if there are markings rel boundary p ˇfi, ˇMiq such
1 pΞq can be obtained from each other by an isotopy of
that ˇf˚
ˇS that does not move points of B ˇS. We will say that M1 and M2 are
geometrically horizontally equivalent if they are topologically horizon-
i pΞpMiqq, holpM1, ˇf1pδqq “
tally equivalent, and if for any edge δ in ˇf˚
holpM2, ˇf2pδqq, where ˇf1 and ˇf2 are as in the deﬁnition of topological
equivalence.
Proposition 5.2. If M P H, b P B and u P U then M and bM are
topologically horizontally equivalent, and M and uM are geometrically
horizontally equivalent.

Proof. Since B acts by postcomposition on the charts, and preserves
the horizontal direction, it preserves the set ΞpMq (possibly changing
the lengths of edges), and hence M and bM are topologically equivalent.
Moreover if b “ u P U then the lengths of edges are unaﬀected and so
(cid:3)
M and uM are geometrically horizontally equivalent.
Corollary 5.3. If µ is an ergodic U -invariant measure on H, then
there is a subset X Ă H of full µ-measure such that for any M1, M2 P
X, M1 and M2 are geometrically horizontally equivalent.

We will deﬁne a combinatorial invariant of topological horizontal
equivalence – the horizontal data diagram. This diagram is an analogue
of the separatrix diagram introduced by Kontsevich and Zorich [KoZo]
and captures some of the properties of ΞpMq which depend only on
the class of M . Note that a graph embedded on a translation surface
is a ribbon graph, namely at each vertex it inherits from the surface a
cyclic order of edges incident to the vertex. Its vertices are labeled by
the labels ξ1, . . . , ξk of the corresponding singularities. Additionally, if
the graph consists of horizontal saddle connection, each edge inherits
an orientation from the translation structure mapping it to a horizontal
edge in the plane.

For any p ˇf , ˇMq P rH, ˇf˚pΞq is a graph embedded in ˇS. By projecting

it to S we thus obtain a ribbon graph with labeled singularities and

42

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

oriented edges. The graphs ˇf˚pΞq carry additional information, namely
the angular distance separating consecutive edges incident at a vertex.
This angle is an integer multiple of π, and where the orientations of
consecutive edges agree if and only if this distance is an even multiple
of π. It is clear that all of this information is an invariant of geometric
horizontal equivalence.
The horizontal data diagram of M records the graph structure in-
duced by ˇf˚pΞq, as well as the orientation of edges, labeling of vertices,
and cyclic structure at each singularity. In order to record the informa-
tion of angular separation of edges at vertices, we indicate as dashed
lines additional left- and right-pointing horizontal. Thus at the singu-
larity ξi there are 2pai ` 1q prongs, some of which correspond to edges
of the graph. Figures 5, 6 and 7 depict graphs which can occur as
ΞpMq for some M in Hp1, 1q.

Figure 5. This ﬁgure represents a horizontal data dia-
gram on a blown up surface.

In Figure 6 the angle between any two adjacent ends is exactly π,
but this is not the case in Figure 7. We capture this angle information
in the diagrams in Figure 7 by inserting additional dotted lines at
each vertex indicating the ends of horizontal separatrices which are not
saddle connections. We can determine the angle between two prongs by
counting the number of ends of separatrices between them. Note that it
makes sense to give orientations to separatrices so that the orientations
of ends at a given vertex alternate with respect to the cyclic ordering.
It follows from Corollary 5.3 that for any ergodic U -invariant measure
µ, there is a subset X of H such that µpXq “ 1 and every M P X
has the same horizontal data diagram. We call it the horizontal data
diagram of µ and denote it by Ξpµq.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

43

If a horizontal data diagram is maximal, i.e. at each vertex, all
prongs are initial or terminal prongs of edges, then the horizontal data
diagram coincides with the separatrix diagram of [KoZo].

A

B

C

D

Figure 6. These ﬁgures represent all maximal horizon-
tal data diagrams in Hp1, 1q up to switching labels and
orientations. See Figure 4 for a polygonal presentation
of a cylinder decomposition of type A.

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 7. These ﬁgures represent some non-maximal
horizontal data diagrams in Hp1, 1q.

We will sometimes need an extension of ΞpMq. Recall that at each
ξi P Σ there are 2pai ` 1q prongs. Some of these are part of saddle
connections in ΞpMq, and we call the others the unoccupied prongs of
ΞpMq. Let Ξ´pMq denote the graph which contains ΞpMq and has one
additional prong edge for every unoccupied prong, with one vertex at
a singular point and one vertex at a point of M (cid:114) Σ, where the edge is
realized by a path in M which lies on the horizontal separatrix issuing
at the corresponding prong.
We will sometimes need to be speciﬁc about the length of edges. In
that case, given L ą 0, we will let Ξ´pM, Lq denote the graph Ξ´pMq
described above, where the prong edges all have length L. Note that
since all of the prong edges are part of an inﬁnite separatrix in the
horizontal direction, the graph Ξ´pM, Lq can be embedded in M for
any L.

44

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

6. An explicit surgery for real Rel

In this section, for ﬁxed M P H and z P ZpMq, we will present
an explicit presentation of RelzM in terms of glued polygons. Our
explicit surgery generalizes the special cases treated in [McM8] and
[B2, §3]. As a by-product, it will enable us to determine ZpMq explicitly
from the geometry of M . This analysis makes it possible to analyze
limits limjÑ8 Relzj M , for zj P ZpMq with limjÑ8 zj P BZpMq. Such
limits do not exist as elements of H; loosely speaking they belong to a
bordiﬁcation of H obtained by adjoining boundary strata. We will not
construct this bordiﬁcation in this paper but hope to return to it in
future work. A particularly simple case of this bordiﬁcation arises when
one takes limits of surfaces in Hp1, 1q for which a segment joining the
two singularities collapses. Even in this relatively simple case, which
will arise in Theorem 6.5, the construction we use diﬀers from earlier
related work (see [KoZo, EMZ]) and leads naturally to the use of framed
surfaces.

e and R´

e (resp.

e

e and the top of R´

We will establish some terminology and make a construction which
will be used in stating Theorem 6.1. Let L and ε be positive numbers.
Given M , we let ΞpMq, Ξ´pMq and Ξ´pM, Lq be as in §5. We say
that N “ NpL, εq Ă M is the pL, εq-rectangle thickening of Ξ´pMq
if N is a union of rectangles R`
e in M , with sides parallel to
the coordinate axes, where e ranges over the edges of Ξ´pM, Lq, Re
has vertical sides of length ε, and the edge e runs along the bottom
of R`
e . Here the words ‘bottom’ and ‘top’ refer
to the orientation provided by the translation surface structure and
need not correspond to the directions shown in our ﬁgures. The edge
identiﬁcation maps of the rectangles are inherited from Ξ´pMq, namely
they are as follows. Each R´
e along e, and the
top of R`
bottom of R´
If the right end of
e is not a singularity (i.e. e is right-pointing prong edge) then the
right hand boundaries of R˘
If the right end of e
e are unattached.
is the singularity ξ then the right hand boundary of R´
e (resp. R`
e )
is attached to the left hand boundary of R´
f , where f is the edge of
Ξ´pMq which is counterclockwise (resp. clockwise) from e at ξ. For
the gluing rule for the left edges, replace left with right and clockwise
with counterclockwise in the above description. See Figure 8.
Note that for any L there is ε0 “ ε0pM, Lq such that for all ε ă ε0,
the pL, εq-rectangle thickening of Ξ´pMq exists and is embedded in M .
Moreover the constant ε0pM, Lq can be chosen to be independent of M
and L, for L in a bounded set of numbers and M in a compact set of
topologically horizontally equivalent surfaces.

is attached to R`
e ) is unattached.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

45

Figure 8. A rectangle thickening of Ξ´pMq in Hp2q
with 10 rectangles.

Given translation surfaces M, M1, and a subset M0 Ă M we say that
M1 can be obtained from M by modifying M0 if there are polygon rep-
0 Ă M1, such that M0, M1
resentations of M and M1, and a subset M1
are unions of polygons, and there is a homeomorphism f : pM (cid:114)M0q Ñ
pM1 (cid:114) M1
0q, which is a translation in each coordinate chart of the trans-
lation surface structures on M and M1.
Theorem 6.1. Let M P H. For each δ P ΞpMq, let ZpM,δq denote the
connected component of 0 in tz P Z : holpM, δq ` zpδq ‰ 0u. Then

0

ZpMq “

ZpM,δq.

(35)

č

δPΞpMq

For any z P ZpMq there is L “ Lz ą 0, such that for any ε ă ε0pM, Lq,
RelzM can be obtained from M by modifying NpL, εq. Moreover, the
function z ÞÑ Lz can be taken to be bounded when z varies in a bounded
Ş
subset of ZpMq.
Proof. First note that ZpMq Ă
Indeed, if z P ZpMq
δPΞpMq ZpM,δq.
then the straight line path tReltzM : t P r0, 1su is embedded in H. In
particular, for any saddle connection δ P ΞpMq,

holpM, δq ` tzpδq “ holpReltzM, δq ‰ 0.
Ş
So the path ttz : t P r0, 1su is contained in ZpM,δq and hence z P ZpM,δq.
δPΞpMq ZpM,δq. Recall that we may think of an element
z of Z – H 0pΣ; Rq{H 0pS; Rq as being represented by a function ¯z :
Σ Ñ R. All such representatives ¯z diﬀer by constants, and

Now let z P

zij “ ¯zpξjq ´ ¯zpξiq “ zpδijq,

(36)

46

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

|¯zpξiq|.

(37)

for any path δij : r0, 1s Ñ S with δijp0q “ ξi, δijp1q “ ξj. We ﬁx one
representative ¯z of z, and let

L ą max
i“1,...,k
Our assumption about z implies that
if δ is from ξi to ξj and holpM, δq ą 0, then holpM, δq ` zij ą 0. (38)
Let ε ă ε0pM, Lq and let N0 “ NpL, εq. Choose a marking pf, Mq P
Hm of M . For each t P r0, 1s, we will deﬁne a translation surface Mt
and a marking ft : S Ñ Mt, as follows. To each rectangle R “ R˘
e in
N0 we deﬁne a trapezoid Rt “ R˘
t,e, by choosing a plane development
¯R of R and moving the vertices of ¯R horizontally, where points of ¯R
which come from BN0 are not moved, and points which correspond
to the singularity ξi are moved by adding t¯zpξiq to their horizontal
component. See Figures 9 and 10.

e0

R`

0

R`
1
e1

R`

2

e2

Figure 9. The complex N0, presented topologically,
showing three adjacent rectangles. The rectangles are
presented with correct geometries below.

R`

0

e0

ξ0

R`

1

e1

R`

2

e2

ξ1

Note that for any t P r0, 1s, the lengths of edges of Rt do not vanish.
Indeed, R˘
e has either one or two vertices which are in Σ, depending
on whether e is a prong edge or an edge of ΞpMq. In case it is a prong
edge, the length of horizontal sides of R is L and (37) implies that
the sidelength of Rt is positive, and in case it is an edge of ΞpMq,

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

47

R`

0

e0

ξ0

R`

0

e0

R`

1

e1

R`

1

e1

ξ0

R`

2

e2

R`

2

e2

ξ1

ξ1

Figure 10. The eﬀect of diﬀerent deformations, trans-
forming the rectangles into trapezoids.

We claim that for each t, the pullback devpft, Mtq “ f˚

(38) implies that the sidelength of Rt is positive. We glue the diﬀerent
trapezoids tRtu to each other along their edges, using the same gluing
that deﬁnes N0, to obtain a complex Nt. Since the sides of R cor-
responding to BN0 have the same length in Rt, their boundaries BNt
and BN0 can be identiﬁed by a translation, and so we can glue Nt to
M (cid:114)N0 along BN0. We denote the resulting translation surface by Mt;
clearly it is obtained from M by modifying N0.
: R Ñ Rt
which sends vertices of R to the corresponding vertices of Rt, and acts
aﬃnely on each boundary edge of BRt. This choice ensures that ¯ft can
be extended consistently from rectangles to their union, deﬁning a map
¯ft : N0 Ñ Nt, and then extended to a homeomorphism ¯ft : M Ñ Mt.
We set ft “ ¯ft ˝ f . With this choice pft, Mtq is a path in Hm, and the
maps ft ˝ f´1 are isotopic to the identity via an isotopy ﬁxing Σ.
t holpMt,¨q is
the cohomology class devpf, Mq ` tz. We verify this formula on each
path γ : r0, 1s Ñ M between singularities ξi and ξj. The path γ is
homotopic to a concatenation of segments δ1, . . . , δ(cid:96) which are com-
pletely contained in N0, and segments δ1
m which are not com-
pletely contained in N0. Each of the segments δ “ δi is homotopic
to a saddle connection in ΞpMq. If δ is a saddle connection of ΞpMq
then it is one of the edges e of the rectangles Re, and by construction
holpf˚
(cid:96) is a path not contained in
N0 we can subdivide it into a concatention of paths σ1, σ2, σ3, σ4, where
σ1 goes from ξ1 to BN0, σ2 goes from BN0 to ξj, σ3 (resp. σ4) is a union
of segments inside (resp. outside) N from BN0 to BN0. Moreover by ap-
plying a homotopy we can assume that on the initial surface M , each of
the segments in σ1, σ2 and σ3 proceeds along a vertical line in the rect-
t Mt, σq´ holpf˚M, σq
angles R˘

e . Now we compute the diﬀerence holpf˚

On each rectangle R we choose a homeomorphism ¯ft

1, . . . , δ1

t Mt, δq “ holpf˚M, δq` tzpδq. If δ1 “ δ1

48

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

t,e. We also have holpf˚

t Mt, σ1q ´ holpf˚M, σ1q “ ´¯zpξiq and
in each case. We have holpf˚
holpf˚
t Mt, σ2q´ holpf˚M, σ2q “ ¯zpξjq by deﬁnition of the deformed ﬂat
t Mt, σ4q ´ holpf˚M, σ4q “ 0,
structure on R˘
since σ4 is in the complement of N0 where the two ﬂat structures are
the same, and we have holpf˚
t Mt, σ3q ´ holpf˚M, σ3q “ 0 since each
of the segments of σ3 passes through both R`
for some e,
leaving and exiting at symmetric points, and the change to the holo-
nomy in these two rectangles cancel each other. All together we have
holpf˚M, δ1q ´ holpf˚
(cid:3)

t Mt, δ1q “ ¯zpξjq ´ ¯zpξiq, as required.

e and R´

e

The following result says that the only obstruction to deﬁning the
Rel ﬂow is the one illustrated in Figure 3. Let zij be deﬁned as in
equation (36).
Corollary 6.2. Suppose Z is the real Rel subspace for a stratum H as
above and let z P Z, M P H. Then M P H1
z exactly when there is no
horizontal saddle connection δ on M from singularity ξi to singularity
ξj, and t P r0, 1s such that holpM, δq ` tzij “ 0. In particular H18 is

the set of surfaces which have no horizontal saddle connections joining
distinct singularities.
Furthermore, if H has two singularities, and v P R – R2, then
M R H1
v if and only if there is a saddle connection δ on M from ξ2 to
singularity ξ1, with holpM, δq “ tv for some t P r0, 1s.
Proof. The ﬁrst assertion is a restatement of (35), and the second as-
sertion follows immediately from the ﬁrst. For the third assertion, let
rθ be the rotation matrix for which rθv is horizontal. We obtain the
assertion by applying the ﬁrst assertion to the surface rθM and using
Proposition 3.4 with g “ rθ.
(cid:3)

Corollary 6.2 was proved in [MW2, Thm. 11.2]. See also [McM8].
Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the meaning of Corollary 6.2. In Figure 3
the saddle connection at the top and bottom of the decagon violates
the ﬁrst condition, when v “ pT, 0q for T which is at least as large
In Figure 4 there are no horizontal
as the length of this segment.
saddle connections joining distinct singularities, and as a consequence
of Corollary 6.2, RelpT,0qM is deﬁned for all T .

We now derive some consequences. As a ﬁrst consequence we have:
Proof of Proposition 3.9. Each ZpM,δq is a half-space, and in particular
(cid:3)
is convex. Thus Proposition 3.9 follows immediately from (35).

An immediate consequence of the explicit surgery we have presented

in the proof of 6.1 is the following useful statement:

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

49

Corollary 6.3. For any M and any t for which ReltM is deﬁned,
there is a natural bijection between horizontal saddle connections on
M and on ReltM , and for each saddle connection δ directed from ξ2 to
ξ1, holpReltM, δq “ holpM, δq ´ pt, 0q. In particular M and ReltM are
topologically horizontally equivalent.

The following will be crucial for analyzing U -invariant measures in

§8.
Deﬁnition 6.4. Suppose H “ Hp1, 1q, and let T P Z – R. Let H2
denote the set of surfaces M P H for which
(i) M contains exactly one directed saddle connection δ1 from ξ2 to

T

ξ1 with holpM, δ1q “ pT, 0q;
that holpM, δq “ pc, 0q with c between 0 and T .

(ii) M contains no directed saddle connection δ from ξ2 to ξ1, such

Theorem 6.5. There is a map

Φ : H2

T Ñ Hp2q

which is aﬃne in charts (hence continuous) and U -equivariant. For
each M P H2
0, L ą T depending on M . There is a map

T , ΦpMq is obtained by modifying Npε, Lq for some ε ą

Φf “ Φ

pTq
f

: H2

T Ñ Hfp2q,

which is a lift of Φ (i.e. Φ “ P ˝ Φf where P : Hfp2q Ñ Hp2q is the
projection), and Φf is a homeomorphism onto its image.

Suppose T ą 0. Note that assumption (ii) implies that r0, Tq Ă
ZpMq, and assumption (i) implies that T R ZpMq; that is T P BZpMq. A
topology on Hp1, 1q Y Hfp2q can be constructed in which the map Φ
can be recovered as ΦpMq “ limsÑT´ RelspMq. We will not construct
this topology here.
Proof. We will assume throughout the proof that T ą 0. The case
in which T ă 0 can be dealt with by repeating the arguments below,
switching the labels of the two singularities. Let δ1 be as in (i) in the
T and let e1 be the corresponding edge of Ξ´pMq. Let
deﬁnition of H2
L ą |T| and deﬁne NpL, εq as in the discussion prior to the statement
of Theorem 6.1, where ε ą 0 is small enough so that the rectangles
e are all embedded in M . Deﬁne the polygons R˘
R˘
T,e as in the proof
of Theorem 6.1. For all e ‰ e1 condition (ii) ensures that R˘
T,e is a
nondegenerate trapezoid. For e1, the length of the edge corresponding
to e1 is zero and so it is a triangle. See Figure 11. We glue the two
T,e, e ‰ e1 to obtain the complex NT
triangles R˘

T,e1 to the trapezoids R˘

50

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

which we glue to M (cid:114)N0 as before, to obtain MT . We note that NT is
a thickening of a graph obtained from Ξ´pM, Lq by collapsing the edge
e1. One can compute explicitly that there is one singular point in NT
and that it has cone angle 6π; that is MT P Hp2q. We set ΦpMq “ MT .

R`

0

e0

1

R`
ξ0 “ ξ1

R`

2

e2

Figure 11. The developing image of degenerate rect-
angles. The trapezoid R`
1 has degenerated to a triangle,
the edge e1 “ e1 has disappeared, and the two singular
points have coalesced.

q3 R`

3

q2 R´

2

R`
δ1
R´
δ1

δ1

R`

4

q4

R´

1

q1

Figure 12. The complex N0, shown topologically, with
δ1 connecting the two singularities.

3

R`
R´

2

R`
δ1
R´
δ1

δ1

ξ1

ξ0

4

R`
R´

1

Figure 13. The developing image of rectangles. The
double lines represent two diﬀerent edges on the surface.

m,T be the pre-image of H2

We now show that Φ is aﬃne in charts. We ﬁrst explain what
T in Hmp1, 1q, and let
this means. Let H2
: Hmp1, 1q Ñ H 1pS,tξ1, ξ2u; R2q be the developing map as
devp1,1q
in (1). Condition (i) in Deﬁnition 6.4 can be expressed as a lin-
ear condition on the image of devp1,1q and condition (ii) is an open

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

51

3

R`
R´

2

R`
δ1
R´
δ1

ξ

4

R`
R´

1

Figure 14. The developing image of rectangles when δ1
shrinks to a point and the two singularities coalesce.

R`

3

q3

R`
δ1

R`

4

q4

q2

R´

2

R´
δ1

q1

R´

1

Figure 15. The corresponding topological correct pic-
ture. The chosen prong edge is labeled q1.
condition on the image of devp1,1q, and thus H2
m,T is an aﬃne sub-
: Hmp2q Ñ H 1pS1,tξ1u; R2q,
manifold of Hmp1, 1q. Also let devp2q
for some model surface S1 of genus 2 with one distinguished point
ξ1. To say that Φ is aﬃne in charts is to say that that there is a
m,T Ñ Hmp2q, which is a lift of Φ, and a linear map
map Φm : H2
L : H 1pS,tξ1, ξ2u; R2q Ñ H 1pS1,tξ1u; R2q such that

Let pf, Mq P H2

m,T be a marked surface projecting to M P H2

T , and
deﬁne the map ¯fT : M Ñ MT as in the proof of Theorem 6.1. Let
fT “ f ˝ ¯fT : S Ñ MT . The map ¯fT is injective on the complement
of e1 and maps all points in e1, including its endpoints ξ1 and ξ2, to
the unique singularity of MT , which we denote by ξ. Note that f´1pe1q
is a simple path connecting the two points ξ1 and ξ2. Let S1 be the
surface obtained from S by collapsing f´1pe1q to a point ξ1, and let

devp2q ˝ Φm “ L ˝ devp1,1q.

(39)

52

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

p : S Ñ S1 be the quotient map. Since f´1pe1q is contractible, S1 is also
a genus 2 surface, and since fT is constant on f´1pe1q, it descends to
a homeomorphism S1 Ñ MT , which we continue to denote by fT . We
see that

Φm : H2

m,T Ñ Hmp2q, Φmpf, Mq “ pfT , MTq

We now show that Φ lifts to a continuous map Φf : H2

is a lift of Φ. Since f´1pe1q is contractible, the pullback p˚ : H 1pS1; R2q Ñ
H 1pS; R2q is an isomorphism. Let Resp1,1q and Resp2q denote the restric-
tion maps in (11), in the two cases corresponding respectively to Hp1, 1q
and Hp2q. Since ξ1, ξ2 are contained in f´1pe1q, and the holonomies of
absolute periods are on the same on pf, Mq and pfT , MTq, we ﬁnd that
Resp2q ˝ devp2q ˝ Φm “ p˚ ˝ Resp1,1q ˝ devp1,1q. Since Resp2q is an isomor-
phism, this yields (39) with L “ Res´1p2q˝p˚˝Resp1,1q. This computation,
and the fact that the action of U does not move the points of e1, also
shows that Φ is U -equivariant.
T Ñ Hfp2q.
In view of the discussion in §2.9, in order to lift Φ to a map to Hfp2q
we need to equip MT with a right-pointing horizontal prong at the
singular point ξ. Let δ1 “ δ1pMq be as in the deﬁnition of H2
T and
let qpMq be the prong which is obtained by moving an angle π in
the counterclockwise direction from the terminal prong of δ1, at the
singularity ξ2. Then qpMq is in the complement of δ1 and so is mapped
by ¯fT to a horizontal prong on MT . See Figures 12 and 15, where qpMq
is marked as q1. We need to show that with this choice of selected
prong, Φf is continuous.
In light of Proposition 2.8, it is enough to
show two things: (i) that the choice of prong M ÞÑ qpMq is continuous
with respect to the coordinates given by the developing map, for any
ﬁxed triangulation; and (ii), that M ÞÑ qpMq is Modp ˇSq-invariant. It
is clear from our description of qpMq that (i) and (ii) are satisﬁed.

Finally, since Φf is a lift of a locally aﬃne map in charts, in order to
show that it is a homeomorphism onto its image we need only verify
that it is injective, and for this we explicitly construct its inverse. We
0 “ ΦfpM0q in each connected component of
ﬁrst pick one basepoint M1
the image of Φ, choose a horizontal prong at M1
0 using the direction of
δ in M0 as in the preceding paragraph, and extend this choice continu-
ously to all surfaces in the image of Φ. Now for any M1 in the image of
Φ, let N 1 be the pL, εq-rectangle thickening of Ξ´pM1q for L ą |T| and
small enough ε. We consider N 1 with its decomposition into rectangles
as in the preceding discussion, and we now modify this decomposition.
Let q1 be the chosen right-pointing prong on M1 and let q2 be the
left-pointing prong which is clockwise from q1. Similarly let q3, q4 be
the left- and right-pointing prongs which are at angular distance 3π

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

53

i Y R´

i

i with R˘

from q1, q2 respectively. Let σ1 (resp. σ2) be the two vertical segment
of lengths ε between q1, q2 (resp., between q3 and q4) connecting ξ to
the boundary of BN1. For i “ 1, 2, the segments σ1, σ2 are boundary
i of the complex N 1, one on each side.
segments of two rectangles R˘
Let ∆i be a triangle which is embedded in the union of R`
i , has
an apex at ξ, and has σi as an altitude contained in its interior. We
now replace each R˘
(cid:114) ∆i, and add the ∆i to the polygo-
nal decomposition of N 1. Thus we have a decomposition of N 1 into
rectangles, trapezoids, and two triangles. To each of them we apply
the map described in the proof of Theorem 6.1, with ´T instead of T .
That is, we do not move points on BN 1 and the non-boundary edges.
The two triangles are thought of as degenerate trapezoids. The choice
of the prongs at ξ, and the fact that M1 is in the image of Φ, ensure
that these operations are well-deﬁned, that is for all t strictly between
0 and T , the deformed shapes are nondegenerate trapezoids. Gluing
them to each other using the gluing map of N 1 and gluing the resulting
complex to M (cid:114) N 1 completes the deﬁnition of the inverse of Φf. (cid:3)
The image of Φ in Theorem 6.5 can be described explicitly in terms
of the choice of horizontal prong at the singularity. Namely suppose
again that T ą 0 and that q1 is the chosen prong. Let q2, . . . , q6 be the
additional prongs at ξ in counterclockwise order. Then the image of Φ
is the set of M P Hfp2q which have no horizontal saddle connections of
length at most T from q1 or q3 to q4 or q6.

The inverse of Φ appearing in Theorem 6.5 is the operation of ‘split-

ting open a singularity’ which was discussed in [EMZ].

7. The eigenform locus

In this section we will deﬁne the eigenform locus ED. We describe
its intersection with Hp1, 1q and Hp2q and describe how it meets some
boundary strata. We summarize some properties of surfaces in the
eigenform locus.

7.1. Deﬁnition of the eigenform loci. The eigenform loci were de-
ﬁned by Calta [C] and McMullen [McM2]. Calta made use of the J
invariant and McMullen used properties of real multiplication on Ja-
cobians. Here we follow the approach of McMullen.
For every positive integer D ” 0, 1 pmod 4q with D ě 4 there is a
closed, connected, G-invariant locus ED Ă Hp2q Y Hp1, 1q, called the
eigenform locus, which we now describe.
An order in a number ﬁeld F is a subring O of the ring of integers
OF which is ﬁnite index as an abelian group. Orders in quadratic ﬁelds

54

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

are particularly simple as they can be classiﬁed by a single integer D,
the discriminant. More precisely, for every positive integer D ” 0, 1
pmod 4q, we consider the real quadratic order

OD “ ZrTs{pT 2 ` bT ` cq,

where b, c P Z are such that b2 ´ 4c “ D. If D is not square, it is a
subring of the real quadratic ﬁeld, FD “ QrTs{pT 2 ` bT ` cq. We also
allow D to be square, in which case FD is isomorphic to Q‘ Q as a Q-
algebra. In either case the isomorphism classes of OD and FD depend
only on D. We ﬁx a choice of a ring homomorphism ι : FD Ñ R. When
D is not square, ι is a ﬁeld embedding. If D is square, ι is obtained
from the projection of Q ‘ Q onto its ﬁrst factor. A more detailed
discussion of orders in number ﬁelds appears in [BoSh].
Consider a genus two Riemann surface X with Jacobian variety
JacpXq “ ΩpXq˚{H1pX; Zq, where ΩpXq is the space of holomor-
phic one-forms on X. Real multiplication by OD on JacpXq is a ring
monomorphism ρ : OD Ñ End0pJacpXqq, where End0pJacpXqq is the
ring of endomorphisms of JacpXq which are self-adjoint with respect
to the intersection form on H1pX; Zq. We also require ρ to be proper,
in the sense that it does not extend to OE Ľ OD for some E|D.
Real multiplication by OD induces a representation of OD on ΩpXq,
and by self-adjointness, a decomposition of ΩpXq into complementary
eigenspaces. A nonzero holomorphic one-form on X is an eigenform
if it lies in one of these eigenspaces. We say that a pair pX, ωq is an
eigenform for real multiplication if JacpXq has real multiplication with
ω an eigenform.

Real multiplication for curves in genus two is very special, as it can
be detected from knowledge of the absolute periods of a single one-
form on the curve. That is to say, real multiplication in genus two has
a “purely ﬂat” description. More precisely:

Proposition 7.1 ([B2]). A genus two translation surface M is an
eigenform for real multiplication by OD if and only if there is a proper
monomorphism ρ0 : OD Ñ End0pH1pM ; Zqq such that
holpM, ρ0pλq ¨ γq “ ιpλqholpM, γq

(40)

for each λ P OD and γ P H1pM ; Zq.

The ρ0 in this Proposition is simply the action on homology induced
by the real multiplication ρ : OD Ñ End0pJacpMqq. See also [McM2,
Lemma 7.4], and see [CaSm] for an alternative approach.
We deﬁne the eigenform locus ED Ă Hp2q Y Hp1, 1q to be the lo-
cus of eigenforms for real multiplication by OD, and we deﬁne EDp2q

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

55

D p1, 1q.

and EDp1, 1q to be the intersections of ED with the respective strata.
Similarly we denote the corresponding subsets of area-one surfaces by
D p2q and Ep1q
Ep1q
The locus EDp1, 1q is GL2pRq-invariant, as it can be easily seen that
the condition of Proposition 7.1 is G-invariant (this was ﬁrst proved
in [McM2] and [C]). It is also Rel invariant since this condition only
involves absolute periods. Moreover EDp1, 1q is a six dimensional linear
submanifold of Hp1, 1q with respect to the period coordinates from
§2.2. To see this explicitly, choose two generators γ1, γ2 of H1pM ; Zq
(as an OD-module) and complete to a set of four generators as a Z-
module, e.g. by adjoining a multiple of each γi by a generator of OD
over Z. Equation (40) now gives linear equations which the vectors
holpM, γq must satisfy, and these equations deﬁne EDp1, 1q locally. As
D p1, 1q is a ﬁve-dimensional manifold locally deﬁned
a consequence Ep1q
in periodic coordinates by linear equations and one quadratic equation.
This dimension count easily implies that GL2pRq-orbits and Rel
leaves locally ﬁll out EDp1, 1q and yields:
Proposition 7.2. For any M P Ep1q
the identity in L and a neighborhood U1 of M in Ep1q
map p : U Ñ U1 deﬁned by

D p1, 1q there is a neighborhood U of
D p1, 1q such that the

ppg, vq “ gM ¯ v

is the restriction of an aﬃne homeomorphism to G ˙ R2.
Proof. Consider a precompact neighborhood W of the identity in GL2pRq.
For some ε ą 0, no surface in W ¨ M has saddle connections of length
less than ε. By Corollary 6.2, p is well-deﬁned on V “ W ˆ Bεp0q Ă
GL2pRq˙ R2. Possibly decreasing ε so that the image of p is contained
in an aﬃne coordinate chart as deﬁned above, p is a homeomorphism
onto its image. Since the action of Rel preserves the area of surfaces, p
sends L into the locus of area-one surfaces. Intersecting V with L and
the image of p with the locus of area-one surfaces, we obtain U and U1
(cid:3)
with the required properties.

The eigenform locus has a more elementary description in the case
where D is a square. A translation surface X is a torus cover if there
is a branched cover p : X Ñ T which is a local translation for some ﬂat
torus T (note that the branch points of p are not required to lie over a
single point of T ). We say p is primitive if it does not factor through
a torus cover of smaller degree, equivalently if the map on homology
p˚ : H1pX; Zq Ñ H1pT ; Zq is onto. McMullen established in [McM3]
that Ed2 is the locus of primitive degree d torus covers.

56

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

7.2. G-invariant measures in genus two. We now discuss the G-
invariant measures in genus two. These were classiﬁed by McMullen
in [McM3]. Measures supported on the full strata were constructed by
Masur [Ma] and Veech [Ve1] using period coordinates on these strata.
In [McM3] McMullen constructed measures on the eigenform loci in an
analogous way using period coordinates.
We may use Proposition 7.2 to deﬁne a measure on EDp1, 1q by locally
pushing forward Haar measure on L. More precisely, given E in the
image U1 of p, we assign to E the Haar measure of p´1pEq Ă L (the
L invariance of Haar measure implies that the measure of E doesn’t
depend on the choice of basepoint). We call this the ﬂat measure on
EDp1, 1q. McMullen proved that this measure is ﬁnite and G-invariant
[McM3].

Here is an alternative description of the ﬂat measure which can
be generalized to deﬁne a measure on any linear submanifold of a
stratum. Suppose f : S Ñ M is a marked translation surface, write
M “ pX, ωq, and suppose that JacpXq admits real multiplication by
OD. The real multiplication on JacpXq gives H1pS; Zq the structure
of an OD-module. A choice of embedding OD Ñ R makes R2 an O-
module as well. We deﬁne H 1ODpS, Σ; R2q Ă H 1pS, Σ; R2q to be the
subspace of cocycles for which the induced period map H1pS; Zq Ñ R2
is OD-linear. This is in other words the space of cocycles satisfying
(40). By Proposition 7.1, the linear subspace H 1ODpS, Σ; R2q parame-
terizes the eigenform locus in Hm near M .
cients in R2):

We have the commutative diagram of homology groups (all coeﬃ-

0

0

/ H 0pΣq{H 0pSq

H 1ODpS, Σq

H 1ODpSq

/ H 0pΣq{H 0pSq

/ H 1pS, Σq

/ H 1pSq

0

/ 0

We give EDp1, 1q a measure by deﬁning a measure on the linear space
H 1ODpS, Σq on which it is modeled which is invariant under the mon-

odromy action. To deﬁne such a measure, we give a measure on the
other two terms of the short exact sequence. The left term is canon-
ically R2, and the monodromy action is trivial. We give it the usual
Euclidean area form. The H 1pSq term has a symplectic form arising
from the intersection form, which is preserved by the action of the map-
ping class group. This descends to a symplectic form on H 1ODpSq which

is preserved by monodromy. This form is non-degenerate; this could be

/
/
/


/
/


/
/


/
/
/
/
HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

57

checked by direct computation, and was proved in complete general-
ity by Avila, Eskin and M¨oller [AEM]. Therefore the symplectic form

deﬁnes a volume form on H 1ODpSq which is also monodromy invariant.
The product of these volume forms induces one on H 1ODpS, Σq which
deﬁnes a measure on EDp1, 1q. Finally, we apply the standard cone
construction (meaning we push forward the restriction of the measure
to surfaces in EDp1, 1q of area at most 1, by the canonical projection
onto the locus of surfaces of area one; see [Zo] for details) to obtain a
ﬁnite G-invariant measure on EDp1, 1q which is supported on the area
one forms.
The eigenform locus EDp1, 1q is nonempty and connected for D ě 4
and D ” 0 or 1 pmod 4q by [McM2].
In the stratum Hp2q, the locus of eigenforms EDp2q, is called the
Weierstrass curve in McMullen’s papers. By [McM5], EDp2q consists
of a single G-orbit if D ı 1 pmod 8q and D ě 5 (note EDp2q is empty
for D ă 5), or if D “ 9. Otherwise EDp2q consists of two orbits. It is
equipped with a ﬁnite measure coming from Haar measure on G.
The square-discriminant eigenform locus Ed2 also contains a count-
able, dense collection of closed G-orbits. A translation surface X is
called a square-tiled surface if it is a branched cover of the standard
square torus with all of the branching lying over a single point. Every
square-tiled surface has a closed G-orbit, and the square-tiled surfaces
are dense in each Ed2.

Closed G-orbits inherit a measure from the Haar measure on G, and
this measure is ﬁnite by a result of Smillie (see [SmWe2]). We will
refer to this measure as the Haar measure on the closed G-orbit. The
decagon surface is the surface obtained by identifying opposite sides of
the regular 10-gon. It was shown by Veech [Ve2] that it has a closed G-
orbit. It belongs to Hp1, 1q and in fact to the eigenform locus E5p1, 1q.
We write Ldec Ă E5p1, 1q for its G-orbit. The closed G-orbits in genus
two were classiﬁed by McMullen in [McM2] and [McM4] (these closed
G-orbits were constructed independently by Calta [C] using diﬀerent
methods):
Theorem 7.3. Each connected component of EDp2q is a closed G-orbit,
and every closed G-orbit in Hp2q is of this form.
Every closed G-orbit in Hp1, 1q is either the G-orbit of a square-tiled
surface or is Ldec.

In [McM3], McMullen showed that the measures deﬁned above are

the full list of ergodic G-invariant measures in genus two:

58

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Theorem 7.4. Every ergodic G-invariant measure on Hp2q is either
the ﬂat measure on the full stratum or Haar measure on a closed G-
orbit.
Every ergodic G-invariant measure on Hp1, 1q is either the ﬂat mea-
sure on the full stratum, the ﬂat measure on some EDp1, 1q, or the Haar
measure on a closed G-orbit.

7.3. Degenerate eigenform surfaces. We will also be interested in
eigenforms which are not genus two surfaces but can be thought of
as surfaces lying in a bordiﬁcation of Hp1, 1q. We will consider two
cases, where the role of “boundary strata” will be played respectively
by Hp0q ˆ Hp0q and Hp0, 0q.
Given a pair of genus one translation surfaces E1 and E2, we may
consider the one-point connected sum X “ E1#E2. These degener-
ations arise from families of genus two surfaces where a separating
curve has been pinched. As we have the direct sum decompositions
H1pXq “ H1pE1q ‘ H1pE2q and ΩpXq “ ΩpE1q ‘ ΩpE2q, the Jacobian
of X is simply the product of E1 and E2:

JacpXq “ Ω˚pXq{H1pX; Zq

– Ω˚pE1q{H1pE1; Zq ‘ Ω˚pE2q{H1pE2; Zq
– E1 ˆ E2

Just as for the case of smooth curves, we say that X is an eigenform for
real multiplication if JacpXq has real multiplication, with the one-form
deﬁning the translation structure belonging to one of the eigenspaces
in ΩpXq.
We say E1 and E2 are isogenous if there is t ą 0 such that tΛ1 Ă Λ2,
where Λi Ă C is the set of holonomies of absolute periods on Ei. This
leads to an isogeny, i.e. a ﬁnite covering map E1 Ñ E2 given in charts
by multiplication by t. McMullen gave a more elementary description
of real multiplication for these stable curves:

Proposition 7.5 ([McM5]). The surface E1#E2 is an eigenform for
real multiplication by OD if and only if there is a degree m translation-
cover (in particular, an isogeny) E1 Ñ E2 and there exists an integral
solution pe, (cid:96)q to the equation e2` 4m(cid:96)2 “ D with (cid:96) ą 0 and gcdpe, (cid:96)q “
1.

We deﬁne PD Ă Hp0q ˆ Hp0q to be the locus of pairs pE1, E2q such
that E1#E2 is an eigenform for real multiplication by OD. With the
diagonal G-action on Hp0q ˆ Hp0q, the locus PD is G-invariant by
Proposition 7.5.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

59

By [McM5], the locus PD consists of ﬁnitely many closed G-orbits.
We recall McMullen’s classiﬁcation of these G-orbits. A prototype for
real multiplication by OD is a triple of integers pe, (cid:96), mq such that D “
e2 ` 4(cid:96)2m, with (cid:96), m ą 0 and gcdp(cid:96), mq “ 1. A prototype pe, (cid:96), mq
determines a prototypical form in PD as follows. Let λ be the unique
positive solution of λ2 “ eλ ` (cid:96)2m. We deﬁne a pair of lattices in C:

Λ1 “ Zpλ, 0q ‘ Zp0, λq Λ2 “ Zp(cid:96)m, 0q ‘ Zp0, (cid:96)q,
and associated genus one translation surfaces Ei “ pC{Λi, dzq. Multi-
plication by λ deﬁnes an isogeny p : E1 Ñ E2 of degree l2m.
Proposition 7.6 ([McM5]). Each G-orbit of PD contains a unique
prototypical form.

Given a prototype pe, (cid:96), mq, we deﬁne PDpe, (cid:96), mq to be the closed
G-orbit containing the prototypical form associated to pe, (cid:96), mq. By
the above proposition, this gives a bijection between prototypes and
components of PD. We say that two pairs of genus-one forms have
the same combinatorial type if they lie on the same component of PD.
By [McM5, Theorem 2.1], the G-orbit corresponding to the prototype
pe, (cid:96), mq is isomorphic to the modular curve G{Γ0pmq, where Γ0pmq Ă
SLp2, Zq is the group of matrices which are upper-triangular mod m.
Finally, in the case when D “ d2 with d ą 1, we consider the moduli
space Hp0, 0q of genus one translation surfaces E with two marked
points p and q. Again, there is a natural G-action on this space. We
deﬁne Sd2 Ă Hp0, 0q to be the locus of pE, p, qq such that p´q is exactly
d-torsion in the group law on E (that is dpp´ qq “ 0 and d1pp´ qq ‰ 0
*
for any d1 ă d, in particular this implies p ‰ q). By [B1], Sd2 is a closed
G-orbit isomorphic to G{Γ1pdq, where
P SL2pZq : a ” e ” 1 (mod dq and c ” 0 (mod dq
Γ1pdq “
.
We can regard pE, p, qq as a degenerate degree d torus cover obtained
by pinching a nonseparating curve. Since p ´ q is a point of order d in
the group law on E, we have a degree d map π : E Ñ F , where F is
the quotient of E by the order d subgroup generated by p ´ q. This π
is the torus cover of minimal degree sending p and q to the same point.
The precise sense in which surfaces in the loci PD, SD, and EDp2q
can all be regarded as lying in the boundary of EDp1, 1q, is explained
in [B1]. We will not explicitly use this point of view.

"ˆ

˙

a b
c e

7.4. Properties of eigenform surfaces. We will require the follow-
ing properties of surfaces in EDp1, 1q. Recall that the modulus of a ﬂat
cylinder is deﬁned to be its height divided by its circumference.

60

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Proposition 7.7. In any cylinder decomposition of a surface in EDp1, 1q
with more than one cylinder, there is at least one rational relation
among the moduli of horizontal cylinders.

Proof. Given a horizontally periodic surface M with n cylinders, the
orbit-closure U M is a torus of dimension n ´ r, where r is the number
of independent rational relations among the moduli of the cylinders
(see [SmWe1, Proposition 4]). We must then show that in any case the
dimension of U M is smaller than n.
First, suppose n “ dim U M “ 3. We may parameterize a neighbor-
hood of M in Hp1, 1q by the three holonomy vectors pxi, yiq of a saddle
connection joining cone points on the two boundary components of the
ith cylinder Ci. Since the yi are constant on U M and dim U M “ 3,
the xi are arbitrary on U M . However, since U M is contained in the
eigenform locus, the xi satisfy some nontrivial real-linear equation, a
contradiction.
Now suppose n “ dim U M “ 2. There must then be a horizontal
saddle connection joining distinct zeros. Applying the real-rel ﬂow so
that the length of this saddle connection tends to 0, yields a surface
M1 in Hp2q with two horizontal cylinders with the same moduli. A
neighborhood of M1 in Hp2q is parameterized by two holonomy vectors
pxi, yiq. Again, if dim U M “ 2, the xi would be arbitrary on U M1,
which contradicts the real-linear equation imposed by the eigenform
locus. (Note in the two-cylinder case, the claim also follows directly
(cid:3)
from [McM3, Theorem 9.1].)
Proposition 7.8. The U -action on each EDp1, 1q, with respect to the
ﬂat measure, is ergodic.

Proof. In a G-action, ergodicity of the geodesic ﬂow implies ergodicity
of the U -action by the “Mautner phenomenon” (see e.g.
[EW]). So
it suﬃces to prove ergodicity of the G-action. This can be proved by
(cid:3)
applying the Hopf argument to the geodesic ﬂow as in [Ma].

Recall that a periodic direction of a translation surface is a direction
in which the surface is a union of parallel cylinders and saddle connec-
tions. A translation surface is completely periodic if for any direction
which contains a cylinder, the surface is a union of parallel cylinders
and saddle connections.

Theorem 7.9 ([McM4, C]). Every genus two surface M which is an
In particular for M P EDp1, 1q, if
eigenform is completely periodic.
ΞpMq contains a saddle connection joining a zero to itself, then the
horizontal direction of M is periodic.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

61

Given two genus one translation surfaces E1 and E2, consider a hor-
izontal segment I Ă R2 which embeds into each Ei. We may form the
connected sum X “ E1#IE2 by removing the image of I from each
EI, and then gluing the resulting boundary components. The result
is a surface X P Hp1, 1q with two horizontal saddle connections whose
union is a loop separating X into two tori (see [McM3] for details).
Theorem 7.10. Suppose that D is not square. Let M P ED, and
suppose M contains a loop which is a union of horizontal saddle con-
nections. Then either

‚ The horizontal direction of M is periodic, or
‚ M is obtained by gluing two genus one translation surfaces with
uniquely ergodic horizontal directions along a horizontal slit.
In particular, in the second case ΞpMq consists of two horizontal saddle
connections joining distinct zeros which are interchanged by the hyper-
elliptic involution (for the corresponding horizontal data diagram, see
diagram 5 in Figure 7).

The ﬁnal statement is proved in the following lemma.

Proof. We regard M as a Riemann surface X equipped with a holo-
morphic one-form ω. By [McM1], if Re ω has zero “Galois ﬂux” and
ΞpMq contains a loop, then we are in one of these two cases. Zero ﬂux
follows from equation (4.2) of [McM1] and Theorem 5.1 of [McM3].
(cid:3)
Lemma 7.11. Let M P Hp1, 1q be a surface with two horizontal sad-
dle connections I and I1 joining distinct zeros. The loop γ “ I Y I1
disconnects M if and only if the hyperelliptic involution interchanges I
and I1.
Proof. Let η : M Ñ M denote the hyperelliptic involution and ω the
holomorphic one-form on M induced by the translation structure.
Suppose that we are in the case where η interchanges I and I1. Since
η˚ω “ ´ω, the map η sends γ to itself preserving the orientation.
Thus rη˚γs “ rγs P H1pM ; Zq. But the hyperelliptic involution acts
on H1pM ; Zq as minus the identity. It follows that γ is homologous to
zero, so it separates M .
Suppose now that η ﬁxes I and I1. Since η reverses the orientation of
each of these saddle connections, each must contain a single ﬁxed point
of η (i.e. one of the six Weierstrass points of M ). If f : M Ñ S2 is the
quotient map induced by the hyperelliptic involution, then in this case
the union fpIq Y fpI1q is a smooth embedded path joining two branch
points of f . Since an embedded path does not disconnect the sphere,
and f has branch points disjoint from fpIq Y fpI1q, the complement
MzpI Y I1q is also connected, a contradiction.
(cid:3)

62

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

When D “ d2, there is one more possible conﬁguration of horizontal
saddle connections. Suppose pE, p, qq is a genus one translation surface
with two marked points p, q whose diﬀerence p ´ q is exactly d-torsion
in the group law of E. There is then a genus one surface F and degree
d cover π : E Ñ F which identiﬁes p and q. Let I Ă R2 be a segment
which may be embedded in E by a translation to yield disjoint parallel
segments I1 and I2 beginning at p and q respectively. We may then
form the self-connected-sum M “ pE, p, qq#I by cutting along I1 and I2
and then regluing to obtain a genus two surface. Since the gluings are
compatible with the covering π : E Ñ F , the surface M is a primitive
degree d branched cover of F , so M P Ed2p1, 1q. If the slope of I is
not a periodic direction on E, the surface M has exactly two saddle
connections of this slope of the same length, and the complement of
this pair of saddle connections is a genus one surface. As in the second
case in Theorem 7.10, the horizontal diagram is once again diagram
5 of Figure 7, but the complement of the slit has a diﬀerent topology
than in the case that D is not a square.

The following theorem says when D is square, this is the only addi-

tional conﬁguration of saddle connections.
Theorem 7.12. Suppose that D “ d2. Let M P ED, and suppose M
contains a loop which is a union of horizontal saddle connections. Then
either

‚ The horizontal direction of M is periodic, or
‚ M is obtained by gluing two genus one translation surfaces with
uniquely ergodic horizontal directions along a horizontal slit,
‚ M is a self-connected sum of pE, p, qq along two horizontal slits
of the same length based at p and q respectively, where E a is
genus one translation surface with uniquely ergodic horizontal
direction, and p ´ q is exactly d-torsion in the group law of E.
In particular, in the second case ΞpMq consists of two horizontal saddle
connections joining distinct zeros which are interchanged by the hyper-
elliptic involution. In the third case, ΞpMq consists of two horizontal
saddle connections of the same length ﬁxed by the hyperelliptic involu-
tion.

Proof. Suppose that M is not periodic. If M has a saddle connection
joining a singularity to itself, this saddle connection is the boundary of
a cylinder, which implies that the horizontal direction of M is periodic
by Theorem 7.9, a contradiction. Therefore ΞpMq consists of two hor-
izontal saddle connections I and I1 joining singularity ξ1 to singularity
ξ2.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

63

Let π : M Ñ F be a primitive degree d cover of a genus one trans-
lation surface. The horizontal direction of F is not periodic, otherwise
M would be periodic as well. The singularities ξi are also the branch
points of π, and the images πpIq and πpI1q are horizontal segments on
F joining πpξ1q to πpξ2q. Since the horizontal direction of F is not
periodic, the images πpξ1q and πpξ2q must be distinct. There is then
a unique horizontal segment on F joining these points which I and I1
are both mapped to injectively by π. It follows that I and I1 have the
same length.
By Lemma 7.11, the loop I Y I1 disconnects M if and only if I and
I1 are interchanged by the hyperelliptic involution.
Suppose we are in the case where I and I1 are ﬁxed by the hyper-
elliptic involution. The complement MzpI Y I1q is then a genus one
translation surface with two boundary components, each a union of
two horizontal segments of the same length. The holonomy around
each boundary component is trivial, so we have exhibited M as a self-
connected-sum pE, p, qq#I. The branch covering π must arise from a
primitive covering E Ñ F which identiﬁes p and q. This implies that
p ´ q is exactly d-torsion in the group law of E.
(cid:3)

8. Construction of ergodic measures for U

In the previous section we discussed G-invariant measures on ED.
In this section we will discuss U -invariant measures which are not G-
invariant.

8.1. Minimal sets. A minimal set for a ﬂow is a minimal (with respect
to inclusion) nonempty closed invariant subset. An example is a closed
orbit, but more complicated examples may arise. The minimal sets for
the horocycle ﬂow in any stratum were classiﬁed in [SmWe1], where
the following was shown.
Proposition 8.1. For M P H, the following are equivalent:

‚ U M is minimal.
‚ U M is compact.
‚ M has a horizontal cylinder decomposition, with ΞpMq consist-
ing of the boundaries of these cylinders.

In case these hold, U M is topologically conjugate to a torus, whose
dimension is the dimension over Q of the span of the moduli of the
cylinders in the horizontal direction of M , and under this conjugacy,
the U -action becomes conjugate to a straight-line linear ﬂow on this
torus. The closure of any U -orbit in H contains some M satisfying the
above conditions.

64

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Corollary 8.2. Each minimal set supports a unique U -invariant mea-
sure (which in particular is ergodic). The measure is linear with respect
to the linear structure on the torus which is the minimal set.

Proof. These are all well-known properties of straight line ﬂows on tori,
(cid:3)
and follow from the isomorphism above.

Corollary 8.3. For cylinder decompositions of type (A) of Figure 6,
the corresponding orbit-closure is a minimal set which is one-dimensional
or two-dimensional. In the former case it is a closed horocycle, and in
the latter, the corresponding measure is invariant under U Z, and this
group acts transitively on the support of the measure. For cylinder
decompositions of types (B), (C) and (D), U -orbits are periodic.

Proof. By Proposition 8.1 the dimension of the U -orbit closure is the
dimension of the Q-span of the moduli, which by Proposition 7.7 is
either 1 or 2. Suppose that it is 2. Again by Proposition 7.7, there must
be three cylinders, so we are in case (A). The description in [SmWe1]
shows that the additional dimension of the orbit closure is given by
changing only the twists around cylinders, and it is straightforward to
check using the explicit coordinates used in [SmWe1], that the Z-action
also aﬀects only the twists, changing them linearly in a way which is
distinct from the U action. Thus the U Z-orbits are 2 dimensional,
and hence U Z is transitive on the orbit-closure and the corresponding
measure is U Z-invariant.

In cases (B) and (C) there are only two cylinders which, by Proposi-
tion 7.7, have rationally related moduli. In case (D) there is only one
cylinder. So in all of these cases the minimal set is 1-dimensional. (cid:3)
8.2. Parameter spaces of minimal sets. For every discriminant D,
there are examples in ED of surfaces belonging to minimal sets of type
(A), for which the U -orbit closure is two-dimensional, i.e. is an orbit
of U Z. These minimal spaces are naturally grouped in continuous
families, which we will refer to as ‘beds’. Their structure was studied
in detail in [B2, §6] when D is not square. We summarize this structure
here. This analysis will not be required in the sequel. Contrary to the
rest of the paper, this discussion will be in the context of surfaces with
unlabeled singularities as the combinatorial structure is simpler.
Each EDp1, 1q contains ﬁnitely many four (real) dimensional beds
which parameterize unit area surfaces with periodic horizontal direc-
tions having three cylinders, where the ratios of circumferences of these
cylinders are ﬁxed, while twist parameters and heights are allowed to
vary, subject to the linear condition which deﬁnes the eigenform locus.
These beds are invariant under the horocycle ﬂow, geodesic ﬂow and

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

65

real and imaginary rel. Each bed is foliated by a family of 2-tori deﬁned
by ﬁxing the heights as well as the circumferences of the cylinders, and
varying the twist parameters. Each torus is a closed U Z-orbit and is
either a U -minimal set or a union of closed U -orbits, depending on
whether or not moduli of the cylinders have rational ratios. We will
see in Theorem 12.3 that applying the geodesic ﬂow to one of these tori
gives a family of measures which equidistribute in EDp1, 1q .

As we vary the heights of the cylinders in one of these families of
three-cylinder surfaces (see Figure 16), the height of a cylinder may
tend to 0, yielding a family of two-cylinder surfaces in the boundary
of the family of three-cylinder surfaces (see Figure 17). For a given
three cylinder surface there are two cylinders which are candidates
for degeneration and for each candidate cylinder there is a path in the
family of three cylinder surfaces leading to a surface in which this cylin-
der is degenerate. Thus there are two distinct families of two-cylinder
surfaces lying in the boundary of each three-cylinder family. These
two-cylinder families are three-dimensional and composed of surfaces
having horizontal data diagram of type (B) or (C). By Corollary 8.3,
each two-cylinder family is a union of closed U -orbits.

Figure 16. Moving in the bed of minimal sets: 3 cylin-
der surfaces in E8p1, 1q, deformed by imaginary rel.

Each family of two-cylinder surfaces is in turn in the boundary of
exactly two families of three-cylinder surfaces. Starting from a given
family of three-cylinder surfaces, we may continue this process of mov-
ing in the family so that the cylinders degenerate to one of the boundary
two-cylinder families and then by undoing a diﬀerent degeneration we
get to a diﬀerent three-cylinder family. After passing through a ﬁnite
sequence of three-cylinder families, we eventually return to the origi-
nal one. These families of minimal sets then comprise ﬁnitely many
disjoint cycles.
If OD is a maximal order, the set of cycles is naturally in bijection
with the ideal class group of OD. The bijection is given by associat-
ing to a periodic surface in one of these families the fractional ideal in

66

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Figure 17. Applying a cut and paste surgery, one can
continue the imaginary rel motion and arrive at a 2-
cylinder surface.

FD obtained by taking the Z-span of the circumferences of its cylin-
ders. These circumferences are constant (up to scale) in each two- or
three-cylinder family of minimal sets, and when a three-cylinder family
degenerates to a two-cylinder family, one cylinder is lost but the frac-
tional ideal generate by their circumferences is unchanged. If OD is
not maximal the analysis becomes more involved. In the case where D
is square, the structure of the collection of minimal sets is more com-
plicated due to the presence of minimal sets consisting of one-cylinder
surfaces, in addition to two and three cylinder decompositions.
8.3. Framing and splitting. Let Hfp2q Ñ Hp2q be the threefold
cover corresponding to choosing a right-pointing horizontal prong at
the singularity, as in §2.9. This cover is connected, since as we have

pre-image of EDp2q in Hfp2q. By the same reasoning as above, each
connected component of EDp2q has connected inverse image. Recall

seen in Proposition 2.9, the ĂSO2pRq-orbits of a point contain all of its
pre-images under the map Hfp2q Ñ Hp2q. We denote by pEDp2q the
that since U is simply connected it lifts to pG, so it acts on pEDp2q.
ponent of pEDp2q.
orem 7.3), pG acts transitively on each connected component of pEDp2q,
and in particular, ergodically. The inclusion U Ă pG has the Mautner
property (see e.g. [EW]) and hence any ergodic pG-action is also ergodic

Proposition 8.4. The action of U is ergodic on any connected com-

Proof. Since any connected component of EDp2q is a G-orbit (see The-

for U .

(cid:3)

8.4. Other U -invariant measures. We now discuss the remaining
ergodic U -invariant measures. Each of these arise from applying the

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

67

rel ﬂow to a closed G-orbit, possibly lying in a boundary stratum of
ED. To avoid working with compactiﬁcations, we will not always take
this point of view explicitly, in favor of more elementary constructions.
We classify the remaining measures in terms of their conﬁguration of
horizontal saddle connections Ξpµq. We have the following possibilities.
Proposition 8.5. Let µ be an ergodic U -invariant measure, which is
not supported on a minimal set. There are four possibilities for Ξpµq:
(i) Ξpµq “ H.
(ii) Ξpµq consists of one saddle connection joining distinct singu-
larities. For µ-a.e. surface, this saddle connection is ﬁxed by
the hyperelliptic involution.
(iii) Ξpµq consists of two saddle connections joining distinct singu-
larities which are interchanged by the hyperelliptic involution.
For µ-a.e. surface M , the union of these saddle connections
disconnects M into a union of two tori with slits removed.
(iv) Ξpµq consists of two saddle connections joining distinct singu-
larities which are ﬁxed by the hyperelliptic involution. For µ-a.e.
surface M , the union of these saddle connections disconnects M
into a torus with two slits removed, and D is a square.

Proof. This follows directly from Theorems 7.10 and 7.12.

(cid:3)
In the case where M belongs to a minimal set, ΞpMq is one of con-

ﬁgurations pictured in Figure 6.

U -invariant measures in each case.

Our goal in this section will be to provide examples of U -ergodic
For ﬁxed discriminant D, let C denote one of the following:
(i) The G-orbit of the regular decagon Ldec Ă E5p1, 1q, or if D is
square, the G-orbit of a square-tiled surface in EDp1, 1q.

(ii) A component of pEDp2q in Hfp2q.

(iii) A component of PD Ă Hp0q ˆ Hp0q.
(iv) If D “ d2, the d-torsion locus SD Ă Hp0, 0q.

Note that in this case and subsquently we use the same symbol to
denote subsets of diﬀerent spaces; that is, more formally we should
replace C with one of Cpiq–Cpivq depending on the cases above. We will
continue with this slight inaccuracy with the set B and map Ψ below,
and this should cause no confusion.

In each case, C has a natural G or pG action, and C is isomorphic to
G{Γ or pG{Γ for some lattice Γ. Let B Ă C denote the subset consisting

of surfaces without horizontal saddle connections. In case (iii) or (iv),
we interpret a saddle connection to be either a closed geodesic or a
segment joining two marked points.

68

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Proposition 8.6. The set B Ă C is the complement of the set of closed
horocycles.

Proof. In cases (i) and (ii) this follows from the Veech alternative [Ve2].
In case (iii), recall that every point of C represents a pair of isogenous
genus one translation surfaces, so the horizontal direction is periodic
for one if and only if it is periodic for the other. A torus with periodic
horizontal direction is stabilized by an inﬁnite cyclic subgroup of U ,
and for two isogenous tori, these subgroups are commensurable. Thus
a point of C representing a pair of tori with periodic horizontal direction
lies on a closed horocycle.
In case (iv), every point of C represents a torus with two marked
points pE, p, qq where p ´ q is d-torsion.
It has a horizontal saddle
connection exactly when the horizontal direction of E is periodic, in
which case E is stabilized by an inﬁnite cyclic subgroup of U . Given E,
there are ﬁnitely many choices of p, q which diﬀer by d-torsion, up to
isomorphism of E. Thus pE, p, qq is also stabilized by an inﬁnite cyclic
(cid:3)
subgroup of U , so lies on a closed horocycle.
Note that B is a dense Gδ subset of a locally compact metrizable
space, and hence the Borel σ-algebra structure on B is a standard
Borel space (see [K]).
Corollary 8.7. In each case the action of U on B is uniquely ergodic,
i.e. there is a unique U -invariant regular Borel measure on B.
Proof. By Proposition 8.6, the action of U on B is measurably conjugate
to the horocycle ﬂow on the complement of the set of horocycles in

G{Γ or pG{Γ for some lattice Γ. Dani [D] classiﬁed the U -invariant
measures on G{Γ and pG{Γ, showing that they are either supported on

closed horocycles or are the global measure induced by Haar measure.
Thus Dani’s theorem implies that the U -action on each B is uniquely
(cid:3)
ergodic.

In each case, we deﬁne a map Ψ : B ˆ p0,8q Ñ Hp1, 1q as follows:
(i) ΨpM, Tq “ RelT M. This is well-deﬁned by Corollary 6.2.
(ii) ΨpM, Tq is the inverse of the map Φ

of Theorem 6.5. Infor-
mally, ΨpM, Tq is the surface obtained by splitting the singular-
ity of angle 6π to two singularities of angle 4π each, and moving
them apart using RelT . The way in which the two singularities
are to be split apart is made explicit by the framing.
(iii) Given a pair of genus one translation surfaces pE1, E2q P B Ă
PD, we deﬁne ΨppE1, E2q, Tq to be the surface obtained by re-
moving a horizontal slit of length T from each Ei and then

p´Tq
f

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

69

gluing the resulting surfaces along their boundaries to obtain
a genus two surface in Hp1, 1q. The resulting surface is an
eigenform, since real multiplication is preserved by deforma-
tions which leave absolute periods constant by Proposition 7.1.
(iv) Given a genus one surface E with marked points p, q which
diﬀer by d-torsion, we deﬁne ΨppE, p, qq, Tq to be the surface
obtained by cutting E along two horizontal slits of length T
with left endpoints p and q and then gluing the resulting two
boundary components to obtain a genus two surface in Hp1, 1q.
We saw above that there is a primitive degree d torus covering
π : E Ñ F sending p and q to the same point. Our gluing
identiﬁes only pairs of points which have the same image, so
the resulting surface is also a primitive degree d torus cover
belonging to Ed2p1, 1q.

In each case, we label the singularities of the resulting surface so
that singularity ξ1 is on the left hand side of the horizontal saddle
connection of length T , and singularity ξ2 is on the right hand side.
We extend the deﬁnition of ΨpM, Tq to T ă 0 as follows. In case
(i), we simply apply RelT . In the remaining cases, we repeat the same
construction using |T| in place of T , but choose the opposite labeling
for the singularities.
For ﬁxed T ‰ 0, let ΨT : B Ñ EDp1, 1q be deﬁned by ΨTpMq “
ΨpM, Tq. In cases (ii), (iii), and (iv), we denote by BT the image of
ΨT .

We summarize this discussion in the following:

Proposition 8.8. For each T , ΨT is continuous on B. In case (i), the
image is a set of surfaces with no horizontal saddle connections. In the
remaining cases, the image BT is the set of surfaces in EDp1, 1q with
‚ in case (ii) there is exactly one horizontal saddle connection δ,
it has length |T|, joins distinct singularities.
‚ in case (iii) there are exactly two horizontal saddle connec-
tions of length |T| joining distinct singularities which are in-
terchanged by the hyperelliptic involution.
‚ in case (iv) there are exactly two horizontal saddle connections
of length |T| joining distinct singularities which have the same
length and are both ﬁxed by the hyperelliptic involution.
These saddle connections are all positively oriented in the case T ą 0
and negatively oriented in the case T ă 0.
invariant) Haar measure on B is the unique U -invariant and U -ergodic
measure µ on EDp1, 1q, such that Ξpµq is as in cases (i)-(iv) above.

In each case, the pushforward under ΨT of the G-invariant (or pG-

70

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Proof. Most of the statements in the Proposition were established in the
preceding discussion. To obtain continuity of ΨT , in case (i), continuity
follows from Proposition 3.3, and in case (ii), from Theorem 6.5. In
the other cases, it follows immediately from the explicit deﬁnition of
the surgeries described above that continuity holds in a neighborhood
of M , for all T suﬃciently small (depending on this neighborhood).
Continuity for arbitrary T follows by combining this with Proposition
3.3.
In order to prove uniqueness, we show that for each of the cases
(i)–(iv), each surface M with ΞpMq “ Ξpµq as described in the list, is
in the image of the map ΨT . Then the claim follows using the unique
ergodicity of the U -action on the corresponding set B. To show that
M is in the image of ΨT , we deﬁne the inverse of ΨT by inverting
the surgery construction used to deﬁne it. Thus for case (ii), we use
Theorem 6.5. In case (iii), ΨT associates to a pair of isogenous tori
pE, Fq, the connected sum E#IF . Given a surface M with two hori-
zontal saddle connections interchanged by the hyperelliptic involution,
we cut M along these saddle connections to obtain a pair of isogenous
tori pE, Fq, and so M “ ΨTpE, Fq. The other cases are similar.
(cid:3)

9. Classification of ergodic measures

In this section we show that the only U -invariant U -ergodic measures
in EDp1, 1q are those described in Section 8. The following is our full
measure classiﬁcation result, which is an expanded version of Theorem
1.1.

Theorem 9.1. Let µ be a U -invariant U -ergodic Borel probability mea-
sure on ED. Then exactly one of the following cases holds:
(1) µ is length measure on a periodic U -orbit, Ξpµq is a complete
separatrix diagram of type (A), (B), (C) or (D), and all the
cylinders in the corresponding cylinder decomposition have com-
mensurable moduli.
(2) µ is the ﬂat measure on a 2-dimensional torus which is a U -
minimal set, Ξpµq is a complete separatrix diagram of type (A),
and the cylinders in the corresponding cylinder decomposition
do not have commensurable moduli. The stabilizer of µ is UˆZ,
and U ˆ Z acts transitively on supp µ.
(3) Ξpµq consists of two saddle connections joining distinct singu-
larities, which disconnect M . The complement consists of two
isogenous tori glued along a slit as in case (iii) of §8.4, and
there is T P R (cid:114) t0u such that µ is the pushforward of Haar
measure on a connected component of PD, via the map ΨT .

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

71

pG-orbit in Hfp2q, where pG and Hfp2q are the threefold covers of

(4) Ξpµq consists of one saddle connection joining distinct singular-
ities, as in case (ii) of §8.4, and there is T P R (cid:114) t0u such that
µ is the image under ΨT of Haar measure on a ﬁnite volume
G and Hp2q described in §2.10.
(5) Ξpµq “ ∅ and there is T P R such that µ is the image under
RelT , of Haar measure on a closed G-orbit in EDp1, 1q. In this
case either D is a square or is equal to 5.
(6) Ξpµq contains two saddle connections joining distinct singular-
ities, whose complement in M is a torus with two parallel slits
of equal length, as in case (iv) of §8.4, and there is T P R (cid:114)t0u
such that µ is the image under ΨT of a G-invariant measure on
the space of tori with two marked points. In this case D is a
square.

(7) µ is the ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q.

Deﬁnition 9.2. The numbering in Theorem 9.1 corresponds to that in
Theorem 1.1. If µ is a measure satisfying the conditions of item n in
this theorem then we will refer to n as the type of the measure µ.
Remark 9.3. Recall from Proposition 7.2 that EDp1, 1q is an aﬃne
manifold in period coordinates, and the tangent space to EDp1, 1q at a
point M is naturally identiﬁed with the Lie algebra l – sl2pRq ˙ R2.
Hence we can discuss the Lie subalgebra lµ which ﬁxes the measure µ.
The following list identiﬁes lµ in each case:

(1) lµ “ u “ LiepUq.
(2) lµ “ u ‘ z.
(3) lµ is the Lie algebra of the subgroup of L ﬁxing the holonomy
of the two saddle connections in Ξpµq (note that these vectors
have the same holonomy).
the vector in Ξpµq.
R2.
(6) lµ is the Lie algebra of the subgroup of L ﬁxing the holonomy of
the two vectors in Ξpµq (note that these vectors have the same
holonomy).

(4) lµ is the Lie algebra of the subgroup of L ﬁxing the holonomy of
(5) lµ is the Lie algebra of the subgroup of L ﬁxing the vector pT, 0q P

(7) lµ “ l.
In all cases above it is easy to show using the maps deﬁned in §8,
that for µ-a.e. point M , the intersection of supp µ with a neighborhood
of M is an aﬃne submanifold whose dimension equals dim lµ. So we

72

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

may say that supp µ is almost everywhere an aﬃne manifold locally
modeled on the Lie algebra lµ.

The proof of Theorem 9.1 occupies the rest of this section.

It is
modeled on arguments of Ratner dealing with horocycle orbits in ho-
mogeneous spaces (see [R] for a survey), which were ﬁrst applied to
spaces of translation surfaces in [EMaMo] and applied to the eigen-
form locus by Calta and Wortman in [CW]. We follow the outline
of [CW] but make several improvements. These enable us to bypass
some entropy arguments used in [CW] and give a clearer justiﬁcation
of Proposition 9.4 below.

Ratner’s argument hinges on the analysis of transverse divergence
of nearby trajectories for the U -action which she calls the R-property
(see [R] p. 22). Suppose we want to compare two orbits utM and utM1
where M and M1 are close. We can write M1 “ gM ¯v. The case when
pg, vq P N is somewhat special and we consider it ﬁrst. In this case g
normalizes U and satisﬁes utg “ guct for some c ą 0 independent of t,
and therefore

utM1 “ utpg, vqM “ putg, vqM “ pguct, vqM “ pg, vquctM.

˙

ˆ

a b
c d

The divergence is caused by two factors. Since pg, vq is independent of
t and small we think of utM1 and uctM as being close. In particular
if c is not 1 then the primary divergence of these two points is in the
horocycle direction. Rescaling time along the second orbit by replacing
t with ct has the eﬀect of removing this divergence. We describe the
remaining orbit divergence as transverse divergence.
Now let us consider the general case where M1 “ gM ¯ v with
P G, and v arbitrary. In order to pick out the divergence
g “
in the directions transverse to the horocycle direction we will rescale
the time factor along the second orbit. Speciﬁcally let utM be the
ﬁrst orbit and write the second orbit as usM1 with s “ sptq. Unlike
the previous case, the time parameter sptq for the second orbit will
depend on the time parameter t in the ﬁrst orbit in a nonlinear way
and the rescaling will only work in a ﬁnite interval of time. We will
show that the time change is not too far from being linear. In order
to do this we choose a family of transversals to the horocycle orbits
and choose the function sptq so that utM and usM1 stay in the same
transversal. Recall from Proposition 7.2 that locally we can model
EDp1, 1q on L. We choose as our family of transversals the elements of
L corresponding to elements pg, vq where g is lower triangular and v is
in R2, and both g, v are small. This deﬁnes a submanifold transverse
to U of complementary dimension.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

73

Since M ¯v is deﬁned, by Proposition 3.4, usgM ¯usv is also deﬁned
and is equal to uspgM ¯ vq “ usM1. Since usgM “ pusgu´tqutM , the
pair pusgu´t, usvq, considered as an element of L, gives a well-deﬁned
map which moves utM to usM1. We calculate:

ˆ

usgu´t “

c

a ` sc b ´ at ` spd ´ ctq

d ´ ct

˙

.

In order for utM and usM1 to lie on the same transversal, we require
that the matrix usgu´t is close to the identity and lower triangular.
For t P R we set

s “ spt, gq def“ at ´ b
d ´ ct

ˆ

.

˙

(41)

With this choice we have:

usptqgu´t “

1
d´ct
c

0

d ´ ct

(42)
(here sptq “ spt, gq), so that utM and usptqM1 lie in the same transverse
leaf as long as t is chosen such that d ´ tc is close to 1.

Note that while the initial displacement may consist of displacement
in the Rel direction as well as the G-direction, the time change only
depends on the initial displacement in the G direction.
Let µ be a U -invariant ergodic measure on EDp1, 1q with Ξpµq “ ∅.
Since N acts on the set of surfaces with Ξpµq “ ∅ we can consider the
subgroup of N that preserves µ. Let N˝
µ to be the connected component
of the identity in Nµ, where Nµ is the stabilizer of µ as in Deﬁnition
4.7.
Proposition 9.4. For any ε ą 0 there is a compact subset K of
EDp1, 1q with µpKq ě 1 ´ ε such that if M P K is a limit of Mk “
hkM ¯ vk P K, with hk P G and vk “ pxk, ykq P R2, and phk, vkq Ñ 1L,
phk, vkq R U for inﬁnitely many k, then dim N˝
Proof. Let Ωµ be the set of µ-generic points for the U -action. The set
Ωµ has full µ measure. Given ε, let Ω1 be a compact subset of Ωµ such
that µpΩ1q ě 1´ε. By the Birkhoﬀ ergodic theorem there is a compact
subset K of EDp1, 1q of measure µpKq ě 1´ ε, and a T0 ą 0, such that
for all M P K and all T ą T0,

µ ě 2.

|tt P r0, Ts : utM P Ω1u| ě 1 ´ 2ε.

1
T

(43)

We will show that this choice of K satisﬁes the conclusion of the Propo-
sition. So let Mk, M , hk and vk “ pxk, ykq be as in the statement of
the Proposition. Write ck

def“ cphkq and dk

def“ dphkq.

74

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

By Corollary 4.8, Nµ is a closed subgroup of N and hence a Lie
group. Thus N˝
µ is a connected Lie group that contains U . In order to
µ ě 2 it suﬃces to rule out the possibility U “ N˝
show that dim N˝
µ,
that is, in any neighborhood of the identity in N , to ﬁnd an element in
N (cid:114) U preserving µ. If the sequence phk, vkq contains inﬁnitely many
elements of N (cid:114) U then it follows from Corollary 4.16 that we have
such a sequence of elements. We may thus assume that phk, vkq R N
for inﬁnitely many k.

Write elements of Z as Rels (where deﬁned). Assume ﬁrst that along

a subsequence

(44)
In this case we will show that for each suﬃciently small δ ą 0, there is
an element

yk “ opckq.

(cid:96) “ (cid:96)pδq “ gτ Relσ

(45)

(46)

preserving µ, such that

ď τ ď 2δ and σ “ Opδq.

εδ
2

The fact that (cid:96) can be written as gτ Relσ means that it lies in N . The
fact that τ ‰ 0 means that (cid:96) does not lie in U .
In light of Corollary 4.16, in order to show that (cid:96) P N belongs to
Nµ, it suﬃces to prove that there are surfaces Mp1q, Mp2q P Ωµ such
that (cid:96)Mp1q “ Mp2q. We will ﬁnd Mp1q and Mp2q as limits of convergent
subsequences in Ω1 and (cid:96) as a limit of a convergent subsequence in L.
Recall that in order for utM and usptqM1 to be close it is necessary
that t be chosen so that d ´ tc is close to 1. For g P G set

def“ tt P R : | lnpd ´ tcq| ď δu, where d “ dpgq, c “ cpgq.

Ig

An elementary computation shows that there is a neighborhood W of
1G such that if g P W then 0 P Ig, and for any t1, t2 in the connected
component of Ig containing 0, we have

|t1 ´ t2|

2

ď |spt1, gq ´ spt2, gq| ď 2|t1 ´ t2|.

(47)
Here the spti, gq are deﬁned by equation (41) and δ is assumed to be
suﬃciently small.
Let Pptq be any linear function, that is P is of the form Pptq “ At`B
for some A, B, and for a ă b, let }P} “ maxxPra,bs |Ppxq|. Then it is
easy to check that

|tt P ra, bs : |Pptq| ă ε}P}u|

b ´ a

ă 2ε.

(48)

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

75

The deﬁnition of Ig and equation (42) ensure that at the endpoints of
Ig, the gt-component of the displacing element usgu´t is 2δ. Namely,
given c ‰ 0 and d, the formula T “ Tpc, dq “ d´e˘δ
gives the two
solutions to the equation | lnpd ´ cTq| “ δ. Since dk Ñ 1 and ck Ñ 0,
for all suﬃciently large k there is a unique such Tk “ Tpck, dkq with
Tk ą 0, and moreover for all suﬃciently large k, we will have Tk ě T0.
Here we take δ suﬃciently small and k suﬃciently large so that

c

ď |dk ´ ckt ´ 1|
| lnpdk ´ cktq| ď 2.

1
2

(49)
We apply the above estimates for T “ Tk and Pptq “ dk ´ ckt ´ 1 and
obtain the existence of a subset of t P r0, Ts, of measure at least 1´ 8ε,
for which all of the following hold:

‚ utM P Ω1 (by (43)).
‚ usMk P Ω1, where s “ sphk, tq (by (47), (43) and since Mk P K).
‚ |dk ´ ckt ´ 1| ě εδ
4 (by (48) and
(49)).
In particular, if we choose ε ă 1{8 (which we may with no loss of
generality), then the set of t satisfying all these properties is nonempty.
Fixing such a t, it follows from (42) and Proposition 3.4 that

2 , and hence | lnpdk ´ cktq| ě εδ

usMk “ usphkM ¯ vkq “ ushku´tutM ¯ usvk

ˆ

“

1

dk´ckt

ck

˙
dk ´ ckt

0

utM ¯ pxk ` syk, ykq .

(50)

For each k we let tk and sk “ sphk, tkq satisfy (50). Using the compact-
ness of Ω1 we can take a subsequence along which we have convergence

utkM Ñ Mp1q, uskMk Ñ Mp2q.

˙
By (50), we have uskMk “ (cid:96)kutkM where

„ˆ


,pxk ` sptk, hkqyk, ykq

.

(cid:96)k “

1

dk´cktk

ck

0

dk ´ cktk

We claim that Mp2q “ (cid:96)Mp1q, for (cid:96) P N satisfying the bounds (45), (46).
ˆ
It is enough to show that after passing to a further subsequence, the
sequence (cid:96)k converges to an element (cid:96) satisfying these bounds. Since
4 , since ck Ñ 0, and by deﬁnition of the interval
| lnpdk ´ cktq| ě εδ
dk´cktk
converge to gτ with τ as in (46).
Ihk, the matrices
Since xk, yk Ñ 0, in order to obtain the required bound on σ we need

dk ´ cktk

˙

ck

0

1

76

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

to show that skyk “ Opδq. But

skyk “yk

aktk ´ bk
dk ´ cktk
(44)“ op1q aktk ´ bk
ck{dk ´ tk

aktk ´ bk
dk{ck ´ tk

“ yk
ck
gkÑ1G“ op1q “ Opδq,

as required.

In case the condition of equation (44) does not hold, we have

ck “ Opykq.

In this case we can employ a similar argument, and ﬁnd an element
(cid:96)pδq as in (45) which satisﬁes (instead of (46)) the estimates
σ ě cδ for some c ą 0, and τ “ Opδq, σ “ Opδq.

(cid:3)

Remark 9.5. The proof of [CW, Lemma 2], which is the statement
analogous to Proposition 9.4, is incomplete. The formula preceding the
ﬁnal paragraph of the proof in [CW] would hold for an honest group
action, but in this case requires justiﬁcation.

Proof of Theorem 9.1. To each ergodic horocycle invariant measure µ
we associate a horizontal data diagram via Corollary 5.3. The possi-
bilities for Ξpµq given in the statement of Theorem 9.1 cover all cases
by Proposition 8.5. In §8, for each possibility for Ξpµq, a measure was
constructed. If it is a complete separatrix diagram, then by Proposi-
tion 8.1 and Corollary 8.2, we must be in cases (1) or (2). In all other
cases for which Ξpµq ‰ ∅, it was shown in Proposition 8.8 that there
are no additional measures. This shows that if Ξpµq ‰ ∅, then µ must
be one of the measures described in items (1), (2), (3), (4) or (6).
We now treat the case Ξpµq “ ∅. Recall from Deﬁnition 3.7 and
Corollary 6.2 that H18 is the set of surfaces in Hp1, 1q with no horizontal
saddle connections joining distinct singular points. Then µpH18q “ 1
and N “ B˙Z acts on H18. Recall that N˝
µ is the connected component
of the stabiliser of µ so that U Ă N˝
µ. We ﬁrst claim that there is no
U -orbit with positive measure. Indeed, if this were the case then by
ergodicity, µ is supported on one orbit which, by Poincar´e recurrence,
must be a periodic orbit. A periodic orbit is a special case of a minimal
set so by Proposition 8.1, Ξpµq consists of a full separatrix diagram.
This contradicts our assumption that Ξpµq “ ∅.
µ ě 2.
We now claim that we cannot have N˝
To see this, let Ωµ Ă H18 be the set of generic points as in Proposition
4.15, and let K be as in Proposition 9.4. We have K Ă Ωµ. Since µ

µ “ U , i.e. that dim N˝

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

77

µ ě 2.

Now suppose Z Ă N˝

assigns zero measure to individual U -orbits and K is a compact set of
positive measure, K contains a sequence pMkq such that Mk Ñ M P K
and none of the Mk are on the U -orbit of M . According to Proposition
9.4 dim N˝
µ. We will show that in this case µ is the ﬂat
measure on EDp1, 1q. Let L be an aﬃne G-invariant subspace of Hp1, 1q,
and let Lp1q be its subset of area-one surfaces. We deﬁne the horospher-
ical foliation for tgtu to be the foliation into leaves locally modelled on
the intersection of the tangent space of Lp1q with the horizontal space
H 1pS, Σ; Rxq (the ﬁrst summand in the splitting (15)). This terminol-
ogy is motivated by the fact that the tgtu-ﬂow is non-uniformly hyper-
bolic and the above leaves are generically its strong unstable leaves.
For the case L “ EDp1, 1q, the leaves of the horospherical foliation are
just the orbits of U Z, so in the case we are now considering, the mea-
sure µ is invariant under the horospherical foliation, and must be ﬂat
measure in light of the following:

Claim 1. Suppose that:

‚ L is GL2pRq-invariant and aﬃne in period coordinates, and is
deﬁned by real-linear equations in H 1pS, Σ; R2q – H 1pS, Σ; Cq.
‚ The ﬂat measure on Lp1q obtained from applying the cone con-
struction to L is G-invariant and ergodic.
Then any strong-stable invariant measure µ on Lp1q, with Ξpµq “ ∅
coincides with the ﬂat measure.

Now suppose dim N˝

This result was proved by Lindenstrauss and Mirzakhani in [LM]
under the additional hypothesis that L the principal stratum, i.e. L “
Hp1, . . . , 1q. In [SmWe4] we adapt the argument of Lindenstrauss and
Mirzakhani to prove the more general statement given above. The
special case we require here, namely L “ EDp1, 1q, was explained by
Calta and Wortman, see [CW, §6].
µ ě 2 but N˝

µ does not contain Z. Since Z is
a normal subgroup of N , N˝
µ does not contain a conjugate of Z. Let
A be the diagonal group in N . Up to conjugacy, the only three one-
parameter subgroups of N are U, Z and A, so we ﬁnd that N˝
µ contains
a conjugate of A. We can write this conjugate as A1 “ nAn´1 where
n P N , and since N “ B˙Z, we can write n “ RelT ua where a P A, u P
U and T P R. Since N˝
µ contains U and A “ aAa´1 we ﬁnd that N˝
contains pRelTqApRel´Tq. Therefore the measure µ1 def“ pRel´Tq˚µ is B-
invariant. By a result of Eskin, Mirzakhani and Mohammadi [EMiMo],
µ1 is G-invariant, and thus by McMullen’s classiﬁcation of G invariant
measures [McM3, McM4], the following are the only possibilities:

µ

78

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

‚ µ1 is the G-invariant measure on a closed G-orbit, and D is
either a square or D “ 5. This implies that µ “ RelT˚µ1 is as
described in case (5).
‚ µ1 is the ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q. Since the ﬂat measure is
Z-invariant, µ “ µ1 and we are in case (7).

(cid:3)

10. Injectivity and nondivergence

In this section we will prove some results which will be used in the
proof of Theorem 11.1. The strategy of proof involves showing that
typical horocycle orbits do not spend too much time close to a closed G-
orbit L or translations of closed G-orbits by the Rel ﬂow. The argument
depends on the fact that a point in an eigenform locus which is close
to the Relt orbit of L but not in the Relt orbit of L drifts slowly in the
direction of the Relt vector ﬁeld. In order to exploit this phenomenon it
is useful to have coordinates close to the Relt orbit of L. This argument
is similar in spirit to the linearization method of Dani-Margulis, see
[KSS, §3.4].
For a stratum H and r ą 0, let Hr denote the set of surfaces M in
H for which there are no horizontal saddle connections of length less
than r, and let

H8 def“ tM P H : ΞpMq “ ∅u “

Hr.

č

rą0

The following is an analogue of [KSS, Cor. 3.4.8].
Lemma 10.1. Let L be a closed G-orbit in EDp1, 1q. Then for any
T ą 0 there is r ą 0 such that the map

pM, x, yq ÞÑ M ¯ px, yq

(51)
is well-deﬁned and injective on Lr ˆr´T, Tsˆt0u, where Lr “ LXHr.
In particular, if we set

L8 def“ L X H8

(52)

then the map (51) is well-deﬁned and injective on L8 ˆ R ˆ t0u.
Proof. We begin by proving that the map (51) is well-deﬁned and in-
jective on L8 ˆ R ˆ t0u. The assertion that the map is well deﬁned
on L8 follows from Corollary 6.2. We prove injectivity. Suppose that
M1, M2 P L8 and x1, x2 P R are such that Relx1M1 “ M1 ¯ px1, 0q “
M2 ¯ px2, 0q “ Relx2M2. If x1 “ x2 then by applying Rel´x1 we ﬁnd

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

79

that M1 “ M2, so we can assume x1 ‰ x2. Let x3
Proposition 3.5

def“ x1 ´ x2. Then by

Relx3pRelx1M1q “ Relx3pRelx2M2q “ Relx1M2,

(53)

and Relx3 is not the identity element of Z.
Let ν denote the G-invariant measure on L coming from the Haar
measure on G, and let ν1 “ Relx1˚ν. By [DS], the set of U -generic
points for ν is the set of surfaces which are not on periodic U -orbits,
and by [Ve2], this is the set of surfaces without horizontal saddle con-
nections. By Proposition 4.15, the same holds for ν1, that is the set of
U -generic points for ν1 are the surfaces in Relx1L without horizontal
saddle connections. By (53), Relx3 maps Relx1M1, which is a generic
point for ν1, to Relx1M2, which is another generic point. In light of
Corollary 4.16, Relx3 preserves ν1. The stabilizer of ν in N contains
the diagonal subgroup A and hence the stabilizer of ν1 in N contains
a non-unipotent element (take for example a nontrivial element of the
conjugate Relx1ARel´x1 in B ˙ Z). Proposition 4.9 implies that the
stabilizer of ν1 properly contains the group ZU . According to Theorem
9.1, the only U -invariant measure on EDp1, 1q whose stabilizer properly
contains ZU is the ﬂat measure, so ν1 is the ﬂat measure. Hence so is
ν “ Rel´x1˚ν1, a contradiction.
We now prove the ﬁrst assertion of the Lemma. According to Corol-
lary 6.2, the map (51) is well-deﬁned on Lr ˆ r´T, Ts ˆ t0u if r ą T .
It remains to show that this map is injective when r is suﬃciently
large. Suppose that M1 def“ Relx1M1 “ Relx2M2 for M1, M2 P L and
x1, x2 P R. According to the ﬁrst part of the proof, at least one of the
surfaces Mi has horizontal saddle connections. Since the Z-action pre-
serves the property of having horizontal saddle connections (by Corol-
lary 6.3), both surfaces have horizontal saddle connections, and since
L is a closed G-orbit, they lie on closed U -orbits and have a horizontal
cylinder decomposition. Since circumferences and heights of cylinders
are the same for Mi and M1, they are the same for M1 and M2 and
this ensures that M1 and M2 lie on the union of one of ﬁnitely many
closed horocycles U x1, . . . , U x(cid:96) of equal length. Suppose ﬁrst that this
length is 1, and denote the union of the horocycles of length 1 by A1.
Let r1 ą 0 be the length of the shortest horizonal saddle connection
on any surface in A1, and choose T1 P p0, r1q for which the map (51) is
injective on A1ˆr´T1, T1sˆt0u. Now suppose the length of the closed
def“ log L, the union of the closed horocycles
horocycles is L. Then for t0
def“ gt0A1, the length of the shortest saddle connections on these
is AL
def“ et0{2r1 and the map (51) is injective on r´TL, TLs
horocycles is rL

80

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

def“ et0{2T1. That is, the ratio rL{TL is independent of L. In
where TL
particular, for any T ą 0, we can choose L so that T “ TL and choose
r ą rL. Since

ď

Lprq Ă L (cid:114)

AL,

rLďr

for these choices, the map (51) will be injective on Lprq ˆ r´T, Ts ˆ
t0u.
(cid:3)
Remark 10.2. The condition that M P Lr is necessary for the validity
of Lemma 10.1. When D is a square and L is the closed G-orbit of a
square-tiled surface, there are surfaces M P L, with a horizontal cylin-
der decomposition of type (A), whose real Rel orbit is compact. When
D “ 5 the ZU -orbit of a surface in L with a cylinder decomposition
of type pAq is also not injectively embedded. That is, in both cases,
injectivity will fail if M has short horizontal saddle connections.

We will also need the following quantitative nondivergence results

for the horocycle ﬂow. The following results are proved in [MW1]:
Theorem 10.3. For any stratum H there are constants C and α such
that for any M P H, any ρ P p0, 1s and any T ą 0, if for any saddle
connection δ for M , maxsPr0,Ts }holpusM, δq} ě ρ then
|ts P r0, Ts : usM has saddle connections of length ă εu| ă CT

ˆ

˙

α

.

ε
ρ

In particular:
(I) For any ε ą 0 and any compact K1 Ă H there is a compact

K Ă H such that for any T ą 0 and any M P K1,

1
T

|ts P r0, Ts : usM R Ku| ă ε.

(54)
(II) For any ε ą 0 there is a compact K Ă H such that for any
M P H8 there is T0 ą 0 such that for all T ą T0, (54) holds.

We will need a reﬁnement of statement (I).

Proposition 10.4. For any positive constants ε and r, and any com-
pact L Ă H8, there is an open neighborhood W of L and a compact
Ω Ă H containing W, such that surfaces in Ω have no horizontal sad-
dle connections shorter than r, and such that for any surface M and
any interval I Ă R for which usM P W for some s P I, we have

|ts P I : usM R Ωu|

|I|

ă ε.

(55)

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

81

Proof. If s0 P I is such that us0M P W then by making the change
of variables s ÞÑ s ´ s0 we can assume M P W and I “ ra, bs with
a ď 0 ď b. By considering separately the subintervals ra, 0s and r0, bs,
we can assume that I “ r0, Ts for some T ą 0. Given a surface M
we let holpMq be the subset of R2 consisting of the holonomies of the
saddle connections of M , and set

def“ tM P H : holpMq X pp´r1, r1q ˆ p´r2, r2qq “ ∅u .

Kr1,r2

Given ε, r and L as in the statement of the proposition, let η satisfy

Then Kr1,r2 is compact for any r1, r2.
Cηα ă ε, where C, α are as in Theorem 10.3, and let t0
and σ1 “ η2
2r

. These choices guarantee

ˆ

(56)

˙

η?
2r

def“ 2 log

et0{2r “ η?
2

and e´t0{2σ1 “ η?
2

.

(57)
Let L2 “ gt0pLq. Then L2 is a compact subset of H8. Compactness
implies that there is a constant θ ą 0 with the property that for any
M P L2 with a saddle connection δ of length less than 1, the vertical
component y “ ypM, δq satisﬁes |y| ě θ. Moreover by making θ smaller
if necessary, we can ensure that the same property holds for all surfaces
θ . Then for any M P W2 and
in a neighborhood W2 of L2. Let T1
any saddle connection δ for M , either }holpM, δq} ě 1 or

def“ 2

}holpuT1M, δq} ě |xpuT1M, δq|

“ |xpM, δq ` T1ypM, δq|
|ypM, δq| ´ 1 ě 1.
ě 2
θ

That is, maxsPr0,T1s }holpusM, δq} ě 1, so we can apply Theorem 10.3
with ρ “ 1. We obtain that for all T ě T1, and all M P W2,
|ts P r0, Ts : usM has saddle connections of length ă ηu| ă ε. (58)
1
T
We now claim that if we set Ω “ Kr,σ for any σ ď σ1 then (55)
holds when M P W1 def“ g´t0 pW2q and I “ r0, Ts, T ą e´t0T1. Indeed
suppose M P W1, δ is a saddle connection for M , and s P r0, Ts such
˙
that holpusM, δq P p´r, rq ˆ p´σ, σq. Let M2 def“ gt0M P W2, s1 def“ et0s
so that gt0usM “ us1M2. By (57),
holpus1M2, δq “ gt0holpusM, δq P

˙

ˆ

ˆ

ˆ

´ η?
2

,

η?
2

´ η?
2

,

η?
2

82

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

and in particular }holpus1M2, δq} ă η. Since the change of variables
s ÞÑ s1 is linear, (55) follows from (58).
Finally, since L Ă H8 is compact, by making σ small enough, we see
that Ω contains a neighborhood of L, so that taking a small enough
neighborhood W of L contained in W1, we can ensure that W Ă Ω and
also that for any s P r0, e´t0T1s and any M P W, holpusMq X p´r, rq ˆ
p´σ, σq “ ∅.
(cid:3)

In light of Proposition 3.3, the following is an immediate consequence

of Lemma 10.1 and Proposition 10.4:

Corollary 10.5. Given positive numbers T and ε, and a compact sub-
set L Ă L8, there is δ ą 0, a neighborhood W of L and a compact set
Ω Ă L, containing W, such that the map (51) is well-deﬁned, continu-
ous and injective on Ω ˆ r´T, Ts ˆ r´δ, δs, and for any interval I and
any M P H, if there is s0 P I such that us0M P W then equation (55)
holds.

(cid:3)
We take this opportunity to record a consequence of Proposition 10.4,

which will not be used in this paper but is of independent interest.
Corollary 10.6. For any ε ą 0 and any compact L Ă H8, there is
a compact Ω Ă H8 containing L such that for any M P L and any
interval I Ă R containing 0, (55) holds.
Proof. For any ε ą 0 and j “ 1, 2, . . . , let εj
2j . By Proposition
10.4, we can ﬁnd Ωj containing L such that all surfaces in Ωj have no
horizontal saddle connections of length less than j, and (55) holds with
εj in place of ε for any interval I containing 0 and any M P L. Then
Ω def“
(cid:3)

j Ωj has the required properties.

def“ ε

Ş

11. All horocycle orbits are generic

The goal of this section is to prove the following more detailed version

of Theorem 1.2.
Theorem 11.1. Let M P EDp1, 1q. Then M is generic for a U -
invariant ergodic measure µM , and the type of µM (as described in
Deﬁnition 9.2) is as follows:
‚ µM has type 1 when ΞpMq is a complete separatrix diagram of
types (B), (C) or (D), or a complete separatrix diagram of type
(A) with commensurable moduli.
‚ µM has type 2 when ΞpMq is a complete separatrix diagram of
type (A) with two cylinders of incommensurable moduli.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

83

‚ µM has type 3 when ΞpMq consists of two saddle connections
joining distinct singularities, which disconnect M into two isoge-
nous tori glued along a slit, as in case (iii) of §8.4.
‚ µM has type 4 when ΞpMq consists of one saddle connection
joining distinct singularities, as in case (ii) of §8.4.
‚ µM has type 5 when ΞpMq “ ∅ and there is s P R so that
RelsM is a lattice surface.
‚ µM has type 6 when ΞpMq is a pair of saddle connections which
do not disconnect M , as in case (iv) of §8.4.
‚ µM has type 7 if it does not correspond to one of the previous
cases i.e. ΞpMq “ ∅ and M is not the result of applying the
Rel ﬂow to a lattice surface.

Remark 11.2. It would be interesting to characterize case (5) ex-
plicitly. That is, give a geometric characterization of those surfaces
M P EDp1, 1q with ΞpMq “ ∅, for which there is s P R such that
RelsM is a lattice surface.

The proof of Theorem 11.1 relies on an analogue of the “linearization

method”, see [KSS, §3.4]. We need the following notion.

Deﬁnition 11.3. The support of a U -invariant U -ergodic measure on
EDp1, 1q is called a sheet. The type of the sheet is the type of the
corresponding measure.

Sheets of the same type typically appear in families. It will be conve-
nient to partition the sheets into families, called beds. In the sequel, a
bed will be a measurable set which is a union of sheets in EDp1, 1q. We
further require the sheets to be of a ﬁxed type j, for j P t3, 4, 5, 6, 7u,
or to be of one of the two types 1 or 2. A bed corresponding to sheets
of type 1 or 2 will be called a minimal sets bed and a bed corresponding
to sheets of type j P t3, . . . , 7u will be called a bed of type j. If B is
a bed corresponding to measures µ of a certain type, we say that µ
belongs to B, and we deﬁne ΞpBq to be Ξpµq for µ belonging to B.

The reason for combining sheets of type 1 and 2 into the same bed
of minimal sets, is that an arbitrarily small perturbation of a sheet of
type 1 can be a sheet of type 2 and conversely (the condition that the
moduli of the cylinders are rationally related is not stable under small
perturbations).

Depending on the application, we will use diﬀerent partitions of the
sheets into beds. For example, for measures of type 1 or 2 (U -minimal
sets), one could take one bed consisting of all U -minimal sets, or take
one bed each for each type (A, B, C, D) of complete separatrix diagram.

84

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

Similarly for type 5, if D “ 5 then the bed could consist of all surfaces
RelsM for M in the G-orbit of the regular decagon. For type 5 when
D is a square, note that EDp1, 1q contains countably many G-orbits of
arithmetic lattice surfaces. In this case one could either take one bed
consisting of all RelsM for all these lattice surfaces, or alternatively,
for each G-orbit GM0, one could take the bed

ď

RelsM.

sPR,MPGM0

In our deﬁnition of beds we only required them to be measurable
but in fact they can be chosen so that they have a nicer structure.
Continuing with Remark 9.3, one can partition the sheets into beds
which are almost everywhere locally modeled on aﬃne subspaces of
the Lie algebra l. However the corresponding aﬃne subspaces of l
need not correspond to Lie subalgebras. Additionally beds may have
complicated topology (e.g. boundary). This will be discussed further
in [SmWe3].

For our analysis, the following property of a bed will be helpful:

Ť
Deﬁnition 11.4. We will say that a sequence of sets K1, K2, . . . ﬁlls
out B if the Ki are compact, and µp
i Kiq “ 1 for any measure µ
which belongs to B.
Proposition 11.5. For each type j ď 6, all sheets in EDp1, 1q of type
j are contained in a ﬁnite or countable union of beds, and for each
bed B there is a countable sequence of compact sets which ﬁlls out B.
Explicitly these properties are satisﬁed by the following choices:
‚ For types j P t3, 4, 6, 7u, we let B be the union of all sheets of
type j, and we let Ki be the closure of the set of M P EDp1, 1q
which have no saddle connections shorter than 1{i, and such
that tδ P ΞpMq : }holpM, δq} ď iu and ΞpBq are the same (as
Ť
horizontal data diagrams).
‚ For types j P t1, 2u we let B be the union of all sheets of type 1
or 2, and we deﬁne Ki as before.
tPR ReltpLq.
‚ If j “ 5, for each closed G-orbit L we take B “
Let ν0 be the Haar measure on L, let L8 be as in (52), let
L1, L2, . . . be a nested sequence of compact subsets of L8 with
ν0 p

Ť
i Liq “ 1, and let
def“
Ki

ď

|t|ďi

ReltpLiq.

Proof. It is clear that the beds listed above contain all sheets of type
j. In all cases except j “ 5 there is just one bed. In the case j “ 5

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

85

the number of beds is at most countable, since each EDp1, 1q contains
Ť
at most ﬁnitely many closed G-orbits.
Ť
We now show that in all cases, the sets Ki listed above ﬁll out the bed.
Suppose ﬁrst that ΞpBq ‰ ∅. It is clear that each Ki as in the statement
i Ki contains all M P B for
of the proposition is compact. The set
i Kiq “ 1 for
which ΞpMq “ ΞpBq, so Corollary 5.3 implies that µp
any measure µ which belongs to B.
Ť
Now suppose B is a bed of type (5). Let L, ν0, Li, Ki be as above.
Ť
Ť
Each Ki is compact by Proposition 3.3. Also, for any measure µ belong-
Ť
Ť
i Liq “ 1,
def“ Relt˚ν0. Since ν0 p
ing to B, there is t P R such that µ “ νt
we have νt p
i ReltpLiqq “ 1 for all t. For each t, since
i Ki contains
i Kiq “ 1 for each t.
i ReltpLiq for each t, we have νt p
(cid:3)

The following result summarizes a strategy for proving equidistribu-

tion results which we will use repeatedly.
Proposition 11.6. Let tµtu be a collection of measures where t ranges
over either the positive integers or non-negative real numbers. Suppose
the following hold:
(a) The sequence pµtq as t Ñ 8 has no escape of mass; i.e. for any
ε ą 0 there is a compact K Ă EDp1, 1q and t0 such that for all
t ě t0, µtpKq ě 1 ´ ε.
(b) Any convergent subsequence pµtkq of pµtq with tk Ñ 8 con-
verges to a measure which is invariant under a conjugate of U
by an element of G.
(c) For any bed B Ł EDp1, 1q there is a sequence K1, K2, . . . of sets
which ﬁll out B, and for any i and any ε ą 0, there is t0 and
an open set U containing Ki such that for all t ě t0, µtpUq ă ε.
Then the sequence µt converges to the ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q as

t Ñ 8.
Proof. It is enough to show that any subsequence pµtkq of pµtq, with
tk Ñ 8 contains a further subsequence converging to the ﬂat measure.
So re-indexing, suppose pµtq is already a subsequence. Since there
is no escape of mass, the set pµtq is precompact with respect to the
weak-˚ topology. So passing to a subsequence we can assume that
µt converges weak-˚ to a probability measure ν and we need to show
that ν is the ﬂat measure. By assumption (b), ν is invariant under a
conjugate U1 “ g´1U g of U , and hence g˚ν is U -invariant. We need
ř
to show that g˚ν is the ﬂat measure, as this will imply that ν is the
ﬂat measure as well. To simplify notation we therefore replace g˚ν
with ν to assume that ν is U -invariant. By ergodic decomposition,
and since there are countably many beds, we can write ν “
7
1 νj

86

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

ş
EDp1,1q ϕ dνj ď 1

a limk

Kiq “ 0.

ş
EDp1,1q ϕ dµtk ď ε

where each νj is supported on the beds of type j, and is a convex
combination of the measures belonging to these beds. We must show
that ν1 “ ¨¨¨ “ ν6 “ 0. We derive this from assumption (c), as follows.
Ť
Fix a type j ď 6 and let B Ł EDp1, 1q be a bed of type j. Let
Ť
Ť
K1, K2, . . . be compact sets as described in assumption (c). Since
Kiq “ 1 for every U -invariant ergodic measure µ belonging to
µp
i Kiq “ 1, in order to show
B, and each µ belonging to B satisﬁes µp
νj “ 0 it suﬃces to show that νjp
Kiq “ 0. Suppose by contradiction
that a def“ νjpEDp1, 1qq is strictly positive. For any i, and any ε ą 0,
let t0 and U be as in (c). There is a continuous compactly supported
function ϕ : EDp1, 1q Ñ r0, 1s which is identically 1 on Ki and vanishes
outside U. The deﬁnition of the weak-˚ topology and condition (c) now
Ť
ensure that νjpKiq ď
a. Since
ε ą 0 was arbitrary we must have νjpKiq “ 0 for each i, and hence
νj p
(cid:3)
Proof of Theorem 11.1. Step 1: M is of types (1–6). If ΞpMq decom-
poses M into horizontal cylinders then the U -action on the orbit-closure
of M is conjugate to an irrational straightline ﬂow on a torus and so
every orbit is equidistributed. This is what happens when ΞpMq is a
complete separatrix diagram, i.e. in cases (1) or (2). When ΞpMq ‰ ∅
but ΞpMq is not a complete separatrix diagram, the U -action on U M
is obtained from the U -action on a simpler space via a U -equivariant
map ΨT . Namely, by Propositions 8.8, in each of the cases (3), (4) and
(6) this simpler space is a ﬁnite volume homogeneous space G{Γ, and
M “ ΨTpM0q where M0 P G{Γ does not lie on a periodic U -orbit, since
ΞpMq is not a complete separatrix diagram. The equidistribution of
U M0 in G{Γ follows from [DS], and the equidistribution of M follows
from the fact that ΨT is U -equivariant. The same argument applies
when ΞpMq “ ∅ and M belongs to RelsL, for a closed G-orbit L and
s P R.
Step 2: M is of type (7) and ΞpBq ‰ ∅: When M is of type (7)
we apply Proposition 11.6 to the collection of measures tµt : t ą 0u
deﬁned by averaging along the orbit of M ; that is, µt “ νpt, Mq, where
νpM, tq is as in (4.13). Property (a) of Proposition 11.6 follows from
Theorem 10.3 (I) and property (b) is immediate from the deﬁnition of
µt. To verify (c) we ﬁrst discuss beds B for which ΞpBq ‰ ∅, adapting
an argument of [EMaMo]. Let K1, K2, . . . be the sequence ﬁlling out
the bed B, as in Proposition 11.5. Fix i and let ε ą 0. Then any surface
in Ki contains a horizontal saddle connection of length at most i. Let
Cpδq be the open set of surfaces whose shortest saddle connection is
shorter than δ. By Theorem 10.3 (II) there is δ ą 0 (depending only

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

87

on the stratum Hp1, 1q) such that every surface M1 without horizontal
saddle connections satisﬁes

(where µM1,t “ νpM1, tq is as in Deﬁnition 4.13). Let

lim sup

tÑ8 µM1,tpCpδqq ă ε
t0 ă 2plog δ ´ log iq,

(59)

(60)

so that if M1 has a horizontal saddle connection of length at most i,
then gt0M1 has a saddle connection of length less than δ; in other words,
Ki Ă U def“ g´t0pCpδqq. Since gt0usg´t0 “ uet0 s, setting M1 “ gt0M , we
have gt0˚µM,t “ µM1,et0 t and (59) implies that

lim sup

tÑ8 µM,tpUq “ lim sup

tÑ8 µM1,tpCpδqq ă ε,

so (c) is satisﬁed.
Step 3: M is of type (7) and ΞpBq “ ∅. That is B is a bed of type
(5). The measures belonging to B are of the form Rels˚µ, where s P R
and µ is the G-invariant measure on a closed G-orbit L. Let L8 be as
in (52). Set

FpM, xq def“ M ¯ px, 0q “ RelxM, FpM, x, yq def“ M ¯ px, yq,

(61)

postponing for the moment questions of domain of deﬁnition of F . Let
Li and Ki be as in Proposition 11.5, so that the Ki ﬁll out B. Note
that Li Ă L8 for each i and

We will verify (c) for the sets Ki. Given i and ε ą 0, choose

`

˘
Ki “ F
Li ˆ r´i, is
j ą p8 ` εqpi ` 1q

.

.

ε

(62)
Corollary 10.5 gives us a constant δ ą 0, an open set W Ă L containing
Li, and a compact set Ω containing W such that: (1) F is well-deﬁned,
continuous and injective on Ω ˆ r´j, js ˆ r´δ, δs, and (2) whenever
M1 P L and I Ă R is an interval such that usM1 P W for some s P I,
we have

(64)
Then U is a neighborhood of Ki, and we need to show that µM,tpUq ă ε
for all suﬃciently large t. That is, we need to ﬁnd t0 so that for t ą t0,

.

4

1

|I| |ts P I : usM1 R Ωu| ă ε
`
˘
W ˆ p´pi ` 1q, i ` 1q ˆ p´δ, δq
ă ε, where pI def“ ts P R : usM P Uu.

.

U def“ F

|pI X r0, ts|

t

(63)

(65)

Now set

I “ Ips0q def“ ts : |x ` sy| ď i ` 1u
J “ Jps0q def“ ts : |x ` sy| ď ju.

These are nested intervals with common centerpoint s “ ´xps0q
yps0q . If an
interval I contains an endpoint of J and intersects I then it contains
one of the two connected components of J (cid:114)I. These two components
have equal lengths since the two intervals share the same centerpoint
and by (62),

|I X I|
|J X I| ď 2pi ` 1q|y1|

pj ´ i ´ 1q|y1| ă ε

(66)
We claim that if s P J (cid:114) I then either usM1 R Ω or us`s0M R U.
Indeed, suppose s P J (cid:114) I and usM1 P Ω. According to Proposition
3.4,

4

.

us`s0M “ usFpM1, x, yq “ uspM1 ¯ px, yqq

“ usM1 ¯ px ` sy, yq “ FpusM1, x ` sy, yq.

88

Whenever s0 PpI there are M1 “ M1ps0q P W and px, yq “ pxps0q, yps0qq P

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

p´pi ` 1q, i ` 1q ˆ p´δ, δq such that us0M “ FpM1, x, yq. Since M is
not of type (5) we have yps0q ‰ 0. We deﬁne the following intervals:

The injectivity of F on Ωˆr´j, jsˆr´δ, δs and |x` sy| ą i` 1 imply
that us`s0M R U. This proves the claim.

For each s0 P I, denote the translates by

|r0, ts X J 1|

I1ps0q def“ Ips0q ` s0.

J 1ps0q def“ Jps0q ` s0,
The claim, combined with (63) and (66), imply that if r0, ts contains
|r0, ts X J 1 XpI|
an endpoint of J 1 “ J 1ps0q, then
|r0, ts X J 1| ď |r0, ts X I1|
|r0, ts X J 1| ` |ts P r0, ts X J 1 : us´s0M1 R Ω|
SincepI is covered by the intervals tJ 1ps0q : s0 PpIu, a standard cov-
s PpI ùñ 1 ď #t(cid:96) : s P J 1
1,J 1
ering argument shows that we can take a countable subcover J 1
satisfying
In particular 0 is contained in at most two of the intervals J 1ps(cid:96)q and
if we take t0 to be larger than the right endpoint of these two intervals,
ˇˇˇr0, ts X J 1
and t ą t0, r0, ts will contain at least one of the endpoints of any J 1ps(cid:96)q
ÿ
ÿ
(cid:96) XpI
which intersects r0, ts. Then for any t ą t0 we will have:

ˇˇˇr0, ts XpI

ˇˇˇ ď ε

|r0, ts X J 1

ˇˇˇ ď

2|r0, ts|

(cid:96)u ď 2.

ă ε
2

.

2, . . .

(cid:96)| ď ε
2

(cid:96)

2

(cid:96)

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

and this proves (65).

89
(cid:3)

12. Additional equidistribution results

In this section we prove equidistribution for periodic horocycles in
Theorem 1.3, for translates of G-invariant measures by the Rel ﬂow in
Theorem 1.4, for circle orbits of increasing radius in Theorem 1.6, and
for pushforwards of invariant measures of minimal sets by the geodesic
ﬂow in Theorem 12.3.
Proof of Theorem 1.4. Let L be a closed G-orbit in EDp1, 1q, let µ be
the Haar measure on L, and let µt “ Relt˚µ. We will prove that as
t Ñ `8 or t Ñ ´8, the measure µt converges to the ﬂat measure on
EDp1, 1q. For deﬁniteness we discuss the case t Ñ `8, the second case
It is enough to show that if tn Ñ 8 is any sequence
being similar.
of real numbers for which µtn converges to some ν (where ν is not
necessarily a probability measure), then ν is the ﬂat measure (and in
particular is a probability measure).

First we show that ν is a probability measure, i.e. that there is no
escape of mass. This follows from statement (II) of Theorem 10.3 as
follows. We need to show that for any ε ą 0 there is a compact subset
K0 of EDp1, 1q such that for all t, µtpK0q ě 1 ´ ε. Given ε let K be
the intersection of EDp1, 1q with the compact set in statement (II) of
Theorem 10.3. Let ϕ be a continuous compactly supported function
on EDp1, 1q, with values in r0, 1s, which is identically equal to 1 on K,
def“ supp ϕ. Let M be a generic point for µt. According to
and let K0
Proposition 4.15, M “ ReltpM1q for M1 P L, such that M1 is generic for
µ. In particular M1 has no horizontal saddle connections, and hence
neither does M . According to (II),

and therefore

lim inf
TÑ8

1
T

µtpK0q ě

|ts P r0, Ts : usM P Ku| ě 1 ´ ε,
ż

ż

ż
ϕ dµt “ lim
TÑ8
T

T

0

1
T

ϕpusMqds
1KpusMqds ě 1 ´ ε.

ě lim inf
TÑ8

1
T

0

Now we claim that νpH8q “ 1, that is ν gives no mass to the set
of surfaces with horizontal saddle connections. This follows by again
expressing µt as the limit of an integral along a generic horocycle orbit,
and repeating the argument of Step 2 of the proof of Theorem 11.1.
Thus, in view of Claim 1 (see the proof of Theorem 9.1), it suﬃces to

90

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

prove that ν is invariant under the ‘horospherical foliation’ U Z. It is
clear that ν is U -invariant, and it remains to show that it is invariant
under Rels for any s P R.
Let ϕ P Cc pEDp1, 1qq. Since ϕ is uniformly continuous, for any ε ą 0
there is a neighborhood U of the identity in G so that

|ϕpMq ´ ϕpgMq| ă ε for any M P EDp1, 1q, g P U.

(67)

Now deﬁne

τpt, sq def“ 2 log

1 ` s
t

and τn

def“ τptn, sq.

By a matrix multiplication in N , and using Corollary 4.2 we see that
these choices ensure that for any surface M with no horizontal saddle
connections,
Moreover gτn Ñ Id as n Ñ 8. Then for n large enough, by (67),

gτnReltnM “ Reltn`sgτnM.

(68)

´

¯

On the other hand, using (68) and the fact that µ is supported on L8,

we obtainż
ż

ϕ ˝ gτn dReltn˚µ

ϕ dReltn˚µ ´
ż

ϕ ˝ gτn dReltn˚µ “
ϕpReltn`sgτnMq dµpMq “

L8

“

L8

ż

L8

ϕpgτnReltnpMqq dµpMq

ϕpReltn`sMqdµpMq.

In the last line we used the fact that µ is invariant under gτ for all τ .
Putting these together we ﬁnd that for suﬃciently large n,

ϕ dReltn˚µ ´

ϕ dpReltn`sq˚ µ

and since ε was arbitrary,

ν “ lim

nÑ8 Reltn˚µ “ lim

nÑ8pRels`tnq˚µ “ Rels˚ν.

(cid:3)

Generalizing Theorem 1.4 we have:

Theorem 12.1. In each of the cases (ii), (iii), (iv) of §8.4, let T ą 0
and let ΨT be the map described in §8.4. Let µT be the pushforward of
Haar measure under ΨT , as in Proposition 8.8. Then as T Ñ 8, µT
tends to the ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q.

The proof of Theorem 1.4 goes through almost verbatim. We leave

the details to the reader.

ˇˇˇˇż

ˇˇˇˇż

ż

ż

ˇˇˇˇ ă ε.

ˇˇˇˇ ă ε,

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

91

Proof of Theorem 1.3. We apply Proposition 11.6 to

ş
0 fpusMqds and tusM : s P r0, psu is a closed horo-

def“ gt˚µ,

(69)

µt

p

ş

f dµ “ 1
where
p
cycle of period p.

To verify that there is no escape of mass we use Theorem 10.3. Let
ρ0 be the length of the shortest horizontal saddle connection on M ,
def“ ´ 2 log ρ0 and let t ě t0. The choice of t0 ensures that the
let t0
shortest horizontal saddle connection on gtM has length at least 1.
Since the orbit U gtM is periodic, the measure µt is identical to the
measure obtained by averaging along any integer multiple of the period
etp of this orbit. The set of saddle connections for gtM whose length is
shorter than 1 is ﬁnite and none of these is horizontal. Thus for each
such saddle connection δ, holpusgtM, δq diverges as s Ñ 8. Therefore
if we take a suﬃciently large multiple of the period s0 “ ketp, k P N,
any saddle connection on M will have length greater than 1 either
for the surface gtM or for the surface us0gtM . As a consequence, the
hypothesis of Theorem 10.3 is satisﬁed with ρ “ 1, and there is no
escape of mass. This veriﬁes hypothesis (a) of Proposition 11.6, and
hypothesis (b) is obvious.

To verify hypothesis (c) we adapt the argument given in the proof
of Theorem 11.1, retaining the same notation. Namely, in step 2 we
verify (c) for beds with ΞpBq ‰ ∅. We ﬁx i and ε ą 0, and note that
the argument in the preceding paragraph, using Theorem 10.3, implies
that there is δ ą 0 such that if t is large enough so that gtM has no
horizontal saddle of length shorter than 1, then

µtpCpδqq ă ε.

(70)
Then we take t0 small enough so that all surfaces in gt0pKiq have hori-
zontal saddle connections shorter than δ, and set U def“ g´t0pCpδqq. Then
(70) and µt`t0 “ gt0˚µt imply that for all suﬃciently large t, µtpUq ă ε,
as required.
Continuing with Step 3, it remains to verify (c) for beds with ΞpBq “
∅. We deﬁne F, Li, Ki as in the proof of Theorem 11.1, recalling that
surfaces in Li have no horizontal saddle connections. Given ε and i, we
deﬁne U via (64), and need to show that µtpUq ă ε for all suﬃciently
large t. For this it suﬃces to prove that

ˇˇˇ ă ε etp, where pI def“ ts P r0, etps : usgtM P Uu.

Before proving (71), we claim that for all suﬃciently large t, if s0 PpI

and gtus0M “ FpM1, x, yq with M1 P W Ă L, then y ‰ 0. Indeed,

ˇˇˇpI

(71)

92

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

n P W, |xn| ď i` 1 and

suppose otherwise, that is there are tn Ñ 8, M1
sn P r0, etnps such that
nq.
usngtnM “ RelxnpM1
nq. which implies
nM “ RelxnpM1
def“ e´tn{2xn Ñ 0.
n, where x1
Our hypothesis that M does not belong to a closed G-orbit implies
that xn ‰ 0. Since U commutes with Relx1

def“ e´tnsn so that gtnus1
ng´tnM1

nM “ Relx1
us1

Set s1

n

n, it follows that

n

U M “ Relx1

nU g´tnM1
n,

(72)
n is a closed horocycle of period p on L. There are
and hence U g´tnM1
only ﬁnitely many such closed horocycles on L and their union is a
n Ñ 0, this
compact set disjoint from the closed orbit U M . Since x1
contradicts (72), and proves the claim.

We now note that the argument given in the proof of Theorem 11.1
for proving (65) goes through, with the same notations, and proves
(71). Indeed the only information we needed in the proof of (65) was
that the number y “ yps0q considered in the proof was nonzero, which
(cid:3)
is exactly what we have shown in the preceding paragraph.

Remark 12.2. When D is a square, Theorem 1.3 can also be proved
by exploiting the connection between EDp1, 1q and a homogeneous space
SL2pRq ˙ R2{Γ (see [EMS]) and using a theorem of Shah [KSS, Thm.
3.7.6].

Generalizing Theorem 1.3 we have:

Theorem 12.3. Let O be a minimal set for the U -action, and let µ be
the U -invariant measure on O. Suppose that O is not contained in a
closed G-orbit. Then gt˚µ tends to the ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q.
Proof. If O is a closed U -orbit this follows from Theorem 1.3. Accord-
ing to Corollary 8.3, in the remaining case dimO “ 2, the cylinder
decomposition is of type (A), and the measure µ is invariant under
U Z. Let ν be any limit point of gtn˚µ, for tn Ñ 8. By repeating the
arguments given in the proof of Theorem 1.3 we ﬁnd that ν is a prob-
ability measure, and gives zero mass to surfaces with horizontal saddle
connections. Also clearly ν is U Z-invariant. Therefore, by Claim 1, ν
is the ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q.
(cid:3)
Proof of Theorem 1.5. We show the existence of ν “ limtÑ˘8 gt˚µ and
describe this limit explicitly, for each of the measures µ in Theorem
9.1. We treat the cases t Ñ `8 and t Ñ ´8 separately, beginning
with the case t Ñ `8. If µ is of type 1, then the limit measure ν is

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

93

either the ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q or a G-invariant measure on a closed
G-orbit, by Theorem 1.3. If µ is of type 2, then Theorem 12.3 implies
that ν is ﬂat measure. If µ is of type 3, 4, or 6, then there is some T ‰ 0
such that µ “ µT is the pushforward of a G-invariant measure under
ΨT , for the map ΨT described in §8.4. Note that this map satisﬁes the
following equivariance rule: for M P B, gtΨTpMq “ ΨetTpgtMq. This
can be seen by examining the deﬁnition of ΨT in each case and using
Proposition 3.4. Therefore we have gt˚µ “ µetT , and by Theorem 12.1,
the limit ν is the ﬂat measure. If µ is of type 5 then µ “ RelT˚µ0, where
µ0 is a G-invariant measure on a closed G-orbit. If T “ 0 then µ “ µ0
is G-invariant and in particular ν “ µ0. If T ‰ 0 then the relation
gtRelT “ ReletT gt (see Proposition 3.4) implies that gt˚µ “ ReletT˚µ0
and by Theorem 1.4, the limit measure ν is the ﬂat measure. Finally
in case 7 the measure µ is G-invariant and there is nothing to prove.
When t Ñ ´8, for each of the measures of type 1, 2, 3, 4 or 6,
almost every surface in the support of µ has at least one horizontal
saddle connection of some ﬁxed length. As t Ñ ´8, the length of this
saddle connection tends to zero and hence gt˚µ diverges in the space
of measures on Hp1, 1q. If µ is of type 5 then µ “ RelT˚µ0, where µ0 is
a G-invariant measure on a closed G-orbit. The commutation relation
gtRelT “ ReletT gt implies that gt˚µ “ ReletT˚µ0 and since t Ñ ´8,
the measure tends to the G-invariant measure µ0. Finally in case 7 the
(cid:3)
measure µ is G-invariant and there is nothing to prove.

We now collect some results which will be used in the proof of The-
orem 1.6. Let Bpa, bq def“ r´a, asˆr´b, bs, and for any t ą 0 and v P R2,
set

def“ tgtrθv : θ P r0, 2πsu.

Et,v

The following is an elementary fact about ellipses whose proof we omit.
Proposition 12.4. Given ε ą 0, suppose r1, r2, δ1, δ2 satisfy the in-
equalities
r1 ă εr2, δ1 ă εδ2.
Then for any t ą 0, either Et,v Ă Bpr2, δ2q, or

(73)

|tθ P r0, 2πs : gtrθv P Bpr1, δ1qu|
|tθ P r0, 2πs : gtrθv P Bpr2, δ2qu| ă ε.

(74)
(cid:3)

We will also need the following analogue of Corollary 10.5.

Proposition 12.5. Given positive ε, T, η, and a compact subset L Ă
L8, there are positive t0, δ, a neighborhood W of L and a compact set
Ω Ă L containing W, such that the map (51) is well-deﬁned, continuous

“

π

94

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

and injective on Ω ˆ r´T, Ts ˆ r´δ, δs, and for any t ě t0, for any
interval I Ă J def“
2 ´ η, π
, and any M P H, if
2 ´ η, 3π
there is θ0 P I such that gtrθ0g´tM P W then
|tθ P I : gtrθg´tM R Ωu|

2 ` η

2 ` η

Y

3π

‰

ă ε.

(75)

‰

“

|I|

Proof. Using Proposition 3.3, we see that it suﬃces to prove an ana-
logue of Proposition 10.4; namely, that for any positive η, ε, r and any
compact L Ă L8, there is a neighborhood W of L, a compact Ω Ă H
containing W, and t0, such that surfaces in Ω have no horizontal sad-
dle connections shorter than r, and for any t ě t0, any interval I Ă J
which contains θ0 with gtrθ0g´tM P W, the estimate (75) holds. This
statement can be obtained from Proposition 10.4 as follows.

A matrix computation shows that
uet tan θ “ apt, θqgtrθg´t, where apt, θq def“
We write apt, θq “ a2pθq a1pt, θq, where

˙

ˆ

ˆ

ˆ

pcos θq´1
0
´e´t sin θ cos θ

.

(76)

˙
˙

a2pθq def“

pcos θq´1

0

0

cos θ

, a1pt, θq def“

1

0
´et tan θ 1

.

Thus a1pt, θq Ñ Id as t Ñ 8, uniformly for θ P J, and a2pθq preserves
Ť
horizontal saddle connections, changing their length by a factor of at
def“ maxθPJpcos θq´1. Also let C2 be an upper bound on the de-
most C1
θPJ a2pθqL,
rivative of the map θ ÞÑ tan θ on the interval J. Let L1 “
which is also a compact subset of L8. We apply Proposition 10.4 with
C1pr` 1q, ε{C2, L1 in place of r, ε, L, to obtain a neighborhood W1 of L1
and a compact set Ω1 containing W1, such that surfaces in Ω1 have no
horizontal saddle connections shorter than C1pr ` 1q, and (55) holds.
We deﬁne:

ď

θPJ

Ω2 def“

a2pθq´1Ω1.

Then Ω2 is a compact set, containing no surfaces with horizontal saddle
connections of length less than r` 1. Therefore for t0 suﬃciently large,
surfaces in

Ω def“

a1pt, θq´1Ω2 “

apt, θq´1Ω1

ď

θPJ,tět0

ď

tět0

have no horizontal saddle connections of length less than r. We will
make t0 larger below. We also note that apt, θq´1Ω1 Ă Ω for every

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

95

t ě t0, θ P J. Now we set

W def“ Ω X

apt, θq´1W1,

č

θPJ,tět0

˙

.

so that if gtrθ0g´tM P W for some θ0 P J and t ě t0, then by (76),
uet tan θ0M P W1. Since (55) holds for Ω1 (with ε{C2 instead of ε),
we obtain that (75) holds for Ω. Finally we note that if t0 is chosen
suﬃciently large, then W contains an open set containing L.
(cid:3)
Proposition 12.6. Suppose L is a closed G-orbit in Hp1, 1q and M R

L. Then there are positiverδ,rt so that for all t ěrt, if there is θ P r0, 2πs
such that gtrθM “ M1 ¯ px, yq with M1 P L, then e´tx2 ` ety2 ěrδ.

Proof. Assume by contradiction that there are Mn P L, tn Ñ 8, θn P
r0, 2πs and xn, yn such that

e´tnx2

n ` etny2

n Ñ 0

(77)
and gtnrθnM “ Mn ¯ pxn, ynq. By Corollary 6.2, there are neighbor-
hoods U Ă Hp1, 1q containing M and V Ă R2 containing 0, such that
the map pM1, vq ÞÑ M1¯v is well-deﬁned on UˆV. Set vn
def“ r´θngtnpxn, ynq.
Then (77) implies that vn Ñ 0 and hence for all suﬃciently large n,
def“ M ¯ ´vn,

the maps M1 ÞÑ M1 ¯ ˘vn are well-deﬁned on U. Set ĂMn
so that ĂMn Ñ M . We have
and this implies that ĂMn “ r´θng´tnMn. We have found a sequence in
ż

L converging to M , contrary to the assumption that M R L.
(cid:3)
Theorem 12.7. For any M P EDp1, 1q which is not a lattice surface,
let µt be the measure on EDp1, 1q deﬁned by

M “ r´θng´tn pMn ¯ pxn, ynqq “ r´θng´tnMn ¯ pr´θng´tnpxn, ynqq

“ r´θng´tnMn ¯ vn,

ż

2π

0

ϕ dµt “ 1
2π

ϕpgtrθMq dθ, for all ϕ P Cc pEDp1, 1qq .
Then µt converges to the ﬂat measure on EDp1, 1q as t Ñ 8.
Proof. We will use Proposition 11.6. Hypothesis (a) was veriﬁed (for
any translation surface M ) in [EM]. To prove hypothesis (b), we note
that µt is invariant under the conjugated group tgtrθg´t : θ P r0, 2πsu.
Conjugating we see that

(78)

ˆ

gtrθg´t “

cos θ
e´t sin θ

´et sin θ
cos θ

`

˘

96

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

For every ﬁxed s and t we set
´se´t

θps, tq def“ arcsin

, so that ´ et sin θps, tq “ s.

Then gtrθps,tqg´t Ñ us as t Ñ 8. Therefore the limit measure ν is
invariant under each us.
We now verify (c) for beds B with ΞpBq ‰ ∅. Let K1, K2, . . . be the
sequence ﬁlling out the bed B, as in Proposition 11.5. Fix i and let
ε ą 0. Then any surface in Ki contains a horizontal saddle connection
of length at most i. As before, let Cpδq be the open set of surfaces
whose shortest saddle connection is shorter than δ. By [EM], there are
positive t1, δ such that for all t ě t1, µtpCpδqq ă ε. Let t0 satisfy (60),
so that Ki Ă U def“ g´t0pCpδqq. Since µt`t0 “ gt0˚µt, for all t ą t0 ` t1
we have

µtpUq “ µt0˚µt´t0pUq “ µt´t0pCpδqq ă ε,

so (c) is satisﬁed.
It remains to verify (c) for beds with ΞpBq “ ∅. Let F, Li, Ki “
FpLi ˆ r´i, isq be as in the proof of Theorem 11.1. Given i and ε ą 0,
choose

with η and with j, Li, ε{8 instead of T, L, ε. Letrδ,rt be as in Proposition
12.6. Making δ smaller and t0 larger, we can assume that t0 ěrt and

Choose η ą 0 small enough so that
π
2

(80)
Let W, Ω, t0, δ be as in Proposition 12.5, where we apply the proposition

j ą 8pi ` 1q
”

|J| “ 4η ă πε, where J def“

´ η,

´ η,

` η

` η

3π
2

3π
2

„

ı

(79)

Y

π
2

.

ε

.

jδ ărδ2.
ˆ

˙

(81)

(82)

Now let

δ1 P

εδ
8

0,

`

U def“ F

W ˆ p´pi ` 1q, i ` 1q ˆ p´δ1, δ1q

and set
(83)
Then U is a neighborhood of Ki, and we need to show that µtpUq ă ε
for all t ě t0. That is, we need to verify

˘
ˇˇˇ ă 2πε, where pI def“ tθ P r0, 2πs : gtrθM P Uu.

ˇˇˇ ă πε. Whenever θ0 P
pI X J there are M1 “ M1pθ0q P W and px, yq “ pxpθ0q, ypθ0qq P p´pi `

In light of (80) it suﬃces to show that

ˇˇˇpI X J

ˇˇˇpI

.

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

97

1q, i ` 1q ˆ p´δ1, δ1q such that gtrθ0M “ FpM1, x, yq. We deﬁne the
following intervals:

I “ Ipθ0q def“ tθ P r0, 2πs : gtrθ´θ0g´tpx, yq P Bpi ` 1, δ1qu
J “ Jpθ0q def“ tθ P r0, 2πs : gtrθ´θ0g´tpx, yq P Bpj, δqu.

choice of t0, we have e´tx2 ` ety2 ěrδ. Using (81) and considering the

We think of r0, 2πs as a circle by identifying 0 and 2π, and think of
these subsets as arcs on the circle. In view of Proposition 12.6 and the
two choices of θ which make rθ´θ0g´tpx, yq horizontal and vertical, we
see that J does not coincide with the entire circle. Then (79), (82)
and Proposition 12.4 imply that
|I|
|J| ă ε

(84)
We claim that if θ P J (cid:114) I then either gtrθ´θ0g´tM1 R Ω or gtrθM R
Indeed, suppose θ P J (cid:114) I and gtrθ´θ0g´tM1 P Ω. According to

8

.

U.
Proposition 3.4,

gtrθM “ gtrθ´θ0g´tgtrθ0M “ gtrθ´θ0g´tpM1 ¯ px, yqq

“ gtrθ´θ0g´tM1 ¯ gtrθ´θ0g´tpx, yq.

The injectivity of F on Ω ˆ r´j, js ˆ r´δ, δs implies that gtrθM R U.
This proves the claim.

The claim, combined with (74) and (75), implies that

|J| ` |tθ P J : gtrθ´θ0g´tM1 R Ω|

ˇˇˇpI X J
ˇˇˇ
|J| ď |I|
!
We have covered pI X J by the intervals
Jpθ0q ` θ0 : θ0 PpI
θ PpI X J ùñ 1 ď #t(cid:96) : θ P J 1
ˇˇˇ ă ε
ˇˇˇpI X J
ÿ

ˇˇˇpI X J 1

ˇˇˇ ď

(cid:96)u ď 2,

|J 1
(cid:96)| ă πε.

ă ε
4

.

|J|

we pass to a subcover such that

)

, and

and obtain:

ÿ

(cid:96)

(cid:96)

4

(cid:96)

(cid:3)

Proof of Theorem 1.6. This follows immediately from Theorem 12.7 by
an argument developed by Eskin and Masur [EM]. See [EMS, EMaMo,
(cid:3)
B2] for more details.

98

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

References

[AEM] A. Avila, A. Eskin and M. M¨oller, Symplectic and isometric SLp2, Rq-

invariant subbundles of the Hodge bundle, preprint (2012).

[B1] M. Bainbridge, Euler characteristics of Teichm¨uller curves in genus two,

Geom. Topol. 11 (2007), 1887–2073.

[B2] M. Bainbridge, Billiards in L-shaped tables with barriers, Geom. Funct. Anal.

20 (2010), no. 2, 299–356.

[Bo] N. Bourbaki, ´El´ements de Mathematique, Livre 6, Integration, Chap-

tre IX, Hermann, Paris 1969.

[Boi] C. Boissy, Labeled Rauzy classes and framed translation surfaces, Ann. Inst.

Fourier, to appear.

[BoSh] A. Borevich, I. Shafarevich, Number theory, Pure and Applied Mathe-

matics, Vol. 20, Academic Press, New York-London, 1966

[BH] M. Bridson and A. Haeﬂiger, Metric spaces of non-positive curvature,

Grund. der Math. Wiss. 319 Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.

[BS] T. Bridgeland and I. Smith, Quadratic diﬀerentials as stability conditions,

arXiv:1302.7030 (2014).

[C] K. Calta, Veech surfaces and complete periodicity in genus 2, J. Amer. Math.

Soc. 17 (2004) 871–908.

[CaSm] K. Calta and J. Smillie, Algebraically periodic translation surfaces, J. Mod.
[CW] K. Calta and C. Wortman, On unipotent ﬂows in Hp1, 1q, Erg. Th. Dyn. Sys.

Dyn. Vol. 2, No. 2, 2008, 209–248., arXiv

30 (2010), no. 2, 379–398.

[D] S. G. Dani, Invariant measures of horospherical ﬂows on noncompact homoge-

neous spaces, Invent. Math. 47 (1978), no. 2, 101–138.

[DS] S. G. Dani and J. Smillie, Uniform distribution of horocycle orbits for Fuchsian

groups, Duke Math. J. 51 (1984), 185-194.

[E] W. Ebeling, Functions of Several Complex Variables and their Singu-

larities, AMS (2007).

[EW] M. Einsiedler and T. Ward, Ergodic theory with a view toward number

theory, Graduate texts in math. 259 (2011).

[EM] A. Eskin and H. Masur. Asymptotic formulas on ﬂat surfaces. Ergodic Theory

Dynam. Systems, 21(2):443–478, 2001.

[EMaMo] A. Eskin, J. Marklof and D. W. Morris, Unipotent ﬂows on the space of

branched covers of Veech surfaces, Erg. Th. Dyn. Sys. 26 (2006) 129–162.

[EMS] A. Eskin, H. Masur and M. Schmoll, Billiards in rectangles with barriers.

Duke Math. J. 118 (2003) 427–463.

[EMi] A. Eskin and M. Mirzakhani, Invariant and stationary measures for the

[EMZ] A. Eskin, H. Masur and A. Zorich, Moduli spaces of abelian diﬀerentials: the
principal boundary, counting problems, and the Siegel-Veech constants, Publ.
I.H.E.S. 97 (2003) 631–678.
SLp2, Rq action on moduli space, preprint (2014).
SL2pRq-invariant submanifolds in moduli space, (preprint) 2013.

[EMiMo] A. Eskin, M. Mirzakhani and A. Mohammadi, Isolation theorems for

[FaMa] B. Farb and D. Margalit, A Primer on Mapping Class Groups, Prince-

ton Mathematical Series, 49. Princeton University Press (2012).

[F] S. Filip, Splitting mixed Hodge structures over aﬃne invariant manifolds,

preprint (2013).

HOROCYCLE DYNAMICS AND THE EIGENFORM LOCI

99

[HKK] F. Haiden, L. Katzarkov and M. Konstevich, Flat surfaces and stability

structures, arXiv:1409.8611 (2015).

[H] A. Hatcher, Algebraic Topology, Cambridge University Press (2002).
[HW] P. Hooper and B. Weiss, The rel leaf and real-rel ray of the Arnoux-Yoccoz

surface in genus 3, preprint (2015).

[HPV] J. Hubbard, P. Papadopol and V. Veselov, A compactiﬁcation of H´enon

maps in C2 as dynamical systems, Acta Math. 184 (2000), 203–270.

[I] N. V. Ivanov, Mapping class groups, in Handbook of Geometric Topology,

p. 523–633 (2002) North Holland.

[K] A. Kechris, Classical Descriptive Set Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathe-

matics 156, Springer (1995).

[KoZo] M. Kontsevich and A. Zorich, Connected components of the moduli spaces
of Abelian diﬀerentials with prescribed singularities, Invent. Math. 153 (2003),
no. 3, 631–678.

[KSS] D. Kleinbock, N. A. Shah and A. Starkov, Dynamics of subgroup actions
on homogeneous spaces of Lie groups and applications to number theory, in
Handbook on Dynamical Systems, Volume 1A, Elsevier Science, North
Holland (2002).

[LM] E. Lindenstrauss and M. Mirzakhani, Ergodic theory of the space of measured

laminations, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN 4 (2008).

[Ma] H. Masur, Interval exchange transformations and measured foliations, Ann.

Math. (2) 115 (1982) 169–200.

[MaSm] H. Masur and J. Smillie, Hausdorﬀ dimension of sets of nonergodic mea-

sured foliations, Ann. Math. 134 (1991) 455–543.

[MaTa] H. Masur and S. Tabachnikov, Rational billiards and ﬂat structures, in

Handbook of dynamical systems, Enc. Math. Sci. Ser. (2001).

[MYZ] C. Matheus, J.-Ch. Yoccoz and D. Zmiaikou, Homology of origamis with

symmetries, preprint (2013), to appear in Ann. Inst. Fourier.

[McM1] C. T. McMullen, Teichm¨uller geodesics of inﬁnite complexity, Acta Math.

191 (2003) 191–223.

[McM2] C. T. McMullen, Billiards and Teichm¨uller curves on Hilbert modular sur-
[McM3] C. T. McMullen, Dynamics of SL2pRq over moduli space in genus two,

faces, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 16 (2003) 857–885.

Ann. Math. (2) 165 (2007), no. 2, 397–456.

[McM4] C. T. McMullen, Teichmller curves in genus two:

torsion divisors and

ratios of sines, Invent. Math. 165 (2006), no. 3, 651–672.

[McM5] C. T. McMullen. Teichm¨uller curves in genus two: Discriminant and spin,

Math. Ann., 333 87–130 (2005).

[McM6] C. McMullen, Prym varieties and Teichm¨uller curves, Duke Math. J. 133

(2006), no. 3, 569–590.

[McM7] C. T. McMullen, Foliations of Hilbert modular surfaces, Amer. J. Math.

129 (2007) 183–215.

[McM8] C. T. McMullen, Navigating moduli space with complex twists, J. Eur.

Math. Soc. (JEMS) 15 (2013) 1223–1243.

[MW1] Y. Minsky and B. Weiss, Non-divergence of horocyclic ﬂows on moduli

spaces, J. Reine Angew. Math. 552 (2002) 131–177.

100

MATT BAINBRIDGE, JOHN SMILLIE, AND BARAK WEISS

[MW2] Y. Minsky and B. Weiss, Cohomology classes represented by measured foli-
ations, and Mahler’s question for interval exchanges, Annales scientiﬁques de
l’ENS 47 (2014).
[R] M. Ratner, Raghunathan’s conjectures for SLp2, Rq, Israel J. Math. 80 (1992),

1-31.

[Sch] M. Schmoll, Spaces of elliptic diﬀerentials, in Algebraic and topological
dynamics, S. Kolyada, Yu. I. Manin and T. Ward eds., Cont. Math. 385
(2005) 303–320.

[SmWe1] J. Smillie and B. Weiss, Minimal sets for ﬂows on moduli space, Isr. J.

Math, 142 (2004) 249–260.

[SmWe2] J. Smillie and B. Weiss, Finiteness results for ﬂat surfaces: a survey
and problem list, in Partially hyperbolic dynamics, laminations, and
Teichm¨uller ﬂow (Proceedings of a conference, Fields Institute, Toronto Jan
2006), G. Forni (ed.)

[SmWe3] J. Smillie and B. Weiss, Examples of horocycle invariant measures on the

moduli space of translation surfaces. In preparation.

[SmWe4] J. Smillie and B. Weiss, Dynamics of the strong stable foliation on loci of

quadratic diﬀerentials. In preparation.

[Th] W. T. Thurston, The geometry and topology of 3-manifolds, lecture

notes (1980), available at http://library.msri.org/books/gt3m/.

[Ve1] W. A. Veech, Moduli spaces of quadratic diﬀerentials, J. Analyse Math. 55

(1990) 117–171.

[Ve2] W. A. Veech, Teichm¨uller curves in moduli space, Eisenstein series and an

application to triangular billiards, Invent. Math. 97 (1989), no. 3, 553–583.

[W1] A. Wright, Cylinder deformations in orbit closures of translation surfaces,

preprint (2014).

[W2] A. Wright, The ﬁeld of deﬁnition of aﬃne invariant submanifolds of the mod-

uli space of abelian diﬀerentials, Geom. Top. (2014).

[Y] J.-C. Yoccoz, Interval exchange maps and translation surfaces, in Homoge-
neous ﬂows, moduli spaces and arithmetic, Clay Math. Proc. 10 (2007)
1–70.

[Zo] A. Zorich, Flat surfaces, in Frontiers in number theory, physics and
geometry, P. Cartier, B. Julia, P. Moussa and P. Vanhove (eds), Springer
(2006).

University of Indiana mabainbr@indiana.edu

University of Warwick j.smillie@warwick.ac.uk

Tel Aviv University barakw@post.tau.ac.il

