6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
4
8
8
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Draft version March 4, 2016
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11

BINARY BLACK HOLES IN DENSE STAR CLUSTERS:
EXPLORING THE THEORETICAL UNCERTAINTIES

Sourav Chatterjee, Carl L. Rodriguez, & Frederic A. Rasio
Center for Interdisciplinary Exploration & Research in Astrophysics (CIERA)

Physics & Astronomy, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60202, USA

sourav.chatterjee@northwestern.edu

Draft version March 4, 2016

ABSTRACT

The exciting discovery of gravitational waves from merging black hole (BH) binaries by Advanced
LIGO has generated widespread interest in the astrophysical origin of these sources. Dense star
clusters such as globular clusters (GCs) are expected to form large numbers of stellar BHs. However,
what happens to these BHs after formation remains somewhat uncertain. Recent theoretical studies
with N -body simulations predict that large numbers of stellar BHs could remain bound to at least
some GCs at present, and merging BH–BH binaries are produced dynamically in signiﬁcant numbers.
Numerical simulations usually make a “standard” set of assumptions related to, e.g., BH formation
in supernovae, stellar winds, binary properties of high-mass stars, and initial stellar mass function
(IMF). However, these assumptions have large uncertainties. Here we systematically vary model
assumptions within existing uncertainties and study the eﬀects on the evolution of BHs in GCs, and
on the ﬁnal structural properties of GCs. This is made possible by the use of a parallel Monte Carlo
code, which provides much higher computational speed than direct N -body codes, thereby allowing
large numbers of models to be computed. We ﬁnd that variations in initial assumptions can set
otherwise identical initial clusters on completely diﬀerent evolutionary paths, signiﬁcantly aﬀecting
their observable properties at present, or even aﬀecting the cluster’s very survival to the present.
However, these changes usually do not aﬀect the numbers or properties of merging BH–BH binaries
produced by GCs. The only exception is that varying assumptions about stellar IMF and winds can
signiﬁcantly change the masses of BHs in merging binaries. For a given IMF and metallicity, all other
variations (e.g., in initial binary properties and binary fraction) leave the numbers and masses of BH–
BH mergers largely unchanged. This is in contrast to binary population synthesis models for the ﬁeld,
where results are very sensitive to a large number of uncertain parameters in the initial properties
of binaries and in the binary stellar evolution physics. We discuss our results in the context of the
recently detected BH–BH merger GW150914, assuming that it originated in a GC. The very large BH
masses in this system are likely not common, even with weak winds and low metallicity; instead, the
properties inferred for the other LIGO trigger event, LVT151012, are closer to what we would predict
for the bulk of BH–BH mergers produced dynamically in GCs.
Subject headings: black hole physics–methods: numerical–methods: statistical–stars: black holes–

stars: kinematics and dynamics–globular clusters: general

1.

INTRODUCTION

Our understanding of how black holes (BHs) evolve
inside star clusters has a long and varied history. Fol-
lowing the classic work by Spitzer (1969), it was sug-
gested that old (∼ 12 Gyr) globular clusters (GCs) can-
not retain a signiﬁcant BH population up to the present
day. It was argued that, due to the much higher mass of
the BHs compared to typical stars, the BHs will quickly
((cid:46) 102 Myr) mass segregate to form an isolated subclus-
ter that is dynamically decoupled from the GC. Due to
the small size, high density, and small number of objects
in the subclusters, relaxation and strong encounters were
expected to eject the majority of BHs on a timescale
∼ 1Gyr. Thus, at most a few BHs would remain in the
old GCs observed in the Milky Way (MW, e.g., Kulka-
rni et al. 1993; Sigurdsson & Hernquist 1993; Portegies
Zwart & McMillan 2000; Kalogera et al. 2004). Further-
more, it was argued that if signiﬁcant numbers of BHs are
present in today’s GCs, a subset of them might be in ac-
creting binary systems, and detectable as X-ray sources.
However, observations of luminous X-ray sources in the

MW GCs prior to 2012 suggested that all of these sources
are accreating neutron stars and not BHs, consistent with
theoretical expectation at the time(e.g., van Zyl et al.
2004; Lewin & van der Klis 2006; Altamirano et al. 2010,
2012; Bozzo et al. 2011).

This classical picture started to change with recent dis-
coveries of BH candidates in extragalactic GCs, charac-
terized by their super-Eddington luminosities and high
variability on short timescales (Maccarone et al. 2007;
Irwin et al. 2010). More recently, with the completion of
the upgraded VLA, surveys combining radio and X-ray
data for the MW GCs detected quiescent BHs by com-
paring their radio and X-ray luminosities (e.g., Strader
et al. 2012; Chomiuk et al. 2013). Interestingly, the MW
GCs containing the detected BH candidates show large
ranges in structural properties, indicating that the re-
tention of BHs may be quite common. Several recent or
ongoing surveys promise much richer observational con-
straints on this question (e.g., Strader et al. 2013; Strader
2014; Miller-Jones et al. 2014a,b).

To be detectable either via electromagnetic signatures

2

Chatterjee et al.

or via gravitational waves (GW) from BH–BH merg-
ers, the BHs must be in binary systems with very spe-
ciﬁc ranges of properties. Although dynamical interac-
tion can enhance the production of binaries containing
a BH (BBHs) (e.g., Kundu et al. 2002; Pooley et al.
2003), modern simulations ﬁnd that the fraction of BHs
in binaries is typically low (e.g., Morscher et al. 2015).
Hence, it has been argued that detection of just a few
BH candidates in GCs indicates the existence of a much
larger population of BHs that are not detectable (e.g.,
Strader et al. 2012; Umbreit 2012; Morscher et al. 2013,
2015). Indeed, recent numerical studies have found that
BH ejection is not nearly as eﬃcient as was previously
thought.
In these studies, it has been shown that the
BH subcluster does not stay decoupled from the rest of
the cluster for prolonged periods. The same interactions
that eject BHs from the subcluster also cause it to expand
and re-couple with the rest of the cluster, dramatically
increasing the timescale for BH evaporation (e.g., Breen
& Heggie 2013; Morscher et al. 2015). These simulations
suggest that tens to thousands of BHs may remain in to-
day’s GCs (e.g., Mackey et al. 2008; Moody & Sigurdsson
2009; Aarseth 2012; Morscher et al. 2013, 2015).

Most recently, Morscher et al. (2015) showed that the
presence of a signiﬁcant number of BHs can dramatically
alter the overall dynamical evolution of GCs. Through
repeated cycles of core-collapse and core re-expansion,
BH-dynamics acts as a signiﬁcant and persistent source
of energy. On the other hand, the clustered environment
and high frequency of strong scattering interactions, es-
pecially involving binaries, can change the numbers and
properties of BBHs that form inside clusters (e.g., Ro-
driguez et al. 2015, 2016a; Antonini et al. 2016). Both
of these aspects intricately depend on several physical
processes, many of which lack strong observational con-
straints. For example, the distribution of the natal kicks
the BHs receive can control how many of them will be
directly ejected from the GCs immediately upon forma-
tion. Natal kicks also control the fraction of BHs that
may retain their binary companions after SN. The high
end of the stellar initial-mass function (IMF) determines
how many BHs a cluster can form. The binary fraction
and binary orbital properties can alter the binary stel-
lar evolution of a BBH (or their progenitors) as well as
the rate at which they take part in dynamical encoun-
ters.
In addition, the ratio between the BH mass and
the average stellar mass, also directly determined by the
IMF, determines the timescale for BHs to sink to the
center. Answers to a wide variety of questions, such as
how many BHs and BBHs can a GC retain at present,
how many BBHs it can form over its whole lifetime, at
what rate do BHs and BBHs get ejected from the clus-
ters, and how do the BHs aﬀect the overall evolution of
the clusters, can potentially depend on these initial as-
sumptions. Hence, we must understand the sensitivity
of our models to initial conditions and assumptions that
are poorly constrained by existing observations.

In this study, we vary the initial assumptions regarding
the high-mass stars and BHs that are usually considered
“standard” in theoretical studies of clusters. In particu-
lar, we vary the stellar IMF, the birth-kick distribution
for the BHs, and the primordial binary fraction and the
binary properties for massive stars. We also vary the as-
sumed prescription for mass loss via stellar winds. Start-

ing from otherwise identical initial star clusters, we study
how varying these assumptions aﬀect BH populations,
and the overall evolution and ﬁnal observable properties
of the host clusters. We also study how these initial as-
sumptions aﬀect the number and properties of merging
BH–BH binaries. We put these ﬁndings in the context
of the recent landmark detection of GWs from a BH–BH
merger by Advanced LIGO (Abbott et al. 2016a,b).
In §2 we describe our numerical models and we list the
initial assumptions that we vary. In §4 we show how the
various assumptions aﬀect the overall evolution and ﬁnal
observable properties of star clusters. §5 focuses on how
these assumptions and resulting diﬀerences in the cluster
evolution as a whole alter the binary properties of BHs.
In §6 we focus on the numbers and properties of BH–
BH mergers and put those results in the context of the
recent discovery of GW150914 (Abbott et al. 2016a). We
summarize our results and conclude in §7.
2. NUMERICAL MODELS

We use our H´enon-type (H´enon 1971) Cluster Monte
Carlo (CMC) code, developed and rigorously tested in
our group over the past 15 years (Joshi et al. 2000, 2001;
Fregeau et al. 2003; Umbreit et al. 2012; Pattabiraman
et al. 2013; Chatterjee et al. 2010, 2013a,b). For a de-
tailed description of the most recent updates and par-
allelization see Pattabiraman et al. (2013) and Morscher
et al. (2015). The Monte Carlo approach is more approx-
imate than a direct N -body integration (e.g., Aarseth
2010), but requires only a fraction of the computational
time. This rapidity allows us to fully explore the param-
eter space of dense star clusters. Results from CMC have
been extensively compared to recent state-of-the-art N -
body simulations, and were found to produce excellent
agreement in all quantities of interest in this study (Ro-
driguez et al. 2016b).

2.1. Standard Assumptions

In order to understand the inﬂuence of each initial as-
sumption on the production and subsequent evolution of
BHs in a cluster, we anchor our numerical models using
the same assumptions as used in Morscher et al. (2015).
We call this our “standard” model and denote it as S
(Table 1). Our standard model initially has N = 8× 105
stars. The position and velocities of the stars are set ac-
cording to a King proﬁle with W0 = 5 (King 1962, 1965,
1966). We adopt the commonly-used IMF presented in
Kroupa (2001), and use the central value for each slope
in the diﬀerent mass ranges between 0.1–100 M(cid:12) to as-
sign masses to these stars.
In model S we assume an
initial binary fraction fb = 0.05. This is realized by ran-
domly selecting the appropriate number (Nb = N × fb)
of stars, independent of their masses or positions in the
cluster, and assigning binary companions to them. The
mass of the secondary (ms) is drawn from a uniform
distribution with a lower limit taken from the assumed
IMF, mmin = 0.1 M(cid:12), and an upper limit equal to the
mass of the primary (mp). The orbital period (P ) is
drawn from a distribution ﬂat in log P between 5 times
the sum of the radii for the binary companions, and the
local hard–soft boundary given by vorb = vσ, where, vorb
is the orbital velocity and vσ is the local velocity disper-
sion. Note that, although all initial binaries are locally
hard, dynamical evolution can make them soft at a later

Binary Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters

3

time, either by increasing the local velocity dispersion
of other stars (typically in the core) or by moving the
binary from its initial location to where the velocity dis-
persion is higher (due to mass segregation). Such soft bi-
naries are maintained in all our simulations until strong
scattering encounters disrupt them. The initial orbital
eccentricities for the binaries are drawn from a thermal
distribution.

Single and binary stellar evolution is performed with
SSE and BSE (Hurley et al. 2000, 2002). We have modi-
ﬁed the prescription for stellar remnant formation in SSE
and BSE by using the results of Fryer & Kalogera (2001)
and Belczynski et al. (2002). All core-collapsed neutron
stars get birth kicks drawn from a Maxwellian distribu-
tion with σ = σNS = 265 km s−1. We assume momentum
(|(cid:126)p|) conserving kicks for BHs following the prescription
of Belczynski et al. (2002). BHs formed via the direct
collapse scenario do not get any natal kicks, since there
is no associated explosion or mass loss. BHs formed with
signiﬁcant fallback get natal kicks calculated by initially
sampling from the same kick distribution as the neutron
stars, but reduced in magnitude according to the frac-
tional mass of the fallback (xfb) material (see Morscher
et al. 2015, for a more detailed description of our stan-
dard model S).

Below we describe how we vary the above-mentioned
initial assumptions.
In each case we describe only the
assumptions we change relative to the baseline model S,
with all other initial conditions held constant.

2.2. Initial Binary Fraction and Binary Properties of

Massive Stars

One source of uncertainty in setting up the initial con-
ditions is whether the binary fraction depends on the
stellar mass. We create two models, F0 and F1, varying
the fraction of high-mass stars (> 15 M(cid:12)) that are ini-
tially in binaries (fb,high). In models F0 and F1, we adopt
limiting initial values of fb,high = 0 and 1, respectively
(Table 1). We assign the binaries in these two models
such that the overall binary fraction fb is kept ﬁxed at
0.05. In model F0, Nb = 0.05×N stars are randomly cho-
sen from all stars with mass ≤ 15 M(cid:12) and are assigned
as binaries. In model F1, we ﬁrst assign all stars with
mass > 15 M(cid:12) as binaries. We randomly choose the ap-
propriate residual number of low-mass stars (≤ 15 M(cid:12))
and assign them as binaries to make fb = 0.05. In F0
and F1, the distributions for the mass ratios (q) and the
orbital properties are identical to model S.

In addition to the binary fraction in high-mass stars,
the binary orbital properties can potentially aﬀect both
the formation and interaction rate of BHs in a cluster.
The observed distributions of initial separations and q for
binaries may have signiﬁcant uncertainties and selection
biases. To understand the eﬀects of these initial assump-
tions, we create a set of models where we vary the initial
binary properties of the high-mass (> 15 M(cid:12)) stars. In
these models, we assume that the initial fb,high = 0.7
following the observational constraint provided in Sana
et al. (2012).
In addition, we choose an initial period
distribution described by dn/d log P ∝ P −0.55 for the
high-mass stars (Sana et al. 2012). The number of bi-
naries for low-mass stars are again adjusted so that the
overall fb is ≈ 0.05, similar to model S. We denote these
models with “F0.7.” Within this variant, we also con-

sider two diﬀerent q distributions for the high-mass bi-
naries. In one, we use a uniform distribution of q between
q = mmin/mp and 1. These models are denoted with the
string “Ms0.1”. Another set of models uses the same uni-
form distribution in q, but within a much smaller range,
0.6 and 1. We denote this set of models with the string
“q0.6” (Table 1).

2.3. Natal Kick Distribution for Black Holes

It has been widely accepted that the neutron stars get
large natal kicks when they form via core-collapse SN
(e.g., Cordes et al. 1993; Lyne & Lorimer 1994; Wang
et al. 2006; Zuo 2015). However, the magnitudes of na-
tal kicks imparted to BHs, is still a matter of debate.
Observational constraints come from modeling the kicks
required to explain the positions and velocities of known
BH X-ray binaries (XRB) in the MW galactic poten-
tial. Detailed analysis of individual BH XRBs results in
widely varying constraints on their natal kick magnitudes
(e.g., Brandt et al. 1995; Nelemans et al. 1999; Willems
et al. 2005; Gualandris et al. 2005; Dhawan et al. 2007;
Fragos et al. 2009; Wong et al. 2012, 2014). Instead of
modeling individual systems, Repetto et al. (2012) and
Repetto & Nelemans (2015) have performed population
synthesis using diﬀerent assumptions of natal kick dis-
tributions and compared their results with the positions
of the observed BHs in the MW. They have found that
BHs may get large kicks, perhaps even as large as the
neutron stars formed via core-collapse SN. In addition,
they have not found evidence of a mass-dependent kick
distribution, which would be expected for the widely used
|(cid:126)p|-conserving kick prescription. Recent theoretical study
of core-collapse SN by Pejcha & Thompson (2015) also
suggests that the birth kicks may not be directly corre-
lated with the BH mass.
In short, the distribution of
formation kicks for BHs is largely uncertain, even at the
qualitative level.

In addition to the one used in S, we create models
with three diﬀerent natal kick distributions for the BHs.
These models assume that the kick magnitudes are inde-
pendent of the BH masses and xfb, and are drawn from a
Maxellian given by σ = σBH. We adopt three variations
that are obtained by using σBH = σNS = 265 km s−1 (de-
noted by the string “K1”), σBH = 0.1σNS (denoted by the
string “K2”), and σBH = 0.01σNS (denoted by the string
“K3”) in Table 1.

2.4. Initial Stellar Mass Function

A lot of observational eﬀort is aimed towards ﬁnding
the expected IMF for stars born in clusters (e.g., Kroupa
& Boily 2002, and the references therein). Of course, the
number of BHs a cluster can form is directly dependent
on the number of massive BH-progenitor stars it initially
contains. This, in turn, is directly dependent on the stel-
lar IMF, especially the power-law slope of the IMF near
the high-end of stellar masses. As described earlier, our
standard models use the central values for the IMF slopes
from Kroupa (2001). However, we note that the best-ﬁt
power-law exponents α in dn/dm ∝ m−α throughout
all mass ranges have large uncertainties. For example,
the power-law exponent α1, for stars more massive than
1 M(cid:12) is 2.3 with 1σ error of 0.7 (Kroupa 2001). We vary
α1 within the quoted 1σ uncertainties, and create mod-

4

Chatterjee et al.

els with α1 = 1.6 (denoted using the string “If”) and
α1 = 3 (denoted using the string “Is”) in Table 1.

2.5. Stellar Wind Prescription

The details of how stars lose mass to stellar winds
is complicated and hard to model theoretically. Most
stellar evolution prescriptions instead model the mass
and metallicity-dependent stellar winds by calibrating
the wind-driven mass loss to catalogues of observed stars
(e.g., de Boer et al. 1997; Van Eck et al. 1998; Hurley
et al. 2000; Vink et al. 2001). The assumed wind pre-
scription dramatically aﬀects the mass of the BH progen-
itor at the time of SN, which in turn determines the mass
of the resultant BH. The wind prescription described in
Hurley et al. (2000) is widely used as part of the SSE
and BSE software packages in many widely-used cluster
dynamics codes. The majority of our models use this
stellar wind prescription. For simplicity, we call BSE’s
implementation for winds as the “strong wind” prescrip-
tion.

Recent observations of high-mass stars suggest that
the stellar winds may not be as strong as suggested by
earlier studies (e.g., Vink et al. 2001; Vink 2008; Bel-
czynski et al. 2010a,b; Dominik et al. 2012; Spera et al.
2015). The details of this wind prescription, based on,
e.g., Vink et al. (2001) is documented in detail in Bel-
czynski et al. (2010b), and implemented in our code in
(Rodriguez et al. 2016a). For simplicity, we call this im-
plementation the “weak wind” prescription. All models
adopting weak winds are denoted with the string “W” in
Table 1.

2.6. Other Assumptions

In addition to the above variations to our standard
model S, we also vary the galactocentric distance (rG),
metallicity (Z), the initial virial radius (rv), and the over-
all spread in the stellar IMF for a handful of models. The
details of all models and initial assumptions are listed in
Table 1.

3. DERIVATION OF OBSERVED CLUSTER PROPERTIES

The deﬁnitions for key structural properties in numer-
ical models are often diﬀerent from those deﬁned by ob-
servers for real clusters (e.g., Chatterjee et al. 2013b).
To be consistent, we “observe” our simulated models to
extract structural properties with deﬁnitions similar to
those used for real observations. We use the last snap-
shot from all our model clusters to extract the observable
structural properties. All relevant ﬁnal structural prop-
erties, measured both using theoretical deﬁnitions, and
observers’ deﬁnitions are listed in Table 2.

3.1. Estimation of “Observed” Structural Properties

We create two-dimensional projections for each model
assuming spherical symmetry. The half-light radius,
rhl,obs, is then estimated by ﬁnding the projected ra-
dius containing half of the total light. We obtain the
observed core radius, rc,obs, and the observed central
density, Σc,obs, by ﬁtting an analytic King model to the
cumulative stellar luminosity at a given projected ra-
dius including stars within a projected distance of rhl,obs
from the center (King 1962, their Eq. 18). This method
was suggested earlier by Morscher et al. (2015). Since,

Fig. 1.— Evolution of the core radius (rc) and the half-mass
radius (rh) for model S. The solid (black) and dashed (blue) lines
denote rc and rh, respectively. The spikes in rc due to BH-driven
core collapse continue until the end of the simulation at 12 Gyr.
Both rc and rh expand all the way to the end.

this approach avoids binning of data, this is more ro-
bust against statistical ﬂuctuations, especially at low
projected distances compared to the often-used method
of ﬁtting the King proﬁle directly to the surface bright-
ness proﬁle (SBP).

We estimate the observed central velocity dispersion
vσ,c,obs by taking the standard deviation of the magni-
tudes of the three-dimensional velocities of all luminous
stars (excluding compact objects) within a projected dis-
tance of rc,obs. In case of binaries, we take into account
the center of mass velocities.

3.2. Estimation of Dissolution Times

Depending on initial assumptions, some of our clus-
ter models get tidally disrupted before the integration
stopping time of 12 Gyr. The basic assumptions of our
Monte Carlo approach are spherical symmetry, and a suf-
ﬁciently large N to ensure that the relaxation timescale is
signiﬁcantly longer than the dynamical timescale. Both
assumptions break down for clusters that have begun to
tidally disrupt, since the tidal boundary is not spheri-
cally symmetric, and a disrupting cluster can lose mass
on a timescale << than the relaxation time. To that end,
once tr(t) > M (t)/ ˙M for a cluster, where tr, and M de-
note relaxation time and total cluster mass respectively,
we consider the cluster to have dissolved. For clusters
that dissolve before 12 Gyr, we list the approximate dis-
solution times and mark them as “Dissolved” in Table
2.

4. OVERALL CLUSTER EVOLUTION

Fig. 1 shows the evolution of the core radius (rc) and
the half-mass radius (rh) for our standard model S. As
expected, rc shows repeated downward spikes indicating
collapse of the BH subcluster (e.g., Morscher et al. 2015).
Dynamical ejections and binary formation following each
BH-driven core collapse produces energy, reversing the
collapse and re-expanding the BH positions to mix with
the rest of the cluster. Through repeated collapses, the
overall rc increases until the integration is stopped at
12 Gyr, and attains rc = 2.8± 0.1 pc. The error-bar here
denotes the 1σ ﬂuctuations during the last 1 Myr of the
cluster’s evolution. rh monotonically increases as well,
attaining a ﬁnal value of about 8 pc.

Binary Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters

5

mation of new binaries, binary–single and binary–binary
scattering, and dynamical ejections from the cluster core)
acts as the dominant source of energy in the core. The
cluster can start the relaxation-driven core-contraction
phase only after this source of energy is suﬃciently de-
pleted. The larger the number of retained BHs (NBH)
at a given time, the bigger the rc,obs and rc,obs/rhl,obs
for the host cluster (Fig. 4). For example, excluding
the disrupted clusters, the correlation coeﬃcient between
NBH and rc,obs at t = 12 Gyr is 0.82 and that between
rc,obs/rhl,obs is 0.78. Because of the large amount of en-
ergy BH-driven dynamics can inject into the clusters, the
central density, Σc,obs, also depends strongly on NBH;
Σc,obs and NBH are anti-correlated with a correlation co-
eﬃcient of −0.3 (Fig. 5).

Note that due simply to the diﬀerences in the initial
assumptions aﬀecting the high-mass stars, clusters with
very similar initial conditions attain widely varying ﬁnal
properties spanning ∼ 4 orders of magnitude in NBH,
(cid:38) 2 orders of magnitude in rc,obs, and (cid:38) 4 orders of
magnitude in Σc,obs at t = 12 Gyr (§2; Tables 1 & 2).
We ﬁnd that the most dramatic diﬀerences in the over-
all ﬁnal properties of a star cluster come from the diﬀer-
ences in NBH. The variations in initial assumptions can
change the evolution of NBH in diﬀerent ways, and as
a result, change the overall evolution of the cluster and
its structural properties (e.g. rc,obs, rhl,obs, and Σc,obs).
We ﬁnd that the most important assumption that deter-
mines the evolution of NBH in a cluster is the natal kick
distribution for the BHs. Hence, we start by discussing
the eﬀects of initial assumptions related to BH-formation
kicks.

4.1. Eﬀects of the Natal Kick Distribution for BHs

The assumed natal kick distribution for BHs directly
controls NBH at a given time, and through that it con-
trols the evolution of the cluster. For example, Fig. 6
shows the evolution of NBH, rc, rh, rc/rh, and the ﬁnal
SBPs for four identical models, all at a ﬁxed rG = 8 kpc.
These models vary only in the assumed distribution of
natal kicks for the BHs. We ﬁnd that if the BHs are
given full NS kicks, i.e., σBH = σNS, most of the BHs
are ejected from the cluster within t ≈ 20 Myr, immedi-
tally after formation. Without the source of energy from
BH dynamics at the center, the cluster starts contract-
ing due to two-body relaxation after the initial expansion
from mass loss via stellar evolution. At about 11 Gyr the
cluster reaches the so-called binary-burning phase, when
core-contraction is arrested due to extraction of bind-
ing energy from binary orbits via super-elastic scatter-
ing encounters (e.g., Heggie & Hut 2003). Based on the
ﬁnal SBP, this cluster would appear as a high-density
core-collapsed cluster (Fig. 6; see also Chatterjee et al.
2013b).
In contrast, clusters modeled with other na-
tal kick distributions, where the BHs essentially receive
much lower kicks compared to the neutron stars formed
via core-collapse SN, do retain large numbers of BHs all
the way through 12 Gyr. Due to the energy produced
from BH dynamics, each of these clusters continues to ex-
pand till the end. K2 with σBH = 0.1σNS contains about
200 BHs at t = 12 Gyr, a suﬃcient number to keep the
cluster in an expanded state. However, the rate of ex-
pansion is lower compared to models S and K3 where at
12 Gyr, NBH are much higher, with values 464 and 759,

Fig. 2.— Comparison between the SBPs at two diﬀerent times,
one corresponding to a core-collapsed state, seen as the downward
spikes in Fig. 1 (at t = 9.27 Gyr; black), and the other correspond-
ing to a non-collapsed state (at t = 9.29 Gyr; red) for model S. The
theoretically deﬁned core radius changes from rc ≈ 0.4 during the
collapsed state to about 3 pc out of that collapse. However, the
observable SBP barely changes.

Fig. 3.— Final SBP at t = 12 Gyr for model S. The dots denote
the surface luminosity density. While calculating the SBP, we dis-
card stars brighter than 20 L(cid:12) to reduce noise from a small number
of bright giant stars (e.g., Noyola & Gebhardt 2006). The hori-
zontal line denotes the central surface luminosity density (Σc,obs)
based on the best-ﬁt King model (§3). The vertical lines denote
the observed core radius rc,obs (obtained from the King ﬁt) and
observed half-light radius rhl,obs.

Of course, an astronomer observing this cluster would
measure diﬀerent values for the structural quantities.
Since the core collapse at any time during the evolution
involves only a small number of the most massive BHs
in the cluster, the observable SBP is insensitive to these
collapses. For example, Fig. 2 shows the SBPs for the
same model cluster at two diﬀerent times during its evo-
lution, one when the cluster is in a core-collapsed state
and the other when the cluster is out of it. There is no
diﬀerence between the SBPs, although the theoretical rc
changes from about 0.4 to 2.8 pc, between the collapsed
and non-collapsed states. Thus, the core collapses driven
by BH dynamics in these clusters are not observable.
Fig. 3 shows the SBP including stars with luminosity
L(cid:63) ≤ 20L(cid:12) for model S at t = 12 Gyr. At this time
model S has Σc,obs ≈ 2.7 × 103 L(cid:12)pc−2, rhl,obs = 5.5 pc,
and rc,obs = 3 pc. Hence, to an observer S would appear
as a cluster with low central density and puﬀed-up core.
In general, if a large number of BHs remain bound to
the host cluster, dynamics involving BHs (dynamical for-

6

Chatterjee et al.

Fig. 4.— Final number of BHs bound to the cluster, NBH vs rc,obs (Left) and rc,obs/rhl,obs (Right) for all models that survived for
at least 11 Gyr. Filled black circles represent models with rG = 8 kpc, rv = 2 pc and strong winds. Blue, green, red, and magenta empty
circles denote models with the same assumptions for rv and stellar wind, but with rG = 1, 2, 4, and 20 kpc, respectively. Black triangles
denote models with rG = 8 kpc, rv = 2 pc, and weak winds. Black and blue squares both denote models with rG = 8 kpc, rv = 1 pc, and a
wider IMF, but with weak and strong winds, respectively. In general, the larger the NBH, the higher the rc,obs and rc,obs/rhl,obs. Eﬀects
of all other initial assumptions are minor (Table 1). One model is a clear outlier with a very large rc,obs and moderate NBH: this is model
WIfK1 (Table 2), which is on the verge of dissolution.

ﬁnal total mass of the cluster. This is because more com-
pact clusters lose less mass via tidal stripping from their
host galaxies. The exact amount of expansion, mass loss,
and the ﬁnal cluster mass also depends on the metallic-
ity (Z) of the cluster, since the metallicity controls the
wind-driven mass loss and the resulting mass of the BH
population. Higher Z leads to the formation of lower-
mass BHs, and as a result the overall expansion due to
BH ejections is reduced. The adopted wind prescrip-
tion yields a similar eﬀect. The weak-wind prescription
leads to a much lower wind-driven mass loss compared
to the strong-wind prescription. As a result, our models
with weak winds form massive BHs with higher masses,
and eventually undergo more cluster expansion than the
models with strong winds. This increased rate of expan-
sion leads to an increased rate of star loss in models with
weak winds compared to those with strong winds and is
reﬂected in the ﬁnal N in these clusters (Table 2).

4.2. Eﬀects of the Assumed IMF

While for a given IMF the BH natal kick distribution is
the dominant factor controlling BH retention and overall
star cluster evolution, any change to the IMF, especially
for the high-mass stars, can also bring about dramatic
diﬀerences in how the cluster evolves. By directly con-
trolling both the number of high-mass stars (and hence
the number of BHs) formed in a cluster, and the average
stellar mass, variations in IMF can control the evolution
of a cluster and even its survival (Chernoﬀ & Weinberg
1990).

For example, we have tested the eﬀects of variation
in the slope α1 of the IMF for stars more massive than
1 M(cid:12) within the quoted uncertainty 2.3 ± 0.7 in Kroupa
(2001). Clusters evolve very diﬀerently depending on the
choice of α1 (Fig. 7). We ﬁrst focus on our standard set
of models (models S, Is, and If; Table 1). While models
with α1 = 2.3 and 3.0 evolve normally and survive until
t = 12 Gyr, the model with α1 = 1.6 dissolves at around
2 Gyr (see §3.2 for how dissolution times are estimated).
At ﬁrst, mass is lost primarily via stellar winds. Cluster
model If loses slightly more mass compared to the other

Fig. 5.— NBH vs Σc,obs for all models that survive for at least
11 Gyr . Point styles are the same as in Fig. 4. The ﬁnal Σc,obs is
strongly dependent on NBH. Eﬀects of rv, rG, fb,high and winds
are minor, only eﬀecting Σc,obs through NBH that are bound in
the clusters at 12 Gyr. Model WIfK1 is on the verge of dissolution
and exhibits very low density and moderate NBH.

respectively. While near the end there are indications
that the model cluster K2 would start contracting after
it ejects some more BHs, models S and K3 are still ex-
panding at t = 12 Gyr, and appear as puﬀy, low-density
clusters from their ﬁnal SBPs. The same initial cluster
can evolve to a ﬁnal observational state with rc,obs and
Σc,obs varying by orders of magnitude, simply because
of changes in the assumed natal kick distribution for its
BHs (Table 2).

The signiﬁcant number of retained BHs can also ex-
pand the cluster closer to its tidal radius, making the
cluster more prone to disruption from Galactic tides. For
example, with otherwise the exact same properties, at
rG = 1 kpc, clusters with relatively larger NBH expand
more (e.g. SR1Zand K3R1Z), and dissolve much earlier
than 12 Gyr. On the other hand, with the same initial
conditions, model clusters with relatively lower NBH are
safe from tidal disruption even at rG = 1 kpc (e.g., K1R1,
K2R1).

In general, the larger the value of NBH, the lower the

Binary Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters

7

Fig. 6.— Comparison between model clusters S (black), K1 (red), K2 (blue), and K3 (green) (Tables 1, 2) identical except the assumption
for the kick distribution during BH-formation. Top-Left: Evolution of the bound NBH for the four models. Bottom-Left: Evolution of
rc and rh. Solid and dashed lines denote rc and rh, respectively. Bottom-Right: Evolution of rc/rh. To reduce scatter we take running
averages for rc/rh. The lines denote the mean and the shaded regions show 1σ spread. Top-Right: Final SBPs for the four models.
The horizontal and vertical lines denote Σc,obs, rc,obs, and rhl,obs for each model. Clearly, the bound NBH depends very strongly on
the assumed distribution of formation kicks for the BHs. As a result, the overall evolution of the cluster also alters dramatically. For
example, K1 with σBH = σNS have only a handful of retained BHs. This cluster evolves to become a dense compact cluster and reaches the
binary-burning phase near t = 12 Gyr, with a SBP typical of the so-called core-collapsed observed GCs. In contrast, all other models that
retain signiﬁcantly larger numbers of BHs at t = 12 Gyr, evolve very diﬀerently. S and K3 keep expanding until t = 12 Gyr, whereas model
K2 ceases to expand at around t = 8 Gyr.

for m(cid:63) > 1 M(cid:12). Black
Fig. 7.— Comparison between models with varying IMFs. Each model has a diﬀerent α1, where dn
dm(cid:63)
(model S), red (model Is) and blue (model If) lines denote α1 = 2.3, 3, and 1.6, respectively (see §2; Kroupa 2001). Left: Evolution of the
total number of BHs formed (thick lines) and total number of BHs retained by the cluster (thin lines). Right: Evolution of the cluster mass
normalized to the initial cluster mass. Starting from otherwise identical initial conditions, the three clusters meet with very diﬀerent fates.
The cluster model with α1 = 1.6 produces many more BHs compared to other models, expands enormously, and gets disrupted around
t = 2 Gyr. The approximate disruption time (§3.2) is marked by arrows.

∝ m

−α1
(cid:63)

tr>M˙M8

Chatterjee et al.

kick case, the weak-wind model loses less mass than the
strong-wind model, IfK1 is disrupted earlier than WIfK1.

4.3. Eﬀects of Other Assumptions

The process and timescale for energy production from
BH dynamics depend critically on the mass segrega-
tion timescale (tS) in a cluster (e.g., Breen & Heggie
2013; Morscher et al. 2013, 2015). The mass segregation
timescale of a massive object depends on the relaxation
timescale (tr), and the ratio of its mass to the average
stellar mass (< m >) in its neighborhood, tS ∝ tr
<m>
(e.g., G¨urkan et al. 2004). Thus, NBH and as a result, the
overall cluster evolution depends on assumptions, such
initial virial radius (rv), and the IMF, that can af-
as:
fect either tr or <m>
. Fig. 9 shows the diﬀerence in the
mi
evolution of two clusters (W and Wrv1) with diﬀerent ini-
tial rv and the overall spread in the IMF (Table 1). The
initial average stellar mass for models W and Wrv1 are
< m >= 0.66 M(cid:12) and 0.62 M(cid:12), respectively. The initial
half-mass relaxation times for the models are 5.2 Gyr and
1.9 Gyr. Due to these diﬀerences, Wrv1 processes through
its BHs much faster than W. Furthermore, Wrv1 retains
signiﬁcantly fewer NBH, and evolves to a much denser
and more compact ﬁnal cluster than W.

mi

We have also tested how changes in the binary fraction
and binary properties of high-mass stars aﬀect the over-
all cluster evolution. We ﬁnd that with a ﬁxed overall
fb, variations simply in fb,high and the distributions of
orbital and companion properties for the high-mass bi-
naries do not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the overall evolution of
the clusters and their global observable properties.

5. BLACK HOLE BINARIES

To be detectable, either by observation of electromag-
netic signals generated via accretion from a non-BH com-
panion in a BH–non-BH binary (BH–nBH), or by detec-
tion of GWs from a BH–BH merger, BHs must be in
binary systems. Here we explore the eﬀects of our vari-
ous initial assumptions on the number and properties of
BBHs. Table 3 lists all our models and the corresponding
numbers of single and binary BHs, retained and ejected
from each cluster over its lifetime.

In general, we ﬁnd that the number of BBHs (of any
kind) in each of our model clusters is much lower com-
pared to the total number of BHs (Table 3). Moreover,
the BBH numbers are not strongly dependent on NBH
(Fig. 10). For example, depending on the assumptions
in our models, we ﬁnd a large range in the values of
NBH, varying from 0 to 935 at t = 12 Gyr. In contrast,
at t = 12 Gyr the variation in the numbers of BH–BH
(NBH−BH) and BH–nBH (NBH−nBH) binaries are 0 to
7 and 0 to 17, respectively. The correlation coeﬃcient
between NBH and NBH−BH at t = 12 Gyr for all model
clusters that did not get disrupted earlier than 12 Gyr is
0.56 and that between NBH and NBH−nBH is 0.07. The
low fraction of BBHs is true also for the BHs that are
ejected from the clusters (Table 3).

These general trends are understandable from the basic
process of how BBHs are created and dynamically pro-
cessed inside dense star clusters. Almost all primordial
binaries containing massive stars are disrupted inside a
cluster. This is mainly due to orbital expansion via mass
loss, which makes these binaries susceptible to disruption

Fig. 8.— Evolution of the star cluster mass normalized by the
initial mass of the cluster for models with α1 = −1.6. Black, red,
and green lines denote models with our standard kick prescription
(models If, WIf), and fallback-independent kick prescriptions with
σBH = 1 (models IfK1, WIfK1), and 0.01σNS (models IfK3, WIfK3),
respectively. Solid and dashed lines denote models with strong and
weak winds, respectively. All of these clusters get disrupted before
t = 12 Gyr. Models that retain signiﬁcant numbers of retained
BHs, weak winds lead to earlier dissolution of the cluster relative
to strong winds. Weak winds lead to formation of higher-mass BHs,
which lead to faster expansion of the clusters, and correspondingly
higher tidal mass loss compared to the strong wind case. For mod-
els with σBH = σNS, this is reversed, since in this case with very
low values of NBH, mass loss from stellar evolution and compact
object formation is the dominant eﬀect.

model clusters with steeper α1. Dramatic diﬀerences ap-
pear during the stage when the clusters lose mass via
compact object formation. As expected, the steeper the
high-end of the IMF, the lower the mass loss from com-
pact object formation. This episode of quick mass loss
ends by the time all the BHs are formed and many of the
BHs are ejected due to their birth kicks. Following this
episode, mass loss slows down and is driven by dynami-
cally BH ejections from the core and mass loss through
the tidal boundary. At this stage, the number of retained
BHs in a cluster becomes very important. Larger values
of NBH lead to more dynamical ejections, which in turn
lead to faster cluster expansion and higher tidal mass loss
rate. Eventually, if the cluster expands too much, it gets
disrupted.

The details of this process depends both on the kick
distribution for the BHs as well as the wind-driven mass
loss (Fig. 8). During the initial stages, clusters mod-
eled with weak winds lose less mass than those modeled
with strong winds. However, lower wind-driven mass
loss leads to the formation of more massive BHs. These
higher-mass BHs segregate more rapidly in the cluster
potential. In addition, higher-mass BHs inject more en-
ergy into the cluster via dynamics and ejections than
their lower-mass counterparts. As a result, once the clus-
ter is suﬃciently old for BH-dynamics to dominate en-
ergy production, the clusters modeled with weak winds
expand faster and get disrupted earlier than those mod-
eled with strong winds. The higher the number of re-
tained BHs, the bigger the diﬀerence between the clusters
modeled with strong and weak winds (Fig. 8). This trend
is reversed in the models IfK1 and WIfK1, both modeled
with the highest natal kicks for the BHs we consider (Ta-
ble 1). Since in these models almost all BHs are ejected
during formation, the above-mentioned diﬀerence due to
BH-dynamics is not relevant. Instead, since in the high-

Binary Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters

9

Fig. 9.— Same as Fig. 6, but comparing between models W (black) and Wrv1 (red; Table 1). The lower relaxation timescale and average
stellar mass for model Wrv1 compared to model W leads to faster mass segregation, and as a result faster dynamical processing of BHs. The
retained number of BHs NBH in model cluster Wrv1 is signiﬁcantly lower compared to NBH in model cluster W. As a result, model cluster
Wrv1 ceases to expand by t = 12 Gyr, and begins the relaxation-driven slow-contraction phase. In contrast, model cluster W keeps expanding
till the end. Wrv1 appears as a higher-density and more compact cluster compared to W.

via subsequent strong scattering encounters (Fig. 11).
Thus, most BHs in dense star clusters are singles. Almost
all BBHs in dense star clusters, as well as BBHs that are
ejected from them after t ∼ 102 Myr, are binaries that are
dynamically created in the dense cores of these clusters,
and are not primordial. Note that even if an old star
cluster typical of the present-day GCs now appears to
have a low central density, its BHs likely have been pro-
cessed in dramatically higher density environments as a
result of repeated past BH-induced core collapse episodes
(e.g., Figs. 1, 3, & 6). Both the values of NBH−BH and
NBH−nBH in a cluster show large ﬂuctuations over time
and can vary between zero to ∼ 10 (e.g., Figs. 11–14).
This is reﬂective of the high frequency of dynamical pro-
cesses that create and modify the BBHs in a dense star
cluster, especially during a BH-driven core collapse. In
these dense environments BBHs continuously form via
three-body encounters, change via swapping of partners
in binary-mediated scattering, get disrupted via strong
scattering, and get ejected due to recoil from strong scat-
tering encounters (e.g., Heggie 1975). The dynamical
processes including disruption of primordial binaries, cre-
ation of new ones, and dynamical ejections essentially
erase the binary properties the high-mass stars were born
with. This in fact is the main diﬀerence between BBHs
formed in a dense star cluster and BBHs that are born
in isolation in the ﬁeld. In the latter case, all BBHs are
formed from primordial binaries, hence, the BBH proper-
ties as well as numbers relative to single stars are directly
related to the assumptions of initial binary properties for

the high-mass stars.

While large numbers of BHs are still present in a star
cluster, the core of the cluster is dominated by the BHs
due to mass segregation. Internal dynamics determines
how many of these BHs can hold onto their compan-
ions once formed via dynamics. As NBH decreases, the
BH-driven core collapses become less pronounced. As a
result, a higher fraction of BHs can remain in binaries,
and the ejection rate of BBHs decreases. Hence, although
NBH decreases, the fraction of BHs in BH–BH binaries
increases, thus keeping NBH−BH largely unchanged (Fig
10). On the other hand, while NBH is large, the very
central regions are dominated by the (mostly) single BHs
and lower-mass stars are driven out. A large NBH also
keeps the cluster puﬀed up, lowering the rate of encoun-
ters between BHs and binaries with non-BH members.
Only after a cluster is suﬃciently depleted of the BHs,
can the rate of formation of BH–nBH binaries via ex-
change interactions involving a BH and a binary with
non-BH members increase. However, at this stage the
maximum NBH−nBH is likely limited by the low number
of remaining BHs.

The lack of a strong correlation between NBH and
NBH−nBH has some interesting implications. For exam-
ple, major eﬀorts are now underway to detect BH can-
didates in GCs (e.g., Strader et al. 2012; Chomiuk et al.
2013; Strader et al. 2013; Miller-Jones et al. 2014b,a).
For detection via electromagnetic signals (by comparing
the radio and X-ray luminosities) there must be a BH
with a non-BH accreting companion. For simplicity, if we

10

Chatterjee et al.

Fig. 11.— Evolution of the number of binary BHs bound to the
cluster for diﬀerent assumed natal kick distributions for BHs. Top
and bottom panels show BH-BH and BH-nBH binary numbers.
Both NBH−BH and NBH−nBH show large scatters over time. This
is a direct consequence of the continuous disruption and ejection
of existing binaries and dynamical formation of new ones at any
given time in clusters. To reduce scatter we have under-sampled
and show the mean (lines) and ± one standard deviation (shaded
region). Black, red, blue, and green denote models S, K1, K2, and
K3, respectively (Table 1). Both NBH−BH and NBH−nBH remain
low independent of the assumed distribution of natal kicks for BHs.
This indicates that the softening of orbits for massive binaries due
to mass loss via winds and compact object formation is responsible
for dynamical disruption of most primordial binary orbits, and that
this process does not depend on the natal kick distribution. Even
with very low adopted natal kicks for BHs, σBH = 2.65 km s−1, K3
contains low numbers of binary BHs.

compared to orbital speeds of the massive binaries, both
show low numbers of BBHs. As discussed earlier, the
combined mass loss from stellar winds and compact ob-
ject formation for high-mass stars expands the binary
orbits and make them dynamically soft. Thus the major-
ity of the high-mass binaries are disrupted independent
of the magnitude of the SN kicks.

To further investigate this we compare two of our mod-
els that are identical in all aspects except the fraction of
high-mass stars that are initially in binaries. To illustrate
the limiting cases, Fig. 12 shows the evolution of retained
BBHs for models F0 with initial fb,high = 0 and F1 with
initial fb,high = 1 (§2.2; Table 1). Although initially the
values of NBH−BH are vastly diﬀerent between the mod-
els, within about 3 Gyr, they converge to essentially the
same steady value in both models. However, NBH−nBH
for the model with initial fb,high = 1 is slightly lower
compared to that in the model with initial fb,high = 0
for t > 5 Gyr. This is likely due to the fact that to keep
the overall fb ﬁxed at 0.05, the fb,high = 1 case started
with fewer low-mass stars in binaries compared to the
fb,high = 0 case. At late times, all BH–nBH binaries
are dynamically formed via exchange interactions where
a BH inserts itself into a binary by ejecting a non-BH
component. Because of this, the relatively small number
of low-mass stellar binaries in the fb,high = 1 case (com-
pared to fb,high = 0 case) reduces the eﬃciency of new
BH–nBH binary formation.

Similar trends are found by comparing models with
diﬀering prescriptions for stellar winds (Fig. 13). While
the values of NBH−BH are very similar between clusters
S and W, the lower ﬁnal ρc in W results in production of
a lower number of BH–nBH binaries compared to S at
late times. This is consistent with our understanding

Fig. 10.— Top: The number of bound BHs NBH vs the number
of bound BH-BH binaries NBH−BH. Middle: NBH vs the number
of bound BH-nBH binaries NBH−nBH. Bottom: Binary fraction in
BHs (fb,BH) normalized by the overall binary fraction fb. Plusses
(black), circles (red), and squares (blue) denote the normalized bi-
nary fraction for all BH binaries, BH-BH binaries, and BH-nBH
binaries, respectively. A larger fraction of BHs are in binaries rela-
tive to the overall binary fraction for models with low NBH. High
NBH leads to BH-driven core-collapse which typically disrupts and
ejects BH binaries. As NBH decreases, BH-driven core-collapses
stop occuring, reducing the eﬃciency of BBH destruction and ejec-
tion. BHs being the most massive objects, typically get exchanged
into binaries via binary-mediated scattering encounters. As a re-
sult, the fraction of BHs in binaries increases as NBH decreases.

treat NBH−nBH as a proxy for the absolute upper limit
on the number of BH candidates that may be detectable
via electromagnetic signatures, the lack of correlation be-
tween NBH and NBH−nBH poses a serious challenge in
inferring the number of total BHs in the GC from the
discovery of BH candidates in that GC.

We now focus our attention on understanding the de-
tailed evolution of BBHs inside a cluster and the eﬀects
of various initial assumptions through selected example
models (Figs 11–14). Since we have shown that the as-
sumed BH natal-kick distribution can bring dramatic
changes to the overall cluster evolution, we ﬁrst inves-
tigate the eﬀects of BH formation kicks on the evolution
of BBHs that are retained in the cluster (Fig. 11). The
number of BBHs in the cluster is quite insensitive to the
details of the kick distribution except for the case with
σBH = σNS (e.g., model K1). In the high-kick case, the
large formation kicks essentially ejects most of the BHs
from the cluster. The natal kicks are also large enough to
disrupt all binaries during BH formation. Hence, not sur-
prisingly, in the high-kick models, the values for NBH−BH
as well as NBH−nBH are always low. Interestingly though,
the number of BBHs is low even in our lowest kick mod-
els. For example, S which assumes a fallback-dependent
momentum-conserving kick prescription and K3 which
assumes that σBH = 2.65 km s−1, typically much lower

Binary Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters

11

Fig. 12.— Same as Fig. 11 but showing a comparison between
the evolution for two identical initial models diﬀering only by the
initial binary fraction in high-mass (> 15 M(cid:12)) stars, fb,high. Black
and red denote models F0 with initial fb,high = 0 and F1 with initial
fb,high = 1, respectively (Table 1). In both cases, the overall binary
fraction fb is kept ﬁxed at 0.05. Independent of the initial fb,high,
the ﬁnal retained NBH−BH converge to a low value. The ﬁnal re-
tained NBH−nBH depends on the eﬃciency with which interactions
involving BHs and binaries with non-BH components can produce
BH-nBH binaries via exchange. The cluster with fb,high = 1 has
fewer low-mass binaries than the cluster with fb,high = 0. As a
result, BH-nBH binary formation is less eﬀective in F1 compared
to that in F0 at late times.

Fig. 13.— Same as Fig. 11 but compares between the evolution
for two identical initial models diﬀering by the assumed prescrip-
tion for mass loss via stellar winds. Black and red denote models
S with the strong and W with the weak wind prescriptions, respec-
tively. The values of NBH−BH shows no diﬀerence between the two
models. The value for NBH−nBH for the weak wind case is slightly
lower compared to that for the the strong wind case. Weak winds
lead to more massive BHs, which in turn lead to more expanded
clusters with lower central densities (e.g., Table 2). As a result, in
the weak wind case, at late times formation of BH–nBH binaries
via binary-mediated exchange interactions between single BHs and
non-BH binaries is less eﬃcient.

that most BH–nBH binaries retained in old clusters typ-
ical of the GCs are dynamically created. The dynamical
age, mass-segregation timescale, and binary fraction can
also moderately aﬀect NBH−nBH. The ﬁrst two control
NBH in the cluster, and as a result the cluster’s dynam-
ical properties and overall evolution. The initial binary
fraction controls the number of binaries with no BH com-
ponents that can take part in exchange interactions with
single BHs and BH–BH binaries in old clusters. Fig.
14 compares NBH−BH and NBH−nBH for two models W

Fig. 14.— Same as Fig. 11 but showing a comparison between
the evolution for two models diﬀering by the overall binary fraction,
rv, and the IMF spread. Black and red denote models W and Wrv1,
respectively (Table 1). The retained NBH−BH for both models
converge within t ≈ 200 Myr. The model cluster W with a lower
initial fb retains a lower NBH−nBH compared to Wrv1. (Tables 1,
3).

and Wrv1 that diﬀer in their initial rv, and fb (Table
1). While NBH−BH converges to similar values within
200 Myr, Wrv1 with a higher fb retains a larger number
of BH–nBH binaries compared to W. In all cases, the frac-
tion of BHs that are in binaries increases only after NBH
is suﬃciently reduced (e.g., Fig. 10; also Table 3).

Independent of how many high-mass stars were born in
binaries, cluster dynamics regulates the total number of
BBHs retained in old GC-like clusters. Other variations
in the binary orbital properties and fb,high (e.g., Sana
et al. 2012) show the same general result. All knowledge
of the primordial binary fraction and binary orbital prop-
erties of BHs or their progenitors is lost due to dynamical
encounters in a star cluster. If massive stars were initially
mostly in binary systems, these binaries would take part
in strong dynamical encounters with other stars. These
frequent scattering encounters either disrupt the binaries
or eject them from the cluster. On the other hand, if ini-
tially BHs or their progenitors are not in binaries, new
binaries can form dynamically. Through both channels
the ﬁnal number of BBHs attains small but similar values
in all GCs (e.g., Table 3).

6. BINARY BLACK HOLE MERGERS

The BH–BH merger rates and properties of the BHs
during merger in the local universe have been studied by
multiple teams, either exploring the contributions from
star clusters (e.g., Ziosi et al. 2014; Rodriguez et al. 2015,
2016a; Antonini et al. 2016) or from isolated binary stel-
lar evolution in the ﬁeld (e.g., Belczynski et al. 2014; Do-
minik et al. 2012, 2013; Belczynski et al. 2014; Dominik
et al. 2015; Kowalska-Leszczynska et al. 2015; Belczyn-
ski et al. 2015). Here we focus on understanding the
uncertainties associated with the BH–BH merger rates
formed in clusters similar to the present-day GCs (e.g.,
Rodriguez et al. 2016a). As in earlier sections, we in-
vestigate how variations in initial assumptions aﬀect the
number of BH–BH mergers, merger times, and the prop-
erties of the binaries. The numbers of BH–BH mergers
and the total masses of these mergers within two values
of redshift (z) are listed in Table 3. Here we assume that
each cluster is 12 Gyr old at the present day, and the red-

12

Chatterjee et al.

Fig. 15.— Top to bottom, the component masses (M1,2), total mass (Mtot), and chirp mass (Mchirp) for BH-BH mergers within
0 ≥ z ≥ 0.2 (blue) and 0.2 ≥ z ≥ 1 (red) for each model identiﬁed by the serial number on the horizontal axis. Dots and crosses denote
mergers after being ejected from the clusters. Circles and squares denote mergers within the clusters. Cyan shaded regions show GW150914
properties for reference. Weak winds help creating relatively more massive mergers. Assumptions of BH’s natal kicks and IMF aﬀect number
of mergers by changing the number of BHs that clusters can retain for dynamical processing, and the number of BHs produced for a given
N , respectively.

shift correponds to the lookback time of each merger.1
To highlight the assumption relating t and z, we will refer
to our model clusters as GCs in this context.

Fig. 15 shows the BH masses for all BH–BH mergers
within z = 0.2 and 1 from all of our models, identiﬁed by
the index numbers listed in Tables 1–3. Rodriguez et al.
(2015, 2016a) found that the BH–BH mergers in the local
universe (z < 1) is dominated by mergers that occur af-
ter the BH–BH binaries are ejected from their host GCs.
This same result is generally found in our models inde-
pendent of the details of the initial assumptions (Table
3). Now we highlight the assumptions that aﬀect the
number and properties of BH–BH mergers originating
from GCs and occurring within some small z.

The largest eﬀect arises from the assumed distribution
of natal kicks for the BHs. We have already seen that in-
dependent of initial assumptions, primordial binaries in-
volving BH-progenitor stars are generally disrupted (§5).
All GCs modeled with an adopted BH natal kick distri-
bution given by σBH = σNS and no scaling based on
fallback, eject almost all of their BHs due to the high na-
tal kicks before they can dynamically form binaries. The
handful of BH–BH binaries these GCs produce are all
dynamically formed via binary-mediated strong scatter-

1 We assume h = 0.677, ΩM = 0.309, ΩK = 0., and ΩL = 0.691.

ing encounters within clusters at later times. As a result,
when these GCs do produce BH–BH binaries that would
merge in the local universe the mergers usually happen
while the BH–BH binary is still bound to the GC.

The only other assumption explored in this study that
can signiﬁcantly impact the production of merging BH–
BH binaries from GCs is the IMF. Any variations in the
IMF for high-mass stars alters the number of mergers at
z < 1 in a predictable manner. IMFs that produce more
high-mass stars produce more BHs, and the number of
BH–BH mergers in the local universe increases accord-
ingly. For example, the IMF with α1 = 1.6, for a given
initial N forms much higher numbers of BHs compared
to models with larger α1. Even models with the largest
natal kicks for the BHs may produce signiﬁcant numbers
of BH–BH mergers if α1 = 1.6 is assumed. Of course,
for the same reason, a combination of ﬂat high-end for
the IMF and low natal kicks for BHs can signiﬁcantly
increase the number of mergers within z < 1. Never-
theless, note that we ﬁnd that all clusters modeled with
α1 = 1.6 get disrupted long before they are 12 Gyr old,
a typical age for the MW GCs, due to a combination of
mass loss and energy production via BH dynamics from
the large numbers of high-mass stars that such an IMF
produces. As a result, this extreme low value of α1 seems
very unlikely in reality. Similarly, if the IMF mass range

Binary Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters

13

Fig. 16.— Top to bottom, the component masses (M1,2), total mass (Mtot), and chirp mass (Mchirp) for BH-BH mergers as a function
of merger time. The top axis shows the lookback redshift z assuming that t = 12 Gyr is equivalent to z = 0. Plusses, and circles denote
mergers that happen after the BH–BH binaries are ejected from the host clusters, and BH–BH mergers that happen while the binaries are
still bound to the host clusters. The reported gravitational wave observation GW150914 and the trigger event LVT151012 are shown with
errorbars in green for reference. Black and red denote BH–BH mergers from models assuming the strong and weak wind prescriptions,
respectively. Most BH–BH mergers in the local universe happen after the binaries are ejected from the host clusters. BH–BH binaries that
merge inside clusters typically have lower masses compared to those that merge after being ejected. Weak winds are necessary for producing
BH–BH mergers as massive as GW150914 for the metallicities we consider. Most mergers in our models are closer to the properties of
LVT151012.

101102M1Mﬂ00.10.20.5123z101102M2Mﬂ101102MtotMﬂ024681012t(Gyr)101102MchirpMﬂ14

Chatterjee et al.

is extended to lower-mass stars, the number of BHs pro-
duced, and as a result, the number of BH–BH mergers is
reduced.

While the distribution of natal kicks and the assumed
IMF may change the actual number of BH–BH merg-
ers from GCs within a given z, the masses of the binary
mergers depend on neither. Instead, the mass distribu-
tion of the merging BHs is primarily determined by the
assumed stellar winds for a given metallicity Z, which
we controlled by using either the weak or strong wind
prescriptions in this study (§2.5). Fig. 16 shows the com-
ponent masses (M1,2), total mass (Mtot) and chirp mass
(Mchirp) of all BH–BH mergers within 12 Gyr from all our
models as a function of their merger times. We divide all
model GCs in two groups based on the two wind prescrip-
tions we consider. GCs modeled with weak winds pro-
duce more massive merging BH–BH binaries compared
to those modeled with strong winds. In particular, GCs
modeled assuming weak stellar winds are the only ones
that can produce BH–BH mergers with masses similar
to GW150914 for the metallicities we consider. Never-
theless, we ﬁnd that the majority of BH–BH binaries
merging within z = 0.2 even from model GCs assuming
weak winds have lower BH masses than the component
masses of GW150914 (Table 1). The BH masses of the
other reported trigger event LVT151012 are more com-
mon in the BH–BH mergers found in our models. GCs
modeled with both strong and weak winds can produce
BH–BH mergers similar in properties to LVT151012 .
Very few of the BH–BH mergers in the local universe are
expected to happen while the binary is still bound to the
host GC. Most BH–BH binaries that merge while bound
to the GC do so at early times, and typically have lower
masses than those that merge after ejection. Since, the
higher the mass of the BHs, the earlier it is ejected from
the cluster (e.g., Morscher et al. 2015), the mergers after
ejection are typically more massive compared to those
that happen within a cluster.

Note that throughout this section we have assumed
that z = 0 is equivalent to t = 12 Gyr keeping, in partic-
ular, the MW GCs in mind. Of course depending on the
relation between t and z, which in terms of astrophysics
is determined by the current age of the clusters that
produce the BHs, the number of BH–BH mergers, their
masses, and the relative importance of mergers within a
cluster and mergers after being ejected from the cluster
can change (Fig. 16).

7. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

In this study we have explored how identical initial
clusters can diverge in their evolution depending on vari-
ous ill-constrained initial assumptions aﬀecting the high-
mass stars, including the high-end slope (α1) of the IMF,
the distribution of natal kicks for BHs, the binary frac-
tion and the binary orbital properties for massive stars,
and the prescriptions adopted for stellar winds. Using
Monte Carlo simulations we have studied the eﬀects of
each of these assumptions from three diﬀerent perspec-
tives: (1) how they aﬀect the global evolution of star
clusters and their ﬁnal observable properties; (2) how
they aﬀect the binary fraction of BHs and the numbers
of diﬀerent types of BH binaries; and (3) how these as-
sumptions aﬀect the number and properties of merging
BH–BH binaries that could be detected as GW sources.

We ﬁnd that, even when we start from the same initial
cluster model, variations in these initial assumptions can
alter the number of retained BHs, NBH, at any given
time by orders of magnitude (e.g., Tables 2, 3). This
diﬀerence in NBH can then change the overall dynamical
evolution of the host star cluster, dramatically altering
its lifetime and, if it survives to the present, its ﬁnal
observable properties (Fig.s 4–9).

In contrast, the total number and properties of BH–
BH and BH–nBH binaries retained inside old star clus-
ters are not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by varying any of these
assumptions. Through dynamical interactions in the
dense cluster cores or kicks at compact object forma-
tion, all primordial binaries containing BH progenitors
are quickly disrupted. On the relaxation timescale, bi-
naries are reformed dynamically and eventually both the
number and properties of retained binaries with at least
one BH component are determined entirely by stellar dy-
namical processes. As NBH decreases, the fraction of BHs
in binaries increases, so that NBH−nBH and NBH−BH in
old clusters do not strongly correlate with NBH. This
has important implications for inferring NBH in clusters
where BH XRB candidates have been identiﬁed. In gen-
eral we ﬁnd that observable cluster properties including
rc,obs and Σc,obs are better indicators of NBH compared
to NBH−nBH (Figs. 4, 5, & 10).

The number of BH–BH mergers from clusters in the
local universe is only aﬀected by the assumptions made
about BH natal kicks and the stellar IMF (Fig. 15, Table
3). This is very diﬀerent from the situation encountered
in binary population synthesis studies for ﬁeld binaries,
where a myriad of assumptions (e.g., about the initial
properties of binaries) and uncertain stellar evolution pa-
rameters (e.g., the infamous common-envelope eﬃciency
αCE) can change results by orders of magnitude. Instead,
far more robust theoretical predictions can be made for
merging BH–BH binaries that are dynamically produced
in dense star clusters.

If BHs receive natal kicks as large as neutron stars
formed in core-collapsed SN, the expected number of
BH–BH mergers becomes very small, simply because al-
most all BHs are ejected from the cluster at birth. Note,
however, that with such large kicks the number of BH–
BH binaries generated in star clusters is signiﬁcantly
higher than in the ﬁeld, where BHs can never again ac-
quire a binary companion if natal kicks disrupt the pri-
mordial binaries they were born in (see Rodriguez et al.
2016a, for comparative rate estimates between star clus-
ters and the ﬁeld assuming high and low natal kicks for
BHs). Variations in the assumed IMF slope change the
number of BH–BH mergers in clusters in a predictable
way, simply by changing the relative proportion of high-
mass stars (see §6, Fig. 15). The component masses and
total masses (or equivalently the chirp masses) of merg-
ing BH–BH binaries are aﬀected only by the assumed
prescription for stellar-wind mass loss. Other parameters
such as fb,high or any of the initial properties of massive
binaries (e.g., the distributions of mass ratios and orbital
periods) have no eﬀect at all (Fig. 15, Table 3).

In the context of GW detection, we therefore expect
the BH–BH merger rates and properties estimated in
Rodriguez et al. (2015, 2016a) for dynamically produced
binaries to be quite robust, and in particular to remain
unaﬀected by any change in assumptions concerning the

Binary Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters

15

initial distributions of binary properties or the binary
stellar evolution. In contrast, the BH–BH merger rates
estimated for isolated ﬁeld binaries (e.g., Belczynski et al.
2015; Dominik et al. 2013, 2015) depend directly and sen-
sitively on many assumptions concerning the details of
stellar evolution (mass transfer, tidal dissipation eﬀects,
common envelopes) and on the assumed distributions of
initial properties for high-mass binaries. In addition, the
assumption of truly isolated binary evolution may be sus-
pect because most stars and binaries currently in the ﬁeld
were still originally formed in clusters, which later dis-
solved (e.g., Carpenter 2000; Lada & Lada 2003; Porras
et al. 2003; Portegies Zwart et al. 2010), and binaries

may have been aﬀected by dynamical interactions before
their release into the ﬁeld (e.g., Ziosi et al. 2014).

We are grateful to Vicky Kalogera for her helpful com-
ments. This work was supported by NASA ATP Grant
NNX14AP92G and NSF Grant AST1312945. S.C. also
acknowledges support from the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration through Chandra Award Number
TM5-16004X/NAS8-03060 issued by the Chandra X-ray
Observatory Center, which is operated by the Smithso-
nian Astrophysical Observatory for and on behalf of the
National Aeronautics Space Administration under con-
tract NAS8-03060.

REFERENCES

Aarseth, S. J. 2010, Gravitational N-Body Simulations
—. 2012, MNRAS, 422, 841
Abbott, B. P., Abbott, R., Abbott, T. D., Abernathy, M. R.,

Acernese, F., & LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration and Virgo
Collaboration. 2016a, Phys. Rev. Lett., 116, 061102

Abbott, B. P., Abbott, R., Abbott, T. D., Abernathy, M. R.,

Acernese, F., Ackley, K., Adams, C., Adams, T., Addesso, P.,
Adhikari, R. X., B., V., & LIGO Scientiﬁc Collaboration and
Virgo Collaboration. 2016b, ApJ, 818, L22

Altamirano, D., Patruno, A., Heinke, C. O., Markwardt, C.,

Strohmayer, T. E., Linares, M., Wijnands, R., van der Klis, M.,
& Swank, J. H. 2010, ApJ, 712, L58

Altamirano, D., Wijnands, R., Heinke, C. O., Sivakoﬀ, G. R., &

Pooley, D. 2012, The Astronomer’s Telegram, 4264, 1

Antonini, F., Chatterjee, S., Rodriguez, C. L., Morscher, M.,

Pattabiraman, B., Kalogera, V., & Rasio, F. A. 2016, ApJ, 816,
65

Belczynski, K., Bulik, T., Fryer, C. L., Ruiter, A., Valsecchi, F.,

Vink, J. S., & Hurley, J. R. 2010a, ApJ, 714, 1217

Fragos, T., Willems, B., Kalogera, V., Ivanova, N., Rockefeller,

G., Fryer, C. L., & Young, P. A. 2009, ApJ, 697, 1057

Fregeau, J. M., G¨urkan, M. A., Joshi, K. J., & Rasio, F. A. 2003,

ApJ, 593, 772

Fryer, C. L. & Kalogera, V. 2001, ApJ, 554, 548
Gualandris, A., Colpi, M., Portegies Zwart, S., & Possenti, A.

2005, ApJ, 618, 845

G¨urkan, M. A., Freitag, M., & Rasio, F. A. 2004, ApJ, 604, 632
H´enon, M. H. 1971, Ap&SS, 14, 151
Heggie, D. & Hut, P. 2003, The Gravitational Million-Body

Problem: A Multidisciplinary Approach to Star Cluster
Dynamics

Heggie, D. C. 1975, MNRAS, 173, 729
Hurley, J. R., Pols, O. R., & Tout, C. A. 2000, MNRAS, 315, 543
Hurley, J. R., Tout, C. A., & Pols, O. R. 2002, MNRAS, 329, 897
Irwin, J. A., Brink, T. G., Bregman, J. N., & Roberts, T. P. 2010,

ApJ, 712, L1

Joshi, K. J., Nave, C. P., & Rasio, F. A. 2001, ApJ, 550, 691
Joshi, K. J., Rasio, F. A., & Portegies Zwart, S. 2000, ApJ, 540,

Belczynski, K., Buonanno, A., Cantiello, M., Fryer, C. L., Holz,

969

D. E., Mandel, I., Miller, M. C., & Walczak, M. 2014, ApJ,
789, 120

Belczynski, K., Dominik, M., Bulik, T., O’Shaughnessy, R., Fryer,

C., & Holz, D. E. 2010b, ApJ, 715, L138

Belczynski, K., Kalogera, V., & Bulik, T. 2002, ApJ, 572, 407
Belczynski, K., Repetto, S., Holz, D., O’Shaughnessy, R., Bulik,

T., Berti, E., Fryer, C., & Dominik, M. 2015, ArXiv e-prints

Bozzo, E., Ferrigno, C., Stevens, J., Belloni, T. M., Rodriguez, J.,

den Hartog, P. R., Papitto, A., Kreykenbohm, I., Fontani, F.,
& Gibaud, L. 2011, A&A, 535, L1

Brandt, W. N., Podsiadlowski, P., & Sigurdsson, S. 1995,

MNRAS, 277, L35

Breen, P. G. & Heggie, D. C. 2013, MNRAS, 432, 2779
Carpenter, J. M. 2000, AJ, 120, 3139
Chatterjee, S., Fregeau, J. M., Umbreit, S., & Rasio, F. A. 2010,

ApJ, 719, 915

Kalogera, V., King, A. R., & Rasio, F. A. 2004, ApJ, 601, L171
King, I. 1962, AJ, 67, 471
King, I. R. 1965, AJ, 70, 376
—. 1966, AJ, 71, 64
Kowalska-Leszczynska, I., Regimbau, T., Bulik, T., Dominik, M.,

& Belczynski, K. 2015, A&A, 574, A58

Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231
Kroupa, P. & Boily, C. M. 2002, MNRAS, 336, 1188
Kulkarni, S. R., Hut, P., & McMillan, S. 1993, Nature, 364, 421
Kundu, A., Maccarone, T. J., & Zepf, S. E. 2002, ApJ, 574, L5
Lada, C. J. & Lada, E. A. 2003, ARA&A, 41, 57
Lewin, W. H. G. & van der Klis, M. 2006, Compact Stellar X-ray

Sources

Lyne, A. G. & Lorimer, D. R. 1994, Nature, 369, 127
Maccarone, T. J., Kundu, A., Zepf, S. E., & Rhode, K. L. 2007,

Nature, 445, 183

Chatterjee, S., Rasio, F. A., Sills, A., & Glebbeek, E. 2013a, ApJ,

Mackey, A. D., Wilkinson, M. I., Davies, M. B., & Gilmore, G. F.

777, 106

2008, MNRAS, 386, 65

Chatterjee, S., Umbreit, S., Fregeau, J. M., & Rasio, F. A. 2013b,

Miller-Jones, J., Maccarone, T., Chomiuk, L., Strader, J.,

MNRAS, 429, 2881

Chernoﬀ, D. F. & Weinberg, M. D. 1990, ApJ, 351, 121
Chomiuk, L., Strader, J., Maccarone, T. J., Miller-Jones,

J. C. A., Heinke, C., Noyola, E., Seth, A. C., & Ransom, S.
2013, ApJ, 777, 69

Cordes, J. M., Romani, R. W., & Lundgren, S. C. 1993, Nature,

362, 133

de Boer, K. S., Tucholke, H.-J., & Schmidt, J. H. K. 1997, A&A,

317, L23

Bogdanov, S., Sivakoﬀ, G., & Heinke, C. 2014a, A new black
hole candidate in the globular cluster 47 Tucanae, ATNF
Proposal

Miller-Jones, J., Maccarone, T., Chomiuk, L., Strader, J.,

Sivakoﬀ, G., Heinke, C., Shishkovsky, L., & Huizenga, D.
2014b, A comprehensive ATCA survey for black holes in
southern globular clusters, ATNF Proposal

Moody, K. & Sigurdsson, S. 2009, ApJ, 690, 1370
Morscher, M., Pattabiraman, B., Rodriguez, C., Rasio, F. A., &

Dhawan, V., Mirabel, I. F., Rib´o, M., & Rodrigues, I. 2007, ApJ,

Umbreit, S. 2015, ApJ, 800, 9

668, 430

Morscher, M., Umbreit, S., Farr, W. M., & Rasio, F. A. 2013,

Dominik, M., Belczynski, K., Fryer, C., Holz, D. E., Berti, E.,

ApJ, 763, L15

Bulik, T., Mandel, I., & O’Shaughnessy, R. 2012, ApJ, 759, 52

Nelemans, G., Tauris, T. M., & van den Heuvel, E. P. J. 1999,

—. 2013, ApJ, 779, 72
Dominik, M., Berti, E., O’Shaughnessy, R., Mandel, I.,

Belczynski, K., Fryer, C., Holz, D. E., Bulik, T., & Pannarale,
F. 2015, ApJ, 806, 263

A&A, 352, L87

Noyola, E. & Gebhardt, K. 2006, AJ, 132, 447
Pattabiraman, B., Umbreit, S., Liao, W.-k., Choudhary, A.,

Kalogera, V., Memik, G., & Rasio, F. A. 2013, ApJS, 204, 15

Pejcha, O. & Thompson, T. A. 2015, ApJ, 801, 90

16

Chatterjee et al.

TABLE 1

Initial model parameters.

No.

Name

M

(105 M(cid:12))

rG

(kpc)

fb

Z

rv
(pc)

BH-formation kick
σBH
σNS

FB

High-mass Binaries

fb,high

q range

dn

d log P

IMF

range

α1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62

S
SR1Z
SR1
SR2
SR4
SR20
SIwfb0.1
SIwfb0.1rv1
F0
F1
F0.7Ms0.1
F0.7q0.6
F0.7q0.6R1
F0.7q0.6R3
K1
K2
K3
SIwfb0.1rv1K1
SIwfb0.1rv1K3
K1R1
K1R2
K1R4
K1R20
K2R1
K2R2
K2R4
K3R1
K3R2
K3R4
K3R20
K1R1Z
K2R1Z
K3R1Z
F0.7Ms0.1K1
F0.7Ms0.1K2
F0.7Ms0.1K3
F0.7q0.6K1
F0.7q0.6K2
F0.7q0.6K1R1
F0.7q0.6K1R3
F0.7q0.6K2R1
F0.7q0.6K2R3
Is
If
IsK1
IsK2
IsK3
IfK1
IfK2
IfK3
W
WK1
WK2
WK3
WF0.7q0.6
WF0.7q0.6K1
WIf
WIfK1
WIfK3
Wrv1
Wrv1K1
Wrv1K3

5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
4.9
4.9
5.2
5.6
5.5
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.2
5.2
5.2
4.9
4.9
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.5
5.5
5.5
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6
3.6
16.1
3.6
3.6
3.6
16.1
16.1
16.1
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.6
5.6
16.1
16.1
16.1
5.0
5.0
5.0

8
8
1
2
4
20
8
8
8
8
8
8
1
3
8
8
8
8
8
1
2
4
20
1
2
4
1
2
4
20
1
1
1
8
8
8
8
8
1
3
1
3
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8

0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.1
0.1
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.1
0.1
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.1
0.1
0.1

0.001
0.001
0.02
0.007
0.003
0.0003
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.02
0.007
0.003
0.0003

0.02
0.007
0.003
0.02
0.007
0.003
0.0003
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.1
0.01

1

0.01

1
1
1
1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

1
0.1
0.01

1
0.1
0.01

1
0.1
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

1
1
1
0.1
0.01

1
0.1
0.01

1
1
0.1
0.01

1
1
1
1

0.01

1
1

0.01

y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
y
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
y
n
n
n
y
n
y
n
n
y
n
n

0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05

0
1
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.7
0.7
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.1
0.1
0.1

[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]

-

P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
-
P 0

[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1] P −0.55
P −0.55
P −0.55
P −0.55

[0.6, 1]
[0.6, 1]
[0.6, 1]

P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0

[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1] P −0.55
[0.1/mp, 1] P −0.55
[0.1/mp, 1] P −0.55
P −0.55
P −0.55
P −0.55
P −0.55
P −0.55
P −0.55

[0.6, 1]
[0.6, 1]
[0.6, 1]
[0.6, 1]
[0.6, 1]
[0.6, 1]

[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]

[0.6, 1]
[0.6, 1]

[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]
[0.1/mp, 1]

P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0

P −0.55
P −0.55

P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0
P 0

[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.08, 150]
[0.08, 150]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.08, 150]
[0.08, 150]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.1, 100]
[0.08, 150]
[0.08, 150]
[0.08, 150]

2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
3.0
1.6
3.0
3.0
3.0
1.6
1.6
1.6
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
1.6
1.6
1.6
2.3
2.3
2.3

Note. — Each model initially has N = 8 × 105 stars. Column FB denotes whether or not natal kicks for BHs are dependent on fallback.

α1 denotes the magnitude of the power-law exponent for stars of initial mass > 1 M(cid:12). q-distribution is always uniform.

Binary Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters

17

Final structural properties of model clusters.

TABLE 2

No.

t

(Gyr)

N

(104)

M

(104M(cid:12))

fb

fb,c

rc

rc,obs

rh

rhl,obs

(pc)

ρc

(103M(cid:12)/pc3)

Σc,obs

(103L(cid:12)/pc2)

vσ,c

vσ,c,obs

(km s−1)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62

12.0
≈ 5
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
≈ 4
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
≈ 4
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
≈ 2
12.0
12.0
12.0
< 0.1
≈ 3
≈ 2
12.0
11.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
≈ 0.6
12.0
≈ 0.4
12.0
12.0
12.0

71

24
55
68
73
76
71
71
73
73
73

63
77
76
70
69
69
30
66
74
77
24
63
73
12
53
67
73
28
20

77
76
73
78
76
26
71
7
69
71

74
72
71

69
77
74
63
69
77

60

67
64
65

26

12
21
25
27
26
25
26
27
27
27

24
28
27
26
23
24
14
25
27
28
12
24
26
6
21
24
27
13
10

28
28
27
28
28
12
26
4
26
25

25
25
25

25
28
27
24
26
28

24

23
22
23

0.05

0.05

2.90

3.06

7.89

5.55

Dissolved

0.06
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.09
0.09
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04

0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.08
0.09
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.07
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.06

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.04
0.07
0.04
0.04

0.04
0.04
0.04

0.05
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.04

0.13
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.12
0.14
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05

0.05
0.11
0.07
0.05
0.13
0.12
0.14
0.12
0.11
0.10
0.13
0.07
0.07
0.12
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.12
0.09

0.09
0.06
0.05
0.09
0.06
0.13
0.09
0.09
0.06
0.09

0.07
0.08
0.10

0.05
0.10
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.09

0.64
2.52
2.83
3.07
1.89
0.83
3.20
2.51
3.15
3.05

3.05
0.36
2.00
3.09
0.32
1.41
0.20
0.37
0.55
0.32
0.65
1.70
2.06
0.77
2.45
2.80
3.30
0.18
1.02

0.59
2.22
3.09
0.71
2.45
0.20
0.68
0.92
2.23
0.29

0.21
0.20
0.36

3.58
0.56
2.50
3.96
3.64
0.76

0.40
2.86
2.59
4.22
1.12
1.12
2.63
3.34
2.81
5.07

2.24
0.22
1.42
3.73
0.22
1.12
0.17
0.05
0.25
0.26
0.48
1.28
1.74
1.11
2.06
3.99
2.28
0.14
1.44

0.31
1.39
2.26
0.36
1.89
0.31
0.59
0.73
1.20
0.13

0.18
0.14
0.10

4.72
0.26
1.57
7.76
2.20
0.56

2.80
6.12
7.16
8.54
5.65
4.29
7.82
7.71
7.77
8.12

1.41
4.01
4.73
6.24
3.27
3.27
5.50
5.39
5.44
5.73

Dissolved

7.54
4.98
5.71
8.20
4.56
5.00
3.05
4.54
4.93
5.07
2.78
4.91
5.67
2.82
6.27
7.36
8.63
2.77
2.89

5.25
2.47
3.48
5.90
2.17
2.90
1.30
2.02
2.26
2.67
1.36
2.75
3.31
1.87
4.19
5.06
6.26
1.52
1.92

Dissolved

5.08
6.00
7.85
5.18
6.47
2.73
4.87
2.48
5.85
4.28

2.63
3.74
5.45
2.66
4.20
1.53
2.55
1.78
3.76
1.68

Dissolved

4.63
4.46
4.14

2.06
1.97
1.61

Dissolved
Dissolved
Dissolved

8.57
4.73
6.28
10.55
8.38
5.09

6.17
2.31
4.07
7.95
5.90
2.61

Dissolved

0.04

0.04

13.95

35.76

21.29

16.29

Dissolved

0.09
0.09
0.09

0.12
0.13
0.11

1.86
0.36
2.42

1.16
0.14
1.46

5.33
3.56
6.50

3.15
1.61
4.24

17.8

44.0
9.1
12.3
21.8
7.5
28.7
3.2

121.1

5.6
20.6

14.0
275.1

8.3
9.1

371.1
68.7
678.2
226.6
96.1
384.3
36.8
4.4
3.9
79.3
17.0
15.5
5.0

1124.2

13.9

68.2
3.2
7.3
42.6
6.7

616.9
58.7
10.8
8.3

384.7

966.6
1107.9
286.1

3.7
89.7
2.6
10.4
2.4
34.4

0.0

5.7

647.6

5.7

1.9

31.5
2.2
2.0
1.5
9.2
9.2
2.2
1.9
2.4
1.4

2.4

126.6

7.6
1.3

121.3
122.9
126.0
2121.9

88.4
92.7
35.0
8.2
5.2
5.3
2.9
1.5
2.4

205.1

8.1

66.2
7.9
2.9
58.2
4.4
55.7
26.9
6.4
8.4

335.5

175.1
260.7
646.3

1.1

112.1

5.8
0.5
2.4
35.1

0.1

10.7
9.2

253.7

9.8

10.9
9.8
9.9
9.7
11.5
13.6
9.9
9.8
10.0
9.7

9.2
14.2
11.7
9.7
14.9
12.1
12.0
13.5
13.5
14.7
11.0
11.7
11.5
7.7
9.5
9.7
9.8
13.7
9.7

13.4
11.4
10.0
13.1
11.0
12.4
13.1
7.0
11.0
15.4

13.5
13.8
15.7

9.3
14.5
11.0
8.2
9.4
13.3

4.8

11.4
17.0
10.3

3.40

4.26
3.32
3.46
3.30
4.37
5.30
3.46
3.46
3.47
3.24

3.23
6.08
4.38
3.30
6.41
4.64
4.92
5.57
5.58
6.42
4.26
4.35
4.19
2.79
3.32
3.30
3.45
5.78
3.39

5.61
4.25
3.53
5.42
4.00
5.01
5.31
2.49
4.05
6.67

5.85
5.93
6.83

3.10
6.06
4.05
2.58
3.31
5.49

1.34

4.36
7.27
3.79

Note. — Serial numbers for models are the same as in Table 1. Observed structural properties are denoted by the subscript “obs.”

Deﬁnitions for observed properties are explained in §3. The approximate dissolution times (§3.2) are listed for dissolved clusters.

18

Chatterjee et al.

TABLE 3

Properties of Black Holes.

No. NBH NBH,esc NBH−BH NBH−BH,esc NBH−nBH NBH−nBH,esc

Nmerge

z < 1

z < 2

in

out

in

out

Mtot

z < 1

z < 2

(M(cid:12))

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62

464
601
165
327
393
579
139
49
458
467
437
503
686
462

6

241
759

1

282

0
3
3
3

132
179
239
398
561
661
741

1

125
881
18
279
673
31
338
13
31
176
315

1

1430

0
0
4
61

1452
1557
393

1

165
653
310
21

1500

39

1917

54
1

289

1260
1001
1259
1213
1227
1200
1318
1458
1265
1286
1298
1367
1083
1346
1757
1465
967
1521
1218
1512
1637
1689
1797
1219
1345
1358
980
972
944
1046
1752
1418
671
1732
1432
1020
1794
1498
1723
1795
1422
1449
165
5377
169
165
164

19012
7774
2502
1341
1764
1563
1068
1761
1916
8638
19134
3554
1469
1519
1237

4
2
4
4
3
4
4
6
5
3
4
2
3
3
1
3
3
0
4
0
1
1
0
2
2
5
4
4
2
7
0
3
3
2
3
3
2
3
0
3
2
5
0
2
0
0
1
0
5
4
2
0
3
1
3
1
9
0
11
1
0
3

130
97
65
132
131
146
65
103
130
156
153
159
116
151

1
89
138

0

172

2
0
2
2
69
80
75
141
141
130
145

2
81
94
20
158
190
25
215
30
28
214
208
13
185

0
9
24
30
148
202
139

1

103
162
282
51
248
43
322
141

1

175

2
1
10
2
1
1
4
4
4
1
1
2
3
4
2
2
5
1
6
0
0
0
1
9
3
1
3
3
3
1
1
1
3
5
6
3
4
3
5
5
0
6
1
5
0
0
0
0
4
4
3
1
1
2
3
5
2
17
4
3
1
7

5
2
5
1
3
6
0
11
2
37
29
23
30
32
3
0
2
1
11
3
2
7
7
6
2
3
4
1
1
5
6
4
1
41
17
13
52
18
57
61
17
14
2
25
1
2
3
45
10
9
10
12
3
2

103
160
75
143
13
7
25
10

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0

32
17
37
42
40
45
22
32
35
39
32
42
21
44
0
25
50
0
52
0
0
0
0
41
25
27
75
53
48
43
0
36
20
3
17
46
5
32
7
3
26
34
2
38
0
1
4
0
48
38
36
0
29
31
24
1
28
0
14
33
0
31

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
3
0

63
46
59
83
77
80
46
55
66
68
64
66
56
75
0
49
71
0

102

0
0
0
0
62
54
49
118
89
79
76
0
51
51
3
37
74
5
55
7
3
49
65
4

105

0
5
12
0
78
106
69
0
52
59
55
2
94
0

117
59
1
69

33.247.6
23.8
34.746.7
27.5
19.821.0
8.8
26.730.5
21.8
30.737.4
24.0
32.044.9
23.6
29.437.2
20.0
21.634.7
15.7
32.946.9
26.7
35.448.3
23.5
35.847.8
25.9
35.750.8
26.9
38.247.1
25.2
32.150.9
24.8
0.00.0
0.0
28.145.6
20.1
34.949.5
24.6
26.926.9
26.9
19.629.6
13.4
0.00.0
0.0
11.611.6
11.6
0.00.0
0.0
37.537.5
37.5
16.121.0
10.7
25.630.7
19.0
27.537.4
19.3
16.020.0
12.0
26.731.4
20.0
29.036.9
21.9
30.348.0
23.7
0.00.0
0.0
27.948.0
19.3
36.248.0
27.1
23.335.9
16.9
30.044.1
23.5
36.350.9
23.5
22.926.3
16.3
29.741.3
21.2
19.621.9
13.2
23.725.9
22.6
26.943.2
9.5
25.446.9
19.3
25.928.3
23.5
50.053.3
21.8
0.00.0
0.0
26.026.9
25.0
19.124.7
15.7
0.00.0
0.0
49.253.8
18.2
49.954.4
46.0
44.355.3
32.0
0.00.0
0.0
43.163.3
32.0
49.757.2
40.2
48.054.2
36.4
60.260.2
60.2
54.656.4
19.1
0.00.0
0.0
77.482.0
35.1
33.645.7
30.3
68.374.6
59.7
34.343.0
24.3

44.249.3
24.8
44.449.1
28.5
19.921.5
10.4
28.731.9
22.4
31.537.4
24.0
36.750.5
24.0
32.238.6
21.5
24.936.1
15.7
40.849.7
27.2
42.350.5
21.2
41.850.7
26.3
37.751.9
23.9
41.050.8
23.0
39.552.0
24.3
0.00.0
0.0
35.449.7
20.4
40.550.2
24.7
26.926.9
26.9
22.835.1
14.1
0.00.0
0.0
11.611.6
11.6
0.00.0
0.0
37.537.5
37.5
17.621.3
11.3
27.031.5
20.0
31.437.5
19.2
17.120.3
12.1
27.431.5
21.8
31.237.4
22.7
39.849.5
24.0
0.00.0
0.0
30.048.6
19.7
43.650.9
27.7
23.335.9
16.9
38.151.1
23.6
40.551.1
23.7
22.926.3
16.3
32.450.8
18.4
19.621.9
13.2
23.725.9
22.6
28.346.2
11.0
29.049.6
19.0
33.146.7
23.7
50.053.4
23.7
0.00.0
0.0
39.449.3
25.2
23.747.9
15.8
0.00.0
0.0
49.653.9
19.9
50.054.5
43.4
49.355.4
32.2
0.00.0
0.0
48.658.0
33.1
51.058.7
40.5
49.774.9
27.3
67.674.6
60.6
54.857.6
23.0
0.00.0
0.0
71.084.7
19.8
36.251.4
30.4
71.679.5
59.9
36.248.3
27.5

Note. — Serial numbers for models are the same as in Table 1. Columns “in” and “out” denote BH-BH mergers inside and
outside clusters. Number of BH-BH mergers and their total masses in the source frame are listed for z < 1 and z < 2 assuming
z = 0 ≡ t = 12 Gyr. The median and 2σ ranges in total mass are listed.

Binary Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters

19

Pooley, D., Lewin, W. H. G., Anderson, S. F., Baumgardt, H.,

Strader, J., Chomiuk, L., Maccarone, T. J., Miller-Jones,

Filippenko, A. V., Gaensler, B. M., Homer, L., Hut, P., Kaspi,
V. M., Makino, J., Margon, B., McMillan, S., Portegies Zwart,
S., van der Klis, M., & Verbunt, F. 2003, ApJ, 591, L131

Porras, A., Christopher, M., Allen, L., Di Francesco, J., Megeath,

S. T., & Myers, P. C. 2003, AJ, 126, 1916

Portegies Zwart, S. F. & McMillan, S. L. W. 2000, ApJ, 528, L17
Portegies Zwart, S. F., McMillan, S. L. W., & Gieles, M. 2010,

J. C. A., & Seth, A. C. 2012, Nature, 490, 71

Strader, J., Miller-Jones, J., Maccarone, T., & Chomiuk, L. 2013,

The ATCA Survey for Black Holes in Southern Globular
Clusters, ATNF Proposal

Umbreit, S. 2012, Nature, 490, 46
Umbreit, S., Fregeau, J. M., Chatterjee, S., & Rasio, F. A. 2012,

ApJ, 750, 31

ARA&A, 48, 431

Van Eck, S., Jorissen, A., Udry, S., Mayor, M., & Pernier, B.

Repetto, S., Davies, M. B., & Sigurdsson, S. 2012, MNRAS, 425,

1998, A&A, 329, 971

2799

Repetto, S. & Nelemans, G. 2015, MNRAS, 453, 3341
Rodriguez, C. L., Morscher, M., Pattabiraman, B., Chatterjee, S.,

Haster, C.-J., & Rasio, F. A. 2015, Physical Review Letters,
115, 051101

Rodriguez, C. L., Chatterjee, S., & Rasio, F. A. 2016a,

arXiv:1602.02444

Rodriguez, C. L., Morscher, M., Wang, L., Chatterjee, S., Rasio,

F. A., & Spurzem, R. 2016b, arXiv:1601.04227

van Zyl, L., Charles, P. A., Arribas, S., Naylor, T., Mediavilla, E.,

& Hellier, C. 2004, MNRAS, 350, 649

Vink, J. S. 2008, New Astronomy Reviews, 52, 419
Vink, J. S., de Koter, A., & Lamers, H. J. G. L. M. 2001, A&A,

369, 574

Wang, C., Lai, D., & Han, J. L. 2006, ApJ, 639, 1007
Willems, B., Henninger, M., Levin, T., Ivanova, N., Kalogera, V.,
McGhee, K., Timmes, F. X., & Fryer, C. L. 2005, ApJ, 625, 324
Wong, T.-W., Valsecchi, F., Ansari, A., Fragos, T., Glebbeek, E.,

Sana, H., de Mink, S. E., de Koter, A., Langer, N., Evans, C. J.,

Kalogera, V., & McClintock, J. 2014, ApJ, 790, 119

Gieles, M., Gosset, E., Izzard, R. G., Le Bouquin, J.-B., &
Schneider, F. R. N. 2012, Science, 337, 444

Sigurdsson, S. & Hernquist, L. 1993, Nature, 364, 423
Spera, M., Mapelli, M., & Bressan, A. 2015, MNRAS, 451, 4086
Spitzer, Jr., L. 1969, ApJ, 158, L139
Strader, J. 2014, A Black Hole in the Galactic Globular Cluster

M10, Chandra Proposal

Wong, T.-W., Valsecchi, F., Fragos, T., & Kalogera, V. 2012,

ApJ, 747, 111

Ziosi, B. M., Mapelli, M., Branchesi, M., & Tormen, G. 2014,

MNRAS, 441, 3703

Zuo, Z.-Y. 2015, A&A, 573, A58

