6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
h
c
e
m

-
t
a
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
8
8
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Many body localization and thermalization: insights from the entanglement spectrum

Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08544, USA

Scott D. Geraedts

Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA and

Center for Theory of Quantum Matter, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA

Rahul Nandkishore

Nicolas Regnault

Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08544, USA and

Laboratoire Pierre Aigrain, Ecole Normale Sup´erieure-PSL Research University,

CNRS, Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie-Sorbonne Universit´es,

Universit´e Paris Diderot-Sorbonne Paris Cit´e, 24 rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France

We study the entanglement spectrum in the many body localizing and thermalizing phases of
one and two dimensional Hamiltonian systems, and periodically driven ‘Floquet’ systems. We focus
on the level statistics of the entanglement spectrum as obtained through numerical diagonalization,
ﬁnding structure beyond that revealed by more limited measures such as entanglement entropy. In
the thermalizing phase the entanglement spectrum obeys level statistics governed by an appropriate
random matrix ensemble. For Hamiltonian systems this can be viewed as evidence in favor of a
strong version of the eigenstate thermalization hypothesis (ETH). Similar results are also obtained
for Floquet systems, where they constitute a result ‘beyond ETH’, and show that the corrections to
ETH governing the Floquet entanglement spectrum have statistical properties governed by a random
matrix ensemble. The particular random matrix ensemble governing the Floquet entanglement
spectrum depends on the symmetries of the Floquet drive, and therefore can depend on the choice
of origin of time. In the many body localized phase the entanglement spectrum is also found to
show level repulsion, following a semi-Poisson distribution (in contrast to the energy spectrum, which
follows a Poisson distribution). This semi-Poisson distribution is found to come mainly from states
at high entanglement energies. The observed level repulsion only occurs for interacting localized
phases. We also demonstrate that equivalent results can be obtained by calculating with a single
typical eigenstate, or by averaging over a microcanonical energy window - a surprising result in the
localized phase. This discovery of new structure in the pattern of entanglement of localized and
thermalizing phases may open up new lines of attack on many body localization, thermalization,
and the localization transition.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Recent advances in the synthesis and control of well
isolated quantum systems, and the increasing importance
of such systems as building blocks for new quantum tech-
nologies, have triggered an explosion of interest in the
statistical mechanics of closed many body quantum sys-
tems. Particular interest has centered on the question of
whether (and how) isolated many body quantum systems
go to thermal equilibrium, and on the validity of the er-
godic hypothesis. It appears that two generic behaviors
are possible for isolated quantum systems, depending on
system details. Either systems can thermalize, with lo-
cal observables approaching equilibrium expectation val-
ues and the ergodic hypothesis being satisﬁed, or they
can localize, displaying non-ergodic behavior and failing
to reach thermal equilibrium even at inﬁnite times [1].
Thermalizing systems have been largely studied through
the lens of the Eigenstate Thermalization Hypothesis
(ETH) [2–4], which explains how equilibrium statistical
mechanics can continue to hold in an isolated quantum
system. The ETH is violated by many body localized
systems, which exhibit a wealth of non-equilibrium phe-
nomena, including an emergent integrability [5, 6], exotic

quantum phases with no analog in equilibrium [7–12], a
non-local response to local perturbations [13], and un-
usual scaling of response functions [14]. An understand-
ing is rapidly emerging of when systems can [15–20] or
can not [21–24] be localized, but our understanding of the
localized and delocalized phases themselves, as well as the
transition between them, remains a work in progress.

Ideas from quantum information have played a cen-
tral role in the developing understanding of localization
and thermalization. Particularly fruitful has been the
notion of quantum entanglement, as characterized by en-
tanglement entropy. Many body eigenstates of thermaliz-
ing systems exhibit an entanglement entropy that scales
with the volume of the subregion being considered, while
many body eigenstates of many body localized systems
display a boundary law scaling (with possible logarithmic
corrections). The study of entanglement entropy and its
dynamics has played a crucial role in the eludication of
the properties of the localized and thermal phases. In-
deed studies of entanglement entropy [25] provided the
ﬁrst clues as to the emergent integrability of the localized
phase, and have also been used to constrain the proper-
ties of the localization transition [26]. However, entan-
glement entropy captures only a small part of the full

entanglement structure of a system. Much greater infor-
mation is contained in the entanglement spectrum [27],
from which the entanglement entropy may be extracted,
and much besides. However, studies of the localizing and
thermalizing phase have yet to exploit the wealth of in-
formation contained in the entanglement spectrum.

In this work, we track the evolution of the entan-
glement spectrum across the many body localization-
delocalization transition, and use it to extract new in-
sights into the many body localizing and thermalizing
phases. We unlock the information contained in the en-
tanglement spectrum by applying ideas from random ma-
trix theory, which provides a powerful mechanism for un-
derstanding thermalization, complementary to the ETH.
In particular, we apply diagnostics from random matrix
theory to the level statistics of entanglement spectra.
Previous investigations of level statistics [19] focused on
the energy spectrum. While a recent work [28] did exam-
ine the entanglement spectrum, it focused mostly on the
density of states distribution, and on the thermal phase
of Hamiltonian systems. We focus instead on the level
statistics, and examine both the thermal and the many
body localized phase, in both Hamiltonian and Floquet
systems. The structure revealed, including remnants of
criticality in the entanglement structure deep in the lo-
calized phase, and features beyond ETH in the entangle-
ment structure of thermal states, have never before been
seen, as far as we are aware.

This work is structured as follows. We begin by in-
vestigating the entanglement structure across the many
body localization transition in Hamiltonian systems (i.e.
systems with a conserved energy). Performing numeri-
cal exact diagonalization on a spin-1/2 Heisenberg chain
in external ﬁeld (the canonical model for studies of the
transition), we ﬁnd that in the thermal phase, the entan-
glement spectrum exhibits level statistics that match the
predictions of random matrix theory, and are governed
by the same random matrix ensemble as the energy spec-
trum. This may be viewed as evidence in support of a
particularly strong version of the ETH [29], insofar as
the usual formulation of the ETH predicts that the en-
tanglement spectrum of a small subregion should obey
the same level statistics as the energy spectrum [30], but
we observe this to be true even for subregions that are
half the size of the system. The level statistics of the
entanglement spectrum are found to be independent of
the choice of eigenstate.

Next, we consider the entanglement spectrum in the
localized phase. We discover that in the localized phase,
the entanglement spectrum diﬀers substantially from the
energy spectrum, and ﬁts to a semi-Poisson form that
is generally considered indicative of criticality [31]. This
‘critical’ structure in the entanglement spectrum (and in
particular the existence of entanglement level repulsion
even deep in the localized phase where the energy spec-
trum shows no level repulsion) constitutes a new and
unexpected property of the localized phase. The statis-
tical properties of the entanglement spectrum appear to

2

be a universal feature that varies only slowly from one
eigenstate to the next, such that microcanonical aver-
ages of level statistics parameters give equivalent results
to calculations with single eigenstates, even though there
is no ETH given reason for this to be true in the localized
phase.

A detailed analysis of the entanglement spectrum re-
veals that these signatures of criticality in the entangle-
ment structure are restricted to states at high entan-
glement energies, with the region of the entanglement
spectrum at low entanglement energy showing no signs
of entanglement level repulsion. Since entanglement en-
tropy and Renyi entropies are dominated by low entan-
glement energies, the residual criticality in the entangle-
ment structure is likely invisible to these entropy mea-
sures, and could only have been revealed by an inves-
tigation of the full entanglement spectrum, explaining
why this structure has never before been observed. We
develop a picture whereby at the critical point, the en-
tire entanglement spectrum is critical, but as the system
moves into the localized phase, the low entanglement en-
ergies become non-critical, erasing all signatures of crit-
icality in standard diagnostics such as entanglement en-
tropy. However, the high entanglement energy region of
the spectrum ‘sticks’ at criticality, such that the entan-
glement structure of eigenstates continues to contain a
memory of criticality, albeit one inaccessible to entropy
measures.

We conjecture an explanation for the residual critical-
ity of the entanglement structure deep in the localized
phase as being due to many body resonances. This ex-
planation predicts that the observed residual criticality
is a consequence of the interacting nature of the many
body localized phase, and would be absent in the non-
interacting Anderson insulator. A numerical investiga-
tion of XXZ spin chains provides strong numerical sup-
port for this scenario, uncovering a new and hitherto
unsuspected distinction between the entanglement struc-
ture of single particle and many body localized eigen-
states.

We note that semi-Poisson statistics are a known di-
agnostic of pseudo-integrability [32, 33], and our results
this suggest that while the entanglement Hamiltonian of
a non-interacting Anderson insulator will be integrable,
the entanglement Hamiltonian of a many body localized
system will be only pseudo-integrable (i.e. not chaotic
but also not integrable). This observation may open new
lines of attack on the many body localized phase.

The investigation in the ﬁrst part of the paper worked
with the ‘canonical’ model of a one dimensional spin
chain. Next, we study the evolution of the entan-
glement spectrum across the many body localization-
delocalization transition in a two dimensional model, of
a transverse ﬁeld Ising spin chain. Again, we observe
that the level splittings in the thermal phase follow pre-
dictions of random matrix theory. Since this two di-
mensional model can thermalize even in the absence of
disorder (whereas the canonical one dimensional mod-

els are integrable in the absence of disorder), we can
conﬁrm that the observed level statistics of the entan-
glement spectrum are purely a property of thermalizing
states, and do not depend on the presence or absence
of disorder. Upon turning on disorder (in the form of
random magnetic ﬁelds) and driving the system across
the localization transition, we ﬁnd that the entanglement
spectrum evolves in precisely the same way as in one di-
mensional systems, displaying semi-Poisson level statis-
tics and residual criticality deep into the localized phase.
This provides strong numerical evidence that the entan-
glement structure of higher dimensional many body lo-
calized phases is analogous to one dimensional localized
phases. We believe this is the ﬁrst systematic study of
the entanglement structure across the many body local-
ization transition in d > 1.

In the ﬁnal section of the paper, we track the evolution
of the entanglement spectrum across the many body lo-
calization transition in periodically driven ‘Floquet’ sys-
tems. Floquet systems, due to the lack of energy con-
servation constraints, provide a particularly interesting
playground for investigating questions of localization and
thermalization, as well as providing a potential new uni-
versality class for the transition. We ﬁnd that the entan-
glement spectrum in the Floquet localized phase univer-
sally obeys semi-Poisson statistics and displays residual
criticality, much as in Hamiltonian systems. However,
we ﬁnd more unexpected features in the entanglement
spectrum of the Floquet thermalizing phase.

The level statistics of the spectrum of Floquet eigen-
phases (the Floquet analog of the energy spectrum) have
previously been studied, e.g.
in [34–36], where it was
found that in the thermalizing phase Floquet eigenphase
spectra obey predictions of random matrix theory, albeit
potentially governed by a diﬀerent ensemble to the in-
stantaneous Hamiltonian [35]. However, unlike in Hamil-
tonian systems, the entanglement spectrum is unrelated
to the eigenphase spectrum by ETH. This is because
ETH relates the entanglement Hamiltonian to βH, where
H is the actual Hamiltonian, but Floquet systems ther-
malize to inﬁnite temperatures β = 0, such that ETH
is totally non-predictive where the entanglement spec-
trum is concerned. Indeed, the entanglement spectrum
is dominated by corrections to ETH, and thus provides a
powerful probe of thermalization beyond ETH.

We ﬁnd that the entanglement spectrum in the Floquet
thermal phase continues to exhibit level statistics charac-
teristic of random matrix theory, indicating that random
matrix theory is a more powerful tool for the study of
thermalization than ETH alone. However, the random
matrix ensemble governing the entanglement spectrum
of a Floquet system may not be the same as the ran-
dom matrix ensemble governing the spectrum of Floquet
eigenphases. Moreover, the entanglement spectrum of
Floquet systems is sensitive to symmetries of the entire
Floquet drive, and the governing random matrix ensem-
ble can depend on the choice of the origin of time. This
indicates that the entanglement structure of the Floquet

3

‘Bloch’ states changes over the period of the drive, such
that the entanglement spectrum depends on when in the
drive period we choose to probe the system. We dis-
cuss how one may deduce the random matrix ensemble
that will govern the entanglement spectrum of a Floquet
thermalizing system.

In conclusion, our numerical investigation reveals new
and hitherto unsuspected entanglement structure in both
the localized and thermalizing phase. This structure is
invisible to entropy measures, and is revealed only by
applying ideas from random matrix theory to the level
statistics of the full entanglement spectrum. Key (and
universal) properties include a residual criticality in the
entanglement structure deep in the localized phase, which
is absent in the Anderson insulator, the lack of depen-
dence of the results on dimensionality, the equivalence
of microcanonical averages of entanglement level statis-
tics parameters to single eigenstate calculations even in
the localized phase, and the continuing applicability of
random matrix theory to the entanglement spectrum of
Floquet thermalizing systems (albeit in a ‘gauge depen-
dent manner’ that is sensitive to the origin of time), even
when such applicability is not guaranteed by ETH.

II. ENERGY SPECTRUM STATISTICS IN A

ONE DIMENSIONAL SPIN CHAIN

A. The model

Before we present our results on entanglement spec-
trum statistics, we ﬁrst review the statistics of the energy
levels. For more detail one can consult an earlier study
[35] of the localization-delocalization transition, which
contains similar results. We begin our investigation by
considering the canonical model for numerical studies of
many body localization and thermalization: a one dimen-
sional system of N spins-1/2. We choose to work with
the Heisenberg Hamiltonian with a random anisotropic
ﬁeld and periodic boundary conditions

(cid:34)

(cid:88)

H ({hα}) =

N(cid:88)

(cid:2)Sα

J

i Sα

i+1

(cid:3) + hα

N(cid:88)

(cid:35)

cα,iSα
i

(1)

α=x,y,z

i=1

i=1

2 σα

i = 1

i and σα is a Pauli matrix. The co-
where Sα
eﬃcients cα,i are uncorrelated and chosen according to
a uniform distribution within the interval [−1, 1]. The
amplitude of the random ﬁeld is set through the hα. In
the following, we set J = 1. Unlike the canonical model
widely used in the literature [19], we do not assume that
the random ﬁeld is necessarily uniaxial. Relaxing this as-
sumption allows us to access a wider range of regimes. If
we take hz = h, this corresponds to the canonical model
with uniaxial random ﬁeld [19], which displays a many
body localized phase (with Poisson energy level statis-
tics) for large h >∼ 3.5, and a thermalizing phase with
Gaussian orthogonal ensemble (GOE) level statistics in a
sector with ﬁxed total Sz for small h[19]. Note that the

level statistics are GOE even though the time reversal
symmetry is broken by the ﬁeld because of the presence
of a disguised antiunitary symmetry, made up of time re-
versal and a rotation by π of all spins about the x axis,
which leaves the Hamiltonian unchanged.

In this work we often ﬁnd it convenient to work with
a system without ﬁxed total Sz. We therefore consider
a system where two components of the ﬁeld are non-zero
(e.g. hx (cid:54)= 0, hz (cid:54)= 0, hy = 0). Here too the level
statistics are described by GOE, for small ﬁelds when
the system thermalizes. The relevant antiunitary sym-
metry is now time reversal plus a π rotation about the y
axis (i.e. Sx → Sx, Sy → −Sy, Sz → Sz), which leaves
the Hamiltonian unchanged[37, 38]. Once all three ﬁelds
are non-zero however there is no longer any such antiuni-
tary symmetry, and the level statistics in the thermaliz-
ing phase are described by the Gaussian unitary ensemble
(GUE), and the many body localization transition is as-
sociated with a change in the level statistics from Poisson
to GUE, instead of Poisson to GOE as in the canonical
model.

√

In a previous work [35] we have found that for the
model with hx = hz = h, hy = 0, the transition from
thermal to localized energy level statistics occurs around
h (cid:39) 3 (i.e. hc
2 ≈ 4.2), while when hx = hy = hz = h
3 ≈ 4.3). Thus a lo-
the transition is at h (cid:39) 2.5 (i.e. hc
calized and thermalizing phase exist in both the orthog-
onal class without Sz conservation, and in the unitary
symmetry class, and there does not appear to be any sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence in the total disorder strength for the
phase transition.

√

4

FIG. 1. Results from numerical exact diagonalization on the
one dimensional spin chain (Eq.1) showing density of states
(a) and level statistics (b) for a system of N = 14 spins for
hx = hz = 0.25 and hy = 0 corresponding to GOE (blue
dots) or hx = hz = hy = 0.25 corresponding to GUE (red
dots). Even without any average over disorder, we clearly
see the good agreement between energy level statistics in the
thermal phase and the predictions of random matrix theory
for the appropriate ensemble (solid lines). The level statistics
clearly diﬀer from the Poisson distribution (brown line). We
also show in the left panel the region of the spectrum (shaded
area) that we will consider for the entanglement spectrum
analysis (we average over the states in the middle third of the
spectrum).

orthogonal or unitary symmetry class.

B. Energy level statistics across the many body

localization transition

In Figs. 1a and 1b we give the density of states and
the level statistics (distribution of spacing between lev-
els) for two systems, one in the orthogonal symmetry
class without Sz conservation (setting hx = hz = h and
hy = 0) and one in the unitary symmetry class (using
hx = hy = hz = h). We choose a value of h such that
the system is in the thermalized phase. A similar study
was performed in Ref. [35], but here we study larger sizes
(N = 14 for Fig.1). We also present data for a single re-
alization of the disorder. Thus we do not perform any
average over disorder. Despite looking at a single sys-
tem with a relatively small number of spins, we clearly
observe the level statistics follow predictions of random
matrix theory for the appropriate ensemble. The data in-
corporates the full energy spectrum (not just the middle
of the band) using the usual unfolding procedure [37].

The energy spectrum of a typical sample deep in the
localized phase is summarized in Figs. 2a and 2b, which
show the density of states and the level statistics when
hx = hz = 12 and either hy = 0 or hy = 12. We clearly
observe that the level spacing follows the Poisson distri-
bution, irrespective of whether the Hamiltonian is in the

FIG. 2. Density of states (a) and level statistics (b) for a sys-
tem of N = 14 spins for hx = hz = 12 and hy = 0 correspond-
ing to the orthogonal class (black dots) or hx = hz = hy = 12
corresponding to the unitary class (red dots). Even without
any average over disorder, we clearly see the good agreement
with the Poisson distribution (blue line). We also show in
the left panel the region of the spectrum (shaded area) that
we will consider for the entanglement spectrum analysis (we
average over the middle third of states).

III. ENTANGLEMENT SPECTRUM IN THE

THERMALIZING PHASE

We now come to the main focus of this work: the study
of the entanglement spectrum. We begin by studying
the entanglement spectrum in the thermalizing phase.
We discover that the entanglement spectrum follows the
predictions of random matrix theory, and is in the same
symmetry class as the energy spectrum. This can be

86420246E0.000.050.100.150.200.25ρ(E)a)012345s0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(s)b)GOE predictionGUE predictionPoisson distributionH orthogonalH unitary80604020020406080E0.0000.0050.0100.0150.0200.025ρ(E)a)012345s0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(s)b)GOE predictionGUE predictionPoisson distributionH orthogonalH unitaryviewed as evidence for a particularly strong version of
the ETH, as we shall discuss.

The entanglement spectrum of an eigenstate can be
deﬁned as follows[27]: we ﬁrst consider a system pre-
pared in an eigenstate |ψ(cid:105). We then cut the system
into two subregions A and B. Unless otherwise speciﬁed,
we always consider the ‘standard entanglement cut’ that
partitions the system (of N spins) into two equal subre-
gions containing N/2 spins each i.e. we cut the system
in half. We then construct the reduced density matrix
ρA(ψ) = Tr B|ψ(cid:105)(cid:104)ψ|. Taking the log of the reduced den-
sity matrix then deﬁnes the entanglement Hamiltonian
Hent(ψ, A) for that eigenstate and cut i.e.

Hent(ψ, A) = − ln ρA(ψ) = − ln(Tr B|ψ(cid:105)(cid:104)ψ|)

(2)

The entanglement spectrum is the spectrum of this en-
tanglement Hamiltonian that we denote ξi.

While conceptually clean, the above deﬁnition is not
the most convenient for numerical work.
Indeed, it is
instead more convenient to consider the Schmidt decom-
position of an eigenstate |ψ(cid:105) into two subregions A and
B i.e.

(cid:88)

|ψ(cid:105) =

e−ξi/2|A : i(cid:105) ⊗ |B : i(cid:105)

(3)

i

where the |A : i(cid:105) states (resp. |B : i(cid:105)) form an orthonor-
mal basis restricted to the region A (resp. B). Note that
|A : i(cid:105) are also the eigenstates of the entanglement Hamil-
tonian Hent(ψ, A). The Schmidt decomposition is ob-
tained through singular value decomposition and it pro-
vides better numerical accuracy for the ξi’s, an important
advantage when analyzing the high entanglement energy
features of the entanglement spectrum.

When studying the entanglement spectrum, we must
decide ﬁrst how to calculate entanglement statistics, since
every many body eigenstate has its own entanglement
spectrum, and the number of many body eigenstates is
exponentially large in system size even for a single dis-
order realization. One possible approach is to study the
entanglement spectrum for a single typical eigenstate. A
drawback of this approach is that the number of entan-
glement energies per entanglement spectrum is at most
2N/2. Therefore we will need to study fairly large sizes
to extract useful data, and even then the small number
of entanglement energies will mean that we incur a large
statistical error.

We can reduce these problems by averaging many en-
tanglement spectra corresponding to diﬀerent eigenstates
of the same Hamiltonian. This will allows us to get better
statistics even though we are limited to small systems. In
the ETH phase we expect that every eigenstate should
have the properties of the Hamiltonian [30], and therefore
this averaging should not distort our data. Sorting the
energies from the smallest to the largest {Ei, Ei ≤ Ei+1},
we consider all states between two indices imin and imax.
These latest are chosen such that we cover a large frac-
tion of spectrum bulk while corresponding to an almost

5

FIG. 3. (a) Density of states for the entanglement spectrum
in the thermalizing phase of (Eq.1) (with hx = hz = 0.25,
hy = 0) and for a variety of diﬀerent system sizes. We work
with the standard entanglement cut which cuts the system
into two equal halves. Note that the density of states has
qualitatively the same behavior whether it is extracted from
a single entanglement spectrum (N = 16, 18) or an average of
many entanglement spectra (N = 12, 14). We have obtained
qualitatively similar data for the unitary Hamiltonian. (b)
Level spacing distributions for the entanglement spectrum in
the thermal phase of Eq.1 (hx = hz = 0.25) for chains obeying
GOE (hy = 0) and GUE(hy = 0.25). We work with the stan-
dard entanglement cut that cuts the system into two equal
halves. The solid lines show the corresponding predictions
for the energy spacings distributions, and we see that there
is good agreement i.e. the level spacings of the entanglement
spectrum follow the same distribution as the level spacings of
the energy spectrum. This is true even for N = 18, where we
show data from the entanglement spectrum of a single typical
state.

constant density of states. Typically we average over all
of the states in the middle third of the spectrum follow-
ing the path trodden by [19]. In the Appendix we further
justify this choice. In Fig. 1a we shade the region that
we have considered for our calculations at N = 14. We
will verify post facto that the averaged results agree with
the results obtained from a single many body eigenstate.
We ﬁrst study the density of entanglement energies in
the orthogonal symmetry class. In Fig. 3 we show den-
sity of states for the entanglement spectrum, at several
diﬀerent system sizes. At sizes N = 12, 14, the density of
states was obtained by averaging over several thousand
states. For N = 16 and 18, the data is for only a single
state with an energy located in the bulk of the spectrum
and obtained using the shift and invert method. This
technique was introduced in the context of the ETH-
MBL transition in Ref. [39]. We see that though the
single-state data is noisier, it gives qualitatively the same
results as the averaged data. This provides evidence in
support of our averaging procedure. For the GUE case
we have obtained data for only N = 12, 14, and the den-
sity of states is very similar. Note that in the absence of a
reliable numerical library for the shift and invert method
for complex matrices, we do not provide any data for
N = 18 when hy (cid:54)= 0.

We next focus on extracting the level spacings of the
entanglement spectrum. Fig. 3 shows the distribution

0510152025ξ0.000.050.100.150.200.250.30ρES(ξ)a)N=12N=14N=16N=18012345s0.00.20.40.60.81.0PES(s)b)GOE predictionGUE predictionH orthogonal, N=14H orthogonal, N=18H unitary, N=14of these spacings. For the GOE case, we plot both the
level spacings for a single state entanglement spectrum
at N = 18, and that for the average of all states in the
shaded region of Fig. 1a at N = 14. We also show GUE
data taken at N = 14. While the density of states for
the entanglement energies barely diﬀers between the or-
thogonal and unitary classes, the situation is drastically
diﬀerent for the level statistics.
Indeed, if the Hamil-
tonian is in the orthogonal (resp. unitary) class, then
the level statistics for the entanglement energies is GOE
(resp. GUE). This is a clear example where we see that
the level statistics of the Hamiltonian are also encoded in
the entanglement spectrum. This agreement of entangle-
ment level statistics in the thermal phase with random
matrix theory predictions was also observed in [28].

The agreement between the entanglement spectrum
and the energy spectrum in the thermal phase can be
viewed as a consequence of ETH. ETH states that for a
small subregion A in a thermal state, the entanglement
Hamiltonian of Eq. 2 should be proportional to the lo-
cal Hamiltonian HA restricted to the subregion A, up to
an additive constant i.e ρA ≈ 1
Z exp(−βHA) and thus
Hent(ψ, A) = − log (ρA) ≈ βHA + log Z [30]. Here β is
an inverse temperature related to the energy density in
the corresponding eigenstate. So the entanglement spec-
trum and energy spectrum should have the same level
statistics. However, traditional ETH only applies when
the subregion A is small (strictly an inﬁnitesimal frac-
tion of the full system), whereas we are considering an
entanglement cut whereby A is half the size of the full
system. Our results can thus be viewed as evidence in
support of a particularly strong form of the ETH (see e.g.
[29]), which continues to apply even when the subregion
is comparable in size to the system itself.

IV. ENTANGLEMENT SPECTRUM IN THE

LOCALIZED PHASE

We now consider tuning up the amplitude of the ran-
dom ﬁeld in Eq. 1, thereby driving the system into the
localized phase, and track the evolution of the entangle-
ment spectrum. The analysis reveals new and hitherto
unsuspected entanglement structure in the eigenstates of
the many body localized phase, including a residual crit-
icality that persists deep into the localized phase and
appears to be a consequence of interactions.

A. Numerical results

We recall that the energy spectrum exhibits Poisson
level statistics in the localized phase, and is believed to
display semi-Poisson level statistics at the critical point
[31], but once we leave the thermal phase there is no
longer any reason to expect the entanglement spectrum
and energy spectrum to match. This expectation is
clearly borne out by numerics (see Fig. 2b), which reveal

6

entanglement spectrum distributions that are deﬁnitely
not Poisson, even though the energy spectrum is Poisson
at the corresponding disorder strength. Moreover we do
not observe any noticeable distinctions in the entangle-
ment spectrum of the localized phase depending whether
the Hamiltonian is in the orthogonal or unitary symme-
try class.

We reexamine the question of whether we can get
meaningful results by averaging entanglement spectra,
since in the localized phase there could be dramatic vari-
ations in the structure of eigenstates from one eigenstate
to the next (which [6] referred to as ‘temperature chaos’).
We address this question within the orthogonal class by
putting hy to zero. Fig. 4 shows the results. It appears
that the entanglement level splitting distribution (b) ob-
tained from averaging over a narrow energy window is
essentially the same as that obtained from a single eigen-
state, so that averaging over eigenstates appears to be an
acceptable procedure even deep in the localized phase,
if entanglement level statistics are the quantity that is
being probed. Thus we conclude that even though the
detailed structure of individual eigenstates can change
dramatically from one eigenstate to the next in the lo-
calized phase, it appears that the statistical properties
of the entanglement spectrum do not change, such that
microcanonical averages of entanglement spectrum level
statistics give essentially the same results as calculations
with a single eigenstate. Moreover, the parameters gov-
erning the statistical distribution appear to vary only
slowly across the energy band such that averaging over
a narrow energy window should be a good method for
accessing statistical properties of the entanglement spec-
trum in a numerically eﬃcient manner.

FIG. 4. Entanglement spectrum properties with the stan-
dard entanglement cut which cuts the system into two equal
halves. Data is for hx = hz = 12, and hy = 0 (orthogonal
class). a) Density of states for the entanglement spectrum in
the MBL phase (hx = hz = 12, hy = 0). Note that the den-
sity of states has qualitatively the same behavior whether it is
extracted from a single entanglement spectrum (N = 16, 18)
or an average of many entanglement spectra (N = 12, 14). b)
Entanglement level splitting distribution averaged over the
middle third of the spectrum (N = 14) of states (red dots),
and for a single eigenstate (N = 18, blue dots). We note that
averaging over a narrow energy window gives the same level
statistics as computing the spectrum for a single eigenstate.

Having established that averaging over energy eigen-

0102030405060708090ξ0.0000.0050.0100.0150.0200.0250.0300.0350.0400.045ρES(ξ)a)N=12N=14N=16N=18012345s0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9PES(s)b)N=14N=187

while the GOE (resp. GUE) distribution is obtained for
γ = 0 and α = 1 (resp. γ = 0 and α = 2). We can also try
to see if such a distribution would describe the ES level
statistics. We still only consider the case where hy =
0. We have ﬁtted the ES level statistics to Eq. 4. The
resulting values of γ and α are depicted in Fig. 6). In the
localized phase the ﬁt parameters seem quite close to the
strict semi-Poisson values α = γ = 1. This is true even
for a single realization of disorder. In the Appendix we
show data averaged over multiple realizations of disorder,
and for a variety of system sizes. Such data are also
consistent with α ≈ γ ≈ 1 in the localized phase.

FIG. 6.
(a) Evolution of the ﬁtted values of γ and α as we
tune disorder strength, for an orthogonal Hamiltonian with
hx = hz, hy = 0, with N = 14. The ﬁt is to an ES averaged
over states in the middle third of the spectrum. For each
exponent we show two curves, each corresponding to a dif-
ferent realization of disorder. There are two sources of error
in such measurement: variations between states in the same
realization of disorder (ROD), and variations between ROD.
The error bars represent the error within an ROD, while the
error between ROD can be estimated from the diﬀerences be-
tween the two curves, and is discussed in more detail in the
Appendix. (b) Same but in the unitary class hx = hy = hz.

B. Criticality in the localized phase ES comes from

high entanglement energies and is invisible to

entropy measures

We have found that in the many body localized phase,
the ES ﬁts well to a semi-Poisson form, exhibiting level
repulsion with small entanglement splittings s being sup-
pressed as sα, where α ≈ 1. Semi-Poisson statistics for
the energy spectrum are associated with multifractality
and arise at criticality [31]. The entanglement spectrum,
however, appears to show persistent criticality and mul-
tifractality deep into the localized phase. This is a major
surprise, since while it is well known that entanglement
entropy and Renyi entropies display multifractal statis-
tics at localization transitions [41, 42], no such features
have ever before been observed (or even conjectured to
exist, as far as we are aware) deep in the localized phase.
A partial understanding may be attained by a careful
consideration of the density of states in Fig. 7a for the

FIG. 5. A comparison of the ES in the localized phase (hx =
hz = 12, hy = 0 for the orthogonal Hamiltonian, hx = hy =
hz = 12 and 24 for unitary) to the semi-Poisson form P (s) ∼
s exp(−s) (i.e. α = γ = 1). The data in the orthogonal case
is the same as that in Fig. 4b. The N = 18 data is noisier
because we have not averaged over eigenstates.

states is an acceptable method of calculating entangle-
ment spectra for small systems, we now turn to a detailed
analysis of the entanglement level splittings. We note in
Fig.4b, the entanglement splittings show level repulsion
but repulsion that is weaker than would be predicted by
the Gaussian ensembles. We ﬁnd that (Fig. 5) the level
spacing distribution ﬁts beautifully to the semi-Poisson
form P (s) ∼ s exp(−s),[40] at least in the orthogonal
symmetry class. In the unitary symmetry class the data
is qualitatively similar but the ﬁt to the semi-Poisson
form is not quite as good. We note that if we go too deep
into the localized phase, we run into problems with ma-
chine precision as the Schmidt coeﬃcients are extremely
small. These machine precision issues are more severe in
the unitary class, are also why we do not show data at
larger sizes for the unitary class.

For the energy spectrum, the transition from the ther-
malizing phase to the localized phase has been recently
probed in Ref. 31 by interpolating between the GOE
distribution and the Poisson distribution. Indeed, they
have proposed to ﬁt the level statistics with the following
generalized semi-Poisson distribution

P (s) = C1(γ, α)sαe−C2(γ,α)s2−γ

(4)

(cid:16) 1+α

(2 − γ)C
1+α
2−γ
2
Γ
2−γ

(cid:17)

and C1(γ, α) =

where

C2(γ, α) =

 Γ

Γ

(cid:16) 2+α
(cid:16) 1+α

2−γ

2−γ

(cid:17)
(cid:17)

2−γ

such that the distribution satisﬁes < 1 >=< s >= 1.
The Poisson distribution corresponds to γ = 1 and α = 0,

(5)

012345s0.00.20.40.60.81.0PES(s)GOE predictionGUE predictionSemi-Poisson predictionH orthogonal, N=14H orthogonal, N=18H unitary, N=14, h=24H unitary, N=14, h=120246810121416hx=hz0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4a)H orthogonalγα05101520253035hx=hy=hz0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0b)H unitarymany-body localized regime. The density of states ex-
hibits a ‘two peak’ structure. There are a small number
of states near zero entanglement energy, and the num-
ber and location of these states is highly dependent on
the realization of disorder. In addition, there are a large
number of states above the ‘entanglement gap’(here con-
centrated around entanglement energy (cid:39) 30). This ‘two
peak structure’ is illustrated also by Fig.8.

FIG. 7. a) The density of states data plotted in Fig.4a, but
only for N = 14. There are two peaks, once around ξ = 0
(which contains only 2% of the states), and a much larger
one around ξ = 30. The red points correspond to the ‘low
entanglement energy’ part of the spectrum, where we expect
non-universal behavior is encoded, while the blue ‘high entan-
glement energy’ points have the universal distribution of level
spacings. b) Level spacing distributions for the low and high
entanglement energy states. The high entanglement energy
states follow a Semi-Poisson distribution with α = γ = 1,
while the low entanglement energy states do not.

FIG. 8. (a) Entanglement spectra for a single eigenstate in
the middle of the energy spectrum (the 8000th eigenstate in
a system with N = 14), for various values of hx = hz and
with hy = 0.
(b) Density of states for the same system,
averaged over all states in the middle third of the spectrum.
We see that most of the states are concentrated in a peak
above the entanglement gap, and this peak moves to higher
entanglement energies as disorder is increased.

An important observation is that the Semi-Poisson
statistics that we observe come entirely from the large
peak and high entanglement energies. In the smaller peak
below the entanglement gap, there are not enough states
to say anything deﬁnitive about the statistics of the en-
tanglement levels, but we do not see any signs of level

8

repulsion in these low entanglement energy states. How-
ever, as is clear from Figs. 4 and 8, since the peak above
the entanglement gap contains a much larger area, the
high entanglement energy states will dominate any mea-
sure which averages over all states. The level statistics of
the full entanglement spectrum will thus be dominated by
the states at high entanglement energy. Further evidence
is provided in Fig. 7b, where we plot the level spacing
distributions for the high (ξ > 8) and low (ξ < 8) entan-
glement energy (EE) states. The high EE states agree
well with the Semi-Poisson distribution, while the low
EE states do not show any signs of level repulsion.

Our ﬁndings conﬁrm that the signatures of ‘critical-
ity’ in the form of semi-Poisson level statistics come pre-
dominantly from states above the entanglement gap at
high entanglement energies. Since most states are lo-
cated above the entanglement gap, these high entangle-
ment energy states dominate the level statistics of the en-
tanglement spectrum. However, since entanglement en-
tropy and Renyi entropies are dominated by the states at
low entanglement energies, the signatures of critical en-
tanglement structure at high entanglement energies will
likely be essentially invisible to these entropy measures.
They might emerge as correction to the area law but
they would be diﬃcult to probe in numerical simulations
of small systems. This explains why the remnants of
criticality in the entanglement structure of many body
localized eigenstates have hitherto been overlooked. For-
tunately, these signatures are straightforwardly revealed
by an analysis of the full ES.

This analysis motivates the following understanding
for the evolution of the entanglement spectrum across
the localization-delocalization transition. Recall that the
entanglement entropy (which dominated by the low en-
tanglement energy states) is volume law in the thermal
phase and at the transition [26], but boundary law in the
localized phase. Thus, in the thermal phase, there are a
large number of states at low entanglement energy, and
they obey random matrix statistics with strong level re-
pulsion (governed by the Gaussian ensembles). At the
critical point there is still a large number of states at low
entanglement energy (a volume law worth), but these
show weaker (but non-zero) level repulsion characteris-
tic of multifractality [42], and follow a semi-Poisson dis-
tribution just like the energy spectrum. At this point,
standard entropy measures such as Von Neumann and
Renyi entropies also see multifractality. As we move into
the delocalized phase, only a small number of states (a
boundary law worth) remain at low entanglement ener-
gies, and these cease to show level repulsion. Thus, stan-
dard entropy measures cease to see any signs of criticality
or multifractlity. However, the vast majority of states (a
volume law worth) move oﬀ to high entanglement ener-
gies, and eﬀectively stick at criticality, continuing to be
governed by a semi-Poisson distribution as a signature of
multifractality, albeit a signature that is diﬃcult to see
in entropy measures, which are dominated by low entan-
glement energies.

01020304050607080ξ0.0000.0050.0100.0150.0200.0250.0300.0350.040ρES(ξ)a)012345PES(s)0.00.20.40.60.81.0b)Poisson predictionSemi-Poisson predictionξ<8ξ>80.2524612hx=hz=h010203040506070ξa)020406080s0.000.050.100.150.200.250.30PES(s)b)h=0.25h=2h=4h=6h=12Thus, signatures of criticality persist in the entangle-
ment structure of eigenstates even deep into the local-
ized phase, but they lie at high entanglement energies
(above the entanglement gap), and ﬂow oﬀ to inﬁnite en-
tanglement energy as we go deep into the localized phase
and the entanglement gap grows. This residual criticality
never disappears, even deep in the localized phase, but
it becomes diﬃcult to see in standard entropy measures,
which are dominated by low entanglement energies.

C. Critical entanglement structure as a signature

of residual many body entanglement resonances

We now propose an explanation for the persistent crit-
icality in the entanglement structure of many body lo-
calized states. The central idea is that small entangle-
ment gaps correspond to a ‘resonant’ structure in the
eigenstates, with diﬀerent Schmidt states having almost
equal weight, and such resonances should be rare in the
localized phase, leading to level repulsion of entangle-
ment energies. To make this idea quantitative we em-
ploy a gedanken experiment - consider instead of Eq.1 an
otherwise identical system, but with the bond strength
at the position of the entanglement cut set to zero i.e.
JN/2 = 0 (for a system with periodic boundary condi-
tions one would also have to set J0 = 0). The Schmidt
states |A : i(cid:105) ⊗ |B : i(cid:105) will now be energy eigenstates,
with eigenvalue Ei. Now the model of Eq.1 may be recov-
ered by turning J0 and JN/2 back on. Now the Schmidt
states are no longer energy eigenstates. When we con-
struct the energy eigenstates of Eq.1, the new eigenstates
will have some (potentially very small) overlap with all
the diﬀerent Schmidt states. The simplest ansatz is that
the overlaps scale as exp(−|E − Ei|/ζ), where ζ is some
kind of localization length. This ansatz would imply that
the entanglement energies are proportional to |E − Ei|.
However, this ansatz cannot be completely correct, since
the energies Ei will be Poisson distributed, and this logic
would imply that the entanglement energies should also
be Poisson distributed, which they are not.

We conjecture that the observed semi-Poisson statis-
tics of the entanglement spectrum can be explained by
modifying the above argument to account for many body
resonances. We modify the above ansatz to say that the
overlaps scale as exp(−|E− ˜Ei|/ζ), where ˜Ei is the energy
density of a Schmidt state |A : i(cid:105) ⊗ |B : i(cid:105) with the full
Hamiltonian i.e. ˜Ei = (cid:104)B : i| ⊗ (cid:104)A : i|H|A : i(cid:105) ⊗ |B : i(cid:105),
where H is the Hamiltonian from Eq.1. If the local oper-
ator that stitches the system back together (by turning
on J0 and JN/2) produces a resonance between two prod-
uct states |A : i(cid:105) ⊗ |B : i(cid:105) and |A : j(cid:105) ⊗ |B : j(cid:105), where a
resonance means that the matrix element between these
two states is comparable to the energy splitting between
them, then this will introduce level repulsion, with the
energy splitting | ˜Ei− ˜Ej| > |Ei−Ej| (note that mean en-
ergies of Schmidt states can exhibit level repulsion even
though the exact eigenenergies of the Hamiltonian do

9
not). The probability of small splittings ˜Ei − ˜Ej will
therefore be suppressed, and the probability of small en-
tanglement energy splittings along with it.

The probability of small entanglement splittings may
be estimated from the probability of small splittings
ω = ˜Ei − ˜Ej. In the absence of resonances, these split-
tings would follow a Poisson distribution. However, a lo-
cal operator (such as the operator that stitches together
the two subregions) will produce resonances, and for an
interacting system the density of resonances will scale as
ω−φ, where 0 < φ < 1 (Ref.[14]), with φ = 1 being the
maximum value consistent with stability of the localized
phase (and φ → 1 at the critical point). The distribution
of small splittings in the energies of Schmidt states may
then be estimated by multiplying the Poisson distribu-
tion by a suppression factor 1/ω−φ, where the suppres-
sion factor accounts for the level repulsion coming from
resonances. The distribution of entanglement splittings
will then follow a Poisson distribution multiplied by ωφ
i.e. will follow P (s) ∼ sφ exp(−s), where 0 < φ ≤ 1
and where φ → 1 at the transition. This is consistent
with our numerical results, which observe a power law
suppression of the density of small entanglement energy
splittings. Moreover, we observe that the entanglement
spectrum (more properly the high entanglement energy
part of the entanglement spectrum) saturates the bound
φ ≈ 1 (which is expected to apply at criticality), consis-
tent with our picture that the high entanglement energies
‘stick’ at criticality as we move into the localized phase.
An interesting test of this conjecture is aﬀorded by
non-interacting localized systems. In non-interacting lo-
calized systems, many body resonances are absent, and
while single particle resonances do exist, their proba-
bility scales simply as a logarithmic function of ω (i.e.
φ = 0). We therefore predict, if the above explanation is
correct, that non-interacting localized phases should ex-
hibit Poisson level statistics of their ES, with interactions
driving a transition to semi-Poisson behavior. That is,
we predict that the semi-Poisson form is a diagnostic of
the many body nature of the localized phase, and that a
non-interacting localized phase would show Poisson level
statistics for the entanglement spectrum. This conjec-
ture may be directly tested by deforming the model of
Eq1 by allowing anisotropic interactions Jx = Jy (cid:54)= Jz
i.e. considering the XXZ spin chain. For Jz = 0, we
have an XX spin chain, which can be Jordan Wigner
transformed into a quadratic fermion model. Evaluating
the ES of this non-interacting model gives the results in
Fig. 9, which shows that at Jz = 0 the entanglement
spectrum loses its level repulsion.

On turning on the interaction and considering the
generic XXZ spin chain we ﬁnd that the level repul-
sion is immediately restored. Fig. 9 shows that even
for small Jz, the entanglement spectrum follows semi-
Poisson statistics. On the small system sizes studied here
we can ﬁnd a transition from the Poisson to semi-Poisson
behavior at small Jz. The critical Jz shrink rapidly to
zero as system size is increased, so we expect that in the

thermodynamic limit the Poisson distribution is unsta-
ble even to small interactions. This conclusively demon-
strates that the level repulsion observed in the entangle-
ment spectrum is intimately tied to the interacting nature
of the localized phase, and reveals a new feature in the
entanglement structure of eigenstates that distinguishes
single particle and many body localized states.
It also
provides supporting evidence for our conjectured expla-
nation of the level repulsion as arising due to many body
resonances.

FIG. 9. Entanglement spacings for a Hamiltonian with
Jx = Jy = 1,hx = hy = 0, hz = 6, and varying Jz. This
system is always in a localized phase, but at Jz = 0 it is a
non-interacting system. We see that in this case (red sym-
bols) the entanglement spectrum does not display the level
repulsion observed elsewhere in this work, instead it seems
to follow a Poisson distribution. Data was taken for N = 16
restricted to the Sz = 0 sector, averaging over the middle
third of the energy spectrum. The blue points show that
even small interactions return the spectrum to semi-Poisson
statistics α = γ = 1.

D. Summary of results on one dimensional

Hamiltonian systems

We now summarize the key results from our study of
the ES in one dimensional Hamiltonian systems. In the
thermal phase the level statistics of the ES follow the pre-
dictions of random matrix theory (for the same ensemble
as the energy spectrum) in accordance with a strong ver-
sion of the ETH. In the localized phase, the level statistics

10

of the ES follow a semi-Poisson distribution. In both the
thermal and the localized phases, the statistical prop-
erties of the ES do not vary much from one eigenstate
to the next, so that averaging over eigenstates in a nar-
row energy window provides essentially identical results
(with lower statistical error) to calculations for a single
eigenstate.

The semi-Poisson level statistics of the ES in the lo-
calized phase are indicative of criticality in the entangle-
ment structure, which surprisingly persists deep into the
localized phase. However, these residual signatures of
criticality are diﬃcult to see in standard measures such
as entanglement entropy or Renyi entropies, since they
are absent in the low entanglement energy states which
dominate these entropy measures, and are carried instead
by the parts of the entanglement spectrum at high en-
tanglement energy. Apparently the ES evolves across the
transition as follows: at the critical point, all entangle-
ment energies follow semi-Poisson statistics, just like the
energy levels. As we move into the localized phase, the
low entanglement energy states (which dominate the en-
tropy measures) cease to show level repulsion, but the
high entanglement energy states ‘stick’ at criticality and
continue to follow the semi-Poisson form. As we move
deep into the localized phase, these states move to ever
higher entanglement energy (i.e. have ever less weight
in the many body wavefunctions), but they continue to
show signs of residual criticality up to the largest dis-
order strengths that we can probe (up to h ≈ 30). We
have also linked this residual criticality to interactions (it
is absent in non-interacting localized phases), and have
advanced an explanation of the apparent level repulsion
in the ES in terms of many body resonances. However,
all our results thus far have been restricted to one dimen-
sional systems.

V. TWO DIMENSIONAL TRANSVERSE FIELD

ISING MODEL

The vast majority of existing work on many body lo-
calization and thermalization has focused on one dimen-
sional systems, with higher dimensional systems repre-
senting an important open problem. In this section, we
investigate the evolution of the ES across a two dimen-
sional localization delocalization transition, using numer-
ical exact diagonalization. We ﬁnd results which are
qualitatively identical to one dimensional systems, sug-
gesting that the entanglement structure in the thermal
and localized phases is insensitive to spatial dimension.
We make use of the model from Ref. 43, which has
recently provided convincing evidence of the ETH for the
two dimensional transverse ﬁeld Ising model using exact
diagonalizations on small clusters. We consider N spin-
1/2 on a square lattice of size Nx × Ny (see Fig. 10) with
periodic boundary conditions. The transverse ﬁeld Ising
Hamiltonian is

012345s0.00.20.40.60.81.0PES(s)GOE predictionGUE predictionSemi-Poisson predictionPoisson predictionJz=0Jz=0.1(cid:88)

<i,j>

Sz
i Sz

j + hx

(cid:88)

i

Sx

i + hz

(cid:88)

i

Sz

i + hzrandom

(cid:88)

i

ciSz
i

H2DTFIM = J

11

(6)

where < i, j > denotes the pairs of neighboring sites. We
ﬁrst look at the disorder free case (hzrandom = 0). This
is informative in two dimensions since (unlike in d = 1)
unless we look at some ﬁnely tuned values of hx and hz,
the model is not integrable. In the following and without
any loss of generality, we will focus on the ferromagnetic
case J < 0. For the numerical calculations we have used
both the translation symmetries along the two directions
x and y and the inversion symmetry. The momentum is
denoted (kx, ky) and the inversion parity λI = ±1. As
observed in Ref. 43, the level statistics of the energy spec-
trum diﬀer if we look at one of the inversion symmetric
momentum sectors (i.e. (0, 0), (0, π), (π, 0) or (π, π)) or
any other momentum sectors. In sectors without inver-
sion symmetry the distribution follows the predictions of
random matrix theory for the GOE, whereas in sectors
with inversion symmetry the distribution is close to (but
not quite) Poisson. This property is illustrated by Fig. 11
for a system of Nx × Ny = 6 × 3 spins.

FIG. 10. The two dimensional square lattice used for the
transverse ﬁeld Ising model. Here we depict the case that we
have considered, namely N = 18 spin-1/2 on square torus of
Nx = 6 sites in one direction and Ny = 3 in the perpendicular
direction. When we perform the ES, the system is cut into
a part A (red dotted region) of NA = 8 = 4 × 2 sites and a
part B (green dotted region) made of the 10 remaining sites.
Note that the cut breaks both translation symmetries and the
inversion symmetry.

We can now look at the properties of the entangle-
ment spectrum for this model. For simplicity, we choose
to cut our system in such a way that the ES does not
inherit any of the quantum numbers of the original sys-
tem. This can be easily achieved by taking a rectangular
domain that break both the translation symmetries and
the inversion symmetry as shown in Fig. 10. We use the
same setup as the one discussed in Sec. III, i.e. we aver-
age over a large number of ES corresponding to states in
the bulk of the spectrum. The average level statistics for
the entanglement spectrum is given in Fig. 12. We ob-
serve the remarkable high similarity between the energy
spectrum level statistics and the entanglement spectrum
level statistics.

We now want to study the transition to the localized
phase, which we will accomplish by tuning hzrandom . Since
no-one has studied this transition before, we begin by lo-

FIG. 11. a) Energy spectrum density of states and b) energy
level statistics for the system of N = 18 spins depicted in
Fig. 10. Here we have used hx = hz = −J = 1.We look at
a typical momentum sector not invariant under the inversion
symmetry ((π/3, 2π/3) black dots) and a typical momentum
sector invariant under the inversion symmetry ((π, 0)).
In
the right panel, we clearly see that level statistics is given
by the GOE for the ((π/3, 2π/3) sector while it is somehow
closer to the Poisson distribution for (π, 0) (the same is true
in other inversion symmetric sectors). We also show in the
left panel the region of the spectrum (shaded area) that we
will consider for the entanglement spectrum analysis, setting
imin = 6000 and imax = 9500 for (π/3, 2π/3) ((cid:39) 24% of all
states in this sector) and imin = 3000 and imax = 4500 for
(π, 0) and λI = ±1((cid:39) 20% of all states in this sector).

FIG. 12. Density of states (a) and level statistics (b) for the
entanglement spectra of the system with N = 18 spins. The
system geometry and the bipartition are shown in Fig. 10.
Here we consider to the Hamiltonians of Eq.6 with hx = hz =
−J = 1. We look the same momentum sectors than those of
Fig. 12. The average over the entanglement spectra is done
over the 3500 states (1500 for each sector of (π, 0)) located in
the bulk of the spectrum as shown in Fig. 11a.

cating the transition by looking at the distributions of the
energy eigenstates. To numerically probe this transition,
we can compute the ratio of adjacent energy gaps. For a
sorted spectrum {λn; λn ≤ λn+1}, the ratio of adjacent
gaps is deﬁned as

rn =

min (λn − λn−1, λn+1 − λn)
max (λn − λn−1, λn+1 − λn)

(7)

AB2015105051015E0.000.020.040.060.080.100.120.14ρ(E)a)012345s0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(s)b)GOE predictionGUE predictionPoisson distribution(π/3,2π/3)(π,0),λI=124681012ξ0.00.10.20.30.40.5ρES(ξ)a)(π/3,2π/3)(π,0),λI=10123456s0.00.20.40.60.81.0PES(s)b)GOE predictionGUE predictionPoisson prediction(π/3,2π/3)(π,0),λI=1We incorporate the full energy spectrum in the calcu-
lation of r. The average ratio r of adjacent gaps is
r (cid:39) 0.530 for GOE[34], r (cid:39) 0.60 for GUE [34] and
r (cid:39) 0.386 for a Poisson spectrum [19].
Fig. 13 a) shows the r for systems of N = 4 × 3 = 12
and N = 5 × 3 = 15 states. We see that it starts at the
GOE value of 0.52, and as hrandom is increased it drops to
the Poisson value of 0.396 at around hrandom = 5. Fig 13
b) shows distributions of the spacings of the energy levels,
which agree with the GOE and Poisson distributions in
the appropriate phases.

FIG. 13. (a) The r level spacing parameter for the energy
eigenstates for the 2D model. The grey lines are a guide
for the eye showing the predicted values for the Poisson
(r ≈ 0.386 [19]) and GOE (r ≈ 0.530 [34]) cases. We see
a transition from GOE to Poisson. For the N = 15 data, only
the 200 states near the middle of the energy spectrum were
used, while the N = 12 data includes all states. (b) Energy
level spacing distributions for a system with N = 12 at rep-
resentative points in the ETH and MBL phases, which follow
the correct distributions.

Now we can ask how the entanglement spectrum be-
haves for the same system. When making entanglement
cuts in 2D, we have some freedom of choice as to where
to make the cut. At N = 12 = 4×3, we cut a 3×2 region
out, similar to Fig.10 but for the diﬀerent size. Similarly
for N = 15 = 5 × 3 we cut a 4 × 2 region. Such cuts are
advantageous in the absence of disorder since they break
all symmetries, but in the disordered case we are free to
choose other cuts, since the disorder breaks symmetries
anyway, and for N = 16 = 4 × 4 we choose a 4 × 2 cut.
First we show entanglement density of states for a vari-
ety of system sizes in Fig. 14. The ﬁgure is qualitatively
very similar to Fig.4, with a peak at very small values
but the bulk of the states in another peak at larger val-
ues. Once again the data is normalized so that the area
is proportional to the number of entanglement states.

We can also look at entanglement level spacings in the
MBL phase, which are shown in Fig. 14, and follow a
semi-Poisson distribution, similar to the 1D case. In the
Appendix we ﬁt the entanglement statistics to Eq (4) and
ﬁnd that once again the exponents are quite close to the
strict semi-Poisson values α = 1 = γ, even though the
energy spectrum is Poisson α = 0. Once again we do not
see any sign of level repulsion in the states at low entan-
glement energy - but the vast majority of the states lie

12

FIG. 14.
(a)Entanglement density of states for the 2D case.
As in the 1D case, we see a small peak at ξ = 0 as well as
a larger peak at higher entanglement entropies. The data is
normalized such that each curve has an equal area. This hides
the behavior at large N and small ξ, so in the inset we plot
data normalized such that each curves area is proportional to
the number of states, and the small ξ peak is visible. Data
is taken for hrandom = 8. (b)Entanglement level spacings for
the 2D case, which follows a strict semi-Poisson distribution
α = γ = 1. Data is taken for hrandom = 8. We see that
the data matches well the expected distribution shown by the
solid green line.

at high entanglement energy and follow the semi-Poisson
form.

To summarize, the statistical properties of the ES in
both the thermal and the localized phase appear sub-
stantially similar in this two dimensional model to the
results we obtained earlier in one dimension. We con-
clude therefore that the entanglement structure of the
eigenstates does not appear to depend strongly on spa-
tial dimensionality.

VI. ENTANGLEMENT SPECTRUM IN

FLOQUET SYSTEMS

Thus far we have focused on the ES in the thermal
and localized phases of Hamiltonian systems, in spatial
dimensions d = 1, 2. We now consider periodically driven
Floquet systems, which constitute a diﬀerent universal-
ity class due to the absence of energy conservation. We
ﬁnd that the entanglement spectrum in the localized and
thermal phases both is substantially similar to that ob-
served in Hamiltonian systems. In the thermal phase this
is something of a surprise since Floquet systems thermal-
ize to inﬁnite temperatures, such that the ETH does not
relate the entanglement Hamiltonian to the real Hamilto-
nian. Nevertheless we ﬁnd that the entanglement spec-
trum in Floquet systems follows predictions of random
matrix theory, which appears to be more generally appli-
cable than ETH. We also ﬁnd that the choice of random
matrix ensemble can depend on the choice of origin of
time for the Floquet operator.

We focus on a simple model based on a chain of N
spins-1/2 with periodic boundary conditions. We are us-

012345678hrandom0.380.400.420.440.460.480.500.520.54ra)N=12N=15012345s0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(s)b)hrandom=0.25hrandom=8GOE predictionPoisson prediction01020304050ξ0.000.010.020.030.040.050.06ρES(ξ)a)N=12N=15N=16012345s0.00.20.40.60.81.0PES(s)b)GOE predictionGUE predictionSemi-Poisson predictionN=14N=15N=16012345ξ0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4ing a two bang approach for the time evolution
U (τ ) = exp(−iH1τ /2) exp(−iH2τ /2).

(8)

13

We consider the situation where both H1 and H2 are

integrable

H1 =

H2 =

Sx
i Sx

i+1 + hcx,iSx
i ,

Sz
i Sz

i+1 + hcz,iSz
i .

(9)

(10)

N(cid:88)
N(cid:88)

i=1

i=1

The level statistics of the Floquet Hamiltonian was dis-
cussed in Ref. 35, for completeness we brieﬂy summarize
it here. Since the Floquet operator is unitary, we are
looking at the phases of its eigenvalues, which we call
here the ‘Floquet energies’. At small h (<∼ 2) the Flo-
quet energy statistics follow a circular orthogonal ensem-
ble (COE), (which has the same spacing distribution as
the GOE distributions studied in this work) at both small
and large τ . There is however a ‘dip’ in the parameter r
when the Floquet bandwidth is similar to the drive fre-
quency. At large h (>∼ 2) the Floquet energy distribution
is localized (obeys a Poisson distribution) at small τ and
thermal (obeys a COE distribution) at large τ . These
properties can be seen in Fig. 15a, where we show the
parameter r as a function of τ for h values representative
of the thermalized and localized phases. Unlike the data
in Ref. 35, here we use only one realization of disorder,
and we use a system size large enough (N = 14) to get
adequate statistics despite this. In Fig. 15b we show the
density of states and spacing distribution for the Floquet
energy levels at h = 6, which further supports the con-
clusions above.

FIG. 15. a) Ratio of adjacent gaps renergy for the Floquet
energies of the two bang-models where H1 and H2 are given
by Eqs. 9 and 10. The calculations were done for N = 14
spins for a single realization of disorder. The Floquet energy
data shows the same behavior of that in Ref. 35. Grey lines
show the predicted values for the Poisson (r ≈ 0.386 [19]) and
COE (r ≈ 0.530 [34]) cases. b) Level statistics (right) for a
system of N = 14 spins for h = 6. Even without any average
over disorder, we clearly see the good agreement with either
the Poisson distribution for τ = 0.25 or the COE for τ = 2
and τ = 6.

FIG. 16. Density of states (a) and level statistics (b) for the
entanglement spectra of a system with N = 14 spins keeping
NA = 7 spins and h = 6. Here we consider evolution times
τ = 0.25 (blacks dots), 2 (blue dots) and 6 (red dots). The
average over the entanglement spectra is done over the all the
4096 states. The origin of time is chosen according to Eq. 8.
Considering only a fraction of the states, does not change
the picture. The level statistics in the thermal phase are well
described by the GUE. In the localized phase (τ = 0.25), there
is a good ﬁt to the strict semi-Poisson form α = γ = 1 (green
line). We have also ﬁtted the level spacing distribution to the
interpolating distribution considered in Ref. [31]. The ﬁtting
parameters are γ (cid:39) 1.68(6) and α = 1.31(2) (red line). [Errors
bars are from the ﬁts alone and do not include averaging over
disorder or ﬁnite size eﬀects]

We now discuss the entanglement spectrum. Fig 16b
shows our results for the entanglement spacings of a Flo-
quet system. We see that as in the undriven case, in the
localized phase the entanglement statistics seem to follow
a semi-Poisson distribution. The story in the thermaliz-
ing phase however is far richer.

When Floquet systems thermalize, they do so to inﬁ-
nite temperature [1]. The ETH therefore predicts that in
a thermalizing Floquet phase, the reduced density ma-
trix will be proportional to the unit operator, and the
entanglement Hamiltonian will be zero, such that the en-
tanglement spectrum will be totally degenerate. In prac-
tice, however, (and certainly for a ﬁnite size system), we
expect there will be corrections to ETH and these cor-
rections will dominate the entanglement spectrum. The
entanglement spectrum thus provides a nice diagnostic
for investigating corrections to ETH, since in the Flo-
quet thermal phase these corrections to ETH provide the
leading contribution to the entanglement spectrum. We
observe indeed that the entanglement spectrum in the
Floquet phase ﬁts well to predictions of random matrix
theory, indicating that random matrix theory is a more
robust descriptor of thermalization than ETH i.e. even
the corrections to ETH follow random matrix theory. We
also highlight a surprising feature of the entanglement
spectrum in the thermal phase : the entanglement spac-
ings follow a GUE distribution, even though the energy
spacings are GOE i.e. the entanglement spectrum in the
thermal phase is governed by a diﬀerent random matrix
ensemble than the energy spectrum.

We note that while the Floquet eigenenergies are in-

012345678τ0.380.400.420.440.460.480.500.520.54renergya)hx=hz=0.5hx=hz=60123456s0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(s)b)COE predictionCUE predictionPoisson distributionτ=0.25τ=2τ=60102030405060708090ξ0.000.050.100.150.200.250.300.35ρES(ξ)a)τ=0.25τ=2τ=60123456s0.00.20.40.60.81.0PES(s)b)GOE predictionGUE predictionSemi-Poisson predictionSemi-Poisson Fitτ=0.25τ=2τ=614

see that rES is only GOE for a TR-symmetric choice of
origin of time.

Fig. 18 shows the level spacing ratio rES for the entan-
glement spectrum with a time-reversal symmetric drive,
for the system whose Floquet energy spacing ratios are
shown in Fig. 15a. Similar to the Floquet energy case,
the entanglement level spacing ratios are GOE at large
τ , and at small τ are GOE for small disorder and Semi-
Poisson for large disorder. Note however that at unlike
in the Floquet energy case there no ‘dip’ in the spacing
ratios between the two τ regimes.

FIG. 18.
Level spacing ratios rES for the entanglement
spectrum for the same model as that shown in Fig. 15a, but
with a time-reversal symmetric origin of time. The grey line
shows the predicted value for the GOE.

VII. CONCLUSION

We have studied the entanglement spectrum in the
thermal and localized phases of Hamiltonian and Floquet
systems, revealing a wealth of information about the en-
tanglement structure. In the thermal phase of Hamilto-
nian systems, the entanglement spectrum is governed by
random matrix theory, in accordance with a particularly
strong form of the eigenstate thermalization hypothesis.
The conclusion appears independent of dimensionality.
In Floquet systems, the entanglement spectrum is con-
trolled by corrections to ETH, but is still governed by
random matrix theory. However, the random matrix en-
semble governing the entanglement spectrum in Floquet
systems can be diﬀerent to that governing the spectrum
of Floquet eigenphases. In particular, the entanglement
spectrum will follow GUE level statistics unless the en-
ergy spectrum is COE, the drive has an inversion center
and we place the origin of time at the inversion center
(note that in Floquet systems the entanglement spectrum
depends on the choice of origin of time).

Meanwhile in the localized phase, we observe that the
entanglement spectrum has level statistics that follow a

FIG. 17.
Demonstration of how the entanglement level
statistics depends on the origin of time. The blue dots are
the entanglement spacings for a time-reversal symmetric ori-
gin of time, they satisfy a GOE distribution, which is the
same as the Floquet energy spacings. The green dots are for
the TR-breaking drive of Eq. 8, they follow a GUE distribu-
tion. All data was taken for N = 14, h = 6. (Inset) The level
spacing ratio for various system sizes, which takes the GOE
value only when ε = 0 (the TR symmetric point).

dependent of the ‘origin of time’ used when deﬁning the
Floquet unitary operator, the eigenstates of that unitary
operator (and hence the entanglement spectrum) do de-
pend on the choice of origin of time. The Floquet unitary
operator with a general choice of origin of time can be
written as:
U (τ, ε) = exp(−iH1

4
(11)
This evolution operator is time-reversal symmetric at
ε = 0 and identical to Eq. 8 for ε = τ . The eigen-
states |ϕi(τ, ε)(cid:105) are related for diﬀerent values of ε by
the unitary transformation

τ − ε

τ
2

4

τ + ε

) exp(−iH2

) exp(−iH1

).

|ϕi(τ, ε)(cid:105) = exp(−iH1(ε(cid:48) − ε)/4)|ϕi(τ, ε(cid:48))(cid:105)

(12)

We clearly see that the entanglement spectrum of
|ϕi(τ, ε)(cid:105) depends on the choice of ε unless H1 does not
couple the two regions A and B deﬁning the biparti-
tion.
In our setup, Eq. 9 has one term that prevents
such a separation. Thus the choice of origin of time will
have a dramatic consequence on our entanglement spec-
trum analysis. We show the level spacing distributions of
the entanglement spectrum for the ordinary TR-breaking
protocols in Fig. 17. We can see that at the TR sym-
metric point ε = 0, the entanglement level spacings are
GOE, just like the Floquet energy distributions. (The
distribution is GOE and not COE because the entangle-
ment Hamiltonian is Hermitian) The inset of Fig.
17
shows how the level spacing ratio rES depends on ε, we

0123456s0.00.20.40.60.81.0PES(s)GOE predictionGUE prediction=0=1/20.00.20.40.60.81.00.520.530.540.550.560.570.580.590.600.61rESN=10N=12N=14012345678τ0.490.500.510.520.53rEShx=hz=0.5hx=hz=6semi-Poisson distribution, unlike the energy spectrum,
which follows Poisson level statistics. This semi-Poisson
form is observed in one and two dimensional Hamilto-
nian systems, and in Floquet localized phases, and thus
appears to be a universal property of the entanglement
structure of the localized phase. However, it is not seen
in non-interacting localized phases i.e. the semi-Poisson
statistics appear to be a consequence of the interacting
nature of the localized phase. We have conjectured an
explanation for the semi-Poisson statistics of the entan-
glement spectrum in terms of many body resonances.

Semi-Poisson statistics are generally considered a diag-
nostic of criticality, and the entanglement structure even
deep in the localized phase thus appears to show a ‘resid-
ual criticality’ that has not hitherto been appreciated.
We have identiﬁed a ‘two peak’ structure in the entangle-
ment spectrum of the localized phase, and have pointed
out that information about the level repulsion and semi-
Poisson statistics is contained mainly in the ‘high en-
tanglement energy’ part of the entanglement spectrum,
with the low entanglement energy states (that control en-
tanglement entropy and Renyi entropies) showing little
sign of level repulsion. Thus it appears that this residual
criticality in the entanglement structure is likely to be
invisible to entropy measures, and could only have been
revealed by an analysis of the full entanglement spec-
trum using diagnostics inspired by random matrix the-
ory. Whether the high energy entanglement spectrum
deep in the MBL phase retains a memory of any other
properties of the critical point (such as other critical ex-
ponents), and if so how this information could be ex-
tracted, is an intriguing question that we leave to future
work. We note that semi-Poisson statistics are also a di-
agnostic of pseudo-integrability [32, 33], and our results
thus suggest that the entanglement Hamiltonian in the
many body localized phase should be pseudointegrable
(i.e. not integrable but also not chaotic), an observation
that may open new lines of attack on the localized phase.
Finally, we have veriﬁed that performing microcanon-
ical averages of level statistics for entanglement ener-
gies gives essentially the same results as calculating level
statistics for the entanglement spectrum of a single eigen-
state. While this is expected in the thermal phase (a
corollary of ETH), it is a surprise in the localized phase,
where eigenstates are known to vary dramatically in their
properties (temperature chaos). Nonetheless it appears
that the statistical properties of the entanglement struc-
ture do not vary much from one eigenstate to the next,
such that microcanonical averaging may be employed as
a useful tool when studying level statistics of entangle-

15

ment spectra even in the many body localized phase.

Thus, a study of the entanglement spectrum has re-
vealed a rich and hitherto unsuspected structure to the
pattern of entanglement in both thermal and localized
phases. Further exploration of such ideas may open a
new line of attack on the localized and delocalized phases,
and the intervening phase transition. We leave further
exploration of these ideas to future work.

Acknowledgments: We acknowledge fruitful discussions
with C. Von Keyserlingk, T. Neupert, A. Chandran, S.
Kourtis, R. Bhatt, B.A. Bernevig, S. Capponi, N. Laﬂo-
rencie and, especially, David Huse. N.R. was supported
by the Princeton Global Scholarship. S.G. was supported
by DOE-BES Grant de-sc0002140.

Appendix A: Diﬀerent ways to average

In the main text at small sizes we had the problem that
there were not enough entanglement states to draw con-
crete conclusions about their level statistics. We found
that averaging over a number of entanglement states gave
the same results as a single state, and therefore this is
the approach that we used throughout the paper. Specif-
ically, we averaged over all states lying within the middle
third of the energy spectrum, but one might wonder how
this energy window was chosen. We support this choice
in Fig. 19. In this ﬁgure we estimate the exponents α and
γ from Eq. 4, as a function of location in the energy spec-
trum, which we computed by averaging over 256 states.
We can see that at the high and low ends of the spectrum,
slightly diﬀerent values for γ are obtained. The shaded
region shows the middle third of states which were aver-
aged over in the main text, we can see that in this region
the exponents are relatively constant.

In the main text, all quantities are computed for only
a single realization of disorder (ROD), but we can ask
how averaging over disorder could improve our data.
In Fig. 19 the diﬀerent symbols correspond to diﬀerent
ROD, and we can see that diﬀerent realizations can give
slightly diﬀerent results. Note that this is a ﬁnite-size ef-
fect, at larger sizes the system would better self-average
and diﬀerences between ROD would disappear. In Fig 20
we average over ROD to improve our estimates of the ex-
ponents α and γ. The improved estimates allow us to see
how these quantities vary with system size. The results
support our hypothesis that in the limit of large N and
large h, α = γ = 1.

[1] R. Nandkishore and D. A. Huse, Annual Review of Con-

452, 854 (2008).

densed Matter Physics 6, 15 (2015).

[5] M. Serbyn, Z. Papi´c, and D. A. Abanin, Phys. Rev. Lett.

[2] J. M. Deutsch, Phys. Rev. A 43, 2046 (1991).
[3] M. Srednicki, Phys. Rev. E 50, 888 (1994).
[4] M. Rigol, V. Dunjko, and M. Olshanii, Nature (London)

111, 127201 (2013).

[6] D. A. Huse, R. Nandkishore, and V. Oganesyan, Phys.

Rev. B 90, 174202 (2014).

16

FIG. 19. This plot was obtained by extracting the values of
α and γ for 256 energy eigenstates at a time. The horizontal
axis shows the index of the ﬁrst state on the set of 256. We
see that the at values at small and large energy are diﬀerent
from that in the middle of the spectrum. The region which
we average over in the main text is shown in gray, we can
see the exponents are relatively constant in this region. The
diﬀerent colored points correspond to diﬀerent realizations of
disorder, we see that changing the disorder realization can
aﬀect the extracted exponents, at least for the ﬁnite size sys-
tems available to our numerics. Data was taken with N = 14,
hx = hz = 12, hy = 0.

[7] D. A. Huse, R. Nandkishore, V. Oganesyan, A. Pal, and

S. L. Sondhi, Phys. Rev. B 88, 014206 (2013).

[8] D. Pekker, G. Refael, E. Altman, E. Demler,

and

FIG. 20.
Fitted values of (a) γ and (b) α (as deﬁned in
Eq. 4) for the ES, for multiple sizes and averaged over multiple
realizations of disorder (16 ROD for N = 12, 4 for N =
14, 16). Data was taken for the GOE case with hx = hz = h,
hy = 0. For N = 12, 14 the entanglement spectra in each
disorder realization was averaged over the one-third of energy
levels in the middle of the spectrum, for N = 16 the spectra
were averaged over 1000 energy levels near the middle of the
energy spectrum. α and γ were extracted for each realization
of disorder, and error bars are the variance of the diﬀerent
values. (c,d) Same as (a,b) but in the unitary symmetry class
hx = hy = hz. In this case the entanglement eigenvalues are
smaller so that at h > 6 we run into problems with machine
precision at N = 16.

V. Oganesyan, Phys. Rev. X 4, 011052 (2014).

[21] A. L. Burin, eprint arXiv:cond-mat/0611387

(2006),

[9] R. Vosk and E. Altman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 217204

cond-mat/0611387.

(2014).

[22] R. Nandkishore and A. C. Potter, Phys. Rev. B 90,

[10] B. Bauer and C. Nayak, Journal of Statistical Mechanics:

195115 (2014).

Theory and Experiment 2013, P09005 (2013).

[11] Y. Bahri, R. Vosk, E. Altman,

and A. Vishwanath,
“Localization and topology protected quantum coher-
ence at the edge of ‘hot’ matter,” (2013), URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1307.4092.

[12] A. Chandran, V. Khemani, C. R. Laumann, and S. L.

[23] N. Y. Yao, C. R. Laumann, S. Gopalakrishnan, M. Knap,
M. M¨uller, E. A. Demler, and M. D. Lukin, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 113, 243002 (2014).

[24] R. Nandkishore, Phys. Rev. B 90, 184204 (2014).
[25] J. H. Bardarson, F. Pollmann, and J. E. Moore, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 109, 017202 (2012).

Sondhi, Phys. Rev. B 89, 144201 (2014).

[26] T. Grover, ArXiv e-prints (2014), URL http://arxiv.

[13] V. Khemani, R. Nandkishore, and S. L. Sondhi, Nature

org/abs/1405.1471.

Physics 11, 560 (2015).

[27] H. Li and F. D. M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 010504

[14] S. Gopalakrishnan, M. M¨uller, V. Khemani, M. Knap,
E. Demler, and D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev. B 92, 104202
(2015).

(2008).

[28] Z.-C. Yang, C. Chamon, A. Hamma, and E. R. Mucciolo,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 267206 (2015).

[15] B. L. Altshuler, Y. Gefen, A. Kamenev, and L. S. Levi-

[29] J. R. Garrison and T. Grover, ArXiv e-prints

(2015),

tov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2803 (1997).

arXiv:1503.00729 [cond-mat.str-el].

[16] I. V. Gornyi, A. D. Mirlin, and D. G. Polyakov, Phys.

[30] V. Khemani, A. Chandran, H. Kim, and S. L. Sondhi,

Rev. Lett. 95, 206603 (2005).

Phys. Rev. E 90, 052133 (2014).

[17] D. Basko, I. Aleiner, and B. Altshuler, Annals of Physics

[31] M. Serbyn and J. E. Moore, ArXiv e-prints

(2015),

321, 1126 (2006).

arXiv:1508.07293 [cond-mat.dis-nn].

[18] V. Oganesyan and D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev. B 75, 155111

[32] P. Richens and M. Berry, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenom-

(2007).

[19] A. Pal and D. A. Huse, Phys. Rev. B 82, 174411 (2010).
[20] J. Imbrie, “On Many-Body Localization for Quantum
(2014), URL http://arxiv.org/abs/

Spin Chains,”
1403.7837.

ena 2, 495 (1981).

[33] E. Bogomolny, R. Dubertrand, and C. Schmit, Nonlin-

earity 22, 2101 (2009).

[34] L. D’Alessio and M. Rigol, Phys. Rev. X 4, 041048

(2014).

0200040006000800010000120001400016000180000.600.650.700.750.800.850.900.951.001.05γ020004000600080001000012000140001600018000state0.650.700.750.800.850.900.95α0246810121416hx=hz0.70.80.91.01.11.21.3αb)0510152025hx=hy=hz0.51.01.52.02.53.0d)02468101214160.00.20.40.60.81.01.2γa)N=12N=14N=1605101520250.20.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4c)[35] N. Regnault and R. Nandkishore, ArXiv e-prints (2015),

arXiv:1510.07653 [cond-mat.stat-mech].

[36] M. Bukov, M. Heyl, D. A. Huse, and A. Polkovnikov,
[cond-

arXiv:1512.02119

ArXiv
e-prints
mat.quant-gas].

(2015),

17

[40] We want a Semi-Poisson form which is normalized to one
and has < s >= 1, so the actual Semi-Poisson function
used in this work is 4xe−2x.

[41] X. Jia, A. R. Subramaniam, I. A. Gruzberg,
S. Chakravarty, Phys. Rev. B 77, 014208 (2008).

and

[37] Y. Avishai, J. Richert, and R. Berkovits, Phys. Rev. B

[42] X. Chen, B. Hsu, T. L. Hughes, and E. Fradkin, Phys.

66, 052416 (2002).

[38] R. Modak and S. Mukerjee, New Journal of Physics 16,

093016 (2014).

[39] D. J. Luitz, N. Laﬂorencie, and F. Alet, Phys. Rev. B

93, 060201 (2016).

Rev. B 86, 134201 (2012).

[43] R. Mondaini, K. R. Fratus, M. Srednicki, and M. Rigol,
ArXiv e-prints (2015), arXiv:1512.04947 [cond-mat.stat-
mech].

