6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
P
A

.
t
a
t
s
[
 
 

1
v
6
9
8
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Uncovering Longitudinal Healthcare

Utilization from Patient-Level Medical Claims

Data

Ross P. Hilton, Nicoleta Serban, Richard Y. Zheng

March 4, 2016

Abstract

The objective of this study is to introduce methodology for study-
ing longitudinal claims data observed at the patient level, with infer-
ence on the heterogeneity of healthcare utilization behaviors within
large healthcare systems such as Medicaid. The proposed approach
is model-based, allowing for visualization of longitudinal utilization
behaviors using simple stochastic graphical networks. The approach
is general, providing a framework for the study of other chronic condi-
tions wherever longitudinal healthcare utilization data are available.
Our methods are inspired by and applied to patient-level Medicaid
claims for asthma-diagnosed children diagnosed observed over a pe-
riod of ﬁve years, with a comparison of two neighboring states, Georgia
and North Carolina.

1

Introduction

Healthcare can be thought of as a continual series of information-processing
experiments: from the initial collection of data (the patient’s history, physical
exam, and diagnostic tests), a hypothesis (diagnosis) is formed and then vali-
dated by further data collection [30]. Data in healthcare are generated at ev-
ery patient’s encounter with the healthcare system, at every implementation
of medical processes, with every decision made by healthcare organizations,
and with every policy implementation in the healthcare ecosystem, resulting

1

in billions of data points every day. Every patient in any medical setting gen-
erates an invaluable data point that can contribute to understanding what
works, for who and where.

One health-related information technology (IT) that has provided sub-
stantive opportunities to study healthcare data across large populations and
across many years is the medical claims system. Information coded in claims
data is standardized to a great extent [6], hence making such data amenable
to large scale studies. Developing methods to translate medical claims data
into meaningful data is the ﬁrst crucial step in deriving knowledge useful to
make inferences about the healthcare system. Further development of adap-
tive and scalable data mining and statistical methods provide the means for
analyzing these data. However, there are a series of challenges associated
with mining data derived from medical claims, including the derivation of
knowledge for decision support while maintaining computational eﬃciency
and complying with privacy regulations.

Two common methodologies for mining healthcare data are network anal-
ysis and cluster modeling. Network analysis investigates the structure of re-
lationships between diﬀerent entities, i.e. healthcare providers or patients,
deﬁned as nodes in the network, in order to determine the extent of rela-
tionships between diﬀerent nodes and groups of nodes [13, 22, 34].
It is
often applied in healthcare analytics to produce visual summaries of large
healthcare datasets and to detect the strength of the connection between dif-
ferent event types [8, 15, 35]. However, most network studies only model the
strength of the connection between two event types without considering a
rigorous treatment of the time domain. Furthermore, most network analysis
models seek to determine clusters of nodes within a single network, not al-
lowing for the heterogeneity in the population. Statistical clustering analysis
is commonly used to characterize heterogeneity or similarity among patients
with respect to a set of predeﬁned features [33, 38, 44], but it has not been
applied to model sequences of discrete healthcare events as proposed in this
study. We propose a method that combines the beneﬁts of network anal-
ysis and model-based clustering for discrete event sequences, assuming the
discrete-event sequences follow a stochastic process. Thus one contribution
is a model-based data mining algorithm that has the ability to scale to mas-
sive data while producing meaningful stochastic networks that can then be
used in decision support through visualization and simulation. The second
contribution is the application of the modeling approach to derive inferences
on utilization behaviors from highly-sensitive, large patient-level claims data.

2

We pilot our methodology using Medicaid Analytic Extract (MAX) data
acquired from the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) for
ﬁve years (2005-2009). We consider one speciﬁc chronic condition, pediatric
asthma, and we compare utilization for two states, Georgia (GA) and North
Carolina (NC). While GA and NC have similar pediatric populations, the
two states deliver care under diﬀerent coordinated-care Medicaid systems
[2, 12]. This pilot study provides insight into the eﬀects of such diﬀerent
state-based Medicaid systems. We chose pediatric asthma as the health
condition of interest because it is a common chronic childhood condition, with
more than 9% of American children aﬀected by the disease [4]. The MAX
data consist of 1.8 and 2.4 millions claims for GA and NC, respectively. We
evaluated the computational complexity of our methodology and tested its
implementation for much larger number of claims, validating the applicability
of our methodological framework to larger states, such as California and New
York, and to larger healthcare beneﬁts systems.

The article is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the data science
framework with a focus on the information translational process, as applied
to the MAX claims data. Section 3 presents the model-based clustering
procedures. We apply the methodology and provide results and ﬁndings in
Section 4. We conclude with overall policy implications and discussions in
Section 5. Diﬃcult derivations and further data summaries beyond the scope
of this article are deferred to the Appendices.

2 From Information to Meaningful Data

The increasing availability of large amounts of data over the last two decades
has resulted in a new ﬁeld of study, data science, dedicated to knowledge
discovery from large data sets. Data science goes beyond statistical data
analysis [21, 43], particularly for massive, complex data sets, where the pri-
orities now shift from simply getting and analyzing data to making them
manageable and understandable. Because the advancements in data science
have not kept pace with the size and complexity of the data available, there is
a clear emergence of methodologies to overcome what Tien & Goldschmidt-
Clermont [37] call the ‘data rich, information poor conundrum.’ Particularly
in healthcare, the derivation of knowledge is especially limited by the avail-
ability of information. When considering large amounts of information, it
is critical not only to decide the appropriate data to use but also to deter-

3

mine how to use them. Knowledge discovery relies and builds entirely on this
initial translation step [21].

In this section, we expand on the derivation of the patient-level utiliza-
tion sequences from the CMS Medicaid Analytic Extract claims data, as
an illustration of the translational process of information into data. The
data are made available as a set of large ﬂat ﬁles, with an extensive data
dictionary including highly-specialized coded information. The ﬂat ﬁles of
medical claims must be reshaped in order to analyze longitudinal utilization
sequences, requiring extensive database structuring and use of data dictio-
naries together with information from various other sources. Parsing through
large, ﬂat text ﬁles is extremely computationally intensive, therefore we re-
construct the ﬂat ﬁles into a relational database, with keys and indices to
accelerate the data extraction process. We use a combination of SQL queries
and scripting language to manipulate and analyze the extracted data.

Our emphasis is on a subset of patients, particularly the Medicaid-enrolled
children ages 4-18 with an asthma-related primary diagnoses. We ﬁltered the
data based on the ICD-9 diagonosis codes provided with each claim (given
in Appendix A) and their date of birth. (The age group 0-3 is excluded from
this study because of the diﬃculty and inaccuracy of diagnosing asthma at
this age.) Moreover, in order to capture longitudinal utilization behaviors,
we only consider those patients that are of the appropriate age to qualify
for Medicaid for at least four of the ﬁve years. Thus starting with a dataset
including a total of 316 and 457 millions of claims for Georgia and North
Carolina, respectively, we derive utilization data from 1.8 and 2.4 millions of
claims for this subset of patients.

The MAX claims are structured into inpatient care (IP), long-term care
(LT), other care including outpatient services (OT), patient summary (PS)
and prescription claim summary (RX) ﬁles.
Included for each claim are
data entries specifying the date of service, the Medicaid Statistical Infor-
mation System identiﬁcation (MSIS ID) of each patient, the International
Classiﬁcation of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9) codes for diagnosis or ser-
vices provided, and the type and place of services rendered. We use the
IP and OT ﬁles to determine the visits to a speciﬁc provider type, and the
RX ﬁle to determine the medication type and date of the prescription be-
ing ﬁlled. We abbreviate our derived provider types as follows: clinic visits
(CL), emergency room visits and outpatient hospitalizations (ER), grouped
together based on their similar expenditure structures, inpatient hospitaliza-
tions (HO), physician’s oﬃce visits (PO), nurse practitioner services (NP),

4

and ﬁlling of medication prescriptions (RX). These provider types are de-
rived from the place of service code and type of service code in the IP and
OT ﬁles. We consider long-term asthma controller medications, derived from
the National Drug Code in the RX ﬁles, as an event type in the sequential
analysis due to its signiﬁcance in treating asthma symptoms.

In short, we are able to extract the utilization-speciﬁc data and transform
claims records into patient-level utilization sequences. We include a table in
Appendix A detailing the roadmap between the entries in these ﬁles and our
categorizations.

3 From Data to Knowledge: Uncovering Uti-

lization Proﬁles

In this section we describe our methods for translating patient-level uti-
lization sequences into knowledge about underlying utilization behaviors via
model-based data mining techniques. We compare our method with other
approaches and provide our contributions, then present our modeling ap-
proach along with details on our choice of model estimation and selection
techniques.

3.1 Model-based Data Mining

The goal of this study is to cluster patients using model-based methods ac-
cording to their healthcare utilization behaviors and to produce meaning-
ful visualization of utilization proﬁles through stochastic network modelling.
Patient-level utilization is observed in the form of sequential data, referring
to the observation of a discrete set of events over a period of time. In se-
quential data, the events may be ordinal or categorical, and the time domain
may be discrete or continuous. Examples of such data can be found in pat-
tern recognition of text and speech [42], in process mining where business
workﬂows must be inferred [5], and in the area of genetics, where sequential
clustering is a primary research interest [17].

The proposed methods for modeling sequential data are inspired by the
large body of existing research in network analysis, process mining and
claims mining literature. While network analysis is useful in determining
the strength of connections between event types and in producing meaning-
ful visual outputs, it has not been applied to model longitudinal sequences

5

of events and it has not been considered jointly with clustering analysis to
derive distinct networks for heterogeneous groups of members or patients
[8, 15, 35]. Process mining techniques are applied in business and health-
care settings to extract meaningful patterns from data logs that document
events making up the workﬂow [5, 3, 9, 11, 14, 16, 29]. Typically, these
methods only model the order of the sequence of events without considera-
tion of the interarrival time between events [11, 29]. Finally, in the existing
research for modeling longitudinal claims data, stochastic models are pri-
marily used to identify outlying utilization behaviors, particularly in fraud
detection [18, 19, 23, 25, 36, 39, 45]. In contrast our objective is to inform
policy decision making on major underlying utilization proﬁles, not outlying
individuals or providers, by simultaneously grouping probabilistically simi-
lar patients and estimating the distribution parameters in order to produce
useful model summaries for visualization.

Our algorithm has the following novel features: adaptability due to the
hierarchical tree-based step, scalability due to our model assumptions, with-
out the need for costly Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) experiments
to initialize the algorithm, and a rigorous treatment of likelihood theory and
model complexity. Model-based clustering approaches do use an expectation-
maximization (EM) algorithm for maximizing the posterior likelihood of the
cluster membership, but without the guarantee of producing consistent re-
sults with each run [11, 29] that is possible with hierarchical methods. Others
use hierarchical methods employing statistical measures of complexity, but
may not necessarily maximize the posterior likelihood [28, 27]. Our approach
combines important properties of hierarchical methods and the EM algorithm
to ﬁnd a clustering outcome that maximizes the tradeoﬀ between posterior
likelihood and model complexity as measured by the Bayesian information
criterion (BIC) score. Additionally, by performing hierarchical clustering in
a top-down approach we are able to quickly identify the large underlying pro-
ﬁles of care. This is in contrast to the computationally extensive bottoms-up
approach of grouping together similar patients or employing costly MCMC
experiments to initialize the algorithm [31].

3.2 Clustering Analysis: The Model

In this section we describe how we use a Markov renewal process (MRP)
framework to model longitudinal utilization sequences. This model-based
algorithm simultaneously estimates model parameters, groups patients into

6

distinct proﬁless, and improves the BIC score at each iteration. By using the
MRP model we take advantage of properties of stochastic processes to provide
simple model estimation procedures with minimal computational complex-
ity. Particularly, Markov processes provide a manner for aggregating large
amounts of sensitive data so that it may be shared in the form of attractive
visual displays.

3.2.1 The MRP Model

We begin introducing our approach by presenting the model for one sequen-
tial realization of the patient’s utilization of the healthcare system [24, 32].
We extend this model to multiple sequences corresponding to multiple pa-
tients in the next section.

Let (cid:126)X = (X1, . . . , XL) refer to the sequence of events and (cid:126)T = (T1, . . . , TL)
to the set of “arrival” times, times that an event occurs, where L is the length
of the patient healthcare utilization sequence. An example of a longitudinal
utilization sequence could be: patient A visits the emergency room for an
asthma attack on January 1st 2005, is given a prescription for an inhaler
which she ﬁlls one month later, and is referred to a primary care physician.
Subsequent visits to the same physician and reﬁlls of her asthma prescrip-
tions occur at 3-month intervals. The sequence (X1, T1), . . . , (X6, T6) is given
by (ER, 0.00), (RX, 0.08), (PO, 0.25), (PO, 0.50), (RX, 0.75), (PO, 1.00).

The MRP is the continuous-time analog of a discrete-time Markov chain
(DTMC). The primary assumption of any Markov process is that it is ‘mem-
oryless’, i.e.
future states are only dependent on the current state of the
system. Deﬁne τn = Tn − Tn−1. Then we have that

P r(τL+1 ≤ t, XL+1 = sj|X1, T1, . . . , XL, TL)
P r(τL+1 ≤ t, XL+1 = sj|XL = si).

(1)

In an MRP, the concept of memoryless-ness arises twice. Not only are the
events memoryless, as in the DTMC, but so are the interarrival time distribu-
tions. While the memoryless property may not be a reasonable assumption
in the case of longitudinal healthcare utilization our clustering algorithm pro-
ﬁles patients based on the complete patient history, so that the clustering
outputs are representative of underlying utilization behaviors from start to
ﬁnish.

7

3.2.2 Parameter Estimation
Consider again the sequence (cid:126)X, (cid:126)T . Let si, i ∈ {1, . . . , S} be all possible
events in the sequence (in our case CL, ER, HO, PO, NP, and RX), where
S is the number of states. In an MRP, the sequence (cid:126)X is itself a DTMC,
with corresponding transition matrix P , where Pij denotes the transition
j=1 Pij = 1. The likelihood function for

probability between si and sj, and(cid:80)S

a single realization of a DTMC is given by

L(P| (cid:126)XL = (cid:126)sL) = P r(X1 = si1, . . . , XL = siL)

L(cid:89)

l=2

=

Pil−1,il,

(2)

L(cid:89)

with the derivation given in Appendix B. We estimate each Pij via maximum
likelihood estimation: for each state si and sj, ˆPij is the number of transitions
from si to sj divided by the total number of transitions out of si.
Now we deﬁne the distributions for the sequence of interarrival times,
τl = Tl+1−Tl. We assume that for each pair i, j ∈ {1, . . . , S}, the distribution
of the interarrival time between states si and sj is given by Fij. We assume
that Fij follows an exponential distribution with rate parameter λij. To
estimate λij we use maximum likelihood estimation. The likelihood function
of the interarrival times is given by

L(Λ| (cid:126)T ) =

λij exp{−λijτl}I(Xl = si, Xl+1 = sj),

(3)

l=2

and the MLE is the reciprocal of the average interarrival times between any
pair of states si and sj. We will use the matrix {Λ}ij to denote the inverse
of the average interarrival times, λij, between states si and sj.

The assumption of exponentially distributed interarrival times is restric-
tive, however it is a reasonable approximation in that it has an appropriate
time domain starting at 0 and with a long tail towards ∞. Additionally,
the MLEs are easy to compute in our model, an important aspect within a
large-data analysis context. Furthermore, if it were the case that the dis-
tribution of interarrival times is multi-modal, then it is within the realm of
our algorithm to separate such subsets of patients by forcing the interarrival
times to be unimodal.

8

Now we can deﬁne the likelihood function for a set of patient utilization

sequences. For patients r ∈ {1, . . . , R}, the likelihood function of P is:

R(cid:89)

Lr(cid:89)

r=1

l=2

Pil−1r ,ilr

.

λij exp{−λijτlr}.

(4)

(5)

(6)

Likewise, the likelihood function of Λ is:

L(P| (cid:126)X1, . . . , (cid:126)XR) = L(P| (cid:126)X (cid:126)R) =
Lr(cid:89)
R(cid:89)

L(Λ| (cid:126)T1, . . . , (cid:126)TR) = L(Λ| (cid:126)T (cid:126)R) =

r=1

l=2

Therefore, the joint likelihood function of P and Λ is:
L(P, Λ| (cid:126)X (cid:126)R, (cid:126)T (cid:126)R) = L(P| (cid:126)X (cid:126)R) × L(Λ| (cid:126)T (cid:126)R),

with the derivation given in Appendix B. Together, the set of all possible
transitions and interarrival times out of state si form a probability distribu-
tion which we refer to as the transition distribution out of si. Each transition
distribution is a mixture of exponential distributions.

Remark: There is no signiﬁcance to the observational timeframe in our
study, 2005 through 2009, other than these are the endpoints of our study. It
is entirely possible that we miss visits and referrals to providers before and
after the time period of our study. Likewise, the estimates for the ﬁrst arrival
time and the last arrival time are going to be extremely biased. Therefore, we
leave the ﬁrst and last interarrival times out of the estimation and calculation
of the posterior distribution. We revise the likelihood function to be:

L(P| (cid:126)X (cid:126)R) × L(Λ| (cid:126)T (cid:126)R) × R(cid:89)

PLC,i1r × R(cid:89)

PiLr ,RC,

r=1

r=1

(7)

where LC is the left censor (Jan. 1st, 2005) and RC is the right censor (Dec.
31st, 2009).

3.2.3 Determining Cluster Membership

In our algorithm we assign each patient to a proﬁle based on the maximum
posterior likelihood of the patient for each proﬁle. Let (cid:126)Z (cid:126)R be a latent variable

9

vector ( (cid:126)Z1, (cid:126)Z2, . . . , (cid:126)ZR), following a multinomial distribution and containing
the latent proﬁle membership of patient r, for r ∈ {1, . . . , R}. Together
the vectors ( (cid:126)X (cid:126)R, (cid:126)T (cid:126)R, (cid:126)Z (cid:126)R) form the complete data on the patient population
under our model assumptions. However, because (cid:126)Z (cid:126)R is unknown, we must
infer the (cid:126)Zr from (cid:126)Xr and (cid:126)Tr, speciﬁcally the posterior (conditional) likelihood
P ( (cid:126)Xr, (cid:126)Tr|Zrk = 1), the probability that patient r belongs to proﬁle k given
(cid:126)Xr, (cid:126)Tr:

P (Zrk = 1| (cid:126)Xr, (cid:126)Tr) =

P ( (cid:126)Xr, (cid:126)Tr|Zrk=1)P (Zrk = 1)

P ( (cid:126)Xr, (cid:126)Tr)

∝ P ( (cid:126)Xr, (cid:126)Tr|Zrk = 1).

(8)

Here, P ( (cid:126)Xr, (cid:126)Tr) will be constant for all k and thus can be ignored. Like-
wise, without any a priori knowledge of the system, we set P (Zr1 = 1) =
P (Zr2 = 1) = ··· = P (ZrK = 1). Therefore, proﬁle membership will be
solely determined by the posterior likelihood P ( (cid:126)X, (cid:126)T|Zrk = 1). That is, each
observation is assumed to belong to the proﬁle which produces it with the
greatest posterior likelihood.

3.2.4 Model Selection
We seek to ﬁnd the optimal clustering of sequences, given by (cid:126)Z (cid:126)R, such that
the BIC score is maximized. The BIC is an objective function that balances
the tradeoﬀ between maximizing the likelihood function while minimizing
model size. For a model M ,

BIC(M ) = (cid:96)(M ) + |M| · log(R)/2,

(9)
where (cid:96)(M ) is the log-likelihood of the model M , |M| is the model size and R
is the number of patients. Given the transition and interarrival parameters
for the set of patients in proﬁle k, Pk and Λk, for k ∈ 1, . . . , K, (cid:96)(M ) is given
by taking the log of the likelihood function, (5),

(cid:96)(M ) =

(cid:96)(Pk| (cid:126)Xr) + (cid:96)(Λk| (cid:126)Tr)

R(cid:88)
K(cid:88)
R(cid:88)

k=1

r=1

+

PLC,ir1 +

PirLr ,RC.

(10)

R(cid:88)

r=1

r=1

10

For model M with K proﬁles, we will estimate KS(S + 1) − 1 parameters
for the transition matrices, Pk, k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, and KS2 in the interarrival
matrices, Λk, k ∈ {1, . . . , K}.

In a previous paper, the authors used an EM algorithm to perform model
estimation. However, such an algorithm requires the user to pre-specify the
number of proﬁles, K, regardless of the number of true proﬁles. Additionally,
each initialization may produce a diﬀerent outcome, implying that a global
optimum is not necessarily reached with each clustering result. However,
with a satisfactory initialization the output will be nearly optimal without
complex calculation.

Other researchers favor a tree-based algorithm, where a distance metric
is used to determine splits in the set of observation [28]. Ramoni, et al., use
the BIC in conjunction with the KL distance to perform agglomerative hier-
archical clustering. However, a top-down approach is warranted in our case
since we can choose a reasonable stopping point in the algorithm where the
smallest number of splits explain the predominant patterns in the system. In
contrast with the EM algorithm, the beneﬁt of such a tree-based algorithm is
that the the number of clusters can be determined after the clustering anal-
ysis is performed. However, it may not be guaranteed to maximize posterior
likelihood of cluster membership. Therefore, we propose a joint tree-based,
EM optimization algorithm that maximizes the BIC criterion.

3.2.5 The Algorithm

As K and R increase, it becomes computationally intractable to consider all
possible partitions to ﬁnd the maximum BIC score. Therefore, we present
an algorithm that searches for a nearly maximal BIC at each iteration. Our
algorithm, as in [28, 27], is guided by the Kullback-Leibler (KL) distance:

(cid:90)

KL(Q1||Q1) =

Q1(x) log (Q1(x)/Q2(x)) dx,

(11)

where Q1 and Q2 are the probability distributions under comparison. Speciﬁ-
cally, we ﬁnd the KL distance between the transition distribution out of each
of the si for each individual sequence and the entire set of sequences in a
given proﬁle and then average across the si, i ∈ {1, . . . , S}. (We provide the
derivation of the KL distance in Appendix B.) We then order the average KL
distances and ﬁnd a nearly optimal partition in the observations to use as

11

the initialization of the EM algorithm to maximize the posterior likelihood
function. An overview of the algorithm is given below:

1. We begin with the null assumption, H0, that all patients in a set belong
to one proﬁle. Find the population MLEs, ¯Λij, and the transition
matrix ¯Pij under the null hypothesis. Calculate the BIC0 value.

2. Calculate the average KL distances between individual sequences and

the one proﬁle (null hypothesis), Dave(P, Λ|| ¯P , ¯Λ).

3. For a suﬃciently large, equally-spaced set of the ordered average KL
distances, (say, 50), D(i), let W −
be the set of patients with average
KL distances from the null distribution less than D(i), and W +
be
D(i)
the set of patient with average KL distances from the null distribution
greater than D(i). For each partition, {W −
} , calculate the
BICA corresponding to the BIC value of the alternative hypothesis,
HA, that the set of sequences should be partitioned into two proﬁles.
}, such that the BIC score is max-
imized. Let this partition be the initialization for the EM algorithm.
Recalculate the BIC score, call it BIC∗
A after the iterations of the EM
algorithm.

4. Consider the partition {W ∗−

, W +

, W ∗+

D(i)

D(i)

D(i)

D(i)

D(i)

5. If BIC∗

A > BIC0, then divide the sequences into distinct proﬁles. Re-

peat steps (1)-(4) until no more divisions are made.

3.3 Deriving Simple Utilization Proﬁle Visualizations

By employing stochastic models for clustering utilization sequences we can
further derive stochastic provider networks via the transition matrices, al-
lowing visualization of the utilization behaviors as networks across providers
of diﬀerent types. The primary inputs for the stochastic provider networks
are the transition matrices. Speciﬁcally, the six provider types, CL, ER, HO,
NP, PO, and RX are the nodes in a directed graph. The directed edges rep-
resent transition probabilities between two provider types, for example, the
transition of patients from the emergency room to a physician’s oﬃce visit.
For a simpliﬁed representation, the networks only include nodes such that a
total of 90% volume is represented. we use diﬀerent types of arcs for diﬀerent
levels of transition probabilities to better identify nodes that are most visited
within each proﬁle.

12

3.4 Assessing our Clustering Algorithm

We highlight ﬁve important properties of our clustering algorithm [1]:

• Robustness: Deﬁned as the ability to detect outliers. Our algorithm
will place every observation within one proﬁle, but as more divisions
are made, the outlying observations become evident in low-membership
proﬁles.

• Minimum user-speciﬁed input: By combining the EM algorithm with
a hierarchical framework we do not need predeﬁne parameters such as
the number of proﬁles in the algorithm.

• Scalability: We simulated 5 diﬀerent settings of R patients (R = 100K,
300K, 500K, 1M , 1.5M ) and determined the run time of a single
iteration of the algorithm. See Fig. 1 for results on the runtime of
the algorithm. In our study with over 100K patients in each state, the
algorithm ran to completion through 8 iterations in approximately 3
hours.

• Computational complexity: The primary computational steps involved
in ﬁtting a patient sequence to an MRP rely on simple counting and
averaging, while the computation of posterior likelihood relies on mul-
tiplication. All of these steps have computational complexity of order
O(n). The sorting step of the posterior likelihoods is the most computa-
tionally expensive with order O(n log n). Therefore, the computational
complexity of our algorithm is O(n log n).

• Visualization feasibility: We translate the transition matrices into stochas-

tic provider networks to produce simple visualizations of the utilization
behaviors with each proﬁle. The ability to quickly digest information on
the similarities and diﬀerences between the diﬀerent stochastic provider
networks is a major advantage over simply providing the resulting es-
timated transition matrices as it can play an integral role in decision
support systems. Moreover, we allow for diﬀerent levels of visualiza-
tion granularity of potentially complex healthcare systems. That is,
the clusters of utilization behaviors can be split further into distinct
proﬁles to reach a desirable balance between the number of proﬁles
and intra-proﬁle complexity. This is especially important when there
are potentially a large number of event types.

13

Figure 1: The runtime in hours of a single iteration of our algorithm plotted
against the number of simulated patients.

4 Results

In this section we summarize the results of our pilot study on pediatric
asthma patients on Medicaid in GA and NC for the years 2005 through
2009. We begin with 1.8 and 2.4 million total claims in Georgia (GA) and
North Carolina (NC) for patients with a primary diagnosis of asthma which
are translated into 754,597 and 1,224,579 visits for GA and NC, respectively.

4.0.1 Graphical Representations

Figures 2 and 3 are visual representations of the estimated utilization proﬁles
as probabilistic network graphs. We only include high-traﬃc nodes in these
graphs, such that 90% of the overall volume of encounters is summarized. The
nodes are labeled by the provider types corresponding to the contributing
states of the utilization sequences in each underlying proﬁle and edges are
a visual representation of the the estimated transition probabilities between
nodes or states. We provide the complete set of interarrival times between
the diﬀerent states in Tables II and III in Appendix D. The legend describes
our choice for visualization of the transitions between providers based on the
transition probabilities between states. Across all networks, we include the
LC (left censoring) and RC (right censoring) nodes specifying the beginning
(2005) and the end (2009) year of the study.

14

Figure 2: Network graphs of estimated utilization proﬁles of GA. Transition
probabilities are given on each edge along with the average interarrival times
measured in months in parentheses.

15

Figure 3: Network graphs of estimated utilization proﬁles of NC. Transition
probabilities are given on each edge along with the average interarrival times
measured in months in parentheses.

16

4.0.2 Utilization Networks for GA

The network graphs of the four utilization proﬁles we highlight from GA are
displayed in Figure 3. Our decision to highlight these four utilization proﬁles
is described in Appendix C.

Proﬁle 1: For patients in this proﬁle, the initial probability of visiting
PO is extremely high (0.97) while the probability of having repeat visits
to PO is low, with average interarrival time of 8.2 months. Likewise, the
initial probability of a RX prescription is low but the probability of repeat
encounters is extremely high (0.96), with an average interarrival time of 1.4
months. There are no directed edges between PO and RX indicating that
this proﬁle consists of those patients who either visit PO or RX but not both,
and would likely be divided into separate proﬁles in later iterations of the
algorithm.

Proﬁle 2: Patients in this proﬁle have a high expected number of RX
encounters, equal to 4.31, and PO visits, equal to 1.09, with a low expected
number of HO, equal to 0.52. There are many directed edges into RX with
high probability (0.57 - PO → RX, 0.70 - repeated RX encounters), with no
directed edges between PO and HO. The interarrival times into RX are also
low (1.0 month for HO → RX, 1.1 months for PO → RX, 1.5 months for RX
reﬁlls), and the interarrival time from HO to PO is 0.6 months. Although
HO is present in this proﬁle, repeat admissions into HO are infrequent, with
an average interarrival time of 7.3 months.

Proﬁle 3: The expected number of visits is 0.46 for CL visits, 0.5 for ER,
1.84 for PO and 3.30 for RX prescriptions, with many directed edges into PO
and RX. The high number of RX prescriptions is due to many directed edges
into RX from ER and PO as well as the high probability of repeat encounters
with relatively high interarrival times compared to the other proﬁles of 4.2
months. PO likewise receives a high number of visits because of a large
number of directed edges, although with low probability, from the other
three provider types. Although ER is present in this proﬁle, the readmission
into the ER are infrequent, with 8.5 months on average between visits.

Proﬁle 4: The expected number of visits to ER, HO, and PO are higher
than in the previous proﬁles with 0.72, 1.13, 2.53, respectively, while RX
still has a high number of encounters, equal to 4.03. The interarrival times
between consecutive RX encounters are low on average at 2.2 months and
interarrival times into ER and HO are overall high, with the lowest being
HO → HO at 4.0 months.

17

RX is present in all four proﬁles, with high expected number of encounters
in Proﬁles 2-4. The PO/RX relationship is highly prevalent, judging by the
high transition probabilities between the two.

4.0.3 Utilization Networks for NC

The network graphs of the four utilization proﬁles we highlight from NC are
displayed in Figure 3. Our decision to highlight these four utilization proﬁles
is described in Appendix C.

Proﬁle 1: This proﬁle consists of patients primarily on asthma-controlled
medication, where the expected number of RX (re)ﬁlls is equal to 9.34 over
the study period. The probability of RX reﬁlls is high at 0.89, while the
interarrival time between consecutive RX encounters is low (1.5 months).
These patients rarely visit physician oﬃces (less that 10% of the utilization
in this proﬁle and hence not present) and they almost never visit ER or
have hospitalization. This group of patients could be used as a baseline to
compare patients with other utilization proﬁles.

Proﬁle 2: The expected number of RX encounters are lower in this proﬁle
(3.14) than Proﬁle 1, with more expected visits to PO, equal to 2.35. A
strong connection between PO and RX is clear, with a stronger directed edge
going from PO to RX, implying RX prescription ﬁlls after a physician oﬃce
visit. The probability of RX reﬁlls is high, equal to 0.68, with a low average
interarrival time of 1.5 months. The average interarrival time between PO
visits is higher (6.3 months). Hence, patients in this proﬁle tend to visit
physician oﬃce more often than those in Proﬁle 1, with insigniﬁcant ER
utilization or hospitalizations.

Proﬁle 3: Patients in this proﬁle have an overall lower number of visits to
RX and PO (equal to 2.51 and 0.97, respectively), while CL and HO add more
visits, with an expected number equal to 0.30 and 0.36, respectively. This
proﬁle has many similarities to Proﬁle 3 of GA, with much higher average
interarrival times between RX encounters equal to 5.3 months, but also with
high average interarrival times between HO readmissions equal to 5.8 months.
Transitions from HO to PO and to RX have high interarrival times at 9.9
months and 9.7 months, indicating non-adherence to follow-up treatment for
controlling asthma.

Proﬁle 4: This proﬁle primarily consists of RX and PO visits, with ex-
pected numbers equal to 7.52 and 4.16, respectively, while ER and HO add
fewer, with expected numbers equal to 0.99 and 1.16, respectively. There are

18

strong connections between PO and RX, and many directed edges with high
probability into RX. Here the average interarrival times between consecutive
readmissions to the ER and HO are 4.0 and 2.8, respectively, while the in-
terarrival times between PO and RX encounters are lower, equal to 2.0 and
2.1, respectively. All the interarrival times from ER and HO to PO and to
RX are low ranging between 2.2 months and 2.5 months. Hence, patients in
this proﬁle display higher variation in their healthcare utilization for asthma
than in the other three proﬁles.

4.0.4 Comparing Utilization in GA & NC

The network graphs for the two states show remarkable similarities between
the longitudinal utilization proﬁles across both states; particularly, proﬁles
Proﬁle 1 of GA and Proﬁle 2 of NC are similar as well as Proﬁles 3 and 4
of both GA and NC. Other commonalities include the apparent prominent
relationship between PO visits and subsequent RX encounters, with high
probabilities, indicating well-managed asthma patients.
In all but Proﬁle
1 of GA and NC there are directed edges between the two provider types,
routinely with high probability and low average interarrival times. Likewise,
as shown in Figures 2 and 3, there are no connections between PO or RX
and HO or ER with transition probability greater than 0.33. By examining
the visits by provider type bar chart in Fig. 4, we ﬁnd that GA has more
uniformity and variation between the provider types across the four proﬁles.
The major diﬀerences between the two states lie in the high concentration of
RX visits in NC (67% versus 54% in GA), and the relatively high proportion
of ER and HO visits in GA (13% versus 8% in NC).

5 Conclusion

In this paper we introduce a data science framework for extracting, analysing
and integrating large, highly-sensitive claims information for deriving simple
graphical interpretations of healthcare utilization. The objective is to charac-
terize and visualize underlying proﬁles of patient-level utilization behaviors.
Our framework begins with manipulation and processing of large ﬂat ﬁles of
administratively coded claims into meaningful data in the form of stream-
lined utilization sequences. The patient-level utilization sequences are then
the input for a scalable model-based clustering analysis for discovering the

19

Figure 4: A chart plotting the total number of visits to each provider type
from all patients per proﬁle during the years 2005 - 2009.

20

underlying utilization proﬁles. Our methods are both rigorous and general,
with applicability beyond the case study in this paper.

We pilot our study with Medicaid claims data across ﬁve years, 2005-
2009. We extract data for only a subset of patients, particularly, asthma-
diagnosed children older than 3, and we focus on two states, Georgia and
North Carolina.

Our study emphasis is on healthcare utilization as it is at the core of crit-
ical aspects of healthcare delivery, including healthcare access, expenditure
and cost, prevention and chronic disease management [32]. We also focus
on the Medicaid system as the test bed for our analysis because caring for
the disadvantaged populations, particularly Medicaid children, is one prior-
ity of the current health policies in the United States, with potential impact
on reducing health and healthcare disparities, and on containing the asso-
ciated costs [41]. Medicaid constitutes the primary source of coverage for
low-income children in the United States.

An important aspect of the Medicaid beneﬁts system is that its implemen-
tation and reimbursement structure vary by state. Due to these state-based
diﬀerences in the implementation, the eﬀectiveness of the program also varies
greatly by state. Thus, by comparing utilization of care across states one can
reveal the impact of these variations on the care ecosystem.

Particularly, we chose Georgia and North Carolina for this comparison be-
cause the demographics of the pediatric populations are very similar (30-50%
minority population [40] and approximately $37,000 Per Capita Personal In-
come 2012 [7]), although they have diﬀerent care-coordinated systems. While
North Carolina has a state-coordinated Medicaid system, Georgia’s Medicaid
patients are primarily managed by three Medicaid Managed Care Organiza-
tions with a reasonably small percentage of children under the fee-for-service
care practice [12]. According to the 2007 ranking of states based on the
Medicaid eligibility, scope of services, quality of care, and reimbursement ob-
tained by the Public Citizen Health Research Group [2], North Carolina is
ranked in the second quartile and Georgia is ranked in the third quartile.

With similar Medicaid populations but diﬀerent care coordination sys-
tems and eﬀectiveness rankings, we ﬁnd some striking similarities in the
longitudinal (multi-year) utilization behaviors for pediatric asthma care.

Both states have an underlying proﬁle including patients primarily visit-
ing a physician’s oﬃce (Proﬁle 1 in GA and Proﬁle 2 in NC). Likewise Proﬁle
2 in GA and Proﬁle 1 in NC have a high probability of ﬁlling a prescription
for asthma-controlled medication (higher for North Carolina than for Geor-

21

gia) but a lower probability of PO visits (lower for North Carolina than for
Georgia). The transition probabilities are low connecting ER/HO to PO
and vice versa, with stronger links between medication and physician oﬃces,
suggesting that the more variational clusters also include a proportion of
patients that primarily visit physician oﬃce with sporadic (low probability)
visits to the emergency department or with hospitalizations. This indicates
that the majority of patients utilizing the physician’s oﬃce in the variational
proﬁles adhere to a great extent to evidence-based practices for asthma care.
A third noteworthy ﬁnding is the prevalence of clinic visits in Proﬁle 3 for
both states, where clinics refer to federally-qualiﬁed and rural health clinics.
This is not surprising since Medicaid children rely heavily on care from clinics
located in underserved areas. Importantly, patients with clinic visits have a
higher probability to follow up with a phyician’s oﬃce visit rather than visit
ER or have an hospitalization for both states.

An important dissimilarity across the two states is the proportion of pa-
tients with regular PO visits (physician’s oﬃce visits make up 59% of non-
RX (re)ﬁlls in Georgia, while they make up 64% of non-RX (re)ﬁlls in North
Carolina). Proﬁles 1 & 2 in North Carolina contain almost 50% of patients
where those patients primarily utilize the physician’s oﬃce along with RX
encounters; in contrast, Proﬁle 1 (21%) and approximately half of Proﬁle 2
(roughly 16%) patients in Georgia utilize the physician’s oﬃce almost ex-
clusively. Hence, in aggregate, North Carolina has around 50% more of the
patient population than Georgia that visit physician’s oﬃces to the exclusion
of other provider types on a regular basis.

In both states, the average interarrival time of RX ﬁlls is very similar av-
eraging 1.5 months in Proﬁles 1 and 2 of both states, 2.2 months in Proﬁle 4,
with Proﬁles 3 having the longest average interarrival times of 4.2 months in
GA and 5.3 months in NC. When comparing the graphical networks, we also
ﬁnd that physician’s oﬃce visits and medication ﬁlls nodes are represented
strongly for both North Carolina and Georgia across all four proﬁles. On the
other hand, emergency department or hospitalization nodes appear to serve
only as intermediary connections for both Georgia and North Carolina, with
a stronger presence in Georgia.

This study has several limitations. One shortcoming in using claims data
to infer utilization is that while we seek to make inference on an entire sub-
population, we capture realized and not potential utilization of the system
[32, 10]. First, the MAX ﬁles only include claims that have been reimbursed.
Second, not all Medicaid-eligible children are enrolled or they have intermit-

22

tent enrollment. Moreover, there will be a percentage of Medicaid-enrolled
children who are undiagnosed due primarily to lack of healthcare access.
Therefore, estimates on the healthcare utilization are likely to be to be bi-
ased, particularly for the Medicaid population, where certain subgroups have
diﬃculty in maintaining Medicaid coverage or are susceptible to particularly
disparate utilization [10, 26]. We provide further analysis of the enrollment
patterns of the Medicaid children in our study in Appendix E.

While our model and its estimation and selection methods are compu-
tationally attractive, they can be extended further for relaxing some of the
underlying assumptions. First, we do not include the mean times until the
ﬁrst event and the mean times between the last event because they are biased
estimates of complete lifetimes due to the censored nature of our data. In
doing so, we are unable to completely determine the consistency with which
patients visit providers. For instance, with unbiased estimates of the arrival
to the ﬁrst event it would be clear if a patient waits a long time between
groups of consecutive visits or utilizes the system at a fairly homogeneous
rate across the complete study time span. Furthermore, in order to produce
simple visualizations and minimize computational costs we assume the inter-
arrival times to be exponentially distributed, conditional on the visit type.
More importantly, it is likely that covariates including age, condition sever-
ity, comorbidities, enrollment status and access play a role in the frequency
of the visits. However, this method does not capture the potential eﬀects of
these covariates on utilization.

Despite these shortcomings, our model allows for reduction of high di-
mensional utilization data into a one-dimensional vector containing cluster
memberships, thus providing the means for policy-makers to easily simulate
or visualize healthcare utilization and further study explanatory variables
that could explain the variations across patient-level utilization proﬁles.

Even though this study has several limitations, it has some important im-
plications for health care providers and policy makers. Importantly, following
the care practice recommendations, if a child visits the emergency depart-
ment for asthma care then he/she needs to be referred back to primary care
[20].
In both Georgia and North Carolina, the transition from emergency
department or from hospitalization to physician’s oﬃce varies across utiliza-
tion proﬁles, with very low probability of physician’s oﬃce follow-up visits
for the patients using emergency department and hospitalization regularly.
Those follow-up visits vary with the patient’s proﬁle, indicating that diﬀerent
interventions should be considered for each of the proﬁle of patients. More

23

importantly, in both states, patients who are visiting emergency department
regularly for asthma care are few, with long periods of time between read-
missions.

Asthma-controlled medication uptake is strongly connected with physi-
cian’s oﬃce visits across three proﬁles, and in one proﬁle where it is not,
patients are regularly taking medication with no signiﬁcant severe outcomes
recorded. From the strength of the links between physician’s oﬃce and med-
ication (re)ﬁlls, and lack of connection of those two event types to the emer-
gency department, those patients who visit a physician’s oﬃce on a regular
basis while staying on asthma-controlled medication are unlikely to have
emergency department visits in both states. This ﬁnding provides evidence
that asthma can be controlled with regular physician’s oﬃce visits and medi-
cation, with the potential of eliminating costly emergency department visits.

Acknowledgment

The authors are thankful to Matt Sanders and Paul Dietrich in assisting
with data safeguards and access as well as with the information technology
infrastructure. The authors are thankful to Dr. Julie Swann for the lead-
ership in the protocol submission of the use of the MAX Medicaid claims
data to the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid and in the Internal Review
Board approval process. We are also thankful to our reviewers who have
helped us improve this document. This research has been supported by a pi-
lot grant from the Institute of People and Technology (IPaT) and Children’s
Healthcare of Atlanta and by a grant from the National Science Foundation
(CMMI-0954283).

References

[1] Bill Andreopoulos, Aijun An, Xiaogang Wang, and Michael Schroeder.
A roadmap of clustering algorithms: ﬁnding a match for a biomedical
application. Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics, 10(3):297–314, 2009.

[2] A R d Arellano and S Wolfe. Unsettling scores: A ranking of state

Medicaid programs. 2007, 2011.

24

[3] Michael Becker and Ralf Laue. A comparative survey of business process

similarity measures. Computers in Industry, 63(2):148–167, 2012.

[4] B. Bloom, L.I. Jones, and Freeman G. Summary health statistics for
U.S. children: National health interview survey. Vital Health Statistics,
10, 2013.

[5] Tobias Blum, Nicolas Padoy, Hubertus Feuner, and Nassir Navab. Work-
ﬂow mining for visualization and analysis of surgeries.
International
Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, 3(5):379–386,
2008.

[6] Mark L Braunstein. Health informatics in the Cloud. Springer, 2012.

[7] Bureau of Business & Economic Research, UNM. Per capita personal

income by state. https://bber.unm.edu/econ/us-pci.htm/, 2013.

[8] Varun Chandola, Sreenivas R Sukumar, and Jack C Schryver. Knowl-
edge discovery from massive healthcare claims data. In Proceedings of
the 19th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining, pages 1312–1320. ACM.

[9] Pavlos Delias, Michael Doumpos, Panagiotis Manolitzas, Evangelos
Grigoroudis, and Nikolaos Matsatsinis. Clustering healthcare processes
with a robust approach. In Proceedings of the 26th European Conference
on Operational Research.

[10] Jennifer E DeVoe, Rachel Gold, Patti McIntire, Jon Puro, Susan Chau-
vie, and Charles A Gallia. Electronic health records vs Medicaid claims:
completeness of diabetes preventive care data in community health cen-
ters. The Annals of Family Medicine, 9(4):351–358, 2011.

[11] Diogo R Ferreira. Applied sequence clustering techniques for process
mining. Handbook of Research on Business Process Modeling, Informa-
tion Science Reference, IGI Global, pages 492–513, 2009.

[12] Kaiser Family Foundation. State health facts: Medicaid & CHIP. http:

//kff.org/state-category/medicaid-chip/, 2014.

[13] Brian Karrer and Mark EJ Newman. Random graph models for directed

acyclic networks. Physical Review E, 80(4):046110, 2009.

25

[14] Sankalp Khanna, Justin Boyle, Norm Good, James Lind, and Kathryn
Zeitz. Time based clustering for analyzing acute hospital patient ﬂow.
In Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2012 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE, pages 5903–5906. IEEE.

[15] Bruce Y Lee, Sarah M McGlone, Yeohan Song, Taliser R Avery, Stephen
Eubank, Chung-Chou Chang, Rachel R Bailey, Diane K Wagener, Don-
ald S Burke, and Richard Platt. Social network analysis of patient shar-
ing among hospitals in Orange County, California. American Journal of
Public Health, 101(4):707, 2011.

[16] Sang-Joon Lee. Visualization of Clinical Practice Guidelines and Patient

Care Process. PhD thesis, 2006.

[17] Weizhong Li, Lukasz Jaroszewski, and Adam Godzik. Clustering
of highly homologous sequences to reduce the size of large protein
databases. Bioinformatics, 17(3):282–283, 2001.

[18] Fen-May Liou, Ying-Chan Tang, and Jean-Yi Chen. Detecting hospital
fraud and claim abuse through diabetic outpatient services. Health Care
Management Science, 11(4):353–358, 2008.

[19] Marianne Kolbasuk McGee. North Carolina ﬁghts Medicaid fraud with

analytics, 2012.

[20] National Institute of Health. National asthma education and preven-
tion program, third expert panel on the diagnosis and management of
asthma. Clinical Practice Guidelines, 2007.

[21] National Research Council. Frontiers in Massive Data Analysis. The

National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2013.

[22] Mark EJ Newman and Elizabeth A Leicht. Mixture models and ex-
ploratory analysis in networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 104(23):9564–9569, 2007.

[23] Pedro A Ortega, Cristin J Figueroa, and Gonzalo A Ruz. A medical
claim fraud/abuse detection system based on data mining: A case study
in Chile. Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on Data
Mining, DMIN, 6:26–29, 2006.

26

[24] Kathryn A Phillips, Kathleen R Morrison, Ronald Andersen, and
Lu Ann Aday. Understanding the context of healthcare utilization: as-
sessing environmental and provider-related variables in the behavioral
model of utilization. Health Services Research, 33(3 Pt 1):571, 1998.

[25] Clifton Phua, Vincent Lee, Kate Smith, and Ross Gayler. A compre-

hensive survey of data mining-based fraud detection research. 2010.

[26] L. T. Piecoro, M. Potoski, J. C. Talbert, and D. E. Doherty. Asthma
prevalence, cost, and adherence with expert guidelines on the utilization
of health care services and costs in a state Medicaid population. Health
Services Research, 36(2):357–371, 2001.

[27] Marco Ramoni, Paola Sebastiani, and Paul Cohen. Multivariate clus-

tering by dynamics. In AAAI/IAAI, pages 633–638.

[28] Marco Ramoni, Paola Sebastiani, and Paul Cohen. Bayesian clustering

by dynamics. Machine learning, 47(1):91–121, 2002.

[29] ´Alvaro Jos da Silva Rebuge. Business process analysis in healthcare

environments. 2012.

[30] Proctor P Reid, W Dale Compton, Jerome H Grossman, and Gary Fan-
jiang. Building a Better Delivery System: a New Engineering/Health
Care Partnership. National Academies Press, 2005.

[31] Greg Ridgeway. Finite discrete Markov process clustering. Technical
report, Technical Report TR 97-24, Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA,
1997.

[32] William B. Rouse and Nicoleta Serban. Understanding and Managing

the Complexity of Healthcare. MIT Press, 2014.

[33] Andrei Sorin Sabau. Survey of clustering based ﬁnancial fraud detection

research. Informatica Economica, 16(1):110–122, 2012.

[34] Hua-Wei Shen, Dashun Wang, Chaoming Song, and Albert-Lszl Barabsi.
Modeling and predicting popularity dynamics via reinforced Poisson pro-
cesses. 2014.

27

[35] Harold Siden and Karen Urbanoski. Using network analysis to map
the formal clinical reporting process in pediatric palliative care: a pilot
study. BMC Health Services Research, 11(1):343, 2011.

[36] L. Sokol, B. Garcia, M. West, J. Rodriguez, and K. Johnson. Precur-
sory steps to mining HCFA health care claims.
In System Sciences,
2001. Proceedings of the 34th Annual Hawaii International Conference
on, page 10 pp.

[37] J. M. Tien and P.J. Goldschmidt-Clermont. Engineering healthcare as
a service system. Information-Knowledge-Systems Management, 8:277–
297, 2009.

[38] Divya Tomar and Sonali Agarwal. A survey on data mining ap-
proaches for healthcare. International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-
Technology, 5(5):241–266, 2013.

[39] Peter Travaille, Roland M Mller, Dallas Thornton, and Jos Hillegers-
berg. Electronic fraud detection in the US Medicaid healthcare program:
lessons learned from other industries. 2011.

[40] U.s. Bureau of

the Census.

2009 minority percentage.
u-s-state-2009-estimated-minority-percentage-1146/, 2010.

Map – U.S.

estimated
http://censuschannel.net/cc/news/

states

[41] U.S. Congress. Patient protection and Aﬀordable Care Act, 2010.

[42] Pak Chung Wong, Wendy Cowley, Harlan Foote, Elizabeth Jurrus, and
Jim Thomas. Visualizing sequential patterns for text mining. In Infor-
mation Visualization, 2000. InfoVis 2000. IEEE Symposium on, pages
105–111. IEEE.

[43] C.F. Jeﬀ Wu. Statistics = data science, 1998.

[44] Illhoi Yoo, Patricia Alafaireet, Miroslav Marinov, Keila Pena-
Hernandez, Rajitha Gopidi, Jia-Fu Chang, and Lei Hua. Data mining
in healthcare and biomedicine: a survey of the literature. Journal of
Medical Systems, 36(4):2431–2448, 2012.

[45] Shenjun Zhu, Qiling Shi, and Aran Canes. Detecting Medicaid data
anomalies using data mining techniques. Report SDA-04, AdvanceMed
Corporation, 2010.

28

