6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
2

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
0
9
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Talk presented at the International Workshop on Future Linear Colliders (LCWS15), Whistler, Canada, 2-6 November 2015

Status of Dual-readout R&D for a linear collider in
T1015 Collaboration

C. Gatto1, V. Di Benedetto2 , E. Hahn2and A. Mazzacane2

On behalf of T1015 Collaboration[1]
1 INFN, Sezione di Napoli, via Cinthia, 80126 Napoli, Italy
2 Fermilab, Batavia (IL), USA

E-mail: corrado.gatto@na.infn.it

Abstract. The hadronic energy resolution required for an hadronic operating at lepton collider
is at the limits or even exceeds that obtained with traditional techniques. Furthermore, it is
a well established fact that the presence of an electromagnetic section in front of an hadron
calorimeter, as occurs in the layouts of the majority of detectors operating at a collider, would
deteriorate the hadronic energy resolution of the device. The novel ADRIAN O technology
(A Dual-readout Integrally Active Non-segmented Option), currently under development at
Fermilab, overcomes the above limitations by complementing an integrally active calorimeter
with the dual-readout technique. Detailed Monte Carlo studies indicate that the energy
resolution is in the 25%/
E interval with a linear response of the detector up to an
√
energy of 200 GeV. A baseline conﬁguration is chosen with an estimated energy resolution of
σ(E)/E ≈ 30%/
E. Several prototypes have been built by T1015 Collaboration at Fermilab,
to explore the eﬀect of modiﬁcations of the layout from the baseline conﬁguration. Preliminary
results from several test beams at the Fermilab Test Beam Facility (FTBF) of ∼ 1λI prototypes
are presented. Future prospects with ultra-heavy glass are, also, summarized.

√
√
E - 38%/

√

1. Introduction
The physics program at future lepton and hadron colliders encompasses a very large number
of processes involving ﬁnal states with multi-jets events. In such an environment, calorimeters
will play an important role at energies above 100 GeV, as their energy resolution scales, in most
E . An intensive detector R&D and Monte Carlo simulation activity is already in
cases, as 1/
progress within the lepton colliders communities[2].
The general consensus within the lepton collider community is that the jet energy resolution
needed to successfully distinguish the W from the Z signal in a high energy (Ecm > 500GeV )
is σ(E)/E ≈ 30%/
E or better. Such a resolution is unprecedented for conventional hadronic
calorimeters and it has been reached in the past only by massive compensating calorimeters
with very small volume ratio between passive and active materials[3]. Unfortunately the average
density of detectors whith such properties is relatively low. Consequently, the volume needed to
contain the showers would be so large to make their use impractical in experiments with colliding
beams. Furthermore, the resolution of conventional, single-readout calorimeters is limited by
the ﬂuctuations in the electromagnetic (EM ) content of the hadronic shower and by the unequal
response of such devices to the EM and hadronic components of the shower itself (e/h (cid:54)= 1)[4].

√

In recent years, dual-readout calorimetry[7] has been introduced as an alternative technique in
order to cope with those eﬀects. The dual-readout technique relies on measuring event-by-event
the EM fraction of the shower and is based on the simultaneous acquisition of signals generated
by independent shower production mechanisms, thus providing complementary information on
the composition of the hadronic shower.

Dual read-out calorimetry falls under two broad categories: sampling and integrally active.
Sampling dual-readout techniques are currently investigated by the DREAM [7] Collaboration.
Extensive R&D conducted in recent years by DREAM has conﬁrmed the several advantages
of the dual-readout technique. However the sampling approach introduces two new important
sources of energy ﬂuctuations: Poisson ﬂuctuations in the ˘Cerenkov signal, induced by the low
photo-electron statistics and sampling ﬂuctuations, generated by the fact that the absorber is
totally passive and the signals are generated only in a small fraction of the volume. Those
ﬂuctuations do not only impair the energy resolution of hadronic particles and jets, but have
also detrimental consequences on the detection quality of photons and electrons. The detection
of EM particles in high energy jets is similarly aﬀected. An obvious solution to the latter
problem would be to design a detector with two distinguished regions: a front EM section and
a rear hadronic section. However, nowadays it is well understood that such a conﬁguration is
sub-optimal in terms of energy measurement of hadronic particles due to the extra ﬂuctuations
introduced by the development of the shower across two diﬀerent sections which, in most cases,
consist of media with very diﬀerent properties [4].

Integrally active dual-readout techniques, on the other hand, are mostly free of the above
limitations since the the absorber is also active and it participates in the compensation
mechanism with the production of the ˘Cerenkov signal. Test beams and extensive simulations
indicate that these techniques provide the energy resolution required by the future lepton
colliders and are capable of operate at the same time as hadronic and EM detectors, with
no need for separate devices.

In this article we will give an update on the status of the Dual-Readout, Integrally Active and
Non-homogeneous Option (ADRIAN O), based on light signals produced in high transmittance
optical glasses and scintillating plastic materials. The related R&D is conducted as part of the
scientiﬁc program of Fermilab based, T1015 Collaboration.

2. Description of ADRIAN O techniques
The ADRIAN O technique (A Dual-readout Integrally Active Non-segmented Option), developed
by T1015 [1] Collaboration is intended to be used for High Energy as well as High Intensity
experiements. However, the diﬀerent requirements for the two classes of experiments have
conducted to two separate designs, each optimized for that speciﬁc application.

ADRIANO for High Energy experiements. Most of the ADRIAN O prototypes which we
have designed and built for High Energy experiments have a full modular structure, with the
base unit consisting of an individual cell of parallelepiped shape with 40× 40 mm2 cross-section
and either 15 cm or 25 cm length. The cell consists of a sandwich of scintillating ﬁbers and high
density, optical grade heavy glass. The glass behaves as an absorber and as an active medium
at the same time, generating almost exclusively ˘Cerenkov light. The scintillation and ˘Cerenkov
sections of ADRIAN O are optically separated. Therefore, the two generated light signals are
well separated, with minimal chance of cross-talk. We have considered various techniques to
optically separate those two regions: white and silver coating of the glass, white coating, silver
coating and aluminum sputtering of the scintillating ﬁbers and, ﬁnally, a thin layer of Teﬂon
between the glass plates and the array of scintillating ﬁbers.

The scintillating ﬁbers are either accommodated in grooves formed in the glass itself or in
white plastic trays sandwiched among plates of glass. They run parallel to the longitudinal
axis of the cell and are responsible for the generation of the scintillation component of the

Figure 1. Molding fabrication technology.

dual-readout calorimeter. The pitch between nearby ﬁbers is suﬃciently small compared to the
nuclear hadronic interaction length of the detector that the shower sampling ﬂuctuations are
well contained.
The ˘Cerenkov light generated inside the glass is collected by WLS ﬁbers running inside grooves
parallel to the scintillating ﬁbers and optically coupled to the glass by compounds formulated
ad-hoc to match the large diﬀerence in the refractive indeces involved. The two light components
are read out at the back of each cell with two distinct photodetectors. In some sense, ADRIAN O
is a spaghetti calorimeter with the passive absorber replaced by an active, transparent absorber
made of heavy glass. Another advantage of ADRIAN O relies on the fact that the heavy glass
absorber can be used to detect electromagnetic showers in exactly the same ways as it has been
done in the past with lead glass based electromagnetic calorimeters. The latters are know to
be excelle EM calorimeters in terms of detection aﬃciency and energy resolution. Therefore,
ADRIAN O does not require a front electromagnetic section.

Several heavy glasses (mostly lead and bismuth based) have been tested, with the intent of
comparing the ˘Cerenkov light yield and propagation. Their refractive index ranges from 1.85
through 2.24 while the densities range from 5.5g/cm3 through 7.5g/cm3. Various constructions
techniques have been considered: diamond machining, precision molding, glass melting, laser
drilling and photo-etching. However, only the former two have been used for the production of
the eleven ADRIAN O prototypes presented in this report. A picture of a 8 mm thick glass slice
obtained with the precision molding technique is shown in Fig.1 .

Two new ADRIANO prototypes, each 10 cm wide and 105 cm long, have been built in 2014;
both of them have been optimized for experiments at High Energy lepton colliders. The ﬁrst
prototype (ADRIAN O 2014A ) was constructed by alternating 10 layers of Schott SF57 lead
glass plates, each 6.5 mm thick, with an equal number of thin (2 mm) scintillating plates,
extruded at Fermilab’s Plastic Extrusion Facility. The scintillating and ˘Cerenkov lights from
the individual plates was captured with optically coupled WLS ﬁbers sitting in grooves running
along the detector. The second prototype (ADRIAN O 2014B ) was built by stacking 10 layers
of Schott SF57 lead glass plates, each 6.5 mm thick. A total of 26 grooves were formed in the
glass plates using the precision molding technique. Twenty scintillating ﬁbers and six WLS
ﬁbers were accomodated in those grooves, the former (optically separated from the glass) were
responsible for the scintillating component of the detector while the latter (optically couple to
the glass) were used to capture the ˘Cerenkov light. Both prototyped have been completely built
at the Fermilab’s Thin Film Facility and were exposed to a beam of particles shortly after their

construction. Preliminary results of the measurements are presented below.

A detailed description of the layouts of the above prototypes and their corresponding

construction techniques will follow in an upcoming article.

A picture of ADRIAN O 2014A and ADRIAN O 2014B during the assembly phase is shown

in Fig.2.

ADRIANO for High Intensity. ADRIAN O prototypes intended for High Intensity
experiments are optimized for larger light yield, rather than for high density, since they will
operate mostly at lower energies and in the EM regime. They were, initially designed for the
ORKA and REDTOP projects at Fermilab, where they would operate in the 5-500 M eV energy
regime, but the layout can be properly optimized for any experiment with energy sensitivity
above few MeV. In this case, we replaced the scintillating ﬁbers with plates of thin (2 mm) and
grooved extruded scintillator sandwiched between thicker (4.2 mm) heavy glass plates (Schott
SF57), also grooved. Each plate is 10 cm wide and 37 cm long and it is formed with the molding
technique described above. A picture of a the two plates is shown in Fig.3

.
The light readout of each plates uses WLS ﬁbers: 6 for the plastic plates and 13 for the glass
plates. The larger number of WLS ﬁbers per unit surface of glass (0.031/cm2 vs 0.012/cm2 used
in the High Energy version) captures more ˘Cerenkov photons, at the expenses of a lower average
density of the detector and an increased number of light sensors.

3. ADRIANO readout system
The scintillating and WLS ﬁbers from each ADRIAN O cell were bundled and routed each
to a photodetector.
In order to compare the performance of the light collection system in
various situations we used three diﬀerent photomultipliers (R647 and H3165 from Hamamatsu
and P30CW5 from Sensetech) and two diﬀerent SiPM (4 × 4mm2 square and Ø2.7mm round
from FBK) for WLS ﬁbers and only one type of SiPM (4 × 4mm2 square from FBK) for the
scintillating ﬁbers. When the PMT’s were used, the ﬁbers were routed through a plastice ﬁxture
and coupled to the photosensor window with custom made optical grease. In the case of SiPM’s,
we used either acrylic light concentrators (designed and produced by INFN Trieste) in direct
contact with the ﬁbers on one side and spaced 0.1mµ from the active SiPM surface or we routed
the ﬁbers directly to the SiPM up to 0.1mµ from the active SiPM surface. A picture of a INFN-
Trieste light concentrators is shown in top left of Fig.4. The output of the SiPM and PMT used
was digitized by the TB4 DAQ system developed at Fermilab. Among the features of the DAQ,
the most relevant for our application are:

• 50Ω inputs
• 14 bit ADC;
• ∼ 30 MHz bandwidth;
• ∼ 212 MSPS digitizer;
• Up to 16 channels per Motherboard;
• Bipolar, so both positive (from SiPM) and negative (from PMT’s) signals can be acquired

simultaneously;

• Slow-control over USB, readout over 100 Mbit Ethernet.

4. Results From the Test Beam at FTBF’s
The two prototypes for High Energy experiments: ADRIAN O 2014A and ADRIAN O 2014B
were subject to several test beam during the year 2014, at the FTBF Facility of Fermilab
(Batavia, US). A picture of the test beam setup is shown in Fig.4

Figure 2. ADRIANO2014A (right) and ADRIANO2014B (left). During the assembly phase at
Fermilab’s Thin Film Facility.

Figure 3. Plastic scintillator (left) and glass (right) plates in the ADRIANO for High Intesity
experiments.

Prototype

2014A
2014B

Layout

10 glass + 10 scintillating plates

10 glass plates + sparsiﬁed scintillating ﬁbers

˘Cerenkov L.Y. Scintillation L.Y.
354 pe/GeV
338 pe/GeV

523 pe/GeV
356 pe/GeV

Table 1. Summary of light yields for ADRIANO2014A (left) and ADRIANO 2014B modules tested
in 2014 at Fermilab’s FTBF .

The beam used was obtained by selecting secondary particles of known momentum from a
120 GeV proton beam impinged on a tungsten target. Data were taken at energies between
2 GeV and 1 GeV. The particle identiﬁcation was provided by FTBF’s double-angle ˘Cerenkov
systems. The scatters plot for electrons with momentum varying between 2 GeV and 16 GeV
are shown in Fig.4 for ADRIAN O 2014A (left) and ADRIAN O 2014B (right).

Analogously, the ratio between the ˘Cerenkov signal from the top half and the bottom half
of the detector obtained from a vertical scan of a 4 GeV electron beam are shown in Fig.4 for
ADRIAN O 2014A (left) and ADRIAN O 2014B (right).

The error bars associated with the measurements indicate that the Center of Gravity of
a shower can be estimated with an error smaller than 1 cm. Finally, the scintillation and the
˘Cerenkov light yields have been estracted from the data analysis, by subtracting the background
induced by the pile-up of multiple events. The values obtained for the two detectors tested are
summarized in Table 1.
of providing an hadronic energy resolution of σ(E)/E ≈ 30%/
would contain most of the shower.

The data indicate that the light yield is suﬃcient to garantee that both techniques are capable
E in a detector volume which

√

5. Summary
Since the start of ADRIANO R&D program, we were able to constantly improve the ˘Cerenkov
light yield by reﬁning the construction techniques and the materials employed. A list of the
˘Cerenkov light yield from the ﬁfteen prototypes tested at FTBF so far is summarized in
TablecThe current limit for a 100 × 90 × 1050mm3 prototype for High Energy is roughly 360
pe/GeV, obtained at a test beam at Fermilab in 2014 with the ADRIAN O 2014A prototype.

Figure 4.
ADRIAN O 2014B prototypes (2014)

Setup of a test beam at Fermilab’s FTBF of ADRIAN O 2014A and

Figure 5. Scatter plots of the scintillating vs the ˘Cerenkov light for ADRIANO2014A (left) and
ADRIANO 2014B (right).

Figure 6. Scatter plots of the scintillating vs the ˘Cerenkov light for ADRIANO2014A (left) and
ADRIANO 2014B (right).

6. Future Prospects
The ﬁrst ﬁve years of R&D performed by the T1015 Collaboration on the ADRIAN O technique
have already produced clear directions. Precision molding technique is, at present, the preferred
fabrication technique since it has the potential of making quick (less than 30 minutes) glass slices
with optical surface ﬁnish and with appropriate grooves. Nonetheless, we will keep exploiting
other fabrication techniques as they might have other potential advantages when compared to
precision molding. Photo-etching techniques, for example, are expected to be equally fast and
low-cost, although they have quite severe chemical hazards associated with.

A great boost in ADRIAN O development is currently obtained with Ohara sponsor-
ship/partnership as they have provided bismuth glass strips of commercial optical glass
(6.6g/cm3, nd = 2.0) and strips of an even denser experimental glass with density of 7.54g/cm3
and refractive index of 2.24.

Prototype #

Layout

Glass

g/cm3

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

5 slices, machine grooved, unpolished, white

5 slices, machine grooved, unpolished, white, v2

5 slices, precision molded, unpolished, coated

2 slices, ungrooved, unpolished

5 slices, sciﬁ silver coated, grooved, clear, unpolished
5 slices, sciﬁ silver coated, grooved, clear, unpolished

10 slices, white, ungrooved, polished
10 slices, white, ungrooved, polished

5 slices, sciﬁ Al sputter, grooved, clear, polished

5 slices, ungrooved, polished

2 slices, plain

ADRIANO for ORKA - barrel (10 layers)
ADRIANO for ORKA - endcap (10 layers)

ADRIANO 2014A
ADRIANO 2014B

Schott SF57HHT
Schott SF57HHT
Schott SF57HHT

Ohara BBH1

Schott SF57HHT
Schott SF57HHT

Ohara PBH56

Schott SF57HHT
Schott SF57HHT
Schott SF57HHT

Ohara experimental

Schott SF57
Schott SF57
Schott SF57
Schott SF57

5.6
5.6
5.6
6.6
5.6
5.6
5.4
5.6
5.6
5.6
7.5
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6

L.Y
82
84
55
65
64
120
> 30

76
30
158
−
4000
4000
354
338

Notes

SiPM readout
SiPM readout

15 cm long

Bismuth glass

15 cm long

improved version
DAQ problems

2 wls/groove
2012 version

DAQ problems

Analysis in progress
Analysis in progress

105 cm long prototype
105 cm long prototype

Table 2. Summary of the ˘Cerenkov light yields for ADRIANO modules from seven test beams occurred from
2011 trough 2014.

Currently, one new ADRIAN O prototypes is under construction at Fermilab aimed at
High Energy experiments (high material density and moderate light yied). The layout of the
new prototype has been designed based on the experience and the results obtained from the
prototypes built and tested in 2014. The goal is that of achieving an excellent light yield, symilar
to that of ADRIAN O 2014A, and an large average density, caracteristic of ADRIAN O 2014B
prototype. A test beam for the new detector is already scheduled in December 2015. For the
medium future, we planned to continue to design and build new modules and, consequently, to
augment the volume of the existing setup for a better shower containement.

√

7. Conclusions
In this report we have presented the status of the R&D activity performed by T1015
Collaboration on the ADRIAN O dual-readout technique. Two new detectors have been built
and tested in 2014 bringing the total number of prototypes to ﬁfteen. Preliminary results from
a test beam at FTBF have been reported. The ˘Cerenkov light yield we have obtained from
most of the detector tested so far is more than adequate for an hadronic calorimeter with an
energy resolution of σ(E)/E ≈ 30%/
E or better. Our goal is to increase the light yield to a
level where the ˘Cerenkov light yield of ADRIAN O can be used to detect also electromagnetic
particles. Hardware R&D and Monte Carlo simulations are in an advanced state and constantly
providing directions in the design of new prototypes. Furthermore, current results by T1015
obtained from several test beams have proved that ˘Cerenkov light readout from heavy glasses
with a WLS light capturing technique is feasible and provides equal or better results than
traditional methods tipically employing large area PMT’s directly coupled to the glass. Correctly
matching calorimetric techniques with SiPM and Front End Electronics is also crucial for a good
performance of the detector. T1015 will address these issues in the future and it will exploit
new, glass-based, calorimetric techniques which will also include scintillating heavy glasses.

8. Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Fermilab for its on-going support and for providing all the infrastructure
for the construction and testing of ADRIAN O prototype. In particular, we would like to thank
Aria Soha, Todd Nebel, Geof Savage, Ewa Skupp and Ray Safarik for their continuig assistence
during the setup and data taking of T1015 at FTBF. We would also like to thank Ohara for
providing us with free samples of their BBH-1 bismuth based glass and of a new super-dense
(about 7.5g/cm3) experimental glass which have been used for the construction of ADRIANO
prototype #6 and #11.

This work has been ﬁnancially supported by the Fermilab’s Detector R&D program and the

“TWICE-AGLAGE project” of Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (Italy).

References
[1] wwwppd.f nal.gov/F T BF/M OUP DF/T 1015 mou.pdf
[2] http : //www.linearcollider.org/ http : //clic − study.web.cern.ch/clic − study/
[3] S. Buontempo et al., “Construction and test of calorimeter modules for the CHORUS experiment”, Nucl.

Instr. and Meth. A 349 (1994), p. 250.

[4] R. Wigmans, Calorimetry energy measurement in particle physics, in: International Series of Monographs on

Physics, vol. 107, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000.

[5] 4th Concept Collaboration - Letter of Intent from the Fourth Detector (4th) Collaboration at the International

Linear Collider, 2009 also at: http://www.4thconcept.org/4LoI.pdf

[6] N. Akchurin, et. al, “New Crystals for Dual-Readout Calorimetry”, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A604(2007)512-526
[7] All DREAM papers are accessible at http://www.phys.ttu.edu/dream, and also http://highenergy.phys.-
ttu.edu.particle physics, in: International Series of Monographs on Physics, vol. 107, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2000.

[8] http : //www.dmf.unisalento.it// danieleb/IlcRoot/

