Second harmonic light scattering induced by defects in the twist-bend nematic phase

of achiral liquid crystal dimers

Shokir A. Pardaev,1 S. M. Shamid,1 M. G. Tamba,2 C. Welch,2 G. H. Mehl,2 J. T.
Gleeson,1 D. W. Allender,1 J. V. Selinger,3 B. Ellman,1 A. Jakli,3 and S. Sprunt1, ∗

1Department of Physics, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio 44242, USA

2Department of Chemistry, University of Hull, Hull HU6 7RX, UK

3Chemical Physics Interdisciplinary Program and Liquid Crystal Institute, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio 44242, USA

(Dated: March 9, 2016)

APS/123-QED

The nematic twist-bend (NTB) phase, exhibited by certain thermotropic liquid crystalline (LC)
dimers, represents a new orientationally ordered mesophase – the ﬁrst distinct nematic variant
discovered in many years. The NTB phase is distinguished by a heliconical winding of the average
molecular long axis (director) with a remarkably short (nanoscale) pitch and, in systems of achiral
dimers, with an equal probability to form right- and left-handed domains. The NTB structure
thus provides another fascinating example of spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking in nature. The
order parameter driving the formation of the heliconical state has been theoretically conjectured
to be a polarization ﬁeld, deriving from the bent conformation of the dimers, that rotates helically
with the same nanoscale pitch as the director ﬁeld. It therefore presents a signiﬁcant challenge for
experimental detection. Here we report a second harmonic light scattering (SHLS) study on two
achiral, NTB-forming LCs, which is sensitive to the polarization ﬁeld due to micron-scale distortion
of the helical structure associated with naturally-occurring textural defects. These defects are
parabolic focal conics of smectic-like “pseudo-layers”, deﬁned by planes of equivalent phase in a
coarse-grained description of the NTB state. Our SHLS data are explained by a coarse-grained free
energy density that combines a Landau-deGennes expansion of the polarization ﬁeld, the elastic
energy of a nematic, and a linear coupling between the two.

PACS numbers: 61.30.Eb,61.30.Dk,64.70.M-

I.

INTRODUCTION

Polar orientational order in liquid crystals (LCs) is tra-
ditionally associated with the hindered rotation of chiral
molecules arranged in layers (smectic phase). In conven-
tional ferroelectric LCs, this hindrance is caused by tilt
of molecules with respect to the layer normal (smectic-C
phase), which leads to broken inversion symmetry and a
spontaneous polarization parallel to the layers. The de-
velopment and exploration in the past 20 years of meso-
gens with a bent-shaped (rather than rod-like) rigid core
structure has seen the requirement of molecular chiral-
ity eliminated:
In these systems of achiral molecules,
both smectic-C and smectic-A (untilted) phases exhibit
in-layer polarization and, perhaps more interestingly, in
the smectic-C case spontaneously separate into domains
of opposite structural chirality. Layer tilt plus layer po-
larization therefore induce chirality.

So far, however, the realization of polar orientational
order without layering or constituent chirality has proven
elusive. While simple nematics exhibit a typically weak
polarization under an applied orientational stress (the
so-called ﬂexoelectric eﬀect [1]), in equilibrium the mag-
nitude of the vector order parameter representing the
dipole moment of the molecules vanishes. The recent
discovery of the twist-bend nematic (NTB) phase [2–4],

∗Electronic address: ssprunt@kent.edu

originally predicted by Meyer [5], may have fundamen-
tally altered this situation.

The NTB phase typically occurs at temperatures be-
low the ordinary uniaxial nematic phase, in achiral liquid
crystal dimers composed of a pair of rodlike mesogenic
units connected by an odd-numbered hydrocarbon link-
age. This linkage favors an overall bent conformation
(Fig. 1(a)). As shown in Fig. 1(b), the NTB state is
characterized by a modulated orientational structure in
which the average molecular long axis (local director ˆn)
simultaneously bends and twists in space in a periodic
fashion, producing a heliconical conﬁguration. The typ-
ical cone angle (average tilt of the molecules away from
the helical axis, inferred from optical birefringence mea-
surements) [3, 6], is β ∼ 10◦. The pitch (t0) of the mod-
ulation, measured directly by freeze-fracture TEM [4], is
surprisingly short – of order a few molecular lengths (i.e.,
t0 ∼ 10 nm). Both parameters diﬀer markedly from the
usual chiral nematic (cholesteric), where β = 90◦ and
t0 (cid:38) 100 nm.

Various theoretical models [7–15] have been proposed
to account for the properties of the NTB phase and the
nature of the nematic-NTB transition. Dozov [7] and
Meyer et al [8] developed a model based on the Frank
elasticity for bend distortions of ˆn becoming negative at
the transition; in this thoery, the order parameter for the
NTB state is sin2 β. Two other models – those of Kats
and Lebedev [10] and Shamid et al [9] – introduce a vec-
tor order parameter and expand the Landau-deGennes
free energy density in terms of this order parameter and

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
8

 

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

2
v
1
1
9
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ˆn. In particular, Shamid et al [9] propose that the or-
der parameter is a helical polarization wave, P, which is
orthogonal to, but has the same nanoscale pitch as, the
heliconical director ˆn. (P may represent a shape polar-
ization in lieu of, or in addition to, an electric polariza-
tion.) A linear coupling of P to the curl of ˆn drives the
heliconical modulation of ˆn, and, on the nematic side of
the transition, renormalizes the bend elastic constant to
zero, destabilizing the nematic phase in agreement with
the theory of Dozov [7] and with experiment [16]. While
studies of ﬂuctuations in the NTB phase are consistent
with the presence of a short-pitch polarization wave [17],
more direct conﬁrmation, by a method sensitive to bro-
ken centrosymmetry due to P, is clearly desirable. Given
the absence of any mass density wave (Bragg peaks) in
X-ray diﬀraction measurements [4, 18, 19], conﬁrmation
of P would establish the NTB state as the ﬁrst example of
a locally polar LC phase without smectic-like molecular
layering – a prospect of fundamental signiﬁcance.

This paper presents the results of a second har-
monic light scattering (SHLS) study designed to test this
prospect. In order to detect at optical wavelengths a po-
larization ﬁeld that averages out over a nanoscale helical
pitch, our approach takes advantage of another interest-
ing feature of the NTB phase – the presence of topological
defects, analogous to the classical parabolic focal conic
(PFC) defects in the layer structure of simple smectic
LCs, that distort the polarization ﬁeld over a length scale
much larger than t0 and thereby produce a nonzero P on
the optical scale suited to the SHLS technique [20].

Speciﬁcally, we demonstrate an SHLS signal in the
NTB phase, whose key features (optical polarization se-
lection rules, in particular) are explained by a model in
which slabs of the NTB system, deﬁned by planes of con-
stant helical phase, are treated as “pseudo-layers”. When
their spacing is reduced due to a temperature dependent
helical pitch, these “layers” exhibit PFC defects in an a
analogous manner as true smectics do when placed un-
der a dilatory strain. The concept of “pseudo-layers” was
previously introduced in the development of a “coarse-
grain” theory of cholesterics [21–23].

This concept has recently been applied to the NTB
phase to describe smectic-like elastic properties [6, 17]
and ﬂuctuation modes [17], strong shear thinning be-
havior [24], and optical stripe and focal textures [25].
Starting from a theoretically proposed free energy den-
sity coupling ˆn and P [9], we show that “pseudo-layer”
deformations associated with PFCs naturally lead to a
distortion of the helical ﬁeld P that breaks centrosym-
metry at length scales comparable to (or greater than)
optical wavelengths. We also verify that the SHLS signal
is absent in an ordinary calamitic smectic liquid crystal
containing a comparable density of PFCs, but lacking
any underlying polar structure. Our results and analy-
sis thus provide strong evidence of an underlying helical
polarization ﬁeld that characterizes the NTB phase.

2

FIG. 1: (a): Structure of LC dimers that form the NTB phase
in the mixture KA(0.2) and the single compound DTC5C7.
(b): Schematic rendering of the heliconical molecular orienta-
tion in the NTB phase, with cone angle β and helical wavenum-
ber q0. Each cylinder represents the average molecular long
axis of a dimer, and the vectors ˆn and P correspond to the lo-
cal director and polarization ﬁelds, respectively, while ˆt is the
average or “coarse-grained” director. (c): 3D CAD rendering
of the experimental apparatus.

II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

The NTB materials studied are: (1) a mixture [denoted
KA(0.2)] [16] of ﬁve odd-membered dimers with ether
linkages between mesogenic groups plus one dimer with
a methylene linkage, CBF9CBF (Fig. 1(a)), which is con-
sidered to be the active component in inducing the NTB
phase; and (2) a pure dimer [18, 26] (labeled DTC5C7
and also shown in Fig. 1(a)). The phase sequences of
these materials (in cooling) are isotropic-(77◦)-N-(37.4◦)-
NTB-(22◦C)-crystal [KA(0.2)] and isotropic-(156.8◦)-N-
(127.8◦)-NTB-(96.6◦)-SmX-(77.4◦C)-crystal (DTC5C7).
As a control compound, we chose the conventional, rod-
like thermotropic, 4-n-octyl-4’-cyanobiphenyl (8CB).

The liquid crystals were either capillary ﬁlled into
sandwich cells made of fused silica (FS) substrates with
a 0.1 mm spacer or loaded into FS cuvettes with a 1 mm
path length. In both cases the substrate surfaces were
thoroughly cleaned but otherwise untreated. The loaded
cells were placed in a temperature-regulated oven with
optical access on opposite sides and with ∼ 0.01 K sta-
bility. The oven ﬁtted between the pole faces of a labo-
ratory electromagnet, with the direction of the ﬁeld ori-
ented perpendicular to the substrate normal (Fig. 1(c)).
The director ˆn in the nematic phase or direction ˆt, corre-
sponding to the average of ˆn over the heliconical pitch in

FFNNH11C5C5H11FFFFCCD EM	  DM p BS λ/2 achromats 532 nm filter  oven IR filter Aspheric lens Power meter p A	  IR-cut filter CBF9CBF DTC5C7 a) !!2πq0b) ! ˆn! ˆt Pβc) EM	  laser the NTB phase (see Fig. 1(b)), was magnetically aligned
by slowly cooling from the isotropic phase in a 1.13 T
ﬁeld produced by the magnet.

The samples were illuminated at normal incidence to
the substrates and to the direction of ˆt with polarized
1064 nm light from a Nd:YAG laser (Continuum Minilite
II, outputting 5-7 ns, ∼ 2 mJ pulses at 10 Hz). The
beam diameter at the sample was reduced to 1 mm by
a ﬁxed aperture. At the incident pulse energy used, no
evidence of damage to the samples was detected during or
after the measurements. The incident polarization could
be rotated between vertical (V , perpendicular to ˆt) and
horizontal (H, parallel to ˆt) orientations. The directions
V , H also refer to vertical and horizontal with respect to
the plane of the apparatus in Fig. 1(c).
The scattered second harmonic (SH) light from the
samples was collected in a cone of 15◦ opening angle
around the forward (transmitted light) direction by a
specially constructed optical telescope, which imaged the
scattering pattern onto the sensor of a cooled CCD cam-
era (Princeton Instruments, model ProEM512). An an-
alyzer was used to set the V and H polarization state
of the SH light, while a series of broad and narrow band
ﬁlters (the latter having a passband of 1 nm FWHM at
532 nm) removed the transmitted fundamental light.

The telescope could be interchanged with a polarizing
optical microscope for in-situ examination of the sam-
ple textures over the region illuminated by the laser
beam and for conﬁrmation of uniform director align-
ment. SH scattering patterns and optical micrographs
were recorded for various polarizer/analyzer combina-
tions at ﬁxed temperatures in the NTB phase of the sam-
ples.

III. RESULTS

A. Microscopy

First we consider the results from polarizing mi-
croscopy displayed in Fig. 2; the images shown were ob-
tained after cooling the samples in the applied magnetic
ﬁeld to temperatures below the transition temperature
(TT B) to the NTB phase.
In the images, the polarizer
and analyzer axes are approximately parallel to the ﬁeld.
The eﬀective director ˆt is uniformly oriented along the
ﬁeld, except in the immediate vicinity of parabolic fo-
cal conic (PFC) defects. These are delineated in Fig. 2
by dark lines tracing out parabolic trajectories, which
are paired together in orthogonal planes such that each
parabola in a pair passes through the other’s focus. The
paired parabolae resemble the classic PFC texture ob-
served in ordinary smectic LCs under a dilatory strain of
the smectic layers [27].

In the images of Fig. 2, typically one parabola lies in
the focal plane (parallel to the cell substrates), while the
second of the pair occupies a plane normal to the viewing
direction. The spacing between the two opposite “arms”

3

(a) and (b):

FIG. 2: Polarizing microscope images of parabolic focal conic
defect arrays in the NTB phase of the studied LC compounds
(polarizer along horizontal direction, analyzer at 10◦ angle
from horizontal).
Images taken in the mid-
plane of a 0.1 mm thick sample of DTC5C7 at temperatures
7.8◦C and 13.8◦C below the unixial nematic to NTB transi-
tion. (These temperatures correspond to two of the data sets
for DTC5C7 in Fig. 3.) (c): Image taken near the surface of
a 1 mm cell of KA(0.2), 0.9◦C below the transition. There
are no observable PFCs and no SH signal (see Fig. 3). (d):
At ∼ 2◦C below the transition, PFCs appear and an SH sig-
nal is observed. All of the images were recorded after cooling
through the transition in a 1.13 T magnetic ﬁeld (horizontal
in the ﬁgure).

within each PFC is ∼ 50µm, while the separation be-
tween foci in the core region is about 6 µm. The sym-
metry axes of the PFCs are well-aligned, and parallel to
the NTB optical axis (ˆt) direction. In the thicker (1 mm)
cells, the core regions of the PFCs could be resolved in
two distinct planes close to the opposing cell boundaries,
whereas in the 0.1 mm cells a single focal plane was lo-
cated at essentially the mid-plane of the cell. Thus, two
layers of PFCs form near the opposing substrates in suf-
ﬁciently thick samples, but are squeezed into a single
layer when the cell thickness becomes comparable to the
dimensions of the parabolae.

As Fig. 2(c) reveals, the PFCs are absent at temper-
atures close to (within ∼ 1◦ of TT B); they appear and
their population increases in the range TT B − T (cid:39) 1 to
3◦C, and then saturates. By analogy with ordinary smec-
tics, we interpret the PFCs as defects in a “pseudo-layer”
structure deﬁned by ∼ 10 nm thick slabs between planes
of constant phase in the heliconical NTB structure. As
the temperature decreases below TT B, the “layer” spac-
ing (pitch t0) shrinks, resulting in PFC formation at a
threshold t0 just as a critical dilatory strain does in the
case of true smectic layers.

4

FIG. 3: Angular distribution of SH light recorded in the NTB phase of KA(0.2) and DTC5C7. The thumbnail images (insets)
show the raw data from the CCD detector, color coded for intensity (light blue representing the background level, dark red
representing peak level). The axis of the applied magnetic ﬁeld (and average LC director) is horizontal in the thumbnails. The
main ﬁgures display plots SH power vs scattering angle for a horizontal cut (40 pixels wide) through the central peak. The
polarizer and analyzer combinations for the normally incident fundamental light (wavevector kω) and the second harmonic
light collected from the sample are indicated in each panel; H (horizontal) corresponds to polarization parallel to the average
LC director ˆt and also to the axis through the foci of the parabolae delineating the PFC defects in Fig. 2, while V (vertical)
applies to the direction perpendicular to ˆt and to kω. First two columns (from left): Data for KA(0.2) in thick (1 mm) and thin
(0.1 mm) optical cells: Note the approximately twofold decrease in signal, despite a tenfold decrease in sample thickness. Data,
taken in cooling, are shown for several temperatures relative to the nematic to NTB transition: −0.9◦C (gray), −3.4◦C (blue),
−5.4◦C (green), and −7.4◦C (red points). For the temperatures close to the transition, no PFCs are observed (Fig. 2), and
there is no SH signal. Note that the central peak is split when the incident (fundamental light) polarization is switched from H
to V (for V SH output), but there is no H output for either H or V input polarization (bottom panels). Third column: Similar
results for a thin cell containing DTC5C7, at temperatures −3.8◦C (gray), −7.8◦C (blue), −9.8◦C (green), and −13.8◦C (red)
relative to the nematic to NTB transition. Again there is no H polarized SH output.

B. Second harmonic light scattering

We now turn to our results from SHLS measurements
in the NTB phase. These are summarized in Fig. 3. First
consider the case where the incident (fundamental) light
is polarized along ˆt and the SH output is polarized per-
pendicular to ˆt (an Hω → V2ω process, following the
nomenclature introduced above). In both NTB materi-
als, for T below but within 1◦C of the transition (TT B)
– the range where PFCs are absent – no SH output is

detected. Below this range and in the presence of PFCs,
a clear SH signal is observed, with a peak in the for-
ward direction. In the KA(0.2) samples, the signal level
increases slightly with decreasing T in both thick and
thin samples, whereas the signal approximately doubles
for DTC5C7. The angular FWHM of the peak (using
data from the thin cell where one expects less broaden-
ing due to multiple scattering) corresponds to a length
scale of 1.22λ2ω/FWHM ∼ 7 µm, which is comparable
to the spacing between foci of the PFCs. The SH signal

is clearly associated with the appearance of PFCs in the
NTB phase.
For V polarized input and V output (Vω → V2ω pro-
cess), the angular distribution of SH light is again con-
centrated around the forward direction. However, the
peak is split approximately symmetrically about zero
scattering angle (compare the thumbnail images in Fig. 3
showing the raw SHLS patterns recorded on the CCD).
Also, the temperature dependence is weaker than for the
Hω → V2ω process. On the other hand, for H polarized
output (Hω → H2ω and Vω → H2ω processes), there is no
SH signal. Thus, all detected SH output is polarized per-
pendicular to the average helical axis of the TB structure
or, equivalently, to the axis of the PFC defects.

The peak SH intensity from the 0.1 mm thick samples
of KA(0.2) is approximately two times lower than in the
1 mm sample. For incoherent SH generation from the
bulk NTB phase, we would normally expect a factor ∼
10 decrease. The discrepancy is explained by the SHG
originating from the PFC defects: As noted above, there
are two “layers” of PFCs, localized near the surfaces, in
the thick cell, but only one in the thin cell – hence the
factor of ∼ 2 change observed in SH intensity.
In all cases, the SH signal is quite weak – of order
∼ 10−7 the level from a 0.5 mm thick Z-cut single crys-
tal quartz reference. Several factors, beyond the pos-
sibility of an intrinsically small nonlinear susceptibility,
may contribute to this weak level. First, the scatter-
ing is incoherent, and there is no phase matching be-
tween the fundamental and second harmonic waves. Sec-
ond, the signal comes only from the PFCs, and the re-
gion of strong “pseudo-layer” deformation (deﬁned by the
parabolic lines in the images in Fig. 2) occupies only a
small fraction of the total volume illuminated by the fun-
damental laser beam. Third, as we shall describe later in
the Discussion section, cancellations in the induced polar-
ization (and eﬀective non-centrosymmetry) occur both at
points on the parabolae and between points on opposite
sides of them, reducing the SH output.

To conﬁrm that the SH signal arises speciﬁcally from
deformation of NTB “pseudo-layers”, we performed simi-
lar measurements on the smectic-A phase of an ordinary
rod-like LC, octyl cyanobiphenyl (8CB), which also ex-
hibits classical PFCs. As shown in Fig. 4, for both 1 mm
and 0.1 mm cells populated with PFC defects of an or-
dinary smectic layer structure, there is no detectable SH
signal under experimental conditions identical to those
used for the NTB samples.

IV. DISCUSSION

5

FIG. 4: Results for 1 and 0.1 mm thick cells of the control
sample of 8CB in the smectic-A phase. No SH output is
observed despite the presence of PFCs in the smectic layer
structure (see accompanying microscope images).

(1) Deformation of the NTB “pseudo-layers” and the av-
erage director, due to PFCs, distorts the helical po-
larization ﬁeld associated with NTB order, and gives
rise to a net polarization P that lies principally in
the plane perpendicular to the PFC axis.

(2) In a coarse-grained picture, the process is analogous
to the electroclinic eﬀect in a chiral smectic-A phase:
Tilting of the average director (helical axis) away
from the “pseudo-layer” normal induces a P orthog-
onal to the tilt plane (with the direction in this plane
depending on the sign of the helicity).

(3) The locally broken centrosymmetry, together with
the electroclinic analogy, determine the structure of
the second-order nonlinear susceptibility tensor χ(2).

(4) The mirror symmetry of the “pseudo-layer” displace-
ment through planes containing the PFC axis and
a pair of parabolic “arms” leads to cancellations of
P between opposing “arms”. While this complicates
development of a quantitative relation between the
local magnitude of P and the observed SH signal,
it still allows an explanation of the main qualitative
features (e.g., polarization selection rules and angular
distribution) of the SH signal.

Let us now consider mechanisms for second harmonic
generation due to the presence of PFCs, which could po-
tentially account for the experimental results described
in the previous section. Before beginning, it may be use-
ful to summarize the following key points of the analysis
developed in the subsections below:

A. Theoretical model for induced polarization

Fig. 5(a) shows a three-dimensional rendering of de-
formed layers in the core region of a PFC, which is based
upon the geometrical construction given in Ref. [27]. Al-
though this construction strictly applies in the limit of in-

compressible layers (i.e., inﬁnite elastic constant for layer
compression), it provides a useful starting point.

In a normal smectic-A, curvature of the layers implies
a splay of the director ﬁeld, and thus in principle a ﬂexo-
electric polarization normal to the layers and in the direc-
tion of ˆn(∇ · ˆn) [1]. However, as already pointed out, no
SHG from such a mechanism was observed due to PFCs
in the smectic-A phase of the control sample 8CB. For the
layer distortion in a PFC defect, the maximum curvature
occurs at the conical “cusps”, where the layers “pinch”
down to points located along the parabolae (dashed lines
in Fig. 5) that deﬁne the defect.
In order to avoid an
inﬁnite splay energy, the molecules must either rotate oﬀ
the layer normal (relaxing the splay) and adopt a more
uniform orientation at the cusp, or the vertex of the cusps
must relax from a conical tip (inﬁnite layer curvature) to
a bowl shape (ﬁnite curvature). In the former case, the
splay ﬂexoelectric polarization would be signiﬁcantly re-
duced, while in the latter case the curvature of the layer
approaching a cusp would have the opposite sign of the
curvature at the bottom of the bowl (that replaces the
sharp tip of the cusp), again tending to cancel the splay
ﬂexoelectricity. These eﬀects can explain the absence of
a detectable SH signal in the control sample (ordinary
smectic-A).

In the dimers forming the pseudo-layered NTB phase,
the same terminal groups on identical mesogenic units
are connected to opposite ends of the ﬂexible spacer;
this architecture tends to eliminate an overall longitu-
dinal molecular dipole, and thus negate the conventional
splay ﬂexoelectric eﬀect at the molecular level. As will
be made clear below, the polarization selection of the
SH light observed in our experiment also cannot be ex-
plained by conventional splay ﬂexoelectric polarization,
which would have its major component along the PFC
axis (ˆz in Fig. 5). Moreover, any bend ﬂexoelectricity
associated with the equilibrium (heliconical) NTB struc-
ture averages out over a length scale much shorter than
an optical wavelength.

Thus, we turn to a model that explicitly couples long
wavelength distortions of the heliconical director struc-
ture to distortions of a helical vector order parameter
P (where P may originate either from a net transverse
dipole moment, or simply from the “shape” polarization,
associated with the bent conformation of LC dimers. It
is convenient to introduce a dimensionless form for this
order parameter, p = P/Psat, where Psat corresponds to
the saturated polarization at low temperature.

The NTB free energy density may then be expanded in
terms of the uniaxial director ﬁeld ˆn and the polarization
ﬁeld p as [9]

FN T B =

K2
2

(ˆn · ∇ × ˆn)2
|p|2 +

(∇ · ˆn)2 +
K1
2
[ˆn × (∇ × ˆn)]2 +
K3
2
(∇p)2 − Λ[ˆn × (∇ × ˆn)] · p + η(ˆn · p)2.
κ
2

+

+

|p|4

ν
4

µ
2

(1)

6

Here, K1, K2, and K3 are the usual Frank elastic con-
stants for splay, twist, and bend distortions of the ne-
matic director ˆn. The coeﬃcient µ = µ0(T − T0) is the
temperature-dependent Landau coeﬃcient for the polar-
ization p (µ0 being a constant), while ν > 0 is a higher-
order, temperature-independent Landau coeﬃcient. The
elastic constant κ penalizes spatial distortions in p, and
the coeﬃcient Λ couples p with bend distortions. The
last term (not included in Ref. [9]), with η > 0, penalizes
any component of p that lies along ˆn. Because p is de-
ﬁned as a dimensionless quantity, the Landau coeﬃcients
µ and ν carry the same units, and κ has the same units
as the Frank constants.

In the NTB phase, the director ﬁeld has the equilibrium
heliconical modulation ˆn = ˆz cos β + ˆx sin β cos(q0z) +
ˆy sin β sin(q0z), with pitch wavenumber q0 and cone angle
β. Likewise, the polarization ﬁeld has the equilibrium
helical modulation p = ˆxp0 sin(q0z) − ˆyp0 cos(q0z), with
magnitude p0, perpendicular to ˆn and to the pitch axis
ˆz, as shown in Fig. 1(b). In the nematic phase, β and
p0 are both zero while q0 is undeﬁned; in the NTB phase,
these quantities all become non-zero.

Let us now consider an imposed spatial variation in the
phase, Φ, of the helicoidal modulation. This corresponds
to a displacement, u = −Φ/q0, of the NTB “pseudo-
layers” along the equilibrium layer normal ˆz. Under the
imposed distortion, the layer plane varies in orientation,
and the directions of ˆn and p also generally change in or-
der to minimize FN T B. To describe such a change in ˆn,
we introduce the orthogonal triad of unit vectors ˆe1, ˆe2,
ˆt, where ˆt is obtained by rotation of ˆz about an arbitrary
axis in the x-y plane, and ˆe1 and ˆe2 are the transformed
ˆx and ˆy under this rotation. Then the distorted ˆn is
ˆn = ˆe1 sin β cos(q0z − q0u) + ˆe2 sin β sin(q0z − q0u) +
(2)

ˆt cos β.

The rotated coordinate unit vectors may be expressed in
the xyz system as

ˆt = tx ˆx + ty ˆy + tzˆz,

y + t2
t2
xtz
ˆx +
t2
x + t2
y
txty(−1 + tz)

t2
x + t2
y
x − t2

1 − t2

ˆe1 =

ˆe2 =

(cid:113)

where tz =
nents of ˆt.

txty(−1 + tz)

x + t2
t2
y
x + t2
t2
ytz
x + t2
t2
y

ˆx +

ˆy − txˆz,

ˆy − tyˆz,

(3)

y, and tx, ty are the x, y compo-

Since p is not a unit vector and need not, in general,
remain orthogonal to ˆn under the imposed distortion, we
write,

p = ˆe1p0 sin(q0z − q0u) − ˆe2p0 cos(q0z − q0u) +

+px ˆx + py ˆy + pzˆz.

(4)

Here px, py, pz are the xyz components of the distortion

7

FIG. 5: (a): 3D rendering of pseudo-layer distortion surrounding the core region of a PFC in the limit of inﬁnite layer
compression elastic constant. The two overlapping parabolae (dashed lines) pass through each other’s focus and lie in orthogonal
planes, whose intersection deﬁnes the axis of the PFC. The parabolae are the loci of conical cusps (“pinch” points) in the
deformation of the layer planes. Since these are points of inﬁnite curvature energy, they will relax into rounded “bowls” in the
actual case of ﬁnite compression constant. The PFC axis corresponds to the direction of average director alignment (applied
magnetic ﬁeld direction H) in our experiment. An orthogonal direction, perpendicular to the plane of one parabola, corresponds
to the wavevector of the incident (fundamental light), ˆkω and to the forward direction of the transmitted SH light. (b): Two
distorted “pseudolayers”, extracted from the stack in (a) and located at equal distances (±z0) from the center (z = 0) of the
PFC. The components of the induced polarization ﬁeld p due to an imposed layer displacement u along ˆz, as predicted from the
model discussed in the text, are shown in the cusp regions (assumed rounded in the limit of ﬁnite layer compression constant).
Note in particular that the model predicts that the component of p perpendicular to the PFC axis is substantially larger than
that along it. The fundamental and second harmonic polarization axes (V and H) are also indicated; these correspond to
vertical and horizontal directions with respect to the ˆkω − H plane of the experiment (and not with respect to those directions
along the page.

in p that does not remain perpendicular to ˆn.

The calculation of these components for an imposed
“pseudo-layer” displacement u = u(x), which varies
along an axis in the equilibrium layer plane (and therefore
describes layer bending), and for u = u(z), which varies
along the layer normal (describing layer compression), is
outlined in the Appendix. For simplicity, the calculation
is done only to linear order in {px, py, pz, tx, ty}.

The results, assuming large η [17] and small β (β (cid:46) 10◦

close to the NTB-N transition [3, 6], are:

ty,

(cid:18)
(cid:18) dtx

tx +

px ≈ − Λq0
2η
py ≈ Λq0
2η
pz ≈ Λβ2
4η

(cid:19)

,

du
dx
− q0ty

(cid:19)

,

du
dx

dx

for u = u(x), and

√

2Λ
ηβ2

dt⊥
dz

,

p⊥ ≈ −
pz ≈ 0,

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

for u = u(z). Here p⊥ = px ˆx + py ˆy and similarly for
t⊥. The approximate equality signs in Eqs. (5)-(9) reﬂect

the approximation associated with our linear analysis in
{px, py, pz, tx, ty}.

Now let us apply these results to the cusp region of a
PFC observed in the NTB phase. We employ them with
the understanding that they are based on a linear analy-
sis, and thus only represent leading order contributions to
p in the case of “pseudo-layer” distortion associated with
a PFC. We also assume that the size of the cusp region is
small compared to the size of a homochiral domain (i.e.,
domain with single handedness of the underlying helicon-
ical director structure) [8], so that the polarization p is
not washed out in the cusp region due to mixed left and
right-handed helical domains.

As mentioned above and particularly in the case of the
NTB phase, where the “pseudo-layer” compression elastic
constant is substantially lower than that for a typical
smectic LC [28, 29], the sharp tips of the cusps should
realistically be envisioned as rounded caps. This also
means that in addition to “pseudo layer” bending, there
will be a compression of the layers in the cusp region.
However, as described in the Appendix, for du/dz (cid:28) 1,
the Euler-Lagrange equation for t⊥ gives t⊥ = 0 to lowest
order, and in that case Eqs. (8) and (9) imply p ≈ 0 for
“pseudo-layer” compression. Therefore, we will focus on
the eﬀect of layer bending.
Consider then a pair of distorted layers equidistant
from the center of the PFC, at +z0 and −z0, along the z

axis, as shown in Fig. 5(b), and consider ﬁrst the behav-
ior in a slice taken through the cusp in the x− z plane for
the layer at −z0. Along x, the displacement u is asym-
metric through the cusp region and thus tx will be also;
this will lead to a net py and pz, according to Eqs. (6)–
(7). On the other hand, for u = u(x), ty = 0 to lowest
order (see Appendix), and thus Eq. (5) implies px ≈ 0
in the −z0 layer. On opposite sides of the x axis, i.e.,
x → −x, the direction of py is reversed.
Next, for a slice taken in the y − z plane, we may
interchange x and y in Eqs. (5)–(7); however, the mir-
ror symmetry across this plane means that only the pz
component of the polarization will survive. The net com-
ponents of p in the cusp region are shown qualitatively
in Fig. 5(b); the relative magnitudes shown for py and pz
will be explained shortly.
For the layer at +z0, the results are the same as for
−z0, except for a 90◦ rotation around the z axis, equiv-
alent to an exchange of px and py and a reversal in the
direction of pz (see Fig. 5(b)).
The relative magnitudes of py and pz in the −z0 layer
(or px and pz in the +z0 layer) may be estimated if we
consider a harmonic form for u – speciﬁcally, a Fourier
component whose wavenumber qx = 2π/δ corresponds
to the length scale of the cusp region of the PFC. That
scale can be estimated [27] from the width δ (cid:39) 2µm of
the birefringent arms of the parabolae (the loci of PFC
cusps) in the textures presented in Fig. 2. Then taking
u = u(x) = u0 exp(iqxx), the Euler Lagrange equation
for tx yields (see Appendix)

tx ≈ −

0β2

K3q2
x + K3q2

0β2

K1q2

du
dx

.

(10)

Typically, β = 0.18 rad, q0 = 2π/(0.01µm), and qx =
0β2. Then the right hand side of
2π/(2µm), so q2
the expression for tx may be expanded, yielding

x (cid:28) q2
(cid:18)

tx ≈

(cid:19) du

dx

−1 +

K1q2
x
K3q2
0β2

(11)

Inserting this result into Eqs. (6) and (7) with u =
u0 exp(iqxx), we obtain to lowest order

py ≈ i
Λ
2η
pz ≈ Λ
4η

K1
K3

q3
x
q0β2 u,
xu.

β2q2

(12)

(13)

Then, using the numerical values given above, and taking
K1 (cid:39) 2K3 (for the bare nematic values) [3], we estimate

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) pz

py

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ≈ β4

2

K3
K1

q0
qx

≈ 0.05

(14)

Since the SH signal should scale as the square of p (as-
suming the components of the second order susceptibil-
ity χ(2) scale with the magnitude of p), the contribution

8

from pz is negligible. A similar result applies to the layer
at +z0.
In the following subsection, we will therefore
concentrate only on the component of p perpendicular
to the axis of the PFC.

B. Nonlinear susceptibility in the NTB phase

Although SHG could possibly arise due to chiral sym-
metry breaking in the undistorted NTB state, this struc-
tural chirality averages out over a molecular length scale
(the heliconical pitch) that is much shorter than the opti-
cal wavelength. We detected SH signal from our samples
only in the presence of pseudo-layer distortion speciﬁ-
cally associated with PFCs. The situation is similar to
the chiral smectic-C* phase, where the helical polariza-
tion must be partly unwound by an applied ﬁeld in order
to observe a signal [30].

Therefore, we propose that the broken centrosymme-
try produced by the induced polarization p, over length
scales comparable to or longer than the optical scale, is
responsible for the observed SHG. As shown in Fig. 5(b),
and based on the arguments above, the dominant compo-
nent of the distortion-induced polarization is normal to
the axis of the PFC and to the direction of the applied
magnetic ﬁeld, both of which are along ˆz. Eq. (6)and the
discussion above reveal that the polarization arises essen-
tially from an electroclinic eﬀect, where the coarse-grain
director tilts with respect to the pseudo-layer normal and
the polarization develops along the axis perpendicular to
the tilt plane. Indeed, for small distortions, the tilt angle
is given by the sum tx + du/dx in Eq. (6).

The local symmetry is therefore that of a tilted chiral
smectic – namely, C2 symmetry, with symmetry axis (p)
perpendicular to the axis of the PFC (ˆz). As evidenced in
Fig. 2, the plane of one parabola of the PFCs is oriented
parallel to the substrates. We take this as the y − z
plane and the incident (fundamental) light propagation
direction as ˆkω = ˆx. Then the polarizations V or H of
the fundamental or second harmonic waves are V = ˆy
and H = ˆz, and the second harmonic intensities for the
various polarization combinations are,

I(Hω → V2ω) ∝ |χ(2)
I(Hω → H2ω) ∝ |χ(2)
I(Vω → H2ω) ∝ |χ(2)
I(Vω → V2ω) ∝ |χ(2)

V HH|2 = |χ(2)
yzz|2,
HHH|2 = |χ(2)
zzz|2,
zyy|2,
HV V |2 = |χ(2)
V V V |2 = |χ(2)
yyy|2.

(15)

Here χ(2) is the second order susceptibility for C2 sym-
metry, with symmetry axis = ˆy (−z0 layer in Fig. 5(b))
or ˆx (+z0 layer). Assuming Kleinman’s symmetry, the
non-vanishing components of χ(2) with recurring indices
are [31],

χ(2)
xxy = χ(2)

xyx = χ(2)

yxx , χ(2)

zzy = χ(2)

zyz = χ(2)

yzz , χ(2)
yyy

for −z0 layers, and

χ(2)
yyx = χ(2)

yxy = χ(2)

xyy , χ(2)

zzx = χ(2)

zxz = χ(2)

xzz , χ(2)
xxx

yzz|2 > |χ(2)

for +z0 layers. From these lists and the relations for
SH intensity in Eq. (15), we conclude that the intensity
for H polarized output vanishes, in agreement with the
polarization selection observed in our experiment, and
that the SH signal is generated predominantly by the
induced polarization in the −z0 layers (where p (cid:107) ˆy) in
Fig. 5(b).
Fig. 3 reveals that the SH intensity is systematically
lower for a Vω → V2ω process than for Hω → V2ω, in-
dicating |χ(2)
yyy|2 according to Eq. (15). We
can then suggest the following explanation for the split-
ting of the forward peak in the Vω → V2ω data: In lin-
ear light scattering, we have observed strong depolarized
scattering from defect structure at small angles in the
NTB phase. Consider then a process by which small-
angle linear scattering converts polarization Vω to Hω,
and then a SH process that converts Hω to V2ω. This
could lead to a slight splitting of the forward peak, as
observed in Fig. 3 for the Vω → V2ω data. On the other
hand, the sequence Hω → Vω → V2ω would be less eﬃ-
cient, producing perhaps a broadening but not a splitting
of the peak in the Hω → V2ω data. Moreover, the peak
for Vω → V2ω splits along the magnetic-ﬁeld alignment
direction – i.e., parallel to the axis of the PFCs. This is
because the distortion-induced polarization near the core
region will be concentrated more along the PFC axis than
normal it.

Finally, we note that the major components of the in-
duced polarization are oppositely directed on opposite
sides of the parabola axis (Fig. 5(b)), even if the en-
tire PFC is in a homochiral domain. In this case, there
will be no net SH output when the distance across the
parabola yields a destructive interference condition, or
when the vector sum of polarizations cancels out over
a length scale small compared to the coherence length
λ2ω/(n2ω − nω) (cid:39) 5 µm (n = refractive index) [31]. As
mentioned in the Results section, this eﬀect accounts for
the relatively weak signal recorded in the experiment.
The phase factor is important, and consequently the sig-
nal level is not a direct measure of the amplitude of the
helical polarization ﬁeld.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have used second harmonic light
scattering to probe polar molecular organization in the
nematic twist-bend phase. The SH signal arises from
parabolic focal conic defects in the “pseudo-layer” struc-
ture of the NTB state. Its key features can be explained
by a coarse-grained free energy that couples the “layer”
deformation to long wavelength distortions of a helical
polarization wave, which serves as the NTB order param-
eter.
In the future, we hope to employ focused funda-

9

mental radiation in order to generate SH light from spe-
ciﬁc regions of an individual PFC defect in a thin sample.
This approach, combined with a more detailed treatment
of the PFC structure, could provide a direct measure of
the magnitude of the NTB polarization ﬁeld.

Acknowledgments

We are indebted to our colleague Prof. O. D. Lavren-
tovich for several informative conversations, and to Dr.
Owain Parri for providing us with the material KA(0.2)
used in this study. This work was supported by the NSF
under grants DMR-1307674 (SP, JG, AJ, SS) and DMR-
1409658 (JVS); the EPSRC under grant EP/J004480/1
(GM and CW); and the EU under project 216025
(MGT).

Appendix: Induced polarization due to

“pseudo-layer” distortion

In this appendix, we sketch the details leading to
Eqs. (5)–(10) of the text. We ﬁrst consider a “pseudo-
layer” displacement u that varies along a single direction
in the plane of the equilibrium “pseudo-layers” – e.g.,
u = u(x). This corresponds to a bending of the layers
without compression along the average layer normal (ˆz).
Expressions for the induced {px, py, pz, tx, ty} that
minimize the free energy under the imposed u(x) may
be obtained by the following procedure: (1) Combine
Eqs. (2)–(4) in the text and insert the result into the
free energy density, Eq. (1); (2) “Coarse-grain” the free
energy density by averaging with respect to z over a
helicoidal pitch, 2π/q0, based on the assumption that
u and the variables {px, py, pz, tx, ty} vary slowly over
the length scales comparable to the pitch;
(3) Ob-
tain and solve the Euler-Lagrange equations for the set
{px, py, pz, tx, ty} that minimize the coarse-grained free
enrgy density. In step (2), the coarse-grained F is eval-
uated as Fcg(ˆt, u, p; x) = q0
F (ˆn, p; x, z) dz. The
2π
assumption on relative length scales is reasonable, since
the pitch is on the molecular scale, while the features
associated with the PFC textures observed in the NTB
phase have sizes (cid:38) 1µm.

(cid:82) 2π/q0

0

After implementing this program, and assuming that
terms containing the elastic constant κ are neglgible (i.e.,
long wavelength limit for the distortion u(x) and small
polarization elastic constant κ [17], we ﬁnd to lowest or-

der in {px, py, pz, tx, ty},

px = −

Λq0 sin2 β

py =

pz =

2(µ + 2νp2

0 + η sin2 β)

Λq0 sin2 β

2(µ + 2νp2

0 + η sin2 β)

2(2η cos2 β + µ + νp2
0)

(cid:18) dtx

dx

(cid:19)

Λ sin2 β

− q0ty

du
dx

(cid:19)

du
dx

(16)

,

(17)

ty,

(cid:18)

tx +

×

.

(18)

For u = u(x), {px, py, pz, tx, ty} are functions of x. Tak-
ing the small β limit of Eqs. (A1)-(A3) yields Eqs. (5)-(7)
of the text.
To linear order in {tx, ty}, the Euler-Lagrange equa-
tions that must be solved to obtain ˆt in terms of a given
u(x), and thus complete the solution for p, are

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

tx +

du
dx

− Ax
2
− Ay
2

d2tx
dx2 +
d2ty
dx2 +

Bx
2
By
2

= 0,

(19)

ty = 0,

(20)

where the coeﬃcients (together with their small β limits)
are given by

Ax = K1(cos 2β + 1) +

(3 − 4 cos 2β + cos 4β) +

K2
32

(28 + 4 cos 2β) sin2 β −

K3
32

Λ2 sin4 β

2(2η cos2 β + µ + νp2
0)

≈ 2K1,

Bx = By = Λp0q0 sin 2β +

0 sin2 β
q2

2

(cid:20)

2K1 +

(3 cos 2β − 1)K2 −

≈ 2Λp0q0β,

Λ2 sin2 β

2(µ + 2νp2

0 + η sin2 β)

Ay =

41 + 20 cos 2β + 3 cos 4β
7 − 4 cos 2β − 3 cos 4β

32

K2 +

K3

≈ 2K2.

32

(21)

(cid:21)

(22)

(23)

Note that Eq. (20) is independent of the imposed dis-

10

tortion u. Thus, to linear order the only physically ac-
ceptable solution is ty = 0, implying px = 0 in Eq. (16).
Next we consider a “pseudo-layer” displacement that
varies along the axis normal to the equilibrium layer
planes – i.e., a layer compression, with u = u(z). Carry-
ing through a similar analysis as above, we ﬁnd to lowest
order in {p⊥ = px ˆx + py ˆy , t⊥ = tx ˆx + ty ˆy}, and ne-
glecting terms containing κ,
√

p⊥ = −

2Λ cos2 β

µ + 2νp2

0 + η sin2 β

dt⊥
dz

,

(24)

pz = 0,

(25)
Here {p⊥, t⊥} depend on z. Eq. (8) in the text corre-
sponds to the large η sin2 β and small β limit of Eq. (24).
The Euler-Lagrange equation for t⊥ (linearized in t⊥)

(cid:18)

is

− A⊥
2

d2t⊥
dz2 +

where

(cid:19)(cid:18)

(cid:19)

B⊥ + C⊥

du
dz

1 − du
dz

t⊥ = 0, (26)

A⊥ = K1 +

K2
4

cos 2β +

7K3

+ (2K3 − K1) ×

+
(K3 − K2) cos 4β

4

+

2Λ2 cos4 β

4

,

µ + 2νp2

0 + η sin2 β
B⊥ = C⊥ + Λp0q0 sin 2β,
C⊥ = −2q2

K1 +

0 sin2 β
(K2 − K3)

(cid:20)
(cid:21)

.

3 cos 2β − 1

2

×

(27)

(28)

(29)

For du/dz (cid:28) 1, Eq. (26) reduces to −(A⊥/2)d2t⊥/dz2 +
B⊥t⊥ = 0, the only physical solution to which is t⊥ = 0.
Finally, if we consider a simple harmonic form for u(x),
u(x) = u0 exp(iqxx), then Eqs. (19), (21) and (22) yield
(for small β),

tx = −

p0q0Λβ
x + p0q0Λβ

K1q2

du
dx

(30)

Since for small β the polarization magnitude p0 in the
NTB phase is [17] p0 ≈ K3q0β/Λ, Eq. (30) produces
Eq. (10) of the text.

[1] R. B. Meyer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22, 918 (1969).
[2] M. Cestari, S. Diez-Berart, D. A. Dunmur, A. Ferrarini,
M. R. de la Fuente, D. J. B. Jackson, D. O. Lopez, G. R.
Luckhurst, M. A. Perez-Jubindo, R. M. Richardson, J.
Salud, B. A. Timimi, and H. Zimmermann, Phys. Rev.
E 84, 031704 (2011).

[3] V. Borshch, Y.-K. Kim, J. Xiang, M. Gao, A. Jakli, V. P.
Panov, J. K. Vij, C. T. Imrie, M. G. Tamba, G. H. Mehl,
and O. D. Lavrentovich, Nat. Commun. 4, 2635 (2013).
[4] D. Chen, J. H. Porada, J. B. Hooper, A. Klittnick, Y.
Shen, M. R. Tuchband, E. Korblova, D. Bedrov, D. M.
Walba, M. A. Glaser, J. E. Maclennan, and N. A. Clark,

11

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 15931 (2013).

[5] R. B. Meyer in Molecular Fluids. Les Houches Lectures,
1973, R. Balian and G. Weill, eds (Gordon and Breach,
1976), pp. 271-343.

[18] V. P. Panov, M. Nagaraj, J. K. Vij, Yu. P. Panarin, A.
Kohlmeier, M. G. Tamba, R. A. Lewis, and G. H. Mehl,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 167801 (2010).

[19] Z. Ahmed, C. Welch, and G. H. Mehl, RSC Adv. 5, 93513

[6] C. Meyer, G. R. Luckhurst, and I. Dozov. J. Mater.

(2015).

Chem. C 3, 318 (2015).

[7] I. Dozov, Europhys. Lett. 56, 247 (2001).
[8] C. Meyer, G. R. Luckhurst, and I. Dozov, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 111, 067801 (2013).

[9] S. M. Shamid, S. Dhakal, and J. V. Selinger, Phys. Rev.

E 87, 052503 (2013).

[10] E. I. Kats and V. V. Lebedev, JETP Lett. 100, 110

(2014).

[11] E. Virga, Double-well elastic theory for twist-bend ne-

[20] A similar approach was recently utilized to study ﬂexo-
electric polarization induced by topological defects in or-
dinary nematics – see Shokir A. Pardaev, J. C. Williams,
R. J. Twieg, A. Jakli, J. T. Gleeson, B. Ellman, and S.
Sprunt, Phys. Rev. E 91, 032501 (2015).

[21] P.-G. de Gennes and J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid
Crystals, second edition (Oxford, 1993), section 6.3.1.3.

[22] T. C. Lubensky, Phys. Rev. A 6, 452 (1972).
[23] L. Radzihovsky and T. C. Lubensky, Phys. Rev. E 83,

matic phases, Phys. Rev. E 89, 052502 (2014).

051701 (2011).

[12] G. Barbero, L. R. Evangelista, M. P. Rosseto, R. S. Zola,
and I Lelidis, Elastic continuum theory: Toward under-
standing of the twist-bend nematic phases, Phys. Rev. E
92, 0350501(R) (2015).

[13] C. Greco, G. R. Luckhurst, and A. Ferrarini, Molecular
geometry, twist-bend nematic phases and unconventional
elasticity: a generalized Maier-Saupe theory, Soft Matter
10, 9318 (2014).

[14] I. Lelidis and G. Barbero, Nematic phases with sponta-
neous splay-bend deformation: standard elastic descrip-
tion, Liq. Cryst. 43, 208 (2016).

[15] A. G. Vanakaras and D. J. Photinos, Soft Matter 12,

2208 (2016).

[16] K. Adlem, M. Copic, G. R. Luckhurst, A. Mertelj, O.
Parri, R. M. Richardson, B. D. Snow, B. A. Timimi, R.
P. Tuﬃn, and D. Wilkes, Phys. Rev. E 88, 022503 (2013).
[17] Z. Parsouzi.A.Sh, S. M. Shamid, V. Borshch, P. K.
Challa, M. G. Tamba, C. Welch, G. H. Mehl, J. T. Glee-
son, A. Jakli, O. D. Lavrentovich, D. W. Allender, J. V.
Selinger, S. Sprunt, submitted to Phys. Rev. X (2016).

[24] S. M. Salili, C. Kim, S. Sprunt, J.T. Gleeson, O. Parri,

A. Jakli, RSC Advances 4, 57419 (2014).

[25] P. K. Challa, V. Borshch, O. Parri, C. T. Imrie S.N.
Sprunt, J.T. Gleeson, O.D. Lavrentovich, and A. Jakli,
Phys. Rev. E. 89, 060501(R) (2014).

[26] M. G. Tamba, S. M. Salili, C. Zhang, A. Jkli, G. H.
Mehl, R. Stannarius, and A. Eremin, RSC Adv. 5, 11207
(2015).

[27] C. S. Rosenblatt, R. Pindak, N. A. Clark, R. B. Meyer,

Journal de Physique, 38, 1105 (1977).

[28] P. K. Challa, V. Borshch, O. Parri, C. T. Imrie, S. N.
Sprunt, J. T. Gleeson, O. D. Lavrentovich, and A. Jakli,
Phys. Rev. E 89, 060501(R) (2014).

[29] C. Meyer and I. Dozov, Soft Matter 12, 574 (2016).
[30] M. I. Barnik, L. M. Blinov, and N. M. Shtykov, JETP

86, 1681 (1984).

[31] R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics, Third edition (Academic

Press, Burlington, MA, 2008), Chapter 2.

