Stochastic Einstein equations with ﬂuctuating volume

Vladimir Dzhunushaliev1,2 and Hernando Quevedo3,4 ∗

1 Physical-Technical Faculty,

al – Farabi Kazakh National University,

al – Farabi av.

71,

050040, Almaty, Kazakhstan

2 IETP, al – Farabi Kazakh National University,

050040, Almaty, Kazakhstan

3 Instituto de Ciencias Nucleares,

Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico,

AP 70543, M´exico, DF 04510, Mexico

4 Dipartimento di Fisica and ICRA,

Universit`a di Roma ”La Sapienza”,

Piazzale Aldo Moro 5,

I-00185 Roma, Italy

Abstract

We develop a simple model to study classical ﬁelds on the background of a ﬂuctuating spacetime

volume. It is applied to formulate the stochastic Einstein equations with a perfect-ﬂuid source. We

investigate the particular case of a stochastic Friedmann-Lemaˆıtre-Robertson-Walker cosmology,

and show that the resulting ﬁeld equations can lead to solutions which avoid the initial big bang

singularity. By interpreting the ﬂuctuations as the result of the presence of a quantum spacetime,

we conclude that classical singularities can be avoided even within a stochastic model that include

quantum eﬀects in a very simple manner.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
1
5
9
0
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: v.dzhunushaliev@gmail.com, quevedo@nucleares.unam.mx

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The idea of taking into account stochastic eﬀects in Einstein gravity in order to investigate

quantum gravitational eﬀects is not new. In fact, several approaches have been proposed.

For instance in [1], a stochastic theory of gravity was proposed in which the gravitational

and matter ﬁelds are treated as probabilistic quantities.

A diﬀerent approach is the so-called semiclassical stochastic gravity [2, 3].

In a full

theory of quantum gravity, one would expect that a metric operator ˆgµν(x) is related to
the energy-momentum operator ˆTµν(x) in a (still unknown) consistent manner. A simpliﬁed

theory consists in considering the classical metric gµν(x), instead of the metric operator, as a
classical variable, and the expectation value of the energy-momentum operator < ˆTµν(x) >,

instead of the operator itself. This semiclassical theory of gravity has been used successfully

in black hole physics and in cosmological scenarios. As long as the gravitational ﬁeld is

assumed to be described by a classical metric, this semiclassical theory is the only dynamical

equation for this metric. Indeed, the metric couples to the the matter ﬁelds through the

energy-momentum tensor and for a given quantum state the expectation value is the only

physical observable that one can construct. However, since no full theory of quantum gravity

is known, it is not clear how to determine the limits of applicability of the semiclassical

theory. It is expected that this theory should break down at Planck scales at which the

quantum eﬀects of gravity should not be ignored. Also, the semiclassical theory is expected

to break down when the quantum ﬂuctuations of the energy-momentum tensor become large

and non-negligible.

Stochastic semiclassical theory is an attempt to take into account in a consistent manner

the quantum ﬂuctuations of the energy-momentum tensor [2, 3]. Formally, to consider

quantum ﬂuctuations at the level of the ﬁeld equations one adds a stochastic function ξ(x)

to the expectation value of the energy-momentum tensor so that the classical metric gµν(x)
couples now to the sum < ˆTµν(x) > +ξ(x). The resulting semiclassical Einstein-Langevin

equations determine the dynamic evolution of the classical metric which acquires now a

stochastic character. It is not easy to analyze physical situations in semiclassical stochastic

gravity because it is necessary to handle not only the conceptual and technical problems of

describing quantum ﬁelds in curved spacetimes, but also the stochastic function source that

accounts for the quantum ﬂuctuations. This is probably one of the reasons why research in

2

this direction [4–6] is less intensive than in other formal quantization methods of gravity [7].

Nevertheless, a concrete set of stochastic Einstein equations was formulated recently

in [8]. In this approach, the dynamical variables correspond to stochastic quantities that

ﬂuctuate according to some probability density. To obtain the probability density and the

ﬁeld equations, it is assumed that the Ricci ﬂow is a statistical system and every metric in

the Ricci ﬂow corresponds to a microscopical state.

In this work, we propose an alternative model to take into account quantum ﬂuctuations.

All the approaches used to quantize gravity try to show or assume that at some scales

spacetime becomes quantized, i.e., it can have only discrete values. This expectation has

been corroborated in loop quantum gravity where area and volume quantum operators

have been obtained with discrete spectra. Although still many technical and conceptual

issues remain to be solved [9], the quantization of the spacetime volume seems to be well

established. This implies that quantum ﬂuctuations should appear that would aﬀect the

geometric structure of spacetime. We propose a model in which the stochastic character of

spacetime is taken into account in a very simple manner at the level of the ﬁeld equations. In

fact, we will see that it is possible to introduce a stochastic factor into the ﬁeld equations so

that the structure of spacetime becomes aﬀected by the presence of ﬂuctuations. Thus, our

model consists of a classical theory on the background of a quantum ﬂuctuating volume. We

will apply our model to the Friedmann-Lemaˆıtre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) cosmology in

order to explore the question about the possibility of avoiding the initial big bang singularity.

We will ﬁnd the conditions under which the avoidance is possible.

This work is organized as follows.

In Sec.

II, we derive the stochastic classical ﬁeld

equations in the case of a perfect-ﬂuid source, and study its properties. We show that

the ﬁeld equations can be interpreted as containing an eﬀective cosmological constant with

dynamic properties which arise as a consequence of quantum ﬂuctuations. Interestingly, stiﬀ

matter turns out to remain unaﬀected by the presence of quantum ﬂuctuations. In Sec. III,

we investigate the stochastic classical equations in the case of a FLRW cosmological model,

and show that the big bang singularity can be avoided in a large class of cosmological models.

Finally, in Sec. IV, we discuss our results.

3

II. STOCHASTIC FIELD EQUATIONS FOR A PERFECT FLUID

One of the goals of quantizing gravity is to show that there exists a limit at which our

classical understanding of spacetime breaks down, and it must be replaced by a diﬀerent

concept, say, a quantum spacetime. This is the case of loop quantum gravity in which

area and volume operators arise which are characterized by discrete spectra. This is a clear

indication of the presence of a quantum spacetime. Other quantization methods even start

from the assumption that at some level spacetime is quantum, and diﬀerent approaches can

be used to implement this idea into a mathematical model [7].

On the other hand, it has been well established in physics that quantum quantities

ﬂuctuate. It follows that spacetime ﬂuctuations should be a consequence of quantization of

gravity. In fact, as mentioned above, the implementation of this idea led to the formulation

of stochastic semiclassical gravity. The resulting Einstein-Langevin equations, however, are

not easy to be handled and many technical diﬃculties appear because in the corresponding

ﬁeld equations it is necessary to consider the expectation value of the energy-momentum

tensor and the stochastic functions, representing the spacetime ﬂuctuations. In this work,

we propose a simple model in which the stochastic nature of spacetime is modeled by a

stochastic factor at the level of the classical ﬁeld equations. One could say that we will

propose a simple model of stochastic classical gravity which allows us to investigate in an

eﬀective manner the consequences of a ﬂuctuating quantum spacetime.

To be more speciﬁc, let us consider the general action of Einstein’s gravity with a matter

Lagrangian Lm,

L = √−g(cid:18)−

1
2κ

R + Lm(cid:19) .

(1)

The corresponding ﬁeld equations are usually obtained by imposing the variational principle

in the form

δL = 0 = √−g(cid:18) 1

2κ

δR + δLm(cid:19) +(cid:18)−

1
2κ

R + Lm(cid:19) δ√−g ,

where the variation of the determinant of the metric is given by

δ√−g = −

1
2

gµνδgµν.

(2)

(3)

Now, we want to consider the contribution of a ﬂuctuating spacetime to the ﬁeld equations

(2). Clearly, in a ﬂuctuating spacetime, the spacetime volume √−gd4x will ﬂuctuate and
the variation δ√−gd4x should take this into account. Then, the simplest possible way to

4

consider ﬂuctuations in the variation of the spacetime volume is by introducing a stochastic

factor s into the variation (3), i.e.,

δ√−g = −

1
2

sgµνδgµν .

(4)

At the level of the ﬁeld equations this is equivalent to replacing gµν by sgµν. Consequently,

in the case of a perfect-ﬂuid source with pressure p and energy density ǫ, we obtain

Rµν −

1
2

sRgµν = −8π[(p + ǫ)uµuν − s p gµν] .

(5)

Thus, we see that within the context of this simple model a ﬂuctuating spacetime leads

to a non-trivial modiﬁcation of the ﬁeld equations. The question is whether the presence

of the stochastic factor in the ﬁeld equations leads to physical consequences that could be

associated with the quantum nature of spacetime. We will analyze this problem in the next

section.

We will now analyze the general properties of the stochastic classical Einstein equations

(5). First, we notice that in the vacuum case with arbitrary s 6= 1
2 , the ﬁeld equations
reduce to Rµν = 0. This implies that any possible stochastic eﬀects might be detected only

in the presence of matter. This is certainly a consequence of the simplicity of the model we

are considering in this work; the spacetime ﬂuctuations aﬀect only the matter and not the

spacetime itself.

The stochastic ﬁeld equations (5) can be rewritten as

Gµν = −8π[(p + ǫ)uµuν − spgµν] +

1
2

(s − 1)Rgµν ,

(6)

where Gµν is the Einstein tensor. From the Bianchi identities we know that the Einstein

tensor is divergence free, i.e., Gµν

;ν = 0, which usually leads to the conservation law T µν

;ν = 0.

However, in the above case the presence of the stochastic factor s implies a violation of the

conservation law. Indeed, the Bianchi identities imply in this case that

− 8π[(p + ǫ)uµuν − pgµν];ν =

1
2

(1 − s) (R + 16πp),ν gµν ,

(7)

so that the term on the right-hand side of the above equation is responsible for the violation

of the conservation law. The conservation law is recovered not only in the trivial case s = 1,

but also for

R = −16πp ,

5

(8)

which corresponds to stiﬀ matter. Indeed, calculating the trace of the ﬁeld equations, we

obtain the relationship

(1 − 2s)R = −8π[ǫ + (1 − 4s)p] ,

(9)

which, when replaced in Eq.(8), leads to the equation of state of stiﬀ matter, ǫ = p. Further-

more, notice that in the particular case s = 1/2, from the trace equation (9) the equation of

state for stiﬀ matter arises, independently of the value of R. This implies that stiﬀ matter

is not aﬀected by the presence of the stochastic factor in the metric.

Finally, let us mention that the stochastic ﬁeld equations (5) can also be written as

Gµν = −8π[(p + ǫ)uµuν − pgµν] +

1
2

(s − 1) (R + 16πp) gµν .

(10)

It follows that the last term in the right-hand side of the above equation be interpreted as

an eﬀective cosmological constant

Λef f = −

1
2

(s − 1) (R + 16πp) ,

(11)

which for a general metric depends explicitly on the spacetime coordinates.

In Einstein

theory, eﬀective cosmological constants appear very often and, when they depend on the

coordinates, in order to be able to determine their dynamics, it is necessary to take into

account additional ﬁelds. In the case of the stochastic Einstein equations, we see that no

additional ﬁelds are necessary. One can say that the dynamics of Λef f is dictated by the

stochastic character of the spacetime metric. Moreover, by using the trace equation (9) in

the expression for the eﬀective cosmological constant, we obtain

We see again that stiﬀ matter (p = ǫ) is not aﬀected by quantum ﬂuctuations of the metric.

Λef f = −4π

s − 1
1 − 2s

(p − ǫ) .

(12)

III. STOCHASTIC FLRW COSMOLOGY

Let us consider the FLRW metric in the form

ds2 = dt2 − a2(t)(cid:20) dr2

1 − kr2 + r2(dθ2 + sin2 θdϕ2)(cid:21) .

The corresponding stochastic ﬁeld equations (5) reduce to

(s − 1)

¨a
a

+

s

a2 ( ˙a2 + k) =

8π
3

[ǫ + (1 − s)p] ,

6

(13)

(14)

(3s − 1)

¨a
a

+

3s − 2

a2

( ˙a2 + k) = −8πsp .

(15)

In the limiting case s = 1, we obtain the standard Friedmann equations, where Eq.(14)

reduces to a ﬁrst-order diﬀerential equation, which is known as the Hamiltonian constraint,

and Eq.(15) determines the dynamics of the scale factor. On the contrary, in the case of

the stochastic ﬁeld equations, we have two second-order diﬀerential equations that dictate

the dynamics of the expansion. However, in the stochastic case we can recover the standard

structure of the Friedmann equations. Indeed, substituting the term ( ˙a2 + k) of Eq.(14) into

Eq.(15), we obtain

(2s − 1)

¨a
a

4π
3

= −

[(3s − 2)ǫ + (5s − 2)p] .

Furthermore, the Hamiltonian constraint can be expressed as

˙a2
a2 +

k
a2 =

4π

3(2s − 1)

[(3s − 1)ǫ + (s − 1)p] .

(16)

(17)

For the further analysis of these equations it is necessary to introduce ad hoc an additional

equation, for instance, in the form of an equation of state p = p(ǫ).

A straightforward computation of the Bianchi identities (7) with the FLRW metric shows

that only one equation is not identically satisﬁed, namely

(6s

2−s−1)p] = 0. (18)

2−9s+3)( ˙a2+k) ˙a+2πsa3[(s−1) ˙p+(3s−1) ˙ǫ]+4πa2 ˙a[(3s

2+s−1)ǫ+(5s

This equations reduces in the limiting case s = 1 to well-known expression for the conser-

vation law

˙ǫ + 3

˙a
a

(ǫ + p) = 0 .

(19)

The integration of the last diﬀerential equation permits us to express ǫ in terms of the scale

factor a, when a barotropic equation of state is assumed. In the general stochastic case,

however, this is not possible. Indeed, substituting the Ansatz ǫ = aα (α = const) with a

barotropic equation of state into Eq.(18), one can show that there is no α which fulﬁlls the

resulting equation.

One of the goals of quantum gravity is to ﬁnd a procedure to avoid curvature singularities

which imply the break down of the classical gravity. For the model under consideration, this

is equivalent to asking whether the presence of the stochastic factor s in the ﬁeld equations

can be used to avoid the initial singularity at t = 0 of the standard cosmological model. To

investigate this question, we simply impose the condition that the solutions of the stochastic

7

Friedmann equations (16) and (17) bounce near t = 0. The condition for a bouncing can

be expressed as ¨a(0) > 0, ˙a(0) = 0 and a(0) = a0 = const. Then, if we assume a barotropic

equation of state p = ωǫ with ǫ(0) = ǫ0 > 0, the dynamic equation (16) implies that

1

2s − 1

[(3s − 2) + ω(s − 2)] < 0 .

This inequality has two possible solutions

2(1 + ω)
3 + 5ω

< s <

1
2

,

i.e.

ω ∈ (−∞, −3/5) ∪ (1, +∞) ,

and

1
2

< s <

2(1 + ω)
3 + 5ω

,

i.e.

ω ∈ (−3/5, 1) .

(20)

(21)

(22)

In both cases, there exists a range of values for ω that satisﬁes the bouncing condition.

We conclude that given a stochastic factor s, there is always a non-trivial probability

that the initial singularity is not reached, and the bouncing condition selects, by means of

the barotropic factor, the type of cosmological models that represent a bouncing universe.
For instance, if we assume that s ≈ 1, as the result of inﬁnitesimal quantum ﬂuctuations,
then the bouncing condition leads to ω ≈ −1/3. This result is physically reasonable since
negative barotropic factors can be associated with repulsive gravitational eﬀects, which are

expected to be the physical cause of the bouncing.

IV. FINAL REMARKS

In this work, we propose a simple model to take into account in Einstein gravity the

ﬂuctuations which appear as a result of the existence of a quantum spacetime volume. To

construct our model, we assume that the quantum spacetime ﬂuctuations can be considered

in the variational principle as a stochastic factor, aﬀecting only the terms which include

the variation of the spacetime volume. We obtain as a result a set of stochastic classical

equations which in the case of the Einstein equations with a perfect-ﬂuid source formally

correspond to multiplying the spacetime metric by the stochastic factor. Our model can be

considered as describing the behavior of classical ﬁelds on the background of a ﬂuctuating

spacetime.

We investigate the classical stochastic classical Einstein equations in the case of the

FLRW spacetime metric, and show that the corresponding Friedmann equations can be

8

used to generate diﬀerent cosmological solutions. We investigate the conditions under which

the initial big bang singularity can be replaced by a bouncing cosmological factor.

It is

shown that in general there is always a non-trivial probability that the big bang is avoided.

We conclude that it is possible to construct simple models that take into account the

presence of a quantum spacetime by considering only the physical consequences of quantum

ﬂuctuations through a simple stochastic factor. In addition, our results show that considering

only a stochastic factor it is possible to avoid the initial big bang singularity in a FLRW

cosmology. We interpret this result as an indication that classical singularities can be avoided

even within a stochastic model that includes quantum eﬀects in a very simple manner.

In our model, we assumed that quantum ﬂuctuations lead to the appearance of a constant

stochastic factor at the level of the spacetime volume, aﬀecting the dynamics of the gravi-

tational ﬁeld. It seems possible to generalize this approach to include a stochastic function,

which is probably a more realistic approach from a physical point of view.

In this case,

however, it will be necessary to consider the dynamics of the stochastic function at the level

of the ﬁeld equations. One would then expect that this type of stochastic dynamics should

be related to the quantum origin of the ﬂuctuations. We expect to investigate this problem

in a future work.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by DGAPA-UNAM, Grant No. 113514, and Conacyt,

Grant No. 166391. VD is grateful for a grant Φ.0755 in fundamental research in natural

sciences by the Ministry of Education and Science of Kazakhstan.

[1] J. W. Moﬀat, Stochastic gravity, Phys. Rev. D 56, 6264-6277 (1997).

[2] B.L. Hu and E. Verdaguer, Stochastic gravity:a primer with applications, Class. Quantum

Grav. 20 , R1-R42 (2003).

[3] B. L. Hu and E. Verdaguer, Stochastic gravity: Theory and Applications, Living Rev. Relativ-

ity, 7, 3 (2004).

[4] S. Sinha, A. Raval and B.L.Hu, Black hole ﬂuctuations and backreaction in stochastic gravity,

Found. Phys. 33, 37 (2003).

9

[5] A. Roura and E. Verdaguer, Cosmological perturbations from stochastic gravity, Phys. Rev. D

78, 0640100 (2008).

[6] S. Satin, K. Lochan and S. Barve, Noise kernel for the self-similar Tolman Bondi metric:

Fluctuations on the Cauchy horizon, Phys. Rev. D 87, 084067 (2013).

[7] S. Carlip, “Quantum gravity: A Progress report,” Rept. Prog. Phys. 64, 885 (2001),

doi:10.1088/0034-4885/64/8/301, [gr-qc/0108040].

[8] V. Dzunushaliev, Stochastic Einstein equations, International Journal of Geometric Methods

in Modern Physics 8, 11891195 (2011), doi: 10.1142/S0219887811005671.

[9] C. Rovelli, Loop quantum gravity, Living Rev. Relativity 11, 5 (2008).

10

