Prepared for submission to JINST

Commissioning of the vacuum system of the
KATRIN Main Spectrometer

KATRIN Collaboration
M. Arenz,a M. Babutzka,b M. Bahr,c J.P. Barrett,d S. Bauer,e M. Beck,f
A. Beglarian,g J. Behrens,e T. Bergmann,g U. Besserer,h J. Blümer,i L.I. Bodine,j
K. Bokeloh,e J. Bonn,i,f,1 B. Bornschein,h L. Bornschein,i S. Büsch,k T.H. Burritt,j
S. Chilingaryan,g T.J. Corona,l L. De Viveiros,c P. J. Doe,j O. Dragoun,m
G. Drexlin,b S. Dyba,e S. Ebenhöch,i K. Eitel,i E. Ellinger,n S. Enomoto,j M. Erhard,b
D. Eversheim,a M. Fedkevych,e A. Felden,i S. Fischer,h J.A. Formaggio,d F. Fränkle,i,l
D. Furse,d M. Ghilea,c W. Gil,i F. Glück,i A. Gonzalez Ureña,o S. Görhardt,i S. Groh,b
S. Grohmann,h R. Grössle,h R. Gumbsheimer,i M. Hackenjos,h V. Hannen,e
F. Harms,b N. Haußmann,n F. Heizmann,b K. Helbing,n W. Herz,h S. Hickford,n
D. Hilk,b B. Hillen,e T. Höhn,i B. Holzapfel,h M. Hötzel,b M.A. Howe,l A. Huber,i
A. Jansen,i N. Kernert,i L. Kippenbrock,j M. Kleesiek,b M. Klein,b A. Kopmann,g
A. Kosmider,i A. Kovalík,m B. Krasch,h M. Kraus,b H. Krause,i M. Krause,b
L. Kuckert,b B. Kuﬀner,i L. La Cascio,b O. Lebeda,m B. Leiber,i J. Letnev,q
V.M. Lobashev,r,1 A. Lokhovr E. Malcherek,i M. Mark,i E.L. Martin,j S. Mertens,s,i
S. Mirz,h B. Monreal,c K. Müller,i M. Neuberger,k H. Neumann,h S. Niemes,h
M. Noe,h N.S. Oblath,d A. Oﬀ,h H.-W. Ortjohann,e A. Osipowicz,q E. Otten,f
D.S. Parno,j P. Plischke,i A.W.P. Poon,s M. Prall,e F. Priester,h P.C.-O. Ranitzsch,e
J. Reich,i O. Rest,e R.G.H. Robertson,j M. Röllig,h S. Rosendahl,e S. Rupp,h
M. Ryšavý,m K. Schlösser,i M. Schlösser,ho K. Schönung,h M. Schrank,i J. Schwarz,i
W. Seiler,q H. Seitz-Moskaliuk,b J. Sentkerestiová,m A. Skasyrskaya,r M. Slezák,m
A. Špalek,m M. Steidl,i N. Steinbrink,e M. Sturm,h M. Suesser,h H.H. Telle,o,p
T. Thümmler,i N. Titov,r I. Tkachev,r N. Trost,i A. Unru,q K. Valerius,i D. Vénos,m
R. Vianden,a S. Vöcking,ie B.L. Wall,j N. Wandkowsky,i M. Weber,g C. Weinheimer,e
C. Weiss,k S. Welte,h J. Wendel,h K.L. Wierman,l J.F. Wilkerson,l D. Winzen,e
J. Wolf,b,2 S. Wüstling,g M. Zacher,e S. Zadoroghny,r M. Zbořile,m
aHelmholtz-Institut fuer Strahlen- und Kernphysik, University Bonn, Nussallee 14-16, 53115 Bonn,
Germany
bInstitute of Experimental Nuclear Physics (IEKP), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT),
Wolfgang-Gaede-Str. 1, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
cDepartment of Physics, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106,
USA
1deceased
2Corresponding author

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
1
0
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

dLaboratory for Nuclear Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
eInstitut für Kernphysik, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Wilhelm-Klemm-Str. 9,
48149 Münster, Germany
f Institut für Physik, Johannes-Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, 55099 Mainz, Germany
gInstitute for Data Processing and Electronics (IPE), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, (KIT)Hermann-
von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
hInstitute for Technical Physics (ITeP), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Hermann- von-
Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
iInstitute for Nuclear Physics (IKP), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Hermann-von-
Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
jCenter for Experimental Nuclear Physics and Astrophysics, and Dept. of Physics, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
kProject, Process, and Quality Management (PPQ), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT),
Hermann- von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
lDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA

mNuclear Physics Institute of the CAS, v. v. i., CZ-250 68 Řež, Czech Republic
nDepartment of Physics, Faculty of Mathematics und Natural Sciences, University of Wuppertal,
Gauss-Str. 20, D-42119 Wuppertal, Germany
oUniversidad Complutense de Madrid, Instituto Pluridisciplinar, Paseo Juan XXIII, no
- Madrid, Spain
pDepartment of Physics, Swansea University, Singleton Park, Swansea SA2 8PP, United Kingdom
qUniversity of Applied Sciences (FH) Fulda, Leipziger Str. 123, 36037 Fulda, Germany
rAcademy of Sciences of Russia, Institute for Nuclear Research, 60th October Anniversary, Prospect
7a, 117312 Moscow, Russia
sInstitute for Nuclear and Particle Astrophysics and Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

¯ 1, 28040

E-mail: joachim.wolf@kit.edu

Abstract: The KATRIN experiment will probe the neutrino mass by measuring the β-
electron energy spectrum near the endpoint of tritium β-decay. An integral energy analysis
will be performed by an electro-static spectrometer (“Main Spectrometer”), an ultra-high
vacuum vessel with a length of 23.2 m, a volume of 1240 m3, and a complex inner electrode
system with about 120 000 individual parts. The strong magnetic ﬁeld that guides the β-
electrons is provided by super-conducting solenoids at both ends of the spectrometer. Its
inﬂuence on turbo-molecular pumps and vacuum gauges had to be considered. A system
consisting of 6 turbo-molecular pumps and 3 km of non-evaporable getter strips has been
deployed and was tested during the commissioning of the spectrometer. In this paper the
conﬁguration, the commissioning with bake-out at 300 ◦C, and the performance of this
system are presented in detail. The vacuum system has to maintain a pressure in the
10−11 mbar range. It is demonstrated that the performance of the system is already close
to these stringent functional requirements for the KATRIN experiment, which will start at
the end of 2016.

Keywords: neutrino detectors; vacuum-based detectors; spectrometers; gas systems and
puriﬁcation

Contents

1 Introduction

2 The KATRIN experiment

2.1 The source and transport section
2.2 The spectrometer and detector section

3 The vacuum system of the Main Spectrometer

3.1 The vacuum vessel
3.2 The vacuum pumps
3.3 The vacuum gauges
3.4 The in-beam valves
3.5 Vacuum and spectrometer operation

4 Simulation of the vacuum system

4.1 Simulation of hydrogen
4.2 Simulation of radon

5 Commissioning of the vacuum system and status after bake-out

5.1 Pump down and leak tests
5.2 Bake-out procedure
5.3 Vacuum performance after baking
5.4 Activation of the NEG pumps
5.5 Estimation of the outgassing rate

6 Preparations for ﬁrst spectrometer measurements

6.1 Locating a leak in the beam-line valve
6.2 Argon venting of the spectrometer
6.3 Vacuum performance during spectrometer measurements

7 Conclusions

A Estimation of the RGA calibration constants

1

4
4
5

8
8
9
10
12
13

14
15
16

17
17
17
21
22
23

25
25
25
28

30

32

1

Introduction

The KArlsruhe TRItium Neutrino experiment (KATRIN) is designed to determine the
eﬀective mass of electron anti-neutrinos with an unprecedented sensitivity of 0.2 eV/c2 at
90% CL. This will be accomplished by measuring the shape of the energy spectrum of
electrons from tritium β-decay [1, 2]. The analysis is focused on the last few eV below

– 1 –

Figure 1. The principle of a MAC-E-Filter. The shaded area marks the magnetic ﬂux tube
connecting the source with the detector. The dashed line at the center indicates the “analyzing
plane” of the MAC-E-Filter, where the magnetic ﬁeld is at its minimum Bmin and the electrostatic
potential barrier at its maximum (−Umax). Electrons, originating from the source, are magnetically
guided against the electrostatic retarding ﬁeld towards the detector. Track a) is the trajectory of
an electron with enough kinetic energy to overcome the retarding potential (cyclotron radius not
to scale). The electron following track c) has less energy and is reﬂected back to the source. Track
b) belongs to a magnetically trapped electron that has been created inside the MAC-E-Filter, for
instance by a radioactive decay. The arrows at the bottom indicate the direction of the momentum
of an electron relative to the guiding magnetic ﬁeld line. The inhomogeneous ﬁeld transforms
transverse momentum into longitudinal momentum and back.

the 18.6 keV endpoint of the β-spectrum. An integrating, electrostatic spectrometer of
MAC-E-Filter1 type [3, 4] can provide high energy resolution with a wide open solid angle
acceptance for β-electrons, emitted isotropically in the tritium source. This technique has
been successfully employed with diﬀerent types of tritium sources in the Mainz and Troitsk
experiments, which provide the most stringent, model-independent limits on the eﬀective
neutrino mass [5–7]:

(cid:118)(cid:117)(cid:117)(cid:116) 3(cid:88)

m(¯νe) =

ei| · m2
|U 2

i < 2 eV/c2

(95%C.L.).

(1.1)

i=1

The eﬀective mass m(¯νe) is the incoherent sum of the three neutrino mass eigenstates mi,
weighted with the mixing matrix coeﬃcients Uei [8].

The main features of a MAC-E-ﬁlter are illustrated in Fig. 1. The β-electrons are
adiabatically guided by strong magnetic ﬁelds from their point of origin in the tritium

1Magnetic Adiabatic Collimation combined with an Electrostatic Filter

– 2 –

source (BS) through the MAC-E-ﬁlter. The superconducting solenoids at both ends provide
the magnetic guiding ﬁeld. For the KATRIN Main Spectrometer additional air coils induce
a weak guiding ﬁeld at the center of the spectrometer, and compensate for distortions by
the earth magnetic ﬁeld, as well as fringe ﬁelds of the solenoids and residual magnetization.
The electrons move along the ﬁeld lines in cyclotron motions, allowing for an accepted
solid angle of almost 2π. On their way to the central plane (“analyzing plane”) of the
spectrometer, the magnetic ﬁeld drops by several orders of magnitude to Bmin. Due to
the slowly varying ﬁeld, the transverse momentum of the cyclotron motion is adiabatically
transformed into longitudinal momentum, parallel to the ﬁeld lines. In short, the magnetic
adiabatic transformation transforms the isotropically emitted β-electrons at the source into
a broad, parallel beam of electrons at the center of the MAC-E-ﬁlter.

With both ends at ground potential and a high negative electric potential at its center
(−Umax), the MAC-E ﬁlter works as an electrostatic high-pass energy ﬁlter, reﬂecting all
electrons with energies below the retarding potential (Fig. 1, track c). All other electrons
are accelerated again towards the far end of the spectrometer, where they are counted by
a detector (Fig. 1, track a). An optional positive potential at the detector (UD) can accel-
erate the electrons further, shifting their energy further away from the low energy ambient
background radiation. The energy spectrum is measured by varying the retarding voltage
around the endpoint energy of the β-spectrum. The energy resolution of the MAC-E-ﬁlter
is limited by the remaining transverse energy of the cyclotron motion, which cannot be
analyzed with the retarding potential. Assuming the conservation of the magnetic moment
of the cyclotron motion, the energy resolution is deﬁned by the ratio of the weak magnetic
ﬁeld Bmin at the analyzing plane and the strongest magnetic ﬁeld Bmax along the trajectory
of an electron with energy Ee [4]:

∆E =

Bmin
Bmax

· Ee.

(1.2)

With a count rate of 10−2 counts per second (cps) in the last eV below the endpoint of
the β-spectrum, the KATRIN experiment requires not only higher statistics and improved
energy resolution, but also aims for a low total background rate of similar size, in order to
achieve an order-of-magnitude improvement in m(¯νe) sensitivity.

A major source of background can arise from keV-range electrons originating from the
radioactive decays of neutral atoms or molecules inside the spectrometer volume, such as
radon [9, 10] and tritium [11]. If the decays occur within the magnetic ﬂux tube inside
the spectrometer, many of these primary electrons can be trapped by the magnetic mirror
eﬀect (Fig. 1, track b). The trapped electrons circulate inside the spectrometer for hours,
until they have lost enough energy through ionization of residual gas molecules to leave
the trap. The low-energy secondary electrons can leave the trap through either end of
the spectrometer. Being accelerated by the retarding potential of the spectrometer, about
half of them can reach the detector with exactly the same energy as the signal electrons
from tritium decay, thereby increasing the background rate. The number of secondary
electrons produced depends on the energy of the primary electron. The storage time, and
thus the background rate, depend on the pressure in the spectrometer volume. Therefore

– 3 –

the vacuum system of the KATRIN experiment [12] is a key component for reducing this
kind of background. Most of the few tritium molecules that reach the spectrometer can be
pumped out before their decay (half-life: 12.1 years). Short-lived isotopes, such as 219Rn
with a half-life of 4 s, are more likely to decay inside the spectrometer. A pressure of
10−11 mbar is needed in order to extend the storage time long enough for removing the
primary background electrons by active methods, such as electric or magnetic pulsing [13],
before they can produce too many secondary electrons.

The subjects of this paper are the commissioning of the complete Main Spectrometer
vacuum system in the ﬁrst half of 2013, the conditioning of the large vessel by vacuum-
baking, various remedies for technical problems that were encountered and the vacuum
performance during the ﬁrst electron measurements with the MAC-E-ﬁlter system. The
next section provides a short overview of the KATRIN experiment. Section 3 describes the
vacuum system of the Main Spectrometer. In Section 4 the vacuum simulations, needed
for the interpretation of the measured data, are described. Section 5 gives an account of
the bake-out procedure of the spectrometer and explains the methods used to quantify the
performance of the vacuum system.
It is followed by section 6, describing the solution
for the problem of a defective valve, which led to the venting of the whole spectrometer
with ultra-clean argon to prevent deactivating the NEG pumps. Finally we draw some
conclusions on the lessons learned in Section 7.

2 The KATRIN experiment

The main components of the KATRIN experiment [1] are shown in Fig 2. The 70 m long
system, currently under construction at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), can
be subdivided into the Source & Transport Section (STS), where the tritium decays take
place, and the Spectrometer & Detector Section (SDS), where the energies of the decay
electrons are measured.

2.1 The source and transport section
The STS has four main components. The central part is the Windowless Gaseous Tritium
Source (WGTS), where molecular tritium gas is injected at the center of a 10 m long,
90 mm diameter tube, and where most of the β-decays take place. The β-activity inside
the source tube will be around 1011 Bq. The tube is diﬀerentially pumped at both ends by
turbo-molecular pumps (TMP), which remove 99% of the gas. The tritium is recirculated
through a closed loop system [14, 15]. At the rear end of the WGTS, the Calibration and
Monitoring System (CMS) measures the tritium activity by monitoring the ﬂux of incoming
β-electrons. In addition it provides mono-energetic electrons from an electron source with
well-deﬁned energy and emission angle for the calibration of the experiment [16]. Between
the WGTS and the spectrometer section two additional pumping systems remove most
of the remaining tritium gas, reducing the total ﬂux by a factor of more than 1014. The
ﬁrst stage is again a Diﬀerential Pumping Section (DPS), using TMPs [17]. The second
stage is a Cryogenic Pumping Section (CPS), where cryosorption on argon frost at 3 K is
used to capture tritium molecules [18, 19]. Throughout the STS superconducting solenoids

– 4 –

Figure 2. Overview of the 70 m long KATRIN experiment: calibration and monitoring system
(CMS), windowless gaseous tritium source (WGTS), diﬀerential pumping section (DPS), cryogenic
pumping section (CPS), Pre-Spectrometer (PS), Main Spectrometer (MS), focal plane detector
(FPD). For better clarity the Main Spectrometer is shown without the surounding magnetic air coil
system.

produce magnetic ﬁelds between 0.5 and 5.6 T, guiding around 1010 β-electrons per second
adiabatically to the spectrometer and detector section.

2.2 The spectrometer and detector section

The SDS consists of three main components, the Pre-Spectrometer (PS) with a moderate
energy resolution of 70 eV, followed by the Main Spectrometer (MS), where the energy of
electrons is analyzed with a resolution of 0.93 eV, and the Focal Plane Detector (FPD),
which counts electrons that have passed the retarding voltages of both MAC-E-Filters.

The PS serves several purposes. It can work as a pre-ﬁlter, rejecting all electrons with
energies more than 300 eV below the endpoint energy of the β-spectrum, thus reducing
the electron ﬂux into the MS by seven orders of magnitude to about 103 electrons per
second. The magnetic guiding ﬁeld of the MAC-E-ﬁlter is induced by 4.5 T superconducting
solenoids at both ends of the spectrometer. The vacuum vessel of the PS, with a diameter
of 1.7 m and a length of 3.4 m, served as a prototype for the vacuum system of the MS. The
vacuum system of the PS uses a combination of non-evaporable-getter (NEG) pumps made
of 90 m of 30 mm wide SAES St707 R(cid:13) NEG strips and two TMPs [20], providing a base
pressure of 10−11 mbar. The vacuum pumps also reduce the small incoming ﬂux of tritiated
molecules from the STS to the MS by another two orders of magnitude. Although the
NEG strips have been identiﬁed as a major source of radon-related background [9], there
is no alternative pumping concept with which to obtain the huge pumping speed needed
to operate the MS, since helium-cooled cryogenic pumps have much higher operating costs.
However, the tests with the PS showed that LN2 cooled baﬄes in front of the getter pumps
are able to suppress the Rn-induced background eﬀectively.

The high energy resolution of the MS of 0.93 eV at 18.6 keV requires a ratio between
Bmin and Bmax (see Equ. 1.2 and Fig. 1) of 1:20 000. The magnetic guiding ﬁeld is generated
by two superconducting solenoids at the detector side at 6 T and 3.5 T, respectively. At
the other end a 4.5 T solenoid is shared between the MS and the PS. In addition the MS is
surrounded by a system of air-coils with a diameter of 12.6 m. It compensates for the earth
magnetic ﬁeld and solenoid fringe ﬁelds, and conﬁnes the ﬂux-tube of the magnetic guiding
ﬁeld inside the volume of the MS [21]. Together these components generate a ﬁeld layout
with a very high degree of axial symmetry, which provides magnetic shielding for low energy

– 5 –

Figure 3. Left: Arrival of the KATRIN Main Spectrometer vacuum vessel at the Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology. One of the 50-cm-long DN200 ports is indicated. Right: Location of the
main vacuum pumps in one of the three pump ports.

electrons emitted from the spectrometer walls, reducing cosmic-ray-induced background by
a factor of 105 [22].

The requirement of adiabatic electron transport with a slowly varying B-ﬁeld in the
MAC-E ﬁlter, and the cross section of the magnetic ﬂux-tube at the analyzing plane, which
scales inversely with the ﬁeld strength, imply a very large MS (see Fig. 3). The stainless
steel (316LN) vacuum vessel has a total length of 23.2 m, a diameter of 9.8 m and a weight
of 200 t.

The vacuum pipes of the electron beam-lines at both ends of the spectrometer terminate
in two axisymmetric aluminum cones, which are held at ground potential as anodes. They
are connected to the vacuum vessel via ceramic insulators. The electrostatic retarding ﬁeld
of the MAC-E ﬁlter is generated by connecting the outer hull of the MS to a high precision
high voltage system (−18.5 kV), which has to be stabilized and monitored with parts-per-
million (ppm) accuracy [23]. Together with a complex wire electrode system that is mounted
to the inner wall, the vessel acts as the cathode. Between the ground electrode and the ﬁrst
and the last ring of the wire electrodes, conical electrodes that are formed from titanium
sheet metal are maintained at the vessel potential. These so-called anti-Penning electrodes
act as shielding in the high-ﬁeld region to prevent deep Penning traps from forming.

The wire-electrode system consists of 23,440 individually insulated wires (see Fig. 4).
It is used for ﬁne-tuning the electrostatic ﬁeld, preventing Penning traps, and providing the
axial symmetry of the ﬁeld [24]. With the wires being at a potential that is 100 V lower
than the vessel, the system is also responsible for the electrostatic rejection of electrons
created by cosmic muons or radioactive decays at the wall of the vessel. The wires are
strung on 248 stainless steel frames (“modules”). In most of these electrode modules the
wires are strung in two layers. In addition the electrode system is subdivided both in the
axial direction and in the vertical direction into several sections. This allows for a gradual
adjustment of the electric potential in the axial direction, and for applying short dipole
pulses regularly to remove magnetically trapped electrons from the MS. Modules belonging

– 6 –

Figure 4. Left: View of the complete wire-electrode system as seen from the beam-line ﬂange at the
source end of the MS. At the far end the three pump ports with the LN2 baﬄes are visible. Right:
Voltage distribution to the corners of an electrode module from the distribution panel underneath
a ﬂange with electrical feedthroughs.

to the same section share the same voltages for their wire layers. Each section contains
between 4 and 50 modules.

The high voltage vacuum feedthroughs are mounted at DN200 ports above the diﬀerent
sections. Inside the vacuum volume, the feedthroughs are connected with 1.5-mm diame-
ter stainless steel (Inconel R(cid:13)) wires to the insulated connectors at the distribution panels
that are attached to the frames of the electrode modules underneath the respective ports.
Copper-beryllium (CuBe) rods with a diameter of 3 mm distribute the voltages from the
distribution panels to the corners of the ﬁrst module of a section, where further distributions
to neighboring modules are achieved via spring-loaded contacts and short wires.

Short circuits between wire layers would reduce the eﬃciency of background rejection,
while a broken wire, which may electrically short to the vessel, would render both the ﬁne
tuning of the ﬁeld and the rejection of backgrounds ineﬀective. Special care and extensive
quality control measures were taken to build a robust wire-electrode system, in particular
with regard to the stress on the numerous wires and interconnects during the bake-out of
the vacuum system.

When the electrons leave the MS, the FPD system [31] takes them from the exit of the
MS to the primary KATRIN detector, a 148-pixel p-i-n-diode array on a monolithic silicon
wafer. The dartboard-pattern pixelation scheme allows the separate analysis of diﬀerent
regions of the analyzing plane. The system contains electron and gamma calibration sources,
as well as two superconducting solenoids to complete the MAC-E ﬁlter of the MS and to
focus electrons onto the detector wafer. A post-acceleration electrode allows the signal
electron energy to be elevated by up to 10 keV. The FPD vacuum system is divided into two
independent regions: an external high-vacuum region containing the front-end electronics,
and an internal UHV region, which contains the detector and couples to the MS vacuum via
an all-metal DN250 gate valve followed by an in-beam valve (see Sec. 3.4). After roughing

– 7 –

Figure 5. Vacuum scheme of the Main Spectrometer. The Extractor gauges on ﬂange F9 (vessel)
and on pump port P3 were used in the vacuum analysis.

and bakeout, the vacuum in each region is maintained by a dedicated cryopump.

3 The vacuum system of the Main Spectrometer

3.1 The vacuum vessel
The design goals of the Main Spectrometer vacuum system are to maintain a pressure in
the lower 10−11 mbar regime during the entire 5-year lifetime of the KATRIN experiment,
as well as suppressing tritium and radon induced background. The vessel has a volume of
1240 m3 and an inner surface area of 690 m2. The inner wire electrode system, with a total of
120,000 individual parts, adds another 532 m2 of stainless steel parts to the inner surface,
increasing the total surface area to 1222 m2. An overview of the principal construction
materials and the respective surface areas of the MS components is given in Table 1.

The outgassing rate of this large surface is the limiting factor for the ultimate pressure
in the MS. Measurements with the pre-spectrometer showed that a hydrogen outgassing rate
of 10−12 mbar · (cid:96)/s · cm2 can be reached for 316LN stainless steel, after electro-polishing,
cleaning, and vacuum baking at temperatures of at least 200 ◦C. The cleaning process of the
MS involved pickling, electro-polishing and rinsing with an alkaline degreaser and deionized

– 8 –

Ground PotentialHigh Voltage: 18600 VNEG ST707(1000 m)(cryo)LN2 bafflePump port 1flange forleak detectorRGA  CF40 (M)Wide rangeBA / PiraniCF100 (V)TMP300 l/sKF40 (V)KF40 (V)KF25 (V)ScrollPump30 m3/hPiraniExtractor  IE 514CF100 (V)gasballastLeybold TMP MAG W 2800CF250 (M)CF40 (V)CF40 (M)KF25 (V)KF25 (V)Pump port 3NEG ST707(1000 m)LN2 baffleInsulatorairLeybold TMP MAG W 2800CF40 (M)CF160 (V)CF63 (M)CF160 (M)Dry fore-pump ISO K-100KF40 (V)Screw pump630 m3/hISOK-63FilterVentingKF40 (V)gasballastPirani   Baratron  InvMagInsulatorMCF63 (M)leak valvecalibrated He leakCF250 (M)CF40 (V)NEG ST707(1000 m)LN2 bafflegasCF40 (M)Wide rangeBA / PiraniWide rangeBA / PiraniPump port 2Valves: V= viton sealM= metal sealflange forleak detectorCF100 (V)TMP300 l/sKF40 (V)KF40 (V)KF25 (V)ScrollPump30 m3/h PiranigasballastKF25 (V)KF25 (V)airleak valveCF100(M)PiraniViewportMFlange F10CF40(M)Flange F9ExtractorIE 514CF100(M)(top view)MAIN SPECTROMETERPump port 3CF200 flanges with HV feedtroughsPump port 1Pump port 2F4F7F8F6F10F2F3F1F5F11F9water. Methods to reduce hydrogen outgassing, such as vacuum ﬁring at high temperatures,
could not be applied due to the size of the MS [12]. Most other components, installed inside
the MS, were cleaned in similar processes, using ultrasonic baths for the alkaline degreaser
In a ﬁnal step they were dried in a drying oven at 110 ◦C for
and the deionized water.
about 12 hours.

Three tubular pump ports, each with a diameter of 1.7 m and a length of approximately
3 m (see Fig. 3), protrude from the detector-facing end of the main vessel. Each pump port
is closed with a DN1700 ﬂange, developed and tested with the PS [20]. The ﬂanges are
metal-sealed by custom-made double-gaskets.
If the innermost gasket developed a leak,
the volume between the two gaskets can be pumped down, reducing the leak-rate by up
to ﬁve orders of magnitude. So far this backup solution has not been needed, since the
inner gaskets always stayed leak-tight at temperatures ranging from -20 ◦C to 350 ◦C. The
spring-energized inner gaskets are made of silver-coated stainless steel tubes (type 321,
diameter 9 mm), bent to a ring, with both ends welded together [25]. Inside each tube a
stainless steel (type 302) spiral spring reinforces the tube and provides enough elasticity to
allow movements of up to 0.2 mm between the ﬂanges. The outer gaskets are only made
of type 321 stainless steel tubes without an internal spiral spring, since the requirements
on the leak-tightness are less stringent. The end-cap ﬂanges of the two outer pump ports
feature six DN400 knees each, ending with DN250 Conﬂat (CF) ﬂanges for TMPs, vacuum
gauges and feedthroughs for LN2 cryogenic lines. The electron beam-lines at the ends
of both spectrometers connect to DN500 ﬂanges, which use the same ﬂange design with
spring-loaded metal gaskets.

On the upper half of the MS vessel eleven 50-cm-long DN200 ports with CF ﬂanges
(see Fig. 3 (left) and the vacuum scheme in Fig. 5) provide access to the inner electrode
system. On top of the ports 25-cm-long six-way crosses are mounted. The top port of
each cross is sealed with a DN200 blank ﬂange, while the four lateral ports with DN40
ﬂanges provide access for feedthroughs for high voltage, internal temperature sensors, and
a vacuum gauge (port F9). One of the DN200 blank ﬂanges has been replaced by a gate
valve, a sapphire window for laser measurements, and a remotely controlled leak valve for
background measurements at elevated pressure (see Fig. 5, port F10). Another blank ﬂange
has been replaced by a burst disk rated to 500 mbar.

3.2 The vacuum pumps

Figure 5 shows an overview of the vacuum system. Three custom-made NEG pumps [26]
(see Fig. 6), each consisting of 1,000 1-m long SAES St707 R(cid:13) getter strips, are mounted
on the three large pump ports. The NEG strips are 30-mm-wide Constantan R(cid:13) strips,
which are coated on both sides with a 27-mm-wide NEG area. Their combined nominal
pumping speed for hydrogen is 1,000 m3/s [27]. As mentioned before, the installation of
LN2-cooled baﬄes in front of each getter pump is necessary for reducing the radon-induced
background component by capturing Rn atoms on the cold surfaces. The conductance of
the baﬄes (157 m3/s each) reduces the total eﬀective pumping speed of the three fully
activated NEG pumps for hydrogen to 375 m3/s. With an expected outgassing rate for

– 9 –

Table 1. The components inside the Main Spectrometer. This table lists the construction materials
of these components, as well as their surface area and nominal operating temperature. The cold
baﬄes and the NEG strips are not included in the calculation of the outgassing rate.

component
MS vacuum vessel
wire electrodes
electrode rail system
feedtrough ﬂanges
ceramic insulators
anti-penning electrode
ground electrodes
cryogenic baﬄes
NEG strips

material
316 LN
316 L
316 LN
316 LN
Al2O3
Ti
Al
Cu
St 707

temperature

surface
20 ◦C 690.0 m2
20 ◦C
472 m2
20 ◦C
58 m2
20 ◦C
2 m2
20 ◦C
6 m2
20 ◦C
11 m2
20 ◦C
1 m2
−187 ◦C
31 m2
20 ◦C
180 m2

stainless steel of 10−12 mbar·(cid:96)/s·cm2 [12, 20], the ultimate pressure in the main volume
would be 3.2 · 10−11 mbar.

The two outer pump ports are each equipped with three TMPs (Leybold MAG-W-
2800 R(cid:13)), which use magnetic bearings in the rotor mechanism. They provide a combined
eﬀective pumping speed for hydrogen of 10 m3/s. These pumps have three tasks:
• initial pump-down during commissioning and baking of the vacuum vessel,
• pumping of released hydrogen during NEG activation and
• pumping of non-getterable gases, such as noble gases and methane during standard

operation.

The fore-vacuum of each set of three TMPs is produced by a 300 (cid:96)/s TMP backed by
a scroll pump. This cascaded setup provides a high enough hydrogen compression ratio for
the MS to reach the required pressure regime.

As a roughing pump for the initial pump down a Leybold SP630 R(cid:13) screw pump (630 m3/h)
is temporarily connected to one of the pump ports. After reaching 10−2 mbar, the TMPs
take over, and reduce the pressure to approximately 10−7 mbar. This process takes two to
three days. After reaching this pressure at room temperature the vessel has to be baked
at temperatures up to 350 ◦C to get rid of water and other contaminants on the inner sur-
faces, and to activate the NEG pumps. After baking the system, hydrogen outgassing from
these surfaces is the limiting factor for the ultimate pressure. A detailed description of the
bake-out procedure is given in Section 5.

3.3 The vacuum gauges
The intermediate vacua between the cascaded TMPs and the fore-vacua, provided by the
scroll pumps, are monitored by several wide-range gauges. The ultra-high-vacuum (UHV)

– 10 –

Figure 6. Left: Closing of one of the main pump ports with the NEG pump and the cryogenic
baﬄe visible in the background. Right: A closeup view of the NEG pump with SAES St707 NEG
strips installed.

pressure level inside the vessel is measured by three ionization gauges and one quadrupole
mass spectrometer:

• a Leybold Extractor gauge (IE514 R(cid:13)) at the DN200 port F9 (see Fig. 5) on the shallow

cone at the detector end of the main volume,

• a Leybold Extractor gauge at a DN400 port of pump port P3 behind the NEG pump,
• a MKS Inverted Magnetron gauge (HPS 421 R(cid:13)) at a DN400 port of pump port P2,
serving mainly as a crosscheck during bake-out and at pressures above 10−5 mbar,
and

• a MKS Microvision II R(cid:13) quadrupole mass spectrometer (RGA) at a DN400 port of

pump port P3.

Both Extractor gauges have been calibrated against a Bayard-Alpert reference gauge
(±10%) for nitrogen, hydrogen, helium and argon at 10−6 mbar. An in situ calibration
at low pressure in the Main Spectrometer was not performed due to the scheduling of
the electromagnetic test measurements with the MS. The residual gas in the spectrometer
was a mixture of diﬀerent gases. Therefore the pressures are reported, using the nitrogen
calibration, if not mentioned otherwise. Gas correction factors relative to the nitrogen
calibration have to be applied, if one gas type dominates the mixture. The factors have
been determined for both Extractor gauges (F9, P3) for hydrogen (2.2, 2.3), helium (5.6,
5.7), and argon (0.70, 0.71). Another correction factor of 1.06 had to be applied to the
Extractor gauge at pump port 3 for the time intervals when the superconducting magnets
were turned on, since the sensitivity of ionization gauges is inﬂuenced by magnetic ﬁelds.
The factor was measured by comparing the displayed pressure before and after the magnetic
ﬁeld was switched on.

While the gauge at P3 was connected to the pump port volume through a 400-mm-
diameter tube, the gauge at F9 was only connected to the main volume through a 40-mm-
diameter and 25-cm-long tube, ending in the 50-cm-long DN200 port. With its ﬁlaments

– 11 –

close to the walls of the tube, and a much lower conductance compared to P3, the lowest
pressure measured in F9 was limited by local outgassing, which produced a measured oﬀset
in the order of 10−10 mbar.

Before and during the bake-out the RGA was used with the built-in Faraday cup
detector. At low pressure the sensitivity of the RGA was increased by using the built-in
secondary electron multiplier (SEM) detector. The RGA peaks were normalized against the
nitrogen-calibrated signal of Extractor gauge P3, which was mounted at a similar location
as the RGA in pump port 3. For two gas species an additional correction factor was applied
to the peaks: hydrogen (mass 1, 2 and 3), and argon (mass 40, 36, and 20). For all other
mass peaks the nitrogen calibration of the Extractor gauge was used. For more details see
Appendix A. The RGA signal was very sensitive to magnetic ﬁelds. Therefore both the
Extractor gauge and the RGA were passively shielded by two layers of soft iron tubes that
are fabricated from Fe-360 metal sheets. Even with this shielding the magnetic ﬁelds aﬀect
the amplitude of the measured mass peaks by 10 % to 20 %, depending on the mass. The
eﬀects for lower mass peaks are more pronounced. Therefore the RGA spectra, shown in
this paper, were taken at times when the magnetic ﬁelds were oﬀ.

One of the Extractor gauges is mounted at the main volume of the vessel (port F9),
while the other one is located in pump port P3 behind the baﬄe and the NEG pump.
Therefore, they measure diﬀerent pressure values. Their pressure ratio depends on the
pumping speed of the NEG pump and on the gas composition. Based on vacuum simula-
tions, described in the following sections, the pressure ratio between these two gauges can
be used to estimate the level of activation of the getter pumps (see Section 5.4). During
standard operation with the high voltage switched on, the Extractor gauge at the main
vessel (port F9) is switched oﬀ, since it produces background electrons that would interfere
with the low count-rate measurements. In this case, the pressure inside the main vessel can
only be estimated from the value of the Extractor gauge at pump port 3, which is usually a
factor of 2 to 5 lower than the actual pressure in the main volume, depending on the level
of activation of the NEG pumps.

3.4 The in-beam valves
During commissioning and bake-out of the MS it is necessary to attach and remove hardware
from either end of the spectrometer. To avoid exposing the conditioned spectrometer to
atmosphere, custom valves were designed to satisfy several requirements. First, they must
be able to temporarily seal the spectrometer at a maximum leak rate of < 10−7 mbar·(cid:96)/s
helium through the valve. Since they must be attached to the MS during bake-out, they
must tolerate temperatures of up to 200 ◦C, and they must accommodate up to 2 cm ther-
mal movement of the spectrometer in addition to spatial adjustments for beam alignment.
Finally, when in the open position, the valves must provide unobstructed passage for the
electron beam.

Due to the movements of up to 12 cm of the MS vessel, caused by thermal expansion
and contraction during the bake-out, both the electron gun and the detector system are
disconnected before the start of the bake-out, with both in-beam valves closed. The valves
are not intended to provide a long-term solution to isolating the MS. Once the valve is

– 12 –

Figure 7. View of the engineering model for the in-beam valve separating the detector system
from the MS. The central body of the valve is transparent to show the ﬂapper mechanism.

closed, the volume exposed to atmosphere is capped with a CF blanking ﬂange and then
evacuated.

An engineering model of the valve separating the MS from the detector system is shown
in Fig. 7. The valve between the PS and the MS is similar. Space constraints demanded
that the valves ﬁt inside the warm bores of the superconducting magnets at either end of
the spectrometer. Edge-welded metal bellows at either end of the valve accommodate MS
movement and facilitate alignment. Sliding joints support the body of the valve without
impeding the movement of the bellows. The valve closure is a simple, manually operated
ﬂapper mechanism. The ﬂapper is sealed by a Kalrez R(cid:13) O-ring which was chosen for its
lower radon emanation compared to Viton R(cid:13) O-rings [32].

3.5 Vacuum and spectrometer operation

During pump down and baking the MS is at ground potential, while for standard operation
it is at high potential. Therefore the whole vessel is supported on electrical insulators, on
which it can slide freely during the bake-out. All vacuum devices and other equipment
directly mounted on the vessel have to be connected to controllers, which are installed in
electrically insulated cabinets and powered via an isolation transformer. At both ends of
the MS the beam-line is connected through 171-mm-long conical Al2O3 ceramic insulators,
which are mounted at the central DN500 ﬂanges. Each set of three TMPs at the pump
ports P2 and P3 is isolated from the grounded fore-vacuum system by a 200-mm-long
DN100 ceramic tube on the high vacuum ﬂange of the 300-(cid:96)/s TMP. In order to prevent
gas discharge, the control system switches oﬀ the high voltage if the pressure in one of the
insulators rises above 10−4 mbar.

The static stray magnetic ﬁelds of the superconducting solenoids and air-coils cannot
only inﬂuence the vacuum gauges, but also the TMPs. The fast-moving all-metal rotors of
TMPs are susceptible to heating by eddy currents, induced by the external magnetic ﬁelds.
The maximum ﬁeld strength at the location of the MAG W 2800 TMPs is 1.7 mT. The
expected rotor temperature of 65◦C is acceptable and can be tolerated without counter-
measures, as extensive tests have shown [28, 29].

– 13 –

For the ﬁrst electro-magnetic test measurements between May and September 2013 a
high precision, angular selective electron gun [30] was used, which sent electrons through
the spectrometer for counting by the detector at the other end. After bake-out the electron
gun and the detector system were connected to the in-beam valves, and evacuated down to
approximately 10−10 mbar, before opening the valves to the MS.

4 Simulation of the vacuum system

The performance of the vacuum system has been estimated by detailed simulations of
the spectrometer vessel using Molﬂow+ 2.4 [33, 34]. Molﬂow+ is a Test Particle Monte
Carlo (TPMC) code for simulating vacuum systems in the molecular ﬂow regime. Three
diﬀerent parameters have been extracted from the simulations for hydrogen and radon: (i)
the eﬀective pumping speeds for the TMPs, NEG pumps, and baﬄes, (ii) the conductance
of a baﬄe, and (iii) the pressure ratio at the locations of the Extractor gauges.

After a particle is started in Molﬂow+ (desorbed from a surface), it is tracked through
the geometry, until it is adsorbed on a pumping surface with a certain sticking coeﬃcient
α, deﬁned as the probability that a particle sticks to the surface after impinging on it. All
other particles are diﬀusely reﬂected. Pumps are simulated by one or more surface elements
with appropriate values for α. The pumping speed S of a pump with an opening area A
of the high vacuum ﬂange, for gas particles with an average speed ¯c (H2: 1754.6 m/s; Rn:
167.2 m/s), is

S =

¯c · A · w.

1
4

(4.1)

The parameter w is the pumping probability, deﬁned as the ratio of particles absorbed
by the pump, to the particles entering the pump through the opening A (for instance the
high vacuum ﬂange of a TMP). This deﬁnition is similar to α, but for a more complex
geometry. Particles leaving the pump towards the vacuum vessel are discarded by setting
the sticking coeﬃcient of the entrance A to 100%.

The conductance of a component with two openings (for instance a tube) is the product
of the transmission probability w and the ﬂow ˙V = 0.25 · ¯c · A into the component through
opening A. The transmission probability is deﬁned as the ratio of particles entering through
opening A and leaving the component through the other opening. The sticking coeﬃcients
are set to 100% for both opening surfaces. Thus the simulation of a conductance is similar
to the simulation of a pumping speed (Equ. 4.1).

The pressure at the location of a vacuum gauge is proportional to the number of
particles hitting a surface element of the model, divided by the area of the element. The
absolute pressure cannot be simulated directly, but has to be calculated, using further
information, such as the total desorption rate or the average speed ¯c. However, the ratio
of two pressure values at diﬀerent locations i can be easily calculated from the number of
hits Hi and the respective areas Ai:

p1
p2

=

H1
H2

· A2
A1

.

– 14 –

(4.2)

Figure 8. Molﬂow+ simulations of the Main Spectrometer with a NEG pump and a baﬄe in each
pump port. (a) Pressure ratio in pump port P3 behind the NEG pump, and in the main volume
of the spectrometer as a function of the NEG sticking coeﬃcient for hydrogen. The measured,
hydrogen dominated ratio of 0.41 leads to a sticking coeﬃcient of α = 1.1%. For a fully activated
NEG pump α = 2.9% is expected. (b) For the partly activated NEG pump the eﬀective pumping
speed for hydrogen was 96 m3/s in one pump port.

Two models were set up to describe the Main Spectrometer. Model 1 comprised the
whole spectrometer vessel, including baﬄes, NEG pumps, TMPs, and vacuum gauges.
Particles were started from all surfaces, assuming homogeneous outgassing rates and a
cosine angular distribution. This model was used to simulate pressure ratios of the two
Extractor gauges. Model 2 simulated one pump port (P3) with a baﬄe, a NEG pump, and
three TMPs. All particles were started towards the pump port from the virtual surface of
the intersection between the pump port and the main vessel. The sticking coeﬃcient of this
surface was set to 100%, i.e. adsorbing all particles that left the pump port towards the
main vessel. This model was used to simulate the eﬀective pumping speeds of TMPs, NEG
pumps, and baﬄes, respectively.

4.1 Simulation of hydrogen

The NEG pumps were deﬁned as 1000 m of getter strips in each pump port, with a sticking
coeﬃcient α, varying from 0.5% to 3.5% in 7 simulations. Since only 27 mm of the 30-
mm-wide real getter strips are coated with NEG material, the sticking coeﬃcients in the
simulated strips were reduced by 10%. The simulated pressure ratio (model 1) between the
Extractor gauges in the pump port behind baﬄe and NEG pump (P3), and in the main
volume (F9) is shown in Fig. 8.a. This plot is used in Section 5.4 to determine the actual
sticking coeﬃcient of the NEG strips after activation. If the NEG pumps are not activated
(α = 0), gas is only pumped by the TMPs. In this case the eﬀective pumping speed is
small compared to the conductance of the baﬄes, and the pressure ratio converges towards
pP3/pF9 = 1.

In a second simulation with the same model, desorption was only deﬁned for the surfaces
of the NEG strips. This corresponds to the situation during activation of the NEG pumps,

– 15 –

0.00.20.40.60.81.01.20%1%2%3%4%Extractor gauge ratio pP3/pF9 NEG sticking coefficient a wall desorptionNEG desorptionmeasured ratio after activation H2 607080901001101201301401501600%1%2%3%4%NEG pumping speed (m3/s) NEG sticking coefficient a maximum: 156 m3/s for a = 100% expected: 125 m3/s for a = 2.9% NEG pump with baffle measured: 96 m3/s  for a = 1.1% b) a) Figure 9. Simulation of the suppression factor of the cryogenic baﬄes for radon emanating from the
NEG strips in the pump ports (a), and eﬀective pumping speed of the baﬄes for radon emanating
from the inner surfaces of the spectrometer (b), plotted over the sticking coeﬃcient for radon. A
sticking coeﬃcient of 80% is estimated for nitrogen-cold baﬄes, using previous measurements with
the pre-spectrometer.

when hydrogen is driven out of the getter and dominates the pressure distribution in the
Main Spectrometer. Since gas can only be pumped through the pump ports, the gas ﬂow
into the main volume continues until an equilibrium with the pump ports is reached. The
pressure ratio between the Extractor gauges is approximately pP3/pF9 = 1.

The eﬀective pumping speed of the NEG pump in pump port 3 was simulated using
model 2. The pumping probability w of the NEG pump was calculated as the number
of particles adsorbed on the surfaces divided by the total number of particles desorbed
from the virtual surface of the intersection between pump port 3 and the main vessel.
The eﬀective pumping speed of the NEG pump was determined by varying the sticking
probability α between 0.5% and 3.5% in seven steps (see Fig. 8b). With the conductance
of the baﬄe (simulation: 157 m3/s) as the limiting factor, the eﬀective pumping speed for
the fully activated getter strips in a pump port (α = 2.9% [27]) was 125 m3/s, or 375 m3/s
for all three pump ports of the Main Spectrometer.

The simulation of the eﬀective pumping speed without the baﬄes (as initially planned)
resulted in a value of 930 m3/s for the spectrometer. Thus, the necessity of introducing
the baﬄes for capturing radon atoms reduced the eﬀective pumping speed for hydrogen by
60%.

4.2 Simulation of radon

Radon was simulated for two diﬀerent sources [9]: (i) NEG strips are known to emanate
small amounts of 219Rn with a half-life of 4.0 s, and (ii) the stainless steel walls and weldings
of the vessel emanate small amounts of 219Rn and 220Rn with a half-life of 55.6 s. The most
common radon isotope, 222Rn with a half-life of 3.8 d, which might also be emanated, is
not taken into account, since almost all of it is pumped out before it decays.

Radon, emanated from the NEG strips in the pump ports, has to be prevented from

– 16 –

0.0010.010.110%20%40%60%80%100%pressure ratio pF9(a)/pF9(0) baffle sticking coefficient aRn a)  0102030405060700%20%40%60%80%100%Radon pumping speed (m3/s) baffle sticking coefficient aRn TMP only pump port 3 Baffle+TMP b)  Rn from NEG entering the spectrometer by the cryogenic baﬄes [35, 36]. The suppression factor of the
baﬄes for radon has been simulated using model 1. The pressure ratio pP3/pF9 of the two
Extractor gauges serves as the measure for radon suppression. This number takes into ac-
count that a considerable fraction of the radon atoms already decay inside the spectrometer
volume. The sticking coeﬃcient for radon, which strongly depends on the temperature of
the baﬄes, was varied from 0% to 90% in the calculations. The results are shown in Fig. 9a.
From the measurements with the pre-spectrometer we expect the sticking coeﬃcient to be
∼80%, which would result in a radon suppression factor of 550.

Radon emanated directly into the main volume from its inner surfaces cannot be pre-
vented from decaying in the ﬂux tube. It can only be pumped out quickly enough before
a large fraction can decay [11]. The pumping speed of a baﬄe in pump port 3 with re-
gard to the main volume has been simulated, using model 2. Fig. 9b shows the results
for the simulated sticking coeﬃcients ranging from 0% to 100%. For a sticking coeﬃ-
cient of 80% the eﬀective pumping speed is 56 m3/s, resulting in a total pumping speed of
S = 170 m3/s. The pump-out rate S/V = 0.14 s−1 has to compete with the decay rates for
219Rn (λ219 = 0.17 s−1), and 220Rn (λ220 = 0.012 s−1), as well as re-desorption from the
baﬄes [37].

5 Commissioning of the vacuum system and status after bake-out

5.1 Pump down and leak tests

Commissioning of the Main Spectrometer vacuum system started in summer 2012, after
a four-year period when the complex inner electrode system, the cryogenic baﬄes, and
the getter pumps were installed under cleanroom conditions. After the initial pump-down
with the SP630 screw pump and three TMPs on pump port 3, the vessel vacuum reached
10−7 mbar. Pump down of the vessel to 10−2 mbar took 6 days due to some coarse leaks,
which had to be closed ﬁrst, before the TMPs could be switched on. A ﬁnal leak test with
a sensitivity of 5 · 10−10 mbar·(cid:96)/s was performed with a leak detector used as fore-pump
for the three TMPs. With an eﬀective pumping speed for helium of 6000 (cid:96)/s and a total
volume of 1240 m3 the response time2 of each leak test was 7 min. For each local leak test
the respective ﬂange was enclosed in a tightly sealed plastic bag ﬁlled with helium.

5.2 Bake-out procedure
The nominal operating temperature of the spectrometer vessel is 20 ◦C. If needed, it can
be cooled down to 10 ◦C, thus reducing the H2 outgassing rate of stainless steel by a factor
of two. During vacuum bake-out it can reach temperatures up to 350 ◦C. The temperature
is controlled to better than 1 ◦C by a thermal oil temperature unit from HTT R(cid:13) [38]. The
system has two independent thermal circuits, one for the main vessel and one for the
three pump ports with the getter pumps. It provides a total heating power of 440 kW and
a cooling power of 60 kW using 9 m3 of heat transfer ﬂuid (Marlotherm LH R(cid:13) [39]). The
ﬂuid is continuously pumped through approximately 1200 m of 114-mm-diameter half-tubes

2Time to reach 90% of the signal.

– 17 –

Figure 10. Based on test measurements with a 300 (cid:96) vacuum vessel, an optimized schedule for the
MS bake-out cycle was deﬁned: a) accelerated desorption of water from all surfaces, b) activation
of the NEG pumps at 350 ◦C, and c) intermediate temperature step, in order to further reduce
hydrogen on all surfaces. For all temperature changes the gradient had to be kept in the range of 1
to 5 ◦C/h in order to allow the inner electrode system to follow the temperature of the vessel within
2 ◦C.

welded to the outer surface of the spectrometer vessel. In addition the heating system is
supported by 56 electrical heating tapes for smaller ports, ﬂanges and gate valves. The
temperature distributions on the exterior surface of the MS, on the interior surface at the
inner electrode system, at the getter pumps and at the LN2-baﬄes are monitored by an
array of 381 temperature sensors. On the outer surface PT100 sensors are used. Inside the
vacuum vessel temperatures are monitored by PT1000 sensors, which are attached to the
NEG pumps, the LN2-baﬄes and some of the inner electrode frames.

The bake-out procedure was tested and optimized with a smaller vacuum vessel (vol-
ume: 300 (cid:96)), built with the same type of stainless steel (316LN) as the MS. Based on these
measurements a schedule for the MS bake-out cycle was devised [37] for both cleaning the
inner surfaces and activating the getter strips at 350 ◦C (see Fig. 10):

1. Increase the temperature slowly to 200 ◦C. Up to a temperature of 90 ◦C a ramping
speed of 1 ◦C/h is used. Above this temperature the ramping speed is slowly increased
in several steps, with a maximum rate of 5 ◦C/h above 150 ◦C.

2. Keep the temperature stable at 200 ◦C for about two days, in order to remove most
of the water bound on the stainless steel surfaces and to reduce the outgassing of
hydrogen before activating the NEG pumps.

3. Increase the temperature to 350 ◦C at a rate of 5 ◦C/h.
4. Keep the temperature stable for at least 24 hours to activate the NEG pumps, as

recommended by the manufacturer.

5. Lower the temperature to 150 ◦C at a rate of 5 ◦C/h.

– 18 –

0501001502002503003504000100200300400500time (h)temperature (°C)60050150250350450550H2Oa)diffusiondesorptionH2Hc)activation ofNEG pumpsreduction of Hon surface 2b)N2O2NEGH2slow cool-down(1 - 5°C/h)desorptionof waterslow heating(1 - 5°C/h)Figure 11. Overview of the actual Main Spectrometer bake-out cycle in January 2013. Plotted
are pressure and temperature versus time. The occurrences of short circuits in the electrode system
and an air leak during the ﬁnal cool down phase at about 52 ◦C are indicated in the plot.

6. Keep the temperature stable for at least one day or until there is no further signiﬁcant
pressure drop over time. This step is expected to reduce the hydrogen concentration
on the surface by desorption, but without replenishing the hydrogen by diﬀusion
from the bulk. At this temperature tests achieved the lowest outgassing rate of
3.5·10−13 mbar·(cid:96)/s · cm2. Other temperature steps between 100 ◦C and 350 ◦C reached
outgassing rates from 5.1 to 11.4 · 10−13 mbar · (cid:96)/s · cm2.

7. Lower the temperature to 20 ◦C. At this time the residual gas composition in the
clean vessel is expected to be dominated by hydrogen diﬀusion from the bulk, with
small traces of water, CO and CO2.

The slow ramping speed of the temperature is necessary to protect the complex inner
electrode system, allowing it to follow the temperature proﬁle of the main vessel. Between
room temperature and 350 ◦C the circumference of the Main Spectrometer vessel expands
by 15 cm, while the electrode modules can only compensate movements of a few mm against
the vessel. Since the electrodes are mainly heated by radiation, the temperature gradient
between vessel and electrodes is constantly monitored. The slower rise time at low temper-
atures takes into account the T4 dependence of heat radiation. During the whole bake-out
and cool-down procedure the temperature gradient between vessel and electrodes was kept
at 1 ◦C, ensuring a similar thermal expansion rate of both systems.

An overview of the whole bake-out cycle, which started on January 4th and ended on
January 31st, 2013, is given in Fig. 11. Within a time interval of 36 h, when the temperature

– 19 –

05010015020025030035001.01.201311.01.201321.01.201331.01.2013pressure (mbar, N2) temperature (°C) time PT100 temp. sensorExtractor pump port (P3)Extractor vessel (F9)temperature air leak first short  circuit several short  circuits short circuit disappeared differentially pumped vacuum sleeve 10-4 10-11 10-10 10-9 10-8 10-7 10-6 10-5 Figure 12. Two air leaks opened up at CF ﬂanges during the cool-down phase after baking (port
F8), and during pump-down after venting the vessel with argon (port F9). Both leaks could be
suﬃciently reduced by diﬀerential pumping (scroll pumps) using two pairs of vacuum sleeves, shown
in this drawing, that were mounted around the leaking ﬂange connections.

rose from 120 ◦C to 200 ◦C, the water content in the residual gas spectrum dropped by a
factor of 50. During the following four days the water content dropped by another factor
of 5, while the vessel was kept at a constant temperature of 200 ◦C.

During the whole bake-out cycle diﬀerent sections and wire layers of the inner electrode
system were constantly monitored for short circuits. At a temperature of 200 ◦C the ﬁrst
incident occurred. A short circuit between two wire layers in one of the central sections
was detected. After ramping of the temperature started again, the short circuit initially
disappeared. However, between 250 ◦C and 300 ◦C several more sections developed short
circuits between wire layers and between adjacent sections. As later inspections through
the CF ports for the high voltage feedthroughs showed, these short circuits were caused by
the deformation of the CuBe rods that connect the distribution panels to the corners of
some of the modules underneath the feedthroughs. In order to prevent further damage, the
bake-out procedure was stopped at 300 ◦C. This temperature was sustained for 28 hours,
activating the NEG pumps at least partly before being reduced to 150 ◦C. The deformation
can be traced back to the fact that the rods lost their tensile strength at temperatures
above 200 ◦C, started to move downwards, and remained in this deformed position.

In the ﬁnal step the temperature was slowly reduced to 20 ◦C. During this ﬁnal cool-
down a major air leak opened up at a temperature of 52 ◦C at a DN200 CF ﬂange of
port F8, which is on one of the conical sections of the spectrometer. The pressure rapidly
increased by ﬁve orders of magnitude. Tightening the bolts of the ﬂange was not suﬃcient
to close the leak, but an immediate repair of the leaking gasket would have resulted in
a two-month delay and considerable operating costs for an additional baking cycle after
venting the spectrometer. Therefore a diﬀerentially pumped vacuum sleeve (see Fig. 12) was
installed around the ﬂange and pumped down to approximately 0.1 mbar by a scroll-pump.
This temporary measure reduced the leak rate suﬃciently to allow the continuation of the

– 20 –

Figure 13. RGA spectra before and after bake-out. Before the bake-out procedure the pressure was
dominated by water (mass = 18 amu). After the campaign hydrogen was the dominant residual
gas. The RGA peaks have been calibrated against the absolute pressure, as measured with the
Extractor gauge of pump port 3. The hydrogen pressure in the main volume was approximately
6 · 10−11 mbar (see text).

planned electro-magnetic test measurements until October 2013, when the spectrometer
was scheduled to be vented again. A second leak opened up after the venting with argon
(described in Sec. 6.2). A similar vacuum sleeve was used to reduce this leak.

5.3 Vacuum performance after baking
After reaching the base temperature of 20 ◦C, the RGA spectrum (see Fig. 13) revealed
a hydrogen-dominated composition that also shows traces of water, CO/N2, and CO2, as
expected for a very clean vessel. Despite the problems described in the previous section,
the baking cycle reduced the ﬁnal pressure by three orders of magnitude.

With the vacuum sleeve around the leaky ﬂange working, the Extractor gauges mea-
sured a pressure of 3.5 · 10−11 mbar in pump port P3, and 1.7 · 10−10 mbar in port F9 at
a temperature of 20 ◦C. As mentioned before, the pressure measured in F9 had an oﬀset
that was caused by local outgassing in the order of 10−10 mbar. Fig. 14a shows a plot of
the pressure in P3 against F9, measured just before the air leak opened up at port F8.
During that period the temperature of the spectrometer dropped from 80 ◦C to 53 ◦C. The
Extractor gauges, mounted outside the thermal insulation of the Main Spectrometer, were
already close to the ambient temperature of 20 ◦C inside the experimental hall. Thus no
temperature correction was applied to the measured pressure. A linear ﬁt to the pressure
data in Fig. 14a provided an oﬀset between the two gauges of 1.8 · 10−10 mbar. Although
the ﬁt can only determine the diﬀerence between the oﬀsets of both gauges, it was assumed

– 21 –

135791113151719212325272931333537394143454749pressure in mbar (N2 cal.) RGA mass (amu) before baking: 6.4E-8 mbarafter baking: 3.5E-11 mbarH2 H2O CO2 CO / N2 10-7 10-13 10-12 10-11 10-10 10-9 10-8 Figure 14. Extractor gauges on port F9 (main volume) and pump port 3: a) Hydrogen dominated
pressure, measured just before the air leak in port F8 occurred, with the vessel temperature between
80 ◦C and 53 ◦C. The oﬀset of the linear ﬁt is mainly attributed to the gauge on F9. The slope is
used to estimate the activation of the NEG pumps. The ﬁt in (b) is used to estimate the pressure
that the spectrometer would have reached without the air leak.

that the oﬀset can be attributed to F9, since the pressure in P3 was already well below this
value.

If the oﬀset, caused by other gas species, cannot be neglected, the hydrogen ratio
between F9 and P3 cannot be determined directly from the ratio of the absolute pressure
values, but only through the slope of a linear ﬁt on data with varying hydrogen pressure
and constant contributions from other gases. Due to a slightly varying leak rate in F8 and
constant hydrogen outgassing at room temperature, this condition was only fulﬁlled before
the air leak occurred. The slope of 0.41 of the ﬁt has been used to estimate the activation
of the NEG pump.

5.4 Activation of the NEG pumps
The thermal activation of the NEG pumps at the recommended temperature of 350 ◦C for
a duration of 24 hours was not possible. Reducing either the temperature or the activation
time can result in a lower pumping speed, and/or a reduced capacity for gas. The actual
activation during the bake-out campaign lasted 28 h at 300 ◦C.

The simulations described in Sec. 4.1 were used to estimate the level of activation and
the eﬀective pumping speed of the NEG pumps. Comparing the plot in Fig. 8.a to the
ﬁtted slope of 0.41 (Fig. 14.a) of the measured data results in a sticking coeﬃcient of 1.1%.
Assuming a sticking coeﬃcient of 2.9% for fully activated NEG strips [27], baking at 300 ◦C
for 28 h led to an activation of 40% of the nominal pumping speed of the NEG strips.

For the partly activated NEG pump with α = 1.1%, the eﬀective pumping speed was
96 m3/s (see Fig. 8.b). This is already 77% of the maximum eﬀective pumping speed. For
three NEG pumps and six TMPs the eﬀective pumping speed for hydrogen in the MS added
up to 300 m3/s.

– 22 –

y = 0.412x - 7.56·10-11 Extractor P3 (mbar) Extractor F9 (mbar) 25.-27.1.2013 prior to the air leak offset p(F9): 1.83·10-10 mbar  1·10-10 0 4·10-10 3·10-10 2·10-10 4·10-10 1.2·10-9 1.0·10-9 8·10-10 6·10-10 a) y = 0.079e-6393x 0.00280.00290.0030.0031wall temperature 1/T (1/K) p(20°C) = 2.6·10-11 mbar 80°C 53°C  𝒑𝐅𝟗∙𝑻/𝟐𝟗𝟑𝐊 (mbar) 10-9 10-10 b) Figure 15. Ratio of the two Extractor gauges pF 9 and pP 3. The start of the deviation of the
pressure ratio during the initial heating indicates the start of the NEG pumping. Apparently the
NEG strips started pumping already at a temperature of 200 ◦C.

In general NEG pumps also pump nitrogen, water, CO, CO2, and other active gases.
While hydrogen is pumped by the reversible process of physisorption, other gases are
pumped by irreversible chemisorption. During the activation process hydrogen is released
and pumped out by TMPs, while compounds with other gas species on the surface diﬀuse
into the bulk of the NEG material, leaving a clean and reactive metal surface, ready to
pump again [40]. During the initial heating, the ratio of pressures in Fig. 15, which was
hydrogen dominated above 150 ◦C, shows that the NEG pumps started pumping already
at 200 ◦C. The pressure ratio can be compared to the simulated ratio as a function of
the sticking coeﬃcient of the NEG strips in Fig. 8. During the air leak the slope for the
nitrogen-dominated gas composition was measured to be 0.94. This leads to the conclusion
that the NEG pumps have either been saturated during the leak, or not been activated at
all for gases other than hydrogen. Thus these gases were mainly pumped by the TMPs.

5.5 Estimation of the outgassing rate

In general the outgassing rate of a surface can be measured with a rise of pressure mea-
surement, where the vacuum vessel is evacuated to ultra-high vacuum before it is iso-
lated from the pumps. This method has been applied before on the Main Spectrometer,
revealing a slowly decreasing hydrogen outgassing rate of the stainless steel from 1.5 to
1.2 · 10−12 mbar · (cid:96)/s · cm2 [12].

However, with the activated NEG pumps inside the pump ports without an isolating
valve, this method could not be used. Therefore the outgassing rate jH2 for hydrogen was
estimated by multiplying the hydrogen pressure pH2 in the main volume with the eﬀective

– 23 –

0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4050100150200250300Extractor gauge ratio p(P3)/p(F9) Main Spectrometer temperature in °C start of NEG pumping at 200°C pumping speed Seﬀ = 300 m3/s, normalized to the inner surface A = 1271 m2:

pH2 · Seﬀ

.

A

jH2 =

(5.1)
The outgassing area includes all surfaces at 20 ◦C, and excludes only the activated getter
surface. With the outgassing rate depending strongly on the temperature, the pressure
had to be determined at the standard operating temperature of 20 ◦C. Since the Extractor
gauge at port F9 had a non-negligible oﬀset, which decreased over time and could not be
determined accurately enough at 20 ◦C, the temperature-dependent, hydrogen-dominated
pressure, measured before the air leak, was extrapolated to 20 ◦C. Atoms and molecules on
a surface oscillate rapidly at a frequency ν0 ≈ 1013 Hz. If their kinetic energy is above the
desorption energy Edes, they can escape the surface into the volume of the spectrometer.
With N particles on a surface area A, ∆N = N · exp(−Edes/R · TW) particles meet this
requirement for a wall temperature TW [41]. R is the molar gas constant. The surface
desorption rate, which is equivalent to the outgassing rate, is

jdes =

1
A

· dN
dt

= −ν0 · N
A

· e−Edes/R·TW .

(5.2)

According to Equ. 4.1 the eﬀective pumping speed of the NEG pumps is proportional to ¯c,
which in turn is proportional to the square root of the gas temperature TW. Assuming that
the sticking coeﬃcient αNEG, and thus the pumping probability w, does not change much
in the temperature range of the measurement, the eﬀective pumping speed at temperature
TW is

Seﬀ (TW) = Seﬀ (293 K) ·

.

(5.3)

√
TW√
293 K

The pressure pm measured by an Extractor gauge is proportional to the particle density

n =

p
kB · T

=

jdes · A
Seﬀ (TW)

.

(5.4)

With Eqs. 5.1, 5.2, and 5.4, the measured pressure as a function of the wall temperature
can be expressed as

pm = a0 ·

√
293 K√
TW

· ea1· 1

TW

(5.5)

A ﬁt of the data from the Extractor gauge (F9) in Fig. 14.b provided parameters a0 and
a1, which were used to extrapolate the pressure in the main volume at 20 ◦C. The ﬁtted
value of 2.6 · 10−11 mbar has to be multiplied with the gas correction factor of gauge F9 for
hydrogen (2.2), in order to get the real hydrogen pressure of p(20 ◦C) = 5.7 · 10−11 mbar
inside the Main Spectrometer. Inserting all numbers in Equ. 5.1, we derive an outgassing
rate at 20 ◦C of jH2 = 1.4 · 10−12 mbar · (cid:96)/s · cm2.
The partial pressure, measured with the RGA about two months after the bake-out (see
Fig. 13), was 1.9 · 10−11 mbar. Since the RGA data have been calibrated against Extractor
gauge P3, it has to be multiplied with a gas correction factor of 2.3 and with the pressure
ratio (1/0.41) between hydrogen in the main volume and in pump port 3, the location of the
RGA. The real hydrogen pressure in the main volume, determined with the RGA, is p(20 ◦C)

– 24 –

= 1.1· 10−10 mbar, corresponding to an outgassing rate of jH2 = 2.5· 10−12 mbar· (cid:96)/s · cm2.
While the uncertainty of the Extractor calibration is 10% at 10−6 mbar (used here as a
reference) the main uncertainties of the pressure cannot be quantiﬁed due to the linear
extrapolation over almost ﬁve orders of magnitude.

The extrapolation from higher temperatures to 20 ◦C and the measurement with the
RGA ﬁnd within uncertainties comparable results for the H2 partial pressure, and therefore,
for the outgassing rate. The outgassing rate is in the same range as that in the ﬁrst
measurements in 2007 [12], where the inner electrode system and the NEG pumps were not
yet installed and the ﬁnal bake-out temperature reached the nominal value of 350 ◦C. This
result also shows that the vacuum quality was not aﬀected after ﬁve years of inner electrode
system installation and other construction work under cleanroom condition in the vessel.

6 Preparations for ﬁrst spectrometer measurements

The last step of the commissioning, before background and transmission measurements
with electrons could start, was to connect the electron source at the source end of the
spectrometer and the detector system at the opposite end. Both components had been de-
coupled from the spectrometer during the bake-out process, in order to protect the ceramic
beam-line insulators from mechanical forces due to thermal expansion (up to 12 cm) and
contraction during temperature cycling. During bake-out the inline valves (see Fig. 16.c),
connecting the insulators with detector and electron source, were closed with blank ﬂanges,
and the ﬂaps of both valves were in the open position.

6.1 Locating a leak in the beam-line valve
After the bake-out was ﬁnished, both valves were to be closed and the outer section vented
with grade 6.0 argon (contamination with other gas species ∼ 10−6) before the blank
ﬂanges were removed for connections to external components. The valve at the source
end performed as expected. When the detector valve was slowly vented with argon, the
pressure in the spectrometer rose immediately, indicating that the valve could not be closed
properly. As long as the blank ﬂange was in place this serious leak posed no threat for the
vacuum of the spectrometer. However, the detector could not be connected. Venting of the
spectrometer with air was not an option, since it would deactivate the NEG pumps.

Before ﬁnding a remedy, the problem had to be diagnosed. The whole valve was X-rayed
from several directions and for several positions of the ﬂap. The result is shown in Fig. 16.a.
One can clearly recognize the Kalrez R(cid:13) O-ring, which had slipped out of its groove. After
identifying the cause of the leak, a method had to be devised to vent the spectrometer,
open the blank ﬂange of the valve, and replace the O-ring without deactivating the NEG
pumps.

6.2 Argon venting of the spectrometer
Calculations showed that 1240 m3 grade-6.0 argon at atmospheric pressure, the best oﬀ-the-
shelf argon available in large quantity, still contained too much nitrogen, oxygen, argon and
water for the NEG pump activation to survive. Therefore a venting system was designed

– 25 –

Figure 16. A partly dislodged O-ring (a: X-ray image, b: photo taken during valve repair)
prevented the inline valve between spectrometer and detector from being closed.

to provide ultra-clean argon of grade 9.0 (contaminations ∼ 10−9). The ultra-clean argon
was produced while venting, by purifying commercially available grade 6.0 argon with a
gas puriﬁer system. The key component of this system was the hot getter unit SAES PS4-
MT50-R that uses a hot, zirconium-based getter cartridge [42]. The gas puriﬁcation system
was provided on short notice by the Münster University group of the XENON collaboration.
The venting schematic is shown in Fig. 17.

The hot getter works like a continuously activated NEG pump.

In particular, gas
species that are pumped by physisorption, such as nitrogen and oxygen, would cover the
NEG getter surface rapidly and reduce its pumping speed. In hot getter material these
compounds diﬀuse quickly into the bulk of the getter, freeing the surface for continuous
pumping. The puriﬁer system is designed for high ﬂow rates up to 100 slpm (standard liters
per minute) at a minimum inlet pressure of 2.8 bar. For an inlet gas purity of 99.9995%
(which is fulﬁlled for the argon 6.0) the system is capable of purifying it to a purity of
better than 1 ppb (part per billion) per contaminant species.

The grade-6.0 argon was delivered in bundles of 12× 50 (cid:96) bottles at 220 bar. During the
venting process 11 bundles were used for the spectrometer to reach atmospheric pressure.
There were always two bundles connected to the system, with only one bundle opened to
the spectrometer. When it reached a pressure below 20 bar, the other bundle was opened,
which allowed a continuous venting process without interruption.

– 26 –

Figure 17. Flowchart of the venting system, used for venting the KATRIN Main Spectrometer
with ultra-clean argon.

The feed lines to both bundles had a connection to a scroll pump and to a blow-oﬀ
valve (via valves V-1x and V-1a in Fig. 17), which were used to remove air from the pipes
after connecting a new bundle of bottles to the system. Only after the section with the new
bundle was ﬂushed with argon, with the blow-oﬀ valve opened, evacuated, and ﬁlled with
clean argon again, was it ready to be connected to the puriﬁer by opening the valve V-1b
or V-1y, respectively. The pressure regulators of the bundle were set to 4.5 - 5 bar.

Before starting the venting, the entire system was evacuated using pump station 2
(TMP and diaphragm pump), and ﬂushed several times with clean argon, in order to
remove all traces of air from the gas lines. All connections on the low pressure side were
either made with VCR and CF ﬂanges, or by orbital-welding of stainless steel tubes. After
setting up the system, it was leak-tested with a sensitivity of < 10−9 mbar · (cid:96)/s.

A quadrupole mass spectrometer was used to monitor for gross impurities in the argon
gas before being puriﬁed by the getter. Due to the high pressure in the feed line of the puri-
ﬁer, the RGA was operated behind a leak valve that is pumped by a TMP. The resolution of
the RGA was not suﬃcient to detect impurities at the ppm level, but it was able to detect
air leaks when new argon bottles were connected to the system. The amount of argon ﬂowed
into the system was measured by a MKS 1579A R(cid:13) mass ﬂow controller. The pressures at
the inlet and the outlet of the getter cartridge were monitored by Swagelok PTU-S-AC9-
31AD R(cid:13) capacitance pressure sensors. For safety reasons a pressure relief valve with an
opening pressure of 0.2 bar was installed to protect the spectrometer from overpressure.

After the spectrometer was ﬁlled to atmospheric pressure, a polyethylene plastic bag
was attached to the end of the beam-line valve, and enclosed the blank ﬂange that had to
be opened for repairing the valve. Clean tools and a replacement O-ring had been placed
inside before attaching the bag to the valve. The air tight bag had two gloves incorporated,

– 27 –

V-13Ar purge outletV-1aV-1xV-1yV-14V-15xyvacuum pump station 1vacuum pump station 2V-1bV-15abargon reservoir 1argon reservoir 2RGAgetterV-2V-3V-4V-6V-5V-7V-8V-9V-10V-11V-12 at P2 MainSpectrometerpressure relief valveflow contr.Figure 18. Overview of the progression of pressure in the main volume and in pump port 3,
measured with the Extractor gauges.

thus serving as a “ﬂexible glove box”. It was evacuated and ﬂushed with clean argon several
times before carefully opening the blank ﬂange. After replacing the O-ring and closing the
blank ﬂange the spectrometer was evacuated again. The whole procedure, from the start
of venting back to UHV, took 24 days.

With the valve repaired, the detector system was connected, and everything was ready

for the start of the electron measurements.

6.3 Vacuum performance during spectrometer measurements

During pump-down another air leak opened up at a CF ﬂange at port F9. Like the leak at
port F8, the ﬂange connection was enclosed in a vacuum sleeve subsequently and pumped
diﬀerentially. Although the remaining leak rate was low enough for the spectrometer mea-
surements, there were additional ﬂuctuations in the pressure oﬀset of the Extractor gauge
due to its close proximity to the leak. Therefore the Extractor gauge was switched oﬀ for
most of the time.

Below 10−8 mbar the pressure dropped only slowly. It took about two months until the
spectrometer reached the same low pressure it had before venting (see Fig. 18). For most
of the time the pressure was dominated by argon. However, the pressure was suﬃcient for
the early measurements, and the slow desorption rate of argon did not delay the schedule.
Sharp changes in the pressure, seen in Fig. 18, were mainly caused by maintenance at the
diﬀerentially pumped leaks, opening and closing of the valve to the electron source, short
tests of the cryogenic baﬄes, and measurements at elevated pressure (argon: 3· 10−8 mbar)
for detailed investigations of the radon-related background rate [37].

– 28 –

1.E-111.E-101.E-091.E-081.E-0701.01.201302.03.201301.05.201330.06.201329.08.2013pressure in mbar time  Extractor pump port (P3)Extractor vessel (F9)10-11 10-10 10-9 10-8 10-7 baking Ar venting cold baffles Ar flow Figure 19. RGA spectra before and after venting with ultra-clean argon. After venting the
hydrogen signal (mass 2) went down by a factor of 30, while most other gases were only slightly
reduced. Since the absolute pressure, measured with the Extractor gauge, remained stable, it was
assumed that the sensitivity of the RGA changed after venting with argon.

After reaching the low pressure regime again, the Extractor gauge in pump port 3
measured a pressure of 3.3 · 10−11 mbar. The Extractor gauge in the main volume on port
F9 read a value of 1.4 · 10−10 mbar, slightly lower than before the venting. However, the
uncorrected mass spectrum displayed a more dramatic eﬀect. While the signals from most
gas species were of similar size as before the venting, the hydrogen peaks (mass 1, 2 and 3)
dropped by a factor of 30. For both measurements the same RGA settings were used. As
described in appendix A, it was assumed that the RGA’s sensitivity for hydrogen changed
during the venting, and a new calibration factor was determined. The RGA spectra before
and after venting are shown in Fig. 19. Despite venting the spectrometer to full atmospheric
pressure with ultra-clean argon, the (corrected) RGA peaks, as well as the absolute pressure,
remained basically the same, which in turn leads to the conclusion that the NEG pumps
were still active after pump-down.

The absolute pressure in the main volume can be estimated with the pressure of the
Extractor gauge in pump port 3 (3.3· 10−11 mbar), and the hydrogen partial pressure of the
RGA (2.1 · 10−11 mbar). The diﬀerence of 1.2 · 10−11 mbar is attributed to the remaining
gas species. Simulations in Sec. 4 showed that the pressures in the main volume and in
the pump ports are approximately the same, if the pumping speed is small compared to
the conductance of the baﬄes. With the pressure ratio of 1.06 observed during the air
leak, it is assumed that this condition is fulﬁlled for all gas species but hydrogen. Adding
the remaining pressure and the hydrogen partial pressure, applying the correction for the
pressure drop at the baﬄe (1/0.41) and multiplying this corrected value by the gas correction

– 29 –

1.E-131.E-121.E-111.E-10135791113151719212325272931333537394143454749pressure in mbar (N2 cal.) RGA mass (amu) after baking: 3.5E-11 mbarafter venting: 3.3E-11 mbarH2 H2O Ar CO2 CO / N2 10-13 10-12 10-11 10-10 factor (2.3) results in an absolute pressure in the main volume of 1.3 · 10−10 mbar. This is
very close to the pressure of 1.4 · 10−10 mbar that was measured by the Extractor gauge at
port F9.

7 Conclusions

In this work we have described the vacuum system of the 23.2 m long Main Spectrometer of
the KATRIN experiment and reported on the details of its successful commissioning. The
simulated nominal pumping speed for hydrogen of the three NEG pumps amounts to almost
1,000 m3/s. It has been designed to reach ultra-high vacuum in the range of 10−11 mbar, for
an expected outgassing rate at room temperature of 10−12 mbar · (cid:96)/s · cm2. The eﬀective
pumping speed, reduced by the cryogenic baﬄes required for the reduction of radon-related
backgrounds, adds up to 375 m3/s, if the getter were activated at 350 ◦C for 24 h. The
actual eﬀective pumping speed was 300 m3/s, which was reached after activating a total
of 3, 000 m of SAES St707 R(cid:13) NEG strips at 300 ◦C for 28 h. With a value in the range of
1.4 − 2.5 · 10−12 mbar · (cid:96)/s · cm2 the estimated hydrogen outgassing rate of the stainless
steel walls was already close to the expected value. The total absolute pressure in the main
volume, which was reduced by more than three orders of magnitude by the baking of the
MS, reached a value of around 10−10 mbar. The residual gas composition was dominated by
hydrogen, which made up about 90% of the total pressure. The rest was mainly composed
of water, CO and CO2.

The lessons learned from the problems that occurred during the commissioning mea-
surements led to several modiﬁcations in the design of the vacuum system, which have been
implemented and tested during the two shutdown periods in 2014 and 2015, followed by
pump-downs and commissioning measurements with and without baking at 200 ◦C:

• Some of the problems with the mechanical stability of the CuBe high-voltage wires
that led to electrical short circuits between the inner and outer wire layers of the
modules of the inner electrode system during bake-out have been solved. About half
of the electrode system is currently free of short circuits. The diﬃcult and time-
consuming repair of the remaining short circuits has been postponed since recent
electron background measurements revealed that the present MS background rate
would not be signiﬁcantly reduced by a full dual layer operation of the wire electrode
system.

• A redesign of the NEG pumps for electrical heating allows a vessel bake-out at lower
temperatures. In the original design, the NEG strips were heated by radiation from
the hot spectrometer walls. In the new design the temperature of the spectrometer
can be as low as 200 ◦C during the local activation process at 400 ◦C. This measure
provides an additional safety margin for the wires of the electrode system.

• After several leaks occurred at CF ﬂanges with standard gaskets (2-mm thick), they
have been replaced by thicker, 3 mm copper gaskets, resulting in a larger travel for
re-tightening of the bolts, if needed. So far no further leaks have occurred.

– 30 –

• The Extractor gauge at port F9 has been moved from the 40 mm tube at the side of the
port to the top, where it looks directly into the main volume through a 100 mm adapter
and valve. The lowest base pressure measured after the bake-out and activation of
one NEG pump was 6·10−11 mbar (nitrogen calibration), compared to 1.7·10−10 mbar
with the old design and three activated NEG pumps.

• At port F10 a calibrated oriﬁce and a Baratron R(cid:13) gauge have been added in front of
a leak valve. This allows more accurate ﬂux measurements with diﬀerent gases for
in-situ calibrations of the gauges and a more accurate determination of the eﬀective
pumping speed.

• The groove for the Kalrez R(cid:13) O-ring in the ﬂapper of the in-beam valve has been

redesigned to prevent the displacement of the seal during bake-out.

A very valuable lesson learned from the mishap with the Kalrez R(cid:13) O-ring was that for
smaller repairs we can vent the spectrometer to atmospheric pressure with ultra-clean argon,
without deactivating the NEG pumps. Grade 6.0 argon, the best quality of bottled argon
available, was further cleaned by a hot NEG-based gas puriﬁer that reduced the impurities
by another three orders of magnitude. With this method the NEG pumps retained their
initial pumping speed, and the absolute pressure before and after venting was virtually the
same.

In the last commissioning measurements in 2014 and 2015, the spectrometer was op-
erated with only one activated NEG pump, successfully testing the new electrical heating
concept. At around 10−10 mbar the pressure dependence of the background rate was negli-
gible. Therefore it has been decided to operate the spectrometer with only two NEG pumps
for the next measurements. Thus, enough of the special low-activity NEG strips remain
as spares to replace at least one NEG-pump, if necessary. A new, high voltage insulated
liquid nitrogen feed-line for the cryogenic baﬄes has also been installed, demonstrating the
reliable suppression of radon background from the NEG pumps.

For the ﬁrst tritium measurements, following the ﬁnal engineering runs after merging
the Source and Transport Section with the Spectrometer and Detector Section in 2016, we
expect for two electrically activated NEG pumps an absolute pressure below 1· 10−10 mbar,
dominated by hydrogen. Final results for the eﬀective neutrino mass are expected ﬁve years
after starting the tritium measurements.

Acknowledgments

We want to thank Christian Day, Volker Hauer and Xueli Luo from the Institute for Tech-
nical Physics at KIT, as well as the ASTEC vacuum group at Daresbury lab (Joe Herbert,
Oleg Malyshev, Keith Middleman, and Ron Reid) for many helpful discussions and their
contributions to the design of the main spectrometer vacuum system. In addition we want
to thank Volker Hauer for calibrating our vacuum gauges with his calibration system. We
also thank our colleagues from the XENON group at Münster University for providing
the gas puriﬁcation system, which was vital for the successful commissioning of the Main

– 31 –

Spectrometer. We acknowledge the support of the German Helmholtz Association (HGF),
the German Ministry for Education and Research BMBF (05A14VK2 and 05A14PMA),
the Helmholtz Alliance for Astroparticle Physics (HAP), the Grant Agency of the Czech
Republic (GACR) P203/12/1896, and the US Department of Energy through grants DE-
FG02-97ER41020 , DE-FG02-94ER40818, DE-SC0004036, DE-FG02-97ER41041, and DE-
FG02-97ER41033. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) is operated by The
Regents of the University of California (UC) for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)
under Federal Prime Agreement DE-AC02-05CH11231.

A Estimation of the RGA calibration constants
The external calibration of the RGA for diﬀerent gas species at pressures between 10−7 and
10−6 mbar for the SEM-detector showed a non-linear behavior. Therefore this calibration
method was not suitable for linear extrapolation over a range of 5 orders of magnitude,
down to the 10−11 mbar pressure regime.

Since the tight measurement schedule did not allow for detailed in-situ calibration
measurements, the RGA peaks (SEM detector) had to be roughly calibrated against the
nitrogen-calibrated signal of Extractor gauge P3 using existing data. This analysis was
done for three gas species: hydrogen (mass 2), argon (mass 40, 36, and 20) and nitrogen
(28, 14). For all other mass peaks the nitrogen calibration was used. The nitrogen and
argon calibrations were determined by comparing the pressure changes of the Extractor
gauge, and the appropriate RGA peaks at several occasions when the partial pressure of
the respective gas species changed. The results before and after the venting with argon
were in good agreement, implying a stable SEM gain for these gas species. The argon
calibration factor was 1.5 times larger than the value for nitrogen. This number is close to
the inverse of the argon gas correction factor of the Extractor gauges (0.7), suggesting that
the sensitivities of the RGA for nitrogen and argon are almost the same.

Since the hydrogen pressure was stable for most of the time at 20 ◦C, the calibration
factor was determined by adjusting it to the diﬀerence between the absolute pressure of
the Extractor gauge and the sum of the other calibrated RGA peaks, excluding mass 2. If
the gas correction factors for the Extractor gauge and for the RGA in SEM mode were the
same, one would expect the same correction factor as for nitrogen. However, three diﬀerent
time intervals were identiﬁed where the hydrogen calibration factor changed dramatically.
The ﬁrst interval was during the bake-out period with a correction factor of 0.34 times the
nitrogen factor, thus indicating a sensitivity that is three times higher for hydrogen. The
second interval started after a large air leak opened up (see Section 5.2). The correction
factor changed to 0.086 times that of nitrogen. The third interval started after the spec-
trometer was vented with ultra-clean argon to atmospheric pressure (see Section 6.2). The
correction factor changed to a value of 2.6 times that of nitrogen, which would imply a de-
crease of the hydrogen sensitivity of the SEM detector by a factor of 30. Within each time
interval the hydrogen signal remained stable. It is not clear why the hydrogen sensitivity
of the RGA would change so dramatically, in particular after the argon venting. However,
assuming that the hydrogen sensitivity was the same before and after the venting, it would

– 32 –

imply that the hydrogen outgassing of the stainless steel has decreased by a factor of 30.
With basically the same absolute pressure measured by the Extractor gauge before and
after the venting, this assumption seems very unlikely compared to a changing sensitivity
for mass 2. Therefore we applied the diﬀerent calibration factors for the mass-2 peaks at
diﬀerent time intervals.

Since the RGA peaks were calibrated against the nitrogen calibration of the Extractor
gauge, one has to apply the gas correction factors of the Extractor gauge, if the real partial
pressure needs to be determined.

– 33 –

References

[1] KATRIN Collaboration, KATRIN Design Report 2004, FZKA report 7090,

http://bibliothek.fzk.de/zb/berichte/FZKA7090.pdf

[2] G. Drexlin, V. Hannen, S. Mertens, and C. Weinheimer, Current Direct Neutrino Mass

Experiments, Adv. High Energy Phys. 2013 (2013) 293986

[3] V.M. Lobashev, P.E. Spivak, A method for measuring the electron antineutrino rest mass,

Nucl. Instrum. Methods A240, (1985) 305–310

[4] A. Picard et al., A solenoid retarding spectrometer with high resolution and transmission for

keV electrons, Nucl. Instrum. Methods 63(3), (1992) 345–358

[5] C. Kraus et al., Final results from phase II of the Mainz neutrino mass search in tritium β

decay, Eur. Phys. J. C40, (2004) 447—468

[6] V.N. Aseev et al., Measurement of the electron antineutrino mass in tritium beta decay in the

Troitsk nu-mass experiment, Phys. of Atomic Nuclei 75(4), (2012) 464–478

[7] K. A. Olive et al. (Particle Data Group), The review of particle properties, Chin. J. Phys. C

38, (2014) 090001, http://pdg.lbl.gov

[8] E.W. Otten and C. Weinheimer ,Neutrino mass limit from tritium β decay, Rep. Prog. Phys.

71, (2008) 086201

[9] F. Fränkle et al., Radon induced background processes in the KATRIN Pre-Spectrometer,

Astroparticle Phys. 35, (2011) 128–134

[10] N. Wandkowsky et al., Validation of a model for radon-induced background processes in

electrostatic spectrometers, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 40, (2013) 085102

[11] S. Mertens et al., Background due to stored electrons following nuclear decays in the KATRIN
spectrometers and its impact on the neutrino mass sensitivity, Astroparticle Phys. 41, (2013)
52–62

[12] J. Wolf, Size matters: The vacuum system of the KATRIN neutrino experiment, J. Vac. Soc.

Jpn. Vol.52 No.5, (2009) 278–284

[13] S. Mertens et al., Stochastic Heating by ECR as a Novel Means of Background Reduction in

the KATRIN spectrometers, JINST 7, (2012) P08025

[14] M. Babutzka et al.,Monitoring of the operating parameters of the KATRIN Windowless

Gaseous Tritium Source, New Journal of Physics 14, (2012) 103046

[15] F. Priester, M. Sturm, and B. Bornschein, Commissioning and detailed results of KATRIN
Inner Loop tritium processing system at Tritium Laboratory Karlsruhe, Vacuum 116, (2015)
42–47

[16] K Valerius et al., Prototype of an angular-selective photoelectron calibration source for the

KATRIN experiment, JINST 6, (2011) P01002

[17] S. Lukic et al., Measurement of the gas-ﬂow reduction factor of the KATRIN DPS2-F

diﬀerential pumping section, Vacuum 86(8), (2012) 1013–1214

[18] X. Lou and Ch. Day, Test particle Monte Carlo study of the cryogenic pumping system of the

Karlsruhe tritium neutrino experiment J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 26(5), (2008) 1319

[19] F. Eichelhardt et al., First Tritium Results of the KATRIN Test Experiment TRAP, Fusion

Sci. and Technol. 54, (2008) 615

– 34 –

[20] L. Bornschein, Ch. Day, F. Habermehl, X. Luo and J. Wolf, Outgassing measurements with a

prototype for a large UHV spectrometer, AIP Conference Proceeding 837, Hydrogen in
matter, (2006) 200–209

[21] F. Glück et al., Electromagnetic design of the large-volume air coil system of the KATRIN

experiment, New J. Phys. 15, (2013) 083025

[22] B. Leiber, Investigations of background due to secondary electron emission in the

KATRIN-experiment, phd-thesis, KIT (2014)

[23] Th. Thümmler, R. Marx and Ch. Weinheimer, Precision high voltage divider for the

KATRIN experiment, New J. Phys. 11, (2009) 103007

[24] K. Valerius, The wire electrode system for the KATRIN Main Spectrometer, Progress in

Particle and Nuclear Physics 64, issue 2, (2010) Pages 291–293

[25] High Tech Metal Seals, http://www.hightechmetalseals.com
[26] X. Luo, L. Bornschein, Chr. Day, J. Wolf, KATRIN NEG pumping concept investigation,

Vacuum 81, (2007) 777–781

[27] Ch. Day, X. Luo, A. Conte, A. Bonucci, P. Manini, Determination of the sticking probability

of a Zr–V–Fe nonevaporable getter strip, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 25(4), (2007) 824–830

[28] J. Wolf et al., Investigation of turbo–molecular pumps in strong magnetic ﬁelds, Vacuum 86,

(2011) 361–369

[29] R. Größle, N. Kernert, S. Riegel and J. Wolf, Model of the rotor temperature of

turbo-molecular pumps in magnetic ﬁelds, Vacuum 86, (2012) 985–989

[30] K. Valerius et al., A UV LED-based fast-pulsed photoelectron source for time-of-ﬂight studies,

New J. Phys. 11, (2009) 063018 (16pp)

[31] J. F. Amsbaugh et al., Focal-plane detector system for the KATRIN experiment, Nucl.

Instrum. Methods A 778, (2015) 40–60

[32] H. Simgen et al., A new system for the 222Rn and 226Ra assay of water and results in the

Borexino project, Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 63 (2003) 407–413

[33] MOLFLOW+ 2.4, molecular ﬂow simulation code, CERN (2013),

http://test-molﬂow.web.cern.ch

[34] R. Kersevan and J.-L. Pons, Introduction to MOLFLOW+, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 27, (2009)

1017

[35] S. Mertens, Study of Background Processes in the Electrostatic Spectrometers of the KATRIN

Experiment, phd-thesis, KIT (2012)

[36] N. Wandkowsky, Study of background and transmission properties of the KATRIN

spectrometers, phd-thesis, KIT (2013)

[37] S. Görhardt, Background Reduction Methods and Vacuum Technology at the KATRIN

Spectrometers, phd-thesis, KIT (2014)

[38] HTT heating – cooling units, http://www.htt.de
[39] Marlotherm heat transfer ﬂuids, Sasol (2009),

http://www.sasoltechdata.com/MarketingBrochures/Marlotherm.pdf

[40] P. Manini, Non Evaporable Getter (NEG) Pumps: a Route to UHV-XHV, AIP Conf. Proc.

1149, (2009) 1138

– 35 –

[41] K. Jousten (editor), Handbook of Vacuum Technology, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim (2008), ISBN:

978-3-527-40723-1, p. 227

[42] High temperature zirconium getter (SAES MonoTorr PS4-MT50-R),

http://www.saespuregas.com

– 36 –

