6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
2
0
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Topological energy gaps in the [111]-oriented InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs core-shell

nanowires

Ning Luo,1 Gaohua Liao,1 Lin-Hui Ye,1 and H. Q. Xu1, 2, ∗
1Key Laboratory for the Physics and Chemistry of Nanodevices and
Department of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

2Division of Solid State Physics, Lund University, Box 118, S-221 00 Lund, Sweden

(Dated: March 4, 2016)

The [111]-oriented InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires have been studied by the 8×8
Luttinger-Kohn (cid:126)k · (cid:126)p Hamiltonian to search for non-vanishing fundamental gaps between inverted
electron and hole bands. We focus on the variations of the topologically nontrivial fundamental
gap, the hybridization gap, and the eﬀective gap with the core radius and shell thickness of the
nanowires. The evolutions of all the energy gaps with the structural parameters are shown to be
dominantly governed by quantum size eﬀects. With a ﬁxed core radius, a topologically nontrivial
fundamental gap exists only at intermediate shell thicknesses. The maximum gap is ∼ 4.4 meV for
GaSb/InAs and ∼ 3.5 meV for InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowires, and for the GaSb/InAs core-shell
nanowires the gap persists over a wider range of geometrical parameters. The intrinsic reason for
these diﬀerences between the two types of nanowires is that in the shell the electron-like states
of InAs is more delocalized than the hole-like state of GaSb, while in the core the hole-like state
of GaSb is more delocalized than the electron-like state of InAs, and both features favor stronger
electron-hole hybridization. Since similar features of the electron- and hole-like states have been
found in nanowires of other materials, it could serve as a common rule to put the hole-like state in
the core while the electron-like state in the shell of a core-shell nanowire to achieve better topological
properties.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Topological

insulators1–3 are the class of materials
which are insulating in the bulk while possess time re-
versal symmetry protected metallic states on the surface.
Until now, all identiﬁed topological insulators are either
3D bulk materials3–5 or 2D quantum well structures6–10.
Although it is not clear whether 1D topological insula-
tor truly exists, the InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs core-
shell nanowires11–13 are considered as possible candidates
based on the identiﬁcation of the topological properties in
the corresponding quantum well structures9,10. Here, the
key feature is that the conduction band bottom of InAs
is lower than the valence band top of GaSb, thus oﬀer-
ing the possibility of band inversion, the characteristics
of most topological insulators. Further, for the nanowire
to be insulating inside, a net fundamental gap must ex-
ist over the whole momentum space. In principle, such
a gap can form through the anti-crossing of the electron
and hole bands, and, if the ordering of these bands is
inverted, then the fundamental gap is topologically non-
trivial.

Experimentally, the observation of the helical edge
state in the InAs/GaSb quantum well9,10 strongly sug-
gests that a topologically nontrivial fundamental gap
could also exist in the corresponding nanowire structures.
On the other hand, ambipolar transport has been re-
alized in the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires11 starting
from a threshold thickness of about 5 nm of the InAs
shell, indicates that the fundamental gap is near to clo-
sure in these particular samples. Later, a quantum dot
system has been realized with a GaSb/InAs core-shell
nanowire and the eﬀect of the interaction between elec-

tron quantum dot states and hole quantum dot states
has been observed,12 indicating a clear occurrence of an
energy overlap of InAs conduction band states and GaSb
valence band states in the core-shell nanowire.

On the theory side, as illustrated in Fig. 1, three dif-
ferent types of energy gaps can, in principle, exist in
an InAs/GaSb or a GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowire with
band inversion: (i) the topologically nontrivial funda-
mental gap E0
g mentioned above, (ii) the hybridization
gap Eh
g resulting from the anti-crossing of the inverted
electron and hole bands which, by deﬁnition, does not in-

FIG. 1. (a) (Color online) Schematic cross-sectional structure
of the core-shell nanowires. Rc is deﬁned as the radius of the
core and Ls the thickness of the shell. (b) Band alignment
of bulk InAs and GaSb. The valence band oﬀset (VBO) is
deﬁned as the energy diﬀerence betweent the valence band
maxima of the two materials.
(c) Illustration of the topo-
logically nontrivial fundamental gap (E0
g ), the hybridization
gap (Eh
g ) in a band structure of a
core-shell nanowire with band inversion.

g ) and the eﬀective gap (Ee

EegEhgE0gLsORcVBOInAsGaSb(b)(a)(c)electronic

structure

the

The

clude gap between normally ordered states, and (iii) the
eﬀective gap Ee
g, i.e., the energy diﬀerence between the
lowest electron-like band and the highest hole-like band
at the Γ point. In presence of band inversion, the eﬀective
gap becomes negative. Here, of particular importance is
the evolution of the hybridization gap with the structural
parameters. Since in the Brillouin zone all hybridization
gaps are formed only around individual points, they are
often covered up by continuous band states elsewhere. To
form a topologically nontrivial fundamental gap, there-
fore, at least one of the hybridization gaps must remain
open over the entire Brillouin zone.
of

[001]-oriented
InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs nanowires have been
calculated by Kishore et al.14 These authors have ex-
plored the variation of the band structure as a function
of the structural parameters, such as the radius of
the core and the thickness of the shell. Although it is
not speciﬁcally targeted on the topological properties,
some useful information can already be extracted from
the work. However, a few important questions still
remain open. First, the results reported so far are
only for nanowires with the [001] orientation.
It is
not clear how they diﬀer for nanowires oriented along
other crystallographic directions, especially along the
experimentally most relevant [111] direction. Second,
although a useful eﬀective-gap map has been oﬀered, of
direct relevance to the topological properties is the topo-
logically nontrivial fundamental gap for which no such a
map has ever been presented. Third, despite that both
the InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires are
experimentally accessible, most theoretical results are
for the former type while the latter type has only been
brieﬂy discussed. Therefore, more detailed studies of the
GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires are needed.

It is the these important questions which have led to
the work presented in this paper. In the paper, we use
the (cid:126)k · (cid:126)p theory to calculate the band structures of the
InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires oriented
along the [111] crystallographic direction. We analyze
band inversion and the evolutions of the three types of
energy gaps with the structural parameters. In particu-
lar, we oﬀer detailed maps of the topologically nontrivial
fundamental gaps over a wide range of structural param-
eters for both the InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs core-shell
nanowires. A fully quantitative comparison between the
results obtained for InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs core-
shell nanowires reveals that although these two types
of nanowires are qualitatively similar, the latter type is
more favorable concerning topological properties.

The rest of this paper is organized as the following:
In Section II we brieﬂy review the theoretical methodol-
ogy of this work. The main results for the InAs/GaSb
and GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires are presented in Sec-
tions III A and III B, respectively. In particular, we will
illustrate in detail how the quantum size eﬀects govern
the formation of the topologically nontrivial fundamental
gap. Section III C is denoted to the evolution of the ef-

2

fective gap with the change in the geometrical structures.
The sign of the eﬀective gap serves as an indicator to the
topological property of an existing fundamental gap. In
Section III D, we present a quantitative comparison be-
tween the topological properties of the InAs/GaSb and
GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires, and illustrate that the
latter structure favors stronger electron-hole hybridiza-
tion and is thus more preferred when concerning topolog-
ical properties. Finally, we conclude this work in Section
IV.

II. METHODOLOGY

Various methods, including density-functional-theory
(DFT)15–19, tight-binding (TB) theory20–30, and the (cid:126)k· (cid:126)p
theory14,31–41, have been used to calculate the band
structure of nanowires. Of the three, DFT is the only
ﬁrst-principle method which is free from any adjustable
parameters, and therefore is often the best choice for elec-
tronic structure calculations. Speciﬁc to the energy gap
properties of the nanowires concerned in this work, how-
ever, DFT is incompetent because it suﬀers from the well-
known “band gap problem”, in that one major compo-
nent of the fundamental gap, the derivative discontinuity
of the exchange-correlation functional, is missing in the
popular local density approximation (LDA) and general-
ized gradient approximations (GGA). Consequently, the
DFT band gaps are typically 0.1 eV to a few eV too
small, with the range of the errors being already on the
orders of magnitude larger than the topologically non-
trivial fundamental gaps interested in this work. Besides,
DFT is relatively costly. Typically, its use is limited to a
few hundred atoms which is often not suﬃcient to treat
nanowires of realistic sizes.
Both TB and the (cid:126)k· (cid:126)p theory can avoid the above DFT
problems at the expense of using empirical parameters.
Comparatively, (cid:126)k · (cid:126)p is computationally more eﬃcient,
and is therefore particularly suited for the exploration of
nanowires with large sizes. As the energy gaps involve
both the valence band top and the conduction band bot-
tom, the 8×8 (cid:126)k·(cid:126)p Hamiltonian needs to be employed. The
Hamiltonian is formulated in the basis of the light hole
(LH), heavy hole (HH), spin split-oﬀ (SO) band states, as
well as the conduction band electron (EL) state. Then,
by including up and down spins the size of the basis set
is doubled. In this work, most band and Luttinger pa-
rameters are taken from Vurgaftman et al.42. The only
exception is the Kane energy Ep of GaSb which has been
changed to 24.76 eV as suggested by Foreman43 to avoid
spurious solutions. Throughout this paper, the valence
band oﬀset (VBO, see Fig.1) is ﬁxed to 0.56 eV44–46 and
the energy zero is set at the top of the valence band of
bulk InAs.

Another slight diﬀerence from the earlier work is that
we use hexagonal boundary for all nanowires which is
more relevant to the experiments than a circular bound-
ary used in the earlier work. For the purpose of study

3

FIG. 2. (Color online) Band structures of the InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowires with a ﬁxed core radius of Rc = 9.0 nm. From
left to right, the shell thicknesses Ls are (a) 2.0 nm, (b) 5.3 nm, (c) 5.9 nm, and (d) 9.0 nm. In (c), the lowest conduction
band state and the three highest valence band states at the Γ-point are labeled by integer numbers. For these bands, their
character analyses are presented in Fig. 4. The crosses placed on the lowest conduction band and the highest valence band in
(c) indicate the states for which the wave functions are plotted in Fig. 10. The inset in each panel indicates schematically the
relative positions of the conduction and valence bands in the calculated band structure shown in the panel.

of the core-shell nanowires oriented along the [111] crys-
tallographic direction in this work, the principal axis of
the Hamiltonian has to be rotated from the [001] to the
[111] crystallographic direction. Then the Hamiltonian
matrix is constructed by the ﬁnite element method. Fi-
nally, through diagonalization, band energies and band
state wave functions are obtained. All technical details
can be found elsewhere.47

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this section, we focus on the evolutions of the topo-
logically nontrivial fundamental gaps in the InAs/GaSb
and GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires with the structural
parameters.
In a core-shell nanowire, the total band
structure is essentially formed by the two sets of bands
from InAs and GaSb, subject to their mutual interac-
tions and the eﬀects of quantum conﬁnement. Especially,
the conduction bands of InAs and the valence bands of
GaSb are close in energy, and it is the hybridization be-
tween them which may oﬀer the fundamental gap we are
interested in. On the other hand, the valence bands
of InAs and the conduction bands of GaSb are either
too low or too high in energy and are essentially irrele-
vant to the formation of the gap. Throughout this pa-
per, bands mostly of the InAs characteristics are termed
“electron-like” due to their positive parabola-like disper-
sions. Similarly, bands mostly of GaSb characteristics
are termed “hole-like” due to their negative parabola-like
dispersions.

A. Topologically nontrivial fundamental gaps in

the InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowires

1. Band structure analysis

By ﬁxing the InAs core radius while varying the GaSb
shell thickness, we have calculated the band structures of
four representative nanowires. Fig 2 shows the calculated
band structures of the InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowires
with a ﬁxed InAs core radius of Rc = 9.0 nm. The
GaSb shell thicknesses considered in Figs. 2(a) to 2(d)
are Ls = 2.0 nm, 5.3 nm, 5.9 nm, 9.0 nm, respectively.
Since the most important features are located near the Γ-
point, the bands are drawn only for about 1/10 of the half
Brillouin zone. Fig 2(a) shows the results of the calcula-
tions for the nanowire with the smallest shell thickness of
Ls = 2.0 nm. Here, a large energy gap of 0.09 eV is found
at the Γ-point. Band character analysis (not shown) re-
veals that the bottom conduction band is electron-like
and the top valence band hole-like. Therefore, band or-
dering is normal and the eﬀective gap is positive. The
0.09 eV energy gap, in this case also the fundamental
gap, is topologically trivial. Besides, both the lowest con-
duction band and the highest valence band have smooth
parabolic shape, indicating small hybridization due to
the large energy separation.

Figure 2(b) shows the results of the calculations for the
nanowire with the shell thickness of Ls = 5.3 nm. Here
it is seen that there is still an energy gap, but the size is
only 2.3 meV. Note that the diﬀerent energy scales are
used in Fig. 2(b) and Fig. 2(a). The conduction band
bottom and the valence band top, referred as the criti-
cal points, are not at the Γ-point, but shift slightly away
from it. For Fig. 2(b), we have picked the lowest con-
duction band and the highest valence band for which the
band characters are shown in Fig. 3. From the Γ to the
critical points, the conduction band is hole-like while the
valence band electron-like. Therefore, band ordering is
inverted which leads to a negative eﬀective gap. The 2.3

kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.1Energy(eV)0.40.450.50.550.6kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.10.510.520.530.540.55kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.10.520.5250.530.5350.540.5450.554321kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.10.530.5350.540.5450.550.5550.56(a)(b)(c)(d)4

FIG. 3.
(Color online) Band characters of (a) the lowest
conduction band and (b) the highest valence band shown in
Fig. 2(b) for the InAs/GaAs core-shell nanowire with the core
radius Rc = 9.0 nm and the shell thickness Ls = 5.3 nm.

meV gap is thus an authentic hybridization gap which
oﬀers a net, topologically nontrivial fundamental gap at
this shell thickness. According to Fig. 3, band inversion
is only limited to the small region around the Γ-point.
On the other hand, beyond the critical points the elec-
tron character gradually resumes in the lowest conduc-
tion band while the hole character gradually resumes in
the highest valence band, so that band ordering returns
to normal. The smallness of the band inversion region in
Fig. 3 implies that Ls = 5.3 nm is close to the threshold
thickness of the shell for band inversion to happen.

Figure 2(c) shows the results of the calculations for the
nanowire with the shell thickness of Ls = 5.9 nm. Here it
is seen that there is still an energy gap of 2.7 meV, and
the critical points shift further away from the Γ-point.
It is also seen in Fig. 2(c) that the electron-like band
penetrates into the hole band region and overlaps with
the three highest valence bands. These four bands are
labeled by numbers for which we show their band char-
acters in Figs. 4. Let us ﬁrst look at the band characters
of the lowest conduction band as shown in Fig. 4(a). It
is seen that the band characters are very similar to that
shown in Fig. 3(a), implying that the two lowest conduc-
tion bands shown in Fig. 2(b) and Fig. 2(c) have similar
topological properties. Namely, for both bands, the hole
character dominates the region between the Γ-point and
the critical points, beyond which the electron character
resumes.

Of the three labeled valence bands in Fig. 2(c), band
4 has the lowest energy which only slightly touches the
tail of the electron-like band at the Γ-point. Correspond-
ingly, in its band character analysis shown in Fig. 4(d),
the electron character shows up only in a tiny region
around the Γ-point, while in the outside of the region,
the hole character dominates. For the remaining two va-
lence bands, bands 2 and 3, their band characters shown
in Fig. 4(b) and Fig. 4(c) both show substantial electron-
hole mixing. The maximum mixing is found around the
“crossing point” where the electron-like band would cross
the hole-like band as seen in Fig. 2(c). This is because
hybridization is increased with decreasing energy separa-
tion and achieves the maximum near energy degeneracy.
We now reach at the analysis of the band properties of

FIG. 4.
(Color online) Band characters of (a) band 1, (b)
band 2, (c) band 3, and (d) band 4 shown in Fig. 2(c) for the
InAs/GaAs core-shell nanowire with the core radius Rc = 9.0
nm and the shell thickness Ls = 5.9 nm.

the nanowire with the largest shell thickness of Ls = 9.0
√
nm as shown in Fig. 2(d). Here, an energy gap of 2.3 meV
is observable at kz ∼ 0.04 π/
3a0. Band character anal-
ysis (again not shown here) reveals that band inversion
is still limited to the vicinity of the Γ-point. Therefore,
the eﬀective gap is negative and the 2.3 meV energy gap
is an authentic hybridization gap. Nevertheless, at this
shell thickness the electron-like band falls so deeply in the
valence band region that the hybridization gap is covered
up by the three high-lying valence bands. Consequently,
there is no net fundamental gap in Fig. 2(d).

2. Quantum size eﬀects

The evolutions of the energy gaps from Fig. 2(a) to
Fig. 2(d) reﬂect the fundamental physics of quantum
conﬁnement in the core-shell nanowires. In a pure semi-
conductor, three major consequences are expected from
quantum conﬁnement:
(i) the valence top is pushed
down, (ii) the conduction bottom is pushed up, and
therefore (iii) the band gap is increased. In a core-shell
nanowire, such quantum size eﬀects are operative in both
the core and the shell. To simplify our analysis, let us
neglect the interface interactions so that the two sets of
bands from the core and the shell can be analyzed sep-
arately. That is to say, if the core radius is ﬁxed, we
basically ﬁx the set of bands from the core and only an-
alyze the variation of the bands from the shell, and vice
versa. Speciﬁc to Fig. 2, bands from the InAs core are
ﬁxed, and we only consider the variation of the bands
from the GaSb shell with diﬀerent levels of the quantum
size eﬀects.

As shown in Fig. 1(b), the energy diﬀerence between
the valence band tops of bulk GaSb and InAs, the so-
called valence band oﬀset (VBO), is 0.56 eV. Counting

kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.1Probability00.51ELLHHHSO(a)(b)kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.100.51(b)00.050.1Probability00.51ELLHHHSO00.050.100.51kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.1Probability00.51(a)(b)(c)kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.100.51(d)5

From the above analysis, we see that a net, topologi-
cally nontrivial fundamental gap exists only at interme-
diate shell thickness.
If the shell is too thin, then the
eﬀective gap is positive and the fundamental gap is topo-
logically trivial. On the other hand, if the shell is too
thick, then although the eﬀective gap turns negative,
the electron-like band overlaps with too many valence
bands, which causes the hybridization gap to be covered
up. Thus, no fundamental band gap would exist.

Figure 5 shows the variations of the topologically non-
trivial fundamental gap as a function of the shell thick-
ness at diﬀerent core radius (a map of the topologically
nontrivial fundamental gap) of the InAs/GaSb core-shell
nanowires extracted from the band structure calcula-
tions over a wide range of structural parameters. By
closely examining the map, we ﬁnd that the maximum
topologically nontrivial fundamental gap present in the
InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowire is 3.5 meV and occurs at
Rc = 10.6 nm and Ls = 3.5 nm. For the core radius at
this value of Rc, the evolution of the gap with increasing
Ls is shown in the inset to Fig. 5.

B. Topologically nontrivial fundamental gaps in

the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires

In the above study of the band properties of the
InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowires, we have simpliﬁed our
analysis by neglecting the interface interactions and ﬁx-
ing the bands of the InAs core. In such a picture, it is
the GaSb valence bands which move up from below and
overlap more and more with the InAs conduction bands
with increasing shell thickness. We now switch the core
and shell materials, i.e., we put GaSb in the core and ﬁx
its geometrical structure, and put InAs in the shell and
vary the shell thickness. Similarly, we assume that the
GaSb bands are ﬁxed and expect that the InAs conduc-
tion bands move down from above and overlap more and
more with the GaSb bands with increasing shell thick-
ness.

Figure 6 shows the band structures of four representa-
tive GaSb/InAS core-shell nanowires with the same core
radius of Rc = 8.0 nm but diﬀerent shell thicknesses. At
the smallest shell thickness of Ls = 6.0 nm, the conduc-
tion bands of InAs are so high in energy that the con-
duction band bottom is above the GaSb valence band
top. Consequently, there is a ﬁnite energy gap as seen
in Fig. 6(a) which is, however, topologically trivial. Al-
though the results shown in Fig. 6(a) is similar to that
in Fig. 2(a), there is a subtle diﬀerence that the high-
est valence band is not so smoothly parabolic but shows
a weak “camel back” structure in the vicinity of the Γ-
point, indicating that the hybridization of electron-like
and hole-like bands in the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowire
is stronger than in the corresponding InAs/GaSb core-
shell nanowire, a point we will come back later.

From Fig. 6(b) to Fig. 6(d), it is seen that the increase
of the shell thickness gradually releases the quantum size

FIG. 5. (Color online) Map of the topologically nontrivial fun-
damental gap of the InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowire extracted
from the band structure calculations over a large range of
structural parameters. Each curve in the ﬁgure presents the
variation of the topologically nontrivial fundamental gap with
increasing shell thickness at a ﬁxed core radius. The curve in
the inset highlights the result for Rc = 10.6 nm at which the
maximum gap is found in the InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowire.

the 0.42 eV band gap of InAs, the valence band top of
GaSb is therefore 0.14 eV higher than the conduction
band bottom of InAs. Since the hole band is above the
electron band, band ordering is intrinsically inverted. For
the InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowires, when the InAs core
is ﬁxed at Rc = 9.0 nm and the GaSb shell is set to
Ls = 2.0 nm, the quantum size eﬀects in the shell are
much stronger than in the core. At this small shell thick-
ness, the GaSb valence band top has been pushed down
so much that it falls below the InAs conduction band bot-
tom, i.e., the band ordering becomes normal. Therefore,
the 0.09 eV fundamental gap in Fig. 2(a) is topologically
trivial.

As the shell thickness is increased, the quantum size
eﬀects are gradually released, which causes the GaSb va-
lence bands to move up. At Ls = 5.3 nm, the valence
band top of GaSb has just passed the conduction band
bottom of InAs so that the intrinsic band inversion of
the two bulk materials resumes. The small hybridiza-
tion gap in Fig. 2(b) comes from the anti-crossing of the
inverted bands. Besides, from the inset to Fig. 2(b), it
is seen that these two bands only slightly overlap which
explains why the critical points are close to the Γ-point.
When Ls increase to 5.9 nm, the GaSb bands move fur-
ther up. From the inset to Fig. 2(c), the band inversion
region expands, pushing the critical points further away
from the Γ-point. Finally, when Ls increase to 9.0 nm,
the GaSb valence bands have moved so high in energy,
that several valence bands overlap with the electron-like
conduction band as illustrated in the inset to in Fig. 2(d).
As a result, the hybridization gap is completely covered
up by the valence bands.

6

FIG. 6. (Color online) Band structures of the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires with a ﬁxed core radius of Rc = 8.0 nm. From
left to right, the shell thicknesses Ls are (a) 6.0 nm, (b) 8.87 nm, (c) 10.2 nm, and (d) 11.0 nm. The crosses placed on the
lowest conduction band and the highest valence band in (c) indicate the states for which the wave functions are plotted in
Fig. 10.

eﬀect, causing the InAs conduction bands to gradually
move down. As shown in Fig. 6(b), at Ls = 8.87 nm
the electron-like band already falls below the highest va-
lence band of the GaSb core and therefore band inversion
starts to emerge. The anti-crossing of the inverted bands
leads to a hybridization gap of 1.3 meV, with the critical
points being very close to the Γ-point. Note that this
hybridization gap is mostly covered up by the “camel
back” structure, so that the net fundamental gap is only
0.5 meV. In this shell thickness, the fundamental gap is
topologically nontrivial. Fig 6(c) shows that at Ls = 10.2
nm, the electron-like band moves further down and its
tail reaches the minimum energy of about 0.52 eV at
the Γ-point. At the same time, the second lowest con-
duction band follows the same trend which now overlaps
with the valence band at about 0.54 eV. The band inver-
sion region is increased to almost half of the plotted kz
vector region. The hybridization gap of 3.8 meV comes
dominantly from the anti-crossing of the lowest electron-
like band with the highest valence band. Fig 6(d) shows
that when Ls further increases to 11.0 nm, the two low-
est conduction bands have penetrated so deeply into the
hole region that their tails reach about 0.51 eV and 0.53
eV, respectively. Due to the strong overlap between the
electron-like and hole-like bands, the hybridization gap
from the ﬁrst conduction band is fully covered up. At
this shell thickness, there is no fundamental gap.

Overall, the evolution of the energy gaps in the
GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires is similar to that of the
InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowires. When the core radius
is ﬁxed to a suﬃciently large values, a net, topologically
nontrivial fundamental gap only exists at intermediate
shell thickness.

To search for the maximum topologically nontrivial
fundamental gap in the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires,
we have again calculated the band structures of the core-
shell nanowires over a wide range of structural parame-
ters and extracted a map for the topologically nontrivial
fundamental gap from the calculations. The results are
presented in Fig. 7. It is seen that the maximum topolog-
ically nontrivial fundamental gap is 4.4 meV and occurs

FIG. 7. (Color online) Map of the topologically nontrivial fun-
damental gap of the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowire extracted
from the band structure calculations over a large range of
structural parameters. Each curve in the ﬁgure presents the
variation of the topologically nontrivial fundamental gap with
increasing shell thickness at a ﬁxed core radius. The curve in
the inset highlights the result for Rc = 10.0 nm at which the
maximum gap is found in the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowire.

at the core radius of Rc = 10.0 nm and the shell thick-
ness of Ls = 9.8 nm. For the core radius at this value of
Rc, the evolution of the gap with increasing shell thick-
ness is highlighted in the inset to Fig. 7. Here, it is seen
that the maximum value of the topologically nontrivial
fundamental gap occurs at an intermediate value of the
shell thickness, as we discussed above.

C. Eﬀective gaps of the InAs/GaSb and the

GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires

At presence of an ﬁnite fundamental gap, the sign of
the eﬀective gap of an InAs/GaSb or GaSb/InAs core-
shell nanowire tells whether the gap is topologically triv-
ial or nontrivial. Therefore, a systematic analysis of the

kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.10.520.5250.530.5350.540.5450.55kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.10.510.5150.520.5250.530.5350.54kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.1Energy(eV)0.520.540.560.580.60.620.64kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.10.520.530.540.550.56kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.10.520.5250.530.5350.540.5450.55kz(π/(√3a0))00.050.10.510.5150.520.5250.530.5350.54(a)(b)(c)(d)7

the InAs core moves down quickly with increasing the
core radius, due to the release of the quantum size eﬀects.
The eﬀective gap is seen to changes from positive to nega-
tive when going from point A to point B. However, when
going from point D and point E, the opposite is found.
Here, the nanowire is mostly composed of the core mate-
rial, while the shell is small. Therefore, the quantum size
eﬀects are mainly limited to the shell, while the core is
not much aﬀected. Correspondingly, the bottom of the
electron-like bands does not vary much while the top of
the hole-like bands moves down quickly. When the top
of the hole-like bands passes the bottom of the electron-
like bands, the eﬀective gap changes sign from negative
to positive. In the region between point B and point D,
relatively large absolute eﬀective gaps are found, where
the maximum value is found to appear at point C. In
this region between point B and point D, all the eﬀective
gaps are negative ones and band inversion appear in the
core-shell nanowires. At point C, which corresponds to
Rc = 21 nm and Ls = 9 nm, the quantum size eﬀects in
both the core region and the shell region are small. Con-
sequently, the bottom of the electron-like bands stays at
energies close to the bulk value assigned to InAs and
the top of the hole-like bands at energies close to the
bulk value assigned to GaSb [see the schematic shown
in Fig. 1(b)] and, thus, the obtained maximum absolute
eﬀective gap of 0.10 eV is not far from the intrinsic value
of 0.14 eV as we would obtained for an ideal InAs/GaSb
heterostructure as shown in Fig. 1(b).

We now explain that for band inversion to appear the
total radius of the nanowire must be large enough. This
is because,
if the total radius of the nanowire is too
small, there may not be a chance for the sizes of the
core and shell to become suﬃciently large at the same
time. Fig 8(b) shows one such case where the total ra-
dius is only 10 nm. Here, the quantum size eﬀects cannot
be suﬃciently small in both the core and the shell region.
Therefore, either the bottom of the electron-like bands is
too high (if the InAs core is too small) or the top of the
hole-like bands is too low (if the GaSb shell is too small),
or both. In any of the cases, the eﬀective gap is positive
and no band inversion could appear. This explains why
in Fig. 8(b), there is a persistent fundamental gap which
is always topologically trivial.

Figure 9 shows the corresponding calculations for the
band energies (at Γ-point) at the bottom of the electron-
like bands and the top of the hole-like bands of the
GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires. However, in the follow-
ing, We shall bypass further analysis of the results, since
Fig. 9(a) and Fig. 8(a), and Fig.9(b) and Fig. 8(b) are sep-
arately almost “left-right symmetric”. Such symmetries
indicate that the InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs nanowires
are qualitatively similar, i.e., the eﬀective gap of the core-
shell nanowires mostly depends on the values of Rc and
Ls, but is not so sensitive to which of the two types of
materials is in the core or in the shell. Next, we present a
quantitative comparison between the topologically non-
trivial fundamental gaps found in these two types of core-

FIG. 8.
(Color online) Energy positions at the bottom of
the electron-like bands and the top of the hole-like bands of
the InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowires. Here, the total sizes
(Rc + Ls) of the nanowires are the same and are ﬁxed at (a)
30 nm and (b) 10 nm, and the energy positions are plotted
against the core radius Rc.

eﬀective gap oﬀers another perspective of the topologi-
cal properties of the nanowire. We now illustrate how
the energies at the bottom of the electron-like bands and
the top of the hole-like bands, both at Γ, vary with the
structural parameters. To simplify our discussion, we
consider the case with a ﬁxed total radius of the core-
shell nanowire, but varied sizes of the core and the shell.
We will consider the representative results obtained from
the calculations for the InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs core-
shell nanowires with two total radii of 30 nm and 10 nm.
Figure 8(a) shows the band energies (at Γ-point) at
the bottom of the electron-like bands and the top of the
hole-like bands of the InAs/GaSb nanowire with a to-
tal radius of 30 nm. Now, we will choose ﬁve represen-
tative structural points for detailed analysis. Point A
in Fig. 8(a) corresponds to the all-shell limit where the
core-shell nanowire becomes a freestanding pure GaSb
nanowire. At this radius, the quantum size eﬀects are so
small that the eﬀective gap is positive, and the size of the
gap is close to the bulk value of GaSb, which is known to
be 0.81 eV. On the other hand, point E in Fig. 8(a) corre-
sponds to the all-core limit where the core-shell nanowire
becomes a freestanding pure InAs nanowire. Similarly,
the eﬀective gap is positive and is 0.42 eV, close to the
bulk value of InAs.

In the structural parameter region between point A
and point B in Fig. 8(a), the nanowire is mostly composed
of the shell material, while the core is small. Therefore,
the quantum size eﬀects are mainly limited to the core,
while the shell is not much aﬀected. Correspondingly, in
this region, the top of the hole-like bands derived domi-
nantly from the GaSb shell barely changes, while the bot-
tom of the electron-like bands derived dominantly from

8

FIG. 9.
(Color online) Energy positions at the bottom of
the electron-like bands and the top of the hole-like bands of
the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires. Here, the total sizes
(Rc + Ls) of the nanowires are the same and are ﬁxed at (a)
30 nm and (b) 10 nm, and the energy positions are plotted
against the core radius Rc.

shell nanowires.

D. Comparison between the InAs/GaSb and

GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires

As far as topological properties are concerned, a
nanowire structure is considered favorable if it possesses a
large, topologically nontrivial fundamental gap, and this
gap is robust against certain level of inaccuracy in exper-
iments. Applying the above criteria to the results shown
in Fig. 5 and Fig. 7, we ﬁnd that the GaSb/InAs core-
shell nanowires are more preferable than the InAs/GaSb
core-shell nanowires because (i) the maximum gap is 4.4
meV for the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires which is
larger than the maximum versus of 3.5 meV found for
the InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowires and (ii) the topolog-
ically nontrivial gap generally persists in the GaSb/InAs
core-shell nanowires over a wider range structural param-
eters.

To better appreciate point (ii), let us ﬁrst recall the
results shown in Fig. 5 that for any given core radius,
the gap only exists over a small range of shell thickness.
For example, in the inset to Fig. 5, corresponding to the
core radius of Rc = 10.6 nm, the gap is non-zero only
for Ls = 3.5 ∼ 4.5 nm. Now let us consider the fol-
lowing more realistic question. Let us assume that the
minimum acceptable gap to be 1 meV and require that
the gap robustly exists over a Ls range of at least 1 nm.
Then, what is the range of the eligible core radius? It
turns out that for a GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowire, any
core radius within Rc = 4.6 ∼ 14.0 nm allows such a gap
to persists over the required shell range. On the other

FIG. 10. (Color online) Probability distributions of the wave
functions of the band states around the critical points marked
by crosses in Fig. 2(c) and Fig. 6(c). (a)-(e) and (f)-(j) show
the results for the ﬁve lowest conduction band states and the
ﬁve highest valence band states of the InAs/GaSb core-shell
nanowire with the core radius Rc = 9.0 nm and the shell
thickness Ls = 5.9 nm, respectively. (k)-(o) and (p)-(t) show
the results for the ﬁve lowest conduction band states and the
ﬁve highest valence band states of the GaSb/InAs core-shell
nanowire with the core radius Rc = 8.0 nm and the shell
thickness Ls = 10.2 nm, respectively. Note that for compari-
son, the probability distribution values in all panels have been
normalized against the highest value appeared in panel (k).
The dashed lines in the ﬁgure mark the core-shell interfaces
in the nanowires.

hand, for an InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowire, the corre-
sponding core range is only 8.2 ∼ 10.2 nm, which is much
smaller. The central factor leading to the better topolog-
ical properties of the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires is
that hybridization in this type of nanowires is stronger,
which we now elaborate below.

In both Fig. 2(c)

(For a InAs/GaSb core-shell
nanowire) and Fig. 6 (c) (For a GaSb/InAs core-shell
nanowire), we have highlighted ﬁve kz points around
each critical point of the hybridization gaps. For each
of these kz points, we analyze the lowest conduction
state and the highest valence state. The wave func-
tions of these states have been plotted in Fig. 10, in the
following order of the lowest conduction band states of
the InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowire (the ﬁrst row), the
highest valence band states of the InAs/GaSb core-shell
nanowire (the second row), the lowest conduction band
states of the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowire (the third
row), and the highest valence states of the GaSb/InAs
core-shell nanowire (the fourth row).
In each row, the
leftmost panel corresponds to the kz value closest to the
Γ-point for which the band ordering is inverted. On the
other hand, the rightmost panel corresponds to the kz
value closest to the Brillouin zone boundary for which
band ordering is normal. From left to right, we expect
continuous change of the electron and hole characters.

Let us look at the ﬁrst row which corresponds to the

ﬁve bottom conduction states of the InAs/GaSb core-
shell nanowire. Fig 10(a) is dominated by a bright ring in
the shell while the core is relatively dark, indicating the
considered state contains a large contribution from the
GaSb shell and small contribution from the InAs core.
On the contrary, Fig. 10(e) is dominated by a bright disk
covering the core region while the shell is dark, indicating
the state contains a large contribution from the InAs core
and a small contribution from the GaSb shell. Therefore,
from Fig. 10(a) to Fig. 10(e), the band character changes
from mostly hole-like to mostly electron-like. The sec-
ond row corresponds to the ﬁve top valence states of the
InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowire. In Fig. 10(f), both the
core and the shell are bright, indicating strong electron-
hole mixing. From Fig. 10(f) to Fig. 10(j), however, the
hole character gradually dominates the top valence band
states.

The remaining two rows are for the GaSb/InAs core-
shell nanowire. Essentially, we found the same trends
as the InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowire, except that the
core is dominated by the hole character while the shell is
dominated by the the electron character. As expected,
from Fig. 10(k) to Fig. 10(o) the bottom conduction band
state becomes more and more electron-like, while from
Fig. 10(p) to Fig. 10(t) the top valence band state be-
comes more and more hole-like.

The biggest diﬀerences between the two types of
nanowires become clear when we separately look at the
core and shell parts of the wave functions. Let us con-
sider the shell ﬁrst.
If the shell is formed from GaSb,
then the wave function in the shell is hole-like and shows
a sharp circular ridge structure [see, e.g., Fig. 10(a)], in-
dicating that the hole-like state is very localized in the
shell. Alternatively, if the shell is formed from InAs,
then the wave function in the shell is electron-like and is
much broader in space [see, e.g., Fig.10(o)], implying that
in the shell the InAs electron-like wave function is more
delocalized then the GaSb hole-like wave function. For
the core similar analysis can be performed. If the core is
formed from InAs, then the wave function in the core is
electron-like and shows a strong peak around the center
of the nanowire [see e.g. Fig.10(e)]. On the other hand,
if the core is formed from GaSb, then the wave function
in the core is hole-like and does not show a peak but a
dip around the center of the nanowire the wave function
[see e.g. Fig.10(k)], so that the maximum of the hole
state is pushed towards the boundary of the core. We
note these features of the bottom conduction band state
and the top valence band state found in the core region
resemble closely the inherent properties of the freestand-
ing [111]-oriented InAs and GaSb nanowires found in the
previous studies.29,30

It has now become clear that in the shell the electron-
like state is more delocalized than the hole-like state,

9

while in the core the opposite is true,
i.e., the hole-
like state is more delocalized than the electron-like state.
Therefore, the electron-hole hybridization is stronger in a
GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowire than in the corresponding
InAs/GaSb core-shell nanowire. We emphasize that in
other nanowire systems we have seen similar localization
characteristics of the electron and hole states.29,30 We
therefore speculate that putting the hole state into the
core while the electron state in the shell may be a com-
mon rule for achieving more robust topologically nontriv-
ial properties in many types of core-shell nanowires.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have presented a detailed study the
properties of the energy gaps, especially the topologi-
cal nature of the fundamental gaps, of the [111]-oriented
InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires. The
evolutions of the energy gaps with the structural pa-
rameters are shown to be dominantly governed by the
quantum size eﬀects. With a ﬁxed core radius, a net,
topologically nontrivial fundamental gap exists only in
a ﬁnite range of
intermediate shell thickness, which
is true for both InAs/GaSb and GaSb/InAs core-shell
nanowires. We have oﬀered detailed maps of the topo-
logically nontrivial fundamental gaps over a wide range of
the structural parameters for the two types of core-shell
nanowires. Comparatively, we ﬁnd the electron-hole hy-
bridization is stronger in the GaSb/InAs nanowires due
to the more delocalized features of the electron and hole
wave functions in the shell and the core, respectively.
This explains the larger size of the maximum topologi-
cally nontrivial fundamental gap, as well as the persis-
tence of the gap within a wider range of structural pa-
rameters in the GaSb/InAs core-shell nanowires. Since
the similar localization characteristics of the conduction
band electron wave functions and the valence band hole
wave functions exist in other types of III-V semiconduc-
tor nanowires, it could be used as a general guidance to
put the hole-like state into the core while the electron-like
state in the shell in constructing a topological core-shell
nanowire with a large and robust topologically nontrivial
fundamental gap.

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the National Basic Re-
search Program of China (Grants No. 2012CB932703
and No. 2012CB932700) and the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 91221202,
No. 91421303, and No. 61321001). HQX also acknowl-
edges ﬁnancial support from the Swedish Research Coun-
cil (VR).

10

∗ hqxu@pku.edu.cn; hongqi.xu@ftf.lth.se
1 C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 146802

(2005).

2 J. E. Moore and L. Balents, Phys. Rev. B 75, 121306

(2007).

3 L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 76, 045302 (2007).
4 H. Zhang, C.-X. Liu, X.-L. Qi, X. Dai, Z. Fang, and S.-C.

Zhang, Nat. Phys. 5, 438 (2009).

5 Y. Xia, D. Qian, D. Hsieh, L. Wray, A. Pal, H. Lin, A.
Bansil, D. Grauer, Y. Hor, R. Cava, et al., Nat. Phys. 5,
398 (2009).

6 B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, and S.-C. Zhang, Science

314, 1757 (2006).

7 M. K¨onig, S. Wiedmann, C. Br¨une, A. Roth, H. Buhmann,
L. W. Molenkamp, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, Science 318,
766 (2007).

8 A. Roth, C. Br¨une, H. Buhmann, L. W. Molenkamp, J.
Maciejko, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, Science 325, 294
(2009).

9 I. Knez, R.-R. Du, and G. Sullivan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107,

136603 (2011).

10 L. Du, I. Knez, G. Sullivan, and R.-R. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett.

114, 096802 (2015).

11 B. Ganjipour, M. Ek, B. M. Borg, K. A. Dick, M.-E. Pistol,
L.-E. Wernersson, and C. Thelander, Appl. Phys. Lett.
101, 103501 (2012).

12 B. Ganjipour, M. Leijnse, L. Samuelson, H. Q. Xu, and C.

Thelander, Phys. Rev. B 91, 161301 (2015).

22 M. Persson and H. Q. Xu, Phys. Rev. B 73, 035328 (2006).
23 Y. Niquet, Nano Lett. 7, 1105 (2007).
24 Y. Niquet, Phys. Rev. B 74, 155304 (2006).
25 M. Luisier, A. Schenk, W. Fichtner, and G. Klimeck, Phys.

Rev. B 74, 205323 (2006).

26 G. Liang, J. Xiang, N. Kharche, G. Klimeck, C. M. Lieber,

and M. Lundstrom, Nano Lett. 7, 642 (2007).

27 A. Paul, S. Mehrotra, M. Luisier, and G. Klimeck, IEEE

Electron Device Lett. 31, 278 (2010).

28 M. Persson and A. Di Carlo, J. Appl. Phys. 104, 073718

(2008).

29 G. Liao, N. Luo, Z. Yang, K. Chen, and H. Q. Xu, J. Appl.

Phys. 118, 094308 (2015).

30 G. Liao, N. Luo, K.-Q. Chen, and H. Q. Xu, J. Phys.: Con-

dens. Matter, in press (2016); arXiv:1512.04206 (2015).

31 Y. He, Y. Zhao, C. Fan, J. Kang, R. Han, and X. Liu,

IEEE Trans. Electron Dev. 56, 1199 (2009).

32 V. R. Kishore, B. Partoens, and F. Peeters, J. Phys.: Con-

dens. Matt. 26, 095501 (2014).

33 B. Lassen, M. Willatzen, R. Melnik, and L. C. L. Y. Voon,

J. Mater. Res. 21, 2927 (2006).

34 W. Kohn and J. Luttinger, Phys. Rev. 98, 915 (1955).
35 J. Luttinger, Phys. Rev. 102, 1030 (1956).
36 D. S. Citrin and Y.-C. Chang, Phys. Rev. B 40, 5507

(1989).

37 J.-B. Xia, Phys. Rev. B 43, 9856 (1991).
38 V. R. Kishore, N. ˇCukari´c, B. Partoens, M. Tadi´c, and F.

Peeters, J. Phys.: Condens. Matt. 24, 135302 (2012).

13 T. Rieger, D. Gr¨utzmacher, and M. Lepsa, Nanoscale 7,

39 B. Lassen, L. Lew Yan Voon, M. Willatzen, and R. Melnik,

356 (2015).

Solid State Comm. 132, 141 (2004).

14 V. V. R. Kishore, B. Partoens, and F. M. Peeters, Phys.

40 P. Redli´nski and F. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B 77, 075329

Rev. B 86, 165439 (2012).

(2008).

15 F. Ning, L.-M. Tang, Y. Zhang, and K.-Q. Chen, Sci. Rep.

41 V. R. Kishore, B. Partoens, and F. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B

5 (2015).

82, 235425 (2010).

16 F. Ning, L.-M. Tang, Y. Zhang, and K.-Q. Chen, J. Appl.

42 I. Vurgaftman, J. Meyer, and L. Ram-Mohan, J. Appl.

Phys. 114, 224304 (2013).

17 S. Cahangirov and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B 79, 165118

(2009).

18 A. Srivastava, N. Tyagi, and R. Ahuja, Solid State Sci. 23,

35 (2013).

19 C. L. Dos Santos and P. Piquini, Phys. Rev. B 81, 075408

(2010).

20 M. Persson and H. Q. Xu, Nano Lett. 4, 2409 (2004).
21 M. Persson and H. Q. Xu, Phys. Rev. B 73, 125346 (2006).

Phys. 89, 5815 (2001).

43 B. A. Foreman, Phys. Rev. B 56, R12748 (1997).
44 L. Claessen, J. Maan, M. Altarelli, P. Wyder, L. Chang,

and L. Esaki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2556 (1986).

45 A. Ekpunobi, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Proc. 8, 463 (2005).
46 G. Sai-Halasz, L. Chang, J.-M. Welter, C.-A. Chang, and

L. Esaki, Solid State Comm. 27, 935 (1978).

47 N. Luo, G. Liao, and H. Q. Xu, arXiv:1603.00811 (2016).

