6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
1
1

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

2
v
6
3
0
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Locally covariant quantum ﬁeld theory

and the spin-statistics connection

Christopher J. Fewster∗1

1Department of Mathematics, University of York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom.

February 5, 2016

Abstract

The framework of locally covariant quantum ﬁeld theory, an axiomatic approach to quan-
tum ﬁeld theory in curved spacetime, is reviewed. As a speciﬁc focus, the connection be-
tween spin and statistics is examined in this context. A new approach is given, which allows
for a more operational description of theories with spin and for the derivation of a more
general version of the spin-statistics connection in curved spacetimes than previously avail-
able. This part of the text is based on arXiv:1503.05797 and a forthcoming publication; the
emphasis here is on the fundamental ideas and motivation.

1 Introduction

The purpose of this contribution is two-fold: on one hand, it serves as a summary of my talk in
the QF2 session on the spin-statistics connection (section 3); on the other, at the request of the
session organisers, it provides an expository review of locally covariant quantum ﬁeld theory in
curved spacetimes (QFT in CST) (section 2).

In the context of a Marcel Grossmann meeting, there should be no need to justify the study
of QFT in curved spacetimes. However, it is worth emphasising that locally covariant QFT has
two main differences from usual practice of QFT in CST: it is an axiomatic approach, and it
aims to discuss arbitrary spacetime backgrounds, rather than speciﬁc examples. The motivation
for the latter has several aspects. First, one wishes to gain a perspective that is independent
of special features of particular spacetimes, but democratically implements the same physics (in
some sense) in all of them. This is motivated by the practical reason that the spacetime we inhabit
does not exhibit any symmetries on small scales, but seems to be well-approximated on large
scales by spacetimes that do, and a setting in which such approximations can be controlled is
desirable. Second, allowing for arbitrary backgrounds gives one ﬂexibility to model macroscopic

∗chris.fewster@york.ac.uk

1

material features (e.g., stars or apparatus etc) by the geometry of the background rather than as
complicated conﬁgurations of a QFT. Third, to embed the principle of locality from the start, it
is expedient to seek a framework in which the formulation in a given spacetime region is (in a
suitable sense) independent of the geometry in its causal complement.

Axiomatic approaches to QFT have been developed since the 1950’s. They arose from con-
cerns about the mathematical deﬁciencies of QFT at that time, with the aim to ‘kill it or cure it’.1
At a basic level, the goal is to write down precisely what a quantum ﬁeld theory aspires to be,
to draw out the general consequences (e.g., a spin-statistics connection, PCT theorem, or no-go
results like Haag’s theorem) that follow from them and thereby to provide guidance for attempts
to rigorously construct models of QFT. It is striking that, despite the undoubted successes of
QFT, the mathematical status of (nonperturbative) interacting theories in four dimensions is still
unsettled. (On the other hand, while there has been no cure, QFT has not been killed by the
discovery of an internal contradiction in its fundamental assumptions.)

There are two basic ﬂavours of axiomatic QFT: the Wightman framework,1 which retains the
idea of a quantum ﬁeld as a key building block of the theory, and the more radical Haag–Kastler–
Araki framework of algebraic QFT (AQFT) or local quantum physics,2 in which the focus is
on algebras of local observables, while ﬁelds enter as secondary and less intrinsic elements.
The motivation of the algebraic approach is to remain close to operational ideas of what can be
measured locally, simultaneously avoiding an over-reliance on classical ﬁeld theory (which, after
all, should emerge as a limit of QFT, rather than being taken as its foundation). Locally covariant
QFT is a natural generalisation of AQFT, but retains a natural place for quantum ﬁelds.

Aside from general structural results applying to wide classes of QFTs, axiomatic QFT also
provides a deepened and better founded conceptual framework, often allied with powerful math-
ematical tools. In turn, this can lead to new developments, such as the formalism of perturbative
algebraic QFT (pAQFT) that has put perturbative QFT on a rigorous basis, even in curved space-
time and even for gauge theories including gravity (see Refs. [3–6] and Rejzner’s contribution to
these Proceedings). A survey of the present status of AQFT, in both ﬂat and curved spacetimes,
can be found in the edited collection Ref. [7].

2 Locally Covariant QFT in CST

Let us set out the general structure of locally covariant QFT. General references for this section
are the original paper,8 and an extensive recent review.9

2.1 Locally covariant theories

Fix a spacetime dimension n ≥ 2. The spacetime backgrounds that we will study, and which we
will call globally hyperbolic spacetimes, consist of tuples MMM = (M, g, o, t), where M is a smooth
manifold with a Lorentzian metric g (signature + − · · · −), an orientation o, and time-orientation
t. Here, we allow M to have ﬁnitely many connected components, while o ⊂ W
n(M) is one
of the components of the nowhere-vanishing smooth n-forms on M and t ⊂ W
1(M) is one of
the components of the nowhere-vanishing smooth 1-forms that are timelike with respect to g.

2

We restrict to those spacetimes that are globally hyperbolic with respect to the given metric and
time-orientation.

The ﬁrst element of the algebraic formulation is the assignment of a ∗-algebra A(MMM), with a
unit 1A(MMM), to each MMM of this type. The self-adjoint elements of A(MMM) are to represent observ-
ables of the given theory on spacetime MMM. A simple example is given by the real scalar ﬁeld,
obeying the Klein–Gordon equation

PMMMf

:= ((cid:3)MMM + m2)f = 0.

(1)

As MMM is globally hyperbolic, there are advanced (−) and retarded (+) Green operators E±
MMM for the
operator PMMM so that, for any smooth compactly supported function f ∈ C¥
0 (MMM), f ± = E±
MMM f solves
the inhomogeneous equation PMMMf ± = f with the support of f ± lying in the causal future (+) or
past (−) of the support of f . Then the ∗-algebra A(MMM) is deﬁned to have a set of generators
{F MMM( f ) : f ∈ C¥
0 (MMM)} labelled by smooth compactly supported functions, a unit 1A(MMM), and
relations given by

• linearity of f 7→ F MMM( f )
• hermiticity: F MMM( f )∗ = F MMM( f ) for all f ∈ C¥
• ﬁeld equation: F MMM(PMMM f ) = 0 for all f ∈ C¥
• commutation relations: [F MMM( f1),F MMM( f2)] = iEMMM( f1, f2)1A(MMM) for all f1, f2 ∈ C¥

0 (MMM)
0 (MMM)

0 (MMM).

Here we have written

EMMM( f1, f2) = ZMMM

f1(p)(EMMM f2)(p)dvolMMM(p),

(2)

where EMMM = E−

MMM − E+
MMM.

The speciﬁcation of the algebra on each spacetime is only one part of the structure. An
important aspect is the ability to compare the algebras on different spacetimes. This can be
done by considering smooth maps y
: MMM1 → MMM2 that are isometric, respect orientation and time-
orientation: if MMMi = (Mi, gi, oi, ti) (i = 1, 2), we require g1 = y ∗g2, o1 = y ∗o2, t1 = y ∗t2. Fur-
thermore, y
is required to have a causally convex image in MMM2, thus ensuring that no causal links
exist in the image that are not already present in the original spacetime. A map y obeying these
conditions will be called a hyperbolic embedding. As a requirement of locality, each hyperbolic
embedding of MMM1 in MMM2 should provide an embedding of the physical content of our theory
on MMM1 within that on MMM2, represented mathematically by a unit-preserving ∗-homomorphism
A(y ) : A(MMM1) → A(MMM2). We demand that A(y ) is an injection, so that no observables are lost
in passing from a small spacetime to a larger one in which it is embedded.1 Moreover, we make
the natural requirements that, if a trivial embedding is made, the algebraic embedding should be

1This is too stringent in some contexts where ‘topological observables’ appear but we set these to the side for

now in the interests of a clean axiomatic framework.

3

likewise trivial, and that the composition of maps arising from successive embeddings should
agree with that of the composition of embeddings:

A(idMMM) = idA(MMM),

A(y ◦ j ) = A(y ) ◦ A(j ),

(3)

where the second equation holds for all pairs of composable maps between spacetimes in our
class. These various requirements can be summarised by a single mathematical assumption:2

Assumption 2.1 (Local covariance). A theory is a covariant functor A : Loc → Alg, where Loc is
the category whose objects are globally hyperbolic spacetimes, and whose morphisms are hyper-
bolic embeddings, while Alg is the category of unital ∗-algebras with injective, unit-preserving
∗-homomorphisms as morphisms.3

In the context of the Klein–Gordon theory, these morphisms are easily described: if y

NNN then A(y ) maps the generators of A(MMM) into those of A(NNN) by

: MMM →

A(y )F MMM( f ) = F NNN(y ∗ f )

(4)
for all f ∈ C¥
0 (MMM). Here, y ∗ denotes the push-forward, so that y ∗ f agrees with f ◦ y −1 on
y (MMM) and vanishes elsewhere. The action of A(y ) on all other elements of A(MMM) is ﬁxed
by the requirement that it be a ∗-homomorphism obeying A(y )1A(MMM) = 1A(NNN). That this can
be done consistently is a consequence of the theory of the Klein–Gordon equation on globally
hyperbolic spacetimes and the relations in A(MMM) and A(NNN). For example, A([F MMM( f1),F MMM( f2)])
can be written as either of A(iEMMM( f1, f2)1A(MMM)) = iEMMM( f1, f2)1A(NNN) or [F NNN(y ∗ f1),F NNN(y ∗ f2)] =
iENNN(y ∗ f1,y ∗ f2)1A(NNN) and consistency is assured because ENNN(y ∗ f1,y ∗ f2) = EMMM( f1, f2). It is less
obvious that the resulting map is injective: this follows because A(MMM) is known to be simple,
so the kernel of A(y ) is either trivial or equals A(MMM), and the latter is impossible because
A(y )1A(MMM) = 1A(NNN) 6= 0.

Other free bosonic models have been formulated as functors from Loc to Alg, including the
Proca and (with some subtleties) Maxwell ﬁelds.11–13 This includes examples (self-dual gauge
ﬁelds) which are not formulated by reference to a classical Lagrangian.14 To incorporate theories
with spin, one can either generalise Loc to a category of spin manifolds,15–17 or – as in Section 3
– use coframed manifolds (see Ref. [18] for yet another approach).

2See Ref. [10] for a general reference on category theory. For the purpose of this review, the reader will not
go too far wrong by thinking of a category as consisting of objects that are ‘sets with structure’ and morphisms
that are ‘structure preserving maps’. Examples include the category of topological spaces with continuous maps
as morphisms, or groups with homomorphisms, as well as Loc and Alg described here. A functor between two
categories maps objects and morphisms in the ﬁrst to objects and morphisms in the second in a coherent way; for
example, a homology functor maps topological spaces to the appropriate homology group and continuous maps
between the topological spaces to group homomorphisms between the homology groups.

3It is of course possible to change the category Alg for, e.g., the category of C∗-algebras. Alternatively theories
other than QFT can be set into a locally covariant context by an appropriate choice of target category, e.g., that of
(pre)symplectic spaces for classical linear ﬁeld theories.

4

2.2 Comparison of theories and locally covariant ﬁelds

Assumption 2.1 has two main strengths: ﬁrst, it has packaged many individual assumptions into
one statement; second, it allows us to discuss a theory as a single mathematical object, rather
than viewing it through its instantiations on each spacetime separately. Category theory provides
a language for this discussion and a number of standard categorical ideas ﬁnd uses in locally
covariant quantum ﬁeld theory. A particularly important example is the notion of a natural
transformation between functors (denoted by a dotted arrow .→), which has two main uses in
locally covariant QFT. The ﬁrst of these concerns relations between theories:

Deﬁnition 2.2. Let A and B be locally covariant theories (functors from Loc to Alg). Any
natural transformation h
→ B deﬁnes an embedding of A as a subtheory of B. If h
is a
natural isomorphism, then it determines a physical equivalence of the theories A and B.

: A

.

Here, a natural transformation h

: A

.→ B is a collection (h MMM)MMM∈Loc of morphisms h MMM :

A(MMM) → B(MMM) such that, for every hyperbolic embedding y
h NNN A(y ) = B(y )h MMM.

: MMM → NNN, one has

(5)

In other words, the square in the diagram

MMM

y

NNN

h MMM

h NNN

A(MMM)

A(y )

A(NNN)

B(MMM)

B(y )

B(NNN)

commutes; h

is a natural isomorphism if each of its components h MMM is an isomorphism.

The interpretation placed on natural transformations and isomorphisms in Deﬁnition 2.2 can
be justiﬁed in several ways and has found various applications.8, 19, 20 In particular, the automor-
phisms of A (the natural isomorphisms of A to itself) form a group G under composition, which
can be interpreted as the global gauge group of the theory A.20 A simple example of a global
gauge transformation for the Klein–Gordon theory is deﬁned so that h MMMF MMM( f ) = −F MMM( f ) (ex-
tended as a unit-preserving ∗-homomorphism); if one considers the theory of n Klein–Gordon
ﬁelds with identical mass one has an O(n) group of orthogonal transformations on the multi-
plet of ﬁelds (and further shift transformations if the mass is zero). An example of a subtheory
embedding can be given if B = A ⊗ A consists of two identical copies of A,4 and we deﬁne
h
→ B so that h MMMA = A ⊗ 1A(MMM), which can easily be veriﬁed as natural. Klein–Gordon
theories with distinct mass, or Klein–Gordon multiplets with differing numbers of ﬁelds, can be
shown to be inequivalent (modulo additional mild technical conditions).8, 9

: A

.

A second use of natural transformations is to describe locally covariant ﬁelds. For simplic-
ity we restrict here to ﬁelds smeared with scalar, smooth compactly supported test functions.
Let Set be the category of sets, with functions as morphisms. This category contains Alg as a

4Thus B(MMM) = A(MMM) ⊗ A(MMM) while B(y ) = A(y ) ⊗ A(y ).

5

subcategory: every unital ∗-algebra is, in particular, a set and every ∗-homomorphism between
such algebras is, in particular, a function. The assignment of the space of scalar test functions to
spacetime MMM can be described as a functor D : Loc → Set by setting D(MMM) = C¥
0 (MMM) for each MMM
and D(y ) = y ∗ for each hyperbolic embedding y
. Locally covariant ﬁelds can be then identiﬁed
as follows:4, 8

Deﬁnition 2.3. Let A be a locally covariant theory. A locally covariant ﬁeld of the theory A is a
natural transformation F

.→ A, where we regard Alg as a subcategory of Set.

: D

This means precisely that the equation (4) should hold for all f ∈ C¥
: MMM → NNN,
with F MMM now reinterpreted as the maps that form the components of F
.→ A. This gives the
Klein–Gordon ﬁeld its own mathematical status. In general, the collection of all locally covariant
ﬁelds forms a unital ∗-algebra Fld(D, A): given F
,

,Y ∈ Fld(D, A), and l ∈ C, the ﬁelds F +l

0 (MMM) and all y
: D

, F

∗ are

(F + l
(F
(F

Y MMM( f )

)MMM( f ) = F MMM( f ) + l
)MMM( f ) = F MMM( f )Y MMM( f ),
∗)MMM( f ) = F MMM( f )∗

(6)
(7)
(8)

and the unit ﬁeld is 1MMM( f ) = 1A(MMM), for all f ∈ C¥
the gauge group of the theory, so that if h ∈ G then h

· F

0 (MMM). This ∗-algebra then carries an action of

is the ﬁeld with components

(h

· F )MMM( f ) = h MMMF MMM( f )

(9)

for all MMM ∈ Loc, f ∈ C¥
0 (MMM). Consequently, the ﬁelds appear in multiplets corresponding to
subspaces of Fld(D, A) that are irreducible under the action of G. One can easily adapt the
same idea to other types of smearing test functions. As with the theories themselves, the lo-
cally covariant viewpoint on ﬁelds allows them to be manipulated as mathematical objects in a
spacetime-independent way.

2.3 The kinematic net

Given a spacetime MMM, one can ask what physical content can be associated with a speciﬁc subre-
gion O ⊂ MMM. This can be achieved in a simple fashion in our functorial setting, if O is causally
convex and open, for then we can equip O with the metric and (time)-orientation inherited from
MMM and regard it as a globally hyperbolic spacetime in its own right, to be denoted MMM|O. More-
over, the inclusion map of O within MMM now induces a hyperbolic embedding i MMM;O : MMM|O → MMM.
Applying the functor, we obtain an algebra A(MMM|O) and a ∗-homomorphism A(i MMM;O) mapping
A(MMM|O) into A(MMM).
Deﬁnition 2.4. For any nonempty, open, causally convex subset O of MMM, the image of A(i MMM;O)
will be denoted Akin(MMM; O) and called the kinematic subalgebra of A(MMM) associated with region
O, and the assignment O 7→ Akin(MMM; O) forms the kinematic net of A on MMM.

6

Y
F
Y
Y
Y
The kinematic subalgebras have a number of nice properties.

If O1 ⊂ O2, then i MMM;O1 =
i MMM;O2 ◦ i MMM|O2;O1, which implies that A(i MMM;O1) = A(i MMM;O2) ◦ A(i MMM|O2;O1) and hence one has the
isotony relation
(10)
: MMM → NNN then, similarly, A(y )(Akin(MMM; O)) = Akin(NNN;y (O)). This is particularly interest-

Akin(MMM; O1) ⊂ Akin(MMM; O2).

If y
ing in the case of a symmetry of MMM, i.e., an isomorphism a

: MMM → MMM, in which case

A(a )(Akin(MMM; O)) = Akin(MMM;a (O)).

(11)

Furthermore, the kinematic subalgebras ﬁt well with the other structures we have introduced: if
F ∈ Fld(D, A), and f ∈ C¥
0 (MMM) is supported within O, then F MMM( f ) ∈ Akin(MMM; O). This holds
because f = D(i MMM;O) ˆf for ˆf = i ∗

MMM;O f ∈ D(MMM|O), and hence

F MMM( f ) = F MMM(D(i MMM;O) ˆf ) = A(i MMM;O)F MMM|O( ˆf ) ∈ Akin(MMM; O).

(12)

Moreover, the gauge transformations act locally: h MMM(Akin(MMM; O)) = Akin(MMM; O) for any h ∈ G,
MMM ∈ Loc and open, causally convex O ⊂ MMM. It is noteworthy that in Minkowski space algebraic
QFT, equations (10) and (11), together with the other properties just described, are separate
assumptions about the theory; here, they are consequences of Assumption 2.1 and the deﬁnition
of the kinematic subalgebras.

One normally makes a further assumption

Assumption 2.5 (Einstein Causality). If O1 and O2 are open, causally convex regions of MMM that
are spacelike separated (O1 ∩ JMMM(O2) = /0) then Akin(MMM; O1) and Akin(MMM; O2) are commuting
subalgebras of A(MMM).

(This could be changed to a graded commutator if required.)

2.4 The timeslice axiom and relative Cauchy evolution

The structures introduced so far are kinematic in nature and lack any notion of dynamics. De-
scribing any hyperbolic embedding y
: MMM → NNN whose image contains a Cauchy surface of NNN as
Cauchy, the existence of a dynamical law can be encapsulated in the following assumption.
Assumption 2.6 (Timeslice). If y
morphism.

: MMM → NNN is Cauchy, then A(y ) : A(MMM) → A(NNN) is an iso-

This assumption means that any observable of the theory on MMM can be measured, equivalently,
within a neighbourhood of any Cauchy surface. It therefore corresponds to an abstracted notion
of a dynamical law. Note that no equation of motion has been assumed in our general framework.
The timeslice axiom has some striking consequences. One of the most prominent is that the
sensitivity of a theory to changes in the metric can be described in terms of a relative Cauchy
evolution.8, 19 Fix a spacetime MMM = (M, g, o, t) ∈ Loc and let h be a smooth and compactly
supported metric perturbation so that MMM[h] := (M, g + h, o, t[h]) is also a globally hyperbolic

7

i+

i−

j+

j−

MMM+

MMM−

h

MMM[h]

MMM

Figure 1: The geometrical construction of relative Cauchy evolution

spacetime in Loc, where t[h] is the unique choice of time-orientation agreeing with t outside the
support of h. Choose any open causally convex sets M± ⊂ M with M± ⊂ M \ J∓
MMM(supph).
Setting MMM± = MMM|M±, the inclusion maps of M± into M induce Cauchy morphisms ı± : MMM± →
MMM, and also Cauchy morphisms j± : MMM± → MMM[h]; see Fig. 1. Each of these Cauchy morphisms
is turned into an isomorphism under the action of the functor A and we may therefore deﬁne an
automorphism of A(MMM) by

rceMMM[h] = A(ı−) ◦ A( j−)−1 ◦ A( j+) ◦ A(ı+)−1,

(13)

which is the relative Cauchy evolution induced by h. (One may show that rceMMM[h] is independent
of the speciﬁc choices of M±.)

The relative Cauchy evolution has been computed for various theories.8, 13, 16, 21–23 Even
more, it is possible under some circumstances to take a functional derivative with respect to h,
thus inducing a derivation of A(MMM) that can be interpreted as a commutator with a stress-energy
tensor.8 To be speciﬁc, let f ab be a compactly supported rank 2-contravariant tensor ﬁeld. Then
the stress-energy tensor smeared against f has the following action on A ∈ A(MMM):

[TMMM( f ), A] = ZMMM

fmn

d rceMMM
d gmn

(A) :=

2
i

d
ds

rceMMM[h(s)]A(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s=0

,

(14)

where h(s) is a differentiable family of metric perturbations with ˙h(0)ab = f (ab). Understood in
this way, TMMM turns out to be symmetric and conserved, and in particular models it coincides with
the standard stress-energy tensor. This a remarkable result, because at no stage was it assumed
that the theory can be derived from a classical action principle. If external ﬁelds are incorporated
into the background, one may consider variations of them as well, leading to other conserved
currents.23

Another application of the relative Cauchy evolution is to provide an alternative notion of
localisation to that encoded in the kinematic net. The idea is to regard an observable as localised
in a region if it is invariant under metric changes in the region’s causal complement. This leads to
a dynamical net: when this coincides with the kinematic net, the theory is said to be dynamically
local – see Ref. [19], where some general consequences are developed. Various models (includ-
ing the massive Klein–Gordon theory) have been shown to be dynamically local.13, 18, 22–24 There

8

are exceptions, which seem to stem from broken symmetries or topological charges; see Ref. [9]
for discussion.

2.5 State spaces

In algebraic QFT, states correspond to experimental preparations, while observables correspond
to physical quantities to be measured. The pairing of states and observables produces the expec-
tation value of the measurements of the given physical quantity, subject to the given preparation.
Technically, a state on a unital ∗-algebra A is a linear functional w
: A → C, which is positive in
the sense that w (A∗A) ≥ 0 for all algebra elements A, and is normalised to the value w (1) = 1
on the algebra unit. On any algebra A, we denote the corresponding set of states by A∗
+,1. Us-
ing the well-known GNS construction, any state on a unital ∗-algebra induces a Hilbert space
representation in which expectation values are given by the standard Born rule.

Experience has shown that the full set of states includes many that do not have good physical
properties and that it is better to focus attention on a smaller class, e.g., the Hadamard states of
Klein–Gordon theory. In the locally covariant context this indicates that one should consider a set
of states S(MMM) ⊂ A(MMM)∗
+,1 on each spacetime MMM. As measurements made in a small spacetime
should also be possible within a larger one, there should be an appropriate relation between S(MMM)
and S(NNN) whenever there is a hyperbolic embedding y

: MMM → NNN.

Deﬁnition 2.7. A state space S for a locally covariant theory A : Loc → Alg is an assignment of
a subset S(MMM) ⊂ A(MMM)∗
+,1 that is closed under convex combinations and operations induced by
A(MMM),5 and obeys

(15)
: MMM → NNN is a hyperbolic embedding.6 If (15) holds with equality for all Cauchy

whenever y
hyperbolic embeddings, then S has the timeslice property.

A(y )∗S(NNN) ⊂ S(MMM)

As already mentioned, the Hadamard states provide an example of such a state space, for the

Klein–Gordon theory.

To understand the signiﬁcance of the above deﬁnition, suppose that A ∈ A(MMM) is an observ-
able on spacetime MMM that is hyperbolically embedded in NNN by y
. Then there is an observable
on spacetime NNN, A(y )A, which corresponds to A. To any state on w ∈ S(NNN) there is an ex-
pectation value w (A(y )(A)), which can be written as (A(y )∗w )(A), i.e., the expectation of A
in the ‘pulled back’ state A(y )∗w on A(MMM). The content of (15) is that this pulled-back state
belongs to the state space S(MMM) and so is a legitimate physical state on MMM. Accordingly, the
same measurement results can be obtained either in MMM or NNN.

A reasonable question is whether one can ﬁnd a state space consisting of a single state in each
spacetime (even dropping the requirement of closure under operations), which would amount to
a choice of a preferred state. However, it can be shown that this is impossible for dynamically
′ (l ∈ [0,1]) also belongs to S(MMM), as also does

′ ∈ S(MMM), each state lw + (1 − l )w

5That is, given states w ,w

the state w A given by w A(C) = w (A∗CA)/w (A∗A) for any A such that w (A∗A) > 0.

6One can give a more categorical deﬁnition, in which S is a subfunctor of the contravariant functor assigning to

each algebra A(MMM) its full state space.

9

local theories that obey standard assumptions in Minkowski space.19 This turns long-standing
folk-wisdom into a rigorous theorem.

2.6 Applications of the locally covariant framework

The locally covariant framework was ﬁrst introduced about 15 years ago and has already led to
substantial progress in understanding both general structural features of QFT in CST and also
speciﬁc physical problems.

Above all, the ideas of local covariance were instrumental in completing the perturbative
construction of interacting theories in curved spacetime,3–5, 17 and extending it to include the-
ories with local gauge symmetries6, 25 and gravity (see Ref. [26] and Rejzner’s contribution to
these Proceedings). In the context of gravity, key issues are the identiﬁcation of suitable gauge-
invariant observables (see also Ref. [27]) and the use of relative Cauchy evolution in the discus-
sion of background independence (see Ref. [28] for similar considerations in another context).
Anomalies have also been studied.29

In addition, there have been a number of results of a structural nature: these include Verch’s
proof of the spin-statistics connection,15 Sanders’ results on the Reeh–Schlieder property,30 and
the analysis of the superselection structure of locally covariant theories,31 including the identi-
ﬁcation of topological sectors in suitable spacetimes.32 The fundamental question of whether
a locally covariant theory can be said to represent the same physics in all spacetimes has been
discussed; the issue is subtle, but there are positive results at least for the class of dynamically
local theories.19 As already described, the global gauge group has been understood at the func-
torial level,20 along with the intrinsic deﬁnition of the stress-energy tensor.8 Quite recently, the
split property33 (see also Ref. [34] for a review) and modular nuclearity35 have been proved in
the locally covariant framework, given suitable additional assumptions. Extensions of the locally
covariant framework towards ‘higher’ categorical structures are also under way.36

Finally, locally covariant ideas have been applied to problems in the theory of Quantum En-
ergy Inequalities37–39 (e.g. to obtain a priori bounds on Casimir energy densities) and to questions
in cosmology.40–43 The remainder of this contribution will focus on the spin-statistics connec-
tion.

3 Spin and Statistics

3.1 Introductory remarks

Observed elementary particles are either bosons of integer spin, or fermions of half-integer spin.
Explanations of this connection between spin and statistics have been sought since the early days
of quantum ﬁeld theory44, 45 and the rigorous proof of a connection between spin and statistics
was an early and major achievement of the axiomatic Wightman framework.1, 46, 47 Similarly,
general results have been proved in the Haag–Kastler framework.48–50 In this section, we will
discuss how the connection can be established in the locally covariant framework, after suitable
adaptations.

10

To set the scene, let us recall the spin-statistics theorem of Burgoyne46 (see also §II.5 in
Ref. [2]) which concerns a Wightman theory in Minkowski space, with Hilbert space H and
vacuum state vector W
. The universal cover SL(2, C) of the proper orthochronous Lorentz group
+ is unitarily represented on H by S 7→ U (S). Let F (x) be a component of a spin J ﬁeld, i.e.,
L↑
is one of a multiplet of ﬁelds F
U (S)F

a (x)U (S)−1 = D(S−1)

transforming as

b (p (S)x),

(16)

a

b

a

where D is a spin-J SL(2, C) representation and

p

: SL(2, C) → L↑
+,

n = Ss n S∗
(17)
is the covering map. Burgoyne argues that the two-point function hW
∗(y)W i can be ex-
tended analytically and displays invariance under the complex Lorentz group, leading to the
identity

s m p (S)

|F (x)F

m

hW

|F (x)F

∗(y)W i = (−1)P+2JhW

|F

∗(−y)F (−x)W i

(18)

(19)

for spacelike separated x, y, where P is ﬁxed by

F (x)F

∗(y) = (−1)PF

∗(y)F (x).

In consequence, for any test function f ,

kF

∗( f )W k2 = (−1)P+2JkF (R f )W k2

where (R f )(x) = f (−x),

(20)

so (except for trivial F
expression of the connection is the statement that

) the spin–statistics connection P = 2J (mod 2) holds. A more algebraic

A1A2 = (−1)P1P2A2A1,

if U (−1)AiU (−1)−1 = (−1)PiAi,

(21)

where the Ai are combinations of ﬁelds smeared in regions Oi at spacelike separation or, more
generally, any local observables associated with these regions; the previous statement of the
spin-statistics connection is a special case of (21) because

U (−1)F

a (x)U (−1)−1 = D(−1)

a

b

b (x) = (−1)2JF

a (x).

(22)

A number of assumptions play crucial parts in this argument, as can be seen from various
well-known evasions of the standard spin-statistics relation. Hilbert space positivity evidently
plays a decisive role, and indeed ghosts provide examples of anticommuting integer spin ﬁelds.
Nonrelativistic ﬁelds, or even relativistic ﬁelds in inﬁnite-dimensional multiplet, can also violate
the spin-statistics connection, so the properties of U (S) are crucial. The analytic continuation
argument depends on energy positivity (bosonic statistics may be imposed on a Dirac ﬁeld at the
cost of sacriﬁcing positivity of the Hamiltonian45) and the ability to obtain a spacetime reﬂection
symmetry x 7→ −x in the identity connected component of the complex Lorentz group.

General curved spacetimes have no geometrical symmetries, no global notion of energy pos-
itivity and the n-point functions of typical states of interest are not expected to have analytic

11

F
F
F
extensions. Burgoyne’s proof, like all the other general proofs mentioned above, therefore has
no traction in curved spacetime and there is no obvious way to repair it. Indeed, for many years,
work on the spin-statistics connection in curved spacetimes was restricted to demonstrations that
free models become inconsistent on general spacetimes if equipped with the wrong statistics
(e.g., imposing anticommutation relations on a scalar ﬁeld)51, 52 unless some other property such
as positivity is sacriﬁced.53

The breakthrough was made by Verch,15 who established a general spin-statistics theorem for
theories deﬁned on each spacetime by a single ﬁeld which, in particular, obeys Wightman axioms
in Minkowski space. Together with Ref. [5], this paper was responsible for laying down many
of the foundations of the locally covariant framework for QFT in curved spacetimes described in
Section 2. Verch’s assumptions allow certain properties of the theory on one spacetime to be de-
duced from its properties on another, provided the spacetimes are suitably related by restrictions
or deformations of the metric. In particular, the spin-statistics connection is proved by noting
that, if it were violated in any one spacetime, it would then be violated in Minkowski space,
contradicting the classic spin-statistics theorem.

There are nonetheless some good reasons to revisit the spin-statistics connection. First, as a
matter of principle, one hopes to gain a better understanding of why spin is the correct concept
to investigate in curved spacetime, given the lack of the rotational symmetries that are so closely
bound up with the description of spin in Minkowski space. Second, Ref. [15] described spinor
ﬁelds as sections of various bundles associated to the spin bundle. While this is conventional
wisdom in QFT in CST, it has the effect of basing the discussion on geometric structures that
are, in part, unobservable. This is unproblematic as long as the goal is to understand particular
models such as the Dirac ﬁeld; however, in order to understand the spin-statistics connection for
general theories one needs a more fundamental starting point that avoids the insertion of spin
by hand. Third, Ref. [15] conﬁned itself to theories in which the algebra in each spacetime is
generated by a single ﬁeld, and the argument is indirect in parts.

This section outlines a new and operationally well-motivated perspective on the spin-statistics
connection in which spin emerges as a natural concept in curved spacetimes, and which leads to
a more general and direct proof of the connection. In particular, there is no longer any need to
describe the theory in terms of one or more ﬁelds. Full details will appear shortly;54 see also
Ref. [55] for a summary.

The main new ideas are contained in a generalization of locally covariant QFT based on
a category of spacetimes with global coframes (i.e., a ‘rods and clocks’ account of spacetime
measurements). As in Ref. [15] the goal is to prove that a spin-statistics connection in curved
spacetime is implied by the standard results holding in Minkowski space; however, the proof
becomes quite streamlined in the new formulation and the overall result can be formulated at a
functorial level.

Putting frames at the centre of the approach introduces redundancies because two coframes
related by a global proper Lorentz transformation ought not to be physically distinguishable. A
key part of the formalism involves tracking these redundancies, which leads naturally from an
operational starting-point to a description that allows for spin. The functorial setting of locally
covariant quantum ﬁeld theory provides various tools that make this possible, but in a way that
connects with traditional understandings of spin in, for example, Wightman ﬁeld theory.

12

3.2 Locally covariant theories on coframed spacetimes

Our new spacetime category consists of coframed globally hyperbolic spacetimes, denoted FLoc.
The objects are pairs M = (M, e), where M is a smooth manifold of dimension n on which
e = (en

)n−1
n =0 is a global coframe, such that

L(M, e) := (M,h mn e

m

n
e

, [e0], [e0 ∧ · · · ∧ en−1])

(23)

deﬁnes a spacetime in the category Loc. A morphism y
: (M, e) → (M′, e′) in FLoc is, by
deﬁnition, a smooth y
: M → M′ that induces a Loc-morphism from L(M, e) to L(M′, e′) and
obeys y ∗e′ = e. Nothing is lost, relative to the framework of Section 2, because each theory
A : Loc → Phys induces a theory A ◦ L : FLoc → Phys, and in four dimensions, every theory
described using spin bundles has a similar reformulation on FLoc.7 On the other hand, as the
geometry does not ﬁx a choice of frame, the use of FLoc introduces redundancies that must be
tracked.

An important point is that these redundancies can be expressed functorially. To each L ∈ L↑
+,

there is a functor T(L ) : FLoc → FLoc,

m

(L e)

= L

m

n
n e

T(L )(M, e) = (M,L e)

(24)
with action on morphisms uniquely ﬁxed so that L ◦ T(L )(y ) = L(y ). In other words, T(L ) is a
rigid rotation of the frames in all spacetimes. Every theory A : FLoc → Phys now induces a family
of theories A ◦ T(L ) labelled by L ∈ L↑
+. Our fundamental assumption is that all these theories
should be physically equivalent, with such equivalences encoded by natural isomorphisms as
explained in Section 2.2. Thus we assume that to each L ∈ L↑
+, there exists an equivalence
h (L ) : A
→ A ◦ T(L ); for convenience we also assume that the h (L ) ‘commute’ with the action
of the global gauge group G.

It is remarkable that this assumption (without further speciﬁcation of the h (L )’s) already
′. There are
′L ), or in two steps, using h (L )
′)T(L )(MMM). The comparison

yields a number of consequences. First, consider successive transformations L
two ways of comparing A with A ◦ T(L
followed by L ∗h (L
between them, i.e., the extent to which the diagram

′), the equivalence deﬁned by (L ∗h (L

′L ): directly using h (L

′))M = h (L

and L

.

h (L )

A

A ◦ T(L )

h
(L

′L
)

L ∗h (L

′)

A ◦ T(L

′L )

fails to commute, is measured by a 2-cocycle x (L
tantly, while there is freedom in choosing the h (L )’s, x
lence, so each theory A on FLoc determines a canonical cohomology class [x ] ∈ H2(L↑

+ in Z(G), the centre of G. Impor-
is unique up to cohomological equiva-
+; Z(G)).

′) of L↑

,L

7Note that all orientable four-dimensional globally hyperbolic manifolds admit global coframings.

13

Under some circumstances, [x ] is trivial: e.g., if Z(G) is trivial or A is induced from a theory on
Loc (as we may take h (L ) = id for every L

).

As discussed in Section 2, the scalar (one-component) ﬁelds of the theory form a ∗-algebra

Fld(D, A). This algebra now carries actions of both the gauge group and the Lorentz group:

· F )(M,e)( f ) = a

(a
(L ⋆ F )(M,L e)( f ) = h (L )(M,e)

(M,e)

(M,e)( f )

(M,e)( f )

(a ∈ G)
+).

(L ∈ L↑

These actions commute, and one ﬁnds

(L

′L ) ⋆ F = x (L

′,L ) · (L

′ ⋆ (L ⋆ F )),

(25)

from which it follows that irreducible subspaces of Fld(D, A) under the action of L↑
multiplier representations of L↑
according to representations of the universal cover of L↑
+.

+ × G carry
+, determined by x . This ‘rediscovers’ the classiﬁcation of ﬁelds
So far we have avoided specifying the h (L ). However the dynamics of the theory suggests
a way to construct them. Consider the spacetimes (M, e) and (M,L e). Let ˜L ∈ C¥
(M, L↑
+)
agree with L
(resp., the identity) everywhere to the future (resp., past) of suitably chosen Cauchy
surfaces. Thus it is locally constant outside a time-compact set. Then the spacetime (M, ˜L e)
interpolates between (M, e) (with which it agrees sufﬁciently to the past) and (M,L e) (with
which it agrees sufﬁciently to the future). Assuming the theory obeys the timeslice axiom, we
may obtain in this way an isomorphism between A(M, e) and A(M,L e) (cf. the construction
of relative Cauchy evolution in Section 2). Without further assumptions, this isomorphism could
depend on the details of ˜L
. However, it is reasonable to assume that frame rotations that are
trivial outside a time compact set and are homotopically trivial within this class induce a trivial
relative Cauchy evolution. In this case, the isomorphism from A(M, e) to A(M,L e) depends
on ˜L only via its homotopy class among C¥
+) maps that are locally constant outside time-
compact sets. The upshot is that each S in the universal cover of L↑
+ induces an isomorphism

(M, L↑

z

.

is any lift of L

(M,e)(S) : A(M, e) −→ A(M,p (S)e).

(26)
Provided that these form the components of a natural isomorphism z (S) : A
→ A ◦ T(p (S))
(which holds subject to an additivity assumption) we may obtain our required family of equiva-
lences by h (L ) = z (SL ), where SL

to the universal cover.

Applying these structures in n = 4 dimensions, one ﬁnds that z (−1) is a global gauge trans-
formation z (−1) ∈ G obeying z (−1)2 = z (1) = id. Moreover, in Minkowski spacetime M0 =
(R4, (dxm
)m =0..3), if SL(2, C) is unitarily implemented by S 7→ U (S) then z (S)T(p (S)−1)(M0) ◦
A(y
p (S)) is implemented by adU(S). This shows how the various aspects of the standard Minkowski
transformation under U (S) are implemented in the locally covariant framework: the active trans-
formation of points is achieved by the functor A(y
p (S)) while the passive relabelling of ﬁeld
components is done by z (S). In particular, in the special case S = −1, z (−1)M0 is implemented
by the adjoint action of U (−1), i.e., the 2p rotation, and can be termed the univalence automor-
phism.

14

F
F
3.3 The spin-statistics connection in four dimensions

We ﬁrst need a deﬁnition of ‘statistics’ at the functorial level. An involutory global gauge trans-
formation g ∈ G, g 2 = id will be said to grade statistics in M if

A1A2 = (−1)

s 1s 2A2A1

(27)

holds for all local operators Ai ∈ Akin(M; Oi), where O1 and O2 are spacelike separated, and
s iAi. From this point of view, the standard spin-statistics connection pre-
obeying g MAi = (−1)
cisely asserts that z (−1) grades statistics in Minkowski space M0. What can be proved is that,
if such a g grades statistics in M0, then it does so in every spacetime of FLoc, an argument that
depends critically on the timeslice property. Now, if the theory obeys the standard spin-statistics
connection in Minkowski space – for example, if A(M0) can be identiﬁed with a Wightman
theory – then z (−1) must grade statistics in every M ∈ FLoc.54, 55 What this means is that the
statistics are directly related to the 2p -rotation of frames in every spacetime, and indeed, the
statement can be made in a spacetime-independent fashion that z (−1) grades statistics for A.
While the proof is indirect, because one argues from the connection in Minkowski space rather
than proving it afresh in each spacetime, this of course does not detract from the worth of the
statement.

As mentioned at the start of this section, the spin-statistics connection is rather subtle, and

even Feynman was forced onto the defensive:

We apologize for the fact that we cannot give you an elementary explanation. An
explanation has been worked out by Pauli from complicated arguments of quantum
ﬁeld theory and relativity. ...[W]e have not been able to ﬁnd a way of reproducing his
arguments on an elementary level. ... The explanation is deep down in relativistic
quantum mechanics. This probably means that we do not have a complete under-
standing of the fundamental principle involved. [RP Feynman, Lectures on Physics
III (§4.1)]56

For the moment, I have to add my own apologies for the lack of a direct proof. However, that
one can prove structural results of quantum ﬁeld theory in curved spacetime at all is a notable
achievement, and indicates the power of the locally covariant framework.

Acknowledgments

I am grateful to the organisers of the QF2 session for arranging partial ﬁnancial support under the
ERC Advanced Grant “Operator Algebras and Conformal Field Theory” (PI Roberto Longo).

References

[1] R. F. Streater and A. S. Wightman, PCT, spin and statistics, and all that (Princeton University Press,

2000).

15

[2] R. Haag, Local Quantum Physics: Fields, Particles, Algebras (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1992).
[3] R. Brunetti and K. Fredenhagen, Commun. Math. Phys. 208, 623 (2000).
[4] S. Hollands and R. M. Wald, Commun. Math. Phys. 223, 289 (2001).
[5] S. Hollands and R. M. Wald, Commun. Math. Phys. 231, 309 (2002).
[6] K. Fredenhagen and K. Rejzner, Commun. Math. Phys. 317, 697 (2013).
[7] R. Brunetti, C. Dappiaggi, K. Fredenhagen and J. Yngvason (eds.), Advances in Algebraic Quantum

Field Theory (Springer International Publishing, 2015).

[8] R. Brunetti, K. Fredenhagen and R. Verch, Commun. Math. Phys. 237, 31 (2003).
[9] C. J. Fewster and R. Verch, Algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory in curved spacetimes, in Advances in
Algebraic Quantum Field Theory, eds. R. Brunetti, C. Dappiaggi, K. Fredenhagen and J. Yngvason
(Springer International Publishing, 2015).

[10] S. Mac Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician, 2nd edn. (Springer-Verlag, New York,

1998).

[11] C. Dappiaggi and B. Lang, Lett. Math. Phys. 101, 265 (2012).
[12] K. Sanders, C. Dappiaggi and T.-P. Hack, Comm. Math. Phys. 328, 625 (2014).
[13] C. J. Fewster and B. Lang, Ann. H. Poincar´e 17, 401 (2016).
[14] C. Becker, M. Benini, A. Schenkel and R. J. Szabo, arXiv:1511.00316 (2015).
[15] R. Verch, Commun. Math. Phys. 223, 261 (2001).
[16] K. Sanders, Rev. Math. Phys. 22, 381 (2010).
[17] J. Zahn, Rev. Math. Phys. 26, 1330012, 37 (2014).
[18] M. T. Ferguson, Aspects of dynamical locality and locally covariant canonical quantization, PhD

thesis, University of York (2013).
http://etheses.whiterose.ac.uk/4529/.

[19] C. J. Fewster and R. Verch, Annales H. Poincar´e 13, 1613 (2012).
[20] C. J. Fewster, Rev. Math. Phys. 25, 1350008, 47 (2013).
[21] M. Benini, arXiv:1111.6471, (2015).
[22] M. Ferguson, Ann. Henri Poincar´e 14, 853 (2013).
[23] C. J. Fewster and A. Schenkel, Ann. Henri Poincar´e 16, 2303 (2015).
[24] C. J. Fewster and R. Verch, Annales H. Poincar´e 13, 1675 (2012).
[25] S. Hollands, Rev. Math. Phys. 20, 1033 (2008).
[26] R. Brunetti, K. Fredenhagen and K. Rejzner, arXiv:1306.1058 (June 2013).
[27] I. Khavkine, Classical Quantum Gravity 32, 185019, 19 (2015).
[28] J. Zahn, Rev. Math. Phys. 27, 1550017, 32 (2015).
[29] J. Zahn, Nuclear Phys. B 890, 1 (2015).
[30] K. Sanders, Commun. Math. Phys. 288, 271 (2009).
[31] R. Brunetti and G. Ruzzi, Commun. Math. Phys. 270, 69 (2007).
[32] R. Brunetti and G. Ruzzi, Commun. Math. Phys. 287, 523 (2009).
[33] C. J. Fewster, Lett. Math. Phys. 105, 1633 (2015).
[34] C. J. Fewster, in press Abhandlungen aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Universit¨at Hamburg,

arXiv:1601.06936 (2016).

[35] G. Lechner and K. Sanders, arXiv:1511.09027 (2015).
[36] M. Benini, A. Schenkel and R. J. Szabo, Lett. Math. Phys. 105, 1193 (2015).
[37] C. J. Fewster and M. J. Pfenning, J. Math. Phys. 47, 082303 (2006).
[38] P. Marecki, Phys. Rev. D 73, 124009 (2006).
[39] C. J. Fewster, Gen. Relativity Gravitation 39, 1855 (2007).

16

[40] C. Dappiaggi, K. Fredenhagen and N. Pinamonti, Phys. Rev. D77, 104015 (2008).
[41] A. Degner and R. Verch, J. Math. Phys. 51, 022302 (2010).
[42] R. Verch, Local covariance, renormalization ambiguity, and local thermal equilibrium in cosmology,
in Quantum Field Theory and Gravity. Conceptual and mathematical advances in the search for a
uniﬁed framework, eds. F. Finster, O. M¨uller, M. Nardmann, J. Tolksdorf and E. Zeidler (Birkh¨auser,
2012). arXiv:1105.6249.

[43] T.-P. Hack and N. Pinamonti, Cosmological applications of algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory, in Ad-
vances in Algebraic Quantum Field Theory, eds. R. Brunetti, C. Dappiaggi, K. Fredenhagen and
J. Yngvason (Springer International Publishing, 2015).

[44] M. Fierz, Helv. Phys. Acta 12, 3 (1939).
[45] W. Pauli, Phys. Rev. 58, 716 (1940).
[46] N. Burgoyne, Nuovo Cimento (10) 8, 607 (1958).
[47] G. L¨uders and B. Zumino, Phys. Rev. (2) 110, 1450 (1958).
[48] H. Epstein, J. Mathematical Phys. 8, 750 (1967).
[49] S. Doplicher, R. Haag and J. E. Roberts, Comm. Math. Phys. 35, 49 (1974).
[50] D. Guido and R. Longo, Comm. Math. Phys. 172, 517 (1995).
[51] R. M. Wald, Ann. Physics 118, 490 (1979).
[52] L. Parker and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. D 39, 3596 (1989).
[53] A. Higuchi, L. Parker and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. D 42, 4078 (1990).
[54] C. J. Fewster, The spin–statistics connection in curved spacetimes, In preparation.
[55] C. J. Fewster, On the Spin-Statistics Connection in Curved Spacetimes, to appear in Quantum Math-
ematical Physics: A Bridge between Mathematics and Physics, eds. F. Finster, J. Kleiner, C. R¨oken
and J. Tolksdorf (Birkh¨auser, 2016). arXiv:1503.05797, (2015).

[56] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman lectures on physics. Vol. 3: Quantum

mechanics (Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc., Reading, Mass.-London, 1965).

17

