Boundary-Induced Pattern Formation from Temporal Oscillation:

Spatial Map Analysis

Takahiro Kohsokabe

Department of Basic Science, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,

The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan

Kunihiko Kaneko

Research Center for Complex Systems Biology,

Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo,

3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan

Abstract

Boundary-induced pattern formation from a spatially uniform state is investigated using one-

dimensional reaction-diﬀusion equations. The temporal oscillation is successively transformed into

a spatially periodic pattern, triggered by diﬀusion from the ﬁxed boundary. We introduced a spatial

map, whose temporal sequence, under selection criteria from multiple stationary solutions, can

completely reproduce the emergent pattern, by replacing the time with space. The relationship of

the pattern wavelength with the period of oscillation is also obtained. The generality of the pattern

selection process and algorithm is discussed with possible relevance to biological morphogenesis.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

.

 
 
]
S
P
n
i
l
n
[
 
 

1
v
8
3
0
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Spatial patterns are ubiquitous in non-equilibrium systems, and the process of sponta-

neous pattern formation has been extensively studied as one of the main issues in non-linear

dynamics. Topic areas in pattern formation include ﬂuid, solid-state, optical, geophysical,

chemical, and biological systems[1–5].

In particular, the reaction-diﬀusion system, which was pioneered by Turing[6], has been

a focus of non-equilibrium studies. In his celebrated study, Turing showed how a spatial

pattern or temporal rhythm is spontaneously formed from a spatially homogeneous and

temporally stationary state, which is unstable against perturbations. Turing classiﬁed such

pattern formation processes into six cases, one of which is known as the Turing pattern;

stationary periodic pattern with the ﬁnite wavelength given by linear stability analysis.

While Turing originally proposed his theory as a model of morphogenesis, it has been applied

to general pattern formation dynamics beyond developmental biology[7, 8].

Spontaneous pattern formation from temporally dynamic states is also possible in a

reaction-diﬀusion system. Destabilization of a spatially homogeneous and temporally oscil-

latory state by diﬀusive interaction often results in spatiotemporal dynamics such as waves,

spirals, and turbulence[9]. Spatiotemporal dynamics by combination of Turing instability

for pattern formation and Hopf bifurcation for temporal oscillation have been studied as

Turing-Hopf bifurcation[10–12].

However, an important factor that has not been fully explored is the inﬂuence of boundary

conditions on spatial patterns. In particular, pattern formation from temporally dynamic

states may be crucially inﬂuenced by the introduction of a ﬁxed boundary. The inﬂuence may

be globally propagated to alter the pattern dynamics. (See also [13, 14] for the relevance of

boundary conditions in pattern dynamics.) In the present letter, we are concerned with such

boundary-induced pattern formation, namely, how a ﬁxed boundary condition destabilizes

the stable, temporally periodic, spatially uniform state and transforms it into a temporally

stationary, spatially periodic pattern.

The question of boundary-induced pattern formation is not only of theoretical interest

but also of experimental interest in developmental biology. In the somitogenesis of vertebrate

development, temporal oscillation in protein expression is ﬁxed into a spatial pattern[15, 16].

As development progresses, the intracellular concentration of the protein c-hairy1, which

initially oscillates in the system, is ﬁxed into a striped pattern along aligned cells. So

far, such spatial pattern formation has been studied by introducing external inputs that

2

move in space with time development (clock and wavefront)[17]. Diﬀusive interaction has

been introduced by Meinhardt in addition to external input using a spatial gradient[18].

For these theoretical studies, the use of an external input is essential to destabilize the

homogeneous state for pattern formation. Some recent experiments, however, suggested

that an external input may not be essential, and intrinsic instability due to diﬀusion might

result in somitogenesis[19, 20]. If boundary-induced pattern formation is possible without

imposing an external input throughout the space, it will provide a plausible mechanism for

vertebrate somitogenesis.

Here, we demonstrate that temporal oscillation in a one-dimensional reaction-diﬀusion

system is ﬁxed into a stationary periodic pattern by introducing ﬁxed boundary condition.

In contrast to the celebrated Turing pattern, the wavelength of the generated pattern cannot

be obtained using linear stability analysis around the ﬁxed point. Instead, to predict the

selected pattern, we introduced a one-dimensional spatial map, whose attractor gives the

one-dimensional pattern by replacing time with space. The generality of this oscillation

ﬁxation and the pattern selection mechanism will be discussed.

Now, consider a one-dimensional reaction-diﬀusion system of two components X and Y .

We assume that the diﬀusion of X is much faster than that of Y , and the diﬀusion of the

latter is neglected for simplicity (the formalism to be discussed is valid even without this

approximation). Then, the equation is written as

= f (X, Y ) + D

∂2X
∂x2

= g(X, Y )

∂X
∂t
dY
dt

(1)

where f (X, Y ) and g(X, Y ) are the reaction functions for X and Y , D is the diﬀusion

constant of X, and the attractor of the dynamical system without D is a limit cycle[21] .

We consider the case in which the spatially uniform, limit cycle state is stable against

perturbations so that, under Neumann or periodic boundary conditions, this state is the

attractor. However, under a ﬁxed boundary condition, the variable X close to the boundary

cannot oscillate, which may destabilize the oscillatory attractor. Indeed, we have found that

a ﬁxed periodic pattern is often generated in this case.

3

As a speciﬁc example, consider the following system,

f (X, Y ) =

g(X, Y ) =

1

1 + e−β(Y −1/2) − X
1 + e−β(Y −X) − Y

1

(2)

which describe the protein expression dynamics with two genes, where X inhibits the expres-

sion of Y and Y activates the expressions of both X and Y [22, 23]. Without the diﬀusion

term, this system has one unstable ﬁxed point (X∗, Y ∗) = (1/2, 1/2) if β > 8, and the limit

cycle is an attractor. Indeed, from initial conditions close to a spatially homogenous state,

a uniform, limit-cycle state is reached if the boundary condition is Neumann or periodic.

In contrast, if a ﬁxed boundary condition is adopted for at least one end, i.e., X(0) = X0,

1B where ∂X

temporal oscillation is replaced by a ﬁxed, spatially periodic pattern [24] (see Fig. 1A and
∂x |x=L = 0 is adopted at the other end). Note that a pattern of the same wave-
length is organized independently of X0 as long as X0 is between [0,1](see Fig. 3). Here,

oscillation ceased in the vicinity of x = 0, which works as a boundary for (X(x), Y (x)) for

slightly larger x. The oscillation is successively ﬁxed for larger x.

We analytically examined how the organized pattern is determined. First, we conﬁrmed

that the linear stability analysis around the uniform ﬁxed-point solution cannot explain the

wavelength in contrast to the Turing instability case. The real part of eigenvalue is positive

against perturbations of a given wavenumber k around the unstable ﬁxed point solution
(0.5, 0.5) for k < k1 = 1
4πq β2−4β+16

D , while the imaginary part is nonzero. On the other hand,
D(β−4) , one of the eigenvalues is positive with a vanishing imaginary
part where Turing instability exists. Thus, both Hopf and Turing instability coexist in this

for k > k2 = 1

4πq β−8

system (see Supplemental Figure 1A). Then, we contrasted the marginal values k1 and k2

with the wavenumber of the emergent pattern by changing β. The observed wavelength

agrees neither with k1 nor with k2(see Supplemental Figure 1B). Even the dependence of

the parameters on β does not agree. Indeed, this discrepancy is natural: pattern formation

occurs from the homogeneous limit cycle, which is far from the unstable ﬁxed solution.

Hence, the standard analysis for the Turing pattern does not work in this system.

Now we need to ﬁnd a procedure to determine the spatial pattern without utilizing linear

stability analysis. We note that once the diﬀusion term is given, the stationary solution

(Xst(x), Yst(x)) can be obtained from the dynamical system of two variables X, Y , where

standard nullcline analysis works. As shown in Fig. 2B, only the nullcline of X (not

4

that of Y ) is horizontally shifted with the diﬀusion term. Accordingly, the ﬁxed point

(Xst(x), Yst(x)) is shifted in the state space.

Once the ﬁxed point (Xst(x), Yst(x)) is given, the gradient term is obtained. For a

ﬁxed pattern, the ﬁxed point (Xst(x), Yst(x)) and the gradient term are determined self-

consistently.

This self-consistent condition, given by ∂X(x, t)/∂t = 0, dY (x, t)/dt = 0, can be solved

explicitly by adopting spatial discretization to compute the diﬀusion term. In general, this

condition is given by

f (Xl, Yl) + D ′(Xl+1 − 2Xl + Xl−1) = 0
g(Xl, Yl) = 0

(3)

where l is discretized space index with a as the discretized unit length, i.e., x = al and

Xl = X(x/a), Yl = Y (x/a). Here, D ′ is the rescaled diﬀusion constant which satisﬁes
D′ = D/a2. From these equations, we can derive the spatial map as follows:

Xl+1 = 2Xl − Xl−1 −
Yl = g−1

Xl (0)

f (Xl, Yl)

D ′

(4)

where g−1
Xl is the inverse function of g(X, Y ) given that X is ﬁxed to Xl, which corresponds to
the cross-points of the nullclines. With these equations, Xl+1 is determined from Xl, Xl−1,
and Yl, while Yl+1 is determined as g−1
(0) (for the use of a “spatial map” in the analysis
Xl+1

of a spatial pattern, see also [25, 26]). However, there can be multiple candidate solutions
for g−1

(0). In fact, not all of the above solutions are stable in terms of dynamical systems

Xl+1

(1). Furthermore, this solution must be attracted from the uniform oscillatory state. These

properties lead to the following selection principles.

Selection principles

1. Ignore candidates in which the resulting state (Xl+1, Yl+1) is not stable against small

perturbations in Xl+1.

2. Ignore candidates in which the resulting value Xl+2 is out of the basin of the original

limit cycle.

3. Calculate Xl+2 from all remaining candidates, and choose the solution that gives the

smallest value of |Xl+2 − 2Xl+1 + Xl|.

5

The ﬁrst criterion is necessary for the stability of the novel ﬁxed point. The second criterion

is necessary for the pattern to emerge from the limit cycle. The third criterion implies the

smallest net diﬀusion, which minimizes the distance from a uniform state. With the second

and third criteria, the solution that is attracted from the uniform oscillatory state is selected.

An example of the pattern obtained from the spatial map with the above selection criteria

is shown in Fig. 3, which agrees well with the numerically obtained pattern. The above

procedure works independently of the parameter values, demonstrating its validity.

Note that the spatial periodic pattern is obtained as an attractor of the spatial map (4).

Hence, independently of the initial condition in the map, the same periodic pattern is selected

as long as the initial condition in the spatial map belongs to the basin of the above attractor.

The initial condition in the spatial map corresponds to the value of ﬁxed boundary. Hence,

a pattern of the same wavelength is reached independently of the boundary value, while the

phase of wave pattern is diﬀerent, which is consistent with the numerical result (see Fig. 3).

In the state space, pattern selection using the spatial map can be described as follows.

When the diﬀusion term is small, the shift of the nullcline is small. The same stable ﬁxed

point, i.e., Yl on the same branch, continues to exist and is selected according to the above

criteria. With iteration of the spatial map, the shift of the nullcline due to the diﬀusion

term is accumulated and at some point, the ﬁxed point of the same branch vanishes with

bifurcation, or do not fulﬁll selection principles. The selected ﬁxed point is replaced by that

of the new branch, as the solution according to the above criteria. Repeating the above

procedure, a periodic pattern is obtained.

This procedure suggests there can be a relationship between the period of oscillation T

and the wavelength λ. First, by rescaling the spatial scale, the wavelength λ is proportional
to √D. (The period is scaled by τ if f and g are similarly scaled by 1/τ , but this is already
set to unity in (1).) Now, following the vector ﬁeld (f (X, Y ), g(X, Y )) in the state space

(Fig. 2A), (X(t), Y (t)) oscillates with the period T . On the other hand, when a stripe is

formed, the “spatial orbit” (X(x), Y (x)) along space x orbits the state space similarly to

the limit cycle orbit. Indeed, except for the vicinity of the Hopf bifurcation, we numerically

conﬁrmed that one stripe is generated in correspondence with one period of oscillation. With

the parameter change, the (magnitude of) vector (f, g) in the state space changes, which

changes the rate of change along the limit cycle as well as that of the “spatial orbit” in

the same way. If these orbits do not have a small radius in the state space, both speeds

6

are expected to change in proportion, implying that the period T and wavelength λ (or
λ/√D) change in proportion. Of course, this is a rough estimate, but this proportionality
approximately holds against changes in the parameter values β (and D), as shown in Fig.

4.

The ﬁxation of the temporal to the spatially periodic pattern as well as the analysis using

the spatial map can be generally applied to a one-dimensional reaction-diﬀusion equation

that has a uniform limit-cycle attractor. As another illustration, we examined the so-called

Brusselator[1]:

f (X, Y ) = BY − XY 2
g(X, Y ) = A − (B + 1)X + XY 2

(5)

In this case, a uniform periodic oscillation is replaced by a periodic spatial pattern by

applying the ﬁxed boundary condition X(0) = X0 for a certain range of parameters, which

agrees with the prediction using the corresponding spatial map (see Supplemental Figure

2).

The approximate proportionality between the period and wavelength is worse than the

model (2) (see Fig. 4), possibly because the change in the ﬂow (f (X, Y ), g(X, Y ) against

the parameters is highly dependent on the state (X, Y ).

In the present letter, we have studied the formation of a periodic pattern from a uniform

oscillatory state induced by the boundary conditions. The emergent pattern is predicted

as an attractor of the spatial map under the selection principle. We have conﬁrmed the

generality of this pattern formation in reaction-diﬀusion systems. The periodic oscillation

exists in a two-component reaction system with negative feedback. That is, in a system

with an activator and an inhibitor, for a certain range of parameters, the spatially periodic

pattern that exists as an attractor replaces the uniform oscillatory state, triggered by the

ﬁxed boundary condition, if the diﬀusion of the inhibitor is suﬃciently large.

We also note that the pattern formation process as well as the nullcline analysis is still
valid even for DY 6= 0, although the spatial map explicitly includes the inverse function of
Y , which would make the analysis more diﬃcult.

Pattern formation generally depends on the boundary and initial conditions.

In the

spatial map, the former is represented by the initial condition in the map, while the latter

is considered by the second and third criteria of the selection principle, which indicate that

the initial condition is not far from the uniform oscillatory state. If the initial condition

7

is far from uniformity, local inhomogeneity can grow.

In the state-space representation,

whether such growth occurs is determined according to the size of the spatial diﬀusion term,

speciﬁcally whether the spatial diﬀusion term is large enough to go across the nullclines

and to induce saddle-node bifurcation. In other words, the condition close to uniformity

represents the absence of such inhomogeneity. On the other hand, for such initial conditions

to allow for the local growth in inhomogeneity, the selection criteria are replaced so that the

choice of the ﬁxed-point solution is close to a given initial condition, leading to a requested

switch to a diﬀerent branch of ﬁxed-points. Hence, the choice of the selection principle

corresponding to the initial condition can predict the emergent pattern. Control of an

emergent pattern is thus possible by manipulating the initial condition.

Here, one stripe is formed with one-to-one correspondence of one oscillation period in

time. Near the Hopf bifurcation point, however, a complex pattern with one stripe is ob-

served per few periods of oscillation. Indeed, the spatial map can have an attractor with

such complex (or quasiperiodic) oscillation in the vicinity of the bifurcation and also by

modifying the selection principle. Analysis of such complex patterns in terms of the spatial

map (see also [26]) will be of interest in the future.

Experimental conﬁrmation of the present pattern formation will be possible in reaction-

diﬀusion systems. In particular, relevance of boundary condition to pattern selection should

be of importance because the real experimental system is ﬁnite and often under a ﬁxed

boundary condition. By carefully examining the boundary eﬀects, we can conﬁrm the present

pattern formation mechanism, where the period-wavelength relationship (Fig. 4) will be

conﬁrmed.

As mentioned in the introduction, spatial pattern formation based on temporal oscillation

is often observed in biological morphogenesis[15, 16] as well as in the numerical evolution of

morphogenesis[27, 28], where the relevance of cell-cell interaction has been recently discussed

in addition to the external morphogen gradient[20, 28]. Considering the simplicity in our

mechanism, which only requires diﬀusion of the inhibitor and a ﬁxed boundary, we expect

that it could be adopted in biological development, which will be conﬁrmed by examining

cell-cell interaction and boundary eﬀects.

The authors would like to thank Nen Saito for useful discussions. This work was par-

tially supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientic Research (No. 21120004) on Innovative

Areas “Neural creativity for communication” (No. 4103) and the Platform for Dynamic

8

Approaches to Living Systems from MEXT, Japan.

9

[1] G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine, Self-organization in nonequilibrium systems (John Wiley & Sons,

New York, 1977).

[2] M. C. Cross and P. C. Hohenberg, Reviews of modern physics 65, 851 (1993).

[3] D. Walgraef, Spatio-temporal Pattern Formation with Examples from Physics, Chemistry and

Materials Science (Springer, 1997).

[4] A. T. Winfree, The geometry of biological time, Vol. 12 (Springer Science & Business Media,

2001).

[5] R. Kapral and K. Showalter, Chemical waves and patterns, Vol. 10 (Springer Science & Busi-

ness Media, 2012).

[6] A. M. Turing, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences

237, 37 (1952).

[7] L. A. Segel and J. L. Jackson, Journal of Theoretical Biology 37, 545 (1972).

[8] I. Lenfyel and I. R. Epstein, Science 251, 650 (1991).

[9] Y. Kuramoto, Chemical oscillations, waves, and turbulence, Vol. 19 (Springer Science & Busi-

ness Media, 2012).

[10] A. De Wit, D. Lima, G. Dewel, and P. Borckmans, Phys. Rev. E 54, 261 (1996).

[11] M. Meixner, A. De Wit, S. Bose, and E. Sch¨oll, Physical Review E 55, 6690 (1997).

[12] M. Baurmann, T. Gross, and U. Feudel, Journal of Theoretical Biology 245, 220 (2007).

[13] Y. Pomeau and S. Zaleski, Journal de Physique 42, 515 (1981).

[14] K. Fujimoto and K. Kaneko, Physical Review E 63, 036218 (2001).

[15] I. Palmeirim, J. Dubrulle, D. Henrique, D. Ish-Horowicz, and O. Pourqui´e, Developmental

genetics 23, 77 (1998).

[16] O. Pourquie, Journal of anatomy 199, 169 (2001).

[17] J. Cooke and E. C. Zeeman, Journal of theoretical biology 58, 455 (1976).

[18] H. Meinhardt, Models of biological pattern formation, Vol. 6 (Academic Press, London, 1982).

[19] A. S. Dias, I. de Almeida, J. M. Belmonte, J. A. Glazier, and C. D. Stern, Science 343, 791

(2014).

[20] J. Cotterell, A. Robert-Moreno, and J. Sharpe, Cell Systems 1, 257 (2015).

[21] When this limit cycle is generated by a Hopf bifurcation from the ﬁxed point (X∗, Y ∗), the

10

eigenvalues of the Jacobi matrix around the ﬁxed point satisfy the positive real part with a
non-zero imaginary part so that a + d > 0 and −2 < d−a
−bc

< 2[6], where

√


a b


 = 


c d

∂f
∂X

∂g
∂X

∂f
∂Y

∂g
∂Y




X=X ∗,Y =Y ∗

.

[22] E. Mjolsness, D. H. Sharp, and J. Reinitz, Journal of theoretical Biology 152, 429 (1991).

[23] Y. Goto and K. Kaneko, Phys. Rev. E 88, 032718 (2013).

[24] A boundary condition for Y is not required as diﬀusion in Y is neglected.

[25] S. Aubry, in Solitons and Condensed Matter Physics (Springer, 1978) pp. 264–277.

[26] F. H. Willeboordse and K. Kaneko, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 86, 428 (1995).

[27] K. Fujimoto, S. Ishihara, and K. Kaneko, PLoS ONE 3, e2772 (2008).

[28] T. Kohsokabe and K. Kaneko, Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B:Molecular and Devel-

opmental Evolution 326B, 61 (2016).

11

FIGURE LEGENDS

A

B

 

L
E
V
E
L
N
O
S
S
E
R
P
X
E

I

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

X
Y

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

x (SPACE)

FIG. 1. Time development of the model (2) under a ﬁxed boundary condition, X(0) = 0. (A)

X(x, t) is displayed with a color scale given by the side bar. The abscissa is time t, and the ordinate

is space x. (B) The generated stationary pattern X(x) and Y (x). The abscissa is the concentration

of X(x) or Y (x), and the ordinate is space x.

12

FIG. 2.

(A) State space plot of nullclines f (X, Y ) = 0 (black solid) and g(X, Y ) (black dotted) as

well as the limit cycle orbit (red) are plotted for the model (2) with D = 0. (B) State space plot of

the nullcline for X (f +D∂2X/∂x2 = 0) are plotted with the change in space x, following the change

in the diﬀusion term D∂2X/∂x2, where the cross-points of the nullclines give (Xst(x), Yst)(x). The

nullclines are shifted horizontally with the spatial gradient.

13

X

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

X0=0.0
X0=0.5
X0=1.0
X0=0.0 (predicted)
X0=0.5 (predicted)
X0=1.0 (predicted)

50

100

150

l

FIG. 3. Stationary pattern (Xst(l), Yst(l)) of the reaction diﬀusion (2) and the predicted pattern of

(Xl, Yl) obtained from the spatial map (4). The predicted pattern (given by ◦) agrees well with the
stationary pattern (lines). Three patterns with boundary values of X0 = 0.0 (purple), X0 = 0.5

(green), and X0 = 1.0 (yellow) are considered.

14

FIG. 4. Relationship between the scaled wavelength λ/√D of the emergent pattern and the period

of the limit cycle orbit T is shown by changing parameter β. Results from diﬀerent D values are

also plotted with diﬀerent symbols. The relationship from the Brusselator Eq. (5) is also plotted

from the obtained data by varying B.

15

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS

SF1 (A) The real part of the Jacobi matrix eigenvalues around the uniform solution

for each wavenumber k for model (2), when β > 8. The eigenvalues are positive for

0 < k < k1 (where the imaginary part is nonzero) and for k > k2 (where the imaginary

part is zero). The imaginary part of the eigenvalue vanishes at k = 1

4πq β

D < k2. In the

blue region, both Turing and Hopf instability exist, and only Turing instability exists

in the red region. (B) The emergent wavenumber ks (green, +), marginal wavenumber

for the blue region in (A) k1(blue), and marginal wavenumber for the red region in

(A) k2 (red) are plotted as a function of β.

16

X0=0.0
X0=1.5
X0=3.0
X0=0.0 (predicted)
X0=1.5 (predicted)
X0=3.0 (predicted)

X

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

50

100

150

l

SF2 Stationary pattern (Xst(l), Yst(l)) of the reaction-diﬀusion (5) and the predicted

pattern of (Xl, Yl) obtained from spatial map (4). The predicted pattern (given by ◦)
agrees well with the stationary pattern (lines). Three patterns with boundary values

of X0 = 0.0 (purple), X0 = 1.5 (green), and X0 = 3.0 (yellow) are considered.

17

