6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
3
2

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

2
v
7
1
1
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Fock Space of Loopy Spin Networks for Quantum Gravity

Christoph Charles1, ∗ and Etera R. Livine1, †

1Laboratoire de Physique, ENS de Lyon, Universit´e de Lyon, CNRS (UMR 5672), Lyon, France

(Dated: March 24, 2016)

In the context of the coarse-graining of loop quantum gravity, we introduce loopy and tagged
spin networks, which generalize the standard spin network states to account explicitly for non-
trivial curvature and torsion. Both structures relax the closure constraints imposed at the spin
network vertices. While tagged spin networks merely carry an extra spin at every vertex encoding
the overall closure defect, loopy spin networks allow for an arbitrary number of loops attached to
each vertex. These little loops can be interpreted as local excitations of the quantum gravitational
ﬁeld and we discuss the statistics to endow them with. The resulting Fock space of loopy spin
networks realizes new truncation of loop quantum gravity, allowing to formulate its graph-changing
dynamics on a ﬁxed background graph plus local degrees of freedom attached to the graph nodes.
This provides a framework for re-introducing a non-trivial background quantum geometry around
which we would study the eﬀective dynamics of perturbations. We study how to implement the
dynamics of topological BF theory in this framework. We realize the projection on ﬂat connections
through holonomy constraints and we pay special attention to their often overlooked non-trivial ﬂat
solutions deﬁned by higher derivatives of the δ-distribution.

Contents

I. Introduction

II. Spin networks and their coarse-graining

A. Spin networks as projective limits
B. Coarse-graining by gauge-ﬁxing
C. A hierarchy of coarse-grained spin network structures

III. Loopy spin networks

A. Loopy intertwiners
B. Superposition of number of loops
C. Holonomy operators as creation and annihilation operators
D. Imposing BF dynamics on loopy spin networks

1. Holonomy constraint on SU(2)
2. Introducing the Laplacian constraint on SU(2)
3. Holonomy constraints on SU(2)N for N ≥ 2
4. The full Hamiltonian constraints for BF theory on loopy spin networks

IV. The Fock space of loopy spin networks

A. Bosonics statistics for loops
B. Factorized states and δ-distribution
C. Holonomy operator on symmetrized states
D. Revisiting the BF constraints as creation and annihilation of loops

V. Tagged spin networks

A. The tagged spin network basis
B. Tags from coarse-graining and tracing out little loops
C. Revisiting BF theory: the non-trivial space of ﬂat spin network states

Conclusion & Outlook

∗Electronic address: christoph.charles@ens-lyon.fr
†Electronic address: etera.livine@ens-lyon.fr

2

5
5
7
10

13
14
15
16
17
19
20
22
24

25
25
27
28
33

38
39
39
40

42

Acknowledgments

A. Projective limits of loopy spin networks

B. Holonomy Constraint on SU(2)

1. Distributions on SU(2) and conjugation-invariant solutions
2. The holonomy constraint as a recursion relation
3. Laplacian constraint, double recursion and ﬂatness equations

References

I.

INTRODUCTION

2

44

44

47
47
49
50

51

Loop quantum gravity (for lecture books, see [1–3]) proposes a non-perturbative and background independent
framework for quantum gravity. Based on a 3+1 splitting of space-time distinguishing time from the 3d space, it real-
izes a canonical quantization of the general relativity reformulated as a gauge ﬁeld theory. The canonically conjugate
ﬁelds are the triad, deﬁning the local 3d frame, and the Ashtekar-Barbero SU(2) connection [4–6]. Quantum states of
geometry, called spin network states, deﬁne the excitations of those ﬁelds over the kinematical Ashtekar-Lewandowski
vacuum of vanishing triad and connection (corresponding to the “nothing”-state of a degenerate vanishing metric).
Their dynamics is implemented through the Hamiltonian constraints, ensuring the invariance of the theory under
space-time diﬀeomorphisms. Several explicit proposals for the quantum dynamics exist, either in the pure canonical
formalism from the original Thiemann deﬁnition of the Hamiltonian constraint operator [7–9] to more recent con-
structions [10–13] (for a review see [14]), or in a covariant path integral approach with transition amplitudes deﬁned
from spinfoam models as in the EPRL model [15–17] and variations [18–20] (for a review of the spinfoam framework
see [21–23]).

The main challenges in this context are the correct deﬁnition of the quantum dynamics and the coarse-graining of
the theory. These two issues are intimately intertwined in that the proper quantum gravity dynamics should address
and solve the perturbative non-renormalisability of general relativity, and more generally because a consistent theory
of quantum gravity should give us the eﬀective dynamics of the geometry at all scale of length and energy and provide
us with a ﬂow from the probably discrete and quantum dynamics at the Planck scale to the classical dynamics of a
classical space-time manifold prescribed by general relativity. The main diﬃculty in realizing this program in the loop
quantum gravity framework is to proceed to a coarse-graining of the gravitational degrees of freedom in a background
independent theory with no a priori length or energy scale and no a priori regular geometrical background on which
to deﬁne a coarse-graining procedure. This translates into the problem of deﬁning new vacuum states representing
non-degenerate metrics and geometries (such as the ﬂat Minkowski space-time) and working out how to expand the
quantum gravity theory, initially deﬁned above the “nothing”-state, around them with an explicit dictionary between
the fundamental geometry excited states and the new eﬀective gravity excitations.

Some progress in this direction has been achieved by Koslowski and Sahlmann in [24], where they deﬁne new
vacuum states for loop quantum gravity peaked on some classical ﬁeld conﬁguration for the triad and connection and
describe the spin network excitations above them. Another approach by Dittrich and Geiller was to deﬁne another
vacuum state, given as the ﬂat connection vacuum of a topological BF theory, and to work out a Hilbert space better
suited to account for curvature defects [25, 26]. Another line of research in the spinfoam framework is the promising
renormalisation program for tensor models and group ﬁeld theories [27–31], but this deviates from the canonical point
of view that we will pursue in the present paper. Indeed, we would like to propose another path to deﬁne the eﬀective
loop quantum gravity dynamics on non-trivial background quantum geometries following the previous work on the
coarse-graining of spin network states [32, 33].

In loop quantum gravity, quantum states of geometry are wave-functions of the Ashtekar-Barbero connection.
More precisely, they are deﬁned as cylindrical functionals of that connection, in that they realize a ﬁnite sampling
of the connection. Indeed each wave-function is constructed with respect to a graph Γ (embedded in the canonical
hypersurface) and depends on the holonomies of the connection along the graph edges (deﬁned as SU(2) group
elements). The set of wave-functions is obtained by taking the union over all embedded graphs with the requirement
of cylindrical consistency1, that is a wave-function initially deﬁned over a given graph Γ is considered as equivalently
deﬁned over any reﬁnement of that graph (i.e. any graph containing Γ as a subgraph). This union quotiented by the
cylindrical consistency is rigorously deﬁned as a projective limit [34, 35]. It leads to the Hilbert space of quantum
states of geometry of loop quantum gravity and has been shown to be the L2 space of functionals of the connection

3

j1

>

i1
•

ℓ1
>

j2

i2
•

>

>ℓ4

>ℓ2

•i4

>

ℓ3
>

• i3

> j3

j4

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•

•

(a) Spin networks are graphs coloured
with spins at the edges and intertwiners

at the vertices.

(b) Each node of a spin network can
naturally be interpreted as a polyhedron
(in blue on the ﬁgure), each face corre-

(c) Spin network geometry is not Regge
geometry since the shapes of the faces
of the glued polyhedra do not have to

sponding to an edge of the graph.

match.

FIG. 1: The geometrical interpretation of spin networks

with respect to the Ashtekar-Lewandowski measure [36].

Spin networks provide basis states of this Hilbert space. They are introduced as diagonalizing the area and volume
operators, both shown to have discrete spectra [37, 38]. A spin network state, as drawn on ﬁg.1a, lives on a given
graph Γ (and therefore lives on any reﬁnement of that graph by cylindrical consistency) and is deﬁned by spins (as
half-integers determining an irreducible representation of the Lie group SU(2)) on each edge and intertwiners (as
singlet states) on each vertex or node of the graph. Spins deﬁne quanta of area while intertwiners give the quanta of
volume. This hints towards a geometrical interpretation of spin networks as discrete geometries. This can be realized
explicitly and spin networks have been shown to be the quantization of twisted geometries [39, 40], which generalize
3d Regge geometries to account for some torsion. Nodes of the graph represent polyhedra, which are glued along
faces dual to the graph edges, as illustrated on ﬁg.1b. The precise face matching of Regge geometries is relaxed to
a simpler area face matching, and the resulting potential shape mismatch is interpreted as torsion along the graph
edge, as depicted on ﬁg.1c.

The Hamiltonian operators of loop quantum gravity then act on both algebraic and combinatorial data, meaning
that they modify both spins and intertwiners living on a given graph and the graph itself. Thus the loop quantum
gravity (LQG) dynamics seems to be a careful balance between ﬁxed-graph dynamics and graph-changing dynamics,
which reﬂects the classical dynamics of general relativity as both dynamics on a given space-time manifold and of
the space-time geometry itself. This mixture between these two types of dynamics render analytical and numerical
calculations extremely diﬃcult. The usual strategy for discrete systems on ﬁxed graphs, as in condensed matter
theory, is to coarse-grain the theory, that is, to integrate the microscopic degrees of freedom inside bounded regions,
thus assimilated to points, and to write eﬀective theories for the relevant macroscopic degrees of freedom. This process
of coarse-graining ultimately leads to the continuum limit of the theory. One can also study the statistical physics of
a varying graph, for instance using matrix models for 2d quantum gravity. Putting these two ingredients together,
for example to study matter coupled to 2d quantum gravity through condensed matter models on random lattices,
is much more involved. Results in this direction, like the KPZ conjecture [41], mostly relie on conformal ﬁeld theory
techniques in the continuum limit.

In the loop quantum gravity context, through the logic of coarse-graining, we would like to map the varying graphs
dynamics onto a ﬁxed graph dynamics. The rational behind this is the following: starting from a base graph, each
node will correspond to a varying coarse-grained region. This means that we will add some extra internal degrees of
freedom to the graph vertices in the eﬀective theory, which should reﬂect that each vertex represent in fact a possibly
varying subgraph itself. This method should mimic a development around this base graph considered as a skeleton
graph for the gravity excitations. Digging deeper in the structure of the spin networks, the wave-functions carry
non-trivial curvature around the loops of the graph (when the composition of the holonomies along the edges of the

1 The deﬁnition of cylindrical consistency can be generalized and extended to a mapping or identiﬁcation between two wave-functions
living on a given graph and a reﬁnement of it. Formulated as such, it becomes equivalent to the choice of a coarse-graining procedure
for the quantum states of geometry. This logic has been used to construct new Hilbert spaces for loop quantum states describing the
excited states of geometry above non-trivial vacua [24].

4

j1

j4

ℓ4

i1
•

•
i4

ℓ1

ℓ 5

ℓ3

i2
•

•
i3

ℓ2

j2

j3

j1

j4

?

j2

j3

FIG. 2: When coarse-graining, the curvature carried by the loops in the collapsed bounded region leads to

curvature. Coarse-grained vertices thus need a new structure to be described.

loops does not yield the identity). When coarse-graining, curvature should build up and the eﬀective coarse-grained
vertices should naturally describe locally curved geometries. As illustrated in ﬁg.2, we will need additional data at
each vertex to encode the coarse-grained curvature now located at the vertices. We will realize this program using
the coarse-graining through gauge ﬁxing procedure already developed in [33, 42]. The idea is that the gauge ﬁxing
procedure collapses a subgraph into a single vertex plus some additional (self-)loops connecting that vertex to itself.
These self-loops carry the curvature initially carried by the loops of the subgraph. In this picture, coarse-graining a
spin network state thus leads to a state living on a coarser graph with many little loops living at each vertex.

Reversing the logic of this procedure, we propose to ﬁx a background graph and deﬁne the Fock space of “loopy
spin networks” above that graph. The base states will be spin network states living on the background graph itself,
while excitations will be spin networks living on the graph plus an arbitrary number of little loops attached to its
vertices. These little loops allow to represent excitations of the curvature and take into account that each vertex
of the background graph is in fact a coarse structure which could be unfolded into a non-trivial, possibly complex,
subgraph. Taking into account these little loops as localized excitations of the quantum geometry allow to project
the graph changing LQG dynamics onto a ﬁxed background graph but with dynamical curvature excitations living
at each vertex. In some sense, the underlying full graph is still dynamical and changes, but we always coarse-grain
it to the same skeleton graph plus some little loops. The dynamics then aﬀect the little loops without touching the
skeleton graph and of course change the algebraic data -spin and intertwiners- carried by the edges and vertices of
the graph. This explicitly realizes the idea proposed in the conclusion of [33].

So we are here proposing an expansion of the theory around an arbitrary non-trivial background graph, in some
sense truncating the dynamics by a coarse-graining procedure to keep the quantum states living on that chosen
background graph with some localized excitations of the geometry. This is rather diﬀerent from the expansion around
a continuous background metric, proposed up to now in loop quantum gravity as in [24], and it will be necessary to
later compare these two approaches in a continuum limit of spin networks.

This paper is organized as follows. The ﬁrst section will review the Hilbert space of spin networks for loop quantum
gravity, underlining the cylindrical consistency requirement, and the “coarse-graining through gauge-ﬁxing” of these
quantum states of geometry. From this perspective, we will introduce a hierarchy of possible extensions of spin
networks encoding extra information at the graph nodes: folded, loopy and tagged spin networks, from the ﬁner to
coarser objects. Folded spin networks allow for an arbitrary number of little (self-)loops at every node of the graph
and moreover contain the data of a circuit at each node, that is a tree linking the little loop ends to the edges attached
to the node. Loopy spin networks forget about the local circuit data, while tagged spin networks simply trace out all
the little loop data and only retains the resulting closure defect at each node.

The second section is dedicated to the deﬁnition and investigation of loopy spin networks. We discuss the holonomy
operator, which is the elementary brick of the loop quantum gravity formalism, and check the compatibility of
our deﬁnition with the cylindrical consistency conditions. We apply this construction to the topological BF theory
and solve for the physical state of ﬂat connections in our new Hilbert of loopy spin networks. We deﬁne the BF
Hamiltonian constraints as holonomy constraints peaking the group elements along the little loops on the identity.
We show that these are (unexpectedly) not enough to enforce the uniqueness of the physical state and lead to an
inﬁnite-dimensional space of (almost)-ﬂat states deﬁned from higher derivatives of the δ-distribution. This is due to
the highly non-trivial structure of the intertwiner space recoupling the loops. We supplement these constraints with
new Laplacian constraints, which decouple the loop and trivialize the intertwiner, ﬁnally leading to a unique ﬂat state
deﬁned by the δ-distribution.

In a third section, we explore the possibility of endowing the little loops at the graph’s nodes with bosonic statistics
and deﬁne the symmetrized Fock space of loopy spin networks. We discuss the interplay between loop creation,

5

>

s(e)

•

ge
>
e

t(e)

•

>

>

>

•

>

>

•

>

FIG. 3: We consider cylindrical wavefunctions: the function only depends on a support graph with oriented
edges. Each edge e carries a colouring ge which is a group element and corresponds to the (open) holonomy

along the corresponding path.

annihilation and spin shift in the deﬁnition of the holonomy operator. This leads us to deﬁne the Hamiltonian
constraints for BF theory in terms of creation and annihilation operators.

The fourth section develops tagged spin networks and shows how they provide a basis for reduced density matrix
when coarse-graining spin networks. We conclude this paper with a discussion on the potential applications of this new
framework, for instance using ﬁxed skeleton graph as background lattices or to the coarse-graining of loop quantum
gravity dynamics.

II. SPIN NETWORKS AND THEIR COARSE-GRAINING

A. Spin networks as projective limits

Loop quantum gravity is based on the ﬁrst order reformulation of general relativity in terms of the Ashtekar-Barbero
variables[4]. The fundamental variables of the theory on the canonical hypersurface are the densitized triad and the
Ashtekar-Barbero connection2, which are endowed with the following symplectic structure:

{Ea

i (x), Aj

b(y)} =

βκ
2

b δj
δa

i δ(x − y) ,

(1)

with all other brackets being zero. The indices a, b, c, .. denote space coordinates while the indices i, j, k, ... refer
to tangent space coordinates. The canonical ﬁelds are the densitized triad Ea
i (x) and the Ashtekar-Barbero SU(2)
connection Aj
b(x). The Poisson backet coupling is given in terms of the gravitational constant κ = 16πG and the
Immirzi parameter β [5, 6, 43]. The classical theory is deﬁned by imposing on this phase space a set of seven ﬁrst
class constraints: the three Gauss constraints generating the local SU(2) gauge invariance and the four constraints
generating space-time diﬀeomorphisms.

At the quantum level, we consider cylindrical wave-functions of the Ashtekar-Barbero connection A. We choose an
arbitrary oriented graph Γ embedded in the canonical hypersurface and consider functions of the holonomies of the
connection along the links or edges e of the graph, as illustrated in ﬁg.3:

ψΓ[A] ≡ ψ ({Ue[A]}e∈Γ) ,

Ue[A] ∈ SU(2) .

(2)

Such functionals realize a ﬁnite sampling of the connection along the considered graph. We require these functionals
to solve the Gauss law, that is to be invariant under local SU(2) gauge transformations. These acts at the end points
of the holonomies, that is at the nodes or vertices v of the graph Γ:

∀hv ∈ SU(2)×V , ψ ({Ue[A]}e∈Γ) = ψ(cid:16){h−1

s(e) Ue[A] ht(e)}e∈Γ(cid:17) ,

(3)

where V is the number of vertices of the graph Γ, while s(e) and t(e) respectively denote the source and target
vertices of the oriented edge e. The Hilbert space of states of the ﬁxed graph Γ is deﬁned by endowing this set of

2 The Ashtekar-Barbero connection is only a space connection deﬁned on the canonical hypersurface and is not generically the pull-back
of a space-time connection [44–48], except in the case of the self-dual and anti-self dual connections given by the purely imaginary choice
of Immirzi paramater β = ±i.

wave-functions with the natural scalar product induced by the Haar measure on SU(2):

HΓ ≡ L2(cid:0)SU(2)E/SU(2)V(cid:1) ,
hΨ|eΨi = ZSU(2)E

EYe=1

dge Ψ(g1, ..., gE)eΨ(g1, ..., gE) ,

∀Ψ ,eΨ ∈ HΓ ,

6

(4)

(7)

where E counts the number of edges in the graph. A basis of this space is provided by the spin networks with support
on the graph Γ. Technically, these are obtained through the Peter-Weyl decomposition of L2 functions on the Lie
group SU(2) in terms of the orthogonal Wigner matrices in the irreducible representations of SU(2). As a result, a
spin network state is labeled by a spin on each edge, which is a half-integer je ∈ N/2 determining the corresponding
irreducible SU(2)-representation V je of dimension (2je + 1), and an intertwiner iv at each vertex v, which is an
invariant tensor in the tensor product of the representations living on the incoming and outgoing edges attached to
the vertex v:

iv : Oe|s(e)=v

V je −→ Oe|t(e)=v

V je .

(5)

The spin network function is deﬁned by contracting the chosen intertwiners with the Wigner matrices of the holonomies
living along the graph edges:

ψ{je,iv }
Γ

(cid:16){ge}e∈Γ(cid:17) = Tr"Oe
= Ye

hjems

Dje (ge) ⊗Ov
eiYv

e| ge |jemt

iv#

h⊗e|t(e)=vjemt

e| iv | ⊗e|s(e)=v jems

ei ,

(6)

with an implicit sum over all the ms,t
indices, where we have introduced the usual spin basis |j, mi of the Hilbert
e
space V j with the index m running from −j to +j by integer steps. That spin network functional is automatically
gauge-invariant due to the SU(2)-invariance of the intertwiners at each vertex. Intertwiners iv at the vertex give the
volume excitations, thus representing chunks of volume dual to each vertex, while the spin je living on the edge e
linking two vertices give the area quanta of the (quantum) surface boundary between the corresponding two chunks
of space. This endows spin networks with a natural interpretation as discrete quantum geometries.

From here, the loop quantum gravity programme proceeds in two steps. First, one sums over all possible graphs
Γ imposing cylindrical consistency. This yields the kinematical Hilbert space of spin network states. Second, one
imposes the Hamiltonian constraints generating the space-time diﬀeomorphisms at the quantum level to deﬁne the
physical Hilbert space of loop quantum gravity.

Indeed, in order to consider the full space of connections and not just its ﬁnite sampling on a ﬁxed graph Γ, we
will consider all possible graphs and sums of cylindrical functions over diﬀerent graphs. To this purpose, one needs to
compare wave-functions with support on diﬀerent graphs, take their sum and scalar product. This is achieved through

requiring cylindrical consistency. A function ψ on a graph Γ is considered as equivalent to another function eψ deﬁned
on a larger graph eΓ, containing Γ as a subgraph, if the ﬁner function does not depend on the group elements living

on the extra edges and coincides with the original coarser function ψ on the subgraph:

Γ ⊂eΓ,

ψΓ ∼ eψeΓ ⇔ ∀ge ∈ SU(2)

eψ({ge}e∈eΓ) = ψ({ge}e∈Γ) .

This means that any wave-function deﬁned on a graph Γ is automatically extended to live on any reﬁnement of Γ.
Now, when summing two wave-functions living on a priori diﬀerent graphs or taking their scalar product, one will

reﬁne the two graphs, say Γ and Γ′, to a larger and ﬁner grapheΓ containing both of them as subgraphs: the two wave-
functions will then be compared on that larger grapheΓ and their sum will be be deﬁned as living on it. A precise and

rigorous treatment of these projective limit techniques can be found in [34–36]. The set of wave-functions is deﬁned
by the union of the sets of wave-functions with support on every graph quotiented by the cylindrical consistency
equivalence relation, and the resulting kinematical Hilbert space for loop quantum gravity is obtained by the sum of
all graphs also quotiented by the cylindrical consistency:

F =  [Γ

FΓ!, ∼ ,

Hkin =  MΓ

HΓ!, ∼ .

(8)

7

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

FIG. 4: To deﬁne the scalar product in the continuum, we use cylindrical consistency: wavefunctions with
trivial dependancy on some edges are identiﬁed with functions on coarser graphs (with the gray dashed edges
removed from the graph). As a consequence, two coarse graphs can always be considered as being embedded

in another ﬁner graph on which the scalar product is well-deﬁned.

This Hilbert space, deﬁned as a projective limit, was shown to be the space of L2-functionals of the connection
with respect to the Ashtekar-Lewandowski measure [35]. Going to the spin network basis, the cylindrical consistency
corresponds to identifying graphs with edges e carrying a vanishing spin je = 0 to the same graphs without those
edges. Thus, if we went to pick a speciﬁc representative for every equivalence class, we could simply choose all spin
networks carrying no vanishing spins:

Hkin =MΓ eHΓ ,

eHΓ = M{je6=0,iv }

C|je, ivi

(9)

This projective limit technique was introduced for graphs embedded in the canonical hypersurface, but was also
shown to work for equivalence classes of graphs under (spatial) diﬀeomorphisms, and can be directly extended to
abstract graphs deﬁned purely combinatorially without reference to an embedding in a speciﬁc manifold.
In the
following, we will not make direct use of the embedding of spin network states, so our deﬁnition and procedures can
be applied to any of those cases. Nevertheless, since we do not discuss the coarse-graining from an embedding point
of view, it is simpler to consider all our deﬁnitions as for abstract graphs.

B. Coarse-graining by gauge-ﬁxing

Let us now discuss the main context of this paper: the coarse-graining of spin networks for loop quantum gravity.
The idea of coarse-graining is to integrate out the microscopic degrees of freedom, by an iterative procedure, up to
some given energy or length scale to get the eﬀective dynamics of the macroscopic degrees of freedom. In condensed
matter models, one typically works on a regular lattice with degrees of freedom living on its edges and/or nodes and
one can decimate consistently the variables, integrating out one node out of two for example, and thus derive an
eﬀective Hamiltonian on the coarser lattice. The length scale is set by the lattice spacing. In quantum ﬁeld theory,
the renormalisation group scheme integrates out quantum ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld of high momentum and energy to
derive an eﬀective dynamics on the low momentum degrees of freedom. In general relativity, the main diﬃculty is
that the space-time geometry itself has become dynamical thus leading to some serious obstacles: in a background
independent context, we face the problems of deﬁning consistently a length or energy scale and of properly localizing
perturbations and degrees of freedom both in position and momentum. These issues persist in the quantum theory.
In loop quantum gravity, one could think that the natural graph structure of the theory makes it simpler to
tackle the coarse-graining of the theory. However, even putting aside the huge complication of ﬂuctuating graphs
and graph superpositions, working out the coarse-graining of loop quantum gravity on a ﬁxed graph still faces the
problem of localizing and determining the energy scale of the geometry ﬂuctuations. Indeed, a natural coarse-graining
procedure on a ﬁxed graph is to subdivide it into a partition of bounded (usually connected) regions and to collapse
those subgraphs to single points. The internal geometrical information carried by the spin network state on those
subgraphs would be coarse-grained to some eﬀective data living at the new node of the coarser graph, as illustrated
on ﬁg.5. Integrating over these local degrees of freedom would lead to new eﬀective dynamics on the coarser graph.
Such a procedure would then be iterated to obtain a tower of eﬀective theories `a la Wilson for loop quantum gravity
towards a large scale limit.

8

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

FIG. 5: We coarse-grain a graph by partionning it into disjoint connected subgraphs. We will reduce each of
these bounded region of space by a single vertex of the coarser graph. Since each of these regions of space
had some internal geometrical structure and were likely carrying curvature, the natural question is whether
spin network vertices carry each data to account for these internal structure and curvature. We will see that
standard spin network vertices can be interpreted as ﬂat and that we need to introduce some new notion of
“curved vertices” carrying extra algebraic information and deﬁne new extensions of spin network states more

suitable to the process of coarse-graining loop quantum gravity.

It remains to decide which partition to choose in practice, which one is the most “coarse-grainable”. We need to
identify the regions of the spin network state whose geometry has the smallest (quantum) ﬂuctuations. Since the
algebraic data -spins and intertwiners- living on the graph determine the discrete geometry deﬁned by the spin network
state, the combinatorial data of the subgraph is not enough to decide if it is to be coarse-grained. One actually needs
to ﬁnd a suitable scale function -length or energy or another geometrical observable such as curvature- and to use an
optimization algorithm running through all possible bounded regions and partitions of the graph in order to ﬁnd the
correct partition to coarse-grain at each step. In simpler words, the obstacle is that the geometry corresponding to
the considered graph is not entirely determined by the combinatorial deﬁnition of the graph but crucially depends on
the algebraic data living on it and carried by the spin network state. And on top of this diﬃculty remains to ﬁnd a
consistent way to deal with graph ﬂuctuations and superpositions.

We propose a truncation of the theory re-introducing a background lattice through coarse-graining. From the point
of view of a given observer, one chooses a lattice, which deﬁnes the network of points whose geometry the observer will
probe. The lattice is not considered as the fundamental graph underlying the physical spin network state. Instead,
since the observer is assumed to have a ﬁnite resolution, its nodes represent bounded regions of space whose internal
geometry can ﬂuctuate. Then, if we consider a spin network states based on a graph with a very ﬁne structure,
we will coarse-grain it onto our chosen lattice. Such a scheme allows to take into account graph ﬂuctuations and
superpositions while actually working on a ﬁxed lattice. Indeed, considering a superposition of graphs, it will live by
cylindrical consistency on a ﬁner graph containing both graphs. Then we will coarse-grain the quantum geometry
state on the ﬁner graph until it lives on our reference lattice.

A key step of this procedure is the coarse-graining of subgraphs to nodes. We use the “coarse-graining through
gauge-ﬁxing” procedure introduced in [32, 33] and also exploited in [25, 26] to reformulate the algebra of geometrical
observables in loop quantum gravity. This is based on the gauge-ﬁxing for spin networks deﬁned earlier in [42], which
allows to collapse an arbitrary subgraph to a ﬂower , that is a single vertex with self-loops -or petals- attached to it.
These loops account for the building-up of the curvature and thus of the gravitational energy density within these
microscopic bounded regions which we will coarse-grain to single points on the measurement lattice chosen by the
observer.

e ≡ X s,t(e)

e

e| = |X s

e = − ge ⊲ X s

Let us give a closer look to this gauge-ﬁxing procedure and the resulting coarse-graining of spin networks. At the
classical level, a spin network state is given by the graph dressed with discrete holonomy-ﬂux data: each oriented
edge carries a SU(2) group element ge ∈ SU(2) while each edge’s extremity around a vertex is colored with a vector
e ∈ R3. So one edge carries two vectors, one living at its source vertex and the other living at its target vertex,
X v
respectively X s,t
. The group element gives the parallel transport of the vectors along the edges, that
is X t
e with the action of ge as a SO(3)-rotation on the ﬂat 3d space. This obviously forces the two
vectors to have equal norm, |X t
e |, which is called the (area-)matching constraint. One requires another set
of constraints: we impose the closure constraint at each vertex v, so that the sum of the ﬂuxes around the vertex
e = 0. This holonomy-ﬂux data can be interpreted as some discrete geometry in the framework
of twisted geometries [39, 49]. This is achieved through Minkowski’s theorem stating that the closure constraint
determines a unique convex polyhedron in ﬂat 3d space dual to each vertex v, such that the ﬂuxes X v
e are the normal
vectors to the polyhedron faces.

vanishes, Pe∋v X v

Curvature appears as non-trivial holonomies around loops L of the graph, when

−−−→Qe∈Lge 6= I. As pointed out

in [33], coarse-graining a subgraph carrying non-trivial curvature leads to an eﬀective vertex breaking the closure
constraint. This underlines the fact that a generalization of spin network states is required in order to properly carry
out a coarse-graining procedure: we need an extended structure allowing for curved vertices.

We illustrate this in ﬁg.6, in 2d instead of 3d. Let us consider a bounded region in space and the normals to its
boundary. Due to gauge-invariance, if the region contains a single vertex, the sum of the normals will sum up to
zero. But if there are loops inside the region, the parallel transport around these loops might introduce non-trivial
rotations. And indeed, as soon as the parallel transport around the loops is non-trivial, the sum of the normals is no
longer zero, leading to a closure defect [33]. This is natural and translates the fact that curvature is carried by the
loops of the spin network. And this must be taken into account when coarse-graining.

9

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

FIG. 6: On this ﬁgure, we represented the dual graph of a 2d trivalent graph. The curvature at the vertex
manifests itself as a defect in the closure condition. This can be seen by ﬂattening the triangulation, which
amounts to gauge-ﬁx the variables. The curvature manifests itself as a gap (in gray on the ﬁgure) at some
edge (in blue on the ﬁgure) in the ﬂattened manifold. The closure defect can be seen as the missing normal

coming from the closure of the ﬂattened polygon (in red on the ﬁgure).

A rigorous way to make this explicit is to gauge-ﬁx the spin network state, following the procedure devised in [42].
Let us consider a bounded region of a larger spin network, deﬁned as a ﬁnite connected subgraph γ of the larger graph
Γ, as in ﬁg.7. The procedure goes as follow:

1. Choose arbitrarily a root vertex v0 of the subgraph and select a maximal tree T of the region:

The subgraph being connected, the maximal tree goes through every vertex of the region and deﬁnes a unique
path of edges from the root vertex v0 to any vertex of the subgraph.

2. Gauge-ﬁx iteratively all the group elements along the edges of the tree ge∈T = I:

Using the gauge-invariance of the wave-functions as given by (3) with gauge transformations acting at every
vertex by SU(2) group elements hv as ge → h−1
s(e)geht(e), we can start from the root of the tree v0 and progress
through the tree until we reach the boundary of our subgraph. We deﬁne the appropriate gauge transformations
hv at every vertex in order to ﬁx all the group elements along the edges of the tree to the identity I. The absence
of loops in the tree, by deﬁnition, guarantees the consistency of this gauge-ﬁxing. We can somewhat interpret
this maximal tree as a synchronization network: we set all the parallel transports along the tree edges to the
identity, thus synchronizing the reference frames at all the vertices and identifying them to a single reference
frame living at the root of the subgraph. This realizes the coarse-graining of the subgraph γ to its chosen root
vertex v0. The action of SU(2) gauge transformations inside the region is not entirely gauge-ﬁxed and we are
still left with the SU(2) gauge transformations at the root vertex.

3. Having collapsed the subgraph γ to its root vertex v0, the edges of the subgraph γ which are not in the tree,

e ∈ γ \ T label all the (independent) loops of the subgraph and lead to self-loops attached to the v0:
As illustrated on ﬁg.7, these self-loops or little loops carry the holonomies around the loops of the original
subgraph γ, that is the curvature living in the bounded region. The ﬂux-vectors living on the boundary edges,
linking the region to the outside bulk, generically do not satisfy the closure constraint anymore since the eﬀective
vertex does satisfy a closure constraint which takes into account the ﬂux-vectors of those boundary edges but
also of the internal loops. The closure defect, induced by the little loops, thus reﬂects the non-trivial internal
structure of the coarse-grained subgraph and curvature developed in the corresponding region of the spin network
state. The interested reader can ﬁnd details and proof in the previous work [33].

This gauge-ﬁxing procedure allows to clearly identify and distinguish between the degrees of freedom of the internal
geometry of the considered bounded region of space to coarse-grain. The tree encodes the internal combinatorial

10

j1

j4

i1
•

ℓ4

•i4

ℓ1

ℓ 5

ℓ3

i2
•

•
i3

ℓ2

j2

j3

j1

j4

k1

• i

k2

j2

j3

FIG. 7: Coarse-graining via gauge-ﬁxing: we can gauge-ﬁx the subgraph using a maximal subtree (in red). The
remaining edges (in blue) correspond to loops on the coarse-grained vertex. There is a residual gauge-freedom
at the coarse-grained vertex that corresponds to the action of the gauge group at the root of the tree (red

vertex on the ﬁgure).

structure of the region and describes the network of points and links within: they provide the bulk structure on which
we can create curvature. The little loops and the SU(2) group elements coloring them are the excitations of the parallel
transport and curvature. Together, tree and little loops attached to a vertex describe all its internal structure and are
the extra data needed to deﬁne curved vertices for the eﬀective coarse-grained theory. These curvature excitations
create a closure defect for the ﬂux-vectors living on the boundary edges linking the coarse-grained vertex -the root
vertex- to the rest of the spin network (obtained by the actually satisﬁed closure constraint between boundary edges
and little loops)

When coarse-graining in practice, we do not want to retain all the information about the internal geometry, but
only want to retain the degrees of freedom most relevant to the dynamics and interaction with the exterior geometry.
In the next section, we will therefore introduce a hierarchy of extensions of spin network states with curved vertices,
from the ﬁnest notion of spin networks decorated with both trees and little loops to the coarser notion of spin networks
with a simple tag at each vertex recording the induced closure defect.

C. A hierarchy of coarse-grained spin network structures

In loop quantum gravity, we start with spin network states, which are graphs decorated with spins on the edges

and intertwiners at the vertices:

HΓ = M{je,iv }

C|je, ivi .

(10)

Curvature is carried loops of the graph. We have argued that coarse-graining these networks should naturally lead to
extended spin networks that can carry localized curvature excitations at the vertices. Following the coarse-graining
through gauge-ﬁxing procedure3, we propose a hierarchy of three possible extensions of the spin network states, which
depend on how much extra information and structure are added to each vertex:

1. Folded spin networks :

In the ﬁrst scenario, we follow the gauge-ﬁxing procedure but we do a minimal coarse-graining, retaining as
much information as possible on the original state. Each vertex is allowed with an arbitrary number of little
loops attached to it and is endowed with a tree connecting the ends of the external edges and of the internal
loops, as represented in ﬁg.8a. This tree can be seen as a circuit telling us how to unfold the vertex, reversing
the gauge-ﬁxing procedure and recovering the original (ﬁner) graph. This Hilbert space Hfolded
can be written

Γ

3 Another approach is to deﬁne spin networks made of intertwiners directly interpretable as dual to polyhedron in a curved space. These
has been developed in the framework of spin networks for loop quantum gravity with a non-vanishing cosmological constant and is based
on a quantum deformation of the SU(2) gauge group [50–56]. However, it is not yet clear how, if possible, to depart from a homogeneous
curvature and glue pieces carrying a diﬀerent curvature, thus obtaining actual spin networks with variable curvature. One possible link
with our present framework would be to show that these curved and quantum-deformed intertwiners can be obtained in a continuum
limit as a vertex with an inﬁnite number of little loops creating a constant homogeneous curvature excitation (for instance, triangulating
a hyperbolic tetrahedron with ﬁner and ﬁner tetrahedra which can be considered as ﬂat in an inﬁnite reﬁnement limit).

11

•

•

••

j1

j4

k1
•i
k2

j2

j3

j1

j4

k1
•i
k2

j2

j3

j1

j4

j, m

•i′

j2

j3

(a) All the information can be preserved by
carrying the SU (2) labels and an unfold-
ing tree describing the inner details of the

coarse-grained vertex.

(b) The particular subgraph can be
forgotten and only the SU (2) infor-

(c) Everything except the closure de-
fect is forgotten. Only a “tag” re-

mation is preserved.

mains.

FIG. 8: The hierarchy of possible coarse-graining frameworks

formally as:

Hfolded

Γ

= M{je,j(v)

ℓ

,iv ,Tv}

C |je, j(v)

ℓ

, iv, Tvi .

(11)

Tv is the unfolding tree for each vertex, j(v)
are the spins carried by the additional loops labeled by the index ℓ
and the intertwiners iv now lives in the tensor product of the spins je of the edges linking to the other neighboring
vertices and (twice) the spins j(v)
living on the internal loops (because each loop has its two ends at the vertex).
With such an internal space at each vertex, we actually lose no information at all on the internal degrees of

ℓ

ℓ

spin network state.

our coarser graph Γ. And we can follow the reverse path. Using the tree at each vertex, we can fully reconstruct

freedom. Starting with a spin network state living on a ﬁner grapheΓ, we simply gauge-ﬁx it to a spin network on
the original ﬁner grapheΓ thus simply perform generic gauge transformations to recover the fully gauge-invariant

Thus the chosen graph Γ can be considered as a skeleton graph, to which we can add extra information to
represent spin network states living on any (ﬁner) graph. In a sense, we have not done any coarse-graining
yet. The truncation of the theory will happen when deﬁning the dynamics on the folded spin network Hilbert
space, distinguishing actual edges and spins of our skeleton lattice -the background- from spins and edges on the
unfolding trees and little loops, when the fundamental dynamics would have considered them on equal footing.

2. Loopy spin networks :

In a second scenario, we coarse-grain the internal structure of the eﬀective vertices by discarding the unfolding
trees. We keep the curvature excitations living on the little loops, but we discard the combinatorial information
of the internal subgraph: we forget that the vertex eﬀectively represents an actual extended region of space and
we localize all the internal curvature degrees of freedom on that coarse-grained vertex. This leads to loopy spin
networks, with an arbitrary number of loops at each vertex but no unfolding tree data:

Hloopy

Γ

= M{je,j(v)

ℓ

,iv }

C|je, j(v)

ℓ

, ivi ,

(12)

where the j(v)
are the spins living on the little loops attached to the vertex v and the intertwiners iv live again
in the tensor product of the spins carried by the graph edges attached to the vertex v and the spins carried by
its little loops.

ℓ

Now our chosen graph Γ for loopy spin network states is to be considered as a background graph. The little
loops are explicit local excitations of the gravitational ﬁelds located at each vertex of the graph. A given loopy
spin network comes from the coarse-graining of several possible ﬁner spin network states living on ﬁner graph,
but we lack the unfolding tree information to recover the original more fundamental state.

12

The truncation of full theory is clear. Spin network states on the “loopy graphs” living on top on Γ, that is the
base graph Γ plus an arbitrary number of self-loops at every vertices, are already in the Hilbert space of the
loop quantum gravity, although we do not usually focus on such graphs. Restricting ourselves to this subset of
states is a clear truncation of the full Hilbert space. The diﬀerence with the standard interpretation is that we
think here of the base graph Γ as embedded in the space manifold, while the little loops are abstract objects
decorating the base graph vertices.

Since we have local degrees of freedom, carried by the little loops, we need to discuss their statistics, which leads
to a few variations of this theme:

(a) Distinguishable loops : First, it is natural to consider that the loops are distinguishable as they come from
a substructure. The loops do come from diﬀerent edges of a ﬁner graph and create curvature excitations
at diﬀerent places within the coarse-grained bounded region. As a result, we should distinguish them and
allow to number and order them.

(b) Undistinguishable bosonic loops : A second possibility is to push further along the logic of coarse-graining
and to consider that the loops undistinguishable since we do not have access anymore to the speciﬁc sub-
structure. This should lead to bosonic statistics, as expected for gravitational ﬁeld exicitations. Formally,
this can be written as the identiﬁcation:

|je, iv, j(v)

ℓ

i = |je, iv, j(v)

σv (ℓ)i

(13)

for any permutation σv ∈ S#ℓ in the symmetric group of order #ℓ when the vertex v has #ℓ loops. This
point of view is compatible with considering the action of space diﬀeomorphisms on the little loops around
the vertex as gauge transformations.

(c) Anyonic statistics : We can easily imagine other statistics, for instance by allowing for a phase in the
equality above (i.e a non-trivial representation of the permutation group). In fact, instead of thinking of
the vertex as a mere point, we can represent the boundary of the bounded region as a sphere and consider
the little loops as living on a sphere around it. Then the diﬀeomorphism invariance on the sphere will lead
to an action of the braiding group leading to interesting anyonics statistics, similarly to the punctures of a
Chern-Simons theory as already explored in the case of black holes in loop quantum gravity [57].

3. Tagged spin networks :

In this third and last scenario, we fully coarse-grain the internal geometry of the bounded region now reduced
to a graph vertex. We discard the unfolding tree, used in the gauge-ﬁxing and unﬁxing procedure, and we
integrate out the little loops attached to the vertex. All we retain is the closure defect induced by the non-
trivial holonomies and spins carried by those little loops. The fact that coarse-graining spin networks, or their
classical counterpart of twisted geometries, leads to closure defect, accounting for the presence of a non-trivial
curvature within the coarse-grained region was already pointed out in [33]. Here, the simplest method to see how
this comes about is to use the intermediate spin decomposition of the intertwiner at the vertices, as illustrated
on ﬁg.9, introducing a ﬁducial link separating the external edges from the internal loops:

InvSU(2)hOe

V je ⊗Oℓ (cid:0)V jℓ ⊗ V jℓ(cid:1)i = MJ

InvSU(2)hV J ⊗Oe

V jei ⊗ InvSU(2)hV J ⊗Oℓ (cid:0)V jℓ ⊗ V jℓ(cid:1)i .

(14)

This spin Jv living at the vertex v encodes the closure defect and is the only extra information with which we

iv
•

iJ
v
•

˜iJ
v
•

J

FIG. 9: We represent a loopy vertex v, here with three little loops attached to it. The intertwiner iv can be
decomposed onto the intermediate spin basis, where we introduce a ﬁducial edge between the external legs and
v and ˜iJ
the internal loops. This orthogonal basis is labeled by the intermediate spin J, and two intertwiners iJ

v

intertwining between that intermediate spin and respectively the external legs or the internal loops.

decorate the graph. We call it the tag and amounts to adding an open leg to every vertex of the graph. This

13

open edge is colored with the spin Jv and a vector in that SU(2) representation. Using the standard spin basis
labeled by magnetic moment number M , the Hilbert space of tagged spin networks on the base graph Γ is then
formally deﬁned as:

Htag

Γ = M{je,Jv,Mv ,iv }

C|je, Jv, Mv, ivi ,

(15)

where the intertwiner iv at the vertex v now lives in the tensor product of the spins je∋v on the external edges
e attached to the vertex and of the vertex tag Jv.
The state |Jv, Mvi is the quantized version of the closure defect vector. Indeed, at the classical level, as shown
in [33], the sum of the ﬂux-vectors living on the external edges e ∋ v does not vanish anymore and should be
balanced by the sum of the ﬂux-vectors living on the internal loops. This defect vector means that there is
no convex polyhedron dual to the vertex, as usual in twisted geometries. One way to go is to try to open the
polyhedron somehow, which wouldn’t have a clear geometrical interpretation. Instead we propose to interpret
it as the dual convex polyhedron should not be embedded in ﬂat space but in a (homogeneous) curved space,
the curvature radius depending on the actual value of the closure defect. Progress in this direction has been
achieved in the study of hyperbolic and spherical tetrahedra [51, 53, 55] but we do not yet have an explicit
embedding and formula relating the curvature to the norm of the defect. It would ultimately be enlightening
to relate this tag Jv to the spectrum of some quasi-local energy operator in loop quantum gravity (e.g.
[58]),
which would allow to view it as a measure of the gravitational energy density within the bounded coarse-grained
region.

These three extended spin network structures are the heart of our present proposal for studying eﬀective truncations
for the coarse-graining of loop quantum gravity. The goal would be to reformulate the dynamics of loop quantum
gravity on these new structures and study their renormalisation ﬂow under coarse-graining. An important point is
that these folded, loopy and tagged spin networks sidestep the problem of ﬂuctuating graph dynamics and allow to
project the whole dynamics on a ﬁxed background graph, or skeleton, interpreted as the lattice postulated by the
observer4. We then have local excitations of the geometry, representing the internal ﬂuctuations of the gravitational
ﬁeld in the coarse-grained regions, living at the graph vertices and represented by the new information attached to
them, respectively unfolding trees, little loops or tags. The use of a background lattice, which might be regular,
would simplify greatly the setting of a systematic coarse-graining of loop quantum gravity.

The folded spin networks are mathematically a simple gauge-ﬁxing of spin networks onto the skeleton graph. In
the following sections, we will focus on providing a clean mathematical deﬁnition of loopy and tagged spin networks
and exploring the deﬁnition of a Fock space of loopy spin networks with bosonic statistics for the little loops living
at every graph vertex.

III. LOOPY SPIN NETWORKS

Here we would like to deﬁne properly loopy spin networks and investigate their propreties. Choosing a ﬁxed graph Γ
with E edges, and given numbers of little loops Nv at each vertex v, we consider the following space of wave-functions
on SU(2)× (E+Pv Nv) invariant under SU(2) gauge transformations acting at every vertices:

ψ(cid:16){ge , hv

ℓ }e,v∈Γ(cid:17) = ψ(cid:16){as(e)gea−1

t(e) , avhv

ℓ a−1

v }(cid:17) ,

∀av ∈ SU(2)×V .

(16)

The SU(2) gauge transformations act as usual on the edges e of the graph, while they act by conjugation as expected
on the little loops. A basis is provided by the spin decomposition on functions in L2(SU(2)) as with standard spin
networks. The loopy spin network basis states are labeled with a spin je on each edge e, a spin kv
ℓ on each little loop
ℓ attached to a vertex v, and an intertwiners iv at each vertex leaving in the tensor product of the attached edges
and of the loop spins:

iv ∈ InvSU(2)hOe∋v

V je ⊗ Oℓ∋v

(V kv

ℓ ⊗ ¯V kv

ℓ )i

(17)

4 The background lattice can then be adapted to the studied models. We could choose a regular lattice or a much simpler graph, such
as a ﬂower with a single vertex and an arbitrary number of little loops. Such simple graphs could reveal useful in the study of highly
symmetric problems as is the case in cosmology or in the study of Einstein-Rosen waves [59, 60].

so that the Hilbert space of loopy spin networks on the graph Γ with given number Nv of little loops at every vertex
is, as announced in the previous section presenting the hierarchy of extended spin network structures:

14

Hloopy

Γ,{Nv} = L2(cid:0)SU(2)× (E+Pv Nv) / SU(2)×V(cid:1) = M{je,kv

ℓ ,iv}

C |je, kv

ℓ , ivi .

(18)

What needs to be properly deﬁned and analyzed is the Hilbert space of states with arbitrary number of little loops,
allowing Nv to run all over N and summing over all these possibilities. To this purpose, the full graph structure Γ
does not intervene and we can ignore it and focus on the space of little loops around a single vertex. Thus, for the
sake of simplifying the discussion, we will focus on a single vertex with no external, but with an arbitrary umber of
little loops attached to it. This is the ﬂower graph.

In this section, we will assume the little loops to be distinguishable. We deﬁne the spin network states with a given
number of loops -the ﬂower graph with ﬁxed number of petals- and we then discuss the whole Hilbert space of states
with arbitrary number of excitations by a projective limit. We deﬁne and analyze the holonomy operators acting on
that space and we ﬁnally implement the BF theory dynamics on that space as a ﬁrst application of our framework
and a consistency check. We will tackle the case of indistinguishable little loops in the next section, imposing bosonic
statistics and deﬁning the holonomy operator on symmetrized states.

A. Loopy intertwiners

Let us start with the ﬂower graph with a ﬁxed number N of petals, that is a single vertex with N little loops attached
to it as drawn on ﬁg.10. We are going to deﬁne the wave-functions on that graph, the corresponding decomposition
on the spin and intertwiner basis and the action of the holonomy operators.

k1

k2

•

I

k5

k3

k4

FIG. 10: We consider the class of special graph, ﬂowers, with a single vertex and an arbitrary number N
of little loops attached to it. Here we have drawn a ﬂower with N = 5 petals. The spin network states on
such graphs are labeled by a spin on each loop, kℓ=1..N , and an intertwiner I living in the tensor product

ℓ=1(V kℓ ⊗ ¯V kℓ).

NN

Wave-functions are gauge-invariant functions of N group elements, that is functions on SU(2)×N invariant under

the global action by conjugation:

Ψ(h1, ..., hN ) = Ψ(gh1g−1, ..., ghN g−1) .

(19)

The scalar product is deﬁned by integration with respect to the Haar measure on SU(2) and the resulting Hilbert
space is:

HN = L2(cid:16)SU(2)×N /Ad SU(2)(cid:17) .

(20)

A basis of this space is provided as usual by the spin network states, labeled by a spin on each loop, kℓ=1..N ∈ N
2 ,

ℓ=1(V kℓ ⊗ ¯V kℓ) and invariant under the action of SU(2):

and an intertwiner I living in the tensor productNN

Ψ{kℓ,I}(cid:0){hℓ}ℓ=1..N(cid:1) = hhℓ | kℓ, Ii = TrhI ⊗

NOℓ=1

Dkℓ(hℓ)i ,

(21)

ℓ=1(V kℓ ⊗ ¯V kℓ ). To underline that each spin repreentation is

where the trace is taken over the tensor product NN

doubled and that I is an intertwiner between the loops around the vertex, we can dub it a loopy intertwiner

The holonomy operator is the basic gauge-invariant operator of loop quantum gravity. It can shift and increase
the spins along the edges on which it acts and so is used in practice as a creation operator. We deﬁne the holonomy
operators ˆχℓ along the loops around the vertex as acting by multiplication on the wave-functions in the group
representation:

( ˆχℓ ⊲ Ψ) (h1, ..., hN ) = χ 1

2

(hℓ)Ψ(h1, ..., hN )

(22)

15

where χ 1
consider holonomy operators that wrap around several loops around the ﬂower:

is the trace operator in the fundamental two-dimensional representation of SU(2). We can of course also

2

( ˆχi,j,k,l,... ⊲ Ψ) (h1, ..., hN ) = χ 1

2

(hihjhkhl...)Ψ(h1, ..., hN ) ,

(23)

where the i, j, k, l, .. indices label loops. These operators are obviously still gauge-invariant, and we can further take
the inverse or arbitrary powers of each group element. There are two remarks we should do about these multi-
loop operators. First, they can be decomposed as a composition of single loop operators combining both holonomy
operators and grasping operators (action of the su(2) generators as a quantization of the ﬂux-vectors) by iterating
the following 2-loop identity:

χ 1

2

(hihj) =

1

2 "χ 1

2

(hi)χ 1

2

(hj) +

χ 1

2

(hiσa)χ 1

2

(hjσa)# ,

3Xa=1

(24)

where the σa’s are the three Pauli matrices, normalized such that their square is equal to the identity matrix. Second,
if the loopy spin network state comes from the gauge ﬁxing of a more complicated graph down to a single vertex,
we had chosen a particular maximal tree on that graph to deﬁne the gauge-ﬁxing procedure. The loops around the
coarse-grained vertex correspond to the edges that didn’t belong to the folding tree. Changing the tree actually maps
the single loop holonomies onto multi-loop holonomies [33]. So, from the coarse-graining perspective, there is no
special reason to prefer single loops over multi-loop operators.

B. Superposition of number of loops

We would like to allow for an arbitrary number of loops N , with possibly an inﬁnite number of loops, and superpo-
sitions of number of loops. We will apply the usual projective limit techniques used in loop quantum gravity, as brieﬂy
reviewed in section II A. We assume here that the little loops are all distinguishable, so we avoid all symmetrization
issue. The case of indistinguishable loops will be dealt with in the next section IV. We discuss the countable inﬁnity
of loops around the vertex, so we can number them using the integers N. The point, as with standard spin networks,
is that a state with a spin-0 on an edge does not actually depend on the group element carried by that edge and is
thus equivalent to a state on the ﬂower without that edge. Reversing this logic, a state built on a ﬁnite number of
loops is equivalent to a state with an arbitrary larger number of loops carrying a spin-0 on all the extra edges , which
will allow to deﬁne it in the projective limit as a state on the ﬂower with an inﬁnite number of loops.

k1

k6

k2

•

k5

k3

k4

FIG. 11: We consider a loopy spin network state with a varying number of loops as a superposition of states

with support over diﬀerent loops.

Let us consider the set P<∞(N) of all ﬁnite subsets of N. A ﬂower with a ﬁnite number of loops corresponds to a
ﬁnite subset E ∈ P<∞(N) of indices labeling its loops. Since we keep the loops distinguishable, we do not identify all
the subsets with same cardinality and keep on distinguishing them. We deﬁne the Hilbert space of gauge-invariant
wave-functions on the ﬂower corresponding to E:

HE = L2(cid:16)SU(2)E/Ad SU(2)(cid:17) ,

Ψ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) = Ψ({ghℓg−1}ℓ∈E) ∀g ∈ SU(2) .

(25)

We would like to consider arbitrary superpositions of states with support on arbitrary subsets E of loops, but we do
not wish to brutally consider the direct sum over all E’s. We still require cylindrical consistency. Indeed, a function
on SU(2)E which actually does not depend at all on the loop ℓ0 ∈ E can legitimately be considered as a function on
SU(2)E\ℓ0 . We introduce the equivalence relation making this explicit. For two subsets E ⊂ F , and two functions Ψ

16

(26)

E ⊂ F , Ψ : SU(2)E → C ,

and eΨ respectively on SU(2)E and SU(2)F , the two wave-functions are deﬁned as equivalent if:
that is the function eΨ on the larger set F does not depend on the group elements hℓ for ℓ ∈ F \ E and coincides with

the function Ψ on the smaller set E. More generally, when the two subsets E and F do not contain one or the other,
we transite trough their intersection E ∩ F .

eΨ : SU(2)F → C ,

Ψ ∼ eΨ ⇔ eΨ({hℓ}ℓ∈F ) = Ψ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) ,

The space of wave-functions in the projective limit is deﬁned as the union over all subsets E of functions on SU(2)E,
quotiented by this equivalence. We similarly deﬁne the projective limit of the integration measure over SU(2). We
use this measure to deﬁne the Hilbert space Hloopy of states on the ﬂower with an arbitrary number of loops. All the
rigorous mathematical deﬁnitions and proofs are given in the appendix A.

The practical way to see this Hilbert space is to use the spin network basis and understand that a loop carrying
a spin-0 means that the wave-function actually does not depend on the group element living on that loop. For
every state, we can thus reduce its underlying graph to the minimal possible one removing all the loops with trivial
dependency. Following this logic, for every subset E, we deﬁne the space of proper states living on E, that is without
any spin-0 on its loops. This amounts to removing all possible 0-modes:

H0

E = (Ψ ∈ HE : ∀ℓ0 ∈ E , ZSU(2)

dhℓ0 Ψ = 0) .

(27)

We can decompose the Hilbert space of states on the subset E ⊂ N of loops onto proper states:

Proposition III.1. The Hilbert space HE on loopy intertwiners on the set of loops E decomposes as a direct sum of
the Hilbert spaces of proper states with support on every subset of E:

HE ≃ MF ⊂E

H0

F .

(28)

This isomorphism is realized through the projections fF = PE,F f ∈ H0
for an arbitrary subset F ⊂ E:

F , acting on wave-functions f ∈ HE, deﬁned

fF(cid:0){hℓ}ℓ∈F(cid:1) = XeF ⊂F

(−1)# eFZ Yℓ∈E\F

dgℓYℓ∈ eF

dkℓ f(cid:0){hℓ}ℓ∈F \ eF , {kℓ}ℓ∈ eF , {gℓ}ℓ∈E\F(cid:1) .

These projections realize a combinatorial transform of the state f ∈ HE:

f = XF ⊂E

fF ,

fF ∈ H0

F ,

∀ℓ ∈ F ,

Z dhℓ fF = 0 .

(29)

(30)

This decomposition is straightforward to prove. It will also be crucial in the case of undistinguishable loops and
symmetrized states, as we will see in the next section IV. Then, as we show in the appendix A, the Hilbert space of
loopy spin networks on the ﬂower, with an arbitrary number of distinguishable loops, deﬁned as the projective limit
of the Hilbert spaces HE is realized as the direct sum of those spaces of proper states:

Hloopy ≃ MF ∈P<∞(N)

H0

F ,

H0

F = Mjℓ∈F 6=0,I

C|jℓ∈F , Ii .

(31)

C. Holonomy operators as creation and annihilation operators

We can revisit the deﬁnition of the holonomy operators5on our Hilbert space H of states with arbitrary number of
loops. Let us consider the loop ℓ0 ∈ N and deﬁne the corresponding holonomy operator ˆχℓ0. Looking at its action
on a state Ψ with ﬁnite number of loops living in the Hilbert space HE, we have two possibilities: either the loop

ℓ0 belongs to the subset E or it doesn’t. If the acting loop ℓ0 is already a loop of our state Ψ, then the holonomy
operator acts on as before by multiplication:

ℓ0 ∈ E , Ψ ∈ HE ,

ˆχℓ0 Ψ ∈ HE ,

( ˆχℓ0 Ψ) ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) = χ 1

2

(hℓ0 ) Ψ ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) .

(32)

If the acting loop doesn’t belong to the initial subset E, we use the cylindrical consistency equivalence relation and
we embed both the new loop and the initial loops in a larger graph, say E ∪ {ℓ0},

ℓ0 /∈ E , Ψ ∈ HE ,

ˆχℓ0 Ψ ∈ HE∪{ℓ0} ,

( ˆχℓ0Ψ) ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) = χ 1

2

(hℓ0) Ψ ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) ,

(33)

17

with the holonomy operator ˆχℓ0 acting as a creation operator, creating a new loop and curvature excitation. Since
the SU(2) character χ 1
| ≤ 2, we can check that the holonomy operators ˆχℓ are
Hermitian, bounded and thus essentially self-adjoint.

is real and bounded by two, |χ 1

2

2

The holonomy operator ˆχℓ is Hermitian and has a component acting as a creation operator.

It must have an
annihilation counterpart. The best way to see this explicitly is to write its action on proper states, consistently
removing the zero-modes. Indeed, if a loop carries a spin 1
2 , then it gets partly annihilated by the holonomy operator:

ℓ0 ∈ E , Ψ ∈ H0

E ,

ˆχℓ0 Ψ ∈ H0

E ⊕ H0

E\{ℓ0} ,

( ˆχℓ0 Ψ) ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) = "χ 1
|

2

(hℓ0)Ψ ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) −Z dhℓ0 χ 1

2

(hℓ0)Ψ ({hℓ}ℓ∈E)#
}

∈ H0
E

{z

+"Z dhℓ0χ 1
|

2

(hℓ0)Ψ ({hℓ}ℓ∈E)#
}
{z

E\{ℓ0}

∈ H0

.

(34)

This way, it is clear that the holonomy operator ˆχℓ0 creates transition adding and removing one loop. This proper
state decomposition of the holonomy operator will become essential when deﬁning it on the Fock space of symmetrized
loopy spin networks in the next section IV.

D.

Imposing BF dynamics on loopy spin networks

Now that we have describe the whole kinematics of loopy spin networks, with distinguishable loops, we would like
to tackle the issue of the dynamics and imposing the Hamiltonian constraints on the Hilbert space of loopy states
Hloopy. The ﬁnal goal of our proposal is to write the Hamiltonian constraints of loop quantum gravity on Hloopy, such
that it allows explicitly for local degrees of freedom, study its renormalization group ﬂow under the coarse-graining
and extract its large scale or continuum limit. Here we will instead describe the much simpler BF dynamics. BF
theory can be considered as a consistency check for all attempts and methods to deﬁne of dynamics in (loop) quantum
gravity6. Its physical states are well-known and the Hamiltonian constraints project onto ﬂat connection states. It
is furthermore a topological theory with no local degrees of freedom -they are pure gauge. Finally it has a trivial
renormalization ﬂow. Indeed the ﬂatness constraint behaves very nicely under coarse-graining, as illustrated on ﬁg.12 :
considering a spin network graph, imposing the ﬂatness of the connection on all small loops garanties that larger loops
will be ﬂat too. All these features must reﬂect in any proposal for the quantum dynamics of BF theory.

5 In order to identify a complete set of operators acting on the Hilbert space Hloopy, we should further consider multi-loops holonomy
operators or grasping operators or deformation operators such as U(N ) operators [61], but in the ﬁrst exploration we propose, in this
paper, we decide to focus on the single-loop holonomy operator.

6 Once the dynamics of BF theory is properly implemented and well under control in a certain framework, one usually use it as a starting
point for imposing the true gravity dynamics, with local degrees of freedom, relying on the reformulation of general relativity as a BF
theory with constraints. This is for instance the logic behind the construction of spinfoam models for a quantum gravity path integral
[21–23].

•

•

I

•

•

I

•

•

•

•

•

I

•

•

•

18

FIG. 12: In BF theory, holonomies behave very nicely under coarse-graining. If each small loops is ﬂat, large

loops are ﬂat too. In other words, the physical state of BF theory is a ﬂat space, which is ﬂat at all scales.

Considering the full space of loopy spin networks on some arbitrary graph Γ, we would like the BF Hamiltonian
constraints to project onto the ﬂat connection state(s), that is impose ﬂatness around all the loops of the graph Γ
and also kill all the local excitations represented by the little loops at every vertex. Flatness around the loops of the
background graph is the standard result for BF constraints. So here we will focus on the fate of the little loops, that
we introduced. To this purpose, it suﬃces to focus on a single vertex, that is to work on the ﬂower graph.

Considering the ﬂower graph with arbitrary number of loops, as we have deﬁned above, we introduce the following

set of constraints:

∀ℓ ∈ N,

(cid:0) ˆχℓ − 2(cid:1)|Ψi = 0 .

(35)

We impose one constraint for every (possible) loop by imposing that the corresponding holonomy operator saturates
its bound and projects on its highest eigenvalue. These constraints all commute with each other. Let us underline
the dual role of Hamiltonian constraints. As ﬁrst class constraints, we need to solve them and identify their solution
space, but they also generate gauge transformations and we need to gauge out their action. Here, the holonomy
constraint operators both impose the ﬂatness of the connection, but they also imply that the little loops are pure
gauge, so that their action can change the number of loops to arbitrary values. We will see below that these one-loop
holonomy constraints are almost enough to fully constrain the theory to the single ﬂat state on the ﬂower graph.

Let us solve these constraints and consider a loop ℓ0 and its action of its holonomy operatorbχℓ0 on a wave-function

Ψ ∈ HE with support on the ﬁnite subset E ⊂ N of loops. A ﬁrst case is when ℓ0 ∈ E belongs to the subset, in which
case we have a simple functional equation on SU(2)E:

( ˆχℓ0 Ψ) ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) = χ 1

2

(hℓ0)Ψ ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) = 2 Ψ ({hℓ}ℓ∈E) .

The second case is when the considered loop ℓ0 /∈ E doesn’t belong to the subset. The holonomy operator ˆχℓ0 then
creates a loop, making a transition from H0
E∪{ℓ0}. This illustrates that the ﬂow generated
by those Hamiltonian constraints can arbitrarily shift the number of loops and therefore the little loops become pure
gauge at the dynamical level in BF theory. This also means that there is no solution to all holonomy constraints with
support on a ﬁnite subset E and a physical state must have support on all possible loops.

E to the orthogonal space H0

To be rigorous, we need to go to the dual space (Hloopy)∗ and solve the holonomy constraints on the space of
distribution deﬁned in the projective limit. We are looking for a family of distributions ϕE on SU(2)E, that is
continuous linear forms over smooth functions on SU(2)E (see appendix B 1 for a discussion of the deﬁnition of
distributions over SU(2)). The cylindrical consistency means that their evaluations on two cylindrically equivalent
smooth functions must be equal:

∀E ⊂ eE , fE ∼ f eE ⇒ ϕE(fE) =ZSU(2)E

Then the holonomy constraints read:

ϕEfE = ZSU(2) eE

ϕ eEf eE = ϕ eE(f eE) .

∀ℓ ∈ N , ∀E ∋ ℓ , ∀fE ∈ C∞

SU(2)E , ZSU(2)E

ϕE(χℓ − 2)fE = 0 ,

where we have considered by default that the loop ℓ belongs to the wave-function support E. Indeed, if ℓ didn’t belong
to E, then we could enlarge the subset E to E ∪ {ℓ} by cylindrical consistency and consider both the test function f
and the distribution ϕ as living on that larger subset. Our goal is to show that the unique solution to these equations
is the ﬂat state, i.e. that there exists λ ∈ C such that ϕE = λ δ⊗E:

∀fE ∈ C∞

SU(2)E , ϕE(fE) = λδE(fE) = λZSU(2)E Yℓ∈E

δ(hℓ)fE({hℓ}ℓ∈E) = λfE(I, .., I) .

(36)

19

Cylindrical consistency simply requires that the factor λ does not depend on the subset E. So we are led to solve the
holonomy constrain on every ﬁnite subset E. Thus, let us consider the functional equation on SU(2)N :

where we drop the subset label E.

∀1 ≤ ℓ ≤ N , ( ˆχℓ − 2) ϕ = 0 ,

1. Holonomy constraint on SU(2)

Let us start with the one-loop case and solve for distributions ϕ on SU(2) the equation:

∀h ∈ SU(2) , χ 1

2

(h)ϕ(h) = 2ϕ(h) .

(37)

(38)

2

Since the character χ 1
is smooth and reaches its maximum value 2 at a single point, the identity I, it seems natural that
the ϕ must be a distribution peaked at the identity. We therefore expect that the only solution be the δ-distribution
and that the ﬁrst derivatives of the
on SU(2), ϕ = δ. However, since the identity is actually an extremum of χ 1
character thus vanishes at this point, this equation admit more solutions: the ﬁrst derivatives of the δ-distribution.
This clearly came as a surprise for us.

2

Let us ﬁrst assume that ϕ is gauge-invariant, i.e. invariant under conjugation. Its Fourier decomposition on SU(2)

involves only the characters in all spins:

ϕ =Xj∈ N

2

ϕjχj .

As well known, the holonomy constraint leads to a recursion relation on the coeﬃcients ϕj :

χ 1
2

χj = χj− 1

2

+ χj+ 1

2

⇒

2ϕ0 = ϕ 1

2

,

2ϕj≥ 1

2

= ϕj− 1

2

+ ϕj+ 1

2

.

Once the initial condition ϕ0 is ﬁxed, these lead to a unique solution:

ϕj = (2j + 1)ϕ0 ,

ϕ = ϕ0Xj

(2j + 1)χj = ϕ0δ .

(39)

(40)

When solving such functional equations in the Fourier basis, one should nevertheless be very careful to work with
well-deﬁned distributions. These are characterized by Fourier coeﬃcients ϕj growing at most polynomially with the

spin j. This ensures that evaluations R f ϕ of the distribution ϕ on smooth test functions f are convergent series.

The δ-distribution is clearly a good solution. But, as an example, solving for eigenvectors of the holonomy operator
associated to (real) eigenvalues (strictly) larger than 2 would lead to exponentially growing Fourier coeﬃcients, which
are too divergent to deﬁne a proper distribution. The interested reader will ﬁnd more details in the appendix B 1.

On the space of functions invariant under conjugation, everything works as expected. Let us now consider the

general case dropping the requirement of gauge-invariance. The δ-distribution is obviously still a solution:

∀f ∈ C∞

SU(2) , Z f (χ 1

2

− 2) δ = (χ 1

2

(I) − 2)f (I) = 0 .

But, now the ﬁrst derivatives of the δ-distributions are also solutions:

∀f ∈ C∞

SU(2) , Z f (χ 1

2

− 2) ∂xδ = −(∂xχ 1

2

) f − (χ 1

2

(41)

(42)

= 0 ,

− 2) f(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)I

where x ∈ R3 indicates the direction of the derivative and the derivatives of the character vanish at the identity since
it is a extremum. We remind the reader that the right-derivative ∂R
x on SU(2) is a anti-Hermitian operator (i∂ is
Hermitian) deﬁned by the inﬁnitesimal action of the su(2) generator ~x · ~J (where the ~J in the fundamental spin- 1
2
representation are simply half the Pauli matrices):

∂R
x f (h) = lim
ǫ→0

f (heiǫ~x· ~J ) − f (h)

ǫ

= f (h x) , with x = ~x · ~J .

(43)

We usually diﬀerentiate along the three directions in R3 ∼ su(2) leading to the insertion of the generators Ja=1,2,3:

20

Acting on the δ-distribution gives the following Fourier decomposition for its derivatives ∂L

a δ = ∂R

a δ = ∂aδ:

∂R
a f (h) = if (hJa) ,

∂L
a f (h) = if (Jah) .

∂aδ(h) = iXj

(2j + 1)Dj

nm(Ja) Dj

mn(h) ,

(44)

(45)

where we use the Wigner matrices for the group element h and the su(2) generators.

We can actually generate a whole tower of higher derivative solutions to the holonomy constraints. We simply need
2 character vanishes at the identity. Thus, at second

to identify the diﬀerential operators whose action on the spin- 1
order, we get ﬁve new independent solutions given by the following operators:

∂1∂2 , ∂1∂3 , ∂2∂3 , (∂1∂1 − ∂2∂2) , (∂1∂1 − ∂3∂3) ,

(46)

that is the ∂a∂b and (∂a∂a − ∂b∂b) for a 6= b. Following this logic, we will get 7 new independent solutions at third
order, and so on with (2n + 1) independent diﬀerential operators at order n, for a total of (n + 1)2 independent
solutions to the holonomy constraints given by diﬀerential operators of order at most n acting on the δ-distribution.
Such as in the conjugation-invariant case, it is enlightening to switch to the Fourier decomposition and translate
the holonomy constraint into a recursion relation on the Fourier coeﬃcients. The diﬀerence is that we had one
Fourier coeﬃcient ϕj for each spin j in the gauge-invariant case while in the general case ϕj is a (2j + 1) × (2j + 1)
matrix. Implementing the recursion, we start from spin 0 and work the way up to higher spins. The problem is that
the recursion relations determine only (2j)2 matrix elements of ϕj in terms of the lower spins coeﬃcients, leaving
(2j + 1)2 − (2j)2 = (4j + 1) matrix elements free to be speciﬁed as initial conditions. This leads to an inﬁnite number
of solutions to the recursion relations, which reproduces the tower of higher order derivative solutions. The interested
reader will ﬁnd all of the details on the recursion relations in appendix B 2.

2.

Introducing the Laplacian constraint on SU(2)

If we work with a single loop, a single petal on the ﬂower, then the wave-function is obviously gauge-invariant and
we do not have to deal with these extra solutions to the holonomy constraint7. However, as soon as we add external
legs attached to the vertex (linking the ﬂower to other vertices in the graph) or add more loops, then we have to ﬁnd
a way to suppress those derivative solutions, in ∂aδ and so on, which would lead to extra degrees of freedom as some
kind of polarized ﬂat states.

Since we want to ensure the full ﬂatness of the holonomy, the most natural proposal is to constrain all the components

of the group element living on the loop and not only its trace:

∀m, n = ±

1
2

, D

1
2

mn(h) ϕ(h) = δmn ϕ(h) .

One can indeed check, both from the diﬀerential calculus point of view or the recursion relations in Fourier space,
that these equations admit the δ-distribution as unique solutions. We can also go beyond multiplicative operators
and insert some diﬀerential operators. Then supplementing the trace holonomy constraint with the other constraints
χ 1
∂a ϕ = 2∂aϕ for a = 1, 2, 3 also ensures a unique ﬂat solution. However, these constraints are not gauge-invariant:
the constraint operators map wave-functions invariant under conjugation to non-invariant functions.

2

7 Indeed, since we already proved that the δ-distribution is the only gauge-invariant solution to the holonomy constraint, all the derivative
solutions can not be gauge-invariant. We can also prove this directly. To get a solution invariant under conjugation, we need to contract
the derivative indices together. Now a fundamental theorem on rotational invariants states that all SO(3)-invariant polynomial of n
3d-vectors ~vi=1..n are generated by scalar products ~vi · ~vj and triple products ~vi · (~vj ∧ ~vk). We simply have to check that the Laplacian
and triple-grasping of the δ-distribution are not solutions of the holonomy constraints:

Z f (χ 1

2

− 2)∂a∂aδ = ∆χ 1
2

(I) f (I) =

−3
2

f (I) 6= 0 ,

Z f (χ 1

2

− 2)ǫabc∂a∂b∂cδ =

−i3
23

ǫabcχ 1
2

(σcσbσa) f (I) =

3
2

f (I) 6= 0 .

In order to keep gauge-invariant constraints, we go to the second derivatives and consider the Laplacian operator.
a , and we

a ∂R

Actually, we introduce the right-Laplacian ∆ ≡Pa ∂R

propose a new constraint8:

a ∂R

a and a mixed Laplacian operator e∆ ≡Pa ∂L
∆ϕ = e∆ϕ ,

At the classical level, the diﬀerential operator ∂a represents the ﬂux vector Xa: the right derivative represents the
ﬂux ~X s at the source of the loop while the left derivative is the ﬂux ~X t at the target of the loop. The target ﬂux is
equal to the source ﬂux parallely transported around the loop by the holonomy h. The Laplacian constraint is the
equality of the scalar product ~X t · ~X s with the squared norm ~X s · ~X s and therefore means that the two ﬂux are equal,
~X s = ~X t. This implies the ﬂatness of the group element h (up to the U(1) stabilizer of the ﬂux vector).

At the quantum level, the Laplacian constraint turns out to play a diﬀerent role. It implies the invariance of the

wave-function by conjugation:

21

(47)

(48)

∆ϕ = e∆ϕ ⇒ ∀h, g ∈ SU(2) , ϕ(h) = ϕ(ghg−1) .

We rigorously prove this statement in the appendix B 3 solving explicitly the recursion relations implied by the
Laplacian constraint on the Fourier coeﬃcients of ϕ. Another way to understand the relation of the Laplacian
constraint to the invariance under conjugation is to think in terms of spin recoupling. Let us call ~J L,R respectively
the su(2) generators living at the two ends of the loop and deﬁning the left and right derivations. The two Casimirs,
given by the two scalar products ~J L · ~J L and ~J R · ~J R, are equal and their (eigen)value is j(j + 1) is the loop carries
the spin j. Then the Laplacian constraint means that their recoupling is trivial:

0 = ~J R · ~J R − ~J R · ~J L =

( ~J R − ~J L)2 ,

1
2

(49)

so that the two ends of the loop recouple to the trivial representation, i.e. the spin-0. As illustrated on ﬁg.13, this

also allows to show that the Laplacian constraint operator (e∆ − ∆) is positive and its spectrum is k(k + 1)/2 where

k is an integer running from 0 to (2j) if the loop carries the spin j. One can also see that the derivatives of the

~J L
•

~J R

k

j

FIG. 13: The left and right derivations respectively act as graspings at the source and target of the loop,

inserting su(2) generators in the wave-functions. The Laplacian operator (e∆ − ∆) then measures the diﬀerence

between the two scalar products ~J R · ~J R and ~J R · ~J L, or equivalently the Casimir ( ~J R − ~J L)2/2 of the recoupling
of the spins at the two ends of the loop. Assuming that the loop carries the spin j then recoupling j with itself

gives a spin k running from 0 to (2j).

δ-distribution are eigenstates of (e∆ − ∆) with non-vanishing eigenvalues. For example, we compute:

a δ = i3Xb (cid:2)f (JaJbJb) − f (JbJaJb)(cid:3) = −if (Ja) = +Z f ∂R

Z f (e∆ − ∆)∂R

a δ ,

and so on with higher order diﬀerential operators. In particular, the derivative distribution ∂aδ corresponds to the
eigenvalue k(k + 1)/2 for k = 1. Higher order derivatives will explore higher eigenvalues.

(50)

8 As an example, we can see how ∆ and e∆ diﬀer through their action on the coupled character χ(h1h2):
4 (cid:0)2χ 1

(h1σaσah2) = −

(σah1σah2) = −

(h1h2) = −

(h1h2) = −

∆1χ 1
2

(h1h2) ,

χ 1
2

3
4

χ 1
2

1
4

χ 1
2

1
4

1

(h1)χ 1
2

2

(h2) − χ 1
2

(h1h2)(cid:1) ,

e∆1χ 1

2

which are of course equal at h1 = I.

To conclude, the original holonomy constraint, supplemented with the new Laplacian constraint, acting on functions
on SU(2) admit the δ-distribution as unique solution: the Laplacian constraint imposes invariance under conjugation
while the holonomy constraint then imposes the ﬂatness of the group element along the loop.

Proposition III.2. There is a unique solution (up to a numerical factor) as a distribution over SU(2) to the holonomy
and Laplacian constraints:

22

=⇒ ∃λ ∈ C , ϕ(h) = λ δ(h) .

(51)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(bχ − 2) ϕ = 0
(∆ −e∆) ϕ = 0

Below, we look at the generic case of an arbitrary number of loops. We will show that we can supplement the
holonomy constraints around each loop either with Laplacian constraints for each loop or with multi-loop holonomy
constraints (that still act by multiplication) wrapping around several loops at once.

3. Holonomy constraints on SU(2)N for N ≥ 2

We now turn to the holonomy constraints on SU(2)N :

with the requirement of invariance under simultaneous conjugation of all the arguments hℓ. Since we do not require
the invariance under the individual action of conjugation on each little loop, the gauge invariance is not enough to
kill the spurious solution identiﬁed above. As proposed above, we can reach the uniqueness of the physical state by
further imposing the Laplacian constraint on each loop:

∀1 ≤ ℓ ≤ N, (bχℓ − 2)ϕ = 0 ,

This now implies the invariance of the wave-function under the individual action of conjugation on each loop. In
terms of spin recoupling, each little loop is linked to the vertex by a spin-0, as illustrated on ﬁg.14, this eﬀectively
trivializes the intertwiner space living at the vertex and the loops can be thought of as decoupled from one another.
The holonomy constraints then impose that the only solution state is the δ-distribution.

∀ℓ ∈ N , (e∆ℓ − ∆ℓ) ϕ = 0 .

(52)

j3

j2

j4

•

•

k4

k5
•

k3
•

k6

•

k2

k1

•

•

j1

j5

j6

FIG. 14: The Laplacian constraint on a loop ℓ constraint the spin jℓ carried by the loop to recouple with itself
into the trivial representation with vanishing spin kℓ = 0.
Imposing this constraint on every loop, the vertex

then recouples a collection of spin-0, the intertwiner is thus trivial and the loops are totally decoupled.

Instead of imposing the Laplacian constraints, another way to proceed is to introduce multi-loop holonomy con-
straints. To prove this, let us start by describing the gauge-invariant derivative solutions to the holonomy constraints.
ℓ=1 δ(hℓ). Then to
ensure invariance under simultaneous conjugation, one must contract all the indices with a SO(3)-invariant tensor I:

The general structure is as follows. One acts with arbitrary derivatives on the δ-distribution QN

ϕI ({hℓ}) = X{aℓ

i }i=1..nℓ

I a1

1..aN
nN

NYℓ=1

∂aℓ

1

..∂aℓ
nℓ

δ(hℓ) ,

(53)

where nℓ is the order of the diﬀerential operator acting on the loop ℓ, for an overall order n = Pℓ nℓ, and I is a

rotational invariant tensor deﬁning the contraction of the diﬀerential indices a’s, i.e.
spin-1 representations.

it is an intertwiner between n

23

To be explicit, for n = 2 diﬀerential insertions, there is a single invariant tensor: I ab = δab. Either we act with the
two derivatives on the same group elements, but then we already know that ∆δ is not a solution to the holonomy

constraint, or we act on two diﬀerent loops getting the non-trivial distributionPa ∂aδ(h1)∂aδ(h2) (here we put aside

all the other loops, where no diﬀerential operator act):

∂aδ1∂aδ2 |f i = −f (Ja, Ja) ,

(54)

hXa

which yields the evaluation f (Ja, Ja) of the spin network state obtained by acting with the double grasping Ja ⊗ Ja
on the test wave-function f . We easily check that this provides a solution to the individual one-loop holonomy
constraints:

∀f ∈ C∞

SU(2)2 , Z f (χ 1

2

(h1) − 2)

3Xa

∂aδ(h1)∂aδ(h2) = 0 ,

(55)

The double grasping, as shown on ﬁg.15, couples the two loops. The goal is to suppress such coupling between the
two loops in order to get as unique solution the factorized ﬂat state δ⊗N where all the loops are entirely decoupled.
To make the system more rigid, the natural constraint to introduce is a two-loop holonomy constraint, which would

h1

•

• ∂a

•
∂a

h2

h3

FIG. 15: We act with derivatives ∂a on the group elements h1 and h2 and contract the indices, which translates

graphically as a double grasping linking the two loops.

kill any correlation between the two loops:

We check that this two-loop constraint eliminates the coupled solution proposed above:

(bχ12 − 2)ϕ(h1, h2) ≡ (χ 1

2

(h1h2) − 2)ϕ(h1, h2) = 0 .

(56)

(57)

Z f (χ 1

2

(h1h2) − 2)

3Xa

∂aδ(h1)∂aδ(h2) = f ∆χ 1

=

3
2

f (I, I) 6= 0 .

2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)I

For n = 3 diﬀerential insertions, we still have a unique intertwiner, given by the completely antisymmetric tensor
ǫabc. This corresponds a triple grasping. The three derivatives can all act on the same loop, in which case we do
not get a solution of the one-loop holonomy constraint, or they can act on two diﬀerent loops, in which case it is not
a solution of the two-loop holonomy constraints we have just introduced, or they can act on three diﬀerent loops in
which case we need to introduce a three-loop holonomy constraint to discard it:

Z f (χ 1

2

(h1h2h3) − 2)ǫabc∂aδ(h1)∂bδ(h2)∂cδ(h3) = −

3

i
2

f (I)ǫabcχ 1

2

(σaσbσc) = −

3i
2

f (I) 6= 0 .

(58)

For an arbitrary number n of diﬀerential insertions acting on the N loops, the grasping will potentially couple the

N loops. In order to kill all those coupled solutions, we introduce all multi-loop holonomy constraints:

∀E ⊂ {1, .., N } , hχ 1

2(cid:0)Yℓ∈E

hℓ(cid:1) − 2i ϕ = 0 .

(59)

24

The ordering of the group elements is important of course for the precise deﬁnition of the multi-loop operator but is
irrelevant to ensure that the action of the corresponding constraint operator on the coupled derivative distributions
does not vanish.
In fact, looking deeper into the structure of SO(3)-invariant tensors, a fundamental theorem on
rotational invariants states that all SO(3)-invariant polynomial of n 3d-vectors ~vi=1..n are generated by scalar products
~vi ·~vj and triple products ~vi ·(~vj ∧~vk). This means that we only need the two-loop and three-loop holonomy constraints
to ensure that the ﬂat state, deﬁned as the δ-distribution, is the only solution to the Hamiltonian constraints.

4. The full Hamiltonian constraints for BF theory on loopy spin networks

To summarize the implementation of BF theory on loopy spin networks, we have introduced individual holonomy
constraints on each little loop around each vertex of the background graph. This is the usual procedure, for instance
when constructing spinfoam amplitudes for BF theory from a canonical point of view. Surprisingly, these constraints
are not strong enough to fully constraint the theory to the single ﬂat state and kill al the little loop excitations. This
can be backtracked to the simple fact that the identity I is an extremum of the SU(2)-character χ 1
and thus the
derivative of the character vanishes at that point. As a result, the δ-function on SU(2) is not the unique solution to
the holonomy constraints, but its ﬁrst derivative are also solutions. While all the solution distributions are peaked
on the identity and vanish elsewhere, we are allowed grasping operators coupling the loops together. To forbid such
such coupling and force to have a unique physical state, we have showed that we can supplement the original one-loop
holonomy constraints with either one-loop Laplacian constraints or with multi-loop holonomy constraints, which leads
us to two proposals for the Hamiltonian constraints for BF theory on loopy intertwiners:

2

• We impose on each loop two gauge-invariant constraints, the holonomy constraint that acts by multiplication

and the Laplacian constraint which acts by diﬀerentiation:

• We impose all multi-loop holonomy constraints, requiring not only that the group elements hℓ on each loop ℓ is
the identity I but also that all their products remain ﬂat. This means one constraint for each ﬁnite subset E of
the set of all loops:

∀ℓ ,

bχℓ ϕ = 2ϕ , ∆ℓ ϕ = e∆ℓ ϕ .

(60)

∀E ⊂ N,

bχE ϕ = 2ϕ ,

bχE ϕ({hℓ}ℓ∈N) = χ 1

2(cid:16)Yℓ∈E

hℓ(cid:17) ϕ({hℓ}ℓ∈N) .

(61)

The ordering of the group elements does not matter in order to impose the ﬂatness. These multi-loop constraints
kill any correlation or entanglement between the loops. It is actually suﬃcient to impose only the two-loop and
three-loop holonomy constraints.

If we only impose the one-loop holonomy constraints, then the totally ﬂat state deﬁned by the δ-distribution is not
the only physical state. We get an inﬁnite-dimensional space of physical states, obtained by the action of ﬁrst order
grasping operators on the δ-distribution, allowing for non-trivial coupling and correlations between the little loops.
It would be interesting to understand the geometrical meaning of those states and if they play a special role9in the
spinfoam models for BF theory (the Ponzano-Regge and Turaev-Viro models for 3d BF theory and the Crane-Yetter
model for 4d BF theory). Maybe those local excitations could provide a ﬁrst extension of the topological BF theory
to a ﬁeld theory with local degrees of freedom.

On the other hand, imposing the full set of Hamiltonian constraints proposed above leads to a unique physical state
for BF theory: the ﬂat state ϕBF = δ. This physical state is clearly not normalizable. But since it is unique, it is not
a big problem to deﬁne the scalar product on this ﬁnal one-dimension Hilbert space10. The physical scalar product

9 As an example, we have in mind the recursion relation satisﬁed by the 6j symbol, which is understood to be the expression of the action
of the holonomy operator on the ﬂat state on the tetrahedron graph [62–64]. Our results suggest that the double and triple graspings on
the 6j symbol might be other solutions to this recursion relation.That would be specially interesting since the triply grasped 6j symbols
is understood to be the ﬁrst order correction of the q-deformed 6j-symbol [65].

10 If we had more solutions to the constraints, for example if we only impose the holonomy constraints without the Laplacian constraints,
we would propose to render the distributions normalizable by modulating them by a damping operator exp(−τ ∆) (heat kernel) or
similar. Expanding all the functions and distributions in Fourier modes, all the scalar products would become ﬁnite and we could then

25

on the initial Hilbert space of loopy spin networks is deﬁned by projecting on this physical state, which amounts at
the end of the day to simply evaluate the wave-functions at the identity i.e. on ﬂat connections:

∀f, ˜f ∈ Hloopy ,

hf | ˜f iphys = hf |ϕBF i hϕBF | ˜f i = hϕBF |f i hϕBF | ˜f i = f (I) ˜f (I) .

(62)

As expected, we are left with a single physical state on the ﬂower, the little loops have been projected out and all
local degrees of freedom have disappeared.

Now that we have checked that loopy spin networks allow for a correct implementation of BF theory’s topological
dynamics, we would like to later introduce Hamiltonian constraints allowing for local degrees of freedom. We wouldn’t
want to kill the little loops as happens for BF theory. The goal would be to have dynamics coupling the little loops
to the spins living on the links of the background graph, in such a way that it reproduces the propagation of the
local geometry excitations of general relativity in a continuum limit. The strategy would be to slightly modify the
BF dynamics -“constrain the BF theory”- most likely following the approaches for the dynamics of discrete/twisted
geometries [63, 66, 67] or of EPRL spinfoam models [15, 16, 23].

IV. THE FOCK SPACE OF LOOPY SPIN NETWORKS

Up to now, we have introduced the loopy spin network states, on a ﬁxed background graph with an arbitrary
number of little loop excitations attached to each vertex. Here we would like to tackle the issue of endowing these
local loops with bosonic statistics and deﬁne the Fock space of loop spin networks over a background skeleton graph
with indistinguishable little loops living at its vertices.

From the perspective of coarse-graining, the little loops represent curvature excitations within the bounded region
coarse-grained to a single vertex. Keeping these little loops distinguishable amounts to remembering that they are
excitations of diﬀerent parts of the internal geometry of that region, while fully coarse-graining the region should erase
any memory of internal localization and the little loops should be considered as indistinguishable: incoming energy
at the vertex would then equally excite any of those loops, irrespective to their a priori diﬀerent localization on the
internal subgraph that we coarse-grained.

In this section, we will thus symmetrize our spin network states over the little loops attached at each vertex. The
diﬃculty reside in the compatibility of the symmetrization with the cylindrical consistency.
Indeed, a little loop
carrying a spin-0 is considering as a non-existing loop, and vice-versa. We cannot symmetrize these non-existing
loops with the other loops carrying non-trivial spins: since we would like to allow for an inﬁnite number of loops, the
symmetrization operation would be ill-deﬁned. In the framework of usual quantum ﬁeld theory, this would be similar
to considering particles carrying a vanishing momentum as non-existent. We would have to update the deﬁnition
of the symmetrization to take this new fact into account. Here, we will show how to systematically subtract the 0-
modes components of the loopy spin network states, symmetrize over non-trivial little loops and deﬁne an appropriate
holonomy operator acting on symmetrized states. A resulting subtlety is that we will be led to distinguish three
components of the holonomy operator, that respectively conserves the number of loops, acts as a creation operator
adding one little loop or as an annihilation operator removing a loop.

A. Bosonics statistics for loops

We would like to deﬁne symmetrized loopy intertwiner states in Hloopy. A direct way would be to work directly on
states with an arbitrary number of loops11, but imposing invariance under the symmetry group for a inﬁnite number
of loops introduces a lof of technicalities. So we follow a more constructive approach and work with ﬁnite number of
loops, symmetrize and then allow for varying number of loops.

compute expectation values of operators on the resulting physical Hilbert space, for instance:

Z δe−τ ∆δ = Xj

(2j + 1)2e−τ j(j+1) < +∞ ,

Z δe−τ ∆∂aδ = iXj

(2j + 1)2e−τ j(j+1)χj (Ja) = 0 .

But we haven’t investigated this line of research further.

11 We would use an extension of the ﬁnite symmetry groups Sn to the group of permutations of integers which only act non-trivially on

a ﬁnite subset:

S∞ = {f : N → N, f bijective and ∃n ∈ N, ∀m > n, f (m) = m} .

26

We start from the deﬁnition of the loopy states in terms of proper states, Hloopy =LE∈P<∞(N) H0

E. This decom-
position has removed all spin-0 and avoids all of the redundancies due to the cylindrical consistency. We can now
symmetrize the states. For each number of loops N , we consider gauge-invariant wave-functions, symmetric under
the exchange of the N loops and such that no loop carries a vanishing spin. The full symmetrized Hilbert space Hsym
will then be the direct sum over N of all the ﬁnite symmetrized states.

Let us realize this programme explicitly. We start with the Hilbert space Hsym

N of wave-functions, f ∈ L2(SU(2)×N ),

gauge-invariant and symmetrized on N loops:

∀k ∈ SU(2),
∀σ ∈ SN ,

f (h1, ..., hN ) = f (kh1k−1, ..., khN k−1) ,
f (h1, ..., hN ) = f (hσ(1), ..., hσ(N )) .

We deﬁne the subspace of proper states, removing the 0 mode:

H0

N =(f ∈ Hsym

N : Z dh1 f (h1, ..., hN ) = 0) .

(63)

(64)

We only need to impose one integration condition, since the function is invariant under permutation of its arguments.
We have a simpliﬁed version of the decomposition onto proper states given in lemma III.1:

Lemma IV.1. The Hilbert space of symmetrized states on N loops decomposes as a direct sum of the Hilbert spaces
of proper symmetrized states on at most N loops:

This isomorphism is realized through a combinatorial transform of the wave-functions:

Hsym

N =

H0
n .

NMn=0

∀f ∈ Hsym
N ,

f =

fn(h1, .., hn) =

(−1)n−mZ
nXm=0

nYi=m+1

dki

NXn=0 X1≤i1<..<in≤N
NYi=n+1

dgi X1≤i1<..<im≤n

fn(cid:0)hi1, .., hin(cid:1) ,

fn ∈ H0
n

f(cid:0)hi1, .., him , km+1, .., kn−m, gn+1, .., gN(cid:1) .

The scalar product is given by the integration with respect to the Haar measure. The integral condition (absence of
0-mode) for the proper states implies that two proper states with diﬀerent support are immediately orthogonal:

(65)

(66)

(67)

(68)

N ,

∀f,ef ∈ Hsym

hf |ef iN = Z NYi=1

dhi f (h1, .., hN )ef (h1, .., hN ) =

NXn=0(cid:18) N

n (cid:19) hfn|efnin .

In the resummation formula (66) above, the sum over labels 1 ≤ i1 < .. < in ≤ N corresponds to the sum over
all subsets with n elements -or n-uplets- among the ﬁrst N integers {1, .., N }. And the injection of the proper state
Hilbert space H0
N requires this sum over all possible choices of n-uplets. This
leads to the binomial coeﬃcient in the scalar product formula (68). This is a clear remnant of having distinguishable
loops. Once the little loops are assumed to be bosonic and fully indistinguishable, there is no reason to distinguish a
state fn(ha1 , .., han ) from fn(hb1, .., hbn ) with diﬀerent choice of n-uplets.

n in the larger symmetrized space Hsym

We would use the canonical action of S∞ on the Hilbert spaces of loopy spin networks HE with ﬁnite number of loops:

This action is compatible with the cylindrical consistency conditions and naturally extends to the projective limit. However, requiring
invariance of states |Ψi ∈ Hloopy under permutations, ∀σ ∈ S∞, σ ⊲ |Ψi = |Ψi, only provides non-normalizable states. This forces us
to work on the dual space to deﬁne symmetrized states and creates unnecessary technicalities for our present purpose.

σ : HE → Hσ(E) ,

(σ ⊲ f )({hei }) = f ({hσ−1(ei)}) .

Therefore, to deﬁne bosonic states in the projective limit N → ∞, we will keep the decomposition as a direct sum
n deﬁning the tower of symmetrized states, but we will modify the scalar product

of vector spaces Hsym
to remove its dependence on N and make it compatible with the projective limit:

n=0 H0

N =LN

27

This is achieved by simply including the symmetrizing factor in the deﬁnition of the injection IN,N +1 : Hsym
of wave-functions of N loops seen as wave-functions of (N + 1) loops:

N ֒→ Hsym

N +1

N

hf |ef ibosonic

=

NXn=0

hfn|efnin .

(69)

(70)

(72)

N

f ∈ Hsym

7→ IN,N +1f ∈ Hsym

f (h1, ..,bhi, .., hN +1) ,
where the element bhi means that we omit it from the list of arguments. This generalizes to injections Hsym

(cid:0)IN,N +1f(cid:1)(h1, .., hN +1) =

using the binomial coeﬃcients:

N +1 ,

N + 1

1

N +1Xi=1

N ֒→ Hsym

N +p

N (cid:19)−1
(cid:0)IN,N +pf(cid:1)(h1, .., hN +p) = (cid:18) N + p

X1≤i1<..<iN ≤N +p

f (hi1 , .., hiN ) .

(71)

f ∈ Hsym

N

7→ IN,N +pf ∈ Hsym

N +p ,

These factors compensate the binomial factors from the scalar product formula (68). As we will see a little bit further,
on symmetric states is the one which makes the holonomy operator(s) Hermitian. Then

we can deﬁne the Fock space of loopy spin networks with bosonic little loop excitations.

this scalar product hf |ef ibosonic

N

Deﬁnition IV.2. The full Fock space of symmetrized loop states is deﬁned as the projective limit of the Hilbert spaces
Hsym
N , endowed with the bosonic scalar product (69), which amounts to the direct sum of the spaces of proper states:

Hsym ≡ MN ∈N

H0

N ,

∀f,ef ∈ Hsym ,

hf |ef i =

∞XN =0
hfN |efN i .

This describes bosonic excitations of the holonomy at each vertex of the base graph for the loopy spin network
states. This Fock space of little loops at a vertex have states for an arbitrary number of indistinguishable loops, that
can be created and annihilated, each of them carrying a spin jℓ ∈ N/2 encoding the corresponding excitation of the
geometry (area quanta). The spin carried by a loop is similar to the momentum carried by a particle. One must
nevertheless keep in mind two diﬀerences with the usual Fock space construction used in standard quantum ﬁeld
theory:

• 0-modes are pure gauge: First, we have implemented explicitly the cylindrical consistency requirement in the
deﬁnition of the Fock space of loopy spin networks. A little loop carrying a spin-0 is identiﬁed to a vanishing
excitation, i.e. a non-existing loop, so we have systematically removed them using proper states. This is similar
to removing particle states with 0-momentum.

• Non-trivial intertwiner structure: Second, for a given number of loops carrying some given spins, the loopy spin
network state still contains more information: the state requires the data of an intertwiner linking all these little
loops together (and to the external legs of the vertex). Each time we create a loop, the intertwiner space at the
vertex is further enlarged. This extra structure implies that factorized states do not constitute a basis of the
Fock space of loopy intertwiners.

After describing factorized states below, we will deﬁne the holonomy operators acting on the Fock space of symmetrized
states and show how they shift the number of loops and become the basic creation and annihilation operators.

B. Factorized states and δ-distribution

It is interesting to check how factorized state, with no correlations between the loops, get decomposed onto proper
states. Let us consider a integrable function ϕ on SU(2). We assume it to be invariant under conjugation, so that it
can be decomposed over the SU(2)-characters for all spins:

∀h, g ∈ SU(2) , ϕ(h) = ϕ(ghg−1) ,

ϕ(h) =Xj∈ N

2

ϕjχj(h) .

(73)

We consider the N -loop symmetric state ϕ⊗N and check its proper state decompositon by the combinatorial formula
given above in the lemma IV.1:

28

ϕ⊗N

0

= (cid:18)Z ϕ(cid:19)N

= ϕN
0 ,

(74)

0

0

0

ϕ⊗N

2

n (h1, .., hn) = ϕN −n
ϕ⊗N

0(cid:3) = ϕN −2

0

We can check the scalar product formula (68):

ϕ⊗N
(h) = ϕN −1
1
(h1, h2) = ϕN −2

(cid:2)ϕ(h) − ϕ0(cid:3) ,
(cid:2)ϕ(h1)ϕ(h2) − ϕ0ϕ(h1) − ϕ0ϕ(h2) + ϕ2
nXm=0
(−1)n−m X1≤i1<..<im≤n
NXn (cid:18) N

(cid:2)ϕ(h1) − ϕ0(cid:3)(cid:2)ϕ(h2) − ϕ0(cid:3) ,
nYi=1(cid:2)ϕ(hi) − ϕ0(cid:3) .
 Z |ϕ|2!N
n (cid:19)Z (cid:12)(cid:12)ϕ⊗N
NXn (cid:18) N
n (cid:12)(cid:12)2
the one-loop wave-function ϕ0 =R ϕ = 1, then the projections of the factorized state do not depend anymore on the

First, we notice that the proper state projections are still factorized. We are merely consistently removing the
spin-0 component from all the loops, without creating any correlation during the process. Second, if we normalize

number of loops N and we can take the projective limit. We can deﬁne a factorized state ϕ⊗∞ with support on an
inﬁnite number of loops by taking the limit N → ∞. We deﬁne its components, dropping the useless ∞ label:

=  |ϕ0|2 +Z (cid:12)(cid:12)ϕ − ϕ0(cid:12)(cid:12)2!N

 Z (cid:12)(cid:12)ϕ − ϕ0(cid:12)(cid:12)2!n

n (cid:19) |ϕ|2(N −n)

ϕ(hi1 )..ϕ(him ) = ϕN −n

ϕn−m

=

=

0

0

0

We can for instance apply this to the δ-distribution and deﬁne the ﬂat holonomy state in our Fock space of symmetrized
states:

Z eϕ = 0 ,

(2j + 1)χj ,

ϕ = 1 +eϕ ,
eδ = δ − 1 =Xj6=0

ϕ0 = 1 , ϕn = eϕ⊗n .
δn =eδ⊗n .

δ0 = 1 ,

C. Holonomy operator on symmetrized states

Now that we have deﬁned the Fock space of loopy intertwiners, we would like to have the basic operators creating
and annihilating loop excitations. This is naturally achieved by the (one-loop) holonomy operator. We start, as in
the case of distinguishable loops, with multiplying wave-functions by the spin- 1
2 character χ(hℓ) applied to the group
element hℓ living on a little loop ℓ. Then we will to distinguish three cases: the loop ℓ does not belong the existing
loops and the operator creates a new loop, or the loop ℓ is already excited, in which case it can act on a spin- 1
2
excitation and actually annihilate the loop, or the operator will generically act on all other spin excitations by simple
multiplication. This leads us to deﬁning three components of the holonomy operator ˆχ acting on symmetrized states:

Deﬁnition IV.3. We deﬁne three operators A, eA, B acting on the Fock space of symmetrized loopy intertwiners Hsym.

They act on an arbitrary state (fN )N ∈N as:

(75)

(76)

(79)

(80)

2

(Bf )0 = 2f0 ,

∀N > 0 , (Bf )N (h1, .., hN ) =

(Af )N (h1, .., hN ) = Z dk χ 1
NXi=1"χ 1
∀N > 0 , (eAf )N (h1, .., hN ) =
eA creates a new loop. We have the following relations on Hsym:

(eAf )0 = 0 ,

1
N

2

B = B† .

eA = A† ,

(k) fN +1(h1, .., hN , k) ,

(hi)fN (h1, .., hN )−Z dki χ 1

2

(77)

(ki) fN (h1, .., ki, .., hN )# (78)

1
N

NXi=1

χ 1

2

(hi)fN −1(h1, ..,bhi, .., hN )

The operator B is the usual action of the holonomy operator by multiplication by the character up to the subtraction
of the resulting spin-0 component. The operator A is the annihilation operator, removing one loop, while the operator

Finally the one-loop holonomy operator for spin 1

2 is deﬁned as the sum of these three components and is self-adjoint:

29

The convention (Bf )0 = 2f0 follows the logic that the 0-component f0, with no loop, represents by default a ﬂat

holonomy and thus should be multiplied by χ 1

2

(I) = 2. Here is the proof for the Hermicity relations:

1

2(cid:0)A + eA + B(cid:1) .

≡

2

bχ 1

(81)

i=1dk χ 1

2

(k) φN (h1, .., hN ) ψN +1(h1, .., hN , k) ,

Proof. We compare the action of A and eA:

hφ|Aψi = XN ∈NZ [dhi]N
heAφ|ψi = XN >0Z [dhi]N

1
N

NXi=1

i=1

(hi) φN −1(h1, ..,bhi, .., hN ) ψN (h1, .., hN ) .
We shift the sum over N in heAφ | ψi and we use the invariance of ψN under permutation of its arguments to conlude
that these two expressions coincides, hφ|Aψi = heAφ|ψi. As for the operator B, we compute:

χ 1

2

χ 1
2

(hi)φN (h1, .., hN ) ψN (h1, .., hN )

hφ|Bψi = 2φ0 ψ0 + XN >0Z [dhi]N

−Z [dhi]N

i=1

1
N

i=1

1
N

NXi
NXi Z dki χ 1

2

(ki)φN (h1, .., hi, .., hN ) ψN (h1, .., ki, .., hN ) .

is a Hermitian operator.

The last term vanishes due to the absence of 0-mode,R dhi φN = 0. This ensures that hφ|Bψi = hBφ|ψi and thus B
To ensure that the operators A and B are well-deﬁned and that the holonomy operator bχ 1

enough to check that it is bounded. And we show below that it is indeed bounded by 2 as in the usual framework.

Lemma IV.4. The two parts of the holonomy operators are both bounded by 2, that is for all states φ ∈ Hsym, we
have the two inequalities:

is self-adjoint, it is

2

|hφ| (A + eA) |φi| ≤ 2hφ|φi ,

|hφ|B|φi| ≤ 2hφ|φi .

(82)

This ensures that they are both self-adjoint. The holonomy operator bχ 1

2

Proof. Let us start with the operator B. The analysis is simpler since it doesn’t shift the number of loops:

is then also bounded by 2 and self-adjoint.

hφ|B|φi = 2|φ0|2 +XN >0

BN , BN =

1
N

NXi Z [dhi]N

i=1χ 1

2

(hi)φN (h1, .., hN ) φN (h1, .., hN ) .

The extra term in the action of B on the state φ vanishes as earlier due to the integral condition on proper states,

is bounded by 2, it is direct to conclude:

hφ|B|φi ≤ 2|φ0|2 + 2XN >0Z |φN |2 = 2hφ|φi .

2

2
N

|BN | ≤

R dhi φN = 0 for all i’s. Since the character χ 1

NXi Z |φN |2 = 2Z |φN |2 ,
We can proceed similarly with the operator A + eA:
AN , AN =Z NYi=1

hφ|A|φi =XN

hφ| (A + eA) |φi = hφ|A|φi + hφ|A†|φi = hφ|A|φi + hφ|A|φi ,

|hφ| (A + eA) |φi| ≤ 2|hφ|A|φi| ,

dhi dk χ 1

(k) φN (h1, .., hN ) φN +1(h1, .., hN , k)

(83)

2

As long as the components φN ’s are square-integrable, we can use the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to bound these
integrals:

30

|AN | ≤vuutZ NYi

dhi dk χ 1

2

(k)2(cid:12)(cid:12)φN (h1, .., hN )(cid:12)(cid:12)2vuutZ NYi

dhi dk(cid:12)(cid:12)φN +1(h1, .., hN , k)(cid:12)(cid:12)2

.

= 1, and then apply the inequality bounding a product ab ≤

1
2

1

|AN | ≤

(a2 + b2)/2:

2Z NYi

We use that the SU(2) character is normalized, R χ2
2Z NYi

dhi(cid:12)(cid:12)φN (h1, .., hN )(cid:12)(cid:12)2
expected bound |hφ| (A + eA) |φi|2 ≤ 2hφ|φi.
Although we consider the holonomy operatorbχ 1

+

1

Summing over N ∈ N, this allows us to conclude that |hφ|A|φi| ≤ hφ|φi − 1

dhi dk(cid:12)(cid:12)φN +1(h1, .., hN , k)(cid:12)(cid:12)2

=

1

2hhφN |φN i + hφN +1|φN +1ii .

(84)

2 |φ0|2 ≤ hφ|φi and thus reproduces the

to be the averaged sum of the two self-adjoint components (A+A†)
and B, each of these is a legitimate operator in itself. We could push this logic further and state that we have deﬁned
two diﬀerent holonomy operators, on the one hand, a holonomy operator (A + A†) that acts as a ladder operator,
creating and annihilating loops, and on the other hand, a holonomy operator B which acts as spin shifts on existing
loops (i.e. modiﬁes the area quanta carried by each loop).

2

The important consistency check, which will be essential for the analysis of the BF theory dynamics, is that the

ﬂat state is an eigenvector of the one-loop holonomy operator:

Proposition IV.5. The ﬂat state δ, deﬁned in (76) by its proper state projections, δ0 = 1 and δN = (δ − 1)⊗N for
N ≥ 1, is an eigenvector of the spin- 1

with the highest eigenvalue on Hsym:

2 one-loop holonomy operator bχ 1

|δi = 2 |δi .

2

2

bχ 1

This distributional ﬂat state is also an eigenvector of the loop annihilation operator A and of the loop creation operator
(B + A†):

Proof. We compute the action of the three parts of the holonomy operators acting on the ﬂat state deﬁned explicitly
as

A|δi = (B + A†)|δi = 2 |δi .

(86)

δ0 = 1 ,

δN (h1, .., hN ) =

NYi (cid:2)δ(hi) − 1(cid:3) .

For the no-loop component, we get:

(Aδ)0 =Z dk χ 1

2

while we compute for all other components:

(A†δ)0 = 0 ,

(k)(cid:2)δ(k) − 1(cid:3) = 2 ,
NYi (cid:2)δ(hi) − 1(cid:3) = 2δN (h1, .., hN )
NXi
NYi (cid:2)δ(hi) − 1(cid:3) −

NYℓ6=i(cid:2)δ(hℓ) − 1(cid:3)
NXi

1
N

1
N

(hi)

(hi)

χ 1

χ 1

2

2

(Aδ)N (h1, .., hN ) = 2

(A†δ)N (h1, .., hN ) =

(Bδ)N (h1, .., hN ) = 2

(Bδ)0 = 2 ,

NYℓ6=i(cid:2)δ(hℓ) − 1(cid:3)

Adding these three contributions, we get as expected for all number of loops (bχ 1

2

δ)N = 2δN .

(85)

(87)

(88)

(89)

31

Since we have three operators built in the holonomy operator, it is natural to investigate their commutation algebra.
It actually involves higher spin operators. We generalize the deﬁnition of the operators A, A† and B to arbitrary
by the higher
spins: one simply replaces in their deﬁnition IV.3 the character in the fundamental representation χ 1
spin character χj for any j ∈ N∗/2, thus producing new operators Aj annihilating a loop excitation of spin j, A†
creating a new loop carrying a spin j and Bj acting with a spin j excitation on an existing loop.

j

2

Then acting on a an arbitrary state f , we get:

(ABf )N =

N

N + 1

(BAf )N +

1

N + 1

(A1f )N ,

(BA†f )N =

N − 1

N

(A†Bf )N +

1
N

(A†

1f )N ,

(AA†f )N =

N

N + 1

(A†Af )N +

1

N + 1

fN .

Remembering that the number of loops N is not constant on the Fock space of loopy intertwiners and should be
treated as an operator ˆN , these translate into commutation relations, being careful about the operator ordering:

ˆN B = B ˆN ,

( ˆN + 1)A = A ˆN ,

ˆN A† = A†( ˆN + 1) ,

AB ˆN = ˆN BA + A1 ,

ˆN BA† = A†B ˆN + A†

1 , A ˆN A† = I + A†A ˆN = I + ˆN A†A .

These generalize to the whole tower of higher spin operators, for all spins a, b ∈ N∗
2 :
b = δabI + A†

AaBb ˆN = ˆN BbAa + Aa⊗b ,

a⊗b , Aa ˆN A†

aBb ˆN + A†

ˆN BbA†

a = A†

bAa ˆN = δabI + ˆN A†

bAa ,

where we use the (natural) convention of the tensor product of spins for the annihilation operator:

We give the last commutation relation:

Aa⊗b ≡

a+bXc=|a−b|

Ac .

ˆN [Ba, Bb] = A†

bAa − A†

aAb .

(90)

(91)

(92)

(93)

(94)

the average sum of those operators as for the fundamental representation:

We can combine these higher spin creation and annihilation operators to deﬁne a spin-j holonomy operator bχj as

This rather natural deﬁnition unfortunately doesn’t ensure that the operatorsbχj’s for diﬀerent spins j’s commute with
each other. Using the algebra computed above, the commutator of two holonomy opertaors bχa and bχb actually looks

like a mess. Nevertheless we can simplify the expressions by introducing suitable number of loops factors. Inserting
the operator ˆN in the character, we ﬁnd:

1

2(cid:0)Aj + A†

j + Bj(cid:1) .

bχj =

(95)

(97)

ˆN
2

(A†

bAa − A†

aAb) =

ˆN 2
2

[Ba, Bb] .

(96)

This combination ˆNbχa isn’t Hermitian, but this can be easily remedied to by consideringp ˆNbχap ˆN instead. This

commutator doesn’t vanish, but we can easily ﬁnd other combinations of the creation and annihilation operators that
do:

(cid:2) ˆNbχa, ˆNbχb(cid:3) =

(cid:2) ˆN (Ba + A†

a − Aa), ˆN (Bb + A†

b − Ab)(cid:3) = 0 .

This suggests using the operators Aa and (Ba + A†
a) as more fundamental as the holonomy operators. Although they
are not Hermitian, the ﬂat state is an eigenvector of both operators and we will exploit this fact in deﬁning ﬂatness
constraints for BF theory in the following section IV D.

The other way to proceed to deﬁning higher spin holonomy operators is to reproduce the classical algebra of the

SU(2) characters. For instance, a spin-1 is obtained from the tensor product of two spin- 1

2 representations:

χ1(h) = χ 1

2

(h)2 − 1 .

32

(98)

We propose to promote these relations to the quantum level:

− 1 =

1

4hA2 + AB + BA + AA† + A†A + B2 + A†B + BA† + A†2i − 1 .

1
2

bχ full
1 ≡ bχ 2

This new spin-1 holonomy operator is already a multi-loop operator: it has a component A2 annihilating two loops
and its adjoint component A†2 creating two loops, and so on. We then deﬁne all the other spin-j holonomy operators

by recursion as polynomials of the fundamental bχ 1
and so on with bχ full

constructed frombχ2j

= χ2 + 3χ1 + 2 ⇒ bχ full

operator:

χ4

1
2

1
2

2

j

and smaller powers. This construction clearly ensures that all the holonomy
operators commute with each other. This method closely intertwines the deﬁnition of higher spin operators with multi-
loop holonomies. These multi-loop operators create spins 1
2 (and then higher spins too) excitations on several loops
at once.

1
2

2 ≡ bχ 4

1
2

− 3bχ 2

+ 1 ,

. . .

(99)

To conclude the exploration of the basic loop quantum gravity operators, we should also deal with the symmetrized
ﬂux operators (and scalar products) with the su(2) generators acting as derivations on the wave-functions, and
check their commutation relations with our new holonomy operators. The ﬂux and grasping operators are especially
important since they allow to explore the intertwiner structure at the vertices. Indeed, acting with one-loop holonomy
operators will only create decoupled loops at the vertex, while a generic intertwiner will couple them. So, even
though we postpone the detailed analysis of the action of ﬂux operators on loopy spin network to future investigation,
we discuss below multi-loop holonomy operators that allow for coupled loops and thus explore the space of (loopy)
intertwiners at the vertex.

For instance, considering two loops with group elements h1 and h2, we would like to excite the overall holonomy
instead of the two independent holonomies, that is act with χ(h1h2) instead of χ(h1)χ(h2). Proceeding similarly to
, which creates and annihilates pairs of

the one-loop holonomy operator, we deﬁne a two-loop holonomy operator bχ(2)

coupled loops:

1
2

Deﬁnition IV.6. We deﬁne the following ﬁve operators C−2,−1,0,+1,+2 on the Fock space of symmetrized loopy
intertwiners Hsym. They act on an arbitrary state (fN )N ∈N as:

(C−1f )N (h1, .., hN ) =

1
N

(C0f )N (h1, .., hN ) =

(C+1f )N (h1, .., hN ) =

N (N − 1)

(k˜k) fN +2(h1, hN , k, ˜k)

(100)

2

2

2

2

(C−2f )N (h1, .., hN ) = Z dkdk χ 1
NXi "Z dk χ 1

(khi) fN +1(h1, .., hN , k) −Z dk dki χ 1
NXi<j"χ 1
(hihj)fN (h1, .., hN ) +Z dkidkj χ 1
(kihj) fN (h1, .., ki, .., hN ) −Z dki χ 1
−Z dki χ 1
NXi6=j"χ 1
(hihj)fN −1(h1, ..,bhi, .., hN ) −Z dkj χ 1

N (N − 1)

1

2

2

2

2

2

(kki) fN +1(h1, .., ki, .., hN , k)# (101)

(kikj) fN (h1, .., ki, .., kj, .., hN )

(102)

(hikj) fN (h1, .., kj, .., hN )#
(hikj)fN −1(h1, ..,bhi, .., kj , .., hN )#

2

(103)

(C+2f )N (h1, .., hN ) =

2

N (N − 1)

NXi<j

χ 1

2

(hihj)fN −2(h1, ..,bhi, .., bhj, .., hN )

We complete this deﬁnition with the “initial conditions” for N = 0 and N = 1:

(104)

(C−1f )0 =Z χ 1

2

f1 ,

(C0f )0 = 2f0 ,

(C+1f )0 = (C+2f )0 = 0 ,

(105)

(C0f )1(h) = χ 1

2

(h)f1(h) −Z χ 1

2

They satisfy the Hermiticity relations:

f1 ,

(C+1f )1(h) = χ 1

2

(h)f0 ,

(C+2f )0 = 0 .

C−2 = C†

2 , C−1 = C†

1 , C0 = C†
0 ,

and the bounds for the L2-norm:

||C−2 + C+2||2 ≤ 2 ,

||C−1 + C+1||2 ≤ 2 ,

||C0||2 ≤ 2 .

Finally the two-loop holonomy operator bχ(2)
bχ(2)

≡

1
2

1
2

This operator is essentially self-adjoint and bounded by 2.

1

4(cid:0)C−2 + 2C−1 + C0 + 2C+1 + C+2(cid:1) .

for spin 1

2 is deﬁned as the sum of these ﬁve components:

33

(106)

(107)

(108)

(109)

So the spectrum of the two-loop holonomy operator is once again bounded by 2. An important consistency check
is that this bound is saturated by the ﬂat state. The proof is a straightforward computation, with special care to the
initial conditions for N = 0 and N = 1.

Proposition IV.7. The ﬂat state δ, deﬁned by δ0 = 1 and δN ≥1 = (δ − 1)⊗N , is an eigenvector of the spin- 1

2 two-loop

with the highest eigenvalue on Hsym:

holonomy operator bχ(2)

1
2

|δi = 2 |δi .

(110)

1
2

bχ(2)

We could then similarly deﬁne an operator χ(hih−1

j ) with a loop reversal or multi-loop operators χ(hi1 ..hin ) taking
care of properly symmetrizing the group elements. We can also generalize our construction replacing the spin- 1
2
, and so on for more loops. We

character by an arbitrary spin j and deﬁne the spin-j two-loop holonomy operatorbχ(2)

will not go into these details, although we do not foresee any obstacle (beside the inﬂation of indices and sums).

We now turn to the ﬁrst application of the holonomy operators discuss below the Hamiltonian constraints for BF

j

theory on the Fock space of loopy spin networks.

D. Revisiting the BF constraints as creation and annihilation of loops

Let us see how to implement the ﬂatness constraint on our Fock space of loopy spin networks with bosonic statistics
for the little loops. As earlier, we do not discuss the ﬂatness constraints around loops of the base graph Γ, which
are implemented as usual by using the standard holonomy operators around those loops. Here, we will focus on the
fate of the little loop excitations at every vertex of the background graph Γ. For this purpose, we can focus on a
single vertex and we can restrict ourselves to the ﬂower graph, i.e. to the Fock space of loop intertwiners around a
unique vertex. As we have constructed the holonomy operator in the previous section, we propose to use it as the
Hamiltonian constraints for BF theory and simply impose:

− 2 .

(111)

H BF =bχ 1

2

holonomy operator. Since bχ 1

This is a self-adjoint operator and imposing this constraint amounts to projecting onto the highest eigenvalue of the
creates and annihilates loops by construction, H BF shifts the number of loops and its
ﬂow should imply that the number of loops becomes pure gauge. Let us look at the space of physical states solving this
ﬂatness constraint. By proposition IV.5, we already know that the ﬂat state, deﬁned as the factorized δ-distribution
state, saturates the holonomy bound, H BF |δi = 0 . The natural question is whether the ﬂat state is the only solution
to this constraint.

2

We will run into the same problem as in the case of distinguishable loops of higher derivative solutions to the
holonomy constraint. In order to deal with this potential inﬁnite-dimensional space of solutions, we will introduce as
before a Laplacian constraint and multi-loop holonomy operators. However we will ultimately show that we require
only a ﬁnite number of constraint operators (three to be exact) to impose full ﬂatness and the uniqueness of the
physical state despite the inﬁnite number of loop excitation modes that need to be constrained.

34

More precisely, the holonomy constraint amounts to solving functional recursion relations, relating fN +1, fN and
fN −1 at each step. The problem is that this relation doesn’t entirely ﬁx fN +1 in terms of fN and fN −1, even assuming
that these functions are invariant under permutations of their arguments and invariant under conjugation. Indeed it
2 component of the
function, so we face two obstacles: the non-trivial internal intertwiner structure and arbitrary higher spin excitations
on each loop. We explain below how to get rid of all those modes by introducing constraints on the creation and
annihilation of loops together with a Laplacian constraint.

only ﬁxes the integral R dkχ 1

(k) fN +1(h1, .., hN , k). This condition seems to ﬁx only the spin- 1

2

Before treating the general case, we explore two simpliﬁed cases. First, factorized states avoid the problem of
possible non-trivial intertwiner structure. It turns out that the spin- 1
2 one-loop holonomy constraint is enough to
constrain all the higher spin excitations and lead to the ﬂat state as the unique physical state. Second we consider the
larger class of states with decoupled loops, deﬁned mathematically as the wave-functions which are invariant under
conjugation of its individual arguments (and not simply under the simultaneous conjugation of all its arguments as
required by gauge invariance). In this case, the spin- 1
2 constraint is not enough anymore and we need to explicitly
introduce explicit constraints for all the higher spin excitations. We summarize these two cases in the following two
propositions.

Proposition IV.8. Let us consider a factorized state ϕ ∈ Hsym, that ϕ0 = 1 and ϕN = F ⊗N for an integrable F
ϕ = 2ϕ has a unique solution, which is the

2

Proof. Let us look at the eigenvector equation on factorized states ϕ deﬁned as ϕ0 = 1 and ϕN = F ⊗N :

ﬂat state, ϕ = δ and F (h) = δ(h) − 1.

invariant under conjugation, F (h) = F (ghg−1). Then the constraint bχ 1
(cid:0)A + A† + B(cid:1) F ⊗N = 4 F ⊗N .

For N = 0, this gives an integral condition on the one-loop wave-function F :

Then, for N = 1, we get a functional equality:

Z dk χ 1

2

(k)F (k) = 2.

χ 1
2

F + χ 1
2

− 2 = 2F .

Let us decompose F on the spin basis. Since it is invariant under conjugation, it decomposes onto the characters

F = Pj6=0 Fjχj. The N = 1 equation translates into a recursion relation on the coeﬃcients Fj while the N = 0

equation sets its initial condition:

F 1
2

= 2 , F1 + 1 = 2F 1

2

,

∀j ≥ 1 , Fj+ 1

2

+ Fj− 1

2

= 2Fj .

(112)

This has a unique solution Fj = (2j + 1), which translates to F = δ − 1. The constraint equation for N ≥ 2
automatically follows.

The case of factorized state works because the holonomy operator couples the creation of loops and the exploration
of the higher spin components of the one-loop wave-function. Next, we move to the larger class of functions which are
invariant under conjugation of its individual arguments. Then the functions φN decompose on the character basis.
Imposing the one-loop holonomy constraints for all spins leads to functional recursion equations such that the ﬂat
state is solution to the holonomy constraint.

Lemma IV.9. Considering a state invariant under conjugation of each of its arguments,

φN (h1, .., hN ) = φN (g1h1g−1

1 , .., gN hN g−1

N ) ,

∀gi ∈ SU(2)N ,

it decomposes on the character basis:

φN (h1, .., hN ) = Xj1,..,jN

φj1,..,jN
N

NYi

χji(hi) .

Assuming that the φN ’s are all symmetric under permutations of their arguments and that they have no 0-modes,

R dh1φN = 0 for all N ≥ 1, then the only such solution to the set of holonomy constraints bχj φ = (2j + 1)φ for all

2 is the ﬂat state φN = (δ − 1)⊗N (up to a global factor).

spins j ∈ N∗

Proof. The proof is straightforward by recursion. For N = 0, the constraint gives φ1 in terms of the no-loop mode φ0:

∀j ≥

1
2

, Z dk χj(k)φ1(k) = (2j + 1)φ0 ,

(113)

35

which gives φj
normalization to φ0 = 1, we recover φ1 = (δ − 1). Then the constraint equations for N ≥ 1 reads:

1 = (2j + 1)φ0 for all non-vanishing spins j while φ0

1 = 0 by hypothesis. This way, if we ﬁx the initial

∀j ≥

1
2

, 2(2j + 1)φN (h1, .., hN ) = Z dk χj(k)φN +1(h1, .., hN , k) +

1
N

NXi=1

φN −1(h1, ..,bhi, .., hN )

+

1
N

NXi=1"χj(hi)φN (h1, .., hN ) −Z dki χj(ki)φN (h1, .., ki, .., hN )# . (114)

We can solve this equation by recursion, determining the Fourier coeﬃcients of φN +1 in terms of φN and φN −1. The
coeﬃcients φj1..jN
vanish by assumption if one of the spins ji is zero. When none of the spins vanishes, we show that

N

φj1 ..jN
N

=

(2ji + 1) .

NYi=1

(115)

Comparing to the case of distinguishable loops, in this case where the loops are individually gauge-invariant and thus
decoupled, we have traded the inﬁnity of holonomy constraints, one for each distinguishable loop, for the inﬁnite tower
of one holonomy constraint per spin mode for indistinguishable loops. Exploiting further the Fock space structure
for the bosonic little loops, we can nevertheless reduce this inﬁnity of holonomy constraints to a pair of constraints.
Indeed, checking the details of the proof of proposition IV.5 on the action of holonomy operators on the δ-state, we
propose to use non-Hermitian constraints and characterize the ﬂat state as an eigenvector of the loop annihilation
operator A and the loop creation operator (B + A†):

Lemma IV.10. Considering a state φ invariant under conjugation of each of its arguments, and with no 0-modes,
we introduce the pair of non-Hermitian constraint operators deﬁned by the spin- 1
2 annihilation and creation operators
acting on Hsym:

A |φi = 2 |φi ,

(B + A†) |φi = 2 |φi .

(116)

Then the only solution to all these constraints is the ﬂat state |φi = |δi.

Proof. Let us write explicitly the eigenvalue equations for the state φ:

∀N ≥ 0, Z dk χ 1

2

(k)φN +1(h1, .., hN , k) = 2φN (h1, .., hN )

(117)

∀N ≥ 1,

NXℓ=1"χ 1

2

(hℓ)hφN −1(h1, .., bhℓ, .., hN )+φN (h1, .., hN )i −Z dkℓ χ 1

2

(kℓ)φN (h1, .., kℓ, .., hN )# = 2N φN (h1, .., hN )

with the initial conditions equation at N = 0 for the creation operator (B + A†) trivially satisﬁed. We could translate
these equations into recursion relations on the Fourier coeﬃcients, but there is actually a simpler and more direct
route. The ﬁrst equation (for A) can be injected in the second equation turning it into a functional recursion:

NXℓ=1

(2 − χ 1

2

(hℓ))hφN −1(h1, .., bhℓ, .., hN ) + φN (h1, .., hN )i = 0 .

For N = 1, this relates the one-loop wave-function φ1 to the no-loop normalization φ0:

(118)

∀h ∈ SU(2),

(2 − χ 1

2

(h)) (φ0 + φ1(h)) = 0 .

Since φ1 is invariant under conjugation, this holonomy constraint has a unique distributional solution up to an
φ1 = 2φ0, ﬁxes this factor and we recover φ1 = (δ − 1)

arbitrary factor, (φ0 + φ1) ∝ δ. The integral condition,R χ 1

as expected as we ﬁx the normalization φ0 = 1.

We then proceed by recursion, ﬁxing the number of loops N ≥ 2 and assuming that φn = (δ − 1)⊗n for all
(h))δ(h) = 0 , we start by

n ≤ (N − 1). Let us now prove this statement holds for n = N . Using the identity (2 − χ 1
checking that:

2

2

36

This implies that:

NXℓ
  NXℓ

(2 − χ 1

2

(hℓ))hYi

(δ(hi) − 1) −Yi6=ℓ
(2 − χ(hℓ)! φN (h1, .., hN ) −Yi
(2 − χ(hℓ) φN (h1, .., hN ) −Yi
(δ(hi) − 1) + αYi
φN (h1, .., hN ) =Yi

NXℓ

∀ℓ ≤ N ,

(δ(hi) − 1)i = 0 .
(δ(hi) − 1)! = 0 .

(δ(hi) − 1)! = 0 .

δ(hi) ,

loop individually:

Since every holonomy operator (2 −bχℓ) is Hermitian positive, this means that the holonomy constraint holds for each

(119)

Since we have assumed that the wave-function is invariant under conjugation individually for each of its arguments,
the only distribution solution to this equation is the product of δ-function up to a global factor:

for some factor α to be determined. Checking this identity against the integral condition R χ 1

α = 0 thus proving the proposition.

2

φN = φN −1 yields

We see that the requirement of the invariance under conjugation for each loop individually (stronger than gauge-
invariance requiring the invariance under global conjugation) is crucial in the last step of the proof. Else we would
have to deal with derivative solutions, in ∂δ and so on, as in the case of distinguishable loops.

Our proposal amounts to adding another constraint along side the Hermitian holonomy constraint bχ 1

= 2. Instead
of taking the average of the two operators A and (B + A†) and deﬁning the holonomy operator, we subtract them
and get the other constraint B + (A† − A) = 0. This new constraint operator has a Hermitian part B and a anti-
Hermitian part (A† − A), such that the overall structure can be interpreted as a holomorphic constraint, similar to the
annihilation operator a = ˆx − iˆp for the harmonic oscillator. From this perspective, eigenvectors of this “holomorphic”
operator B + (A† − A) can be considered as coherent states, which is pretty natural since we are looking into coherent
superpositions of any number of loops summing over N , and the δ-state, as a null eigenvector of that operator, can
be considered as a ground state.

2

The trick why these two constraint operators A and (B + A†) are enough to kill all the degrees of freedom and
lead to a single physical state is that they do not commute and their commutators actually generate higher spin
constraints:
Lemma IV.11. Imposing the two constraints with A and (B + A†) on Hsym implies a tower of constraints with all
the higher spin annihilation operators:

A |φi = (B + A†) |φi = 2 |φi

=⇒

∀j ≥

1
2

, Aj |φi = (2j + 1) |φi .

(120)

Proof. Let us look at the commutator ( ˆN + 1) [Aj, (B + A†)]. This commutator will vanish on solution states |φi.
Using the commutation relations computed earlier (91) and (92), we get for j = 1
2 :

( ˆN + 1) [A, (B + A†)] = A1 + I − (B + A†)A , A1 |φi =h(B + A†)A − Ii |φi = (4 − 1) |φi = 3 |φi ,

then for higher spins j ≥ 1 the commutation relation ( ˆN + 1) [Aj, (B + A†)] = Aj+ 1

+ Aj− 1

2

2

I − (B + A†)Aj implies:

Aj+ 1

2

|φi =h(B + A†)Aj − Aj− 1

2i |φi =h2(2j + 1) − 2ji |φi = (2j + 2) |φi .

(121)

Our two (non-Hermitian) constraints do not commute and generate an inﬁnite number of constraints killing all
the higher spin excitations, leaving us at the end of the day with the single totally ﬂat state. In some sense, this
pair of annihilation and creation constraint operators can be considered as the generators of the algebra of holonomy
operators on the Fock space of loopy spin networks.

37

Let us move on to the general case. Working with states invariant under conjugation for each loop individually
amounts to considering states created loop by loop, only by the action of one-loop holonomy operators. This leads
to decoupled loops and unfortunately does not explore the whole space of intertwiners: we still need to reach all the
states globally invariant under conjugation but not invariant under conjugation of the individual arguments, such as
χ(h1h2..). In the spin decomposition of the wave-functions, this corresponds to the fact that the modes are not simply
φj1,..,jN
: they do not depend only on the spins ji=1..N but further depend on the
N
data of a (loopy) intertwiner I between (two copies of) all the spins. This leads to the existence of the derivative
solutions to the holonomy constraints, deﬁned by applying diﬀerential operators (graspings) to the δ-distribution.

but should be labelled as φj1,..,jN ,I

N

The intertwiner structure is hard to constraint completely. One way to go is to not only use higher spin operators
but introduce multi-loop holonomy constraints, as in the case of disitinguishable loops. Indeed, since we would like
to freeze all the spin excitations on the possible inﬁnity of loops, it is natural to introduce one constraint operator
per mode12.

We propose to take a diﬀerent route in order to keep a ﬁnite number of (primary) constraints. We introduce a
Laplacian constraint to project onto the space of wave-functions invariant under conjugation and use the creation and
annihilation operators for loops to impose ﬂatness:

Proposition IV.12. We consider the pair of non-Hermitian constraint operators deﬁned by the spin- 1
and creation operators acting on Hsym:

2 annihilation

We supplement these constraints with the Laplacian constraint:

A |φi = 2 |φi ,

(B + A†) |φi = 2 |φi .

(122)

(123)

(e∆ − ∆) |φi = 0

with

(∆ϕ)N =

1
N

NXℓ

∆ℓ ϕN ,

(e∆ϕ)N =

1
N

NXℓ e∆ℓ ϕN .

Imposing these three eigenvalue equations leads to a unique solution (up to a global factor), the ﬂat state |φi = |δi
deﬁned by φN = (δ − 1)⊗N .

Proof. We start with the Laplacian constraints:

Xℓ

(e∆ℓ − ∆ℓ)φN = 0 .

Since every Laplacian constraint operator (e∆ℓ − ∆ℓ) on each loop ℓ is Hermitian and positive, this imposes that each
of them vanish on the wave-function, i.e. for all ℓ we have (e∆ℓ − ∆ℓ)φN = 0. This implies that φN is invariant under

conjugation of each of its argument. Then we apply lemma IV.10 to prove the uniqueness of the solution state.

On the one hand, the Laplacian constraint ﬁxes how every loop is attached to the vertex, through a trivial spin-0.
Each loop is invariant under conjugation on its own, states are collections of bosonic loops, each carrying a spin and
with a trivial intertwiner between them. On the other hand, the constraints A and (B + A†) realize explicitly the
idea that BF dynamics impose that the creation and annihilation of loops are pure gauge.

12 This leads us to conjecture a set of complete holonomy constraints for BF theory. Considering all the multi-loop holonomy operators

for arbitrary spins acting on the Fock space of loopy intertwiners Hsym:

∀j ∈

N∗

2

,

∀n ∈ N∗ ,

(n)
j

bχ

|φi = (2j + 1) |φi ,

then the only solution to all these constraints is the ﬂat state φ = δ. We have checked this conjecture up to the three-loop component of
the state, N = 3, but we haven’t gone further. This would require explicitly and carefully deﬁning the multi-loop holonomy operators.
We should also take special care of working with legitimate states, controlling the convergence/divergence of the series in j and N to
ensure that the states are distributions.

38

To conclude this section, we would like to underline the similarities and diﬀerences between the case of distinguish-
able loops and the Fock space of indistinguishable little loop excitations. When working with little loops endowed
with bosonic statistics, one must take a special care to consistently remove the spin-0 modes on every loop to im-
plement the cylindrical consistency of the wave-functions. This leads to a (spin- 1
2 ) holonomy operator also creating
and annihilating loops . We explicitly separate its components respectively creating and annihilating loops and use
them as legitimate constraint operators for BF theory. This is diﬀerent from distinguishable loops where holonomy
operators are deﬁned as attached to a loop: a holonomy operator acts on a given loop, exciting and shifting the spin
carried by the loop.

Nevertheless, the issue of the intertwiner space living at vertex and coupling the loops is the same in both frame-
works. We have identiﬁed an inﬁnity of solutions to the holonomy constraints, constructed as diﬀerential operators
acting on the δ-distribution (as graspings on the spin network wave-function). These are still peaked on the identity
group element, but they potentially deﬁne an inﬁnity of gauge-invariant local degrees of freedom living at the vertex.
To get rid of these “spurious” solutions, we have introducing a Laplacian constraint that forces each loop excitation
to be invariant under conjugation, thus linking it trivially to the vertex. This allows to kill all local intertwiner
excitation. Then we take as Hamiltonian constraints for BF theory this combination on holonomy and Laplacian
constraints, which lead as wanted to a unique physical state, the ﬂat δ-state.

V. TAGGED SPIN NETWORKS

After folded spin networks, which retains the internal combinatorial structure inside coarse-grained regions, and
loopy spin networks, which keep local curvature excitations as little loops attached to the vertices of the base graph
and which we have explored in great details in the previous sections, we move on to the third and last step of
coarse-grained structures: tagged spin networks.

When integrating out the connection group elements inside a bounded region, as discussed in [25, 26, 33] and
reviewed in the ﬁrst section II, and coarse-graining the region to a single vertex, we naturally break the local gauge
invariance at the resulting coarse-grained vertex. This also happens as soon as we introduce fermionic matter ﬁelds,
which act as sources for loop quantum gravity’s Gauss law and thus create non-trivial closure defects. At the classical
level, this is reﬂected by a non-vanishing closure defect: the sum of the ﬂux vectors around the eﬀective vertex does
not vanish anymore and is actually balanced by the internal ﬂuxes living on the loops living inside the bounded region
and carrying non-trivial holonomies. Overall, the gauge invariance is restored if we take into account the internal
degrees of freedom of the region however, once we have coarse-grained it, the breaking of the gauge invariance reﬂects
the geometry excitations which have developed in the region’s bulk and which we have traced out. At the quantum
level, the closure defect becomes a tag, attached to each vertex, as drawn on ﬁg.16. This internal degree of freedom is
deﬁned as an extra spin coupling to the actual spin living on the links and edges attached to the eﬀective vertex and
connecting the coarse-grained region to its exterior. This tag allows to relax the gauge invariance in a controlled way.
Mathematically, we are thus led to consider the whole space of non-gauge-invariant cylindrical functionals of the
connection on a given ﬁxed background graph Γ. The tagged spin networks will provide a basis of that space, with the
tags record how much the local gauge-invariance is broken: when the tags vanish, we recover the usual gauge-invariant
spin network basis states. This allows to account for graph changing dynamics in an eﬀective manner. Even though
the graph changes and might get more complexed as the geometry evolves, we keep on coarse-graining the state
projecting it onto the ﬁxed base graph (chosen by the observer), then the internal degrees of freedom and non-trivial
curvature developed inside the coarse-grained regions gets translated into excitations of the eﬀective tag degree of
freedom attached to the base graph vertices.

The space of tagged spin networks is naturally quite simple and we believe it oﬀers a useful framework for the study

of coarse-graining of the loop quantum gravity dynamics.

j1

j4

j, m

•
i

j2

j3

FIG. 16: We consider tagged vertices: a vertex with the additional tag corresponding to a closure defect. The
representations j1, .., j4 living on the graph edges linked to the vertex do not form an intertwiner on their own,

but they recouple to the spin j deﬁning the tag.

A. The tagged spin network basis

39

We consider the space Htag

of non-gauge-invariant wave-functions on the (oriented and connected) graph Γ. This
is simply the space of L2 functions on SU(2)×E, where E is the number of edges or links of Γ, with no further
assumption. Considering such a function, we can project onto the usual space of gauge-invariant states by group
averaging:

Γ

ψ({ge}e∈Γ) ∈ Htag
Γ

7→ ψ0({ge}e∈Γ) = ZSU(2)V

dhvψ({h−1

s(e)geht(e)}e∈Γ) ∈ HΓ .

(124)

We can generalize this projection to non-trivial recouplings at every vertex and get an exact decomposition of the full
non-invariant state:

(2Jv + 1) P{Jv}ψ , P{Jv }ψ ({ge}e∈Γ) = Z dhv Yv
ψ = X{Jv }∈ N
2Yv

χJv (hv) ψ({h−1

s(e)geht(e)}e∈Γ) .

(125)

The spin Jv is the tag living at the vertex v and provides a measure of how much gauge-invariance is relaxed at that
vertex. It is the variable conjugate to the group averaging variable hv. Following this logic, we can make all states in
Htag
gauge-invariant by adding hv as an actual argument of the wave-function. This provides a isomorphism between
Htag

Γ = L2(SU(2)×E × SU(2)×V /SU(2)×V ) where ext stands for “extended”:

Γ
Γ = L2(SU(2)×E) and Hext

Ψ({ge, hv}e,v∈Γ) = Ψ({k−1

s(e)gekt(e), k−1

v hv}e,v∈Γ)

7→ ψ({ge}e∈Γ) = Ψ({ge, hv = I}e,v∈Γ) .

(126)

We deﬁne tagged spin networks as basis states for Hext
thus providing through this gauge-ﬁxing map a basis for
generic non-gauge-invariant states. These generalizations of spin networks are labeled by spins je on every edge e,
the tag spin Jv an magnetic momentum Mv at every vertex, as well as an intertwiner Iv recoupling at each vertex
between the tag and the spins on the edges attached to that vertex: the incoming and outgoing edges attached to the
vertex v:

Γ

Ψ{je,Jv,Mv,Iv}({ge, hv}) ≡ Yv

DJv

mvMv

e| ge |jemt

h⊗e|t(e)=vjemt

e| Iv |Jvmv ⊗e|s(e)=v jems

ei ,

(127)

V je −→ Oe|t(e)=v

V je ,

Iv : V Jv ⊗ Oe|s(e)=v
(hv)Ye

hjems

eiYv

with an implicit over the magnetic momenta mv
an extra open edge at every vertex. The spins carried by those open edges are the tags.

e and mv. In simple words, we work with spin network on graphs with

The whole question is the physical interpretation of these tags, which we added to the usual spin network states.
It is mathematically clear how the closure defects arise from coarse-graining and that the tags reﬂect non-trivial
holonomies around the loops of the subgraph within the coarse-graining regions. The next challenge would be to show
that they can be related to some physical notions of (quasi-)local energy density or mass (see e.g. [58] for a deﬁnition
of the quasi-local energy operator in loop quantum gravity).

B. Tags from coarse-graining and tracing out little loops

Let us show how starting from a loopy spin network and tracing out the little loops attached to the vertices leads
naturally to a reduced density matrix deﬁned in terms of tagged spin networks. So we consider a gauge-invariant
loopy state deﬁned on the base graph Γ with a certain number of loops nv attached to each vertex v:

φ({ge, hv

ℓ }) = φ({k−1

s(e)gekt(e), k−1

v hv

ℓ kv}) ∀kv ∈ SU(2)×V ,

where the group elements hv

ℓ live on the little loops ℓ attached to the vertex v, and we integrate out the loops:

ρ({ge, ˜ge}e∈Γ) = Z Yv

nvYℓ=1

dhv

ℓ φ({ge, hv

ℓ }) φ({˜ge, hv

ℓ }) .

(128)

je

jℓ

iv
•

˜iv
•

Jv

40

FIG. 17: We introduce the intermediate spin basis for the vertices of loopy spin networks:
intertwiners will
decompose into two intertwiners, the ﬁrst one iv recoupling the spins living on the base graph edges and the
other ˜iv recoupling the spins living on the little loops attached to the vertex, which are linked together by the
intermediate spin Jv. When we coarse-grain by tracing over the little loops, the only remaining information is
this intermediate spin Jv, which becomes the tag measuring the closure defect at the vertex. It is the remnant

of the curvature ﬂuctuations and internal geometry within the vertex.

Let us compute the reduced density matrix using the natural loopy spin network basis. We focus on the little loops
attached to single vertex, say v0, and drop the index v from the little loop group elements for the sake of simplicity.
We consider the loopy states deﬁned by basis intertwiners deﬁned by two intertwiners, one recoupling the spins living
on the edges linked to the vertex v0 and one recoupling the little loops attached to that vertex, glued through an
intermediate spin Jv0 , as drawn on ﬁg.17:

Φ{je,Jv0 ,iv ,jℓ,˜iv0 }({ge, hℓ}) = Ye

eiYℓ

ℓi Yv6=v0

hjems

e| ge |jemt

hjℓms

ℓ| hℓ |jℓmt

h⊗e|t(e)=vjemt

e| iv | ⊗e|s(e)=v jems
ei

h⊗e|t(e)=v0 jemt

e| iv0 |Jv0 Mv0 ⊗e|s(e)=v jems

ei hJv0 Mv0 ⊗ℓ jℓmt

ℓ|˜iv0 | ⊗ℓ jℓms

ℓi , (129)

with an implicit sum over all magnetic moment labels. We have assumed, as announced, that only the vertex v0 has
little loops attached to it, so all other vertices are thought as having a vanishing intermediate spin Jv6=v0 = 0.

A loopy state will decompose onto that basis, |φi = φ{je,Jv0 ,iv ,jℓ,˜iv0 } |Φ{je,Jv0 ,iv ,jℓ,˜iv0 }i, and we easily compute the
resulting reduced density matrix using the orthonormality of the Wigner matrices with respect to the Haar measure
on SU(2) and ﬁnd that it naturally decompose onto the tagged spin network basis introduced Ψ{je,Jv,Mv,Iv} above in
(127):

ρ = Tr{hℓ}|φihφ| = (cid:16) X{ms,t

ℓ }(cid:12)(cid:12)hJv0 Mv0 ⊗ℓ jℓmt

ℓ|˜iv0 | ⊗ℓ jℓms

ℓi(cid:12)(cid:12)2(cid:17) |Ψ{je,Jv0 ,Mv0 ,iv }ihΨ{je,Jv0 ,Mv0 ,iv}| .

(130)

Thus the intermediate spins of the loopy spin networks, which recouple between the base graph edges and the little
loop excitations, become the tags of the tagged spin network basis after tracing out the holonomies living on the little
loops. This concludes the coarse-graining of the geometry of a bounded region to a single vertex plus one extra degree
of freedom -the tag- registering the excitations of geometry and curvature within that region’s bulk.

C. Revisiting BF theory: the non-trivial space of ﬂat spin network states

The (totally) ﬂat state on a closed and connected graph Γ is deﬁned by a δ-distribution on every loop of the graph.
This is generically redundant, so we choose a set of independent loops13, that is L ≡ (E − V + 1) loops generating
all the loops of Γ, and deﬁne the ﬂat state as the product of the δ-distribution on those independent loops. Now we
would like to impose holonomy operator constraints along all the (independent) loops of the graph in order to this
ﬂat state as single physical states. We will encounter the same obstacle of the derivative solutions to the holonomy
constraints as with loopy spin networks.

Let us, for the sake of simplicity, look at the Θ-graph, made of two vertices connected by three edges, as in ﬁg.18.

The ﬂat state is:

δΘ(g1, g2, g3) = δ(g1g−1

2 )δ(g1g−1

3 ) = δ(g1g−1

2 )δ(g2g−1

3 ) = δ(g1g−1

3 )δ(g2g−1

3 ) ,

(131)

13 The simplest way to proceed is, as in the gauge ﬁxing procedure, to choose a maximal tree on Γ, then to associate one loop to each
edge which does not belong to the tree. This ensures that each of those loops contains one edge that no other loop contain and are thus
independent.

41

1

2

3

3

2

4

1

6

5

FIG. 18: The Θ-graph on the left and the tetrahedron graph on the right.

where we give the three possible sets of independent loops, corresponding to the three choices of tree on the Θ-graph.
This is clearly a solution to the three holonomy constraints:

(cid:16)χ 1

2

(g1g−1

2 ) − 2(cid:17) δΘ = (cid:16)χ 1

2

(g2g−1

3 ) − 2(cid:17) δΘ = (cid:16)χ 1

2

(g3g−1

1 ) − 2(cid:17) δΘ = 0 .

However, any ﬁrst derivative give also a solution to those holonomy constraints. As an example, if we diﬀerentiate
along the ﬁrst group element g1, we ge the distribution ∂(1)
3 ) also
satisfying:

3 ) = iδ(g1Jag−1

a δ12δ23 = ∂(1)

2 )δ(g2g−1

2 )δ(g2g−1

a δ(g1g−1

(cid:16)χ 1

2

(g1g−1

2 ) − 2(cid:17) ∂(1)

a δ12δ23 = (cid:16)χ 1

2

(g2g−1

3 ) − 2(cid:17) ∂(1)

a δ12δ23 = (cid:16)χ 1

2

(g3g−1

1 ) − 2(cid:17) ∂(1)

a δ12δ23 = 0 .

(132)

And we can go on constructing an inﬁnity of higher order derivative solutions, as explained in the framework of loopy
spin networks in sections III D 2 and III D 3. In some sense, the totally ﬂat state, deﬁned by the δ-distribution, is the
primary state. Then we act on it with diﬀerentiation operators and generate a whole space of solutions. All these
states are technically still ﬂat, since they are peaked exclusively on the identity group element I. They seem to be pure
excitations of the triad conjugate to the connection (similar to quantum excitations of the electric ﬁeld at vanishing
magnetic ﬁeld). This non-trivial space of ﬂat states over the ﬂat state sounds similar in spirit to the construction
by Dittrich and collaborators [25, 26] where they build a Hilbert space representation for loop quantum gravity with
the ﬂat state as “ground state”. It would be interesting to check if an explicit relation with our present construction
could be identiﬁed.

As the ﬁrst derivative are not gauge-invariant distributions, it is reasonable to wonder if restricting to gauge-
invariant spin network states by imposing vanishing tags allows to kill all those higher order ﬂat solutions and leave
the original δ-distribution as sole physical state. We show below that this is indeed the case, but with the very
important subtlety that we need to impose the holonomy constraints along all the loops of the graph and not only a
set of independent loops.

First, we impose the tags to vanish by a Laplacian constraint at every vertex:

∆v ≡ (cid:0) Xe|v=t(e)

∂(e)R

a − Xe|v=s(e)

∂(e)L
a

(cid:1)2

.

(133)

Requiring ∆v ϕ = 0 implies that the recoupling of the spins je on the edges attached to the vertex v is trivial, i.e.
that the tag Jv is the trivial representation, i.e that the wave-function ϕ satisﬁes the gauge-invariance at the vertex
v. Imposing this constraint at all the vertices allows to project from the tagged spin networks down to the usual
gauge-invariant spin network states.

Second, let us revisit the ﬂatness constraints to impose on standard spin networks in order to implement BF theory
and its projector on the ﬂat state. Imposing the holonomy constraints on a set of independent loops turns out not
to be enough to get a unique solution state and we have gauge-invariant remnants of the derivative solutions. To
remedy this, it is necessary and suﬃcient to impose the holonomy constraints on all possible loops of the graph. This
is the counterpart of the multi-loop holonomy constraints for imposing the ﬂatness of loopy intertwiners as explained
in sections III D 3 and III D 4.

For instance, on the Θ-graph, a set of independent loops is provided by the two loops, g1g−1

2 and g2g−1

imposing that these two group elements vanish implies that the ﬂatness of the third “composite” loop, g1g−1

3 . Classically,
3 . At the

by acting with grasping operators, as an example:

quantum level however, we can construct an inﬁnity of derivative solutions to the holonomy constraints bχ12 and bχ23

a δ(g1g−1
∂(1)

2 )∂(3)

a δ(g3g−1

(g1g−1

2 ) − 2(cid:17) ϕ = (cid:16)χ 1

2

(g2g−1

ϕ =Xa

(g1g−1

3 ) − 2) ϕ = −

f ∆χ 1

f (I) 6= 0 .

(134)

2

2 ) ⇒ (cid:16)χ 1
Z f (χ 1

but

2

3 ) − 2(cid:17) ϕ = 0
2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)I

= −

3
2

1
4

three holonomy constraints together determines the δ-state δΘ as unique solution.

These distributions will actually not be solution to the third holonomy constraint bχ13 and, so imposing directly the

Another interesting case is on the tetrahedron graph, see ﬁg.18, where imposing the holonomy constraints around
three triangles (g1g6g−1
1 ) does not imply the holonomy constraint around the fourth triangle
(g4g5g6). This is realized by a triple grasping around the vertex (123) acting on the δ-distribution, which gives the
following gauge-invariant state:

2 ), (g2g4g−1

3 ) and (g3g5g−1

42

ϕ = ǫabc∂(1)L

a

δ(g1g6g−1

2 )∂(2)L

b

δ(g2g4g−1

3 )∂(3)L

c

δ(g3g5g−1

1 ) .

(135)

Applying this distribution against a gauge-invariant test function f (g1, .., g6), we compute the action of the holonomy
operators around the four 3-cycles of the tetrahedron graph:

(g1g6g−1

2 ) − 2) ϕ = Z f (χ 1

2

(g2g4g−1

3 ) − 2) ϕ = Z f (χ 1

2

(g3g5g−1

1 ) − 2) ϕ = 0 ,

2

Z f (χ 1
Z f (χ 1

2

(g4g5g6) − 2) ϕ = Z f (I, I, I, g4, g5, g6) (χ 1

2

i
8

(g4g5g6) − 2) ∂aδ(g6)∂bδ(g4)∂cδ(g5)

=

ǫabcχ 1

2

(σaσbσc) f (I) 6= 0 .

(136)

So this triple-grasped ﬂat state is a solution to three holonomy constraints, but the ﬂatness around these three loops
does not imply the ﬂatness around the composite loop at the quantum level.

At the end of the day, to fully impose the ﬂatness of the physical state, we require “redundant” holonomy constraints:
imposing the holonomy constraints on an independent set of loops, as expected at the classical level, is not suﬃcient
anymore at the quantum level to kill all the potential geometry excitations. This is especially relevant for the coarse-
graining of the dynamics of loop quantum gravity. A common scenario is that we impose the ﬂatness of the smallest
loops, at the “fundamental” Planck scale, and that these will induce the ﬂatness of the larger loops at larger scale.
However, we see that it is not enough: there exist ﬂat states (distributions peaked on the identity), solutions to
the fundamental holonomy constraints, but which couple and entangle the fundamental loops through some grasping
operators in such a way that they are not solutions anymore to the holonomy constraints around larger loops. In
order to impose the complete ﬂatness of the state at all scales, we need to impose the ﬂatness of all the loops at
all scales, allowing for holonomy constraints around loops of arbitrary size similarly to the construction of Ising-like
states for loop quantum gravity deﬁned in [68].

Conclusion & Outlook

Following the logic of coarse-graining the quantum geometry of loop quantum gravity, we have extended spin
network states by enriching the structure of its vertices: we have attached to the vertices new local degrees of freedom
so that they eﬀectively represent coarse-grained regions of space with non-trivial gravitational ﬁeld and geometry
ﬂuctuations. To this purpose, we have introduced a hierarchy of three generalization of spin network states, based on
the coarse-graining through gauge-ﬁxing approach developed in [33]: folded, loopy and tagged spin networks.

Folded spin networks on a graph Γ are spin network states with an arbitrary number of additional little loops
attached to each vertex of the graph and the extra information of a circuit, or folding tree, for each vertex describing
how these little loops are connected to each other and to the edges of the graph. This is a mathematical reformulation
of gauge-ﬁxed spin networks where the original states live on ﬁner graphs which have been coarse-grained down to
Γ. Loopy spin networks forget about the folding trees and describe spin networks on the base graph Γ plus the little
loops attached to its vertices. These little loops describe local excitations of curvature and geometry, which can then
propagate on top of the background geometry deﬁned by the base graph. We have payed special attention to describing
the cases of distinguishable and indistinguishable little loops, leading to a deﬁnition of a Fock space for loopy spin
network with bosonic little loop excitations. Tagged spin networks are the last step of coarse-graining and deﬁne a
basis for non-gauge-invariant spin network states. Each vertex carries an extra spin, or tag, represented as living on an
open leg attached the vertex, which deﬁnes the closure defect, that is how much the local gauge-invariance is broken.
From the perspective of coarse-graining, this closure defect provides an overall measure of the non-trivial holonomies
which have developed within the coarse-grained region or along the little loops attached to the vertex. Ultimately
we would like to interpret this tag as some quasi-local mass or energy density for the (quantum) gravitational ﬁeld
ﬂuctuations inside the coarse-grained region.

These structures deﬁne a new framework for loop quantum gravity, where we can implement and study its graph-
Indeed, starting from a given base graph Γ, we

changing dynamics while working on a ﬁxed background graph.

43

represent any spin network states on a ﬁner graph as a loopy spin network on the base graph plus little loops taking
into account the more complex structure of the original graph. In a way, we constantly coarse-grain spin networks
to our chosen background graph and the little loops represent all the ﬁner geometry excitations. This proposes a
truncation of loop quantum gravity where the little loops are eﬀective local degrees of freedom, which can propagate
and interact on and with the base graph Γ. For instance, we could choose as background graph, a regular 3d cubic
lattice (e.g. as for deﬁning Bianchi I cosmology as a truncation of loop quantum gravity[69]) or any other base graph
suited for the case at study, and consider all the ﬁner geometry ﬂuctuations from an eﬀective point of view as little loop
inhomogeneities propagating on that base graph, as illustrated on ﬁg.19. The little loops are the extra information
carried by the loopy spin networks compared to a lattice formulation of loop quantum gravity. They encode an
inﬁnity of degrees of freedom attached to each vertex of the graph and describing excitations and ﬂuctuations of the
gravitational ﬁeld.

•

•

•

•

•

•

FIG. 19: Loopy spin networks on a 2d square lattice: the little loop excitations attached to its vertices represent
ﬁner graph structures which have been coarse-grained and allow to take into account graph changing dynamics

while working on a ﬁxed base graph.

Re-introducing in such a way a background structure oﬀers a perfect setting for studying the coarse-graining of
the dynamics of loop quantum gravity. In a sense, we have split the gravitational ﬁeld degrees of freedom into a
dynamical background geometry on a ﬁxed graph and localized ﬂuctuations of geometry, which can be though of as
higher energy or ﬁner scale excitations. As we coarse-grain, structures of the base graph will become little loops.

We have also studied in great detail how to implement the dynamics of BF theory and deﬁned suitable Hamiltonian
constraints that select ultimately the ﬂat state as unique physical state. In particular, it should kill any local degree
of freedom and project out all the potential little loop excitations (or non-trivial tags). We faced two subtleties.
First, the holonomy operators of loop quantum gravity now act also as creation and annihilation operators for the
little loops. Second we identiﬁed an inﬁnity of solutions to the holonomy constraints, deﬁned as higher derivative of
the δ-distribution or equivalently by acting with grasping operators on the totally ﬂat state. These are still peaked
exclusively on the ﬂat connection, but introduce some non-trivial correlation and entanglement between the little loop
excitations. This comes from the fact that the dimension of the intertwiner space at a vertex grows with the number
of little loops and these “spurious” solutions can be interpreted as non-trivial intertwiners between ﬂat little loops.
We have introduced Laplacian constraints to supplement the holonomy constraints and decouple the loops, allowing
us to get rid of this tower of higher order ﬂat states and get ﬁnally as wanted a unique physical state. Nevertheless,
this Hilbert space of “grasped ﬂat states” could prove an interesting sector of loop quantum gravity, with an inﬁnity
of degrees of freedom, especially as a toy model to investigate the continuum limit of the theory.

kℓ

•

js
e

jt
e

ke

•

js
e

jt
e

FIG. 20: Two regions, to be coarse-grained, can be related by several links. These links should in turn be
coarse-grained into a single edge. However since the holonomies along the original links might have been
diﬀerent, the eﬀective edge should be able to carry some data reﬂecting this non-trivial curvature. Identifying
a spin network edge as a bivalent vertex, it is natural to introduce tagged edges, where the tag ke creates a
trivalent intertwiner with the spins at the source and target of the edge, js
e, which can now be diﬀerent.
Another natural possibility is to attach a loop or tadpole to the edge to account for the non-trivial curvature
between the two regions, which would also create a defect along the edge leading to diﬀerent spins at the
source and target of the edge. The diﬀerence between these two generalizations of spin network edges is that

e and jt

the loop implies that the midway vertex now has a non-trivial volume while the tag does not.

44

After having set in the present work the kinematics of loopy and tagged spin networks and shown how to implement
the topological dynamics of BF theory, the next step will be to deﬁne some non-topological loop quantum gravity
dynamics, coupling the degrees of freedom on the base graph to the little loops, and study its coarse-graining ﬂow.

There is however another generalization of spin networks worth investigating before moving on to the dynamics
of the theory. We have focussed up to now on coarse-graining bounded regions of spaces into eﬀective vertices and
therefore introduced the notions of loopy and tagged spin network states with extra structure and data attached to
the vertices. We have dressed the graph’s nodes, so shouldn’t we also consider dressing the its links? Comparing to
Feynman diagrams in quantum ﬁeld theory, we have renormalized the interaction vertices but we should also describe
how to renormalize the propagator. Indeed, after partitioning the graph spanning the 3d space into bounded regions
and coarse-graining each region to a single vertex, there is generically several edges linking these eﬀective vertices.
We need to bundle them together into a single new eﬀective edge. Since those edges to coarse-grain link the same two
regions and thus form loops, there is naturally non-trivial holonomies which can formed between the two regions and
therefore the new eﬀective edge should be able to carry some notion of curvature. One way to proceed is to consider all
the edges of a spin network state as bivalent intertwiners, recoupling between the two spins living at its source and at
its target. Such intertwiners are trivial and the source and target spins are identiﬁed. But as curvature builds up, it is
natural to allow this intertwiner to acquire a tag or little loops, accounting for the curvature excitations carried by the
edge. For instance, as shown on ﬁg.20, a tag would turn the bivalent intertwiner into a trivalent intertwiner allowing
the source and target spins to diﬀer. It would be interesting to develop the notion of spin networks with tagged links.
And it could be relevant to compare such spin networks with both tagged vertices and edges to projected SL(2, C)
spin networks[70, 71], which allow for both features of non-vanishing closure defect at vertices and non-matching spins
along edges, and which are the basic states and building blocks for the EPRL-FK spinfoam models for loop gravity
path integrals[15–17].

Finally, tags and little loops closely resemble particle insertions on spin network states and it would be enlightening
to understand if they can truly be interpreted as matter ﬁeld degrees of freedom, especially from the perspective of
working out the continuum limit of loop quantum gravity as a quantum ﬁeld theory.

C.C. would like to thank Michel Fruchart and Dimitri Cobb for their keen insights and useful discussions with them.

Acknowledgments

Appendix A: Projective limits of loopy spin networks

The general framework of a projective family and the projective limit can be found in [34], where it is applied to
deﬁne the kinematical Hilbert space of spin network states for loop quantum gravity. Here we apply these deﬁnitions
to loopy spin networks, in order to deﬁne superposition states of potentially an inﬁnite number of little loops. To this
purpose, we focus on the ﬂower graph, with a single vertex and an arbitrary number of loops attached to that central
node.

In order to deﬁne precisely this idea of varying number of loops, we start with wave-functions over a ﬁnite number
of loops and deﬁne a nesting, that is describe how to include a set of loops inside a larger one. We will identity the
set of all potential loops with the set of integers. Finite sets of loops are deﬁned as ﬁnite subsets of integers. Loops
are labeled by the integers and are a priori distinguishable. For instance, a wave-function with the support on the
loop number 2 and a wave-function on the loop number 277 are not the same though they both are one-loop states
and depend on only one variable, as illustrated in ﬁg.21.

2

•

6=

2

•

277

277

FIG. 21: We distinguish the diﬀerent potential loops and therefore consider the resulting wave-functions as

diﬀerent even when they excite the same number of loops.

45

Mathematically, we consider the set of all ﬁnite subsets of integers P<∞(N). To each subset E ∈ P<∞(N), we
associate the set SU(2)E of colorings of the corresponding loops by SU(2) group elements. Then wave-functions on E
are gauge-invariant functions over SU(2)E:

{Ψ : SU(2)E → C : ∀g ∈ SU(2), Ψ({ghℓg−1}ℓ∈E) = Ψ({hℓ}ℓ∈E)} .

(A1)

Deﬁning the scalar product using the Haar measure over SU(2)E, the Hilbert space HE of quantum states on the
loopy spin network deﬁned by the subset E of loops is the L2(SU(2)E/AdSU(2)).

The space of loops is equipped with a partial directed order given by the inclusion of subsets of integers. The
partial directed order encodes how diﬀerent subsets are nested within one another: a wave-function over the loop
number 2 and a wave-function over the loop number 277 are diﬀerent but they are both embedded in the larger class
of wave-functions which depend on both loop number 2 and loop number 277 as illustrated in ﬁg.22.

2

•

277

2

•

277

2

•

277

FIG. 22: Though diﬀerent, two functions over two diﬀerent loops can be embedded in a larger space of
functions depending on several loops by identifying them with functions with trivial dependancy on some loops.

This partial ordering by inclusion of subsets induces a projective structure on the loop colorings by group elements.

We deﬁne a projector pEE′ deﬁned for every pair of subsets (E, E′) such that E ⊆ E′ by:

pEE′ : SU(2)E′

→ SU(2)E

s 7→ s E

This projector is simply the canonical restriction from the larger subset E′ to the smaller subset E. These projectors
satisfy a key transitivity property:

∀E, E′, E′′, E ⊂ E′ ⊂ E′′ =⇒ pE′E′′ ◦ pEE′ = pEE′′ ,

(A2)

so that the couple of sets (SU(2)E, pEE′)E,E′∈P<∞(N) form what is called a projective family. The projective limit
SU(2) is then deﬁned by:

SU(2) =n(gE)E∈P ∈ ×E∈PSU(2)E : E ⊆ E′ ⇒ pEE′ gE′ = gEo

Intuitively, this corresponds to collections of colorings on all possible subsets of loops which are compatible with
each other with respect to the inclusion. Therefore, these compatibility conditions between all ﬁnite samplings of the
collection, as illustrated in ﬁg.23, is the precise implementation of the notion of a coloring of an inﬁnite number of
loops.

We translate the projective structure to the space of wave-functions. The projectors pEE′ for E ⊂ E′ turn into

injections IEE′ ≡ p∗

EE′ deﬁned by their pull-backs:

(A3)

(A4)

IEE′ : HE → HE′

f 7→ p∗

EE′f : p∗

EE′ f(cid:0){gℓ}ℓ∈E′(cid:1) = f(cid:0){{gℓ}ℓ∈E}(cid:1) ,

where p∗
compatibility conditions translates into an equivalence relation:

EE′f trivially depends on group elements living on loops of E′ which do not belong to the smaller set E. The

fE1 ∼ fE2 ⇔ ∀E3 ∈ P, E1 ⊆ E3, E2 ⊆ E3, p∗

E1E3 fE1 = p∗

E2E3fE2

(A5)

2

•

42

277

46

2

•

42

277

42

2

•

277

42

2

•

277

· · ·

FIG. 23: The projective limit is made of collections of colorings of ﬁnite subsets equipped with compatibility

conditions: the coloring of a ﬁnite subset is the projection of the coloring of any larger subset.

This allows to deﬁne wave-functions on the projective limit of the loop colorings SU(2) and give a precise sense to
functions over an inﬁnite number of loops:

H = [E∈P

HE! / ∼

(A6)

In order to make this projective limit less abstract and easier to handle, we use another representation. For every
equivalence class of wave-functions in the projective limit H, let us remove all the trivial dependency and pick its
representant based on the smallest subset of loops. So, in practice, we deﬁne spaces of “proper states”, i.e. wave-
functions that have no trivial dependency:

H0

E = {f ∈ HE : ∀ℓ ∈ E ,ZSU(2)

dhℓ f = 0} .

(A7)

This is the space of functions really deﬁned on the subset E, with an actual dependance on each loop and no constant
term. The integral condition removes all the spin-0 components of the wave-functions. First, we show that an arbitrary
wave-function over the subset E of loops can be fully decomposed into proper states with support on all the subsets
of E:

Lemma A.1. The following isomorphism holds as a pre-Hilbertian space isomorphism:

∀E ∈ P<∞(N), HE ≃ MF ∈P(E)

H0

F ,

(A8)

where the direct sum is over all subsets F ⊂ E. This isomorphism is realized through the projections fF = PE,F f
acting on wave-functions f ∈ HE:

fF(cid:0){hℓ}ℓ∈F(cid:1) = XeF ⊂F

(−1)# eFZ Yℓ∈E\F

dkℓ f(cid:0){hℓ}ℓ∈F \ eF , {kℓ}ℓ∈ eF , {gℓ}ℓ∈E\F(cid:1) .

Its inverse is the re-summation of the projections:

Proof. We proceed in two steps. First we check that each projection fF is a proper state,

and that re-summing these projectionsPF ⊂E fF yields f . Second, we check that the integral condition, ensuring that

there is no spin-0 mode, also implies that the subspaces H0

F are pairwise orthogonal, which concludes the proof.

dgℓYℓ∈ eF
f = XF ⊂E

fF .

∀ℓ ∈ F ,

Z dhℓ fF = 0 ,

(A9)

(A10)

47

(A11)

(A12)

H ≃ ME∈P<∞(N)

H0

E .

φ : ME∈P<∞(N)

(fE)E∈P<∞(N)

7→ XE∈Cf

fE

This decomposition generalizes to the projective limit:

Proposition A.2. The following isomorphism holds as a pre-Hilbertian space isomorphism:

Proof. If (fE)E∈P<∞(N) is inLE∈P<∞(N) H0

Cf = {E ∈ P<∞(N) : fE 6= 0} .

E, we deﬁne the set of subsets on which the state f does not vanish:

By deﬁnition of the direct sum, Cf is ﬁnite, so we can deﬁne the ﬁnite subset F = ∪E∈Cf E and the re-summation
map:

H0

E → H

(A13)

where the brackets refer to the equivalence class of the function. This map is obviously linear and we now look for a
deﬁnition of its inverse. So let us consider a state in H, that is an equivalence class s. We deﬁne the set of subsets of
loops on which it has support:

Ds = {E ∈ P<∞(N) : ∃f ∈ s, f ∈ HE}

(A14)

Then we consider the smallest set in Ds , which can be deﬁned14as the intersection Fs =TE∈Ds

E. . In a sense, this
is the minimal support of the state s. We choose a representative f s of the equivalence class s in Fs. It is actually
unique by deﬁnition of the equivalence relation. Then we consider the decomposition in proper states of f s over all
subsets F of Fs and deﬁne:

H0
E

(A15)

ψ : H → ME∈P<∞(N)

s 7→ XF ⊂Fs

PFs,F f s

It is direct to check that it is indeed the inverse of φ.

This decomposition into proper states is very useful to visualize the space: each wave-function can be decomposed
into a sum of wave-functions over a ﬁnite number of loops but with no trivial dependancy. This gives a precise
meaning to superpositions of numberss of loops.

Appendix B: Holonomy Constraint on SU(2)

1. Distributions on SU(2) and conjugation-invariant solutions

We would like to impose the holonomy constraints for BF theory which read for a single group element:

∀g ∈ SU(2), bχϕ (g) = χ 1

2

(g)ϕ(g) = 2 , ϕ(g) .

(B1)

If we stay in the strict framework of the Hilbert space L2(SU(2)), no square integrable function actually provides such

an eigenvector for bχ and we should solve this equation in the dual space. As is standard in quantum mechanics, the

14 This is the point where we choose not to use the completion and just have an isomorphism of pre-Hilbertian spaces in order to have the

existence of Ff .

48

natural framework for solving the equation is a rigged-Hilbert space (or Gelfand triple), that is a triplet: S ⊂ H ⊂ S∗.
The space H is the Hilbert space. The smaller space S is provided with a stronger topology than the induced one and
can thought of as the test function space, while its dual S∗ is the space of continuous linear forms on S and deﬁnes
the distribution space. The major property of S is to be small enough for the algebra of observables to be deﬁned
over it. Then the operator algebra can be naturally extended on S∗ and thus on H. For instance, an operator A
deﬁned on S acts on a (dual) state ϕ be in S∗ as:

∀f ∈ S, Aϕ(f ) = ϕ(A†f ) .

(B2)

So let us be explicit for functions over SU(2). The Hilbert space H is the space of square-integrable functions. The
space S is usually chosen to be the Schwarz space so that canonical position and momentum operator can be deﬁned.
Here, the rapid fall-oﬀ condition is not needed since we are dealing with a compact group, but we keep the smoothness
requirement:

S = {ψ ∈ H/ψ ∈ C∞}

(B3)

Regarding the topology, the space S is naturally endowed with the convergence on every Ck space. More precisely
the space of Ck functions is equipped with the following norm:

kf kCk = sup
0≤i≤k

k∂a1,...,aif k∞

(B4)

This norm has two nice properties. First, diﬀerentiation is continuous from Ck to Ck−1. Second, the topology induced

functions fn∈N in S admits 0 as its limit if the sup-norm of all its derivatives k∂αfnk∞ go to 0 for arbitrary multi-index
α. This is topology is naturally ﬁner than all the Ck topologies and the diﬀerentiation is still continuous. Provided
it is complete and metrizable (though no norm is deﬁned). Note that,
with this topology, S is a Frechet space:

by the norms are ﬁner as k goes to inﬁnity. So the limit topology on S = Tk∈N Ckgoes as follows: a sequence of
although all the Ck are Banach spaces, their descending intersectionTk∈N Ck is not.

Things are usually clearer and more explicit in the Fourier decomposition. Let us consider the Fourier decomposition

of a function over SU(2) on the Wigner matrices:

f (g) =Xj,a,b

f j
abDj

ab .

By the Fourier convergence theorem, smoothness actually translates into a rapid fall-oﬀ of the Fourier coeﬃcients:

f ∈ S ⇐⇒ ∀K ∈ N , Xj

|f j|dK

j < +∞ ,

(B5)

where dj = (2j + 1) is the dimension of the spin-j representation and |f j| can equally be the sup-norm or the square-
norm of the matrix f j
ab. This also means that the Fourier coeﬃcients of a distribution cannot diverge faster than
polynomially:

ϕ ∈ S∗ ⇐⇒ ∃K , Xj

|ϕj|d−K

j < +∞ .

(B6)

The strong topology on S means that a sequence of smooth functions fn converges to 0 in S if and only if all the
K-power sums go to 0:

lim
n→∞

fn = 0 ⇐⇒ ∀K ∈ N , Xj

|f j

n|dK

j −→
n→∞

0 .

(B7)

This ensures that the evaluations of a distribution ϕ will also converge ϕ(fn) → 0.

Let us apply this to the holonomy constraints for functions invariant under conjugation on SU(2). In this case, all

functions decompose on the characters,

ϕ(g) =Xj∈ N

2

ϕjχj(g) ,

and the eigenvalue problem χ(g)ϕ(g) = 2ϕ(g) translates into a recursion relation on the Fourier coeﬃcients:

ρϕ0 = ϕ 1

2

,

ρϕj≥ 1

2

= ϕj− 1

2

+ ϕj+ 1

2

.

49

(B8)

Once we ﬁx the initial condition ϕ0, this recursive equation has a solution for every complex value ρ ∈ C, but this
does not systematically deﬁnes a solution state, in L2 or a distribution. The solution to the recursion is given in terms
of the two solutions µ± of the quadratic equation µ2 − ρµ + 1 = 0:

∀j ∈

N

2

, ϕj =

µ2j+1
+ − µ2j+1
−
µ+ − µ−

.

(B9)

For ρ = 2, the discriminant (ρ2 − 4) vanishes and this ansatz fails leads: instead of the power law, we get a linear
growth fj = (2j + 1), which leads back to the δ-distribution peaked on the identity. For real values |ρ| < 2, the
discriminant is negative and we get an oscillatory solution. Mapping ρ to an angle θ deﬁned as ρ = 2 cos θ, the
two solutions are µ± = exp(±iθ) and the Fourier coeﬃcients are ϕj = sin(2j + 1)θ / sin θ = χj(θ), which gives a
δ-distribution ﬁxing the class angle of the group element g to θ. For |ρ| > 2, the positive discriminant will leads to
exponentially divergent coeﬃcients ϕj and do not deﬁne a proper distribution.

2. The holonomy constraint as a recursion relation

We decompose the distribution ϕ on the Wigner matrices:

Let us write the holonomy constraint equation bχ ϕ = 2 ϕ for distributions on SU(2) in the Fourier decomposition.

ϕ(h) = Xj,m,n

(2j + 1)ϕj

nm Dj

mn(h) ,

with the magnetic moment indices −j ≤ m, n ≤ +j. We know from spin recoupling the action of a spin- 1
2 Wigner
matrix on an arbitrary spin (for example calculating the corresponding Clebsh-Gordan coeﬃcients using the Schwinger
representation of the su(2) Lie algebra in terms of a pair of harmonic oscillators):

∀A, B = ± , D

1
2
A
2 , B
2

(h) Dj

m,n(h) = 1

2j+1" ABp(j + Am + 1)(j + Bn + 1) D

+p(j − Am)(j − Bn) D

j− 1
2
m+ A

2 ,n+ B

2

j+ 1
2
m+ A

2 ,n+ B
2

(h)

(h)# ,

(B10)

with the obvious action on the trivial spin j = 0 mode. The action of the spin- 1
two operators for A = B = ±:

2 character is obtained by adding the

We can then translate the functional equation χ 1

2

ϕ = 2 ϕ into a recursion relation on the Fourier coeﬃcients ϕj

nm:

χ 1
2

(h) = D

1
2
+ 1

2 ,+ 1

2

(h) + D

1
2
− 1

2 ,− 1

2

(h) .

2ϕ0 = ϕ

1
2
− 1

2 ,− 1

2

+ ϕ

1
2
+ 1

2 ,+ 1

2

,

2(2j + 1)ϕj

n,m = ϕ

j− 1
2
n− 1

2 ,m− 1
j− 1
2
n+ 1

2 ,m+ 1

j+ 1
2
n− 1

2p(j + m)(j + n) + ϕ
2p(j − m)(j − n) + ϕ

2 ,m− 1
j+ 1
2
n+ 1

2 ,m+ 1

2p(j − m + 1)(j − n + 1)
2p(j + m + 1)(j + n + 1) .

+ ϕ

(B11)

We easily check that ϕj
δ-distribution on the group ϕ(h) = δ(h). But straightforward computations also tell us that ϕj
a = z, ± are also solutions, or explicitly:

nm(I) is a solution to these recursion relations, which corresponds to the
nm(Ja) for

nm = δnm = Dj

nm = Dj

ϕj

nm = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

Dj
Dj
Dj

nm(Jz) = mδn,m

nm(J+) =p(j + m + 1)(j − m)δn,m+1
nm(J−) =p(j − m + 1)(j + m)δn,m−1

(B12)

In general, we can show that for every vector ~x ∈ R3, the coeﬃcients ϕj
nm(h) and evaluates it at the identity,
Indeed, one diﬀerentiates χ 1

(h)Dj

2

nm = Dj

nm(~x · ~J) solve the recursion equation.

50

−i∂xχ 1

2

(h)Dj

= χ 1

2

(I)Dj

nm(~x · ~J) + χ 1

2

(~x · ~J)Dj

nm(I) = 2Dj

nm(~x · ~J) .

(B13)

nm(h)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)I

Then one applies the recoupling relations given above to decompose χ 1
j ± 1
correspond to the ﬁrst derivative of the δ-distribution, ϕ(h) = ∂xδ(h).

nm onto the Wigner matrices for spins
nm(~x · ~J) do satisfy the required recursion relation. These coeﬃcients actually

2 in order to prove that ϕj

nm = Dj

2

Dj

In order to classify all the solutions to these recursion relations, we need to determine the initial data required to
implement the recursion. The problem is that the size of the matrices ϕj increases with the mode j. If we start with
ﬁxing ϕ0, then this determines only one component out of four of the next matrix ϕ
2 , thus leaving three new initial
conditions to be freely chosen. The 4 = (1 + 3) solutions corresponding to those required initial conditions are δ and
the ∂aδ’s.

2 matrix (indeed one relation per matrix elements of ϕ

Moving up to the spin j = 1 components, we have four recursion relations determining the matrix elements ϕ1 in
terms of the ϕ
2 ). This leaves us with 5 = (9 − 4) undetermined
matrix elements, which we need to specify as initial conditions. Choosing vanishing ϕ0 and ϕ
2 initial conditions,
these ﬁve new initial conditions correspond to the ﬁve linearly-independent second-order-derivative solutions of the
holonomy constraint: ∂a∂b and ∂a∂a − ∂b∂b for a 6= b. So in total, we need to specify 9 initial conditions up to the
spin 1 modes. And this will inexorably grow as we explore higher and higher spins, with 4j + 1 = [(2j + 1)2 − (2j)2]
new initial conditions for the matrix ϕj, thus reproducing the inﬁnite dimensional space of solutions of the holonomy
constraint, with the tower of higher and higher derivatives.

1

1

1

1

3. Laplacian constraint, double recursion and ﬂatness equations

We introduce another constraint supplementing the holonomy constraint in order to truly impose ﬂatness and get
a is
a mixes the right and left derivations. These two operators do not change

the δ-distribution as unique solution: we impose the Laplacian constraint (e∆ − ∆) = 0, where ∆ = ∂L
the usual Laplacian operator and e∆ = ∂L

the spin j and act rather simply on the Wigner matrices:

a = ∂R

a ∂R

a ∂R

a ∂L

∆Dj

mn(h) = −Dj

mn(hJaJa) = −j(j + 1)Dj

mn(h) ,

∆Dj

mn(h) = −Dj

mn(JahJa) .

(B14)

Using the explicit action of the three su(2) generators, and applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to bound the

into equations on the Fourier coeﬃcient matrices ϕj:

sums, we can check that the operator (e∆ − ∆) is positive. We can also translate the Laplacian constraint ∆ϕ = e∆ϕ

j(j + 1)ϕj

nm = nm ϕj

nm +

+

1
2
1
2

ϕj

ϕj

n−1,m−1p(j + n)(j − n + 1)(j + m)(j − m + 1)
n+1,m+1p(j − n)(j + n + 1)(j − m)(j + m + 1) .

(B15)

This is a recursion at ﬁxed spin j on the matrix elements of each ϕj independently. It works at ﬁxed (n − m), that
is along the diagonals of the matrix, determining the matrix elements from, say, the highest weight components:

ϕj,j → ϕj−1,j−1 → ϕj−2,j−2 → . . .
ϕj,j−1 → ϕj−1,j−2 → ϕj−2,j−3 → . . .
ϕj,j−2 → ϕj−1,j−3 → ϕj−2,j−4 → . . .

Putting this constraint with the holonomy constraint, we get a double recursion structure. The holonomy constraint
realizes a recursion on the spin j, determining the matrix ϕj from the lower spin matrices, while the Laplacian
constraint implements a recursion on the magnetic moment m within each matrix ϕj :

ϕ0 →(cid:18) ց ց

ց ց(cid:19) →

ց ց ց
ց ց ց

ց ց ց →

ց ց ց ց
ց ց ց ց
ց ց ց ց
ց ց ց ց

 → . . .

This allows to solve the problem of the inﬁnite initial conditions needed for the holonomy constraint. We easily check
that ϕnm = δnm is a solution:

j(j + 1) = m2 +

1
2

(j + m)(j − m + 1) +

1
2

(j − m)(j + m + 1) .

But then, we completely solve the constraint and show that it implies that the function is invariant under conjugation:

51

Proposition B.1. Let us consider the Laplacian constraint (∆ − e∆) ϕ = 0 translated to the Fourier decomposition
ϕ(h) =Pj,m,n(2j + 1)Tr ϕjDj (h). Then the each of the Fourier coeﬃcient matrix ϕj at ﬁxed spin j is proportional

to the identity. This means that ϕ is invariant under conjugation.

Proof. Let us ﬁx j ≥ 1
2 . The spin-0 component ϕ0 is unconstrained and left free. The recursion relation (B15)
allows to start with an element ϕj,j−M with 0 ≤ M ≤ 2j and to determine all of the following components along the
corresponding diagonal, ϕj−N,j−M−N for 0 ≤ N ≤ (2j − M ). One actually gets a relation in terms of combinatorial
factors:

ϕj−N,j−M−N = ϕj,j−Ms (M + N )!

M !N !

(2j)!(2j − M − N )!
(2j − M )!(2j − N )!

.

In particular, one obtains for the other end of the diagonal:

ϕ−j+M,−j = ϕj,j−M

(2j)!

M !(2j − M )!

.

(B16)

(B17)

The trick is that the recursion relation (B15) is symmetric under the exchange (n, m) ↔ (−m, −n): we start now
from the other end of the same diagonal and work our way back to the initial top element. Therefore the previous
equality holds but in the opposite way:

ϕj,j−M = ϕ−j+M,−j

(2j)!

M !(2j − M )!

= ϕj,j−M(cid:18)

(2j)!

M !(2j − M )!(cid:19)2

,

(B18)

thus either

(2j)!

M !(2j − M )!

= 1 or ϕj,j−M = 0 .

In the special case M = 0, along the principal diagonal, the recursion relation simpliﬁes and reads ϕj,j = ϕj−1,j−1 =
ϕj−2,j−2 = . . . . For all the other cases M 6= 0, the matrix elements must vanish. This concludes the proof that the
matrix ϕj must be proportional to the identity.

[1] C. Rovelli, Quantum Gravity. Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[2] T. Thiemann, Modern Canonical Quantum General Relativity. Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics.

Cambridge University Press, 2007.

[3] R. Gambini and J. Pullin, A ﬁrst course in loop quantum gravity. Oxford University Press, 2011.
[4] A. Ashtekar, “New Variables for Classical and Quantum Gravity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 57 (Nov, 1986) 2244–2247.
[5] J. F. Barbero G., “Real Ashtekar variables for Lorentzian signature space times,” Phys.Rev. D51 (1995) 5507–5510,

arXiv:gr-qc/9410014.

[6] G. Immirzi, “Real and complex connections for canonical gravity,” Class.Quant.Grav. 14 (1997) L177–L181,

arXiv:gr-qc/9612030.

[7] T. Thiemann, “Anomaly - free formulation of nonperturbative, four-dimensional Lorentzian quantum gravity,” Phys.Lett.

B380 (1996) 257–264, arXiv:gr-qc/9606088.

[8] T. Thiemann, “Quantum spin dynamics (QSD),” Class. Quant. Grav. 15 (1998) 839–873, arXiv:gr-qc/9606089.
[9] T. Thiemann, “Quantum spin dynamics (qsd). 2.,” Class. Quant. Grav. 15 (1998) 875–905, arXiv:gr-qc/9606090.
[10] T. Thiemann, “The Phoenix project: Master constraint program for loop quantum gravity,” Class.Quant.Grav. 23

(2006) 2211–2248, arXiv:gr-qc/0305080.

[11] E. Alesci, “Regularized Hamiltonians and Spinfoams,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 360 (2012) 012041, arXiv:1110.6150.

52

[12] E. Alesci, M. Assanioussi, J. Lewandowski, and I. Mkinen, “Hamiltonian operator for loop quantum gravity coupled to a

scalar ﬁeld,” Phys. Rev. D91 (2015), no. 12, 124067, arXiv:1504.02068.

[13] M. Assanioussi, J. Lewandowski, and I. Mkinen, “New scalar constraint operator for loop quantum gravity,” Phys. Rev.

D92 (2015), no. 4, 044042, arXiv:1506.00299.

[14] V. Bonzom and A. Laddha, “Lessons from toy-models for the dynamics of loop quantum gravity,” SIGMA 8 (2012) 009,

arXiv:1110.2157.

[15] J. Engle, E. Livine, R. Pereira, and C. Rovelli, “LQG vertex with ﬁnite Immirzi parameter,” Nucl.Phys. B799 (2008)

136–149, arXiv:0711.0146.

[16] J. Ben Geloun, R. Gurau, and V. Rivasseau, “EPRL/FK Group Field Theory,” Europhys. Lett. 92 (2010) 60008,

arXiv:1008.0354.

[17] F. Vidotto and C. Rovelli, Covariant Loop Quantum Gravity. Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics.

Cambridge University Press, 2014.

[18] M. Dupuis and E. R. Livine, “Holomorphic Simplicity Constraints for 4d Spinfoam Models,” Class. Quant. Grav. 28

(2011) 215022, arXiv:1104.3683.

[19] S. Speziale and W. M. Wieland, “The twistorial structure of loop-gravity transition amplitudes,” Phys. Rev. D86 (2012)

124023, arXiv:1207.6348.

[20] W. M. Wieland, “Hamiltonian spinfoam gravity,” Class. Quant. Grav. 31 (2014) 025002, arXiv:1301.5859.
[21] E. R. Livine, The Spinfoam Framework for Quantum Gravity. PhD thesis, Lyon, IPN, 2010. arXiv:1101.5061.
[22] A. Perez, “The Spin Foam Approach to Quantum Gravity,” Living Rev. Rel. 16 (2013) 3, arXiv:1205.2019.
[23] E. Bianchi and F. Hellmann, “The Construction of Spin Foam Vertex Amplitudes,” SIGMA 9 (2013) 008,

arXiv:1207.4596.

[24] T. Koslowski and H. Sahlmann, “Loop quantum gravity vacuum with nondegenerate geometry,” SIGMA 8 (2012) 026,

arXiv:1109.4688.

[25] B. Dittrich and M. Geiller, “A new vacuum for Loop Quantum Gravity,” Class. Quant. Grav. 32 (2015), no. 11, 112001,

arXiv:1401.6441.

[26] B. Bahr, B. Dittrich, and M. Geiller, “A new realization of quantum geometry,” arXiv:1506.08571.
[27] D. Oriti, “Group ﬁeld theory as the 2nd quantization of Loop Quantum Gravity,” arXiv:1310.7786.
[28] V. Rivasseau, “Quantum Gravity and Renormalization: The Tensor Track,” AIP Conf. Proc. 1444 (2011) 18–29,

arXiv:1112.5104.

[29] V. Rivasseau, “The Tensor Track, III,” Fortsch. Phys. 62 (2014) 81–107, arXiv:1311.1461.
[30] S. Carrozza, Tensorial methods and renormalization in Group Field Theories. PhD thesis, Orsay, LPT, 2013.

arXiv:1310.3736.

[31] S. Carrozza, “Group ﬁeld theory in dimension 4 − ǫ,” Phys. Rev. D91 (2015), no. 6, 065023, arXiv:1411.5385.
[32] E. R. Livine and D. R. Terno, “Reconstructing quantum geometry from quantum information: Area renormalisation,

coarse-graining and entanglement on spin networks,” arXiv:gr-qc/0603008.

[33] E. R. Livine, “Deformation Operators of Spin Networks and Coarse-Graining,” arXiv:1310.3362.
[34] A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski, “Projective techniques and functional integration for gauge theories,” J.Math.Phys. 36

(1995) 2170–2191, arXiv:gr-qc/9411046.

[35] A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski, “Diﬀerential geometry on the space of connections via graphs and projective limits,” J.

Geom. Phys. 17 (1995) 191–230, arXiv:hep-th/9412073.

[36] A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski, “Representation theory of analytic holonomy C* algebras,” arXiv:gr-qc/9311010.
[37] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin, “Discreteness of area and volume in quantum gravity,” Nucl.Phys. B442 (1995) 593–622,

arXiv:gr-qc/9411005.

[38] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin, “Spin networks and quantum gravity,” Phys.Rev. D52 (1995) 5743–5759,

arXiv:gr-qc/9505006.

[39] L. Freidel and S. Speziale, “Twisted geometries: A geometric parametrisation of SU(2) phase space,” Phys.Rev. D82

(2010) 084040, arXiv:1001.2748.

[40] M. Dupuis, J. P. Ryan, and S. Speziale, “Discrete gravity models and Loop Quantum Gravity: a short review,” SIGMA

8 (2012) 052, arXiv:1204.5394.

[41] V. Knizhnik, A. M. Polyakov, and A. Zamolodchikov, “Fractal Structure of 2D Quantum Gravity,” Mod.Phys.Lett. A3

(1988) 819.

[42] L. Freidel and E. R. Livine, “Spin networks for noncompact groups,” J.Math.Phys. 44 (2003) 1322–1356,

arXiv:hep-th/0205268.

[43] S. Holst, “Barbero’s Hamiltonian derived from a generalized Hilbert-Palatini action,” Phys. Rev. D53 (1996) 5966–5969,

arXiv:gr-qc/9511026.

[44] J. Samuel, “Is Barbero’s Hamiltonian formulation a gauge theory of Lorentzian gravity?,” Class. Quant. Grav. 17 (2000)

L141–L148, arXiv:gr-qc/0005095.

[45] S. Alexandrov, “On choice of connection in loop quantum gravity,” Phys. Rev. D65 (2002) 024011,

arXiv:gr-qc/0107071.

[46] M. Geiller, M. Lachieze-Rey, K. Noui, and F. Sardelli, “A Lorentz-Covariant Connection for Canonical Gravity,” SIGMA

7 (2011) 083, arXiv:1103.4057.

[47] M. Geiller, M. Lachieze-Rey, and K. Noui, “A new look at Lorentz-Covariant Loop Quantum Gravity,” Phys. Rev. D84

(2011) 044002, arXiv:1105.4194.

[48] C. Charles and E. R. Livine, “Ashtekar-Barbero holonomy on the hyperboloid: Immirzi parameter as a Cut-oﬀ for

53

Quantum Gravity,” arXiv:1507.00851.

[49] L. Freidel and J. Ziprick, “Spinning geometry = Twisted geometry,” Class.Quant.Grav. 31 (2014), no. 4, 045007,

arXiv:1308.0040.

[50] M. Dupuis and F. Girelli, “Quantum hyperbolic geometry in loop quantum gravity with cosmological constant,” Phys.

Rev. D87 (2013), no. 12, 121502, arXiv:1307.5461.

[51] V. Bonzom, M. Dupuis, F. Girelli, and E. R. Livine, “Deformed phase space for 3d loop gravity and hyperbolic discrete

geometries,” arXiv:1402.2323.

[52] M. Dupuis, F. Girelli, and E. R. Livine, “Deformed Spinor Networks for Loop Gravity: Towards Hyperbolic Twisted

Geometries,” Gen. Rel. Grav. 46 (2014), no. 11, 1802, arXiv:1403.7482.

[53] C. Charles and E. R. Livine, “Closure constraints for hyperbolic tetrahedra,” Class. Quant. Grav. 32 (2015), no. 13,

135003, arXiv:1501.00855.

[54] H. M. Haggard, M. Han, W. Kami?ski, and A. Riello, “SL(2,C) Chern-Simons Theory, a non-Planar Graph Operator,

and 4D Loop Quantum Gravity with a Cosmological Constant: Semiclassical Geometry,” Nucl. Phys. B900 (2015) 1–79,
arXiv:1412.7546.

[55] H. M. Haggard, M. Han, and A. Riello, “Encoding Curved Tetrahedra in Face Holonomies: a Phase Space of Shapes from

Group-Valued Moment Maps,” arXiv:1506.03053.

[56] H. M. Haggard, M. Han, W. Kami?ski, and A. Riello, “Four-dimensional Quantum Gravity with a Cosmological
Constant from Three-dimensional Holomorphic Blocks,” Phys. Lett. B752 (2016) 258–262, arXiv:1509.00458.

[57] A. G. Pithis and H.-C. Ruiz Euler, “Anyonic statistics and large horizon diﬀeomorphisms for Loop Quantum Gravity

Black Holes,” Phys.Rev. D91 (2015) 064053, arXiv:1402.2274.

[58] J. Yang and Y. Ma, “Quasi-Local Energy in Loop Quantum Gravity,” Phys. Rev. D80 (2009) 084027, arXiv:0812.3554.
[59] D. Korotkin and H. Samtleben, “Canonical quantization of cylindrical gravitational waves with two polarizations,”

Phys.Rev.Lett. 80 (1998) 14–17, arXiv:gr-qc/9705013.

[60] A. Ashtekar, J. Bicak, and B. G. Schmidt, “Behavior of Einstein-Rosen waves at null inﬁnity,” Phys.Rev. D55 (1997)

687–694, arXiv:gr-qc/9608041.

[61] E. F. Borja, L. Freidel, I. Garay, and E. R. Livine, “U(N) tools for Loop Quantum Gravity: The Return of the Spinor,”

Class.Quant.Grav. 28 (2011) 055005, arXiv:1010.5451.

[62] V. Bonzom, E. R. Livine, and S. Speziale, “Recurrence relations for spin foam vertices,” Class. Quant. Grav. 27 (2010)

125002, arXiv:0911.2204.

[63] V. Bonzom and L. Freidel, “The Hamiltonian constraint in 3d Riemannian loop quantum gravity,” Class. Quant. Grav.

28 (2011) 195006, arXiv:1101.3524.

[64] V. Bonzom, M. Dupuis, and F. Girelli, “Towards the Turaev-Viro amplitudes from a Hamiltonian constraint,” Phys. Rev.

D90 (2014), no. 10, 104038, arXiv:1403.7121.

[65] L. Freidel and K. Krasnov, “Discrete space-time volume for three-dimensional BF theory and quantum gravity,” Class.

Quant. Grav. 16 (1999) 351–362, arXiv:hep-th/9804185.

[66] V. Bonzom and E. R. Livine, “A New Hamiltonian for the Topological BF phase with spinor networks,” J. Math. Phys.

53 (2012) 072201, arXiv:1110.3272.

[67] V. Bonzom and B. Dittrich, “Dirac’s discrete hypersurface deformation algebras,” Class. Quant. Grav. 30 (2013) 205013,

arXiv:1304.5983.

[68] A. Feller and E. R. Livine, “Ising Spin Network States for Loop Quantum Gravity: a Toy Model for Phase Transitions,”

Class. Quant. Grav. 33 (2016), no. 6, 065005, arXiv:1509.05297.

[69] E. Alesci and F. Cianfrani, “Quantum-Reduced Loop Gravity: Cosmology,” Phys. Rev. D87 (2013), no. 8, 083521,

arXiv:1301.2245.

[70] E. R. Livine, “Projected spin networks for Lorentz connection: Linking spin foams and loop gravity,” Class. Quant.

Grav. 19 (2002) 5525–5542, arXiv:gr-qc/0207084.

[71] M. Dupuis and E. R. Livine, “Lifting SU(2) Spin Networks to Projected Spin Networks,” Phys. Rev. D82 (2010) 064044,

arXiv:1008.4093.

