March 4, 2016 1:23 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

diﬀeo-symm-qg

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
8
2
1
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Diﬀeomorphism invariant cosmological symmetry in full quantum

gravity

Christopher Beetle1∗, Jonathan S. Engle1†, Matthew E. Hogan1

,

2‡, Phillip Mendon¸ca1 §

1 Department of Physics, Florida Atlantic University, 777 Glades Road,

Boca Raton, Florida 33431, USA

2 Department of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Wells College, 170 Main Street,

Aurora, New York 13026, USA

This paper summarizes a new proposal to deﬁne rigorously a sector of loop quantum
gravity at the diﬀeomorphism invariant level corresponding to homogeneous and isotropic
cosmologies, thereby enabling a detailed comparison of results in loop quantum gravity
and loop quantum cosmology. The key technical steps we have completed are (a) to for-
mulate conditions for homogeneity and isotropy in a diﬀeomorphism covariant way on
the classical phase space of general relativity, and (b) to translate these conditions consis-
tently using well-understood techniques to loop quantum gravity. Some additional steps,
such as constructing a speciﬁc embedding of the Hilbert space of loop quantum cosmol-
ogy into a space of (distributional) states in the full theory, remain incomplete. However,
we also describe, as a proof of concept, a complete analysis of an analogous embedding of
homogeneous and isotropic loop quantum cosmology into the quantum Bianchi I model
of Ashtekar and Wilson-Ewing. Details will appear in a pair of forthcoming papers.

Symmetry is a powerful tool for simplifying the physics of a system in order to
extract predictions. In the case of quantum gravity, the most promising place to seek
potentially observable predictions is in cosmology, where classical gravity breaks
down at the Big Bang and quantum eﬀects become important. The universe appears
spatially homogeneous and isotropic to a very good approximation at large scales,
and cosmological models exploit this symmetry to enable exact solutions of the
otherwise prohibitively complicated dynamics of Einstein’s theory.

Imposing homogeneity and isotropy, or indeed any spatial symmetry, in quantum

gravity, however, immediately runs into two obstacles:

(1) Symmetry must be imposed on the full set of initial data — both conﬁguration
and momentum variables. Classically this is necessary for the future evolution

∗cbeetle@fau.edu
†jonathan.engle@fau.edu
‡mhogan@wells.edu
§pmendon1@fau.edu

1

March 4, 2016 1:23 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

diﬀeo-symm-qg

2 C. Beetle, J.S. Engle, M.E. Hogan, and P. Mendon¸ca

to continue to be symmetric. However, at the quantum level, this violates the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle.

(2) Usually symmetry is imposed by requiring invariance of the initial data under
a ﬁxed action of the symmetry group. However, such a method of imposing
symmetry necessarily breaks the diﬀeomorphism invariance of general relativity.
As a consequence, in the quantum theory, such a method of imposing symmetry
will never be consistent with imposition of the dynamical constraints.a

In this paper, we introduce a way to impose symmetry in quantum gravity that
overcomes these fundamental obstacles. Speciﬁcally, we formulate new diﬀeomor-
phism covariant constraints that impose homogeneity and isotropy in the phase
space of general relativity. These constraints involve complex functions on phase
space, which have a closed Poisson algebra. The latter fact allows us to overcome the
ﬁrst obstacle mentioned above in a manner similar to that used in the Gupta–Bleuler
quantization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld.2, 3 Furthermore, the complex constraint
functions can be quantized using existing techniques in the framework of loop quan-
tum gravity. This yields for the ﬁrst time a systematically motivated homogeneous
and isotropic sector at the diﬀeomorphism-invariant level of the quantum theory.

Our ultimate goal is to use this homogeneous and isotropic sector of loop quan-
tum gravity to develop a clear and detailed connection to homogeneous and isotropic
loop quantum cosmology. The latter arises by imposing the symmetry classically,
prior to quantization. The resulting quantum model is much more tractable than
the full theory, and allows explicit comparison between theoretical predictions and
observations, but loses any a priori connection to the full quantum theoryb. Our
aim is to restore that connection, so that observational constraints on a quantum
cosmological model can also help dictate choices that must be made in quantizing
the full theory. In particular, one would like to be able to use constraints on the
dynamics of the quantum cosmological model to similarly constrain the dynamics
of the full theory.

Some steps of our program to relate a symmetric sector of loop quantum gravity
to loop quantum cosmology remain incomplete, however. We will summarize the
steps that have been completed below, and mention those that are the subject of
ongoing work. We have, however, completed the analogous task relating the loop
quantum Bianchi I model of Ashtekar and Wilson-Ewing12 to homogeneous and
isotropic loop quantum cosmology. We were surprised to ﬁnd that the homogeneous
and isotropic model could be embedded in the Bianchi I model using a known linear
mapping. Speciﬁcally, the embedding is the adjoint of the projection from Bianchi I
to the fully symmetric model previously found by Ashtekar and Wilson-Ewing. We

aUnless one quantizes the full theory by ﬁxing the diﬀeomorphism gauge ﬁrst. However, such a
strategy is not usually proposed as a way to obtain a fundamental theory of quantum gravity, due to
known problems which occur when gauge ﬁxing is used to obtain a non-perturbative quantization
of a gauge theory with non-Abelian constraints.1
bSee, however, recent progress in Refs. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

March 4, 2016 1:23 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

diﬀeo-symm-qg

Diﬀeomorphism invariant cosmological symmetry in full quantum gravity

3

will discuss this simpliﬁed embedding scheme, both as a proof of concept for our
larger goal and as an interesting result in its own right.

Details of our results will be published in two forthcoming papers.13, 14

1. Deﬁnition of the symmetry constraints

Ai

a + γK i
a

a = Γi
i is the inverse of ei

a and a densitized
i . These are related to the traditional ADM phase-space variables — the

The basic variables of loop gravity are an SU (2) connection Ai
triad ˜Ea
spatial metric and extrinsic curvature qab, Kab — by
˜Ea

and

i = |det e| ea
i

aebi, ea

where qab = ei
the triad ei
usually is ﬁxed through considerations of black hole entropy.17, 18

a is the spin connection determined by
a := Kabeai, and γ is the Barbero-Immirzi parameter,15, 16 which

a, K i

a, Γi

We seek a condition on these variables equivalent to homogeneity and isotropy
that is nevertheless diﬀeomorphism invariant. An initial data set (qab, Kab) is homo-
geneous and isotropic if and only if qab is maximally symmetric — that is, possesses
six Killing vector ﬁelds — and Kab is proportional to qab by a constant:

Kab = Hqab.

(1)

It is well known that if qab is maximally symmetric, then its Riemann curvature has
the form

Rabcd =

1
6

R(cid:0)hac hbd − had hbc(cid:1),

(2)

where the scalar curvature R is constant over space. In fact, the converse is also
true.13 It follows that a spacetime admits a foliation by maximally symmetric spatial
slices if and only if it admits initial data satisfying

Fab

i(Γ) = ρ Σab

i

and

K i

a = H ei
a

(3)

for some constants ρ and H, where Fab
ǫi

jkej

aek
b .
The two conditions (3) can be combined in a useful form for quantization using
the complexiﬁer method of Thiemann.19 Fixing a complexiﬁer function C on phase
space, one deﬁnes a 1-parameter family

i(Γ) is the curvature of Γi

a and Σi

ab :=

∂
∂t

tO := i(cid:8)tO, C(cid:9)

with

0O := O

(4)

of complex functions tO on phase space deriving from a given (generally real-valued)
function O. Importantly, the corresponding family of operators in the quantum
theory will have the form t ˆO = e−t ˆC ˆO et ˆC , so in principle it is straightforward to
quantize such complexiﬁed observables.

Choosing C to be proportional to the total volume V of space and setting O = Ai
a

yields a complexiﬁed connection

tAi

a = Ai

a + iαt ei
a,

(5)

March 4, 2016 1:23 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

diﬀeo-symm-qg

4 C. Beetle, J.S. Engle, M.E. Hogan, and P. Mendon¸ca

where α is a constant with units of inverse length. The (co-)triad ei
a is invariant
under this complexiﬁcation ﬂow. Calculating the curvature of this complexiﬁed con-
nection shows that the real and imaginary parts of the single relation

Fab

i = b Σab

i,

(6)

where we have set t = 1 and b is a complex constant, imply both of the real
symmetry conditions (3). Furthermore, taking a wedge product with fij ej
c, where
fij is an arbitrary smearing function, and integrating over all space gives

B[f ] := Z fij Fi ∧ ej = bZ fij δij ǫklm ek el em =: b V [f ].

(7)

The right side here is proportional to the proper-volume integral of the trace of
fij over all space. Cross-multiplying two such equations allows us to eliminate the
constant b and write the symmetry conditions in the form

S[f, g] := B[f ] V [g] − B[g] V [f ] = 0

(8)

for all fij and gkl.

The non-complexiﬁed version of B[f ] is nearly identical to the Euclidean self-
dual Hamiltonian constraint of general relativity, which arises when fij = N δij . It
can be quantized using the same basic method used for the Euclidean Hamiltonian
constraint. Finally, we can complexify the result in the quantum theory by setting

ˆB[f ] := e− ˆV /v0 ˆB[f ] e

ˆV /v0 ,

(9)

where v0 is an ﬁxed, but arbitrary, constant with units of volume.

The functions in equation (8) are our constraints, whose vanishing is equivalent
to homogeneity and isotropy of the gravitational ﬁeld with respect to some action
of a maximal symmetry group. They are manifestly diﬀeomorphism and gauge co-
variant, so that their vanishing for all test functions is a diﬀeomorphism and gauge
invariant condition.

2. First class nature

A necessary condition for a given set (cid:8)Ci(cid:9) of classical constraints to admit operator
analogues(cid:8) ˆCi(cid:9) that can be imposed strongly (i.e., ˆCi |ψi = 0) and consistently (i.e.,

simultaneously) at the quantum level is that their classical Poisson algebra should
close. That is, there should exist phase-space functions λij

k such that

(cid:8)Ci, Cj(cid:9) = Xk

λij

k Ck.

(10)

We refer to such constraints as a ﬁrst-class set.

We wish to impose the symmetry conditions S[f, g] discussed above strongly
in quantum theory, as well as the Gauss and diﬀeomorphism constraints C[Λ] and
C[ ~N ] of general relativity. Remarkably, these functions do form a ﬁrst class set

March 4, 2016 1:23 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

diﬀeo-symm-qg

Diﬀeomorphism invariant cosmological symmetry in full quantum gravity

5

classically. The ﬁrst thing to check is that the symmetry conditions form a ﬁrst
class set by themselves. One ﬁnds

(cid:8)S[f, g], S[h, k](cid:9) =

κγ
2

V [g] S[f # h, k] +

κγ
2

S[g, k]Z tr f ek ∧ D(cid:0)hkl el(cid:1)

(11)

− (f ↔ g) − (h ↔ k) + (f h ↔ gk),

where Da denotes the gauge-covariant derivative deﬁned by Ai
deﬁned the “hash product”

a, and where we have

(f # h)ij := 2 fik V abc ek

a Db(cid:0)hjl el

c(cid:1) − fij V abc ek

a Db(cid:0)hkl el

c(cid:1) − (f ↔ h)

(12)

of smearing functions. The next thing to check is the algebra of the symmetry
conditions and the constraints. One ﬁnds immediately that

(cid:8)C[Λ], S[f, g](cid:9) = 0

and

(cid:8)C[ ~N ], S[f, g](cid:9) = S[L ~N f, g] + S[f, L ~N g]

(13)

because S[f, g] is (Gauss) gauge-invariant and diﬀeomorphism-covariant. The total
algebra of symmetry conditions and constraints therefore closes. Thus, it is rea-
sonable to seek a sector of (distributional) states in loop quantum gravity lying
simultaneously in the kernels of all the symmetry condition operators, as well as all
the Gauss and diﬀeomorphism constraint operators.

3. Quantum implementation

To construct an operator corresponding to the smeared constraint function S[f, g]
(8), one ﬁrst constructs operators corresponding to B[f ] and V [g] in (7). This is a
simple task in the framework of loop quantum gravity. First, the standard quan-
tization of the volume element given in Ref. 20 yields a canonical deﬁnition for
ˆV [f ]. Second, as we mentioned above, B[f ] has a form closely related to that of the
Euclidean self-dual Hamiltonian constraint

ab is the curvature of Ai

CEucl[N ] = Z N F i ∧ ei,
where F i
a. Speciﬁcally, B[f ] diﬀers only in that (a) the two
indices are no longer contracted with each other, but rather with those of a matrix-
valued smearing function, and (b) one uses the complexiﬁed connection Ai
a instead
of the real connection Ai
a. Neither of these diﬀerences aﬀect Thiemann’s proce-
dure21 for quantizing CEucl[N ]. Exactly the same methods can be used to deﬁne an
operator ˆB[f ]. One can either carry out the Thiemann strategy using the quantum
complexiﬁed connection directly, or ﬁrst using the quantum real connection and
then complexifying as in (9). The resulting operator in either case will be the same
due to the structure of quantum complexiﬁcation.

There is a further subtlety to be addressed, even with ˆB[f ] and ˆV [f ] constructed.
As in the case of Thiemann’s Hamiltonian constraint, the operator ˆB[f ] has a well-
deﬁned action only within the space of solutions Vdiﬀ to the quantum diﬀeomor-
phism constraint. Furthermore, as with Thiemann’s constraint (when it is smeared

March 4, 2016 1:23 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

diﬀeo-symm-qg

6 C. Beetle, J.S. Engle, M.E. Hogan, and P. Mendon¸ca

with a non-constant lapse), ˆB[f ] maps diﬀeomorphism-invariant states out of Vdiﬀ .
That is, its domain and range are mutually exclusive. In contrast, the smeared vol-
ume operator ˆV [f ] is well-deﬁned on all states, diﬀeomorphism invariant or not, but
generally maps diﬀeomorphism-invariant states out of Vdiﬀ . These facts determine
the operator ordering to use when building the operators ˆS[f, g] analogous to (8).
Namely, if we choose the domain of ˆS[f, g] to be Vdiﬀ, then we must order ˆB[f ] to
act before ˆV [g], and likewise ˆB[g] to act before ˆV [f ]. The space of states annihilated
by ˆS[f, g] for all smearing functions f i
j then deﬁnes our homogeneous and
isotropic sector Vsymm ⊂ Vdiﬀ .

j and gi

4. Program to relate dynamics

The Gauss and diﬀeomorphism constraints hold identically in loop quantum cos-
mology, and also in the new homegeneous and isotropic sector of loop quantum
gravity described above. The only remaining constraint is the (Lorentzian) Hamil-
tonian constraint C[N ]. Furthermore, there is only one independent smearing of the
Hamiltonian constraint that needs to be imposed in the homogeneous and isotropic
context, which can be taken to be the unit-lapse smearing C[1]. There exists a quan-
tum analogue of C[1] in both loop quantum cosmology and loop quantum gravity,
which we denote ˆCS and ˆC[1], respectively. One of the key aims of our program is
to give a direct relation between these two operators at the quantum level.

This part of our program remains incomplete, but the general strategy we intend
to follow is to construct an embedding ι of LQC states into Vsymm such that, at
least in an approximate sense, the matrix elements of the two Hamiltonian constraint
operators match:

hιψ, ˆC[1]ιφi

phιψ, ιψihιφ, ιφi

=

hψ, ˆCSφi
phψ, ψihφ, φi

.

(14)

This condition should hold for all LQC states ψ and φ. The division by the norms
here is needed because ι will in general not be norm-preserving, so that φ, ψ, ιφ
and ιψ will in general not be simultaneously normalizable. The extent to which
the above condition can be satisﬁed for some ι is then a measure of the extent
to which the two deﬁnitions of dynamics are consistent. Alternatively, ι can be
determined by imposing a similar equality of matrix elements for one or more pairs
of simpler operators. Then, given an operator ˆC[1] in the full theory, equation
(14) will uniquely determine a corresponding operator in LQC, which can then be
compared with the Hamiltonian constraint operator used in the LQC literature.

In practice, the above prescriptions are more involved than they sound, as Vsymm
is expected to consist in states which are not normalizable in the diﬀeomorphism
invariant inner product on Vdiﬀ ,22, 23 so that the left hand side of the above equation
will likely be of the form ∞/∞ and so will need to be regularized. We refer to the
larger paper13 for such details.

March 4, 2016 1:23 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

diﬀeo-symm-qg

Diﬀeomorphism invariant cosmological symmetry in full quantum gravity

7

5. Application to Bianchi I

Even though the program of section 4 has not been carried to completion in relating
the full theory of LQG to LQC, it has been completed14 to impose isotropy at the
quantum level in a Bianchi I model.12 This is a simpler, but still non-trivial, problem.
This application allows a detailed comparison of the isotropy-reduced quantum
dynamics of Bianchi I12 with that of the well-established isotropic LQC model.24, 25
The results were unexpected. We found an exact match of kinematics and dynamics
in the two theories, as well as an exact match of naturally deﬁned operators in each
model corresponding to spatial volume, average spatial curvature, and Hubble rate.
Furthermore, the embedding ι in this application to Bianchi I turned out to be none
other than the adjoint of the dynamical projector ˆP from Bianchi I to isotropic LQC
proposed in Ref. 12. That is, the image of the adjoint of the dynamical projector of
Ref. 12 satisﬁes precisely the symmetry constraint operator equation proposed in
this paper, specialized to Bianchi I in a straightforward way.

In light of the successful application to Bianchi I, and of the equivalence to
the dynamical projector method of Ref. 12 in that case, one can view the present
program as way to reformulate the dynamical projector method and generalize it to
the full theory of LQG. What makes this possible is the sharpened understanding
of the role of homogeneity and isotropy.

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Ted Jacobson, Atousa Chaharsough Shirazi, Brajesh
Gupt, Jorge Pullin, Parampreet Singh, Xuping Wang, and Shawn Wilder for dis-
cussions. This work was funded in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation
under grants PHY-1205968 and PHY-1505490, and by NASA through the Univer-
sity of Central Florida’s NASA-Florida Space Grant Consortium.

References

1. V. N. Gribov, Nuclear Physics B 139 (1978) 1.
2. S. N. Gupta, Proc. Phys. Soc. A 63 (1950) 681.
3. K. Bleuler, Helv. Phys. Acta 23 (1950) 567.
4. N. Bodendorfer, Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) 081502.
5. E. Alesci and F. Cianfrani, Phys. Rev. D 92 (2015) 084065.
6. E. Alesci and F. Cianfrani, Europhys. Lett. 111 (2015) 40002.
7. C. Fleischhack, arXiv:1010.0449 (2010).
8. M.

Hanusch,

and

Symmetry
Reduction in Loop Quantum Gravity, PhD thesis, University of Paderborn (2014).
https://digital.ub.uni-paderborn.de/ubpb/urn/urn:nbn:de:hbz:466:2-15277.

Connections

Invariant

9. M. Hanusch, arXiv:1307.5303 (2013).

10. J. Engle, Class.Quant.Grav. 30 (2013) 085001.
11. J. Engle, Class. Quant. Grav. 24 (2007) 5777.
12. A. Ashtekar and E. Wilson-Ewing, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 083535.
13. C. Beetle, J. S. Engle, M. E. Hogan and P. Mendon¸ca, Diﬀeomorphism invariant

cosmological sector in loop quantum gravity (2016) In preparation.

March 4, 2016 1:23 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

diﬀeo-symm-qg

8 C. Beetle, J.S. Engle, M.E. Hogan, and P. Mendon¸ca

14. C. Beetle, J. S. Engle, M. E. Hogan and P. Mendon¸ca, Quantum isotropy and the

reduction of dynamics in Bianchi I (2016) In preparation.

15. J. F. Barbero G., Phys. Rev. D 51 (1995) 5507.
16. G. Immirzi, Class. Quant. Grav. 14 (1995) L177.
17. M. Domagala and J. Lewandowski, Class.Quant.Grav. 21 (2004) 5233.
18. K. Meissner, Class. Quantum Grav. 21 (2004) 5245.
19. T. Thiemann, Class. Quantum Grav. 23 (2006) 2063.
20. A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 1 (1998) 388.
21. T. Thiemann, Class. Quant. Grav. 15 (1998) 839.
22. A. Ashtekar, J. Lewandowski, D. Marolf, J. Mour˜ao and T. Thiemann, J. Math. Phys.

36 (1995) 6456.

23. A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski, Class. Quant. Grav. 21 (2004) R53.
24. A. Ashtekar, T. Pawlowski and P. Singh, Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 084003.
25. A. Ashtekar, M. Bojowald and J. Lewandowski, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 7 (2003)

233.

