6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
T
A
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
7
3
1
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A SPECTRAL SEQUENCE FOR STRATIFIED SPACES AND

CONFIGURATION SPACES OF POINTS

DAN PETERSEN

Abstract. We construct a spectral sequence associated to a stratiﬁed space, which com-
putes the compactly supported cohomology groups of an open stratum in terms of the
compactly supported cohomology groups of closed strata and the reduced cohomology
groups of the poset of strata. Several familiar spectral sequences arise as special cases.
The construction is sheaf-theoretic and works both for topological spaces and for the étale
cohomology of algebraic varieties. As an application we prove a very general representation
stability theorem for conﬁguration spaces of points.

1. Introduction

Let X =Sα∈P Sα be a stratiﬁed space. By this we mean that the topological space X is the

union of disjoint locally closed subspaces Sα called the strata, and that the closure of each
stratum is itself a union of strata. The set P of strata becomes partially ordered by declaring
that α ≤ β if Sα ⊇ Sβ.

Let χc(−) denote the compactly supported Euler characteristic of a space. Since this invariant
is additive over stratiﬁcations, one has an equality

(1)

χc(Sα) =Xα≤β

χc(Sβ)

for all α ∈ P . By the Möbius inversion formula for the poset P , it therefore holds that

(2)

χc(Sα) = Xα≤β

µP (α, β) · χc(Sβ)

where µP is the Möbius function of the poset. This expresses the simple combinatorial fact
that if one knows all the integers χc(Sα), then one can also determine the integers χc(Sα) by
inclusion-exclusion.

Equation (1) can be upgraded (or “categoriﬁed”) to a relationship between actual cohomology
groups. Suppose σ : P → Z is a function such that σ(α) < σ(β) if α < β. Such a function
deﬁnes a ﬁltration of Sα by closed subspaces, and the corresponding spectral sequence in
compactly supported cohomology reads

(3)

Epq

1 = Mα≤β

σ(β)=p

H p+q

c

(Sβ, Z) =⇒ H p+q

c

(Sα, Z)

By equating the Euler characteristics of the E1 and E∞ pages of this spectral sequence one
recovers Equation (1).

1

2

DAN PETERSEN

It is then natural to ask whether also the dual Equation (2) admits a similar interpretation.
We point out that the quantity µP (α, β) is also an Euler characteristc, by Philip Hall’s
theorem: the Möbius function µP (α, β) equals the reduced Euler characteristic of N(α, β),
by which we mean the nerve of the poset (α, β), where (α, β) denotes an open interval in P .
(The preceding is valid only if α < β: in the degenerate case α = β it is natural to deﬁne
the reduced cohomology of N(α, β) to be Z in degree −2, as we explain in Section 2.) In any
case, one can expect such a categoriﬁcation to also involve the reduced cohomology groups of
the poset.

In this paper, we construct a spectral sequence accomplishing this goal:

Theorem 1.1. There exists a spectral sequence

Epq

1 = Mα≤β

σ(β)=p Mi+j+2=p+q

H j

c (Sβ, eH i(N(α, β), Z)) =⇒ H p+q

c

(Sα, Z).

Taking Euler characteristics of both sides, we recover Equation (2). This would seem a very
natural question — given the cohomology of the closed strata, how does one compute the
cohomology of open strata? — and it is close in spirit to the work of Vassiliev [Vas92; Vas95].
Yet to my knowledge the result is new.

The proof is elementary and completely sheaf-theoretic, and the theorem we prove in the
body of the paper is a more general statement that is valid with coeﬃcients given by any
sheaf or complex of sheaves F on X. It also works in the setting of ℓ-adic sheaves, if X is an
algebraic variety: in this case, the spectral sequence is a spectral sequence of ℓ-adic Galois
representations.

As an application of our result we prove a very general representation stability theorem
for conﬁguration spaces of points. In particular, a novel feature is that if one is willing to
work with Borel–Moore homology (or dually, compact support cohomology), then one can
prove homological stability results for an arbitrary topological space M satisfying rather mild
hypotheses; to my knowledge, all existing results in the literature prove homological stability
for conﬁguration spaces of points on manifolds.
In this introduction we focus on the case
when M is a (possibly singular) algebraic variety, in which case the result is easier to state.

Let M be a space, and let A be a ﬁnite collection of closed subspaces Ai ⊂ M ni. We
deﬁne a conﬁguration space FA(M, n), parametrizing n ordered points on M ”avoiding all
A-conﬁgurations”. For instance, if A consists only of the diagonal inside M 2, then FA(M, n)
is the usual conﬁguration space of distinct ordered points on M .

Theorem 1.2. Let M be a geometrically irreducible d-dimensional algebraic variety over a
ﬁeld κ, and let A be an arbitrary ﬁnite collection of closed subvarieties Ai ⊂ M ni.

(1) For κ = C, the (singular) Borel–Moore homology groups H BM

i+2dn(FA(M, n)(C), Z)

form a ﬁnitely generated FI-module for all i ∈ Z.

(2) For ℓ 6= char(κ), the (étale) Borel–Moore homology groups H BM

i+2dn(FA(M, n)κ, Zℓ)
form a ﬁnitely generated FI-module in ℓ-adic Gal(κ/κ)-representations, for all i ∈ Z.

In particular, the homology groups H BM
quence of Sn-representations, and the Sn-invariants H BM
logical stability as n → ∞.

i+2dn(FA(M, n), Q) form a representation stable se-
i+2dn(FA(M, n)/Sn, Q) satisfy homo-

A SPECTRAL SEQUENCE FOR STRATIFIED SPACES

3

If M is smooth, or at least a homology manifold, we may conclude instead that the cohomology
groups H i(FA(M, n), Z) form a ﬁnitely generated FI-module, by Poincaré duality.

Vakil and Wood [VW15] introduced certain conﬁguration spaces wc
λ(M ), depending on a
partition λ. For a suitable choice of A, one has FA(M, n)/Sn = wc
λ(M ), so Theorem 1.2
implies in particular a homological stability theorem for the spaces wc
λ(M ) as n → ∞, which
proves a conjecture of Vakil and Wood [VW15, Conjecture F]. This conjecture has previously
been proven by Kupers–Miller–Tran [KMT14]. Compared to Kupers–Miller–Tran, our proof
gives the stronger assertion of representation stability, and makes no smoothness assumptions
about M (they assume M is a smooth manifold). On the other hand, their proof gives in
many cases integral stability for the unordered conﬁguration space, and they give an explicit
stability range. The latter should be possible in our setting, too, but we have not done so.

A remark is that Vakil and Wood formulated their conjecture after making point counts of
varieties over ﬁnite ﬁelds, and using the Grothendieck–Lefschetz trace formula to guess what
the cohomology should look like. Since the Grothendieck–Lefschetz trace formula concerns
compact support cohomology, it is in a sense natural that we obtain stronger results when
working with compact support cohomology/Borel–Moore homology from the start.

As mentioned, one can prove also a version of Theorem 1.2 for an arbitrary topological space,
but the assumptions on M and A become more cumbersome to state. However, if we let
A be the arrangement leading to the conﬁguration spaces considered by Vakil–Wood, the
hypotheses are quite simple:
if M is any locally compact topological space with ﬁnitely
generated Borel–Moore homology groups, and such that there exists an integer d ≥ 2 for
which H BM
i+dn(FA(M, n), Z) is a ﬁnitely
generated FI-module if d is even; if d is odd, one needs to twist by the sign representation,
and H BM

i+dn(FA(M, n), Z) ⊗ sgnn is a ﬁnitely generated FI-module.

(M, Z) = 0 for i > d, then H BM

(M, Z) ∼= Z and H BM

d

i

2. Generalities on posets

Let P be a poset, always assumed to be ﬁnite. We deﬁne its nerve NP to be the simplicial
complex with vertices the elements of P , and a subset S ⊆ P forms a face if and only if all
elements of S are pairwise comparable. The corresponding simplicial set is exactly the usual
nerve of P , when P is thought of as a category.

to work with cohomology. The usual deﬁnition would be to set

We use eC•(∆) to denote the reduced cellular chains of a simplicial complex ∆. The group
eCi(∆) is free abelian on the set of i-dimensional faces; we include the empty set as a (−1)-
dimensional face. The homology of this chain complex is eH•(∆, Z). However, we will prefer
but we will ﬁnd it more convenient to use the distinguished basis of eCi(∆) to consider eC i(∆)
If x ≤ y in P , we denote by eC•(x, y) the chain complex which in degree d is the free abelian

as also being the free abelian on the set of i-dimensional faces; then the diﬀerential becomes
an alternating sum over ways of adding an element to a face.

eC•(∆) = Hom(eC•(∆), Z)

group spanned by the increasing sequences

x = z−1 < z0 < z1 < . . . < zd < zd+1 = y,

4

DAN PETERSEN

and whose diﬀerential ∂ : eCd → eCd+1 is an alternating sum over ways of adding an element
to the sequence. For x < y, eC•(x, y) is equal to eC•(N(x, y)), where (x, y) denotes an open
interval in P ; for x = y, it consists of Z placed in degree −2. We denote by eH •(x, y) the

cohomology of this cochain complex.

Let σ : P → Z be a strictly increasing function, e.g. a grading or a linear extension.
Proposition 2.1. For x < y in P , there exists a spectral sequence

Epq

1 = Mx≤z≤y

σ(z)=p eH p+q−1(x, z)

converging to zero.

x = z−1 < z0 < z1 < . . . < zd ≤ y.

Proof. Consider the chain complex eC• = eC•(N(x, y]), where (x, y] denotes a half-open interval
in P . Since (x, y] has a unique maximal element its nerve is contractible, so the complex eC•
is acyclic. We identify eC d with the set of increasing sequences
Deﬁne a decreasing ﬁltration on this complex by taking F peC d to be the span of all sequences
with σ(zd) ≥ p. This makes eC• a ﬁltered complex. Consider the quotient
and its induced diﬀerential. Then F peCd/F p+1eCd has a basis consisting of sequences such that

σ(zd) is exactly equal to p, and the diﬀerential is a sum over all ways of adding an element
to the sequence coming before zd. It therefore follows that the quotient is isomorphic to the
direct sum

F peC•/F p+1eC•

Mx≤z≤y
σ(z)=p eC•−1(x, z),

by an isomorphism taking the sequence x = z−1 < z0 < z1 < . . . < zd ≤ y ∈ F peC d/F p+1eC d
to the sequence x = z−1 < z0 < z1 < . . . zd−1 < zd = zd in eC d−1(x, zd). Thus the spectral

sequence associated to this ﬁltration has the required form.

(cid:3)

Let Int(P ) denote the set of pairs (x, y) ∈ P × P with x ≤ y. We deﬁne the Möbius function

µ : Int(P ) → Z

by µ(x, y) =Pi(−1)i rank eH i(x, y).
Proposition 2.2. If x < y, thenPx≤z≤y µ(x, z) = 0.

Proof. The left hand side is the Euler characteristic of the E1 page of the spectral sequence
constructed in Proposition 2.1, and the right hand side is the Euler characteristic of the E∞
page.
(cid:3)

A consequence of the above is a simple recursive procedure for calculating the Möbius function:
the Möbius function could equivalently have been deﬁned as

µ(x, y) =(1

−Px≤z<y µ(x, z)

if x = y
if x < y

A SPECTRAL SEQUENCE FOR STRATIFIED SPACES

5

In most treatments this is taken as the deﬁnition of the Möbius function. The fact that
µ(x, y) for x < y equals the reduced Euler characteristic of the nerve of the interval (x, y) is
then called Philip Hall’s theorem. We may think of Proposition 2.1 as a categoriﬁcation of
the usual recursion for the Möbius function.

3. The construction and several examples

Let X =Sα∈P Sα be a stratiﬁed space. By this we mean that the space X is the union of

disjoint locally closed subspaces Sα called the strata, and that the closure of each Sα is itself
a union of strata. By a “space” we mean either:

(1) X is a locally compact Hausdorﬀ topological space,
(2) X is an algebraic variety over some ﬁeld.

In the former case, “sheaf” will just mean “sheaf of abelian groups”; in the latter case, “sheaf”
will mean “constructible ℓ-adic sheaf, for ℓ diﬀerent from the characteristic”.

The set P of strata becomes partially ordered by declaring that α ≤ β if Sα ⊇ Sβ. We assume
for simplicity (and without loss of generality) that P has a unique minimal element 0, i.e. a
unique open dense stratum S0.

For α ∈ P we denote by jα the locally closed inclusion Sα ֒→ X, and by iα the inclusion
Sα ֒→ X of the closure of a stratum.

For d ≥ 0, deﬁne a sheaf

Ld(F) =

M0=α0<α1<...<αd∈P

(iαd )∗(iαd )∗F

on X. In particular, L0(F) = F. We may deﬁne a diﬀerential

Ld(F) → Ld+1(F)

as an alternating sum over ways of adding an element to the sequence α0 < α1 < . . . < αd,

just as in our deﬁnition of eC•(∆) for a simplicial complex ∆; when the element we add

appears at the end of the sequence, i.e., as αd+1 > αd, then the diﬀerential uses the map

(iαd )∗(iαd )∗F → (iαd+1)∗(iαd+1)∗F

obtained from the fact that iαd+1 factors through iαd. This makes L•(F) into a complex, for

the same reason that eC•(∆) is.

Proposition 3.1. The complex L•(F) is quasi-isomorphic to j0!j−1
sion of the open stratum.

0

F, where j0 is the inclu-

Proof. We show that

j0!j−1
0

F → L0(F) → L1(F) → L2(F) → . . .

is an acyclic complex of sheaves. It suﬃces to check this on stalks. For x ∈ S0 the induced
sequence on stalks reads

Fx → Fx → 0 → 0 → . . . ,

6

DAN PETERSEN

with the map Fx → Fx the identity. Thus we may restrict attention to x in some stratum
Sβ, β 6= 0. In this case (j0!j−1

F)x will of course vanish, and we will have

0

Ld(F)x ∼=

M0=α0<α1<...<αd∈P

αd≤β

Fx

with the diﬀerential on L•(F)x given by adding an element to the sequence of αi’s. But
this means that L•(F)x is (up to a degree shift) the tensor product of Fx with the complex
(cid:3)

eC•(N(0, β]), which is acyclic because the poset (0, β] has a unique maximal element.

Remark 3.2. Another way to think about the complex L•(F) is that j0!j−1
F[−1] can be
calculated as the cone of F → i∗i∗F, where i : (X \ S0) → X is the inclusion. Now i∗i∗F may
be calculated as the homotopy limit of the various (iα)∗(iα)∗F (for α 6= 0), and L≥1(F) is the
bar resolution computing this homotopy limit.

0

Suppose we are given σ : P → Z an increasing function. We may now deﬁne a decreasing
ﬁltration of L•(F) by taking

F pLd(F) =

M0=α0<α1<...<αd∈P

σ(αd)≥p

(iαd )∗(iαd )∗F.

The compactly supported hypercohomology spectral sequence associated to this ﬁltration
reads

Epq

1 = Hp+q

c

(X, Grp

F L•(F)) =⇒ Hp+q

c

(X, L•(F)) = H p+q

c

(S0, j−1

0

F)

where the second equality is the preceding proposition. Thus we should understand the
associated graded Grp
F L•(F). By arguments just like those in the proof of Proposition 2.1,
the associated graded can be written as

(iβ)∗(iβ)∗F,

σ(β)=p

Grp

F Ld(F) = Mβ∈P

M0=α0<α1<...<αd=β
σ(β)=peC•+2(0, β) ⊗ (iβ)∗(iβ)∗F = Mβ∈P

σ(β)=p eH •+2(0, β) ⊗L (iβ)∗(iβ)∗F.

and hence

Grp

F L•(F) = Mβ∈P

The last equality uses that C•+2(0, β) is a complex of free modules, so it calculates the derived
tensor product, and that any complex of abelian groups is quasi-isomorphic to its cohomology.

In full generality, this can not be simpliﬁed further. However, in most cases occuring in
practice we can:

(1) If F = R is a constant sheaf associated to the ring R, then eH •+2(0, β) ⊗L (iβ)∗(iβ)∗F
is the constant sheaf eH •+2(0, β; R).
(2) If the cohomology groups eH i(0, β) are torsion free, or if F is a sheaf of k-vector spaces

for some ﬁeld k, then we may replace the derived tensor product with the usual tensor
product.

Let us state our main result only in these two simpler situations.

A SPECTRAL SEQUENCE FOR STRATIFIED SPACES

7

Theorem 3.3. Let X =Sβ∈P Sβ be a stratiﬁed space, where the set P is partially ordered by

reverse inclusion of the closures of strata. Choose a function σ : P → Z such that σ(x) < σ(y)
if x < y.

(i) For any ring R, there is a spectral sequence

Epq

1 = Mβ∈P

σ(β)=p Mi+j=p+q−2

H j

c (Sβ, eH i(0, β; R)) =⇒ H p+q

c

(S0, R).

(ii) If F is a sheaf on X, and we assume either that F is a sheaf of k-vector spaces or
that each interval (0, β) in P has torsion free cohomology, then the there is a spectral
sequence
Epq

F) =⇒ H p+q

(S0, j−1

F).

c (Sβ, i∗

β

c

0

1 = Mβ∈P

σ(β)=p Mi+j=p+q−2 eH i(0, β) ⊗ H j

If in (ii) X is an algebraic variety and F is an ℓ-adic sheaf, then this spectral sequence is a

spectral sequence of Galois representations, if the cohomology groups eH i(0, β) are given the

trivial Galois action.

3.1. Examples and applications.

Example 3.4. If the stratiﬁcation consists only of a closed subspace i : Z ֒→ X, then the
complex L•(F) reduces to the two-term complex F → i∗i∗F, and the spectral sequence reduces
to the long exact sequence

. . . → H k

c (X, F) → H k

c (Z, F) → H k+1

c

(X \ Z, F) → H k+1

c

(X, F) → . . .

⊳

Example 3.5. Let X be a complex manifold, and D = D1 ∪ . . . ∪ Dk a strict normal crossing
divisor. Consider the stratiﬁcation of X by the various intersections of the components of

D. For I ⊂ {1, . . . , k}, let DI =Ti∈I Di, including D∅ = X. Each interval in the poset of

strata is a boolean lattice, so its reduced cohomology vanishes below the top degree, where
it is one-dimensional. The spectral sequence therefore reduces to

Epq

1 = M|I|=p

H q

c (DI , Z) =⇒ H p+q

c

(X \ D, Z).

This is the Poincaré dual of the spectral sequence used by Deligne to construct the mixed
Hodge structure on a smooth noncompact complex algebraic variety [Del71]. In the algebraic
⊳
case, the above is a spectral sequence of mixed Hodge structures/Galois representations.

Example 3.6. Suppose X = An is aﬃne space over a ﬁeld, and the stratiﬁcation consists of
all the intersections in some subspace arrangement. Let σ(α) = − dim(Sα). Let F = Qℓ. In
this case the spectral sequence simpliﬁes to

Since all columns have diﬀerent weight there can be no diﬀerentials in the spectral sequence.
It follows that (up to semisimpliﬁcation of the Galois representation)

Epq

1 = Mβ∈P

σ(β)=p eH q+3p−2(0, β) ⊗ Qℓ(p) =⇒ H p+q

c

(S0, Qℓ).

H n

c (S0, Qℓ) =

nMj=0

Qℓ(−j) ⊗ Mβ:dim(Sβ )=j eH n−2j−2(0, β)

8

DAN PETERSEN

which re-proves a result of Björner and Ekedahl [BE97].

⊳

Example 3.7. The aforementioned result of Björner and Ekedahl is the algebro-geometric
analogue of a theorem of Goresky–MacPherson [GM88] about real subspace arrangements.
Goresky and MacPherson originally proved it as an application of their stratiﬁed Morse the-
ory; many diﬀerent authors have subsequently given alternative proofs and/or strengthenings.
Their result, in turn, is a reﬁnement of the work of Orlik–Solomon on complex hyperplane
arrangements [OS80]. In any case, suppose that X is a real vector space, stratiﬁed accord-
ing to intersections in a real subspace arrangement. Let σ(α) = − dimR Sα. The result of
Goresky–MacPherson is equivalent to our spectral sequence degenerating at E1. The weight
argument used in the case of a complex subspace arrangement is of course not valid in this
setting. We can instead argue as follows:

Choose for each α an open ball Uα inside Sα. Then C•
c (Uα, Z) (compactly supported cochains)
is a subcomplex of C•
c (Sα, Z) for all α. The inclusion of each of these subcomplexes is a
quasi-isomorphism, and the restriction maps between these subcomplexes are identically zero
(since Uα is disjoint from all Sβ with β > α.) By additionally choosing an arbitrary quasi-
isomorphism between C•
c (Sα, Z) we thus get a quasi-isomorphism between the
two functors P → Chk (where the poset P is thought of as a category) given by α 7→ S•
c (Sα, Z)
and α 7→ H •

c (Uα, Z) and H •

c (Sα, Z).

We can compute RΓc(X, L•(Z)) by means of a double complex, with each vertical row a
direct sum of complexes S•
c (Sα, Z), and the diﬀerentials in the horizontal row given by the
diﬀerentials in the complex L•(Z); equivalently, given by the functor α 7→ S•
If
we apply the quasi-isomorphism of functors constructed in the previous paragraph we can
replace this double complex with one in which the vertical rows have zero diﬀerential, and

c (Sα, Z).

the horizontal rows are direct sums of complexes of the form eC•+2(0, β).

Our spectral sequence arises from a ﬁltration of this double complex. In this case, the ﬁltration
⊳
clearly splits, and the spectral sequence degenerates immediately.

Example 3.8. Let us give two variations of our spectral sequence.

(1◦) Let D denote Verdier’s duality functor. The ﬁltration on L•(F) induces a ﬁltration on
DL•(F), satisfying GrF DL•(F) ∼= DGrF L•(F). Thus the associated graded pieces of DL•(F)
are quasi-isomorphic to

D Mσ(β)=p eH •+2(0, β) ⊗L (iβ)∗(iβ)∗F = Mσ(β)=p eH−•−2(0, β) ⊗L (iβ)!(iβ)!DF.

Since the cohomology of DR in negative degrees equals Borel–Moore homology with coeﬃ-
cients in R, our ﬁltration of DL•(F) gives rise to a Borel–Moore homology spectral sequence

E1

pq = Mβ∈P

σ(β)=p Mi+j=p+q−2

H BM

j

(Sβ, eHi(0, β; R)) =⇒ H BM

p+q (S0, R).

(2◦) Instead of taking the compact support cohomology of L•(F) ≃ j0!j−1
the usual cohomology. Since j0!j−1
(X \ S0) ֒→ X, this gives instead a spectral sequence

F, we may take
F[1] is the cone of F → i∗i∗F, where i is the inclusion

0

0

Epq

1 = Mβ∈P

σ(β)=p Mi+j=p+q−2

H j(Sβ, eH i(0, β; R)) =⇒ H p+q(X, X \ S0; R).

⊳

A SPECTRAL SEQUENCE FOR STRATIFIED SPACES

9

Example 3.9. Let X = {X(n)} be a topological operad. Suppose that X(n) is stratiﬁed in
such a way that the strata correspond to trees with n legs, the closed stratum correspond to a

tree T isQv∈Vert(T ) X(nv), and the composition maps in the operad X are given tautologically

by grafting of trees. Let Y (n) be the open stratum in X(n) corresponding to the unique tree
with a single vertex. Examples of such operads abound: the Stasheﬀ associahedra, the Fulton–
MacPherson model of the en-operads, the Deligne–Mumford spaces M0,n, the Boardman–
Vogt W -construction applied to an arbitrary topological operad, Devadoss’s mosaic operad,
the cactus operad, Brown’s dihedral moduli spaces M δ
0,n, the brick operad B(n) of Dotsenko–
Shadrin–Vallette...

Clearly, the compact support cohomology H •
c (X(n), Q) will form a cooperad. Moreover,
the degree-shifted cohomologies H •−1
(Y (n), Q) will form an operad: Y (n) × Y (m) will be a
stratum adjacent to Y (n+m−1) inside X(n+m−1), and there is a connecting homomorphism
H •
(Y (n + m − 1), Q) coming from the long exact sequence of a
pair in compact support cohomology.

c (Y (n) × Y (m), Q) → H •+1

c

c

If σ is the function taking a stratum to the number of vertices in the corresponding tree, then
we get a ﬁltration of X(n). The corresponding spectral sequence in compact support coho-
mology (Eq. (3) from the introduction) is a cooperad in the category of spectral sequences.
Its E∞ page is the associated graded for a ﬁltration on H •
c (X(n), Q), and its E1 page is
exactly the bar construction on the operad H •−1

(Y (n), Q).

c

Our Theorem 1.1 then gives a dual spectral sequence. All intervals in the poset of trees are
boolean lattices, and the spectral sequence of Theorem 1.1 takes the simple form

Epq

1 = M#Vert(T )=p

H q

c Yv∈Vert(T )

X(nv), Q =⇒ H p+q−1

c

(Y (n), Q).

This is now an operad in the category of spectral sequences, whose E∞ page is the associated
graded for a ﬁltration on H •−1
(Y (n), Q), and whose E1 page is exactly the cobar construction
on the operad H •

c
c (X(n), Q).

Thus we see that working with compact support cohomology gives a quite general setting for
⊳
proving bar/cobar-duality results for such pairs of operads X, Y .

Example 3.10. Suppose that the poset P is Cohen–Macaulay, or more generally that P is

graded with rank function ρ and that eHi(0, β) = 0 for i < ρ(β) − 2 = dim N(0, β). Then if

we apply the spectral sequence for the function ρ, the spectral sequence simpliﬁes to

c (Sβ, i∗

β

F) =⇒ H p+q

c

(S0, j−1

0

F).

Epq

1 = Mβ∈P

ρ(β)=p eH p−2(0, β) ⊗ H q

In fact, something stronger is true: the chain complex L•(F) is ﬁltered quasi-isomorphic to a
complex of sheaves K •(F), with

K d(F) = Mβ∈P

ρ(β)=d eH d−2(0, β) ⊗ (iβ)∗(iβ)∗F,

and which is ﬁltered by the “stupid ﬁltration”. The Cohen–Macaulay condition is extremely
⊳
well studied and is known for large classes of posets. See e.g. [Wac07, Section 4].

Example 3.11. Suppose that X is a complex manifold, and that we are given an “arrangement-
like” divisor D on X, i.e. D can locally be deﬁned by a product of linear forms. Then the

10

DAN PETERSEN

poset of strata is a geometric lattice and therefore Cohen–Macaulay. The complex of sheaves
K •(F) is the Verdier dual of the one constructed by Looijenga in [Loo93, Section 2]. As part of
his construction, he needs to inductively choose a certain free Z-module ES for each stratum
S — the fact that such a choice is possible is not obvious, and requires the Cohen–Macaulay
⊳
condition!

Example 3.12. Suppose that P is Cohen–Macaulay and the two contravariant functors
P → Chk given by α 7→ RΓc(Sα, i∗
F) are quasi-isomorphic. Then the
α
spectral sequence degenerates at E2.

F) and α 7→ H •

c (Sα, i∗

α

Indeed, we can realize RΓc(X, K •(F)) as a double complex, with each column a direct sum
of complexes RΓc(Sα, i∗
F), and the diﬀerentials in each row given by the diﬀerentials in the
α
complex K •(F). If we have such a quasi-isomorphism we can therefore replace this double
complex with one in which all vertical diﬀerentials vanish. Our spectral sequence is the
spectral sequence given by ﬁltering this double complex column-wise, since K •(F) has the
stupid ﬁltration. Thus it will indeed be the case that the spectral sequence has nontrivial
diﬀerential only on E1.

Suppose that each closed stratum Sα is a compact complex manifold on which the ddc-lemma
holds, e.g. a Kähler or Moishezon manifold, and that the sheaf F is the constant sheaf R.
Then the criterion in the previous proposition is satisﬁed. Indeed, we may take as our model
for RΓc(Sα, R) = RΓ(Sα, R) the real de Rham complex of Sα, and then the validity of the
⊳
above criterion is a particular case of [DGMS75, Section 6, Main Theorem (ii)].

Example 3.13. Suppose that P is Cohen–Macaulay, and that each closed stratum is an
algebraic variety whose compact support cohomology is of pure weight in each degree (e.g. a
smooth projective variety). Then the spectral sequence also degenerates at E2, using instead
⊳
a weight argument.

Example 3.14. For a space M , let F (M, n) denote the conﬁguration space of n distinct
ordered points on M .
If M is an oriented manifold, a spectral sequence calculating the
cohomology of F (M, n) was constructed by Cohen and Taylor [CT78]. Their construction
was later simpliﬁed by Totaro, who noticed that the spectral sequence is just the Leray
spectral sequence for the inclusion j : F (M, n) ֒→ M n [Tot96]. Getzler [Get99] then realized
that the spectral sequence exists for a more or less arbitrary topological space, if one works
with compactly supported cohomology instead: more precisely, Getzler constructed a complex
of sheaves quasi-isomorphic to j!j−1F, whose compactly supported hypercohomology spectral
sequence was Poincaré dual to the spectral sequence of Cohen–Taylor in the case of an oriented
manifold.

So suppose that X = M n for some space M , and let us stratify X according to points
coinciding. Then the poset of strata is the partition lattice Πn, which is Cohen–Macaulay.
Our complex K •(F) is exactly the one considered by Getzler, and the resulting spectral
sequence

c (M n−p, Z) =⇒ H p+q

c

(F (M, n), Z)

Epq

1 = Mβ∈Πn

ρ(β)=p eH p−2(0, β) ⊗ H q

is the Poincaré dual of Cohen–Taylor’s if M is an oriented manifold. To see the identiﬁcation
of K •(F) with Getzler’s resolution we need to know the cohomology of the partition lattice.

Note ﬁrst of all that each lower interval [0, β] in the partition lattice is itself a product of
partition lattices: e.g. if β corresponds to the partition (136|27|45), then [0, β] ∼= Π3 ×Π2 ×Π2.

A SPECTRAL SEQUENCE FOR STRATIFIED SPACES

11

This calculation is hard to attribute correctly — it follows by combining the results of [Kly74]

Thus by the Künneth theorem we only need to know the top cohomology group eH n−3(Πn, Z).
and [Sta82], see also [Joy86, Section 4]. The result is in any case that eH n−3(Πn, Z) has rank

(n − 1)! and that as a representation of the symmetric group Sn, it is isomorphic to Lie(n) ⊗
sgnn, where Lie(n) is the arity n component of the Lie operad. But the same is also true for
the cohomology group H n−1(F (C, n), Z), by the results of Cohen [CLM76]; speciﬁcally, since
the homology of the little disk operad is the Gerstenhaber operad, and the Gerstenhaber
operad in top degree is just a suspension of the Lie operad, we get the above identiﬁcation.
This explains why the cohomology groups of F (C, n) appear in Getzler’s construction of
the resolution: the decomposition of H •(F (C, n)) into summands corresponding to diﬀerent
partitions of {1, . . . , n} used by Getzler corresponds to

H k(F (C, n), Z) ∼= Mβ∈Πn

ρ(β)=k eH k−2(0, β).

If we instead consider the second “variant” spectral sequence described in Example 3.8, applied
to the stratiﬁcation of X = M n according to points coinciding, then we recover the spectral
⊳
sequence of Bendersky–Gitler [BG91].

Example 3.15. Consider the example X = M n of a conﬁguration space. Let A•
c (M ) be
a cdga model for the compactly supported cochains on M . Then the criterion described in
Example 3.12 is equivalent to A•
c (M ) are quasi-
isomorphic. Hence if A•
c (M ) is formal then the Cohen–Taylor–Totaro spectral sequence de-
generates after the ﬁrst diﬀerential.

c (M ) begin formal, i.e. that A•

c (M ) and H •

If in the same situation we consider the second variant of Example 3.8 (i.e. the Bendersky–
Gitler spectral sequence), then we see by the same argument that the spectral sequence
degenerates after the ﬁrst diﬀerential whenever M is a formal space, a result which is also
⊳
proven in Bendersky–Gitler’s original paper.

3.2. Compatibility with Hodge theory. We have already mentioned several times that
in the algebraic case, we obtain a spectral sequence of ℓ-adic Galois representations. It is
natural to ask whether in the complex algebraic setting we get a spectral sequence of mixed
Hodge structures.

The answer is: yes, and it follows from Saito’s theory of mixed Hodge modules [Sai90]. Yet
some care must be taken here. Saito proves the existence of a six functors formalism on
the level of the derived categories Db(MHM(X)), where X is a complex algebraic variety.
We deﬁned the complex L•(F) in such a way that Ld(F) is a sum of objects of the form
(iαd )∗(iαd )∗F. Now if F is a mixed Hodge module then (iαd )∗(iαd )∗F is in general only going
to be an object of Db(MHM(X)), and this is not good enough: a “chain complex” of objects
in a triangulated category T can in general have several non-isomorphic totalizations to an
object of T, or none at all (cf. e.g. [Kap88]).

Thus the construction can only be carried out if i∗i∗ is a t-exact functor, for i a closed
immersion. This is of course true for the usual t-structure of constructible sheaves, but
c(X): i∗ is still t-exact, but i∗ clearly is not.
it is false for the perverse t-structure on Db
Since a mixed Hodge module does not have an underlying constructible sheaf but instead an
underlying perverse sheaf, i∗ is not t-exact for mixed Hodge modules.

12

DAN PETERSEN

However, one can choose instead to give Db(MHM(X)) a constructible (i.e. non-perverse) t-
structure, which is uniquely characterized by the functor rat : Db(MHM(X)) → Db
c(X) being
c(X), cf. [Sai90, Remark 4.6], using the same glu-
exact for the constructible t-structure on Db
ing techniques used to show that the perverse t-structure on Db
c(X) is well deﬁned [BBD82,
Théorème 1.4.10]. For this t-structure i∗ will be t-exact. Let H(X) be its heart. Our con-
struction works, then, to produce a ﬁltered complex L•(F) inside Db(H(X)), quasi-isomorphic
to j0!j−1
F ∈ H(X). Using the realization map Db(H(X)) → Db(MHM(X)) [Lur14, Section
1.3.3], we may realize L•(F) as a ﬁltered complex of mixed Hodge modules, which is enough
to conclude. It is very natural to believe that Db(H(X)) → Db(MHM(X)) is an equivalence
of categories, which would be the analogue for mixed Hodge modules of Be˘ılinson’s theorem
[Be˘ı87], but I do not know if this is known and I have not attempted to prove it.

0

4. Representation stability

The notion of representation stability was introduced by Church and Farb [CF13] as an exten-
sion of homological stability to situations where the Betti numbers do not actually stabilize.
Roughly, a sequence {V (n)} of representations of Sn over Q is said to be representation stable
if, for n ≫ 0, the representation V (n + 1) is obtained from the representation V (n) by adding
a single box to the top row of the Young diagram of each irreducible representation occuring
in V (n). Thus V (n + 1) is completely determined from V (n) for suﬃciently large n. Note in
particular that the Sn-invariants satisfy V (n + 1)Sn+1 ∼= V (n)Sn for n ≫ 0; if {V (n)} were
a sequence of homology groups, the Sn-invariants would satisfy homological stability in the
usual sense.

The theory was clariﬁed by the introduction of FI-modules [CEF15]. The key point is that the
underlying sequence of Sn-representations of an FI-module in Q-vector spaces is representa-
tion stable if and only if the FI-module is ﬁnitely generated. Most examples of representation
stability arise from an FI-module in this way.

One of the main examples of representation stability is given by the following theorem of
Church [Chu12]: if M is an oriented manifold, then H i(F (M, n), Q) is a representation stable
sequence of Sn-representations for any i. In this example, it was known since [McD75] that the
cohomology of the unordered conﬁguration space F (M, n)/Sn satisﬁes homological stability
for integer coeﬃcients if M is an open manifold, but also that integral homological stability
is false in general. Church’s result shows in particular that with Q-coeﬃcients, the unordered
conﬁguration space always satisﬁes homological stability.

This result of Church ﬁts well into the general framework of FI-modules. The assignment
S 7→ F (M, S) is a contravariant functor from FI to spaces: if S ⊂ T , then F (M, T ) → F (M, S)
is the map that forgets all the points indexed by elements of T \ S. On applying H i(−, Q) one
gets an FI-module, which turns out to be ﬁnitely generated; in fact, ﬁnite generation holds
already with integral coeﬃcients [CEFN14].

For the remainder of this paper, we will prove a theorem extending Church’s result in several
ways:

(1) Our proof works in a uniform way for a much larger class of conﬁguration-like spaces,
λ(M ) considered by Vakil–Wood,

such as “k-equals” conﬁguration spaces, the spaces wc
etc.

A SPECTRAL SEQUENCE FOR STRATIFIED SPACES

13

(2) We give a proof valid also in the algebro-geometric setting, so we get e.g. representa-
tion stability in the category of ℓ-adic Galois representations. (This was previously
proven for the spaces F (M, n) in [FW15] under rather restrictive assumptions on M .)
(3) We allow M to have singularities. In the paper we focus on the case when M is an
algebraic variety (with arbitrary singularities); we comment towards the end on the
diﬀerences in the topological setting.

In order to have representation stability in the more general setting of a singular space,
one needs to work with Borel–Moore homology/compactly supported cohomology. Note
that compactly supported cohomology is only contravariant for proper maps, and the map
F (M, T ) → F (M, S) is (almost) never proper, so H •
c (F (M, S), Q) is not directly an FI-
module. This should in any case not be surprising: if we want to recover Church’s theorem
by Poincaré duality when M is an oriented manifold, then we had better prove that the coho-
mology H •
c (F (M, S), Q) satisﬁes representation stability up to a degree shift by the dimension
of F (M, S).

4.1. Twisted commutative algebras and FI-modules. Our proof of representation sta-
bility uses the formalism of FI-modules and twisted commutative algebras. We brieﬂy recall
the deﬁnitions for the reader’s convenience.

Let C be a symmetric monoidal category (the reader is encouraged to take C to be the
category of dg vector spaces over a ﬁeld of characteristic zero). By a species in C we mean a
functor B → C, where B the category of ﬁnite sets and bijections. The category of species is
equivalent to the category of sequences of representations of the symmetric groups Sn in C.
We write a species as “S 7→ A(S)” or “n 7→ A(n)”, depending on whether we wish to consider
is as a functor of ﬁnite sets or as a sequence of representations. We call A(n) the arity n
component of the species A.

We deﬁne a tensor product on the category of species by Day convolution:

(A ⊗ B)(S) = MS=T1⊔T2

A(T1) ⊗ B(T2).

Let us consider B as a symmetric monoidal category, with monoidal structure given by disjoint
union. A twisted commutative algebra (tca) in C is a lax monoidal functor B → C. Thus a
twisted commutative algebra in C consists of a sequence {A(n)} of Sn-representations in C,
equipped with multiplication maps A(n) ⊗ A(m) → A(n + m) which are Sn × Sm-equivariant
and satisfy suitable commutativity and associativity axioms. An equivalent deﬁnition is that
a twisted commutative algebra is a left module over the commutative operad Com in C.

Suppose that C is the category of dg R-modules. Let A be a species in C. We deﬁne the
suspension SA by

The suspension is a symmetric monoidal endofunctor on the symmetric monoidal category of
species. In partiular, if A is a tca, then so is SA.

SA(n) = A(n)[−n] ⊗ sgnn.

Let FI denote the category of ﬁnite sets and injections. By an FI-module in the category C
we mean a functor FI → C.

Let Com be the twisted commutative algebra which is given by the monoidal unit with trivial
Sn-action in each arity, and for which all multiplication maps Com(S)⊗Com(T ) → Com(S⊔T )

14

DAN PETERSEN

are given by the canonical isomorphism 1 ⊗ 1 ∼= 1. In other words, we are considering the
commutative operad as a left module over itself. There is a general notion of a module over
an algebra over any operad, which in this case specializes to an evident notion of a module
over a tca.

Lemma 4.1. Every module over the tca Com is in a canonical way an FI-module, and vice
versa.

Proof. (Sketch) Let M be a module over the tca Com, and let S ⊂ T . Then we have a map

M (S) = M (S) ⊗ 1 = M (S) ⊗ Com(T \ S) → M (S ⊔ (T \ S)) = M (T ),

where 1 denotes the monoidal unit in C and “=” denotes a canonical isomorphism. This
makes M into an FI-module. The converse construction is similar.
(cid:3)

If A is a tca in C, then the choice of a morphism a : 1 → A(1) is the same as the choice of a
morphism of tca’s Com → A. Thus the choice of such an a deﬁnes the structure of FI-module
on the underlying species of the tca A.

In particular, let C be the category if graded R-modules. For a tca A in C, let us write Ad(n)
for the degree n component of A(n). Then any a ∈ A0(1) deﬁnes a structure of FI-module
on the collection Ai(n), for all i ∈ Z. We write |a| for the degree of a homogeneous element
in a graded vector space.

Lemma 4.2. Suppose A is a tca in graded R-modules, and that {a0, a1, a2, . . . , } is a set of
generators. Suppose that |ak| ≤ 0 for all k, with equality only for a single element a0 ∈ A0(1),
and that for each p ∈ Z, there are only ﬁnitely many k for which |ak| ≥ p. Then the FI-module
n 7→ Ai(n) deﬁned by multiplication with a0 is ﬁnitely generated for all i ∈ Z.

Proof. The hypotheses imply that there are only ﬁnitely many monomials in {a1, a2, . . . , }
(i.e. all generators except a0) of given degree. Those monomials of degree i generate the
FI-module n 7→ Ai(n).
(cid:3)

Applying the previous lemma to the d-fold suspension SdA we get the following:

Lemma 4.3. Suppose A is a tca in graded R-modules, and that {a0, a1, a2, . . . , } is a set of
generators. Suppose that if ak ∈ Ai(n) then i ≤ nd, with equality only for a single element
a0 ∈ Ad(1), and that for each p ∈ Z, there are only ﬁnitely many k for which ak ∈ Ai(n) and
i ≥ nd − p. If d is even, then n 7→ Ai+dn(n) becomes an FI-module by multiplication with a0,
and if d is odd, then n 7→ Ai+dn(n) ⊗ sgnn becomes an FI-module in this way. This FI-module
is ﬁnitely generated for all i ∈ Z.

4.2. The “ A-avoiding” conﬁguration spaces. For each ﬁnite set S, let M S be the carte-
sian product of |S| copies of some space M . The functor S 7→ M S is a co-FI-space. If S ֒→ T ,
then we denote by πT

S : M T → M S the projection.

Let A be a ﬁnite collection of closed subspaces {Ai ⊂ M Si}ℓ
set. For every ﬁnite set T , consider the stratiﬁcation of M T given by all subspaces

i=1, where each Si is some ﬁnite

(πT

Si )−1(Ai) ⊂ M T ,

i = 1, . . . , ℓ

A SPECTRAL SEQUENCE FOR STRATIFIED SPACES

15

ranging over all inclusions Si ֒→ T , and all intersections of those subspaces. Let PA(T ) be
the poset of strata in this stratiﬁcation, and let FA(M, T ) denote the open stratum which is
the complement of all of the (πT

Si )−1(Ai).

Example 4.4. If A is a singleton with A1 = ∆ ⊂ M 2, then FA(M, n) is the classical
conﬁguration space of n points on M . If A instead consists only of the small diagonal in M k,
⊳
then FA(M, n) is the “k-equals” conﬁguration space of points on M .

Example 4.5. If a ﬁnite group G acts on M , then we can let A consist of all subspaces
{(x, g · x) : x ∈ M } inside M 2, in which case FA(M, n) parametrizes n distinct ordered points
all of which are in distinct G-orbits. An example of this is the complement of hyperplanes in
⊳
the Coxeter arrangement associated to the wreath product (µr)n ⋊ Sn acting on Cn.
Example 4.6. Suppose that M = Y 2 for some other space Y , and A consists of the collection
{∆13, ∆14, ∆23, ∆24} of diagonals inside M 2 = Y 4. Then FA(M, n) parametrizes points
x1, . . . , xn and y1, . . . , yn in Y such that the xi (resp. yi) may collide amongst each other,
⊳
but xi 6= yj for all i, j.

Example 4.7. Let λ be a partition of n. As our notation for partitions we use both λ =

(λ1, λ2, λ3, . . .) and λ = (1n1 2n2 3n3 . . .), so that n =Pj≥1 λj =Pi≥1 i · ni. Vakil and Wood

[VW15] deﬁned an open subspace wc
λ(M ) ⊂ M n/Sn, and they studied the behaviour of these
spaces under the operation of “padding λ with ones”, i.e. letting n1 approach ∞ while keeping
all ni, i ≥ 2, ﬁxed.

We can understand their construction in our terms as follows: if λ is a partition of n with
n1 = 0, let ∆λ ⊂ M n be the locus where the ﬁrst λ1 points coincide, the subsequent λ2
points coincide, etc., and put A = {∆λ}. If λ′ is the partition of N ≥ n obtained by padding
λ with ones, then wc
λ′ (M ) = FA(M, N )/SN . In particular, rational homological stability for
the spaces wc
λ(M ) under the operation of padding λ with ones follows from representation
⊳
stability for the spaces FA(M, n) as n → ∞.

Example 4.8. The conﬁguration space of n points in P2 such that no three of them lie on
⊳
a line and no six lie on a conic is of this form.

We are going to prove a homological stability result for the spaces FA(M, n). To avoid dealing
with trivial cases we will assume that |Si| ≥ 2 for all i, and that no subspace Ai can be written
as

where S′

i is a proper subset of S.

Ai = (πSi
S ′
i

)−1(A′
i)

4.3. The set-up. Observe that there is an open embedding

FA(M, S ⊔ T ) ֒→ FA(M, S) × FA(M, T ).

This makes S 7→ FA(M, S) a twisted cocommutative coalgebra of spaces. Since Borel–Moore
homology is contravariant for open embeddings and admits cross products

H BM

•

(X, R) ⊗ H BM

•

(Y, R) → H BM

•

(X × Y, R)

(which are isomorphisms if R is a ﬁeld), we get a twisted commutative algebra in graded
R-modules:

for any choice of coeﬃcients R.

S 7→ H BM

•

(FA(M, S), R),

16

DAN PETERSEN

The functor S 7→ PA(S) forms a twisted commutative algebra in the category of posets: the
product of a stratum in M S and a stratum in M T is a stratum in M S⊔T , which identiﬁes
PA(S) × PA(T ) with an order ideal in PA(S ⊔ T ). If β ∈ PA(S) and γ ∈ PA(T ), then we
write β × γ for their product in PA(S ⊔ T ).

Let L•(S) denote the complex of sheaves L•(R) on M S constructed in the previous part,
associated to the stratiﬁcation PA(S). The previous paragraph implies that L•(S) ⊠ L•(T )
is a subcomplex of L•(S ⊔ T ), and DL•(S) ⊠ DL•(T ) is a quotient of DL•(S ⊔ T ). Applying
RΓ(−), we see that the functor

S 7→ RΓ−•(M S, DL•(S))

is a twisted commutative algebra of chain complexes, whose homology is the tca S 7→
H BM

(FA(M, S), R).

•

4.4. The hypotheses. Let us now describe the hypotheses on M and A that will lead to a
proof of representation stability. Fix M and A as above, and a coeﬃcient ring R.
(M, R) ∼= R, and that homology vanishes above this
Hypothesis 4.9. We assume that H BM
degree. We assume that (possibly after reﬁning the stratiﬁcations) all strata in all spaces M n
have ﬁnitely generated homology groups, and there exists an increasing function σ : PA(n) → Z
for all n such that:

d

(1) If β ∈ PA(S) satisﬁes σ(β) = p and γ ∈ PA(T ) satisﬁes σ(γ) = q, then σ(β × γ) =

p + q.

(2) If β ∈ PA(n) satisﬁes σ(β) = p, then H BM
nd−2p(Sβ, R) is a projective R-module.

and H BM

i

(Sβ, R) vanishes above degrees nd − 2p,

i

d

(M, Z) ∼= Z, H BM

Example 4.10. Suppose that M is a geometrically irreducible algebraic variety of dimen-
sion (d/2), and that A consists of closed subvarieties. Then it will indeed be the case that
(M, Z) = 0 for i > d, and all strata have ﬁnitely generated homology.
H BM
Let σ(β) be the codimension of Sβ. After reﬁning the stratiﬁcations we may assume all strata
irreducible, in which case σ becomes a strictly increasing function, and conditions (1) and (2)
⊳
are clearly satisﬁed.
Example 4.11. Suppose that all the subspaces in A are given by diagonals, so all closed strata
are products of the same space M . This covers e.g. all the conﬁguration spaces considered by
Vakil and Wood. In this case, for Sβ ∼= M k ⊂ M n, we can take σ(β) = (n − k). If we suppose
(M, R) ∼= R,
that M has ﬁnitely generated homology and ﬁnite dimension d > 1, and H BM
d
⊳
then Hypothesis 4.9 is satisﬁed. (Condition (2) is not satisﬁed unless d > 1.)

From now on we shall assume that Hypothesis 4.9 is satisﬁed.

4.5. Proof with coeﬃcients in a ﬁeld. In this subsection, we ﬁx a ﬁeld k of coeﬃcients,
and all homology groups will be taken with coeﬃcients in k. In the algebraic case we take
k = Qℓ, where ℓ is not equal to the characteristic. We will later see that the proof can be
modiﬁed to work also for integral coeﬃcients, but the added complications arising from the
lack of a Künneth isomorphism obscure the ideas somewhat.
Lemma 4.12. There exists a twisted commutative algebra of spectral sequences satisfying

E1

pq(S) = Mβ∈PA(S)

σ(β)=p Mi+j=p+q−2 eHi(0, β) ⊗ H BM

j

(Sβ, k),

A SPECTRAL SEQUENCE FOR STRATIFIED SPACES

17

and which converges to the twisted commutative algebra S 7→ H BM

•

(FA(M, S), k).

Proof. By Condition (2) in Hypothesis 4.9, the ﬁltration on L•(S) ⊠ L•(T ) induced by σ
agrees with the one on L•(S ⊔ T ), when we consider L•(S) ⊠ L•(T ) as a subcomplex of
L•(S ⊔ T ). This makes the twisted commutative algebra S 7→ RΓ−•(M S, DL•(S)) a tca in
ﬁltered chain complexes, and the associated spectral sequence is given as above.
(cid:3)

We say that an element β ∈ PA(T ) is indecomposable if whenever T = S ⊔ S′ and β is in the
image of the multiplication map PA(S) × PA(S′) → PA(T ), then S or S′ is empty.

Lemma 4.13. There exists a constant C such that if β ∈ PA(T ) is indecomposable, then
σ(β) ≥ C · |T |.

Proof. The stratum Sβ is (an open stratum inside of) an intersection of subspaces of the
Si )−1(Ai), for some collections of inclusions Si ֒→ T . We may assume this collection
form (πT
of subspaces to be irredundant. In order that β be indecomposable, it is certainly necessary
that the images of the Si ֒→ T cover T , which means that the number of subspaces that
one needs to intersect to obtain Sβ grows linearly in |T |. Moreover, since we assumed the
collection irredundant and that σ increasing, the value of σ must go up by at least 1 for each
subspace we intersect, which proves the result.
(cid:3)

Let E be the twisted commutative algebra in graded vector spaces given by

S 7→ E•(S);

Ei(S) = Mp+q=i

E1

pq(S).

Lemma 4.14. The tca E satisﬁes the hypotheses of Lemma 4.3, so that n 7→ Ei+dn(n)⊗sgn⊗d
n
is a ﬁnitely generated FI-module.

composable elements of PA(n).

Proof. The tca E is generated by classes eHi(0, β) ⊗ H BM
If β ∈ PA(n) satisﬁed σ(β) = p, then eHi(0, β) vanishes above degree p − 2, and H BM

(Sβ, k)
vanishes above degree dn − 2p. Thus the corresponding generators in Ei(n) satisfy i ≤ dn − p.
In particular, we get a generator in degree i = dn only for p = 0. But the open stratum is
indecomposable only when n = 1, in which case we get a single generator in this degree from
the one-dimensional space H BM

(Sβ, k) where β ranges over inde-

(M, k).

d

j

j

Moreover, by Lemma 4.13, for each p ≥ 0 there are only ﬁnitely many strata in PA(n)
(summed over all n) with σ(β) ≤ p, which means that only ﬁnitely many of these generators
satisfy i ≥ dn − p. Thus the hypotheses of Lemma 4.3 are satisﬁed.
(cid:3)

Remark 4.15. “sgn⊗d
trivial representation if d is even”.

n ” is of course just a compact way of writing “sgnn if d is odd, and the

Theorem 4.16. The FI-module given by n 7→ H BM
ated for all i ∈ Z.

i+dn(FA(M, n), k) ⊗ sgn⊗d

n is ﬁnitely gener-

18

DAN PETERSEN

Proof. By the previous lemma,

n 7→ Ei+dn(n) ⊗ sgn⊗d

E1

pq(n) ⊗ sgn⊗d

n

n = Mp+q=i+dn

is a ﬁnitely generated FI-module. Then so is n 7→ Lp+q=i+2dn E∞

n , being a
subquotient of a ﬁnitely generated FI-module [CEF15, Theorem 1.3]. But the latter is just
the associated graded of the FI-module n 7→ H BM
for the Leray
ﬁltration.
(cid:3)

i+dn(FA(M, n), k) ⊗ sgn⊗d

pq (n) ⊗ sgn⊗d

n

Remark 4.17. The sign representation which appears for odd d arises from Lemma 4.3,
and does not play a role in the algebraic case since an algebraic variety has even (real)
dimension. That the sign representation should appear is clear, if we want to recover rep-
resentation stability for the usual cohomology H i(F (M, n), k) from Poincaré duality when
M is an oriented manifold.
Indeed, the Poincaré duality isomorphism for F (M, n) in-
volves capping with the fundamental class, which generates the 1-dimensional vector space
nd (M n, k). When d is even this vector space carries the trivial rep-
H BM
resentation of Sn, but when d is odd it has the sign representation.

nd (F (M, n), k) ∼= H BM

4.6. Proof for integral coeﬃcients. In the proof given in the preceding subsection, we
used that any subquotient of a ﬁnitely generated FI-module is ﬁnitely generated. This was
proven for ﬁeld coeﬃcients in [CEF15], but the result was then extended to any noetherian
ring in [CEFN14]. We will now use the latter result to give a proof also for integral coeﬃcients.

However, the real reason we used ﬁeld coeﬃcients in the preceding subsection was to have
a robust Künneth isomorphism: without it, it would not be true that generators for the
twisted commutative algebra we considered arise from indecomposable strata. Namely, if β
is decomposable — say Sβ = Sγ × Sγ ′ — then the cross product map

H BM

•

(Sγ, Z) ⊗ H BM

•

(Sγ ′, Z) → H BM

•

(Sβ, Z)

is not necessarily surjective. To remedy this, we will need to work on the chain level, analogous
to [CEFN14, Lemma 4.1].

For the remainder of this section we ﬁx a coeﬃcient ring R of global dimension ≤ 1, e.g.
R = Z or R = Zℓ. In order for the proof to work, we shall need to verify a reﬁnement of
Hypothesis 4.9.

Lemma 4.18. For each stratum Sβ in any of the spaces M n, we can choose a quasi-
isomorphism

C•(Sβ) ≃ RΓ−•(Sβ, DR)

where C•(Sβ) is a ﬁnite complex of ﬁnitely generated projective modules, and such that

• For any decomposable stratum Sα × Sβ, we have an equality

C•(Sα) ⊗ C•(Sβ) = C•(Sα × Sβ)

compatible with the quasi-isomorphism

RΓ−•(Sα, DR) ⊗ RΓ−•(Sβ, DR) ≃ RΓ−•(Sβ × Sα, DR);

• For Sα ⊂ Sβ, there is a map

C•(Sα) → C•(Sβ)

A SPECTRAL SEQUENCE FOR STRATIFIED SPACES

19

compatible with the map

RΓ−•(Sα, DR) → RΓ−•(Sβ, DR);

• If Sβ ⊂ M n has σ(β) = p then C BM

(Sβ, R) vanishes above degree nd − 2p, and

•

Cn(M ) ∼= R.

The assumptions in Hypothesis 4.9 immediately imply that such a complex C•(Sβ) can be
constructed for each individual stratum, but we need the choices to satisfy various compati-
bilities.

Taking the lemma for granted for the moment, the idea will be to run nearly the same proof,
but instead of starting at the E1 page of the spectral sequence, we start at E0. Equiva-
lently, we work directly on the level of the double complex computing RΓ−•(M n, DL•(R)),
associated to our ﬁltration of DL•(R). The ﬁltration on DL•(R) has its associated graded

is the inclusion of a closed stratum, so the columns of this double complex are of the form

pieces quasi-isomorphic to sums of complexes of the form eC−•−2(0, β) ⊗ (iβ)∗DR, where iβ
RΓ−•(M n,eC−•−2(0, β) ⊗ (iβ)∗DR). Under our Hypothesis 4.18 we may (for all β) replace
this with the totalization of the double complex eC•+2(0, β) ⊗ C•(Sβ). Then this collection of

double complexes becomes a twisted commutative algebra, and that we get a tca of spectral
sequences:

Lemma 4.19. There exists a twisted commutative algebra of spectral sequences satisfying

E0

pq(S) = Mβ∈PA(S)

σ(β)=p Mi+j=p+q−2 eCi(0, β) ⊗ Cj(Sβ),

and which converges to the twisted commutative algebra S 7→ H BM

•

(FA(M, S), R).

If we consider the twisted commutative algebra in graded abelian groups given by

S 7→ E•(S);

Ei(S) = Mp+q=i
then this tca will be generated by classes eCi(0, β) ⊗ C BM

(Sβ, R) where β ranges over inde-
composable elements of PA(n). In particular, it satisﬁes the hypotheses of Lemma 4.3, for
the same reason as the tca E considered in the previous subsection, and the rest of the proof
carries over without any changes.

E0

pq(S),

j

Let us now argue that Lemma 4.18 is satisﬁed.

Proof. (of Lemma 4.18) First oﬀ, we replace each RΓ−•(Sβ, DR) by a functorial projective
resolution, and then apply the “wise” truncation functor τ ≤(nd−2p). Let us call the resulting
complexes C BM
(Sβ, R). Unfortunately, the truncation functor has the wrong functoriality:
there is for any chain complex C• a map C• → τ ≤nC•, but we need a map in the opposite
direction. However, the assumption that H BM
nd−2p(Sβ, R) is projective and that gl.dim(R) = 1
implies that C BM
(Sβ, R) is itself a
projective resolution, and the truncation map has a section. One checks that any choice of
section gives rise to a well deﬁned chain map C BM
(Sα, R) for Sβ ⊂ Sα,
(Sβ, R) functorial.
making the assignment β 7→ C BM

nd−2p(Sβ, R) is a projective module.

In particular, C BM

(Sβ, R) → C BM

•

•

•

•

•

20

DAN PETERSEN

To replace these complexes with ones that are ﬁnitely generated in each degree, we work
inductively, starting with M itself. If we have chosen complexes C•(Sβ) ∼→ C BM
(Sβ, R) for
all β ∈ PA(n), n < N , then the condition that we have an “on-the-nose” Künneth isomorphism
determines our choice of C•(Sβ) for all decomposable strata β ∈ PA(N ). Now I claim that
if we have compatible choices of C•(Sβ) for all β in some order ideal I ⊂ PA(N ), and α is
any minimal element of PA(N ) \ I, then we can also choose C•(Sα) compatibly (and thus the
inductive procedure can be continued). Indeed, consider the composition

•

colim
β<α

(C•(Sβ)) −→ colim
β<α

(C BM

•

(Sβ, R)) −→ C BM

•

(Sα, R).

By induction, the image of this composition is ﬁnitely generated in each degree, so we may
(Sα, R) where C•(Sα) is again ﬁnitely generated
choose a quasi-isomorphism C•(Sα) → C BM
in each degree, such that the image contains the image of colimβ<α(C•(Sβ)). Then there is
a factorization

•

colim
β<α

(C•(Sβ)) → C•(Sα) ∼→ C BM

•

(Sα, R)

which proves the claim.

(cid:3)

References

[BBD82]

[BE97]

[Be˘ı87]

[BG91]

[CEF15]

Alexander A. Be˘ılinson, Joseph Bernstein, and Pierre Deligne. “Faisceaux per-
vers”. Analysis and topology on singular spaces, I (Luminy, 1981). Vol. 100.
Astérisque. Paris: Soc. Math. France, 1982, 5–171.
Anders Björner and Torsten Ekedahl. “Subspace arrangements over ﬁnite ﬁelds:
cohomological and enumerative aspects”. Adv. Math. 129 (2), (1997), 159–187.
Alexander A. Be˘ılinson. “On the derived category of perverse sheaves”. K-theory,
arithmetic and geometry (Moscow, 1984–1986). Vol. 1289. Lecture Notes in
Math. Springer, Berlin, 1987, 27–41.
Martin Bendersky and Sam Gitler. “The cohomology of certain function spaces”.
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 326 (1), (1991), 423–440.
Thomas Church, Jordan S. Ellenberg, and Benson Farb. “FI-modules and sta-
bility for representations of symmetric groups”. Duke Math. J. 164 (9), (2015),
1833–1910.

[CEFN14] Thomas Church, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Benson Farb, and Rohit Nagpal. “FI-

[CF13]

[Chu12]

[CLM76]

[CT78]

[Del71]

modules over Noetherian rings”. Geom. Topol. 18 (5), (2014), 2951–2984.
Thomas Church and Benson Farb. “Representation theory and homological sta-
bility”. Adv. Math. 245 (2013), 250–314.
Thomas Church. “Homological stability for conﬁguration spaces of manifolds”.
Invent. Math. 188 (2), (2012), 465–504.
Frederick R. Cohen, Thomas J. Lada, and J. Peter May. The homology of iterated
loop spaces. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 533. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
1976, vii+490 pages.
Frederick R. Cohen and Laurence R. Taylor. “Computations of Gel’fand-Fuks co-
homology, the cohomology of function spaces, and the cohomology of conﬁgura-
tion spaces”. Geometric applications of homotopy theory (Proc. Conf., Evanston,
Ill., 1977), I. Vol. 657. Lecture Notes in Math. Berlin: Springer, 1978, 106–143.
Pierre Deligne. “Théorie de Hodge. II”. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math.
(40), (1971), 5–57.

[DGMS75] Pierre Deligne, Phillip Griﬃths, John Morgan, and Dennis Sullivan. “Real ho-

motopy theory of Kähler manifolds”. Invent. Math. 29 (3), (1975), 245–274.

[FW15]

[Get99]

[GM88]

[Joy86]

[Kap88]

[Kly74]

[KMT14]

[Loo93]

[Lur14]

[McD75]

[OS80]

[Sai90]

[Sta82]

[Tot96]

[Vas92]

[Vas95]

[VW15]

[Wac07]

REFERENCES

21

Benson Farb and Jesse Wolfson. “Étale homological stability and arithmetic sta-
tistics”. Preprint. arXiv:1512.00415. 2015.
Ezra Getzler. “Resolving mixed Hodge modules on conﬁguration spaces”. Duke
Math. J. 96 (1), (1999), 175–203.
Mark Goresky and Robert MacPherson. Stratiﬁed Morse theory. Vol. 14. Ergeb-
nisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988,
xiv+272 pages.
André Joyal. “Foncteurs analytiques et espèces de structures”. Combinatoire
énumérative (Montreal, Que., 1985/Quebec, Que., 1985). Vol. 1234. Lecture
Notes in Math. Springer, Berlin, 1986, 126–159.
Mikhail M. Kapranov. “On the derived categories of coherent sheaves on some
homogeneous spaces”. Invent. Math. 92 (3), (1988), 479–508.
Aleksandr A. Klyachko. “Lie elements in the tensor algebra”. Sibirsk. Mat. Zh.
15 (1974), 914–920.
Alexander Kupers, Jeremy Miller, and TriThang Tran. “Homological stability
for symmetric complements”. To appear in Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. Preprint.
arXiv:1410.5497. 2014.
Eduard Looijenga. “Cohomology of M3 and M 1
3 ”. Mapping class groups and mod-
uli spaces of Riemann surfaces (Göttingen, 1991/Seattle, WA, 1991). Vol. 150.
Contemp. Math. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1993, 205–228.
Jacob Lurie. “Higher algebra”. Version of September 2014. Available at
http://www.math.harvard.edu/~lurie/papers/higheralgebra.pdf. 2014.
Dusa McDuﬀ. “Conﬁguration spaces of positive and negative particles”. Topology
14 (1975), 91–107.
Peter Orlik and Louis Solomon. “Combinatorics and topology of complements of
hyperplanes”. Invent. Math. 56 (2), (1980), 167–189.
Morihiko Saito. “Mixed Hodge modules”. Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 26 (2),
(1990), 221–333.
Richard P. Stanley. “Some aspects of groups acting on ﬁnite posets”. J. Combin.
Theory Ser. A 32 (2), (1982), 132–161.
Burt Totaro. “Conﬁguration spaces of algebraic varieties”. Topology 35 (4), (1996),
1057–1067.
Victor A. Vassiliev. Complements of discriminants of smooth maps: topology
and applications. Vol. 98. Translations of Mathematical Monographs. Translated
from the Russian by B. Goldfarb. American Mathematical Society, Providence,
RI, 1992, vi+208 pages.
Victor A. Vassiliev. “Topology of discriminants and their complements”. Proceed-
ings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. 1, 2 (Zürich, 1994).
Birkhäuser, Basel, 1995, 209–226.
Ravi Vakil and Melanie Matchett Wood. “Discriminants in the Grothendieck
ring”. Duke Math. J. 164 (6), (2015), 1139–1185.
Michelle L. Wachs. “Poset topology: tools and applications”. Geometric combi-
natorics. Vol. 13. IAS/Park City Math. Ser. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
2007, 497–615.

