The limitations of discrete-time approaches to continuous-time contagion dynamics

Peter G. Fennell,1 Sergey Melnik,1 and James P. Gleeson1

1MACSI, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Limerick, Ireland

Continuous-time Markov process models of contagions are widely studied, not least because of
their utility in predicting the evolution of real-world contagions and in formulating control measures.
It is often the case, however, that discrete-time approaches are employed to analyze such models or
to simulate them numerically. In such cases, time is discretized into uniform steps and transition
rates between states are replaced by transition probabilities. In this paper, we illustrate potential
limitations to this approach. We show how discretizing time leads to a restriction on the values of
the model parameters that can accurately be studied. We examine numerical simulation schemes
employed in the literature, showing how synchronous-type updating schemes can bias discrete-time
formalisms when compared against continuous-time formalisms. Event-based simulations, such as
the Gillespie algorithm, are proposed as optimal simulation schemes both in terms of replicating
the continuous-time process and computational speed. Finally, we show how discretizing time can
aﬀect the value of the epidemic threshold for large values of the infection rate and the recovery rate,
even if the ratio between the former and the latter is small.

I.

INTRODUCTION

A feature of our environment is the existence of net-
works, from real-life human contact networks, to virtual
networks such as online social networks, to functional
and technological networks such as transport networks
and the Internet [1]. Networks form a medium for con-
tagions, which spread from node to node through the
links of the networks. Contagions can be physical [2, 3],
cultural [4, 5], societal [6–8], ﬁnancial [9–11] and the
modelling of such contagions [12–16] – along with the
understanding of the suitability of various modelling ap-
proaches [17–19] – is vital for matters of the upmost pub-
lic importance [20–22].

A common modelling paradigm for studying conta-
gions is the framework of continuous-time Markov pro-
cesses [23–25], where events (such as the infection of a
susceptible individual by an infected individual) occur
at certain rates. The most well known of these mod-
els are epidemiological compartment models [3] which,
although introduced as models of disease spread [26],
are also widely used as models of social contagions such
as the diﬀusion of
information and innovations [27–
29]. Continuous-time Markov process models can pro-
vide valuable insights into contagion processes, and have
real value in both predicting and controlling contagious
outbreaks [30–32].

One avenue to study continuous-time Markov process
models is by using discrete-time approximations [32–
43]. Such approaches can be either numerical (i.e., syn-
chronous updating Monte Carlo simulations) or theoret-
ical.
In a discrete-time approach, time is discretized
into time-steps of length ∆t (which usually takes the
value ∆t = 1), and events occur with certain probabil-
ities. These probabilities are known as the state tran-
sition probabilities, and are simply the product of the
corresponding rate and the time-step ∆t.

Although discrete-time approaches correspond to their
continuous-time counterpart in the limit ∆t → 0,
they can signiﬁcantly diﬀer in the case that ∆t is ﬁ-

nite. Allen, in her work [33], shows that discrete-time
susceptible-infected-susceptible (SIS) and susceptible-
infected-recovered (SIR) models can produce complex be-
haviour such as period doubling and chaotic eﬀects for
suﬃciently large values of the time step and/or contact
rate. This behaviour is not possible in the continuous-
time SIS and SIR models, and is thus no more than an
artefact of discretizing time. Similarly, Gomez et al. [44]
observe that diﬀerences between continuous and discrete-
time SIS dynamics are “substantial” when an arbitrary
time step of ∆t = 1 is employed. An understanding of the
discrepancies introduced as a result of discretizing time
is thus important, allowing us to gauge the validity of
discrete-time approaches and when they may accurately
be employed.

In this paper, we show the limitations of discrete-time
approaches when used to study continuous-time conta-
gion dynamics. Our message is clear – that the accuracy
of such methods will be poor if state transition proba-
bilites are too large, leading to deviations from the un-
derlying continuous-time process. The repercussions of
this are manifold. Discrete-time theoretical approaches
can be signiﬁcantly inaccurate for large values of the con-
tagion parameter values (such as infection and recovery
rates), and thus the analysis of such approaches will not
be valid. Furthermore, discrete-time Monte Carlo simu-
lations – often used as a gold standard [2, 34, 45] – can
be inaccurate for large parameter values, and such in-
accurate simulations can lead to misleading conclusions.
We illustrate this latter point with an example from the
literature in Section 4. Our results shed light on the in-
accuracies caused when the state transition probabilities
of discrete-time approaches are too large, and provide
guidelines for the appropriate use of such approaches.

6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
2
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
3
1
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

II. CONTINUOUS-TIME CONTAGION
DYNAMICS AND THE DISCRETE-TIME

APPROXIMATION

To begin, we describe in some detail both continuous
and discrete-time Markov processes to illustrate mathe-
matically the diﬀerence between the two. In continuous-
time Markov processes, events are described by rates λ,
while events in the discrete-time analogue are described
by transition probabilities ˜λ, where ˜λ = λ∆t.
In the
course of our analysis we focus on the speciﬁc exam-
ple of SIS dynamics; however, our analysis holds for any
continuous-time Markovian dynamics, with the core mes-
sage being the limitations on the size of the transition
probabilites ˜λ for which discrete-time approaches are ac-
curate.

A. Continuous-time SIS dynamics

t which is either susceptible (X i

Consider SIS dynamics taking place on a network of N
nodes. This is a continuous-time Markov process where
at any time t each node i in the network has a corre-
sponding state X i
t = S)
or infected (X i
t = I) [23, 46, 47]. The states of each node
in the network change dynamically over time. Suscepti-
ble nodes become infected through each of their infected
neighbours at a rate β per infected neighbour, while in-
fected nodes recover at a rate µ. “Rate” here refers to
instantaneous transition rates, which in continuous-time
dynamics deﬁne the transitions between states; these are
deﬁned in terms of probabilities as

µ = lim
∆t→0

β = lim
∆t→0

P (X i

t+∆t = S|X i

t = I)

∆t

,

P (X i

t+∆t = I via j|X i

t = S, X j

t = I)

∆t

(1)

(2)

where {X i
t+∆t = I via j} is the event that a susceptible
node i became infected through an infected neighbour j.
The fraction terms in the right hand sides of Eqs. (1)
and (2) are the probabilities of state changes per unit
time and taking the limit of these fractions as ∆t → 0
leads to the concept of transition rates. In general, we
can deﬁne ri as the rate at which a node i changes from
its current state to the opposite state; this is given by

ri =(βmi,t

µ

if X i
if X i

t = S
t = I

,

(3)

where mi,t is the number of infected neighbours of node
i at time t.

The evolution of the dynamics in the network can be
fully described by the master equation for the Markov
process [24, 48]. If we denote by Yt = {X i
i=1 the state
of the network at time t, and by p(y, t) the probability
that the network is in state Yt = y, then the master

t}N

equation is given by

d
dt

p(y, t) = Xy

′6=y(cid:16)p(y′, t)ry

′→y − p(y, t)ry→y

′(cid:17),

2

(4)

′ is the
with initial conditions p(y, 0) = p0(y). Here ry→y
instantaneous rate at which the network changes from
state y to y′ and is fully determined by the network struc-
ture and the transition rates µ and β. While the master
equation is the gold standard – exactly describing the
evolution of SIS dynamics – the dimension of its sample
space Ω is 2N , which in general is prohibitively large for
analytical or numerical studies. One way to tackle this
problem is to study the dynamics as a series of individual
transitions between states. In continuous-time dynamics
nodes change state one at a time, or asynchronously [49].
Given the state of the network, the probability distri-
butions governing both the length of time until the next
state change and the node which will change state can be
constructed. These are given by the following lemmas (of
which rigorous derivations can be found in the literature,
e.g., [23, Chapter 10]):

Lemma II.1. Let τ be the holding time of the network,
the length of time that the network remains in its cur-
rent state before changing to the next state. Then τ is
an Exponentially distributed random variable and the pa-
rameter of the distribution is the sum of the individual

j=1 rj .

Lemma II.2. The probability that the next node in the

i=1 ri.

node transition rates, i.e., PN
network to change state will be node i is ri/PN

Lemmas II.1 and II.2 describe how the network prob-
abilistically evolves from one state to another. They
are the basis of continuous-time stochastic simulation
methods such as the well-known Gillespie algorithm, also
known as the Stochastic Simulation algorithm or Kinetic
Monte Carlo [50–53]. Such simulations are often referred
to as event-based simulations because the time intervals
are not ﬁxed but rather correspond to the time between
consecutive state-changes in the system. At each step
in such algorithms, time advances by an amount τ and
node i changes its state, where τ and i are random num-
bers drawn according to Lemmas II.1 and II.2 (Fig. 1).
Stochastic simulations give the opportunity to construct
p(y, t) empirically by running multiple realizations of the
stochastic process and aggregating over an ensemble of
realizations. Such simulations are statistically exact as
they are fully based on Lemmas II.1 and II.2 which are
derived without approximation from the axioms of the
Markov process.

B. The discrete-time approach

In a discrete-time framework, time is no longer treated
as a continuous variable but rather takes the form of
a discrete variable which advances in time intervals of

3

(a) Gillespie Algorithm

(b) Synchronous Updating

τ

Δt

t

t

k

j

i

h

k

j

i

h

k

j

i

h

k

j

i

h

FIG. 1: Schematics of both (a) the Gillespie algorithm and (b) the synchronous updating scheme. Vertical ticks on

the t-axis indicate the moments through which the simulation advances — in synchronous updating the interval

between these moments is a ﬁxed time-step with value ∆t while in the Gillespie algorithm the interval is a random

variable τ given by Lemma II.1. The light green and dark red circles are nodes in the network which are in the
susceptible and infected states respectively. A square around a node means that the node has been chosen for

updating at a certain moment and may change its state. In the Gillespie algorithm a node is chosen according to

Lemma II.2 and will always change its state while in the synchronous updating scheme every node has the chance to
change state and will do so with a probability that depends on their state and the states of their nearest neighbours.

length ∆t. Instantaneous transition rates are replaced by
transition probabilities. In a single time interval, suscep-
tible nodes become infected through their infected neigh-
bours with probability ˜β = β∆t per infected neighbour,
while infected nodes recover with probability ˜µ = µ∆t.
Note that ∆t is often assumed to take the value ∆t = 1,
but even in this case it should be included in the ex-
pression for ˜β and ˜µ to clarify that a rate needs to be
multiplied by a time step before it can be expressed as a
probability.

The discretization of time in this manner leads to two
deviations from the continuous-time process. These de-
viations arise through both the transition probabilities
which are used in place of transition rates as well as the
parallel (synchronous) state-changes in discrete-time sys-
tems that are uncharacteristic of continuous-time dynam-
ics. To understand the roots of the deviations introduced
through the transition probabilities we can examine the
deﬁnitions of µ and β as rates given in Eqs. (1) and (2).
These equations can be re-arranged to give transition
probabilities in terms of these rates, i.e.,

P (X i
P (X i

t+∆t = S|X i
t+∆t = I via j|X i

t = I) = µ∆t
t = S, X j

t = I) = β∆t

(5)

(6)

where in this case ∆t is an inﬁnitesimally small length
of time. In the case that ∆t is not inﬁnitesimally small,
Eqs. (5) and (6) become approximations. In a time in-
terval of length ∆t in the continuous-time Markov pro-
cess, the exact probability that an infected node will re-
cover is 1−e−µ∆t while the probability that a susceptible
node will become infected by a given infected neighbour
is 1 − e−β∆t. The transition probabilities ˜µ and ˜β, the
right-hand side of Eqs. (5) and (6), are approximations
to 1 − e−µ∆t and 1 − e−β∆t respectively and an impor-
tant question then arises of the eﬀect on the dynamics to

which these approximations have.

Figure 2 shows the actual probability 1 − e−λ∆t along
with the discrete-time probability ˜λ = λ∆t, where we
use the parameter λ to represent either µ or β. We also
plot the error ǫ which is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between
the discrete-time probability and the actual probability.
When ˜λ < 0.1, ǫ < 0.01 and so the approximation is
fairly accurate in this range. For larger values of the
state transition probability ˜λ, however, the approxima-
tion diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the true values. At ˜λ = 0.5,
ǫ ≈ 0.1 and when ˜λ = 1, ǫ ≈ 0.37. These individual errors
can accumulate and have signiﬁcant implications on the
dynamics as a whole; indeed we show empirically in Sec-
tions III and IV that although discrete-time approaches
can be very accurate when ˜µ and ˜β are very small they
begin to lose accuracy when ˜µ and ˜β are of the order of
magnitude of 10−1.

Secondly, we comment on the synchronous updating
nature of discrete-time approaches. This is in contrast
to the continuous-time process where nodes change state
asynchronously and the change of state of one node im-
mediately aﬀects the transition rates of the other nodes
(Fig. 1). The strength of eﬀect will depend on the transi-
tion probabilities, as the values ˜µ and ˜β dictate the num-
ber of state changes that take place in each time step and
thus the propensity of multiple nodes to change state at
the same time.

Thus we arrive at a simple conclusion: the values of ˜µ
and ˜β (and thus µ, β and ∆t) used in discrete-time ap-
proaches should be controlled so that these approaches
are accurate representations of the continuous-time pro-
cess. For large values of µ or β, the time step ∆t should
be small while if ∆t = 1, as in the case of the majority
of discrete-time approaches, the values of µ and β should
be relatively small. Throughout the rest of this paper we

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

˜λ = λ∆t
1 − e−λ∆t

ǫ

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

λ∆t

FIG. 2: The actual probability (blue solid line) that a

rate λ event will occur in a time step of length ∆t

plotted along with the approximate probability ˜λ (black
dash-dotted line) as used in discrete-time formalisms.
The error ǫ is deﬁned as the absolute distance between

the two.

will give empirical evidence of this conclusion.

Finally, we comment on discrete-time numerical sim-
ulation schemes that are used to stochastically simulate
SIS dynamics. A commonly used simulations scheme is
synchronous updating, also referred to as Rejection sam-
pling (Fig. 1) [2, 34, 52, 54]. In this case, time advances
in steps of one time unit, i.e., ∆t = 1. In a single time
unit, a susceptible node will become infected by its in-
fected neighbours with probability ˜β per infected neigh-
bour while infected nodes become susceptible with prob-
ability ˜µ. Synchronous updating simulations are statis-
tically exact realizations of the discrete-time dynamics;
these dynamics are fully described by the discrete-time
master equation

p(y, t + 1) =Xy

′

p(y′, t)qy

′→y,

(7)

′→y is the probability that the network changes
where qy
from state y′ to state y in a time-step of length ∆t =
1 and is fully determined by the network structure
and the transition probabilities ˜µ and ˜β [24]. Be-
cause synchronous updating simulations exactly mimic
the discrete-time dynamics and master equation they will
be used throughout this paper to gauge the accuracy of
the discrete-time approach.

In the remainder of the paper, we show how the ap-
proximations introduced in discrete-time approaches can
lead to misrepresentation of the actual continuous-time
dynamics. We begin in the next section by examining the
discrete-time approximations of Eqs. (5) and (6) for ﬁxed
µ and β and various values of ∆t. We show that discrete-
time dynamics can accurately reproduce continuous-time
dynamics for small values of ∆t, but that they incur a
breakdown in accuracy as ∆t increases. Further to this,
we show in Section IV that when the time-step is ﬁxed to
the value ∆t = 1, as in much of the literature, discrete-
time approaches break down in accuracy when the tran-
sition rates (µ and β) are too large. This limits the
range of parameters that can be studied with discrete-

4

time approaches. We illustrate this with an example
from the literature, also showing how synchronous up-
dating simulation schemes can favour discrete-time for-
malisms leading to biased conclusions when comparing
against continuous-time theories. Finally in Section V
we show that overly-large values of ˜β and ˜µ can aﬀect
the value of the epidemic threshold, even if the eﬀective
transition rate deﬁned as γ = β/µ = ˜β/˜µ is small.

III. EFFECT OF THE TIME-STEP ∆t WHEN

DISCRETIZING TIME.

In this section, we analyze the discrete-time approxi-
mations introduced in Section II B as a function of the
size of the discrete time-step ∆t. We do this by carrying
out synchronous updating simulations for various values
of ∆t and comparing them against exact results obtained
from the master equation. Numerical simulations are car-
ried out in C++ and the code is available online from [55].
As our example, we consider SIS dynamics on a com-
plete graph of N nodes, i.e., a graph where every pair of
nodes is connected. On such a graph, the SIS dynamics
are deﬁned by the rate functions

ri =( βZt

µ

if X i
if X i

t = S
t = I

,

(8)

where Zt is the number of infected nodes at time t and
β and µ are the infection rate and recovery rate respec-
tively, consistent with Eq. (3) for the complete graph.
We choose the complete graph because on such a graph
the master equation given in Eq. (4) can be reduced from
a system of 2N equations for p(y, t) to a system of N + 1
equations for p(n, t), the probability that there are n in-
fected nodes in the graph at time t [24]. This reduced
system is given by

d
dt

p(n, t) = −(cid:16)µn + βn(N − n)(cid:17)p(n, t)

+ µ(n + 1)p(n + 1, t) + β(n − 1)(N − n + 1)p(n − 1, t),

(9)

for 0 ≤ n ≤ N with initial conditions p(n, 0) = p0(n).
For small values of N , this system can easily be solved
using standard diﬀerential-equation solvers, giving us a
gold standard against which to compare the discrete-time
simulations. We also perform Gillespie algorithm simula-
tions to illustrate the accuracy and the speed of such sim-
ulations and thus their eﬃcacy in simulating continuous-
time dynamics.

We present the results for SIS dynamics with β = 1,
µ = 1 running on a complete graph with N = 10 nodes
in Fig. 3. We plot the solution of Eq. (9) as well as
the numerical results given by the Gillespie algorithm
and synchronous updating schemes with diﬀerent time
steps ∆t. For the numerical simulations, we performed
106 realisations and obtained the corresponding p(n, t)

Exact

Synchronous, Dt = 0.1

Synchronous, Dt = 1

5

Ηt

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5
t

2.0

2.5

3.0

(a) Time evolution of ηt

Exact

Dt=0.01

Dt=0.1

Dt=1

Exact

GA

pn,3

pn,3=∆n,9 when Dt=1 ®

pn,3

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

n

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

n

(b) Synchronous updating

(c) Gillespie algorithm

FIG. 3: SIS dynamics with β = µ = 1 on a complete graph with N = 10 nodes. (a): Time evolution of the expected

fraction of infected nodes ηt for both the exact master equation Eq. (9) (solid line) and synchronous updating
simulations with time steps ∆t = 0.1 and ∆t = 1 (dashed lines). The Gillespie algorithm and Exact curves are

indistinguishable. (b) and (c): Histograms showing the exact probability mass function p(z, t) at t = 3 — calculated

from numerical integration of Eq. (9) — and the probability mass functions obtained empirically from 106

simulation realizations for both synchronous updating simulations with time steps ∆t = 0.01, ∆t = 0.1 and ∆t = 1

and the Gillespie algorithm respectively.

by taking the fraction of realisations in which there are n
infected nodes at time t. For the synchronous updating
simulations, we consider time steps of ∆t = 0.01, 0.1 and
1. From Fig. 2, it is clear that these values of ∆t with
µ = β = 1 will give a comprehensive range on which to
judge the accuracy of the discrete-time approach.

ηt = P10

which stage the expected fraction of

We consider the SIS process at time t = 3 at
infected nodes
n=0 np(n, t) has reached a metastable state
(Fig 3a) [56]. At t = 3 we empirically construct p(n, 3)
from the synchronous updating simulations and compare
it to p(n, 3) calculated from the master equation (9). Fig-
ure 3b shows this comparison. From this Figure it is clear
that while the discrete-time simulations are quite accu-
rate for small ∆t this accuracy can fully break down when
∆t is too large. The accuracy of the probability distribu-
tion in the metastable state depends highly on the value
of the time step used to reach the metastable state. In
the synchronous updating simulations with ∆t = 1 the
results are highly inaccurate with all of the probability
concentrated on n = 9, i.e., p(n, 3) = δn,9. Even the case

∆t = 0.1, while fairly accurate, shows discrepancies in
both the probability distribution p(n, 3) and the expected
fraction of infected nodes ηt (Fig. 3a). Considering that
the error ǫ between ˜µ (resp. ˜β) and 1 − e−µ∆t (1 − e−β∆t)
is less than 0.005 for µ = β = 1 and ∆t = 0.1 (Fig. 2), we
conclude that these discrepancies are due to the simulta-
neous state-changes in synchronous updating which are
uncharacteristic of the continuous-time process.

In Fig. 3c we compare p(n, 3) constructed empirically
from the Gillespie algorithm to p(n, 3) calculated from
the master equation. The Gillespie algorithm is ex-
tremely accurate and matches the exact p(n, t) to a high
degree of precision. Furthermore, this algorithm is com-
putationally rapid. We performed a short comparison of
the simulation algorithms in terms of speed, showing in
Table I the simulation run times for the 106 realisations
for the Gillespie Algorithm and for synchronous updating
with various values of ∆t. For ∆t = 0.01 – corresponding
to the simulations which most closely match the accuracy
of the Gillespie simulations – the Gillespie algorithm is
an order of magnitude faster. This computational speed,

6

(a) Complete network

(Section III)

(b) Erd˝os-R´enyi network

(Section IV)

Gillespie

Synchronous

Gillespie

Synchronous

∆t
-

T

5.67

∆t
0.01
0.1
1

T

65.62
12.46
4.48

∆t
-

T

42.1

∆t
0.01

1

T

2555.8

81.4

TABLE I: Time T (in seconds) taken to carry out the Gillespie algorithm and synchronous updating numerical

simulations for the examples described in Section III (Table Ia) and Section IV (Table Ia). The simulation code was

written in C++ and the simulations were run on a single-CPU contemporary desktop computer.

along with its natural precision of the algorithm, make
the Gillespie algorithm an optimal algorithm for simulat-
ing continuous-time dynamics.

To summarize, the accuracy of discrete-time approxi-
mations to continuous-time dynamics depends highly on
the size of the discrete-time step ∆t at which the sys-
tem evolves. This has extremely important implications
for real-world predictive models of epidemic spreads that
are discrete-time based [31, 32], as overly-large time-steps
can aﬀect the prediction of both the expected evolution
of a contagion (Fig. 3a) as well as variance or conﬁdence
intervals around the expected evolution (Fig. 3b).

In the next section, we ﬁx the time-step at ∆t = 1 and
show how the accuracy breaks down when the infection
and recovery rates are too large, showing that discrete-
time formalisms using this approach are limited in the
ranges of the rate parameters that they can study and
thus their ability to match continuous-time dynamics.

IV. LIMITATIONS ON RANGE OF
PARAMETER VALUES WHEN ∆t = 1

As mentioned in Section II B, synchronous updating
has the same characteristics of discrete-time systems
which are characterized by transition probabilities and
diﬀerence equations of the form

p(y, t + ∆t) = f ({p(y′, t)}y

′∈Ω) ,

(10)

where p(y, t+∆t) — the probability that the system is in
state y at time t + ∆t — is a function of the probabilities
p(y′, t) for all possible states y′ in the sample space Ω.
On the other hand, continuous-time systems are char-
acterized by transition rates and diﬀerential equations
of the form given by the master equation Eq. (4). Al-
though the discrete-time formulation coincides with the
continuous-time one in the limit ∆t → 0, the dynamics
will diﬀer for non-inﬁnitesimal ∆t. Issues then arise when
comparing discrete and continuous-time systems and the
choice of numerical scheme becomes important. We il-
lustrate this now with an example from the literature,
while also showing how the accuracy of discrete-time ap-
proaches with ∆t = 1 can be insuﬃcient for large values
of the transition rates.

A prominent current strand of research is the be-
haviour of the SIS model on inﬁnite networks with
power-law degree distributions [2, 36, 57–61].
In [36],
Chakrabarti et al. introduced the NonLinear Dynamical
Systems (NLDS) theory, a discrete-time approach to SIS
modeling with a set of mean-ﬁeld diﬀerence equations of
the form

pi,t+1 = f(cid:0){pj,t}N

j=1(cid:1) ,

(11)

for 0 ≤ i ≤ N , where pi,t+1 is the probability that node
i is infected at time t. They compare their results to two
continuous-time formulations, the Heterogeneous Mean
Field (HMF) approach of Pastor-Sattoras and Vespig-
nani [2] and the Kephart-White (KW) [62] approach.
The bases of the comparison are synchronous updating
numerical simulations with a time step ∆t = 1 and it
is found — see for example Figure 4 of [36] — that the
NLDS theory is much closer to the numerical simulations
than both the HMF and KW theories.

the

However,

comparison of discrete-time

and
continuous-time formulations in this manner is biased.
Synchronous updating with a time step ∆t = 1 is the cor-
rect procedure for numerically simulating discrete-time
dynamics. On the other hand, to simulate continuous-
time dynamics either synchronous updating with a van-
ishingly small time step or a continuous-time simulation
scheme such as the Gillespie algorithm should be used.

To illustrate the diﬀerence resulting from the use of
the diﬀerent updating methods we reproduce an exam-
ple from [36]. The example is SIS dynamics on an Erd˝os-
R´enyi network of 1000 nodes and mean degree hki = 4.
Figure 4 shows various numerical simulations of these
dynamics. Again, the computer code used to perform
the simulations is available from [55]. Included in Fig. 4
are synchronous updating simulations with a time step
∆t = 1, as in [36], along with synchronous updating sim-
ulations with a small time step ∆t = 0.01 and Gille-
spie algorithm simulations. In Fig. 4(c) of [36], where
µ = 0.72 and β = 0.2, it can be seen that the fraction
¯η of infected nodes in the metastable state given by the
NLDS theory matches very closely the synchronous up-
dating numerical simulations. However, as can be seen in
Fig. 4b here, these synchronous updating simulations dif-
fer quite signiﬁcantly from continuous-time simulations,

7

(a) µ = 0.48, β = 0.2

(b) µ = 0.72, β = 0.2

t

η

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

0.15

0.1

0.05

t

η

0

0

S∆t=1
S∆t=0.01
GA

50

100

150

200

t

S∆t=1
S∆t=0.01
GA

50

100

t

150

200

FIG. 4: Time evolution of the expected fraction of infected nodes ηt for SIS dynamics on an Erd˝os-R´enyi network

with 1000 nodes and average degree hki = 4. Each trajectory is averaged over 104 realisations. Synchronous

updating with a time step of ∆t = 1 — as in [36] — is given by the circular symbols (S∆t=1). This signiﬁcantly

deviates from Gillespie algorithm simulations (GA, triangular symbols) and synchronous updating simulations with

a small time step of ∆t = 0.01 (S∆t=0.01, square symbols) if the transition rates µ and/or β are too large.

which plateau at the metastable state with ¯η ≈ 0.04.
The KW theory, which in [36] is rejected as being in-
accurate, actually converges to a value much closer to
the continuous-time simulations than the NLDS theory.
Thus, using the correct simulation technique, the conclu-
sions in [36] should be reversed: the KW model is more
accurate than the NDLS model.

For ﬁxed ∆t = 1, the accuracy of the discrete-time
approach decreases as µ and β increase. In the example
above, when µ is decreased from µ = 0.72 to µ = 0.48
the discrete-time simulations match relatively closer to
the continuous-time simulations (Fig. 4a), while when
µ is decreased further to µ = 0.24 the discrepancy be-
tween the two simulations in negligible. Chakrabarti et
al. state that their model “outperforms (the KW model)
when µ is high”. However the opposite is the case: their
discrete-time approach breaks down in accuracy (as an
approximation to the continuous-time process) as µ in-
creases.

We conclude with an observation to motivate the next
section. As µ is increased from µ = 0.48 (Fig. 4a) to
µ = 0.72 (Fig. 4b), the fraction of infected nodes in the
metastable state ¯η (at, for example, t = 100) decreases
for both the continuous-time simulations and discrete-
time simulations. However, ¯η decreases quicker for the
continuous-time simulations and so it would seem that
the critical value µc at which ¯η ﬁrst becomes zero will
be diﬀerent depending on whether a discrete-time or
continuous-time approach is used. This has implications
for the epidemic threshold, which is the focus of the next
section.

V. EFFECT ON EPIDEMIC THRESHOLD.

A characteristic of SIS dynamics is the occurrence of
phase transitions as the eﬀective transition rate γ is var-

ied. Recall that the eﬀective transition rate is deﬁned as
the ratio of the infection rate to the recovery rate, i.e.,
γ = β/µ. Depending on the structure of the network
and whether the network is ﬁnite or inﬁnite, the critical
point, or epidemic threshold, γc between diﬀerent phases
can vary. As mentioned in Section IV, there are still re-
maining questions about the steady-state behaviour of
the SIS model — particularly the value of the epidemic
threshold on such networks — and so a good understand-
ing of how diﬀerent approximations aﬀect the value of the
epidemic threshold is important. In this section, we show
that although the epidemic threshold is deﬁned in terms
of the ratio γ = β/µ = ˜β/˜µ, the individual values of the
transition probabilities ˜β and ˜µ used in discrete-time ap-
proaches aﬀect the value of the epidemic threshold when
it is calculated by (a) performing discrete-time numerical
simulations or (b) iterating a discrete-time system (such
as Eq. (10)) from a set of initial conditions (as, for exam-
ple, in [37]). Note however that the epidemic threshold
predicted by steady-state analysis (i.e., setting pt+1 = pt
in Eq. (11)) — such as in [36] — is completely valid.

We show how ˜µ and ˜β aﬀect the value of the epidemic
threshold in the following manner. For a given network,
we ﬁx the value of ˜µ and vary ˜β so that the eﬀective
transition rate γ varies between γmin and γmax where
γmin and γmax are chosen so that the epidemic threshold
lies between them, i.e., γmin ≪ γc ≪ γmax. Thus when ˜µ
is small (resp. large), ˜β will be small (large) so that their
ratio lies in the range γmin ≪ ˜β/˜µ ≪ γmax. We perform
standard synchronous updating simulations (with ∆t =
1) and obtain the critical value γc as the smallest value of
γ such that the fraction of nodes in the metastable state
is non-zero. If the epidemic threshold depends only on
the ratio γ = ˜β/˜µ and is independent of the individual
values of ˜µ and ˜β, then γc should be the same regardless
of the value of ˜µ which is ﬁxed. However, we ﬁnd that
this is not the case.

We perform this experiment on an Erd˝os-R´enyi net-
work with N = 104 nodes and mean degree hki = 4,
the same network as used in the example of Section IV
(Fig. 5). On such a network, the epidemic threshold is
predicted by steady-state analysis of both the NDLS and
HMF theories as γc = 0.25. From Fig. 5 we see that when
˜µ is small (˜µ=0.1), the epidemic threshold predicted by
synchronous updating simulations corresponds to this
value γc = 0.25. However as ˜µ (and thus ˜β) increases,
the accuracy of the discrete-time approach breaks down
and both the fraction of infected nodes in the metastable
state and the epidemic threshold deviate from the true
values. The epidemic threshold decreases from γc = 0.25
when ˜µ = 0.1 to γc = 0.2 when ˜µ = 1, even though
the ratio γ = ˜β/˜µ remains in the same range. Thus
in discrete-time formalisms the steady-state behaviour is
not fully determined by the eﬀective transition rate γ but
also depends on ˜µ and ˜β. From our analysis in Section III
(Fig. 3a) it is clear that the metastable state reached it-
eratively from an initial condition depends on the single-
step transition probabilities ˜µ and ˜β.
If these are too
large, the errors introduced in the discrete-time approxi-
mation become signiﬁcant, aﬀecting the metastable state
and the value of the epidemic threshold.

The results of this Section have important implica-
tions for discrete-time approaches. Firstly, they show
that the epidemic threshold calculated empirically using
synchronous updating simulations can be incorrect if ˜µ
and ˜β are too large, even if the ratio between them is
small. Secondly, they have implications for calculating
the epidemic threshold from discrete-time systems of the
form pt+1 = f (pt) by forward iterating the system from
an initial condition [37].
If the transition probabilities
˜µ and ˜β used in such systems are too large then the
metastable state will be aﬀected, possibly leading to a
miscalculation of the epidemic threshold.

8

underlying continuous-time processes, thus compromis-
ing their utility and their applicability to prediction and
analysis.

Our message is clear - due care needs to be taken
when implementing discrete-time methods as approxi-
mations to continuous-time dynamical processes. Being
constructive, we have brieﬂy discussed alternatives. For
simulations of continuous-time processes on networks,
event-based simulations such as the Gillespie algorithm
are more favourable than synchronous updating schemes
both in terms of accuracy and speed. For theoretical
analysis, continuous-time analogues [58, 63] of discrete-
time approaches should be employed because they are

0.2

0.1

∞
η

˜µ = 1

0
0.15

˜µ = 0.1

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

γ = ˜β/˜µ

FIG. 5: The fraction of infected nodes η∞ in the

metastable state in an Erd˝os-R´enyi network with 104
nodes and mean- degree hki = 4 for various values of
the transition probabilities ˜µ and ˜β. Along each of the
ﬁve curves shown, ˜µ is ﬁxed at the values 0.1, 0.325,
0.55, 0.775 and 1 respectively and ˜β varies so that
γ = ˜β/˜µ varies between 0.15 and 0.35. The vertical
dashed line indicates the epidemic threshold γc = 0.25

predicted by both the NLDS and HMF theories.

unconstrained in the range of dynamics parameter val-
ues which can be studied.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

In this paper, we have provided conclusive evidence of
the limitations of discrete-time approaches as approxi-
mations to continuous-time contagion processes. When
the state transition probabilities are too large, such ap-
proaches become inaccurate and misrepresentative of the

This work has been partially funded by Science Foun-
dation Ireland, Grant Nos. 11/PI/1026 and 12/PI/1683,
and the FET-Proactive project PLEXMATH (FP7-ICT-
2011-8; Grant No. 317614), funded by the European
Commission.

[1] M. E. Newman, Networks: An Introduction (Oxford Uni-

[5] D. J. Watts, Proceedings of the National Academy of

versity Press, 2010).

Sciences 99, 5766 (2002).

[2] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Physical Review

[6] D. J. O’Sullivan, G. J. O’Keeﬀe, P. G. Fennell, and J. P.

Letters 86, 3200 (2001).

[3] R. M. Anderson and R. M. May, Nature , 361 (1979).
[4] R. Axelrod, Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 41, 203

(1997).

Gleeson, Frontiers in Physics 3, 71 (2015).

[7] D. Centola, Science 329, 1194 (2010).
[8] N. O. Hodas and K. Lerman, Scientiﬁc Reports 4 (2014).
[9] J. P. Gleeson, T. Hurd, S. Melnik,
and A. Hackett,
in Advances in Network Analysis and its Applications

9

(Springer, 2012) pp. 27–56.

[10] P. Gai and S. Kapadia, in Proceedings of the Royal Soci-
ety of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineer-
ing Sciences (The Royal Society, 2010) p. rspa20090410.
[11] R. M. May and N. Arinaminpathy, Journal of the Royal

Society Interface 7, 823 (2010).

[12] J. P. Gleeson, D. Cellai, J.-P. Onnela, M. A. Porter, and
F. Reed-Tsochas, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 111, 10411 (2014).

[13] S. Melnik, J. A. Ward, J. P. Gleeson, and M. A. Porter,

Chaos 23, 013124 (2013).

[36] D. Chakrabarti, Y. Wang, C. Wang, J. Leskovec, and
C. Faloutsos, ACM Transactions on Information and Sys-
tem Security (TISSEC) 10, 1 (2008).

[37] S. G´omez, A. Arenas, J. Borge-Holthoefer, S. Meloni,
and Y. Moreno, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 89, 38009
(2010).

[38] M. De Domenico, A. Lima, P. Mougel, and M. Musolesi,

Scientiﬁc Reports 3 (2013).

[39] X. Wei, N. C. Valler, B. A. Prakash,

I. Neamtiu,
M. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, Selected Areas in Com-
munications, IEEE Journal on 31, 1049 (2013).

[14] J. P. Gleeson, J. A. Ward, K. P. OSullivan, and W. T.

[40] C. Granell, S. G´omez, and A. Arenas, Physical review

Lee, Physical Review Letters 112, 048701 (2014).

letters 111, 128701 (2013).

[15] J. P. Gleeson, Physical Review Letters 107, 068701

[41] E. Cozzo, R. A. Banos, S. Meloni, and Y. Moreno, Phys-

(2011).

ical Review E 88, 050801 (2013).

[16] J. P. Gleeson, Physical Review X 3, 021004 (2013),

[42] E. Valdano, L. Ferreri, C. Poletto, and V. Colizza, Phys-

1209.2983.

ical Review X 5, 021005 (2015).

[17] J. P. Gleeson, S. Melnik, J. A. Ward, M. A. Porter, and

[43] J. G´omez-Garde˜nes, L. Lotero, S. Taraskin,

and

P. J. Mucha, Physical Review E 85, 026106 (2012).

F. P´erez-Reche, Scientiﬁc Reports 6 (2016).

[18] S. Melnik, A. Hackett, M. A. Porter, P. J. Mucha, and

[44] S. G´omez, J. G´omez-Gardenes, Y. Moreno, and A. Are-

J. P. Gleeson, Physical Review E 83, 036112 (2011).

nas, Physical Review E 84, 036105 (2011).

[19] A. Faqeeh, S. Melnik, and J. P. Gleeson, Physical Review

E 91, 052807 (2015).

[20] M. F. Gomes, A. Piontti, L. Rossi, D. Chao, I. Longini,
M. E. Halloran, and A. Vespignani, PLOS Currents Out-
breaks 1 (2014).

[21] S. Gonz´alez-Bail´on, J. Borge-Holthoefer, A. Rivero, and

Y. Moreno, Scientiﬁc Reports 1 (2011).

[22] D. Lazer, A. S. Pentland, L. Adamic, S. Aral, A. L.
Barab´asi, D. Brewer, N. Christakis, N. Contractor,
J. Fowler, M. Gutmann, et al., Science (New York, NY)
323, 721 (2009).

[23] P. Van Mieghem, Performance Analysis of Complex Net-
works and Systems (Cambridge University Press, 2014).
[24] A. Barrat, M. Barthelemy, and A. Vespignani, Dynami-
cal Processes on Complex Networks (Cambridge Univer-
sity Press Cambridge, 2008).

[45] M. Barth´elemy, A. Barrat, R. Pastor-Satorras,

and
A. Vespignani, Physical Review Letters 92, 178701
(2004).

[46] N. T. Bailey, The Mathematical Theory of Infectious Dis-
eases and its Applications (Charles Griﬃn & Company
Ltd, 1975).

[47] T. M. Liggett, Stochastic Interacting Systems: Contact,
Voter and Exclusion processes, Vol. 324 (Springer, 1999).
[48] C. W. Gardiner, Springer Series in Synergetics (1985).
[49] T. M. Liggett, Interacting Particle Systems (Springer,

1985).

[50] D. T. Gillespie, The Journal of Physical Chemistry 81,

2340 (1977).

[51] S. C. Ferreira, C. Castellano, and R. Pastor-Satorras,

Physical Review E 86, 041125 (2012).

[52] C. L. Vestergaard and M. G´enois, PLoS Comput Biol 11,

[25] D. R. Cox and H. D. Miller, The Theory of Stochastic

e1004579 (2015).

Processes (CRC Press, 1977).

[53] A. F. Voter, in Radiation Eﬀects in Solids (Springer,

[26] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, in Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical
and Engineering Sciences, Vol. 115 (The Royal Society,
1927) pp. 700–721.

[27] J. L. Toole, M. Cha, and M. C. Gonz´alez, PloS One 7,

e29528 (2012).

[28] M. Kitsak, L. K. Gallos, S. Havlin, F. Liljeros, L. Much-
nik, H. E. Stanley, and H. A. Makse, Nature Physics 6,
888 (2010).

2007) pp. 1–23.

[54] R. M. Neal, Annals of Statistics , 705 (2003).
[55] https://github.com/peterfennell/SIS-simulations

(2016).

[56] We refer to the metastable state as the state when the
expected fraction of infected nodes has reached a plateau
which very slowly decreases towards 0.

[57] C. Castellano and R. Pastor-Satorras, Physical Review

Letters 105, 218701 (2010).

[29] D. Daley and D. G. Kendall, IMA Journal of Applied

[58] A. V. Goltsev, S. N. Dorogovtsev, J. Oliveira, and J. F.

Mathematics 1, 42 (1965).

[30] N. M. Ferguson, D. A. Cummings, C. Fraser, J. C. Cajka,
P. C. Cooley, and D. S. Burke, Nature 442, 448 (2006).
[31] M. L. C. Degli Atti, S. Merler, C. Rizzo, M. Ajelli,
M. Massari, P. Manfredi, C. Furlanello, G. S. Tomba,
and M. Iannelli, PLoS One 3, e1790 (2008).

[32] D. Balcan, B. Gon¸calves, H. Hu, J. J. Ramasco, V. Col-
izza, and A. Vespignani, Journal of Computational Sci-
ence 1, 132 (2010).

[33] L. J. Allen, Mathematical Biosciences 124, 83 (1994).
[34] Y. Wang, D. Chakrabarti, C. Wang, and C. Faloutsos,
in Reliable Distributed Systems, 2003. Proceedings. 22nd
International Symposium on (IEEE, 2003) pp. 25–34.

[35] C. C. Zou, D. Towsley, and W. Gong, Dependable and
Secure Computing, IEEE Transactions on 4, 105 (2007).

Mendes, Physical Review Letters 109, 128702 (2012).

[59] P. Van Mieghem, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 97, 48004

(2012).

[60] M. Bogu˜n´a, C. Castellano, and R. Pastor-Satorras, Phys-

ical Review Letters 111, 068701 (2013).

[61] A. S. Mata and S. C. Ferreira, Physical Review E 91,

012816 (2015).

[62] J. O. Kephart and S. R. White, in Proceedings of the
1991 IEEE Computer Society Symposium on Research
in Security and Privacy (IEEE, 1991) pp. 343–359.

[63] P. Van Mieghem, J. Omic, and R. Kooij, Networking,

IEEE/ACM Transactions on 17, 1 (2009).

