Form factors and the dilatation operator in

N = 4 super Yang-Mills theory and its

deformations

D i s s e r t a t i o n

( ¨Uberarbeitete Fassung)

eingereicht an der

Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftlichen Fakult¨at

der Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin

von

Matthias Wilhelm

matthias.wilhelm@nbi.ku.dk

Institut f¨ur Physik und Institut f¨ur Mathematik,Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin,

IRIS Geb¨aude, Zum Großen Windkanal 6, 12489 Berlin

Niels Bohr Institute, Copenhagen University,
Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
h
t
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
5
4
1
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

Zusammenfassung

Seit mehr als einem halben Jahrhundert bietet die Quantenfeldtheorie (QFT) den genausten
und erfolgreichsten theoretischen Rahmen zur Beschreibung der fundamentalen Wechsel-
wirkungen zwischen Elementarteilchen, wenn auch mit Ausnahme der Gravitation. Den-
noch sind QFTs im Allgemeinen weit davon entfernt, vollst¨andig verstanden zu sein. Dies
liegt an einem Mangel an theoretischen Methoden zur Berechnung ihrer Observablen sowie
an fehlendem Verst¨andnis der auftretenden mathematischen Strukturen.
In den letzten
anderthalb Jahrzehnten kam es zu bedeutendem Fortschritt im Verst¨andnis von speziellen
Aspekten einer bestimmten QFT, der maximal supersymmetrischen Yang-Mills-Theorie
in vier Dimensionen, auch N = 4 SYM-Theorie genannt. Diese haben die Hoﬀnung
geweckt, dass die N = 4 SYM-Theorie exakt l¨osbar ist. Besonders bemerkenswert war der
Fortschritt auf den Gebiet der Streuamplituden auf Grund der Entwicklung sogenannter
Masseschalen-Methoden und auf dem Gebiet der Korrelationsfunktionen zusammengeset-
zter Operatoren auf Grund von Integrabilit¨at. In dieser Dissertation gehen wir der Frage
nach, ob und in welchem Umfang die in diesem Kontext gefunden Methoden und Struk-
turen auch zum Verst¨andnis weitere Gr¨oßen in dieser Theorie sowie zum Verst¨andnis an-
derer Theorien beitragen k¨onnen.

Formfaktoren beschreiben den quantenfeldtheoretischen ¨Uberlapp eines lokalen, eich-
invarianten, zusammengesetzten Operators mit einem asymptotischen Streuzustand. Als
solche bilden sie eine Br¨ucke zwischen der Welt der Streuamplituden, deren externe Im-
pulse sich auf der Masseschale beﬁnden, auf der einen Seite und der Welt der Korrela-
tionsfunktionen von zusammengesetzten Operatoren, welche keine entsprechende Bedin-
gung erf¨ullen, auf der anderen Seite.
Im ersten Teil dieser Arbeit berechnen wir Form-
faktoren von allgemeinen, gesch¨utzten und ungesch¨utzten Operatoren f¨ur verschiedene
Schleifenordnungen und Multiplizit¨aten externer Teilchen in der N = 4 SYM-Theorie.
Dies gelingt durch Anwendung verschiedener Masseschalen-Methoden, die im Kontext von
Streuamplituden entwickelt wurden und sehr erfolgreich angewandt werden konnten, wenn
auch erst nach wichtigen Weiterentwicklungen. Insbesondere zeigen wir, wie Formfaktoren
und die zuvor genannten Methoden es erm¨oglichen, den Dilatationsoperator zu bestim-
men. Dieser Operator liefert das Spektrum der anomalen Skalendimensionen der zusam-
mengesetzten Operatoren und wirkt als Hamilton-Operator der integrablen Spin-Kette des
Spektralproblems. Auf Einschleifenordnung nutzen wir verallgemeinerte Unitarit¨at, um
den aus entsprechenden Schnitten rekonstruierbaren Teil des Formfaktors mit minimaler
Multiplizit¨at f¨ur beliebige zusammengesetzte Operatoren zu berechnen, von dem wir den
vollst¨andigen Dilatationsoperator auf Einschleifenordnung ablesen k¨onnen. Am Beispiel
des Konishi-Operators und Operatoren des SU(2)-Sektors auf Zweischleifenordnung zeigen
wir, dass Masseschalen-Methoden und Formfaktoren auch auf h¨oheren Schleifenordnun-
gen zur Bestimmung des Dilatationsoperators eingesetzt werden k¨onnen. Die R¨uckstands-
funktionen letztgenannter Formfaktoren erf¨ullen interessante universelle Eigenschaften im

3

4

Zusammenfassung

Bezug auf ihre Transzendenz. Auf Baumgraphenniveau konstruieren wir Formfaktoren
¨uber erweiterte Masseschalen-Diagramme, Graßmann-Integrale und die integrabilit¨atsin-
spirierte Technik der R-Operatoren. Letztere erm¨oglicht es, Formfaktoren als Eigen-
zust¨ande der integrablen Transfermatrix zu konstruieren, was die Existenz eines Satzes
erhaltener Ladungen impliziert.

Deformationen der N = 4 SYM-Theorie erlauben es uns, andere Theorien mit den
gleichen speziellen Eigenschaften zu ﬁnden und neue Erkenntnisse ¨uber den Ursprung von
Integrabilit¨at und der AdS/CFT-Korrespondenz zu gewinnen. Im zweiten Teil dieser Ar-
beit untersuchen wir die N = 1 supersymmetrische β-Deformation und die nichtsuper-
symmetrische γi-Deformation. Beide teilen viele Eigenschaften mit der N = 4 SYM-
Theorie, speziell im planaren Limes. Sie zeigen jedoch auch neue Merkmale, insbesondere
das Auftreten von Doppelspurtermen in ihrem Wirkungsfunktional. Zwar scheinen diese
Terme im planaren Limes zu verschwinden, doch k¨onnen sie durch einen neuen Eﬀekt
der endlichen Systemgr¨oße, welchen wir Vorwickeln nennen, in f¨uhrender Ordnung beitra-
gen. In der β-Deformation werden diese Terme f¨ur die konforme Invarianz ben¨otigt und wir
berechnen die durch sie entstehenden Korrekturen zum vollst¨andigen planaren Dilatations-
operator auf Einschleifenordnung und dessen Spektrum. In der γi-Deformation zeigen wir,
dass Quantenkorrekturen rennende Doppelspurkopplungen ohne Fixpunkte induzieren, was
die konforme Invarianz bricht. Dann berechnen wir die planaren anomalen Skalendimensio-
nen von Einspuroperatoren, die aus L identischen Skalarfeldern bestehen, bei der kritischen
Wickelordnung ℓ = L f¨ur alle L ≥ 2. F¨ur L ≥ 3 stimmen die Ergebnisse unser feldtheo-
retischen Rechnung exakt mit den durch Integrabilit¨at gewonnenen Vorhersagen ¨uberein.
F¨ur L = 2, wo die Vorhersage durch Integrabilit¨at divergiert, ﬁnden wir ein endliches, ra-
tionales Ergebnis. Dieses h¨angt jedoch von der rennenden Doppelspurkopplung und durch
sie vom Renormierungsschema ab.

Abstract

For more than half a century, quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) has been the most accurate and
successful framework to describe the fundamental interactions among elementary particles,
albeit with the notable exception of gravity. Nevertheless, QFTs are in general far from
being completely understood. This is due to a lack of calculational techniques and tools
as well as our limited understanding of the mathematical structures that emerge in them.
In the last one and a half decades, tremendous progress has been made in understanding
certain aspects of a particular QFT, namely the maximally supersymmetric Yang-Mills
theory in four dimensions, termed N = 4 SYM theory, which has risen the hope that
this theory could be exactly solvable. In particular, this progress occurred for scattering
amplitudes due to the development of on-shell methods and for correlation functions of
gauge-invariant local composite operators due to integrability. In this thesis, we address
the question to which extend the methods and structures found there can be generalised
to other quantities in the same theory and to other theories.

Form factors describe the overlap between a gauge-invariant local composite operator
on the one hand and an asymptotic on-shell scattering state on the other hand. Thus,
they form a bridge between the purely oﬀ-shell correlation functions and the purely on-
shell scattering amplitudes. In the ﬁrst part of this thesis, we calculate form factors of
general, protected as well as non-protected, operators at various loop orders and numbers
of external points in N = 4 SYM theory. This is achieved using many of the successful on-
shell methods that were developed in the context of scattering amplitudes, albeit after some
important extensions. In particular, we show how form factors and on-shell methods allow
us to obtain the dilatation operator, which yields the spectrum of anomalous dimensions
of composite operators and acts as Hamiltonian of the integrable spin chain of the spectral
problem. At one-loop level, we calculate the cut-constructible part of the form factor with
minimal particle multiplicity for any operator using generalised unitarity and obtain the
complete one-loop dilatation operator from it. We demonstrate that on-shell methods and
form factors can be used to calculate the dilatation operator also at higher loop orders,
using the Konishi operator and the SU(2) sector at two loops as examples. Remarkably,
the ﬁnite remainder functions of the latter form factors possess universal properties with
respect to their transcendentality. Moreover, form factors of non-protected operators share
many features of scattering amplitudes in QCD, such as UV divergences and rational terms.
At tree level, we show how to construct form factors via extended on-shell diagrams, a
Graßmannian integral as well as the integrability-based technique of R operators. Using
the latter technique, form factors can be constructed as eigenstates of an integrable transfer
matrix, which implies the existence of a tower of conserved charges.

Deformations of N = 4 SYM theory allow us to ﬁnd further theories with its special
properties and to shed light on the origins of integrability and of the AdS/CFT correspon-
dence. In the second part of this thesis, we study the N = 1 supersymmetric β-deformation

5

6

Abstract

and the non-supersymmetric γi-deformation. While they share many properties of their
undeformed parent theory, in particular in the planar limit, also new features arise. These
new features are related to the occurrence of double-trace terms in the action. Although
apparently suppressed, double-trace terms can contribute at leading order in the planar
limit via a new kind of ﬁnite-size eﬀect, which we call prewrapping. In the β-deformation,
these double-trace terms are required for conformal symmetry, and we calculate the corre-
sponding corrections to the complete planar one-loop dilatation operator and its spectrum.
In the γi-deformations, we show that running double-trace terms without ﬁxed points are
induced via quantum corrections, thus breaking conformal invariance. We then calculate
the planar anomalous dimensions of single-trace operators built from L identical scalars at
critical wrapping order ℓ = L for any L ≥ 2. At L ≥ 3, our ﬁeld-theory results perfectly
match the predictions from integrability. At L = 2, where the integrability-based predic-
tion diverges, we ﬁnd a ﬁnite rational result, which does however depend on the running
double-trace coupling and thus on the renormalisation scheme.

Contents

Zusammenfassung

Abstract

Publications

Introduction

Overview

1 N = 4 SYM theory

1.1 Field content, action and symmetries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Composite operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
’t Hooft limit and ﬁnite-size eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3
1.4 One-loop dilatation operator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I Form factors

2 Introduction to form factors

2.1 Generalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Minimal tree-level form factors for all operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Diﬃculties for non-minimal and loop-level form factors . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

3.1 General structure of loop corrections and the dilatation operator
. . . . . .
3.2 One-loop corrections in the SU(2) sector via unitarity . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 One-loop corrections for all operators via generalised unitarity . . . . . . .

4 Minimal two-loop Konishi form factor

4.1 Konishi operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Calculation of form factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Subtleties in the regularisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 Final result and Konishi anomalous dimension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Minimal two-loop SU(2) form factors

5.1 Two-loop form factors via unitarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Two-loop dilatation operator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Remainder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

3

5

9

11

21

23
23
24
26
27

31

33
33
35
39

41
41
44
48

61
61
62
68
71

73
73
77
77

8

CONTENTS

6 Tree-level form factors

6.1 Stress-tensor supermultiplet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 On-shell diagrams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 R operators and integrability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4 Graßmannian integrals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

II Deformations

83
83
84
93
99

111

7 Introduction to integrable deformations

113
7.1 Single-trace action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
7.2 Relation to the undeformed theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114

8 Prewrapping in the β-deformation

117
8.1 Prewrapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
8.2 Complete one-loop dilatation operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119

9 Non-conformality of the γi-deformation

123
9.1 Multi-trace couplings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
9.2 Renormalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
9.3 Beta function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128

10 Anomalous dimensions in the γi-deformation

131
10.1 Classiﬁcation of diagrams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
10.2 Anomalous dimensions for L ≥ 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
10.3 Anomalous dimension for L = 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134

Conclusions

Outlook

Acknowledgements

139

143

145

A Feynman integrals

147
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
A.1 Conventions and lifting
A.2 Passarino-Veltman reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
A.3 Selected integrals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149

B Scattering amplitudes

151
B.1 MHV and MHV amplitudes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
B.2 Scalar NMHV six-point amplitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152

C Deformed theories

153
C.1 Renormalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
C.2 One-loop self energies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155

Bibliography

157

Publications

This thesis is based on the following publications by the author:

[1] J. Fokken, C. Sieg, and M. Wilhelm, “Non-conformality of γi-deformed N = 4 SYM
theory,” J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 47 (2014) 455401, arXiv:1308.4420 [hep-th].

[2] J. Fokken, C. Sieg, and M. Wilhelm, “The complete one-loop dilatation operator of

planar real β-deformed N = 4 SYM theory,” JHEP 1407 (2014) 150,
arXiv:1312.2959 [hep-th].

[3] J. Fokken, C. Sieg, and M. Wilhelm, “A piece of cake: the ground-state energies in
γi-deformed N = 4 SYM theory at leading wrapping order,” JHEP 1409 (2014) 78,
arXiv:1405.6712 [hep-th].

[4] M. Wilhelm, “Amplitudes, Form Factors and the Dilatation Operator in N = 4 SYM

Theory,” JHEP 1502 (2015) 149, arXiv:1410.6309 [hep-th].

[5] D. Nandan, C. Sieg, M. Wilhelm, and G. Yang, “Cutting through form factors and
cross sections of non-protected operators in N = 4 SYM,” JHEP 1506 (2015) 156,
arXiv:1410.8485 [hep-th].

[6] F. Loebbert, D. Nandan, C. Sieg, M. Wilhelm, and G. Yang, “On-Shell Methods for
the Two-Loop Dilatation Operator and Finite Remainders ,” JHEP 1510 (2015) 012,
arXiv:1504.06323 [hep-th].

[7] R. Frassek, D. Meidinger, D. Nandan, and M. Wilhelm, “On-shell Diagrams, Graß-

mannians and Integrability for Form Factors,” JHEP 1601 (2016) 182,
arXiv:1506.08192 [hep-th].

The author has also contributed to the following publications:

[8] B. Schroers, and M. Wilhelm, “Towards Non-Commutative Deformations of Rela-

tivistic Wave Equations in 2+1 Dimensions,” SIGMA 1410 (2014) 053,
arXiv:1402.7039 [hep-th].

[9] J. Fokken, and M. Wilhelm, “One-Loop Partition Functions in Deformed N = 4

SYM Theory,” JHEP 1503 (2015) 018, arXiv:1411.7695 [hep-th].

9

10

Publications

Introduction

Quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) is arguably the most successful theoretical framework to
describe and predict the fundamental interactions between the elementary particles, albeit
with the notable exception of gravity. In the form of the Standard Model of particle physics
(SM), it describes three of the four known fundamental forces of nature: electromagnetism,
the weak force and the strong force. A particle which is consistent with being the last
missing piece to the Standard Model, a Higgs boson, was recently discovered at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) [10, 11]. Using the Standard Model, theoretical predictions could
be made that were conﬁrmed by experiments with unprecedented precision. The magnetic
moment of the electron, for example, is known with an accuracy of 10−12, which is the
equivalent of knowing the distance from New York to Moscow by the width of a hair.

Despite these successes, however, quantum ﬁeld theory and in particular the Standard
Model are far from being completely understood. One reason for this is that many quan-
tities are currently only accessible via perturbation theory, in which the accuracy of the
prediction decreases as the strength of the interaction increases. While processes involv-
ing only the electromagnetic force and the weak force are relatively well accounted for
by considering only the ﬁrst quantum correction, those involving the strong force require
considerably more computational eﬀort. For instance, very involved calculations [12] are
required to determine whether all properties of the discovered Higgs boson agree with the
predictions of the Standard Model and where new physics might emerge. Moreover, the
strength of interactions is not constant but depends on the energy scale. At low energies,
the strong force, which is described by quantum chromodynamics (QCD), is so strong that
perturbation theory becomes meaningless. Hence, non-perturbative methods are required
e.g. to answer why the elementary quarks are conﬁned to hadrons such as protons and to
calculate the mass of the latter composite particles.

In order to develop a qualitative understanding of quantum ﬁeld theories in general as
well as calculational techniques that can later be applied to the Standard Model, it is useful
to look at the simplest non-trivial quantum ﬁeld theory in four dimensions. Arguably, this
is the maximally supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory (N = 4 SYM theory) [13], which is
sometimes also called the harmonic oscillator of the 21st century. As the Standard Model, it
is a non-Abelian gauge theory, but in contrast to the Standard Model, it enjoys many more
symmetries. Its ﬁeld content also consists of gauge bosons, fermions and scalars, but these
are all related by supersymmetry. Moreover, N = 4 SYM theory is conformally invariant,
which implies that the strength of the interactions is scale independent. Together with
Poincar´e invariance, these symmetries combine to the superconformal invariance with the
symmetry group PSU(2, 2|4).
Remarkably, we cannot only learn something about gauge theories by studying N = 4
SYM theory. Via the anti-de Sitter / conformal ﬁeld theory (AdS/CFT) correspondence
[14–16], N = 4 SYM theory is conjectured to be dual to a certain kind of string theory,

11

12

Introduction

namely type IIB superstring theory on the curved background AdS5 × S5, which is the
product of ﬁve-dimensional anti-de Sitter space and the ﬁve-sphere.1 String theory is a
candidate for quantum gravity, i.e. a quantum theory of gravity. Gravity, the fourth known
fundamental force of nature, cannot be incorporated into the framework of perturbative
quantum ﬁeld theory. Using the AdS/CFT correspondence, we can hence learn something
about string theory and thus gravity by studying gauge theory, and vice versa.

Both N = 4 SYM theory and type IIB superstring theory can be further simpliﬁed by
taking ’t Hooft’s planar limit [19]. In the gauge theory with gauge group U(N ) or SU(N ),
this amounts to taking the number of colours N → ∞ and the Yang-Mills coupling gYM → 0
while keeping the ’t Hooft coupling λ = g2
YMN ﬁxed. As a result, only Feynman diagrams
that are planar with respect to their colour structure contribute. The string theory, on the
other hand, becomes free.

A surprising property of both theories in the ’t Hooft limit is integrability; see [20] for
a review. The concept of integrability goes back to Hans Bethe. In 1931, he solved the
spectrum of the (1 + 1)-dimensional Heisenberg spin chain, a simple model for magnetism
in solid states, with an ansatz that now bears his name [21]. As some principles of in-
tegrability are fundamentally two-dimensional, its ﬁrst occurrence in a four-dimensional
theory, concretely in high-energy scattering in planar QCD as found by Lipatov [22], came
unexpected. Later, integrability was also found in N = 4 SYM theory in the spectrum of
anomalous dimensions of gauge-invariant local composite operators. These operators are
built from products of traces of elementary ﬁelds at the same point in spacetime. Confor-
mal symmetry signiﬁcantly constrains the form of their correlation functions, which are an
important class of observables in a gauge theory. In particular, it guarantees that a basis
of operators exists in which the two-point correlation functions are determined entirely by
the operators’ scaling dimensions. For so-called scalar conformal primary operators in this
basis, the non-vanishing two-point functions read

hO(x)O(y)i =

1

(x − y)2∆ ,

∆ = ∆0 + γ ,

(0.1)

where ∆ is the scaling dimension of the operator O. For operators saturating a Bogomolny-
Prasad-Sommerﬁeld-type bound [23, 24], called BPS operators, ∆ is protected by super-
symmetry and equals the classical scaling dimension ∆0; generically, however, ∆ receives
quantum corrections captured in terms of an anomalous part γ that is added to ∆0. The
scaling dimensions can be measured as eigenvalues of the generator of dilatations, the di-
latation operator, which is part of the conformal algebra. Diagonalising the dilatation
operator, though, is a non-trivial problem which can be simpliﬁed by restricting to certain
subsectors of the complete theory. It was found by Minahan and Zarembo that the action
of the one-loop dilatation operator of N = 4 SYM theory on single-trace operators in the
so-called SO(6) subsector maps to the action of the Hamiltonian of an integrable spin chain
and that it can hence be diagonalised by a Bethe ansatz [25]. This was later extended to
the complete one-loop dilatation operator [26], which was found in [27]. Postulating inte-
grability to be present also at higher loop orders, an all-loop asymptotic Bethe ansatz was
formulated [28]. This ansatz is valid provided that the range of the interaction is smaller
than the number L of ﬁelds in the single-trace operator, which corresponds to the length
of the spin chain, and hence for loop orders ℓ < L − 1.2

1See [17, 18] for reviews.
2Due to the structure of the interactions and the presence of supersymmetry, the asymptotic Bethe

ansatz in N = 4 SYM theory is in fact even valid for higher loop orders.

Introduction

13

A further important step in the development of integrability in N = 4 SYM theory
is marked by ﬁnite-size eﬀects. As gauge-invariant local composite operators are colour
singlets, Feynman diagrams which are non-planar in momentum space can still be planar
with respect to their colour structure and hence contribute in the ’t Hooft limit. One
mechanism giving rise to such diagrams is the so-called wrapping eﬀect [29],3 which stems
from interactions wrapping once around the operator. The leading wrapping correction to
the Konishi operator, which is the prime example of a non-protected operator, was calcu-
lated in [32–34]. The wrapping eﬀect is incorporated into the framework of integrability
in terms of L¨uscher corrections [35] and the thermodynamic Bethe ansatz (TBA) [36–41].
After several reformulations as Y-system [42], T-system, Q-system and ﬁnite system of
non-linear integral equations (FINLIE) [43], the present formulation as quantum spectral
curve (QSC) [44] is currently able to yield anomalous dimensions up to the tenth loop
order [45]. Furthermore, numeric results at any value of the coupling are available [46].
Thus, integrability opens up a window of quantitative non-perturbative understanding of
gauge theories.

The latter successes in solving the spectral problem, however, are much closer in spirit
to the string-theory description, where the classically integrable two-dimensional sigma
model serves as a natural starting point. The ﬁeld-theoretic origin of integrability is still
largely unclear. One further complication is that the length of the spin chain in N = 4
SYM theory is not constant beyond one loop order, which makes it hard to describe using
the solid-state-physics-inspired spin-chain techniques. Moreover, the complete dilatation
operator, and hence also the eigenstates that correspond to the anomalous dimensions, are
still only known at one-loop order.

Although most insights of N = 4 SYM theory into QCD are of qualitative nature, a
surprising quantitative relation exists as well. In [47], it was argued that the anomalous
dimensions of twist-two operators in N = 4 SYM theory are of uniform transcendentality
and given by the leading transcendental part of the corresponding expressions in QCD.
This relation is known as principle of maximal transcendentality; see [48–51] for further
discussions.

A further important advancement in understanding N = 4 SYM theory, and gauge
theories in general, was the development of so-called on-shell methods for scattering ampli-
tudes; see e.g. [52,53] for reviews. Scattering amplitudes describe the interaction of usually
two incoming elementary particles producing n−2 outgoing elementary particles. They are
the basic ingredients for cross sections, which are the observables determined experimen-
tally at colliders. Using crossing symmetry to choose all n elementary ﬁelds to be outgoing,
the n-point scattering amplitude is given by the overlap of an outgoing n-particle on-shell
state with the vacuum |0i:

An(1, 2, . . . , n) = h1, 2, . . . , n|0i .

(0.2)

i satisfy the mass-shell condition p2

Here, on-shell means that the external momenta pµ
i =
pµ
i pi,µ = m2, where m2 = 0 in the case of N = 4 SYM theory. Almost 30 years ago,
Parke and Taylor succeeded in writing down a closed formula for the tree-level scattering
amplitude of two polarised gluons of negative helicity with n−2 polarised gluons of positive
helicity in any Yang-Mills theory [54]. Proving this formula is greatly facilitated by choosing
a set of variables in which the on-shell condition of the external ﬁelds in four dimensions is
manifest, namely spinor-helicity variables λα
i . In the maximally supersymmetric N = 4

i , ˜λ ˙α

3See also [30, 31] for earlier discussions.

14

Introduction

SYM theory, their fermionic analogues are given by the expansion parameters ˜ηA
N = 4 on-shell superspace [55].
The main idea behind on-shell methods is to build amplitudes not via Feynman di-
agrams with virtual particles and gauge dependence. Instead, they are built from other
amplitudes with a lower number of legs or a lower number of loops, which are manifestly
gauge-invariant and whose external particles are real.

i of Nair’s

One important on-shell method is unitarity [56, 57], which uses the fact that the scat-
tering matrix is unitary and generalises the optical theorem. Via unitarity, loop-level
amplitudes can be reconstructed from their discontinuities, which are given by products of
lower-loop and tree-level amplitudes. These discontinuities can by calculated via so-called
cuts, which impose the on-shell condition on internal propagators. In generalised unitar-
ity [58], also cuts are taken that do not correspond to discontinuities but still lead to a
factorisation of the loop-level amplitude into lower-loop and tree-level amplitudes.

One problem in the calculation of amplitudes as well as other quantities is the occur-
rence of divergences, which need to be regularised. This can be achieved by continuing
the dimension of spacetime from D = 4 to D = 4 − 2ε. Although D-dimensional unitarity
exists, the on-shell unitarity method as well as other on-shell methods are most powerful
in four dimensions, where spinor-helicity variables can be used.
Integrands that vanish
in four dimensions can, however, integrate to expressions that are non-vanishing in four
dimensions. At one-loop level, they evaluate to rational terms, which have no discontinu-
ities. Hence, they cannot be reconstructed via four-dimensional unitarity. In N = 4 SYM
theory, however, all one-loop amplitudes were proven to be cut-constructible [56].
The structure of divergences in amplitudes is well understood. Since N = 4 SYM
theory is conformally invariant, no ultraviolet (UV) divergences arise in amplitudes, only
infrared (IR) divergences. Based on the universality and exponentiation properties of the
latter, Bern, Dixon and Smirnov (BDS) conjectured that the all-loop expression for the
logarithm of the amplitude is completely determined by the IR structure and the one-loop
ﬁnite part [59].4,5 Although correct for four and ﬁve points, the BDS ansatz deviates from
the complete amplitude at higher points [64]. The diﬀerence, which was termed remainder
function, was ﬁrst studied for six points in [65–67]. It exhibits uniform transcendentality
and is composed of (generalised) polylogarithms, which can be simpliﬁed using the Hopf-
algebraic structure of these functions, in particular the so-called symbol [68, 69]; see [70]
for a review.6,7

Further important on-shell methods, namely Cachazo-Svrcek-Witten (CSW) [76] and
Britto-Cachazo-Feng-Witten (BCFW) [77,78] recursion relations, make use of the fact that
tree-level amplitudes as well as their loop-level integrands are analytic functions of the
external momenta. The poles of these functions correspond to propagators going on-shell,
resulting in the factorisation of the amplitude into lower-point amplitudes or the forward
limit of a lower-loop amplitude with two additional points. Using these methods, all tree-
level amplitudes of N = 4 SYM theory could be calculated [79] as well as the unregularised
integrand of all loop-level amplitudes [80]. To understand the structure and the symmetries

4See also the previous studies [60] including those in QCD [61, 62].
5The coeﬃcient of the leading IR divergence, the so-called cusp anomalous dimension, was actually

determined via integrability for all values of the ’t Hooft coupling [63].

6Using the structure of the occurring transcendental functions, the six-point remainders can currently

be bootstrapped up to four-loop order; see [71, 72] and references therein.

7For higher loops and points, examples of amplitudes are known that contain also elliptic functions

[73–75].

Introduction

15

of these results, also the formulation in twistor [81] and momentum-twistor [82] variables
has been very useful.

Tree-level scattering amplitudes and their unregularised loop-level integrands can also
be represented by so-called on-shell diagrams [74], which furthermore yield the leading
singularities of loop-level amplitudes.8 Moreover, all tree-level amplitudes can be obtained
as residues of integrating a certain on-shell form over the Graßmannian manifold Gr(n, k),
i.e. the set of k-planes in n-dimensional space [90–92]. Here, k is the maximally-helicity-
violating (MHV) degree of the amplitude, which corresponds to a degree of 4k in the
fermionic ˜η variables. Amplitudes with k = 2 are denoted as MHV, amplitudes with
k = 3 as next-to-MHV (NMHV) and amplitudes with general k as Nk−2MHV. Furthermore,
amplitudes can be understood geometrically as volumes of polytopes that triangulate the
so-called amplituhedron [93–95], which also generalises to loop level.

In addition to providing qualitative understanding of scattering amplitudes and calcu-
lational techniques, the study of scattering amplitudes in N = 4 SYM theory can also serve
as an intermediate step in calculating scattering amplitudes in pure Yang-Mills theory or
massless QCD. The latter theories share the computationally most challenging part, the
gauge ﬁelds, with N = 4 SYM theory. Therefore, the diﬀerences can be accounted for as
corrections that are easier to calculate; see e.g. [56].9
For several years, the developments in scattering amplitudes and integrability proceeded
independently. In [97], however, it was found that the superconformal symmetry and the
newly discovered dual superconformal symmetry [98] of scattering amplitudes combine
into a Yangian symmetry, which is a smoking gun of integrability. Moreover, based on
the fact that both objects are completely ﬁxed by symmetry, Benjamin Zwiebel found a
connection between the leading length-changing contributions to the dilatation operator
and all tree-level amplitudes [99]. In particular, it connects the complete one-loop dilatation
operator to the four-point tree-level amplitude.10 These ﬁndings inspired the study of the
integrable structure of scattering amplitudes at weak coupling as well as their deformation
with respect to the central-charge extension of PSU(2, 2|4) [100–110].
In particular, a
spin chain appeared in this context as well, albeit a slightly diﬀerent one. Via the duality
between scattering amplitudes and Wilson loops [111], the integrable structure of scattering
amplitudes is currently better understood at strong coupling, where it can be mapped to
a minimal surface problem [111] that can be solved via a Y-system [112, 113]. Recently,
much progress using the latter approach has also been made at ﬁnite coupling in certain
kinematic regimes; see [114, 115] and references therein.

Given the success of on-shell methods for scattering amplitudes and the interesting
structures found in them, it is an intriguing question whether they may be generalised to
quantities that include one or more composite operators. An ideal starting point to answer
this question is given by form factors. Form factors describe the overlap of a state created
by a composite operator O from the vacuum with an n-particle on-shell state, i.e.

FO,n(1, . . . , n; x) = h1, . . . , n|O(x)|0i .

(0.3)

In contrast to the elementary ﬁelds in the on-shell state, the momentum q associated
with the composite operator via a Fourier transformation does not satisfy the on-shell

8More recently, on-shell diagrams were also studied for non-planar amplitudes [83–88] and planar am-

plitudes in less supersymmetric theories [74, 89].

9At tree level, the contributions from the diﬀering ﬁeld content can even be projected out [96].
10For this special case, this connection goes back to Niklas Beisert.

16

Introduction

condition, i.e. q2 6= 0, and we hence call it oﬀ-shell. Containing n on-shell ﬁelds and
one oﬀ-shell composite operator, form factors form a bridge between the purely on-shell
scattering amplitudes and the purely oﬀ-shell correlation functions. Moreover, generalised
form factors, which contain multiple operators, are the most general correlators composed
of local objects alone.

Similar to scattering amplitudes, form factors occur in many physical applications in-
cluding collider physics. For instance, the composite operator can arise as part of a vertex
in an eﬀective Lagrangian. A concrete example for this is the dominant Higgs production
mechanism at the LHC, in which two gluons fuse to a Higgs boson via a top-quark loop. As
the top mass is much larger than the Higgs mass, the top-quark loop can be integrated out
to obtain an eﬀective dimension-ﬁve operator H tr(Fµν F µν ), see e.g. [116].11 In N = 4 SYM
theory, tr(Fµν F µν ) is part of the stress-tensor supermultiplet, which contains tr(φ14φ14)
as its lowest component. The operator can also be the (conserved) current describing a
two-particle scattering such as e+e− annihilation into a virtual photon or Drell-Yan scat-
tering. Moreover, form factors appear in the calculation of ‘event shapes’ such as energy or
charge correlation functions [117–120] as well as deep inelastic scattering in N = 4 SYM
theory [121]. Form factors have also played an important role in understanding the expo-
nentiation and universal structure of IR divergences, which in turn helped to understand
scattering amplitudes [122–125].

Form factors in N = 4 SYM theory were ﬁrst studied 30 years ago by van Neerven [126].
Interest resurged when a description at strong coupling was found via the AdS/CFT cor-
respondence as a minimal surface problem [64]. This minimal surface problem is similar
to the one of amplitudes and can also be solved via integrability techniques [127, 128].
Many studies at weak coupling followed [50,118,129–141]. In particular, it was shown that
many of the successful on-shell techniques that were developed in the context of scattering
amplitudes can also be applied to form factors. Concretely, spinor-helicity variables [129],
Nair’s N = 4 on-shell superspace [131], twistor [129] and momentum-twistor [131] variables,
BCFW [129] and CSW recursion relations [131] as well as (generalised) unitarity [129,136]
were shown to be applicable. In certain examples, also colour-kinematic duality [142] was
found to be present [137]. Furthermore, an interpretation of the tree-level expressions in
terms of the volume of polytopes exists [140]. Interestingly, the remainder of the two-loop
three-point form factor of tr(φ14φ14) [134] was found to match the highest transcendentality
part of the remainder of the Higgs-to-three-gluon amplitude in QCD [143], thus extending
the maximal transcendentality principle from numbers to functions of the kinematic vari-
ables.12 Via generalised unitarity, also correlation functions can be built using amplitudes,
form factors and generalised form factors as building blocks [118]. As for scattering ampli-
tudes, the complexity of calculating form factors increases with the number of loops and
external ﬁelds. A form factor with the minimal number of external ﬁelds, namely as many
as there are ﬁelds in the operator, is called a minimal form factor.

However, most previous studies have focused on the form factors of the stress-tensor
supermultiplet and its lowest component tr(φ14φ14) as well as its generalisation to tr(φL
14).
The minimal form factors of these operators have been calculated up to three-loop order [50]
and two loop-order [139], respectively.13 The only exceptions are operators from the SU(2)
and SL(2) subsectors, whose tree-level MHV form factors were given in [118], and the

11In particular, this approximation is used in the calculation of [12].
12A relation between the transcendental functions describing energy-energy correlation in N = 4 SYM

theory and QCD was also found in [144].

13The integrand of the minimal form factor of tr(φ14φ14) is even known up to four-loop order [137, 145].

Introduction

17

Konishi operator, whose minimal one-loop form factor was calculated in [130].14 In fact,
among experts, it has been a vexing problem how to calculate the minimal two-loop Konishi
form factor via unitarity. Moreover, not all interesting structures that were discovered
for scattering amplitudes have found a counterpart for form factors yet and the role of
integrability for form factors at weak coupling has remained unclear.

In the ﬁrst part of this thesis, which is based on a series of papers [4–7] by the present

author and collaborators, we focus on form factors.

We calculate form factors of general, protected as well as non-protected, operators at
various loop orders and for various numbers of external points. We show that the minimal
tree-level form factor of a generic operator is essentially given by considering the operator
in the oscillator representation [27, 146, 147] of the spin-chain picture and replacing the
oscillators by super-spinor-helicity variables. Moreover, the generators of the superconfor-
mal algebra in the corresponding representations are related by the same replacement.15 In
particular, this allows us to use on-shell techniques from the study of scattering amplitudes
to determine the dilatation operator, which is the spin-chain Hamiltonian. Hence, minimal
form factors realise the spin chain of the spectral problem of N = 4 SYM theory in the
language of scattering amplitudes.
At one-loop level, we calculate the cut-constructible part of the minimal form factor of
any operator via generalised unitarity and extract the complete one-loop dilatation oper-
ator from its UV divergence. In particular, this yields a ﬁeld-theoretic derivation of the
connection between the one-loop dilatation operator and the four-point amplitude found
in [99]. Furthermore, we calculate the minimal form factor of the Konishi primary op-
erator up to two-loop order using unitarity and obtain the two-loop Konishi anomalous
dimension from it, thus solving this long known problem. The occurrence of general op-
erators, such as the Konishi operator, requires an extension of the unitarity method to
include the correct regularisation. At one-loop order this extension leads to a new kind of
rational terms, whereas from two-loop order on it aﬀects also the divergent contributions
and hence the dilatation operator. We also calculate the two-loop minimal form factors
in the SU(2) sector and extract the corresponding dilatation operator. In contrast to the
aforementioned cases, this case involves both the mixing of UV and IR divergences and
operator mixing, such that the exponentiation of the divergences takes an operatorial form.
Moreover, we calculate the two-loop remainder function, which is an operator in this case,
via the BDS ansatz, which has to be promoted to an operatorial form as well. Its matrix
elements satisfy linear relations which are a consequence of Ward identities for the form
factor. For generic operators, the remainder function is not of uniform transcendentality.
However, its maximally transcendental part is universal and agrees with the remainder
of the BPS operator tr(φL
14) calculated in [139], thus extending the principle of maximal
transcendentality even further.16

14We address an important subtlety occurring in the latter result further below.
15This replacement was already studied in [148] and also played an important role in [99]. However, no

connection to form factors was made in these works.

16Anomalous dimensions and the dilatation operator can also be determined via on-shell methods and
correlation functions. In [118], certain matrix elements of the one-loop dilatation operator in the SL(2)
sector were obtained via three-point functions and generalised unitarity.
In [149], which appeared con-
temporaneously with [4] by the present author, the one-loop dilatation operator in the SO(6) sector was
calculated via two-point functions and the twistor action. In [5], the present author and collaborators have
calculated the two-loop Konishi anomalous dimension also via two-point functions and unitarity, where
the same subtlety in the regularisation appears as for form factors. The results of [149] were later re-
produced using MHV rules and generalised unitarity in [150] and [151], respectively. For further on-shell

18

Introduction

Furthermore, we study tree-level form factors for a generic number of external on-shell
ﬁelds with a focus on the stress-tensor supermultiplet. We extend on-shell diagrams to
describe form factors, which requires to include the minimal form factor as an additional
building block. This allows us to ﬁnd a Graßmannian integral representation of form factors
in spinor-helicity variables, twistors and momentum twistors. Moreover, we introduce a
central-charge deformation of form factors and show that they can be constructed via the
integrability-based technique of R operators. In the non-minimal case, form factors embed
the spin chain of the spectral problem in the one that appeared in the study of scattering
amplitudes. In particular, we ﬁnd that form factors are eigenstates of the transfer matrix
of the latter spin chain provided that the corresponding operators are eigenstates of the
transfer matrix of the former spin chain. This implies the existence of a tower of conserved
charges and symmetry under the action of a part of the Yangian.17

Given the success of integrability in N = 4 SYM theory, in particular in the planar
spectrum of anomalous dimensions, as well as its many remarkable properties, such as
the existence of an AdS/CFT dual, the question arises whether more theories with these
properties can be found that can be equally solved via integrability. Moreover, one wonders
how integrability is related to conformal symmetry and the high amount of supersymmetry
and what its origin is. These questions can be addressed by studying deformations of N = 4
SYM theory in which the high amount of (super)symmetry is reduced in a controlled
way. The deformations fall into two classes: discrete orbifold theories and continuous
deformations, see [156, 157] for reviews.

The prime example of a continuous deformation is the so-called β-deformation, which
has one real deformation parameter β. It is a special case of the N = 1 supersymmetric
exactly marginal deformations of N = 4 SYM theory, which were classiﬁed by Leigh
and Strassler [158]. In [159], Lunin and Maldacena conjectured the β-deformation to be
dual to type IIB superstring theory on a certain deformed background. This background
can be constructed by applying a sequence of a T duality, a shift (s) along an angular
coordinate and another T duality to the S5 factor of AdS5 × S5. Applying three such TsT
transformations instead, Frolov generalised this setup to the non-supersymmetric three-
parameter γi-deformation [160], which reduces to the β-deformation in the limit where all
real deformation parameters γi, i = 1, 2, 3, are equal.

Both the β- and the γi-deformation can be formulated in terms of a Moyal-like ∗-
product, which replaces the usual product of ﬁelds in the action. A similar ∗-product
occurs in a certain type of spacetime non-commutative ﬁeld theories, where the deformation
parameter is related to the Planck constant ; see [161] for a review. In the latter theories,
planar diagrams of elementary interactions can be related to their undeformed counterparts
via a theorem by Thomas Filk [162]. This theorem can be adapted to planar single-trace
diagrams in the β- and the γi-deformation, in particular to the diagrams that yield the
asymptotic dilatation operator density.18 This was used in [165] to relate the asymptotic
one-loop dilatation operator in the deformed theories to the one in N = 4 SYM theory
and to formulate an asymptotic Bethe ansatz, showing that the deformed theories are
asymptotically integrable, i.e. integrable in the absence of ﬁnite-size eﬀects. Moreover, it
was shown that the β- and the γi-deformation are the most general N = 1 supersymmetric

approaches to correlation functions using a spacetime version of generalised unitarity and twistor-space
Lagrangian-insertion techniques, see [152, 153] and [154], respectively.

17Some of the results presented in [7] were also independently found in [155].
18For discussions in the context of orbifold theories, see [163, 164].

Introduction

19

14 φ1

and non-supersymmetric continuous asymptotically integrable ﬁeld-theory deformations of
N = 4 SYM theory, respectively.
Further checks of integrability in the deformed theories must hence go beyond the
asymptotic level, to where ﬁnite-size eﬀects contribute. Their corresponding subdiagrams
of elementary interactions are non-planar, and therefore, a priori, Filk’s theorem is not
applicable. In [166], the anomalous dimensions of the so-called single-impurity states in the
β-deformation were calculated via Feynman diagrams at leading wrapping order, yielding
explicit results for 3 ≤ ℓ = L ≤ 11. These are single-trace states in the SU(2) sector which
are composed of one complex scalar of one kind and L− 1 complex scalars of a second kind,
say tr(φL−1
24). Being protected in the undeformed theory, their anomalous dimensions
receive contributions only due to the presence of the deformation. Using integrability,
the results of [166] have been reproduced in [167] for β = 1
2 and in [168] and [169] for
generic β, based on L¨uscher corrections, Y-system and TBA equations, respectively. At
L = 2, however, the integrability-based predictions diverge. In the γi-deformation, also
a state composed of only one kind of complex scalars, say tr(φL
In
contrast to the single-impurity states in the β-deformation, which receive also corrections
from deformed single-trace interactions, the anomalous dimensions of the vacuum states
in the γi-deformation receive contributions only from ﬁnite-size eﬀects. This makes them
particularly well suited for testing the non-trivial eﬀects of the deformation on integrability.
For these states, which correspond to the vacuum of the spin chain, integrability-based
predictions exist up to double-wrapping order ℓ = 2L using L¨uscher corrections, the TBA
and the Y-system [170].19 However, also in this case, the integrability-based prediction
diverges for L = 2.20

14), is not protected.

An interesting property of the deformed theories which does not have a counterpart
in N = 4 SYM theory is related to the choice of U(N ) or SU(N ) as gauge group.
In
N = 4 SYM theory, all interactions are of commutator type, i.e. the interaction part of
the action can be formulated such that the colour matrices of any given ﬁeld only occur
in a commutator. Hence, the additional U(1) mode in the theory with gauge group U(N )
decouples from all interaction and is thus free. As a consequence, the undeformed theories
with gauge group U(N ) and SU(N ) are essentially the same.

In the deformed theories, the commutators are replaced by ∗-commutators, from which
the U(1) mode no longer decouples. The theories with gauge group U(N ) and SU(N ) are
hence diﬀerent [176, 177].21 Moreover, the β-deformed theory with gauge group U(N ) is
not even conformally invariant, as quantum corrections induce the running of a double-
trace coupling in the component action [178]. In the conformally invariant β-deformation
with gauge group SU(N ), this coupling is at its non-vanishing IR ﬁxed point; its ﬁxed-
point value can be obtained by integrating out the auxiliary ﬁelds in the deformed action
in N = 1 superspace, see e.g. [1]. Furthermore, this double-trace coupling is responsible
for making the planar one-loop anomalous dimension of tr(φ14φ24), the aforementioned
single-impurity state with L = 2, vanish for gauge group SU(N ) while it is non-vanishing
for gauge group U(N ) [176].

In contrast to single-trace couplings, double-trace couplings are in general not restricted

19These results were also recently reproduced at single-wrapping order using the QSC [171].
20A similar divergence for the vacuum state tr(φ14φ14) has previously occurred in the undeformed theory
[172] and in non-supersymmetric orbifold theories [173].
In the undeformed theory, the divergence can
be regularised using a twist in the AdS5 direction to show that the anomalous dimension of tr(φ14φ14)
vanishes [174]. This regularisation extends to the vacuum state in the β-deformation [175].

21See [177] also for a discussion in the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence.

20

Introduction

by Filk’s theorem. In particular, they are not covered by the proofs of conformal invariance
of the planar deformed theories [179,180], which only apply to the single-trace couplings. In
non-supersymmetric orbifold theories, running double-trace couplings without ﬁxed point
were found, which break conformal invariance [181]. These ﬁndings amounted to a no-
go theorem that no perturbatively accessible conformally invariant non-supersymmetric
orbifold theory can exist [182].22 Moreover, these running double-trace couplings were
related to the occurrence of tachyons in the dual string theory [181], similar to the case for
non-commutative ﬁeld theories treated in [184].23

In the second part of this thesis, we discuss further developments in the ﬁeld of defor-
mations based on the series of papers [1–3] by the present author and collaborators. In
particular, we study the inﬂuence of double-trace couplings and the double-trace structure
in the SU(N ) propagator on correlation functions of general operators. It can be under-
stood in terms of a new kind of ﬁnite-size eﬀect, which starts to aﬀect operators one loop
order earlier than the wrapping eﬀect and which we hence call prewrapping. Based on the
mechanism behind it, we classify which operators are potentially aﬀected by prewrapping.
Moreover, we incorporate prewrapping and wrapping into the asymptotic one-loop dilata-
tion operator of [165] to obtain the complete one-loop dilatation operator of the planar
β-deformation.24

We show that the γi-deformation in the form proposed in [160] is not conformally
invariant due to a running double-trace coupling without ﬁxed point, neither for gauge
group U(N ) nor SU(N ). Furthermore, it cannot be rendered conformally invariant by
including further multi-trace couplings that fulﬁl a set of minimal requirements. We then
calculate the anomalous dimension of the vacuum states tr(φL
14) in the γi-deformation
at critical wrapping order ℓ = L. For L ≥ 3, the calculation can be reduced to four
Feynman diagrams which can be evaluated analytically for any L. We ﬁnd a perfect match
with the prediction of integrability. For L = 2, the ﬁnite planar two-loop anomalous
dimension depends on the running double-trace coupling and hence on the renormalisation
scheme. This explicitly demonstrates that the theory is not conformally invariant, not even
in the planar limit. Interestingly, the (unresolved) divergences in the integrability-based
description occur in the same cases in which the double-trace couplings contribute.

22The above arguments exclude ﬁxed points of the double-trace coupling as a function of the Yang-Mills
coupling, i.e. ﬁxed lines. They cannot exclude Banks-Zaks ﬁxed points [183] though, which are isolated
ﬁxed points at some ﬁnite but perturbatively accessible value of the Yang-Mills coupling.

23Non-supersymmetric orientifolds of type 0 B string theory can be tachyon free, see e.g. [185–187], and

the corresponding gauge theory was shown to have no running double-trace couplings [188].

24At one-loop order, prewrapping aﬀects operators of length two for gauge group SU(N ) while wrapping

aﬀects operators of length one for gauge group U(N ).

Overview

This work is structured as follows.

In chapter 1, we give a short introduction to N = 4 SYM theory and other concepts
that will be important in both parts of this work. These include the spin-chain picture of
composite operators, the ’t Hooft limit and the complete one-loop dilatation operator of
N = 4 SYM theory.
in N = 4 SYM theory and encompasses chapters 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6.
In the ﬁrst section of chapter 2, we introduce important concepts for form factors as
well as our conventions and notation. Based on [4], we then calculate the minimal tree-level
form factors for generic composite operators.

The main body of this thesis in divided into two parts. The ﬁrst part treats form factors

In chapter 3, which is largely based on [4], we start to calculate loop corrections to the
minimal form factors. In section 3.1, we discuss the general structure of loop corrections
to the minimal form factors and how one can read oﬀ the dilatation operator from them.
In section 3.2, we give a pedagogical example of using the on-shell unitarity method to
calculate the minimal one-loop form factors in the SU(2) sector and the corresponding
one-loop dilatation operator. We then calculate the cut-constructible part of the one-loop
correction to the minimal form factor of a generic operator using generalised unitarity in
section 3.3. From its UV divergence, we can read oﬀ the complete one-loop dilatation
operator of N = 4 SYM theory.
In chapter 4, which is based on [5], we demonstrate that on-shell methods and form
factors can also be employed to calculate anomalous dimensions at two-loop level using
the Konishi primary operator as an example. After giving a short introduction to this
operator in section 4.1, we calculate its minimal one- and two-loop form factors via the
unitarity method in section 4.2. However, for operators like the Konishi primary operator,
important subtleties occur when using four-dimensional on-shell methods, which require
the extension of these methods. In section 4.3, we analyse these subtleties in detail and
show how to treat them correctly. We give the resulting form factors in section 4.4.

A further challenge at two-loop order, the non-trivial exponentiation of UV and IR
divergences due to operator mixing, is tackled in chapter 5, where we treat the two-loop
form factors in the SU(2) sector. In section 5.1, we calculate the two-loop minimal form
factors of all operators in the SU(2) sector. We extract the two-loop dilatation operator in
section 5.2. In section 5.3, we calculate the corresponding ﬁnite remainder functions via
the BDS ansatz, which has to be promoted to an operatorial form, and ﬁnd interesting
universal behaviour with respect to their transcendentality.

In chapter 6, which is based on [7], we consider tree-level form factors with a focus
on the stress-tensor supermultiplet. After a short introduction to this supermultiplet and
its form factors in section 6.1, we brieﬂy introduce on-shell diagrams and extend them to
form factors in section 6.2. We then deﬁne a central-charge deformation for form factors

21

22

Overview

and show how to systematically construct them via the integrability-based method of R
operators in section 6.3. In section 6.4, we ﬁnd a Graßmannian integral in spinor-helicity
variables, twistors and momentum twistors, whose residues yield the form factors.

The second part of this work, which encompasses chapters 7, 8, 9 and 10, treats defor-
mations of N = 4 SYM theory. We give somewhat less details on the calculations in this
part as compared to the more recent work on form factors.
In chapter 7, we give a short introduction to the β- and γi-deformation of N = 4
SYM theory. Based on [2], we then discuss and extend the relation between the deformed
theories and their undeformed parent theory in section 7.2.

In chapter 8, which is largely based on [2], we analyse the eﬀect of double-trace cou-
plings in the β-deformation on two-point functions and the spectrum of planar anomalous
dimensions. In section 8.1, we ﬁnd that these couplings contribute at leading order in N via
a new kind of ﬁnite-size eﬀect, which we call prewrapping, and we determine which states
are potentially aﬀected by it. In section 8.2, we calculate the corresponding ﬁnite-size cor-
rections to the asymptotic dilatation operator to obtain the complete one-loop dilatation
operator of the planar β-deformation.

In chapter 9, based on [1], we show that the three-parameter non-supersymmetric γi-
deformation proposed in [160] is not conformally invariant. In section 9.1, we formulate
minimal requirements on multi-trace couplings that can be added to the single-trace part of
the action and list all couplings that fulﬁl them. In section 9.2, we then show that for any
choice of the tree-level values of these couplings, a particular double-trace is renormalised
non-trivially. Moreover, its beta function has no zeros such that it runs without ﬁxed
points, as is shown in section 9.3. Hence, conformal symmetry is broken. Moreover,
this also aﬀects the spectrum of planar anomalous dimensions, as is demonstrated in the
subsequent chapter.

In chapter 10, which is based on [3], we calculate the planar anomalous dimensions of
the operators tr(φL
14) in the γi-deformation at the critical wrapping order ℓ = L. In section
10.1, we classify all diagrams contributing to the renormalisation of these operators with
respect to their deformation dependence. In the case L ≥ 3, which is covered in section
10.2, this reduces the calculational eﬀort to only four Feynman diagrams, which can be
evaluated analytically for any ℓ = L. We ﬁnd perfect agreement with the integrability-
based prediction of [170]. In the case L = 2, treated in section 10.3, also the previously
discussed running double-trace coupling contributes, such that the anomalous dimension
is ﬁnite but depends on the renormalisation scheme.

We conclude with a summary of our results and an outlook on interesting directions
for further research. Moreover, several appendices are provided. Appendix A contains
our conventions and several explicit expressions for Feynman integrals. We give explicit
expressions for scattering amplitudes in appendix B. In appendix C, we give a short review
on the renormalisation of ﬁelds, couplings and composite operators, which provides further
details on the calculations in the second part of this work.

Chapter 1

N = 4 SYM theory

In this chapter, we give a short introduction to N = 4 SYM theory. In particular, we intro-
duce important concepts that will be required in both parts of this work. For introductions
to N = 4 SYM theory that go beyond what is covered here, see [30, 189].

1.1 Field content, action and symmetries

The maximally supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory in four dimensions, termed N = 4 SYM
theory, was ﬁrst constructed via dimensional reduction of N = 1 SYM theory in ten
dimensions by Brink, Schwarz and Scherk almost forty years ago [13]. Although it is now
argued to be the simplest quantum ﬁeld theory [190], this is not manifest in its ﬁeld content
or action.

As follows from the dimensional reduction, the ﬁeld content of N = 4 SYM theory
consists of one gauge ﬁeld Aµ with µ = 0, 1, 2, 3, four fermions ψA
α with α = 1, 2, A =
1, 2, 3, 4 transforming in the anti-fundamental representation of SU(4), four antifermions
¯ψ ˙αA with ˙α = ˙1, ˙2 transforming in the fundamental representation of SU(4) as well as
six real scalars φI with I = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 transforming in the fundamental representation
of SO(6). Using the matrices σµ
α ˙α = (1, σ1, σ2, σ3)α ˙α, where σi are the Pauli matrices,
we can exchange a Lorentz index µ for a pair of spinor indices α,
˙α, which exploits the
isomorphism between (the algebras of) the Lorentz group and SU(2)×SU(2). For instance,
we deﬁne Aα ˙α = σµ
α ˙αAµ. Note that throughout this work we are using Einstein’s summation
convention, i.e. a pair of repeated indices is implicitly summed over. Similarly, we can
exploit the isomorphism between (the algebras of) SO(6) and SU(4) to deﬁne scalars φAB =
σI
ABφI via the corresponding matrices σI
AB. These scalars transform in the antisymmetric
representation of SU(4), φAB = −φBA, and satisfy (φAB)∗ = φAB = 1
2 ǫABCDφCD, where
ǫABCD is the completely antisymmetric tensor in four dimensions. Moreover, in particular
in the context of the second part of this work, it is useful to deﬁne complex scalars φi = φi4,
¯φi = (φi)∗ with i = 1, 2, 3, which transform in the fundamental and anti-fundamental
representations of SU(3) ⊂ SU(4), respectively.
group. We deﬁne the covariant derivative

All ﬁelds in N = 4 SYM theory transform in the adjoint representation of the gauge

and the ﬁeld strength

Dµ = ∂µ − igYM[Aµ , • ]

Fµν =

i

gYM

[ Dµ , Dν ] .

23

(1.1)

(1.2)

24

1 N = 4 SYM theory

In Euclidean signature, the action of N = 4 is given by

S =Z d4x tr(cid:18) −

1
4

αψαA

F µν Fµν − (Dµ ¯φj) Dµ φj + i ¯ψ ˙αA D ˙α
+ gYM(cid:16) i
j , ψαk} + φj{ ¯ψ ˙α4 , ¯ψj

ǫijkφi{ψα

2
[ ¯φj , φj][ ¯φk , φk] +

˙α} + h.c.(cid:17)
[ ¯φj , ¯φk][φj , φk](cid:19) ,

g2
YM
2

g2
YM
4

−

(1.3)

where h.c. denotes Hermitian conjugation and ǫijk is the completely antisymmetric tensor
in three dimensions. In fact, the extended N = 4 supersymmetry ﬁxes the action (1.3)
uniquely up to the choice of the gauge group.
Throughout this work, we consider the gauge group to be either SU(N ) or U(N ). We

denote their generators as (Ta)i

j, where i, j = 1, . . . , N and a = s, . . . , N 2 − 1. Here,
s =(0

for U(N ) ,
for SU(N ) .

1

(1.4)

While immaterial for N = 4 SYM theory, the diﬀerence between choosing either SU(N )
or U(N ) as gauge group plays a major role in its deformations, which are treated in the
second part of this work. We normalise the generators via

where δab denotes the Kronecker delta. They satisfy the completeness relation

tr(Ta Tb) = δab ,

(Ta)i

N 2−1Xa=s

j(Ta)k

l = δi

l δk
j −

s
N

j δk
δi
l .

(1.5)

(1.6)

We expand the elementary ﬁelds in terms of the gauge group generators as Aµ = Aa
etc.

µ Ta,

In addition to the N = 4 super Poincar´e group, N = 4 SYM theory is invariant
under the conformal group. These two symmetry groups combine into the larger N = 4
It is generated by the translations Pα ˙α, the super
superconformal group PSU(2, 2|4).
translations QαA and ˙Q ˙α
A, the dilatations D, the special conformal transformations Kα ˙α,
the special superconformal transformations SαA and ˙SA
˙α as well as the SU(2), SU(2) and
SU(4) rotations Lα
B, respectively. Moreover, we can add the central charge C
and the hypercharge B in order to obtain U(2, 2|4). The commutation relations of these
generators are rather lengthy but follow immediately from the oscillator representation
given in (1.16) and (1.17) below.

and RA

β , ˙L ˙α
˙β

1.2 Composite operators

Apart from the elementary ﬁelds, which can occur e.g. in asymptotic scattering states, an
important class of objects are gauge-invariant local composite operators.

Local composite operators O(x) contain products of ﬁelds evaluated at a common

spacetime point x. Using the momentum generators Pµ, we can write

O(x) = eixP O(0) e−ixP ,

(1.7)

1.2 Composite operators

25

where xP = xµPµ is understood. It follows that the action of any generator J of PSU(2, 2|4)
on O(x) is entirely determined by the action of PSU(2, 2|4) on O(0):
JO(x) = eixP(cid:16)e−ixP J eixP(cid:17)O(0) e−ixP
= eixP(cid:18)J + (−i)xµ[Pµ , J] +
(−i)2
2!

xµxν [Pµ , [Pν , J]] + . . .(cid:19) O(0) e−ixP ,

(1.8)

where the sum actually terminates at the third term or before. Based on these arguments,
it suﬃces to look at local composite operators O(x) for x = 0.
In order to obtain gauge-invariant expressions, we can take traces of products of ﬁelds
that transform covariantly under gauge transformations. These include the scalar ﬁelds
φAB, the antifermions ¯ψ ˙αA and the fermions ψαABC = ǫABCDψD
α .1 The gauge ﬁeld Aµ
itself does not transform covariantly under gauge transformations. It can, however, occur
in the gauge-covariant combinations of the covariant derivative

Dα ˙α = Dµ(σµ)α ˙α

and the ﬁeld strength

Fαβ ˙α ˙β = Fµν (σµ)α ˙α(σν )β ˙β = −

√2ǫ ˙α ˙βFαβ −

√2ǫαβ ¯F ˙α ˙β ,

(1.9)

(1.10)

which we have split into its self-dual part Fαβ and its anti-self-dual part ¯F ˙α ˙β. We normalise
the occurring antisymmetric tensors in two dimensions as ǫ21 = ǫ12 = ǫ ˙2 ˙1 = ǫ ˙1 ˙2 = 1. The
covariant derivatives can act on all ﬁelds that transform covariantly under gauge transfor-
mations to yield further ﬁelds that transform covariantly under gauge transformations.

Using the Bianchi identity2

D[µ Fνρ] = 0 ,

(1.11)

the deﬁnition of the ﬁeld strength (1.2) and (1.10) as well as the equations of motion,
every ﬁeld with antisymmetric α and ˙α indices can be replaced by a sum of ﬁelds that
are individually symmetric under the exchange of all α and ˙α indices. Thus, we arrive at
irreducible ﬁelds composing the alphabet

A = { D(α1 ˙α1 ··· Dαk ˙αk Fαk+1αk+2),
D(α1 ˙α1 ··· Dαk ˙αk ψαk+1)ABC ,
D(α1 ˙α1 ··· Dαk ˙αk) φAB,
D(α1 ˙α1 ··· Dαk ˙αk
D(α1 ˙α1 ··· Dαk ˙αk

¯ψ ˙αk+1)A,
¯F ˙αk+1 ˙αk+2)} ,

(1.12)

where k ≥ 0 and (. . . ) denotes symmetrisation in all αi as well as all ˙αi.
The irreducible ﬁelds (1.12) transform in the so-called singleton representation VS of
PSU(2, 2|4) and form the spin chain of N = 4 SYM theory. The singleton representation
can be constructed by two sets of bosonic oscillators ai,α, a†α
i as well as one
set of fermionic oscillators di,A, d†A
[27,146,147]. These satisfy the following non-vanishing
i
commutation relations:

i and bi, ˙α, b† ˙α

[ai,α , a†β

j ] = δβ

αδi,j ,

[bi, ˙α , b† ˙β

j ] = δ

˙β
˙αδi,j ,

{di,A , d†B

j } = δB

A δi,j ,

(1.13)

1Hence, ψA
2The brackets [. . . ] denote antisymmetrisation in the respective indices.

3! ǫABCDψαBCD.

α = − 1

26

1 N = 4 SYM theory

while all other (anti)commutators vanish. The ﬁelds (1.12) can be obtained by acting with
the creation operators on a Fock vacuum | 0 i:

Dk F
Dk ψABC
Dk φAB
Dk ¯ψA
Dk ¯F

b= (a†)k+2(b†)k d†1d†2d†3d†4 | 0 i ,
b= (a†)k+1(b†)k d†Ad†Bd†C | 0 i ,
b= (a†)k
b= (a†)k
b= (a†)k

(b†)k d†Ad†B | 0 i ,
(b†)k+1d†A | 0 i ,
(b†)k+2 | 0 i ,

where we have suppressed all spinor indices. We can characterise the irreducible ﬁelds in
(1.14) by vectors containing the occupation numbers of the eight oscillators,

~ni = (a1

i , a2

i , b

˙1
i , b

˙2
i , d1

i , d2

i , d3

i , d4

i ) .

In terms of the oscillators, the generators of PSU(2, 2|4) can be written as

(1.14)

(1.15)

(1.16)

β a†γ
δα

i ai,γ ,

i bi, ˙γ ,

˙β b† ˙γ
δ ˙α
Bd†C
δA

i di,C ,

QαA

i = a†α

i d†A

i

,

Si,αA = ai,αdi,A ,

˙Q ˙α

i,A = b† ˙α

i di,A ,

i,β = a†α
Lα

i, ˙β = b† ˙α
˙L ˙α
i,B = d†A

RA

Di =
i = a†α

Pα ˙α

1
2
1
2
1
4

i ai,β −
i bi, ˙β −
i di,B −
1
(a†γ
2
i b† ˙α

,

i

i ai,γ + b† ˙γ

i bi, ˙γ + 2) ,

˙SA

i, ˙α = bi, ˙αd†A

i

,

Ki,α ˙α = ai,αbi, ˙α .

Bi = d†C

i di,C .

(1.17)

Moreover, the additional generators of U(2, 2|4) are3

Ci =

1
2

(a†γ
i ai,γ − b† ˙γ

i bi, ˙γ − d†C

i di,C + 2) ,

The central charge Ci vanishes on all physical ﬁelds, cf. (1.14), whereas the hypercharge
Bi counts the fermionic oscillators.

Single-trace operators containing L irreducible ﬁelds can be described using the L-fold
tensor product of the singleton representation. The diﬀerent factors in the tensor product
are labelled by i = 1, . . . , L. In the language of spin chains, they correspond to the sites and
their number is referred to as length L. Single-trace operators are invariant under graded
cyclic symmetry, i.e. they are invariant under permuting a ﬁeld from the ﬁrst position of
the trace to the last if the ﬁeld and/or the rest of the operator is bosonic but obtain a
sign if both are fermionic. Hence, the spin-chain states describing them have to share this
property.

1.3

’t Hooft limit and ﬁnite-size eﬀects

In the perturbative expansion in terms of Feynman diagrams, diﬀerent powers of the num-
ber of colours N occur. The N -power of a given contribution can be easily determined

3Note that some authors also deﬁne the hypercharge as Bi = 1

2 (a†γ

i

ai,γ − b† ˙γ
i

bi, ˙γ + d†C

i

di,C + 2). Both

deﬁnitions agree for vanishing central charge Ci.

1.4 One-loop dilatation operator

27

using the so-called fat or ribbon graphs, also known as double-line notation [19]. In this
notation, the ﬂow of each fundamental gauge group index i, j, k, l, . . . = 1, . . . , N is depicted
by a line. Each closed line yields a factor of δi

i = N .

The perturbative expansion becomes particularly simple in the so-called ’t Hooft, large
N or planar limit N → ∞, gYM → 0 with the ’t Hooft coupling λ = g2
YMN ﬁxed [19]. In
this limit, only Feynman diagrams contribute that are planar with respect to their double-
line notation, i.e. with respect to their colour structure. It should be stressed that this
notion of planarity is in general diﬀerent from planarity in momentum space, where all
external momenta are understood to point outwards. Both notions coincide for Feynman
diagrams containing only elementary interactions and hence in particular for scattering
amplitudes. However, this ceases to be the case in the presence of gauge-invariant local
composite operators, as these are colour singlets but have a non-vanishing momentum.
Figure 1.1 shows an example of a Feynman diagram that is planar in double-line notation
(b) but leads to a Feynman integral that is non-planar in momentum space (c). Whether
a diagram is planar or non-planar in the sense of the ’t Hooft limit can in general only be
determined via N counting after all colour lines have been closed. Following [29], we call
a diagram with n open double lines planar if it contributes at the leading order in N after
a planar contraction of these lines with an n-point vertex at inﬁnity. Of course, whether
a diagram contributes at leading order to a particular process depends on the contraction
of the colour lines in this process. In particular, subdiagrams of elementary interactions
which appear to be suppressed in the ’t Hooft limit as they are non-planar and have a
double-trace structure can contribute at the leading order when contracted with composite
operators in a certain way. The reason for this is that the complete planar contraction
of the composite operator with a trace factor in the double-trace interaction leads to an
additional power of N compared to the contraction with a single-trace interaction. As
the mechanism behind this enhancement of the N -power requires the interaction range
to equal the number of ﬁelds in the single-trace operator, i.e. the length L of the spin
chain, it is called ﬁnite-size eﬀect. The right factor in ﬁgure 1.1 (a) shows a non-planar
double-trace diagram; the fact that it is non-planar can be seen when taking all external
ﬁelds to point outwards. However, the depicted contraction of this double-trace interaction
with a composite operator leads to the planar diagram in ﬁgure 1.1 (b). One source of the
double-trace structure of the interaction can be a sequence of ﬁelds wrapping around the
composite operator [29]. We will encounter this wrapping eﬀect in both parts of this work
— as well as a new ﬁnite-size eﬀect in the second part.

1.4 One-loop dilatation operator

In this section, we give a short introduction to the quantum corrections to the dilatation
operator, in particular at one-loop order. These play a major role in both parts of this
work.

Deﬁning the eﬀective planar coupling constant

g2 =

λ

(4π)2 =

g2
YMN
(4π)2 ,

(1.18)

28

a
a

c

d

b

c

b × c

1 N = 4 SYM theory

d
d

a
a

b
b

(a) tr(Ta Tb) tr(Tc Td) × tr(Tc Td)

(b) N 2 tr(Ta Tb)

(c) Feynman integral

Figure 1.1: Planarity and non-planarity in double-line notation and momentum space:
(a) contraction of a non-planar double-trace interaction with a composite operator, (b)
resulting planar diagram in double-line notation, (c) corresponding non-planar momentum
space integral. In double-line notation the operator is depicted as a grey blob, while it is
depicted by a double line in momentum space. (We trust that the reader will not confuse
both kinds of double lines.)

the dilatation operator can be expanded as4

D =

g2ℓD(ℓ) .

(1.19)

∞Xℓ=0

LXi=1

At ℓ-loop order, connected interactions can involve at most ℓ + 1 ﬁelds of a composite
operator of length L at a time. Moreover, in the planar limit, these have to be neighbouring
ﬁelds in the same trace factor. Hence, in this limit the ℓ-loop dilatation operator D(ℓ) can
be written as sum of a density (D(ℓ))i...i+ℓ that acts on ℓ + 1 neighbouring sites of the
corresponding spin chain:

D(ℓ) =

(D(ℓ))i...i+ℓ ,

(1.20)

where cyclic identiﬁcation i + L ∼ i is understood. The study of the dilatation operator
can be simpliﬁed by restricting to closed subsectors, which are deﬁned via constraints on
the various quantum numbers [27].

The complete one-loop dilatation operator density (D(1))i i+1 of N = 4 SYM theory
was ﬁrst calculated by Niklas Beisert via a direct Feynman diagram calculation in the
SL(2) sector that was then lifted to the complete theory via symmetry [27]. It was later
shown that (D(1))i i+1 is completely ﬁxed by symmetry apart from one global multiplicative
constant [30]. Several diﬀerent representations of (D(1))i i+1 exist.

The ﬁrst kind of representation employs the following decomposition of the tensor

product of two singleton representations [27]:

VS ⊗ VS =

∞Mi=0

Vj .

(1.21)

4Beyond one-loop order and certain subsectors, also odd powers of g can occur in the expansion (1.19).

In this thesis, however, we restrict ourselves to cases where even powers suﬃce.

1.4 One-loop dilatation operator

Denoting the projection operator to the subspace Vj as
Pj : VS ⊗ VS −→ Vj ,

the one-loop dilatation operator density can be written as

(D(1))i i+1 = 2

h(j)(Pj )i i+1 ,

∞Xj=0

29

(1.22)

(1.23)

where h(j) =Pj

1
i is the jth harmonic number. Though quite compact, this represen-
tation is not very useful in direct calculations of anomalous dimensions due to the lack of
handy expressions for Pj.

i=1

For direct calculations, a second kind of representation is advantageous, which is known
as harmonic action. It uses the oscillators deﬁned in section 1.2, which can be combined
into one superoscillator

A†

i = (a†1

i , a†2

i , b† ˙1

i , b† ˙2

i , d†1

i , d†2

i , d†3

i , d†4

i ) .

(1.24)

We specify the individual component oscillators of A†
A†1
density can be written as a weighted sum over all their reorderings [27]:

, i.e.
i . Using these superoscillators, the one-loop dilatation operator

i by superscripts Ai as A†Ai

i , . . . , A†8

i = d†4

i = a†1

i

(D(1))1 2 A†A1
s1

··· A†An

sn | 0 i =

2Xs′

1,...,s′

n=1

δC2,0 c(n, n12, n21)A†A1
s′
1

··· A†An

n | 0 i ,

s′

(1.25)

where n denotes the total number of oscillators at both sites, n12 (n21) denotes the number
of oscillators changing their site from 1 to 2 (2 to 1) and the Kronecker delta ensures that
the resulting states fulﬁl the central charge constraint. The coeﬃcient is given by

c(n, n12, n21) =(2h(cid:0) 1
2 n(cid:1)
2(−1)1+n12n21B(cid:0) 1

where B denotes the Euler beta function.

2 (n12 + n21), 1 + 1

if n12 = n21 = 0 ,
else,

2 (n − n12 − n21)(cid:1)

(1.26)

An integral formulation of the latter representation was found by Benjamin Zwiebel

in [191].5 Deﬁning

(A†

i )~ni = (a†1

i )a1

i (a†2

i )a2

i (b† ˙1

i )b ˙1

i (b† ˙2

i )b ˙2

i (d†1

i )d1

i (d†2

i )d2

i (d†3

i )d3

i (d†4

i )d4
i ,

(1.27)

the representation (1.25) can be recast into the form

(D(1))1 2 (A†

1)~n1(A†

where

2

2)~n2 | 0 i = 4δC2,0Z π
2 ! = V (θ)  A†
2 ! ,

1
A†

0

  A′†

1
A′†

dθ cot θ(cid:16)(A†

1 )~n1(A′†

1)~n1(A†

2)~n2 − (A′†
V (θ) =(cid:18) cos θ − sin θ
cos θ (cid:19) .

sin θ

2 )~n2(cid:17)| 0 i ,

(1.28)

(1.29)

5An alternative integral representation of the harmonic action can be found in [9] and an operatorial

form in [101, 103].

30

1 N = 4 SYM theory

The equivalence of (1.28) and (1.25) can be seen from the known integral representations

B(x, y) = 2Z π
h(y) = 2Z π

0

0

2

2

(1.30)

dθ(sin θ)2x−1(cos θ)2y−1 ,

dθ cot θ(cid:0)1 − (cos θ)2y(cid:1) .

Note that the ﬁrst summand in the integral on the right hand side of (1.28) acts as regu-
larisation, altering the divergent integral representation of B(0, y) such that it yields h(y)
instead. In chapter 3, we will ﬁnd that the integral representation (1.28) emerges naturally
when deriving the complete one-loop dilatation operator via ﬁeld theory alone.

Beyond one-loop order, several complications arise. The range of the interaction on
a composite operator of length L is naturally bounded by L. If this bound is saturated,
the dilatation operator acts on the whole spin chain at once, invalidating the notion of an
interaction density. At this point, ﬁnite-size eﬀects set in, which will be a main topic of the
second part of this thesis.6 Moreover, the length of a composite operator is not a conserved
quantum number beyond one-loop order. The leading length-changing contributions to the
dilatation operator are completely ﬁxed by symmetry and were found in [99]. In certain
subsectors of the theory, such as the SU(2) sector, the length L is connected to global
charges of the theory, and hence preserved. In this thesis, we will not consider cases where
length-changing occurs.

6In fact, we will ﬁnd a new kind of ﬁnite-size eﬀect in the second part of this thesis, which already sets

in at one-loop order in the deformed theories.

Part I

Form factors

31

Chapter 2

Introduction to form factors

In this chapter, we start our investigation of form factors in N = 4 SYM theory. We
review some important concepts that underlie the modern study of scattering amplitudes
as well as form factors in section 2.1. This also allows us to introduce our notation and
conventions.
In section 2.2, we then calculate the minimal tree-level form factors of all
operators via Feynman diagrams and relate them to the spin-chain picture. We discuss the
general problems arising for non-minimal and loop-level form factors in section 2.3.

While section 2.1 is a review of well known results, section 2.2 is based on original work

by the author ﬁrst published in [4].

2.1 Generalities

The physical quantities we are going to study are form factors of local gauge-invariant
composite operators O. For such an operator, the form factor is deﬁned as the overlap
between the state created by O(x) from the vacuum |0i and an n-particle on-shell state
h1, . . . , n|,1 i.e.
(2.1)

FO,n(1, . . . , n; x) = h1, . . . , n|O(x)|0i .

This deﬁnition reduces to the one for the scattering amplitude when setting O = 1:

An(1, . . . , n) = h1, . . . , n|0i .

(2.2)

In both cases, the on-shell state is speciﬁed by the momenta pi, the helicities hi, the ﬂavours
and the gauge-group indices ai of the on-shell ﬁelds i = 1, . . . , n. We take all on-shell ﬁelds
to be outgoing.

Most on-shell techniques that were developed for scattering amplitudes work in mo-
mentum space.2 Hence, as a ﬁrst step, we Fourier transform (2.1) from position space to
momentum space:

FO(1, . . . , n; q) =Z d4x e−iqxh1, . . . , n|O(x)|0i =Z d4x e−iqxh1, . . . , n| eixP O(0) e−ixP|0i

= (2π)4δ4 q −

pi!h1, . . . , n|O(0)|0i ,

nXi=1

1The n external ﬁelds are set on-shell using Lehmann-Symanzik-Zimmermann (LSZ) reduction [192].
2For recent reviews about on-shell techniques for scattering amplitudes, see [52, 53].

33

(2.3)

34

2 Introduction to form factors

where we have used (1.7) in the second line and the delta function in the third line guar-
antees momentum conservation. We depict the Fourier-transformed form factor as shown
in ﬁgure 2.1.

q

FO,n

···

p2

p3

p1

pn

Figure 2.1: The form factor of an operator O in momentum space. The n on-shell ﬁelds
with momenta pi (p2
i = 0 for i = 1, . . . , n) are depicted as single lines while the operator
with oﬀ-shell momentum q (q2 6= 0) is depicted as double line. The direction of each
momentum is indicated by an arrow.

Using the matrices σα ˙α

µ = (1, σ1, σ2, σ3)α ˙α, where σi are the usual Pauli matrices, the
four-dimensional momenta pµ
i σα ˙α
µ .
The on-shell condition p2
i pi,µ = 0 then translates to det p = 0. Hence, on-shell
pi and ˜λ ˙α
momenta pα ˙α
pi,
which transform in the anti-fundamental representations of SU(2) and SU(2), respectively:

i can be written in terms of 2 × 2 matrices as pα ˙α
can be expressed as products of two two-dimensional spinors λα

i = pµ

i = pµ

i

pα ˙α
i = λα
pi

˜λ ˙α
pi .

(2.4)

pi = ±(λα

These are known as spinor-helicity variables. For real momenta and Minkowski signature,
they are conjugate to each other, i.e. ˜λ ˙α
pi)∗, where the + (−) occurs for positive
(negative) energy. Moreover, multiplying λα
pi by
t−1 leaves the momentum pα ˙α
invariant. The behaviour of amplitudes and form factors
under this transformation is called little group scaling. In order to simplify notation, we
will frequently abbreviate λα
i , respectively. Contractions of the
˙β
˜λ
spinor-helicity variables are denoted as hiji = ǫαβλα
j and [ij] = −ǫ ˙α ˙β
j . They satisfy
the so-called Schouten identities

pi by a phase factor t ∈ C, |t| = 1, and ˜λ ˙α

i and ˜λ ˙α
i λβ

pi and ˜λ ˙α

pi as λα

˜λ ˙α
i

i

hijihkli + hikihlji + hilihjki = 0 ,

[ij][kl] + [ik][lj] + [il][jk] = 0 .

(2.5)

Furthermore, we can use Nair’s N = 4 on-shell superﬁeld [55] to describe external ﬁelds

of all diﬀerent ﬂavours and helicities in a uniﬁed way:

˜ηA
i ˜ηB
i
2!

ǫABCD ˜ηA
i ˜ηB
3!

i ˜ηC
i

¯ψA(pi) +

φAB(pi) +

Φ(pi, ˜ηi) = g+(pi) + ˜ηA
i

i g−(pi) ,
(2.6)
where g+ (g−) denotes the gluons of positive (negative) helicity and ˜ηA
i , A = 1, 2, 3, 4, are
anticommuting Graßmann variables transforming in the anti-fundamental representation
of SU(4). We can then combine all component amplitudes into one super amplitude and
all component form factors into one super form factor. The component expressions can be
extracted from the super expressions by taking suitable derivatives with respect to the ˜ηA
i

ψD(pi) + ˜η1

i ˜η4

i ˜η2

i ˜η3

35

,

n(cid:19) FO(1, 2, . . . , n; q)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)˜ηA

2.2 Minimal tree-level form factors for all operators

variables. For instance,

FO(1g+

, 2g−

, . . . , nφ12; q) =(cid:18) ∂

∂ ˜η1
2

∂
∂ ˜η2
2

∂
∂ ˜η3
2

∂
∂ ˜η4

2(cid:19)···(cid:18)−

∂
∂ ˜η1
n

∂
∂ ˜η2

i =0
(2.7)
where the superscripts specify the component ﬁelds and the sign takes into account that the
˜ηi variables anticommute. Due to SU(4) invariance, the elementary interactions of N = 4
SYM theory can change the ˜η-degree of super amplitudes and super form factors only in
units of four. The respective expressions with the minimal degree in ˜η that allows for a
non-vanishing result are called maximally-helicity-violating (MHV). For super amplitudes,
this minimal degree is eight, whereas it depends on the composite operator for super form
factors.3 Expressions with a Graßmann degree that is higher by four are called next-to-
MHV (NMHV) and those with a Graßmann degree higher by 4˜k are called N˜kMHV.

In addition to momenta, helicities and ﬂavours, amplitudes and form factors also depend
on the colour degrees of freedom of each on-shell ﬁeld. We can split oﬀ this dependence by
deﬁning colour-ordered amplitudes ˆAn and colour-ordered form factors ˆFO,n as
tr(Taσ(1) ··· Taσ(n)) ˆAn(σ(1), . . . , σ(n))

An(1, . . . , n) = gn−2

(2.8)

YM Xσ∈Sn/Zn

+multi-trace terms

and

FO,n(1, . . . , n; q) = gn−L

YM Xσ∈Sn/Zn

tr(Taσ(1) ··· Taσ(n)) ˆFO,n(σ(1), . . . , σ(n); q)

(2.9)

+multi-trace terms ,

where the sum is over all non-cyclic permutations. Starting at one-loop order, also multi-
trace terms can occur in (2.8) and (2.9). These multi-trace terms are formally suppressed
in the planar limit. Hence, the double-trace part of amplitudes is irrelevant when studying
the single-trace part of amplitudes and the double-trace part of form factors is irrelevant
when studying the single-trace part of form factors. However, the double-trace part of
amplitudes is relevant for calculating the single-trace part of form factors, as we will see in
chapter 4.4

Expressions for tree-level scattering amplitudes that will be used throughout the ﬁrst

part of this thesis are collected in appendix B.

2.2 Minimal tree-level form factors for all operators

Let us now calculate the form factors of all operators, starting in the free theory. As every
occurrence of the coupling constant gYM either increases the number of loops or the number
of legs, the form factor in the free theory coincides with the minimal tree-level form factor
in the interacting theory. It is suﬃcient to look at operators built from irreducible ﬁelds as
reviewed in section 1.2 since all operators are given by linear combinations of such operators
and the form factor is linear in the operator. We ﬁrst look at single-trace operators.

3Concretely, it is given by the eigenvalue of B acting on the composite operators.
4See also the discussion in section 1.3.

36

2 Introduction to form factors

p = 1

for an outgoing scalar φAB

p,± = ¯u±(p)

p,± = v±(p)

p,µ = ǫµ,±(p, r)

1
for an outgoing fermion ψA of helicity ±
2
for an outgoing antifermion ¯ψA of helicity ±
for an outgoing gluon of helicity ± 1

1
2

Figure 2.2: Feynman rules for outgoing scalars, fermions, antifermions and gluons in
momentum space; cf. for instance [53].

In the free theory, the form factors can be easily computed via Feynman diagrams.
As interactions are absent, the Feynman diagram reduces to the vertex for the composite
operator and the collection of outgoing ﬁelds. The required colour-ordered Feynman rules
for outgoing ﬁelds are shown in ﬁgure 2.2. For an outgoing scalar ﬁeld φAB, the momentum-
space Feynman rule is simply 1. As the scalar ﬁelds comes with a factor of ˜ηA
in Nair’s
N = 4 superﬁeld (2.6), the total factor for a scalar ﬁeld φAB in the composite operator that
exits the diagram at leg i is ˜ηA
i . In the free theory, the covariant derivative Dα ˙α reduces
to the ordinary derivative ∂α ˙α, which gives a factor of pα ˙α
in momentum space.5
For instance, the total factor for an irreducible ﬁeld Dα ˙α φAB in the composite operator that
exits the diagram at leg i is λα
α of
i
helicity − 1
2 , the momentum space Feynman rule yields one of the solutions to the massless
Dirac equation, namely ¯u−(pi) = (λα
In order to obtain the super
i ˜ηC
form factor, this has to be dressed by ˜ηA
i ˜ηB
i . For
an outgoing antifermion ¯ψ ˙αA with helicity + 1
2 , the momentum space Feynman rule yields
v+(pi) = (0, ˜λ ˙α
i )T , which is another solution to the massless Dirac equation, and hence ˜λ ˙α
i .
Taking the required Graßmann variables into account, the total factor is ˜λ ˙α
i . For an
outgoing gauge ﬁeld of positive or negative helicity, the momentum space Feynman rules
yield the polarisation vectors

i . For an outgoing fermion ψαABC = ǫABCDψD

i , so the total factor is λα

i , 0), and hence λα
i .

i ˜ηA

i ˜ηB

i ˜ηC

˜λ ˙α
i ˜ηA

i ˜ηB

i = λα
i

˜λ ˙α
i

i ˜ηB

i ˜ηB
i

i ˜ηA

+ (pi; ri) = √2
ǫα ˙α

˜λ ˙α
λα
ri
pi
hripii

,

− (pi; ri) = √2
ǫα ˙α

˜λ ˙α
λα
ri
pi
[piri]

,

(2.10)

respectively, where ri is a light-like reference vector that can be chosen independently for
each i. As reviewed in section 1.2, gauge-invariant local composite operators contain gauge
ﬁelds only in the gauge-covariant combinations of covariant derivatives and the self-dual
and anti-self-dual parts of the ﬁelds strength. For vanishing coupling, the latter read

Fαβ =

1
2√2

ǫ ˙α ˙β(∂α ˙αAβ ˙β − ∂β ˙βAα ˙α) ,

¯F ˙α ˙β =

1
2√2

ǫαβ(∂α ˙αAβ ˙β − ∂β ˙βAα ˙α) .

(2.11)

Calculating the contribution of a ﬁeld strength in the composite operator that exits the
diagram at leg i amounts to replacing the gauge ﬁelds in (2.11) by the polarisation vectors

5We have absorbed a factor of the imaginary unit i, which one would expect from the Fourier transfor-

mation, into the (covariant) derivative.

2.2 Minimal tree-level form factors for all operators

37

(2.10) and the derivatives by λi˜λi. After a short calculation, we ﬁnd

Fαβ

Fαβ

¯F ˙α ˙β

¯F ˙α ˙β

ǫ+−→ −
ǫ−−→ −
ǫ+−→ −
ǫ−−→ −

1
2√2
1
2√2
1
2√2
1
2√2

ǫ ˙α ˙β(λα
pi

˜λ ˙α
pi

ǫ ˙α ˙β(λα
pi

˜λ ˙α
pi

ǫαβ(λα
pi

ǫαβ(λα
pi

piǫβ ˙β
˜λ ˙α

piǫβ ˙β
˜λ ˙α

pi

pi

pi

ǫβ ˙β
+ − λβ
ǫβ ˙β
− − λβ
+ − λβ
− − λβ

pi

˙β
˜λ
pi

ǫα ˙α
+ ) = 0 ,

˙β
˜λ
pi

− ) = λα
ǫα ˙α
pi

λβ
pi

,

˙β
˜λ
piǫα ˙α

+ ) = ˜λ ˙α
pi

˙β
˜λ
pi ,

˙β
˜λ
piǫα ˙α

− ) = 0

(2.12)

for the diﬀerent combinations of polarisation vectors and parts of the ﬁeld strength; cf.
also [193]. The gauge ﬁelds of positive and negative helicity occur in Nair’s N = 4 on-shell
superﬁeld with zero and four factors of ˜ηi, respectively. Hence, the total contributions
˙β
˜λ
of the self-dual and anti-self-dual parts of the ﬁeld strength are λα
i ,
respectively. As in the scalar case, covariant derivatives Dα ˙α that act on any of the ﬁelds
˜λ ˙α
in the composite operator yield an additional factor of λα
i , where i is the leg at which
i
the respective ﬁeld exits the diagram. Note that the resulting expressions at leg i are
manifestly symmetric in all SU(2) and SU(2) indices and manifestly antisymmetric in all
SU(4) indices, as are the corresponding expressions in the oscillator picture. Let us now
summarise these results.

i and ˜λ ˙α

i λβ

i ˜η1

i

i ˜η2

i ˜η3

i ˜η4

For a given gauge-invariant local composite single-trace operator O characterised by
i )}i=1,...,L, the minimal colour-ordered tree-level

i , b ˙2

i , b ˙1

i , d4

i , d3

i , d2

i , d1

i , a2

{~ni}i=1,...,L = {(a1
super form factor is
ˆFO,L(Λ1, . . . , ΛL; q) = (2π)4δ4 q −

pi! Xσ∈ZL

LXi=1

(λ1

σ(i))a1

i (λ2

σ(i))a2

i (˜λ

LYi=1

σ(i))b ˙1
˙1

i (˜λ

σ(i))b ˙2
˙2

i (˜η1

σ(i))d1

i (˜η2

σ(i))d2

i (˜η3

σ(i))d3

i (˜η4

σ(i))d4
i ,

(2.13)

i , ˜λ ˙α

i , ˜ηA

where Λi = (λα
i ). The sum over all cyclic permutations accounts for all possible
colour-ordered contractions of the ﬁelds in the operator with the external legs and reﬂects
the (graded) cyclic invariance of the single-trace operator. The grading is implemented
in the product in the second line of (2.13), which should be understood as ordered with
respect to i. Restoring the canonical order with respect to σ(i) requires to anticommute the
Graßmann variables, which can result in a total sign. Form factors for composite operators
that are characterised by linear combinations of {~ni}i=1,...,L are given by the respective
linear combinations of (2.13).
Note that the expression (2.13) coincides with replacing the oscillators in the oscillator

representation (1.14) of the operator according to

a†α
i → λα
i ,
ai,α → ∂i,α =

∂

∂λα
i

b† ˙α
i → ˜λ ˙α
i ,

, bi, ˙α → ∂i, ˙α =

∂
∂˜λ ˙α
i

d†A
i → ˜ηA

i

,

, di,A → ∂i,A =

∂

∂ ˜ηA
i

(2.14)

and multiplying the result with the momentum-conserving delta function and a normali-

38

sation factor of L:6

2 Introduction to form factors

ˆFO,L(Λ1, . . . , ΛL; q) = L(2π)4δ4 q −

LXi=1

pi! × O a†α

i → λα
i
b† ˙α
i → ˜λ ˙α
i
d†A
i → ηA
i

.

(2.15)

As was already observed in [148],7 the replacement (2.14) relates the generators (1.16) of
PSU(2, 2|4) in the oscillator representation to their well known form on on-shell superﬁelds
in scattering amplitudes:

β λγ
δα

i ∂i,γ ,

QαA

i = λα

i ˜ηA
i

,

δ ˙α
˙β

˜λ ˙γ
i ∂i, ˙γ ,

Si,αA = ∂i,α∂i,A ,

1
2
1
2
1
4

RA

i,β = λα
Lα

i ∂i,β −
˙L ˙α
i, ˙β = ˜λ ˙α
i ∂i, ˙β −
i,B = ˜ηA
i ∂i,B −
1
(λγ
2
1
2
B = ˜ηC
i ∂i,C ,

Di =

Ci =

B ˜ηC
δA

i ∂i,C ,

i ∂i,γ + ˜λ ˙γ
(λγ
i ∂i,γ − ˜λ ˙γ

i ∂i, ˙γ + 2) ,
i ∂i, ˙γ − ˜ηC

˙Q ˙α

i,A = ˜λ ˙α

i ∂i,A ,

˙SA

i, ˙α = ∂i, ˙α ˜ηA
i

,

(2.16)

i ∂i,C + 2) , Pα ˙α

i = λα
i

˜λ ˙α
i ,

Ki,α ˙α = ∂i,α∂i, ˙α ;

cf. [193].

(2.13) is given by

The action of any generator J of PSU(2, 2|4) on the on-shell part of the form factor

nXi=1

Ji ˆFO,n(1, . . . , n; q) .

(2.17)

Note that some of the generators Ji contain diﬀerential operators, which act both on the
polynomial in the super-spinor-helicity variables and on the momentum-conserving delta
function in (2.13). The action on the polynomial is precisely given by the action of the
corresponding generator written in terms of oscillators (1.16) on the ﬁelds (1.14) in the
oscillator representation. Moreover, the terms arising from the action on the momentum-
conserving delta function agree with the spacetime-dependent terms in (1.8), i.e. those
vanishing for x = 0, after the Fourier transformation (2.3). Hence,

LXi=1

Ji ˆFO,L(1, . . . , L; q) = ˆFJO,L(1, . . . , L; q) ,

(2.18)

where JO is given in (1.8) and (1.16).
We have seen that, apart from a normalisation factor L and the momentum-conserving
delta function, the minimal tree-level for factors can be obtained by replacing the su-
peroscillators of the oscillator picture by super-spinor-helicity variables. Moreover, the

6The normalisation factor L arises as we assume the states in the oscillator picture to be graded cyclic

symmetric and normalised to unity.

7Moreover, the replacement (1.16) plays an important role in the algebraic considerations of [99], which
connect the one-loop dilatation operator to the four-point tree-level scattering amplitude. This connection
will be the subject of section 3.3. However, the connection between the replacement (2.14) and form factors
was made neither in [148] nor in [99].

2.3 Diﬃculties for non-minimal and loop-level form factors

39

corresponding generators of PSU(2, 2|4) are related by the same replacement. Hence, min-
imal tree-level form factors translate the spin-chain of free N = 4 SYM theory into the
language of scattering amplitudes.
In fact, (2.18) is a special case of a superconformal Ward identity for form factors
derived in [131]. In principle, this Ward identity should also hold in the interacting theory.
In practise, however, the generators are known to receive quantum corrections for both
scattering amplitudes and composite operators, and in the former case also anomalies occur;
see [148, 194] for reviews. For form factors, both the corrections for scattering amplitudes
and the corrections for composite operators contribute.
In the following chapters, we
calculate the corrections to the action of a particular generator on composite operators via
form factors, namely the dilatation operator. We leave the study of corrections to further
generators on composite operators via form factors for future work.

Finally, let us mention that for multi-trace operators the single-trace minimal tree-level
form factors naturally vanish. The respective multi-trace minimal tree-level form factors
are obtained by performing the replacement (2.15) for each trace factor and multiplying
by the length of each of them.

2.3 Diﬃculties for non-minimal and loop-level form factors

Let us conclude this chapter with some discussion on non-minimal and loop-level form
factors. The minimal tree-level form factors coincide with the form factors in the free theory.
For non-minimal and loop-level form factors, interactions play a role. In principle, these
interactions can be calculated via Feynman diagrams. In practise, however, this becomes
intractable after the ﬁrst few loop orders and additional legs due to the large growth in the
number of contributing Feynman diagrams.8 In the case of amplitudes, eﬃcient on-shell
methods have been developed to overcome this limitation. Previous studies have shown
that these are at least partially also applicable to form factors. However, these studies
have largely focused on the form factors of the stress-tensor supermultiplet and its lowest
component tr(φ14φ14) as well as its generalisation to tr(φL

14).

At tree level, for instance BCFW recursion relations can be used to calculate general n-
point form factors. These were applied to the stress-tensor supermultiplet at general MHV
degree [129,131,140]. Moreover, they were applied to the supermultiplet of tr(φL
14) [138] and
to operators from the SU(2) and SL(2) subsectors [118] at MHV level. In this thesis, we will
restrict our study of non-minimal tree-level form factors to the stress-tensor supermultiplet.
In chapter 6, we will investigate the structure and symmetries of these form factors and
present alternative ways to construct them. Non-minimal tree-level form factors of general
operators will be studied in [195].

At loop level, an additional complication apart from the growing number of Feynman
diagrams is the occurrence of loop integrals, which need to be evaluated. Moreover, these
can contain divergences, such that the theory needs to be regularised. A natural starting
point to calculate loop corrections is given by the minimal form factors. In previous studies,
the minimal form factors of the stress-tensor supermultiplet and its generalisation to tr(φL
14)
have been calculated via unitarity up to three-loop order [50] and two loop-order [139],
respectively.9 However, among experts, it has been a vexing problem how to calculate the

8Moreover, the individual Feynman diagrams depend on the gauge choice, which only drops out at the

end. Thus, the ﬁnal result is often much shorter than each of the intermediate steps.

9The integrand of the minimal form factor of tr(φ14φ14) is even known up to four loops [137, 145].

40

2 Introduction to form factors

minimal two-loop Konishi form factor via unitarity. In chapter 3 of this thesis, we study
one-loop corrections to minimal form factors of general operators. In chapter 4, we address
the problem of calculating the minimal two-loop Konishi form factor via unitarity, ﬁnding
that it is related to a subtlety in the regularisation. We then study minimal two-loop form
factors of operators in the SU(2) sector in chapter 5.

Let us mention that also non-minimal loop-level form factors have been studied, namely
two-loop three-point and one-loop n-point MHV and NMHV form factors of the stress-
tensor supermultiplet [129, 131, 134, 135], one-loop n-point MHV form factors of its gener-
alisation to tr(φL
14) [138] as well as one-loop three-point form factors of the Konishi primary
operator [5].

Finally, as already alluded to in the end of the last section, a further complication
for non-minimal and loop-level form factors lies in the fact that the symmetries of these
expressions are obscured by corrections and anomalies in the symmetry generators.

Chapter 3

Minimal one-loop form factors

In this chapter, we compute one-loop corrections to minimal form factors. We begin by
discussing the general structure of loop corrections to form factors in section 3.1.
In
particular, we show how to obtain the dilatation operator from them. In section 3.2, we
introduce the on-shell method of unitarity by calculating the one-loop corrections to the
minimal form factors for composite operators in the SU(2) sector. After this warm-up
exercise, we use generalised unitarity to calculate the cut-constructible part of the one-
loop correction to the minimal form factor of any composite operator in section 3.3. This
allows us to (re)derive the complete one-loop dilatation operator.

This chapter is based on results ﬁrst published in [4] and partially adapts a presentation

later developed in [6].

3.1 General structure of loop corrections and the dilatation

operator

Before starting to compute loop corrections to minimal form factors, let us ﬁrst discuss
their general structure.

A general property of loop calculations in QFTs is the appearance of divergences in the
occurring Feynman integrals. Ultraviolet (UV) divergences stem from integration regions
where the energy of a virtual particle is very large, while infrared (IR) divergences stem
from integration regions where the energy of the virtual particle is very low and/or it is
collinear to an external particle. In order to perform calculations, the divergences have to
be regularised. This can be achieved by continuing the dimension of spacetime from D = 4
to D = 4− 2ε. At the same time, also the ﬁelds have to be continued, which leads to some
subtleties when applying on-shell methods. We will postpone their discussion to section
4.3 in the next chapter.

Infrared divergences occur in theories with massless ﬁelds. In all observables, the IR
divergences from virtual loop corrections are cancelled by contributions from the emission of
soft and collinear real particles according to the Kinoshita-Lee-Nauenberg (KLN) theorem
[196, 197].

Ultraviolet divergences signal that certain quantities appearing in the formulation of
the theory (ﬁelds, masses, coupling constants, etc.) depend on the energy scale due to
quantum eﬀects. They require renormalisation, i.e. the absorption of divergences into a
redeﬁnition of these quantities. In a conformal ﬁeld theory like N = 4 SYM theory, all
beta functions are zero, i.e. the strength of the interactions is independent of the energy

41

42

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

scale. Hence, scattering amplitudes in N = 4 SYM theory are UV ﬁnite and require no
renormalisation.

Loop corrections to scattering amplitudes can be written as

ˆAn(˜g2, ε) = ˜I(˜g2, ε) ˆA(0)

n = 1 +

˜g2ℓ ˜I (ℓ)(ε)! ˆA(0)

n ,

∞Xℓ=1

(3.1)

where ˜I (ℓ) is the ratio between the ℓ-loop and tree-level amplitude. The modiﬁed eﬀective
planar coupling constant ˜g2 is deﬁned as

˜g2 =(cid:0)4π e−γE(cid:1)ε

g2 =(cid:0)4π e−γE(cid:1)ε g2

YMN
(4π)2 ,

(3.2)

where γE is the Euler-Mascheroni constant.1 The structure of the IR divergences occurring
in ˜I(˜g2, ε) is universal and well understood [122–125]:
log(cid:16)˜I(˜g2, ε)(cid:17) =

4ℓε# nXi=1(cid:18)−

+ Fin(˜g2) + O(ε) ,

γ(ℓ)
cusp

8(ℓε)2 − G(ℓ)

µ2 (cid:19)−ℓε

˜g2ℓ"−

∞Xℓ=1

si i+1

(3.3)

0

where si i+1 = (pi + pi+1)2

γcusp(˜g2) =

∞Xℓ=1

˜g2ℓγ(ℓ)

cusp = 8˜g2 −

8π2
3

˜g4 +

88π4
45

˜g6 + O(˜g8)

is the cusp anomalous dimension and

G0(˜g2) =

∞Xℓ=1

˜g2ℓG(ℓ)

0 = −4ζ3˜g4 + 8(cid:18) 5π2ζ3

9

+ 4ζ5(cid:19) ˜g6 + O(˜g8)

(3.4)

(3.5)

is the collinear anomalous dimension. The ’t Hooft mass µ, which sets the renormalisation
scale, originates from a rescaling of gYM in order to render it dimensionless in D = 4 − 2ε
dimensions [198].2 Fin(˜g2) denotes a ﬁnite part in the ε expansion, which can also be a
function of the coupling constant (3.2).

The above form of the loop corrections and their IR divergences is also shared by form
factors of protected operators [126,129,130,133,134,138,139].3 The situation becomes more
complicated for form factors of general operators, as analysed in [4–6]. Although N = 4
SYM theory is conformally invariant, these form factors are UV divergent due to the
presence of the composite operator. The UV divergences can be absorbed by renormalising
this operator. Moreover, general operators are not eigenstates under renormalisation but
mix with other operators that have the same quantum numbers. We deﬁne the renormalised
operators Oa

ren in terms of the bare operators Oa
bare as
bOb
Oa
ren = Z a
1The rescaling of g2 deﬁned in (1.18) with (cid:0)4π e−γE (cid:1)ε

bare ,

absorbs terms containing γE and log(4π), which
would otherwise appear in the Laurent expansion of ˜I (ℓ)(ε) in ε. In particular, this makes certain number-
theoretic properties of ˜I (ℓ)(ε) manifest, see e.g. [70].

2The occurrence of µ in (3.3) signals in particular that the collinear anomalous dimension G0 depends
on the renormalisation scheme and is hence not an observable. The expansion (3.5) for G0 is valid in the
scheme which is given by minimal subtraction in the coupling ˜g2 shown in (3.2).

3In fact, form factors have played a central role in the developments leading to (3.3) [122–124].

(3.6)

3.1 General structure of loop corrections and the dilatation operator

43

where the indices a and b range over the set of operators and the matrix-valued renormal-
isation constant has the following loop expansion:4

b = δa

b +

Z a

∞Xℓ=1

˜g2ℓ(Z (ℓ))a

b .

The renormalisation constant is connected to the dilatation operator as5,6

Z = exp

˜g2ℓ D(ℓ)
2ℓε

.

∞Xℓ=1

The renormalised form factor is then given as

ˆFOa

ren,n = Z a

b ˆFOb

bare,n .

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

Due to the mixing of the operators, the loop correction to the form factor of one operator
is no longer proportional to the tree-level form factor of that operator. However, we can
still write

ˆFO,L(1, . . . , L; q) = I ˆF (0)

O,L(1, . . . , L; q) = 1 +

˜g2ℓI (ℓ)! ˆF (0)

O,L(1, . . . , L; q) ,

∞Xℓ=1

(3.10)

if we promote I (ℓ) to operators that act on the minimal tree-level form factor. We will
give concrete examples of these interaction operators in the next sections. Due to the
close connection (2.15) between the composite operators and their minimal form factors,
we can equally write the renormalisation constant as an operator acting on the minimal
form factor:

Z a

b ˆFOb

bare,L(1, . . . , L; q) = Z ˆFOa

bare,L(1, . . . , L; q) .

(3.11)

The renormalised form factors can then be obtained by acting with the renormalised in-
teraction operators

I = IZ ,

I(ℓ) =

I (l)Z (ℓ−l) ,

(3.12)

ℓXl=0

on the minimal tree-level form factor. As the IR divergences are universal, the renormalised
interaction operators have to satisfy (3.3). Inserting (3.8), we ﬁnd that the bare interaction
operators satisfy:

log (I) =

˜g2ℓ"−

∞Xℓ=1

γ(ℓ)
cusp

8(ℓε)2 − G(ℓ)

0

4ℓε# LXi=1(cid:18)−

si i+1

µ2 (cid:19)−ℓε

−

∞Xℓ=1

˜g2ℓ D(ℓ)
2ℓε

+ Fin(˜g2) + O(ε) .

(3.13)
Thus, we can determine the dilatation operator D via I. Let us now show how to calculate
I via on-shell methods.

4Beyond one-loop order and certain subsectors of the theory, also odd powers of ˜g appear in (3.7).
These correspond to mixing between operators with diﬀerent lengths. In this work, however, we are not
treating cases where length-changing occurs and hence disregard the corresponding terms to simplify the
presentation.

5As in (3.7), we have neglected terms with odd power of ˜g, which correspond to length-changing contri-

butions to the dilatation operator.

6Note that the expansion of the dilatation operator in ˜g coincides with its expansion in g shown in (1.19).

44

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

3.2 One-loop corrections in the SU(2) sector via unitarity

In this section, we demonstrate in detail how to calculate one-loop corrections to minimal
form factors via the on-shell method of unitarity.7 We focus on composite operators from
the SU(2) sector for explicitness.

Operators in the SU(2) sector are formed from two kinds of scalar ﬁelds with one
common SU(4) index, say X = φ14 and Y = φ24. According to (2.13), the colour-ordered
minimal tree-level super form factor of such operators is given by a polynomial in ˜η1
i and
˜η2
i ˜η4
i multiplied by a momentum-conserving delta function; e.g. for O = tr(XXY X . . . ),
we have

i ˜η4

ˆF (0)
O,L(1, . . . , L; q) = (2π)4δ4(q −

4 ··· + cyclic permutations(cid:1) .
(3.14)
We encode the one-loop corrections in the interaction operator I (1) deﬁned in (3.10).
At this loop order, only two ﬁelds in the composite operator can interact at a time, and
those have to be neighbouring in order to produce a single-trace structure. Hence, we can

λi˜λi)(cid:0)˜η1

1 ˜η1

4 ˜η4

1 ˜η4

2 ˜η4

3 ˜η1

3 ˜η4

2 ˜η2

LXi=1

write I (1) in terms of its interaction density I (1)
LXi=1

I (1) =

i i+1 as

I (1)
i i+1 ,

(3.15)

where I (1)
We depict I (1)

i i+1 as

i i+1 acts on the ﬁelds i and i + 1 and cyclic identiﬁcation i + L ∼ i is understood.

I (1)
i i+1 = I (1)

i

,

(3.16)

where we in general only specify the ﬁrst ﬁeld the density acts on in the case that this
determines all ﬁelds it acts on unambiguously.

In the SU(2) sector, we can write I (1)

i i+1 explicitly as a diﬀerential operator in the

fermionic variables:

I (1)
i i+1 =

2XA,B,C,D=1

(I (1)

i

ZAZB ˜ηC
)ZC ZD
i

∂

∂ ˜ηA
i

˜ηD
i+1

∂
∂ ˜ηB

i+1

,

(3.17)

where Z1 = X and Z2 = Y . The matrix element (I (1)
)ZC ZD
ZAZB encodes the contributions of
all interactions that transform the ﬁelds ZA, ZB in the operator to external ﬁelds ZC, ZD.

i

As the global charges are conserved, the only non-vanishing matrix elements are

(I (1)

i

)XX
XX ,

(I (1)

i

)XY
XY ,

(I (1)

i

)Y X
XY ,

(I (1)

i

)Y X
Y X ,

(I (1)

i

Y X and (I (1)
)XY

i

)Y Y
Y Y .

(3.18)

Moreover, matrix elements that are connected by a simple relabelling of X and Y coincide,
i.e.

i

(I (1)

XX = (I (1)
)XX

i
Hence, we only have to calculate (I (1)
this can be achieved via the on-shell method of unitarity.

XY = (I (1)
)XY
i
XX, (I (1)
)XX

(I (1)
)Y X
Y X ,
i
XY and (I (1)
)XY

(I (1)

)Y Y
Y Y ,

i

i

i

7For reviews of unitarity for scattering amplitudes, see e.g. [52, 199, 200].

XY = (I (1)
)Y X

i

)XY
Y X .

(3.19)

)Y X
XY . As already mentioned,

i

3.2 One-loop corrections in the SU(2) sector via unitarity

45

The general idea behind unitarity [56,57] and generalised unitarity [58] is to reconstruct
processes, such as scattering amplitudes, form factors or correlation functions, at loop order
by applying cuts. Here, a cut denotes replacing one or more propagators according to

i
i → 2πδ+(l2
l2

i ) = 2πδ(l2

i )Θ(l0

i ) ,

(3.20)

where δ+(l2
i ) denotes the delta function picking the positive-energy branch of the on-shell
condition l2
i = 0. This delta function can be explicitly written using the Heaviside step
function Θ, as shown on the right hand side of (3.20). On such a cut, the process factorises
into the product of one or more tree-level or lower-loop processes. In the case of unitarity,
the cut has to result in exactly two factors and corresponds to a discontinuity in one of the
kinematic variables. For generalised unitarity, more general cuts are possible.8 Through-
out this work, we are using four-dimensional (generalised) unitarity, i.e. we evaluate the
expressions on the cut in D = 4 dimensions.9 This allows us to use the simpler building
blocks in four dimensions but requires that the results are lifted to D = 4 − 2ε, leading to
some subtleties as discussed in the next chapter.
In this section, we apply unitarity at the level of the integrand, i.e. we aim to reconstruct
the integrand of the minimal one-loop form factors via cuts. As each interaction density
I (1)
i i+1 depends only on a single scale, namely si i+1 = (pi + pi+1)2, it is suﬃcient to consider
the double cut corresponding to the discontinuity in si i+1. For convenience, we set i = 1.
On this cut, the minimal one-loop form factor ˆF (1)
O,L factorises into the product of the
minimal tree-level form factor ˆF (0)
4 , as shown
in ﬁgure 3.1:10

O,L and the four-point tree-level amplitude ˆA(0)

O,L(1, 2, 3, . . . , L)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s12
ˆF (1)
The loop integralR dDl

of particles n and general D is given by

=Z dLIPS2,{l} d4 ˜ηl1 d4 ˜ηl2

4 (−l2,−l1, 1, 2) .
(3.21)
(2π)D is reduced to a phase-space integral, which for a general number

O,L(l1, l2, 3, . . . , L; q) ˆA(0)
ˆF (0)

In four dimensions, we can alternatively write the integration as

i )(cid:19) .
dDli
(2π)D 2πδ+(l2

Z dLIPSn,{l} =Z (cid:18) nYi=1
Z d4liδ+(l2

i ) d4 ˜ηli =Z d2λli d2˜λli

U(1)

d4 ˜ηli ≡Z dΛli ,

(3.22)

(3.23)

where the factor of U(1) refers to the fact that λli and ˜λli are deﬁned only up to a phase,
which is not integrated over; cf. the discussion below (2.4). In our conventions, the super-
spinor-helicity variables corresponding to −li are related to those corresponding to li as
λ−li = −λli, ˜λ−li = ˜λli, ˜η−li = ˜ηli.

8See [201] for a discussion of the relation between cuts and discontinuities across the corresponding

branch cuts in generalised unitarity.

9For a review of D-dimensional unitarity, see [202].
10Here and throughout the ﬁrst part of this work, we are splitting oﬀ the dependence on the gauge group
generators Ta to work with colour-ordered objects as deﬁned in (2.8) and (2.9). The contractions of the
generators Ta in the trace factors of (2.8) and (2.9) can be performed via (1.6), which is trivially done in
the case of planar cuts.

46

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

pL

q

p3

ˆFO,L

···

l1

l2

ˆA4

p1

p2

Figure 3.1: The double cut of the minimal one-loop form factor ˆF (1)
(p1 + p2)2.

O,L in the channel

We look at (I (1)

1 )XX

XX in detail.11 We have

O,L(1, 2, 3, . . . , L)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(I (1)
ˆF (1)
=Z dLIPS2,{l} d4 ˜ηl1 d4 ˜ηl2

1 )XX

XX ,s12

O,L(l1|X , l2|X , 3, . . . , L; q) ˆA(0)
ˆF (0)

4 (−l2,−l1, 1|X , 2|X ) ,

(3.24)

where we denote by the superscript and the vertical bar the speciﬁed component deﬁned
in (2.7) dressed with the corresponding ˜η factors. For instance,

ˆA(0)
4 (−l2,−l1, 1|X , 2|X ) = ˆA(0)

4 (−l2,−l1, 1X , 2X )˜η1

1 ˜η4

1 ˜η1

2 ˜η4
2 .

(3.25)

Inserting the expression (B.1) for the super amplitude and performing the integration over
the fermionic variables, we ﬁnd

ˆF (1)

O,L(1, 2, 3, . . . , L)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(I (1)

1 )XX

h1l1ih2l2i
(3.26)
Here, we have deﬁned d]LIPS as dLIPS multiplied by the momentum-conserving delta
function from the amplitude. In general,

XX ,s12

O,L(1X , 2X , 3, . . . , L) iZ d]LIPS2,{l}h12ihl1l2i
ˆF (0)

.

= ˜η1

1 ˜η4

1 ˜η1

2 ˜η4
2

d]LIPSn,{l} = dLIPSn,{l}(2π)DδD(cid:16)pi,j −

nXi=1

li(cid:17) ,

(3.27)

where pi,j =Pj

k=i pk is the total external momentum traversing the cut, which is p1,2 =
p1 + p2 in the case under consideration. The Schouten identity (2.5) and momentum
conservation yield

h12ihl1l2i
h1l1ih2l2i

= −

(p1 + p2)2
(p1 − l1)2 .

(3.28)

Thus, the cut of this one-loop form factor is proportional to the cut of the triangle integral:12

ˆF (1)

O,L(1, 2, 3, . . . , L)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(I (1)

1 )XX

XX ,s12

= ˜η1

1 ˜η4

1 ˜η1

2 ˜η4
2

ˆF (0)

O,L(1X , 2X , 3, . . . , L) i−s12

l1

l2

p1

 .

p2
(3.29)

11This case was already treated in [129].
12Here, the depicted cut integral denotes the double cut of (A.13) but with measure R dD l

(2π)D instead of

eγE ε R dD l

.

D
2

iπ

3.2 One-loop corrections in the SU(2) sector via unitarity

47

(I (1)

i

)

i

i+1

i

i+1

XX
XX

XY
XY

Y X
XY

si i+1

-1

-1

0

0

-1 +1

Table 3.1: Linear combinations of Feynman integrals forming the matrix elements for the
minimal one-loop form factors in the SU(2) sector.

Now, we lift the result to the D-dimensional uncut expressions, i.e. we conclude that the
same proportionality exists between the uncut one-loop form factor and the uncut triangle
integral. The precise rules for this lifting procedure, which in particular removes the factor
i in (3.29), are explained in appendix A.1. We ﬁnd that

(I (1)

1 )XX

XX = −s12

p1

p2

.

A similar calculation for (I (1)

1 )Y X

XY shows that

ˆF (1)

O,L(1, 2, 3, . . . , L)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(I (1)

and hence

= ˜η2

1 ˜η4

1 ˜η1

2 ˜η4
2

1 )Y X

XY ,s12

(I (1)

1 )Y X

XY =

ˆF (0)

O,L(1X , 2Y , 3, . . . , L) i

l1

l2

p1

p2

.

(3.30)

p1

p2

 ,

(3.31)

(3.32)

This is an explicit example where the one-loop form factor is not proportional to the tree-
level form factor of the same composite operator, making it necessary to promote I (ℓ) to
operators as done in (3.10).

The case (I (1)

1 )XY

XY can be calculated in complete analogy to the previous cases. We
have summarised the results of the three calculations in table 3.1. Note that the diﬀerent
matrix elements satisfy

This identity is in fact a consequence of the Ward identity (2.18) for the generators

(I (1)

i

XY + (I (1)
)XY

i

XY = (I (1)
)Y X

i

)XX
XX .

J1
i = ˜η1
i

∂
∂ ˜η2
i

+ ˜η2
i

∂
∂ ˜η1
i

,

J2
i = −i˜η1

i

∂
∂ ˜η2
i

+ i˜η2
i

∂
∂ ˜η1
i

,

J3
i = ˜η1
i

∂
∂ ˜η1

i − ˜η2

i

∂
∂ ˜η2
i

(3.33)

(3.34)

of SU(2). Applying (2.18) once for the tree-level form factor in (3.10) and once for its
one-loop correction, we ﬁnd

[JA,I (1)] = 0 ,

(3.35)

which implies (3.33).

48

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

Deﬁning the identity operator

1i i+1 =

2XA,B=1

˜ηA
i

∂
∂ ˜ηA
i

˜ηB
i+1

∂
∂ ˜ηB

i+1

and the permutation operator

Pi i+1 =

2XA,B=1

˜ηB
i

∂

∂ ˜ηA
i

˜ηA
i+1

∂
∂ ˜ηB

i+1

,

(3.36)

(3.37)

we can recast the one-loop corrections into the following form:

I (1)
i i+1 = − si i+1

i

i+1

× 1i i+1 −

i

i+1

× (1−P)i i+1 .

(3.38)

Explicit expressions for the one-mass triangle integral and the bubble integral are given

in (A.13) and (A.12), respectively. The divergence of the triangle integral is

− si i+1

i

i+1

= −

1

ε2 (−si i+1)−ε + O(ε0) ="−

and the one of the bubble integral is

i

i+1

=

1
ε

+ O(ε0) ,

γ(1)
cusp

8ε2 − G(1)

4ε # (−si i+1)−ε + O(ε0)

0

(3.39)

(3.40)

cusp and G(1)

where γ(1)
0 were given in (3.4) and (3.5), respectively. Comparing (3.38) to the
general form (3.13), we can immediately read oﬀ the one-loop dilatation operator in the
SU(2) sector as

with density

D(1) =

D(1)

i i+1

LXi=1

D(1)
i i+1 = 2(1−P)i i+1 .

(3.41)

(3.42)

This is exactly the Hamiltonian density of the integrable Heisenberg XXX spin chain and
perfectly agrees with the result ﬁrst obtained in [25].

After this warm-up exercise, let us now derive the complete one-loop dilatation operator

via generalised unitarity.

3.3 One-loop corrections for all operators via generalised

unitarity

In this section, we use four-dimensional generalised unitarity to calculate the cut-constructi-
ble part of the one-loop correction to the minimal form factor of any composite operator.
As demonstrated in the previous section in the SU(2) sector, this immediately yields the
one-loop dilatation operator.

3.3 One-loop corrections for all operators via generalised unitarity

49

Whereas we have worked at the level of the integrand in the previous section, we now
work at the level of the integral. In non-compact subsectors, such as the SL(2) subsector,
as well as in the complete theory, minimal form factors can have arbitrarily high powers
of λi and ˜λi. Via (3.21), they lead to one-loop integrands with arbitrarily high powers of
the loop momentum in the numerator, which can be expressed in a countably inﬁnite basis
of tensor structures. The resulting integrals, however, satisfy considerably more identities
than the integrands, as non-vanishing integrands can integrate to zero. They can thus
be reduced further. Instead of working at the level of the integrand and performing this
reduction, we can simply work at the level of the integral.

It is well known that every one-loop Feynman integral in strictly four dimensions can
be written as a linear combination of box integrals, triangle integrals, bubble integrals,
tadpole integrals and rational terms [203].13
In massless theories such as N = 4 SYM
theory, the tadpole integrals vanish. Hence, we can make a general ansatz for the one-loop
form factor, which is shown in ﬁgure 3.2.

p1

p2

q

ˆFO,n

p3

···

pn

= Xi,j,k,l

pi+1

pi

c(i,j,k,l)
box

q

·
pl+1 ·

pi

q

c(i,j)
bubble

pj+1

+Xi,j

pj

pj+1

···

pk

pk+1

+Xi,j,k

pi

q

c(i,j,k)
triangle

pk+1

·
·

pi+1

···

···

pk

pj

pj+1

···

···

pi+1

+ rational terms

···

pj

pl

·
·

Figure 3.2: The n-point one-loop form factor ˆF (1)

O,n of a generic single-trace operator O can
be written as a linear combination of box integrals, triangle integrals, bubble integrals and
rational terms. The coeﬃcients of these integrals are labelled by the diﬀerent combinations
of momenta ﬂowing out of their corners.

The coeﬃcients in this ansatz can be ﬁxed by applying cuts to both sides in ﬁgure
3.2 and integrating over all remaining degrees of freedom. First, the maximal cuts are
taken, which are the quadruple cuts. They isolate the box integrals and hence ﬁx their
coeﬃcients. Next, the triple cuts are taken, which isolate the box integrals and triangle
integrals. As the box coeﬃcients are already known, this ﬁxes the triangle coeﬃcients.
Finally, the double cuts are taken, which have contributions from box integrals, triangle
integrals and bubble integrals. Knowing the coeﬃcients of the former, this ﬁxes the bubble
coeﬃcients. The ﬁnite rational terms vanish in all cuts and can hence not be obtained via
this variant of four-dimensional generalised unitarity. We refer to the expression in ﬁgure
3.2 without the rational terms as the cut-constructible part.14

13In order to also obtain all terms in D = 4 − 2ε dimensions that vanish for D = 4, the pentagon integral

has to be included; see e.g. [53].

14Note that at least some of the rational terms in this ansatz can be constructed by applying the double

cut at the level of the integrand and using PV reduction, see [4] for an example.

50

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

p1

p2

q

ˆFO,L

p3

···

pL

pi−1

ci,i+1
triangle

q

pi+2

·
·

=Xi

+rational terms

pi

pi+1

pi−1

ci,i+1
bubble

q

pi+2

·
·

+Xi

pi

pi+1

Figure 3.3: The minimal one-loop form factor ˆF (1)

O,L of a generic single-trace operator O
can be written as a linear combination of one-mass triangle integrals, bubble integrals and
rational terms. Here, the coeﬃcients of the integrals are labelled by the two momenta that
ﬂow through the integrals and thus set their scale.

The above method shares many features with other variants of generalised unitarity
from the literature on scattering amplitudes, but there are also important diﬀerences which
are designed to make it well suited for form factors of general operators. As the method
of Ossola, Papadopoulos and Pittau (OPP) [204], it ﬁrst ﬁxes the coeﬃcients in an ansatz
that correspond to many propagators and then uses them to determine the coeﬃcients
corresponding to less propagators.
In contrast to OPP, however, it works at the level
of the integral and not the integrand. Moreover, the integral over all unﬁxed degrees of
freedom in the cut is taken in several other methods, including ones for the direct extraction
of integral coeﬃcients [190, 205]. Our way to perform the integration, though, is diﬀerent.

For minimal one-loop form factors, the general ansatz shown in ﬁgure 3.2 simpliﬁes even
further. By deﬁnition, minimal form factors have as many external ﬁelds as there are ﬁelds
in the composite operator. The box integral involves two ﬁelds of the composite operator,
which enter its left corner; see ﬁgure 3.2. However, at least one external ﬁeld is connected
to each of the three other corners of the box integral. Hence, it can only contribute to form
factors which have at least one more external ﬁeld than ﬁelds in the operator, i.e. to at
least next-to-minimal form factors. For the same reason, exactly one external ﬁeld has to
be connected to each of the two corners of the triangle integral that are not connected to
the composite operator, and exactly two external ﬁelds have to be connected to the right
corner of the bubble integral. Thus, only one-mass triangle integrals, bubble integrals and
rational terms can contribute to the minimal one-loop form factor. This simpliﬁed ansatz
is shown in ﬁgure 3.3.

As the box integral is absent, the maximal possible cut of the minimal one-loop form
factor is the triple cut. As shown in ﬁgure 3.4, it isolates the triangle integral and hence ﬁxes
the triangle coeﬃcient. We explicitly compute the triangle coeﬃcient from the triple cut in
the next subsection. Next, we take the double cut. It has contributions from the triangle
integral and the bubble integral, as shown in ﬁgure 3.5. Knowing the triangle coeﬃcient,
we can calculate the bubble coeﬃcient from this cut. We perform this calculation in
subsection 3.3.2. In subsection 3.3.3, we summarise our result and extract the complete
one-loop dilatation operator from it. Moreover, we give a short discussion of the rational
terms.

3.3 One-loop corrections for all operators via generalised unitarity

51

p1

p2

q

ˆFO,L

p3

= c1,2

triangle

···

pL

pL

q

p3

·
·

p1

p2

Figure 3.4: Three-particle cut of the ansatz for the minimal one-loop form factor ˆF (1)
O,L of
a generic single-trace operator O. Taken between p1, p2 and the rest of the diagram, this
cut isolates the triangle integral with external on-shell legs p1 and p2 and its coeﬃcient
c1,2
triangle.

p1

p2

q

ˆFO,L

p3

= c1,2

triangle

···

pL

pL

q

p3

·
·

p1

p2

+ c1,2

bubble

pL

q

p3

·
·

p1

p2

Figure 3.5: Two-particle cut of the ansatz for the minimal one-loop form factor ˆF (1)
O,L of
a generic single-trace operator O. Taken between p1, p2 and the rest of the diagram, this
cut isolates the triangle integral and the bubble integral with external on-shell legs p1 and
p2 and their respective coeﬃcients c1,2

triangle and c1,2

bubble.

52

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

3.3.1 Triple cut and triangle coeﬃcient

In this subsection, we calculate the triangle coeﬃcient of the minimal one-loop form factor
shown in ﬁgure 3.3. To this end, we study the triple cut between two neighbouring external
ﬁelds i and i + 1 and the rest of the diagram. We set i = 1 to simplify the notation. As
shown in ﬁgure 3.4, this cut isolates the one-mass triangle integral with external momenta
p1 and p2, which is multiplied by the coeﬃcient c1,2
triangle. On the cut, the minimal one-
loop form factor ˆF (1)
O,L on the left hand side of ﬁgure 3.4 factorises into the product of
the minimal tree-level form factor ˆF (0)
3 , as
(2π)9Z dΛl1 dΛl2 dΛl3

O,L and two three-point tree-level amplitudes ˆA(0)

shown in ﬁgure 3.6. The corresponding four-dimensional phase-space integral is

O,L(Λl1 , Λl2 , Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q) ˆA(0)
ˆF (0)

3 (Λ1, Λl3 , Λ−l1) ˆA(0)

1

3 (Λ−l3 , Λ2, Λ−l2) .
(3.43)

pL

q

p3

l1

l2

ˆFO,L
ˆFO,L

···

ˆA3
ˆA3

ˆA3
ˆA3

l3

p1

p2

O,L shown on
the left hand side of ﬁgure 3.4 factorises into the product of the minimal tree-level form

Figure 3.6: On the three-particle cut, the minimal one-loop form factor ˆF (1)
factor ˆF (0)

O,L and two three-point tree-level amplitudes ˆA(0)
3 .

The triple cut imposes the following three constraints:

l2
1 = l2 = 0 ,
l2
2 = (p1 + p2 + l)2 = l2 + (p1 + p2)2 + 2(p1 + p2) · l = 0 ,
l2
3 = (p1 + l)2 = l2 + 2l · p1 = 0 ,

(3.44)

where the loop momentum l is chosen as −l1. Since l has four components, one might
expect a one-parameter real solution. Instead, the real solution for l1 and l2 is unique:

l1 = p1 ,

l2 = p2 .

(3.45)

This is a consequence of p2
variables, (3.45) reads

1 = p2

2 = 0, cf. for example [190]. In terms of spinor-helicity

λα
l1 = eiφ1 λα
λα
l2 = eiφ2 λα
1 ,
2 ,
1 , ˜λ ˙α
l2 = e−iφ2 ˜λ ˙α
˜λ ˙α
l1 = e−iφ1 ˜λ ˙α
2 .

(3.46)

where φ1 and φ2 parametrise the U(1) freedom in deﬁning a pair of spinor-helicity variables
that corresponds to a given vector.

Up to now, we have neglected the momentum of the third cut propagator l3. Together
with momentum conservation at the three-point amplitudes, the on-shell conditions for p1
and p2 impose the constraints

1 = (l1 − l3)2 = 0 ,
p2

p2
2 = (l2 + l3)2 = 0 ,

(3.47)

3.3 One-loop corrections for all operators via generalised unitarity

53

which, in terms of spinor-helicity variables, read

hl1l3i[l1l3] = 0 ,

hl2l3i[l2l3] = 0 .

(3.48)

For real momenta and Minkowski signature, the angle and square brackets in (3.48) are
negative conjugates of each other.15 Hence, we have to allow complex momenta to obtain
a non-trivial solution, as is usual for massless three-particle kinematics. We then consider
the limit of the complex solutions where the momenta become real and (3.45), (3.46) are
satisﬁed. For complex momenta, the constraints (3.48) imply λl3 ∝ λl1 or ˜λl3 ∝ ˜λl1 and
λl3 ∝ λl2 or ˜λl3 ∝ ˜λl2, respectively. Choosing λl1 ∝ λl2 ∝ λl3 would imply λp1 ∝ λp2, which
is incompatible with having generic external momenta p1 and p2. Analogously, not all ˜λli
can be proportional. This leaves us with two possibilities: either

or

(i)

˜λl3 ∝ ˜λl1

and

λl3 ∝ λl2

(ii)

λl3 ∝ λl1

and

˜λl3 ∝ ˜λl2 .

(3.49)

(3.50)

The resulting contributions for both solutions should be averaged over, i.e. summed with
a prefactor of 1

2 , cf. [58, 206].16

The three-point amplitudes in the three-particle cut can be either of MHV type or of
MHV type, and we have to sum both contributions. However, only the combination of an
upper MHV amplitude with a lower MHV amplitude is non-vanishing on the support of
solution (i) while only the opposite combination is non-vanishing on the support of solution
(ii). Let us look at solution (i) ﬁrst.

The product of the two colour-ordered tree-level three-point amplitudes is given by

1 ˜ηA

l3 − hl1l3i˜ηA

l1 ˜ηA

l3 − h1l1i˜ηA

1 ˜ηA
l1 )

3

=

ˆAMHV (0)

3

(Λ−l3 , Λ2, Λ−l2)

i(2π)4δ4(p1 + l3 − l1)

h1l3ihl3l1ihl11i

(Λ1, Λl3 , Λ−l1) ˆAMHV (0)
4YA=1
(h1l3i˜ηA
4YA=1

[2l2][l2l3][l32]

([l2l3]˜ηA

(−i)(2π)4δ4(p2 − l2 − l3)

2 + [2l2]˜ηA
= (2π)8δ4(p1 + l3 − l1)δ4(p2 − l2 − l3)h12i e2i(φ1+φ2)
[12]3h1l1i4
4YA=1(cid:16)h1l3i(˜ηA

l3 − h1l1i˜ηA

1 − eiφ1 ˜ηA

l1 )˜ηA

1 ˜ηA

l3 + [l32]˜ηA
l2 )

(3.51)

l1(cid:17) 4YA=1(cid:16)[2l3](e−iφ2 ˜ηA

2 − ˜ηA

l2 ) + [2l2]˜ηA

l3(cid:17) ,

where we have used the identities

h1l3i[l32] = h1|l3|2] = h1|l1|2] = h1l1i[l12] = h1l1i[12] e−iφ1 ,
hl3l1i[l2l3] = [l2|l3|l1i = −[l2|p1|l1i = −h1l1i[l21] = h1l1i[12] e−iφ2 ,
h12i[2l2] = h1|p2|l2] = h1|l1|l2] = h1l1i[l1l2] = h1l1i[12] e−i(φ1+φ2) ,
15Recall that l1, l2 and l3 have positive energy due to the Heaviside step function in (3.20).
16The above procedure has an equivalent description in terms of a sequence of four generalised cuts
as follows. On the double cut in l1 and l2, the squared momentum in the third propagator factors to
l2
3 = (l1 − p1)2 = hl1p1i [l1p1]. Hence, further generalised cuts can be taken in hl1p1i and [l1p1] individually.

(3.52)

54

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

which follow from momentum conservation. Moreover, we have dropped terms that are
subleading in the limit where the momenta become real and satisfy (3.46). Integrating out
the fermionic ˜ηA
l3

variables, we ﬁnd

(2π)8δ4(p1 + l3 − l1)δ4(p2 − l2 − l3)h12i e2i(φ1+φ2)
[12]3h1l1i4
l1)[2l3](e−iφ2 ˜ηA

1 − eiφ1 ˜ηA

4YA=1(cid:16)h1l3i(˜ηA

2 − ˜ηA

l2 ) + h1l1i˜ηA

1 ˜ηA

(3.53)

l1 [2l2](cid:17) .

Using (3.52), we can cancel all angle and square brackets in the denominator such that the
expression is manifestly ﬁnite in the limit where the momenta are real and satisfy (3.46).
Furthermore, the second term in the parenthesis in (3.53) is found to vanish in this limit,
such that we have

− (p1 + p2)2(2π)8δ4(p1 + l3 − l1)δ4(p2 − l2 − l3) e2i(φ1+φ2)

4YA=1(cid:16)(e−iφ1 ˜ηA

1 − ˜ηA

l1)(e−iφ2 ˜ηA

l2 )(cid:17) .
2 − ˜ηA

The subsequent integration over the fermionic variables ˜ηA
l1

and ˜ηA
l2

replaces

l1 → e−iφ1 ˜ηA
˜ηA
1 ,

l2 → e−iφ2 ˜ηA
˜ηA

2

(3.54)

(3.55)

in the tree-level form factor, while the phase-space integral leads to similar replacements in
the bosonic variables via (3.46). The resulting total phase factor is e2iφ1Cl1 e2iφ2Cl2 , which
equals unity as the central charges Cl1 and Cl2 corresponding to the tree-level form factor
vanish. Thus, the phase-space integral (3.43) evaluates to

1
2π

−

(p1 + p2)2 ˆF (0)

O,L(Λ1, Λ2, Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q)

(3.56)

on the support of solution (i). A completely analogous calculation yields the same result
for solution (ii), which cancels the prefactor of 1
2 .17 In comparison, the phase-space integral
of the triple-cut triangle integral yields18

l1

l2

l3

p1

p2

=

1
2π

.

Thus, we ﬁnd

triangle = −(p1 + p2)2 ˆF (0)
c1,2

O,L(Λ1, Λ2, Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q) .

(3.57)

(3.58)

17In fact, we could hence also have taken only one of the two solution. The crucial point is that the same

procedure is applied to both sides of the ansatz in ﬁgure 3.3.

18Note that we are considering the cut triangle integral based on the measure factor

i(2π)4 here, which is
a mixture of both sides of (A.1). This is a consequence of the fact that ˜g2 is factored out in the ansatz for
ˆF (1)

1

O,L in ﬁgure 3.3.

3.3 One-loop corrections for all operators via generalised unitarity

55

3.3.2 Double cut and bubble coeﬃcient

In this subsection, we calculate the bubble coeﬃcient of the minimal one-loop form factor
shown in ﬁgure 3.3. We study the double cut between the two external ﬁelds 1 and 2 and
the rest of the diagram. As shown in ﬁgure 3.5, this cut is the sum of two contributions.
The ﬁrst contribution is the double-cut one-mass triangle integral with external momenta
p1 and p2 multiplied by the triangle coeﬃcient c1,2

triangle:19

l1

p1

c1,2
triangle

l2

p2

i

(2π)2Z dΛl1 dΛl2 δ4(p1 + p2 − l1 − l2)

(p1 + p2)2
(l1 − p1)2

ˆF (0)
O,L(Λ1, Λ2, Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q) .

(3.59)

= −

The second contribution is the double-cut bubble integral with external momenta p1 and
p2 multiplied by the bubble coeﬃcient c1,2

bubble:

c1,2
bubble

l1

l2

p1

p2

= c1,2

bubble

i

(2π)2Z dΛl1 dΛl2 δ4(p1 + p2 − l1 − l2) .

(3.60)

On the cut, the minimal one-loop form factor ˆF (1)
into the product of the minimal tree-level form factor ˆF (0)
amplitude ˆA(0)

4 , as shown in ﬁgure 3.1. This yields

O,L on the right side of ﬁgure 3.5 factorises
O,L and the four-point tree-level

ˆF (0)
O,L(Λl1 , Λl2 , Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q) ˆA(0)

4 (Λ−l2 , Λ−l1 , Λ1, Λ2) ,

(3.61)

1

(2π)6Z dΛl1 dΛl2

cf. (3.21).

To obtain the bubble coeﬃcient c1,2

bubble, we have to evaluate the four-dimensional phase-
space integrals in (3.59), (3.60) and (3.61). This can be achieved via an explicit parametri-
sation. We use the parametrisation of [99] in order to make contact with the observation
on the connection between the four-point amplitude and the one-loop dilatation operator
presented in that paper:

(cid:18) λ1
l2 (cid:19) = r1 eiσ1 U(cid:18) λ1
2 (cid:19) ,

l1
λ1

1
λ1

where

U = diag(eiφ2 , eiφ3) V (θ) diag(1, eiφ1) ,

1
λ2

l1
λ2

(cid:18) λ2
l2 (cid:19) = r2 U V (σ2)(cid:18) λ2
2 (cid:19) ,
V (θ) =(cid:18) cos θ − sin θ
cos θ (cid:19) .

sin θ

(3.62)

(3.63)

, ˜λ ˙1
l2

, ˜λ ˙2
l1

and ˜λ ˙2
l2

The spinors ˜λ ˙1
are obtained from (3.62) by complex conjugation. The
l1
parameters are r1, r2 ∈ (0,∞), θ, σ2 ∈ (0, π
2 ) and σ1, φ1, φ2, φ3 ∈ (0, 2π). Diﬀerent values
of the phases φ2 and φ3 yield the same momenta l1 and l2, and hence we do not need
to integrate over them. Below, we will explicitly show that the phase-space integrals are
independent of φ2 and φ3, as required by consistency.20

19In this section, as in the previous subsection, we are considering the cut triangle integral and the cut

bubble integral based on the measure factor

1

i(2π)4 .

20In fact, the phases φ2 and φ3 exactly parametrise the U(1) in (3.23) for i = 1, 2.

56

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

In [99], the parametrisation (3.62) was used to obtain a compact expression for (3.61).

We brieﬂy review the corresponding calculation below.

Under the change of variables, the momentum-conserving delta function transforms as

δ4(P ) = δ4(p1 + p2 − l1 − l2) =

=

4(λ1
1

˜λ ˙1
1 + λ1
2

˜λ ˙1
2)(λ2
1

δ(λα
1

˜λ ˙α
1 + λα
2

2Yα=1

˜λ ˙α
2 − λα
iδ(1 − r1)δ(1 − r2)δ(σ1)δ(σ2)
˜λ ˙2
˜λ ˙2
1 + λ2
2) − [12](λ1
2

˙2Y˙α= ˙1
2)(cid:16)h12i(˜λ ˙1

˜λ ˙2
1 + ˜λ ˙1

˜λ ˙α
l1 − λα

˜λ ˙2

l1

2

1

l2

˜λ ˙α
l2)

(3.64)

1λ2

1 + λ1

2λ2

2)(cid:17) .

Thus, momentum conservation localises the integrals over r1, r2 and σ1, σ2 at 1 and 0,
respectively. The Jacobian corresponding to the change of variables equals 2 cos θ sin θ
times the denominator of the second line in (3.64) when evaluated at these values. Hence,

d2λl1 d2˜λl1

d2λl2 d2˜λl2

U(1)

U(1)

δ4(P ) → dφ1 dθ 2i cos θ sin θ .

The MHV denominator of the four-point amplitude can then be simpliﬁed to

h12ih2l2ihl2l1ihl11i = h12i4 e2i(φ1+φ2+φ3) sin2 θ ,

and the supermomentum-conserving delta function becomes

(3.65)

(3.66)

1 ˜ηA

2 − h1l1i˜ηA

1 ˜ηA

l1 − h1l2i˜ηA

1 ˜ηA

l2 − h2l1i˜ηA

2 ˜ηA

l1 − h2l2i˜ηA

2 ˜ηA

l2 + hl1l2i˜ηA

l1 ˜ηA

δ8(Q) =

4YA=1(cid:16)h12i˜ηA

= h12i4 e4i(φ1+φ2+φ3)

4YA=1(cid:16) e−i(φ1+φ2+φ3) ˜ηA

1 ˜ηA

2 + e−iφ3(sin θ ˜ηA

1 + e−iφ1 cos θ ˜ηA

2 )˜ηA
l1

+ e−iφ2(e−iφ1 sin θ ˜ηA

2 − cos θ ˜ηA

1 )˜ηA

l2 + ˜ηA

l1 ˜ηA

l2(cid:17) .

(3.67)
amounts to the following replacements in

l2(cid:17)

(3.68)

(3.69)

(3.70)

Integrating over the fermionic variables ˜ηA
l1
ˆF (0)
O,L:

, ˜ηA
l2

while

l1
˜ηA

(cid:18) ˜ηA
l2 (cid:19) = U ∗(cid:18) ˜ηA
2 (cid:19) ,   ˜λ ˙α
(cid:18) λα
l2 (cid:19) = U(cid:18) λα

2 (cid:19) ,
l2 ! = U ∗(cid:18) ˜λ ˙α
2 (cid:19) .

l1
˜λ ˙α

l1
λα

1
˜ηA

1
˜λ ˙α

1
λα

Assembling all previous steps, (3.61) can be simpliﬁed to21

2

(2π)2Z 2π

0

−

dφ1 e2iφ1Cp2 e2iφ2Cl1 e2iφ3Cl2Z π

0

2

dθ cot θ ˆF (0)

O,L(Λ′

1, Λ′

2, Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q) ,

21Note that there is an additional factor of i in the amplitude (B.1) combining with the one in (3.65)
to make the total prefactor real. Similarly, the additional factor of (2π)4 in (B.1) combines with the
corresponding factor in (3.61).

3.3 One-loop corrections for all operators via generalised unitarity

57

where

(cid:18) λ′α
2 (cid:19) = V (θ)(cid:18) λα

1
λ′α

1
λα

2 (cid:19) , (cid:18) ˜λ′ ˙α

2 (cid:19) = V (θ)(cid:18) ˜λ ˙α

1
˜λ′ ˙α

1
˜λ ˙α

2 (cid:19) , (cid:18) ˜η′A

2 (cid:19) = V (θ)(cid:18) ˜ηA
2 (cid:19) .

1
˜η′A

1
˜ηA

(3.71)
The central charges Cl1 and Cl2 vanish as the ﬁelds at l1 and l2 correspond to the minimal
tree-level form factor and hence satisfy the required little group scaling. Thus, the depen-
dence on φ2 and φ3 drops out as expected. The integral over φ1 yields a Kronecker delta
that ensures that the central charge vanishes also for p2:

Z 2π

0

dφ1 e2iφ1Cp2 = 2πδCp2 ,0 .

(3.72)

As the amplitude conserves the central charge, this ensures that both p1 and p2 have the
correct little group scaling. In total, we have

4 (Λ−l2 , Λ−l1 , Λ1, Λ2)(cid:17)

(3.73)

1

(2π)6Z dΛl1 dΛl2(cid:16) ˆF (0)

1
π

2

δCp2 ,0Z π

0

= −

O,L(Λl1 , Λl2 , Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q) ˆA(0)

dθ cot θ ˆF (0)

O,L(Λ′

1, Λ′

2, Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q) .

As a next step, we evaluate the phase-space integral (3.59). In terms of spinor-helicity

variables, the denominator of (3.59) can be written as
(l1 − p1)2 = hl11i[l11] .

Inserting the parametrisation (3.62) localised by momentum conservation, we ﬁnd

hl11i = h12i ei(φ1+φ2) sin θ ,

and hence

Combining this with c1,2

(l1 − p1)2 = h12i[12] sin2 θ = −(p1 + p2)2 sin2 θ .
triangle, (3.65) and (3.72), we have

(3.74)

(3.75)

(3.76)

c1,2
triangle

l1

l2

p1

p2

1
π

= −

2

δCp2 ,0Z π

0

dθ cot θ ˆF (0)

O,L(Λ1, Λ2, Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q) ,

(3.77)

where we have included δCp2 ,0 to match the prefactor of (3.73), which is possible since the
central charge Cp2 belongs to the tree-level form factor in this case and hence vanishes
automatically.

Via (3.65) and explicit integration, the cut bubble integral yields

l1

l2

p1

p2

=

i

(2π)2Z dΛl1 dΛl2δ4(P ) = −

2

1

πZ π

0

dθ sin θ cos θ = −

1
2π

.

(3.78)

As shown in ﬁgure 3.5, the bubble coeﬃcient can be obtained by subtracting (3.77)

from (3.73) and dividing by (3.78). This gives

c1,2

bubble = −2δCp2 ,0Z π

0

2

dθ cot θ(cid:16) ˆF (0)
O,L(Λ1, Λ2, Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q)
− ˆF (0)

O,L(Λ′

1, Λ′

2, Λ3, . . . , ΛL; q)(cid:17) .

(3.79)

58

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

Note that the integral of each summand in (3.79) diverges when taken individually. This
divergence occurs in the integral region where θ = 0, i.e. where the uncut propagator
in (3.59) goes on-shell. Hence, it is the collinear divergence of the tree-level four-point
amplitude. This divergence in (3.61) is precisely cancelled by (3.59).

3.3.3 Results and the complete one-loop dilatation operator

Let us summarise our results from the previous two subsections in terms of the interaction
density deﬁned in (3.15). The cut-constructible part of the one-loop correction to the
minimal form factor of a generic single-trace operator is obtained by acting with the density

I

(1)

i i+1 = −si i+1

i

i+1 × 1i i+1 +

i

i+1 × Bi i+1 + rational terms

(3.80)
on the minimal tree-level form factor, where si i+1 = (pi + pi+1)2, 1i i+1 is the identity
operator and the integral operator Bi i+1 acts as

Bi i+1 ˆF (0)

O,L(Λ1, . . . , ΛL; q) = −2δCi+1,0Z π

0

2

O,L(Λ1, . . . , Λ′

dθ cot θ(cid:16) ˆF (0)
O,L(Λ1, . . . , Λi, Λi+1, . . . , ΛL; q)
− ˆF (0)
V (θ) =(cid:18) cos θ − sin θ
cos θ (cid:19) .

i+1, . . . , ΛL; q)(cid:17) ,

i, Λ′

sin θ

(3.82)

(3.81)

with

(cid:18) Λ′

i
Λ′

i+1 (cid:19) = V (θ)(cid:18) Λi

Λi+1 (cid:19) ,

Note that the ﬁnite rational terms in (3.80) are absent in the SU(2) sector discussed
in the last section. For general operators, however, they are non-vanishing; see [4] for a
simple example in the SL(2) sector. It would be interesting to determine these rational
terms in general.22

As discussed in detail in the end of the last section, we can read oﬀ the dilatation
operator from (3.80) by comparison with the general form (3.13). Accordingly, the complete
one-loop dilatation operator of N = 4 SYM theory is given by the density

(D(1))i i+1 = −2Bi i+1 .

(3.83)

Note that this precisely agrees with (1.28) after replacing all superoscillators by super-
spinor-helicity variables according to (2.14).

In [99], a connection between the leading length-changing part of the complete ℓ-loop
dilatation operator and the n-point tree-level scattering amplitudes was derived via sym-
metry considerations, which was based on the fact that both objects are completely de-
termined by PSU(2, 2|4). In particular, the second part in (1.28) was obtained from the
four-point tree-level amplitude. The ﬁrst part in (1.28) was added as a regularisation. The
author of [99] has numerically shown that it is uniquely ﬁxed by commutation relations
with certain leading length-changing algebra generators but states that a (more) physical
argument would be desirable. Above, we have given this physical argument and, moreover,
derived the complete result via ﬁeld theory.

22Methods to determine rational terms were developed in the context of scattering amplitudes in QCD,

see e.g. [200] for a review. These methods might also be applicable here.

3.3 One-loop corrections for all operators via generalised unitarity

59

Let us mention that our result for the minimal one-loop form factor is not limited to the
planar theory. It can be immediately generalised to the non-planar case by acting with the
interaction density (3.80) on pairs of non-neighbouring legs and performing the occurring
contractions of traces via (1.6).23

In the next chapters, we will proceed to two-loop order. In contrast to the situation
at one-loop order, the basis of integrals is not known at two-loop order; see e.g. [207] for
an approach in this direction, though. Hence, at two-loop order, we cannot apply exactly
the same method as used in this section. We will work with unitarity at the level of the
integrand as used in the previous section instead. Moreover, there are some conceptual
problems which need to be solved before proceeding to treat all operators. These problems
concern the non-trivial mixing between IR and UV divergences and operator mixing beyond
one-loop order and the long known problem how to calculate the minimal two-loop Konishi
form factor via unitarity. We will address them in the following two chapters.

23This is a straightforward generalisation of the way the complete one-loop dilatation operator acts in the
non-planar case, which is described in detail in [27]. It is similar to the situation of one-loop amplitudes as
well, whose non-planar double-trace contributions are also completely determined by the planar single-trace
contributions [56].

60

3 Minimal one-loop form factors

Chapter 4

Minimal two-loop Konishi form
factor

Having derived the complete one-loop dilatation operator via form factors and on-shell
methods in the previous chapter, we now proceed to two-loop order. Concretely, we cal-
culate the minimal two-loop form factor of the Konishi primary operator and obtain the
Konishi anomalous dimension up to two-loop order from it. The Konishi operator is the
best-studied example of a non-protected operator in N = 4 SYM theory. Calculating its
form factors and correlation functions via on-shell methods involves some important sub-
tleties concerning the regularisation. These subtleties also occur for a wide class of other
operators and require an extension of the on-shell method of unitarity.

We introduce the Konishi primary operator in section 4.1. In section 4.2, we present the
calculation of its two-loop form factor via unitarity. Subsequently, we analyse the occurring
subtleties and show how to treat them correctly in section 4.3. Finally, we summarise our
results in section 4.4.

The results presented in this chapter were ﬁrst published in [5].

4.1 Konishi operator

The best-studied composite operators in N = 4 SYM theory arise from taking the trace of
two scalar ﬁelds, where we are now considering real scalars transforming in the fundamental
representation of SO(6).

One of them is the traceless symmetric part

OBPS = tr(φ(I φJ)) ,

I, J = 1, . . . , 6 ,

(4.1)

which transforms in the 20’ of SO(6). It is part of the stress-tensor supermultiplet, which
also contains the on-shell Lagrangian. Moreover, it is half BPS, and hence protected.

The other one is the trace part

K = δIJ tr(φI φJ )

(4.2)

and known as the Konishi primary operator. It is the primary operator of a long supermul-
tiplet of PSU(2, 2|4). Although not protected, the Konishi primary is an eigenstate under
renormalisation, i.e.

Kren = ZKKbare ,

ZK(˜g, ε) = exp

˜g2ℓ γ(ℓ)

K
2ℓε

.

∞Xℓ=1

(4.3)

61

62

4 Minimal two-loop Konishi form factor

In the planar limit, the anomalous dimension of the Konishi operator is1

γK =

∞Xℓ=1

˜g2ℓγ(ℓ)

K = 12˜g2 − 48˜g4 + 336˜g6 − 96(26 − 6ζ3 + 15ζ5)˜g8

(4.4)

+ 96(158 + 72ζ3 − 54ζ 2

3 − 90ζ5 + 315ζ7)˜g10 + O(˜g12) .

Non-planar corrections to (4.4) start to occur at the fourth loop order [208]. The ﬁrst
two orders in (4.4), which we reproduce in this chapter, were ﬁrst calculated via Feynman
diagrams in [209, 210] and [211–213], respectively.2

In order to apply four-dimensional supersymmetric on-shell methods, we need to express
the operators (4.1) and (4.2) in terms of the antisymmetric scalars appearing in Nair’s
N = 4 on-shell superﬁeld (2.6). In terms of these ﬁelds, (4.1) can be written as

OBPS = tr(φABφCD) −

1
12

ǫABCD tr(φEF φEF ) .

Without loss of generality, we focus on the particular component

OBPS = tr(φABφAB) ,

(4.5)

(4.6)

where A and B are not summed over. Similarly, the Konishi primary operator (4.2) can
be expressed as

K6 =

1
8

ǫABCD tr(φABφCD) = tr(φ12φ34) − tr(φ13φ24) + tr(φ14φ23) .

(4.7)

Note that (4.7) as well as the superﬁeld (2.6) manifestly require Nφ = 6 scalars. Hence, we
denote the operator deﬁned in (4.7) as K6. The expression (4.2), however, is meaningful
for any Nφ. In fact, supersymmetric regularisation in D = 4 − 2ε dimensions requires to
continue the number of scalars to Nφ = 10 − D = 6 + 2ε. Hence, K6 6= K. We come back
to this subtlety in section 4.3.

4.2 Calculation of form factors

Let us now calculate the one- and two-loop corrections to the Konishi two-point form factor
via the on-shell method of unitarity in four dimensions. As already mentioned, this yields
direct results only for K6 6= K.3
The Konishi primary operator is an eigenstate under renormalisation. Thus, all loop
corrections to its form factors are proportional to the tree-level expressions and the opera-
tors I (ℓ) deﬁned in (3.10) reduce to simple functions, as in the case of amplitudes and form
factors of the BPS operator (4.1). We denote these functions as f (ℓ).
According to section 2.2, the colour-ordered minimal tree-level super form factor of K6

is given by

ˆF (0)
K6,2(1, 2) =

1
4

ǫABCD ˜ηA
1 ˜η3
1 ˜η1

1 ˜η2
1 ˜η4

=(cid:0) + ˜η1

+ ˜η3

2 ˜ηD
1 ˜ηB
1 ˜ηC
1 ˜η3
2 ˜η4
2 − ˜η1
2 − ˜η2
2 ˜η2
1 ˜η4

1 ˜η2
1 ˜η1

2 (2π)4δ4(cid:0)λ1˜λ1 + λ2˜λ2 − q(cid:1)

2 ˜η4
2 ˜η3

2 + ˜η1
2 + ˜η2

1 ˜η4
1 ˜η3

1 ˜η2
1 ˜η1

2 ˜η3
2
2 ˜η4

(4.8)

2(cid:1)(2π)4δ4(cid:0)λ1˜λ1 + λ2˜λ2 − q(cid:1) .

4.2 Calculation of form factors

63

q

ˆFK,2

l1

l2

ˆA4

p1

p2

Figure 4.1: The double cut of the minimal one-loop Konishi form factor ˆF (1)
channel (p1 + p2)2.

K,2 in the

The one-loop correction to (4.8) can be calculated via unitarity in analogy to section
3.2. We only have to consider the double cut given in (3.21) and depicted in ﬁgure 3.1.
Specialising to L = 2 and O = K6, ﬁgure 3.1 reduces to ﬁgure 4.1 and we ﬁnd4
ˆF (1)

=Z dLIPS2,{l} d4 ˜ηl1 d4 ˜ηl2
K6,2(1, 2) iZ d]LIPS2,{l}hl12i2hl21i2 + 4hl11ihl12ihl21ihl22i + hl11i2hl22i2
= ˆF (0)
}

K6,2(1, 2)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s12

hl11ih12ih2l2ihl2l1i
f (1)

K6,2(−l1,−l2) × ˆA(0)
ˆF (0)

4 (p1, p2, l2, l1)

|

.

(4.9)

Applying the Schouten identity (2.5), this yields

f (1)

K6(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)s12

= iZ d]LIPS2,{l}(cid:18)hl1l2ih12i
= iZ d]LIPS2,{l}(cid:18)−

hl11ihl22i
s12
(l1 + p1)2 + 6

l1

p1

= −i s12

l2

p2

+ i 6

(l1 + p2)2

s12

(cid:19)

p1

p2

,

(4.10)

s12

l1

l2

{z
K6(cid:12)(cid:12)s12
h12ihl1l2i(cid:19)

(l1 + p2)2

+ 6hl12ihl21i

where the loop-momentum dependent prefactor (l1 + p2)2 is understood to appear in the
numerator of the depicted integral.

As in the previous chapter, we have to sum the contributions from cuts in all pairs of
neighbouring legs. In the case of L = 2, those are p1 and p2 as well as p2 and p1, which
are inequivalent when considering colour-ordered quantities. The contributions from both
cuts, however, do agree, resulting in a total prefactor of 2. In total, we ﬁnd

f (1)

K6,2 = 2−s12

l

p1

p2

+ 6

s2l
s12

p1

p2

 .

(4.11)

1In a conformal ﬁeld theory like N = 4 SYM theory, the anomalous dimensions are scheme independent.

Hence, the expansions of γK in g and ˜g coincide.

2Currently, the anomalous dimension γK of the Konishi operator is known up to ℓ = 5 from ﬁeld

theory [32–34, 48, 214–216] and up to ℓ = 10 from integrability [35, 45, 217–223].

3We postpone a detailed discussion of this subtlety to the next section.
4Note that we have reversed the momenta l1 and l2 with respect to the last chapter.

64

4 Minimal two-loop Konishi form factor

q

ˆFK,2
ˆFK,2

l1

l2

ˆA4ˆA4

p1

p2

Figure 4.2: The planar two-particle cut of the two-loop Konishi form factor ˆF (2)
channel (p1 + p2)2.

K,2 in the

In contrast to the one-loop results in section 3.2, not all integrals appearing in the result
(4.11) are scalar.
Instead, also a linear tensor integral occurs. Via Passarino-Veltmann
(PV) reduction [203], however, it can be reduced to a scalar integral, as shown in appendix
A.2. Using (A.8), we have

f (1)
K6,2(1, 2) = −2s12

p1

p2

− 6

p1

p2

,

(4.12)

|

f (1)
BPS,2(1,2)

{z

}

where the ﬁrst summand is equal to the corresponding result for OBPS.
At two-loop order, several diﬀerent cuts have to be considered, which are depicted in
ﬁgures 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4. We treat these cuts one after the other. The ﬁrst cut is the planar
double cut depicted in ﬁgure 4.2, on which the minimal colour-ordered two-loop form factor

K6,2 factorises into the product of the minimal colour-ordered tree-level form factor ˆF (0)
ˆF (2)
and the colour-ordered one-loop four-point amplitude ˆA(1)
4 . The latter is given by [224]5
4 (p1, p2, p3, p4)(− s12s23)I (1)

4 (p1, p2, p3, p4) = ˆA(0)
ˆA(1)

4 (p1, p2, p3, p4) ,

(4.13)

K6,2

where the box integral is

I (1)

4 (p1, p2, p3, p4) = (eγE µ2)εZ dlD

iπ

D
2

Hence, we have

l2(l + p1)2(l + p1 + p2)2(l + p1 + p2 + p3)

1

=Z dLIPS2,{l} d4 ˜ηl1 d4 ˜ηl2

I

ˆF (2)

K6,2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

s12

K6,2(−l1,−l2) ˆA(0)
ˆF (0)
× (−)s12s1l1I (1)

4 (p1, p2, l2, l1)

4 (p1, p2, l2, l1) .

.

(4.14)

(4.15)

The ﬁrst line in (4.15) can now be simpliﬁed in complete analogy to the one-loop case in
(4.10) such that we ﬁnd

I

f (2)

K6,2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

s12

s1l1 − 6

=Z d]LIPS2,{l}(cid:16) s12
12 − 6s1l1 s2l1(cid:17)
=(cid:16)s2

l1

l2

s2l1

s12(cid:17)s12s1l1 I (1)

p1

4 (p1, p2, l2, l1)

(4.16)

.

p2

5The sign in (4.13) is related to our conventions for the box integral (4.14).

4.2 Calculation of form factors

65

p1

l1

q

ˆFK,2

l2

p2

Figure 4.3: The non-planar two-particle cut of two-loop Konishi form factor ˆF (2)
channel (p1 + p2)2.

K,2 in the

We denote the resulting contribution to the two-loop form factor of K6 as

f (2),I

K6,2 =(cid:16)s2

12 − 6s1l1 s2l1(cid:17)

l

p1

.

p2

(4.17)

As in the one-loop case, this cut can be taken between the legs p1 and p2 as well as p2 and
p1, which are inequivalent conﬁgurations for colour-ordered objects.

in ﬁgure 4.3. On this cut, the colour-ordered two-loop minimal form factor ˆF (2)
into the product of the colour-ordered minimal tree-level form factor ˆF (2)

In addition to the planar double cut, also a non-planar double cut contributes, as shown
K6,2 factorises
K6,2 and the double-
4 . The latter appears with trace

of the one-loop four-point amplitude A(1)

ˆˆA(1)

4

trace part
structure

ˆˆA(1)
4 (l1, l2; p1, p2)

1
N

tr(Tal1 Tal2 ) tr(Tap1 Tap2 ) ,

(4.18)

where the momenta in diﬀerent traces are separated by a semicolon. Although (4.18) is
apparently suppressed in 1
N , it contributes at leading order in N in this cut due to the
can be

wrapping eﬀect [29], cf. the discussion in section 1.3. The double-trace part
expressed in terms of colour-ordered amplitudes as [56]

ˆˆA(1)

4

ˆˆA(1)
4 (l1, l2; p1, p2) = ˆA(1)
4 (p1, p2, l1, l2) + ˆA(1)
+ ˆA(1)
4 (p1, p2, l2, l1) + ˆA(1)

4 (p1, l1, p2, l2) + ˆA(1)
4 (p1, l2, p2, l1) + ˆA(1)

4 (p1, l1, l2, p2)

4 (p1, l2, l1, p2) ,

(4.19)

The two lines in (4.19) are related by relabelling l1 ↔ l2. Since we are working with full
amplitudes at this point, we have to include a prefactor of 1
2 in the phase-space integral to
compensate for the freedom to relabel l1 ↔ l2, which eﬀectively reduces (4.19) to its ﬁrst
line. The ﬁrst and the last term in the ﬁrst line of (4.19) both contribute the same integral
as the previous cut, such that the total prefactor of f (2),I
K6,2 becomes 4. The second term in
the ﬁrst line of (4.19) yields6

=Z dLIPS2,{l} d4 ˜ηl1 d4 ˜ηl2

II

s12

ˆF (2)

K6,2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

K6,2(−l1,−l2) ˆA(0)
ˆF (0)
× (−)s12s1l1 I (1)

4 (p1, l1, p2, l2)

4 (p1, l1, p2, l2) ,

(4.20)

6See [134] for an alternative derivation of the contributions (4.15) and (4.20) of the (planar and non-
planar) double cut to the two-point two-loop form factor of an operator of length two, which uses funda-
mental and adjoint gauge-group indices.

66

4 Minimal two-loop Konishi form factor

q

ˆFK,3

l1

l2

l3

ˆA5

p1

p2

Figure 4.4: The three-particle cut of the two-loop Konishi form factor ˆF (2)
(p1 + p2)2.

K,2 in the channel

such that

II

s12

f

(2)

K6,2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

=(cid:16)s2

12 − 6s1l1 s2l1(cid:17)

p1

Its contribution to the two-loop form factor of K6 is

f (2),II

K6,2 =(cid:16)s2

12 − 6s1ls2l(cid:17)

l1
l2

p2 .

(4.21)

l

p1

p2

.

(4.22)

The three-particle cut, or triple cut (TC), of the minimal two-loop form factor ˆF (2)
K6,2
K6,2 factorises into the product of the tree-level

K6,3 and the tree-level ﬁve-point amplitude ˆA(0)
5 :

is shown in ﬁgure 4.4. On this cut, ˆF (2)
three-point form factor ˆF (0)
=Z dLIPS3,{l}

ˆF (2)

K6,2(1, 2)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)TC

(4.23)
where two summands arise due to the diﬀerent possibilities to distribute the MHV degree
between the amplitude and the form factor. In fact, those two summands are conjugates
of each other.

For any composite operator built from L scalar ﬁelds, the next-to-minimal tree-level
form factors can be easily obtained via Feynman diagrams or from the component expansion
of the super form factors of tr(φL
14) given in [138].7 They can be of MHV or NMHV type.
For MHV, two diﬀerent cases can occur. In the ﬁrst case, a g+ can be emitted between two
neighbouring scalars φAB and φCD at positions i and i + 1. This leads to the replacement

··· ˜ηA

i ˜ηB

i ˜ηC

i+1 ˜ηD

i+1 ··· −→ ··· ˜ηA

i ˜ηB
i

hi i+2i

hi i+1ihi+1 i+2i

˜ηC
i+2 ˜ηD

i+2 ···

(4.24)

7Since no interactions among the diﬀerent scalar ﬁelds in the composite operator can occur at tree level,

the corresponding components of the tree-level form factors are insensitive to the ﬂavours of the scalars.

K6,3

d4 ˜ηli(cid:16) ˆF (0),MHV
3Yi=1
+ ˆF (0),NMHV
K6,2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)TC

K6,3

,

= ˆF (0)

K6,2(1, 2)f (2)

(−l1,−l2,−l3) ˆA(0),NMHV

5

(p1, p2, l3, l2, l1)

(−l1,−l2,−l3) ˆA(0),MHV

5

(p1, p2, l3, l2, l1)(cid:17)

4.2 Calculation of form factors

67

l1

p1

p2

+

l1

l2

l3

l2

l3

+

p1

p2

l1

l3

p1

l1

l2

p1

p2

+

l3

+

p2

l2

p2

l3

l1

p1

l2

Figure 4.5: Triple cuts of the integrals in (4.17) and (4.22), which yield the ﬁrst ﬁve
terms in (4.28). Here, we have suppressed the numerator factors occurring in (4.28).

in the minimal tree-level form factor. In the second case, a scalar ﬁeld φCD at position i
splits into two antifermions ¯ψC and ¯ψD, leading to

··· ˜ηA

i−1 ˜ηB

i−1 ˜ηC

i ˜ηD

i ˜ηE

i+1 ˜ηF

i+1 ··· −→ ··· ˜ηA

i−1 ˜ηB
i−1

(˜ηC

i ˜ηD

i+1 − ˜ηD

i ˜ηC

i+1)˜ηE

i+2 ˜ηF

i+2 ··· .

(4.25)
For NMHV, two diﬀerent cases can occur as well, which are in fact conjugates of the above
cases.8 In the ﬁrst case, a g− can be emitted between two neighbouring scalars φAB and
φCD at positions i and i + 1, leading to

1

hi i+1i

−[i i+2]

i ˜ηB
i

i+1 ˜ηD

i ˜ηB

i ˜ηC

··· ˜ηA

i+1 ··· −→ ··· ˜ηA

i+2 ··· .
In the second case, the scalar ﬁeld φCD at position i splits into two fermions ψC′
ǫCDC′D′ = 1, leading to
··· ˜ηA

(¯˜ηi,C′ ¯˜ηi+1,D′ − ¯˜ηi,D′ ¯˜ηi+1,C′)˜ηE

i+1 ··· −→ ··· ˜ηA

i−1 −1
[i i+1]

[i i+1][i+1 i+2]

i−1 ˜ηB

i−1 ˜ηC

i ˜ηD

i ˜ηE

˜η1
i+1 ˜η2

i−1 ˜ηB

i+1 ˜ηC

i+2 ˜ηD

i+1 ˜ηF

i+1 ˜η3

i+1 ˜η4

i+2 ··· ,
(4.27)
j . These replacements have to be summed over all possible

i+2 ˜ηF

(4.26)

, ψD′

with

where ¯˜ηj,A = 1
insertion points.

3! ǫABCD ˜ηB

j ˜ηC

j ˜ηD

Inserting the above expressions for the next-to-minimal form factors as well as those

for the ﬁve-point amplitudes into (4.23), we ﬁnd

= iZ d]LIPS3,{l}(cid:18) s2

f (2)

K6,2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)TC

12 − 6s1l1 s2l1
s2l3 sl1l2 sl2l3
s2
12 − 6s1l2 s2l2
s1l1 sl1l3 sl2l3

+

s2
12 − 6s1l3 s2l3
s1l1 sl1l2 sl2l3
s2
12 − 6s1l2 s2l2
s1l1s2l3 sl1l3

+

+

s2
12 − 6s1l2 s2l2
s2l3 sl1l2 sl1l3
18s1l3
18
s12 −
s12sl1l2 −

+

+

(4.28)
The ﬁrst ﬁve terms in (4.28) stem from triple cuts of the integrals in (4.17) and (4.22), as
shown in ﬁgure 4.5.

The remaining three terms correspond to integrals that could not be detected in the

18s2l1

s12sl2l3(cid:19) .

previous cuts:

III

TC

f (2)

K6,2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

= i18 1

s12

l1

l2

l3

l1

p1

p2

s1l3
s12

−

l2

l3

l1

l2

p1

p2

s2l1
s12

−

l3

p1

p2

 . (4.29)

8They can be obtained using the conjugation rule described in appendix B.

68

Hence,

f (2),III

K6,2 = 18 1

s12

= 18

4 Minimal two-loop Konishi form factor

p1

p2

s1l
s12

−

l

l

p1

p2

s2l
s12

−

p1

p2



(4.30)

p1

p2

,

where the last step is valid at the level of the integral, i.e. up to terms that integrate to
zero. Similarly to the previous cases, we have to add the result from the triple cut in the
legs p2 and p1, which yields a factor of two.

Note that there is also a fourth cut, namely the double cut on which the minimal two-

loop form factor ˆF (2)
and the tree-level four-point amplitude ˆA(0)

K6,2 factorises into the product of the minimal one-loop form factor ˆF (1)
K6,2
4 . This cut is consistent with the previous cuts

and contributes no new integrals; see [5] for details.

Assembling all pieces, the total result for the two-loop minimal form factor of K6 is9

K6,2 = 4f (2),I
f (2)

K6,2 + f (2),II

K6,2 + 2f (2),III

K6,2

= − 6(l + p1)2(l + p2)2(cid:18)4

l

+ 36

p1

p2

+ s2

12(cid:18)4

|

p1

p2

+

l

p1

+

p2

{z

f (2)
BPS,2

(4.31)

p1

p2

(cid:19)

.

p1

p2(cid:19)
}

The integrals occurring in (4.31) are given in appendix A.3.

Employing (3.13), however, we ﬁnd a mismatch with the known two-loop Konishi
anomalous dimension (4.4). As already mentioned, this is because K6 does not coincide
with the Konishi primary operator K when regulating the theory in D = 4− 2ε dimensions.
This subtlety is the subject of the following section.

4.3 Subtleties in the regularisation

In this section, we discuss some important subtleties that arise when applying on-shell
methods that were developed for scattering amplitudes to the computation of form factors
and correlation functions. These subtleties are related to regularisation and require an
extension of the on-shell methods. For concreteness, we focus on the calculation of the
Konishi form factor via unitarity as an example.

As discussed in section 3.1, the occurrence of divergences in loop calculations requires
us to regularise the theory. In general, such a regularisation should be compatible with the
symmetries of the theory. For gauge theories, the regularisation of choice is dimensional
regularisation, i.e. continuing the dimension of spacetime from D = 4 to D = 4 − 2ε.
Conventional dimensional regularisation (CDR) [226] and the ’t Hooft Veltmann (HV)

9This result agrees with the unpublished notes of Boucher-Veronneau, Dixon and Pennington [225]. We

thank Camille Boucher-Veronneau, Lance Dixon and Jeﬀrey Pennington for sharing these notes.

4.3 Subtleties in the regularisation

69

scheme [227], however, break supersymmetry as the number of vector degrees of freedom
is changed — since the polarisation vectors ǫ±
µ are in D = 4 − 2ε dimensions — while the
number of scalars Nφ = 6 and fermions Nψ = 4 stays the same. A way to regularise the
theory while preserving supersymmetry is dimensional reduction (DR) from ten dimensions
[228,229]. It exploits the fact that four-dimensional N = 4 SYM theory is the dimensional
reduction of ten-dimensional N = 1 SYM theory to D = 4. Dimensionally reducing to
D = 4 − 2ε instead, one obtains a regularised supersymmetric theory with Nψ = 4 and
Nφ = 10−D = 6+2ε. In the DR scheme, the ten-dimensional metric gM N , M, N = 0, . . . , 9,
is split into the (4 − 2ε)-dimensional metric gµν , µ, ν = 0, . . . , 3 − 2ε, and the metric δIJ ,
I, J = 1, . . . , 6 + 2ε, of the scalar ﬁeld ﬂavours. The ten-dimensional gauge ﬁeld AM splits
into the (4 − 2ε)-dimensional gauge ﬁeld Aµ and Nφ = 6 + 2ε scalars φI .

A modiﬁcation of the DR scheme is the so-called four-dimensional-helicity (FDH)
scheme [230, 231]. In this scheme, the additional 2ε scalars are absorbed into the vector
bosons such that the polarisation vectors are in four dimensions. As the DR scheme, the
FDH scheme apparently preserves supersymmetry, as the number of bosonic and fermionic
degrees of freedom match. Moreover, it allows to use spinor-helicity variables (2.4) and
Nair’s N = 4 on-shell superﬁeld (2.6). Most on-shell methods implicitly use the FDH
scheme, which has been successful for amplitudes and form factors of BPS operators.
However, as we will argue below, it is incompatible with the occurrence of operators that
are sensitive to the reorganisation of the 2ε scalars, such as the Konishi primary operator
K.

In order to investigate the diﬀerences between working in four dimensions, the DR
In Feynman
scheme or the FDH scheme, we study the underlying Feynman diagrams.
diagrams, factors of D = gµ
I arise from gauge ﬁelds and scalar ﬁelds that
circulate in a loop in such a way that also their indices form a loop. Moreover, such an
index loop can exist even though the loop in the ﬁeld ﬂavours is interrupted e.g. by a self-
energy insertion. We call an index loop internally closed if it involves only the elementary
vertices of the theory and externally closed if it involves also a composite operator.

µ and Nφ = δI

Let us consider internally closed index loops ﬁrst. Both vector ﬁelds and scalar ﬁelds
in N = 4 SYM theory originate from the ten-dimensional vector ﬁeld in N = 1 SYM
theory, and so do their elementary interaction vertices. Hence, for every Feynman diagram
with an internally closed vector index loop, there exists an accompanying diagram with
an internally closed scalar index loop. The sum of both contributions is proportional to
Nφ + D = 10, which is independent of ε. As far as internally closed index loops are
concerned, one is thus free to work in strictly four dimensions, the FDH scheme, or the
DR scheme. Scattering amplitudes and form factors of the BPS operators tr(φL
14) contain
only internally closed index loops. This explains their successful calculation via on-shell
methods.

The situation changes for externally closed index loops. Composite operators in N = 4
SYM theory do not in general arise from the dimensional reduction of ten-dimensional
composite operators in N = 1 SYM theory. In particular, there are composite operators
that contain only scalar ﬁelds and no vector ﬁelds. Hence, a factor of Nφ from an externally
closed scalar index loop is in general not accompanied by a factor of D from a closed vector
index loop and vice versa. For externally closed index loops, the result thus depends on
working in the FDH scheme, in four dimensions or in the DR scheme. For instance, the δIJ
in the Konishi primary K = δIJ φI φJ in (4.2) can give rise to externally closed index loops.

70

q

4 Minimal two-loop Konishi form factor

p1

p2

=

I

J

K

L

+

I

J

K

L

+

I

J

K

L

(a) δIK δJ L

(b) δILδJK

(c) δIJ δKL

Figure 4.6: As a consequence of R-charge conservation, only three diﬀerent tensor struc-
tures can occur in a Feynman diagram that contributes to the minimal ℓ-loop form factor
of the operator tr(φI φJ ) with external ﬁelds φK and φL: (a) δIK δJL, (b) δILδJK and (c)
δIJ δKL.

Via its tensor structure, this operator explicitly depends on the dimension of spacetime.10
Let us consider a Feynman diagram that contributes to the ℓ-loop minimal form factor
of the operator tr(φI φJ ) with external ﬁelds φK and φL. As a consequence of R-charge
conservation, only three diﬀerent tensor structures can occur, as shown in ﬁgure 4.6: (a)
δIK δJL, (b) δILδJK and (c) δIJ δKL. They are denoted as identity, permutation and trace,
respectively. In the cases (a) and (b), no externally closed index loop occurs. In the case
(c), one externally closed index loop occurs. In strictly four dimensions or the FDH scheme,
it yields Nφ = 6, while it yields Nφ = 6 + 2ε in the DR scheme. We can hence multiply
the tensor structure (c), which is the trace, by a factor

rφ =

6 + 2ε

6

(4.32)

to account for the diﬀerence.

The contributions of the tensor structures (a), (b) and (c) to the BPS operator (4.1)
and the Konishi primary operator (4.2) can be obtained by contraction with the respective
tensor structures in (4.1) and (4.2). We ﬁnd that the sum of (a) and (b) contributes to the
BPS operator (4.1) while the sum of (a), (b) and (c) contributes to the Konishi primary
operator (4.2). Hence, we can single out the tensor structure (c) as diﬀerence between the
form factors of the Konishi operator and the BPS operator.

In all results of the last section, we have already written the form factor ratios of K6 as

K6,2 = f (ℓ)
f (ℓ)

BPS,2 + ˜f (ℓ)

K6,2 ,

(4.33)

BPS,2 coincides with the form factor ratio of the BPS operator (4.6) and ˜f (ℓ)

where f (ℓ)
K6,2 is the
diﬀerence between the form factor ratios of K6 and the BPS operator. Writing the form
factor ratios of K as

K,2 = f (ℓ)
f (ℓ)

BPS,2 + ˜f (ℓ)
K,2 ,

(4.34)

we can obtain them by the simple replacement rule

˜f (ℓ)
K6,2

rφ−→ rφ ˜f (ℓ)

K6,2 = ˜f (ℓ)
K,2 .

(4.35)

10The diﬀerence K − K6, which vanishes for D = 4, is an example of a so-called evanescent operator,

which also occur in QCD [232]. For a textbook treatment, see [226].

4.4 Final result and Konishi anomalous dimension

71

The above arguments do not depend on the loop order ℓ and should hence be valid for
generic ℓ.11 Here, we have looked only at the minimal form factor. The above replacement
(4.35), however, is valid for general n-point form factors of K, cf. [5].
Moreover, the subtleties analysed in this section for the Konishi form factor also oc-
cur for form factors, generalised form factors and correlation functions of other operators
that depend on the spacetime dimension via contracted indices. Our analysis can be
straightforwardly generalised to these cases and so should our solution. The latter relies
on the possibility to decompose the diﬀerent contributions to these quantities with respect
to tensor structures and to calculate the contributions to the diﬀerent tensor structures
independently.

Let us look at some further examples of spacetime-dependent operators. Another scalar
example is the operator tr(φI φI φK), which is an eigenstate of the one-loop dilatation op-
erator with one-loop anomalous dimension 8. An example with contracted vector indices
instead of scalar indices is tr(Dµ φ12 Dµ φ12), which is an eigenstate of the one-loop dilata-
tion operator with one-loop anomalous dimension 0. In one-loop diagrams, this contraction
of covariant derivatives leads to a contraction of the loop momentum with itself. The dif-
ference between performing this contraction in D = 4 or D = 4− 2ε dimensions is given by
the integral in the Passarino-Veltman reduction discussed in appendix A.2 that contains
ε = l2
(4) − l2 in the numerator. This integral evaluates to a rational term. Similarly, the
l2
replacement (4.35) leads to a rational term in f (1)
K,2; it arises when multiplying the term in
rφ that is linear in ε with the 1
K,2. Both rational terms arise from contributions
to the integrand that vanish for D = 4 but integrate to a ﬁnite value in D = 4 − 2ε.12

ε pole in ˜f (1)

4.4 Final result and Konishi anomalous dimension

Using the modiﬁcation rule (4.35) and the integrals provided in appendix A.3, the minimal
one-loop form factor of the Konishi primary K is given by

f (1)

BPS,2 =(cid:16) −
K,2 =(cid:16) −

˜f (1)

q2

µ2(cid:17)−ε(cid:20)−
µ2(cid:17)−ε(cid:20)−

q2

2
ε2 +
6

π2
6

+

14
3

ζ3ε +

47
720

π4 ε2(cid:21) + O(ε3) ,

ε − 14 −(cid:16)28 −

π2

2 (cid:17)ε −(cid:16)56 −

7π2

6 − 14ζ3(cid:17)ε2(cid:21) + O(ε3) ,

(4.36)

where the decomposition into fBPS and ˜fK was deﬁned in (4.34). Similarly, the minimal
two-loop form factor of the Konishi primary K is given by

f (2)

BPS,2 =(cid:16) −
K,2 =(cid:16) −

˜f (2)

q2

µ2(cid:17)−2ε(cid:20) 2
µ2(cid:17)−2ε(cid:20) 12

q2

ε4 −

ε3 +

π2
6ε2 −
46
ε2 +

25ζ3
3ε −
152 − 2π2

ε

7π4

60 (cid:21) + O(ε) ,
+(cid:16)484 −

35π2

3 − 56ζ3(cid:17)(cid:21) + O(ε) .

(4.37)

11They do, however, rely on the DR scheme, which has known inconsistencies at higher loop orders

[233–236].

12A complementary view on this subtlety is as follows. Using four-dimensional unitarity, the results have
to be lifted to D dimensions, i.e. the occurring functions have to be continued from D = 4 to D = 4 − 2ε.
This concerns the loop momenta but also the factors arising from ﬂavours, at least if we are interested in
the D-dimensional theory that is the dimensional reduction of ten-dimensional N = 1 SYM theory. The
continuation to D = 4 − 2ε is not unique if terms contribute that vanish for D = 4, such as l2
(4) − l2
or K − K6. However, we can make the lifting unique by decomposing the four-dimensional result in terms
of tensor structures that are meaningful for general D, such as identity, permutation and trace.

ε = l2

72

4 Minimal two-loop Konishi form factor

These results match with the results of a direct Feynman diagram calculation, which is
presented in [5].

Comparing (4.36) and (4.37) with the general form of loop corrections (3.13), we ﬁnd

the anomalous dimensions

γ(1)
K = 12 ,

γ(2)
K = −48 ,

(4.38)

in perfect agreement with the known values (4.4).

Chapter 5

Minimal two-loop SU(2) form
factors

Next, we look at minimal two-loop form factors in the SU(2) sector. The subtleties dis-
cussed in the last chapter do not occur in this case. However, a non-trivial mixing of UV
and IR divergences occurs, which demonstrates that the exponentiation of divergences is
indeed in terms of interaction operators as given in (3.13). Furthermore, we study the ﬁnite
part of the form factors, or, more precisely, the remainder functions.

We calculate the minimal two-loop form factors for generic operators in the SU(2) sector
via unitarity in section 5.1. In section 5.2, we extract the two-loop dilatation operator in
the SU(2) sector from them and, in section 5.3, the ﬁnite remainder function.

This chapter is based on results ﬁrst published in [6].

5.1 Two-loop form factors via unitarity

In section 3.2, we have calculated the minimal one-loop form factors for operators in the
SU(2) sector. Now, we proceed to the next loop order.

Connected interactions at two-loop order can involve either two or three neighbouring
ﬁelds of the composite operator at a time.1 We denote them as having range two or range
three, respectively. Moreover, disconnected interactions can occur, which are products of
two one-loop interactions. Hence, we can write the two-loop interaction operator I (2) in
terms of corresponding densities as2

I (2) =

LXi=1(cid:16)I (2)

i i+1 i+2 + I (2)

i i+1 +

1
2

L+i−2Xj=i+2

I (1)
i i+1I (1)

j j+1(cid:17) .

(5.1)

Similarly to the one-loop case, the densities are operators and can be expressed in terms

1Recall that interactions involving only one ﬁeld lead to integrals that can only depend on the vanishing

scale p2

i = 0. These integrals vanish themselves.

2We restrict ourselves to L ≥ 3 here. All operators in the SU(2) sector with L = 2 are related via SU(2)
symmetry to the BPS operator tr(φ14φ14), whose minimal two-loop form factor was ﬁrst calculated in [126].
In particular, no ﬁnite-size eﬀects contribute here.

73

74

q

pL

p3

5 Minimal two-loop SU(2) form factors

ˆFO,L
ˆFO,L

···

l1

l2

ˆA4ˆA4

p1

q

pL

p2

p4

l1

l2

l3

ˆFO,L

···

ˆA6

p1

p2

p3

(a) First double cut of ˆF (2)
channel (p1 + p2)2.

O,L in the two-particle

(b) Triple cut of ˆF (2)
nel (p1 + p2 + p3)2.

O,L in the three-particle chan-

q

pL

p3

l1

l2

l3

ˆFO,L+1

···

ˆA5

p1

q

pL

p2

p3

ˆFO,LˆFO,L

···

l1

l2

ˆA4
ˆA4

p1

p2

O,L in the two-particle channel

(d) Second double cut of ˆF (2)
(c) Triple cut of ˆF (2)
particle channel (p1 + p2)2.
(p1 + p2)2.
Figure 5.1: Unitary cuts of the minimal two-loop form factor ˆF (2)

O,L in the SU(2) sector.

O,L in the two-

of their matrix elements as3

I (2)
i i+1 = I (2)

i

I (2)
i i+1 i+2 = I (2)

i

=

=

i

(I (2)

2XA,B,C,D=1
2XA,B,C,D,E,F =1

ZA ZB ˜ηC
)ZC ZD
i

∂

∂ ˜ηA
i

˜ηD
i+1

∂
∂ ˜ηB

i+1

,

(5.2)

(I (2)

i

ZAZB ZC ˜ηD
)ZD ZE ZF
i

∂

∂ ˜ηA
i

˜ηE
i+1

∂
∂ ˜ηB

i+1

˜ηF
i+2

∂
∂ ˜ηC

i+2

.

Several of these matrix elements vanish due to SU(4) charge conservation and further
matrix elements are trivially related to each other via relabelling X ↔ Y or inverting the
order of the ﬁelds. Hence, we only need to calculate (I (2)
)Y X
XY at
range two as well as (I (2)
)XXY
XY X at
range three.

XY and (I (2)
)XY
i
XY X and (I (2)
)XY X

i
i
XXY , (I (2)
)Y XX

XXX, (I (2)
)XXX

XXY , (I (2)
)XXY

XXY , (I (2)
)XY X

XX, (I (2)
)XX

i

i

i

i

i

i

The matrix elements can be calculated via the on-shell unitarity method as in the last
two chapters. The required cuts are shown in ﬁgure 5.1. The cuts in ﬁgures 5.1a, 5.1c and
5.1d have already been discussed in the case of the Konishi two-loop form factor treated
in the previous chapter and they can be calculated analogously in the present case.
In
addition to these cuts, also the triple cut in the three-particle channel is required, which is
shown in ﬁgure 5.1b. On this cut, the minimal two-loop form factor ˆF (2)
O,L factorises into the
product of the minimal tree-level form factor ˆF (0)
O,L and the tree-level six-point amplitude
ˆA(0)
6 . The required amplitudes are of NMHV type; we give explicit expressions for them in
(B.6) of appendix B.2. Via the triple cut in the three-particle channel, each term in (B.6)
maps to one of the integrals occurring in the interactions of range three.

The resulting matrix elements are shown in table 5.1 for range two and table 5.2 for

3We are using the notation introduced in section 3.2.

5.1 Two-loop form factors via unitarity

75

l

(I (2)

i

)

i

i+1

i

i+1

i

i+1

i

i+1

i

i+1

XX
XX

XY
XY

Y X
XY

s2
i i+1

+1 +1

si i+1

+1 +1

0

0

si i+1si l

0 +1

-1

0 +1

-1

0 +1

-1

Table 5.1: Linear combinations of Feynman integrals forming the matrix elements of
range two for the minimal two-loop form factors in the SU(2) sector. Integrals between
horizontal lines occur in ﬁxed combinations.

range three.4 They satisfy the linear relations

(I (2)

i

XY + (I (2)
)XY

i

XY = (I (2)
)Y X

i

)XX

XX

and

i

XXY + (I (2)
)Y XX
XY X + (I (2)
)XY X
XXY + (I (2)
)XY X
i
These identities are a consequence of

(I (2)
(I (2)
(I (2)

i

i

i

i

i

XXY + (I (2)
)XY X
XY X + (I (2)
)Y XX
XXY = (I (2)
)Y XX

XXY = (I (2)
)XXY
XY X = (I (2)
)XXY
XY X + (I (2)
)XXY

i

i

i

i

i

[JA,I (2)] = 0 ,

)XXX
XXX ,

)XXX
XXX ,

)XXY
Y XX .

(5.3)

(5.4)

(5.5)

which follows from the Ward identity (2.18) as in the one-loop case. Accordingly, we can
bring the two-loop interaction density into the form

and

XX − (I (2)
)XX

i

)Y X

XY

Pi i+1

I (2)

i

I (2)

i i+1 =(cid:0)(I (2)
i i+1 i+2 =(cid:0)(I (2)
XXX − (I (2)
)XXX
+(cid:0)(I (2)
Y XX − (I (2)
)XY X
)Y XX

i
+(I (2)

XXY

i

i

i

i

i

Y XX − (I (2)
)XY X
XXY(cid:1)Pi i+1 +(cid:0)(I (2)
)Y XX

)XXY

Y XX

i

Pi i+1Pi+1 i+2 + (I (2)

)Y X

i

XY(cid:1) 1i i+1 +(I (2)
XXY(cid:1) 1i i+1 i+2

)XY X

XXY − (I (2)
)XY X
i
i
Pi+1 i+2Pi i+1 ,

)XXY

Y XX(cid:1)Pi+1 i+2

(5.6)

(5.7)

where 1i i+1 i+2 is deﬁned in analogy to (3.36).

The Feynman integrals occurring in tables 5.1 and 5.2 can be reduced to master integrals
via IBP reduction, which is implemented e.g. in the Mathematica package LiteRed [237].
Expressions for the required master integrals can be found in [238].

4The matrix elements (I (2)

i

XX and (I (2)
)XX

i

results agree with the ones found there.

)XXX
XXX also occur for the BPS vacuum treated in [139] and our

76

5 Minimal two-loop SU(2) form factors

(I (2)

i

)

XXX
XXX

XXY
XXY

XY X
XY X

XY X
XXY

XXY
XY X

Y XX
XXY

silsi+1i+2 +1

+1

+1

sii+1si+2l +1

+1

+1

sii+1i+2

-1

-1

-1

0

0

0

l

l

l

l

i

i+1

i+2

i

i+1

i+2

i

i+1

i+2

i

i+1

i+2

i

i+1

i+2

i

i+1

i+2

i

i+1

i+2

i

i+1

i+2

i

i+1

i+2

i

i+1

i+2

i

i+1

i+2

0

0

0

-1

-1

0

0

0

0

0

0

+1

0

0

0

0

sii+1

sil

si+1i+2

si+2l

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

+1

+1

-1

+1

+1

-1

-1

-1

+1

+1

0

0

0

0

0

+1

-1

+1

+1

-1

+1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

-1

Table 5.2: Linear combinations of Feynman integrals forming the matrix elements of
range three for the minimal two-loop form factors in the SU(2) sector. Integrals between
horizontal lines occur in ﬁxed combinations.

5.2 Two-loop dilatation operator

77

5.2 Two-loop dilatation operator

As in the previous chapters, we can extract the dilatation operator by comparing the results
(3.38) and (5.6), (5.7) for the one-loop and two-loop interaction operators (3.38) and (5.1)
with the general form (3.13). Inserting the explicit expressions for the occurring Feynman
integrals, we ﬁnd5

D(2)
i i+1 i+2 = −2(4 1i i+1 1+2 −3Pi i+1 − 3Pi+1 i+2 + Pi i+1Pi+1 i+2 + Pi+1 i+2Pi i+1) .

(5.8)

This matches the known result of [217].

Having dealt with the divergent terms in (3.13), let us now turn to the ﬁnite terms and

in particular to the remainder function.

5.3 Remainder

For scattering amplitudes, the BDS ansatz [59,60] states that the ﬁnite part of the logarithm
of the loop correction (3.3) is entirely determined by the one-loop result. While this
ansatz gives correct predictions for four and ﬁve points, it misses certain contributions
starting at six points [64–67]. The contributions missed by the BDS ansatz are known as
remainder functions. In addition to scattering amplitudes, remainder functions were also
studied for form factors of BPS operators [134, 139]. In both cases, they were found to
be of maximal uniform transcendentality and could be vastly simpliﬁed using the so-called
symbol techniques [68, 69].

For form factors of non-protected operators that renormalise non-diagonally, the deﬁ-

nition of the remainder function has to be generalised to

where

R(2) = I(2)(ε) −

1

2(cid:16)I (1)(ε)(cid:17)2

− f (2)(ε)I (1)(2ε) + O(ε) ,

f (2)(ε) = −2ζ2 − 2ζ3ε − 2ζ4ε2

(5.9)

(5.10)

as in the amplitude case [59] and the renormalised interaction operators I (ℓ) have been
deﬁned in (3.12). In particular, R(2) is an operator itself. The term f (2)(ε)I (1)(2ε) subtracts
the result expected due to the universality and exponentiation of the IR divergences. In
general, f (ℓ) is connected to the cusp and collinear anomalous dimensions as f (ℓ) = 1
cusp +
4G(ℓ)
ε ℓ
0 + O(ε2) [59].
As all disconnected contributions in I(2) are cancelled by the square of I(1) in (5.9),

the remainder can be written in terms of a density of range three:

8 γ(ℓ)

R(2) =

LXi=1

r(2)
i i+1 i+2 .

(5.11)

5While there is in general a freedom to deﬁne the dilatation operator density (5.8), the requirement
of having a ﬁnite density eﬀectively eliminates this freedom for the remainder function; see the discussion
below. Here, we give the dilatation operator density that corresponds to the ﬁnite remainder function
density.

78

5 Minimal two-loop SU(2) form factors

This density is explicitly given by

r(2)
i i+1 i+2

=

1
2

I (2)
i

+ I (2)

i

+

1
2

I (2)
i+1 + Z (2)

i +

I (1)
i

1
2 Z (1)

i

I (1)
i+1

I (1)
i

+

Z (1)

i

+

Z (1)
i+1

+

1
2

I (1)
i+1

Z (1)
i+1

1
2

−

I (1)
i

1
2 I (1)

i

I(1)
i+1

I (1)
i

+

I(1)
i

+

I (1)
i+1

+

1
2



I (1)

i+1  − f (2)(cid:18) 1

2

I (1)
i+1

I (1)
i

+

1
2

I(1)

i+1 (cid:19)ε→2ε

.

(5.12)
Note that there is a freedom of deﬁning the density r(2)
i i+1 i+2, which is related to distributing
the contributions with eﬀective range two between the ﬁrst and second pair of neighbouring
legs. In order to obtain a ﬁnite density, however, these contributions have to be distributed
equally; hence the prefactors of 1
2 in front of the respective terms in (5.12).6 The occurring
renormalisation constants are depicted in analogy to the interaction operators. They can
be obtained from the dilatation operator via (3.8).

The diﬀerent matrix elements of the remainder density satisfy analogous identities to

those of I (2)

i i+1 i+2:

i

(r(2)
(r(2)
(r(2)

i

i

XXY + (r(2)
)Y XX
XY X + (r(2)
)XY X
XXY + (r(2)
)XY X

i

i

XXY + (r(2)
)XY X
XY X + (r(2)
)Y XX
XXY = (r(2)
)Y XX

XXY = (r(2)
)XXY
XY X = (r(2)
)XXY
XY X + (r(2)
)XXY

i

i

i

)XXX
XXX ,

)XXX
XXX ,

)XXY
Y XX .

i

i

i

i

These identities are a consequence of SU(2) symmetry and follow from

[JA, R(2)] = 0 ,

which can be derived from (3.35) and (5.5). Accordingly, we can write

(5.13)

(5.14)

r(2)

i

i i+1 i+2 =(cid:0)(r(2)
+(cid:0)(r(2)

i
+(r(2)

XXX − (r(2)
)XXX
Y XX − (r(2)
)XY X
)Y XX

)XY X

XXY(cid:1) 1i i+1 i+2

Y XX − (r(2)
)XY X
XXY(cid:1)Pi i+1 +(cid:0)(r(2)
)Y XX

XXY − (r(2)
)XY X
i
i
Pi+1 i+2Pi i+1 .

)XXY

Pi i+1Pi+1 i+2 + (r(2)

i

i

i

Y XX

XXY

i

i

)XXY

Y XX(cid:1)Pi+1 i+2

(5.15)

Taking into account the symmetry under inverting the order of the ﬁelds, it is hence
suﬃcient to calculate (r(2)

XXY and (r(2)
)XY X

XXX, (r(2)
)XXX

)Y XX
XXY .

i

i

i

Each of these matrix elements depends on the Mandelstam variables si i+1, si+1 i+2 and

si+2 i mainly through the ratios7

ui =

si i+1

si i+1 i+2

,

vi =

si+1 i+2
si i+1 i+2

, wi =

si+2 i

si i+1 i+2

,

(5.16)

si i+1

6For other choices that lead to divergent densities, the divergent contributions cancel in the sum (5.11).
7The BPS remainder studied in [139] depends only on the rations ui, vi and wi. The fact that also
occur in (5.21), (5.22) and (5.23) reﬂects the fact that we are considering form
factors of composite operators that are in general non-protected. As required, the latter terms cancel for
the BPS case.

and si+2 i
µ2

, si+1 i+2

µ2

µ2

5.3 Remainder

79

where si i+1 i+2 = si i+1 + si+1 i+2 + si+2 i and ui + vi + wi = 1.

The ﬁrst matrix element was already calculated in [139] and is of uniform transcenden-

tality four:

(r(2)

i

XXX = (r(2)
)XXX

i

,

(5.17)

)XXX

XXX(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)4

where we denote the restriction to functions with a speciﬁc degree of transcendentality by a
vertical bar. Inserting the respective expressions for the Feynman integrals into (5.12), one
ﬁnds a result ﬁlling several pages. One can, however, simplify it using the symbol [68,69].8
The symbol of (r(2)

)XXX
XXX is given by [139]

i

S(cid:16)(r(2)

i

)XXX

XXX(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)4(cid:17) = −ui ⊗ (1 − ui) ⊗(cid:20) 1 − ui

vi
wi
ui
wi − ui ⊗ vi ⊗

−ui ⊗ vi ⊗

vi
wi ⊗

ui ⊗

+

vi
wi ⊗
vi
ui
wi ⊗
wi

w2
i

uivi(cid:21) − ui ⊗ ui ⊗

+ (ui ↔ vi) .

1 − ui

vi ⊗

wi
vi

(5.18)

In [139], it was integrated to the relatively compact expression

(r(2)

i

)XXX
XXX|4

wi

= −Li4(1 − ui) − Li4(ui) + Li4(cid:18) ui − 1
− log (ui)(cid:20)Li3(cid:18) vi
1 − ui(cid:19) + Li3(cid:18)−
ui (cid:19) Li2(cid:18) vi
−Li2(cid:18) ui − 1
1
log4 (ui) −
24
1
log (1 − ui) log2 (ui) log (vi) −
2

ui (cid:19) − log(cid:18)1 − ui
ui (cid:19) − Li3 (1 − ui)(cid:21)
wi (cid:19)(cid:20)Li3(cid:18) ui − 1
log3 (1 − ui)(cid:21)
vi (cid:19) −
vi(cid:19) + Li3(cid:18) vi − 1
log3 (vi) −
1 − ui(cid:19) + Li2 (ui)(cid:20)log(cid:18) 1 − ui
wi (cid:19) log (vi) +
wi (cid:19)(cid:21)
log2(cid:18) 1 − ui
log2 (1 − ui) log (ui) log(cid:18) wi
vi(cid:19)
log2 (ui) log2 (vi) −
1
6
wi (cid:19) −

−ζ2h log (ui) log(cid:18)1 − vi
vi (cid:19) +

log2(cid:18) 1 − ui

log2 (ui)i

log3 (ui) log (wi)

−

1
3

1
2

1
2

1
3

1
2

1
2

1
8

+

+ζ3 log(ui) +

+ G ({1 − ui, 1 − ui, 1, 0} , vi) + (ui ↔ vi) .

ζ4
2

(5.19)
where the Goncharov polylogarithm G ({1 − ui, 1 − ui, 1, 0} , vi) in the last line is the only
term that cannot be expressed in terms of classical polylogarithms.

The matrix element (r(2)

i

)XY X
XXY has mixed transcendentality of degree three to zero. Its

maximally transcendental part has the symbol

S(cid:16)(r(2)

i

)XY X

XXY(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)3(cid:17) = vi ⊗

vi

1 − vi ⊗

ui

1 − vi − vi ⊗

1 − vi
ui ⊗

vi
wi − ui ⊗

1 − ui

vi ⊗

vi
wi

,

(5.20)

8The symbol is implemented e.g. in the Mathematica code [239].

80

5 Minimal two-loop SU(2) form factors

which can be integrated to

log (ui) log (vi) log (wi) −

i

1
2

1 − ui(cid:19) +
log2 (vi) log(cid:18) 1 − vi

log (1 − ui) log (ui) log(cid:18) w2
1 − ui(cid:19)
log3 (wi) + (ui ↔ vi)(cid:21)
π2 log(cid:18) vi
ui (cid:19) +
wi(cid:19)

1
12

1
6

(r(2)

i

)XY X

XXY(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)3

ui

1
2

1
2

1
2

−

uivi

− Li3 (1 − vi) + Li3 (ui) −

=(cid:20)Li3(cid:18)−
wi(cid:19) − log (ui) Li2(cid:18) vi
wi (cid:19) −
Li3(cid:18)−
π2 log(cid:18)−
XXY(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)3

µ2 (cid:19) .

+ log (ui) log (vi) −

si i+1 i+2

)XY X

−

1
6

(r(2)

i

XXY = (r(2)
)XY X

i

+ Li2 (1 − ui) + Li2 (1 − vi)

Together with the less transcendental parts, the complete second matrix element reads

(5.21)

1
2

si+1 i+2

log(cid:18)−

π2
3 − 7 .
(5.22)
)Y XX
XXY has mixed transcendentality with degree two to zero. It

vi(cid:19) + 2 log(cid:18)−

µ2 (cid:19) log(cid:18) ui

µ2 (cid:19) +

si i+1

The matrix element (r(2)

i

is given by

(r(2)

i

)Y XX
XXY =

1
2

log(cid:18)−
+ log(cid:18)−

si+1 i+2

µ2 (cid:19) log(cid:18) ui
µ2 (cid:19) − 2 log(cid:18)−

si+1 i+2

si i+1

µ2 (cid:19) +

7
2

.

vi(cid:19) − Li2 (1 − ui) − log (ui) log (vi) +

1
2

log2 (vi)

(5.23)
From the above results and the form (5.15), we ﬁnd that the remainder of any operator
in the SU(2) sector is given by a linear combination of one function of transcendentality
four, one function of transcendentality three and two functions of transcendentality two
and less.
In particular, the transcendentality-four contribution to the remainder is the
same for any operator in the SU(2) sector and agrees with the one of the BPS operator
tr(φL
14) studied in [139]. This generalises the principle of maximal transcendentality to
non-protected operators in N = 4 SYM theory. The diﬀerence with respect to the BPS
remainder is of transcendentality three or less and can be written entirely in terms of
classical polylogarithms.

Given the above results, it is tempting to conjecture that the universality of the leading
transcendental part extends to the remainder functions of the minimal form factors of
all operators, also beyond the SU(2) sector. Moreover, this suggests that the leading
transcendental part of the three-point form factor remainder of any length-two operator
matches the corresponding BPS remainder calculated in [134], which also matches the
leading transcendental part of the Higgs-to-three-gluons amplitude calculated in [143]. It
would be desirable to check this conjecture in further examples or even to prove it.9

Furthermore, note that the maximal degree of transcendentality t in a given matrix
element is related to the shuﬄe number s as t = 4 − s, where s is the number of sites by
which a single Y among two X’s or vice versa is displaced. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the

9One approach to such a proof might be to show the universality of the leading singularities. The latter
are closely related to the maximally transcendental functions in the dlog form, see e.g. [74]. Moreover,
leading singularities are related to on-shell diagrams, which will be one of the subjects of the next chapter.

5.3 Remainder

81

degree-zero contributions to the remainder function are related to the two-loop dilatation
operator as

.

(5.24)

D(2)
i i+1 i+2 = −

4
7

r(2)

i i+1 i+2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0

An important property of scattering amplitudes and form factors is their behaviour
under soft and collinear limits.
In these limits, they in general reduce to lower-point
scattering amplitudes and form factors multiplied by some universal function. Similarly,
the corresponding remainders reduce to lower-point remainders. This poses important
constraints on the remainders, which, together with other constraints, even made it possible
to bootstrap them in several cases; see for instance [71, 72] and references therein.

As already observed for the BPS remainder in [139], also the soft and collinear limits
of the remainders in the SU(2) sector considered here yield non-vanishing results. This
is interesting as these remainders correspond to the minimal form factors, i.e. no non-
vanishing form factors with less legs exist to which they could be proportional. In fact,
a similar behaviour occurs also for scattering amplitudes. For example, several of the
six-point NMHV amplitudes listed in appendix B.2 have non-vanishing soft and collinear
limits that do not correspond to physical amplitudes. Via the three-particle unitarity cut,
this behaviour of the amplitudes can be related to the one of the minimal form factor
remainders. A better understanding of theses limits is clearly desirable.

This chapter concludes the treatment of minimal loop-level form factors in this thesis
— although many interesting questions remain unanswered. Most notably, it would be
very interesting to extend the methods presented here to obtain the minimal two-loop
form factor of a generic operator and from it the complete two-loop dilatation operator.
These questions are currently under active investigation. In the next chapter, we will turn
to non-minimal (n-point) form factors at tree-level.

82

5 Minimal two-loop SU(2) form factors

Chapter 6

Tree-level form factors

In the previous chapters, we have studied loop-level form factors with the minimal number
of external legs. In this chapter, we turn to the opposite conﬁguration — n-point form
factors at tree level. We will mostly focus on the form factors of the chiral part of the
stress-tensor supermultiplet, which we will brieﬂy introduce in section 6.1. In the subse-
quent sections, we extend several powerful techniques that were developed in the context
of scattering amplitudes to form factors, in particular on-shell diagrams, central-charge
deformations, an integrability-based construction via R operators and a formulation in
terms of Graßmannian integrals. For each of these techniques, we ﬁrst give a very short
description in the case of scattering amplitudes and then show how to generalise them to
form factors. We introduce on-shell diagrams, corresponding permutations, their construc-
tion and the extension to top-cell diagrams in section 6.2.
In section 6.3, we introduce
central-charge deformations for form factors, show how form factors can be constructed
via the integrability-based method of R operators and demonstrate how they can thus be
found as solutions to an eigenvalue equation of the transfer matrix, which also (partially)
generalises to generic operators. In the ﬁnal section 6.4, we ﬁnd a Graßmannian integral
representation of form factors in spinor-helicity variables, which we moreover translate to
twistor and momentum-twistor variables. As we are only discussing tree-level expressions,
we will be dropping the superscript that indicates the loop order throughout this chapter.

The results presented in this chapter were ﬁrst published in [7].

6.1 Stress-tensor supermultiplet

As already mentioned in section 4.1, one of the two best studied examples of composite
operators in N = 4 SYM theory is the BPS operator tr(φ14φ14), which is the lowest
component of the stress-tensor supermultiplet. In the previous chapters, we have studied
(super) form factors of individual operators. In this chapter, we consider the (super) form
factors of the supermultiplet the operator belongs to, or, more precisely, its chiral half. A
convenient way to do so is N = 4 harmonic superspace [240], see also [131, 140, 241].
as well as their conju-
gates ¯u+a
A , where the indices a, a′ and ± correspond to the respective factors in
SU(2)× SU(2)′ × U(1) ⊂ SU(4). Using these variables, the SU(4) charge index of the chiral
superspace coordinates θA
A . Similarly,
2 ǫabu+a
we deﬁne φ++ = 1
B φAB. The chiral part of the stress-tensor supermultiplet is

α can be decomposed as θ+a
A u+b

Harmonic superspace introduces the variables u+a

A and u−a′

A and ¯u−a′

A

α = θA

α u+a

A , θ−a′

α = θA

α u−a′

83

84

6 Tree-level form factors

then given by

(6.1)

(6.2)

(6.3)

T (x, θ+) = tr(φ++φ++)(x) + ··· +

1
3
where the highest component L is the on-shell Lagrangian.
transformation in the fermionic variables and deﬁne1

(θ+)4L(x) ,

In addition to the bosonic Fourier transformation (2.3), we can also take the Fourier

FT,n(1, . . . , n; q, γ−) =Z d4x d4θ+ e−iqx−iθ+a

α γ−α

a h1, . . . , n|T (x, θ+)|0i

= δ4(P )δ4(Q+)δ4(Q−)h1, . . . , n|T (0, 0)|0i ,

where γ−αa is the supermomentum of the supermultiplet,

P =

nXi=1

λi˜λi − q ,

Q+ =

nXi=1

λi ˜η+
i ,

Q− =

nXi=1

λi ˜η−

i − γ−

= ¯u−a′

A ˜ηA, ˜η−a′

and ˜η+a = ¯u+a
A ˜ηA. Hence, supermomentum conservation is manifest in
addition to momentum conservation, which allows the use of many supersymmetric meth-
ods that were developed in the context of amplitudes, such as the supersymmetric form of
BCFW recursion relations [77, 78].

The tree-level colour-ordered MHV super form factor of T is [131]2

ˆFT,n,2(1, . . . , n; q, γ−) =

h12ih23i··· hn−1 nihn1i
As for amplitudes, we can write the Nk−2MHV form factors of T as

δ4(P )δ4(Q+)δ4(Q−)

.

(6.4)

ˆFT,n,k(1, . . . , n; q, γ−) = ˆFT,n,2(1, . . . , n; q, γ−) × ˆr(1, . . . , n; q, γ−) ,

(6.5)

where ˆr is of Graßmann degree 4(k− 2). Expressions for ˆr of T in momentum-twistor space
were given in [131] and [140] at NMHV level and Nk−2MHV level, respectively. Results for
certain components can be found in [129, 131].

6.2 On-shell diagrams

In the following section, we introduce on-shell diagrams for form factors.

6.2.1 On-shell diagrams

On-shell diagrams for scattering amplitudes were intensively studied in [74]. They can be
used to represent tree-level amplitudes and their unregularised loop-level integrands and
furthermore yield the leading singularities of loop-level amplitudes.3 As already mentioned,
we will restrict ourselves to tree level. Note that we are using slightly diﬀerent conventions
than [74].

1Following the literature on on-shell diagrams, in this chapter we are suppressing a factor of (2π)4 in

each form factor and each amplitude.

2Following the conventions in the literature on form factors of T , we have absorbed a sign here. Hence,

ˆFT,2,2(1φ++

, 2φ++

; q, γ−) = −1 in contrast to (2.15).

3For extensions to non-planar amplitudes, see [83–88].

6.2 On-shell diagrams

85

For scattering amplitudes, on-shell diagrams are built from two diﬀerent building blocks,
namely the tree-level three-point MHV and MHV amplitudes, which are depicted as black
and white vertices, respectively:4

1

1

3

3

2

2

= ˆA3,2(1, 2, 3) =

δ4(λ1˜λ1 + λ2˜λ2 + λ3˜λ3)δ8(λ1 ˜η1 + λ2 ˜η2 + λ3 ˜η3)

h12ih23ih31i

,

= ˆA3,1(1, 2, 3) =

δ4(λ1˜λ1 + λ2˜λ2 + λ3˜λ3)δ4([12] ˜η3 + [23] ˜η1 + [31] ˜η2)

[12] [23] [31]

(6.6)

.

One way to obtain the on-shell graph for a given scattering amplitude is by constructing

the latter via the BCFW recursion relation [77, 78], which can be depicted as [74]5,6

n′

n′ + 1

···

···

ˆAn′ ,k′

ˆAn′′ ,k′′

n

.

(6.7)

3

ˆAn,k = Xn′,n′′,k′,k′′

n′+n′′=n+2
k′+k′′=k+1

2

1

The representation of an amplitude in terms of BCFW terms, however, is not unique,
and neither is the one in terms of on-shell diagrams. Instead, several equivalent represen-
tations exist. For planar on-shell diagrams, the set of equivalence relations is generated
by two diﬀerent moves: the merge/unmerge move and the square move [74]. These are
depicted in ﬁgure 6.1.

3

2

4

1

=

3

2

4

1

=

3

2

4

1

3

2

4

1

=

3

2

4

1

(a) Merge/unmerge move for black vertices.

(b) Square move.

Figure 6.1: Equivalence moves between on-shell diagrams for scattering amplitudes. An
analogous version of the merge/unmerge move also exists for white vertices.

4In accordance with the literature on on-shell diagrams, we suppress the factor of ±i(2π)4 occurring in

the amplitudes throughout this chapter.

5Note that we are using BCFW bridges with the opposite assignment of black and white vertices com-

pared to [74].

6A more eﬃcient way will be described further below.

86

6 Tree-level form factors

For form factors of the stress-tensor supermultiplet, a similar construction via BCFW

recursion relations exists [129, 131], which we can depict as:

n′

···
ˆFT,n′ ,k′

3

ˆFT,n,k = Xn′,n′′,k′,k′′

n′+n′′=n+2
k′+k′′=k+1

n′ + 1

···

ˆAn′′ ,k′′

n′

···

ˆAn′ ,k′

n′ + 1

···
ˆFT,n′′ ,k′′

n

.

(6.8)

n

3

+

2

1

2

1

Via these recursion relations, all ˆFT,n,k can be written in terms of the three-point ampli-
tudes (6.6) and the minimal form factor ˆFT,2,2.
In order to introduce on-shell diagrams for form factors, we have to add the minimal
form factor as a further building block:7

2

=

1

1

= ˆFT,2,2(1, 2)

2

δ4(λ1˜λ1 + λ2˜λ2 − q)δ4(λ1 ˜η+

=

2 )δ4(λ1 ˜η−

1 + λ2 ˜η−

2 − γ−)

.

1 + λ2 ˜η+
h12ih21i

(6.9)
Thus, on-shell diagrams can be used to represent all tree-level form factors — at least
for the stress-tensor supermultiplet. It remains to characterise these on-shell diagrams, to
ﬁnd the equivalence relations among them and to ﬁnd a more direct way to construct them
than via BCFW recursion relations.

6.2.2

Inverse soft limits

Another way to construct amplitudes is via the so-called inverse soft limit [80, 242, 243].
This construction amounts to gluing the following structures to two adjacent legs of an
on-shell diagram:

,

,

(6.10)

which respectively preserve the MHV degree k or increase it by one.
In principle, all
tree-level scattering amplitudes can be constructed via the inverse soft limit [244]. Adding
k-preserving and k-increasing structures, however, does not commute. Hence, the inverse
soft limit is most powerful for minimal and maximal MHV degree, where only one of the
two structures in (6.10) occurs and the order of applying them is irrelevant. Moreover, the
inverse soft limit can also be applied to construct tree-level form factors of T [244].

Via the k-preserving inverse soft limit, the four-point MHV amplitude ˆA4,2 can be

7While the three-point amplitudes can be either MHV or MHV, the minimal form factor is both MHV
and NmaxMHV. Hence, we only have one form-factor vertex (6.9) as building block, while we have two
amplitude vertices (6.6).

6.2 On-shell diagrams

87

constructed from the three-point MHV amplitude ˆA3,2 as
2

2

1

3

−−−−→

1

3

,

(6.11)

4

which agrees with the result from the BCFW recursion relation (6.7).8

Similarly, the three-point MHV form factor ˆFT,3,2 can be built from the minimal form

factor ˆFT,2,2 as

1

2

−−−−→

1

,

2

(6.12)

3

which agrees with the result from the BCFW recursion relation (6.8).

Note that the on-shell diagram (6.12) for ˆFT,3,2 is not manifestly invariant under cyclic
permutations of its three on-shell legs, while ˆFT,3,2 is. Similarly, the on-shell diagram
(6.11) for ˆA4,2 is not manifestly invariant under cyclic permutations of its four on-shell
legs, although ˆA4,2 is. The equivalence of both cyclic orderings of the on-shell diagram
(6.11) is precisely the statement of the square move depicted in ﬁgure 6.1b. The cyclic
invariance of the on-shell diagrams for all other MHV amplitudes, however, follows from
its combination with the merge/unmerge move. Hence, we have to add an additional
equivalence move for on-shell diagrams of form factors, which reﬂects the cyclic invariance
of the three-point form factor. This move is depicted in ﬁgure 6.2 and we call it rotation
move. As the square move for amplitudes, it implies the cyclic invariance of all other MHV
form factors when combined with the moves in ﬁgure 6.1.

3

=

1

1

=

2

2

3

2

3

1

Figure 6.2: Rotation move for on-shell diagrams that involve the minimal form factor.
In addition to the depicted version with one black and two white vertices, an analogous
version with one white and two black vertices exists. Similar to the other moves, this move
can be applied to any subdiagram of a given on-shell diagram.

The three-point NMHV form factor ˆFT,3,3 can be built from the minimal form factor
ˆFT,2,2 by the k-increasing inverse soft limit. The resulting on-shell diagram is related to

8Throughout this chapter, we disregard terms in which external legs are connected by a chain of vertices
of the same colour, as these do not contribute for generic external momenta; cf. also the discussion in
subsection 3.3.1.

88

6 Tree-level form factors

the on-shell diagram (6.12) by inverting the colour of the vertices. As in the MHV case, its
cyclic invariance gives rise to another equivalence move: the rotation move with inverted
colours.

6.2.3 Permutations

For scattering amplitudes, a permutation σ can be associated with every on-shell diagram
[74, 245]. For brevity, we write permutations

σ =

1
3
↓
↓
σ(1) σ(2) σ(3)

2
↓

. . .
n
↓
. . .
. . . σ(n)



(6.13)

as σ = (σ(1), σ(2), σ(3), . . . , σ(n)). The association is as follows. Entering the on-shell
diagram at an external leg i, turn left at every white vertex and right at every black vertex
until arriving at an external leg again, which is then identiﬁed as σ(i). For example,

1

3

2

→ σ = (3, 1, 2) ,

1

3

2

→ σ = (2, 3, 1) .

(6.14)

Note that the permutation associated with an on-shell diagram is invariant under the
equivalence moves in ﬁgure 6.1.9

We can deﬁne a permutation for on-shell diagrams of form factors by the additional

prescription to turn back at the minimal form factor, i.e.

2

1 → σ = (1, 2) .

(6.15)

The resulting permutation is invariant under the equivalence moves in ﬁgure 6.1 as well as
ﬁgure 6.2.

For n-point MHV and MHV scattering amplitudes, the permutations associated with
the on-shell diagrams are well known to be σ = (3, . . . , n, 1, 2) and σ = (n−1, n, 1 . . . , n−2)
[74], respectively. From the construction via inverse soft limits, we ﬁnd that the permuta-
tions associated with the on-shell diagrams of n-point MHV and NmaxMHV form factors
are respectively given by σ = (3, . . . , n, 1, 2) and σ = (n − 1, n, 1 . . . , n − 2) as well.

6.2.4 Systematic construction for MHV and NmaxMHV

Using the permutations, the corresponding on-shell diagrams for MHV and MHV am-
plitudes can be reconstructed in a systematic way [74]. To this end, the permutation
σ is decomposed into a sequence of transpositions of minimal length. Note that mul-
tiplication of permutations is understood in the sense of the right action, i.e. σ1σ2 =
(σ2(σ1(1)), . . . , σ2(σ1(n))).10 Each transposition (i, j) is associated with a BCFW bridge

9Note that, in contrast to [74], we are not using decorated permutations.
10This is diﬀerent with respect to [74] and related to the fact that we are using the opposite colour

assignment for BCFW bridges.

6.2 On-shell diagrams

89

between legs i and j. Starting from an empty diagram with n vacua,11 the on-shell diagram
can be built by acting with BCFW bridges, where the order of applying the bridges is the
inverse of the order of the multiplication among the transpositions. Then, all vacua are
removed from the diagram as well as all lines that are directly connected to them. In the
ﬁnal step, all vertices that have become two-valent by removing these lines are removed
while connecting the two lines that enter the vertices. For the three-point MHV amplitude
ˆA3,2, this construction is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.3.

σ = (3, 1, 2) = (2, 3)(1, 2) −→

− − +

3

2

1

−→

1

3

2

Figure 6.3: Permutation, construction via BCFW bridges and on-shell diagram for ˆA3,2.

For MHV and NmaxMHV form factors, we can use an analogous construction. The only
diﬀerence is that the two left-most vacua or the two right-most vacua have to be replaced
by the minimal form factor, respectively. We illustrate this construction for ˆFT,3,2, ˆFT,4,2,
ˆFT,5,2 and ˆFT,3,3 in ﬁgures 6.4, 6.5, 6.6 and 6.7, respectively.

+

σ = (3, 1, 2) = (2, 3)(1, 2) −→

−→

3

3

2

1

1

2

Figure 6.4: Permutation, construction via BCFW bridges and on-shell diagram for ˆFT,3,2.

+ +

σ = (3, 4, 1, 2) = (2, 3)(3, 4)(1, 2)(2, 3) −→

−→

4

4

3

2

1

1

2

3

Figure 6.5: Permutation, construction via BCFW bridges and on-shell diagram for ˆFT,4,2.

11These vacua will be given a speciﬁc meaning below. For now, they can be understood in a purely

symbolic way.

90

6 Tree-level form factors

σ = (3, 4, 5, 1, 2) = (2, 3)(3, 4)(4, 5)(1, 2)(2, 3)(3, 4) −→

+ + +

5

−→

5

4

3

2

1

4

3

1

2

Figure 6.6: Permutation, construction via BCFW bridges and on-shell diagram for ˆFT,5,2.

−

σ = (2, 3, 1) = (1, 2)(2, 3) −→

−→

3

3

2

1

1

2

Figure 6.7: Permutation, construction via BCFW bridges and on-shell diagram for ˆFT,3,3.

6.2.5 On-shell diagrams at Nk−2MHV and top-cell diagrams

One important diﬀerence between MHV, NmaxMHV and general Nk−2MHV is that sums
of diﬀerent BCFW terms occur in the latter case, whereas only one non-vanishing BCFW
term contributes in the former cases. As the BCFW terms are represented by on-shell
diagrams, this leads to a sum of diﬀerent on-shell diagrams. For a given amplitude, all
these on-shell diagrams can be obtained from a so-called top-cell diagram by deleting edges,
which corresponds to taking residues at the level of BCFW bridges.12 The top-cell diagram
for amplitudes can be obtained from the permutation

σ = (k + 1, . . . , n, 1, . . . , k) .

(6.16)

For amplitudes, the MHV degree k ranges from 2 to n − 2. Hence, the simplest amplitude
which is neither MHV nor MHV is the NMHV six-point amplitude ˆA6,3.
For form factors of the stress-tensor supermultiplet, the MHV degree k ranges from 2
to n. Hence, the simplest form factor which is neither MHV nor NmaxMHV is the NMHV
four-point form factor ˆFT,4,3. We will look at this example in some detail. All BCFW terms
with adjacent shifts that contribute to ˆFT,4,3 are shown in ﬁgure 6.8. Via the equivalence
moves in ﬁgures 6.1 and 6.2, the diﬀerent terms can be shown to satisfy the following
identities:

Ai = D(i+2) mod 4 ,

Bi = C(i+2) mod 4 .

(6.17)

Hence, only eight diﬀerent BCFW terms occur. These BCFW terms can be obtained
from the top-cell diagram depicted in ﬁgure 6.9 as well as its image under a cyclic shift of

12Note that not all edges are removable. A criterion for removability is given in [74, 245].

6.2 On-shell diagrams

91

4

1

2

3

4

3

1

4

2

1

3

2

+

+

+

+

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

1

3

A1

4

A2

1

A3

2

A4

B1

B2

B3

B4

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

1

+

+

+

+

2

1

4

C1

3

2

1

C2

4

3

2

C3

1

4

3

C4

3

+

4

+

1

+

2

+

2

1

3

2

4

3

1

4

D1

D2

D3

D4

3

4

4

1

1

2

2

3

Figure 6.8: All BCFW terms of ˆFT,4,3 that arise from adjacent shift. The terms are
grouped such that the ith line stems from a shift in the legs i and i + 1.

92

6 Tree-level form factors

the external on-shell legs by two. Note that several diﬀerences occur with respect to the
amplitude case. While one top-cell diagram suﬃces to generate all BCFW terms in the case
of scattering amplitudes, this is no longer the case for form factors. This can also be seen
from the permutation associated with the top-cell diagram of ˆFT,4,3, which is not cyclic.
Moreover, the decomposition of this permutation into transpositions that is required for
the construction of the top-cell diagram in terms of BCFW bridges as discussed in the last
subsection is not minimal in the sense it is for amplitudes, cf. ﬁgure 6.9.13

σ = (4, 2, 3, 1) = (1, 2)(3, 4)(2, 3)(1, 2)(3, 4) −→

+

−

4

3

2

1

−→

4

3

1

2

Figure 6.9: Permutation, construction via BCFW bridges and top-cell diagram for ˆFT,4,3.
For higher n and k, more than one edge has to be deleted to obtain the BCFW terms
from the top-cell diagram, which makes an explicit construction of the latter via BCFW
terms increasingly tedious.
In all cases
considered in this chapter, the on-shell diagrams encoding the BCFW terms for the form
factor as well as the top-cell diagrams for the form factor can be obtained from their
counterparts in the amplitude case with two more legs as follows. We use the moves in
ﬁgure 6.1 to expose a box at the boundary of the corresponding on-shell diagram in the
amplitude case with two more legs and replace this box by the minimal form factor:

Instead, we employ the following observation.

n + 1

n + 2

−→

,

(6.18)

n ···

3

2

1

n ···

3

2

1

where the grey area denotes the rest of the on-shell diagram and we have replaced a box
at the external legs n + 1 and n + 2 for concreteness.

At the level of the BCFW terms, the above relation can be proven as follows. The on-
shell diagram for ˆA4,2 is nothing but a box and the on-shell diagram of ˆFT,2,2 can indeed
be obtained by replacing this box with the minimal form factor. Recursively constructing
ˆAn+2,k via (6.7), boxes can only occur at the boundary of the on-shell diagram. Comparing

13It would be interesting to ﬁnd a reﬁned version of the construction in the amplitude case that yields

the top-cell diagram directly from the permutation.

6.3 R operators and integrability

93

this to the recursive construction of ˆFT,n,k via (6.8), we ﬁnd that each BCFW term in (6.8)
can be obtained from one term in (6.7) by replacing a box with the minimal form factor.
It would be interesting to prove relation (6.18) also at the level of the top-cell diagrams.
In the following, we will assume that it is valid, which will also yield further examples
supporting this conjecture.

The permutation corresponding to the top-cell diagram for the amplitude ˆAn+2,k is

given by

ˆAn+2,k :

σ = (k + 1, . . . , n, n + 1, n + 2, 1, 2, . . . , k) .

(6.19)

As the permutation corresponding to an additional box is a transposition, the permutation
encoded in the top-cell diagram after removing a box at the legs n + 1 and n + 2 is

ˆFT,n,k without ˆFT,2,2 :
˜σ = (k + 1, . . . , n, n + 2, n + 1, 1, 2, . . . , k − 2, k, k − 1) . (6.20)
Gluing in the minimal form factor at the legs n + 1 and n + 2 according to (6.15), the
permutation for the form factor top-cell diagram becomes

ˆFT,n,k :

σ = (k + 1, . . . , n, k − 1, k, 1, 2, . . . , k − 2) .

(6.21)

Note that, in contrast to the situation for tree-level amplitudes, the permutation σ
cannot directly be used to construct on-shell diagrams for tree-level form factors. Instead,
we can construct the on-shell diagrams without the minimal form factor via ˜σ, e.g. using
the Mathematica package positroid.m [246], and glue in the minimal form factor. This is
similar to the situation for on-shell diagrams of one-loop amplitudes, which are not directly
constructed from their permutations either, but via corresponding tree-level amplitudes
with two additional legs and the forward limit.

The diﬀerent top-cell diagrams can be obtained from the top-cell diagram with the box
replaced by the minimal form factor at legs n + 1 and n + 2 via a cyclic permutation of the
legs 1, . . . , n. In general, one might expect that all copies of the top-cell diagram under this
cyclic permutation are required to generate all BCFW terms. For the example of ˆFT,4,3, we
have seen that two out of four suﬃce. It would be interesting to ﬁnd a pattern for general
n and k.

6.3 R operators and integrability

In this section, we extend the integrability-based construction of scattering amplitude via
R operators [102, 103, 105, 106] to form factors of the stress-tensor supermultiplet. In par-
ticular, this allows us to introduce a central-charge deformation to form factors in analogy
to the amplitude case. While amplitudes are Yangian invariant and hence eigenstates of
the spin-chain monodromy matrix, we ﬁnd that form factors can be constructed as solu-
tions to an eigenvalue equation of the spin-chain transfer matrix. In particular, the latter
statement also generalises to minimal tree-level form factors of generic operators.

6.3.1 Construction for amplitudes

In the integrability-based construction, it is convenient to work with GL(4|4), which is
the (centrally) extended and complexiﬁed version of PSU(2, 2|4). Its generators in what

94

6 Tree-level form factors

is conventionally called the quantum space can be given in Jordan-Schwinger form ˜JAB =
ˆxA ˆpB with the Heisenberg pairs

ˆxA =(cid:18)λα,−

∂
∂˜λ ˙α ,

∂

∂ ˜ηA(cid:19) ,

ˆpA =(cid:18) ∂

∂λα , ˜λ ˙α, ˜ηA(cid:19) ,

(6.22)

which satisfy [ˆxA, ˆpB] = (−1)|A|δAB; see e.g. [101].14 Here, we have combined the indices
˙α and A into A, | · | denotes the grading and [·,·] the graded commutator.
α,
One central object in integrability is the Lax operator L. It depends on the spectral
parameter u and acts on one copy of the quantum space associated with the external leg i
as well as an auxiliary space with generators (eAB)CD = δA
C δB
D:
= u + (−1)|B|eAB ˆxB

Li(u) =

(6.23)

i

i ˆpA
i

,

where we have depicted the quantum space by a solid line and the auxiliary space by a
dashed line.

The Lax operators can be used to deﬁne the spin-chain monodromy matrix by taking
the n-fold tensor product with respect to the quantum space and the ordinary product in
the auxiliary space:

Mn(u,{vi}) =

···
···

n

2

1

= Ln(u − vn)··· L2(u − v2)L1(u − v1) ,

(6.24)

where the vi are inhomogeneities associated with each quantum space. The inhomogeneities
correspond to local shifts of the spectral parameter u.

The Yangian invariance of tree-level scattering amplitudes [97] can be expressed as an

eigenvalue equation for the monodromy matrix, cf. [102, 103]:

Mn(u,{vi})A ∝ 1A .

(6.25)

In [102, 105, 106], it was shown how to construct tree-level amplitudes as solutions to
this equation.15 This construction is based on reinterpreting and generalising the BCFW
bridges and vacua encountered in the previous section.

The BCFW bridges are interpreted as R operators [102], which can be formally written

as

Rij(u) =

j

i

=Z

dα
α1+u e−α(ˆxj ·ˆpi) ,

(6.26)

where u is the spectral parameter. These operators satisfy the Yang-Baxter equation

Rij(uj − ui)Lj(uj)Li(ui) = Lj(ui)Li(uj)Rij(uj − ui) ,

which can be depicted as

=

.

j

i

j

i

(6.27)

(6.28)

14Note that this form of the generators diﬀers from the one in (2.16) by a slight reorganisation.
15See also the alternative construction [103] via Bethe-ansatz methods.

6.3 R operators and integrability

95

Note that the arguments of the Lax operators on the right hand side of (6.27) are exchanged
with respect to the left hand side.

The vacua are given by

+

i

= δ+

i = δ2(λi) ,

−
i

= δ−

i = δ2(˜λi)δ4(˜ηi) .

(6.29)

They are eigenstates of the Lax operators, i.e. they satisfy

Li(u) δ+

i = (u − 1) 1 δ+

i

which is depicted as

+

i

= (u − 1)

+

i

,

,

Li(u) δ−

i = u 1 δ−

i

,

(6.30)

−
i

= u −

.

i

(6.31)

Deformed tree-level scattering amplitudes can then be constructed by acting with a
chain of R operators on the vacua [102, 105, 106] following the procedure discussed in
subsection 6.2.4 for the undeformed case. The resulting on-shell diagram has to be planar,
which imposes certain constraints on the R operators. In particular, we assume that i < j
for each Rij. In order to yield a Yangian invariant, the diﬀerent spectral parameters and
inhomogeneities have to be related via the permutation σ that is associated with the on-
shell diagram as discussed in subsection 6.2.3. Concretely, as a consequence of (6.27), the
monodromy matrix can be pulled through a sequence of R operators,

M(u,{vi}) Ri1j1(z1)··· Rimjm(zm) = Ri1j1(z1)··· Rimjm(zm)M(u,{vσ(i)}) ,

(6.32)

provided that we have the following relation among the inhomogeneities vi and the spectral
parameters zi:

zℓ = vτℓ(iℓ) − vτℓ(jℓ)

with

τℓ = (i1, j1)··· (iℓ, jℓ) ,

ℓ = 1, . . . , m ,

(6.33)

see [102, 105, 106] for details. The inhomogeneities vi are related to the central charges ci
via [104]

For example, the deformed three-point tree-level MHV amplitude ˆA3,2 can be con-

structed as

ci = vi − vσ(i) .

(6.34)

R23(v32)R12(v31)δ+

1 δ−

2 δ−

3 =

δ4(P3

i=1 λi˜λi)δ4(P3

h12i1−v23h23i1−v31h31i1−v12

i )δ4(P3

i=1 λi ˜η+

i=1 λi ˜η−
i )

where

Its Yangian invariance is diagrammatically shown in ﬁgure 6.10.

vij = vi − vj .

,

(6.35)

(6.36)

96

6 Tree-level form factors

− − +

− − +

=

= (u − v3 − 1)(u − v1)(u − v2)

3

2

1

3

2

1

− − +

3

2

1

Figure 6.10: Action of the monodromy matrix on ˆA3,2.

6.3.2 Construction for form factors of the stress-tensor supermultiplet

As for amplitudes, we can also construct on-shell diagrams for form factors of the chiral
half of the stress-tensor supermultiplet via the R operators (6.26) and the vacua (6.29)
if we include the minimal form factor as an additional vacuum. We denote such on-shell
diagrams, which can in particular encode top-cell diagrams, BCFW terms and factorisation

channels, by ˆ˜FT,n:

ˆ˜FT,n = Ri1j1(z1)··· Rimjm(zm) δ+

1 ··· δ+

k−2

ˆFT,2,2(k − 1, k) δ−

k+1 ··· δ−
n ,

(6.37)

where m is the number of R operators.
Using the above steps, we ﬁnd that

Mn(u,{vi}) ˆ˜FT,n = f(u,{vσ(i)}) Ri1j1(z1)··· Rimjm(zm)

× δ+

1 ··· δ+

k−2 hM2(u,{vσ(i)}) ˆFT,2,2(k − 1, k)i δ−

k+1 ··· δ−
n ,

where

M2(u,{vσ(i)}) = Lk(u − vσ(k))Lk−1(u − vσ(k−1))

is the reduced monodromy matrix of length two acting on sites k − 1 and k and

f(u,{vσ(i)}) =

k−2Yi=1

(u − vσ(i) − 1)

nYi=k+1

(u − vσ(i))

(6.38)

(6.39)

(6.40)

arises from the action (6.30) of the Lax operators on the vacua δ+ and δ−. This procedure
is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.11 for the case of ˆFT,n,2.
In contrast to the vacua δ+ and δ−, the minimal form factor is not an eigenstate of
the monodromy matrix M2 as would be required for Yangian invariance in analogy to the
amplitude case. For instance, the oﬀ-diagonal generator ˜Jα ˙α acts as

kXi=k−1

˜Jα ˙α
i

ˆFT,2,2(k−1, k) = (λα

k−1

˜λ ˙α
k−1 +λα
k

˜λ ˙α
k ) ˆFT,2,2(k−1, k) = qα ˙α ˆFT,2,2(k−1, k) , (6.41)

which is non-vanishing; cf. (2.18).

6.3 R operators and integrability

97

···

+ +

···

+ +

···

+ +

BCFW bridges

=

BCFW bridges

= f(u)

BCFW bridges

n n−1

···

2

1

n n−1

···

2

1

n n−1

···

2

1

Figure 6.11: Action of the monodromy matrix on ˆFT,n,2.

6.3.3 Transfer matrix

Instead of considering the monodromy matrix Mn, we can take its supertrace to obtain
the transfer matrix Tn:

Tn(u,{vi}) =

···
···

n

2

1

= strMn(u,{vi}) .

(6.42)

As the monodromy matrix, the transfer matrix can be pulled through the sequence of R
operators to obtain the action of the reduced transfer matrix T2(u,{vσ(i)}) on the minimal
form factor. Moreover, we require the reduced transfer matrix to be homogeneous, i.e. the
two inhomogenities occurring in it have to be equal:

T2(u − v) = strLk(u − vσ(k))Lk−1(u − vσ(k−1)) ,

with vσ(k−1) = vσ(k) ≡ v .

(6.43)

In contrast to the reduced monodromy matrix M2(u,{vσ(i)}), the reduced transfer matrix
T2(u − v) satisﬁes an eigenvalue equation with respect to the minimal form factor, as we
will see in the following. Further below, we will show that this also generalises to the case
of generic single-trace operators.

An important property of the transfer matrix is its GL(4|4)-invariance:

In particular, it commutes with any function ofPn
Pn

˜JαA
i =
i , and thus also with the momentum- and supermomentum-conserving delta

i andPn

i ˜ηA
i=1 λα
functions.

˜Jα ˙α

i =Pn

i=1 λα
i

˜λ ˙α

i=1

Using this property, we ﬁnd that

T2(u − v) ˆFT,2,2 = δ4(P )δ4(Q+)δ4(Q−)T2(u − v)

1

h12ih21i

= 0 ,

(6.45)

where the last step is the consequence of a straightforward evaluation using (6.43), (6.23)
and (6.22). This means the minimal tree-level form factor of the stress-tensor supermul-
tiplet is an eigenstate of the homogeneous transfer matrix T2(u − v) with eigenvalue zero.

"Tn(u,{vi}),

i # = 0 .

˜JAB

nXi=1

i=1

(6.44)

98

6 Tree-level form factors

Moreover, it follows from the previous discussion that also all planar on-shell diagrams
containing an insertion of the minimal form factor ˆFT,2,2 are annihilated by Tn:

Tn(u,{vi}|vσ(k−1)=vσ(k)) ˆ˜FT,n = 0 .

(6.46)

In particular, this is the case for the (undeformed) tree-level form factors ˆFT,n,k themselves:
(6.47)

Tn(u) ˆFT,n,k = 0 .

Using the construction above, we can also build deformed form factors as solutions to

(6.47). For instance, we ﬁnd

ˆFT,n,2(1, . . . , n; q, γ−) =

δ4(Pn

i=1 λi˜λi − q)δ4(Pn

i=1 λi ˜η+

i )δ4(Pn

i=1hi i+1i1−vi+1 i+2

Qn

i=1 λi ˜η−

i − γ−)

,

(6.48)

where vij was deﬁned in (6.36) and v3 = v4 has to be satisﬁed for the reduced transfer
matrix to be homogeneous. In the limit of vanishing deformation parameters, (6.48) reduces
to (6.4) as required.

6.3.4 Generic operators
Let us now look at form factors of generic operators O of length L, starting at the minimal
case. As the homogeneous transfer matrix of length L commutes with the momentum-
conserving delta function, it only acts on the last factor in (2.15), which contains the
operator in the spin-chain picture with oscillators replaced by super-spinor-helicity variables
according to (2.14). We thus have

where

TL(u) ˆFO,L = ˆFTL(u)O,L ,

TL(u) = TL(u)

ai,α,a†α
bi, ˙α,b† ˙α
di,A,d†A

i → ∂i,α,λα
i
i → ∂i, ˙α,˜λ ˙α
i
i → ∂i,A,˜ηA
i

(6.49)

(6.50)

is the homogeneous transfer matrix in the oscillator representation, which also arises in
the spectral problem. Although the transfer matrix TL(u) does not contain the spin-
chain Hamiltonian, i.e. the one-loop dilatation operator D(1) of (1.28), it can be used to
diagonalise D(1) and the transfer matrix that does contain D(1); see e.g. [101, 247–250].
Hence, an operator O is an eigenstate of TL(u),

TL(u)O = t(u)O ,

(6.51)

provided that it is an eigenstate of the transfer matrix that contains D(1). In this case,
(6.49) yields

TL(u) ˆFO,L = t(u) ˆFO,L ,

(6.52)

i.e. the minimal form factor is an eigenstate of the transfer matrix occurring in the study
of amplitudes provided that the corresponding operator is an eigenstate of the one-loop
spectral problem.

Moreover, we can build planar on-shell diagrams containing ˆFO,L in analogy to (6.37).

They satisfy

Tn(u) ˆ˜FO,n = f(u) ˆ˜FTLO,n = f(u)t(u) ˆ˜FO,n ,

(6.53)

6.4 Graßmannian integrals

99

where f(u) denotes the factor arising from the action of the Lax operators on the amplitude
vacua in generalisation of (6.40) and the last equality holds for operators satisfying (6.51).
This equation is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.12.16

BCFW bridges & δ±s

= f(u) BCFW bridges & δ±s

= f(u)t(u) BCFW bridges & δ±s

Figure 6.12: Action of the transfer matrix on a planar on-shell diagram containing the
minimal form factor of a generic operator.

Note that the on-shell diagrams ˆ˜FO,n containing an insertion of the minimal form factor
ˆFO,L do not necessarily correspond to tree-level form factors of the operators O. However,
they yield certain leading singularities of loop-level form factors of O. It would be very
interesting to clarify the relation between these on-shell diagrams and the general tree-level
form factors of the operators.17 We leave a detailed investigation for future work.

6.4 Graßmannian integrals

An amazing discovery in the study of scattering amplitudes in N = 4 SYM theory was that
these objects can be written as integrals of a certain on-shell form on the Graßmannian
manifold Gr(k, n), i.e. on the space of all k-dimensional planes in n-dimensional space
[74, 90–92]. In the following, we will show that a similar formulation also exists for form
factors. Again, we focus on the stress-tensor supermultiplet T .

6.4.1 Geometry of (super)momentum conservation

One important idea behind the Graßmannian integral formulation for scattering amplitudes
is to realise momentum conservation and supermomentum conservation geometrically. To
this end, the collection of λα
i variables is considered as a two-dimensional plane in an n-
dimensional space. Similarly, the ˜λ ˙α
i variables are considered as another two-dimensional
plane, and the ˜ηA

i variables are considered as a four-dimensional plane.

16Actually, the second step in ﬁgure 6.12 shows the generalisation of (6.38) to the transfer matrix and to

generic operators, which coincides with the second step in (6.53) via (6.49).

17In contrast to the BCFW recursion relation (6.8) for T , an analogous recursion relation for the MHV
form factors of the supermultiplet of tr(φL
14) contains non-vanishing residues at inﬁnity [138]. Nevertheless,
also the latter recursion relation can be solved and could be used as a basis for constructing on-shell diagrams
for these operators. Other BCFW recursion relations for MHV form factors, which involve also shifts of the
oﬀ-shell momentum q, were studied in the SU(2) and SL(2) sectors in [118]; these might also be suitable to
construct on-shell diagrams. In [195], we will provide explicit expressions for non-minimal tree-level form
factors for general operators.

100

6 Tree-level form factors

Momentum conservation is the statement that the λ-plane and the ˜λ-plane are orthog-

onal to each other:

λ · ˜λ ≡

nXi=1

λi˜λi = 0 .

(6.54)

Similarly, supermomentum conservation is the statement that the λ-plane and the ˜η-plane
are orthogonal to each other:

λi ˜ηi = 0 .

(6.55)

λ · ˜η ≡

nXi=1

These constraints can be linearised by introducing the auxiliary plane C ∈ Gr(k, n), which
contains the λ-plane and is orthogonal to the ˜λ- and the ˜η-plane:

(C · ˜λ)I =

(C · ˜η)I =

nXi=1
nXi=1

CIi˜λi = 0 and (C ⊥ · λ)J =

CIi ˜ηi = 0

and (C ⊥ · λ)J =

nXi=1
nXi=1

C ⊥

Jiλi = 0

=⇒ λ · ˜λ = 0 ,

C ⊥

Jiλi = 0

=⇒ λ · ˜η = 0 ,

(6.56)

with I = 1, . . . , k, J = 1, . . . , n − k. Here, the requirement that C contains the λ-plane
is written as the λ-plane being orthogonal to the orthogonal complement C ⊥ of C, which
satisﬁes

C(C ⊥)T = 0 .

(6.57)

We would like to proceed in a similar way for form factors. The Graßmannian Gr(n, k),
however, is too small for this purpose; in particular, k ranges from 2 to n for form factors
but Gr(n, n) is just a point. The relation (6.18) between the top-cell diagrams of ˆAn+2,k and
ˆFT,n,k suggests that the correct Graßmannian is Gr(n + 2, k). Moreover, this is consistent
with the fact that one oﬀ-shell momentum can be parametrised by two on-shell momenta.
Concretely, we can deﬁne the new set of variables

λk = λk ,

k = 1, . . . , n , λn+1 = ξA ,

λn+2 = ξB ,

˜λk = ˜λk ,

k = ˜η+
˜η+
k ,
k = ˜η−
˜η−
k ,

k = 1, . . . , n ,

k = 1, . . . , n ,

k = 1, . . . , n ,

˜λn+1 = − hξB|q
hξBξAi
˜η+
n+1 = 0 ,
n+1 = −hξB|γ−
hξBξAi

˜η−

,

,

˜λn+2 = − hξA|q
hξAξBi
˜η+
n+2 = 0 ,
n+2 = −hξA|γ−
hξAξBi

˜η−

,

,

(6.58)

where ξA and ξB are arbitrary reference spinors which account for the fact that two on-shell
momenta together have two more degrees of freedom than one oﬀ-shell momentum. The
two additional on-shell legs satisfy

λn+1

˜λn+1 + λn+2

˜λn+2 = −q ,

λn+1 ˜η±

n+1 + λn+2 ˜η±

n+2 = −γ± ,

(6.59)

where γ+ = 0. Hence, momentum and supermomentum conservation can be written as
λ · ˜λ = 0 and λ · ˜η = 0, respectively. These constraints can be linearised via an auxiliary
plane C ′ ∈ Gr(k, n + 2) by requiring
C ′ · ˜λ = 0 ,

C ′⊥ · λ = 0 .

C ′ · ˜η = 0 ,

(6.60)

6.4 Graßmannian integrals

101

For scattering amplitudes, the Graßmannian integral is given by [90]18

Z dk×nC

GL(k)

Ωn,k δ2×k(C · ˜λ) δ4×k(C · ˜η) δ2×(n−k)(C ⊥ · λ) ,

(6.61)

where the on-shell form is speciﬁed by

Ωn,k =

1

(1··· k)(2··· k+1)··· (n··· k−1)

(6.62)

and (1··· k) denotes the minor built from the ﬁrst k columns of C, etc. By abuse of
notation, we will also directly refer to Ωn,k as the on-shell form.

From the above arguments, the Graßmannian integral for form factors is given by

Z dk×(n+2)C ′

GL(k)

n,k δ2×k(C ′ · ˜λ) δ4×k(C ′ · ˜η) δ2×(n+2−k)(C ′⊥ · λ) ,
Ω′

(6.63)

where the on-shell form Ω′
on-shell diagrams of section 6.2.

n,k remains to be determined. In order to ﬁnd Ω′

n,k, we use the

6.4.2 On-shell gluing

Each of the amplitude vertices has a representation in terms of a Graßmannian integral.
Moreover, these representations can be combined into the Graßmannian for an on-shell
diagram by gluing the individual expressions together, i.e. by integrating over all degrees
of freedom in the intermediate legs. Hence, we can obtain the on-shell form in the Graß-
mannian integral (6.63) by assembling it from the individual expressions in the respective
top-cell diagram obtained in section 6.2. For practical purposes, however, it is more conve-
nient to start with the minimal form factor and the on-shell subdiagram that is obtained
by excising the minimal form factor from the top-cell diagram. A Graßmannian integral
representation for the latter can be readily obtained e.g. from the Mathematica package
positroid.m [246] via the permutation ˜σ given in (6.20). It can be written as

I =Z dα1

α1 ···

dαm
αm

δk×2(C(αi) · ˜λ) δk×4(C(αi) · ˜η) δ(n+2−k)×2(C ⊥(αi) · λ) ,

(6.64)

where C(αi) ∈ Gr(k, n + 2) and m is the dimension of the corresponding cell in the Graß-
mannian.19

Writing the minimal form factor as

δF

ij ≡ ˆF2,2(i, j) = δ2(cid:18)˜λi − hj|q
δ2(cid:18)˜λj − hi|q

hjii(cid:19) δ2(cid:18)˜η−
hiji(cid:19) δ2(cid:18)˜η−

i − hj|γ−
j − hi|γ−

hjii (cid:19) δ2(cid:0)˜η+
i (cid:1)
hiji (cid:19) δ2(cid:0)˜η+
j(cid:1) ,

18Two n × k matrices that diﬀer by a GL(k) transformation still parametrise the same k-plane in n-
dimensional space; hence, the measure factor in (6.61) is divided by the action of GL(k). Note that we are
also relaxing the reality conditions on the momenta by allowing complex n × k matrices.

19In particular, the parametrisation by the αi’s ﬁxes the GL(k) gauge freedom that appears in (6.61).

(6.65)

102

6 Tree-level form factors

the Graßmannian integral corresponding to the top-cell diagram is given by20

d2˜λn+2 d4 ˜ηn+2 δF

I(1, . . . , n + 2) ,

n+1 n+2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)λ→−λ

Z d2λn+1

GL(1)

d2˜λn+1 d4 ˜ηn+1

d2λn+2
GL(1)

(6.66)
where the momentum ﬂow in the minimal form factor is inverted as discussed below (3.23).
Performing the integrations over ˜λn+1, ˜λn+2, ˜ηn+1 and ˜ηn+2 via the delta functions in
δF
n+1 n+2 leads to the following replacements in I:

˜λn+1 → − hn + 2|q
hn+2 n+1i
˜λn+2 → − hn + 1|q
hn+1 n+2i

, ˜η+

, ˜η+

n+1 → 0 , ˜η−
n+2 → 0 , ˜η−

n+1 → − hn + 2|γ−
hn+2 n+1i
n+2 → − hn + 1|γ−
hn+1 n+2i

We can eliminate the GL(1) gauge freedom in (6.66) by parametrising

λn+1 = ξA − β1ξB ,

λn+2 = ξB − β2ξA ,

,

.

(6.67)

(6.68)

where ξA and ξB are arbitrary reference spinors that will be identiﬁed with the ones ap-
pearing in (6.58) shortly. Hence, hn + 1 n + 2i = (β1β2 − 1)hξBξAi and the replacement
(6.67) becomes

1

1

1

˜λn+1 →
˜η−
n+1 →
˜λn+2 →
˜η−
n+2 →
while the integration changes to

β1β2 − 1

β1β2 − 1

β1β2 − 1

1

β1β2 − 1

hξB|q
hξBξAi
hξB|γ−
hξBξAi
hξA|q
hξAξBi
hξA|γ−
hξAξBi

+

+

+

+

β2

β1β2 − 1

β2

β1β2 − 1

β1

β1β2 − 1

β1

β1β2 − 1

hξA|q
hξAξBi
hξA|γ−
hξAξBi
hξB|q
hξBξAi
hξB|γ−
hξBξAi

,

,

,

,

Z d2λn+1

GL(1)

d2λn+2
GL(1)

= hξAξBihξB ξAiZ dβ1 dβ2 .

We deﬁne a matrix C ′ ∈ Gr(n + 2, k) with columns
n+2) ,

C ′ = (C ′

1 ··· C ′

(6.69)

(6.70)

(6.71)

by C ′

i = Ci for i = 1, . . . , n and modifying the last two columns to

C ′

n+1 =

1

1 − β1β2

Cn+1 +

β1

1 − β1β2

Cn+2 ,

C ′

n+2 =

1

1 − β1β2

Cn+2 +

β2

1 − β1β2

Cn+1 .

(6.72)

In its orthogonal matrix C ′⊥, we have

C ′⊥

n+1 = C ⊥

n+1 − β2C ⊥

n+2 ,

C ′⊥

n+2 = C ⊥

n+2 − β1C ⊥

n+1 .

(6.73)

20As is conventional in the literature on on-shell diagrams and Graßmannian integrals, we divide by the
pi )∗.

volume of GL(1) instead of U(1) here. This is related to relaxing the reality condition ˜λ ˙α
Moreover, we have suppressed all factors of (2π).

pi = ±(λα

6.4 Graßmannian integrals

Note that in the delta function involving C ′⊥, which is deﬁned as

δ(n+2−k)×2(C ′⊥ · λ) =

kYK=1Z d2ρK δ(n+2)×2(cid:0)λi − ρLC ′
Li(cid:1)

103

(6.74)

with auxiliary variables ρα
see [7] for details.

K, K = 1, . . . , k, this leads to a Jacobian factor of (1 − β1β2)2;
In total, the Graßmannian integral obtained from gluing the top-cell diagram together

as in (6.66) is

IF = hξAξBihξB ξAiZ dα1

α1 ···

dαm
αm

dβ1 dβ2
(1 − β1β2)2

× δk×2(C ′(αi, βi) · ˜λ) δk×4(C ′(αi, βi) · ˜η) δ(n+2−k)×2(C ′⊥(αi, βi) · λ) ,

(6.75)

where the variables λi, ˜λi and ˜ηi have been deﬁned in (6.58).

6.4.3 Graßmannian integral

Using the gluing procedure described in the last subsection and the on-shell subdiagrams
I obtained from the permutation ˜σ in (6.20), we have found the following form of the
Graßmannian integral:21

Z dk×(n+2)C ′

GL(k)

n,k δ2×k(C ′ · ˜λ) δ4×k(C ′ · ˜η) δ2×(n+2−k)(C ′⊥ · λ)
Ω′

(6.76)

with

Ω′

n,k =

Y =

hξAξBi2Y (1 − Y )−1

(1··· k)(2··· k+1)··· (n··· k−3)(n+1··· k−2)(n+2··· k−1)
(n−k+2··· n n+1)(n+2 1··· k−1)
(n−k+2··· n n+2)(n+1 1··· k−1)

.

,

(6.77)

In contrast to the on-shell form (6.62) in the case of planar amplitudes, the on-shell
form (6.77) contains consecutive as well as non-consecutive minors. The latter also appear
for non-planar amplitudes [84, 85, 87, 88].22

Note that the permutation ˜σ in (6.20), and hence also the on-shell form in (6.77),
correspond to the top-cell diagram with the minimal form factor glued in at positions n + 1
and n + 2. In addition, we have to consider the cyclic permutations of this on-shell diagram
with respect to the n on-shell legs.23 This can be achieved by permuting the super-spinor-
helicity variables in the delta functions of (6.76) or, equivalently, by permuting the entries
of the minors in (6.77).

Before evaluating (6.76), (6.77) explicitly, we bring it into an equivalent form that

makes its evaluation easier.24

21We have explicitly checked this for all ˆFT,n,k with k ≤ n ≤ 6.
22As we have explicitly seen in chapter 4, the diagrams contributing to loop-level form factors can become
non-planar when removing the minimal form factor. At least at the level of leading singularities, it might
hence not surprise to see features of non-planar amplitudes appear for form factors.

23Recall that the top-cell diagram is not cyclically symmetric unless k = 2 or k = n.
24For explicit evaluations of the Graßmannian integral in super-spinor-helicity variables, see [7].

104

6 Tree-level form factors

6.4.4 Graßmannian integral in twistor space

An alternative formulation of the Graßmannian integral (6.61) for scattering amplitudes,
which was ﬁrst given in [90], uses twistor variables [81] instead of spinor-helicity variables.
The former formulation is related to the latter by Witten’s half Fourier transform [193]:

(6.78)

(6.79)

In contrast to spinor-helicity variables, twistors

j λjα)f (λj) .

f (λj) −→Z d2λj exp(−i˜µα


W i =

˜µα
i
˜λ ˙α
i
˜ηA
i

transform under the little group as W → t−1W. Hence, they can be deﬁned projectively.
In analogy to the amplitude case, we can also transform (6.76) and (6.77) to twistor
space. The on-shell form (6.77) depends on the λi only through the reference spinors
ξA = λn+1 and ξB = λn+2. Using (6.78), the respective factor in (6.77) becomes

hξAξBi2 =(cid:28) ∂

∂ ˜µn+1

∂

∂ ˜µn+2(cid:29)2

.

(6.80)

Writing the delta function δ2×(n+2−k)(C ′⊥· λ) as in (6.74), the integrals (6.78) over λi yield

kYK=1Z d2ρK exp(cid:18) − i

n+2Xj=1

kXL=1

LC ′
ρα

Lj ˜µαj(cid:19) = δ2k(C ′ · ˜µ) .

(6.81)

In total, the Graßmannian integral (6.76) can be written as

(cid:28) ∂

∂ ˜µn+1

∂

∂ ˜µn+2(cid:29)2Z dk×(n+2)C ′

GL(k)

n,k δ4k|4k(C ′ · W) ,
Ω′

(6.82)

where the on-shell form is now given by

Ω′

n,k =

Y =

Y (1 − Y )−1

(1··· k)(2··· k+1)··· (n··· k−3)(n+1··· k−2)(n+2··· k−1)
(n−k+2··· n n+1)(n+2 1··· k−1)
(n−k+2··· n n+2)(n+1 1··· k−1)

.

,

(6.83)

It would be interesting to explore this representation of the Graßmannian integral in terms
of twistors further, but this is beyond the scope of this work.

6.4.5 Graßmannian integral in momentum-twistor space

In [91], a formulation of the Graßmannian integral (6.61), (6.62) in terms of diﬀerent
variables was given, namely in terms of Hodges’s momentum-twistor variables [82]. A
derivation of this momentum-twistor Graßmannian from (6.61), (6.62) was later provided in
[92]. After a brief introduction of momentum twistors, we will show that the Graßmannian
integral representation of form factors can be equally formulated in terms of momentum

6.4 Graßmannian integrals

105

twistors. This can be achieved by adapting the strategy of [92] in the reﬁned version
of [251].

The deﬁnition of momentum-twistor variables [82] is based on dual or regional (su-
per)momenta, which have also played a major role in showing dual superconformal invari-
ance of scattering amplitudes [98]. For scattering amplitudes, the dual momenta yi and
dual supermomenta ϑi are deﬁned by25
i − yα ˙α
i+1 ,

i − ϑαA
i+1 ,

˜λ ˙α
i = yα ˙α

λα
i ˜ηA

i = ϑαA

(6.84)

λα
i

which determines them up to a global shift. As a consequence of (super)momentum con-
servation, they form a closed contour. Momentum twistor variables are then deﬁned as

Zi =

λα
i
µ ˙α
i
ηA
i

 =

λα
i
yα ˙α
i λi,α
ϑαA
i λi,α

 ,

(6.85)

which transform homogeneously as Z → tZ under the little group.
For form factors, the n on-shell momenta do not add up to zero but to the oﬀ-shell
momentum q. The contour is hence not closed but periodic with period q [64]. We can
close it in several ways using the two auxiliary on-shell momenta pn+1 and pn+2 with
pn+1 + pn+2 = −q, see ﬁgure 6.13. The construction of the momentum twistors proceeds as
for amplitudes but using the variables with underscores deﬁned in (6.58). In the following,
only these variables occur, and we will hence drop the underscore in contractions of the
spinor and twistor variables.

y4

p3

y2

p2

y3

p4

y5

p5

p6

y6

p1

y1

Figure 6.13: For form factors, the momenta pi with 1 ≤ i ≤ n form a periodic contour
with period q. Using two auxiliary momenta pn+1 and pn+2 with pn+1 + pn+2 = −q, this
contour can be closed in diﬀerent ways to deﬁne dual momenta yi. The periodic contour is
depicted in solid lines for n = 4, the auxiliary momenta are depicted as dashed lines and
two diﬀerent ways of inserting the latter into the former are shown in grey boxes.

Now, let us transform the Graßmannian integral representation (6.76) and (6.77) to
In a ﬁrst step, we can use part of the GL(k) freedom to

momentum-twistor variables.
choose

ρ =(cid:18)0 ···

0 ···

0 1 0

0 0 1(cid:19) .

(6.86)

25Deﬁnitions in the literature diﬀer by a sign and/or a cyclic relabelling.

106

6 Tree-level form factors

The integration over the auxiliary variables ρ in (6.74) then ﬁxes

Ck−1 i = λ1
i ,

Ck i = λ2
i .

(6.87)

As a consequence, the momentum- and supermomentum-conserving delta functions are
split from the remaining delta functions and we can write (6.76) as

δ4(λ · ˜λ) δ8(λ · ˜η)Z
where the shift symmetry Tk−2 as part of the remaining gauge freedom acts on the ﬁrst
k − 2 rows of C ′ as

n,k δ2×(k−2)(C ′ · ˜λ) δ4×(k−2)(C ′ · ˜η) ,
Ω′

d(k−2)×(n+2)C ′
GL(k − 2) ⋉ Tk−2

(6.88)

C ′
Ii −→ C ′

Ii + r1I λ1

i + r2I λ2
i ,

I = 1, . . . , k − 2 ,

(6.89)

with r1I and r2I arbitrary.

In a second step, we replace the super-spinor-helicity variables within the integral in
(6.88) by momentum twistors (6.85). In terms of the former, the latter are explicitly given
as

˜λi = hi+1 iiµi−1 + hi i−1iµi+1 + hi−1 i+1iµi
˜ηi = hi+1 iiηi−1 + hi i−1iηi+1 + hi−1 i+1iηi

hi−1 iihi i+1i

,

.

(6.90)

hi−1 iihi i+1i

Deﬁning the matrices D as

DIi = hi i+1iC ′

I i−1 + hi−1 iiC ′

I i+1 + hi+1 i−1iC ′

I i

hi−1 iihi i+1i

,

(6.91)

we have

n+2Xi=1

C ′
Ii

˜λi = −

n+2Xi=1

DIiµi ,

n+2Xi=1

C ′
Ii ˜ηi = −

n+2Xi=1

DIiηi ,

I = 1, . . . , k − 2 .

(6.92)

In a third step, we express the minors of C ′ in terms of minors of D. In the case of

planar amplitudes, only consecutive minors occur, which are related as

(C ′

1 ··· C ′

k) = −h1 2i··· hk−1 ki(D2 ··· Dk−1)

(6.93)

and its cyclic permutations. In our case, also non-consecutive minors occur in the on-shell
form (6.77). These are related as

(C ′

1 ··· C ′

k−1C ′

k+1) = −h1 2i··· hk−2 k−1ihk−1 k+1i(D2 ··· Dk−1)
−h1 2i··· hk−2 k−1ihk k+1i(D2 ··· Dk−2Dk) ,

(C ′

1C ′

3 ··· C ′

k+1) = −h1 3ih3 4i··· hk k+1i(D3 ··· Dk)

−h1 2ih3 4i··· hk k+1i(D2D4 ··· Dk) ,

(6.94)

etc. Using these relations, we ﬁnd

(1··· k)C′ ··· (n+2··· k−1)C′ = (−1)n+2(h1 2i··· hn+2 1i)k−1(1··· k)D ··· (n+2··· k−1)D
(6.95)

6.4 Graßmannian integrals

and

Y =

=

(n−k+2··· n n+1)C′(n+2 1··· k−1)C′
(n−k+2··· n n+2)C′(n+1 1··· k−1)C′

hn n+1i(n−k+3··· n)D

hn n+2i(n−k+3··· n)D + hn+1 n+2i(n−k+3··· n−1 n+1)D

hn+2 1i(1··· k−2)D

.

hn+1 1i(1··· k−2)D + hn+1 n+2i(n+2 2··· k−2)D

107

(6.96)

The remaining steps are again completely analogous to [251]. In a fourth step, the Tk−2
I2 = 0. The

shift symmetry is used to set the ﬁrst two columns of C ′ to zero: C ′
measure transforms under this change of variables as

I1 = C ′

= h12ik−2 d(k−2)×(n)C ′
GL(k − 2)
In a ﬁfth step, the integration variable is changed from C ′ to D:

d(k−2)×(n+2)C ′
GL(k − 2) ⋉ Tk−2

.

d(k−2)×(n)C ′
GL(k − 2)

=(cid:18)h12i··· hn+2 1i

h12i2

(cid:19)k−2 d(k−2)×(n)D

GL(k − 2)

.

(6.97)

(6.98)

In the sixth and ﬁnal step, the integration over the ﬁrst two columns of D, which are ﬁxed
by ﬁxing the ﬁrst two columns of C ′, is formally restored by introducing

h12iδ2(DIiλi)

(6.99)

for each row I = 1, . . . , k − 2. For the details of these steps, we refer the interested reader
to [251].

Assembling all pieces, we ﬁnd

ˆFT,n,2Z d(k−2)×(n+2)D

GL(k − 2)

n,k δ4(k−2)|4(k−2)(D · Z) ,
Ω′

(6.100)

where
n,k = hn 1ihn+1 n+2i
Ω′
hn n+1ihn+2 1i
with Y given in (6.96).

(1··· k−2)(2··· k−1)··· (n··· k−5)(n+1··· k−4)(n+2··· k−3)
(6.101)

Y (1 − Y )−1

Note that we still have the freedom to choose the reference spinors ξA and ξB. A
convenient choice is λn+1 ≡ ξA = λ1, λn+2 ≡ ξB = λn. Using this choice, (6.101) becomes

Ω′

n,k =

− ˜Y (1 − ˜Y )−1

(1··· k−2)··· (n··· k−5)(n+1··· k−4)(n+2··· k−3)

(6.102)

with

˜Y =

(n−k+3··· n)(1··· k−2)

(n−k+3··· n−1 n+1)(n+2 2··· k−2)

.

(6.103)

The contributions from the other top-cell diagrams can be obtained by shifting the
position at which the legs n + 1 and n + 2 are inserted into the contour from between (n, 1)
to between (n + s mod n, 1 + s mod n). This is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.13 for n = 4.

108

6 Tree-level form factors

6.4.6 Examples

Let us now evaluate the momentum-twistor Graßmannian integral (6.100), (6.102), (6.103)
for certain examples.

In the case k = 2, the integral (6.100) is zero-dimensional. All consecutive minors
are equal to 1 whereas all non-consecutive minors vanish. Inserting this into (6.102) and
(6.103), we ﬁnd that Ω′
n,2 = 1.26 Hence, the only contribution comes from the prefactor
ˆFT,n,2 in (6.100), which is the correct result. This explicitly shows that our Graßmannian
integral representation works at MHV level.

In the case k = 3,

(6.104)

D =(cid:0)d1 d2

···

dn+2(cid:1) .

The consecutive minors (i) of D are equal to the di’s, whereas the non-consecutive minors
of length one are by deﬁnition equal to the corresponding consecutive minors (i) = di,
where i is the index that stands alone in the non-consecutive minor for general k. Thus,
the Graßmannian integral (6.100) becomes

ˆFT,n,2Z d1×(n+2)D

GL(1)

1

1

1

1 − dn+1dn+2

d1dn

d1 ··· dn

dn+1dn+2

δ4|4(D · Z) .

(6.105)

Its integrand diverges for di = 0 with i = 2, . . . , n − 1, n + 1, n + 2 as well as for d1dn =
dn+1dn+2. In fact, only the former poles will be relevant for computing form factors as
residues of (6.105). For k = 3 and general n, n − 3 consecutive residues have to be taken.
As for scattering amplitudes [251], they can be characterised by a list of the ﬁve di’s with
respect to which no residues are taken. Considering only residues of the type di = 0 with
i = 2, . . . , n − 1, n + 1, n + 2, it follows that both d1 and dn have to be included in the list
of these ﬁve variables. This allows for two cases. In the ﬁrst case, both dn+1 and dn+2 are
included in this list as well. Suppressing a possible global sign,27 the corresponding residue
reads

ˆFT,n,2Z dd1 ddi ddn ddn+1 ddn+2

GL(1)

1

1

1 − dn+1dn+2

d1dn

d1didndn+1dn+2

δ4|4(d1Z 1 + diZ i + dnZ n + dn+1Z n+1 + dn+2Z n+2) .

(6.106)
We can use the GL(1) redundancy to ﬁx d1 = hi n n + 1 n + 2i, where the four-bracket is
deﬁned as
(6.107)
and Z • denotes the four bosonic components of Z •. The delta function then ﬁxes the four
remaining integration variables to

hi j k li = det(Z iZj ZkZ l) = ǫABCDZA

k Z D
l

i Z B

j Z C

di = hn n+1 n+2 1i ,
Hence, (6.106) reduces to

dn = hn+1 n+2 1 ii ,

dn+1 = hn+2 1 i ni ,

dn+2 = h1 i n n+1i .
(6.108)

Resi = ˆFT,n,2

1

1 − hn+2 1 n iih1 n i n+1i

hn i n+1 n+2ihi n+1 n+2 1i

[i n+1 n+2 1 n] ,

(6.109)

26Note that ˜Y is formally divergent when inserting the values of the consecutive and non-consecutive mi-

nors that correspond to k = 2. Hence, we have to expand − ˜Y
1− ˜Y
before setting k = 2, in which case we ﬁnd − ˜Y
1− ˜Y

= 1.

27See [251] for a method to determine this sign in the case of amplitudes.

=

(n−k+3···n−1 n+1)(n+2 2···k−2)−(n−k+3···n)(1···k−2)

−(n−k+3···n)(1···k−2)

6.4 Graßmannian integrals

where i ∈ {2, . . . , n − 1} and the ﬁve bracket is deﬁned as

[i j k l m] =

δ4(hi j k liηm + cyclic permutations)
hi j k lihj k l mihk l m iihl m i jihm i j ki

.

109

(6.110)

In the second case, at least one of dn+1, dn+2 is not part of the aforementioned list. The
resulting residue can be evaluated in complete analogy to the previous case. This yields

where i, j, k ∈ {2, . . . , n − 1, n + 1, n + 2}.

In the case n = 3, no residues have to be taken and we obtain

gResi,j,k = ˆFT,n,2 [i j k 1 n] ,
ˆFT,3,3 = ˆFT,3,2 Res2 .

(6.111)

(6.112)

We ﬁnd a perfect numeric match between this expression and the known results [131, 140].
For n ≥ 4, two complications occur. Residues have to be taken and — due to residue
theorems — the sum of all residues vanishes such that only a particular combination yields
the correct result for the form factor. Moreover, several top-cell diagrams are required. The
ﬁrst complication can be solved by a numeric comparison to the known results, whereas
the second one can be solved by shifting the position at which the legs n + 1 and n + 2 are
inserted into the contour from (n, 1) to (n + s mod n, 1 + s mod n) as discussed above.

Numerically comparing with the results of [140], we ﬁnd28

ˆFT,4,3 = ˆFT,4,2(Res3 +gRes2,3,5 + Ress=2
ˆFT,5,3 = ˆFT,5,2(Res4 +gRes3,4,6 +gRes
+gRes2,3,6 +gRes

3 +gRes
3,4,7 −gRes

s=3
2,3,6 + Ress=3
s=3
s=3
2,3,4 + Ress=1

3 −gRes2,3,4

5

s=2
2,3,5) ,

where the superscript s speciﬁes the shift.

(6.113)

) ,

Finally, let us look at the simplest case for k = 4, namely n = 4. Using the GL(2)

redundancy, the D matrix becomes

D =(cid:18)1 0 d13 d14 d15 d16
0 1 d23 d24 d25 d26(cid:19) ,

(6.114)

and the delta functions completely ﬁx its remaining entries to

di3 = − hi 4 5 6i
h3 4 5 6i

di5 = − hi 3 4 6i
h3 4 5 6i
for i = 1, 2. After using the generalised Schouten identity

di4 = + hi 3 5 6i
h3 4 5 6i

,

,

,

di6 = + hi 3 4 5i
h3 4 5 6i

,

(6.115)

hi j k lihi j m ni + hi j k mihi j n li + hi j k nihi j l mi = 0 ,

(6.116)

we ﬁnd29

ˆFT,4,4 = ˆFT,4,2h1 3 4 5ih1 3 4 6ih1 3 5 6ih2 3 4 6ih2 3 5 6ih2 4 5 6i [1 3 4 5 6] [2 3 4 5 6]
h1 2 3 4ih1 2 3 6ih3 4 5 6i2 (h1 2 4 6ih1 3 4 5i + h1 2 5 6ih3 4 5 6i)

.

(6.117)

28Note that, due to residue theorems, the decomposition in (6.113) is not unique. In particular, some of

the terms can be obtained from diﬀerent top-cell diagrams.

29Note that a subtle global sign occurs in the evaluation of this momentum-twistor Graßmannian integral;

this sign is also present in the case of the related amplitude ˆA6,4.

110

6 Tree-level form factors

We have numerically checked this against component results of [131] and found perfect
agreement.

The above results give strong evidence for the conjectured top-cell diagram for form
factors (6.18) and the resulting on-shell form (6.77) in the Graßmannian integral (6.76).
Nevertheless, a proof of the relation (6.18) at the level of the top-cell diagrams and a proof
of (6.77) would be desirable.

Note on central-charge deformations

In [108, 109], a central-charge deformation of the Graßmannian integral formulation for
scattering amplitudes was proposed. For the case of MHV form factors of the stress-
tensor supermultiplet, we have shown in [7] that a similar deformation also exists for the
Graßmannian integral formulation for form factors. The deformed Graßmannian integral
is obtained immediately when constructing these form factors via deformed R operators,
see [7] for details. In the construction of the Graßmannian integral for Nk−2MHV form
factors in this section, though, we have used the approach of on-shell gluing. It should also
be possible to construct a central-charge deformed version of the Graßmannian integral for
Nk−2MHV form factors via R operators. However, this is beyond the scope of this work.

Part II

Deformations

111

Chapter 7

Introduction to integrable
deformations

In the previous chapters, we have studied the maximally supersymmetric N = 4 SYM
theory. Let us now turn to deformations of this theory in which this high amount of
symmetry is reduced.1 Concretely, we look at the β- and γi-deformation. They were
respectively shown to be the most general N = 1 supersymmetric and non-supersymmetric
ﬁeld-theory deformations of N = 4 SYM theory that are integrable in the planar limit at the
level of the asymptotic Bethe ansatz [165], i.e. asymptotically integrable. In this chapter,
we introduce these theories as well as some of their properties.

We give the single-trace part of the action of the deformed theories in section 7.1.
In section 7.2, we discuss the similarities and diﬀerences between the deformed theories
and certain non-commutative ﬁeld theories, in particular with respect to the notion of
planarity. This last discussion, which is based on [1–3], yields important relations between
the deformed theories and their undeformed parent theory.

7.1 Single-trace action

The single-trace part of the action of the deformed theories can be obtained from the
action (1.3) of N = 4 SYM theory via a certain type of non-commutative Moyal-like
∗-product [159, 160]. For two ﬁelds A and B, the ∗-product is deﬁned as

A ∗ B = AB e

i

2 (qA∧qB ) ,

(7.1)

A, q2

where qA = (q1
B) are the SU(4) Cartan charge vectors of the
ﬁelds, which are given in table 7.1. The antisymmetric product of the charge vectors is
deﬁned as

A) and qB = (q1

A, q3

B, q2

B, q3

qA ∧ qB = (qA)TC qB ,

(7.2)

C =

0 −γ3
γ2
0 −γ1
γ3
−γ2
0
γ1

 .

1We give somewhat less details on the calculations in this part compared to the ﬁrst part. Further
and partially complementary details can be found in the Ph.D. thesis [252] of Jan Fokken, with whom I
coauthored [1–3].

113

114

7

Introduction to integrable deformations

B Aµ, Dµ, Fµν φ1 φ2 φ3 ψα1 ψα2 ψα3 ψα4
2 + 1
q1
B
2 + 1
q2
B
2 + 1
q3
B

2 − 1
2 − 1
2 + 1

0 + 1
0 − 1
1 − 1

2 − 1
2 + 1
2 − 1

0
0
0

1
0
0

0
1
0

2

2

2

Table 7.1: SU(4) Cartan charges of the diﬀerent ﬁelds [165]. Their respective antiﬁelds
have the opposite charges.

The three real deformation parameters γ1, γ2 and γ3 frequently occur in the linear combi-
nations

γ±
1 = ±

1
2

(γ2 ± γ3) ,

γ±
2 = ±

1
2

(γ3 ± γ1) ,

(γ1 ± γ2) .

1
2

γ±
3 = ±
i = β and γ−

(7.3)

In the limit of the β-deformation, these assume the values γ+
although non-commutative, the ∗-product (7.1) is associative.
replacing all products of ﬁelds in (1.3) by their ∗-products. This yields

We can then obtain the single-trace part of the action of the deformed theories by

i = 0. Note that,

S =Z d4x tr(cid:16) −

1
4

αψαA

F µνFµν − (Dµ ¯φj) Dµ φj + i ¯ψ ˙αA D ˙α
+ gYM(cid:16) i
j , ψαk}∗ + φj{ ¯ψ ˙α4 , ¯ψj

ǫijkφi{ψα

2
[ ¯φj , φj][ ¯φk , φk] +

˙α}∗ + h.c.(cid:17)
[ ¯φj , ¯φk]∗[φj , φk]∗(cid:17) ,

g2
YM
4

−

g2
YM
2

(7.4)

where [ · , · ]∗ and { · , · }∗ are the ∗-deformed (anti)commutators deﬁned via (7.1). We
have dropped the ∗ in cases where the ∗-products trivially reduce to the usual products in
the case of the γi-deformation. In the β-deformation, also the interactions of the gluino
ψα4 and the antigluino ¯ψ4

˙α are undeformed.

7.2 Relation to the undeformed theory

The non-commutative ∗-product (7.1) is similar to a ∗-product appearing in certain types
of non-commutative ﬁeld theories, see [161] for a review of the latter. This allows to adapt
a theorem developed in the context of these theories by Thomas Filk [162]. This theorem
relates planar single-trace diagrams built from elementary interactions in the deformed and
undeformed theory. In the formulation of [253], it reads

A1 A2

Ai

A1 A2

Ai

planar
β or γi

=

planar
N = 4

× Φ (A1 ∗ A2 ∗ . . . ∗ An) ,

(7.5)

An

An−1

Ai+1

An

An−1

Ai+1

7.2 Relation to the undeformed theory

115

where Ai, i = 1, . . . , n, are elementary ﬁelds of the theory, the grey area depicts planar
elementary interactions between them and Φ(A1 ∗ A2 ∗ ··· ∗ An) denotes the phase factor
of the ∗-product A1 ∗ A2 ∗ ··· ∗ An. As the single-trace couplings are not renormalised
in N = 4 SYM theory, this relation could be used in [179] and [180], respectively, to
show that the single-trace couplings in the β- and γi-deformation are not renormalised
either. Furthermore, it was used to relate planar colour-ordered scattering amplitudes in
the deformed theories to their undeformed counterparts [253].

However, when applying relation (7.5) to Feynman diagrams that contain composite
operators, such as those contributing to correlation functions, form factors or operator
renormalisation, one has to be very careful. A priori, relation (7.5) is only valid for planar
single-trace diagrams built from the elementary interactions of the theory. In order to apply
it to a planar single-trace diagram that contains a composite operator, one needs to remove
the operator from the diagram. The resulting subdiagram of elementary interactions is
either of single-trace type or of double-trace type, the latter occurring in the presence of
ﬁnite-size eﬀects [29]. Relation (7.5), however, can only be applied in the former case.

In the context of non-commutative ﬁeld theories, Filk’s theorem can easily be extended
to include composite operators. They can simply be added to the action with appropriate
source terms and can be deformed in analogy to the elementary interactions. Problems
arise when adapting this extension to the β- and γi-deformation. In the non-commutative
ﬁeld theories, the ordering principle at each vertex refers to the positions in spacetime, or,
equivalently, to the momenta. The phase factor introduced by the corresponding ∗-product
is also deﬁned in terms of the momenta. In particular, momentum conservation is satisﬁed
at every vertex and composite operator such that the phase factor is invariant under a
cyclic relabelling of the ﬁelds. In the β- and γi-deformation, the ordering principle refers
to colour, whereas the phase factor is deﬁned by the SU(4) Cartan charges. Colour singlets
such as traces can, however, be charged under the Cartan subgroup of SU(4). In this case,
the deﬁnition of the phase factor in the ∗-product (7.1) is incompatible with the (graded)
cyclic invariance of the trace. For example, tr(φiφj) = tr(φj φi) but tr(φi ∗ φj) 6= tr(φj ∗ φi)
unless i = j. Thus, the extension of Filk’s theorem can only be adapted for composite
operators whose trace factors are neutral with respect to the SU(4) charges that deﬁne the
phase factor in the ∗-product (7.1).2
One example of an operator for which we can extend Filk’s theorem is the Konishi
primary operator studied in chapter 4. According to the above arguments, its planar
anomalous dimension and minimal form factors are independent of the deformation pa-
rameters, as well as all planar correlation functions that contain only this operator.3 In
the β-deformation, another example is the chiral primary operator

˜Ok = tr(cid:0)(φ1)k(φ2)k(φ3)k(cid:1) + permutations ,

(7.6)

where each permutation is weighted by S
3k with S being the smallest cyclic shift that
Its SU(4) Cartan charge is (q1, q2, q3) = (k, k, k), which
maps the operator to itself.
vanishes in all antisymmetric products (7.2) in the β-deformation.
In contrast to the
Konishi primary operator, the operators ˜Ok are altered when replacing all products in

2Note that the phase factor in the β-deformation depends only on two linear combinations of the three

Cartan charges of SU(4).

3Non-minimal and generalised Konishi planar form factors in the deformed theories are related to their

undeformed counterparts via (7.5).

116

7

Introduction to integrable deformations

(7.6) by ∗-products.4 By the above considerations, however, all their planar correlation
functions have to be deformation independent. This is consistent with the explicit results
available in the literature. Concretely, the planar anomalous dimensions of the operators
˜Ok were argued to vanish in [177], generalising an argument of [254, 255] for rational β.
Moreover, three-point functions h ˜Ok ˜Ok′ ˜Ok′′i were studied in [256] at one-loop order in the
planar gauge theory as well as at strong coupling via the Lunin-Maldacena background
and found to be independent of β.

Considering the subdiagram of elementary interactions that is obtained from a planar
single-trace diagram that contains a single uncharged operator by removing this operator,
we ﬁnd the following relation for double-trace diagrams:5

A1 A2

Ai

A1 A2

Ai

β or γi

δq=0

=

β or γi

N = 4

δq=0

N = 4

An

An−1

Ai+1

An

An−1

Ai+1

|

Φ (A1 ∗ . . . ∗ Ai ∗ Ai+1 ∗ . . . ∗ An)

{z

× Φ (A1 ∗ . . . ∗ Ai) Φ (Ai+1 ∗ . . . ∗ An)

,

(7.7)

}

where δq denotes the ﬂow of the relevant charges.

The above extension is very powerful for planar (generalised) form factors and corre-
lation functions of composite operators that are neutral with respect to the charges which
deﬁne the deformation. For planar (generalised) form factors and correlation functions
of charged operators, however, it is not applicable. As already mentioned, the composite
operators have to be removed from the diagrams in this case, resulting in a subdiagram of
elementary interactions which can be either of single-trace type or of multi-trace type. If
this subdiagram is of single-trace type, relation (7.5) can be applied. In particular, it can
be applied to the subdiagrams that yield the asymptotic dilatation operator. At one-loop
order, this gives [165]

N =4)AkAl
AiAj

i

= e

(D(1)
β,γi

)AkAl
AiAj

2 (qAk ∧qAl −qAi ∧qAj )(D(1)

= Φ(Ak ∗ Al ∗ Aj ∗ Ai)(D(1)

.
(7.8)
Moreover, relation (7.5) was used to derive asymptotic integrability of the deformed theories
from the assumption that N = 4 SYM theory is asymptotically integrable [165]. However,
if the subdiagram is of multi-trace type, which occurs for ﬁnite-size eﬀects, relation (7.5)
cannot be applied to relate the deformed result to the undeformed one. Hence, ﬁnite-size
eﬀects have to be studied for checks of integrability and the AdS/CFT correspondence that
go beyond the undeformed case. These will be the subject of the next three chapters.

N =4)AkAl
AiAj

4In [176], an alternative prescription to obtain the deformed chiral primary operators ˜Ok is given; the

result using this prescription diﬀers only by a global phase factor.

5This relation was derived earlier for the leading double-trace part of scattering amplitudes in the β-

deformation in [257].

Chapter 8

Prewrapping in the β-deformation

In this chapter, we study double-trace couplings in the planar β-deformation. We analyse
the inﬂuence of these couplings on two-point correlation functions and anomalous dimen-
sions in section 8.1. We ﬁnd that, although apparently suppressed by a factor of 1
N , they
can contribute at planar level via a new kind of ﬁnite-size eﬀect. As this ﬁnite-size ef-
fect starts to contribute one loop order before the ﬁnite-size eﬀect of wrapping, we call it
prewrapping. Moreover, we classify which composite operators are potentially aﬀected by
prewrapping. Finally, we obtain the complete one-loop dilatation operator of the planar β-
deformation by incorporating this ﬁnite-size eﬀect into the asymptotic dilatation operator
in section 8.2.

The results presented in this chapter were ﬁrst published in [2].

8.1 Prewrapping

As reviewed in section 1.3, subdiagrams of elementary interactions with a multi-trace struc-
ture, and in particular a double-trace structure, can contribute at leading order in the pla-
nar limit if each trace factor in the subdiagram is planarly contracted with a trace factor
of matching length in a composite operator [29]. This can only happen if the range of the
interaction equals the length of the operator, and it is hence known as ﬁnite-size eﬀect. In
the well known ﬁnite-size eﬀect of wrapping [29], the double-trace structure is built from
single-trace interactions that wrap around the operator. In this section, we study the eﬀect
of double-trace structures whose origin is also of double-trace type. In particular, we ﬁnd
that they give rise to a new type of ﬁnite-size eﬀect.

One source of double-trace structures is the completeness relation (1.6), which appears

as colour part of each propagator. In double-line notation, it can be written as

l δk
δi
j −

s
N

δi
j δk

l =

i

j

l

k −

s
N

i

j

l

k

,

(8.1)

where s = 1 for gauge group SU(N ) and s = 0 for gauge group U(N ) as deﬁned in (1.4).
The double-trace term in (8.1) subtracts the U(1) component in the ﬁrst term in (8.1),
which is absent for gauge group SU(N ).

In correlation functions of gauge-invariant local composite operators, the fundamental
gauge-group indices i, j, k, l = 1, . . . , N in (8.1) have to be contracted by vertices, composite
operators and other propagators. Two possible cases can occur.
In the ﬁrst case, i is

117

i

j

|

s
N

−

l

k

}

i

j

|

N 1

{z

l

k

}

N 2

{z

∝ (1 − s) N .

(8.3)

118

8 Prewrapping in the β-deformation

connected to l and k is connected to j:

i

j

l

k

s
N

−

i

j

l

k

∝ (cid:16)1 −

s

N 2(cid:17) N 2 .

(8.2)

|

N 2

{z

}

|

N 1

{z

}

In this case, the contribution from the double-trace term is suppressed with respect to the
1
N 2 . In the second case, i is connected to j
one from the single-trace term by a factor of
and k to l:

In this case, the double-trace term contributes at the same leading order as the single-trace
term. Moreover, the sum of both contributions vanishes for gauge group SU(N ), where
s = 1. This can be interpreted as follows. The contribution of the U(1) component, which
is subtracted by the double-trace term, is of leading order only if it is the only contribution.
This is precisely what occurs in the second case, where the connection of the indices projects
out all other components. In the undeformed N = 4 SYM theory, the U(1) component is
free, as all interactions are of commutator type. Hence, the diagrams of the second case
have to vanish due to cancellations between diﬀerent contributions.

For two-point functions, a generic diagram corresponding to the second case is

s
N

−

∝ (1 − s)N 2L−1 ,

(8.4)

where the dark grey area denotes arbitrary planar interactions and both grey-shaded op-
erators are assumed to be of single-trace type and length L.1 We denote such diagrams as
s-channel type. As every cubic vertex comes with a factor of gYM and every quartic vertex
with a factor g2
YM, this diagram contains a minimum of 2L− 2 factors of gYM. Hence, it can
start to contribute to the two-point function and thus to the anomalous dimension at loop
order ℓ = L − 1. As this is one loop order earlier than the critical wrapping order ℓ = L,
we call this new ﬁnite-size eﬀect prewrapping.
Another source of double-trace structures are double-trace terms in the action. While
the action of the β-deformation in N = 1 superspace is free of double-trace terms, they do
occur in the component action for gauge group SU(N ) and read

Z d4xh−

s
N

g2
YM
2

tr(cid:0)[ ¯φj , ¯φk]∗(cid:1) tr(cid:0)[φj , φk]∗(cid:1)i ,

(8.5)

where the ∗-commutator is deﬁned via the ∗-product in complete analogy to the usual
commutator. These double-trace terms arise when integrating out the auxiliary ﬁelds

1This analysis can be immediately generalised to the length-changing case.

8.2 Complete one-loop dilatation operator

119

and using the completeness relation (1.6), see e.g. [1] for a detailed derivation.2 Hence,
it can be completely understood via the previous analysis by considering the theory in
N = 1 superspace or in component space without integrating out the auxiliary ﬁelds. We
will encounter other double-trace terms, which do not arise via this mechanism, in the
γi-deformation in the next chapters.

Understanding the mechanism of prewrapping, we can also formulate criteria for single-
trace operators to be potentially aﬀected by it. In order for the Feynman diagram (8.4) to
exist, a ﬁeld in the theory or a trace factor in a multi-trace coupling must have the same
SU(4) Cartan charges as the composite operator. Moreover, in the ﬁrst case, this ﬁeld
has to have non-trivial ∗-products with other ﬁelds, i.e. it has to have deformed vertices.
If all its vertices are undeformed, the diﬀerent contributions cancel as in the undeformed
theory. A table of all potentially aﬀected single-trace operators in closed subsectors of
the β-deformation is given in [2]. As follows from an easy combinatorial analysis, this
table contains only the operators tr(φiφj) and tr( ¯φi ¯φj) with i 6= j, which are known to
be aﬀected by prewrapping. In non-compact subsectors or the complete theory, however,
large families of potentially aﬀected operators exist, such as

tr(cid:16)φ2φ3(φ1 ¯φ1)i(φ2 ¯φ2)j(φ3 ¯φ3)k(ψ1 ¯ψ1)l(ψ2 ¯ψ2)m(ψ3 ¯ψ3)n(ψ4 ¯ψ4)oF p ¯F q(cid:17) ,

(8.6)

where i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, q ∈ N0 and all spinor indices are suppressed.
Based on the mechanism of prewrapping as well as ﬁniteness theorems in N = 1
superspace, it was furthermore argued in [2] that the anomalous dimensions of tr(φiφj)
and tr( ¯φi ¯φj) with i 6= j as well as those of their superpartners vanish at all orders of planar
perturbation theory in the β-deformation with gauge group SU(N ).3

8.2 Complete one-loop dilatation operator

Next, we incorporate the ﬁnite-size eﬀects of wrapping and prewrapping into the asymp-
totic dilatation operator density (7.8) in order to obtain the complete one-loop dilatation
operator of the planar β-deformation. Moreover, we comment on its one-loop spectrum.

8.2.1 Gauge group SU(N )

For gauge group SU(N ), the ﬁnite-size eﬀect of prewrapping has to be incorporated into
the asymptotic dilatation operator density (7.8). Before doing so, let us illustrate why
(7.8) fails to yield the correct result in the β-deformation while it does give the correct
result in the undeformed theory. As an example, consider the operator O = tr(ψα1φ2), or,
more concretely, the coeﬃcient of O in D(1)O. In the undeformed theory, this coeﬃcient
is the sum of four matrix elements of the dilatation operator density D(1)

N =4, namely

(D(1)

N =4)ψ1φ2
ψ1φ2

= +3 ,

(D(1)

N =4)φ2ψ1
ψ1φ2

= −1 ,

(D(1)

N =4)φ2ψ1
φ2ψ1

= +3 ,

(D(1)

N =4)ψ1φ2
φ2ψ1

= −1 ,

(8.7)

2The double-trace term (8.5) was explicitly written down in [257] but occurred already implicitly in [176]

several years earlier.

3These anomalous dimensions were found to vanish at two-loop order in [258].

120

8 Prewrapping in the β-deformation

where we are suppressing the index α of the fermion. The ﬁrst two matrix elements stem
from the following sums of Feynman diagrams

ψ1

ψ1

φ2

+2

{z

+

1
2

|

φ2

+

ψ1

φ2

+1

{z

}

ψ1

ψ1

|

φ2

φ2

}

−1

{z

ψ1

φ2

+

,

ψ1

φ2

|

+1

{z

}

(8.8)

}

,

}

(D(1)

N =4)ψ1φ2
ψ1φ2

=

1
2

|

(D(1)

N =4)φ2ψ1
ψ1φ2

=

φ2

ψ1

ψ1

φ2

|

−1

{z

where complex scalars are depicted by solid lines, fermions by dashed lines, self-energy
insertions by black blobs and the composite operators by thick horizontal lines.4 The
fact that only the single-trace part is considered is depicted by the thick horizontal lines’
extension beyond the points where the ﬁeld lines exit them. The Feynman rules used to
calculate these matrix elements can be found in [1]. The last two matrix elements stem
from the reﬂections of the above Feynman diagrams at the vertical axis. As expected, the
sum of all s-channel-type diagrams vanishes due to cancellations among the four asymptotic
contributions.

In the β-deformation, the four matrix elements (8.7) receive the phase factors 1, eiβ,
1 and e−iβ, respectively, which follows both from relation (7.5) and the Feynman diagram
calculation. The resulting sum of the s-channel-type diagrams is non-vanishing and given
by

1 − eiβ +1 − e−iβ = 4 sin2 β

2

.

(8.9)

In principle, the failure of (7.8) to yield the correct result requires the separate cal-
culation of the double-trace contribution to the dilatation operator, e.g. by the method
of section 3.3. In the following, however, we will argue that a shortcut is available which
avoids any calculation. The main idea behind this argument is to restore the cancellation
mechanism of the undeformed theory in order to set the contributions of all s-channel-type
diagrams to zero without altering any other contributions.
In the β-deformation, only
vertices built from matter-type ﬁelds, i.e. the chiral superﬁelds Φi, ¯Φi, i = 1, 2, 3 and its
components φi, ¯φi, ψiα, ¯ψi
˙α in Wess-Zumino gauge, are deformed. Vertices containing at
least one gauge-type ﬁeld, i.e. the vector superﬁeld V and its components Aµ, ψ4α, ¯ψ4
˙α, are
undeformed. In s-channel-type diagrams, one undeformed vertex suﬃces for the cancella-
tion of the undeformed theory to occur. Hence, we only need to consider s-channel-type
diagrams with two deformed vertices. An exhaustive list of them is shown in table 8.1.
Note that these diagrams only occur for matrix elements of the dilatation operator with
four matter-type ﬁelds or four anti-matter-type ﬁelds. Hence, we can restore the cancella-
tion mechanism of the undeformed theory by setting β = 0 in these matrix elements. It

4While the whole two-point function is shown, only the part contributing to the oﬀ-shell operator

renormalisation is depicted in black whereas the rest is depicted in grey.

8.2 Complete one-loop dilatation operator

121

s-channel
+ vertical &
horizontal
reﬂections

+ twists

t-channel
+ vertical &
horizontal
reﬂections

in components

N = 1

ψi

ψj

φi

ψj

φi

φj

Φi

Φj

φi

φj =

ψi

ψj

φi

ψj

φi

φj

φi

φj

Φi

Φj

¯ψj

ψi

ψi

¯ψj

¯ψj

φi

φi

¯ψj

¯φj

¯φj

φi =

φi

¯φj

φi

φi

¯φj

¯Φj

Φi

Φi

¯Φj

Table 8.1: Feynman diagrams with two deformed vertices that contribute to the dilatation
operator at range two. Complex scalars and chiral superﬁelds are depicted by solid lines,
fermions by dashed lines, auxiliary ﬁelds by dotted lines and the composite operators by
thick horizontal lines. ‘Twist’ denotes the reﬂection of only the upper half of the diagram
at a vertical axis.

remains to be shown that this does not alter any non-s-channel-type diagrams, i.e. that
no other deformed diagrams with these combinations of external ﬁelds exist.
It is easy
to convince oneself that this is the case.5 Further note that this argument is completely
independent of any covariant derivatives that can act on the external ﬁelds.
We deﬁne the alphabets of matter-type ﬁelds and anti-matter-type ﬁelds

Amatter = {Dk φ1, Dk φ2, Dk φ3, Dk ψα1, Dk ψα2, Dk ψα3} ,
¯Amatter = {Dk ¯φ1, Dk ¯φ2, Dk ¯φ3, Dk ¯ψ1

˙α, Dk ¯ψ3
˙α}

˙α, Dk ¯ψ2

(8.10)

as subsets of the alphabet A given in (1.12). We have furthermore abbreviated the in-
dex structure of the ﬁelds as Dk ψαi ≡ D(α1 ˙α1 ··· Dαk ˙αk ψα)i, etc. The complete one-loop
dilatation operator of the β-deformation with gauge group SU(N ) is then given by

(D(1)

β )AkAl
AiAj

= e

i
2 (qAk ∧qAl −qAi ∧qAj )

(D(1)

N =4)AkAl
AiAj

.

(8.11)

β=0 if L=2 and
(Ai,Aj,Ak,Al∈Amatter or
Ai,Aj,Ak,Al∈ ¯Amatter)

8.2.2 Gauge group U(N )

For gauge group U(N ), the prewrapping eﬀect is absent at one-loop order.6 However,
the well known wrapping eﬀect occurs for operators of length L = 1. The corresponding
wrapping diagrams are one-particle reducible and given entirely by the self-energy diagrams
of the U(1) component. For the scalar ﬁelds, these are calculated in appendix C.2. Via
supersymmetry, this also determines the self energies of the matter-type fermions7 and we

5The only other diagrams with deformed vertices and these combinations of external ﬁelds are of self-
energy type. Hence, they have range one and we can apply relation (7.5) to show that their planar part is
deformation independent.

6This is true if the running double-trace coupling (8.5) is set to zero at tree level, which is the case we

are considering here.

7The self energies of the fermions were also explicitly calculated in [9] for the case of the more general

γi-deformation.

122

ﬁnd8

γ(1)
tr Dk φi

= γ(1)

tr Dk ¯φi = γ(1)

tr Dk ψαi

8 Prewrapping in the β-deformation

= γ(1)

tr Dk ¯ψi
˙α

= 4 sin2 β
2

(8.12)

in the notation introduced below (8.10). The U(1) components of the gauge-type ﬁelds are
free as in the undeformed theory and hence their self energies vanish. Thus, we ﬁnd

γ(1)
tr Dk Fαβ

= γ(1)

tr Dk ¯F ˙α ˙β

= γ(1)

tr Dk ψα4

= γ(1)

tr Dk ¯ψ4
˙α

= 0 .

(8.13)

8.2.3 One-loop spectrum

Using the above results, the spectrum of all primary operators with classical scaling dimen-
sion ∆0 ≤ 4.5 was calculated in [2]. Interestingly, only the supermultiplets of the operators
tr(φiφj) and tr( ¯φi ¯φj) with i 6= j were found to be aﬀected by the prewrapping eﬀect at
one-loop order, although it aﬀects inﬁnitely many matrix elements, cf. (8.11). At the di-
agrammatic level, this can be understood from cancellations among the contributions of
the diﬀerent single-trace operators whose linear combinations form the primary operators;
see [2] for a detailed example.
It would be very interesting to ﬁnd a general principle
to explain this, in particular one that can also be applied to constrain the occurrence of
prewrapping at higher loop orders.

8The anomalous dimensions can be calculated from the self energies (C.25) using (C.19) and (C.22).

Chapter 9

Non-conformality of the
γi-deformation

In this chapter, we show that the non-supersymmetric three-parameter γi-deformation [160]
is not conformally invariant due to the running of a double-trace coupling without ﬁxed
point. Moreover, it cannot be rendered conformally invariant by including further multi-
trace couplings that satisfy certain minimal requirements. Via the prewrapping eﬀect, this
also aﬀects the planar theory.

In section 9.1, we enlist the aforementioned requirements on multi-trace couplings and
give all couplings that satisfy them. We calculate the one-loop renormalisation of a partic-
ular double-trace coupling in section 9.2. In section 9.3, we give its one-loop beta function
and ﬁnd that it has no zeros for generic deformation parameters. We provide a short re-
view on renormalisation, which includes the derivation of some of the formulae used in this
chapter, in appendix C.

The results presented in this chapter were ﬁrst published in [1].

9.1 Multi-trace couplings

It is well known that loop corrections in a quantum ﬁeld theory can introduce UV diver-
gences, which have to be absorbed into counterterms via renormalisation. The presence
of these counterterms at loop level requires us to consider the corresponding couplings
already at tree level.
In principle, the counterterms can depend on all couplings in the
theory. Including further couplings might thus restore conformal invariance which is bro-
ken otherwise. Hence, we consider all multi-trace couplings that fulﬁl a set of minimal
requirements.

The requirements are as follows. First, the action should be renormalisable by power
counting. Second, the ’t Hooft limit should exist, i.e. no proliferation of N -powers beyond
the planar limit is permitted. Third, the three U(1) charges shown in table 7.1 should be
preserved by the multi-trace couplings. Fourth, the theory should reduce to N = 4 SYM
theory in the limit γ1 = γ2 = γ3 = 0.
Via ﬁnite-size eﬀects, the planar contraction of each additional trace factor in a coupling
with a single-trace operator of the same length increases the N -power by one. Hence, it
follows from the second requirement that couplings with n traces should have a prefactor
of (at least)

N n−1 , which we write out explicitly.

1

For gauge group SU(N ), every trace factor has to contain at least two ﬁelds as the

123

124

9 Non-conformality of the γi-deformation

generators of SU(N ) are traceless. This allows for the following set of couplings that
satisfy the four requirements:

−

g2

YM

N (cid:2)Qkl

F ij tr( ¯φi ¯φj) tr(φkφl) + Qkl

D ij tr( ¯φiφk) tr( ¯φj φl)(cid:3) .

For the action to be real in Euclidean signature, the coupling tensors have to satisfy

(Qkl

F ij)∗ = Qij

F kl ,

(Qkl

D ij)∗ = Qij

D kl .

For gauge group U(N ), also trace factors containing a single ﬁeld can occur, which
project to the U(1) component of that ﬁeld. This allows for the following cubic multi-trace
couplings

(9.1)

(9.2)

(9.3)

(9.4)

+

+

gYM

N (cid:2)(ρi

ψ)BA tr(ψα
+ (ρ†
+ (˜ρi
+ (˜ρ†

gYM

N 2(cid:2)(ρi

A) tr(φiψαB) + (ρi

φ)BA tr(φi) tr(ψα

BψαA)

¯ψ i)BA tr( ¯ψ ˙αA) tr( ¯φi ¯ψB
¯ψ)BA tr( ¯ψ ˙αA) tr(φi ¯ψB
ψ i)BA tr(ψα

˙α ) + (ρ†
˙α ) + (˜ρi
A) tr( ¯φiψαB) + (˜ρ†
A) tr(φi) tr(ψαB) + (ρ†

¯φ i)BA tr( ¯φi) tr( ¯ψ ˙αB ¯ψA
˙α )
¯φ)BA tr(φi) tr( ¯ψ ˙αB ¯ψA
˙α )
¯φ i)BA tr( ¯φi) tr(ψα
3 i)BA tr( ¯ψ ˙αA) tr( ¯φi) tr( ¯ψB
˙α )

3)BA tr(ψα

BψαA)(cid:3)
A) tr( ¯φi) tr(ψαB)(cid:3)

+ (˜ρi

3)BA tr( ¯ψ ˙αA) tr(φi) tr( ¯ψB

˙α ) + (˜ρ†

3 i)BA tr(ψα

as well as the additional quartic multi-trace couplings

YM

YM

g2

g2

N (cid:2)Qkl
N 2(cid:2)Qkl
g2
N 3 Qkl

YM

−
−

−

¯φ ij tr( ¯φi) tr( ¯φj φkφl) + Qkl

¯φ ¯φ ij tr( ¯φi) tr( ¯φj) tr(φkφl) + Qkl
+ Qkl

¯φφ ij tr( ¯φi) tr(φk) tr( ¯φj φl)(cid:3)

4 ij tr( ¯φi) tr( ¯φj) tr(φk) tr(φl) .

φ ij tr(φk) tr( ¯φi ¯φj φl)(cid:3)

φφ ij tr(φk) tr(φl) tr( ¯φi ¯φj)

The latter have to satisfy the reality conditions

(Qkl

φ ij)∗ = Qji
¯φ kl

,

(Qkl

¯φφ ij)∗ = Qij

¯φφ kl

,

(Qkl

φφ ij)∗ = Qij

¯φ ¯φ kl

,

(Qkl

4 ij)∗ = Qij

4 kl .

(9.5)
For gauge group U(N ), all U(1) components are understood to be absorbed into the trace
factors of length one such that only SU(N ) components occur in the traces containing two
or more ﬁelds.

9.2 Renormalisation

In order to ﬁnd a one-loop conformally invariant theory, one has to renormalise all couplings
in the previous section, calculate their beta functions and ﬁnd a conﬁguration of tree-level
values such that the beta functions vanish simultaneously. Performing this analysis, one
ﬁnds, however, that such a conﬁguration does not exist. To prove this, it is suﬃcient to

9.2 Renormalisation

125

identify a single coupling whose beta function does not vanish. In the following, we show
that the three couplings

g2
YM
N

−

Qii

F ii tr( ¯φi ¯φi) tr(φiφi) ,

have a non-vanishing beta function.

i = 1, 2, 3 not summed,

(9.6)

In renormalising the couplings (9.6), we exploit the fact that they are not renormalised
in the undeformed N = 4 SYM theory. It is hence suﬃcient to calculate only deformed
contributions to the renormalisation constant

ZQii

F ii

= 1 + δZ (1)

Qii

F ii

+ O(g4) ;

(9.7)

the undeformed contributions can be inferred from the requirement that both contributions
add up to one in the limit of the undeformed theory. In contrast to the ﬁrst part, in this
and the following chapter we work in the DR scheme described in section 4.3 with the
eﬀective planar coupling constant g deﬁned in (1.18). Moreover, as the N -counting is more

subtle here, we include a power of g2ℓ in the deﬁnition of the ℓ-loop contribution δZ (ℓ)

Qii

F ii

and similarly for all other quantities.

F ii

Qii

Up to reﬂections, all one-particle-irreducible (1PI) Feynman diagrams that contain
at leading order in N are shown in ﬁgure

deformed interactions and contribute to δZ (1)

9.1. Note that the additional couplings present for gauge group U(N ) in comparison to
gauge group SU(N ) contribute only at subleading order in N ; the result is thus independent
of considering either U(N ) or SU(N ). These Feynman diagrams can be evaluated using the
Feynman rules given in [1]; see [1] for the details of this calculation. In order to regulate the
IR divergences, it is suﬃcient to direct one oﬀ-shell momentum p in a suitably chosen way
through the diagram, such that only the scale p2 occurs in the integrals.1 The total leading
contributions of deformed diagrams with only scalar, gluonic and fermionic intermediate
states, respectively, are

K(cid:2)(1 + R|)[ (I) + (II) ] + (III) + 2 (IV)(cid:3) = 8g4
K(cid:2)(1 + R|)(IX)(cid:3) = −8g4

2 K [(V) + (VI)] = 8αg4

YM K[I1](cid:0) cos2 2γ+

+ (Qii

i cos2 2γ−
i
F ii)2 + Qii

YM K[I1]Qii
YM K[I1](cos 2γ+

F ii(cid:0)ab(cid:1)(cid:0)cd(cid:1) ,

i + cos 2γ−

F ii(cid:1)(cid:0)ab(cid:1)(cid:0)cd(cid:1) ,
i )(cid:0)ab(cid:1)(cid:0)cd(cid:1) ,

(9.8)
where α is the gauge-ﬁxing parameter, the operator K extracts the poles in ε and R| denotes
the reﬂection of the diagram at the vertical axis while keeping the original order of the
indices. Moreover, we have abbreviated

(a1 ··· an) ≡ tr(Ta1 ··· Tan) .

(9.9)

The factors 2 in front of (IV), (V) and (VI) stem from the reﬂections of these diagrams
at the horizontal axis, which yield identical contributions. The total contribution of 1PI
diagrams to δZ (1)
, which is given by the sum of all terms in (9.8) and the undeformed
contribution, has to vanish in the limit of N = 4 SYM theory. Hence, we ﬁnd that the
undeformed 1PI diagrams at leading order contribute

Qii

F ii

1In particular, we are not calculating the full double-trace contribution to the amplitude here. We only

need to extract its UV divergence.

8g4

YM K[I1](cid:0)ab(cid:1)(cid:0)cd(cid:1) .

(9.10)

126

9 Non-conformality of the γi-deformation

a

d

a

d

b

c

b

c

b

a

b

a

b

a

c

(I)

d

(IV)

d

a

d

(II)

c

b

d

a

c

d

(III)

c

b

c

(V)

b

a

(VI)

b

a

c

d

c

d

(VII)

(VIII)

(IX)

Figure 9.1: Deformed 1PI diagrams contributing to the renormalisation constant δZ (1)

F ii
at leading order in N . The colour structure of the individual terms is depicted in double-
line notation. Scalars are depicted by solid central lines, fermions by dashed central lines
and gauge ﬁelds by vanishing central lines.

Qii

9.2 Renormalisation

The occurring integral and its UV divergence are given by

I1 =

e−γEε
(4π)2−ε

, K[I1] =

1

(4π)2ε

,

127

(9.11)

where the bubble integral was deﬁned in (A.12). As already mentioned, we use the DR
scheme with minimal subtraction in the eﬀective planar coupling constant g in this and
the following chapter; hence the ε-dependent prefactor in (9.11).

The counterterm δQii

F ii appears in the action as

g2
YM
N

−

(Qii

F ii + δQii

F ii) tr( ¯φi ¯φi) tr(φiφi)

(9.12)

and has to cancel the UV divergences of the 1PI diagrams. At one-loop order and leading
order in N , it hence reads

δQii (1)

F ii = − K

ia

id



ib

ic



(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)−4

g2
YM
N (ab)(cd)

(9.13)

=

2g2

ε (cid:0)4 sin2 γ+

i sin2 γ−

i + (Qii

F ii(cid:1) ,
F ii)2 − (1 + α)Qii

where the vertical bar prescribes to take the coeﬃcient of the speciﬁed term while the
factor 4 in this term arises when taking functional derivatives with respect to the ﬁelds in
order to derive the Feynman rules.

In addition to the 1PI diagrams, also self-energy diagrams contribute to the renormal-

isation constant ZQii

F ii

. Their total contribution at one-loop order is

1
2

−

K

ia

id

ib

ia

ib

ia

ib

ia

+

+

+

ic

id

ic

id

ic

id



ib

ic



(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)−4

g2
YM
N (ab)(cd)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)−4

g2
YM
N (ab)(cd)

= −2 Kh

i 1

p2

ia

id

ib

ic

= −2δSU(N ),(1)

φi

Qii

F ii = 2(1 + α)

g2
ε

Qii

F ii ,

(9.14)
denotes the one-loop self energy of the SU(N ) components, which is pre-

where δSU(N ),(1)
sented in appendix C.2.2

φi

Hence, the one-loop renormalisation constant δZ (1)
F ii(cid:0)4 sin2 γ+

F ii − 2δSU(N ),(1)

δQii (1)
F ii
Qii

δZ (1)

1
Qii

g2
ε

= 2

Qii

F ii

Qii

F ii

=

φi

is given by

i sin2 γ−

i + (Qii

(9.15)

F ii)2(cid:1) ,

2The self-energy diagrams of the U(1) component contribute only to couplings in which at least one

trace factor of length one occurs.

128

9 Non-conformality of the γi-deformation

cf. appendix C.1.

9.3 Beta function

From the renormalisation constant (9.15), the one-loop beta function is determined as

i sin2 γ−

i + (Qii

(9.16)

F ii)2(cid:1) ,

β

(1)
Qii

F ii

= Qii

F iiεgYM

∂

∂gYM

δZ (1)

Qii

F ii

= 4g2(cid:0)4 sin2 γ+

where the eﬀective planar coupling g2 is deﬁned in (1.18); see appendix C.1 for details.3
The beta function (9.16) is non-zero unless γj = γk ± nπ with n ∈ Z. Hence, for generic
deformation parameters and generic N , the γi-deformation is not conformally invariant.4
Note that this running double-trace coupling aﬀects the planar spectrum of anomalous
dimensions via the ﬁnite-size eﬀect of prewrapping, as we will explicitly demonstrate in
the next chapter. Thus, conformal invariance is broken even in the planar limit.5,6 Recall
that in our analysis we have been looking for ﬁxed points as functions of the (perturbative)
coupling g, i.e. ﬁxed lines. We cannot exclude that isolated Banks-Zaks ﬁxed points [183]
exist as some ﬁnite value of g. Since the beta function (9.16) is always positive for generic
values of the deformation parameters, the running coupling Qii
F ii moreover has a Landau
pole, which makes the theory instable.7

As the AdS/CFT correspondence relates the conformal invariance of the gauge theory
to the AdS5 factor in the string-theory background, several diﬀerent scenarios are possible.

1. The string background is instable due to the emergence of closed string tachyons.
In the setup of non-supersymmetric orbifolds, these occur and were related to the
running multi-trace couplings in the corresponding gauge theories [182]. Tachyons
were also found in γi-deformed ﬂat space [262], but could not yet be related to
instabilities of the γi-deformation.

2. String corrections deform the AdS5 factor in the Frolov background [160].

3. The AdS5 factor is exact but the gauge theory dual to this background has not yet
been found. All natural candidates are, however, excluded by our analysis. It could
be that this theory does not even have a Lagrangian description with the ﬁeld content
of N = 4 SYM theory.

3Recall that, in contrast to the ﬁrst part, in this as well as the following chapter we are including a

factor of g2ℓ in the deﬁnition of ℓ-loop expressions.

4We have worked in the large N expansion, where diﬀerent orders in N are assumed to be linearly
independent. Our arguments cannot exclude cancellations between diﬀerent orders for some non-generic
ﬁnite N . The fact that N is an integer does, however, severely restrict this possibility.

5The result (9.16) agrees with the unpublished result of [259]; we thank Radu Roiban for communication
on this point. It was also later conﬁrmed in [260]. However, note that the author of [260] nevertheless calls
the γi-deformation conformally invariant in the planar limit.

6Note that the breakdown of conformal invariance cannot be detected using the analysis based on D-
instantons in [261], neither in the γi-deformation nor in the β-deformation with gauge group U(N ). First,
the double-trace couplings seem to be discarded by the formalism as they are formally suppressed in 1
N .
Second, the full geometry is only probed by the instantons at linear order in the deformation parameters
γi, while the breakdown of conformal invariance occurs at quadratic order, cf. (9.16).

7In the later article [260], also the ﬂow of the deformation parameters γi was analysed and it was argued

that the Landau pole can be avoided for γ−

i = O(1/N 2).

9.3 Beta function

129

4. The deformation parameters γi are functions of the eﬀective planar coupling g which
coincide for g = 0. Similar ﬁnite functions of the couplings were found in ABJ(M)
theory [263, 264] and in the interpolating quiver gauge theory of [265], see [266–268]
and [269], respectively. This possibility is hard to exclude via perturbation theory as
γi − γj might always be of one loop-order higher than the one currently analysed.

It would be very interesting to determine which of these possibilities is the case.8

8For a recent interpretation of double-trace couplings in the AdS/CFT dictionary, see [270].

130

9 Non-conformality of the γi-deformation

Chapter 10

Anomalous dimensions in the
γi-deformation

In this chapter, we calculate the planar anomalous dimensions of the operators OL = tr(φL
i )
at L-loop order via Feynman diagrams. For L ≥ 3, we ﬁnd a perfect match with the
predictions of integrability. For L = 2, where the integrability-based result diverges, we
obtain a ﬁnite rational answer. Via the prewrapping eﬀect, it depends on the running
double-trace coupling Qii
F ii whose non-vanishing beta function we have calculated in the
last chapter, and hence on the renormalisation scheme. This explicitly demonstrates that
conformal invariance is broken even in the planar limit.

As we show in section 10.1, the calculation can be vastly simpliﬁed by using relation
(7.5) between Feynman diagrams in the γi-deformation and the undeformed theory as well
as the fact that the operators OL = tr(φL
i ) are protected in the latter. In the case of L ≥ 3,
only four Feynman diagrams have to be evaluated; the corresponding calculation is shown
in section 10.2. The calculation for L = 2 is performed in section 10.3. We brieﬂy review
the foundations of the renormalisation theory used in this chapter in appendix C.

This chapter is based on results ﬁrst published in [3].

10.1 Classiﬁcation of diagrams

In the previous chapter, we have exploited the fact that the double-trace coupling (9.6) is
not renormalised in N = 4 SYM theory to simplify the calculation of its renormalisation
constant and beta function in the γi-deformation. Similarly, we can exploit the fact that
the operators OL = tr(φL
i ) are protected, i.e. not renormalised, in the undeformed theory
to simplify the calculation of their renormalisation constant ZOL and anomalous dimension
γOL in the γi-deformation. This means we only need to calculate diagrams that are aﬀected
by the deformation.

According to the discussion in section 7.2, two classes of diagrams contribute to the
operator renormalisation. In the ﬁrst class, the subdiagram of elementary interactions is of
single-trace type. It is either a connected diagram with the structure tr((φi)R( ¯φi)R), R ≤ L,
or a product of disconnected factors with structure tr((φi)Rj ( ¯φi)Rj ),Pj Rj ≤ L. Applying
relation (7.5) to these structures, we ﬁnd that the diagrams in the ﬁrst class are independent
of the deformation, as the occurring phase factor is Φ(φi ∗ φi ∗ ··· ∗ φi ∗ ¯φi ∗ ¯φi ··· ∗ ¯φi) = 1.
In the second class of diagrams, the subdiagram of elementary interactions is of double-
trace type with structure tr((φi)L) tr(( ¯φi)L). This structure can arise from the ﬁnite-size

131

132

10 Anomalous dimensions in the γi-deformation

eﬀects of wrapping and prewrapping. According to the criteria developed in section 8.1,
prewrapping cannot aﬀect the operators OL = tr(φL
i ) for L ≥ 3. It starts to aﬀect the
operator O2 = tr(φiφi) at the critical prewrapping order ℓ = L − 1 = 1 and, moreover,
stems from the deformation-dependent double-trace coupling (9.6) alone. The wrapping
eﬀect, on the other hand, aﬀects all OL = tr(φL
i ) starting at the critical wrapping order
ℓ = L.

We can further decompose the set of wrapping diagrams in two subclasses as

φi

φi

¯φi

¯φi

=

φi

φi

¯φi

¯φi

+

φi

φi

¯φi

¯φi

.

(10.1)
Wrapping diagrams in the ﬁrst subclass contain a closed path around the operator that is
built from the propagators of scalars and fermions alone. In (10.1), this path is depicted
as a solid line. Wrapping diagrams in the second subclass do not contain such a path, i.e.
every closed path around the operator contains at least one gauge-ﬁeld propagator, which
is depicted by wiggly lines.

We can now prove that every wrapping diagram in the second subclass is independent
of the deformation. Given a wrapping diagram of the second subclass, we can eliminate all
gauge ﬁelds by the following replacements:

,

−→

,

(10.2)

where the solid central line denotes scalars and fermions and the wiggly central line denotes
gauge ﬁelds. By deﬁnition, this replacement interrupts every closed path around the oper-
ator at least once. Thus, the resulting diagram is no longer a wrapping diagram. Instead,
its subdiagram of elementary interactions is of single-trace type, and we can use the above
argument to show that it is deformation independent.1 However, as the interaction vertices
of the gauge ﬁeld are independent of the deformation parameters, the resulting subdiagram
has the same dependence on the deformation parameters as the original diagram, which
concludes the proof.

Thus, we have shown that at any loop order only wrapping diagrams of the ﬁrst subclass
in (10.1) and prewrapping diagrams that contain the coupling (9.6) can be deformation
dependent. Let us now calculate the anomalous dimensions of the operators tr(φL
i ) at
L-loop order.

1In the case that the subdiagram is not connected, we can apply relation (7.5) to each of its connected

components.

10.2 Anomalous dimensions for L ≥ 3

133

10.2 Anomalous dimensions for L ≥ 3

As shown in the previous section, the only deformation-dependent diagrams that contribute
to the anomalous dimension of OL = tr(φL
i ) with L ≥ 3 are wrapping diagrams of the ﬁrst
class in (10.1). Those are wrapping diagrams which contain a closed path around the
operator that is built from scalars and fermions alone. In particular,

ZOL = 1 + δZ (L)

OL

+ O(g2L+2) ,

(10.3)

and the anomalous dimension vanishes for ℓ < L.2 At the critical wrapping order ℓ = L,
only four non-vanishing diagrams in the ﬁrst class in (10.1) exist:

L

1

S(L) = L−1

¯S(L) = L−1

F (L) = L−1

˜F (L) = L−1

L

L

L

2

2

2

2

3

1

3

1

3

1

3

= g2L

YMN L(cid:16)2 eiLγ−

i cos Lγ+

i +

1

2L(cid:17)PL ,

= g2L

YMN L(cid:16)2 e−iLγ−

i cos Lγ+

i +

1

2L(cid:17)PL ,

(10.4)

= −4g2L

YMN L cos Lγ+

i PL ,

= −4g2L

YMN L cos Lγ−

i PL ,

where we have depicted scalars by solid lines, fermions by dashed lines and the operator
insertion by the central dot. The arrows indicate the charge ﬂow. The four diagrams
in (10.4) have been calculated using the Feynman rules in [1]; see [3] for details of this
calculation. The occurring ‘cake’ integral as well as its divergence, which is only a UV one,

2As in the last chapter, we are including a factor of g2ℓ in the deﬁnition of an ℓ-loop expression throughout

this chapter.

134

read [271]

10 Anomalous dimensions in the γi-deformation

L

PL = L−1

1

3

2

,

PL = K[PL] =

1

(4π)2L

1
ε

2

L(cid:18)2L − 3
L − 1(cid:19)ζ2L−3 ,

(10.5)

where we are working in the DR scheme as in the previous chapter.

The contribution of the four deformed diagrams to the renormalisation constant is

δZ (L)

OL,def = − K[S(L) + ¯S(L) + F (L) + ˜F (L)]

i −

= 4g2L

i cos Lγ−

i + cos Lγ−

undeformed theory:

i − cos Lγ+

YMN L(cid:16) cos Lγ+

2L+1(cid:17)PL .
The contribution of all other diagrams to the renormalisation constant δZ (L)
formation independent and can be found from the requirement that δZ (L)
2L+1(cid:17)PL .

YMN L(cid:16)1 −
The complete planar L-loop renormalisation constant δZ (L)
YMN L sin2 Lγ+

OL,def(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)γ±

δZ (L)

OL,non-def = −δZ (L)

= δZ (L)

OL,def + δZ (L)

OL,non-def = −16g2L

sin2 Lγ−

= −4g2L

δZ (L)

OL

i =0

OL

OL

1

is thus given by

1

(10.6)

OL,non-def is de-
vanishes in the

(10.7)

i

i

2
i = β, γ−

2 PL .
i = 0, as required.

(10.8)

In particular, it vanishes in the limit of the β-deformation, γ+

Using (3.8), this yields the planar anomalous dimension

γOL = −64g2L sin2 Lγ+

i
2

sin2 Lγ−

i

2 (cid:18)2L − 3

L − 1(cid:19)ζ2L−3 + O(g2L+2) ,

(10.9)

which perfectly agrees with the integrability-based prediction of [170].3

10.3 Anomalous dimension for L = 2

For O2 = tr(φiφi), both wrapping and prewrapping corrections contribute. Moreover, the
latter already set in at one-loop order. Accordingly, we decompose the renormalisation
constant ZO2 as

ZO2 = 1 + δZ (1)

O2

+ δZ (2)

O2

+ O(g6) .

(10.10)

At one-loop order, the only deformation-dependent diagram is the prewrapping diagram

QF = −2g2

YMN Qii

F iiI1 ,

(10.11)

where I1 was deﬁned in (9.11) and the QF in the diagram indicates that the quartic vertex
next to it is given by the double-trace coupling (9.6). As Qii
F ii is set to zero when taking

3In order to match the deﬁnitions of [170], a factor of 2 has to absorb into the eﬀective planar coupling

constant g deﬁned in (1.18) and a factor of L has to be absorbed into γ±
i .

10.3 Anomalous dimension for L = 2

135

the limit of the undeformed theory, all other contributions have to add up to zero as well
in order to reproduce the result of N = 4 SYM theory for vanishing deformations. Hence,
the complete one-loop contribution to the renormalisation constant is given by

δZ (1)

O2

= 2g2

YMN Qii

F ii K[I1] ,

(10.12)

where K[I1] was deﬁned in (9.11).

At two-loop order, we need the following additional one-loop diagrams as they can

occur as subdiagrams:

= g2

YMN I1 ,

= g2

YMN αI1 ,

(10.13)

= g2

YMN p2(1−ε)(−(1 + α)I1 + 2(α − 1)I ′

1) .

Here, the gluon is depicted as a wiggly line and the black blob represents all contributions
of the self-energy diagrams for the SU(N ) components of the scalar ﬁeld φi with oﬀ-shell
momentum p. The ﬁnite integral I ′
1 contains a numerator as well as a doubled propagator
and is given by

I ′
1 =

e−γEε
(4π)2−ε

(−lµpµ)

l2

l

=

e−γEε
(4π)2−ε ε

,

(10.14)

where we have completed the square and used integration-by-parts (IBP) identities in
the last step. As in the ﬁrst part, the loop-momentum-dependent prefactor in (10.14) is
understood to occur inside of the depicted integral, and the arrow depicts the direction of
the loop momentum. The resulting one-loop counterterms read

= δJ (1)

O2,def = 2g2Qii

F ii

1
ε

,

= δJ (1)

O2,non-def = −g2(1 + α)

1
ε

,

QF

= − p2δSU(N ),(1)

φi

,

δSU(N ),(1)
φi

= −g2(1 + α)

1
ε

.

(10.15)
The contribution of all diagrams that contain only single-trace couplings to the two-loop

is essentially given by setting L = 2 in (10.8):

renormalisation constant δZ (2)
δZ (2)

O2

O2,st = −16g4

YMN 2 sin2 γ+

i sin2 γ−

i K[I2] ,

where the ‘cake’ integral with two pieces is denoted as

I2 =

e−2γEε
(4π)4−2ε

,

K[I2] =

1

(4π)4(cid:18) 1

2ε2 +

1

ε(cid:18)5

2 − γE + log 4π − log

p2

µ2(cid:19)(cid:19) ,

(10.16)

(10.17)

136

10 Anomalous dimensions in the γi-deformation

with the two-loop ‘ﬁsh’ integral given in (A.14).4
In contrast to the integrals PL with
L ≥ 3, it does have a non-subtracted subdivergence as can be seen from the logarithmic
dependence on the square of the oﬀ-shell momentum p divided by the ’t Hooft mass µ.5
This momentum-dependent divergence cannot be absorbed into δZ (2)
; it is required by
consistency that this subdivergence is subtracted by other contributions such that only the
overall UV divergence

O2

I2 = K R[I2] = K[I2 − K[I1]I1] =

1

(4π)4(cid:16) −

1
2ε2 +

1

2ε(cid:17)

(10.18)

remains. Here, the operator R subtracts the subdivergences, cf. [226].6 This also shows
that a truncation of the theory to only the single-trace part is inconsistent.7

The following 1PI two-loop diagrams with a double-trace coupling contribute to the

renormalisation constant:

QF

=

QF = −2g4

YMN 2Qii

F iiI 2
1 ,

QF = −2g4

YMN 2Qii

F iiαI 2
1 ,

QF
QF = 4g4

YMN 2(Qii

F ii)2I 2
1 ,

QF = −2g4

YMN 2Qii

F ii(2(3 − α)I2 − (3 − 2α)I 2
1 ) ,

QF = −4g4

YMN 2Qii

F ii(−(1 + α)I2 + (α − 1)(2I2 − I 2

1 )) .

Moreover, the following 1PI one-loop diagrams with one-loop counterterms contribute:

(10.19)

QF = 4g2

YMN δSU(N ),(1)

φi

Qii

F iiI1 ,

QF = −2g2

YMN δQii (1)

F ii I1 ,

QF = −2g2

YMN δJ (1)

O2,non-defQii

F iiI1 ,

= −2g2

YMN δJ (1)

O2,defQii

F iiI1 ,

QF

QF

= g2

YMN δJ (1)

O2,defI1 ,

(10.20)

QF

QF

= g2

YMN δJ (1)

O2,defαI1 ,

4Recall that, in contrast to the ﬁrst part of this thesis, we calculate only UV divergent contributions and
not the full form factor here. Hence, the two external legs on the right side of the two-loop ‘ﬁsh’ integral
should be understood as one oﬀ-shell momentum p and the third external momentum is set to zero.

5In contrast to the ﬁrst part, we are working in Euclidean signature here. Hence, the positive sign in

front of p2.

6We trust that the reader does not confuse this operator with the reﬂection operator R| of the previous

chapter or the Rij operators of chapter 6.

7As we will see below, the second term in K[I2 − K[I1]I1] of (10.18) is provided by the one-loop coun-

terterm (9.13) of the running double-trace coupling Qii

F ii.

10.3 Anomalous dimension for L = 2

137

which are deformation dependent as they contain the double-trace coupling either directly
or via a counterterm.

The total contributions of the 1PI diagrams with a double-trace coupling is

i sin2 γ−

i K[K[I1]I1] + 2Qii

F ii(α + 1 − 2Qii

F ii) K R[I 2

1 ](cid:1) ,

(10.21)

(10.22)

δJ (1)

O2,def ,

(10.23)

δZ (2)

O2,dt,1PI = g4

YMN 2(cid:0)16 sin2 γ+

where

K R[I 2

1 ] = K[I 2

δZ (2)

O2,dt,non-1PI =

1

2"

QF

cf. (C.20).

1 − 2 K[I1]I1] = − K[I1]2 .
# = −δSU(N ),(1)

φi

+

QF

Finally, also one-particle-reducible (non-1PI) diagrams contribute as

The complete two-loop renormalisation constant δZ (2)

O2

(10.16), (10.21) and (10.23):

can be obtained by summing

δZ (2)

O2

= δZ (2)
= −g4

O2,st + δZ (2)
YMN 2(16 sin2 γ+

O2,dt,1PI + δZ (2)
i sin2 γ−

O2,dt,non-1PI

i I2 + 4(Qii

F ii)2 K R[I 2

1 ]) .

(10.24)

Up to two-loop order, the logarithm of the renormalisation constant is given by

log ZO2 = δZ (1)
= 2g2Qii

O2

1

O2 −

O2(cid:17)2
2(cid:16)δZ (1)
+ δZ (2)
+ 2g4(cid:18)8 sin2 γ+

1
ε

F ii

+ O(g6)
i (cid:18) 1

i sin2 γ−

2ε2 −

1

2ε(cid:19) + (Qii

F ii)2 1

ε2(cid:19) + O(g6) ,

(10.25)
which still contains double poles. In fact, the presence of the double poles is associated
with the non-vanishing beta function (9.16). In appendix C.1, we give the more general
expression (C.22) for an anomalous dimension, which is applicable in this case. Applying
(C.22), we ﬁnd that the double poles cancel with the contribution of (9.16).

The anomalous dimension up to two-loop order is then given by
F ii − 32g4 sin2 γ+

F ii(cid:17) log ZO2 = 4g2Qii

γO2 =(cid:16)εg

∂
∂g − βQii

∂
∂Qii

F ii

i sin2 γ−

i + O(g6) .

(10.26)
This result is valid in the DR scheme. In a diﬀerent scheme with coupling constant g̺ =
g e

̺

2 ε, the anomalous dimension reads
̺ sin2 γ+

γ̺
O2

= 4g2
= 4g2

̺Qii
̺Qii

F ii − 32g4
F ii − 8g4

i sin2 γ−

̺(cid:0)4(1 + ̺) sin2 γ+

i − 2g2
i sin2 γ−

̺̺ βQii
i + ̺(Qii

F ii

+ O(g6
̺)
F ii)2(cid:1) + O(g6

̺) .

In particular, we have ̺ = −γE+log 4π in the DR scheme used in the ﬁrst part of this thesis.
A general derivation of the scheme change can be found in [3]. At level of the calculation
above, the inﬂuence of the scheme change can be seen as follows. In the presence of double
poles in log ZO2, the redeﬁnition of the coupling constant from g to g̺ does not commute
with applying the operator K which extracts the poles. Instead, a multiple of the coeﬃcient
of the double pole, which is proportional to the beta function, is added to the single pole,
which yields the anomalous dimension.

The renormalisation-scheme dependence of the planar anomalous dimension (10.27)

explicitly demonstrates that conformal invariance is broken even in the planar theory.

(10.27)

138

10 Anomalous dimensions in the γi-deformation

Conclusions

The last one and a half decades have seen tremendous progress in understanding scattering
amplitudes and correlation functions in N = 4 SYM theory.
In this thesis, we have
addressed the question to which extend the methods developed in this context and the
structures found there can be generalised to other quantities in N = 4 SYM theory as well
as to other theories.
In the ﬁrst part of this thesis, we have studied form factors of generic gauge-invariant
local composite operators in N = 4 SYM theory. Form factors form a bridge between
the purely on-shell scattering amplitudes and the purely oﬀ-shell correlation functions.
They provide an ideal starting point for applying on-shell methods to quantities containing
composite operators. Furthermore, form factors allow us to study the dilatation operator
and hence the spectral problem of integrability via powerful on-shell methods.

, b† ˙α
i

, d†A

i , ˜λ ˙α

At tree-level and for a minimal number of external ﬁelds, we have found that, up to a
momentum-conserving delta function and a normalisation factor, the colour-ordered form
factor of an operator is simply given by replacing the oscillators (a†α
i ) in the spin-
i
chain representation of the operator by the super-spinor-helicity variables (λα
i , ˜ηA
i ).
Moreover, the generators of PSU(2, 2|4) act on them accordingly. Hence, minimal form
factors realise the spin-chain picture of N = 4 SYM theory in the language of scattering
amplitudes.
At one-loop level, we have calculated the cut-constructible part of the minimal form
factor of any operator using generalised unitarity. While its IR divergence is of the well
known universal form, its UV divergence depends on the operator and allows us to read
oﬀ the complete one-loop dilatation operator of N = 4 SYM theory. To the author’s
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst derivation of the complete one-loop dilatation operator using
ﬁeld theory alone, i.e. without lifting results from a closed subsector of the theory via
symmetry. Moreover, our results provide a ﬁeld-theoretic derivation of the connection
between the tree-level four-point amplitude and the complete one-loop dilatation operator
derived on the basis of symmetry considerations in [99]. Note that our results do not rely
on the planar limit and are valid for any N .

The approach to calculate the dilatation operator via (minimal) form factors and on-
shell methods continues to work at higher loop orders, as we have demonstrated using
the Konishi primary operator and the operators of the SU(2) sector at two-loop order as
examples.

For the Konishi operator K, which is the prime example of a non-protected operator, an
important subtlety arises in the calculation of its form factors via on-shell methods. This
operator depends on the number of scalars Nφ in the theory, and, through the relation
Nφ = 10− D = 6 + 2ε, also on the dimension of spacetime D. Employing four-dimensional
unitarity yields direct results only for KNφ=6, which is not the correct analytic continuation
of the Konishi primary operator to D = 4 − 2ε dimensions. Using a group-theoretic

139

140

Conclusions

decomposition of the diﬀerent contributions to its form factor, however, we have given
an all-loop prescription how to lift the result for KNφ=6 to K. This extends the method
of unitarity and solves the long standing puzzle of calculating the Konishi form factor
via on-shell methods. While the diﬀerence between the form factors of KNφ=6 and K
aﬀects the anomalous dimension starting from two-loop order, it is a new source of ﬁnite
rational terms already at one-loop order. Moreover, similar subtleties also arise for other
dimension-dependent operators and can be solved analogously. These subtleties are also
not restricted to form factors and to the on-shell method of unitarity; they equally occur
for generalised form factors and correlation functions, as well as for other four-dimensional
on-shell methods. Our results suggest that they can also be solved in these contexts, thus
providing the basis to apply the on-shell unitarity method as well as other on-shell methods
also to generalised form factors and correlation functions of general operators.

For operators in the SU(2) sector, a diﬀerent complication occurs. In contrast to the
Konishi operator, these operators are not eigenstates under renormalisation but mix among
each other. This leads to a non-trivial mixing of the universal IR divergences and the UV
divergences, which are operator-valued due to the operator mixing. In order to disentangle
the former from the latter, also the exponentiation of the divergences has to be understood
in an operatorial form. Taking the logarithm and subtracting the universal IR divergences,
we have read oﬀ the dilatation operator from the UV divergences. Moreover, we have
calculated the ﬁnite remainder functions for the minimal form factors, which have to be
understood as operators as well. In contrast to the remainders of scattering amplitudes
and BPS form factor, they are not of uniform transcendentality. Their maximally tran-
scendental part, however, is universal and coincides with the result of [139] for the BPS
operators tr(φL
14), thus extending the principle of maximal transcendentality to form factors
of non-protected operators. Due to Ward identities for form factors, the lower transcenden-
tal parts can be expressed in terms of one simple function of transcendental degree three
and two simple functions of transcendental degree two and less. We conjecture that the
universality of the maximally transcendental part extends to all operators, also beyond the
SU(2) sector.

Our results provide a solid stepping stone towards deriving the complete two-loop di-
latation operator, which is currently unknown, via on-shell methods. Moreover, they show
that form factors of non-protected operators in N = 4 SYM theory share many features
with scattering amplitudes in QCD, such as UV divergences and rational terms. Form
factors hence allow us to study these features within the simpler N = 4 SYM theory. Note
that our methods do not rely on the planar limit or integrability. They could also be
applied to more general theories.

Aiming to understand the geometry and the integrable structure underlying form factors
for a general non-minimal number of external points, we have studied tree-level form factors
of the chiral part of the stress-tensor supermultiplet for any number of external points n.
In particular, we have extended on-shell diagrams to the partially oﬀ-shell form factors.
In addition to the two building blocks and two equivalence moves present for on-shell
diagrams of amplitudes, the extension to form factors only requires the minimal form
factor as a further building block as well as one further equivalence move. We have found a
relation between the on-shell diagrams for form factors and those for scattering amplitudes,
which allows us to obtain the on-shell diagrams for all tree-level form factors from their
counterparts for amplitudes. In contrast to the case of amplitudes, several top-cell diagrams
are required to obtain all BCFW terms for form factors. The diﬀerent top-cell diagrams are,
however, related by cyclic permutations of the on-shell legs. Furthermore, the permutation

Conclusions

141

associated with the on-shell diagram plays a slightly diﬀerent role for form factors. Our
results open the path to extend on-shell diagrams to form factors of general operators,
generalised form factors and correlation functions.

Following the approach for scattering amplitudes, we have introduced a central-charge
deformation for form factors. This allows their construction via the integrability-based
technique of R operators, which was initially developed for tree-level amplitudes. Form
factors do not share the Yangian invariance of amplitudes and are hence not eigenstates
of the monodromy matrix of the spin chain from the study of amplitudes. However, they
are eigenstates of the transfer matrix of this spin chain provided that the corresponding
operators are eigenstates of the transfer matrix that appeared in the spin chain of the
spectral problem. This implies the existence of a tower of conserved charges and symmetry
under the action of a part of the Yangian. In particular, form factors embed the integrable
spin chain of the spectral problem into the one that appeared for amplitudes. In addition to
n-point tree-level form factors of the stress-tensor supermultiplet, we have explicitly shown
this transfer-matrix identity for the minimal tree-level form factors of generic operators,
but we are conﬁdent that it holds for all n-point tree-level form factors.

Turning back to the chiral part of the stress-tensor supermultiplet, we have found
that the corresponding form factors can be obtained from a Graßmannian integral rep-
resentation. As we are using two auxiliary on-shell momenta to parametrise the oﬀ-shell
momentum of the composite operator, the occurring Graßmannian is Gr(n + 2, k). We
have given the Graßmannian integral representation in spinor-helicity variables, twistors
and momentum twistors. In contrast to the case of planar amplitudes, the on-shell form in
this integral contains consecutive as well as non-consecutive minors; the latter also occur
in the case of non-planar scattering amplitudes [84, 85, 87, 88].

Our results, in addition to other studies, have shown that many structures found in
scattering amplitudes have a natural generalisation for quantities containing local com-
posite operators such as form factors and that also the methods developed for amplitudes
can be generalised to these cases. In the end, on-shell methods might turn out to be as
powerful for form factors and correlation functions as they are for scattering amplitudes.
Deformations of N = 4 SYM theory provide us with further examples of theories that
can be understood using similar methods. Moreover, they can shed some light on the
origins and interdependence of the special properties of N = 4 SYM theory. In the sec-
ond part of this thesis, we have studied the β- and the γi-deformation of N = 4 SYM
theory. They were respectively shown to be the most general N = 1 supersymmetric and
non-supersymmetric ﬁeld-theory deformations of N = 4 SYM theory that are integrable
at the level of the asymptotic Bethe ansatz [165], i.e. asymptotically integrable. Planar
single-trace interactions in these theories are closely related to their undeformed counter-
parts via Filk’s theorem. Hence, in the planar limit and in the asymptotic regime, all
results for scattering amplitudes, correlation functions, anomalous dimensions and form
factors in N = 4 SYM theory remain valid in the deformed theories after some minimal
modiﬁcations. In particular, this is true for the asymptotic form factor results of chap-
ters 3 and 5. Moreover, we have extended Filk’s theorem to composite operators that are
neutral with respect to the charges that deﬁne the deformation. Thus, in particular the
results for the minimal form factors of the Konishi primary operator, which were obtained
in chapter 4 up to two-loop order, remain valid in the deformed theories to all orders of
planar perturbation theory.

For general charged composite operators, however, the operators have to be removed
In the case of ﬁnite-size eﬀects, the

from the diagram before applying Filk’s theorem.

142

Conclusions

resulting subdiagram of elementary interactions is of multi-trace type, and Filk’s theorem
is not applicable. In particular, Filk’s theorem cannot be used to prove that integrability
is inherited to the deformed theories in the presence of ﬁnite-size eﬀects. This has lead
us to investigate multi-trace and especially double-trace terms. In addition to non-planar
combinations of single-trace interactions, they can originate from the double-trace part of
the SU(N ) propagator and from double-trace couplings induced by quantum corrections.
In the N = 1 supersymmetric β-deformation with gauge group SU(N ), such a double-trace
coupling is required for conformal invariance. In contrast, the β-deformation with gauge
group U(N ) is not conformally invariant. This shows in particular that the deformed the-
ories distinguish between the gauge groups U(N ) and SU(N ). In the non-supersymmetric
γi-deformation with gauge group U(N ) or SU(N ), we have identiﬁed a running double-trace
coupling without ﬁxed points, which breaks conformal invariance. Moreover, conformal in-
variance cannot be restored by including further multi-trace couplings that satisfy certain
minimal requirements.

Double-trace couplings aﬀect planar correlation functions and anomalous dimensions
through a new type of ﬁnite-size eﬀect. As it starts to contribute one loop order earlier
than the well known wrapping eﬀect, we have called it prewrapping. We have analysed
the mechanism behind prewrapping in detail and given a necessary criterion for composite
operators to be aﬀected by it.

In the β-deformation with gauge groups U(N ) and SU(N ), we have included the re-
spective ﬁnite-size correction for wrapping and prewrapping for operators of length one
and two into the asymptotic one-loop dilatation operator of [165] to obtain the complete
one-loop dilatation operator of the planar theory.
Interestingly, the only prewrapping-
aﬀected supermultiplets in the complete planar one-loop spectrum are those of tr(φiφj)
and tr( ¯φi ¯φj) with i 6= j, which are moreover related by a Z3 symmetry of the theory and
charge conjugation; the respective contributions to all other potentially aﬀected operators
cancel in the speciﬁc combinations that form the eigenstates.

Aiming to test integrability in the γi-deformation and spurred by a puzzling diver-
gence in an integrability-based prediction, we have calculated the planar L-loop anomalous
dimensions of the operators tr(φL
14) in this theory. This calculation can be hugely sim-
pliﬁed using the fact that these operators are protected in the undeformed theory. For
generic L ≥ 3, only four diagrams have to be calculated, which can moreover be evalu-
ated analytically for any L. We have found a perfect match between our results and the
integrability-based predictions of [170]. This is one of the very rare occasions in quan-
tum ﬁeld theory where quantities can be calculated at generic loop orders. Moreover, it
yields a highly non-trivial test of integrability in the deformed setting. For L = 2, where
the integrability-based description diverges, we ﬁnd a ﬁnite rational result. This result
depends on the running double-trace coupling and hence on the renormalisation scheme,
which explicitly shows that the γi-deformed theory is not conformally invariant — not even
in the planar limit.

Outlook

Our results open up many interesting paths for further investigations, both concerning
form factors and deformations.

While we have calculated the cut-constructible part of the one-loop form factor of any
operators in chapter 3, this leaves potential ﬁnite rational terms undetermined.
In [4],
we have given an example in which such rational terms indeed occur, and it would be
interesting to calculate them in general. Methods to determine rational terms have been
developed for amplitudes in QCD and might also be applicable in our case, see [200] for a
review.

Moreover, it would be very interesting to calculate the minimal form factors of generic
operators at two-loop order. In particular, this would yield the complete two-loop dilatation
operator of N = 4 SYM theory, which is currently unknown. Apart from further checks
of integrability beyond the limitations of closed sectors, the two-loop dilatation operator
would also provide the eigenstates that correspond to the anomalous dimensions given by
integrability. Further two-loop results for minimal form factors would also allow for addi-
tional checks of our conjecture about the universality of the highest transcendental part of
the form factor remainders. In addition, it might even be possible to prove this conjecture,
cf. the discussion in section 5.3. A better understanding of the non-trivial behaviour of the
minimal form factors under soft and collinear limits would also be desirable.

In chapter 5, we have used the Ward identity (2.18) for the generators of SU(2) to
relate various components in the loop corrections to the minimal form factors. For general
generators, however, these Ward identities are anomalous. Corresponding corrections to
(some of) the generators are known for amplitudes as well as for the spin-chain picture.
For form factors, both kinds of corrections occur and can hence be studied.

At tree level, we have observed a relation between the top-cell diagrams for the (n + 2)-
point scattering amplitudes and the n-point form factors of the stress tensor supermultiplet.
It would be interesting to prove this relation and to determine the exact number of top-cell
diagrams that are required in the form factor case. Moreover, it might provide further in-
sights to see whether the above relation is related to the forward limit and the Lagrangian
insertion technique. In addition, a better understanding of the on-shell form that is in-
tegrated in the Graßmannian integral representation would be desirable. For amplitudes,
the on-shell form is completely determined by having logarithmic divergences at all bound-
aries. A more reﬁned argument might also determine the on-shell form in the case of form
factors. For amplitudes, the Graßmannian integral representation has been generalised to
the amplituhedron [93–95], which is also applicable at loop level. A similar construction
for form factors in terms of a “formfactorhedron” should also be possible. Moreover, it
would be very interesting to extend on-shell diagrams for form factors to general opera-
tors. Diﬀerent BCFW recursion relations that might serve as a basis of this construction
were given for the operators tr(φL
14) as well as for operators in the SU(2) and SL(2) sectors

143

144

Outlook

in [138] and [118], respectively.
In particular, this would generalise the transfer-matrix
identity to these form factors and should also allow for their construction via integrability
and Graßmannian integrals.

From the construction of correlation functions via generalised unitarity [118], it follows
that on-shell diagrams can also be used to describe leading singularities of loop-order
correlation functions. It would be interesting to extend this to the full correlation functions.
Especially correlation functions of the chiral half of the stress-tensor supermultiplet have
been intensively studied in the last years, see e.g. [272] and references therein.

Finally, form factors can also be calculated using the twistor action [273], as will be

shown in [195].

In the β- and γi-deformed theories, the important question whether these theories are
also integrable beyond the asymptotic regime remains to be answered. This would require
to incorporate the ﬁnite-size eﬀect of prewrapping into the integrability-based description.
In the conformal β-deformation with gauge group SU(N ), a ﬁrst step would be to obtain
a non-divergent and vanishing result for the anomalous dimension of tr(φiφj) with 1 ≤
i < j ≤ 3. Applying the same procedure to the state tr(φiφi) with i = 1, 2, 3 in the γi-
deformation, a match with our ﬁeld-theory result (10.27) might also be achievable, at least
for some choice of the tree-level coupling Qii
F ii and the scheme ρ. This choice should then
be checked for other states, which might lead to the conclusion that integrability is also
valid beyond conformality. Also for this reason, it would be very interesting to identify
further states that are aﬀected by prewrapping and can hence serve as a testing ground.

In chapter 9, we have listed four possible interpretations of the non-conformality of
It would be highly

the γi-deformation in the context of the AdS/CFT correspondence.
desirable to see which of them is actually realised.

It would also be very interesting to shed some further light on the role of the gauge group
in the AdS/CFT correspondence. The derivation [14] of the AdS/CFT correspondence
starts with the brane picture, where the massless part of the open string theory is a U(N )
In the undeformed setting, however, the U(1) mode decouples and the
gauge theory.
theories with gauge group U(N ) and SU(N ) are essentially the same.
In the deformed
theories, this is no longer the case; see [177] for a discussion. In particular, only the β-
deformation with gauge group SU(N ) is conformally invariant. In [177], it was also argued
that the gauge group in the deformed AdS/CFT correspondence should be SU(N ), as the
couplings to the U(1) components of the ﬁelds are non-vanishing but ﬂow to zero in the
IR. Using the results of chapter 7 – 10, we can make a prediction at all orders of planar
perturbation theory. While the operators in the 20′ of SO(6) are all protected in the
undeformed theory, this degeneracy lifts in the deformed theories in a speciﬁc way. The
operators tr(φiφi) and tr( ¯φi ¯φi) with i = 1, 2, 3 are protected in the β-deformation but have
non-vanishing anomalous dimensions in the γi-deformation. The anomalous dimensions
of the operators tr(φiφj) and tr( ¯φi ¯φj) with 1 ≤ i < j ≤ 3 vanish in the β-deformation
with gauge group SU(N ) but are non-vanishing in the β-deformation with gauge group
U(N ). The anomalous dimensions of tr( ¯φiφj) with i, j = 1, 2, 3, i 6= j, are non-vanishing
in both deformed theories, while the anomalous dimensions of the traceless combinations
tr( ¯φ1φ1 − ¯φ2φ2) and tr( ¯φ2φ2 − ¯φ3φ3) vanish in both deformed theories. These predictions
should be checked at strong coupling in the string theory in order to clarify the question
of the gauge group.

Acknowledgements

It is a pleasure to thank my advisor Matthias Staudacher for oﬀering me the opportunity to
be part of his wonderful group at the vibrant surrounding of Humboldt-University Berlin,
for sharing his knowledge and views, for inspiring discussions, encouragement, tea, cookies
and for the opportunity to travel the world through physics. Further, I am deeply grateful
to my coadvisor Christoph Sieg for sharing his knowledge, for stimulating discussions about
physics and beyond, for countless cups of espresso as well as for always having had an open
door.

I am indebted to Jan Fokken, Rouven Frassek, Florian Loebbert, David Meidinger,
Dhitiman Nandan, Christoph Sieg and Gang Yang for the fruitful, inspiring and enjoyable
collaborations on the various project that are summarised in this thesis.

I am grateful to Malte Pieper, Christoph Sieg and Matthias Staudacher for comments
on the manuscript and suggestions on how to improve it. I would like to thank Jan Plefka,
Matthias Staudacher and Tristan McLoughlin for acting as referees of this thesis.

I have greatly beneﬁted from discussions and communications with Zoltan Bajnok,
Benjamin Basso, Niklas Beisert, David Berenstein, Zvi Bern, Massimo Bianchi, Sophia
Borowka, Jacob Bourjaily, Andreas Brandhuber, Johannes Broedel, Simon Caron-Huot,
Lance Dixon, Burkhard Eden, Oluf Engelund, Ewa Felinska, Livia Ferro, Jan Fokken,
Valentina Forini, Rouven Frassek, Sergey Frolov, Philip H¨ahnel, Johannes Henn, Paul
Heslop, Nils Kanning, Vladimir Kazakov, Minkyoo Kim, Thomas Klose, Yumi Ko, Laura
Koster, Charlotte Kristjansen, Kasper Larsen, Marius de Leeuw, S´ebastien Leurent, Pedro
Liendro, Georgios Linardopoulos, Florian Loebbert, Tomasz  Lukowski, Christian Marboe,
Lionel Mason, David Meidinger, Vladimir Mitev, Dhitiman Nandan, Erik Panzer, Brenda
Penante, Jan Plefka, Elli Pomoni, Gregor Richter, Radu Roiban, Henning Samtleben,
Volker Schomerus, Alessandro Sfondrini, Christoph Sieg, Vladimir Smirnov, Mads Søgaard,
Marcus Spradlin, Martin Sprenger, Matthias Staudacher, Ryo Suzuki, Stijn van Tongeren,
Alessandro Torrielli, Gabriele Travaglini, Vitaly Velizhanin, Christian Vergu, Pedro Viera,
Gang Yang, Anastasia Volovich and Konstantinos Zoubos — both on various aspects of the
topics covered in this work and beyond. Moreover, I thank Camille Boucher-Veronneau,
Lance Dixon and Jeﬀrey Pennington for sharing their unpublished notes.

I would like to thank everyone in the group at Humboldt University Berlin for the good
company, the movie evenings, the cakes, the music, and for having made my time in Berlin
a very enjoyable one.

I am grateful to the Kavli Institute for the Physics and Mathematics of the Universe
in Tokyo, the Simons Center for Geometry and Physics, the C.N. Yang Institute for The-
oretical Physics, the Queen Mary University of London, the Niels Bohr Institute, the
University of Oxford and the ETH Z¨urich for warm hospitality during diﬀerent stages of
my PhD studies.

This work was supported by the DFG, SFB 647 Raum – Zeit – Materie. Analytische und

145

146

Acknowledgements

Geometrische Strukturen, the Marie Curie network GATIS (gatis.desy.eu) of the European
Union’s Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013/ under REA Grant Agreement No
317089 and the Marie Curie International Research Staﬀ Exchange Network UNIFY (FP7-
People-2010-IRSES under Grant Agreement No 269217).
Ich danke der Studienstiftung
des deutschen Volkes f¨ur ein Promotionsf¨orderungsstipendium.

Ich danke meinen Freunden f¨ur ihre Unterst¨utzung und daf¨ur, dass sie w¨ahrend der
Zeit der Doktorarbeit auch f¨ur die gelegentlich notwendige Ablenkung gesorgt haben. Ins-
besondere danke ich Inka, Malte und Patrick, die mich auf der abenteuerlichen Reise des
Physikstudiums von Anfang an begleitet haben.
Ich danke meinen Eltern und meiner
Schwester f¨ur die konstante Unterst¨utzung, die ich in meinem Studium und Leben durch
sie erfahren habe. Zu guter Letzt danke ich meiner Theresa.

Appendix A

Feynman integrals

In this appendix, we summarise our conventions for Feynman integrals and the lifting
procedure. Moreover, we provide explicit expressions of Passarino-Veltman reductions as
well as several Feynman integrals that occur throughout this thesis.

A.1 Conventions and lifting

Using Feynman diagrams, the following combination of the Yang-Mills coupling gYM, the
number of colours N and the ’t Hooft mass µ occurs at ℓ-loop order of planar perturbation
theory:

where ˜g is the modiﬁed eﬀective planar coupling constant (3.2) and

f (l1, . . . , lℓ)

(gYMµε)2ℓN ℓ(−i)ℓZ dDl1

dDlℓ
(2π)D

(2π)D ···

Qj Dj
I (ℓ)[f (l1, . . . , lℓ)] = (eγE µ2)ℓεZ dDl1

iπ

D

= ˜g2ℓI (ℓ)[f (l1, . . . , lℓ)] ,

(A.1)

2 ···

dDlℓ
iπ

D
2

f (l1, . . . , lℓ)

Qj Dj

.

(A.2)

In these expressions, f (l1, . . . , lℓ) denotes a polynomial in the loop momenta and Dj = k2
j
denote the inverse propagators, where kj is the combination of external momenta and loop
momenta that ﬂow through the propagator.

The lifting procedure of unitarity employed in chapters 3, 4 and 5 consists of two steps.

First, we have to undo the replacements (3.20) by setting

2πδ+(l2

i ) →

i
l2
i

.

(A.3)

Second, we have to change the coupling constant and the measure factor such that the
uncut integrals have the form given in (A.2). For example, in the one-loop case (3.29), we
have

g2

YMNZ d]LIPS2,{l}

s12

(l1 − p1)2 = g2

YMN s12

l1

p1

lifting

−→ −i˜g2s12

p2
(A.4)
Note that this procedure includes the continuation of the expression from D = 4 to D =
4 − 2ε, which is not always unique. For the Lorentz vectors, this issue is discussed in [57].
For the ﬂavour degrees of freedom, a diﬀerent issue arises, which is discussed in section 4.3.

p2

l2

p1

.

147

148

A Feynman integrals

A.2 Passarino-Veltman reduction

In loop-level calculations using on-shell methods or Feynman diagrams, Feynman integrals
with uncontracted loop momenta lµ
in the numerator can occur. These can be reduced
i
to scalar integrals or integrals with fully contracted loop momenta in the numerator using
Passarino-Veltman (PV) reduction [203].

Let us illustrate this reduction for the simple case of the linear bubble integral at

one-loop order:

l

lµ

p1

p2

= (eγE µ2)εZ dDl

iπ

D
2

lµ

l2(l + q)2 ,

(A.5)

where q = p1 + p2 and the momentum-dependent prefactor is understood to appear inside
of the depicted integral as shown. Lorentz symmetry requires that the resulting expression
after integration is proportional to the single external Lorentz vector that occurs in the
integral, i.e.

l

lµ

p1

p2

= A qµ .

(A.6)

In order to ﬁx the constant of proportionality A, we contract both sides of (A.6) with qµ.
We ﬁnd

A q2 = (eγE µ2)εZ dDl

iπ

D
2

q2
2

= −

(eγE µ2)εZ dDl

iπ

D
2

(l + q)2 − l2 − q2

l2(l + q)2

(A.7)

l · q

l2(l + q)2 =

1
2

p1

p2

,

where the two additional terms with l-dependent numerators in the second-to-last step
drop out as they lead to massless tadpole integrals, which integrate to zero. Hence,

l

lµ

p1

p2

qµ
2

= −

p1

p2

.

(A.8)

Using a similar procedure, we can also reduce more complicated tensor integrals with
higher loop order as well as higher power of the loop momenta in the numerator. For two
powers of the loop momentum lµlν in the numerator, also the four-dimensional metric gµν
occurs in the ansatz for the reduction. Contracting its inverse with the momenta yields

gµν lµlν = l2

(4) = l2 + l2
ε ,

(A.9)

where l(4) denotes the four-dimensional part of the loop momentum and lε its (−2ε)-
dimensional part.1 For instance, the PV reduction of the tensor-two one-mass triangle

1In the decomposition of l into l(4) and lε, we have assumed that ε < 0. The sign in (A.9) is due to the

mostly-minus metric we are using.

A.3 Selected integrals

integral yields

l

lµlν

p1

p2

= pµ

1 pν
1

p1

p2

+(cid:18) gµν

2 −

pµ
1 pν

1pµ

2

2 + pν
s12

+(cid:18) gµν

4

+

3pµ
1 pν
1
2s12 −

pµ
2 pν
2
2s12 −

pµ
1 pν

1pµ

2

2 + pν
s12

(cid:19)

149

l

(cid:19) l2

ε

p1

p2

p1

p2

,

where the one-mass triangle integral with numerator l2
[274]:

(A.10)
ε evaluates to a ﬁnite rational function

l

l2
ε

p1

p2

=

1
2

+ O(ε) .

(A.11)

A.3 Selected integrals

In this section, we provide explicit expressions for several one- and two-loop integrals that
are required throughout this work.

At one-loop order, we require the bubble integral as well as the one-mass triangle

integral. These are given by

p1

p2

p1

p2

D
2

iπ

= (eγE µ2)εZ dDl
= (eγE µ2)εZ dDl
= − eγEε Γ(1 − ε)2Γ(1 + ε)

iπ

D
2

Γ(1 − 2ε)

1

1

l2(l + q)2 = eγEε Γ(1 − ε)2Γ(1 + ε)

Γ(1 − 2ε)

1

ε(1 − 2ε)(cid:16) −

,

q2

µ2(cid:17)−ε

(A.12)

(l + p1)2l2(l − p2)2

(A.13)

q2

µ2(cid:17)−ε

,

1
ε2

1

(−q2)(cid:16) −

cf. e.g. [275]. Both these integrals depend on the single scale q2 = (p1 + p2)2.

At two-loop order, it is advantageous to reduce the occurring integrals via integration-
by-part (IBP) identities as implemented e.g. in the Mathematica package LiteRed [237].
The two-loop one-scale integrals required in chapter 4 can be reduced as

p1

p2

p1

p2

(q2)2

p1

=

2 − 3ε
ε(−q2)
3(1 − 2ε)(1 − 3ε)(2 − 3ε)

p2

,

= −

ε3(−q2)
3(1 − 2ε)(1 − 3ε)

2ε2

+

p1

p2

p1

p2

+

(1 − 2ε)2

ε2

(cid:18)

(A.14)

(A.15)

p1

p2(cid:19)2

,

150

s1ls2l

s1ls2l

l

l

p1

p2

p1

p2

=

=

A Feynman integrals

(2 − 3ε)(2 − 9ε + 10ε2 − 4ε3)

(1 − ε)(1 − 2ε)ε2(−q2)
1 − 4ε + 2ε2
(1 − ε)ε

(1 − 2ε)(2 − 3ε)(3 − 5ε)

ε2(1 − 4ε)(−q2)
(1 + ε)(1 − 2ε)

ε(1 − 4ε)

−

−

p1

p2

p1

p2

−

2 − 3ε + 2ε2

2(1 − ε)ε (cid:18)

p1

p2

p1

p2

−

ε (−q2)2
(1 − 4ε)

(A.16)

p1

p2(cid:19)2

,

(A.17)

p1

p2

.

The occurring master integrals are [276]

p1

p2

p1

p2

p1

p2

= e2γEε Γ(1 − ε)3Γ(1 + 2ε)
2ε(1 − 2ε)Γ(3 − 3ε)

µ2(cid:19)−2ε
(cid:18)−
= e2γEε Γ(1 − ε)2Γ(1 + ε)Γ(1 + 2ε)Γ(1 − 2ε)

(−q2)(cid:18)−

2ε2(1 − 2ε)Γ(2 − 3ε)

q2

,

q2

µ2(cid:19)−2ε

,

= e2γEε

1

(−q2)2(cid:18)−

q2

µ2(cid:19)−2ε(cid:20) Γ(1 − 2ε)4Γ(1 + 2ε)3Γ(1 − ε)Γ(1 + ε)
3F2(cid:0)1, 1, 1 + 2ε; 2 + ε, 2 + 2ε; 1(cid:1)

ε4(1 − 4ε)2Γ(1 + 4ε)

4Γ(1 − ε)2Γ(1 − 2ε)Γ(1 + 2ε)
ε2(1 + ε)(1 + 2ε)Γ(1 − 4ε)
Γ(1 − ε)2Γ(1 + ε)Γ(1 − 2ε)Γ(1 + 2ε)

2ε4Γ(1 − 3ε)

3F2(cid:0)1,−4ε,−2ε; 1 − 3ε, 1 − 2ε; 1(cid:1)
4F3(cid:0)1, 1 − ε,−4ε,−2ε; 1 − 3ε, 1 − 2ε, 1 − 2ε; 1(cid:1)(cid:21) ,

(A.18)

Γ(1 − ε)3Γ(1 + 2ε)

2ε4Γ(1 − 3ε)

+

+

+

where pFq denotes the respective generalised hypergeometric functions.

In chapter 5, also two-loop two- and three-scale integrals occur. They can be reduced
via IBP identities in a similar way. The corresponding master integrals are more lengthy
and we hence refrain from showing them; they can be found in [238].

Appendix B

Scattering amplitudes

In this appendix, we provide explicit expressions for several colour-ordered tree-level scat-
tering amplitudes that are required throughout the ﬁrst part of this thesis. We use the
notation and conventions introduced in section 2.1.

B.1 MHV and MHV amplitudes

As explained in section 2.1, super amplitudes can be classiﬁed according to their degree in
the Graßmann variables ˜ηA
i . Super amplitudes with the minimal Graßmann degree, which
is eight, are denoted as maximally-helicity-violating (MHV). The n-point colour-ordered
tree-level MHV super amplitude is given by

ˆAMHV (0)

n

(1, . . . , n) =

i(2π)4δ4(P )δ8(Q)
h12ih23i··· hn1i

,

where

δ8(Q) =

1
24

4YA=1

nXi,j=1

ǫαβQαA

i QβA

j =

4YA=1 X1≤i<j≤n

hiji˜ηA

i ˜ηA
j .

(B.1)

(B.2)

Super amplitudes of the maximal degree in the Graßmann variables ˜ηA

i , which is 4n− 8,
are denoted as MHV. They can be obtained from the MHV super amplitudes by conju-
gation, i.e. by replacing λi → ˜λi, ˜λi → λi, ˜ηi → ˜η∗
i and applying the fermionic Fourier
transformationQn
i,C .1 For example, the three-point colour-ordered tree-level

i=1R d4 ˜η∗

MHV super amplitude is given by

i ˜η∗

i e˜ηC

ˆAMHV (0)

3

(1, 2, 3) =

(−i)(2π)4δ4(P )δ4( ¯Q)

[12][23][31]

,

where

δ4( ¯Q) =

4YA=1(cid:0)[12]˜ηA

3 + [23]˜ηA

1 + [31]˜ηA

2(cid:1) .

(B.3)

(B.4)

1Here, we have assumed all on-shell ﬁelds to have positive energy. For negative energy, we have λi → −˜λi

and ˜λi → −λi as discussed in section 2.1.

151

152

B Scattering amplitudes

B.2 Scalar NMHV six-point amplitudes

In this section, we collect some scalar NMHV six-point amplitudes at tree level, which are
required in the unitarity calculation of chapter 5. We abbreviate the component amplitudes
as

( ˆA(0)

6 )Z1Z2Z3

Z6Z5Z4 = ˆA(0)

6 (1Z1 , 2Z2 , 3Z3 , 4

¯Z4 , 5

¯Z5 , 6

¯Z6 ) .

(B.5)

Using MHV or BCFW recursion relation and simplifying the result such that only Man-
delstam variables occur in it, we ﬁnd

6 )XXY

Y XX = −
XXY = −
XXX =

6 )Y XX

6 )XXX

1

s234

1

,

,

s345
s23s56

6 )XY X

XXY =

6 )XY X

Y XX =

6 )XXY

XY X =

6 )Y XX

XY X =

s16s34s234

s12

s16s345

s23

s34s234

s12

s16s345

s23

s34s234

+

+

+

+

( ˆA(0)
( ˆA(0)
( ˆA(0)
( ˆA(0)
( ˆA(0)
( ˆA(0)
( ˆA(0)
( ˆA(0)
( ˆA(0)
( ˆA(0)

+

s12s45
s16s34s345 −
s56
s16s234 −
+
s45
s34s345 −
s56
s16s234 −
s45
s34s345 −

1
s16
1
s34
1
s16
1
s34
s12s45

+

+

+

s123
s16s34

,

1

s345

1

s234

1

s234

1

s345

,

,

,

,

6 )XXY

6 )Y XX

6 )XY X

XXY = −
Y XX = −
XY X = −
−

s23s56
s16s34s234 −
s23s56
s16s34s234 −
s23s56
s16s34s234 −
s12
s16s345 −

s16s34s345

s12s45

s16s34s345

s12s45

s16s34s345
1
s56
s16 −

+

s16s234

+

+

+

s123
s16s34 −
s123
s16s34 −
s123
s16s34
1
s345 −

(B.6)

s12
s16s345 −
s23
s34s234 −

s56

s16s234

s45

s34s345

+

+

1
s16
1
s34

,

,

s23
s34s234 −

s45

s34s345

+

1
s34 −

1

s234

,

where we have suppressed a factor of i(2π)4δ4(P6

i=1 pi) in each amplitude.

Appendix C

Deformed theories

In this appendix, we provide some details on the renormalisation of ﬁelds, couplings and
composite operators in the deformed theories. Moreover, we give the self energies of the
scalar ﬁelds. The presentation in this appendix is based on [1, 3].

C.1 Renormalisation

In this section, we discuss the renormalisation of ﬁelds, couplings and composite operators.
In particular, we discuss the coeﬃcients occurring in the renormalisation group equations
(RGEs), i.e. the beta functions and anomalous dimensions. We focus on the cases required
for chapters 8–10 and refer the reader to [226, 277] for general treatments.

Some of the most basic quantities that in general require renormalisation are the ele-
mentary ﬁelds themselves. Although the corresponding self energies vanish in the super-
symmetric formulation employed in the ﬁrst part of this thesis, they are non-vanishing in a
component formulation, in particular in the one used in the second part of this work. For
our purpose, it is suﬃcient to look at the scalar ﬁelds φi. We deﬁne the renormalised ﬁeld
φi in terms of the bare ﬁeld φi 0 and the renormalisation constant Zφi as

The latter can be expanded in terms of its counterterm as

φi = Z

− 1
2
φi

φi 0 .

Zφi = 1 + δφi .

(C.1)

(C.2)

We calculate δφi up to one-loop order in the next section. Note that in theories with gauge
group U(N ), we also have to distinguish between the self energies of the SU(N ) and the
U(1) components. In our conventions, traces of more than one ﬁeld are always understood
to contain only the SU(N ) components of the ﬁelds, cf. section 9.1. Hence, only the SU(N )
self energies occur in the context of such traces.

The renormalised Yang-Mills coupling gYM is deﬁned in terms of its bare counterpart

by a rescaling with the ’t Hooft mass µ, which sets the renormalisation scale:

Its beta function is deﬁned as

gYM = µ−εgYM 0 .

βgYM = µ

d
dµ

gYM .

153

(C.3)

(C.4)

154

C Deformed theories

Using that the bare Yang-Mills coupling gYM 0 is independent of µ, we ﬁnd

0 = µ

d
dµ

gYM 0 =(cid:16)µ

∂
∂µ

+ βgYM

∂

∂gYM(cid:17)µεgYM = µε(εgYM + βgYM) ,

and hence

βgYM = −εgYM .

(C.5)

(C.6)

Note that βgYM vanishes for D = 4 as is required for conformal invariance.

Next, we turn to the renormalisation of the running coupling (9.6). Writing it once in
terms of bare quantities and once in terms of renormalised quantities and counterterms,
we have

g2
YM 0
N

−

Qii

0 F ii tr( ¯φi
0

¯φi
0) tr(φi 0φi 0) = −

µ2εg2
N

YM

(Qii

F ii + δQii

F ii) tr( ¯φi ¯φi) tr(φiφi) ,

(C.7)

where i = 1, 2, 3 is not summed over. The renormalised coupling is related to the bare
coupling as

The renormalisation constant ZQii

F ii

Qii

F ii = Z −1
Qii
can explicitly be written as

0 F ii .

Qii

F ii

ZQii

F ii

=(cid:0)1 + (Qii

F ii)−1δQii

F ii(cid:1)Z −2

φi

.

The beta function of this coupling is deﬁned as

βQii

F ii

= µ

d
dµ

Qii

F ii ,

and, in analogy to the case of gYM, we have

(C.8)

(C.9)

(C.10)

βQii

F ii

.

(C.11)

0 = µ

d
dµ

Qii

0 F ii = Qii

∂

∂gYM

+ βQii

F ii

∂
∂Qii

+ ZQii

F ii

Inserting (C.6), we ﬁnd

F ii(cid:16)βgYM
F ii(cid:16) − εgYM

F ii

F ii(cid:17)ZQii
F ii(cid:17) log ZQii

0 = Qii

∂

∂gYM

+ βQii

F ii

∂
∂Qii

+ βQii

F ii

.

(C.12)

F ii

This equation can be solved order by order. At lowest order, we have1

βQii

F ii

= Qii

F iiεgYM

∂

∂gYM

δZ (1)

Qii

F ii

+ O(g4

YM) .

(C.13)

Now, let us come to the renormalisation of gauge-invariant local composite operators.
For the sake of concreteness, we focus on OL = tr(φL
i ). Composite operators can be
regarded as external states and can be added to the action with appropriate source terms
JOL. Writing this once in terms of bare quantities and once in terms of renormalised
quantities and counterterms, we have

δSOL =Z dDx JOL,0 OL,0(φi 0) =Z dDx JOL(cid:2)OL(φi) + δJOLOL(φi)(cid:3) .

1As in chapters 9 and 10, we include an appropriate factor of the coupling constant in the deﬁnition of

(C.14)

ℓ-loop quantities.

C.2 One-loop self energies

The renormalisation constant of the source term is deﬁned via

JOL = Z −1
JOL

JOL,0 ,

ZJOL

= ZOL,1PIZ

− L
2
φi

.

Its one-particle-irreducible (1PI) contribution is related to the counterterm as

ZOL,1PI = 1 + δJOL .

155

(C.15)

(C.16)

Note that the renormalisation of the source term is equivalent to the renormalisation

of the operator

which we have been using in the ﬁrst part of this work. Furthermore, from

OL(φi) = ZOLOL,0(φi 0) ,

we ﬁnd

JOL,0 OL,0(φi 0) = JOLOL(φi) ,

ZOL = ZJOL

= ZOL,1PIZ

− L
2
φi

.

At the ﬁrst two loop orders, we have

OL

δZ (1)
δZ (2)

OL

= δJ (1)

= δJ (2)

OL −
OL −

L
2
L
2

δ(1)
φi ,

δ(2)
φi −

L
2

δ(1)

φi (cid:16)δJ (1)

OL −

L + 2

4

δ(1)

φi (cid:17) .

The anomalous dimension γOL is deﬁned as

γOL = −µ

d
dµ

log ZOL .

Using (C.6), we ﬁnd

(C.17)

(C.18)

(C.19)

(C.20)

(C.21)

∂
∂gYM − βQii

γOL =(cid:16)εgYM
which generalises the relation (3.8) used in the ﬁrst part of this thesis and becomes impor-
tant in section 10.3, where ZO2 depends on Qii

F ii(cid:17) log ZOL =(cid:16)εg

F ii(cid:17) log ZOL ,

F ii in addition to gYM.

∂
∂g − βQii

∂
∂Qii

∂
∂Qii

(C.22)

F ii

F ii

C.2 One-loop self energies

In the following, we compute the one-loop self energies of the scalar ﬁelds.

The UV divergences of the corresponding Feynman diagrams are

Kh ia
Kh ia
Kh ia

i

i

ε

1

δj

jbi = −2p2 g2
jbi = −2p2 g2
jbi = p2 g2

i(cid:2)(cid:0)ab(cid:1) − cos γ−
i(cid:2)(cid:0)ab(cid:1) − cos γ+
i (3 − α)(cid:2)(cid:0)ab(cid:1) −

N(cid:0)a(cid:1)(cid:0)b(cid:1)(cid:3) ,
N(cid:0)a(cid:1)(cid:0)b(cid:1)(cid:3) ,
N(cid:0)a(cid:1)(cid:0)b(cid:1)(cid:3) ,

δj

δj

1

1

ε

ε

(C.23)

156

C Deformed theories

where we have depicted the scalars by solid lines, the fermions by dashed lines and the
gauge ﬁelds by wiggly lines. The charge ﬂow is indicated by arrows, α is the gauge-ﬁxing
parameter and we have used the abbreviation (9.9). We have separated the diagrams with
exchanged fermions into those which contain a ψ4 in the ﬁrst line and those which do not
contain a ψ4 in the second line. The diagrams have been calculated using the Feynman
rules of [1].

The one-loop counterterm for the SU(N ) components of the scalar ﬁeld is

δSU(N ),(1)
φi

=

1

p2 Khia

g2
ε

= −

(1 + α) ,

(C.24)

jbi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)δj

i (ab)

where the vertical bar prescribes to take the coeﬃcient of the speciﬁed expression.

The one-loop counterterm for the U(1) component reads

δU(1),(1)
φi

=

1

p2 Khia
ε (cid:18)sin

g2

i (ab)

jbi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)δj
2 (cid:19) ,

γ−
i

γ+
i
2

+ sin

+

1

p2 Khia

jbi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)δj

i

1
N (a)(b)

(C.25)

= −4

which vanishes for γ±

i = 0 as required.

Bibliography

[1] J. Fokken, C. Sieg, and M. Wilhelm, “Non-conformality of γi-deformed N = 4 SYM

theory,” J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 47 (2014) , arXiv:1308.4420 [hep-th].

[2] J. Fokken, C. Sieg, and M. Wilhelm, “The complete one-loop dilatation operator of

planar real β-deformed N = 4 SYM theory,” JHEP 1407 (2014) 150,
arXiv:1312.2959 [hep-th].

[3] J. Fokken, C. Sieg, and M. Wilhelm, “A piece of cake: the ground-state energies in
γi-deformed N = 4 SYM theory at leading wrapping order,” JHEP 09 (2014) 78,
arXiv:1405.6712 [hep-th].

[4] M. Wilhelm, “Amplitudes, Form Factors and the Dilatation Operator in N = 4

SYM Theory,” JHEP 02 (2015) 149, arXiv:1410.6309 [hep-th].

[5] D. Nandan, C. Sieg, M. Wilhelm, and G. Yang, “Cutting through form factors and
cross sections of non-protected operators in N = 4 SYM,” JHEP 1506 (2015) 156,
arXiv:1410.8485 [hep-th].

[6] F. Loebbert, D. Nandan, C. Sieg, M. Wilhelm, and G. Yang, “On-Shell Methods for

the Two-Loop Dilatation Operator and Finite Remainders,” JHEP 10 (2015) 012,
arXiv:1504.06323 [hep-th].

[7] R. Frassek, D. Meidinger, D. Nandan, and M. Wilhelm, “On-shell diagrams,

Graßmannians and integrability for form factors,” JHEP 01 (2016) 182,
arXiv:1506.08192 [hep-th].

[8] B. Schroers and M. Wilhelm, “Towards Non-Commutative Deformations of

Relativistic Wave Equations in 2+1 Dimensions,” SIGMA 10 (2014) 053,
arXiv:1402.7039 [hep-th].

[9] J. Fokken and M. Wilhelm, “One-Loop Partition Functions in Deformed N = 4

SYM Theory,” JHEP 1503 (2015) 018, arXiv:1411.7695 [hep-th].

[10] CMS Collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et al., “Observation of a new boson at a mass

of 125 GeV with the CMS experiment at the LHC,”
Phys. Lett. B716 (2012) 30–61, arXiv:1207.7235 [hep-ex].

[11] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., “Observation of a new particle in the search

for the Standard Model Higgs boson with the ATLAS detector at the LHC,”
Phys. Lett. B716 (2012) 1–29, arXiv:1207.7214 [hep-ex].

157

158

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[12] C. Anastasiou, C. Duhr, F. Dulat, F. Herzog, and B. Mistlberger, “Higgs Boson

Gluon-Fusion Production in QCD at Three Loops,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 no. 21, (2015) 212001, arXiv:1503.06056 [hep-ph].

[13] L. Brink, J. H. Schwarz, and J. Scherk, “Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theories,”

Nucl.Phys. B121 (1977) 77.

[14] J. M. Maldacena, “The Large N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and

supergravity,” Adv.Theor.Math.Phys. 2 (1998) 231–252,
arXiv:hep-th/9711200 [hep-th].

[15] S. Gubser, I. R. Klebanov, and A. M. Polyakov, “Gauge theory correlators from

noncritical string theory,” Phys.Lett. B428 (1998) 105–114,
arXiv:hep-th/9802109 [hep-th].

[16] E. Witten, “Anti-de Sitter space and holography,” Adv.Theor.Math.Phys. 2 (1998)

253–291, arXiv:hep-th/9802150 [hep-th].

[17] O. Aharony, S. S. Gubser, J. M. Maldacena, H. Ooguri, and Y. Oz, “Large N ﬁeld

theories, string theory and gravity,” Phys.Rept. 323 (2000) 183–386,
arXiv:hep-th/9905111 [hep-th].

[18] E. D’Hoker and D. Z. Freedman, “Supersymmetric gauge theories and the AdS /

CFT correspondence,” arXiv:hep-th/0201253 [hep-th].

[19] G. ’t Hooft, “A Planar Diagram Theory for Strong Interactions,”

Nucl.Phys. B72 (1974) 461.

[20] N. Beisert et al., “Review of AdS/CFT Integrability: An Overview,”

Lett.Math.Phys. 99 (2012) 3–32, arXiv:1012.3982 [hep-th].

[21] H. Bethe, “Zur Theorie der Metalle,”

Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik A: Hadrons and Nuclei 71 (1931) 205–226.

[22] L. Lipatov, “High-energy asymptotics of multicolor QCD and exactly solvable

lattice models,” arXiv:hep-th/9311037 [hep-th].

[23] E. B. Bogomolny, “Stability of Classical Solutions,” Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 24 (1976)

449. [Yad. Fiz.24,861(1976)].

[24] M. K. Prasad and C. M. Sommerﬁeld, “An Exact Classical Solution for the ’t Hooft

Monopole and the Julia-Zee Dyon,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 35 (1975) 760–762.

[25] J. Minahan and K. Zarembo, “The Bethe ansatz for N = 4 superYang-Mills,”

JHEP 0303 (2003) 013, arXiv:hep-th/0212208 [hep-th].

[26] N. Beisert and M. Staudacher, “The N = 4 SYM integrable super spin chain,”

Nucl.Phys. B670 (2003) 439–463, arXiv:hep-th/0307042 [hep-th].

[27] N. Beisert, “The complete one-loop dilatation operator of N = 4 superYang-Mills

theory,” Nucl.Phys. B676 (2004) 3–42, arXiv:hep-th/0307015 [hep-th].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

159

[28] N. Beisert and M. Staudacher, “Long-range psu(2, 2|4) Bethe Ansatze for gauge

theory and strings,” Nucl.Phys. B727 (2005) 1–62,
arXiv:hep-th/0504190 [hep-th].

[29] C. Sieg and A. Torrielli, “Wrapping interactions and the genus expansion of the

2-point function of composite operators,” Nucl.Phys. B723 (2005) 3–32,
arXiv:hep-th/0505071 [hep-th].

[30] N. Beisert, “The Dilatation operator of N = 4 super Yang-Mills theory and

integrability,” Phys.Rept. 405 (2005) 1–202, arXiv:hep-th/0407277 [hep-th].
Ph.D. Thesis.

[31] N. Beisert, V. Dippel, and M. Staudacher, “A Novel long range spin chain and

planar N = 4 super Yang-Mills,” JHEP 07 (2004) 075,
arXiv:hep-th/0405001 [hep-th].

[32] F. Fiamberti, A. Santambrogio, C. Sieg, and D. Zanon, “Wrapping at four loops in

N = 4 SYM,” Phys.Lett. B666 (2008) 100–105, arXiv:0712.3522 [hep-th].

[33] F. Fiamberti, A. Santambrogio, C. Sieg, and D. Zanon, “Anomalous dimension with

wrapping at four loops in N = 4 SYM,” Nucl.Phys. B805 (2008) 231–266,
arXiv:0806.2095 [hep-th].

[34] V. Velizhanin, “The four-loop anomalous dimension of the Konishi operator in

N = 4 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,” JETP Lett. 89 (2009) 6–9,
arXiv:0808.3832 [hep-th].

[35] Z. Bajnok and R. A. Janik, “Four-loop perturbative Konishi from strings and ﬁnite

size eﬀects for multiparticle states,” Nucl. Phys. B807 (2009) 625–650,
arXiv:0807.0399 [hep-th].

[36] J. Ambjorn, R. A. Janik, and C. Kristjansen, “Wrapping interactions and a new

source of corrections to the spin-chain/string duality,”
Nucl.Phys. B736 (2006) 288–301, arXiv:hep-th/0510171 [hep-th].

[37] G. Arutyunov and S. Frolov, “On String S-matrix, Bound States and TBA,”

JHEP 12 (2007) 024, arXiv:0710.1568 [hep-th].

[38] G. Arutyunov and S. Frolov, “String hypothesis for the AdS5 × S5 mirror,”

JHEP 03 (2009) 152, arXiv:0901.1417 [hep-th].

[39] D. Bombardelli, D. Fioravanti, and R. Tateo, “Thermodynamic Bethe Ansatz for

planar AdS/CFT: A Proposal,” J. Phys. A42 (2009) 375401,
arXiv:0902.3930 [hep-th].

[40] N. Gromov, V. Kazakov, A. Kozak, and P. Vieira, “Exact Spectrum of Anomalous
Dimensions of Planar N = 4 Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory: TBA and excited
states,” Lett. Math. Phys. 91 (2010) 265–287, arXiv:0902.4458 [hep-th].

[41] G. Arutyunov and S. Frolov, “Thermodynamic Bethe Ansatz for the AdS5×S5

Mirror Model,” JHEP 05 (2009) 068, arXiv:0903.0141 [hep-th].

160

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[42] N. Gromov, V. Kazakov, and P. Vieira, “Exact Spectrum of Anomalous Dimensions

of Planar N = 4 Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009) 131601, arXiv:0901.3753 [hep-th].

[43] N. Gromov, V. Kazakov, S. Leurent, and D. Volin, “Solving the AdS/CFT

Y-system,” JHEP 1207 (2012) 023, arXiv:1110.0562 [hep-th].

[44] N. Gromov, V. Kazakov, S. Leurent, and D. Volin, “Quantum Spectral Curve for
Planar N = Super-Yang-Mills Theory,” Phys.Rev.Lett. 112 no. 1, (2014) 011602,
arXiv:1305.1939 [hep-th].

[45] C. Marboe and D. Volin, “Quantum spectral curve as a tool for a perturbative

quantum ﬁeld theory,” Nucl. Phys. B899 (2015) 810–847,
arXiv:1411.4758 [hep-th].

[46] N. Gromov, F. Levkovich-Maslyuk, and G. Sizov, “Quantum Spectral Curve and

the Numerical Solution of the Spectral Problem in AdS5/CFT4,”
arXiv:1504.06640 [hep-th].

[47] A. Kotikov and L. Lipatov, “DGLAP and BFKL evolution equations in the N = 4

supersymmetric gauge theory,” arXiv:hep-ph/0112346 [hep-ph].

[48] A. Kotikov, L. Lipatov, A. Onishchenko, and V. Velizhanin, “Three loop universal
anomalous dimension of the Wilson operators in N = 4 SUSY Yang-Mills model,”
Phys.Lett. B595 (2004) 521–529, arXiv:hep-th/0404092 [hep-th].

[49] A. Kotikov and L. Lipatov, “On the highest transcendentality in N = 4 SUSY,”

Nucl.Phys. B769 (2007) 217–255, arXiv:hep-th/0611204 [hep-th].

[50] T. Gehrmann, J. M. Henn, and T. Huber, “The three-loop form factor in N = 4

super Yang-Mills,” JHEP 1203 (2012) 101, arXiv:1112.4524 [hep-th].

[51] Y. Li, A. von Manteuﬀel, R. M. Schabinger, and H. X. Zhu, “Soft-virtual

corrections to Higgs production at N3LO,” Phys. Rev. D91 (2015) 036008,
arXiv:1412.2771 [hep-ph].

[52] H. Elvang and Y.-t. Huang, “Scattering Amplitudes,” arXiv:1308.1697 [hep-th].

[53] J. M. Henn and J. C. Plefka, “Scattering Amplitudes in Gauge Theories,”

Lect.Notes Phys. 883 (2014) 1–195.

[54] S. J. Parke and T. Taylor, “An Amplitude for n Gluon Scattering,”

Phys.Rev.Lett. 56 (1986) 2459.

[55] V. Nair, “A Current Algebra for Some Gauge Theory Amplitudes,”

Phys.Lett. B214 (1988) 215.

[56] Z. Bern, L. J. Dixon, D. C. Dunbar, and D. A. Kosower, “One-loop n-point gauge

theory amplitudes, unitarity and collinear limits,”
Nucl.Phys. B425 (1994) 217–260, arXiv:hep-ph/9403226 [hep-ph].

[57] Z. Bern, L. J. Dixon, D. C. Dunbar, and D. A. Kosower, “Fusing gauge theory tree

amplitudes into loop amplitudes,” Nucl.Phys. B435 (1995) 59–101,
arXiv:hep-ph/9409265 [hep-ph].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

161

[58] R. Britto, F. Cachazo, and B. Feng, “Generalized unitarity and one-loop

amplitudes in N = 4 super-Yang-Mills,” Nucl.Phys. B725 (2005) 275–305,
arXiv:hep-th/0412103 [hep-th].

[59] Z. Bern, L. J. Dixon, and V. A. Smirnov, “Iteration of planar amplitudes in

maximally supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory at three loops and beyond,”
Phys.Rev. D72 (2005) 085001, arXiv:hep-th/0505205 [hep-th].

[60] C. Anastasiou, Z. Bern, L. J. Dixon, and D. Kosower, “Planar amplitudes in

maximally supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,” Phys.Rev.Lett. 91 (2003) 251602,
arXiv:hep-th/0309040 [hep-th].

[61] S. Catani, “The Singular behavior of QCD amplitudes at two loop order,”

Phys.Lett. B427 (1998) 161–171, arXiv:hep-ph/9802439 [hep-ph].

[62] G. F. Sterman and M. E. Tejeda-Yeomans, “Multiloop amplitudes and

resummation,” Phys.Lett. B552 (2003) 48–56, arXiv:hep-ph/0210130 [hep-ph].

[63] N. Beisert, B. Eden, and M. Staudacher, “Transcendentality and Crossing,”

J.Stat.Mech. 0701 (2007) P01021, arXiv:hep-th/0610251 [hep-th].

[64] L. F. Alday and J. Maldacena, “Comments on gluon scattering amplitudes via

AdS/CFT,” JHEP 0711 (2007) 068, arXiv:0710.1060 [hep-th].

[65] J. Bartels, L. N. Lipatov, and A. Sabio Vera, “BFKL Pomeron, Reggeized gluons

and Bern-Dixon-Smirnov amplitudes,” Phys. Rev. D80 (2009) 045002,
arXiv:0802.2065 [hep-th].

[66] Z. Bern, L. Dixon, D. Kosower, R. Roiban, M. Spradlin, C. Vergu, and A. Volovich,

“The Two-Loop Six-Gluon MHV Amplitude in Maximally Supersymmetric
Yang-Mills Theory,” Phys.Rev. D78 (2008) 045007, arXiv:0803.1465 [hep-th].

[67] J. Drummond, J. Henn, G. Korchemsky, and E. Sokatchev, “Hexagon Wilson loop

= six-gluon MHV amplitude,” Nucl.Phys. B815 (2009) 142–173,
arXiv:0803.1466 [hep-th].

[68] B. Goncharov, A, “A simple construction of Grassmannian polylogarithms,”

arXiv:0908.2238 [math.AG].

[69] A. B. Goncharov, M. Spradlin, C. Vergu, and A. Volovich, “Classical

Polylogarithms for Amplitudes and Wilson Loops,”
Phys.Rev.Lett. 105 (2010) 151605, arXiv:1006.5703 [hep-th].

[70] C. Duhr, “Mathematical aspects of scattering amplitudes,” in Theoretical Advanced

Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics: Journeys Through the Precision
Frontier: Amplitudes for Colliders (TASI 2014) Boulder, Colorado, June 2-27,
2014. 2014. arXiv:1411.7538 [hep-ph].

[71] L. J. Dixon, J. M. Drummond, and J. M. Henn, “Bootstrapping the three-loop

hexagon,” JHEP 11 (2011) 023, arXiv:1108.4461 [hep-th].

[72] L. J. Dixon, J. M. Drummond, C. Duhr, M. von Hippel, and J. Pennington,

“Bootstrapping six-gluon scattering in planar N = 4 super-Yang-Mills theory,” PoS
LL2014 (2014) 077, arXiv:1407.4724 [hep-th].

162

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[73] S. Caron-Huot and K. J. Larsen, “Uniqueness of two-loop master contours,”

JHEP 1210 (2012) 026, arXiv:1205.0801 [hep-ph].

[74] N. Arkani-Hamed, J. L. Bourjaily, F. Cachazo, A. B. Goncharov, A. Postnikov, and

J. Trnka, “Scattering Amplitudes and the Positive Grassmannian,”
arXiv:1212.5605 [hep-th].

[75] D. Nandan, M. F. Paulos, M. Spradlin, and A. Volovich, “Star Integrals,

Convolutions and Simplices,” JHEP 05 (2013) 105, arXiv:1301.2500 [hep-th].

[76] F. Cachazo, P. Svrcek, and E. Witten, “MHV vertices and tree amplitudes in gauge

theory,” JHEP 0409 (2004) 006, arXiv:hep-th/0403047 [hep-th].

[77] R. Britto, F. Cachazo, and B. Feng, “New recursion relations for tree amplitudes of

gluons,” Nucl.Phys. B715 (2005) 499–522, arXiv:hep-th/0412308 [hep-th].

[78] R. Britto, F. Cachazo, B. Feng, and E. Witten, “Direct proof of tree-level recursion

relation in Yang-Mills theory,” Phys.Rev.Lett. 94 (2005) 181602,
arXiv:hep-th/0501052 [hep-th].

[79] J. Drummond and J. Henn, “All tree-level amplitudes in N = 4 SYM,”

JHEP 0904 (2009) 018, arXiv:0808.2475 [hep-th].

[80] N. Arkani-Hamed, J. L. Bourjaily, F. Cachazo, S. Caron-Huot, and J. Trnka, “The

All-Loop Integrand For Scattering Amplitudes in Planar N = 4 SYM,”
JHEP 1101 (2011) 041, arXiv:1008.2958 [hep-th].

[81] R. Penrose, “Twistor algebra,” J.Math.Phys. 8 (1967) 345.

[82] A. Hodges, “Eliminating spurious poles from gauge-theoretic amplitudes,”

JHEP 1305 (2013) 135, arXiv:0905.1473 [hep-th].

[83] N. Arkani-Hamed, J. L. Bourjaily, F. Cachazo, and J. Trnka, “Singularity Structure

of Maximally Supersymmetric Scattering Amplitudes,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 no. 26, (2014) 261603, arXiv:1410.0354 [hep-th].

[84] B. Chen, G. Chen, Y.-K. E. Cheung, Y. Li, R. Xie, and Y. Xin, “Nonplanar

On-shell Diagrams and Leading Singularities of Scattering Amplitudes,”
arXiv:1411.3889 [hep-th].

[85] N. Arkani-Hamed, J. L. Bourjaily, F. Cachazo, A. Postnikov, and J. Trnka,

“On-Shell Structures of MHV Amplitudes Beyond the Planar Limit,”
JHEP 06 (2015) 179, arXiv:1412.8475 [hep-th].

[86] Z. Bern, E. Herrmann, S. Litsey, J. Stankowicz, and J. Trnka, “Logarithmic

Singularities and Maximally Supersymmetric Amplitudes,” JHEP 06 (2015) 202,
arXiv:1412.8584 [hep-th].

[87] S. Franco, D. Galloni, B. Penante, and C. Wen, “Non-Planar On-Shell Diagrams,”

JHEP 06 (2015) 199, arXiv:1502.02034 [hep-th].

[88] B. Chen, G. Chen, Y.-K. E. Cheung, R. Xie, and Y. Xin, “Top-forms of Leading

Singularities in Nonplanar Multi-loop Amplitudes,” arXiv:1506.02880 [hep-th].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

163

[89] P. Benincasa, “On-shell diagrammatics and the perturbative structure of planar

gauge theories,” arXiv:1510.03642 [hep-th].

[90] N. Arkani-Hamed, F. Cachazo, C. Cheung, and J. Kaplan, “A Duality For The S

Matrix,” JHEP 1003 (2010) 020, arXiv:0907.5418 [hep-th].

[91] L. Mason and D. Skinner, “Dual Superconformal Invariance, Momentum Twistors

and Grassmannians,” JHEP 0911 (2009) 045, arXiv:0909.0250 [hep-th].

[92] N. Arkani-Hamed, F. Cachazo, and C. Cheung, “The Grassmannian Origin Of Dual
Superconformal Invariance,” JHEP 1003 (2010) 036, arXiv:0909.0483 [hep-th].

[93] N. Arkani-Hamed and J. Trnka, “The Amplituhedron,” JHEP 1410 (2014) 30,

arXiv:1312.2007 [hep-th].

[94] N. Arkani-Hamed and J. Trnka, “Into the Amplituhedron,” JHEP 1412 (2014) 182,

arXiv:1312.7878 [hep-th].

[95] N. Arkani-Hamed, J. L. Bourjaily, F. Cachazo, A. Hodges, and J. Trnka, “A Note

on Polytopes for Scattering Amplitudes,” JHEP 1204 (2012) 081,
arXiv:1012.6030 [hep-th].

[96] L. J. Dixon, J. M. Henn, J. Plefka, and T. Schuster, “All tree-level amplitudes in

massless QCD,” JHEP 01 (2011) 035, arXiv:1010.3991 [hep-ph].

[97] J. M. Drummond, J. M. Henn, and J. Plefka, “Yangian symmetry of scattering

amplitudes in N = 4 super Yang-Mills theory,” JHEP 0905 (2009) 046,
arXiv:0902.2987 [hep-th].

[98] J. Drummond, J. Henn, G. Korchemsky, and E. Sokatchev, “Dual superconformal

symmetry of scattering amplitudes in N = 4 super-Yang-Mills theory,”
Nucl.Phys. B828 (2010) 317–374, arXiv:0807.1095 [hep-th].

[99] B. I. Zwiebel, “From Scattering Amplitudes to the Dilatation Generator in N = 4

SYM,” J.Phys. A45 (2012) 115401, arXiv:1111.0083 [hep-th].

[100] L. Ferro, T.  Lukowski, C. Meneghelli, J. Plefka, and M. Staudacher, “Harmonic

R-matrices for Scattering Amplitudes and Spectral Regularization,”
Phys.Rev.Lett. 110 no. 12, (2013) 121602, arXiv:1212.0850 [hep-th].

[101] L. Ferro, T.  Lukowski, C. Meneghelli, J. Plefka, and M. Staudacher, “Spectral

Parameters for Scattering Amplitudes in N = 4 Super Yang-Mills Theory,”
JHEP 1401 (2014) 094, arXiv:1308.3494 [hep-th].

[102] D. Chicherin, S. Derkachov, and R. Kirschner, “Yang-Baxter operators and

scattering amplitudes in N = 4 super-Yang-Mills theory,”
Nucl.Phys. B881 (2014) 467–501, arXiv:1309.5748 [hep-th].

[103] R. Frassek, N. Kanning, Y. Ko, and M. Staudacher, “Bethe Ansatz for Yangian

Invariants: Towards Super Yang-Mills Scattering Amplitudes,”
Nucl.Phys. B883 (2014) 373–424, arXiv:1312.1693 [math-ph].

164

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[104] N. Beisert, J. Broedel, and M. Rosso, “On Yangian-invariant regularization of

deformed on-shell diagrams in N = 4 super-Yang-Mills theory,”
J.Phys. A47 (2014) 365402, arXiv:1401.7274 [hep-th].

[105] N. Kanning, T.  Lukowski, and M. Staudacher, “A shortcut to general tree-level

scattering amplitudes in N = 4 SYM via integrability,”
Fortsch.Phys. 62 (2014) 556–572, arXiv:1403.3382 [hep-th].

[106] J. Broedel, M. de Leeuw, and M. Rosso, “A dictionary between R-operators,

on-shell graphs and Yangian algebras,” JHEP 1406 (2014) 170,
arXiv:1403.3670 [hep-th].

[107] J. Broedel, M. de Leeuw, and M. Rosso, “Deformed one-loop amplitudes in N = 4

super-Yang-Mills theory,” JHEP 11 (2014) 091, arXiv:1406.4024 [hep-th].

[108] T. Bargheer, Y.-t. Huang, F. Loebbert, and M. Yamazaki, “Integrable Amplitude

Deformations for N = 4 Super Yang-Mills and ABJM Theory,”
Phys. Rev. D91 no. 2, (2015) 026004, arXiv:1407.4449 [hep-th].

[109] L. Ferro, T.  Lukowski, and M. Staudacher, “N = 4 scattering amplitudes and the

deformed Graßmannian,” Nucl.Phys. B889 (2014) 192–206,
arXiv:1407.6736 [hep-th].

[110] N. Kanning, Y. Ko, and M. Staudacher, “Graßmannian integrals as matrix models

for non-compact Yangian invariants,” Nucl. Phys. B894 (2015) 407–421,
arXiv:1412.8476 [hep-th].

[111] L. F. Alday and J. M. Maldacena, “Gluon scattering amplitudes at strong

coupling,” JHEP 0706 (2007) 064, arXiv:0705.0303 [hep-th].

[112] L. F. Alday, D. Gaiotto, and J. Maldacena, “Thermodynamic Bubble Ansatz,”

JHEP 09 (2011) 032, arXiv:0911.4708 [hep-th].

[113] L. F. Alday, J. Maldacena, A. Sever, and P. Vieira, “Y-system for Scattering

Amplitudes,” J.Phys. A43 (2010) 485401, arXiv:1002.2459 [hep-th].

[114] B. Basso, A. Sever, and P. Vieira, “Spacetime and Flux Tube S-Matrices at Finite

Coupling for N = 4 Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory,”
Phys.Rev.Lett. 111 no. 9, (2013) 091602, arXiv:1303.1396 [hep-th].

[115] B. Basso, J. Caetano, L. Cordova, A. Sever, and P. Vieira, “OPE for all Helicity

Amplitudes,” JHEP 08 (2015) 018, arXiv:1412.1132 [hep-th].

[116] C. R. Schmidt, “H −→ g g g (g q anti-q) at two loops in the large M(t) limit,”

Phys.Lett. B413 (1997) 391–395, arXiv:hep-ph/9707448 [hep-ph].

[117] D. M. Hofman and J. Maldacena, “Conformal collider physics: Energy and charge

correlations,” JHEP 05 (2008) 012, arXiv:0803.1467 [hep-th].

[118] O. T. Engelund and R. Roiban, “Correlation functions of local composite operators
from generalized unitarity,” JHEP 1303 (2013) 172, arXiv:1209.0227 [hep-th].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

165

[119] A. V. Belitsky, S. Hohenegger, G. P. Korchemsky, E. Sokatchev, and A. Zhiboedov,

“From correlation functions to event shapes,” Nucl. Phys. B884 (2014) 305–343,
arXiv:1309.0769 [hep-th].

[120] A. V. Belitsky, S. Hohenegger, G. P. Korchemsky, E. Sokatchev, and A. Zhiboedov,

“Event shapes in N = 4 super-Yang-Mills theory,”
Nucl. Phys. B884 (2014) 206–256, arXiv:1309.1424 [hep-th].

[121] L. Bianchi, V. Forini, and A. V. Kotikov, “On DIS Wilson coeﬃcients in N = 4

super Yang-Mills theory,” Phys.Lett. B725 (2013) 394–401,
arXiv:1304.7252 [hep-th].

[122] A. H. Mueller, “On the Asymptotic Behavior of the Sudakov Form-factor,”

Phys.Rev. D20 (1979) 2037.

[123] J. C. Collins, “Algorithm to Compute Corrections to the Sudakov Form-factor,”

Phys.Rev. D22 (1980) 1478.

[124] A. Sen, “Asymptotic Behavior of the Sudakov Form-Factor in QCD,”

Phys.Rev. D24 (1981) 3281.

[125] L. Magnea and G. F. Sterman, “Analytic continuation of the Sudakov form-factor

in QCD,” Phys.Rev. D42 (1990) 4222–4227.

[126] W. van Neerven, “Infrared Behavior of On-shell Form-factors in a N = 4

Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Field Theory,” Z.Phys. C30 (1986) 595.

[127] J. Maldacena and A. Zhiboedov, “Form factors at strong coupling via a Y-system,”

JHEP 1011 (2010) 104, arXiv:1009.1139 [hep-th].

[128] Z. Gao and G. Yang, “Y-system for form factors at strong coupling in AdS5 and

with multi-operator insertions in AdS3,” JHEP 1306 (2013) 105,
arXiv:1303.2668 [hep-th].

[129] A. Brandhuber, B. Spence, G. Travaglini, and G. Yang, “Form Factors in N = 4

Super Yang-Mills and Periodic Wilson Loops,” JHEP 1101 (2011) 134,
arXiv:1011.1899 [hep-th].

[130] L. Bork, D. Kazakov, and G. Vartanov, “On form factors in N = 4 SYM,”

JHEP 1102 (2011) 063, arXiv:1011.2440 [hep-th].

[131] A. Brandhuber, O. Gurdogan, R. Mooney, G. Travaglini, and G. Yang, “Harmony

of Super Form Factors,” JHEP 1110 (2011) 046, arXiv:1107.5067 [hep-th].

[132] L. Bork, D. Kazakov, and G. Vartanov, “On MHV Form Factors in Superspace for

N = 4 SYM Theory,” JHEP 1110 (2011) 133, arXiv:1107.5551 [hep-th].

[133] J. M. Henn, S. Moch, and S. G. Naculich, “Form factors and scattering amplitudes

in N = 4 SYM in dimensional and massive regularizations,”
JHEP 1112 (2011) 024, arXiv:1109.5057 [hep-th].

[134] A. Brandhuber, G. Travaglini, and G. Yang, “Analytic two-loop form factors in

N = 4 SYM,” JHEP 1205 (2012) 082, arXiv:1201.4170 [hep-th].

166

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[135] L. Bork, “On NMHV form factors in N = 4 SYM theory from generalized

unitarity,” JHEP 1301 (2013) 049, arXiv:1203.2596 [hep-th].

[136] H. Johansson, D. A. Kosower, and K. J. Larsen, “Two-Loop Maximal Unitarity

with External Masses,” Phys.Rev. D87 (2013) 025030,
arXiv:1208.1754 [hep-th].

[137] R. H. Boels, B. A. Kniehl, O. V. Tarasov, and G. Yang, “Color-kinematic Duality

for Form Factors,” JHEP 1302 (2013) 063, arXiv:1211.7028 [hep-th].

[138] B. Penante, B. Spence, G. Travaglini, and C. Wen, “On super form factors of

half-BPS operators in N = 4 super Yang-Mills,” JHEP 1404 (2014) 083,
arXiv:1402.1300 [hep-th].

[139] A. Brandhuber, B. Penante, G. Travaglini, and C. Wen, “The last of the simple

remainders,” JHEP 1408 (2014) 100, arXiv:1406.1443 [hep-th].

[140] L. V. Bork, “On form factors in N = 4 SYM theory and polytopes,”

JHEP 12 (2014) 111, arXiv:1407.5568 [hep-th].

[141] R. Huang, Q. Jin, and B. Feng, “Form Factor and Boundary Contribution of

Amplitude,” arXiv:1601.06612 [hep-th].

[142] Z. Bern, J. Carrasco, and H. Johansson, “New Relations for Gauge-Theory
Amplitudes,” Phys.Rev. D78 (2008) 085011, arXiv:0805.3993 [hep-ph].

[143] T. Gehrmann, M. Jaquier, E. Glover, and A. Koukoutsakis, “Two-Loop QCD

Corrections to the Helicity Amplitudes for H → 3 partons,”
JHEP 1202 (2012) 056, arXiv:1112.3554 [hep-ph].

[144] A. V. Belitsky, S. Hohenegger, G. P. Korchemsky, E. Sokatchev, and A. Zhiboedov,

“Energy-Energy Correlations in N = 4 Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 no. 7, (2014) 071601, arXiv:1311.6800 [hep-th].

[145] R. Boels, B. A. Kniehl, and G. Yang, “Master integrals for the four-loop Sudakov

form factor,” arXiv:1508.03717 [hep-th].

[146] M. Gunaydin and C. Saclioglu, “Oscillator Like Unitary Representations of

Noncompact Groups With a Jordan Structure and the Noncompact Groups of
Supergravity,” Commun. Math. Phys. 87 (1982) 159.

[147] M. Gunaydin, D. Minic, and M. Zagermann, “4-D doubleton conformal theories,

CPT and IIB string on AdS5 × S5,” Nucl. Phys. B534 (1998) 96–120,
arXiv:hep-th/9806042 [hep-th]. [Erratum: Nucl. Phys.B538,531(1999)].

[148] N. Beisert, “On Yangian Symmetry in Planar N = 4 SYM,”

arXiv:1004.5423 [hep-th].

[149] L. Koster, V. Mitev, and M. Staudacher, “A Twistorial Approach to Integrability in

N = 4 SYM,” Fortsch. Phys. 63 no. 2, (2015) 142–147,
arXiv:1410.6310 [hep-th].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

167

[150] A. Brandhuber, B. Penante, G. Travaglini, and D. Young, “Integrability and MHV

diagrams in N = 4 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 071602, arXiv:1412.1019 [hep-th].

[151] A. Brandhuber, B. Penante, G. Travaglini, and D. Young, “Integrability and

unitarity,” JHEP 05 (2015) 005, arXiv:1502.06627 [hep-th].

[152] O. T. Engelund, “Lagrangian Insertion in the Light-Like Limit and the

Super-Correlators/Super-Amplitudes Duality,” arXiv:1502.01934 [hep-th].

[153] E. Laenen, K. J. Larsen, and R. Rietkerk, “Position-space cuts for Wilson line

correlators,” JHEP 07 (2015) 083, arXiv:1505.02555 [hep-th].

[154] D. Chicherin, R. Doobary, B. Eden, P. Heslop, G. P. Korchemsky, L. Mason, and
E. Sokatchev, “Correlation functions of the chiral stress-tensor multiplet in N = 4
SYM,” JHEP 06 (2015) 198, arXiv:1412.8718 [hep-th].

[155] L. V. Bork and A. I. Onishchenko, “On Soft Theorems And Form Factors In N = 4

SYM Theory,” arXiv:1506.07551 [hep-th].

[156] K. Zoubos, “Review of AdS/CFT Integrability, Chapter IV.2: Deformations,

Orbifolds and Open Boundaries,” Lett.Math.Phys. 99 (2012) 375–400,
arXiv:1012.3998 [hep-th].

[157] S. J. van Tongeren, “Integrability of the AdS5 × S5 superstring and its

deformations,” J.Phys. A47 (2014) 433001, arXiv:1310.4854 [hep-th].

[158] R. G. Leigh and M. J. Strassler, “Exactly marginal operators and duality in

four-dimensional N = 1 supersymmetric gauge theory,”
Nucl.Phys. B447 (1995) 95–136, arXiv:hep-th/9503121 [hep-th].

[159] O. Lunin and J. M. Maldacena, “Deforming ﬁeld theories with U(1) × U(1) global

symmetry and their gravity duals,” JHEP 0505 (2005) 033,
arXiv:hep-th/0502086 [hep-th].

[160] S. Frolov, “Lax pair for strings in Lunin-Maldacena background,”

JHEP 0505 (2005) 069, arXiv:hep-th/0503201 [hep-th].

[161] R. J. Szabo, “Quantum ﬁeld theory on noncommutative spaces,”

Phys.Rept. 378 (2003) 207–299, arXiv:hep-th/0109162 [hep-th].

[162] T. Filk, “Divergencies in a ﬁeld theory on quantum space,”

Phys.Lett. B376 (1996) 53–58.

[163] M. Bershadsky, Z. Kakushadze, and C. Vafa, “String expansion as large N

expansion of gauge theories,” Nucl. Phys. B523 (1998) 59–72,
arXiv:hep-th/9803076 [hep-th].

[164] M. Bershadsky and A. Johansen, “Large N limit of orbifold ﬁeld theories,”

Nucl. Phys. B536 (1998) 141–148, arXiv:hep-th/9803249 [hep-th].

[165] N. Beisert and R. Roiban, “Beauty and the twist: The Bethe ansatz for twisted

N = 4 SYM,” JHEP 0508 (2005) 039, arXiv:hep-th/0505187 [hep-th].

168

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[166] F. Fiamberti, A. Santambrogio, C. Sieg, and D. Zanon, “Single impurity operators
at critical wrapping order in the β-deformed N = 4 SYM,” JHEP 0908 (2009) 034,
arXiv:0811.4594 [hep-th].

[167] J. Gunnesson, “Wrapping in maximally supersymmetric and marginally deformed

N = 4 Yang-Mills,” JHEP 0904 (2009) 130, arXiv:0902.1427 [hep-th].
[168] N. Gromov and F. Levkovich-Maslyuk, “Y-system and β-deformed N = 4

Super-Yang-Mills,” J.Phys. A44 (2011) 015402, arXiv:1006.5438 [hep-th].

[169] G. Arutyunov, M. de Leeuw, and S. J. van Tongeren, “Twisting the Mirror TBA,”

JHEP 1102 (2011) 025, arXiv:1009.4118 [hep-th].

[170] C. Ahn, Z. Bajnok, D. Bombardelli, and R. I. Nepomechie, “TBA, NLO Luscher
correction, and double wrapping in twisted AdS/CFT,” JHEP 1112 (2011) 059,
arXiv:1108.4914 [hep-th].

[171] V. Kazakov, S. Leurent, and D. Volin, “T-system on T-hook: Grassmannian

Solution and Twisted Quantum Spectral Curve,” arXiv:1510.02100 [hep-th].

[172] S. Frolov and R. Suzuki, “Temperature quantization from the TBA equations,”

Phys.Lett. B679 (2009) 60–64, arXiv:0906.0499 [hep-th].

[173] M. de Leeuw and S. J. van Tongeren, “Orbifolded Konishi from the Mirror TBA,”

J.Phys. A44 (2011) 325404, arXiv:1103.5853 [hep-th].

[174] M. de Leeuw and S. J. van Tongeren, “The spectral problem for strings on twisted

AdS5 × S5,” Nucl.Phys. B860 (2012) 339–376, arXiv:1201.1451 [hep-th].

[175] S. Frolov., private communication.

[176] D. Z. Freedman and U. Gursoy, “Comments on the β-deformed N = 4 SYM

theory,” JHEP 0511 (2005) 042, arXiv:hep-th/0506128 [hep-th].

[177] S. Frolov, R. Roiban, and A. A. Tseytlin, “Gauge-string duality for

(non)supersymmetric deformations of N = 4 super Yang-Mills theory,”
Nucl.Phys. B731 (2005) 1–44, arXiv:hep-th/0507021 [hep-th].

[178] T. J. Hollowood and S. P. Kumar, “An N = 1 duality cascade from a deformation

of N = 4 SUSY Yang-Mills theory,” JHEP 0412 (2004) 034,
arXiv:hep-th/0407029 [hep-th].

[179] S. Ananth, S. Kovacs, and H. Shimada, “Proof of all-order ﬁniteness for planar

β-deformed Yang-Mills,” JHEP 0701 (2007) 046,
arXiv:hep-th/0609149 [hep-th].

[180] S. Ananth, S. Kovacs, and H. Shimada, “Proof of ultra-violet ﬁniteness for a planar

non-supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,” Nucl.Phys. B783 (2007) 227–237,
arXiv:hep-th/0702020 [HEP-TH].

[181] A. Dymarsky, I. Klebanov, and R. Roiban, “Perturbative search for ﬁxed lines in

large N gauge theories,” JHEP 0508 (2005) 011,
arXiv:hep-th/0505099 [hep-th].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

169

[182] A. Dymarsky, I. Klebanov, and R. Roiban, “Perturbative gauge theory and closed

string tachyons,” JHEP 0511 (2005) 038, arXiv:hep-th/0509132 [hep-th].

[183] T. Banks and A. Zaks, “On the Phase Structure of Vector-Like Gauge Theories

with Massless Fermions,” Nucl. Phys. B196 (1982) 189.

[184] A. Armoni, E. Lopez, and A. M. Uranga, “Closed strings tachyons and

noncommutative instabilities,” JHEP 02 (2003) 020,
arXiv:hep-th/0301099 [hep-th].

[185] R. Blumenhagen, A. Font, and D. Lust, “Tachyon free orientifolds of type 0B

strings in various dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B558 (1999) 159–177,
arXiv:hep-th/9904069 [hep-th].

[186] R. Blumenhagen, A. Font, and D. Lust, “Nonsupersymmetric gauge theories from

D-branes in type 0 string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B560 (1999) 66–92,
arXiv:hep-th/9906101 [hep-th].

[187] C. Angelantonj and A. Armoni, “Nontachyonic type 0B orientifolds,

nonsupersymmetric gauge theories and cosmological RG ﬂow,”
Nucl. Phys. B578 (2000) 239–258, arXiv:hep-th/9912257 [hep-th].

[188] P. Liendo, “Orientifold daughter of N = 4 SYM and double-trace running,”

Phys. Rev. D86 (2012) 105032, arXiv:1107.3125 [hep-th].

[189] J. A. Minahan, “Review of AdS/CFT Integrability, Chapter I.1: Spin Chains in

N = 4 Super Yang-Mills,” Lett.Math.Phys. 99 (2012) 33–58,
arXiv:1012.3983 [hep-th].

[190] N. Arkani-Hamed, F. Cachazo, and J. Kaplan, “What is the Simplest Quantum

Field Theory?,” JHEP 1009 (2010) 016, arXiv:0808.1446 [hep-th].

[191] B. I. Zwiebel, “The psu(1, 1|2) Spin Chain of N = 4 Supersymmetric Yang-Mills
Theory,” 2007.
http://search.proquest.com/docview/304839945?accountid=38978. Ph.D.
Thesis.

[192] H. Lehmann, K. Symanzik, and W. Zimmermann, “On the formulation of

quantized ﬁeld theories,” Nuovo Cim. 1 (1955) 205–225.

[193] E. Witten, “Perturbative gauge theory as a string theory in twistor space,”

Commun.Math.Phys. 252 (2004) 189–258, arXiv:hep-th/0312171 [hep-th].

[194] T. Bargheer, N. Beisert, and F. Loebbert, “Exact Superconformal and Yangian

Symmetry of Scattering Amplitudes,” J.Phys. A44 (2011) 454012,
arXiv:1104.0700 [hep-th].

[195] L. Koster, V. Mitev, M. Staudacher, and M. Wilhelm., “Form Factors from the

Twistor Action.” In preparation.

[196] T. Kinoshita, “Mass singularities of Feynman amplitudes,”

J.Math.Phys. 3 (1962) 650–677.

170

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[197] T. Lee and M. Nauenberg, “Degenerate Systems and Mass Singularities,”

Phys.Rev. 133 (1964) B1549–B1562.

[198] G. ’t Hooft, “Dimensional regularization and the renormalization group,”

Nucl.Phys. B61 (1973) 455–468.

[199] L. J. Dixon, “Calculating scattering amplitudes eﬃciently,” in QCD and beyond.

Proceedings, Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics,
TASI-95, Boulder, USA, June 4-30, 1995. 1996.
arXiv:hep-ph/9601359 [hep-ph].

[200] Z. Bern, L. J. Dixon, and D. A. Kosower, “On-Shell Methods in Perturbative

QCD,” Annals Phys. 322 (2007) 1587–1634, arXiv:0704.2798 [hep-ph].

[201] S. Abreu, R. Britto, C. Duhr, and E. Gardi, “From multiple unitarity cuts to the

coproduct of Feynman integrals,” JHEP 1410 (2014) 125,
arXiv:1401.3546 [hep-th].

[202] R. Britto, “Loop Amplitudes in Gauge Theories: Modern Analytic Approaches,”

J. Phys. A44 (2011) 454006, arXiv:1012.4493 [hep-th].

[203] G. Passarino and M. Veltman, “One-Loop Corrections for e+e− Annihilation Into

µ+µ− in the Weinberg Model,” Nucl.Phys. B160 (1979) 151.

[204] G. Ossola, C. G. Papadopoulos, and R. Pittau, “Reducing full one-loop amplitudes

to scalar integrals at the integrand level,” Nucl.Phys. B763 (2007) 147–169,
arXiv:hep-ph/0609007 [hep-ph].

[205] D. Forde, “Direct extraction of one-loop integral coeﬃcients,”
Phys.Rev. D75 (2007) 125019, arXiv:0704.1835 [hep-ph].

[206] D. A. Kosower and K. J. Larsen, “Maximal Unitarity at Two Loops,”

Phys.Rev. D85 (2012) 045017, arXiv:1108.1180 [hep-th].

[207] J. Gluza, K. Kajda, and D. A. Kosower, “Towards a Basis for Planar Two-Loop

Integrals,” Phys.Rev. D83 (2011) 045012, arXiv:1009.0472 [hep-th].

[208] V. N. Velizhanin, “The Non-planar contribution to the four-loop universal

anomalous dimension in N = 4 Supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory,”
JETP Lett. 89 (2009) 593–596, arXiv:0902.4646 [hep-th].

[209] D. Anselmi, M. T. Grisaru, and A. Johansen, “A Critical behavior of anomalous

currents, electric - magnetic universality and CFT in four-dimensions,”
Nucl.Phys. B491 (1997) 221–248, arXiv:hep-th/9601023 [hep-th].

[210] D. Anselmi, D. Freedman, M. T. Grisaru, and A. Johansen, “Universality of the

operator product expansions of SCFT in four-dimensions,”
Phys.Lett. B394 (1997) 329–336, arXiv:hep-th/9608125 [hep-th].

[211] M. Bianchi, S. Kovacs, G. Rossi, and Y. S. Stanev, “On the logarithmic behavior in
N = 4 SYM theory,” JHEP 9908 (1999) 020, arXiv:hep-th/9906188 [hep-th].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

171

[212] M. Bianchi, S. Kovacs, G. Rossi, and Y. S. Stanev, “Anomalous dimensions in

N = 4 SYM theory at order g4,” Nucl.Phys. B584 (2000) 216–232,
arXiv:hep-th/0003203 [hep-th].

[213] B. Eden, C. Schubert, and E. Sokatchev, “Three loop four point correlator in N = 4

SYM,” Phys.Lett. B482 (2000) 309–314, arXiv:hep-th/0003096 [hep-th].

[214] B. Eden, C. Jarczak, and E. Sokatchev, “A Three-loop test of the dilatation

operator in N = 4 SYM,” Nucl.Phys. B712 (2005) 157–195,
arXiv:hep-th/0409009 [hep-th].

[215] C. Sieg, “Superspace computation of the three-loop dilatation operator of N = 4

SYM theory,” Phys.Rev. D84 (2011) 045014, arXiv:1008.3351 [hep-th].

[216] B. Eden, P. Heslop, G. P. Korchemsky, V. A. Smirnov, and E. Sokatchev,

“Five-loop Konishi in N = 4 SYM,” Nucl.Phys. B862 (2012) 123–166,
arXiv:1202.5733 [hep-th].

[217] N. Beisert, C. Kristjansen, and M. Staudacher, “The Dilatation operator of
conformal N = 4 superYang-Mills theory,” Nucl.Phys. B664 (2003) 131–184,
arXiv:hep-th/0303060 [hep-th].

[218] Z. Bajnok, A. Hegedus, R. A. Janik, and T.  Lukowski, “Five loop Konishi from

AdS/CFT,” Nucl.Phys. B827 (2010) 426–456, arXiv:0906.4062 [hep-th].

[219] G. Arutyunov, S. Frolov, and R. Suzuki, “Five-loop Konishi from the Mirror TBA,”

JHEP 1004 (2010) 069, arXiv:1002.1711 [hep-th].

[220] J. Balog and A. Hegedus, “5-loop Konishi from linearized TBA and the XXX

magnet,” JHEP 1006 (2010) 080, arXiv:1002.4142 [hep-th].

[221] Z. Bajnok and R. A. Janik, “Six and seven loop Konishi from Luscher corrections,”

JHEP 1211 (2012) 002, arXiv:1209.0791 [hep-th].

[222] S. Leurent and D. Volin, “Multiple zeta functions and double wrapping in planar

N = 4 SYM,” Nucl.Phys. B875 (2013) 757–789, arXiv:1302.1135 [hep-th].

[223] D. Volin, “Quantum spectral curve for AdS5/CFT4 spectral problem.” Talk given

at Integrability in Gauge and String Theory (IGST) 2013.

[224] Z. Bern, L. J. Dixon, and D. A. Kosower, “Progress in one loop QCD

computations,” Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 46 (1996) 109–148,
arXiv:hep-ph/9602280 [hep-ph].

[225] C. Boucher-Veronneau, L. Dixon, and J. Pennington, Unpublished notes.

[226] J. C. Collins, Renormalization, vol. 26 of Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical

Physics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1986.

[227] G. ’t Hooft and M. Veltman, “Regularization and Renormalization of Gauge

Fields,” Nucl.Phys. B44 (1972) 189–213.

[228] W. Siegel, “Supersymmetric Dimensional Regularization via Dimensional

Reduction,” Phys.Lett. B84 (1979) 193.

172

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[229] D. Capper, D. Jones, and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, “Regularization by Dimensional

Reduction of Supersymmetric and Nonsupersymmetric Gauge Theories,”
Nucl.Phys. B167 (1980) 479.

[230] Z. Bern and D. A. Kosower, “The Computation of loop amplitudes in gauge

theories,” Nucl.Phys. B379 (1992) 451–561.

[231] Z. Bern, A. De Freitas, L. J. Dixon, and H. Wong, “Supersymmetric regularization,

two loop QCD amplitudes and coupling shifts,” Phys.Rev. D66 (2002) 085002,
arXiv:hep-ph/0202271 [hep-ph].

[232] A. J. Buras and P. H. Weisz, “QCD Nonleading Corrections to Weak Decays in

Dimensional Regularization and ’t Hooft-Veltman Schemes,”
Nucl.Phys. B333 (1990) 66.

[233] W. Siegel, “Inconsistency of Supersymmetric Dimensional Regularization,”

Phys.Lett. B94 (1980) 37.

[234] L. Avdeev, G. Chochia, and A. Vladimirov, “On the Scope of Supersymmetric

Dimensional Regularization,” Phys.Lett. B105 (1981) 272.

[235] L. Avdeev, “Noninvariance of Regularization by Dimensional Reduction: An
Explicit Example of Supersymmetry Breaking,” Phys.Lett. B117 (1982) 317.

[236] L. Avdeev and A. Vladimirov, “Dimensional Regularization and Supersymmetry,”

Nucl.Phys. B219 (1983) 262.

[237] R. N. Lee, “LiteRed 1.4: a powerful tool for reduction of multiloop integrals,”

J.Phys.Conf.Ser. 523 (2014) 012059, arXiv:1310.1145 [hep-ph].

[238] T. Gehrmann and E. Remiddi, “Two loop master integrals for γ∗ −→ 3 jets: The

Planar topologies,” Nucl.Phys. B601 (2001) 248–286,
arXiv:hep-ph/0008287 [hep-ph].

[239] C. Vergu, “Lecture Notes for the Mathematica Summer School on Theoretical

Physics.” http://msstp.org/sites/default/files/Demo.nb, 2011.

[240] G. Hartwell and P. S. Howe, “(N, p, q) harmonic superspace,”

Int.J.Mod.Phys. A10 (1995) 3901–3920, arXiv:hep-th/9412147 [hep-th].

[241] B. Eden, P. Heslop, G. P. Korchemsky, and E. Sokatchev, “The

super-correlator/super-amplitude duality: Part I,”
Nucl.Phys. B869 (2013) 329–377, arXiv:1103.3714 [hep-th].

[242] N. Arkani-Hamed, F. Cachazo, C. Cheung, and J. Kaplan, “The S-Matrix in

Twistor Space,” JHEP 1003 (2010) 110, arXiv:0903.2110 [hep-th].

[243] M. Bullimore, “Inverse Soft Factors and Grassmannian Residues,”

JHEP 01 (2011) 055, arXiv:1008.3110 [hep-th].

[244] D. Nandan and C. Wen, “Generating All Tree Amplitudes in N = 4 SYM by

Inverse Soft Limit,” JHEP 1208 (2012) 040, arXiv:1204.4841 [hep-th].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

173

[245] A. Postnikov, “Total positivity, Grassmannians, and networks,”

arXiv:math/0609764 [math.CO].

[246] J. L. Bourjaily, “Positroids, Plabic Graphs, and Scattering Amplitudes in

Mathematica,” arXiv:1212.6974 [hep-th].

[247] L. D. Faddeev, “How algebraic Bethe ansatz works for integrable model,” in

Relativistic gravitation and gravitational radiation. Proceedings, School of Physics,
Les Houches, France, September 26-October 6, 1995, pp. 149–219. 1996.
arXiv:hep-th/9605187 [hep-th].

[248] B. Sutherland, “Exact Solution of a Two-Dimensional Model for Hydrogen-Bonded

Crystals,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 19 (Jul, 1967) 103–104.

[249] E. K. Sklyanin, “Quantum inverse scattering method. Selected topics,”

arXiv:hep-th/9211111 [hep-th].

[250] Y. Kazama, S. Komatsu, and T. Nishimura, “On the singlet projector and the
monodromy relation for psu(2, 2|4) spin chains and reduction to subsectors,”
JHEP 09 (2015) 183, arXiv:1506.03203 [hep-th].

[251] H. Elvang, Y.-t. Huang, C. Keeler, T. Lam, T. M. Olson, S. B. Roland, and D. E.

Speyer, “Grassmannians for scattering amplitudes in 4d N = 4 SYM and 3d
ABJM,” JHEP 1412 (2014) 181, arXiv:1410.0621 [hep-th].

[252] J. Fokken, Ph.D. thesis, to appear.

[253] V. V. Khoze, “Amplitudes in the β-deformed conformal Yang-Mills,”

JHEP 0602 (2006) 040, arXiv:hep-th/0512194 [hep-th].

[254] D. Berenstein, V. Jejjala, and R. G. Leigh, “Marginal and relevant deformations of

N = 4 ﬁeld theories and noncommutative moduli spaces of vacua,”
Nucl.Phys. B589 (2000) 196–248, arXiv:hep-th/0005087 [hep-th].

[255] D. Berenstein and R. G. Leigh, “Discrete torsion, AdS/CFT and duality,”

JHEP 0001 (2000) 038, arXiv:hep-th/0001055 [hep-th].

[256] J. R. David and A. Sadhukhan, “Structure constants of β deformed super

Yang-Mills,” JHEP 10 (2013) 206, arXiv:1307.3909 [hep-th].

[257] Q. Jin and R. Roiban, “On the non-planar β-deformed N = 4 super-Yang-Mills

theory,” J.Phys. A45 (2012) 295401, arXiv:1201.5012 [hep-th].

[258] S. Penati, A. Santambrogio, and D. Zanon, “Two-point correlators in the

β-deformed N = 4 SYM at the next-to-leading order,” JHEP 0510 (2005) 023,
arXiv:hep-th/0506150 [hep-th].

[259] A. Dymarsky and R. Roiban., unpublished.

[260] Q. Jin, “The Emergence of Supersymmetry in γi-deformed N = 4 super-Yang-Mills

theory,” arXiv:1311.7391 [hep-th].

174

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[261] F. Ferrari, M. Moskovic, and A. Rovai, “Examples of Emergent Type IIB

Backgrounds from Matrices,” Nucl. Phys. B872 (2013) 184–212,
arXiv:1301.3738 [hep-th].

[262] M. Spradlin, T. Takayanagi, and A. Volovich, “String theory in beta deformed

spacetimes,” JHEP 11 (2005) 039, arXiv:hep-th/0509036 [hep-th].

[263] O. Aharony, O. Bergman, D. L. Jaﬀeris, and J. Maldacena, “N = 6 superconformal

Chern-Simons-matter theories, M2-branes and their gravity duals,”
JHEP 10 (2008) 091, arXiv:0806.1218 [hep-th].

[264] O. Aharony, O. Bergman, and D. L. Jaﬀeris, “Fractional M2-branes,”

JHEP 11 (2008) 043, arXiv:0807.4924 [hep-th].

[265] A. Gadde, E. Pomoni, and L. Rastelli, “The Veneziano Limit of N = 2

Superconformal QCD: Towards the String Dual of N = 2 SU(Nc) SYM with Nf =
2 Nc,” arXiv:0912.4918 [hep-th].

[266] J. A. Minahan, O. Ohlsson Sax, and C. Sieg, “Magnon dispersion to four loops in

the ABJM and ABJ models,” J. Phys. A43 (2010) 275402,
arXiv:0908.2463 [hep-th].

[267] J. A. Minahan, O. Ohlsson Sax, and C. Sieg, “Anomalous dimensions at four loops

in N = 6 superconformal Chern-Simons theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B846 (2011) 542–606, arXiv:0912.3460 [hep-th].

[268] M. Leoni, A. Mauri, J. A. Minahan, O. Ohlsson Sax, A. Santambrogio, C. Sieg, and

G. Tartaglino-Mazzucchelli, “Superspace calculation of the four-loop spectrum in
N = 6 supersymmetric Chern-Simons theories,” JHEP 12 (2010) 074,
arXiv:1010.1756 [hep-th].

[269] E. Pomoni and C. Sieg, “From N = 4 gauge theory to N = 2 conformal QCD:
three-loop mixing of scalar composite operators,” arXiv:1105.3487 [hep-th].

[270] O. Aharony, G. Gur-Ari, and N. Klinghoﬀer, “The Holographic Dictionary for Beta

Functions of Multi-trace Coupling Constants,” JHEP 05 (2015) 031,
arXiv:1501.06664 [hep-th].

[271] D. J. Broadhurst, “Evaluation of a Class of Feynman Diagrams for All Numbers of

Loops and Dimensions,” Phys.Lett. B164 (1985) 356.

[272] D. Chicherin, R. Doobary, B. Eden, P. Heslop, G. P. Korchemsky, and

E. Sokatchev, “Bootstrapping correlation functions in N = 4 SYM,”
arXiv:1506.04983 [hep-th].

[273] R. Boels, L. J. Mason, and D. Skinner, “Supersymmetric Gauge Theories in

Twistor Space,” JHEP 02 (2007) 014, arXiv:hep-th/0604040 [hep-th].

[274] Z. Bern and G. Chalmers, “Factorization in one-loop gauge theory,”

Nucl.Phys. B447 (1995) 465–518, arXiv:hep-ph/9503236 [hep-ph].

[275] V. A. Smirnov, “Evaluating Feynman integrals,” Springer Tracts Mod.Phys. 211

(2004) 1–244.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

175

[276] T. Gehrmann, T. Huber, and D. Maitre, “Two-loop quark and gluon form-factors

in dimensional regularisation,” Phys.Lett. B622 (2005) 295–302,
arXiv:hep-ph/0507061 [hep-ph].

[277] J. Zinn-Justin, “Quantum ﬁeld theory and critical phenomena,”

Int.Ser.Monogr.Phys. 113 (2002) 1–1054.

