6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
3
 
 
]
l
e
-
r
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
5
1
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

March 4, 2016

Unconventional superconductivity and interaction induced Fermi

surface reconstruction in the two-dimensional Edwards model

Dai-Ning Cho1, Jeroen van den Brink1, Holger

Fehske2, Klaus W. Becker3, and Steﬀen Sykora1*

1IFW Dresden, P.O. Box 270116,

01171 Dresden, Germany

2Institut f¨ur Physik,

Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Universit¨at Greifswald,

D-17487 Greifswald, Germany

3Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik,

Technische Universit¨at Dresden,

D-01062 Dresden, Germany

*Correspondence to [s.sykora@ifw-dresden.de]

Abstract

We study the competition between unconventional superconducting pairing and charge density

wave (CDW) formation for the two-dimensional Edwards Hamiltonian at half ﬁlling, a very gen-

eral two-dimensional transport model in which fermionic charge carriers couple to a correlated

background medium. Using the projective renormalization method we ﬁnd that a strong renor-

malization of the original fermionic band causes a new hole-like Fermi surface to emerge near the

center of the Brillouin zone, before it eventually gives rise to the formation of a charge density

wave. On the new, disconnected parts of the Fermi surface superconductivity is induced with a

sign-changing order parameter. We discuss these ﬁndings in the light of recent experiments on

iron-based oxypnictide superconductors.

PACS numbers: 71.28.+d, 71.35.Lk, 71.30.+h

1

Introduction

In a number of superconducting (SC) materials the pairing interaction is not predom-

inantly mediated by phonons, but rather by electron-electron interactions, for instance

in the guise of spin ﬂuctuations in the recently discovered extended family of iron-based

superconductors1–3. Electron-electron interactions, however, are also driving the metallic

ground state towards other long-range ordered states, in particular spin4,5- or charge-density

waves6-8 (CDWs). A minimal model to eﬀectively describe these interactions considers

fermionic charge carriers in the presence of a correlated background that is provided by

bosonic modes in the particle’s immediate vicinity which take an active part in the trans-

port of the fermions9. Such a picture is very general with wide applicability, for example to

the case of charge transport in high-temperature SC materials10-12 where superconductivity

appears close to magnetically ordered phases13.

The fundamental question arises whether there is a SC state where the Cooper pairing is

solely based on electron-electron interaction and in particular whether and how such a phase

competes with other ordered states mediated by the same generic background correlations.

An eﬀective lattice model which mimics quantum transport in a correlated background is

the Edwards fermion-boson model14,

H/tb = −(cid:88)

(cid:104)i,j(cid:105)

†
jci(b

i + bj) − Λ
†

c

(cid:88)

i

†
i + bi) + Ω

(b

(cid:88)

i

†
i bi,

b

(1)

which is here considered for a 2D square lattice. It describes the hopping of spinless fermions

between nearest-neighbor sites i and j aﬀected by a correlated background medium mod-

elled by bosonic degrees of freedom. Local excitations and quantum ﬂuctuations in the

background medium are parametrized by dimensionless parameters Ω and Λ, which give the

energy cost of a bosonic excitation and the ability of the background to relax, respectively.

Originally, the Edwards model was introduced to describe the motion of a spinless particle in

an antiferromagnetic correlated spin background - like a hole in the t-J model. In this con-

text the Edwards model is relevant to charge transport in high-temperature superconductors

at doping levels close to an antiferromagnetically ordered state15 but also in other materials

with related models with spin degrees of freedom16. The advantage of the Edwards model is

that the correlated spin background is parametrized by bosonic degrees of freedom, which

might be represented, for example, by Schwinger bosons. Thus, in the Edwards model the

2

charge carriers are modelled by spinless fermions, whereas the background spin correlations

are represented by bosons. Therefore, the 2D Edwards Hamiltonian (1) also allows the study

of superconductivity using spinless fermions and the spin degrees of freedom are modelled

by bosons in a way described above.

Shortly after its introduction the model (1) was solved numerically for a single particle in

1D by a variational diagonalization technique15, and in 2D treated approximatively by the

momentum-average approach17. The many-particle case has been studied intensively for the

1D system within DMRG, where a surprisingly rich phase diagram has been found, including

metallic repulsive and attractive Tomonaga-Luttinger-liquid phases, insulating CDW states

at half-ﬁlling18,19 and one-third-ﬁlling20, and regions with phase separation21.

In this work, we exploit the projective renormalization method (PRM)22 to the Edwards

model at half-ﬁlling and ﬁnd an intricate interplay between stable superconducting and

charge-density wave states, that strongly depends on the excitation energy of the correlated

background medium. The original fermionic band is strongly renormalized by the coupling to

the bosonic modes, which can give rise to an entirely new hole-like part of the Fermi surface

(FS) close to the center of the Brillouin zone. The superconducting order parameter has a

diﬀerent sign on the two disconnected parts of the FS that subsequently emerge. Such an

interaction induced Fermi surface reconstruction has been observed in recent experiments

on oxypnictide superconductors where indeed also sign-changing s± superconductivity is

present.

Before discussing the results of our many-particle method for the Edwards model in 2D

we start with an appropriate reformulation of Hamiltonian (1) in such a way that a coupled

system of free fermions and bosons is obtained. Fourier transformation, introduction of

ﬂuctuation operators for fermions, and elimination of the linear term of bosonic operators
as shown in Ref.19 allows the following decomposition H = H0 + H1 in momentum space,

(cid:88)

k

1√
N

εkδ(c

(cid:88)

kq

H0 =

H1 =

(cid:88)

q

†
kck) + Ωtb

(cid:104)

qbq − N
b†

Ωt2
f
4tb

,

(cid:105)

,

(2)

(3)

b†
qδ(c

†
kck+q) + bqδ(c

†
k+qck)

gk

(1/N )(cid:80)

where εk = −2t(cos kxa + cos kya), gk = −2tb(cos kxa + cos kya), and t = (2tb/Ω)[Λ −
kck(cid:105)]. Here a is the lattice constant of the 2D square lattice with N
†
kck+q(cid:105) were introduced in order to
†

sites. Fluctuation operators δ(c

k(gk/tb)(cid:104)c

†
kck+q) = c

kck+q − (cid:104)c
†

3

attribute the mean-ﬁeld contributions to the free term H0, which simpliﬁes the solution of
the many-body problem by the projective renormalization method (PRM).

Results

One of the main aims of our work is to discuss the question whether the Edwards

model provides an attractive pairing interaction.

If so, we have to clarify its structure

in momentum space and in which parameter space the SC phase is stable with respect

to other ordered states. To reveal a possible SC pairing mechanism an approximate

be derived from the PRM renormalization equations, ˜∆k ≈ (1/N )(cid:80)

BCS-like relation between the SC order parameter and pairing correlation function can
q Vk,q(cid:104)c−qcq(cid:105), where
Vk,q is an approximate analytic expression for the momentum-dependent pairing potential,
Vk,q = −4gkgk+q ˜ωq/[˜ω2
q − (˜εk − ˜εk+q)2]. The momentum-dependent quantities ˜εk and ˜ωq
are determined self-consistently by the PRM approach and they describe the fully renor-

malized one-particle energies of the fermions and bosons, respectively (compare Eq. (5)
from the Methods section). According to the prefactor gk = −2tb(cos kxa + cos kya), the
pairing potential becomes strongly momentum-dependent with a sign-change indicating an

unconventional Cooper pairing mechanism.

We have evaluated the PRM renormalization equations in the half-ﬁlled band case, i.e. for

Ne/N = 0.5, where Ne is the number of fermionic particles, and have varied the parameter

Ω. The second parameter Λ was ﬁxed to a very small value Λ = 0.001 describing a rather

stiﬀ, strongly correlated background which supports the formation of ordered states, as for

example the SC and CDW states. As a result we found that the 2D Edwards model forms

three diﬀerent ground states. A metallic state at small values of Ω, a SC state in a narrow
region for intermediate values of the bosonic energy, Ω ≈ 2.8··· 3.5, and a quantum phase
transition to a CDW state for large values of Ω, which is a characteristic ground state in

the limit of large background excitations energies.

In Fig. 1(a) a SC solution at Ω = 3.27 is shown. Here the SC pairing correlation function
(cid:104)c−kck(cid:105) and the pairing potential Vk=0,q/tb are given along momentum cuts in the main
symmetry directions. Most notably, we ﬁnd a pronounced tendency towards electron pairing

in a certain momentum region around the Γ point k = (0, 0), where also an attractive pairing

potential evolves. As is shown further below, the SC state is accompanied by the appearance

4

of a new Fermi surface formed around the Γ point in the course of band renormalization,

which appears for a speciﬁc range of Ω values. Note that the pairing potential is also negative

around (π, π), where, however, SC pairing is suppressed due to the absence of fermionic low-

energy states. The jump in the pairing potential appearing in Fig. 1(a) at momenta where
˜εk ≈ ˜ωq is an artifact of the speciﬁc perturbative shape of Vk,q. In the actual calculations
this divergency is removed by renormalization contributions up to inﬁnite order in gk.

Fig. 1(b) shows solutions of the renormalized SC and CDW order parameters ∆SC = ˜∆SC
kF
(kF : Fermi momentum) as a function of Ω. Thereby the normalization

and ∆CDW = ˜∆CDW

kF

factors BW in Fig. 1(b) are the band widths of the corresponding renormalized fermionic

quasiparticle bands.

To characterize the three phases in more detail, in Fig. 2 we have considered the fully

renormalized one-particle energies ˜εk (left panels) and ˜ωq (right panels) in the entire Brillouin

zone. First, for a small value Ω = 2, we ﬁnd typical metallic behavior with a strong

dispersion ˜εk, which corresponds to the quasiparticle energy. For larger values of Ω, ˜εk

changes dramatically as can be seen for Ω = 3.27. In this regime, the bosonic energy is

in the same order as the renormalized fermionic bandwidth. Moreover, ˜εk is shifted to

values very close to the Fermi level in a certain region in momentum space. The strong
renormalization leads to a new hole-like Fermi surface appearing at momentum kF ≈ 0.16π,
which describes an unoccupied area around the Γ point. According to Fig. 1(a) the states

inside this region have been detected to be responsible for the formation of the SC state.

However, the low-energy states along the outer Fermi surface are not involved in the SC

pairing, because there the pairing potential is zero. For the same reason, combinations of

inter-pocket scattering vectors between inner and outer Fermi surface parts do not contribute

to the pairing. For still larger Ω inside the CDW regime the SC state is suppressed, due to

the absence of a Fermi surface in a momentum region with negative pairing potential. As

in the metallic state, the normal state Fermi surface runs along the line where gk is zero,

leading to a suppression of the pairing potential.

For the SC gap we ﬁnd constant values along the two Fermi surface parts and a charac-
teristic sign change between them. At Ω = 3.27 we have computed the values ∆1 = 1.3·10−2
and ∆2 = −2.0·10−4 (in terms of the renormalized bandwidth) for the inner hole pocket and
the outer part, respectively. Thus, along the outer Fermi surface the gap value is non-zero
but very small, |∆2| (cid:28) |∆1|, which suppresses the pairing function (cid:104)c−kck(cid:105) in Fig. 1(a)

5

upon crossing the outer Fermi surface. The sign-change on disconnected parts of the Fermi

surface, with s-wave pairing on each disjunct part is often denoted as s± superconductiv-
ity in the context of iron-based pnictide superconductors23. The remarkable feature in the

half-ﬁlled Edwards model is not as much the s± symmetry of the superconducting order

parameter, but rather that the interactions induce a change in the topology of the Fermi

surface – a Lifshitz transition. Such an interaction-induced Fermi-surface reconstruction was

recently observed in a prototypical compound 1111-type iron-based oxypnictide supercon-

ductor, SmFe0.92Co0.08AsO, which has a Tc of 55 K. Angle resolved photoemission (ARPES)

experiments show that its Fermi surface is reconstructed by the edges of several bands that

are pulled to the Fermi level from the depths of the theoretical band structure24. This type

of Fermi surface reconstruction is argued to be correlated with the maximally attainable

superconducting transition temperature in iron-based superconductors.

In particular our

observation of a rather high density of states in the vicinity of the inner hole pocket giving

rise to the strong Cooper pairing around the Γ point is consistent with these ARPES results.

For larger Ω > 4.19 the hole-like Fermi surface disappears again. For Ω > 6.2 we ﬁnd

a CDW ordered state characterized by a gap in the fermionic quasiparticle spectrum. A

representative CDW solution is shown in Fig. 2 at Ω = 8 (left panel). The gap opens along
the black solid line connecting the momentum vectors (0,±π) and (±π, 0) and is reﬂected in
a jump of the color code. Note that between Ω ≈ 3.5 and Ω ≈ 6.1 no stable CDW solution
was found so that no reliable statement can be given for this interval.

Finally, let us characterize the diﬀerent regimes from the viewpoint of the background

correlations.

In Fig. 2 (right panel) the renormalized bosonic energy ˜ωq/(Ωtb) describes

the excitations in the background which have acquired a dispersion from the coupling to the

fermions. This renormalization is a consequence of an eﬀective non-local interaction between

bosons, which is mediated by higher-order contributions in the fermion-boson coupling. As a

result the frequency of the boson either increases (hardens) or decreases (weakens). However,

a real soft-mode behavior as it is discussed for instance in the context of structural phase

transitions is not observed in the Edwards model in any parameter regime. First, the metallic

state (Ω = 2.0) is characterized by a lowering of the eﬀective background energy indicating an

attractive Fermi liquid. Here the transport is accompanied by a ’cloud’ of bosonic excitations

similar to the large polaron formation in the presence of phonons. In particular, in the SC

state (Ω = 3.27) an interesting structure of the background energy distribution is found in

6

momentum space. The ﬁgure shows that ˜ωq increases inside a Brillouin zone region (green

and yellow color), which is bounded by scattering vectors q that roughly fulﬁll the resonance
condition |˜εk − ˜εk+q| ≈ ˜ωq. This leads to a large renormalization with a characteristic
change from hardening to softening. Such a behavior is also seen in the jump of the pairing

potential in Fig. 1(b) which, however, appears at diﬀerent momentum vectors due to the

ﬁxed k vector. Inside the boson hardening region we can identify the momentum vectors

of the particular bosons which are involved in the SC pairing (represented by two purple

arrows in Fig. 2). They connect states inside the new inner hole pocket where the pairing

correlation function is non-zero. Finally, in the CDW regime (Ω = 8.0) the softening area

disappears completely and no states are available to form Cooper pairs. Here ˜ωq/(Ωtb) > 1

throughout the Brillouin zone and the momentum dependence of the background excitation

energy is inverted with respect to the metallic state emphasizing strongly repulsive particle-

particle interaction, leading immediately to a breakup of any pairing. The hardening is a

characteristic feature of the CDW phase and has already been found in 1D19.

Conclusions. We have studied the interplay between unconventional superconductivity

and CDW order within a generic fermion-boson transport model in 2D. In the half-ﬁlled

case stable SC solutions besides a CDW state were found. The SC state is stabilized by an

attractive pairing on an additional hole-like Fermi surface around the center of the Brillouin

zone which arises through a strong renormalization of the bare fermionic bandstructure.

The highly unconventional pairing mechanism is due to interaction processes of inﬁnite

order in the coupling gk between spinless fermions and background correlations, leading to

a momentum-dependent pairing potential which forms a SC state with possible variation of
the order parameter phase. Fourier transformation of the ˜∆k solution to real space leads
to a rather local pairing between next nearest lattice sites. It follows that the character of

the SC pairing is inﬂuenced by ﬂuctuations of the competing charge ordered state. These

results are highly relevant for the currently investigated iron-based oxypnictides.

Methods

Following the basic idea of Ref.19 the interaction part H1, given by Eq. (3), is integrated
out by a series of unitary transformations starting from large to zero transition energies.

Assuming that all transitions with energies larger than some energy cutoﬀ λ have already

7

been integrated out, the transformed Hamiltonian Hλ consists of a part which has the same
operator structure as Eqs. (2) and (3), but with λ-dependent parameters, and an additional

k[∆k,λc

†
kc

†
−k + ∆∗

k,λc−kck] allowing for possible SC solutions based on an

term of the form(cid:80)

unconventional Cooper pairing of spinless fermions.

Evaluating the unitary transformation up to order g2

k, discrete renormalization equations
for all λ-dependent parameters are obtained, which connect the parameters at cutoﬀ λ with
those at λ− ∆λ. The discrete renormalization equation for the SC order parameter function
reads

∆k,λ−∆λ − ∆k,λ = −2gk
N

gk+q(cid:104)c−(k+q)ck+q(cid:105) ×

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

Θ∆λ
k,q,λΘk+q,−q,λ
εk,λ − εk+q,λ + ωq,λ
k,q,λ = Θk,q,λ(1−Θk,q,λ−∆λ) with Θk,q,λ = Θ(λ−|εk,λ−εk+q,λ+ωq,λ|)
restrict the momentum sum to excitation energies within a small energy shell ∆λ. This

where the Θ-functions Θ∆λ

(4)

+

,

q
Θk,q,λΘ∆λ
k+q,−q,λ
εk+q,λ − εk,λ + ωq,λ

allows to apply perturbation theory in each small renormalization step. However, the overall

renormalization is far beyond perturbation theory and renormalization processes to inﬁnite

order in the coupling gk are taken into account. Furthermore, note that in each single

renormalization step a factorization approximation leads to the appearance of expectation

values in the renormalization equations19.

The renormalization approach starts by reducing λ in steps ∆λ until λ = 0 is reached.

This is achieved by numerical evaluation of the renormalization equations. Then, all transi-
tions from H1 are used up and the fully renormalized Hamiltonian ˜H = Hλ=0 describes an
uncoupled system of bosons and spinless fermions, which can be SC ( ˜∆k (cid:54)= 0) depending on
the chosen initial parameter set: The fully renormalized Hamiltonian reads

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

(cid:88)

˜H =

†
kck + ( ˜∆kc

†
kc

†
−k + h.c.)

˜εkc

+

˜ωqb†

qbq.

(5)

k

q

The PRM described in Ref.19 also allows the calculation of expectation values, (cid:104)A(cid:105) =
(cid:104) ˜A(cid:105) ˜H, where ˜A is the fully renormalized quantity using the same set of unitary transfor-
mations as for ˜H. An example is the pairing expectation value (cid:104)c−kck(cid:105) from Eq. (4). In
a second step the renormalization procedure starts again with the improved expectation
values (cid:104)c−kck(cid:105) by reducing again the cutoﬀ from its maximum value ¯λ to λ = 0. After a

8

suﬃcient number of such cycles, the expectation values are converged and the renormaliza-

tion equation (4) is solved self-consistently. Besides SC order we also take into account a

possible CDW order (not included in Eq. (5)), a phase that is expected to be present at

half-ﬁlling18,19.

1 Mazin, I. I., Singh, D. J., Johannes, M. D. & Du, M. H. Unconventional Superconductivity

with a Sign Reversal in the Order Parameter of LaFeAsO1−xFx. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 057003

(2008).

2 Kuroki, K., et al. Unconventional Pairing Originating from the Disconnected Fermi Surfaces of

Superconducting LaFeAsO1−xFx. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 087004 (2008).

3 Tsuei, C. C. & Kirtley, J. R. Pairing symmetry in cuprate superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys.

72, 969 (2000).

4 Millis, A. J., Schoﬁeld, A. J., Lonzarich, G. G. & Grigeria, S. A. Metamagnetic Quantum

Criticality in Metals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 217204 (2002).

5 Lester, C., et al. Field-tunable spin-density-wave phases in Sr3Ru2O7. Nature Materials 14,

373 (2015).

6 Johannes, M. D. & Mazin, I. I. Fermi surface nesting and the origin of charge density waves in

metals. Phys. Rev. B 77, 165135 (2008).

7 Hellmann, S., et al. Time-domain classiﬁcation of charge-density-wave insulators. Nature Com-

munications 3, 1069 (2012).

8 Watanabe, H., Seki, K. & Yunoki, S. Charge-density wave induced by combined electron-

electron and electron-phonon interactions in 1T -TiSe2: A variational Monte Carlo study. Phys.

Rev. B 91, 205135 (2015).

9 Berciu, M. Viewpoint: Challenging a hole to move through an ordered insulator. Physics 2, 55

(2009).

10 Wu, T., et al. Magnetic-ﬁeld-induced charge-stripe order in the high-temperature superconduc-

tor YBa2Cu3Oy. Nature 477, 191 (2011).

11 Chang, J., et al. Direct observation of competition between superconductivity and charge

density wave order in YBa2Cu3O6.67. Nature Physics 8, 871 (2012).

12 Ghiringhelli, G.,

et

al.

Long-Range

Incommensurate Charge Fluctuations

in

9

(Y,Nd)Ba2Cu3O6+x. Science 337, 821 (2012).

13 Wohlfeld, K., Oles, A. M. & Horsch, P. Orbitally induced string formation in the spin-orbital

polarons. Phys. Rev. B 79, 224433 (2009).

14 Edwards, D. M. A quantum phase transition in a model with boson-controlled hopping. Physica

B 378-380, 133 (2006).

15 Alvermann, A., Edwards, D. M. & Fehske, H. Boson-Controlled Quantum Transport. Phys.

Rev. Lett. 98, 056602 (2007).

16 Edwards, D. M., Ejima, S., Alvermann, A. & Fehske, H. A Green’s function decoupling scheme

for the Edwards fermion-boson model. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 22, 435601

(2010).

17 Berciu, M. & Fehske, H.. Momentum average approximation for models with boson-modulated

hopping: Role of closed loops in the dynamical generation of a ﬁnite quasiparticle mass. Phys.

Rev. B 82, 085116 (2010).

18 Ejima, S., Hager, G. & Fehske, H. Quantum Phase Transition in a 1D Transport Model with

Boson-Aﬀected Hopping: Luttinger Liquid versus Charge-Density-Wave Behavior. Phys. Rev.

Lett. 102, 106404 (2009).

19 Sykora, S., Becker, K. W. & Fehske, H. Charge-density-wave formation in a half-ﬁlled fermion-

boson transport model: A projective renormalization approach. Phys. Rev. B 81, 195127

(2010).

20 Ejima, S. & Fehske, H. Charge-Density-Wave Formation in the Edwards Fermion-Boson Model

at One-Third Band Filling. JPS Conf. Proc. 3, 013006 (2014).

21 Ejima, S., Sykora, S., Becker, K. W. & Fehske, H. Phase separation in the Edwards model.

Phys. Rev. B 86, 155149 (2012).

22 Becker, K. W., H¨ubsch, A. & Sommer, T. Renormalization approach to many-particle systems.

Phys. Rev. B 66, 235115 (2002).

23 Johnston, D. C. The puzzle of high temperature superconductivity in layered iron pnictides

and chalcogenides. Adv. Phys. 59, 803 (2010).

24 Charnukha, A., et al. Interaction-induced singular Fermi surface in a high-temperature oxyp-

nictide superconductor. Sci. Rep. 5, 10392 (2015).

10

Author contributions

S.S. and H.F. initiated the project. D.N.C. and S.S. developed the theory. D.N.C.

performed the numerical calculations. S.S., H.F., K.W.B., and J.v.d.B. wrote the main

manuscript text and D.N.C. and S.S. prepared the ﬁgures. All authors discussed the results

and reviewed the manuscript.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank S. Ejima, G. Hager, K. Koepernick, and D. Efremov for helpful

discussions. This work was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the

Collaborative Reserach Center SFB 1143, and SFB 652 B5 (H.F.).

11

FIG. 1: Panel (a): Momentum cuts along the symmetry directions Γ ⇒ X ⇒ M ⇒ Γ in the
SC regime at Ω = 3.27 for the pairing correlation function (cid:104)c−kck(cid:105) (left axis) and approximate
pairing potential Vk,q/tb (right axis) where k is set to k = (0, 0). The pairing potential is negative

in a certain region around the Γ-point leading to attractive pairing inside the inner hole pocket

which is indicated by a non-zero pairing correlation function. Panel (b): Renormalized SC order

parameter ∆SC (red solid line) and charge-density wave order parameter ∆CDW (blue dashed line)

as a function of the bosonic energy Ω. The order parameter values are related to the respective

band widths (BW) of the renormalized fermionic bands for the two cases. The lattice grid is
100×100 and the temperature is set to zero.

12

FIG. 2: Fully renormalized quasiparticle energies ˜εk/tb = εk,λ=0/tb (left panels) and ˜ωq/(Ωtb) =

ωq,λ=0/(Ωtb) (right panels) of fermions and bosons in the 2D square lattice Brillouin zone for

Λ = 0.001 and diﬀerent values of Ω. Ωtb is the bare bosonic energy. The Fermi surface (black

dotted line) and the strong dispersion of ˜εk/tb indicate metallic behavior at Ω = 2. In the SC

state (Ω = 3.27) the momentum dependence of ˜εk/tb changes qualitatively, forming a new hole-like
Fermi surface around the center of the Brillouin zone. The momentum vectors with |˜εk| < ∆SC
(white dots), where ∆SC is the SC gap, indicate the position of the respective normal state Fermi

surface. It is split into two disconnected parts. Arrows mark representative dominant processes

stabilizing the SC state by virtual bosons. For Ω = 8 a CDW state is found. The formation of

the CDW gap is indicated by the black lines, which also encompass the reduced Brillouin zone in

the CDW phase. The remaining area describes the second quasiparticle band which can be back

folded by the CDW ordering vector Q = (π, π) to the reduced Brillouin zone.

13

