Prepared for submission to JHEP

Cavendish-HEP-16/03
TUM-HEP-1037/16
March 4, 2016

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
8
7
1
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Oﬀ-shell single-top production at NLO matched to
parton showers

R. Frederix,a S. Frixione,b A.S. Papanastasiou,c S. Prestel,d and P. Torriellie

aPhysik Department T31, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, James-Franck-Str. 1,
D-85748 Garching, Germany
bINFN, Sezione di Genova, Via Dodecaneso 33, I-16146, Genoa, Italy
cCavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, J.J. Thomson Avenue,
CB3 0HE, Cambridge, UK
dSLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, 2575 Sand Hill Road,
Menlo Park, CA 94025-7090 USA
eDipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Torino and INFN, Sezione di Torino,
Via P. Giuria 1, I-10125, Turin, Italy

E-mail: rikkert.frederix@tum.de, Stefano.Frixione@cern.ch,
andrewp@hep.phy.cam.ac.uk, prestel@slac.standford.edu,
torriell@to.infn.it

Abstract: We study the hadroproduction of a W b pair in association with a light jet, fo-
cusing on the dominant t-channel contribution and including exactly at the matrix-element
level all non-resonant and oﬀ-shell eﬀects induced by the ﬁnite top-quark width. Our simu-
lations are accurate to the next-to-leading order in QCD, and are matched to the Herwig6
and Pythia8 parton showers through the MC@NLO method. We present phenomeno-
logical results relevant to the 8 TeV LHC, and carry out a thorough comparison to the
case of on-shell t-channel single-top production. We formulate our approach so that it
can be applied to the general case of matrix elements that feature coloured intermediate
resonances and are matched to parton showers.

Keywords: QCD, NLO computations, oﬀ-shell eﬀects, single top, parton showers.

2

4
4
6
7

11
11
13
15
16
18
21
24
26

28

29

32

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Matching setup, subtleties and technicalities

2.1

Integration of subtracted cross sections with resonances
2.1.1 Treatment of resonances in FKS

2.2 Matching to parton showers

3 Results

3.1 Single-top hadroproduction: process deﬁnition and approximations
3.2 Diﬀerential distributions

Invariant mass of reconstructed top quark, M (W +, Jb)

3.2.1 Transverse momentum of reconstructed top quark, pT (W +, Jb)
3.2.2 Transverse momentum of primary b-jet, pT (Jb)
3.2.3
3.2.4 Mass of primary b-jet, M (Jb)
3.2.5 Relative transverse momentum of primary b-jet, pT,rel(Jb)
3.2.6

Invariant mass of lepton+b-jet system, M (l+, Jb)

4 Conclusions and outlook

A Technicalities on the treatment of resonances

References

– 1 –

1 Introduction

Single-top production at hadron colliders has continued to be an active ﬁeld of research,
challenging both experimental and theoretical communities, since its observation at the
Tevatron [1, 2]. Measurements of the dominant t-channel subprocess have been presented
by CDF and D0 [3–5] at the Tevatron, as well as by the ATLAS [6–8] and CMS [9–11]
collaborations, at both the 7 TeV and 8 TeV LHC, with preliminary results [12, 13] available
at 13 TeV as well. This channel has also been exploited by the ATLAS collaboration in the
ﬁrst top-mass extraction from single-top events in ref. [14]. More recently, experimental
evidence has been found [15–18] of s- and W t-channel production, which are characterised
by cross sections smaller than that of the t channel. Single top production has been shown
to be sensitive to anomalous tW b-couplings (see for example refs. [19, 20]), and eﬀorts are
being made by experiments [21, 22] to use the t-channel process to search for such features.
Furthermore, with increased statistics at run II of the LHC, measurements of the top-quark
decay products and of diﬀerential quantities will be possible with vastly improved precision.
With a view to matching the progress achieved on the experimental side, it is important
to review, assess and improve the current theoretical predictions available for single-top
production. Top quarks are never observed as stable particles, but rather their production
is inferred through a kinematic reconstruction of their decay products (jets, leptons and
missing energy). Theoretical predictions, whenever possible, should therefore reﬂect this
fact, namely they should deal with top decay products instead of stable top quarks as
primary objects. This is particularly important for observables sensitive to the decay and
oﬀ-shellness of the top, as well as for those sensitive to non-resonant contributions, which
are completely missing in the stable-top approximation.

Nonetheless, the current theoretical standard only partially fulﬁls this requirement.
State-of-the-art predictions at the hadron level for this process are obtained through NLO-
matching with parton showers (NLO+PS) both in the four- and ﬁve-ﬂavour schemes [23–
25] in the MC@NLO [26] and POWHEG [27, 28] approaches, assuming stable-top hard
matrix elements.
In such setups, the top-quark decay is performed with LO accuracy,
and the oﬀ-shellness of the top propagator is introduced through a simple Breit-Wigner
smearing, either by the PS itself, or at the matrix-element level (which allows one to
correctly account for both production and decay spin correlations) by applying the method
introduced in ref. [29]. At ﬁxed order, alongside the NLO corrections to the production,
NLO corrections to the decay of the top quark have been included in the narrow-width
approximation (NWA) [30–33]. A systematic treatment of oﬀ-shell eﬀects for resonant top
quarks was ﬁrst presented in refs. [34, 35], using an eﬀective-theory-inspired generalisation
of the pole expansion. The NLO corrections to the t-channel process with full oﬀ-shell and
non-resonant eﬀects have been computed in ref. [36] by adopting the complex-mass scheme
(CMS) [37, 38].

Including NLO QCD corrections to the top decay has been shown to play a signiﬁcant
role, especially for observables such as transverse momentum of the b-jet or the invariant
mass of the lepton+b-jet system [33, 39]. Additionally, treating the top quark as on-shell
(as in the NWA) or oﬀ-shell can also lead to striking diﬀerences in the NLO predictions of

– 2 –

experimentally relevant observables [34–36], a prime example being the invariant mass of
the reconstructed top (see also refs. [40–42] for similar features in t¯t production). In light
of these observations at ﬁxed order, understanding to what extent these eﬀects survive
the showering and hadronisation stages in a Monte Carlo (MC) is not only interesting
from the theory point of view, but it also becomes crucial for improved predictions of
the observables mentioned above.
In particular, with predictions at NLO+PS accuracy
and full oﬀ-shell eﬀects at the hard matrix-element level, it becomes possible to validate
NLO+PS approaches where the underlying hard matrix elements are computed in the on-
shell-top approximation.
It is also of great relevance to use these improved predictions
to properly assess the systematics aﬀecting the extraction of the top mass when using, as
is currently done, MCs within which the hard matrix elements do not include full NLO
oﬀ-shell eﬀects. Recently, work has been performed in this direction in refs. [43, 44] within
the POWHEG+Pythia8 framework, including NLO corrections in both production and
decay, and considering t¯t production in the NWA and single-top t-channel production with
full oﬀ-shell eﬀects, respectively.

In this work we adopt the MC@NLO scheme, and study the NLO matching to parton
showers of t-channel single-top hadroproduction with full oﬀ-shell and non-resonant eﬀects,
namely the t-channel contribution to the EW process pp → W +bj, with j being a light jet,
at the 8 TeV LHC. We match our computations to the Herwig6 [45, 46] and Pythia8 [47]
parton showers. In this context, we discuss in general the subtleties that occur in NLO+PS
simulations for processes with intermediate coloured resonances, and perform a thorough
comparison to other available approximations of t-channel single-top cross section.
In
doing so, we present a study of hadron-level observables sensitive to top-decay radiative
corrections and oﬀ-shell eﬀects. The shape of such observables is often a result of a sensitive
interplay of a number of diﬀerent phenomena, which we endeavour to disentangle and
understand here.

We perform our calculations in the framework of MadGraph5 aMC@NLO [48],
which automates all ingredients relevant to the simulation of LO and NLO cross sections,
including the matching to parton showers. The FKS method [49, 50] (automated in the
module MadFKS [51]) for the subtraction of the infrared (IR) singularities of real-emission
matrix elements underpins all NLO-accurate results. The computations of one-loop ampli-
tudes are carried out by switching dynamically between two integral-reduction techniques,
OPP [52] and TIR [53–55]. These have been automated in the module MadLoop [56],
which in turn exploits CutTools [57] together with an in-house implementation of the
OpenLoops optimisation [58]. Matching to parton showers is achieved by means of the
MC@NLO formalism [26].

The paper is structured as follows: in section 2 we describe the setup of the compu-
tation, and in particular the subtleties related to the phase-space parametrisation, inte-
gration, and MC@NLO-type matching of processes with intermediate coloured resonances;
in section 3 we discuss some details of the various approximations to the complete W +bj
process, and we present our results for a selected set of observables; in section 4 we draw
our conclusions.

– 3 –

2 Matching setup, subtleties and technicalities

2.1

Integration of subtracted cross sections with resonances

Regardless of whether a computation that features an unstable intermediate particle (that
henceforth we denote by β, and assume to have mass mβ and width Γβ (cid:28) mβ) is matched
to parton showers, one problem which must be addressed is that of the eﬃcient integration
of the corresponding matrix elements. This is particularly non-trivial in the case where
these matrix elements enter the real-emission contribution to an NLO cross section, owing
to the necessity of IR-subtracting them. At the amplitude level, the unstable particle is
represented by an s-channel propagator and thus the matrix elements will contain a term

1

β − m2
(k2

β)2 + (Γβmβ)2 ,

(2.1)

β = m2

β − m2

β), that forces k2

β > 0 the virtuality of β. Because of eq. (2.1), kinematic conﬁgurations with k2

β (cid:39) m2
with k2
β
will be associated with large weights, and hence the corresponding unweighted events will
be more likely to occur. The likelihood of this increases with decreasing Γβ, which is easy to
understand also in view of the fact that the Γβ → 0 limit of eq. (2.1) is proportional to the
Dirac delta function δ(k2
β exactly. An eﬃcient matrix element
β (cid:39) m2
integration therefore requires that the phase-space generation be biased towards k2
β
conﬁgurations, a requirement which is independent of the perturbative order. At the LO
(i.e. tree) level, this is not diﬃcult to achieve. The most direct way is that of choosing k2
β
as one of the integration variables, so that the adaptive integration quickly knows where to
throw most of the phase-space points. This is what is done in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO.
While one would like to apply a similar strategy at the NLO and beyond, it is the IR
subtractions relevant to the real-emission terms that prevent one from doing this in a
straightforward manner. In contrast, all of the other non-subtracted contributions to an
NLO cross section, such as the Born and the virtuals, can be dealt with in exactly the
same way as the LO. In order to simplify the discussion of the relevant issues without
loss of generality, let us assume that only one type of singularity is relevant (say, the soft
singularities). Following FKS, we shall denote by ξ the phase-space variable that in the
limit ξ → 0 causes the matrix elements to be soft-singular, and by b all of the other (Born-
level) phase-space variables. The typical structure of the integrated NLO cross section will
thus be:

(cid:2)ς(cid:0)k2
β(b, ξ)| b, ξ(cid:1) − ς(cid:0)k2

β(b, 0)| b, 0(cid:1)(cid:3) ,

(cid:90)

dbdξ

1
ξ

(2.2)

where the redundant ﬁrst argument (k2
β) of the integrand ς (ς is equal to the matrix elements
times phase-space factors) has been inserted explicitly only in view of its relevance to the
present discussion. Because of the way eq. (2.2) is integrated (i.e. by choosing some b and ξ
for any given random number), its event and counterevent contributions (ﬁrst and second
term, respectively, under the integral sign in eq. (2.2)) will typically have very diﬀerent
weights, owing to eq. (2.1), unless the condition

k2
β(b, ξ) = k2

β(b, 0) ,

∀ ξ ,

b given

(2.3)

– 4 –

is fulﬁlled. Such a diﬀerence in weights is responsible for a poorly-convergent integration.
In principle, this is simply an eﬃciency problem, since the convergence in the large-

statistics limit is guaranteed by the condition

k2
β(b, ξ) = k2

β(b, 0) ,

lim
ξ→0

(2.4)

which holds regardless of whether eq. (2.3) is true or not. In practice, however, the statistics
one needs to accumulate rapidly grows with the inverse of Γβ, becoming inﬁnite in the
Γβ → 0 limit. Indeed, it is instructive to consider the situation in the limiting case where
eq. (2.1) is replaced by a Dirac delta. When this happens and the condition of eq. (2.3)
is not fulﬁlled, then for any given b either the event or the counterevent is non-null, but
never both simultaneously (since it is either k2
β). This implies
that the phase space is partitioned into two disjoint regions, in which either only the event
or only the counterevent contribution to the integrand of eq. (2.2) is non-null, which in
turn renders the numerical integration impossible with ﬁnite statistics. Alternatively, and
from a more physical viewpoint, in processes where Γβ is very small, for the majority of
phase-space points the event is computed at the resonance peak, while the counterevents
are far away from the peak (or vice versa), even though the energy of the emitted parton
(ξ in eq. (2.2)) might be small as well. Thus, a small-width resonance severely hampers the
cancellation between event and counterevents. A viable solution stems from a re-mapping
of the phase space:

β(b, 0) = m2

β(b, ξ) = m2

β or k2

b −→ Φξ(b) .

(2.5)

There is ample freedom in choosing the speciﬁc form of eq. (2.5), but nevertheless we can
distinguish two classes of re-mappings. The members of the ﬁrst class fulﬁll the following
condition:

for any given b. This can be exploited by rewriting eq. (2.2) as follows:

∀ ξ ,

β(b, ξ) = k2
k2

β(Φξ(b), 0) ,

(cid:20)

β(b, ξ)| b, ξ(cid:1) − ∂Φξ(b)
ς(cid:0)k2

∂b

β(Φξ(b), 0)| Φξ(b), 0(cid:1)(cid:21)
ς(cid:0)k2

(2.6)

.

(2.7)

dbdξ

1
ξ

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

In other words, eq. (2.5) is used for changing the integration variables of the counterevent
(see Appendix A for a few technical details on this procedure). Thanks to this, the virtuality
of β is the same in the event and counterevent of eq. (2.7), hence solving the original
problem. Conversely, the re-mappings that belong to the second class fulﬁll the condition:

k2
β(Φξ(b), ξ) = k2

β(b, 0) ,

∀ ξ ,

(2.8)

for any given b. One thus changes the integration variables of the event contribution,
whence the analogous of eq. (2.7) reads:

(cid:20) ∂Φξ(b)

∂b

dbdξ

1
ξ

ς(cid:0)k2
β(Φξ(b), ξ)| Φξ(b), ξ(cid:1) − ς(cid:0)k2

β(b, 0)| b, 0(cid:1)(cid:21)

,

(2.9)

which again solves the problem.

– 5 –

In summary, there are three possible ways out. The ﬁrst, which we call a type-I
solution, is that of choosing a phase-space parametrisation such that eq. (2.3) is fulﬁlled
(this is essentially what has been done in ref. [44]). The second (called type-IIa solution)
entails a re-mapping of the phase-space variables relevant to the counterevent, so that
eq. (2.6) is fulﬁlled. Finally, with a type-IIb solution the re-mapping acts on the variables
relevant to the event, so that eq. (2.8) is fulﬁlled. While approaches of type I are simpler
than those of type II, they are not necessarily more convenient in the context of NLO
or NLO+PS computations, where the primary concern is that of ﬁnding a phase-space
parametrisation which is ideally suited to IR subtractions (and, in the case of NLO+PS, to
MC matching). The latter requirement might render eq. (2.3) diﬃcult to achieve. It also
implies that it is hard to ﬁnd a solution to the problem which can be applied to a generic
IR-subtraction formalism. It is much more convenient to work in the context of a speciﬁc
subtraction scheme, and for this reason in what follows we shall concentrate on FKS and
on its implementation in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO.

2.1.1 Treatment of resonances in FKS

We assume that the reader is familiar with the basics of FKS subtraction; if not, all of
the relevant information can be found in the original papers [49, 50] and in ref. [51]. The
latter work deals speciﬁcally with the issues relevant to automation, and hence to the
MadGraph5 aMC@NLO implementation. There are two possible situations, depicted
in ﬁgure 1: the case where the FKS pair – identiﬁed in what follows by the indices i (the
FKS parton) and j (its sister) – is not directly connected to the tree1 that stems from
the resonance β (left panel); and the case where the FKS pair is part of the tree whose
root is β (right panel). We also have to keep in mind that, at variance with the simpliﬁed

Figure 1. Left panel: the FKS pair (i, j) is not connected to the resonance β. Right panel: the
FKS pair is connected to the resonance.

treatment presented in section 2.1, in QCD there are both soft and collinear singularities.
However, one of the key properties of the phase-space parametrisations relevant to FKS
in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO is that for a given real-emission resolved conﬁguration, the
reduced (i.e. Born-like) conﬁgurations associated with the soft and collinear limits are
identical to each other. We observe that this is a suﬃcient condition for a type-IIb approach

1Note that this is a sensible deﬁnition, because β is an s-channel, and hence it is the root of a tree that

can be separated from the rest of the diagram by a single cut.

– 6 –

                                                                                                                                βγµjki                                                                                                                                 βγµijto work (since the re-mapping of eq. (2.8) requires that the r.h.s. of that equation be unique
for a given b). Conversely, type-IIa solutions might be implemented in any case, however
with possibly diﬀerent re-mappings associated with soft and collinear conﬁgurations.

The situation depicted in the left panel of ﬁgure 1 can occur with either initial-state or
ﬁnal-state singularities, and the phase-space parametrisation in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO
oﬀers a type-I solution in this case. This is because for both types of singularities all of the
ﬁnal-state momenta relevant to a given event (excluding i and j in the case of a ﬁnal-state
singularities) are related to those of the associated counterevents by means of boosts. Since
neither i nor j contribute to the invariant mass of β, this implies that eq. (2.3) is fulﬁlled,
and therefore one can choose k2

β as an integration variable.

Let us now turn to the situation depicted in the right panel of ﬁgure 1, which oc-
curs solely in the case of ﬁnal-state singularities. Relevant cases are for example that
of a Z branching, with (β, µ, γ) = (Z, q, ¯q) and (i, j) = (g, q), or that of a top-quark
branching, with (β, µ, γ) = (t, b, W ) and (i, j) = (g, b). In the current version of Mad-
Graph5 aMC@NLO, the phase-space parametrisation adopted is that of section 5.2 of
ref. [28], and its generalisation to the case of a massive FKS sister. Such a parametrisation
does not obey eq. (2.3), and we have therefore considered type-II approaches. In order to
keep the present discussion at a non-technical level, we limit ourselves here to saying that
for the sake of this work, and for future versions of MadGraph5 aMC@NLO, we have
implemented a type-IIb solution. However, further details are provided in Appendix A.

2.2 Matching to parton showers

The matching of matrix elements to parton showers in the presence of coloured intermediate
resonances in s-channels presents some non-trivial features irrespective of the perturbative
order at which it is carried out.
In order to simplify the following discussion we shall
always refer to the process we study in this paper; however, it should be clear that our
considerations and procedure are valid in general. At the parton level, simulations for
oﬀ-shell non-resonant single-top hadroproduction are based on processes of the type xy →
W bq(+z), rather than on their on-shell analogues xy → tq(+z). Therefore, there is no
physical way (nor formal necessity) of ﬂagging a speciﬁc subset of generated events as
stemming from top-quark contributions. Nonetheless, despite the formal categorising of
events as containing or not containing an intermediate top being unphysical, the description
of higher-order contributions induced through parton showering might be very diﬀerent in
the two cases.

MC event generators typically handle the showering from a coloured resonance and
from its decay products in a factorised fashion: emissions from the resonance are treated
ﬁrst and are in competition with all other sources of radiation, and emissions oﬀ the res-
onance decay products are added in a second, separate step. This choice is physically
motivated by the NWA, which dictates a factorisation into production and decay subpro-
cesses, as well as a suppression of the interference of radiation in production and in decay
by Γt/mt (cid:28) 1. In the presence of a top-quark resonance, the showers from its decay prod-
ucts will usually be forced to preserve the reconstructed top invariant mass mrec
(to be
precisely deﬁned below). On the other hand, no such constraint is applied if the informa-

t

– 7 –

tion on the intermediate top quark is absent. Such a disparity may lead to very diﬀerent
shower evolutions even when starting from exactly the same ﬁnal-state kinematics. For
certain observables, especially those related to the invariant mass of the W b-jet system,
W bq samples for which the top quark is not written in any of the events may thus pro-
duce results in visible disagreement with analogous on-shell t(→ W b)q samples, even in
the narrow-width limit. The reconstructed top-quark mass is itself a prime example of this
issue. This situation is disturbing, since it is ultimately due to arbitrary choices made in
MC modelling. The decision of whether or not to write the resonance in the event record
(which is based on the NWA that breaks down precisely in the oﬀ-shell region which one
aims to investigate), and the constraint that the resonance mass is kept constant if written
in the event record, are both choices that are non-parametric in nature. These can there-
fore easily oﬀset the increase in precision attained by computing higher-order corrections.
At the same time, this implies that systematic studies of these aspects of MC modelling
can sensibly be carried out also at the LO.

Pending thorough comparisons with data, at the theoretical level one can assume the
on-shell-top limit of the showered results to be a sensible benchmark. Hence, the discussion
above suggests that the explicit presence of the intermediate top in a W bq sample is a
desirable feature under certain conditions. The most straightforward example of the latter
is that kinematic conﬁgurations for which mrec
is “suﬃciently close” to the pole top mass
mt should include an intermediate top quark at the level of hard events to be given in
input to the shower. Evidence for this feature comes from the ﬁxed-order results, where
it can be shown that near top-quark resonances, the dominant contributions to the cross
section arise from Feynman diagrams involving intermediate top quarks [34–36]. It would
appear consistent that the leading topologies at ﬁxed-order should also be the dominant
ones after parton-showering, and the presence of intermediate top quarks in W bq samples
would allow for this.

t

The strategy we have adopted in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO works essentially in the
same way at the LO (where it was already the default [59]) and at the NLO. It is completely
general, and is not restricted to the W bj process we are considering in this paper. Moreover,
it is already used, in a simpliﬁed format, for resonances that are not charged under QCD.
The method relies on the adaptive multi-channel integration, in which integration chan-
nels are roughly in one-to-one correspondence with Born-level Feynman diagrams2. When
considering a single integration channel, the corresponding diagram has a well-deﬁned
structure, possibly with intermediate s-channel contributions. We use this information to
decide whether any of these intermediate resonances is written in the hard-event record.
In particular, for each of such resonances:

a.) If the diagram that deﬁnes the integration channel does not feature the intermediate
resonance in an s-channel conﬁguration, then that resonance is not written in the
hard-event ﬁle.

2Even in the NLO mode of MadGraph5 aMC@NLO, the integration channels correspond to the un-

derlying Born diagrams only – see section 6.3 of ref. [51], with f = 1.

– 8 –

b.) If the diagram contains a resonance in an s-channel conﬁguration, then we distinguish
various cases depending on the FKS sector which is presently integrated.
If the
diagram and the FKS sector are such that the grandmother of the real-emission
radiation can be identiﬁed with that resonance (this is the situation depicted in the
right panel of ﬁgure 1) the resonance is written on the hard-event record, and a type-
IIb re-mapping is used, as outlined in section 2.1 and Appendix A, unless the MC
one matches to does not conserve the reconstructed resonances mass when emissions
of this kind occur. In this same FKS sector there are conﬁgurations for which the
re-mapping cannot be performed (see Appendix A), and for these no information on
the resonance appears in the hard event. For all of the other FKS conﬁgurations or
at the LO, we use a dimensionless number, xcut, to determine whether the resonance
will be part of the hard-event record. In detail, if and only if the given kinematic

conﬁguration satisﬁes the condition(cid:12)(cid:12)mrec

β − mβ

(cid:12)(cid:12) < xcutΓβ

(2.10)

will the resonance be part of the hard-event record. The quantity mrec
β denotes the
reconstructed mass of the resonance β, and is deﬁned as the invariant mass of the
four-momentum sum of all the decay products of the resonance, as determined by
the diagram used in the multi-channel integration (and the FKS sector in the case of
real-emission-like events); xcut is a free parameter.

What is done here is not motivated by considerations of numerical stability, as in the
ﬁxed-order NLO (fNLO henceforth [48]) computation (stability is merely a by-product
in the present case), but rather by the fact that it is in keeping with the procedures
adopted internally by the MCs. This implies that the construction of the MC counterterms
relevant to the MC@NLO matching is modiﬁed in order to take the above information into
account. In particular, the features described in items a.) and b.) are applied to the MC
counterterms as well, in order to precisely mimic the kinematic constraints imposed by
the PS at O(αb+1
). It should thus be clear that the only new ingredient w.r.t. the current
implementation in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO is one relevant to emissions oﬀ the resonance
decay products, which, being a phase-space re-mapping, can be trivially automated.

s

A couple of comments on the procedures adopted in MCs are in order here. Firstly, for
emissions that do not involve s-channel resonances (left panel of ﬁgure 1) MCs can easily,
and do in the cases considered in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO, conserve mrec
β . Therefore,
the dependence of physical observables on the parameter xcut is not induced by the con-
servation or the lack thereof of the reconstructed resonance mass, but by the diﬀerent
behaviours of the showers depending on the presence of the resonance in the event record
– we shall see explicit examples of this in section 3. Secondly, and as far as emissions
oﬀ the resonance decay products are concerned (right panel of ﬁgure 1), in the case of
Herwig6, mrec
is conserved, whilst in Pythia8 it is not (owing to global recoil). In the
β
MadGraph5 aMC@NLO matching to Pythia8, the global-recoil strategy is adopted in
the latter, which allows one to simplify the MC counterterm deﬁnition in the former. In
particular, the presence of resonances becomes irrelevant in this respect, since radiation

– 9 –

from the decay products is generated identically to any other hard-process external par-
tons, which means that the same evolution kernels, phase-space boundaries and kinematics
are applied for similar evolution steps. Thus, all ﬁnal-state particles compensate for the
momentum shifts necessary to give non-null virtuality to the radiating parton. In the case
of top decays, this ultimately implies that the invariant mass of the W b system (before an
emission) and the invariant mass of the W bg system (after an emission) are not identical.
For this reason, as already mentioned in general in item b.) above, in the case of Pythia8
we do not apply a type-IIb phase-space re-mapping. We have further explicitly checked
that, at the LO, diﬀerences between the global and local (which is mrec
-preserving) recoil
schemes are negligible for all diﬀerential distributions studied in the context of this paper
(a sample of which will be presented in section 3).

t

We remark that one can envisage the possibility of introducing an xcut dependence for
emissions oﬀ the decay products as well (i.e. of using the condition of eq. (2.10) to decide
whether or not to perform a re-mapping). We have presently refrained from doing so for a
couple of reasons. Firstly, it is technically more complicated at the matrix-element level.
Secondly, this eﬀort would not really be justiﬁed in view of the fact that the Breit-Wigner
function is steeply falling, and thus even for relatively small values of xcut one is actually
quite close to the asymptotic case xcut → ∞. Because of this, in what follows Herwig6-
based predictions have been obtained by setting xcut = 35 (our default, with 35 being
our arbitrary choice of a very large value, consistently with the Breit-Wigner lineshape),
and compared to those obtained with xcut = 0 (in which case, we disallow the type-IIb
re-mapping in the phase space; this option will not be made available in the public version
of MadGraph5 aMC@NLO). On the other hand, with Pythia8 these precautions are
not necessary, and several values of xcut will be considered.

While suitably writing the top quark in the hard events addresses the on-shell-limit
issue, it poses another problem in the context of the MC@NLO matching. Despite the
top quark not being an external particle in oﬀ-shell W bq production, the factorised-shower
structure described above allows MCs to radiate gluons both oﬀ the W b system and oﬀ the
top. The latter radiation may spoil the formal NLO accuracy of the computation. In fact,
since gluon emission from an intermediate resonance is not IR-singular, in the context of
the MC@NLO approach it is not associated with an MC counterterm, whence a potential
double counting with the radiation of MC origin mentioned before.

Two solutions to this double-counting issue are possible: either a ﬁnite extra MC
counterterm is added to the MC@NLO short-distance cross section in order to match at the
NLO level the eﬀects of the radiation oﬀ the top quark, or this type of radiation is directly
disallowed in the PS. For simplicity, and without loss of formal accuracy, we have chosen
the latter alternative3, but have nevertheless veriﬁed (by switching it on and oﬀ, which at
least at the LO is fully consistent) that the impact of such top-quark radiation is negligible
for all of the observables considered in this paper. The issue of double counting is speciﬁc
to the NLO, and therefore no special measures regarding radiation from intermediate top

3We are grateful to Bryan Webber for providing us with a version of Herwig6 that disallows radiation

oﬀ intermediate top quarks.

– 10 –

quarks need to be taken at the LO; in our LO simulations, top quarks have been allowed
to radiate.

3 Results

3.1 Single-top hadroproduction: process deﬁnition and approximations

The starting point of the present work is the fNLO calculation for the t-channel single-
top cross section in the ﬁve-ﬂavour scheme presented in ref. [36], in which the reaction
considered was4

p p → W + Jb Jlight + X.

(3.1)

As in typical single-top searches, at least two jets are present in the ﬁnal state we study:
a b-jet, Jb, deﬁned as a jet containing the outgoing b-quark from the hard interaction (for
this reason, we call this jet the primary b-jet), and an additional light jet, Jlight, that does
not necessarily contain bottom quarks. The assumption of a third-generation diagonal
CKM matrix (Vtb = 1) is made in order to have a self-consistent deﬁnition of the t-channel
process [36]5. We remark that a consistent treatment of ﬁnite-width and non-resonant
eﬀects for top-quark production at NLO can be achieved through the use of the complex-
mass scheme [37, 38]. This is a renormalisation scheme that introduces the top-width
parameter Γt as part of a complex top-quark mass at the Lagrangian level. Examples of
recent applications in NLO calculations with full oﬀ-shell eﬀects are the NLO results for top-
pair [40, 60–64] and t-channel single-top [36] production. In MadGraph5 aMC@NLO,
the generation of the process of eq. (3.1) is obtained by issuing the following commands
(see ref. [48] for details on the syntax):

./bin/mg5 aMC

MG5 aMC> import model loop sm-no b mass

MG5 aMC> set complex mass scheme True

MG5 aMC> define p = p b b~; define j = p

MG5 aMC> generate p p > w+ b j $$ w+ w- z a QED=3 QCD=0 [QCD]

MG5 aMC> output; launch

As was discussed in ref. [36], a consistent deﬁnition of the process of eq. (3.1) in the ﬁve-
ﬂavour scheme requires a kinematic cut on the primary b-jet transverse momentum, which
is not necessary when oﬀ-shell eﬀects are neglected, i.e. when the top quark is taken to
be stable. This constraint, which is relatively straightforward to impose when working at
ﬁxed order, becomes more complicated in the presence of parton showers, since it may
become far from obvious which of the B-hadrons in the ﬁnal state descends from the hard-
interaction b-quark. In order to directly compare our present results to previous work at
fNLO [36], and to ensure that the conclusions presented below at the hadron level are in as

4We emphasise that even if in ref. [36] and in this paper we simulate W + (i.e. top) production, the case

of W − (i.e. antitop) production is fully identical.

5The inclusion of the s-channel contribution would require a reﬁnement to the deﬁnition of the b-jet
in order make the process well-deﬁned. Moreover, note that the requirement that the production be EW
implies that no Born-level channel features a gluon in the ﬁnal state, regardless of the value of Vtb.

– 11 –

close analogy as possible with those of ref. [36], we have chosen to exploit MC truth6. This
enables the tagging of the primary B-hadron and thus that of the primary b-jet, the latter
being identiﬁed as the jet containing the primary B-hadron. In addition to the pT cut on
the primary b-jet, we impose other cuts at the analysis level, summarised in table 1, which
we adopt throughout our simulations. They are identical to those of ref. [36], and thus
allow for a direct comparison with that paper. We limit ourselves here to reminding the
reader that this setup has been chosen so as to avoid artiﬁcial enhancements of non-resonant
contributions, so that a meaningful comparison with the on-shell single-top simulations can
be made.

pT (Jb) > 25 GeV pT (Jlight) > 25 GeV
|η(Jb)| < 4.5

|η(Jlight)| < 4.5

140 GeV < M (W +, Jb) < 200 GeV

kt jet algorithm [65, 66], with Rjet = 0.5

Table 1. Setup for process deﬁnition and analysis.

Given that observables sensitive to the leptonic decays of the W boson are also of in-
terest in single-top analyses (e.g. the invariant mass of the lepton+b-jet system, M (l+, Jb),
or the transverse mass of the reconstructed top quark, MT (l+, νl, Jb)), we consider a lep-
tonically decaying W +. For events passed to the PS, these decays are carried out by the
showers themselves, whereas at ﬁxed order we simply decay the W + isotropically in its rest
frame (which is also what the MCs do). We note that in this way production spin correla-
tions for the leptons are not included. While these may be phenomenologically important,
they are not relevant for the assessment of the oﬀ-shell and non-resonant eﬀects we are
presently interested in, and therefore do not warrant the more involved process deﬁnition
that would be necessary when generating directly leptonic matrix elements.

In view of the process deﬁnition and of the cuts in table 1, one expects its on-shell
Indeed, as it has been shown both
analogue to constitute a reasonable approximation.
in single top [34–36] and in t¯t [40–42] production, the NWA does an excellent job in
approximating the fully-oﬀ-shell results for many distributions. However, since it does fail
to capture the dominant eﬀects in regions of phase space that are sensitive to the top oﬀ-
shellness and to non-resonant contributions, misuse of the NWA may therefore introduce
errors that vastly exceed the na¨ıve estimate of ∼ O(Γt/mt), which ultimately may have a
bearing on experimental procedures such as top tagging and top-mass extractions.

The presence of potentially large eﬀects of this kind will be studied in the following
through a systematic comparison of the W +bj results with their on-shell counterparts,
which we generically denote by tj. In tj production the top is a stable external particle,
hence its radiation in the shower is consistently matched at the level of the MC@NLO

6In both the Herwig6 and Pythia8 showers, the mother (JMOHEP) and daughter (JDAHEP) arrays in
the event record are used to perform this identiﬁcation. In the Herwig6 analysis we also make use of the
information on the space-time vertices (VHEP) where particles are produced.

– 12 –

short-distance cross sections. Thus, in this case, showering from the top must be allowed
in order to avoid double counting: this is the usual procedure [23, 25]. The inclusion
of NLO corrections to tj production, while highly desirable, is largely incomplete from
the phenomenology viewpoint, since it does not improve the description of the top decays
(which is left to the MC), and does not include any non-resonant contributions. This
situation is addressed in part by the use of the procedure of ref. [29], automated in Mad-
Graph5 aMC@NLO in the module MadSpin [67], which allows one to include both
production and decay spin correlations, and to give a rough description of oﬀ-shell eﬀects
through a simple Breit-Wigner smearing. For this reason, in the following we shall always
use tj predictions in conjunction with MadSpin. Although an improvement w.r.t. the
“bare” tj results, these still do not contain NLO corrections to top decays, and fully ignore
the non-resonant contributions to the W +bj ﬁnal state.

In summary, by systematically comparing fNLO, tj+MadSpin NLO+PS, and W +bj
NLO+PS results, as well as their LO counterparts, we shall be able to assess the impact
of a variety of mechanisms, since the above simulations are characterised by an increasing
degree of complexity, owing to the inclusion of parton showers, of NLO corrections to
decays, and of oﬀ-shell and non-resonant contributions.

3.2 Diﬀerential distributions

In this section we present our predictions for several observables, obtained with the dif-
ferent computational schemes discussed in section 3.1. All of these have been derived by
setting the input parameters that enter the hard matrix elements as shown in table 2.
The width value labelled by “NLO” in table 2 is adopted in the context of the W +bj
NLO+PS and fNLO calculations, whereas that labelled by “LO” is used in all the other
cases. Theory uncertainties are estimated by varying the renormalisation and factorisation
scales independently in the range [µ0/2, 2µ0]. These variations are performed automati-
cally by MadGraph5 aMC@NLO in the course of a single run, thanks to the re-weighting
technique introduced in ref. [68]7. We point out that, for certain observables, the LO scale
dependence may be pathologically small, since the Born cross section does not contain any
αs factor. We have refrained from reporting the uncertainties associated with PDF errors,
chieﬂy in view of the fact that they aﬀect equally the W +bj and tj production processes.
We have run the two MCs by adopting the respective default parameters, except for the
PDFs, which have been taken equal to those used in the short-distance computations. The
simulation of the underlying events is turned oﬀ, and in order to simplify the analysis B
hadrons are imposed to be stable.

In the following, to each observable we associate a ﬁgure that contains two main
panels, one for Herwig6 and one for Pythia8, each accompanied by three insets. The
main panels display four curves: W +bj results at NLO+PS and LO+PS with xcut = 35
(solid and dashed blue, respectively), at fNLO (dashed green with full diamonds), and
tj+MS results at NLO+PS (solid red with full circles). MadSpin decays are characterised
by a user-deﬁned parameter, BWcut, that sets the allowed range (i.e. the distance, in width

7This implies that the scale dependence of the top width is neglected.

– 13 –

mZ = 91.1876 GeV

mW = 80.3980 GeV

ΓZ = 2.4952 GeV
GF = 1.6639 × 10−5 GeV−2 α−1
mt = 173.2 GeV

ΓW = 0 GeV

e = 132.3384

ΓLO

t = 1.5017 GeV

mb = 0 GeV
ΓNLO

t

(µ = mt/2) = 1.3569 GeV

Central scale: µ0 = mt/2

PDFs: MSTW2008NLO [69]

Table 2. Input parameters for hard matrix elements.

units, from the resonance pole mass) for the invariant mass of the system composed of the
resonance decay products. We choose BWcut = 35 as our default, and indicate this explicitly
by appending the value of BWcut to the label ‘MS’ in the plots (e.g. ‘MS35’ indicates
MadSpin results with BWcut = 35, and so on). We emphasise that the parameters xcut
and BWcut are technically diﬀerent, even though they are both associated with a distance
from the resonance pole mass. MadSpin simulations feature a top quark in all of their Les-
Houches events and therefore are independent of xcut (more precisely, they are characterised
by xcut = ∞) but depend on BWcut. Conversely, simulations of the full W +bj process do
not require MS decays, thus these events are strictly BWcut-independent, but do carry a
dependence on xcut. Still, xcut and BWcut have a similar meaning from a physics viewpoint,
because they parametrise, in diﬀerent contexts, eﬀects related to top-quark oﬀ-shellness.
This is the reason why we have chosen their default values to be identical. Similarly,
BWcut = 0.1 is the analogue8 of xcut = 0.

The ﬁrst (upper) inset in each ﬁgure contains ratios of the various perturbative ap-
proximations to the full W +bj process: LO+PS/NLO+PS (solid blue), fLO/fNLO (dashed
green), Herwig6/Pythia8 at NLO+PS and at LO+PS (solid and dashed brown on the
right, respectively), in addition to scale-variation bands (Herwig6 only, LO in yellow, NLO
in grey on the left). The second (middle) inset contains the ratio, with respect to NLO+PS
W +bj with xcut = 35, of NLO+PS tj+MS with BWcut = 35 and with BWcut = 0.1 (solid red
and dashed magenta, respectively) and of fNLO (dashed green). Finally, the third (lower)
inset displays the ratio, with respect to NLO+PS W +bj with xcut = 35, of NLO+PS W +bj
with xcut = 0, 1, and 5 (solid cyan, dashed red, and solid green, respectively, with the latter
two values adopted only for Pythia8, as explained in section 2.2).

In order not to further complicate the discussion of the diﬀerent eﬀects that play a
role in the results presented below, for each ﬁgure our analysis is structured as follows.
After a brief overview of the observable examined and the important features of the ﬁxed-
order results (including the eﬀects of NLO corrections, sensitivity to oﬀ-shellness, and
non-resonant contributions), we address in turn:

1. the eﬀect of NLO corrections on the matched results for the full W +bj process (ﬁrst

8In MadSpin one cannot set BWcut strictly equal to zero, and thus we have used 0.1 instead. Given the

values of the top mass and width, this diﬀerence is fully irrelevant.

– 14 –

inset, solid blue curve);

2. the eﬀect of parton showering with respect to the ﬁxed-order results for the full W +bj

process (ﬁrst and second insets);

3. the diﬀerences between results for the full W +bj process, showered with Herwig6
and Pythia8 (ﬁrst inset, dashed and solid brown curves on the right-hand panels);

4. the quality of the stable-top+MadSpin approximations to the full result (second

inset, solid red and dashed magenta curves);

5. the sensitivity of the results to the arbitrary xcut parameter (third inset).

3.2.1 Transverse momentum of reconstructed top quark, pT (W +, Jb)
The ﬁrst observable we examine is pT (W +, Jb), the transverse momentum of the recon-
structed top quark (deﬁned as the system composed of the W + and the primary b-jet),
shown in ﬁgure 2. This observable is inclusive in the invariant mass of the reconstructed
top and is thus barely sensitive to oﬀ-shell eﬀects [36]. Resonant/non-resonant interfer-
ences and pure non-resonant eﬀects also do not play a major role. By comparing the fNLO
results to MCFM [30] (t-channel single top in the NWA, with NLO corrections in both
production and decay; not shown here) it can be deduced that the trend of the spectrum
becoming harder at high pT (W +, Jb) at fNLO w.r.t. fLO is a direct consequence of the
corrections to production, but is however also enhanced by those to the decay.

1. The inclusion of NLO corrections to the matched simulation mirrors the hardening

of the spectrum observed when including NLO corrections at a ﬁxed order.

2. The dashed green curve in the second inset indicates that PS eﬀects are on the
whole not large (below 10% in all bins except the ﬁrst bin for Pythia8), and do not
signiﬁcantly alter the shape of the ﬁxed-order results.

3. The agreement between Herwig6 and Pythia8 improves at NLO (the solid brown
curve on the ﬁrst right-hand inset is systematically closer to unity than the dashed
brown curve). However, it should be pointed out that the agreement is already good
at LO (especially shape-wise).

4. The second inset reveals that there is a general trend of the tj+MS spectra be-
coming softer compared to those of the NLO+PS W +bj results. This eﬀect follows
from the same reasoning as the softer behaviour of the fLO or the LO+PS spectra
w.r.t. their NLO counterparts, but is of much smaller size since the MadSpin results
do include radiative corrections to the production subprocess, while they lack those
to the top decay. Overall, the results for NLO+PS tj+MS are in agreement with
the full NLO+PS W +bj ones to better than 10% for both showers, indicating that
not only corrections to the decay but also non-resonant contributions are small in
this case. Moreover, the invariance of the MadSpin results under variation of the
BWcut parameter conﬁrms that this distribution is relatively insensitive to oﬀ-shell
eﬀects.

– 15 –

Figure 2. Transverse momentum of reconstructed top, pT (W +, Jb).

5. The third inset reveals that pT (W +, Jb) is largely stable against the choice of xcut,
with only xcut = 0 displaying any visible eﬀects. The latter are however smaller than
(Pythia8) or comparable to (Herwig6) the NLO scale uncertainty illustrated by
the band in the upper left inset.

3.2.2 Transverse momentum of primary b-jet, pT (Jb)

Figure 3 shows the transverse momentum of the primary b-jet, pT (Jb). This observable is
less inclusive than pT (W +, Jb) over the top decay products, and therefore NLO corrections
to the decay are expected to play a more important role. This is indeed the case since
the non-trivial shape at low pT of the diﬀerential K-factor at ﬁxed order is driven by the
NLO corrections to the top decay (this has again been cross-checked with MCFM). These
corrections also result in a harder pT (Jb)-tail at NLO w.r.t. LO. The feature at small pT

– 16 –

10−1100101dσ/dpT[pb/GeV]Herwig6W+bjNLO+PSW+bjLO+PStj+MS35NLO+PSfNLO0.70.80.91.01.1W+bjratiosLONLO0.80.91.01.11.2ratiowrtW+bjratiowrtW+bjNLO+PS:tj+MS35NLO+PStj+MS0.1NLO+PSfNLO50100150200250pT(W+,Jb)[GeV]0.80.91.01.11.2ratiowrtxcut=35ratiowrtxcut=35:xcut=0xcut=1xcut=5(allW+bjNLO+PS)10−1100101Pythia80.70.80.91.01.1W+bjratios:LO+PS/NLO+PSfLO/fNLONLO+HW6/NLO+PY8LO+HW6/LO+PY80.80.91.01.11.250100150200250pT(W+,Jb)[GeV]0.80.91.01.11.2Figure 3. Transverse momentum of primary b-jet, pT (Jb).

in the fLO/fNLO ratio can be attributed to the kinematical fact that real radiation oﬀ
the b-quark carries energy away from the b-jet, thus softening the NLO spectrum; such a
leakage occurs less often when moving towards large pT ’s, where the jets tend to be more
collimated.

1. The diﬀerential K-factors for the showered results at large values of pT (Jb) display
the same features as the ﬁxed-order results (NLO+PS distributions are harder than
LO+PS ones). However, the kinematic suppression in fLO/fNLO at low pT (Jb),
driven by the fLO shape, does not carry over to the showered case. This is due to
the fact that the shower, already at the LO, accounts for multiple emissions from
the ﬁnal-state b quark, hence the radiation leakage outside the b-jet, induced by real
corrections in the ﬁxed-order case, has a much milder impact at the showered level.

2. The dashed green curve in the second inset indicates that the shower eﬀects for Her-

– 17 –

10−1100101dσ/dpT[pb/GeV]Herwig6W+bjNLO+PSW+bjLO+PStj+MS35NLO+PSfNLO0.70.80.91.01.11.2W+bjratiosLONLO0.80.91.01.11.2ratiowrtW+bjratiowrtW+bjNLO+PS:tj+MS35NLO+PStj+MS0.1NLO+PSfNLO50100150200pT(Jb)[GeV]0.80.91.01.11.2ratiowrtxcut=35ratiowrtxcut=35:xcut=0xcut=1xcut=5(allW+bjNLO+PS)10−1100101Pythia80.70.80.91.01.11.2W+bjratios:LO+PS/NLO+PSfLO/fNLONLO+HW6/NLO+PY8LO+HW6/LO+PY80.80.91.01.11.250100150200pT(Jb)[GeV]0.80.91.01.11.2wig6 at NLO are small, i.e. that NLO+PS is very close to fNLO, with a distribution
only marginally harder (±5% at low and high pT (Jb), respectively). With eﬀects of
around ±10%, Pythia8 departs more from the fNLO result.

3. From the brown dashed and solid curves in the upper right inset, we conclude that
there are only mild shape diﬀerences between the Herwig6 and Pythia8 predictions;
Pythia8 tends to be slightly harder than Herwig6. The ratio of the two MC
predictions displays a more regular behaviour (i.e. in a larger pT range) at the NLO
than at the LO. This is most likely due to the fact that the impact of the matrix-
element normalisation constraint is more important in the former than in the latter
case. Such a pattern is similar to that observed in the case of pT (W +, Jb) but is of
slightly bigger size here, which is consistent with the fact that the present observable
is more dependent on MC modelling than the transverse momentum of the pseudo
top.

4. The trend of the NLO+PS tj+MS curves (solid red, second inset) closely follows that
of the LO+PS W +bj predictions, namely they are softer than the NLO+PS W +bj
benchmarks. The eﬀect is similar to that observed in pT (W +, Jb) but is somewhat
more pronounced here. Given that at fNLO in the NWA it is the corrections to
the decay that induce the dominant features of the fLO/fNLO ratio, and that it is
precisely these corrections that are missing in the MadSpin results, this is a strong
indication that corrections to the decay subprocess are important for this observable.
The independence of the MadSpin result on the BWcut parameter indicates that oﬀ-
shell eﬀects are essentially irrelevant for this observable – a feature that can also be
seen at ﬁxed order.

5. As for the case of pT (W +, Jb), the present observable is relatively insensitive to the
value of xcut. We only observe a marked eﬀect for xcut = 0, with diﬀerences to the
xcut = 35 result of up to 20% in the hard tails, for both showers.

3.2.3 Invariant mass of reconstructed top quark, M (W +, Jb)
The reconstructed top quark mass, M (W +, Jb), displayed in ﬁgure 4, is an important
observable used to tag top quarks and to help separate the single-top signal from its back-
grounds. It may also be used in various ways to extract the top mass from data. At ﬁxed
order, the real-radiation corrections to both production and decay are important and are
the dominant contributions to the shape of the fLO/fNLO ratio. The region above the
peak is sensitive to radiation from the production subprocess, whereas the region below
the peak is sensitive to radiation from the top decay products. Additionally, treating the
top quark as oﬀ-shell is vital to sensibly describe this distribution at ﬁxed order, with the
predictions using the NWA failing to capture most of its features; see ref. [36] for more
details.

1. The eﬀect of the NLO corrections on the LO+PS curve is to skew the distribution
towards the right. The agreement in shape between LO+PS and NLO+PS in the
low-mass region, i.e. the region sensitive to radiation from the ﬁnal-state b-quark, is
satisfactory for both showers (and slightly better for Herwig6). This is an indication

– 18 –

Figure 4. Invariant mass of reconstructed top, M (W +, Jb).

that for this observable, and in this phase-space region, hard radiation originating
from the top-quark decay products is well approximated by the parton showers.
The harder spectra at NLO+PS, particularly visible from the large-mass slope of
the Herwig6 result, stem from hard radiation in the production subprocess being
clustered into Jb by the jet algorithm. The Pythia8 high-mass tail does not show as
strong a trend as Herwig6, likely pointing to more (or harder) production radiation
in the LO results compared to the Herwig6 shower. The fact that this behaviour is
mostly driven by the LO predictions can be inferred from the two brown histograms
in the upper right-hand inset – see item 3 below.

2. The eﬀect of parton showering with respect to ﬁxed-order results is very signiﬁcant
over the full range considered, and exceeds 50% in the bins near the peak. Radiation
by both showers smears and ﬂattens the sharply-peaked ﬁxed-order distribution. This

– 19 –

100101dσ/dM[pb/GeV]Herwig6W+bjNLO+PSW+bjLO+PStj+MS35NLO+PSfNLO0.60.81.01.21.4W+bjratiosLONLO0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6ratiowrtW+bjratiowrtW+bjNLO+PS:tj+MS35NLO+PStj+MS0.1NLO+PSfNLO165170175M(W+,Jb)[GeV]0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6ratiowrtxcut=35ratiowrtxcut=35:xcut=0xcut=1xcut=5(allW+bjNLO+PS)100101Pythia80.60.81.01.21.4W+bjratios:LO+PS/NLO+PSfLO/fNLONLO+HW6/NLO+PY8LO+HW6/LO+PY80.40.60.81.01.21.41.6165170175M(W+,Jb)[GeV]0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6smearing results from the combined eﬀect of ISR and FSR enhancing the high-mass
tail when clustered into the b-jet, and of b-quark FSR enhancing the low-mass tail
when leaking out of the b-jet.

3. The dashed and solid brown curves in the ﬁrst right-hand inset indicate that, both at
LO and NLO, the Pythia8 distributions are ﬂatter overall than the corresponding
Herwig6 ones, with eﬀects as large as 20% and 40% at NLO and LO, respectively.
Despite the remaining visible diﬀerences, there is a substantial improvement in the
consistency of the two showers at NLO, compatible with the increased formal ac-
curacy of the simulation. Diﬀerences between the two showers are to some extent
expected – the smearing cannot be attributed to one single factor, but rather is
a combination of various sources that vary between the showers: diﬀerent αs(mZ)
or ΛQCD choices, diﬀerent showering models (interleaved ISR/FSR in Pythia8 and
sequential ISR/FSR in Herwig6) and diﬀerent hadronisation models.

4. The results for tj+MS are, for large values of BWcut, in good agreement (20% or
better in the case BWcut = 35) with the NLO+PS W +bj distributions. This is par-
ticularly true for Pythia8, especially above the peak, while in the case of Herwig6
the tj+MS result displays a softer behaviour over the full mass range considered.
As for the observables considered previously, for both showers the tj+MS/W +bj
ratio has a similar pattern, though milder (i.e. it is closer to one), as that of the
W +bj LO+PS/NLO+PS ratio. The large discrepancies between the BWcut = 35 and
BWcut = 0.1 results, which are signiﬁcant close to the peak (and, to a lesser extent,
above it), indicate the importance of including oﬀ-shell eﬀects for a good description
of this observable in that region. On the other hand, all BWcut choices appear to be
in good mutual agreement below the peak. This is likely due to oﬀ-shell eﬀects being
subdominant in this region w.r.t. corrections to the top decay products.

5. M (W +, Jb) exhibits a sensitivity to xcut qualitatively similar to that seen for pT (Jb)
and pT (W +, Jb), namely there is a very small dependence for xcut ≥ 1, while the
extreme choice xcut = 0 gives some visible shape distortions9. For both MCs the
xcut = 0 results are ﬂatter, more markedly so with Pythia8, which has also a mild
tendency to skew the distribution rightwards, while in the case of Herwig6 the
skewing is rather leftwards. This shows that, when the MCs have no information
about the intermediate resonance, large model-dependent eﬀects can be introduced
in the resonance structure. In the region of M (W +, Jb) above the peak, Pythia8
appears to be signiﬁcantly more sensitive than Herwig6 to the choice of xcut =
0. This is related to the diﬀerent construction principle underlying the showering
models. While Herwig6 ﬁrst generates initial-state radiation, and follows up by
generating ﬁnal-state emissions, Pythia8 constructs both showers in a combined,
interleaved sequence. Thus, initial- and ﬁnal-state radiation are in direct competition

9This statement depends on the pseudo-top mass range considered. If plotted in a range wider than
that of ﬁgure 4, the xcut = 1 and xcut = 5 results (the former to a much larger extent than the latter, as
expected) would also exhibit increasingly large diﬀerences w.r.t. the xcut = 35 one.

– 20 –

in Pythia8. This competition is drastically diﬀerent for xcut = 0 and xcut = 35. In
general, the PS can emit from the initial-state partons, the light ﬁnal-state partons,
and from the top-quark decay products. In the xcut = 0 case, all of these possibilities
compete with each other for phase space. In the xcut = 35 case, the evolution is split
into showering the production process, and showering the decay products. Thus,
while all partons associated with the production process compete with each other,
the radiation oﬀ the decay products is not encumbered by any competition10. These
diﬀerent mechanisms – due to the diﬀerent evolution prescriptions in the xcut = 0
and ﬁnite xcut cases – lead to the xcut dependence seen in the Pythia8 results.

It is beyond the scope of this work to decide which showering model (interleaved
versus independent) is preferable. We have instead chosen to document the features
related to this choice for the process under consideration, and regard the xcut depen-
dence as a way of parametrising this modelling uncertainty. The fact remains, that
by never writing the top on the hard-event record, one becomes more sensitive to the
diﬀerent underlying shower mechanisms.

3.2.4 Mass of primary b-jet, M (Jb)

Next, we examine the invariant mass of the primary b-jet, M (Jb), displayed in ﬁgure 5.
Due to the analysis setup we have adopted (speciﬁcally the requirement of both a b-jet
and a light jet in the ﬁnal state), at fLO M (Jb) only receives contributions in the ﬁrst
bin, M (Jb) = mb = 0. At fNLO, the region M (Jb) > 0 is ﬁlled by events where real
radiation is clustered together with the b-quark to form the b-jet. Since only real radiation
contributes non-trivially in this region, the fNLO prediction diverges as M (Jb) → 0. Shower
eﬀects are dramatic: the threshold is shifted from zero to the mass of the lowest-lying B
hadron, and the low-mass divergence present at ﬁxed order is oﬀset by the usual Sudakov
damping. Consequently, discrepancies in this case are expected to be signiﬁcant, both in
the comparison between NLO+PS and fNLO results, and between diﬀerent MCs. We point
out that the characteristics of the present observable outlined above render it analogous
to any quantity which has only kinematically-trivial contributions at fLO, meaning that
it displays maximal sensitivity to real radiation and to the shower. In these cases, a by-
product of matching to showers is also that of featuring an NLO-type scale uncertainty in
the region which receives solely non-hard real-emission contributions. This analogy only
holds to a certain extent here since, for the b-jet mass, hard (as opposed to soft) real
radiation cannot be associated with certainty to a speciﬁc region of the phase space. For
example, a hard emission from the initial state could be nearly collinear to the ﬁnal-state b-
quark, yielding a small b-jet mass. However, one expects the impact of these conﬁgurations
to be subdominant.

Jet masses will, in general, aside from an increased sensitivity to perturbative eﬀects
(including NLO-matching systematics), also show a relatively strong dependence on non-

10Note that the absence of competition does not mean the absence of constraints, since overall phase-
space boundaries and momentum conservation have to be respected. For example, if no radiation oﬀ other
legs were present, then the constraints for radiation oﬀ the b quark would be independent of xcut, in the
global recoil scheme.

– 21 –

Figure 5. Mass of primary b-jet, M (Jb).

perturbative and soft-physics modelling; this is particularly true at small masses. There-
fore, any conclusion based on varying only “perturbative parameters” is potentially incom-
plete.

1. Including NLO corrections when matching to parton showers leads to a harder M (Jb)
distribution in the case of Herwig6, while induces only a constant shift for Pythia8.
In both cases the eﬀects are relatively mild (up to 20% for Herwig6, and 10% for
Pythia8), which is remarkable if compared with the situation at ﬁxed order.

2. The eﬀects of parton showering for M (Jb) lead to completely diﬀerent distributions
with respect to ﬁxed-order results; the latter are indeed not particularly sensible for
an observable of this type. As discussed before, this stems from two main reasons.
Firstly, at ﬁxed order the bins for M (Jb) > 0 only receive contributions from real
corrections. Secondly, b-jets are reconstructed at the hadron level, and hence their

– 22 –

10−1100dσ/dM[pb/GeV]Herwig6W+bjNLO+PSW+bjLO+PStj+MS35NLO+PSfNLO0.80.91.01.11.2W+bjratiosLONLO0.80.91.01.11.2ratiowrtW+bjratiowrtW+bjNLO+PS:tj+MS35NLO+PStj+MS0.1NLO+PSfNLO05101520M(Jb)[GeV]0.80.91.01.11.2ratiowrtxcut=35ratiowrtxcut=35:xcut=0xcut=1xcut=5(allW+bjNLO+PS)10−1100Pythia80.80.91.01.11.2W+bjratios:LO+PS/NLO+PSfLO/fNLONLO+HW6/NLO+PY8LO+HW6/LO+PY80.80.91.01.11.205101520M(Jb)[GeV]0.80.91.01.11.2mass threshold is close to the physical mass of B hadrons. We remark, however,
that even if b-jets were reconstructed at the parton level in (N)LO+PS simulations,
one would obtain a very similar threshold, owing to the fact that the MCs need to
b ∼ 5 GeV, in order to give a realistic
turn b quarks into massive objects with mMC
description of b-physics phenomena.

3. The comparison between Pythia8 and Herwig6 reveals sizable diﬀerences, compat-
ible with the fact that this observable receives large contributions both from higher
perturbative orders and from the underlying showers. Nevertheless, given the be-
haviour of the ﬁxed-order results, the (N)LO+PS predictions appear to be reason-
ably close to each other and, in addition, by including the information on the NLO
matrix elements the diﬀerences seen at LO+PS are reduced. In particular, it is reas-
suring that the agreement between Herwig6 and Pythia8 improves to about 15%
in the medium- and high-mass regions. There is also an improvement at low jet
masses (not visible in ﬁgure 5), which however should not be over-interpreted, since
non-perturbative eﬀects are expected to be substantial in this region.

4. The solid-red and dashed-magenta lines in the second inset indicate that the Mad-
Spin results roughly follow similar shape patterns as those of LO+PS W +bj, namely
that they are softer than NLO+PS W +bj for Herwig6, and ﬂat for Pythia8. How-
ever, in absolute value they are in much better agreement than the LO+PS results
with the NLO+PS W +bj predictions. The MadSpin results show no dependence on
the BWcut parameter, indicating that oﬀ-shell eﬀects do not have an impact on the
shape of M (Jb).

5. The third inset shows that Herwig6 and Pythia8 have a vastly diﬀerent dependence
on xcut. The results showered with Herwig6 are mostly independent of xcut (except
in the low-mass region), while those showered with Pythia8 are highly sensitive
to this parameter over the whole range considered. As for the case of M (W +, Jb),
this behaviour can be attributed to the diﬀerent showering models. The Pythia8
sensitivity of the b-jet kinematics on xcut does indeed largely drive the xcut variation
of the reconstructed-top mass that we have observed previously11. Radiation from the
b-quark is the primary source of mass increase in the region of moderate b-jet masses,
i.e. M (Jb) (cid:38) 10 GeV, with other phenomena playing only a subdominant role there
(contributions from splash-in radiation oﬀ other legs become more important at larger
masses, which we do not show in ﬁgure 5). For a vanishing xcut value, as discussed in
item 5 of section 3.2.3, this radiation is always in direct competition with radiation oﬀ
all other initial and ﬁnal state partons, forming a single evolution chain. Conversely,
for non-null values of xcut the radiation oﬀ the b starts without competition. Thus,
it turns out that in this case non-competing radiation oﬀ the b quark ﬁlls the b-jet
more substantially, and leads to a heavier jet. Such an xcut dependence diminishes

11We remark that the xcut dependence of M (Jb) is subdominant as far as the behaviour of the recon-
structed top mass is concerned. In the case of M (W +, Jb), the xcut dependence is chieﬂy driven by changes
in the direction of ﬂight of the b-jet, which renders the M (Jb)− M (W +, Jb) correlation a rather non-trivial
function of xcut and of the mass ranges considered.

– 23 –

at larger M (Jb), owing to oﬀ-b radiation no longer being dominant. The behaviour
at low M (Jb) (cid:46) 10 GeV is also due to the choice of cuts on the b-jet. Lowering the
pT (Jb)-cut in particular leads to a less marked shape diﬀerence between the low- and
high-xcut results. Crucially, we have checked (with LO simulations) that the same
xcut-variation pattern in Pythia8 is found when using the local recoil. Hence, the
striking feature seen in the comparison of the Pythia8 and Herwig6 results is not
due to the recoil scheme we have adopted.

We conclude this section by re-iterating the message that ﬁgure 5 must be seen in its
entirety: diﬀerences between generators are as important as perturbative uncertainties,
and can suggest strategies to improve the description of M (Jb). Furthermore, we point out
that this observable is also quite sensitive to eﬀects controlled by tuning and underlying-
event modelling, which we have not studied here.

3.2.5 Relative transverse momentum of primary b-jet, pT,rel(Jb)

t − m2

We now turn our attention to the transverse momentum of the primary b-jet in the recon-
structed top quark rest frame, relative to the direction of ﬂight of the reconstructed top
quark. We denote this quantity by pT,rel(Jb), and display it in ﬁgure 6. This observable
is challenging to simulate accurately because its shape is – already at ﬁxed order – the
result of a balance between diﬀerent kinematical eﬀects. The sharp edge present in this
distribution corresponds to the value pT,rel(Jb) = (m2
W )/2mt. In the NWA at fLO,
transverse momenta larger than this threshold are kinematically forbidden; the tail beyond
the edge starts appearing at fNLO, due to real corrections to the production subprocess.
NLO corrections to the decay become important near the peak of the distribution, whilst
at the peak and above it becomes crucial to treat the top quark as oﬀ-shell [36]. The
shoulder of the distribution and the region above the peak are shaped by an interplay of
contributions from real emissions that originate from the production subprocess, as well
as resonant/non-resonant interference eﬀects and pure non-resonant eﬀects – the latter
increasing in importance the further one goes into this region of phase space. The sen-
sitivity of the shoulder and the tail of this distribution to mt make it potentially a good
observable for mt-extraction, provided that the theoretical systematics are under control.
Additionally, observables such as this one are well-suited to disentangling top signals from
QCD backgrounds. Therefore, it is imperative that MC predictions are fully understood,
and faithfully describe any signiﬁcant eﬀects over the full range of pT .

1. Overall, it is apparent that the ﬁxed-order K-factor, as in the case of M (W +, Jb),
is smoothed out by the showers. In the region of the shoulder and below the peak,
LO+PS and NLO+PS predictions are similar in shape for both showers. However,
at the kinematic threshold and beyond, the NLO corrections result in a “step up” in
Herwig6 whilst in Pythia8 they do not induce such a change in shape. This is an
indication of how copiously the Pythia8 shower populates this region with radiation
already at LO.

2. The eﬀects of parton showering are mild in the low-pT,rel(Jb) region (especially for
Pythia8), while they are very large at the sharp edge and also visible in the high-

– 24 –

Figure 6. Transverse momentum of primary b-jet, pT (Jb) in top quark rest frame, relative to the
direction of ﬂight of the reconstructed top quark.

pT,rel(Jb) tail. The sharp edge at ﬁxed order is made less steep through the combi-
nation of two eﬀects. Firstly, near the edge (i.e. close to the ﬁxed-order kinematical
threshold) multiple FSR emissions oﬀ the b-quark leaking out of the b-jet lead to
the lowering of the peak. Secondly, emissions from the production process captured
inside Jb enhance the region beyond the sharp edge. We note that the high-pT,rel(Jb)
region is predominantly LO-accurate in the context of the simulations performed
in this paper12, hence the results are expected to have a larger sensitivity to the
various approximations here than elsewhere. This is reﬂected in the shape of the
scale-uncertainty band in the top-left inset.

12This is strictly true in the NWA, while oﬀ-shell eﬀects partially ﬁll the region beyond threshold already

at fLO in the full W +bj computation.

– 25 –

10−210−1100dσ/dpT.rel[pb/GeV]Herwig6W+bjNLO+PSW+bjLO+PStj+MS35NLO+PSfNLO0.60.81.01.21.4W+bjratiosLONLO0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6ratiowrtW+bjratiowrtW+bjNLO+PS:tj+MS35NLO+PStj+MS0.1NLO+PSfNLO6065707580pT.rel(Jb)[GeV]0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6ratiowrtxcut=35ratiowrtxcut=35:xcut=0xcut=1xcut=5(allW+bjNLO+PS)10−210−1100Pythia80.60.81.01.21.4W+bjratios:LO+PS/NLO+PSfLO/fNLONLO+HW6/NLO+PY8LO+HW6/LO+PY80.40.60.81.01.21.41.66065707580pT.rel(Jb)[GeV]0.40.60.81.01.21.41.63. Considering the balance of diﬀerent eﬀects resulting in the shape at ﬁxed order, the
relative agreement between Pythia8 and Herwig6 for this observable is encour-
aging. There is a clear improvement in the agreement when passing from LO+PS
to NLO+PS, even in the high-tail region, where the cross section is reduced by 2–3
orders of magnitude with respect to the peak. The pattern of the Herwig6 over
Pythia8 ratio at the LO+PS level can be understood as due to the larger amount of
radiation (from production) in Pythia8, which enhances the region above threshold,
and thus, by unitarity, decreases the cross section below threshold. At NLO+PS this
feature is very much reduced, with discrepancies smaller than 15% in most bins.

4. For values of pT,rel(Jb) below the sharp edge, all MadSpin results do a very good
job in approximating the shape of the full result in both showers. However, beyond
threshold, the diﬀerences between the two MadSpin BWcut values, as well as the
diﬀerences of these w.r.t. the full result, begin to grow signiﬁcantly, reaching 50%
or more at the edge of the range considered. By moving deeper into this region of
phase space, as also pointed out in ref. [36], the result becomes increasingly sensi-
tive to oﬀ-shell and non-resonant eﬀects. Non-resonant contributions are missing in
the MadSpin results and therefore the diﬀerences between these and the complete
NLO+PS W +bj result can be expected. This comparison indicates that for this ob-
servable and in these regions of phase space the full NLO+PS W +bj computation is
a prerequisite for a reliable description.

5. There is a striking diﬀerence in the dependence of the Herwig6 and Pythia8 re-
sults on the xcut parameter. This is particularly pronounced beyond the edge in the
spectrum, i.e. in the region where both real radiation and non-resonant eﬀects are
very important. The Herwig6 distribution displays at most a 20% dependence on
xcut. On the other hand, beyond the sharp edge the results showered with Pythia8
become very sensitive to xcut, a feature that stems from the same reasons as those
already described in detail in item 5 of sections 3.2.3 and 3.2.4.

3.2.6 Invariant mass of lepton+b-jet system, M (l+, Jb)

The relative transverse momentum discussed in section 3.2.5 can be seen as a member
of a class of observables characterised by the presence of sharp edges due to thresholds
in the NWA. Other examples are the invariant mass of the b-jet-lepton pair, M (l+, Jb),
and the transverse mass of the system composed of the b-jet, the charged lepton, and the
neutrino13.

These observables may have fairly diﬀerent properties from the experimental viewpoint
(in particular as far as the reconstruction of the candidate top pseudo-particle is concerned),
the discussion of which is beyond the scope of the present work. On the other hand, because
of the kinematic features they have in common, they display similar patterns in terms of
the various theoretical approximations that can be used to predict them.

13Strictly speaking, the pseudo-top mass itself also belongs to this category, but being extremely peculiar

it constitutes a case on its own.

– 26 –

To exemplify this fact, in ﬁgure 7, we show the results for M (l+, Jb). This observ-
able is often used as a discriminating variable to help disentangle top-quark signal events
from backgrounds, and interestingly it has been employed to extract the top mass in t-
channel-enhanced events [14]. As can be seen from the plots of ﬁgure 7, the conclusions of
section 3.2.5 also apply, largely unchanged, to the present case.

Figure 7. Invariant mass of lepton+b-jet system, M (l+, Jb).

Given that the diﬀerent predictions have been studied in detail and are now available,
it would be interesting to exploit these to quantify the systematic error on the extraction
of mt via M (l+, Jb) that is introduced through the use of generators that do not include
full oﬀ-shell eﬀects and NLO top-decay corrections.

– 27 –

10−210−1100dσ/dM[pb/GeV]Herwig6W+bjNLO+PSW+bjLO+PStj+MS35NLO+PSfNLO0.60.81.01.21.4W+bjratiosLONLO0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6ratiowrtW+bjratiowrtW+bjNLO+PS:tj+MS35NLO+PStj+MS0.1NLO+PSfNLO120130140150160170180M(l+,Jb)[GeV]0.40.60.81.01.21.41.6ratiowrtxcut=35ratiowrtxcut=35:xcut=0xcut=1xcut=5(allW+bjNLO+PS)10−210−1100Pythia80.60.81.01.21.4W+bjratios:LO+PS/NLO+PSfLO/fNLONLO+HW6/NLO+PY8LO+HW6/LO+PY80.40.60.81.01.21.41.6120130140150160170180M(l+,Jb)[GeV]0.40.60.81.01.21.41.64 Conclusions and outlook

In this paper we have studied t-channel single-top hadroproduction, where full oﬀ-shell
and non-resonant eﬀects are computed at the matrix-element level with NLO accuracy in
QCD, and matching to parton showers is included. We have done so in the context of the
automated MadGraph5 aMC@NLO framework, where we have implemented our solu-
tions in a process-independent way. This constitutes the ﬁrst example, in the MC@NLO
approach, of the matching of an NLO calculation to a parton shower that features an
improved treatment of intermediate coloured resonances.

We have considered two Monte Carlos, Pythia8 and Herwig6, as representatives of
diﬀerent behaviours with regard to several characteristics, most notably shower evolution
and handling of resonances. This has allowed us to deal in detail with a few resonance-
speciﬁc aspects of the matching. Among these were the deﬁnition of the MC counterterms
necessary in the MC@NLO formalism, the treatment of resolved MC emissions oﬀ inter-
mediate top quarks, and the writing of information on these tops in Les-Houches event
ﬁles. The latter item, to a large extent, pertains to MC modelling, and it is thus impor-
tant to keep in mind that the writing of an intermediate top in the hard-event ﬁle can
signiﬁcantly aﬀect how the events look after parton showering. Although we have argued
that including such information is certainly physically motivated, and is consistent with
results obtained in the Γt → 0 limit, we have studied its consequences by parametrising
it by means of an arbitrary dimensionless quantity xcut. It will be interesting to compare
theoretical predictions, and their dependence on xcut, with actual data.

We have obtained results based on a generic ﬁnal-state analysis, chosen to be as similar
as possible to that of the ﬁxed-order calculation presented in ref. [36], in order to allow
for a direct comparison to the latter paper. Overall, it is observed that for this typical
analysis the diﬀerential K-factors at the hadron level can be large and non-constant in
shape. However, as expected, the scale dependence of the results generally decreases when
going to NLO+PS accuracy. Our comparison to the fNLO predictions illustrates that
eﬀects of parton showering and hadronisation can be large (>10-15%). We also ﬁnd that
the agreement between the predictions of the two showers improves at NLO, though the
diﬀerences themselves are found to be sizeable for some observables (in particular for the
invariant mass of the primary b-jet).

An important consequence of the availability of predictions at NLO+PS accuracy, with
full oﬀ-shell eﬀects, is that existing approximations can be scrutinised and validated. We
have made a detailed comparison to the results of stable single-top production at NLO+PS
accuracy, where the spin-correlated decay of the top quark and the leading oﬀ-shell eﬀects
are included by using MadSpin. On the whole, it is observed that the MadSpin results
describe the full results remarkably well, which is certainly encouraging in view of the fact
that the predictions of the former type presently constitute the benchmark for simulations
that involve coloured resonances at LHC experiments. However, we have observed some
notable diﬀerences between stable-top and full results in some of the distributions we have
studied, with an observable-dependent pattern. We have attributed these to NLO eﬀects
in the top-quark decay and to non-resonant eﬀects, neither of which can be described by

– 28 –

the MadSpin procedure, and to oﬀ-shell eﬀects, which MadSpin can simulate only in an
approximate manner. We thus conclude that, when targeting a less-than-10% accuracy, a
better description of intermediate resonances is a necessity.

There are several aspects of this paper that will be interesting to consider in future
work. The most obvious is the application of our ﬁndings to the matching of t¯t produc-
tion with full oﬀ-shell eﬀects (W +W −b¯b) to parton showers. Furthermore, in view of the
sometimes large diﬀerences between the Pythia8 and Herwig6 predictions, it will also
be worthwhile performing a careful study of the impact of shower initial conditions. This
is because single-top production is an example of a multi-scale process for which a more
sophisticated choice of shower scales might be required for an improved phenomenology
treatment (as recently observed e.g. in ref. [70], which also deals with the presence of ﬁnal-
state b quarks). Finally, we point out that our results matched to the Pythia8 shower
show qualitative agreement with those presented in ref. [44], which employ the POWHEG
matching scheme. A thorough comparison of the two approaches using the same inputs
and analysis setup would obviously be of great interest, and one which we intend to pursue.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Bryan Webber for many useful and illuminating discussions on
this topic as well as for providing us with a modiﬁed version of Herwig6 that allowed the
vetoing of PS emissions oﬀ intermediate top quarks.

The work of RF is supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, in the
framework of the Sofja Kovaleskaja Award Project “Event Simulation for the Large Hadron
Collider at High Precision,” endowed by the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research. SF is grateful to CERN TH division for hospitality during the course of this work.
The work of AP is supported by the UK Science and Technology Facilities Council [grant
ST/L002760/1]. SP is supported by the US Department of Energy under contract DE-
AC02-76SF00515. The work of PT has received funding from the European Union Seventh
Framework programme for research and innovation under the Marie Curie grant agreement
N. 609402-2020 researchers: Train to Move (T2M). This work has been supported in part by
the ERC grant 291377 “LHCtheory: Theoretical predictions and analyses of LHC physics:
advancing the precision frontier”.

A Technicalities on the treatment of resonances

In this appendix we sketch the implementation in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO of the type-
IIb solution alluded to in section 2.1.1, for the case of ﬁnal-state singularities relevant to
the FKS sector where the FKS pair belongs to the tree whose root is the resonance β. In
order to simplify the discussion as much as possible, we shall proceed as in section 2.1,
i.e. pretending that only soft singularities are present. However, as mentioned before, in
MadGraph5 aMC@NLO all counterevents associated with a given event have the same
reduced kinematics. Therefore, the actual formulae implemented in the program diﬀer
from those given below only by marginal technical aspects. We also recall that in the

– 29 –

case of the singularities we are interested in, the phase-space parametrisation employed by
MadGraph5 aMC@NLO is that of section 5.2 of ref. [28], and its generalisation to the
case of a massive FKS sister. This implies that, using the labelling of ﬁgure 1:

β(b, ξ) = (kγ + kµ)2 ,
k2

(A.1)

β(b, 0) =(cid:0)¯kγ + ¯kµ

(cid:1)2 ,

k2

where the barred four-momenta ¯k conventionally denote those of the counterevent con-
ﬁguration associated with the event conﬁguration whose four-momenta are denoted by
un-barred symbols k. Furthermore

(A.2)
with B a boost. Therefore, eq. (2.3) is not fulﬁlled, whence the necessity of a type-II
solution.

¯kγ = B kγ ,

¯kµ (cid:54)= B kµ ,

In order to proceed, let us start from the basic expression of the subtracted cross

section, eq. (2.2), that we can replace with:

(cid:90)

(cid:90) ξM(b)

db

dξ

1
ξ

(cid:2)σ(cid:0)k2
β(b, ξ)| b, ξ(cid:1) − σ(cid:0)k2

β(b, 0)| b, 0(cid:1)(cid:3) ,

where:

0

ς(b, ξ) = σ(b, ξ)Θ(ξM(b) − ξ) .

(A.3)

(A.4)

Equation (A.3) diﬀers from eq. (2.2) by a contribution due to the integral of the countert-
erm in the range ξ > ξM(b) (owing to the fact that for the soft counterterm the Θ function
of eq. (A.4) is identically equal to one). As already discussed in section 2.1, Born-like terms
do not pose signiﬁcant problems in the presence of resonances. We shall thus ignore this
contribution in what follows, and deal solely with eq. (A.3). In MadGraph5 aMC@NLO,
the parametrisation of Born-level integration variables in the context of an NLO computa-
tion is identical to that adopted for a tree-level computation of the same multiplicity (see
ref. [51]). This implies that, by construction, one of the variables b will coincide with the
virtuality of the resonance β, computed with the counterevent kinematics. Let us denote
this variable by bβ, and all of the other integration variables collectively by bAβ:

By construction, one has:

b = {bβ, bAβ} .

bβ = k2

β(b, 0) ≡ k2

β(bβ, bAβ, 0) ,

whereas, owing to eqs. (A.1) and (A.2):

bβ (cid:54)= k2

β(bβ, bAβ, ξ) .

(A.5)

(A.6)

(A.7)

Equation (A.7) suggests that k2
β(bβ, bAβ, ξ), seen as a function of bβ at ﬁxed (bAβ, ξ), can be
identiﬁed with Φξ of eq. (2.5) for a one-dimensional change of integration variables for a
type-IIa solution; its inverse can be used for a type-IIb solution.

We have considered both types of approaches, and found that the type-IIa one did not
perform in a satisfactory manner from the numerical viewpoint. The reason is the following:

– 30 –

β(bβ, bAβ, ξ) (cid:39) m2

with a type-IIa solution, both event and (re-mapped) counterevents have a Breit-Wigner
peak at k2
β. This implies that the integration variable bβ will not be
peaked at m2
β, but at a somewhat diﬀerent (typically lower) value. Moreover, and more
importantly, the position of such a peak will be correlated with the value of ξ (and, in the
actual QCD case where collinear singularities are present, with that of the angle between
the FKS parton and its sister). The ﬁrst issue renders it diﬃcult to guess analytically an
eﬃcient change of variables from the relevant “Vegas x” to bβ, which implies a longer-than-
desired grid optimisation, while the second issue eﬀectively hampers such an optimisation
(since correlations are notoriously diﬃcult to handle in adaptive integrations). For this
reason, our solution of choice in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO is a type-IIb one, which we
now proceed to describe in greater detail.

As discussed in section 2.1, type-IIb solutions entail the manipulation of the event con-
tribution. We single out such contribution in eq. (A.3), which we implicitly and temporarily
regularise (e.g. with a cutoﬀ) in order to avoid divergences, and rewrite it as follows:

(cid:90)
(cid:90)

db(cid:48)(cid:90) ξM(b(cid:48))
(cid:90) 1

0

βdb(cid:48)
db(cid:48)
Aβ

0

σ(cid:0)k2
β(b(cid:48), ξ)| b(cid:48), ξ(cid:1)
(cid:16)
Aβ, ξ)| b(cid:48)

β(b(cid:48)
k2

β, b(cid:48)

σ

dξ
ξ
dξ
ξ

E =

≡

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

Θ

ξM(b(cid:48)

β, b(cid:48)

Aβ) − ξ

(cid:17)

,

(A.8)

β, b(cid:48)

Aβ, ξ

having trivially renamed b as b(cid:48). We then perform the following change of integration
variables:

{b(cid:48)
β, b(cid:48)

Aβ} −→ {bβ, bAβ} ,

b(cid:48)
Aβ = bAβ ,

b(cid:48)
β = k2−1

β

(bβ, bAβ, ξ) ,

(A.9)

whence eq. (A.8) becomes:

(cid:90)

E =

dbβdbAβ

(cid:90) 1

0

dξ
ξ

∂k2−1

β

(cid:16)

(bβ, bAβ, ξ)
∂bβ
bβ | k2−1

β

× σ

(cid:16)

Θ

ξM(k2−1

β

(bβ, bAβ, ξ), bAβ, ξ

.

(bβ, bAβ, ξ), bAβ) − ξ
(cid:17)

(cid:17)

(A.10)

The ﬁrst argument of σ in eq. (A.10) shows that the event now has the desired property
(thanks to eq. (A.6)), namely that the reconstructed invariant mass of the resonance is

equal to that of the counterevent (generated with the same {bβ, bAβ} and not re-mapped), in

keeping with the general derivation of type-IIb solutions. A drawback of eq. (A.10) is the
possible diﬃculty of computing the jacobian analytically; in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO
we bypassed this problem by resorting to entirely numerical methods, with excellent per-
formances in terms of stability and accuracy. The re-mapped subtracted cross section
can ﬁnally be obtained by replacing the event contribution to eq. (A.3) with the r.h.s. of
eq. (A.10). Such a form is essentially what is implemented in MadGraph5 aMC@NLO,
barring numerically-small contributions due to the following features.

• The support of k2

β(bβ, bAβ, ξ) is in general diﬀerent w.r.t. that of its inverse. In this
case, where either the event or the counterevents are equal to zero, no re-mapping is
performed.

– 31 –

• It may happen that, for certain values of ξ (typically far from zero, and with a massive
FKS sister) and close to the borders of the support of k2
β(bβ, bAβ, ξ), such a function
is not monotonic. Although one could carry out the procedure outlined above in a
piece-wise manner, we have opted for not performing the re-mapping in such a case.

Finally, we point out that in our code the integration variable relevant to the FKS soft
subtraction is not ξ, but actually its rescaled version ˆξ, deﬁned so that ξ = ˆξξM(b). This
guarantees a better numerical performance, chieﬂy owing to the complete absence of cor-
relations between ˆξ and other integration variables.

References

[1] CDF Collaboration, T. Aaltonen et al., First Observation of Electroweak Single Top Quark

Production, Phys.Rev.Lett. 103 (2009) 092002, [arXiv:0903.0885].

[2] D0 Collaboration, V. Abazov et al., Observation of Single Top Quark Production,

Phys.Rev.Lett. 103 (2009) 092001, [arXiv:0903.0850].

[3] CDF Collaboration, T. Aaltonen et al., Observation of Single Top Quark Production and
Measurement of —Vtb— with CDF, Phys. Rev. D82 (2010) 112005, [arXiv:1004.1181].

[4] D0 Collaboration, V. M. Abazov et al., Model-independent measurement of t-channel single

√

s = 1.96 TeV, Phys. Lett. B705 (2011) 313–319,

top quark production in p¯p collisions at
[arXiv:1105.2788].

[5] CDF, D0 Collaboration, T. A. Aaltonen et al., Tevatron Combination of Single-Top-Quark

Cross Sections and Determination of the Magnitude of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa
Matrix Element Vtb, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (2015), no. 15 152003, [arXiv:1503.05027].

[6] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., Measurement of the t-channel single top-quark

production cross section in pp collisions at
B717 (2012) 330–350, [arXiv:1205.3130].

s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Phys.Lett.

√

√

[7] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., Comprehensive measurements of t-channel single
s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Phys. Rev.

√

top-quark production cross sections at
D90 (2014), no. 11 112006, [arXiv:1406.7844].

[8] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., Measurement of t-Channel Single Top-Quark

Production in pp Collisions at sqrt(s) = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector,
ATLAS-CONF-2012-132.

[9] CMS Collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et al., Measurement of the t-channel single top quark

production cross section in pp collisions at
[arXiv:1106.3052].

s = 7 TeV, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107 (2011) 091802,

[10] CMS Collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et al., Measurement of the single-top-quark t-channel
s = 7 TeV, JHEP 1212 (2012) 035, [arXiv:1209.4533].

cross section in pp collisions at

√

[11] CMS Collaboration, V. Khachatryan et al., Measurement of the t-channel single-top-quark

production cross section and of the | Vtb | CKM matrix element in pp collisions at
TeV, JHEP 06 (2014) 090, [arXiv:1403.7366].

√

s= 8

[12] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., Measurement of the inclusive cross-section of single
s = 13 TeV, ATLAS-CONF-2015-079.

top-quark t-channel production in pp collisions at

√

– 32 –

[13] CMS Collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et al., Measurement of the t-channel single top-quark

cross section at 13 TeV, CMS-PAS-TOP-15-004.

[14] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., Measurement of the top quark mass in topologies
s = 8 TeV ATLAS data,

enhanced with single top-quarks produced in the t-channel in
ATLAS-CONF-2014-055.

√

[15] CMS Collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et al., Evidence for associated production of a single top

quark and W boson in pp collisions at
[arXiv:1209.3489].

s = 7 TeV, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013) 022003,

√

√

[16] CDF, D0 Collaboration, T. A. Aaltonen et al., Observation of s-channel production of

single top quarks at the Tevatron, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014) 231803, [arXiv:1402.5126].

[17] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., Measurement of the production cross-section of a

single top quark in association with a W boson at 8 TeV with the ATLAS experiment, JHEP
01 (2016) 064, [arXiv:1510.03752].

[18] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., Evidence for single top-quark production in the

s-channel in proton-proton collisions at
Matrix Element Method, arXiv:1511.05980.

s =8 TeV with the ATLAS detector using the

[19] C. Zhang and S. Willenbrock, Eﬀective-Field-Theory Approach to Top-Quark Production and

Decay, Phys. Rev. D83 (2011) 034006, [arXiv:1008.3869].

[20] Q.-H. Cao, B. Yan, J.-H. Yu, and C. Zhang, A General Analysis of W tb anomalous

Couplings, arXiv:1504.03785.

[21] CMS Collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et al., Search for anomalous Wtb couplings and top

FCNC in t-channel single-top-quark events, CMS-PAS-TOP-14-007.

[22] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et al., Search for anomalous couplings in the W tb vertex

from the measurement of double diﬀerential angular decay rates of single top quarks produced
in the t-channel with the ATLAS detector, arXiv:1510.03764.

[23] S. Frixione, E. Laenen, P. Motylinski, and B. R. Webber, Single-top production in MC@NLO,

JHEP 0603 (2006) 092, [hep-ph/0512250].

[24] S. Alioli, P. Nason, C. Oleari, and E. Re, NLO single-top production matched with shower in

POWHEG: s- and t-channel contributions, JHEP 0909 (2009) 111, [arXiv:0907.4076].

[25] R. Frederix, E. Re, and P. Torrielli, Single-top t-channel hadroproduction in the four-ﬂavour

scheme with POWHEG and aMC@NLO, JHEP 1209 (2012) 130, [arXiv:1207.5391].

[26] S. Frixione and B. R. Webber, Matching NLO QCD computations and parton shower

simulations, JHEP 0206 (2002) 029, [hep-ph/0204244].

[27] P. Nason, A New method for combining NLO QCD with shower Monte Carlo algorithms,

JHEP 0411 (2004) 040, [hep-ph/0409146].

[28] S. Frixione, P. Nason, and C. Oleari, Matching NLO QCD computations with Parton Shower

simulations: the POWHEG method, JHEP 0711 (2007) 070, [arXiv:0709.2092].

[29] S. Frixione, E. Laenen, P. Motylinski, and B. R. Webber, Angular correlations of lepton pairs
from vector boson and top quark decays in Monte Carlo simulations, JHEP 0704 (2007) 081,
[hep-ph/0702198].

[30] J. M. Campbell, R. K. Ellis, and F. Tramontano, Single top production and decay at

next-to-leading order, Phys.Rev. D70 (2004) 094012, [hep-ph/0408158].

– 33 –

[31] S. Heim, Q.-H. Cao, R. Schwienhorst, and C.-P. Yuan, Next-to-leading order QCD

corrections to s-channel single top quark production and decay at the LHC, Phys.Rev. D81
(2010) 034005, [arXiv:0911.0620].

[32] R. Schwienhorst, C.-P. Yuan, C. Mueller, and Q.-H. Cao, Single top quark production and
decay in the t-channel at next-to-leading order at the LHC, Phys.Rev. D83 (2011) 034019,
[arXiv:1012.5132].

[33] J. M. Campbell and R. K. Ellis, Top-quark processes at NLO in production and decay, J.

Phys. G42 (2015), no. 1 015005, [arXiv:1204.1513].

[34] P. Falgari, P. Mellor, and A. Signer, Production-decay interferences at NLO in QCD for

t-channel single-top production, Phys.Rev. D82 (2010) 054028, [arXiv:1007.0893].

[35] P. Falgari, F. Giannuzzi, P. Mellor, and A. Signer, Oﬀ-shell eﬀects for t-channel and

s-channel single-top production at NLO in QCD, Phys.Rev. D83 (2011) 094013,
[arXiv:1102.5267].

[36] A. Papanastasiou, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi, and F. Maltoni, Single-top t-channel

production with oﬀ-shell and non-resonant eﬀects, Phys.Lett. B726 (2013) 223–227,
[arXiv:1305.7088].

[37] A. Denner, S. Dittmaier, M. Roth, and D. Wackeroth, Predictions for all processes e+e− → 4

fermions +γ, Nucl.Phys. B560 (1999) 33–65, [hep-ph/9904472].

[38] A. Denner, S. Dittmaier, M. Roth, and L. Wieders, Electroweak corrections to

charged-current e+e− → 4 fermion processes: Technical details and further results,
Nucl.Phys. B724 (2005) 247–294, [hep-ph/0505042].

[39] K. Melnikov and M. Schulze, NLO QCD corrections to top quark pair production and decay

at hadron colliders, JHEP 0908 (2009) 049, [arXiv:0907.3090].

[40] A. Denner, S. Dittmaier, S. Kallweit, and S. Pozzorini, NLO QCD corrections to WWbb

production at hadron colliders, Phys.Rev.Lett. 106 (2011) 052001, [arXiv:1012.3975].

[41] SM AND NLO MULTILEG and SM MC Working Groups Collaboration,

J. Alcaraz Maestre et al., The SM and NLO Multileg and SM MC Working Groups:
Summary Report, arXiv:1203.6803.

[42] P. Falgari, A. S. Papanastasiou, and A. Signer, Finite-width eﬀects in unstable-particle

production at hadron colliders, JHEP 05 (2013) 156, [arXiv:1303.5299].

[43] J. M. Campbell, R. K. Ellis, P. Nason, and E. Re, Top-pair production and decay at NLO

matched with parton showers, JHEP 04 (2015) 114, [arXiv:1412.1828].

[44] T. Jeˇzo and P. Nason, On the Treatment of Resonances in Next-to-Leading Order

Calculations Matched to a Parton Shower, JHEP 12 (2015) 065, [arXiv:1509.09071].

[45] G. Corcella, I. Knowles, G. Marchesini, S. Moretti, K. Odagiri, et al., HERWIG 6: An Event

generator for hadron emission reactions with interfering gluons (including supersymmetric
processes), JHEP 0101 (2001) 010, [hep-ph/0011363].

[46] G. Corcella, I. Knowles, G. Marchesini, S. Moretti, K. Odagiri, et al., HERWIG 6.5 release

note, hep-ph/0210213.

[47] T. Sjostrand, S. Mrenna, and P. Z. Skands, A Brief Introduction to PYTHIA 8.1,

Comput.Phys.Commun. 178 (2008) 852–867, [arXiv:0710.3820].

– 34 –

[48] J. Alwall, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi, F. Maltoni, et al., The automated computation
of tree-level and next-to-leading order diﬀerential cross sections, and their matching to parton
shower simulations, JHEP 1407 (2014) 079, [arXiv:1405.0301].

[49] S. Frixione, Z. Kunszt, and A. Signer, Three jet cross-sections to next-to-leading order,

Nucl.Phys. B467 (1996) 399–442, [hep-ph/9512328].

[50] S. Frixione, A General approach to jet cross-sections in QCD, Nucl.Phys. B507 (1997)

295–314, [hep-ph/9706545].

[51] R. Frederix, S. Frixione, F. Maltoni, and T. Stelzer, Automation of next-to-leading order

computations in QCD: The FKS subtraction, JHEP 0910 (2009) 003, [arXiv:0908.4272].

[52] G. Ossola, C. G. Papadopoulos, and R. Pittau, Reducing full one-loop amplitudes to scalar

integrals at the integrand level, Nucl.Phys. B763 (2007) 147–169, [hep-ph/0609007].

[53] G. Passarino and M. Veltman, One Loop Corrections for e+e− Annihilation Into µ+µ− in

the Weinberg Model, Nucl.Phys. B160 (1979) 151.

[54] A. I. Davydychev, A Simple formula for reducing Feynman diagrams to scalar integrals,

Phys.Lett. B263 (1991) 107–111.

[55] A. Denner and S. Dittmaier, Reduction schemes for one-loop tensor integrals, Nucl. Phys.

B734 (2006) 62–115, [hep-ph/0509141].

[56] V. Hirschi, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, M. V. Garzelli, F. Maltoni, et al., Automation of

one-loop QCD corrections, JHEP 1105 (2011) 044, [arXiv:1103.0621].

[57] G. Ossola, C. G. Papadopoulos, and R. Pittau, CutTools: A Program implementing the OPP

reduction method to compute one-loop amplitudes, JHEP 0803 (2008) 042,
[arXiv:0711.3596].

[58] F. Cascioli, P. Maierhofer, and S. Pozzorini, Scattering Amplitudes with Open Loops,

Phys.Rev.Lett. 108 (2012) 111601, [arXiv:1111.5206].

[59] F. Maltoni and T. Stelzer, MadEvent: Automatic event generation with MadGraph, JHEP 02

(2003) 027, [hep-ph/0208156].

[60] G. Bevilacqua, M. Czakon, A. van Hameren, C. G. Papadopoulos, and M. Worek, Complete

oﬀ-shell eﬀects in top quark pair hadroproduction with leptonic decay at next-to-leading
order, JHEP 1102 (2011) 083, [arXiv:1012.4230].

[61] A. Denner, S. Dittmaier, S. Kallweit, and S. Pozzorini, NLO QCD corrections to oﬀ-shell

top-antitop production with leptonic decays at hadron colliders, JHEP 1210 (2012) 110,
[arXiv:1207.5018].

[62] R. Frederix, Top Quark Induced Backgrounds to Higgs Production in the W W (∗) → llνν

Decay Channel at Next-to-Leading-Order in QCD, Phys.Rev.Lett. 112 (2014), no. 8 082002,
[arXiv:1311.4893].

[63] F. Cascioli, S. Kallweit, P. Maierhfer, and S. Pozzorini, A uniﬁed NLO description of

top-pair and associated Wt production, Eur.Phys.J. C74 (2014) 2783, [arXiv:1312.0546].

[64] G. Heinrich, A. Maier, R. Nisius, J. Schlenk, and J. Winter, NLO QCD corrections to

W +W −b¯b production with leptonic decays in the light of top quark mass and asymmetry
measurements, JHEP 1406 (2014) 158, [arXiv:1312.6659].

[65] S. Catani, Y. L. Dokshitzer, M. Seymour, and B. Webber, Longitudinally invariant Kt

clustering algorithms for hadron hadron collisions, Nucl.Phys. B406 (1993) 187–224.

– 35 –

[66] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam, and G. Soyez, FastJet User Manual, Eur.Phys.J. C72 (2012) 1896,

[arXiv:1111.6097].

[67] P. Artoisenet, R. Frederix, O. Mattelaer, and R. Rietkerk, Automatic spin-entangled decays of

heavy resonances in Monte Carlo simulations, JHEP 1303 (2013) 015, [arXiv:1212.3460].

[68] R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi, F. Maltoni, R. Pittau, et al., Four-lepton production at
hadron colliders: aMC@NLO predictions with theoretical uncertainties, JHEP 1202 (2012)
099, [arXiv:1110.4738].

[69] A. Martin, W. Stirling, R. Thorne, and G. Watt, Parton distributions for the LHC,

Eur.Phys.J. C63 (2009) 189–285, [arXiv:0901.0002].

[70] M. Wiesemann, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi, F. Maltoni, and P. Torrielli, Higgs
production in association with bottom quarks, JHEP 02 (2015) 132, [arXiv:1409.5301].

– 36 –

