6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
6
8
1
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

Preprint 4 March 2016

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style ﬁle v3.0

Solar cycle variation of interstellar neutral He, Ne, O
density and pick-up ions along the Earth’s orbit

Justyna M. Sok´o l1⋆, Maciej Bzowski1, Marzena A. Kubiak1, and Eberhard M¨obius2
1Space Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, 00-716 Warsaw, Poland
2University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH 03824, USA

Accepted 2016 March 01. Received 2016 February 27; in original form 2015 November 03.

ABSTRACT
We simulated the modulation of the interstellar neutral (ISN) He, Ne, and O density
and pick-up ion (PUI) production rate and count rate along the Earth’s orbit over the
solar cycle from 2002 to 2013 to verify if solar cycle-related eﬀects may modify the
inferred ecliptic longitude of the ISN inﬂow direction. We adopted the classical PUI
model with isotropic distribution function and adiabatic cooling, modiﬁed by time-
and heliolatitude-dependent ionization rates and non-zero injection speed of PUIs. We
found that the ionization losses have a noticeable eﬀect on the derivation of the ISN
inﬂow longitude based on the Gaussian ﬁt to the crescent and cone peak locations.
We conclude that the non-zero radial velocity of the ISN ﬂow and the energy range
of the PUI distribution function that is accumulated are of importance for a precise
reproduction of the PUI count rate along the Earth orbit. However, the temporal
and latitudinal variations of the ionization in the heliosphere, and particularly their
variation on the solar cycle time scale, may signiﬁcantly modify the shape of PUI cone
and crescent and also their peak positions from year to year and thus bias by a few
degrees the derived longitude of the ISN gas inﬂow direction.

Key words: Sun: heliosphere, ISM: atoms, (Sun:) solar wind, interplanetary medium,
Sun: activity, ISM: kinematics and dynamics

1 INTRODUCTION

After theoretical predictions in mid 1970-ties (Axford 1972;
Vasyliunas & Siscoe 1976) and the ﬁrst successful observa-
tions in mid 1980-ties by AMPTE (M¨obius et al. 1985) and
later by Ulysses (Gloeckler et al. 1993; Geiss et al. 1994)
pick-up ions (PUIs) have been used as a tool to investi-
gate the environment inside and outside the heliosphere.
The so-called interstellar PUIs (e.g. Gloeckler et al. 2004;
Drews et al. 2012) are created through ionization of in-
terstellar neutral (ISN) atoms by the solar wind and so-
lar EUV radiation. Together with direct sampling of ISN
He (by Ulysses (Witte et al. 1992; Witte 2004) and IBEX
(McComas et al. 2009; M¨obius et al. 2009)) and observa-
tions of the helium backscatter glow (e.g. Weller & Meier
1974; Vallerga et al. 2004) PUIs provide an important in-
sight into the very local interstellar medium.

Before the IBEX launch, the inﬂow direction of the
helium component of the ISN gas was determined to
be λ ∼ 255◦ (Witte (2004), ecliptic longitude, J2000
epoch; see also review by M¨obius et al. (2004)). Analy-
sis of the ﬁrst two years of IBEX data (Bzowski et al.

⋆ E-mail: jsokol@cbk.waw.pl (JMS)

c(cid:13) 2015 The Authors

2012; M¨obius et al. 2012) suggested that this direction may
be diﬀerent by ∼ 4◦ toward larger values. This ﬁnding
was supported by an analysis of PUI measurements from
STEREO A/PLASTIC (Drews et al. 2012). The diﬀerence
between the ISN inﬂow direction determined from the past
and present measurements encouraged Frisch et al. (2013,
2015) to review the determinations of the inﬂow direc-
tion of the ISN He gas into the heliosphere during the
last 40 years. They gathered results obtained using diﬀer-
ent observational and analysis methods and pointed out
that a change in the inﬂow longitude over time was sta-
tistically more likely than the lack of change. An impor-
tant support of this hypothesis was the result of the anal-
ysis of the ﬁrst two seasons of IBEX observations of ISN
He, and the He, Ne, and O PUI count rate observed by
STEREO. However, recent reanalysis of the Ulysses data
(Bzowski et al. 2014; Wood et al. 2015) and the newest anal-
ysis of IBEX data (Bzowski et al. 2015; Schwadron et al.
2015; McComas et al. 2015b,a; Leonard et al. 2015) showed
that the velocity vectors of the ISN gas derived from these
two data sets are similar within uncertainties, with the tem-
perature of the ISN gas higher than previously thought
(Witte 2004). Therefore the hypothesis of a temporal change
in the ISN gas inﬂow direction is not supported.

2

J. M. Sok´o l et al.

The

results

of

analysis

the PUI

from the
STEREO A/PLASTIC measurements by Drews et al.
(2012)
indicated an inﬂow ecliptic longitude diﬀerent
than the present consensus value of ∼ 255◦. They were
obtained from analysis of the He, Ne, and O PUIs and the
observed locations of the peak of the cone and crescent
(an enhancement in the PUI count rate in the upwind
direction, opposite to the peak of the downwind focusing
cone). In this paper, we look into details of the production
of He, Ne, O PUIs to test if the apparent shifts in the ISN
longitude observed by Drews et al. (2012) may be related
to variations in the ionization of interstellar gas due to solar
activity changes. The diﬀerences in the inﬂow direction
derived from ISN gas and PUI measurements motivate us
to study how accurate the determination of the neutral
interstellar ﬂow direction is when it is based on the position
of the downwind cone and upwind crescent of the PUIs
close to the Sun observed by a spacecraft orbiting the
Sun similarly as Earth does. The key question is whether
eﬀects of time- and latitude-variation of the ionization rate
on the ISN gas distribution along the Earth’s orbit can
masquerade as a change of the inﬂow direction.

We performed a theoretical study of the structure of the
ISN He, Ne, and O gas density and their PUIs at the Earth’s
orbit1 and of the evolution of this structure during solar cy-
cle. We assumed a constant inﬂow direction of ISN gas in
front of the heliosphere and calculated the density of the
gas inside Earth’s orbit from 2002 to 2013. Based on these
densities, the instantaneous local production rate of PUIs at
Earth was determined, and subsequently the expected count
rates of PUIs measured by an electrostatic analyzer were cal-
culated. We studied the factors responsible for modulation
of the modeled quantities with special attention to the mod-
iﬁcation of the observed signatures by the ionization rates
close to the Sun and the presence of the crescent at the up-
wind side. Finally, we determined the longitude of the peak
locations approximating the cone and crescent peaks with
a Gaussian function and compared them with the longitude
of the ISN ﬂow assumed in the simulation of the ISN gas
density.

Section 2 presents details of the model. In Section 3, the
densities of ISN He, Ne, and O are shown. Section 4 presents
the PUI productions rates at Earth and the expected count
rates. The peak locations from the Gaussian ﬁt are shown
in Section 5. Section 6 summarizes the results and concludes
the study.

2 MODELS AND SIMULATIONS

Ruci´nski et al. (2003) presented an analysis of the expected
modulation of the ISN He density and PUI ﬂux in the he-
liosphere as a function of distance from the Sun over a so-
lar activity cycle. We extend their analysis to Ne and O,
and in contrast to Ruci´nski et al. (2003), who took into ac-
count only spherically symmetric photoionization losses, we

1 By “at Earth”, “at the Earth’s orbit” etc. we mean the locations
precisely at the instantaneous distance of the Earth from the Sun,
not 1 AU. The reason for this diﬀerentiation will be explained
later in the text.

include all the most relevant ionization processes, it is pho-
toionization by solar EUV radiation, charge exchange with
solar wind particles, and electron impact ionization. The
total ionization rate is a sum of photoionization, which is
mostly responsible for the global, solar-cycle related modu-
lation of the total ionization rate, electron-impact ionization,
which is responsible for slight departures of the total ioniza-
tion rate from the inverse-square dependence on the helio-
centric distance and contributes to the heliolatitudinal struc-
ture in the ionization ﬁeld, and charge exchange between ISN
atoms and solar wind ions, which is mostly responsible for
the heliolatitude dependence of the total ionization rate. All
three reactions feature signiﬁcant daily and monthly quasi-
random ﬂuctuations. We include the deviation of the ion-
ization rate from spherical symmetry due to the latitudi-
nal dependence of the solar wind speed and density (see
Sok´o l et al. (2013), and for a most recent review Sok´o l et al.
(2015b)). In our analysis we use a model of ionization rates
based on observations (Bzowski et al. 2013b; Sok´o l et al.
2013; Bochsler et al. 2014; Sok´o l & Bzowski 2014). Time-
dependent eﬀects in the distribution of ISN gas were studied
by Ruci´nski & Bzowski (1995, 1996); Bzowski et al. (1997)
and Bzowski (2003) for H and by Ruci´nski et al. (2003) for
He, but to our knowledge, the time evolution of the ISN
Ne and O density has not been available in the literature.
As we will show, even seemingly small eﬀects of solar cycle
modulated ionization are important, especially for ISN O.

The densities of ISN He, Ne, and O were calcu-
lated using the Warsaw Test Particle Model (WTPM; see
Bzowski et al. (2012); Kubiak et al. (2014), and for recent
review Sok´o l et al. (2015a)) for a Maxwell-Boltzmann dis-
tribution of the ISN gas in front of the heliosphere. This
model follows the original “hot model” paradigm (Fahr 1978;
Thomas 1978; Wu & Judge 1979), modiﬁed to account for
ionization losses dependent on time and heliolatitude. In this
paper, we focused on one full solar activity cycle (SC) from
the maximum of SC 23 (≈ 2002) to the maximum of SC 24
(≈ 2013). We chose this time interval to have a homogeneous
time series of daily photoionization rates, which are available
as a continuous and long time series only from TIMED/SEE
(Woods et al. 2005), launched in 2002. The photoionization
rates were calculated by direct integration of the solar EUV
ﬂux measurements from TIMED/SEE (Level3 data, ver-
sion 11) multiplied by the cross section from Verner et al.
(1996) (for a detailed discussion of the photoionization mod-
els see Bochsler et al. (2014) and Sok´o l & Bzowski (2014)).
For photoionization rates, the pole-to-equator ﬂattening of
the latitudinal structure was adopted after Auch`ere et al.
(2005b,a) (see also discussion in Bzowski et al. (2013a)). The
latitudinal structure of the solar wind proton speed and den-
sity was adopted from Sok´o l et al. (2013), with the OMNI
(King & Papitashvili 2005) solar wind time series for the
ecliptic plane. We assumed a 1/r2 decrease with distance
from the Sun r for the solar wind density and photoion-
ization rates and we assumed that solar wind speed does
not change over the distances from the Sun that we stud-
ied. The electron impact ionization rate was calculated fol-
lowing a model proposed by Ruci´nski & Fahr (1989, 1991),
adapted originally for ISN H by Bzowski (2008), and devel-
oped for ISN He, Ne, and O by Bzowski et al. (2013b). In
this model, a measurement-based relation of the decrease
of the electron impact ionization rate with distance from

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

the Sun was adopted, which does not follow the 1/r2 re-
lation (see Figure 2 in Bzowski et al. (2013b)). In eﬀect,
this source of ionization becomes important mostly inside
∼ 2 AU from the Sun. In the calculation of the ISN gas den-
sity in the heliosphere we used ionization rates averaged over
solar (Carrington) rotation2 periods linearly interpolated to
daily values.

The latitudinal structure of the ionization rates aﬀects
mostly the charge exchange ionization process (due to the
latitudinal variation of the solar wind, right panel of Fig-
ure 1), which is an signiﬁcant source of ionization losses for
ISN O, contributing up to 40% of the total ionization rate
in the ecliptic plane. For ISN Ne, charge exchange is less
important, and for ISN He almost negligible (see Figure 1
in Bzowski et al. (2013b)). The left-hand panel in Figure 1
presents the total ionization rate for He, Ne, and O at the
Earth’s orbit as a daily and CR-averaged time series. The
ﬁgure presents time variations over the interval studied in
this analysis. The daily series varies rapidly due to the short-
scale ﬂuctuations of the solar wind and EUV ﬂux, and the
general trend is illustrated by the CR averages. The rates
for He and Ne show clear variations with the solar activ-
ity cycle, while for O these variations are less pronounced.
This is due to the large contribution of charge exchange
with solar wind protons to the total ionization rate for O,
which follows the evolution of the solar wind ﬂux with time.
The solar wind ﬂux featured a secular drop during the pre-
vious two solar activity cycles (e.g. McComas et al. 2008;
Sok´o l et al. 2013; McComas et al. 2013), and close to the
ecliptic plane it does not vary quasi-periodically with solar
activity. Consequently, the quasi-periodic component in the
ionization rate for O is weaker than in the ionization rates for
He and Ne, which have a dominant contribution from pho-
toionization rate, strongly modulated by solar activity (see
also discussion in Bzowski et al. (2013b)). The total ioniza-
tion rate increases from a minimum to maximum value by
a factor of about 2.5 for He, 2.8 for Ne, and 2 for O. Even
though the amplitude of variation of the ionization rate is
the weakest for O, the total rate is the highest, which results
in the largest attenuation of the ISN O gas measured in the
Earth’s orbit.

The right-hand panel in Figure 1 shows the diﬀerences
in the latitudinal structure of the total ionization rates at
1 AU for ISN O for three selected years (in this case only, in
the approximation of stationary atoms3). During solar min-
imum, the solar wind exhibits a bi-modal structure, with a
slow and dense streams at low latitudes, and a fast and di-
lute ﬂow at high latitudes, with a transition region at mid
latitudes. During a short interval of a few months at solar
maximum, the slow solar wind extends to mid- and high lat-
itudes and the structure of the solar wind outﬂow is almost
uniform in latitude. The modulation in the solar wind struc-
ture in the northern and southern hemispheres is shifted in
phase (see Figure 20 in Sok´o l et al. (2013), Figures 7 and

2 1 sidereal solar rotation = 27.2753 days (Carrington rotation,
CR afterward)
3 In the stationary atom approximation, the charge exchange col-
lision speed is adopted as equal to the solar wind expansion speed.
In reality, a more accurate approximation would use the magni-
tude of the vector diﬀerence between the radial speed of solar
wind and the instantaneous orbital velocity of the atom.

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

ISN He, Ne, O density and PUI

3

11 in Sok´o l et al. (2015b), and Tokumaru et al. (2015)). In
eﬀect, the solar wind structure is approximately spherically
symmetric only for a very short time during the solar cy-
cle, and, as illustrated in the right panel of Figure 1, the
charge exchange ionization rate is uniform in heliolatitude
also during solar maximum. Many of the ISN atoms detected
in the ecliptic plane traverse also higher latitudes during
their travel from the front region of the heliosphere. There-
fore the latitudinal structure of the ionization rate, espe-
cially for ISN O, has to be appropriately taken into account
in the calculation of the ISN gas distribution, especially on
the downwind side.

Our objective is to test how the PUI count rate, mea-
sured by a spaceborne detector in the Earth’s orbit, re-
ﬂects the ISN gas ﬂow direction in front of the helio-
sphere. We used the ISN gas parameters derived from the
analysis of IBEX measurements of ISN He in 2009 and
2010 after Bzowski et al. (2012) (longitude 259.2◦, latitude
5.12◦ (ecliptic coordinate system for J2000 epoch), speed
22.756 km s−1, and temperature 6165 K), with the longi-
tude similar to that found by Drews et al. (2012) from the
analysis of PUI measurements. We used these values in all
simulations, unless stated otherwise. These ISN parameters
are now updated in the analysis of McComas et al. (2015a);
Bzowski et al. (2015); Schwadron et al. (2015), but in our
analysis we decided to keep the direction consistent with
the result of the PUI study presented by Drews et al. (2012)
to test whether this direction might be shifted in longitude
by ionization processes. We started our test particle calcu-
lations with the gas ﬂowing from the source region (set at
150 AU from the Sun) and searched how the bulk ﬂow is
modiﬁed between the source region in front of the helio-
sphere and the Earth’s orbit by the gravitational focusing
and the ionization ﬁeld in the heliosphere. We worked in the
Sun-centered ecliptic coordinate frame and we maintained
this convention throughout the paper. We carried out the
analysis based on one ﬁxed, arbitrary set of the inﬂow pa-
rameters, but we checked that the conclusions do not depend
on the adopted ISN ﬂow direction.

3 DENSITIES OF ISN HE, NE, AND O

In the ﬁrst step, we calculated the densities of the ISN
species assuming the following densities in the source re-
gion in the Local Interstellar Cloud (LIC): 0.015 cm−3 for
He, 0.582 × 10−5 cm−3 for Ne, and 0.5 × 10−4 cm−3 for O
(Slavin & Frisch 2007, 2008). These densities result from the
abundance of these species in interstellar matter on one hand
and from the ionization state of these species in the LIC on
the other hand. The densities inside the heliosphere were
simulated at a one-day resolution from February 9, 2002
through July 20, 2013, but with a CR average applied to
the ionization rates (dark lines in the left panel of Figure 1).
Figure 2 shows the full sequence of the resulting density of
ISN He, Ne, and O observed along the Earth’s orbit as a
function of time. In Figure 3, we compare normalized densi-
ties for the solar minimum (∼ 2008) and maximum (∼ 2002)
phase, shown as a function of the Earth’s ecliptic longitude.
In this ﬁgure one can study in detail diﬀerences between
the densities of the three species in the cone region due to
diﬀerent thermal speeds and diﬀerent ionization losses. The

4

J. M. Sok´o l et al.

Figure 1. Left panel: time series of daily (faint and strongly varying lines) and CR-averaged (dark lines) total ionization rates for He,
Ne, and O at Earth. Right panel: latitudinal structure of the total ionization rates for O at 1 AU close to the maximum of SC 23 (2002.5)
and SC 24 (2012.5), and for the minimum of SC 23/24 (2008.5) (for this ﬁgure only, the stationary atom approximation is used).

simulated densities show a clear downwind focusing cone for
all three species and both activity phases. The upwind cres-
cent is well visible for O during both solar minimum and
maximum, for Ne also, but during solar minimum it is very
faint, and for He the crescent is absent for both high and low
activity conditions. The ISN Ne and O densities are similar
and less abundant at Earth than He. Figure 3 shows the
scale of attenuation of these species with respect to the val-
ues in the LIC. ISN O is the most attenuated, ISN Ne is also
strongly reduced except in the cone region during solar min-
imum, when the density enhancement due to the focusing
by solar gravity exceeds the ionization losses. The increase
of the ISN He density is the strongest, almost ∼ 6.5 times in
the cone during solar minimum. The diﬀerence in the abso-
lute densities between solar minimum and maximum ranges
from ∼ 29% in the upwind region to ∼ 58% in the downwind
region for He, ∼ 68% and ∼ 94% for Ne, and for O ∼ 75%
and ∼ 96%, respectively.

Figure 2 illustrates solar cycle related trends in the den-
sity distribution along the Earth’s orbit that are due to the
solar cycle related changes in the absolute ionization rates:
the densities increase when the ionization rates decrease and
opposite, the densities decrease when the ionization rates in-
crease (see also Figure 1). The minimum in the ionization
rate occured about 2008 and shortly afterwards the general
upward trend in the densities reversed. These eﬀects are ob-
served for all species, but they are the strongest for O, and
next for Ne. As a result, the densities are not symmetrical
around the crescent peaks when observed by an observer
moving with the Earth.

Next, we studied the eﬀect of some assumptions and
simpliﬁcations commonly made in the modeling of the den-
sity pattern, taking ISN O as an example. The ionization

losses are one of the modeling aspects that is often simpli-
ﬁed as constant in time and spherically symmetric. Also the
Earth’s orbit is typically assumed to be circular, instead of
elliptical. We start with the simplest assumption of a circular
Earth’s orbit (with the radius equal to 1 AU), and a con-
stant, spherically symmetric ionization rate of ∼ 2.8 × 10−7
(i.e., the average value of the in-ecliptic photoionization
rates from 2005.5 to 2008.5; βconst). The resulting ISN O
density is illustrated with the gray line in the top panel of
Figure 4. Due to the absence of time variations in the ion-
ization rate, the density time series is strictly periodic and
the only visible features are the very narrow focusing cone
downwind and the broad crescent upwind. In the next step,
we introduced the time variations of the in-ecliptic ionization
rates while still keeping the uniform distribution with heli-
olatitude and the circularity of the Earth’s orbit (β1AU(t),
blue line in the ﬁgure). Now the magnitudes of the upwind
and downwind density peaks are modulated in time and fol-
low the solar cycle, with higher densities during solar min-
imum, and lower during solar maximum. Additionally, the
cone and the crescent are no longer symmetric with respect
to the respective peak values due to time variations of ion-
ization rates.

The orange line in Figure 4 represents the density of
ISN O calculated with the heliolatitude φ dependance of the
ionization rates included (β1AU(t, φ)) in addition to the time
dependence. The densities are calculated for the in-ecliptic
orbit, however, the total density is accumulated from a broad
source region in the LIC, focused by solar gravitation, and
thus a part of the population has traversed also higher lati-
tudes. Therefore, the latitudinal structure of the ionization
inside the heliosphere, which is controlled mainly by the so-
lar cycle dependent variations of the solar wind speed and

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

ISN He, Ne, O density and PUI

5

Figure 2. Time series of absolute ISN He, Ne, and O density calculated along the Earth’s orbit. The ISN Ne and O densities are scaled
upward by a factor of 103. The vertical scale is logarithmic. The solar cycle related systematic eﬀects for He can be better appreciated
in Figure 5.

tions of the time series signiﬁcantly enough to be taken into
account in a detailed analysis of the ISN densities, but its
inﬂuence is much less than that of the other eﬀects.

The structure of the crescent is sometimes corrugated in
the peak (see, e.g., the crescent in the middle of 2007, 2009,
and 2011 of top panel of Figure 4). This wavy structure
is due to short-lasting temporal changes in the ionization
rates that occurred in the periods when the Earth traverses
the crescent region of its orbit. The crescent is broad, it
covers far more than 180◦ in longitude along the orbit, and
traversing it takes the Earth more than 6 months, so a few
percent increase/decrease in the ionization rates during ∼ 2
months can make the shape wavy. Additionally, asymmetries
in the density time series appear around the cone (compare
the two minima around the cone bottom in the blue line in
the top panel of Figure 4 in, e.g., 2007 or 2010). These are
also caused by short-time variations in ionization. The cone
traversal by the Earth lasts slightly longer than a month, and
the month-to-month diﬀerences in the ionization rate can
signiﬁcantly modify the slopes of the narrow cone structure.
While the cone is always present for the species under
discussion, it may be missed by an observer in the Earth’s or-
bit because the ISN density is strongly reduced by ionization
for heavy species, which results in a faint signal compared
to magnitudes before and after the cone (see e.g. 2012 in top
panel of Figure 4). Note also that due to the inclination of
the inﬂow direction to the ecliptic by ∼ 5◦, the Earth misses
the absolute maximum of the density pattern in the cone.

The crescent is not present in the density series for
ISN He in Earth’s orbit around the Sun even for the so-
lar minimum years, contrary to the density of ISN Ne and
O (Figures 2, 3, and 5). This motivated us to study the ef-
fect of the ISN bulk speed on the creation of the crescent
in the ISN He density. In Figure 5 we compare time series
of the ISN He density in the Earth’s orbit for four selected
speeds of the ISN gas in front of the heliosphere, while keep-
ing the remaining parameters unchanged. For higher ISN
ﬂow speed, the crescent is stronger, which suggests that the
formation of the crescent for ISN He is somewhat sensitive
to the Mach number of the ﬂow of a given species (the higher

Figure 3. Density of ISN He, Ne, and O calculated along the
Earth’s orbit for each day of 2002 (solid lines) and 2008 (dashed
lines), normalized to the respective densities of these species in
the LIC. The horizontal line emphasizes the diﬀerences in the
densities relative to the LIC.

density with heliolatitude, is important in the modeling es-
pecially for ISN O, for which the charge exchange losses
have a signiﬁcant contribution to the total ionization rates
(see e.g. Figure 1 in Bzowski et al. (2013b)). The orange
line in the bottom panel of Figure 4 presents the ratio of the
ISN O density when comparing the cases with the spheri-
cally symmetric ionization with the heliolatitude-dependent
ionization. The ratio diﬀers from 1 by a few percent in the
crescent peak, but decreases rapidly in the crescent slopes
and reaches a minimum in the cone. This illustrates the high
importance of the latitudinal structure of the solar wind for
the density of ISN O in the cone region.

The eﬀect of the last commonly made simpliﬁcation,
i.e., adopting a circular 1 AU orbit instead of the realistic
elliptical Earth’s orbit (βEarth(t, φ)) is illustrated by green
lines in Figure 4. The eccentricity modiﬁes the calculated
densities slightly, introducing an annual modulation by up
to 7%. The eccentricity modiﬁes the densities for given por-

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

6

J. M. Sok´o l et al.

Figure 4. Top panel: modiﬁcation of the ISN O density calculated under diﬀerent assumptions and simpliﬁcations. βconst - calculations
with constant, spherically symmetric in-ecliptic ionization at 1 AU (gray); β1AU (t) - spherically symmetric, time variable in-ecliptic
ionization rates at 1 AU for the time of detection (blue); β1AU (t, φ) - ionization variable in time and heliolatitude at 1 AU (orange);
βEarth (t, φ) - same as before, but for the true Earth’s distance to the Sun (green). Bottom panel: ratios of the results for spherically
symmetric versus latitudinally dependent ionization rates (orange line) and for a circular 1 AU orbit versus the realistic Earth’s orbit
(green line). The vertical grid lines mark the times of the crossing of the longitudes of upwind and downwind directions.

Mach number, the more collimated is the ISN beam), espe-
cially for the years with strong ionization losses, when the
small speed portion of the population is more readily ion-
ized. We also veriﬁed that higher ionization leads to a more
structured crescent.

In addition, we studied whether the distance of obser-
vation from the Sun has an eﬀect on the presence of the
crescent in the ISN He density in the ecliptic plane. We cal-
culated the ISN He density for a number of distances down
to 0.4Rd, where Rd is the actual Earth’s distance from the
Sun and we concluded that the formation of the crescent is
weakly distance-dependant. For ISN He in the ecliptic plane,
the density crescent appears for the closest distance from the
Sun and only during the phase of high solar activity.

4 SIGNATURES OF PICK-UP IONS AS SEEN

FROM THE EARTH’S ORBIT

Direct measurements of the absolute density of the ISN gas
close to the Sun are not carried out, but in-direct meth-
ods have been successfully applied to derive the density of
ISN gas in the heliosphere, e.g.; analysis of the ISN He ﬂux
measured by Ulysses/GAS (Witte et al. 1996; Witte 2004)
or analysis of the He2+ PUI ﬂuxes from Ulysses/SWICS
(Gloeckler et al. 2004). Direct sampling experiments, like
Ulysses or IBEX, measure the diﬀerential ﬂux as a func-
tion of the location in the sky while integrating over the
energy, and the measurements can only be successfully car-
ried out on fragments of the spacecraft orbit around the Sun
(M¨obius et al. 2012). Observations of the helioglow, both
spectroscopic and photometric, measure a convolution of the
ISN density and the illuminating solar EUV ﬂux along the
line-of-sight (LOS), modulated by the radial component of
the velocity vector of the gas. The extraction of the absolute

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

ISN He, Ne, O density and PUI

7

rates vary because of ﬂuctuations in the ionization rates (see
also the faint lines in the left-hand panel of Figure 1). In the
further analysis, we smoothed the resulting time series by a
27-day moving average to not bias the results by the rapidly
varying daily changes and to track the general modulation.
The production rates reﬂect the general shape of the ISN
density along the Earth’s orbit, in particular the presence
or absence of the crescent and cone.

The ﬂux of PUIs at the distance R from the Sun for a
given moment in time can be calculated as an integral of the
local production rate along the radial path between the Sun
at r0 and R (Ruci´nski et al. 2003):

F (R) =

1

R2 Z R

r0

S(r)r2dr =

1

R2 Z R

r0

n(r)β(r)r2dr.

(2)

Note that this form diﬀers from the one frequently used in
PUI studies in the treatment of the local ionization rates β,

where typically β(r) = β1(cid:0) r1

r (cid:1)2, with the ionization rate β1

at 1 AU and r1 = 1 AU. We did not make this simpliﬁca-
tion (see Section 2) and included the entire radial depen-
dence of β self-consistently. The total PUI ﬂux cannot be
observed in practice because of the limited energy range of
detectors and competition with solar wind ions. Instead, the
energy ﬂux density or a portion of the distribution function
which typically includes the PUI cut-oﬀ is collected. Gen-
erally, PUI detectors measure the distribution function of
the solar wind and PUI populations as a function of energy
per charge in ﬁxed steps and in a restricted FoV. The reg-
istration of the energy per charge allows for an independent
distinction between the solar wind and PUIs. Because the
PUI speed is tied to the solar wind speed (i.e., on average,
there is no streaming of the PUI population relative to the
solar wind), it is convenient to express the PUI energy as a
fraction of the bulk solar wind speed w2 = (vPUI/vsw)2. The
integration of the PUI ﬂux is carried out over a ﬁxed inter-
val in the w-space that includes the PUI cut-oﬀ at w ∼ 2
in the observer frame, and over the sensor FoV. This ap-
proach enables to separate the interstellar PUIs from the
inner source PUIs, which are expected close to the Sun,
and from the solar wind ions (e.g. Gloeckler & Geiss 2001;
Gloeckler et al. 2004; Drews et al. 2012; Berger et al. 2015;
Drews et al. 2015; Taut et al. 2015).

In the present analysis, we modeled the PUI count
rate by integrating the production rate of PUIs in the
w domain, neglecting the instrumental factors (i.e., real
FoV, energy response function). We calculated the PUI
count rate in the Sun-centered frame in ecliptic coordi-
nates as seen by a stationary observer at the Earth’s dis-
tance from the Sun. We followed the classical approach
on PUI modeling, assuming instantaneous pitch angle scat-
tering and thus a spherically symmetric PUI distribution
in the solar wind frame. We considered adiabatic cooling
of the PUI population between their creation and detec-
tion and neglected transport- and magnetic-ﬁeld eﬀects (e.g.
Fichtner et al. 1996; Chalov & Fahr 1998; Chalov & Fahr
1999; Fahr & Fichtner 2011). For each time t and distance
from the Sun r, we calculated the normalized PUI speed in
the spacecraft (SC) frame wsc using the relation:

wsc (r, t) =

vsc
PUI (r, t)
vsw (R, t)

(3)

with vsc

PUI (r, t) being the speed of the PUI created at dis-

Figure 5. Density of ISN He calculated in the Earth’s orbit for
various inﬂow speeds of ISN gas in front of the heliosphere. A cres-
cent builds up during higher solar activity and for faster speeds.

density is biased by the integration along the LOS. Thus,
observations of derivative populations, like PUIs, are very
useful to study the ISN gas in-situ.

In this section we present simulations of the expected
He, Ne, and O PUIs along the Earth’s orbit. For the calcu-
lations we used the daily time series of the ISN gas densities
(Figure 2) and ionization rates (Figure 1) in the ecliptic
plane, between 0.4Rd and 1Rd in 0.1Rd increments. To cal-
culate the distance dependence of the ionization rates we as-
sumed solar wind speed constant with heliocentric distance
and an inverse-square law with distance for solar wind den-
sity and EUV ﬂux 4 We approximated the PUI observations
for a detector at rest (it is a detector that has a relative
velocity to the Sun equal zero) and has an exactly sunward,
pencil-beam like (inﬁnitesimally small and radial) ﬁeld-of-
view (FoV). Determination of the PUI formulae used in the
calculations are presented in Appendix A, and details of the
calculation scheme are presented in Appendix B.

In the ﬁrst step, we calculated the instantaneous,
local PUI production rate (the source function, e.g.,
Vasyliunas & Siscoe (1976); M¨obius et al.
(1988, 1995);
Bzowski & Ruci´nski (1996)) at Earth as a function of dis-
tance r from the Sun and time t:

S(r, t) = n(r, t)β(r, t),

(1)

where n(r, t) is the density of the ISN atoms and β(r, t) the
total ionization rate at time t and solar distance r. The tem-
poral and spatial variation along the orbit of the virtual de-
tector are used interchangeably in the further discussion be-
cause the longitude grid is based on a daily grid (the Earth’s
location changes by about 1◦ in ecliptic longitude each day,
although not exactly linearly). The calculations were based
on a daily grid identical to that used for the calculations of
density discussed in the previous section.

The time series of the instantaneous local PUI produc-
tion rates at Earth for He, Ne, and O in 2002 and 2008,
calculated according to Equation 1, are shown in the cen-
ter row of Figure 6 and the corresponding ISN densities are
shown in the upper row of this ﬁgure. The daily production

4 More in Appendix B

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

8

J. M. Sok´o l et al.

Figure 6. Top row: the ISN He, Ne, and O densities. Middle row: the instantaneous local PUI production rates at the Earth’s locations
for He, Ne, and O, calculated based on Equation 1 (daily values – highly variable and a 27-day moving average). Bottom row: simulated
count rates calculated over the range in wsc based on Equation 7 and normalized by the average value over the whole time interval
studied for each species separately, given in arbitrary units. All lines are shown for 2002 (red, solar maximum) and 2008 (blue, solar
minimum). The vertical bars indicate the ecliptic longitudes of the upwind and downwind directions of the ﬂow of the ISN gas in the
source region assumed in the calculation of the ISN densities.

tance r from the Sun in the SC-frame and vsw (R, t) the
solar wind speed measured at the time and distance of de-
tection. We assumed that the PUIs ﬂow with the solar wind
speed that was registered by the detector at the moment
of detection. A more sophisticated approach would require
MHD modeling to trace the solar wind ﬂow that carries the
PUIs, which is beyond the scope of this paper. We made
this simpliﬁcation because of lack of solar wind observations
inside the Earth’s orbit and we used the daily time series
of in-ecliptic solar wind at the Earth’s distance to the Sun,
smoothed by a 27-day moving average. This is a reasonable
assumption because the solar wind speed is constant for the
distance range interesting for the PUI observations.

In the solar wind frame, the PUI speed at the distance
of their creation is the magnitude of the vector sum of the
interstellar ﬂow and solar wind velocity. As discussed by
M¨obius et al. (2015), it is suﬃcient to only consider the ra-
dial components, which yields:

vsw
PUI(r) = vsw(R) − vr(r),

(4)

where vr is the radial component of the ISN bulk veloc-
ity vector, as deﬁned, e.g., by Bzowski et al. (1997). At the
observer distance R the speed of PUIs that move exactly

radially outward is the sum of the solar wind speed and
the PUI speed in the solar wind frame (vsw
PUI (r)) after adia-
batic cooling from their creation at distance r, according to
Equation 3.2 in M¨obius et al. (1995) (see also M¨obius et al.
1999):

vsc
PUI (R) = vsw

PUI (r)(cid:18) R

r (cid:19)−γ

+ vsw (R) ,

(5)

where γ is the cooling index (equal to 2
3 for adiabatic cool-
ing), and R is the observer distance (equal to Rd in this
study).

Figure 7 illustrates the radial component (vr) of the
mean velocity vector of the ISN He ﬂow distribution at Rd
and 0.4Rd for solar minimum and solar maximum. The vari-
ation of the radial speed with ecliptic longitude along the
Earth’s orbit is almost identical for He, Ne, and O, with only
minor diﬀerences around the cone. The extrema around the
upwind and downwind directions are well pronounced. The
radial speed depends weakly on the phase of solar cycle, with
diﬀerences only close to the cone because of the diﬀerential
action of ionization (Bzowski et al. 1997). Ionization more
readily eliminates the slower atoms from the distribution,
which results in an eﬀect of acceleration (change in velocity

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

ISN He, Ne, O density and PUI

9

vector) of the whole ISN population. In particular, the mean
velocity is a superposition of the so-called direct and indi-
rect beams, with the indirect beam more attenuated during
solar maximum than during solar minimum. This mecha-
nism is the most eﬃcient for ISN He, because its thermal
speed is the largest. Interestingly, the radial ISN speed at
the cone is almost independent of the solar distance. The
distance-related diﬀerences are much more pronounced for
the crescent (they reach ∼ 20 km s−1).

For observations carried out at the distance Rd from
the Sun, the normalized PUI speed in the SC-frame wsc =
vsc
PUI/vsw is modulated by the injection speed and modiﬁed
by adiabatic cooling. This is illustrated in the top panel of
Figure 8, where are shown the normalized speeds of PUIs
detected at Rd, but created at Rd and 0.4Rd. The quasi-
periodic variations are due to the non-zero injection speed
as shown in Figure 7, and the small-scale ﬂuctuations due
to the daily variations in solar wind speed. The macroscopic
diﬀerence between wsc(Rd) and wsc(0.4Rd) is due to the adi-
abatic cooling of the PUIs over the distance 0.4Rd–Rd on one
hand and the lack of this cooling for the PUIs created at Rd.
When the non-zero PUI injection speed is neglected, the nor-
malized speed of PUIs created at 0.4Rd and Rd would diﬀer
only due to adiabatic cooling, without the yearly modula-
tion, as illustrated by the horizontal lines in the upper panel
of Figure 8.

For the PUIs created at Rd from the Sun, the expected
value of wsc exceeds 2 in the upwind hemisphere and de-
creases below 2 close to the cone. As evident from Equa-
tions 2 and 6, integration of the PUI ﬂux can be carried out
either in the domain of solar distances r or, equivalently, in
the domain of normalized PUI speeds wsc, where wsc is tied
to r by Equation A2. Under assumption of zero injection ve-
locities selecting a ﬁxed integration range in the wsc domain
is equivalent to selecting a ﬁxed interval in the r domain
which does not vary with ecliptic longitude. However, when
the assumption of the injection speed is removed, keeping
ﬁxed integration range in r results in the necessity to appro-
priately adjust the integration boundaries in the wsc domain.
This is illustrated in the top panel of Figure 8, where for a
ﬁxed interval from 0.4Rd to 1Rd we show the corresponding
boundaries in the wsc domain. Frequently in experimental
practice, the PUI count rate is obtained by integration over
a ﬁxed range in the wsc domain. This approach will be exer-
cised in the remainder of this paper. Adopting a ﬁxed range
of integration in the wsc domain results in admitting the
PUIs created over range of heliocentric distances that varies
with ecliptic longitude of the observer, as illustrated in the
bottom panel of Figure 8.

The calculation of the PUI ﬂux in the domain of nor-
malized PUI speed in the SC-frame requires a change of
variables in Equation 2 from distance r to wsc. The deriva-
tion is shown in Appendix A. The resulting formula for the
PUI ﬂux is the following:

wsc,2

F = αR

Z

wsc,1

S w−3α

sw (wsc − 1)3α−1 dwsc,

(6)

with α = 1

γ , and R = Rd.

PUIs are typically measured using a sensor that includes
an electrostatic analyzer. The quantity registered by the sen-
sor is the count rate, which is linked to the phase space den-

Figure 7. The radial component of the ISN He bulk ﬂow veloc-
ity vector along the Earth’s orbit for 2002 (red lines) and 2008
(blue lines) at Rd (solid lines) and 0.4Rd (dashed lines). The ver-
tical bars indicate the longitudes of the upwind and downwind
directions adopted in the calculations.

Figure 8. Top panel: time series of the normalized PUI speed wsc
calculated from the formula in Equation A1, for PUIs detected
at Rd, but created at 0.4Rd and Rd taking adiabatic cooling into
account. Presented are series for He, but they are very similar
for Ne and O. The horizontal lines illustrate the case for which
the radial velocity of ISN atoms at the moment of ionization is
neglected. Bottom panel: the distance of the origin of PUIs cal-
culated for diﬀerent values of the lower boundary wsc,1 in the
integral in Equation 6 based on Equation A2, shown for the lon-
gitude of the Earth changing with time. The black solid line Rd
represents the longitude-dependent Earth’s distance to the Sun.

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

10

J. M. Sok´o l et al.

sity of PUIs f (v) (assuming an isotropic distribution in the
solar wind frame) and the speed v of the sampled particles
in the observer frame. The formula for PUI count rates in
the wsc domain is the following (for details see Appendix A):

wsc,2

Cp =

1
2

αRA

Z

wsc,1

S w−3α

sw (wsc − 1)3α−1 wscdwsc,

(7)

where A is a proportionality constant depending on details
of the instrument.

We calculated the expected PUI count rate using Equa-
tion 7 assuming a constant lower integration boundary wSC,1
given by one of the values wSC,1 = 1.7, 1.8 or 1.9. For the up-
per integration boundary wSC,2 we evaluated Equations A1
at r = R = Rd, which leads to wsc,2 = 2 − vr
and includes
vsw
the variation with ecliptic longitude. The variable upper in-
tegration limit is equivalent to choosing the high ﬁxed value
used by Drews et al. (2012) because the phase space above
the PUI cut-oﬀ is empty.

Figure 9 illustrates the resulting modulation of the ex-
pected He PUI count rate calculated for various values of
wSC,1 in Equation 7. The diﬀerences are most pronounced
in the upwind part of the orbit. The crescent forms in all so-
lar activity conditions for wsc,1 = 1.9, but is less pronounced
during solar minimum for wsc,1 = 1.7 and wsc,1 = 1.8. The
contrast between the cone and the crescent peaks varies with
the change wsc,1. It is higher for the lower limit and decreases
with an increase in wsc,1. The count rate series are ﬂat at
the upwind side of the Earth’s orbit when calculated with
zero injection speed. In this case, the downwind cone is the
dominant feature in the annual pattern, and its magnitude
depends weakly on the phase of solar activity. We conclude
that the factor responsible for the creation of the He PUI
crescent is the non-zero PUI injection speed.

For the Ne and O PUI count rate, however, the crescent
exists regardless of the choice of wsc,1, but the cone as seen
from a detector in the Earth’s orbit almost disappears for
higher values of wsc,1 in the case of ISN O. The visibility
of the cone in the Earth’s orbit strongly depends on solar
activity. The more active the Sun, the higher the ionization
rate, and the fainter the cone observed from the ecliptic
plane. Thus, the most favorable times to analyze the PUI
cone are during solar minimum.

Based on these ﬁndings, we chose wsc,1 = 1.8 as the
lower integration boundary for Ne and O, and wsc,1 = 1.9
for He for further analysis. The resulting time series of the
PUI count rate is shown in the lower row of Figure 6 for 2002
and 2008. In contrast to the ISN density (top panels) and in-
stantaneous local production rate in the Earth’s orbit (mid-
dle panels), the crescent for the He PUI count rate is now
visible for both years. Also for the other species, both struc-
tures, cone and crescent, are present, with the cone strongly
reduced for the O PUI count rate during solar maximum.

5 DERIVATION OF THE ISN FLOW

LONGITUDE FROM THE PUI COUNT
RATE

The longitude of the ISN inﬂow is often determined from
the positions of the peak of the PUI cone and crescent (e.g.,
Gloeckler et al. (2004); Drews et al. (2012)). We looked for

the positions of the peaks by ﬁtting a Gaussian function
to the crescents and cones for individual years in the time
series in Figure 6: the density of ISN atoms, the instanta-
neous local production rate of PUIs, and the PUI count rate.
The Gaussian function was ﬁtted to the 27-day moving av-
erage series of these quantities (except for the ISN density,
for which the time series are smooth enough). Note that
smoothing by a 27-day moving average broadens the width
of the cone more for the heavier species, for which the cone is
narrow (compare strongly varying and smooth lines in mid-
dle panel of Figure 6 for Ne and O), but this eﬀect does not
bias the determination of the location of the peak. The ﬁts
were performed to data selected for the following ranges in
longitude: (65◦ − 95◦, 70◦ − 90◦, 71◦ − 87◦) for the ISN He,
Ne, O density cone, respectively; (160◦ − 10◦, 130◦ − 30◦)
for the ISN Ne and O density crescent, respectively.
For the local PUI production rate and count rate at
Earth, the longitudinal ranges were adopted as follows:
(55◦ − 105◦, 70◦ − 90◦, 65◦ − 90◦), for He, Ne, O cone, re-
spectively; and (150◦ − 20◦, 130◦ − 20◦, 110◦ − 50◦) contin-
uously counted through 360◦ for the He, Ne, O crescents,
respectively.

We analyzed expected departures of the positions of
the peaks obtained in our model of the PUI count rate ob-
served at Earth from the ISN inﬂow longitude assumed in
the model. Figure 10 shows the longitudes of the ﬁtted peak
positions. The left column panels show the results for the
cones and the right column panels show the results for the
crescents. The horizontal line in each panel indicates the as-
sumed ecliptic longitude of the ISN gas ﬂow in front of the
heliosphere used in the calculation of the ISN density (79.2◦
downwind and 259.2◦ upwind). In an ideal case, when mod-
ulation of the ISN gas and the PUIs does not exist inside
the heliosphere, the ﬁtted longitudes should be exactly these
values. In the case when modulation is accounted to the lon-
gitude direction derived from the ﬁt to the density of ISN
atoms at Earth almost perfectly reproduces the ISN ﬂow lon-
gitude for He and Ne and a small systematic shift is found for
O. This ∼ 1◦ shift in the cone position of the ISN O density
is caused by the asymmetry of the solar wind in heliolati-
tude, reﬂected in the charge exchange rate (as presented in
Figure 11). The values obtained from ﬁtting to the cone of
the local PUI production rate and PUI count rate show a
scatter of ∼ 1◦ for He and Ne, and a systematic ∼ 1◦ − 2◦
downward shift for O. Additionally, the ﬁt is closer to the
assumed value for years of solar minimum, when ionization
is weaker and varies little. There is a clear year-to-year scat-
ter which does not clearly correspond to the solar activity
cycle. Since the density peak varies very little in time, we
conclude that the scatter in the peak positions of the quan-
tities other than density is caused by the ﬂuctuations in the
PUI production rates and in the solar wind that carry the
PUIs. This conclusion is supported by the left-hand panel of
Figure 11, which illustrates the ﬁtted positions of the O den-
sity peak for densities calculated using various assumptions
on ionization rates, similarly as it was in the case of Figure 4.
Clearly, the case of a circular orbit and constant ionization
produces no shift, switching in the time variations adds the
yearly scatter in the peak positions, adding the latitude de-
pendence adds the systematic shift, and the departure from
orbit circularity does not modify these conclusions.

The derivation of the longitude of the ISN gas ﬂow from

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

ISN He, Ne, O density and PUI

11

Figure 9. Time series of simulated PUI count rates for He at Earth, calculated based on Equation 6, with wsc,1 = (1.7, 1.8, 1.9) and
normalized by the averaged value for the studied time series, given in arbitrary units. The black dashed line represents the case with the
radial speed vr ignored in the integration of the PUI count rates.

ﬁts to the crescent (right-hand panels of Figure 10) is less
accurate and can diﬀer from the expected value up to 10◦.
Based on similar analysis to that just presented for the cone
positions, the reason is the variation in the ﬁtted location
of the density peaks, which is transmitted into variation of
the peaks of the PUI production rate and count rate. The
smallest diﬀerences are found for the years during low solar
activity. Furthermore, for Ne and O the deviations from the
expected longitude seem to follow the decrease of solar activ-
ity after 2002, but the increase of activity after the minimum
around 2008 is not clearly reﬂected. This may be a reﬂection
of the weaker upward trend in the ionization rate after 2008
than the downward trend before 2008. In opposite to Ne and
O, the peak locations for the He PUI count rate crescent do
not present a clear trend in time. Figure 9 shows that it is
diﬁcult to unambiguously identify the peak in the crescent
region.

Time variations of the ionization rate are reﬂected in
time variations of the PUI production rate and count rate
observed by a detector traveling with Earth. Systematic de-
partures of the ﬁtted peak are due to the general trend in
the density series related to the systematic change in the
ionization rate. As a result, the structures are not symmet-
ric around the peaks, and this is reﬂected in the locations of
the ﬁtted positions of the peak of the symmetric Gaussian
function. Additionally, the deviations present in the results
of Gaussian ﬁts to the ISN density and the local PUI pro-
duction rate for 2011, as well as in the 2008 series of He PUI
count rate, arise because of a underdeveloped structure of
the crescent which is far from the Gaussian shape and thus
the ﬁt is the poorest. The crescent structure is seldom close
to the Gaussian shape, it is usually neither symmetric nor
smooth in the peak.

Figure 12 summarizes results of ﬁtting the peak posi-
tions for the cone and crescent in the count rate. The points
(with respective error bars) correspond to the cone (hori-
zontal axis) and crescent (vertical axis) for a given calendar
year. The points with asterisks are the weighted average
values of the sample, with the error bars corresponding to
the weighted standard deviation of the sample. The aver-

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

aged cone position for He matches the assumed longitude of
the downwind direction almost perfectly. The average longi-
tude for Ne agrees with that assumed within the uncertainty,
but the cone position found for O is systematically shifted
towards lower longitudes, i.e. oppositely to the diﬀerence
between the inﬂow longitude found by Drews et al. (2012)
and the longitudes from direct sampling (McComas et al.
2015a). The peak positions for the crescent are systemati-
cally shifted towards larger longitudes for all three species,
i.e., in agreement with the direction of the shift resulting
from the analysis by Drews et al. (2012). The magnitudes of
the diﬀerences are marginally lower than the uncertainties
for Ne and He, but not for O. The reason for the systematic
diﬀerences between the shifts averaged over almost entire so-
lar cycle and the assumed inﬂow direction are the variations
in the ionization rates and (for O) the anisotropies of the
solar wind, which are not periodical and cause unbalanced
trends, skewing the yearly structure of PUIs enhancement
by the Earth.

6 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We have analyzed the modulation of the densities, instanta-
neous PUI production rates, and simulated PUI count rates
of ISN He, Ne, and O for Earth’s locations in the ecliptic
plane during almost entire solar cycle, from the solar min-
imum in 2002 until the next maximum in 2013. The den-
sity was calculated using the full time- and heliolatitude-
dependent hot model of ISN gas inside the heliosphere. The
PUI count rate was calculated using the simulated ISN gas
as the source population and the classical theory of the cre-
ation and evolution of the PUI distribution function in the
solar wind, i.e., assuming a distance-independent solar wind
speed, instantaneous pitch angle isotropisation, and adia-
batic cooling. However, instead of the typically made as-
sumption of a zero injection speed of PUIs relative to the
Sun, we assumed that their injection speed is equal to the
local radial component of the ISN gas bulk velocity, char-
acteristic for the heliocentric distance and ecliptic longitude

12

J. M. Sok´o l et al.

Figure 10. Longitude (λ) of the peaks of the focusing cone (left-hand panels) and crescent (right-hand panels) from the Gaussian ﬁts
to the ISN density (top row) and 27-day moving averages of the local production rate at Earth of PUIs (second row from top) and
simulated count rate integrated over normalized PUI speed wsc (bottom row) for He (orange), Ne (blue), and O (green) for the case of
detection at the Earth’s orbit (Rd). The horizontal solid line mark the direction of the ISN gas in the source region for upwind (259.2◦)
and downwind (79.2◦) sides, assumed in the calculation of densities. The uncertainties of the ﬁts are illustrated by the error bars, in
most cases they are smaller than the spatial dimension of the dots.

Figure 11. The analysis of factors potentially responsible for shifting the peak longitude (λ) (cone left-hand panel, crescent right-hand
panel) for ISN O density for the cases shown in Figure 4. The peak positions are determined from Gaussian ﬁts. The color code is the
same as in Figure 4. Notice that the green line is almost totally hidden under the orange line in the left-hand panel. The uncertainties
of the ﬁts are illustrated by the error bars, in most cases they are smaller than the spatial dimension of the dots.

of the injection location. In addition, we adopted a realis-
tic model of the ISN gas ionization rate, which is based on
observations and takes into account all ionization reactions
relevant for the three species considered.

In principle, two maxima in the time series of the PUI
count rate are expected during the year: one upwind (cres-
cent), and the other one downwind (cone). The longitudes of
the cone and crescent peaks have been used as indicators of

the ecliptic longitude of the direction of the ISN gas ﬂow in
front of the heliosphere. The goal of our study was to inves-
tigate the modulation of the ISN gas density and PUI count
rate observed along the Earth’s orbit due to the variations
of the ionization rates inside heliosphere. Additionally, we
wanted to check if the ionization processes could shift the
perceived longitude of the inﬂow direction of ISN gas.

We simulated the time series of the ISN densities and

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

ISN He, Ne, O density and PUI

13

O, adds another systematic eﬀect: the positions of the cone
are systematically shifted from their nominal positions. The
apparent cone position is shifted towards lower longitudes
by ∼ 0.5◦ in the ISN O density, and in the O PUI produc-
tion and count rates this shift is more than twice larger.
We found that diﬀerent magnitudes of shifts are because
of a secular evolution of the ionization rates. Since during
most of this interval the total ionization rates were decreas-
ing (this trend reversed after 2008, and the positive gradient
was weaker than the previous negative gradient) and since
the solar wind was on average asymmetric in heliolatitude,
the departures of the respective longitudes of the crescent
and cone from the assumed upwind and downwind longi-
tudes are not zero when averaged over the whole studied
time series. The shifts of the crescent are mostly due to the
non-balanced temporal trends in the global ionization rate
during the calculation interval, and the shift in the cone is
due to the departure of the charge exchange and electron-
impact ionization rate from spherical symmetry.

In an ideal case, one could expect that the average of
the cone and crescent peak positions over the whole solar
cycle should give the expected value. However, it is not so
in reality, because of the secular changes in the ionization
rates and asymmetries in the solar cycle. In our case, when
averaged over almost the entire solar cycle from 2002 to
2013, the departure of the ﬁtted longitude averaged over
the whole sample from the expected value for He is small.
Additionally, it is close to the expected value within its re-
spective weighted standard deviation. This is also true for
Ne, but with a larger departure. In the case of O, the de-
parture from the expected value is the largest, larger than
the standard deviation, which suggests a statistically sig-
niﬁcant systematic eﬀect. The directions of the departures
agree among the species: they are towards larger longitudes
for the crescent, in agreement with the direction of the dif-
ference found by Drews et al. (2012), and towards lower lon-
gitudes for the cone, oppositely to the diﬀerence found by
Drews et al. (2012). Note, however, that in our study the
latter ones are within the error bar for He and Ne.

Since our simulations were done for the Earth, while
the observations by Drews et al. (2012) were carried out
from STEREO, which is on an orbit diﬀerent from that of
the Earth, we cannot say with certainty that it is the so-
lar cycle-related modulation of the ISN gas density and PUI
production that is responsible for the diﬀerence in the ISN
gas inﬂow direction found by Drews et al. (2012), but we be-
lieve this cause is very likely. The main reason for the eﬀect
observed in PUIs is the modulation of the parent ISN gas dis-
tribution along the Earth orbit. The short-term variations
in the PUI production rates are responsible for additional
yearly scatter and tend to increase the observed diﬀerences.

The results we have obtained are particularly interest-
ing in the case of O. They suggest that the heliolatitu-
dinal anisotropy of the ionization rate, resulting from the
anisotropy of the solar wind, produces noticeable eﬀects in
the distribution of ISN O density in the ecliptic plane and
thus must be appropriately taken into account. Thus, the
classical model of ISN gas in the heliosphere with a spher-
ically symmetric ionization rate is not suﬃcient for inter-
pretation of measurements of particle populations related to
ISN O.

Figure 12. Longitude (λ) of the ISN ﬂow derived from the Gaus-
sian ﬁt to the He, Ne, and O PUI count rate cones and crescents
for each studied year, together with uncertainties of the ﬁt illus-
trated as error bars (2013 is omitted because we have results only
for crescent as our data set ends before cone creation). The star-
points with error bars represent the weighted average value for a
given species with weighted standard deviation as an error bar.
The cross-hairs mark the longitude expected to reproduce.

PUI production and count rates, starting from the classical
assumption of spherically symmetric and constant in time
ionization rate, and including the assumption of non-zero
PUI injection speed. Next, one by one, we switched on the
time and heliolatitude variations in the ionization rate and
departures of the Earth’s orbit from circularity. We found
that the crescent can be expected in the PUIs for Ne and
O regardless of the details of the production and detection
process, but for He, the crescent is created only when the
non-zero PUI injection speed is taken into account. In the
absence of time- and heliolatitude dependence of the ioniza-
tion rate, the crescent and cone peaks in the ISN density
and PUI production and count rates are found precisely at
the upwind and downwind longitudes, respectively. However,
switching on the solar cycle modulation of the ionization rate
results in spatio-temporal gradients in the ISN gas distribu-
tion encountered by Earth in its travel around the Sun, and
as a result, some departures of the observed peak positions
from the nominal values appear. This is especially true for
the PUIs production and count rates. The departures are
relatively mild in the cone (almost none for the density and
on the order of 2◦for the PUIs) and are much greater for the
crescent.

The positions of the crescent for Ne and O feature a
systematic shift towards larger longitudes in 2002, which
gradually fades and starts to reverse after ∼ 2008. The shift
in the crescent longitude is appreciably modulated by time
variations in the ionization rate. The heliolatitudinal depen-
dence of the ionization rate, which is important mostly for

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

dEdΩ E is the diﬀerential energy ﬂux density,

The quantity dF
and ∆(E/Q)

Cp =

dF

dEdΩ

EA.

E/Q G = const = A (cid:2)m2sr(cid:3). Thus,

Using Equation A6 we obtain:

Cp =

v2
m

f (v)

m
2

v2A =

1
2

Av4f (v)

and after applying Equation A5 we obtain:

wsc (R) = wsw (R)(cid:18) R

r (cid:19)−γ

+ 1.

(A1)

Cp =

1
2

Av

dF

dvdΩ

.

14

J. M. Sok´o l et al.

APPENDIX A: DERIVATION OF THE
FORMULAE FOR THE PUI FLUX AND COUNT
RATES

In this Appendix, we start from the deﬁnition of the PUI
ﬂux given in Equation 2 and the relation between the PUI
speed at the location of creation r and its speed at a distance
of detection R given in Equation 5, and we calculate the ﬂux
and count rate of the PUIs observed at Rd. Equation 5 can
be rewritten to the form of wsc by dividing it by vsw (R) on
both sides:

The ﬂux of PUIs is given by Equation 2, but in our case
the integration must be carried out in the wsc-domain of the
“measured” PUIs. To do this, r is expressed as a function of
wsc based on Equation A1:

r = R(cid:18) wsc − 1

,

wsw (cid:19)α
γ . Finally, with dr = αRw−α

sw (wsc − 1)α−1 dwsc,
with α = 1
the integral from Equation 2 after the change of variables
from r to wsc takes the form:

(A2)

wsc,2

F = αR

Z

wsc,1

Sw−3α

sw (wsc − 1)3α−1 dwsc.

(A3)

With the normalized PUI speed in the solar wind wsw =
vsw
PUI/vsw, where vsw
PUI is given in Equation 4 and with the
PUI source function from Equation 1, we obtain:

wsc,2

F = αR

Z

wsc,1

nβ(cid:18)1 −

vr

vsw(cid:19)−3α

(wsc − 1)3α−1 dwsc.

(A4)

Generally, the diﬀerential particle ﬂux takes the form:

dF = vf (v)v2dvdΩ,

(A5)

where f (v) is the distribution function of PUIs. The kinetic
energy of the measured particle is E = 1
dv = mv,
thus:

2 mv2, and dE

dF

dEdΩ

=

vf (v)v2dvdΩ

dEdΩ

=

vf (v)v2

mv

=

v2
m

f (v).

(A6)

The relation between the count rate Cp and the diﬀer-
ential particle ﬂux dF over the solid angle element dΩ and
energy range dE is the following:

dF

Cp

=

(A7)

∆E G

dEdΩ
where ∆E is the energy band width and G a constant ef-
fective geometric factor of the instrument. For an electro-
static analyzer ∆(E/Q)
is constant for a given instrument
(E/Q)
and determined by its geometry because the measurements
are carried out at ﬁxed E/Q steps, where Q is the ionic
charge number of the ion. Thus, the energy pass band is
determined by:

∆E =

∆(E/Q)
(E/Q)

(E/Q)Q,

Combining Equation A7 and Equation A8, we obtain:

Cp =

dF

dEdΩ

E

∆(E/Q)
(E/Q)

G.

(A8)

(A9)

(A10)

(A11)

(A12)

(A13)

Now, we transform to the wsc-domain:

Cp =

1
2

Awsc

dF

dwscdΩ

.

From Equation A13 it follows that the PUI count rate scales
as the diﬀerential ﬂux multiplied by the normalized speed of
the PUIs. Thus, Equation 6 is modiﬁed as follows:

wsc,2

Cp =

1
2

αRA

Z

wsc,1

S w−3α

sw (wsc − 1)3α−1 wscdwsc.

(A14)

This form is identical to Equation 7. A is a proportionality
factor and since we are interested in the variation of the
count rate along the Earth’s orbit and not in its absolute

values, we can put it A = 1(cid:2)m2sr(cid:3).

APPENDIX B: CALCULATION SCHEME

The starting point of the simulations are the densities n(r, t)
of the ISN gas, calculated for each day t from February 9,
2002 until July 20, 2013 for distances r from 0.4Rd to 1.1Rd
with a step 0.1Rd, where Rd(t) is the Earth’s distance from
the Sun for the time t. The simulations are done as the
observer moves with the Earth around the Sun. For each
time t the Earth’s longitude is calculated and assigned to
the computed density. This makes the simulation grid for the
densities, which is elliptical in distance and longitude. Since
we calculate the densities for each day of the year, the step
in longitude varies slightly around the Sun. The densities are
calculated with the ionization rates linearly interpolated for
each day from the CR-averaged series (dark lines in the left-
hand panel of Figure 1). In calculation of PUI production
and count rates we assumed that the ISN density is locally
homogeneous in longitude for a given time t.

mula hvir = R vrf (~v)v2dvdΩ. To calculate vsw

For each day t and distance r, the speed of the PUI
created by ionization of an ISN atom (vsw
PUI) is calculated
using Equation 4. The radial component of the bulk veloc-
ity of ISN neutrals is calculated numerically from the for-
PUI, we use the
solar wind speed vsw for the time t and detection distance
Rd, smoothed by the 27-day moving average. With vsw
PUI and
vsw, the speed of PUIs in the SC-frame vsc
PUI is determined
following Equation 5, where the adiabatic cooling of PUIs is
taken into account. The ionization rate series used to pro-
duce the PUIs is a daily time series for a given time t at
1 AU, adjusted to the given distance r. The adjustment is
because most of the data used to estimate the ionization
rates are obtained from spacecraft close to the Earth and no

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

direct information from closer distances to the Sun is avail-
able as a homogeneous and long time series. To calculate
the ionization conditions at the distance of PUI creation,
which is smaller than 1 AU, an appropriate adjustment of
the series known at 1 AU is required in time and space. We
assume that PUIs propagate at the solar wind speed typical
for the moment of their detection (it is a simpliﬁcation, but
we have to do it because we know only the solar wind speed
and density registered at the same moment that PUIs were
registered by the detector in the Earth’s orbit). For exam-
ple, a PUI created at a distance rj is registered at a distance
ri > rj at a time ti. This allows us to calculate the time span
between the creation and the detection under the assump-
tion of a motion at a constant speed vi, it is ∆t = (rj −ri)/vi.
Knowing this, we calculate the time tj of the PUI creation
at rj as tj = ti − ∆t. For the found moment tj we calculate
the ionization rate and ISN density and next create the PUI.
Additionally, we adjust the EUV ﬂux and solar wind den-
sity to account for their quadratic decrease with the distance
from the Sun, e.g., solar wind density measured at ri has to

rj(cid:17)2
be multiplied by a factor (cid:16) ri

to get its value at rj. We are
aware that such a simpliﬁcation of the creation of PUIs is
not fully realistic, but without an appropriate MHD model-
ing it is not possible to improve it. We believe it is suﬃcient
for the study we present given all the other simpliﬁcations
we make.

The densities (n), ionization rates for PUI production
(β), and radial speeds of the ISN atoms (vr) are tabulated
as a function of distance r and time t. In the calculation of
count rates based on Equation 7, we tabulate the integrand
function as a function of wsc and adopt a linear interpolation
to the initial grid to determine the count rates for the ions
created at a given distance r and time t. Finally, the count
rates are normalized by an average value over the whole time
series studied for each species separately.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

from SRC PAS acknowledge

The authors
sup-
port by the Polish National Science Center grant
2012/06/M/ST9/00455.

the

REFERENCES

Auch`ere F., Cook J. W., Newmark J. S., McMullin D. R., von

Steiger R., Witte M., 2005a, Adv. Space Res., 35, 388

Auch`ere F., Cook J. W., Newmark J. S., McMullin D. R., von

Steiger R., Witte M., 2005b, ApJ, 625, 1036

Axford W. I., 1972, in C. P. Sonnet P. J. Coleman J. M. W., ed.,

The Solar Wind. NASA Spec. Publ. 308. p. 609

Berger L., Drews C., Taut A., Wimmer-Schweingruber R. F.,

ISN He, Ne, O density and PUI

15

Bzowski M., Fahr H. J., Ruci´nski D., Scherer H., 1997, A&A, 326,

396

Bzowski M., et al., 2012, ApJS, 198, 12
Bzowski M., et al., 2013a, in Bonnet R., Qu´emerais E., Snow
M., eds, ISSI Scientiﬁc ReportNo. 12, Cross-Calibration of
Past and Present Far UV Spectra of Solar Objects and the
Heliosphere. Springer Science+Business Media, pp 67–138
(arXiv:1112.2967)

Bzowski M., Sok´o l J. M., Kubiak M. A., Kucharek H., 2013b,

A&A, 557, A50

Bzowski M., Kubiak M. A., H lond M., Sok´o l J. M., Banaszkiewicz

M., Witte M., 2014, A&A, 569, A8
Bzowski M., et al., 2015, ApJS, 220, 28
Chalov S. V., Fahr H. J., 1998, A&A, 335, 746
Chalov S. V., Fahr H. J., 1999, Sol. Phys., 187, 123
Drews C., Berger

L., Wimmer-Schweingruber R. F.,
Bochsler P., Galvin A. B., Klecker B., M¨obius E., 2012,
Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics), 117, 9106

Drews C., Berger L., Taut A., Peleikis T., Wimmer-

Schweingruber R. F., 2015, A&A, 575, A97

Fahr H. J., 1978, A&A, 66, 103
Fahr H. J., Fichtner H., 2011, A&A, 533, A92
Fichtner H., Le Roux J. A., Mall U., Rucinski D., 1996, A&A,

314, 650

Frisch P. C., et al., 2013, Science, 341, 1080
Frisch P. C., et al., 2015, ApJ, 781:61, 10.1088/0004
Geiss J., Gloeckler G., Mall U., von Steiger R., Galvin A. B.,

Ogilvie K. W., 1994, A&A, 282, 924

Gloeckler G., Geiss J., 2001, Space Sci. Rev., 97, 169
Gloeckler G., et al., 1993, Science, 261, 70
Gloeckler G., et al., 2004, A&A, 426, 845
King J. H., Papitashvili N. E., 2005, J. Geophys. Res., 110, 2104
Kubiak M. A., et al., 2014, ApJS, 213, 29
Leonard T. W., et al., 2015, ApJ, 804, 42
McComas D. J., Ebert R. W., Elliot H. A., Goldstein B. E.,
Gosling J. T., Schwadron N. A., Skoug R. M., 2008,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L18103

McComas D. J., et al., 2009, Space Sci. Rev., 146, 11
McComas D. J., Angold N., Elliott H. A., Livadiotis G.,
Schwadron N. A., Skoug R. M., Smith C. W., 2013, ApJ,
779, 2

McComas D., et al., 2015a, ApJS, 220, 22
McComas D., et al., 2015b, ApJ, 801, 28
M¨obius E., Hovestadt D., Klecker B., Scholer M., Gloeckler G.,

1985, Nature, 318, 426

M¨obius E., Klecker B., Hovestadt D., Scholer M., 1988, Ap&SS,

144, 487

M¨obius E., Ruci´nski D., Hovestadt D., Klecker B., 1995, A&A,

304, 505

M¨obius E., et al., 1999, Geophys. Res. Lett., 26, 3181
M¨obius E., et al., 2004, A&A, 426, 897
M¨obius E., et al., 2009, Space Sci. Rev., 146, 149
M¨obius E., et al., 2012, ApJS, 198, 11
M¨obius E., Lee M. A., Drews C., 2015, ApJ, 000
Ruci´nski D., Bzowski M., 1995, A&A, 296, 248
Ruci´nski D., Bzowski M., 1996, Space Sci. Rev., 78, 265
Ruci´nski D., Fahr H. J., 1989, A&A, 224, 290
Ruci´nski D., Fahr H. J., 1991, Ann. Geophys., 9, 102
Ruci´nski D., Bzowski M., Fahr H. J., 2003, Ann. Geophys., 21,

2015, A&A, 576, A54

1315

Bochsler P., Kucharek H., M¨obius E., Bzowski M., Sok´o l J. M.,

Didkovsky L., Wieman S., 2014, ApJS, 210, 12

Bzowski M., 2003, A&A, 408, 1155
Bzowski M., 2008, A&A, 488, 1057
Bzowski M., Ruci´nski D., 1996, in Winterhalter D., Gosling J. T.,
Habbal S. R., Kurth W. S., Neugebauer M., eds, Solar Wind
Eight. No. 382 in AIP Conference Proceedings. American In-
stitute of Physics, Woodbury, New York, pp 650–654

Schwadron N., et al., 2015, ApJS, 220, 25
Slavin J. D., Frisch P. C., 2007, Space Sci. Rev., 130, 409
Slavin J. D., Frisch P. C., 2008, A&A, 491, 53
Sok´o l J. M., Bzowski M., 2014, preprint (arXiv:1411.4826)
Sok´o l J. M., Bzowski M., Tokumaru M., Fujiki K., McComas

D. J., 2013, Sol. Phys., 285, 167

Sok´o l J. M., Kubiak M., Bzowski M., Swaczyna P., 2015a, ApJS,

220, 27

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

16

J. M. Sok´o l et al.

Sok´o l J. M., Swaczyna P., Bzowski M., Tokumaru M., 2015b,

Sol. Phys., 290, 2589

Taut A., Berger L., Drews C., Wimmer-Schweingruber R. F.,

2015, A&A, 576, A55

Thomas G. E., 1978, Ann. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., 6, 173
Tokumaru

Fujiki

M.,

K.,

Iju

T.,

2015,

Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics), 120

Vallerga J., Lallement R., Lemoine M., Dalaudier F., McMullin

D., 2004, A&A, 426, 855

Vasyliunas V., Siscoe G., 1976, J. Geophys. Res., 81, 1247
Verner D. A., Ferland G. J., Korista T. K., Yakovlev D. G., 1996,

ApJ, 465, 487

Weller C. S., Meier R. R., 1974, ApJ, 193, 471
Witte M., 2004, A&A, 426, 835
Witte M., Rosenbauer H., Keppler E., Fahr H., Hemmerich P.,

Lauche H., Loidl A., Zwick R., 1992, A&AS, 92, 333

Witte M., Rosenbauer H., Banaszkiewicz M., Fahr H. J., 1996,

Space Sci. Rev., 78, 289

Wood B. E., M¨uller H.-R., Witte M., 2015, ApJ, 801, 62
Woods T. N., et al., 2005, J. Geophys. Res., 110, A01312
Wu F. M., Judge D. L., 1979, ApJ, 231, 594

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX ﬁle prepared by
the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2015)

