Generated using version 3.1.2 of the oﬃcial AMS LATEX template

Forcings and Feedbacks on Convection in the 2010 Pakistan

Flood: Modeling Extreme Precipitation with Interactive

Large-Scale Ascent

Ji Nie ∗

Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, New York, New York

Daniel A. Shaevitz

Department of Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics, Columbia University, New York, New York

Adam H. Sobel

Department of Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics, and

Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, New York, New York

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
1
2
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Corresponding author address: Ji Nie, Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, 301E Oceanography, 61

Route 9W, Palisades, NY, 10964.

E-mail: jn2460@columbia.edu

1

ABSTRACT

Extratropical extreme precipitation events are usually associated with large-scale ﬂow

disturbances, strong ascent and large latent heat release. The causal relationships between

these factors are often not obvious, however, and the roles of diﬀerent physical processes

in producing the extreme precipitation event can be diﬃcult to disentangle. Here, we ex-

amine the large-scale forcings and convective heating feedback in the precipitation events

which caused the 2010 Pakistan ﬂood within the Column Quasi-Geostrophic framework. A

cloud-revolving model (CRM) is forced with the large-scale forcings (other than large-scale

vertical motion) computed from the quasi-geostrophic omega equation with input data from

a reanalysis data set, and the large-scale vertical motion is diagnosed interactively with the

simulated convection.

Numerical results show that the positive feedback of convective heating to large-scale

dynamics is essential in amplifying the precipitation intensity to the observed values. Oro-

graphic lifting is the most important dynamic forcing in both events, while diﬀerential po-

tential vorticity advection also contributes to the triggering of the ﬁrst event. Horizontal

moisture advection modulates the extreme events mainly by setting the environmental hu-

midity, which modulates the amplitude of the convection’s response to the dynamic forcings.

When the CRM is replaced by either a single-column model (SCM) with parameterized

convection or a dry model with a reduced eﬀective static stability, the model results show

substantial discrepancies compared with reanalysis data. The reasons for these discrepancies

are examined, and the implications for global models and theoretical models are discussed.

1

1. Introduction

In late-July-early-August 2010, an unprecedented ﬂood struck Pakistan. This devastating

event, aﬀecting about 20 million people and submerging one-ﬁfth of Pakistan’s land area

under water, resulted from a series of extremely heavy rainfall events (e.g. Houze et al.

2011; also see Fig. 1a).

The extreme precipitation events which caused the 2010 ﬂood, as well as other similar

precipitation events in the same region, have been studied by a number of investigators

(e.g. Houze et al. 2011; Hong et al. 2011; Galarneau et al. 2012; Lau and Kim 2012;

Martius et al. 2013; Kumar et al. 2014; Rasmussen et al. 2014; Shaevitz et al. 2016).

These events usually are associated with several synoptic-scale features in the atmosphere:

1) southward intrusion of upper-level potential vorticity (PV) perturbations in the trough

east of the European block causing large-scale ascent; 2) a lower-level jet associated with a

monsoon depression impinging on the rising terrain in Northern Pakistan, forcing orographic

ascent; 3) the same lower-level jet transporting moisture from the tropical ocean — either

the Arabian Sea, the Bay of Bengal or both — to the ﬂood region. From the perspective of

an air column over the ﬂood region, the ﬁrst two factors can be viewed as dynamically forced

large-scale ascent due to forcing at upper or lower levels, respectively. The third factor, the

moisture transport, is also essential for the extreme precipitation events, in that it leads to a

moist environment that favors the embedded convection. These factors, however, usually act

simultaneously and interact with one another, so that the causal mechanisms are diﬃcult to

disentangle. For example, the upper-level PV anomalies can steer the lower-level jet toward

the rising terrain, and the low-level southerlies cause orographic lift while simultaneously

transporting moisture from the tropical oceans. The simultaneity and inter-relatedness of

these varied inﬂuences obscure our understanding of their individual roles.

In these extreme precipitation events, large-scale dynamics and convection are strongly

coupled. The dynamical forcings by both the upper-level PV perturbations and orographic

lifting induce large-scale ascent, and stimulate deep convection by destabilizing the atmo-

2

spheric stratiﬁcation. The diabatic heating associated with the convection, in turn, drives

further large-scale ascent by allowing air parcels to rise across surfaces of potential temper-

ature. Shaevitz et al. (2016) use the quasi-geostrophic (QG) omega equation to decompose

the large-scale pressure velocity (omega, ω) based on reanalysis data. They show that di-

abatic heating accounted for more than half of the total ω in the free troposphere in the

2010 events, and that of the dynamic forcings, orographic lifting is more important than

ascent due to diﬀerential advection of potential vorticity. We may think of these dynamic

forcings as forcing the convection by inducing some component of the large-scale ascent, but

the feedback from the convective heating onto the large-scale vertical motion must also be

taken into account in order to understand these events fully. This feedback is the object of

the present study.

In this study, we use the Column Quasi-Geostrophic (CQG) modeling framework, pro-

posed by Nie and Sobel (2016), to explore the coupling between large-scale dynamics and

convection. This modeling framework extends the notion of “parameterization of large-scale

dynamics” previously applied in the tropics — including the weak-temperature-gradient

method (e.g. Sobel 2000; Raymond and Zeng 2005; Daleu et al. 2015), the damped-gravity-

wave method (e.g. Kuang 2008; Blossey et al. 2009; Romps 2012; Daleu et al. 2015),

and related others (e.g. Mapes 2004, Bergman and Sardeshmukh 2004) — to parameterize

large-scale vertical motion. These methods allow attribution of precipitation to environ-

mental factors such as the sea surface temperature (SST) or the large-scale tropospheric

temperature proﬁle, and have been used to aid understanding of a variety of phenomena

in the tropics (e.g., Chiang and Sobel 2002; Wang et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2015; Nie and

Sobel 2015; Sessions et al. 2015).

In the extratropics, quasi-balanced dry adiabatic PV

dynamics, captured in an approximate way by the QG system (e.g., Hoskins et al. 1985)

plays a larger role in inducing large-scale vertical motion than it does in the tropics. The

CQG approach parameterizes large-scale vertical motion, including components due to both

the dry adiabatic QG dynamics and diabatic heating, using the QG omega equation (here-

3

after just “omega equation”). The component due to diabatic heating can be thought of as

representing the geostrophic adjustment processes to that heating. Combining the omega

equation with a numerical model that resolves convection, the CQG approach allows one

to separate the forcing and diabatic heating feedback on large-scale vertical motion, and

attribute extratropical precipitation events to speciﬁc large-scale forcings.

The goal of this paper is to quantitatively untangle the interaction between the large-scale

dynamics and moist convection in the 2010 Pakistan events using the CQG framework. In

the ﬁrst part (section 3), a cloud-resolving model (CRM) is used to simulate convection with

relatively high ﬁdelity. The large-scale forcings are obtained from reanalysis data and are

used to force the CRM to produce precipitation variations in time, with the large-scale ascent

modeled interactively under CQG as a function of the CRM-simulated diabatic heating as

well as the imposed forcings. After showing that the precipitation of the 2010 Pakistan events

is well reproduced by the CRM, we examine the positive diabatic heating feedback that

makes the precipitation so intense, and quantify the role of each of the large-scale forcings

in driving the events. We also explore the control of background relative humidity on the

precipitation intensity. In the second part of the paper (section 4), with the CRM results

serving as a benchmark, we simulate these events using two simpliﬁed, but also widely used,

representations of convection. They are a single-column model (SCM) with parameterized

convection, and a dry model with a reduced eﬀective static stability, which is often used in

theoretical studies to extend theories from a dry atmosphere to a moist atmosphere. We

show that both of these simpliﬁed representations of convection have substantial deﬁciencies

in reproducing the 2010 extreme events, examine the reasons causing the deﬁciencies, and

discuss their implications. Conclusions and discussion are presented in section 5.

4

2. Methodology

a. CQG modeling framework

A brief introduction to the CQG framework is presented here; more details can be found

in Nie and Sobel (2016). The horizontally averaged temperature (T ) and moisture (q)

equations for an air column in pressure coordinates may be written as

σp
R

ω + Q,
∂tT = AdvT +
∂tq = Advq − sqω + Qq,

(1)

(2)

where σ = − RT

p ∂plnθ is the dry static stability, ω is the pressure vertical velocity, and

sq = ∂pq. AdvT and Advq are the large-scale horizontal advection of T and q, respectively. Q

and Qq are the heating and moistening tendencies due to sub-column scale processes (e.g.,

dry and moist convection, and radiation), respectively.

In CQG we parameterize the large-scale dynamics using the QGω equation (e.g. Holton

2004), assuming the horizontal structure of the disturbance of interest has a single horizontal

wavenumber (k, with an equivalent wavelength L = 2π/k). It may be written as

∂ppω − σ(

k
f0

)2ω = − 1
f0

∂pAdvζ +

R
p

(

k
f0

)2AdvT +

R
p

(

k
f0

)2Q.

(3)

Here ζ = 1
f0

∇2φ + f is the geostrophic absolute vorticity and f0 is the reference value of the

Coriolis parameter. The right hand side (RHS) terms are the ω forcing associated with the

horizontal advection of geostrophic absolute vorticity, horizontal advection of temperature ,

and diabatic heating, respectively. The ﬁrst two RHS terms can be combined to yield the

total forcing on ω by PV advection (Trenberth 1978).

CQG is a framework for modeling of the state of the convecting air column by, for

example, a CRM. It uses the omega equation to parameterize large-scale dynamics, producing

a large-scale ω ﬁeld that is both a function of the convection itself and a forcing on that

convection. After each CRM time step, we take the horizontally averaged diabatic heating

(Q) computed by the CRM, and use this together with the PV forcing and orographic

5

lift obtained from reanalysis data to calculate ω from the omega equation. The vertical

temperature and moisture advection terms determined from the resulting ω and the CRM’s

horizontal mean T and q proﬁles are then applied in the CRM via the domain-averaged

equations (Eq. 1-2). Then, the CRM proceeds to the next time step and repeats the above

processes. The procedure is described visually in Fig. 1 of Nie and Sobel (2016).

The coupling between convection and large-scale dynamics through the QGω equation

provides a feedback that can amplify convective anomalies triggered by dynamics. Consider

an upward ω anomaly forced by synoptic-scale inﬂuences (e.g., a PV intrusion), destabilizing

the temperature stratiﬁcation and leading to a local convection anomaly. Without coupling

with large-scale dynamics, the convective heating anomaly will warm the local column,

drive its temperature proﬁle towards convective stability, and shut down further convection
anomalies on a convective adjustment timescale (∼ 1 day). When coupled to large-scale QG

dynamics, Nie and Sobel (2016) show that the convective heating anomaly induces a large-

scale ascent anomaly, representing the geostrophic adjustment that tries to re-establish the

geostrophic and hydrostatic balance of the large-scale ﬂow. This ascent is associated with

adiabatic cooling that compensates for a large fraction of the heating, reducing the warming

and stabilization of the column, and also with moisture convergence, both of which amplify

and sustain the convection anomalies and increase the adjustment time to several days.

The strength of the positive feedback depends on the horizontal wavelength of the large-

scale disturbance, with a maximum at wavelengths on the order of the Rossby deformation

radius.

Since the omega equation is linear, we can express ω as the sum of three components:

ω = ωP V + ωBF + ωQ,

(4)

where the ωP V , ωBF , and ωQ are the ω proﬁles which would occur if only a single term

were present on the RHS of (Eq. 3): PV forcing, orographic lift, and diabatic heating,

respectively. The diabatic heating Q is an internal, prognostic variable in CQG, so ωQ is

predicted while the other two components are imposed. Even when the diabatic heating

6

term is the largest on the RHS of Eq. 3 as during the strong precipitation events, however,

we expect time variations in vertical motion and precipitation to be controlled externally by

time variations in the large-scale forcing terms. In this paper, we consider three types of

large-scale forcings: PV forcing (the Advζ and AdvT terms in Eq. 3), orographic lift (ω0),

and horizontal moisture advection (Advq). The advection terms (Advζ, AdvT , and Advq) are

applied directly in Eq. (1-3). The orographic lifting (ω0), is not explicitly expressed in the

equations, but serves as the lower boundary condition on the omega equation, applied at the

top of a nominal planetary boundary layer (PBL) as discussed by Shaevitz et al. (2016).

A signiﬁcant limitation of the CQG approach (in addition to the approximations asso-

ciated with the QG system itself) is that the large-scale dynamic forcings are treated as

external and speciﬁed. In reality, convection can alter the large-scale ﬂow, and thus feed

back on the advection terms. We provisionally accept this limitation as a sacriﬁce that must

be made in order to reduce a three-dimensional problem to a one-dimensional one. We view

the comparison to observations made in this study, in part, as a test of the usefulness of the

resulting CQG system.

b. Reanalysis data

We use the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts’ reanalysis dataset

(ERA-Interim; Dee et al. 2011) to construct the large-scale forcings and to verify the model

results. The ERA reanalysis data has a temporal resolution of 6 hours and a spatial resolution
of 0.7◦. The precipitation data is the 12-hourly atmospheric model forecast from the same

data set. The period of study is from July 1, 2010 (marked as day 0) to Aug. 10, 2010.
The latitude-longitude box, 70◦E ∼ 77◦E and 30◦N ∼ 37◦N , in which most of the rainfall

fell during the 2010 events, is deﬁned as the target region from which data are extracted for

deriving the forcings and comparison to the model results. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, all

results from the reanalysis are averaged over this box.

7

c. Cloud-resolving model

This subsection introduces the CRM, the System for Atmospheric Modeling (Khairout-

dinov and Randall 2003), used in section 3. The other two representations of convection,

the SCM and eﬀective static stability, are introduced in section 4.

The CRM has a spatial domain of 128 km × 128 km, 2 km horizontal grid spacing,

and doubly periodic horizontal boundaries. There are 64 vertical levels with vertical grid

spacings stretching from 75 m near the surface to about 500 m in the free troposphere. The

surface ﬂuxes are computed using Monin-Obukhov similarity theory. We do not consider the
eﬀects of interactive radiation, instead applying constant radiative cooling of −1.5 K day−1

in the troposphere (levels with T > 207.5K), and relaxation of temperature towards 200 K

over 5 days in the stratosphere, following Pauluis and Garner (2006).

The CRM domain is considered to represent the horizontal mean state of the atmospheric

column in the Northern Pakistan regional box. The heterogeneities of surface conditions

inside the regional box, such as the surface temperature distribution and topography, are

not considered explicitly in the CRM simulation here. The orographic lifting, however, is

included as an imposed lower boundary condition.

In reality, the region of interest has

complicated topography, with the surface pressure decreasing from 1000 hP a to 500 hP a

from the south to the north. We approximate that as a ﬂat surface in the CRM with a

surface pressure of 825 hP a, about the mean surface pressure of that regional box. We

also simplify the CRM surface condition as an ocean surface with a ﬁxed SST of 298.5 K,

which is chosen to match the near surface air temperature in the CRM with that in the

reanalysis. These idealizations in our experimental setting, although inducing some biases

in the CRM mean state when compared with the reanalysis, greatly simplify the problem and

remove some complexities that we hypothesize are secondary in the extreme weather events

of interest. Our main interest is in the precipitation variations which occur over time. As

will be seen below, the simulations produce a precipitiation time series which is reasonably

similar, qualitatively and quantitatively, to those found in the reanalysis, even with these

8

idealizations. We view this as an indication that the modeling approach captures the most

essential dynamics in the extreme events.

The QGω equation is solved in the free troposphere. The upper boundary condition is

a rigid lid at the tropopause (125 hP a). The lower boundary condition is forced by the

orographic lift, ω0, at the top of a nominal PBL, p0, taken here to be 700 hP a. This is

high enough that frictional eﬀects are small and the large-scale ﬂow is close to geostrophic,

and low enough that the PBL top approximately follows the orographic height (Fig. 9 in

Shaevitz et al. 2016). In our simulations we simply use ω at 700 hP a (ω0), obtained from the

reanalysis, as orographic lift to force the CRM. Similar results are obtained, however, if we

derive the ω0 from the dot product of the geostrophic wind at the top of the PBL with the

topographic slope, as described by Shaevitz et al. (2016) and as shown below. In the PBL, ω

is linearly interpolated between zero at the surface and ω0 at p0. The Coriolis parameter f0
is set to be 7 × 10−5 s−1, equivalent to that at 29◦N . The characteristic wavelength L is set

to be 1500 km, which is close to the Rossby deformation radius at this latitude, assuming

a characteristic value of the static stability.

In section 3a, the choice of L is justiﬁed by

comparing model results with the reanalysis.

The model temperature and moisture proﬁles are initialized with a sounding taken from

a radiative-convective equilibrium (RCE) simulation performed over the same surface tem-

perature, 298.5 K, and ﬁrst run to a equilibrium state with the omega equation coupled,

but without any externally imposed large-scale forcing. This equilibrium state has the same

T and q proﬁles as the RCE proﬁles, a time mean ω of zero, and a mean precipitation rate
of 4 mm day−1. Then, beginning at a time denoted day 0, the model is forced with the

large-scale forcings (Advζ, AdvT , Advq and ω0) taken from the reanalysis, starting from July

1, 2010 and continuing to August 10, 2010. Simulations from days 0-10 are discarded as

spin-up.

9

3. CRM Results

Before presenting the model results, we ﬁrst examine the main features of the 2010 events

seen in the reanalysis. A more detailed exposition can be found in Shaevitz et al. (2016), and

additional detailed studies of these events were carried out earlier by Martius et al. (2013)

and Galarneau et al. (2012). The black bars in Fig. 1a show the precipitation series in the
ERA data. Standing out are the two peaks of rainfall with maxima close to 60 mm day−1.

The ﬁrst peak, which we label “event 1”, extends from day 20 to day 23, and the second

peak (“event 2”) extends from day 27 to day 30. Associated with the precipitation peaks

is strong upward motion (negative ω) in the free troposphere (Fig. 1b), indicating a close

balance between the diabatic cooling associated with ascent and the convective heating in

the temperature equation. The precipitation and ω time series are the main targets of our

numerical simulations.

The large-scale forcings are shown in Fig. 2. During event 1, Advζ and AdvT have

signiﬁcant maxima in the upper troposphere (Fig. 2a-b), which are indications of the PV

intrusion associated with the European block in the upper stream (e.g. Lau and Kim 2012).

The PV forcing, is much weaker during event 2, however, because the strong PV intrusion

remained well to the north of the ﬂood regions during event 2 (Martius et al. 2013; Shaevitz

et al. 2016). The PV forcing thus plays only a secondary role in event 2.

Horizontal moisture advection (Advq) is shown as a function of time and pressure in Fig.
2c. We also plot the column-integrated horizontal moisture advection ((cid:104)Advq(cid:105), where (cid:104)∗(cid:105)
means vertical integration through the column,) in the units of precipitation, mm day−1, in

the lower panel. During precipitation events, Advq itself is not a large term in the moisture

budget, compared to condensation and vertical moisture advection; considering the vertical
integral, (cid:104)Advq(cid:105) is much smaller than precipitation. Nonetheless, horizontal moisture advec-

tion is important when moist static energy rather than moisture alone is considered (since

condensation vanishes in the moist static energy budget) and it can exert an important in-

ﬂuence on the moisture ﬁeld. During most of the examined period, Advq is negative due

10

to dry air import by the westerlies. However, just before the periods of heavy precipitation

(days 13-18 for event 1, and days 23-26 for event 2), Advq becomes less negative or even

slightly positive due to the weakening of westerlies and strengthening of the southerlies.

The positive Advq anomalies moisten the column, making the column more favorable to the

subsequent convection. During the heavily raining period, Advq is again negative (although

the moisture ﬂux convergence is positive), because at that time the column is as moist as or

even moister than the equatorward regions upwind.

Fig. 2d shows the orographic lift (ωorog = (cid:126)V0 ·∇hs, where hs is the orographic height and

subscript 0 indicates values at the PBL top) and ω at 700 hP a. The close match between

them indicates that ω at the PBL top is mainly orographic forced.

In our simulations,

for a better consistence, we simply use ω at 700 hP a (ω0) obtained from the reanalysis

as orographic lift to force the CRM. The maxima in orographic lift during the two heavy

precipitation events (Fig. 2d) suggest that at least some portion of extreme precipitation is

orographically induced.

a. Diabatic heating feedback

Next we present the CRM results. We ﬁrst examine the control case, in which the model

is forced by all the large-scale forcings together. The T and q proﬁles from this control

case averaged between day 10 and day 40 (referred as the background proﬁles hereafter) are

compared with the proﬁles obtained from the reanalysis in the same period in Fig. 3. There

is a cold bias in the model results, especially in the upper troposphere, and a wet bias in the

middle troposphere. Actually, the CRM relative humidity shows a similar vertical structure

to that in the reanalysis data, except compressed in height, because the CRM surface level is

825 hP a. We presume that these discrepancies between the background proﬁles are due to

deﬁciencies in the model physics, uncertainties in the reanalysis data, and the idealizations

in the CRM settings (the simple radiation scheme, the ﬂat surface, neglect of a background

vertical motion, and so on). Our main interest is not in the time mean background proﬁles,

11

but in simulating the precipitation variations, and the idealizations in experimental setting

allow us to avoid additional complexities which would be involved in tuning the model to

obtain better agreement with the time mean proﬁles. The most important test of whether

these idealizations are adequate are the comparisons of the simulated and observed time

series of precipitation and vertical motion.

The precipitation from the control simulation matches that from the reanalysis remark-

ably well (Fig. 1a). The two extreme events are well reproduced by the model, except that

the model results underestimate the precipitation intensity slightly. The model results even

capture the minor precipitation peaks around days 13, 18, and 34. The simulated ω also

largely resembles that in the reanalysis data (Fig. 1b-c).

The components of ω (ωP V , ωBF , and ωQ) in the reanalysis and model results are com-

pared side by side in Fig. 4. The ω components in the reanalysis are ﬁrst computed using

full omega equation on the 3-dimensional sphere grids before averaging over the regional box

(Shaevitz et al. 2016). Thus, this diagnosis does not assume a speciﬁc disturbance wave-

length. Further, this analysis treats the diabatic heating as known (the diabatic heating

in the reanalysis is calculated as a residual from the temperature equation) and compares

its inﬂuence in the omega equation to that of the other terms. In reality, these terms are

not independent; the diabatic heating is related to the large-scale processes represented by

the other terms, as they inﬂuence the convection. These inﬂuences are considered explicitly

in the next section. Here we simply establish the magnitudes of the diﬀerent terms in the

omega equation.

The sum of the ω components obtained from the 3-dimensional QGω calculation (left

panels in Fig. 4) is very close to the ω directly obtained from the reanalysis (Fig. 1b).

Consistent with Fig. 2, considerable ascent in the upper troposphere is directly forced by

PV forcing during event 1 (Fig. 4a). A large portion of the ascent in the lower troposphere

is associated with orographic lift (Fig. 4c). The ω component due to diabatic heating (Fig.

4e) is largest in the middle troposphere, and has the largest amplitude among the three

12

components during the events.

The ω components in the CQG model (right panels in Fig. 4) are calculated diﬀerently

from those described above (and shown in the left panels of Fig. 4). Using the regional-

box-averaged large-scale forcings in the reanalysis and Q in the CRM, we solve the single

wavenumber QGω equation (Eq. 3) with the speciﬁed characteristic wavenumber k. Thus,

comparing the dynamic forcing components of ω can guide the choice of k. Fig. 4a-d show

that ωP V and ωBF in the model results approximately match those in the reanalysis, indi-
cating that k = 4.2 × 10−6m−1 (equivalent to 1500 km wavelength) used here is reasonable.

In the model, the component of ω due to heating (ωQ) is related to the large-scale

forcings through their inﬂuence on convection. The large-scale forcings alter the T and q

proﬁles in the column, which then determine the embedded convection and convective heating

(Q). Meanwhile, ωQ itself also modiﬁes T and q interactively. Thus a good simulation

of ωQ requires a good simulation of convection as well as a good representation of the

coupling between convection and the large-scale dynamics. The agreement between ωQ in

the reanalysis and model results (Fig. 4e-f) indicates that the CRM with the CQG framework

captures the above processes and reproduces the 2010 extreme events well.

Similarly, we can decompose the precipitation variations to diﬀerent components of the

forcing and the response. With the approximation that the adiabatic cooling due to ascent is

balanced by latent heating due to condensation, we can estimate the precipitation associated

with ω or its individual components,

P ≈ − cp
gLc

(cid:104) σp
R

ω(cid:105),

(5)

where cp is the speciﬁc heat of air at constant pressure, and Lc is the latent heat of conden-

sation. Precipitation estimated in this way allows negative values with descending ω. The

precipitation decomposition is shown in Fig. 5. Each color line is calculated using Eq. 5

with ω replaced by one of the components shown in Fig. 4. In the reanalysis, using Eq. 5

underestimates the precipitation, as shown by the black dashed line compared to the black

solid line in Fig. 5a. This may be due to errors in the approximation (5), or possibly to

13

the uncertainties in the reanalysis precipitation; in the ERA reanalysis, as with any data

set generated with data assimilation, the temperature and moisture budgets do not close

due to analysis increments. The precipitation in the TRMM data set is smaller than that

in the ERA reanalysis (Fig. 5 in Martius et al. 2013). In the model, the total precipitation

estimated by Eq. 5 is very close to that directly output by the model. Nevertheless, the

precipitation decomposition is consistent with the ω decompositions in Fig. 4. It shows the

signiﬁcant roles of PV forcing in event 1 and of orographic lift in both events 1 and 2, and

the large contributions from the diabatic heating feedback component. The model results

again show precipitation decomposition similar to the reanalysis diagnoses.

The diabatic heating feedback of convection to the large-scale dynamics as parameterized

in CQG is essential for the CRM to reproduce the extreme events. To demonstrate this,

we run an experiment in which the diabatic heating feedback is turned oﬀ, by removing the

third RHS term in Eq. 3, while keeping others the same as in the control case. This modiﬁed

case produces precipitation (shown by black circles in Fig. 5b) that is much smaller than

that in the control case. Without the positive feedback of diabatic heating on large-scale

dynamics, convection only responds passively, producing approximately just enough diabatic

heating to balance the imposed large-scale forcings.

b. Attribution of precipitation to large-scale forcings

In the previous sections we treated the diabatic heating as a known quantity and com-

pared it directly to other processes in the omega equation. Here we attribute the precipita-

tion variations to the large-scale forcings. We consider the role of each forcing in modulating

the convection, and thus diabatic heating, while treating the diabatic heating itself as an

internal, prognostic quantity associated with the convection simulated by the CRM. Three

types of large-scale forcing (Fig. 2) are examined: the upper-level PV forcing, the lower-

level orographic lift, and horizontal moisture advection. The ﬁrst two inﬂuence convection

dynamically by forcing ascent that destabilizes the atmospheric stratiﬁcation. The moisture

14

advection inﬂuences convection thermodynamically by modifying the humidity of the col-

umn. Nie and Sobel (2016) showed that the responses of convection vary with the type of

forcing as well as the forcing altitude.

The attribution of precipitation to each of the large-scale forcings is examined by forcing

the model with one of the forcings at a time. Note that while the QGω equation is linear,

so that the diﬀerent components of ω must sum up to the total diagnosed by that equation,

the precipitation or ω time series from these individual forcing experiments need not add up

to that from the control experiment, because the simulated convection need not be a linear

function of the forcings. Precipitation from these experiments is shown as the red lines in

Fig. 6b-d. For reference, also plotted are the control case precipitation (black line) and

the precipitation component corresponding to the imposed large-scale forcing (blue line).

With only PV forcing (Fig. 6b), the model results capture about half of the control case

precipitation in event 1. Event 2 is missed since PV forcing is very small there. When forced

only by orographic lift (Fig. 6c), the model captures the other half of precipitation in event

1 and almost all of the precipitation in event 2. The low-level orographic lift seems to be

more important in causing heavy precipitation than is the upper-level PV forcing, especially

for event 2. A possible reason may be that convection is more sensitive to lower tropospheric

temperature and moisture perturbations than to upper tropospheric ones (e.g. Kuang 2010;

Tulich and Mapes 2010; Nie and Kuang 2012).

Horizontal moisture advection aﬀects convection in these events in a diﬀerent way. When

the model is forced only by Advq (Fig. 6d), the simulated precipitation does not resemble
that in the control case. Instead, it is closely correlated with the moisture forcing ((cid:104)Advq(cid:105),

in the same units as the precipitation, shown as the blue line in Fig. 6c.) During most

of the simulation, the negative Advq dries the column, leading to dry periods with little

precipitation between precipitation peaks. However, the sharp precipitation peaks at days

17, 26, and 34 closely follow the periods of positive Advq with a time delay of about one

day. This experiment shows that even without the dynamic forcings Advq variations on the

15

synoptic timescale can trigger precipitation events directly. However, this direct triggering

eﬀect is not expressed in the 2010 events. Rather, as will discuss next, Advq exerts its

inﬂuence mainly by modifying the environment to a drier or wetter state, which aﬀects the

strength of the convection’s response to the dynamic forcings.

The sum of the precipitation in the individually-forced experiments is compared with
that in the control case precipitation in Fig. 6a. An oﬀset of 8 mm day−1 is subtracted, to

account for the multiple counting of the component of the time-mean precipitation needed
to balance the radiative cooling (corresponding to 4 mm day−1). Since we are adding results
from three simulations, it is appropriate to subtract twice this amount, 8 mm day−1, before

comparing to the control case.

Even apart from this mean oﬀset, the sum of the individually-forced experiments need

not equal the control experiment because the system is not inherently linear. During the

two precipitation peak periods, the two are in fact approximately equal, indicating that the

strong dynamical forcings account for most of the precipitation there. However, there are

some diﬀerences between the sum of the individually-forced experiments and the control

case. We hypothesize that these are due to interactions between the forcings. For example,
around days 11∼12, a dynamic destabilizing coincided with strong drying by horizontal
advection. As a result, the onset of precipitation is delayed to day 13∼14, by when the

drying is much weaker. As another example, the moistening by horizontal advection at day

17 and 26 coincided with dynamically-forced descent, mostly due to the PV forcing, so that

the horizontal moisture advection-forced precipitation seen in Fig. 6d is suppressed in the

control case.

c. Inﬂuence of environmental relative humidity on convection

Environmental humidity exerts an important control on convection (e.g., Raymond 2000;

Derbyshire et al. 2004; Bretherton et al. 2004; Sobel et al. 2004; Holloway and Neelin 2009).

In section 3b, we examined the eﬀects of synoptic-scale variations in horizontal moisture

16

advection on the extreme events. In this subsection, we focus on the control on precipitation

exerted by background relative humidity on longer time scales.

We perform experiments that are same with the control case, but with the background

humidity nudged towards diﬀerent states. We perform four experiments, in which q is nudged

to the control case q multiplied by a factor of 0.6 (Dry0.6), 0.8 (Dry0.8), 1.1 (Moist1.1), and

1.2 (Moist1.2), respectively. To rule out eﬀects due to the associated temperature changes,

the T proﬁles are nudged to the control case T in these runs. The nudging timescale is

5 days, so that the synoptic timescale variations are not strongly aﬀected by the nudging.

These cases are forced with the same large-scale forcings as in the control case. Fig. 3 shows

the resulting background T and q of the driest and the moistest case. The T proﬁles are

very close to each other, while the q and relative humidity proﬁles deviate from each other as

designed. Thus, these experiments shall be viewed as examining the dependence of extreme

precipitation on background relative humidity. Because the nudging is relatively weak, the

q diﬀerences between these runs are much smaller than the diﬀerences in the target proﬁles

towards which they are nudged.

The results of these experiments show that the precipitation in the extreme events is very

sensitive to the background humidity (Fig. 7a). The shapes of the precipitation time series

of these cases are similar, but the diﬀerence in the magnitudes of the precipitation maxima

between the driest case and the moistest case is more than a factor of 3. The dependence of

extreme precipitation intensity on background humidity is summarized by a scatter plot in

Fig. 7c, with the data averaged in the same way. The x-axis is the background precipitable
water (column-integrated speciﬁc humidity, averaged over day 10∼40), and the y-axis is the
precipitation rate averaged over the two extreme events (day 20∼23 and day 27∼30). Over

the examined range, the precipitation is linearly proportional to the background precipitable
water, with a slope of 1.68 d−1 (equivalently, mm d−1 mm−1). This strong dependence

suggests that the intensities of extreme events can be modulated by large-scale circulation

anomalies that induce regional background relative humidity changes, such as those due to

17

the El Ni˜no Southern Oscillation (e.g. Lau and Kim 2012), monsoon (e.g. Freychet et al.

2015); or anthropogenic climate change (e.g. Allan and Soden 2008; Byrne and O’Gorman

2013).

4. Results with simpliﬁed representations of convection

a. Results using a convective parameterization

We repeat the experiments in section 3 with the CRM replaced by the MIT SCM

(Emanuel and ˘Zivkovic-Rothman 1999). The core of this SCM is Emanuel’s convective

parameterization (Emanuel 1991), which represents an ensemble of convective clouds, and a

stratiform cloud parameterization (Bony and Emanuel 2001). The vertical resolution is 25

hP , and the time step is 5 minutes. All other experimental settings, such as the radiative

cooling, surface conditions, and others, are the same as in the CRM experiments.

The precipitation from the SCM in the control case, in which the SCM is forced by all

the large-scale forcings, is compared with the reanalysis precipitation in Fig. 8a. The model

captures the general shape of the precipitation time series, but underestimates the intensities

of the two main events by as much as half, indicating that the SCM responds too weakly to

the large-scale forcings.

As we did above for the CRM, we force the SCM with the large-scale forcings one at

a time to examine their individual eﬀects. These SCM results, shown in Fig. 8b-d, can

be directly compared with the CRM results in Fig. 6b-d (Note the range of y-axis in Fig.

8b-d is stretched for better visibility.) For the orographic lift forcing, the SCM precipitation

is comparable with that from the CRM (Fig. 8c, Fig. 6c). However, when forced by PV

forcing, the SCM produces much weaker precipitation than does the CRM (Fig. 8b, Fig. 6b),

suggesting that the SCM does not respond strongly enough to the dynamic destabilization

in the upper troposphere. The SCM also shows much weaker precipitation variations in

response to synoptic timescale moisture forcing than does the CRM (Fig. 8d, Fig. 6d).

18

The lack of convective moisture sensitivity in SCM is also shown in its responses to

background relative humidity changes. The experiments with the background q proﬁles

nudged to diﬀerent states, as in section 3c with the CRM, are performed with the SCM.

The SCM results again show much weaker dependence on the background q than did the

CRM (Fig. 7a-b). We summarize all the SCM cases on the same precipitable-water-and-

peak-precipitation scatter plot with the CRM results in Fig. 7c. A linear ﬁt of all the SCM

cases examined here gives the dependence of extreme precipitation intensity on background

precipitable water with a slope of 0.89 mm/day per mm, about half of the CRM results’

slope. The linear ﬁts to the CRM and SCM results converge in the dry limit where latent

heating is negligible. However, the discrepancies between them increase as the environment

becomes moister.

Although only one convective parameterization is examined here, the lack of convective

sensitivity to moisture is a common problem in many convective parameterizations (e.g.

Derbyshire et al. 2004). This deﬁciency may aﬀect the modeling of extreme precipitation in

general circulation models (GCMs) which use such parameterizations.

b. Results using an eﬀective static stability

In some theoretical studies, the eﬀects of latent heating are taken into account in by

replacing the dry static stability σ by an eﬀective (or moist) static stability σe in otherwise

dry models (e.g. Kiladis et al. 2009; O’Gorman 2011; Cohen and Boos 2016). In the QGω

equation, one may deﬁne σe as

and rewrite Eq. 3 as

σe = σ +

R
pω

Q,

∂ppω − σe(

k
f0

)2ω = − 1
f0

∂pAdvζ +

R
p

(

k
f0

)2AdvT .

(6)

(7)

In Eq. 7, the latent heating Q is hidden in the deﬁnition of σe, but the content of the equation

is formally unchanged. The new parameter σe absorbs all the complexities of convection and

19

should, in principle, depend on the state of the column. However, in studies where this device

is used, it is common to further specify that σe is constant fraction of σ (e.g. Emanuel et al.

σ

1994; Cohen and Boos 2016):

σe =

: ω ≥ 0,

(8)

ασ : ω < 0,

where α ∈ [0, 1] is a free parameter. α = 1 represents a dry atmosphere, and α = 0 means

that the atmosphere is exactly neutral to moist convection, such as would be the case for

a saturated atmosphere with a moist adiabatic temperature proﬁle. For any value of α less

than unity, the reduction in static stability is conditional on the sign of ω, so that σe < σ

only when there is large-scale ascent. The use of σe with this parameterization removes any

dependence of convection on moisture.

We force Eq. 7 with the same PV forcing and orographic lift as before (Advq is not

applicable here, since there is no explicit coupling to the moisture ﬁeld). The computed ω

includes both the forcing component and the diabatic heating component, with the latter

implicitly expressed via Eq. 7. The resulting ω is then converted into precipitation using Eq.

5. This precipitation, computed with diﬀerent values of α, is compared with the reanalysis

precipitation in Fig. 9a. Precipitation in the dry limit (α = 1) corresponds solely to that

produced by the dynamic forcings, with no diabatic feedback. As expected, precipitation

increases as α decreases. The value α = 0.2 produces good results for event 1, but greatly

underestimates precipitation in event 2. As α further decreases, precipitation in event 1

increases sharply, while precipitation in event 2 increases only slowly.

By tuning α, we can easily change the amplitude of the response to PV forcing, but not

the response to orographic lift. Fig. 9b-e shows the results with Eq. 8 being forced by PV

forcing and orographic lift separately. The increase of precipitation with decreasing α seen

in Fig. 9a is almost entirely due to the increase of the PV-forced component (Fig. 9b). The

precipitation response to orographic lift is not sensitive to α (Fig. 9c). In Fig. 10d, we show

the ω proﬁles forced by PV forcing on day 22, a representative day during event 1. With

20

α = 0.2, the dry system (Eq. 7) matches the CRM results well. Decreasing α further leads to

a large overestimation of the PV-forced ω. Fig. 9e shows the ω proﬁles forced by orographic

lift on day 28, a representative day during event 2. Above the PBL top, ω decreases with

height. This is qualitatively diﬀerent from the CRM results, which show that orographic lift

can trigger convection whose latent heating maximizes in the free troposphere (black dashed

line in Fig. 9e), and which agree well with the reanalysis data (Fig. 4e).

This qualitative diﬀerence can be understood by considering the analytic solution to (7)

for constant σe, in the special case that the PV forcing (the RHS of Eq. 7) is zero, but there

is a nonzero orographic lift at the lower boundary, ω0. The analytic solution, with upper

boundary condition of ω(pt) = 0, is

ω = ω0(1 − e2 k

f

√

σe(pt−p0))−1(e

k
f

√
σe(p−p0) − e

k
f

√

≈ ω0e

k
f

σe(2pt−p−p0))
σe(p−p0),

√

(9)

where p0 is the pressure at the top of the PBL and pt is the pressure at the tropopause. We

see that the solution must decay exponentially with height. A smaller α leads to only slower

decay. The use of σe (Eq. 8) cannot produce an ω proﬁle with a maximum in the interior

as observed.

With a suﬃciently complex representation of σe, allowing it to be a function of pressure

(and to take on negative values), the parameterization (Eq. 7) can in principle capture any

solution. However, in that case this parameterization is of little value, since then one is back

to the problem of parameterizing convection in its full complexity. Our conclusion is that

while the dry system with an eﬀective static stability may be useful for some purposes, it

is unsatisfactory for the purpose of modeling the events studied here, and perhaps any deep

convective events triggered by orographic forcing.

21

5. Conclusions and Discussion

This study examines the large-scale forcings and the convective responses to those forcings

in the extreme precipitation events of 2010 in Pakistan, using the Column Quasi-Geostrophic

modeling framework. Forcing a CRM with large-scale forcings taken from reanalysis data

and coupling large-scale dynamics with convection through the QGω equation, we have

successfully reproduced the main features of the extreme precipitation events. The positive

feedback of convective heating to large-scale vertical motion is essential in amplifying the

precipitation intensity to reach the observed values. The large-scale forcings, including those

due to diﬀerential vorticity and temperature advection (which together can be represented

as diﬀerential advection of potential vorticity), mechanical orographic lift, and horizontal

moisture advection, play signiﬁcant roles forcing convection. Orographic lift is the most

important dynamical forcing, especially for the second of the two heavy precipitation events,

while PV forcing also contributes to the triggering of the ﬁrst event. Horizontal moisture

advection modulates the convection mainly by setting the environment humidity, which

controls the amplitude of convection’s responses to the dynamic forcings.

We also performed calculations using CQG in which convection was represented by a

convective parameterization in a single column model (SCM) as well as by an eﬀective

static stability in a dry model. The results from these calculations have more substantial

deﬁciencies than do the CRM results. The SCM underestimates the convective response to

upper-level PV forcing, and shows much weaker sensitivity to environmental humidity than

does the CRM. The eﬀective static stability can be tuned to match the extreme precipitation

triggered by upper-level PV forcing, but its response to orographic is qualitatively inaccurate,

in that it cannot produce maximum ascent in the interior whereas the observations and

CRM simulations both show such maxima. In addition, the eﬀective static stability cannot

represent the dependence of convection on environmental humidity.

The method used here can be used to investigate other extreme precipitation events.

Shaevitz et al. (2016) ﬁnd that the extreme precipitation events of summer 2014 in India

22

and Pakistan are similar to the second event of the 2010 ﬂood studied here. They also ﬁnd a

strong correlation between the extreme precipitation intensity to orographic lift and column

precipitable water in a 10-years reanalysis data in this region (their Fig. 14), suggesting that

our ﬁndings may apply to a larger number of events. Globally, a large number of the most

intense precipitation events occur in the subtropical belt during summer (Zipser et al. 2006;

Cecil and Blankenship 2012), likely results of interactions between extratropical dynamics

with suﬃcient moisture supply from the tropics. Applying the CQG method of this study

to events in other regions, e.g., Texas (e.g. Wang et al. 2015) or the Middle East (e.g. de

Vries et al. 2013), may be useful in identifying the most important physical factors leading

to extreme precipitation events in these diﬀerent regions.

Climate simulations with GCMs have been shown to underestimate extreme precipita-

tion, and to exhibit signiﬁcant uncertainties in the changes in extreme precipitation they

project as the climate warms (e.g. Sun et al. 2006, 2007; O’Gorman 2015), mostly due

to deﬁciencies in convection parameterizations. Results of this study suggest that the lack

of convective moisture sensitivity in convective parameterizations (e.g., Derbyshire et al.

2004) may contribute to the biases. The CQG approach may also be used to study the

physics underlying the projected changes of extreme precipitation in the future. Variations

in the large-scale vertical motion proﬁles between diﬀerent models have been shown to be

responsible for much of the diversity in GCM projections (O’Gorman and Schneider 2009;

Sugiyama et al. 2010). The CQG approach allows us to study in detail how diﬀerent factors

inﬂuence vertical motion proﬁles in the presence of convection, and may provide a route to

some insight on this problem.

Acknowledgments.

The authors thank Shuguang Wang, William Boos, and Zhiming Kuang for discussion.

This research was supported by the Lamont Postdoctoral Fellowship to JN, an AXA Award

from the AXA Research Fund to AHS, and NASA grant XXX which supported DAS.

23

REFERENCE:

Allan, R. P. and B. J. Soden, (2008): Atmospheric warming and the ampliﬁcation of

precipitation extremes. Science, 321, 1481–1484.

Bergman, J. W. and P. D. Sardeshmukh, (2004): Dynamic Stabilization of Atmospheric

Single Column Models. J. Clim., 17, 1004–1021.

Blossey, P. N., C. S. Bretherton, and M. C. Wyant, (2009): Understanding subtropical

low cloud response to a warmer climate in a superparameterized climate model. Part II: Col-

umn modeling with a cloud-resolving model. J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst.,1, doi:10.3894/JAMES.2009.1.8.

Bony, S. and K. A. Emanuel, (2001): A parameterization of the cloudiness associated with

cumulus convection: Evaluation using TOGA COARE data. J. Atmos. Sci., 58, 3158–3183.

Bretherton, C. S., M. E. Peters, and L. E. Back, (2004): Relationships between water

vapor path and precipitation over the tropical oceans. J. Climate, 17, 1517–1528.

Byrne, M. P., and O’Gorman, P. A., (2013): Land-ocean warming contrast over a wide

range of climates: convective quasi-equilibrium theory and idealized simulations, J. Climate,

26, 4000–4016.

Cecil, D. J. and C. B. Blankenship, (2012): Toward a Global Climatology of Severe

Hailstorms as Estimated by Satellite Passive Microwave Imagers. J. Climate, 25, 687–703.

Chiang, J. C. and A. H. Sobel, (2002): Tropical tropospheric temperature variations

caused by ENSO and their inﬂuence on the remote tropical climate, J. Climate, 15, 2616–

2631.

Cohen, N. Y., and W. R. Boos, (2016): Perspectives on moist baroclinic instability: impli-

cations for the growth of monsoon depressions. J. Atmos. Sci., In press. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JAS-

D-15-0254.1.

Dee, D. P., et al., (2011): The ERA-Interim reanalysis: Conﬁguration and performance

of the data assimilation system. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 137: 553–597.

Derbyshire, S. H., I. Beau, P. Bechtold, J. Y. Grandpeix, J. M. Piriou, J. L. Redelsperger,

and P. M. M. Soares, (2004): Sensitivity of moist convection to environmental humidity.

24

Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 130, 3055–3079.

de Vries, A. J., E. Tyrlis, D. Edry, S. O. Krichak, B. Steil, and J. Lelieveld, (2013):

Extreme precipitation events in the Middle East: Dynamics of the Active Red Sea Trough.

J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 118, 7087–7108, doi:10.1002/jgrd.50569.

Emanuel, K. A., (1991): A scheme for representing cumulus convection in large-scale

models. J. Atmos. Sci., 48, 2313–2335.

Emanuel, K. A., J. D. Neelin, and C. S. Bretherton, (1994): On large-scale circulations

in convecting atmospheres. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 120, 1111–1143.

Emanuel, K. A., and M. ˘Zivkovic-Rothman, (1999): Development and evaluation of a

convection scheme for use in climate models. J. Atmos. Sci., 56, 1766–1782.

Freychet, N., H. H. Hsu, C. Chou, and C.-H. Wu, (2015): Asian Summer Monsoon in

CMIP5 Projections: A Link between the Change in Extreme Precipitation and Monsoon

Dynamics. J. Climate, 28, 1477–1493.

Galarneau Jr., T. J., T. M. Hamill, R. M. Dole, and J. Perlwitz, (2012): A Multiscale

Analysis of the Extreme Weather Events over Western Russia and Northern Pakistan during

July 2010. Mon. Wea. Rev., 140, 1639–1664.

Holloway, C. E. and J. D. Neelin, (2009): Moisture Vertical Structure, Column Water

Vapor, and Tropical Deep Convection. J. Atmos. Sci., 66, 1665–1683.

Holton, J., (2004): An introduction to dynamic meteo- rology. Forth edition, Elsevier

Academic Press. P164–168.

Hong, C. C., H. H. Hsu, N. H. Lin, and H. Chiu, (2011): Roles of European blocking

and tropical extratropical interaction in the 2010 Pakistan ﬂooding, Geophys. Res. Lett.,

38, L13806, doi:10.1029/2011GL047583.

Hoskins, B. J., M. E. Mcintyre, and A. W. Robertson, (1985): On the use and signiﬁcance

of isentropic potential vorticity maps, Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 111, 877–946.

Houze Jr., R. A., K. L. Rasmussen, S. Medina, S. R. Brodzik, and U. Romatschke,

(2011): Anomalous Atmospheric Events Leading to the Summer 2010 Floods in Pakistan.

25

Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 92, 291–298.

Khairoutdinov, M. F. and D. A. Randall, (2003): Cloud resolving modeling of the ARM

summer 1997 IOP: Model formulation, results, uncertainties, and sensitivities. J. Atmos.

Sci., 60, 607–625.

Kiladis, G. N., M. C. Wheeler, P. T. Haertel, K. H. Straub, and P. E. Roundy, 2009:

Convectively coupled equatorial waves. Rev. Geophys., 47, RG2003.

Kuang, Z., (2008): Modeling the interaction between cumulus convection and linear

waves using a limited domain cloud system resolving model. J. Atmos. Sci., 65, 576–591.

Kuang, Z., (2010): Linear response functions of a cumu- lus ensemble to temperature

and moisture perturbations and implication to the dynamics of convectively coupled waves.

J. Atmos. Sci., 67, 941–962.

Lau, W. K. M. and K. Kim, (2012): The 2010 Pakistan Flood and Russian Heat Wave:

Teleconnection of Hydrometeorological Extremes. J. Hydrometeor, 13, 392–403.

Mapes, B. E., (2004): Sensitivities of cumulus ensemble rainfall in a cloud-resolving

model with parameterized large-scale dynamics. J. Atmos. Sci., 61, 2308–2317.

Martius, O., H. Sodemann, H. Joos, S. Pfahl, A. Winschall, M. Croci-Maspoli, M. Graf,

E. Madonna, B. Mueller, S. Schemm, J. Sedl´a˘cek, M. Sprenger, H. Wernli, (2013): The role

of upper-level dynamics and surface processes for the Pakistan ﬂood of July 2010. Q. J. R.

Meteorol. Soc. 139: 1780–1797.

Nie, J. and Z. Kuang, (2012): Responses of shallow cumulus convection to large-scale

temperature and moisture perturbations: a comparison of large-eddy simulations and a

convective parameterization based on stochastically en- training parcels, J. Atmos. Sci., 69,

1936–1956.

Nie, J. and A. H. Sobel, (2015): Responses of tropical deep convection to the QBO:

cloud-resolving simulations, J. Atmos. Sci., 72, 3625–3638.

Nie, J. and A. H. Sobel, (2016): Modeling the Interaction between Quasi-Geostrophic

Vertical Motion and Convection in a Single Column, J. Atmos. Sci., 73, 1101–1117.

26

O’Gorman, P. A. and T. Schneider, (2009): The physical basis for increases in precipi-

tation extremes in simulations of 21st-century climate change. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 106,

14773–14777.

O’Gorman, P. A., (2011): The Eﬀective Static Stability Experienced by Eddies in a Moist

Atmosphere. J. Atmos. Sci., 68, 75–90.

O’Gorman, P. A., (2015): Precipitation extremes under climate change, Current Climate

Change Reports, 1, 49–59.

Pauluis, O. and S. Garner, (2006): Sensitivity of radiative-convective equilibrium simu-

lations to horizontal resolution, J. Atmos. Sci., 63, 1910–1923.

Rasmussen, K. L., A. J. Hill, V. E. Toma, M. D. Zuluaga, P. J. Webster, and R. A. Houze,

(2014): Multiscale analysis of three consecutive years of anomalous ﬂooding in Pakistan.

Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc., 141: 1259–1276.

Raymond, D. J., (2000): Thermodynamic control of tropical rainfall, Quart. J. Roy.

Meteor. Soc., 126, 889–898.

Raymond, D. J. and X. Zeng, (2005): Modelling tropical atmospheric convection in

the context of the weak temperature gradient approximation. Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc., 131:

1301–1320.

Romps D. M., (2012): Weak Pressure Gradient Approximation and Its Analytical Solu-

tions. J. Atmos. Sci., 69, 2835–2845.

Shaevitz, D. A., J. Nie and A. H. Sobel, (2016): The 2010 and 2014 ﬂoods in India and

Pakistan: dynamical inﬂuences on the vertical motion and precipitation. Submitted to J.

Geophys. Res.. The manuscript is available at http://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/~sobel/

Papers/shaevitz_et_al_QJ.pdf

Sessions, S. L., M. J. Herman, and S. Senti´c, (2015): Convective response to changes

in the thermodynamic environment in idealized weak temperature gradient simulations, J.

Adv. Model. Earth Syst., 7, 712–738, doi:10.1002/2015MS000446.

Sobel, A. H. and C. S. Bretherton, (2000): Modeling tropical precipitation in a single

27

column. J. Clim., 13, 4378–4392.

Sobel, A. H., S. E. Yuter, C. S. Bretherton, and G. N. Kiladis, (2004): Large-scale

meteorology and deep convection during TRMM KWAJEX. Mon. Wea. Rev.,132, 422–444.

Sugiyama, M., H. Shiogama, M. Emori, (2010): Precipitation extreme changes exceeding

moisture content increases in MIROC and IPCC climate models. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.,

107, 571–575, doi: 10.1073/pnas.0903186107.

Sun, Y., S. Solomon, A. Dai, and R. W. Portmann, (2006): How often does it rain? J.

Climate, 19, 916–934.

Sun, Y., S. Solomon, A. Dai, and R. W. Portmann, (2007): How Often Will It Rain?. J.

Climate, 20, 4801–4818.

Trenberth, K. E., (1978):

Interpretation of the diagnos- tic quasi-geostrophic omega

equation. Mon. Wea. Rev., 106, 131-137.

Tulich, S. N. and B. E. Mapes, (2010): Transient envi- ronmental sensitivities of explicitly

simulated tropical con- vection. J. Atmos. Sci., 67, 957–974.

Wang, S., A. H. Sobel, and Z. Kuang, (2013): Cloud-resolving simulation of TOGA

COARE using parameterized large-scale dynamics. J. Geophys. Res., DOI: 10.1002/jgrd.50510.

Wang, S., A. H. Sobel, and J. Nie, (2015): Modeling the MJO rain rates using param-

eterized large scale dynamics: vertical structure, radiation, and horizontal advection of dry

air, submitted to J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst.

Wang, S. S.-Y., W.-R. Huang, H.-H. Hsu, and R. R. Gillies, (2015): Role of the strength-

ened El Ni˜no teleconnection in the May 2015 ﬂoods over the southern Great Plains, Geophys.

Res. Lett., 42, 8140–8146, doi:10.1002/2015GL065211.

Zipser, E. J., C. Liu, D. J. Cecil, S. W. Nesbitt, and D. P. Yorty, (2006): Where are the

most intense thunderstorms on earth? Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 87, 1057–1071.

28

List of Figures

1

(a) 12-hourly precipitation from the ERA-Interim reanalysis averaged over

Northern Pakistan regional box (black bars), and CRM simulated precipita-

tion in the control case (red dotted curve). (b) and (c) show the time series

of ω in the ERA data and CRM control case as functions of time and pres-

sure, respectively. Day 0 indicates July 1, 2010. The black vertical lines

mark day 20, 23, 27, and 30, indicating the time windows of the two extreme

precipitation events.

2

Horizontal advection of (a) total vorticity, (b) temperature, and (c) moisture

in the reanalysis data. For better visibility, the white contours in (c) are

the zero contour lines. The lower panel in (c) plots the column-integrated
horizontal moisture advection, in the unit of mm day−1. (d) shows ω at 700
hP a and the estimated orographic lift (ωorog = (cid:126)V0 · ∇hs.)

3

The (a) temperature, (b) moisture, and (c) relative humidity proﬁles of re-

analysis data and CRM results averaged between day 10 and day 40. The

description of cases Dry0.6 and Moist1.2 is in section 3c. The proﬁles in the

reanalysis data extend to 1000 hP a, however, only levels above the surface

are included in the averaging.

4

The decomposition of QG ω. From top to bottom, plotted are ω due to PV

forcing (ωP V ), due to orographic lift (ωBF ), and due to diabatic heating (ωQ).

Note the color bars on diﬀerent rows are diﬀerent. The left column shows

results from reanalysis data with three-dimensional QGω inversion. The right

column shows the results of the CRM control case with one-dimensional QGω

inversion.

32

33

34

35

29

5

The decomposition of precipitation on each ω component from (a) reanalysis

data, and (b) the CRM control case. In (a), the black line is precipitation

from reanalysis, and the black dashed line is precipitation converted from

ω, which is further decomposed into components associated with ωP V (cyan

line), associated with ωBF (blue line); associated with ωQ (red line). In (b),

the black dashed line (sum of color lines) almost overlaps with the black solid

line, thus is omitted. The black circle line in (b) is the CRM results with the

diabatic heating feedback in the QGω equation turned oﬀ.

36

6

(b)-(d): The red lines are CRM precipitation forced by only (b) PV forcing,

(c) orographic lift, and (d) horizontal moisture advection. The blue lines are

precipitation time series corresponding to each individual imposed forcing.

The red line in (a) is the sum of the red lines in (b)-(d) with a subtraction
of 8 mm day−1 as multiple-counted mean precipitation. As references, the

control case precipitation (black line) is also plotted in each panel.

37

7

The (a) CRM and (b) SCM simulated precipitation with diﬀerent background

relative humidity. (c) is a scatter plot of the precipitation during the events

against the background precipitable water from all the cases. The color lines

are the linear ﬁt with slope shown in the legend. The black black triangle

corresponds to the 2010 events from the reanalysis data.

8

The SCM results. (a) is same with Fig. 1a, except the red dots showing the

SCM results; (b)-(d) are same with Fig. 6b-d, respectively, except using the

SCM. Note the y-axis in (b)-(d) are stretched for better visibility.

38

39

30

9

Results with the dry QGω equation with the use of σe (Eq. 7). (a) is same with

Fig. 1a, except the color lines showing results with diﬀerent α. The middle

row shows precipitation forced by only (b) PV forcing and (c) orographic lift.

(d) shows vertical proﬁles of ω forced by the PV forcing at day 22. (e) shows

vertical proﬁles of ω forced by the orographic lift at day 28. In (d)-(e), the

black dashed line shows the corresponding ω from the CRM simulations.

40

31

Fig. 1. (a) 12-hourly precipitation from the ERA-Interim reanalysis averaged over Northern
Pakistan regional box (black bars), and CRM simulated precipitation in the control case (red
dotted curve). (b) and (c) show the time series of ω in the ERA data and CRM control
case as functions of time and pressure, respectively. Day 0 indicates July 1, 2010. The black
vertical lines mark day 20, 23, 27, and 30, indicating the time windows of the two extreme
precipitation events.

32

1015202530350204060daymm/dayPrec.(a)dayhPaERA ω (hPa/hr)  (b)101520253035200400600800−10−50dayhPaCRM ω (hPa/hr)  (c)101520253035200400600800−10−50Fig. 2. Horizontal advection of (a) total vorticity, (b) temperature, and (c) moisture in the
reanalysis data. For better visibility, the white contours in (c) are the zero contour lines.
The lower panel in (c) plots the column-integrated horizontal moisture advection, in the unit
of mm day−1. (d) shows ω at 700 hP a and the estimated orographic lift (ωorog = (cid:126)V0 · ∇hs.)

33

101520253035−15−10−505dayhPa/hrω0  ω700ωorogdayhPaAdvζ (10−4 /s/day)  101520253035200400600800−1012dayhPaAdvT (K/day)  101520253035200400600800−10−50510dayhPaAdvq (g/kg/day)  101520253035200400600800−6−4−202(a)(b)(c)(d)101520253035−10−505daymm/dayFig. 3. The (a) temperature, (b) moisture, and (c) relative humidity proﬁles of reanalysis
data and CRM results averaged between day 10 and day 40. The description of cases Dry0.6
and Moist1.2 is in section 3c. The proﬁles in the reanalysis data extend to 1000 hP a,
however, only levels above the surface are included in the averaging.

34

2002503000200400600800KhPamean T  (a)ERACtlDry0.6Moist1.2010200200400600800g/kghPamean q  (b)ERACtlDry0.6Moist1.20501000200400600800%hPamean RH  (c)ERACtlDry0.6Moist1.2Fig. 4. The decomposition of QG ω. From top to bottom, plotted are ω due to PV forcing
(ωP V ), due to orographic lift (ωBF ), and due to diabatic heating (ωQ). Note the color bars
on diﬀerent rows are diﬀerent. The left column shows results from reanalysis data with
three-dimensional QGω inversion. The right column shows the results of the CRM control
case with one-dimensional QGω inversion.

35

dayhPaωPV (hPa/hr)  (a)101520253035200400600800−6−4−202dayhPaωPV (hPa/hr)  (b)101520253035200400600800−6−4−202dayhPaωBF (hPa/hr)  (c)101520253035200400600800−8−6−4−202dayhPaωBF (hPa/hr)  (d)101520253035200400600800−8−6−4−202dayhPaωQ (hPa/hr)  (e)101520253035200400600800−10−8−6−4−202dayhPaωQ (hPa/hr)  (f)101520253035200400600800−10−8−6−4−202ERA: 3D inversionCRM: 1D inversionFig. 5. The decomposition of precipitation on each ω component from (a) reanalysis data,
and (b) the CRM control case. In (a), the black line is precipitation from reanalysis, and
the black dashed line is precipitation converted from ω, which is further decomposed into
components associated with ωP V (cyan line), associated with ωBF (blue line); associated
with ωQ (red line). In (b), the black dashed line (sum of color lines) almost overlaps with
the black solid line, thus is omitted. The black circle line in (b) is the CRM results with the
diabatic heating feedback in the QGω equation turned oﬀ.

36

1015202530350204060daymm/dayprec., ERA  (a)precprec(ω)prec(ωPV)prec(ωBF)prec(ωQ)1015202530350204060daymm/dayprec., CRM  (b)precprec(ωPV)prec(ωBF)prec(ωQ)prec, no fdbkFig. 6.
(b)-(d): The red lines are CRM precipitation forced by only (b) PV forcing, (c)
orographic lift, and (d) horizontal moisture advection. The blue lines are precipitation time
series corresponding to each individual imposed forcing. The red line in (a) is the sum of the
red lines in (b)-(d) with a subtraction of 8 mm day−1 as multiple-counted mean precipitation.
As references, the control case precipitation (black line) is also plotted in each panel.

37

1015202530350204060daymm/dayPrec forced by PV  (b)precprec(ωPV)1015202530350204060daymm/dayPrec forced by ω0  (c)precprec(ωBF)1015202530350204060daymm/dayPrec forced by Advq  (d)precprec(Advq)1015202530350204060daymm/dayPrec sum (b) to (d)(a)Fig. 7. The (a) CRM and (b) SCM simulated precipitation with diﬀerent background
relative humidity. (c) is a scatter plot of the precipitation during the events against the
background precipitable water from all the cases. The color lines are the linear ﬁt with
slope shown in the legend. The black black triangle corresponds to the 2010 events from the
reanalysis data.

38

1015202530350102030405060daymm/dayCRM Prec.  CtlDry0.6Moist1.21015202530350102030405060daymm/daySCM Prec.  CtlDry0.6Moist1.22530354051015202530PW (mm)Prec (mm/day)  2010 floodsCtlCtlCRM (β=1.68)SCM (β=0.89)(a)(b)(c)Fig. 8. The SCM results. (a) is same with Fig. 1a, except the red dots showing the SCM
results; (b)-(d) are same with Fig. 6b-d, respectively, except using the SCM. Note the y-axis
in (b)-(d) are stretched for better visibility.

39

1015202530350204060daymm/daySCM Prec.(a)101520253035−10010203040daymm/dayPrec forced by PV  (b)precprec(ωPV)101520253035−10010203040daymm/dayPrec forced by w0  (c)precprec(ωBF)101520253035−10010203040daymm/dayPrec forced by Advq  (d)precprec(Advq)Fig. 9. Results with the dry QGω equation with the use of σe (Eq. 7).
(a) is same
with Fig. 1a, except the color lines showing results with diﬀerent α. The middle row
shows precipitation forced by only (b) PV forcing and (c) orographic lift. (d) shows vertical
proﬁles of ω forced by the PV forcing at day 22. (e) shows vertical proﬁles of ω forced by
the orographic lift at day 28. In (d)-(e), the black dashed line shows the corresponding ω
from the CRM simulations.

40

101520253035020406080100120mm/dayPrec  α=1α=0.2α=0.1α=0.05(a)101520253035050100daymm/dayPrec forced by PV  (b)α=1α=0.2α=0.1α=0.05101520253035050100daymm/dayPrec forced by ω0  (c)α=1α=0.2α=0.1α=0.05−40−30−20−100200400600800hPa/hrhPaω(day 22), forced by PV  (d)CRMα=1α=0.2α=0.1α=0.05−40−30−20−100200400600800hPa/hrhPaω(day 28), forced by ω0  (e)CRMα=1α=0.2α=0.1α=0.05day