March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
h
t
-
l
c
u
n
[
 
 

1
v
3
5
2
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chapter 1

Chiral Electroweak Currents in Nuclei

D.O. Riska

Finnish Society of Science and Letters, Helsinki, Finland, and

The Cyprus Institute, Nicosia, Cyprus

R. Schiavilla

Theory Center, Jeﬀerson Lab, Newport News, Virginia, and

Physics Department, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia

The development of the chiral dynamics based description of nuclear elec-
troweak currents is reviewed. Gerald E. (Gerry) Brown’s role in basing
theoretical nuclear physics on chiral Lagrangians is emphasized. Illus-
trative examples of the successful description of electroweak observables
of light nuclei obtained from chiral eﬀective ﬁeld theory are presented.

1. Introduction

The phenomenological success of the systematic application of chiral ef-
fective ﬁeld theory (χEFT) to the electromagnetic and weak observables
of light nuclei in the mass range A = 2–10 has been remarkable. Here
the background and early application of chiral Lagrangians to nuclear cur-
rent operators, and Gerry Brown’s role as an initiator of this approach are
reviewed in the next section. The third and fourth sections contain a sum-
mary of the present stage of the χEFT approach and a set of illustrative
examples of its application to nuclear electroweak observables.

2. Historical Perspective

2.1. Gerry Brown’s early work with chiral Lagrangians

Gerry Brown was one of the ﬁrst physicists to appreciate the utility of eﬀec-
tive chiral Lagrangians in theoretical nuclear physics. In the late 1960s he

1

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 2

2

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

planned a major eﬀort to derive a realistic nucleon-nucleon (N N ) interac-
tion model from meson exchange, as he saw that the pair suppression built
into Weinberg’s non-linear chiral Lagrangian for the pion-nucleon interac-
tion [1] might solve the over-binding problem, which the two-pion exchange
interaction described with the conventional pseudoscalar pion-nucleon cou-
pling model inevitably led to. That a realistic description of the nucleon-
nucleon amplitude could be constructed in this way was then demonstrated
by Brown and Durso [2] and Chemtob, Durso, and Riska [3].

In parallel with this development Chemtob and Rho derived expressions
for the exchange current contributions to the electromagnetic and axial two-
nucleon current operators that arise from the eﬀective chiral Lagrangians
for pion and vector meson exchange [4]. The ρ-meson exchange interaction
complements the pion exchange one by counteracting the strong tensor
component of the latter and improving the interaction models of Refs. [2, 3].
Concurrently, it enhances the eﬀects of the long range electromagnetic pion
exchange current.

Gerry Brown’s interest in the role of exchange currents in nuclei was
stimulated by Chemtob and Rho’s estimate of the axial exchange current
enhancement of the Gamow-Teller matrix element in Tritium β-decay [5].
He suggested that the D-state components in the trinucleon wave functions,
even if small, could enhance the calculated value. This was illustrated with
a schematic model for the those components [6].

The axial exchange current is related to the N N interaction indirectly
through the partially-conserved axial current (PCAC) relation to the pion-
production operator. The form of the electromagnetic exchange current is
in contrast directly constrained by the N N interaction through the continu-
ity equation [7, 8]. The ﬁrst demonstrations that electromagnetic exchange
currents could play a signiﬁcant role in nuclear observables were in fact
related to those. In 1971 Gerry Brown’s attention was drawn to the fact
the well measured total cross section for capture of thermal neutrons on
protons—the process 1H(n, γ)2H—could not be fully explained by the sum
of the neutron and proton magnetic moments. He asked one of us (DOR) to
take into account the pion exchange current operators derived by Chemtob
and Rho [4]. The result was that the exchange current contribution can
account for the ∼ 10% diﬀerence between the calculated and the experi-
mental value for the cross section [9]. The key part of the pion exchange
current operator was related to the chiral Lagrangian for the pion-nucleon
interaction. A smaller, nevertheless signiﬁcant, eﬀect was due to the pion
exchange operator, which involved intermediate ∆ resonances [10].

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 3

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

3

2.2. The sequel

It was soon afterwards shown that the experimental values of the 3H and
3He magnetic moments could also be almost fully accounted for in the same
way with realistic wave functions [11]. Moreover it was found that the pion
exchange current contribution could provide about one half of the cross
section for capture of thermal neutrons on 2H [12]. Later it was shown
that the exchange current contribution to the calculated cross section for
thermal neutron capture on 3He is about 5 times larger than that from the
sum of the three nucleon magnetic moments [13]. Finally it was shown that
the cross section for radiative neutron capture on 3He is almost totally due
to the exchange current contribution [14].

While the strength of the N N interaction scales with the mass of the
exchanged system, the meson exchange magnetization operator scales with
the inverse mass of the exchanged system [15]. This makes the relative con-
tribution of short-range mechanisms to the matrix elements of the exchange
current operators much weaker than to the matrix elements of the inter-
action. The calculated cross section for backward electro-disintegration
of the deuteron, which is very strongly dependent on the electromagnetic
exchange currents, illustrates this well [16].
In this reaction the matrix
element of the single-nucleon current operators changes sign at fairly low
momentum transfer and therefore the cross section near that zero is built
up entirely from the exchange current contribution. In this case the cross
section obtained with the pion-exchange current alone is quite similar to
that calculated later with wave functions that are consistent with a real-
istic phenomenological interaction model [17]. In the case of the magnetic
form factors of the trinucleons there is a similar destructive interference
between the matrix elements of the single-nucleon current operators for the
S- and D-state components of the wave functions [18], with the consequence
that the exchange current contribution is very large [19]. With only the
single-nucleon current operator, the calculated magnetic form factors of
the trinucleons would have zeroes at fairly low values of momentum trans-
fer, in disagreement with experiment. This has later been demonstrated
with improved wave functions and exchange current operators that satisfy
the continuity equation with realistic interactions [20]. In larger nuclei the
main features in elastic and transition electromagnetic form factors are due
to the shell structure. Even so, it has been shown that in the case of Li,
the inclusion of the exchange current contribution does markedly improve
the agreement with experiment for these form factors, once the interaction

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 4

4

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

currents are consistent with wave functions corresponding to realistic in-
teraction models [21]. The eﬀect is smaller in 12C [22] and in 7Li, 9Be and
10B [23].

In the examples above, it is the isovector part of the pion exchange
current operator, which is numerically most important. In the case of the
magnetic form factor of the deuteron, only the isoscalar part of the pion
exchange current contributes, and the most important term in that oper-
ator involves a ρπγ transition. Without this exchange current operator
the calculated magnetic moment of the deuteron would have a node close
to momentum transfer values ∼ 6 GeV/c, in disagreement with experi-
ment [17, 24]. Since the ρπγ exchange current is transverse, its form is not
constrained by the N N interaction by the continuity equation. Its longer
range form can however be determined in the Skyrme model approach by
the chiral anomaly [25, 26].

While the two-nucleon exchange current operators give large contribu-
tions to nuclear electromagnetic observables, it has been demonstrated that
the three-nucleon exchange current operators that are associated with two-
pion exchange with pion scattering oﬀ an intermediate nucleon, give but
very small contributions to the magnetic form factors of the trinucleons [27].
The remarkably successful nuclear phenomenology based on the simple pion
exchange operators that are related to the lowest order chiral Lagrangian
for the pion-nucleon interaction has later been explained within the context
of χEFT [28].

2.3. The axial exchange current

The role of the pion exchange axial exchange current was ﬁrst considered
for the case of the Gamow-Teller transition in the β-decay of Tritium.
Those results were reaﬃrmed with more accurate wave functions [29]. Gari
and Huﬀman noted that this axial exchange current also contributes a
small enhancement of the cross section for the basic solar burning reac-
tion 1H(p, e+ νe)2H [30]. This was conﬁrmed by Dautry, Rho, and Riska
in a study of muon absorption in the deuteron 2H(µ−, νµ) nn with an im-
proved version of the axial exchange current operator, which was checked
for consistency against the P-wave piece of the cross section for the reac-
tion 1H(p, π+)2H near threshold [31]. The same Hamiltonian was then
used to calculate the matrix elements for the solar neutrino processes
1H(p, e+ νe)2H and 1H(p e−, νe)2H as well. A later calculation, with wave
functions obtained from the realistic Argonne v14 N N interaction [32] of the

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 5

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

5

weak proton capture reactions 1H(p, e+ νe)2H and 3He(p, e+ νe)4He normal-
ized axial exchange current operator against the known rate of the Gamow-
Teller component in Tritium [33]. The result was that the exchange cur-
rent increased the cross section of the reaction 1H(p, e+ νe)2H by 1.5 % and
that of the reaction 3He(p, e+ νe)4He by almost a factor 5. The axial ex-
change current contributions to the solar burning reaction 1H(p, e+ νe)2H
have later been recalculated on the basis of χEFT, and have been found
to enhance the cross section obtained with single-nucleon currents by ∼ 4
% [34]—however, see below for a more recent assessment. Finally, parame-
ter free calculations of the cross section for this reaction and the associated
3He(p, e+ νe)4He reaction have been carried out in Ref. [35].

2.4. Nuclear charge form factors

The phenomenological success of the exchange current operators described
above was mainly due to the chiral Lagrangians for the pion-nucleon cou-
plings. The corresponding contributions to nuclear charge operators in-
volve terms of higher power in the momentum transfer. The observation
by Kloet and Tjon that there is a signiﬁcant pion exchange contribution to
the charge form factors of the trinucleons therefore came as a surprise [36].
This pion exchange operator brings the ﬁrst diﬀraction minimum to lower
values of momentum transfer and therefore closer to the experimental data.
This observation was subsequently conﬁrmed by a calculation of the charge
form factor of the α-particle [37]. Later calculations of the charge form
factors of 3H, 3He, and 4He with realistic variational wave functions reaf-
ﬁrm the need for a substantial exchange charge eﬀect for agreement with
the empirical values [38]. This exchange current eﬀect is most prominent
in the lightest nuclei, and less so in the case of heavier nuclei as 16O and
40Ca, where the shell structure is most prominent [39, 40]. The pion ex-
change eﬀect nevertheless does improve slightly the agreement between the
calculated and empirically extracted charge distributions throughout the
periodic table [41]. The best indication of the role of the pion exchange
charge operator was ﬁnally provided by the measurement of the charge
form factor of the deuteron [42]. Inclusion of the exchange charge operator
clearly improved the agreement with the experimental values. While the
exchange charge operators that involve two nucleons were found to give
substantial contributions to nuclear charge form factors, the corresponding
exchange charge operators that involve three nucleons were found to give
only minor contributions, because of cancellations between the pion and

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 6

6

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

rho-meson exchange operators. Those involving 4 nucleons were found to
be insigniﬁcant [43].

2.5. The axial charge operator

That there is a signiﬁcant nuclear enhancement of the axial charge of the
nucleon was demonstrated by Kirchbach, Mach, and Riska, who extended
the Adler-Weisberger sum rule to light nuclei [44]. A subsequent explicit
calculation of the nuclear enhancement of the axial charge based on meson
exchange indicated that pion-exchange mechanisms yield enhancements of
the order 45–60%. In combination with short range mechanisms the total
enhancement in heavy nuclei is of the order 85–100%, depending on the
interaction model [45, 46]. This is suﬃcient to explain almost all of the
empirically observed ∼ 100% enhancement of ﬁrst forbidden β-decay tran-
sitions in the lead region [47]. The large nuclear enhancement of the axial
charge operator has later been explained within χEFT, which provides a
dynamical basis for the utility of early chiral charge algebra [48]. Finally,
Lee and Riska employed the PCAC relation between the axial current and
pion-production operators to show that the axial exchange current could
explain the large diﬀerence between the empirical cross section for the reac-
tion 1H(p, π0) pp and the value given by the single-nucleon pion-production
operators alone [49].

2.6. Gerry Brown and the Skyrmion

In the late 1970’s Gerry Brown engaged in a project to develop a chiral
dynamics basis for quark bag models of baryons [50].
In the limit of a
small bag radius this led to a connection to Skyrmes topological soliton
model for the nucleon [51], which had been shown by Witten to give re-
sults that are consistent with quantum chromodynamics (QCD) in the large
color limit [52]. Skyrme’s topological soliton model is based on a chiral La-
grangian for pions yielding ﬁnite size solutions, which may be interpreted
as baryons. The Noether currents of this Lagrangian can be viewed as
models for the electromagnetic and axial currents of nucleons and nuclei.
When the meson ﬁeld is described by the common product ans¨atz for the
two-nucleon system, the current operators separate into single nucleon and
exchange current operators. Indeed, Nyman and Riska [25, 53] showed that
if the chiral proﬁle of the Skyrmion ﬁeld for a nucleon is ﬁtted to its electric
form factor, then the deuteron form factors can be calculated with good
qualitative agreement with data. In the case of the magnetic form factor

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 7

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

7

the exchange current contribution is large, and essential for agreement with
the empirical form factor at large values of moment transfer. In the long-
range limit there is a simple relation between the isoscalar exchange current
and the phenomenological exchange current that is associated with the ρπγ
vertex [26]. The long-range component of the isovector magnetic moment
operator too is similar to the corresponding conventional pion-exchange
magnetic-moment operator [54].

3. The chiral eﬀective ﬁeld theory approach

The last two decades have witnessed remarkable developments in nuclear
χEFT, originally proposed by Weinberg [55–57]. Chiral symmetry is an ap-
proximate symmetry of QCD, which becomes exact in the limit of vanishing
quark masses. Nuclear χEFT is the theoretical framework that permits the
derivation of nuclear interactions and electroweak currents with hadronic
degrees of freedom, while preserving the symmetries of QCD—the exact
Lorentz, parity, and time-reversal symmetries, and the approximate chiral
symmetry. The latter requires the pion couplings to hadrons to be propor-
tional to powers of its momentum Q and, as a consequence, the Lagrangian
for these interactions may be expanded in powers of Q/Λχ, where Λχ ∼ 1
GeV is the chiral symmetry breaking scale. The Lagrangians may be or-
dered into classes deﬁned by the power of Q/Λχ, or equivalently by order
of the gradients of the pion ﬁeld and/or pion mass factors. Each of these
contain a certain number of parameters or “low-energy constants” (LECs),
which in practice are ﬁxed by comparison with experimental data. These
LECs could in principle be calculated from the underlying QCD theory of
quarks and gluons, but the non-perturbative nature of the theory at low
energies makes this task extremely diﬃcult. Thus, nuclear χEFT provides
a direct connection between QCD and the strong and electroweak inter-
actions in nuclei, and at the same time a practical calculational scheme
which, at least in principle, may be improved systematically. In this sense
it provides a fundamental basis for low-energy nuclear physics.

The nuclear χEFT approach has been applied in a number of studies
to derive the two- and three-nucleon potentials [58–66] including isospin-
symmetry-breaking corrections [67–70].
In the electroweak sector there
have been derivations of parity-violating two-nucleon potentials induced
by hadronic weak interactions [71–74], constructions of nuclear electroweak
currents [48], and studies of Compton scattering on nucleons and nuclei
with the explicit inclusion of ∆-resonance degrees of freedom [75, 76]. Here

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 8

8

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

the focus is on nuclear electroweak current operators. These were originally
derived up to one loop level in the heavy-baryon formulation of covariant
perturbation theory by Park et al. [35, 48, 77]. More recently two inde-
pendent derivations, based on time-ordered perturbation theory (TOPT),
have been published—one by the present authors (RS) [78–81] and the other
by K¨olling et al. [82, 83], although these latter works only deal with elec-
tromagnetic currents. In the following, we outline the derivation of these
electroweak operators, referring to the original papers [78–81] for the more
technical aspects.

3.0.1. Interaction Hamiltonians

ππ and L(n)

πN and L(m)

In the simplest implementation, χEFT Lagrangians are constructed in
terms of nucleon and pion degrees of freedom. This has been described
in a number of papers [84, 85], and ππ and πN Lagrangians, denoted re-
spectively as L(m)
πN , have been derived up to high order in the
chiral expansion. Contributions that arise from additional degrees of free-
dom, such as ∆-resonances and heavier mesons, are subsumed in the LECs
of L(n)
ππ . In principle these Lagrangians contain an inﬁnite number
of interactions compatible with the QCD symmetries, but as the transition
amplitudes obtained from them may be expanded in powers of Q/Λχ, the
number of terms that contribute to the amplitude at any given order of
the expansion is ﬁnite [55–57]. The Hamiltonians are constructed from the
chiral Lagrangians by the canonical formalism.
πN , L(2)

πN in the πN sector,
and L(2)
ππ in the ππ sector, which are relevant to the derivation of
nuclear potentials and electroweak operators at one loop level lead to the
following Hamiltonians:

The leading interaction terms in L(1)

πN , and L(3)

ππ and L(4)

HπN =

HγN = e

Hγπ = e

HγπN =

(cid:90)

2fπ

eN
2 m

1
4f 2
π

eN V 0 + i

τa σ · ∇πa +

τ · (π × Π) + . . .

dx N†(cid:104) gA
(cid:105)
(cid:90)
dx N†(cid:104)
(cid:16)−←−∇ · V + V · −→∇(cid:17) − µN
(cid:16)∇2V 0 + σ × ∇V 0 · −→∇ − ←−∇ · σ × ∇V 0(cid:17)
− 2 µN − eN
(cid:90)
dx(cid:2)V 0 (π × Π)z + zab πa (∇πb) · V + . . .(cid:3) ,
(cid:90)
dx N†(cid:104) gA
(τ · π + πz) σ · ∇V 0 −(cid:2)8 d8∇πz
(cid:3) · ∇ × V + . . .

+8 d9 τa∇πa − (2 d21 − d22) zabτb σ × ∇πa

e
2fπ

8 m2

2 m

N ,

(1)

σ · ∇ × V

2 m

(cid:105)

+ . . .

N , (2)

(3)

(cid:105)

N , (4)

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 9

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

gA
2

(cid:90)
(cid:90)
dx(cid:0)Aa · ∇πa + A0
(cid:90)
dx N†(cid:104) − 1

dx N† (τa σ · Aa + . . . ) N ,

a Πa + . . .(cid:1) ,

9

(5)

(6)

(cid:105)

N ,(7)

HAN =

HAπ = fπ

HAπN =
− c4
fπ

a (τ × π)a +
A0

4fπ

Aa · ∇πa

2 c3
fπ

abcτa(Ab × ∇πc) · σ − c6
4mfπ

(τ × π)a (∇ × Aa) · σ + . . .

where gA, fπ, e, and m are, respectively, the nucleon axial coupling con-
stant, pion decay amplitude, proton electric charge, and nucleon mass, and
the parameters ci and di are LECs in the L(2)

πN and L(3)

πN Lagrangians.

The isospin doublet of (non-relativistic) nucleon ﬁelds, isospin triplet of
pion ﬁelds and conjugate ﬁelds, electromagnetic vector ﬁeld and weak axial
ﬁeld are denoted by N , π and Π, V µ, and Aµ respectively, and σ and τ
are spin and isospin Pauli matrices. The arrow over the gradient speciﬁes
whether it acts on the left or right nucleon ﬁeld. The isospin operators eN
and µN are deﬁned as

eN = (1 + τz)/2 , κN = (κS + κV τz)/2 , µN = eN + κN ,

(8)

where κS and κV are the isoscalar and isovector combinations of the anoma-
lous magnetic moments of the proton and neutron. The power counting of
the resulting vertices follows by noting that each gradient brings in a factor
of Q, so, for example, the two terms in HπN are both of order Q, while
(ignoring the counting Q assumed for the external ﬁelds V µ and Aµ) the
ﬁrst term in HγπN (HAπN ) is of order Q (Q0), while the remaining ones
are of order Q2 (Q1).

In addition to the chiral Hamiltonians above, up to and including order
Q2 there are fourteen contact interaction terms allowed by the symmetries
of the strong interactions, each one multiplied by a LEC. Two of these con-
tact terms (proportional to the LECs CS and CT in standard notation) are
of a non-derivative type, and therefore are of order Q0, while the remaining
twelve (proportional to the LECs C(cid:48)
i) of order Q2 involve two gradients
acting on the nucleon ﬁelds (these are listed in Ref. [86]). The contact po-
tential at order Q2, derived from them in the two-nucleon center-of-mass
system, in fact depends on CS and CT , and seven linear combinations of
the C(cid:48)
i, which are customarily denoted as C1, . . . , C7. The remaining ﬁve
linear combinations of C(cid:48)
i have been shown to be related to CS and CT by
requiring that the Poincar´e covariance of the theory be satisﬁed to order
Q2 [86]. The Q2 potential therefore involves nine independent LECs. (As

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 10

10

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

a side remark, the contact potential at order Q4 requires an additional ﬁf-
teen independent LECs.) These LECs are determined by ﬁts to two-nucleon
elastic scattering data.

Minimal substitution in the gradient terms leads to a (two-nucleon)
electromagnetic contact current denoted as j(1)
γ,min in Refs. [78, 80], where
the superscript (n) speciﬁes the power counting Qn. Non-minimal couplings
through the electromagnetic ﬁeld tensor Fµν are also allowed. It may be
shown [78] that only two independent operator structures enter at order
Q1, which lead to the contact term given by

(cid:105) × q + (1 (cid:10) 2)

(9)

(cid:104)
γ,nm = −i e
j(1)

C(cid:48)
15 σ1 + C(cid:48)

16 × (τ1,z − τ2,z) σ1

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

where q is the external ﬁeld momentum, and the isoscalar C(cid:48)
15 and isovector
C(cid:48)
16 LECs (as well as the di’s multiplying the higher order terms in the γπN
Hamiltonian) can be determined by ﬁtting photo-nuclear data in the few-
nucleon systems [80].

In the weak axial sector, there is a single contact term at order Q0,

5,a = z0 (τ1 × τ2)a
j(0)

σ1 × σ2 −

q

q · (σ1 × σ2)

(10)

q2 + m2
π

(here the second term of Eq. (10) is the pion-pole contribution), and
none at order Q1. This term is due to an interaction of the type

(cid:0)N γµγ5 N(cid:1)(cid:0)N uµ N(cid:1) and, as ﬁrst pointed out in Ref. [87], the LEC z0

is related to the LEC cD (in standard notation), which enters the three-
nucleon potential at leading order. The two LECs cD and cE which fully
characterize this potential have recently been constrained by reproducing
the empirical value of the Gamow-Teller matrix element in tritium β decay
and the binding energies of the trinucleons [88, 89] (see below). Lastly,
in the limit of small momentum transfers, there are two independent two-
nucleon contact terms in the axial charge at order Q1 [81]:

5,a = i z1 (τ1 × τ2)a (σ1 · k1 − σ2 · k2)
ρ(1)

+i z2 (σ1 × σ2) · (τ1,a k2 − τ2,a k1) .
The LECs z1 and z2 have, however yet to be determined.

(11)

3.0.2. From amplitudes to potentials and currents

Application of χEFT to nuclear structure and bound states requires go-
ing beyond perturbation theory. As suggested by Weinberg
[55–57], the
formalism brieﬂy described below for constructing nuclear potentials and
currents is based on time-ordered perturbation theory (TOPT) although it

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 11

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

11

diﬀers from Weinberg’s in the way reducible contributions are dealt with.
This has been employed in Refs. [78–81, 90] for constructing nuclear poten-
tials and currents.

The terms in the TOPT expansion are conveniently represented by di-
agrams. Here a distinction is made between reducible diagrams, which
involve at least one pure nucleonic intermediate state, and irreducible dia-
grams, which include pionic and nucleonic intermediate states. The contri-
butions of the former are enhanced with respect to those of corresponding
irreducible ones by a factor of Q for each pure nucleonic intermediate state.
In the static limit, in which m → ∞ or, equivalently, nucleon kinetic en-
ergy terms are dropped, the reducible contributions are infrared-divergent.
The prescription proposed by Weinberg [55–57] to treat these is to deﬁne
the nuclear potential (and currents) as given by the irreducible contribu-
tions only. The reducible contributions are generated by solution of the
Lippmann-Schwinger (or Schr¨odinger) equation iteratively, with the nu-
clear potential (and currents) given by the irreducible amplitudes.

The formalism originally developed in Ref. [90] is based on this ap-
proach. The omission of the reducible contributions from the deﬁnition
of the interaction operators requires care, when the irreducible amplitudes
are evaluated in the static approximation, which is commonly used. The
iterative process will in that limit generate only part of the reducible ampli-
tude. The reducible part of the amplitude beyond the static approximation
has then to be incorporated order by order—along with the irreducible
amplitude—in the deﬁnition of nuclear operators. This scheme in combi-
nation with TOPT, which is best suited to separate the reducible content
from the irreducible one, has been implemented in Refs. [78–81] and is de-
scribed below. The method does however lead to nuclear operators, which
are not uniquely deﬁned because of the non-uniqueness of the transition
amplitude oﬀ-the-energy shell. This lack of uniqueness is immaterial, how-
ever, because the resulting operators are unitarily equivalent, and therefore
the description of physical observables is not aﬀected by this ambiguity
[79].

Another approach for overcoming the diﬃculties posed by the reducible
amplitudes, has been introduced by Epelbaum and collaborators [59]. That
method is usually referred to as the unitary transformation method and is
based on TOPT. It exploits the Okubo (unitary) transformation [91] to
decouple the Fock space of pions and nucleons into two subspaces, one that
has pure nucleonic states and the other with states which retain at least
one pion. In this decoupled space, the amplitude does not involve enhanced

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 12

12

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

contributions associated with the reducible diagrams. The subspaces are
not uniquely deﬁned, as it is always possible to perform additional unitary
transformations on them, with a consequent change in the formal deﬁnition
of the resulting nuclear operators. This, of course, does not aﬀect the
calculated physical observables.

The two TOPT-based methods outlined above lead to formally equiva-
lent operator structures for the nuclear potential and electromagnetic cur-
rents up to loop-corrections included [80]. It is natural to conjecture that
the two methods are closely related, although this remains to be proved.
Below we brieﬂy outline the methods developed in Refs. [78–81] and sketch
how nuclear operators are derived from transition amplitudes.

We start from the conventional perturbative expansion of the N N scat-

tering amplitude T :

(cid:18)

∞(cid:88)

n=1

(cid:19)n−1 | i(cid:105) .

1

(cid:104)f | T | i(cid:105) = (cid:104)f | H1

H1

Ei − H0 + i η

(12)
Here | i(cid:105) and | f(cid:105) represent the initial and ﬁnal N N states with energy
Ei = Ef , H0 is the Hamiltonian describing free pions and nucleons, and H1
is the Hamiltonian describing interactions between them (see Sec. 3.0.1).
The evaluation of this amplitude is in practice carried out by inserting
complete sets of H0 eigenstates between successive terms of H1. Power
counting is then used to organize the expansion.

In the perturbation expansion of Eq. (12), a generic (reducible or ir-
reducible) contribution is characterized by a certain number, say M , of
vertices, each scaling as Qαi × Q−βi/2 (i=1, . . . , M ), where αi is the power
counting implied by the relevant interaction Hamiltonian and βi is the num-
ber of pions in and/or out of the vertex, a corresponding M − 1 number
of energy denominators, and possibly L loops. Out of these M − 1 energy
denominators, MK will involve only nucleon kinetic energies, which scale
as Q2, and the remaining M − MK − 1 will involve, in addition, pion ener-
gies, which are of order Q. Loops, on the other hand, contribute a factor
Q3 each, since they imply integrations over intermediate three momenta.
Hence the power counting associated with such a contribution is

Qαi−βi/2

Q−(M−MK−1) Q−2MK

(13)
Clearly, each of the M − MK − 1 energy denominators can be further
expanded as

i=1

1

Ei − EI − ωπ

= − 1
ωπ

1 +

Ei − EI

(Ei − EI )2

+

ωπ

ω2
π

+ . . .

,

(14)

(cid:105) × Q3L .
(cid:21)

(cid:33)

×(cid:104)
(cid:20)

(cid:32) M(cid:89)

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 13

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

13

where EI denotes the kinetic energy of the intermediate two-nucleon state,
ωπ the pion energy (or energies, as the case may be), and the ratio (Ei −
EI )/ωπ is of order Q. The terms proportional to powers of (Ei − EI )/ωπ
lead to non-static corrections.

The Q-scaling of the interaction vertices and the considerations above

show that the amplitude T admits the following expansion:

T = T (ν) + T (ν+1) + T (ν+2) + . . . ,

(15)
where T (n) ∼ Qn, and chiral symmetry ensures that ν is ﬁnite. In the case
of the two-nucleon potential ν = 0. A two-nucleon potential v can then be
derived, which when iterated in the Lippmann-Schwinger (LS) equation,

v + v G0 v + v G0 v G0 v + . . . ,

(16)

leads to the on-the-energy-shell (Ei = Ef ) T -matrix in Eq. (15), order by
order in the power counting.
In practice, this requirement can only be
satisﬁed up to a given order n∗, and the resulting potential, when inserted
into the LS equation, will generate contributions of order n > n∗, which do
not match T (n). In Eq. (16), G0 denotes the free two-nucleon propagator,
G0 = 1/(Ei − EI + i η), and we assume that

v = v(0) + v(1) + v(2) + . . . ,

(17)

where the still to be determined term v(n) is of order Qn. We also note
that, generally, a term like v(m) G0 v(n) is of order Qm+n+1, since G0 is of
order Q−2 and the implicit loop integration brings in a factor Q3.

Having established the above power counting, we obtain

v(0) = T (0) ,

v(1) = T (1) −(cid:104)
v(2) = T (2) −(cid:104)
−(cid:104)

v(0) G0 v(0)(cid:105)
v(0) G0 v(0) G0 v(0)(cid:105)
v(1) G0 v(0) + v(0) G0 v(1)(cid:105)

,

(18)

(19)

.

(20)

The leading-order (LO) Q0 term, v(0), consists of (static) one-pion exchange
(OPE) and two (non-derivative) contact interactions, while the next-to-
leading (NLO) Q1 term, v(1), is easily seen to vanish [79], since the leading
non-static corrections T (1) to the (static) OPE amplitude add up to zero on
the energy shell, while the remaining diagrams in T (1) represent iterations
or partial cancellations of this type persist at higher n ≥ 2 orders). The

of v(0), whose contributions are exactly canceled by(cid:2)v(0) G0 v(0)(cid:3) (complete

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 14

14

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

next-to-next-to-leading (N2LO) Q2 term, which follows from Eq. (20), con-
tains two-pion-exchange (TPE) and contact (involving two gradients of the
nucleon ﬁelds) interactions.

The inclusion (in ﬁrst order) of electroweak interactions in the pertur-
bative expansion of Eq. (12) is in principle straightforward. The transition
operator can be expanded as [79, 81]:

ext

ext

+ . . . ,

+ T (νe+2)

Text = T (νe)

ext + T (νe+1)

a = (A0

(21)
ext is of order Qn and νe = −3 in this case. The nuclear electromag-
where T (n)
netic (weak axial) charge, ργ (ρ5,a), and current, jγ (j5,a), operators follow
a ρ5,a − Aa · j5,a), where V µ = (V 0, V)
from vγ = V 0 ργ − V · jγ (v5 = A0
[Aµ
a, Aa)] is the electromagnetic vector (weak axial) ﬁeld, and it is
assumed that vext has a similar expansion as Text. The requirement that,
in the context of the LS equation, vext matches Text order by order in
the power counting implies relations for the v(n)
and
v(n)
5 = A0
5,a, which can be found in Refs. [79, 81], similar to
those derived above for v(n), the strong-interaction potential.
and axial current operators have νe = −3,

The lowest order terms that contribute to the electromagnetic charge

5,a − Aa · j(n)

γ − V · j(n)

γ = V 0 ρ(n)

a ρ(n)

γ

1 + τ1,z

2

(cid:18)

+ (1 (cid:10) 2),
σ1 −

q

(cid:19)

τ1,a

(23)
There are no Q−3 contributions to j and ρ5,a, and the lowest order (νe = −2)
consists of electromagnetic current and axial charge operators, given by

q2 + m2
π

σ1 · q

+ (1 (cid:10) 2) .

(22)

(cid:19)

γ

= e

ρ(−3)
j(−3)
5,a = − gA
2
(cid:18)
j(−2)
2 m
ρ(−2)
5,a = − gA
2 m

=

e

γ

1 + τ1,z

+ i σ1 × q
2 K1
τ1,a σ1 · K1 + (1 (cid:10) 2) ,

2

µS + µV τ1,z

2

+ (1 (cid:10) 2) , (24)

(25)

where ki and Ki denote hereafter the combinations of initial and ﬁnal
nucleon momenta

ki = p(cid:48)

i − pi ,

Ki = (p(cid:48)

i + pi)/2 .

(26)
The counting Q−3 (Q−2) in the electromagnetic charge and axial current
(electromagnetic current and axial charge) operators follows from the prod-
uct of the power counting associated with the γN N , AN N , Aπ, and πN N
vertices, and the Q−3 factor due to the momentum-conserving δ-function
implicit in disconnected terms of this type.

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 15

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

15

Fig. 1. Diagrams illustrating one- and two-body electromagnetic currents entering at
Q−2 (LO), Q−1 (NLO), Q 0 (N2LO), and Q 1 (N3LO). Nucleons, pions, and photons are
denoted by solid, dashed, and wavy lines, respectively. The square in panel (d) represents
the (Q/m)2 relativistic correction to the LO one-body current; the solid circle in panel
(j) is associated with the γπN current coupling of order Q, involving the LECs d8, d9,
and 2 d21 − d22; the solid circle in panel (k) denotes two-body contact terms of minimal
and non-minimal nature, the latter involving the LECs C(cid:48)
16. Only one among
all possible time orderings is shown for the NLO and N3LO currents, so that all direct-
and crossed-box contributions are accounted for.

15 and C(cid:48)

The contributions up to one loop to the electromagnetic current and
charge operators are illustrated diagrammatically in Figs. 1 and 2, while
those to the weak axial current and charge operators in Figs. 3 and 4. As
already noted, the LO starts at νe = −2 for the electromagnetic current
and axial charge and at νe = −3 for the electromagnetic charge and axial
current; NnLO corrections to these are labelled as Qn × LO. We begin by
discussing the electromagnetic operators.

The electromagnetic currents from LO, NLO, and N2LO terms and from
N3LO loop corrections depend only on the known parameters gA and fπ
(NLO and N3LO), and the nucleon magnetic moments (LO and N2LO).
Unknown LECs enter the N3LO OPE contribution involving the γπN ver-
tex of order Q2 from HγπN , the term proportional to the di in Eq. (4),

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 16

16

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

Fig. 2. Diagrams illustrating one- and two-body electromagnetic charge operators en-
tering at Q−3 (LO), Q−1 (N2LO), Q0 (N3LO), Q1 (N4LO). The square in panel (b) rep-
resents the (Q/m)2 relativistic correction to the LO one-body charge operator, whereas
the solid circle in panel (c) is associated with a γπN charge coupling of order Q. As in
Fig. 1, only a single time ordering is shown for the N3LO and N4LO charge operators.

as well as the contact currents implied by non-minimal couplings, Eq. (9),
discussed in the next subsection. On the other hand, in the charge operator
there are no unknown LECs up to one loop level, and OPE contributions,
illustrated in panels (c)-(e) of Fig. 2, only appear at N3LO. The contri-
butions in panels (d) and (e) involve non-static corrections [79], while the
contribution in panel (c) is associated with the γπN coupling of order Q
originating from the ﬁrst term in Eq. (4). It leads to a two-body charge
operator:

σ1 · q σ2 · k2

k2
2 + m2
π

ρ(0)
γ (OPE) =

e

8 m

g2
A
f 2
π

(τ1 · τ2 + τ2z)

+ (1 (cid:10) 2) .

(27)

In the present χEFT context, ρ(0)
π was derived ﬁrst by Phillips in 2003 [92].
However, the operator of Eq. (27) is the same as the π-exchange contribu-
tion derived within the conventional approach (see Ref. [93] and references
therein). This operator plays an important role in yielding predictions for
the A=2–4 charge form factors that are in very good agreement with the
experimental data at low and moderate values of the momentum transfer

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 17

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

17

Fig. 3. Diagrams illustrating one- and two-body axial currents entering at Q−3 (LO),
Q−1 (N2LO), Q 0 (N3LO), and Q 1 (N4LO). Nucleons, pions, and axial ﬁelds are denoted
by solid, dashed, and wavy lines, respectively. The squares in panels (c) and (d) denote
relativistic corrections to the one-body axial current, while the circles in panels (e) and
(f) represent vertices implied by the L(2)
πN chiral Lagrangian, involving the LECs ci (see
Ref. [81] for additional explanations). As in Fig. 1, only a single time ordering is shown.

(q (cid:46) 5 fm−1) [80, 94]. The calculations in Ref. [80] also showed that the
OPE contributions from panels (d) and (e) of Fig. 2 are typically an order
of magnitude smaller than those generated by panel (c).

The axial current and charge operators illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4 in-
clude pion-pole contributions, which are crucial for the current to be con-
served in the chiral limit [81] (these contributions were ignored in the earlier
studies of Park et al. [35, 48]; obviously, they are suppressed in low mo-
mentum transfer processes). It is also interesting to note that there are no
direct couplings of A0
a to the nucleon, see panel (a) in Fig. 4. In the axial
current pion-range contributions enter at N3LO, panels (e) and (f) of Fig. 3,
and involve vertices form the sub-leading L(2)
πN Lagrangian, proportional to
the LECs c3, c4, and c6. It is given by (the complete operator, including

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 18

18

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

pion pole contributions, is listed in Ref. [81])
2 c3 τ2,a k2 + (τ1 × τ2)a

j(0)
5,a(OPE) =

(cid:20) i
(cid:21)(cid:27) σ2 · k2

2 m

k2
2 + m2
π

K1 − c6 + 1
4 m
+ (1 (cid:10) 2) .

σ1 × q

(28)

(cid:26)

gA
2 f 2
π

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

+

c4 +

1

4 m

σ1 × k2

In contrast, the axial charge has a OPE contribution at NLO, illustrated
in panels (b) and (c) of Fig. 4, which reads
(τ1 × τ2)a

ρ(−1)
5,a (OPE) = i

+ (1 (cid:10) 2) .

(29)

σ2 · k2
k2
2 + m2
π

gA
4 f 2
π

In fact, an operator of precisely this form was derived by Kubodera et
al. [95] in the late seventies, long before the systematic approach based on
chiral Lagrangians now in use was established. Corrections to the axial
current at N4LO in panels (i)-(v) of Fig. 3 and those to the axial charge at
N3LO in panels (d)-(n) of Fig. 4 have yet to be included in actual calcu-
lations of weak transitions in nuclei. It is worthwhile noting that vertices
involving three or four pions, such as those, for example, occurring in pan-
els (l), (p), (q) and (r) of Fig. 3, depend on the pion ﬁeld parametrization.
This dependence must cancel out after summing the individual contribu-
tions associated with these diagrams, as indeed it does [81] (this and the
requirement, remarked on below, that the axial current be conserved in the
chiral limit provide useful checks of the calculation).

The loop integrals in the diagrams of Figs. 1–4 are ultraviolet diver-
gent and are regularized in dimensional regularization [78, 79, 81–83]. In
the electromagnetic current the divergent parts of these loop integrals are
reabsorbed by the LECs C(cid:48)
i [78, 83], while those in the electromagnetic
charge cancel out, in line with fact that there are no counter-terms at
N4LO [79, 83].
In the case of the axial operators [48, 81], there are no
divergencies in the current, while those in the charge lead to renormaliza-
tion of the LECs multiplying contact-type contributions. In particular, the
inﬁnities in loop corrections to the OPE axial charge (not shown in Fig. 4)
are re-absorbed by renormalization of the LECs di in the L(3)
πN Lagrangian.
For a discussion of these issues we defer to Ref. [81].

We conclude this subsection by pointing out that at the present time
two-nucleon potentials have been derived, and widely used, up to order
(Q/Λχ)4 (or v(4), requiring two-loop contributions). Very recently, a new
derivation up to order (Q/Λχ)5 has appeared [96]. Some of these high-order
potentials have been used, in conjunction with the one-loop operators pre-
sented here, in calculations of electroweak observables of light nuclei, as re-
ported below. Conservation of the electromagnetic current q· jγ = [ H , ργ ]

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 19

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

19

Fig. 4. Diagrams illustrating one- and two-body axial charge operators entering at Q−2
(LO), Q−1 (NLO), and Q 1 (N3LO). Nucleons, pions, and axial ﬁelds are denoted by
solid, dashed, and wavy lines, respectively. The diamonds in panels (l) and (m) indicate
higher order AπN vertices implied by the L(3)
πN chiral Lagrangian, involving the LECs
di (see Ref. [81] for additional explanations). As in Fig. 1, only a single time ordering is
shown.

γ

γ

and the T (−1), v(n), and ρ(n)

with the two-nucleon Hamiltonian given by H = T (−1) + v(0) + v(2) + . . .
and where the (two-nucleon) kinetic energy T (−1) is counted as Q−1, im-
plies [78], order by order in the power counting, a set of non-trivial relations
between the j(n)
(note that commutators im-
plicitly bring in factors of Q3)—incidentally, similar considerations also
apply to the conservation of the axial current in the chiral limit [81]. These
relations couple diﬀerent orders in the power counting of the operators,
making it impossible to carry out a calculation, which at a given n for j(n)
γ ,
v(n), and ρ(n)
(and hence “consistent” from a power-counting perspective)
also leads to a conserved current.

γ

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 20

20

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

4. Results

In this section we provide a sample of results obtained with χEFT elec-
troweak currents for light systems, including A = 2–4 nuclei and s- and
p-shell nuclei in the mass range A = 6–10, in the last ﬁve years or so. The
few-nucleon calculations are based on the chiral two-nucleon potentials de-
veloped by Entem and Machleidt [60, 61] at order Q4 in the power counting
including up to two-loop corrections, and chiral three-nucleon potentials
at leading order [97]. (Below, this combination of two and three-nucleon
potentials will be referred to as N3LO/N2LO, as is customarily done in
the literature, even though such a classiﬁcation does not conform to the
power-counting notation adopted in the present chapter.) As noted ear-
lier, the two LECs cD—related to the LEC z0 in the contact axial current
of Eq. (10)—and cE entering the three-nucleon potential have been con-
strained by ﬁtting the Gamow-Teller matrix element in tritium β-decay
and the binding energies of the trinucleons [88, 89].

Fig. 5. The isoscalar dS and cS , and isovector dV
electromagnetic current at N3LO.

1 , dV

2 , and cV LECs characterizing the

The electroweak operators in Figs. 1–4 have power law behavior for
large momenta, and need to be regularized before they can be sandwiched
between nuclear wave functions. The regulator is taken of the form CΛ(k) =
exp[−(k/Λ)n] with n = 4 and Λ in the range (500–600) MeV. For processes
involving low momentum and energy transfers one would expect predictions
to be fairly insensitive to variations of Λ. As shown below, this expectation
is borne out in actual calculations, at least in the case of processes which
are not inhibited at leading order, such as the n 3He radiative capture or
p 3He weak fusion.

There are 5 unknown LECs in j—see Fig. 5 or panels (j) and (k) of
Fig. 1—and none in ρ [78, 80, 82, 83]. Two (three) of these LECs multiply
isoscalar (isovector) operators. For each Λ the two isoscalar LECs are ﬁxed
by reproducing the deuteron and isoscalar trinucleon magnetic moments.
Two of the isovector LECs are then constrained by assuming ∆-resonance

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 21

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

21

Table 1. Values for the LECs in units 1/Λ2 for
dS and 1/Λ4 for cS and cV ; see text for further
explanations.

Λ

MeV
500
600

cS

4.1
11

dS × 10

cV (σnp)

cV (µV )

2.2
3.2

–13
–22

–8.0
–12

saturation [80], while the remaining LEC is determined by reproducing
(again for each Λ) either the np radiative capture cross section σnp at ther-
mal neutron energies or the isovector trinucleon magnetic moment µV [80].
There are no three-body currents entering at the order of interest [98], and
so it is possible to use three-nucleon observables to ﬁx some of these LECs.
Their values are listed in Table 1. They are generally rather large, par-
ticularly when cV is determined by the np radiative capture cross section.
The exception is the isoscalar LEC dS multiplying the one-pion exchange
current involving a sub-subleading γπN vertex from the chiral Lagrangian
L(3)
πN , which in a resonance-saturation picture reduces to the ρπγ transition
current.

The calculations of A = 6–10 nuclei are carried out in the hybrid ap-
proach, in which χEFT electroweak currents are used in combination with
he Argonne v18 two-nucleon (AV18) and Illinois-7 three-nucleon (IL7) po-
tentials. The AV18 consists of a long-range component induced by OPE and
intermediate-to-short range components modeled phenomenologically and
constrained to ﬁt the NN database beyond the pion-production threshold
(Elab = 350 MeV). The IL7 includes a central (albeit isospin dependent)
short-range repulsive term and two- and three-pion-exchange mechanisms
involving excitation of intermediate ∆ resonances.
Its strength is deter-
mined by four parameters which are ﬁxed by a best ﬁt to the energies of
17 low-lying states of nuclei in the mass range A ≤ 10, obtained in com-
bination with the AV18 potential. The AV18/IL7 Hamiltonian then leads
to predictions of ∼ 100 ground- and excited-state energies up to A = 12,
including the 12C ground- and Hoyle-state energies, in good agreement with
the corresponding empirical values (for a recent review of these as well as
results obtained for nuclear and neutron matter, see Ref. [99]).

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 22

22

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

4.1. Electromagnetic observables of A = 2–4 nuclei

The deuteron magnetic form factor, calculated in Ref. [80], is shown in
Fig. 6. The bands reﬂect the sensitivity to cutoﬀ variations in the range Λ =
(500–600) MeV. The black bands include all corrections up to N3LO in the
(isoscalar) electromagnetic (EM) current. The NLO OPE and N3LO TPE
currents are isovector and therefore give no contributions to this observable.
The right panel of Fig. 6 contains a comparison of the results of Ref. [80]
with those of a calculation based on a lower order potential and in which a
diﬀerent strategy was adopted for constraining the LEC’s dS and cS in the
N3LO EM current [100]. This ﬁgure and the following Fig. 2 are from the
recent review paper by S. Bacca and S. Pastore [101].

Fig. 6. Magnetic form factor of the deuteron: the left panel shows results obtained
with LO and N3LO currents and either the chiral N3LO or conventional AV18 potential;
the right panel shows results obtained with N3LO currents and either the chiral N3LO
(same as in left panel) or a chiral N2LO potential by K¨olling et al.. The bands reﬂect
cutoﬀ variation. Experimental data are the empty circles.

The predicted magnetic form factors of the 3He and 3H ground states are
compared to experimental data in Fig. 7 [80]. Isovector OPE and TPE two-
body terms in the EM current play an important role in these observables,
conﬁrming previous results obtained in the conventional meson-exchange
framework. We show the N3LO results corresponding to the two diﬀer-
ent ways used to constrain the LEC cV in the isovector contact current
(recall the the LECs dV
2 are assumed to be saturated by the ∆
resonance), namely by reproducing (i) the empirical value for the np cross
section—curve labeled N3LO(σnp)—or (ii) the isovector magnetic moment
of 3He/3H—curve labeled N3LO(µV ). The bands display the cutoﬀ sen-
sitivity, which becomes rather large for momentum transfers q (cid:38) 3 fm−1.
The N3LO(σnp) results are in better agreement with the data at higher

1 and dV

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 23

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

23

momentum transfers; however, they overestimate µV by ∼ 2%. On the
other hand, the N3LO(µV ) results, while reproducing µV by construction,
under-predict σnp by ∼ 1% .

Fig. 7. Magnetic form factors of 3He (left panel) and 3H (right panel); see text for
further explanations.

Moving on to the EM charge operator, we show in Figs. 8 and 9 very re-
cent calculations of the deuteron monopole and quadrupole form factors [80]
and 4He (charge) form factor [102]. There are no unknown LECs beyond
gA, fπ and the nucleon magnetic moments—the latter enter a relativis-
tic correction, suppressed by Q2 relative to the LO charge operator, i.e.,
the well-known spin-orbit term. The loop contributions (at N4LO) from
two-pion exchange are isovector and hence vanish for these observables.

The deuteron monopole and quadrupole form factor data are obtained
from measurements of the A structure function and tensor polarization
observable in electron-deuteron scattering. In Fig. 8 the two bands corre-
spond to two diﬀerent calculations, one of which, labeled as NN(N2LO),
is based on a lower order chiral potential [92, 103]. There is good agree-
ment between theory and experiment. Diﬀerences between the two sets
of theory predictions merely reﬂect diﬀerences in the deuteron wave func-
tions obtained with the N3LO and N2LO potentials. These diﬀerences are
ampliﬁed in the diﬀraction region of the monopole form factor.

The 4He charge form factor is obtained from elastic electron scattering
cross section data. These data now extend up to momentum transfers
q (cid:46) 10 fm−1 [104], well beyond the range of applicability of χEFT. In Fig. 9

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 24

24

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

Fig. 8. The deuteron monopole and quadrupole form factors obtained from measure-
ments of the A structure function and tensor polarization are compared to predictions
based on N2LO and N3LO chiral potentials.

Fig. 9. The 4He charge form factor obtained from elastic electron scattering data is
compared to results obtained with the LO and N3LO charge operator.

only data up to q (cid:46) 5 fm−1 are shown. They are in excellent agreement
with theory.

Predictions for the charge radii of the deuteron and helium isotopes and
for the deuteron quadrupole moment (Qd) are listed in Table 2 [80]. They
are within 1% of experimental values. It is worth noting that until recently
calculations based on the conventional meson-exchange framework used to
consistently underestimate Qd. However, this situation has now changed,
and a relativistic calculation in the covariant spectator theory based on a
one-boson exchange model of the N N interaction has led to a value for the

01234567q [fm-1]10-310-210-1100|GC|ρN3LO/NN(N2LO), PhillipsρN3LO/NN(N3LO), Piarulli et al.(c)01234567q [fm-1]10-310-210-1100101102|GQ|ρN3LO/NN(N2LO), PhillipsρN3LO/NN(N3LO), Piarulli  et al.(d)March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 25

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

25

Table 2. The charge radii of the 2H, 3He, and 4He nuclei,
and 2H quadrupole moment. The numbers in parentheses at
the side of the χEFT predictions give the cutoﬀ dependence
of the results.

rc(2H)
(fm)

Qd

(fm2)

χEFT
EXP

2.126(4)
2.130(10)

0.2836(16)
0.2859(6)

rc(3He)

(fm)

1.962(4)
1.973(14)

rc(4He)

(fm)

1.663(11)
1.681(4)

quadrupole moment [105] which is in agreement with experiment.

Fig. 10. Results for the nd and n 3He radiative capture cross sections, obtained by
including cumulatively the LO, NLO, N2LO, N3LO(no LECs), and N3LO(full) contri-
butions from the χEFT electromagnetic current. Also shown are predictions obtained
in the conventional approach based on the AV18/UIX Hamiltonian and accompanying
eﬀective-meson exchange currents, the square labeled IA+MEC and IA+IA(RC)+MEC,
the latter including relativistic correction to the IA operator. The black band represents
the experimental data, see text for further explanations.

As a last example we show in Fig. 10 predictions for the nd and n 3He
radiative capture cross sections at thermal neutron energies [98]. It is well
known that these M 1 transitions are suppressed when the magnetic dipole
operator is taken to consist only of proton and neutron contributions, i.e.,
in the impulse approximation (IA). The results shown in Fig. 10 have been
obtained from highly accurate (essentially exact) solutions of the bound

500600700Λ (MeV)-40-20020406080µbIA+MECIA+IA(RC)+MEC500600700Λ  (MeV)0.00.20.40.6mbLO = IANLON2LO N3LO(no LECs)σγndσγn3He(a)(b)EXPEXPN3LO(full)N3LO(full)March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 26

26

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

and continuum states of the A = 3 and 4 systems with the hyperspherical-
harmonics technique [106], based on both chiral and conventional two- and
three-nucleon potentials, the N3LO/N2LO and AV18/UIX, and chiral elec-
tromagnetic currents up to N3LO. However, in this earlier study, the proce-
dure adopted to ﬁx the three isovector LECs is diﬀerent from that utilized
in the calculations discussed so far. Here ∆-resonance saturation is ex-
ploited only to ﬁx the ratio of the two LECs dV
2 in the tree-level
contribution of Fig. 5, and the remaining two (isovector) LECs are then
determined by a simultaneous ﬁt to σnp and the isovector combination of
the trinucleon magnetic moment. Furthermore, the LECs in the contact
current originating from minimal couplings have been taken from a lower
order (NLO) chiral potential [78] rather than from the N3LO potential of
Ref. [60, 61].

1 and dV

In Fig. 10 the experimental data are from Ref.

[107] for nd and
Refs. [108, 109] for n 3He, the band thickness denoting the error. Results
obtained with the complete N3LO χEFT operator are shown by the or-
ange band labeled N3LO(full): those corresponding to the N3LO/N2LO
(AV18/UIX) model delimit the lower (upper) end of the band in the case
of nd, and its upper (lower) end in the case of n 3He. There is considerable
cutoﬀ dependence, particularly for the four-body capture. In this connec-
tion, it is interesting to note the crucial role played by the N3LO currents
in Fig. 5: indeed, retaining only the minimal contact currents and the cur-
rents from TPE loop corrections—bands labeled N3LO(no LECs)—would
severely under-estimate the measured cross sections.
It is clear that the
convergence of the chiral expansion for these processes is problematic. The
LO (or IA) is unnaturally small, since the associated operaotr cannot con-
nect the dominant S-states in the hydrogen and helium bound states. This
leads to an enhancement of the NLO contribution, which, however, in the
case of n 3He, is oﬀset by the destructive interference between it and the
LO contribution. Thus a satisfactory description of these processes remains
particularly challenging for nuclear theory and nuclear χEFT in particular.

4.2. Electromagnetic transitions in A = 6–10 nuclei

Heavier systems oﬀer new challenges and opportunities for applications of
nuclear χEFT, and ab initio studies of electroweak processes based on this
approach in systems with A > 4 have only just begun. In the mass range
A = 6–12 Variational Monte Carlo (VMC) and Green’s function Monte
Carlo (GFMC) methods allow us to carry out accurate, in fact exact in

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 27

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

27

the case of GFMC, ﬁrst-principles calculations of many nuclear properties
(see Ref [99] for a recent review). However, since these methods are for-
mulated in conﬁguration space, it has not been possible to use them in
conjunction with the chiral two-and three-nucleon potentials above, which
are given in momentum-space (and are strongly non-local in conﬁguration
space). A ﬁrst step in this direction is the very recent development of a
class of conﬁguration-space, minimally non-local two-nucleon chiral poten-
tials that ﬁt the np and pp database up to the pion-production threshold
with a χ2 per datum close to 1.3 [110], i.e., of the same quality as the well
established N3LO models of Refs. [60, 61]. Use of these potentials in VMC
and, especially, GFMC calculations of light s- and p-shell nuclei will expand
the scope of the nuclear χEFT approach, and in particular test its validity
beyond the realm of few-nucleon systems, to which it has primarily been
limited so far.

Fig. 11. Magnetic moments in nuclear magnetons for A ≤ 10 nuclei obtained in GFMC
calculations based on the conventional AV18/IL7 Hamiltonian and chiral electromagnetic
currents. Black stars indicate the experimental values, while the blue (red) dots represent
the results of calculations including the LO (N3LO) chiral electromagnetic current.

As mentioned earlier, the results presented in this subsection for the

-3-2-101234µ (µN)EXPTGFMC(IA)GFMC(FULL)np2H3H3He6Li6Li*7Li7Be8Li8B9Li9Be9B9C10B10B*March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 28

28

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

magnetic moments and transition widths of A = 6–10 nuclei [111] have been
obtained in the hybrid approach, which combines conventional potentials
(AV18 and IL7) with chiral electromagnetic currents, see Figs. 11 and 12.
Figure 11 makes it plain that the inclusion of corrections beyond LO is
necessary in order to have a satisfactory description of the experimental
data: their eﬀect is particularly pronounced in the A = 9 and isospin
T = 3/2 systems , in which they provide up to ∼ 20% (40%) of the total
predicted value for the 9Li (9C) magnetic moments.

Fig. 12. Ratio to the experimental M 1 and E2 transition widths in A ≤ 9. Black stars
with error bars indicate the experimental values, while the blue dots (red diamonds)
represent GFMC AV18/IL7 calculations including chiral electromagnetic currents at LO
(up to N3LO).

In Fig. 12 the calculated M 1 and E2 transition widths for A = 6–9
nuclei are compared to experimental data. Overall, there is good agreement

0123Ratio to experimentEXPT6Li(0+ → 1+) B(M1)7Li(1/2- → 3/2-) B(M1)7Li(1/2- → 3/2-) B(E2)7Be(1/2- → 3/2-) B(M1)8Li(1+ → 2+) B(M1)8Li(3+ → 2+) B(M1)8B(1+ → 2+) B(M1)8B(3+ → 2+) B(M1)9Be(5/2- → 3/2-) B(M1)9Be(5/2- → 3/2-) B(E2)jLOAV18+IL7jN3LOAV18+IL7March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 29

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

29

between theory and experiment, particularly when one considers the fact
that for systems like 8Li and 8B the errors bars are so large to prevent
any robust conclusions to be drawn from the apparent under-prediction by
theory of the associated widths. It should be noted that the E2 widths have
been obtained with the LO EM charge operator. Higher order corrections
are expected to be very small, in particular the OPE charge operator in
Eq. (27) vanishes in the static limit.

4.3. Weak transitions in few-nucleon systems

Most calculations of nuclear axial current matrix elements, such as those
discussed below for the pp weak fusion and for muon capture on 2H and
3He, have used axial current operators up to N3LO or Q0 (one exception is
Ref. [112], which included eﬀective one-body reductions, for use in a shell-
model study, of some of the TPE corrections to the axial current derived in
Ref. [35]). A recent application of these N3LO transition operators is the
calculation of the rates for µ− capture on deuteron and 3He [89]. These
rates have been predicted with ∼ 1% accuracy,

Γ(2H) = (399 ± 3) sec−1 ,

Γ(3He) = (1494 ± 21) sec−1 .

At this level of precision, it is necessary to also account for electroweak
radiative corrections, which have been evaluated for these processes in
Ref. [113]. The error quoted on the predictions above results from a com-
bination of (i) the experimental error on the 3H GT matrix element used
to ﬁx the LEC in the contact axial current, (ii) uncertainties in the elec-
troweak radiative corrections—overall, these corrections increase the rates
by 3%—and (iii) the cutoﬀ dependence.
There is a very accurate and precise measurement of the rate on 3He:
ΓEXP(3He) = (1496±4) sec−1 [114]. It can be used to constrain the induced
pseudo-scalar form factor of the nucleon. It gives GP S(q2
µ) =
8.2 ± 0.7, which should be compared to a direct measurement on hydrogen
µ) = 8.06±0.55 [115], and a chiral perturbation
at PSI, GEXP
theory prediction of 7.99 ± 0.20 [116, 117].
The situation for µ− capture on 2H remains, to this day, somewhat
confused: there is a number of measurements that have been carried out,
but they all have rather large error bars. However, this unsatisfactory state
of aﬀairs should be cleared by an upcoming measurement of this rate by
the MuSun collaboration at PSI with a projected 1% error.

0 = −0.95 m2

P S (q2

0 = −0.88 m2

Another recent example is the proton weak capture on protons [35,
it is the largest source

118]. This process is important in solar physics:

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 30

30

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

of energy and neutrinos in the Sun. The astrophysical S-factor for this
weak fusion reaction is one of the inputs in the standard model of solar
(and stellar) evolution [119]. A recent calculation based on N3LO chiral
potentials including a full treatment of EM interactions up to order α2
(α is the ﬁne structure constant), shows that it is now predicted with an
accuracy of much less than 1%: S(0) = (4.030 ± 0.006) × 10−23 MeV-fm2.
This calculation also included the (small) eﬀects from capture of the two

Fig. 13. The S-factor for pp weak fusion due to S- and (S+P)-wave capture as function
of energy.

protons in relative P-wave, see Fig. 13 [118]. The increase due to P-wave
capture oﬀsets the decrease from higher order EM eﬀects, in particular
vacuum polarization.

5. Conclusion

The presentation above illustrates the remarkable progress of the develop-
ment and application of the chiral Lagrangian based description of nuclear
electroweak current operators beginning with the ﬁrst steps taken by Gerry
Brown, Mannque Rho and their colleagues and students around 1970. The
early work in the 1970s was, however, based on the lowest order terms in
the chiral Lagrangians and, to a large extent, phenomenological wave func-
tions. The advent of systematic chiral eﬀective ﬁeld theory has brought the
theoretical work to a quantitative level and has provided a basis for it in

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 31

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

31

the fundamental theory of the strong interactions.

We wish to thank our collaborators A. Baroni, J. Carlson, L. Girlanda, A.
Kievsky, L.E. Marcucci, S. Pastore, M. Piarulli, S.C. Pieper, M. Viviani,
and R.B. Wiringa for their many contributions to the work presented here.
The support of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract DE-AC05-
06OR23177 is also gratefully acknowledged.

References

[1] S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 616 (1966).
[2] G. Brown and J. Durso, Phys. Lett. B 35, 120 (1971).
[3] M. Chemtob, J. Durso, and D.O. Riska, Nucl. Phys. B 38, 141 (1972).
[4] M. Chemtob and M. Rho, Nucl. Phys. A 163, 1 (1971).
[5] M. Chemtob and M. Rho, Phys. Lett. B 29, 540 (1969).
[6] D.O. Riska and G. Brown, Phys. Lett. B 32, 662 (1970).
[7] D.O. Riska, Phys. Scr. 31, 471 (1985).
[8] F. Gross and D.O. Riska, Phys. Rev. C 36, 1928 (1987).
[9] D.O. Riska and G. Brown, Phys. Lett. B 38, 193 (1972).

[10] G. Stranahan, Phys. Rev. 135, 953 (1964).
[11] E. Harper, Y. Kim, A. Tubis, and M. Rho, Phys. Lett. B 40, 533 (1972).
[12] E. Hadjimichael, Phys. Rev. Lett. 31, 183 (1973).
[13] I. Towner and F. Khanna, Nucl. Phys. A 356, 445 (1981).
[14] J. Carlson, D.O. Riska, R. Schiavilla, and R.B. Wiringa, Phys. Rev. C 42,

830 (1990).

[15] D.O. Riska, Nucl. Phys. A 606, 251 (1996).
[16] J. Hockert, D.O. Riska, M. Gari, and A. Huﬀman, Nucl. Phys. A 217, 14

(1973).

[17] R. Schiavilla and D.O. Riska, Phys. Rev. C 43, 437 (1991).
[18] R.A. Brandenburg, Y.E. Kim, and A. Tubis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 1325

(1974).

[19] A. Barroso and E. Hadjimichael, Nucl. Phys. A 238, 422 (1975).
[20] R. Schiavilla, V.R. Pandharipande, and D.O. Riska, Phys. Rev. C 40, 2294

(1989).

[21] R.B. Wiringa and R. Schiavilla, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4317 (1998).
[22] M. Chemtob and A. Lumbroso, Nucl. Phys. B 17, 401 (1970).
[23] J. Dubach, J. Koch, and T.W. Donnelly, Nucl. Phys. A 271, 279 (1976).
[24] M. Gari and H. Hyuga, Phys. Rev. Lett. 36, 345 (1976).
[25] E.M. Nyman and D.O. Riska, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 3007 (1986).
[26] M. Wakamatsu and W. Weise, Nucl. Phys. A 477, 559 (1988).
[27] L.E. Marcucci, D.O. Riska, and R. Schiavilla, Phys. Rev. C 58, 3069 (1998).
[28] T.-S. Park, D.-P. Min, and M. Rho, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 4153 (1995).
[29] E. Fischbach, E. Harper, Y. Kim, A. Tubis, and W. Cheng, Phys. Lett. B

38, 8 (1972).

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 32

32

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

[30] M. Gari and A. Huﬀman, Astrophys. J. 174, L153 (1972).
[31] F. Dautry, M. Rho, and D.O. Riska, Nuclear Physics A 264, 507 (1976).
[32] R.B. Wiringa, V.G.J. Stoks, and R. Schiavilla, Phys. Rev. C 51, 38 (1995).
[33] J. Carlson, D.O. Riska, R. Schiavilla, and R.B. Wiringa, Phys. Rev. C. 44,

619 (1991).

[34] T.-S. Park, K. Kubodera, D.-P. Min, and M. Rho, Astrophys. J. 507, 443

(1998).

[35] T.-S. Park, L.E. Marcucci, R. Schiavilla, M. Viviani, A. Kievsky, S. Rosati,

K. Kubodera, D.-P. Min, and M. Rho, Phys. Rev. C 67, 055206 (2003).

[36] W. Kloet and J. Tjon, Phys. Lett. B 49, 419 (1974).
[37] J. Borysowicz and D.O. Riska, Nucl. Phys. A 254, 301 (1975).
[38] R. Schiavilla, V.R. Pandharipande, and D.O. Riska, Phys. Rev. C 41, 309

(1990).

[39] M. Radomski and D.O. Riska, Nucl. Phys. A 274, 428 (1976).
[40] A. Lovato, S. Gandolﬁ, R. Butler, J. Carlson, E. Lusk, S.C. Pieper, and

R. Schiavilla, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 092501 (2013).

[41] J.W. Negele and D.O. Riska, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 1005 (1978).
[42] D. Abbott et al., Eur. Phys. J. A 7, 421 (2000).
[43] D.O. Riska and M. Radomski, Phys. Rev. C 16, 2105 (1977).
[44] M. Kirchbach, R. Mach, and D.O. Riska, Nucl. Phys. A 511, 592 (1990).
[45] M. Kirchbach, D.O. Riska, and K. Tsushima, Nucl. Phys. A 542, 616

(1992).

[46] I. Towner, Nucl. Phys. A 542, 631 (1992).
[47] E.K. Warburton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 1823 (1991).
[48] T.-S. Park, D.-P. Min, and M. Rho, Phys. Rep. 233, 341 (1993).
[49] T.-S.H. Lee and D.O. Riska, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2237 (1993).
[50] G. Brown and M. Rho, Phys. Lett. B 82, 177 (1979).
[51] G. Brown, A. Jackson, M. Rho, and V. Vento, Phys. Lett. B 140, 285

(1984).

[52] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B. 160, 57 (1979).
[53] E.M. Nyman and D.O. Riska, Nucl. Phys. A 468, 473 (1987).
[54] U. Blom and D.O. Riska, Nucl. Phys. A 476, 603 (1988).
[55] S. Weinberg, Phys. Lett. B 251, 288 (1990).
[56] S. Weinberg, Nucl. Phys. B 363, 3 (1991).
[57] S. Weinberg, Phys. Lett. B 295, 114 (1992).
[58] C. Ordonez, L. Ray, and U. van Kolck, Phys. Rev. C 53, 2086 (1996).
[59] E. Epelbaum, W. Gloeckle, and U. G. Meissner, Nuc. Phys. A 637, 107

(1998).

[60] D. Entem and R. Machleidt, Phys. Rev. C 68, 041001 (2003).
[61] R. Machleidt and D. Entem, Phys. Rep. 503, 1 (2011).
[62] P. Navratil, Few-Body Syst. 41, 117 (2007).
[63] E. Epelbaum et al., Phys. Rev. C 66, 064001 (2002).
[64] U. van Kolck, Phys. Rev. C 49, 2932 (1994).
[65] V. Bernard, E. Epelbaum, H. Krebs, and U.-G. Meissner, Phys. Rev. C 84,

054001 (2011).

[66] L. Girlanda, A. Kievsky, and M. Viviani, Phys. Rev. C 84, 014001 (2011).

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 33

Using World Scientiﬁc’s Review Volume Document Style

33

[67] J. L. Friar and U. van Kolck, Phys. Rev. C 60, 034006 (1999).
[68] E. Epelbaum and U. G. Meissner, Phys. Lett. B 461, 287 (1999).
[69] J. L. Friar, U. van Kolck, M. C. M. Rentmeester, and R. G. E. Timmermans,

Phys. Rev. C 70, 044001 (2004).

[70] J. L. Friar, G. L. Payne, and U. van Kolck, Phys. Rev. C 71, 024003 (2005).
[71] W. C. Haxton and B. R. Holstein, Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 71, 185 (2013).
[72] S. L. Zhu, C. M. Maekawa, B. R. Holstein, M. J. Ramsey-Musolf, and

U. van Kolck, Nucl. Phys. A 748, 435 (2005).
[73] L. Girlanda, Phys. Rev. C 77, 067001 (2008).
[74] M. Viviani, A. Baroni, L. Girlanda, A. Kievsky, L. E. Marcucci, and

R. Schiavilla, Phys. Rev. C 89, 064004 (2014).

[75] V. Pascalutsa and D.R. Phillips, Phys. Rev. C 67, 055202 (2003).
[76] H. Griesshammer, J. McGovern, D.R. Phillips, and G. Feldman, Prog. Part.

Nucl. Phys. 67, 841 (2012).

[77] T.-S. Park, D.-P. Min, and M. Rho, Nucl. Phys. A 596, 515 (1996).
[78] S. Pastore, L. Girlanda, R. Schiavilla, M. Viviani, and R. Wiringa, Phys.

Rev. C 80, 034004 (2009).

[79] S. Pastore, L. Girlanda, R. Schiavilla, and M. Viviani, Phys. Rev. C 84,

024001 (2011).

[80] M. Piarulli, L. Girlanda, L. Marcucci, S. Pastore, R. Schiavilla, and M. Vi-

viani, Phys. Rev. C 87, 014006 (2013).

[81] A. Baroni, L. Girlanda, S. Pastore, R. Schiavilla, and M. Viviani, Phys.

Rev. C 93, 015501 (2016).

[82] S. K¨olling, E. Epelbaum, H. Krebs, and U.-G. Meissner, Phys. Rev. C 80,

045502 (2009).

[83] S. K¨olling, E. Epelbaum, H. Krebs, and U.-G. Meissner, Phys. Rev. C 84,

054008 (2011).

[84] J. Gasser and H. Leutwyler, Annals of Physics 158, 142 (1984).
[85] N. Fettes, U.-G. Meissner, M. Mojzis, and S. Steininger, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.)

283, 273 (2000).

[86] L. Girlanda, S. Pastore, R. Schiavilla, and M. Viviani, Phys. Rev. C. 81,

034005 (2010).

[87] A. G˚ardestig and D.R. Phillips, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 232301 (2006).
[88] D. Gazit, S. Quaglioni, and P. Navr´atil, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 102502

(2009).

[89] L.E. Marcucci, A. Kievsky, S. Rosati, R. Schiavilla, and M. Viviani, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 108, 052502 (2012).

[90] S. Pastore, R. Schiavilla, and J.L. Goity, Phys. Rev. C 78, 064002 (2008).
[91] S. Okubo, Prog. Theor. Phys. 12, 603 (1954).
[92] D.R. Phillips, Phys. Lett. B. 567, 12 (2003).
[93] D. O. Riska, Phys. Rep. 181, 207 (1989).
[94] J. Carlson and R. Schiavilla, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 743 (1998).
[95] K. Kubodera, J. Delorme, and M. Rho, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 755 (1978).
[96] E. Epelbaum, H. Krebs, and U. G. Meissner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 122301

(2015).

[97] E. Epelbaum, A. Nogga, W. Gl¨ockle, H. Kamada, U.-G. Meißner, and

March 4, 2016 1:36

ws-rv9x6

Book Title

review5 page 34

34

D.O. Riska and R. Schiavilla

H. Wita(cid:32)la, Phys. Rev. C 66, 064001 (2002).

[98] L. Girlanda, A. Kievsky, L. Marcucci, S. Pastore, R. Schiavilla, and M. Vi-

viani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 232502 (2010).

[99] J. Carlson, S. Gandolﬁ, F. Pederiva, S. C. Pieper, R. Schiavilla, K. Schmidt,

and R. Wiringa, Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 1067 (2015).

[100] S. K¨olling, E. Epelbaum, and D.R. Phillips, Phys. Rev. C. 86, 047001

(2012).

[101] S. Bacca and S. Pastore, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 41, 123002 (2014).
[102] L. E. Marcucci, F. Gross, M. T. Pea, M. Piarulli, R. Schiavilla, I. Sick,
A. Stadler, J. W. V. Orden, and M. Viviani, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys.
43, 023002 (2016).

[103] D.R. Phillips, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 34, 365 (2007).
[104] A. Camsonne et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 132503 (2014).
[105] F. Gross, Phys. Rev. C 91, 014005 (2015).
[106] A. Kievsky, S. Rosati, M. Viviani, L.E. Marcucci, and L. Girlanda, J. Phys.

G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 35, 063101 (2008).

[107] E. T. Jurney, P. J. Bendt, and J. C. Browne, Phys. Rev. C 25, 2810 (1982).
[108] F.L.H. Wolfs, S.J. Freedman, J.E. Nelson, M.S. Dewey, and G.L. Greene,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 2721- (1989).

[109] R. Wervelman, K. Abrahams, H. Postma, J. Booten, and A.V Hees, Nucl.

Phys. A 526, 265 (1991).

[110] M. Piarulli, L. Girlanda, R. Schiavilla, R.N. P´erez, J.E. Amaro, and

E.R. Arriola, Phys. Rev. C 91, 024003 (2015).

[111] S. Pastore, S.C. Pieper, R. Schiavilla, and R.B. Wiringa, Phys. Rev. C 87,

035503 (2013).

[112] P. Klos, J. Men´endez, D. Gazit, and A. Schwenk, Phys. Rev. D 88, 083516

(2013).

[113] A. Czarnecki, W.J. Marciano, and A. Sirlin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 032003

(2007).

[114] P. Ackerbauer et al., Phys. Lett. B 417, 224 (1998).
[115] V. A. Andreev et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 012504 (2013).
[116] V. Bernard, N. Kaiser, and U.-G. Meissner, Phys. Rev. D 50, 6899 (1994).
[117] N. Kaiser, Phys. Rev. C 67, 027002 (2003).
[118] L. E. Marcucci, R. Schiavilla, and M. Viviani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 192503

(2013).

[119] J.N. Bahcall and M.H. Pinsonneault, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 121301 (2004).

