6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
5
2
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Intermediate Water Cherenkov Detector at J-PARC
Mark Scott1 for the NuPRISM and Hyper-K collaborations

1TRIUMF, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

E-mail: mscott@triumf.ca

(Received January 31, 2016)

Recent neutrino oscillation results have shown that the existing long baseline experiments have some
sensitivity to the eﬀects of CP violation in the neutrino sector. This sensitivity is currently statisti-
cally limited, but the next generation of experiments, DUNE and Hyper-K, will provide an order of
magnitude more events. To reach the full potential of these datasets we must achieve a commensurate
improvement in our understanding of the systematic uncertainties that beset them.
This talk describes two proposed intermediate detectors for the current and future long baseline os-
cillation experiments in Japan, TITUS and NuPRISM. These detectors are discussed in the context of
the current T2K oscillation analysis, highlighting the ways in which they could reduce the systematic
uncertainty on this measurement. The talk also describes the short baseline oscillation sensitivity of
NuPRISM along with the neutrino scattering measurements the detector makes possible.

1.

Introduction

Long baseline neutrino oscillation experiments have reached the point where systematic uncer-
tainties dominate over statistical precision when measuring neutrino disappearance. The discovery
of large θ13 by Daya Bay [1], RENO [2] and T2K [3], combined with increases in neutrino beam
power and the construction of larger experiments, mean that this will soon be the case for neutrino
appearance measurements as well. The sensitivity of future experiments to CP violation will depend
strongly on how well they can control their systematics.

The next generation experiments, DUNE [4] and Hyper-Kamiokande (Hyper-K) [5], require the
total systematic uncertainty on their far detector rate prediction to be less than 3%, as shown by
Figure 1. This can be compared to the systematic uncertainty currently demonstrated by the T2K
experiment [6], which has achieved a systematic uncertainty of around 7% on their far detector event
rate prediction, with the greatest part of this coming from nuclear interaction uncertainties.

The T2K analysis parameterises both their neutrino ﬂux prediction and their neutrino interaction
model, producing a set of parameters with associated errors that are then constrained using data
from the T2K near detector, ND280. This produces a tuned prediction for the far detector event
rate, changing the central value of the ﬂux and cross section model parameters whilst reducing their
uncertainty. The far detector event rate uncertainties are shown in Table I.

Firstly, Table I shows that near detectors are essential to reduce the eﬀect of ﬂux and neutrino
interaction cross-section systematics at the far detector, with the far detector event rate uncertainty
falling from 24% to 3% because of the near detector constraint. Table I also shows that the largest
far detector uncertainty is caused by ‘Independent cross section’ systematics. These are associated to
neutrino interaction processes that, for two main reasons, the T2K near detector did not measure in
this analysis:
(1) Diﬀerent target nuclei at the near and far detectors
(2) A near detector insensitive to some far detector backgrounds
Few of the recent neutrino cross-section measurements have been made with an oxygen target, and

1

Predicted sensitivity to CP violation of the

LBNE experiment over 50% of the δCP

parameter space, assuming a range of signal
and background normalisation uncertainties,

as a function of exposure. [7]

Predicted fraction of δCP parameter space for
which a 3σ (red) or 5σ (blue) measurement
of CP violation would be made for a given
integrated beam power at Hyper-K. This

assumes a total uncertainty of 3% on the far

detector event rate. [8]

Fig. 1. Published CP violation sensitivity curves from the LBNE (left) and Hyper-K (right) experiments.

Source of uncertainty

Flux and common cross section

w/o ND measurement
w/ ND measurement

Independent cross sections
Super-K detector
Final or Secondary Hadronic Interaction

Total

w/o ND measurement
w/ ND measurement

νµ sample

νe sample

21.7%
2.7%
5.0%
4.0%
3.0%
23.5%
7.7%

26.0%
3.2%
4.7%
2.7%
2.5%
26.8%
6.8%

Table I. Table showing the uncertainty on the predicted number of selected events at the T2K far detector,
broken down by source [6].

there are signiﬁcant uncertainties on the scaling of the cross section between diﬀerent nuclei. The T2K
near detector has two targets, one fully composed of plastic scintillator and the second a combination
of plastic scintillator and water. The analysis discussed above used data from the plastic scintillator
target, so could not constrain the interaction cross section on oxygen. Future T2K analyses will also
include data from the water target, ﬁtting both carbon and oxygen interactions simultaneously. This
will provide a constraint on the neutrino interaction cross section on oxygen, but will be fundamen-
tally limited by the need to statistically subtract interactions on carbon from the water sample.

For the second point, without samples of the far detector background processes it is impossible to
constrain their associated uncertainties using near detector data. Using the same detection technology
at both near and far detectors would ensure that the background events in the far detector can be
measured at the near detector.

In addition to the points above, the T2K near detector geometry was optimised to reconstruct
particles travelling in the same direction as the incoming neutrino beam. As a consequence it has
almost no acceptance for particles travelling perpendicularly to the neutrino beam. Meanwhile the far
detector, Super-Kamiokande (SK), has a high reconstruction eﬃciency across the full 4π solid angle.
T2K must therefore rely on their neutrino interaction model to extrapolate the reduced phase space
near detector data to the full phase space observed by SK. This will limit how far the systematics in

2

the T2K oscillation analysis can be reduced.

Luckily, these limitations can be overcome in the future by building a water Cherenkov detector

between 1 km and 2 km from the T2K neutrino beam production point.

2. An intermediate water Cherenkov detector

Building a kiloton scale water Cherenkov detector around 1 km or 2 km from the T2K neutrino

beam production point provides four beneﬁts:
(1) A water target
(2) Identical signal and background interaction modes as at SK
(3) 4π solid angle acceptance
(4) A smaller error on the ﬂux extrapolation from the near to the far detector

An identical target and detection technology mean that this intermediate detector will address the
the issues discussed in Section 1. The T2K neutrino beam is created by pion decay-in-ﬂight, with
pions produced by impinging protons from the J-PARC main ring onto a carbon target. The pions are
then focussed into a 90 m long volume, where they decay to produce neutrinos. The ND280 detector
is 280 m downstream of the carbon target, so measures a line source of neutrinos. SK, 295 km away,
observes the neutrinos as if from a point source. This diﬀerence in the neurino spectrum at the near
and far detectors means that the near-to-far ﬂux extrapolation is imperfect. By siting an intermediate
detector further from the neutrino production point it will see a ﬂux much more similar to that at SK
than at the ND280, reducing the uncertainty in the ﬂux extrapolation.

This talk discusses two proposed intermediate detectors for the J-PARC neutrino program, TI-

TUS [9] and NuPRISM [10].

2.1 TITUS

TITUS, the Tokai Intermediate Tank to measure the Unoscillated Spectrum, is a cylindrical water

Cherenkov detector with its long axis parallel to the neutrino beam, shown in Figure 2.

Fig. 2. An initial design of the proposed TITUS detector.

The detector would be placed 2 km from the neutrino production point and be instrumented with
with PMTs interspersed with large area picosecond photo-detectors if these become available. The
design also features two magnetised muon range detectors (MRDs), one downstream of the tank and
the other on the top edge. TITUS was designed to perform neutron tagging, so incorporates a 0.1%
by mass gadolinium loading in the baseline design.

3

The TITUS studies presented here take the particle reconstruction eﬃciency and resolution from
the SK detector simulation. The detector response model is calculated as a function of distance of the
most energetic particle to the wall, taking into account the smaller size of TITUS relative to SK. This
process assumes that the TITUS reconstruction will be able to achieve the same performance as SK.
The existing SK 1-ring electron-like and 1-ring muon-like selections [6] are then applied to give the
selected TITUS samples.

2.1.1 Detector orientation

The TITUS group studied the muon reconstruction eﬃciency for two detector orientations – one
with the long axis parallel to the neutrino beam the other with the axis perpendicular to the beam.
Figure 3 shows the eﬃciency for these two situations as a function of the muon momentum and angle
to the neutrino beam axis.

Fig. 3. The muon reconstruction eﬃciency as a function of muon momentum and angle to the neutrino beam
axis for the two proposed detector orientations. The muon is required to stop within the detector for it to be
reconstructed.

The vertical tank is unable to reconstruct muons with momenta greater than 2.5 GeV/c, and loses
some eﬃciency as the muon direction approaches the radial direction of the cylinder. This study
motivated the choice for the detector orientation, but even so 18% of the muons from charged current
neutrino interactions are expected to exit the detector. These exiting muons can be recovered by the
muon range detectors.

2.1.2 Magnetised Muon Range Detectors

The MRDs are tracking detectors composed of iron sheets interleaved with scintillator layers and
air gaps, magnetised to 1.5 T. By tuning the iron thickness and the size of the air gaps the MRDs
will be able to use the curvature of particles to measure their charge, achieving a 90–95% eﬃciency
for muons with momenta from 0.5–2 GeV/c. Placing an MRD at the downstream end of the water
tank will allow higher momentum particles, that would usually exit the detector, to be reconstructed
correctly. Similarly, a smaller MRD on the side of the tank provides additional acceptance for muons
travelling perpendicularly to the neutrino direction.

A proof-of-principal detector is being constructed by the University of Geneva [11] for use in the
WAGASCI experiment [12] at J-PARC. This data will then be used to optimise the MRD design for
TITUS.

4

2.1.3 Gadolinium doping

Gadolinium has a neutron capture cross section of 49,000 barns, far greater than for neutron
capture on hydrogen. The capture process produces an excited state of gadolinium which promptly
decays by emitting an 8 MeV gamma cascade of which 4-5 MeV is visible in a water Cherenkov
detector. A cartoon of an anti-neutrino interacting with a proton is shown in Figure 4 to illustrate this
process. The SK collaboration has recently decided to introduce gadolinium to the SK detector, so

Fig. 4. A cartoon showing an anti-neutrino inter-
action followed by the capture of the produced neu-
tron on gadolinium.

in order to have the same target composition both TITUS and NuPRISM have included gadolinium
doping in their design.

For neutrino oscillation studies, gadolinium enables neutrino interactions to be categorised by
the number of neutrons in the ﬁnal state. This could allow neutrino charged current quasi-elastic
(CCQE) interactions to be statistically separated from other processes by selecting events with 0
tagged neutrons. Initial studies of this have been done with TITUS and are shown in Figure 5.

Fig. 5. The reconstructed neutrino energy resolution, assuming charged current quasi-elastic kinematics, for
events selected at TITUS from the T2K neutrino mode beam. The selected events are separated according to
the number of tagged neutrons, 0 on the left and > 1 on the right.

Given the neutron multiplicities predicted by the neutrino event generator used to simulate these
interactions (NEUT [13]), the combination of gadolinium loading and the MRDs allows TITUS to

5

select samples of neutrino and anti-neutrino charged current events with a purity of 96% at the T2K
neutrino ﬂux peak. More usefully, the MRDs provide a check of the neutron tag by correlating the
number of observed neutrons with the charge of the observed lepton. Such a validation would be
much less dependent on the correct simulation of poorly understood nuclear eﬀects.

2.1.4 Hyper-K CPV sensitivity study with TITUS

A simpliﬁed oscillation analysis was performed to assess the impact of the TITUS detector on the
Hyper-K δCP sensitivity. This was performed by simultaneously ﬁtting samples of single ring, muon-
like and electron-like events from the T2K neutrino and anti-neutrino beams, giving four samples
in total at both TITUS and the Hyper-K far detector – the T2K near detector is not included. The
study assumes a 6% ﬂux uncertainty that is 100% correlated between TITUS and Hyper-K and 60%
correlated between the neutrino and anti-neutrino beam modes. The T2K neutrino interaction model
uncertainties [14] were used and a 10% uncertainty was assumed for the gadolinium neutron tagging
eﬃciency. The oscillation parameter values used in the study are shown in Table II. It is worth pointing
out that this is the best case scenario, since the eﬀect of gadolinium on the event reconstruction has
not been included and the NEUT ﬁnal state nucleon predictions are assumed to be correct.

Parameter Nominal value and prior uncertainty
δCP
sin22θ13
sin22θ23
sin22θ12
∆m2
32
∆m2
12

0.000, uniform in δCP
0.095, uniform in sin22θ13
1.000 ± 0.03,
0.857 ± 0.034
2.320 ± 0.100 × 10−3 eV2
7.500 ± 0.200 × 10−5 eV2

Table II. Oscillation parameters used in the TITUS δCP
sensitivity study.

Fig. 6. The 1 σ uncertainty on the measured
value of sin δCP as a function of integrated beam
power for combinations of the Hyper-K and TITUS
detectors with and without using neutron tagging
as a selection cut.

The precision of measuring δCP = 0 for this setup is displayed in Figure 6, which shows the ﬁtted
uncertainty on sin δCP as a function of the integrated neutrino beam power. The integrated beam power
is assumed to have been divided equally between the neutrino and anti-neutrino beam modes.

Figure 6 shows that adding the binary neutron tag discussed above to both the near and far de-
tectors can lead to a 17% improvement in the precision of a sin δCP measurement at Hyper-K. This
motivates a more detailed study into the hadronic side of neutrino interaction models, leading to better
theoretical predictions for the hadronic ﬁnal states and improved descriptions of particle re-interaction
with the target nucleus. Improved theoretical understanding must also be matched by improved ex-
perimental measurements of these processes in order to be conﬁdent enough to use these neutron
tagging techniques in oscillation analyses.

2.2 NuPRISM

The neutrinos in a conventional neutrino beam come from the two-body decay-in-ﬂight of charged
pions. As one moves further from the beam axis the observed neutrino energy spectrum narrows and

6

peaks at a lower energy; this is called the “oﬀ-axis” eﬀect. By measuring neutrino interactions across
a range of oﬀ-axis angles NuPRISM would sample many diﬀerent neutrino spectra, each of which
peaks at a diﬀerent energy. A cartoon of this is shown in Figure 7. The detector is split into slices,
each at a diﬀerent oﬀ-axis angle, which can be weighted and combined to create an arbitrarily shaped
neutrino spectrum. Reconstructed events are selected in each slice, and applying the chosen linear
combination to these events gives the expected reconstructed event distribution for the desired neu-
trino ﬂux. An example of this is shown in Figure 8, where a Gaussian ﬂux centred at 700 MeV is cre-
ated. The 1D histograms on the right show the diﬀerent oﬀ-axis ﬂuxes whilst the 2D histograms show
the corresponding reconstructed lepton momentum and angle to the neutrino beam. The two lowest
plots show the result of applying the linear combination, with the Gaussian ﬂux on the right and
the expected lepton kinematic distribution for that ﬂux on the right. Using this technique, NuPRISM
provides a direct link between the observed reconstructed event information and the neutrino energy.

Fig. 7. The diﬀerent neutrino energy spectra
across the NuPRISM detector.

Fig. 8. An example of the linear combinations
required to produce a Gaussian neutrino ﬂux.

In this talk MC analyses were performed using a dataset corresponding to an exposure of 4.5e20
protons-on-target for each oﬀ-axis slice of NuPRISM. This is equal to roughly half the expected T2K
neutrino beam mode dataset and only 20% of that proposed for the T2K-II extension. All analyses
presented here use the SK reconstruction eﬃciency to create the NuPRISM samples. The eﬃciency at
SK was calculated as a function of true lepton momentum, true angle and the distance from the inter-
action vertex to the closest wall of the SK tank. The default NuPRISM design has a 3 m inner detector
radius, so the reconstruction eﬃciency is taken from the outer 3 m ring of SK, where its performance
is worst. The NuPRISM group is working on a full detector simulation and reconstruction, so expect
the reconstruction performance to improve for future analyses. Individual analyses also incorporate
the T2K ﬂux and neutrino interaction uncertainties when needed, using the models from Ref. [14].

2.2.1 Gaussian neutrino beams

The range of neutrino energies for which NuPRISM can form a Gaussian ﬂux is determined by
the oﬀ-axis angles that NuPRISM spans. The initial design has NuPRISM covering the 1 – 4 ◦ oﬀ-axis
angles, allowing the creation of Gaussian beams from 400 MeV to 1200 MeV. Figure 9 shows the
true neutrino energy distribution of selected events for Gaussian neutrino ﬂuxes centred at 600 MeV
and 1200 MeV. The light blue error bars depict the error on the absolute ﬂux prediction, which is
fully correlated across all bins, while the black error bars give the uncertainty on the ﬂux shape. The
statistical uncertainty on the NuPRISM sample is shown by the light brown shading. More details of
this analysis can be found in Ref. [10].

7

a) 600 MeV.

b) 1200 MeV.

Fig. 9. The true energy of the neutrinos that pass the NuPRISM single ring, muon-like selection after apply-
ing the linear combinations necessary to produce a Gaussian ﬂux peaked at either 600 MeV (left) or 1200 MeV
(right). The ﬂux systematic error is shown, along with the statistical uncertainty.

The same event samples are shown as a function of reconstructed neutrino energy in Figure 10,
where the reconstructed energy is calculated assuming the observed lepton was produced from a
CCQE interaction on a single nucleon at rest. These plots also include the expected distribution for
all true CCQE and non-CCQE events in the MC, demonstrating clear separation between CCQE and
non-CCQE in the selected event samples.

a) 600 MeV.

b) 1200 MeV.

Fig. 10. The reconstructed energy distributions for the events in Figure 9. The plots also include the expected
distributions for true CCQE and non-CCQE events.

This measurement can be repeated using any reconstructed distribution of interest, such as neu-
tron multiplicity, for Gaussian ﬂuxes covering a range of neutrino energies. These distributions would
show how the quantity of interest changed with true neutrino energy, and would have highly corre-
lated ﬂux and detector uncertainties, something that would otherwise be impossible when averaging
over the full neutrino ﬂux energy spectrum. Creating a known neutrino energy also allows analysers
to perform neutrino scattering measurements as a function of the 3-momentum or energy transfer to
the nucleus, shown in Figures 11 and 12. These variables are better probes of neutrino scattering than
neutrino energy, since they directly determine which interaction processes can take place. This would
mirror the methods used in electron scattering experiments, providing more accurate measurements
of speciﬁc neutrino interaction processes.

8

Fig. 11. The reconstructed 3-momentum trans-
fer (q2) plotted against the reconstructed energy
transfer (ω) for selected events from a Gaussian
neutirno ﬂux centred at 1 GeV. True CCQE events
are shown by the red boxes, with the dashed blue
indicating non-CCQE events.

Fig. 12. A 1-D slice from Figure 11 for q2 values
between 0.7 and 0.9 GeV2/c2, showing clear sepa-
ration between CCQE (red) and non-CCQE (blue)
events.

2.2.2 Short baseline oscillations

Both TITUS and NuPRISM would have the correct baseline and neutrino energy spectrum to
test the LSND [15] and MiniBooNE [16] short baseline results, but the NuPRISM concept provides
some unique capabilities. As Figure 13 shows, moving further oﬀ-axis in NuPRISM means that the
neutrino spectrum being sampled peaks at diﬀerent energies, which can be used to test the energy
dependence of any oscillation signal. The expected backgrounds also change with neutrino energy,
but in a diﬀerent way to the oscillated signal events.

νe

Fig. 13. The
appearance probability at
NuPRISM for the given values of the sterile oscil-
lation parameters. This is compared to the neutrino
energy spectrum at three diﬀerent oﬀ-axis angles,
showing the change in oscillation probability
across the NuPRISM tank.

The NuPRISM analysis selects single ring, electron-like, events across all the oﬀ-axis slices and
includes the full T2K ﬂux and neutrino interaction uncertainties as described earlier. These samples
are ﬁt as a function of reconstructed neutrino energy and oﬀ-axis angle to determine their sensitivity

9

to the appearance of electron neutrinos from sterile oscillations. More details are given in Ref. [10].

a) The 1.1 – 1.8 ◦ on-axis slice.

b) The 3.2 – 3.9 ◦ oﬀ-axis slice.

Fig. 14. The intrinsic electron neutrino background (red), muon neutrino background (blue) and appearance
signal (points) for the NuPRISM sterile oscillation analysis searching for νe appearance.

The real power of NuPRISM is shown in Figure 14, which plot the selected events in the most
oﬀ-axis and most on-axis slices of the detector. The blue histogram shows the selected background
events coming from νµ interactions, the red histogram shows the intrinsic beam νe background and
the black points are a given appearance signal. In the on-axis slice there is a large νµ contamination
and the signal events have a broad reconstructed energy distribution. Moving to the oﬀ-axis slice the
νµ contamination is greatly reduced whilst the signal is concentrated in a narrow reconstructed energy
region.

This behaviour allows NuPRISM to set strong constraints on the sterile oscillation parameter
phase space, shown in the left plot of Figure 15. This shows NuPRISM excluding the entire LSND
allowed region at 90% conﬁdence, with most of it excluded at 5 σ. This is expected to improve for
future analyses, which will use a full detector simulation and reconstruction to provide increased
statistics data samples and direct constraints on the background processes. The eﬀect of an increase
in statistics is shown in the right plot of Figure 15, where the analysis has been re-done assuming the
T2K-II exposure, greatly increasing the excluded region across the parameter space. This analysis
will be further improved by the inclusion of the existing T2K near detector, allowing a full near-far
oscillation analysis at a short baseline.

3. Summary

The current generation of long baseline neutrino oscillation experiments have reached the point
where systematic uncertainties have a noticeable eﬀect on their measurements. To make a measure-
ment of CP violation in the lepton sector requires a solid understanding and good control of these
systematics, something not possible with the current T2K near detector. Building an intermediate
water Cherenkov detector will address the shortcomings of the ND280, reducing the uncertainty for
the T2K-II and Hyper-K oscillation experiments. The NuPRISM detector has a compelling physics
program in addition to this, providing unique measurements of neutrino scattering and a powerful
probe of short baseline neutrino oscillations.

References
[1] F. P. An et al. Phys. Rev. Lett., 112, 061801 (2014).
[2] Soo-Bong Kim et al. Phys. Rev. Lett., 108, 191802 (2012).

10

LSND 90% CL
LSND 99% CL
NuPRISM 90%CL
 CLσ
NuPRISM 3
 CLσ
NuPRISM 5

2

210
m
∆

10

1

-110

-210

-410

-310

-210

-110

1
θ22sin

a) Exclusion region with 2.2521 POT in
neutrino beam mode, the expected T2K

b) Exclusion region with 7.5e21 POT in
neutrino beam mode, the expected T2K-II

exposure

exposure

Fig. 15. The oscillation parameter regions where NuPRISM can exclude sterile neutrino oscillations at the
90%, 3 σ and 5 σ conﬁdence level. This is compared to the allowed region from the LSND experiment.

[3] K. Abe et al. Phys. Rev. Lett., 112, 061802 (2014).
[4] R. Acciarri et al. arXiv:1512.06148 (2015).
[5] K. Abe et al. arXiv:1412.4673 (2014).
[6] K. Abe et al. Phys. Rev. D, 91, 072010 (2015).
[7] C. Adams et al. arXiv:1307.7335 (2013).
[8] K. Abe et al. PTEP, 2015, 053C02 (2015).
[9] Pierre Lasorak and Nick Prouse. In Topical Research Meeting on Prospects in Neutrino Physics (Nu-

Phys2014) London, UK, December 15-17, 2014, (2015)

[10] S. Bhadra et al. arXiv:1412.3086 (2014).
[11] R. Asfandiyarov et al. arXiv:1405.6089 (2014).
[12] T. Koga et al. JPS Conf. Proc., 8, 023003 (2015).
[13] Yoshinari Hayato. Acta Phys. Polon., B40, 2477 (2009).
[14] K. Abe et al. Phys. Rev. Lett., 111, 211803 (2013).
[15] A. Aguilar et al. Phys. Rev. D, 64, 112007 (2001).
[16] A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. Phys. Rev. Lett., 110, 161801 (2013).

11

