6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
h
t
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
9
5
2
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Systematics of Axion Inﬂation
in Calabi-Yau Hypersurfaces

Cody Long, Liam McAllister, and John Stout

Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA

cel89@cornell.edu, mcallister@cornell.edu, jes554@cornell.edu

We initiate a comprehensive survey of axion inﬂation in compactiﬁcations of type IIB
string theory on Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces in toric varieties. For every threefold with
h1,1 ≤ 4 in the Kreuzer-Skarke database, we compute the metric on K¨ahler moduli
space, as well as the matrix of four-form axion charges of Euclidean D3-branes on
rigid divisors. These charges encode the possibility of enlarging the ﬁeld range via
alignment. We then determine an upper bound on the inﬂationary ﬁeld range ∆φ
that results from the leading instanton potential, in the absence of monodromy. The
bound on the ﬁeld range in this ensemble is ∆φ (cid:46) 0.3Mpl, in a compactiﬁcation where
the smallest curve volume is (2π)2α(cid:48), and we argue that the sigma model expansion
is adequately controlled. The largest increase resulting from alignment is a factor
≈ 2.6. We also examine a set of threefolds with h1,1 up to 100 and characterize their
axion charge matrices. We discuss how our ﬁndings could be modiﬁed by the eﬀects
of orientifolding, seven-branes, and ﬂuxes.

March 4, 2016

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Four-Form Axions in O3/O7 Orientifolds

2.1 The eﬀective Lagrangian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 The axion fundamental domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 The superpotential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Computing the ﬁeld range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 The Topology of Calabi-Yau Hypersurfaces

4 A Complete Scan at Small h1,1

5 Probing Large h1,1

5.1 Field ranges and volumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 The structure of Q . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Conclusions

7 Acknowledgements

2

4
4
6
8
10
11

13

16

19
20
22

23

25

– 1 –

1

Introduction

The prospect of detecting or strongly bounding primordial gravitational waves through
measurements of CMB B-modes in the next few years makes the question of large-ﬁeld
inﬂation in quantum gravity an urgent one. Exhibiting a totally explicit model of
large-ﬁeld inﬂation in string theory, or proving no-go theorems that exclude classes
of constructions, remains challenging. A persistent diﬃculty is establishing control
of the theory in the parameter range where large-ﬁeld inﬂation would occur: making
the inﬂaton potential ﬂat over a super-Planckian distance often requires adjusting
compactiﬁcation parameters, such as cycle sizes, ﬂux quanta, and numbers of D-branes,
away from the weakly coupled limit. While it is easy to speculate that something that
appears diﬃcult might in fact be impossible, and some authors have promoted this
expectation to a principle, there has been little success in actually establishing that
large-ﬁeld inﬂation is (im)possible in some corner of string theory, except in very simple
settings.1

Axion inﬂation is a promising framework for examining large-ﬁeld inﬂation in
string theory. As in the original model of natural inﬂation [2], all-orders shift symme-
tries give structure to the inﬂaton potential and sharpen the problem of exhibiting a
ﬂat potential over a large range to that of achieving a large axion periodicity. Axions
are numerous in Calabi-Yau compactiﬁcations of string theory, descending from p-form
ﬁelds in ten dimensions, reduced on suitable p-cycles. The resulting axion ﬁelds inherit
perturbatively exact continuous shift symmetries from the higher-dimensional gauge
symmetry, provided that the latter is not broken by classical sources such as wrapped
D-branes or background ﬂuxes, which would introduce monodromy in the axion poten-
tial [3, 4].2 In this work we will consider axion inﬂation without explicit monodromy:
we will investigate inﬂation driven by the strictly periodic potential generated by Eu-
clidean D-branes.

Although it is diﬃcult to arrange for a single axion in string theory to have peri-
odicity 2πf > Mpl in a regime of perturbative control [7, 8], an appealing alternative is
to arrange for a particular linear combination of N > 1 axions to have a large eﬀective
periodicity. The resulting inﬂationary model, aligned natural inﬂation, is a version of
assisted inﬂation [9]. The ﬁrst such proposal, for the case N = 2, is due to Kim, Nilles,
and Peloso (KNP) [10], and is known as ‘KNP alignment’ or ‘lattice alignment.’

More recently, generalizations of lattice alignment to N (cid:29) 1 have been studied
[11–13], and a distinct alignment phenomenon involving the kinetic term, known as
In §2
‘kinetic alignment,’ has been identiﬁed [14]. Related works include [15–28].
we will review these alignment eﬀects in more detail. One key point is that the ﬁeld
range enhancement due to lattice alignment is determined by a matrix Q of quantized

1See [1] for an overview.
2See e.g. the discussions in [5, 6].

2

axion charges carried by instantons, which without loss of generality we can take to
be integers. In an eﬀective ﬁeld theory construction of aligned natural inﬂation, the
axion periodicity can be made arbitrarily large if these integer charges are unbounded.
However, quantum gravity theories with conventional black hole thermodynamics are
generally thought not to allow exact continuous global internal symmetries. More con-
cretely, any ﬁnite class of string compactiﬁcations will be characterized by a ﬁnite set of
integer data—such as intersection numbers, ﬂux quanta, and D-brane charges—which
only allows for a ﬁnite degree of alignment. While this plausibly excludes arbitrar-
ily super-Planckian ﬁeld ranges in axion theories without monodromy, the question
of physical interest is whether the ﬁeld range ∆φthy allowed by quantum gravity can
exceed the upper bound3 ∆φexp determined by measurements of CMB B-modes.

To determine what quantitative upper bound quantum gravity, and in particular
string theory, imposes on the ﬁeld range in axion inﬂation, one can ask whether the
integer data in an actual string compactiﬁcation can permit a high degree of alignment,
and whether this is suﬃcient to achieve ∆φthy > ∆φexp in a parametrically controlled
construction.
In this paper, we answer these questions, in the negative, for a large
class of explicit Calabi-Yau compactiﬁcations.

We consider inﬂation driven by the Ramond-Ramond four-form C4, in compacti-
ﬁcations of type IIB string theory on Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurfaces in toric four-
folds. We examine all 5922 threefolds with h1,1 ≤ 4 in the Kreuzer-Skarke database
[30], and identify divisors that are rigid and so support Euclidean D3-brane contribu-
tions to the superpotential.4 In 4390 of these compactiﬁcations, Euclidean D3-branes
wrapping linear combinations of up to three toric divisors suﬃce to break all contin-
uous axion shift symmetries, and correspondingly lift all ﬂat directions in the K¨ahler
moduli space.5 The axion fundamental domain is therefore compact in these examples,
and we compute its diameter as a function of the K¨ahler moduli. The geometric ﬁeld
range R ≈ ∆φthy, deﬁned in §2.1, is a function of the curve volume parameters ti,
and is homogeneous of degree −2 with respect to the overall scaling ti → λti, so the
upper bound on ∆φ is dictated, in part, by the smallest curve volumes compatible
with control of the α(cid:48) expansion. We argue that in a region of reasonable perturbative
s ≡ (2π)2α(cid:48), the upper bound on the
control, where the minimum curve volume is (cid:96)2
geometric ﬁeld range is R (cid:46) 0.3 Mpl, with Mpl the four-dimensional reduced Planck
The largest contribution of lattice alignment to R in our ensemble is a factor of
3For single-ﬁeld natural inﬂation, the Planck measurements of the tilt also imply a lower bound

mass.

on ∆φ [29].

becomes more expensive.

4Our method is applicable for larger h1,1, as we show in §5, but computing the divisors’ topology
5The ﬂat directions in the remaining examples may well be lifted by more complicated instanton

conﬁgurations, but we do not analyze those geometries any further.

3

2.6, in a compactiﬁcation where h1,1 = 4 with axion charge matrix

 1

0
−1 −1
0
0
0
0

 .

0
1
1
0

0
1
0
1

Q = 2π

(1.1)

In this example R = 0.08Mpl, while with Q = 2π1 one would have R = 0.03Mpl.

We make one simplifying assumption that deserves special mention.

In deter-
mining which divisors D yield Euclidean D3-brane contributions to the superpoten-
tial, we examine only the topology of D itself, and require the rigidity condition

h•(D,OD) = (1, 0, 0). We do not systematically include corrections to this zero-mode

counting due to orientifolding, worldvolume ﬂux, bulk ﬂux, or intersections with seven-
branes (see e.g. [31–36]). While incorporating these eﬀects is beyond the scope of this
work, it will be an important next step.

The organization of this paper is as follows. In §2 we review how the topological
and geometric data of an O3/O7 orientifold compactiﬁcation determines an eﬀective
theory for axions, and we explain how to compute the ﬁeld range, including the eﬀects
of alignment, in such a theory. In §3 we recall how to obtain the topological data of a
Calabi-Yau threefold hypersurface in a toric variety. In §4 we present the results of a
complete scan through the Kreuzer-Skarke database at h1,1 ≤ 4, and in §5 we describe
a few examples at much larger h1,1. Our conclusions appear in §6.

2 Four-Form Axions in O3/O7 Orientifolds

A comparatively well-understood class of four-dimensional N = 1 solutions of string
theory are compactiﬁcations of type IIB string theory on O3/O7 orientifolds of Calabi-
Yau threefolds. Because the full space of N = 1 orientifolds is not known,6 in this
work we will focus on their Calabi-Yau double covers, which can be enumerated sys-
tematically in the case of hypersurfaces in toric varieties.

2.1 The eﬀective Lagrangian

In type IIB string theory compactiﬁed on an O3/O7 orientifold of a Calabi-Yau three-
fold X, the closed string moduli are the complex structure moduli, axiodilaton, and
K¨ahler moduli. The complex structure moduli and axiodilaton can be completely ﬁxed
by a suitable choice of quantized G3 ﬂux, while the K¨ahler moduli are unﬁxed to all
orders in perturbation theory due to the gauge symmetry of the Ramond-Ramond
four-form. When h1,1− = 0, which we will assume in this work, the coordinates on
K¨ahler moduli space are the complexiﬁed volumes T i of four-cycles, deﬁned as

(cid:90)

T i =

1
2

(cid:90)

J ∧ J + i

Di

C4 ≡ τ i + iθi,

(2.1)

Di

6However, see [37] for progress in classifying involutions that exchange two coordinates.

4

where J is the K¨ahler form, Di is a basis element of H4(X, Z), and C4 is the Ramond-
Ramond four-form ﬁeld. The K¨ahler potential is given by

where V is the volume7 of the internal space,

K = −2 log V,

(cid:90)

V =

1
6

J ∧ J ∧ J.

X

(2.2)

(2.3)

We can write the volume as V = 1
6κijktitjtk by expanding the K¨ahler form as J = tiωi,
where ωi form a basis for H 1,1(X, Z) and the κijk are triple intersection numbers among
divisors Di.

The space of K¨ahler parameters ti is restricted by the requirement that the metric
on ﬁeld space be positive deﬁnite. To identify the resulting conditions on the ti, we
consider the Mori cone of X, Mori(X), which is the cone of holomorphic curves: any
holomorphic curve C in X can be written as

(cid:88)

a

C =

naCa

(2.4)

ti for which(cid:82)

where the Ca are the generators of Mori(X), and na are nonnegative integers. The
K¨ahler cone is the space dual to the Mori cone, i.e. it is the region of K¨ahler parameters

C J > 0 for every holomorphic curve C.

Everywhere inside the K¨ahler cone, the axion ﬁeld space metric Kij obtained from
the tree-level K¨ahler potential (2.2) is positive deﬁnite. However, as one approaches
the walls of the K¨ahler cone, (2.2) does not necessarily provide a good approximation
to the true K¨ahler potential that incorporates all α(cid:48) and gs corrections. Our computa-
tion based on (2.2) is therefore meaningful only when the ti are restricted to a proper
subset of the K¨ahler cone. To understand the conditions that must be imposed on
the ti, we recall the form of the perturbative and nonperturbative corrections to the
eﬀective Lagrangian. The superpotential for the K¨ahler moduli is purely nonperturba-
tive because of the axion shift symmetry, and we will compute it directly in this work,
modulo some important technical assumptions detailed below. The K¨ahler potential
receives perturbative corrections in the α(cid:48) and gs expansions, as well as nonperturbative
corrections, and none of these has been fully characterized.

Control of the string loop expansion can be achieved by arranging for gs (cid:28) 1 by
a suitable choice of quantized three-form ﬂux. We remark that string loop corrections
to the K¨ahler potential are suppressed not only by powers of gs, but also by powers
of V, so at large threefold volume very small gs is not necessary for ensuring that
string loop corrections are small.8 Next, as a proxy for control of the α(cid:48) expansion, we
7All volumes in this work are determined in ten-dimensional Einstein frame in units of (cid:96)s = 2π√α(cid:48).
8Investigations of axion ﬁeld ranges at moderately strong coupling include [38, 39].

5

will consider worldsheet instantons wrapping nontrivial curves C ⊂ X: in the region
where the gs and α(cid:48) expansions are well-controlled, these are generically the leading
nonperturbative corrections to K, and are proportional to9

−2π

−1 e

√

gs t,

∆K ∼ V

(2.5)

where t is the Einstein frame volume of C, i.e. the volume measured with the ten-
dimensional Einstein frame metric, in units of (cid:96)2
s. (The string frame volume of C is
then √gst.) To ensure that the worldsheet instanton corrections are small, we will
require that the volumes of all curves are larger than some threshold value. In this
work we take the threshold volume to be (cid:96)2
s, so that worldsheet instanton contributions
gs, which is small for gs (cid:38) 0.1. Because the K¨ahler
are suppressed by factors of e−2π
metric is homogeneous of degree −2 with respect to overall scaling ti → λti, it is
trivial to translate our results to any other desired threshold, as might be motivated
by examining the form of perturbative corrections in particular examples.

√

set of K¨ahler parameters ti for which (cid:82)

In view of the above requirement, we now deﬁne the stretched K¨ahler cone as the
C J > 1, for all holomorphic curves C. The
condition on curve volumes explained in the previous paragraph corresponds to the
requirement that the ti lie in the stretched K¨ahler cone. This condition leads to a
lower bound on the volumes of divisors, τ i ≡ ∂V/∂ti, and on the volume V of X itself.
2.2 The axion fundamental domain

At a point in K¨ahler moduli space that falls inside the stretched K¨ahler cone, the eﬀec-
tive Lagrangian for the N = h1,1 axions takes the form, in four-dimensional Einstein
frame,

P(cid:88)

a=1

(cid:0)1 − cos(Qa
iθi)(cid:1).

Λ4
a

M 2
pl
2 R4 −

M 2
pl
2

L =

Kij∂µθi∂µθj −

(2.6)

Here Kij is the K¨ahler metric on ﬁeld space, and (2π)−1Q is a matrix of rational
numbers determined by instanton charges. We will search for examples in which Q is
a full-rank (that is, rank N ) matrix, so that there are no exactly ﬂat directions in the
axion ﬁeld space, and correspondingly no unstabilized10 K¨ahler moduli. In order for
Q to have rank N , there must be at least N linearly independent divisors contributing
to the superpotential, i.e. we must have P ≥ N .
intersection of the 2P half-plane constraints −π ≤ Qa
1. When Q has rank N , F is compact.

The fundamental domain F (cf. [41]) of the axions is the region contained in the
iθi ≤ π, as visualized in Figure

9We adopt the normalizations of [40], as laid out in Appendix A of [40].
10Strictly speaking, we will not be stabilizing the real part K¨ahler moduli τi, in the sense that we
will not minimize the scalar potential with respect to the τi. We do, however, ensure that all the τi
appear in the superpotential, in N linearly independent combinations.

6

Figure 1: The geometric ﬁeld range R is the semi-diameter of the fundamental domain
F, which is the region contained in the intersection of the 2P hyperplane constraints
iθi ≤ π. Surfaces of constant distance are ellipsoids with weight matrix Kij.
−π ≤ Qa

The fundamental domain is a polytope in ﬁeld space, and may also be expressed
as the convex hull of a set of vertices {di}. We deﬁne the geometric ﬁeld range R as
the distance, measured with respect to the K¨ahler metric Kij, from the origin to the
most distant point on the boundary of F. Equivalently, R is the distance from the
origin to the most distant of the di, i.e. R is the semi-diameter of F.

The length ∆φ of an inﬂationary trajectory driven by a general potential on F
may be larger or smaller than R, but when the initial conditions are arranged so that
the trajectory is well-approximated by a straight line, we expect that ∆φ (cid:46) R. We

have veriﬁed this expectation by solving for the inﬂationary evolution that results from
the full potential.

The identiﬁcations deﬁning F, and hence also the size R of F, depend on the
set of instantons included in the sum in (2.6). Because the Λa depend exponentially
on four-cycle volumes, there will generally be large hierarchies among the Λa, and so
some terms in the axion potential may provide only small ripples that are unimportant
in determining the maximum ﬁeld range. Our approach is to choose the dominant
instantons, deﬁned as follows. Given a set of P > N instanton contributions, i.e. P
row vectors Q1
i, one can search for one or more sets of N linearly-independent
vectors, corresponding to full-rank square matrices contained in Q. When there are
multiple such full-rank sets, we choose the one for which the Λa are as large as possible;
that is, we identify the 2N most important hyperplanes deﬁning the fundamental
domain.11

i, . . . , QP

11Speciﬁcally, we sort the P > N vectors so that the corresponding Λa are ordered from largest
to smallest. We then select vectors in order from this list, omitting any vector that is not linearly
independent of those that have already been selected, and so arrive at a set of N vectors that can be
assembled to form a full-rank square matrix Q.

7

RQ1iθi≤πQ1iθi≥−πQ2iθi≤πQ2iθi≥−πQ3iθi≤πQ3iθi≥−πOnce the dominant rows of Q are identiﬁed, the corresponding inequalities deﬁne
a polytope in ﬁeld space. The point in this convex polytope furthest from the origin
must be one of the vertices di. Thus, given a constant K¨ahler metric K and a full-
rank square matrix Qi
i, corresponding to the identiﬁcations imposed by the
leading instantons, we obtain the axion ﬁeld range by enumerating the vertices of the
associated polytope and computing

j ⊂ Qa

R2 = max

i

d

(cid:124)
i ·K·di.

(2.7)

Each choice of Q will determine a diﬀerent polytope in ﬁeld space and thus yield a
diﬀerent value of R. In particular, the semi-diameter of the polytope formed by the 2N
most important hyperplanes serves as an upper bound on the length of straight-line
trajectories that stay within the fundamental domain.

2.3 The superpotential

In the type IIB orientifolds considered in this work, the superpotential interactions of
the K¨ahler moduli T i are generated by nonperturbative eﬀects, either from Euclidean
D3-branes on a divisor D in the Calabi-Yau X, or from strong gauge dynamics, such
as gaugino condensation, on a stack of seven-branes on a divisor D in X. As ex-
plained above, we will restrict our attention to Euclidean D3-branes. Necessary and
suﬃcient conditions for a Euclidean D3-brane contribution to the superpotential were
given in [42]. These conditions were derived in the case of M-theory compactiﬁed on
an elliptically ﬁbered Calabi-Yau fourfold Y4, with base B3. Consider a Euclidean
M5-brane wrapping a smooth divisor ˆD ⊂ Y4. Two necessary conditions for a super-
potential contribution are that ˆD is vertical, meaning that π( ˆD) is a divisor of B3,
and that ˆD is eﬀective (see e.g. [43] for the deﬁnition). Granting these requirements,
a ﬁnal condition suﬃcing for a contribution is the rigidity condition

•
h

( ˆD,O ˆD) = (1, 0, 0, 0).

(2.8)

We will refer to divisors that obey these conditions as rigid divisors, with the vertical
and eﬀective conditions being implicit.

To translate (2.8) to a condition on smooth divisors D = π( ˆD) ⊂ B3, we use the

relation [44]

where ha ≡ 0 when a < 0. Here 12∆ =(cid:80) niΣi, where the Σi are the loci where the ﬁber

hi( ˆD,O ˆD) = hi(D,OD) + hi−1(D,−∆|D),

degenerates, and the ni denote the type of singularity. Since the hi−1(D,−∆|D) are
nonnegative, a necessary condition on D in order for ˆD to fulﬁll the suﬃcient condition
(2.8) is that hi(D,OD) = 0, i = 1, 2. In the special case that the degeneration locus of

0 ≤ i ≤ 3,

(2.9)

8

the elliptic ﬁber does not intersect D—in weak coupling terms, this means that D does

not intersect divisors wrapped by D7-branes—we have hi−1(D,−∆|D) = 0, so that

•
h

(D,OD) = (1, 0, 0)

(2.10)

actually suﬃces to ensure a superpotential contribution. In summary, a divisor D ⊂ B3
that is eﬀective, does not intersect the discriminant locus 12∆, and obeys the rigidity
condition (2.10) supports a Euclidean D3-brane contribution to the superpotential: its
preimage ˆD = π∗(D) is eﬀective, vertical, and obeys (2.8).

2V

We have emphasized the ‘threefold rigidity condition’ (2.10) because it depends
only on the base B3, and so can be assessed directly from the combinatorial data
in the Kreuzer-Skarke database. A more comprehensive analysis, also applicable to
divisors D that intersect ∆, would require information about the elliptic ﬁbration,
which in our framework requires specifying an orientifold of the Calabi-Yau threefold
X whose image is the non-negatively curved base B3. A systematic treatment of all Z2
involutions is beyond the scope of this work. We will work with the K¨ahler potential

(cid:1), where V is the volume of the double-cover Calabi-Yau manifold. This

K = −2 log(cid:0) 1

provides a reasonable proxy for the metric on the K¨ahler moduli space of the orientifold,
at least in the case of orientifolds that ﬂip a single toric coordinate xi → −xi. In such a
case, we have h1,1
+ = h1,1(X), and we do not expect the orientifold action to signiﬁcantly
change the intersection ring. Beyond the eﬀects of orientifolds themselves, it is worth
noting that incorporating D7-branes provides additional freedom to increase the ﬁeld
range R, by factors of the dual Coxeter numbers of the condensing gauge groups.12

Let us be very clear on this point: an eﬀective divisor D obeying (2.10) that
does not intersect seven-branes (including O7-planes) will yield a Euclidean D3-brane
superpotential term; but because we are working directly with threefolds, without ei-
ther orientifolding or taking a weak-coupling limit from a fourfold, the non-intersection
condition is a simplifying assumption that is not veriﬁable in our framework. We view
this approach as an intermediate step between working only with the N = 2 data of a
threefold, and performing a full N = 1 analysis complete with explicit orientifolding.

The superpotential that results takes the form

p(cid:88)

W = W0 +

−2πqα

iT i

Aα e

,

(2.11)

α=1

where W0 is a ﬂux-dependent constant, and Aα are Pfaﬃans that depend on the
vacuum expectation values of the complex structure moduli. The constant matrix
qα
i speciﬁes which K¨ahler moduli appear in each non-perturbative contribution to the
superpotential; at the level of our analysis each of the p linear combinations ¯Dα ≡ qα
iDi

12A string theory embedding of this proposal was considered in [45], where the enhancement was

realized by multiply-wound D7-branes.

9

corresponds to a rigid divisor. The full supergravity potential is given by

K(cid:16)

DiWDiW − 3|W|2(cid:17)

V = e

,

(2.12)

where Di = ∂i + Ki is the K¨ahler covariant derivative. In this work, we will assume
that the moduli can be stabilized in a vacuum where the cosmological constant is small
in string units, and that the dynamics of the real-part saxions may be ignored.13 The
eﬀective Lagrangian density for the axions θi is then given by Eq. 2.6, where

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

Qa

i = 2π

qα
i
qβ
i − qγ

,

i

(2.13)

i with β > γ, which result from cross terms in (2.12).

is a P × N matrix, with P = p(p + 1)/2. The last p(p− 1)/2 rows consist of diﬀerences
qβ
i − qγ
In summary, the axion charge matrix Q, whose rows specify the hyperplanes
that deﬁne the fundamental domain, is given by (2.13), where ¯Dα = qα
iDi, α =
1, . . . , p are p eﬀective divisors of the threefold X that fulﬁll the rigidity condition
(2.10), and so support Euclidean D3-brane contributions to the superpotential. We
now turn to understanding the impact of the axion charge matrix Q on the size R of
the fundamental domain.

2.4 Computing the ﬁeld range

In §2.3 we explained how to obtain the data of the periodic identiﬁcations deﬁning
the axion fundamental domain F, which are determined by the particular divisors ¯Dα
that are rigid and so support Euclidean D3-brane superpotential terms. These iden-
tiﬁcations correspond to the hyperplanes in Figure 1. We also recalled, in §2.1, how
to compute the K¨ahler metric Kij and to determine the region of the two-cycle size
parameters ti for which the α(cid:48) and gs expansions are well-controlled (the ‘stretched
K¨ahler cone’). This metric corresponds to the ellipse in Figure 1. These data com-
pletely specify the geometry of F, or more precisely the possible geometries of F: the
size R of F depends on the K¨ahler moduli. To determine the maximal ﬁeld range in
a given theory, we must maximize R subject to the linear constraints on the ti that
deﬁne the stretched K¨ahler cone.

The tree-level metric is a homogeneous function of the ti, and scales with the

simplicial, the h1,1 constraints(cid:82)

−4/3. By using the scaling ti → λti, one ﬁnds that the maximal

overall volume as V
ﬁeld range is achieved on the boundary of the stretched K¨ahler cone. If Mori(X) is
J = 1 can be simultaneously fulﬁlled at the apex of
the stretched K¨ahler cone, where all of the two-cycle volumes are set to unity (in units
of (cid:96)s), and the maximal ﬁeld range is achieved at the apex. However, in more general

Ci

13Ignoring the saxions would be untenable in a construction of an inﬂationary solution, but is

reasonable here because we are simply deriving upper bounds on the geometric diameter.

10

h1,1(cid:88)

i=1

V =

(cid:0)1 − cos(cid:0)

Qi

jθj(cid:1)(cid:1) ,

cases the point in the stretched K¨ahler cone giving the largest R can occur on a wall,
but away from the apex. We therefore searched the stretched K¨ahler cone numerically
to determine the optimal ﬁeld range. For the purpose of the search, we retained only
h1,1 terms in the potential, taking

(2.14)

j is the leading-order14 full rank piece of the full Q. In general there will be
where Qi
further terms that reduce the size the of the fundamental domain, both from additional
instantons and from cross terms in the supergravity potential, but because we are
quoting an upper bound these can be omitted at this stage.

(cid:82)

To search for the maximal R, we computed the four-cycle volumes at a reference
point t0, and then extracted the full rank piece of Q that is leading order at t0. We
then scanned over the stretched K¨ahler cone for the point tL with the largest R. For
the reference point, we used the apex of the stretched K¨ahler cone, deﬁned as the
point where the Euclidean norm of the vector (v1, . . . , vNC ) is minimized, where the
va ≡
J and Ca are the NC generators of the Mori cone. We then checked that
Q at tL is the same as at t0, meaning that the same instantons remain dominant,
and the analysis is self-consistent. In a small fraction of cases we found that the set
of dominant instantons changed during the exploration from t0 to tL, which we then
accounted for in computing the ﬁeld range.

Ca

2.5 Alignment

Once the rigid divisors ¯Dα ≡ qα

Many authors have argued that quantum gravity will censor super-Planckian ﬁeld
displacements, or at least will do so in suﬃciently restrictive circumstances. The large
degree of structure imposed on axion theories by all-orders shift symmetries makes
these theories a promising setting for directly quantifying the restrictions, if any, that
descend from quantum gravity. The objective of the present work is to compute the
size15 R of the axion fundamental domain F in an ensemble of string compactiﬁcations.
iDi, the K¨ahler metric Kij, and the stretched
K¨ahler cone have been determined in a particular theory, the size R of F is completely
speciﬁed, and one could mechanically apply the process described in §2.4 to compute R
in a large number of examples, as we shall do in §4. However, it will be valuable to ﬁrst
explain that a suitable structure in the axion charge matrix could lead to R (cid:29) Mpl,
even while the eigenvalues of Kij remain (cid:28) M 2
pl: this is the celebrated phenomenon of
14After the h1,1 most important terms have been determined, by comparing their prefactors Λa
according to the algorithm given in §2.2, the problem becomes purely geometric, and we can then set
all Λa = 1, as we have done in (2.14).
15We stress that including a source of monodromy, which we will not do here, may ultimately allow
displacements O(nR), where n ∈ Z is the number of cycles (also known as windings) of monodromy.

11

ηnaive

.

(2.15)

?

= Ractual
RQ=2π1

alignment, and more precisely of KNP alignment [10], also known as lattice alignment.
Here we will attempt to be very precise about the notion of lattice alignment in a
Calabi-Yau compactiﬁcation.

Roughly speaking, an axion theory may be said to manifest lattice alignment
when the size of F is larger than it ‘would have been if Q had been trivial,’ i.e. the
notion of alignment is that of an increase in ﬁeld range resulting from the structure
of the axion charge matrix Q. Heuristically, one might try to deﬁne the alignment
enhancement16 factor η as

The numerator is well-deﬁned in general, but the axion charge matrix alone is not
invariant under a change of the variables θi, so stating that Q = 2π1 presupposes a
choice of basis. The (physically meaningful) ﬁeld range R is of course invariant under
j θj, with M ∈ GL(N, R), but Kij and Q separately
the change of variables θi → M i
transform.

Why talk about alignment at all, if a precise deﬁnition is subtle (though achiev-
able, see below)? One motivation is that it is generally far easier to compute the
classical geometric data determining the metric Kij than it is to determine the non-
perturbative, quantum data of Q, which after all is a matrix of axionic charges carried
by (D-brane) instantons. As such, one may sometimes know Kij without knowing Q,
and it would then be valuable to understand how large an error might be made by
approximating Q ≈ 2π1. In systems of N (cid:29) 1 axions, including the ensemble studied
here with 2 ≤ N ≤ 100, this error can easily be a factor of order N , and in theories
with special structure [11, 13] (not established to date in string theory) the error can
be exponential in N .

If we were equipped with a canonical choice of basis B, we could deﬁne the denom-
inator in (2.15) by taking the ‘reference’ charge matrix to read Q = 2π1 in the basis
B. In other words, the degree of alignment would be dictated by the extent to which
the actual charge matrix Q, expressed in the basis B, diﬀers from 2π1, as quantiﬁed
by (2.15).

We are not aware of a natural and fully-speciﬁed canonical basis. However, a
natural but (in general) overcomplete set consists of the minimal generators of Eﬀ(X),
the cone of eﬀective divisors in X. The number NEﬀ of minimal generators EA, A =
1, . . . , NEﬀ of Eﬀ(X) often exceeds h1,1, and there is then no unique choice of a basis
for H 1,1(X): there are ﬁnitely many choices.

Assume for the moment that NEﬀ = h1,1, so that the generators EA of Eﬀ(X)
deﬁne a unique basis B. If each of the EA were rigid and supported a Euclidean D3-
brane contribution to the superpotential, we would have Q = 2π1 in the basis B
16When η > 1, we say that the theory manifests alignment, and when η < 1 the result may be

termed anti-alignment.

12

deﬁned by the EA. Moreover, because every eﬀective divisor is a linear combination
of the EA with nonnegative integer coeﬃcients, the Euclidean D3-branes supported on
the EA correspond to the most important instanton contributions in the theory: any
additional rigid divisors will have equal or larger action. This simple theory, in which
the minimal generators EA of Eﬀ(X) are rigid, serves as a reference case that we deﬁne
to have trivial alignment (η = 1).

We now propose that a natural deﬁnition of a trivial charge matrix Q is the ma-
trix whose rows are the minimal generators EA of Eﬀ(X), even when NEﬀ > h1,1. In
other words, a well-deﬁned null hypothesis for examining alignment is the assump-
tion that each of the EA gives an independent contribution to the non-perturbative
superpotential. We may then deﬁne the enhancement factor η as

η = Ractual
REﬀ(X)

,

(2.16)

where Ractual is computed using the Q generated by the rigid divisors ¯Dα, and REﬀ(X)
is computed using the (by deﬁnition) trivial Q generated by assuming that the minimal
eﬀective divisors EA are rigid. For both the numerator and the denominator only the
h1,1 most important rows of Q are included, as explained in §2.2.

Although we have now given a precise deﬁnition of the enhancement η resulting
from lattice alignment, it remains to determine whether η can be large in actual string
compactiﬁcations. We therefore turn to determining the numbers qα
i in an ensemble
of Calabi-Yau geometries.

3 The Topology of Calabi-Yau Hypersurfaces

Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces in toric fourfolds provide a large ensemble of Calabi-Yau
threefolds, and allow an eﬃcient combinatorial approach to determining the geome-
try [30, 46]. We refer the reader to [47], among many others, for an introduction to
the subject.

The combinatorial data needed to construct a Calabi-Yau consists of a dual pair
of reﬂexive polytopes ∆ and ∆◦, and a triangulation of ∆◦ that deﬁnes a fan F . F then
deﬁnes a toric variety V , and the anticanonical hypersurface −K in V is a Calabi-Yau
threefold X. The triangulation of ∆◦ must be star with respect to the origin, meaning
that every simplex must contain the origin, in order to deﬁne a fan. In addition, the
triangulation must be ﬁne and regular, in order to ensure that the hypersurface is
generic and projective.17 Because a generic hypersurface misses any given point of
V , we can allow V to have pointlike singularities without making a generic threefold
singular. As a result, points interior to facets can be ignored when triangulating ∆◦.
17See [48] for a discussion of these points.

13

We have made use of several publicly-available software packages to obtain and
analyze triangulations. The algebraic software Sage [49] provides a useful interface
for working with toric varieties. The triangulations can be performed in TOPCOM [50],
which has been integrated into Sage. In addition, we used the program PALP [51] for
calculations involving reﬂexive polytopes, and its Mori extension [52] is very powerful
in computing relevant topological data at small h1,1. Most triangulation algorithms
are not specialized to compute star triangulations; instead, all triangulations are com-
puted, and then the star ones are selected. When one is mostly concerned with hy-
persurfaces with small h1,1, whose polytopes are readily triangulated in TOPCOM, the
cost of computing all triangulations is generally not prohibitive. However, since we
will describe some preliminary results at large h1,1, we will outline how one can begin
to probe these geometries. For h1,1 (cid:46) 30, one can use the algorithms given in [48, 53]
to get all the triangulations of the polytope by gluing together the triangulations of
individual facets, but this quickly becomes expensive as h1,1 grows. However, even
when computing all triangulations in this way is impractical, it is possible to obtain a
single triangulation very quickly. The method was implicit in [46], and was made very
clear in [54]: one simply computes a regular and ﬁne (not star) triangulation of the
polytope, and then deletes the lines in the strict interior of the polytope. This induces
a regular triangulation of the facets, and then a star triangulation is constructed by
drawing a line from the origin to each point in the polytope. Using this method it is
easy to compute a single triangulation of any polytope in the Kreuzer-Skarke database;
for instance, a triangulation of a polytope whose hypersurface X has h1,1(X) = 400
takes about ten seconds on a typical laptop.

The tree-level K¨ahler potential depends only on the classical volume, and can be
computed easily via toric methods, as one only needs the intersection ring and the Mori
cone Mori(X). We will consider only favorable hypersurfaces X, i.e. those in which
all of the divisors of the Calabi-Yau are inherited from divisors of V ; in such cases we
have Mori(X) ⊂ Mori(V ). Computing Mori(X) from toric data is challenging, so we
take the conservative approach of imposing the Mori cone conditions inherited from
V .18

Determining the nonperturbative superpotential is more involved, as we need
to know the Hodge numbers of divisors in the hypersurface. In favorable Calabi-Yau
threefolds, the vanishing loci of the individual homogeneous coordinates, corresponding
to rays in the fan, furnish a generating set of h1,1 + 4 divisors ˇDa in the Calabi-Yau.
To search for a set of h1,1 independent rigid divisors we consider the cohomology of
these generators and their linear combinations. Recall that the number of independent
homology classes of divisors is counted by h1,1(X, Z). Given a choice of a basis {Di}
i aiDi is rigid.

of divisors, the task at hand is to determine whether a divisor D =(cid:80)

18Note that Mori(X) can be a proper subset of Mori(V ). In particular, if a curve C is in V but not

in X, the sigma model expansion on X is unaﬀected by taking the volume of C to zero.

14

To do so, we need to specify what values the ai can take.
In some cases one can
choose a basis such that all holomorphic hypersurfaces can be written as sums of
the Di with non-negative integer coeﬃcients, and the problem reduces to scanning
over an (N)h1,1
lattice. This happens only when Eﬀ(X) is simplicial.19 The eﬀective
cone is not simplicial in general, so the ranges of the coeﬃcients ai are not always
obvious. However, one can consider non-negative linear combinations of the generators
of Eﬀ(X), which will by deﬁnition generate all eﬀective divisors.

The Hodge numbers of the toric divisors ˇDa, which correspond to rays in the fan
F and therefore to points in ∆◦, can be computed via polytope data alone [55], in the
same fashion that the Hodge numbers of the Calabi-Yau are computed in [46, 56]. We
provide a brief summary of the results. As mentioned above, the polytopes ∆ and ∆◦
are dual, so there is a one-to-one relation between faces of dimension k, Θ◦[k], of ∆◦,
and faces of dimension 3− k, Θ[3−k], of ∆. The divisors Da can be organized according
to their corresponding points in ∆◦. Let l∗(Θ) denote the number of interior points of
a face Θ; then:
(1, 0, n), where n = l∗(cid:0)Θ[3](cid:1) and Θ[3] is the three-dimensional face dual to Θ◦[0].
• For divisors Da that correspond to vertices Θ◦[0] of ∆◦, we have h•(D,OD) =
Θ◦[1] of ∆◦, we have h•(D,OD) = (1, n, 0), where n = l∗(cid:0)Θ[2](cid:1) and Θ[2] is the
faces Θ◦[2] of ∆◦, we have h•(D,OD) = (n, 0, 0), where n = l∗(cid:0)Θ[1](cid:1)+1 and Θ[1] is

• For divisors Da that correspond to points va that are interior to two-dimensional
the one-dimensional face dual to Θ◦[2]. If n > 1 then these divisors are reducible.

• For divisors Da that correspond to points va interior to one-dimensional faces

two-dimensional face dual to Θ◦[1].

These facts make computing the Hodge numbers of toric divisors ˇDa a simple combi-
natorial process. However, it is often the case that there are fewer than h1,1 linearly-
independent rigid toric divisors, and therefore to search for instantons leading to a full
rank Q one must consider linear combinations of toric divisors that are not linearly
equivalent to a toric divisor. Because such combinations do not simply correspond
to rays in the fan, obtaining their Hodge diamonds requires more eﬀort. The Koszul
sequence allows one to calculate this data, and has been implemented in the program
cohomcalg [57, 58], which we used extensively. We refer the interested reader to [57, 58]
for details.

19The divisors whose rigidity properties we need to examine are all the divisors D that are eﬀective
in X. Because we have selected only favorable hypersurfaces X, all divisors of X are inherited from
divisors of V .
In this work we will consider only eﬀective divisors in X that are inherited from
eﬀective divisors in V , but more general eﬀective divisors of X are possible. We thank M. Stillman
for explaining this point to us.

15

h1,1(X)
Number of polytopes
Number of favorable polytopes
Number of favorable triangulations
Number of full-rank triangulations
Full-rank with only smooth divisors

2
36
36
48
24
9

3
244
243
525
262
199

4

1197
1185
5330
4104
3214

Table 1: Results of the scan over reﬂexive polytopes with h1,1(X) ≤ 4.

It is worth remarking that a linear combination of toric divisors that is rigid
and irreducible is also necessarily singular.20 Consider a divisor D that is linearly
equivalent to Dx + Dy, where Dx and Dy are toric divisors deﬁned by the vanishing of
toric coordinates x and y, respectively. In order for D to be rigid we need h2(D) = 0,
which implies that h2(Dx) = h2(Dy) = 0, as taking a linear combination will not aﬀect
the presence of these deformations. Then the only polynomial one can write to deﬁne
the divisor is xy = 0. This is singular along the intersection of the divisors x = y = 0.
If the divisor is irreducible then Dx and Dy must have non-zero intersection, and
therefore the point x = y = 0 is contained in the space, and D is necessarily singular.
We ﬁnd that of the 4390 triangulations in our ensemble that have a full-rank Q, 3422
remain full rank when only smooth toric divisors are included.

4 A Complete Scan at Small h1,1

Equipped with the results of §2 and §3, we computed the relevant topological data of
all Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces in the Kreuzer-Skarke database with 2 ≤ h1,1 ≤ 4. We
searched for divisors D that are rigid linear combinations of up to three toric divisors
ˇD,

D = na ˇDa ,

na = 3 and(cid:80)

(4.1)
a na ≤ 3. We computed
where na are nonnegative integers obeying max
the topology of individual toric divisors via polytope data, and that of linear combina-
tions with cohomcalg. At h1,1 = 2, 3, 4 we found that 24, 262, and 4104 triangulations,
respectively, have full-rank q matrices resulting from Euclidean D3-branes. The results
are summarized in Table 1.21

a

The combined ﬁeld space radii for h1,1 = 2, 3, 4 are plotted in Figure 2. We ﬁnd
the maximum to be R ≈ 0.5Mpl, in a case with h1,1 = 3, but in this example the overall
20We thank M. Stillman and B. Sung for helpful explanations of this point.
21It sometimes happens that two isomorphic hypersurfaces are realized as hypersurfaces in diﬀerent
toric varieties corresponding to diﬀerent polytopes. Since we are simply performing a scan over the
geometries, we will not attempt to distinguish whether two Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces are diﬀerent
but will instead only refer to individual triangulations.

16

Figure 2: Histogram of geometric ﬁeld ranges R, in units of the reduced Planck mass
Mpl, for h1,1 ≤ 4. The inset shows the tail of the distribution.

volume of the Calabi-Yau is close to unity, and so the compactiﬁcation is arguably not
within the regime of perturbative control. The next largest is an example with h1,1 = 4
in which R ≈ 0.3Mpl, and where the overall volume is ≈ 20. This example is much
better controlled, and therefore gives the upper bound that we report.

In Figure 3, we show a histogram of enhancements from lattice alignment, η,
for the 4390 geometries with h1,1 = 2, 3, and 4. As seen in the inset, there is a
spike at η = 1 corresponding to a large fraction of geometries—2180 out of 4390—
that experience no enhancement from Q. This occurs when the minimal generators of
Eﬀ(X) are rigid and thus the leading order Q is trivial. In addition, many of the non-
trivial Q-matrices actually decrease the geometric ﬁeld range R. We ﬁnd a positive
enhancement in 494 examples.

In this ensemble, the maximum enhancement from a nontrivial charge matrix is
a factor of η = 2.6 in a threefold with h1,1 = 4. The vertices of the polytope ∆◦ are
given by

(cid:110)

di =

(1,−1, 0, 0), (−1, 4,−1,−1), (−1,−1, 0, 0), (−1,−1, 1, 0),
(−1,−1, 0, 1), (−1, 2, 0, 0), (−1,−1, 1, 1)

.

(4.2)

(4.3)

Here we have

Q = 2π

(cid:111)
 .

0
1
1
0

0
1
0
1

 1

0
−1 −1
0
0
0
0

17

00.10.20.30.40.50100200300400500600700R0.30.40.5012Figure 3: Histogram of enhancements η for h1,1 = 2, 3, 4.
Inset demonstrates the
large peak at η = 1, i.e. many geometries see no enhancement in size, or a reduction,
from a non-trivial Q.

This occurs in an example where the eigenvalues of Kij are quite small, and the geo-
metric ﬁeld range increases from 0.03Mpl to only about 0.079Mpl. In this example not
all of the rigid divisors are smooth. The next largest enhancement is η = 2.55, which
increases the geometric ﬁeld range from R = .05 to R = 0.12. The vertices of the
polytope ∆◦ are given by

(cid:110)

di =

(−1, 2,−1,−1), (−1,−1, 2, 1), (−1,−1, 1, 1), (1, 0,−1,−1),
(−1,−1, 1, 2), (0,−1, 1, 1), (2, 1,−2,−2)

,

and Q is given by

0
0
0
0
1
0
1 −1
In this example all of the rigid divisors are smooth.

Q = 2π

0
1
0
2

 1

0
0
2

(cid:111)
 .

(4.4)

(4.5)

Although the scan at small h1,1 did not yield a geometry that allows a paramet-
rically large fundamental domain, some of the examples exhibit features that could
be interesting for inﬂationary model building. Consider, for instance, the Calabi-Yau
hypersurface in the toric variety (P1)4. The volume is

V = 2 (t1t2t3 + t1t2t4 + t2t3t4 + t1t3t4) ,

(4.6)

18

0.511.522.50100200300η0.511.522.505001000150020000)M 2

and the Mori cone conditions are simply ti > 0, i = 1, . . . , 4. In this geometry, one
can make the overall volume arbitrarily large while holding the largest eigenvalue of K
ﬁxed, by taking t2 = t3 = t4 ≡ t0 for constant t0, and letting t1 ≡ t (cid:29) 1. The largest
eigenvalue of K is then 1/(144t4
pl. This is an appealing feature, as suitably scaling
up the volume can provide protection against some perturbative and nonperturbative
corrections, while keeping the largest eigenvalue ﬁxed at a sizable value. For instance,
by taking t → ∞ and setting t0 = 0.2, the largest eigenvalue of K becomes 4.3M 2
pl.
However, there is a22 divisor Ds with volume τs = 6t2
0 ≈ 0.24. If there are higher-order
instanton contributions23 ∼ e−kτs for k > 1, these are not necessarily negligible, e.g. for
k = 2 their importance relative to the leading term is e−2π(0.48)/e−2π(0.24) ∼ 0.22.
5 Probing Large h1,1

Our analysis thus far has been restricted to small Hodge numbers, h1,1 ≤ 4, but
arguments in eﬀective ﬁeld theory and in random matrix theory suggest that new
phenomena will appear in compactiﬁcations with h1,1 (cid:29) 1 [41, 59]. A comparative
analysis of these proposals for alignment, and of the requisite degree of ﬁne-tuning at
the level of eﬀective ﬁeld theory, will appear in [59]; here we will brieﬂy summarize the
main ideas in order to provide orientation for our search at large h1,1.

An inﬂuential early suggestion for alignment of N (cid:29) 1 axions was the N-ﬂation
proposal [60], where it was observed that the ﬁeld range of a simple24 system of N
axions is the Pythagorean sum of the ranges of the individual axions, and schematically
R ∝ N 1/2. More recent works have identiﬁed stronger enhancements at large N .
Multi-axion alignment, the N -dimensional generalization of KNP alignment, yields
exponentially large ranges, while plausibly requiring severe ﬁne-tuning [11]. Finally,
in [41] it was observed that generic charge matrices could give ‘spontaneous’ ﬁeld range
enhancements as large as N 3/2 from a combination of lattice and kinetic alignment.
More precisely, the ﬁnding of [41] is that for charge matrices Q whose entries are well-
approximated as independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) variables, and are not
too sparse, the distribution of ﬁeld ranges takes the form

R = N pζ ,

(5.1)

superpotential can be neglected.

22The remaining three divisors have large volumes for t → ∞, and their contributions to the
23It is not clear that higher-order contributions from Euclidean D3-branes without ﬂux will be
nonvanishing, because h0(kD) = h2(kD) = k.
In fact, in this example are no rigid divisors at
all: all of the toric divisors pulled back to the Calabi-Yau hypersurface have the Hodge numbers
of K3 surfaces. A superpotential might still be generated if worldvolume ﬂuxes lift the zero modes
corresponding to h2(D) deformations.

24The simplifying assumption is that Q = 2π1 in a basis in which Kij is diagonal. This does not

hold in generic examples, and in particular is violated in every geometry in our ensemble.

19

where 1 (cid:46) p (cid:46) 3/2 depends on the sparsity of Q. Here ζ is a positive stochastic
variable, varying from one realization of Q to another, that has unit median and a
heavy tail toward large values: in particular, the mean obeys (cid:104)ζ(cid:105) (cid:29) 1. The distribution
of ζ is computable in special cases. When the entries of Q are such that QQ(cid:62) is a
Wishart matrix W, one ﬁnds ζ ≈ λ1(W)−1/2, with λ1(W) the smallest eigenvalue of
W. Because the probability density function of λ1(W) has support near λ1 = 0, ζ has
a tail toward large positive values. In turn, the range R has a heavy tail, and one
expects to ﬁnd, after a modest number of independent trials, a range R that exceeds
the median value Rmed by orders of magnitude.

Both the engineered N -dimensional alignment of [11], and the spontaneous align-
ment of [41], provide ﬁeld-theoretic mechanisms for parametrically large ﬁeld ranges.
However, it is clearly necessary to test these ideas in actual string compactiﬁcations,
in order to understand whether quantum gravity indeed allows these eﬀective the-
ories, and so permits ﬁeld ranges that are very large in Planck units. To begin
exploring this point, we will examine a number of Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces, with
h1,1 ∈ {50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100}. More systematic results will appear in [61].
5.1 Field ranges and volumes
For ten geometries each at h1,1 ∈ {50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100}, we computed the relevant
topological and metric data and bounded the geometric ﬁeld range R. Computing
the topology of nontrivial linear combinations of toric divisors is computationally ex-
pensive at large h1,1, so we only searched for rigid divisors among the toric divisors
themselves. In many cases the toric divisors suﬃce to lift all ﬂat directions, and in
such cases we bounded the ﬁeld range. At large h1,1, the vertex enumeration problem
is computationally taxing and we used alternative methods to obtain the ﬁeld range.
We may always trivialize 2N of the hyperplane constraints via the ﬁeld transfor-

mation

(5.2)
If P = N , this maps the fundamental domain F into the hypercube of side length 2π.
For P > N , the 2P hyperplane constraints

Q

j Φj.

−π ≤ Qa

i

Q

jΦj ≤ π

(5.3)

restrict F to a hypercube subject to 2(P − N ) hyperplane ‘cuts.’
distance in ﬁeld space in Planck units is measured with respect to the metric

In the Φi basis,

θi =(cid:0)
(cid:0)

−1(cid:1)i
−1(cid:1)i

Ξ =(cid:0)Q−1(cid:1)(cid:62)

· K·Q−1,

whose maximum eigenvalue we denote ξ2

straints (5.3), computing R via (2.7) involves evaluating the Ξ-norm of 2N−1 vertices

N . If we temporarily ignore the additional con-

20

(5.4)

Figure 4: log10 of the mean volumes V as a function of h1,1.

and is thus prohibitively expensive at large N . However, we can always bound the
geometric ﬁeld range by

R ≤ Rmax = π√N ξN Mpl .

(5.5)

At large N , eigenvector delocalization generally ensures that the ellipsoid’s principal
axes are nearly aligned with the diagonals of the hypercube, so that (5.5) is often
nearly saturated. Upon including the additional 2(P − N ) constraints (5.3), the ﬁeld
range will be reduced by the maximally constraining cut, as detailed in [41]. Because
we always work with the full-rank square matrix Qi
i, we approximate the ﬁeld
range using Eq. 5.5.

j ⊂ Qa

(cid:62)(cid:1)−1

QQ

root of the largest eigenvalue of (cid:0)

In all cases we ﬁnd R (cid:28) Mpl. The mean volume of the Calabi-Yau at the apex of
the stretched K¨ahler cone, as a function of h1,1, is plotted in Figure 4, and the mean
value of ξN as a function of h1,1 is plotted in Figure 5a. We also show qN , the square
in this basis, in Figure 5b. We ﬁnd the
largest enhancement from lattice alignment occurs at h1,1 = 100, with ηmax = 7.86.
We note that while the eﬀect of alignment can be signiﬁcant for h1,1 (cid:29) 1, in our
examples this is dwarfed by the growth of the volume with h1,1. As h1,1 grows, the
number of holomorphic curves grows as well, giving more inequalities on the K¨ahler
parameters to stay within the K¨ahler cone. By demanding that we remain in a regime
of control, where all curve volumes are greater than one, the volume is forced to grow
quite large (cf. [62, 63]).

These characteristics are in stark contrast with those of the compactiﬁcation stud-
ied by Denef et al. in [40], where h1,1 = 51, but the volume was stabilized at V ∼ 50.
In [40] the K¨ahler moduli were stabilized at a point where the smallest curve volumes
were 0.2, but even after scaling up the curve volumes to be ≥ 1, one ﬁnds V ∼ 250,
which is vastly smaller than the volumes we ﬁnd in hypersurfaces with comparable h1,1.
A main reason that the volume can be kept small in [40] is that the moduli space is very
symmetric. The Calabi-Yau is constructed by taking identical toric patches and gluing

21

506070809010010.51111.51212.513h1,1log10V(a) Average log10 ξN vs. h1,1.

(b) Average log10 qN vs. h1,1.

Figure 5: Average ξN and qN at large h1,1.

them together, so the divisor and curve structure is simply repeated. The result is that
the overall volume of the Calabi-Yau does not increase dangerously with the curve vol-
umes. In the two-parameter model of [40], denoting the volumes of the two classes of
curves as s and u, the overall volume takes the form V = s3 + 24s2u + 96su2 + 128u3,
which is simple due to the symmetric intersection structure.

5.2 The structure of Q

We have seen that, although the largest eigenvalue(cid:0)

ﬁeld range was still small. Writing Q as

(cid:62)(cid:1)−1

QQ

was often quite large, the

Q = 2π1 + ∆Q ,

(5.6)

the remainder ∆Q is then extremely sparse.26 We found that (cid:0)
largest-eigenvalue eigenvectors of the K¨ahler metric Kij and of(cid:0)

we expect (cf. the analysis in [41, 59]) that if the entries of ∆Q are well-approximated
as i.i.d. stochastic variables, and if these entries are not too sparse,25 then R should
manifest a large degree of enhancement from alignment. In the geometries we exam-
ined, Q is highly structured, and contains an identity matrix of size at least h1,1 − 1;
can in fact
have a very large eigenvalue, but this is only necessary, not suﬃcient, for a large
enhancement of the ﬁeld range. Indeed, we should interpret qN as the maximum pos-
sible enhancement from lattice alignment. The largest enhancement occurs when the
are parallel,
such that ξN = fN qN , where f 2
N is the largest eigenvalue of Kij. If these eigenvectors
are misaligned, the enhancement occurs in a diﬀerent direction in ﬁeld space—one
25Concretely, if e.g. 5% of the entries of a 100 × 100 matrix ∆Q are nonzero, the random matrix
26Between 1% to 7% of the entries in the large h1,1 ensemble are populated, but the nonzero

analysis yields a heavy tail toward large R.
oﬀ-diagonal entries are restricted to a few rows and columns.

(cid:62)(cid:1)−1
(cid:62)(cid:1)−1

QQ

QQ

22

5060708090100−5.6−5.4−5.2−5−4.8−4.6−4.4h1,1log10ξN50607080901001.21.41.61.822.22.4h1,1log10qNthat is irrelevant to the semi-diameter R—and can compress the polytope, ultimately
diminishing the ﬁeld range.

Let us brieﬂy discuss why Q so consistently contains a large identity matrix. First
consider a Calabi-Yau with large h1,1 and small h2,1. Here the large number of rigid
divisors can be understood as a consequence of mirror symmetry. If h2,1 is small, then
the number of points in the dual polytope ∆ is small. Recall that the Hodge numbers
of the toric divisors are computed by counting lattice points interior to faces of ∆,
so as ∆ gets smaller the number of points interior to faces decreases, so more of the
toric divisors have a better chance of becoming rigid.27 For instance, consider the
hypersurfaces in the Kreuzer-Skarke database with h1,1 = 404 and h2,1 = 14. There
are six lattice polytopes corresponding to these Hodge numbers, and in all six at least
402 of the toric divisors are rigid.

On the other hand, this argument does not apply when both h1,1 and h2,1 are
large. For example, we can consider a hypersurface with h1,1 = h2,1 = 100, whose
corresponding ∆◦ polytope has vertices

(cid:110)

(5.7)

(cid:111)

.

di =

(1,−1,−1,−1), (−1,−1,−1,−1), (−1,−1, 6,−1), (−1, 2,−1,−1),
(−1,−1, 6, 2), (−1,−1, 4, 5), (−1, 2,−1, 0), (−1,−1,−1, 11), (−1,−1, 1, 9)

Here 98 of the 104 toric divisors have h•(D,OD) = (1, 0, 0), even though the dual

polytope has 134 points, only 8 of which are vertices. Therefore most of the dual cones
have no interior points, and the non-vertex points are interior to only a few cones. This
seems to be a consequence of the shape of ∆, and is likely related to the requirement
that the origin is the only interior point of ∆: as the number of points included in
the polytope grows, the shape must be more and more skewed. In summary, we ﬁnd
it reasonable to conjecture that in many geometries with large h1,1, Q will have a
large-dimensional identity block, which does not contribute to lattice alignment.

6 Conclusions

In this work we have initiated a systematic analysis of axion ﬁeld ranges in type IIB
compactiﬁcations on Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces in toric varieties. For axions descending
from the Ramond-Ramond four-form C4 in the 4390 geometries that we considered,
we found a maximum ﬁeld range of Rmax = 0.3Mpl. The largest enhancement of R
due to lattice (KNP) alignment in our ensemble was a factor 2.6, in an example with
R (cid:28) Mpl. The numerical value of Rmax should not be overinterpreted, because it can
be made smaller or larger by imposing a more or less stringent requirement for control
of the α(cid:48) expansion; the quoted value results from the requirement that the smallest
27We thank Andreas Braun for inspiration on this point.

23

curve has volume (2π)2α(cid:48). What is clear is that in our examples, with our assumptions,
the geometric ﬁeld range does not parametrically exceed the Planck mass.

To assess the implications of these results, let us reexamine our assumptions and
ask which of them might be relaxed. First of all, it is plausible that in some geometries,
one or more curves could be taken to have volume ti < 1, while keeping other volumes
large, without invalidating the sigma model expansion. In this work we have followed
a conservative, model-independent approach, but a more complete understanding of
perturbative and nonperturbative corrections could allow for much larger ﬁeld ranges.
Second, we considered axion potentials generated by Euclidean D3-branes wrap-

ping divisors D fulﬁlling the rigidity condition h•(D,OD) = (1, 0, 0). That is, we

required that D be a rigid divisor of a smooth threefold, and did not incorporate the
eﬀects of orientifolding, worldvolume ﬂuxes, bulk ﬂuxes, and spacetime-ﬁlling seven-
branes, which could alter the set of instanton contributions to the superpotential. In
particular, strong gauge dynamics on seven-branes, such as gaugino condensation on
a stack of D7-branes coinciding with an O7-plane, provides a plausible mechanism
for allowing larger ﬁeld ranges, and more signiﬁcant alignment, than we found in this
work. The axion periodicity induced by such branes is increased by a factor of the dual
Coxeter number c2(G) of the condensing gauge group G, and many proposals for lat-
tice alignment in string theory invoke stacks of D7-branes with c2 > 1. Systematically
investigating such constructions would be valuable.

Third, we only examined C4 axions in compactiﬁcations of type IIB string theory
on Calabi-Yau hypersurfaces X in toric varieties V , and we insisted that X be favor-
able, meaning that all divisors of X are inherited from V . Each of these restrictions
merits further investigation. Two-form axions have a distinct parametric dependence
on K¨ahler moduli, possibly allowing larger ﬁeld ranges while maintaining control of
the α(cid:48) expansion [63, 64]. We have no evidence to guide speculation about axion ﬁeld
ranges in threefolds that are not favorable hypersurfaces.

Finally, our systematic investigation occurred at small Hodge numbers, h1,1 ≤ 4,
and we studied only a handful of examples with h1,1 up to 100. An analysis based
on random matrix models, with parameters calibrated by the examples found here,
suggests that the maximum ﬁeld range at moderate h1,1 could be large. Whether this
can occur in actual compactiﬁcations depends on a competition between a tendency
for the overall volume V to grow with h1,1, which suppresses the entries of the K¨ahler
metric, and the fact that larger axion charge matrices Q can manifest a greater degree
of lattice alignment. We observed a tendency for Q to be close to the identity in
cases with h1,1 (cid:29) 1, which precludes large enhancements from alignment, due to the
prevalence of rigid toric divisors in these examples.

In summary, in compactiﬁcations of type IIB string theory on Calabi-Yau hyper-
surfaces with h1,1 ≤ 4, Euclidean D3-branes wrapping divisors D that do not intersect
seven-branes give rise to a potential for C4 axions that allows for a small degree of lat-

24

tice alignment, which is insuﬃcient to allow a super-Planckian geometric ﬁeld range,
in the absence of monodromy, in a parameter regime where all curves have volume

≥ (2π)2α(cid:48). Understanding the geometry of axion ﬁeld space in far more general com-

pactiﬁcations is an important problem for the future.

7 Acknowledgements

We thank A. Braun and J. Halverson for discussions, and thank V. Khrulkov, M. Still-
man, and B. Sung for collaboration on the related work [61]. We are particularly
indebted to M. Stillman for many helpful explanations.

References

[1] D. Baumann and L. McAllister, Inﬂation and String Theory. Cambridge University

Press, 2015.

[2] K. Freese, J. A. Frieman and A. V. Olinto, Natural inﬂation with pseudo -

Nambu-Goldstone bosons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65 (1990) 3233–3236.

[3] E. Silverstein and A. Westphal, Monodromy in the CMB: Gravity Waves and String

Inﬂation, Phys.Rev. D78 (2008) 106003, [0803.3085].

[4] L. McAllister, E. Silverstein and A. Westphal, Gravity Waves and Linear Inﬂation

from Axion Monodromy, Phys.Rev. D82 (2010) 046003, [0808.0706].

[5] F. Marchesano, G. Shiu and A. M. Uranga, F-term Axion Monodromy Inﬂation, JHEP

09 (2014) 184, [1404.3040].

[6] L. McAllister, E. Silverstein, A. Westphal and T. Wrase, The Powers of Monodromy,

JHEP 09 (2014) 123, [1405.3652].

[7] T. Banks, M. Dine, P. J. Fox and E. Gorbatov, On the possibility of large axion decay

constants, JCAP 0306 (2003) 001, [hep-th/0303252].

[8] P. Svrcek and E. Witten, Axions In String Theory, JHEP 0606 (2006) 051,

[hep-th/0605206].

[9] A. R. Liddle, A. Mazumdar and F. E. Schunck, Assisted inﬂation, Phys. Rev. D58

(1998) 061301, [astro-ph/9804177].

[10] J. E. Kim, H. P. Nilles and M. Peloso, Completing natural inﬂation, JCAP 0501

(2005) 005, [hep-ph/0409138].

[11] K. Choi, H. Kim and S. Yun, Natural inﬂation with multiple sub-Planckian axions,

Phys.Rev. D90 (2014) 023545, [1404.6209].

[12] T. Higaki and F. Takahashi, Natural and Multi-Natural Inﬂation in Axion Landscape,

JHEP 07 (2014) 074, [1404.6923].

[13] D. E. Kaplan and R. Rattazzi, A Clockwork Axion, 1511.01827.

25

[14] T. C. Bachlechner, M. Dias, J. Frazer and L. McAllister, Chaotic inﬂation with kinetic

alignment of axion ﬁelds, Phys. Rev. D91 (2015) 023520, [1404.7496].

[15] M. Czerny, T. Higaki and F. Takahashi, Multi-Natural Inﬂation in Supergravity, JHEP

1405 (2014) 144, [1403.0410].

[16] S. H. H. Tye and S. S. C. Wong, Helical Inﬂation and Cosmic Strings, 1404.6988.

[17] R. Kappl, S. Krippendorf and H. P. Nilles, Aligned Natural Inﬂation: Monodromies of

two Axions, Phys.Lett. B737 (2014) 124–128, [1404.7127].

[18] I. Ben-Dayan, F. G. Pedro and A. Westphal, Hierarchical Axion Inﬂation, 1404.7773.

[19] X. Gao, T. Li and P. Shukla, Combining Universal and Odd RR Axions for Aligned

Natural Inﬂation, JCAP 1410 (2014) 048, [1406.0341].

[20] I. Ben-Dayan, F. G. Pedro and A. Westphal, Towards Natural Inﬂation in String

Theory, 1407.2562.

[21] T. Higaki and F. Takahashi, Axion Landscape and Natural Inﬂation, 1409.8409.

[22] H. Abe, T. Kobayashi and H. Otsuka, Towards natural inﬂation from weakly coupled

heterotic string theory, PTEP 2015 (2014) 063E02, [1409.8436].

[23] T. Ali, S. S. Haque and V. Jejjala, Natural Inﬂation from Near Alignment in Heterotic

String Theory, 1410.4660.

[24] C. Burgess and D. Roest, Inﬂation by Alignment, JCAP 1506 (2015) 012,

[1412.1614].

[25] I. Garc´ıa-Etxebarria, T. W. Grimm and I. Valenzuela, Special Points of Inﬂation in

Flux Compactiﬁcations, Nucl. Phys. B899 (2015) 414–443, [1412.5537].

[26] G. Shiu, W. Staessens and F. Ye, Large Field Inﬂation from Axion Mixing, JHEP 06

(2015) 026, [1503.02965].

[27] E. Palti, On Natural Inﬂation and Moduli Stabilisation in String Theory, JHEP 10

(2015) 188, [1508.00009].

[28] R. Kappl, H. P. Nilles and M. W. Winkler, Modulated Natural Inﬂation, Phys. Lett.

B753 (2016) 653, [1511.05560].

[29] Planck collaboration, P. A. R. Ade et al., Planck 2015 results. XX. Constraints on

inﬂation, 1502.02114.

[30] M. Kreuzer and H. Skarke, Complete classiﬁcation of reﬂexive polyhedra in

four-dimensions, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 4 (2002) 1209–1230, [hep-th/0002240].

[31] R. Blumenhagen, M. Cvetic, R. Richter and T. Weigand, Lifting D-Instanton Zero

Modes by Recombination and Background Fluxes, JHEP 10 (2007) 098, [0708.0403].

[32] R. Donagi and M. Wijnholt, MSW Instantons, JHEP 06 (2013) 050, [1005.5391].

[33] T. W. Grimm, M. Kerstan, E. Palti and T. Weigand, On Fluxed Instantons and

Moduli Stabilisation in IIB Orientifolds and F-theory, Phys. Rev. D84 (2011) 066001,

26

[1105.3193].

[34] M. Bianchi, A. Collinucci and L. Martucci, Magnetized E3-brane instantons in

F-theory, JHEP 12 (2011) 045, [1107.3732].

[35] M. Cvetic, R. Donagi, J. Halverson and J. Marsano, On Seven-Brane Dependent

Instanton Prefactors in F-theory, JHEP 11 (2012) 004, [1209.4906].

[36] M. Bianchi, G. Inverso and L. Martucci, Brane instantons and ﬂuxes in F-theory,

JHEP 07 (2013) 037, [1212.0024].

[37] X. Gao and P. Shukla, On Classifying the Divisor Involutions in Calabi-Yau

Threefolds, JHEP 11 (2013) 170, [1307.1139].

[38] T. W. Grimm, Axion Inﬂation in F-theory, Phys. Lett. B739 (2014) 201–208,

[1404.4268].

[39] J. P. Conlon and S. Krippendorf, Axion decay constants away from the lamppost,

1601.00647.

[40] F. Denef, M. R. Douglas, B. Florea, A. Grassi and S. Kachru, Fixing all moduli in a

simple f-theory compactiﬁcation, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 9 (2005) 861–929,
[hep-th/0503124].

[41] T. C. Bachlechner, C. Long and L. McAllister, Planckian Axions in String Theory,

JHEP 12 (2015) 042, [1412.1093].

[42] E. Witten, Nonperturbative superpotentials in string theory, Nucl. Phys. B474 (1996)

343–360, [hep-th/9604030].

[43] P. A. Griﬃths and J. Harris, Principles of Algebraic Geometry. Wiley, New York, 1978.

[44] A. Grassi, Divisors on elliptic Calabi-Yau 4-folds and the superpotential in F-theory, I,

alg-geom/9704008.

[45] C. Long, L. McAllister and P. McGuirk, Aligned Natural Inﬂation in String Theory,

Phys. Rev. D90 (2014) 023501, [1404.7852].

[46] V. V. Batyrev, Dual Polyhedra and Mirror Symmetry for Calabi-Yau Hypersurfaces in

Toric Varieties, alg-geom/9310003.

[47] D. Cox, J. Little and H. Schenck, Toric Varieties. Graduate studies in mathematics.

American Mathematical Soc., 2011.

[48] R. Altman, J. Gray, Y.-H. He, V. Jejjala and B. D. Nelson, A Calabi-Yau Database:

Threefolds Constructed from the Kreuzer-Skarke List, JHEP 02 (2015) 158,
[1411.1418].

[49] The Sage Developers, Sage Mathematics Software (Version 6.10), 2016.

[50] J. Rambau, TOPCOM: Triangulations of point conﬁgurations and oriented matroids,
in Mathematical Software—ICMS 2002 (A. M. Cohen, X.-S. Gao and N. Takayama,
eds.), pp. 330–340, World Scientiﬁc, 2002.

[51] M. Kreuzer and H. Skarke, PALP: A Package for analyzing lattice polytopes with

27

applications to toric geometry, Comput. Phys. Commun. 157 (2004) 87–106,
[math/0204356].

[52] A. P. Braun and N.-O. Walliser, A New oﬀspring of PALP, 1106.4529.

[53] C. Long, L. McAllister and P. McGuirk, Heavy Tails in Calabi-Yau Moduli Spaces,

JHEP 10 (2014) 187, [1407.0709].

[54] A. P. Braun and T. Watari, The Vertical, the Horizontal and the Rest: anatomy of the
middle cohomology of Calabi-Yau fourfolds and F-theory applications, JHEP 01 (2015)
047, [1408.6167].

[55] A. P. Braun, Tops as Building Blocks for G2 Manifolds, 1602.03521.

[56] V. I. Danilov and A. G. Khovanskii, Newton Polyhedra and an Algorithm for

Computing Hodge-Deligne Numbers, Mathematics of the USSR-Izvestiya 29 (1987)
279.

[57] R. Blumenhagen, B. Jurke, T. Rahn and H. Roschy, Cohomology of Line Bundles: A

Computational Algorithm, J. Math. Phys. 51 (2010) 103525, [1003.5217].

[58] R. Blumenhagen, B. Jurke, T. Rahn and H. Roschy, Cohomology of Line Bundles:

Applications, J. Math. Phys. 53 (2012) 012302, [1010.3717].

[59] C. Long, L. McAllister and J. Stout, to appear.

[60] S. Dimopoulos, S. Kachru, J. McGreevy and J. G. Wacker, N-ﬂation, JCAP 0808

(2008) 003, [hep-th/0507205].

[61] V. Khrulkov, C. Long, L. McAllister, M. Stillman and B. Sung, work in progress.

[62] F. Denef, M. R. Douglas and B. Florea, Building a better racetrack, JHEP 06 (2004)

034, [hep-th/0404257].

[63] T. Rudelius, On the Possibility of Large Axion Moduli Spaces, JCAP 1504 (2015) 049,

[1409.5793].

[64] T. W. Grimm, Axion inﬂation in type II string theory, Phys.Rev. D77 (2008) 126007,

[0710.3883].

28

