Young Stars & Planets Near the Sun
Proceedings IAU Symposium No. 314, 2015
J. H. Kastner, B. Stelzer, & S. A. Metchev, eds.

c(cid:13) 2015 International Astronomical Union
DOI: 00.0000/X000000000000000X

Young Stars & Planets Near the Sun in 2015:

Five Takeaways and Five Predictions

1Institute for Astronomy, University of Hawaii, 2680 Woodlawn Drive, Honolulu, HI 96822,

USA

Michael C. Liu1

Abstract. I present a highly biased and skewed summary of IAU Symposium 314, “Young Stars
and Planets Near the Sun,” held in May 2015. This summary includes some takeaway thoughts
about the rapidly evolving state of the ﬁeld, as well as some crowd-sourced predictions for
progress over the next ∼10 years. We predict the elimination of 1–2 of the currently recognized
young moving groups, the addition of 3 or more new moving groups within 100 pc, the continued
lack of a predictive theory of stellar mass, robust measurements of the gas and dust content of
circumstellar disks, and an ongoing struggle to achieve a consensus deﬁnition for a planet.

Keywords. stars, brown dwarfs, planetary systems

1. Five Takeaways from 2015

“Every great cause begins as a movement, becomes a business, and

eventually degenerates into a racket.” — Eric Hoﬀer

IAU Symposium 314 has been an incredible testament to the progress made in study-
ing young stars near Earth since the last dedicated meeting on this topic almost 15
years ago, in 2001. Thanks the diligence of conference participants Matthew Kenworthy
and Rahul Patel, short summaries of every conference talk are available on Facebook
(https://goo.gl/pvHUHd). So like many other things in today’s world, the traditional role
of a conference summary talk has been superseded thanks to social media. Thus instead
of trying to recapitulate the content of this week-long meeting, instead I provide here
some personal impressions about the state of the ﬁeld.

1. Learn to live with ambiguity. Stellar characterization is currently experiencing
a renaissance. For young stars, there has been ample progress in key topics such as stellar
age-dating, assessment of moving group membership, and spectroscopic characterization.
However, we should remember that ambiguity is inherent to this ﬁeld. Many of the key
physical properties that we seek may simply be inaccessible.
The star formation process in molecular clouds shows us that most stars form in bound
clusters. The dissolution of such clusters is inevitable over time, and stars are lost from
these primordial groups into the ﬁeld (talk by Lada). Thus, when we ﬁnd young stars
and brown dwarfs in the ﬁeld, we should accept that the birth history for a signiﬁcant
fraction of them will be unrecoverable. In short, not every young star that you ﬁnd should
belong to a moving group.
As the census of moving groups has grown, so have the methods used to assign member-
ship, with the current pinnacle being the quantitative BANYAN method (talks by Malo
& Gagne). Nevertheless, the known groups overlap in both velocity (U V W ) and space
(XY Z). Thus, spatial and kinematic information may not be suﬃcient, on its own, to
ever assign some young stars to a speciﬁc group. Similarly, the challenges of stellar age

1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
6
6
2
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

Liu

dating can be expected to persist, rendering an inherent fuzziness in our ability to assign
ages to young stars in groups and in the ﬁeld.
Finally, even objects that have a large suite of high quality measurements can present a
challenge when deriving physical properties. A very timely example is the recent activ-
ity in determining ages and masses for young brown dwarfs, from the stellar/substellar
boundary all the way into the planetary mass regime. Their young ages are reﬂected in
their spectra through gravity-dependent absorption features. But spectral features alone
are remarkably degenerate for young objects of diﬀerent masses and ages — similar spec-
tra (and colors and magnitudes) between objects do not necessarily correspond to the
similar masses and ages (talk by Allers).

2. Everything gets more complicated the closer you look. Fields of astronom-
ical research often have a natural progression, as the quantity and quality of data grow.
In the early phases, data are sparse and thus simple paradigms of how things work can
be remarkably successful. This is followed by a natural compulsion to deepen and expand
our data, which then sweeps away much of the initial paradigm. At this IAU meeting, we
saw many examples of the growth of complexity. For instance, there is the long-standing
picture of the nearest OB association, Sco-Cen, whereby the history of its star forma-
tion is thought to have sequentially migrated across the region. This simple concept
now needs to be revisited given the more detailed maps of its stellar distribution, which
show a patchwork of diﬀerent ages sewn together on the sky (talk by Mamajek). More
broadly, stellar activity modeling is now building an integrated theoretical framework
that combines interior modeling, angular momentum evolution, mass loss, and magnetic
ﬁelds (talk by Matt). And yet we only need to look at the work being done on our Sun
by the solar physics community to see how far we have to go even given a plethora of
observations.

3. Initial conditions matter. Stellar evolution theory has made signiﬁcant advances
in modeling the range of initial conditions relevant to the earliest stages of star formation,
namely magnetic ﬁelds, accretion, rotation, and photospheric spots (talks by Feiden,
Baraﬀe, and Somers). This is encouraging, given the challenges of modeling these physical
eﬀects. However, such eﬀorts also bring to light the large role that initial conditions
play in the ﬁnal observational properties, even many tens to hundreds of millions of
years after formation. Since initial conditions are largely inaccessible to observations,
and many are fundamentally unknowable (e.g. the early accretion history of a star),
we made be heading towards a situation where the failings between models and data
are naturally attributed to “initial conditions.” Thus, in the same way that historical
astronomers invoked epicycles to explain the discrepancies between the observed motion
of the planets and their theoretical model (namely the Earth-centric universe), we may
have found our own modern epicycles in magnetic ﬁelds, accretion, and rotation.

4. You can’t always get what you want. A prime driver for the identiﬁcation of
young stars near Earth is the beneﬁt for directly imaging exoplanets and circumstellar
disks. Tremendous gains have been made in this arena, both through the identiﬁcation of
the best targets (i.e., the youngest, nearest stars) and the development of high-contrast
adaptive optics systems to distinguish the planets from their bright host stars. This two-
pronged approach has been enormously successful, yielding ≈10 directly imaged planets
to date and with more expected to come imminently from Gemini/GPI, VLT/SPHERE,
and SPHERE/HiCIAO. However, during the same time that target identiﬁcation and
planet imaging capabilities have been improving, concurrent theoretical eﬀorts in exo-
planet formation and evolution have revealed the intense degeneracies of diﬀerent for-
mation models (cold/warm/hot start) when manifested into the available observables
(luminosity, age, magnitudes, temperature, etc.). Thus, like a small child who desires

Young Stars: Five Takeaways and Five Predictions

3

many presents on Christmas but then cannot open the shrink-wrapped boxes to get to
the toys, we may soon achieve our long-sought goal of having a rich census of directly
imaged planets, and yet understanding of how they form and evolve may be elusive.

5. Stop comparing models to data and start actually testing models with
data. “Testing models with data” is a near-ubiquitous statement in proposals seeking
telescope time and funding support. This IAU Symposium has amply shown the advances
both in the theoretical models and the observational data. And yet it also shows the
signiﬁcant gap in our eﬀorts to integrate the two aspects. Many results shown here, and
many more results published in the literature, are not truly tests of the models (Figure 1).
For stellar/substellar evolution, our very rich data sets are paired with state-of-the-art
evolutionary and atmospheric models simply by placing the two on the same plot —
this “chi-by-eye” approach neglects the very rich information available in the numbers,
distributions, and outliers of the data, as well as the more subtle features of the models.
Similarly, in determining physical parameters for young brown dwarfs and exoplanets,
an oft-used technique is to derive temperatures and gravities by overlaying models onto
photometric and spectroscopic data (likewise with higher-order quantities such as clouds
and chemistry, as well as “uncertainties” on all these quantities). This “overlay” method
is inherently an open loop process, with no actual validation of the models used to derive
the physical parameters. We should endeavor to do better in order to yield the full fruit
of our eﬀorts.

Figure 1. Representation of common practices for the interplay of models and data. We need

to do better.

2. Five Predictions for 2025

The future is very bright for study of young stars and planets near Earth given the
wide range of upcoming astronomical facilities on the horizon, e.g., ALMA, Pan-STARRS,
GAIA, eROSITA, JWST, LSST, and a host of ELTs. We can easily see the tremendous
growth in this ﬁeld by comparing the advances from the 2001 meeting and our 2015
gathering. What does the next decade hold?

Everyone et al (2015a) Teﬀ	  Lbol	  Chi by eye Overlay λ	
fλ	
Everyone et al (2015b) 4

Liu

Figure 2. The wisdom of the masses is a common method to discern the answer to questions
that are too diﬃcult for any individual to answer, such as the number of jellybeans in a jar.

In an attempt to forecast the future (and to provide some legacy value for this confer-
ence proceedings), the audience† was presented with 5 key scientiﬁc questions that will
be addressed in the next 10 years. Since prognostication is a diﬃcult task for any one
individual, we invoked the method of the “wisdom of the masses.” A common example
of this method is counting jellybeans in a jar: it is hard for any one person to guess
the right number, but the median of guesses from a large group of people will yield an
accurate result (Figure 2). In this spirit, the audience voted on three possible outcomes
for each of the key science questions. The results are summarized here. (Note that the
vote-counting was done in real-time from the podium, so it may not be exactly accurate.
Not everyone voted on every question, so the total number of votes for each question is
not the same.)

1. How many of the currently known young moving groups will be elimi-
nated? Some of the known YMGs are quite secure in terms of their legitimacy, while
the reality of others is currently being debated. For reference, we consider the 7 groups
adopted in the BANYAN model (TWA, β Pic, AB Dor, Tuc-Hor, Columba, Argus &
Carina) as the current census. CHOICES: None (7 votes), 1–2 (82 votes), >2 (3 votes).
2. How many new young groups will be found within 100 pc? With the revo-
lutionary astrometric datasets from GAIA and LSST, as well as complementary massive
spectroscopic surveys and the new all-sky X-ray mission eROSITA, we can anticipate
signiﬁcant progress in ﬁnding/deﬁning new moving groups. CHOICES: None (2 votes),
1–2 (25 votes), >2 (65 votes).

† This refers to the audience that was actually present for the ﬁnal talk of the conference,

which amounted to 68% of the registered participants.

Young Stars: Five Takeaways and Five Predictions

5

3. Will we have a complete predictive theory of how stars get their mass?
While observational studies have made great advances in mapping the physical conditions
and resulting distributions (in mass, age, position, etc.) of forming stars and their natal
molecular clouds, a predictive theory of the stellar initial mass function remains an
outstanding challenge. CHOICES: Yes (1 vote – Chabrier), No (91 votes).

4. Will we be able to robustly measure the gas and dust masses of circum-
stellar disks? We are at the start of a great observational revolution in sub-millimeter
astronomy thanks to ALMA. To advance studies of disks and the associated planet forma-
tion process, an accurate inventory of the gas and dust components is needed. CHOICES:
Yes (48 votes), No (27 votes).

5. Will we have a consensus deﬁnition of a “planet”? The diversity of objects
that might warrant the prized label of a planet has expanded now that observational
facilities are capable of directly detecting objects down to a few Jupiter masses, both free-
ﬂoating and as companions around higher mass objects. The 2003 deﬁnition produced
by the International Astronomical Union, using the deuterium-burning limit (≈13 MJup)
as the dividing line between planets and brown dwarfs, has amply been shown to be
an inadequate description of nature. Will we have a clear view on this in 10 years?
CHOICES: Yes (14 votes), No (78 votes).

Figure 3. A selection of acronyms presented at this meeting. Top row: PALMS (B. Bowler),
LACEWING (A. Riedel), HAZMAT (E. Shkolnik). Middle row: SACY (P. Elliott), SPHERE
(G. Chauvin), DALI (N. van der Marel). Bottom row: BASS (J. Gagne), BANYAN (L. Malo),
JASON (S. Murphy).

