The Eﬀect of Orbital Conﬁguration on the Possible Climates

and Habitability of Kepler-62f

Aomawa L. Shields1,2,5, Rory Barnes3,5, Eric Agol3,5,

Benjamin Charnay3,5, Cecilia Bitz4,5 Victoria S. Meadows3,5,

ABSTRACT

As lower-mass stars often host multiple rocky planets, gravitational inter-

actions among planets can have signiﬁcant eﬀects on climate and habitability

over long timescales. Here we explore a speciﬁc case, Kepler-62f (Borucki

et al., 2013), a potentially habitable planet in a ﬁve-planet system with a

K2V host star. N -body integrations reveal the stable range of initial eccen-
tricities for Kepler-62f is 0.00 (cid:54) e (cid:54) 0.32, absent the eﬀect of additional,

undetected planets. We simulate the tidal evolution of Kepler-62f in this

range and ﬁnd that, for certain assumptions, the planet can be locked in

a synchronous rotation state. Simulations using the three-dimensional (3-

D) “Laboratoire de M´et´eorologie Dynamique” (LMD) Generic global climate

model (GCM) indicate that the surface habitability of this planet is sensitive

to orbital conﬁguration. With 3 bars of CO2 in its atmosphere, we ﬁnd that

Kepler-62f would only be warm enough for surface liquid water at the upper

1Corresponding author: Aomawa Shields, Department of Physics and Astronomy,

University of California, Los Angeles, Box 951547, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1547.

ashields@astro.ucla.edu.

2NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellow, UC President’s Postdoctoral Program Fellow,

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles and Harvard-Smithsonian

Center for Astrophysics

3Department of Astronomy and Astrobiology Program, University of Washington

4Department of Atmospheric Sciences, University of Washington

5NASA Astrobiology Institute’s Virtual Planetary Laboratory

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

.

 
 
]
P
E
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
2
7
2
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

limit of this eccentricity range, providing it has a high planetary obliquity
(between 60◦ and 90◦). A climate similar to modern-day Earth is possible

for the entire range of stable eccentricities if atmospheric CO2 is increased

to 5-bar levels. In a low-CO2 case (Earth-like levels), simulations with ver-

sion 4 of the Community Climate System Model (CCSM4) GCM and LMD

Generic GCM indicate that increases in planetary obliquity and orbital eccen-

tricity coupled with an orbital conﬁguration that places the summer solstice

at or near pericenter permit regions of the planet with above-freezing sur-

face temperatures. This may melt ice sheets formed during colder seasons.

If Kepler-62f is synchronously rotating and has an ocean, CO2 levels above

3 bars would be required to distribute enough heat to the night side of the

planet to avoid atmospheric freeze-out and permit a large enough region of

open water at the planet’s substellar point to remain stable. Overall, we ﬁnd

multiple plausible combinations of orbital and atmospheric properties that

permit surface liquid water on Kepler-62f.

Subject headings: extrasolar planets—habitability—planetary environments

2

1.

Introduction

NASA’s Kepler mission (Borucki et al., 2006), launched in 2009, identiﬁed more than

4700 transiting planet candidates—over 1000 of which have been conﬁrmed as planets—in
its ﬁrst ﬁve years of observations1. Recent statistical surveys estimate ∼40% of planetary

candidates to be members of multiple-planet systems (Rowe et al., 2014). Analyses also

suggest a low false-positive probability of discovery, indicating that the clear majority of

these multiple-planet candidates are indeed real, physically associated planets (Lissauer

et al., 2012b; 2014). Kepler data also indicate that smaller stars are more likely to

host a larger number of planets per star (Swift et al., 2013), and smaller planets are

more abundant around smaller stars (Howard et al., 2012; Mulders et al., 2015). These

statistical data suggest that systems of multiple small planets orbiting low-mass stars are

a major new planetary population, and one that may be teeming with habitable worlds

(Anglada-Escud´e et al., 2013).

One of the systems of particular interest for habitability orbits Kepler-62 [Kepler

Input Catalog (KIC) 9002278, Kepler Object of Interest (KOI) 701], a K2V star. With a

mass of 0.69M(cid:12) and a radius of 0.63R(cid:12), Kepler-62 hosts ﬁve planets—Kepler-62b-f—with
orbital periods ranging from ∼5 to ∼267 days, and radii from 0.54 to 1.95R⊕ (Borucki
et al., 2013). The inclinations of all ﬁve planets are edge-on (i∼89-90◦). However, nei-

ther their orbital eccentricities nor their planetary obliquities are constrained. The two

outermost planets, Kepler-62e (1.61R⊕) and Kepler-62f (1.41R⊕) receive 120% and 41%

of the amount of ﬂux that Earth receives from the Sun, respectively. Kepler-62e, with
an equilibrium temperature of ∼270 K without an atmosphere, is likely to be too hot

(with an atmosphere) to have liquid water on its surface, although a signiﬁcant amount

of cloud cover could reﬂect incident radiation and cool a planet, if it is synchronously

rotating (Yang et al., 2013; 2014). In contrast, Kepler-62f sits near the outer edge of the

habitable zone, with a relatively low incoming stellar insolation (hereafter “instellation”).

1http://kepler.nasa.gov/ as of February 12, 2016

3

However, the planet could avoid freezing with a suﬃcient greenhouse eﬀect (Kaltenegger

et al., 2013), although there are few measured planetary characteristics that could help

constrain whether habitability is likely.

Based on planet size and instellation, Kepler-62f is the most likely candidate for a

habitable world in this system. While Kepler-62f has a radius of 1.41 R⊕ (Borucki et al.,

2013), its mass is unknown, leaving its density also unconstrained. Recent statistical sur-

veys of a population of Kepler planets with known masses (from companion RV surveys)

found that volatile inventory increases with planet radius (Marcy et al., 2014; Weiss and

Marcy, 2014). However, the most recent bayesian analysis of Kepler planets with RV
follow-up data found that planets with radii (cid:54) 1.6R⊕ are likely suﬃciently dense to be
rocky (composed of iron and silicates), though this study was limited to close-in planets

with orbital periods less than 50 days (Rogers, 2015).

There are many planetary properties that aﬀect the presence of surface liquid water

and perhaps life, and in the absence of suﬃcient observational data, many of the eﬀects

of these properties can only be explored using a global climate model (GCM). Previous

work on the climate modeling of Kepler-62f found that 1.6-5 bars of CO2 would yield

surface temperatures above the freezing point of liquid water, depending on the mass and

surface albedo of the planet (Kaltenegger et al., 2013). However, this work was done using

a 1-D radiative-convective atmospheric code, and did not include a treatment of clouds

beyond a scaling of surface albedo. Additionally, the eﬀect of the orbital architecture and

evolution of this multiple-planet system on the climate of Kepler-62f was not explored.

The eccentricity of a planet could be pumped to high values in the presence of additional

companions in the system (Mardling, 2007; Correia et al., 2012), and the eccentricity of

Kepler-62f is poorly constrained. The eﬀect of diﬀerent rotation rates on atmospheric

circulation was also not examined. Changes in planetary obliquity (Ward, 1974; Williams,

1975; Williams and Kasting, 1997; Dobrovolskis, 2013) and eccentricity (Berger et al.,

1993; Berger et al., 2006) will aﬀect the seasonality and average instellation received by

a planet throughout its orbit, respectively. Simulations have found that a large moon

4

around Kepler-62f could be long lived over timescales necessary for biological evolution,

and could help stabilize the planet’s obliquity and climate (Sasaki and Barnes, 2014),

as the Moon has for the Earth (Laskar et al., 1993). However, large moons may not

be required to stabilize a planet’s obliquity over long timescales, given that variations

in a planet’s obliquity without a moon would be constrained (Lissauer et al., 2012a)

and slowly evolving (Li and Batygin, 2014). Large moons could even be detrimental at

the outer edge of the habitable zone (Armstrong et al., 2014). Additionally, planetary

rotation rate has been shown to aﬀect atmospheric circulation (Joshi et al., 1997; Merlis

and Schneider, 2010; Showman et al., 2011; Showman and Polvani, 2011; Showman et al.,

2013). Quantifying the eﬀect of orbital and rotational dynamics on the climate of Kepler-

62f using a 3-D GCM is therefore crucial for a more accurate assessment of its habitability.

An understanding of the eﬀect of tides on orbital evolution and planetary habitability

is vital given the close proximity of low-mass planets orbiting in the habitable zones of

their stars, and the likelihood of additional planetary companions in these systems. Tides

raised between a star and a close orbiting planet introduce torques on the planet, resulting

in changes in semi-major axis and eccentricity (Barnes et al., 2008; 2009). With an orbital
period of ∼267 days, tidal eﬀects are expected to be weak, but could aﬀect the rotation

rate of the planet (Heller et al., 2011). Recent work has shown that planets orbiting in

the habitable zones of lower-mass stars may not necessarily be synchronously rotating

(Leconte et al., 2015). Bolmont et al. (2014; 2015) found it likely that the rotation period

of Kepler-62f is still evolving (and therefore not synchronized with its orbital period), and

that it could have a high obliquity. However, they used only one tidal model, and others

exist.

Here we combine constraints obtained with an orbital evolution model with a 3-

D GCM to explore the eﬀect of orbital conﬁguration on the climate and habitability

of Kepler-62f, for diﬀerent atmospheric compositions and planetary rotation rates. We

calculated the orbital locations of the inner four planets in the Kepler-62 system relative

to the position of Kepler-62f, for a range of possible initial eccentricities and longitudes

5

of pericenter for this planet. We then used an n-body model to integrate the orbits of all

ﬁve planets given diﬀerent planetary masses, to identify the maximum initial eccentricity

possible for Kepler-62f while still maintaining stability within the planetary system. With

these results we calculated the rotational and obliquity evolution possible for this planet.

The potential habitability as a function of its stable eccentricity was then explored with

a GCM, for atmospheres with Earth-like and high CO2 levels, focusing on the presence

of surface liquid water on the planet over an annual cycle.

2. Models

Here we describe the orbital and climate models used for this study. The existing n-

body model HNBody (Section 2.1) is used to integrate the orbits of multiple planets in a

system orbiting a central, dominant body (in this case a star). Our method for estimating

the masses for the planets is described in Section 2.2.

In Section 2.3 we describe the

models used to explore the tidal evolution of Kepler-62f. The two GCMs used to run

climate simulations of the potentially habitable planet Kepler-62f (with output from the

n-body model as input) are described in Section 2.4.

2.1. HNBody: Modeling the Orbital Evolution of Multiple-Planet Systems

The Hierarchical N-Body (HNBody) package (Rauch and Hamilton, 2002), a set of

software utilities we employed as our n-body model, integrates the orbits of astronomical

bodies governed by a dominant central mass. It is based on the technique of symplectic

integration, an n-body mapping method, developed by Wisdom and Holman (1991), and

performs standard point mass orbital integrations for a given number of planets in a

system.

In the n-body mapping method, the Hamiltonian—a mathematical function used to

generate the equations of motion for a dynamical system—is the sum of the Keplerian

and the interacting contributions to the motion of orbiting planetary bodies (Wisdom

6

and Holman, 1991). The former describes the Keplerian motion of the orbiting planetary

bodies around a central mass (the host star), and the latter describes the gravitational

interactions between the planets themselves.

The evolution of the complete Hamiltonian is determined by alternately evolving

the Keplerian and interacting parts separately in a sequence of steps leading to new n-

body maps of the system, which are composed of the individual Keplerian evolution of

the planets and the kicks due to the perturbations the planets deliver to one another.

The output from HNBody consists of a series of data ﬁles that describe the evolution of

selected orbital parameters over time. In the next section we describe the inputs that

HNBody requires to generate this information.

2.1.1. HNBody: Model Inputs

While we know from transit timing data where each planet in the Kepler-62 system

is relative to our line of sight when it transits its host star, the locations of the other

four planets at each planet’s individual transit time are unconstrained. An accurate

integration of their orbits requires the location of all planets at the same epoch.

The Keplerian orbit of a planetary body can generally be described by a set of six

parameters that characterize the orbit. The parameters we chose as input to HNBody for

each of the ﬁve planets in the Kepler-62 system were the semi-major axis a, the orbital

eccentricity e, the inclination of the orbit i, the longitude of the ascending node Ω, the

longitude of pericenter ω, and the true anomaly f (see Figure 1 and Table 1 for deﬁnitions

of these parameters).

While a and i are constrained from transit observations of the Kepler-62 system

(Borucki et al., 2013), e, Ω, ω, and f are poorly constrained. Given the close proximities

of planets 62b-e (0.05-0.43 AU), which are all within their tidal circularization orbital
radii after 4.5 Gyr (Kasting et al., 1993), and the estimated age of Kepler-62 (∼7 billion

years, Borucki et al., 2013), we assumed e = 0 for these inner four planets. However, we

7

acknowledge that in a multiple-planet system, the tidal evolution of a close-in planet is

coupled to secular interactions with other planets in the system, and these interactions

can cause planet eccentricities to vary (Greenberg and Van Laerhoven, 2011; Laskar et al.,

2012; Hansen and Murray, 2015).

Following from this assumption, ω is undeﬁned, as all points along the orbit are

equidistant from the star. We also assumed Ω = 0 for all planets. This is reasonable
given that i ∼89-90◦ for all planets, thus constituting an edge-on orbit capable of yielding

a transit observable by the Earth. We determined the locations of Kepler-62b-e relative to

Kepler-62f at the same point in time, assuming a range of possible eccentricities between

0.0 and 0.9 and a range of longitudes of pericenter ω between 0 and 2π for Kepler-62f.

In the Appendix we outline the equations that were used to generate the locations of all

planets in the system, using transit data for these planets (Borucki et al., 2013), and the

aforementioned values for the other orbital elements.

2.2. Planetary masses of the Kepler-62 system

HNBody also requires a seventh parameter as input—the planet’s mass relative to its

host star. There are several mass-radius relations in the literature, and we chose two to

explore the eﬀect of planetary mass on the orbital evolution of the Kepler-62 system. We

used the following mass-radius relation determined by Kopparapu et al. (2014) derived

from the exoplanets.org database (Wright et al., 2011):

Mp
M⊕

= 0.968(

Rp
R⊕

)3.2,

Mp < 5M⊕

(1)

This yields a planetary mass of ∼3M⊕ for Kepler-62f. We also ran HNBody integra-
tions with planet masses derived using the following mass-radius (for Kepler-62d, e, and

f) and density ρ (for Kepler-62b and c) relations from Weiss et al. (2014):

Mp
M⊕

= 2.69(

Rp
R⊕

)0.93,

1.5 (cid:54) Rp
R⊕

< 4

(gaseous)

(2)

8

ρ = 2.43 + 3.39(

Rp
R⊕

) g/cm3,

Rp < 1.5R⊕

(rocky)

(3)

The Weiss et al. (2014) relationship resulted in higher masses for Kepler-62b and f, and

lower masses for Kepler-62c, 62d, and 62e, compared to those using the Kopparapu et al.

(2014) treatment. Finally, we ran additional orbit integrations with the maximum mass

limits for all planets, as determined by Borucki et al. (2013). Although these maximum

masses are likely unphysical, they should result in a similar constraint on eccentricity as

more physically plausible mass estimates (such as iron or Earth-like compositions). This

varied approach allows us to address the spread in mass-radius relationships that can

arise given diﬀerent planetary compositions (Wolfgang and Lopez, 2015). The masses for

all ﬁve Kepler-62 planets used as input to HNBody integrations are given in Table 2.

Additional model speciﬁcations include the preferred coordinate system, the class of

particles (based on the scale of the masses and how their interaction is to be taken into

account), and the timestep and total length of integration. We speciﬁed a bodycentric

coordinate system (ex. heliocentric reference frame in the case of the Solar System),

which treats the system as dominated by the mass of the central star. We ran our

HNBody integrations for interactions between “heavy weight particles” (which includes

the star and the planets) for 106 years, with a time step equal to 1/20th and 1/100th of

the orbital period of the innermost planet in the Kepler-62 system. As Kepler-62b has

an orbital period of 5.7 days, we used time steps of 0.29 and 0.06 days, respectively. See

Deitrick et al. (2015) for more details on HNBody. Barnes and Quinn (2004) showed
that in simulations that last one million orbits, only ∼1% of ejections occurred in the
timescale between 105 and 106 years of simulation, with the vast majority of unstable

conﬁgurations occurring within 104 years. While orbital instabilities can arise at any

timescale, one million orbital periods has emerged as a practical reference.

We deﬁned orbital stability as a successful integration in which stable, periodic

amplitude oscillation was present for all planets throughout the entire million years,

the energy was conserved to better than one part in 104, and no planets were ejected

9

from the system. Eccentricities spanning the full range of stability for Kepler-62f were

then used as input to our GCMs. We then ran climate simulations of this planet with a

variety of atmospheric compositions, orbital conﬁgurations and rotation rates to explore

and assess its possible climate states, and to determine the best possible combination of

these parameters for surface habitability.

2.3. Tidal Model

In this section we consider the tidal evolution of Kepler-62f. Bolmont et al. (2014;

2015) examined the rotational evolution of planets e and f and found that the rotation

period of f is not synchronized with the orbital period and that a wide range of obliquities

is possible. However, they only considered circular orbits for planet f. Furthermore, they

used only one equilibrium tide model in which the time interval between the passage of

the perturber and the passage of the tidal bulge is constant, a model we call the constant

time lag (CTL) model (Hut, 1981; Ferraz-Mello et al., 2008; Leconte et al., 2010). In this

section we relax some of these choices and ﬁnd that synchronous rotation of Kepler-62f

is possible.

In addition to the CTL model, we also employed a model in which the angle be-

tween the perturber and the tidal bulge, as measured from the center of the planet,

is constant, a model we call the constant phase lag (CPL) model (Goldreich and Soter,

1966; Ferraz-Mello et al., 2008; Heller et al., 2011). These two equilibrium tide models are

mathematical treatments of tidal deformation, angular momentum transfer, and energy

dissipation due to tidal friction, and both have known ﬂaws (Greenberg, 2009; Efroimsky

and Makarov, 2013). However, they provide a qualitative picture of tidal evolution and

can be used to infer possible rotation states of Kepler-62f.

Both models are one-dimensional with the tidal properties encapsulated in either the

time lag τ for CTL or the tidal quality factor Q for CPL. For both models we assumed

that Kepler-62f has the same tidal properties as the Earth: τ⊕ = 640 s (Lambeck, 1977)

10

and Q⊕ = 12 (Yoder, 1995). The values for Kepler-62f are assuredly diﬀerent, but these

choices are likely not oﬀ by more than an order of magnitude, assuming Kepler-62f has

oceans and continents. A Q of 100 would result in a tidal locking timescale that is less

than ten times longer.

Rather than present the full set of equations, the reader is referred to Appendix

E of Barnes et al. (2013). The salient features are that each model contains 6 coupled

diﬀerential equations that track the orbital semi-major axis and eccentricity, as well as

the rotation rate and obliquity of both bodies. The eﬀects of the other planets in the

system are ignored. Therefore, we consider limiting cases to explore the range of these

eﬀects. The equations conserve angular momentum, and energy is dissipated by the tidal

deformation of the bodies. In this case, tidal eﬀects on the star are negligible.

We used calculated minimum and maximum initial eccentricities for Kepler-62f (Sec-
tion 3); initial spin periods of 8 hr, 1 day, or 10 days; and initial obliquities of 5◦, 23.5◦,
or 80◦. We chose this range of initial conditions for Kepler-62f with the goal of setting

boundary conditions for the climate simulations.

2.4. Climate Modeling of Kepler-62f

Our primary goal in the climate modeling of Kepler-62f was to identify the most

favorable combination of planetary parameters that would result in areas of the planet

with warm enough surface temperatures for liquid water. To determine the scenario for

which the largest habitable surface area is possible, we varied the atmospheric composi-

tion, orbital eccentricity, planetary obliquity, the angle of the vernal equinox (the point

in the planet’s orbit where both hemispheres receive equal instellation) relative to peri-

center (closest approach to the star), and the rotation rate of the planet in our GCM

simulations.

11

2.4.1. Model Inputs to CCSM4

We used version 4 of the Community Climate System Model (CCSM42), a fully-

coupled, global climate model (Gent et al., 2011). We ran CCSM4 with a 50-meter deep,

slab ocean (see e.g., Bitz et al., 2012), with the ocean heat transport set to zero, as done

in experiments by Poulsen et al. (2001) and Pierrehumbert et al. (2011). The ocean is
treated as static but fully mixed with depth. The horizontal resolution is 2◦. There is

no land, hence we refer to it as an “aqua planet”. The sea ice component to CCSM4 is

the Los Alamos sea ice model CICE version 4 (Hunke and Lipscomb, 2008). We made

the ice thermodynamic only (no sea-ice dynamics), and use the more easily manipulated

sea-ice albedo parameterization from CCSM3, with the surface albedo divided into two
bands, visible (λ (cid:54) 0.7 µm) and near-IR (λ > 0.7 µm). We used the default near-IR and

visible band albedos (0.3 and 0.67 for cold bare ice and 0.68 and 0.8 for cold dry snow,

respectively). For more details, see Shields et al. (2013).

Because CCSM does not allow a 267-day orbital period (the actual orbital period

of Kepler-62f), the orbital period was set to 365 days, so the model would still simulate

a full annual cycle. As atmospheric radiative and convective adjustment timescales are

short compared to either orbital period, we do not expect this to make much diﬀerence in

the overall climate. We used CCSM4 for continuity with our previous work, to evaluate

the general climate behavior given changes in orbital parameters, and used LMD Generic

GCM to simulate the climate of a planet with physical characteristics more closely like

those of Kepler-62f. The details of the LMD Generic GCM are given in the following

section.

Kepler-62f receives 41% of the modern solar constant from its star, therefore signif-

2We used three components of CCSM4 in this work: CICE4, CAM4, and a slab ocean. For simplicity,

we refer collectively to this suite of model components as CCSM4 throughout this work, as done in Shields

et al. (2013; 2014). Bitz et al. (2012)—the ﬁrst study to use the CCSM4 slab conﬁguration—also used

this convention.

12

icant amounts of CO2 or other greenhouse gases may be required to keep temperatures

above the freezing point of water on the surface, as is widely assumed for planets near

the outer edge of their host stars’ habitable zones (Kasting et al., 1993). An active car-

bon cycle capable of generating increased amounts of atmospheric CO2 in response to

decreasing surface temperatures (Walker et al., 1981) would be a relatively straightfor-

ward means of maintaining habitable surface temperatures on the planet. More than
∼2 bars of CO2 could accumulate in the atmosphere of a planet with an active carbon
cycle before the maximum greenhouse limit for CO2 is reached (Pierrehumbert, 2010).

Large increases in atmospheric CO2 concentration begin to have signiﬁcant eﬀects on

convection, and the manner in which it adjusts the temperature lapse rate (the rate at

which atmospheric temperature decreases with increasing altitude) on a planet. Addi-

tionally, CO2 condensation becomes likely at levels of 1 to 2 bars, and collisional line

broadening becomes important, increasing the infrared opacity of the atmosphere (Pier-

rehumbert, 2005). These eﬀects are neglected in Earth-oriented GCMs such as CCSM4.

We therefore used the CCSM4 model to simulate only scenarios with an Earth-like at-

mospheric CO2 concentration (400 ppmv), and allowed water vapor to vary throughout

each simulation according to evaporation and precipitation processes. The rest of the

atmospheric composition is preindustrial. We then used an additional GCM—the LMD

Generic GCM—to simulate the climate of Kepler-62f with Earth-like as well as 1-12 bars

of CO2, as LMD Generic GCM contains parameterizations for addressing atmospheres

with high CO2 content.

It was important to consider the possibility that Kepler-62f may not have suﬃcient

atmospheric CO2 to keep surface temperatures above freezing. We therefore explored

alternate means of creating habitable areas of the planet with lower, Earth-like CO2 levels.

Given the eﬀects of planetary obliquity (Ward, 1974; Williams, 1975) and eccentricity

(Berger et al., 1993; Berger et al., 2006) on seasonality and annual global instellation, the

best possible scenario for habitability in the low-CO2 case may be one in which Kepler-

62f has a high obliquity and a high eccentricity. Additionally, an orbital conﬁguration

in which the hotter, summer months in a given hemisphere coincide with the pericenter

13

of the planet’s orbit could amplify the eﬀects of high obliquity and eccentricity. To test

this prediction, we ran simulations with CCSM4 (and LMD Generic GCM), assuming an

aqua planet, with a range of diﬀerent values for these parameters.

We ran 30-year GCM simulations using CCSM4 with the input maximum initial

eccentricity for stable HNBody integrations for Kepler-62f (see Section 3). We also ran

additional simulations with lower eccentricity values to explore the eﬀect of eccentricity on

instellation and planetary surface temperature. We used a synthetic stellar spectrum from

the Pickles Stellar Atlas (Pickles, 1998), with ﬂux in the range of 1150-25000 Angstroms,

and an eﬀective photospheric temperature of 4887 K, which is close to the estimated

eﬀective temperature of Kepler-62 (4925 K, Borucki et al., 2013). The percentage of the

total ﬂux from the star was speciﬁed in each of the twelve incident wavelength bands in

CAM4 (see Table 3), as done in Shields et al. (2013, 2014).

We also ran 40-yr CCSM4 simulations with an Earth-like obliquity of 23◦, and with
an obliquity of 60◦. To explore the inﬂuence of the location of summer solstice relative to

pericenter, we varied the angle of the vernal equinox relative to the longitude of pericenter

(VEP), which governs the diﬀerence in instellation between southern hemisphere summer

and northern hemisphere summer (Fig. 13). Because CCSM4 is parameterized for Earth-

like conditions, we kept the radius, mass, and surface gravity of the planet equal to those

of Earth in these simulations.

2.4.2. LMD Generic GCM

We used the “Laboratoire de M´et´eorologie Dynamique” (LMD) Generic GCM (Hour-

din et al., 2006), developed to simulate a wide range of planetary atmospheres and cli-

mates. It has been used in studies of the early climates of solar system planets (Charnay

et al., 2013; Forget et al., 2013; Wordsworth et al., 2013), and in previous studies of the

climates of extrasolar planets (Wordsworth et al., 2011; Leconte et al., 2013; Wordsworth,

2015).

14

Like CCSM4, LMD Generic GCM solves the primitive equations of ﬂuid dynamics

using a ﬁnite diﬀerence method and a 3-D dynamical core. The radiative transfer scheme

is based on a correlated-k method, with absorption coeﬃcients calculated from high-

resolution spectra generated using the HITRAN 2008 database (Rothman et al., 2009).

A smaller database of correlated-k coeﬃcients was then generated from this spectra using
12×9×8 temperature (T=100, 150, ...600, 650 K, in 50 K steps), log-pressure (p=0.1,
1, 10, ..., 107 Pa), and water vapor mixing ratio (qH2O=10−7, 10−6, ..., 1) grids. These
correlated-k coeﬃcients ensure expedient radiative transfer calculations in the GCM. The

spectral intervals included 38 shortwave (incident stellar radiation) bands and 36 long-

wave (outgoing radiation) bands, with a sixteen-point cumulative distribution function

for integration of absorption data within each band. The radiative transfer equation is

then solved in each atmospheric layer using a two-stream approximation (Toon et al.,

1989). Parameterizations for convective adjustment, and CO2 collision-induced absorp-

tion are included based on work by Wordsworth et al. (2010). Simulations were run

with a two-layer ocean, including a 50m-deep top layer and an underlying 150m-deep

second layer. Both layers are assumed to be well-mixed, with horizontal diﬀusion used

to approximate ocean heat transport by large-scale eddies. Adiabatic adjustment is also

included, whereby the ocean lapse rate is adjusted to maintain a warmer top ocean layer

at all times.

We ran our LMD Generic GCM simulations for 60-200 years (depending on the

amount of CO2 and required model equilibration time) with a horizontal spatial resolution
of 64×48 (corresponding to 5.625◦ longitude × 3.75◦ latitude), with 20 vertical levels. A

blackbody spectrum with the stellar eﬀective temperature of Kepler-62 (4925 K, Borucki

et al., 2013) was used as the host star spectrum. The albedo of snow was set to 0.55 for

the high-CO2 simulations, and 0.43 for the simulations with Earth-like CO2 (to match the

two-band albedo parameterization in CCSM4 for accurate comparison). The albedo of

sea ice was allowed to vary between a minimum of 0.20 and a maximum of 0.65, depending

on ice thickness. We assumed an aqua planet with diﬀerent amounts of atmospheric CO2,

and water vapor that varied throughout each simulation as with CCSM4. We used the

15

radius of Kepler-62f (1.41 R⊕, Borucki et al., 2013), a surface gravity of 14.3 m/s2, based
on a ∼3M⊕ planet (see Section 2.2), a 267-day year, Earth-like (24-hr) and synchronous
(267-day) rotation rates, and the minimum and maximum stable initial eccentricities

possible for Kepler-62f (see Section 3). Additional input parameters for simulations using

CCSM4 and LMD Generic GCM for our work on Kepler-62f are given in Tables 4 and 5.

The results of these simulations, and the implications for the habitability of Kepler-62f

are presented and discussed in the following section.

3. Results

3.1. N-body simulations

Figure 2 shows the fraction of stable orbital integrations performed using HNBody,

assuming diﬀerent initial eccentricities for Kepler-62f, and zero eccentricity for Kepler-

62b-e (see e.g., Barnes and Quinn, 2001). The maximum initial eccentricity for which

stable integrations were possible for greater than 90% of the simulated longitudes of

pericenter, was e = 0.32, assuming the Kopparapu et al. (2014) mass-radius relation. A

higher upper eccentricity limit is 0.36 assuming a smaller mass (equal to that of the Earth)

for Kepler-62f and a larger mass for Kepler-62e. Simulations using a shorter time step of

1/100th of the orbital period of the innermost planet reduced the percentage of longitudes
of pericenter with stable integrations at e = 0.32 by ∼30%, though we still found over

half of our simulated conﬁgurations at this eccentricity to be stable. Stable integrations

were possible for 23% of the simulated longitudes of pericenter at e = 0.33. However,

we did not consider this a large enough fraction of stable conﬁgurations, and consider

e = 0.32 to be the conservative maximum. The maximum stable initial eccentricity
decreased by ∼3%, to e = 0.31, when the Weiss et al. (2014) mass-radius and density

relations were used, and decreased by 28%, to e = 0.23, using the maximum mass limits

for all planets (Borucki et al., 2013). The evolution of the eccentricities of all ﬁve planets

for a stable integration at e = 0.32 for Kepler-62f is shown in Figure 3. All planets

16

exhibited eccentricity oscillations—a characteristic of multiple-planet systems—with a

regular period that remained constant over the entire 106-year integration. Integrations

assuming higher initial eccentricities for Kepler-62f yielded eccentricity evolution that

exhibited irregular oscillatory motion indicative of the occurrence of signiﬁcant orbital
shifts. Consequently, we considered 0.00 (cid:54) e (cid:54) 0.32 to be the maximum allowable range

of initial eccentricities for Kepler-62f.

3.2. Tidal Evolution of Kepler-62f

We began our simulations with e = 0.00 or 0.32, and spin periods and obliquities as

given in Section 2.3. In general tidal evolution is faster for larger eccentricity, larger spin
period, and smaller obliquity. Thus the e = 0.32, 10 day spin period and 5◦ obliquity

cases should evolve most rapidly toward an equilibrium spin state.

In Figure 4 we show the evolution of spin period and obliquity for the two tidal

models. The diﬀerence between the two models naturally produces diﬀerent torques on

the planetary rotation, and thus diﬀerent timescales to reach equilibrium. On the left,

the CTL model shows results very similar to those in Bolmont et al. (2014; 2015) and it

is unlikely that the system has reached a tidally locked state, though tidal de-spinning

is signiﬁcant over 10 Gyr. The right panels show that tidal locking is possible, which is

easily shown by the spin period evolution ﬂattening out at either 267 days or 178 days.

The latter corresponds to a 2:3 spin-orbit resonance which is closer to the equilibrium spin

period for an eccentricity of 0.32. Only the extremely fast rotating and high obliquity

cases do not tidally lock within 5 Gyr in the CPL model.

As the estimated age of Kepler-62 (7 Gyr, Borucki et al., 2013) is uncertain, as well

as the initial eccentricity and rotation state, we conclude that the rotational period of

Kepler-62f can lie anywhere from less than 1 day all the way to 267 days. Similarly, the
obliquity can have a range of values from 0 to at least 90◦. For our assumptions, the

rotation period and obliquity should lie betwen the solid gray line and the dotted black

17

line. Therefore, habitability and climate studies of this planet should account for this

range of rotational states, as well as both small and large obliquities. We present the

results of such studies in the following section.

3.3. Climate simulations

With the present atmospheric level (PAL) of CO2 on Earth (400 ppmv), all CCSM4
simulations with eccentricity e = 0.00−0.32 resulted in completely ice-covered conditions,

with global mean surface temperatures below 190 K. While our CCSM4 simulations were

run with a 365-day orbital period rather than the actual orbital period of Kepler-62f (267

days), a comparison of LMD Generic GCM sensitivity tests run with 267- and 365-day

orbital periods showed equivalent results. Figure 5 shows the annual mean instellation
as a function of latitude for these diﬀerent eccentricities, assuming an obliquity of 23◦.

The average instellation over an annual cycle increases with eccentricity (Berger et al.,

1993; Williams and Pollard, 2002; Berger et al., 2006), in accordance with the following

relation:

S =

Sa√
1 − e2

(4)

where S is the average instellation at the mean star-planet distance; Sa is the instellation

at a given distance a from the star during a planet’s orbit; and e is the eccentricity of

the planet’s orbit (Berger et al., 2006).

If CO2 is eﬃciently outgassed, and the silicate weathering rate is weak, higher levels

of CO2 may be expected to accumulate in the planet’s atmosphere prior to reaching the

maximum greenhouse limit (Kopparapu et al., 2013a;b). Since PAL CO2 was clearly

insuﬃcient to yield habitable surface temperatures for Kepler-62f at its value of incoming

stellar ﬂux, we ran simulations using LMD Generic GCM with CO2 concentrations of

up to 12 bars, at both limits of the stable eccentricity range for Kepler-62f. We let the

amount of water vapor vary (through transport, evaporation, and circulation) during the

course of each simulation. Global mean, minimum, and maximum surface temperatures

18

for each simulation are plotted in Figure 6. With 5 bars of CO2 in the atmosphere,
Kepler-62f exhibits a global mean surface temperature similar to modern Earth, at ∼282
and ∼290 K for the lower and upper stable eccentricity limits, respectively. Surface

temperatures increase with CO2 concentration. However, while the surface temperature

on the planet is 46-50 K warmer (depending on eccentricity) with 5 bars of atmospheric
CO2 compared to the 3-bar CO2 case, it is only an additional 20-25 K warmer (∼308
K) with 8 bars of CO2 in the atmosphere. Further increases in atmospheric CO2 yield

successively smaller increases in surface temperature. We also found that the planetary

albedo reached a minimum at 8 bars, and then began to slowly increase (Figure 7). This

indicates that we are likely approaching the point where the eﬀects of Rayleigh scattering

begin to dominate over the greenhouse eﬀect at this level of CO2. Additionally, the

diﬀerence between minimum and maximum surface temperatures decreases with CO2

concentration, highlighting the role of a denser atmosphere in evening out temperature

contrasts (Wordsworth et al., 2011; Pierrehumbert, 2011).

While the majority of our simulations run with 3 bars of CO2, including that run

at Earth’s present obliquity yielded globally ice-covered conditions (Figure 8), we did
ﬁnd that at an extremely high planetary obliquity (90◦), at the upper eccentricity limit

(0.32), surface temperatures exceeded the freezing point of water over close to 20% of

the planet, though the global mean surface temperature was well below freezing, at 246

K. As shown in Figure 8, the regions with zero ice cover occur in the polar regions,

which receive more instellation than the equator at high obliquities. We also found that,
while high-eccentricity simulations with an obliquity of 60◦ ultimately yielded ice-covered

conditions, maximum surface temperatures reached 273 K during the planet’s orbit at

small orbital distances from its star, which could result in melting of ice formed when the

planet is at more distant points in its orbit.

Figure 9 shows the surface temperature as a function of latitude and longitude for an

LMD Generic GCM simulation with 5 bars of CO2, variable water vapor, and e = 0.00.
With a global mean surface temperature of 282 K, only ∼17% of the planet is ice-covered.

19

Simulations run at e = 0.32 resulted in a higher global mean surface temperature by ∼8
K, and ∼10% less ice cover on the planet.

Given that Kepler-62f could have a wide range of rotation periods, including a syn-

chronous rotation rate, using CCSM4 and LMD Generic GCM we ran simulations of

the planet assuming an Earth-like rotation rate, and a synchronous rotation period, for

400 ppmv (Earth-like), 1-bar, and 3-bar CO2 atmospheres, with both the eccentricity and

obliquity set to zero. Our CCSM4 simulations with Earth-like CO2 levels were completely

ice covered. Figure 10 shows the surface temperature as a function of latitude and longi-

tude for the LMD Generic GCM 1-bar and 3-bar CO2 cases. The synchronous case with
1-bar of CO2 has a global mean surface temperature of ∼206 K, with 99.7% of the planet
covered in ice. There is a small circular region of open water at the substellar point on

the planet (Fig. 10). However, as we have not included sea ice transport in our GCM,

and glacial ﬂow of thick sea ice could cause a planet to become fully glaciated (Abbot

et al., 2011), this region of open water is likely unstable. Furthermore, temperatures on

the night side of the planet reach below the limit for CO2 to condense at 1-bar surface

pressure, indicating the likelihood for atmospheric freeze-out at this atmospheric concen-

tration. The non-synchronous case with the same CO2 level has a global mean surface
temperature that is ∼11 degrees warmer (∼217 K), although it is completely covered in
ice. The 3-bar CO2 cases, while ∼17-18 K warmer, exhibit a similar behavior, with the
non-synchronous case yielding a global mean surface temperature (∼235 K) that is ∼12
K warmer than the synchronous case (∼223 K). Surface temperatures on the night side

of the planet in the 3-bar CO2 case are right at the boundary for CO2 condensation at

this surface pressure and CO2 concentration.

High amounts of CO2 would be a relatively straightforward means of generating hab-

itable surface temperatures on a planet receiving low instellation from its star. However,

the eﬃciency of the carbonate-silicate cycle—which has been shown to be sensitive to a

variety of factors, including the mantle degassing rate of a planet (Driscoll and Bercovici,

2013)—is unknown for Kepler-62f.

If the planet has a low amount of CO2 in its at-

20

mosphere, and lacks an active carbon cycle to adjust the silicate weathering rate with

temperature (Walker et al., 1981), the fraction of habitable surface area may decrease

signiﬁcantly compared to our simulated cases with 3 bars and higher CO2. We therefore

explored diﬀerent orbital conﬁgurations which could improve conditions for habitabil-

ity on a planet that does not have an eﬀective means of increasing its concentration of

greenhouse gases.

Since we do not know the location of pericenter for the orbit of Kepler-62f, we ex-

plored the eﬀect on instellation of changes in the VEP of a planet’s orbit, as this can aﬀect

the hemispherical annually-averaged instellation on a planet (Berger, 1978; Berger et al.,
1993). Figure 11 shows the results of CCSM4 simulations assuming a VEP of 0◦ and 90◦,
with the obliquity and eccentricity held ﬁxed at 23◦ and 0.32, respectively. At VEP=0◦,

the point where both hemispheres receive equal amounts of instellation coincides with the

planet’s closest approach to its star. The diﬀerence in monthly instellation is relatively

small in the southern hemisphere, as it receives equal instellation to that received by the
northern hemisphere at pericenter. At a VEP of 90◦, the southern hemisphere receives a

signiﬁcantly higher percentage of instellation compared to the northern hemisphere dur-

ing its summer months when the planet is at or near pericenter. Because of the planet’s

obliquity, this is when the southern hemisphere is angled toward the star.

The obliquity of Kepler-62f is observationally unconstrained, so we also explored how

diﬀerent obliquities might aﬀect the planet’s climate in a low-CO2 scenario. As shown in
Figure 12, CCSM4 at an obliquity of 60◦ reveals more instellation received in the high-

latitude regions of the planet than in the tropics. The global mean surface temperature is
still signiﬁcantly below freezing at both of the simulated obliquities (23◦ and 60◦), given

the Earth-like CO2 levels and low stellar ﬂux. However, surface temperatures do get above

freezing in the southern hemisphere during its summer months in the high-obliquity case,
with VEP=90◦, in both our CCSM4 and LMD Generic GCM simulations. This means

that summer in the southern hemisphere occurs near the planet’s closest approach to

its star, as shown in the schematic diagram in Figure 13. This results in higher annual

21

mean surface temperatures in this hemisphere during its summer months, compared to

the northern hemisphere. The less extreme cold temperatures in the LMD Generic GCM

simulations are due to a 10-meter maximum thickness limit of sea ice in LMD Generic
GCM, while the CCSM4 sea ice thickness near the poles is ∼30 meters. This causes a

greater temperature diﬀerence between the models at the poles during winter months.

The reduced ice thickness in LMD Generic GCM results in a larger conductive heat ﬂux

through the ice, though this has a lower impact for the warmer climates (e.g. with 3-5

bars and higher CO2), where there is less ice. We calculated the temperature diﬀerence

between the models by equating the residual surface energy ﬂux with the conductive heat

ﬂux through the ice assuming 10- and a 30-m ice thicknesses, and found the diﬀerence to
equal that between the coldest temperatures in LMD Generic GCM and CCSM4 (∼60

K). Both models indicate that an orbital conﬁguration that places the summer solstice

near pericenter may amplify the eﬀects of high obliquity and eccentricity, and this may

cause surface melting to occur during an annual cycle in a low-CO2 scenario. This eﬀect is

also seen clearly in a comparison between LMD Generic GCM simulations with 3 bars of
atmospheric CO2 and VEP of 0◦ and 90◦ (Figure 14), where the latter simulation shows

warmer surface temperatures in the southern hemisphere of the planet. We noticed a
decrease in planetary ice cover of ∼0.6% per 90-degree increase in VEP in our 3-bar CO2
simulations run at 90◦ obliquity and e = 0.32.

4. Discussion

We explored the plausible range of orbital, rotational, and atmospheric states of

Kepler-62f and found that some permit habitability, but some do not. A global mean

surface temperature similar to modern-day Earth is possible throughout the planet’s orbit

with 5 bars of CO2 in its atmosphere, for both lower and upper limits of the range of

stable initial eccentricities (e = 0.00 and e = 0.32), assuming present Earth obliquity.

Our simulations with e = 0 yielded lower global mean surface temperatures, consistent

with average instellation decreasing with decreasing eccentricity. These results indicate

22

that if Kepler-62f has an active carbon cycle, where CO2 is allowed to build up in the

atmosphere as silicate weathering decreases at lower surface temperatures (Walker et al.,

1981), the best possible scenario for habitable surface conditions is one that combines

moderate to high eccentricity with high atmospheric CO2. The maximum CO2 greenhouse

limit for stars with the eﬀective temperature of Kepler-62 occurs at a stellar ﬂux3 that

is well below that received by Kepler-62f (41% of the modern solar constant, Borucki
et al., 2013). Given that 3-5 bars of CO2 are signiﬁcantly below this limit (∼7-8 bars,
Kopparapu et al., 2013a;b), these levels of CO2 are plausible for this planet.

Earlier work exploring the possible climates of Kepler-62f proposed habitable condi-

tions with 1.6 bars of CO2 or more in the planet’s atmosphere (Kaltenegger et al., 2013).

However, this work was not done with a 3-D GCM, and therefore lacked a full treatment

of clouds and atmosphere-ocean interactions. Using a 3-D GCM, we ﬁnd that the only

scenario that permits Kepler-62f to exhibit clement temperatures for surface liquid water

with 3 bars of CO2 in the planet’s atmosphere requires stringent orbital conﬁguration
requirements (high eccentricity and obliquity). With an obliquity of 90◦, open water was
present over just ∼20% of the planet, at polar latitudes. This indicates that it is likely

that more than 1.6 bars of CO2 is required for surface habitability on this planet.

We assumed a ﬁve-planet system for Kepler-62 in our n-body simulations. While

there is currently no observational evidence for additional planets, the existence of other

planets in this system is a clear possibility, and their presence would certainly aﬀect the

eccentricity limit for dynamical stability that we have calculated here. Future discovery

of additional planets in this system with transit timing variations or RV may provide

additional dynamical constraints on the eccentricity of Kepler-62f.

We combined climate simulations using CCSM4 and the LMD Generic GCM to

provide a comprehensive exploration of the possible climates for Kepler-62f given its

n-body model constraints. Previous work using the LMD Generic GCM at a higher

3∼30% of the modern solar constant (Kopparapu et al., 2013a;b)

23

resolution (e.g. 128×96) yielded similar results to those at the resolution we employed
here (64×48), and as we conﬁrmed that the global mean surface temperature had not
changed by more than 1◦K in the last 20 years of simulation, we are conﬁdent that

running our simulations for longer timescales would not change our results signiﬁcantly.

We veriﬁed that simulations assuming Earth-like CO2 levels in both GCMs exhibited

similar (ice-covered) conditions, conﬁrming the robustness of these simulations to various

assumptions.

Our simulations with higher levels of CO2 resulted in increasingly higher surface

temperatures on the planet. As CO2 was increased, the changes in global mean surface

temperatures became progressively smaller. This logarithmic relationship between CO2

concentration and radiative forcing is long established (Wigley, 1987). As regions of the

spectrum become opaque, additional CO2 molecules become far less eﬀective at increasing

temperatures (Shine et al., 1990). Thus, the greenhouse eﬀect starts to become less
eﬃcient as a warming mechanism. Additionally, CO2 is 2.5× more eﬀective as a Rayleigh
scatterer than Earth’s air (Kasting, 1991; Forget and Pierrehumbert, 1997), and this

behavior likely contributes to the loss of warming at higher CO2 concentrations (Kasting,

1991; Kasting et al., 1993; Selsis et al., 2007).

We have not included the eﬀect of CO2 condensation in our simulations. As discussed

in Section 2.4, at levels of 1-2 bars, CO2 condensation is likely to occur in the upper

atmosphere (Pierrehumbert, 2005). Depending on the particle size of CO2 ice grains, this

could result in cooling of the planet due to the albedo eﬀect of CO2 ice clouds (Kasting,

1991), or warming by scattering outgoing thermal radiation back towards the surface of

the planet (Forget and Pierrehumbert, 1997).

Kopparapu et al. (2013a; 2013b) found that the maximum CO2 greenhouse limit is
∼7-8 bars for a star with a similar eﬀective temperature to that of Kepler-62 (Koppa-

rapu et al., 2013a;b). We did ﬁnd that the planetary albedo, which had decreased with

increasing CO2 concentration, started to increase, albeit slowly, at a CO2 level of 8 bars.

However, our simulations with 8-12 bars of CO2 resulted in global mean surface temper-

24

atures that were still higher than those with lower CO2, so we conclude that we had not

yet reached the maximum CO2 limit in our simulations, and that it may be higher than

originally proposed. Kopparapu et al. (2013a; 2013b) used a 1-D radiative-convective

model in their work, and did not include the eﬀect of water clouds or CO2 clouds in their

calculations. While water clouds could increase the planetary albedo, thereby cooling the

planet further, they may also contribute to the greenhouse eﬀect, as both H2O and CO2

have strong absorption coeﬃcients in the near-IR, which increase the amount of radia-

tion absorbed by planets with lower-mass host stars that emit strongly in the near-IR

(Kasting et al., 1993; Selsis et al., 2007; Kopparapu et al., 2013a;b; Joshi and Haberle,

2012; Shields et al., 2013; 2014). Our results with a 3-D GCM do include water clouds,

though not CO2 clouds. A comprehensive study of the eﬀect of CO2 condensation as a

function of particle size would be an important step towards identifying its ultimate eﬀect

on planetary climate. Regardless, dense CO2 atmospheres can be expected to cause more

even distributions of heat across a planet, and reduce the contrast between maximum and

minimum surface temperatures. This is particularly important on synchronously-rotating

planets (Joshi et al., 1997; Edson et al., 2011), where the diﬀerence in instellation on the

day and night sides of the planet is large. We also see this result in our simulations, which

show smaller maximum/minimum surface temperature contrasts with larger amounts of

CO2.

All of our simulations assumed an aqua planet conﬁguration, with no land. Previous

work exploring the habitability of planets composed almost entirely of land and orbiting

G-dwarf stars suggests that due to their lower thermal inertia and drier atmospheres, land

planets are less susceptible to snowball episodes than aqua planets, requiring 13% less

instellation to freeze over entirely (Abe et al., 2011). The presence of land could certainly

aﬀect the silicate weathering rate and atmospheric concentration of CO2 on a planet.

However, Abbot et al. (2012) found that climate weathering feedback does not have a

strong dependence on land fraction, as long as the land fraction is at least 0.01. Edson

et al. (2012) found that the amount of CO2 that accumulates in the atmosphere of a

synchronously-rotating planet could be much greater if the substellar point is located over

25

an ocean-covered area of the planet, where continental weathering is minimal, although

atmospheric CO2 concentration could still be limited by seaﬂoor weathering processes

(Edson et al., 2012).

Including land in future simulations of a synchronously-rotating

Kepler-62f, using a GCM with a carbonate-silicate cycle included (rather than assigning a

prescribed atmospheric CO2 concentration as we have done here) would be a valuable step

towards assessing the role of surface type in regulating the atmospheric CO2 inventory

on synchronously-rotating planets.

We have concentrated on CO2 as the primary greenhouse gas in our study of the in-

ﬂuence of atmospheric composition on the habitability of Kepler-62f. Previous work has

highlighted the role of molecular hydrogen as an incondensable greenhouse gas that, due

to collision-induced absorption, could allow planets to maintain clement temperatures

for surface liquid water far beyond the traditional outer edge of a star’s habitable zone

(Pierrehumbert and Gaidos, 2011). Given that the orbital distance of Kepler-62f is inte-

rior to the limit for which an entire primordial H2 envelope could be lost due to extreme

ultraviolet-driven atmospheric escape (assuming a 3-4 M⊕ planet), even at apocenter (at

an eccentricity of 0.32), an H2 greenhouse may not be an eﬀective mechanism for warming

this planet. Exploring this mechanism in detail in the context of the Kepler-62 system

would be an interesting topic for future study.

4.1. Additional orbital inﬂuences on the climate of Kepler-62f

High amounts of CO2 in the atmosphere of Kepler-62f would provide for consistently

habitable surface conditions throughout the planet’s orbit at its level of instellation,

thereby oﬀering the best chances for sustained surface liquid water and life. However,

given the uncertainty of an active carbonate-silicate cycle operating on this planet, we

explored orbital parameters that may periodically improve surface conditions during the

course of an orbit in the event of low-CO2 atmospheric conditions similar to the Earth,

though these conditions would be short-lived. Planetary habitability throughout the

course of an eccentric orbit has been shown to be most strongly aﬀected by the time-

26

averaged global instellation—provided there is an ocean to contribute to the planet’s

heat capacity—which is greater at higher eccentricities (Williams and Pollard, 2002).

Therefore, although high-eccentricity planets may spend signiﬁcant fractions of an orbit

outside of their stars’ habitable zones, high eccentricity may help these planets maintain

habitable surface conditions over an annual cycle (Kopparapu et al., 2013a;b), though

habitability could be aﬀected by tidal forces and resultant heating at close distances

from the star during a planet’s eccentric orbit (Driscoll and Barnes, 2015). Planets on

eccentric orbits could undergo freeze/thaw cycles depending on the orbital distance of

apocenter and pericenter, respectively, and this could also have important implications

for planetary habitability. Limbach and Turner (2015) found that catalogued RV systems

of higher multiplicity exhibit lower eccentricities. However, as these are statistical results,

they do not mean that all such systems have low eccentricities. Furthermore, they used

data from RV systems of more massive planets than those in the Kepler-62 system. There

are currently no observational constraints on the eccentricities of low-mass, long-period

extrasolar planetary systems. Our calculated eccentricity of 0.32 is entirely plausible for

Kepler-62f, and consistent with observations.

Given that the obliquity, rotation rate, and the VEP for Kepler-62f are unknown, we

explored how these factors might also inﬂuence surface habitability on this planet. Our

results indicate that high obliquity, which has been shown to increase seasonality and

stability against snowball episodes (Williams and Kasting, 1997; Williams and Pollard,

2003; Spiegel et al., 2009), results in even higher seasonality at high eccentricity, due to

the larger diﬀerence between the orbital distance at pericenter and apocenter (Williams

and Pollard, 2002). This eﬀect is more pronounced in the southern hemisphere during
its summer months, when the angle of the vernal equinox relative to pericenter is 90◦,

so that the planet’s high obliquity signiﬁcantly increases the instellation received by this
hemisphere. If we had simulated VEP=270◦ we would expect the northern hemisphere to

exhibit a similar eﬀect, as this is a symmetric problem. Though we did not include ocean

heat transport in our high-obliquity CCSM4 simulations that yielded global ice cover,

previous work has found that snowball collapse is possible at high obliquity regardless of

27

the presence of a dynamical ocean with ocean heat transport (Ferreira et al., 2014).

We identiﬁed several orbital conﬁgurations that, though rare, may cause temporarily

habitable surface conditions during the course of an orbit given Earth-like levels of CO2.

Even on an ice-covered high-obliquity planet, our simulations using both models showed

that surface temperatures reached above the freezing point of water during southern

hemisphere summer months, which could cause surface melting. Our LMD Generic GCM

simulations with 3 bars of CO2 also resulted in higher surface temperatures in the summer
hemisphere with a higher VEP of 90◦ compared to 0◦. The VEP can therefore amplify

the warming eﬀects of high obliquity and eccentricity, and may keep ice from forming

at the poles, or reducing an ice sheet formed during the planet’s orbit.

If the planet

experiences large oscillations in obliquity, polar ice could be prevented from forming

on both hemispheres over an annual cycle, allowing habitable surface conditions to be

maintained on planets with large eccentricities (Armstrong et al., 2014).

The weaker Coriolis force on synchronously-rotating planets permits rapid heat trans-

port by advection compared to radiative heat transfer for surface pressures signiﬁcantly
greater than ∼0.2 bars (Showman et al., 2013). Combined with suﬃcient greenhouse gas

concentration levels (Joshi et al., 1997), this can prevent atmospheric freeze out on the

night side of the planet, through the transport of high amounts of heat from the day side

to the night side (Pierrehumbert, 2011). Our results have shown that a synchronously

rotating Kepler-62f exhibits a lower global mean surface temperature than one that is

non-synchronous. This may underscore a lack of suﬃcient heat distribution between the

day and night sides of the planet at the levels of CO2 which we have simulated at this

planet’s instellation. Horizontal heat transport is less eﬀective for smaller amounts of

CO2 (Wordsworth et al., 2011), which we conﬁrmed in the 1-bar CO2 case, where the

ratio between the outgoing thermal ﬂuxes on the night side and day side (a proxy for

the redistribution eﬃciency) is lower. This caused larger diﬀerences between maximum

and minimum surface temperatures on the day and night sides of the 1-bar CO2 planet

compared to the 3-bar CO2 case.

28

Additionally, though we did not measure signiﬁcant diﬀerences in planetary albedo

between the synchronous and non-synchronous climate simulations at a given CO2 con-

centration, Kepler-62f lies near the outer edge of its star’s habitable zone, receiving 41%

instellation. On more temperate synchronously-rotating planets than we have simulated

here, the increased cloud cover that will likely result on the day side of a synchronously-

rotating planet with an ocean could increase the overall planetary albedo and reduce

surface temperatures (Yang et al., 2013; 2014). The strength of this eﬀect on distant

worlds would depend on the greenhouse gas concentration and the behavior of the hy-

drological cycle. The results presented here imply that synchronously-rotating planets

may require more CO2 in their atmospheres than their non-synchronous counterparts to

generate equivalent global mean surface temperatures farther out in their star’s habitable

zones, and this could aﬀect planetary habitability.

The n-body model used in this work does not include the eﬀect of tides. With an

orbital period of 267 days, tides are likely to be weak on Kepler-62f, but they could aﬀect

its rotation period (see Section 3.2), and would certainly be an important consideration

for potentially habitable planets orbiting even closer to their stars. Tidal eﬀects can

lead to changes in orbital parameters, and may induce capture into resonances in spin-

orbit period, depending on the planet’s eccentricity and its equatorial ellipticity (the

equilibrium shape attained as a result of the gravitational interaction between the planet

and the host star, Rodr´ıguez et al., 2012). Our work here explored the extreme case of

spin-orbit resonance—synchronous rotation. Non-synchronous resonance conﬁgurations,

such as the 3:2 spin-orbit resonance observed on the planet Mercury (Goldreich and Peale,

1966; Correia and Laskar, 2004) are also possible, and may be sustained on a planet in

a non-circular orbit over long timescales (Rodr´ıguez et al., 2012). Such conﬁgurations

become more likely at larger orbital eccentricities (Malhotra, 1998; Correia and Laskar,

2004), and are worth exploring.

The habitability requirements we have determined here did not account for any

uncertainties in measured parameters such as stellar luminosity and semi-major axis.

29

Including such uncertainties might permit a larger habitable surface area for an even

wider range of parameters.

Using constraints from n-body models as input to GCM simulations permits the

exploration of the impact on climate of the gravitational interactions inherent to a grow-

ing population of exoplanets—potentially habitable planets orbiting in multiple-planet

systems around low-mass stars—and the resulting prospects for the habitability of these

worlds. The techniques presented here can be applied to planets orbiting stars of any

spectral type, with a range of possible atmospheric and surface compositions and dynam-

ical architectures. They can be used to help assess the potential habitability of newly

discovered planets for which observational measurements are still limited, and can be

easily modiﬁed to incorporate new observational data that are acquired for these planets

in the future. While future missions such as the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite

(TESS, Ricker et al., 2009; 2014) and the James Webb Space Telescope (Gardner et al.,

2006) will not be capable of characterizing distant planets like Kepler-62f, the procedure

we have carried out here serves as excellent preparation for closer planets that could be

observed and characterized with these missions. These methods will help identify which

among the habitable-zone planets discovered to date could exhibit conditions conducive

to the presence of surface liquid water for the widest range of atmospheric and orbital

conditions, making them priorities for these and other future characterization missions.

5. Conclusions

We carried out a comprehensive exploration of the orbital evolution of Kepler-62f

using an n-body model, and found that the range of eccentricities that Kepler-62f could
have while maintaining dynamical stability within the system was 0.00 (cid:54) e (cid:54) 0.32. The

upper limit of 0.32 is consistent with the analytic Hill Stability criterion (cf. Gladman,

1993; Barnes and Greenberg, 2006). A higher upper eccentricity limit is 0.36 assuming a

smaller mass (equal to that of the Earth) for Kepler-62f and a larger mass for Kepler-62e.

The constraints from the n-body model were used as input to 3-D climate simulations to

30

explore the possible climates and habitability of Kepler-62f.

At 41% of the modern solar constant, this planet will likely require an active carbonate-

silicate cycle (or some other means by which to produce high greenhouse gas concentra-

tions) to maintain clement conditions for surface liquid water. With 3 bars of CO2 in its

atmosphere and an Earth-like rotation rate, 3-D climate simulations of Kepler-62f yielded
open water across ∼20% of the planetary surface at the upper limit of the stable eccentric-
ity range possible for the planet, provided that it has an extreme obliquity (90◦). With 5

bars of CO2 in its atmosphere, a global mean surface temperature similar to modern-day

Earth is possible for the full range of stable eccentricities and at the present obliquity

of the Earth. This higher CO2 level is therefore optimal, as it is below the maximum

CO2 greenhouse limit, and generates habitable surface conditions for a wide range of

orbital conﬁgurations throughout the entire orbital period of the planet. If Kepler-62f is

synchronously rotating, CO2 concentrations above 3 bars would be required to distribute

suﬃcient heat to the night side of the planet to avoid atmospheric freeze-out.

We have also shown that surface temperatures above the freezing point of water

during an annual cycle are possible on the planet if it has a low (Earth-like) level of CO2,
provided that the obliquity is high (60◦ or greater) compared to an Earth-like obliquity
(23◦), and the summer solstice at a given hemisphere occurs at or near the planet’s closest

approach to its star. This is a rare but possible orbital conﬁguration that could cause

surface melting of an ice sheet formed during a planet’s orbit, and amplify the eﬀects

of moderate to high eccentricity and obliquity. While less optimal than the high-CO2

case, this may result in periodically habitable surface conditions in a low-CO2 scenario

for Kepler-62f.

6. Acknowledgments

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation

under Award No. 1401554, and Grant Nos. DGE-0718124 and DGE-1256082, and by

31

a University of California President’s Postdoctoral Fellowship. This work was facili-

tated through the use of advanced computational, storage, and networking infrastruc-

ture provided by the Hyak supercomputer system at the University of Washington. We

would also like to acknowledge high-performance computing support from Yellowstone

(ark:/85065/d7wd3xhc) provided by NCAR’s Computational and Information Systems

Laboratory, sponsored by the National Science Foundation. This work was performed

as part of the NASA Astrobiology Institute’s Virtual Planetary Laboratory Lead Team,

supported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration through the NASA

Astrobiology Institute under solicitation NNH12ZDA002C and Cooperative Agreement

Number NNA13AA93A. The authors wish to thank Dorian Abbot and an anonymous ref-

eree for their comments and suggestions, which improved the paper. B.C. acknowledges

support from an appointment to the NASA Postdoctoral Program at NAI Virtual Plan-

etary Laboratory, administered by Oak Ridge Aﬃliated Universities. R.B. acknowledges

support from NSF grant AST-1108882. A.S. thanks Brad Hansen, Jonathan Mitchell,

John Johnson, Russell Deitrick, and Tom Quinn for helpful discussions regarding this

work.

7. Author Disclosure Statement

No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.

32

APPENDIX

Determining Initial Planet Locations

The location of a planet can be expressed in terms of the planet’s true anomaly, the

longitude measured from the direction of the pericenter of the planet’s orbit. We used

the transit times for each of the ﬁve Kepler-62 planets and calculated the true anomaly

values for all ﬁve planets at the same epoch, using one planet’s location as a reference

point.

As stated in Section 2.1.1, we do not know the eccentricity of Kepler-62f (we assumed

e = 0 for Kepler-62b-e). The angular velocity and location of a planet in its orbit depends

on its eccentricity, following Kepler’s second law; therefore, we do not know the pericenter

of the orbit for Kepler-62f. We therefore calculated the true anomaly for a range of

possible eccentricities for Kepler-62f. Here we outline the equations used in our model to

generate the true anomaly values, given assumed values for other key orbital parameters.

Time of pericenter passage

The time t(fi) that it takes for a planet to go from some initial reference point (to which it

arrives at to) to the point of closest approach (where it arrives at tperi), can be calculated

(cid:20)(1 − e2)1/2 tan(fi/2)

(cid:21)(cid:27)

.

1 + e

using the following formula given by Sudarsky et al. (2005):

−(1 − e2)1/2P

t(fi) =

2π

1 + e cos fi

− 2(1 − e2)−1/2 tan−1

(cid:26) e sin fi

(A1)
Taking the relation that t(fi) = to − tperi, we rearranged (A1) to yield an expression for
tperi:

tperi = to +

(1 − e2)1/2P

e sin fi

2π

1 + e cos fi

− P
π

tan−1

(cid:20)(1 − e2)1/2 tan(fi/2)

(cid:21)

1 + e

.

(A2)

To ﬁnd each planet’s true anomaly, it is necessary to ﬁrst determine the location of

each planet when it transits its star, fi. Using Figure 1 for reference, with Θ = f + ω = 0

when the planet m2 passes through the sky plane (the plane perpendicular to the reference

33

direction), at the time the planet passes behind the star, Θ = π/2. By extension, the

planet is in front of the star and transiting at Θ = 3π/2. Therefore, for any value of ω,
fi = 3π/2− ω. Since we have assumed ω = 0 for all planets except Kepler-62f, fi = 3π/2
for these planets. Values of fi for Kepler-62f varied depending on the value of ω. Values

used in Equation (A2) for the orbital period P , the transit time for each planet to, e, and

fi are given in Table 6. With these values, tperi was calculated for each planet.

From Mean Anomaly to True Anomaly

The location of a planet in its orbit around a central star is generally described by one

of three angular parameters: the mean anomaly, the eccentric anomaly, and the true

anomaly. The mean anomaly is a function of the average angular velocity of the planet,

and therefore does not provide a precise location. Rather, the mean anomaly is an

approximate location that is easy to calculate:

M = n(to − tperi),

(A3)

where n = 2π/P . We used the ﬁrst transit time for Kepler-62f as the reference point to

(see Table 6).

The eccentric anomaly E is an angle measured from a line through the focus of the

planet’s elliptical orbit to the radius of a circle that passes through the pericenter of the

ellipse. It is related to the mean anomaly and the orbital eccentricity e through Kepler’s

equation:

M = E − esinE.

(A4)

As this equation cannot be solved analytically, we solved it numerically following the

method provided by Danby and Burkardt (1983). With calculated values of E for our

assigned eccentricities, the true anomaly was calculated using the following relation:

f = 2tan−1

tan(E/2)

.

(A5)

(cid:35)

(cid:34)(cid:18) 1 + e

1 − e

(cid:19)1/2

34

Eq. (A5) allows us to calculate the relative positions of all the planets at any given

time so that our n-body integrations will realistically reproduce the system’s orbital

evolution.

35

REFERENCES

Abbot, D. S., Cowan, N. B., and Ciesla, F. J. (2012).

Indication of Insensitivity of

Planetary Weathering Behavior and Habitable Zone to Surface Land Fraction.

ApJ , 756:178.

Abbot, D. S. G., Voigt, A., and Koll, D. (2011). The Jormungand global climate state

and implications for Neoproterozoic glaciations. J. Geophys. Res., 116:D18103.

URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2011JD015927

Abe, Y., Abe-Ouchi, A., Sleep, N. H., and Zahnle, K. J. (2011). Habitable Zone Limits

for Dry Planets. Astrobiology, 11:443–460.

Anglada-Escud´e, G., Tuomi, M., Gerlach, E., Barnes, R., Heller, R., Jenkins, J. S.,

Wende, S., Vogt, S. S., Butler, R. P., Reiners, A., and Jones, H. R. A. (2013). A

dynamically-packed planetary system around GJ 667C with three super-Earths in

its habitable zone. AandA, 556:A126.

Armstrong, J. C., Barnes, R., Domagal-Goldman, S., Breiner, J., Quinn, T. R., and

Meadows, V. S. (2014). Eﬀects of Extreme Obliquity Variations on the Habitability

of Exoplanets. Astrobiology, 14(4):277–291.

Barnes, R., and Greenberg, R. (2006). Stability Limits in Extrasolar Planetary Systems.

ApJ , 647:L163–L166.

Barnes, R., Jackson, B., Greenberg, R., and Raymond, S. N. (2009). Tidal Limits to

Planetary Habitability. ApJ , 700:L30–L33.

Barnes, R., Mullins, K., Goldblatt, C., Meadows, V. S., Kasting, J. F., and Heller,

R. (2013). Tidal Venuses: Triggering a Climate Catastrophe via Tidal Heating.

Astrobiology, 13:225–250.

Barnes, R., and Quinn, T. (2001). A Statistical Examination of the Short-Term Stability

of the Upsilon Andromedae Planetary System. ApJ , 550:884–889.

36

Barnes, R., and Quinn, T. (2004). The (In)stability of Planetary Systems. ApJ , 611:

494–516.

Barnes, R., Raymond, S. N., Jackson, B., and Greenberg, R. (2008). Tides and the

Evolution of Planetary Habitability. Astrobiology, 8:557–568.

Berger, A., Loutre, M. F., and M´elice, J. L. (2006). Equatorial insolation: from precession

harmonics to eccentricity frequencies. Climate of the Past, 2(2):131–136.

URL http://www.clim-past.net/2/131/2006/

Berger, A., Loutre, M.-F., and Tricot, C. (1993). Insolation and earth’s orbital periods.

J. Geophys. Res., 98:10341.

Berger, A. L. (1978). Long-term variations of caloric insolation resulting from the Earth’s

orbital elements. Quaternary Research, 9:139–167.

Bitz, C. M., Shell, K. M., Gent, P. R., Bailey, D. A., Danabasoglu, G., Armour, K. C.,

Holland, M. M., and Kiehl, J. T. (2012). Climate Sensitivity of the Community

Climate System Model, Version 4. Journal of Climate, 25(9):3053–3070.

Bolmont, E., Raymond, S. N., Leconte, J., Correia, A., and Quintana, E. (2014). Tidal

evolution in multiple planet systems: application to Kepler-62 and Kepler-186.

ArXiv e-prints.

Bolmont, E., Raymond, S. N., Leconte, J., Hersant, F., and Correia, A. C. M. (2015).

Mercury-T: A new code to study tidally evolving multi-planet systems. Applica-

tions to Kepler-62. ArXiv e-prints.

Borucki, W. J., Agol, E., Fressin, F., Kaltenegger, L., Rowe, J., Isaacson, H., Fischer, D.,

Batalha, N., Lissauer, J. J., Marcy, G. W., Fabrycky, D., D´esert, J.-M., Bryson,

S. T., Barclay, T., Bastien, F., Boss, A., Brugamyer, E., Buchhave, L. A., Burke,

C., Caldwell, D. A., Carter, J., Charbonneau, D., Crepp, J. R., Christensen-

Dalsgaard, J., Christiansen, J. L., Ciardi, D., Cochran, W. D., DeVore, E., Doyle,

L., Dupree, A. K., Endl, M., Everett, M. E., Ford, E. B., Fortney, J., Gautier,

37

T. N., Geary, J. C., Gould, A., Haas, M., Henze, C., Howard, A. W., Howell, S. B.,

Huber, D., Jenkins, J. M., Kjeldsen, H., Kolbl, R., Kolodziejczak, J., Latham,

D. W., Lee, B. L., Lopez, E., Mullally, F., Orosz, J. A., Prsa, A., Quintana, E. V.,

Sanchis-Ojeda, R., Sasselov, D., Seader, S., Shporer, A., Steﬀen, J. H., Still, M.,

Tenenbaum, P., Thompson, S. E., Torres, G., Twicken, J. D., Welsh, W. F., and

Winn, J. N. (2013). Kepler-62: A Five-Planet System with Planets of 1.4 and 1.6

Earth Radii in the Habitable Zone. Science, 340:587–590.

Borucki, W. J., Koch, D., Basri, G., Brown, T., Caldwell, D., Devore, E., Dunham,

E., Gautier, T., Geary, J., Gilliland, R., Gould, A., Howell, S., and Jenkins, J.

(2006). The Kepler Mission: A Transit-Photometry Mission to Discover Terrestrial

Planets. ISSI Scientiﬁc Reports Series, 6:207–220.

Charnay, B., Forget, F., Wordsworth, R., Leconte, J., Millour, E., Codron, F., and Spiga,

A. (2013). Exploring the faint young Sun problem and the possible climates of the

Archean Earth with a 3-D GCM. Journal of Geophysical Research (Atmospheres),

118:10414.

Correia, A. C. M., Bou´e, G., and Laskar, J. (2012). Pumping the Eccentricity of Exo-

planets by Tidal Eﬀect. ApJ , 744:L23.

Correia, A. C. M., and Laskar, J. (2004). Mercury’s capture into the 3/2 spin-orbit

resonance as a result of its chaotic dynamics. Nature, 429:848–850.

Danby, J. M. A., and Burkardt, T. M. (1983). The solution of Kepler’s equation. I.

Celestial Mechanics, 31:95–107.

Deitrick, R., Barnes, R., McArthur, B., Quinn, T. R., Luger, R., Antonsen, A., and

Benedict, G. F. (2015). The Three-dimensional Architecture of the Upsilon An-

dromedae Planetary System. ApJ , 798:46.

Dobrovolskis, A. R. (2013).

Insolation on exoplanets with eccentricity and obliquity.

Icarus, 226:760–776.

38

Driscoll, P., and Barnes, R. (2015). Tidal heating of Earth-like exoplanets around M

stars: Thermal, magnetic, and orbital evolutions. ArXiv e-prints.

Driscoll, P., and Bercovici, D. (2013). Divergent evolution of Earth and Venus: Inﬂuence

of degassing, tectonics, and magnetic ﬁelds. Icarus, 226:1447–1464.

Edson, A., Lee, S., Bannon, P., Kasting, J. F., and Pollard, D. (2011). Atmospheric

circulations of terrestrial planets orbiting low-mass stars. Icarus, 212:1–13.

Edson, A. R., Kasting, J. F., Pollard, D., Lee, S., and Bannon, P. R. (2012). The

Carbonate-Silicate Cycle and CO2/Climate Feedbacks on Tidally Locked Terres-

trial Planets. Astrobiology, 12:562–571.

Efroimsky, M., and Makarov, V. V. (2013). Tidal Friction and Tidal Lagging. Applica-

bility Limitations of a Popular Formula for the Tidal Torque. ApJ , 764:26.

Ferraz-Mello, S., Rodr´ıguez, A., and Hussmann, H. (2008). Tidal friction in close-in

satellites and exoplanets: The Darwin theory re-visited. Celestial Mechanics and

Dynamical Astronomy, 101:171–201.

Ferreira, D., Marshall, J., O’Gorman, P. A., and Seager, S. (2014). Climate at high-

obliquity. Icarus, 243:236–248.

Forget, F., and Pierrehumbert, R. T. (1997). Warming Early Mars with Carbon Dioxide

Clouds That Scatter Infrared Radiation. Science, 278:1273.

Forget, F., Wordsworth, R., Millour, E., Madeleine, J.-B., Kerber, L., Leconte, J., Marcq,

E., and Haberle, R. M. (2013). 3D modelling of the early martian climate under

a denser CO2 atmosphere: Temperatures and CO2 ice clouds. Icarus, 222:81–99.

Gardner, J. P., Mather, J. C., Clampin, M., Doyon, R., Greenhouse, M. A., Hammel,

H. B., Hutchings, J. B., Jakobsen, P., Lilly, S. J., Long, K. S., Lunine, J. I.,

McCaughrean, M. J., Mountain, M., Nella, J., Rieke, G. H., Rieke, M. J., Rix, H.-

W., Smith, E. P., Sonneborn, G., Stiavelli, M., Stockman, H. S., Windhorst, R. A.,

39

and Wright, G. S. (2006). The James Webb Space Telescope. Space Sci. Rev., 123:

485–606.

Gent, P. R., Danabasoglu, G., Donner, L. J., Holland, M. M., Hunke, E. C., Jayne, S. R.,

Lawrence, D. M., Neale, R. B., Rasch, P. J., Vertenstein, M., Worley, P. H., Yang,

Z., and Zhang, M. (2011). The Community Climate System Model Version 4.

Journal of Climate, 24:4973–4991.

Gladman, B. (1993). Dynamics of systems of two close planets. Icarus, 106:247.

Goldreich, P., and Peale, S. (1966). Spin-orbit coupling in the solar system. AJ , 71:425.

Goldreich, P., and Soter, S. (1966). Q in the Solar System. Icarus, 5:375–389.

Greenberg, R. (2009). Frequency Dependence of Tidal q. Astrophys. J., 698:L42–L45.

Greenberg, R., and Van Laerhoven, C. (2011). Tidal Evolution of a Secularly Interacting

Planetary System. ApJ , 733:8.

Hansen, B. M. S., and Murray, N. (2015). Secular eﬀects of tidal damping in compact

planetary systems. MNRAS , 448:1044–1059.

Heller, R., Barnes, R., and Leconte, J. (2011). Habitability of Extrasolar Planets and

Tidal Spin Evolution. Origins of Life and Evolution of the Biosphere, 41:539–543.

Hourdin, F., Musat, I., Bony, S., Braconnot, P., Codron, F., Dufresne, J.-L., Fairhead,

L., Filiberti, M.-A., Friedlingstein, P., Grandpeix, J.-Y., , Krinner, G., LeVan, P.,

Li, Z.-X., and Lott, F. (2006). The LMDZ4 general circulation model: climate

performance and sensitivity to parametrized physics with emphasis on tropical

convection. Climate Dynamics, 27:787–813.

Howard, A. W., Marcy, G. W., Bryson, S. T., Jenkins, J. M., Rowe, J. F., Batalha, N. M.,

Borucki, W. J., Koch, D. G., Dunham, E. W., Gautier, T. N., III, Van Cleve,

J., Cochran, W. D., Latham, D. W., Lissauer, J. J., Torres, G., Brown, T. M.,

Gilliland, R. L., Buchhave, L. A., Caldwell, D. A., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J.,

40

Ciardi, D., Fressin, F., Haas, M. R., Howell, S. B., Kjeldsen, H., Seager, S., Rogers,

L., Sasselov, D. D., Steﬀen, J. H., Basri, G. S., Charbonneau, D., Christiansen,

J., Clarke, B., Dupree, A., Fabrycky, D. C., Fischer, D. A., Ford, E. B., Fortney,

J. J., Tarter, J., Girouard, F. R., Holman, M. J., Johnson, J. A., Klaus, T. C.,

Machalek, P., Moorhead, A. V., Morehead, R. C., Ragozzine, D., Tenenbaum, P.,

Twicken, J. D., Quinn, S. N., Isaacson, H., Shporer, A., Lucas, P. W., Walkowicz,

L. M., Welsh, W. F., Boss, A., Devore, E., Gould, A., Smith, J. C., Morris, R. L.,

Prsa, A., Morton, T. D., Still, M., Thompson, S. E., Mullally, F., Endl, M., and

MacQueen, P. J. (2012). Planet Occurrence within 0.25 AU of Solar-type Stars

from Kepler. ApJS , 201:15.

Hunke, E. C., and Lipscomb, W. H. (2008). CICE: The Los Alamos Sea Ice Model.

Documentation and Software User’s Manual. Version 4.0.. T-3 Fluid Dynamics

Group, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Tech. Rep. LA-CC-06-012.

Hut, P. (1981). Tidal evolution in close binary systems. Astro. and Astrophys., 99:

126–140.

Joshi, M. M., and Haberle, R. M. (2012). Suppression of the Water Ice and Snow Albedo

Feedback on Planets Orbiting Red Dwarf Stars and the Subsequent Widening of

the Habitable Zone. Astrobiology, 12:3–8.

Joshi, M. M., Haberle, R. M., and Reynolds, R. T. (1997). Simulations of the Atmospheres

of Synchronously Rotating Terrestrial Planets Orbiting M Dwarfs: Conditions for

Atmospheric Collapse and the Implications for Habitability. Icarus, 129:450–465.

Kaltenegger, L., Sasselov, D., and Rugheimer, S. (2013). Water-planets in the Habitable

Zone: Atmospheric Chemistry, Observable Features, and the Case of Kepler-62e

and -62f. ApJ , 775:L47.

Kasting, J. F. (1991). CO2 condensation and the climate of early Mars. Icarus, 94:1–13.

41

Kasting, J. F., Whitmire, D. P., and Reynolds, R. T. (1993). Habitable Zones around

Main Sequence Stars. Icarus, 101:108–128.

Kopparapu, R. K., Ramirez, R., Kasting, J. F., Eymet, V., Robinson, T. D., Mahade-

van, S., Terrien, R. C., Domagal-Goldman, S., Meadows, V., and Deshpande,

R. (2013a). Erratum: ”Habitable Zones around Main-sequence Stars: New Esti-

mates”. ApJ , 770:82.

Kopparapu, R. K., Ramirez, R., Kasting, J. F., Eymet, V., Robinson, T. D., Mahade-

van, S., Terrien, R. C., Domagal-Goldman, S., Meadows, V., and Deshpande, R.

(2013b). Habitable Zones around Main-sequence Stars: New Estimates. ApJ , 765:

131.

Kopparapu, R. K., Ramirez, R. M., SchottelKotte, J., Kasting, J. F., Domagal-Goldman,

S., and Eymet, V. (2014). Habitable Zones around Main-sequence Stars: Depen-

dence on Planetary Mass. ApJ , 787:L29.

Lambeck, K. (1977). Tidal Dissipation in the Oceans: Astronomical, Geophysical and

Oceanographic Consequences. Royal Society of London Philosophical Transactions

Series A, 287:545–594.

Laskar, J., Bou´e, G., and Correia, A. C. M. (2012). Tidal dissipation in multi-planet

systems and constraints on orbit ﬁtting. AandA, 538:A105.

Laskar, J., Joutel, F., and Robutel, P. (1993). Stabilization of the earth’s obliquity by

the moon. Nature, 361:615–617.

Leconte, J., Chabrier, G., Baraﬀe, I., and Levrard, B. (2010). Is tidal heating suﬃcient

to explain bloated exoplanets? Consistent calculations accounting for ﬁnite initial

eccentricity. Astro. and Astrophys., 516:A64+.

Leconte, J., Forget, F., Charnay, B., Wordsworth, R., Selsis, F., Millour, E., and Spiga,

A. (2013). 3D climate modeling of close-in land planets: Circulation patterns,

climate moist bistability, and habitability. AandA, 554:A69.

42

Leconte, J., Wu, H., Menou, K., and Murray, N. (2015). Asynchronous rotation of Earth-

mass planets in the habitable zone of lower-mass stars. Science, 347:632–635.

Li, G., and Batygin, K. (2014). On the Spin-axis Dynamics of a Moonless Earth. ApJ ,

790:69.

Limbach, M. A., and Turner, E. L. (2015). Exoplanet orbital eccentricity: Multiplicity

relation and the solar system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

112(1):20–24.

URL http://www.pnas.org/content/112/1/20.abstract

Lissauer, J. J., Barnes, J. W., and Chambers, J. E. (2012a). Obliquity variations of a

moonless Earth. Icarus, 217:77–87.

Lissauer, J. J., Marcy, G. W., Bryson, S. T., Rowe, J. F., Jontof-Hutter, D., Agol,

E., Borucki, W. J., Carter, J. A., Ford, E. B., Gilliland, R. L., Kolbl, R., Star,

K. M., Steﬀen, J. H., and Torres, G. (2014). Validation of Kepler’s Multiple

Planet Candidates. II. Reﬁned Statistical Framework and Descriptions of Systems

of Special Interest. ApJ , 784:44.

Lissauer, J. J., Marcy, G. W., Rowe, J. F., Bryson, S. T., Adams, E., Buchhave, L. A.,

Ciardi, D. R., Cochran, W. D., Fabrycky, D. C., Ford, E. B., Fressin, F., Geary,

J., Gilliland, R. L., Holman, M. J., Howell, S. B., Jenkins, J. M., Kinemuchi, K.,

Koch, D. G., Morehead, R. C., Ragozzine, D., Seader, S. E., Tanenbaum, P. G.,

Torres, G., and Twicken, J. D. (2012b). Almost All of Kepler’s Multiple-planet

Candidates Are Planets. ApJ , 750:112.

Malhotra, R. (1998). Orbital Resonances and Chaos in the Solar System. In D. Lazzaro,

R. Vieira Martins, S. Ferraz-Mello, and J. Fernandez (Eds.) Solar System For-

mation and Evolution, vol. 149 of Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference

Series, (p. 37).

Marcy, G. W., Isaacson, H., Howard, A. W., Rowe, J. F., Jenkins, J. M., Bryson, S. T.,

43

Latham, D. W., Howell, S. B., Gautier, T. N., III, Batalha, N. M., Rogers, L.,

Ciardi, D., Fischer, D. A., Gilliland, R. L., Kjeldsen, H., Christensen-Dalsgaard,

J., Huber, D., Chaplin, W. J., Basu, S., Buchhave, L. A., Quinn, S. N., Borucki,

W. J., Koch, D. G., Hunter, R., Caldwell, D. A., Van Cleve, J., Kolbl, R., Weiss,

L. M., Petigura, E., Seager, S., Morton, T., Johnson, J. A., Ballard, S., Burke,

C., Cochran, W. D., Endl, M., MacQueen, P., Everett, M. E., Lissauer, J. J.,

Ford, E. B., Torres, G., Fressin, F., Brown, T. M., Steﬀen, J. H., Charbonneau,

D., Basri, G. S., Sasselov, D. D., Winn, J., Sanchis-Ojeda, R., Christiansen, J.,

Adams, E., Henze, C., Dupree, A., Fabrycky, D. C., Fortney, J. J., Tarter, J.,

Holman, M. J., Tenenbaum, P., Shporer, A., Lucas, P. W., Welsh, W. F., Orosz,

J. A., Bedding, T. R., Campante, T. L., Davies, G. R., Elsworth, Y., Handberg,

R., Hekker, S., Karoﬀ, C., Kawaler, S. D., Lund, M. N., Lundkvist, M., Metcalfe,

T. S., Miglio, A., Silva Aguirre, V., Stello, D., White, T. R., Boss, A., Devore, E.,

Gould, A., Prsa, A., Agol, E., Barclay, T., Coughlin, J., Brugamyer, E., Mullally,

F., Quintana, E. V., Still, M., Thompson, S. E., Morrison, D., Twicken, J. D.,

D´esert, J.-M., Carter, J., Crepp, J. R., H´ebrard, G., Santerne, A., Moutou, C.,

Sobeck, C., Hudgins, D., Haas, M. R., Robertson, P., Lillo-Box, J., and Barrado,

D. (2014). Masses, Radii, and Orbits of Small Kepler Planets: The Transition

from Gaseous to Rocky Planets. ApJS , 210:20.

Mardling, R. A. (2007). Long-term tidal evolution of short-period planets with compan-

ions. MNRAS , 382:1768–1790.

Merlis, T. M., and Schneider, T. (2010). Atmospheric Dynamics of Earth-Like Tidally

Locked Aquaplanets. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems, 2:1–17.

URL http://dx.doi.org/10.3894/JAMES.2010.2.13

Mulders, G. D., Pascucci, I., and Apai, D. (2015). An Increase in the Mass of Planetary

Systems around Lower-mass Stars. ApJ , 814:130.

Pickles, A. J. (1998). A Stellar Spectral Flux Library: 1150-25000 ˚A. PASP , 110:863–878.

44

Pierrehumbert, R. (2005). Climate dynamics of a hard snowball Earth. Journal of

Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 110:2156–2202.

Pierrehumbert, R. (2010). Principles of Planetary Climate. Cambridge University Press.

Pierrehumbert, R., and Gaidos, E. (2011). Hydrogen Greenhouse Planets Beyond the

Habitable Zone. ApJ , 734:L13.

Pierrehumbert, R. T. (2011). A Palette of Climates for Gliese 581g. ApJ , 726:L8.

Pierrehumbert, R. T., Abbot, D. S., Voigt, A., and Koll, D. (2011). Climate of the

Neoproterozoic. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 39:417–460.

Poulsen, C. J., Pierrehumbert, R. T., and Jacob, R. L. (2001). Impact of ocean dynamics

on the simulation of the Neoproterozoic “snowball Earth”. Geophys. Res. Lett.,

28:1575–1578.

Rauch, K. P., and Hamilton, D. P. (2002). The HNBody Package for Symplectic Inte-

gration of Nearly-Keplerian Systems. In AAS/Division of Dynamical Astronomy

Meeting #33 , vol. 34 of Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, (p. 938).

Ricker, G. R., Latham, D. W., Vanderspek, R. K., Ennico, K. A., Bakos, G., Brown,

T. M., Burgasser, A. J., Charbonneau, D., Deming, L. D., Doty, J. P., Dunham,

E. W., Elliot, J. L., Holman, M. J., Ida, S., Jenkins, J. M., Jernigan, J. G., Kawai,

N., Laughlin, G. P., Lissauer, J. J., Martel, F., Sasselov, D. D., Schingler, R. H.,

Seager, S., Torres, G., Udry, S., Villasenor, J. S., Winn, J. N., and Worden, S. P.

(2009). The Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS). In American Astro-

nomical Society Meeting Abstracts No. 213 , vol. 41 of Bulletin of the American

Astronomical Society, (p. 403.01).

Ricker, G. R., Winn, J. N., Vanderspek, R., Latham, D. W., Bakos, G. A., Bean, J. L.,

Berta-Thompson, Z. K., Brown, T. M., Buchhave, L., Butler, N. R., Butler, R. P.,

Chaplin, W. J., Charbonneau, D., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Clampin, M., Dem-

ing, D., Doty, J., De Lee, N., Dressing, C., Dunham, E. W., Endl, M., Fressin, F.,

45

Ge, J., Henning, T., Holman, M. J., Howard, A. W., Ida, S., Jenkins, J., Jernigan,

G., Johnson, J. A., Kaltenegger, L., Kawai, N., Kjeldsen, H., Laughlin, G., Levine,

A. M., Lin, D., Lissauer, J. J., MacQueen, P., Marcy, G., McCullough, P. R., Mor-

ton, T. D., Narita, N., Paegert, M., Palle, E., Pepe, F., Pepper, J., Quirrenbach,

A., Rinehart, S. A., Sasselov, D., Sato, B., Seager, S., Sozzetti, A., Stassun, K. G.,

Sullivan, P., Szentgyorgyi, A., Torres, G., Udry, S., and Villasenor, J. (2014). The

Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite. ArXiv e-prints.

Rodr´ıguez, A., Callegari, N., Michtchenko, T. A., and Hussmann, H. (2012). Spin-orbit

coupling for tidally evolving super-Earths. MNRAS , 427:2239–2250.

Rogers, L. A. (2015). Most 1.6 Earth-radius Planets are Not Rocky. ApJ , 801:41.

Rothman, L. S., Gordon, I. E., Barbe, A., Benner, D. C., Bernath, P. F., Birk, M.,

Boudon, V., Brown, L. R., Campargue, A., Champion, J. P., Chance, K., Coud-

ert, L. H., Dana, V., and Devi, V. M. (2009). The HITRAN 2008 molecular spec-

troscopic database. Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer ,

110:533–572.

Rowe, J. F., Bryson, S. T., Marcy, G. W., Lissauer, J. J., Jontof-Hutter, D., Mullally,

F., Gilliland, R. L., Issacson, H., Ford, E., Howell, S. B., Borucki, W. J., Haas,

M., Huber, D., Steﬀen, J. H., Thompson, S. E., Quintana, E., Barclay, T., Still,

M., Fortney, J., Gautier, T. N., III, Hunter, R., Caldwell, D. A., Ciardi, D. R.,

Devore, E., Cochran, W., Jenkins, J., Agol, E., Carter, J. A., and Geary, J. (2014).

Validation of Kepler’s Multiple Planet Candidates. III. Light Curve Analysis and

Announcement of Hundreds of New Multi-planet Systems. ApJ , 784:45.

Sasaki, T., and Barnes, J. W. (2014). Longevity of moons around habitable planets.

International Journal of Astrobiology, 13:324–336.

Selsis, F., Kasting, J. F., Levrard, B., Paillet, J., Ribas, I., and Delfosse, X. (2007).

Habitable planets around the star Gliese 581? AandA, 476:1373–1387.

46

Shields, A. L., Bitz, C. M., Meadows, V. S., Joshi, M. M., and Robinson, T. D. (2014).

Spectrum-driven Planetary Deglaciation due to Increases in Stellar Luminosity.

ApJ , 785:L9.

Shields, A. L., Meadows, V. S., Bitz, C. M., Pierrehumbert, R. T., Joshi, M. M., and

Robinson, T. D. (2013). The Eﬀect of Host Star Spectral Energy Distribution

and Ice-Albedo Feedback on the Climate of Extrasolar Planets. Astrobiology, 13:

715–739.

Shine, K. P., Derwent, R. G., Wuebbles, D. J., and Morcrette, J. J. (1990). Radiative

Forcing of Climate.

In Houghton (Ed.) Report prepared for Intergovernmental

Panel on Climate Change by Working Group I , Climate Change: The IPCC Sci-

entiﬁc Assessment (1990).

Showman, A. P., Cho, J. Y.-K., and Menou, K. (2011). Atmospheric Circulation of

Exoplanets, (pp. 471–516).

Showman, A. P., and Polvani, L. M. (2011). Equatorial Superrotation on Tidally Locked

Exoplanets. ApJ , 738:71.

Showman, A. P., Wordsworth, R. D., Merlis, T. M., and Kaspi, Y. (2013). Atmospheric

Circulation of Terrestrial Exoplanets, (pp. 277–326).

Spiegel, D. S., Menou, K., and Scharf, C. A. (2009). Habitable Climates: The Inﬂuence

of Obliquity. ApJ , 691:596–610.

Sudarsky, D., Burrows, A., Hubeny, I., and Li, A. (2005). Phase Functions and Light

Curves of Wide-Separation Extrasolar Giant Planets. ApJ , 627:520–533.

Swift, J. J., Johnson, J. A., Morton, T. D., Crepp, J. R., Montet, B. T., Fabrycky,

D. C., and Muirhead, P. S. (2013). Characterizing the Cool KOIs. IV. Kepler-32

as a Prototype for the Formation of Compact Planetary Systems throughout the

Galaxy. ApJ , 764:105.

47

Toon, O. B., McKay, C. P., Ackerman, T. P., and Santhanam, K. (1989). Rapid cal-

culation of radiative heating rates and photodissociation rates in inhomogeneous

multiple scattering atmospheres. J. Geophys. Res., 94:16287–16301.

Walker, J. C. G., Hays, P. B., and Kasting, J. F. (1981). A negative feedback mechanism

for the long-term stabilization of the earth’s surface temperature. J. Geophys. Res.,

86:9776–9782.

Ward, W. R. (1974). Climatic variations on Mars: 1. Astronomical theory of insolation.

J. Geophys. Res., 79:3375.

Weiss, L. M., and Marcy, G. W. (2014). The Mass-Radius Relation for 65 Exoplanets

Smaller than 4 Earth Radii. ApJ , 783:L6.

Wigley, T. M. L. (1987). Relative Contributions of Diﬀerent Trace Gases to the Green-

house Eﬀect. Climate Monitor , 16:14–29.

Williams, D. M., and Kasting, J. F. (1997). Habitable Planets with High Obliquities.

Icarus, 129:254–267.

Williams, D. M., and Pollard, D. (2002). Earth-like worlds on eccentric orbits: excursions

beyond the habitable zone. International Journal of Astrobiology, 1:61–69.

Williams, D. M., and Pollard, D. (2003). Extraordinary climates of Earth-like planets:

three-dimensional climate simulations at extreme obliquity. International Journal

of Astrobiology, 2:1–19.

Williams, G. E. (1975). Late precambrian glacial climate and the earth’s obliquity. Ge-

ological Magazine, 112(5):441–544.

Wisdom, J., and Holman, M. (1991). Symplectic maps for the n-body problem. AJ , 102:

1528–1538.

48

Wolfgang, A., and Lopez, E. (2015). How Rocky Are They? The Composition Distri-

bution of Kepler’s Sub-Neptune Planet Candidates within 0.15 AU. ApJ , 806:

183.

Wordsworth, R. (2015). Atmospheric Heat Redistribution and Collapse on Tidally Locked

Rocky Planets. ApJ , 806:180.

Wordsworth, R., Forget, F., and Eymet, V. (2010). Infrared collision-induced and far-line

absorption in dense CO 2 atmospheres. Icarus, 210:992–997.

Wordsworth, R., Forget, F., Millour, E., Head, J. W., Madeleine, J.-B., and Charnay,

B. (2013). Global modelling of the early martian climate under a denser CO2

atmosphere: Water cycle and ice evolution. Icarus, 222:1–19.

Wordsworth, R. D., Forget, F., Selsis, F., Millour, E., Charnay, B., and Madeleine, J.-

B. (2011). Gliese 581d is the First Discovered Terrestrial-mass Exoplanet in the

Habitable Zone. ApJ , 733:L48.

Wright, J. T., Fakhouri, O., Marcy, G. W., Han, E., Feng, Y., Johnson, J. A., Howard,

A. W., Fischer, D. A., Valenti, J. A., Anderson, J., and Piskunov, N. (2011). The

Exoplanet Orbit Database. PASP , 123:412–422.

Yang, J., Bou´e, G., Fabrycky, D. C., and Abbot, D. S. (2014). Strong Dependence of the

Inner Edge of the Habitable Zone on Planetary Rotation Rate. ApJ , 787:L2.

Yang, J., Cowan, N. B., and Abbot, D. S. (2013). Stabilizing Cloud Feedback Dramati-

cally Expands the Habitable Zone of Tidally Locked Planets. ApJ , 771:L45.

Yoder, C. F. (1995). Astrometric and Geodetic Properties of Earth and the Solar System.

In T. J. Ahrens (Ed.) Global Earth Physics: A Handbook of Physical Constants,

(pp. 1–31).

This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.2.

49

y
b

e
l

b
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

t
i
s
n
a
r
t

a

g
n

i

d
l
e
i
y

f
o

e
l

b
a
p
a
c

t
i

b
r
o

n
o
-
e
g
d
e

n
a

s
e
t
u
t
i
t
s
n
o
c

e
h
t

d
e
t
t
i

m
o

e
v
a
h

e
w

h
g
u
o
h
t

,
)
3
1
0
2
(

.
l
a

t
e

i
k
c
u
r
o
B
m
o
r
f

e
r
a

n
o
i
t
a
n

i
l
c
n

i

,

n
o
i
t
a
n

i
l
c
n

i

l
a
t
i
b
r
o

e
h
t

r
o
f

t
p
e
c
x
e

s
n
a
i

d
a
r

n

i

e
r
a

e
r
e
h

s
e
l
g
n
A

.
s
t
i
b
r
o

y
r
a
t
e
n
a
l

p

2
6
-
r
e
l

p
e
K
e
b

i
r
c
s
e
d

o
t

d
e
s
u

s
t
n
e
m
e
l
e

l
a
t
i

b
r
O

:
1

e
l

b
a
T

◦

0
9
=

i

,
y
r
t
e
m
o
e
g

t
e
n
a
l
p
o
x
e

n
I

.
s
e
e
r
g
e
d

n

i

d
e
t
s
i
l

s
i

h
c
i

h
w

l
a
t
i

b
r
o

e
h
t

d
n
a

s
i
x
a

r
o
j
a
m

-
i

m
e
s

e
h
t

r
o
f

a
t
a
D

.

h
t
r
a
E

e
h
t

i

.
g
n
d
a
e
r

f
o

e
s
a
e

r
o
f

e
r
e
h

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

0
.
0

,
0
.
0

,
0
.
0

,
0
.
0

,
0
.
0

n

i

m
o
r
f

s
e
s
s
a
p

t
e
n
a
l

p

e
h
t

e
r
e
h
w
t
n

i
o
p

e
h
t

d
n
a

r
a
t
s

e
h
t

d
n

i

h
e
b

o
t

f
o

t
n
o
r
f

)
6
/
π
=
ω
∆

(

π
2

→

0
.
0

,
0
.
0

,
0
.
0

,
0
.
0

,
0
.
0

a

f
o

h
c
a
o
r
p
p
a

t
s
e
s
o
l
c

f
o

t
n

i
o
p

e
h
t

d
n
a

)
r
e
t
n
e
c
i
r
e
p
(

r
a
t
s

s
t
i

o
t

t
e
n
a
l

p

x
i

d
n
e
p
p
A
n

i

d
e
t
a
l

u
c
l
a
C

r
a
t
s

t
s
o
h

s
t
i

d
n
u
o
r
a

e
s
p

i
l
l
e

l
a
t
i

b
r
o

n
a

n
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l

s
’
t
e
n
a
l

p

e
h
t

d
n
a

r
e
t
n
e
c
i
r
e
p

h
g
u
o
r
h
t

r
o
t
c
e
v

s
u

i

d
a
r

a

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
l
g
n
a

e
h
T

f

y
l
a
m
o
n
A
e
u
r
T

n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r

a

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
l
g
n
a

e
h
T

ω

r
e
t
n
e
c
i
r
e
P

f
o

e
d
u
t
i
g
n
o
L

)
f
2
6

,
e
2
6

,

d
2
6

,
c
2
6

,

b
2
6
-
r
e
l

p
e
K
(

s
e
u

l
a
V

l
a
i
t
i

n
I

n
o
i
t
i

n
ﬁ
e
D

s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P

8
1
7
.
0

,
7
2
4
.
0

,
0
2
1
.
0

,
9
2
9
0
.
0

,
3
5
5
0
.
0

t
i

b
r
o

n
a

f
o

r
e
t
e
m
a
i

d

t
s
e
g
n
o
l

e
h
t

f
o

f
l
a
H

)
U
A
(

a

s
i
x
A
r
o
j
a
m

-
i

m
e
S

9
.
0
–
0
.
0

,
0
.
0

,
0
.
0

,
0
.
0

,
0
.
0

0
9
.
9
8

,
8
9
.
9
8

,
7
.
9
8

,
7
.
9
8

,
2
.
9
8

t
i

b
r
o

n
a

f
o

)
e
p
a
h
s

l
a
v
o
(

y
t
i
c
i
t
p

i
l
l
e

f
o

e
e
r
g
e
d

e
h
T

e

y
t
i
c
i
r
t
n
e
c
c
E

e
n
a
l
p

l
a
t
i

b
r
o

s
’
t
e
n
a
l

p

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
l
g
n
a

e
h
T

)
c
i
l
o
b
a
r
a
p

-

1
=
e

;
r
a
l

u
c
r
i
c

-

0
=
e
(

)

◦

(

i

n
o
i
t
a
n

i
l
c
n
I

e
d
u
t
i
g
n
o
l

◦

0

s
’
e
n
a
l
p

y
k
s

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
l
g
n
a

e
h
T

Ω
e
d
o
N
g
n

i

d
n
e
c
s
A

f
o

e
d
u
t
i
g
n
o
L

e
n
a
l

p

y
k
s

e
h
t

d
n
a

50

Table 2: Masses (M⊕) used as inputs to HNBody for diﬀerent sets of orbital integrations
of the planets Kepler-62b-f.

Kepler-62b Kepler-62c Kepler-62d Kepler-62e Kepler-62f

Relation/Source

2.3
2.8
9.0

0.1
0.1
4.0

8.2
5.0
14

4.4
4.2
36

2.9
3.7
35

Kopparapu et al. (2014)

Weiss et al. (2014)
Borucki et al. (2013)

51

Table 3: CAM4 spectral wavelength bands specifying shortwave (stellar) incoming ﬂux
into the atmosphere, and the percentage of ﬂux within each waveband for a synthetic
spectrum of a K-dwarf star with a similar photospheric temperature to Kepler-62, from
the Pickles Stellar Atlas (Pickles, 1998).

Band

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

λmin
0.200
0.245
0.265
0.275
0.285
0.295
0.305
0.350
0.640
0.700
2.630
4.160

λmax K2V star % ﬂux
0.245
0.265
0.275
0.285
0.295
0.305
0.350
0.640
0.700
5.000
2.860
4.550

0.128
0.075
0.054
0.056
0.070
0.091
1.076
27.33
6.831
64.35
0.000
0.000

52

0
.
0

0

2
3
.
0

3
2

2
3
.
0

0
6

2
3
.
0

3
2

2
.
0

3
2

1
.
0

3
2

0
.
0

3
2

s
y
a
d

5
6
3

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

0
9

0

0
9

0
9

0
9

0
9

0
9

)

y
t
i
c
i
r
t
n
e
c
c
e

l
a
t
i

b
r
O

◦

)

(

y
t
i

u
q
i
l
b
O

e
t
a
r

◦

(
P
E
V

n
o
i
t
a
t
o
R

l
a
u
q
e

s
i

d
o
i
r
e
p

n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r

s
’
t
e
n
a
l

p

e
h
t

e
r
e
h
w

,
e
s
a
c

e
t
a
r

n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r

s
u
o
n
o
r
h
c
n
y
s

e
h
t

s
i

7
n
u
R

.
r
e
t
n
e
c
i
r
e
p

o
t

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

x
o
n
u
q
e

i

l
a
n
r
e
v

e
h
t

.

d
o
i
r
e
p

l
a
t
i

b
r
o

s
t
i

7
n
u
R

6
n
u
R

5
n
u
R

4
n
u
R

3
n
u
R

2
n
u
R

1
n
u
R

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P

e
l
g
n
a

e
h
t

s
i

”
P
E
V
“

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

e
h
t

e
r
e
H

.
f
2
6
-
r
e
l
p
e
K

f
o

s
n
o
i
t
a
l

u
m

i
s

e
t
a
m

i
l
c

4
M
S
C
C

n

i

d
e
s
u

s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

t
u
p
n

i

l
a
n
o
i
t
i

d
d
A

:
4

e
l

b
a
T

f
o

o
t

53

◦

◦

◦

l
a
n
o
i
t
i

d
d
a

o
w
T

.
f
2
6
-
r
e
l

p
e
K

f
o

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
m

i
s

e
t
a
m

i
l
c

M
C
G

c
i
r
e
n
e
G

D
M
L

2

O
C
-
h
g
i

h

n

i

d
e
s
u

s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

t
u
p
n

i

l
a
n
o
i
t
i

d
d
A

:
5

e
l

b
a
T

4
M
S
C
C
e
h
t

h
t
i
w
n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

r
o
f

,

0
9

f
o
P
E
V
a

d
n
a

2
3
.
0
=
e

,

0
6

d
n
a

3
2

f
o

s
e
i
t
i

u
q
i
l

b
o

,
2

O
C
e
k
i
l
-
h
t
r
a
E
h
t
i
w
n
u
r

e
r
e
w
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
m

i
s

7
2
-
2
1
n
u
R

1
1
n
u
R

0
1
n
u
R

9
n
u
R

8
n
u
R

7
n
u
R

6
n
u
R

5
n
u
R

4
n
u
R

3
n
u
R

2
n
u
R

1
n
u
R

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P

.
2
1

e
r
u
g
i
F

n

i

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
a
l

u
m

i
s

f
o

s
t
e
s

h
t
o
B

.
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
m

i
s

2
3
.
0
-
0

0
9
-
0

3

s
r
h

4
2

0
9
-
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1

2
3
.
0

5
.
3
2

2
1

2
3
.
0

5
.
3
2

0
1

2
3
.
0

5
.
3
2

8

2
3
.
0

5
.
3
2

5

2
3
.
0

5
.
3
2

3

0
0
.
0

5
.
3
2

3

2
3
.
0

5
.
3
2

1

s
y
a
d

7
6
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
y
a
d

7
6
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

s
r
h

4
2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

c
c
E

◦

)

(

l

b
O

)
s
r
a
b
(

2

O
C

t
o
R

P
E
V

54

Table 6: Key parameters used as inputs to Eq. (A2) for Kepler-62b-f. BJD (Barycentric
Julian Date) is the Julian date (the number of days since the beginning of the Julian
period, ca. 4713 BC) corrected for Earth’s changing position relative to the center of
mass (barycenter) of the Solar System.

Kepler-62f

267.291
522.710
0.0–0.9

−π/2 → 3π/2

P (days)

to (BJD-2454900)

Kepler-62b Kepler-62c Kepler-62d Kepler-62e
5.714932
122.3874
83.404
103.9189

18.16406
113.8117

12.4417
67.651

e
fi

0.0
3π/2

0.0
3π/2

0.0
3π/2

0.0
3π/2

55

Fig. 1.— Geometry of the elliptical orbit of a body of mass m2 around m1. The ellipse
has semi-major axis a, semi-minor axis b, eccentricity e, and longitude of pericenter w.
The true anomaly f denotes the angle subtended by an imaginary line connecting m1
with the location of m2 in its orbit and one connecting m1 with pericenter (the point of
closest approach to m1). This assumes that m1 (cid:29) m2.

56

Fig. 2.— Fraction of stable conﬁgurations after a 106-yr HNBody integration for initial
eccentricities between 0.0 and 0.9 for Kepler-62f, assuming the Kopparapu et al. (2014)
mass-radius relationship. The eccentricities of all other planets in the Kepler-62 system
were set to zero.

57

0.00.20.40.60.81.0Initial Eccentricity0.00.20.40.60.81.0Fraction of Stable ConfigurationsFig. 3.— Evolution of the eccentricities of Kepler-62b-f as a function of time calculated
with HNBody. Initial eccentricities and longitudes of pericenter for Kepler-62b-e were
set to zero. The initial eccentricity of Kepler-62f was set to 0.32 with a longitude of
pericenter equal to π.

58

e_f=0.320, omega=3.1402•1054•1056•1058•1051•106Time (years)0.00.10.20.30.40.5EccentricitybcdefFig. 4.— Rotational evolution of Kepler-62f due to tidal processes. Left: Evolution of the
spin period (top) and obliquity (bottom) for the CTL model. The gray curves assume a
circular orbit, and the black curves assume an eccentricity of 0.32. Solid lines represent
planets that begin with an 8-hr rotation period and an obliquity of 80◦. Dashed lines
assume the planet began with the modern Earth’s rotational state. Dotted lines assume
an initial spin period of 10 days and an obliquity of 5◦. Right: Same as left panels, but
for the CPL model.

59

Constant Time Lag0.11.010.0100.0Spin Period (d)0246810Time (Gyr)50100150Obliquity (o)Constant Phase Lag0.11.010.0100.0Spin Period (d)0246810Time (Gyr)50100150Obliquity (o)Fig. 5.— Instellation as a function of latitude for Kepler-62f (using CCSM4), assuming
e = 0.0 (black), e = 0.1 (blue), e = 0.2 (green), and e = 0.32 (red). The plots show
12-month averages. The obliquity of the planet was set to 23◦. The angle of the vernal
equinox relative to pericenter was set to 90◦, similar to the Earth (102.7◦). The larger
the eccentricity, the larger the annually-averaged instellation received at a given latitude.

60

−100−500501006080100120140160180200Latitude (°)Instellation (W/m2)  e=0.0e=0.1e=0.2e=0.3Fig. 6.— Mean (plus symbols), minimum (triangles), and maximum (diamonds) surface
temperature for Kepler-62f after 100-200-year LMD Generic GCM simulations, assuming
e = 0.00 (blue) and e = 0.32 (red), an Earth-like rotation rate, and diﬀerent levels of
atmospheric CO2. The mean values take into account the location of measured surface
temperature values relative to the total surface area of the planet. An obliquity of 23.5◦
and VEP = 0◦ is assumed.

61

110Bars CO2200250300350Surface Temperature (K)MaxMinMeanFig. 7.— Planetary albedo of Kepler-62f as a function of simulated atmospheric CO2
concentration after 100-200-year LMD Generic GCM simulations. The 3-bar CO2 simu-
lation, which was ice-covered, with a planetary albedo of 0.491, is not shown, to enlarge
the turning point in planetary albedo at 8 bars CO2. An obliquity of 23.5◦, an eccentricity
of zero, and VEP = 0◦ is assumed.

62

2468101214Bars CO20.3320.3340.3360.3380.3400.342Planetary AlbedoFig. 8.— Sea ice cover fraction as a function of latitude for Kepler-62f after 160-year
LMD Generic GCM simulations, with 3 bars of CO2 in the atmosphere, the maximum
stable initial eccentricity (e = 0.32), Earth-like (blue) and 90◦ (green) obliquities, and an
Earth-like rotation rate. A VEP of 0◦ is assumed.

63

−80−60−40−2002040608000.20.40.60.81Latitude (°)Sea ice cover fraction  Obl=90Obl=23.5Fig. 9.— Surface temperature as a function of latitude for Kepler-62f after a 120-year
LMD Generic GCM simulation, assuming e = 0, an obliquity of 23.5◦, 5 bars of CO2,
and an Earth-like rotation rate. A VEP of 0◦ is assumed.

64

Longitude (°)Latitude (°)5 bars CO2, e=0.00  −150−100−50050100150−80−60−40−20020406080(K)245250255260265270275280285290Fig. 10.— Surface temperature for a synchronous (left) and Earth-like (24-hr) rotation
rate for Kepler-62f, after a 65-100-year LMD Generic GCM simulation with 1 bar (top)
and 3 bars (bottom) of CO2 in the atmosphere. We assumed e = 0, VEP = 0◦ and an
obliquity of 0◦ for all four simulations.

65

Longitude (°)Latitude (°)Surface Temperature (1 bar CO2)  −150−100−50050100150−80−60−40−20020406080(K)170180190200210220230240250260270280Longitude (°)Latitude (°)Surface Temperature (1 bar CO2)  −150−100−50050100150−80−60−40−20020406080(K)170180190200210220230240250260270280Longitude (°)Latitude (°)Surface Temperature (3 bars CO2)  −150−100−50050100150−80−60−40−20020406080(K)170180190200210220230240250260270280Longitude (°)Latitude (°)Surface Temperature (3 bars CO2)  −150−100−50050100150−80−60−40−20020406080(K)170180190200210220230240250260270280Fig. 11.— Annual mean instellation as a function of latitude for Kepler-62f as a function
of the month of the year after 40-yr CCSM4 simulations, assuming a 12-month annual
cycle and a VEP of 0◦ (left), and 90◦ (right). The obliquity and eccentricity of the planet
was set to 23◦ and 0.32, respectively.

66

MonthLatitude (°)Instellation (VEP=0°)  101112 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9101112−80−60−40−20020406080(W/m2)050100150200250300350400450MonthLatitude (°)Instellation (VEP=90°)   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9101112 1 2 3−80−60−40−20020406080(W/m2)050100150200250300350400450Fig. 12.— Top: Annual mean instellation as a function of latitude for Kepler-62f after
40-yr CCSM4 simulations, assuming the present atmospheric level of CO2 on Earth (400
ppmv), an obliquity of 23◦ (blue) and 60◦ (green). Middle: Surface temperature as a
function of the month of the year, assuming a 12-month annual cycle, for an obliquity of
60◦ (left) and 23◦ (right), after 40-yr CCSM4 simulations. Bottom: Surface temperature
as a function of month of year for an obliquity of 60◦ (left) and 23◦ (right), after 60-yr
In both models VEP was set to 90◦, similar to the
LMD Generic GCM simulations.
Earth (102.7◦). The eccentricity was set to 0.32. The less extreme cold temperatures in
the LMD Generic GCM simulations are due to a 10-m maximum thickness limit of sea
ice in LMD Generic GCM, while the CCSM4 sea ice thickness near the poles is ∼30 m.

67

−100−500501006080100120140160180200Latitude (°)Instellation (W/m2)  Obl 23°Obl 60°MonthLatitude (°)Surface Temperature (Obl=60°)   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9101112 1 2 3−80−60−40−20020406080(K)120140160180200220240260280MonthLatitude (°)Surface Temperature (Obl=23°)   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9101112 1 2 3−80−60−40−20020406080(K)120140160180200220240260280MonthLatitude (°)Surface Temperature (Obl=60°)  123456789101112123−80−60−40−20020406080(K)120140160180200220240260280MonthLatitude (°)Surface Temperature (Obl=23°)  123456789101112123−80−60−40−20020406080(K)120140160180200220240260280Fig. 13.— Schematic diagram of assumed orbital conﬁguration for CCSM4 (and select
LMD Generic GCM) simulations of Kepler-62f. The angle of the vernal equinox with
respect to pericenter was set to 90◦, similar to the Earth (102.7◦).

Fig. 14.— Surface temperature as a function of latitude for Kepler-62f, after 160-year
LMD Generic GCM simulations with 3 bars of atmospheric CO2 and VEP is 0◦ (dashed
line) and 90◦ (solid line). An obliquity of 90◦ and an eccentricity of 0.32 is assumed.

68

−80−60−40−20020406080220230240250260270280290300Latitude (°)Surface Temperature (K)