Quantitative Chemically-Speciﬁc Coherent Diﬀractive Imaging of Buried Interfaces

using a Tabletop EUV Nanoscope

Elisabeth R. Shanblatt,1, 2, ∗ Christina L. Porter,1, 2, † Dennis F. Gardner,2 Giulia F.
Mancini,2 Robert M. Karl Jr.,2 Michael D. Tanksalvala,2 Charles S. Bevis,2 Victor
H. Vartanian,3 Henry C. Kapteyn,2 Daniel E. Adams,2 and Margaret M. Murnane2

1These authors contributed equally to this work.

2JILA, University of Colorado, 440 UCB, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0440, USA

3SUNY Poly SEMATECH, 257 Fuller Road, Suite 2200, Albany, NY 12203, USA

(Dated: March 2016)

Characterizing buried layers and interfaces is critical for a host of applications in nanoscience and
nano-manufacturing. Here we demonstrate non-invasive, non-destructive imaging of buried inter-
faces using a tabletop, extreme ultraviolet (EUV), coherent diﬀractive imaging (CDI) nanoscope.
Copper nanostructures inlaid in SiO2 are coated with 100 nm of aluminum, which is opaque to vis-
ible light and thick enough that neither optical microscopy nor atomic force microscopy can image
the buried interfaces. Short wavelength (29 nm) high harmonic light can penetrate the aluminum
layer, yielding high-contrast images of the buried structures. Moreover, diﬀerences in the absolute
reﬂectivity of the interfaces before and after coating reveal the formation of interstitial diﬀusion and
oxidation layers at the Al–Cu and Al–SiO2 boundaries. Finally, we show that EUV CDI provides a
unique capability for quantitative, chemically-speciﬁc imaging of buried structures, and the material
evolution that occurs at these buried interfaces, compared with all other approaches.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Probing and characterizing nanoscale interfaces buried
beneath visibly opaque materials is a critical capabil-
ity for nanoscience and nanotechnology. Most imag-
ing modalities cannot be used for non-destructive, sub-
surface (>50 nm) imaging. Optical microscopy and
atomic force microscopy (AFM) image the surfaces of vis-
ibly opaque samples. Backscattered electron (BSE) scan-
ning electron microscopy (SEM), and secondary electron
SEM with secondary electrons generated from backscat-
tered electrons (SE-II) [1], can image buried features with
increasing electron energy providing increased penetra-
tion depth [2]. However, there is a tradeoﬀ in terms of
decreased resolution [3], charging of insulating samples,
sample damage, and hydrocarbon buildup [4]. Further-
more, SEM often produces a complicated mixture of mor-
phology and composition information making quantita-
tive image analysis diﬃcult. Finally, in BSE-SEM, ele-
mental contrast for neighboring elements is often subtle
because backscattered electron eﬃciency is proportional
to the natural logarithm of the atomic number [5].

Various specialized imaging techniques have been em-
ployed for buried layer metrology. Mode-synthesizing
AFM and scanning near-ﬁeld ultrasound holography can
detect subsurface structures [6, 7]. Three-dimensional
structures have also been probed using large-scale syn-
chrotron X-ray diﬀraction microscopy in a transmission
geometry [8, 9]. However, these approaches are not eas-
ily extendable to high-throughput imaging, especially for
thick objects.

∗ elisabeth.shanblatt@colorado.edu
† christina.porter@colorado.edu

Short wavelength extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and X-ray
light have unique potential for imaging buried interfaces
because they can penetrate through optically opaque
materials, provide chemically-speciﬁc contrast, and also
image nanoscale features.
In particular, by combin-
ing coherent, short-wavelength beams from either high
harmonic generation (HHG) [10] or X-ray free electron
lasers (XFELs) [11] with coherent diﬀractive imaging
(CDI) [12–15], it is now possible to reach near-wavelength
resolution imaging in the EUV and X-ray regions for
the ﬁrst time [16, 17]. Accordingly, CDI has found a
range of applications in transmission and reﬂection ge-
ometries [18–20] to investigate nanoscale strain [21, 22],
semiconductor structures [18], and for biological imag-
ing [23–25]. EUV/X-ray CDI can be non-destructive and
suﬀers no charging eﬀects or resolution loss with depth.
Moreover, the contrast mechanisms in EUV CDI are rel-
atively straightforward and intrinsically high, with am-
plitude images showing material composition, and phase
images showing material composition and topography.

Here, we perform tabletop, high harmonic spectro-
nanoscopy of buried interfaces opaque to visible light,
enabling unique, non-destructive investigation of many
interfacial phenomena. We use ptychographic CDI [26,
27], which utilizes redundant information from multiple
diﬀraction patterns recorded with overlapping ﬁelds of
view to robustly reconstruct both the amplitude and
phase of a buried layer. Ptychographic CDI [27] has
been implemented in a high-NA reﬂection geometry us-
ing HHG illumination beams [16, 17], with the ampli-
tude of the reconstructed images yielding the relative re-
ﬂectivity (or transmissivity) between diﬀerent regions of
the sample. Here, we also demonstrate a modiﬁcation of
ptychography that returns absolute reﬂectivities simply
by measuring the ﬂux of the illuminating beam. This

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
3

 

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
0
3
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

new capability called Reconstructed Absolute Ptycho-
graphic Transmissivity/Reﬂectivity CDI (RAPTR-CDI)
allows us to non-destructively detect the formation of in-
terstitial diﬀusion and oxidation layers at the Al–Cu and
Al–SiO2 boundaries. We verify the presence of interdiﬀu-
sion using destructive Auger electron spectroscopy sput-
ter depth proﬁling (AES). Thus, we demonstrate that
EUV CDI provides a unique capability for quantitative,
chemically-speciﬁc imaging of buried structures. This
will make possible unprecedented studies of material evo-
lution at buried interfaces, compared with all other ap-
proaches. In the future, the fast temporal resolution of
high harmonics can be harnessed for imaging dynamically
functioning and evolving interfaces.

II. EXPERIMENT

setup is

The experimental

illustrated in Fig. 1.
Bright, phase-matched, fully spatially coherent high har-
monic beams [10, 28–30] were generated by focusing a
Ti:Sapphire laser beam (23 fs, 1.5 mJ, 785 nm pulses at 5
kHz) into a 5 cm-long waveguide ﬁlled with Argon gas at
49 Torr [10, 30]. Harmonics around the 27th order (29.1
nm) were reﬂected from two super-polished silicon sub-
strates set at Brewster’s angle to reﬂect the HHG beam
while rejecting residual laser light. Two 200 nm-thick
Al ﬁlters were used to block any remaining fundamental
laser light. The HHG beam was then passed through an
iris to induce a hard edge on the beam incident on the
sample. Two narrow-bandwidth multilayer mirrors set
at 12◦ and 47.7◦, and with a bandpass of approximately
1 nm, were used to select the 29.1 nm harmonic light.
An ellipsoidal mirror at a 5◦ angle of incidence from the
surface focused the HHG beam to a ≈ 16 µm diameter
spot, which was incident on the sample at 57.8◦ from the
normal. A 2048× 2048 Princeton Instruments (PI-MTE)
CCD, placed a distance of 3.85 cm downstream of the
sample and normal to the un-diﬀracted beam, was used
to collect the light diﬀracted from the sample.

The two samples imaged in this work were cleaved from
a damascene-style wafer consisting of Cu structures in-
laid in SiO2 [31], provided by SEMATECH. The wafer
was polished ﬂat using chemical mechanical planarization
(CMP). After exposure to atmospheric conditions for 14
months, repeating patterned cells were cleaved such that
essentially identical areas of interest would be present
on two samples. One of the samples was coated with
100 nm of Al using an Edwards Cryo 304 electron-gun
physical vapor deposition system, while the other was
left uncoated for comparison. For both samples, the pty-
chographic data set consisted of 270 diﬀraction patterns,
collected with 3 µm step sizes between scan positions.
A random oﬀset of ±20% of the step size was added to
each scan position to prevent periodic artifacts in the re-
constructions [32]. The total EUV exposure time for the
uncoated sample was 5.8 min, compared with 23.6 min
for the Al-coated sample, with a total scanned area of

2

FIG. 1. Schematic of the Experiment and Samples.
Schematic of the experimental setup. The inset shows a di-
agram of the two samples imaged, topped with their optical
microscope images. The tantalum was deposited by physi-
cal vapor deposition (PVD), and the top layer of copper was
electroplated (EP).

4270 µm2 each.
In future experiments, these exposure
times can be reduced signiﬁcantly (>10×) using opti-
mized driving lasers.

For both samples, the object and probe were compu-
tationally reconstructed using a combination of ptychog-
raphy algorithms. The diﬀraction patterns were inter-
polated onto a linear spatial frequency grid using tilted
plane correction [33], then reconstructed with RAPTR-
CDI with position correction [34]. The multilayer mir-
rors allowed small amounts of adjacent harmonics to leak
through, broadening the total fractional bandwidth of the
illumination and degrading the ﬁdelity of the reconstruc-
tions. For this reason, the corrected positions were next
fed into a multicolor ptychographic information multi-
plexing algorithm [35]. By using this multicolor algo-
rithm, noise due to the presence of the unwanted har-
monics could be ﬁltered out so that only 29.1 nm light
contributed to the reconstructed images. The multicolor
algorithm signiﬁcantly improved the image ﬁdelity over
single color ptychography (see Supplementary Fig. S1).
In order to use RAPTR-CDI to characterize the ab-
solute reﬂectivity of the buried metal-metal and metal-
oxide interfaces at 29.1 nm, we measured the ﬂux of the
HHG beam before each ptychography scan. We recorded
images of the beam reﬂected from a gold mirror, then
used the exposure time and reﬂectivity of gold to cal-
culate the number of available photons incident on the
sample, in units of detector counts. The reﬂectivity of
the gold mirror was taken to be 27.9% [36] with the
surface roughness assumed to be that of sibling silicon
substrates used in Ref. [17]. Then, in RAPTR-CDI, the
probe is normalized to the measured power in each iter-
ation. The absolute value squared of the reconstructed
object’s complex amplitude is therefore equal to the sam-
ple’s reﬂected intensity at every pixel. Because the sam-

3

FIG. 2. Comparison of AFM, SEM, and EUV Ptychography Images. Uncoated sample (top row) and Al-coated sample
(bottom row). AFM images with a 20 µm scale bar are shown in (a,b) with black corresponding to 0 nm height and white to
60 nm height. The AFM images were ﬂattened with 5th order polynomial ﬁts to remove substrate curvature and horizontal lines
were removed where the AFM tip erroneously jumped due to surface contamination. SEM images collected with a secondary
electron detector at 18 kV are shown in (c,d). EUV ptychography images obtained with the multicolor reﬁnement algorithm
are shown in (e,f). The reconstructions are scaled to show absolute reﬂectivity based on the mean absolute reﬂectivity of the
features and substrate in the RAPTR-CDI reconstructions.

ple reﬂectivity is spatially varying, masks for the features
and substrates (Supplementary Fig. S2) were used to se-
lect regions free from contamination. We segmented the
RAPTR-CDI reconstructions to calculate the average ab-
solute reﬂectivities reported in Fig. 4. We also scaled the
multicolor reconstructions such that the mean reﬂectivity
of the masked regions agrees with that of the RAPTR-
CDI images. The scaled multicolor reconstructions for
both samples are shown in Fig. 2.

III. CHEMICALLY SPECIFIC IMAGING OF
BURIED METAL-METAL AND METAL-OXIDE

INTERFACES

To highlight the extreme sensitivity of EUV light
to interfacial composition, we compare our multicolor
CDI amplitude images (which have been normalized to
the measured RAPTR-CDI reﬂectivities) to optical mi-
croscopy (Fig. 1) as well as secondary electron SEM and
AFM (Fig. 2). The SEM (FEI Nova NanoSEM 630) with
an Everhart-Thornley secondary electron detector and
an accelerating voltage of 18 kV shows contrast on both

samples (Fig. 2c,d). The contrast on the coated sample is
due to a combination of morphology on the surface of the
Al as well as the chemical diﬀerence between the under-
lying features and substrate. This elemental contrast is
detectable because the Everhart-Thornley detector also
captures SE-II electrons generated from backscattered
electrons reﬂected from the underlying structures [4].
This means that the coated SEM image includes a com-
plex mixture of height and material information that is
not easily decoupled.

The AFM (Digital

Instruments MMAFM-2) only
shows surface topography. The coated features are vis-
ible on the top surface because Al deposition is slow
(5 ˚A, or approximately two atomic layers, per second),
causing each layer to acquire the underlying topography.
However, the AFM’s accuracy in the vicinity of surface
contamination is signiﬁcantly degraded due to the much
higher aspect ratio of the contamination than the nearly-
ﬂat features.

The EUV ptychography amplitude reconstruction
(Fig. 2f) is the only image that deﬁnitively visualizes the
buried interfaces, as conﬁrmed by the amplitude contrast
between the Cu features and substrate.
Indeed, if the

4

FIG. 3. Comparison of EUV CDI Height Maps with AFM. Height maps for the uncoated and Al-coated samples. Both
the coated EUV and AFM images show high aspect-ratio artifacts where debris is located on the surface of the sample.

EUV nanoscope were only imaging the top Al surface,
then the absolute reﬂectivity image in Fig. 2 would ap-
pear featureless and the reconstruction would be phase-
only. Instead, EUV light penetrates through the Al to
reveal the buried structures, yielding the observed reﬂec-
tivity variation. Additionally, the penetration depth of
Al at 29.1 nm exceeds 400 nm, meaning that 80% of the
light is transmitted through 100 nm of Al. The trans-
verse spatial resolution of the EUV images is limited by
the eﬀective numerical aperture (NA) of the imaging sys-
tem. Because there are no optics between the sample and
detector, the NA is determined by the distance from the
sample to the detector (z = 38.5 mm) and the size of
the detector (D). The diﬀraction patterns were cropped
to 512× 512 to reduce computation time, so the eﬀective
detector size, Deﬀ is 512 × p, with pixel size p = 13.5 µm
square. Therefore, the NA is Deﬀ/z = 0.09 and the
diﬀraction limited resolution is λ/(2N A) = 162 nm.

IV. HIGH RESOLUTION SURFACE

TOPOGRAPHY FROM PHASE

RECONSTRUCTIONS

In addition to the chemical composition discernible
from the amplitude of the reconstructions (shown in
Fig. 2), the phase of the reconstructions contains both
material and height information. By subtracting the
phase of the complex reﬂectivity predicted by our mod-
eled feature and substrate stacks (discussed below) from
the reconstructed phase images, we can generate height
maps showing the surface topography of the samples [16,
17]. In the case of the coated sample, the phase of the

exit surface wave accounts for phase changes within the
stack, and the height map therefore shows the top surface
topography as opposed to the buried surface. We com-
pare these height maps to AFM height maps shown in
Fig. 3. The z-axis is scaled by a factor of 200 to highlight
the height variations between the features and substrate.
There is very good agreement between the height maps
generated from ptychogrpahy and AFM.

V. QUANTITATIVE DETECTION OF

REACTIONS AND DIFFUSION AT BURIED

INTERFACES

In order to compare our experimental reﬂectivity mea-
surements to those theoretically predicted, we calculated
the complex reﬂectivities of multilayer stacks representa-
tive of the features and substrate for the damascene sam-
ples, using methods derived from Ref [37], which solve
Maxwell’s equations directly in the multilayer stack. We
conﬁrmed our predictions with IMD [36], a software pro-
gram that uses the Fresnel equations to calculate the
complex reﬂectivity for a stack of materials at EUV/X-
ray wavelengths [38, 39]. Our multilayer stack method
and IMD agree to within 0.3% reﬂectivity and 5◦ reﬂected
phase, which would correspond to a 0.38 nm height dif-
ference in a height map.

The four distinct areas—uncoated substrate, uncoated
features, coated substrate, and coated features—are
modeled as multilayer stacks with values for surface
roughness, oxide layer thickness, composition, and in-
terdiﬀusivity informed by AFM and AES, as discussed
below. Modeling the propagation of light through these

stacks returns a complex reﬂectivity coeﬃcient. We ver-
ify that the intensity matches our measured reﬂectivity,
while the phase produces height maps consistent with
the AFM. Therefore, the modeled stacks have three con-
straints: the AES data (for applicable regions), the re-
constructed intensity, and the reconstructed phase. The
uncertainty in the experimental measurement includes
uncertainty in the gold mirror reﬂectivity and the stan-
dard deviation from the mean reﬂectivity due to spatial
variation in the reconstructed reﬂectivity. Our ﬁnal re-
ﬂectivity models (green striped bars) are compared to
the experimentally measured reﬂectivities (grey bars) in
Fig. 4.

FIG. 4. Experimental vs. Modeled Reﬂectivities. Ex-
perimentally measured reﬂectivities compared to modeled re-
ﬂectivities for the uncoated and Al-coated samples. For the
coated sample, the green bars represent predictions by a
model that includes diﬀusion, and the red bars represent pre-
dictions by a model with the same material quantities as those
in the full model, but with no diﬀusion. Because the pri-
mary sources of uncertainty in these calculations arise from
the oxide layer thicknesses, which are intrinsically diﬃcult to
quantify, we omit error bars from our model results.

In the case of the uncoated sample, we estimate that
the Cu features form a native oxide bilayer upon ex-
posure to the atmosphere consisting of 4.8 nm CuO
atop 7.4 nm Cu2O, based on a study of copper oxide
growth at ambient temperatures indicating a ratio of
0.65 = dCuO/dCu2O [40]. We calculate the total oxide
thickness by assuming that the sample was polished ﬂat
during chemical mechanical planarization and the aver-
age feature height measured by the AFM is all due to ox-
ide growth. This total thickness agrees with the amount
of oxide predicted based on the AES measurement of the
coated features (discussed below). We assume the sub-
strate is simply SiO2. These modeled stacks lead to good
agreement for the reﬂectivity of the uncoated sample.

To predict the coated sample feature reﬂectivity, we
initially used a simple model with 100 nm of Al deposited
on the same stacks used for the uncoated sample. This
model led us to predict Rfeatures = 5.6% and Rsubstrate =
3.8%. However, these predictions are signiﬁcantly higher
than both of our experimental measurements (which were
Rfeatures = 2.0% and Rsubstrate = 2.7%). Furthermore,
the reconstruction displays a contrast inversion in the

5

coated sample image, where the coated Cu features are
less reﬂective than the coated substrate, whereas they
were more reﬂective in the uncoated sample (Fig. 2e,f)
and in the simple model for the coated sample. Adding
an Al2O3 layer on top of the Al layer could not resolve
this contrast inversion, nor could assuming that the Al
scavenged O from the copper oxides to form Al2O3 at
the interface, which is an energetically favorable reac-
tion since 2Al + 3CuO → Al2O3 + 3Cu corresponds to
∆f H◦ = −1207.52 kJ/mol [41].

The seeming inexplicability of this relative contrast in-
version led us to hypothesize that Kirkendall diﬀusion
occurred at the Al–Cu boundary, forming an interstitial
layer that decreased the reﬂectivity at the interface [42].
We conﬁrmed the presence of this interstitial diﬀusion
layer on the coated features using AES sputter depth
proﬁling, a destructive technique that requires ion sput-
tering through the sample to obtain Auger electron spec-
tra at every relevant depth [43] (Fig. 5). This technique
revealed a 40 nm diﬀusive region at the interface. We
used the AES depth proﬁle shown in Fig. 5 to calcu-
late the theoretical reﬂectivity of the Al-coated features
and substrate. In the feature regions, we calculated stoi-
chiometrically plausible percent compositions for Al, Cu,
Al2O3, CuO, and Cu2O from the elemental composition
provided by the AES at each depth. We tested two dif-
fusive models, one in which Al2O3 is the only oxide at
the Al–Cu interface and one in which there is a mixture
of Al2O3, CuO, and Cu2O at the interface. We ﬁnd that
the model in which we assume Al captures all of the O
from the copper oxides at the boundary ﬁts well with our
measured reﬂectivity (Fig. 4).

FIG. 5. Auger electron sputter depth proﬁle. Auger
electron spectroscopy sputter depth proﬁle of a coated sample
feature, showing a diﬀusive region between the Al and Cu.

For the coated substrate, we used the same stack as in
the full model of the coated features for the top 50 nm
of the sample (including a 3 nm diﬀusive Al2O3 layer),
followed by an abrupt Al–SiO2 interface at a depth cor-
responding to 100 nm of deposited Al. However, this re-
sulted in a predicted reﬂectivity of 7.4%, which is twice
as bright as we observe experimentally. We resolved this

6

FIG. 6. Depth proﬁles used to model sample reﬂectivities. Stacks used to model the reﬂectivity of diﬀerent parts of the
samples and their surface roughnesses. The top row shows the stacks corresponding to the features, and the bottom row shows
stacks corresponding to the substrate. The full model for the features includes signiﬁcant diﬀusion. Neglecting this diﬀusion
(shown in the third column) predicts reﬂectivity values highly inconsistent with the reconstructed reﬂectivities.

discrepancy by incorporating 26.5 nm of Al2O3 at the
Al–SiO2 interface, with diﬀusion modeled by convolving
the depth proﬁle with a Gaussian of full-width 6 nm.
Since this Al2O3 layer corresponds to Al scavenging O
from SiO2, we incorporated the corresponding amount of
liberated silicon in a layer below the Al2O3. This mod-
iﬁcation produced agreement between the experimental
reﬂectivity (2.66%) and the model (2.57%). We were
unable to experimentally conﬁrm the presence of the dif-
fusive Al2O3 layer at the interface because SiO2 is non-
conductive, preventing a reliable AES depth proﬁle on
the coated substrate. However, there is experimental ev-
idence in the literature indicating that Al can scavenge
oxygen from SiO2 when deposited via e-beam evapora-
tion [44, 45]. Visual representations of all the stacks used
in our models, including surface roughnesses, are shown
in Fig. 6.

To investigate how sensitive reﬂectivity in the EUV
spectral range is to diﬀusion, we modeled our ﬁnal coated
sample stacks (Fig. 6, middle column) with the same
amount of material as in our full model, but without any
diﬀusion (Fig. 6, right column). The predictions of this
diﬀusionless model are shown by the red crosshatched
bars in the right panel of Fig. 4. They dramatically
disagree with our measurements,
indicating that our
method is highly sensitive to diﬀusion.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

We combined ptychographic CDI with EUV high har-
monic beams to demonstrate a unique new capability for
quantitatively imaging buried interfaces with chemically-
speciﬁc contrast through metal layers that are opaque to
visible light, AFM, and SE-I SEM. We developed a new
technique, RAPTR-CDI, which is a modiﬁed ptychogra-
phy algorithm that yields absolute reﬂectivities by nor-
malizing the probe at every iteration to the correct mea-
sured ﬂux incident on the sample. This allowed us to
non-destructively detect the existence of interstitial dif-
fusion and oxidation layers between the buried Cu and
SiO2 structures and the Al coating. The sample features
and interdiﬀusion layer thicknesses agree well with those
characterized using AFM, SEM, Auger electron spec-
troscopy as well as values from the literature [40]. We
also demonstrated the utility of multicolor ptychography
as a spectral ﬁlter to improve resolution and image qual-
ity compared to single color reconstructions, even with
only minor contributions from neighboring harmonics.

In the future, we can extend this work by observing
interfacial charge, energy and spin transport, examining
the eﬀect of increased temperature on interstitial diﬀu-
sion, and using a comb of harmonics spanning an ab-
sorption edge to simultaneously image through multiple
layers. RAPTR-CDI also opens the door to fully quan-

titative material characterization combined with EUV
imaging, much like imaging ellipsometry, by performing
angle-resolved measurements with the sample placed on
a tilt stage. This would allow for highly-sensitive metrol-
ogy of thick samples inaccessible to optical ellipsometry.
The technique could further be extended to perform high-
throughput buried layer imaging by using multiple EUV
beams to achieve a wide ﬁeld of view [46].

VII. METHODS

A. Sample Fabrication

The Cu structures were deposited by physical vapor
deposition and patterned using I-line resist with a Canon
GS22 followed by electroplating to reach a total height
of 750 nm. Subsequently, 500 nm of SiO2 was deposited
using tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS).

B. Uncoated Sample Reﬂectivity Model

Calculation

It is possible that a small amount of interdiﬀusion may
occur between the Cu and its oxide layers, but we found
that modeling diﬀusion by convolving the depth proﬁle
with a Gaussian having up to a 5 nm standard
deviation did not signiﬁcantly alter the theoretical
reﬂectivity or phase.

Experiment

Model

Features
10.97 ± 1.26

11.10

Substrate
6.77 ± 0.61

6.45

TABLE I. Experimentally reconstructed mean reﬂectivity val-
ues (%) compared to modeled reﬂectivities of features and
substrate on the uncoated sample. The error shown is the
standard deviation from the mean of the reconstructed reﬂec-
tivity in the masked regions (Fig. S2).

C. Coated Sample Reﬂectivity Values

Experiment

Model

Features
2.04 ± 0.56

1.99

Substrate
2.66 ± 0.35

2.57

TABLE II. Experimentally reconstructed mean reﬂectivity
(%) values compared to modeled reﬂectivities of features and
substrate on the coated sample.

D. Height Maps

7

In the case of the uncoated sample, the model predicts
the Fresnel phase shift due to the features is -96◦, while
the phase change from the substrate is -65◦. In the case
of the coated sample, the phase change from the features
is -92◦, while the phase change from the substrate is -43◦.
For plotting purposes, the AFM images have been
smoothed with a Gaussian ﬁlter with full width equal
to the EUV microscope’s pixel size in the case of the
coated sample and twice the EUV pixel size in the case
of the uncoated sample (to remove a one pixel artifact in
the image around the letters). Without smoothing, the
AFM images appear noisy because the feature heights
are similar to the surface roughness of the sample.

Images were ﬂattened using a 5th order polynomial
surface ﬁt to decrease substrate height variations and
make the feature heights more easily comparable. Bi-
nary masks used to assign Fresnel phases in the CDI re-
constructions were generated using the intelligent scissors
algorithm [47].

E. Ptychography Reconstructions

Each of the reconstructions were run ﬁrst using
RAPTR-CDI for an initial 50 iterations, with position
correction [34] implemented for another 3000 iterations
afterwards. The multicolor reconstructions were both
run using the wavelengths of the 25th, 27th, and 29th
harmonics and for approximately 2000 iterations.

The diﬀerence between the positions found using the
position correction algorithm and the initial recorded po-
sitions were used to correctly determine the pixel size of
the reconstructed images. This is necessary in general
for ptychography CDI because any error in the measure-
ment of the sample to detector distance or angle results in
changes in the reconstructed pixel size. To solve for this
change in the x and y directions, the diﬀerence between
the corrected positions and the initial positions was ﬁt to
a plane. In particular, the scale factor necessary to cor-
rect the pixel size in the x-direction, ax is 1 − sx, where
sx is the slope of the plane ﬁt to the position diﬀerences.
Then, dx · ax is the corrected pixel size with dx being
the predicted pixel size in the absence of tilted plane cor-
rection and any error in the measured detector-sample
distance. It was found that after solving for the correct
pixel size the scaling of the EUV reconstructions agreed
well with the SEM measurements, whereas without this
scaling the reconstructions were stretched by up to 18%
in a given direction.

To correct for error in the XY-calibration of the AFM
used for comparison to the HHG CDI reconstructions,
the AFM images in Figs. 2 and 3 were scaled in the hor-
izontal and vertical directions so that the transverse di-
mensions of the number “725” are in agreement with the
SEM images shown in Fig. 2.

8

FIG. 7. RAPTR-CDI vs. multicolor reconstructions. (a,b) SEM images for comparison. (c,d) RAPTR-CDI reconstruc-
tions, which return absolute reﬂectivity, but assume all diﬀraction is from exactly one harmonic. (e,f) Multicolor ptychography
reconstructions demonstrating the enhanced ﬁdelity provided by the multicolor algorithm. Because the multicolor algorithm
only returns relative reﬂectivity, the reconstructions have been scaled such that their average reﬂectivity agrees with that of
the RAPTR-CDI reconstructions.

9

FIG. 8. Masks used in reﬂectivity calculations. Masks used to calculate the average feature reﬂectivity (yellow) and
substrate reﬂectivity (red) for the uncoated (b) and coated (d) sample are shown in the right column. Masks (b) and (d) were
generated from masks (a) and (c) by excluding points further than one standard deviation from the mean reﬂectivity of the
included areas. Masks (a) and (c) were made using the intelligent scissors algorithm [47]. Masks (b) and (d) were used to scale
the multicolor reconstructions so that their average reﬂectivity matches the RAPTR-CDI reconstructions.

10

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge sup-
port for this work from an NSF MRSEC grant DMR-
1420620, the DARPA PULSE program, and a Gordon
and Betty Moore Foundation EPiQS Award. We thank
SEMATECH for providing the samples used in this work,
David Alchenberger for helpful discussion and assistance
with processing and characterization techniques, Patrick
Stevens and Marilyn Andrews from Rocky Mountain
Laboratories for performing the Auger electron spec-
troscopy and helpful discussion, as well as David Windt,
Jonas Gertsch, R. Joseph Kline, and Galen Miley for
helpful discussion. C. L. Porter and D. F. Gardner
were supported by the NSF Graduate Research Fellow-
ship Program and C. L. Porter was also supported by
the Katharine Burr Blodgett Fellowship. E. R. Shan-
blatt and D. F. Gardner were supported by the NSF
COSI IGERT program. D. F. Gardner was also sup-
ported by a Ford fellowship. R. M. Karl Jr. was sup-
ported by the NSF MRSEC grant DMR-1420620. G.F.
Mancini was supported by the Swiss National Science
Foundation through the Early Postdoc.Mobility Fellow-
ship No. P2ELP2 158887.

IX. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

In alphabetical order: H.C.K. and M.M.M. conceived
of the experiment. D.F.G. designed and constructed
the experimental apparatus. D.E.A., D.F.G., R.M.K.,
G.F.M., C.L.P., and E.R.S. conducted the experiment.
D.E.A., C.L.P., and E.R.S. performed the data analysis.
V.H.V. provided the sample. All authors commented on
the results and prepared the manuscript.

X. COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.

[1] Bernstein, G., Carter, A. & Joy, D. Do SE-(II) electrons
really degrade SEM image quality? Scanning 35, 1–6
(2013).

[2] Niedrig, H. & Rau, E. Information depth and spatial res-
olution in BSE microtomography in SEM. Nucl. Instrum.
Meth. B 142, 523–534 (1998).

[3] Erlandsen, S., Macechko, P. & Frethem, C. High resolu-
tion backscatter electron (BSE) imaging of immunogold
with in-lens and below-the-lens ﬁeld emission scanning
electron microscopes. Scanning Microscopy 13, 43–54
(1999).

[4] Goldstein, J. et al. Scanning Electron Microscopy and
X-ray Microanalysis (Springer Science, New York, 2003),
3rd edn.

[5] Lloyd, G. Atomic number and crystallographic contrast
images with the SEM: A review of backscattered electron
techniques. Mineralogical Mag. 51, 3–19 (1987).

[6] Vitry, P. et al. Mode-synthesizing atomic force mi-
croscopy for 3D reconstruction of embedded low-density
dielectric nanostructures. Nano Research 8, 1–7 (2015).
[7] Shekhawat, G. & Dravid, V. Nanoscale imaging of buried
structures via scanning near-ﬁeld ultrasound holography.
Science 310, 89–92 (2005).

[8] Song, C. et al. Nanoscale imaging of buried structures
with elemental speciﬁcity using resonant X-ray diﬀrac-
tion microscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 025504 (2008).

[9] Jiang, H. et al. Three-dimensional coherent X-ray diﬀrac-
tion imaging of molten iron in mantle olivine at nanoscale
resolution. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 205501 (2013).

[10] Bartels, R. et al. Generation of spatially coherent light at
extreme ultraviolet wavelengths. Science 297, 376–378
(2002).

[11] Chapman, H. X-ray imaging beyond the limits. Nature

Mater. 8, 299–301 (2009).

[12] Sayre, D. Some implications of a theorem due to Shan-

non. Acta Crystallogr. 5, 843–843 (1952).

[13] Fienup, J. Phase retrieval algorithms: a comparison.

Appl. Optics 21, 2758–2769 (1982).

[14] Miao, J., Charalambous, P., Kirz, J. & Sayre, D. Extend-
ing the methodology of X-ray crystallography to allow
imaging of micrometre-sized non-crystalline specimens.
Nature 400, 342–344 (1999).

[15] Robinson, I. et al. Coherent X-ray diﬀraction imaging of
silicon oxide growth. Phys. Rev. B 60, 9965–9972 (1999).
[16] Seaberg, M. et al. Tabletop nanometer extreme ultravio-
let imaging in an extended reﬂection mode using coherent
Fresnel ptychography. Optica 1, 39 (2014).

[17] Zhang, B. et al. High contrast 3D imaging of surfaces
near the wavelength limit using tabletop EUV ptychog-
raphy. Ultramicroscopy 158, 98–104 (2015).

[18] Harada, T., Nakasuji, M., Nagata, Y., Watanabe, T. &
Kinoshita, H. Phase imaging of extreme-ultraviolet mask
using coherent extreme-ultraviolet scatterometry micro-
scope. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 52, 06GB02 (2013).

[19] Roy, S. et al. Lensless X-ray imaging in reﬂection geom-

etry. Nature Photon. 5, 243–245 (2011).

[20] Sun, T., Jiang, Z., Strzalka, J., Ocola, L. & Wang,
J. Three-dimensional coherent X-ray surface scattering
imaging near total external reﬂection. Nature Photon. 6,
588–592 (2012).

11

[21] Harder, R. & Robinson, I. Coherent X-ray diﬀrac-
tion imaging of morphology and strain in nanomaterials.
JOM-US 65, 1202–1207 (2013).

[22] Robinson, I. & Harder, R. Coherent X-ray diﬀraction
imaging of strain at the nanoscale. Nature Mater. 8,
291–8 (2009).

[23] Jiang, H. et al. Quantitative 3D imaging of whole, un-
stained cells by using X-ray diﬀraction microscopy. P.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 11234–9 (2010).

[24] Seibert, M. et al. Single mimivirus particles intercepted
and imaged with an X-ray laser. Nature 470, 78–81
(2011).

[25] Dumas, C., van der Lee, A. & Palatinus, L. Lensless
coherent imaging of proteins and supramolecular assem-
blies: Eﬃcient phase retrieval by the charge ﬂipping al-
gorithm. J. Struct. Biol 182, 106–16 (2013).

[26] Thibault, P. et al. High-resolution scanning X-ray diﬀrac-

tion microscopy. Science 321, 379–82 (2008).

[27] Maiden, A. & Rodenburg, J. An improved ptychograph-
ical phase retrieval algorithm for diﬀractive imaging. Ul-
tramicroscopy 109, 1256–62 (2009).

[28] Corkum, P. Plasma perspective on strong ﬁeld multipho-

ton ionization. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994–1997 (1993).

[29] Rundquist, A. Phase-matched generation of coherent soft

X-rays. Science 280, 1412–1415 (1998).

[30] Popmintchev, T., Chen, M.-C., Arpin, P., Murnane,
M. M. & Kapteyn, H. C. The attosecond nonlinear optics
of bright coherent X-ray generation. Nature Photon. 4,
822–832 (2010).

[31] Hummler, K. et al. TSV and Cu–Cu direct bond wafer
and package-level reliability.
In 2013 IEEE 63rd Elec-
tronic Components and Technology Conference, 41–48
(IEEE, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2013).

[32] Thibault, P., Dierolf, M., Bunk, O., Menzel, A. & Pfeif-
fer, F. Probe retrieval in ptychographic coherent diﬀrac-
tive imaging. Ultramicroscopy 109, 338–43 (2009).

[33] Gardner, D. et al. High numerical aperture reﬂection
mode coherent diﬀraction microscopy using oﬀ-axis aper-
tured illumination. Opt. Express 20, 19050–9 (2012).

[34] Zhang, F. et al. Translation position determination in
ptychographic coherent diﬀraction imaging. Opt. Express
21, 13592–606 (2013).

[35] Batey, D., Claus, D. & Rodenburg, J. Information mul-
tiplexing in ptychography. Ultramicroscopy 138, 13–21
(2014).

[36] Windt, D. L.

IMD-Software for modeling the optical
properties of multilayer ﬁlms. Comput. Phys. 12, 360
(1998).

[37] Moharam, M., Gaylord, T., Pommet, D. & Grann, E.
Stable implementation of the rigorous coupled-wave anal-
ysis for surface-relief gratings: enhanced transmittance
matrix approach. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 12, 1077 (1995).

[38] N´evot, L. & Croce, P. Caract´erisation des surfaces par
r´eﬂexion rasante de rayons X. application `a l’´etude du
polissage de quelques verres silicates. Rev. Phys. Appl.
15, 761–779 (1980).

[39] Stearns, D. The scattering of X-rays from nonideal mul-

tilayer structures. J. Appl. Phys. 65, 491 (1989).

[40] Keil, P., L¨utzenkirchen-Hech, D. & Frahm, R. Investi-
gation of room temperature oxidation of Cu in air by
Yoneda-XAFS. In AIP Conference Proceedings, vol. 882,

12

490–492 (AIP, Stanford, California, USA, 2007).

[41] Chase, M. J. NIST-JANAF thermochemical tables, 4th
Ed., Part I, Al–Co. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Mono-
graph No. 9 (1998).

[42] Nakajima, H. The Discovery and Acceptance of the Kirk-
endall Eﬀect: The Result of a Short Research Career.
JOM-US 49, 15–19 (1997).

[43] Hofmann, S. Sputter depth proﬁling: past, present, and

future. Surf. Interface Anal. 46, 654–662 (2014).

[44] Roberts, S. & Dobson, P. J. Evidence for reaction at the
Al–SiO2 interface. J. Physics D Appl. Phys. 14, L17–L22
(1981).

[45] Zeng, L., Greibe, T., Nik, S., Delsing, P. & Olsson, E.
Interdiﬀusion at the Al/SiO2 interface in Al/AlOx/Al
Josephson junctions. In Proc. of the 15th European Mi-
croscopy Congress (Manchester Central, United King-
dom, 2012).

[46] Karl, R. et al. Spatial, spectral, and polarization multi-
plexed ptychography. Opt. Express 23, 30250–8 (2015).
[47] Mortensen, E. N. & Barrett, W. A. Intelligent scissors
for image composition. In Proc. of the 22nd annual con-
ference on computer graphics and interactive techniques
- SIGGRAPH ‘95, 191–198 (ACM Press, New York, New
York, USA, 1995).

