Topological phases and Majorana states in screened interacting quantum wires

School of Physics and Technology, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, China

Hengyi Xu∗ and Ye Xiong

Department of Physics, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China

(Dated: March 7, 2016)

Jun Wang

We study theoretically the eﬀects of long-range and on-site Coulomb interactions on the topo-
logical phases and transport properties of spin-orbit-coupled quasi-one-dimensional quantum wires
imposed on an s-wave superconductor. The electrostatic potential and charge density distributions
are computed self-consistently within the Hartree approximation. Due to the ﬁnite width of the
wires and the charge repulsion, the potential and density distribute inhomogeneously in the trans-
verse direction and tend to accumulate along the lateral edges where the hard-wall conﬁnement is
assumed. This result has profound eﬀects on the topological phases and the diﬀerential conductance
of the interacting quantum wires and their hybrid junctions with superconductors. Coulomb interac-
tions renormalize the chemical potential, and alter the topological phases strongly by enhancing the
topological regimes and producing jagged boundaries. Moreover, the multicritical points connecting
diﬀerent topological phases from high-index subbands are modiﬁed remarkably in striking contrast
to the predictions of the two-band model. We further suggest the possible non-magnetic topolog-
ical phase transitions manipulated externally with the aid of long-range interactions. Finally, the
transport properties of normal-superconductor junctions are also examined and interaction impacts
on the emergence of Majorana fermions and the strength of Majorana zero-bias peaks are revealed.

PACS numbers: 74.45.+c, 73.21.Hb, 03.65.Vf, 74.78.Na, 73.43.Cd

I.

INTRODUCTION

The existence of Majorana fermions as elementary par-
ticles has been a myth since the original proposal sug-
gested by E. Majorana in 1937.1 In recent years, con-
densed matter physicists have been searching for the
Majorana fermions as quasi-particle excitations in var-
ious solid state hybrid structures with vigorous eﬀorts
attributed to some alluring and promising theoretical
predictions.2–4 The enthusiasm was further ignited by
the relevant experimental realizations in semiconduc-
tor quantum wires with strong spin-orbit couplings and
proximity-induced s-wave superconductivity by Mourik
et al.,5 and other groups subsequently6–8. In these exper-
iments, zero-bias conductance peaks have been observed
due to perfect Andreev reﬂection, signaling the presence
of Majorana states at the ends of quantum wires. The
experimental measurements show that the zero-bias dif-
ferential conductance evolves into peaks as the system is
tuned into the predicted topological regime without tak-
ing into account various eﬀects, such as the ﬁnite-length,
ﬁnite temperature, and electron-electron interactions etc.
To clarify some discrepancies between experiments and
theories, the eﬀects of disorder9,10, nonclosure of gaps11,
inhomogeneous pairing potentials12 have been investi-
gated theoretically. More severely, alternative mecha-
nisms, for examples, the Andreev bound state13 and the
Kondo eﬀect14 which also produce the zero-bias peaks
have been suggested to challenge the experimental ﬁnd-
ings.

Among all the aforementioned eﬀects, the electronic
importance and tricky to treat

interaction is of vital

microscopically.15 It is expected that Coulomb interac-
tions can strongly inﬂuence the stability of Majorana
modes16–18, and are, therefore, crucial for understanding
quantitatively the experimental ﬁndings and ultimately
recognition of the existence of Majorana bound states at
the ends of quantum wires. In the one-dimensional (1D)
quantum wires, repulsive interacting electrons form in-
teracting Luttinger liquids and should be described more
precisely by the corresponding theory.17,19 To attack this
problem, various methods have been employed. Based
on the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG),
tunneling spectra of interacting Kitaev chains and Ma-
jorana edge states have been examined.15 In particu-
lar, E. Stoudenmire et al.,20 compared systematically
the DMRG, Hartree-Fock, and bosonization approaches
for treating the interacting Majorana wires and found
that the interaction problem can be described reason-
ably well using Hartree-Fock theory with the suﬃciently
strong proximity eﬀect and applied magnetic ﬁelds al-
beit it deserves more powerful DMRG and bosonization
techniques. Besides the single-mode wires, multichannel
wires have also been studied considerably.21–25 Lutchyn
et al.,22 have studied the roles of interactions on the low-
energy topological phase diagram near the multicritical
point connecting the topological phases originating from
the ﬁrst and second transverse subbands, and revealed
that the interactions renormalize the phase boundary
near the multicritical point leading to the hybridization
of Majorana modes from diﬀerent subbands. Further-
more, the presence of disorder was found to induce the
phase transition from topological phases to trivial local-
ized phases together with interactions.26

In a realistic experimental setup, the semiconducting

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
n
o
c
-
r
p
u
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
3
3
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

quantum wire with a high g-factor and spin-orbit cou-
pling is exposed on a metallic s-wave superconductor
to get a proximity energy gap. The metallic supercon-
ductor, as a secondary eﬀect, may drive the electronic
interactions into a strongly screened regime.27 Conse-
quently, the electronic density and potential distribu-
tions in multiband nanowires are rather inhomogeneous
along the transverse direction due to the ﬁnite width
and electronic repulsions. This inhomogeneity in elec-
trostatic potential can be one of the major sources of the
soft superconducting gaps. For the transport properties
of the semiconductor-superconductor hybrid structures,
much of the prior work has been focusing on the non-
interacting cases.19,28–32 How the screened interactions
and the inhomogeneous potential distribution inﬂuence
the topological phases in multiband quantum wires and
the related Majorana modes, has received relatively less
attention. In this work, we study the topological phases
and Majorana zero mode in a typical experiment-relevant
semiconductor-superconductor hybrid device composed
of an interacting quantum wire in proximity to an s-
wave superconductor. The screened Coulomb interac-
tions are incorporated by the self-consistent Hartree-Fock
calculations in the presence of external magnetic ﬁelds.
It is shown that electron-electron interactions strongly
change the energy bands and modify the topological
phase boundaries as well as the emergence of Majorana
modes.

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we intro-
duce the structure to be investigated and formulate our
model. The calculation results are presented and dis-
cussed in Sec. III. Sec. IV contains the summary and
conclusions.

with respective form given by

c†
i,σcj,σ

H0 = Xi,σ

c†

+

1
2

c†
i,σsxBxci,σ′ ;

i,σ(ǫ0 + VH − µ)ci,σ − t Xhi,ji,σ
gµB Xi;σ,σ′
HR = itR Xhi,ji;σ,σ′

ˆez · (s × dij)c†

i,σcj,σ′ ;

HU = UXi,σ

niσni¯σ.

2

(2)

(3)

(4)

where c†
i,σ and ci,σ are creation and annihilation oper-
ators for an electron with spin σ(↑, ↓) on site i, and s
denotes the Pauli matrices. The Hamiltonian H0 in Eq.
(2) represents the Hamiltonian of semiconductor quan-
tum wires including the on-site energy ǫ0 = −4t and the
hopping energy t between the nearest-neighbouring sites
along x- and y-directions. VH and µ are the Hartree po-
tential and the chemical potential, respectively, and the
last contribution is from the Zeeman splitting due to the
in-plane magnetic ﬁeld Bx. The term HR in Eq. (3) de-
scribes the Rashba spin-orbit coupling with dij being a
lattice vector pointing from site j to site i. hi runs over
all the nearest-neighbouring sites. The on-site electronic
interactions between electrons of the opposite spins are
captured by the Hubbard-like term HU in Eq. (4). To fa-
cilitate the computation, Eq. (4) can be rewritten within
the mean-ﬁeld approximation such that a charge with
spin σ at the site ri interacts with the average charge
population with an opposite spin hn¯σi at the same site
and vice versa. Moreover, the Hartree term VH (r) in Eq.
(2) depicts the long-range Coulomb interactions between
charges at diﬀerent sites in the semiconducting quantum
wire,27,33

II. THEORETICAL MODEL

VH (ri) =

We consider a spin-orbit-coupled semiconductor quan-
tum wire of the width W in the y-direction and the
length L along the x-direction deposited on an s-wave
superconducting electrode, while its left side is contacted
through a tunnel barrier Up by a normal metallic lead as
shown in Fig. 1(a). The s-wave superconductor induces
a paring potential ∆ for the electrons in the wire. The
whole system is subjected to a uniform in-plane mag-
netic ﬁeld Bx. Throughout the calculations, we choose
the realistic parameters for InSb semiconductor quantum
wires: ∆ = 0.25meV, g-factor g = 50, Rashba spin-orbit
coupling strength tR = 20meV · nm, and eﬀective mass
m∗ = 0.015me with me being the electron mass.

The system is described by the tight-binding Hamilto-

nian consisting of three terms as

H = H0 + HR + HU ,

(1)

e2

4πǫ0ǫr Xri6=rj

n(rj) 

1

|ri − rj |

−

1

p|ri − rj|2 + 4d2! .

(5)
where d is the distance between the quantum wire and the
superconducting metallic gate, and the second part in the
parenthesis is the contribution from the mirror charges
due to the presence of the metallic superconducting gate.
The average charge population at the site ri is calculated
by

1

π Z EF

−∞

hnσ(ri)i = −

ℑ[Gσ(ri, ri; E)]fF D(E, EF )dE,

(6)
where Gσ(ri, ri; E) is the Green’s function on the site ri
at energy E for spin σ. From the computational point
of view, both short- or long-range Coulomb interactions
aﬀect only the diagonal elements of the Hamiltonian ma-
trix. Eqs. (1)-(6) can be solved self-consistently start-
ing from some initial guess of charge density hnσi to ob-
tain the self-consistent charge and electrostatic potential

distributions which can be further used to calculate the
band structures, the interacting topological phase dia-
grams and the diﬀerential conductance spectroscopy.

We study the topological phase diagram by calculat-
ing a Z2 analogy topological invariant in quasi-1D wires,
namely the evolution of Wannier function center during
a pumping process, which has been formulated in detail
in Ref.
[34]. Here we only give a very brief description
of this method. The main idea of this formalism is to
investigate the maximally localized evolution of Wannier
functions for quasi-1D systems by studying the eigen-
states of the position operator projected into the sub-
space of the occupied states. In the eigenstate space, the
projected position operator can be written in a matrix
form with nonzero super-diagonal and left-down corner
elements. The nonzero elements of the matrix are again
the matrices formed by the products of all occupied eigen-
vectors. The eigenproblem of the block position operator
can be solved by constructing the matrix D(ky), a prod-
uct of all of its nonzero block matrices. Equivalently,
D(ky) can be viewed as a product of the Berry connec-
tions along the so-called “Wilson loop” and further ex-
pressed in the language of non-Abelian gauge ﬁelds Amn
as D(ky) = ΠNx−1
i=0 e−iAi,i+1δk with Nx being the number
of discrete kx and δk = ki+1
x. The phase factor θD
m
of the m-th eigenvalue of D(ky) determines the evolution
of the Wannier function center pairs which reside in a
cylinder surface and enclose it integer times for an eﬀec-
tive 1D system with ky. The enclosing times equivalent
to the winding number of the Wannier center pairs are
used to distinguish the diﬀerent phases in our study.

x − ki

i,i+1

Normal Metal

S-wave SC

Up

(c)

 

(cid:270)
T
(cid:269)
x
B

2

1.6

1.2

0.8

0.4

(a)

y

x

(b)

2

1.6

1.2

0.8

0.4

(cid:270)
T
(cid:269)
x
B

0

 
0

1

2

3

4

μ (meV)

0

 

0

1
2
μ (meV)

3

3

W

D

θ (units of 2π)

 

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

FIG. 1: (Color online) (a) The schematic structure of the
normal metal-superconductor (NS) junction for the transport
properties calculations. Lower panels: the phase diagrams as
a function of the chemical potential and the magnetic ﬁeld
for width (b) W = 200nm and (c) W = 400nm. The white
rectangular frame in (c) indicates the regime to be considered
in the interacting case. Other parameters are ∆ = 0.25meV,
g = 50, tR = 20meV · nm, and m∗ = 0.015me.

potentials are used in Eq. (7).

The diﬀerential conductance of normal-superconductor

(NS) junctions is calculated by

dI
dV

=

e2
h

[N − Ree + Reh] ,

(9)

The calculations are started by performing the Fourier
transformation along x-direction since kx is a good quan-
tum number, while the Hamiltonian in the y-direction
remains in the real-space. Thus, the Hamiltonian for a
discretized site i in the momentum space is given by

where N is the number of propagating modes in the nor-
mal lead, and Ree and Reh are the normal and Andreev
reﬂections, respectively. The calculations of the reﬂec-
tions are based on the Nambu Green’s function technique
which has been formulated in detail in Ref. [35,36].




h↑

2itR sin(kx)

∆

−2itR sin(kx)

∆

h↓
−∆∗

−∆
−h∗
↑

2itR sin(kx)

−2itR sin(kx)

−h∗
↓

(7)
with hσ(ri) = ǫ0 − 2t cos(kx) − µ + VH (ri) + VU (ri) ± Ez
and σ = (↑, ↓), and VU is the potential from Eq. (4).
The nearest-neighboring sites along the y-direction are
coupled by the matrix




t

−itR/2

itR/a

t

−t

−itR/2

−itR/2

−t




.

(8)

The total Hamiltonian H can be written in the block ma-
trix form with the diagonal part in the form of Eq. (7)
and superdiagonal or subdiagonal part in the form of Eq.
(8). By directly diagonalizing H in the momentum-real
mixed space, one can obtain the wave functions of the
eigenstates and furthermore the matrix D(ky). For in-
teracting cases, the self-consistent Hartree and Hubbard

,




III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

As the ﬁrst step, we study the non-interacting phase
diagrams in wide parameter ranges by calculating the
phase factor θD
m associated with the evolution of the Wan-
nier function center for quasi-1D wires. Fig. 1(b) and (c)
show the topological invariants as a function of the chem-
ical potential µ and the applied magnetic ﬁeld Bx for dif-
ferent wire widths. As the parameters vary, two phase
factors θD
m split and meet again resulting in an integer
times of 2π diﬀerence in their values, which is equiva-
lent to the winding number of Wannier center pairs. For
W = 200nm (see Fig. 1(a)), the multichannel quantum
wire exhibits three topological phase regimes separated
by topological trivial regimes in the calculated parame-
ter range. The topological phases with a value of 0.5 in
units of 2π appear as rounded rectangular blocks origi-
nating from diﬀerent subbands in the phase diagram. As
the wire width increases, more topological regimes asso-
ciated with high-energy subbands show up as shown in

(b)

2

(a)

4

interacting

non-interacting

0.45

(a)

0.35

0.25

)

V
e
m

(
 

H
V

0.15

0.05

1         10         20         30        40         50 

sites

2
-

 

3
-

)
 
 
 
a
 
 
 

0
1
x
(
 

n

6

4

2

0

1         10         20         30        40         50 

sites

(c)

)

V
e
m

(
 

y
g
r
e
n
E

2

1

0

-1

-2

(d)

)

V
e
m

(
 

y
g
r
e
n
E

2

1

0

-1

-2

 -0.4         -0.2            0             0.2          0.4 

 -0.4         -0.2            0             0.2          0.4 

k (1/a)

k (1/a)

FIG. 2: (Color online) The self-consistent (a) Hartree po-
tential together with Hubbard term and (b) charge density
proﬁles at the multi-critical point with µ = 1.9meV and
Bx = 1.2T. Comparison between the non-interacting (c)
and interacting (d) band structures at the multicritical point.
εr = 18 for InSb and d = 10nm.

Fig. 1(c) since the energy separations between subbands
decrease with the wire width.

For both cases, the topological regimes along the direc-
tion of sweeping µ with ﬁxed Bx are disconnected. Their
separations are basically the distance between the neigh-
boring subbands with diﬀerent spins.
In contrast, the
topological regimes may contact each other forming the
so-called multicritical point with varying the magnetic
ﬁeld at a ﬁxed chemical potential. The emergence of mul-
ticritical points owes to that two subbands are very close
and even touch each other at low energies around k = 0
such that two topological phase transitions occur con-
tinuously and even simultaneously, see Fig.2(c). More-
over, relatively small subband separations of the wider
wire give rise to small topological islands at low mag-
netic ﬁelds corresponding to the ﬁrst subband as shown
in Fig. 1(c). It should be noted that the noninteracting
phase diagrams of quasi-1D nanowires have also been ex-
amined and a similar phase diagram was found.37

When Coulomb interactions are turned on, the charges
distribute inhomogeneously along the transverse direc-
tion due to long-range repulsive potentials computed by
Eq. (5) as shown in Fig. 2. We ﬁrst focus on the ef-
fects of Coulomb interactions on the multicritical point
in the white frame shown in Fig. 1(c). Fig. 2(a) and (b)
show the electronic potential and corresponding charge
density proﬁles in the transverse direction at the critical
point where one topological regime transits to another.
The application of gate voltages can tune the chemical
potential of the system and vary the charge density. The
overall charge distribution shows a density enhancement
toward the wire edges, which is related to the eﬀect of
the electrostatic Coulomb repulsion in a hard-wall con-

)
T
(
 
x
 
 
B

1.6

1.2

0.8

0.4

0

0                 1                 2                 3                 4

1.8

(b)

1.6

interacting

non-interacting

)
T
(
 
x
 
 
B

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

1.5                      2                      2.5                     3

μ (meV)

FIG. 3: (Color online) The interacting phase diagrams as a
function of the magnetic ﬁeld Bx and the chemical poten-
tial µ for (a) W = 200nm and (b) W = 400nm. The non-
interacting phase diagrams (Red thin) have been included for
comparisons. The parameters range in (b) are indicated by
the white rectangular frame in Fig. 1(c).

ﬁned structure. The applied magnetic ﬁeld lifts the spin
degeneracy, while the short-range Coulomb potential ac-
counted by Eq. (4) further enhances the Zeeman splitting
leading to an asymmetry between the spin-up and spin-
down branches in the potential. As a result, the oppo-
site spin subbands are not equally populated as indicated
in charge density proﬁle (see Fig. 2(b)). The roles of
on-site Coulomb interactions in single-mode wires have
been studied previously by Stoudenmire et al.,20 and
the conclusions are equally applied here for multichan-
nel nanowires. The experimental signiﬁcance of on-site
interactions is to lower the critical magnetic ﬁeld to enter
the topological phase with Majorana modes existing at
two ends of the wire.

Fig.

2(c) shows the corresponding non-interacting
band structure of the multicritical point at µ = 1.9meV
and Bx = 1.2T where the 3rd-subband spin-up branch
overlaps with the lower index subbands. As the magnetic
ﬁeld increases, the particle and hole subbands approach
each other and a topological phase transition results with
a process of the gap closure and reopening. The sys-
tem may undergo a series of phase transition processes

as the gap is further closed and reopened by the subse-
quent subbands. In the presence of Coulomb interactions
as shown in Fig. 2(d), the low-energy subbands around
small wave vectors retreat towards particle and hole di-
rections, respectively, while the minigap where particle
and hole subbands anticross remains unchanged. Evi-
dently, the interactions do not spoil the overlap of two
subbands around the zero energy but defer the emergence
of the multicritical point. It will be clear in the following
that the inﬂuences of interactions on mutlitcritical points
may vary according to their subband originations.

In Fig.

3, we show the roles of Coulomb interac-
tions in diﬀerent quantum wires with broad parameter
ranges. The inhomogeneous electrostatic potential renor-
malizes the chemical potential due to electronic repul-
sions and shifts the topological phases to high chemical
potentials. Also, the interactions enlarge the areas of
topological regimes, which is consistent with the single-
mode cases where on-site interactions increase the chem-
ical potential windows for ﬁxed magnetic ﬁelds, thereby
enhancing the system immunity against the ﬂuctuation of
µ.20 Most strikingly, the long-range Coulomb interactions
strongly modify the boundaries of topological phases and
even generate jagged boundaries. It is also evident that
some very small isolate topological regimes may be pro-
duced near the phase boundaries, and topologically triv-
ial phases may appear in topological areas as well. This
is because, close to the phase boundaries, small pertur-
bations are suﬃcient to introduce or interrupt a closure
of the energy gap so that additional phase transitions oc-
cur. For the case of W = 400nm, the topological island
at Bx = 1.2T and µ = 2.6meV appears as a remnant
of the non-interacting multicritical point since the sub-
band overlap is preserved as shown in Fig. 2(d). It has
been pointed out the repulsive on-site interactions aﬀect
only quantitatively the topological phases and the ap-
pearance of multicritical points remains similar.22 In our
cases, the impact of long-range interactions on the multi-
critical point in the narrow wire is predominantly a shift
to higher µ in agreement with the two-band model in Ref.
[22]. By contrast, long-range Coulomb interactions inﬂu-
ence the multicritical points formed by the high-index
subbands in a more profound way. From Fig. 3(b), one
can see clearly that the two phase boundary vertexes do
not coincide with each other in chemical potential any
longer due to interactions. Thus, the multicritical points
from high-index subbands are more fragile to the inho-
mogeneity of Coulomb potentials along the transverse di-
rection.

In fact, Coulomb interactions may play a much more
crucial role in the manipulation of topological phase tran-
sitions. In graphene, San-Jose at al.,38 has recently put
forward a Majorana zero-mode mechanism through in-
teractions without the aid of spin-orbit couplings. This
is a very signiﬁcant progress in this ﬁeld and pave a
way for constructing graphene Majorana in view of the
rather weak spin-orbit coupling of graphene. For long-
range Coulomb interactions, their major advantage in

5

FIG. 4: The diﬀerential conductance as a function of the bias
voltage and the magnetic ﬁeld for the cases of the (a) non-
interacting and (b) interacting quantum wires. The system
has parameters µ = 2.5meV, W = 200nm and L = 200nm.
The pinch-oﬀ gate Up = 8meV with width d = 10nm.

FIG. 5: The diﬀerential conductance as a function of the bias
voltage and the magnetic ﬁeld for the cases of the (a) non-
interacting and (b) interacting quantum wires. The system
has parameters µ = 1.4meV, W = 400nm and L = 200nm.
The pinch-oﬀ gate Up = 8meV with width d = 10nm.

the present case is that they can be tuned externally by
gate voltages. Therefore, the long-range interaction can
be an important tool at hand which enables ones to ma-
nipulate the phase transitions conveniently. It has been
shown that long-range Coulomb interactions can gener-
ate band-structure warping and lead to an anomalous
conductance reduction in graphene indicating a possible
topological transition.39,40 Based on these considerations,
study of eﬀects of interactions in nanowires are extremely
important for its promising realization of a non-magnetic
topological phase transition and the related Majorana
quasi-particle.

We proceed by studying the diﬀerential conductance
dI/dV of quantum wires with a superconducting metal
as the right lead. In our case, we consider the simplest hy-
brid structure, namely a normal-superconductor junction
as shown in Fig. 1(a). Various hybrid junctions hosting
Majorana fermions have been studied extensively, and a
rich phenomenology has been revealed.41 Here we primar-
ily concern with the interaction eﬀects on the diﬀerential
conductance spectroscopy such that a simple geometry is
more illuminating. Fig. 4-6 show the diﬀerential conduc-
tance as a function of the bias voltage V and the magnetic
ﬁeld Bx for diﬀerent widths and chemical potentials. The

6

from Majorana modes becomes stronger and more recog-
nizable in intermediate magnetic ﬁelds. We further con-
sider the wire with higher chemical potential as shown
in Fig. 6. Compared with the non-interacting case, the
interactions modiﬁes the particle and hole gap edges re-
ducing the minigap which is reﬂected resonances within
the bulk gap at the zero magnetic ﬁeld in Fig. 6(b). The
ZBP around Bx ≈ 1T from Majorana mode is suppressed
accompanied with the modiﬁcation of phase transitions
due to Coulomb interactions.
In addition, the interac-
tions also inﬂuence the position of resonances due to An-
dreev bound states.

From above transport calculations, we arrive at some
points on Majorana fermion observations.
(i) long-
range Coulomb interactions modify the topological phase
boundary and aﬀect the position of ZBPS in the param-
eter space. In experiments, the Majorana ZBP may ap-
pear at quite diﬀerent places with the non-interacting
theoretical predictions for multichannel wires. This will
no doubt cause the diﬃculties in the recognition of Ma-
jorana fermions.
(ii) Coulomb interaction can change
topological windows and number of phase transitions
thereby strongly altering the appearance of Majorana
ZBPs. Theoretical predictions based on single-particle
models is unreliable for interpreting the experimental
ﬁndings particularly for high chemical potential in multi-
band wires.

We end this section with the following comments.
Throughout our calculations, we ﬁxed the pinch-oﬀ gate
voltage and wire length.
It is expected that pinch-oﬀ
gates and wire length only aﬀect the resonances in triv-
ial phases, and have no signiﬁcant eﬀects on topological
regimes. Also, our calculations are performed at zero
temperature. We expect that ﬁnite temperature will in-
ﬂuence the results quantitatively not qualitatively. Our
discussion and conclusions remain valid. Finally, the in-
terplay between Coulomb interactions and disorder is an
interesting question. Most recent researches concentrate
on the disorder eﬀects in the normal region of NS junc-
tions. How disorder inﬂuences the topological phases to-
gether with the long-range Coulomb interaction is de-
sirable for both experimental purposes and theoretical
interest. However, this issue is beyond the scope of the
present work and will be the central task in our further
work.

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We have calculated the phase diagrams of an inﬁnitely
long quasi-1D wire with a high spin-orbit interaction
imposed on an s-wave superconductor. The phase dia-
grams in Bx − µ plane demonstrate connected or discon-
nected topological phase regimes originating from dif-
ferent subbands. We incorporate Coulomb interactions
in a self-consistent way within the Hartree approxima-
tion and study the potential and charge density distri-
butions along the transverse direction. The repelling

FIG. 6: The diﬀerential conductance as a function of bias volt-
age and magnetic ﬁeld for the cases of the (a) non-interacting
and (b) interacting quantum wires. The system has parame-
ters µ = 2.8meV, W = 400nm and L = 200nm. The pinch-oﬀ
gate Up = 8meV with width d = 10nm.

left and right panels correspond to the non-interacting
and interacting cases, respectively.

In Fig. 4, the non-interacting dI/dV peaks around the
gap edges at zero magnetic ﬁeld. With the increase of
the magnetic ﬁeld, the gap slowly shrinks and closes at
the critical point of phase transitions forming a prototyp-
ical Y-type structure in the Bx − V (magnetic ﬁeld-bias
voltage) plane. As the gap is closed and reopened, the
zero-bias peak (ZBP) develops implying the formation
of Majorana end states. Fig. 4(b) shows the interact-
ing diﬀerential conductance through the topological su-
perconductor with the self-consistent potential which is
calculated for diﬀerent magnetic ﬁelds. The commence-
ment of the ZBP moves towards higher magnetic ﬁelds
and the peak strength becomes even stronger at high
magnetic ﬁelds compared with the non-interacting case.
This change in the ZBP can be traced back to the phase
diagram in Fig. 3(a).
In the presence of Coulomb in-
teractions, the phase boundary at µ = 2.5meV is dis-
placed with respect to the magnetic ﬁeld compared with
non-interacting case consistent with the changes in the
ZBP quantitatively. However, this consistency is just
a serendipity because the phase diagrams are obtained
for inﬁnitely long wires, while the dI/dV spectroscopy
is calculated through semi-inﬁnite topological supercon-
ductors. For wider wires, their discrepancies are evident.
Fig. 5 shows the wider quantum wire with W = 400nm
and a smaller chemical potential µ = 1.4meV. Besides
the similar Y-type structure, the dI/dV spectroscopy ex-
hibits richer structures. The ﬁrst visible peak appears at
Bx = 0.2T for the non-interacting wire, which is due to
the Andreev bound states since it splits with the mag-
netic ﬁeld. The ZBP induced by Majorana zero-modes
arises at Bx = 0.3T and builds up as the magnetic ﬁeld
increases. However, the ZBP is interrupted with the in-
creasing of magnetic ﬁelds by the phase transitions orig-
inating from diﬀerent subbands. This can be veriﬁed
by the phase diagram shown in Fig. 1(c). Fig. 5(b)
shows the eﬀects of Coulomb interactions on diﬀerential
conductance spectroscopy. The resonance from Andreev
bound states at µ = 0.2meV is diminished and the ZBP

charges tend to accumulate along the wire edges and form
the characteristic oscillations in proﬁle. The inhomoge-
neously distributed potentials alter the band structures
strongly and modify the phase diagrams in a nontrivial
way.
In particular, the multicritical points from high-
index subbands respond to the interactions more promi-
nently compared with those from low-index subbands.

The changes in the phase diagram due to interactions
can be experimentally detected by transport measure-
ments, namely dI/dV spectroscopy. The study of the
roles of interactions in dI/dV is particularly important
for recognition of Majorana fermions in experiments. For
multiband wires, dI/dV spectroscopy with interactions
may be dramatically diﬀerent compared with the non-

7

interacting cases. The careful investigation of the eﬀects
of Coulomb interactions on the transport properties has
a far-reaching signiﬁcance for identiﬁcation of Majorana
fermions in experiments.

Acknowledgments

H.X. acknowledges ﬁnancial support from Department
of Education of Jiangsu province through Grant No.
164080H00210. J.W. thanks the support from NSFC
(Grant No. 115074045).

∗ Electronic address: hengyi.xu@njnu.edu.cn
1 E. Majorana, Il Nuo. Cim. 14, 171 (1937).
2 C. W. J. Beenakker, Annu. Rev. Con. Mat. Phys. 4, 113

(2013).

3 J. Alicea, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, 076501 (2012).
4 J. Alicea, Phys. Rev. B 81, 125318 (2010).
5 V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. Frolov, S. Plissard, E. Bakkers, and

22 R. M. Lutchyn and M. P. A. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 84,

214528 (2011).

23 M. Wimmer, A. Akhmerov, M. Medvedyeva, J. Tworzyd lo,

and C. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 046803 (2010).

24 A. C. Potter and P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 83, 094525

(2011).

25 R. M. Lutchyn, T. D. Stanescu, and S. D. Sarma, Phys.

L. Kouwenhoven, Science 336, 1003 (2012).

Rev. Lett. 106, 127001 (2011).

6 M. Deng, C. Yu, G. Huang, M. Larsson, P. Caroﬀ, and

26 A. M. Lobos, R. M. Lutchyn, and S. Das Sarma, Phys.

H. Xu, Nano Lett. 12, 6414 (2012).

Rev. Lett. 109, 146403 (2012).

7 A. Das, Y. Ronen, Y. Most, Y. Oreg, M. Heiblum, and

27 A. Manolescu, D. Marinescu, and T. D. Stanescu, J. Phys.:

H. Shtrikman, Nature Phys. 8, 887 (2012).

Cond. Matt. 26, 172203 (2014).

8 A. Finck, D. Van Harlingen, P. Mohseni, K. Jung, and

28 J. Cayao, E. Prada, P. San-Jose, and R. Aguado, Phys.

X. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 126406 (2013).

Rev. B 91, 024514 (2015).

9 J. Liu, A. C. Potter, K. Law, and P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev.

29 F. Setiawan, P. Brydon, J. D. Sau, and S. D. Sarma, Phys.

Lett. 109, 267002 (2012).

Rev. B 91, 214513 (2015).

10 D. Pikulin, J. Dahlhaus, M. Wimmer, H. Schomerus, and

30 J. Liu, F.-C. Zhang, and K. T. Law, Phys. Rev. B 88,

C. Beenakker, New J. Phys. 14, 125011 (2012).

064509 (2013).

11 T. D. Stanescu, S. Tewari, J. D. Sau, and S. D. Sarma,

31 P. San-Jose, J. Cayao, E. Prada, and R. Aguado, New J.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 266402 (2012).

of Phys. 15, 075019 (2013).

12 S. Takei, B. M. Fregoso, H.-Y. Hui, A. M. Lobos, and S. D.

32 Y. Komijani and I. Aﬄeck, Physical Review B 90, 115107

Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 186803 (2013).

(2014).

13 M. Zareyan, W. Belzig, and Y. V. Nazarov, Phys. Rev. B

33 S. Ihnatsenka and I. Zozoulenko, Phys. Rev. B 73, 075331

65, 184505 (2002).

(2006).

14 S. Sasaki, S. De Franceschi, J. Elzerman, W. Van der Wiel,
M. Eto, S. Tarucha, and L. Kouwenhoven, Nature 405, 764
(2000).

15 R. Thomale, S. Rachel, and P. Schmitteckert, Phys. Rev.

B 88, 161103 (2013).

16 S. Gangadharaiah, B. Braunecker, P. Simon, and D. Loss,

34 R. Yu, X. L. Qi, A. Bernevig, Z. Fang, and X. Dai, Phys.

Rev. B 84, 075119 (2011).

35 H. Xu, T. Heinzel, M. Evaldsson, and I. Zozoulenko, Phys.

Rev. B 77, 245401 (2008).

36 H. Xu and T. Heinzel, Phys. Lett. A 377, 3148 (2013).
37 S. Tewari, T. Stanescu, J. D. Sau, and S. D. Sarma, Phys.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 036801 (2011).

Rev. B 86, 024504 (2012).

17 E. Sela, A. Altland, and A. Rosch, Phys. Rev. B 84, 085114

38 P. San-Jose, J. Lado, R. Aguado, F. Guinea, and

(2011).

J. Fern´andez-Rossier, Phys. Rev. X 5, 041042 (2015).

18 F. Hassler and D. Schuricht, New J. Phys. 14, 125018

39 H. Xu, T. Heinzel, A. A. Shylau, and I. Zozoulenko, Phys.

(2012).

Rev. B 82, 115311 (2010).

19 L. Fidkowski, J. Alicea, N. H. Lindner, R. M. Lutchyn,

40 A. Avetisyan, B. Partoens, and F. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B

and M. P. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 85, 245121 (2012).

79, 035421 (2009).

20 E. M. Stoudenmire, J. Alicea, O. A. Starykh, and M. P.

41 E. Prada, P. San-Jose, and R. Aguado, Phys. Rev. B 86,

Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 84, 014503 (2011).

21 A. C. Potter and P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 227003

180503 (2012).

(2010).

