6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]

.

R
T
n
i
f
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
1
4
3
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hong Kong - Shanghai Connect / Hong Kong - Beijing Disconnect (?)

Scaling the Great Wall of Chinese Securities Trading Costs

Ravi Kashyap

Markit / City University of Hong Kong

December 01, 2015

Hong Kong; Shanghai; Connect; Trading Cost; Market Impact; Uncertainty

JEL Codes: G15 International Financial Markets; D53 Financial Markets; G17 Financial Forecasting and

Simulation; F37 - International Finance Forecasting and Simulation

Contents

1 Abstract

2 Introduction(1)

2.1 Stock Markets and Economic Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 The Connect

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 Some Other Tidbits

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4 Dual Listing Dynamics

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4.1 Main Diﬀerence from Dual Listing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.5 Unintended Consequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.5.1 Uncertainty due to the Limited Quota

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.6 A Recipe for the Skeptics

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Trading Cost Measurement Methodology

3.1 Market Impact Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.1.1

Introducing our Innovation into the Implementation Shortfall

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.1.2 Market Impact Simple Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.1.3 Market Impact Complex Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 From Symbols to Numbers (From Modeling to Trading), Numerical Results

4.1 The Four Elements of the Empirical Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Stationary Tests on Volume and Price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 Price Convergence of Dual Listed Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

2

3

3

4

5

6

7

8

8

8

10

12

13

15

16

17

18

19

19

4.3.1 Price Premium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4 Hong Kong and Shanghai Traded Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.5 Simulated Trading Cost Comparison on Dual Listed Hong Kong and Shanghai Securities . . .

4.6 Estimated and Actual Costs across Real Orders on Dual Listed Hong Kong Securities

. . . .

4.7 Auxiliary Metrics on Real Orders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.8 Volume Curves for Select Hong Kong and Shanghai Names

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Conclusions and Possibilities for Future Research

6 Notes and References

7 Appendix

7.1 Price Premium Charts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.2 Trading Cost Comparisons between HK and China using Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.3 Comparison of Estimated and Actual Costs on Real Orders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.4 Auxiliary Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.5 Volume Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

22

23

24

25

26

26

27

30

30

32

43

50

52

1 Abstract

We utilize a fundamentally diﬀerent model of trading costs to look at the eﬀect of the opening of the

Hong Kong Shanghai Connect that links the stock exchanges in the two cities, arguably the biggest event

in international business and ﬁnance since Christopher Columbus set sail for India. We design a novel

methodology that compensates for the lack of data on trading costs in China. We estimate trading costs

across similar positions on the dual listed set of securities in Hong Kong and China, hoping to provide useful

pieces of information to help scale “The Great Wall of Chinese Securities Trading Costs”. We then

compare actual and estimated trading costs on a sample of real orders across the Hong Kong securities in

the dual listed pair to establish the accuracy of our measurements.

The primary question we seek to address is “Which market would be better to trade to gain

exposure to the same (or similar) set of securities or sectors?” We ﬁnd that trading costs on

Shanghai, which might have been lower than Hong Kong, might have become higher leading up to the

Connect. What remains to be seen is whether this increase in trading costs is a temporary equilibrium due

to the frenzy to gain exposure to Chinese securities or whether this phenomenon will persist once the two

markets start becoming more and more tightly coupled.

It would be interesting to see if this pioneering policy will lead to securities exchanges across the globe

linking up one another, creating a trade anything, anywhere and anytime marketplace. Looking beyond

2

mere trading costs, such studies can be used to gather some evidence on what eﬀect the mode of governance

and other aspects of life in one country have on another country, once they start joining up their ﬁnancial

markets.

2

Introduction(1)

On November 17, 2014, amidst the backdrop of the protests in Hong Kong regarding electoral reform,

the plan to connect the stock markets of Hong Kong and Shanghai proceeded after a slight delay over the

preceding weeks. The opening of the Hong Kong - Shanghai connect, henceforth “ Connect”, opens a new era

in the cross border ﬂow of capital into and out of China. While the proximate intention behind this scheme

could be to increase the trading of securities and bolster the equity markets in China, the fundamental

reasoning could be to liberalize the ﬁnancial system and spur economic growth, which has fallen sharply from

the double digit rates of the recent past(2). Whether this is part of a bigger scheme to ﬁnancially join the two

economies and aid greater politically uniﬁcation is a matter to be studied over the next few decades. Also of

interest would be to see if this pioneering policy will lead to securities exchanges across the globe linking up

one another, creating a trade anything, anywhere and anytime ﬁnancial marketplace.

2.1 Stock Markets and Economic Growth

There is a vast body of literature regarding ﬁnancial liberalization and economic growth. Bekaert, Harvey

and Lundblad (2005) show that equity market liberalizations on average lead to an increase in annual real

economic growth rates. They point out that equity market liberalization directly reduces ﬁnancing constraints

by making available more foreign capital, and foreign investors may insist on better corporate governance,

which should promote ﬁnancial development. Levine (2001) suggests that stock markets inﬂuence growth

through eﬃcient capital allocation. New information can lead to proﬁtable trading and improved information

about ﬁrms improves resource allocation and hence economic growth.

Levine and Zervos (1996, 1998a) ﬁnd that stock market liquidity – as measured both by the value of stock

trading relative to the size of the market and by the value of trading relative to the size of the economy – is

positively and signiﬁcantly correlated with current and future rates of economic growth, capital accumulation

and productivity growth. Levine and Zervos (1998b) looks at the stock market liquidity following capital

control liberalization in 15 emerging market economies and ﬁnd that stock markets tend to become larger,

more liquid, more volatile and more integrated following liberalization. Building on the consensus that stock

market liberalizations can reduce the cost of equity capital, Henry (2000), ﬁnds that there can be a boom

in private investments following the liberalization. Beck and Levine (2004) show that stock markets are

important for economic growth independent of the banking sector, with some evidence that the two could

provide diﬀerent set of ﬁnancial services and could be complimentary to one other. Deeg and O‘Sullivan

(2009) chronicle the shift from predominantly state controlled ﬁnancial systems to multilateral agencies like

3

the International Monetary Fund. They emphasize the increasing signiﬁcance of regulatory regimes generated

through the interactions of public and private actors that extend across national boundaries. The discussion

turns towards the consequences of the current trends toward ﬁnancialization and the recovery that is cur-

rently underway after the 2008 collapse. Epstein (2005) deﬁnes ﬁnancialization, broadly, as the increasing

role of ﬁnancial motives, ﬁnancial markets, ﬁnancial actors and ﬁnancial institutions in the operation of

the domestic and international economies; and goes on to a deeper discussion regarding the dimensions of

ﬁnancialization, its implications for economic stability, growth, income distribution, political power, policy

formulation. Adding to the importance of liquidity for asset pricing, Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2007)

use measures of liquidity constructed using daily returns and the length of the non-trading interval to show

that liquidity predicts future returns. While admitting that transaction data are hard to obtain in emerging

markets, they justify the usage of this alternate measure for emerging markets.

One aspect that stands out among all these studies is that none of them explicitly consider the implicit

trading costs or the uncertainty associated with market prices, either in the measures of liquidity or otherwise,

while the actual transfer of capital happens through the means of trading in the stock markets.

In this

study, we focus heavily on the trading cost element when there is a major liberalization event. We utilize

a fundamentally diﬀerent model of measuring trading costs and apply it to study one of the, if not the,

biggest event in international ﬁnance since Christopher Columbus set sail for India. If we ﬁnd that trading

costs are being inﬂuenced heavily by market liberalizations, the lessons from such a study can be manifold,

change in transaction costs could be a signal of potential building up of a bubble and a later bust. When

not indicative of such extreme situations, trading or transaction costs, could serve to highlight whether the

transfer of capital or investment is happening as expected and whether foreign investors view on liquidity

has been shaped positively, to bring in additional sources of capital.

2.2 The Connect

The oﬃcial announcement of the “Connect” program launch on April 10, 2014, sent ﬁnancial intermediaries

into an arms race, of sorts, to be prepared to trade on the connect right from the ﬁrst day of the program.

Before the Connect, shares listed in China, called A-shares, were only available to foreign institutional

investors through certain investment products called Qualiﬁed Foreign Institutional Investor (QFII) funds

and other such investment vehicles. Likewise, formal channels of overseas investment by Chinese residents to

the Qualiﬁed Domestic Institutional Investor (QDII) schemes. The Connect program allows a small number

of securities listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) to be traded by participants in Hong Kong and

vice versa. Under this pilot program, shares eligible to be traded through the Northbound Trading Link

(from Hong Kong to Shanghai) will comprise all the constituents of the SSE 180 Index and SSE 380 Index,

and shares of all SSE-listed companies which have issued both A shares and H shares. Shares eligible to be

traded through the Southbound Trading Link (from Shanghai to Hong Kong) comprise all the constituents

4

of the Hang Seng Composite Large Cap Index and Hang Seng Composite Mid Cap Index, and shares of all

companies listed on both SSE and Stock Exchange of Hong Kong. The initial expected date of the launch was

towards the middle of October. The delay also gives us a chance to study the reaction of market participants

on the announcement of the delay and the trends in the run up to the ﬁnal launch.

2.3 Some Other Tidbits

• Launched at 9:30 AM November 17, 2014. In the ﬁrst seven minutes (Figure 1), more than 50% of the

Quota was used up(3).

Figure 1: First Seven Minutes of Trading

• HK Exchange Total Market Cap $3.1 trillion (Currently 6th globally), Shanghai Exchange Total Market

Cap $2.4 trillion (7th) - Combined Market Cap will put them in the top three.

• Currently QFII Quota (Includes other asset classes as well) around US $150 Billion. This is available

only to large institutions

• 568 Securities in the Northbound (Hong Kong to Shanghai), 268 in the Southbound (Shanghai to Hong

Kong), 68 Dual Listed Securities

• Daily Northbound Quota is RMB 13 Billion (Around $2 Billion USD), Daily Southbound Quota is

RMB 10.5 Billion (Less than $2 Billion USD)

• Market Cap (Approximate) on Hong Kong Connect Securities - $105 Billion USD

5

• Daily Average Daily Volume, ADV, (Approximate) on Hong Kong Connect Securities - $ 5 Billion USD

• Market Cap (Approximate) on Shanghai Connect Securities - $53 Billion USD

• Daily ADV (Approximate) on Shanghai Connect Securities - $30 Billion USD

2.4 Dual Listing Dynamics

There is again a massive amount of literature on dual listing and its eﬀect on stock returns. Serra

(1999) investigates the eﬀects on stock returns of dual-listing on an international exchange across a sample of

emerging market securities. The results from the sample they analyze conﬁrm previous empirical ﬁndings that

there are positive abnormal returns before listing and a signiﬁcant decline in expected returns following the

listing. Such a result is explained by the extent of integration of capital markets, where integration is deﬁned

as a situation where investors earn the same risk-adjusted expected return on similar ﬁnancial instruments

in diﬀerent markets. In a fully integrated market, the price of risk would be the same in all markets and this

would be the compensation for the systemic risk factors that occur globally. Where the extent of integration

is less or where there is segmentation, risk associated with local factors is priced into the security returns,

yielding diﬀerent rewards to risk. Dual listing or other forms of cross listing would mitigate segmentation

by improving risk sharing. The increased liquidity and investor awareness might lower the required rate of

return. Cross listing could also reduce the cost of capital, acting as an incentive for ﬁrms.

Shleifer and Vishny (1997) in their seminal work on the limits of arbitrage point out that risk free arbitrage

rarely exists in the real world. Most arbitrageurs, who are specialized investors, managing assets on behalf of

others, face the possibility of interim liquidations before the price disparity is restored, sometimes even when

the arbitrage opportunity is at its best, due to the short term losses that can crop up from the diverging prices.

This limitation on the capital available for arbitrage could even amplify the arbitrage opportunity by forcing

the actions of investors against the direction of trading that could potentially restore the price deviation and

is compounded due to any long run fundamental risk faced by the arbitrageurs. Gromb and Vayanos (2010)

emphasize costs that arbitrageurs could face, like a) risk, both fundamental and non-fundamental; b) cost

of short selling; c) leverage and margin constraints; d) and constraints on equity capital. Fundamental risk

arises due to asset payoﬀs and non-fundamental risk could be due to demand shocks generated by the set of

investors who are not solely looking to proﬁt from the arbitrage opportunity, also labeled “noise traders”.

De Jong, Rosenthal and Van Dijk (2003, 2009) continue along this line of inquiry by looking at price

deviations across securities formed as a result of mergers, in which both companies remain incorporated

independently. In contrast to securities listed on diﬀerent exchanges by the same company, the securities

6

could be listed on the same exchange in this case. To ensure there is no confusion in the terminology, we

refer to these as Siamese twins, as opposed to the listing of shares in Hong Kong and China, which we

refer to as dual listed. They show that abnormal returns could persist even after accounting for systematic

risk, transaction costs and margin requirements. Market frictions are controlled for by taking into account

estimates of brokerage commissions, bid-ask spreads, short rebates and capital requirements. The cost of

setting up an arbitrage position is taken as half of the bid-ask spread, which lends some realism to the

analysis yet remains questionable of the real costs execution traders face while implementing portfolios of

large orders. Arbitrage activity could be further impeded due to the volatility of returns from arbitrage and

the high incidence of negative returns, due to the uncertainty about the horizon at which prices will converge

and deviations from parity. Bedi, Richards and Tennant (2003) highlight an interesting nuance that the

pricing of Siamese twins converges following the announcement of uniﬁcation via a raise in the price of the

twin trading at a discount, while conﬁrming that a price divergence continues to exist for regular listings on

merged companies.

Peng, Miao, and Chow (2008) argue that the extent of segmentation between Hong Kong and China is

high due to the restrictions imposed on the mobility of capital. An interesting point to note is that almost all

dual listed companies have issued more H shares than A shares. The relatively small supply of A shares could

exacerbate the price diﬀerential leading to the A share premium. Their investigation of the price dynamics

reveals that the A and H price diﬀerential is stationary with a trend towards relative price convergence, where

the diﬀerential will not diverge persistently from a certain level, as opposed to absolute price convergence

or long term equalization, where the price gap has a long term mean of zero. In addition to micro factors,

Fong, Wong and Yong (2008) consider macroeconomic factors and ﬁnd that Chinese currency appreciation

expectations and monetary expansion contributed to the A-H share price disparity by aﬀecting the prices of

A shares, but their inﬂuence on the prices of H shares was insigniﬁcant.

2.4.1 Main Diﬀerence from Dual Listing

• Comparing the Connect situation to a dual listed security, one main diﬀerence would be the daily and
aggregate quota limits on the amount securities, being bought and sold, that are part of this pilot

connect program.

• The other diﬀerence being that participants wishing to buy shares in Shanghai need to go through their

representatives or broker ﬁrms in Hong Kong and vice versa.

7

2.5 Unintended Consequences

Any attempt at regulatory change is best exempliﬁed by the story of Sergey Bubka(4), the Russian pole

vault jumper, who broke the world record 35 times. Attempts at regulatory change can be compared to

taking the bar higher. In this case, the intended eﬀect of the change is to provide investors’ greater access to

China markets without creating price distortions and/or opportunities for abnormal proﬁts. Despite all the

uncertainty (See Kashyap 2014a, 2014b), we can be certain of one thing, that the market participants will

ﬁnd some way over the intended consequences, prompting another round of rule revisions, or raising the bar,

if you will. (Kashyap 2015b) looks at a recent empirical example related to trading costs where unintended

consequences set in. Below we mention the unknowns (or unintended consequences) that we know about (or

can anticipate). What about the unknowns that we don’t know about (or cannot even imagine). The only

thing, we know about these unknown unknowns are that, there must be a lot of them, hence the need for us

to be eternally vigilant, compelling all attempts at risk management to make sure that the unexpected, even

if it does happen, is contained in the harm it can cause, while being cognizant that this is easier said than

done; a topic best saved for another time.

2.5.1 Uncertainty due to the Limited Quota

• Whenever there are limits imposed on the total amount of any good and there is no explicit mechanism
to distribute it, it can lead to stock piling (in this case literally) and later distribution at a proﬁt. It

remains to be seen, if the daily quota allowed in this case is big enough to meet the demand or whether

it would lead to someone accumulating shares and parceling it out later.

• Imagine just one keg of beer, a few dozen college kids and no rules as to how much beer each one gets!!!

• The imposed quota might exacerbate the possibility of arbitrage between the connect shares across the

two markets.

• Due to the quota there is some execution risk, which means if the quota is ﬁlled just before an execution,
the execution could get rejected. This can happen despite the fact that the SEHK plans to disseminate

remaining quota balances every ﬁve seconds.

2.6 A Recipe for the Skeptics

Among the key questions in the minds of many who wish to beneﬁt from this increased exposure to China,

would be one key question “Which market would be better to trade to gain exposure to the same

(or similar) set of securities or sectors?” The answer to this question would be determined by the

implicit trading costs incurred on comparable securities in Hong Kong and China.

8

1. The main issue we run into, while doing any study on trading costs in China, is that it is very hard to

get a good sample of orders for securities traded in China, before the connect was launched.

2. Another related issue is that there are many ways to measure and estimate implicit trading costs. The

discussion on which ones are better can prove to be very interesting, very long, and some would say,

somewhat inconclusive.

To solve both these problems, and perhaps make a case for even the most hardened of skeptics amongst us,

we design our study as follow:

• We ran a set of simulations across dummy orders, with the same set of parameters, and estimated
implicit trading costs on dual listed securities that trade both in China and Hong Kong. The estimated

costs on dummy orders, gives us a way of comparing similar orders trading under similar market

conditions in Hong Kong and Shanghai, and provides a way to understand the trading cost trends in

the two markets.

– We run time trend regressions across the market impact estimates, which helps us understand

which market is showing an increasing cost trend.

– We do Welch t-tests (Welch 1947) on the estimated trading costs across Hong Kong and Shanghai

securities which gives us a way to assess which time series is larger and hence instructive as to

which market is more expensive to trade.

• We then look at the same set of metrics, estimated and actual trading costs, across real orders on
the Hong Kong securities in the dual listed pair. This tells us how accurate our estimates are when

compared to actual trading costs.

– Lastly, we perform Mincer Zarnowitz regressions (Mincer and Zarnowitz 1969) to assess how good

the forecasts are versus the observed values on real orders, on which we have both the actual

market impact costs and the corresponding estimates.

• We perform series of tests with diﬀerent ﬂavors, such as, considering: the full sample; a sub sample two
months before the event; taking the simple average; taking the notional weighted average; excluding

high liquidity demanding orders; and aggregating costs across diﬀerent categories such as Side (Buy or

Sell), Market Capitalization, Sector and %ADV demand of the orders.

9

• Structuring the study in this way, helps us abstract away from many of the nuances of how trading
costs are measured and estimated. This allows us to focus on the bigger puzzle of comparing the two

markets.

Despite this abstraction of some of the technical details, it is worthwhile to have a brief sketch of the

methodology we have used. The next section presents a synopsis of our fundamentally diﬀerent approach

to Trading Cost Analysis. Kashyap (2015c) is a complete development of this transaction cost model, that

incorporates stochastic dynamic programming based techniques into the below formulation, under diﬀerent

laws of motion of the security prices, starting with a benchmark scenario and extending this to include

multiple sources of uncertainty, liquidity constraints due to volume curve shifts and relates trading costs

to the spread. We then move on to the numerical results, hoping to provide someone looking to enter the

Chinese Securities markets certain useful pieces of information and to help them scale “The Great Wall of

Chinese Securities Trading Costs”.

3 Trading Cost Measurement Methodology

The unique aspect of our approach to trading costs is a method of splitting the overall move of the security

price during the duration of an order into two components (Collins and Fabozzi 1991; Treynor 1994; Yegerman

and Gillula 2014). One component gives the costs of trading that arise from the decision process that went

into executing that particular order, as captured by the price moves caused by the executions that comprise

that order. The other component gives the costs of trading that arise due to the decision process of all the

other market participants during the time this particular order was being ﬁlled. This second component is

inferred, since it is not possible to calculate it directly (at least with the present state of technology and

publicly available data) and it is diﬀerence between the overall trading costs and the ﬁrst component, which

is the trading cost of that order alone. The ﬁrst and the second component arise due to competing forces,

one from the actions of a particular participant and the other from the actions of everyone else that would be

looking to fulﬁll similar objectives. Naturally, it follows that each particular participant can only inﬂuence

to a greater degree the cost that arises from his actions as compared to the actions of others, over which he

has lesser inﬂuence, but an understanding of the second component, can help him plan and alter his actions,

to counter any adversity that might arise from the latter. Any good trader would do this intuitively as an

optimization process, that would minimize costs over two variables direct impact and timing, the output

of which recommends either slowing down or speeding up his executions. With this measure, traders now

actually have a quantitative indicator to ﬁne tune their decision process. When we decompose the costs, it

would be helpful to try and understand how the two sub costs could vary as a proportion of the total. The

volatility in these two components, which would arise from diﬀerent sources (market conditions), would require

10

diﬀerent responses and hence would aﬀect the optimization problem mentioned above invoking diﬀerent sorts

of handling and based on the situation, traders would know which cost would be the more unpredictable

one and hence focus their eﬀorts on minimizing the costs arising from that component. Another popular

way to decompose trading costs is into temporary and permanent impact [See Almgren and Chriss (2001);

Almgren (2003); and Almgren, Thum, Hauptmann and Li (2005)]. While the theory behind this approach

is extremely elegant and considers both linear and nonlinear functions of the variables for estimating the

impact, a practical way to compute it requires measuring the price a certain interval after the order. This

interval is ambiguous and could lead to lower accuracy while using this measure.

We now introduce some terminology used throughout the discussion.

1. Total Slippage - The overall price move on the security during the order duration. This is also a proxy

for the implementation shortfall (Perold 1988 and Treynor 1981). It is worth mentioning that there are

many similar metrics used by various practitioners and this concept gets used in situations for which it is

not the best suited (Yegerman and Gillula 2014). While the usefulness of the Implementation Shortfall,

or slippage, as a measure to understand the price shortfalls that can arise between constructing a

portfolio and while implementing it, is not to be debated, slippage need to be supplemented with more

granular metrics when used in situations where the eﬀectiveness of algorithms or the availability of

liquidity need to gauged.

2. Market Impact (MI) - The price moves caused by the executions that comprise the order under consid-

eration. In short, the MI is a proxy for the impact on the price from the liquidity demands of an order.

This metric is generally negative or zero since in most cases, the best impact we can have is usually no

impact.

3. Market Timing - The price moves that happen due to the combined eﬀect of all the other market

participants during the order duration.

4. Market Impact Estimate (MIE) - This is the estimate of the Market Impact, explained in two above

based on recent market conditions. The MIE calculation is the result of a simulation which considers the

number of executions required to ﬁll an order and the price moves encountered while ﬁlling this order,

depending on the market micro-structure as captured by the trading volume and the price probability

distribution including upticks and down-ticks, over the past few days. This simulation can be controlled

with certain parameters that dictate the liquidity demanded on the order, the style of trading, order

duration, market conditions as reﬂected by start of trading and end of trading times. In short, the

MIE is an estimated proxy for the impact on the price from the liquidity demands of an order. Such

an approach holds the philosophical viewpoint that making smaller predictions and considering their

11

combined eﬀect would result in lesser variance as opposed to making a large prediction; estimations

done over a day as compared to estimations over a month, say. A geometrical intuition would be

that ﬁtting more lines (or curves) over a set of points would reduce the overall error as compared to

ﬁtting lesser number of lines (or curves) over the same set of points. When combining the results of

predictions, of course, we have to be mindful of the errors of errors, which can get compounded and

lead the results astray, and hence, empirical tests need to be done to verify the suitability of such a

technique for the particular situation.

5. All these variables are measured in basis points to facilitate ease of comparison and aggregation across

diﬀerent groups. It is possible to measure these in cents per share and also in dollar value or other

currency terms.

6. We start with equations, expressed in simple mathematical terms to facilitate easier understanding,

that govern the relationships between the variables mentioned above. Next, we show two formulations

of Market Impact that can be ﬁt into this framework, with a complete dynamic programming approach

available in (Kashyap 2015c).

3.1 Market Impact Equations

Total Slippage = Market Impact + Market Timing

{Total Price Slippage = Your Price Impact + Price Impact From Everyone Else (Price Drift)}

Market Impact Estimate = Market Impact Prediction = f (Execution Size, Liquidity Demand)

Execution Size = g(Execution Parameters, Market Conditions)

Liquidity Demand = h(Execution Parameters, Market Conditions)

Execution Parameters <->vector comprising (Order Size, Security, Side, Trading Style, Timing Decisions)

Market Conditions <-> vector comprising (Price Movement, Volume Changes, Information Set)

Here, f, g, h are functions. We could impose concavity conditions on these functions, but arguably, similar

results are obtained by assuming no such restrictions and ﬁtting linear or non-linear regression coeﬃcients,

which could be non-concave or even discontinuous allowing for jumps in prices and volumes. The speciﬁc

functional forms used could vary across diﬀerent groups of securities or even across individual securities or

even across diﬀerent time periods for the same security. The crucial aspect of any such estimation is the

comparison with the costs on real orders, as outlined earlier. Simpler modes are generally more helpful in

interpreting the results and for updating the model parameters. Hamilton [1994] and Gujarati [1995] are

classic texts on econometrics methods and time series analysis that accentuate the need for parsimonious

models.

12

The Auxiliary Information Set could be anything under our Sun or even from under other heavenly objects.

A useful variable to include would be the blood pressure and heart rate time series of a representative group

of security traders.

3.1.1

Introducing our Innovation into the Implementation Shortfall

As a refresher, the total slippage or implementation shortfall is derived below with the understanding

that we need to use the Expectation operator when we are working with estimates or future prices. (Kissell

2006) provides more details including the formula where the portfolio may be partly executed. The list of

symbols we use are,

• ¯S, the total number of shares that need to be traded.

• T , the total duration of trading.

• N, the number of trading intervals.

• τ = T /N, the length of each trading interval. We assume the time intervals are of the same duration,

but this can be relaxed quite easily. In continuous time, this becomes, N → ∞, τ → 0.

• The time then becomes divided into discrete intervals, tk = kτ, k = 0, ..., N.

• For simplicity, let time be measured in unit intervals giving, t = 1, 2, ..., T .

• St, the number of shares acquired in period t at price Pt.

• P0 can be any reference price or benchmark used to measure the slippage. It is generally taken to be
the arrival price or the price at which the portfolio manager would like to complete the purchase of the

portfolio.

• Any trading trajectory, would look to formulate an optimal list of total pending shares, W1, ..., WT +1.
Here, Wt is the number of units that we still need to trade at time t. This would mean, W1 = ¯S and
WT +1 = 0 implies that ¯S must be executed by period T . Clearly, ¯S =
Sj. This can equivalently be
represented by the list of executions completed, S1, ..., ST . Here, Wt = Wt−1−St−1 or St−1 = Wt−1−Wt
is the number of units traded between times t − 1 and t. Wt and St are related as below.

T(cid:80)

j=1

Wt = ¯S − t−1(cid:88)

T(cid:88)

Sj =

Sj

, t = 1, ..., T.

Using the above notation,

j=1

j=t

13

Paper Return = ¯SPT − ¯SP0

Real Portfolio Return = ¯SPT −

(cid:32) T(cid:88)

(cid:33)

StPt

t=1

Implementation Shortfall = Paper Return − Real Portfolio Return

(cid:33)

(cid:32) T(cid:88)

t=1

=

StPt

− ¯SP0

This can be written as,

Implementation Shortfall =

(cid:32) T(cid:88)
(cid:32) T(cid:88)

t=1

(cid:33)
(cid:33)

StPt

(cid:33)

− ¯SP0

− P0

(cid:32) T(cid:88)

t=1

t=1

St

StPt

=
= S1P1 + S2P2 + ... + ST PT − S1P0 − S2P0 − ... − ST P0
= S1 (P1 − P0) + S2 (P2 − P0) + ... + ST (PT − P0)

Implementation Shortfall = S1 (P1 − P0) +

S2 (P2 − P1) + S2 (P1 − P0) +
S3 (P3 − P2) + S3 (P2 − P1) + S3 (P1 − P0) +

... +
ST (PT − PT−1) + ST (PT−1 − PT−2) + ... + ST (P1 − P0)

The innovation we introduce would incorporate our earlier discussion about breaking the total impact or

slippage, Implementation Shortfall, into the part from the participants own decision process, Market Impact,

and the part from the decision process of all other participants, Market Timing. This Market Impact, would

capture the actions of the participant, since at each stage the penalty a participant incurs should only be

the price jump caused by their own trade and that is what any participant can hope to minimize. A subtle

point is that the Market Impact portion need only be added up when new price levels are established. If the

price moves down and moves back up (after having gone up once earlier and having been already counted

in the Impact), we need not consider the later moves in the Market Impact (and hence implicitly left out

from the Market Timing as well). This alternate measure would only account for the net move in the prices

but would not show the full extent of aggressiveness and the push and pull between market participants and

hence is not considered here, though it can be useful to know and can be easily incorporated while running

simulations. We discuss two formulations of our measure of the Market Impact in the next two subsections.

14

The reason for calling them simple and complex will become apparent as we continue the discussion.

3.1.2 Market Impact Simple Formulation

The simple market impact formulation does not consider the impact of the new price level established on all

the future trades that are yet to be done. From a theoretical perspective it is useful to study this since it

provides a closed form solution and illustrates the immense practical application of separating impact and

timing. This approach can be a useful aid in markets that are clearly not trending and where the order size

is relatively small compared to the overall volume traded, ensuring that any new price level established does

not linger on for too long and prices gets reestablished due to the trades of other participants. This property

is akin to checking that shocks to the system do not take long to dissipate and equilibrium levels (or rather

new pseudo equilibrium levels) are restored quickly. Our measure of the Market Impact then becomes,

T(cid:88)

Market Impact =

{max [(Pt − Pt−1) , 0] St}

The Market Timing is then given by,

t=1

Market Timing = Implementation Shortfall − Market Impact

(cid:32) T(cid:88)

(cid:33)

− ¯SP0 − T(cid:88)

=

StPt

{max [(Pt − Pt−1) , 0] St}

For illustration, let us consider some examples,

t=1

t=1

1. When all the successive price moves are above their corresponding previous price, that is max [(Pt − Pt−1) , 0] =

(Pt − Pt−1), we have

Market Impact =

T(cid:88)

{max [(Pt − Pt−1) , 0] St}

t=1

= S1 (P1 − P0) + S2 (P2 − P1) + S3 (P3 − P2) + ... + ST (PT − PT−1)

Market Timing = Implementation Shortfall − Market Impact

(cid:33)

(cid:32) T(cid:88)

t=1

− ¯SP0 − S1 (P1 − P0) − S2 (P2 − P1) − S3 (P3 − P2) − ... − ST (PT − PT−1)

StPt

=
= S1P0 + S2P1 + S3P2 + ... + ST PT−1 − ¯SP0
= S2 (P1 − P0) + S3 (P2 − P0) + ... + ST (PT−1 − P0)

2. Some of the successive prices are below their corresponding previous price, let us say, (P2 < P1) and (P3 < P2),

15

we have

Market Impact =

T(cid:88)

{max [(Pt − Pt−1) , 0] St}

t=1

= S1 (P1 − P0) + S2 (0) + S3 (0) + ... + ST (PT − PT−1)

Market Timing = Implementation Shortfall − Market Impact

(cid:33)

(cid:32) T(cid:88)

t=1

StPt

− ¯SP0 − S1 (P1 − P0) − S2 (0) − S3 (0) − ... − ST (PT − PT−1)

=
= S2P2 + S3P3 + S1P0 + S4P3 + S5P4 + ... + ST PT−1 − ¯SP0
= S2 (P2 − P0) + S3 (P3 − P0) + S4 (P3 − P0) + S5 (P4 − P0) + ... + ST (PT−1 − P0)

3.1.3 Market Impact Complex Formulation

Another measure of the Market Impact can be formulated as below which represents the idea that when a

participant seeks liquidity and establishes a new price level, all the pending shares or the unexecuted program

is aﬀected by this new price level. This is a more realistic approach since the action now will explicitly aﬀect

the shares that are not yet executed. This measure can be written as,

T(cid:88)

Market Impact =

{max [(Pt − Pt−1) , 0] Wt}

The Market Timing is then given by,

t=1

Market Timing = Implementation Shortfall − Market Impact

(cid:32) T(cid:88)

(cid:33)

− ¯SP0 − T(cid:88)

=

StPt

{max [(Pt − Pt−1) , 0] Wt}

For illustration, let us consider some examples,

t=1

t=1

1. When all the successive price moves are above their corresponding previous price, that is max [(Pt − Pt−1) , 0] =

(Pt − Pt−1), we have

Market Impact =

T(cid:88)

{max [(Pt − Pt−1) , 0] Wt}

t=1

= W1 (P1 − P0) + W2 (P2 − P1) + W3 (P3 − P2) + ... + WT (PT − PT−1)

16

(cid:33)

(cid:32) T(cid:88)
(cid:34) T(cid:88)

t=1

=

=

Market Timing = Implementation Shortfall − Market Impact

StPt

− ¯SP0 − W1 (P1 − P0) − W2 (P2 − P1) − W3 (P3 − P2) − ... − WT (PT − PT−1)

(Wt − Wt+1) Pt

− W1P0 − W1 (P1 − P0)

t=1

−W2 (P2 − P1) − W3 (P3 − P2) − ... − WT (PT − PT−1)
= (W1 − W2) P1 + (W2 − W3) P2 + ... + (WT − WT +1) PT

−W1P0 − W1 (P1 − P0) − W2 (P2 − P1) − W3 (P3 − P2) − ... − WT (PT − PT−1)

= 0

2. Some of the successive prices are below their corresponding previous price, let us say, (P2 < P1) and (P3 < P2),

we have

Market Impact =

T(cid:88)

{max [(Pt − Pt−1) , 0] Wt}

t=1

= W1 (P1 − P0) + W2 (0) + W3 (0) + ... + WT (PT − PT−1)

(cid:35)

(cid:35)

(cid:33)

(cid:32) T(cid:88)
(cid:34) T(cid:88)

t=1

=

=

Market Timing = Implementation Shortfall − Market Impact

StPt

− ¯SP0 − W1 (P1 − P0) − W2 (0) − W3 (0) − ... − WT (PT − PT−1)

(Wt − Wt+1) Pt

− W1P0 − W1 (P1 − P0)

t=1

−W2 (0) − W3 (0) − ... − WT (PT − PT−1)

= (W1 − W2) P1 + (W2 − W3) P2 + ... + (WT − WT +1) PT

−W1P0 − W1 (P1 − P0) − W2 (0) − W3 (0) − ... − WT (PT − PT−1)

= −W2P1 + W2P2 − W3P2 + W3P3
= W2 (P2 − P1) + W3 (P3 − P2)

4 From Symbols to Numbers (From Modeling to Trading), Numer-

ical Results

Adhering to a modiﬁed version of the old adage, “A picture is equal to a thousand words or a million

numbers (or pixels)”, we try to present, where possible, the main empirical results as easy to read charts,

supplementing them with statistical tests and highlighting any major trends with explanations. It is worth

17

noting that majority of the conclusions are fairly self-explanatory and some are possible to interpret in

diﬀerent ways depending on the view one holds. The data-set and the metrics are elaborated upon in the

relevant sections below.

4.1 The Four Elements of the Empirical Study

We utilize a four pronged approach to understand the trading trends due to the Hong Kong – Shanghai

Connect. The four parts can be categorized as follows

1. Volume: We look at the Volume Traded in the two markets across the entire group of Connect securities.

We also look at volume curves across some single names in both Hong Kong and Shanghai across certain

key dates. The key dates we consider for the volume curves are

(a) The start of the year, which also falls about three months before the announcement of the program.

This also captures any pre announcement leakage of information. January 10, 2010

(b) The announcement date, April 10, 2010

(c) The initial expected launch date, October 27, 2014

(d) The actual launch date on November 17, 2014

2. Price: The Price Convergence and Premium on dual listed securities is analyzed in greater detail. This

gives an indication of whether prices are moving together or away from each other on similar securities

and hence helps shed some additional light on what we can expect from trading costs.

3. Market Impact or Implicit Trading Costs: We calculate the Market Impact Estimate (MIE) on a sample

of close to 500,000 dummy orders across the dual listed securities with the same exact set of parameters.

We then look at the MIE and other trading cost metrics on close to 100,000 real orders across the dual

listed Hong Kong securities. The analysis time period for the simulation was from January 10 2014 to

November 14, 2014. The analysis time period for the real orders was from January 10 2014 to November

10, 2014.

4. Auxiliary Order Level Metrics: We look at other useful metrics from order level data including average

trade size, average notional size, percentage of spread paid, actual spread cost, order duration, number

of executions per minute and how the executions are dispersed over the order interval. These auxiliary

metrics are possible indicators of changes in the trading strategies used over time.

18

4.2 Stationary Tests on Volume and Price

We perform standard stationary tests on prices and volume on the overall group securities eligible for

the Connect and also across just the dual listed securities. We perform the Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test,

the KPSS test and Phillips-Perron test. The null hypothesis for the ADF and PP test is that the series is

explosive or stationary against the alternate that there is a unit root. The KPSS null hypothesis is that the

series is level or trend stationary against the alternate that there is a unit root. It is easily apparent that

volumes are stationary and prices are not (Figure 2) across the entire group of the connect securities. A

similar result holds when we look at volumes and prices across the dual listed pairs of securities.

4.3 Price Convergence of Dual Listed Securities

We now zoom into the convergence of the prices of the dual listed pair of securities. Greasley and Oxley

(1997); and Bernard and Durlauf (1995, 1996) check for the convergence of economic time series based on

unit root tests. We apply similar methods to the price series of the dual listed stocks to see if there are trends

towards convergence. The deﬁnition of convergence used implies that the below diﬀerence does not converge

if it contains a unit root.

k→∞E(yi,t+k − yj,t+k

lim

|

It) = 0

yi,t+k ↔ Time Series for ﬁrst security in the pair
yj,t+k ↔ Time Series for second security in the pair

It ↔ Information Set

We look at the below few combinations of the dual listed prices while checking for unit roots. When taking

the diﬀerence, we always consider the Hong Kong security as the ﬁrst element.

1. The price diﬀerence between the dual listed pair denominated in the Chinese currency.

2. The price diﬀerence between the dual listed pair denominated in the Chinese currency, where the

diﬀerence is above zero.

3. The price diﬀerence between the dual listed pair denominated in the Chinese currency, where the

diﬀerence is below zero.

4. The price diﬀerence as a percentage of the price of the shanghai security of the pair.

5. The price diﬀerence as a percentage of the price of the shanghai security of the pair, where the diﬀerence

is above zero.

19

6. The price diﬀerence as a percentage of the price of the shanghai security of the pair, where the diﬀerence

is below zero.

7. We calculate the Hong Kong and Shanghai price spread and check whether it is stationary. The spread

is the error term when we run a regression of one price against the other price in the security pair.

xit = βyit + εit
xit ↔ price of ﬁrst security in the pair
yit ↔ price of second security in the pair
β ↔ Linear Regression Coeﬃcient
εit ↔ error term

The results are summarized in the ﬁgure 2. We ﬁnd that there is a trend towards convergence among a subset

of the dual listed universe. It is worth noting that for the dual listed securities, the sums of the security counts

on the negative and positive diﬀerences, do not add up to the security count on the aggregate, indicating that

some security pairs reverse the sign of their price diﬀerence during this time period. The second table is the

same set of tests repeated over a shorter time frame. This gives us a chance to check whether there is greater

convergence in the dual listed price pairs once participants have had long enough duration to react to the

initial announcement. The convergence is slightly higher for the tests on the shorter time frame indicating

that perhaps the delays have contributed to the divergence again, though this is not signiﬁcant. (Su, Chong

and Yan 2007) ﬁnd that there was convergence in the prices after the launch of two policies, the QFII and

the Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement (CEPA). A point worth noting is that there were less number

of dual listed shares (less than half the number now) at the time of their study.

Some questions that bubble up to the surface are:

1. Do additional or newer dual listings bring in more divergence? With the launch of the connect, it

remains to be seen whether companies would continue to prefer dual listings over listing on just one of

the exchanges, since, technically speaking, the two exchanges are Connected (!).

2. Is convergence a temporary phenomenon?

3. Are the eﬀects of direct trading related regulations (as the Connect) stronger on convergence as com-

pared to more indirect policy interventions (as the QFII and CEPA)?

20

Figure 2: Convergence and Stationary Test Results

4.3.1 Price Premium

The Positive Price Premium on dual listed securities has fallen by more than 100% (Figure 3). The positive

price premium is measured as the diﬀerence between the Hong Kong Security Price and the Shanghai Security

Price as a percentage of the Shanghai price, when the Hong Kong Security Price is greater than the Shanghai

Price. While the below is the daily average across securities with a positive premium, we see similar results

for the aggregate and also when we take a weighted average based on the volumes traded. The median

number of securities with the positive premium varies is 24 and it varies between 20 to 25 over the course

of the analysis time period. From the PP stationary test, there are more number of securities here, as a

proportion of the total that might have price convergence. This explains the distinct change in the price

premium in this group, as compared to the negative premium and the aggregate premium. The negative

price premium is deﬁned and treated similarly. The median number of securities with the negative premium

is 40 and it varies between 40 to 45 over the course of the analysis time period. We create a price index to

show the overall price movement in all the Hong Kong and Shanghai securities that are part of the connect,

21

weighted by market capitalization and the starting value set to one. The Hong Kong price index is higher

while the Shanghai price index is not (Figure 3).

Additional graphs illustrating the total premium and how the premium is distributed based on Market

Cap and Turnover are given in Appendix 7.1.

Figure 3: Price Premium and Price Index

4.4 Hong Kong and Shanghai Traded Volume

Volume Traded in Shanghai has gone up by more than 200% (Figure 4). The volume is indexed to one at the

start of the time period and the eﬀect of price increases have been removed to capture only the growth in

notional traded. Since volume is stationary from the earlier section, we can conclude there is indeed a shift

towards higher trading levels.

Figure 4: Volume Traded

22

4.5 Simulated Trading Cost Comparison on Dual Listed Hong Kong and Shang-

hai Securities

We look at how the trading cost estimates on dual listed securities have changed over the months leading

up to the Connect. The simulations used have the same parameters for the Hong Kong security and for

the dual listed Shanghai security. We look at the full sample and also slice it into various categories like

Side, Market Capitalization, Sector and % ADV demand of the order. We run time trend regressions of the

sort below, where we aggregate the market impact across diﬀerent buckets by taking the notional weighted

average and for comparison purposes, we also consider another version of these regressions just by taking the

simple average.

K(cid:88)

wiyit = β0 + β1t + εt

i=1

Here, wi is the weight of an estimate yit in a particular category being considered at time t with a total of
K estimates being aggregated in that bucket.

We perform Welch-T tests across Hong Kong and Shanghai securities for the simple average and notional

weighted average trading cost estimates over diﬀerent buckets. The t statistic for this test, checks the

diﬀerence in the means of two time series and accounts for the diﬀerent variances.

t =

(cid:113) s2

X 1 − X 2
+ s2
2
N2

1
N1

where X i, s2

i and Ni are the sample mean, sample variance and sample size, respectively.

We repeat the entire set of tests for the last two months before the event. We perform another set of

comparisons excluding liquidity demand 50%+ ADV from the sample since the higher impact orders tend

to be larger and would skew the results. This would lead to better conclusions because the number of real

orders in these buckets tends to be small, but we can still look at the changes in these higher ADV orders as

they will show up separately in the ADV categorization.

We see that the trading costs in Shanghai on an overall basis are lower than Hong Kong till the days

leading up to the connect, but as we get closer to Connect, the costs in Shanghai become higher. This is seen

in the more negative co-eﬃcients (statistically signiﬁcant) on the China sub-groups as compared to the HK

sub-groups in the time trend regressions. The results are only ampliﬁed when we consider the full sample

and the notional weighted average. In the Welch tests we see that the HK means are higher for the overall

sample, but in the last two months before the event the China means are higher for the majority of the

sub-groups. We summarize the comparison in ﬁgure 5 below. Additional graphs including the results of the

time trend regressions and welch tests are given in Appendix 7.2.

23

Figure 5: Simulation Trading Costs

4.6 Estimated and Actual Costs across Real Orders on Dual Listed Hong Kong

Securities

When doing any study of trading costs, we need to face the realities of high variance and extremely low

co-eﬃcient of variations. The key is to extract the signal from the noise being mindful of the fact that if

we have a candle in the dark, our mission is accomplished. To aid this eﬀort at amplifying the signals, we

ﬁlter out orders that show zero market impact since they increase the noise without adding any meaningful

explanation. This is also practical from another point since the orders with zero impact are traded very

passively and hence their inclusion would only reduce the contribution of orders with meaningful impact

towards any patterns we wish to uncover. To diﬀerentiate this study from other impact studies that rely

signiﬁcantly on price volatility, we run the test without including price volatility, but use only a dummy

variable to include the type of volatility environment. We ﬁrst run Mincer-Zarnowitz type regressions of the

type shown below, on the whole sample and across various sub groups. Results of test of hypothesis (both

24

joint and separate) on the estimated co-eﬃcients using the F-test of signiﬁcance for β0 = 0; β1 = 1 result in
rejection; but with β0 = ˆβ0±(cid:52)0; β1 = ˆβ1±(cid:52)1, that is with small values around the estimated co-eﬃcients we
get high p-values implying that the co-eﬃcients are signiﬁcant but have a great deal of sensitivity around their

estimated values, an artifact of the high noise environment. The trading costs are broken down into various

categories similar to the ones we used in the previous section. This allows the comparison of how accurate

the estimated costs are versus real costs and helps establish conﬁdence in our estimation methodology. The

results (Appendix 7.3) show that the co-eﬃcients are non-zero and signiﬁcant, indicating a good level of

forecasting prowess.

yt = β0 + β1 ˆyt + εt

To understand the upper limits of the predictive ability of our methodology, we include other variables and

run secondary regressions. First we include category variables. We report two ﬂavors of results here. One

with the set of category variables that we know before an order is traded. The other set would deﬁne the

environment when an order is being executed. This illustrates that speciﬁc numerical forecasts of these second

set of variables can enhance predictive power, but even a judgment regarding which category might apply

will still be helpful towards improving performance. We then include the notional traded, the arrival price

and the number of shares. Lastly, including the 90 day moving price volatility at the security level we see

marginally improved performance. The evaluation of the forecasts still relies on the basic Mincer-Zarnowitz

regression. The other speciﬁcations are merely to illustrate the increased explanatory power that comes with

our methodology.

K(cid:88)

βiDi + εt

yt = β0 + β1 ˆyt +

Here,

i=2

Di are dummy variables that deﬁne each of our sub groups.

yt = β0 + β1 ˆyt + ln (N otionalt) + ln (Sharest) + (Arrival P ricet)

+(cid:0)M oving P rice V olatility{90−t,t}(cid:1) +

K(cid:88)

βiDi + εt

4.7 Auxiliary Metrics on Real Orders

i=2

The price of liquidity, as measured by the spread, both in terms of the actual value or in terms of

percentage of the spread paid has not changed drastically. The size of trades have increased both in shares

and notional terms, as has the duration over which orders are traded. The velocity of trading as measured by

the number of executions per minute has decreased. This could be an indication of traders grabbing bigger

chunks of liquidity but more patiently since they are waiting longer to ﬁll the entire orders. Combining this

25

inference with the Volume Weighted Execution Time (VWET) we ﬁnd that the trading is still fairly evenly

spread out over the duration of the order. VWET indicates the extent to which executions are front loaded

or back loaded within the entire order duration. A value close to 50% indicates a fairly even distribution of

executions or executions closer to the front or to the back of the order duration. (Appendix 7.4)

4.8 Volume Curves for Select Hong Kong and Shanghai Names

Volume Curves across key dates leading up to the Connect are shown for a select number of single names.

It is fairly easy to infer that the volumes traded increase signiﬁcantly around announcement dates and on the

launch date of the Connect. We show the volume both as percentage of day’s total volume and in number of

shares. (Appendix 7.5)

5 Conclusions and Possibilities for Future Research

Adhering to a modiﬁed version of the old adage, “A picture is equal to a thousand words or a million

numbers (or pixels)”, we have presented, where possible, some of the main empirical results as easy to read

graphs supplementing the analysis with statistical tests, explanations and highlighting major observations.

One conclusion that emerges is that the trading costs in Shanghai which might have been cheaper compared

to Hong Kong might be becoming more expensive in the run up to the Connect and perhaps even beyond.

Contrary to what one would except, given the increasing trading volume and converging price premium,

the divergence of trading costs stands out as an interesting eﬀect of the greater demand for liquidity on

the northbound route. What remains to be seen and analyzed in later studies is whether this increase in

trading costs is a temporary equilibrium due to the frenzy to gain exposure to Chinese securities or whether

this phenomenon will persist once the two markets start becoming more and more tightly coupled. Also of

interest would be to see whether other regulatory interventions in the ﬁnancial markets will lead to such

drastic changes to the costs of trading.

Once the actual connect program starts, we expect to have a signiﬁcant number of orders traded on

securities listed in Shanghai through the Connect. This will allow subsequent studies to do an actual com-

parison on real orders of which market oﬀers the better way to gain exposure to similar securities from both

a trading and also from a portfolio construction perspective. Finally, as an afterthought we let the reader

ponder about what ﬁnancial liberalizations means to the mode of governance in a country. It might be an

interesting study to look at other cases where there have been signiﬁcant changes to the extent of cross border

ﬂows of capital and what eﬀect it has had on the economy and the overall well-being of the representative

population (See Boyer and Drache 1996; Kashyap 2015a; Quinn 2000; Simmons, Dobbin and Garrett 2008).

A related question is the eﬀect; the mode of governance and other aspects of life in one country have on

another country, once they start linking up their ﬁnancial markets.

26

6 Notes and References

1. The author would like to express his gratitude to Brad Hunt, Henry Yegerman, Samuel Zou and Alex

Gillula at Markit for many inputs during the creation of this work. Dr. Isabel Yan, Dr. Yong Wang,

Dr. Vikas Kakkar, Dr. Fred Kwan, Dr. Costel Daniel Andonie, Dr. Humphrey Tung and Dr. Xu

Han at the City University of Hong Kong provided advice and more importantly encouragement to

explore and where possible apply cross disciplinary techniques. The views and opinions expressed in

this article, along with any mistakes, are mine alone and do not necessarily reﬂect the oﬃcial policy or

position of either of my aﬃliations or any other agency.

2. A Review of China’s Economy in 2013. Center for Macroeconomic Research, Xiamen University.

China’s Macroeconomic Outlook. Springer.

3. http://www.hkex.com.hk/eng/csm/chinaConnect.asp?LangCode=en

4. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergey_Bubka

5. Almgren, R., & Chriss, N. (2001). Optimal execution of portfolio transactions. Journal of Risk, 3, 5-40.

6. Almgren, R. F. (2003). Optimal execution with nonlinear impact functions and trading-enhanced risk.

Applied mathematical ﬁnance, 10(1), 1-18.

7. Almgren, R., Thum, C., Hauptmann, E., & Li, H. (2005). Direct estimation of equity market impact.

Risk, 18, 5752.

8. Beck, T., & Levine, R. (2004). Stock markets, banks, and growth: Panel evidence. Journal of Banking

& Finance, 28(3), 423-442.

9. Bedi, J., Richards, A. J., & Tennant, P. (2003). The characteristics and trading behavior of dual-listed

companies. Reserve Bank of Australia Research Discussion Paper, (2003-06).

10. Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., & Lundblad, C. (2005). Does ﬁnancial liberalization spur growth?. Journal

of Financial economics, 77(1), 3-55.

11. Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., & Lundblad, C. (2007). Liquidity and expected returns: Lessons from

emerging markets. Review of Financial Studies, 20(6), 1783-1831.

12. Bernard, A. B., & Durlauf, S. N. (1995). Convergence in international output. Journal of applied

econometrics, 10(2), 97-108.

13. Bernard, A. B., & Durlauf, S. N. (1996). Interpreting tests of the convergence hypothesis. Journal of

econometrics, 71(1), 161-173.

27

14. Boyer, R. & Drache, D. (Eds.).

(1996). States against markets: the limits of globalization. York

University. University of Toronto. Innis College (Toronto). London: Routledge.

15. Collins, B. M., & Fabozzi, F. J. (1991). A methodology for measuring transaction costs. Financial

Analysts Journal, 47(2), 27-36.

16. Deeg, R., & O’Sullivan, M. A. (2009). The political economy of global ﬁnance capital. World Politics,

61(04), 731-763.

17. De Jong, A., Rosenthal, L., & Van Dijk, M. A. (2003). The limits of arbitrage: evidence from dual-listed

companies. Erasmus University working paper.

18. De Jong, A., Rosenthal, L., & Van Dijk, M. A. (2009). The Risk and Return of Arbitrage in Dual-Listed

Companies*. Review of Finance, 13(3), 495-520.

19. Easley, D., & O’Hara, M. (2010). Microstructure and Ambiguity. Journal of Finance, 65(5), 1817-1846.

20. Epstein, G. A. (Ed.).

(2005). Financialization and the world economy. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Cheltenham, UK.

21. Fong, T., Wong, A., & Yong, I. (2008). Share price disparity in Chinese stock markets. Macroeconomic

Linkages between Hong Kong and Mainland China.

22. Greasley, D., & Oxley, L. (1997). Time-series based tests of the convergence hypothesis: some positive

results. Economics Letters, 56(2), 143-147.

23. Gromb, D., & Vayanos, D. (2010). Limits of Arbitrage. Annual Review of Financial Economics, 2(1),

251-275.

24. Gujarati, D. N. (1995). Basic econometrics, 3rd. International Edition.

25. Hamilton, J. D. (1994). Time series analysis (Vol. 2). Princeton university press.

26. Henry, P. B. (2000). Do stock market liberalizations cause investment booms?. Journal of Financial

economics, 58(1), 301-334.

27. Kashyap, R. (2014a). Dynamic Multi-Factor Bid–Oﬀer Adjustment Model. The Journal of Trading,

9(3), 42-55.

28. Kashyap, R. (2014b). The Circle of Investment. International Journal of Economics and Finance, 6(5),

244-263.

28

29. Kashyap, R. (2015a). Financial Services, Economic Growth and Well-Being: A Four Pronged Study.

Indian Journal of Finance, 9(1), 9-22.

30. Kashyap, R. (2015b). A Tale of Two Consequences. The Journal of Trading, 10(4), 51-95.

31. Kashyap, R. (2015c). David vs Goliath (You against the Markets), A Dynamic Programming Approach

to Separate the Impact and Timing of Trading Costs. Working Paper.

32. Kissell, R. (2006). The expanded implementation shortfall: Understanding transaction cost compo-

nents. The Journal of Trading, 1(3), 6-16.

33. Levine, R. (2001). International ﬁnancial liberalization and economic growth. Review of International

economics, 9(4), 688-702.

34. Levine, R., & Zervos, S. (1996). Stock market development and long-run growth. The World Bank

Economic Review, 10(2), 323-339.

35. Levine, R., & Zervos, S. (1998a) Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth. American economic

review. 88(3), 537-558.

36. Levine, R., & Zervos, S. (1998b). Capital control liberalization and stock market development. World

Development, 26(7), 1169-1183.

37. Mincer, J. A., & Zarnowitz, V. (1969). The evaluation of economic forecasts. In Economic Forecasts

and Expectations: Analysis of Forecasting Behavior and Performance (pp. 3-46). NBER.

38. Peng, W., Miao, H., & Chow, N. (2008). Price convergence between dual-listed A and H shares.

Macroeconomic Linkages between Hong Kong and Mainland China, 295-315.

39. Perold, A. F. (1988). The implementation shortfall: Paper versus reality. The Journal of Portfolio

Management, 14(3), 4-9.

40. Quinn, D. P. (2000). Democracy and international ﬁnancial liberalization. McDonough School of

Business, Georgetown University.

41. Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1997). The limits of arbitrage. The Journal of Finance, 52(1), 35-55.

42. Simmons, B. A., Dobbin, F., & Garrett, G. (Eds.).

(2008). The global diﬀusion of markets and

democracy (pp. 319-332). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

43. Serra, A. P. (1999). Dual-listings on international exchanges: the case of emerging markets’ stocks.

European Financial Management, 5(2), 165-202.

29

44. Su, Q., Chong, T. T. L., & Yan, I. K. M. (2007). On the convergence of the Chinese and Hong Kong

stock markets: a cointegration analysis of the A and H shares. Applied Financial Economics, 17(16),

1349-1357.

45. Treynor, J. L. (1981). What does it take to win the trading game?. Financial Analysts Journal, 37(1),

55-60.

46. Treynor, J. L. (1994). The invisible costs of trading. The Journal of Portfolio Management, 21(1),

71-78.

47. Welch, B. L. (1947). The generalization of student’s’ problem when several diﬀerent population vari-

ances are involved. Biometrika, 28-35.

48. Yegerman, H. & Gillula, A. (2014). The Use and Abuse of Implementation Shortfall. Markit Working

Paper.

7 Appendix

7.1 Price Premium Charts

The Total Premium is the average diﬀerence in price between Hong Kong price and Shanghai price expressed

as a percentage of the Shanghai Price. The Combined Market Capitalization is the sum of the Market Cap of

the Hong Kong and Shanghai Security expressed in USD Billions. The Combined Turnover is the sum of the

turnover of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Security, with both using the price of Shanghai security expressed

in CNY Billions.

Figure 6: Total and Negative Premium

30

Figure 7: Premium vs Combined Market Cap and Turnover

31

7.2 Trading Cost Comparisons between HK and China using Simulations

Figure 8: Time Trend Regression - Without 50%+ ADV

32

Figure 9: Time Trend Regression - Without 50%+ ADV HK Securities

33

Figure 10: Time Trend Regression - Without 50%+ ADV SH Securities

34

Figure 11: Time Trend Regression - Without 50%+ ADV Notional Weighted

35

Figure 12: Time Trend Regression - Without 50%+ ADV Last Two Months

36

Figure 13: Time Trend Regression - Full Sample

37

Figure 14: Welch T Test - Without 50%+ ADV

38

Figure 15: Welch T Test - Without 50%+ ADV Last Two Months

39

Figure 16: Welch T Test - Full Sample

40

Figure 17: Simulation Trading Costs by % ADV Demand

The following Market Cap buckets are deﬁned:

1. Small Cap less than 1 Billion USD

2. Mid Cap 1 Billion to 10 Billion USD

3. Large Cap 10 Billion USD and above

41

Figure 18: Simulation Trading Costs by Market Capitalization

Figure 19: Simulation Trading Costs by Sector

42

7.3 Comparison of Estimated and Actual Costs on Real Orders

Figure 20: Mincer Zarnowitz Regression Results

43

Figure 21: Mincer Zarnowitz Regression Results - HK Securities

44

Figure 22: Estimate Regression Results

Figure 23: Regression Correlation Matrix

The Five Trade Momentum buckets are based on the side adjusted percentage return during the order’s

trading interval:

1. Signiﬁcant Adverse (<-2%)

2. Adverse (-1/3% thru -2%)

45

3. Neutral (-1/3% thru +1/3%)

4. Favorable (+1/3% thru 2%)

5. Signiﬁcant Favorable (>+2%)

The Four Trade Volatility buckets are based on the coeﬃcient of variation of prices during the execution

horizon:

1. High Volatility (>0.0050)

2. Moderate Volatility (0.0010 thru 0.0050)

3. Low Volatility (0.000000000000001 thru 0.0010)

4. No Volatility (<= 0.000000000000001)

The Volume Event Metric (VEM) measure captures the magnitude of the volume shift on a trading day for

a speciﬁc stock. We compare a stock’s current volume proﬁle to the past 60 day’s average proﬁle in each

half-hour interval of the trading day. The absolute values of these percent of daily volume diﬀerences in each

interval are then summed up to create the Volume Event Metric. The below three categorizations are used:

1. Negligible Volume Shift (VEM < 30%)

2. Small Volume Shift (VEM >= 30% and < 40%)

3. Large Volume Shift (VEM >= 40%)

Figure 24: Trading Costs on Real Orders

46

Figure 25: Market Impact Costs on Real Orders

47

Figure 26: Market Impact Estimate Costs on Real Orders

48

Figure 27: Market Timing Costs on Real Orders

49

Figure 28: Total Slippage Costs on Real Orders

7.4 Auxiliary Metrics

All the metrics mentioned here are weighted averages, weighted by the executed value calculated over the

same sample of real orders. Order Duration is in Minutes. The average Trade Size is in number of shares.

Percentage of Spread Paid indicates the percentage of the spread paid across the order data set. Spread Cost

indicates the actual spread cost in basis points. It is negative here to indicate that it is a cost.

50

Figure 29: Auxiliary Metrics on Real Orders

51

7.5 Volume Curves

Figure 30: Volume Curves for 0001.HK

Figure 31: Volume Curves for 0688.HK

Figure 32: Volume Curves for 0813.HK

52

Figure 33: Volume Curves for 0992.HK

Figure 34: Volume Curves for 1928.HK

Figure 35: Volume Curves for 0669.HK

53

Figure 36: Volume Curves for 0700.HK

Figure 37: Volume Curves for 0941.HK

Figure 38: Volume Curves for 1114.HK

54

Figure 39: Volume Curves for 2388.HK

Figure 40: Volume Curves for 600036.SS

Figure 41: Volume Curves for 600104.SS

55

Figure 42: Volume Curves for 600519.SS

Figure 43: Volume Curves for 600900.SS

Figure 44: Volume Curves for 601299.SS

56

Figure 45: Volume Curves for 600048.SS

Figure 46: Volume Curves for 600372.SS

Figure 47: Volume Curves for 600690.SS

57

Figure 48: Volume Curves for 601006.SS

Figure 49: Volume Curves for 601888.SS

58

