Inter-User Interference Coordination in Full-Duplex
Systems Based on Geographical Context Information

Melissa Duarte, Afef Feki, and Stefan Valentin

Mathematical and Algorithmic Sciences Lab,
FRC, Huawei Technologies, Paris, France,

{melissa.duarte, afef.feki, stefan.valentin}@huawei.com

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
T
I
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
9
3
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—We propose a coordination scheme to minimize
the interference between users in a cellular network with full-
duplex base stations and half-duplex user devices. Our scheme
exploits signal attenuation from obstacles between the users by
(i) extracting spatially isolated regions from a radio map and (ii)
assigning simultaneous co-channel uplink and downlink transmis-
sions to users in these regions such that inter-user interference
is minimized. While adding low computational complexity and
insigniﬁcant signaling overhead to existing deployments, evaluat-
ing our solution with real coverage data shows impressive gains
compared to conventional half-duplex and full-duplex operation.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Base stations can considerably increase spectral efﬁciency
by enabling simultaneous uplink and downlink transmission
within the entire frequency band [1]. Such in-band full-duplex
operation avoids the orthogonal use of channel resources and
can, thus, increase capacity. A main problem of such operation,
however,
is the interference between the simultaneous co-
channel uplink and downlink transmissions of neighboring
users. In this paper, we introduce an interference coordina-
tion scheme that minimizes such inter-user interference by
exploiting the signal attenuation due to obstacles between
the users. This attenuation is extracted from geographical
context information, provided by radio maps [2, 3, 4] and user
positions.

A. Idea and Contributions

To minimize the interference between full duplex users,
the proposed coordination scheme exploits electromagnetic
isolation. Even neighboring users may be separated by build-
ings or other obstacles, which leads to a high attenuation
of the direct path between them. Our coordination scheme
detects the spatial isolation, provided by such attenuators, and
assigns uplink and downlink transmission such that inter-user
interference is minimized.

To do so, our scheme (i) extracts spatially isolated areas
from a radio map, (ii) estimates the attenuation between these
areas, and (iii) solves an assignment problem to minimize the
interference between users located in these areas. Our simula-
tion results verify the effectiveness of our solution and show
high gains in spectral efﬁciency, compared to baseline half-
duplex operation and full-duplex with random coordination.
For the operating network, these gains come only at the cost of
obtaining the users’ positions which is either already supported
or introduces low signaling overhead [5]. Since the radio maps
can be processed ofﬂine, the only signiﬁcant online operation
corresponds to an assignment problem.

B. Related Work

There is a plethora of methods to reduce interference in
cellular networks. Almost Blank Subframe (ABS) [6] use or-
thogonal resource allocation patterns to reduce the interference
at the cell edge. Although practical and widely adopted in
cellular networks, these schemes require additional signaling
to coordinate the ABS patterns and, above all, reduce spectral
efﬁciency by introducing orthogonal transmission in time. An
alternative like Fractional Frequency Reuse (FFR) [7] reduces
spectral efﬁciency of the system because of the orthogonal
frequency allocation for neighboring users, which increases
the distance between co-channel users. This prevents the use
of full-duplex in the center of the cell. Power control [8] can
reduce the interference from uplink or downlink users but
decreases the received power and, thus, spectral efﬁciency.

Although Interference Alignment (IA) [9, 10] does not
reduce the spectral efﬁciency, it requires accurate Channel
State Information (CSI) between communicating and inter-
fering users. Such CSI comes at the cost of high signaling
overhead. Since interference alignment operates on a number
of time slots that depends on the CSI, it also adds a non-
deterministic transmission delay. Further solutions require mul-
tiple antennas at the user equipment (UE) [9]. As ABS and
FFR, such approaches use the channel’s degrees of freedom
for interference compensation instead of data transmission
and, thus, reduce spectral efﬁciency. Other solutions make use
of additional bandwidth to establish a side channel between
interfering users [11]. With limited bandwidth this means,
again, a reduction of spectral efﬁciency.

In summary, the above alternatives either reduce spectral
efﬁciency of the wireless link by introducing orthogonality
or requiring further resources or come at the cost of high
signaling overhead and signiﬁcant delay. During operation,
our interference-coordination scheme adds only insigniﬁcant
overhead to existing cellular networks in order to obtain the
users’ positions. Moreover, our scheme does not decrease
spectral efﬁciency, adds no transmission delay and can be
applied in the cell center.

C. Structure

Section II of this paper presents the proposed interference-
coordination scheme. After introducing system model and
parametrization, Section III studies our scheme’s performance
in a simple scenario based on real and simulated propagation
measurements. Finally, Section IV concludes the paper.

(a) Macro-cell scenario. Base station on top of a
building and users at opposite sides of a building.

(b) Small cell scenario. Base station on a lamp
post and users at opposite sides of a building.

(c) Indoor scenario. Access point in the corridor
and users separated by walls.

Fig. 1: Example scenarios where spatially separated areas can be exploited for interference coordination. The interference created
by an uplink user UE1 in region A to a downlink user UE2 in region B is attenuated by obstructions like buildings and walls.

II.

INTER-USER INTERFERENCE COORDINATION BASED

ON GEOGRAPHICAL CONTEXT

In this section, we propose a framework for inter-user
interference coordination tailored for full-duplex operation and
based on geographical context information. First, we introduce
a metric to characterize the attenuation between geographical
regions. We name this metric the mitigation factor α. Second,
we present a method to identify spatially isolated regions, to
compute α between them, and to store the result in a database.
Third, we explain how to use this database to identify spatially
isolated users and to perform interference coordination for a
full-duplex base station.

A. Mitigation Factor

Inter-user interference mitigation can be achieved by ex-
ploiting the location of obstructions that attenuate the wireless
signal. Examples of such obstructions and their effect on inter-
user interference are shown in Fig. 1. In Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b, the
inter-user interference that user UE1 generates to user UE2 is
attenuated by a building that is located between the two users.
In Fig. 1c, the inter-user interference between UE1 and UE2
is attenuated by the walls between the users.

Let us deﬁne the regions A and B that are separated by
such an attenuator, as illustrated in Fig. 1. We characterize
the interference attenuation between different regions as the
mitigation factor α. This factor indicates the minimum level of
signal attenuation between regions A and B. Formally deﬁned:
For any user UE1 ∈ A and any user UE2 ∈ B, the inter-
user interference mitigation between UE1 and UE2 is greater
than α dB. Hence, for a given pair of regions A and B, the
mitigation factor α between these two regions indicates that
the attenuation of a signal transmitted from A and received at
B is at least α dB.

B. Creating a Database for Spatial Isolation

We use spatially isolated regions to assign co-channel
uplink and downlink users. Let us now describe the extraction
of these regions and the calculation of the mitigation factor α
in detail. The result of this procedure, which is performed
ofﬂine on a potentially large radio map,
is then saved in
a database. Then, this database is used for the interference
coordination scheme, operating in real time.

STEP 1. Maps are used to identify obstructions that atten-
uate the propagation of a wireless signal. A high path loss

in a radio map can indicate the presence of an obstruction,
for example, a building, as shown in Fig. 2a and Fig 2b.
While obstructions can also by identiﬁed from street maps and
building plans, in this paper only radio maps, on which areas
of strong attenuation can be identiﬁed, are required. Note that
constructing radio maps is out of the scope of this paper, but
many studies such as [2, 3, 4] deal with this topic.

STEP 2. Identify spatially isolated regions around an
obstruction. Spatially isolated regions are geographical areas
with high signal attenuation between them. Fig. 2c illustrates
the process of identifying the spatially isolated regions A and
B. Once the path loss within a region exceeds a threshold,
the region can be speciﬁed as an area within d meters away
from the obstruction boundary. The segmentation of a radio
map into such regions can be performed by image processing
techniques such as [12].

STEP 3. Mitigation factor α between regions is computed.
To compute the signal attenuation µ(pa, pb) between any
position pa in A and any position pb in B, one of the following
methods can be used: (i) a path loss model (ii) using ray
tracing (iii) measures of area as given in a radio map (iv)
measures at dedicated positions, e.g., from drive tests. Let M
be the set containing all the computed values of µ(pa, pb) for
A and B. The mitigation factor α between A and B is equal to
minM µ(pa, pb). Notice that the larger the set M, the higher
resolution one will have for the attenuation between regions
A and B. If there is a pair of points pa and pb for which
µ(pa, pb) is less than a predeﬁned threshold value, then one
can go back to STEP 2 and redeﬁne the region boundaries.

STEP 4. Storing spatial isolated regions in a database.
If the mitigation factor α computed in STEP 3 satisﬁes a
predeﬁned threshold condition then the value of α and the
corresponding region localization are stored in a database.
There may be multiple pairs of spatially isolated regions
around an obstruction and more than one obstruction in a given
area. To organize this information, we use a database in the
form of pairs of regions and their corresponding mitigation
factor. The k-th entry in the database corresponds to the k-
th pair of spatially isolated regions and the entry is a triplet
that has (1) the mitigation factor αk between the regions Ak
and Bk (2) the positions of the boundaries that delimit region
Ak and (3) the positions of the boundaries that delimit region
Bk. The database can be stored either at the base station or a
central controller in the core network.

UE1UE2ABUE1AUE2UE1UE2AB(a) Two areas of high path loss
(delimited by dashed white boxes)
are identiﬁed on a radio map.

(b) We can verify by a street map
that the two areas in Fig. 2a corre-
spond to buildings.

(c) The areas from Fig. 2a are used
to deﬁne the adjacent spatially iso-
lated regions A and B.

(d) Now uplink and downlink trans-
missions can be assigned to users
within A and B such that inter-user
interference is minimized.

Fig. 2: Using a radio map from [2] for the identiﬁcation of spatially isolated regions that enable the proposed inter-user interference
mitigation. Note that the step in Fig. 2b is not part of the procedure and only added for the sake of explanation.

C. Interference coordination scheme: Problem statement

Let us now describe how the database with the mitiga-
tion factors is used by the network to coordinate the uplink
and downlink transmission such that inter-user interference is
minimized.

First, the Base Station (BS) has to obtain the positions
of the active users with outstanding scheduling grants. These
positions can often be obtained from an existing localization
service in the cellular network [5]. Based on their positions,
the users attached to a base station are separated into two
sets: the set that belongs to the spatial isolated regions and
the set of users outside these regions. Transmissions of users
in the second set are allocated by the conventional BS sched-
uler. However, users in the ﬁrst set are handled ﬁrst by our
interference coordination scheme.

f =1 cu,f xu,f

The idea of this scheme is illustrated in Fig. 2d and
we can formulate this allocation of uplink and downlink
transmissions as the following assignment problem between
the set of transmissions (including both uplink and downlink)
and the set of available resources (frequency resources per
transmission time interval in our case).

u=1

min (cid:80)|U|
(cid:80)|F|
(cid:80)|U|
(cid:80)|U|
(cid:80)|U|
(cid:80)|F|

s.t.

u=1 xu,f = 2

u=1,u odd xu,f = 1
u=1,u even xu,f = 1

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Therein, cu,f corresponds to the cost measure for a user u
using frequency resource f, |U| is the total number of users
to schedule and |F| is the total available frequencies. xu,f is
the assignment variable that equals to 1 if user u is assigned
frequency f and 0 in the contrary.

∀f
∀f
∀f
∀u
∀u, f

f =1 xu,f = 1
xu,f ∈ {0, 1}

numbers of u to refer to users in downlink operation while an
even u refers to the users in uplink. This notation avoids the
use of a third dimension and, thus, allows to apply bipartite
matching algorithms. A common method to ﬁnd optimal
bipartite matches is the Hungarian algorithm, which has the
computational complexity of O(|U|3) [13]. Note that this is
typically much faster than solving (1)-(5) by Binary Integer
Programming, which is NP-hard.

In the objective formulation (1), the cost measure

(cid:16)

cu,f =

r

1
Su

Nu+Iv→u,f

(cid:17)

(7)

is deﬁned as the inverse of the rate experienced by the user
u when communicating on frequency resource f. The rate
r is a function of the Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio
(SINR), which is composed of the received signal power Su for
user u, the noise power Nu that affects user u’s signal, and the
interference power Iv→u,f at user u due to the transmission of
user v on frequency f. Exact real-time knowledge of Iv→u,f
is prohibitively complex. Thus, we use the knowledge of the
regions and the users’ positions to compute an approximation
of Iv→u,f as:

Iv→u,f = Pv − max ((1F Dreg × α) , pv,u) ,

(8)
where Pv is user v’s transmission power in dBm, pv,u is the
path loss between user v and user u and 1F Dreg is an indicator
function that equals to 1 if the users v and u are spatially
isolated users and equals to 0 otherwise. Since the position of
the users is known, the path loss pv,u between two users v and
u can be approximated via mathematical models [14, 15].

Notice that constraints (2)-(4) implicitly assume that (i) the
number of DL users to schedule is equal to the number of UL
users to schedule and (ii) the number of available frequency
resources |F| is at least |U|/2. These assumptions allow for
a simpliﬁed problem statement but can be modiﬁed in future
work to consider a more general case.

The constraint (5) requires that a user, either in uplink or
downlink, is assigned only one frequency, while the constraints
(2)-(4) state that only two users can be assigned to one
frequency. This represents full-duplex operation and uses odd

D. Interference coordination scheme: Assignment heuristics

For a large amount of users, the Hungarian algorithm,
although optimal, may not be computational efﬁcient [13].

Hence, we propose two heuristics to approximate the solution
of the assignment problem described in the previous section.
These two heuristics, which we label as FDregrand and
FDregHDelse, are explained below.

1) FDregrand: The BS uses FD in all available frequency
resources. The BS ﬁrst assigns frequencies to users that are in
the identiﬁed pairs of spatially isolated regions. Then, users
outside the regions are assigned frequencies randomly. The
pseudocode for FDregrand is shown in Algorithm 1.

2) FDregHDelse: The BS uses FD only in a subset of
available frequency resources. The pairs of isolated regions
are used to decide which users to serve in FD UL-DL.
Whereas, users outside these regions are served in HD UL-
DL with a random frequency assignment. The pseudocode for
FDregHDelse procedure is shown in Algorithm 1.

III. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

Let us now study interference and spectral efﬁciency in a

simple scenario based on real and simulated measurements.

A. System Model and Parametrization

We assume a single BS, which can operate in half-duplex
or full-duplex mode. In the latter case, we assume perfect
self-interference cancellation at the BS. Users are randomly
distributed over the complete radio map and their UEs operate
in half-duplex, each using a single antenna.

To create the database for spatial isolation according to
Section II-B, we use real-world measurements from [2]. In
particular, we focus on the path loss towards the strongest
serving BS and isolate a speciﬁc area in this radio map for
clear representation. This area is shown in Fig. 2 and further
parameters of the radio map are given in Table I.

In this area, we identify the two obstructions O1 and O2
resulting in the spatially isolated regions in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b.
Over both obstructions, 8 pairs of spatial
isolated regions
are identiﬁed where any of these pairs is fully speciﬁed by
(Ak, Bk) with the set of boundary coordinates A and B and
index k = 1, . . . , 8.

Path loss between BS and UEs is available from the radio
map but path loss between two arbitrary UEs i and j is
not included. We, thus, compute this path loss, pi,j, from
3GPP-compliant path loss models [14, 15] that depend on the
inter-user distance di,j and carrier frequency fi,j as shown
in Table I. For the case where users i and j belong to an
identiﬁed pair k of spatially isolated regions (UE i ∈ Ak
and UE j ∈ Bk) then we calculate the inter-user path loss
as max{αk, pi,j}. The constant αk reﬂects the attenuation
between the k-th pair of spatially isolated regions and is
estimated to be αk = 140 dB for all k. We justify this choice
by the large size of obstructions O1 and O2 (each at least 100
m per edge) and the considerable number of walls within these
buildings. This leads to a high attenuation of traversing radio
signals.

Table I summarizes the main simulation parameters and

propagation models.

Set of users U.
Set of available frequencies resources F .

Initialize frequency resource counter: f = 0.

Output: xu,f , ∀u ∈ U and ∀f ∈ F .
Initialize: xu,f = 0 ∀u, ∀f.
Step 1: Scheduling of users inside regions.
for 1 ≤ k ≤ K
(a) Find DL users in region Ak: DLAk = {u : uodd ∈ Ak}.
Find UL users in region Bk: ULBk = {u : ueven ∈ Bk}.
Update frequency resource initial index: f0 = f.
for 1 ≤ l ≤ min(|DLAk|,|ULBk|)
- Update frequency resource counter:f = f0 + l.
- Assign full-duplex mode: assign frequency resource f to
a DL user and an UL user, xDLAk (l),f = 1, xULBk (l),f = 1.
endfor
(b) Find UL users in region Ak: ULAk = {u : ueven ∈ Ak}.
Find DL users in region Bk: DLBk = {u : uodd ∈ Bk}.
Update frequency resource initial index: f0 = f.
for 1 ≤ l ≤ min(|ULAk|,|DLBk|)
- Update frequency resource counter:f = f0 + l.
- Assign full-duplex mode: assign frequency resource f to
a DL user and an UL user, xULAk (l),f = 1, xDLBk (l),f = 1.
endfor

Algorithm 1 Proposed full duplex operation
Inputs: Region pairs (Ak, Bk), k = 1, 2, ...K.

endfor
Step 2: Scheduling of users outside regions and users inside
regions that were not scheduled in Step 1.
(a) Find users to be scheduled in Step 2: Find set DLTBS of
DL users that are outside regions Ak and Bk, for all k, or
that are inside these regions but were not scheduled in Step
1. Find set ULTBS of UL users that are outside regions Ak
and Bk, for all k, or that are inside these regions but were
not scheduled in Step 1.

(b) Initialize variables: Update frequency resource initial
index: f0 = f. Initialize total number of users to be
scheduled: TDL = |DLTBS| and TUL = |ULTBS|.
(c) switch: procedure
case: FDregrand
Initialize user counter l = 1.
while TDL (cid:54)= 0 or TUL (cid:54)= 0.
- Update frequency resource counter:f = f0 + l.
- Assign full-duplex mode: assign frequency resource f to
a DL user and an UL user, xDLTBS(l),f = 1, xULTBS(l),f = 1.
- Update l = l + 1. Update TDL = TDL − 1 and TUL =
TUL − 1.
endwhile
case: FDregHDelse
for 1 ≤ l ≤ TDL
- Update frequency resource counter:f = f0 + l.
- Assign DL half-duplex mode: assign frequency resource
f to a DL user, xDLTBS(l),f = 1.
endfor
for 1 ≤ l ≤ TUL
- Update frequency resource counter:f = f0 + TDL + l.
- Assign UL half-duplex mode: assign frequency resource
f to an UL user, xULTBS(l),f = 1.
endfor

(a) Four pairs of regions around
obstruction O1.

(b) Four pairs of regions around
obstruction O2.

Fig. 3: Eight pairs of regions (Ak, Bk), k = 1, 2, ...8 around
two obstructions (buildings).

TABLE I: Main simulation parameters

Value

2100 − 2180 MHz
1900 − 1980 MHz

80 Mhz

from radio map [2]

pi,j (dB) = 20 log10(4πdi,j fi,j /c)

d in km and f in MHz
c is speed of light in m/s

pi,j (dB) = 38.32 log10(di,j )
+21 log10(fi,j ) + 61.6

d in km and f in MHz

200
200

Uniformly random

46 dBm and 20 dBm

10 m

−100 dBm
20 dBm
8 pairs
140 dBm
50 × 50 m

1050 × 1100 m

Parameter

Frequency band f1
Frequency band f2
f1 and f2 bandwidth
Path Loss BS <-> UE

Path Loss UEi <-> UEj if d < 50 m

Path Loss UEi <-> UEj if d > 50 m

Number of DL UE
Number of UL UE

UE placement
BS Tx power

Antenna height from mean rooftop

Noise ﬂoor
UE Tx power

Number of isolated regions

α

Radio map area size
Radio map pixel size
Radio map data source

Measurements and ray tracing [2]

B. Simulated Schemes

We compare four different schemes in order to study the
performance of our proposed inter-user interference coordina-
tion method.

1- Baseline, half-duplex operation (HD): In this con-
ﬁguration, the BS performs conventional Frequency Division
Duplex (FDD) operation with frequency band f1 used for
uplink (UL) and frequency band f2 for downlink (DL) as
shown in Fig. 4a. Inter-user interference does not occur since
the users are assigned to orthogonal frequency resources.
Equally for the 200 DL and 200 UL users, we assume 400 kHz
of bandwidth per user, leading to 80 MHz for DL and UL,
respectively and to 160 MHz in total. Frequencies are assigned
randomly.
2- Baseline, full-duplex operation (FDrand): The BS per-
forms full-duplex (FD) mode in all available frequencies with
a random assignment for attached UL and DL users. Since the
UL and DL users share same frequencies, the total bandwidth
used is 80 MHz as shown in Fig. 4b.
3- Proposed full-duplex operation (FDregrand): The BS
uses the FDregrand assignment heuristic explained in Sec-

(a) Half-duplex.

(b) Full-duplex.

(c) Hybrid-duplex.

Fig. 4: Frequency utilization in simulated schemes.

tion II-D. The total bandwidth used is 80 MHz as shown in
Fig. 4b. Notice that this total bandwidth is equal to the FDrand
scheme. The only difference between the two schemes is the
way the frequencies are assigned.
4- Proposed hybrid duplex operation (FDregHDelse): The
BS uses the FDregHDelse assignment heuristic explained in
Section II-D. With such a scheme, the total bandwidth used
will be greater than 80 MHz but less than 160 MHz. A possible
realization of 120 MHz bandwidth is illustrated in Fig. 4c.

C. Simulation Results

1) Inter-User Interference Mitigation: We ﬁrst focus on
analyzing how our proposed method reduces the inter-user
interference. Recall that the noise ﬂoor of the system is set at
-100 dBm. Hence, when the inter-user interference increases
beyond -100 dBm, then the interference experienced by the DL
user becomes larger than the noise ﬂoor and the performance
degradation is dominated by interference. From Fig. 5, we
observe that for the FDrand scheme,
the probability that
UE-UE interference is larger than -100 dBm is 44%. For
the FDregrand scheme, this probability is 22%. Hence, our
proposed method substantially reduces the number of links
that are dominated by inter-user interference. Speciﬁcally,
using the regions with the FDregrand scheme mitigates the
inter-user interference such that the probability of interference
dominating over the noise ﬂoor decreases by 50% compared
to the reference FDrand scheme. Note that this decrease will
be even more signiﬁcant for lower noise ﬂoor.
In addition, we notice a jump of the FDregrand CDF at
−120 dB. Recall that in our simulations the value of α =
140 dB and the UEs transmit at 20 dBm. Hence, for FD links
with users in the identiﬁed regions, the inter-user interference
will be at most −120 dBm. Many users in the regions expe-
rience this value of interference since the path loss between
users in the regions is max{140, pi,j} dB. Hence, the fact that
several users experience this level of interference results in
this jump. The fact that the jump at −120 dBm is almost not
present in the FDrand results shows that a random assignment
is not capable of harnessing the spatial isolation provided by
the geographical context. Notice that the FDregrand scheme
took advantage of the spatially isolated regions such that
there is approximately a 50% probability that the inter-user
interference is less than or equal to −120 dBm. In contrast,
for the FDrand scheme, this probability is only about 5%.

2) Spectral Efﬁciency: In Fig. 6a and Fig. 6b we compare
the spectral efﬁciency of the FDrand and FDregrand schemes.
Both schemes have the same UL performance so we focus our
comparison on the DL. We consider BS transmitted power of
20 dBm (Pico cell) and 46 dBm (Macro cell). The results in

Fig. 5: CDF of inter user interference.

(a) CDF of spectral efﬁciency for the entire cell when the base station
has transmission power of 20 dBm.

(a) CDF of downlink spectral efﬁciency for the entire cell.

(b) CDF of downlink spectral efﬁciency for cell center.

Fig. 6: Simulation results comparing FDrand and FDregrand
schemes.

Fig. 6a are computed for all the DL users in the cell while
the results in Fig. 6b reﬂect only the users in the cell center.
Here, only DL users and co-channel UL users within a 300 m
radius from the BS are considered.

In Fig. 6a and Fig. 6b, we observe that the FDregrand
has higher spectral efﬁciency than the FDrand scheme. The
gain obtained across the entire cell is modest. From Fig. 6a,
we compute this gain to be 6% for a BS transmit power of
46 dBm and 13% for a BS transmit power of 20 dBm. In
contrast, the gain is more signiﬁcant if we observe only cell

(b) CDF of spectral efﬁciency for the entire cell when the base station
has transmission power of 46 dBm.

Fig. 7: Simulation results comparing half-duplex with
FDregrand and FDregHDelse.

center links. From Fig. 6b, we compute that the gain is 22%
for a BS transmit power of 46 dBm and 55% for a BS transmit
power of 20 dBm.

This signiﬁcant increase in gain for cell center users results
from the fact that the closer users are to the BS, the more
full-duplex communication suffers from inter-user interference.
Also, the closer UL and DL users are to the base station,
the more likely it is that they are close to each other and,
thus, generating high inter-user interference power among
themselves. The FDregrand scheme uses the spatially isolated
regions to carefully choose which UL-DL users can share the
same frequency band and this results in an effective decrease of
the inter-user interference experienced at the cell center. Here,
enabling full-duplex is of particular interest due to the small
average proximity of the users to the BS, which is a favorable
condition for full-duplex operation since it can simplify the
implementation of self-interference cancellation [1]. However,
cell-center full-duplex operation also results small average
proximity between users and high loss in spectral efﬁciency
from inter-user interference. The results in Fig. 6b show that
our proposed scheme can effectively reduce this interference
in order to achieve 55% improvement over a scheme that does
not exploit the spatially isolated regions.

3) Comparison with Half-Duplex: The results in Figs. 7a
and 7b compare the performance of half-duplex against the
performance of the hybrid-duplex scheme that we labeled

[8] R. Kurda, L. Boukhatem, T. Yahiya, and M. Kaneko, “Power adjustment
mechanism using context information for interference mitigation in two-
tier heterogeneous networks,” in Computers and Communication (ISCC),
2014 IEEE Symposium on, June 2014, pp. 1–6.

[9] K. Sundaresan, M. Khojastepour, E. Chai, and S. Rangarajan, “Full-
duplex without strings: Enabling full-duplex with half-duplex clients,”
in Proceedings of the 20th Annual International Conference on Mobile
Computing and Networking, ser. MobiCom ’14. New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2014, pp. 55–66.

[10] A. Sahai, S. Diggavi, and A. Sabharwal, “On degrees-of-freedom of
full-duplex uplink/downlink channel,” in Information Theory Workshop
(ITW), 2013 IEEE, Sept. 2013, pp. 1–5.

[11] J. Bai and A. Sabharwal, “Distributed full-duplex via wireless side-
IEEE

channels: Bounds and protocols,” Wireless Communications,
Transactions on, vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 4162–4173, Aug. 2013.

[12] P. Arbelaez, M. Maire, C. Fowlkes, and J. Malik, “Contour detection
and hierarchical image segmentation,” Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 898–916, May
2011.

[13] R. Burkard, M. Dell’Amico, and S. Martello, Assignment Problems.
Philadelphia, PA, USA: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics,
2009.

[14] 3GPP, “TR 36.828, Further Enhancements to LTE Time Division Duplex
(TDD) for Downlink-Uplink (DL-UL) Interference Management and
Trafﬁc Adaptation, v.11.0.0,” June 2012.

[15] ——, “Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); Selec-
tion procedures for the choice of radio transmission technologies of the
UMTS (UMTS 30.03 version 3.2.0), TR 101 112(ETSI),” 1998.

FDregHDelse and against the performance of the FDregrand
scheme. We observe that
the use of full-duplex and the
spatially isolated regions improves the spectral efﬁciency over
the performance of HD. The results in Fig. 7a are for a BS
transmit power of 20 dBm and the results in Fig. 7b are
for a BS transmit power of 46 dBm. An observation of the
medians shows that for both transmission powers, the hybrid
scheme achieves 34% gain over HD. Also, for both cases, the
FDregrand scheme further improves to achieve between 89%
and 92% gain over HD.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We described in this paper a new inter-user interference
coordination scheme in cellular networks with full-duplex. Our
scheme assigns simultaneous uplink and downlink transmis-
sions to users in areas that are separated by large obstacles.
The attenuation from such obstacles, isolates the simultaneous
transmissions from each other and, thus, allows to minimize
interference. The proposed assignment scheme adds only low
computational complexity and signaling overhead to the Radio
Access Network (RAN), while segmenting radio maps into
spatial isolated areas can be performed ofﬂine, in arbitrary
data centers.

The initial performance results of this approach are impres-
sive. For small and large cells, outstanding spectral efﬁciency
gains can be shown that are clearly due to the reduction of
inter-user interference. Especially in the cell center – where
inter-user interference dominates over path loss – very high
increases in spectral efﬁciency are provided.

We conclude that

the described inter-user interference
coordination scheme is a promising example of exploiting
geographical context information in RAN. The outstanding
gains, the low computational complexity, and the increasing
availability of radio maps and user positions, make this ap-
proach a promising candidate to support full-duplex in future
RAN generations.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Sabharwal, P. Schniter, D. Guo, D. Bliss, S. Rangarajan, and R. Wich-
man, “In-band full-duplex wireless: Challenges and opportunities,” Se-
lected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 32, no. 9, pp.
1637–1652, Sept 2014.

[2] U. T. A. Eisenblatter H.-F, Geerdes T. Koch, “MOMENTUM data
scenarios for radio network planning and simulation,” in ZIB-Report,
2004. [Online]. Available: https://opus4.kobv.de/opus4-zib/ﬁles/782/ZR-
04-07.pdf

[3] H. Braham, S. Ben Jemaa, B. Sayrac, G. Fort, and E. Moulines,
“Coverage mapping using spatial interpolation with ﬁeld measurements,”
in Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communication (PIMRC), 2014
IEEE 25th Annual International Symposium on, Sep. 2014, pp. 1743–
1747.

[4] M. Kasparick, R. Cavalcante, S. Valentin, S. Stanczak, and M. Yukawa,
“Kernel-based adaptive online reconstruction of coverage maps with
side information,” Vehicular Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. PP,
no. 99, pp. 1–1, Jul. 2015.

[5] Y. Zhao, “Standardization of mobile phone positioning for 3g systems,”
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 108–116, Jul. 2002.
[6] K. Pedersen, Y. Wang, B. Soret, and F. Frederiksen, “eicic functionality
and performance for lte hetnet co-channel deployments,” in Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC Fall), 2012 IEEE, Sept 2012, pp. 1–5.

[7] T. Novlan, J. Andrews, I. Sohn, R. Ganti, and A. Ghosh, “Comparison of
fractional frequency reuse approaches in the ofdma cellular downlink,”
in Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM 2010), 2010
IEEE, Dec 2010, pp. 1–5.

