ALMOST INVARIANCE OF DISTRIBUTIONS FOR RANDOM WALKS ON

GROUPS

ANNA ERSCHLER

ABSTRACT. We study the neighborhoods of a typical point Zn visited at n-th step of
a random walk determined by the condition that the transition probabilities stay close to

µ˚npZnq. If such neighborhood contains a ball of radius C?n, we say that the random

walk has almost invariant transition probabilities. We prove that that simple random walks
on wreath products of Z with ﬁnite groups have almost invariant distributions. A weaker
version of almost invariance implies a necessary condition of Ozawa’s criterion for the
property HFD. We describe subsets in the wreath product of Z with ﬁnite groups such that
with probability close to one the transition probabilities remain constant after a multiplica-
tion by an element of these sets. We deﬁne and study the radius of almost invariance, and
we show that radius of almost invariance of transition probabilities can be larger than the
radius of almost constancy of transition probabilities. We estimate the radii of almost in-
variance for random walks on iterated wreath products and provide the examples of groups
with very small radii of almost invariance. We also discuss possible limiting distribution
of quotients of transition probabilities on non almost invariant scale.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]

.

R
G
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
8
5
4
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1. INTRODUCTION

Given a sequence of functions fn : G Ñ R, a sequence of probability measures µn,
and a sequence of subsets Vn Ă G , we can consider the quotients fnpxgnq{fnpxq, where
gn P Vn) and ask whether this quotient is equal to one with probability close to one with
respect to µn? Is it close to one with probability close to one? If the latter happens for
Vn being the ball of of radius rpnq, centered at the identity, we say that fn is (strongly)
almost invariant on the scale rpnq and if the estimate is uniform on g P Vn we say that fn
is uniformly almost invariant on the scale rpnq.
More generally, we can ask whether the quotient is bounded from below and above by
some positive constant. In this case we can say that fn is weakly almost invariant on the
scale rpnq.
probability one with respect to µn, to a given probability distribution?

Otherwise, if this is not the case, we can ask whether fnpxqgn{fnpxq is close, with
In this paper, we study the case when both fn and µn are n step transition probabilities
of a random walk pG, µq. Here G is some ﬁnitely generated group and µ is a probability
measure on µ, fnpgq “ µnpgq “ µ˚npgq.
For example, non-degenerate aperiodic random walks on ﬁnite groups are almost invari-
ant on any scale. The estimates of Hebisch and Saloff-Coste imply that simple aperiodic
random walks on nilpotent groups are almost invariant on the scale ?n (see Example
examplenilpotent
2.2).
We say that rpnq is the radius of almost invariance for transition probabilities of the
random walk pG, µq if µ˚n is almost invariant on the scale r2pnq for any r2pnq such that
r2pnq{rpnq Ñ 0 and if for any function r1pnq such that r1pnq{rpnq tends to inﬁnity on
some subsequence, µ˚n is not almost invariant on the scale r1pnq.

1

2

ANNA ERSCHLER

We believe that the radius of almost invariance is at most ?n for any simple random
walk with the support generating an inﬁnite group. We say that the random walk pG, µq
has almost invariant transition probabilities if rpnq ě ?n.
We would like to stress that it is essential for the questions we study in this paper that the
centers of neighborhood are chosen at random with respect to µ˚n. Quotients of transition
probabilities in the neighborhoods of a deterministic point have been studied in various
situations: for amenable groups where one can study what we call radii of almost con-
fixedpoint
stancy(see the deﬁnition below and section
2.1); for non-amenable groups where one can
study ratio theorems for quotients of transition probabilities. Quotients µ˚nphgq{µ˚nphq,
with h chosen at random on the trajectory of the random walk pG, µq have been studied so
far only for ﬁxed increments, according to our knowledge. In the latter case, it has been
kaimanovichvershik
11] that closeness of such quotients to one charac-
proven by Kaimanovich and Vershik [
terizes non-triviality of the Poisson boundary.

The radius of almost invariance describes the size of a neighborhood of a typical point
(chosen at random with respect to µ˚n) such that the transition probabilities are almost
constant in such neighborhood. If instead of a random point we consider a ﬁxed point, the
fixedpoint
2.1). The existence of
size of such neighborhood can be quite different, see Subsection
a non-trivial neighborhood of the identity with almost constant decay for a symmetric
random walk on G is equivalent to the amenability of G (as it follows from the ratio
lemmaamenable
theorem of Avez, see Lemma
2.12), while the existence of non-trivial scale of almost
invariance is equivalent to the triviality of the Poisson boundary (as it follows from the
results of Kaimanovich and Vershik, mentioned above, for more details see Proposition
propositiontrivialboundary
2.4).

Let us say that Rpnq is the radius of almost constancy for transition probabilities of
the random walk pG, µq if there exists C ą 0 such that µ˚npgq{µ˚npeq is bounded (by
C from above and 1{C from below) for any element g of length at most Rpnq and if for
any increasing sequence ni and R1 such that R1pniq{Rpniq tends to inﬁnity, there exists
a sequence gi, of length at most R1pniq, such that µ˚nipgq{µ˚nipeq is not bounded. This
deﬁnition is mostly interesting for symmetric measure µ, and in this case the quotient in
question is bounded if it is bounded from below, for even n.

The radii of almost invariance and almost constancy of transition probabilities in the
neighborhood of a ﬁxed point are asymptotically equivalent for simple random walks on
nilpotent groups. For all random walks with non-trivial boundary (as well as for various
examples of random walks with trivial boundary) the radius of almost constancy in the
neighborhood of a ﬁxed point is asymptotically equal or larger than the radius of almost
invariance. We show however that there exist groups such that the radius of almost invari-
ance for simple random walks on such groups is larger than the radius of almost constancy
in the neighborhood of a ﬁxed point. This is the case for wreath product of Z with a ﬁnite
group, as follows from Theorem

maintheorem
1.1.

Recall that the wreath product of A and B, which we denote by A ≀ B, is a semi-direct

product of A and řA B, where A acts on řA B by shifts.
A probability measure µ on the wreath product of A with B, deﬁnes a switch-walk-
switch random walk, if µ “ µB ˚ µA ˚ µB, where µA and µB are measures on A and B
correspondingly.
In case A “ Z and B being a ﬁnite group, let us say that µ deﬁnes a standard simple
switch-walk-switch random walk on G “ A ≀ B, if µ “ µB ˚ µA ˚ µB, where µA is a sym-
metric measure on A with its support being equal to ´1, 0, 1 and µB is the equidistribution
on B.

maintheorem

ALMOST INVARIANCE OF DISTRIBUTIONS FOR RANDOM WALKS ON GROUPS

3

1) [Almost Invariance.]

Theorem 1.1. Let G “ Z ≀ F , F is a ﬁnite group. Let pG, µq be a standard simple switch-
walk-switch random walk on G.
For any ǫ there exists c ą 0 and a subsets Ωn, such that
µ˚npΩnq ě 1 ´ ǫ and such that for any h P Ωn and any g P Bpe, c?nq
|µ˚nphgq{µ˚nphq ´ 1| ď ǫ,

where Bpe, cnq is the ball of radius cn is some word metric of G.
2) [Invariance] For any ǫ there exists c ą 0 and subsets Ωn, such that µ˚npΩnq ě 1 ´ ǫ
and such that for any h P Ωn and any g P Bpe, c?nq X G0

where G0 “ ř F Ă G.

maintheorem

µ˚nphgq “ µ˚nphq,

1.1 implies that G “ Z ≀ F satisﬁes the ﬁrst assumption of
The ﬁrst claim of Theorem
ozawa
13]. Since it is well known and easy to see that the wreath
Proposition in Section 4 of [
products of Z with ﬁnite groups admit a sequence of subsets Un Ă Bpe, CNq for some
C ą 0, such that #BUn{#Un ď 1{n (that is, they admit a contolled Foelner sequence
cornuliertesseravalette
2]), these wreath products satisfy also the second assumption of
in the terminology of [
maintheorem
Ozawa’s proposition. Theorem
1.1 provides therefore an answers for a question of Ozawa
(private communication) about existence of groups of super-polynomial growth where his
criterion can be applied to prove the property HF D, deﬁned by Shalom in [

While the assumption on the measure in Theorem

maintheorem
1.1 is important for the second claim,
this assumption is not necessary for the ﬁrst claim of the theorem. It can be shown that the
same conclusion holds for any simple random walk. Moreover, the argument in the proof
maintheorem
1.1 can be applied to large classes of groups, we plan to return
of the ﬁrst part of Theorem
to this question elsewhere. We ask in this context:

shalom
15].

Question 1.2. Let G be a group of ﬁnite Pruefer rank (e.g. polycyclic) and µ be a non-
degenerate symmetric ﬁnitely supported measure on G. Is it true that the distributions of
pG, µq are almost invariant?

Recall that the drift function Lpnq is the mean displacement after n steps of the random
walk, that is, Lpnq “ řgPG lSpgqµ˚npgq.
In contrast with Lpnq, the radii of almost invariance are deﬁned for measures not nec-
essarily satisfying a moment condition. The asymptotic behavoir of the radii of almost
invariance is related to, but not deﬁned by the drift function. For standard simple random
4.2 that rpnq is asympotically
walks on i times iterated wreath products of of Z we show in
smaller that n1{2i`1. It can be shown that in these examples the above mentioned inequality
is asymptotically strict. It will be shown elsewhere that for some other groups, the radius
of almost invariance can be signiﬁcantly larger than n{Lpnq.
Question 1.3. Is it true that any group of ﬁnite Pruefer rank satisﬁes the property HF D of
Shalom? Does group such that a simple random walk has drift asymptotically equivalent
to ?n satisfy the property HF D of Shalom?

propositioniterated

Since groups with property HF D admit a ﬁnite index subgroup with inﬁnite Abeliniza-
shalom
15]), the positive answer to the question above would imply two conjectures below.

tion ([

Conjecture 1.4. The drift function of any simple random walk on an inﬁnite ﬁnitely gen-
erated simple group is strictly larger than ?n.
Conjecture 1.5. The drift function of any simple random walk on an inﬁnite ﬁnitely gen-
erated torsion group is strictly larger than ?n.

4

ANNA ERSCHLER

It is proven in [

erschlercritical
5], Corollary 1 that the drift of simple random walks on the ﬁrst Grig-
orchuk group satisﬁes Lpnq ě nγ, for some γ ą 1{2 and inﬁnitely many n. It can be
grigorchukdegrees
9] that are
shown that the drift of torsion groups, e.g. some of Grigorchuk groups from [
close on some scales to solvable groups, can be arbitrary close to ?n on an inﬁnite subse-
quence (moreover, on a sequence of arbitrarily quickly growing intervals).

It seems interesting to describe smallest possible drifts for simple random walks on

inﬁnite simple groups and on inﬁnite torsion groups.

In Section

examplefree
5.2.

The paper has the following structure.

Though no group with non-trivial boundary can admit a non-trivial scale for almost
invariance, it may happen that µ˚nphgnq{µ˚nphq, normalized by a constant Cg, admits a
(non-constant) limit distribution, see Example
preliminaries
2 we describe ﬁrst examples and
propositiontrivialboundary
basic properties of almost invariance and radii of almost invariance. In Proposition
2.4 we
corollaryentropy
2.9 we give a lower bound
describe the relation with the Poisson boundary. In Corollary
lemmaconditionned
2.10 is
for the radii of almost invariance in terms of entropy of random walks. Lemma
essential for optimal lower bounds for radii of almost invariance for various groups: the
idea is that in order to prove almost invariance for µ˚n, it is sufﬁcient to chose a sequence
of events αn on the space of the trajectories of the random walk pG, µq, such that the
probabilities of αn are close to one, and to prove the almost invariance for the sequence
fixedpoint
of conditional measures µn “ µ˚npgq|αn. In Subsection
2.1 we compare the radius of
almosst invariance with that of almost constancy of transition probabilities.

In Section
In Section

proofmaintheorem
3 we prove Theorem
smallradii
4 we estimate the radii of almost invariance for distributions of simple ran-
piecewise
4.1 we prove the following

maintheorem
1.1.

dom walks on iterated wreath products with Z. In Subsection
proposition that shows that invariance radii can be arbitrary small.

propositionbadinvariance

Proposition 1.6. For any Fpnq tending to inﬁnity there exists a ﬁnitely generated group G
such that any simple random walk on G admits a non-trivial almost invariance radius and
for any K, ǫ and any sufﬁcient large n any almost invariance radius rǫ,Kpnq ď Fpnq.

In the last Section we show that, though no group with non-trivial boundary can admit a
non-trivial scale for almost invariance, it may happen that µ˚nphgnq{µ˚nphq, normalized
by a constant Cg, admits a (non-constant) limit distribution, see Example

examplefree
5.2.

preliminaries

2. PRELIMINARIES

Recall that the period of a probability measure µ on a group G is the greatest common
divisors of K ě 0 such that µ˚Kpeq ą 0. A probability measure µ is called aperiodic if its
period is equal to one. For example, if µpeq ą 0 then µ is aperiodic. Observe that for any
symmetric measure on a group it holds µ˚2peq ą 0, and hence a symmetric measure µ on
a group G is aperiodic if and only if there exists an odd integer K such that µ˚Kpeq ‰ 0.
Example 2.1 (Finite groups). LetF be a ﬁnite group, and µ be a non-degenerate aperiodic
random walk on F . For any sequence rpnq the distributions of pG, µq are almost invariant
on the scale rpnq.
Example 2.2 (Nilpotent groups). Let G be a ﬁnitely generated virtually nilpotent group,
µ be a ﬁnitely supported symmetric non-degenerate aperiodic random walk on F . Put
rpnq “ ?n. Then the distributions of the random walk pG, µq are almost invariant on the
scale ?n.

examplefinite

examplenilpotent

ALMOST INVARIANCE OF DISTRIBUTIONS FOR RANDOM WALKS ON GROUPS

5

Proof. Follows from the ”gradient estimate” of Saloff-Coste (see line 2 on p.675 and

(14) of Theorem 5.1 in [

hebischsaloff

8]), who prove, under assumption µpeq ą 0 that
Spxq{CNq,

µ˚npgq ´ µ˚npgsq ď C1n´pD`1q{2 expp´l2

where s is in some ﬁnite generating set S of G (see ﬁrst line on page 675, as well as (14)
of Theorem 5.1 ).

This estimate shows that if lSpgq ď K?n, then µ˚npgq ´ µ˚npgsq ď C2n´pD`1q{2
for some C2 ą 0 and that µ˚npgq ´ µ˚npghq ď C2n´D{2lphq{?n for h ď K?n.
8]), we conclude that µ˚npgq{µ˚npghq if lSpgq ď K?n and
Since µ˚npgq ě C0n´D{2 ([
lSphq ď ǫ?n.
Since the statement holds true for measures with µpeq ‰ e, it is clear it holds also for
examplenilpotent
2.2 is symmetric is not important. Indeed,
The assumption that the measure in Example
the statement of this example for measures, symmetric or not, follows from a general bound
for scale of invariance in terms of the entropy, see Corollary

corollaryentropy
2.9.

any aperiodic measure.

hebischsaloff

Remark 2.3 (General Markov chains). For random walks on groups, it is not important
whether we consider multiplication on the left or from the write in the deﬁnition of almost
invariance. For general random walks and individual sequence gn, the deﬁnition makes
sense for the multiplication on the left and there seems to be no analog of this notion in
the case of multiplication on the right. However, for uniform almost invariance on a given
scale, one can deﬁne this notion for the multiplication on the right as well.

Proposition 2.4 (Relation with the triviality of the Poisson boundary). Let G be a ﬁnitely
generated group and µ be a non-degenerate aperiodic measure on G. The following prop-
erties are equivalent

propositiontrivialboundary

boundary.

(1) There exists a function Rpnq, tending to inﬁnity, such that the distributions of the
random walk pG, µq are strongly almost invariant on the scale Rpnq.
(2) There exists a sequence Rpnq, tending to inﬁnity on some subsequence, such that
the distributions of the random walk pG, µq are weakly almost invariant distribu-
tions on the scale Rpnq.

(3) the Poisson boundary of pG, µq is trivial.
Proof. It is clear that p1q implies p2q.
Let us show that p2q implies p3q. Take a random walk pG, µq with non trivial Poisson
kaimanovich02law
12], Theorem 2.1, p.155), we know that for
By the Law of 0 and 2 (see Kaimanovich, [
any ǫ ą 0 there exists probability distributions such that řgPG |ν1µ˚npgq ´ ν2µ˚npgq| ě
2 ´ ǫ for all sufﬁciently large n. Observe that for any ǫ ą 0 we can chose ν1 and ν2 as
above to have ﬁnite support. Observe also that if řgPG |ν1µ˚npgq ´ ν2µ˚npgq| ě 2 ´ ǫ
for some n, then for some h1 and h2 in the supports of ν1 and ν2 it holds řgPG |h1µ˚npgq´
h2µ˚npgq| “ řgPG |µ˚npgq´h´1h2µ˚npgq| ě 2´ǫ. Since řgPG |µ˚npgq´h´1h2µ˚npgq|
is a non-increasing function in n, this implies that for any ǫ ą 0 there exists h P G such
that řgPG |µ˚npgq ´ hµ˚npgq| ě 2 ´ ǫ for all sufﬁciently large n.
Therefore, for any ǫ ą 0 and C ą 0 there exists h P G such that for all sufﬁciently
large n.

µ˚npg P G : µ˚npghq{µ˚npgq ą Cq ě 1 ´ ǫ.

This is in contradiction with p2q.

6

ANNA ERSCHLER

kaimanovichvershik
11].

Now we show that p3q implies p1q. The statement follows from Theorem 4.2 in [

Since the boundary is trivial, we know that for any g P G

µ˚npx P G : |1 ´ µ˚npgxq{µ˚npxq| ą ǫq Ñ 0,

as n tends to 8.

Chose N1 ă N2 ă N3 . . . ... P N such that for any n ą Ni and any g : lSpgq ď Ni

µ˚npx P G : 1 ´ 1{n ă µ˚npgxq{µ˚npxq ă 1 ` 1{nq ą 1 ´ 1{n.

Let rpnq be the maximum of m such that Nm ď n. It is clear that rpnq Ñ 8 as n Ñ 8

and that for any ǫ, any sufﬁciently large n and any g of length at most rpnq

µ˚npx P G : |1 ´ µ˚npgxq{µ˚npxq| ą ǫq ď ǫ.

This completes the proof of the proposition.

remarkreiter Remark 2.5. Let µ and µ1 be probability measures on a space X.

1) If for some K, ǫ ą 0 µpgq{µ1pgq ď K with probability ě 1 ´ ǫ with respect to µ,

then

ÿ
xPX |µpxq ´ µ1pxq| ď 2pǫ ` K ´ 1q

2) If for some K2, ǫ2 ą 0 it holds µpgq{µ1pgq ě K2 with probability ě ǫ2 with respect

to µ, then

ÿ
xPX |µpxq ´ µ1pxq| ě ǫ2pK ´ 1q

Proof.
1). Observe that

ÿ

|µpxq ´ µ1pxq| “ 2
2). The proof is straightforward.

xPX

ÿ

|µpxq ´ µ1pxq| ď 2pǫ ` K ´ 1q

xPX:µpxqěµ1pxq

Corollary 2.6. The transition probabilities of the random walk pG, µq are strongly almost
invariant with respect to a sequence gn if and only if the total variance between convolu-
tions of µ and shifted convolutions of µ tends to zero:

ÿ
gPG |µ˚npgq ´ µ˚npggnq| Ñ 0,

as n Ñ 8.

remarkdifmeasures Remark 2.7. Let S be a ﬁnite subset of G. Suppose that for any s P S it holds

ÿ

h

|pµ˚nphq ´ µ˚nphsq| ď 1{Fpnq.

Then for any g in the subgroup generated by S

ÿ

h

|pµ˚nphq ´ µ˚nphgq| ď lSpgq{Fpnq.

Proof. Observe that
ÿ
h |pµ˚nphq ´ µ˚nphabq| ď ÿ

h |pµ˚nphq ´ µ˚nphaqq| ` ÿ

h |pµ˚nphq ´ µ˚nphbqq|.

ALMOST INVARIANCE OF DISTRIBUTIONS FOR RANDOM WALKS ON GROUPS

7

corollary1 Corollary 2.8. Let µ be a ﬁnitely supported measure on G such that for some Fpnq and

for any s in the support of µ

ÿ
h |pµ˚nphq ´ µ˚nphsq| ď 1{Fpnq.

Take fpnq such that fpnq{Fpnq Ñ 0 as n Ñ 8. The distributions of pG, µq are

strongly almost invariant on the scale fpnq.

remarkdifmeasures
2.7 and 2) of Remark

remarkreiter
2.5.

Proof. Follows from Remark
Recall that an entropy of a probability measure ν on a space X is ´ řx P Xνpxq logpνpxqq.

Given a probability measure µ on a group G denote by Hpnq the entropy of its n-th con-
volution, Hpnq “ Hpµ˚nq.

corollaryentropy Corollary 2.9. Let µ be a ﬁnitely supported aperiodic measure on G and fpnq be a func-
tion such that fpnqaHpn ` 1q ´ Hpnq Ñ 0 as n Ñ 8. The distributions of pG, µq are
strongly almost invariant on the scale fpnq.

Proof. For some C ą 0 and any s in the support of µ

ÿ

h

|pµ˚nphq ´ µ˚nphsqq ď CaHpn ` 1q ´ Hpnq,

erschlerkarlsson

(see 2) of Lemma 5.1 in [
7]. In that lemma it is assumed that µpeq ą 0 and this assumption
can be easily replaced by aperiodicity). The Corollary follows therefore from Corollary
corollary1
2.8.

lemmaconditionned

lemmanotalmostinvariant

Lemma 2.10. 1) Let µn be a sequence of probability measures on G. Let αn be a sequence
of events of for µn such that µnpαnq Ñ 1 as n Ñ 8. Let µ1
n be the conditional measure
n and Ωn, then for any ǫ1 and
pµn|αnq. If fn are pK, ǫq almost invariant with respect to µ1
any sufﬁciently large n fn are Kp1 ` ǫ1q, ǫp1 ` ǫ1q almost invariant with respect to µn and
Ωn.
2) Let µn “ µ˚n and let αn be a sequence of events on Gn viewed as the space of
trajectories of length n for the random walk pG, µq such that Prαns Ñ 1 as n Ñ 8. Let
µ1
n be the projection on the n-th coordinate of Gn of the conditional measure pµn|αnq.
n and Ωn, then for any ǫ1 and any
If fn are pK, ǫq almost invariant with respect to µ1
sufﬁciently large n fn are Kp1` ǫ1q, ǫp1` ǫ1q almost invariant with respect to µn and Ωn.
Proof. 1) Since µnpαnq Ñ 1, it holds řgPG |µnpgq ´ µ1
npgq| Ñ 0. Therefore, for any
ǫ1 ą 0 and any sufﬁciently large n µnpg P G : |µnpgq{µ1
npgq ´ 1| ě ǫ1q ď ǫ1. Observe
also that for any ǫ1 ą 0 and any sufﬁciently large n µnpg P G : |µnpghq{µ1
npghq ´ 1| ě
ǫ1q ď ǫ1. This implies the statement of 1).
n is the
conditional measure for µn for the condition αn. This implies that for any ǫ1 ą 0 and any
npxq ´ 1| ě ǫ1q ď ǫ1. Therefore, the
sufﬁciently large n it holds µnpx P Gn : |µnpxq{µ2
same condition holds for the projection of µn and µ2
n to the n-th coordinate of Gn: for
any ǫ1 ą 0 and any sufﬁciently large n µnpg P G : |µnpgq{µ1
npgq ´ 1| ě ǫ1q ď ǫ1. This
implies the statement of 2).
Lemma 2.11. Let gn P G and An be an event on the space of trajectories of length n.
Suppose that µ˚npAnq ą c for some c ą 0 and all sufﬁciently large n. Suppose also that
µ˚npgnAnq tends to zero as n tends to zero. Then the distributions of pG, µq are not weakly
almost invariant with respect to gn.

2) Analagously to 1), we observe that řxPGn |µnpxq ´ µ2

npxq| Ñ 0, where µ2

8

ANNA ERSCHLER

Proof. Suppose that the distributions of pG, µq are weakly almost invariant with respect
to gn. Then on some subsets of probability close to one the quotient µ˚npgnxq{µ˚npxq ą
C, for some C ą 0 and all sufﬁciently large n. This would in particular hold for a subsets
of An of probability at least c{2. This would imply that µ˚npgnAnq ě c{2C for all
sufﬁciently large n.

2.1. Comparison with the radius of almost constancy in the neighborhood of the iden-
tity.

fixedpoint

lemmaamenable

Lemma 2.12. Let G be a ﬁnitely generated group and µ be a symmetric non-degenerate
aperiodic measure. The following conditions are equivalent

(1) There exists a sequence rpnq, tending to inﬁnity as n tends to inﬁnity, such that
the distributions of pG, µq are almost constant in the neighborhood of e of radius
rpnq.
(2) There exists a sequence rpnq, tending to inﬁnity as n tends to inﬁnity, such that
the distributions of pG, µq are weakly almost constant in the neighborhood of e of
radius rpnq.

(3) G is amenable.
Proof. First show that p2q implies p3q. Suppose that G is non-amenable. There exists
This implies that for any K ą 0 there exists m such that µ˚pn`mqpeq ď µ˚npeq{K for
Consider M such that µ˚mpBpe, Mqq ě 1{2. Since µ is symmetric, we know that
Observe that for all sufﬁciently large n there exists an element hn of length at most M

c ă 0 such that for all n ą N it holds µn`1peq ď cµ˚npeq.
all m and all sufﬁciently large n. Observe that µ˚pn`mqpeq “ řgPG µ˚npgqµ˚mpg´1q.
µ˚npgq ď µ˚npeq for all even n and all g.
such that µ˚nphnq ď 2{Kµ˚npeq.
avezratio
1]) states that for any
symmetric non-degenerate measure µ on an amenable group G, such that µ˚mpeq ‰ 0 for
some odd m and any g P G it holds

Now we show that p3q implies p1q. The ratio theorem of Avez ([

examplerevelle

lim
nÑ8

µ˚npgq{µ˚npeq “ 1.

Chose Npiq such that for any n ą Npiq and any g of length at most i

1 ´ 1{i ă µ˚npgq{µ˚npeq ă 1 ` 1{i.

Let rpnq be the maximum of i such that Npiq ă rpnq. It is clear that for any gn such that
lpgnq ď rpnq it holds µ˚npgnq{µ˚npeq Ñ 1.

Finally, it is clear that 1 implies 2.

revelle

Example 2.13 (Revelle, Theorem 1 [
14]). Let G “ Z ≀ F , F is a ﬁnite group and µ be
an aperiodic switch-walk-switch ﬁnitely supported measure on G. For any ǫ ą 0 there
exists c ą 0 such that for all sufﬁciently large n and all g of length at most cn1{3 it holds
p1 ´ ǫq ď µ˚npgq{µ˚npeq ď 1. For any αpnq : αpnq{n1{3 Ñ 8 there exists gn P G,
lpgnq ě αpnq such that µ˚npgnq{µ˚npeq Ñ 0.

Revelle uses the fact that the random walk is switch-walk-switch in the proof of Theo-
revelle
14] to obtain more precise description of the decay of transition probabilities in
examplerevelle
2.13 can be proven for any

rem 1 in [
the neighborhood of the identity. The statement of Example
ﬁnitely supported aperiodic random walk on Z ≀ F

proofmaintheorem
auxiliary

firstlemmaline

ALMOST INVARIANCE OF DISTRIBUTIONS FOR RANDOM WALKS ON GROUPS

9

Remark 2.14. Let G be an amenable ﬁnitely generated group and µ be a non-degenerate
symmetric ﬁnitely supported measure such that the Poisson boundary of pG, µq is non-
trivial. The radius of almost constancy of transition probabilities of pG, muqi s not trivial
(that is, rpnq tends to inﬁnity), while the radius of almost invariance is trivial (Rpnq is
bounded).

While in Abelian groups Rpnq and rpnq are asymptotically equivalent, the remark
shows that rpnq could be asymptotically smaller than Rpnq (and not asymptotically equiv-
alent). Theorem
1.1 shows that for G “ Z≀F we have rpnq „ n1{2, and since Rpnq „ n1{3
we see that rpnq can be larger than Rpnq.

maintheorem

3. PROOF OF THEOREM

maintheorem
1.1

3.1. Auxiliary facts about random walks on Z. For a random walk on Z we denote by
M inn and M axn the minimal and the maximal point of Z, visited at least once until the
moment n.

Lemma 3.1. Consider a random walk on Z deﬁned by a symmetric ﬁnitely supported mea-
sure µ such that the support of µ is not equal to the identity. For any ǫ ą 0 there exists
c ą 0 such that with probability ě 1 ´ ǫ with respect to µ˚n it holds

´c?n ď Minn, Maxn ě c?n

erdosKac

Proof. Recall that by a result of Erd¨os and Kac [

3] the limit as n Ñ 8 of the probability
PrMaxn ď c?ns “ C şc
x“0 expp´t2{2qBt, for any non-degenerate µ on Z with zero
mean and ﬁnite second moment. Therefore, for ǫ ą 0 there exists c ą 0 such that with
probability ě 1 ´ ǫ with respect to µ˚n it holds Maxn ě c?n. Since Minn is equal to
Maxn for the trajectory, reﬂected at 0, it follows that for any ǫ ą 0 there exists c ą 0 such
that with probability ě 1 ´ ǫ with respect to µ˚n it holds ´c?n ď Minn.
For a random walk on Z denote by In the interval of Z visited until time instant n.
Observe that if the support of µ belongs to t´1, 0, 1u, then this interval coincides with the
sites visited until the time instant n.

lemmainvariancez0

Lemma 3.2. Consider a symmetric aperiodic ﬁnitely supported non-degenerate random
walk on Z. For any ǫ1 there exist ǫ ą 0 such that the following holds, for all sufﬁciently
large n, with probability ě 1 ´ ǫ1 with respect to µ˚n. Let Sn be the random walk and In
be an interval of Z of points visited up to the instant n. For any z ď ǫ?n.

PrIn “ I 0

n, Sn “ S0

n ` zs{PrIn “ I 0

n, Sn “ S0

ns ě 1 ´ ǫ1

Proof. Consider the random walk at the instant rp1´δqns, δ is a small positive constant,
δ ă 1{2. With probability close to one the maximum of the random walk until the instant
n is already achieved at the instant p1´ δqn, never achieved between instants np1´ δq and
n. Indeed, observe that Mk ´ Sk behaves as a random walk on Z, reﬂected a the identity.
This implies that with probability close to one Mnp1´δq ´ Snp1´δq is greater than C?n .
Observe that the maximal displacement of Sm, np1 ´ δqm ď n, is not greater than δ1?n,
Finally, observe that quotients of transition probabilities µ˚δnpxq{µ˚δnpxyq is close to
one if y P Z has absolute value at most ǫ1?n, for a small positive constant ǫ1.

where δ1 is close to zero if δ is small enough.

lemmasupportcontainsinterval

10

ANNA ERSCHLER

maintheorem

1.1. Take an element z P G, h “ pa, fq, a P Z, f is a ﬁnitely
3.2. Proof of Theorem
supported function on Z with values in F . For such function, we denote by Iphq “ Ipfq
the minimal interval, containing the support of f . Denote by Jphq, the minimal interval
containing a, e and Ipfq.
Lemma 3.3. Let µ be a symmetric non-degenerated ﬁnitely supported measure on G “
Z ≀ F , F is a ﬁnite group containing at least 2 elements. Denote by X1, X2, . . . , Xn a
trajectory of a random walk pG, µq.
1) For any ǫ ą 0 there exists C ą 0 such that IpXnq belong to the interval r´C?n, C?ns
with probability greater than 1 ´ ǫ.
2) For any ǫ ą 0 there exist ǫ1 ą 0 such that Ipfq contains the interval r´ǫ1?n, ǫ1?ns
with probability greater than 1 ´ ǫ.

Proof. 1) Follows from the fact, that the support of g belongs to the set, visited by the
projection of the random walk to Z up to the moment n and from the fact, that any ﬁnitely
supported symmetric random walk on Z, stays with a probability close to one (with respect
to n step distribution) in a ball of radius C?n.

firstlemmaline
3.1 implies

2) Lemma
that with the probability close to one, with respect to n step distribution, the projection

of the random walk on Z has visited some points X and Y , X ď ´ǫ2?n and Y ě ǫ2?n.
Let S be a ﬁnite generating set of G and CS be the maximum of lSpsq, where s P sup µ.
Suppose that the random walk has visited X, Y as above. Observe that the conditional
probability that IpXnq contains some elements ´L and M , with L, M ě 1{2ǫ2?n is
greater than expp´C{CSǫ2?nq, for some C ą 0, all ǫ2 and all n.

This probability is close to one if ǫ2 is small enough, and we have proved the lemma.
Now we start by proving the second claim of the theorem.

lemmaswitch

Lemma 3.4. Let µ be a measure deﬁning a standard simple switch-walk-switch random
walk on G “ Z ≀ F . Suppose that g0 “ pe, hq and that Jpg0q Ă Jpzq. Then for any n ą 0
µ˚npzq “ µ˚npg0zq.

Proof. Take some z “ pa, fq P Z ≀ F . By assumption on the measure, the support
of its projection to Z is equal to t´1, 0, 1u. Observe that if the projection of the random
walk pG, µq visits X, Y P Z until some time instant n, then this projection visits all integer
points of the interval rX, Y s. Let Xn “ pan, fnq be the trajectory of the random walk on
G. Observe that if we condition the random walk to the condition that the projection to Z
visits some interval I, then for each integer k P I the value of fnpkq takes all values in F ,
and that these values are independent for all k (in this interval)

This implies that the transition probability

µ˚npzq “ ÿ

I

PrIpXnq “ I, Ipzq Ă I, and PpXnq “ as

1

#F #I “

“ ÿ

I:IpzqĂI

PrIpXnq “ I and PpXnq “ as

1

#F #I

lemmaswitch
3.4 and concludes the proof of the second claim

This implies the statement of Lemma

of the theorem.

Now we prove the ﬁrst claim of the theorem.
Any element g of the wreath product can be written as a product g “ g0z0, where g0
has trivial projection to Z and z0 P Z. It is clear that for any word metric lS on the wreath
product there exists a constant C ą 0 such that for all g the length of the elements g0 and

ALMOST INVARIANCE OF DISTRIBUTIONS FOR RANDOM WALKS ON GROUPS

11

z0 in their decomposition as the product above satisfy lspg0q, lspz0q ď Clpgq. Therefore,
in order to prove that the distributions of a random walk on a wreath product are almost
invariant for multiplications by elements of length asymptotically smaller than Rpnq, it is
sufﬁcient to prove that they are almost invariant for multiplications by g0, z0, where the
length of g0 and z0 is asymptotically smaller than Rpnq.
the second claim of Lemma

For elements g0 (with trivial projection to Z) the statement follows from Lemma

lemmasupportcontainsinterval
3.3.

lemmaswitch
3.4,

For elements z0 (z0 P Z) the statement follows from Lemma

lemmaconditionned
2.10.

Lemma

lemmainvariancez0
3.2 and the second part of

smallradii

4. SMALL RADII OF ALMOST INVARIANCE

lemmaiterated

propositioniterated

Let C be a wreath product of A and B, and c P C, c “ pa, fq, where f : A Ñ B. Given
a P A, denote by cppaqq the value fpaq. Take C “ A ≀ pA ≀ Bq and a1, a2 P A. Observe
that cppa1qq is an element of A ≀ B, denote by cppa1, a2qq its value at a2. Likewise, for i
times iterated wreath product C ≀pA ≀pA ≀ . . . q ≀ Bq . . .q we consider cppa1, . . . , aiqq deﬁned
inductively as the value of cppa1, . . . , ai´1qq at ai. If a1 “ a2 ¨¨¨ “ aieA, we also use the
notation cpe, iq for cppa1, . . . , aiqq “ cppeA, . . . , eAqq.
Lemma 4.1. Let GipHq be i times iterated wreath product of Z with H (Z is the group
that acts). Consider switch-walk-switch symmetric ﬁnitely supported random walk µi on
Gi and suppose that the drift function of the corresponding random walk on H is ?n.
Then the expected value after n steps of the random walk pGi, µiq

ErlpXippe, iqs “ n1{2i`1

.

Proof. Let L0pnq be the number of visits of e after n steps of a random walk on Z.
The expectation of L0pnq is „ C?n. Consider the conditional event that L0 “ ¯L0. If we
condition moreover by the fact that the point of Z visited by the random walk at the moment
n is not equal to 0, then the value of Xipeq is obtained as a position after 2 ¯L0pnq ´ 1 steps
of a switch-walk-switch symmetric ﬁnitely supported switch-walk-switch random walk on
Gi´1pHq. Otherwise, if we condition by the fact that the point of Z visited by the random
walk at the moment n is equal to 0, then the value of Xipeq is obtained as a position after
2 ¯L0pnq steps of the above mentioned switch-walk-switch symmetric ﬁnitely supported
switch-walk-switch random walk on Gi´1pHq.

This implies that for i “ 1

ErlpX1pe, 2qs “ n1{4.

and, arguing by induction on i, we obtain the claim of the lemma for any i ě 1.
Proposition 4.2. Let GipHq be i times iterated wreath product of Z with H (Z that acts
each time). Consider switch-walk-switch symmetric ﬁnitely supported random walk µi on
Gi and suppose that the drift function of the corresponding random walk on H is ?n.
Then the radius of almost invariance rpGi, µiqpnq ď C{n1{2i`1.

For example, Proposition

4.2 can be applied to H “ Z and states that simple switch-
walk-switch random walks on Z ≀ Z have almost invariant radius asymptotically not larger
than n1{4, that in case of random walks on Z ≀ Z ≀ Z the corresponding almost invariance
radius is at most n1{8 etc.

propositioniterated

Proof. Follows from Lemma

lemmaiterated
4.1 and Lemma

lemmanotalmostinvariant
2.11.

12

ANNA ERSCHLER

piecewise

4.1. Transition probabilities of piecewise automatic groups. The goal of this subsec-
tion is to prove Proposition

propositionbadinvariance
1.6

erschlerpiecewise
6].

Given a function Fpnq, we need to construct a group G such that that for all ǫ, K the
distributions µni of simple random walks on G are not pǫ, Kq almost invariant with respect
to balls of radius Fpnq, for none of the choice of the subsequence ni.

We will use the construction from [
In this paper, we deﬁne and study ”piecewise automatic groups”, and we show (see
erschlerpiecewise
6] and the proof of this proposition) that for τ1 being the standard ﬁnite
Proposition 1 in [
state automaton for the ﬁrst Gigorchuk group (possibly extended to some larger alphabet
than 0 and 1) and τ2 being a ﬁnite state automata, containing e, a, b, c, d as its states, such
that a, b, c, d generate the free product Z{2Z ˚ pZ{2Z ` Z{2Zq, then the corresponding
”piecewise automatic groups with returns” has the following properties.
For any t1 ă T1 ă t2 ă T2 ă t3... one constructs a group Gpt1, t2, ...T1, T2, ...q
with the following properties. There exist ”comparison groups” Apt1, T1, t2, T2, . . . tiq
and Bpt1, T1, t2, T2, . . . ti, Tiq, such that

jects to the group G2, generated by the automaton τ2,

as a subgroup in a ﬁnite direct power of the the ﬁrst Grigorchuk group G1,

(1) all groups Apt1, T1, t2, T2, . . . tiq are commensurable with a group which imbeds
(2) all groups Bpt1, T1, t2, T2, . . . ti, Tiq are commensurable with a group which sur-
(3) furthermore, for some Ψpxq tending to 8 as x tends to 8 the balls of radius ΨpTiq
(4) the balls of radius Ψpri`1q in Gpt1, t2, ..., T1, T2, ...q and Bpt1, T1, t2, T2, . . . ti, Tiq

in Gpt1, t2, ..., T1, T2, ...q and Apt1, T1, t2, T2, . . . tiq coincide,
coincide.

In particular, these properties imply that the constructed groups are of sub-exponential
growth, so far as the sequence t1 ă T1 ă t2 ă T2 ă t3... grows quickly enough. In
particular, symmetric ﬁnitely supported random walks on these group have trivial Poisson
propositiontrivialboundary
2.4 we know that in this case the group admits a non-trivial
boundary. By Proposition
radius of almost invariance.

Observe that the groups Bpt1, T1, t2, T2, . . . ti, Tiq are non-amenable, for any quickly
enough growing sequence t1 ă T1 ă t2 ă T2 ă t3 ă .... This implies that any non-
degenerate random walk on these groups has non-trivial Poisson boundary. By Proposition
propositiontrivialboundary
2.4 we know that for any K, ǫ there exists C (depending on Bpt1, T1, t2, T2, . . . ti, Tiq)
such that the random walk on Bpt1, T1, t2, T2, . . . ti, Tiq is not pK, ǫq on the balls of radius
C.
4.3 below implies therefore that for any Fpnq, tending to 8 there exists a
sequence t1 ă T1 ă t2 ă T2 ă t3 ă ... such that the corresponding piecewise automatic
group satisﬁes the following property. For any K, ǫ and any sufﬁcient large n any almost
invariance radius rǫ,Kpnq ď Fpnq, and this completes the proof of the Proposition

The remark

remarkCayley

propositionbadinvariance
1.6.

remarkCayley Remark 4.3. Let A and B the groups generated by SA and SB such that their marked
Cayley graphs are isometric in the balls of radius R ě 1. Let µA and µB be probability
measures supported on SA and SB such that πpµAq “ µB, for isomorphism π between the
balls of Cayley graphs (e.g. µA is an equidistribution on SA and µB is an equidistribution
on SB). If the distributions of pA, µAq are pK, ǫq almost invariant for g P A such that
lSA ď rpnq and all n, then for any n such that n ` rpnq ď R the distributions of pB, µBq
are pK, ǫq almost invariant for g P B such that lSB ď rpnq.

ALMOST INVARIANCE OF DISTRIBUTIONS FOR RANDOM WALKS ON GROUPS

13

Proof. Observe that for any n such that n ` rpnq ď R, any h P A in the support of µ˚n

A

and any g P A such that lApgq ď rpnq, it holds lApghq ď R.

5. NON CONSTANT LIMIT DISTRIBUTIONS FOR QUOTIENTS OF TRANSITION

PROBABILITIES

iL , tj2 “ s´1

iL´1

iL´2

5.1. Limit distributions for word lengths. Given a ﬁnitely generated group G and a
ﬁnite set of generators S of G, we consider the word length lS. Given a sequence gn P G
(or a sequence of subsets Vn Ă G and a sequence µn of probability measures on G, we
can ask what is the limit behavior of lSpxgnq ´ lSpxq (where gn is a ﬁxed sequence or
gn P Vn), considered as a function on the probability space pG, µnq. As before, we are
interested in this paper in the case where µn “ µ˚n for some probability measure µ on G.
Lemma 5.1. [Free groups, distributions of lSpxhq ´ lSpxq] Let S be the free generating
set of G “ Fm, and µ be a measure which is equidistributed on S Y S´1. Fix an element
h P Fm .
There exists ǫn, tending to 0 as n Ñ 8 such that for any h P G and any k ď lSphq it
holds |µ˚npg : lSpghq ă lSpgq ` lphq ´ 2kq ´ 1{vmpkq| ď ǫn.

iL , then lSpghq “ K ` L. If tj1 “ s´1

tj1 . . . tiK , tj P S. If tj1 ‰ s´1
lSpghq “ K ` L´ 2. If tj1 “ s´1
etc

Proof. Let lSpgq “ L and lSphq “ K. Write g “ si1 . . . siL, sj P S and h “
iL but tj2 ‰ s´1
iL´1, then
then lSpghq “ K ` L´ 3

, but tj3 ‰ s´1
Observe that µ˚npxq “ µ˚npyq for any x, y : lSpxq “ lSpyq.
Since the random walk pG, µq is transient, we know that for any C ą 0 it holds
µ˚npBpe, Cqq Ñ 0, where Bpe, Cq is the ball of radius C in the word length lS.
Fix an element h of length L. Observe that if we chose an element g at random from the
sphere of radius K ą L in pG, lSq, then with probability 1 ´ 1{vmp1q the last letter s´1
iL of
g is not equal to the inverse of the ﬁrst letter t´1
j1 of h. In this caselSpghq “ lSpgq ` lphq
With probability 1 ´ 1{vmp2q at least one two among the two pairs of letters are not equal:
either tj1 ‰ s´1
iL´1. In this case lSpghq ě lSpgq` lphq´ 2. For any r ě 1 the
following holds: at least m among the letters of g and the corresponding inversed letters of
h are not equal with proability 1 ´ 1{vmprq, and in this case lSpghq ě lSpgq ` lphq ´ 2r
To prove the statement of the Lemma it sufﬁces therefore to consider ǫn “ µ˚npBpe, Kqq.
5.2. Non-constant limit distributions. Though no group with non-trivial boundary can
admit a non-trivial scale for almost invariance, it may happen that such groups admit a scale
of weak almost constant contraction. That is, a scale on which the multiplication by an
element g multiplies the transition probability by some constant Cg, up to a multiplicative
constant and with probability close to one. This is the case for simple random walk on a
free group Fm.

iL or t tj2 ‰ s´1

Let vmpnq “ p2m ´ 1qp2mqn´1 be the spherical growth function of the free group.

with respect to the free generating set.
Example 5.2. Let S be the free generating set of Fm, m ě 2, and µ be a measure which
is equidistributed on S Y S´1.
Let νm be the probability measure on the set 0, 1, 2, . . . such that νmp´xq “ 1{vmpxq´
1{vmpx ` 1q “ 1{2mp1{p2m ´ 1qx ´ 1{p2m ´ 1qx`1q for any integer x ě 0. Consider
the function fpxq “ ´2x on this probability space. Take any sequence gn P Fm such that
lpgnq Ñ 8 and lpgnq{?n Ñ 0, where l is some word metric on Fm. Then the distributions
of the function µ˚npgq{µ˚npggnq on the probability space µ˚n tend to that of f on νm.

lemmalengthfreegroups

examplefree

14

ANNA ERSCHLER

Proof. Consider the random walk Xn on Z`, reﬂected at zero, which goes with proba-
bility 1{p2mq to the left and p2m´1q{2m) to the right for any x P Z`, x ‰ 0. Observe that
the simple random walk on Fm visits an element of length l with probability of Xn “ l,
and that for two elements g and h in the free group of the same word length with respect
to S it holds µ˚npgq “ µ˚nphq for all n.

In particular,

µ

˚npgq “ 1{vpnqPrXn “ lSpgqs.

n P Z` be such that pX o

n ´ pm ´ 1q{mnqq{?n Ñ 0 and such that
ns{PrXn “ rpm´1q{mnss Ñ
n ´ rpm ´ 1q{mnsqq is not divided by two for each n, then PrXn “

Remark 5.3. Let X o
n´rpm´1q{mnsqq is divided by two. Then PrXn “ X o
pX o
1. Otherwise, pX o
ns{PrXn “ rpm ´ 1q{mns ` 1s Ñ 1.
X o
The statement of Example

examplefree
5.2 follows therefore from the Lemma

lemmalengthfreegroups
5.1.

avezratio

cornuliertesseravalette

erdosKac

erschlerdrift

erschlercritical

erschlerpiecewise

erschlerkarlsson

hebischsaloff

grigorchukdegrees

gromov

kaimanovichvershik

kaimanovich02law

ozawa
revelle

shalom

spitzer

REFERENCES

[1] Andr´e Avez, Limite de quotients pour des marches al´eatoires sur des groupes, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris S´er.

A-B 276 (1973), A317–A320 (French). MR0315750 (47 #4299)

[2] Yves de Cornulier, Romain Tessera, and Alain Valette, Isometric group actions on Hilbert spaces: growth
of cocycles, Geom. Funct. Anal. 17 (2007), no. 3, 770–792, DOI 10.1007/s00039-007-0604-0. MR2346274
(2009g:22007)

[3] P. Erd¨os and M. Kac, On certain limit theorems of the theory of probability, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 52 (1946),

292–302. MR0015705 (7,459b)

[4] Anna Erschler, On drift and entropy growth for random walks on groups, Ann. Probab. 31 (2003), no. 3,

1193–1204, DOI 10.1214/aop/1055425775. MR1988468 (2004c:60018)

[5]

[6]

, Critical constants for recurrence of random walks on G-spaces, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 55

(2005), no. 2, 493–509. MR2147898 (2006c:20085)

, Piecewise automatic groups, Duke Math. J. 134 (2006), no. 3, 591–613, DOI 10.1215/S0012-7094-

06-13435-X. MR2254627 (2007k:20086)

[7] Anna Erschler and Anders Karlsson, Homomorphisms to R constructed from random walks, Ann. Inst.
Fourier (Grenoble) 60 (2010), no. 6, 2095–2113 (English, with English and French summaries). MR2791651
(2012c:60018)

[8] W. Hebisch and L. Saloff-Coste, Gaussian estimates for Markov chains and random walks on groups, Ann.

Probab. 21 (1993), no. 2, 673–709. MR1217561 (94m:60144)

[9] R. I. Grigorchuk, Degrees of growth of ﬁnitely generated groups and the theory of invariant means, Izv. Akad.

Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 48 (1984), no. 5, 939–985 (Russian). MR764305 (86h:20041)

[10] Mikhael Gromov, Groups of polynomial growth and expanding maps, Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. Publ. Math.

53 (1981), 53–73. MR623534 (83b:53041)

[11] V. A. Ka˘ımanovich and A. M. Vershik, Random walks on discrete groups: boundary and entropy, Ann.

Probab. 11 (1983), no. 3, 457–490. MR704539 (85d:60024)

[12] Vadim A. Kaimanovich, Measure-theoretic boundaries of Markov chains, 0-2 laws and entropy, Harmonic
analysis and discrete potential theory (Frascati, 1991), Plenum, New York, 1992, pp. 145–180. MR1222456
(94h:60099)

[13] Narutaka Ozawa, A functional analysis proof of Gromov’s polynomial growth theorem.
[14] David Revelle, Heat kernel asymptotics on the lamplighter group, Electron. Comm. Probab. 8 (2003), 142–

154 (electronic), DOI 10.1214/ECP.v8-1092. MR2042753 (2005e:60100)

[15] Yehuda Shalom, Harmonic analysis, cohomology, and the large-scale geometry of amenable groups, Acta

Math. 192 (2004), no. 2, 119–185, DOI 10.1007/BF02392739. MR2096453 (2005m:20095)

[16] Frank Spitzer, Principles of random walk, 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg, 1976. Graduate

Texts in Mathematics, Vol. 34. MR0388547 (52 #9383)

CNRS, DMA, ´ECOLE NORMALE SUP ´ERIEURE, 45 RUE D’ULM, PARIS, FRANCE

