6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
8
4
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

373 K Superconductors

Ivan Zahariev Kostadinov

373K-SUPERCONDUCTORS, Private Research Institute

(Dated: March 7, 2016)

Experimental evidence of superconductors with critical temperatures above 373K is presented. In
a family of diﬀerent compounds we demonstrate the superconductor state, the transition to normal
state above 387K, an intermediate 242K superconductor, susceptibility up to 350K, I −V curves at
4.2 K in magnetic ﬁeld of 12 T and current up to 60 A, 300 K Josephson Junctions and Shapiro steps
with radiation of 5GHz to 21T Hz, 300K tapes tests with high currents up to 3000A and many T Hz
images of coins and washers. Due to a pending patent1, the exact chemical characterization and
technological processes for these materials are temporarily withheld and will be presented elsewhere.

PACS numbers: 74.25.F-, 74.25.N-, 74.55.+v

I.

INTRODUCTORY REMARKS

The search for superconductors with increasingly
higher Tc has started with the discovery of Kamerlingh
Onnes[1], who on April 08, 1911 observed the electrical
resistance of pure mercury vanish at liquid He tempera-
ture of 4.2K. After the 1986 discovery of superconductiv-
ity in perovskite-type oxides by Bednortz and Mueller[2],
a new age in the quest for room temperature supercon-
ductivity has begun. In a short span of time till 1993, the
critical temperature increased up to 163 K, in materials
under external pressure. As these events are well known
to the community, we will refer the reader to the excel-
lent reviews and analysis of the observed phenomena[3].
Other very recent advancements worth mentioning are in
systems at extremely high pressures[4, 5].

As many others, our group started working on high-
temperature superconductivity in 1987. Some of the
topics we have been interested in are listed in the
references[10–17]. The present author was active on the
broad subject[6], and continued working on the synthesis
of various superconductors over the years.

In this communication we focus our attention on novel
superconductor materials we have synthesized and char-
acterized with transition temperatures in the range of
373 K = 100 C degrees and even well above, because
of their obvious importance. Below we present exper-
imental results for selected samples of these materials
obtained in the previous century, marked as type A, B,
C, D=E and some recent ones.

• Resistance temperature dependence of the sample
A in the range between 350 and 388 K with a zero
resistance state and a transition point at 387 K.

• AC magnetic susceptibility of a sample type B with

intermediate critical temperature Tc = 242 K.

1For inquiries about the USPTO application contact Thomas W.
Humphrey, Partner, Wood Herron and Evans LLP.

• Magnetic susceptibility data from the twin sample
E, collected during several runs on diﬀerent tem-
peratures in a Quantum Design system. The curves
show negative susceptibility up to 5 T in the range
from 60 K to 350 K. The system does not reach
normal state due to a restriction in temperature
ranges of the experimental setup.

• I − V data at 4.2 K of the sample D that demon-
strates a typical superconductors behavior in high
magnetic ﬁeld of up to 12 T and current of up to
60 A. It proves existence of superconductivity in
the twin sample to the one studied in the Quan-
tum Design for magnetic susceptibility (sample E).
The interpretation of the observed curves indicates
possible presence of magnetic-ﬂux avalanches.

• The gap in the energy spectrum was evaluated via
measuring the tunneling current at 300 K of a sam-
ple of the type C. The gap was found to be about
15 mV in several measurements, the one shown is
based on 9000 data points its lowest current being
6.49 pA. The waiting time is the reason to collect
larger current values at the same voltage due to
the existence of parallel super-current paths in the
pellet.

• A Josephson Junction (JJ)[7] is shown, with several
other setups marking the broad range of frequencies
from about 5 GHz up to 21 THz involved in the
Shapiro steps[8] and the JJ mesa-type THz waves
generation.

• THz waves images of coins and small washers are
also displayed with tiny features indicating few
THz waves presence.

• Experiments were performed by passing 125 A cur-
rent via: a) a superconductor tape (black) and si-
multaneously in series with b) a copper tape of the
same size and thickness at room temperature of
300 K . The copper tape started burning after
about 5 seconds. The technical current density was
about 10, 000 A/cm2, which is comparable with in-
dustrial high current transport superconductors.

The data presented here are based on the above-
mentioned samples of composite materials, of types A,
B, C, D=E superconductors and some recently pro-
duced ones. These marked samples (with the excep-
tion of sample B) are all with Tc in the broad vicin-
ity of 373 K. Other compounds with slightly higher Tc
were synthesized and tested but data is not presented
here as they were not fully characterized. As a perspec-
tive, our decades-long studies include compositions of el-
ements from several major groups in the periodic table,
many of them with lower or higher critical temperatures,
and many of them non-superconductors at all.
In this
exhaustive investigation we were initially guided by our
theoretical ideas and practical experience in the HTS ma-
terials. The details of these novel insights we have gained
over our study, which have led to the current materials
with room-temperature Tc’s, will be shared in upcoming
publications.

II. THE DC RESISTANCE TRANSITION

First we describe the DC resistance temperature de-
pendence of a macroscopical sample across it and demon-
strate the critical temperature Tc of the transition from
superconductive to normal state. In F ig.1 we show that
the sample is still in zero resistance state above the boil-
ing water temperature of 100 C and that the transition
occurs at about 387 K or 114 C. The recorded data ob-
tained from a sample of the composition A type group
are displayed. Many of the initially studied samples
were compacted to form circular pellets at a pressure
of about 5 − 10 kbar/cm2 of about 1 cm diameter and
about 2mm−3mm thickness with four contacts attached
made of In-Ga eutectic composition. Other size pellets
were also pressed at a pressure of 5 − 10 kbar/cm2 and
studied. The temperature was measured with a platinum
100 Ohms thermometer attached to the sample inside
the sample holder. There were two other thermometers
and a heater built in our standard closed cycle cryostat
with lowest temperature of 10K. Measurements in the
range from 350 K to 390 K are shown demonstrating a
well-visible zero resistance state and a sharp transition
at 387 K.

III.

Tc = 242 K RECORDED IN THE

MAGNETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY OF SAMPLE B

In this section we show data from a sample with a dif-
ferent composition B type, as a milestone mark, studied
among many others on the way toward the above 100 C
superconductors presented in the ﬁrst section. The mag-
netization temperature dependence is the second funda-
mental characteristic of the superconductor state, which
together with the resistance makes the two observations
proving the presence of superconductivity in a macro-
scopical sample. The magnetization of a sample of B

2

FIG. 1: The DC resistance temperature dependence of an
early A type sample. The measuring current was 0.5 A and
the resistivity is in Ohm.cm. The Tc = 387 K or 114 C
and the lowest measured voltage is in the few micro Volts
range.

type composition was studied in the same closed cycle
cryostat described in Section II, with a standard three-
coil system. The coils were calibrated with a sample
of Y1Ba2Cu3O7−x producing strong signal of the Lock-
in ampliﬁer operating at a frequency of 137 Hz. The
Y BCO sample was otherwise not speciﬁcally character-
ized. From the graph in F ig.2 we clearly observe that the
amplitude of the transition signal variation of the sam-
ple having a transition temperature of 242 K is of the
same magnitude as the Y1Ba2Cu3O7−x system used for
calibration.

All measured samples in the susceptibility setup were
cut in an approximately rectangular 2x2x4 mm shape.
A typical discrepancy of about 4 − 5 K was observed
of the critical temperatures of the cooling and warming
regimes due to the position of the coil and the thermo-
couple above the cooler. This diﬀerence is absent if the

FIG. 2: The susceptibility of a B type sample in relative units
showing a critical temperature of 242 K. In the inset is the
Y1Ba2Cu3O7−x calibration curve of the coil.

3

FIG. 3: RTS disk of a diameter about 2 cm and about
3.4 mm tick is on the surface of a 3 inch diameter permanent
magnet with a B ≃ 1.4 T ﬁeld in the center.

thermal stabilization is applied at every few degrees. The
number 242 K was selected as the last point before the
sharp increase due to the transition from a supercon-
ductor state to a metallic type of resistance. This set
of data displayed in the graph below is included here
to show that the Room Temperature Superconductors
(RTS) were found in a process including synthesis of
a large amount of various superconductor compositions
with intermediate transition temperatures.

IV. NEGATIVE MAGNETIZATION AT B = 5 T

AND T = 350 K

Before presenting the data demonstrating the magnetic
susceptibility, we are posting a photo of a RTS sample
positioned on a 8 cm diameter N eodimium based perma-
nent magnet with magnetic ﬁeld in the center of about
1.4 T. As with any diamagnet (i.e. copper), the super-
conductor sample is attracted to the magnet, but being
placed in the center of its surface, strong surface super-
currents are created shielding the interior of the sample
from the magnetic ﬁeld. If the ﬁeld is between the ﬁrst
and second critical magnetic ﬁeld values there may be
partial penetration in the form of ﬂuxoids - single ﬂux
quanta (or a bunch of them), which could be forming
a regular or irregular Abrikosov lattice[9].
In our case
there are two stable positions of the disk of about 2 cm
diameter: one is horizontal and the other is vertical. In
the horizontal position the sample, barely laying on the
surface, slides away from the strongest ﬁeld to the edge as
a place with highest gradient of the ﬁeld. In the vertical
position it also tends to escape the center and ﬂoats to
the edge at a tiny distance above (or below if suspended)
the magnet surface. As it is presented in F ig.3, around
halfway to the edge, the RTS disk stays slightly tilted
and it may stay tilted, or oscillate like a metronome.

The magnetic ﬁeld eﬀect on some substances is to in-

FIG. 4: The magnetization (-5 T,+5 T) scans at selected sev-
eral temperatures from 10 K to 350 K show a transition from
paramagnetic to diamagnetic behavior at room temperatures
and higher. An upturn begins to show at 350 K. The same
sample was in superconductor/diamagnetic state at 4.2K and
12 T magnetic ﬁeld from 0 up to 6 A current(see sec.5)

duce a small attractive force, which is measured with the
diamagnetic susceptibility, studied here in order to ﬁnd
the magnitude of the induced diamagnetic polarization.
The data were collected from a sample E type. The data
show only the characteristic for superconductors negative
susceptibility in the range between 60 K and 350 K, as
the transition to a normal metallic state has not been
reached since it takes place at higher temperatures, close
to or above 400 K. The data demonstrate sensitivity in
the vicinity of the transition to the normal state. There
is a smaller value of the susceptibility at 5 T at 350 K,
when nearing the transition point (in the range of 400 K)
as demonstrated in F ig.4 by the less negative magneti-
zation at 350 K, when compared to the 300 K curve.

The samples D and E type were two diﬀerent pieces
of a larger one with a speciﬁc synthesis history and with
critical transition temperature close to 400 K - a temper-
ature not available in the measuring system from Quan-
tum Design used in the experiment. Next we show a 3D
graph F ig.5 of the actual recorded data points.

The transition back to normal state is in the range of
400 K and could not be reached by the system. We show
also a 3D graph, where the data points are connected
with yellow surface. The zero magnetization is marked
with a blue plane. The paramagnetic to diamagnetic
transition is seen F ig.6 at the crossing lines of the two
surfaces-yellow and blue one.

For a superconductor sample with higher Tc the second
critical magnetic ﬁeld is expected to be much higher then
5 T and for this reason a direct downturn transition at
lower temperatures (10 K and 30 K) was not observed (it
was found that 12T at 4.2K turn it in diamagnetic state-
see sec.5). We ﬁrst present all the data in a single graph
to show the speciﬁc for this sample features at low mag-
netic ﬁeld. For all curves, one of the loops near B = 0

4

FIG. 7: The magnetization (-5T,+5T) scans at selected tem-
peratures 10 K to 350 K show a transition from diamagnetic
to paramagnetic in the low magnetic ﬁelds region near the
origin from 10 K to room temperatures and higher.

tive near zero, turns negative at smaller negative values
of B, then is positive for negative B = −5 T and re-
turns to zero being negative i.e. near zero the sample
is diamagnetic F ig.7 coming from negative values and
paramagnetic from positive values of B. It can be stated
with certainty that at higher then 5 T ﬁeld there will be
a downturn at 10 K and 30 K due to the existing su-
perconductivity of the same sample at higher magnetic
ﬁelds(see next sections).

Further, at 60 K and all higher temperatures up to
350 K, all curves have negative magnetization showing
a low-temperatures diamagnetic behaviour, then a para-
magnetic magnetization is seen and again downturn dia-
magnetic at higher magnetic ﬁelds, which stays diamag-
netic up to 5 T . Moreover, one can trace various lines
of transitions in the zero magnetization B − T plane,
if the data points are connected to form a 3D surface
(see the 3D graph). The speciﬁc synthesis history of the
twin samples D and E could be related to the transition
from diamagnetic near B = 0 to paramagnetic and later
again diamagnetic as seen on the 3D graph. It remains to
demonstrate that there are samples with transition tem-
peratures higher then the one shown of 387K and we will
give further such records of the magnetization. When the
samples of the D and E types are overheated above the
Tc in a room temperatures environment to about 150 C
(well above Tc ) the magnetization undergoes successive
transitions from a superconductor state at room temper-
ature to a non-superconductor one if over-heated well
above Tc and well above the boiling point of the water -
like 150 C.

V.

I-V AT 12T AND 4.2 K UP TO 60 A

The critical current of sample E (same as D) was stud-
ied in liquid He 4.2 K and a high magnetic ﬁeld of 12 T .
These results are listed next. The previous graph was of

FIG. 5: The magnetization (-5 T,+5 T) scans at the selected
temperatures from 10K to 350K show a transition from para-
magnetic to diamagnetic behavior starting at 60 K and seen
at room temperatures and higher. An upturn begins at 350K.

FIG. 6: The magnetization (-5 T,+5 T) scans at selected tem-
peratures from 10 K to 350 K show in blue a transition from
paramagnetic to diamagnetic behavior from 60 K to room
temperatures and higher. An upturn of the yellow surface
begins to show at 350 K the normal state being in the 400K
range

magnetic ﬁled shows a small initial part of diamagnetic
susceptibility expanded hereF ig.7 to demonstrate it. All
graphs present a peculiar behavior showing a transition
from positive magnetization to a negative one. Except
for the 10 K and 30 K all pass another zero becoming
negative as seen in the ﬁrst graph before reaching 5 T .
To make clear how the loop is recorded we mention that
for the 60 K run it starts at B = 5 T negative, is posi-

sample E showing the magnetization being negative in up
to 5 T magnetic ﬁeld and up to 350 K temperature. Here
we study its twin sample D in high magnetic ﬁeld of 12 T
under strong DC current sweep in a heavy experimental
setup used for industrial samples serial testing. The sam-
ple was in liquid helium at 4.2 K at all times (because of
the experimental setup to reach and maintain the high
magnetic ﬁeld) with attached 4 high current contacts of
Sn − Ag composition and the ﬁeld of 12 T was applied
continuously. From F ig.8 it can be observed that for cur-
rents up to about 6A the sample was in a superconductor
state. Comparing this observation with the data of the
Quantum Design magnetic susceptibility we come to the
conclusion that the 12 T high ﬁeld was enough strong
to overturn the positive susceptibility to negative one in
liquid He. This observation is proving our conjecture
from the previous section that the transition at the ori-
gin of the 3D graph was starting from a superconductor
and became a paramagnetic metal driven by the increase
of the magnetic ﬁeld and with further increase will be-
come again diamagnetic. In the I − V curve we observe
a sharp current variation with a remarkable decrease of
the current F ig.8. It is probably due to magnetic ﬂux
avalanches, when the magnetic ﬁeld penetrates the sam-
ple. Next we will show that samples with high critical
temperature similar to the D, E types are undergoing
transitions from superconductor to normal state in the
range of 400 K temperatures.

VI. ROOM TEMPERATURE GAP IN THE

ENERGY SPECTRUM FROM THE TUNNELING

I − V CURVE

The energy spectrum gap (the energy necessary for
breaking the pairs) is an important characteristic of any
superconductor. Here we report the experimental data
from sample C type measured at 300 K. The tunneling
I − V curve of a sample type C with contacts was mea-

FIG. 8: I-V curve of the sample D at 4.2 K in 12 T magnetic
ﬁeld. The critical current density is about 38 A/cm2.

5

FIG. 9: The 9000 data points show presence of a tunneling
gap in the sample at 300 K of about 15 mV as seen in the
inset. The vertical current jumps at ﬁxed voltage values are
similar to the zero voltage current jump in the Josephson
junctions and show presence of zero resistance in the sample
at any ﬁxed voltage V as seen from ∆V

∆I = 0

.

sured with a Keithley pico-Amper meter and the data
collected were at a very close range between each other.
The sample was a pellet of about 1.26 cm diameter and
about 3 mm thick with 4 gold contacts evaporated par-
allel to each other. The lowest current measured was
6.49 pA. Because of the relatively long collection time
at any ﬁxed voltage several larger values of the current
were collected along parallel super-current pathways at
this particular voltage. It clearly demonstrates supercon-
ductivity of the sample at 300 K (Fig. 9) since the local
resistance was evidently zero ( ∆V

∆I = 0).

A remark about the near zero values of the current
at voltages outside the gap is due and it is evidently
related to the super-current parallel pathways mentioned
about the vertical current lines. More can be said and
some theories accounting for it may be mentioned later
if there is interest in these phenomena (not restricted to
the presented graphs).

VII. JOSEPHSON JUNCTIONS I − V ’S

In this section we will present several I − V ’s of var-
ious samples and other characteristics verifying the su-
perconductivity at 300 K and higher temperatures. We
show the room temperature I − V F ig.10 of a mesa-type
Josephson Junction (JJ)[7] of a size of 0.28cm acting as a
resonator selecting the generated frequency we observed.
In F ig.11 we list the zero voltage Josephson supercur-
rent jump of about 0.1494 mA. Due to the contacts it
is shifted to 0.0495 V , which is characteristic of the gold
contact and the material.

In a diﬀerent experiment we applied a 10 GHz source
and found well-formed Shapiro steps[8]. We have often

6

FIG. 10: Josephson Junction I −V . The Josephson frequency
is 103.006 GHz at T = 300 K as seen from the Shapiro
steps voltage width.

FIG. 12: Josephson Junction I − V with ﬁrst current jump
up magnitude of about 0.355 mA shifted, the ﬁrst Shapiro
step being about 45 mV equivalent to a frequency of about
21.762 T Hz at room temperature T = 300 K.

FIG. 11: Josephson Junction I − V with zero voltage super-
current magnitude of about 0.1494 mA shifted by a contact
voltage 0.0495 V at T = 300 K.

observed Shapiro steps of high frequency created by the
mesa-type Josephson Junctions (JJ) with a resonant fre-
quency related to the resonator formed by the circuit.
In F ig.12 we show such a JJ I − V with a frequency of
21.762 T Hz.

Other type of Shapiro steps were observed in a broad
spectrum of frequencies with the mesa-type of JJ like the
ones shown above in F ig.13.

Yet another, diﬀerent single Shapiro step is observed
with the similar mesa-type of JJ like the ones in the pre-
vious ﬁgure of a diﬀerent frequency F ig.14.

More Shapiro steps were observed in various ranges of
a broad spectrum F ig.15 of frequencies with the mesa-
type of JJ like the ones shown here.

Several other types of Shapiro steps were observed in
a broad range of frequencies with the mesa-type of JJ
like the ones shown above. Next we reproduce an image
F ig.16 obtained with such a mesa-type source of T Hz
waves of coins and metallic washers.

FIG. 13: Josephson Junction I − V with the ﬁrst Shapiro
step being about 5.0 mV equivalent to a frequency of about
2.418 T Hz at room temperature T = 300 K.

FIG. 14: Josephson Junction I − V with a single Shapiro
step of about 12 microV equivalent to a frequency of about
5.803 GHz at room temperature T = 300 K.

7

FIG. 15: Josephson Junction I − V with diﬀerent Shapiro
steps within one long step of about 4.7 mV , the smallest
being of 100 and 200 microV olts equivalent to a frequency of
about 48.36 GHz and 96.72 GHz at room temperature T =
300 K.

VIII. MULTIPLE SUCCESSIVE RESISTANCE

TRANSITIONS

Once the cooling is not necessary to observe RTS, it
is enough to heat the sample and leave it to cool by it-
self.
In an open environment this process is highly in-
dividual. With successive heating and cooling measure-
ments of the same circuit at room temperature one can
ﬁnd that the sample invariably makes a very sharp jump
to the smallest measured voltage of the setup. Using a
Keithley Nano-Voltmeter we observed jumps to the few
nano-Volts characteristic for the zero resistance state for
the not small current of 0.05 A. Several such experiments
were prepared with diﬀerent samples which were heated
up to temperatures larger than 400 K. In F ig.17 we plot
the data from representative measurements, which are
readily veriﬁed to be diﬀerent from each other as natural
processes of cooling from diﬀerent initial temperatures.

FIG. 16: A JJ mesa-type of source of T Hz waves produced
the images presented below of metallic coins and washers ob-
tained at room temperature T = 300 K. The presence of
tiny blue lines around the coins demonstrates presence of few
T Hz waves in the spectrum of the JJ mesa-type source.

FIG. 17: Successive heating well above Tc to about420 K of
the sample and self cooling it demonstrates abrupt jumps to
zero resistance state.

In a 300 K environment we clearly observe successive
superconductor to normal metal transitions and back to
superconductor. Under repeated heating above the criti-
cal temperature and self-cooling conditions the jumps to
the zero resistance state are abrupt. The slow self-cooling
eﬀect is clearly seen in longer relaxation time.The lowest
measured voltage is few nano-Volts. Here are presented
some 5 transitions to or from zero resistance state.

IX. SUCCESSIVE DIAMAGNETIC

SUSCEPTIBILITY TRANSITIONS: Tc IN THE

RANGE OF 400K AND ABOVE

Similarly, one can reproduce successive transitions to
superconductor state via magnetization measurements.
The only diﬀerence is that the magnitude of the signal
is zero in the non-superconductor state and is maximally
negative in the zero resistance state. Indeed it is visible
in the next graph F ig.18 .

Exposition of samples and the eﬀect of the magnet on
diamagnetic objects is visible. Like copper, the super-
conductors are attracted to the magnets. When on the
surface of the magnet strong super-currents are induced
on the surface of the objects creating a repulsive force
acting as well as the weight.

The minimal energy position depends on the shape
and the size of any diamagnetic object. Left horizon-
tally the disks tend to spring up and stay upright as seen
on the photo F ig.19. If heated above the critical temper-
ature they remain immobile on the surface of the magnet
and when cooled down to room temperature they spring
up indicating a precise value of the critical temperature.
This is a mechanical actuator type of sensor, which may
be applied where necessary. Usually the RTS tend to
reach the highest ﬁeld gradient, which is at the edge of
the cylinder. For this reason objects are hanging on the
edge as it is seen on the following photographs F ig.20

8

FIG. 18: A sample heated well above Tc up to about420 K
is left to cool in 300 K environment. Whenever it reaches
the critical temperature of few tens of degrees above 373 K
it spontaneously jumps into zero resistance state. The sample
is then heated again.

FIG. 20: Side view of some superconductor objects on the
same magnet running away from the center or staying upright
and at various angles.

FIG. 19: Top view of some superconductor objects indicating
diﬀerent reﬂectivity and inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld mak-
ing them stay upright or sideways, or stick out of the edge.

X. SIMPLE TEST EXPERIMENTS

In the next experiment we connected two tapes in se-
ries: One made of copper and the other being a cop-
per tape covered with a thin superconductor ﬁlm (about
10microns thick). Passing a current of about 125A made
the copper tape burn in about 5 seconds and left the su-
perconductor intact. A photograph of both is shown here
F ig.21. Both were the same length and same width and
thickness. The superconductor is longer, but the current
was passed via equal pieces of both connected in series,
ﬁrst the superconductor and second the copper tape from
the positive terminal.

In another experiment 3000 A current was passed via
a diﬀerent tape and reaching the critical value it ”licked”
the tiny superconductor layer in a ﬂash with a short
sound as seen on the photo F ig.22. The tape was ob-
tained by multi-layer deposition of about 10 µm super-
conductor compound on copper tape resulting in about
80 µm total thickness of the tape. The tape was obtained
by multi-layer deposition of about 10 µm superconductor
compound on copper tape resulting in about 80 µm total
thickness of the tape.

FIG. 21: Results of an experiment of passing 125A current via
a superconductor tape (black) and a copper tape of the same
size and thickness at room temperature of 300 K. The copper
tape started burning after 5 seconds and the current was cut
oﬀ. The overheated spot is seen on the left side. The tape
was obtained by multi-layer deposition of about 10 microns
superconductor composition on a copper tape.

Similar experiments show that the voltage (I − Ic)n
dependence has a high value of n when the tape breaks
between the contacts in a tiny cut with a weak short
sound(see F ig.23). Only high value of n can explain such
fast almost explosive type of heat released from the cur-
rent as compared to common wires experience.

Next we give photographs of various THz sources emis-

sion in various conditions.

All experiments of this type were performed at room

FIG. 22: Results of an experiment of passing 3000 A current
via a superconductor tape (left side of the photo) at room
temperature of 300 K. The current evidently was passing on
the superconductor surface and not along the substrate tape,
the positive contact being connected to the bright left part of
the tape. The ﬂash burning was with a sharp sound and took
about a fraction of a second.

9

were near a tick metallic reﬂecting mirror. On its sur-
face the waves had a zero amplitude and this caused the
bright images of various coins and washers. Similar im-
ages in the open space are rather dark like the image
of a large ﬂat source in photograph E and also the top
of photograph A. The bottom of A include washers and
coins without a mirror. The photograph B is a large
source emission in the close vicinity of the tick metal-
lic mirror causing the bright images of the absorbing
metallic objects (the small washers are 3/8 inch size and
the large washer is 3/4 inch). The top part of the pho-
tographs D,F,G and H are from one side of the emitter,
but near the mirror, while the bottom parts of the same
photographs are on the other side of the same source
in open space. If a reﬂecting cover is placed some dis-
tance away from the source the image gets again more
clear, but we do not show such one here.The image C has
dark right side caused by the discharge created by the
higher then 30kV/cm ﬁeld strength, which was accom-
panied with a short sound and lightings. Values of ﬁelds
strength of 40kV/cm, 80kV/cm and higher were used as
pumping ﬁeld in vacuum (∼ 1 nanobar) for Josephson
Plasma Waves (JPW) for creating THz JPWs in cuprate
superconductors[18]. Various sources with power in the
range below 100 W and in the range of 400W were pro-
duced and studied. A reasonable power measurement of
a source about 40W was carried out both ways, by elec-
trical and by thermal measurements. The data for the
absorption of a bag of water inside the the rectangular
cavity of about 50x 40x30mm covered with a tick cop-
per lid (its absorbed energy was about 483J as compared
with the water absorbing about 4340J) show an average
power generation of about 40W for 120 seconds. The re-
sult is a THz ”ﬂash bulb” of 40W emitting broad band
THz waves very eﬀectively.

XI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author would like to thank all his colleagues from
the University of Soﬁa and the other academic institu-
tions mentioned in the cited papers below, with whom
he started working on superconductivity in the Spring of
1987. He also thanks all his colleagues and friends and is
indebted in particular to his Ohio State University col-
leagues.

FIG. 23: Results of an experiment of passing a current of
2700 A via the large pellet of sample X, 2200 A via the small
pellet (sample X), 400 A via the intact tape,( it was bent
upward by the Hall-LorentzjxB force) and 1200 A via the
tape cut oﬀ by the overcritical current ( 620 A were checked
to be under critical) all at room temperature of 300 K.

FIG. 24: Results of an experiment of illumination with various
sources of THz waves in open air conditions (760 mm Hg
pressure) all at room temperature of 300 K. The real size
of the images is found from the quarters( 7/8 inch) and the
washers (the small are 3/8 inch and the large is 3/4 inch).
The image C has a dark right side caused by discharge due to
the higher then 30kV/cm ﬁeld strength. The images A,D,F,G
and H are composed of two diﬀerent images from the two sides
of one source in one experiment. In D,F, G and H the top
side is next to the tick metallic mirror, while the bottom part
is emission in free air. In the top part of the image A and
near the center of E one sees the traces of bunches of vortices
causing brownish traces.

temperature near 300K and at normal atmospheric pres-
sure of 760mm Hg in open air. Some of the photographs

XII. REFERENCES

[1] Kamerling Onnes, H.,Comm. Phys. Lab. Univ. Leiden,

189m(1986).

120b, (1911).

[2] J. G. Bednorz and K. A. Mller, Z. Phys. B 64,

[3] C. W. Chu, A Possible Approach from BCS through HTS
to RTS, Superconductivity Centennial Conference. Den

Haag, Netherlands, September 23, (2011), see also C. W.
Chu, L. Z. Deng, B. Lv, PhysicaC,514, 210-313(2015),
Chu, C. W.; Canﬁeld, P. C.; Dynes, R. C.; Fisk, Z.;
Batlogg, B.; Deutscher, G.; Geballe, T. H.; Zhao, Z. X.;
Greene, R. L.; Hosono, H.; Maple, M. B.PhysicaC,514,
437-443(2015. .

[4] Ranga P. Dias, Ori Noked,
Phases

arXiv:1510.05686,New
Recombination of Hydrogen Deuteride to 3.4 Megabar.

Isaac F. Silvera,.
and
Dissociation-

[5] A. P. Drozdov1, M. I. Eremets, I. A. Troyan, V. Kseno-
fontov, and S. I. Shylin, eprint arXiv:1506.08190, Nature
525, 73 (2015).

10

[12] I.Z.Kostadinov, V.G.Hadjiev,

J.Tihov, M.Mateev,
M.Mikhov, O.Petrov, V.Popov, E.Dinolova, Ts.Zheleva,
G.Tyuliev, V.Kojouharov, Physica C, 156, 427-433
(1988).

[13] I.Z.Kostadinov,

Y.Proykova,

and
D.Dimitrov. Proceedings of First General Confer-
ence of the Balkan Physical Union, September 26-28,
Thessaloniki, Greece, (1991).

B.Alexandrov,

[14] I.Z.Kostadinov,

B.Alexandrov,

G.Georgiev, E.Dinolova, O.Petrov, Tz.
Bulgarian Journal of Physics 19, No 1/2,64-67, (1992).

[15] I.Z.Kostadinov and B.Alexandrov, Physica C 201, 126-

V.Valtchinov,
Sariisky.

[6] I.Z.Kostadinov, Field Theory of Localization and Super-

130 (1992).

conductivity,IC/85/238,Internal Report, ICTP,1985.

[16] V.G.Hadjiev,

I.Z.Kostadinov, L.Bozukov, E.Dinolova,

[7] B.Josephson,Phys.Letters 1, 251(1962).
[8] S.Shapiro, A.Little, Phys. Rev. Lett.2, 80 (1963).
[9] A. Abrikosov, J. of Physics and Chemistry of Solids,

2(3), 199-208 (1957).

[10] Superconducting Glass Behavour in High Temperature
Superconductors, I.Kostadinov, M.Mateev, I.V.Petrov,
P.Vassilev, J.Tihov, Physica C, 153-155, 320-321(1988).
[11] I.Z.Kostadinov, M.Mikhov,V.Hadjiev, M.Iliev, O.Petrov,
M.Mateev, S.Tinchev, J.Tihov, E.Dinolova,Ts.Zheleva,
V.Popov, G.Tyuliev, V.Kojouharov, Tz.Ivanov, Physica
C, 153-155, 627-628 (1988).

D.M.Mateev, Solid State Commun.71 , 1093, (1989).

[17] I.Z.Kostadinov, B.Alexandrov, V.I.Dimov, O.Petrov,
Superconductivity in rapidly annealed
M.Michov,
Hg1Ba2Sr0.33Cu1.5O5−δ precursor, High Tc Update,
(1993).

[18] Laplace, D. Nicoletti, G. D. Gu, S. R. Clark D.Jaksch,
A. Cavalleri, S. Rajasekaran, E. Casandruc, Y, Paramet-
ric Ampliﬁcation of a Terahertz Quantum Plasma Wave,
arXiv:151108378R (1915).

