6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]

.

A
O
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
3
9
4
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

QDQ vs. UCT

Wilhelm Winter

Abstract This is a survey of recent progress in the structure and classiﬁcation the-
ory of nuclear C∗-algebras. In particular, I outline how the Universal Coefﬁcient
Theorem ensures a positive answer to the quasidiagonality question in the presence
of faithful traces. This has strong consequences for the regularity conjecture and
the classiﬁcation problem for separable, simple, nuclear C∗-algebras. Moreover, it
entails a positive solution to Rosenberg’s conjecture on quasidiagonality of reduced
C∗-algebras of discrete amenable groups. This note is largely based on a joint paper
with Aaron Tikuisis and Stuart White.

Introduction

Quasidiagonality was deﬁned by Halmos as an external ﬁnite dimensional approxi-
mation property for sets of operators on a Hilbert space [21]. Voiculescu studied the
notion as a property of (represented) C∗-algebras; cf. [40, 41].

For nuclear C∗-algebras quasidiagonality can be expressed as an embedding
property via the Choi–Effros lifting theorem. Another connection to amenability
was disclosed by Hadwin in [20] and—in an appendix to the same paper—by Rosen-
berg who observed that discrete group C∗-algebras can only be quasidiagonal for
amenable groups. The converse statement became known as Rosenberg’s conjec-
ture.

Elliott’s programme to classify nuclear C∗-algebras by K-theory data ﬁrst fea-
tured quasidiagonality in the proof of Kirchberg’s embedding theorem [23] (where
it entered through Voiculescu’s homotopy invariance theorem [40]), which then led
up to the celebrated Kirchberg–Phillips classiﬁcation of purely inﬁnite nuclear C∗-
algebras.

Wilhelm Winter
Mathematisches Institut der Westf¨alischen Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster, Einsteinstraße 62,
48149 M¨unster, Deutschland; e-mail: wwinter@uni-muenster.de

1

2

Wilhelm Winter

In the stably ﬁnite case, the relevance of quasidiagonality was ﬁrst marked by
Popa’s local quantisation of [32], which then inspired Lin to deﬁne TAF algebras,
thus leading up to the whole TAF/TAI classiﬁcation machinery (which recently cul-
minated in the spectacular [18] and [15] by Elliott, Gong, Lin, and Niu).

The quasidiagonality question (QDQ) of Blackadar and Kirchberg asks whether
all separable, stably ﬁnite, nuclear C∗-algebras are quasidiagonal; see [3]. In the
2000’s, the interest in the interplay between quasidiagonality and nuclearity was re-
newed in Brown’s [5] (which takes a measure theoretic or tracial point of view) and
in [25] (which establishes a further link to topological approximation properties via
the decomposition rank, a noncommutative covering dimension). The latter notion
was generalised to nuclear dimension in [44], and it became an intriguing problem
to characterise the difference between decomposition rank and nuclear dimension.
A massive breakthrough was achieved by Matui and Sato in [28]: In the simple,
monotracial and Z-absorbing case (where Z denotes the Jiang–Su algebra from
[22]) quasidiagonality implies ﬁnite decomposition rank. In the absence of quasidi-
agonality, by [35] one always has ﬁnite nuclear dimension. For larger trace spaces,
one has to consider Brown’s more reﬁned notion of quasidiagonality of traces; cf.
[4].

The latter condition also appears in [15] which amounts to the classiﬁcation of
all separable, unital, simple C∗-algebras with ﬁnite nuclear dimension, which sat-
isfy the Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem (UCT for short; satisfying it is equivalent to
being KK-equivalent to a commutative C∗-algebra) and for which all traces are qua-
sidiagonal. Although of stunning generality, the last two hypotheses in this result do
remain mysterious. The UCT holds for C∗-algebras of amenable groupoids by [39]
and is also ensured by a bootstrap type condition; therefore in concrete situations of
interest it can usually be conﬁrmed (see, for example, [13]). To date it is unknown
whether all separable nuclear C∗-algebras satisfy the UCT. Quasidiagonality—due
to its poor permanence properties—is usually also hard to verify even in very con-
crete and geometric setups; see for example [30] or [27].

Remarkably, neither of these two problems occur in the von Neumann algebra
context of Connes’ celebrated classiﬁcation of injective factors (which remains an
inspiration for the classiﬁcation of nuclear C∗-algebras—at a philosophical, but also
at a technical level, since the various available proofs in [7, 31, 19] have revealed
important insights for C∗-algebraists).

The situation on the C∗-algebra side changed considerably with [36], in which
the two problems were linked to the effect that the UCT indeed ensures quasidiago-
nality under suitable circumstances, with the crucial extra tool being stable unique-
ness theorems as introduced in [9, 26]. The result has strong consequences for the
structure and classiﬁcation of simple nuclear C∗-algebras (including the regularity
conjecture of Toms and myself); moreover, it veriﬁes Rosenberg’s conjecture.

In this note I give a survey of the result, its proof and its corollaries. I try to
motivate it and put it into a larger context—especially in view of the remaining
open problems in the area—by specialising to the case of strongly self-absorbing
C∗-algebras.

QDQ vs. UCT

3

In Section 1 I recall the concept of and some elementary facts about quasidiag-
onality. In Section 2 I state the stable uniqueness theorems and outline the role of
the UCT for the controlled version. Section 3 looks at strongly self-absorbing C∗-
algebras and approaches various versions of the quasidiagonality question from this
point of view. Section 4 contains the main result and its consequences for structure
and classiﬁcation of nuclear C∗-algebras and for Rosenberg’s conjecture. The proof
of the main theorem is outlined in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 collects a number of
open problems, mostly on quasidiagonality and on the UCT.

Most of the contents of the paper are based on [36], except for those of Sec-
tions 3 and 6 which have not previously been published in this form. I would like
to thank Ilijas Farah, David Kerr, Aaron Tikuisis and Stuart White for some helpful
comments on an earlier version.

This note was written during a research stay at the Mittag-Lefﬂer Institute to
which I am indebted for their hospitality. I am grateful to the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft for their support through the collaborative research centre SFB 878.
And I would like to thank the organisers of the 2015 Abel Symposium for their kind
invitation to this marvellous conference.

1 Quasidiagonality

1.1 Quasidiagonality was originally deﬁned by Halmos for sets of operators on
a Hilbert space; an abstract C∗-algebra is called quasidiagonal if it has a faithful
representation the image of which is quasidiagonal in this sense. For our purposes,
it will be useful to take Voiculescu’s characterisation from [40] as a deﬁnition:

Deﬁnition A C∗-algebra A is quasidiagonal if, for every ﬁnite subset F of A and
e > 0, there exist k ∈ N and a completely positive contractive (c.p.c.) map y
: A →
Mk such that

ky (ab) − y (a)y (b)k, kak − ky (a)k < e

for all a,b ∈ F.

1.2 With the aid of the Choi–Effros lifting theorem it is not hard to see that for sepa-
rable nuclear C∗-algebras quasidiagonality can be rephrased in terms of embeddings
into Qw , where Q is the universal UHF algebra, w ∈ b N \ N is a free ultraﬁlter, and
Qw = (cid:213) N Q/{(xn)N | limn→w xn = 0}.

Proposition A separable nuclear C∗-algebra A is quasidiagonal if and only if there
is an embedding A ֒→ Qw .

1.3 Remark Note that in this characterisation unitality is not an issue: A as above
is quasidiagonal if and only if the smallest unitisation A∼ is quasidiagonal if and
only if there is a unital embedding A ֒→ Qw . (This last statement uses the fact that

4

Wilhelm Winter

Q is self-similar in the sense that every unital hereditary C∗-subalgebra of Q is
isomorphic to Q.)

1.4 Brown considered in [5] the reﬁned notion of quasidiagonal traces; this is based
on Voiculescu’s observation [41] that a unital, separable, quasidiagonal C∗-algebra
always has at least one tracial state which is picked up by a sequence of (unital)
quasidiagonal approximations as in Deﬁnition 1.1.

Deﬁnition A tracial state t A ∈ T(A) on a C∗-algebra A is quasidiagonal if, for every
ﬁnite subset F of A and e > 0, there exist k ∈ N and a c.p.c. map y
: A → Mk such
that
ky (ab) − y (a)y (b)k, |t A(a) − t Mk ◦ y (a)| < e

for all a,b ∈ F.

1.5 Similar to Proposition 1.2, one can characterise quasidiagonality of traces in
terms of maps to Qw .

Proposition Let A be a separable nuclear C∗-algebra. A tracial state t A ∈ T(A)
is quasidiagonal if and only if there is a ∗-homomorphism p
such that
t A = t Qw ◦p , where t Qw
is the unique tracial state on Qw given by t Qw ([(xn)N]) =
limw

: A → Qw

t Q(xn).

2 Stable uniqueness and the Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem

2.1 It is a common problem in classiﬁcation to decide when two morphisms are
(approximately unitarily) equivalent, provided there is no obvious K-theoretic ob-
struction. Stable uniqueness theorems provide partial solutions by establishing ‘lo-
cal almost’ unitary equivalences after adding the same map on both sides with sufﬁ-
ciently large multiplicity. (Very roughly speaking, this could perhaps be interpreted
as a ﬁne-tuned version of Voiculescu’s theorem.) The problem has been studied ex-
tensively by Lin (see [26], for example); for our purposes a version of Dadarlat and
Eilers—which we state here in a simpliﬁed form for brevity—will be particularly
useful.

Theorem [9, Theorem 4.5] Let C,B be unital C∗-algebras with C separable and
nuclear. Let i : C → B be a unital ∗-homomorphism which is totally full, i.e., for
every nonzero c ∈ C the element i (c) generates B as an ideal. Let j ,y
: C → B be
unital ∗-homomorphisms with the same induced KK-class.

Then, for every ﬁnite subset G ⊂ C and d > 0 there are n ∈ N and a unitary

u ∈ Mn+1(B) such that

ku(j (c) ⊕ i ⊕n(c))u∗ − (y (c) ⊕ i ⊕n(c))k < d ,

c ∈ G.

QDQ vs. UCT

5

2.2 Remark For our purposes it is important that the domain algebra C in the
theorem above need not be simple. In fact, we will apply it to the unitisation of the
suspension of the algebra we are actually interested in. For the target we mostly care
about the algebra Qw ; for technical reasons we also consider algebras like (cid:213) N Qw .

2.3 For the proof of our main result, we need a reﬁned version of Theorem 2.1, since
for our method it is vital that n can be chosen independent of the speciﬁc maps j ,y
and especially i . Such a result was in fact already provided in [9, Theorem 4.12],
at least for simple domains C. However, the proof carries over to the nonsimple
situation as long as one retains some control over the fullness of i . This is done in
[36] in terms of a control function D
+ is the unit ball of the
positive elements of C); D -fullness of a ∗-homomorphism i : C → B is then ensured
by comparing D (c) with tracial values of i (c) for c ∈ C1
+ (thus measuring how many
‘copies’ of c are required to ‘cover’ the unit of the target algebra B).

+ \ {0} → N (where C1

: C1

The proof of [9, Theorem 4.12] works by assuming the statement is false and
then producing a sequence of pairs of counterexamples for contradiction. The crux
is it to assemble the two resulting sequences of maps into two single maps (with
larger target algebras) and at the same time keeping control over their KK-classes.
In our situation, the individual maps will be zero-homotopic, and the problem is it
to decide when maps of the form

KK(cid:0)C,(cid:213) N Bn(cid:1) → (cid:213) N KK(C,Bn)

(1)

are injective. The issue is that a sequence of homotopies doesn’t necessarily give
rise to a (continuous) homotopy of sequences, since the parameter speeds might in-
crease quickly. It is for this purpose—and for this purpose only—that the Universal
Coefﬁcient Theorem enters the stage.

2.4 Deﬁnition [34, Theorem 1.17], [2] A separable C∗-algebra A is said to satisfy
the Universal Coefﬁcient Theorem (UCT) if the sequence

0 → Ext(K∗(A),K∗+1(B)) → KK(A,B) → Hom(K∗(A),K∗(B)) → 0

is exact for every s -unital C∗-algebra B.

2.5 It is known that the separable nuclear C∗-algebras satisfying the UCT are pre-
cisely the ones which are KK-equivalent to abelian C∗-algebras; see [34] or [2,
Theorem 23.10.5]. The closure properties of the class of nuclear UCT C∗-algebras
are so strong that to date nobody has managed to ﬁnd a nuclear example outside it.
The UCT problem reads as follows.

Question Does every separable nuclear C∗-algebra satisfy the UCT?

2.6 In our situation, the UCT provides just enough information to make the map
of (1) injective; see [9] and [36] for details. Let us state the resulting ‘controlled’

6

Wilhelm Winter

stable uniqueness theorem, again for brevity in a simpliﬁed version. (See [36] for
the complete statement; this involves K-theory with coefﬁcients, which here boils
down to just ordinary K-theory by Q-stability.)

: C1

Theorem Let C be a separable, unital, nuclear C∗-algebra satisfying the UCT. Let
D
+ \ {0} → N be a control function, let G ⊂ C be a ﬁnite subset and let d > 0.
Then there exists n ∈ N such that for any unital D -full ∗-homomorphism i : C → B
(where B is of the form Q, Qw or (cid:213) N Qw ), and any unital ∗-homomorphisms j ,y
:
C → B with K∗(j ) = K∗(y ), there is a unitary u ∈ Mn+1(B) such that

ku(j (c) ⊕ i ⊕n(c))u∗ − (y (c) ⊕ i ⊕n(c))k < d ,

c ∈ G.

3 QDQ: a strongly self-absorbing point of view

3.1 The quasidiagonality question, also known as Blackadar–Kirchberg problem,
was posed in [3]:

QDQ Is every separable, stably ﬁnite, nuclear C∗-algebra quasidiagonal?

Note that by Remark 1.3, QDQ is equivalent to QDQ1, the respective question for
unital C∗-algebras.

Likewise, one could add simplicity or both unitality and simplicity to the hy-
potheses; we denote the resulting questions by QDQsimple and QDQsimple,1. At this
point I am not aware of any (but the obvious) formal implications between QDQ,
QDQsimple and QDQsimple,1, although it doesn’t seem unlikely that the general case
can be reduced to the simple situation (for example via some Bernoulli type crossed
product construction as in [29]?).

3.2 Although the quasidiagonality question has been around for a long time, until
recently its role for the structure and classiﬁcation theory of nuclear C∗-algebras
has remained somewhat obscure, and its nature and complexity is still hard to
gauge. Maybe most conspiciously, it seems to be a very ﬁnite problem, in stark con-
trast to other structural phenomena, which often exhibit a dichotomy between ﬁnite
and inﬁnite situations, such as the interplay between Lin’s TAF classiﬁcation and
Kirchberg–Phillips classiﬁcation, the roles of the Jiang–Su algebra Z and the Cuntz
algebra O¥

, and Toms’ and Rørdam’s topologically high-dimensional examples.

3.3 In order to shed some light on the quality of the problem, let us be more re-
strictive and formulate the quasidiagonality question for strongly self-absorbing C∗-
algebras. These have been abstractly deﬁned in [37], but the concept goes back to
Effros–Rosenberg [14] in the C∗-algebra setting, which in turn was inspired by the

QDQ vs. UCT

7

von Neumann algebra context where it was crucial for Connes’ celebrated classiﬁ-
cation of injective II1 factors [7].

3.4 Deﬁnition A separable unital C∗-algebra D 6= C is strongly self-absorbing, if
there is an isomorphism j
: D → D ⊗ D which is approximately unitarily equivalent
to the ﬁrst factor embedding, i.e., there is a sequence of unitaries (un)N in D ⊗ D
such that un(d ⊗ 1D)u∗
n

n→¥
−→ j (d) for all d ∈ D.

3.5 It was shown in [14] that strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras are always simple
and nuclear; from results of Kirchberg it follows that they are either purely inﬁnite
or stably ﬁnite, in which case there is a unique tracial state; cf. [37]. By [42] they
are always Z-stable.

3.6 For strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras tensorial absorption can be charac-
terised in terms of (exact or approximate) unital embeddings; the proof is based on
an Elliott intertwining argument. As a consequence, two strongly self-absorbing C∗-
algebras D and E are isomorphic if and only if there are unital embeddings D ֒→ E
and E ֒→ D if and only if there are unital embeddings D ֒→ Ew and E ֒→ Dw ; see
[14] and [37]. Upon combining this with Proposition 1.2, we see that a (necessarily
ﬁnite) strongly self-absorbing D is quasidiagonal if and only if D ⊗ Q ∼= Q. More-
over, Kirchberg’s embedding theorem yields that O2 absorbs any other strongly
self-absorbing C∗-algebra, O2 ⊗ D ∼= O2. (This last statement holds in much greater
generality.)

3.7 Examples The chart below contains all known strongly self-absorbing C∗-
algebras. Here, UHF¥
stands collectively for UHF algebras of inﬁnite type. (The
universal UHF algebra Q is one of them; we list it separately to emphasise its role
as a ‘semiﬁnal’ object.) An arrow means ‘embeds unitally into’ or equivalently ‘is
tensorially absorbed by’.

O2

↑

ր

Q → Q ⊗ O¥

↑

↑

UHF¥

→ UHF¥

⊗ O¥

↑

Z →

↑

O¥

Arguably the most important question about strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras is
whether or not the list above is complete. This makes direct contact with fundamen-
tal open problems such as the classiﬁcation problem, the Toms–Winter conjecture,

8

Wilhelm Winter

the UCT problem, or the quasidiagonality question. Even though being strongly
self-absorbing is a very restrictive condition, at this point there is no evidence these
fundamental questions will be substantially easier to answer when restricted to the
strongly self-absorbing situation. On the other hand, such a restriction can often bare
the problem of merely technical additional complications, and in this way some-
times disclose its true nature. Occasionally, a solution in the strongly self-absorbing
case will then even give us a clue of how to deal with the general situation. This
has happened for example in the run-up to [35] and to [36]; it is one of the reasons
why I like to think of strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras as a microcosm within the
world of all nuclear C∗-algebras.

3.8 It is a crucial feature of the point of view above that fundamental questions on
the existence or non-existence of examples with certain properties can be rephrased
in terms of abstract characterisations of the known examples. For instance, the
Jiang–Su algebra Z was characterised in [42] as the uniquely determined initial
object in the category of all strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras. (An object in a
category is initial, if there is a morphism to every other object; in our situation,
the morphism will be unique when using approximate unitary equivalence classes
instead of just unital ∗-homomorphisms.) At the opposite end, O2 is the unique ﬁ-
nal object (i.e., there is a morphism from every other object to O2) by Kirchberg’s
embedding theorem. These are, as Kirchberg put it, sociological characterisations,
based on interactions with peer objects. In [10], it was observed that O2 can also be
characterised intrinsically—or genetically—as the unique strongly self-absorbing
C∗-algebra with trivial K0-group. Conspicuously, this characterisation of the ﬁnal
object does not require the UCT; in contrast, Kirchberg has shown that the UCT
problem is in fact equivalent to the question whether a Kirchberg algebra with triv-
ial K-theory is isomorphic to O2, and Dadarlat has a parallel result featuring Q [8].
It is tempting to think of Q and Q ⊗ O¥
in a similar way, as ‘semiﬁnal’ objects: Q
is ﬁnal in the category of all known ﬁnite strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras, and,
more abstractly, also in the category of all quasidiagonal strongly self-absorbing
C∗-algebras (cf. [14]). One can now turn the tables and interpret this fact as a char-
acterisation of quasidiagonality for strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras in terms of
its ﬁnal object. Similarly, Q ⊗ O¥
is the ﬁnal object in the category of all known
strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras which are not O2. Turning tables again one can
look at the category of all strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras which embed unitally
into Q ⊗ O¥
and interpret this as a notion of quasidiagonality which also makes
sense in the inﬁnite setting, at least in the strongly self-absorbing context.

3.9 The strongly self-absorbing version of the quasidiagonality question reads: Is
every ﬁnite strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebra quasidiagonal? In view of the pre-
ceding discussion, we obtain an equivalent formulation as follows:

QDQﬁnite s.s.a. Is D ⊗ Q ∼= Q for every ﬁnite strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebra D?

Note that this asks whether Q can be characterised abstractly as the ﬁnal object in
the category of ﬁnite strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras. In the above one could

QDQ vs. UCT

9

specialise even a bit more and require the ordered K0-group of D to be a subgroup
of Q (with natural order).

3.10 Unlike the original quasidiagonality question, the version of 3.9 yields an
obvious inﬁnite counterpart by simply replacing Q with Q ⊗ O¥ and ‘ﬁnite’ with
the minimal necessary condition ‘not isomorphic to O2’:

QDQinﬁnite s.s.a.
algebra D not isomorphic to O2?

Is D ⊗ Q ⊗ O¥ ∼= Q ⊗ O¥

for every strongly self-absorbing C∗-

Once again this asks for an abstract characterisation of Q ⊗ O¥ as the ﬁnal object in
the category of all strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras which are not O2 (or equiv-
alently, which have nontrivial K-theory).

This inﬁnite (or rather, general) version of the strongly self-absorbing quasidi-
agonality question runs completely parallel with its ﬁnite antagonist, and may be
taken as ﬁrst evidence that the original quasidiagonality question is just the ﬁnite
incarnation of a much more general type of embedding problem.

3.11 We have now used a tool from classiﬁcation—Elliott’s intertwining argument—
to rephrase the quasidiagonality question as an isomorphism problem, which makes
sense both in a ﬁnite and an inﬁnite context. Going only one step further, we
see that classiﬁcation not only predicts, but in fact provides, a positive answer to
QDQinﬁnite s.s.a.: The secret extra ingredient is to assume that D satisﬁes the UCT
(or rather, is KK-equivalent to a commutative C∗-algebra). Under this hypothesis,
it was observed in [37] that the K-theory of D has to agree with that of one of
the known strongly self-absorbing examples, and then it follows from Kirchberg–
Phillips classiﬁcation that D is indeed absorbed by Q ⊗ O¥

. We therefore have:

Theorem If D 6= O2 is a strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebra which satisﬁes the
UCT, then D ⊗ Q ⊗ O¥ ∼= Q ⊗ O¥

.

In other words, Q ⊗ O¥

is the unique ﬁnal object in the category of strongly

self-absorbing C∗-algebras which have nontrivial K-theory and satisfy the UCT.

With this observation at hand, I found it harder and harder to imagine QDQﬁnite s.s.a.
fails when also assuming the UCT. Now we know this perception was indeed correct
even in a generality going far beyond the strongly self-absorbing context. Here I
took the strongly self-absorbing perspective mostly for a cleaner picture of a simpler
situation—but with the beneﬁt of hindsight, the theorem above provided just the
necessary impetus to combine the quasidiagonality question with the UCT problem.

4 The main result: structure and classiﬁcation

4.1 Theorem [36, Theorem A] Let A be a separable nuclear C∗-algebra which
satisﬁes the UCT. Then every faithful trace on A is quasidiagonal.

10

Wilhelm Winter

Before outlining the proof let us list some consequences, mostly for the structure

and classiﬁcation of simple C∗-algebras, but also for Rosenberg’s conjecture.

4.2 Corollary [36, Corollary B] Every separable nuclear C∗-algebra which satis-
ﬁes the UCT and has a faithful trace is quasidiagonal. In particular, the quasidiag-
onality question has a positive answer for simple unital C∗-algebras satisfying the
UCT.

4.3 In the appendix of [20], Rosenberg observed that for a discrete group G, if
the reduced group C∗-algebra C∗
r (G) is quasidiagonal then G is amenable. The con-
verse was Rosenberg’s conjecture, open since the 1980’s. Our result in conjunction
with [39] (which veriﬁes the UCT assumption) conﬁrms the conjecture (the canoni-
cal trace on C∗
r (G) is well-known to be faithful). Together with Rosenberg’s earlier
result this yields a new characterisation of amenability for discrete groups. Note
that at ﬁrst glance our result seems to only cover countable discrecte groups (The-
orem 4.1 deals with separable C∗-algebras), but the general case follows since both
quasidiagonality and amenability are local conditions.

Corollary [36, Corollary C] For a discrete amenable group G, its reduced group
C∗-algebra C∗

r (G) is quasidiagonal.

4.4 Elliott, Gong, Lin and Niu have very recently (see [15], which heavily uses [18])
obtained a spectacular classiﬁcation result for unital simple nuclear C∗-algebras—
the crucial additional assumptions being ﬁnite decomposition rank and the UCT.
They also show that ﬁnite decomposition rank may be weakened to ﬁnite nuclear
dimension, provided all traces are quasidiagonal. Our Theorem 4.1 now shows that
this last hypothesis is in fact redundant. This is important for applications, since
ﬁnite nuclear dimension is notoriously easier to verify than ﬁnite decomposition
rank, but it is also very satisfactory from a conceptual point of view, since for once
it allows to state the purely inﬁnite and the stably ﬁnite incarnations of classiﬁcation
in the same framework—and it also shows that quasidiagonality of traces precisely
marks the dividing line between nuclear dimension and decomposition rank (at least
in the simple UCT case), thus answering [44, Question 9.1] in this context.

Corollary [36, Corollary D] The class of all separable, unital, simple, inﬁnite
dimensional C∗-algebras with ﬁnite nuclear dimension and which satisfy the UCT
is classiﬁed by the Elliott invariant.

4.5 It is worth highlighting the special case when there is at most one trace. For
once, the statement becomes particularly clean then, partly because the classifying
invariant reduces to just ordered K-theory in this situation, and moreover the proof
only relies on work that has already been published (apart from [36]). The traceless
case has been known for a long time—it is the by now classical Kirchberg–Phillips
classiﬁcation of purely inﬁnite C∗-algebras.

QDQ vs. UCT

11

Corollary [36, Corollaries E and 6.4] The full Toms–Winter conjecture holds for
C∗-algebras with at most one trace and which satisfy the UCT.

That is, for a separable, unital, simple, inﬁnite dimensional, nuclear C∗-algebra

A with at most one trace and with the UCT, the following are equivalent:

(i) A has ﬁnite nuclear dimension.
(ii) A is Z-stable.
(iii) A has strict comparison of positive elements.

If A is stably ﬁnite, then (i) may be replaced by

(i’) A has ﬁnite decomposition rank.

Moreover, this class is classiﬁed up to Z-stability by ordered K-theory.

4.6 Since strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras are Z-stable by [42], we now know
that the chart of 3.7 is indeed complete within the UCT class.

Corollary The strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras satisfying the UCT are pre-
cisely the known ones.

5 A sketch of a proof

5.1 In this outline of the proof of Theorem 4.1 I freely assume A to be unital, since
one can easily reduce to this case. The very rough idea of the argument is it to
produce two complementary cones over A and ‘connect’ them along the interval in
order to construct an almost multiplicative map from C([0,1]) ⊗ A to M2(Qw ).

5.2 Let us begin by producing two cones over A in Qw
such that at least their
scalar parts are compatible. In order to conjure up a single cone over A inside Qw
one might try to employ Voiculescu’s theorem [40] on homotopy invariance of qua-
sidiagonality, which will immediately yield an embedding of the cone over A into
Qw . However, this method will typically give an embedding which is small in trace
(not surprisingly, since Voiculescu’s result works in complete generality, even when
there are no traces around at all). For us this means that we won’t be able to re-
peat the step in order to ﬁnd the complementary second cone. Instead, we will need
a more reﬁned way of implementing quasidiagonality of cones. We will do this
by carefully controlling tracial information for the embedding C0((0,1],A) ֒→ Qw .
Roughly speaking, we want the canonical trace on Qw
to be compatible with a pre-
scribed trace on A and with Lebesgue measure on the interval. This was essentially
laid out in [35] and reﬁned in [36], it heavily relies on Connes’ [7] and also uses
Kirchberg and Rørdam’s [24].
Lemma Let A be a separable, unital, nuclear C∗-algebra and let t A ∈ T(A) be a
tracial state.

12

Wilhelm Winter

(i) There is a ∗-homomorphism

such that

Y

: C0((0,1]) ⊗ A → Qw

t Qw ◦Y = ev1 ⊗ t A.

(ii) There are ∗-homomorphisms

´F

`F

: C0((0,1]) ⊗ A → Qw ,

: C0([0,1)) ⊗ A → Qw ,
Q

: C([0,1]) → Qw

which are compatible in the sense that

´F

|C0((0,1])⊗1A = Q

|C0((0,1])

and

`F

|C0([0,1))⊗1A = Q

|C0([0,1)),

and such that

t Qw ◦ ´F = t Lebesgue ⊗ t A

and

t Qw ◦ `F = t Lebesgue ⊗ t A.

We use t Lebesgue to denote the traces induced by Lebesgue measure on C([0,1])
and on the two cones C0((0,1]) and C0([0,1)).

Idea of proof (i) This is essentially contained in [35]. For simplicity let us assume
the trace t A is extremal, so that the weak closure of the GNS representation of A is a
w
ﬁnite injective factor. We therefore obtain a unital ∗-homomorphism A → R ⊂ R
w . By
which picks up the trace t A when composed with the canonical trace on R
w , when dividing out the trace
Kaplansky’s density theorem Qw
kernel ideal. By the Choi–Effros lifting theorem, there is a c.p.c. lift from A to
Qw . The ‘curvature’ of this map (the defect of it being multiplicative) then lies
in the trace kernel ideal of Qw , and one can use a quasicentral approximate unit
in conjunction with a reindexing argument to replace it by a c.p.c. order zero lift.
(Alternatively, one can use Kirchberg’s e -test from [24] in place of reindexing.)
This order zero map corresponds to a ∗-homomorphismY deﬁned on the cone over
A which will have the right properties.

surjects onto R

(ii) Find a ∗-homomorphism l

: C0((0,1]) → Q such that t Q ◦ l = t Lebesgue.
Next, ﬁnd a unital copy of Q in Qw ∩Y (C0((0,1]) ⊗ A)′. We compose this inclusion
with l and tensor with Y

to obtain a ∗-homomorphism

: C0((0,1]) ⊗ C0((0,1]) ⊗ A → Qw .

eY

Since C0((0,1]) is the universal C∗-algebra generated by a positive contraction, the
assignment id(0,1] ⊗ a 7→ id(0,1] ⊗ id(0,1] ⊗ a induces a ∗-homomorphism; we deﬁne
´F

to be the composition with eY

.

QDQ vs. UCT

13
Next observe that the two cones in Qw generated by ´F (1A) and 1Qw − ´F (1A)
carry the same Cuntz semigroup information (which is determined by Lebesgue
measure on the interval), and are therefore unitarily equivalent by [6] (and reindex-
ing). Deﬁne `F
is then ﬁxed by these
data since `F (1A) + ´F (1A) = 1Qw .

to be the resulting conjugate of ´F

. The map Q

5.3 Now we have produced two cones over A inside Qw ; the scalar parts of these ﬁt
nicely together, but the A-valued components might be in general position. The task
is to join these in order to ﬁnd a c.p.c. map from C([0,1]) ⊗ A to (matrices over) Qw
which is either exactly or at least approximately multiplicative. We wish to establish
this connection by comparing the two restrictions to the suspension over A,

and

´L

:= ´F

`L

:= `F

|C0((0,1))⊗A : C0((0,1)) ⊗ A → Qw

|C0((0,1))⊗A : C0((0,1)) ⊗ A → Qw .

Here’s what would make this work. It’s not quite going to, but it is a blueprint of the
actual proof, and it isolates the necessary ingredients.

Lemma In the setting above, suppose there is a unitary u ∈ Qw such that

´L ( . ) = u `L ( . )u∗.

(2)

Then, there is a ∗-homomorphism

such that

F

: A → M2(Qw )

(trM2 ⊗ t Qw ) ◦ F =

· t A.

1
2

In particular, the unital ∗-homomorphism

F

: A −→ F (1A)M2(Qw )F (1A) ∼= Qw

shows that the trace t A is quasidiagonal.
Proof We write down the map F explicitly. Deﬁne a partition of unity of piecewise
linear positive continuous functions h0,h1/2,h1 on the interval so that h0 equals 1 at
0, and is 0 on [1/4,1]; h1 is just h0 reﬂected at 1/2. Consider a continuous rotation
R ∈ M2(C([0,1])) with

R|[0,1/4] ≡(cid:18) 1 0

R|[3/4,1] ≡(cid:18) 0 1
1 0(cid:19) .
(2) : M2(C([0,1])) → M2(Qw ) denote the ampliﬁcation of Q

0 1(cid:19) and

Let Q

We may then deﬁne a c.p. map by setting

to 2 × 2 matrices.

14

Wilhelm Winter

0

0(cid:19)
F (a) :=(cid:18) `F (h0 ⊗ a) 0
(2)(R)(cid:18) `L (h1/2 ⊗ a) 0
+(cid:18) 1 0
0(cid:19)Q
0 u(cid:19)Q
+(cid:18) 0
0 ´F (h1 ⊗ a)(cid:19)
for a ∈ A; it is not hard to check that F
trace t A as claimed in the lemma.

0

0

0 u∗(cid:19)
(2)(R∗)(cid:18) 1 0

is in fact multiplicative and picks up the

5.4 Remarks (i) If one only had an approximate version of (2) the same argu-
ment would yield an approximately multiplicative c.p.c. map F
; after reindexing
this would still be good enough to prove quasidiagonality.

(ii) It is natural to ask whether the use of 2 × 2 matrices is really essential here.
One could certainly hide the matrices by rotating and compressing everything into
the upper left corner—but that’s a red herring since one cannot necessarily force
the resulting map to be unital. The reason is that the method above allows only
limited control over K-theory, and one cannot guarantee that F (1A) is Murray–von
(of course the two agree tracially, but that’s not
Neumann equivalent to e11 ⊗ 1Qw
enough in ultropowers, even of UHF algebras).

5.5 In general, unitary equivalence of the two suspensions as in (2) seems too much
to ask for—and the same goes for approximate versions. On the other hand, it’s
not completely outrageous either; for example, it is not too hard to see that when A
happens to be strongly self-absorbing then the converse of Lemma 5.3 holds, i.e.,
unitary equivalence of the two suspensions is implied by quasidiagonality. More
can be said using [4], but whether this kind of unitary equivalence is a necessary
condition for quasidiagonality in complete generality is not clear, and we don’t have
means to check it directly. The way around this is the stable uniqueness machinery
as introduced by Lin in [26], then reﬁned by Dadarlat–Eilers in [9] and since often
used and further reﬁned by Elliott, Gong, Lin, Niu, and others.

5.6 Let us revisit Lemma 5.3 and replace the critical hypothesis (2) by a weaker
one (still not quite weak enough for us to conﬁrm it in sufﬁcient generality, but now
almost within reach):

∃n ∈ N, u,v ∈ U(Mn+1(Qw )) such that

`L ⊕ `L ⊕n = u(cid:16) ´L ⊕ `L ⊕n(cid:17)u∗

and
Then we can chop the interval which sits via Q
into small
pieces and apply the idea of the proof of Lemma 5.3 2n times along the interval (we
have to switch from u to v halfway, which is why we have to use 2n intervals, not
just n); diagrammatically we end up with the following picture; cf. [36, Figure 1]:

inside Qw ∼= M2n+1 ⊗ Qw

`L ⊕ ´L ⊕n = v(cid:16) ´L ⊕ ´L ⊕n(cid:17)v∗.

(3)

QDQ vs. UCT

`L

`L

`L
.
.
.

`L

`L

`L

`L

∼u

`L

`L

`L
.
.
.

`L

`L

`L

´L

∼u

`L

`L

`L
.
.
.

`L

`L

´L

´L

∼u

`L

`L

`L
.
.
.

`L

´L

´L

´L

. . .

`L

`L

´L
.
.
.

´L

´L

´L

´L

∼v

`L

´L

´L
.
.
.

´L

´L

´L

´L

∼v

15

´L

´L

´L
.
.
.

´L

´L

´L

´L

This will produce a ∗-homomorphism

F

: A → M2 ⊗ M2n ⊗ Qw

in a similar way as in Lemma 5.3, which again entails quasidiagonality.

, respectively, and also with `L and ´L

5.7 Just as in Remark 5.4(i), it would be enough to come up with an approximately
multiplicative c.p.c. map F
, which would follow from an approximate version of
(3). The latter is very close to the conclusion of Theorem 2.1, with `L and ´L
in place
of j and y
in place of i . However, there is a
catch: The maps in the diagrammatic chart of 5.6 are in fact not the original maps
`L or ´L
; rather, they are restrictions of those maps to small subintervals of (0,1).
This makes a difference, since it means that the maps depend on the number of
intervals, hence on n, which in Theorem 2.1 in turn depends on the maps—and the
whole affair becomes circular! Luckily, there is a backdoor: In the controlled stable
uniqueness theorem 2.6 the number n does not depend on the actual maps; it only
depends on the control function D which is tied to the Lebesgue measure on the
interval via the prescribed trace and the map Q
. The price for this additional control
is the UCT hypothesis in Theorem 4.1.

6 Some open problems

6.1 Of course the main problems in the context of this paper are the UCT problem
and the quasidiagonality question in its various versions as discussed in Section 3.
These are expected to be hard; the problems listed below aim to highlight their
interplay and to break them up into smaller bits and pieces which will hopefully be
easier to attack.

16

Wilhelm Winter

6.2 Question Are there formal implications between the versions of the quasidi-
agonality question from Section 3? In other words, can we prove any of the impli-
cations [QDQinﬁnite s.s.a. holds] ⇐⇒ [QDQﬁnite s.s.a. holds] =⇒ [QDQsimple,1 holds]
=⇒ [QDQsimple holds] =⇒ [QDQ holds]?

6.3 By Corollary 4.2, the UCT implies quasidiagonality under suitable conditions,
and one can ask under which hypotheses there is a converse. This is also interesting
for special cases:

Questions Does every quasidiagonal strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebra satisfy the
UCT? What about strongly self-absorbing C∗-subalgebras of Q ⊗ O¥ ? Or unital,
simple, nuclear and monotracial C∗-subalgebras of Z?

6.4 Kirchberg has reduced the UCT problem to the simple case; even more, the
problem is equivalent to the question whether O2 is the only Kirchberg algebra with
trivial K-theory. As discussed in 3.8, for strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras the
answer is known. From this point of view the following does not seem likely, but I
still think it is worth asking.

Question Can the UCT problem be reduced to the strongly self-absorbing case?

6.5 It was shown in [37] that the K-theory of a strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebra
satisfying the UCT has to agree with the K-theory of one of the known strongly self-
absorbing examples. However, the proof really only requires the formally weaker
K¨unneth Theorem for tensor products, and one may ask whether even this can be
made redundant, or whether there are at least some restrictions on the possible K-
groups. For example, Dadarlat pointed out that for a quasidiagonal strongly self-
absorbing D, K1(D) cannot have an inﬁnite cyclic subgroup.

Questions If D is a strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebra, does K1(D) have to be
trivial? Does K∗(D) have to be torsion free?

6.6 It is a classical question when a C∗-algebra is isomorphic to its opposite. When-
ever one expects classiﬁcation by K-theory data the answer should be positive, and
it certainly is for strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras with UCT; see Corollary 4.6.

Question Is a strongly self-absorbing D isomorphic to its opposite Dop?

6.7 Questions For a separable, unital, nuclear C∗-algebra A, do the quasidiagonal
traces form a face? If, in addition, A is quasidiagonal, are all traces quasidiagonal?

Together with a result from [5], [36, Corollary 6.1] yields a positive answer to the
second question when also assuming the UCT.

6.8 In both [29] and [36], quasidiagonality of amenable group C∗-algebras is de-
rived abstractly from classiﬁcation techniques—but at this point there is no way to
construct quasidiagonalising ﬁnite-dimensional subspaces of ℓ2(G) explicitly.

QDQ vs. UCT

17

Question Is there a group theoretic (or dynamic) proof of Rosenberg’s conjecture?

6.9 C∗-algebras of amenable groups are almost never simple—but they have simple
quotients, and one may ask when these are classiﬁable. There is by now a range of
very convincing results along these lines; cf. [12, 13].

Question When are simple quotients of amenable group C∗-algebras classiﬁable?
When can one at least show Z-stability?

6.10 In a similar vein, one can look at topological dynamical systems, where free
and minimal actions typically yield simple C∗-crossed products. These algebras
tend to be nuclear provided the groups—or at least their actions—are amenable;
cf. [38, 1]. We know from [16] that one cannot expect regularity in general, and
that conditions on the dimension of the underlying space (or again the action) are
essential to guarantee Z-stability or ﬁnite nuclear dimension of the crossed product.
Recent results of Kerr, however, together with the tiling result of [11], suggest that
we might be only a stone’s throw away from an answer to the following:

Question For free minimal actions of countable discrete amenable groups on Can-
tor sets, are the crossed product C∗-algebras classiﬁable?

The setup is shockingly general: free minimal Cantor actions of amenable groups!
So how are we even entitled to ask this? Quasidiagonality of the crossed product
is given by our Theorem 4.1 in connection with [39], which veriﬁes the UCT. Z-
stability seems now within reach with Kerr’s techniques on tiling (based on [11])
together with Archey and Phillips’ large subalgebra approach (or, alternatively, us-
ing the idea of dynamic dimension as deﬁned by the author). From here only ﬁnite
nuclear dimension of the crossed product would be missing to arrive at classiﬁa-
bility (by [15] via [43]; for a slightly more direct approach in the uniquely ergodic
case see [35]). In the case when the ergodic measures form a compact space, ﬁnite
nuclear dimension follows from Z-stability by [4].

Here is an even more general—though not necessarily more daring—layout.

Questions For free minimal actions of countable discrete amenable groups on ﬁnite
dimensional spaces, are the crossed product C∗-algebras classiﬁable? What about
amenable actions of countable discrete groups?

The following rigidity question was beautifully answered for Cantor minimal Z-
actions in [17] in terms of strong orbit equivalence. In the situation of amenable
group actions, it seems much more speculative, and one can only expect a less
complete answer. If one is prepared to go beyond the context of amenable group
actions, Popa’s rigidity theory for von Neumann algebras (cf. [33]) is extremely
encouraging—but on the C∗-algebra side one would have to change the game com-
pletely and develop most of the technology from scratch.

18

Wilhelm Winter

Question To what extent are topological dynamical systems determined by their
associated C∗-algebras?

References

1. Claire Anantharaman-Delaroche. Amenability and exactness for dynamical systems and their

C∗-algebras. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 354:4153–4178, 2002.

2. Bruce Blackadar. K-theory for operator algebras, volume 5 of Mathematical Sciences Re-
search Institute Publications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, second edition, 1998.
3. Bruce Blackadar and Eberhard Kirchberg. Generalized inductive limits of ﬁnite-dimensional

C∗-algebras. Math. Ann., 307(3):343–380, 1997.

4. Joan Bosa, Nathanial P. Brown, Yasuhiko Sato, Aaron Tikuisis, Stuart White, and
Covering dimension of C∗-algebras and 2-coloured classiﬁcation.

Wilhelm Winter.
arXiv:1506.03974v2, 2015.

5. Nathanial P. Brown. Invariant means and ﬁnite representation theory of C∗-algebras. Mem.

Amer. Math. Soc., 184(865):viii+105, 2006.

6. Alin Ciuperca and George A. Elliott. A remark on invariants for C∗-algebras of stable rank

one. Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN, 2008(5):Art. ID rnm 158, 33 pp., 2008.
, IIIl , l

7. Alain Connes. Classiﬁcation of injective factors. Cases II1, II¥

104(1):73–115, 1976.

6= 1. Ann. Math. (2),

8. Marius Dadarlat. Some remarks on the universal coefﬁcient theorem in KK-theory. In Oper-

ator algebras and mathematical physics (Constant¸a), pages 65–74, 2003.

9. Marius Dadarlat and Søren Eilers. On the classiﬁcation of nuclear C∗-algebras. Proc. London

Math. Soc. (3), 85(1):168–210, 2002.

10. Marius Dadarlat and Wilhelm Winter. On the KK-theory of strongly self-absorbing C∗-

algebras. Math. Scand., 104(1):95–107, 2009.

11. Tomasz Downarowicz, Dawid Huczek, and Guohua Zhang. Tilings of amenable groups.

arXiv:1502.02413, 2015.

12. Siegfried Echterhoff, Wolfgang L¨uck, N. Christopher Phillips, and Samuel Walters. The struc-
ture of crossed products of irrational rotation algebras by ﬁnite subgroups of SL2(Z). J. Reine
Angew. Math., 639:173–221, 2010.

13. Caleb Eckhardt and Elizabeth Gillaspy. Irreducible representations of nilpotent groups gener-

ate classiﬁable C∗-algebras. M¨unster J. Math., to appear. arXiv:1510.05469, 2015.

14. Edward G. Effros and Jonathan Rosenberg. C∗-algebras with approximately inner ﬂip. Paciﬁc

J. Math., 77(2):417–443, 1978.

15. George A. Elliott, Guihua Gong, Huaxin Lin, and Zhuang Niu. On the classiﬁcation of simple

amenable C∗-algebras with ﬁnite decomposition rank, II. arXiv:1507.03437v2, 2015.

16. Julien Giol and David Kerr. Subshifts and perforation. J. Reine Angew. Math., 639:107–119,

2010.

17. Thierry Giordiano, Ian F. Putnam, and Christian F. Skau. Topological orbit equivalence and

C∗-crossed products. J. Reine Angew. Math., 469:51–111, 1995.

18. Guihua Gong, Huaxin Lin, and Zhuang Niu. Classiﬁcation of ﬁnite simple amenable Z-stable

C∗-algebras. arXiv:1501.00135v4, 2015.

19. Uffe Haagerup. A new proof of the equivalence of injectivity and hyperﬁniteness for factors

on a separable Hilbert space. J. Funct. Anal., 62(2):160–201, 1985.

20. Don Hadwin. Strongly quasidiagonal C∗-algebras. J. Operator Theory, 18(1):3–18, 1987.

With an appendix by Jonathan Rosenberg.

21. Paul. R. Halmos. Ten problems in Hilbert space. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 76:887–933, 1970.
22. Xinhui Jiang and Hongbing Su. On a simple unital projectionless C∗-algebra. Amer. J. Math.,

121:359–413, 1999.

QDQ vs. UCT

19

23. Eberhard Kirchberg. Exact C∗-algebras, tensor products, and the classiﬁcation of purely in-
In Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. 1, 2

ﬁnite algebras.
(Z¨urich, 1994), pages 943–954. Birkh¨auser, Basel, 1995.

24. Eberhard Kirchberg and Mikael Rørdam. Central sequence C∗-algebras and tensorial absorp-

tion of the Jiang–Su algebra. J. Reine Angew. Math., 695:175–214, 2014.

25. Eberhard Kirchberg and Wilhelm Winter. Covering dimension and quasidiagonality. Internat.

J. Math., 15(1):63–85, 2004.

26. Huaxin Lin. Stable approximate unitary equivalence of homomorphisms. J. Operator Theory,

47(2):343–378, 2002.

27. Huaxin Lin. AF-embeddings of the crossed products of AH-algebras by ﬁnitely generated

abelian groups. Int. Math. Res. Pap. IMRP, 2008(3):Art. ID rpn007, 67 pp., 2008.

28. Hiroki Matui and Yasuhiko Sato. Decomposition rank of UHF-absorbing C∗-algebras. Duke

Math. J., 163(14):2687–2708, 2014.

29. Narutaka Ozawa, Mikael Rørdam, and Yasuhiko Sato. Elementary amenable groups are qua-

sidiagonal. Geom. Funct. Anal., 25(1):307–316, 2015.

30. Mihai V. Pimsner. Embedding some transformation group C∗-algebras into AF-algebras. Er-

godic Theory Dynam. Systems, 3(4):613–626, 1983.

31. Sorin Popa. A short proof of “Injectivity Implies Hyperﬁniteness” for ﬁnite von Neumann

algebras. J. Operator Theory, 16:261–272, 1986.

32. Sorin Popa. On local ﬁnite-dimensional approximation of C∗-algebras. Paciﬁc J. Math.,

181(1):141–158, 1997.

33. Sorin Popa. Deformation and rigidity for group actions and von Neumann algebras. In Inter-
national Congress of Mathematicians. Vol. I, pages 445–477. Eur. Math. Soc., Z¨urich, 2007.
34. Jonathan Rosenberg and Claude Schochet. The K¨unneth theorem and the universal coefﬁcient

theorem for Kasparov’s generalized K-functor. Duke Math. J., 55(2):431–474, 1987.

35. Yasuhiko Sato, Stuart White, and Wilhelm Winter. Nuclear dimension and Z-stability. Invent.

Math., 202:893–921, 2015.

36. Aaron Tikuisis, Stuart White, and Wilhelm Winter. Quasidiagonality of nuclear C∗-algebras.

arXiv:1509.08318, 2015.

37. Andrew S. Toms and Wilhelm Winter. Strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras. Trans. Amer.

Math. Soc., 359(8):3999–4029, 2007.

38. Andrew S. Toms and Wilhelm Winter. Minimal dynamics and K-theoretic rigidity: Elliott’s

conjecture. Geom. Funct. Anal., 23(1):467–481, 2013.

39. Jean-Louis Tu. La conjecture de Baum–Connes pour les feuilletages moyennables. K-Theory,

17(3):215–264, 1999.

40. Dan Voiculescu. A note on quasi-diagonal C∗-algebras and homotopy. Duke Math. J.,

62(2):267–271, 1991.

41. Dan Voiculescu. Around quasidiagonal operators.

Integral Equations Operator Theory,

17(1):137–149, 1993.

42. Wilhelm Winter. Strongly self-absorbing C∗-algebras are Z-stable. J. Noncommut. Geom.,

5(2):253–264, 2011.

43. Wilhelm Winter. Classifying crossed product C∗-algebras. Amer. J. Math., to appear.

arXiv:1308.5084v2, 2013.

44. Wilhelm Winter and Joachim Zacharias. The nuclear dimension of C∗-algebras. Adv. Math.,

224(2):461–498, 2010.

