Analyzing Games with Ambiguous Player Types using the

MINthenMAX Decision Model

(work in progress)

Ilan Nehama

The Federmann Center for the Study of Rationality

& The Rachel and Selim Benin School of Computer Science and Engineering

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

March 2016

Abstract

In many common interactive scenarios, participants lack information about other participants, and
speciﬁcally about the preferences of other participants. In this work, we model an extreme case of incom-
plete information, which we term games with type ambiguity, where a participant lacks even information
enabling him to form a belief on the preferences of others. Under type ambiguity, one cannot analyze the
scenario using the commonly used Bayesian framework, and therefore he needs to model the participants
using a diﬀerent decision model.

In this work, we present the MINthenMAX decision model under ambiguity. This model is a reﬁne-
ment of Wald’s MiniMax principle, which we show to be too coarse for games with type ambiguity. We
characterize MINthenMAX as the ﬁnest reﬁnement of the MiniMax principle that satisﬁes three proper-
ties we claim are necessary for games with type ambiguity. This prior-less approach we present her also
follows the common practice in computer science of worst-case analysis.

Finally, we deﬁne and analyze the corresponding equilibrium concept assuming all players follow
MINthenMAX. We demonstrate this equilibrium by applying it to two common economic scenarios:
coordination games and bilateral trade. We show that in both scenarios, an equilibrium in pure strategies
always exists and we analyze the equilibria.

Keywords: decision under ambiguity, games with ambiguity, Wald’s MiniMax principle, MINthenMAX
decision model, MINthenMAX equilibrium

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
3

 
 
]
T
G
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
4
2
5
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

This work is supported by ISF grant 1435/14 administered by the Israeli Academy of Sciences and Israel-USA Binational

Science Foundation (BSF) grant 2014389.

The author would like to thank Tomer Siedner, Yannai Gonczarowski, Gali Noti, Shmuel Zamir, Bezalel Peleg, Noam
Nisan, Mike Borns, as well as to participants of the computation & economics seminar at the Hebrew University for numerous
discussions and comments that helped to improve this paper.

1

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Model

3 Axiomatization of MINthenMAX

4 Bilateral trade

5 Coordination games

6 Summary & Future directions

References

A Proof of Lemma 3 (Best-response is well-deﬁned)

B Proof of Theorem 4 (MIN-NE existence)

C Proof of Theorem 10 (Axiomatization of MINthenMAX)

D Proof of Lemma 12 (Bilateral trade games)

E Proof of Lemma 14 (Coordination games)

3

7

10

11

14

17

18

21

21

22

24

27

2

1

Introduction

In many common interactive scenarios participants lack information about other participants, and speciﬁcally
about the preferences of other participants. The extreme case of such partial information scenario is termed
ambiguity,1 and in our case ambiguity as to the preferences of other participants. In these scenarios, not only
does a participant not know the preferences of other participants, but he cannot even form a belief on them
(that is, he lacks the knowledge to form a probability distribution over preferences). Hence, one cannot
analyze the scenario using the Bayesian framework, which is the common practice for analyzing partial-
information scenarios, and new tools are needed.2 Similarly, in the computer science literature, many times
algorithms, agents, and mechanisms are analyzed without assuming a distribution on the input space or on
the environment. In this paper, we deﬁne and analyze equilibria under ambiguity regarding the information
of other players, namely their type, and we concentrate on equilibria of games with type ambiguity, i.e., games
with ambiguity regarding other players’ preferences. Our equilibria deﬁnition is based on a reﬁnement of
Wald’s MiniMax principle, which corresponds to the common practice in computer science of worst-case
analysis.

In Section 2, we deﬁne a general model of games with ambiguity, similar to Harsanyi’s model of games
with incomplete information [19],3 and derive from it the special case of games with type ambiguity. In this
model, the knowledge of Player i on Player j is represented by a set of types T . Player i knows that the
type of Player j belongs to T , but has no prior distribution on this set, and no information that can be
used to construct one. Our model also enables us to apply the extensive literature on knowledge, knowledge
operators, and knowledge hierarchy for ambiguity scenarios.

Next, we present a novel model for decisions under ambiguity: MINthenMAX preferences. We charac-
terize MINthenMAX as a decision model in the general framework of decision under partial information, as
the unique ﬁnest preference that satisﬁes a few natural properties. Speciﬁcally, we claim these properties
are satisﬁed by players when facing games with type ambiguity, thereby justifying choosing MINthenMAX
as the analysis tool.

Finally, we derive the respective equilibrium concept, dubbed MINthenMAX-NE, and present some of
its properties, both in the context of the general model of games with type ambiguity and in two common
economic scenarios’ models.

Wald’s MiniMax principle

A common model for decision under ambiguity is the MiniMax principle presented by Wald [31], which we
refer to as MIN preferences (in contrast to the MINthenMAX preferences that we present).4 In this model,
similarly to the worst-case analysis in computer science, the preference of the decision maker over actions is
based solely on the set of possible outcomes (in games with type ambiguity, the possible outcomes are the
consequence of playing the game with the possible types of the other players). An action a is preferred to
another action b if the worst possible outcome (for the decision maker) from taking action a is better than the
worst outcome from taking action b. This generalizes the classic preference maximization model: if there is no
ambiguity, there is a unique outcome for each action, and the MIN decision model coincides with preference
maximization. The MIN model has been used for analyzing the expected behavior in scenarios of decision
under ambiguity regarding some parameters of the environment, e.g., ambiguity regarding the distribution
of prizes (the multi-prior model) [18], and ambiguity of the decision maker regarding his own utility [11].
MIN has also been used for analyzing interactive scenarios with ambiguity, e.g., ﬁrst-price auctions under
ambiguity of both the bidders and the seller regarding the ex-ante distribution of bidders’ values [10], and for

1In decision theory literature, the terms “ambiguity”, “pure ambiguity”, “complete ignorance”, “uncertainty” (as opposed

to “risk”), and “Knightian uncertainty” are used interchangeably to describe this case of unknown probabilities.

2Clearly, if a player has information that he can use to construct a belief regarding the others, we expect the player to use

it. In this work, we study the extreme case in which one has no reason to assume the players hold such a belief.

3As described, for example, in [24, Def. 10.37 P. 407].
4Wald measures actions by their losses while we analyze actions by their possible gains. This is the reason that this rule,

which aims to maximize the worst (minimal) gain, was named by Wald the MiniMax principle.

3

designing mechanisms assuming ambiguity of the players regarding the ex-ante distribution of other players’
private information [32].

As we show shortly, as part of the coordination games example, the MIN decision model is too coarse and
oﬀers too little predictive value in some scenarios involving ambiguity regarding other players. We show a
natural scenario (a small perturbation of the battle of the sexes game [22]), in which almost all action proﬁles
are Nash equilibria according to MIN. Hence, we are looking for a reﬁnement of the MIN model that breaks
indiﬀerences in some reasonable way in cases in which two actions result in equivalent worst outcomes. In
Section 3, we show that na¨ıvely breaking indiﬀerences by applying MIN recursively5 does not suit scenarios
with ambiguity regarding other players either. We present two game scenarios, and we claim that they are
equivalent in a very strong sense: a player cannot distinguish between these two scenarios, even if he has
enough information to know the outcomes of all of his actions. Hence, we claim that a rational player should
act the same way in these two scenarios. Yet, we show that a player that follows the recursive MIN decision
model does not play the same way in the two scenarios. We claim that a decision model for scenarios with
type ambiguity should not be susceptible to this problem.

The MINthenMAX decision model

In this work we suggest a reﬁnement of Wald’s MiniMax principle that is not susceptible to the above
problems, and we term this preference MINthenMAX. According to MINthenMAX the decision maker (DM)
picks an action having an optimal worst outcome (just like under MIN), and breaks indiﬀerences according
to the best outcome. We characterize MINthenMAX as the unique ﬁnest reﬁnement of MIN that satisﬁes
three desired properties (Section 3): monotonicity in the outcomes, state symmetry, and independence of
irrelevant information. Monotonicity in the outcomes is a natural rationality assumption stating that the
DM (weakly) prefers an action a to an action b if in every state of the world (in our framework, a state
is a vector of types of the other players), a results in an outcome that is at least as good as the outcome
of b. State symmetry asserts that the decision should not depend on the names of the states and should
not change if the names are permuted. Independence of irrelevant information asserts that the DM should
not suﬀer from susceptibility to irrelevant information bias, which we describe above. That is, the DM’s
decision should depend only on state information that is relevant to his utility. Speciﬁcally, it requires that
if two states of the world have the same outcomes for each of the actions, the distinction between the two
should be irrelevant for the DM, and his preference over actions should not change in case he considers these
two states as a single state. We show that these properties characterize the family of preferences that are
determined by only the worst and the best outcomes of the actions. Moreover, we show that MINthenMAX
is the ﬁnest reﬁnement of MIN in this family: for any preference P that satisﬁes the three properties, if P is
a reﬁnement of MIN,6 then MINthenMAX is a reﬁnement of P.

Equilibrium under MINthenMAX preferences

In Section 2, we deﬁne MIN-NE to be the Nash equilibria under MIN preferences, that is, the set of ac-
tion proﬁles in which each player best-responds to the actions of other players, and similarly we deﬁne
MINthenMAX-NE to be the Nash equilibria under MINthenMAX preferences.

We show that for every game with ambiguity, a MIN-NE in mixed strategies always exists (Thm. 4). On
the other hand, we show there are generic games with ambiguity in which the set of MIN-NE is unrealistic
and too large to be useful. This holds even for cases in which the ambiguity is symmetric (all players have the
same partial knowledge) and is only regarding other players’ preferences. Here, once again is our motivation
for studying the equilibria under MINthenMAX. On the other hand, we present a simple generic two-player
game with type ambiguity for which no MINthenMAX-NE exists. We note that since MINthenMAX is the
unique ﬁnest reﬁnement of MIN (which satisﬁes some properties), the equilibria of a game with ambiguity

5I.e., when the decision maker faces two actions that have equivalent worst outcomes, he decides according to the second-worst

outcome, and so on.

6That is, for any two actions a and b, if a is strongly preferred to b according to MIN, then a is strongly preferred to b

according to P too.

4

under any other reﬁnement of MIN is a super-set of the set of MINthenMAX-NE. Hence, one can think
of MINthenMAX-NE as the set of equilibria that do not depend on assumptions regarding the tie-breaking
rule over MIN applied by the players.

We show that ﬁnding a MIN-NE is a PPAD-complete problem [28, 27], same as the computational

complexity of ﬁnding a Nash equilibrium when there is no ambiguity.

Applications of MINthenMAX-NE to economic scenarios

To understand the beneﬁts of analysis using the MINthenMAX model, we apply MINthenMAX-NE to two
well-studied economic scenarios while introducing ambiguity: coordination games and bilateral trade games.
We show that in both scenarios, a MINthenMAX-NE in pure strategies always exists, and we analyze these
equilibria.

Coordination games

In coordination games, the players simultaneously choose a location for a common meeting. All players prefer
to choose a location that maximizes the number of players they meet, but they diﬀer in their tie-breaking
rule, i.e., their preference over the possible locations. This is a generalization of the game battle of the
sexes [22, Ch. 5, Sec. 3], and it models economic scenarios where the players need to coordinate a common
action, like agreeing on a meeting place, choosing a technology (e.g., cellular company), and locating a public
good when the cost is shared, as well as Schelling’s focal point experiments [29, P. 54–57]: the parachuters’
problem and meeting in NYC problem.

For example, consider a linear street with four possible meeting locations: LL, L, R, and RR (see ﬁgure
for the distances between the locations), and two players who choose locations simultaneously, trying to
meet each other.

GFED
@ABCLL

10

9

?>=<
89:;L

?>=<
89:;R

8

GFED
@ABCRR

Both players prefer the meeting taking place to not taking place, but have diﬀerent preferences over the
meeting places (and both are indiﬀerent regarding their action if the meeting does not take place). We also
assume that the preference of each player is by the distance to a location he is located in.7

Consider a scenario in which each player can be located in each of the four locations, but each player
does not know the location of the other; i.e., there is ambiguity regarding the types of the players (and hence
regarding their preference).

First, we notice that proﬁles in which both players choose, regardless of their types, the same location
are MINthenMAX-NE of the game. From the perspective of Player 2, if all the types of Player 1 choose
the same location, then choosing this location and meeting Player 1 for sure is strictly preferred (regardless
of the position of Player 2) to any other choice, which would surely result in no meeting. The analysis for
Player 1 is identical, proving that these proﬁles are indeed MINthenMAX-NE.

Next, consider a case in which Player 1 goes either to LL or to RR (i.e., the locations chosen by the
types of Player 1 are these two locations). From Player 2’s perspective, all of his actions are equivalent in
terms of their worst outcome, as there is always a possibility of not meeting Player 1 (when facing a type
of Player 1 who chose a diﬀerent location). Thus, Player 2 chooses according to the best outcome for him.
Only the actions LL and RR result in a possibility to meet Player 1, i.e., meet one of the types of Player 1,
and hence these actions are strictly preferred to L and R, and so Player 2 will choose between LL and RR
according to his preference over them. Following this reasoning, we show that the proﬁle in which each type
of each of the players goes to the location closest to him out of LL and RR is MINthenMAX-NE, and that
any other proﬁle in which one of the players plays both LL and RR (i.e., the locations played by his types
are these two locations) is not MINthenMAX-NE.

This simple scenario also demonstrates the drawback of using the MIN model to analyze games with type
ambiguity. When Player 1 goes to either LL or RR, Player 2 is indiﬀerent between the worst outcomes of all

7For example, the preference of a player located in L is L ≻ R ≻ LL ≻ RR.

5

of his actions, and so according to the MIN model Player 2 is indiﬀerent between all of his actions. Hence,
the proﬁle in which each type goes to the location farthest from him out of LL and RR is MIN-NE. This
seems highly unrealistic: we would expect a rational Player 2 of type LL to prefer playing LL to RR.8

We show that, in general, for every coordination game with type ambiguity the pure Nash equilibria of
the no-ambiguity case, in which all players choose the same unique location are also MINthenMAX-NE.9
Note that the set of equilibria when there is no ambiguity does not depend on the players’ types (which
are only a tie-breaking rule between two locations having the same number of other players). Yet, we get
that ambiguity regarding the types gives rise to new equilibria, which we characterize. We show that an
equilibrium is uniquely deﬁned by a set of meeting locations (LL and RR in the example above) to be the
action proﬁle in which each type of each player chooses his optimal location in this set. Finally, we also
characterize the equilibria for several cases in which we assume a natural homogeneity constraint on the type
sets. The constraint we choose, taking the type sets to be single-peaked consistent w.r.t. a line, restricts
the ambiguity regarding other players in a natural way, and hence its impact on the set of equilibria is
informative for the study of equilibria under type ambiguity.

Bilateral trade

The second scenario we analyze is bilateral trade. These are two-player games between a seller owning an
item and a buyer who would like to purchase the item. Both players are characterized by the value they
attribute to the item (their respective willingness to accept and willingness to pay). In the mechanism that
we analyze, both players simultaneously announce a price and if the price announced by the buyer is higher
than the one announced by the seller, then a transaction takes place and the price is the average of the
two.10 For simplicity, we assume that a player has the option not to participate in the trade.11

When there is no ambiguity, an equilibrium that includes a transaction consists of a single price, which
is announced by both players. When there is ambiguity regarding the values, we show that in addition a
new kind of equilibrium emerges. For instance, consider the case in which the value of the buyer can be any
value between 20 and 40 and the value of the seller can be any value between 10 and 30. First, we notice
that there are equilibria that are based on one price as above,12 but in any such equilibrium there will be
types (either of the buyer or of the seller) that will prefer not to participate. If, for example, the price is 25
or higher, then there are types of the buyer that value the item at less than this price and will prefer not
to participate; similarly, for prices below 25 there are possible sellers that value the item at more than 25
and hence will prefer not to participate. We show also MINthenMAX-NE with two prices, 15 and 35, and
in which both players participate regardless of their type: the seller announces 35 if his value is higher than
15 and 15 otherwise, and the buyer announces 35 if his value is higher than 35 and 15 otherwise.13 In this
proﬁle, a buyer that values the item at more than 35 prefers buying the item at either price to not buying it,
and hence he best-responds by announcing 35 and buying the item for sure. A buyer that values the item at
less than 35 prefers buying the item at 15 to not buying it, and not buying the item to buying it at 35. The
best worst-case outcome he can guarantee is not buying the item (e.g., by announcing any value between
15 and his value). Based on the worst outcome the buyer is indiﬀerent between these announcement, hence
choosing between these announcements according to the best-outcome (i.e., meeting a seller who announces
15), he best-responds by announcing 15. Similar analysis shows that also the seller best-responds in this
proﬁle.

8In general, for a coordination game over m locations and n players s.t. each of them has at least t types, more than

(1 − 1/m

t−1)n-fraction of the pure action proﬁles are MIN-NE of the game.

9In general,

if an action proﬁle a is a Nash equilibrium for all the possible combinations of types, then a is also a
MINthenMAX-NE, since we expect the players to follow the proﬁle when the information regarding the types is irrelevant
to their decision.

10Our result also holds for a more general case than setting the price to be the average.
11This option is equivalent to the option of the seller declaring an extremely high price that will not be matched (and similarly

for the buyer).

12An equilibrium in which both players choose (as a function of their value) either to announce a price common to both or

not to participate.

13I.e., the seller announces the lower of the two if both are acceptable to him, and the higher otherwise; And the buyer

announces the higher of the two if both are acceptable to him, and the lower otherwise.

6

We characterize the set of MINthenMAX-NE for bilateral trade games, and in particular we show that
for every bilateral trade game, an equilibrium consists of at most two prices. As a corollary we characterize
the cases for which there exists a full-participation MINthenMAX-NE, i.e., equilibria in which both players
choose to participate regardless of their value (but their bid in these equilibria might depend on the value).

2 Model

We deﬁne a more general model - game with ambiguity14 and then derive from it as a special case games

with type ambiguity. A game with ambiguity is a vectorDN ,(cid:0)Ai(cid:1)i∈N , Ω,(cid:0)ui(cid:1)i∈N ,(cid:0)T i(cid:1)i∈NE, where:
• DN ,(cid:0)Ai(cid:1)i∈NE is an n-player game form. That is,

N is a ﬁnite set of players N = {1, . . . , n};
Ai is a ﬁnite set of actions of Player i, and we denote by A the set of action proﬁles ×i∈N Ai.

• Ω is a ﬁnite set of states of nature.

• ui : Ω × A → ℜ is a utility function for a Player i specifying his utility from every state of nature and

proﬁle of actions. We identify ui with its linear extension to mixed actions - ui : Ω × ∆(cid:0)Ai(cid:1) → ℜ,
where ∆(cid:0)Ai(cid:1) is the set of mixed actions over Ai.15
• DN , Ω,(cid:0)T i(cid:1)i∈NE is an Aumann model of incomplete information. That is, T i is a partition of Ω to a

ﬁnite number of partition elements ( Ω = ˙∪ti∈T i ti). We refer to ti ∈ T i as a type of Player i.16

The above is commonly known by the players. A game proceeds as follows:

• Nature chooses (arbitrarily) a state of the nature ω ∈ Ω.

• Each player is informed (only) about his own partition element ti ∈ T i satisfying ω ∈ ti.

• The players play their actions simultaneously: Player i, knowing his type ti, selects a (mixed) action

ai ∈ ∆(cid:0)Ai(cid:1).
• Every player gets a payoﬀ according to u: Player i gets ui (t, a), where a =(cid:0)a1, a2, . . . , a2(cid:1) is the action
proﬁle, and t =(cid:0)t1, t2, . . . , t2(cid:1) is the type proﬁle.

Notice that the diﬀerence between this model and the common model of games with incomplete informa-
tion [19] (e.g., as described in [24, Def. 10.37 P. 407]), is that in the latter it is assumed that the players also
have posterior distributions on ti (or equivalently, they have subjective prior distributions on Ω).

In this work we are interested in games with type ambiguity. In these games the states of nature are
the type vectors Ω = ×n
i=1T i, so a player cannot deduce from his type information regarding the type of
others. For this restricted model, we justify our choice of MINthenMAX preferences. Note that we prove
the existence of a mixed MIN-NE (Thm 4) for every game with ambiguity.

A strategy of a player states his action for each of his types σi : T i → ∆(cid:0)Ai(cid:1). Given a type proﬁle t =
(cid:0)t1, . . . , tn(cid:1) and a strategy proﬁle σ =(cid:0)σ1, . . . , σn(cid:1), we notate by t−i the types of the players besides Player i

14For simplicity we deﬁne a ﬁnite game but the deﬁnitions extend to inﬁnite cases as well. Our deﬁnitions of preferences and

results also extend under minor technical assumptions.

15An implicit assumption here is that the players have a vNM preferences; They evaluate a mixed action proﬁle by its
expectation. This does not restrict the modeling of preferences under ambiguity. Using the terminology of Anscombe and
Aumann [2], we distinguish between roulettes and horse races.

16For a full deﬁnition of the Aumann model and its descriptive power, see (for example) [6, 5] and [24, Def. 9.4 P. 323].
As described in [5] this model is equivalent to deﬁning T i using signal functions or by knowledge operators (the systematic
approach).

7

and by σ−i(cid:0)t−i(cid:1) their actions under t and σ. I.e., σ−i(cid:0)t−i(cid:1) =(cid:0)σ1(cid:0)t1(cid:1) , . . . , σi−1(cid:0)ti−1(cid:1) , σi+1(cid:0)ti+1(cid:1) , . . . , σn (tn)(cid:1).
We note that given σ−i(cid:0)t−i(cid:1) the utility of Player i of a given type is not aﬀected by the actions of other

types of Player i. Therefore, it is possible to model Player i choice of action as a vector of choice, one for
each of his types (best-responding to the others). We refer to these problems as the decision process done
by a type.

Preferences Under Ambiguity

Decision theory ([22, Ch. 13], [17]) deals with scenarios in which a single decision maker (DM) needs to
choose an action from a given set A when his utility from an action a ∈ A depends also on an unknown state
of nature ω ∈ Ω, when his preference is represented by a utility function u : A × Ω → ℜ. Player i (of type
ti) looks for a response (an action) to a proﬁle σ−i. This response problem is of the same format as the DM
problem: he needs to choose an action while not knowing the state of nature ω (the types of his opponents

t−i and their actions σ−i(cid:0)t−i(cid:1) are derived from ω).

We deﬁne the two preference orders over actions, MIN and MINthenMAX, in the framework of Decision
Theory. We deﬁne them by deﬁning the pair-wise comparison relation, and it is easy to see this relation is
indeed an order. The ﬁrst preference we deﬁne corresponds to Wald’s MiniMax decision rule [31].

Deﬁnition 1 (MIN preference). A DM strongly prefers an action a to an action a′ according to MIN, if the
worst outcome possible when playing a is preferred to the worst outcome of playing a′.17

min
ω∈Ω

u (a, ω) > min
ω∈Ω

u (a′, ω)

The second preference we introduce is a reﬁnement of the MIN preference, it breaks ties in cases MIN

states indiﬀerence between actions.

Deﬁnition 2 (MINthenMAX preference). A DM strongly prefers an action a to an action a′ according
to MINthenMAX, if either minω∈Ω u (a, ω) > minω∈Ω u (a′, ω), or when he is indiﬀerent between the two
respective worst outcomes and he prefers the best outcome of playing a to the best outcome if playing a′.18

( min

ω∈Ω
max
ω∈Ω

u (a, ω) = min
ω∈Ω
u (a, ω) > max
ω∈Ω

u (a′, ω)
u (a′, ω)

Returning to our framework of games with ambiguity, we deﬁne the corresponding best-response corre-
spondences: MIN-BR and MINthenMAX-BR. The best-response of a (type of a) player is a function that
maps any action proﬁle of the others to the actions that are optimal according to the preference. It is easy
to see that a best-response according to MINthenMAX is also a best-response according to MIN, that is,
MINthenMAX-BR is a reﬁnement of MIN-BR. We show that the two best-response notions are well-deﬁned
and exist for any (ﬁnite) game.

Lemma 3. 19The correspondences pure MIN-BR, mixed MIN-BR, pure MINthenMAX-BR, and mixed
MINthenMAX-BR are non-empty.

Equilibria Under Ambiguity

Next we deﬁne the corresponding (interim) Nash equilibrium (NE) concepts as the proﬁles of strategies in
which each type best-responds to the strategies of the others. From the deﬁnition of MINthenMAX it is clear
that any equilibrium according to MINthenMAX is also an equilibrium according to MIN. Hence we regard

17The MIN preference is representable by a utility function U (a) = minω∈Ω u (a, ω).
18MINthenMAX preferences are not representable by a utility function, from the same reason the lexicographic preference

over ℜ2 is not representable by a function [23, Ch. 3.C, P. 46].

19This lemma can be easily extended to inﬁnite number of states case by assuming some structure on the actions set and the

utility function.

8

MINthenMAX-NE as an equilibrium selection notion or a reﬁnement of MIN-NE, in cases in which we ﬁnd
MIN-NE to unreasonable. Our main theorem for this section is showing that any game with ambiguity has
an equilibrium according to MIN (MIN-NE) in mixed strategies.

Theorem 4. Every game with ambiguity has a MIN-NE in mixed actions.

Proof idea: We take S to be the set of all proﬁles of mixed strategies of the types and deﬁne the following
set-valued function F : S → S. Given a strategy proﬁle s, F (s) is the product of the best-responses to
s (according to MIN) of the diﬀerent types. We prove the existence of a mixed MIN-NE by applying
Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem [21] to F . A ﬁxed point of F is a proﬁle s satisfying s ∈ F (s), i.e., each type
best-responds to the others in the proﬁle s, so s is a MIN-NE.

Since the existence of MIN-NE is the result of applying Kaukutani’s ﬁxed point theorem on the best-

response function,20 we get a characterization of the complexity of computing MIN-NE.

Corollary 5. Finding a MIN-NE is in PPAD [28, 27]. Moreover, it is a PPAD-complete problem since a
private case of it, computing a Nash equilibrium, is a PPAD-hard problem [13].

Next we show that there are games that have no equilibrium according to MINthenMAX. We show this

is true even for a simple generic game – a two-player game with type ambiguity on one side only.

Lemma 6. There are games for which there is no MINthenMAX-NE.

Proof. Let G be the following two-player game with two actions for each of the players. The Row player

utility is

L R
0
T
0
B −1
1

. The Column player is one the two types: either

L R
T
1
0
B 0 −2

or

L R
T
2
0
B 0 −1

(and

the Row player does not know which).

Then, in the unique MIN-NE the ﬁrst type of the Column player is mixing 1

2 R, the second type
of the Column player is playing R, and the Row player is mixing 2
3 B (all his mixed actions give him
a worst-case payoﬀ of 0). But this is not a MINthenMAX-NE since the Row player prefers to deviate to
playing B for the possibility of getting 1, and hence the game does not have MINthenMAX-NE in mixed
strategies.21

2 L + 1

3 T + 1

20We note that the best-response is computable in polynomial time.

BR (s) = argmaxσi minω∈Ω u (cid:0)ω, σi, s−i (cid:0)t−i (ω)(cid:1)(cid:1)

= argmaxσi minω∈Ω Ea∼σi u (cid:0)ω, a, s−i (cid:0)t−i (ω)(cid:1)(cid:1)
= argmaxσi minω∈Ω Ea∼σi Ca,ω

for Ca,ω = u (cid:0)ω, a, s−i (cid:0)t−i (ω)(cid:1)(cid:1) .

The maximal value a player can guarantee himself

v∗ = argmax

σi

min
ω∈Ω

Ea∼σi Ca,ω = max v s.t. ∀w Ea∼σi Ca,ω > v

is the solution to a linear program that can be found in polynomial time.
Given v, BR (s) is the intersection of |Ω| hyperplanes of the form Ea∼σi Ca,ω > v∗.

21A technical comment: The reason Kakutani’s theorem cannot be applied here (besides its result being wrong) is twofold:

• The best-response set is not convex: Consider a player that needs to choose between two actions, having a utility

L M R
0
2
T
1
B 0

1
2

, and faces one of three opponent’s types. Then, when facing a proﬁle of the opponent playing the

three actions, respectively, he is indiﬀerent between his two options (Both give him 0 on the worst case and 2 on the
best case), but strictly prefers the two pure actions on any mixture of the two (giving him less than 2 in the best case).

• The best-response function is not upper semi continuous:

In the example in the lemma, when the Row player is facing one type playing the pure strategy R and other mixing
2 + ǫ(cid:1) L + (cid:0) 1
(cid:0) 1

2 − ǫ(cid:1) R, his unique best-response is playing T for any ǫ > 0, but playing B for ǫ = 0.

9

3 Axiomatization of MINthenMAX

In this section we justify using equilibria under MINthenMAX preferences for the analysis of games with type
ambiguity. We do so by presenting three properties for decision making under ambiguity and characterizing
MINthenMAX as the ﬁnest reﬁnement of MIN which satisﬁes them (Thm. 10). We claim these properties
are necessary for modeling decisions under ambiguity regarding other players’ types, by that justifying our
application of MINthenMAX-NE.

The framework

Let Ω be a ﬁnite set of states of nature. We characterize a preference, i.e., a total order, of a decision maker
(DM) over the set actions A where an action is a function a : Ω → ℜ that returns a utility for each state of
nature.22

Our ﬁrst two properties are natural and we claim that any reasonable preference under ambiguity should
satisfy them. The ﬁrst property we present is the basic rationality assumption - monotonicity. It requires
if that an action a results in a higher or equal utility than an action b in all states of nature, then the DM
should weakly prefer a to b.

Axiom 7 (Monotonicity). For any two actions a and b, if a (ω) > b (ω) for all ω ∈ Ω, then either the DM
is indiﬀerent between the two or he prefers a to b.

The second property, state symmetry, states that the DM should decide based on properties of the actions
and not of the states. I.e., if we permute the states’ names, his preference should not change. Since we can
assume that the states themselves have no intrinsic utility beyond the deﬁnition of the actions, this property
formalizes the property that the DM, having ambiguity regarding the state, should satisfy the Principle of
Insuﬃcient Reason and treat the states symmetrically.23

Axiom 8 (State symmetry). For any two actions a and b and a bijection ψ : Ω → Ω: if a is preferred to b,
then a ◦ ψ is preferred to b ◦ ψ (a ◦ ψ (ω) is deﬁned to be a (ψ (ω))).

The last property we present is independence of irrelevant information. This property requires that if
the DM considers one of the states of natures as two, by considering some a new parameter, his preference
should not change. We show the desirability of this property to games with type ambiguity by the following
example. Consider the following variant of Battle of the Sexes game between Alice and Bob that need to
decide on a joint activity - either a Bach concert (B) or a Stravinsky concert (S). Taking the perspective
of Alice, assume she faces one of two types of Bob: BobB that she expects to chooseB or BobS that she

expects to choose S. Assume that Alice prefers B, so her valuation of actions is:

BobB BobS

B :
S :

2
0

(0

0
1

if they do not meet and 2 or 1 if they jointly go to a concert). But there might be other information Alice
does not know regarding Bob. In case he prefers (and chooses) S, she also does not know his favorite soccer

team.24 So she might actually think on the situation as

BobB BobS

⋆ BobS
†

B :
S :

2
0

0
1

0
1

. Since this new soccer

information is irrelevant to the game, it should not change the action of a rational player. Notice that is case
Alice chooses according to the recursive MIN rule we described in the introduction, she will choose according
to the second-worst outcome and hence choose B in the ﬁrst scenario and S in the second scenario. We ﬁnd
a decision model of a rational player which is susceptible to this problem ill-deﬁned.

22Changing ℜ to any other ordered set does not change our result, so ℜ can be interpreted as a preference over the outcomes.
23This property rules out any subjective expectation maximization preference, except for expectation according to the uniform

distribution.

24Of course, favorite soccer team is clear in case he prefers Bach.

10

Axiom 9 (Independence of irrelevant information). Let a and b be two actions on Ω s.t. a 4 b, and let

bω ∈ Ω be a state of nature. Deﬁne a new state space Ω′ = Ω ˙∪(cid:8)bbω(cid:9) and let a′ and b′ be two actions on
Ω′ satisfying a′ (ω) = a (ω) and b′ (ω) = b (ω) for all states ω ∈ Ω \ {ˆω}, a′(cid:0)bbω(cid:1) = a′ (ˆω) = a (ˆω) , and
b′(cid:0)bbω(cid:1) = b′ (ˆω) = b (ˆω). Then a′ 4 b′.

We show that MINthenMAX is the ﬁnest reﬁnement of MIN that satisﬁes the above three axioms.25

Theorem 10. MINthenMAX is the unique preference that satisﬁes

• Monotonicity

• State symmetry

• Independence of irrelevant information

• It is a reﬁnement of MIN.26

• It is the ﬁnest preference that satisﬁes the above three properties. That is, it is a reﬁnement of any

preference that satisﬁes the above properties.

Proof Idea: In order to prove this theorem we ﬁrst prove that any preference that satisﬁes the ﬁrst three
properties can be deﬁned using the worst (minimal) and best (maximal) outcomes of the actions.27

Lemma 11. Any preference that satisﬁes monotonicity, state symmetry, and independence of irrelevant
information, can be deﬁned as a function of the worst and the best outcomes of the actions.

Next we show that for two actions a and b that have the same worst-case outcome, i.e., MIN is indiﬀerent
between them, if there a way to deﬁne a preference for a over b without contradicting the axioms, then the
best outcome of a is strictly better than the best outcome of b. I.e., MINthenMAX is the ﬁnest reﬁnement,
and the uniqueness follows trivially.

4 Bilateral trade

In order to demonstrate this new notion of equilibrium, MINthenMAX-NE, we apply it to two economic
scenarios that have type ambiguity. The ﬁrst scenario we analyze is bilateral trade games. Bilateral trade is
one of the most basic economic models, which models many common scenarios. It describes an interaction
between two players, a seller and a buyer. The seller has in his possession a single indivisible item that he
values at vs (e.g., the cost of producing the item), and the buyer values the item at vb. We assume that
both values are private information, i.e., each player knows only his own value, and we would like to study
the cases in which the item changes hands in return for money, i.e., a transaction occurs.28 Chatterjee and
Samuelson [12] presented bilateral trade as a model for negotiations between two strategic agents, such as
settlement of a claim out of court, union-management negotiations, and of course a negotiation on transaction
between two individuals and trade in ﬁnancial products. The important feature they note is that an agent,
while certain of the potential value it places on the transaction, has only partial information concerning
the value of the other player.29 Bilateral trade, and moreover a multi-player generalization of it - double

25Notice that MIN preference satisﬁes these properties.
26That is, for any two actions a and b, if a is strongly preferred to b by a DM holding a MIN preference, then a is strongly

preferred to b by a DM holding a MINthenMAX preference.

27Arrow and Hurwicz [3] showed a similar result for decision rules. They deﬁne four properties (A–D) and show that under
these properties the decision rule can be deﬁned using the worst and best outcomes only. Their properties are of similar nature
to the properties we present: Property A in [3] derives that the decision rule is derived by a preference ([23, Prop. 1.D.2, P. 13]),
and Properties B, C, and D are of similar ﬂavor to the properties state symmetry, independence of irrelevant information, and
monotonicity in the outcomes, respectively. In order to avoid deﬁning the framework of decision rules, and since our proof is
simple and diﬀerent from the proof they use, we prove Lemma 11 directly and not rely on their result.

28There is another branch of the literature on bilateral trade, which studies the process of bargaining (getting to a successful

transaction). Since we would like to study the impact of ambiguity, we restrict our attention to the outcome.

29For instance, in haggling over the price of a used car, neither buyer nor seller knows the other’s walk-away price.

11

auction,30 is also of a theoretical importance. These models have been used as a tool to get insights on how
to organize trade between buyers and sellers, as well as study how prices are determined in markets.

In this section we assume that there is ambiguity regarding the values of the players (their type), and
study trading mechanisms, i.e., procedures for deciding whether the item changes hands, and how much the
buyer pays for it. We assume that the players are strategic, and hence a mechanism should be analyzed by
its expected outcomes in equilibrium.

We concentrate on a family of simple mechanisms (a generalization of the bargaining rules of Chatterjee
and Samuelson [12]): The seller and the buyer post simultaneously their respective bids, as and ab, and if
as 6 ab the item is sold for x (as, ab), for x being a known monotone function satisfying x (as, ab) ∈ [as, ab].
For ease of presentation, we add to the action sets of both players a “no participation” action ⊥, that models
the option of a player not to participate in the mechanism, i.e., there is no transaction whenever one of the
players plays ⊥. This simpliﬁes the presentation by grouping together proﬁles in which a player chooses
extreme bids that would not be matched by the other player. Hence, the utilities of a seller of type vs and
a buyer of type vb from an action proﬁle (as, ab) are (w.l.o.g., we normalize the utilities of both players to
zero in case there is no transaction):

x (as, ab) − vs
as 6 ab
as > ab
0
as = ⊥ ∨ at = ⊥ 0

;

vb − x (as, ab)
as 6 ab
as > ab
0
as = ⊥ ∨ at = ⊥ 0

ub (vb; as, ab) =

us (vs; as, ab) =

Under full information (the values vs and vb are commonly known), there is essentially only one kind
of equilibrium: one-price equilibrium. If vs 6 vb, the equilibria in which there is a transaction are all the
proﬁles (as, ab) s.t. as = ab ∈ [vs, vb] (i.e., the players agree on a price), and the equilibria in which there is
no transaction are all proﬁles in which both players choose not to participate regardless of their type.

Introducing type ambiguity, we deﬁne the seller type set Vs and the buyer type set Vb, where each set
holds the possible valuations of the player for the item. We show that under type ambiguity, there are at most
three kinds of equilibria, and we characterize fully the equilibria set. We show that in addition to the above
no-transaction equilibria and one-price equilibria, we get a new kind of equilibrium - two-prices equilibria. In
such an equilibrium, both the seller and the buyer always participate (i.e., both players participate regardless
of their valuations), and bid one of two possible prices pL and pH . For some type sets, Vs and Vb, these
two-prices are the only full-participation equilibria, i.e., equilibria in which both players choose to announce
a price and participate regardless of their value.

Lemma 12. 31

Let G be a bilateral trade game deﬁned by a price function x (as, ab) and two type sets Vs and Vt, both
having a minimum and maximum.32 Then all the MINthenMAX-NE of G are of one the following classes:

1. No transaction equilibria (These equilibria exist for any two sets Vs and Vb)

In these equilibria, both players do not participate (play ⊥, or play a bid too extreme for all types of
the other player) regardless of their valuations.

2. One-price equilibria (These equilibria are deﬁned only when min Vs 6 max Vb. I.e., when an ex-post

transaction is possible.)

In a one-price equilibrium, both the seller and the buyer choose to participate for some of their types.
It is deﬁned by a price p ∈ [min Vs, max Vb] s.t. the equilibrium strategies are:

30In double auction [16], there are several sellers and buyers, and we study mechanisms and interactions matching them to

trading pairs.

31This result is also valid, and even more natural, for inﬁnite type sets.
32We state the result here for the case when both sets have a minimal valuation and a maximal valuation. Dropping this

assumption does not change the result in an essential way (some of the inequalities are changed to strict inequalities).

12

The seller bids p for valuations vs 6 p, and ⊥ otherwise (the second clause might be vacuously
true).

The buyer bids p for valuations vb > p, and ⊥ otherwise (the second clause might be vacuously
true).

Hence, the outcome is

❳

❳

❳

Buyer

❳

❳

❳

Seller

❳

❳

❳

❳

Low:

vs 6 p

High:

vs > p

Low:
High:

vb < p
vb > p

no transaction

p

no transaction
no transaction

3. Two-prices equilibria (These equilibria are deﬁned only when min Vs 6 min Vb and max Vs 6 max Vb.
I.e., when there is a value for the seller s.t. an ex-post transaction is possible for any value of the buyer,
and vice versa)

In a two-prices equilibrium, all types of both the seller and the buyer choose to participate, and their

bids depend on their valuation. It is deﬁned by two prices pL < pH s.t(cid:26) min Vs 6 pL < max Vs 6 pH

pL 6 min Vb < pH 6 max Vb

and the equilibrium strategies are:

The seller bids pL for valuations vs 6 pL, and pH otherwise.

The buyer bids pH for valuations vb > pH, and pL otherwise.

❳

❳

❳

Hence, the outcome is

Buyer
Low:
High:

vb < pH
vb > pH

pL

no transaction

x (pL, pH ) ∈ (pL, pH )

pH

❳

❳

❳

❳

Seller

❳

❳

❳

Low:

vs 6 pL

High:

vs > pL

Proof idea: It is easy to verify that these proﬁles are indeed equilibria. We will prove that these are the
only equilibria.

Assume for contradiction there is another MINthenMAX-NE proﬁle of actions (i.e., bids or ⊥), (as, ab).
We deﬁne Ps to be the set of bids that are bid by the seller, i.e., Ps = {as (vs) | as (vs) 6= ⊥}, and similarly
we deﬁne Pb = {ab (vb) | as (vb) 6= ⊥}. Both these sets are not empty since (as, ab) is not a no-transaction
equilibrium. First, we notice that if Ps is of size one, i.e., whenever the seller participates he announces p,
then if the buyer chooses to participate (based on his valuation) he chooses to match p in order to minimize
the price (and vice versa). Analyzing the valuations for which they choose to participate, proves this proﬁle is
a one-price equilibrium. Now, assume that both these sets are of size at least two. If both players participate
regardless of their value (never choose ⊥), then the worst and best cases for a player are facing the highest
and lowest bidder of the other player. Hence his best-response will be to match one of the two, and we
get a two-prices equilibrium. If the seller chooses whether to participate based on his value, i.e., there is a
value vs for which he chooses ⊥ , then the buyer cannot guarantee himself more than zero (for instance, if
he meets vs), so he will choose one of the actions that guarantee him zero on the worst case (e.g., ⊥), and
will break ties among these actions by the best case (meeting the lowest bidding type of the seller). Hence,
given his value, the buyer either chooses ⊥, or matches the lowest bidding type of the seller. This proves this
equilibrium is either a no-transaction equilibrium or a one-price equilibrium. The case in which the buyer
chooses whether to participate based on his value is symmetrical.

We ﬁnd it interesting that the set of equilibria depends on the possible types of the players, and not
on the price mechanism x (as, ab). In addition to the two classic equilibria, no-transaction equilibria and
one-price equilibria, we get a new kind of equilibrium. We see that in this equilibrium each of the players
announces one of two bids, essentially announcing whether his value is above some threshold or not. This
decision captures the (non-probabilistic) trade-oﬀ a player faces, whether to trade for sure, i.e., with all types
of the other player, or to get a better price. E.g., the buyer decides whether to bid the high price and buy
the item for sure, but maybe paying more than his value; or to bid the low price, buying at a lower price,
but taking the risk of not buying at all. Since MINthenMAX is a function of the worst-case and best-case

13

outcomes only, it does not seem surprising that we get this dichotomous trade-oﬀ and at most two bids
(messages) for a player in equilibrium. This might capture scenarios in which a participant needs to choose
which of two markets to attend, e.g., ﬂorists that choose whether to sell in a highly competitive auction, or
in an outside market, while not knowing the demand for this day. In a continuation work, we follow this
story, and analyze double auctions with several buyers and sellers, in order to check this intuition.

5 Coordination games

In this section we study a second application of MINthenMAX-NE to an economic scenario: Analyzing
coordination games with type ambiguity. These games model scenarios in which the participants prefer to
coordinate their actions with others, e.g., due to positive externalities. For example, choosing a meeting place
(a generalization the game battle of the sexes [22, Ch. 5, Sec. 3]), choosing a cellular company, and placing
a public good or bad when the cost is shared. We analyze coordination games in which all players prefer to
maximize the number of other players they coordinate with (and indiﬀerent regarding their identity), but
they might diﬀer in their tie-breaking rule between two maximizing actions.

Deﬁnition 13 (Coordination games with type ambiguity33). A (ﬁnite) coordination game of n players over
m locations is a game in which all players have the set set of actions of size m (and we refer to the actions as
locations), and the preference of each player (his type) over the action proﬁles is deﬁned by a strict (ordinal)
preference α over the locations in the following way: Player i, holding a preference α over the locations,

strongly prefers an action proﬁle a =(cid:0)a1, . . . , an(cid:1) ∈ A to an action proﬁle b =(cid:0)b1, . . . , bn(cid:1) ∈ A if either he
meets more players under a than under b ((cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:8)j 6= i(cid:12)(cid:12) aj = ai(cid:9)(cid:12)(cid:12) >(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:8)j 6= i(cid:12)(cid:12) bj = bi(cid:9)(cid:12)(cid:12)) or if he meets the same

(non-zero) number of players under both proﬁles and he prefers the meeting location in a to the one in b (ai
is preferred to bi according to α). I.e., the set of types of Player i, T i, is a set of strict preferences over the
m locations. In particular, a player is indiﬀerent between the outcomes in which he does not meet any of
the other players.

We show that every MINthenMAX-NE proﬁle a is uniquely deﬁned by the set of locations chosen in a,

L (a) =(cid:8)l(cid:12)(cid:12) ∃i ∈ N , ti ∈ T i s.t. Player i of type ti plays l in the proﬁle a(cid:9) .

Lemma 14. Let G be a coordination game and let L be a non-empty set of locations. There exists a
MINthenMAX-NE proﬁle a s.t. L (a) = L if and only if for all i the mapping f i : T i → L that maps a type
to his best location in L is onto.

Moreover, the action proﬁle a in which every type of every player chooses his best location in L is the

unique pure MINthenMAX-NE that satisﬁes L (a) = L.

Abusing notation, we say that a location set L is a MINthenMAX-NE (L ∈ MINthenMAX-NE (G)), if
there exists a MINthenMAX-NE proﬁle a s.t. L (a) = L. An immediate corollary from the lemma is that

any location set L ∈ MINthenMAX-NE satisﬁes |L| 6 mini(cid:12)(cid:12)T i(cid:12)(cid:12), and in particular, if there is no ambiguity
for the type of at least one player (∃i s.t. (cid:12)(cid:12)T i(cid:12)(cid:12) = 1), then the only MINthenMAX-NE are the ones in which
all types of all players choose the same location. Notice that for any vector of type sets (cid:8)T i(cid:9) an action
From now on we assume that(cid:12)(cid:12)T i(cid:12)(cid:12) > 1 for all i (there is real ambiguity regarding the preference each of

proﬁle in which all types of all players choose the same location is always a MINthenMAX-NE. In these
proﬁles, any deviation of a (type of a) player results in the deviator not meeting any of the other players
and hence hurting him.

the players), and study the equilibria (location sets) according to MINthenMAX. We analyze the non-trivial
equilibria that emerge due to the type ambiguity. We call an equilibrium proﬁle a non-trivial if |L (a)| > 1,34
and call a location set non-trivial if it includes at least two locations.

From the characterization above, we prove several easy properties of MINthenMAX-NE.

33Most of the current literature (e.g., [29, P. 54–74], [22, P. 90–91], [26, P. 15–16]) deal with two-player coordination games
(games in which the best-response of a player is to copy the other player’s action). We use the same name here for multi-player
(generalized) coordination games, which capture the same kind of scenarios.

34I.e., there exist at least two diﬀerent locations that each of them is chosen by some type of some player.

14

Corollary 15. Let G be a coordination game over m locations and n players with type sets T i.

is independent of i (i.e., in equilibrium all players choose the same set of actions)

• Let a be an equilibrium proﬁle, then the set(cid:8)l(cid:12)(cid:12) ∃ti ∈ T i s.t. Player i of type ti plays l in the proﬁle a(cid:9)
cT i satisfying T i ⊆cT i for all i. Then, MINthenMAX-NE (G) ⊆ MINthenMAX-NE (G′).35

• ( Increasing ambiguity:) Let G′ be a coordination game over m locations and n players with type sets

• ( MINthenMAX-NE is downward closed:) If L ∈ MINthenMAX-NE (G), then any L′ ⊆ L is also an

equilibrium of G.

• ( Irrelevant information:)

Player i, while keeping the preferences over the locations in L. Then L is also an equilibrium of

– Let L be an equilibrium of G and let cT i the result of changing the preferences of the types of
the coordination game over m locations and n players with type setsDT −i, cT iE.36

– Let L be an equilibrium of G and let G′ be an extension of G to m + 1 locations s.t. for any player
and any of his types the preference over the ﬁrst m locations is the same as in G. Then L is also
an equilibrium of G′.

Coordination Games with single-peaked consistent preferences

Next, we study the equilibria of coordination games under type ambiguity for several special cases in which
the type sets satisfy some natural constraints. In this work, we present cases in which the set of preferences
∪iT i is single-peaked consistent with regard to a line.

Deﬁnition 16 (single-peaked consistent preferences with regard to a line [8]). A preference α over a set of
locations S ⊆ ℜ is said to be single-peaked with regard to ℜ, if there exists a utility function f : ℜ → ℜ s.t.
for any two locations y and z, y is preferred to z if f (y) > f (z) (i.e., f represents α); the top ranked location
x⋆ in α is the unique maximizer of f ; and for any two locations y and z, if x⋆ < y < z or x⋆ > y > z, then
y is preferred to z.

A set of preferences over a set of locations S is single-peaked consistent w.r.t. a line, if there exists an
embedding function e : S → ℜ (which we refer to as the order of the locations) s.t. for any preference α in
the set, e (α) is single-peaked with regard to ℜ.37

For ease of presentation, we state the results for S ⊆ ℜ (so the embedding is the identity function).
For example, consider the scenario of decision on locating a common good on a linear street. It is known
that each player holds an ideal location (his location), and that his preference is monotone in the path
between this ideal location to the common good. Yet, there might be ambiguity regarding the ideal location,
or regarding the preference between locations that are not on the same side of the ideal location (e.g, the
preference might be a function of properties of the path).

We interpret the single-peakedness assumption as constraining the game in two diﬀerent ways. First, it
constrains the type ambiguity in a natural way: Player i knows the order over the locations (common to all
types of Player j), and hence he has some information he can use to anticipate the action of other players.
Second, this assumption limits the disagreement between the players (as captured by the characterization
of Arrow [4, P. 77]), since they agree on the underlining order of locations. Hence, we expect to get
more strict characterizations utilizing the single-peaked assumption.38 Note that a set of single-peaked
consistent preferences might be single-peaked with regard to more than one order of the locations (i.e., an

35In particular, the equilibria of the case with no ambiguity, are also equilibria of any coordination game.
36I.e., the same type sets for all players except Player i, and the perturbed type set for Player i.
37An equivalent deﬁnition of single-peaked consistency [4, P. 77] is that for any triplet of locations, at least one of them is

not ranked last (among the three) according to any of the preferences in the set.

38Constraining the disagreement by single-peaked consistency is a common assumption in the social choice literature, and it is
known to have an impact on characterizations, e.g., of preference aggregation rules [9], and of facility location mechanisms [25].

15

embedding).39 In cases ∪iT i is single-peaked consistent w.r.t. several orders of the locations (which can be
thought of stronger homogeneity constraint), our results hold w.r.t. any of the orders, giving rise to stricter
characterizations.

In the examples we describe below, we limit the ambiguity further (adding more information on players),

but not adding to the inter-player agreement.

The ﬁrst case we analyze is when assuming no ambiguity regarding the players’ ideal location. That is,
for every player there exists a location (his ideal location) x⋆ shared by all his type in T i. We show that in
this case there can be at most two locations in the equilibrium set, one more extreme to the right than any
of the ideal locations and one more extreme to the left than any of them.

Lemma 18. Let G be a coordination game with single-peaked consistent preferences s.t.
there is no am-
biguity regarding the players ideal locations, and let xi be Player i’s ideal location. Then any (non-trivial)
MINthenMAX-NE L satisﬁes that there exist two diﬀerent locations α and β s.t. L = {α, β} and α <
mini xi 6 maxi xi < β.

This condition is tight. Any set L satisfying the above condition is a MINthenMAX-NE of the game in

case the type sets T i are rich enough.40

Proof. Notice that the result is equivalent to requiring that for every player i there is at most one location
α in L s.t. α < xi and at most one location β in L s.t. xi < β. Assume for contradiction that there are two

locations in L either in(cid:0)−∞, xi(cid:3) or in(cid:2)xi, ∞(cid:1). Then one of them must be on the path between x and the

other, and hence preferred to it regardless of the type of Player i, contradicting L being an equilibrium.

In order to prove tightness, given a set L = {α, β} as above, for any player i there are single-peaked
preferences with xi at the top in which α is preferred to β, and there are single-peaked preferences with xi
at the top in which β is preferred to α. If the set T i includes both a type that prefers α to β, and a type
that prefers β to α, then the mapping f i : T i → L that maps a type to his preferred location in L is onto.
Hence, if this condition is satisﬁed by all type sets, then L is a MINthenMAX-NE.

We see that under this homogeneity constraint, the (non-trivial) equilibria are constrained to be two
extreme locations. This result can be interpreted as the power of extreme players in these scenarios.
Note that when the types are single-peaked w.r.t. several orders, the equilibria should satisfy the above
characterization w.r.t.
all of them. For instance, consider the scenario of two players and type sets
T 1 = T 2 = {2 ≻ 1 ≻ 3 ≻ 4 ≻ 5 , 2 ≻ 3 ≻ 1 ≻ 4 ≻ 5} (a subset of the set of preferences of Example 17).
These preferences are single-peaked w.r.t. the order 5−1−2−3−4, but L = {4, 5} is not a MINthenMAX-NE
although satisfying the property of the lemma because both types prefer 4 to 5 and will not choose 5, and
indeed {4, 5} does not satisfy the property w.r.t. the order 1−2−3−4−5.

The second case we analyze is having ambiguity regarding the ideal location only, and assuming a structure
on the preferences. A simple example of such structure is Euclidean preferences. A Euclidean preference
is uniquely derived from its ideal location by ordering the locations according to their distance from the
ideal location. Notice that also this restriction can be stated as homogeneity constraint on the preferences
given the common embedding: it can be stated as a common metric on the locations set shared by all all
preferences.

Lemma 19. Let G be a coordination game on the real line s.t. all players have Euclidean preferences. Then
a (non-trivial) location set L = {l1 < l2 < · · · < lk} is a MINthenMAX-NE if and only if

for every player i there are types derived by possible ideal locations x1 < x2 < · · · < xk s.t.

for t =
1, 2, . . . , k − 1: any location m satisfying m ∈ argmaxp |d (p, lt) − d (p, lt+1)|,41 is (strictly) between xt and

39For example,

Example 17. The preferences 1 ≻ 2 ≻ 3 ≻ 4 ≻ 5, 2 ≻ 1 ≻ 3 ≻ 4 ≻ 5, 2 ≻ 3 ≻ 1 ≻ 4 ≻ 5, and 3 ≻ 2 ≻ 1 ≻ 4 ≻ 5, are
single-peaked w.r.t. the following four orders (and their inverse): 1−2−3−4−5, 5−1−2−3−4, 5−1−2−3−4, and 5−4−1−2−3.

Escoﬃer et al. [15] proved that for any number of locations n and r 6 2n−1, there exist 1

r 2n−1 diﬀerent preferences that are

single-peaked consistent w.r.t r diﬀerent orders (for the tight bounds see [15]).

40In particular, if for all players T i is the set of all single-peaked preferences with top xi, these are all the (non-trivial)

MINthenMAX-NE.

41I.e., m is the median between lt and lt+1.

16

xt+1.

A special case of the lemma is when there are exactly two types of each player, derived by two possible
ideal locations xi < yi. In this scenario we get that a (non-trivial) location set L is a MINthenMAX-NE
if and only if there exist two locations α and β s.t. L = {α, β}, and any location m satisfying m ∈
argmaxp |d (p, α) − d (p, β)| is (strictly) between xi and yi for all players. Hence, a (non-trivial) MINthenMAX-NE

exists if and only if the intersection of the segments(cid:0)xi, yi(cid:1) is non-empty.

Proof. ⇒: Let L = {l1 < l2 < · · · < lk} be an equilibrium and let i be a player. Since L is an equilibrium,
there are types of Player i,42 x1 < x2 < · · · < xk, s.t. Player i chooses lt when his type is xt. In particular,
for t < k his preference between lt and lt+1 when his type is xt is diﬀerent from his preference when his type
is xt+1. Hence, xt and xt+1 lie on diﬀerent sides of the median between lt and lt+1.

⇐: Following the same reasoning, it is easy to see that if L satisﬁes the property of the lemma, then

Player i of type xt prefers lt to any other location in L, hence L is an equilibrium.

6 Summary & Future directions

The questions how people choose an action to take when facing partial information, and how they should
choose their action, is one of the basic questions in economics, and it is the pillar which the deﬁnition of
equilibrium is built upon (both as a prediction tool, and as a self-enforcing contract). The main stream of
the game-theory literature includes the assumption that the economic agents are expectation maximizers
(according to some objective or subjective prior), and moreover it is assume some consistency between the
players’ priors (the “common prior” assumption).

In this work, we chose the extreme opposite scenario and studied cases in which the players have no
information on the state of the world. We deﬁned a general framework of games with ambiguity following
Harsanyi’s model of games with incomplete information [19], and deﬁned a speciﬁc case of the model, games
with type ambiguity. We axiomatized a family of decision models under ambiguity which we claimed a
rational agent is expected to follow, and characterized the ﬁnest reﬁnement of this family, MINthenMAX.
This family can be interpreted as following Wald’s MiniMax principle when facing (extreme) ambiguity,
and all rational ways to break indiﬀerences in cases in which the MiniMax principle is mute. We showed
MINthenMAX is the unique model that follows Wald’s MiniMax principle and breaks all possible indiﬀerences
(without violating the rationality axioms we assumed). Finally, we studied the respective equilibrium notion,
MINthenMAX-NE. and applied it to two families of games: coordination games and bilateral trade games.
One might ask himself why to choose MINthenMAX as the analysis tool, and not a diﬀerent decision model
in the family. We note that MINthenMAX-NE (G), i.e., the equilibria of G under the MINthenMAX, are in
fact also equilibria of G under any proﬁle of rational reﬁnements of Wald’s MiniMax principle. Moreover,
MINthenMAX-NE (G) can be equivalently deﬁned as the set of all such robust equilibria of G.

This scenario of extreme ambiguity might seem unrealistic. Yet, we claim this model approximates many
partial-information real-life scenarios better than the subjective expectation maximization model. Clearly,
if players have information which they can use to construct a belief regarding the other players, and we
expect they will use it, then the expectation maximization decision model is a better analysis tool.
In
intermediate scenarios, when players have some information but it is unreasonable to expect them to form a
distribution over the world, it is reasonable to model the players as following one of the intermediate models
for decision under ambiguity,43 e.g., the multi-prior model (for an overview of such models, the interested
reader is referred to [17]). It remains an open question what are the common features of equilibria under
MINthenMAX and equilibria under other decision models under ambiguity. By characterizing these common
features, we would like to analyze the sensitivity of the equilibria we’ve found in this work to the speciﬁc
analysis tool.

42We identify between the types and their ideal locations.
43We refer to them as intermediate since they do not satisfy the principle of indiﬀerence, and hence they diﬀerentiate between

the states of the world.

17

In order to study further the notion of equilibrium under MINthenMAX-NE, we hope to analyze other
families of games, e.g., ﬁner cases of coordination games when adding homogeneity constraints that are either
knowledge on other players, or intra-player agreement, diﬀerentiating between the two and by that analyzing
the impacts separately. In addition, we see few further directions of research.

Variance of information between types: In the examples we analyzed the information of a player did not
depend on his type. The model we presented in Sec. 2 includes more general scenarios. We have preliminary
results, which we omitted here, for Schelling’s Homeowner-Burglar game [29, P. 207]. For this game, we got
similar predictions to the prediction of Schelling, replicating the power of partial-knowledge of high degrees.
Mechanism design: In the full version of this work, we extend the result regarding bilateral trade, to
characterization of incentive compatible, individually rational, deterministic mechanisms for bilateral trade.
We show that (essentially) the implementable allocation rules, are those that are implemented using the
price announcement mechanisms we analyzed. Also here, implementability under MINthenMAX-NE can be
interpreted as robust implementability under ambiguity, i.e., implementability without assuming a speciﬁc
decision model, but analyzing the proﬁles that are equilibria for any proﬁle of decision models of the players
from the family we characterized. Another direction of research is analyzing what a designer can gain by
adding ambiguity to a mechanism, and speciﬁcally whether it is possible to increase the participation of the
players, similarly to the full-participation result we proved.

Information update: The main drawback of modeling the knowledge of a player using a set of types
for other players (or, in the general case, of states of the world) instead of a richer structure, is that there
is no reasonable way to deﬁne information update in this model. This prevents us to extend this work to
two natural directions: analysis of extensive form games (e.g., when the players play in turns, learning the
the type of each other as the evolve), and value of information (the question of how much a player should
invest in order to decrease his ambiguity). In the decision theory literature, there are several non-Bayesian
information update rules, e.g., Dempster-Shafer [14, 30] and Jeﬀrey update rule [20]. These rules usually
assume a ﬁner representation of knowledge than the representation we had in this work, but we think that
after basing a rational decision model in our simpliﬁed knowledge representation, it should not be hard to
extend the decision model to these ﬁner knowledge models.

References

[1] Charalambos D. Aliprantis and Kim Border.

Inﬁnite Dimensional Analysis: A Hitchhiker’s Guide.

Springer, 3 edition, 2006. 21

[2] F. J. Anscombe and R. J. Aumann. A deﬁnition of subjective probability. The Annals of Mathematical

Statistics, 34(1):199 – 205, 1963. 7

[3] Kenneth J. Arrow and Leonid Hurwicz. An optimality criterion for decision-making under ignorance. In
Charles Frederick Carter and J. L. Ford, editors, Uncertainty and Expectations in Economics, chapter 1,
pages 1 – 29. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1972. 11

[4] Kenneth Joseph Arrow. Social Choice and Individual Values. Cowles Foundation Monographs Series.

Yale University Press, 3 edition, 2012. 15

[5] J. Robert Aumann. Interactive epistemology i: Knowledge. International Journal of Game Theory,

28(3):263 – 300, 1999. 7

[6] Robert J. Aumann. Agreeing to disagree. The Annals of Statistics, 4(6):1236–1239, 1976. 7

[7] C. Berge. Topological Spaces: Including a Treatment of Multi-valued Functions, Vector Spaces, and

Convexity. Dover books on mathematics. Dover Publications, 1963. 21

[8] Duncan Black. On the rationale of group decision-making. Journal of Political Economy, 56(1):23 – 34,

1948. 15

18

[9] Duncan Black. The Theory of Committees and Elections. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1957 (reprint

at 1986). 15

[10] Subir Bose, Emre Ozdenoren, and Andreas Pape. Optimal auctions with ambiguity. Theoretical Eco-

nomics, 1(4):411–438, December 2006. 3

[11] Simone Cerreia-Vioglio, David Dillenberger, and Pietro Ortoleva. Cautious expected utility and the

certainty eﬀect. Econometrica, 83(2):693 – 728, 2015. 3

[12] Kalyan Chatterjee and William Samuelson. Bargaining under incomplete information. Operations

Research, 31(5):835 – 851, 1983. 11, 12

[13] Xi Chen, Xiaotie Deng, and Shang-Hua Teng. Settling the complexity of computing two-player nash

equilibria. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 56(3), May 2009. 9

[14] A. P. Dempster. Upper and lower probabilities induced by a multivalued mapping. The Annals of

Mathematical Statistics, 38(2):325 – 339, 1967. 18

[15] Bruno Escoﬃer, J´erˆome Lang, and Meltem ¨Ozt¨urk. Single-peaked consistency and its complexity. In
ECAI 2008 - 18th European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Patras, Greece, July 21-25, 2008,
Proceedings, pages 366 – 370, 2008. ECAI 2008: 18th European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
July 21-25. 16

[16] Daniel Friedman and John Rust. The Double Auction Market: Institutions, Theories, and Evidence.
Proceedings volume in the Santa Fe Institute studies in the sciences of complexity. Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company, 1993. 12

[17] Itzhak Gilboa and Massimo Marinacci. Ambiguity and the Bayesian paradigm. In Daron Acemoglu,
Manuel Arellano, and Eddie Dekel, editors, Advances in Economics and Econometrics, volume 1, pages
179 – 242. Cambridge University Press, 2013. Cambridge Books Online. 8, 17

[18] Itzhak Gilboa and David Schmeidler. Maxmin expected utility with non-unique prior. Journal of

Mathematical Economics, 18(2):141–153, 1989. 3

[19] John C. Harsanyi. Games with incomplete information played by ”Bayesian” players, I-III. part I. the

basic model. Management Science, 14(3):159 – 182, 1967. 3, 7, 17

[20] Richard C. Jeﬀrey. Contributions to the Theory of Inductive Probability. PhD thesis, Princeton Univer-

sity, 1957. 18

[21] Shizuo Kakutani. A generalization of brouwers ﬁxed point theorem. Duke Mathematical Journal,

8(3):457 – 459, 9 1941. 9, 21

[22] Robert Duncan Luce and Howard Raiﬀa. Games and decisions: Introduction and critical survey. Study

of the behavioral models project. Dover Publications, 1957. 4, 5, 8, 14

[23] Andreu Mas-Colell, Michael Whinston, and Jerry Green. Microeconomic Theory. Oxford University

Press, 1995. 8, 11

[24] Michael Maschler, Eilon Solan, and Shmuel Zamir. Game Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2013.

3, 7

[25] Herve Moulin. On strategy-proofness and single peakedness. Public Choice, 35(4):437 – 455, 1980. 15

[26] Martin J. Osborne and Ariel Rubinstein. Course in Game Theory. Mit Press, 1994. 14

[27] Christos Papadimitriou. The complexity of computing equilibria.

In H. Peyton Young and Shmuel
Zamir, editors, Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications - Vol. 4, chapter 14, pages 779
– 810. Elsevier, 2015. 5, 9

19

[28] Christos H. Papadimitriou. On the complexity of the parity argument and other ineﬃcient proofs of

existence. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 48(3):498 – 532, 1994. 5, 9

[29] Thomas Crombie Schelling. The Strategy of Conﬂict. Harvard University Press, 2 edition, 1980. 5, 14,

18

[30] Glenn Shafer. A Mathematical Theory of Evidence. Princeton University Press, 1976. 18

[31] Abraham Wald. Statistical decision functions. Wiley publications in statistics. Wiley, 1950. 3, 8

[32] Alexander Wolitzky. Mechanism design with maxmin agents: theory and an application to bilateral

trade. Theoretical Economics, 2015. 4

20

A Proof of Lemma 3 (Best-response is well-deﬁned)

This lemma can be easily extended to inﬁnite number of states case by assuming some structure on the
actions set and the utility function.

Lemma. The correspondences pure MIN-BR, mixed MIN-BR, pure MINthenMAX-BR, and mixed MINthenMAX-BR
are non-empty.

Proof. We prove the lemma in the more general decision theory framework. We show that if there are ﬁnitely
many states of the nature and ﬁnitely many pure actions, there is always at least one optimal mixed action.
Since the number of players and the number of types of each player are ﬁnite, a player faces one of a ﬁnite
number of proﬁles (states of the nature) and we get the desired result.

The existence of an optimal pure action is trivial since there are ﬁnitely many pure actions. Next, we
prove the existence of optimal mixed actions. The set of optimal actions according to MIN OptActMIN is

OptActMIN = argmax
σ∈∆(A)

minω∈Ω u (σ, ω) .

For every state of the nature ω ∈ Ω, u (σ, ω) is a continuous function in σ (it is a linear transforma-
tion). minω∈Ω u (σ, ω) is also continuous in σ as the minimum for ﬁnitely many continuous functions. Hence,
argmaxa∈σ∈∆(A) minω∈Ω u (σ, ω) is non-empty as the maxima of a continuous function over a simplex. More-
over, OptActMIN is a compact set.

Similarly, the set of optimal actions according to MINthenMAX, OptActMINthenMAX = argmaxa∈OptActMIN

maxω∈Ω u (σ, ω),

is non-empty since OptActMIN is compact and maxω∈Ω u (σ, ω) is continuous in σ.

B Proof of Theorem 4 (MIN-NE existence)

Theorem. Every game with ambiguity has a MIN-NE in mixed actions.

Proof. We prove the existence of a mixed MIN-NE by applying Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem [21]44 to the
following set S and set-valued function F . We set S ⊆ ℜK to be the set of all proﬁles of mixed strategies of
the types,45 i.e., a cross product of the corresponding simplexes. Given a strategy proﬁle s, we deﬁne F (s)
to be the product of the best-response correspondences of the diﬀerent types to the proﬁle s.

Clearly, S is a convex compact non-empty set. We proved (Lemma 3) that the best-response always
exists and hence F (s) is non-empty for all s ∈ S. We show that the best-response correspondence of a type
is an upper semi-continuous function (and hence also F ) by applying Berge’s Maximum theorem [7, Thm. 2,
p. 116]46 to47

f(cid:0)σi, s(cid:1)= min

ω∈Ω

u(cid:0)ω, σi, s−i(cid:0)t−i (ω)(cid:1)(cid:1)

We notice that the best-response of a type of Player i to a strategy proﬁle s ∈ S is the maxima over his

mixed strategies σi of f(cid:0)σi, s(cid:1); that u is a linear function in σi and in s; and that f(cid:0)σi, s(cid:1) is a continuous

function in s and σi. Hence, we get that the best-response is an upper semi-continuous correspondence.

Next, we show that for any proﬁle s and a type of Player i, the best-response set is convex, and hence
In order to prove the convexity of the best-response set, let σ and τ be two

also F (s) is a convex set.
best-responses and let

m = min
ω∈Ω

u(cid:0)ω, σi, s−i(cid:0)t−i (ω)(cid:1)(cid:1)

44Let S ⊆ ℜn be a non-empty compact convex set. Let F : S → S be a set-valued upper semi-continuous function on S such

that F (s) is non-empty and convex for all s ∈ S. Then F has a ﬁxed point, i.e. a point s ∈ S such that s ∈ F (s).

45for K being the sum of the number of types over the players.
46If f : X × Y → ℜ is a continuous function, then the mapping µ : X → Y deﬁned by µ (x) = argmaxy∈Y f (y) is a upper

semi-continuous mapping.
(The statement of the theorem is taken from [1, Lemma 17.31, p. 570])

47Where t−i (ω) are the types Player i is facing according to ω, and s−i (cid:0)t−i (ω)(cid:1) are their actions according to s.

21

be their worst-case value. For any convex combination ζ of σ and τ , on one hand we get that

from the optimality of σ, and on the other hand

min
ω∈Ω

u(cid:0)ω, ζ i, s−i(cid:0)t−i (ω)(cid:1)(cid:1) 6 m

since we assumed this lower-bound both on σ and on τ . Hence,

u(cid:0)ω, ζ i, s−i(cid:0)t−i (ω)(cid:1)(cid:1) > m for all ω ∈ Ω.

and ζ is a best-response.

min
ω∈Ω

u(cid:0)ω, ζ i, s−i(cid:0)t−i (ω)(cid:1)(cid:1) = m

By applying Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem we get that there is a proﬁle s s.t. s ∈ F (s). That is, in the

proﬁle s every type best-responds to the others, so s is a MIN-NE.

C Proof of Theorem 10 (Axiomatization of MINthenMAX)

Theorem. MINthenMAX is the unique preference that satisﬁes

• Monotonicity

• State symmetry

• Independence of irrelevant information

• It is a reﬁnement of MIN.48

• It is the ﬁnest preference that satisﬁes the above three properties. That is, it is a reﬁnement of any

preference that satisﬁes the above properties.

Proof. In order to prove this theorem we use the following lemma (proved next) that any preference that
satisﬁes the ﬁrst three properties can be deﬁned using the worst (minimal) and best (maximal) outcomes of
the actions.

Lemma. Any preference that satisﬁes monotonicity, state symmetry, and independence of irrelevant infor-
mation, can be deﬁned as a function of the worst and the best outcomes of the actions.

Using this lemma, we turn to prove the characterization of MINthenMAX.
It is easy to verify that MINthenMAX indeed satisﬁes the ﬁrst four properties. We note that the
uniqueness is an immediate consequence of the uniqueness of a ﬁnest reﬁnement and prove that indeed
MINthenMAX is a ﬁnest reﬁnement. Let P be an arbitrary reﬁnement of MIN that satisﬁes Monotonicity,
state symmetry, and Independence of Irrelevant Information. Let a and b be two actions s.t. a DM holding
a P preferences strongly prefers a to b, and we’ll show that a is preferred to b also by a DM holding
a MINthenMAX preference. Applying Lemma 11, we get that P can be deﬁned using the minimal and
maximal outcomes. We denote the respective minimal and maximal outcomes of a by ma and Ma, and of b
by mb and Mb.

Assume for contradiction that a DM holding a MINthenMAX preference weakly prefers b to a. Since P
is a reﬁnement of MIN, it cannot be that mb > ma, and hence we get that mb = ma and Mb > Ma. Both
P and MINthenMAX can be deﬁned as a function of the minimal and maximal outcome, so with no loss of
generality we can assume that a and b result in the same minimal outcome ma is some state ωm, result in
their respective maximal outcomes in the same state ωM , and result in the same intermediate outcomes in
all other states. Since P is monotone, we get that a DM holding a P preference weakly prefers b to a and by
that get a contradiction.

48That is, for any two actions a and b, if a is strongly preferred to b by a DM holding a MIN preference, then a is strongly

preferred to b by a DM holding a MINthenMAX preference.

22

C.1 Proof of lemma

Lemma. Any preference that satisﬁes monotonicity, state symmetry, and independence of irrelevant infor-
mation, can be deﬁned as a function of the worst and the best outcomes of the actions.

Proof. For this proof it is easier to use the following property that is equivalent (when Ω is ﬁnite) to state
symmetry.

Axiom. For any action a and bijection ψ : Ω → Ω, the DM is indiﬀerent between a and a ◦ ψ.

Let a and a′ be two actions over the states set Ω s.t. minω∈Ω a (ω) = minω∈Ω b (ω) and maxω∈Ω a (ω) =
maxω∈Ω b (ω). We show that the DM is indiﬀerent between the two, and notice that this will prove the
lemma. Assuming this claim, given any two pairs of actions: a and a′ that have the same minimal and
maximal outcome, and b and b′ that have the same minimal and maximal outcome, a is preferred to b if and
only if a′ is preferred to b′, because the DM is indiﬀerent between a and a′, and between b and b′.

Assume for contradiction that (w.l.o.g) the DM strictly prefers a′ to a. Since the preference satisﬁes
state symmetry, we can assume that a and a′ are co-monotone, that is, for any two states ω and ω′, the
actions satisfy that (a (ω) − a (ω′)) (a′ (ω) − a′ (ω′)) > 0. We denote by m and M the minimal and maximal
outcomes of a and by ωm and ωM the two respective states of nature.

ωm other states ωM
∈ [m, M ] M
∈ [m, M ] M

a m
a′ m

We deﬁne two new actions over Ω. An action b that results in m in all states besides ωM and M otherwise,

and an action b′ that results in M in all states besides ωm and m otherwise.

ωm other states ωM
∈ [m, M ] M
M
∈ [m, M ] M

m

a m
b m
a′ m
b′ m

M

M .

Due to monotonicity the DM (weakly) prefers a to b, and b′ to a′, and hence the DM strictly prefers b′

to b. Next, we deﬁne an auxiliary space bΩ = {ωm, ωo, ωM } and two actions on it c and c′ by unifying the

middle states into one as follows:

ωm ωo ωM
c m m M
c′ m M M .

Since the preference satisﬁes Independence of Irrelevant Information we get that the DM strictly prefers c′
to c. Now we deﬁne a new action c′′ (see below), and by the state symmetry property we get that also c′′ is
strictly preferred to c.

ωm ωo ωM
c m m M
c′ m M M
c′′ M M m .

Using a collapsing argument similar to the one above, we get that for the following collapsed space and

two actions

ωm ωM
d m M
d′′ M m ,

d′′ is strictly preferred to d, but this contradicts the state symmetry property.

23

D Proof of Lemma 12 (Bilateral trade games)

Lemma. Let G be a bilateral trade game deﬁned by a price function x (as, ab) and two type sets Vs and
Vt, both having a minimum and maximum.49 Then all the MINthenMAX-NE of G are of one the following
classes:

1. No transaction equilibria (These equilibria exist for any two sets Vs and Vb)

In these equilibria, both players do not participate (play ⊥, or play a bid too extreme for all types of
the other player) regardless of their valuations.

2. One-price equilibria (These equilibria are deﬁned only when min Vs 6 max Vb. I.e., when an ex-post

transaction is possible.)

In a one-price equilibrium, both the seller and the buyer choose to participate for some of their types.
It is deﬁned by a price p ∈ [min Vs, max Vb] s.t. the equilibrium strategies are:

The seller bids p for valuations vs 6 p, and ⊥ otherwise (the second clause might be vacuously
true).

The buyer bids p for valuations vb > p, and ⊥ otherwise (the second clause might be vacuously
true).

Hence, the outcome is

❳

❳

❳

Buyer

❳

❳

❳

❳

Seller

❳

❳

❳

Low:

vs 6 p

High:

vs > p

Low:
High:

vb < p
vb > p

no transaction

p

no transaction
no transaction

3. Two-prices equilibria (These equilibria are deﬁned only when min Vs 6 min Vb and max Vs 6 max Vb.
I.e., when there is a value for the seller s.t. an ex-post transaction is possible for any value of the buyer,
and vice versa)

In a two-prices equilibrium, all types of both the seller and the buyer choose to participate, and their

bids depend on their valuation. It is deﬁned by two prices pL < pH s.t(cid:26) min Vs 6 pL < max Vs 6 pH

pL 6 min Vb < pH 6 max Vb

and the equilibrium strategies are:

The seller bids pL for valuations vs 6 pL, and pH otherwise.

The buyer bids pH for valuations vb > pH, and pL otherwise.

Hence, the outcome is

Buyer
Low:
High:

❳

❳

❳

❳

❳

❳

Seller

❳

❳

❳

❳

Low:

vs 6 pL

High:

vs > pL

vb < pH
vb > pH

pL

no transaction

x (pL, pH ) ∈ (pL, pH )

pH

Proof. We will prove that these proﬁles are equilibria (MINthenMAX-NE) and that they are the only equi-
libria.

• No-transaction proﬁles

In these proﬁles for at least one of the players does not participate (⊥, or bids an extreme bid) regardless
of his type.

A player, facing a proﬁle in which all the types of the other player do not participate, is indiﬀerent
between all his actions (all of them result in no-transaction for sure), and hence he best-responds.

49We state the result here for the case when both sets have a minimal valuation and a maximal valuation. Dropping this

assumption does not change the result in an essential way (some of the inequalities are changed to strict inequalities).

24

Facing any other proﬁle, at least for some of his types (e.g., the maximal value for the buyer, and
minimal value of the seller), choose to participate. Hence, the only no-transaction proﬁle that is an
equilibrium, is when both players do not participate.

• One-price proﬁles

In these proﬁles, both the seller and the buyer choose to participate for some of their types, and when
they choose to participate, both bid the same price p.

First, we prove that given a one-price proﬁle as described in the lemma, it is indeed an equilibrium.

Consider a seller of type vs facing a proﬁle in which there are types of the buyer that choose p and
(maybe) others that choose not to participate.

– If vs 6 p: He prefers bidding p to any bid as < p, because both bids will result in a transaction with
the same types of the buyer, but as will result in a lower price (Monotonicity of MINthenMAX).
He prefers bidding p to any bid as > p, because as will result in no-transaction with all types
of the buyer, while p results in a proﬁtable transaction with some of them (Monotonicity of
MINthenMAX).
We notice that since p > min Vs there are types of the seller that bid p.

– If vs > p: Any bid that results in a transaction with some types of the buyer, will be at a price
lower than vs, and hence the transaction will be a losing one. Hence, he prefers not to participate
at all (Monotonicity of MINthenMAX).

Similarly, consider a buyer of type vb facing a proﬁle in which there are types of the seller that choose
p and (maybe) others that choose not to participate.

– If vb < p: Any bid that results in a transaction with some types of the seller, will be at a price
higher than vb, and hence the transaction will be a losing one. Hence, he prefers not to participate
at all (Monotonicity of MINthenMAX).

– If vb > p: He prefers bidding p to any bid ab > p, because both bids will result in a transaction with
the same types of the seller, but as will result in a higher price (Monotonicity of MINthenMAX).
He prefers bidding p to any bid as < p, because as will result in no-transaction with all types
of the seller, while p results in a proﬁtable transaction with some of them (Monotonicity of
MINthenMAX).
We notice that since p 6 max Vb there are types of the buyer that bid p.

Next, we prove that any single-price proﬁle other than those described in the lemma, cannot be an
equilibrium.

First we claim, that in equilibrium it cannot be that the prices of participating types of one of the sides
vary, while all types of the other player bid the same. If there is a unique price p bid by participating
types of the seller, based on the analysis above, all participating types of the buyer bid p. Similarly,
if there is a unique price p bid by participating types of the buyer, all participating types of the seller
bid p.

Hence, in a single-price proﬁle, there exists a price p s.t. both some types of the seller and some types
of the buyer choose p, and all other types (might be an empty set) choose not to participate.

If p ∈ [min Vs, max Vb], by the analysis above, we see there is only one single-price equilibrium support-
ing p.

If p /∈ [min Vs, max Vb], by the analysis above, either all types of the buyer or all types of the seller
choose not to participate. In either case this is a no-transaction proﬁle.

25

• All-participating proﬁles

In these proﬁles, all types of both the seller and the buyer choose to participate (did not choose ⊥).

First we prove that given an all-participating proﬁle as described in the lemma as two-prices equilibria,
it is indeed an equilibrium.

Consider a seller of type vs facing a proﬁle in which all the types of the buyer participate, and let pL
be the inﬁmum of the bids chosen by types of the buyer and pH the supremum of the bids.

– If vs 6 pL: He prefers bidding pL to any bid as < pL, because both bids will result in a transaction
with all types of the buyer, but as will result in a lower price with each of them (Monotonicity of
MINthenMAX).
He prefers bidding pL to any bid as > pL, because as will result in no-transaction with some
types of the buyer, while pL results in a non-losing transaction with all of them (MINthenMAX
extends MIN).

– If vs > pL and vs 6 pH : He prefers bidding pH to any bid as < pH, because when facing the
types of the buyer that bid ab ∈ [as, pH ], both bids will result in a transaction, but as will result
in a lower price, and when facing other types of the buyer (that bid less than as), both result in
no-transaction (Monotonicity of MINthenMAX).
He prefers bidding pH to any bid as > pH, because as results in no-transaction with all types of
the buyer, while pH results in a non-losing transaction with some types of the buyer (Monotonicity
of MINthenMAX).

We notice that since in the proﬁles of the lemma satisfy min Vs 6 pL < max Vs 6 pH, all the types of
the seller participate, there are types of the seller that bid pL, and there are types that bid pH .

Similarly, consider a buyer of type vb facing a proﬁle in which all the types of the seller participate,
and let pL be the inﬁmum of the bids chosen by types of the seller and pH the supremum of the bids.

– If vb < pH and vb > pL: He prefers bidding pL to any bid ab < pL, because ab results in no-
transaction with all types of the seller, while pL results in a non-losing transaction with some
types of the seller (Monotonicity of MINthenMAX).
He prefers bidding pL to any bid ab > pL, because when facing the types of the seller that bid
as ∈ [pL, ab], both bids will result in a transaction, but ab will result in a higher price, and when
facing other types of the seller (that bid more than ab), both result in no-transaction (Monotonicity
of MINthenMAX).

– If vb > pH : He prefers bidding pH to any bid ab < pH, because ab will result in no-transaction
with some types of the seller, while pH results in a non-losing transaction with all of them
(MINthenMAX extends MIN).
He prefers bidding pH to any bid ab > pH , because both bids will result in a transaction with
all types of the seller, but ab will result in a higher price with each of them (Monotonicity of
MINthenMAX).

We notice that since in the proﬁles of the lemma satisfy pL 6 min Vb < pH 6 max Vb, all the types of
the buyer participate, there are types of the buyer that bid pL, and there are types that bid pH .

Next, we prove that any all-participating non single-price proﬁle, other than the above, cannot be an
equilibrium.

In an all-participating non single-price proﬁle, all the types of both the buyer and seller participate,
and for both players, not all their types choose the same price.

26

If there is a type of the buyer whose value is lower than any of the prices bid by types of the seller,
then this type prefers not to participate, so it cannot be an equilibrium. Any other type of the buyer
bids either the supremum of the inﬁmum of the prices bid by types of the seller. Given that types of
the buyer bid one of two prices, if there is a type of the seller whose value is higher than both prices,
then this type prefers not to participate, and the proﬁle is not an equilibrium. Otherwise, the types of
the seller also bid these two prices and we get the proﬁle is of the type described in the lemma.

• Last, we show that all other proﬁles are not equilibria of the game.

Assume towards a contradiction that a is an equilibrium proﬁle of the game that is not one of the
above proﬁle types.

Clearly, for a match of any pair of types of the seller and the buyer, the utility of neither of them
cannot be negative, because he can guarantee himself to get at least zero against all types of the other
player by choosing ⊥.

Assume there is a type vs of the seller that chose ⊥. Then for any participating type vb of the buyer,
vb cannot guarantee himself to get a utility greater than zero (his utility from being matched with vs)
in the worst case. Hence, he breaks the tie between all the bids ab 6 vb, all giving him zero in the
worst case, according to the best case which is being matched with the lowest bid of a participating
type of the seller. Hence, we get a contradiction by showing the proﬁle is a one-price proﬁle.

Similarly, assume there is a type vb of the buyer that chose ⊥. Then for any participating type vs
of the seller, vs cannot guarantee himself to get a utility greater than zero (his utility from being
matched with vb) in the worst case. Hence, he breaks the tie between all the bids ab > vs, all giving
him zero in the worst case, according to the best case which is being matched with the highest bid of
a participating type of the buyer. Hence, we get a contradiction by showing the proﬁle is a one-price
proﬁle.

E Proof of Lemma 14 (Coordination games)

Lemma. Let G be a coordination game and let L be a non-empty set of locations. There exists a MINthenMAX-NE
proﬁle a s.t. L (a) = L if and only if for all i the mapping f i : T i → L that maps a type to his best location
in L is onto.

Moreover, the action proﬁle a in which every type of every player chooses his best location in L is the

unique pure MINthenMAX-NE that satisﬁes L (a) = L.

Proof. The case |L| = 1 is trivial. Let l be the location in L. The only proﬁle satisfying L (a) = L is when
all players choose l regardless of their type, and this is an equilibrium. The mappings f i are onto, and hence
the lemma is proved for this case.

From now on, we assume that |L| > 2. Given a proﬁle a we deﬁne Li (a) to be the set of locations chosen

in a by Player i,

Li (a) =(cid:8)l(cid:12)(cid:12) ∃ti ∈ T i s.t. Player i of type ti plays l in the proﬁle a(cid:9) ,

so L (a) = ∪i∈N Li (a).
⇒:
Assume there exists an equilibrium a s.t. L (a) = L.

First we claim that for all players,(cid:12)(cid:12)Li (a)(cid:12)(cid:12) > 1. Assume towards a contradiction, there is a non-empty
set of players S s.t. i ∈ S ⇐⇒ (cid:12)(cid:12)Li (a)(cid:12)(cid:12) = 1, and let p be a player in S and l the location chosen by p.

If |S| = 1, then for any of the other players the only action guaranteeing them to meet another player is
choosing l, and hence all players choose l regardless of their type. I.e., L (a) = {l} and we get a contradiction.
If |S| > 1, then any of the players can guarantee himself to meet another player on the worst case, and
hence will choose a location in ∪i∈SLi (a). Since all players aim to maximize the number of other players
they meet on the worst-case, it cannot be that two players in S choose diﬀerently (both maximize the

27

players, and hence he will choose the best location according to his type among the locations in ∪j6=iLj (a)

number of other players from S that choose like them). Hence,(cid:12)(cid:12)∪i∈SLi (a)(cid:12)(cid:12) = 1 and we get that |L (a)| = 1.
Hence, for all players, (cid:12)(cid:12)Li (a)(cid:12)(cid:12) > 1. Player i of type ti ∈ T i cannot guarantee himself to meet other
that maximize the number of other players he might meet - m (l) = #(cid:8)j 6= i(cid:12)(cid:12) l ∈ Lj (a)(cid:9).

Next, we prove that for all players Li (a) = L (a). Assume for contradiction there exists a player p
s.t. Lp (a) ( L (a). Let l ∈ Lp (a) be a location chosen by p, and let l′ be a location and p′ a player s.t.
l′ ∈ Lp′
(a) \ Lp (a). Since Player p (of some type) chose l, we get that the number of players j 6= p that
chose l is at least as large as the number of players j 6= p that chose the location l′. Taking the viewpoint of
Player p′ we get that the number of players j 6= p′ that chose l is strictly larger than the number of players
j 6= p′ that chose the location l′. But this is a contradiction to l′ ∈ Lp′

Contradiction.

(a) .

Hence, we get that in a, Player i of type ti ∈ T i choose the best location according to his type among
the locations in L (in all of them he meets no-one in the worst-case and everyone else in the best case). That
is, Player i plays according to the function f i, and L = Li = Im (f ), so f is onto. Notice that we also get
this proﬁle is the unique equilibrium s.t. L (a) = L.

⇐:
Assume the functions f i are onto. It is easy to verify that in the proﬁle a in which Player i plays according
to f i, Player i best-responds (for all i). - None of his actions guarantees him to meet some other player in
the worst case; if he plays an action a /∈ L, he does not meet another player even in the best-case; if he plays
an action a ∈ L, he meets all other players in the best-case; hence, he best-responds playing according to f i.

28

