PS2 :: National Conference on CICAHEP, Dibrugarh (2015), 1–6

Horizon, homogeneity and ﬂatness problems – do their resolutions
really depend upon inﬂation?

Ashok K. Singal
Astronomy and Astrophysics Division, Physical Research Laboratory, Navrangpura, Ahmedabad - 380 009, India
(asingal@prl.res.in); COS3, poster, CICAHEP15.169

In textbooks and review articles on modern cosmology [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] one almost invariably comes across
a section devoted to the subject of observed homogeneity and near-ﬂatness of the universe where it is argued
that to explain these observations inﬂation is almost a must. In fact that was the prime motive of Guth [7] to
propose inﬂation in the ﬁrst place. We show that the arguments offered therein are not proper. The horizon
problem, which leads to the causality arguments, arises only in the world models where homogeneity and
isotropy (cosmological principle) is presumed to begin with. We do not know whether the horizon problem
would still arise in non-homogeneous world models. Therefore as long as we are investigating consequences
of the cosmological models based on Robertson-Walker line element, there is no homogeneity issue.

We also show that the ﬂatness problem, as it is posed, is not even falsiﬁable. The usual argument used
in literature is that the present density of the universe is very close (within an order of magnitude) to the critical
density value. From this one infers that the universe must be ﬂat since otherwise in past at 10−35 second (near
the epoch of inﬂation) there will be extremely low departures of density from the critical density value (i.e.,
differing from unity by a fraction of order ∼ 10−53), requiring a sort of ﬁne tuning. Actually we show that
even if the present value of the density parameter (in terms of the critical density value) were very different,
still at 10−35 second it would in any case differ from unity by a fraction of order ∼ 10−53. For instance, even if
had an almost empty universe, with say, ρo ∼ 10−56 gm/cc or so (with density parameter Ωo ∼ 10−28, having
a mass equivalent to that of Earth alone to ﬁll the whole universe), we still get the same numbers for the density
parameter at the epoch of inﬂation. So such a ﬁne-tuning does not discriminate between various world models
and a use of ﬁne tuning argument amounts to a priori rejection of all models with k 6= 0, because inﬂation
or no inﬂation, the density parameter in all Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) world models gets arbitrarily
close to unity as we approach the epoch of the big bang. That way, without even bothering to measure the
actual density, we could use any sufﬁciently early epoch and use “extreme ﬁne-tuning” arguments to rule out
all non-ﬂat models. Thus without casting any whatsoever aspersions on the inﬂationary theories, we point out
that one cannot use these type of arguments, viz. homogeneity and ﬂatness, in support of inﬂation.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
9
3
5
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1. Horizon and Homogeneity Problem

Object horizon in the cosmological context implies a maximum distance yonder which we as observers have
not yet seen the universe due to a ﬁnite speed of light as well as a ﬁnite age of the universe. In other words
these are the farthest regions of the universe (redshift z → ∞) from which the light signals have just reached
us. However when we look at the universe we ﬁnd that distant regions in opposite directions seen by us have
similar cosmic microwave background radiation (CMBR) temperatures. The object horizon problem in stan-
dard cosmological big bang model is that these different regions of the universe have not ever communicated
with each other, but nevertheless they seem to have the same temperature, as shown by the CMBR which shows
almost a uniform temperature (2.73◦ K) across the sky, irrespective of the direction. How can this be possible,
considering that any exchange of information (say, through photons or any other means) can occur, at most, at
the speed of light. How can such two causally disconnected regions have one and same temperature, unless one
makes a somewhat “contrived” presumption that the universe was homogeneous and isotropic to begin with
when it came into existence [1]?

2

Ashok K. Singal

Figure 1. An observer at O (us) receiving signal from distant objects at A and B at time to, which is the time since big
bang. Signal from A having just reached O could not have yet reached B and vice versa.

One can illustrate the object horizon problem using a simple, though somewhat naive, argument in the follow-
ing way. According to the big bang model the universe has only a ﬁnite age, say to. Then light (or information)
from regions at a cosmological distance cto from us would have reached us just now, and could not have
crossed over to similar distant regions on the other side of us. Then how two far-off regions on two opposite
sides of us have managed to achieve the homogeneity so that we see them having same properties. Though the
argument does contain an element of truth, but it could not be always true and its naive nature can be seen from
the simplest of FRW models, namely empty universe of Milne (ρ = 0, qo = 0), where even the most distant
(z → ∞) observable point in the inﬁnite extent of the universe is within horizon for each and every point of
the universe, let it be in any region in any direction from us in this inﬁnite universe model. For instance, in this
world-model B will receive signals from us (at O) and from A in same amount of time. In fact all regions in
this universe at any time receive past signals from all other regions even though the universe is inﬁnite. Thus
horizon problem does not arise in this particular world-model. However, in more realistic cases of general
relativistic cosmological models, say with ﬁnite density, almost invariably one comes across horizon problems.

From the observed CMBR, the universe appears to be very close to isotropic. At the same time Copernican
principle states that earth does not have any eminent or privileged position in the universe and therefore an
observer’s choice of origin should have no bearing on the appearance of the distant universe. From this we
infer that the cosmos should appear isotropic from any vantage point in the universe, which directly implies
homogeneity. For this one uses Weyl’s postulate of an inﬁnite set of equivalent fundamental observers spread
around the universe, who agree on a “global” time parameter, orthogonal to 3-d space-like hyper surfaces, and
measured using some local observable like density, temperature, pressure etc. as a parameter [1, 3, 8]. Thus we
are led to the cosmological principle that the universe on a sufﬁciently large scale should appear homogeneous
and isotropic to all fundamental observers, and then one gets for such observers a metric for the universe known
as Robertson-Walker metric.

Is there any other evidence in support of the cosmological principle? Optically the universe shows structures up
to the scale of super clusters of galaxies and even beyond up to hundreds of mega parsecs, but the conventional
wisdom is that when observed on still larger scales the universe would appear homogeneous and isotropic. It is
generally thought that radio galaxies and quasars, the most distant discrete objects (at distances of gig parsecs
and farther) seen in the universe, should trace the distribution of matter in the universe at that large scale and
should therefore appear isotropically distributed from any observing position in the universe.

But there is a caveat. In the 3CRR survey, the most reliable and most intensively studied complete sample of
strong steep-spectrum radio sources, large anisotropies in the sky distributions of powerful extended quasars
as well as some other sub-classes of radio galaxies are found [9]. If we include all the observed asymmetries in
the sky distributions of quasars and radio galaxies in the 3CRR sample, the probability of their occurrence by
a chance combination reduces to ∼ 2 × 10−5. Such large anisotropies present in the sky distribution of some

Horizon, homogeneity and ﬂatness problems – do their resolutions really depend upon inﬂation?

3

of the strongest and most distant discrete sources imply inhomogeneities in the universe at very large scales
(covering a fraction of the universe).

Also using a large sample of radio sources from the NRAO VLA Sky Survey, which contains 1.8 million
sources, a dipole anisotropy has been found [10] which is about 4 times larger than the CMBR dipole. These
dipoles presumably are of a kinetic origin due to the solar motion with respect to the otherwise isotropic
universe. These unexpected ﬁndings have later been corroborated by two independent groups [11, 12]. The
large difference in the inferred motion (as much as a factor of ∼ 4) cannot be easily explained. A genuine
discrepancy in the dipoles inferred with respect to two different cosmic reference frames would imply a large
(∼ 103 km/sec) relative motion between these frames, not in accordance with the cosmological principle.
If we ignore these and some other similar threats to the cosmological principle and trust the assumption of
homogeneity and isotropy for the whole universe for all times, then the line element can be expressed in the
Robertson-Walker metric form, [2, 3, 4, 8],

ds2 = c2dt2 − R2(t)"

dr2

(1 − k r2)1/2 + r2(dθ2 + sin2 θ dφ2)# ,

(1)

where the only time dependent function is the scale factor R(t). The constant k is the curvature index that can
take one of the three possible values +1, 0 or −1 and (r, θ, φ) are the time-independent comoving coordinates.
Using Einstein’s ﬁeld equations, one can express the curvature index k and the present values of the cosmic
scale factor Ro in terms of the Hubble constant Ho, the matter energy density Ωm and the vacuum energy (dark
energy) density ΩΛ as [2, 3, 4],

k c2
H 2
o R2
o

(2)

= Ωo − 1,
where Ωo = Ωm + ΩΛ. The space is ﬂat (k = 0) if Ωo = 1.
In general it is not possible to express the comoving distance r in terms of the cosmological redshift z of the
source in a close-form analytical expression and one may have to evaluate it numerically. For example, in the
Ωm + ΩΛ = 1, ΩΛ 6= 0 world-models, r is given by [2],

r =

c

HoRo Z 1+z

1

dz

(ΩΛ + Ωmz3)1/2 ,

(3)

For a given ΩΛ, one can evaluate r from Eq. (3) by a numerical integration.
However for ΩΛ = 0 cosmologies, where the deceleration parameter qo = Ωm/2, it is possible to express the
comoving (coordinate) distance r as an analytical function of redshift [13],

r =

c

HoRo

z

(1 + z) (cid:2)1 + z + √1 + 2qoz(cid:3)
(cid:2)1 + qoz + √1 + 2qoz(cid:3)

,

which for the empty Milne universe (qo = 0) of negative curvature (k = −1) yields,

while for the Einstein - de Sitter world-model (qo = 1/2) with zero curvature (k = 0) we get,

r =

c

2HoRo (cid:20)1 + z −

1

1 + z(cid:21) ,

r =

2c

HoRo (cid:20)1 −

1

√1 + z(cid:21) ,

(4)

(5)

(6)

4

Ashok K. Singal

From Eq. (5) we see that in the Milne universe, corresponding to redshift z → ∞, the comoving coordinate
r → ∞ too, thus there is no ﬁnite horizon limit in this case and the whole universe is visible to any observer at
any time, consistent with our discussion above. On the other hand from Eq. (6) we notice in the ﬂat universe
redshift z → ∞ yields for r a ﬁnite value. However in this world model the range of coordinate r goes up
to inﬁnity. Thus there is a certain ﬁnite object horizon roh = 2c/(HoRo) beyond which we are unable to see
because there is only a ﬁnite amount of time since the big bang singularity (corresponding to z → ∞), and
thus only a ﬁnite distance that photons could have travelled within the age of the universe. It turns out that all
non-trivial (that is with ﬁnite density) FRW world-models starting with a big bang necessarily have an object
horizon [3].

Appearance of object horizon in a world model is generally interpreted as that different parts of the universe
in that model did not get sufﬁcient time to interact with each other and thus may have yet no causal relations
and therefore could not have achieved uniformity everywhere. Therefore inﬂation is invoked in which an
exponential expansion of space takes place at time t ∼ 10−35 sec by a factor of ∼ 1028 or larger and the
space-points now far apart (and thus apparently not in touch with each other so they appear to be causally
unrelated) were actually much nearer before t ∼ 10−35 sec or so and could have had time to interact with each
other before inﬂation.

A most crucial point that somehow seems to have been missed (or ignored) in these deliberations is that
the question of horizon problem arises only when we to begin with assume that the Universe was “always”
homogeneous and isotropic, because only then we can make use of Robertson-Walker element where we
separate the time co-ordinate from the 3-d space which may or may not be ﬂat and has the time-dependence
only through a single scale parameter R(t). It is only there that horizon makes an appearance which in turn
has given rise to the oft-discussed question of uniformity and homogeneity of space. However, as long as we
make use of the Robertson-Walker metric we are taking for guarantee that the universe was ever homogeneous
and isotropic, and that a single parameter R(t) can describe the past and determine the future of the universe.
There is no doubt about the presence of a horizon, which follows from the Robertson-Walker line element.
However that in itself does not imply a nonexistence or lack of homogeneity as horizon itself exists only in
models where to begin with homogeneity is presumed. All we ﬁnd from calculations is that in a universe which
is isotropic and homogeneous on a large enough scale and where one can assign a single common parameter
to all fundamental observers to use as time, the light signals in a ﬁnite amount of time are not able to cover
the whole available range of space coordinate r in the universe. In fact some of the world models even in an
inﬁnite time all r may not get covered by light signals emitted from a point (“event horizon”). Cause and effect
seem to reverse their roles. It is not that because horizon exists so uniformity is not possible, ironically it is
where a uniformity is present to begin with that we seem to end up with a horizon problem. In these models
we assume not only a single parameter t, but all other parameters describing the universe like the scale factor
R(t), density ρ(t), Hubble parameter H(t), deceleration parameter q(t) etc. at any given time t to be the same
everywhere (even beyond object or event horizons wherever we encounter such horizons). It is yet to be seen
whether such horizons would still arise in models where one does not begin with the cosmological principle
and one has to deal with a genuine non-uniformity problem.

Actually if we follow the standard arguments in the literature then inﬂation in one sense makes the application
of cosmological principle difﬁcult. Though it may alleviate the problem of object horizon, yet it gives rise
to much more acute event horizon problems. After all even just before inﬂation began, there were object
horizons which because of a rapid expansion of the universe due to inﬂation will become even more “remote”
from each other ending up in growth of large number of event horizons, with all such regions of the universe
never able to interact with each other. Thus such a universe will comprise huge number of large patches still
isolated from each others. Then how can one still apply the cosmological principle to such a disjointed universe
which would conﬂict with our starting assumption (Weyl’s postulate!), and where we cannot even get a single

Horizon, homogeneity and ﬂatness problems – do their resolutions really depend upon inﬂation?

5

parameter to act as cosmic time, orthogonal to 3-d space-like hyper surfaces, based purely on the condition of
universal homogeneity and isotropicity. We cannot then even use Robertson-Walker line element to describe
the geometry and then all our conclusions about the cosmological models would have to be abandoned and we
will then be back to square one.

Once again, the only saviour here is that, inﬂation or no inﬂation, these horizons are encountered only in the
models where we have already assumed cosmological principle. However, if we do want to really examine the
question of homogeneity or its absence then we need to abandon the standard model based on the Robertson-
Walker metric and then with some new model, where possibility of large scale anisotropy or inhomogeneity is
assumed to begin with, one has to examine if in such models also we come across horizons and if so, then we
may have a genuine problem to contend with.

2. Flatness Problem

In the so-called ﬂatness problem, the current density of the universe is observed to be very close to the critical
value, needed for a zero curvature (k = 0). Since the density departs rapidly from the critical value with time,
the early universe must have had a density even closer to the critical density, so much so that if we extrapolate
the density parameter to the epoch of inﬂation (t ∼ 10−35 sec) we ﬁnd it to be within unity within an extremely
small fraction of order ∼ 10−53. This leads to the question how the initial density came to be so closely ﬁne-
tuned to the critical value. Cosmic inﬂation was proposed to resolve this issue along with the horizon problem
[7]. However, as we will show, the ﬂatness problem, as it is posed, is not falsiﬁable.

A general form of Eq. (2) valid at any epoch is,

Making use of Eq. (2) we get,

H 2R2(Ω − 1) = kc2.

o(Ωo − 1),
which for the epoch of inﬂation (t ∼ 10−35 sec) can be simpliﬁed [1] to,

H 2R2(Ω − 1) = H 2

o R2

(Ω − 1) ≈ 10−53(Ωo − 1),

(7)

(8)

(9)

The usual argument prevalent in literature is that the present density of the universe is very close (within an
order of magnitude) to the critical density value, i.e., 0.1 < Ωo < 1. From this one infers that the universe
must be ﬂat since otherwise in past at 10−35 second (near the epoch of inﬂation) there will be extremely low
departures of density from the critical density value (i.e., differing from unity by a fraction of order ∼ 10−53),
requiring a sort of ﬁne tuning. However this argument could be applicable to almost any present value of the
observed density of the Universe. What is implied here is that even in a hypothetical almost empty universe
where the density of universe is say, ρo ∼ 10−56 gm/cc) or so (with density parameter Ωo ∼ 10−28, having
only a mass equivalent to that of Earth alone to ﬁll the whole universe), from Eq. (9) the density parameter
at the epoch of inﬂation would differ from unity by the same fraction, of order ∼ 10−53. Is there really any
substance in this type of arguments as even a mass equal to that of earth alone spread over the universe will
lead to the same low departures from unity of 10−53? In fact even the presence of a mere single observer
would imply the same departures from unity of 10−53. Thus without casting any whatsoever doubts on the
inﬂationary theories, we merely point out that one cannot use these type of arguments to support inﬂation. A
use of ﬁne tuning argument amounts to a priori rejection of all models with k 6= 0, because inﬂation or no
inﬂation, the density parameter in all Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) world models gets arbitrarily close
to unity as we approach the epoch of the big bang. That is the property of all these FRW models. That way,

6

Ashok K. Singal

irrespective of the actual density, we could use any sufﬁciently early epoch and use the “extreme ﬁne-tuning”
arguments to reject all non-ﬂat models. But that is not what one could call a falsiﬁable theory. Thus without
casting any whatsoever aspersions on the inﬂationary theories, we point out that one cannot use these type of
arguments to support inﬂation.

In fact ﬂatness and homogeneity problems seem to contradict each other. If we say that the universe is ﬂat
(k = 0) then we are assuming that the density is exactly equal to the critical value and does not depart from
it to even by a smallest fraction. Or in other words, each and every particle is essential and is thus accounted
for and even a single particle is not extra or less in the whole cosmos, as excess of even a single particle more
than that needed for the critical density will ultimately turn the universe from a ﬂat to a curved one. Which
means this much information we have about the whole universe. Then how can we say that we may have no
information about some other parts of the universe due to the so-called horizon problem? While on one hand
we guarantee that in k = 0 world models (ﬂat space), each and every particle in the universe is accounted for
(as otherwise even a single extra or missing particle more than the critical density would cause the universe to
deviate from the ﬂat universe (a runaway case!), but on the other hand we are saying that we (one part of the
universe) have no communication or information about distant parts of the universe and know nothing about
them i.e., about the density, temperature, pressure etc. there, so that uniformity or homogeneity could not have
been enforced since the “birth” of the universe. Are we not contradicting ourselves?

By opting for a ﬂat universe, the least probable out of three possible curvature values, we seem to be following
the example of Copernicus epicycles on philosophical grounds. Further, the argument of ﬂatness perhaps has a
catch. Inﬂation might make the universe ﬂatter (by bringing density parameter closer to unity) but it can make
it ﬂat (by making the density parameter exactly equal to unity). What we mean is that if we think that inﬂation
has brought about only a near-ﬂatness then we are essentially assuming that k 6= 0, because otherwise if k = 0,
then inﬂation does not have a role to play here as it cannot ﬂatten it further. And if k 6= 0 then inﬂation cannot
make it k = 0, even though it might bring the density parameter closer to unity. In fact by assuming a ﬂat
model we are assuming the ultimate ﬁnest-ever tuning imaginable where even the least amount of perturbation
on this unstable equilibrium model (in the form of an excess or deﬁciency of the smallest amount of matter
from the critical density - a single particle or atom extra or missing!) can ultimately take the universe away
from the ﬂat-space model to a curved one.

References

[1] J. V. Narlikar, Introduction to Cosmology, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge (1993)
[2] J. A. Peacock, Cosmological Physics, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge (1999)
[3] W. Rindler, Relativity - Special, General and Cosmological, 2nd ed., Oxford Univ. Press, New York

(2006)

[4] S. Weinberg, Cosmology, Oxford Univ. Press, New York (2008)
[5] T., Padmanabhan, & T. R. Seshadri, J. Astrophys. Astr., 8, 275 (1987)
[6] M. J. Rees, J. Astrophys. Astr., 5, 331 (1984)
[7] A. Guth, Phy. Review D, 23, 347 (1981).
[8] C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne, J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation, Freeman, San Fransisco (1973)
[9] A. K. Singal, Astrphys. Sp. Sc., 357, 152 (2015) DOI: 10.1007/s10509-015-2388-2
[10] A. K. Singal, Astrophys. J. 742, L23, (2011)
[11] M. Rubart, D. J. Schwarz, Astrophys. Astr., 555, A117 (2013)
[12] P. Tiwari et al., Astropart. Phys., 61, 1 (2015)
[13] J. Terrell, Am. J. Phys., 45, 869 (1977)

