A stochastic model of solid state thin ﬁlm deposition: application to chalcopyrite

growth

Robert J. Lovelett,1, 2 Xueqi Pang,1, 2 Tyler M. Roberts,1, 2 William N. Shafarman,3, 2

Robert W. Birkmire,3, 2 and Babatunde A. Ogunnaike1, a)

1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Delaware,

Newark, DE 19716

2)Institute of Energy Conversion, University of Delaware, Newark,

DE 19716

3)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Delaware,

Newark, DE 19716

(Dated: 7 March 2016)

Developing high ﬁdelity quantitative models of solid state reaction systems can be

challenging, especially in deposition systems where, in addition to the multiple com-

peting processes occurring simultaneously, the solid interacts with its atmosphere.

In this work, we develop a model for the growth of a thin solid ﬁlm where species

from the atmosphere adsorb, diﬀuse, and react with the ﬁlm. The model is mesoscale

and describes an entire ﬁlm with thickness on the order of microns. Because it is

stochastic, the model allows us to examine inhomogeneities and agglomerations that

would be impossible to characterize with deterministic methods. We demonstrate

the modeling approach with the example of chalcopyrite Cu(InGa)(SeS)2 thin ﬁlm

growth via precursor reaction, which is a common industrial method for fabricat-

ing thin ﬁlm photovoltaic modules. The model is used to understand how and why

through-ﬁlm variation in the composition of Cu(InGa)(SeS)2 thin ﬁlms arises and

persists. We believe that the model will be valuable as an eﬀective quantitative de-

scription of many other materials systems used in semiconductors, energy storage,

and other fast-growing industries.

Keywords: stochastic simulation; thin ﬁlm deposition; CuInGaSe2

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
5
5
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

a)E-mail: ogunnaike@udel.edu

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Quantitative understanding of solid state reactions involved in ﬁlm deposition and growth

is important for improved processing in a number of industries including microelectronics,

photovoltaics, energy storage, and pharmaceuticals. While there are many useful clas-

sical modeling approaches (from simple mass action kinetics1,2 to detailed Avrami-type

modeling3–6) the increasingly complex material systems used in modern manufacturing re-

quire more sophisticated methods. Most modern techniques, however, employ microscopic

level or ab initio approaches (e.g., Refs. 7 and 8), which promote fundamental knowledge but,

because of current computational hardware limitations, are incapable of providing larger-

scale property or composition predictions. In this paper, we present a mesoscopic thin ﬁlm

growth model capable of predicting ﬁlm-scale composition.

In order to examine and characterize the lateral heterogeneity that can arise during ﬁlm

growth, the model we present is stochastic, rather than deterministic. Our approach is

related to the stochastic simulation algorithm ﬁrst developed by Gillespie9, which assumes

a uniformly mixed system with no mass transfer limitations. In solid state systems, how-

ever, mass transfer eﬀects are always important and often rate-limiting. Gillespie’s method

has recently been extended to include diﬀusion, mostly used for micro-scale modeling of

biomolecular systems. Erban and Chapman10 discuss two general approaches: on-lattice

methods and oﬀ-lattice methods. On-lattice approaches restrict the position of molecules

to discrete locations or compartments where each compartment contains multiple occupant

species, while oﬀ-lattice methods allow movement on a continuous domain, usually through

Brownian motion. However, these approaches are designed for ﬂuid systems where species

density may vary.

In this work, we apply similar concepts and expand the capability of

stochastic models for reactions in the solid state. Our approach, discussed in Section II, is

similar to on-lattice methods, but with the additional restriction that lattice occupancy is

always exactly one. Instead of interacting with co-occupants, species interact with adjacent

lattice points. We show how this approach allows stochastic simulation of mesoscale systems
of solid, crystalline species, where unit-cell level (1 ˚A) simulation would be impractical for

complete thin ﬁlm (1–10 µm) systems. Although we assume the lattice is square, with a

coordination number of four, our approach is easily generalized to allow for simulation of

advanced, non-isotropic materials such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, and other materi-

2

als with complex microstructure. We use the chalcopyrite Cu(InGa)(SeS)2 system as an

example to demonstrate how one can simulate ﬁlm growth rate, composition proﬁle, and

agglomeration using the proposed stochastic approach.

Polycrystalline chalcopyrite CuInSe2-based materials are commonly used as the absorber

layer in thin ﬁlm solar cells. Devices using these materials have demonstrated eﬃciencies

exceeding 20%11–13.In order to increase voltage and improve eﬃciency, gallium and sulfur

are alloyed with CuInSe2 to form a continuous solid solution: Cu(InGa)(SeS)2. The most

common industrial process for producing these absorbers involves two steps in which a metal

precursor (Cu-In-Ga) is deposited ﬁrst and then reacted with gas-phase H2Se and/or H2S14.

The reaction step can result in heterogeneous ﬁlms with steep through-ﬁlm composition

gradients15 and spatially-conﬁned agglomerations16,17. The spatial heterogeneity resulting

from the selenium and sulfur reactions makes this process an ideal system to demonstrate

our solid state reaction model.

In the remaining sections, we present a novel stochastic model for solid state reaction

kinetics, with emphasis on the ability to predict the composition proﬁle and other spatial

heterogeneities. In Section II we develop the model, describe an eﬃcient solution algorithm,

and explain the relationship between the model parameters and physical properties. Then,

in Section III we describe a reaction mechanism for Cu(InGa)(SeS)2 production, show how

to apply the model using this mechanism, use the model to predict composition proﬁles and

agglomeration statistics, and compare model predictions and experimental results. Finally,

we oﬀer conclusions and suggestions for future applications.

II. MODEL DEVELOPMENT AND THEORY

The system in question is a thin ﬁlm in which solid state reactions occur, species inter-

diﬀuse, and the ﬁlm interacts with its environment by adsorption and desorption of volatile

species. We represent the ﬁlm with a two-dimensional square lattice, where each point con-

tains a species or a vacancy. The model is mesoscopic; so that each lattice point does not

represent an individual atom, molecule, or unit cell, otherwise the lattice would be too large

to be computationally tractable. The lattice is therefore a coarse-grained approximation of

the actual ﬁlm; each lattice point is a ﬁnite volume element small enough such that it is

accurately approximated as phase-pure.

3

Our approach is to recast Gillespie’s stochastic simulation algorithm9 for spatially hetero-

geneous solid state systems with approximately constant mass density and number density.

In Gillespie’s method, a random number is selected at each time step to determine which

reaction occurs. Here, we generalize reaction events to “lattice” events, which take place at

interfaces between lattice points and are classiﬁed as reaction, diﬀusion, adsorption, or des-

orption events. The probability and the rate of occurrence of each lattice event are governed

by an intrinsic parameter called the propensity constant. The propensity of a given event is

the product of its propensity constant and the number of interfaces at which the event can

occur.

The modeling approach is as follows:

1. A square lattice is initialized with the starting species. If adsorption/desorption events

are included, the lattice should contain vacancy points above the species. If the lattice
is represented as an N × M array, row 0 and row N are considered boundaries with no
interactions above row 0 points or below row N points. Column 0 is considered adja-

cent with column M (cf., periodic boundary conditions in a boundary value problem

involving a partial diﬀerential equation).

2. Propensity of each lattice event is calculated as: ai = piNi, where pi is the propensity

constant and Ni the number of interfaces associated with lattice event i.

3. Probability of each lattice event is proportional to the propensity of an event; a random

number is generated to determine which lattice event occurs.

4. The time, τ , until the next time step is selected from an exponentially distributed

random variable.

5. The reaction chosen in Step 3 occurs at one possible interface. For example, if a reac-

tion takes place between species A and B, then one of the A—B interfaces is selected

at random and updated accordingly. For reaction events, the ﬁnal orientation (that

is, the relative position of the product species) is random; it is ﬁxed for adsorption,

and diﬀusion events.

6. The lattice is updated and steps 2–5 are repeated until an exit condition is met.

4

A. Solution Algorithm

The conceptually simplest algorithm for implementing this modeling approach is to store

the lattice in a 2D array that is updated at each time step. Although straightforward, this

method is ineﬃcient and will be computationally tractable only for relatively small lattice

sizes. There are two possible bottlenecks that can lead to very slow solutions: (1) counting

the number of interfaces of each kind, and (2) choosing one of these interfaces at random

for a reaction event. To address these issues, we do not store and update the lattice itself at

each time step; instead we track each interface and its position in an array. First, we deﬁne

the simple 2D representation of the lattice; then we demonstrate how to convert this to the

1D representation that is used in the algorithm.

Consider a ﬁlm discretized to a lattice and represented by the 2D array: L ∈ N(N ×M )
with elements l(i,j). The indices of each element in L represent the position of each lattice

0

point (i.e., volume element) in physical space, and the value of that element represents its

occupant species. If there are S unique species, including vacant elements, and the value of

each array element corresponds to its occupant species, then the domain of l(i,j) is given as:
{l(i,j)|l(i,j) ∈ N0, l(i,j) < S}. Now, consider the set of adjacent points in L. For this model,
we deﬁne the set of adjacent elements to be:

(l1

adj, l2

adj) ∈

adj)|(l1

adj, l2

(l(i,j), l(i,j−1))∀j > 0,
(l(i,j), l(i−1,j))∀i > 0,
(l(i,0), l(i,M −1))

(1)




where the ﬁrst two cases are trivially adjacent points and the third is analogous to applying

periodic boundary conditions to a PDE to reduce edge eﬀects. The periodic boundary con-

dition is applied only to the columns of L, as the rows represent the full thickness of the thin

ﬁlm. Next, we convert the 2D representation, L, to a 1D representation X, with elements

xk by: (1) deﬁning a mapping from species pairs to interface kinds, or, x = f (l1

adj),
and (2) deﬁne a mapping from indices in L to index in X, or k = g((i1, j1), (i2, j2)), where
((i1, j1), (i2, j2)) are the indices of (l1

adj, l2

adj, l2

adj).

Each adjacent pair of lattice elements constitutes an interface, which can be represented
by a single value {x|x ∈ N0, x < S2}, where there are S2 “kinds” of interfaces (observe that
interfaces of diﬀerent orientation are considered distinct). We can then map pairs of species

5

to interface kinds:

where x is the interface kind.

x = l1

adjS + l2
adj

(2)

Next, we deﬁne a mapping for the indices for interface location in L to the index for

interface location in X. Here, we assume that the number of columns, M, is an even

number (a similar procedure applies if M were odd-valued). With ((i1, j1), (i2, j2)) as indices

of adjacent elements in L and k as the index of X:

j1




k =

M + 2M(i1 − 1) + 2j1
M + 2M(i1 − 1) + 2j1 + 1 if j1 = j2

if i1 = i2 6= 0

if i1 = i2 = 0

(3)

Using the mappings deﬁned in Equations 2 and 3 to translate L → X, the simulation

algorithm may now be written as follows:

1. Deﬁne a set of allowable species, {0, 1, 2, . . . (S − 1)}.

2. Deﬁne a set of directional lattice events, D. Directional events will preserve the orien-

tation of the interface and are used to represent diﬀusion, adsorption, and desorption
events. D is a (ND × 3) matrix, where ND is the number of directional lattice events.
The columns of D correspond to {p, x0, xf} for the propensity constant, initial interface
kind, and ﬁnal interface kind, respectively.

3. Deﬁne a set of non-directional lattice events, N. Non-directional events will not pre-

serve the orientation of the interface and are used to represent reaction events. N is
a (3 × NN ) matrix, where NN is the number of non-directional lattice events. The
columns of N correspond to {p, x0, xf} for the propensity constant, initial interface
kind, and ﬁnal interface kind, respectively. Directionality refers to the orientation of

the products, not the reactants. For example, if there are species A, B, C, and D, then
the reaction A + B −→ C + D is distinct from B + A −→ C + D.

4. Deﬁne an initial condition L0.

5. Use Equations 2 and 3 to map L0 → X
6

6. Count the number of interfaces of each kind in array X, saving the results in array Y,

referred to as the “interface count array”:

ym = Xm∈X

1, for m ∈ N0, m < S2

(4)

7. Calculate the total propensity array, A ∈ R((rows(D)+rows(N))×1) from each event in D

and N, which has the elements:

ai = {p ∈ Di}yx0∈Di and

ai+rows(D) = {p ∈ Ni}yx0∈Ni

8. Determine the time step, τ , drawn from the probability mass function:

P r(τ|A) = X ai exp (τ X ai)

9. Determine which lattice event occurs using probabilities:

Pi =

ai

P aj

(5)

(6)

(7)

10. From a uniformly random distribution, choose the reactive interface, i.e., the allowable

interface at which the reaction takes place.

11. Update X and Y. The reactive interface (an element in X) and the interfaces adjacent

to the reactive interface will be updated. The interface count array Y is updated by

subtracting the previous the values of X and adding the new values of X to their

corresponding elements in Y. (Refer to the code at the URL below for a complete

deﬁnition of adjacent elements in X).

12. Check if exit condition is reached.

If yes: continue; else: return to Step 7. The

exit condition should be determined on a case-by-case basis. In this work, a speciﬁed

simulation time is used and alternatives include a speciﬁed number of time steps or

composition (though specifying a composition as an exit condition will not ensure that

the composition will ever be reached).

13. Using the inverses of Equations 2 and 3, calculate L. End.

7

It should now be clear that the solution of the model is equivalent to sampling from

a Markov chain where the elements of X deﬁne the system state;

further, each step

of the Markov chain will be assigned a step time in continuous time by assuming that

each step is a Poisson process with intensity equal to the sum of all event propensities.

The algorithm has been written in Python using Numpy18 and the code is available at

www.bitbucket.org/rlovelett/stochastic_solid_state. Moderately sized simulations

(about 1000 elements in L, 100 elements in D and N, and 107 time steps) run in several

minutes on a typical personal computer.

B. Relation to Physical Properties

One of the advantages of a spatially distributed model is its ability to decouple the

rates of diﬀerent processes—reactions, adsorption, desorption, and diﬀusion. The physical

properties that govern these rates can be related to the propensity constants used to advance

the model. We now show how to derive physical property values from the value of the

propensity constants.

1. Reaction Propensity

In its original implementation, the Gillespie algorithm’s propensity constant, ci, is related

to the macroscopic reaction rate constant, ki according to ki = V b−1ci, where V is the reactor

volume and b is the reaction order. Our system is analogous, except that our reactions occur

at surfaces. We assume that every formula unit on a lattice site is available for reaction at

the surface, i.e., that diﬀusion within a lattice site is rapid. The characteristic surface area

for reaction is ℓ2, where ℓ is the length of a lattice site. Therefore, we can write the rate

constant as:

ki = ℓ2ρn,spi

(8)

where ρn,s is the area speciﬁc number density (units of inverse area) of formula units. With

enough data at varying temperature, activation energies of the reactions can be estimated

using the Arrhenius equation.

8

2. Adsorption Propensity

The rate of adsorption can be described by the product of the rate of collisions between a

surface and a gas, and a sticking coeﬃcient, Si, or the probability that the species will stay

on the surface. In some cases, like the chalcopyrite growth system we examine in Section III,

the probability of dissociation of a gas phase species should also be included. For simplicity,

however, probability of hydride gas dissociation will be lumped with the sticking coeﬃcient.

First, from kinetic theory, we can determine the rate of collisions with the surface per
area, Fi,a = Pi/√2πMikbT , where Fi,a is the adsorptive ﬂux of species i (m−2s−1); Pi, the
partial pressure; Mi, the molecular weight; kb, Boltzmann’s constant; and T , the absolute

temperature. Therefore, we can determine the rate of adsorption on a single lattice site

using the area of that lattice site: rads = Fi,aSℓ2. However, this rate is in molecules per

time, not lattice sites per time; thus, it should be scaled by the number of molecules in a

lattice site, or ρnℓ3, where ρn is the number density of the species. Since 1/pi is the average

time until an adsorption event occurs on a single site, pi is the stochastic equivalent of the

rate of adsorption on a single lattice site. If the propensity constant is known, then we can

derive an expression for Si as:

pi√2πMikbT

ρnℓ5Pi

Si =

(9)

3. Desorption Propensity

Desorption is physically equivalent to evaporation. Unlike other lattice events, however,

the rate of evaporation is not a function of thermodynamic properties only; it depends also

on system-speciﬁc parameters such as gas ﬂow rate and reactor geometry. Therefore, the rate

of evaporation is best captured by a mass transfer coeﬃcient, km,i = Fi,e/∆fi, where Fi,e is

the evaporative ﬂux, and ∆fi is the diﬀerence in the species i fugacity between the adsorbed

phase and gas phase. Assuming that the gas phase is ideal, the fugacity diﬀerence reduces
to (Pvap,i − Pi). Similar to the adsorption case, we can determine the rate of evaporation
from a single lattice site, revap = Fi,eℓ2, scale it by the number of molecules in a lattice site,

and set the scaled evaporation rate equal to the propensity constant. Solving for km,i yields:

km,i =

pi

ρnℓ5(Pvap,i − Pi)

9

(10)

4. Diﬀusion Propensity

Multicomponent systems with signiﬁcant diﬀusion limitations can be challenging to model

appropriately. However, because our modeling approach involves binary interactions be-

tween species, we can relate the propensity constants for diﬀusion events to binary diﬀu-

sivities. We will use a well-known result from statistical physics to obtain the diﬀusivities,

where diﬀusivity can be written as:

Ds1,s2 = Z ∞

t

R(t′)dt′

(11)

Here Ds1,s2 is the diﬀusivity and R(t′) is the velocity autocorrelation function of species s1
surrounded by species s2, deﬁned as R(t′) = hv(t) · v(t + t′)i, denoting the inner product of
v(t) and v(t + t′). In our system, consider a single lattice point with value s1 surrounded

by an inﬁnite lattice species s2. In this case, because there are four s1, s2 interfaces, the

propensity for diﬀusion is as1,s2 = 4ps1,s2, which means that the average time until the

occurrence of a diﬀusion event is:

∆tk =

1

4ps1,s2

(12)

Therefore, the velocity magnitude of species i is 4ps1,s2ℓ. Choosing the current time to be

immediately before a diﬀusion event, and recognizing that our model consists of discrete

time steps, we can rewrite Equation 11 as:

Ds1,s2 = hv0 · v0i∆t0 +

∞

Xk=1

hv0 · vki∆tk

(13)

where vk is the velocity of species s1 during time step k, ∆tk is the duration of time step k,

and initial element of the series (k = 0) is moved outside the summation. Considering that

the direction of the velocity vector vk will be chosen randomly from two orthogonal unit

vectors and their inverses at each time step, we conclude that the sum will converge to zero,

and that only the average value of the ﬁrst term should be retained. Therefore, by using

the average velocity magnitude and average time until the occurrence of an event given in

Equation 12, the binary diﬀusivity is obtained as:

Ds1,s2 = 4ps1,s2ℓ2

(14)

Finally, we should note that our approach is unconventional for describing diﬀusion in

solids. Typically, the crystallinity of the material should be taken into account explicitly

10

and non-isotropic eﬀects should be considered. Our analysis, however, does not include non-

isotropic eﬀects or explicitly consider the presence of discrete crystalline grains. Therefore,

our approach will strictly only be valid if (1) the crystal does not show preferential orientation

and (2) grain interior diﬀusion (such as interstitial or vacancy-mediated diﬀusion) occurs at a

rate similar to or greater than grain boundary diﬀusion. The second condition could be very

restrictive, as grain boundary diﬀusion usually dominates in polycrystalline ﬁlms. However,

if this assumption were to be violated, the result would be that the diﬀusion propensities

in the model would correspond to eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcients (via Equation 14). In this

case, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient would not correspond to the energy of a fundamental reaction

step or obey the Arrhenius relation that is typical of solid state diﬀusivities.

III. APPLICATION TO Cu(InGa)(SeS)2 FILM GROWTH

A. Reaction Mechanism

To apply the model to the reaction of Cu-In-Ga precursors with H2Se and H2S, we require

a reaction mechanism. Several groups6,15,19,20 have suggested plausible reaction pathways.

The speciﬁc phases or species involved vary somewhat among groups, suggesting that the

reaction pathway may be process dependent. However, some elements are common to each

mechanism. First, there are at least two stages to the reaction: (1) metal chalcogenide

formation (e.g., InSe, InS, Ga2Se3), and (2) chalcopyrite formation (CuInSe2, CuInS2, etc.).

Second, although reaction rates are often not determined quantitatively, it is suggested that

the reaction of Se and In is faster than the reaction of Se and Ga16. This asymmetry

in reaction rates leads to mostly CuInSe2 near the front of the ﬁlm and Ga-containing

species accumulated at the back. Next, we note that the reaction mechanism we propose

implies that the Cu(InGa)(SeS)2 ﬁlms are stoichiometric and that the discrete nature of the

model enforces the stoichiometry. In practice, however, the precursors (and consequently the
ﬁnal ﬁlms) are deposited as copper-deﬁcient with the ratio Cu/(In+Ga) ≈ 0.914,21. We do
not treat copper deﬁciency explicitly, though the diﬀusion coeﬃcients (and, in this model,

diﬀusion propensities) would change if stoichiometric or copper rich-ﬁlm ﬁlms were modeled

because indium and gallium may diﬀuse through copper vacancies22,23. Finally, for the

initial condition, we assume that a mixture of CuIn and CuGa binary species is an adequate

11

simpliﬁed representation of an actual metal precursor, which typically contains more complex

Cu-Ga-In alloys and elemental In21. Consequently, we propose that the system can modeled

using the mechanism in Table I and the values given for propensity constants are discussed

in the following section.

B. Parameter Reduction

The reaction mechanism presented in Table I involves 12 reaction propensities, 4 ad-

sorption/desorption propensities, and, in principle, (cid:0)14

2(cid:1) = 91 unique diﬀusion propensities

(though many are neglected). Furthermore, the lattice size may aﬀect the model results (see

Section II B) and will greatly aﬀect the computation time. With such a large parameter

set and a computationally intensive model, conventional parameter ﬁtting is impractical.

We present three simplifying assumptions and heuristics and show how we can use them to

guide us in determining physically meaningful estimates for the model parameters.

1. Parabolic Film Growth: Results from the literature5,6 suggest that Cu(InGa)(SeS)2

ﬁlms produced via reaction of metal precursors follow a parabolic growth mechanism,

referring to a solid state reaction process where there is a planar, advancing reaction

front, rather than a nucleation and growth mechanism.

Invoking this mechanism

suggests that the gas phase reactants, Se and S, can diﬀuse through reacted species, but

not through the original CuIn and CuGa species. Therefore, diﬀusion propensities are

set such that no species can diﬀuse with precursors—except for precursors themselves

(CuIn and CuGa), which may diﬀuse with each other.

Recognizing that the diﬀusion of Se and S are rate limiting in the parabolic mechanism,

we can estimate the magnitude of the diﬀusion coeﬃcients using the characteristic

diﬀusion time:

τD =

L2

Ds1,s2

(15)

Since the reaction takes place on the order of minutes and the ﬁlm thickness is approx-
imately 2 µm, a reasonable estimate for the diﬀusivity of Se is 6.7× 10−14m2s−1. After
selecting a lattice size, the diﬀusion coeﬃcients can be used to estimate the propensity

constant for diﬀusion from Equation 14. In the simulations presented below, the lat-

tice size is 100 nm, suggesting 1.7 (which we truncate to 1.0) is a reasonable estimate

12

TABLE I. Reaction mechanism/lattice events for chalcopyrite production with values of baseline

propensity constants (p). Propensity constants, as shown in Section II B, depend on the size of the

lattice element, ℓ. In this example, ℓ = 100 nm. Each reaction takes place between exactly two

lattice sites; for accurate stoichiometry, Se and S sites are twice as number-dense, and chalcopyrite

sites are half as number-dense as other species; atomic number density is therefore constant across

lattice sites.

Event Class

Adsorption/

Desorption

Binary

Selenide/

Sulﬁde

Formation

Chalcopyrite

Formation

Diﬀusionb

Event

Selenium Adsorption

Sulfur Adsorption

Selenium Desorption

Sulfur Desorption

CuIn + 2 Se −→ CuSe + InSe

CuGa + 2 Se −→ CuSe + GaSe

CuIn + 2 S −→ CuS + InS

CuGa + 2 S −→ CuS + GaS

CuSe + InSe −→ CuInSe2

CuSe + GaSe −→ CuGaSe2

CuS + InS −→ CuInS2

CuS + GaS −→ CuGaS2

CuS + InSe −→ 0 · 5 CuInSe2 + 0 · 5 CuInS2

CuS + GaSe −→ 0 · 5 CuGaSe2 + 0 · 5 CuGaS2

CuSe + InS −→ 0 · 5 CuInSe2 + 0 · 5 CuInS2

CuSe + GaS −→ 0 · 5 CuGaSe2 + 0 · 5 CuGaS2

CuIn ←→ CuGa

2 Se ←→ CuInSe2

2 Se ←→ CuGaSe2

2 Se ←→ CuInS2

2 Se ←→ CuGaS2

2 S ←→ CuInSe2

2 S ←→ CuGaSe2

2 S ←→ CuInS2

2 S ←→ CuGaS2

p

0.20

0.01a

5.00

5.00

50.00

1.00

1.00

25.00

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.10

20.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

10.00

10.00

10.00

10.00

a H2Se-only simulations are also presented, in which case sulfur adsorption propensity is zero.
b All pairs of species not shown here have baseline diﬀusion propensities of zero. Refer to Section III B for

justiﬁcation of zero-valued diﬀusion propensities.

13

of selenium diﬀusion propensity.

2. Slow Chalcopyrite Interdiﬀusion: One feature commonly observed in Cu(InGa)(SeS)2

ﬁlms produced by reaction of metal precursors is a persistent gradient in gallium.

That is, a gallium gradient forms and does not quickly anneal out to yield a uniform

ﬁlm15,17,19,23,24. However, because Cu(InGa)(SeS)2 is a continuous solid solution, the

gradient is not a thermodynamic limitation, but must be limited by mass transfer.

Therefore, we set the diﬀusion propensities of fully reacted species with each other to

be zero, as their diﬀusion time is longer than the time scale of a typical reaction.

3. Fast Precursor Interdiﬀusion: In contrast to fully reacted chalcopyrite species, the

unreacted species must interdiﬀuse relatively quickly. The fast interdiﬀusion of CuIn

and CuGa (at least faster than the time scale of the diﬀusion and reaction of Se) is

required for the reaction asymmetry to cause composition gradients.

The three heuristics presented above were used to guide parameter selection, especially

the diﬀusion propensities for all sulfur-free lattice events (sulfur-containing lattice events

are discussed in the next section when sulfur-containing models are presented). From the

ﬁrst heuristic, to ensure a reasonable time scale, the diﬀusion propensities of selenium with

chalcogenides and chalcopyrites were set to 1.0. Based on the second heuristic, most of the

remaining diﬀusion propensities were set to zero, except for interdiﬀusion of precursor species

(CuIn and CuGa). The third heuristic compels us to select a diﬀusion propensity for CuIn

and CuGa that is larger than that of selenium and reacted phases; therefore we selected 20.0

for the baseline. As discussed earlier, the rate of reaction of Se and In species is much faster

than Se and Ga, therefore a baseline estimate for the propensity constant is 50.0 for InSe

formation and 1.0 for GaSe formation. The remaining reaction propensities (chalcopyrite

formation reactions) did not have a substantial eﬀect on the composition proﬁle and were set

to 0.1. One possible approach for estimating adsorption and desorption propensities would

be to use ﬁrst principles and the equations derived in Section II B. However, unless reasonable

estimates for sticking coeﬃcient are available (in many cases, its order of magnitude is much

less than 1), we recommend choosing a value of similar order to the propensity constants

of the other processes to reduce computational burden. For our case, because we do not

expect signiﬁcant accumulation of selenium in its elemental form (due to its high vapor

pressure and the stability of H2Se molecules), the propensity of adsorption should be less

14

Depth in Film (Relative Position)

FIG. 1. Ga proﬁle produced from simulation of an H2Se-only process. Note that “relative position”

is a scaled variable. The full thickness is approximately 2 µm.

than propensity for desorption. Therefore, for selenium, we set adsorption propensity to 0.1

and desorption propensity to 5.0. These propensities were used for the baseline simulations

presented in the next section and are shown in Table I.

C. Composition Proﬁle Prediction

The simulation algorithm from Section II was applied to the chalcopyrite growth model
in Table I. The initial lattice, L0, is 23 rows × 100 columns, with rows 0 to 11 speciﬁed
as vacancy elements, and rows 12 to 22 speciﬁed as a 0.25:0.75 mixture of CuGa and CuIn

elements (this ratio was chosen for industrial relevance). Because Cu(InGa)(SeS)2 ﬁlms

for photovoltaic cells are typically about 2 µm thick, the 23 rows result in lattice length
ℓ ≈ 100 nm. The algorithm was applied to advance the lattice until 40 minutes simulation
time elapsed. A useful way to visualize the results from the simulations is to plot the

Ga/(In+Ga) and S/(S+Se) ratios as functions of depth.

For a ﬁrst case, we considered a process with only H2Se, for which the propensity for

adsorption of H2S was therefore set to zero. The results are shown in Fig. 1, where a large

amount of gallium accumulates near the back of the ﬁlm, which is a feature that has been

well-documented experimentally15–17.

For a second case, the precursors are reacted simultaneously in equal concentrations of

15

(a)

(b)

Depth in Film (Relative Position)

Depth in Film (Relative Position)

FIG. 2. Proﬁles of Ga (a) and S (b) produced from simulation of an H2Se+H2S process.

H2Se and H2S. The simultaneous reaction process is modeled by setting adsorption of sulfur

lower than adsorption of selenium, but diﬀusion of sulfur faster than diﬀusion of selenium

(the eﬀect of sulfur adsorption is discussed in more detail in Section III E). Through-ﬁlm

proﬁles of gallium and sulfur are shown in Fig. 2. Consistent with experimental results

from25, gallium is distributed more homogeneously than in a process with H2Se only.

The gallium and sulfur proﬁles in Figs. 1 and 2 result from complex interactions of the

diﬀerent propensity constants. One way to understand how these proﬁles arise is to examine

the dynamics of the process. A simpliﬁed representation of the dynamics is shown in Fig.

3, where composition is spatially averaged through the entire ﬁlm and shown as a function

of time.

In the ﬁrst case, because the propensity for reaction with CuIn is much faster

than with CuGa, most CuGa remains in its precursor form until nearly all of the CuIn is

16

(a)

(b)

FIG. 3. Time evolution of composition of the reacting ﬁlm for the reaction in (a) H2Se only and (b)

H2Se and H2S. Fractional composition is the fraction of occupied lattice sites, or volume fraction

of the ﬁlm. The intermediate phases, binary selenides and sulﬁdes, are not shown but exist as a

small volume fraction throughout the simulation.

converted to chalcopyrite. During this time, CuGa diﬀuses toward the back contact leading

to the proﬁle in Fig. 1. The observation that Ga-containing species diﬀuse toward the back

contact, while In-containing species are incorporated in the chalcopyrite phase (CuInSe2), is

supported by experiments from the literature. For example, in16, x-ray diﬀraction patterns

indicate that Cu9(In.2Ga.8)4 is present on the back contact after a 10 minute reaction in

H2Se, but only Cu9Ga4 is present after 30 and 90 minute reactions. For the second case,

with H2Se and H2S, there is ﬁrst a rapid increase in CuInSe2 because of the relatively faster

adsorption of Se compared to S; however, the faster diﬀusion of sulfur, combined with its

17

preference to react with CuGa, leads to more incorporation of CuGa earlier in the process

than if there were H2Se alone.

D. Agglomeration Size Distribution

One of the advantages of applying stochastic simulation at the mesoscopic scale is that

it allows one to study ﬂuctuations in local composition explicitly. The ﬂuctuations result in

some spatially conﬁned features that can be described statistically in the example system,

Cu(InGa)(SeS)2. One of the important features observed experimentally is agglomerations

of Ga-rich species at the back contact16. In principle, there are two causes of these agglom-

erations: thermodynamic phase separation, and random ﬂuctuations in species positions.

The modeling approach cannot account for thermodynamic phase separations, but we can

use it to examine the eﬀect of random ﬂuctuations. Although thermodynamic driving forces

are likely important in Cu(InGa)(SeS)2 ﬁlms (evidenced by formation of Cu9Ga4 phase near

the back contact16,17), we still present the model results to demonstrate our approach for

characterizing agglomeration size distribution.

For this purpose, simulations with large lattice sizes (2500 columns) were run with no

adsorption or reaction events allowed and with precursors (i.e., L0 matrices) of varying

composition and thickness. We deﬁne any isolated collection of CuGa elements to be an

agglomeration, regardless of size. Thus, a single, isolated CuGa element is considered a

size-1 agglomeration. Figs. 4a–d show histograms of the size distribution of agglomerations

for diﬀerent ﬁlm thicknesses and compositions (which models later stages of the reaction,

where the precursor ﬁlm gets thinner as the front of the ﬁlm is converted to chalcopyrite).

We consider the negative binomial probability distribution function as an appropriate

model for quantifying the eﬀects of composition ﬂuctuations on agglomeration formation for

the following reasons: The negative binomial random variable is, by deﬁnition, the number

of Bernoulli trials with probability p until r “successes” are reached. Further, r can be

thought of as a “waiting time” parameter and need not be integer-valued. More generally,

the negative binomial random variable is an overdispersed form of a Poisson random variable

with mean µ = pr
1−p + 1, but with gamma-distributed intensity. In this form, the r parameter
is often referred to as an “aggregation” or inverse dispersion parameter, where as r → 0,
σ2 → ∞, where σ2 is variance26–28. Now, if the formation of an agglomeration can be

18

(a)

(b)

FIG. 4.

(a)–(d) Agglomeration size distribution for CuGa after 10 s simulation time with no

reactions/adsorption allowed, for the following compositions (Ga/(In+Ga)) and lattice thicknesses

(in units of lattice sites), respectively: (a) 0.05, 4; (b) 0.05, 10; (c) 0.45, 4; (d) 0.45, 10. (e) MLE

estimates (points) and ﬁtted response surface for negative binomial random variable parameter p.

(f) MLE estimates (points) and ﬁtted response surface for negative binomial random variable r.

considered as a series of trials, where p is the probability of adding another species to the

agglomeration, then the agglomeration size should follow a negative binomial distribution

with r = 1 (i.e., a geometric distribution). However, because of its improved handling of

highly dispersed data, we use the more general negative binomial form allowing both p and

r to be estimated. Intuitively, an increasing p or increasing r, will move the distribution

rightward, toward a tendency for larger agglomerations.

19

The expression for the negative binomial probability distribution,

f (x|r, p) =

Γ(x − 1 + r)
(x − 1)!Γ(r)

px(1 − p)r, for x = 1, 2, 3...

(16)

is used to characterize agglomeration size distribution by estimating the two parameters, p

and r, using Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) (see Appendix A) from the simulation

data.

In order to uncover the eﬀects of geometry (i.e., ﬁlm thickness) and composition

(Ga/(In+Ga)) on the parameters, (p, r), we constructed a face-centered cubic response

surface design, and used it to develop an empirical model. In the response surface model,

geometry and composition are considered factors that aﬀect the response variables, p and

r. Nine simulations were run with varying lattice thickness and Ga/(In+Ga) ratios; p and r

were estimated with MLE; and the estimates were used to ﬁt 2nd order polynomial models

of p and r as a function of lattice thickness and composition (see Appendix B). The ﬁtted

response surfaces, i.e., the polynomial models, are shown in Figs. 4e–f, from which we con-

clude that the probability of success parameter, p, is a function of only composition. Thus,

all else being equal, when the fraction of CuGa sites increases, the agglomerations of CuGa

tend to grow larger. The waiting time/aggregation parameter, r, has a more complicated

response surface that is strongly aﬀected by the interaction of geometry and composition.

Speciﬁcally, from the partial derivative of the response surface ( ∂r
∂x1

of Equation B2), ﬁlms

with a gallium fraction less than 0.33 form larger agglomerations (due to larger r) when

thickness is greater; the inverse is true for ﬁlms with a gallium fraction greater than 0.33.

E. Model Predictions vs. Experimental Results

In order to compare our model predictions to experimental data, we produced a series

of samples in the laboratory with the following process conditions: reaction temperature of

550 °C, H2Se concentration of 1%, and varying H2S concentration in Ar gas. (See Appendix

C for a summary of experimental methods). Sample compositions were measured using

Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy with results for Ga/(In+Ga) shown in Fig. 5.

While sulfur was detected in each sample, the composition was too low (less than 1 atom

percent) for accurate quantitative measurement. The EDX spectroscopy measurements have

a depth sensitivity of approximately 0.7 to 0.9 µm (or about one half of total ﬁlm thickness).

20

Therefore, EDX measurements can be treated as spatial averages of composition in the front

half of the ﬁlm. Each precursor sample has an average Ga ratio of 0.25; therefore, if the

measured Ga ratio is less than 0.25, then the Ga is segregated toward the back of the ﬁlm.

Without time- and depth-resolved data, conventional parameter ﬁtting is impossible.

Further, even if the data were available, parameter ﬁtting would be very computationally

intensive because it requires numerous simulation runs. Instead, we compare the eﬀect of

varying H2S concentration in the gas phase to the equivalent change in our model, that is,

changing the propensity for adsorption of sulfur. We expect that varying H2S concentration

will aﬀect the through-ﬁlm gallium proﬁle, and that this eﬀect will be captured in experi-

mental results and by our model. However, rather than absolute convergence (which would

require more precise parameter estimates), similar trends should be observed in experiments

and simulations.

Fig. 5 shows the through-ﬁlm gallium proﬁles from the model using the baseline simu-

lation parameters, except for adsorption of sulfur, which varies between simulations. Also

displayed in the ﬁgure is the measured gallium ratio of the ﬁlms produced with varying

H2S concentration in the gas phase. In both simulation and experiment, when the sulfur

(propensity in simulations or concentration in experiments) is low, gallium fraction increases

near the front surface with increasing sulfur, but the eﬀect is diminished as sulfur increases

further. However, our simulation overestimates the eﬀect of sulfur on gallium fraction. Sev-

eral mechanisms may explain the discrepancy; for example, the reaction between selenium

and indium or the adsorption rate of selenium may be faster than our estimate, which limits

the tendency of sulfur to increase gallium homogenization. Other authors25 reported more

substantial gallium homogenization than we observed, which may be explained by the lower

H2Se concentration (0.35%) in their experiments. However, we cannot use such low con-

centrations in our reactor, which operates in batch mode, because the gas phase would be

depleted of H2Se before reaction is complete (the authors of25 use a ﬂow reactor, where H2Se

is continuously replenished).

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We have presented a novel method for modeling thin ﬁlm growth using a stochastic

simulation method. We demonstrated an algorithm that makes the model computationally

21

Depth in Film (Relative Position)

FIG. 5. Gallium proﬁles (points) resulting from simulation of an H2Se+H2S process using baseline

simulation parameters (from Table I) except for sulfur adsorption, which has a varying propensity

constant. EDX measurements (horizontal lines, with length corresponding roughly to sampling

depth) of Ga/(In+Ga) from samples produced with varying H2S concentration.

tractable for a typical desktop PC. In particular, we showed how the model applies to the

industrially relevant case of thin ﬁlm Cu(InGa)(SeS)2 growth using a precursor reaction

process. The model explains how the complicated, experimentally observed through-ﬁlm

proﬁles in Ga and S arise from complex interactions of reaction rates, adsorption rates,

and diﬀusion limitations. We show that the stochastic nature of the model allows it to be

used to understand lateral inhomogeneities, such as agglomerations, that would otherwise

be ignored or averaged out in continuum approaches.

We believe that this modeling approach can ﬁnd wide application in a number of thin

ﬁlm or other solid state material systems.

In particular, we suggest that this approach

will be especially useful for vacuum-deposited Cu(InGa)Se2, for Cu2ZnSnS4, and for silicon

systems with impurities because of similarities to our model system, including the potential

for composition proﬁles and lateral heterogeneity. Furthermore, because of our method’s

emphasis on material adjacency, it can be applied to systems with complex geometry, such

as graphene or carbon nanotubes. More fundamentally, however, the stochastic simulation

that we developed is a new approach that could be generalized for any system where system

evolution is governed by network connectivity (in our case, material adjacency) instead of

bulk composition, and may be applied in entirely unrelated ﬁelds.

22

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This material is based upon work primarily supported by the Quantum Energy and

Sustainable Solar Technology Engineering Research Center (QESST ERC), the National

Science Foundation (NSF) and the Department of Energy (DOE) under NSF CA No. EEC-

1041895. Any opinions, ﬁndings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this

material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect those of NSF or DOE.

Appendix A: Parameter Estimation and Validation for Agglomeration

Distribution

In this appendix, we use a slightly altered version of the negative binomial probability

model (ﬁrst shown in Equation 16), given by

f (x|r, p) =

Γ(x + r)
(x)!Γ(r)

px(1 − p)r, for x = 0, 1, 2...

(A1)

to characterize the agglomeration size distribution.

In this form, the domain of x has

been shifted leftward by 1 unit; thus the data should be shifted down by 1 unit (i.e.,

size-1 agglomerations will be considered size-0 agglomerations), but the parameter values

remain unchanged. The two parameters, r and p were estimated using Maximum Likelihood

Estimation (MLE). The likelihood function for a sample of agglomeration data, X is then

obtained as:

L(r, p|X) = Yx∈X

Γ(x + r)
(x)!Γ(r)

px(1 − p)r

and for a total of N agglomeration samples, the log-likelihood function is:

l(r, p|X) =Nr ln(1 − p) − N ln(Γ(r))+

Xx∈X

(ln(Γ(x − 1 + r)) − ln((x − 1)!) + x ln(p))

(A2)

(A3)

To maximize the log-likelihood function (equivalent to maximizing the likelihood function)

the partial derivatives of the log-likelihood function with respect to the paramters are set to

zero:

∂l(r, p)

∂r

∂l(r, p)

∂p

= 0 = N ln(1 − p) − NΨ(r) + Xx∈X
= 0 = Nrp − Px∈X x

p

Ψ(x − 1 + r)

(A4)

23

TABLE II. Results from MLE estimates and χ2 tests of the negative binomial parameters from

the agglomeration distribution data. There is no evidence to reject the null hypothesis that the

model is adequate in any case. The thickness and composition values were selected to complete a

face-centered cubic response surface design.

Thickness

Ga/(In+Ga)

N

p

r

P r(C 2 > χ2(m − 3))

4

10

4

10

4

10

7

7

7

.05

.05

.45

.45

.25

.25

.05

.45

.25

481

1173

1228

2662

1442

3454

808

1858

2428

0.2182

0.1935

0.8690

0.9058

0.6433

0.6568

0.1685

0.9035

0.6456

0.2290

0.5371

0.3993

0.3192

0.4028

0.4352

0.4826

0.3333

0.4280

N/Aa

0.098

0.526

0.592

0.508

0.557

N/Aa

0.567

0.407

a Sample size too small for chi-square test. Fit is very good visually.

where Ψ(x) is the digamma function, or Γ′(x)/Γ(x). While the second of these equations

can be solved explicitly for p, in general, there is no closed form solution to Equations A4 for

r and p. The system of equations is solved numerically to obtain the parameter estimates

In order to validate this approach, simulations were run with varying ﬁlm thicknesses

and gallium fractions, p and r were estimated, and a χ2 test was applied to compare model

predictions to data. The response surface method (see Appendix B) was used to select the

speciﬁc values of ﬁlm thickness and gallium fraction. The χ2 test statistic is:

C 2 =

m

Xi

(fi − φi)2

φi

(A5)

fi is the observed count of agglomerations of size i, φi is the predicted count using the

negative binomial distribution with MLE parameter estimates, and m is the largest agglom-

eration size with at least 5 instances. If the model is appropriate, C 2 should approximate a
χ2(ν) random variable with ν = m − 3 degrees of freedom. Thus, we calculate the proba-
bility that C 2 > χ2(m − 3) and if this value is less than 0.05 (a commonly-used signiﬁcance

24

level), then we reject the null hypothesis that that model is appropriate. The results of the

χ2 tests are shown in Table II and there is no evidence to reject the null hypothesis in any

of the cases.

Appendix B: Response Surface Methods for Agglomeration Distribution

Response surface methodology is an experimental design approach usually used for op-

timizing a process with a response variable that is approximated as a 2nd order function

of several input (or factor) variables. In this work, we use the methodology to understand

empirically the eﬀects of ﬁlm thickness and composition on the negative binomial random

variable parameters, (p, r). We postulate that the following model is appropriate:

y = β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + β12x1x2 + β11x2

1 + β22x2
2

(B1)

where y is the response variable (p or r), x1 is ﬁlm thickness and x2 is Ga/(In+Ga). We

employ a face-centered cubic response surface design and the results from each run are

shown in Table II (traditionally, two or more replicates of the center point are included—we

include only one replicate because of the low variance resulting from simulated, rather than

experimental, data). The parameters (βi) were estimated using ordinary least squares and

insigniﬁcant eﬀects (p > 0.05, assuming normally distributed error) were removed from the

models. The resulting response surfaces (plotted in Figs. 4e-f) are:

p = 0.05 + 3.07x2 − 2.64x2
r = 0.06x1 + 1.12x2 − .18x1x2

2

(R2 = 0.997)

(R2 = 0.991)

(B2)

Appendix C: Experimental Methods

The ﬁlms analyzed in Section III E were produced as follows. Soda lime glass substrates
(2.5 cm × 2.5 cm) were coated with 700 nm of Mo followed by 700 nm of a Cu-In-Ga
mixture using DC magnetron sputtering. The Cu-In-Ga layers were rotationally sputtered

from Cu0.8Ga0.2 and In sputter targets to yield ﬁnal Ga/(In+Ga) ratio of 0.25. The samples

were then placed on a graphite sample holder and inserted in a 5 cm diameter quartz reactor
tube. The reactor was evacuated to at least 6 × 10−3 Pa to remove gas impurities, and then
charged with H2Se, H2S, and Ar at the desired concentrations. Samples were heated to 550 °C

25

using a 1000 W quartz-halogen lamp and maintained at that temperature for 10 minutes.

Each sample composition was measured using an Oxford Instruments PentaFET 6900 EDX

detector in an Amray 1810 scanning electron microscope with the samples in plan view.

The microscope acceleration potential was set to 20 kV which corresponds to an EDX depth

sensitivity of approximately 0.8 µm, or one half of the ﬁlm thickness after reaction.

REFERENCES

REFERENCES

1S. Verma,

N. Orbey,

R. W. Birkmire,

and T. W.

F. Russell,

Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 4, 341 (1996).

2N. Orbey,

H. Hichri,

R. W. Birkmire,

and T. W.

F. Russell,

Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 5, 237 (1997).

3M. Avrami, Journal of Chemical Physics 7, 1103 (1939).

4M. Avrami, Journal of Chemical Physics 9, 177 (1941).

5W. K. Kim, S. Kim, E. A. Payzant, S. A. Speakman, S. Yoon, R. M. Kaczyn-

ski, R. D. Acher, T. J. Anderson, O. D. Crisalle, S. S. Li,

and V. Craciun,

Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 66, 1915 (2005).

6M. Purwins, A. Weber, P. Berwian, G. M¨uller, F. Hergert, S. Jost,

and R. Hock,

Journal of Crystal Growth 287, 408 (2006).

7E. Wimmer and W. Wolf, Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing 3, 3 (2000).

8M. R. Ryzhikov, V. A. Slepkov, S. G. Kozlova, S. P. Gabuda,

and V. E. Fedorov,

Journal of Computational Chemistry 36, 2131 (2015).

9D. T. Gillespie, The Journal of Physical Chemistry 81, 2340 (1977).

10R. Erban and S. J. Chapman, Physical Biology 6, 46001 (2009).

11P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, S. Paetel, R. Wuerz, R. Menner, W. Wischman, and

M. Powalla, Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 19, 894 (2011).

12A. Chirila, P. Reinhard, F. Pianezzi, P. Bloesch, A. R. Uhl, C. Fella, L. Kranz, D. Keller,

C. Gretener, H. Hagendorfer, D. Jaeger, R. Erni, S. Nishiwaki, S. Buecheler, and A. N.

Tiwari, Nature Materials 12, 1107 (2013).

26

13Solar Frontier, “Solar Frontier Sets Thin-Film PV World Record with 20.9% CIS Cell,”

(2014).

14W. N. Shafarman, S. Siebentritt, and L. Stolt, in Handbook of Photovoltaics, edited by

A. Luque and S. Hegedus (Wiley, 2011) pp. 546–592.

15C. L.

Jensen, D. E. Tarrant,

J. H. Ermer,

and G. A. Pollock,

Proceedings of the 23rd IEEE PVSC , 577 (1993).

16G. M. Hanket, W. N. Shafarman, B. E. McCandless,

and R. W. Birkmire,

Journal of Applied Physics 102, 074922 (2007).

17K. Kim,

G. M. Hanket,

T. Huynh,

and W. N.

Shafarman,

Journal of Applied Physics 111, 083710 (2012).

18S.

van

der

Walt,

S.

Colbert,

and

G.

Varoquaux,

Computing in Science Engineering 13, 22 (2011).

19F.

Hergert,

S.

Jost,

R.

Hock,

M.

Purwins,

and

J.

Palm,

Thin Solid Films 511-512, 147 (2006).

20J. Koo, S. C. Kim, H. Park, and W. K. Kim, Thin Solid Films 520, 1484 (2011).

21M. Purwins, R. Enderle, M. Schmid, P. Berwian, G. M¨uller, F. Hergert, S. Jost, and

R. Hock, Thin Solid Films 515, 5895 (2007).

22P. Szaniawski, P. Salome, V. Fjallstrom, T. Torndahl, U. Zimmermann, and M. Edoﬀ,

IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics 5, 1775 (2015).

23W. Witte, D. Abou-Ras, K. Albe, G. H. Bauer, F. Bertram, C. Boit,

R. Br¨uggemann, J. Christen, J. Dietrich, A. Eicke, D. Hariskos, M. Maiberg,

R. Mainz, M. Meessen, M. M¨uller, O. Neumann, T. Orgis, S. Paetel, J. Pohl,

H. Rodriguez-Alvarez, R. Scheer, H.-W. Schock, T. Unold, A. Weber, and M. Powalla,

Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications 23, 717 (2014).

24M. Marudachalam, R. W. Birkmire, H. Hichri, J. M. Schultz, a. Swartzlander, and M. M.

Al-Jassim, Journal of Applied Physics 82, 2896 (1997).

25W.

K.

Kim,

G.

M.

Hanket,

and W.

N.

Shafarman,

Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 95, 235 (2011).

26J. O. Lloyd-Smith, PLoS ONE 2, e180 (2007).

27D. J. Shaw, B. T. Grenfell, and A. P. Dobson, Parasitology 117, 597 (1998).

28N. Alexander, R. Moyeed, and J. Stander, Biostatistics 1, 453 (2000).

27

