6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
1
6
5
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Volume entropy

Valerio Astuti∗, Marios Christodoulou†, and Carlo Rovelli‡

Aix Marseille Universit´e, CNRS, CPT, UMR 7332, 13288 Marseille, France.

March 7, 2016

Abstract. Building on a technical result by Brunnemann and Rideout on the spectrum of the Volume
operator in Loop Quantum Gravity, we show that the dimension of the space of the quadrivalent states –with
ﬁnite-volume individual nodes– describing a region with total volume smaller than V , has ﬁnite dimension,
bounded by V log V . This allows us to introduce the notion of “volume entropy”: the von Neumann entropy
associated to the measurement of volume.

I. Introduction

Thermodynamical aspects of the dynamics of spacetime
have ﬁrst been pointed out by Bekenstein’s introduction
of an entropy associated to the horizon of a black hole
[1]. This led to the formulation of the “laws of black holes
thermodynamics” by Bardeen, Carter, and Hawking [2]
and to Hawking’s discovery of black role radiance, which
has reinforced the geometry/thermodynamics analogy
[3]. The connection between Area and Entropy suggests
that it may be useful to treat aspects of space-time sta-
tistically at scales large compared to the Planck length
[4], whether or not we expect the relevant microscopic el-
ementary degrees of freedom to be simply the quanta of
the gravitational ﬁeld [5], or else. Black hole entropy, in
particular, can be interpreted as cross-horizon entangle-
ment entropy (see [6] for recent results reinforcing this
interpretation, and references therein), or –most likely
equivalently– as the von Neumann entropy of the statis-
tical state representing a macrostate with given horizon
Area. In the context of Loop Quantum Gravity (LQG),
this was considered in [7] and later extensively analyzed;
for a recent review and full references see [8, 9].

All such developments are based on the assignment of
thermodynamic properties to spacetime surfaces. This
association has motivated the holographic hypothesis:
the conjecture that the degrees of freedom of a region
of space are somehow encoded in its boundary.

In this paper, instead, we study statistical properties
associated to spacetime regions. We show that it is pos-
sible to deﬁne a Von Neumann entropy for the quantum
gravitational ﬁeld, associated to the Volume of a region,
and that this entropy is (under suitable conditions) ﬁ-
nite. The existence of an entropy associated to bulk
degrees of freedom of a spin network was already con-
sidered in [10].

To this aim, we prove a ﬁniteness result on the num-

∗valerio.astuti@roma1.infn.it
†christod.marios@gmail.com
‡rovelli@cpt.univ-mrs.fr

ber of quantum states of gravity describing a region of
ﬁnite volume. More precisely, we work in the context
of LQG, and we prove that the dimension of the space
of diﬀeomorphism invariant quadrivalent states without
zero-volume nodes, describing a region of total volume
smaller than V is ﬁnite. We give explicitly the upper
bound of the dimension as a function of V . The proof
is based on a result on the spectrum of the LQG Vol-
ume operator proven by Brunnemann and Rideout [11,
12]. Using this, we deﬁne the Von Neumann entropy of
a quantum state of the gravitational ﬁeld associated to
Volume measurements.

II. Counting spin networks

Consider the measurement of the volume of a 3d space-
like region Σ. The physical system measured is the grav-
itational ﬁeld.
In the classical theory, this is given by

the metric q on Σ: the volume is V = RΣ √det q d3x.
In the quantum context, using the LQG formalism, the
geometry of Σ is described by a state in the kinematical
Hilbert space Hdiﬀ. The volume measurement of Σ are
described by a volume operator ˆV on this state space.
We refer to [13, 14] for details on basic LQG results and
notation.

We restrict Hdiﬀ to four-valent graphs Γ where the
nodes n have non-vanishing (unoriented) volume vn. The
spin network states |Γ, jl, vni ∈ Hdiﬀ, where jl is the link
quantum number or spin, form a countable, orthonormal
basis of Hdiﬀ.
(We disregard here eventual additional
quantum numbers such as the orientation, that have no
bearing on our result.) The intertwiner basis at each
node is chosen so that the local volume operator ˆVn, act-
ing on a single node, is diagonal and is labelled by the
eigenvalues vn, of the node volume operator ˆVn associ-
ated to the node n.

ˆVn |Γ, jl, vni = vn|Γ, jl, vni

(1)

The states |Γ, jl, vni are also eigenstates of the total vol-
ume operator ˆV = PN
ˆVn, where N is the number of

n=1

1

nodes in Γ, with eigenvalue

Equation (4) bounds the spins. Since we must have

v =

N

Xn=1

vn,

(2)

the sum of the node volume eigenvalues vn.

We seek a bound on the dimension of the subspace HV
spanned by the states |Γ, jl, vni such that v ≤ V . That
is, we want to count the spin-networks with volume less
than V . We do this by bounding the number NΓ of four
valent graphs in HV , the number N{jl} of possible spin
assignments, and the number of the volume quantum
numbers assignments N{vn} on each such graph. Clearly

V ≥ vgap, we must also have

j ≤ jmax ≤ 32

V 2
Pγ3 =
ℓ6

1
2

n2

(8)

In a graph with n nodes there are at most 4n links (the
worst case being all boundary links), and therefore there
are at most (2jmax + 1)4n spin assignments, or, in the
large j limit, (2jmax)4n. That is

N{jl} ≤ (2jmax)4n ≤ n8n

(9)

Finally, the dimension of the intertwiner space at each

dimHV ≤ NΓ N{jl}N{vn}.

(3)

node is bounded by the areas associated to that node:

Crucial to this bound is the analytical result on the
existence of a volume gap in four-valent spin networks
found in [11, 12]. The result is the following. In a node
bounded by four links with maximum spin jmax all non-
vanishing volume eigenvalues are larger than

vgap ≥

1
4√2

ℓ3
Pγ

3

2pjmax

(4)

Where ℓP is the Planck constant and γ the Immirzi pa-
rameter. Numerical evidence for equation (4) was ﬁrst
given in [15] and a compatible result was estimated in
[16]. Since the minimum non-vanishing spin is j = 1
2 ,
this implies that

vgap ≥

1
8

ℓ3
Pγ

3

2 ≡ vo

(5)

From the existence of the volume gap, it follows that
there is a maximum value of NΓ, because there is a max-
imum number of nodes for graphs in HV , as every node
carries a minimum volume vo. Therefore a region of vol-
ume equal or smaller than V contains at most

n =

V
vo

(6)

nodes. Equation (4) bounds also the number of allowed
area quantum numbers, because too large a jmax would
force too large a node volume. Therefore N{jl} is also
ﬁnite. Finally, since the dimension of the space of the
intertwiners at each node is ﬁnite and bounded by the
value of spins, it follows that also the number N{vn} of
individual volume quantum numbers is bounded. Then
(3) shows immediately that the dimension of HV is ﬁnite.
Let us bound it explicitely.
We start by the number of graphs. The number of
nodes must be smaller than n, given in (6). The number
NΓ of 4-valent graphs with n nodes is bounded by

dimKj1,j2,j3,j4 =
= dim InvSU(2) (Hj1 ⊗ Hj2 ⊗ Hj3 ⊗ Hj4 )
= min (j1 + j2, j3 + j4) − max ((j1 − j2), (j3 − j4)) + 1
≤ 2 max(jl∈n) + 1 ≤ 4 max(jl∈n)
with the last step following from max(jl∈n) ≥ 1/2. Thus
on a graph with n nodes, the maximum number of com-
bination of eigenvalues is limited by:

N{vn} ≤ (4jmax)n = 2nn2n

(10)

Combining equations (3), (7), (9) and (10), we have
an explicit bound on the dimension of the space of states
with volume less than V = nvo:

dim HV ≤ (cn)14n

where c is a number. For large n we can write

SV ≡ log dimHV ≤ 14 n log n

(11)

(12)

which is the entropy associated to Hilbert space. Explic-
itly

SV ≤ 14

V
vo

log

V
vo ∼ V log V.

(13)

In the large volume limit, when the eigenvalues become
increasingly dense, this corresponds to a density of states
ν(V ) ≡ d(dimHV )/dV similarly bounded
ν(V ) < 14 [log(n) + C] (cn)14n.

(14)

III. Von Neumann proper volume

entropy

NΓ ≤ n4n

(7)

because each node can be connected to each other nn
four times (nn)4.

In the previous section, we have observed that the di-
mension of the space of (with four-valent, ﬁnite-volume
nodes) quantum states with total volume less than V
is ﬁnite. This results implies that there is a ﬁnite von

2

Neumann volume entropy associated to statistical states
describing to volume measurements.

The simplest possibility is to consider the micro-
canonical ensemble describing the volume measurement
of a region of space. That is, we take Volume to be
a macroscopic (or thermodynamic, or“coarse grained”)
variable, and we write the corresponding statistical mi-
crostate that maximizes entropy. If the measured volume
is in the interval IV = [V − δV, V ], with small δV , then
the corresponding micro-canonical state is simply

ρ = PV,δV
dim HV
where PV,δV is the projector on

.

(15)

HV,δV ≡ Span{|Γ, jl, vn > : v ∈ IV }.

(16)

namely the span of the eigenspaces of eigenvalues of the
volume that are in IV . Explicitly, the projector can be
written in the form

PV,δV ≡ Xv∈IV

|Γ, jl, vn >< Γ, jl, vn|

(17)

The von Neumann entropy of (15) is

S = −T r[ρ log ρ] = log dimHV < SV ∼ V log V.
It is interesting to consider also a more generic state
where ρ ∼ p(V ), for an arbitrary distribution p(V ) of
probabilities of measuring a given volume eigenstate with
volume V . For this state, the probability distribution of
ﬁnding the value V in a volume measurement is

(18)

P (V ) = ν(V )p(V )

(19)

and the entropy can be written as the sum of two terms

S = Z dV ν(V )p(V ) log(p(V )) = S1 + S2

where the ﬁrst

SP = −Z dV P (V ) log(P (V ))

(20)

(21)

is just the entropy due to the spread in the outcomes of
volume measurements, while the second

SVolume ≡ S − SP = Z dV P (V ) log(ν(V ))

(22)

IV. Lower bound

Let us now bound the dimension of HV from below. The
crucial step for this is to notice the existence of a max-
imum δV in the spacing between the eigenvalues of the
operator ˆVn. For instance, if we take a node between
two large spins j and two 1
2 spins, the volume eigen-
values have decreasing spacing, with maximum spacing
for the lowest eigenvalues, of the order vo. Disregarding
irrelevant small numerical factors, let’s take vo as the
maximal spacing.

Given a volume V , let, as before, n = V /v0 and con-
sider spin networks with total volume in the interval
In = [(n − 1)vo, nvo]. Let Nm be the number of spin
networks with m nodes that have the total volume v
in the interval In. For m = 1, there is at least one
such spin network, because of the minimal spacing. For
m = 2, the volume v must be split between the two
nodes: v = v1 + v2. This can be done in at least n − 1
manners, with v1 ∈ Ip and v1 ∈ In−p and p running
from 1 to n − 1. This possibility is guaranteed again by
the existence of the maximal spacing. In general, for m
nodes, there are

Nn,m = (cid:18) n − 1
m − 1(cid:19)

(23)

diﬀerent ways of splitting the total volume among nodes.
This is the number of compositions of n in m subsets.
Finally, the number m of nodes can vary between 1 and
the maximum n, giving a total number of possible states
larger than

Nn =

n

Xm=1

Nn,m =

n

Xm=1

(cid:18) n − 1
m − 1(cid:19) = 2n−1.

From which it follows that

dimHV ≥ 2n−1.

(24)

(25)

Can all these states be realised by inequivalent spin
networks, with suitable choices of the graph and the
spins? To show that this is the case, it is suﬃcient to
display at least one (however peculiar) example of spin
network for each sequence of vn. But given an arbitrary
sequence of vn we can always construct a graph formed
by a single one dimensional chain of nodes, each (except
the two ends) with two links connecting to the adjacent
nodes in the chain and two links in the boundary. All
these spin networks exist and are non-equivalent to one
another. Therefore we have shown that there are at least
2n−1 states with volume between V − vo and V . In the
large volume limit we can write

can be seen as as a proper volume entropy. The bound
found in the previous Section on ν(V ), which indicates
that ν(S) grows less that V 2, shows that this proper
volume entropy is ﬁnite for any distribution P (V ) whose
variance is ﬁnite. SVolume can be viewed as the irre-
ducible entropy associated to any volume measurement.

dim HV ≥ 2n = 2

V

vo .

so that the entropy satisﬁes

cV ≤ S ≤ c′V log V.

with c and c′ constants.

(26)

(27)

3

ond principle of thermodynamics to hold, the initial
state of the universe must have had low entropy.
On the other hand, from cosmic background radi-
ation observations, the initial state of matter must
have been close to having maximal entropy. Pen-
rose addresses this discrepancy by taking into con-
sideration the entropy associated to gravitational
degrees of freedom. His hypothesis is that the de-
grees of freedom which have been activated to bring
the increase in entropy from the initial state are the
ones associated to the Weyl curvature tensor, which
in his hypothesis was null in the initial state of the
universe. A deﬁnition of the bulk entropy of space,
which, as would be expected, grows with the vol-
ume, could perhaps perform the same role as the
Weyl curvature degrees of freedom do in Penrose’s
hypothesis: the universe had a much smaller vol-
ume close to its initial state, so the total available
entropy was low - regardless of the matter entropy
content - and has increased since, just because for
a space of larger volume we have a greater number
of states describing its geometry.

(vi) We close with a very speculative remark. Does the
fact that entropy is large for larger volumes im-
ply the existence of an entropic force driving to
larger volumes? That is, could there be a statistical
bias for transitions to geometries of greater volume?
Generically, the growth of the phase space volume
is a driving force in the evolution of a system:
in
a transition process, we sum over out states, more
available states for a given outcome imply greater
probability of that outcome. A full discussion of
this point requires the dynamics of the theory to
be explicitly taken into account, and we postpone
it for future work.

Acknowledgments

MC and VA thank Thibaut Josset and Ilya Vilenski for
critical discussions. MC acknowledges support from the
Educational Grants Scheme of the A.G.Leventis Founda-
tion for the academic years 2013-2014, 2014-2015, 2015-
2016, as well as from the Samy Maroun Center for Time,
Space and the Quantum. VA acknowledges ﬁnancial sup-
port from Sapienza University of Rome.

V. Discussion

Geometrical entropy associated to surfaces of given Area
plays a large role in the current discussions of the quan-
tum nature of spacetime. Here we have shown that, un-
der suitable conditions, it is also possible to compute
a Von Neumann entropy associated to measurements of
the Volume of a region of space. We have not discussed
possible physical roles played by this entropy. A number
of comments are in order:

3

(i) Since in the classical low energy limit Volume and
2 , the Volume entropy
area are related by V ∼ A
2 log A may
we have considered SV ∼ V log V ∼ A
exceed the Bekenstein bound S < SA ∼ A. Volume
entropy is accessible only by being in the bulk, and
not necessarily from the outside, therefore it does
not violate the versions of the Bekenstein bound
that only refer to external observables.

3

(ii) The result presented above depends on the restric-
tion of Hdiﬀ to four-valent states. We recall that
the discussion is currently open in the literature on
which of the two theories, with or without this re-
striction, is physically more interesting, with good
arguments on both sides. However, it might be
possible to extend the results presented here to the
case of higher-valent graphs. Indeed, there is some
evidence that there is a volume gap in higher-valent
cases too, see for instance [17]. The eﬀect of zero-
volume nodes on the Volume entropy will be dis-
cussed elsewhere.

(iii) Volume entropy appears to fail to be an extensive
quantity. The signiﬁcance of this conclusion de-
serves to be explored. This feature is usual for sys-
tems with long range interactions, and in particu-
lar for systems of particles governed by the grav-
itational interaction.
It is suggestive that grav-
ity could retain this feature even when there are
no interacting particle, and the role of long range
interactions is taken by “long range” connections
between graph nodes1. A ﬁnal word on this be-
haviour, however, has to wait for a more precise
computation of the entropy growth with volume.

(iv) It has been recent pointed out that the interior of
an old black old contains surfaces with large volume
[18, 19] and that the large volume inside black holes
can play an important role in the information para-
dox [9, 20]. The results presented here may serve to
quantify the corresponding interior entropy.

(v) A notion of entropy associated to the volume of
space might perhaps provide an alternative to Pen-
rose’s Weyl curvature hypothesis [21]. For the sec-

1Of course they are not really long range, in the sense that

graph connections actually deﬁne locality.

4

[12] Johannes Brunneman

and David Rideout.
in loop
II. Detailed presentation”.
65002.

(2008), p.

the volume operator

“Properties of
quantum gravity.
25
Class. Quant. Grav.
arXiv:0706.0382 [gr-qc].

[13] C. Rovelli and F. Vidotto. Covariant Loop Quan-

tum Gravity. Cambridge University Press, 2014.

[14] Carlo Rovelli. Quantum Gravity. Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, 2004.

[15] Johannes Brunnemann and Thomas Thiemann.
“Simpliﬁcation of the spectral analysis of the
volume operator
in loop quantum gravity”.
Class. Quant. Grav. 23 (2006), pp. 1289–1346.
arXiv:0405060 [gr-qc].

[16] Eugenio Bianchi and Hal M Haggard. “Discrete-
ness of the volume of space from Bohr-Sommerfeld
quantization” (2011). arXiv:1102.5439 [gr-qc].

[17] Hal Haggard. “Pentahedral volume, chaos, and
quantum gravity”. Physical Review D 87 (2013),
p. 044020. arXiv:1211.7311.

[18] Marios Christodoulou and Carlo Rovelli. “How big
is a black hole?” Physical Review D 91 (2015),
p. 064046. arXiv:1411.2854.

[19] Marios Christodoulou and Tommaso De Lorenzo.
“The (huge) volume of an evaporating black hole”.
in preparation (2016).

[20] Alejandro Perez. “No ﬁrewalls in quantum grav-
ity: the role of discreteness of quantum geometry
in resolving the information loss paradox”. Clas-
sical and Quantum Gravity 32 (2015), p. 084001.
arXiv:1410.7062.

[21] R Penrose. “Before the big bang: An outrageous
new perspective and its implications for particle
physics”. Conf.Proc. C060626 (2006), pp. 2759–
2767.

References

[1] J D Bekenstein. “Black Holes and Entropy”. Phys.

Rev. D 7 (1973), pp. 2333–2346.

[2] James M Bardeen, B Carter, and S W Hawking.
“The Four laws of black hole mechanics”. Com-
mun.Math.Phys. 31 (1973), pp. 161–170.

[3] S W Hawking. “Particle creation by black holes”.

Commun. Math. Phys. 43 (1975), pp. 199–220.

[4] Ted Jacobson. “Thermodynamics of space-time:
The Einstein equation of state”. Phys.Rev.Lett.
(1995), pp. 1260–1263. arXiv:9504004 [gr-qc].

[5] Goﬀredo Chirco et al. “Spacetime thermodynam-
ics without hidden degrees of freedom” (2014).
arXiv:1401.5262.

[6] Eugenio Bianchi. “Horizon entanglement entropy
and universality of the graviton coupling” (2012).
arXiv:1211.0522.

[7] Carlo Rovelli. “Black Hole Entropy from Loop
Quantum Gravity”. Physical Review Letters
77.16 (1996), pp. 3288–3291.
issn: 0031-9007.
arXiv:9603063 [gr-qc].

[8] G.J. Fernando Barbero and Alejandro Perez.
“Quantum Geometry and Black Holes”. 100
to appear (2015).
Years of General Relativity,
arXiv:1501.02963.

[9] Abhay Ashtekar. “The Issue of Information Loss:
International Loop Quantum

Current Status”.
Gravity Seminar February 9 (2016).

[10] Krzysztof A Meissner.

the
in loop quantum gravity”.
volume operator
Class. Quant. Grav. 23 (2006), pp. 617–626.
arXiv:gr-qc/0509049 [gr-qc].

“Eigenvalues of

[11] Johannes Brunnemann and David Rideout. “Prop-
erties of the volume operator in loop quantum
gravity. I. Results”. Class. Quant. Grav. 25 (2008),
p. 65001. arXiv:0706.0469 [gr-qc].

5

