Back to Parmenides∗

Henrique Gomes†

Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics
31 Caroline Street, ON, N2L 2Y5, Canada

March 7, 2016

Abstract

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
4
7
5
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

After a brief introduction to issues that plague the realization of a theory of quantum gravity, I
suggest that the main one concerns deﬁning superpositions of causal structures. This leads me to a
distinction between time and space, to a further degree than that present in the canonical approach
to general relativity. With this distinction, one can make sense of superpositions as interference
between alternative paths in the relational conﬁguration space of the entire Universe. But the full use
of relationalism brings us to a timeless picture of Nature, as it does in the canonical approach (which
culminates in the Wheeler-DeWitt equation). After a discussion of Parmenides and the Eleatics’
rejection of time, I show that there is middle ground between their view of absolute timelessness and
a view of physics taking place in timeless conﬁguration space. In this middle ground, even though
change does not fundamentally exist, the illusion of change can be recovered in a way not permitted by
Parmenides. It is recovered through a particular density distribution over conﬁguration space which
gives rise to ‘records’. Incidentally, this distribution seems to have the potential to dissolve further
aspects of the measurement problem that can still be argued to haunt the application of decoherence
to Many-Worlds quantum mechanics. I end with a discussion indicating that the conﬂict between
the conclusions of this paper and our view of the continuity of the self may still intuitively bother us.
Nonetheless, those conclusions should be no more challenging to our intuition than Derek Parﬁt’s
thought experiments on the subject.

1 Quantum gravity implications for spacetime.

The technical summary (tl;dr) This paper consists in the following sequence of arguments:

1. In nonrelativisitic quantum mechanics, to ﬁnd the amplitude for a given initial state, one evolves
a future outcome backwards in time to ﬁnd the overlap with the current wavefunction using the
Heisenberg picture. However, in the absence of a ﬁxed causal structure, this procedure becomes
ill-deﬁned. The key requisite feature of quantum mechanics, unitarity, becomes muddied in the
presence of alternate causal structures, as would happen in quantum gravity. This leads us to
consider a theory in which space is fundamental, and duration is derived from the change of space.
A timeless theory.

2. In a timeless theory, conﬁguration space is singled out as the space of ‘beables’, or ontological
entities. The primary object encoding physics is the timeless transition amplitude between two
conﬁgurations, W (q1, q2) [1].

3. Requiring symmetries to act solely as functions of the conﬁguration variables is equivalent to
demanding ‘laws of the instant’. The only two types of such symmetries turn out to be spatial
scale and diﬀeomorphism transformations, acting as δg = g and δg = Lg.

4. In the presentist framework, all that we can be sure of is conﬁguration ‘now’. To activate the rela-
tional (timeless) transition amplitude, W (q1, q2), we require a way to deﬁne another conﬁguration
besides the present one.

∗Submitted for “Space and time after quantum gravity” essay contest, from the Center for the Philosophy of Physics.
†gomes.ha@gmail.com

1

5. The physical conﬁguration space here is conformal superspace – the quotient of the space of met-
rics wrt diﬀeomorphisms and scale transformations. Conformal superspace for gravitational ﬁelds
over the 3-sphere is a stratiﬁed manifold for which there is always a preferred stratum – the one
corresponding to the spherical metric. I call a representative of this conﬁguration, q∗.

6. Conﬁguration q∗ provides the activation key to the transition amplitude.

complex distribution on physical conﬁguration space, W (q) := W (q∗, q).

It yields a preferred

7. Using W (q), I then want to create a volume form on conﬁguration space, V (W (q))Dq, which will
count conﬁgurations. Requiring certain properties of this positive function, it was argued elsewhere
[2] (but not proven) that V (W (q)) = |W (q)|2.

8. But in our daily experiments we don’t require knowledge of the most homogeneous conﬁguration.
When a precise structure – called a record – exists, we can eﬀectively infer a history between a
recorded conﬁguration, qr, and its record-holding conﬁguration, q. The existence of records implies
that W (q∗, q) = W (q∗, qr)W (qr, q). With this equation, the properties of V imply the equation for
the probability of q becomes that of a conditional probability, conditional on the occurrence of qr:
P (q) = P (qr)P (q|qr). When ﬁnding out which ‘now’ we belong to in daily experimentation, we
restrict our attention to conﬁgurations with the same records, rendering the amplitude W (q∗, qr)
superﬂuous.

9. Without time, and with the role of measurements taken over by records, I argue that i) there is
no measurement problem of quantum mechanics in this context, and ii) there is no superposition
of metrics, but we can still infer interference of alternative paths in conﬁguration space from the
structure of V (q).

This new theory brings with it new questions: about locality, Bayesian probabilities, Born rule, etc,
which I tried to answer as fully as I could in [3, 2] and which I will only touch on here. Let me now lay
down the argument contained in this paper, and the problems it aims to solve, at length.

A summary of my argument

Quantum mechanics arose in the 1920’s. General relativity has been around since the 1910’s. And yet,
we still have no quantum theory of gravity. What is taking us so long? I believe that the most challenging
obstacle in our way is understanding what it means to superpose causal structures. I also believe that
we can overcome this obstacle only if we accept a fundamental distinction between time and space. The
distinction is timid in general relativity – even in its ADM form [4] – and here we want to push it further.
I will take space to be fundamental and time to be a derived concept – a concept at which we arrive
from change (to loosely quote Ernst Mach).

Is this diﬀerent perspective in conﬂict with what we have learned from general relativity? Not
necessarily. For instance, Lorentz invariance can be a property recovered for classical solutions of the
ﬁeld equations [5]. From this point of view Einstein’s uniﬁcation of space and time is a property of
solutions of the equations of motion rather than a foundational principle of the theory. I don’t want to
ﬂout the laws of relativity, only delegate their enforcement.

Following the ideas of Mach further, we ﬁnd that general relativity falls short of his relational demands
on Nature. According to Mach, the properties of objects can have no intrinsic meaning – it is only by
comparison that we obtain objective knowledge. For example, only relative positions of particles should
enter our description of the Universe. In general relativity, even in vacuum the proper time of spacetime
curves sets a scale, irrespective of any ruler to gauge their lengths. In more mathematical jargon, the
spacetime length of (non-null) curves are not generally invariant under conformal transformations of the
spacetime metric.1

If we accept the ontological split of spacetime into space and time, we gain access to a diﬀerent kind
of symmetry: the ones that act on each spatial ﬁeld conﬁguration. On the other hand, symmetries that
had previously acted naturally on spacetime lose their simplicity and privileged status.

Focusing on space and its symmetries rather than spacetime, we can demand complete relationalism,
to the satisfaction of Mach’s demands. There are two types of symmetries – of scale and of position –

1The lengths of null curves are indeed invariant under conformal transformations. But even without matter the Einstein-
Hilbert action is not explicitly conformally invariant. Upon a conformal transformation the action gains a kinetic term for
the conformal factor.

2

implied by spatial relationalism. Thus both the local scale and the spatial position are to be deﬁned
relationally – that is without ever referring to any absolute frame of reference.

These two examples act ‘intrinsically’ on each spatial metric conﬁguration. By ‘intrinsic’, I mean that
the action of such a transformation on a conﬁguration should only depend on the conﬁguration itself, not
on other conﬁgurations or on tangent vectors, which is why I call it a ‘law of the instant’. As we will see,
a timeless transition amplitude is only compatible with such types of transformations. Fortuitously, the
relational symmetries are found to be the most general laws of the instant. Thus, physical conﬁguration
space of a timeless theory becomes the quotient of conﬁguration space wrt relational symmetries. In the
case of gravity, this quotient is called conformal superspace. A curve in conformal superspace describes
changes of scale-free geometry – or shapes – as it goes along.

On the other hand, symmetries that are inherited from spacetime need not be laws of the instant.
For example, the usual symmetry of refoliations is an oﬀspring of spacetime diﬀeomorphisms. It is not
a ‘law of the instant’ and is thus disallowed by spatial relationalism as I deﬁne it here.2

Once spacetime is nothing but the relational change of space, superposing geometries becomes a more
straightforward problem to tackle. Quantum mechanical superpositions of three-geometries are realized
through interfering paths in physical conﬁguration space – the space of all relationally equivalent three-
geometries.

This is a counter-intuitive view on superpositions. We instinctively believe quantum subsystems
exist within a spacetime, together with ourselves as observers of these subsystems. We naturally expect
therefore to see superpositions of macroscopic objects. But if instead we experience only instantaneous
conﬁgurations, we should expect something diﬀerent.

Interference, not superposition. Let me explain what is it that we should expect in the relational
context of a closed Universe. Each possible ‘spacetime’ (not necessarily of the generally-covariant sort) is
identiﬁed with a curve in physical conﬁguration space (conﬁguration space modulo relational symmetries).
In this context, the timeless path integral formulation of gravity resembles the usual timeless path integral
of quantum mechanics.

This analogy allows us to borrow from consistent histories [7] their notion of decoherence, or lack
thereof – namely, interference.
In the path integral formulation of consistent histories, one measures
superposition through the use of an operator called the ‘decoherence functional’. Given an ‘in’ and an
‘out’ conﬁguration, q1 , q2, and a partitioning of paths between q1 and q2 (called a coarse-graining of the
paths), the decoherence functional gives a measure of interference between the elements of the partition.

With a preferred notion of space, and the accompanying preferred choice of relational ﬁeld-conﬁguration

space, there is no need to dig so deep into the meaning of ‘a superposition of spatial metrics’. Instan-
taneous conﬁgurations are experienced more, or less, frequently.
It is these frequencies which signal
underlying interference patterns.

Timelessness The ideas developed here have ancient roots. They are a modern version of the classical
debate between Parmenides and Heraclitus. Heraclitus held that nothing in this world is constant except
change and becoming. Parmenides on the other hand believed that the ontic changes we experience with
our senses are deceptive; behind the veil of our perceptions lays the changeless true nature of the World.
A much more recent incarnation of the Parmenidean view is found in the work of Julian Barbour (see
[8]), which I use here as a nearer harbor from which to sail forth my arguments. Barbour observes that
timeless conﬁguration space should be seen as the realm containing every possible ‘now’, or instantaneous
conﬁguration of the universe. In [9], Barbour attempts to accommodate timelessness more intuitively:

An alternative is that our direct experience, including that of seeing motion, is correlated
with only conﬁguration in our brains: the correlate of the conscious instant is part of a
point of conﬁguration space [...] Our seeing motion at some instant is correlated with a
single conﬁguration of our brain that contains, so to speak, several stills of a movie that we
are aware of at once and interpret as motion.
[...] Time is not a framework in which the
conﬁgurations of the world evolve. Time exists only so far as concrete conﬁgurations express
it in their structure. The instant is not in time; time is in the instant.

2It is not enough to note that refoliations act diﬀerently on phase space than spatial diﬀeomorphisms (e.g. act as a
groupoid vs as a group). Both transformations have inﬁnitesimal actions on phase space points after all, and, apart from
matters having to do with chaos [6], it is not clear why the action of one would permit a quotienting procedure, but not
the other. Here the diﬀerence is made explicit.

3

Timelessness and the relational transition amplitude When there is some underlying notion of
the passage of time, we think about conﬁguration q1 as ‘now’; it is a conﬁguration which has evolved
from earlier initial conditions (e.g.: the Big Bang). We think of q2 as some conﬁguration in the future,
and we want to predict the probability that our Universe will somehow become q2.

In standard quantum mechanics, the amplitude for this transition is given by the usual propagator
G((t1, q1), (t2, q2)). Conversely, we can think of this amplitude as saying that, having measured q1 at a
previous time, and some certain time having elapsed after that, we now want to calculate the probability
density of q2. Both represent the probability of q2 ‘conditional’ on q1.

In the timeless context, the transition amplitude W (q1, q2) is the substitute of G((t1, q1), (t2, q2)). It
is construed as ‘the amplitude related to ﬁnding a given relational conﬁguration q2, given that you ‘now’
observe q1’. Finding when in the future? Any ‘future time’, as it will involve an integration over all
time parameters (see eq. (20)). But this does not tell us how the present will become the future, even
if the future is left unspeciﬁed. The alternative view of q1 and q2 presents similar problems. Loosely
quoting Chiou [1] (page 16), W (q1, q2) represents ‘the amplitude related to measuring q2, given that q1
was measured at a previous instance’.

Although W (q1, q2) appears to be mathematically self-consistent, we are still left with host of ques-
tions unanswered. What ‘previous instance’? How do we know that the previous conﬁguration really
‘happened’, and how did it ‘become’ the present one? When Time is to be a derived concept at which we
arrive from change, what is it that promotes change itself? What is it that drives the present to become
the future?

Going back to a simple case where we can identify a time variable might provide some guidance. For a
region in conﬁguration space in which a variable that has ‘time-like’ properties exists, the conﬁgurations
have the form qa = (t, qi). It is true that in this case we obtain W (q1, q2) = G((t1, qi
2)) (see eq.
(23)), which is, at least in form, the amplitude we know exists for an absolute notion of time. Nonetheless,
in previous equation, time is merely a part of the conﬁguration, not an absolute clock external to the
system.3 The partial conﬁguration t is on the same footing as the other conﬁguration variables, and
that footing is too slippery to support change itself. The main question – how do we exit the ‘now’?–
remains.

1), (t2, qi

My answer will be that the past doesn’t become the present – it is only embedded in the present.

Records and the illusion of a past Again quoting Barbour [9] as our proxy for Parmenides

By analogy with Descartes’s Cogito ergo sum, we know that the present instant is actualized.
However, because we can never step out of the present instant, we can never know if any
other instant is actually experienced. For we shall never know whether other possible instants,
including what we take to be our own past, are actual or whether the present instant is unique.

Indeed, it seems undeniable that the present has a preferred ontological status than either the past or
the future. Perhaps the diﬃculty of assigning ontological meaning to W (q1, q2) is a reﬂection of this fact.
Everything we experience at any instant, including memories, must be etched into our instantaneous
brain conﬁguration. Records of apparent past events should exist in the present conﬁguration. This is
what Barbour alludes to by saying that ‘time is in the instant’. But why do records give a consistent
picture of the past? At any moment we are in the possession of a host of redundant records of the same
event, and they better be in mutual accord.

I want to confront these questions about timelessness head on in a quantum gravity theory. In doing
so, the main questions I need to answer are: why am I sure that I had a donut this morning? And why
is that particular memory corroborated by the jelly stain on my shirt? Or perhaps more generally, how
have we even come upon the concept of a concrete past which has evolved to the present?

After a description of timeless quantum mechanics and its path integral formulation in section 4, I
will introduce a volume form in conﬁguration space, and a notion of semi-classical records – the key
constructions to answer these questions.

Since certain spatial ﬁeld conﬁgurations contain also an observer’s conscious instant, the (inﬁnites-
imal) volume around such a conﬁguration expresses the amount of observers which all possess similar
experiences. The volume form introduced will tightly depend on the given Lagrangian action, and we
can determine paths that extremize this action between two conﬁgurations (if any such path exists).

3And it is monotonic along ﬂow curves in phase space. But there are no unique ﬂow curves passing through the

projection onto conﬁguration q1. See section 4.1 below.

4

The kernel of the argument lies in accepting timelessness by interpreting q2 as conﬁguration ‘now’,
but having q2 contain records of q1.4
In other words, even if there is no concrete sense in which q1
‘previously happened’, in the presence of records of q1, the volume of conﬁgurations in the region around
q2 become tightly correlated with the volume of conﬁgurations around q1. The connection between the
two inﬁnitesimal volume forms implies that if there aren’t many copies of an observer close to q1, there
will be even less around q2.

Furthermore I can show that If q2 has a record of q1 and there is a unique extremal path between
the two conﬁgurations, then the entire path has an ordering of records. Namely, parametrizing the path,
γ(t), such that γ(0) = q1 , γ(t∗ > 0) = q2, then γ(t) is a record of γ(t(cid:48)) iﬀ t < t(cid:48).

In this particular case of nested records, we are led to the idea of a complete past history, culminating
always in the present. Just as we observe it. Diﬀerent lines of evidence for the objective existence of q1
seem to concur. After all, every aspect of our present conﬁguration q2 is connected to q1 by a classical
history of the ﬁelds. This nesting of records is also what allows us to eﬀectively use “repeatability” of
experiments. Even though we only have access to ‘now’, each previous run of an experiment can be
encoded in a future run. It allows frequentist approaches to probabilities.

From a Bayesian perspective, we are in fact completely justiﬁed in assuming that conﬁguration q2

evolved from q1, realizing every conﬁguration in between. The reconstruction of the past is complete.

2 The problems with quantizing gravity

2.1 A tale of two theories

General relativity is one of the pillars of our modern understanding of the Universe, deserving a certain
degree of familiarity from all those who purport to study Nature, whether from a philosophical or
mathematical point of view. The theory has such pristine logical purity that it can be comprehensively
summarized by John A. Wheeler’s famous quip:

“Matter tells spacetime how to curve, and spacetime tells matter how to move.”

(1)

We should not forget however, that ensconced within Wheeler’s sentence is our conception of spacetime
as a dynamical geometrical arena of reality: no longer a ﬁxed stage where physics unfolds, it is part and
parcel of the play of existence.

In mathematical terms, we have:

Rµν − 1
2

(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:124)

spacetime curving

Rgµν

(cid:125)

∝

(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)

Tµν

sources for curving

(2)

Given the sources, one will determine a geometry given by the spacetime metric gµν – the ‘ matter tells
spacetime how to curve’ bit. Conversely, it can be shown that very light, very small particles will roughly
follow geodesics deﬁned by the geometry of the lhs of the equation – the ‘spacetime tells matter how to
move’ part.

A mere decade after the birth of GR, along came quantum mechanics, the new radical kid on the block.
It was a framework that provided unprecedented accuracy in experimental conﬁrmation, predictions of
new physical eﬀects and a reliable compass for the construction of new theories. And yet, it has resisted
the intuitive understanding that was quickly achieved with general relativity. A much less accurate
characterization than Wheeler’s quip for general relativity has been borrowed from the pessimistic adage
“everything that can happen, does happen”.5 The sentence is meant to raise the principle of superposition
to the status of core concept of quantum mechanics (whether it expresses this clearly or not is very much
debatable).

In mathematical terms, the superposition principle can be seen in the Schroedinger equation:

ˆHψ = −i d
dt

ψ

(3)

whose linearity implies that two solutions ψ1 and ψ2 add up to a solution ψ1 + ψ2. In the path integral
representation it is built-in. The very formulation of the partition function is a sum over all possible

4It is not clear to me if this construction is or isn’t a realization of what Barbour has called ‘time capsules’, of which I

only learned recently. More work is required to connect the ideas.

5Recently made the title of a popular book on quantum mechanics [10].

5

ﬁeld conﬁgurations φ, each contributing to the overall amplitude with a term proportional to its action
S[φ]:

Z[φ] =

D[φ]eiS[φ]/

(4)

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

Unfortunately, for the past 90 years, general relativity and quantum mechanics have not really gotten
along. Quantum mechanics, the ‘new kid on the block’, soon claimed a large chunk of territory in the
theoretical physics landscape, leaving a small sliver of no-man’s land also outside the domain of general
relativity. In most regimes, the theories will stay out of each other’s way - domains of physics where both
eﬀects need to be taken into account for an accurate phenomelogical description of Nature are hard to
come by. Nonetheless, such a reconciliation might be necessary even for the self-consistency of general
relativity: by predicting the formation of singularities, general relativity “predicts its own demise”, to
borrow again the words of John Wheeler. Unless, that is, quantum eﬀects can be suitably incorporated
to save the day at such high curvature regimes.

2.2 The problems of quantum gravity

At an abstract level, the question we need to face when trying to quantize general relativity is: how to
write down a theory that includes all possible superpositions and yet yields something like equation (2)
in appropriate classical regimes? I for one am willing to consider a theory that incorporates these two
principles as a successful candidate for a theory of quantum gravity.

Indeed, although the incompatibility between general relativity and quantum mechanics can be of
technical character, it is widely accepted that it has more conceptual roots. We will discuss two aspects
of these roots, in a manner that will lead us to a discussion of the role of time.

Problem 1: perturbative non-renormalizability

The more common obstruction mentioned in conjunction with “the problem of quantum gravity” is the
issue of perturbative non-renormalizability, which I will in this section try to interpret in light of the
joint application of the principle of superposition and (1), both stated above.

Technically, one writes down the action of general relativity

S[g] =

√

g

d4x 4R

(5)

√

(where 4R is the spacetime Ricci scalar, and d4x
g is the spacetime volume-element), and then makes
an ansatz that the metric is nearly that of ﬂat spacetime ηµν.
I.e. that it diﬀers only by a “small”
perturbation: gµν = ηµν + hµν. Having done this, the issue of non-renormalizability can already be
hinted at from the positive mass dimensions related to the propagation of hµν. This posistive mass
dimension means that if the theory were valid at all energy scales, perturbation theory could create an
inﬁnite amount of diﬀerent counter-terms, whose divergences therefore cannot be reabsorbed in any ﬁnite
number of coupling constants. One would have to include in the theory inﬁnite types of interactions
which would require an inﬁnite amount of independent experimental inputs for their respective coupling
constants.

To explain the problem in conceptual terms, departing from the two descriptions given above for gen-
eral relativity and quantum mechanics, requires more eﬀort. As a backdrop illustration for the discussion,
let us take the following 1-loop contribution to an electron-positron scattering: This diagram describes a
process in which an electron-positron annihilation into a photon which creates another positron electron
pair, and the whole thing is then repeated once. The issue is that we have no access to the intermediate
loop of electron-positrons.6 According to the rule of “everything that can happen, does happen”, we
must take into account all possible ‘internal’ histories of the process, even those that contain divergent
momenta. The reason we do not need to sum over the external legs is decoherence: we are ourselves be-
coming entangled with the particles coming out of the process, and the superposition of such macroscopic
alternative states becomes negligible.

At a classical level, electromagnetism is a linear theory. As such, perturbations in the electromagnetic
ﬁeld are invisible to each other: two separate solutions of the equations of motion can be summed up
into another solution (photons don’t self-interact). As is the nature of non-linear theories such as GR

6And there are an inﬁnite number of ways in which their individual momenta can still conserve the total momentum.
This is not true for instance of the photon lines in ﬁgure 2.2, whose behavior can be inferred from the momenta of the
external lines, even if we do not have ‘direct’ access to it, because the vertices of the diagram conserve momentum.

6

Figure 1: Example of a 1-loop eﬀect. It hides a process – the creation and annihilation of an electron-
positron pair – from entanglement with the environment.

however, small perturbations of spacetime curvature are not invisible to other such perturbations (there
are graviton-graviton interactions). That is, in a linearized regime, it is harder to abide by “matter tells
spacetime how to curve, and spacetime tells matter how to move”, because perturbations can act like
sources.7 To make an analogy, it is as if light itself carried an electric charge, which would not allow me
to see the image of the blackboard to my right completely independently from the image of the computer
in front of me.

It is easy to see how such sourcing can get out of hand in a runaway eﬀect when we take all possible
histories for a process which is entirely outside of our direct control (a 1-loop eﬀect, as in ﬁgure 2.2).
The problem is that unlike what is the case in other non-linear theories, the ‘charges’ carried by the
non-linear terms in linearized general relativity are too ‘heavy’, generating a cascade of ever increasing
types of interactions once one goes to high enough energies.

The root of the problem could be that in formulating the theory in the linearized regime, non-linear
terms act as small sources. We are breaking the domain of sentence (1) by transgressing between left
and right hand sides of equation (2). But such is the nature of perturbative treatments.

Is our conception of Time part of these obstacles? At a more formal level, to combine (2) with
our principle of superposition one should keep in mind that space-times deﬁne causal structures, and it
is far from clear how one should think about these in a state of superposition. For instance, which causal
structure should one use in an algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory approach when declaring that space-like
separated operators commute? 8

There are theories, such as Horava-Lifschitz gravity [11], which seem to be naively perturbatively
renormalizable. The source of renormalizability here is the greater number of spatial derivatives as
compared to that of time derivatives. This imbalance violates fundamental Lorentz invariance, breaking
up spacetime into space and time. Unfortunately, the theory introduces new degrees of freedom that
appear to be problematic (i.e. their inﬂuence does not disappear at observable scales).

And perhaps perturbative non-renormalizability is not the only problem.

Indeed, for some time
we have known that a certain theory of gravity called ‘conformal gravity’ (or ‘Weyl squared’) is also
perturbatively renormalizable. The problem is that the theory is sick. Conformal gravity is not a
unitary theory, which roughly means that probabilities will not be conserved in time. But, which time?
And is there a way to have better control over unitarity?9

Problem 2: a problem of time

Quantum ﬁeld theory is formulated in a ﬁxed spacetime geometry, while in general relativity spacetime
is dynamical. Without a ﬁxed deﬁnition of time or an a priori distinction between past and future, it is
hard to impose causality or interpret probabilities in quantum mechanics.

7For instance, for scalar ﬁeld interactions, say φ3, one expands the purely classical equations of motion for a small
coupling constant, by ﬁnding the Green’s function for the quadratic part and treating non-linearities as sources. Doing
this iteratively gives all tree-level diagrams.

8I am here assuming that metrics are indeed the fundamental variables that will still describe reality at a most funda-
mental level. It could be the case of course that they represent only emergent degrees of freedom from more fundamental
ones.

9Another approach to quantum gravity called Asymptotic Safety [12] also suﬀers from such a lack of control of unitar-
ity. This approach also explores the possible existence of gravitational theories whose renormalization will only generate
dependence on a ﬁnite number of coupling constants, thus avoiding the loss of predictibility explained above.

7

Can we formulate quantum gravity in a way which reﬂects the fundamental distinction between space
and time? One way of approaching this question is to ﬁrst use a more dynamical account of the theory.
We don’t need to reinvent this account, as it is already standard in the study of gravity, and goes by the
acronym of ADM (Arnowitt-Deser-Misner) [4]. The main idea behind a dynamical point of view is to set
up initial conditions and construct the spacetime geometry by evolving in a given auxiliary deﬁnition of
time. Indeed most of the work in numerical general relativity requires the use of the dynamical approach.
Such formulations allow us to use the tools of the Hamiltonian formalism of quantum mechanics to bear
on the problem. With these tools, matters regarding unitarity are much easier to formulate, because
there is a time with respect to which probabilities are to be conserved.

However, since the slicing of spacetime is merely an auxiliary structure, the theory comes with a
constraint – called the Hamiltonian constraint – which implies a freedom in the choice of such auxiliary
time slicings. The metric associated to each equal time slice, gab, and its associated momenta, πab, must
be related by the following relation at each spatial point:

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

H := R − 1
g

πabπab − 1
2

π2

= 0

(6)

where g stands for the determinant of the metric.The constraints (6) guarantee that observables of the
theory should not depend on the auxiliary ‘foliation’ of spacetime. But we should be wary that we might
be throwing the baby out with the bathwater. The freedom to refoliate spacetime implied by (6) also
contains the generator of time evolution. In other words, time evolution becomes inextricably mixed
with a certain type of gauge-freedom, leading some to conclude that in GR evolution is “pure gauge”.
This is one facet of what people have called “the problem of time”.

Upon a naive quantization of (6), one gets the infamous Wheeler-DeWitt equation:

ˆHψ[g] = 0

(7)

where ψ[g] is a wave-functional over the space of three-geometries. And thus the classical ‘problem of
time’ gets transported into the quantum regime. One could look at equation (7) as a time-independent
Schroedinger equation, which brings us again to the notion of “frozen time”, from (3). A solution of
the equation will not be subject to time evolution; it will give a frozen probability wave-function on the
space of three-geometries.10

Other canonical approaches have so far similarly found insurmountable problems with the quan-
tization of this constraint.
I contend that this is because local time reparametrization represents an
eﬀective, but not fundamental symmetry. I.e. I contend that invariance under refoliation is not present
at a quantum mechanical level, but should be recovered dynamically for states that are nearly classical.
Nonetheless, apart from all of the technical diﬃculties, the property of timelessness represented by equa-
tion (7) should remain in any theory that is completely relational, in that it would not contain an explicit
time variable.

3 The unique existence of the present

Time is change - Parmenides and Zeno

It could be argued that we do not “experience” space-times. We experience ‘one instant at a time’,
so to say. We of course still appear to experience the passage of time, or perhaps more accurately, we
(indirectly) experience changes in the spatial conﬁguration of the world around us, through changes of
the spatial conﬁguration of our brain states.

But if present experience is somehow distinguished, how does “change” come about? This is where
Parmenides has something to say that is relevant for our discussion. Parmenides was part of a group
called the Eleatics, whose most prominent members were himself and Zeno, and whose central belief
was that all change is illusory. The reasoning that led them to this conclusion was the following: if the
future (or past) is real, and the future is not existing now, it would have both properties of existing and

10 But equation (7) has some further problems of its own. It has operator ordering ambiguities, functional derivatives of
the metric acting at a singular point, no suitable inner product on the respective Hilbert space with respectable invariance
properties, etc. One could also attempt to interpret (7) as a Klein-Gordon equation with mass term proportional to the
spatial Ricci scalar, but unlike Klein-Gordon, it is already supposed to be a quantized equation. Furthermore, the problem
in deﬁning suitable inner products are an obstacle in separating out a positive and negative spectrum of the Klein-Gordon
operator.

8

not existing, a contradiction (or a ‘turning back on itself’). Without past and future, the past cannot
transmute itself into future, and thus there is also no possible change. Of course, the argument hinges
on the distinction we perceive between present, past and future.

Aristotle was able to give convincing arguments rebuking Zeno’s paradox, by conceding that there
is no time without change, but maintaining that Time should not be identiﬁed with change. Instead,
change was just a measure of Time, or, in Aristotle’s own words: “change is the unit of Time”. Like
numbers, change would be something capturing an existing aspect of Nature, without itself being part
of Nature. For Aristotle, Time is like the real line. However, he argues, the time it takes to get from one
place to another is not actually composed of an inﬁnite number of ﬁnite lengths of time. Unfortunately,
neither parties of the argument had the tools of calculus at their disposal, with which all of these notions
can be made precise. Without these tools the argument was not completely resolved, but was largely
deemed to be answered by Aristotle.

But even Aristotle did not fully provide an answer to what Time is supposed to be when past and
future cannot exist. Augustine of Hippo noticed the loophole in Aristotle’s argument, and picked up the
question. Similarly to Parmenides, he concluded that change was an illusion and yet,

How can the past and future be, when the past no longer is, and the future is not yet? As for
the present, if it were always present and never moved on to become the past, it would not
be time, but eternity.[...] Nevertheless we do measure time. We cannot measure it if it is not
yet into being, or if it is no longer in being, or if it has no duration, or if it has no beginning
and no end. Therefore we measure neither the future nor the past nor the present nor time
that is passing. Yet we do measure time.

According to Augustine, Time is a human invention: the diﬀerence between future and past is merely
the one between anticipation and memory.

To the extent that future and past events are real, they are real now, i.e. they are somehow encoded
in the present conﬁguration of the Universe. Apart from that, they can be argued not to exist. My
memory of the donut I had for breakfast is etched into patterns of electric and chemical conﬁgurations
of my brain, right now. We infer the past existence of dinosaurs because it is encoded in the genes of
present species and in fossils in the soil. In a timeless Universe, what we actually do is deduce from
the present that there exists a continuous curve of conﬁgurations connecting ‘now’ to some event in the
past. But if the ideas of past and future are all false, how have we come to have such illusions in the ﬁrst
place? How to connect a snapshot of the dinosaur dying with the snapshot of the archaeologist ﬁnding
its remains? Does the Eleatic argument bring about a ‘solipsism of the instant’ ?11
A more mathematical posing of the question. Let’s call conﬁguration space M, which we endow
with a reasonable topology (see appendix A). Given an appropriate action functional over M, one obtains
continuous curves that extremize this functional. It makes sense to have conﬁguration ‘bite on donut’
connected by one such continuous curve to conﬁguration ‘me, reminiscing about donut, six hours later’.
But what is the meaning of these curves? In which sense can we think of ourselves as traversing them?
We now turn to the meaning of timeless conﬁguration space, and how to construct a theory of

quantum gravity there.

4 Timelessness quantum mechanics in conﬁguration space

What does a timeless, relational theory, quantum or classical, look like? A long literature exists on this
matter, and it is of course beyond the scope of this work to give any reasonably detailed account of the
subject. Instead, I will give a very brief account of the results of [1], which are specially useful for my
purposes. Chiou translates canonical timeless quantum mechanics (see e.g. [13], brieﬂy summarized in
appendix B) into the path integral formulation – which is the approach I believe carries the most useful
conceptual baggage.

4.1 Timeless path integral in quantum mechanics
We start with a ﬁnite-dimensional system, whose conﬁguration space, M, is coordinitized by qa, for
a = 1,··· , n. An observation yields a complete set of qa, which is called an event. Let us start by
making it clear that no coordinate, or function of coordinates, need single itself out as a reference

11Julian Barbour tells me that the expression was originated in discussions with Fay Dowker.

9

(cid:90)

parameter of curves in M. The systems we are considering are not necessarily ‘deparametrizable’ – they
do not necessarily possess a suitable notion of time variable.
Now let Ω = T ∗M be the cotangent bundle to conﬁguration space, with coordinates qa and their
momenta pa. The classical dynamics of a reparametrization invariant system is fully determined once
one ﬁxes the Hamiltonian constraint surface in Ω, given by H = 0. A curve γ ∈ M is a classical history
2 if there exists an unparametrized curve ¯γ in T ∗M such that the following
connecting the events qa
action is extremized:

1 and qa

padqa

(8)
for curves lying on the constraint surface H(qa, pa) = 0, and are such that ¯γ’s projection to M is γ,
connecting qa

S[¯γ] =

¯γ

1 and qa
2 .

Feynman’s original demonstration of the equivalence between the standard form of non-relativistic
quantum mechanics and his own path integral formulation relied on reﬁning time slicings, which gave a
straightforward manner by which to partition paths into smaller and smaller segments. Without absolute
time, one must employ new tools in seeking to show the equivalence. For instance, a parametrized curve
¯γ : [0, 1] → Ω need not be injective on its image (it may go back and forth). This requires one to
use a Riemann-Stieltjes integral as opposed to a Riemann one in order to make sense of the limiting
procedure to inﬁnite sub-divisions of the parametrization. Furthermore, one must then sum over all
parametrizations, at which point the integral over τ in (20) ends up indeed giving a functional δ[H], and
the entire transition amplitude (19) becomes:

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

W (q1, q2) =

Dqa

Dpa δ[H] exp

(cid:21)

(cid:90)

(cid:20) i



padqa

¯γ

(9)

where the path integral sums over paths whose projection starts at q1 and ends at q2. In the presence of
gauge symmetries, if it is the case that these symmetries form a closed Lie algebra, one can in principle
use the group averaging procedure mentioned in appendix B, provided one uses a similarly translation
invariant measure of integration.

For a strictly deparametrizable system,12 one obtains again:

(cid:90)

W (t1, qi

1, t2, qi

2) ∼

Dt G(t1, qi

1, t2, qi

2) ∼ G(t1, qi

1, t2, qi
2)

up to an irrelevant overall factor. Further, if the Hamiltonian is quadratic in the momenta, one can
integrate them out and obtain the conﬁguration space path integral with the Lagrangian form of the
action.

The absence of change. Note that it is not enough that a timeless theory be deparametrizable for
one to recover a “ driver of change”, as discussed in the introduction. The classical vector ﬂow XH
of a theory is deﬁned by the functional gradient of the Hamiltonian in phase space, ıXH = δH, and
this makes sense whether the system is deparametrizable or not. Even if the ﬂow curves don’t have a
time parameter, one can still think of the Hamiltonian as the promoter of ‘change’. The ﬂow takes one
phase space point (q1, p1) to another (q2, p2) – which should and can be speciﬁed in a relational manner.
However, because the ﬂow occurs in phase space and not in conﬁguration space, one needs to specify
also the momentum at q1 to determine how the direction of the ﬂow, XH (q1, p1). Specifying q1 is not
enough to arrive at a ﬂow, and is thus not enough to get us out of q1.

In the path integral representation of the timeless transition amplitude, W (q1, q2) depends only on the
conﬁguration variables (momenta are being integrated over), and it again is not clear what ontological
meaning to give to W (q1, q2) by itself.13 I will require symmetries to be ‘laws of the instant’ precisely so
that they are compatible with a theory deﬁned at its most fundamental level by W (q1, q2).

4.2 Timeless quantum gravity

In the last section, I reviewed a timeless path integral formulation of quantum mechanics by Chiou [1],
building on previous results on timeless quantum mechanics (see [13] for a review). In these formulations,

12I.e. one for which [ ˆH(t1), ˆH(t2)] = 0. If this is not the case, the equality will only hold semi-classically.
13In the case of shape dynamics [14], for the theory to possess the full gamut of spatial relationalism it must acquire
a preferred time parameter (see (28)). This is the time parameter which can be deﬁned to drive the change that deﬁnes
duration relationally. Nonetheless, it will be a time parameter that somehow exists outside the domain of observability,
which is still uncomfortable for relationalist sensibilities.

10

conﬁguration space is the ‘space of all possible instants’. This section will consist of a (extremely)
summarized account of my work in [3] and [2].
Conﬁguration space for timeless ﬁeld theories, which I will still denote by M, is the set of all possible
ﬁeld conﬁgurations over a given (in our case ﬁnite-dimensional, closed) manifold M . Each point of
conﬁguration space q ∈ M is a “snapshot” of the whole Universe.14 One nice thing about this inﬁnite-
dimensional space is that it is metrizable, which gives it the minimal topological properties we want from
the requirements of appendix A.

Symmetries, relationalism and ‘laws of the instant’

In Hamiltonian language, the most general symmetry transformation acts through the Poisson bracket
on conﬁgurations as

(cid:27)

(cid:26)(cid:90)

δgij(x) =

d3x F [g, π; x(cid:48))(x(cid:48)) , gij(x)

(10)

where  is the gauge parameter, which in this inﬁnite dimensional context is a function on M (not
necessarily scalar), and we are using DeWitt’s mixed functional dependence, i.e. F depends functionally
on gij (not just on its value at x(cid:48)), as denoted by square brackets, but it yields a function with position
dependence – the “ ; x(cid:48))” at the end.

Regarding the presence of gauge symmetries in conﬁguration space, we would like to implement the
most general relational principles that are applicable to space (as opposed to spacetime). At face value,
the strictly relational symmetries should be:

• Relationalism of locations. This property is represented by the (spatial) diﬀeomorphism group of
j(x), which yields on

the manifold M , Diﬀ(M ). This symmetry is generated by F [g, π; x(cid:48)) = ∇iπi
conﬁguration space δa gij(x) = La gij(x).

• Relationalism of scale. This property is represented by the group of scale transformations (also
called the Weyl group), C(M ). This symmetry is generated by F [g, π; x(cid:48)) = gijπij(x), which yields
on conﬁguration space δgij(x) = (x)gij(x). In this case the gauge parameter is a scalar function,
as opposed to a vector ﬁeld for the diﬀeomorphisms.

Unlike what is the case with the constraints emerging from the Hamiltonian ADM formalism of general
relativity, these symmetries form a (inﬁnite-dimensional) closed Lie algebra.

Forgetting about relationalism, we would also like symmetries to act solely on conﬁguration space, in
ij) give all the information we need about a theory.
ij ,  ; x) for some mixed functional

a manner compatible with the demand that W (g1
To be compatible with presentism, I thus require that δg1
G – which crucially only depends on g1
ij.

ij(x) = G[g1

ij , g2

In other words, the action of the symmetry transformations of ‘now’, only depend on the content of
‘now’. The action of these relational symmetries on each conﬁguration is self-determined, they do not
depend on tangent vectors v1 ∈ Tg1M or on conﬁgurations g3
ij diﬀerent than the ones the symmetries
are acting upon. In the appendix, I sketch a proof that the relational symmetries of scale and position
are indeed the only symmetries whose action in phase space projects down to an intrinsic action on
conﬁguration space.15

The conclusion of this argument is that spatial relationalism is singled out by demanding that sym-
metries have an intrinsic action on conﬁguration space. This feature is not realized by the action of
the ADM scalar constraint (6), since it is a symmetry generated by terms quadratic in the momenta.
Thus the transformation it generates on the metric requires knowledge of the conjugate momentum (and
vice-versa).16

14 For instance, it could be the space of sections on a tensor bundle, M = C∞(T M ⊗ · · · T M ⊗ T M∗ · · · T M∗). In the

case of gravity, these are sections of the positive symmetric tensor bundle: M = C∞

+ (T M∗ ⊗S T M∗).

15This is not entirely true. There is the possibility of a third constraint, πab = 0. This constraint would subsume the

other two, and imposing it would imply that indeed we live in a static, Eleatic Universe.

16Similarly, the action of these relational symmetries also act independently on the momenta, i.e. their action splits, and

ﬁnite gauge transformations can be written schematically, in the form:
· gab , exp

(gab, πab) → (exp

where exp(cid:82) dτ ξ(τ ) represents the ﬂow of the vector ﬁeld part of ξ(t) and the usual exponential of an inﬁnitesimal Weyl

transformation, and the · denotes the respective group action, e.g.: for the metric, pull-back for the diﬀeomorphisms and
pointwise multiplication for Weyl, [15]).

· πab)

dτ ξ(τ )

dτ ξ(τ )

(cid:18)(cid:90)

(cid:18)(cid:90)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

11

Lastly (and also unlike what is the case with the scalar constraint (6)), barring the occurrence of
metrics with non-trivial isometry group, the action of these symmetries endows conﬁguration space
M with a well-deﬁned, neat principal ﬁber bundle structure (see [15]), which enables their quantum
treatment [3].

Given these symmetries (and the principal ﬁber bundle structure they form), we take the analogous

of (9), schematically projected down onto the space of conformal geometries17:

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

W ([g1], [g2]) =

D[g]

D[π] exp

(cid:90)

(cid:20) i



[πab] d[gab]

¯γ

(cid:21)

(11)

where I have (again, schematically) used square brackets to denote the conformal-diﬀeo equivalence
classes of the metric and momenta. Probabilities can then be calculated using the analogue of (22), for
theories such as the examples deﬁned in appendix B.

Still, there is a fundamental diﬀerence between the notion of duration in a spatially relational theory
such as the one deﬁned in (11) and duration in a spacetime theory such as GR, even in its ADM form. In a
3+1 description of GR, given an initial and a ﬁnal Cauchy surfaces and a unique spacetime interpolating
between the two, duration is read oﬀ from the lapse associated to that foliation. In (11) there is no
inkling of a lapse anywhere to be seen. Suppose we are given a unique extremal ﬁeld history between
[g1] and [g2]. One must then deﬁne duration as a local measure of change in the conformal geometry. In
this case, duration along a worldline is completely relational, and does not set a scale by itself, unlike in
GR.

For a theory that contains some driver of change, at this point we could stop, claiming that we have
expounded on what we expect a relational theory of space to look like. Shape dynamics [14] employing
the complete relational symmetries is a theory of that sort. However, the presence of Time is still
somehow disturbing from a relational point of view: where is this Time if not in the relations between
elements of the conﬁgurations? Therefore, to fully satisfy our relational fantasies, we must again tackle
the question posed at the introduction: without a driver for change, what is the meaning of a transition
amplitude?

Records and timelessness

In a true spatially relational theory, an instantaneous state of an observer is encoded in a partial ﬁeld
conﬁguration. There are no subjective overtones attributed to an observer – it is merely a (partial) state
of the ﬁelds. Of course, there are many regions of conﬁguration space where no such thing as an observer
will be represented.

Since each point is a possible ‘now’, and there is no evolution, each ‘now’ has an equal claim on
existing. This establishes the plane of existence, every ‘now’ that can exist, does exist! We are at least
partway towards the adage of quantum mechanics. If this was a discrete space, we could say that each
element has the same weight. This is known as the principle of indiﬀerence and it implies that we count
each copy of a similar observer once.18
But conﬁguration space is a continuous space, like R2 (but inﬁnite-dimensional). Unlike what is the
case with discrete spaces, there is no preferred way of counting points of R2. We need to imprint M
with a volume form; each volume form represents a diﬀerent way of counting conﬁgurations.

Born rule and the preferred conﬁguration. Contrary to what occurs in standard time-dependent
Many Worlds quantum mechanics, I will deﬁne a single, standard time-independent ‘volume element’
over conﬁguration space M. Integrated over a given region, this volume element will simply give the
volume, or the amount, of conﬁgurations in that region.19
The volume form V ([g])D[g] is deﬁned as a positive scalar function of the transition amplitude,
V ([g]) := F (W ([g∗], [g])), where F : C → R+ with the extra property that it preserves the multiplicative

17The full treatment of the gauge conditions requires a gauge-ﬁxed BRST formalism, which is a level of detail I don’t

need here. See [3] for a more precise deﬁnition, equation (28), where we use K(g1, [g2]) as opposed to W ([g1], [g2]).

18The intuition obtained for Many Worlds in the discrete conﬁguration spaces can be misleading for our purposes. In
that case, each ‘branch’ can be counted, and one needs a further explanation to count them according to the Born rule.
Based on this principle, and on the Epistemic Principle of Separability, Carroll et al claim that the Born rule can be derived
[16].

19Of course, these volume forms are divergent and technically diﬃcult to deﬁne. Properties of locality of the volume
form, discussed in [3] are essential to show that nonetheless their deﬁnition reduces to the usual Born rule for isolated ﬁnite-
dimensional systems. Furthermore, only ratios of the volume form have any meaning, and only in a Bayesian interpretation.

12

group structure,

F (z1z2) = F (z1)F (z2)

(12)

an important property to recover locality and an empiric notion of records from the transition amplitude
[3]. This measure, F , gives a way to “count” conﬁgurations, and it is assumed to act as a positive
functional of the only non-trivial function we have deﬁned on M, namely, the transition amplitude
W (q∗, q). Together with certain locality properties of W (q∗, q) discussed in [3], and the factorization
property of records (15) below, my hope is that (12) will uniquely lead to a derivation of the Born rule
in the future.
variable, q, and just assume that F (W (q∗, q)) = |W (q∗, q)|2, i.e.

Now, for simplicity of notation, let us denote the equivalence classes [g] by the former coordinate

V (q) = |W (q∗, q)|2

(13)

Still, in the deﬁnition of V (q) I have sneaked in a ‘in’ conﬁguration, q∗, which deﬁnes once and for
all the static volume form over (reduced) conﬁguration space. I deﬁne q∗ roughly as the simplest, most
structureless conﬁguration of the ﬁelds in question.

The preferred conﬁguration, q∗. This might sound subjective, but in fact it is not. Reduced
conﬁguration spaces may not form smooth manifolds, but only stratiﬁed manifolds in general. This
is because the symmetry group in question may act qualitatively diﬀerently on diﬀerent orbits. For
orbits corresponding to points that have a non-trivial stabilizer subgroups (subgroups that leave that
point ﬁxed) , the symmetry does not act freely, and thus the quotient of conﬁguration space wrt to the
symmetry may vary in dimensionality.

Stratiﬁed manifolds have nested “corners” – each stratum has as boundaries a lesser dimensional
isometries
stratum, and is indexed by the stabilizer subgroup of the symmetry group in question (e.g.
as a subgroup of Diﬀ(M)). The larger the stabilizer group, the lower the strata. Let Mo be the set of
metrics without isometries. This is a dense and open subset of M, the space of smooth metrics over M .
Let In be the isometry group of the metrics gn, such that the dimension of In is dn. Then the quotient
space of metrics with isometry group In forms a manifold with boundaries, Mn/Diﬀ(M ) = Sn. The
boundary of Sn decomposes into the union of Sn(cid:48) for n(cid:48) > n (see [17]). A useful picture to have in mind
for this structure is a cube (seen as a manifold with boundaries). The interior of the cube has boundaries
which decomposes into faces, whose boundaries decompose into lines, whose boundaries decompose into
points.

Conﬁgurations with the highest possible dimension of the stabilizer subgroup are what I deﬁne as q∗
– they are the pointiest corners of reduced conﬁguration space! And it is these preferred singular points
of conﬁguration space that we deﬁne as an origin of the transition amplitude.

Thus, depending on the symmetries acting of conﬁguration space, and on the topology of M , one
can have diﬀerent such preferred conﬁgurations. For the case at hand – in which we have both scale and
diﬀeomorphism symmetry and M = S3– there exists a unique such preferred point! The preferred q∗ of
M/(Diﬀ(M ) (cid:110) C) is the one corresponding to the round sphere.

Semi-classical records: recovering Time But, the astute reader may ask, having already deﬁned
q∗, we can set it as q1 and obtain a meaningful transition amplitude W (q1, q2) to ‘now’, represented by
q2? Yes, we can. At a fundamental level, q∗, together with a deﬁnition of F and the action, completely
specify the physical content of the theory by giving the volume of conﬁgurations in a given region of M.
But, if another class of object which I call records, exists, then one can more realistically model our
practice of the scientiﬁc method. For after all, in our everyday laboratory usage of quantum mechanics,
we don’t calculate the transition amplitude to the origin of the Universe. Instead, one calculates the
transition amplitude with respect to some not-too-distant initial conditions, some nearby ‘in’ state, q1.
The existence of records, embedded in the present conﬁguration q, formalizes this notion. It makes sense
out of amplitudes between a record and a record-holding conﬁguration, leaving the actual amplitude
between the record and the ‘origin’, q∗, redundant.

Let us sketch how this comes about. When semi-classical approximations may be made for the

transition amplitude between q∗ and a given conﬁguration, we have

Wcl(q∗, q) =

∆j exp ((i/)Scl[γj])

(14)

(cid:88)

γj

13

where the γj are curves that extremize the action and ∆ are certain weights for each one. Roughly
speaking, when all of γj go through a conﬁguration qr (cid:54)= q, I will deﬁne q as possessing a semi-classical
record of qr. Note that this is a statement about q, i.e. it is q that contains the record.20

Indeed, for records, it can be shown that the amplitude suﬀers a decomposition (this is shown in [2],

and works also for strings of records)

To show this, one uses the same techniques as to show that the usual semi-classical transition amplitude
has the semi-group property:

Wcl((q1, t1), (q3, t3)) =

dq2Wcl((q1, t1), (q2, t2))Wcl((q2, t2), (q3, t3))

W (q∗, q) (cid:39) W (q∗, qr)W (qr, q)
(cid:90)

(15)

(16)

In a simpliﬁed case of a system deparametrizable around the components tr
we immediately recover

2 of the record conﬁgurations,

Wcl(q∗, q) (cid:39)(cid:88)

Wcl(q∗, qr)Wcl(qr, q)

and for a single record we recover (15).

qr

Calculating the probability of q from equation (15), we get an equation of conditional probability, of

q on qr,

P (qr) = P (q|qr)P (qr)

If records are present, it would make absolute sense for ‘observers’ in q to attribute some of its properties
to the ‘previous existence’ of qr. It is as if conﬁguration qr had to ‘happen’ in order that q came into
existence.

When comparing relative amplitudes between possibly ﬁnding yourself in conﬁgurations q1 or q2,
both possessing the same records, the amplitude W (q∗, qr) factors out, becoming irrelevant. We don’t
need to remember what the origin of the Universe was, when doing experiments in the lab.21

I believe that indeed, it is diﬃcult to assign meaning to some future conﬁguration q in the timeless
context. Instead, what we do, is to compare expectations ‘now’, with retrodictions, which are embedded
in our records, or memories. When we have a record at q, then qr itself acquires meaning. Accordingly,
records imbue W (qr, q) with stronger epistemological status.

Furthermore, it is easy to show that when q1 is a record of q2 and there is a unique classical path
between the two conﬁgurations, then the entire path has an ordering of records. Namely, parametrizing
the path, γ(t), such that γ(0) = q1 , γ(t∗) = q2, then γ(t) is a record of γ(t(cid:48)) iﬀ t < t(cid:48). This ﬁnally
gives us back a complete notion of history, which is recovered only in the complete classical limit! This
retrodiction aspect begs for a Bayesian treatment of probabilities, which works well (but to we leave this
analysis for the appendix E).

If there is nothing to empirically distinguish between our normal view of history – as having actually
happened – on one hand, and the tight correlation between the present and the embedded past on the
other, why should we give more credence to the former interpretation? Bayesian analysis can pinpoint
no pragmatic distinction, and I see no reasons for preferring one over the other, except psychological
ones.

5 What are we afraid of ?

What usually unsettles people – including me – about this view is the damage it does to the idea of a
continuous conscious self. The nearly equal status of all instantaneous conﬁgurations of the Universe –
carrying on their backs our own present conscious states – raises alarms in our heads. Could it be that
each instant exists only unto itself, that all our myriad instantaneous states of mind exist separately,
but presently? This proposal appears to conﬂict with the narrative we have construed of our personas.
But perhaps, upon reﬂection, it shouldn’t bother us. For it is not so easy to put our ﬁnger on what a
continuous self really means.

Let’s have the experts chime in.

20A more precise deﬁnition of records using semi-classical coarse-grainings is left for the appendix D, deﬁnition 3.
21But note that whenever a record exists, the preferred conﬁguration q∗ is also a record. In fact, one could have deﬁned
it as the record, of all of conﬁguration space. Indeed, it does have the properties of being as unstructured as possible,
which we would not be amiss in taking to characterize an origin of the Universe.

14

The continuity of the self - Locke, Hume and Parﬁt

John Locke considered personal identity (or the self) to be founded on memory, much like my own view
here. He says in “Of Ideas of Identity and Diversity”:

“This may show us wherein personal identity consists: not in the identity of substance, but
[...]
[...] This personality extends itself beyond present
existence to what is past, only by consciousness”

in the identity of consciousness.

David Hume, wrote in “ A Treatise of Human Nature” that when we start introspecting, “we are never
intimately conscious of anything but a particular perception; man is a bundle or collection of diﬀerent
perceptions which succeed one another with an inconceivable rapidity and are in perpetual ﬂux and
movement.”.

Indeed, the notion of self, and continuity of the self, are elusive upon introspection.

I believe,
following Locke, that our self is determined biologically by patterns in our neural connections. Like
any other physical structure, under normal time evolution these patterns are subject to change. What
we consider to be a ‘self’ or a ‘personality’, is inextricably woven with the notion of continuity of such
patterns in (what we perceive as) time. Yes, these patterns may change, but they do so continuously. It
is this continuity which allows us to recognize a coherent identity.

In Reasons and Persons, Derek Parﬁt puts these intuitions to the test. He asks the reader to imagine
entering a ”teletransporter,” a machine that puts you to sleep, then destroys you, copying the information
of your molecular structure and then relaying it to Mars at the speed of light. On Mars, another machine
re-creates you, each atom in exactly the same relative position to all the other ones. Parﬁt poses the
question of whether or not the teletransporter is a method of travel – is the person on Mars the same
person as the person who entered the teletransporter on Earth? Certainly, when waking up on Mars, you
would feel like being you, you would remember entering the teletransporter in order to travel to Mars,
you would even remember eating a donut this morning.

Following this initial operation, the teletransporter on Earth is modiﬁed to not destroy the person
who enters it. Each replica left on Earth would claim to be you, and also remember entering the
teletransporter, and then getting out again, still on Earth. Using thought experiments such as these,
Parﬁt argues that any criteria we attempt to use to determine sameness of personal identity will be
lacking. What matters, to Parﬁt, is simply what he calls “Relation R”: psychological connectedness,
including memory, personality, and so on.

This is also my view, at least intellectually if not intuitively. And it applies to conﬁguration space
in the same way as it does in Parﬁt’s description. There exists a past conﬁguration, represented (but
not contained) in conﬁguration ‘now’ in the form of a record. This past conﬁguration has in it neural
patterns that bear a strong resemblance to neural patterns contained in conﬁguration ‘now’. Crucially,
these two conﬁgurations are connected by continuous extremal paths in conﬁguration space, ensuring that
indeed we can act as if they are psychologically connected. We can, and should, act as if one classically
evolved from the other. There seems to be no further reason for this conclusion to upset us, beyond
those reasons that already make us uncomfortable with Parﬁt’s thought experiment.

6 Conclusions

The idea of timelessness is certainly counter-intuitive.

But our own personal histories can indeed be pieced together from the static landscape of conﬁguration
space. Such histories are indiscernible from, but still somehow feel less real than our usual picture of our
pasts. As argued in the previous section, the individual existence of every instant seems to punch holes
in the integrity of our life histories. For this reason, the idea of timelessness threatens the ingrained
feeling that we are self-determining beings.

But this is a hollow threat. Forget about timelessness; free will and personal identity are troublesome
concepts all on their own. I like to compare them to mythical animals: Nessie, Yetis, unicorns and the
like. They are constructs of our minds, and – apart from blurry pictures – shall always elude close enough
inspection. Crypto-zoologists notwithstanding, Yetis and Unicorns are not endangered species. We need
not be overly concerned about encroaching on their natural habitat.

Crippling Time

15

“Time does not exist. There is just the furniture of the world that we call instants of time.
Something as ﬁnal as this should not be seen as unexpected. I see it as the only simple and
plausible outcome of the epic struggle between the basic principles of quantum mechanics and
general relativity. For the one – on its standard form at least – needs a deﬁnite time, but the
other denies it. How can theories with such diametrically opposed claims coexist peacefully?
They are like children squabbling over a toy called time. Isn’t the most eﬀect way to resolve
such squabbles to remove the toy?”[8]

Following the Eleatic view of the special ontological status of the present, here we have carved Time
away from spacetime, being left with timeless conﬁguration space as a result. If Time is the legs which
carries space forward, we might seem to have emerged from this operation with a severely handicapped
Universe.

The criticism is to the point. Even if Time does not exist as a separate entity in the Universe, our
conception of it needs to be recovered somehow. If there is no speciﬁc variable devoted to measuring
time, it needs to be recovered from relational properties of conﬁgurations. This essay showed that this
can be done, in explicit mathematical form.

Rehabilitating Time The plan was to recover Time by using a semi-classical approximation of a
fundamentally timeless quantum mechanics theory in conﬁguration space. Mathematically, before all
else we need to ﬁnd a way to breath life into the conﬁguration space propagator, W (q1, q2), by deﬁning
a second conﬁguration other than the present conﬁguration, ‘now’.

This ﬁrst step was accomplished by deﬁning a preferred conﬁguration q∗. It is preferred in that it is
the most structureless point of reduced conﬁguration space, and it is also the conﬁguration representing
the “ pointiest corner” of conﬁguration space. The precise choice of q∗ depends both on the topology of
the spatial manifold M and on the relational symmetry group at hand. For the case of M = S3 and the
symmetry group Diﬀ(M ) (cid:110) C, q∗ is represented by (the orbit of) the round metric on S3.
With the introduction of the preferred ‘in’ conﬁguration, we deﬁned a positive scalar density (a volume
form) on conﬁguration space, V (q)Dq. Restrictions of locality (see [3]) and factorization properties
(required to make V (q) compatible with the later introduction of records), limit our choices, leading us
to conjecture that we can recover the Born form, V (q) = |W (q∗, q)|2.
But in any case, this state of aﬀairs is still not completely satisfactory. The number |W (q∗, q)|2,
which makes reference to some “ preferred initial conﬁguration”, is too removed from everyday practice
of physics, and it seems to say nothing about why I believe I really had a donut this morning. To
get around this, we need the emergence of records which are more local in conﬁguration space. In the
semi-classical path integral representation, there indeed exists such a candidate object to play this role.
We have named this object a semi-classical record (or just a record here).

If qr is the record possessed by the conﬁguration ‘now’, q, then W (qr, q) can encode our immediate
pasts, through a correlation of amplitudes. The probability of q becomes the conditional probability of q
given qr, P (q) = P (q|qr)P (qr). Time emerges as something that we infer from the present. Its emergence
requires a shift from the notion of “state” (or spacetime) to that of “process”, between a record and the
present.

This timeless picture requires a Bayesian approach to science, which I brieﬂy discuss in the appendix
E. In certain circumstances, all of the conﬁgurations between qr and q will themselves deﬁne an ordering
of records, completely reproducing our notion of continuous history.
In such cases, each previous run of
an experiment is encoded in each posterior run. This feature gives us access to frequentist approaches
to probabilities, even though we only have access to conﬁguration ‘now’. The equations emerging for
a Bayesian treatment for the ﬁtness of a given theory are identical to the usual, timeful ones, as was
shown in [2].

The more records a certain conﬁguration has, the more data one has to test their theories. Consis-
tency of multiple records within a given conﬁguration increases our level of conﬁdence in a theory, and
inconsistency decreases it, as expected. The more such types of consistent structure a conﬁguration has,
the more we will have perceived time to have passed. In other words, an arrow of time points from q∗ –
the most symmetric conﬁguration – to ones that have consistent records.

Regarding duration, unlike GR where proper time is intrinsic to the worldline itself, duration needs

to be deﬁned as a measure of local change in conformal geometry. 22

22Not only is this possible, but it has been done for one theory that is not intrinsically formulated in spacetime. In [18],
it was shown that weak matter perturbations evolving through standard unitary Hamiltonian evolution in shape dynamics,
will perceive conformal geometry change – or duration – in the exact proportion to rebuild an Einstein spacetime (in a
particular foliation, called CMC).

16

We have gone from the picture of a Universe that limps, to one that lilts – to the sound of complex

structures encoding dynamics, consistent records, duration and an arrow of time.

Relationalism and Laws of the Instant
Interestingly, by formulating a theory that requires no
external input other than what is contained in conﬁguration space itself, we put severe restrictions on
the types of symmetries that can exist. Namely, we only allow those symmetries whose action depends
solely on the conﬁguration on which it is acting. The ones that obey these restrictions we call, ‘Laws of
the Instant”.

Had we allowed symmetries which are not ‘Laws of the Instant’, the transition amplitude would not
have been a well-deﬁned object by itself, and records would not be invariant under such symmetries,
thus losing objective meaning. Fortuitously, we ﬁnd that the most general Laws of the Instant are those
that indeed embody the full gamut of relational symmetries.

I want to repeat once more that the theory of general relativity does not accommodate all mani-
festations of spacetime relationalism. In particular, it does not incorporate relationalism of scale: the
theory is not conformally invariant (unlike its unitarily-challenged cousin, conformal gravity). In a 3+1
formulation, general relativity still does not respect the Laws of the Instant; refoliations are not intrinsic
to conﬁguration space.

Spatially relational theories also have better control over questions of unitarity (unlike conformal
gravity), and have the correct number of degrees of freedom (unlike Horava gravity), although we have
said little in these directions here. Not to mention that conﬁguration space only has a principal ﬁber
bundle structure for symmetry groups which are ‘Laws of the Instant’, and this is a useful structure to
have for explicitly writing the path integral [3].

The challenge is to ﬁnd ‘natural’ forms of the action for completely spatially relational theories, which
are in accord with experiment. Shape dynamics, with its non-local Hamiltonian, might be deemed overly
contrived. In the future, we need to investigate the phenomenology of the more natural relational model,
given by (30).23

What gives, Wheeler’s quip or superpositions? Neither, really.

Perhaps our shortcomings in the discovery of a viable theory of quantum gravity are telling us that
spacetime is the obstacle. Though at ﬁrst sight we are indeed mutilating the beautiful unity of space
and time, this split should not be seen as a step back from Einstein’s insights. I believe the main insight
of general relativity, contained in Wheeler’s sentence (1), is about the dynamism of space and time
themselves. There is no violence being done to this insight here.

Spatial geometry appears dynamic – warping throughout evolution whenever we have a string of
records. Regarding the dynamism of Time, the notion of ‘duration’ is emergent from relational properties
of space. Thus duration too, is dynamic and space-dependent.

Nonetheless, all relational properties are encoded in the static landscape of conﬁguration space. The
point is that this landscape is full of hills and valleys, dictated by the preferred volume form that sits on
top of it. From the way that the volume form distributes itself on conﬁguration space, certain classical
ﬁeld histories – special curves in conﬁguration space – can give a thorough illusion of change. This
illusion is indistinguishable from how we perceive motion, history, and time.

With regards to the quantum mechanics adage, the processes W (qr, q) straightforwardly embody “ev-
erything that can happen, does happen”. The concept of superposition of causal structures (or even that
of superposition of geometries), is to be replaced by interference between paths in conﬁguration space.
By looking at the processes between records and record-holding conﬁgurations, we can straightforwardly
make sense of interference, or lack thereof, between (coarse-grained) histories of the Universe.

In all honesty, I don’t know if formulating a theory in which space and time appear dynamical, and in
which we can give precise meaning to superpostions of alternative histories, is enough to quantize gravity.
Although the foundations seem solid, the proof is in the pudding, and we must further investigate tests
for these ideas.

But I also don’t believe that dropping Time from the picture is abdicating hard-won knowledge
about spacetime. Indeed, we can recover a notion of history, we can implement strict relationalism, we
transﬁgure the ‘measurement problem’, and we can make sense of a union of the principles of quantum

23 This model is particularly interesting. The most general local model obeying the Laws of the Instant which are second
order in time derivatives also can admit a potential term which is a function of the Chern-Simons functional. Thus (30) is
the simplest action without a potential, i.e. that can be written as a geodesic in conformal superspace [3].

17

mechanics and geometrodynamics.24

It seems to me that there are many emotions against this resolution, but very few arguments; as I
said at the beginning of these conclusions, accepting timelessness is deeply counter-intuitive. But such
a resolution would necessarily change only how we view reality, not how we experience it.25 This is the
hallmark of a philosophical insight, albeit one heavily couched on physics. According to Wittgenstein:
“Once the new way of thinking has been established, the old problems vanish; indeed they become hard
to recapture. For they go with our way of expressing ourselves and, if we clothe ourselves in a new form
of expression, the old problems are discarded along with the old garment.”

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank Lee Smolin and Wolfgang Wieland for discussions and help with the writing,
and Athmeya Jayaram for introducing me to the work of Derek Parﬁt. This research was supported
by Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics. Research at Perimeter Institute is supported by the
Government of Canada through Industry Canada and by the Province of Ontario through the Ministry
of Research and Innovation.

APPENDIX

A Zeno’s paradox and solipsism of the instant: a matter of

topology

In a timeless (non-relativistic) theory, the space of all possible instants, i.e. all possible snapshots of the
Universe, is also the space of conﬁgurations of the Universe. But if there is no change, and no notion of
time evolution, then all of the elements of the space of conﬁgurations are disconnected, and there is no
manner of “hopping” from one to the other.

It might not seem like it, but the discussion about whether we have a preponderance of ‘a collection
of individual instants’ over ‘a continuous curve of instants’ hinges, albeit disguisedly, on the topology we
assume for conﬁguration space. Our modern dismissal of Zeno’s paradox relies on the calculus concept of
a limit. But in fact, a limit point in a topological space also requires the notion of topology: a limit point
of a set C in a topological space X is a point p ∈ X (not necessarily in C) that can be “approximated”
by points of C in the sense that every neighborhood of p with respect to the topology on X also contains
a point of C other than p itself.

In the ﬁnest topology – the discrete topology – each subset is declared to be open. On the real line,
this would imply that every point is an open set. Let us call an abstract pre-curve in X the image of
an injective mapping from R (endowed with the usual metric topology) to the set X. Thus no pre-curve
on X can be continuous if X is endowed with the ﬁnest topology. Because the mapping is injective,
the inverse of each point of its image (which is an open set in the topology of X) is a single point in
R, which is not an open set in the standard metric topology of R. Likewise, with the ﬁnest topology,
Zeno’s argument becomes inescapable – when every point is an open set, there are no limit points and
one indeed cannot hop continuously from one point to the next.

In my opinion, the idea that Zeno and Parmenides were inductively aiming at was precisely that of
a discrete topology, where there is a void between any two given points in the real line. If X is taken
to be conﬁguration space, this absolute “solipsism of the instant” would indeed incur on the conclusions
of the Eleatics, and frozen time would necessarily follow. However, this topology cannot be obtained by
inductively reﬁning metric topologies.

With a more appropriate topology on conﬁguration space, there indeed exists a connection between a
present fossil discovery and the event of the death of the dinosaur we now ﬁnd buried deep underground.
I can safely assume that there is a continuous sequence of conﬁgurations connecting me eating that donut
this morning, to this present moment of reminiscence. One could think of this sequence in terms of a
continuous reel of ﬁlm, with each frame being one instant, or one conﬁguration of my surroundings. In

24Perturbative techniques of course still need to be employed, even in the semi-classical limit, to make sense of the

weights ∆ in (14). This, and other issues to do with renormalizability are left for future study.

25On the other hand, from our search for a natural action embodying timelessness we were led to (30). This theory needs

to be phenomenologically investigated.

18

other words, there is a continuous curve of conﬁgurations connecting conﬁguration ‘bite on donut’ to
conﬁguration ‘me reminiscing about donut’.

The point being that with an appropriate topology we can have timelessness in a brander version
than the Eleatics. Even assuming that reality is entirely contained in conﬁguration space without any
absolute time – i.e. the space of all possible snapshots of all possible Universes. With an appropriate
coarser (e.g. metric) topology on conﬁguration space, we do not have to worry about a radical “solipsism
of the instant” as there are at least continuous curves interpolating between a record and a record-holding
conﬁguration.

B Timeless quantum mechanics, the canonical theory
Conﬁguration space, M, is coordinitized by qa, for a = 1,··· , n. An observation yields a complete set
of qa, which is called an event.
Ω = T ∗M is the cotangent bundle to conﬁguration space, with coordinates qa and their momenta
pa. The classical dynamics is fully determined once one ﬁxes the Hamiltonian constraint surface in Ω,
given by H = 0, where H : Ω → Rk is the Hamiltonian of the system.
If k = 1, then we have a
single Hamiltonian constraint, whose action only generates reparametrizations of curves in phase space,
if k > 1, then we have further gauge-invariance.
curve ¯γ in T ∗M such that the following action is extremized:

A curve γ ∈ M is a physical motion connecting the events qa

2 if there exists an unparametrized

1 and qa

S[¯γ] =

padqa

(17)

for curves lying on the constraint surface H(qa, pa) = 0, and are such that ¯γ’s projection to M connects
qa
1 and qa

2 . By parametrizing the curve with a parameter τ , we get the familiar form:

(cid:90)

dτ(cid:0)pa ˙qa − Ni(τ )H i(qa, pa)(cid:1)

S[¯γ] =

(cid:90)

¯γ

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

where the N i are Lagrange multipliers.

One can now deﬁne the fundamental transition amplitudes between conﬁguration eigenstates:26

where ˆP is the “evolution operator”:

ˆP :=

dτ e−iτ ˆH

W (q1, q2) := (cid:104)q1| ˆP|q2(cid:105)

(cid:90)

where ˆH is the canonically quantized (with Weyl ordering) Hamiltonian. Note that since one integrates
over all τ , the projector is parametrization independent. To obtain physical states, one need still use the
quantization of the constraints, as in (7):

ˆH|ψ(cid:105) = 0

We will for now implicitly consider the case of a single constraint, H : Ω → R.

Given two regions in conﬁguration space, R1, R2, we have that the probability of an observation in

R2 given an observation in R1 is:

P (R1, R2) =

where

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2

W (R2, R2)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

W (R1, R2)

(cid:112)
W (R1, R1)(cid:112)
(cid:90)
(cid:90)

W (R1, R2) =

dq1

R1

R2

dq2 W (q1, q2)

26As much as possible, I want to avoid technicalities which won’t be required here. Having said this, formally one would
have had to deﬁne the so-called kinematical Hilbert space K for the quantum states over M by using a Gelfand triple over
M with measure ddqa = dq1 · · · dqd, i.e. S ⊂ K ⊂ S(cid:48). This is not necessary in my case, because we will not require a
Hilbert space, as we will see.

19

Standard non-relativistic quantum mechanics through deparametrizable systems

If one can single out a degree of freedom to parametrize motion on a whole region of conﬁguration space,
we can write qa = (t, qi), in which case one gets a momenta conjugate to time and writes H(t, qi, pt, pi) =
pt + Ho(t, qi, pi). In this case, by inserting a decomposition of the identity in terms of eigenstates pt and
E of ˆpt and ˆHo, one obtains:

W (qa

1 , qa

2 ) = W (t1, qi

2, t2, qi

2) =

dE e−iE(t1−t2)(cid:104)qi

1|E(cid:105)(cid:104)E|qi

2(cid:105) = G(t1, qi

2, t2, qi
2)

(23)

(cid:90)

where G(t1, qi

2, t2, qi

2) is the usual transition amplitude in quantum mechanics.27

Gauge transformations
The presence of more than one constraint, i.e. H : Ω → Rk, indicates further gauge symmetries of the
system. In this case we must impose all of the respective equations (21) simultaneously, which generally
is diﬃcult. When the the commutation of the constraints form a true Lie Algebra:

[ ˆH i, ˆH j] = f ij
k

ˆH k,

(24)

i.e. when f ij
k have no phase space-dependence, diﬀerent methods can be used to ﬁnd the projection
onto the physical states, the most straightforward of which is called ‘group-averaging’ [20]. This consists
in integrating over the group:

(cid:90)

|Ψ(cid:105) =

dµ(U ) ˆU|ψ(cid:105)

where dµ is the Haar measure, which is translation invariant. In the more general case, this technique
will in general incur in anomalies.28

G

C Relational symmetries and laws of the instant

In the case at hand, suppose that the transformations in phase space are given by a Hamiltonian vector
ﬁeld, associated to a smeared functional F [g, π, η], polynomial in its variables. For this to have an action
on conﬁguration space that is independent of the momenta, F [g, π, η] must be linear in the momenta.
This already severely restricts the forms of the functional to

A Poisson bracket here results in
{F [g, π, η1], F [g, π, η2]} =

(cid:90)

d3x

F [g, π, η] =

(cid:90)
(cid:18) δF1(g, η1)ab

δgcd

F1(g, η)abπab

πabF1(g, η2)cd − δF1(g, η2)ab

δgcd

πabF1(g, η1)cd

(cid:19)

where F1(g, η)ab must be a covariant tensor of rank two.

If F1 has no derivatives of the metric, it will straightforwardly commute. But with no derivatives the

only objects we can form are:

F1(g, η)ab = ηgab , and F1(g, η)ab = ηabgab

In the ﬁrst case, these are just conformal transformations, in the second, they would imply that πab = 0,
a constraint killing any possibility of dynamics, which is still consistent (also consistent with the strictly
Eleatic Universe).

27 One should be careful to note however, that in standard non-relativistic quantum theory, time is not an operator,
and thus ∆t = 0, i.e. measurements are made at a speciﬁc instant. Thus, although at the level of transition amplitudes,
equation (19) for deparametrizable systems reproduces G(t1, qi
2), the probabilities for measurements performed with
some inaccuracy ∆t in the time variable need not match. The basic reason is that according to (22), one sums over the
transition amplitudes ﬁrst, and then one takes the squared norm. Thus they are summed interferentially. For standard
quantum mechanics with time dependence, one takes the squared norm at each instant and then integrates over the time
taken by the measurement. The temporal resolution ∆t necessary for a good agreement between the two theories was
studied in [19] for simple systems.

2, t2, qi

28In the more general case one should use BRST techniques, but in the Lie groupoid case – i.e. when the structure
k(q, p) – is still much more problematic, as one has a BRST charge that is not (usually)

constants depend on the ﬁelds, f ij
of rank 1 in ghost momenta [21].

20

The point now is to show that only with one derivative – which implies a Lie derivative for a covariant
object – they still weakly commute. With more derivatives of the metric, the conjecture is that one does
not close the algebra. For example,

F1(g, η)ab = η(αRab + βRgab)

it is straightforward but tedious to show that the algebra does not close for any values of α and β. If
one instead chose a term of the form βRηab one can show that the rank of this constraint is not constant
along phase space. Furthermore, it implies that almost everywhere πab = 0, as before. The conjecture is
that these conclusions hold order by order in number of derivatives of the metric.

One could also impose a more stringent deﬁnition of ‘law of the instant’ , as acting independently on

both metric and momenta. Of course, the proof is much more straightforward then, yielding:

(cid:18)(cid:90)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)(cid:90)

(cid:19)

(gab, πab) → (exp

dτ ξ(τ )

where exp(cid:82) dτ ξ(τ ) represents the ﬂow of the vector ﬁeld part of ξ(t) and the usual exponential of an

inﬁnitesimal Weyl transformation, and the · denotes the respective group action. On the metric, this
action is by pull-back for the diﬀeomorphisms and pointwise multiplication for Weyl, and for the momenta
it is by inverse of the push-forward for the diﬀeomorphisms and the inverse scalar multiplication for Weyl
[15].

dτ ξ(τ )

(25)

· gab , exp

· πab)

C.1 Conﬁguration space metrics

Superspace One nice thing about the space of metrics is that itself comes with a supermetric, deﬁned,
(cid:90)
for v , w ∈ TgM, at the base point gab ∈ M by:29

(cid:104)v , w(cid:105)g =

d3x

g gacgbdvabwcd

√

(26)

This supermetric induces a metric topology on M.30 Furthermore, the inner product (26) is invariant
wrt to diﬀeomorphisms acting through pull-back. That is, the directions along the diﬀeomorphism orbits
in M are Killing wrt the metric (26) (see [22]).

Conformal Superspace However, the supermetric (26) is not invariant wrt conformal transforma-
tions, because of the presence of

g. Thus we construct:

√

(cid:90)

(cid:113)

(cid:104)v , w(cid:105)g =

√

g

d3x

C ef Cef gacgbdvabwcd

(27)

where Cab is the Cotton-York tensor, which is both traceless and transverse, and has the correct conformal
weight for the inner product to be conformally invariant.

Examples of relational conformal geoemetrodynamical theories

Let me exemplify the constructions above with two diﬀerent actions. The ﬁrst is that of shape dynamics,
and is given in Hamiltonian form by

(cid:90) √

g(cid:0)(e6φo − ρπabgab − piabLξgab

(cid:1)

(28)
where Lξ denotes the Lie derivative, and φo is deﬁned implicitly from the modiﬁed Lichnerowicz-York
equation [23]:

HSD =

g(cid:0)e6φ(−(t2/6) + 2Λ) + e2φ(−R + 8(∇aφ∇aφ + ∇2φ))(cid:1) = 0

(29)

e−6φ πabπab√
g

+

√

29In fact, it comes with a one-parameter family of supermetrics, where we substitute gacgbd → gacgbd + λgabgcd. This
supermetric however is only positive for λ > −1/3. Note also that we are not symmetrizing the DeWitt supermetric
because we are assuming that it is acting on tangent vectors of M, which are already symmetric.

30More formally, one would work with what is called a weak Whitney topology, which roughly is a norm on the jet

bundles of the sections. We will ignore these more formal aspects here.

21

The problem with (28) is that it can be put in this form only when it is deparametrizable (see [24]).
Otherwise, one must use not the full group of scale transformations as symmetries, but only those that
preserve the total volume of space. I.e. instead of ρπabgab one must use (ρ − (cid:104)ρ(cid:105))πabgab where

(cid:82) √
(cid:82) √

gρ
g

(cid:104)ρ(cid:105) =

This is a non-local restriction, and is hard to make sense of from a purely relational manner.

The second action is given in its Lagrangian Jacobi form (see [23, 3]): We have the reparametrization

and conformal-diﬀeomorphism invariant geodesic action:

(cid:90)

(cid:115)(cid:90)

S =

dt

M

(cid:112)

√

gd3x

C abCab ( ˙gcd − (Lξg)cd − ρgcd) ( ˙gcd − (Lξg)cd − ρgcd))

(30)

where ξa and ρ are the Lagrange multipliers corresponding to diﬀeomorphisms and conformal transfor-
mations, respectively.

To stress, this is a fully conformal diﬀeomorphism invariant action with the same physical degrees
of freedom as general relativity, but which does not have local refoliation invariance, only a global
reparametrization one. Equation (30) is furthermore a purely geodesic-type action in Riem, with just one
global lapse and thus one global notion of time, as such it also possesses inherent value in a relationalist
setting. Classical solutions are one-parameter collections of conformal geometries, which extremize the
total length according to a given supermetric (27). Although this theory is completely relational – it is
not yet clear whether it will reproduce standard tests of general relativity, and more analysis is required.
As a last comment, I address a usual concern: we never know exactly which metric conﬁguration we
are at. That is true. To deal with this, one should use not the usual conﬁguration space, but an eﬀective
one. For instance, one which only takes into account eigenmodes of the Laplacian at each point above a
certain cut-oﬀ. Of course, one should then use the eﬀective action to that scale, as opposed to the bare
action above. These issues are brieﬂy discussed in [3].

D Preferred coarse-grainings and records

The following deﬁnitions are taken from [2]. They assume that conﬁguration space (or reduced conﬁg-
uration space) possesses a metric, with respect to which one can deﬁne tubular neighborhoods of given
radii around non-intersecting paths. Γ(φ∗, φ) is the space of unparametrized paths between φ∗ and φ.
Deﬁning coarse–grained histories between two conﬁgurations φ∗ and φf , requires us to ﬁrst deﬁne a
collection of subsets of Γ(φ∗, φf ), {Cα, α ∈ Λ}, where each path γ ∈ Cα has a bundle νγ ⊂ Cα. The
amplitude kernel for Cα is:

(cid:90)

Wα :=

Dγ(t)e−iS[γ(t)]/

(31)

I then deﬁne:

Cα

Deﬁnition 1 (Coarse-graining) A set of coarse–grained histories {Cα ⊂ Γ(φ∗, φf ), α ∈ I} between
two conﬁgurations φ∗ and φf will be said to be exclusive and exhaustive to order  if i) Cα ∩ Cα(cid:48) = ∅
for α (cid:54)= α(cid:48) (exclusive, i.e. no path belongs to two α’s) ii) each element γ in Cα has a bundle νγ and iii)
such that

W (φ∗, φf ) =

Wα + O() =

Dγ(t)ei(S[γ(t)]/) + O()

(32)

(cid:90)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i.e. the total transition amplitude from φ∗ to φf is approximated to order  (in the absolute value sense)
by taking the limited path integral of paths contained in the coarse-grained histories (exhaustive).

α

α

Cα

and φ. Each element is deﬁned by Cα = {γ ∈ Γ(φ∗, φ) ∩ ((cid:83)

Deﬁnition 2 (Extremal coarse-grainings (ECs)) An -exhaustive extremal coarse-graining for the
paths in Γ(φ∗, φ) is a coarse-graining {Cα, α ∈ I} seeded in the extremal paths {γα, α ∈ I} between φ∗
φ∈γα Bρmin(φ))}. The radius ρmin is the

minimum such that the coarse-graining is exhaustive to the given order ().

This allows us to deﬁne the semi-classical records as:

22

Figure 2: An extremal coarse-graining between φ∗ and φ in conﬁguration space M, consisting of the
elements C1 and C2, seeded by the extremal paths γ1, γ2, with radius ρmin. Here φ contains a single
segmented semi-classical record of φr (see [2]).

Deﬁnition 3 (Semi-classical record (single segmented)) Given an initial conﬁguration φ∗, φ and
{Cα}α∈I the -extremal coarse graining (def. 2) between φ∗ and φ, of radius ρmin, φ holds a (single-
segmented) semi-classical record of a ﬁeld conﬁguration φr to order , if the ball Bρmin(φr) is contained
in every Cα, i.e. Bρmin(φr) ⊂ Cα,∀α ∈ I. (see ﬁgure 1 below).

With these deﬁnitions, it can be shown [2] that

Proposition 1 For a (single-segmented) semi-classical record, we have:

W (φ∗, φ) = W (φ∗, φr)W (φr, φ)

(33)

E Bayesian analysis

Let us call ‘an observation’ E a property of correlations within a conﬁguration. We call the manifold
M(Eo) the manifold which has records of observation Eo. Given a theory Ti (where i indexes the theory
we are discussing), the probability of observation E1 is given by the relative volume of observers:

P (E|Ti) =

Vi(E1)
Vi(M(Eo))

:=

Fi(φ)Dφ
Fi(φ)Dφ

E1

M(Eo )

(cid:82)

(cid:82)

(cid:90)

23

In Bayesian analysis we want to judge the ability of the theories to explain a given distribution of the
observation given the theory This number is called the ‘likelihood’ of the theory Ti given the observation
of E. We want to compare the chances that we will ﬁnd ourselves correlated with a “new” observation
E1, according to the two distinct theories above. Assuming that (33) holds for Eo and E1, that F

factorizes according to (12),(cid:90)

Fi(φ)Dφ = Fi(K(φ∗, Eo))

Fi(K(Eo, φ))Dφ

E1

E1

and using Bayes rule, we can determine the posterior probability of the theory given the records Eo and
observation E1:

P (Ti|E1) ≈ P (Ti)P (E1|Ti, Eo)

P (E1)

where P (E1|Ti, Eo) is obtained from (34) by the replacement Fi(φ) → Fi(K(Eo, φ)).
It should be
interpreted as the probability that you would ﬁnd E1 if Ti is correct, and you have already ‘observed’
Eo (it is a record). For conﬁgurations that have many records of properties of E we can – by just looking
at these records – update the prior of the next (or present) such observation En. This is the standard
way in which we test our theories, nothing needs to change.

(34)

(35)

φγ2ρminC1γ1φrC2φ∗References

[1] D.-W. Chiou, “Timeless path integral for relativistic quantum mechanics,” Class. Quant. Grav.,

vol. 30, p. 125004, 2013.

[2] H. Gomes, “Path integrals in conﬁguration space and the emergence of classical behavior for closed

systems,” 2015.

[3] H. Gomes, “Semi-classical locality for the non-relativistic path integral in conﬁguration space,”

[4] R. Arnowitt, S. Deser, and C. Misner, “The dynamics of general relativity pp.227264,,” in in Grav-

itation: an introduction to current research, L. Witten, ed., Wiley, New York, 1962.

[5] S. Carlip and H. Gomes, “Lorentz Invariance in Shape Dynamics,” Class.Quant.Grav., vol. 32, no. 1,

p. 015021, 2015.

[6] B. Dittrich, P. A. Hoehn, T. A. Koslowski, and M. I. Nelson, “Chaos, Dirac observables and con-

straint quantization,” 2015.

[7] P. C. Hohenberg, “An Introduction to consistent quantum theory,” Rev.Mod.Phys., vol. 82, pp. 2835–

2844, 2010.

[8] J. Barbour, ’The End of Time: The Next Revolution in Physics. Oxford University Press, 1999.

[9] J. B. Barbour, “The timelessness of quantum gravity: Ii. the appearance of dynamics in static

conﬁgurations,” Classical and Quantum Gravity, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 2875, 1994.

[10] J. F. Brian Cox, Everything that can happen does happen. Allen Lane, 2011.

[11] P. Horava, “Quantum Gravity at a Lifshitz Point,” Phys.Rev., vol. D79, p. 084008, 2009.

[12] M. Reuter, “Nonperturbative evolution equation for quantum gravity,” Phys.Rev., vol. D57, pp. 971–

985, 1998.

[13] C. Rovelli, Quantum Gravity. Cambridge University Press, 2007.

[14] H. Gomes, S. Gryb, and T. Koslowski, “Einstein gravity as a 3D conformally invariant theory,”

Class. Quant. Grav., vol. 28, p. 045005, 2011.

[15] A. Fischer and J. Marsden, “The manifold of conformally equivalent metrics,” Can. J. Math., vol. 29,

pp. 193–209, (1977).

[16] C. T. Sebens and S. M. Carroll, “Self-Locating Uncertainty and the Origin of Probability in Ev-

erettian Quantum Mechanics,” 2014.

[17] A. R. Fischer, “The theory of superspace,” in Proceedings of the Relativity Conference held 2-6 June,
1969 in Cincinnati, OH. Edited by Moshe Carmeli, Stuart I. Fickler, and Louis Witten. New York:
Plenum Press, 1970., p.303, 1970.

[18] T. A. Koslowski, “Shape Dynamics and Eﬀective Field Theory,” Int.J.Mod.Phys., vol. A28,

p. 1330017, 2013.

[19] D. Marolf and C. Rovelli, “Relativistic quantum measurement,” Phys. Rev., vol. D66, p. 023510,

2002.

[20] D. Marolf, “Group averaging and reﬁned algebraic quantization: Where are we now?,” in Recent
developments in theoretical and experimental general relativity, gravitation and relativistic ﬁeld the-
ories. Proceedings, 9th Marcel Grossmann Meeting, MG’9, Rome, Italy, July 2-8, 2000. Pts. A-C,
2000.

[21] M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim, Quantization of gauge systems. Princeton University Press, 1992.

[22] D. Ebin, “The manifold of riemmanian metrics,” Symp. Pure Math., AMS,, vol. 11,15, 1970.

[23] J. W. York, “Gravitational degrees of freedom and the initial-value problem,” Phys. Rev. Lett.,

vol. 26, pp. 1656–1658, 1971.

[24] F. Mercati, “A Shape Dynamics Tutorial,” 2014.

24

