6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
7
5
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Role of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction for magnetism in transition-metal chains at

Pt step-edges

B. Schweﬂinghaus, B. Zimmermann, M. Heide, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Bl¨ugel

Peter Gr¨unberg Institut and Institute for Advanced Simulation,
Forschungszentrum J¨ulich and JARA, 52425 J¨ulich, Germany

(Dated: March 7, 2016)

We present an ab initio study exploring chiral magnetism in one-dimensional monatomic Mn, Fe,
and Co chains deposited at the Pt(664) step-edge by means of density functional theory (DFT). The
analysis is embedded in a micromagnetic model, where besides the spin stiﬀness and the magnetic
anisotropy energy, the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) is taken into account. Although
the atomic structure is the same for all three systems, not only the size but also the direction of
their eﬀective Dzyaloshinskii vectors (D-vectors) diﬀer from system to system. The latter is in
contradiction to the Fert-Levy model of the DMI in metals. For the Mn chain we predict a long-
period spin spiral of unique rotational sense determined by the oﬀ-symmetry direction of the D-
vector winding the otherwise atomic-scale antiferromagnetic phase in a plane whose surface normal
is tilted relative to the normal of the Pt surface by 62◦ towards the upper step of the surface. The
Fe and Co chains show a ferromagnetic ground state since the DMI is too weak to overcome their
respective magnetic anisotropy barriers. An analysis of domain walls within the latter two systems
reveals a Bloch wall for the Fe chain and a N´eel wall of unique rotational sense for the Co chain in
a plane tilted by 29◦ towards the lower step. Due to the regarded step-edge structure, this work
provides also insight into the DMI due to roughness at surfaces and interfaces of magnets. We
provide expressions relating ab initio results to model parameters entering a spin-lattice as well as
a micromagnetic model. We proof that a planar homogeneous spiral of classical spins of a given
wave vector rotating in a plane with a rotation vector parallel to the D-vector is an exact solution
of a spin-lattice model for a periodic solid including Heisenberg exchange and DMI. For each wave
vector of the two-dimensional Brillouin zone we ﬁnd two stationary states representing two spirals
of opposite chirality whose energies diﬀer by the DM energy. In the vicinity of a collinear magnetic
state assuming that the DMI is much smaller than the exchange interaction, the curvature and slope
of the energy of the spiral as function of the wave vector provides directly the values of the spin
stiﬀness and the spiralization required in micromagnetic models. The validity of the Fert-Levy model
for the evaluation of micromagnetic DMI parameters and for the analysis of ab initio calculations
for chains is explored. The results suggest some care has to be taken applying the model to inﬁnite
periodic systems.

PACS numbers: 75.70.Tj, 71.15.Mb, 71.70.Gm, 73.90.+f

I.

INTRODUCTION

In a seminal work, Gambardella et al.1,2 showed for the
ﬁrst time the presence of a truly one-dimensional (1D)
metallic magnet. They have succeeded in growing high-
density arrays of monatomic Co chains on vicinal Pt(997)
surfaces,3–5 denoted as Co/Pt(997), and investigated the
magnetic properties by X-ray magnetic circular dichro-
ism (XMCD). They found that below a blocking temper-
ature of about TB = 15 K a long-range ordered collinear
spin state is observed with magnetic moments aligned in
the easy axis direction. The authors explained this ferro-
magnetic order with a large magnetic anisotropy energy
(MAE) of ∆E = (2.0±0.2) meV / Co atom that counter-
acts the magnetic ﬂuctuations due to the ﬁnite tempera-
ture. The success in growing and measuring 1D magnetic
monatomic chain structures as well as a detection of an
unusual easy axis direction pointing perpendicular to the
chain direction and tilted by an angle of 43◦ towards the
upper terrace triggered theoretical investigations based
on density functional theory (DFT),6–11 that by in large
veriﬁed the unusual direction of the easy axis. The strong

MAE could be traced back to the large spin-orbit cou-
pling (SOC) contribution of the Pt substrate. Succeeding
these pioneering experiments alternative 1D systems had
been investigated, among those FePt alloys12 and sub-
monolayer Fe stripes,13,14 both on Pt(997), as well as
Fe stripes15 and Co zigzag chains,16 both on an Ir(001)
(5×1) surface.

In this paper we address the question in how far
these results and their interpretation remain unchanged
in the light of the recently discovered interface in-
duced Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI).17 The
DMI18,19 appears in magnetic systems that lack inversion
symmetry and exhibit strong SOC. Only recently it was
found to be an indispensable ingredient to understand
non-collinear magnetic structures of unique rotational
sense observed in thin ﬁlms, as for the ﬁrst time demon-
strated by Bode et al.17 who measured and analyzed a
Mn monolayer on a W(110) substrate. Up to now a num-
ber of similar systems are known in which the DMI leads
to magnetic ground states that are described as cycloidal
spin spirals20–22 or to the formation of a two-dimensional
generalization of spirals with one-dimensional propaga-

tion vectors, the topological magnetic skyrmions.23,24
Also for biatomic Fe chains deposited on an Ir(001)
(5×1) surface such a DMI-induced non-collinear mag-
netic ground state has been predicted25,26 and experi-
mentally veriﬁed shortly after.27

In the light of these analyses we turn to the Pt step-
edge structure and investigate the leading magnetic in-
teractions for diﬀerent monatomic TM chains deposited
along the step-edges. Due to the reduced symmetry oc-
curring at step-edges, a multiplex interplay of the DMI,
the MAE and the exchange interaction is found to de-
termine the magnetic ground state or the rotation type
within a domain wall.

The magnetic structures are explored in the context
of a micromagnetic model that is introduced in Sec. II.
There, we discuss consequences of the symmetry of the
investigated structure on the magnetic anisotropy and
DMI and derive two micromagnetic criteria that deter-
mine the appearance of homogeneous and inhomogeneous
spin spirals as magnetic ground states. In Sec. III we give
details about the unit cell and the performed DFT calcu-
lations. We proceed in Sec. IV with presenting the results
of the performed calculations for the three investigated
systems, monatomic chains of Mn, Fe, and Co at Pt(664)
step-edges, and extract parameters for the previously dis-
cussed micromagnetic model. Based on these parameters
we predict the magnetic ground state for each system and
characterize possible domain wall structures. We con-
clude this paper with four appendices: In Appendix A
we relate the micromagnetic parameters to the param-
eters of a lattice-spin model.
In Appendix B we show
that the spin spiral as calculated from ﬁrst principles is
a stationary state of the lattice-periodic spin model con-
taining Heisenberg interaction and DMI. In Appendix C
we relate the micromagnetic parameters with the spin-
spiral energetics as calculated from ﬁrst principles.
In
Appendix D we analyze the relation between the micro-
scopic DM vectors as obtained from the Fert-Levy model
and the micromagnetic DM vectors. DM vectors are eval-
uated and compared to the ab initio results in the main
text.

II. MICROMAGNETIC ANALYSIS OF THE

STEP-EDGE STRUCTURE

A. Symmetry considerations

2

Fig. 1), however, only one mirror plane perpendicular
to the chain direction remains. A consequence of this
reduction of symmetry with respect to ﬁlm structures is
the previously mentioned easy axis direction for the Co
chains, tilted by 43◦ towards the upper terrace. Similarly,
the rules of Moriya19 only allow to reduce the possible
orientation of the D-vector to the plane perpendicular to
the chain axis, which is why ab initio calculations become
necessary to determine not only the strength of the DMI
but also the direction of the D-vector.

Due to this particular symmetry at hand, here the
search for the magnetic ground state takes place in a
higher-dimensional space. Besides the strength of the D-
vector and the diﬀerences among easy, medium, and hard
axes, one has to include in the ﬁnal analysis the relative
angle between D and the principal axes of the anisotropy
tensor.

B. The micromagnetic model

To systematically study the magnetic phases in a solid
from ﬁrst-principles one usually employs a multiscale ap-
proach. DFT calculations are performed that allow to ex-
tract system-speciﬁc parameters, which characterize the
behavior of the system in terms of a suitable model, e.g.,
a (generalized) Heisenberg or spin-lattice model,29 i.e.,
spins placed on a discrete lattice. When the magnetic
structure varies slowly across the crystal, meaning that
the magnetic moments rotate on a length scale that is
much larger than the interatomic distance, a micromag-
netic model becomes favorable. Instead of a classical spin
vector on each atom site, such a model uses a continu-
ous magnetization vector ﬁeld m(r) (with |m| = 1) with
eﬀective parameters in which atom-speciﬁc contributions
are implicitly contained. In case one deals with an an-
tiferromagnetic spin-alignment, the classical spin vector
is replaced by a staggered spin vector where the diﬀer-
ence of up and down spins on neighboring atoms form
a new order parameter, that is treated then as a con-
tinuous ﬁeld. Regarding the atomic structure we deal
with here in the paper, a linear chain of magnetic atoms
along the y direction as depicted in Fig. 1, the magnetic
energies for such spin textures can be expressed by the
micromagnetic energy functional

(cid:21)
D
2π · (m × ˙m) + mTKm

,

(cid:90)

(cid:20) A

E[m] =

dy

4π2 ( ˙m)2 +

Many of the systems, in which the DMI is known to
lead to a non-collinear magnetic ground state, consist of
one or more layers of 3d transition-metal (TM) elements
placed on top of a heavy element substrate17,21,22 and
exhibit two mirror planes. This restricts the direction
of easy, medium, and hard axis as well as the direction
of the eﬀective Dzyaloshinskii-vector28 (D-vector) to be
aligned along high-symmetry directions. Thus, the D-
vector always points along easy, medium, or hard axis.
In the step-edge structure discussed in this paper (see

(1)
with m = m(y) and ˙m = d
dy m. The ﬁrst term in
Eq. (1) contains the spin stiﬀness A and favors collinear
spins ( ˙m ≡ 0).
In contrast, the second term is lin-
ear in ˙m and thus shows a preference in the rotational
sense of m with a strength and direction determined
by the Dzyaloshinskii-vector D. Finally, the magnetic
anisotropy is accounted for by the last term, that features
the anisotropy tensor K whose principle axes point along
hard, medium, and easy axis.54 Note that in this work,

without loss of generality, the energy-zero is given with
respect to a magnetic conﬁguration in which all spins are
pointing along the easy axis. Furthermore, we point out
that the local character of the integrand in Eq. (1) is
reasonable as long as the range of the magnetic interac-
tions is shorter than the characteristic length scale of the
magnetic structure that is described.

3

In the following it is assumed to have knowledge of the
model parameters A, D, and K. Considering the symme-
try of the step-edge structure (cf. Fig. 1 and discussion
in previous Sec. II A) the latter two are of the form

Dx

0
Dz

 , K =

Kxx

Kxz

0 Kyy

0 Kxz

0
0 Kzz

 .

D =

(2)

The direction of the Dzyaloshinskii vector, ˆeDM =
(sin ϑD, 0, cos ϑD)T, is described with respect to the z-
axis by the angle55

ϑD = atan2 (Dx, Dz) ∈ (−180◦, 180◦] .

(3)

The eigenvalues of the anisotropy ellipsoid K, K1, K2,
and K3, are the magnetic anisotropies along the principle
axes. The principle axis corresponding to K2 is parallel to
the y-axis. The axes ˆe1 = Ry(ϑK)ˆex and ˆe3 = Ry(ϑK)ˆez
associated with K1 and K3 are obtained by a clockwise
rotation, Ry(ϑK), of the magnetization m → Ry(ϑK)m
around the y-axis by an angle

ϑK =

1
2

atan2 (−2Kxz, Kxx − Kzz) ∈ (−90◦, 90◦] ,
(4)

which results to

K1 = Kxx cos2 ϑK − Kxz sin 2ϑK + Kzz sin2 ϑK , (5)
K2 = Kyy ,
(6)
K3 = Kxx sin2 ϑK + Kxz sin 2ϑK + Kzz cos2 ϑK . (7)

C. Homogeneous versus inhomogeneous ﬂat spin

spirals

It was ﬁrst shown by Dzyaloshinskii30 that the mag-
netization direction m(y) that minimizes the energy in
functional (1) may correspond to spins that are periodi-
cally modulated rather than collinearly aligned along the
easy axis. According to the analysis of Heide et al.28
such a non-collinear spin structure can be either a three-
dimensional (3D) spin spiral or a ﬂat spin spiral with
a propagation vector q along the step-edge (y direction)
with magnetic moments rotating around the rotation axis
of the spiral ˆerot = (sin ϑr, 0, cos ϑr)T with an angle ϑr
that encloses ˆerot and the z-axis (the surface normal)
and that is restricted to −90◦ < ϑr ≤ 90◦. In the follow-
ing we restrict our analysis to ﬂat spin spirals, i.e., the
magnetization direction is always perpendicular to the
rotation axis and ˆerot is independent of y. For one part,

Fig. 1: (color online) The step-edge structure is shown and the
unit vectors and parameters used in the text are given with
respect to the Cartesian coordinate system (x, y, z). The D-
vector, being orthogonal on the y-axis, points along ˆeDM and
encloses the angle ϑD with the z-axis. The pairwise orthog-
onal principle axes of the anisotropy tensor K, ˆe1, ˆe2, and
ˆe3, are associated with K1, K2, and K3, respectively, where
ˆe3 encloses the angle ϑK with the z-axis. The rotation axis
ˆerot is perpendicular to the y-axis and encloses the angle ϑr
with the z-axis. Dr denotes the projection of the D-vector
onto ˆerot. ˆe(cid:107) and ˆe⊥ are parallel and perpendicular to the
y-axis and are associated with K(cid:107) and K⊥, respectively, the
anisotropy components within the rotation plane perpendicu-
lar to ˆerot. The magnetization density m(y) varies as function
of distance along the step-edge (y-axis) within the rotation
plane (see semitransparent orange area) and encloses with ˆe⊥
the spin-spiral rotation angle ϕ. Note that the angles ϑK ,
ϑD, and ϑr are positive (negative) when pointing towards the
lower (upper) terrace of the step-edge.

this allows an analytical treatment of the problem, and
for the other, we will show in Sec. IV that for all investi-
gated systems the regime of truly 3D spin spirals can be
excluded. Thus, the magnetization direction along the
chain is given by


cos ϕ(y)

sin ϕ(y)

0

m(y) = Ry(ϑr)

(8)

(cid:35)

(9)

and depends on a 1D parameter, the spin-spiral rotation
angle ϕ(y). The matrix Ry describes a rotation around
the y-axis. Inserting this into the energy functional from
Eq. (1), normalized to one period length, one arrives at
an expression for the average energy density,

A
4π2 ˙ϕ +

K⊥ cos2 ϕ + K(cid:107) sin2 ϕ

˙ϕ

(cid:34)

(cid:90) 2π

dϕ

0
Dr
λ

,

Eλ [ϕ, ϑr] =

1
λ

+

with ˙ϕ = dϕ
vector onto the rotation axis and reads

dy . Dr is the projection of the Dzyaloshinskii-

Dr = D · ˆerot = Dx sin ϑr + Dz cos ϑr .

(10)

K⊥ and K(cid:107) denote the anisotropy components in the
rotation plane of the magnetization perpendicular and

yˆe2ˆe3ˆe1ϑKˆeDMϑDxzϕm(y)ˆerotϑrˆekˆe⊥DDrparallel to the chain axis and are given by

K⊥ = Kxx cos2 ϑr − Kxz sin 2ϑr + Kzz sin2 ϑr ,(11)
(12)
K(cid:107) = Kyy = K2 .

K = (cid:0)K⊥ + K(cid:107)

(cid:1) /2. Note, that λ can become negative

Note, that Dr and K⊥ depend explicitly on the an-
gle of ration axis, ϑr, such that the the functional of
the average energy density in Eq. (9) depends on ϑr as
well. For later purposes we additionally deﬁne Kmax =
max{K⊥, K(cid:107)}, Kmin = min{K⊥, K(cid:107)}, and the average
since the present formalism also accounts for the rota-
tional sense of the spiral. We distinguish a right-rotating
spiral for ˙ϕ > 0 and λ > 0 (energetically preferred when
Dr < 0, see Eq. (9)) and a left-rotating spiral for ˙ϕ < 0
and λ < 0 (energetically preferred when Dr > 0) fol-
lowing the convention that a left-rotating spiral rotates
clockwise when projecting the magnetic moments onto
the xy plane and reading the spiral rotation along the
positive y direction (see Fig. 1).

For a homogeneous spin spiral ϕ(y) changes linearly
with distance within the chain and one ﬁnds ϕ(y) = y q·
˙ϕ =
ˆey, where q is the spin-spiral wave vector. Thus,
q · ˆey = 2π/λ = const., and Eq. (9) simpliﬁes to

Ehom

λ =

A
λ2 +

Dr
λ

+ K ,

(13)

i.e., the energy density shows a parabolic behavior with
respect to the inverse of the spiral length. Only when the
minimum of this expression,

Ehom
λmin = −

D2
r
4A

+ K , with λmin = −2

A
Dr

,

(14)

is below zero (corresponding to the energy of collinear
spins aligned along the easy axis direction), a spiraling
magnetic ground state can be established. This leads to
the criterion for the appearance of a homogeneous spin
spiral,

f hom
crit (ϑr) =

1
4

D2
r
AK

!
> 1 .

(15)

In the case of an inhomogeneous spin spiral ( ˙ϕ (cid:54)= const.)
the energy-density functional in Eq. (9) can be minimized
by means of the Euler-Lagrange formalism30 resulting in

Einh
λ = −2|K⊥ − K(cid:107)|
λinh = −

sign(Dr)

2
π

(cid:113)

E()
2K() − c +

Dr
λinh ,

A/|K⊥ − K(cid:107)| K() ,

(16)

(17)

(cid:112)

with the Lagrange multiplier c > − min{K⊥, K(cid:107)}. K()
and E() are the complete elliptic functions of ﬁrst and
second kind,56 respectively, with the ellipticity  = (c) =
|K⊥ − K(cid:107)|/(Kmax + c). It can be shown that the av-
erage energy density in Eq. (16) gets minimal when
Einh
λ = −c. Together with Eq. (17) this leads to a condi-
tional equation for c = c(),

|Dr| =

4
π

A|K⊥ − K(cid:107)|

E()



.

(18)

(cid:113)

An inhomogeneous spiral appears for −c < 0, leading to
the criterion

4

1
4

D2
r
AK · α(K⊥, K(cid:107))

!
> 1 ,

(19)

f inh
crit(ϑr) =

where

α(K⊥, K(cid:107)) =

K

Kmax

 2

π

(cid:115)

E

−2

(20)

|K⊥ − K(cid:107)|

Kmax

is a factor that depends on the ellipticity of the
anisotropy energy within the plane of rotation of the
magnetic moments spiral rotation axis: If the ellipticity 
within the rotation plane is zero (K⊥ = K(cid:107)), then α = 1,
which means that both criteria, Eqs. (15) and (19), be-
come identical. One can show that elsewise α > 1, mean-
ing that the criterion for the appearance of an inhomo-
geneous spin spiral is always easier to be fulﬁlled than
the criterion for the appearance of a homogeneous spiral,
Eq. (15). For the case that the easy axis lies along the
rotation axis (Kmin = 0) we have α = π2/8 and Eq. (19)
simpliﬁes to

D2
r

AKmax

!
>

16
π2 ,

(21)

which has been already discussed in literature.30,31

Eq. (9) could also be written as(cid:0)K⊥ − K(cid:107)

(cid:1) cos2 ϕ + K(cid:107),

As a ﬁnal remark we state that the anisotropy term in

which leads to the same expressions as derived above.

D. Micromagnetic Parameters

The three micromagnetic parameters A, D, and K are
related to the site-dependent microscopic parameters of
a spin-lattice model via

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

j>0

1
2∆

j>0

A
4π2 = −
1
D
∆
2π

=

R2

0jJ0j ,

R0jD0j ,

and K =

1
∆K0 ,

(22)

where ∆ deﬁnes the distance between two neighboring
atoms within the chain, and R0j = j ∆ is the distance
between atoms at sites 0 and j. J0j, D0j, and K0 are the
exchange interaction, the Dzyaloshinskii vector between
a pair of atoms at sites 0 and j, and the on-site anisotropy
at the representative atom labeled 0, respectively (see
Appendix A and Ref. 22 for details).

The integrand of Eq. (1) is an energy density. For the
quasi one-dimensional magnets studied in this work, it
has the unit energy per length. Accordingly, the param-
eters A, D, and K take the units energy times length,
energy, and energy per length, respectively. However, it
is often convenient to use another normalization, and rep-
resent energy densities in units of energy per TM atom.

The conversion from the ﬁrst normalization to the sec-
ond one is done by multiplication with ∆. In analogy,
the units for the micromagnetic parameters A, D, and K
change to energy times area per TM atom, energy times
length per TM atom, and energy per TM atom, respec-
tively. For the rest of this paper we use the same sym-
bols for the two diﬀerent normalizations, and the used
normalization can be inferred from the unit.

Notice, it is customary that both communities, the mi-
cromagnetic and the spin-lattice model community, refer
to D or Dij, respectively, as the Dzyaloshinskii-vector,
although they are obviously diﬀerent. We follow this tra-
dition, but refer in addition to the D-vector in the spin-
lattice model as microscopic D-vector, and in the micro-
magnetic model either as the micromagnetic or eﬀective
D-vector or as the spiralization,32 whenever necessary.

The spin stiﬀness and spiralization can be obtained di-
rectly from ﬁrst-principles calculations invoking the ho-
mogeneous spin-spiral state.
In Appendix B we proof
that for each wave vector q there are two ﬂat homoge-
neous spin spirals of opposite handedness with a rota-
tion axis parallel and antiparallel to the D-vector of that
given mode. The lowest energy is found for a wave vec-
tor Q with a spin-chirality opposite to the D-vector of
that mode. In Appendix C we show that if Q is in the
vicinity of a high-symmetry point in the Brillouin zone
for the wave vectors, e.g., Q = 0 in case of the ferromag-
netic state, typically this implies that the DMI is small
compared to the exchange interaction. For the step-edge
structure q becomes one-dimensional and we obtain the
spin stiﬀness from the curvature A ∝ d2E(q)/dq2 and
the spiralization projected onto the direction of the DMI-
vector from the slope [ˆeDM · D] ∝ dE(q, ˆeDM)/dq of the
energy calculated for wave vectors q in the vicinity of
the high-symmetry point.
In the following Section III
we show that we calculate A and D from E(q) for spin-
spiral waves with q-vectors of diﬀerent length from ﬁrst-
principles in two separate steps: At ﬁrst, E(q) is calcu-
lated without spin-orbit interaction employing the gen-
eralized Bloch theorem, from which the spin stiﬀness is
determined and for which the spiralization is zero by def-
inition, and then the spiralization is determined by cal-
culating the change of the total energy ∆E(q) adding
the spin-orbit interaction in ﬁrst order perturbation cal-
culated from electronic states related to the spin-spiral
solution.

III. FIRST PRINCIPLES THEORY

A. Structural Model and Computational Details

The ab initio calculations based on DFT are car-
ried out in the ﬁlm geometry as implemented in the
fleur code,33 an implementation of the full-potential
linearized augmented plane-wave (FLAPW) method.34,35
The chains at stepped surfaces are modeled like in earlier
studies,10,11 where the chosen unit cell, a (664) step-edge

5

Fig. 2:
(color online) Sketch of the investigated unit cell,
a slab of a (664) step-edge structure decorated with a
monatomic chain along the edge, and its repetition within
the plane. The dark blue spheres correspond to the transition
metals (Co, Fe, Mn) and the bright gray spheres represent the
substrate atoms (Pt). The chain-to-chain distance is 13.24 ˚A
and the nearest-neighbor distance within the chain is 2.82 ˚A.
The inset in the lower left illustrates the use of the coordinates
within the text. Note that the structure is periodic with re-
spect to the x(cid:48)y plane. Although in the actual calculation all
quantities are referenced with respect to (x(cid:48)yz(cid:48)), throughout
this paper they are given with respect to (xyz), in accordance
with Fig. 1.

structure, has proved to be a suitable structural model.
The setup of the unit cell is inversion symmetric and
consists of a tilted 8-layered Pt slab with two monatomic
TMs deposited on both sides of the slab onto the step-
edge. Throughout this investigation no relaxation of the
structure is considered. This is because it was found that
relaxations can lead to an unphysical strong quenching
of the orbital moment and thus to less accurate results
for the MAE.10,11,36 In Fig. 2 we sketch the structural
model and indicate the unit cell by the darker spheres in
the foreground. The chain axis and thus the propagation
direction of the investigated spiral structure is chosen as
the y-axis. To ensure a periodic repetition of the struc-
ture along the x(cid:48)-direction as required by a solid-state
code the steps of the surfaces with normal [111] direc-
tion are tilted by an angle of about 10◦, so that the z(cid:48)-
direction of the unit cell is [664] and the x(cid:48)-direction is
[113] (see inset in the lower left of Fig. 2), resulting in
a (6×1) surface unit cell. The used lattice constant is
aPt = 3.99 ˚A and was calculated by Baud et al.10 Along
the x direction the unit cell has the length of the distance
of two vicinal TM chains, ax(cid:48) = √11·aPt ≈ 13.24 ˚A. The
ing TM atoms within one chain, ay = aPt/√2 ≈ 2.82 ˚A.

width corresponds to the distance between two neighbor-

For all types of atoms within the 2D unit cell the muﬃn-
tin (MT) radius is chosen to be RMT = 1.16 ˚A. Al-
though not said explicitly any further below, all energies

TMPt13.24˚A2.82˚A[111]z[664]z0yxx0obtained from ﬁrst-principles calculations refer to ener-
gies per computational unit cell. Depending then on the
micromagnetic quantity under consideration, this energy
can be related to energy per magnetic TM atom or per
chain atom, respectively.

For the exchange and correlation functional we chose
the local density approximation (LDA) as proposed by
Moruzzi, Janak, and Williams.37 The computational cut-
oﬀ values for the expansion of the Kohn-Sham potential
are chosen as Gmax = 12.0 a.u.−1 for the potential and
Gxc
max = 9.5 a.u.−1 for the exchange-correlation poten-
tial. The Hamiltonian matrix elements for all atoms in
the unit cell due to the non-spherical part of the potential
are expanded up to (cid:96)n−sph
max = 6. The spherical harmonics
expansion of the LAPW basis includes functions up to
(cid:96)max = 8 within each MT sphere and all basis functions
satisfying |k(cid:107) + G(cid:107)| < Kmax are included. If not stated
otherwise, Kmax = 3.5 a.u.−1 is used. All self-consistent
calculations have been carried out with 128 k-points in
the full 2D Brillouin zone, whereas for all one-shot cal-
culations employing the force theorem of Andersen38 512
k-points have been used.

B. Spin stiﬀness

The parameters A, D, and K are calculated as outlined
in Refs. 22 and 39. The spin stiﬀness, A, is obtained by
determining the total energy ESS(q) of the system as
function of ﬂat homogeneous spin spirals with wave vec-
tors q of diﬀerent lengths, all in the vicinity of the fer-
romagnetic or antiferromagnetic state and all along the
chain direction. Since the lengths of the q-vectors are
small we applied the force theorem of Andersen38 to ob-
tain these energies as deviations from the collinear state
whose densities are calculated self-consistently employing
the scalar relativistic approximation and which served as
the initial state from which the force theorem is applied.
To avoid numerical errors the magnetization in the in-
terstitial region was set to zero before applying the force
theorem. A detailed description can be found in Ref. 29.
When calculating the spin stiﬀness we omitted the en-
ergy correction due to SOC, because it proved small in
tests and thus we can restrict ourselves to the use of the
generalized Bloch theorem.40

C. Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction

The eﬀective D-vector is determined treating SOC in
ﬁrst-order perturbation theory on top of ﬂat homoge-
neous spin-spiral solutions used to determine A. The
DM energy is given by22,39

(cid:88)

EDM(q, ˆerot) =

f (0

kν, T ) δkν(q, ˆerot) .

(23)

kν

The occupation numbers are given by the Fermi function
f (, T ), which introduces a broadening of the occupation

6

around the Fermi energy by the temperature T . They
depend on the wave vector q through the unperturbed
(i.e., without SOC) eigenvalue spectrum 0
kν(q). The
change of the eigenvalue spectrum

δkν(q, ˆerot) = (cid:104)U(ˆerot)ψkν(q)|Hso|U(ˆerot)ψkν(q)(cid:105) (24)
due to SOC described by the Hamiltonian Hso, depends
additionally on the rotation axis ˆerot. The unitary trans-
formation U(ˆerot) directs the ﬂat spin spiral of the unper-
turbed state rotating around the z-axis to the global spin-
rotation axis and ψkν(q) denotes the spin-spiral eigen-
states of the unperturbed Hamiltonian. The summation
in Eq. (23) goes over all states characterized by the Bloch
vector k and band index ν. Due to the ﬁnite number of
k-points (512 k-points in the whole 2D unit cell) the ef-
fect of the broadening temperature will be a subject of
study in Sec. IV B, which allows an estimation for the
qualitative reliability of our results.

We analyzed EDM, the change of the DM energy for a
set of q-vectors that point along the chain direction (i.e.,
the y-axis) but vary in length, as well as two diﬀerent ro-
tation axes pointing along x- and z-direction (ˆerot = ˆex
and ˆerot = ˆez, see Fig. 1 and Eq. (10)) to determine inde-
pendently the two non-vanishing components of the D-
vector (the third component vanishes due to symmetry,
as already discussed in Sec. II A). In the micromagnetic
limit, i.e., in the limit of long-period spirals, Eq. (9) is
applicable from which we conclude that if the spin-orbit
interaction is included, the DM energy is expected to
change linearly with the length of the wave vector q in
the vicinity of the collinear spin alignment. Consequently
we evaluate the eﬀective D-vector as the slope of the en-
ergy change with respect to q in the limit q → 0.
As outlined in Ref. 22, the spin-orbit coupling opera-
tor Hso can be safely approximated by an atom-by-atom
superposition of SOC operators limited to the muﬃn-tin
spheres of the atoms, i.e.,

Hso =

ξ(rµ) σ · Lµ ,

(25)

(cid:88)

µ

MT. Rµ references the center and Rµ

where ξ is the spin-orbit strength related to the spherical
muﬃn-tin potential V (rµ), ξ ∼ r−1 dV /dr, rµ = r − Rµ,
and |rµ| < Rµ
MT is
the radius of the µth muﬃn-tin sphere in the unit cell,
and µ runs over all atoms in the unit cell. The atom-
by-atom analysis is supported by the observation that
ξ ∼ r−3 for small r. We observed for example in case
of the Rashba eﬀect that 90% of the Rashba strength
is produced by the wave function occupying a volume
in the vicinity of the nucleus given by a radius of only
about 10% (0.25 a.u.) of the muﬃn-tin radius.41 We ex-
pect an analogous behavior for the DMI. Thus, accord-
ing to Eqs. (24) and (25) also δµ
kν(q, ˆerot) is atom de-
pendent and the DM energy is a result of atom-by-atom
DMI(q, ˆerot), at least
in ﬁrst-order perturbation theory that we discuss here
throughout the paper. The linear ﬁt of Dµ(ˆerot) q to

contributions EDMI(q, ˆerot) =(cid:80)

µ Eµ

7

Eµ
DMI(q, ˆerot) at the vicinity of a high symmetry point
in the Brillouin zone of propagation vectors gives then
the decomposition of the D-vector into contributions Dµ,
which satisfy

(cid:88)

kν

(Dµ · ˆerot) q (cid:39)

f (0

kν, T ) δµ

kν(q, ˆerot) .

(26)

For the interpretation of the atom dependent spiraliza-
tion we refer to the discussion of the Fert-Levy model in
Sec. IV B and in Appendix D.

Since the structure of the unit cell setup in our ab ini-
tio calculation is inversion symmetric, the contributions
of the DMI to the total energy cancel when all atoms are
taken into account. Thus, we manually break the inver-
sion symmetry by considering only the energy diﬀerences
due to SOC from the atoms that are placed in the upper
half of the unit cell.

D. Magnetic anisotropy

For the magnetic anisotropy energy the force theorem
of Andersen38 is applied, now in order to extract en-
ergy diﬀerences between collinear systems with magneti-
zations pointing in diﬀerent directions. Starting point for
the force theorem are self-consistent calculations includ-
ing SOC, for which the magnetic moments point along
the y direction. For each system we evaluate the total
energy for several directions of the magnetic moments
collinearly aligned within the xz plane and the yz plane.
Out of the obtained energy landscape one is able to ex-
tract K1, K2, and K3, the principle axes of the anisotropy
tensor, K (cf. Eq. (2)).

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Spin stiﬀness

The results of the spin-spiral energy ESS(q) for all
three investigated systems as function of the wave vector
q across the one-dimensional Brillouin zone are summa-
rized in Fig. 3. For Co and Fe chains the minimal energy
is found for the ferromagnetic state, i.e., the state with
wave vector q = 0, whereas the Mn chains align in the an-
tiferromagnetic order. According to the micromagnetic
model in Sec. II C (see Eq. (9)) and the discussions in
Sec. II D we expect in the long-wavelength limit a lin-
ear relationship between the exchange energy and the
squared inverse wavelength, which is realized by these
systems for a large fraction of the Brillouin zone (40%)
and shown in the right panel of Fig. 3 with the result-
ing ﬁt. The slope gives the spin stiﬀness A. For the Mn
system it is smallest (0.030 aJnm) and rises when going
to Fe (0.041 aJnm) and Co (0.055 aJnm). The results
are also collected in Table I. A small spin stiﬀness is fa-
vorable for the stabilization of a chiral spin spiral and in
this respect the Mn chain is the most favorable system.

Fig. 3: (color online) Determination of the spin stiﬀness: In
the left panel the total energies relative to their respective low-
est energy, ESS, are shown as functions of the length of the
wave vector, q, for Mn, Fe, and Co chains (magenta circles,
red diamonds, and blue triangles, respectively). All systems
show a collinear ground state, i.e., a ferromagnetic (q = 0)
ground state for the Co and Fe chains and an antiferromag-
netic (q = 0.5 in units of 2π/ay) ground state for the Mn
chains. The right panel shows the energy as function of λ−2 in
the linear regime with the corresponding linear ﬁts. The slope
represents the spin stiﬀness, A. Note that for the Mn chain
we consider the antiferromagnetic ordering vector, meaning
that λ → ∞ leads to the AFM spin alignment. The relative
error due to the linear regression is in the order of 5% to 8%
for the shown data range.

B. The Dzyaloshinskii-vector

Fig. 4 displays the DM energies per chain atom EDM
and the x and z components of the spiralization vector
D for the Mn chains.
In the upper panel we present
EDM(1/λ, ˆex/z) as function of the inverse wavelength,
1/λ, for clockwise rotating (negative values of λ) homo-
geneous spin spirals of two rotational directions ˆex and
ˆez. Analogously to the discussion of the spin stiﬀness, we
utilize the micromagnetic model and expect a linear be-
havior of EDM(1/λ, ˆex/z) ∝ Dx/z · 1/λ for corresponding
wave vectors in the vicinity of high-symmetry points in
the one-dimensional Brillouin zone, q = 0 and q = π/ay.
Indeed we ﬁnd a linear behavior for wave vectors covering
10% of the Brillouin zone measured from the antiferro-
magnetic state at π/ay for EDM(1/λ, ˆex). However, for
EDM(1/λ, ˆez) we notice a periodic modulation on top of
the linear behavior. Such oscillations can occur due to ﬁ-
nite numerical resolutions, e.g., due to ﬁnite sampling of
the Brillouin zone.22 In the lower panel of Fig. 4 we ana-
lyze the eﬀect of the electronic Fermi surface broadening
temperature T on the obtained slopes that correspond
to the D-vector components and the loss of linear behav-
ior reﬂected in the error bars. When T is decreased, the
values of the slopes and thus those of the D-vector com-
ponents converge while at the same time the error bars

0.00.20.4q (2π / ay)050100150ESS (meV / TM atom)CoFeMn0.00.20.40.6λ−2 (nm−2)0204060CoFeMn8

the chain, albeit some contributions from some farther
atoms can play a role as it is the case for Fe. A dom-
inant contribution comes from the nearest-neighbor Pt
atom at the upper terrace. For all systems it has about
the same size, but for Pt next to Co, Dµ points in a dif-
ferent direction than next to Mn or Fe. For the Co and
Fe systems, each Pt atom µ with a dominant contribu-
tion Dµ has a vicinal atom with a Dµ vector of opposite
sign and similar size. The dominant term for the Mn
system, the nearest-neighbor atom at the upper terrace,
has no counteratom and consequently leads over all to a
larger size of the Dzyaloshinskii-vector D. This analy-
sis shows that although the atom resolved contributions
might have large values themselves, the sum of all contri-
butions can still lead to a rather moderate D-vector due
to destructive addition.

In Fig. 5(d) we show an attempt to describe the re-
garded structure in terms of the model proposed by Fert
and Levy,42,43 where the DM energy Eµ
DMI is given as
sum over two distinct magnetic atoms within the chain
interacting with the substrate atom µ (see Appendix D
for details). Within this model, the direction of the atom-
resolved Dµ-vectors is predeﬁned as being perpendicular
to the connection of the center of atom µ and the chain
axis and perpendicular to the chain direction. This is in
good agreement with the directions for the Dµ-vectors for
the Mn and the Fe chains (cf. Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) with
Fig. 5(d)), while it cannot be used to explain the direc-
tions for the Dµ-vectors for the Co chain (cf. Fig. 5(c)
with Fig. 5(d)).

We next discuss the strength of the Dµ-vectors. Ap-
plying the Fert-Levy model to a periodic inﬁnite chain,
one ﬁnds that Eµ
DMI vanishes in the limit q → 0, while
its derivative and thus the Dµ-vector, diverges. There-
fore, this model is not applicable in this limit and the
introduction of corrections attenuating or truncating the
interaction between atoms in the inﬁnitely long periodic
chain after a certain interaction range, e.g., due to the
lack of phase coherence or the presence of disorder will
resolve this problem. Here, however, we avoid this sin-
gularity by evaluating the strength of Eµ
DMI(q0)/q0 for
a ﬁnite wave vector q0 = 0.05 2π
, which corresponds to
ay
λ−1 = 1.77 nm−1 and thus matches in length with a q-
vector used in the presented ab initio calculations, see
leftmost data points in upper panel of Fig. 4. The result-
ing strengths of the Dµ-vectors decrease with distance
to the chain (see Fig. 5(d)). The same behavior is also
found for the three investigated chains, albeit the length
of the vectors cannot be explained by the distance to the
chain only. In Appendix D we furthermore show that the
strength decays with distance much faster when the mag-
netic moments of the atoms within the chain show a AFM
short-range order, as compared to a FM short range order
in the same chain. This observation, however, cannot be
extracted from the ab initio results, e.g., when compar-
ing the Mn chain (see Fig. 5(a)) to the Fe or the Co chain
(see Figs. 5(b) and 5(c)). In conclusion, with regard to
the structure of an inﬁnite chain of magnetic atoms we

(color online) The upper panel displays

Fig. 4:
for
Mn/Pt(664) the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya energy EDM (see
Eq. (23)), in the vicinity of the AFM state as function of
the inverse wave length for ﬂat homogeneous spirals rotating
in the yz plane (magenta squares and solid line) and in the
xy plane (magenta spheres and dashed line) for a temperature
broadening of kBT = 27.2 meV. The slopes give the values for
the components of the D-vector (see Eq. (2)) which are shown
in the lower panel as function of a broadening temperature.
Since for kBT = 27.2 meV (dotted vertical line) the values
are converged and the error bars are still reasonably small
(for this system as well as for the other two the relative error
due to the linear regression is in the order of 5% to 10%.), the
corresponding values are considered in the following.

are increasing. In the following the values corresponding
to kBT = 27.2 meV (see dotted vertical black line in the
lower panel of Fig. 4) are used and can be found in Ta-
ble I. Among the three systems the resulting D-vectors
show remarkable diﬀerences in direction and strength.
Therefore, we investigate its origin in more detail in the
next paragraph.

For the three investigated systems, a more detailed
study of the atom-resolved contributions to the D-vectors
is given in Figs. 5(a)-5(c). These atom-resolved contri-
butions, i.e., Dµ for the atom with label µ, are obtained
by switching on the SOC contribution for atom µ only.
For each system they are plotted as vector with x and
z components twice, (i) with respect to atom µ in the
step-edge structure in the left part of each panel and
(ii) with respect to the same origin in the right part of
each panel, where in addition their sum, the D-vector,
is shown as bolt arrow. At ﬁrst, we realize that for the
Mn and Fe chain both D-vectors point into very similar
directions. Although all three D-vectors show towards
the upper step-edge, the direction of the D-vector of the
Co chain is quite diﬀerent from those of the Mn and of
the Fe chain. The lengths of the D-vectors for Fe and
Co chains are quite similar, but about only half as large
In general, the contribution Dµ
as for the Mn chain.
of the 3d atom itself is nearly negligible. The largest
contributions come from atoms that are located next to

0.20.10.0λ−1 (nm−1)101EDM ‡meVMnatom·kBT=27.2 meV10-1100101102103kBT (meV)84048Dx, Dz ‡meVnmMnatom·DzDx9

Fig. 5: (color online) The atom resolved contributions {Dµ} to the D-vectors are shown (a) for the Mn chain, (b) for the Fe
chain, and (c) for the Co chain, extracted from the performed ab initio calculations, as well as (d) for a TM chain when applying
the Fert-Levy model (see Appendix D). For each of the four cases, these contributions are depicted twice. In the left image, a
cross section of the step-edge structure is shown with these vectors {Dµ}, for convenience, located at the corresponding atom
µ (in fact, these vectors act only on the TM atoms within the chain, represented by the light blue circles). In the right image,
µ Dµ,

they are given with respect to the same origin. In addition, the resulting D-vector, i.e., the sum over atoms µ, D =(cid:80)

is printed in boldface.

state that the model of Fert and Levy does not capture
the diverse behavior of the three considered chains and
we advice the application of this model to chains with
some precaution. A more thorough investigation of the
predictive power of the Fert-Levy model with respect to
ﬁlms and heterostructures would be interesting.

C. The anisotropy tensor

Following the ﬁndings of Sec. IV A we investigate the
magnetic anisotropy tensor for the ferromagnetic order
for the Co and Fe chains, and for the antiferromagnetic
order for the Mn chains. The two required data sets for
the latter system are shown in Fig. 6. The ﬁt functions
represent the leading order term and have the form

Eϕ(ϑ) = Aϕ · cos2 (ϑ + Bϕ) − Ez

(27)

with the energy oﬀset Ez = Eϕ=0(ϑ = 0), the polar angle
ϑ as argument, the azimuth angle ϕ ∈ {0◦, 90◦} as pa-
rameter (see the inset in Fig. 6), and ﬁt parameters Aϕ
and Bϕ. The mirror plane perpendicular to the chain di-
rection is reﬂected in Bϕ=90◦ = 0, leading to a symmetric
function with respect to ϑ. The resulting hard, medium,
and easy axes for all three systems are summarized in
Table I. In the following we use the easy axis as energy
oﬀset.

With respect to the resulting principal components the
Mn system appears to be the most promising candidate

Fig. 6:
(color online) Magnetic anisotropy energy for
Mn/Pt(664). The energy is plotted for magnetic moments
pointing along directions discretized by the angles ϕ and ϑ
relative to the orientation in z direction. The symbols rep-
resent ab initio calculated energy diﬀerences, whereas the ﬁt
functions correspond to Eq. (27). In the case of ϕ = 0◦ (solid
red line) the xz plane and in the case of ϕ = 90◦ (dashed blue
line) the yz plane is sampled.

for a non-collinear ground state. The anisotropy ener-
gies for the medium and the hard axis are the smallest
compared to those of the other two systems. In addition,

(a)Dµ=1MnMnDMnDµ=1Mn(b)FeDFe(c)CoDCo(d)DFL9060300306090polar angle ϑ (degrees)0.20.00.20.4Eϕ(ϑ)−Ez (meV / Mn atom)ϕ=0◦ϕ=90◦m(r)ϑϕthe easy axis points along the chain direction which is
of relevance for the following reason: The only spin-orbit
driven spin spiral that the D-vector (perpendicular to
the chain axis) can give rise to are of cycloidal character,
meaning that the spiral rotation plane always contains
the direction along the chain. Thus, the rotation over
the easy axis is achieved automatically, regardless of the
rotation axis. For the Co chains the easy axis is at about
61◦ tilted towards the upper terrace, which is in satisfy-
ing agreement with other experimental1 and theoretical
ﬁndings.6–8 The easy axis of the system containing the Fe
chains is directed in approximately the same direction as
the one for the Co chains. A remarkable ﬁnding for the
Fe system is the strength as well as the orientation of the
hard axis. It not only exhibits the largest value among
all three systems, but also is oriented along the chain di-
rection. Therefore, it shows the most unfavorable setup
for a cycloidal spiral to appear since a rotation over the
hard axis would be unavoidable.

D. Magnetic ground states

crit (ϑr) and f inh

In the previous Secs. IV A, IV B, and IV C we extracted
the parameters that now can be used to evaluate the cri-
teria for the appearance of homogeneous and inhomoge-
neous spin spirals (see Eqs. (15) and (19), respectively)
and their respective properties.57 Those criteria depend
on the spin stiﬀness A as well as Dr, the projection of the
Dzyaloshinskii-vector onto the rotation axis ˆerot, and K(cid:107),
and K⊥, the two principal axes of the anisotropy tensor
that describe spins rotating in the plane perpendicular to
the rotation axis (see Fig. 1). Evaluating Eqs. (15) and
(19) the resulting magnetic ground state is determined
by the functions f hom
crit(ϑr) and whether their
value exceeds the critical threshold of 1 for at least one
rotation direction, described by the rotation angle ϑr. As
we can see in Fig. 7 the Mn chains indeed fulﬁll both cri-
teria when the direction of the spin-rotation axis, around
which the magnetic moments of the spiral rotate, is in
the regime between about −90◦ ≤ ϑr ≤ −20◦. The max-
imum values of f hom
crit(ϑr) are obtained for
ϑr = −62◦, which at the same time represents the mini-
mum of the total energy, i.e., the magnetic ground state.
This rotation angle can be understood as a compromise
between the optimal DMI contribution (ϑr = −38◦, ro-
tation axis parallel to D-vector) and the minimal MAE
barriers (ϑr = −72◦, rotation axis along K3, the hard
axis). Since Dr is positive for ϑr = −62◦, the obtained
magnetic structure is a left-rotating spiral, which modu-
lates the otherwise antiferromagnetic order. As the mag-
netic anisotropy within the yz plane (see Fig. 6, dashed
blue curve) is small, the ﬁndings for homogeneous and
inhomogeneous spirals are quite similar. For the same
set of parameters, Eqs. (14) and (17) lead to a spiral
length of λ = 15.7 nm for a homogeneous spin spiral and
λ = 16.3 nm for an inhomogeneous spiral. Both values
correspond to a period length of about 60 atoms along the

crit (ϑr) and f inh

10

60

2π
ay

chain, which is equivalent to an average rotation angle of
ϕ ≈ 174◦ between neighboring Mn atoms and a q-vector
of q = − 1
ˆey, measured from the AFM alignment.
These large period lengths justify in retrospect our ansatz
of a micromagnetic model. Employing Eqs. (14) and (16)
we ﬁnd an averaged energy gain of ∆E = −0.106 meV
per chain atom (∆E = −0.376 meV nm−1) for the ho-
mogeneous spin spiral and ∆E = −0.113 meV per chain
atom (∆E = −0.399 meV nm−1) in the case of an inho-
mogeneous spin spiral.
In contrast to the analysis of the Mn chains, the ob-
tained parameters for the Fe and Co chains conﬁrm a
ferromagnetic ground state, which is in line with previ-
ous studies.10–12 For one part the resulting DMI is not
large enough to change the collinear order favored by the
spin stiﬀness, which we trace back to oppositely directed
atom-resolved contributions to the D-vector of the Pt
atoms nearby the chain (cf. Figs. 5(b) and 5(c)). On the
other hand, the magnetic anisotropy causes energy barri-
ers that prevent the system from forming a non-collinear
ground state. Especially for the case of Fe chains the
formation of a spin spiral turns out to be energetically
unfavorable, as the spin moments would have to rotate
over the hard axis, as mentioned in Sec. IV C.

We conclude the investigation on the magnetic ground
state with a brief discussion on the possibility of ﬁnding
non-planar spin spirals. For systems with orthorhom-
bic anisotropy, phase diagrams are known28 that take
such three-dimensional non-collinear spin structures into
account. However, to make our parameters match the
Ansatz made in Ref. 28 one has to assume that the D-
vector is oriented along one of the two principle axes of
the anisotropy vector, K1 or K3. This is to some extent
only reasonable for the Fe chains where the angle be-
tween easy axis direction and D-vector is 16◦ (see insets
in Fig. 7). In addition this system is the best candidate
for a three-dimensional spiral since a rotation over the
unfavorable hard axis is avoided, so that we restrict our
analysis onto the Fe chains only. Following the notation
of Ref. 28 we arrive at DI = 0.32 and KI = −0.48, when
the D-vector is assumed to point along the easy axis di-
rection. Thus, we miss the critical regime of DI > 1 by
a factor of 3, and this pair of parameters distinctly lies
in the collinear region (cf. Fig. 3(b) in Ref. 28).

E. Formation of domain walls

Although for Fe and Co chains the DMI is not strong
enough to introduce a chiral magnetic ground state its
presence can inﬂuence the formation of domain walls.44
We follow the analysis of chiral domain walls put for-
ward by Dzyaloshinskii,30 but apply this analysis to the
ferromagnetic Fe and Co chains. Once again the starting
point is the energy functional as given in Eq. (1), now
with the boundary condition

m(y)

y→±∞−−−−−→ ±measy .

(28)

11

Fig. 7: (color online) In the upper panels we show the values of the functions f hom
crit for the appearance of homogeneous
and inhomogeneous spin spirals (cf. Eqs. (15) and (19), respectively) in (a) Mn, (b) Fe, and (c) Co chains as functions of ϑr,
the direction of the rotation axis, see Fig. 1. For each system the inset shows the relative orientation of the D-vector with
respect to the principle axes of the anisotropy tensor. In the lower panels the corresponding parameters Dr, K(cid:107), and K⊥ are
plotted. In the last two systems the critical threshold of 1 is missed by more than one order of magnitude. For the Mn chains,
however, both criteria are fulﬁlled, both reaching their maxima for ϑr = −62◦. This can be seen as a compromise between
ﬁnding the largest DMI contribution (dashed green line) and having the smallest anisotropy energy K⊥ (dashed brown line).

crit and f inh

(cid:0) meV nm

|D|

(cid:1)

TM atom

7.2
3.5
3.4

ϑD

(degrees)
−38
−49
−102

(cid:0) meV

K1

(cid:1)

(cid:0) meV

K2

(cid:1)

(cid:0) meV

K3

(cid:1)

TM atom

TM atom

TM atom

0.69
0.84
1.65

0.0
2.61
0.97

0.19
0.0
0.0

ϑK

ϑmax

r

(degrees)

−72
25
29

(degrees)

−62
(−42)
(+46)

µmag
(µB)

4.00
3.27
2.20

µorb
(µB)

0.04
0.14
0.19

A(cid:16) meV nm2

(cid:17)

TM atom

52
72
97

TM

Mn
Fe
Co

TABLE I: Collected results for the three investigated TM chains on Pt(664) step-edges: Spin stiﬀness A, absolute value of the
Dzyaloshinskii-vector |D| and its orientation ϑD, principal components of the anisotropy tensor K (cf. Eq. (2)), K1, K2, K3,
and ϑK , the orientation of the principal axis corresponding to K3 measured from the z-axis, the rotation angle ϑmax
r measured
from the z-axis, as well as the spin magnetic moment µmag and orbital magnetic moment µorb of the TM atom for the case
that the spin-quantization axis points along the easy axis are given. All angles are measured with respect to the z-axis, see
Fig. 1 and the insets of Figs. 7(a), 7(b), and 7(c). ϑmax
crit gets maximal, representing the planar
inhomogeneous spin-spiral of lowest energy among all spirals. Only for the Mn chains this energy is lower than the one for the
collinear state (i.e., criterion (19) is satisﬁed) and a spin-spiral state is assumed as ground state. For the Fe and Co chains
the collinear state always remains lower in energy. Note that K2, the anisotropy along the chain, is the easy axis for the Mn
chains but the hard axis for the Fe system. A, |D|, and Ki can be expressed in units directly compatible to the micromagnetic
equation (1) dividing the parameter values by ∆ = 0.282 nm / TM atom.

indicates where the function f inh

r

By this constraint a rotation by 180◦ is forced to take
place spread within the inﬁnite chain. A distinction is
made between a Bloch wall (helical rotation) and a N´eel
wall (cycloidal rotation). For both cases a characteristic
width of the planar domain wall can be deﬁned by44

(cid:114)

w =

1
π ·

A
K

,

(29)

where K represents the anisotropy energy for magnetic
moments that point perpendicular to the easy axis direc-

tion within the spin rotation plane. The expression for
the minimal energy reads44

E =

2
π ·

√AK − |ˆerot · D|

2

,

(30)

where for the N´eel wall ˆerot·D is equal to the expression in
Eq. (10), but vanishes for a Bloch wall (ˆerot ⊥ D). Thus,
only for a N´eel wall a preference in the rotation direction
is expected and N´eel walls can be realized even if the
MAE favors a Bloch wall. Note, that the energetically

0123fcritfhomcritfinhcrit404Dr ‡meVnmTMatom·9060300306090ϑr (degrees)012K ‡meVTMatom·KK(a)MnchainsϑKϑD0.000.020.040.06fhomcritfinhcrit4049060300306090ϑr (degrees)012KK(b)FechainsϑKϑD0.000.020.040.06fhomcritfinhcrit4049060300306090ϑr (degrees)012KK(c)CochainsϑKϑDTM

Fe
Co

EB

(meV)
17.49
28.26

wB
(nm)
2.94
2.42

EN (EnoDMI

N

)

(meV)

29.06 (30.82)
17.73 (21.68)

wN
(nm)
1.67
3.15

TABLE II: The domain wall energies for a Bloch wall and a
N´eel wall, EB and EN respectively, as well as the correspond-
ing wall widths, wB and wN, are listed. Due to the DMI
the N´eel wall always exhibits a certain rotational sense that
lowers the energy with respect to its value without taken the
D-vector into account (EnoDMI
). For the Fe chains the Bloch
wall is energetically always more favorable, for the Co chains
the N´eel wall is preferred.

N

favored rotational sense of the domain wall is accounted
for by the minus sign and the absolute value of the second
term in Eq. (30).

The resulting domain wall energies as well as the pre-
dicted wall widths for Fe and Co chains are listed in Ta-
ble II. Since for both systems the easy-axis direction is
perpendicular to the chain direction, the rotation axis is
ﬁxed by Eq. (28) and the chain direction. If the easy axis
points along the chain direction, ˆerot is a compromise be-
tween magnetic anisotropy and DMI as it was the case
for the ground-state analysis.
In such a case no Bloch
wall can be established.

For the Fe chains, a Bloch wall is energetically more
favorable than the N´eel wall even when the DMI contri-
bution is taken into account, so that we do not expect a
preference in the rotational sense for the domain walls for
this system. One reason is that a N´eel wall forces a rota-
tion of the spins over the chain direction that is the hard
axis of this system. Furthermore, the rotation plane is
predeﬁned by the easy axis direction. Since the D-vector
is oriented nearly within this plane, the projection to the
rotation axis ˆerot is relatively small.

N

For the Co chains, the energy of the Bloch wall, EB, is
already by more than 6 meV higher in energy than the
corresponding N´eel wall, EnoDMI
, where the DMI contri-
bution is neglected. When in Eq. (30) the DMI contri-
bution is taken into account the preference of a N´eel wall
is even higher. This gain in energy is achieved only for a
right-rotating domain wall. This is because the rotation
angle ϑr = 29◦ that describes a rotation plane perpendic-
ular to the easy axis leads to a negative Dr, see Fig. 7(c).
Such a spin-orbit driven preference of a particular rota-
tional sense of the N´eel wall should be observable in an
experiment.

V. SUMMARY

Density-functional theory (DFT) calculations were
performed to study the magnetic interactions in Mn, Fe,
and Co chains at Pt step-edges. These calculations al-
low to extract parameters for a micromagnetic model

12

Fig. 8: (color online) Schematic visualization of the energeti-
cally preferred rotational sense for (a) the ground-state of the
Mn chain (left-rotating spin-spiral) and (b) the domain wall
for the Co chain (right-rotating N´eel wall).

that takes into account the spin-stiﬀness constant, A, the
magnetic anisotropy tensor, K, and the D-vector, which
arises from the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI).
Using this model, the magnetic ground state for the three
investigated systems is determined employing two diﬀer-
ent instability criteria for the appearance of spin-orbit
driven non-collinear structures, one for the homogeneous
and one for the inhomogeneous spin spiral. The main
results are listed in Table III.

Our results predict a spiral magnetic ground state for
the Mn chains, that modulates the antiferromagnetic or-
der with a period length of about 16 nm or 50-60 atoms
along the chain. These ﬁndings establish Mn as a promis-
ing candidate for experimental research groups to inves-
tigate the DMI in 1D systems. A new aspect of this
system, diﬀerent to the systems studied in the literature,
is the non-trivial direction of the D-vector, that is not
fully determined by symmetry. As a result the spiral ro-
tates in a plane that is tilted by about 62◦ towards the
upper terrace (see Fig. 8(a)). For the Fe and Co chains
we conclude that the formation of a non-collinear spi-
ral magnetic structure is unlikely. For one part, this is
due to magnetic anisotropies that are larger compared
to the Mn chains. For the other part, their D-vectors
are too small to overcome these anisotropy barriers. A
detailed atom-resolved analysis of this quantity showed
that their moderate strengths are due to destructive addi-
tion of the atomic contributions. For Co, the results are
consistent with recent ﬁndings for the Co zigzag chain
on Ir(001) (5×1),16 for which also no spiraling solution
was observed. On the other hand, the Fe/Pt step-edge

y−62◦ˆerotxz(a)y29◦xzˆerot(b)TM GS (no SOC) GS (with SOC)
Mn
Fe
Co

AFM
FM
FM

(cid:96)-SS
FM
FM

easy axis DW type
(cid:107) chain
⊥ chain
⊥ chain

—
BW
r-NW

density functional theory. One consequence is that the
slope and the curvature of the spiral energy as function of
the wave vector as calculated in density functional theory
provides directly the spin stiﬀness and the spiralization
that enter a material speciﬁc micromagnetic model.

13

TABLE III: This table summarizes the outcome of the paper.
Whereas in the absence of SOC only collinear ground-states
occur (FM and AFM), the Mn chain forms a left-rotating
homochiral spin spiral ((cid:96)-SS) when SOC is taken into account.
The easy axis can point along the chain (Mn) or perpendicular
to it (Fe and Co). For the deﬁnition of ϑK see Fig. 7 or Eq. (4).
The analysis of the domain wall (DM) type reveals that the
Fe chain prefers a Bloch wall (BW) whereas for the Co chain
a right-rotating N´eel wall (r-NW) is energetically favored.

behaves diﬀerent to the biatomic Fe chain Ir(001),27 for
which a spiral with a short period pitch was observed.

The calculated directions and strengths of the D-
vectors for the diﬀerent chains were compared to those
that result from the model of Fert and Levy. It appears
that this model reproduces to some extent the directions
of the D-vectors of the Mn and the Fe chains. For the Co
chain, however, it fails to describe the direction of D cor-
rectly. We noticed that the model of Fert and Levy may
be used with some precaution at least for one-dimensional
chains as the micromagnetic DM vector diverges for inﬁ-
nite chains in the limit of long wavelengths. A more thor-
ough investigation of the predictive power of the Fert-
Levy model with respect to ﬁlms and heterostructures
would be interesting.

Furthermore, an analysis of planar domain wall struc-
tures for the Fe and the Co chains was presented.
It
appears that in the Fe system a Bloch wall is energeti-
cally more favorable. Since this type of domain wall is
by symmetry not aﬀected by the DMI, a preferred sense
in the rotation direction is not expected. In contrast, the
Co chains form a N´eel wall, which shows a homochiral
preference in the wall rotation that is caused by the DMI
(see Fig. 8(b)).

We encourage experimental groups to verify our ﬁnd-
ings for the Mn chains in terms of the magnetic ground
state. Furthermore, a statistically preferred rotational
sense of domain walls in the Co chains should be observ-
able in experiment. This could add a substantial aspect
to the understanding of magnetism in low-dimensional
systems and could provide some inside into the conse-
quences of surface and interface roughness on the DMI.
On the methodological side we showed that for a spin-
lattice model of classical spins on a Bravais lattice in-
cluding Heisenberg and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac-
tion the homogeneous spin-spiral is an exact solution if
the rotation vector of the spin-spiral points either par-
allel or antiparallel to the D-vector, representing a so-
lution of two diﬀerent chiralities. This has important
consequences since the spin-spiral state is a state that is
frequently employed in the ﬁrst-principles context using

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We would like to thank Albert Fert, Miriam Hinzen,
Daniel A. Kl¨uppelberg and Christoph Melcher for fruit-
ful suggestions and stimulating discussions during the
coarse of this work. We gratefully acknowledge comput-
ing time on the JUROPA supercomputer provided by
the J¨ulich Supercomputing Centre (JSC). B.S. acknowl-
edges funding by the HGF-YIG Programme VH-NG-717
(Functional Nanoscale Structure and Probe Simulation
Laboratory, Funsilab). B.Z. and S.B. acknowledge fund-
ing from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement No
665095 (MAGicSky).

Appendix A: Relation between micromagnetic and

spin-lattice model

A natural starting point for a multiscale analysis of a
complex magnetic structure is the spin-lattice Hamilto-
nian

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i<j

i

E{S} =

[Jij Si · Sj + Dij · (Si × Sj)] +

ST
i Ki Si ,
(A1)
where Jij is the exchange integral between atoms at sites
i and j, Dij is the Dzyaloshinskii vector and Ki is the
microscopic on-site anisotropy tensor. If these parame-
ters are determined from ﬁrst-principles, one refers to a
realistic spin-lattice model. Assuming lattice periodicity
it follows that Jij = J|j−i|, Dij = Dj−i = −Di−j, and
Ki = K0 for all sites i, and considering that the exchange
interaction and the DMI are even and odd functions, re-
spectively, with respect to inversion symmetry. In this
appendix we relate these parameters to the micromag-
netic parameters in model (1).

If we assume that the magnetic structure is slowly
varying along the chain, meaning that the magnetic mo-
ments rotate on a length scale that is much larger than
the interatomic distance, then it is certainly possible
to choose for the magnetization direction a continuous
normalized function m(y) with |m(y)| = 1, such that
m(j ∆) = Sj, where ∆ denotes the spacing between the
lattice points along the y-axis. If we assume further that
m does not vary much on a length scale at which the in-
teractions J, D are relevant, then the interactions can be
considered local over that length scale which is consistent
with the formulation of the interactions in the micromag-
netic energy functional (1). Under these conditions one
can Taylor expand Sj = m(j∆) around m(i ∆). The en-

ergy expression (A1) treated within the lowest relevant

order reads then

(cid:88)

j>i

(cid:20)

−

1
2

(cid:88)

i

∆

E =

(j − i)2∆J|j−i|

˙m2(i∆) + (j − i)Dj−i · (m(i∆) × ˙m(i∆))

14

(A2)

(cid:21)

+

1
∆

 ,

m(i∆)T K0 m(i∆)

For the exchange term we make explicitly use of the nor-
malization as m2(y) = 1, d
˙m(y) = 0
and d2

dy m2(y) = 2 m(y) ·
dy2 m2(y) = 2 m(y) · ¨m(y) + 2 ˙m2(y) = 0.

Reminding that the distance Rij between atoms at site
i and j is given by (j − i)∆ = Rij, replacing ∆ by dy in
(A2) in the limit of small changes, the energy functional
of spin-model (A1) approaches the energy functional of
micromagnetic model (1), E{S} → E[m], with parame-
ters A, D and K as summarized in Eq. (22).

Appendix B: Spin-spiral solution of spin-lattice
model with Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction

From the view-point of ﬁrst-principles calculations of a
magnetic crystalline solid, the planar helical or cycloidal
spin-spiral represents an interesting magnetic state, be-
cause at absence of spin-orbit coupling the spin-spiral
state can be calculated by partitioning a solid into the
same (chemical) unit cell that is used for non-magnetic or
ferromagnetic calculations. This becomes possible by em-
ploying the generalized Bloch theorem40 and holds true
for any arbitrary wave vector q ∈ BZ taken from the Bril-
louin zone (BZ) of wave vectors. It is a major concept to
make such ﬁrst-principles calculations feasible.

In this Appendix B we show that the planar homoge-
neous spin-spiral state of wave vector q, whose rotation
axis points parallel or antiparallel to the Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya vector, is a stationary solution, and for a par-
ticular wave vector Q, the spin-spiral state is also the
energy minimizer of the spin-lattice model (A1) for a pe-
riodic solid, when the magnetic anisotropy term is ig-
nored. It is known that the spin-spiral state is the sta-
tionary solution of a classical Heisenberg model on the
Bravais lattice.45–48 Here we show that the solution holds
true also for the Heisenberg exchange plus DMI. In diﬀer-
ence to the Heisenberg exchange only, where the energy
is isotropic with respect to the rotation directions of the
spirals, the DMI lowers the rotational symmetry, and se-
lects spirals whose rotation directions are parallel and
antiparallel to Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya vector Dq of mode
q.

In the following we assume a crystalline solid with lat-
tice periodicity and restrict ourselves for simplicity to one
atom per unit cell. We neglect the single-site anisotropy
tensor in (A1). The spin-model (A1) on the Bravais lat-

tice is then replaced by the quadratic form

E{S} =

1
2

ST
i Jij Sj ,

(B1)

(cid:88)

i,j

with prefactor 1/2 preventing a double counting of terms
and the exchange tensor

 Jij Dz

−Dz
ij
Dy
ij −Dx

ij −Dy
ij
Jij Dx
ij
Jij

ij

 ∈ R3×3 ,

Jij =

(B2)

and Jij = J T
ji . The lattice periodicity implies Jij =
J0,j−i = J T
0,i−j. The aim is to ﬁnd the set of spins {Si},
with Si : Z → S2 ⊂ R3, that minimizes E{S} subject to
the constraints that the length of spins are on sphere S2
of radius S and remain unchanged at all sites i,

Si · Si = S2 ∀ i ∈ Z .

(B3)

Luttinger and Tisza49,50 realized that the minimization
of a quadratic form under N strong constraints can be
replaced by a much simpler problem of minimizing the
energy (B1) subject to the weak constraint

Si · Si = N S2 ,

(B4)

(cid:88)

i

(cid:88)

q

where N is the number of lattice sites. This is a neces-
sary condition and becomes suﬃcient if the solution also
fulﬁlls the strong constraint, as given in Eq. (B3).

To take advantage of the translational symmetry of
the crystalline solid, we transform the spin at lattice site
i with the lattice vector Ri into momentum space

Si =

1
√N

Sq eiqRi

and Sq =

1
√N

(cid:88)

i

Si e−iqRi .

(B5)

but the derivations hold correct also for one- and two-

Without loss of generality we assume here Ri ∈ R3,
dimensional lattices. Since Si ∈ R3 is a three-tuple of real
numbers, it holds that S∗q = S−q. With this deﬁnition,
the quadratic form (B1) and the weak constraint (B4)
can be expressed in momentum space as

E{Sq} =

1
2

ST−q Jq Sq =

1
2

S†q Jq Sq

(B6)

(cid:88)

q

(cid:88)

q

the local z-axis points always parallel (not anti-parallel)
to Dq. We can always choose a transformation such that
the exchange tensor becomes block diagonal

the eigenvectors simplify to

wq,1 =

1
√2

(cid:48)

q

(cid:88)
(cid:88)


j

−

and

(cid:88)

q

S−q · Sq =

respectively, with

(cid:48)

J αα

q

=

=

e−iq(0−Rj ) =

(cid:17)∗
(cid:17)∗

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

0j

(cid:16)
J αα
(cid:16)

q

J αα
J αα

q

S†q Sq = N S2 ,

(B7)

(cid:16)

(cid:48)

J α

q

(cid:17)∗ =

(cid:16)

α

(cid:17)∗

(cid:48)

J αα
−q

,

(B8)

for α = α(cid:48)
for α (cid:54)= α(cid:48)

1
2

1
2

(cid:88)

Jq =

and α ∈ {x, y, z}. Since the oﬀ-diagonal elements of J αα
are purely imaginary, we replace Dα
q . The ex-
change tensor in momentum space is related then to the
tensor in real space (B2) as

q by iDα

q

 ∈ C3×3 ,

i Dz
q −i Dy
q
i Dx
Jq
q
q −i Dx
Jq

 Jq
−i Dz
q
i Dy
q ∈ R. Analogously, we ﬁnd for the ex-
(cid:88)

(B9)

q

with Jq and Dα
pression of the DM energy of the spin-model (A1)

N

EDM{S} =

D0j · C0j with C0j = S0 × Sj ,
(B10)
in terms of the vector chirality C0j, or sum over modes
in momentum space, respectively,

j

q

EDM{Sq} =

Dq · Cq with C(Sq) = iS∗q × Sq ,
(B11)
where C(Sq) is the vector chirality of mode Sq. Obvi-
ously energy is gained if the vector chirality is antiparallel
to the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya vector, Cq ∝ −Dq.
To simplify the minimization problem it is convenient
to transform the 3N dimensional quadratic form (B6)
into the principle axes by diagonalizing the matrix Jq.
Since, Jq = J †q is Hermitian, Jq has 3 real eigenvalues
λq,γ with γ ∈ {1, 2, 3}:

λq,1(3) = Jq (∓) |Dq| and λq,2 = Jq

(B12)

with orthonormal eigenvectors Vq = {vq,1, vq,2, vq,3} ∈
C3×3. The eigenvector vq,2 points for each wave vector
q into the direction of the Dzyaloshinskii vector vq,2 =
ˆeq,DM = Dq/|Dq| (see also Eq. (3)). Obviously eigenvec-
tors vq,1 and vq,3 live in the orthogonal subspaces. With-
out loss of generality we choose for each mode q the coor-
dinate system of the spin space such that ˆeq,DM coincides
with the z-axis, ˆeq,DM = ˆez. In this new frame of refer-
ence RqDq = (0, 0, Dq)T with Dq = |Dq| ≥ 0, the eigen-
vectors transform to Wq = RqVq = {wq,1, ˆez, wq,3} ∀q,
where Rq ∈ R3×3 is the respective rotation matrix, which
conserves handedness, i.e., detR = 1. With those deﬁni-
tions it is clear that R−q = −Rq, because of the symme-
try D−q = −Dq (see Eq. (B8)) and our deﬁnition that

15

(B13)

 , (B14)

Rq Jq RT

0

q =

−iDq Jq
0

iDq 0
0
Jq

 ,
 Jq
 0
 = (wq,3)∗ , wq,2 =
 1
(cid:88)
3(cid:88)

0
1

i
0

and the energy in momentum space reads

E{Sq} =

1
2

q

γ=1

S†qRT

q wq,γλq,γw†q,γRqSq .

(B15)

The eigenvalues and eigenvectors are invariant with re-
spect to space inversion symmetry I transforming Iq =
−q, and complex valued functions as IJ (q) = J ∗(−q),
and Iwq,γ = w∗
−q,γ. The matrix of vector chirality for
the three eigenvectors C(Wq) = {−ˆez, 0, ˆez} ∀q are mo-
mentum independent and the chirality vector of the state
with the lowest (highest) eigenvalue point antiparallel
(parallel) to the direction of the DMI.

Now we turn to our primary goal to ﬁnd the state SQ
that minimizes the energy expression E{Sq} of Eqs. (B6)
or (B15), respectively.
Irrespective of the sign of Jq,
eigenvalue λq,1 is always the lowest eigenvalue for any
wave vector q, Λq,min = λq,1. Considering the symme-
try relation J (q) = J (−q)∗ (see Eq. B8)), both matri-
ces have the same eigenvalues and subsequently Λq,min =
Λ−q,min has at least a twofold degeneracy for q ∈ BZ, but
the eigenvectors corresponding to the lowest and highest
value exchange the roles, i.e., w−q,1 = (wq,1)∗ = wq,3
and vice versa. A lower bound to E{Sq} can be esti-
mated considering that S†qJqSq ≥ S†qΛq,minSq is limited
by the lowest eigenvalue, and thus

E{Sq} ≥

1
2

Λ

S†q Sq =

1
2

ΛN S2 ,

(B16)

(cid:88)

q

with Λ = Λ±Q = minqΛq the lowest eigenvalue of all q.
In the state that minimizes the 3N -dimensional ellip-
soid transformed to the principle axis (see Eq. (B15))
with respect to S†q subject to the constraint (B7) of a
3N -dimensional sphere of radius N S2, it is easy to show
by the method of Lagrange multipliers that the Sq must
satisfy

(λq,γ − 2ξ) w†q,γRqSq = 0 ∀q, γ ,

(B17)

where ξ is the Lagrange multiplier independent of q. Us-
ing Eqs. (B17) and (B7), the energy (B15) becomes

E{Sq} = ξN S2 .

(B18)

(cid:114)

Hence the minimum E{SQ} is obtained for the minimum
ξ for which solutions of Eq. (B17) exist, which is realized
for ξ = 1/2Λ, prooﬁng that the ground state satisﬁes the
equal sign in Eq. (B16).

Now we have a closer look at Eq. (B17). If Sq (cid:54)= 0 for
all q and since Wq spans the whole three-dimensional
spin-space there exists for each vector q at least one
eigenvector wq,γ for which w†q,γRqSq (cid:54)= 0. As a conse-
quence for each vector q, there is at least one eigenvalue
λq,γ for which λq,γ = 2ξ. Since ξ is independent of q,
all eigenvalues and thus all Jq, and |Dq| should be inde-
pendent of q, and this is unphysical. On the contrary a
single-q state,

N S2
2 RT

Sq|¯q,γ =
¯q (w¯q,γδq,¯q + w−¯q,γδq,−¯q) , (B19)
i.e., a state for which Sq = 0, ∀ q \ {¯q,−¯q}, made of a
superposition of two arbitrary modes with wave vectors
¯q and −¯q, for which eigenvalue λ¯q,γ = λ−¯q,γ is two-
fold degenerate, with polarization directions determined
by the principle axes of the exchange tensor J¯q satisﬁes
Eq. (B17) for the Lagrange parameter ξ = 1/2λ¯q,γ and
the respective energy

E{Sq|¯q,γ} =

1
2

λ¯q,γN S2 ,

(B20)

and is a stationary state of the energy functional, with
λ¯q,γ from Eq. (B12). The term ∝ RT
¯q w¯q,γδq,¯q satisﬁes
also condition (B17), but not the condition S∗q = S−q,
and thus Si /∈ R. Therefore, this case is not further
discussed.

The three eigenmodes (B19) exhibit the chirality

N S2
2 RT

¯q ˆez (δq,¯q − δq,−¯q)

(B21)

(B22)

C(Sq|¯q,1) = −
C(Sq|¯q,2) = 0
C(Sq|¯q,3) =

N S2
2 RT

¯q ˆez (δq,¯q − δq,−¯q) . (B23)
Obviously, the modes Sq|¯q,1 and Sq|¯q,3 are of opposite
chirality.
A Fourier back-transformation of the eigenmodes
shows that the modes with γ = 1 and γ = 3 correspond
to ﬂat spin spirals,

 cos(¯q · Ri)

(∓) sin(¯q · Ri)

 ,

0

Si|¯q,1(3) = S RT

¯q

(B24)

where the upper (lower) sign corresponds to mode 1 (3)
and the rotation corresponds to a clockwise (counter-
clockwise) rotation around ˆe¯q,DM = RT
¯q ˆez. The assign-
ment of sign and handedness is consistent (i) with the
common deﬁnition of the rotation matrix

Rz(ϕ) =

cos ϕ (±) sin ϕ 0
cos ϕ 0
0
1

(∓) sin ϕ

0

(B25)





16

(cid:73)
(cid:73)

rotating vector Si|¯q,1(3) in a right-handed coordinate sys-
tem clockwise (counter-clockwise) around ˆez by an angle
ϕ = ¯q · Ri with 0 ≤ ϕ ≤ π, (ii) as well as with the
deﬁnition of the winding number

w1(3) =

=

1
2π
1
2π

dϕ S1(3) ×

(cid:20)

dϕ

Sx|1(3)(ϕ)

dS1(3)

dϕ
dSy|1(3)(ϕ)

dϕ

−Sy|1(3)(ϕ)

dSx|1(3)(ϕ)

dϕ

= (∓)1

(cid:21)

(B26)

counting the total number of turns of the spin-spiral as
a curve parameterized by ϕ with 0 ≤ ϕ ≤ 2π, where
counter-clockwise motion counts as positive and clock-
wise motion counts as negative integers, and (iii) with
the vector spin-chirality between atom i and i + 1 de-
ﬁned in

Ci,i+1(Si|¯q,1(3)) = (∓)S2 sin (¯q (Ri+1 − Ri)) ˆe¯q,DM .

(B27)
Alternatively we could also say, that mode 1 (3) rotates
counter-clockwise (clockwise) around (∓)ˆe¯q,DM, but this
is not the deﬁnition we follow here. These two modes
γ = 1, 3 are separated by an energy N S2|D¯q|.
sity wave in the direction of D¯q,

On the contrary, the mode Sq|¯q,2 represents a spin den-

Si|¯q,2 = S ˆe¯q,DM cos(¯q · Ri) .

(B28)

All three modes satisfy per construction the weak con-
straint (B4), but this mode does not fulﬁll the strong
constraint (B3) and thus must be excluded from the set
of solutions.

¯q takes the physical meaning of the propagation vector
of the spin spiral. If the propagation vector is parallel to
the DMI-vector, ¯q(cid:107)D¯q, then we call the spiral a helical or
Bloch-type spin-spiral for which holds that curl S¯q,1(3) =
∇R × S¯q1(3) = (±)(¯q · ˆe¯q,DM)S¯q1(3). If the propagation
vector is perpendicular to the DMI-vector, ¯q ⊥ D¯q, then
we name the spiral a cycloidal or N´eel-type spin-spiral for
which curl S¯q,1(3) = (∓)(¯q · S¯q,1(3))ˆe¯q,DM. Here the spin-
spiral S¯q = S¯q(R) : R3 → S2 is a smooth function whose
values coincide at the positions of the lattice vectors Ri
with Si|¯q. The details of the vector relation between ¯q
and D¯q depends on the symmetry of the crystal lattice.
So far we focused on physical realizations where the
eigenvalues of the stationary state Λ¯q are exactly two-
fold degenerate, namely for ¯q and −¯q for ¯q,−¯q ∈ BZ.
For systems with a non-trivial point group, the ¯q-vector
is equivalent to a star of p ¯q-vectors, {¯q}, formed by
consideration of ¯qα = Pα ¯q for all symmetry operations
α denoted by Pα of the symmetry group of the lattice.
Accordingly, Λ{¯q} is p-fold degenerate, p diﬀerent S¯qα
can satisfy Eq. (B17) simultaneously, and the single-q
state Sq|¯q,γ in Eq. (B19) may be replaced by an alter-
native ansatz describing a multi-q state by a superposi-
tion of properly normalized Sq|¯qα,γ for any choice of α

taken from the symmetry group as long as the strong
constraint (B3) is fulﬁlled. For ¯q = Q we may expect
a multi-q ground state. The competition of the various
possible multi-q states with the single-q state as possible
ground state is typically determined by energy contribu-
tions beyond the model discussed here.51

Appendix C: Extracting micromagnetic parameters
from ﬁrst-principles energetics of spin-spiral state

17

energy of a spin-spiral state, Etot(q, ˆerot) (cid:39) ESS(q) +
EDM(q, ˆerot), can be explicitly approximated by calcula-
tions in two steps: self-consistent calculations of the spin-
spiral energy without SOC, ESS(q), and the energy due
to SOC, EDM(q, ˆerot), in ﬁrst order perturbation theory
for a given rotation axis ˆerot. We work here with a nor-
malized length of magnetic spins, S2 = 1, as typical for
spin-lattice and micromagnetic models. The parameters
J(q) and D(q) of particular systems are then obtained
from ﬁrst principles by a direct comparison of the ener-
gies E(q, (∓)ˆeDM(q)) = 1

2 λq,1(3),

An important aspect in undertaking multi-scale simu-
lations of magnetic structures is the development of real-
istic micromagnetic models with material-speciﬁc param-
eters. In this Appendix C we show that the spin stiﬀness
A and the spiralization D, which enter the micromagnetic
model (see Eq. (1)) can be extracted directly from ﬁrst-
principles calculations of the total energy Etot(q, ˆerot)
given per magnetic atom for a planar homogeneous spin-
spiral with wave vector q and ﬁxed rotation axis ˆerot
related to the planar spiral as ˆerot = ˆmi × d ˆmi/dRi.
In the following we give a rather general derivation
not restricted to one-dimensional chains and thus we

than with the spin stiﬀness A and the spiralization ten-

work with the spin-stiﬀness tensor A ∈ Rd×d rather
sor D ∈ R3×d, also called matrix of Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya constants, rather than the Dzyaloshinskii-vector
D. d ∈ {1, 2, 3} refers to the dimensionality of the micro-
magnetic problem with d = 1 relevant for chains, domain-
walls or magnetic spirals, d = 2 for ﬁlms, interfaces or
the treatment of skyrmions and d = 3 for bulk or bubbles
for example.

In the general case, the expression of the DM en-
ergy density of the micromagnetic energy functional (1)
translates from the one-dimensional case D· (m × ˙m) to
D : (m × ∇ · m) in case of higher dimensions. The expres-
with matrix elements Lαβ = (cid:80)
sion in the parenthesis is also called the Lifshitz matrix
L(m) ∈ R3×d ⊆ R3×3, a matrix of diﬀerential one-forms
α(cid:48)α(cid:48)(cid:48) , with
α, β ∈ {x, y, z}. L(β)
αα(cid:48) = −(mα∂βmα(cid:48) − mα(cid:48)∂βmα) are
(cid:3) =(cid:80)
trices: D : L(m) = tr(cid:2)
the Lifshitz invariants and  is the Levi-Civita symbol.
The operator “:” refers to the inner product of two ma-
αβ DαβLαβ. Which of
the Lifshitz invariants or which of the maximal 9 compo-
nents of the D-matrix, respectively, are relevant depends
on the point-group of the crystal, an aspect which is not
considered here any further.

α(cid:48)α(cid:48)(cid:48) αα(cid:48)α(cid:48)(cid:48)L(β)

DTL

Starting point of the derivation is the observation
made in Appendix B that ﬂat spirals with rotation
axis ∓ˆeDM(q) are the stationary states of the spin-
lattice model with Heisenberg and DM interaction with
an energy per atom of E(q, (∓)ˆeDM(q)) = 1
2 λq,1(3) =
2 (J(q) (∓) |D(q)|) and two opposite rotation senses.58
The extraordinary nature of these states lies in the eﬃ-
cient realization in ﬁrst-principles theory of the electronic
structure. We recall from the discussion in Sec. III that
by neglecting the magnetic anisotropy energy, the total

1

δJ(q) = J(q) − J(0) = 2 (ESS(q) − ESS(0))

|D(q)| = 2EDM (q, ˆeDM) ,

and

(C1)
(C2)

∀q ∈ BZ. Note, the equalities hold only if ESS and
EDM are given as energy per magnetic atom. The back
Fourier transformation of J(q) and D(q) according to
Eq. (B8) provides then the Heisenberg exchange param-
eter J0j and the microscopic DM-vectors D0j on the real
space lattice. There might be cases where the direction
ˆeDM(q) is not known a priori. In this case we can deter-
mine the three components of D(q) applying Eq. (C2)
for each wavevector q and for three independent axes of
spiral rotations ˆerot, i.e., ˆerot · D(q) = 2EDM (q, ˆerot).
In micromagnetic models one typically assumes that
the ground state of the system is close to the collinear
state qc, e.g., the ferromagnetic state at qc = 0 or an
antiferromagnetic state at a high-symmetry point at the
boundary of the Brillouin zone. At such a point qc in the
Brillouin zone, |J(qc)| typically takes a local minimum.
If we assume that |D(q)| (cid:28) |J(q)| for q in the vicinity of
qc and measured from qc, i.e., the long wavelength limit
where |q| is small, the relevant energy landscape may be
explored by Taylor expanding Eqs. (C1) and (C2), i.e.,
the exchange parameters

δJ(q) = 2

J0j (cos(qRj) − 1)

≈ −

J0j(Rjq)2,

(C3)

D(q) ˆeDM(q) = D(q)

(ˆeDM(q) · ˆe(k)

rot) ˆe(k)

rot

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

j≥1

j≥1

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

j≥1

j≥1

3(cid:88)

k=1

= 2

≈ 2

D0j sin(qRj)

D0j (Rjq)

(C4)

and the total energy

1
VΩ

Etot(q, ˆerot) =

(cid:21)T

(cid:20)
ˆerot · D

2π

q + qT A

4π2 q + O(q3)

(C5)
up to second order in |q| measured relative to qc, for
a ﬁxed rotation axis ˆerot. k labels the maximum three
linear independent rotation axes ˆe(k)
rot. VΩ represents the

volume of the unit cell in a 3D system, the surface area in
2D, or, respectively, the spacing between magnetic atoms
in 1D, so that the left-hand-side represents an energy
density. The numerical prefactors appear in order to keep
consistency with the deﬁnition of the energy functional in
the main text, Eq. (1). We arrive at the energy expression
with the spin stiﬀness A obtained from the curvature
and the projection of the spiralization matrix D onto the
direction of the rotation vector ˆerot, [ˆerot · D] ∈ Rd, from
the slope of the total energy at wave vector qc calculated
for the rotation axis ˆerot,

A
4π2 =

=

1

2VΩ

1

2VΩ

D
2π

= ˆerot ⊗

=

1
VΩ

∂2
∂q2 ESS(q)|qc

(cid:88)

J0jRj ⊗ Rj ,
j≥1
1
VΩ
D0j ⊗ Rj .

∂
∂q

(cid:88)

j≥1

EDM(q, ˆerot)|qc

(C6)

(C7)

The product denoted by ”⊗” indicates the tensorial prop-
erty of the spin-stiﬀness and the DM-matrix. These equa-
tions provide the link between the micromagnetic param-
eters, the ab initio results of spin-spiral calculations and
a spin-lattice model. On the basis of the ﬁrst expression
on the right-hand side of Eq. (C7) we can interpret the
D-matrix as a tensor in the space spanned by the mag-
netization direction and real space.
In Eqs. (C3) and
(C4) we made explicitly use of the symmetry relations
J(q) = J(−q) and D(q) = −D(−q) and chose J(qc) as
origin of energy.

Appendix D: Atom-dependent micromagnetic
D-vector in the Fert-Levy model obtained for a

spin-spiral state

Applying the Fert-Levy model42,43 for determining the
microscopic DM vector in metals is very appealing due

18

to its simplicity and clarity. It is frequently applied to
determine the direction of the DM vector.
It is inter-
esting because it could provide a basis for interpreting
our ﬁrst-principles results. The assumptions under which
the model is derived motivates this appendix, in which
we explore the validity and applicability of the model to
extended periodic systems, primarily to chains.

Fert and Levy investigated CuMnT ternary alloys,
with a small concentration (1% or 2%) of Mn impuri-
ties and of heavy nonmagnetic atoms T=Au or Pt. They
found that experimental anisotropy data are explained
by Mn atoms carrying a magnetic moment and inter-
act not only by the typical Rudermann-Kittel-Kasuya-
Yosida (RKKY) interaction, but also by a DM-type in-
teraction due to spin-orbit scattering of the conduction
electrons by the nonmagnetic impurities. They derived
the leading order expression for the DMI-energy that is
ﬁrst order in the spin-orbit coupling and second order
in the exchange interaction, which results from an ex-
pression for the third-order perturbation of the ground-
state energy of the gas of conduction electrons due to the
presence of the Mn spins and the nonmagnetic impurity.
Evaluating this expression under the assumption that (i)
the magnetic moments are located at the Mn atoms and
(ii) the spin-orbit interaction at the non-magnetic impu-
rity atoms only, (iii) that both atom types are located
in the host as impurities in the low, but not very low
(> 1000 ppm), concentration limit, (iv) that Cu pro-
vides the gas of homogeneous electrons described by the
Fermi energy, EF, and wavevector, kF, (v) that scatter
at the non-magnetic impurity with the scattering phase
shift δ2(EF) and the spin-orbit strength λ, and hybridize
with the 3d states of the Mn atoms described by Γ, the
exchange interaction strength between the host electrons
and local spins, they arrived at a trilinear expression for
the DMI-energy,

Eijµ
DM = −

135π

32

λ Γ2
E2
F k3
F

sin δ2(EF) sin[kF(Riµ + Rjµ + Rij) + δ2(EF)] ·

ˆRiµ · ˆRjµ
RiµRjµRij

( ˆRiµ × ˆRjµ) · (Si × Sj) ,

(D1)

relating three atoms: one nonmagnetic impurity denoted
by µ and two magnetic impurities denoted by i, j placed
at the position Ri(j)µ measured from the position of the
spin-orbit impurity. Rij measures the distance between
the two atoms i and j.

Now we apply this model to a single transition-metal
chain on the Pt substrate. We are aware of the fact
that neither the spin-orbit atoms Pt nor the magnetic

chain atoms are in the low concentration limit. Also the
Fermi surface of Pt is more complex than Cu and the
isotropic approximation of the Fermi wavevector under-
lying this model is a further approximation. Further, we
assume that all Pt atoms, irrespective of their distance
and position from the chain are electronically identical,
i.e., δµ
2 = δ2, and λµ = λ. In diﬀerence to the ab ini-
tio calculations we consider here a truly single magnetic

chain and no periodic repetition of the surface unit cell.
This is a good approximation for Pt atoms µ close to
the chains, but diﬀerences are expected for atoms in the
center of the terrace as they experience competitive in-
teractions to chains at the upper and lower terrace.

The DM-energy contribution of a magnetic texture
which arises solely through the presence of a certain spin-
orbit atom µ is given by

Eµ

DM =

Eijµ
DM .

(D2)

The brackets denote a summation over all pairs of mag-

(cid:104)i,j(cid:105)

(cid:88)

19

netic chain-atoms i and j. For a ﬁxed atom µ, the direc-
tion of ˆRiµ × ˆRjµ in Eq. (D2) is always the same, irre-
spective of i and j, and we denote it by ˆnµ = ˆey × ˆdµ.
Here, ˆdµ is the unit vector pointing from the atom µ into
the direction of shortest distance to the chain. Then, ϕiµ
is the angle between ˆRiµ and ˆdµ.

In the spirit of the ﬁrst-principles calculations, we next
consider a homogeneous spin spiral for which Si × Sj =
sin(q ay (j − i)) ˆerot, where erot is the rotation axis, and
we obtain

Eµ
DM(q) = −C εµ(q) ˆnµ · erot

with

C =

135π

sin δ2(EF)

and

λ Γ2
E2
F k3
F

32
cos(ϕjµ − ϕiµ)
RiµRjµRij

(cid:88)

(cid:104)i,j(cid:105)

εµ(q) =

sin[kF(Riµ + Rjµ + Rij) + δ2(EF)] ·

sin(ϕjµ − ϕiµ) sin(q ay (j − i)) .

(D3)

(D4)

Clearly, Eµ
ˆnµ, depending on the sign of the prefactor.

DM is lowest if erot is parallel (anti-parallel) to

The contribution of this atom to the spiralization is

deﬁned as

Dµ
2π

=

1
ay

∂Eµ
∂q

DM

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)q=0 · ˆnµ .

(D5)

Unfortunately, Dµ diverges in the limit q → 0 for this
periodic model for one dimension, due to an eﬀective
1/R-dependence for each of the two sums over i and j
contained in Eq. (D5). In a realistic solid we expect a ﬁ-
nite phase coherence length of the wave function or some
structural or chemical disorder, which truncates the in-
teraction range of the atoms in the ﬁnite chain and thus
the summations in the sums in Eq. (D4). This would
prevent the divergence of Eq. (D5).

In contrast, the energies are well behaved and we have
εµ(q) → 0 for q → 0 (see Eq. (D4)). To compare to
our ab initio results in Sec. IV (Fig. 5), we evaluate for
the rest of this appendix the energy at a ﬁxed wave vec-
tor q0 = 0.05 2π
(corresponding to a pitch of 5.6 nm) as
ay
magnetic state and calculate Eµ
DM numerically. For this
q0, the evaluation of the sum in Eq. (D4) in a supercell
containing 4000 unit cells in the ±y-direction yields well
converged results. We notice, however, that the conver-
gence depends on the value of q0, i.e., that a lower value
of q0 would require a larger number of unit cells in order
to reach convergence. The atom-resolved contributions
to the D-vector are then approximated by the ﬁnite dif-
ference,

Dµ ≈ const ·

εµ(q0)

q0

· ˆnµ .

(D6)

These values compare to the atom-resolved spiralization
from our ﬁrst principles calculations presented in Fig. 5
and discussed in Sec. IV of the main text. Here, we only
discuss the results predicted by the model:

The type of the 3d atom (i.e., Mn, Fe, or Co) only
enters the prefactor in Eq. (D6) through the parameter
Γ. Up to a sign, the directions ˆnµ (visualized by arrows
in Fig. 5(d) in the main text) are independent of the
type of magnetic chain 3d atoms. The dependence of the
DMI strength on the substrate atom is governed by εµ
for a ﬁxed q0. For the results in this paper that utilize
the Fert-Levy model (see Eq. (D4)) we use the following
parameters: 2πk−1
F = 2 nm as given by Ref. 52 and δ2 =
π
10 Zd, where Zd = 9.4 gives the number of d-electrons.42
In Fig. 9, we analyze εµ as function of the distance d of
Pt atom µ to the chain for two diﬀerent cases: that the
spin-spiral is of (i) ferromagnetic short-range order (FM-
SS) as the case for Fe and Co, or of (ii) anti-ferromagnetic
type (AFM-SS) as in the case of Mn (see circles and
squares, respectively). More precisely, ε(dµ) is a func-
tion of the distance d of atom µ to the chain if we dis-
tinguish two geometrical cases: (a) that the projection of
the position of atom µ coincides with the position of a 3d
atom, or (b) that this projection is in the middle of two
3d atoms (see Fig. 9). This distance dependence is indi-
cated by solid and broken lines, respectively. We observe
typical RKKY-like oscillations that decay approximately
as 1/d2. In total, we ﬁnd that for the AFM case the DMI
strength is smaller and decays faster with distance than
for the FM case. As a result, in AFM-SS the ﬁrst maxi-
mum determines the overall DMI strength nearly alone.
Moreover, the period length of the oscillations is nearly
by a factor 2 larger in FM-SS (4.5 ay and 2.5 ay for FM-

SS and AFM-SS, respectively).

20

The disagreement between the Fert-Levy model and
the ab initio results for Co (see Figs. 5(c) and 5(d)) can-
not be resolved by adjusting the parameters for Co or
the diﬀerent Pt atoms (e.g., the phase shifts or Fermi
wavevector) since for the most important Pt atoms, those
next to Co, the direction of D does not coincide at all
with the model of Fert and Levy, where the direction is
exclusively determined by geometry. Maybe in the case
of Co the interaction between the upper and lower Co
chains, which is included in our ab initio calculations,
but neglected in the Fert-Levy model contributes to this
diﬀerence. This and the extension of the model to ﬁlms
and heterostructures will be a matter of future investiga-
tions.

bone, et al., Phys. Rev. B 79, 104430 (2009).

14 C. Carbone, S. Gardonio, P. Moras, S. Lounis, M. Heide,
G. Bihlmayer, N. Atodiresei, P. H. Dederichs, S. Bl¨ugel,
S. Vlaic, et al., Adv. Funct. Mater. 21, 1212 (2011).

15 L. Hammer, W. Meier, A. Schmidt, and K. Heinz, Phys.

Rev. B 67, 125422 (2003).

16 B. Dup´e, J. E. Bickel, Y. Mokrousov, F. Otte, K. von
Bergmann, A. Kubetzka, S. Heinze, and R. Wiesendanger,
New J. Phys. 17, 023014 (2015).

17 M. Bode, M. Heide, K. von Bergmann, P. Ferriani,
S. Heinze, G. Bihlmayer, A. Kubetzka, O. Pietzsch,
S. Bl¨ugel, and R. Wiesendanger, Nature 447, 190 (2007).

18 I. E. Dzyaloshinskii, Sov. Phys. JETP 5, 1259 (1957).
19 T. Moriya, Phys. Rev. 120, 91 (1960).
20 B. Santos, J. M. Puerta, J. I. Cerda, R. Stumpf, K. von
Bergmann, R. Wiesendanger, M. Bode, K. F. McCarty,
and J. de la Figuera, New J. Phys. 10, 013005 (2008).

21 P. Ferriani, K. von Bergmann, E. Y. Vedmedenko,
S. Heinze, M. Bode, M. Heide, G. Bihlmayer, S. Bl¨ugel, and
R. Wiesendanger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 027201 (2008).

22 B. Zimmermann, M. Heide, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Bl¨ugel,

Phys. Rev. B 90, 115427 (2014).

23 S. Heinze, K. von Bergmann, M. Menzel, J. Brede, A. Ku-
betzka, R. Wiesendanger, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Bl¨ugel,
Nature Physics 7, 713 (2011).

24 N. Romming, C. Hanneken, M. Menzel, J. E. Bickel,
B. Wolter, K. von Bergmann, A. Kubetzka, and R. Wiesen-
danger, Science 341, 636 (2013).

25 Y. Mokrousov, A. Thiess, and S. Heinze, Phys. Rev. B 80,

Fig. 9:
(color online) Distance-dependence normal to the
chain of the DMI energy per Pt atom for a spin-spiral of
ferromagnetic (FM) or antiferromagnetic (AFM) short-range
order, evaluated at a ﬁxed q0 = 0.05 2π
. Points and squares
ay
highlight the actual positions of atoms in the Pt(664) unit
cell. Two diﬀerent geometries need to be considered. For a
description of the geometries see text.

1 P. Gambardella, A. Dallmeyer, K. Maiti, M. C. Malagoli,
W. Eberhardt, K. Kern, and C. Carbone, Nature 416, 301
(2002).

2 P. Gambardella, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 15, S2533

(2003).

3 A. Dallmeyer, C. Carbone, W. Eberhardt, C. Pampuch,
O. Rader, W. Gudat, P. Gambardella, and K. Kern, Phys.
Rev. B 61, R5133 (2000).

4 P. Gambardella, M. Blanc, H. Brune, K. Kuhnke, and

K. Kern, Phys. Rev. B 61, 2254 (2000).

5 P. Gambardella, M. Blanc, L. B¨urgi, K. Kuhnke, and

K. Kern, Surf. Sci. 449, 93 (2000).

6 M. Komelj, C. Ederer, J. W. Davenport, and M. F¨ahnle,

Phys. Rev. B 66, 140407 (2002).

7 A. B. Shick, F. M´aca, and P. M. Oppeneer, Phys. Rev. B

69, 212410 (2004).

8 B. ´Ujfalussy, B. Lazarovits, L. Szunyogh, G. M. Stocks,

and P. Weinberger, Phys. Rev. B 70, 100404 (2004).

9 M. Komelj, D. Steiauf, and M. F¨ahnle, Phys. Rev. B 73,

134428 (2006).

10 S. Baud, C. Ramseyer, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Bl¨ugel, Phys.

Rev. B 73, 104427 (2006).

11 S. Baud, G. Bihlmayer, S. Bl¨ugel, and C. Ramseyer, Surf.

Sci. 600, 4301 (2006).

12 J. Honolka, T. Y. Lee, K. Kuhnke, A. Enders, R. Skom-
ski, S. Bornemann, S. Mankovsky, J. Min´ar, J. Staunton,
H. Ebert, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 067207 (2009).

13 J. Honolka, T. Y. Lee, K. Kuhnke, D. Repetto, V. Sessi,
P. Wahl, A. Buchsbaum, P. Varga, S. Gardonio, C. Car-

012345distance d normal to the chain (ay)−0.2−0.10.00.10.20.30.40.5DMI strength ε(d) (arb. units)FM-SS, geom. aFM-SS, geom. bAFM-SS, geom. aAFM-SS, geom. b195420 (2009).

26 R. Mazzarello and E. Tosatti, Phys. Rev. B 79, 134402

(2009).

27 M. Menzel, Y. Mokrousov, R. Wieser, J. E. Bickel,
E. Vedmedenko, S. Bl¨ugel, S. Heinze, K. von Bergmann,
A. Kubetzka, and R. Wiesendanger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108,
197204 (2012).

28 M. Heide, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Bl¨ugel, J. Nanosci. Nan-

otechnol. 11, 3005 (2011).

29 M. Leˇzai´c, P. Mavropoulos, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Bl¨ugel,

Phys. Rev. B 88, 134403 (2013).

30 I. E. Dzyaloshinskii, Sov. Phys. JETP 20, 665 (1965).
31 Y. A. Izyumov, Sov. Phys. Usp. 27, 845 (1984).
32 F. Freimuth, S. Bl¨ugel, and Y. Mokrousov, J. Phys.: Con-

dens. Matter 26, 104202 (2014).

33 For program description see http://www.flapw.de.
34 H. Krakauer, M. Posternak, and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev.

B 19, 1706 (1979).

35 E. Wimmer, H. Krakauer, M. Weinert, and A. J. Freeman,

Phys. Rev. B 24, 864 (1981).

36 A. Mosca Conte, S. Fabris, and S. Baroni, Phys. Rev. B

78, 014416 (2008).

37 V. L. Moruzzi, J. F. Janak, and A. R. Williams, Calculated

electronic properties of metals (Pergamon Press, 1978).

38 A. R. Mackintosh and O. K. Andersen, Cambridge Univer-

sity Press 77, 149 (1980).

39 M. Heide, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Bl¨ugel, Phys. B: Condens.

Matter 404, 2678 (2009).

40 L. M. Sandratskii, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 3, 8565

(1991).

41 G. Bihlmayer, Y. Koroteev, P. Echenique, E. Chulkov, and

S. Bl¨ugel, Surf. Sci. 600, 3888 (2006).

42 A. Fert and P. M. Levy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 1538 (1980).
43 P. M. Levy and A. Fert, Phys. Rev. B 23, 4667 (1981).
44 M. Heide, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Bl¨ugel, Phys. Rev. B 78,

21

140403 (2008).

45 A. Yoshimori, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn 14, 807 (1959).
46 J. Villain, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 11, 303 (1959).
47 T. A. Kaplan, Phys. Rev. 116, 888 (1959).
48 T. A. Kaplan, Phys. Rev. B 79, 229901 (2009).
49 J. M. Luttinger and L. Tisza, Phys. Rev. 70, 954 (1946).
50 J. M. Luttinger, Phys. Rev. 81, 1015 (1951).
51 P. Kurz, G. Bihlmayer, K. Hirai, and S. Bl¨ugel, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 86, 1106 (2001).

52 L. Zhou, J. Wiebe, S. Lounis, E. Vedmedenko, F. Meier,
S. Bl¨ugel, P. H. Dederichs, and R. Wiesendanger, Nat.
Phys. 6, 187 (2010).

53 G. Bihlmayer, Magnetism goes Nano (36th Spring School
of the Institute of Solid State Research (IFF), 2005), chap.
C2 Reduced Dimensions II: Magnetic Anisotropy.

54 In general, one would need to include the non-local dipole-
dipole interaction as well. Following the estimate in Ref. 53,
however, its contribution turns out to be negligible.
55 In Eqs. (3) and (4), we use atan2 (y, x) = Arg(x + iy) ∈
(−180◦, 180◦], the generalized form of the arcus-tangent
x ∈ (−90◦, 90◦), allowing to properly ac-
function arctan y
count for all sign combinations of x and y.
56 The complete elliptic functions of ﬁrst and second kind

dφ (cid:0)1 − 2 sin2(φ)(cid:1)−1/2 and

are deﬁned by K() = (cid:82) π/2
E() =(cid:82) π/2

dφ (cid:0)1 − 2 sin2(φ)(cid:1)1/2, respectively.

0

0

57 In Sec. II C it was pointed out that for the same set of
parameters the criterion for the appearance of an inhomo-
geneous spin spiral is always more likely to be fulﬁlled than
the one for the homogeneous spiral. Nevertheless we will
still present our ﬁndings regarding both spiral types, which
enables the reader to compare.

58 That λq,γ corresponds to an energy per magnetic atom can

be inferred from Eq. (B20).

