FLICA: A Framework for Leader Identiﬁcation in

Coordinated Activity

Chainarong

Amornbunchornvej

University of Illinois at Chicago

Chicago, IL, USA

camorn2@uic.edu

Ivan Brugere

University of Illinois at Chicago

Chicago, IL, USA
ibruge2@uic.edu

Ariana

Strandburg-Peshkin

Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, USA

astrandb@princeton.edu

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
I
S
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
7
5
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Damien Farine

Max Planck Institute for

Ornithology

Konstanz, Germany

dfarine@orn.mpg.de

Margaret C. Crofoot

University of California, Davis
mccrofoot@ucdavis.edu

Davis, CA, USA

Tanya Y. Berger-Wolf

University of Illinois at Chicago

Chicago, IL, USA

tanyabw@uic.edu

ABSTRACT
Leadership is an important aspect of social organization that
aﬀects the processes of group formation, coordination, and
decision-making in human societies, as well as in the social
system of many other animal species. The ability to identify
leaders based on their behavior and the subsequent reactions
of others opens opportunities to explore how group decisions
are made. Understanding who exerts inﬂuence provides key
insights into the structure of social organizations.
In this
paper, we propose a simple yet powerful leadership infer-
ence framework extracting group coordination periods and
determining leadership based on the activity of individuals
within a group. We are able to not only identify a leader or
leaders but also classify the type of leadership model that is
consistent with observed patterns of group decision-making.
The framework performs well in diﬀerentiating a variety of
leadership models (e.g. dictatorship, linear hierarchy, or lo-
cal inﬂuence). We propose ﬁve simple features that can be
used to categorize characteristics of each leadership model,
and thus make model classiﬁcation possible. The proposed
approach automatically (1) identiﬁes periods of coordinated
group activity, (2) determines the identities of leaders, and
(3) classiﬁes the likely mechanism by which the group co-
ordination occurred. We demonstrate our framework on
both simulated and real-world data: GPS tracks of a baboon
troop and video-tracking of ﬁsh schools, as well as stock mar-
ket closing price data of the NASDAQ index. The results of
our leadership model are consistent with ground-truthed bi-
ological data and the framework ﬁnds many known events in
ﬁnancial data which are not otherwise reﬂected in the aggre-
gate NASDAQ index. Our approach is easily generalizable
to any coordinated activity data from interacting entities.

CCS Concepts
•Information systems → Spatial-temporal systems; Data
mining; •Applied computing → Sociology;

Keywords
leadership, spatio-temporal data, collective behavior, inﬂu-
ence, social networks

1.

INTRODUCTION

Leadership is an important aspect of the social organiza-
tion, formation, and decision-making of groups of people in
online and oﬄine communities, as well as other social ani-
mals. Understanding the dynamics of emerging leadership
allows researchers to gain insights into how social species
make decisions. Until recently, it has been diﬃcult if not
impossible to pinpoint the identity of a leader from avail-
able observational data without explicit additional informa-
tion. However, the availability of data from physical prox-
imity sensors, GPS, and the web opens up the possibility of
measuring leadership in online activities, face-to-face inter-
actions, animal populations, and aggregate social processes
such as economic activity. This paper presents an automated
method for unsupervised identiﬁcation of leader identity in
the context of successful initiation of coordinated activities
among groups of individuals. The method uses only the
data on the time series of individual activities, with no ad-
ditional information. The proposed approach automatically
determines (1) when a group decision was made, (2) the
identity of the leader, and (3) the mechanism by which the
group agreed to follow the leader.

Previous work over several domains deﬁnes leadership ac-
cording to physical movement, in public spaces [31], location
based social networks [26], physical association patterns [22],
and other physical trajectories [1]. Leadership has also been
studied in online social networks [12], where user actions are
imitated over the network topology. Much of this work has
focused on identifying leaders from dyadic interactions, but
little work has focused on measuring leadership in coordi-
nated group activity, which occurs in group decision-making
and collaborative systems. Under this view of leadership, a
leader is simply the individual who successfully initiates the
coordinated activity of a group, followed by other individu-
als. Moreover, most of the previous work does not explicitly
focus on the time when the decision is made and leader-
ship is manifested, (i.e. the period of a group’s transition to
the coordinated activity). Finally, many of the previous ap-
proaches assume a particular model of leadership, such as in-
ﬂuence maximization, whereas here we present a framework
to diﬀerentiate between alternate models of leadership.

Figure 1: A high-level overview of the proposed framework

1.1 Our Contributions

We propose a general, scientiﬁcally grounded, unsuper-
vised, modular, and extendable framework with few assump-
tions for identifying individuals who lead a group to a state
of coordinated activity. Our framework is capable of:
• Detecting events of coordinated activity: discover-
ing time intervals of coordination in group activity data
and the transition periods of decision-making which lead
to that coordination;
• Identifying leaders: identifying the initiators of this co-
ordinated behavior, the individuals who succeeded in lead-
ing the group to coordination; and
• Classifying the group leadership model: character-
izing the type of the group’s transition behavior to coor-
dination according to interpretable, dynamic models (e.g.
hierarchical, dictatorial).
We demonstrate the framework’s ability to analyze lead-
ership in coordinated activity on synthetic and real datasets
over several domains. We use synthetic simulated data to
validate every aspect of the framework. We use two bio-
logical datasets – GPS tracks of a baboon troop and video-
tracking of ﬁsh schools, – as well as stock market closing
price data of the NASDAQ index. The results are consis-
tent with ground-truthed biological data and the framework
ﬁnds many known events in ﬁnancial data which are not
otherwise reﬂected in the aggregate NASDAQ index. Our
approach is easily generalizable to any coordinated activity
data from interacting entities.
1.2 Related Work

Coordinating patterns of individual activity is a challenge
that all social organisms face, and diverse strategies–from
democratic to dictatorial–have emerged to allow members
of groups to reach consensus. Leadership (deﬁned as non-
random, diﬀerential inﬂuence [30]) plays a key role in or-
ganizing the collective (i.e. group) behaviors of social or-
ganisms ranging from humans
[9] to hyaena [29] to hy-
menoptera [25]. It potentiates complex patterns of cooper-
ation and conﬂict (e.g., lions [15], hyaenas [4], meerkat [23],
chimpanzees [10], humans [11]), organizes group movements
(ﬁsh [7], humans [9], dogs [3]), and may prevent free-riding [17,
24].

Substantial interest currently exists in identifying individ-
uals who act as leaders and determining how they inﬂuence
the behavior of others in their social network. Most previous
computational work creates global, static leadership ranking
over the entirety of the input data [2, 12, 18, 31, 38]. This
assumes that leadership relationships are global and ﬁxed
across time. However, the important initiators of group ac-

tivity are not necessarily the individuals found at the top of
their group’s social dominance hierarchy [5, 32, 33, 39]. Our
framework explicitly identiﬁes heterogenous, dynamic lead-
ership ranking by identifying local time intervals of leader-
ship and measuring rank-stability over time.

While domain-driven leadership models typically measure
pairwise dyadic dominance or following interactions in the
absence of an explicit network structure [1, 21, 26], most of
the work in machine learning is on explicit, known network
topologies [37]. Our framework generalizes to either an ex-
plicit network or hidden implicit dynamic network topologies
inferred over multidimensional time series data. Further-
more, reporting only dyadic leadership relationships does
not incorporate conditional dependencies over the group (e.g.
interactions are assumed as independent) [20]. To miti-
gate this, previous work on leadership incorporates high-
level network measures [18] including PageRank and HITS,
or cascade-size [2]. Our framework can use any ranking func-
tion, such as PageRank, and can be extended to any high-
level measure on our inferred ‘following’ network.

From a social network perspective, leaders can be char-
acterized as inﬂuential individuals who have many followers
that imitate the leader’s actions [12], and thus are able to
successfully take a group from one behavioral state to an-
other. Signiﬁcant attention has been paid to the problem
of inﬂuence maximization (IM)–i.e. how individuals in a
speciﬁc community are able to maximize their impact on
the behavior of the community as a whole [13,19]. Recently,
these IM models, as well as more general domain-driven def-
initions of leadership have been shown to have considerable
instability in the presence of noise often found in real-world
datasets [14]. Our framework is general, allowing to test
multiple leadership models and requires no parametric as-
sumptions for the deﬁnition of following.

The ability to identify leaders based on their behavior
and the subsequent reactions of others opens opportunities
to explore how an individual aﬀects group behavior and how
group decisions are made. However, because leadership can
occur in a multitude of contexts and take diverse forms,
any generalized framework for identifying leaders or testing
models about the underlying decision-making process that
leads to group consensus must allow for domain-speciﬁc be-
havioral features. Further, a framework for testing among
diﬀerent models of leadership and consensus-building would
pave the way for a more generalized understanding of collec-
tive behaviors and how they shape disparate social systems.
Unfortunately, no such framework for leadership model clas-
siﬁcation exists. Here, we tackle this problem for the ﬁrst
time, focusing on developing de novo methods for both lead-

Multidimensional Time Series DataInputDynamic ‘Following’Network InferencePreDuringCoordination IntervalIdentificationOutputLeadership Measurement andClassificationRank Ordering and Comparisonership identiﬁcation and leadership model classiﬁcation.

Symbol
s(PQ,U )

d(G)
C, I

R•,I ,
¯R•
corr•,•

sup•(i)

ω, δ, β, λ

Deﬁnition
Mean of the signed index diﬀerence of a DTW
optimal warping path PQ,U :
s(PQ,U ) =
sign(j − i)/|PQ,U|

(cid:80)

(i,j)∈PQ,U

Density of graph G, d(G) = 2|E|/(n× (n− 1))
I a coordination event, C the set of
all coordination events identiﬁed by the frame-
work, I ∈ C
R•,I a rank-order of some measure on I.
¯R• the ‘global’ rank order over all I ∈ C.
Kendall rank correlation comparison over I ∈
C, corr•,• =
The support of
#((i,1)∈R•,I )

sup•(i) =
, I ∈ C, (fraction of ﬁrst-ranked

I∈C τ (R•,I ,R•,I )

individual

|C|

i,

(cid:80)

|C|

over intervals)

Model Parameters

Time-series window size ω, overlapping win-
dow shift
size δ, Dynamic Time Warp-
ing (DTW) warping band β, and density-
coordination threshold λ

Table 1: Table of symbol deﬁnitions used through-
out this paper.

2. METHODS

Our proposed framework measures ‘following’ relation-
ships in multidimensional time series of an arbitrary cardi-
nality, and constructs a network model to rank the leaders
before and at the time of coordination. Table 1 summarizes
all symbols and parameters introduced below.1

Figure 1 gives a high-level overview of our proposed frame-
work. The framework takes as input a collection of multi-
dimensional time series data. The framework ﬁrst (a) com-
putes time-series measures appropriate for ‘following’ rela-
tionships (e.g. Dynamic Time Warping, see Section 2.2.1)
over sliding windows, and (b) uses these associations to con-
struct a sequence of directed ‘following’ graphs. We (c)
model time intervals of coordination using the density over
time of the graph sequence. For these intervals, we (d) apply
our set of leadership ranking measures (e.g. PageRank) to
capture diﬀerent aspects of leadership. Finally, we output
these ordered rankings.
2.1 A working example

Figure 2 presents a key example and a brief introduction
to our framework, on real GPS trajectory data of olive ba-
boons (Papio anubis). This event was validated with video
taken on-site (see: Section 3.3.1). Figures 2(b)-2(d) show
the GPS locations of baboons over three diﬀerent time steps
(t = 50, 100, 250). These ﬁgures also show the directed ‘fol-
lowing’ network, and the PageRank of individuals at that
time step (by node size scaling).

The middle plot shows the density of the ‘following’ net-
work over the duration of the entire event. The dotted red
lines denote diﬀerent intervals of this event, based on net-
work density over time.The increase in density corresponds
1Matrices, vectors, and sets are denoted by capital letters,
individual scalars are denoted with lowercase, parameters
are denoted with Greek letters.

(b) t=50

(c) t=100

(d) t=250

Figure 2: PageRank (top) and density (middle) of
the ‘following’ network over time for an event of
movement initiation by in baboons by individual
ID3.
(Bottom) The locations of individuals over
three diﬀerent time steps (t = 50, 100, 250), with
the ‘following’ network, and PageRank indicated by
node size.

to the transition from uncoordinated to coordinated move-
ment and the interval of high density between the dotted
lines corresponds to coordinated group movement. The top
ﬁgure presents the PageRank of individuals in the following
network over a coordination event.

Figures 2(b)-2(c) show the initiation of movement of the
group by ID3 (Black). Figure 2(d) shows the ‘following’
network now in the coordination interval.
Individual ID3
has the largest weight in the ﬁrst two snapshots, and the
PageRank of individual ID1 (Blue) surpasses ID3 only af-
ter the network is ‘coordinated’ (e.g. moving together). If
we measure the leadership ranking after network density
is high, we miss that ID3 ‘built’ the network in the pre-
coordination interval (to the left of the ﬁrst dotted red line).
2.2 Time series analysis
A multidimensional time series Q is a tuple of cardinality
m ≥ 2 of time-ordered sequences of observations of length t:

Q1 = (q1,1, q1,2, ..., q1,t)...
Qm = (qm,1, qm,2, ..., qm,t)

(1)

Our input dataset D contains n time series of ﬁxed cardi-
nality (any m ≥ 1). Each Q ∈ D represents the activity
of an entity (e.g. user, individual). The total size of D is
then given by [n × m × t]. In the case of typical geospatial
trajectories, m = 2, for latitude and longitude.
2.2.1 Time series measures and sliding windows
Our framework constructs a directed association network
by measuring following interactions between time series. The
deﬁnition of the ‘following’ relationship is the atomic unit
which determines our network topology, and the subsequent
leadership analysis.

We focus on Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [27]. How-

Figure 3: (Left) Toy time series showing Q following
U . (Right) the optimal warping path on the DTW
dynamic programming matrix, shifting Q forward in
time onto U .

(cid:118)(cid:117)(cid:117)(cid:116) m(cid:88)

ever, any appropriate local measure of time-lagged similarity
may be used. Dynamic Time Warping is an optimal elastic
matching between sequences using dynamic programming
and is regarded as “remarkably hard to beat as a time series
distance measure, across a host of domain applications, and
a host of tasks; including clustering, classiﬁcation and sim-
ilarity search” [28]. Figure 3 (Left) shows two trajectories,
where time-shifting Q ahead in time produces a better match
to U , illustrated in the warping path in Figure 3 (Right). For
the multidimensional generalization of DTW, we use DTWD
(with D standing for ‘dependent’ [28]). To compute the dis-
tance between multidimensional observations at cell (i, j) in
the dynamic programming matrix, DTWD simply uses the
Euclidean distance over the dimensions:2

dist(Q∗,i, U∗,j) =

(qk − uk)2

(2)

k=1

In practice, DTW uses a warping band which constrains the
diﬀerence in time between matched observations such that
|j − i| ≤ β. Aside from reducing computation from O(t2) to
O(tb), this enforces domain knowledge of what constitutes a
‘coherent’ match for our ‘following’ relationships of interest.
We discuss parameter selection in Section 2.6.2.
2.2.2 Associations in time series sliding windows
Dynamic time warping is typically applied as a global
matching measure. However, we make a Markovian as-
sumption to identify ‘following’ on time series subsequences,
which in aggregate may not correspond to the global optimal
warping solution (see Section: 2.6.1 for discussion).

For a (Q, U ) pair of time series, a time series window size
ω and a sliding window step-size δ (see Section 2.6.2), we
calculate DTWD on the time series subsequences deﬁned on
these overlapping windows. The k-th window is an interval
given by: w(k) = (k × δ, ..., k × δ + ω). DTWD then outputs
an optimal warping path on the time series subsequence pair
(U∗,w(k), Q∗,w(k)). We denote this path by PU,Q, represented
as a sequence of index pairs (i, j), see: Figure 3 (Right). We
compute the mean of the signed index diﬀerence on this
index pairs sequence:

(cid:80)

s(PU,Q) =

sign(j − i)

(i,j)∈PU,Q

|PU,Q|

(3)

This function measures the extent of warping between two
time series. For time series which cannot be warped one-
onto-the-other, s(PU,Q) ≈ 0. When s(PU,Q) is positive, U
2 We use ‘*’ subscript notation in matrices to indicate slicing
in the dimension(s).

Figure 4: A coordination event is a pair of inter-
vals. We deﬁne the pre-coordination interval and co-
ordination interval using threshold λ on the network
density time series.

follows Q, as shown in Figure 3 and when negative, Q follows
U . This function is bounded by [-1, 1].
2.3 Dynamic association network: inference

and analysis

(cid:1)

We construct a time-varying, directed association network
on the multidimensional time series dataset D for sliding
window steps w(k). Let G = (V, E) be a network with node-
set V of size n, and edge-set E of size |E|. The nodes are

the entities represented by each time series Q ∈ D. For(cid:0)n

2
pairs of time series, we construct a sequence of edge-sets Ek
using Equation 3 on valid w(k) windows bounded by time
series length t. Non-zero s(PU,Q) deﬁne directed edges at
time k, between nodes associated with Q and U . Although
here we compute the pairwise association network between
all time series pairs, our framework trivially generalizes to
the case where an explicit network is given, where we mea-
sure ‘following’ relationships only for the time series pairs
associated with adjacent nodes in that network.

2.3.1 Detecting intervals of coordination
Recall that our framework identiﬁes time intervals of co-
ordinated activity and measures the leader who initiated
that coordination. Once the group’s actions are already co-
ordinated, we are ‘too late’ to observe the initiation. Our
dynamic ‘following’ network captures pairwise following ac-
tivity. Therefore, network density, d(G) = 2|E|/(n×(n−1))
is a simple measure of group coordination with the fewest
assumptions on the structure of following.

Figure 4 illustrates the deﬁnition of a coordination event
as a pair of time intervals. We apply a threshold λ to
the network density time series d(Gk), over varying k. We
set λ adaptively, according to the distribution of d(Gk) by
taking as the threshold value either the mean, median, or
another percentile of the density distribution. A contigu-
ous time interval above the threshold deﬁnes a coordina-
tion interval, and the preceding interval below λ is a pre-
coordination interval. For the pre-coordination interval, the
trend of network density is assumed to be monotonically
nondecreasing. Therefore, we determine the beginning of
the pre-coordination interval as the ﬁrst time-step prior to
the coordination interval where the discreet derivative (e.g.
diﬀerence) is zero: diﬀ(d(Gk−1, d(Gk)) ≤ 0.

Together, these intervals are one coordination event, rep-
resented by the 3-tuple of time indices (i, j, l) (sharing index
j). The collection of coordination events is a set C. The
total interval of the event, (i, l) are non-overlapping in C,
and |C| denotes the total number of 3-tuples. For the re-

Pre-coordinationIntervalCoordinationIntervalTimeNetwork DensityThreshold λ𝑖𝑗𝑙mainder of our framework, we measure leadership only on
these events in set C. To reduce the number of intervals
which might be generated near the threshold λ, we apply a
greedy merging of nearby coordination intervals (taking the
range from the DTW warping band window β).

2.4 Leadership ranking

In this section, we propose several methods for measur-
ing diﬀerent aspects of leadership by comparing higher-order
network features against individual time series features. These
feature spaces give an extendable way to compare diﬀerent
aspects of leadership in the absence of a single, unambiguous
leadership deﬁnition.

In all of the below analysis, we compare rank ordering,
denoted R, as the sorted position from best to worst of nodes
on some measure function, i.e. R = argsort(f (•)).3

2.4.1 PageRank
PageRank [6] is a standard method for approximating
eigenvector centrality in networks, designed to measure the
importance of a node by the number and the importance of
the other nodes linking to it. In a network where a link rep-
resents a following relationship between nodes, PageRank
measures how many other nodes follow a given node and
how many followers do those nodes have, etc. Thus, it ﬁts
well with our deﬁnition of a leader.

PageRank returns a weight vector of length n, with a sum
of 1. We calculate PageRank for each static graph Gk within
the dynamic graph sequence of the pre-coordination interval,
and let Rpr,k = argsort(P R(Gk)) be a sequence of n-length
PageRank vectors.

While the deﬁnition of a time step in the original time se-
ries domain and the ‘following’ network may be diﬀerent,
the pre-coordination interval is precisely deﬁned in both
domains. We aggregate the rankings over the entire pre-
coordination interval and produce one rank value per indi-
vidual for the entire interval.

2.4.2 Velocity Convex Hull
The velocity convex hull measures the frequency with which
the discrete time series derivative (dQ/dt) associated with a
node i is outside the bounds of the population’s discrete
derivative distribution (including node i) in the previous
time step.
In aggregate, a high rank of this measure in-
dicates which node ﬁrst moves in the group.
In the case
of spatiotemporal trajectories, this measure corresponds to
how often an individual’s velocity at a given time step is out-
side the range of velocities that were present in the group at
the previous time step.

The convex hull can be computed on arbitrary m dimen-
sions of a multidimensional time series, or their derivatives,
jointly or independently. The convex hull function CH(•)
returns an m-dimensional surface represented as lines be-
tween points in the input data, which encompass all other
points. Because we look at velocity jointly in the one di-
mensional case, we can directly use the max and min.
Let V be a [n×t−1]-sized matrix measuring individual ve-
locity over time, on time series dataset D. For an individual

3 We use ‘•’ to denote placeholders, e.g. for parameters.

i at time-step j, we deﬁne the following indicator function:

VCH(V, i, j) =

Vi,j > max(V∗,j−1)
−1, Vi,j < min(V∗,j−1)
0,

otherwise

(4)

1,

For time step j we output an n-length rank order vector as
Rv,j = argsort((V CH(V, i, j))i=1...n).
2.4.3 Position Convex Hull
The position convex hull is analogous to velocity, except
that our indicator function measures an individual’s posi-
tion relative to the convex hull containing the population at
the previous time step. Rather than look at velocity of ini-
tiation, this measure captures an individual’s frequency of
moving outside the geometric boundaries of the group, and
close to the average heading of the group (e.g. in ‘front’ of
the group).

heading vector: (cid:126)v∗,j =(cid:80)

We compute the convex hull function on time-step j, Hj
= CH(D∗,∗,j), and also introduce the heading vector of
individual i: (cid:126)vi,j = (Di,∗,j−1, Di,∗,j), and the population
i=1..n (cid:126)vi,j. We deﬁne the function
IN(A, B) to denote standard ‘B contains A’ spatial queries
between two geometry objects, and (cid:93)( (cid:126)v1, (cid:126)v2) to measure the
angle between two vectors (cid:126)v1 and (cid:126)v2.

Using these deﬁnitions, we deﬁne the position convex hull

indicator function for individual i at time j:

1,

PCH(D, i, j) =

¬IN(Di,∗,j, Hj−1), (cid:93)((cid:126)vi,j, (cid:126)v∗,j) ≤ 90◦
−1, ¬IN(Di,∗,j, Hj−1), (cid:93)((cid:126)vi,j, (cid:126)v∗,j) > 90◦
0,

otherwise

(5)
For time step j we output an n-length rank order vector

as Rp,j = argsort((PCH(D, i, j))i=1...n).
2.5 Leadership comparison

In Section 2.3.1 we described how we detect coordination
events. We now describe how we apply the measures de-
scribed in Section 2.4 on the collection of detected coordi-
nation events to determine leader identity.
2.5.1 Leadership support
Recall that C denotes the coordination events discovered
by our framework, and |C| is the total number of events.
We aggregate rankings across a single coordination event
I ∈ C. For node i we calculate the mean rank over all
time-steps in I’s pre-coordination interval. We then rank
nodes by this value. Note that by design, the mean rank
is aﬀected proportional to the distance from the mean (e.g.
outlier values), unlike the mode (e.g. the node’s most likely
ranking). In practice, ranking has considerable noise in the
local ordering, so ranking by expectation is more robust.

We also deﬁne a ‘global’ rank order by this same proce-
dure, combining all rank-order vectors over all coordination
events in C, and computing the mean rank-ordering. Let
this ‘global’ rank ordering be deﬁned as ¯Rpr for PageRank,
¯Rv for velocity convex hull, and ¯Rp for position convex hull.
For all I ∈ C, and node i, Leadership Support is deﬁned
relative to a particular measure (e.g. PageRank) for i as the
fraction of intervals where i is ﬁrst ranked:

sup•(i) =

#((i, 1) ∈ R•,I )

|C|

, I ∈ C

(6)

depending on the cost. This forces a mismatch of the ‘follow-
ing’ event. Similarly, Figure 5(b) has a low cost matching by
shifting the entire time series at a constant rate. By match-
ing only local subsequences, we can recover both of these
‘following’ events.
2.6.2 Parameter selection
Although the proposed framework has four parameters,
the dynamic time warping band β, and the overlapping win-
dow shift size δ are minor parameters that primarily trade
oﬀ computation versus the sampling rate of the time se-
ries process. For a window size ω, the DTW sub-procedure
is computed in O(βω), where β = ω yields the traditional
quadratic runtime. Although the warping band β reduces
computation, it also enforces domain knowledge of an ap-
propriate time-lag. The framework is multiplicative in the

number of individual-pairs, (cid:0)n

(cid:1), the number of time win-

2

δ , and the cost of DTW. Therefore, the total cost is
δ × ωβ), which can be reduced by increasing δ or

dows t
O(n2 × t
decreasing β.

The parameters deﬁning the dynamic network time-scale
ω and the threshold of coordination events λ are the ma-
jor parameters of the framework. We tune ω according to
the TWIN heuristic [36] on network density. TWIN is an
information-theoretic heuristic which discovers natural time
scales in dynamic networks data. For λ, we explore diﬀerent
percentiles on the density distribution.

3. EVALUATION DATASETS

We evaluate our framework on four synthetic trajectory

models and three real datasets.
3.1 Simulation models

We develop synthetic trajectory models which capture
several hypotheses of movement with respect to leadership.
These models are not intended to accurately reproduce tra-
jectories in our domain, nor are they exhaustive of diﬀerent
properties of interest. Comparing real data against model
simulations provides interpretable characterization of these
datasets. We propose four synthetic models: dictatorship,
hierarchical, linear-threshold, and ﬁxed-destination (random)
models. For evaluation, we attempt to identify the top-
ranked individual, which we know as a ground-truth label
from running the simulation.
3.1.1 Dictatorship Model
In the Dictatorship Model (or ‘DM’), we ﬁx a single leader
who initiates movement from initial positions of the popula-
tion, randomly sampled from a circle geometry. At the start
of the pre-coordination interval, the leader moves in a ﬁxed
direction and velocity. Every other individual samples a uni-
formly random lag. After waiting this time, the individual
follows the leader at a ﬁxed velocity (with sampled Gaussian
noise in the heading). After a ﬁxed duration of coordinated
movement over the entire population, post-coordination be-
gins and individuals decrease velocity at random, until stop-
ping. To produce multiple coordination events, this proce-
dure is repeated after a suﬃcient waiting time, starting from
the stopping positions of the previous coordination event.
3.1.2 Hierarchical Model
The Hierarchical Model (or ‘HM’) is a variation of the
Dictatorship Model, where we ﬁx a sequence of individu-

(cid:80)

(cid:80)

(7)

(8)

(a) Pattern order alignment

(b) Global shift alignment

Figure 5: Dynamic Time Warping global vs.
example

local

To measure the global leader in our framework, we use
PageRank in the deﬁnition of maximum support over all
I ∈ C: argmaxi(suppr(i)).
2.5.2 Comparing rank-orders
We use the Kendall rank correlation coeﬃcient τ (•) to
compare local and global rank-orders. This measure pro-
vides a similarity between two rankings according to their
ordinal agreement over all list-pairs (e.g. j is “below” i in
both lists).

To compare global and local rank orders, we use the mean
Kendall rank correlation over all coordination events against
the global:

corr• =

I∈C τ ( ¯R•, R•,I )

|C|

For example, corrv compares local and global velocity

convex hull rank orders.

Similarly, we compute the mean Kendall correlation be-
tween local rankings associated with diﬀerent measures (e.g.
velocity convex hull, position convex hull):

corr•,• =

I∈C τ (R•,I , R•,I )

|C|

Equation 7 formalizes our intuition that leaders consis-
tently move outside of the spatial extent (corrp), or the dis-
tribution of velocity over the population (corrv). By com-
paring the global vs. local correlation in rank ordering, we
measure the stability of the global ranking is over time.

Equation 8 measures the relationship between higher-order
graph structure (centrality) and simple time series features.
Using this measure, we can gain a better understand the
high-level aspects of initiating coordination. For example,
we see whether changing velocity (corrv,pr), or position (corrp,pr)
within the group is correlated with network rank position.
2.6 Framework discussion

2.6.1 Local vs. Global Matching
Our proposed framework uses local alignment on time se-
ries subsequences, rather than global alignment on the full
time series. Figure 5 presents a motivation for this choice.
Suppose we intend to match sparse ‘following’ events rep-
resented as the pair of spikes with relatively low magnitude
at the end of the red and blue time series. In Figure 5(a),
the time series is shifted to match one of the two patterns,

als (n=4) to follow the previous individual in the sequence,
after a ﬁxed lag. The remainder of individuals in the pop-
ulation follow exactly one of these high-ranking individuals,
allocated in decreasing proportion per rank.
3.1.3 Linear Threshold Model
The Linear Threshold Model (or ‘LT’) [19] adapts the
Dictatorship Model by initiating individual movement as a
linear threshold over a network of the k-nearest neighbors
at the current time-step. There is still one individual who
attempts to initiate movement. After the initial step, the
model is parameterized by κ, the number of nearest neigh-
bors to query, and ρ the proportion of these κ neighbors re-
quired to initiate movement (e.g. “become infected”). Once
“infected” the individual follows the leader as in the previous
models. The initial probability of moving for each individ-
ual is 0.5. We explore the parameter space on combinations
of: κ ∈ {3, 5, 10} and ρ ∈ {0.25, 0.50, 0.75}. For convenient
notation, we refer to LTκ,(ρ×100) as the Linear Threshold
Model under these parameters, e.g. LT3,25.
3.1.4 Random model
In the random model, there is no ‘following’ relationship.
At the start of the pre-coordination interval, each individ-
ual starts moving to a ﬁxed position. Velocity and heading
error are sampled from ﬁxed distributions, therefore, the
initial positions yield some spurious following relationships.
However, the density in the following network is generally
insuﬃcient for ﬂagging a coordination event. When coordi-
nation events do occur, the PageRank values and PageRank
support is typically low.
3.2 Synthetic trajectory simulation

For each of the above models, we generate a trial of syn-
thetic data consisting of 20 individuals and 12,000 total
time-steps, with 20 separate coordination events. Each co-
ordination event has pre-coordination and coordination in-
tervals of 200 time-steps each. Following the coordination
interval is another 200 time steps of a post-coordination gap,
before the start of the next coordination event. We generate
100 trials for each of the above models.
3.3 Real datasets

We demonstrate the utility of our framework on three real-
world datasets from two diﬀerent domains. First, we look at
biological trajectory datasets derived from GPS, and cam-
eras. Next we look at ﬁfteen years of stock closing-price data
from the NASDAQ index.
3.3.1 Baboon trajectories
In this dataset, high-resolution GPS collars track 26 indi-
viduals of a troop of olive baboons (Papio anubis) living in
the wild in Mpala Research Centre, Kenya [8, 34]. The data
consists of latitude-longitude location pairs for each individ-
ual at one observation per second. We analyze a subset of
16 individuals whose collars remained functional for a 9 day
period (419,095 time steps). The task is to automatically
detect periods of coordinated group movement and to iden-
tify the initiator(s) of these periods, as well as to classify the
type of leadership mechanism employed.
3.3.2 Fish schools trajectories
In this dataset, the movements of a ﬁsh school of golden
shiners (Notemigonus crysoleucas) are recorded by video in

order to study information propagation over the visual ﬁelds
of ﬁsh [35]. Within schools of 70 ﬁsh, there were 10 trained
individuals who were able to lead the school to feeding sites
over 24 separate leadership events. Individual trajectories
were identiﬁed based on automated tracking from video im-
ages, and trained ﬁsh were identiﬁable in the videos based
on colored tags. Here, periods of coordinated activity had
already been identiﬁed by experimenters, so the task is to
correctly identify trained ﬁsh by leadership ranking.

Each population contains 70 ﬁsh, with 10 trained, labeled
ﬁsh who are able to lead the school to feeding sites over 24
separate leadership events. The task is to correctly identify
trained ﬁsh by leadership ranking.

Stock closing-price time series

3.3.3
We collected daily closing price data for stocks listed in
NASDAQ, using Yahoo! Finance.4 These time series are
from January 2000 to Jan 2016 (4169 time-steps). We re-
move symbols with a large amount of missing data, leaving
a total of 1443 symbols in our dataset. Our analysis focuses
on discovering diﬀerent intervals of coordination, and the
leaders and sectors involved in these coordinated events.

4. RESULTS

4.1

Identifying leaders

In each simulation, we have the label of the true leader
(and select the ﬁrst individual as ‘leader’ in the random
model). For each of the 100 simulation trials, our method
identiﬁes the ‘leader’ as the individual with maximum sup-
port, according to Equation 6. This is the individual ranked
ﬁrst most frequently over the 20 coordination events. For
each model, we set λ threshold at the mean of the density
d(Gk). We report the ‘precision’ as the fraction of correctly
identiﬁed leaders.

Table 2 reports precision over all synthetic model simula-
tions. PageRank performs best at identifying the leader of
the group across all (non-random) simulation models. This
follows our intuition that there is a higher order structure
to leadership where directed paths through the network are
meaningful.

Table 2 shows that Velocity Convex Hull (VCH) correctly
identiﬁes leadership in Dictatorship Model (DM) and Hier-
archical Model (HM) simulations. This is because the leader
moves ﬁrst by the design of each model, which is suﬃcient
for a consistent ﬁrst ranking. In the Linear Threshold Model
(LT), the leader only starts moving in the pre-coordination
interval after ‘infection’, therefore velocity is more uniform
across the population and, thus, poor at ranking. Position
Convex Hull (PCH) performs fairly well for recovering the
leader. In all models, the leader emerges at the front of the
group after some time. How the group is organized prior to
emerging determines the ‘noise’ in this ranking.

We also test our framework’s ability to distinguish het-
erogeneous leadership. Figure 6 illustrates a slight variation
of the Dictatorship Model (DM), where the individual i is
the leader for interval j when j = i (e.g. along the diag-
onal). We correctly identify leaders of all
intervals using
PageRank rank ordering. On an aggregated static network,
all individuals are indistinguishable by PageRank.

4http://ﬁnance.yahoo.com/

Table 2: Precision of leadership identiﬁcation on
simulation models

Simulation PageRank

VCH

DM
HM

LT3,25
LT5,25
LT10,25
LT3,50
LT5,50
LT10,50
LT3,75
LT5,75
LT10,75
Random

1
1
1
1

0.93

1

0.97
0.89
0.78
0.86
0.61
0.02

1
1
0
0

0.01

0

0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04

0

0.04

PCH
0.84
0.26

1

0.99

1

0.97
0.95
0.79
0.61
0.8
0.48

0

Figure 6: Synthetic experiment (on Dictatorship
Model) with a changing leader, where the individ-
ual i along the diagonal is the leader for event j
when j = i. We correctly identify all local leaders
by PageRank. In the static, aggregated network in-
dividuals are indistinguishable by PageRank.

4.2

Identifying leadership hierarchy

We now infer the top-k leaders according to support (Equa-
tion 6). Recall that in our proposed Hierarchical Model
(HM), we have ﬁxed identities of ranks 1 to 4, which we com-
pare to our top-4 support individuals according to diﬀerent
leadership rankings. We report the same precision as in Ta-
ble 2 for each individual rank. Table 3 shows PageRank per-
forms well even deeper in the ranking. Recall that ‘follow-
ers’ in the remainder of the population are allocated to high
ranked individuals proportional to rank. This causes spuri-
ous directed edges ‘up’ the hierarchy, between both leaders
and followers. This demonstrates the aggregate ranking is
robust to these noisy edges. We also observe that while
the Velocity Convex Hull (VCH) and Position Convex Hull
(PCH) had some performance for recovering the top ranked
individual, they completely fail for lower rankings.
4.3 Case Study: trained leaders in ﬁsh schools

Table 3: Precision on leadership hierarchy identiﬁ-
cation (on HM simulation)
PageRank

Rank

VCH

1
2
3
4

1

0.93
0.91
0.46

1
0
0
0

PCH
0.26

0
0
0

We identify the top-k leaders by support, on the ﬁsh school
trajectory dataset (see: Section 3.3.2), where we have the
labels of ‘trained’ individuals who should lead the school
to feeding sites. Table 4 reports precision over 24 trials.
Similar to the simulation models, PageRank performs best
overall, again suggesting that following is better captured in
network representation than individual trajectory features.

Table 4: Leader identiﬁcation in ﬁsh

PageRank VCH PCH
0.67
0.47

0.79
0.70

0.67
0.57

Ranking

Top ranked support
Top-4 ranked support

4.4 Case study: ﬁnding leaders of stock mar-

ket events

We apply our leadership framework to stock market clos-
ing price data of the NASDAQ index (see: Section 3.3.3).
A ‘leader’ in this context measures the extent that a stock
increases or decreases in value before a large group of other
stocks (e.g. a coordinated group). We apply the framework
without any special consideration to the domain, only to
validate that we can discover known events.

Figure 7: (Top) NASDAQ ‘following’ network den-
sity and (Bottom) NASDAQ index value. The
framework detects many known events in ﬁnancial
data (labeled above). Many of these events are not
reﬂected in the aggregate NASDAQ index.

Figure 7 shows the network density of the inferred ‘fol-
lowing’ network over time, where we discover coordination
events with λ threshold at the 75th percentile of density.
Pre-coordination and coordination intervals are shown in
red and green, respectively. We ﬁnd signiﬁcant economic
events such as the 2000 tech collapse, and 9/11. More inter-
estingly, we discover signiﬁcant events which are captured in
the network density signal but not necessarily the NASDAQ
index. For example, we discover a technical econometric
event where the TED Spread (a surrogate of national credit

Table 5: Random forest classiﬁcation of synthetic
leadership models using rank correlation features
and PageRank maximum support

Model
DM
HM
LT

Random

Precision Recall F score

1

0.95
0.99
0.94

1
1

0.99
0.91

1

0.97
0.99
0.92

risk) begins ﬂuctuating in July 2007, and a small market fail-
ure in August 2011. For the discovered coordination event
of the 2000 collapse, the top-ranked companies are primarily
in IT and semiconductors–matching our intuition–including
large companies such as ARM Holdings, eBay, and SanDisk
in the top 10.
4.5 Leadership model classiﬁcation

Recall that we proposed several leadership rankings (Sec-
tion 2.4) and presented Kendall rank correlation to compare
them (Section 2.5.2). We do model classiﬁcation on a sim-
ulation trial using all proposed features derived from the
rank correlations: corrp, corrv, corrp,pr and corrv,pr and the
PageRank maximum support. A classiﬁer takes those fea-
tures and produces a leadership model label. We use 10-fold
cross validation on Random Forests [16], over 1200 total
trials over all models. Table 5 reports the classiﬁcation re-
sults over each simulation model. For the Linear Threshold
model (LT), we combine diﬀerent parameter settings under
the same label. We see that all the models have high F-score.
Figure 8 visualizes sub-spaces in the full feature-space.
Figure 8 (Top-Left) shows corrv (the rank correlation be-
tween global and local velocity convex hull (VCH) ranking)
against the maximum support over all individuals for this
trial. This ﬁgure supports our observations in Table 2 that
the Linear Threshold model has low rank correlation (consis-
tency) while the Hierarchical (HM) and Dictatorship Model
(DM) have high maximum support and correlation (HM has
higher rank correlation between the two because more ranks
are explicitly ﬁxed).

A key aspect of our simulation modeling is that we can
characterize real datasets according to how they map into
these feature-spaces, compared to synthetic models. We
compute each rank correlations over high-conﬁdence baboon
events, labeled ”Baboon (High Conﬁdence)” in Figure 8 ,
thresholded at the 99th percentile of density. We observe
that within diﬀerent sub-spaces, the baboon ranking is sim-
ilar to Random or Linear Threshold, and has low maximum
support for global-local rank correlation features. We also
plot the baboon rank correlation for the ground-truthed run-
ning example, (as presented in Section 2.1). For our key
example, labeled “Baboon (Example)”, we see it has high
rank correlation between both cross-feature axes. This sug-
gests that in aggregate, baboon leadership is heterogenous
and context-driven (similar to the simulated case shown in
Figure 6). This analysis provides a strategy for hypothesis
testing and generation on contrasting time-scales and sub-
spaces.

5. CONCLUSIONS

The work presented in this paper proposes a concrete,
simple yet powerful, general framework for (1) identifying
periods of coordinated group behavior, (2) identifying lead-
ers of these events, and (3) classifying the type of leadership
process at play. We validate the accuracy of our framework
in performing all three of these tasks using simulated data.
We further show that the framework can provide insights on
real-world data, including data on collective animal move-
ment and the economy. The methodology presented here
is highly general and is likely to be applicable to a wide
variety of domains where coordination across many agents
is observed. In addition, our framework is highly ﬂexible,
and can easily be extended to incorporate other models of
leadership or other features used in model classiﬁcation, de-
pending on the details of the system being analyzed.

6. REFERENCES
[1] M. Andersson, J. Gudmundsson, P. Laube, and T. Wolle.

Reporting leaders and followers among trajectories of
moving point objects. GeoInformatica, 12(4):497–528, 2008.

[2] E. Bakshy, J. M. Hofman, W. A. Mason, and D. J. Watts.

Everyone’s an Inﬂuencer: Quantifying Inﬂuence on
Twitter. WSDM’11, 65–74. ACM, 2011.

[3] R. Bonanni, S. Cafazzo, P. Valsecchi, and E. Natoli. Eﬀect

of aﬃliative and agonistic relationships on leadership
behaviour in free-ranging dogs. Anim Behav,
79(5):981–991, 2010.

[4] E. E. Boydston, T. L. Morelli, and K. E. Holekamp. Sex

diﬀerences in territorial behavior exhibited by the spotted
hyena (Hyaenidae, Crocuta crocuta). Ethology,
107(5):369–385, 2001.

[5] L. J. Brent, D. W. Franks, E. A. Foster, K. C. Balcomb,

M. A. Cant, and D. P. Croft. Ecological knowledge,
leadership, and the evolution of menopause in killer whales.
Current Biol., 25(6):746 – 750, 2015.

[6] S. Brin and L. Page. The anatomy of a large-scale

hypertextual web search engine. WWW’98, 107–117, 1998.

[7] I. D. Couzin, J. Krause, N. R. Franks, and S. A. Levin.

Eﬀective leadership and decision-making in animal groups
on the move. Nature, 433(7025):513–516, 2005.

[8] M. C. Crofoot, R. W. Kays, and M. Wikelski. Data from:

Shared decision-making drives collective movement in wild
baboons. 2015.

[9] J. R. G. Dyer, A. Johansson, D. Helbing, I. D. Couzin, and

J. Krause. Leadership, consensus decision making and
collective behaviour in humans. Philos Trans R Soc Lond
B Biol Sci, 364(1518):781–789, 2009.

[10] I. C. Gilby, Z. P. Machanda, D. C. Mjungu, J. Rosen,

M. N. Muller, A. E. Pusey, and R. W. Wrangham. ’impact
hunters’ catalyse cooperative hunting in two wild
chimpanzee communities. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol
Sci, 370(1683), 2015.

[11] L. Glowacki and C. von Rueden. Leadership solves

collective action problems in small-scale societies. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 370(1683), 2015.

[12] A. Goyal, F. Bonchi, and L. V. Lakshmanan. Discovering

leaders from community actions. CIKM’08, 499–508, 2008.

[13] A. Goyal, F. Bonchi, and L. V. Lakshmanan. Learning

inﬂuence probabilities in social networks. WSDM’10,
241–250. ACM, 2010.

[14] X. He and D. Kempe. Stability of Inﬂuence Maximization.

ArXiv e-prints, 2015.

[15] R. Heinsohn and C. Packer. Complex cooperative strategies

in group-territorial african lions. Science,
269(5228):1260–1262, 1995.

[16] T. K. Ho. The random subspace method for constructing

decision forests. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
20(8):832–844, 1998.

Figure 8: Comparison of feature spaces of leadership model classiﬁcations on simulations and real data

[17] P. L. Hooper, H. S. Kaplan, and J. L. Boone. A theory of

hyaenas. Anim Behav, 105:187–200, 2015.

leadership in human cooperative groups. J Theor Biol,
265(4):633–646, 2010.

[18] A. Java, P. Kolari, T. Finin, and T. Oates. Modeling the
spread of inﬂuence on the blogosphere. WWW’06, 22–26,
2006.

[19] D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, and ´E. Tardos. Maximizing the

spread of inﬂuence through a social network. KDD’03,
137–146, 2003.

[20] M. B. Kjargaard, H. Blunck, M. Wustenberg, K. Gronbask,
M. Wirz, D. Roggen, and G. Troster. Time-lag method for
detecting following and leadership behavior of pedestrians
from mobile sensing data. Proc. IEEE PerCom, 56–64,
2013.

[21] Z. Li, F. Wu, and M. C. Crofoot. Mining Following

Relationships in Movement Data. ICDM’13, 458–467, 2013.

[22] D. Lusseau and L. Conradt. The emergence of unshared

consensus decisions in bottlenose dolphins. Behav Ecol
Sociobiol, 63(7):1067–1077, 2009.

[23] R. Mares, A. J. Young, and T. H. Clutton-Brock.
Individual contributions to territory defence in a
cooperative breeder: weighing up the beneﬁts and costs.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 279(1744):3989–3995,
2012.

[24] R. O’Gorman, J. Henrich, and M. Van Vugt. Constraining

free riding in public goods games: designated solitary
punishers can sustain human cooperation. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 276(1655):323–329, 2009.

[25] D. A. M. P. Weinstein. Leadership behaviour in sawﬂy
larvae Perga dorsalis (Hymenoptera: Pergidae). Oikos,
79(3):450–455, 1997.

[26] H. Pham and C. Shahabi. Spatial Inﬂuence - Measuring

Followship in the Real World. ICDE’16, 2016.

[30] J. E. Smith, S. Gavrilets, M. B. Mulder, P. L. Hooper,
C. E. Mouden, D. Nettle, C. Hauert, K. Hill, S. Perry,
A. E. Pusey, M. van Vugt, and E. A. Smith. Leadership in
mammalian societies: Emergence, distribution, power, and
payoﬀ. Trends Ecol Evol, 31(1):54–66, 2016.

[31] F. Solera, S. Calderara, and R. Cucchiara. Learning to
identify leaders in crowd. CVPR’15 Workshops, 43–48,
2015.

[32] J. C. Stewart and J. P. Scott. Lack of correlation between
leadership and dominance relationships in a herd of goats.
J Comp Physiol Psych, 40(4):255–264, 1947.

[33] A. Strandburg-Peshkin, D. R. Farine, I. D. Couzin, and
M. C. Crofoot. Shared decision-making drives collective
movement in wild baboons. Science, 348(6241):1358–1361,
2015.

[34] A. Strandburg-Peshkin, D. R. Farine, I. D. Couzin, and
M. C. Crofoot. Shared decision-making drives collective
movement in wild baboons. Science, 348(6241):1358–1361,
2015.

[35] A. Strandburg-Peshkin, C. R. Twomey, N. W. F. Bode,

A. B. Kao, Y. Katz, C. C. Ioannou, S. B. Rosenthal, C. J.
Torney, H. S. Wu, S. A. Levin, and I. D. Couzin. Visual
sensory networks and eﬀective information transfer in
animal groups. Current Biology, 23(17):R709–R711, 2016.

[36] R. Sulo, T. Berger-Wolf, and R. Grossman. Meaningful
selection of temporal resolution for dynamic networks.
MLG’10, 127–136. ACM, 2010.

[37] J. Sun and J. Tang. A Survey of Models and Algorithms

for Social Inﬂuence Analysis, 177–214. 2011.

[38] C. Tan, J. Tang, J. Sun, Q. Lin, and F. Wang. Social

Action Tracking via Noise Tolerant Time-varying Factor
Graphs. KDD’10, 1049–1058, 2010.

[27] H. Sakoe and S. Chiba. Dynamic programming algorithm

[39] M. Van Vugt. Evolutionary origins of leadership and

optimization for spoken word recognition. IEEE Trans Sig.
Process., 26(1):43–49, 1978.

[28] M. Shokoohi-Yekta, J. Wang, and E. Keogh. On the

Non-Trivial Generalization of Dynamic Time Warping to
the Multi-Dimensional Case. SDM’15, 289–297.

[29] J. E. Smith, J. R. Estrada, H. R. Richards, S. E. Dawes,

K. Mitsos, and K. E. Holekamp. Collective movements,
leadership and consensus costs at reunions in spotted

followership. Pers Soc Psychol Rev, 10(4):354–371, 2006.

