Manipulating waves by distilling frequencies:
A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

Davide Cardella 1,2,∗, Paolo Celli 2,∗, Stefano Gonella 2
1 Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi 24, 10129 Torino, Italy
2 Department of Civil, Environmental, and Geo- Engineering, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA
∗ D.C. and P.C. both contributed majorly to the realization of this work

E-mail: sgonella@umn.edu

7 March 2016
Submitted to Smart Mater. Struct.

In this work, we propose and test a strategy for tunable, broadband
Abstract.
wave attenuation in electromechanical waveguides with shunted piezoelectric
inclusions. Our strategy is built upon the vast pre-existing literature on vibration
attenuation and bandgap generation in structures featuring periodic arrays of
piezo patches, but distinguishes itself for several key features. First, we demystify
the idea that periodicity is a requirement for wave attenuation and bandgap
formation. We further embrace the idea of “organized disorder” by tuning
the circuits as to resonate at distinct neighboring frequencies.
In doing so, we
create a tunable “rainbow trap” [1] capable of attenuating waves with broadband
characteristics, by distilling (sequentially) seven frequencies from a traveling
wavepacket. Finally, we devote considerable attention to the implications in terms
of packet distortion of the spectral manipulation introduced by shunting. This
work is also meant to serve as a didactic tool for those approaching the ﬁeld
of shunted piezoelectrics, and attempts to provide a diﬀerent perspective, with
abundant details, on how to successfully design an experimental setup involving
LR shunts.

Keywords: Wave manipulation, Resonant shunts, Metamaterials, Rainbow trap,
Broadband ﬁlter

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
0
6
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

1. Introduction

Ever since Robert Forward’s paper on the electronic
damping of vibrations in optical structures [2] (where
he stated “We hope that the examples presented in
this paper will [...]
lead to the realization that one
does not need to ﬁnd a purely mechanical solution
to a mechanical vibration problem”), there has been
extensive progress in the ﬁeld of vibration control via
shunted piezoelectric elements. Shunting is referred to
as the act of connecting the electrodes of a piezoelectric
element to a passive electrical circuit, which represents
an electrical extension of the structure. A seminal work
on the topic is that of Hagood and von Flotow [3],
who presented a detailed theoretical formulation on
shunting based on linear piezoelectric theory, and
experimental results on the attenuation of a single
mode of vibration via resistive (R) and resistive-
inductive (RL) circuits. While R circuits behave
as broadband dampers, RL circuits allow to obtain
pronounced and localized vibration attenuation; when
connecting a RL in series to a piezo patch (which can be
modeled as a capacitor in series with a voltage supply)
we obtain a resonant RLC circuit, which behaves as
an electrical dynamic damper which can be tuned by
modifying the circuit parameters.
In recent years,
extensive eﬀorts have been devoted to extending the
eﬀects of LR circuits to multiple modes of vibration [4–
6] (multimodal vibration attenuation) and to the
investigation of alternative passive circuits, such as
the negative capacitor (NC) [7–9]. Moreover, with the
discovery of phononic crystals [10]—periodic structures
with unconventional wave manipulation characteristics
such as phononic bandgaps—researchers have begun
to incorporate shunted piezoelectric patches in the
architectures of these materials to obtain tunable,
complex wave patterns.
This has motivated an
increasingly larger number of studies on structures
involving periodic arrays of shunted piezos. Among
these, we recall the pioneering contribution of Thorp
[11], who paired the concepts of phononic
et al.
It is
crystals and shunting for the ﬁrst time.
also interesting how the authors hinted at
the
concept of relaxation of the periodicity to widen the
bandgaps, invoking Anderson localization mechanisms,
anticipating a discussion that has become central in
recent phononic crystals literature [12]. Noteworthy
is also the work of Airoldi and Ruzzene [13], who
were the ﬁrst
to use a periodic structure with
independent RL shunts to control waves, rather than
to attenuate resonance peaks; their work—the ﬁrst
catering to problems encountered in metamaterial
engineering applications—provided compelling results
locally-resonant bandgap generation.
in terms of
In parallel,
researchers have also proposed more
convoluted active and passive shunting strategies to

2

enhance vibration attenuation. Examples are electrical
networks placed in parallel to the mechanical network
(where each patch is shunted to the neighboring patch
instead of connected to ground) [14–16], enhanced
resonant shunts [17] and ampliﬁer-resonator feedback
circuits [18]. While most of the studies involving
periodic arrays of shunted piezos are centered around
vibration attenuation and bandgap generation [11, 13–
26], others have proposed shunted piezos as a mean
to achieve tunable wave focusing in metamaterial
architectures [27,28], and tunable waveguiding [29,30].
So far, most of the experimental studies involving
multiple patches bonded to the same substrate have
been characterized by a uniform tuning of
the
circuit characteristics. Apart from the previously-
discussed work by Thorp et al.
[11], exceptions
recent works of Wang and Chen [18]
are the
and Bergamini et al.
[16], who discussed the use
of a superlattice method and diatomic unit cells,
respectively, as strategies to extend the bandgaps
In both cases, diﬀerent
to multiple frequencies.
inductance values are
connected to neighboring
patches, while preserving some sort of periodicity.
While modeling structures with periodically-placed
piezoelectric elements might present some convenient
aspects,
such as the possibility of using reduced
models (i.e., a unit cell analysis) and the availability
of additional frequency regions of Bragg attenuation,
one might argue that, when dealing with resonant
shunts, periodicity is not strictly needed for bandgap
generation and wave attenuation. In fact, when locally-
resonant mechanisms are involved, the resonators’
placement throughout the medium does not aﬀect
the global formation of bandgaps [12, 31]. On the
contrary, in some situations, it might be convenient
to leverage some “organized disorder” to enhance
the wave attenuation performance.
The attempt
to extend the usually narrow frequency regions of
resonance-based attenuation has
received growing
interest in the metamaterials community over recent
years. An example is the work of Kr¨odel et al. [32]
on metamaterial-enabled seismic isolation, where a
wide locally-resonant bandgap is created by employing
resonators tuned at adjacent frequencies and displaying
slightly overlapping spectra. The concept of trapping
a wide spectrum of adjacent frequencies has been
pioneered by work in optics, where the application
to the control of visible light has inspired the name
“rainbow trap” [1, 33], and has recently been extended
to the realm of acoustic waves [34–36].

In our work, we embrace these ideas of disorder
and relaxation of the periodicity to demonstrate
the wave attenuation capabilities of an array of
randomly-positioned piezoelectric elements shunted
with non-uniform RL circuits. We demonstrate that a

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

3

Figure 1. Experimental setup.

Figure 2. Schematic (side view) of the beam specimen, highlighting some of its characteristic dimensions. This ﬁgure is to be used
as reference for the numbering of the patches. The solid black squares represent input and output accelerometers.

device capable of attenuating vibrations over a broad
frequency range can be obtained by tuning diﬀerent
RL circuits to resonate at diﬀerent frequencies, thus
realizing a tunable rainbow trap for elastic wave
manipulation. The behavior of our test system is
probed with a transient chirp signal and monitored by
measuring how its spectro-spatial characteristics are
modiﬁed by the sequential activation of the shunting
circuits. Moreover, we propose an additional angle
to the problem, whereby we look at the eﬀects of
wave manipulation through the prism of wave packet
distortion.

This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we
discuss in detail our experimental setup, including the
specimen, the circuitry and the acquisition system. In
Sec. 3 we discuss the individual tuning of the circuits.
In Sec. 4 we report on the broadband wave attenuation
enabled by the rainbow trap strategy. Finally, the
conclusions of our work are drawn in Sec. 5.

2. Experimental setup

In this section, we describe in detail the experimen-
tal framework used throughout this work. A compre-

hensive picture of the setup is shown in Fig. 1. We
would like to point out that most of the circuitry solu-
tions used here are inspired by the informative works
of Viana and Steﬀen [5], and of Thomas, Ducarne and
De¨u [6, 37].

2.1. Specimen geometry and patch conﬁguration

Our specimen is an Aluminum beam with eighteen
PZT patches (STEMiNC, part SMPL20W15T14R111)
bonded according to a random spatial pattern, as
shown in the schematic of Fig. 2. Note that the beam
is instrumented with a dense population of patches.
While this may be redundant for most wave control
applications, it grants the possibility to test a variety
of shunting sequences and to potentially investigate
the eﬀects of location, clustering and order.
In our
experiments, a maximum of seven patches will be
activated simultaneously. Note that each patch has
a slightly diﬀerent value of capacitance; the average
capacitance measured with a multimeter is Cp, ave =
2.137 nF. The main geometric dimensions of the
specimens are the following: the length of the beam is
L = 51.6 cm, the thickness of the beam is t = 0.26 cm,

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

4

the width of the beam is b = 1.5 cm, the length of
each patch is Lp = 2 cm, the thickness of a patch
is tp = 0.014 cm and the width of the patch is bp =
1.5 cm. Note that, for the sake of brevity, we did not
report the distance between each pair of neighboring
patches; it will be demonstrated that this parameter
is essentially uninﬂuential with respect to the eﬀects
discussed in this article. The patches are bonded to the
beam using a 2-part epoxy glue (3M Scotch-Weld 1838
B/A); details on how to properly bond the patches are
reported in the Supplementary Data (SD) section. The
sketch also shows the position of the actuator and of
the input and output accelerometers.

The measured frequency response function of the
beam (obtained using the signals recorded at the input
and output accelerometers in response to a multitone
excitation spanning the 5–10 kHz range) is shown in
Fig. 3. The region highlighted in red represents the

Note that the resistance R does not inﬂuence the
natural frequency of the resonant circuit, but is directly
proportional to the level of damping introduced in the
structure. Given the very small capacitance values of
the piezoelectric patches (of the order of 1 nF), and
given the fact that we want to operate at relatively low
frequencies (of the order of 1000 Hz), the inductances
required to achieve resonant conditions in the desired
range could vary in between 0.01 H and 10 H. Such
values of inductance are achievable with conventional
coil-based inductors, using devices with characteristic
sizes of the order of
To avoid
working with inductors of impractical dimensions, it
is customary to resort to synthetic inductors,
i.e.,
circuits which artiﬁcially mimic the electrical behavior
of conventional inductors. An example is the Antoniou
circuit [38], which involves two operational ampliﬁers,
a capacitor and three resistors, arranged as sketched in
Fig. 4a. The equivalent inductance can be calculated

few centimeters.

Figure 3. Frequency response function of the beam specimen
(with short-circuited patches), obtained using the signals
recorded at the input and output accelerometers in response to
a multi-tone signal in the 5–10 kHz range. The boxed region
corresponds to the frequency interval of interest for our analysis.

frequency interval of interest, i.e., the region where we
want to test our wave attenuation strategy; note how
this region, ranging from 7 kHz to 8.8 kHz, deliberately
spans multiple peaks of the beam response. The reason
for selecting this frequency region will be explained in
Sec. 2.2.

2.2. Circuitry

Throughout this work, we resort to resistor-inductor
(RL) shunting circuits. As shown by Hagood and von
Flotow [3] and by Viana and Steﬀen [5], a piezoelectric
patch (which acts as a capacitor with capacitance
Cp in series with a voltage supply) placed in series
with a RL circuit realizes a resonant RLC circuit and
therefore behaves as a dynamic damper.
In analogy
with purely-mechanical resonant systems, the electric
dynamic damper resonates at a frequency that can be
determined from the circuit parameters as:

Figure 4. The Antoniou circuit. (a) Schematic. (b) Realization
on a breadboard, showing a series resistor Rs and a tunable
potentiometer in lieu of R1.

fres =

1

2 πs 1

L Cp

.

(1)

as:

Leq =

R1 R3 R4 C

R2

.

(2)

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

5

Rs) are zero or small. In an ideal scenario, it would
be preferable not to use any series resistor, to enhance
the attenuation behavior of each resonant circuit at
its resonant frequency. However, without Rs, spurious
vibrations are transmitted to the beam specimen and
the patches can be heard “screaming”, i.e., vibrating
in the audible frequency range. Interestingly, this be-
havior is particularly strong when multiple shunts are
tuned to resonate at the same frequency. This aspect
is discussed more in detail in the SD section. In the
following, to avoid instability phenomena at the fre-
quencies of interest, we select Rs = 100 Ω.

2.4. Signal generation and response acquisition

To generate and acquire the signals, we resort to a
data acquisition system (NI cDAQ-9174), equipped
with an output module (NI 9263) and an input module
(NI 9215), and connected to a laptop running the
LabVIEW software. The input signal is generated
in LabVIEW, sent through the output module to a
power ampliﬁer (Br¨uel & Kjær Type 2718) and then
fed to a shaker (Br¨uel & Kjær Type 4810), which
transmits it to the beam specimen through a stinger.
To span the frequency range of interest (highlighted
in Fig. 3), we prescribe the signal shown in Fig. 5a,
i.e., a sine-modulated chirp with frequency content
linearly increasing from 7 kHz to 8.8 kHz in 2 ms. The
frequency content of the signal is shown in Fig. 5b.

One of the advantages of using this circuit is the fact
that the value of the equivalent inductance can be
modiﬁed by simply tuning one of the components. In
our case, as visible in the realization of the circuit on a
breadboard shown in Fig. 4b, the tunable component
is the potentiometer corresponding to R1, which can
assume values in the 100–1000 Ω range. The other
circuital components are: R2 = 680 Ω, R3 = 1000 Ω,
R4 = 1500 Ω, C = 0.22 µF (Mylar type), while, for the
operational ampliﬁers, we select the OPA445 model (TI
OPA445AP). Note that the ampliﬁers are powered by
two DC power supplies (BK Precision 1667) arranged
in series as to share the same ground and produce a
voltage diﬀerence of ±30 V. Note that the ground
terminal coming from the power supplies is used as
reference ground for the circuits as well as for the
patches. More details on grounding are reported in
the SD section. Given these components, the circuit
can assume inductance values ranging from 0.0485 H to
0.485 H (from Eq. 2). Since the average capacitance of
the piezo patches is Cp, ave = 2.137 nF, the piezo+LR
circuits can be tuned to resonate between 4950 Hz and
15600 Hz (from Eq. 1).

In fact,

It is important to point out that the choice of
circuit components is not accidental.
in
order to harness the full attenuation capability of
the shunting strategy,
it is fundamental to reduce
as much as possible the parasitic resistance of the
circuit (i.e., the resistance that is inherent to the
circuit components). The parasitic resistance can be
measured experimentally as a function of the circuit
components. In general, lower equivalent inductances
lead to smaller values of the parasitic resistance; in
light of this, working at high frequencies can be
advantageous. For this reason, we decided to work in
the 7–8.8 kHz frequency range. In any case, once the
components are chosen and the circuits are assembled,
it is suggested to test their electric response. Details on
how to electrically test RL circuits are also discussed
in the SD section.

2.3. Shunting and “screaming”

the beam comprises

eighteen randomly-
While
positioned patches, we only shunt seven of them (the
results in this article refer to the activation of patches
1, 5, 8, 10, 12, 14 and 18, according to the numbering
in Fig. 2). Working with a subset of patches strength-
ens our claim regarding the non-inﬂuence of the patch
positioning.
It is worth pointing out that increasing
the number of patches working at the same time is not
a simple task. This is due to the fact that shunting
multiple patches can lead to an unstable behavior of
the system. This is especially observed when the se-
ries resistors Rs (as previously mentioned, the circuit
connected to each patch also includes a series resistor

Input signal:

linear chirp with frequency content
Figure 5.
ranging from 7 kHz to 8.8 kHz. (a) Time history. (b) Frequency
spectrum.

To evaluate the system response, we analyze the
data recorded by the output accelerometer, i.e., the
one which is further away from the excitation source.
The signal recorded by this accelerometer (PCB Model
352A73) is conditioned with a signal conditioner (PCB
Model 482A22), sent to the input module and displayed
in LabVIEW. The postprocessing of the data is
performed in MATLAB. To reduce the noise, the signal
corresponding to each separate experiment is acquired
seven times and averaged.

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

6

Figure 6. Experimental results on single-frequency distillation; these spectra are obtained via Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
of the transient signal acquired at the output accelerometer. (a) Short circuit. (b) RED shunt only. (c) ORANGE shunt only. (d)
YELLOW shunt only. (e) GREEN shunt only. (f) BLUE shunt only. (g) INDIGO shunt only. (h) VIOLET shunt only. In (b-h),
the vertical lines indicate the estimated tuning frequency of each shunt, while the thin gray proﬁles in the background correspond
to the short circuit response, used as reference.

3. Circuit tuning and single-frequency
distillation

Let us recall that our objective is to realize a tunable
bandgap ﬁlter capable of operating over broadband
spectra.
This is the elasto-acoustic analog of a
concept that, in optics and electromagnetism, has been
originally termed “rainbow trap”. The idea consists of
shunting a discrete number of patches and tuning each
one individually at diﬀerent adjacent frequencies, such
that the corrections are felt over slightly overlapping
frequency bands. Here, we demonstrate the concept
using seven of the amenable eighteen patches (1, 5,
8, 10, 12, 14 and 18). The individual tuning of the
patches is performed by monitoring real-time changes
in the frequency content of the signal recorded at the
output accelerometer. Fig. 6a represents the frequency
content of the signal in the reference scenario, in which
all patches are short circuited. We can see that the
spectrum of the applied chirp has morphed into the
two-peak structure of Fig. 6a, to reﬂect the presence
of two resonances in the frequency response of the
beam in the 7–8.8 kHz range (as shown in Fig. 3).

The thick black curves in Figs. 6b-h represent the
frequency content of the signals obtained by activating
one patch at the time, superimposed on top of the
response of the short-circuited beam (thin gray line).
We can see that each shunt has a very localized
behavior, being able to distill (subtract) the energy
associated with a very narrow frequency band.
In
analogy with the spectrum of visible light rainbows,
and in order to maintain a convenient and visually
friendly taxonomy of the frequency sequence, we name
each of the seven shunts as one of the seven colors of
a discrete (Newtonian) rainbow: the RED (R) shunt
resonates at fR ≈ 7260 Hz (Fig. 6b), the ORANGE
(O) at fO ≈ 7390 Hz (Fig. 6c), the YELLOW (Y) at
fY ≈ 7520 Hz (Fig. 6d), the GREEN (G) at fG ≈
7600 Hz (Fig. 6e), the BLUE (B) at fB ≈ 7700 Hz
(Fig. 6f), the INDIGO (I) at fI ≈ 7850 Hz (Fig. 6g)
and the VIOLET (V) at fV ≈ 8000 Hz (Fig. 6h).
These resonant frequencies are estimated by inspecting
Figs. 6b-h and are highlighted by colored vertical lines.
Also note that the R shunt corresponds to patch 14, the
O to 8, the Y to 18, the G to 12, the B to 1, the I to 10
and the V to 5. By comparing the results produced by

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

7

Figure 7. Behavior of the rainbow trap in the frequency domain. The trap is activated following the sequence R-I-O-B-V-G-Y.
(a-g) Results after each of the seven activation steps. The thin gray proﬁles in the background represent the frequency content of
the signal recorded when the patches are all short circuited. (h) Final spectrum of the signal, obtained when all seven shunts are
activated.

individual shunts, we can see that some of them cause
stronger attenuation than others. In our opinion, this
is not inﬂuenced by the position of the patch and it
might be predominantly due to bonding imperfections
(which could reduce the eﬀective contact area of some
of the patches).

4. The rainbow trap

In this section, we illustrate the result of the simul-
taneous activation of multiple patches and we pro-
vide a demonstration of our tunable electromechani-
cal rainbow trap, analyzing its eﬀects both on the fre-
quency content of the signal and on the shape of the
wavepacket.

4.1. Frequency response - Bandgap eﬀect

To activate the broadband trap, we short circuit all
the patches, we turn on the DC power supplies and
then we connect all the shunts one after the other,
according to a pre-determined activation sequence. For
completeness, we report the data recorded at each
activation step. The frequency content of the signal

recorded at the output accelerometer, for a R-I-O-
B-V-G-Y activation sequence, is reported in Fig. 7.
In Figs. 7a-g, the colored vertical lines indicate the
frequencies at which the shunts activated at each step
of the sequence are tuned (the lines correspond to the
tuning frequencies estimated in Fig. 6). As we go
through the shunting sequence, the energy associated
with the wave packet is gradually distilled: each shunt
absorbs the energy corresponding to frequencies close
to its resonance, until we reach the ﬁnal attenuation
stage shown in Fig. 7h. It is interesting to notice how
the activation of some patches causes the frequency
content of the signal to be stretched, compressed and
deformed, apparently deploying some of the energy
from the corrected region to a neighboring frequency
interval. For example, this is visible in Fig. 7a, where
the RED circuit causes frequencies around 7.7 kHz to
become more favorable than in the reference case.
Fig. 7h allows to fully appreciate the broadband wave
attenuation capability of our rainbow trap;
it also
conﬁrms how the periodicity of the patch placement
and the homogeneity of the shunts characteristics
are not required in a transient wave propagation
problem involving LR shunts. This is due to the fact

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

8

of the I correction. When we also activate O, as shown
in Fig. 8d, we observe a scenario similar to R (Fig. 8b),
with the only diﬀerence being the fact that this shunt
inﬂuences higher frequencies, closer to the middle of
the packet. Similar considerations can be made for the
eﬀects of all the other patches, from B to V, G and Y
(Figs. 8e-h). Finally, in Fig. 8i, we compare the signal
recorded when the rainbow trap is completely activated
against the short circuited case. This last ﬁgure should
highlight how the shunting strategy causes a very
strong de-energization of the signal and acts eﬀectively
as a strong acousto-elastic signal jammer.

5. Conclusions

To summarize,
in this work we have demonstrated
the wave attenuation capabilities of a random array
of piezo elements bonded to a waveguide (beam)
and shunted with RL circuits.
By letting the
shunts resonate at adjacent frequencies, we obtained
broadband attenuation of a traveling wavepacket. We
have revised the concept of “organized disorder” in
the context of shunted piezoelectrics, thus adding a
layer to the outstanding versatility of shunted piezo
elements and their applicability in the design of tunable
metamaterials.

Acknowledgments

the support of

We acknowledge the support of the National Science
Foundation (grant CMMI-1266089). Davide Cardella
also acknowledges
the Outgoing
oﬃce of Politecnico di Torino (through the Master
Thesis Abroad Scholarship). We are indebted to
Lauren E. Linderman and Paul Bergson (University
of Minnesota) for their support with the experimental
equipment. We are grateful to Iacopo Gentilini
and Douglas Isenberg (Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University, Prescott) for their helpful
insight and
assistance with circuitry during the initial stages of
our work.
Finally, we thank Benjamin S. Beck
(Pennsylvania State University) for an enlightening
discussion on shunted piezoelectrics.

that the traveling packet, which has local support,
propagates along the beam and is therefore forced
to interact sequentially with all the patches, thus
feeling the eﬀect of each correction. Moreover, due
to its short wavelength characteristics, the wave has
the opportunity to impart signiﬁcant deformation to
each patch.
in vibration attenuation
problems (steady-state conditions), the possibility for
the patches to undergo signiﬁcant levels of strain at
the frequencies corresponding to the peaks that we
intend to suppress is directly related to the modal
characteristics of the structure. In such scenario, the
arrangement of patches would need to be carefully
designed.

In contrast,

4.2. Time domain considerations - Packet distortion

Most of the existing literature on LR shunts has
focused on achievable spectral eﬀects.
In this work,
we also attempt to provide an additional angle, by
monitoring how the resonant shunts aﬀect the spatial
characteristics of the chirp recorded at the output
accelerometer.
In Fig. 8a, we report the wavepacket
recorded when all the patches are short circuited.
In the 0–2.8 ms interval, we can identify a ﬁrst
packet, corresponding mainly to the signal traveling
away from the source, here termed forward (FWD)
packet. The oscillations starting at 2.8 ms, on the
other hand, correspond to the signal reﬂected by the
clamped boundary and traveling back towards the
source,
i.e., to the backward (BWD) packet. We
can see that the FWD packet already features some
distortion with respect to the prescribed signal (shown
in Fig. 5a). This is consistent with the fact that
some of the imposed frequencies are favored by the
bi-modal response of the beam in the frequency region
of interest. The time signals recorded at each step of
the activation sequence are shown in Figs. 8b-h.
In
each of these plots, the signal recorded for the current
activation step (black line) is compared to the signal
recorded at the previous step (gray line); moreover,
the regions of the signal undergoing modiﬁcations are
highlighted by colored boxes.
In Fig. 8b we can
appreciate how the R shunt causes modiﬁcations in
three regions. IR and IIIR correspond to attenuation
regions, and they take place at the beginning of both
the FWD and BWD packets due to the fact that R
is the lowest-frequency shunt and low frequencies are
concentrated at the early stages of the chirp. The
signal enhancement in IIR is due to the fact that the
shunt causes an increase of the energy associated with
frequencies around 7.7 kHz. This partial energy shift
was already documented in Fig. 7a and discussed in
Sec. 4.1.
In Fig. 8c we also activate the I shunt,
which causes a mild attenuation of the tail of the FWD
packet, consistently with the high frequency response

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

9

Figure 8. Eﬀect of the rainbow trap on the shape of the wavepacket. (a) Short circuit scenario. (b-h) Wavepacket after each of
the seven activation steps (black lines). To provide a visual comparison, the gray lines in (b-h) represent the packet proﬁle at the
previous step; the boxed regions highlight, at each step, individual distorted features (up to three per case). (i) Comparison between
the signal obtained when the trap is fully activated (black line) and the signal in the short circuit case (gray line), highlighting the
global distortion due to the rainbow trap.

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

References

[21] Airoldi L and Ruzzene M 2011 J. Intel. Mat. Syst. Struct.

22 1567–1579

10

[1] Tsakmakidis K L, Boardman A D and Hess O 2007 Nature

[22] Wang G, Chen S and Wen J 2011 Smart Mater. Struct. 20

450 397–401

015026

[2] Forward R L 1979 Appl. Opt. 18 690–697
[3] Hagood N and von Flotow A 1991 J. Sound Vib. 146 243–

268

[4] Hollkamp J J 1994 J. Intel. Mat. Syst. Str. 5 49–57
[5] Viana F A C and Steﬀen Jr V 2006 J. Braz. Soc. Mech.

[23] Bergamini A, Delpero T, De Simoni L, De Lillo L, Ruzzene

M and Ermanni P 2014 Adv. Mater. 26 1343–1347

[24] Chen Y Y, Huang G L and Sun C T 2014 J. Vib. Acoust.

136 061008

[25] Zhou W, Wu Y and Zuo L 2015 Smart Mater. Struct. 24

Sci. Eng. 28 293–310

065021

[6] Thomas O, Ducarne J and De¨u J F 2012 Smart Mater.

[26] Zhu R, Chen Y Y, Barnhart M V, Hu G K, Sun C T and

Struct. 21 015008

[7] Behrens S, Fleming A J and Moheimani S O R 2003 Smart

Mater. Struct. 12 18

[8] Park C H and Baz A 2005 J. Vib. Control 11 331–346
[9] Beck B S, Cunefare K A, Ruzzene M and Collet M 2011 J.

Huang G L 2016 Appl. Phys. Lett. 108 011905

[27] Celli P and Gonella S 2015 Appl. Phys. Lett. 106 091905
[28] Wen J, Chen S, Wang G, Yu D and Wen X 2016 J. Intel.

Mat. Syst. Struct. 27 28–38

[29] Hwan Oh J, Kyu Lee I, Sik Ma P and Young Kim Y 2011

Intel. Mat. Syst. Struct. 22 1177–1187

Appl. Phys. Lett. 99 083505

[10] Kushwaha M S, Halevi P, Dobrzynski L and Djafari-

[30] Casadei F, Delpero T, Bergamini A, Ermanni P and

Rouhani B 1993 Phys. Rev. Lett. 71(13) 2022–2025

Ruzzene M 2012 J. Appl. Phys. 112 064902

[11] Thorp O, Ruzzene M and Baz A 2001 Smart Mater. Struct.

[31] Rupin M, Lemoult F, Lerosey G and Roux P 2014 Phys.

10 979

[12] Celli P and Gonella S 2015 Appl. Phys. Lett. 107 081901
[13] Airoldi L and Ruzzene M 2011 New J. Phys. 13 113010
[14] dell’Isola F, Maurini C and Porﬁri M 2004 Smart Mater.

Struct. 13 299

Rev. Lett. 112(23) 234301

[32] Kr¨odel S, Thom´e N and Daraio C 2015 Extreme Mech. Lett.

4 111–117

[33] Gan Q, Gao Y, Wagner K, Vezenov D, Ding Y J and Bartoli

F J 2011 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108 5169–5173

[15] Lossouarn B, De¨u J F and Aucejo M 2015 Smart Mater.

[34] Zhu J, Chen Y, Zhu X, Garcia-Vidal F J, Yin X, Zhang W

Struct. 24 115037

[16] Bergamini A, Z¨undel M, Flores Parra E A, Delpero T,
Ruzzene M and Ermanni P 2015 J. Appl. Phys. 118
154310

[17] Wang G, Wang J, Chen S and Wen J 2011 Smart Mater.

Struct. 20 125019

[18] Wang G and Chen S 2016 Smart Mater. Struct. 25 015004
[19] Spadoni A, Ruzzene M and Cunefare K A 2009 J. Intel.

Mat. Syst. Struct. 20 979–990

[20] Casadei F, Ruzzene M, Dozio L and Cunefare K A 2010

Smart Mater. Struct. 19 015002

and Zhang X 2013 Sci. Rep. 3

[35] Ni X, Wu Y, Chen Z G, Zheng L Y, Xu Y L, Nayar P, Liu

X P, Lu M H and Chen Y F 2014 Sci. Rep. 4

[36] Zhou C, Yuan B, Cheng Y and Liu X 2016 Appl. Phys. Lett.

108 063501

[37] Ducarne J 2009 Mod´elisation et optimisation de dispositifs
non-lin´eaires damortissement de structures par syst´emes
pi´ezo´electriques commut´es Ph.D. thesis CNAM

[38] Antoniou A 1969 Proc. IEEE 116 1838–1850

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

Supplementary Data (SD)

S1. Bonding the patches

A proper bonding of the piezoelectric patches to
the substrate is a key aspect for the realization of
successful experiments involving shunting circuits [37].
As piezoelectric materials react to strain by creating a
voltage, a strong coupling between patch and substrate
ensures that the generated voltage is large enough to
trigger the desired eﬀects in the shunt circuits. For this
reason, we report a few useful tips on how to properly
bond PZT patches to an Aluminum substrate. In our
work, we use a two-part epoxy glue (3M Scotch-Weld
1838 B/A) as bonding agent. The bonding procedure
consists of three basic stages: surface cleaning, glue
application and pressure application. These stages are
shown in Fig. S1. Note that it is suggested to solder
the wires to the electrodes of the patch only after the
bonding procedure.

Figure S1. Stages of the bonding procedure.
cleaning.
Final result showing the soldered wires.

(b) Glue application.

(c) Pressure application.

(a) Surface
(d)

S1.1. Surface cleaning

A proper cleaning of the surfaces to be bonded
(both the patch’s beam-side electrode and the beam
substrate) is crucial to eliminate impurities, which
might compromise the quality of the bonding. As far
as the piezo patch is concerned, we suggest to apply
tape on the top-side electrode, as shown in Fig. S1a;

S1

this should facilitate the patch positioning, without
any need to touch the treated surface. To clean the
electrode and to dissolve traces of grease, we used an
acetone solution. Then, the patch must be washed
with water. It is very important not to use sandpaper
on the patch; this could result in permanent damage
to the thin electrodes. To prepare the surface of the
beam, we follow a diﬀerent procedure. First, we use
ﬁne-grade sandpaper to create micro-asperities in the
contact area:
increase the eﬀectiveness of
the bonding. This etching process can be enhanced
by also applying a diluted solution of sulfuric acid,
which should then be removed with an acid removal
solution and water. From this point on, touching the
contact area should be avoided. The steps that follow
should be performed quickly to minimize the amount
of aluminum oxide formed on the beam surface.

this will

S1.2. Epoxy glue application

At this stage, we can prepare the mixture of epoxy glue
and reagent (for the 3M Scotch-Weld 1838 B/A Epoxy,
it is suggested to use equivalent amounts in weight).
After the mixture is created, we apply a thin layer of
it to the beam-side electrode of the patch, as shown in
Fig. S1b. This application step can be performed with
a wooden stick or a similar tool. It is important to try
to spread the layer along a single direction. Note that
this step is very crucial: the quality of the bonding will
strongly depend on whether the glue has been applied
evenly or not.

S1.3. Pressure application

At this stage, we can use the previously-applied tape
segment to lift the patch from the table and to place
it in the desired position on the substrate. Now we
can apply pressure, using a weight or a clamp (as
shown in Fig. S1c), to reduce the thickness of the
glue layer and to guarantee that bonding will take
place. This pressure needs to be applied for the whole
“resting time” indicated by the epoxy manufacturer.
After a couple of hours, when the glue is not yet solid,
we suggest to remove the clamp and check the patch
positioning; at this stage, small displacements are still
allowed. Moreover, this is a good time to remove excess
epoxy glue. Note that, if using a conductive glue, it is
fundamental to avoid glue on the top-side electrode;
this would cause an unwanted short-circuiting of the
patch.

S2. Testing the circuits

As mentioned in the main article (Sec. 2.2), we
suggest to test the Antoniou circuits electrically before
attempting to connect them to the patches;
this

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

S2

strategy allows to single out issues related to the
circuitry. The experimental setup we used to perform
these tests is shown in Fig. S2. The goal is to test the

0.00

Figure S3. Testing the Antoniou circuit of the RED shunt.
The black line represents the experimental frequency response
function of the test resonant circuit. The red line indicates the
resonance predicted by Eq. S3.

Figure S2. Sketch of the experimental setup used to test the
Antoniou circuits.

S3. Minimizing the parasitic resistance

functioning of the Antoniou circuit, whose inductance
is labeled Leq. To do so, we connect it to a test
resistance Rt and to a test capacitance Ct [5]; the
RtLeqCt circuit resonates at:

fr =

1

2 πs 1

Leq Ct

.

(S3)

The circuit is tested by subjecting it to a multitone
input voltage containing a superposition of harmonics
between 5 kHz and 10 kHz with a frequency increment
of 0.1 Hz (generated in LabVIEW, sent through the
output module of the DAQ to the power ampliﬁer and
then fed to the resonant circuit). A frequency response
function of the circuit is then calculated by dividing the
voltage measured at Rt (VR) by the input voltage (Vin).
If the synthetic inductor works properly, the response
is characterized by a single peak corresponding to the
resonance of the circuit. The response of the Antoniou
circuit in one of the shunts used in this work (the RED
shunt), coupled to a test resistance Rt = 1 kΩ and to a
test capacitance Ct = 2.2 nF is shown in Fig. S3. Note
that, to calculate the theoretical fr, we used measured
values of Leq (0.2189 H, obtained from Eq. 2 by setting
R1 = 440 Ω, R2 = 666 Ω, R3 = 981 Ω, R4 = 1480 Ω
and C = 228.2 nF) and Ct (2.072 nF), which slightly
diﬀer from the nominal ones. We can see that the
experimental result in terms of resonant frequency
agrees well with the theoretical one. Diﬀerences in
measured and calculated fr are inevitable, and are due
to the presence of additional (parasitic) resistances in
the Antoniou circuit.

In general,

The parasitic resistance Rp is a resistance which is
inherent to the circuit components. For example, in
a synthetic inductor, Rp is due to the presence of
capacitors and operational ampliﬁers. Rp is usually
responsible for the diﬀerences between the nominal
and the actual behavior of the Antoniou circuits.
For example, this is the case for the results shown
in Fig. S3:
the parasitic resistance is responsible
for the discrepancy in resonance frequency, and for
the fact that the maximum amplitude of the FRF
is not equal to 1.
it is best to design
the circuits as to reduce as much as possible Rp.
In fact, as Rp gets larger, we might be facing a
scenario in which the Antoniou circuits stop working
properly; this could cause the resonant shunt to lose
its resonant behavior. While the parasitic resistance
can be estimated from experiments, here we just limit
ourselves to few practical considerations: ﬁrst, it is
best to place a capacitor with low value of C in the
Antoniou circuit; second, the equivalent inductance of
the Antoniou circuit Leq should be as small as possible;
third, we suggest to use Mylar capacitors, which seem
to be characterized by smaller inherent resistances with
respect to the electrolytic ones. In a shunting scenario,
the second consideration implies that working at higher
frequencies is more convenient (in fact,
for a ﬁxed
capacitance of the piezo Cp, higher frequencies imply
smaller values of Leq).

S4. Grounding

While a physical
inductor has a ﬂoating reference
point, the synthetic inductor needs a ﬁxed reference

A tunable shunt-enabled rainbow trap

S3

ground. The ground of the circuit needs to be the same
as the ground of the DC power supply used to power
the operational ampliﬁers. In our case, we use two DC
power supplies connected as shown in Fig. S4. This

are shown in Fig. S5. We can see that the time

V

60.0

V

60.0

Figure S5. Response, recorded at the output accelerometer,
when circuits 12, 14 and 18 are simultaneously shunted, without
series resistors. (a) Time response. (b) Frequency spectrum.

response is characterized by unexpected oscillations
starting right at the beginning of the acquisition.
This translates into a very strong resonance peak
recorded around 7550 Hz. Note that this peak reaches
amplitudes far higher than those recorded in the short
circuit case (the short circuit spectrum is also shown in
Fig. S5(b), as a thin gray line). Not surprisingly, the
frequency at which the unexpected resonance occurs
is very close to the resonant frequency of one of
the connected circuits (circuit 18, which resonates at
fY ≈ 7520 Hz). While we are not sure about the
reason behind this unstable behavior, placing a large-
enough series resistance Rs in the shunts appears to
be an eﬀective solution to the problem. Note that
this unstable behavior is essentially not discussed in
the literature, except for a few useful comments in the
work of dell’Isola et al. [14].

Figure S4. Schematic of the DC power supplies, showing how
to obtain a reference ground.

series connection allows to generate a ±60 V voltage
(in our experiments, we use ±30 V only), while also
providing a reference ground pin. This ground pin is
used to ground the synthetic inductors as well.

When using the Antoniou circuits in the resonant
shunts, it is also important to have them share the
same ground as the patches. For this reason, the
beam-side electrode of each patch is connected to the
reference ground. Since the epoxy used for bonding
does not display excellent conductivity, this represents
the best strategy to assure that the patches share the
same ground. If conductive epoxy were to be used, it
would have been suﬃcient to connect the beam to the
reference ground.

S5. Instabilities

In Sec. 2.3, we discussed how a series resistor Rs is
always needed when using resonant shunts, to suppress
instability phenomena that take place when multiple
patches are shunted. These instabilities manifest in
several ways. The most characteristic indicator is a
“screaming” sound that can be heard coming from
some of the shunted patches; this noise is caused by
strong vibration of the patches in the audible frequency
range. Another manifestation of this unstable behavior
is the heating up of the circuit components, which
is to be avoided at all costs, as it can quickly (and
irreversibly) damage the components. To investigate
this phenomenon, we recorded the signal at the output
accelerometer when patches 12, 14 and 18 were shunted
at the same time, without any resistor Rs in the shunts.
Note that, due to the fact that circuits were heating
up during the signal acquisition, we did not perform
multiple measurements for this experiment.
The
results in terms of time signal and frequency spectrum

