6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
9
1
6
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–16 (2015)

Printed 8 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

The Co-Evolution of Total Density Proﬁles and Central
Dark Matter Fractions in Simulated Early-Type Galaxies

Rhea-Silvia Remus1⋆, Klaus Dolag1,2, Thorsten Naab2, Andreas Burkert1,3,
Michaela Hirschmann4, Tadziu L. Hoﬀmann1, Peter H. Johansson5
1 Universit¨ats-Sternwarte M¨unchen, Scheinerstr. 1, D-81679 M¨unchen, Germany
2 Max Planck Institut for Astrophysics, D-85748 Garching, Germany
3 Max Planck Institut for Extraterrestrial Physics, D-85748 Garching, Germany
4 Sorbonne Universites, UPMC-CNRS, UMR7095, Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris, F-75014, Paris, France
5 Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Gustaf H¨allstr¨omin katu 2a, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland

Accepted ... Received ...; in original form ...

ABSTRACT
We present evidence from cosmological hydrodynamical simulations for a co-evolution
of the slope of the total (dark and stellar) mass density proﬁles, γtot, and the dark
matter fractions within the half-mass radius, fDM, in early-type galaxies. The relation
can be described as γtot = A fDM + B and holds for all systems at all redshifts. We
test diﬀerent feedback models and ﬁnd that the general trend is independent of the
assumed feedback processes and is set by the decreasing importance of dissipative
processes towards lower redshifts and for more massive systems. Early-type galaxies
are smaller, more concentrated, have lower dark matter fractions and steeper total
density slopes at high redshifts and at lower masses for a given redshift. The values
for A and B change distinctively with the assumed feedback model, and thus this
relation can be used as a test for feedback models. A similar correlation exists between
γtot and the stellar mass surface density Σ∗. The model with weak stellar feedback
and, in particular, feedback from black holes is in better agreement with observations.
All simulations, independent of the assumed feedback model, predict steeper total
density slopes and lower dark matter fractions at higher redshifts. While the latter
is in agreement with the observed trends, the former is in conﬂict with currently
available lensing observations, which indicate constant or decreasing density slopes.
This discrepancy cannot be overcome by any of the feedback models included in this
study.

Key words: galaxies: evolution – formation – cosmology: dark matter – methods:
numerical

1

INTRODUCTION

The distribution of dark and luminous matter in early-
type galaxies (ETGs) has been the subject of many stud-
ies over the past years. The total mass of galaxies can, for
example, be estimated from the X-ray emission of hot halo
gas (e.g., Pratt & Arnaud 2005; Pointecouteau et al. 2005;
Das et al. 2011; Newman et al. 2013), strong lensing mea-
surements (e.g., Koopmans et al. 2006; Auger et al. 2010;
Barnab`e et al. 2011), or dynamical modelling at diﬀerent
levels of complexity (e.g., Gerhard et al. 2001; Thomas et al.
2007; Cappellari et al. 2013; Tortora et al. 2014b). More
recently, measurements using tracer populations such as
planetary nebulae or globular clusters have also been able

⋆ E-mail:rhea@usm.lmu.de

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS

to assess mass distributions and stellar kinematics out
to large radii (e.g., Deason et al. 2012; Napolitano et al.
2014; Cappellari et al. 2015). The contribution of the dark
matter is typically estimated by subtracting the luminous
stellar component. Uncertainties in the IMF slope and
thus the mass-to-light ratio, however, can result in sig-
niﬁcant variations in the derived dark matter fractions
(e.g., Barnab`e et al. 2011; Dutton et al. 2013; Deason et al.
2012), i.e., a bottom-heavy IMF, for example, results in more
stellar mass for a given stellar luminosity, lowering the dark
matter fraction.

of Coma

Dynamical modelling

cluster ETGs
(Thomas et al. 2007) as well as numerical simulations
(Remus et al. 2013) indicate that the total (stellar plus
dark matter) radial density proﬁles of ETGs at z = 0
can be well described by a power law ρ ∝ rγ , with an

2

Remus et al.

average slope of γ ≈ −2.1 over a large radial range of
0.3 R1/2 < r < 4 R1/2. This is also in good agreement with
the results presented by Humphrey & Buote (2010), who
studied 10 early-type galaxies (ETGs) in diﬀerent environ-
ments from ﬁeld to cluster densities at low redshifts. They
modeled the total mass proﬁles of ETGs using X-ray mea-
surements of the hot halo surrounding the galaxies, covering
0.2 Reﬀ < r < 10 Reﬀ , and ﬁnd power-law slopes for the
total density between −2 < γ < −1.2. Larger galaxies tend
to have ﬂatter slopes, similar to what has been shown by
Remus et al. (2013). More recently, Cappellari et al. (2015)
presented similar results for ETGs from the SLUGGS
survey, but their slopes tend to be steeper than those found
by Humphrey & Buote (2010) and Thomas et al. (2007).

Humphrey & Buote (2010) also found the central dark
matter fraction within the eﬀective radius to vary with
other galaxy properties. They suggest that the accretion of
mostly collisionless material leads to a reordering of the sys-
tem towards an isothermal state (see e.g., Hilz et al. 2012).
Recently, Tortora et al. (2014a) studied the central total
mass density proﬁles of ≈ 4300 ETGs at z < 0.1 from
the SPIDER survey (La Barbera et al. 2010) and 260 ETGs
from the Atlas3D survey down to stellar masses as low as
M∗ ≈ 1010M⊙. They ﬁnd a clear correlation between the
slope of the total central density proﬁle of the galaxies and
their size and stellar mass, with their most massive galaxies
having slopes close to isothermal (γ ≈ −2). A correlation of
the total density slope within the eﬀective radius and the
mass of the ETG has also been reported by Newman et al.
(2015), who studied ETGs in group environments, and by
Forbes et al. (2016) from the SLUGGS survey.

As suggested by Remus et al. (2013), these correlations
of the size, dark matter fractions, and in-situ fractions with
the total mass density slopes originate from the galaxies’
formation histories: At high redshifts, galaxy growth is dom-
inated by dissipative processes like early gas-rich assembly
from ﬁlaments and gas-rich mergers. These processes lead
to an enhanced in-situ star formation, which increases the
baryonic content of the galaxies especially in their central
parts, and thus results in low central dark matter fractions
(e.g., Oser et al. 2010). They also lead to steeper total den-
sity slopes (see Remus et al. 2013; Sonnenfeld et al. 2014).
After a redshift of z ≈ 2, dissipative processes become less
important, while the dissipationless processes start to dom-
inate, i.e., the galaxy growth is mainly driven by merger
events and accretion. This picture is sometimes called the
two-phase formation scenario for galaxies (e.g., Naab et al.
2007; Guo & White 2008; Naab et al. 2009; Bezanson et al.
2009; Oser et al. 2010; Johansson et al. 2012; Moster et al.
2013; Wellons et al. 2015; Furlong et al. 2015; Wellons et al.
2016). This theoretical framework oﬀers an explanation for
the observed trends at z = 0: Gas-poor (collisionless) merg-
ers can increase the dark matter fractions within the eﬀec-
tive radius by violent relaxation during major merger events
or, even more eﬃciently, by rapidly increasing the luminous
size of the galaxies in minor merger events (e.g., Hilz et al.
2012, 2013). In this picture, ETGs which experienced multi-
ple (mostly) gas poor merger events have lower in-situ frac-
tions, higher dark matter fractions, and larger sizes at z = 0,
but the violent accretion of mostly collisionless material also
leads to a reordering of the system towards an isothermal
state (Johansson et al. 2009; Remus et al. 2013). Therefore,

ETGs that have steeper slopes at z = 0 had either only
a few or only gas-rich accretion events since z ≈ 2, and
therefore still have high in-situ fractions, smaller sizes and
low central dark matter fractions. They also tend to be less
massive, however, this tendency is much less pronounced
than the correlation between slope and size. The ﬂattening
of the slope with decreasing redshift found in simulations
(Johansson et al. 2012; Remus et al. 2013) can therefore be
naturally explained by ETG growth after about z ≈ 2 being
dominated by mostly dry merger events, which cause a ﬂat-
tening of the density slope while enhancing the central dark
matter fraction.

However, observations of galaxies that are strong
lenses have revealed a diﬀerent picture: Most studies ﬁnd
no evolution of the total density slopes with redshift
(Koopmans et al. 2006; Auger et al. 2010; Ruﬀ et al. 2011;
Bolton et al. 2012; Barnab`e et al. 2011) or even a mild de-
crease of the density slopes (Sonnenfeld et al. 2013) up to
redshifts of z ≈ 1. Treu & Koopmans (2004), for example,
report average slopes of γ ≈ −1.75 ± 0.10 for their set of 5
ETGs from the LSD survey at redshifts between 0.5 < z < 1.
In this paper we use numerical simulations to investi-
gate the evolution of the central mass distributions of ETGs,
especially emphasizing the central dark matter fractions.
We include ETGs selected from zoom-in simulations with
varying star formation feedback models and ETGs from a
large-volume cosmological simulation (Magneticum) includ-
ing feedback from active galactic nuclei (AGN) in order to
understand the impact of those diﬀerent feedback mecha-
nisms. Details of the simulations are presented in Sec. 2. In
Sec. 3 we present the evolution of the mass-size relation for
the diﬀerent simulated ETG samples and compare to obser-
vations, and in Sec. 4 we discuss the evolution of the central
dark matter fractions with redshift and its correlation with
galactic mass and size. In Sec. 5 we discuss the total density
slopes found in our simulations at diﬀerent redshifts and
their correlations with the dark matter fractions and stel-
lar mass surface densities, and present a comparison with
observations. We conclude in Sec. 6 with a summary and
discussion.

2 NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS

We use ETGs selected from three diﬀerent simulation sets
to study the eﬀect of diﬀerent sub-resolution feedback mod-
els on our results. The Magneticum Pathﬁnder simulations
are a set of large-scale hydrodynamical cosmological simula-
tions, while the other two samples are taken from zoom-
in re-simulations of selected halo samples. In the follow-
ing we brieﬂy describe the simulations with respect to the
included feedback models relevant for this work. For fur-
ther details, we refer to the previous works that describe
the simulations in more detail. All simulations were per-
formed using extended versions of the parallel TreePM-SPH-
code GADGET-2 (Springel 2005) called P-GADGET-3. An
overview of the general properties of the simulations can be
found in Tab. 1.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

Co-Evolution of Total Density Proﬁles and Central Dark Matter Fractions

3

Table 1. Simulation details

SPH

AGN Wind

cooling

Reference

Oser
standard
Magneticum improved
Wind
standard

no
yes
no

no

weak
strong

primordial
incl. metals Hirschmann et al. (2014); Teklu et al. (2015)
incl. metals

Hirschmann et al. (2013, 2015)

Oser et al. (2010, 2012)

2.1 The Magneticum Pathﬁnder Simulations

The Magneticum Pathﬁnder1 simulations (Dolag et al., in
prep.) are a set of hydrodynamical cosmological boxes with
volumes ranging from (2688 Mpc/h)3 to (48 Mpc/h)3 and
resolutions of mGas = 2.6 × 109M⊙/h up to mGas = 7.3 ×
106M⊙/h (see also Bocquet et al. 2016). Throughout all
simulations, a WMAP7 (Komatsu et al. 2011) ΛCDM cos-
mology is adapted with σ8 = 0.809, h = 0.704, ΩΛ = 0.728,
ΩM = 0.272 and ΩB = 0.0451 and an initial slope for the
power spectrum of ns = 0.963.

The version of GADGET-3 used for these simu-
lations includes various updates in the formulation of
SPH regarding the treatment of the viscosity (Dolag et al.
2005; Beck et al. 2016), thermal conduction (Dolag et al.
2004) and the employed SPH kernels (Donnert et al. 2013;
Beck et al. 2016). Kinetic feedback from galactic winds is in-
cluded following Springel & Hernquist (2003), and the metal
enrichment and star-formation descriptions follow the pat-
tern of metal production from SN Ia, SN II, and AGB
mass losses (Tornatore et al. 2004, 2007). Each gas parti-
cle can form up to four stellar particles. Regarding the
metal enrichment, 12 diﬀerent types of elements are fol-
lowed. Additionally, a self-consistent dependence of the
gas cooling on the local metallicity is included following
Wiersma et al. (2009). Black hole feedback is implemented
according to Springel et al. (2005); Fabjan et al. (2010) and
Hirschmann et al. (2014). For the identiﬁcation of sub-
structures, a modiﬁed version of SUBFIND (Springel et al.
2001) is used which includes the contribution of the stars
(Dolag et al. 2009).

The Magneticum Pathﬁnder Simulations show good
agreement with observational results for the pressure proﬁles
of the intra-cluster medium (Planck Collaboration et al.
2013; McDonald et al. 2014) and the properties of the
formed black hole (BH) and AGN population over cosmic
times (Hirschmann et al. 2014; Steinborn et al. 2015). They
have also been found to produce populations of both late and
early-type galaxies which resemble the observed angular mo-
mentum properties (Teklu et al. 2015) and global dynamical
properties (Remus et al. 2015a).

In this work we use ETGs selected from a medium-sized
(48 Mpc/h)3 cosmological box, which initially contains a
total of 2×5763 particles (dark matter and gas) with masses
of mDM = 3.6 × 107M⊙/h and mGas = 7.3 × 106M⊙/h. The
mass of the stellar particles varies due to the fact that each
gas particle can spawn 4 stellar particles, thus on average
the stellar masses are on the order of m∗ = 2 × 106M⊙/h.
The gravitational softening evolves from high redshifts to
z = 2, and from z = 2 to z = 0 the softening is ﬁxed to

1 www.magneticum.org

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

ǫDM = ǫGas = 1.4 kpc/h for dark matter and gas particles
and to ǫ∗ = 0.7 kpc/h for stellar particles.

2.2 Cosmological Zoom Simulations

Cosmological zoom simulations are re-simulations of halos
selected from a parent dark-matter-only simulation with
higher resolutions and additional baryonic physics included.
While large cosmological volumes provide a statistically rep-
resentative sample of galaxies, zoom-in re-simulations are
computationally less expensive to run and thus can be used
to study the impact of the diﬀerent feedback models on
galaxy properties simultaneously allowing for higher reso-
lution levels.

The re-simulations studied in this work are selected
from a parent cosmological box of (72 Mpc/h)3 with 5123
DM particles (Moster et al. 2010; Oser et al. 2010). The par-
ticles have a mass resolution of mDM = 2 × 108M⊙/h, and a
comoving gravitational softening of ǫDM = 2.52 kpc/h was
adopted. For all simulations, a ΛCDM cosmology based on
WMAP3 (Spergel et al. 2007) was adopted, i.e., h = 0.72,
ΩΛ = 0.74, ΩM = 0.26 and σ8 = 0.77. The used initial power
spectrum has a slope of ns = 0.95.

Halos with masses in the range 1011M⊙/h to 1013M⊙/h
were re-simulated with a spatial resolution twice of the orig-
inal box, leading to mDM = 2.1 × 107M⊙/h, mGas = M∗ =
4.2 × 106M⊙/h with gravitational softenings at z = 0 of
ǫDM = 0.89 kpc/h, ǫGas = ǫ∗ = 0.4 kpc/h For these
re-simulations, a baryon fraction of fbar = 0.169, that is
ΩDM = 0.216 and ΩB = 0.044, was adopted.

The ﬁrst set of zoom simulations used in this work were
simulated with the code GADGET-2, including star for-
mation and self-regulated supernova feedback according to
Springel & Hernquist (2003) as well as radiative cooling for
a primordial mixture of hydrogen and helium (Katz et al.
1996). In addition, a uniform but redshift dependent UV ra-
diation background was included following Haardt & Madau
(1996). The smaller halos in this simulation set have also
been re-simulated with a higher spatial resolution, with par-
ticle resolutions of MDM = 3.6 × 106M⊙/h, mgas = m∗ =
7.4 × 105M⊙/h and comoving gravitational softenings of
ǫDM = 0.45 kpc/h, ǫgas = ǫ∗ = 0.2 kpc/h. Additional de-
tails on the galaxy properties of these simulation can also
be found in Oser et al. (2012); Hirschmann et al. (2012);
Remus et al. (2013); Naab et al. (2014).

Several of the zoom-simulations from this sample have
been also re-simulated including metal enrichment and
momentum-driven galactic winds. For the metal enrich-
ment, contributions from SNIa, SNII and AGB-stars are in-
cluded following the four elements C, O, Si and Fe following
Oppenheimer & Dav´e (2008). The values for the mass load-
ing η and the wind velocity vwind are, however, not constant

4

Remus et al.

(as in Springel & Hernquist (2003), and thus as in Mag-
neticum), but instead they scale with the galaxy velocity
dispersion, motivated by observations of galactic superwinds
of Martin (2005); Rupke et al. (2005). These simulations are
described in detail by Hirschmann et al. (2013, 2015). In
general, the simulations are successful in predicting fairly
realistic SFR histories and baryon conversion eﬃciencies in
low-mass halos. However they still form too massive galax-
ies with too high SFR due to missing AGN feedback. From
these simulations, the second set of zoom-simulations used
in this work are selected.

2.3 Galaxy Classiﬁcation

We use a classiﬁcation scheme based on the circularity pa-
rameter, similar to Scannapieco et al. (2008): At ﬁrst, we
align each galaxy along its principal axis of inertia of the
stars within 0.1 Rvir. The stellar mass within 0.1 Rvir also
serves as the deﬁnition of the total stellar mass of our galax-
ies, M∗. The circularity parameter for each gas and star par-
ticle within 0.1 Rvir is then calculated as

ǫcirc = jz/jcirc

(1)

where jz is the speciﬁc angular momentum of each particle
with respect to the z-axis and jcirc is the speciﬁc angular
momentum expected if the particle were on a circular or-
bit. For each galaxy, we then consider the histograms of
the circularity parameter. If a galaxy is rotationally sup-
ported, the majority of the stellar (and the gas) particles
has a circularity close to ǫcirc = 1 (or ǫcirc = −1 in case of a
counter-rotating (gas) disk). On the other hand, if a galaxy
is dispersion-dominated, the majority of the particles have
a circularity close to ǫcirc = 0. In the following, a galaxy is
classiﬁed as ETG if more than a given fraction f (ǫcirc) of its
stellar particles have circularities within −0.3 6 ǫcirc 6 0.3
and the fraction of cold gas within the half-mass radius (the
radius which contains 50% of the stellar mass M∗, see also
Remus et al. 2013) is smaller than fgas < 3%. This criterion
is a result of a detailed analysis by Teklu et al. (2015), where
it was already applied to select ‘poster child’ samples of both
spheroidal and disk galaxies in the Magneticum simulations.
As a stringent criterion to avoid contamination of our
selected sample of ETGs with disk-like galaxies, merging
and distorted structures as well as red disks, we choose a
circularity fraction of f (ǫcirc) > 40% based on Fig. 5 and
Fig. 19 of Teklu et al. (2015). This choice of f (ǫcirc) also en-
sures that the same selection criterion can be applied safely
at all studied redshifts. The Magneticum Simulation stud-
ied in this work contains a total of 269 halos with a total
stellar mass greater than M∗ > 5 × 1010M⊙, of which 96
were classiﬁed as ETGs. Using the same selection criterion,
we also identify ETGs from the Magneticum simulation at
higher redshifts, always using the same lower total mass cut
of M∗ > 5 × 1010M⊙. In this work we especially focus on
the samples of ETGs selected at z = 0 (96 ETGs), z = 0.5
(87 ETGs), z = 1 (56 ETGs) and z = 2 (5 ETGs), however,
if necessary, additional redshifts are also available. The se-
lection limits and the numbers of all galaxies and ETGs at
all redshifts are listed in Tab. 2. The ETGs at high red-
shift are most likely the progenitors of some of the ETGs at
z = 0, however, we do not trace the ETGs back in time for
this analysis but only select them at each timestep according

to the above mentioned total mass and circularity criteria.
These ETGs selected from the Magneticum simulations are
in the following called ‘Magneticum ETGs’.

However,

if we apply the same choice of f (ǫcirc) >
40% to the zoom simulations, the second set, where the
momentum-driven wind model is included, reduces to only
2 galaxies at z = 0 and none at higher redshifts. We thus
weaken the circularity criterion to have only 35% of the stel-
lar mass with circularities between −0.3 6 ǫcirc 6 0.3 (i.e.,
f (ǫcirc) > 35%). Following Teklu et al. (2015), this weaker
criterion should still lead to the selection of dispersion dom-
inated, spheroidal galaxies, but while disk galaxy contami-
nation is still excluded, merging or distorted systems could
theoretically contaminate the selection. Since both samples
of zoom simulations are, however, rather small, we simply
check all selected galaxies by eye to avoid contamination2.
The gas criterion, on the other hand, is not changed.

We apply the f (ǫcirc) > 35% criterion to both zoom
simulations to ensure a better consistency between both
samples, as both samples are simulated from the same set
of initial conditions. For the ﬁrst set of zoom-simulations
(Oser et al. 2010), nearly all galaxies at z = 0 were classi-
ﬁed as ETGs (20 out of 21 galaxies), with decreasing num-
bers of ETGs at higher redshifts (see Tab. 2). The ETGs
at higher redshifts are always the progenitors of those at
lower redshift. These ETGs are the same as those studied
by Remus et al. (2013), and will in the following be denoted
as ‘Oser ETGs’.

For the second set of zoom-simulations, the number of
selected ETGs at z = 0 enhances to 5 out of 13 galaxies.
At higher redshifts, however, still only one or two galax-
ies classify as ETG (see Tab. 2), and thus we only include
the 5 ETGs at z = 0 from this simulation set in our anal-
ysis. These ETGs will be denoted as ‘Wind ETGs’. The
reduced amount of ETGs clearly shows the impact of the
momentum-driven wind model and the metal enrichment,
which is discussed in detail in Hirschmann et al. (2013): Al-
beit the initial conditions and the numerical scheme are the
same for both the wind and the Oser zoom simulations, the
simulations including the momentum-driven wind and metal
models produce signiﬁcantly more disk-like galaxies, while
the simulations without those models tend to mostly form
ETGs even at high redshifts. This is due to the more eﬃcient
removal of low-angular-momentum gas in the wind models,
which later on can be reincorporated in the galaxies, how-
ever, then its angular momentum is larger and thus build
up more disk-like structures (see also ¨Ubler et al. 2014).

3 THE MASS-SIZE RELATION

The mass of an ETG is observationally closely correlated
with its size, as shown, for example, by Shen et al. (2003)
for SDSS and by Baldry et al. (2012) for the GAMA sur-
vey. For our simulations, we use the three-dimensional half-
mass radius R1/2, that is the radius which contains half of

2 As the number of galaxies in the Magneticum simulation is so
much larger than the number of galaxies in both zoom simulation,
we do not need to weaken the criterion but rather decided to use
the stronger cut to ensure an uncontaminated selected sample of
ETGs without the necessity of a visual inspections.

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

Co-Evolution of Total Density Proﬁles and Central Dark Matter Fractions

5

Table 2. ETG Samples

ETG
Sample

Masscut
(z = 0)

Masscut
(z > 0)

NETG/Ngal NETG/Ngal NETG/Ngal NETG/Ngal

f (ǫcirc)

(z = 0)

(z = 0.5)

(z = 1)

(z = 2)

(|ǫcirc| 6 0.3)

M∗ > 5 × 1010M⊙

progenitors

Oser
Magneticum M∗ > 5 × 1010M⊙ M∗ > 5 × 1010M⊙
Wind

M∗ > 5 × 1010M⊙

(progenitors)

20/ 21
96/269
5/ 13

18/ 21
87/305
( 2/ 13)

12/ 21
56/298
( 1/ 13)

11/ 21
5/212
( 1/ 13)

35%
40%
35%

Figure 1. Mass-size relation at z = 0 for Magneticum ETGs (blue), Oser ETGs (red) and Wind ETGs (yellow) compared to the
mass-size relations for ETGs from the SDSS survey (left panel; Shen et al. 2003, black solid line) and from the GAMA survey (right
panel; Baldry et al. 2012, black dotted line). The shaded areas mark the 1σ-range of observations.

Figure 2. Same as Fig. 1 but at diﬀerent redshifts (left panel: z = 0.5; middle panel: z = 1; right panel: z = 2). The black dotted
line shows the relation from SDSS at z = 0 (Shen et al. 2003) for comparison in all panels. The black dashed lines in all three panels
show the mass-size relations found by van der Wel et al. (2014) at diﬀerent redshift bins. In the left panel, we include the relations from
van der Wel et al. (2014) at z = 0.25 (upper line) and z = 0.75 (lower line), the central panel includes their relations at z = 0.75 (upper
line) and z = 1.25 (lower line), and the right panel includes their relations at z = 1.75 (upper line) and z = 2.25 (lower line).

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

6

Remus et al.

the mass of the galaxy within 10% of the virial radius rvir,
to compare to the eﬀective radius reﬀ from observations.
This is the same deﬁnition used by Remus et al. (2013) and
other similar studies, and it might slightly but systemati-
cally overestimate the actual size of the galaxy compared to
the observations.

In Fig. 1 we show the mass-size relations from SDSS
by Shen et al. (2003) (left panel) and from GAMA by
Baldry et al. (2012) (right panel) for their ETGs in compar-
ison with the results from our simulations. Both the Oser
ETGs (red ﬁlled circles) and the Magneticum ETGs (blue
ﬁlled circles) are in good agreement with the SDSS observa-
tions at the high mass end, where the GAMA survey does
not have any data points. The Oser ETGs tend to be slightly
below the observed relation from SDSS, and are generally
more massive at the same sizes than their counterparts from
the Magneticum ETG sample. This most likely originates
from the fact that the simulations of the Magneticum ETGs
include black holes and their associated feedback, which are
not present in the Oser ETG simulations (Choi et al. 2015;
Crain et al. 2015).

Especially for the smaller masses, the Magneticum
ETGs are usually larger in size than the SDSS galaxies of
the same mass. In that mass regime, however, they are in
excellent agreement with the observations from the more re-
cent GAMA survey that shows a tilt in the mass-size relation
for smaller mass ETGs. This tilt was also found in a recent
re-analysis of the SDSS data by Mosleh et al. (2013), who
showed that the sizes of the smaller galaxies were under-
estimated in the previous study (see also Hall et al. 2012).
The ETGs from the Wind ETG sample (yellow ﬁlled
circles) have masses above M∗ > 2 × 1011M⊙ and are all
clearly below the observed mass-size relation. This is due
to the fact that, at the high mass end, the AGN feedback
becomes important, and counteracts the eﬀects of the stellar
feedback (see also Hirschmann et al. 2013). The comparison
of Magneticum ETGs and Wind ETGs clearly shows that
here the AGN feedback is the important missing ingredient
(see also Dubois et al. 2013).

2013;

2013;

the

same mass

Bezanson et al.

Szomoru et al.
van der Wel et al.

At higher redshifts, observations show that ETGs
tend to be smaller in size than their present-day coun-
(e.g., van Dokkum et al.
terparts of
2013;
2009;
van de Sande et al.
2014;
Marsan et al. 2015). Fig. 2 shows the mass-size rela-
tion for our simulated ETGs at diﬀerent redshifts of z = 0.5
(left panel), z = 1 (middle panel) and z = 2 (right panel).
For comparison, we included in each panel the mass-size
relations for ETGs from van der Wel et al. (2014) as dashed
black lines and the mass-size relations at z = 0 from SDSS
by Shen et al. (2003) as black dotted line. All simulations
predict the same shift in size towards more compact galaxies
at higher redshifts as seen in the observations, albeit we
only have very few galaxies at the high mass end at z ≈ 2
in our sample. Both, the Oser ETGs and the Magneticum
ETGs show the same behaviour, clearly stating that this is
independent of the subgrid models for feedback used in the
simulations (see Tab. 1). Nevertheless, both simulations are
shifted compared to each other, with the Oser ETGs slightly
below the Magneticum ETGs, already at high redshifts.
Again, the Magneticum ETGs are in better agreement with
the observations, but at the higher mass end the ETGs

from both simulations are more compact than the observed
relations from van der Wel et al. (2014) suggest. However,
note that compact ETGs have also been observed (see for
example van de Sande et al. 2013).

Another interesting aspect concerning Magneticum
ETGs is that the mass growth through dry (minor) merg-
ing, which shifts the ETGs strongly in size but not in mass
(Naab et al. 2009; Hilz et al. 2012, 2013), cannot be the only
mechanism for the formation of all ETGs that are observed
at z = 0, as the number of Magneticum ETGs is signiﬁ-
cantly lower at z = 2 than at z = 0 and therefore not all
those Magneticum ETGs at z = 0 can be grown from com-
pact ETG progenitors through dry minor merging. Other
processes such as late major merger events or ram-pressure
stripping in dense (galaxy cluster) environments can also
lead to the formation of ETGs. Thus, ETGs formed in these
ways do not necessarily need to follow the mass-size growth
relations predicted for the dry merging scenario.

4 CENTRAL DARK MATTER FRACTIONS

We calculate the central dark matter fractions within the
stellar half-mass radius, fDM, for all our galaxies. At z = 0
we ﬁnd a large scatter from less than fDM ≈ 10% up to
fDM ≈ 60%. The Oser ETGs show a much smaller scat-
ter in dark matter fractions than the Magneticum ETGs.
The Wind ETGs populate the same area as the Oser ETGs,
indicating that there is no obvious change due to the inclu-
sion of the momentum-driven stellar feedback in this aspect
for massive galaxies. This range is similar to the range of
dark matter fractions found by Koopmans et al. (2006) and
Barnab`e et al. (2011) from strong lensing (within diﬀerent
radii), and by Thomas et al. (2007), who estimate the cen-
tral dark matter fractions within the eﬀective radius from
dynamical modelling. It also agrees with the ﬁndings by
Courteau & Dutton (2015), who propose a range of dark
matter fractions within the eﬀective radius of fDM ≈ 10%
up to fDM ≈ 60% for ETGs, depending on whether the dark
halo has been adiabatically contracted or not.

At z = 0, we ﬁnd only a very weak correlation between
the stellar mass and the central dark matter fraction for
the Magneticum ETGs, but a noticeable tendency for more
massive galaxies to have higher central dark matter fractions
for the Oser ETGs, as shown in the upper left panel of Fig. 3.
The Wind ETGs have slightly lower central dark matter
fractions with respect to the stellar mass than both other
simulated samples; however, the sample size is too small to
see any possible correlations.

Contrary to the stellar mass, we ﬁnd a clear correla-
tion between the size of an ETG and its central dark mat-
ter fraction at z = 0: Smaller ETGs always have smaller
central dark matter fractions, as shown in the lower left
panel of Fig. 3. This trend is more pronounced for the Oser
ETGs than for the Magneticum ETGs. The Wind ETGs
show a similar behaviour as both the Oser ETGs and the
Magneticum ETGs.

For comparison, data from Thomas et al. (2007) are
included as
light green open circles, and data from
Barnab`e et al. (2011) are shown as green diamonds in the
upper left panel of Fig. 3. Similar to the Magneticum ETGs,
the observations reveal no clear correlation between the stel-

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

Co-Evolution of Total Density Proﬁles and Central Dark Matter Fractions

7

Figure 3. Stellar mass (M∗, upper panels) and half-mass radius (R1/2, lower panels) versus dark matter fractions within the half-mass
radius fDM for our simulated galaxies. Oser ETGs are shown as red ﬁlled circles, Wind ETGs as yellow ﬁlled circles, and Magneticum
ETGs as blue ﬁlled circles. From left to right: redshift as labeled. Upper left panel: For comparison, central dark matter fractions from
observations are shown, for Coma cluster ETGs as light green open circles (Thomas et al. 2007), and for SLACS lenses (Barnab`e et al.
2011, assuming a Chabrier IMF) as bright green diamonds. Lower panels: Linear ﬁts to the Magneticum ETGs and Oser ETGs are shown
in the corresponding colors.

lar mass and the central dark matter fractions. There are
several massive ETGs in the Coma sample with relatively
low dark matter fractions which have no counterpart in any
of our simulated samples of ETGs. This has already been
shown for the Oser ETGs by Remus et al. (2013), and the
discrepancy remains with the Magneticum ETGs. This could
be due to a selection eﬀect in both our simulated ETG
samples, namely to only include ETGs which are at the
centers of dark matter halos and no subhalos, whereas all
Coma cluster ETGs in this study are actually substructures
within the Coma Cluster host halo. Those substructures will
have suﬀered from environmental processes like tidal strip-
ping and harassment, which might inﬂuence the dark matter
fractions even in the central areas (Whitmore et al. 1988;
Dolag et al. 2009; Limousin et al. 2009; Shu et al. 2015;
Parry et al. 2016). Unfortunately, none of our simulations
include a massive galaxy cluster like Coma to test this hy-
pothesis.

At higher redshifts, the dark matter fractions are gener-
ally lower than at z = 0. At z = 2, the highest central dark
matter fraction for the Magneticum ETGs is fDM ≈ 15%.
For the Oser ETGs there are two galaxies which have higher
fractions, but they are still below fDM < 30%. The major-
ity of ETGs in both simulation samples have central dark
matter fractions of fDM ≈ 10% or less, and the scatter is
small. The average central dark matter fractions at z = 2
are hfDMi = (10 ± 5)% and hfDMi = (11 ± 6)% for the

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

Magneticum and Oser ETGs, respectively, in comparison to
hfDMi = (36 ± 10)% and hfDMi = (27 ± 8)% at z = 0.
This agrees with results from Toft et al. (2012) who report
dark matter fractions of fDM = (18 ± 20)% for their sam-
ple of massive compact quiescent galaxies at z = 2 and
fDM = (46 ± 23)% for their comparison sample of local
ETGs. Similarly, Tortora et al. (2014b) found for their ob-
served ETGs at redshifts up to z ≈ 0.8 that the high-redshift
ETGs have signiﬁcantly smaller central dark matter frac-
tions than their low redshift counterparts.

The other three upper panels (from left to right) of
Fig. 3 show the stellar mass versus central dark matter frac-
tions for our simulated galaxies at diﬀerent redshifts, for
z = 0.5, z = 1, and z = 2, respectively, and the lower three
panels show the halfmass radius versus the central dark mat-
ter fraction, correspondingly. While there is still no clear
correlation between stellar mass and central dark matter
fractions even at higher redshifts but a general slight ten-
dency for more massive systems to have slightly larger dark
matter fractions, the correlation between central dark mat-
ter fractions and size is present at all redshifts. The growth
in size and dark matter fractions follows a linear relation
R1/2 = AfDM + B valid for all redshifts, which is shown
as blue (red) dashed line for the Magneticum ETGs (Oser
ETGs) in all four lower panels of Fig. 3. Those ﬁts were
made to the full sample of Magneticum ETGs (Oser ETGs)
at all four redshifts together, and we clearly see that, apart

8

Remus et al.

Figure 4. The fraction of stars formed in-situ versus the fraction
of dark matter within the half-mass radius for the Oser ETGs at
z = 0.

from the larger Oser ETGs at z = 2, all our galaxies are well
represented by the lines independent of their redshift This
suggests that the growth mechanisms for the central dark
matter fractions and the galaxy sizes are much stronger cor-
related than with the mass growth.. The ﬁtting parameters
A and B for both curves can be found in Tab. 3. Note that,
while the Wind ETGs did not ﬁt at all at the mass-size re-
lation at z = 0, they nevertheless still fall on the R1/2–fDM
relation.

This could be interpreted as a direct eﬀect of the mass
growth of galaxies through (minor) merger events: Hilz et al.
(2012) showed that an increase in mass by a factor of 2
through minor merger events enhances the central dark
matter fraction by about 80%, while one equal mass ma-
jor merger event only increases the dark matter fraction by
25%. Accordingly, the growth in size is much larger in case
of multiple minor mergers than for a major merger, thus
explaining the much tighter correlation between dark mat-
ter fraction and size and the lacking correlation in mass.
Both types of merger can thus also explain the observed in-
crease in central dark matter fractions with decreasing red-
shift. In addition, recent merger events can also cause stellar
outwards migration (Hirschmann et al. 2015), which would
also lead to an increase in the central dark matter fractions.
The fact that this increase is seen in both of our simulation
samples again indicates that these trends are not caused by
numerical artefacts but are due to the underlying physics of
accretion through merger events.

This becomes even more clear when we compare the in-
situ fraction of the simulated ETGs at z = 0 with their cen-
tral dark matter fractions, as shown in Fig. 4 for the Oser
ETGs, using the in-situ fractions obtained by Oser et al.
(2012). The central dark matter fraction is anti-correlated
with the in-situ fraction such that galaxies with lower cen-
tral dark matter fractions have higher in-situ fractions,
while ETGs with high central dark matter fractions have

only about fin-situ ≈ 20% or less. This again supports the
idea that (mostly) dry merging is the main driver of mass
growth for those galaxies that were already ETGs at about
z ≈ 2, since dry merging also reduces the fraction of stars
formed in-situ while simultaneously enhancing the central
dark matter fraction. But note that the insitu fractions are
most likely strongly underestimated in the Oser ETGs, at
least compared to abundance matching predictions (see e.g.,
Hirschmann et al. 2013).

5 TOTAL DENSITY PROFILE SLOPES

We ﬁt the total (i.e., stellar plus dark matter) radial density
proﬁles of our ETGs by a single power law with a slope of

γ =

d log(ρ)
d log(r)

.

(2)

These ﬁts have been shown to be a reasonable description
of the density proﬁles for the Oser ETGs by Remus et al.
(2013) and for the Magneticum ETGs by Remus et al.
(2015b). In the following we will study these slopes in more
detail and link them to the quantities studied before, espe-
cially the central dark matter fractions.

5.1 Total Density Slope Evolution with Redshift

At low redshifts we ﬁnd the total radial density proﬁles
of most of our simulated ETGs to be close to isothermal,
i.e., γtot ≈ −2. This was already shown for the Oser ETGs
by Remus et al. (2013), and turns out to be the case for
the Magneticum ETGs as well. As can be seen in Fig. 5,
the Magneticum ETGs tend to have ﬂatter slopes (black
histograms), with an average of hγtoti = −2.05 ± 0.13,
than the Oser ETGs, which have a mean value of hγtoti =
−2.30±0.28. The Wind ETGs have generally steeper density
slopes of hγtoti = −2.56 ± 0.03. At higher redshifts, both the
Oser and Magneticum ETGs have generally steeper slopes
than at low redshifts, although the Oser ETGs always show
steeper slopes than the Magneticum ETGs. Nevertheless,
even if the actual values for the mean total density slopes for
the Oser ETGs are smaller than for the Magneticum ETGs
at each redshift bin, the general evolutionary trends are the
same. As shown by the red and blue lines in Fig. 5, the
evolution of the average total density slopes hγtoti in both
simulated samples of ETGS follows a linear correlation with
z, i.e., hγtoti = A z + B, with very similar values for A found
for both simulations (A = −0.21 for the Magneticum ETGs,
A = −0.27 for the Oser ETGs, see also Tab. 3 for the ﬁt pa-
rameters). A similar evolutionary trend was also found by
Johansson et al. (2012) for their set of re-simulations. The
generally ﬂatter average slopes of the Magneticum ETGs
compared to the Oser ETGs at all redshifts originate most
likely from the additional feedback included in the Mag-
neticum simulations, especially the AGN feedback (see also
Dubois et al. 2013). However, the diﬀerent feedback mod-
els do not cause a change in the general trends of the total
density slopes with redshift.

While both our simulated samples of Magneticum
ETGs and Oser ETGs clearly show that at higher red-
shifts the total density slopes γtot were steeper than at

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

Co-Evolution of Total Density Proﬁles and Central Dark Matter Fractions

9

Figure 5. Total density proﬁle power-law slopes versus lookback time for the ETGs from the Magneticum simulation, with total masses
above M∗ > 5 × 1010M⊙ shown as black histograms at each time-bin. The evolution of the density slope for the Oser ETGs is shown as
red ﬁlled circles, the average value for the Wind ETGs is shown as yellow ﬁlled circle. For the Magneticum ETGs and Oser ETGs, linear
ﬁts in redshift are included in the corresponding color as solid lines (see Tab. 3 for the ﬁtting parameters). The observations are shown as
colored symbols: Light green open circles show the observations for the Coma Cluster ETGs from Thomas et al. (2007) at z ≈ 0.02. Dark
green open circles show observations from the SLUGGS survey from Cappellari et al. (2015) for their set of very nearby galaxies. All
other observations are from strong lensing: SLACS lenses (blue open diamonds, Auger et al. 2010), SL2S lenses (magenta open diamonds:
Ruﬀ et al. 2011; and lilac ﬁlled diamonds: Sonnenfeld et al. 2013), and LSD lenses (green ﬁlled diamonds, Treu & Koopmans 2004).

lower redshifts, the observations indicate a diﬀerent be-
haviour. Sonnenfeld et al. (2013) demonstrated that the
power-law slopes of the radial density proﬁles inferred from
observations of strong lensing ETGs are ﬂatter at higher
redshifts than at low redshifts. In a subsequent paper,
Sonnenfeld et al. (2014) argued that merger events at low
redshifts thus must contain a signiﬁcant amount of cold gas
to steepen the slope. Fig. 5 highlights the tension between
simulations and observations, showing the observations as
colored symbols. While the total density slopes found for
the Oser ETGs at high redshifts are all much steeper than
the observed ones, the Magneticum ETG sample actually
includes galaxies with total density slopes as ﬂat as the ob-
served ones even at higher redshifts. This is mainly due to
the fact that the Magneticum ETG sample is selected from a
full cosmological box, and thus also includes massive evolved
galaxies even at redshifts as high as z = 2 which are the pro-
genitors of the most massive galaxies at z = 0.

Even though there are ETGs in the Magneticum ETG

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

sample which show similarly ﬂat slopes as the observations
at high redshifts, they are nevertheless outliers. We can spec-
ulate about three possible explanations for this discrepancy:
First, it might be possible that, at high redshifts, the most
massive galaxies have a higher probability to be a gravita-
tionally lensing galaxy, and thus the observational sample is
biased towards more evolved systems. Second, there might
be a major problem in our simulations and the underlying
theoretical framework. Third, there could be an issue with
the calculation of the total density slopes from observations.
Unfortunately, to conclusively solve the origin of this dis-
crepancy is beyond the scope of this work.

5.2 Correlating Galaxy Properties with the Total

Density Slope

The central dark matter fractions fDM correlate with the
in-situ fractions fin-situ of the ETGs (Fig. 4), and the in-situ
fractions show a correlation with the total density slope γtot

10

Remus et al.

Figure 6. Total mass density proﬁle slopes γtot versus stellar mass surface densities Σ∗ (ﬁrst column), versus central dark matter
fractions fDM (second column), versus stellar mass M∗ (third column), and versus half-mass radius R1/2 (fourth column). Rows: From
top to bottom: z = 0, z = 0.5, z = 1, z = 2. Magneticum ETGs are shown as blue circles, Oser ETGs as red circles, and Wind ETGs as
yellow circles. Dashed blue and red lines show ﬁts to the Magneticum ETGs and Oser ETGs, respectively, with the ﬁt parameters listed
in Tab. 3.

(Fig. 10 in Remus et al. 2013). Therefore, there should also
exist a correlation between the central dark matter fractions
and total density slope γtot. The second column of Fig. 6
shows γtot versus fDM, for the Magneticum ETGs (blue cir-
cles) and the Oser ETGs (red circles) at diﬀerent redshifts
(z = 0, z = 0.5, z = 1, and z = 2 from top to bottom).
We ﬁnd a clear correlation between both quantities for both
samples of ETGs, in the sense that ETGs with a ﬂatter slope
have larger central dark matter fractions. However, the cor-
relations have very diﬀerent slopes: While the Oser ETGs
show a steep, nearly linear increase in γtot with increasing
fDM, the Magneticum ETGs show a strong increase in γtot
for small changes in fDM at low central dark matter frac-
tions, and a ﬂattening of the correlation above fDM ≈ 20%,
where the slopes only change slightly, and are on average
already close to isothermal.

Another interesting observational quantity to compare

to is the eﬀective stellar mass surface density, deﬁned as

Σ∗ =

M∗
2πr2
eﬀ

(3)

following Sonnenfeld et al. (2013), which can be considered
as a measurement of the concentration of the stellar com-
ponent: the smaller Σ∗, the less concentrated a galaxy. We
calculated Σ∗ for our simulated halos, using the stellar half-
mass radius instead of the eﬀective radius in Eq. 3, and ﬁnd
a clear correlation with the total density slope (see left col-
umn of Fig. 6) for both simulation samples: More compact
galaxies have steeper total density slopes. Most of the Oser
ETGs are much more concentrated than the Magneticum
ETGs. This is due to the missing AGN feedback in the Oser
ETG simulations, as the AGN feedback suppresses the star

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

Co-Evolution of Total Density Proﬁles and Central Dark Matter Fractions

11

Table 3. Fitting parameters

γtot = Az + B

R1/2 = AfDM + B

γtot = A fDM + B

γtot = A log(Σ∗) + B

fDM = A ΣB

∗

γtot = A log(R1/2) + B

Oser
ETGs

−0.27
−2.33

0.33
−2.87

0.03
−3.20

−0.57
3.06

Magneticum

ETGs

−0.21
−2.03

0.21
−0.28

0.01
−2.52

−0.38
1.32

A
B

A
B

A
B

A
B

A 2.73 × 1012
B

−2.05

A
B

0.71
−2.83

6.70 × 1010

−1.30

0.69
−2.61

Dark matter fractions fDM are calculated within the half-mass
radius R1/2. The parameters A and B are in the according units
of M⊙ and kpc.

formation in the center of the galaxies. The Wind ETGs,
which also do not have AGN feedback, are similarly com-
pact as the Oser ETGs; however, their total density slopes
are all very steep, which shows that the stellar feedback has
a much stronger inﬂuence on the total density slope than on
the concentration.

The third column of Fig. 6 shows the total density slope
γtot versus the stellar mass M∗ at z = 0, z = 0.5, z = 1, and
z = 2 (from top to bottom). We ﬁnd a much weaker trend
between the slopes of the total density proﬁles and the stellar
masses for the Magneticum ETGs than for the Oser ETGs.
This holds true for all redshifts, and is also a result of the ad-
ditional AGN feedback that is included in the Magneticum
ETGs. In this correlation, the inﬂuence of the stellar feed-
back can be seen best, as the Wind ETGs here clearly devi-
ate from the correlations found for the Oser ETGs, namely
their total density proﬁles are steeper for a given stellar
mass, while they agree with the Oser ETGs for all the other
correlations at z = 0. This is due to the fact that the stel-
lar feedback enhances the fraction of stars formed in situ
while simultaneously lowering the fraction of accreted stars
(see Hirschmann et al. 2013), and higher in situ fractions
correlate with steeper total density slopes (see Remus et al.
2013). On the contrary, the AGN feedback has the opposite
eﬀect of the stellar feedback: While it suppresses the star
formation at the center, it enhances the amount of accreted
stars at lower redshifts (e.g., Dubois et al. 2013), and also
leads to ﬂatter total density slopes at a given stellar mass.
For the half-mass radii R1/2 we see a clear correla-
tion with the total density slopes γtot for both simulations.
As shown by the rightmost column of Fig. 6, at all red-
shifts (from z = 2 to z = 0, bottom to top) the galax-
ies are distributed along the correlation deﬁned by the
overall evolution (colored lines) which can be described as
γtot = A log(R1/2) + B. Interestingly, both the Magneticum
and Oser ETGs lead to almost identical correlations, diﬀer-
ing only by a small oﬀset B (see Tab. 3). The Wind ETGs at

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

z = 0 are again roughly in agreement with the Oser ETGs,
indicating that the oﬀset in the relations found for the Mag-
neticum ETGs and the Oser ETGs originates from the in-
cluded AGN and not from the stellar feedback.

A similar behaviour can be seen for the evolution of
the correlation between the total density slopes γtot and the
stellar mass surface density Σ∗ as well as the correlation
between the total density slopes γtot and the central dark
matter fractions fDM. Both the Magneticum ETGs and Oser
ETGs evolve with redshift along a path that can be esti-
mated by ﬁtting to all galaxies at all redshifts for the respec-
tive simulation sets. The correlations can be well described
by γtot = A log(Σ∗) + B and γtot = A fDM + B (ﬁtting pa-
rameters see Tab. 3, and blue and red dashed lines in the
ﬁrst and second rows of Fig. 6). This can also be seen in
the upper rows of Fig. 7, where we show γtot versus fDM
(left column) and γtot versus Σ∗ (middle column), including
the Magneticum ETGs and Oser ETGs at all four redshift
bins. The ﬁts are a good representation of the galaxies at
all redshifts, and we again see the co-evolution of all three
quantities with redshift. The Wind ETGs show a similar be-
haviour to the Magneticum ETGs and Oser ETGs, however,
they tend to follow the ﬁts found for the Oser ETGs and
not those for the Magneticum ETGs. This suggests that the
slight diﬀerences seen for the trends for Magneticum ETGs
and Oser ETGs originate mostly from the impact of the in-
cluded AGN feedback and not from the stellar feedback. For
completeness, we show the stellar mass density Σ∗ versus the
central dark matter fraction fDM in the upper right panel of
Fig. 7. As expected, there is a clear tendency for ETGs with
larger fDM to be less compact, and while this is supported
by both the Magneticum ETGs and the Oser ETGs, there is
a clear oﬀset between the actual values of both simulations.
Of these three evolutionary trends, the correlation between
fDM and γtot is the tightest, and is thus best suited for com-
parison to observations to constrain diﬀerent AGN feedback
models.

These evolutionary trends support the idea that, after
about z = 2, the evolution of ETGs becomes more domi-
nated by merger events, which enhance the central dark mat-
ter fractions, lead to stronger growth in size than in mass,
and evolve the total density slope towards an isothermal so-
lution through dynamical friction and violent relaxation. In
summary, we ﬁnd that simulations show clear evidence for
a co-evolution of γtot, Σ∗, and fDM with a relation that is
independent of redshift. While the relations are similar, the
slopes for these correlations are diﬀerent for diﬀerent sets of
simulation models, and therefore we suggest that they can
be used as a test for diﬀerent feedback models.

5.3 Comparison to Observations

We compare the correlations found between γtot, fDM, and
Σ∗ to observations from strong lensing as well as dynamical
modelling. This is shown in the lower panels of Fig. 7, to-
gether with the correlations for the Magneticum ETGs and
Oser ETGs (blue and red dashed lines, respectively, as in
the upper three panels of the same ﬁgure).

The lower left panel of Fig. 7 shows γtot versus fDM.
The observations from strong lensing (SLACS sample,
Barnab`e et al. 2011) and dynamical modelling (COMA clus-
ter ETGs, Thomas et al. 2007, and SPIDER and ATLAS3D,

12

Remus et al.

Figure 7. Correlations between central dark matter fractions fDM, total mass density slopes γtot and stellar mass surface density Σ∗.
Left panels: Total density slopes γtot versus central dark matter fractions fDM. Middle panels: Total density slopes γtot versus stellar
mass surface density Σ∗. Right panels: Stellar mass surface density Σ∗ versus central dark matter fractions fDM. The upper panels
show the simulations: Magneticum ETGs at z = 0 (blue ﬁlled circles) and z > 0 (light blue open circles), Oser ETGs at z = 0 (red
ﬁlled circles) and z > 0 (open light red circles), and Wind ETGs at z = 0 (yellow circles). The blue and red dashed lines represent ﬁts
to the total populations of the Magneticum ETGs and Oser ETGs at all four redshifts, respectively; see Tab. 3 for the parameters of
the ﬁts. The lower panels show observations on top of the ﬁts to the Magneticum ETGs and Oser ETGs from the upper panels. Black
squares are taken from the SPIDER and ATLAS3D surveys from Tortora et al. (2014a), light green open circles show the results for the
COMA cluster ETGs from (Thomas et al. 2007), and green open diamonds mark the results for SLACS lenses (Barnab`e et al. 2011). In
the central panel, additional observational results from strong lensing are included: SLACS lenses from Auger et al. (2010) (light blue
diamonds), SL2S lenses from Ruﬀ et al. (2011) (magenta open diamonds) and Sonnenfeld et al. (2013) (purple ﬁlled diamonds), and
LSD lenses from Treu & Koopmans (2004) (ﬁlled light green diamonds).

Tortora et al. 2014a) are included as open green diamonds,
open light green circles and open black squares, respectively.
They reveal a very good agreement with the correlation
found for the Magneticum ETGs, while their match with
the Oser ETGs is rather poor. The strongest deviations are
present for the Coma Cluster ETGs, which show a much
larger scatter than the other observations and our simula-
tions, as they include a subset of ETGs which have extremely
high masses and ﬂat total density slopes but low central
dark matter fractions. As discussed before, this could be an
environmental eﬀect, since those galaxies all reside inside
a massive galaxy cluster environment as satellite galaxies.
The Magneticum ETGs are in excellent agreement with the
observations from SPIDER and ATLAS3D (Tortora et al.
2014a). This result clearly highlights the importance of AGN
feedback for the evolution of ETGs.

The middle panel of Fig. 7 shows γtot versus Σ∗ com-
pared to all strong lensing observations (see Fig. 5) in addi-
tion to the Coma Cluster ETGs from Thomas et al. (2007).
Generally, Sonnenfeld et al. (2013) but also Auger et al.
(2010) report for their observations, that ETGs with more

concentrated stellar components have steeper total density
proﬁles well in agreement with the correlation found in the
simulations. The trend seen for the observations is much
weaker than the relations found from both of our simula-
tions, but it agrees best with the results from strong lens-
ing presented by Sonnenfeld et al. (2013) (purple ﬁlled di-
amonds). This is especially interesting since the evolution
found for the total density slope with redshift from these
strong lensing observations is so diﬀerent from that found
in the simulations. That indicates that there might be some
selection bias towards galaxies with ﬂatter slopes at higher
redshift in the observations.

In the right panel of Fig. 7, Σ∗ versus fDM is shown
compared to the Coma cluster ETGs from Thomas et al.
(2007) (open light green circles) and the strong lensing re-
sults from Barnab`e et al. (2011) (open green diamonds). In
this case, the agreement between observations and simu-
lations is rather poor. Nevertheless, for the Coma cluster
ETGs the match is again much worse for the Oser ETGs
than for the Magneticum ETGs. For the strong lensing data,
the Oser ETGs are in better agreement for the ETGs with

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

Co-Evolution of Total Density Proﬁles and Central Dark Matter Fractions

13

lower redshifts. At z = 0, we identify 96 out of 269 galaxies
as ETGs.

The second set of 20 ETGs is selected from the sample
of cosmological zoom simulations presented by Oser et al.
(2010). At each timesteps analysed in this work, the Oser
ETGs are the progenitors of the 20 ETGs selected at z = 0.
At z = 0, we include a third set of simulations, namely
5 ETGs selected from a sample of galaxy zoom-in simula-
tions which include a momentum-driven stellar feedback and
metal evolution model but no feedback from AGNs. As that
simulation sample did not form ETGs at higher redshifts,
we only include them at z = 0. All samples, however, are
limited to central halo galaxies, excluding ETGs which are
substructures.

We study the evolution of the mass-size relation with
redshift and ﬁnd a generally good agreement with the obser-
vations, at all redshifts. At low redshifts, our relations found
from the simulated ETGs at the high mass end are in good
agreement with the mass-size relation found for the SDSS
sample by Shen et al. (2003), while at the lower mass range
the simulations more closely resemble the results from the
GAMA survey (Baldry et al. 2012), which is focussed espe-
cially on the low mass end of the galaxy mass function. Both
simulated samples of ETGs show a similar scatter around
the relation as well as similar evolution trends for the high
redshift ETGs to have smaller sizes, but the Magneticum
ETGs are generally less massive than the Oser ETGs of the
same size at all redshifts. This is due to the fact that the
Oser ETGs do not include a central black hole and the as-
sociated AGN feedback, which, in case of the Magneticum
ETGs, eﬃciently prevents the overcooling problem by heat-
ing part of the cold gas in the centers of the galaxies during
their evolution. In comparison, the Wind ETGs show smaller
sizes at comparable masses at the high mass end as the Oser
ETGs, which is due to the lack of AGN feedback and an
even stronger overproduction of stars in the center due to
metal cooling and late re-accretion of previously blown-out
gas, overall increasing the in-situ fraction and lowering the
fraction of accreted stellar material (see Hirschmann et al.
2013).

Additionally, we analyse the evolution of the central
dark matter fraction of ETGs. We ﬁnd that the central
dark matter fractions generally decrease with redshift for
all our ETG samples, in good agreement with recent ob-
servational results by Tortora et al. (2014b). While there is
only a weak correlation with the masses of the galaxies, the
central dark matter fractions clearly correlate with the sizes
of the ETGs. Furthermore, we ﬁnd a strong anti-correlation
between the central dark matter fraction and the in-situ
fraction of ETGs, i.e., ETGs with high central dark mat-
ter fractions have only very little stars formed in situ. This
is a natural consequence of the late growth through (dry)
merger events (Hilz et al. 2012, 2013).

As shown by Remus et al. (2013), the in-situ fractions
also correlate with the slopes γtot of the total (stellar plus
dark matter) radial density proﬁles. These slopes are on av-
erage close to γtot ≈ −2, indicating that the ETGs are close
to isothermal. However, they show a large scatter and can
be as steep as γtot ≈ −3. Interestingly, we ﬁnd clear correla-
tions between the steepness of the total density slopes and
other quantities studied in this work:

Figure 8. Total mass density slopes γtot versus stellar mass
M∗ at z = 0, but with observations from the SPIDER and
ATLAS3D surveys from Tortora et al. (2014a) included as black
open squares for comparison. Simulations are shown as blue (Mag-
neticum ETGs), red (Oser ETGs) and yellow (Wind ETGs) cir-
cles.

higher central dark matter fractions. However, the general
trends in simulations and observations agree, especially for
the Magneticum ETGs, and therefore support the evolution-
ary trend found from the simulations.

One last but very interesting comparison between ob-
servations and simulations is shown in Fig. 8. Here we show
the slopes of the total density proﬁles γtot versus the stellar
mass M∗ at z = 0 for all our simulations, and compare
the result with observations from Tortora et al. (2014a),
shown as black open squares. While the Oser ETGs show
a strong trend between the slope of the density proﬁle and
the stellar mass, the Magneticum ETGs only show a much
weaker trend. As can be seen, the observations are in excel-
lent agreement with the Magneticum ETGs, which clearly
demonstrates that the AGN feedback is an essential ingre-
dient for properly modelling the higher-mass ETGs. This
is also in agreement with the results from the recent work
by Forbes et al. (2016) from the SLUGGS survey, who also
ﬁnd only a very weak trend between the stellar mass and
the total density slopes of their ETGs.

6 SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

We analyse ETGs selected from three diﬀerent simulation
sets over a redshift range from 0 < z < 2 to study the evo-
lution of the central dark matter fractions and the slopes
of the total density proﬁles. The ﬁrst set of ETGs are
selected from the hydrodynamic cosmological box simula-
tion Magneticum. For this ensemble of galaxies, we iden-
tify at each timestep all galaxies more massive than M∗ =
5 × 1010M⊙, and select those which classify as ETGs follow-
ing Teklu et al. (2015). The ETGs at high redshift can, but
do not necessarily need to, be the progenitors of ETGs at

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

14

Remus et al.

• A tight co-evolution exists between the central dark
matter fractions and the slopes of the total density pro-
ﬁles: Galaxies with larger central dark matter fractions
have ﬂatter slopes. This co-evolution can be described as
γtot = AfDM + B and holds for all systems at all redshifts,
independent of the diﬀerent feedback models.

• The values for A and B change distinctively with the
assumed feedback model, and thus this relation can be used
as a test for feedback models.

• A similar correlation exists between γtot and the stellar
mass surface density Σ∗, in that compact ETGs tend to
have steeper total density slopes than their more extended
counterparts.

This is in agreement with observations from strong lens-
ing (e.g., Sonnenfeld et al. 2013) and dynamical modelling
(Tortora et al. 2014a). As expected, the model with weak
stellar feedback and, in particular, feedback from black holes
is in better agreement with observations.

All simulations, independent of the assumed feedback
model, predict steeper total density slopes and lower dark
matter fractions at higher redshifts. While the latter is in
agreement with the observed trends, the former is inconsis-
tent with current lensing observations (Treu & Koopmans
2004; Auger et al. 2010; Ruﬀ et al. 2011; Sonnenfeld et al.
2013) who ﬁnd no changes in the total density slopes with
redshift, or,
if any, a tendency towards ﬂatter slopes at
higher redshifts. This discrepancy cannot be solved by any of
the tested feedback models and therefore remains a matter
of debate.

In summary, we ﬁnd clear indications from all sets of
simulations for the two-phase evolution scenario for central
ETGs: At high redshift, gas dominates the mass growth of
(early-type) galaxies, thus many stars are formed in situ
and only few are accreted. The gas dissipates its energy and
sinks to the center of the potential well where it forms the
stars in a compact central structure, thus the dark matter
fractions are small and the total density slopes are steeper.
At lower redshifts, (dry) merger events of all mass ratios
start to dominate the mass growth of the galaxies, leading
to an enhanced growth in size compared to the growth in
mass, as mass is mostly added to the outskirts (apart from
the rare major merger events which actually mix the whole
galaxy). This leads to a growth of the central dark matter
fraction, a ﬂattening of the total density slopes and a de-
crease of the in-situ fraction of stars. Indeed, we ﬁnd a very
close correlation between the central dark matter fractions
and the slopes of the total radial density proﬁles of ETGs at
all redshifts. Thus, we conclude that the central dark matter
fractions and the slopes of the total radial density proﬁles
of ETGs are good indicators for the amount of dry merging
events a galaxy has undergone.

Generally, we ﬁnd that the AGN feedback leads to less
compact ETGs with higher central dark matter fractions
and ﬂatter slopes of the total density proﬁles. Therefore,
the co-evolution of both quantities can be used as a test
for feedback models, as the slopes of this correlation, albeit
constant in time, diﬀer depending on the included feedback
mechanisms.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank St´ephane Courteau and Crescenzo Tortora
for helpful discussions and comments. The Magneticum
Pathﬁnder simulations were partially performed at the
Leibniz-Rechenzentrum with CPU time assigned to the
Project “pr86re”. This work was supported by the DFG
Cluster of Excellence “Origin and Structure of the Uni-
verse”. We are especially grateful for the support by M.
Petkova through the Computational Center for Particle and
Astrophysics (C2PAP). TN acknowledges support by the
DFG priority program 1573. MH acknowledges ﬁnancial sup-
port from the European Research Council via an Advanced
Grant under grant agreement no. 321323 NEOGAL. PHJ
acknowledges the support of the Academy of Finland grant
1274931.

REFERENCES

Auger, M. W., Treu, T., Bolton, A. S., et al. 2010, ApJ,

724, 511

Baldry, I. K., Driver, S. P., Loveday, J., et al. 2012, MN-

RAS, 421, 621

Barnab`e, M., Czoske, O., Koopmans, L. V. E., Treu, T., &

Bolton, A. S. 2011, MNRAS, 415, 2215

Beck, A. M., Murante, G., Arth, A., et al. 2016, MNRAS,

455, 2110

Bezanson, R., van Dokkum, P. G., Tal, T., et al. 2009, ApJ,

697, 1290

Bezanson, R., van Dokkum, P. G., van de Sande, J., et al.

2013, ApJL, 779, L21

Bocquet, S., Saro, A., Dolag, K., & Mohr, J. J. 2016, MN-

RAS, 456, 2361

Bolton, A. S., Brownstein, J. R., Kochanek, C. S., et al.

2012, ApJ, 757, 82

Cappellari, M., Romanowsky, A. J., Brodie, J. P., et al.

2015, ApJL, 804, L21

Cappellari, M., Scott, N., Alatalo, K., et al. 2013, MNRAS,

432, 1709

Choi, E., Ostriker, J. P., Naab, T., Oser, L., & Moster,

B. P. 2015, MNRAS, 449, 4105

Courteau, S. & Dutton, A. A. 2015, ApJL, 801, L20
Crain, R. A., Schaye, J., Bower, R. G., et al. 2015, MNRAS,

450, 1937

Das, P., Gerhard, O., Mendez, R. H., Teodorescu, A. M.,

& de Lorenzi, F. 2011, MNRAS, 415, 1244

Deason, A. J., Belokurov, V., Evans, N. W., & McCarthy,

I. G. 2012, ApJ, 748, 2

Dolag, K., Borgani, S., Murante, G., & Springel, V. 2009,

MNRAS, 399, 497

Dolag, K., Jubelgas, M., Springel, V., Borgani, S., & Rasia,

E. 2004, ApJL, 606, L97

Dolag, K., Vazza, F., Brunetti, G., & Tormen, G. 2005,

MNRAS, 364, 753

Donnert, J., Dolag, K., Brunetti, G., & Cassano, R. 2013,

MNRAS, 429, 3564

Dubois, Y., Gavazzi, R., Peirani, S., & Silk, J. 2013, MN-

RAS, 433, 3297

Dutton, A. A., Macci`o, A. V., Mendel, J. T., & Simard, L.

2013, MNRAS, 432, 2496

Fabjan, D., Borgani, S., Tornatore, L., et al. 2010, MNRAS,

401, 1670

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

Co-Evolution of Total Density Proﬁles and Central Dark Matter Fractions

15

Forbes, D. A., Romanowsky, A. J., Pastorello, N., et al.

Oser, L., Ostriker, J. P., Naab, T., Johansson, P. H., &

2016, ArXiv e-prints [arXiv:1601.02597]

Burkert, A. 2010, ApJ, 725, 2312

Furlong, M., Bower, R. G., Crain, R. A., et al. 2015, ArXiv

Parry, W. G., Grillo, C., Mercurio, A., et al. 2016, MN-

e-prints [arXiv:1510.05645]

RAS[arXiv:1602.02753]

Gerhard, O., Kronawitter, A., Saglia, R. P., & Bender, R.

Planck Collaboration, Ade, P. A. R., Aghanim, N., et al.

2001, AJ, 121, 1936

Guo, Q. & White, S. D. M. 2008, MNRAS, 384, 2
Haardt, F. & Madau, P. 1996, ApJ, 461, 20
Hall, M., Courteau, S., Dutton, A. A., McDonald, M., &

Zhu, Y. 2012, MNRAS, 425, 2741

2013, A&A, 550, A131

Pointecouteau, E., Arnaud, M., & Pratt, G. W. 2005, A&A,

435, 1

Pratt, G. W. & Arnaud, M. 2005, A&A, 429, 791
Remus, R.-S., Burkert, A., Dolag, K., et al. 2013, ApJ, 766,

Hilz, M., Naab, T., & Ostriker, J. P. 2013, MNRAS, 429,

71

2924

Hilz, M., Naab, T., Ostriker, J. P., et al. 2012, MNRAS,

425, 3119

Hirschmann, M., Dolag, K., Saro, A., et al. 2014, MNRAS,

442, 2304

Hirschmann, M., Naab, T., Dav´e, R., et al. 2013, MNRAS,

436, 2929

Hirschmann, M., Naab, T., Ostriker, J. P., et al. 2015, MN-

RAS, 449, 528

Hirschmann, M., Naab, T., Somerville, R. S., Burkert, A.,

& Oser, L. 2012, MNRAS, 419, 3200

Humphrey, P. J. & Buote, D. A. 2010, MNRAS, 403, 2143
Johansson, P. H., Naab, T., & Ostriker, J. P. 2009, ApJL,

697, L38

Johansson, P. H., Naab, T., & Ostriker, J. P. 2012, ApJ,

754, 115

Katz, N., Weinberg, D. H., & Hernquist, L. 1996, ApJS,

105, 19

Komatsu, E., Smith, K. M., Dunkley, J., et al. 2011, ApJS,

192, 18

Koopmans, L. V. E., Treu, T., Bolton, A. S., Burles, S., &

Moustakas, L. A. 2006, ApJ, 649, 599

La Barbera, F., de Carvalho, R. R., de La Rosa, I. G., et al.

2010, MNRAS, 408, 1313

Limousin, M., Sommer-Larsen, J., Natarajan, P., &

Milvang-Jensen, B. 2009, ApJ, 696, 1771

Marsan, Z. C., Marchesini, D., Brammer, G. B., et al. 2015,

ApJ, 801, 133

Martin, C. L. 2005, ApJ, 621, 227
McDonald, M., Benson, B. A., Vikhlinin, A., et al. 2014,

ApJ, 794, 67

Mosleh, M., Williams, R. J., & Franx, M. 2013, ApJ, 777,

117

Moster, B. P., Naab, T., & White, S. D. M. 2013, MNRAS,

428, 3121

Moster, B. P., Somerville, R. S., Maulbetsch, C., et al. 2010,

ApJ, 710, 903

Naab, T., Johansson, P. H., & Ostriker, J. P. 2009, ApJL,

699, L178

Naab, T., Johansson, P. H., Ostriker, J. P., & Efstathiou,

G. 2007, ApJ, 658, 710

Remus, R.-S., Dolag, K., Bachmann, L. K., et al. 2015a,
in IAU Symposium, Vol. 309, Galaxies in 3D across the
Universe, ed. B. L. Ziegler, F. Combes, H. Dannerbauer,
& M. Verdugo, 145–148

Remus, R.-S., Dolag, K., & Burkert, A. 2015b, in IAU Sym-
posium, Vol. 311, Galaxy Masses as Constraints of For-
mation Models, ed. M. Cappellari & S. Courteau, 116–119
Ruﬀ, A. J., Gavazzi, R., Marshall, P. J., et al. 2011, ApJ,

727, 96

Rupke, D. S., Veilleux, S., & Sanders, D. B. 2005, ApJS,

160, 115

Scannapieco, C., Tissera, P. B., White, S. D. M., &

Springel, V. 2008, MNRAS, 389, 1137

Shen, S., Mo, H. J., White, S. D. M., et al. 2003, MNRAS,

343, 978

Shu, Y., Bolton, A. S., Brownstein, J. R., et al. 2015, ApJ,

803, 71

Sonnenfeld, A., Nipoti, C., & Treu, T. 2014, ApJ, 786, 89
Sonnenfeld, A., Treu, T., Gavazzi, R., et al. 2013, ApJ, 777,

98

Spergel, D. N., Bean, R., Dor´e, O., et al. 2007, ApJS, 170,

377

Springel, V. 2005, MNRAS, 364, 1105
Springel, V., Di Matteo, T., & Hernquist, L. 2005, MNRAS,

361, 776

Springel, V. & Hernquist, L. 2003, MNRAS, 339, 289
Springel, V., White, S. D. M., Tormen, G., & Kauﬀmann,

G. 2001, MNRAS, 328, 726

Steinborn, L. K., Dolag, K., Hirschmann, M., Prieto, M. A.,

& Remus, R.-S. 2015, MNRAS, 448, 1504

Szomoru, D., Franx, M., van Dokkum, P. G., et al. 2013,

ApJ, 763, 73

Teklu, A. F., Remus, R.-S., Dolag, K., et al. 2015, ApJ,

812, 29

Thomas, J., Saglia, R. P., Bender, R., et al. 2007, MNRAS,

382, 657

Toft, S., Gallazzi, A., Zirm, A., et al. 2012, ApJ, 754, 3
Tornatore, L., Borgani, S., Dolag, K., & Matteucci, F. 2007,

MNRAS, 382, 1050

Tornatore, L., Borgani, S., Matteucci, F., Recchi, S., &

Naab, T., Oser, L., Emsellem, E., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 444,

Tozzi, P. 2004, MNRAS, 349, L19

3357

Tortora, C., La Barbera, F., Napolitano, N. R., et al. 2014a,

Napolitano, N. R., Pota, V., Romanowsky, A. J., et al.

MNRAS, 445, 115

2014, MNRAS, 439, 659

Newman, A. B., Ellis, R. S., & Treu, T. 2015, ApJ, 814, 26
Newman, A. B., Treu, T., Ellis, R. S., & Sand, D. J. 2013,

ApJ, 765, 25

Oppenheimer, B. D. & Dav´e, R. 2008, MNRAS, 387, 577
Oser, L., Naab, T., Ostriker, J. P., & Johansson, P. H. 2012,

Tortora, C., Napolitano, N. R., Saglia, R. P., et al. 2014b,

MNRAS, 445, 162

Treu, T. & Koopmans, L. V. E. 2004, ApJ, 611, 739
¨Ubler, H., Naab, T., Oser, L., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 443,
2092

van de Sande, J., Kriek, M., Franx, M., et al. 2013, ApJ,

ApJ, 744, 63

771, 85

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

16

Remus et al.

van der Wel, A., Franx, M., van Dokkum, P. G., et al. 2014,

ApJ, 788, 28

van Dokkum, P. G., Kriek, M., & Franx, M. 2009, Nature,

460, 717

Wellons, S., Torrey, P., Ma, C.-P., et al. 2016, MNRAS,

456, 1030

Wellons, S., Torrey, P., Ma, C.-P., et al. 2015, MNRAS,

449, 361

Whitmore, B. C., Forbes, D. A., & Rubin, V. C. 1988, ApJ,

333, 542

Wiersma, R. P. C., Schaye, J., & Smith, B. D. 2009, MN-

RAS, 393, 99

c(cid:13) 2015 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–16

