Postulates for and measurements in Everett’s quantum mechanics

Per Arve∗

Mikael Elias Gymnasium

Warfvinges v¨ag 23, 112 51 Stockholm, Sweden

(Dated: March 22, 2016)

Everetts Relative State Interpretation (aka Many Worlds Interpretation) has gained increasing
interest due the progress understanding the role of decoherence. In order to fullﬁl its promise as
an intellectually economic realistic description of the physical world, two postulates are formulated.
In short they are 1) the system is described by ψ(x) and its density ρ(x) = ψ∗(x)ψ(x) gives the
distribution of the localization of the system with the respect to the variable x; 2) an equation of
motion for the state i∂tψ = Hψ. The quantum probabilities (Born’s rule) is easily derived from
the new postulates, as well as other parts of the traditional postulates.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

2
v
5
2
6
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

I.

INTRODUCTION

Early on quantum mechanics was judged not to be able
to describe what happened in a measurement situation.
The distribution of the wave function and the associated
uncertainty was in conﬂict with the certainty that is ap-
parent when a measurement has been recorded. Born
gave the rule that the probability distribution is given
by the wave function absolute squared ψ∗ψ [1]. Bohr
and Heisenberg took the view that quantum mechanics
is correct in the microscopic world. However, at the act
of measurement a deﬁnite value appears and a transi-
tion of our description to that of the ”classical” theory is
necessary. This view has been called the Copenhagen In-
terpretation. This dichotomy has been problematic and
led to statements of the kind ”quantum mechanics is im-
possible to understand” and the advice to students ”shut
up and calculate”.

Einstein refused to believe that the fundamental
physics is probabilistic. The quantum physics could at
best be an eﬀective theory, covering up a deeper reality.
In that vein the wave function amplitude is often called
a probability amplitude and has been seen that its sole
purpose is to give probabilities. But, that terminology
is diﬃcult to reconcile with its wave nature which is of
ultimate importance to describe nature.

Quantum mechanics enormous success in describing
the detailed physics of everything around us. The de-
tails of atoms, chemistry, nuclei, particle physics, solids
are well described. Is it really sensible to claim that this
theory only describes what happens in between prepa-
ration and measurement, but not the measurement pro-
cess? When I sit on a chair I do continuous observation
of its stability, which has is explained by the wave na-
ture of electrons. Am I not doing an observation of the
molecular bindings when I sit on a chair without falling
through its seat? As we do observations all the time of
phenomena that are explained by quantum mechanics, it
seems that quantum mechanics is our description of the
world around us.

∗per.arve@mikaelelias.se

An important step towards erasing the dichotomy was
taken by Everett in his PhD thesis 1957 [2]. In Everett’s
interpretation, the wave function or rather the vector in
Hilbert space, completely describes the state of the (rel-
evant parts of the) physical world. He presented how
quantum mechanics may describe the measurement pro-
cess. He used the observation that measurements will
lead to entanglement between the system being measured
and the detector. An observer that reads of the detector
can be seen as a detector that measures this entangled
state and hence gets entangled with it. The total state is
a sum over all possibilities of the measured system. Each
term describes the measured system in a state of precise
value of the measured property, the detector have regis-
tered that value so has the observer. These terms were
called branches and they have one important property in
common. The observer has experienced that one partic-
ular value was measured, but the value diﬀers between
the branches. The problems of previous interpretations
seems to be resolved by this observation, though two
important aspects were missing or insuﬃciently treated.
Firstly, it was not shown that the branches can not inter-
fere and that the observer experience a world following
the ”classical” physics. This has since been explained
as an eﬀect of decoherence, see [3–5]. Secondly, as this
theory tries to describe the process of measurement in
quantum mechanical terms, the probabilities as given by
Born’s rule should be derived from the theory. The latter
point was attempted by Everett but his argumentation
was insuﬃcient.

A weakness of Everett’s derivation lies in a lack of
initial interpretation of the wave function. Then there
can be no meaning to expressions derived from the wave
function either. Equations that describe physical pro-
cesses always have an interpretation. This means: (1)
there has to exist a correspondence between the quanti-
ties that enter into the equations and well deﬁned phys-
ical phenomena and observations; (2) an understanding
of what the equations are able to describe, their region of
applicability. In this sense, all physical equations must
have an interpretation.

The purpose of this article is to formulate suitable pos-
tulates of quantum mechanics and to discuss their impli-
cations for the description of measurements, in particular

the derivation of Born’s rule. A discussion of previous at-
tempts is deferred to the end of the article.

II. POSTULATES

The standard model of particle physics is formulated
in terms of locally interacting ﬁelds. The quantum world
around us is understood in terms of local interactions.
Thus in the analysis presented here, only local interac-
tions are considered, even if the need for regularization
of quantum ﬁeld theories indicate the existens of non-
locality at very small distances. Nevertheless, due to
renormalizability only local interactions remain. This
implies that we only have to understand and interpret
quantum mechanics with local interactions. In particu-
lar, measurement processes are physical process conﬁned
to the interactions available. Position measurements is
the singel most important type of measurement, indicat-
ing that locality of interactions is a fundamental aspect
of actual measurements.

Postulate 1 (EQM1) The state is a set of complex
functions of position Ψ = {ψa(t, x1, x2, ...)} where
a runs over, e.g., spin and gauge components.
Its basic interpretation is given by that the den-
sity ρa(t, x1, x2, . . .) = |ψa(t, x1, x2, . . .)|2 answers
where the system is in position, spinn, gauge etc.
It is absolute square integrable normalized to one

. . . dx1dx2 . . .

|ψa(x1, x2, . . .)|2 = 1.

(1)

(cid:90) (cid:90)

(cid:88)

a

2

same as the (PVM) measurement theory of C2-4 up to a
unitary transformation [7].

Both EQM1 and C1 establish that the state must be
normalizable. EQM1 demands explicitly that the state
is a function of some continuous variables and possibly
some discrete variables. It also diﬀers from C1 in that
there is no mention of Hilbert space, but the normaliza-
tion requirement (1) implies that the state belongs to a
Hilbert space. The necessary inner product [8] can be
arrived at by writing the projection of Ψ on some other
state φ as λφ and ﬁnding the λ that minimizes (cid:107)Ψ− λφ(cid:107).
If (cid:107)φ(cid:107) = 1 that value of λ is equal to (cid:104)φ|Ψ(cid:105), which is
the inner product. If the number of degrees of freedom is
ﬁnite the requirement of normalization guarantees that
Ψ belongs to a separable Hilbert space.

Note that in EQM1 there is no mention of any rela-
tion between ρ and probability. When the propagation
of diﬀerent parts is dependent on each other, the con-
cept of probability is not relevant. However, the density
ρa(x1, x2, . . .) as a distribution of the particles positions
is always relevant and was a part of Schr¨odinger’s original
interpretation of quantum mechanics [9]. The following
relations lends support to the interpretation of ρ as the
distributed position.

(i) The continuity equation, here for a single particle,

∂tρ + ∇ · j = 0,

(3)

shows
changes in a continuous manner.

that distribution of particle positions

(ii) In ﬁrst order perturbation theory, the correction to

the energy is for a single particle given by

(cid:90)

Postulate 2 (EQM2) There is a unitary time devel-

opment of the state, e.g.,

∆E =

d3x ρ(x)U (x).

(4)

i∂tΨ = HΨ,

(2)

where H is the hermitian Hamiltonian of local in-
teractions such that there is a locally conserved
current. Any state for which the density is time
independent is a state of deﬁnite energy.

The following shortened version [6] show the essentials
of the Copenhagen Interpretation: (C1) the state of a
physical system is a normalized vector |Ψ(cid:105) in a Hilbert
space H; (C2) every measurable quantity is described by
a Hermitian operator (observable) B acting in H; (C3)
the only possible result of measuring a physical quantity
is one of the eigenvalues of the corresponding observable
B; (C4) the probability for obtaining eigenvalue b in a
measurement of B is P r(b) = (cid:104)Ψ|Pb|Ψ(cid:105), where Pb is the
projector onto the eigensubspace of B having eigenvalue
b. Adding the collapse postulate ”the post-measurement
state in such a measurement is Pb|Ψ(cid:105)/P r(b)” the pos-
tulates correspond to what Schlosshauer [5] called the
standard interpretation. Some modern formulations of
the postulates allow for POVM type measurements, but
that generalization oﬀers nothing extra here as it is the

An outside (or inside) agent interacts with the sys-
tem weakly enough not to essentially change the
state will ﬁnd that it interacts with a distribution,
not with particles in deﬁnite positions.

(iii) The expression for the average position follows how
the average position would be calculated for a dis-
tributed charge density

(cid:90)

(cid:104)x(cid:105) =

d3x xρ(x).

(5)

For a free particle its average position moves along
a straight line.

(iv) The particles are not at positions where the density

is zero.

(v) From molecular, atomic, nuclear and particle
physics it is well established that the single particle
density of elektrons, protons or quarks

(cid:90)

ρ(x) = N

d3x2d3x3 . . . ρ(x, x2, x3, . . .)

(6)

multiplied with the charge of the N identical par-
ticles, constitutes a charge density. For example,
in the Oppenheimer-Born approximation the nu-
clei interact with the (instantaneous) charge distri-
bution of the electrons as given by equation 6. In
nuclear physics the comparison between calculated
charge distribution and experimental is an impor-
tant method to test theories, see [10].

As the measurement process is a physical process de-
scribed by the dynamics (EQM2) there is no new postu-
lates corresponding to C2-4.

How does real physical measurement processes corre-
sponds to the C-postulates? This article will not address
everyday observations but conﬁne the discussion to mea-
surements in designated experimental setups. When well
deﬁned values are recorded it is necessary the detection
system creates decoherence. This is a deﬁnite result from
the modern analysis of Everett’s quantum mechanics. If
deﬁnite values can be measured in a situation where the
measured state contains a variation of values, decoher-
ence must be active. If not, this interpretation would be
disproven.

It is diﬃcult to analyze which quantities are possible
to measure based on possible experimental setups. De-
tectors can typically measure position and sometimes ki-
netic energy. The momentum of a charged particle can be
transformed into a measurement of position. The mea-
surement of angular momentum in a ﬁxed direction can
be transformed inte an energy measurement by the Zee-
man eﬀect or into position by a Stern-Gerlach apparatus.
These are examples physical measurement processes that
correspond to Hermitian operators.

Detectors measuring position will record particles en-
tering a certain volume or area. Then the measured sub-
space is the set of states with support only within that
volume or area. These states are orthogonal to states
with support outside. This suggests that we can assume
that diﬀerent measurement values correspond to diﬀerent
orthogonal subspaces. The association of these subspaces
with real numbers (detector position) deﬁnes a Hermitian
operator being measured. That may then be mapped to
another Hermitian operator by a unitary dynamics, e.g.,
mapping the spin of silver atoms onto position by a Stern-
Gerlach apparatus. Hence, a physical measurement pro-
cess can produce the same eﬀect as postulates C2 and
C3. The requirement of local interactions in EQM2 is
important to guarantee that position measurement are
possible.

The postulate C4 can be abolished if Born’s rule can be
derived from EQM. With the basic interpretation of the
density at hand, Born’s rule may be derived in a manner
free from the problems of previous attempts.

III. SINGLE MEASUREMENT

3

As diﬀerent measurement values correspond to orthog-
onal subspaces, the state to be measured can be written

|ψ(cid:105) =

cb|b(cid:105).

(7)

(cid:88)

b

The states |b(cid:105) are orthogonal and normalized and diﬀer-
ent subsets of them corresponds to the diﬀerent possible
values. In order to simplify the presentation it is below
assumed that each basis state |b(cid:105) correspond to diﬀerent
values b. Hence, there is an operator B with eigenval-
ues b and eigenstates |b(cid:105) associated with the property
being measured. The density numbers ρb = |cb|2 give
the distribution of the system in that basis, i.e. where
the system is with respect to the properties of the states
|b(cid:105). Then the average value of the property B is given by
The interaction between |ψ(cid:105) and the measurement ap-

(cid:104)B(cid:105) =(cid:80)

b bρb.

paratus M changes the combined state [2],
cb|b(cid:105)(cid:48)|Mb(cid:105).

cb|b(cid:105)(cid:1)|Mφ(cid:105) →(cid:88)

(cid:0)(cid:88)

(8)

b

b

The measurement apparatus changes its state from its
nothing registered state |Mφ(cid:105) to a state |Mb(cid:105) consistent
with having registered the state |b(cid:105). Realistically, there
are more than one state of the apparatus consistent with
having registered state |b(cid:105), but that complication adds
nothing of interest here. The state of the system before
the measurement |b(cid:105) and after |b(cid:105)(cid:48), may be the same.

After the experimentalist has observed the apparatus
its state still belongs to the set of states consistent with
that the state |b(cid:105) has been registered. We can here as-
sume that the observation process is described by
cb|b(cid:105)(cid:48)|Mb(cid:105)|Ob,(cid:105)

cb|b(cid:105)(cid:48)|Mb(cid:105)(cid:1)|Oφ(cid:105) →(cid:88)

(cid:0)(cid:88)

(9)

b

b

where the state of the apparatus |Mb(cid:105) is not altered. Due
to the complicated nature of the apparatus, the observer
and their interactions with the environment, the possi-
bility of interference between the diﬀerent terms in the
ﬁnal state of (9), disappears rapidly. The diﬀerent terms
will belong to diﬀerent ”worlds” as they will evolve in-
dependently of each other. This is the essential point of
the many world understanding of quantum physics.

In any of the ”worlds” the observer has seen one par-
ticular value and has no direct knowledge of the read-
ings made in the other ”worlds”. Looking at the many
”worlds” from the outside the question: What reading
did the observer get? is equivalent to: What is the dis-
tribution of observer readings? The answer is arrived at
by integrating over the degrees of freedom of the mea-
sured system and the apparatus to get the corresponding
density

ρb = |cb|2,

(10)

This is the same distribution as the measured system had
before interacting with the measurement apparatus.

IV. REPEATED MEASUREMENTS

Suppose the measurement apparatus is able to record
several subsequent measurements of identically prepared
systems (7). Further, assume that the way the apparatus
interacts with the next system is not aﬀected by previous
measurements. The second measurement is described by

4
As N → ∞ this density approaches the delta function
δ(x− ρa). This shows that the system becomes localized
at x = ρa.

As there is a density distribution related to any her-
mitian operator the question arises: Is there an operator
for which the frequency distribution (18) is the density.

The ﬁrst guess may be the frequency operator F

cb1|b1(cid:105)(cid:48)|Mb1(cid:105) →

F =

1
N

fi

(19)

the transition(cid:0)(cid:88)

cb2|b2(cid:105)(cid:1)(cid:88)
(cid:88)

b1

b1b2

b2

ﬁnal state becomes(cid:88)

cb2cb1|b2(cid:105)(cid:48)|b1(cid:105)(cid:48)|Mb1b2(cid:105).

(11)

When the interaction with the observer is included the

cb2cb1|b2(cid:105)(cid:48)|b1(cid:105)(cid:48)|Mb1b2(cid:105)|Ob1b2(cid:105).

(12)

b1b2

Each sequence of readings belong to diﬀerent ”worlds”.
The distribution of observer reading sequences is now

ρb1b2 = |cb1|2|cb2|2.

(13)

After N measurements the sequences of observer readings
are distributed according to

ρb1b2...bN = |cb1|2|cb2|2...|cbN|2.

(14)

When N is large, the relative frequencies of the diﬀerent
values of b became interesting. To focus on the value
b = a, denote the summed density of all the others

ρ¬a =

|cb|2

(15)

(cid:88)

b(cid:54)=a

and ρa = |ca|2. The sum of the densities (14) over all
sequences where b = a appears precisely m times out of
N measurements
ρ(m : N | a) =

(ρa)m(ρ¬a)N−m.

(16)

N !

(N − m)!m!

Among the diﬀerent ”worlds” there are observer states
corresponding to any possible value of m. The variable m
corresponds to where the observer is in the property, how
many times the value a appeared. This is a distributed
property with the distribution ρ(m : N | a).

For large number of measured systems N , the distribu-
tion (16) may be approximated by a gaussian, see Feller
[11],
ρ(m : N | a) =

exp(cid:0) − (m − N ρa)2

(cid:1).

1

(2πN ρaρ¬a)1/2

2N ρaρ¬a

(17)
For large N the distribution (17) may be represented as
function of the relative frequency x = m/N taken as a
continuous variable. The properly normalized distribu-
tion with respect to that variable is

ρ(x|a) =(cid:0) N

2πρaρ¬a

(cid:1)1/2

exp(cid:0) − N (x − ρa)2

(cid:1).

2ρaρ¬a

(18)

N(cid:88)

i=1

where fi operates on the i-th system being measured with
f|a(cid:105) = |a(cid:105) and f|b(cid:105) = 0 if b (cid:54)= a. The eigenvalues of F
are x = m/N, m = 1, ..., N . The density related to F
acting on

|ΨN(cid:105) = |ψ(cid:105)1|ψ(cid:105)2...|ψ(cid:105)N

(20)

is given by (16) which is discrete and each value ap-
proaches zero as pointed out by Squires [12].
To get to the continuous frequency distribution (18)
the real numbers are divided into a set of intervalls {Ik},

Ik = [xk − ∆x/2, xk + ∆x/2[, xk = ρa + k∆x,

(21)

where k is an integer. Deﬁne ˜ρ(k) as the sum of den-
sities ρ(m : N | a) with m/N in the intervall Ik. As
N approaches inﬁnity ˜ρ(k)/∆x approaches ρ(a|x) (18) if
∆x ∼ N−1/4.

The operator S deﬁned by its action on products of
eigenstates to the operator B.
If the frequency of the
eigenvalue a is in the intervall k with midpoint xk, then

Sa,{Ik}|b1(cid:105)1|b2(cid:105)2...|bN(cid:105)N = xk|b1(cid:105)1|b2(cid:105)2...|bN(cid:105)N .

(22)

The density of this operator is ˜ρ(k). As N approaches
inﬁnity all ˜ρ(k) approach zero, but for k = 0 as ˜ρ(0) ap-
proaches one.This is true for any value of ∆x, thus there
is an operator for any of the approximands (˜ρ(k)/∆x) to
ρ(a|x).

The result is that the observer state has approximately
a distribution in relative frequency given by (18). When
the number of measured systems N grows more of the
observer’s distribution will be in the vicinity of the rela-
tive frequency equal to ρa. More precisely, for any 1 > 0
the part of the distribution with the relative frequency
x such that |ρa − x| < 1 can be larger than 1 − 2 for
any 2 > 0 if the number of systems being measured N
is larger than some number N0(1, 2).

V. PROBABILITIES

Consider an observer who is involved in a deliberate
measurement process of a phenomena where the outcome
is uncertain due to the observed quantum state contain-
ing more than one possible value. After a long sequence
of measurements, the observer is distributed over very
many branches. In each branch, a random sequence is

observed which call for a statistical analysis by the ob-
server. The observer will assume that there is a proba-
bility Pa for measuring a in a single measurement. The
probability of the measured relative frequency x after N
repeated measurements and some value of Pa is

exp(cid:0) − N (x − Pa)2

2Pa(1 − Pa)

(cid:1).

P (x|a) =(cid:0)

(cid:1)1/2

N

2πPa(1 − Pa)

(23)
As this a very narrow distribution for large N , this shows
that Pa will be close to x. The relative frequency x is dis-
tributed over all branches according to (18), see ﬁgure 1.
Hence, the distribution of Pa over the branches may be
seen as the folding of the two distributions. As the num-

FIG. 1: The solid line shows the density Eq. 18 if ρa = 0,3
and N = 1000. The dotted line shows where an observer in
a typical branch may estimate the probability to be from the
observed sequence alone.

ber of repeated measurements N grows the width of the
distribution of Pa tends to zero. There is one additional
eﬀect that can make that width to decrease faster. That
happens if the observer knows what quantum state the
system is in. Then, when the observer sees a relative fre-
quency close to ρa the observer will likely assume that
Pa is precisely ρa as stated by Born’s rule. Hence, the
Pa distribution will be narrowed by the theoretical bias.
To summarize the present analyses of probabilities in
quantum mechanics: the observer distribution in relative
frequency (18) is narrowing in precisely the same fashion
as for a classic probability (23).
If it is assumed that
the observer’s branch is reasonably typical, the observer
experiences Borns’s rule when the number of repeated
experiments are large, unless an exceptional sequence ap-
pears. Such sequences are also a consequence of Born’s
rule. Any mechanism giving Born’s rule must also give
rise to possible but improbable sequences. In any statisti-
cal analysis it is assumed that what will be or is observed
is reasonably typical, here this applies to both P (x|a) and
ρ(x|a).

Note that the density ρ is primarily giving how the
system is distributed with respect to some variable. Its
function as probability is only an emergent eﬀect caused
by decoherence.

5

VI. PREVIOUS ATTEMPTS TO DERIVE

BORN’S RULE

Several previous studies have tried to derive Born’s rule
using arguments that in eﬀect are based on the narrowing
of the relative frequency distribution (18).

Both Hartle [13] and Graham [14] derived that the
frequency of a certain eigenvalue in a sequence of mea-
surements. They show that in the limit N → ∞ the
“variance” of the frequency operator F (19), (∆N F )2 =
(cid:104)ΨN|(F − ρa)2|ΨN(cid:105), tends to zero. They want to con-
clude that in the limit it is certain that the frequency is
that of Born’s rule. Similarly Finkelstein found in ref [15]
that the “variance” of a more general operator tends to
zero which implies the same result.
The results of these articles show that the distribution
ρ(x|a) (18) becomes narrow.
In order to prove Born’s
rule they have abandoned postulate C4 leaving ρ(x|a)
without interpretation. Then there is no physical mean-
ing to their results why these derivations fail to prove
Born’s rule [6, 16]

The situation is analogous in classical probability the-
ory where the concept of probability is diﬃcult to de-
ﬁne. Two ways out have been used. The frequentist
solution is to deﬁne probability from a measure on sets
as described in [17]. Inﬁnite sequences of events show the
same frequency except for a set of sequences of measure
zero. Probability is here identiﬁed with frequency. The
alternative is Bayesian theory [18] where probabilities on
a fundamental level are taken to be subjective beliefs.
Bayesian theory has become popular within philosophy
and probability theory. A discussion of the diﬀerent ap-
proaches to probability and their relation to quantum
probability can be found in the book on Wallace on [19].
Wallace and Saunders [20] point out the need to base the
notion of probability on a pre-probability concept. In the
present analysis the density ρ plays that role.

In an appendix to Ref.

[13] Hartle considers inﬁnite
sequences. The frequency operator is deﬁned for such
sequences and it is proven the frequency coincides with
Born’s rule for all but a set of measure zero of the se-
quences. In Ref.
[16] Fahri et al oﬀered an alternative
mathematical treatment giving the same result. A math-
ematical diﬃculty is that the full Hilbert space is non-
separable. Caves and Schack [6] criticized the treatment
of Fahri et al for being arbitrary.
In particularly, the
choice of norm is argued to be arbitrary. Additionally, it
was argued that the frequency of an inﬁnite sequence is
undeﬁned as a reordering of the sequence can arbitrarily
change the frequency.
In [21] van Wesep has oﬀered a
third proof using algebraic set theory and showed that
procedure in [16] was essentially correct.

An additional point of criticism against some of the
frequency related derivations can be found in [6] and [22]
relates to a dependency on which norm is used. If states

are normalized in a diﬀerent way, e.g.,(cid:82) |ψ|4dx, the prob-

ability will be diﬀerent. A defense for the derivations can
be that the Hilbert space norm has to be used which re-

quires that the use of Hilbert space is suﬃciently well
motivated.

Wada [23, 24] has suggested an alternative to postu-
late EQM1, in which ρb = 0 and ρb = 1 are interpreted as
the particle is not at b and deﬁnitely at b, respectively.
Wada attempted to prove Born’s rule by showing that
for an inﬁnite repetition state, the density is one if the
frequency x complies with Born’s rule and zero other-
wise. This is achieved by projecting the state of ﬁnite
repetitions onto a state |x(cid:105) of frequency maximally close
to Born’s rule. Wada did not show that the state of
ﬁnite frequency exists for an inﬁnite sequence. Hence,
it was only shown that the density ρ(x) approaches a
delta function. Thereby Wada failed to derive Born’s
rule in much the same way as the works by Hartle [13],
Finkelstein[15].and Graham [14] do not imply Born’s rule
in the EQM context.

Proving that for a particular state ρb = 1 is equivalent
to showing that the normalized state is the same vector
in Hilbert space as exp(iφ)|b(cid:105). Hence, there is a phys-
ical assumption underlying the investigations of inﬁnite
sequences, that density is one for some property value
implies that the system does take that value. This is
a weak version of EQM1 in which only the case ρ = 0
is interpreted. If the probabilistic interpretation of ρ is
derived,we would be left without interpretation of situa-
tions in which coherence prevails. However, we do need
to have some understanding of, for example what a gaus-
sian wave packet describes. The relevans of its group
velocity is only apparent if the peak value of the density
can be given a meaning like that of EQM1.

The discussion is a reﬂection of the arguments between
frequentists and bayesians within probability theory. The
present derivation avoids the bayesian criticism in that
inﬁnite sequences are avoided and that it the quantities
entering the derivation are given a physical meaning.

Due to the previous diﬃculties in proving Born’s rule
with frequency arguments and the conceptual diﬃculties
with the frequentist view of probability, several authors
have tried other routes. One such approach starts with
showing that states with equal magnitude of the ampli-
tude have equal probability. For unequal magnitudes it
is then assumed that

|ψ(cid:105) = α|1(cid:105) + β|2(cid:105),

|α|2
|β|2 =

p
q

,

(24)

where p and q are integers. The state |1(cid:105) is divided into
p substates, and |2(cid:105) into q substates. such that |ψ(cid:105) is
equal to n = p + q diﬀerent states with equal amplitudes,
rendering the probability of |1(cid:105) to p/n and |2(cid:105) to q/n.

Deutch [25] uses decision theoretic arguments in which
probabilities are emergent quantities, to motivate the
equal magnitude conclusion. Wallace has sharpened the
decision theoretic reasoning to get Born’s rule in his com-
prehensive argumentation for the Many Worlds Interpre-
tation in Ref. [19]. In [26] Zurek argues that there is an
environment assisted of invariance called envariance that

6

is used to establish that equal magnitudes implies equal
probability.
A common weakness of studies of this is need to split
the states |1, 2(cid:105). This implies that another quantity than
the original is measured or that a subsequent measure-
ment is performed. The authors have so far failed to
argue that probabilities are not aﬀected by these alter-
ations.

In [2] Everett relies on the relation between probabil-
ity and mathematical measure. Born’s rule is proven by
assuming the measure only depends on the magnitude of
the amplitude and additivity of probabilities.

A diﬃculty of all the attempts to prove Born’s rule
with decision theory or measure theory arguments is that
they never prove that the concept of probability is appli-
cable. For this it has to be shown that the measurement
sequences converge to a deﬁnite frequency as number of
repeated measurements goes to inﬁnity. This is in con-
trast with the present analysis which clearly shows how
probability is related to the quantum evolution.

The arguments that Born’s rule is a consequence of Ev-
eretts quantum mechanics that Wallace gave in [19] also
include elements close to those presented here. In par-
ticular, Wallace denotes |cb|2 with the term weight what
is here called density, and gives it a decisive roll. The
arguments for giving the weights their role are intuitive,
failing to put the theory on a ﬁrm ground.

VII. FINAL REMARKS

It has been shown that all aspects of the measurement
process are correctly described by EQM, if supplied with
the postulates and the eﬀects of decoherence. For this
purpose, EQM has been supplied with an interpretation
of the wave function (the state). The density distribution
ρ(x) = ψ∗ψ is postulated to be the answer to where the
system is with respect to coordinate of ψ.

There is no claim that the quantum state is real (on-
tological), only that quantum mechanics describe nature
as far as we have encountered. The exception is gravity.
From the EQM point of view there is no known event
where for example an electron behaves in a way that can-
not be understood as a quantum mechanical phenomena.
The description of ρ as a probability density should be
avoided as it that is not its primary role. The traditional
language suggests that there is a classical point parti-
cle to appear with the probability given by the density,
but there is no known phenomena that motivates this
conception. In the same vein, denoting the wave func-
tion amplitude by the somewhat contradictory term, the
probability amplitude, is not appropriate either.

Though all particles are waves, it is still appropriate to
use the term particle. The Ehrenfest theorem reinforced
by decoherence, shows when classical particle mechanics
applies. Scattering between free particles and inelastic
scattering on composite systems show important similar-
ities with classical particle collisions.

Acknowledgement

tions. Finally, I am on it.

I wish to acknowledge Ben Mottelson for trying under
several decades to make me work on quantum founda-

Additionally, I acknowledge Lev Vaidmann for identi-
fying some missing explanations in an earlier version of
the manuscript.

7

[1] M. Born, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik 38, 803 (1926).
[2] H. Everett III, Reviews of Modern Physics 29, 454

(1957).

[3] E. Joos and H. D. Zeh, Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik B Con-

[16] E. Farhi,

J. Goldstone,

and S. Gutmann, An-
nals of Physics 192,
ISSN 0003-
4916, URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/0003491689901413.

368

(1989),

densed Matter 59, 223 (1985).

[17] W. Feller, An introduction to probability theory and its

[4] W. H. Zurek, Reviews of Modern Physics 75, 715 (2003).
[5] M. A. Schlosshauer, Decoherence: and the quantum-to-

applications, vol. 2 (John Wiley & Sons, 2008).

[18] E. T. Jaynes, Probability theory:

the logic of science

classical transition (Springer, 2007).

(Cambridge university press, 2003).

[6] C. M. Caves and R. Schack, Annals of Physics 315, 123

(2005).

[7] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum computation
and quantum information (Cambridge university press,
2010).

[8] M. Reed and B. Simon, Methods of modern mathemati-
cal physics: Functional analysis, vol. 1 (Academic Press,
1972).

[19] D. Wallace, The emergent multiverse: Quantum theory
according to the Everett interpretation (Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2012).

[20] S. Saunders, in Many Worlds?, edited by S. Saunders,
J. Barrett, A. Kent, and D. Wallace (Oxford University
Press, 2010).

[21] R. A. Van Wesep, Annals of Physics 321, 2438 (2006).
[22] S. Weinberg, Lectures on quantum mechanics (Cam-

[9] E. Schr¨odinger, Annalen der Physik IV 81, 109 (1926).

bridge University Press, 2013).

[10] J. W. Negele, Physical review C 1, 1260 (1970).
[11] W. Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its
Applications: Volume 1 (J. Wiley & sons, 1968), 3rd ed.

[12] E. J. Squires, Physics Letters A 145, 67 (1990).
[13] J. B. Hartle, American Journal of Physics 36, 704 (1968).
[14] N. Graham,
in The Many-Worlds Interpretation of

Quantum Mechanics (1973), vol. 1, p. 229.

[15] D. Finkelstein, Transactions of the New York Academy

of Sciences 25, 621 (1963).

[23] S. Wada, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 76,

094004 (2007).

[24] S. Wada, arXiv preprint arXiv:0909.3188 (2009).
[25] D. Deutsch, in Proceedings of the Royal Society of Lon-
don A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
(The Royal Society, 1999), vol. 455, pp. 3129–3137.
[26] W. H. Zurek, Physical Review A 71, 052105 (2005).

