Dirac loops in trigonally connected 3D lattices

Kieran Mullen,1 Bruno Uchoa,1 Daniel T. Glatzhofer,2 and Bin Wang3

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma 73069, USA

2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma 73069, USA

3School of Chemical, Biological and Materials Engineering,
University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma 73069, USA

We consider diﬀerent generalizations of the honeycomb lattice to three dimensional structures.
We address the family of the hyper-honeycomb lattice, which is made up of alternating layers of 2D
honeycomb nano-ribbons, with each layer rotated by π/2 with the layer below. When the orbitals
of the lattice sites are symmetric with respect to the planes of the trigonal links, these structures
can produce a Dirac loop, a closed line of Dirac nodes in momentum space. For orbitals that
break that symmetry, such as the carbon p-wave orbitals, hyper-honeycomb lattices do not possess
the loop structure. We also consider a new structure, the screw hyper-honeycomb, in which the
successive layers of parallel units are rotated by 2π/3. This structure has a Dirac loop if reﬂection
symmetry in the unit cell is imposed, regardless the symmetry of the onsite orbitals. We discuss
the implementation of those systems in optical lattices.

I.

INTRODUCTION.

Materials such as graphene1, 3D Dirac and Weyl
semimetals2,3 have in common the presence of a Fermi
surface that is described by a discrete number of Dirac
points. Another possibility, Dirac line semimetals, are
materials where the Fermi surface is described by a line
of Dirac nodes6–13. One interesting example refers to the
case where the Fermi surface is a Dirac loop, a closed line
in momentum space where the electrons have a vanishing
density of states and about which it varies linearly, as for
massless Dirac fermions. Dirac loops are conceptually in-
teresting due to their quantized conductivities6,14,15, and
the possibility of a 3D quantum Hall eﬀect6.

In honeycomb lattices, the Dirac point is special be-
cause it is protected by time reversal and inversion sym-
metry, and it does not require any spin-orbit interaction
or band inversion. Natural extensions of the planar trig-
onal connectivity of the honeycomb lattice in 3D include
the family of harmonic honeycomb lattices, which have
been studied both theoretically and experimentally in the
context of the Kitaev model16–19. Here we investigate
simple tight binding lattice models with trigonally con-
nected structures and study conditions for the realization
of Dirac loops. We present a systematic study of diﬀerent
families of lattices.

In section II we examine the harmonic honyecomb lat-
tices, which consist of perpendicularly oriented honey-
comb lattice strips. The Dirac loop is present in tight
binding models whenever the on-site orbitals preserve
the reﬂection symmetry of the planes set by the trigo-
nal links, as shown in Fig. 1. This is the case for s-wave
states in hyper-honeycomb lattices considered in Ref. [6].
In the case of tight binding lattices with higher angular
momentum states that break that symmetry, such as p-
wave orbitals in carbon atoms, the Dirac loops collapse
at the edge of the Brillouin zone and are not observable.
Hence, Dirac loops cannot be observed in simple carbon

realizations of those lattices, but could possibly be real-
ized in other materials and in optical lattice realizations
of those structures.

In section III we look at trigonal lattices that have dif-
ferent screw symmetries than the hyper-honeycomb lat-
tices. We address the family of screw hyper-honeycomb
lattices, where the planes of the ribbons are rotated along
the screw axis by 2π/3 rather than at right angles. When
reﬂection symmetry in the unit cell is imposed, these lat-
tices display a Dirac loop, regardless the symmetry of the
states in the lattice sites.

For s-wave states, those lattices also have Fermi surface
points at the corners of the Brillouin zone (BZ), which
has hexagonal symmetry. The energy dispersion around
those points is parabolic in plane of the loop and linear
in the perpendicular direction. The crossing point has a
two-fold band degeneracy per spin, has chiral quasipar-
ticles but zero Chern number. For higher angular mo-
mentum states, those points split into small Dirac loops.
While screw hyper-honeycomb lattices can be challenging
to realize in solid state structures due to chemical stabil-
ity, they may have promising realizations in other phys-
ical systems. We conclude with a brief discussion about
possible implementations of those families of structures
in optical lattices.

II. HYPER-HONEYCOMB LATTICE FAMILY

Our discussion starts with the simplest family of struc-
tures shown in Fig.1a, known as the harmonic honeycomb
lattices, H-N . Those structures belong to the family
of the hyper-honeycomb lattices, H-0, shown in Fig. 1.
Each structure consists of a lattice of perpendicular hon-
eycomb nano-ribbons N hexagon units wide, containing
a screw symmetry and a glide symmetry. Each nano-
ribbon is rotated in π/2 around the screw axis. The re-
sult is a structure with planar trigonally connected sites

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
9
2

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

2
v
7
4
6
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

but in 3D.
The tight binding basis is a function of the form
ψα,k(r) = φα(k) eik·r, with α = 1, 2, 3, . . . , N labeling the
components of a N vector Φk, which describes the am-
plitudes of the electronic wavefunction on the N atoms
in the unit cell. The tight binding Hamiltonian satisﬁes
the eigenvalue equation HΦk = EΦk where

Hα,β =

tα,βeik·(cid:126)δα,β

(1)

(cid:88)

(cid:126)δα,β

and tα,β is the hopping energy between nearest neighbors
sites separated by the vector (cid:126)δα,β connecting an atom
of the kind α with its nearest neighbor of the kind β.
The sum is carried over all nearest neighbor vectors (cid:126)δα,β
among any two given species of sites, α and β. In explicit
form, the H-0 Hamiltonian is:

 0 Θx

Θ∗
x
0
γf∗

z

0
γfz
0
γfz
0
γf∗
0 Θy
0 Θ∗
0

z

y



H(0)
αβ = t

lattices:

(2)

where fz = eikza,

Θi = 2eikza/2 cos(

√

3kia/2)

(3)

H(N )
αβ = t

with i = x, y and a is the lattice constant. While all the
bonds to a given site atom are co-planar and trigonal, the
bonds of adjacent atoms need not lie in the same plane.
The variable t is the hopping parameter for sites in the

same ribbon and tγ is the hopping for NN sites between
two adjacent ribbons rotated in π/2.

2

At the tight binding level, the orbital sites can be ap-
proximated by hydrogen atom wave functions, whose an-
gular part is described in terms of spherical harmonics.
One can account for the eﬀect of the rotation along the
screw axis through the overlap hopping integral. For s-
wave states, the rotation has no eﬀect in the orbital over-
lap between sites at the edge of the ribbons (γ = 1).
For p-wave states, such as the case of carbon atoms,
γ ∼ cos2 ϕ in leading approximation in the tight bind-
ing potentials, where ϕ is the rotation angle. Therefore,
for screw axis rotations of ϕ = π/2, γ = 0. The eﬀects of
this rotation for p-wave orbitals is addressed below. The
variable γ is non-zero by symmetry for higher angular
momentum states that preserve the reﬂection symmetry
with respect to the planes of the trigonal links at the edge
between two strips (see Fig. 1).
The structure of matrix (2) is preserved for all H-N



0 Θx
Θ∗
0
f∗

x

z

0
...

0
fz

. . .
0 . . .
. . .

0 Θx
Θ∗

x

0
f∗

z

fz

0
. . .

. . .
. . .
f∗

z

...
0
γfz

0

. . .



. . .

0 γf∗
z
0
...

. . .
. . .
0 Θy
Θ∗
y
0

0

0
fz
0
f∗
0 Θy
0 Θ∗
0

z

y

The reciprocal

(4)
producing a banded matrix with elements in the oﬀ-
diagonal corners. The upper left half diagonal elements
involve Θx, while the lower right half diagonal elements
contain Θy; The four skew-diagonal elements still have a
factor of γ.
lattice for the H-0 lattice is gener-
√
√
ated by the vectors b1 = (2π/
3a, 0, π/3a), b2 =
3a,−π/3a) and b3 = (0, 0, 2π/3a), as shown in
(0, 2π/
Fig. 2a, and has four high symmetry points, Γ, R, X,
and Z. The BZ of the higher H-N structures is quite
similar, with the exception of the H-1 structure, which
is tetragonal and has generators making 90◦ angles with
√
each other, b1 = (2π/
3, 0), and
b2 = (0, 0, π/3, 0). All other structures including the H-0
are triclinic.
The harmonic lattices H-N are only a symmetric sub-
set in a hierarchy of possible lattices that can be made by
perpendicular chains of trigonally connected atoms. In
Fig. 3a we show a typical asymmetric unit cell. When re-
peated it creates a structure in which the horizontal units
are single hexagons as in the H-1 structures, while the
vertical units are simple chains as in the H-0 structure.

√
3, 0, 0), b2 = (0, 2π/

FIG. 1. (Color online) Unit cells in the family of the hyper-
honeycomb lattice. All create simple lattice structures where
all atoms are connected by three co-planar bonds spaced by
120◦, and are drawn with the positive z-axis pointing to the
right, along the screw axis. a) The hyper-honeycomb lattice
(H-0), with a four atom unit cell. The full structure consists
of a lattice parallel sets of vertical and horizontal linear chains
connected by links in the z-direction. b) An eight atom unit
cell (H-1). The horizontal and vertical chains are expanded
to strips of single hexagons of graphene. c) The H-2 unit cell,
with 12 atoms, and d) the H-4 unit cell, with 20 atoms.

(a)(b)(c)(d)3

FIG. 3. (Color online) Analysis of the asymmetric (1,0) struc-
ture. (a) The unit cell for the (1, 0) structure, which consists
of parallel horizontal honeycomb nanoribbons at right angles
to layers of parallel, vertical chains. (b) The Brillouin zone
for this structure, which lacks the rotational and screw sym-
metry of the H-N structures. (c) Slice at the ﬂattened corner
of the BZ for γ = 1. The Dirac loop (red line) is centered
around the C point, at the edge of the zone. (d) Slices of the
energy bands along the red path shown in (b).

II.1.

s-wave states

We ﬁrst consider the case of s-wave orbitals, where
γ = 1. In this case all H-N lattice Hamiltonians have a
zero energy eigenvalue along the curve deﬁned by kz = 0
and

(cid:16)√

(cid:17)

(cid:16)√

(cid:17)

4 cos

3kxa/2

cos

3kya/2

= 1.

(5)

The nodal line is entirely contained in the ﬁrst BZ, as
shown in Fig. 2(b). Projecting H(N ) at the lowest en-
ergy bands, the projected Hamiltonian of the low energy
excitations is

Hp(q) = −[vx(φ)qx + vy(φ)qy]σx + vz(φ)qzσz,

(6)
where q ≡ k(φ) − k0(φ), with k0(φ) deﬁning the zero
energy line, and σx, σz the corresponding Pauli matrices
acting in the projected space of the two low energy bands
crossing at the Dirac loop.
In Fig. 2(c)-(f) we show the band structure of the H-N
lattices in the kz = 0 plane for N = 0, 1, 2 and 4 along
the path depicted in Fig. 2a. The nodal line crosses the
path along both the Γ − M(cid:48) and Γ − R directions, as
indicated in the plots. As N increases, the width of the
unit cell in the z-direction increases and the correspond-
ing height of the BZ in the kz direction decreases, but
has only slight distortions in the kx and ky directions.
Therefore it is meaningful to compare plots across the
H-N structures along similar paths in the kz = 0 plane.
Each additional atom in the unit cell adds an addi-
tional band to the eigenspectrum. However, inversion

FIG. 2. (Color online) a) 3D Brillouin zone of the H-0 hyper-
honeycomb lattice. b) BZ in the kz = 0 plane showing the
Dirac loop lines (solid white). Black line: boundary of the BZ,
centered at the Γ point. Energy spectra of Eq. (2) for s-wave
orbitals (γ = 1) in units of the hopping t plotted along the
path shown in the red line of panels a) and b) for the (c) N =
0, (d) N = 1, (e) N = 2 and (f) N = 4 cases. The low energy
bands cross along the Dirac loop present in all structures. The
optical gap outside the loop around decreases rapidly around
the M(cid:48) point (red circle) as N increases. Energy surfaces at
the kz = 0 plane for (g) H-0 and (h) H-4 lattices.

This asymmetric unit cell in turn breaks screw symmetry
and produces an asymmetric Brillouin zone, with mono-
clinic symmetry, as shown in Fig.3b. Its BZ has 16 high
symmetry points, including Γ, H1, H2, C, E, Z, A, X
√
and Y points. The generators in the reciprocal space are
3,−2π/9),
the vectors b1 = (2π/3, 0, 0)), b2 = ((0, 2π/
and b3 = (0, 0, 4π/9). We refer to the structure in Fig.
3a as the (1,0) lattice. In general, we deﬁne the (n, m)
structures as formed by two subsets of alternating hon-
eycomb strips rotated by 90◦, with the integers nx, ny
indexing their respective widths in number of honeycomb
hexagons along the x and y directions (n = 0 means a
zigzag chain of atoms).

1b2b3RM’bΓZX(e)(f)RΓM’(c)(d)EnergyEnergy(a)(b)(g)(h)X3(a)(b)(c)EZAΓb1YCH1H1H2b2bEΓH2H1EΓEnergyC C−202(d)4

FIG. 4. (Color online) Velocity of quasiparticles at the Fermi
energy as a function of φ in units of t/a, for the (a) H-0, (b)
H-1, (c) H-2, and (d) H-4 structures. The black, blue, red
and green curves are the velocities in the vx, vy, vz and vρ
directions repectively.

symmetry forces the lowest energy bands to cross at
E = 0, which is also the Fermi energy for the undoped
system. As N increases, the optical gap between the
bands outside of the Dirac loop is greatly decreased, in
particular along the Γ-M(cid:48) direction, so that the range
over which we may approximate the full Hamiltonian by
a linearized model is greatly reduced, as show in Fig.2(c)-
(f). For N = 4 the bands quickly become quite ﬂat along
that direction away from the Dirac loop.

The large N limit does not trivially reduce to that
of a 2D honeycomb sheet despite the presence of large
parallel strips, since the six fold rotational symmetry of
stacked honeycomb lattices is never recovered.
In any
event, the nodal ring persists, and the velocities in the x,
y, z and ρ directions are plotted in Fig.4 for N = 0, 1, 2
and 4 lattices. The ideal ”isotropic” radial velocity nearly
occurs with the H-1 structure, with velocity asymmetries
inverting from N = 0 case, and growing stronger with N .
However, the shrinking of the gap outside the nodal ring
implies that the region over which the dispersion is linear
decreases, including in the z direction, which eventually
becomes ﬂat suﬃciently far away from the nodal line.
Generically, the asymmetric (nx, ny) structures (nx (cid:54)=
ny) also have Dirac loops, whenever the onsite orbitals
connecting adjacent rotated strips preserve the reﬂection
symmetry with respect to the plane of the corresponding
strip, as in the case of the H-N structures. However, the
Dirac loop is not in the kz = 0 plane, but is oﬀset in the
BZ in a direction that depends upon the nature of the
unit cell. In Fig.3(d) we show the single particle energies
as a function of momentum for the path traced in mo-
mentum space in the kx = 0 plane depicted in Fig.3(b).
The Dirac loop is not centered aroound the Γ point but
around C, at the edge of the BZ. All the structures open

FIG. 5. (Color online) (a) Tight bnding band structure in the
H-0 lattice for γ = 1
2 and (b) γ = 0. As γ decreases, the zero
energy line moves to the edge of the BZ, where the bands are
ﬂat. In the γ → 0 limit, the nodal line disappears. (c) Nodal
lines in the kz = 0 plane as a function of γ. White line: γ = 1;
blue: γ = 1
8 . (d) Velocity in the
z-direction (vz) in units of ta along the nodal line (φ angle)
for γ = 1, 1

2 ; green: γ = 1

4 ; red: γ = 1

2 , 1

4 and 1

8 , from top to bottom.

a gap when sublattice symmetry is broken, as in the H-N
lattices. However, the asymmetric structure diﬀers from
the H-N structure in that it lacks a screw axis symmetry.

II.2. Higher symmetry states

Conduction in 2D graphene comes from the overlap of
parallel pz orbitals in adjacent atoms. In the family of the
hyper-honeycomb lattices there is a π/2 rotation between
the pz orbitals at the edge of two adjacent perpendicular
ribbons. Due to the antisymmetric nature of those or-
bitals, a ϕ = π/2 rotation along the screw axis leads to
exact cancelation of the hopping matrix element γt = 0.
Other orbitals of higher angular momenta may lead to
diﬀerent, non-zero values of γ, which parametrizes the
coupling between the strips. To systematically under-
stand this physics from the perspective of tight binding
lattice models, we vary the parameter γ in the H-0 struc-
ture for γ ranging from γ = 1 down to γ = 0.

In Fig. 5 we see that as γ decreases, the nodal ring
expands to the very edge of the Brillouin zone, as illus-
trated in Fig. 5(a)-(c), and the optical gap outside the
nodal ring closes. At γ = 0 the ring is exactly at the
edge, and at the same time, the bands crossing the nodal
line become ﬂat. In panel 5(d) we show the velocity of
the quasiparticles in the z direction, along the nodal line,
for diﬀerent values of γ. Hence, in the γ → 0 limit the
Dirac loop is no longer present.

To verify this behavior, we conducted DFT calcula-

(a)(b)(c)φ/πφ/πφ/πφ/π(d)VelocityVelocityVelocityVelocityM’0c)Ra)b)Γd)10velocity z−axis2−2ΓRM’ΓM’0.51φ/πΓEnergy0RΓ2−25

FIG. 6. Top panels: DFT calculations for the H-0 (a) and
H-1 (b) structures using hydrogen-like orbitals. In both cases
the DFT calculation reproduces the structures found in the
simpler tight-binding model. Lower panels: DFT calculations
for the H-0 (c) and H-1 (d) structures with carbon atoms. In
both cases the suppression of inter-ribbon hopping has moved
the nodal ring to the very corner of the Brillouin zone.

tions in the H-0 and H-1 lattices assuming both s-wave
and p-wave orbitals, as shown in the panels of Fig. 6. The
DFT results were carried out using the VASP package20.
The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient ap-
proximation exchange-correlation potential21 was used,
and the electron-core interactions were treated in the pro-
jector augmented wave method22,23.
In panels 6a and 6b we used hydrogen-like atom poten-
tials (s-wave) arranged in the H-0 and H-1 lattices. The
lattice constant was assumed to be large enough to avoid
charge polarization eﬀects among hydrogen atoms, which
could lower the point group symmetry of the crystal. The
plots are in very good agreement with tight binding re-
sults. In panels 6c and d, we display the DFT results for
pz orbitals (carbon) for the same lattices. While those
plots also indicate the disappearance of the nodal lines,
they also suggest the non-trivial role of the sigma bands
in the electronic spectrum. In any case, the crossing point

FIG. 7. (Color online) Screw hyper-honeycomb lattice with
reﬂection symmetry. Parallel chains of the H-0 structure are
rotated by 2π/3 between the ﬁrst three layers, and then by
−2π/3 between the next three layer

FIG. 8. (Color online) An analysis of a generalization of the
screw hyper-honeycomb lattice to one with reﬂection symme-
try. (a) The unit cell for a structure. The Brillouin zone for
this structure, is the same as that of Fig. 7. (b) BZ of the
twisted lattice, with hexagonal symmetry. (c) Slice of the BZ
in the kz = 0 plane. The white thin lines show the Dirac lines.
The higher rotational symmetry of the lattice has yielded a
more circular Dirac loop. (d) Energy bands along the path
shown in red in Fig. 8. (b).

is moved away from the Fermi energy and into the very
corner of the Brilllouin zone. Thus, this generic family
of lattices has nodal rings with s-wave states and possi-
bly with higher angular momentum states that preserve
all reﬂections symmetries in the unit cell. Dirac loops
however cannot be realized in simple carbon structures
of those lattices, as originally conjectured6.

III. SCREW HYPER-HONEYCOMB LATTICES

All structures discussed up to this point have consisted
of alternating layers of parallel “strips” that are oriented
at right angles to one another, where the strips are ei-
ther identical or diﬀerent. However, we may also create
a structure in which subsequent layers are rotated by
2π/3. Such structures, the screw hyper-honeycomb lat-
tices, are chiral and possess a screw symmetry. The ones
we are interested also have an additional reﬂection sym-
metry along the screw axis, as depicted in Fig 7, which
is necessary for zero energy nodal lines to emerge.

The screw structure of successive rotations in one di-
rection lacks inversion and reﬂection symmetries, so a

210-1MГRГMГRГ420-2-4002EnergyEnergy200ΓM’RΓΓRM’Γ−2−2(b)(c)(d)(a)b3b1b2MKHAL(b)(c)Γ(a)M02KΓEnergyHA(d)KΓΓ−2M’K6

nodal line is not expected. We ﬁnd that this has parabolic
dispersion as a function of kx and ky at the K and K(cid:48)
points, and a linear dispersion as a function of kz. The
structure depicted is chiral, since we rotate each succes-
sive layer of chains by 2π/3 with respect to the one below
it. This destroys the inversion and reﬂection symmetries.
However, we may restore reﬂection symmetry by dou-
bling the size of the unit cell, so that the second half
consists of layers that rotate in the opposite sense to the
ﬁrst. In ﬁg. 8(a) we show the unit cell of the lattice de-
picted in Fig. 7. The unit cell consists of 12 atoms sitting
in a parallel chains which are rotated by 2π/3 between the
ﬁrst three layers, and then by −2π/3 between the next
three layers. This lattice generates a simple hexagonal
crystal with a Brillouin zone plotted in Fig. 8(b). The
√
generators of the BZ are the vectors b1 = (4π/3, 0, 0),
b2 = (−2π/3, 2π/
3, 0), and b3 = (0, 0, 2π/9), shown in
the same panel.

For s-wave orbitals (γ = 1), the lattice has zero energy
nodal lines in the kz = 0 plane shown in Fig. 8(c). The
equation for this loop is given by:

(cid:33)

(cid:32)√

3
2

(cid:19)

(cid:112)

(cid:18) 3

2

4 cos

ky

+ 2 cos

kx

=

6 + 2 cos 3kx.

(7)

The nodal line is centered around the Γ point, but is not
as simple as the Dirac ring expression (5) in the family
of the hyper-honeycomb lattice H-N , which has four-fold
symmetry and thus are symmetric in x and y. The higher
rotational symmetry of the lattice has yielded a more
circular Dirac loop. Projection of the 12×12 Hamiltonian
into the two lowest energy bands results in the same low
energy 2×2 Hamiltonian of Eq. (6).

The band structure along the path indicated in the red
lines in Fig. 8(b) is shown in panel (d) of the same ﬁgure.
The nodal line crosses the path both along the Γ−M and
Γ − K directions in the kz = 0 plane. In addition to the
Dirac loop, the band structure also shows crossings at
the K points, as indicated in the red circles of panel 8(d).
At those points, the spectrum of excitations is parabolic
along the x, y directions but is linear along the z axis.
Expanding around the two fold degenerate K points in
lowest order in momentum, the 12×12 Hamiltonian can
be reduced to a 2×2 eﬀective Hamiltonian,

(cid:34)

(cid:35)

HK(q) = −

q2
x + q2
y
2m

σx + vzqzσy

,

(8)

where vz = 3ta/2, m = 8a2/3t is the eﬀective mass of the
quasiparticles in the kz = 0 plane and q their momen-
tum away from K. This low energy Hamiltonian can be
parametrized in terms of two Pauli matrices, has a chiral
structure in the zx and yz planes and zero Chern number.
Hence, those touching points are not protected by adia-
batic deformations that lower the point group symmetry
of the lattice, as in double Weyl points.

FIG. 9. (Color online) Tight binding band structure of the
screw hyper-honeycomb lattice depicted in Fig. 8 for higher
symmetry orbitals (γ = 1/4) with 2π/3 rotation. (b) Evo-
lution of the nodal lines with γ: Blue lines: Dirac loop for
γ = 1; dashed black line: γ = 0.75; and red lines: γ = 1/4
lines. At γ < 1, the double Weyl points at the corner of the
BZ (K) split into a small Dirac loop centered around K and
equivalent points. (c) inset showing the merging of the the
Dirac loop centered at Γ with the one centered at K along
the Γ − M line (red circle in panel a). (d) Energy surface in
the kz = 0 plane for γ = 1 in the s-wave case. The red arrow
indicates the quadratic band touching point at K. (e) Energy
surface in the γ = 1/4 case. The blue arrow indicates the K
point in the center of the smaller Dirac loops.

In panel 9(a), we show the energy spectrum for the
twisted hyper-honeycomb lattice for γ = cos2(2π/3) =
1/4, which parametrizes the eﬀect of a screw axis rota-
tion by 2π/3 between two adjacent pz orbitals. Unlike
in the family of the hyper honeycomb lattice, which has
screw axis rotations of 90◦, the hopping matrix element
between two strips of atoms rotated by 2π/3 is always
ﬁnite, regardless the orbital symmetry.

The evolution of the nodal lines in the twisted hyper-
honeycomb lattice is shown in panel 9(b) for diﬀerent
values of γ. The blue lines represent the γ = 1 case (s-
wave states). For γ < 1, the touching points described
by Eq. (8) split into small Dirac loops centered at the
K point (dashed line). For γ = 1/4, the Dirac loops
centered at Γ and K start to merge into each other. In
panel 9(c), we zoom in two zero energy crossings along

ka2Energy0−2(b)(a)(c)(d)(e)Energy01.7KΓ1.9HMΓΓKMAΓ2.1the Γ − M direction near the M point. Each crossing
belongs to a diﬀerent Dirac loop.
In panels 9(d) and
(f) we show the energy surfaces in the kz = 0 plane for
γ = 1 and 1/4 respectively. The arrows indicate the
position of the K points at the edge of the BZ. Those
panels illustrate the evolution of the bands around the
K points, from a parabolic dispersion to the emergence
of a second small Dirac loop centered at K.

IV. DISCUSSION

The family of the hyper-honeycomb lattice with Dirac
nodal lines can be experimentally realized for instance
in optical lattices with fermions (such as K atoms) oc-
cupying s-wave states. In optical lattices, each site can
be approximated by a conﬁning parabolic potential. s-
wave states can be physically constructed in the situation
where the lowest energy Bloch band is populated.

Very recently, honeycomb crystals have been arti-
ﬁcially simulated with fermionic optical lattices using
three interfering laser beams with appropriate phases,
amplitudes and detuning24. Those experiments mea-
sured the energy of the Dirac quasiparticles and their
corresponding Berry phases. Because of the tunability of
the system, the Dirac points that result can be merged
and manipulated. Other experimental results25 include
the realization of the Haldane model, where the bands
acquire a Chern number and become topological. In the-
ory, the generalization of the three laser beam geometry
to the hyper-honeycomb lattice H-0 may provide a sim-
ple physical realization of this system. The population of
the lowest energy band with fermionic atoms constitutes
a promising path towards the experimental observation
of a Dirac loop in this geometry.

We showed that nodal lines can be realized in s and
higher angular momentum states in the screw hyper-
honeycomb structure with 2π/3 rotations. Higher angu-

7

lar momentum states such as p-wave could be in principle
realized in the excited Bloch bands of optical lattices26,27.
Those bands are metastable and have a lifetime in the
ms range, shorter than the typical intraband relaxation
time scales. Those states have been physically realized in
bosonic bipartite lattices engineered with a shallow and
a deep potential wells26,27. This construction breaks re-
ﬂection symmetry of the unit cell, and cannot be used for
observing nodal lines. In the screwed hyper-honeycomb
case, the two sublattices must have potentials of equal
depth.

In summary, we have systematically described the
nodal lines that appear in diﬀerent families of 3D crystals
with plannar trigonally connected sites. In the family of
the hyper-honeycomb lattice, we showed that Dirac lines
are expected in the presence of on site orbitals that pre-
serve the reﬂection symmetry of the planes set by the
trigonal links. We found that screwed hyper-honeycomb
structures with reﬂection symmetry in the unit cell also
present Dirac loops regardless the symmetry of the on
site states. Those crystals also present a touching point
at the corners of the BZ with chiral 3D quasiparticles,
but zero Chern number. Those lattices are just a small
subset of a vast number of possibilities of tight binding
lattices having nodal quasiparticles. We have proposed
optical lattice realizations of those structures.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We

thank I. Spielmann, A. Schwettman and
T. Esslinger for illuminating discussions. K. M. was sup-
ported by NSF grant DMR-1310407. B. U. acknowledges
NSF CAREER grant DMR-1352604 for support. The
DFT calculations were performed at the OU Supercom-
puting Center for Education and Research at the Univer-
sity of Oklahoma.

1 A. H. Castro Neto, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov, and

8 L. S. Xie, L. M. Schoop, E. M. Seibel, Q. D. Gibson, W.

A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 81, 109. (2009)

2 M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045

(2010).

3 X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1057

(2011).

Xie, and R. J. Cava, APL Mat. 3, 083602 (2015).

9 Hongming Weng, Yunye Liang, Qiunan Xu, Rui Yu, Zhong
Fang, Xi Dai, and Yoshiyuki Kawazoe Phys. Rev. B 92,
045108 (2015).

10 Rui Yu, Hongming Weng, Zhong Fang, Xi Dai, and Xiao

4 X. Wan, A. M. Turner, A. Vishwanath, and S. Y. Savrasov,

Hu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 036807 (2015).

Phys. Rev. B, 83, 205101 (2011).

5 S. M. Young,S. Zaheer, J. C. Y. Teo, C. L. Kane, E. J.
Mele, and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 108, 140405
(2012).

6 Kieran Mullen, Bruno Uchoa, and Daniel T. Glatzhofer

Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 026403 (2015).

11 Chen Fang, Yige Chen, Hae-Young Kee, and Liang Fu,

Phys. Rev. B 92, 081201(R) 2015.

12 TT Heikkil, GE Volovik, New J. Phys. 17, 093019 (2015).
13 Y. Chen, Y. Xie, S. A. Yang, H. Pan, F. Zhang, M. L.

Cohen, and S. Zhang, Nano Lett. 15 6974 (2015).

14 P. Hosur, S. A. Parameswaran, and A. Vishwanath, Phys.

7 Youngkuk Kim, Benjamin J. Wieder, C. L. Kane, and An-

Rev. Lett. 108, 046602 (2012).

drew M. Rappe Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 036806 (2015).

15 M. Phillips, V. Aji, arXiv:1408.3084 (2014).
16 A. Kitaev, Annals of Physics 321, 2 (2006).

17 S. Mandal, and N. Surendran, Phys. Rev. B 79, 024426

(2009).

23 G. Kresse; D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 (1999).
24 L. Tarruel, D. Greif, T. Uehlinger, G. Jotzu, T. Esslinger,

18 E. K-H Lee, R. Schaﬀer, S. Bhattacharjee, and Y. B. Kim

Nature 483 302 (2012).

Phys. Rev. B 89 045117 (2014).

19 I. Kimchi, J. G. Analytis, and A. Vishwanath, Phys. Rev.

B 90, 205126 (2014).

20 G. Kresse, J. Furthmuller, Phys. Rev. B, 54, 11169 (1996).
21 J. P. Perdew; K. Burke; M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett.,

25 G. Jotzu, M. Messer, R. Desbuquois, M. Lebrat, T.
Uehlinger, D. Greif, T. Esslinger, Nature 515, 237 (2014).
26 T. Cock, C. Hippler, A. Ewerbeck and A. Hemmerich, J.

Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 49, 042001 (2016).

27 G. Wirth, M. lschlger and A. Hemmerich, Nat. Physics 7

77, 3865-3868 (1996).

22 P. E. Blochl, Phys Rev B 50, 17953 (1994).

147 (2011).

8

