NOVEL DYNAMICAL PHENOMENA

IN MAGNETIC SYSTEMS

SOHAM BISWAS

DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS

UNIVERSITY OF CALCUTTA

INDIA

2011

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
4

 

 
 
]
h
c
e
m

-
t
a
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
6
4
6
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Acknowledgement

I express my sincere gratitude to Prof. Parongama Sen for her invaluable guidance,

advice and continuous encouragement for the past ﬁve years. In these years her

words became true that “the relationship between a student and a supervisor

is much more than simply a student-teacher relationship”.

I have enjoyed not

only academic but also non-academic discussions with her. I thank Prof Deepak

Dhar, Prof. Bikas Chakrabarti, Prof. Indrani Bose, Prof Subinay Dasgupta, Prof

Purusattam Ray and Prof. P.K.Mohanti for some valuable discussions regarding

my work.

I also thank my collaborators Prof Purusattam Ray and Dr. Anjan Kumar

Chandra for all the help and support that I received from them.

I thank the faculty members of the Department of Physics, University of Cal-

cutta for their support in various forms.

I thank all my friends of the Department of Physics, University of Calcutta.

I shared my room in the Department with Roshni, Sanchari, Bipasha, Biplob,

Chirashree, Pankaj and Anindya. I have thoroughly enjoyed the primarily non-

academic and some academic discussions with them.

I also thank the University of Calcutta, the University Grants Commission

(UGC/520/Jr. Fellow (RFSMS) and the Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Re-

search (SRF-DIRECT: sanction no. 09/028 (0818)/2010 EMR-I) for providing me

the ﬁnancial support. DST project SR/S2/CMP-56/2007 is also acknowledged for

the ﬁnancial support and also for the providing computational facilities for this

work.

Finally, I thank my parents for their support.

Contents

1 Introduction

1.1 Magnetic system : The Models

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.2 Dynamical phenomena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.3 The outline of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 Dynamical Phenomena in Ising systems

2.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Equilibrium dynamics

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2.1 Monte Carlo Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 Quenching dynamics

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3.1 Glauber dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3.2 Domain coarsening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3.3 Persistence

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4 Quenching of nearest neighbour Ising model

. . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4.1 Finite size scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4.2 Known results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Zero Temperature Dynamics of Ising models with competating

interactions

3.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

i

1

1

3

6

11

11

12

12

15

16

18

19

21

22

25

30

30

3.2 Quantities calculated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 Detailed dynamical behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.1

Stability of simple structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.2

0 < κ < 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.3 κ > 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.4 κ = 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.5 κ ≤ 0.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Discussions and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Quenching Dynamics: Eﬀect of the nature of randomness of com-

plex networks

4.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Description of the network models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.1 Classiﬁcation of network models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.2 Network models of our interest

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 Quantities Calculated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4 Detailed results of quenching dynamics on RMA . . . . . . . . . .

4.5 Detailed results of quenching dynamics on RMB . . . . . . . . . .

4.6 Discussions on the results

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.6.1 Comparison of the results for RMA and RMB . . . . . . .

4.6.2 Analysis of some general features of the quenching phenom-

ena on networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.7 Summary and concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Opinion formation : A newly proposed dynamics

5.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 Description of the proposed model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3 Model I : Detailed dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ii

33

35

35

37

41

43

46

50

56

56

58

58

60

63

64

69

73

73

76

79

83

83

85

87

5.4 Eﬀect of disorder : Rigidity parameter

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

89

5.5 Mapping of the opinion dynamics model to reaction diﬀusion system 94

5.6 Summary and concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

97

6 Dynamical crossover : Model with variable range of interaction 101

6.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

101

6.2 Dynamical rule and quantities calculated . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

104

6.3 Case with ﬁnite R (p → 0) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4 Case with p > 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

105

106

6.4.1 Results for 0 < p < 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

108

6.4.2 Discussions on the results

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

114

6.5 The case with quenched randomness

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

117

6.6 Summary and concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

119

iii

Chapter 1

Introduction

1.1 Magnetic system : The Models

A magnet may be regarded as consisting of a set of magnetic dipoles residing on the

vertices of a crystal lattice. We often refer to the magnetic dipoles as spins. The

spins are able to exchange energy through interactions between themselves and

with other degrees of freedom of the crystal lattice (e.g., via spin orbit coupling).

There are many models which have been proposed to represent magnetic systems.

Ising, XY and Heisenberg models are three spin models which may be considered

to be the most basic models among them [1].

The simplest model describing interactions between spins, is the Ising Model,

proposed by E. Ising in 1925 to represent magnetic systems and alloys and mag-

netic phase transitions from ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic to paramagnetic

states [2]. The model consists of a system of magnetic dipoles placed on a hyper-

cubic lattice, that can be either up or down and interact among themselves only

by nearest neighbour interactions. The Hamiltonian of the Ising model with no

1

external magnetic ﬁeld can be written as

H = − X<ij>

JijSiSj,

(1.1)

where the interaction between the ith and jth spins is denoted by Jij. This model

with nearest neighbour uniform interaction exhibits a temperature-induced con-

tinuous phase transition at a non-zero temperature in two and higher dimensions,

but not in one dimension. Though in this model a spin can have only two states

(either up or down), still it is possible to obtain phase transition and critical be-

haviour in a realistic manner from this simple model which has made it one of the

most studied models in history of condensed matter physics.

In the Heisenberg model, spins Si obey a continuous symmetry instead of

discrete symmetry. That means the Si are vectors. The Hamiltonian of equation

(1.2) can be generalized as the Hamiltonian of Heisenberg and XY model.

H = − X<ij>

Jij ~Si. ~Sj.

(1.2)

In the Heisenberg model Si are allowed to point in all directions (4π steradians),

rather than having only up or down state of the spins (Si = ±1). The Hamiltonian
of the XY Model is also given by equation (1.2) but the spins are unit vectors

conﬁned to rotate in a plane. Since the Heisenberg and XY models involve more

than one component of spin, these models are essentially quantum in nature as

the diﬀerent components of the spin do not commute. The Ising model on the

other hand, is purely classical in nature.

Ising model can be generalized to the q-state classical spin model popularly

known as Potts model [3] where lattice spins can take q diﬀerent discrete values.

In this model, a system of spins are considered to be conﬁned in a plane, with

2

each spin pointing to one of the equally spaced directions speciﬁed by the angles

Θn =

2πn

q

,

n = 0, 1, 2, ...., q − 1

The interaction Hamiltonian of the Potts model is given by

H = − X<ij>

JijδSi,Sj ,

(1.3)

where the interaction between spins Si and Sj, is denoted by Jij and δkr is the

Kronecker delta given by

δα,β =

1
q

[1 + (q − 1)eαeβ]

and α = 0, 1, ..., q − 1 are q unit vectors pointing in the q symmetric directions of
a hypertetrahedron in q − 1 dimensions. For q = 2, Potts model is equivalent to
the Ising model. Though Potts model is a simple extension of the Ising model, it

has a much richer phase structure, which makes it an important testing ground

for new theories and algorithms in the study of critical phenomena [4].

Ising model does not have any intrinsic dynamics as it is a classical model. The

dynamics of Ising model can only be induced by the inﬂuence of some external

agents (change of temperature or ﬁeld etc.). In this thesis to study the dynamics

of the magnetic systems we will restrict ourselves in the study of the dynamics of

Ising like classical spin systems only.

1.2 Dynamical phenomena

Dynamics of spin models is a much studied phenomenon and has emerged as a rich

ﬁeld of present-day research. Models having identical static critical behavior may

3

display diﬀerent behavior when dynamic critical phenomena are considered [5].

Our primary focus is on a prototypical system that is initially in a homogeneous

high-temperature disordered phase and the temperature is quenched (suddenly

dropped) to below the critical temperature. The quenching phenomenon below the

critical temperature is an important dynamical feature. Because of the complexity

of the domain coarsening process at the level of discrete spins, considerable eﬀort

has been devoted in constructing a complementary approach that is based on

a phenomenological description at the continuum level. But here in this thesis

we have studied the quenching dynamics of Ising spin like system which exhibit

discrete symmetry, not the continuous one. The details of the dynamics and the

methodology is discussed in the next chapter (Chapter 2 ) of the thesis.

When a homogeneous system is quenched to below the critical temperature,

a coarsening mosaic of ordered-phase domains forms, as the distinct broken-

symmetry phases compete with each other in their quest to select the low-temperature

thermodynamic equilibrium state [6, 7]. As a result of this competition, equilib-

rium is never reached for an inﬁnite system. Instead, self-similar behavior typically

arises, where the domain mosaic looks the same at diﬀerent times but only its over-

all length scale changes. This self-similarity is an important simplifying feature

that is characteristic of coarsening. So one of the very interesting phenomena

widely studied in the quenching process is the domain growth [6, 7].

For the dynamics of zero temperature quenching the scenario is a little bit dif-

ferent. In one dimension, a zero temperature quench of the Ising model ultimately

leads to the equilibrium conﬁguration, i.e., all spins point up (or down) for the
ﬁnite system size. The average domain size D increases in time t as D(t) ∼ t1/z,
where z is the dynamical exponent associated with the growth. In two or higher

dimensions, however, the system does not always reach equilibrium [8] even for

the ﬁnite system size, although the scaling relations still hold good. But even in

4

one dimension, if the interactions are not restricted to nearest neighbours only,

the dynamical behaviour may change considerably, often leading to absence of

scaling altogether. We have therefore studied the zero temperature quenching

dynamics of Ising spin like models in several systems where the interactions are

more complicated than simple nearest neighbour type.

Apart from the domain growth phenomenon, another important dynamical

behavior commonly studied is persistence [9, 10]. In Ising model, in a zero tem-

perature quench, persistence is simply the probability that a spin has not ﬂipped
till time t and is given by P (t) ∼ t−θ. θ is called the persistence exponent and is
unrelated to any other previously known static or dynamic exponents. A general

discussion of persistence and its scaling etc., has been included in the next chapter

(Chapter 2).

With the understanding developed in connection with the dynamics of non-

linearly coupled many body systems in Physics for the last four decades, people

started to study the macroscopic dynamics of various social systems or networks.

One of the ﬁrst models in sociophysics was proposed by Schelling [12] in 1971 to

simulate social segregation, which was similar (in purpose) to phase separation

models studied by physicists. In recent years, building on the development of the

kinetic theory of gases and statistical mechanics, physicists have begun to incorpo-

rate a statistical thermodynamic perspective in models of social physics in which

individuals are viewed as some eﬀective atoms/molecule-like units (having spatial

and dynamical properties) and the law of large numbers yields social behaviours.

Microscopic human behaviour is assumed to be represented in such models by real

numbers. When these numbers are discrete and have binary choices, the social

system can be modeled as a magnetic model where the Ising spin variables can

represent the states of the individuals and the interactions among them by spin-

spin interactions [13, 14]. Existence of a phase transition from a heterogeneous

5

society to a homogeneous society [15, 16] in many opinion dynamics models also

adds to the interest of Sociophysics.

The dynamics of Ising model can also be mapped to a random walk problem

as domain coarsening is identical to a reaction diﬀusion system [17]. The motions

of the domain walls in one dimension (with nearest neighbour interactions only),

can be viewed as the motions of the particles A with the reaction A + A → ∅.
This means the particles are walkers and when two particles come on top of each

other they are annihilated. The annihilation reaction ensures domain coalescence

and coarsening.

1.3 The outline of the thesis

The work reported in this thesis includes studies on the zero temperature quench-

ing dynamics of Ising spin like models as well as opinion dynamics, which involves

Ising spin like variables. A random walk problem is also included in this thesis,

as domain coarsening in one dimension can be mapped to a reaction diﬀusion

system.

In chapter 2 we have presented a general discussion on the features associated

with the quenching dynamics, coarsening phenomena, persistence etc. and the

numerical methods we have used to study them.

In chapter 3 we have presented our investigation on the dynamics of a two

dimensional axial next nearest neighbour Ising (ANNNI) model following a quench

to zero temperature. The Hamiltonian is given by

H = −J0

L

Xi,j=1

Si,jSi+1,j − J1 Xi,j=1

[Si,jSi,j+1 − κSi,jSi,j+2].

(1.4)

For κ < 1, the system does not reach the equilibrium ground state but slowly

6

evolves to a metastable state. For κ > 1, the system shows a behaviour similar

to the two dimensional ferromagnetic Ising model in the sense that it freezes to a

striped state with a ﬁnite probability. The persistence probability shows algebraic

decay here with an exponent θ = 0.235 ± 0.001 while the dynamical exponent of
growth z = 2.08 ± 0.01. For κ = 1, the system belongs to a completely diﬀerent
dynamical class; it always evolves to the true ground state with the persistence

and dynamical exponent having unique values. Much of the dynamical phenomena

can be understood by studying the dynamics and distribution of the number of

domains walls. We have also compared the dynamical behaviour to that of a

Ising model in which both the nearest and next nearest neighbour interactions are

ferromagnetic [18].

Randomness is known to aﬀect the dynamical behaviour of complex systems to

a large extent. In the next chapter (chapter 4) we have presented our investigation

on how the nature of randomness aﬀects the dynamics in a zero temperature

quench of Ising model on two types of random networks. In both the networks,

which are embedded in a one dimensional space, the ﬁrst neighbour connections

exist and the average degree is four per node. In the random model A, the second

neighbour connections are rewired with a probability p while in the random model

B, additional connections between neighbours at Euclidean distance l (l > 1) are
introduced with a probability P (l) ∝ l−α. We ﬁnd that for both models, the
dynamics leads to freezing such that the system gets locked in a disordered state.

The point at which the disorder of the nonequilibrium steady state is maximum is

located. Behaviour of dynamical quantities like residual energy, order parameter

and persistence are discussed and compared. Overall, the behaviour of physical

quantities are similar although subtle diﬀerences are observed due to the diﬀerence

in the nature of randomness.

In chapter 5, we have proposed a new model of binary opinion for opinion

7

dynamics in which the opinion of the individuals change according to the state of

their neighbouring domains. If the neighbouring domains have opposite opinions,

then the opinion of the domain with the larger size is followed (Model I). Starting

from a random conﬁguration, the system evolves to a homogeneous state. The

dynamical evolution show novel scaling behaviour with the persistence exponent

θ ≃ 0.235 and dynamic exponent z ≃ 1.02 ± 0.02. Here we have obtained a
new dynamical class. Introducing disorder in Model I through a parameter called

rigidity parameter ρ (probability that people are completely rigid and never change

their opinion), the transition to a heterogeneous society at ρ = 0+ is obtained.

Close to ρ = 0, the equilibrium values of the dynamic variables show power

law scaling behaviour with ρ. We have also discussed the eﬀect of having both

quenched and annealed disorder in the system [20]. Further, by mapping Model I

to a system of random walkers in one dimension with a tendency to walk towards

their nearest neighbour with probability ǫ, we ﬁnd that for any ǫ > 0.5, the Model

I dynamical behaviour is prevalent at long times [21].

In chapter 6, a parameter p is deﬁned to modify the dynamics introduced

in chapter 5 such that a spin can sense domain sizes up to R = pL/2 in a one

dimensional system of size L. For the cutoﬀ factor p → 0, the dynamics is Ising
like and the domains grow with time t diﬀusively as t1/z with z = 2, while for

p = 1, the original model I showed ballistic dynamics with z ≃ 1. For intermediate
values of p, the domain growth, magnetization and persistence show model I like

behaviour up to a macroscopic crossover time t1 ∼ pL/2. Beyond t1, characteristic
power law variations of the dynamic quantities are no longer observed. The total
time to reach equilibrium is found to be t = apL + b(1 − p)3L2, from which we
conclude that the later time behaviour is diﬀusive. We have also considered the

case when a random but quenched value of p is used for each spin for which

ballistic behaviour is once again obtained [22].

8

Bibliography

[1] N. Goldenfeld, Lectures on Phase Transitions and the Renormaliza-

tion Group Addison-Wesley, 1992

R. J. Baxter Exactly solved models in Statistical Mechanics , Aca-

demic, New York, 1989

[2] E. Ising, Z. Phys. 31, 253 (1925)

[3] R. B. Potts, Ph. D. thesis, University of Oxford (1951)

R. B. Potts, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 48, 106 (1952)

[4] F. Y. Wu, Rev. Mod. Phys, 54 235 (1982)

[5] P. C. Hohenberg and B. I. Halperin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 49 435 (1977).

[6] J. D. Gunton, M. San Miguel and P. S. Sahni, Phase Transitions

and critical phenomena, Vol 8, eds. C. Domb and J. L. Lebowitz

(Academic, NY 1983)

[7] A. J. Bray, Adv. Phys. 43 357 (1994) and the references therein.

[8] V. Spirin, P. L. Krapivsky and S. Redner, Phys. Rev.E 63 036118

(2001).

[9] For a review, see S. N. Majumdar, Curr. Sci. 77 370 (1999).

9

[10] B. Derrida, A. J.Bray and C. Godreche, J.Phys. A 27 L357 (1994)

[11] D. Stauﬀer, J. Phys. A 27 5029 (1994).

[12] T. C. Schelling, Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1, 143 (1971).

[13] D. Stauﬀer, Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science edited

by R. A. Meyers, Springer, New York (2009).

[14] K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd, Int. J. Mod. Phys C 11 1157 (2000)

[15] A. Baronchelli, L. DallAsta, A. Barrat, and V. Loreto, Phys. Rev. E

76 051102 (2007);

C. Castellano, M. Marsili and A. Vespignani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85

3536 (2000).

[16] S. Galam, Physica A 333 453 (2004)

S. Galam, Europhys. Lett. 70 705 (2005).

[17] B. Derrida, V. Hakim, V. Pasquier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 751 (1995)

[18] S.Biswas, A.K.Chandra and P.Sen, Phys. Rev. E 78, 041119 (2008)

[19] S.Biswas and P.Sen, Phys. Rev. E 84, 066107 (2011) (2011)

[20] S. Biswas and P. Sen, Phys. Rev. E 80, 027101 (2009).

[21] S. Biswas, P.Sen and P.Ray, Journal of Physics: Conference Series

297 012003 (2011)

[22] S. Biswas and P. Sen, Journal of Physics A 44 145003 (2011).

10

Chapter 2

Dynamical Phenomena in Ising

systems

2.1

Introduction

Dynamics of spin models, as mentioned in the previous chapter, has emerged as a

rich ﬁeld of present day research. When a system is at the critical point or close to

the critical point, anomalies occur in a large variety of dynamical properties and

models having identical static critical behavior may display diﬀerent dynamical

behavior when the system is close to the critical point. The dynamical properties

of a system are quantities which depend on the equations of motion and are not

determined simply by the equilibrium properties.

Over last few decades, a number of theoretical ideas like (i) the conventional

theory of critical slowing down, (ii) the ‘mode-coupling theory’ of transport phe-

nomena, (iii) the hypothesis of dynamical scaling and universality and (iv) the

renormalization group approach to critical dynamics etc. have been proposed and

discussed for understanding of dynamic critical phenomena. Brief reviews of these

concepts may be found in [1].

11

2.2 Equilibrium dynamics

A system is in equilibrium when its bulk properties remain constant or at least

ﬂuctuate closely around a constant mean value over a time period long enough in

the context of the study. The equilibrium statistical mechanics can be explored

totally once the partition function Z of the system is known. But even when the

system is in thermal equilibrium, to calculate any thermodynamic quantity we

need the knowledge of the variation of Z with temperature and other parameters

aﬀecting the system (like external magnetic ﬁeld). If the partition function can be

calculated exactly, the problem is said to have an exact solution [2, 3]. But when-

ever we are studying the dynamics of the system, most of the times a probabilistic

description is required for the formation of of equation of motion. Often it is not

possible to compute the probability distribution functions analytically in explicit

form, because of the complexity of the problem and we need to go for a number

of approximate techniques which include series expansions, ﬁeld theoretical meth-

ods and computational methods. The focus of this chapter will be mainly the

computational methods, explicitly the method of Monte Carlo Simulation [4, 5]

2.2.1 Monte Carlo Study

Numerical simulation can be regarded as an experiment made on computer. For

stochastic systems in which the number of degrees of freedom is large and ana-

lytical methods are not very eﬃcient, computer simulation becomes a very useful

method. Monte-Carlo methods aim at a numerical estimation of probability dis-

tributions as well as of averages, that can be calculated from them, making use

of (pseudo) random numbers [4]. Whenever we are considering any classical stem

(say for example Ising spin system) to calculate the average of any observable

quantity O, not all conﬁgurations are equally likely, rather their probabilities are

12

proportional to the Boltzmann factor exp(−βE). Thus the ensemble average of
the quantity of interest over all states µ of the system (weighting each other with

its own Boltzmann probability) is given by

hOi = Pµ Oµ exp(−βEµ)
Pµ exp(−βEµ)

(2.1)

where β = 1/kT , k being the Boltzmanns constant and Eµ is the energy of the

state µ.

One can choose N such states {µ1, µ2, .., µN} randomly and take the above
average. However, it should be remembered that for the canonical ensemble the
ﬂuctuations in the energy vanishes as 1/√L (L be the system size) which means

that only a few states with energy very close to the average energy will occur with

high probability and contribute to the average. Thus it will be meaningful to

device a method by which one can generate the states which are more probable.

These states can be dynamically evolved from arbitrary initial states. The

mechanism of generating a new state δ from the initial state µ of the system, in

a random fashion using a ‘transition probability’ wµδ is called a Markov pro-

cess [6]. For a Markov process all the transition probabilities should satisfy the

following two conditions :

1. They should not vary over time.

2. They should depend only on the properties of the current states µ and δ,

and not on any other states the system has passed through (history independent).

The transition probabilities P (µ → δ) must satisfy also the constraint

Xδ

P (µ → δ) = 1

If PA(t) is the probability of a state A at time t, then the master equation can be

13

written as

dPA
dt

= XB

wBAPB(t) − XB

wABPA(t),

(2.2)

where the ﬁrst term is a gain term and the second one is the loss term. w′ s denote

the transition probabilities. The above equation (Equ. 2.2) can be written, for

discrete times,

PA(t + 1) − PA(t) = XB

wBAPB(t) − XB

wABPA(t).

(2.3)

At steady state, which is expected to occur for large times, the RHS is zero which

gives the condition

wBAPB(t → ∞) = wABPA(t → ∞).

Since at equilibrium, the probabilities are given by the Boltzmanns expression,

we have,

wBA exp(−βEB) = wAB exp(−βEA)

(2.4)

The above condition (Equ 2.4) is known as the principle of detailed balance.

That means the system is not sampling all the states with equal probability,

but sampling them according to the Boltzmann probability distribution. This

process of choosing states which are more probable than just choosing a set of

random states is known as importance sampling. Thus in an importance sam-

pling, average values are calculated using the formula

hOi =

1
N

N

Xµ=1

Oµ

(2.5)

instead of equation 2.1.

There can be several choices for the transition probabilities. Metropolis and

14

Glauber are important among them. In this thesis we have basically studied the

nonequilibrium quenching dynamics of Ising spin systems using Glauber dynamics.

The detail of these are discussed in next section of this chapter.

2.3 Quenching dynamics

The phenomena in which the temperature of a system is suddenly dropped from

very high (T → ∞) to a very low value (T ∼ 0), is called quenching. For
an Ising spin system very high temperature means the system is in completely

random disordered phase. The behaviour of Ising spin system following a deep

quench below the critical temperature comprises a central topic in the study of

the nonequilibrium dynamics of the system nowadays. Systems quenched from a

disordered phase into an ordered phase do not order instantaneously. Instead, the

length scale of ordered regions grows with time as the diﬀerent broken symmetry

phases compete each other to select the equilibrium state [7].

The nonequilibrium process is very complex and critical to understand [8].

Here the probability distributions are not the simply Boltzmann distributions (as

in equilibrium process) and changing at each and every time step. This process

may be roughly devided in two diﬀerent categories. First, the dynamical system

which evolve according to some given dynamical rules exist and there is no so called

Hamiltonian describing the system. Second the systems, where the equilibrium

state is known and one starts far from equilibrium. Then we evolve the system

according to a rule which has been determined from the equilibrium dynamics

of the system (these rules lead the system to the equilibrium many times) and

observe what happens. Thus in the second case we use the transition probabilities

determined from the equilibrium dynamics of the system and we also use the

formula given by equation 2.5 to calculate the average of any observable quantity

15

O. One of the example pf the second case is the quenching dynamics of Ising spin

system, in which we are interested.

Many rigorous and nonrigorous results have been obtained on diﬀerent ques-

tions arising in this context: the formation of domains, their subsequent evolution

(discussed in Sec. 2.3.2), spatial and temporal scaling properties, the persistence

properties at zero and positive temperature (Sec. 2.3.3); the observed aging phe-

nomena in both disordered and ordered systems and many others [7, 9].

It may be noted that Glauber dynamics can be used when the order parame-

ter is not conserved. For system with conserved order parameter, the dynamical

evolution can be studied using e.g, the Kawasaki exchange dynamics [10]. In this

thesis we shall present our investigation on those systems, where the order param-

eter is not conserved. So in this thesis we shall discuss the quenching phenomena

considering the evolution of the Ising spin system using Glauber Dynamics [11].

2.3.1 Glauber dynamics

Let us take a Ising spin system with Hamiltonian

H = − X<ij>

JijSiSj,

(2.6)

where Si = ±1 and the interaction between the ith and jth spins is denoted
by Jij. We start from a completely random disordered phase (that means spins

are completely uncorrelated and Si = ±1 equiprobably) which evolve by very
low ﬁnite temperature Glauber dynamics [11] corresponding to a quench from

very high temperature (T → ∞) to very low one (T ∼ 0). For each initial
spin conﬁguration, one realization of the dynamics was performed until the ﬁnal

state has been reached. As Glauber dynamics is essentially a single spin ﬂip

dynamics, one may consider single spin ﬂips to generate the conﬁguration B from

16

the conﬁguration A. Thus only one spin in conﬁguration A is ﬂipped to get the

conﬁguration B. The choice of transition probability wAB in Glauber dynamics is

simply

wAB = 1/2(1 − tanh(β △ E))

(2.7)

where △E = EB − EA and β = 1/kT

So the precise steps for performing Monte Carlo simulation following Glauber

dynamics will be as follows :

1. Pick up a spin at random.

2. Calculate the change of energy △E which is essentially Ef lipped − Epresent.
3. Flip the spin according to the probability given by equation (2.7).

For zero temperature Glauber dynamics (that means the Ising spin system is

quenched to T = 0 temperature) the rule of spin ﬂip will be as follows (obtained

by putting T = 0 in equation 2.7) :

1. If △E < 0 : The spin will ﬂip (wAB = 1)
2. If △E > 0 : The spin will not ﬂip (wAB = 0)
3. If △E = 0 : The spin will ﬂip with probability 1/2 (wAB = 1/2)
For a system of N spins, one Monte Carlo time step is said to be completed

after N such ﬂippings. Here the process of update we have considered (pick up a

spin at random and update it according to the rule) is known as random update.

In the process of random update, in one MC time step a single spin can be picked

up more than once and there may exist few spins which could not be picked up at

all. There is another process of update, known as sequential update where each

and every spin of the spin system are used to be picked up sequentially one after

another for update.

Random update process can be of two types named (a) random sequential

update and (b) random parallel update. In the random update process either all

17

spins are randomly selected and updated at each time step, or only one spin is

randomly selected and updated in each time step. We refer to the ﬁrst update rule

as random parallel update, and the second as random sequential update. The time

interval between updates is taken △t = 1 in parallel updates, and △t = 1/N in
sequential updates, such that in both cases O(N) spins are updated per unit time.

Here N is the number of spins or the system size. Glauber dynamics was originally

introduced as a sequential updating process [11] and in one dimension evolution

under this dynamics with random sequential updating is already well known and

can be derived analytically [12]. The process of updating of all the spins of the

spin system simultaneously, at one go following the rule of the dynamics, is known

as parallel update [13].

Here in this thesis we have used the process of random sequential update

everywhere.

2.3.2 Domain coarsening

It is mentioned earlier that when a system is quenched from a homogeneous high

temperature disordered state to a low temperature state it does not order instan-

taneously. Broken symmetry phases compete each other to select the equilibrium

state and the domains grow with time. A scale-invariant morphology is developed,

i.e., the network of domains is (statistically) independent of time when lengths are

rescaled by a single characteristic length scale that typically grows algebraically

with time [7, 14]. For the zero temperature dynamics the average domain size D

increases in time t as

D(t) ∼ t1/z,

where z is the dynamical exponent associated with the growth. A typical picture

of domain coarsening following a quench to zero temperature is shown in ﬁgure

18

2.1.

t1

t3

t2

tf

Figure 2.1: Domain growth with time for two dimensional Ising spin system, after
a quench to zero temperature. Here t1 < t2 < t3 < tf . tf is the time counted after
the system has reached the equilibrium(all up or all down state for T = 0.

2.3.3 Persistence

Apart from the domain growth phenomenon, another important dynamical be-

havior that has attracted considerable interest recently is persistence. Persis-

19

tence is simply the probability that the ﬂuctuating nonequilibrium ﬁeld does not

change sign upto time t [15]. The problem of persistence in spatially extended

nonequilibrium systems has recently generated a lot of interest both theoretically

[16, 17, 18, 19] and experimentally [21, 22].

Single spin persistence provides a natural counterpart to the survival proba-

bility in the realm of many-particle systems. In the context of reaction processes,

persistence is equivalent to the survival of immobile impurities and therefore does

not provide information about collective properties of the bulk [20].

In Ising

model, in a zero temperature quench, persistence is simply the probability that a

spin has not ﬂipped till time t and is given by

P (t) ∼ t−θ,

where θ is called the persistence exponent and is unrelated to any other previously

known static or dynamic exponents. Persistence probability is in general non-

Markovian time evolution of a local ﬂuctuating variable, such as a spin from its

initial state.

The persistence probability is hard to measure in simulations, at nonzero tem-

perature, because one needs to distinguish spin ﬂips due to thermal ﬂuctuations

from those due to the motion of interfaces. The prescription for measuring the

persistence probability for single spin ﬂip at a ﬁnite temperature is given in [23].

Apart from such ‘local′ persistence, one can also study the ‘global′ persistence

behaviour by measuring the probability PG(t) that the order parameter does not

change its sign till time t [24]. At the critical temperature, the probability that

the individual spins will not be ﬂipped till time t has an exponential decay, while

20

the global persistence shows an algebraic decay:

PG(t) ∼ t−θG.

2.4 Quenching of nearest neighbour Ising model

The Hamiltonian of the Ising spin model we have considered here is given by

equation 2.6, where Si = ±1 and the sum is over all nearest-neighbor pairs of
sites hiji. Now we ask the question, what is the fate of the Ising system after
In one dimension, a zero temperature quench of
a zero temperature quench.

the Ising model (with nearest neighbour interactions only) ultimately leads to

the equilibrium conﬁguration (Figure 2.2). Here the domain walls approach each

other and annihilate, the system goes to its stable state (all up or all down) at

very large times.

Figure 2.2: Schematic picture of the zero temperature quenching dynamics of one
dimensional nearest neighbour Ising model. The red colour domain is shrinking
with time and the domain walls between the red and blue colour spin will anni-
hilate each other to form all up state (with blue colour spins only) after few time
steps.

In higher dimensions, the system cannot reach the ground state for all initial

conﬁgurations.

In two dimensions, the system can ﬁnd out the ground state

for about 70% cases [25]. In two dimension, on the square lattice, there exist a

21

huge number of metastable states that consists of alternating vertical or horizontal

stripes whose widths are all ≥ 2. These arise because in zero-temperature Glauber
dynamics, a straight boundary between up and down phases is stable (Figure2.3).

Figure 2.3: Schematic picture to show freezing at the zero temperature Glauber
dynamics of two dimensional nearest neighbour Ising model.

From the schematic picture 2.3, it is very clear that any spin at the boundary

is supported by three neighbouring spins and a reversal of any spin along the

boundary increases the energy. However, a stripe of width one is unstable, as

there will not be any change of energy due to the ﬂipping of one of the spins in

the stripe.

In three dimensions the Ising spin system (with nearest neighbour interac-

tion), never reaches the ground state by zero temperature single spin ﬂip Glauber

dynamics.

2.4.1 Finite size scaling

It is not possible to reach the thermodynamic limit (means L → ∞) numerically,
when we are doing the simulations in computer. We always do our simulations in

22

ﬁnite system size, no matter how large. So we need the ﬁnite size corrections for

getting the results at the thermodynamic limit (L → ∞). In this subsection we
shall discuss the theory of ﬁnite size scaling of the dynamical exponent z and the

persistence exponent θ for the zero temperature quenching dynamics.

It is already discussed that domain size D increases in time t as D(t) ∼ t1/z.

Now as magnetization m ∼ √D, so magnetization grows with time as

m(t) ∼ t1/2z.

Let us consider a Ising spin system of d-dimensional geometry of linear size L with

nearest neighbour interaction. The system of spins evolve in time following the

Glauber dynamics, lowering the total energy of the conﬁguration in the process.
the persistence probability shows a power law form in time, P (t) ∼ t−θ, as long as
t << t∗. For t >> t∗ , the domain cannot grow any further because of the ﬁnite

system size and persistence probability stops decaying, attaining a limiting value

P (∞, L) ∼ L−zθ.

From the above behaviour of the persistence probability one can write down the

dynamical scaling relation [26]

P (t, L) ∼ t−θf (L/t1/z),

(2.8)

where the scaling function f (x) ∼ x−α with α = zθ for x << 1. For large x, f (x)
is a constant. The equation 2.8 can also be written as

P (t, L) ∼ L−αf (t/Lz)

(2.9)

23

with α = zθ. The scaling function f (x) ∼ x−θ for x << 1 and f (x) is a constant
for large x. Similar ﬁnite size scaling ideas also have been used in the context of

global persistence exponent for nonequilibrium critical dynamics [24].

The spatial correlation among the persistent sites can be quantiﬁed by the

two point correlation function C(r, t) deﬁned as the probability that site (x + r) is

persistent, given that the site x is persistent (averaged over x). For a d-dimensional

system, C(r, t) satisﬁes the normalization condition

Z L

0

C(r, t)ddr = LdP (t, L).

(2.10)

To calculate the integral we have to put the form of P (t, L) (equation 2.9) in

equation 2.10. The calculation and argument ultimately leads to the dynamical

scaling form for C(r, t) :

C(r, t) = r−αg(t/rz),

(2.11)

with α = zθ. The nature of the function g(x) is same as that of the function f (x).

For large t (as t → ∞)

C(r, t) ∼ r−α.

So the exponent α gives the spatial correlations of the persistent spins for the

dynamics. This scaling description was introduced in the context of A + A → ∅
It has been shown that the exponent α is related to the fractal
model [27].

dimension df = d − zθ of the fractal formed by the persistent spins [26]. The
entire picture stated above is true as long as

zθ
d

< 1

For zθ > d, persistence probability will decay to zero for any lattice size L.

24

The ﬁnite size size scaling form of the correlation functions for quenches to

ﬁnal temperatures T = 0 and T = Tc for nearest neighbour Ising model in two

dimensions has been proposed and discussed in [28].

2.4.2 Known results

Glauber found the ﬁrst exact solution for the nearest neighbour kinetic Ising chain

and it is proved that the dynamical exponent z = 2 for the simplest Glauber

dynamics of the Ising chain [11]. The dynamical exponent z is equal to 2 also in

the higher dimensions [8].

There have been many attempts in recent years to determine the persistence

exponent θ analytically for various systems and processes [15]. Persistence expo-

nents belong to a new class of exponents and it cannot be derived, in general,

from other static and dynamic exponents. Exact expression for θ is known only

in one-dimensional Potts model for any Potts state q [29]:

θ(q) = −

1
8

+

2
π2 [cos−1(

2 − q
√2q

)]2

(2.12)

Putting q = 2 in equation 2.12 we get θ(2) = 3/8, the persistence exponent for one-

dimensional nearest neighbour Ising model. Exact value of the global persistence

exponent for the nearest-neighbour Ising chain is also known (θG = 0.25) [24].

For the higher dimensions the persistence exponent is determined numerically

and by some approximation methods. The persistence and dynamical exponents

for one, two and three dimensions, for the nearest neighbour Ising model are listed

below in the following table :

25

Ising model

θ

1-D

2-D

3-D

3/8

0.22

0.16

z

2

2

2

Further in the next chapters we shall compare these values of the exponents (θ

and z) with the newly obtained values, for diﬀerent types of Ising spin systems.

26

Bibliography

[1] P. C. Hohenberg and B. I. Halperin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 49 435 (1977).

[2] L. Onsagor, Phys. Rev. 65, 117 (1944).

[3] R. J. Baxter, Exactly solved models in statistical mechanics, Aca-

demic Press, London (1982).

[4] K. Binder, Editor, Applications of the Monte Carlo Method in Sta-

tistical Physics, (Springer-Verlag, 1986).

K.Binder, p249, Mathematical Tools for Physicists. Edited by George

L. Trigg (2005)

[5] M. E. J. Newman and G. T. Barkema, Monte Carlo Methods in

Statistical Physics, Oxford University Press.

[6] W. Feller, Introduction to probability theory and its application, Wi-

ley, New York, 3rd edition, vol 1 (1968).

[7] A. J. Bray, Adv. Phys. 43 357 (1994) and the references therein.

[8] V. Privman, Editor Nonequilibrium statistical mechanics in one di-

mension, Cambridge University press (1997)

[9] C. M. Newman and D. L. Stein, Physica A 279 159 (2000) and the

references therein.

27

[10] K. Kawasaki, Phys. Rev. 145, 224 (1966)

[11] R. J. Glauber, J. Math. Phys 4 294 (1963)

[12] C. Godreche, J. M. Luck, Journal of Physics - Condensed Matter,

17, 2573 (2005)

[13] J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 18, 1781 (1985)

[14] J. D. Gunton, M. San Miguel and P. S. Sahni, Phase Transitions

and critical phenomena, Vol 8, eds. C. Domb and J. L. Lebowitz

(Academic, NY 1983)

[15] For a review, see S. N. Majumdar, Curr. Sci. 77 370 (1999).

[16] B. Derrida, A.J. Bray, and C. Godrche, J. Phys. A 27, L357 (1994);

[17] D. Stauﬀer, J. Phys. A 27 5029 (1994).

[18] P. L. Krapivsky, E.Ben-Naim and S. Redner, Phys. Rev.E 50 2474

(1994).

[19] A. Watson, Science, 274, 919 (1996).

[20] P. L. Krapivsky and E. Ben-Naim, Phys Rev E, 56, 3788 (1997)

[21] M. Marcos-Martin, D. Beysens, J-P Bouchaud, C. Godr‘che, and I.

Yekutieli, Physica 214D, 396 (1995).

[22] W.Y. Tam, R. Zeitak, K.Y. Szeto, and J. Stavans, Phys. Rev. Lett.

78, 1588 (1997).

B. Yurke, A. N. Pargellis, S. N. Majumdar, and C. Sire, Phys Rev

E, 56 R40 (1997)

28

[23] B. Derrida, Phys. Rev.E 55 3705 (1997).

[24] S. N. Majumdar, A. J. Bray, S. J. Cornell and C. Sire Phys. Rev.

Lett. 77 3704 (1996)

[25] V. Spirin, P. L. Krapivsky, and S. Redner, Phys. Rev. E , 63, 036118

(2001)

[26] G. Manoj and P. Ray, Phys. Rev. E 62, 7755 (2000)

[27] G. Manoj and P. Ray, J. Phys A 33, 5489 (2000).

[28] K Humayun and A J Bray, J. Phys A 24, 1915 (1991)

[29] B. Derrida, V. Hakim and V. Pasquir, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995)

751; J. Stat. Phys. 85 (1996) 763

29

Chapter 3

Zero Temperature Dynamics of

Ising models with competating

interactions

3.1

Introduction

In one dimension, a zero temperature quench of the Ising model as mentioned

earlier ultimately leads to the equilibrium conﬁguration, i.e., all spins point up
(or down). The average domain size D increases in time t as D(t) ∼ t1/z, where z is
the dynamical exponent associated with the growth [1, 2]. As the system coarsens,
the magnetization also grows in time as m(t) ∼ t1/2z (discussed in chapter 2). In
two or higher dimensions, however, the system does not always reach equilibrium

[3] although these scaling relations still hold good.

Apart from the domain growth phenomenon [1, 2], another important dynam-

ical behavior commonly studied is persistence. In Ising model, in a zero temper-

ature quench, persistence is simply the probability that a spin has not ﬂipped
till time t and is given by P (t) ∼ t−θ. θ is called the persistence exponent and is

30

unrelated to any other known static or dynamic exponents [3, 4, 5, 6, 7] (discussed

in chapter 2).

Drastic changes in the dynamical behaviour of the Ising model in presence of a

competing next nearest neighbor interaction have been observed earlier [8, 9, 10].

The one dimensional ANNNI (Axial next nearest neighbour Ising) model with L

spins is described by the Hamiltonian

L

H = −J

Xi=1

(SiSi+1 − κSiSi+2).

(3.1)

Here it was found that for κ < 1, under a zero temperature quench with single

spin ﬂip Glauber dynamics, the system does not reach its true ground state. (The

ground state is ferromagnetic for κ < 0.5, antiphase for κ > 0.5, and highly

degenerate at κ = 0.5 [11]). On the contrary, after an initial short time, domain

walls become ﬁxed in number but remain mobile at all times thereby making the

persistence probability go to zero in a stretched exponential manner. For κ > 1 on

the other hand, although the system reaches the ground state at long times, the

dynamical exponent and the persistence exponent are both diﬀerent from those

of the Ising model with only nearest neighbour interaction [9].

The above observations and the additional fact that even in the two dimen-

sional nearest neighbour Ising model, frozen-in striped states appear in a zero

temperature quench [3], suggest that the two dimensional Ising model in presence

of competing interactions could show novel dynamical behaviour. In the present

work, we have introduced such an interaction (along one direction) in the two

dimensional Ising model, thus making it equivalent to the ANNNI model in two

dimensions precisely. The Hamiltonian for the two dimensional ANNNI model on

31

a L × L lattice is given by

H = −J0

L

Xi,j=1

Si,jSi+1,j − J1 Xi,j=1

[Si,jSi,j+1 − κSi,jSi,j+2].

(3.2)

Henceforth, we will assume the competing interaction to be along the x (hori-

zontal) direction, while in the y (vertical) direction, there is only ferromagnetic

interaction.

Although the thermal phase diagram of the two dimensional ANNNI model

is not known exactly, the ground state is known and simple.

If one calculates

the magnetization along the horizontal direction only, then for κ < 0.5, there is

ferromagnetic order and antiphase order for κ > 0.5. Again, κ = 0.5 is the fully

frustrated point where the ground state is highly degenerate. On the other hand,

there is always ferromagnetic order along the vertical direction. In Fig. 3.1, we

have shown the ground state spin conﬁgurations along the x direction for diﬀerent

values of κ.

Highly degenerate

Ferro
++++++

Antiphase
++ −−++ −−

0

0 .5

T =  0

κ

Figure 3.1: The ground state (temperature T = 0) spin conﬁgurations along the
x direction are shown for diﬀerent values of κ. In the ferromagnetic phase, there
is a two fold degeneracy and in the antiphase the degeneracy is four fold. The
ground state is inﬁnitely degenerate at the fully frustrated point κ = 0.5.

In section 3.2, we have given a list of the quantities calculated. In section 3.3,

we discuss the dynamic behaviour in detail. In order to compare the results with

those of a model without competition, we have also studied the dynamical fea-

32

tures of a two dimensional Ising model with ferromagnetic next nearest neighbour

interaction, i.e., the model given by eq. (3.2) in which κ < 0. These results are

also presented in section 3.3. Discussions and concluding statements are made in

the last section of this chapter.

3.2 Quantities calculated

We have estimated the following quantities in the present work:

1. Persistence probability P (t): As already mentioned, this is the probability

that a spin does not ﬂip till time t.

In case the persistence probability shows a power law form, P (t) ∼ t−θ, one
can use the ﬁnite size scaling relation [12]

P (t, L) ∼ t−θf (L/t1/z).

(3.3)

For ﬁnite systems, the persistence probability saturates at a value L−α at
large times. Therefore, for x << 1 , f (x) ∼ x−α with α = zθ. For large x,
f (x) is a constant.

It has been shown that the exponent α is related to the fractal dimension of

the fractal formed by the persistent spins [26]. Here we obtain an estimate

of α using the above analysis.

2. Number of domain walls ND: Taking a single strip of L spins at a time,

one can calculate the number of domain walls for each strip and determine

the average.

In the L × L lattice, we consider the fraction fD = ND/L
and study the behaviour of fD as a function of time. One can take strips

along both the x and y directions (see Fig. 3.2 where the calculation of

33

I

II

I

(a)

I
II
I
II
I

(b)

Figure 3.2: The schematic pictures of conﬁgurations with ﬂat interfaces separating
domains of type I and II are shown: (a) when the interface lies parallel to y axis,
we have nonzero fDx (= 2/L in this particular case) and (b) with interfaces parallel
to the x axis we have nonzero fDy (= 4/L here)

fD in simple cases has been illustrated). As the system is anisotropic, it is

expected that the two measures, fDx along the x direction and fDy along the

y direction, will show diﬀerent dynamical behaviour in general. The domain

size D increases as t1/z as already mentioned and it has been observed earlier

that the dynamic exponent occurring in coarsening dynamics is the same as

that occurring in the ﬁnite size scaling of P (t) (eq. (3.3)) [12]. Although we

do not calculate the domain sizes, the average number of domain walls per

strip is shown to follow a dynamics given by the same exponent z, at least

for κ > 1.

3. Distribution P (fD) (or P (ND)) of the fraction (or number) of domain walls

at steady state: this is also done for both x and y directions.

4. Distribution P (m) of the total magnetization at steady state for κ ≤ 0 only.
We have taken lattices of size L × L with L = 40, 100, 200 and 300 to
study the persistence behaviour and dynamics of the domain walls of the

system and averaging over at least 50 conﬁgurations for each size have been

made. For estimating the distribution ND we have averaged over much

34

larger number of conﬁgurations (typically 4000) and restricted to system

sizes 40 × 40, 60 × 60, 80 × 80 and 100 × 100. Periodic boundary condition
has been used in both x and y directions. J0 = J1 = 1 has been used in the

numerical simulations.

3.3 Detailed dynamical behaviour

Before going in to the details of the dynamical behaviour let us discuss the stability

of simple conﬁgurations or structures of spins which will help us in appreciating

the fact that the dynamical behaviour is strongly dependent on κ.

3.3.1 Stability of simple structures

An important question that arises in dynamics is the stability of spin conﬁgu-

rations - it may happen that conﬁgurations which do not correspond to global

minimum of energy still remain stable dynamically. This has been termed “dy-

namic frustration” [13] earlier. A known example is of course a striped state

occurring in the two or higher dimensional Ising models which is stable but not a

conﬁguration which has minimum energy.

In ANNNI model, the stability of the conﬁgurations depend very much on the

value of κ. It has been previously analysed for the one dimensional ANNNI model

that κ = 1 is a special point above and below which the dynamical behaviour

changes completely because of the stability of certain structures in the system.

Let us consider the simple conﬁguration of a single up spin in a sea of down

spins. Obviously, it will be unstable as long as κ < 2. For κ > 2, although this

spin is stable, all the neighbouring spins are unstable. However, for κ < 2, only

the up spin is unstable and the dynamics will stop once it ﬂips. When κ = 2 the

spin may or may not ﬂip, i.e., the dynamics is stochastic.

35

Next we consider a domain of two up spins in a sea of down spin. These two

may be oriented either along horizontal or vertical direction. These spins will be

stable for κ > 1 only while all the neighouring spins are unstable. For κ < 1,

all spins except the up spins are stable. When κ = 1, the dynamics is again

stochastic.

 

− − − − −            − − − − − −        
− − + − −            − − + + − −      
− − − − −            − − − − − −       
        (a)                                             (b)

    

− − − − − − 
− − + + − −
− − + + − − 
− − − − − − 

          (c)

Figure 3.3: Analysis of stability of simple structures: (a) single up spin in sea of
down spins; here for κ < 2 all the spins except the up spin is stable (b) two up
spins in a sea of down spins, all spins except the two up spins are stable for κ < 1
(c) a two by two structure of up spins - here all the spins are stable for κ < 1
while neighbouring spins are not (see text for details).

A two by two structure of up spins in a sea of down spins on the other hand

will be stable for any value of κ > 0. But the neighbouring spins along the

vertical direction will be unstable for κ ≥ 1. This shows that for κ < 1, one can
expect that the dynamics will aﬀect the minimum number of spin and therefore

the dynamics will be slowest here. A picture of the structures described above are

shown in Fig 3.3.

One can take more complicated structures but the analysis of these simple

36

ones is suﬃcient to expect that there will be diﬀerent dynamical behaviour in the

regions κ < 1, κ = 1, κ > 1, κ = 2 and κ > 2. However, we ﬁnd that as far

as persistence behaviour is concerned, there are only three regions with diﬀerent

behaviour: κ < 1, κ = 1 and κ > 1. On the other hand, when the distribution of

the number of domain walls in the steady state is considered, the three regions

1 < κ < 2, κ = 2 and κ > 2 have clearly distinct behaviour.

3.3.2

0 < κ < 1

We ﬁnd that as in [9], in the region 0 < κ < 1, the system has identical dynamical

behaviour for all κ. Also, like the one dimensional case, here the system does

not go to its equilibrium ground state. However, the dynamics continues for a

long time, albeit very slowly for reasons mentioned above. In Figs. 3.4 - 3.7, we

show the snapshots of the system at diﬀerent times for a typical quench to zero

temperature. As already mentioned, here domains of size one and two will vanish

very fast and certain structures, the smallest of which is a two by two domain

of up/down spins in a sea of oppositely oriented spins can survive till very long

times. These structures we call quasi-frozen as the spins inside these structures

(together with the neighbourhood spins) are locally stable; they can be disturbed

only when the eﬀect of a spin ﬂip occurring at a distance propagates to its vicinity

which usually takes a long time.

The pictures at the later stages also show that the system tends to attain a

conﬁguration in which the domains have straight vertical edges, it can be easily

checked that structures with kinks are not stable. We ﬁnd a tendency to form

strips of width two (“ladders”) along the vertical direction - this is due to the

second neighbour interaction - however, these strips do not span the entire lattice

in general. The domain structure is obviously not symmetric, e.g., ladders along

37

the horizontal direction will not form stable structures. The dynamics stops once

the entire lattice is spanned by only ladders of height N ≤ L.

 40

 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

 0

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 35

 40

Figure 3.4: Snap shot of a 40× 40 system at time t = 10 for κ < 1 A few simplest
quasi frozen structures are highlighted.

 40

 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

 0

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 35

 40

Figure 3.5: Same as Fig. 3.4 with t = 100.

The persistence probability for κ < 1 shows a very slow decay with time which

can be approximated by

1

log(t) for an appreciable range of time. At later times, it

approaches a saturation value in an even slower manner. The slow dynamics of

the system accounts for this slow decay.

The fraction of domain walls fDx and fDy along the x direction and y directions

show remarkable diﬀerence as functions of time. While that in the x direction

saturates quite fast, in the y direction, it shows a gradual decay till very long times

38

 40

 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

 0

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 35

 40

Figure 3.6:
Same as Fig. 3.4 with t = 500. One of the two by two structures
has melted while another one has formed. The ladder like structures which have
formed are perfectly stable.

 40

 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

 0

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 35

 40

Figure 3.7: Same as Fig. 3.4 with t = 75000. This snapshot is taken after a very
long time to show that the system has undergone nominal changes compared to
the length of the time interval. The whole conﬁguration now consists of ladders
and the dynamics stops once the system reaches such a state.

39

100

10-1

fDx

P(t)

fDy

10-2

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

Time

Figure 3.8: Persistence P (t) and average number of domain walls per site, fD
are shown for κ < 1.

(see Fig. 3.8). This indicates that the dynamics essentially keeps the number of

domains unchanged along x direction while that in the other direction changes

slowly in time. The behaviour of fDx is similar to what happens in one dimension.

In fact, the average number of domain walls NDx at large times is also very close

to that obtained for the ANNNI chain, it is about 0.27L. However, in contrast to

the one dimensional case where the domain walls remain mobile, here the mobility

of the domain walls are impeded by the presence of the ferromagnetic interaction

along the vertical direction causing a kind of pinning of the domain walls.

The distribution of the fraction of domain walls in the steady state shown

in Fig. 3.9 also reveals some important features. The distribution for fDx and

fDy are both quite narrow with the most probable values being fDx ≃ 0.27 and
fDy ≃ 0.04 (these values are very close to the average values). With the increase
in system size, the distributions tend to become narrower, indicating that they

approach a delta function like behaviour in the thermodynamic limit.

40

e
c
n
e
r
u
c
c
o
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

 0.9

 0.8

 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0

fDx

fDy

 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

 0.25

 0.3

 0.35

 0.4

Fraction of domain wall

Figure 3.9: Steady state distributions of fraction of domain walls at κ < 1 for
diﬀerent system sizes. The distributions become narrower as the system size is
increased.

3.3.3

κ > 1

It was already observed that κ = 1 is the value at which the dynamical behaviour

of the ANNNI model changes drastically in one dimension. In two dimensions,

this is also true, however, we ﬁnd that the additional ferromagnetic interaction

along the vertical direction is able to aﬀect the dynamics to a large extent. Again,

similar to the one dimensional case, we have diﬀerent dynamical behaviour for

κ = 1 and κ > 1. In this subsection we discuss the behaviour for κ > 1 while the

κ = 1 case is discussed in the next subsection.

The persistence probability follows a power law decay with θ = 0.235±0.001 for
all κ > 1, while the ﬁnite size scaling analysis made according to (3.3) suggests a z

value 2.08±0.01. This is checked for diﬀerent values of κ (κ = 1.3, 1.5, 2.0, 20, 100)
and the values of θ and z have negligible variations with κ which do not show any

systematics. Hence we conclude that the exponents are independent of κ for κ > 1.

A typical behaviour of the raw data as well as the data collapse is shown in Fig.

41

3.10.

The dynamics of the average fraction of domain walls along the horizontal

direction, fDx again shows a fast saturation while that in the y direction has a

power law decay with an exponent ≃ 0.48 (Fig. 3.11). This exponent is also
independent of κ. As mentioned in section II, we ﬁnd that there is a good agree-

ment of the value of this exponent with that of 1/z obtained from the ﬁnite size

scaling behaviour of P (t) implying that the average domain size D is inversely

proportional fDy . This is quite remarkable, as the fraction of domain walls cal-

culated in this manner is not exactly equivalent to the inverse of domain sizes in

a two dimensional lattice; the fact that fDx remains constant may be the reason

behind the good agreement (essentially the two dimensional behaviour is getting

captured along the dimension where the number of domain walls show signiﬁcant

change in time).

Although the persistence and dynamic exponents are κ independent, we ﬁnd

that the distribution of the number of domain walls has some nontrivial κ depen-

dence.

Though the system, for all κ > 1, evolves to a state with antiphase order along

the horizontal direction, the ferromagnetic order along vertical chains is in some

cases separated by one or more domain walls. A typical snapshot is shown in

Fig. 3.13 displaying that one essentially gets a striped state here like in the two

dimensional Ising model.

Interfaces which occur parallel to the y axis, separating two regions of antiphase

and keeping the ferromagnetic ordering along the vertical direction intact, are

extremely rare, the probability vanishing for larger sizes. Quantitatively this

means we should get fDx = 0.5 at long times which is conﬁrmed by the data (Fig.

3.11). Hence in the following our discussions on striped state will always imply

ﬂat horizontal interfaces, i.e., antiphase ordering along each horizontal row but

42

the ordering can be of diﬀerent types (e.g., a + + − − + + − − · · · type and a
− − + + − − + + · · · type, which one can call a ‘shifted’ antiphase ordering with
respect to the ﬁrst type).

It is of interest to investigate whether these striped states survive in the inﬁnite

systems. To study this, we consider the distribution of the number of domain walls

rather than the fraction for diﬀerent system sizes. The probability that there are

no domain walls, or a perfect ferromagnetic phase along the vertical direction,

turns out to be weakly dependent on the system sizes but having diﬀerent values

for diﬀerent ranges of values of κ. For 1 < κ < 2, it is ≃ 0.632, for κ = 2.0, it is
≃ 0.544 while for any higher value of κ, this probability is about 0.445. Thus it
increases for κ although not in a continuous manner and like the two dimensional

case, we ﬁnd that there is indeed a ﬁnite probability to get a striped state.

While we look at the full distribution of the number of domain walls at steady

state (Fig. 3.12), we ﬁnd that there are dominant peaks at NDy = 0 (corresponding

to the unstripped state) and at NDy = 2 (which means there are two interfaces).

However, we ﬁnd that the distribution shows that there could be odd values of

NDy as well. This is because the antiphase has a four fold degeneracy and the

and a ‘shifted’ ordering can occur in several ways such that odd values of NDy

are possible. In any case, the number of interfaces never exceeds NDy = 6 for the

system sizes considered.

3.3.4

κ = 1

Here we ﬁnd that the persistence probability follows a power law decay with

θ = 0.263 ± 0.001. The ﬁnite size scaling analysis suggests a z value 1.84 ± 0.01
(Fig. 3.14).

We have again studied the dynamics of fDx and fDy; the former shows a fast

43

100

)
t
(
P

10-1
10-2

100

102 103
t

106

L = 40
L = 100
L = 200
L = 300

κ > 1

Θ
-

t
/
)
t
,
L
(
P

100

10-1

10-1

10-1

100

101
L/t

1/z

102

103

Figure 3.10: The collapse of scaled persistence data versus scaled time using
θ = 0.235 and z = 2.08 is shown for diﬀerent system sizes for κ > 1. Inset shows
the unscaled data.

s

l
l

i

 

a
W
n
a
m
o
D

 
f

 

o
o
N

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

101

fDx

fDy

102

103

104

105

106

Time

Figure 3.11: Decay of the fraction of domain walls with time at κ > 1 are shown
along horizontal and vertical directions. The dashed line has slope equal to 0.48.

44

e
c
n
e
r
u
c
c
o
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0

 0

κ > 2.0
κ = 2.0
1.0 < κ< 2.0

 1

 2

 3

 4

 5

 6

No. of domain Walls

Figure 3.12: Normalized steady state distributions of number of domain walls
for diﬀerent κ > 1 show that striped states occur with higher probability as κ
increases. The lines are guides to the eye.

 40

 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

 0

 5

 10

 15

 20

 25

 30

 35

 40

Figure 3.13: A typical snapshot of a steady state conﬁguration for κ > 1 with ﬂat
horizontal interfaces separating two regions of antiphase ordering (see text).

45

100

)
t
(
P

10-1

10-2

100

102 103
t

106

L = 40
L = 100
L = 200
L = 300

κ = 1

10-1

100

101
1/z

L/t

102

103

Θ
-

t
/
)
t
,
L
(
P

100

10-1

10-1

10-2

Figure 3.14: The collapse of scaled persistence data versus scaled time using
θ = 0.263 and z = 1.84 is shown for diﬀerent system sizes at κ = 1. Inset shows
the unscaled data.

saturation at 0.5 while the latter shows a rapid decay to zero after an initial power

law behaviour with an exponent ≈ 0.515 (Fig. 3.15). This value, unlike in the
case κ > 1, does not show very good agreement with 1/z obtained from the ﬁnite

size scaling analysis. We will get back to this point in the next section.

The results for fDx and fDy imply that the system reaches a perfect antiphase

conﬁguration as there are no interfaces left in the system with fDx = 0.5 and

fDy = 0 at later times.

3.3.5

κ ≤ 0.0

In order to make a comparison with the purely ferromagnetic case, we have also

studied the Hamiltonian (3.2) with negative values of κ which essentially corre-

sponds to the two dimensional Ising model with anisotropic next nearest neighbour

ferromagnetic interaction.

κ = 0 corresponds to the pure two dimensional Ising model for which the

numerically calculated value of θ ≃ 0.22 is veriﬁed. We ﬁnd a new result when κ

46

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

100

fDx

fDy

101

102

103

104

105

Time

Figure 3.15: Decay of the fraction of domain walls with time at κ = 1 are shown
along horizontal and vertical directions. The dashed line has slope equal to 0.515.

is allowed to assume negative values, the persistence exponent θ has a value ≃ 0.20
for |κ| > 1 while for 0 < |κ| ≤ 1, the value of θ has an apparent dependence on κ,
varying between 0.22 to 0.20. However, it is diﬃcult to numerically conﬁrm the

nature of the dependence in such a range and we have refrained from doing it. At

least for |κ| >> 1, the persistence exponent is deﬁnitely diﬀerent from that of at
κ = 0. The growth exponent z however, appears to be constant and ≃ 2.0 for all
values of κ ≤ 0. A data collapse for large negative κ is shown in Fig. 3.16 using
θ = 0.20 and z = 2.0.

The eﬀect of the anisotropy shows up clearly in the behaviour of fDx and fDy

as functions of time (Fig. 3.17). For κ = 0, they have identical behaviour, both

reaching a ﬁnite saturation value showing that there may be interfaces generated

in either of the directions (corresponding to the striped states which are known

to occur here). As the absolute value of κ is increased, fDx shows a fast decay

to zero while fDy attains a constant value. The saturation value attained by fDy

increases markedly with |κ| while for fDx the decay to zero becomes faster. One
can conduct a stability analysis for striped states to show that such states become

47

 4

 1

Θ
-

t
/
)
t
,
L
(
P

L = 100
L = 200
L = 300

)
t
(
P

 0.1

102

103

106

t

κ < 0

 0.4

 0.1

 1

1/z

L/t

 10

 100

Figure 3.16: The collapse of scaled persistence data versus scaled time using
θ = 0.20 and z = 2.0 is shown for diﬀerent system sizes for κ < −1. Inset shows
the unscaled data.

unstable when the interfaces are vertical and κ increases beyond 1, leading to the

result fDx → 0.

Extracting the z value from the variations of fDx or fDy is not very simple

here as the quantities do not show smooth power law behaviour over a suﬃcient

interval of time.

The fact that fDy and/or fDx reach a ﬁnite saturation value indicates that

striped states occur here as well. The behaviour of fDx and fDy suggests that

in contrast to the isotropic case where interfaces can appear either horizontally

or vertically, here the interfaces appear dominantly along the x direction as κ

is increased. Thus the normalized distribution of the number of domain walls

along y is shown in Fig. 3.18. We ﬁnd that as κ is increased in magnitude, more

and more interfaces appear. However, the number of interfaces is always even

consistent with the fact that interfaces occur between ferromagnetic domains of

all up and all down spins.

Lastly in this section, we discuss the behaviour of the magnetization which is

48

s

l
l

i

a
w
 
n
a
m
o
d
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

101

κ = -1.5
κ = -1.0
κ = -0.7

κ = 0.0

κ = 0.0

κ = -0.7
κ = -1.0

κ = -1.5

102

103

104

105

106

Time

Figure 3.17: Decay of the fraction of domain walls with time at κ ≤ 0 are shown
along horizontal (fDx), shown by dotted lines) and vertical (fDy), shown by solid
lines) directions.

e
c
n
e
r
u
c
c
o
 
f
o
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

 0.8

 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0

0

κ = 0.0
κ = -0.7
κ = -1.0
κ = -1.5
κ = -2.0
κ = -20.0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

No. of domain walls

Figure 3.18: Normalized steady state distributions of number of domain walls
for diﬀerent κ ≤ 0 show that striped states occur with higher probability as |κ|
increases. The lines are guides to the eye.

49

the order parameter in a ferromagnetic system. As striped states are formed, the

magnetization will assume values less than unity. The probability of conﬁgura-

tions with magnetization equal to unity shows a stepped behaviour, with values

changing at |κ| = 1 and 2 and assuming constant values at 1 < |κ| < 2 and above
|κ| = 2 (Fig. 3.19).

 

1
=
n
o

 

i
t

a
s
i
t

e
n
g
a
m

 
f

o

 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

 0
-2.5

-2

-1.5

κ

-1

-0.5

 0

Figure 3.19: Probability that the magnetization takes a steady state value equal
to unity is shown against κ when κ ≤ 0.
3.4 Discussions and Conclusions

We have investigated some dynamical features of the ANNNI model in two di-

mensions following a quench to zero temperature. We have obtained the results

that the dynamics is very much dependent on the value of κ, the ratio of the an-

tiferromagnetic interaction to the ferromagnetic interaction along one direction.

This is similar to the dynamics of the one dimensional model studied earlier, but

here we have more intricate features, e.g., that of the occurrence of quasi frozen-in

structures for κ < 1 where the persistence probability shows a very slow decay

with time. Persistence probability is algebraic for κ ≥ 1, but exactly at κ = 1, the
exponents θ and z are diﬀerent from those at κ > 1. The exponents for κ > 1 are

50

in fact very close to those of the two dimensional Ising model with nearest neigh-

bour ferromagnetic interaction. (This was not at all true for the one dimensional

ANNNI chain, where the persistence exponent at κ > 1 was found to be apprecia-

bly diﬀerent from that of the one dimensional Ising chain with nearest neighbour

ferromagnetic interaction.) This shows that the ferromagnetic interaction along

the vertical direction is able to negate the eﬀect of the antiferromagnetic interac-

tion to a great extent. This is apparently a counter intuitive phenomenon, κ = 0

and κ > 1 having very similar dynamic behaviour while in the intermediate val-

ues, the dynamics is qualitatively and quantitatively diﬀerent. At far as dynamics

is concerned, the ANNNI model in two dimensions cannot be therefore treated

perturbatively.

Although the values of θ and z are individually quite close for κ = 0 and κ > 1,

the product zθ = α are quite diﬀerent. For κ = 0, α ≃ 0.44 while for κ > 1, it
is 0.486 ± 0.002. This shows that the spatial correlations of the persistent spins
are quite diﬀerent for the two and one can safely say that the dynamical class

for κ = 0 and κ > 1 are not the same. κ = 1 is the special point where the

dynamic behaviour changes radically. Here there appears to be some ambiguity

regarding the value of z; estimating α from the ﬁnite size scaling analysis gives

α ≈ 0.484±0.005 while using the z value from the domain dynamics, the estimate
is approximately equal to 0.51. However, the dynamics of the domain sizes may

not be very accurately reﬂected by the dynamics of fDy in which case α ≈ 0.48 is
a more reliable result. Thus we ﬁnd that although the values of θ and z are quite

diﬀerent for κ = 1 and κ > 1, the α values are close.

We would like to add here that when there is a power law decay of a quantity

related to the domain dynamics, it is highly unlikely that it will be accompanied

by an exponent which is diﬀerent from the growth exponent. Thus, even though

we get slightly diﬀerent values of z for κ = 1 from the two analyses, it is more

51

likely that this is an artifact of the numerical simulations.

Another feature present in the two dimensional Ising model is the ﬁnite prob-

ability with which it ends up in a striped state. The same happens for κ > 1, but

here the probabilities are quite diﬀerent and also dependent on κ. We ﬁnd that

there is a signiﬁcant role of the point κ = 2 here as this probability has diﬀerent

values at κ = 2, κ > 2 and κ < 2.

Comparison of the ANNNI dynamics with that of the ferromagnetic anisotropic

Ising model shows some interesting features. In the latter, one gets a new value

of persistence exponent for κ < −1 while in the former a new value is obtained
for κ ≥ 1.The new values (except for κ = 1) are in fact very close to that of
the two dimensional Ising model, but simulations done for identical system sizes

averaged over the same number of initial conﬁgurations are able to conﬁrm the

diﬀerence. The qualitative behaviour of the domain dynamics is again strongly κ

dependent when κ is negative. Another point to note is that the probability that

the system evolves to a pure state is κ dependent in both the ANNNI model and

the Ising model. In both cases in fact, this probability decreases in a step like

manner with increasing magnitude of κ. We also ﬁnd the interesting result that

while the distribution of the number of domain walls can have non-zero values

at odd values of ND in the ANNNI model because of the four fold degeneracy of

the antiphase, for the Ising model, odd values of ND are not permissible as the

ferromagnetic phase is two fold degenerate.

Finally we comment on the fact that although the dynamical behaviour, as far

as domains are concerned, reﬂects the inherent anisotropy of the system (in both

the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic models), the persistence probability is

unaﬀected by it. In order to verify this, we estimated P (t) along an isolated chain

of spins along x and y directions separately and found that the two estimates gave

identical results for all values of κ.

52

In conclusion, it is found that except for the region 0 < |κ| < 1, the dynamical
behaviour of the Hamiltonian (3.2) is remarkably similar for negative and positive

κ; the persistence and growth exponents get only marginally aﬀected compared to

the values of the two dimensional Ising case (κ = 0) and the domain distributions

have similar nature. However, the region 0 < κ < 1 is extraordinary, where

algebraic decay of persistence is absent. There is dynamic frustration as the

system gets locked in a metastable state consisting of ladder-like domains and the

dynamics is very slow because of the presence of quasi-frozen structures. There

is in fact dynamic frustration at other κ values also in the sense that except for

κ = 1, the system has a tendency to get locked in a “striped state”. However,

even in that case, the algebraic decay of the persistence probability is observed.

Thus algebraic decay of persistence probability seems to be valid only when the

metastable state is a striped state. Although there is no dynamic frustration at

κ = 1 in the sense that it always evolves to a state with perfect antiphase structure,

it happens to be a very special point where the persistence exponent and growth

exponents are unique and appreciably diﬀerent from those of the κ = 0 case.

In this chapter, the behaviour of the two dimensional ANNNI model under

a zero temperature has been discussed; the dynamics at ﬁnite temperature can

be in fact quite diﬀerent. At ﬁnite temperatures, the spin ﬂipping probabilities

are stochastic, and the dynamical frustration may be overcome by the thermal

ﬂuctuations. It has been observed earlier [13] that in a thermal annealing scheme

of the one dimensional ANNNI model, the κ = 0.5 point becomes signiﬁcant. A

similar eﬀect can occur for the two dimensional case as well. The deﬁnition of

persistence being quite diﬀerent at ﬁnite temperatures [14], it is also not easy to

guess its behaviour (for either the one or two dimensional model) simply from the

results of the zero temperature quench. Indeed, the ANNNI model under a ﬁnite

temperature quench is an open problem which could be addressed in the future.

53

Bibliography

[1] J. D. Gunton, M. San Miguel and P. S. Sahni, Phase Transitions and critical

phenomena, Vol 8, eds. C. Domb and J. L. Lebowitz (Academic, NY 1983).

[2] A. J. Bray, Adv. Phys. 43 357 (1994) and the references therein.

[3] V. Spirin, P. L. Krapivsky and S. Redner, Phys. Rev.E 63 036118 (2001).

[4] For a review, see S. N. Majumdar, Curr. Sci. 77 370 (1999).

[5] B. Derrida, A. J.Bray and C. Godreche, J.Phys. A 27 L357 (1994)

[6] D. Stauﬀer, J. Phys. A 27 5029 (1994).

[7] P. L. Krapivsky, E.Ben-Naim and S. Redner, Phys. Rev.E 50 2474 (1994).

[8] S. Redner and P. L. Krapivsky, J.Phys. A 31 9229 (1998)

[9] P. Sen and S. Dasgupta, J. Phys. A 37 11949 (2004).

[10] D. Das and M.S. Barma, Physica A 270 245 (1999); Phys. Rev. E 60, 2577

(1999).

[11] W. Selke, Phys. Rep. 170, 213 (1988).

[12] G. Manoj and P. Ray, Phys. Rev. E 62 7755 (2000);

G. Manoj and P. Ray, J. Phys A 33 5489 (2000).

54

[13] P. Sen and P. K. Das in Quantum Annealing and other optimization problems

eds. A. Das and B. K. Chakrabarti, Springer Verlag (2005).

[14] B. Derrida, Phys. Rev. E 55 3705 (1997)

55

Chapter 4

Quenching Dynamics: Eﬀect of

the nature of randomness of

complex networks

4.1

Introduction

The dynamical behaviour of Ising models may change drastically when random-

ness is introduced in the system. Randomness can occur in many ways and its

eﬀect on dynamics can depend on its precise nature. For example, randomness in

the Ising model can be incorporated by introducing dilution in the site or bond

occupancy in regular lattices and consequently the percolation transition plays an

important role [1, 2]. Here the scaling behaviours are completely diﬀerent from

power laws. One can also consider the interactions to be randomly distributed,

either all ferromagnetic type or mixed type (e.g., as in a spin glass) [3]; the sys-

tem goes to a frozen state following a zero temperature quenching in both cases.

Another way to introduce randomness is to consider a random ﬁeld in which case

the scaling behaviour is also completely diﬀerent from power laws [4].

56

Here we consider Ising models on random graphs or networks where the nearest

neighbour connections exist. In addition, the spins have random long range inter-

actions which are quenched in nature. In general, here, the dynamics, instead of

leading the system towards its equilibrium state, makes it freeze into a metastable

state such that the dynamical quantities attain saturation values diﬀerent from

their equilibrium values.

Moreover, rather than showing a conventional power law decay or growth, the

dynamical quantities exhibit completely diﬀerent behaviour in time.

A point to be noted here is, when long range links are introduced, the domains

are no longer well-deﬁned as interacting neighbours could be well separated in

space. This results in freezing of Ising spins on random graphs as well as on small

world networks [5, 6]. The phase ordering dynamics of the Ising model on a Watts-

Strogatz network [7], after a quench to zero temperature, produces dynamically

frozen conﬁgurations, disordered at large length scales [8, 6]. Even on small world

networks, the dynamics can depend on the nature of the randomness;

it was

observed that while in a sparse network there is freezing, in a densely connected

network freezing disappears in the thermodynamic limit [9].

In this chapter, we shall present our investigation on the dynamical behaviour

of an Ising system on two diﬀerent networks following a zero temperature quench.

In these two networks, both of which are sparsely connected, the nature of ran-

domness is subtly diﬀerent and we study whether this diﬀerence has any eﬀect

on the dynamics. Both these networks are embedded in a one dimensional lattice

and the nearest neighbour connections always exist and the nodes have degree

four on an average. They diﬀer as in one of the networks, the random long range

interactions have a spatial dependence. It may be mentioned here that quenching

dynamics on such Euclidean networks has not been considered earlier to the best

of our knowledge.

57

It is also quite well known that many dynamical social phenomena can be

appropriately mapped to dynamics of spin systems. At the same time, social sys-

tems have been shown to behave like complex networks (having small world and/or

scale free features etc.). So the present study may be particularly interesting in

the context of studying social phenomena described by Ising-type models.

In section 4.2.1 we have discussed some basic network properties and network

models. In section 4.2.2 we have described the two diﬀerent networks which we

call random model A (RMA) and random model B (RMB). In Section 4.3 we have

given a list of the quantities calculated. In section 4.4 and 4.5 we have discussed

the detailed dynamical behaviour of Ising spin systems on random model A and

random model B respectively. The comparison of the results of the quenching

dynamics between the two models are discussed in section 4.6.

In addition, a

qualitative analysis of the quenching dynamics is also presented. Summary and

concluding statements are made in the last section.

4.2 Description of the network models

In this section we shall ﬁrst discuss some basic network properties and network

models as well as the models we have considered for our investigation.

4.2.1 Classiﬁcation of network models

A network is a set of vertices (nodes) connected via edges (links). Networks

with directed edges are called directed networks and those with undirected edges

are undirected networks. One may classify the networks studying three basic

network properties which are average shortest paths, clustering coeﬃcient and

degree distribution. The total number of connections of a vertex is called its

degree (k). In a directed network the number of incoming edges of a vertex is

58

called its in-degree ki and the number of outgoing edges is called its out-degree

ko.

k = ki + ko

The clustering coeﬃcient characterize the density of connections in the environ-

ment close to a vertex. The clustering coeﬃcient C of a vertex is the ratio between

the total number of the edges connecting its nearest neighbours and the total num-

ber of all possible edges between all this nearest neighbours. The shortest path

length is the shortest distance S between any two nodes (say, A and B ) is the

number of edges on the shortest path from A to B through connected nodes.

Networks are the same as graphs. In graph theory nodes are termed as vertices

and links as edges. Mathematicians had already classiﬁed graphs into two groups

: 1. Regular graph : In which each vertex is linked to its k nearest neighbours.

For regular graph the shortest path distance S ∼ l, where l is the linear dimension
of the graph/lattice and clustering coeﬃcient C ∼ 1 (ﬁnite).

2. Random graph : In which any two vertices have a ﬁnite probability to get

linked [10, 11]. So in general in a random graph/network each vertex get linked to

k arbitrary vertices. In this network or graph, both D, the diameter of the network

(the largest of the shortest distances S) and hSi were found to vary as log(N). It
may be mentioned here that in the random graph the degree distribution function

P (k) is given by :

P (ki = k) =N −1 Ckpk(1 − p)N −k−1,

(4.1)

which is basically Binomial distribution, where N = total number of nodes, k =

degree of a node. For large N the above equation can be replaced by Poisson

distribution :

P (k) =

e−pN (pN)k

k!

=

e−hkihkik

k!

(4.2)

59

where average degree of graph hki = p(N − 1) ≃ pN The signiﬁcance of hki lies
in the fact of forming cluster in random graphs.

Now we would like to introduce two types of network namely (1) small world

network and (2) scale free network.

1. Small world Network : It is basically intermediate between the previous

two networks. In simple terms this describe the fact that despite huge physical

size of real networks, any two nodes are connected by relatively short paths,

hence the network is named as ‘small world′. These networks are characterized

by large clustering coeﬃcient compared to the corresponding random graph and

logarithmic dependence of shortest path [10, 11].

Ssw ∼ log(l) → similar to random graph.
Csw ∼ 1 → similar to regular graph.
2. Scale free network : For this type of network, the probability that a node

was connected to k other nodes is proportional to k−n. This means their degree

distribution follows a power law for large k. In general but not necessarily, scale

free networks have small world properties. However the clustering coeﬃcient of the

SF model decreases with the network size following approximately a power-law.
The decay is slower than the decay observed for random graphs (C = hkiN −1)
and is also diﬀerent from the behavior of the small-world models, where C is

independent of N [10, 11].

4.2.2 Network models of our interest

The two network models under consideration were introduced in reference [12].

The random model A (RMA) is in fact very similar to the Watts-Strogatz network

[7]. Here initially a spin is connected to its four nearest neighbours and then only

the second nearest neighbour links are rewired with probability p (Fig. 4.1). In

60

the RMB, each spin is connected to its two nearest neighbour and then two extra

bonds (on an average) are attached randomly to each spin. The extra bonds
are attached to spins located at a distance l > 1 with probability P (l) ∝ l−α
(Fig. 4.1). We keep the ﬁrst neighbours intact in both cases to ensure that the

networks are connected. Average degree per node is four in both the networks.

The dynamical evolution is considered on the static networks after the process of

rewiring/addition of links is completed (for a review on spatial networks see [13]).

REGULAR      NETWORK

 

  

 

 

  

  

  

RANDOM MODEL     A
p

P

 

 


 

 


  

  


 

 


 

 


  

  


  

  


RANDOM MODEL    B

l−α

 

 


  

  


 

 


 

 


−α

l

−α

l

  

  


  

  


  

  


(Color online) Schematic diagram for diﬀerent network models. Av-
Figure 4.1:
erage degree is 2K = 4 in each network. In the regular network both the ﬁrst and
second nearest neighbours are present. In random model A only second neigh-
bours are rewired with probability p. In random model B ﬁrst nearest neighbours
are always linked while other nodes are linked with the probability l−α with l ≥ 2.

The general form of the Hamiltonian in a one dimensional Ising spin system

for RMA and RMB can be written as

H = −Xi<j

JijSiSj,

(4.3)

where Si = ±1 and Jij = J when sites i and j are connected and zero otherwise.
(We take J = 1 in this work.) The ground state (minimum energy state at zero

61

temperature) of the Ising spin system in both RMA and RMB is a state with all

spins up or all spins down.

RMA is a variant of WS model with identical static properties. It is regular for

p = 0, random for p = 1, and for any p > 0, the nature of RMA is small world like

[7, 12]. Euclidean models of RMB type have been studied in a few earlier works

[14, 15, 16, 12]. While it is more or less agreed that for α ≤ 1, the network is
random and for α > 2, it behaves as a regular network, the nature of the network

for intermediate values of α is not very well understood. According to the earlier

studies [14, 15, 16, 12], it may either have a small world characteristic or behave

like a ﬁnite dimensional lattice. In the present work, we assume that RMB has

random nature for α < 1 and for 1 < α < 2, it is small world like (at least for the

system sizes considered here) following the results of [12], which is based on exact

numerical evaluation of shortest distance and clustering coeﬃcients. This is also

because the Euclidean model considered in [12] is exactly identical to RMB with

average degree four, while the average degree of the Euclidean models considered

in the other earlier studies is not necessarily equal to four.

In case of RMA, the network is regular and random for only two extreme

values p = 0 and p = 1 respectively, whereas for RMB, the random and regular

behaviour of the network are observed over an extended region. The regular

network corresponding to these two models is the one dimensional Ising spin

system with nearest neighbour and next nearest neighbour interactions. We have

studied the zero temperature quenching dynamics for this model also, and the

results for the dynamics are identical to that of the nearest neighbour Ising spin

model. So it will be interesting to note how the dynamics is aﬀected by the

introduction of randomness in the Ising spin system and also how the diﬀerence

in the nature of randomness of the two models RMA and RMB shows up in the

dynamics.

62

In the simulations, single spin ﬂip Glauber dynamics is used in both cases, the

spins are oriented randomly in the initial state. We have taken one dimensional

lattices of size L with 100 ≤ L ≤ 1500 to study the dynamics. The results
are averaged over (a) diﬀerent initial conﬁgurations and (b) diﬀerent network

conﬁgurations. For each system size the number of networks considered is ﬁfty

and for each network the number of initial conﬁguration is also ﬁfty. Periodic

boundary condition has been used.

4.3 Quantities Calculated

We have estimated the following quantities in the present work.

1. Magnetization m(t): For a Ising spin system with regular connections and

having only the ferromagnetic interaction, the order parameter is usually

the magnetization, m =

|Pi Si|

L

. L is the size of the system. Magnetization

can be considered as the order parameter, even when the connections are

random. We have calculated the growth of magnetization with time and

also the variation of the saturation value of the magnetization, msat, with p

and α for RMA and RMB respectively.

2. Persistence probability P (t): As already mentioned, this is the probability

that a spin does not ﬂip till time t.

3. Energy E(t): In these networks, domain wall measurement is not very sig-

niﬁcant, as domains are ill-deﬁned. The presence of domain walls in regular

lattices causes an energy cost [8]. So instead of the number of domain

walls, the appropriate measure for disorder is the residual energy per spin

ε = E − E0 = E + 4, where E0 = −4 is the known ground state energy per

63

spin and E is the energy of the dynamically evolving state. In fact, the mag-

netization is not a good measure of the disorder either, since even when the

energy is close to the ground state, magnetization may be very close to zero

(this is also true for the models without randomness). So residual energy

measurement is the best way to ﬁnd out whether the system has reached

the equilibrium ground state or it is stuck in a higher energy nonequilibrium

steady state. We have measured the decay of residual energy ε with time

and the variation of its saturation value, εsat, with p and α for RMA and

RMB respectively.

4. Freezing probability: The probability with which any conﬁguration freezes,

i.e., does not reach the ground state (the state with magnetization m = 1

or the state with zero residual energy) is deﬁned as the freezing probability.

5. Saturation time : It is the time taken by the system to reach the steady

state. It has been observed in some earlier studies [17] that it also shows a

scaling behaviour with the system size with the dynamical exponent z. This

in fact provides an alternative method to estimate z when straight forward

methods fail.

Both magnetization and energy are regarded as dimensionless quantities (ǫ

and E scaled by J) in this work.

4.4 Detailed results of quenching dynamics on

RMA

The results of a zero temperature quench for the Ising model on the RMA are

presented in this section. Starting from a initial random conﬁguration following a

64

quench to zero temperature the system cannot reach the ground state (the state

with zero residual energy) always for any p 6= 0. The magnetization, energy,
persistence all attain a saturation value in time. The saturation values of all the

quantities show nonmonotonic behaviour as a function of p.

Figure 4.2 shows the decay of residual energy per spin and the growth of

magnetization with time for diﬀerent values of the rewiring probability.

 2

 1

)
t
(
ε

 0.5

p=0.042,L=1000
p=0.099,L=1000
p=0.612,L=1000
p=0.9,L=1000

1

0.7

p=0.042,L=1000
p=0.099,L=1000
p=0.612,L=1000
p=0.9,L=1000

)
t
(
m

0.4

0.3

0.2

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

0.1

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

t

t

Figure 4.2: (Color online) Decay of residual energy per spin and the growth of
magnetization with time for RMA for diﬀerent probabilities.

It is to be noted that the dynamic quantities do not show any obvious power

law behaviour beyond a few time steps. For small p, there is apparently a power

law behaviour for a larger range of time which we believe is the eﬀect of the p = 0

point where such a scaling deﬁnitely exists.

The saturation value of the residual energy per spin εsat increases with the

rewiring probability p (for small p), reaches a maximum for an intermediate value

of p (p < 1) and then decreases again. This implies that the disorder of the spin

system is maximum for a non trivial value of p = pmaxdis, which can be termed

as the point of maximum disorder. The saturation value of magnetization on

65

the other hand decreases for small p and takes its minimum value for another

intermediate value of p (p < 1), and then increases again (Fig. 4.3).

ε
sat,L=1000
ε
sat,L=800
ε
sat,L=600
msat,L=1000
msat,L=800
msat,L=600

 1

 0.9

 0.7

 0.5

 0.3

 0.1

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

p

Figure 4.3: (Color online) Saturation value of residual energy per spin εsat and the
saturation value of magnetization msat is plotted with the probability of rewiring
p for Random Model A.

pmaxdis increases with the system size L for small L and then appears to sat-

urate for larger system sizes. The value of the residual energy at pmaxdis also

increases with the system size (Fig. 4.4). This establishes the existence of the

point of maximum disorder at an intermediate value of p (p ≃ 0.62) even in the
thermodynamic limit.

Magnetization reaches a minimum at a value of p which is less than pmaxdis.

This implies that there exists a region where both magnetization and energy in-

crease as p increases. This is also apparent from Fig 4.3. The physical phenomena

responsible for this intriguing feature is conjectured and discussed in detail in sec-

tion 4.6.2.

The saturation time decreases very fast with the rewiring probability p for

small p and remains almost constant as p increases (Fig. 4.5). It is known that

for p = 0 the saturation time varies as L2, here it appears that for any p > 0,

66

 0.62

 0.6

 0.58

s
i
d
x
a
m
p

 0.56

 0.54

 0.52

 0.5

 200

RMA

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
l
a
u
d
i
s
e
R

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

 200

 600

 1000

System size (L)

 400

 600

 800

 1000

System size (L)

Figure 4.4: (Color online) Rewiring probability at the point of maximum disorder
is plotted with the system size. Inset shows the increase of residual energy at the
point of maximum disorder with the increment of the system size.

there is no noticeable size dependence.

For RMA, the freezing probability is almost unity for small p. However, when

the disorder is increased beyond p ≃ 0.5, the freezing probability shows a rapid
decrease (Fig: 4.5, inset). In one dimension, we checked that the freezing proba-

bility is zero for the regular network (p = 0), but here we ﬁnd that even for very

small values of p, the freezing probability is unity. So there is a discontinuity in

the freezing probability at p = 0. This also supports the fact that any ﬁnite p can

make the dynamics diﬀerent from a conventional coarsening process.

An interesting observation may be made about the behaviour of the saturation

value of the residual energy in the region p < 0.5. If one allows p to decrease from

0.5 to 0, the saturation value of the residual energy also decreases although the

freezing probability is unity in the entire region. This implies that in this range of

the parameter, although the system does not reach the real ground state in any

realization of the network (or initial conﬁguration), such that ǫ 6= 0 in each case,
the system has a tendency to approach the the actual ground state monotonically

with p for p < 0.5 (Fig. 4.3).

67

  12×10

3

  10×10
e
m
i
   8×10
T
 
n
o
i
   6×10
t
a
r
a
   4×10
u
t
a
S
   2×10

3

3

3

3

3

0

L=1000
L=600

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
p
 
g
n
i
z
e
e
r
F

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9

p

 0.1

 0.3

 0.5

 0.7

 0.9

p

Figure 4.5: (Color online) Time of saturation with the probability of rewiring is
plotted for two diﬀerent sizes for Random Model A. Inset shows the variation of
freezing probability with the probability of rewiring for RMA.

100

10-1

L=1000, p=0.042
L=1000, p=0.154

1.1

0.9

0.7

0.5

0.3

b, L=1000
c, L=1000

0.1

0.3

0.5
p

0.7

0.9 1

t
a
s
P
-
)
t
(
P

10-2

10-3

10-4

100

0.5

t
a
s
P

0.4

0.3

Psat, L=1000
Psat, L=800
Psat, L=600

0.2

0.1

0.3

0.7

0.9 1

0.5
p

101

102
Time

103

104

Figure 4.6: (Color online) Decay of P (t)−Psat with time t alongwith the stretched
exponential function found to ﬁt its form are shown. The inset in the bottom left
shows the variation of the saturation value of persistence Psat with p. The other
inset on the top right shows the variation of b and c with p.

68

The persistence probability follows a stretched exponential behaviour with

time for any non zero p, ﬁtting quite well to the form

P (t) − Psat ≃ a exp(−btc).

(4.4)

The saturation value of the persistence is Psat, and it does not depend on the

system size. Psat changes with the rewiring probability p and there also exists

an intermediate value of p where the value of Psat is maximum. b and c vary

nonmonotonically with p (Fig. 4.6).

4.5 Detailed results of quenching dynamics on

RMB

In this section we will present the results of the zero temperature quenching dy-

namics of Ising model on RMB. Here also the system does not reach the ground

state always for any ﬁnite value of α. The magnetization, energy, persistence all

attain a saturation value in time as in RMA. Figure 4.7 shows the decay of resid-

ual energy per spin and the growth of magnetization with time for diﬀerent values

of α. It is to be noted that the dynamical quantities do not show any obvious

power law behaviour also for RMB.

The saturation values of all the quantities show nonmonotonic behaviour as a

function of α. The saturation value of residual energy per spin εsat increases with

α for small α, reaches a maximum for a ﬁnite value of α and then decreases again.

This implies that for the RMB also, the disorder of the spin system is maximum

for a ﬁnite value of α, which is the point of maximum disorder here. On the other

hand, the saturation value of the magnetization decreases for small α and takes

its minimum value for another ﬁnite value of α and then slowly increases (Fig.

69

 2

 1

)
t
(
ε

 0.5

α=0.5,L=1000
α=1.0,L=1000
α=1.2,L=1000
α=3.0,L=1000

1

0.7

α=0.5,L=1000
α=1.0,L=1000
α=1.2,L=1000
α=3.0,L=1000

)
t
(
m

0.4

0.3

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

0.2

0.1

1

10

2

10

t

3

10

4

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

t

Figure 4.7: (Color online) Decay of residual energy per spin and the growth of
magnetization with time for RMB for diﬀerent probabilities.

4.8).

The value of α = αmaxdis, at which the maximum disorder occurs, decreases

with the system size L for small L and then saturates for larger system sizes.

The value of the residual energy at αmaxdis also increases with the system size

(Fig. 4.9). This establishes the existence of the point of maximum disorder, for

the RMB, at a ﬁnite value of α (α ≃ 1.2) even in the thermodynamic limit.
Similar to the RMA, here is a region beyond α = 1.2 where the energy and the

magnetization both decrease, until the magnetization starts growing again. As

already mentioned, this issue is addressed in section 4.6.2.

Saturation time for RMB in the random network in the region 0 ≤ α < 1
shows too large ﬂuctuations to let one conclude whether it is a constant in this

region or has a variation with α. Beyond α = 1 and upto α = 3.0, it is almost

independent of α. For α > 3 the saturation time increases with α. There is no

remarkable ﬁnite size eﬀect in the saturation time for the RMB for any ﬁnite

value of α. The saturation time varies as L2 for a regular lattice corresponding to

70

ε
sat,L=1000
ε
sat,L=800
ε
sat,L=600
msat,L=1000
msat,L=800
msat,L=600

 0.9

 0.7

 0.5

 0.3

 0.1

 0

 2

 4
α

 6

 8

Figure 4.8: (Color online) Saturation value of residual energy per spin εsat and
the saturation value of magnetization msat is plotted with α for Random Model
B.

 2

 1.8

 1.6

s
i
d
x
a
m

α

 1.4

 1.2

 1

 200

RMB

RMB

0.9

0.7

0.5

 200  600  1000  1500

System size (L)

y
g
r
e
n
e
 
l
a
u
d
i
s
e
R

 600

 1000

System size (L)

 1500

Figure 4.9: (Color online) The value of α at the point of maximum disorder is
plotted with the system size. Inset shows the increase of residual energy at the
point of maximum disorder with the increment of the system size.

71

α → ∞, here it appears that for any ﬁnite α, however large, there is no remarkable
size dependence.

The freezing probability is small for α = 0 (≃ 0.2) and increases rapidly
with α for small α. Freezing probability becomes almost unity beyond α ≃ 1.2
and remains the same for large α. It seems that for any ﬁnite α > 1.2 freezing

probability remains unity and it will be zero only at α → ∞ (Fig. 4.10), as in one
dimension, the freezing probability is zero for the regular network. So for RMB

there is a discontinuity of freezing probability at α = ∞ which corresponds to the
p = 0 point of RMA.

  14×10

3

  12×10
e
m
  10×10
i
T
 
n
   8×10
o
i
t
   6×10
a
r
a
u
   4×10
t
a
S
   2×10

3

3

3

3

3

3

L=1000
L=600

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
p
 
g
n
i
z
e
e
r
F

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

α

   0

 1

 2

 3

 4

 5

 6

 7

α

Figure 4.10: (Color online) Time of saturation with the value of α is plotted for
two diﬀerent sizes for Random Model B. Inset shows the variation of freezing
probability with α for RMB.

Beyond α ≃ 1.2, the energy decreases with α though the freezing probability
remains unity. This implies that although the system deﬁnitely reaches a frozen

state, it approaches the real ground state monotonically as α → ∞ (Fig. 4.8).

The above results indicate that, though for α > 2 the network behaves as a

regular one, dynamically the network is regular only at its extreme value α → ∞.
We ﬁnd that the persistence probability follows roughly a stretched exponential

form with time (given by equation (2)) for any ﬁnite α. The saturation value of

72

the persistence, Psat, does not depend on the system size. Psat changes with α

and there exists an intermediate value of α where the value of Psat is maximum.

For RMB also b and c vary nonmonotonically with α (Fig: 4.11).

100

10-1

10-2

t
a
s
P
-
)
t
(
P

10-3

L=1000, α=0.5
L=1000, α=1.2

t
a
s
P

0.5

0.4

0.3

Psat, L=1000
Psat, L=800
Psat, L=600

0

1

3

5

7

α

b, L=1000
c, L=1000

0.9

0.7

0.5

0.3

10-4

100

0

1

3

5

7

α
101

102
Time

103

104

Figure 4.11: (Color online) Decay of P (t) − Psat with time t along with the
stretched exponential function found to ﬁt it approximately are shown. The inset
in the top right shows the variation of the saturation value of persistence Psat with
α. The other inset on the bottom left shows the variation of b and c with α.

4.6 Discussions on the results

4.6.1 Comparison of the results for RMA and RMB

In the last two sections the results of a quench at zero temperature for the Ising

model on RMA and RMB have been presented separately.

In this subsection

we will compare the results to understand how the diﬀerence in the nature of

randomness aﬀects the dynamics of Ising spin system.

The gross features of the results are similar: in both models we have a freezing

eﬀect which makes the system get stuck in a higher energy state compared to

the static equilibrium state in which all spins are parallel. No power law scaling

73

behaviour with time is observed in the dynamic quantities in either model. There

exists a point in the parameter space where the deviation from the static ground

state is maximum. The behaviour of the saturation times and freezing probability

as functions of the disorder parameters are also quite similar qualitatively.

The saturation values of magnetization and persistence attain a minimum and

maximum value respectively at an intermediate value of the relevant parameters

in both models. The decay of the persistence probability also follows the same

functional form in the entire parameter space. The saturation values of the persis-

tence has no size dependence for both the models. This indicates that as a whole

the dynamics is not much aﬀected due to the change in the nature of randomness

of the Ising spin system.

Let us consider the parameter values at which the RMA and RMB are equiv-

alent as a network: RMA and RMB behave as random networks at p = 1 and

α = 0 respectively. So one can expect that the saturation values of residual energy

per spin, magnetization and the numerical value of the saturation time would be

same at these values. However, the numerical values of these quantities are quite

diﬀerent. For RMA, at p = 1 the saturation value of the residual energy per

spin εsat ≃ 0.415 whereas for RMB at α = 0 εsat ≃ 0.224 for L = 1000. Simi-
larly we found numerically that for RMA the value of saturation magnetization

msat ≃ 0.735 for RMA and msat ≃ 0.855 for RMB for the same system size. This
is because even though the networks are both random here, the connections have

a subtle diﬀerence. For RMA, the number of second nearest neighbour is exactly

zero at p = 1 and all the other long range neighbour connections are equally prob-

able. On the other hand, for RMB, second nearest neighbours can be still present

in the network and the probability is same for this and any other longer range con-

nection. This diﬀerence in the nature of randomness aﬀects the dynamics of the

Ising spin system suﬃciently to make the saturation values diﬀerent. This means

74

that the systems are locked at diﬀerent nonequilibrium steady states. For RMB,

it is closer to the actual ground state as it is more short ranged in comparison.

The other values at which the two networks are equivalent are p = 0 and

α > 2 where regular network behaviour is found as far as the network properties

are concerned.

Interestingly, the behaviour of RMB even when α is ﬁnite and

greater than 2, is not quite like the dynamics of a regular one dimensional lattice

with nearest and next nearest neighbour links only. In fact, the point at which

the magnetization becomes minimum is well inside the region α > 2 and not

within the small world region as in RMA. Actually there is an extended region of

regular and random network behaviour for the RMB, and as a result, a few more

interesting points are possible to observe here. Only at the extreme point α = ∞,
the one dimensional Ising exponents z = 2.0 and θ = 0.375 can be recovered as

the frozen states continue to exist even for ﬁnite values of α > 2 for RMB. For the

regular network with nearest and next nearest neighbour model, we have checked

that there is no freezing at all. So discontinuities of the freezing probabilities

occur at p = 0 and α = ∞ on RMA and RMA respectively.

Though the nature of randomness is diﬀerent for RMA and RMB, for both the

models there exists a point of maximum disorder where the saturation value of the

residual energy per spin attains a maximum value. For RMB, maximum disorder

of the Ising spin system occurs near the static phase transition point (small world

to random phase) whereas for RMA, the point of maximum disorder is well within

the small world region.

We try to explain this considering the deviation from the point p = 1 (for

RMA) and α = 0 (for RMB). Two processes occur simultaneously here: (a) Num-

ber of connections with further neighbours decreases and (b) clustering becomes

more probable. As a result of these two processes, freezing occurs. For RMA,

the eﬀect is less as there is less clustering [12]. But for RMB, the eﬀect is more

75

and spans the entire parameter space α > 1 and therefore the point of maximum

disorder of Ising spin system is very close to the random - small world phase

transition point α = 1.

The question may arise whether this diﬀerence prevails when the models are

made even more similar. In RMB, the probability p3(α) that l ≥ 3 can be ex-
pressed as a function of α:

p3(α) = P
P

l=L/2
l=3
l=L/2
l=2

l−α
l−α

.

(4.5)

A further correspondence between the two networks can be established by impos-

ing p = p3(α), which makes the number of second neighbour links in RMA and

RMB also same (but the rest of the extra links are connected diﬀerently).

Using equation (3) we can obtain the value of p corresponding to a given value

of α and vice versa. But it is immediately seen that the two networks are not

equivalent even after making them similar upto the second neighbour connections.

For example, for α = 2.0, the corresponding value of p = 0.612 in this scheme.

But we have already seen that while the point of maximum disorder occurs close

to this value of p in RMA, the point of maximum disorder for RMB is considerably

away from α = 2.0. So the nature of randomness continues to aﬀect the dynamics

at least quantitatively.

4.6.2 Analysis of some general features of the quenching

phenomena on networks

We ﬁnd several interesting features in the quenching phenomena of Ising spin

systems on both the networks and in this subsection we attempt to provide an

understanding of the same.

76

It is intriguing that the results indicate that the minimum amount of ran-

domness can make the system freeze. What happens for small randomness? The

interactions are still dominantly nearest neighbour type and domains in the con-

ventional sense should grow which will be of both plus and minus signs. The

system will freeze as there will be some stable domain walls due to the few long

range interactions present. The domains, as the system attains saturation, will

be small in number and large in size irrespective of their signs. As a result, the

magnetization attains a small value while the residual energy is still small.

This eﬀect continues for some time till something more interesting happens.

Take for example the case of quenching on RMA. There is a distinct region 0.4 <

p < 0.6 where the energy and magnetization grow simultaneously, an apparently

counterintuitive result. Similar behaviour can be noted for the quenching on RMB

in a certain region in its parameter space. A problem to analyse the situation for

diﬀerent p (or α) values is that the ﬁnal frozen states are not related in any way

in principle. This is because the energy landscapes change as p is changed and

the initial conﬁgurations which undergo evolution are completely uncorrelated. In

fact, in such a situation, even if the energy landscape is same with a number of local

minima, diﬀerent initial conﬁgurations will end up in diﬀerent ﬁnal nonequilibrium

steady states. Nevertheless, one can attempt to explain this counterintuitive result

assuming that the ﬁnal states are not largely diﬀerent when p is changed slightly in

the following way. This assumption and explanation are supported by the actual

ﬁnal states obtained for small system sizes.

Let us for example consider the RMA and take two values of p, p2 > p1, and for

which the magnetization and residual energy of the ﬁnal state corresponding p2 are

both larger than those for p1. Now this can be possible due to the fragmentation of

a larger domain into several domains such that the magnetization increases. This

can be demonstrated with a simple example: let us imagine a situation where one

77

has only two domains of size N + (of up spins) and N − (of down spins) for p1
with magnetization equal to m1 = |(N + − N −)|/L and assume that for p2, the
domain with N + up spins remains same while the domain with N − down spins

gets fragmented into three domains of size N −
2 in the ﬁnal state.
1−N −)|/L which is larger
For p2, therefore, the magnetization is m2 = |(N + +2N +
than m1. Here in this hypothetical case, we have assumed that N + > N −, and

1 and N −

1, N +

p2 is very close to p1. One can also assume that the energy increases for p2 as the

system is still suﬃciently short ranged and the new domain walls cause an extra

energy compared to the state obtained for p1. Of course this is an oversimpliﬁed

picture where we have assumed that the ﬁnal states for p1 and p2 are identical

except for the fragmentation of one domain. However, we ﬁnd that the ﬁnal

conﬁgurations obtained for small systems for diﬀerent values of p as shown in Fig.

4.12 are consistent with our conjecture. These snapshots are representative of

the real situation in the sense that they give a typical picture and are not just

rare cases; we have obtained a similar picture from almost all such conﬁgurations

generated for small systems.

As p further increases, should the domains get fragmented into even smaller

pieces? Answer is no, as the increasing number of long range interactions again

help in the growth of so called domains, of one particular sign only such that the

magnetization grows and the energy decreases. However, domains of both signs

still survive, although the sizes are no longer comparable.

It can therefore be

expected that the region for which both magnetization and energy increase as a

function of p or α would continue till the short range interactions are dominating

and our results are consistent with this expectation.

78

p=0.8

p=0.7

p=0.55

p=0.4

 0

 10

 20

 30

Sites

 40

 50

 60

Figure 4.12: (Color online) Snap shots of the ﬁnal spin conﬁgurations for diﬀerent
values of the disorder parameter p for quenching on RMA. The + and • signs
indicate up and down spins respectively. The domains in the conventional sense
are clearly visible.

4.7 Summary and concluding remarks

In this chapter, we addressed the question how the quenching dynamics of Ising

spins depend on the nature of randomness of the underlying network by consid-

ering two networks in which the randomness is realized diﬀerently. The networks

are same upto the ﬁrst neighbour links and have same average degree per node.

While the qualitative features are same, there are intricate diﬀerences occurring

in the behaviour of the saturation values of the dynamical quantities.

Overall, we ﬁnd some interesting features: the saturation values of the dy-

namical quantities do not have monotonic behaviour as a function of the disorder

parameters. Especially, we ﬁnd that increasing randomness does not necessarily

make the system get locked in a higher energy state. The dynamics takes the

system to a steady state very fast, and the saturation times are not dependent

on the system size. No scaling behaviour is obtained from the studies either

with time or with system size for any of the dynamic quantities. The most sur-

79

prising result is perhaps the existence of a region in the parameter space where

both the residual energy and the magnetization increase which can be explained

phenomenologically.

The Euclidean model, on which the study of the quenching of Ising spins is done

for the ﬁrst time to the best of our knowledge, shows some surprising behaviour

both in the random and regular regions. We ﬁnd that decreasing randomness

makes the system end up in a higher energy state in the random region while

in the regular region, familiar behaviour of the Ising dynamics with short range

interactions are not obtained;

in fact the probability of freezing is unity here

indicating that in none of the realization, the system could end up in the static

ground state. The saturation time also does not show scaling with time.

As already mentioned, the present study is relevant for dynamical social phe-

nomena on complex networks. For example, the evolution of binary opinions on a

complex network (where the initial states are randomly +1 and −1) is analogous
to the dynamical study reported in the present chapter. Of course, in case of

the opinion dynamics, the interactions could be more complex compared to the

the simple Ising model. Our result indicates that the qualitative features of the

results will not be much diﬀerent for diﬀerent complex networks.

Dynamic frustration [18] is responsible for freezing in many Ising systems where

there is no frustration in the conventional sense. One interesting observation is

that the nature of dynamic frustration in regular lattices of dimension greater

than one and that in systems with random interaction (but no frustration) are in

general quite diﬀerent as in the latter one does not encounter the familiar scaling

laws.

80

Bibliography

[1] C. K. Harris and R. B. Stinchcombe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 869 (1986).

[2] S. Jain, J. Phys A 19 , L57 (1986);

S. Jain, Phys. Rev. E 59, R2493 (1999).

[3] C. M. Newman, D. L. Stein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3944 - 3947 (1999).

[4] D. S. Fisher, P. L. Doussal and C. Monthus, Rhys Rev E 64, 066107 (2001).

[5] P. Svenson, Phys. Rev. E 64 036122 (2001).

[6] O. Haggstrom, Physica A 310 275 (2002).

[7] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).

[8] D. Boyer and O. Miramontes, Phys. Rev. E 67, R035102 (2003).

[9] P. K. Das and P. Sen, Eur. Phys. J. B 47, 306 (2005).

[10] R. Albert, A.-L. Barabsi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47 (2002)

[11] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003)

[12] S. Goswami, S. Biswas and P. Sen Physica A 390, 972 (2011).

[13] M. Barthlemy, Physics Reports, 499, 1 (2011)

81

[14] J. Kleinberg, Nature 406, 845 (2000);

S. Jespersen and A. Blumen, Phys. Rev. E 62, 6270 (2000).

P. Sen and B. K. Chakrabarti, J. Phys A 34, 7749 (2001).

[15] P. Sen, K. Banerjee, T. Biswas, Phys. Rev. E 66 037102 (2002);

C. F. Moukarzel and M. A. de Menezes, Phys. Rev. E 65 056709 (2002);

P. Sen, K. Banerjee and T. Biswas, Phys. Rev. E 66, 037102 (2002);

H. Zhu and Z-X. Huang, Phys. Rev. E 70, 036117 (2004);

A. Chatterjee and P. Sen, Phys. Rev. E 74 036109 (2006);

YuF. Chang, L. Sun and X. Cai, Phys. Rev. E 76 021101 (2007);

[16] For a recent review on Euclidean networks, see P. Sen, in Recent Developments

in Theoretical Physics, eds S. Ghosh and G. Kar, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,

2010, p. 375.

[17] P. Sen and S. Dasgupta, J. Phys. A 37 11949 (2004);

P. Sen, Phys. Rev. E 81, 032103 (2010),

S. Biswas and P. Sen, J. Phys. A 44 145003 (2011).

[18] P. Sen and P. K. Das, in Quantum Annealing and other optimisation problems,

eds. A. Das and B. K. Chakrabarti, Springer Verlag p 325 (2005).

82

Chapter 5

Opinion formation : A newly

proposed dynamics

5.1

Introduction

Sociophysics has emerged as one of the important areas of research during recent

times. The concepts of statistical physics ﬁnd application to many situations that

occur in a social system with the assumption that individual free will or feelings

do not take crucial role in these situations [1, 2]. One of the major issues that

has attracted a lot of attention is how opinions evolve in a social system. Starting

from random initial opinions, dynamics often leads to a consensus which means

a major fraction of the population support a certain cause, for example a motion

or a candidate in an election etc.

Simulating human behaviour by models eﬀectively implies quantifying the out-

come of the behavior by suitable variables having continuous or discrete values.

Diﬀerent dynamical rules are proposed for the evolution of these variables, de-

pending on how these variables change with time following social interactions.

Thus, a social system can be treated like a physical system. For example, in case

83

of opinion dynamics, if the opinions have only discrete binary values, the social

system can be regarded as a magnetic system of Ising spins.

In this context, Schelling model [3], proposed in 1971, seems to be the very

ﬁrst model of opinion dynamics. Since then, a number of models describing the

formation of opinions in a social system have been proposed [4]. While on one

hand these models attempt an understanding of how a society behaves and social

viewpoints evolve, on the other hand, these provide rich complex dynamical physi-

cal systems suitable for theoretical studies. Many of these show a close connection

to familiar models of statistical physics, e.g., the Ising and the Potts models.

Dynamics of complex systems has become a subject of extensive research from

several aspects. For many such systems, e.g., traﬃc or agent based models, one

cannot deﬁne a conventional Hamiltonian or energy function. The only method

by which one can study the steady state behaviour of such systems is by looking

at the long time dynamics. Nonequilibrium dynamics involves the evolution of a

system from a completely random initial conﬁguration and associated with this

evolution are several phenomena of interest like domain growth or persistence

that have been studied, for example, in spin systems. Since in many sociophysics

model, one can have variables analogous to spin variables, these phenomena can be

readily studied here. An important objective is to identify dynamical universality

classes by estimating the relevant dynamical exponents.

Another point of interest in studying dynamics is that many systems may

have identical equilibrium behaviour but behave diﬀerently as far as dynamics is

concerned. For example, Ising spin dynamics with or without conservation belong

to diﬀerent dynamic universality class although their equilibrium behaviour is

identical.

Apart from the dynamical behaviour, diﬀerent kinds of phase transitions have

also been observed in these models by introducing suitable parameters. One such

84

phase transition can be from a homogeneous society where everyone has the same

opinion to a heterogeneous one with mixed opinions [5].

Change in the opinion of an individual takes place in diﬀerent ways in diﬀerent

models. For example in the Voter model [6], an individual simply follows the

opinion of a randomly chosen neighbour while in the Sznajd model [7], the opinion

of one or more individuals are changed following more complicated rules.

5.2 Description of the proposed model

In a model of opinion dynamics, the key feature is the interaction of the individu-

als. Usually, in all the models, it is assumed that an individual is inﬂuenced by its

nearest neighbours. In this chapter we propose a one dimensional model of binary

opinion in which the dynamics is dependent on the size of the neighbouring do-

mains as well. Here an individual changes his/her opinion in two situations: ﬁrst

when the two neighbouring domains have opposite polarity, and in this case the

individual simply follows the opinion of the neighbouring domain with the larger

size. This case may arise only when the individual is at the boundary of the two

domains. An individual also changes his/her opinion when both the neighbouring

domains have an opinion which opposes his/her original opinion, i.e., the individ-

ual is sandwiched between two domains of same polarity. It may be noted that

for the second case, the size of the neighbouring domains is irrelevant.

This model, henceforth referred to as Model I, can be represented by a sys-

tem of Ising spins where the up and down states correspond to the two possible

opinions. The two rules followed in the dynamical evolution in the equivalent spin

model are shown schematically in Fig. 5.1 as case I and II. In the ﬁrst case the

spins representing individuals at the boundary between two domains will choose

the opinion of the left side domain (as it is larger in size). For the second case the

85

down spin ﬂanked by two neighbouring up spins will ﬂip.

Case−I

Case−II

Figure 5.1: Dynamical rules for Model I: in both cases the encircled spins may
change state; in case I, the boundary spins will follow the opinion of the left
domain of up spins which will grow. For case II, the down spin between the two
up spins will ﬂip irrespective of the size of the neigbouring domains.

The main idea in Model I is that the size of a domain represents a quantity

analogous to ‘social pressure’ which is expected to be proportional to the number

of people supporting a cause. An individual, sitting at the domain boundary, is

most exposed to the competition between opposing pressures and gives in to the

larger one. This is what happens in case I shown in Fig.5.1. The interaction in

case II on the other hand implies that it is diﬃcult to stick to one’s opinion if the

entire neighbourhood opposes it.

Deﬁning the dynamics in this way, one immediately notices that case II cor-

responds to what would happen for spins in a nearest neighbour ferromagnetic

Ising model (FIM) in which the dynamics at zero temperature is simply an energy

minimisation scheme. However, the boundary spin in the FIM behaves diﬀerently

in case I; it may or may not ﬂip as the energy remains same.

In the present

model, the dynamics is deterministic even for the boundary spins (barring the

rare instance when the two neighbourhoods have the same size in which case the

individual changes state with ﬁfty percent probability).

In this model, the important condition of changing one’s opinion is the size

of the neighbouring domains which is not ﬁxed either in time or space. This

86

is the unique feature of this model, and to the best of our knowledge such a

condition has not been considered earlier. In the most familiar models of opinion

dynamics like the Sznajd model [7] or the voter model [6], one takes the eﬀect of

nearest neighbours within a given radius and even in the case of models deﬁned

on networks [8], the inﬂuencing neighbours may be nonlocal but always ﬁxed in

identity.

5.3 Model I : Detailed dynamics

We have done Monte Carlo simulations to study the dynamical evolution of the

proposed model from a given initial state. With a system of N spins representing

individuals, at each step, one spin is selected at random and its state updated.

After N such steps, one Monte Carlo time step is said to be completed.

If N+ is the number of people of a particular opinion (up spin) and N− is the

number of people of opposite opinion (down spin), the order parameter is deﬁned

as m = |N+ − N−|/N. This is identical to the (absolute value of) magnetization
in the Ising model.

Starting from a random initial conﬁguration, the dynamics in Model I leads

to a ﬁnal state with m = 1, i.e., a homogeneous state where all individuals have

the same opinion.

It is not diﬃcult to understand this result;

in absence of

any ﬂuctuation, the dominating neighbourhood (domain) simply grows in size

ultimately spanning the entire system.

We have studied the dynamical behaviour of the fraction of domain walls D

and the order parameter m as the system evolves to the homogeneous state. We

observe that the behaviour of D(t) and m(t) are consistent with the usual scaling
behaviour found in coarsening phenomena; D(t) ∝ t−1/z with z = 1.00± 0.01 and
m(t) ∝ t1/2z with z = 0.99 ± 0.01. These variations are shown in Fig. 5.2.

87

0

10

m

-1

10

-2

10

L=5000
L=1000
slope=0.51

4

10

0

10

-1

10

-2

10

-3

10

D

-5

10

0

10

1

10

2

3

10

10
Time

0

10

1

10

2

10

Time

3

10

4

10

Figure 5.2:
(Color online) Growth of order parameter m with time for two
diﬀerent system sizes along with a straight line (slope 0.51) shown in a log-log
plot. Inset shows the decay of fraction of domain wall D with time.

We have also calculated the persistence probability that a person has not

change his/her opinion up to time t. Persistence, which in general is the probabil-

ity that a ﬂuctuating nonequilibrium ﬁeld does not change sign upto time t, shows
a power law decay behaviour in many physical phenomena, i.e., P (t) ∝ t−θ, where
In that case, one can use the ﬁnite size scaling
θ is the persistence exponent.

relation [9, 10]

P (t, L) ∝ t−θf (L/t1/z).

(5.1)

For ﬁnite systems, the persistence probability saturates at a value ∝ L−α at large
times. Therefore, for x << 1 , f (x) ∝ x−α with α = zθ. For large x, f (x) is
a constant (discussed in detail in chapter 2). Thus one can obtain estimates for

both z and θ using the above scaling form.

In the present model the persistence probability does show a power law decay

with θ = 0.235 ± 0.003, while the ﬁnite size scaling analysis made according to
(5.1) suggests a z value 1.04 ± 0.01 (Fig. 5.3). Thus we ﬁnd that the values of z
from the three diﬀerent calculations are consistent and conclude that the dynamic

88

exponent z = 1.02 ± 0.02.

It is important to note that both the exponents z and θ are novel in the sense

that they are quite diﬀerent from those of the one dimensional Ising model [11]

and other opinion/voter dynamics models [12, 13, 14]. Speciﬁcally in the Ising

model, z = 2 and θ = 0.375 and for the Sznajd model the persistence exponent is

equal to that of the Ising model. This shows that the present model belongs to

an entirely new dynamical class.

0

10

)
t
(
P
10

-1

-2

10

0

10

10

2

3

10
t

N=1000
N=5000
N=10000
N=500

6

10

-1

10

0

10

1

10
1/z

N/t

2

10

3

10

θ
-

t
/
)
t
,
N
(
P

 2

 1

 0.5

 0.3

-2

10

Figure 5.3: The collapse of scaled persistence probability versus scaled time
using θ = 0.235 and z = 1.04 is shown for diﬀerent system sizes. Inset shows the
unscaled data.

5.4 Eﬀect of disorder : Rigidity parameter

The Model I described so far has no ﬂuctuation. Fluctuations or disorder can be

introduced in several ways. We adopt a realistic outlook: since every individual

is not expected to succumb to social pressure, we modify Model I by introducing

a parameter ρ called rigidity coeﬃcient which denotes the probability that people

are completely rigid and never change their opinions. Such rigid individuals had

89

been considered earlier in [15]. The modiﬁed model will be called Model II in

which there are ρN rigid individuals (chosen randomly at time t = 0), who retain

their initial state throughout the time evolution. Thus the disorder is quenched in

nature. The limit ρ = 1 corresponds to the unrealistic noninteracting case when

no time evolution takes place; ρ = 1 is in fact a trivial ﬁxed point. For other

values of ρ, the system evolves to a equilibrium state.

The time evolution changes drastically in nature with the introduction of ρ.

All the dynamical variables like order parameter, fraction of domain wall and

persistence attain a saturation value at a rate which increases with ρ. Power law

variation with time can only be observed for ρ < 0.01 with the exponent values

same as those for ρ = 0. The saturation or equilibrium values on the other hand

show the following behaviour:

ms ∝ N −α1ρ−β1
Ds ∝ ρ−β2
Ps = a + bρ−β3

(5.2)

where in the last equation a is a constant ≃ 0.06 independent of ρ. The values
of the exponents are α1 = 0.500 ± 0.002, β1 = 0.513 ± 0.010, β2 = 0.96 ± 0.01
and β3 = 0.430 ± 0.01. (Figs 5.4 and 5.5.) The variation of ms with ρ is strictly
speaking not valid for extremely small values of ρ. However, at such small values

of ρ, it is diﬃcult to obtain the exact form of the variation numerically.

It can be naively assumed that the Nρ rigid individuals will dominantly appear

at the domain boundaries such that in the ﬁrst order approximation (for a ﬁxed

population), D ∝ 1/ρ. This would give m ∝ 1/√ρ indicating β1 = 0.5 and β2 = 1.

The numerically obtained values are in fact quite close to these estimates.

The results obtained for Model II can be explained in the following way: with

90

 1

L=2000
slope=0.96
L=3000
L=4000

 0.4

 0.2

e
c
n
e
t
s
i
s
r
e
P

 0.1

 0.001  0.01

 0.2

 1

 0.4

 0.1

l
l
a
w
 
n
i
a
m
o
d
 0.04
 
f
o
 
n
 0.01
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

 0.001

 0.004

 0.01

 0.04

 0.1

ρ

Figure 5.4:
Saturation values of fraction of domain walls Ds and persistence
probability Ps (shown in inset) increase with rigidity coeﬃcient ρ in a power law
manner. There is no system size dependence for both the quantities.

 50

 25

1

α

N
s
m

 10

0

10

N=4000
N=2000
N=3000

s
m

10

-1

-3

10

-2

10

-1

10

 5

-3

10

-2

10

ρ

-1

10

Figure 5.5: Scaled saturation value of ms decays with the rigidity coeﬃcient ρ.
nset shows the unscaled data.

91

ρ 6= 0, the domains cannot grow freely and domains with both kinds of opinions
survive making the equilibrium ms less than unity. Thus the society becomes

heterogeneous for any ρ > 0 when people do not follow the same opinion any

longer. The variation of ms with N shows that ms → 0 in the thermodynamic
limit for ρ > 0. Thus not only does the society become heterogeneous at the

onset of ρ, it goes to a completely disordered state analogous to the paramagnetic

state in magnetic systems. Thus one may conclude that a phase transition from

a ordered state with m = 1 to a disordered state (m = 0) takes place for ρ = 0+.

It may be recalled here that m = 0 at the trivial ﬁxed point ρ = 1 and therefore

the system ﬂows to the ρ = 1 ﬁxed point for any nonzero value of ρ indicating

that ρ = 1 is a stable ﬁxed point.

That the saturation values of the fraction of domain walls do not show system

size dependence for ρ = 0+ further supports the fact that the phase transition

occurs at ρ = 0.

The eﬀect of the parameter ρ is therefore very similar to thermal ﬂuctuations

in the Ising chain, which drives the latter to a disordered state for any non-zero

temperature, ρ = 1 being comparable to inﬁnite temperature. However, the role of

the rigid individuals is more similar to domain walls which are pinned rather than

thermal ﬂuctuations. In fact, the Ising model will have dynamical evolution even

at very high temperatures while in Model II, the dynamical evolution becomes

slower with ρ, ultimately stopping altogether at ρ = 1. This is reﬂected in the

scaling of the various thermodynamical quantities with ρ, e.g., the order parameter

shows a power law scaling above the transition point.

Since the role of ρ is similar to domain wall pinning, one can introduce a

depinning probability factor µ which in this system represents the probability for

rigid individuals to become non-rigid during each Monte Carlo step. µ relaxes

the rigidity criterion in an annealed manner in the sense that the identity of

92

µ=1

µ

ρ=0

+

ρ

ρ=1

Figure 5.6: The ﬂow lines in the ρ− µ plane: Any non-zero value of ρ with µ = 0
drives the system to the disordered ﬁxed point ρ = 1. Any nonzero value of µ
drives it to the ordered state (µ = 1, which is a line of ﬁxed points) for all values
of ρ.

the individuals who become non-rigid is not ﬁxed (in time). If µ = 1, one gets

back Model I (identical to Model II with ρ=0) whatever be the value of ρ, and

therefore µ = 1 signiﬁes a line of (Model I) ﬁxed points, where the dynamics leads

the system to a homogeneous state.

With the introduction of µ, one has eﬀectively a lesser fraction ρ′ of rigid

people in the society, where

ρ′ = ρ(1 − µ).

(5.3)

The diﬀerence from Model II is, of course, that this eﬀective fraction of rigid

individuals is not ﬁxed in identity (over time). Thus when ρ 6= 0, µ 6= 0, we have
a system in which there are both quenched and annealed disorder. It is observed

that for any nonzero value of µ, the system once again evolves to a homogeneous

state (m = 1) for all values of ρ. Moreover, the dynamic behaviour is also same

as Model I with the exponent z and θ having identical values. This shows that

the nature of randomness is crucial as one cannot simply replace a system with
parameters {ρ 6= 0, µ 6= 0} by one with only quenched randomness {ρ′

6= 0,

93

µ′ = 0} as in the latter case one would end up with a heterogeneous society. We
therefore conclude that the annealed disorder wins over the quenched disorder; µ

eﬀectively drives the system to the µ = 1 ﬁxed point for any value of ρ. This is

shown schematically in a ﬂow diagram (Fig. 5.6). It is worth remarking that it

looks very similar to the ﬂow diagram of the one dimensional Ising model with

nearest neighbour interactions in a longitudinal ﬁeld and ﬁnite temperature.

5.5 Mapping of the opinion dynamics model to

reaction diﬀusion system

The opinion dynamics model discussed so far are models where the dynamics is

described in terms of the Ising spins that mimic the binary opinions an individual

can have. In this model, a spin deep inside a domain does not ﬂip. The dynamics

is governed by the ﬂipping of the spins only at the domain walls. The dynamics,

in this respect, is reminiscent of the zero temperature Glauber dynamics of the

kinetic Ising model. The motions of the domain walls can be viewed as the motions

of the particles A with the reaction A + A → ∅. This means the particles are
walkers and when two particles come on top of each other they are annihilated.

The annihilation reaction ensures domain coalescence and coarsening. Unlike that

in Glauber Ising model, the walkers A corresponding to Model I do not perform

random walks. These walkers move ballistically towards their nearest neighbours.

This bias, as we have seen before, gives rise to a new universality class than that

of conventional reaction diﬀusion system [16].

We have also studied A + A → ∅ model with the particles A performing
random walk with a bias ǫ towards their nearest neighbors. We have taken ǫ as

the probability that a walker walks towards its nearest neighbour. Clearly, ǫ =

94

0.5 corresponds to usual reaction diﬀusion system with the particles performing

random walk. On the other hand, ǫ = 1 is equivalent to our Model I as has been

described above. We have studied the dynamics of the reaction diﬀusion system

for diﬀerent values of ǫ in the range [0+, 1.0].

In reaction diﬀusion systems, the growth of domains is given by the number

of surviving walkers. Persistence P (t) in these systems is deﬁned as the fraction

of sites unvisited by any of the walkers A till time t. Figures 5.7 and 5.8 show

the decay of persistence and fraction of walkers with time for diﬀerent values of

ǫ > 0.5.

L=500,ε=0.7
L=1000,ε=0.7
L=1000,ε=0.55
L=500,ε=0.55
slope=-0.23

 1

 0.7

 0.5

 0.3

 0.1

e
c
n
e
t
s
s
r
e
P

i

100

101

102

103

104

105

Time

Figure 5.7: Decay of persistence with time for ǫ = 0.7 and ǫ = 0.55

We ﬁnd that for ǫ > 0.5, the Model I behaviour is observed, namely: z ≃ 1.0
and θ ≃ 0.235, with some possible correction to the scaling which becomes weaker
as ǫ is increased. For example, there is a logarithmic correction to scaling for the

decay of the fraction of domain walls which takes the form t−1(1 + α(ǫ) log(t))

where α(ǫ) → 0 as ǫ → 1. One can compare the above model with the cases
discussed in section 2.2.3, where the introduction of stochastic dynamics also

95

occurred with a bias towards the larger domain.

In case of thermal disorder,

the parameter comparable to ǫ is β. In the present case, the exact sizes of the

domains do not matter (which is important for the case with β) but the results

are consistent in the sense that any bias towards the larger domain (or nearest

walker) makes the system behave like Model I.

L=500,ε=0.7
L=1000,ε=0.7
L=1000,ε=0.55
L=500,ε=0.55
slope=-1.0
f(t)

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

s
r
e
k
a
w

l

 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
F

100

101

102

103

104

105

Time

Figure 5.8: Decay of number of walkers with time for ǫ = 0.7 and ǫ = 0.55. There
is a logarithmic correction to scaling for the value of ǫ = 0.55. The form of f (t)
is t−1(1 + α log(t)) with α = 3.92

In this model, we have also studied the ǫ < 0.5 region where the opposite

happens, the walker has a bias towards the further neighbour. Obviously domain

annihilations take place very slowly now, even slower than 1/ log(t) and the dy-

namics continues for very long times. Consequently, the persistence probability

no longer shows a power law variation now but falls exponentially to zero (Fig

5.9).

96

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

100

Dw(t)*0.4,ε=0.3 
Dw(t)*0.4,ε=0.45 
P(t),ε=0.45
P(t),ε=0.3
g(t)

101

102

103

104

105

Time

Figure 5.9: Decay of persistence and number of walkers with time for ǫ = 0.3 and
ǫ = 0.45. The form of g(t) is a(1/ log(t)) where a is any constant.

5.6 Summary and concluding remarks

In summary, we have proposed a model of opinion dynamics in which the social

pressure is quantiﬁed in terms of the size of domains having same opinion. In the

simplest form, the model has no disorder and self organises to a homogeneous state

in which the entire population has the same opinion. This simple model exhibits

novel coarsening exponents. This model (Model I) in one dimension belongs to a

new dynamical universality class with novel dynamical features not encountered

in any previous models of dynamic spin system or opinion dynamics. In the corre-

sponding reaction diﬀusion system A + A → ∅, we have introduced a probability ǫ
of random walkers A moving towards their nearest neighbors. ǫ = 0.5 corresponds

to the particles A performing unbiased random walks and the system belongs to

the dynamical universality class of zero temperature Glauber Ising model. We

ﬁnd that for ǫ > 0.5, the system still shows power law behavior of domain growth

and persistence but with a universality class of that of Model I. For ǫ < 0.5, the

97

domain grows logarithmically and the persistence decays exponentially in time.

With disorder, the model undergoes a phase transition from a homogeneous

society (with order parameter equal to one) to a heterogeneous one which is fully

disordered in the sense that no consensus can be reached as the order parameter

goes to zero in the thermodynamic limit. With both quenched and annealed

randomness present in the system, the annealed randomness is observed to drive

the system to a homogeneous state for any amount of the quenched randomness.

Many open questions still remain regarding Models I and II, the behaviour

in higher dimensions being one of them. In fact, full understanding of the phase

transition occurring in Model II reported here is an important issue: although the

phase transition has similarities with the one dimensional Ising model, there are

some distinctive features which should be studied in more detail. All the models

discussed in the present article can easily be extended to higher dimensions and its

universality class determined. Phase transitions occurring at non-extreme values

of suitably deﬁned parameters may also be expected in higher dimensions.

98

Bibliography

[1] Econophysics and Sociophysics : Trends and Perspectives, Eds. B. K.

Chakrabarti, A. Chakrabarti and A. Chatterjee, Wiley VCH, Berlin (2006).

[2] C. Castellano, S. Fortunato and V. Loreto Rev. Mod. Phys. 81 591 (2009).

[3] T. C. Schelling, J. Math. Sociol. 1: 143 (1971)

[4] D. Stauﬀer, in Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science edited by

Meyers R A (Springer, New York, 2009);

[5] A. Baronchelli, L. Dall’Asta, A. Barrat, and V. Loreto, Phys. Rev. E 76,

051102 (2007);

C. Castellano, M. Marsili and A. Vespignani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 3536 (2000).

[6] T. M. Liggett Interacting Particle Systems: Contact, Voter and Exclusion

Processes (Springer-Verlag Berlin 1999).

[7] K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd, Int.J.Mod.Phys C 11 1157 (2000).

[8] C.Castellano, D.Vilone and A.Vespignani, Europhys. Lett. 63 153 (2003).

[9] G. Manoj and P. Ray, Phys. Rev. E 62 7755 (2000);

G. Manoj and P. Ray, J. Phys A 33 5489 (2000).

[10] S.Biswas, A.K.Chandra and P.Sen, Phys. Rev. E 78, 041119 (2008)

99

[11] B. Derrida in Lecture notes in Physics 461 165 (Springer, 1995);

B. Derrida, V. Hakim, V. Pasquier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 751 (1995)

[12] D. Stauﬀer and P. M. C. de Oliveira, Eur. Phys. J B 30 587 (2002.)

[13] J. R. Sanchez, arXiv:cond-mat/0408518v1

[14] P. Shukla, J. Phys. A Math. Gen. 38 5441 (2005).

[15] S. Galam, Physica A 381 366 (2007)

[16] Redner S, in Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics in One Dimension edited

by Privman V (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997)

100

Chapter 6

Dynamical crossover : Model

with variable range of interaction

6.1

Introduction

Dynamical phenomena is an important topic in statistical physics. Physical quan-

tities in self organized and/or driven systems show rich time dependent behaviour

in many cases. Some of the dynamical phenomena which have attracted a lot

of attention are critical dynamics, quenching and coarsening, reaction diﬀusion

systems, random walks etc.

In most of these phenomena, we ﬁnd there is a single timescale leading to

uniform time dependent behaviour which in many cases is a power law decay or

growth [1]. However, in some complex systems, it has been observed that the

dynamics is governed by a distinct short time behaviour followed by a diﬀerent

behavior at long times. For example, in spin systems, at criticality, the order

parameter is observed to grow for a macroscopically short time [2] while at longer

times it decays in an expected power law manner. For correlated random walks,

e.g., the persistent random walk on the other hand, one ﬁnds a ballistic (i.e., when

101

the root mean square (rms) displacement scales linearly with time) to diﬀusive

(rms displacement varying as the square root of time) crossover in the dynamics

[3]. Random walks on small world networks show a completely opposite behaviour,

the number of distinct sites visited by the walker has an initial diﬀusive scaling

followed by a ballistic variation with time [4]. This is also true for a biased random

walker.

In this chapter, we shall present our study on a dynamical model of Ising

spins in one dimension which is governed by a single parameter. The system is a

generalized version of a recently proposed model in [5] (which we refer to as model

I henceforth) where the state of the spins (S = ±1) may change in two situations:
ﬁrst when its two neighbouring domains have opposite polarity, and in this case

the spin orients itself along the spins of the neighbouring domain with the larger

size. This case may arise only when the spin is at the boundary of the two domains.

The neighbouring domain sizes are calculated excluding the spin itself, however,

even if it is included, there is no change in the results. A spin is also ﬂipped when

it is sandwiched between two domains of spins with same sign. When the two

neighbouring domains of the spin are of the same size but have opposite polarity,

the spin will change its orientation with ﬁfty percent probability. Except for this

rare event the dynamics in the above model is deterministic. This dynamics leads

to a homogeneous state of either all spins up or all spins down. Such evolution to

absorbing homogeneous states are known to occur in systems belonging to directed

percolation (DP) processes, zero temperature Ising model, voter model etc. [6, 7].

Model I was introduced in the context of a social system where the binary

opinions of individuals are represented by up and down spin states. In opinion

dynamics models, such representation of opinions by Ising or Potts spins is quite

common [8]. The key feature is the interaction of the individuals which may lead

to phase transitions between a homogeneous state to a heterogeneous state in

102

many cases [9].

Model I showed the existence of novel dynamical behaviour in a coarsening pro-

cess when compared to the dynamical behaviour of DP processes, voter model,

Ising models etc. [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. The domain sizes were observed to grow as

t1/z with the exponent z very close to unity. It may be noted that the dynamics

of a domain wall can be visualized as the movement of a walker and therefore

the value z ≃ 1 indicated that the eﬀective walks are ballistic. When stochas-
ticity is introduced in this model, such that spin ﬂips are dictated by a so called

“temperature” factor, it shows a robust behaviour in the sense that only for the

temperature going to inﬁnity there is conventional Ising model like behaviour with

z = 2, i.e., the domain wall dynamics becomes diﬀusive in nature [15].

In this work, we have introduced the parameter p, which we call the cutoﬀ

factor, such that the maximum size of the neighbouring domains a spin can sense

is given by R = pL/2 in a one dimensional system of L spins with periodic

boundary condition.

It may be noted that for p = 1, we recover the original

model I where there is eﬀectively no restriction on the size sensitivity of the spins.

R = 1 corresponds to the nearest neighbour Ising model where p → 0 in the
thermodynamic limit.

By the introduction of the parameter p we have essentially deﬁned a restricted

neighbourhood of inﬂuence on a spin. Thus here we have a ﬁnite neighbourhood to

be considered, which is like having a model with ﬁnite long range interaction. In

addition, here we impose the condition that within this restricted neighbourhood,

the domain structure is also important in the same way it was in model I. If one

considers opinion dynamics systems (by which model I was originally inspired), the

domain sizes represent some kind of social pressure. A ﬁnite cutoﬀ (i.e., p < 1)

puts a restriction on the domain sizes which may correspond to geographical,

political, cultural boundaries etc. The case with uniform cutoﬀ signiﬁes that all

103

the individuals have same kind of restriction; we have also considered the case

with random cutoﬀs which is perhaps closer to reality.

In the next section, we describe the dynamical rule and quantities estimated.

We present the results for the case when p is same for all spins in section 6.3 and

6.4 and in section 6.5 we consider the case when the values of p for each spin is

random, lying between zero and unity and constant over time for each spin. In

the last section, we end with concluding remarks.

6.2 Dynamical rule and quantities calculated

As mentioned before, only the spins at the boundary of a domain wall can change

its state. When sandwiched between two domains of same sign, it will be always

ﬂipped. On the other hand, for other boundary spins (termed the target spins

henceforth), there will be two neighbouring domains of opposite signs. For such

spins, we have the following dynamical scheme: let dup and ddown be the sizes of

the two neighbouring domains of type up and down of a target spin (excluding

itself). In model I, the dynamical rule was like this: if dup is greater (less) than

ddown, the target spin will be up (down) and if dup = ddown the target spin is

ﬂipped with probability 0.5. Now, with the introduction of p, the deﬁnition of dup

and ddown are modiﬁed: dup = min{R, dup} and similarly ddown = min{R, ddown}
while the same dynamical rule applies.

As far as dynamics is concerned, we investigate primarily the time dependent

behaviour of the order parameter, fraction of domain walls and the persistence

probability. The order parameter is given by m = |Lup−Ldown|

L

where Lup (Ldown)

is the number of up (down) spins in the system and L = Lup + Ldown, the total

number of spins. This is identical to the (absolute value of) magnetization in the

Ising model.

104

The average fraction of domain walls Dw, which is the average number of

domain walls divided by the system size L is identical to the inverse of average

domain size. Hence the dynamical evolution of the order parameter and fraction of
domain walls is expected to be governed by the dynamical exponent z; m ∝ t1/(2z)
and Dw ≃ t−1/z [1].

The persistence probability P (t) of a spin is the probability that it remains in

its original state up to time t [14] is also estimated. P (t) has been shown to have a

power law decay in many systems with an associated exponent θ. The persistence

probability, in ﬁnite systems has been shown to obey the following scaling form

[16, 17]

P (t, L) ∝ L−αf (t/Lz).

(6.1)

The exponent α = θz is associated with the saturation value of the persistence
probability at t → ∞ when Psat(L) = P (t → ∞, L) ∝ L−α [16].

In the simulations, we have generated systems of size L ≤ 6000 with a mini-
mum of 2000 initial conﬁgurations for the maximum size in general. Depending

on the system size and time to equilibriate, maximum iteration times have been

set. Random updating process has been used to control the spin ﬂips. In general,

the error bars in the data are less than the size of the data points in the ﬁgures

and therefore not shown.

6.3 Case with ﬁnite R (p → 0)

In this section, we discuss the case when R is ﬁnite. Eﬀectively this means that R

does not scale with L and is kept a constant for all system sizes. Since R is kept

ﬁnite, expressing R = pL/2 implies p → 0 in the the thermodynamic limit. For
R = 1, the model is same as the Ising model as the dynamical rule is identical to

105

the zero temperature Glauber dynamics. But it may be noted that making R > 1

will make the dynamical rules diﬀerent from the case of R = 1; as an example we

show in Fig. 6.1 how making R = 2 or 3 changes the dynamical rule compared to

R = 1.

  
  

Figure 6.1: A schematic picture to show the dynamics in the present model for
a ﬁnite value of R. Both the encircled spins will change their state with ﬁfty
percent probability for the nearest neighbour Ising model (R = 1). For R = 2,
the encircled spin on the left will ﬂip with probability 1/2 while the one on the
right will ﬂip with probability 1. For R = 3, the left one will not ﬂip but the right
one will.

We have simulated systems with R = 2 and R = 3 which show that the

dynamics leads to the equilibrium conﬁguration of all spins up/down. Not only

that, the dynamic exponents also turn out to be identical to those corresponding to

the nearest neighbour Ising values (i.e., θ = 0.375 and z = 2). As R is increased,

the ﬁnite size eﬀects become stronger, however,

it is indicated that the Ising

exponents will prevail as the system size becomes larger. In an indirect way, we

have shown later that z = 2 as p → 0 using a general scaling argument. The
behaviour of the diﬀerent dynamic quantities for R = 3 are shown in Figs 6.2 and

6.3.

6.4 Case with p > 0

In this section, we discuss the case when p is ﬁnite. We also assume that p is

uniform, which means each spin experiences the same cutoﬀ.

106

R=3, L=1500
R=3, L=2000

10-2

10-3

)
t
(
w
D

10-4

0.9

0.5

0.3

)
t
(
m

10-5

0.1

102

103

105

t

107

102

103

105

106

t

Figure 6.2: Decay of the fraction of domain walls Dw(t) with time for R = 3
and two diﬀerent system sizes shown in a log-log plot. The dashed line has slope
equal to 0.5. Inset shows growth of magnetization m(t) with time for R = 3; the
dashed line here has slope equal to 0.25.

R=3,L=1000
R=3,L=1500
R=3,L=2000
slope=0.375

 1

 0.1

 0.01

)
t
(
P

 0.001

102

103

104

105

106

107

t

Figure 6.3: Decay of persistence probability P (t) with time for three diﬀerent
sizes shown in a log-log plot. The straight line has slope 0.375.

107

The equilibrium behavior is same for all p, i.e., starting from a random initial

conﬁguration, the dynamics again leads to a ﬁnal state with m = 1, i.e., all spins

up or all spins down. For p = 1, that is in model I, it was numerically obtained that

θ ≃ 0.235 and z ≃ 1.0 giving α ≃ 0.235, while in the one dimensional Ising model
θ = 0.375 and z = 2.0 (exact results) giving α = 0.75. It is clearly indicated that

though model I and the Ising model have identical equilibrium behaviour, they

belong to two diﬀerent dynamical classes which correspond to p = 1 and p → 0
limit respectively of the present model. It is therefore of interest to investigate

the dynamics in the intermediate range of p.

6.4.1 Results for 0 < p < 1

100

2
/
1
-

p
)
t
(
m

10-1

100

100

)
t
(
m

10-1

100

102 103
t

106

p=0.1
p=0.2
p=0.4

10-2

101

102

103

105

t/p

106

108

Figure 6.4: The collapse of scaled order parameter versus scaled time for diﬀerent
values of p, shows z = 1 for t < t1 .
Inset shows unscaled data. System size
L = 3000.

Drastic changes in the dynamics are noted for ﬁnite values of p < 1. The

behaviour of all the three quantities, m(t), Dw and P (t) shows the common feature

of a power law growth or decay with time up to an initial time t1 which increases

with p. The power law behaviour is followed by a very slow variation of the

108

quantities over a much longer interval of time, before they attain the equilibrium

values. The power law behaviour in the early time occur with exponents consistent

with model I, i.e., z ≃ 1 and θ ≃ 0.235. This early time behaviour accompanied
it occurs while the domain sizes are
by model I exponents is easy to explain:

less than pL/2 such that the size sensitivity does not matter and the dynamics is

identical to that in model I. As the domain size increase beyond this value, the

sizes of the neighbouring domains as sensed by the boundary spin become equal

making the dynamics stochastic rather than deterministic as a result of which the

dynamics becomes much slower.

10-1

10-3

10-5

)
t
(
w
D

p=0.1
p=0.2
p=0.4

100

102 103
t

106

10-1

10-2

10-3

p
)
t
(
w
D

10-4

10-5

10-6

101

102

103

105

106

108

t/p

Figure 6.5: The collapse of scaled fraction of domain walls versus scaled time for
diﬀerent values of p; shows z = 1 for t < t1. Inset shows unscaled data. System
size L = 3000.

We thus argue that since domain size ∼ t1/z, the time up to which model I
behaviour will be observed is t1 = (pL/2)z. Since z for model I is 1 we expect

that t1 = pL/2. For a ﬁxed size L one can then consider the scaled time variable

t′ = t/p, and plot the relevant scaled quantities against t′ for diﬀerent values of p

to get a data collapse up to t′

1 = t1/p, independent of p. We indeed observe this,

in Figures 6.4, 6.5 and 6.6, the scaling plots as well as the raw data are shown.

109

From the raw data, t1 is clearly seen to be diﬀerent for diﬀerent p.

100

)
t
(
P

10-1

100

10-1

θ

p
)
t
,
L
(
P

10-2

101

10-2

100

p=0.1
p=0.2
p=0.4
p=0.8
slope=  -0.375

103

105
t/p

107 108

101

102

103
t

104

105

106

Persistence probability versus time for diﬀerent values of p; the
Figure 6.6:
straight line with slope 0.375 shown for comparison. Power law behaviour can be
observed only at the initial time. System size L = 3000. Inset shows the collapse
of scaled persistence probability versus scaled time indicating z = 1 for t < t1.

Although the model I behaviour is conﬁrmed up to t1 and explained easily,

beyond t1, the raw data do not give any information about the dynamical expo-

nents z and θ as no straight forward power law ﬁttings are possible. While an

alternative method to calculate θ is not known, one may have an estimate of z

using an indirect method. It has been shown recently that for various dynamical

Ising models, the time tsat to reach saturation varies as Lx where x is identical to

the dynamical exponent z [15, 18]. One may attempt to do the same here.

Actually it is possible to ﬁnd out theoretically the form of tsat from the qual-

itative behaviour of the dynamical quantities described above and the snapshot

of the system (Fig. 6.7) at times beyond t1. At t > t1, the domain sizes of the

neighbours of any spin at the boundary appear equal such that the domain walls

perform random walks slowing down the annihilation process. Domain walls anni-

hilate only after one of the neighbouring domains shrinks to a size < pL/2 again.

110

e
m
i
T

 140

 120

 100

 80

 60

 40

 20

 0

 0

 10

 20

 30

 40

 50

 60

 70

 80

 90

 100

Sites

Figure 6.7: Snapshot for p < 1.0 (p = 0.4) for system size L = 100.

In a small system, one can see that the slow process continues with only two do-

main walls separating two domains remaining in the system at later times (Fig.

6.7). Even in larger systems, there will be only a few domain walls remaining

making Dw ∝ 1/N at t > t1 as we note from the inset of Fig 6.5: Dw remains
close to O(1/N) for a long time before going to zero.

Thus tsat will have two components, t1, already deﬁned and t2, the time during

which there is a slow variation of quantities over time and the last two domains
remain. While t1 ∝ pL, one can argue that t2 ∝ (1 − p)3L2. The argument runs
as follows: Let us for convenience consider the open boundary case. Here, the size
sensitivity of the spins is Ropen = qL where 0 ≤ q ≤ 1 with the system assuming
the model I behaviour for q ≥ 0.5. At very late times, there will remain only one
domain boundary in the system separating two domains of size, say, γL and βL,

such that γ + β = 1. With both γ, β > q the domain wall will perform random

walk until either of the domains shrinks to a size qL. (This picture is valid for

q < 0.5 and otherwise the dynamics will be simple model I type). Let us suppose

that the domain with initial size βL shrinks to qL in time topen

2

such that the

111

domain wall performs a random walk over a distance s where βL − s = qL. This
gives

topen
2

(β) ∝ (β − q)2L2.

Or, the average value of topen

2

is given by

2 ∝ Z 1−q
topen

q

(β − q)2L2dβ =

(1 − 2q)3L2

3

.

The result for the periodic boundary condition is obtained by putting q = p/2

such that

and therefore

t2 ∝ (1 − p)3L2

tsat = apL + b(1 − p)3L2

(6.2)

The above form is also consistent with the fact that tsat ∝ L2 for p = 0 and
tsat ∝ L for p = 1.
10-1

2

L
/
t
a
s
t

10-2

10-3

10-4

L = 400
L = 600
L = 1000
L = 2000
0.05*x**3

 0.2

 0.3

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

(1-p)

Figure 6.8: Scaled saturation time (tsat/L2) against (1 − p) for diﬀerent L shows
collapse with tsat/L2 ∝ (1 − p)3.

112

For large L, the second term in the above equation will dominate making
tsat ∝ (1 − p)3L2. In order to verify this, we have numerically obtained tsat and
plotted tsat/L2 against (1 − p) for diﬀerent L and found a nice collapse and a ﬁt
compatible with eq (6.2) (Fig. 6.8) with a ∼ 1 and b ∼ O(10−2). We conclude
therefore that in the thermodynamic limit at later times, for any p 6= 1, z = 2,
i.e., the dynamics is diﬀusive. This argument, in fact holds for p → 0 as well
showing that for R ﬁnite, z = 2, as discussed in the preceding section.

 0.7

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

)
t
,
L
(
P

L=400
L=600
L=1000
L=2000
L=3000

 0.25

 0.2

 0.15

 0.1

)
L
(
t
a
s
P

102

103
L

104

 0.1

100

101

102

103

105

106

108

t

Figure 6.9: Persistence probability as a function of time for p = 0.4 for diﬀerent
sizes. Inset shows that the saturation values of the persistence probability shows a
variation L−α for values of p = 0.8, 0.4, 0.2 (from top to bottom) with α ≃ 0.230.

We have discussed so far the time dependent behaviour and exponents only.

But another exponent α which appears at t → ∞ for the persistence probability
can also be extracted here. The persistence probabilities show the conventional

saturation at large times, with the saturation values depending on L. The log-log

plot of P (L, t → ∞) against L shows that power law behaviour is obeyed here
with the exponent α once again coinciding with the model I value, ∼ 0.23 for any
value of p 6= 0 (Fig. 6.9).

Having obtained α, we use eq (6.1) with trial values of z to obtain a collapse of

113

the data P Lα versus t/Lz for any value of nonzero p < 1. As expected, an unique

value of z does not exist for which the data will collapse over all t/Lz. However,

we ﬁnd that using z = 1, one has a nice collapse for initial times up to t1 while

with z = 2, the data collapses over later times (Fig. 6.10). The signiﬁcance of the

result is, an unique value of α is good for collapse for both time regimes. However,

it is not possible to extract any value of θ for later times as θ is extracted from

eq (6.1) in the limit t/Lz < 1 only.

3
3
2
.
0

L
)
t
,
L
(
P

 3

 2

 1

 0.8

 0.6

10-3

L=600
L=1000
L=2000
L=3000

10-2

10-1

100

101

102

103

t/L

(a)

3
3
2
.
0

L
)
t
,
L
(
P

 3

 2

 1

 0.8

 0.6

10-6

L=600
L=1000
L=2000
L=3000

10-2

100

10-4

2

t/L

(b)

Figure 6.10: P Lα versus t/Lz for p = 0.4, shows a nice collapse for initial times
up to t1 using z = 1 and α = 0.233 (a) while using z = 2 and the same value of
α, the data collapses over later times (b).

6.4.2 Discussions on the results

At this juncture, several comments and discussions are necessary. We have ob-

tained a crossover behaviour in this model where an initial ballistic behaviour for

macroscopic time scales is followed by a diﬀusive late time behaviour. However,

the diﬀusive behaviour at later times is not apparent in the simple log-log plots

of the variables and can be extracted only from the study of the total time to

equilibriate. This is due to the fact that the initial ballistic dynamics leaves the

system into a non-typical conﬁguration which is evidently far from those on diﬀu-

114

sion paths. In fact in the diﬀusive regime, the coarsening process hardly continues

in terms of domain growth as only few domain walls remain at t > t1.

A consequence of this is evident in the behaviour of the persistence at later

times. One may expect that the persistence exponent 3/8 may be obtained at

very late times as here one has independent random walkers, few in number,

which annihilate each other as they meet much like in a reaction diﬀusion process.

However, such an exponent is not observed from the data (Fig. 6.6). Although

with z = 2 we can obtain a collapse at later times, it is not possible to obtain a

value of θ. Since persistence is a non-Markovian phenomena and it depends on

the history, the exponent may not be apparent even if the phenomena is reaction

diﬀusion like. Therefore to analyse the dynamical scenario further, we study the

persistence in a diﬀerent way. In order to study the persistence dynamics beyond

t = t1, we reset the zero of time at t = t1. In case the number of domain walls

left in the system at t1 is of the order of the system size (O(L)), the behaviour of

persistence should be as in the case of Ising model, i.e., a power law decay with

exponent 3/8. On the other hand, if the number of independent random walkers

is ﬁnite (i.e., vanishes in the L → ∞ limit) which can not annihilate each other,
the persistence probability is approximately

Prand(t, L) = 1 − ct1/2/L,

(6.3)

where we have assumed that number of distinct sites visited by the walker is

proportional to the distance traveled, which is O(t1/2).

We ﬁnd that in the present case, resetting the zero of time at t1, the persistence

probability shows a decay before attaining a constant value. The decay for a large
initial time interval can be ﬁtted to a form ˜P (t) = 1 − cty where the exponent
y increases with L and clearly tends to saturate at 0.5 as the system size is

115

L=1000
L=3000
L=6000
1-ct1/2/L

 1

 0.9

 0.8

 0.5
 0.49

 0.47

y

 0.7

 0.45

)
L
,
t
(
d
n
a
r
P

 0.43

 500

 1000

 3000

 6000

L

 0.6

 0.58

100

101

102

103

105

107

t

Figure 6.11: Persistence probability shows a decay as a function of time when t1
is set as the initial time. The L = 6000 curve is ﬁtted to the form Prand(t, L) =
1 − cty/L with y = 0.5 (shown with the broken line). Inset shows the variation of
y with system size. p = 0.4 here.

increased. This shows that the persistence probability is identical to (6.3) in form

(Fig. 6.11). This signiﬁes that at t > t1, the dynamics only involves the motions of

random walkers which do not meet and annihilate each other for a long time and

explains the fact that domain walls remain a constant over this interval. Only at

very large times close to equilibriation the domain walls meet and the persistence

probability starts deviating from the behaviour given by (6.3). Actually once one

of the neighbouring domains becomes less than pL/2 in size, the random walk will

cease to take place and will become ballistic, which ﬁnally leads to annihilation

within a very short time. Therefore although we have at later times independent

walkers performing random walk, the power law behaviour with exponent 3/8 will

never be observed (even when the origin of the time is shifted) as the annihilation

here is not taking place as in a usual reaction diﬀusion system but determined by

the model I like dynamics. It may also be noted that beyond t = t1, annihilations

occur only when the system is very close to equilibriation unlike in a reaction

116

diﬀusion system where annihilations occur over all time scales.

The reason why a single value of α is valid for both t > t1 and t < t1 is also

clear from the above study. We expect that at t = t1, the number of persistent
sites ∝ L−α with the value of α ≃ 0.235 as in model I. The additional number
of sites which become non-persistent beyond t1 is proportional to (t − t1)y/L and
therefore at t = tsat expected number of persistent site is

c1L−α − c2(tsat − t1)y/L = c1L−α − c2ty

2/L ,

where c1, c2 are proportionality constants. Since in the thermodynamic limit y →
1/2 and t2 ∝ L2, the number of persistence sites remains ∝ L−α. Here we have
assumed c2 to be independent of L, the assumption is justiﬁed by the result.

6.5 The case with quenched randomness

In this section, we brieﬂy report the behaviour of the system when each spin is

assigned a value of p (0 < p ≤ 1) randomly from a uniform distribution. The
randomness is quenched as the value of p assumed by a spin is ﬁxed for all times.

Here we note that the equilibrium behaviour, all spins up or down is once

again achieved in the system. However the time to reach equilibrium values are

larger than the p = 1 case.

The entire dynamics of the system, once again, can be regarded as walks

performed by the domain walls. For p = 1 for all sites, the walks are ballistic

with the tendency of a domain wall being to move towards its nearest one. For

0 < p ≤ 1 but same for all sites, as discussed in the previous section, the walk is
either ballistic (at initial times) or diﬀusive (at later times) but identical for all

the walkers. When p is diﬀerent for each site, one expects that when a site with

117

 4000

 1

 0.5

 0.3

 1000

)
t
(
P

Random p
p=1

L=1000
L=2000
L=3000
slope=-0.235

 400

 0.1

100

101

102

103

104

105

t

t
a
s
t

 100

 30

102

100
10-1
10-1

10-1

)
t
(
m

L=1000
L=2000
L=3000
slope=0.5

100

101

102

103

104

105

t
103

104

102

103
L

Figure 6.12:
Saturation time (tsat) against system size L shows z = 1. Inset
on the top left shows the persistence probability P (t) with time which follows a
power law decay with exponent ∼ 0.235 initially. The other inset on the bottom
right shows the growth of magnetization m(t) with time where the initial variation
is like m(t) ∼ t1/2.

a relatively large p is hit, the corresponding domain wall will move towards its

nearest domain wall while when a site with relatively small p is hit, the dynamics

of the domain wall will be diﬀusive.

It has been previously noted that model I with noise (of a diﬀerent kind) which

induces similar mixture of diﬀusive and ballistic motions shows an overall ballistic

behaviour (for ﬁnite noise) with the value of the dynamic exponent equal to unity

[15]. In the present model with quenched randomness also, we ﬁnd, by analyzing

the saturation times that z = 1. However, the variation of the magnetization, do-

main walls and persistence show power law scalings with exponents corresponding

to model I only for an initial range of time (Fig 6.12).

118

6.6 Summary and concluding remarks

In summary, we have proposed a model in which a cutoﬀ is introduced in the size

of the neighbouring domains as sensed by the spins. The cutoﬀ R is expressed in

terms of a parameter p. At p → 0 (ﬁnite R) and p = 1 it shows pure diﬀusive
and ballistic behavior respectively. In the uniform case where p is same for all

spins, a ballistic to diﬀusive crossover occurs in time for any nonzero p 6= 1.
Usually in a crossover phenomenon, where a power law behaviour occurs with two

diﬀerent exponents, the crossover is evident from a simple log-log plot. In this

case, however, the crossover phenomena is not apparent as a change in exponents

in simple log-log plots does not appear. The crossover occurs between two diﬀerent

types of phenomena, the ﬁrst is pure coarsening in which domain walls prefer to

move towards their nearest neighbours as in model I and one gets the expected

power law behaviour. At t1, as mentioned before, some special conﬁgurations are

generated and therefore the second phenomena involves pure diﬀusion of a few

domain walls (density of domain walls going to zero in the thermodynamic limit)

which remain non-interacting up to large times. Naturally, the only dynamic

exponent in the diﬀusive regime is the diﬀusion exponent z = 2 which is distinct

from the growth exponent z = 1. So the two dynamic exponents not only diﬀer

in magnitude, they are connected to distinct phenomena as well. This crossover

behaviour is therefore a striking feature for the model. For R ﬁnite (p → 0),
there is no crossover eﬀect, as the time t1 is too small to generate these special

conﬁgurations and usual reaction diﬀusion type of behaviour prevails.

Persistence probability, in whichever way one sets the zero of time, does not

show any power law behaviour in the second time regime. At the same time, a

single value of α is required for the collapse in the two regimes.

Another point of interest is that while z = 2 is expected for nonzero p 6= 1

119

values at later times, the behaviour of the total time to equilibriate as a function
of p is not obvious. Our calculation shows that it is proportional to (1−p)3, which
is another important result of the present work.

We also found that making p a quenched random variable taken from an uni-

form distribution, one gets back model I like behaviour to a large extent. However,

choosing a diﬀerent distribution might lead to diﬀerent results. The fact that the

model has diﬀerent behaviour with uniform p and with quenched random value

of p is reminiscent of the diﬀerent behaviour observed in agent based models with

savings in econophysics [19].

120

Bibliography

[1] A. J. Bray, Adv. Phys. 43 357 (1994) and the references therein.

[2] H. K. Janssen, B. Schaub and B. Schmittmann, Z.Phys. B73 539 (1989)

[3] E. Renshaw and R. Henderson, Journal of Applied Probability 18, 403 (1981),

D. Szasz and B. Toth, Journal of Statistical Physics 37,(1984);

I. M. Sokolov, J. Klafter, and A. Blumen, Phys. Rev. E 61, 2717(2000).

[4] E. Almaas, R. V. Kulkarni and D. Stroud, Phys. Rev. E 68, 056105(2003)

A. Procacci, R. Sanchis and B. Scoppola, Lett. Math. Phys. 83, 181 (2008).

[5] S. Biswas and P. Sen, Phys. Rev. E 80, 027101 (2009).

[6] H. Hinrichsen, Adv. Phys. 49 815 (2000); J. Marro and R. Dickman,

Nonequilibrium Phase Transitions in Lattice Models (Cambridge University

Press, Cambridge), 1999;

G. Odor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 76 663 (2004).

[7] T. M. Liggett Interacting Particle Systems: Contact, Voter and Exclusion

Processes (Springer-Verlag Berlin 1999).

[8] D. Stauﬀer, in Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science edited by R.

A. Meyers (Springer, New York, 2009);

121

K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd, Int. J. Mod. Phys C 11 1157 (2000);

S. Galam, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 19 409 (2008).

[9] A. Baronchelli, L. Dall’Asta, A. Barrat, and V. Loreto, Phys. Rev. E 76,

051102 (2007);

C. Castellano, M. Marsili and A. Vespignani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 3536 (2000).

[10] J. Fuchs, J. Schelter, F. Ginelli and H. Hinrichsen, J. Stat. Mech. P04015

(2008).

[11] D. Stauﬀer and P. M. C. de Oliveira, Eur. Phys. J B 30 587 (2002).

[12] J. R. Sanchez, arXiv:cond-mat/0408518v1

[13] P. Shukla, J. Phys. A Math. Gen. 38 5441 (2005).

[14] B. Derrida, A. J. Bray and C. Godreche, J.Phys. A 27 L357 (1994).

For a review on persistence, see S. N. Majumdar, Curr. Sci. 77 370 (1999).

[15] P. Sen, Phys. Rev. E 81, 032103(2010)

[16] G. Manoj and P. Ray, Phys. Rev. E 62 7755 (2000);

G. Manoj and P. Ray, J. Phys A 33 5489 (2000).

[17] S. Biswas, A. K. Chandra and P. Sen, Phys. Rev. E 78, 041119 (2008)

[18] P. Sen and S. Dasgupta, J. Phys. A Math. Gen. 37 11949 (2004).

[19] A. Chatterjee, B. K. Chakrabarti, S. S. Manna, Physica A 335 (2004) 155;

Phys. Scripta T 106 (2003) 36.

122

a)

b)

......

......................

YES

NO

.............

I 1

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

I

2

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

