6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
n
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

4
v
2
4
6
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nature of the Quantum Potential

Anton A. Lipovka

Centro de Investigacion en Fisica, Universidad de Sonora,

Sonora, Mexico. e-mail: aal@cifus.uson.mx

March 01, 2016

Abstract

In this paper we suggest a natural interpretation of the de Broglie-
Bohm quantum potential, as the energy of oscillating electromagnetic ﬁeld
(virtual photon) coupled with moving charged particle. Generalization
of the Schr¨odinger equation is obtained from classical ﬁeld theory. The
wave function is shown to be the eigenfunction of the Sturm - Liouville
problem in which we expand virtual photon to include it implicitly into
consideration.
It is shown the non - locality of quantum mechanics is
related only with virtual photon. As an example, the zero - energy of
harmonic oscillator is obtained from classical equations.

PACS: 02.40, 03.65.-w, 03.65.Ta, 05.30.-d, 11.10.Ef

”I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics.”
(Richard Feynman)

1 Introduction

Interpretation of quantum theory (both classical and relativistic) since its birth
to the present day, for more than 100 years, is the subject of much debate on
the fundaments of physics. At ﬁrst glance, the situation is reassuring, because
now we have dozen of diﬀerent formulations of quantum theory [1] and can
apply these powerful techniques for computing. However, there are a number
of unresolved fundamental issues shows us something we do misunderstand in
the meaning of these formulations and we still no have a ﬁnal interpretation of
quantum theory.

It is well known, the Bohmian formulation based on Louis de Broglie’s pilot-
wave theory, suggest particularly a great conceptual advantages in possible in-
terpretation because it is causal and not local. Finally it leads to the complete
Hamilton function that contains the quantum potential, which is of great impor-
tance and reﬂects fundamental properties of nature (see [2,3,4,5] and references
therein).

1

The quantum potential plays a central role in the formalism of Bohm and
is used in modern physics and theoretical chemistry. Actually it is of great
importance because on the one hand the Bohmian formulation and quantum
potential allow us deeply understand the basics of the theory. On the other
hand quantum potential has multiples practical applications in diﬀerent ﬁelds
of knowledge (for example in the solid state physics, in theoretical chemistry
etc.) because it gives us an opportunity to simulate diﬀerent quantum eﬀects
without the involvement of the wave functions of system, and without solving
the Schr¨odinger equation. In this case, the Monte Carlo method is applied to
the hydrodynamic calculations, which are sometimes the only possibility to get
the result, when the Schr¨odinger equation can not be solved exactly.

Unfortunately up to now we did not understand clearly the nature of quan-
tum potential and wave functions. This problem on the one hand provokes
many speculations and strange hypothesis, but on the other hand this misun-
derstanding makes it diﬃcult to progress in important areas such as quantum
computers, solid state and many others. These fundamental questions were de-
bated by many authors from the beginning of quantum theory. As an example
we quote here the paper [1]: “Schr¨odinger invented this formulation in hope of
casting quantum mechanics into a “congenial” and “intuitive” form – he was
ultimately distressed when he found that his wavefunctions were functions in
conﬁguration space and did not actually exist out in ordinary three-dimensional
space.”, and also: “The wavefunction should be regarded as a mathematical
tool for calculating the outcomes of observations, not as a physically present
entity existing in space. . . ”.

As it was mentioned above, this misunderstanding provokes many strange
and exotic ideas and papers, where quantum potential is used for speculations,
particularly in cosmology to construct the most intrigue entity – cosmological
constant. For this reasons it is of great importance to reveal physical sense and
nature of quantum potential, and to determine the speciﬁc place of the wave
function in the formalism of quantum mechanics.

Recently the paper [6] was published, in which a new foundation has been
proposed to unify the quantum theory and relativity. In this paper it was shown
that quantization naturally appears as consequence of geometrical properties of
our Universe, and Planck’s constant is just adiabatic invariant determined by
the Riemann - Cartan geometry (by the Hubble constant and the cosmological
constant). It was constructed self-consistent non-local quantum theory based
on Einstein’s generalized theory of gravity in the space of Riemann - Cartan. It
should be stressed this theory does not requires any initial assumptions, external
to the theory and alien by nature. So, we need not any axioms, wave functions
or hidden variables.

Another paper in which a natural origin of quantization is suggested, was
published by Garcia - Morales [7]. In this work the quantization of the action
S was obtained as a consequence of thermodynamic theory (i.e. also without
artiﬁcial axiomatic constructions).

These results also suggest that the orthodox formulations of quantum theory
[1] based on the axiom of the wave function existence are not complete and

2

should be reconsidered.

In present paper the quantum potential is shown to be formed by bounded
electromagnetic ﬁeld - virtual photon (see section 3 for details), which is a
principle part and main participant for any bounded quantum system.

2 Enigma of quantum potential.

Usually quantum potential in the Bohmian formulation of quantum theory is
deﬁned this way (we consider here one - particle case because that for many
particles is treated the same manner). Schr¨odinger equation is

i

∂Ψ(x, t)

∂t

= −

2

2m

∇2Ψ(x, t) + U (x)Ψ(x, t)

(1)

Writing the wave function in form Ψ(x, t) = R(x, t) exp(iS(x, t)/) we im-

mediately obtain two equations:

∂S
∂t

= −Htot = −

(∇S)2

2m

− U (x) +

2

∇2R

2m

R

and

∂R2
∂t

+ ∇(R2

∇S
m

) = 0

(2)

(3)

The ﬁrst one is a Hamilton - Jacobi equation written for a modiﬁed Hamil-

tonian:

Htot(t, x, p, R) =

(∇S)2

2m

+ U (x) − Q(x, t)

(4)

where Q(x, t) = 2
2m

∇2R
R is so-called quantum potential, and second one
is a continuity equation written for R2. This modiﬁed Hamiltonian usually
named as Ψ - dependent one, and additional term (the quantum potential)
usually interpreted as ”an internal energy associated with a certain region of
phase space, absent in classical mechanics, but arising in quantum mechanics
from the uncertainty principle” [2].
It is diﬃcult to agree with this point of
view for many reasons. First of all note that the discussed system, described by
equation (1) is supposed to be isolated one, but it does not contains any variable
electromagnetic ﬁeld. Instead, it contains an artiﬁcial quantum potential.

It is clear, our system should contain an oscillating electromagnetic ﬁeld
produced by electron, but we do not see it in equation (1). At the same time
the Bohmian formulation has the following features:

- there is presence of hidden variables ( it should be treated as a hint for

presence of bounded electromagnetic ﬁeld)

- it is causal (so, it should be a classical ﬁeld theory)
- not local (presence of an electromagnetic ﬁeld in theory).

3

Taking into account the fact that the only real substance we have in our
arsenal to capture experimental events - is electromagnetic ﬁeld (this is an ex-
perimental fact), we can conclude that this ﬁeld we lost in the beginning. This
”lost” ﬁeld was found in [6] and now we are able to identify quantum potential
with that bounded non-local classical electromagnetic ﬁeld mentioned above.

3 Nature does not have hidden variables.

Recently [8] the idea was suggested that quantum potential appears due to a
“concealed” motion. Namely author show that in the case when our system
consist of two parts, one of which is characterized by observable coordinates
qi(t) and other one has “concealed” coordinates Qi(t) (here we use notations of
author), the Hamilton function of such system can be shown to contain quantum
potential, which “may be regarded as the kinetic energy of additional concealed
freedoms.”[8]. But the Lagrangian used by author is incomplete (see eq. (1.1)
in [8]), so to begin with we need to write correct action for our system.

Action of the system under consideration one can write as:

Here S0 is action for particle(s) without electromagnetic ﬁeld,

Stot = S0 + Sint + Sem .

Sint = −

1

c2 Z jα(x)Aα(x)d4x

- is the interaction between electromagnetic ﬁeld and charge(s), and

Sem = −

1

16πc Z F αβFαβd4x

(5)

(6)

(7)

- is action for electromagnetic ﬁeld. It can be seen that both Sint and Sem
contains the ﬁeld coordinates, so in this case we are speaking about a bounded
photon coupled with electron. Such bounded photon is named as a virtual
photon (see for details [9]) and in this paper this deﬁnition is used.

It should be stressed here, the Bohmian formulation is non-relativistic by
origin, so we may restrict our speculation by non-relativistic case. Let us con-
sider the hydrogen atom as an example, where to simplicity sake we believe
me << mp . So, we can consider one-body equation, as it was made in the case
of the equation (1). It is easy to show that introduction of second body will not
change main properties of our result, but leads to small corrections which have
well-understood nature, but are not signiﬁcant for our present aim.

The classical energy equation for our reduced classical system S0 (ﬁxed pro-
ton and moving electron) is H = p2/2m + U (x) = E . It is important empha-
size again: in this equation there are no harmonic electromagnetic ﬁeld, which
should appears due to electron oscillations. Canonical quantization procedure
applied to this relation leads directly to the Schr¨odinger equation (1) for a par-
ticle moving in a potential U (x). However the oscillating electron does produce

4

harmonic electromagnetic ﬁeld ϕ(k, x) (which appears in (6), (7)) and this har-
monic function can be used to write opposite Fourier - transformation of the
energy equation on 4 - coordinates x . This is the way in which electromagnetic
ﬁeld appears implicitly in the Schr¨odinger equation (1) and Hamilton function
transforms to the operator (see also [6]):

Z ˆHϕd4x = iZ ∂

∂t

ϕd4x

(8)

Here integration is carried out over 4-volume , and ˆH is operator of Liou-
ville written for ”reduced” non-relativistic system ˆH = −2∇2/2m + U (x),
which corresponds to the problem of Sturm - Liouville with eigenfunctions
Ψn(x, t) = exp(iSn/). These functions, in turn, form complete basis and we can
expand our virtual photon, and this way include it into consideration through
the coeﬃcients of expansion Rn(pα):

ϕ(pα, xα) = X Rn(pα)Ψn(xα)

Here we sum only over n , and index α is just to mention the fact we are
working with 4-vectors pα and xα in the Minkowsky space. By substitute this
in (8) we have

(9)

(10)

Z ˆH P Rn(pα)Ψn(xα)d4x = iZ ∂

∂t P Rn(pα)Ψn(xα)d4x

This actually are complete ”quantum” non-local equations described our
system in Minkowsky space, with clearly written non-local ”hidden variables” of
the virtual photon (which are the coeﬃcients Rn(pα)). In general case we should
integrate this over 4-volume. However if we are interested in non-relativistic
Schr¨odinger equation, we can evaluate these integrals by taking into account
relation ve << c, so, the main part of each integral is contributed by small
region in vicinity of the electron and integration can be carried out easily. If
we are interested in the case when our system stay in a deﬁned state n, we can
write (10) as:

R(∇S)2

2m

∂R
∂t

− R

i
m

−

i
2m

(cid:20)−

2

2m

∇2R −

∇R∇S +

R∇2S + RU (x)(cid:21) = i

∂S
∂t
(11)
From this relation we immediately obtain the Hamilton - Jacobi equation
(2) written for a complete Hamiltonian of our system (4), where ”quantum
potential” now has clear sense and must be attributed to the virtual photon
(electromagnetic ”pilot-wave”). As to the continuity equation (3) written for
R2, it must be interpreted as continuity equation for energy of the virtual photon
coupled and moving with velocity of the electron
v e. It is actually an analog
for well known Poynting’s theorem. It should be stressed here in this continuity
equation the Planck constant in fact does not appears, because it is classical

→

5

equation for classical electromagnetic ﬁeld coupled with electron:

where

∂R2
∂t

+ ∇(J) = 0

R2 =

1
8π

(E2 + H 2)

→

J = R2

∇S
m

= R2→
v e

(12)

(13)

(14)

To conclude this part it should be useful to make some comments on the

Hamilton - Jacobi equation (2)

∂S
∂t

= −Htot = −

(∇S)2

2m

− U (x) +

2

∇2R

2m

R

(15)

Now, when the physical sense of ”quantum potential” (as classical poten-
tial of oscillating electromagnetic ﬁeld with energy ω) became clear, we may
deﬁnitely interpret limit ω → 0 as an hypothetical situation with absence of
the virtual photon (the energy of the oscillating electromagnetic ﬁeld ϕ(k, x) is
zero). In this case we obtain a classical system with classical Hamilton function
H = (∇S)2
2m + U (x) for our (reduced, incomplete) system with Hamilton function
H = p2/2m + U (x).

4 Discussion

Very fundamental and at the same time useful example suggests harmonic os-
cillator. We have discussed it from this point of view before in [6], but it would
be interesting to consider it brieﬂy in respect to the quantum potential of our
system. It should be done the same way as it was made in previous part (see
eq. (5) - (15)). The Hamilton function for harmonic oscillator has a form:

H = −

2

2m

∇2 +

1
2

mω2r2

(16)

Substituting wave function Ψ = exp(−mωr2/2) into Schr¨odinger equation

immediately give us quantum potential for harmonic oscillator:

Q = ω/2

(17)

which should be recognized as energy of virtual photon in zero-state of har-
monic oscillator (remember here the frequency of electron oscillations is the
same that has the virtual photon). So total Hamilton function for ”quantum”
(in reality classical) harmonic oscillator in ground state is

Htot(t, x, p, R) =

(∇S)2

2m

6

+ U (x) − ω/2

(18)

with the oscillation frequency of electron (and virtual photon) ω. It should
be noted here, in the paper [2] there is an error in the expression for the quantum
potential of harmonic oscillator, which we have corrected in eq. (17) and (18).
One can see again - the total Hamilton function corresponds to the complete
mechanical system (classical by nature), without any hidden variables, and so
called ”quantum potential” is merely virtual photon with frequency ω, which
appears in classical Hamilton function and forms a ”quantum” zero-state energy
ω/2. So, now we can deﬁnitely identify ”quantum potential” and ”hidden
variables” with oscillating electromagnetic ﬁeld (virtual photon) coupled with
the moving electron.

In light of these results it becomes immediately obvious meaning of Bell’s
theorem, as a classical statement about the impossibility of motions with a speed
faster than light in the framework of the relativistic theory.
Conclusions of our work could be formulated as follows:
The quantum potential is shown to be an additional energy, electromagnetic
by origin, which appears due to coupled harmonic electromagnetic ﬁeld (virtual
photon).

The wave functions are shown to be just a complete basis of the Sturm -
Liouville problem (written for reduced system with action S0), in which the
virtual photon is expanded to include it implicitly into Schr¨odinger equation.

It is stressed - the non-locality of quantum mechanics is related only with
this virtual photon, namely with distribution of harmonic electromagnetic ﬁeld
in the system under consideration.

5 Bibliography

[1] Daniel F. Styer, Miranda S. Balkin, Kathryn M. Becker, Matthew R. Burns,
Christopher E. Dudley, Scott T. Forth, Jeremy S. Gaumer, Mark A. Kramer,
David C. Oertel, Leonard H. Park, Marie T. Rinkoski, Clait T. Smith, and Tim-
othy D. Wotherspoon. (March 2002) Nine formulations of quantum mechanics.
Am. J. Phys. 70 (3) . DOI: 10.1119/1.1445404

[2] len Dennis, aurice A. de Gosson, asil J. Hiley.

(June 2015) Bohm’s
Quantum Potential as an Internal Energy. Physics Letters A., Volume 379,
Issues 18–19, 26 , pp. 1224–1227. arXiv:1412.5133v1 [quant-ph] 15 Dec 2014

[3] Peter J. Riggs.

(2008) Reﬂections on the deBroglie–Bohm Quantum

Potential. Erkenn 68:21–39. DOI: 10.1007/s10670-007-9054-1

[4] S. Esposito. (1999) Photon Wave Mechanics: A De Broglie-Bohm. Ap-

proach. Foundations of Physics Letters, Vol. 12, No. 6, pp.533-545.

[5] Gerhard Gr¨ossing. (2009) On the Thermodynamic Origin of the Quantum

Potential. Physica A 388 pp. 811-823. DOI: 10.1016/j.physa.2008.11.033

[6] Lipovka, A. (2014) Planck Constant as Adiabatic Invariant Characterized
by Hubble’s and Cosmological Constants. Journal of Applied Mathematics and
Physics, 2, 61-71. doi: 10.4236/jamp.2014.25009.

; http://lanl.arxiv.org/abs/1401.2404

7

[7] Vladimir Garcia-Morales. (2015) Quantum Mechanics and the Principle

of Least Radix Economy. Foundations of Physics 45, 295-332 (Springer)

[8] Peter Holland. (2015) Quantum potential energy as concealed motion.

Foundations of Physics (Springer), V. 45, Issue 2, pp 134-141

[9] V. Ginzburg (1987) Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics. (Pergamon

press)

8

