6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
5

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
e
h
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
6
6
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eyring equation and the second order rate law:

Overcoming a paradox

L. Bonnet∗

CNRS, Institut des Sciences Mol´eculaires,

UMR 5255, 33405, Talence, France

Univ. Bordeaux, Institut des Sciences Mol´eculaires,

UMR 5255, 33405, Talence, France

(Dated: March 8, 2016)

The standard transition state theory (TST) of bimolecular reactions was recently shown to lead to
a rate law in disagreement with the expected second order rate law [Bonnet L., Rayez J.-C. Int.
J. Quantum Chem. 2010, 110, 2355]. An alternative derivation was proposed which allows to
overcome this paradox. This derivation allows to get at the same time the good rate law and Eyring
equation for the rate constant. The purpose of this paper is to provide rigorous and convincing
theoretical arguments in order to strengthen these developments and improve their visibility.

A classic result of ﬁrst year chemistry courses is that for elementary bimolecular gas-phase reactions [1] of the type

I.

INTRODUCTION

A + B −→ P roducts,

the time-evolution of the concentrations [A] and [B] is given by the second order rate law

−

d[A]
dt

= K[A][B],

(1)

(2)

where K is the rate constant. For reactions proceeding through a barrier along the reaction path, Eyring famous
equation [2] allows the estimation of K with a considerable success for more than 80 years [3]. This formula is the
central result of activated complex theory [2], nowadays called transition state theory (TST) [3–18]. Note that other
researchers than Eyring made seminal contributions to the theory at about the same time [3], like Evans and Polanyi
[4], Wigner [5, 6], Horiuti [7], etc... In the limit where the potential energy of the molecular system is separable in
the vicinity of the barrier saddle point, Eyring equation reads

K =

kT
h

Q‡

QAQB

exp(cid:18)−

U‡

kT (cid:19) ,

(3)

where k and h are Boltzmann and Planck constants, respectively, T is the temperature, QA and QB are the partition
functions per unit volume of A and B, respectively, Q‡ is the partition function per unit volume of the activated
complex or transition state (TS), deﬁned as the molecular system minus the reaction coordinate at the barrier top,
and U‡ is the classical barrier heigth with respect to the separated reagents. More general and sophisticated versions

∗ Email: claude-laurent.bonnet@u-bordeaux.fr

2

of Eq. (3) are available, which include the variational search of the TS and quantum corrections to deal with tunneling
and the quantization of both reagents and TS internal states. The use of Eyring equation requiring electronic structure
calculations for a reduced number of molecular conﬁgurations, this formula has been applied to an uncountable number
of widely diﬀerent processes by several generations of chemists and physicists (in comparison, molecular dynamics
simulations have provided only a tiny number of rate constants, due to the heaviness of the numerical calculations
required). In addition, the simplicity of this formula makes it an unrivaled interpretative tool for rationalizing the
rate of chemical processes. Therefore, Eyring equation is a major result of physical-chemistry, taught at the graduate
level for several decades in universities world-wide.

In view of this, it was a few years ago a real surprise to the authors of ref. [19] when they realized that Eyring’s
derivation [2], as well as its numerous reports in the literature since 1935, imply the following clear contradiction:
while the aim of Eyring was to predict K in Eq. (2), his derivation of Eq. (3) leads to a rate law diﬀerent from
Eq. (2). This paradox was obviously disconcerting, but could ﬁnally be overcome by introducing in the theoretical
developments a constraint on reagent species that was seemingly ignored at the time [19] (see Section III). We wish to
emphasize that the contradiction is subtle, for it does absolutely not put into question the validity of Eyring equation
itself [19], as we shall see at the end of this work.

Six years later, ref. [19] is still virtually unknown. Yet, it establishes the missing link between TST and the second
order rate law (we could never ﬁnd it in the literature), thereby shedding light on a still obscure area of reaction
rate theory. The goal of the present work is thus essentially to strengthen the material of ref. [19], so it may enjoy
better understanding and conﬁdence among the readers concerned with the consistency of TST. In particular, the
distinction previously made between the standard and dynamical derivations of Eyring equation [19] is abandoned,
for we realized that it obscures the developments and is not justiﬁed. Moreover, we shall be comparing our formal
developments with those of authoritative works in the literature, starting with Eyring’s paper, in order to check the
validity of ours. This is a necessary work to convince the reader that the paradox raised in ref. [19] is truly founded.

II. SPECIFYING THE MOLECULAR SYSTEM AND THE THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

A. Experimental conditions

A vessel of volume V is supposed to contain a gas made of about one mole of molecules A, the same amount of
molecules B, and a much larger amount of inert buﬀer gas at a temperature T1 such that the thermal energy kT1 is
much smaller than the barrier heigth. Hence, the Boltzmann population of A-B systems with an energy larger than
the barrier heigth is totally negligible and reaction (1) cannot take place. However, at a given instant that will be time
0 of the kinetic experiment in the next developments, the mixture is heated in such a way that the new thermal energy
kT2 is larger than the barrier heigth and the reaction starts. Moreover, the transient time for heating the mixture
is assumed to be neglible as compared to the average time for reaction. The gas mixture can thus be considered to
already be in canonical equilibrium at T2 at time 0. T2 will simply be called T from now on. The newly formed
products, two molecules C and D for instance, start diﬀusing in the gaseous medium to eventually collide with D and
C molecules, respectively. However, it is supposed that the exothermicity of reaction (1) is suﬃciently large for kT
to be much smaller than the barrier for reverse reaction C + D −→ A + B. In other words, the equilibrium constant
of reaction (1) is strongly unfavorable to its reverse reaction, and the reagents are virtually not reformed. The time
evolutions of [A] and [B] are measured and K is deduced from Eq. (2). The electronic structure of the A-B system is
such that at T , reaction (1) takes place in the electronic ground state only.

B. Potentially reactive pairs

At time t (larger than 0), the numbers of A and B molecules are NA and NB, respectively. Due to thermal
agitation, each A molecule collides a large number of times with buﬀer gaseous species before meeting a B molecule.

This collision, however, does not necessarily lead to reaction. In fact, the barrier makes the reaction probability per
A-B encounter rather low. A given A molecule located somewhere in the vessel at time 0 has thus enough time to
diﬀuse in the gas mixture, experience many unsuccessful collisions with B species, to eventually react with a given B
molecule located at a macroscopic distance from the initial position of A. Consequently, each A molecule can poten-
tially react with each and everyone of the B molecules. The number of potentially reactive pairs (PRPs) at time t is thus

3

N = NANB.

(4)

C. Phase space coordinates

The A-B molecular system is assumed to involve I nuclei and thus, 3I Cartesian coordinates to locate them in the
laboratory space. However, within the neigborhood of the barrier top, we shall use the normal mode coordinates at
the saddle point, denoted qi, i = 1, ..., 3I. q1 is the reaction coordinate associated with the imaginary frequency. qi,
i = 2, ..., 3I − 6 are vibrational coordinates. qi, i = 3I − 5, ..., 3I are translational and rotational coordinates of the
whole A-B system. Nuclear motions are assumed to be satisfyingly described by classical mechanics. This is the ﬁrst
assumption of TST. The momenta conjugate to qi is denoted pi. The phase space is made of the 6I coordinates qi
and pi, i = 1, ..., 3I. Γ is a vector in this space.

D. Topology of the barrier, TS and no recrossing assumption

For simplicity’s sake, we assume that the normal mode description is valid over a broad neigborhood of the saddle
point. In this region, the topology of the potential energy surface is thus quadratic and motion is completely separable.
As stated in the introduction, the activated complex or TS is deﬁned by q1 = 0. Within the phase space, the TS
is thus the (hyper) surface of the phase space orthogonal to the reaction coordinate at the barrier top. Due to the
previous separability, recrossing of the TS is not possible close to the barrier top. In addition to that, we assume
that due to the strong exothermicity of the reaction, the repulsive forces between the nascent products C and D in
the descent down the barrier are very strong and prevent from any return back to the reagents. Therefore, once a
trajectory crosses the TS towards the products, reaction is expected to be completed. This is the second assumption
of TST.

We shall call reactive pairs (RPs) the PRPs having crossed the TS (in the product direction, necessarily). N ‡ will

be the number of RPs at time t.

E. Reactive pairs

F. Canonical distribution of the states of potentially reactive pairs

The probability distribution ρ (Γ) of the phase space states of the N PRPs is assumed to be canonical. This is the

third assumption of TST. This distribution reads

ρ (Γ) =

exp(cid:0)− H

kT(cid:1) Θ(−q1)

Z(T )

(5)

with

Z(T ) = Z dΓ exp(cid:18)−

H

kT (cid:19) Θ(−q1).

4

(6)

H is the classical Hamiltonian or energy of the molecular system. Θ(x) is the Heaviside function equal to 0 for x < 0
and 1 for x ≥ 0. Hence, Θ(−q1) makes ρ (Γ) equal to 0 on the product side of the TS. The N PRPs are indeed on
the reagent side of the TS. On the other hand, note that right at the TS, ρ (Γ) is diﬀerent from 0 given our deﬁnition
of the Heaviside function.

G. Flux of reactive pairs

The probability ﬂux through the TS is the amount of probability crossing the TS in the product direction per unit
time. Since the no recrossing assumption is assumed to be valid, this ﬂux is a reaction probability ﬂux. This quantity
is given by

f = Z dΓ ρ (Γ)

p1
m1

δ(q1)Θ(p1).

(7)

The delta term δ(q1) limits the integral to the TS, where we have seen that ρ (Γ) is diﬀerent from 0. Hence, the
above expression makes sense. The ﬂux of RPs, i.e., the number of RPs (or PRPs as well) crossing the TS per unit
time, is thus

dN ‡
dt

= N f.

(8)

This ﬂux can also be called rate of appearence of the RPs. The rate of disappearence of the PRPs being equal to the
previous ﬂux, we have

−

dN
dt

= N f.

(9)

III. PARADOX IN EYRING THEORY

A. Reaction rate in TST

We are now adressing the most sensitive part of the work, i.e., the deﬁnition of the reaction rate according to

Eyring. Immediately before Eq. (1) of his paper [2], Eyring writes:

“The procedure for calculating the rate [20] is the following: One ﬁrst calculates the concentration of activated
complexes per unit length and with momentum p lying between p and p + dp, both these quantities taken for the
degree of freedom corresponding to decomposition. This is then multiplied by the associated velocity p/m∗ and
summed for all values of momenta which correspond to passing over the barrier in the forward direction, i.e., for p =
0 to ∞.”

In the present work, the degree of freedom corresponding to decomposition is q1, p = p1 and m∗ = m1. The

mathematical formulation of the above statement is not detailed by Eyring, so we give it now. Setting Γ = (cid:0)Γ‡, q1, p1(cid:1),

the concentration of PRPs with the reaction coordinate lying between −dq1 and 0 and its conjugate momentum lying
between p1 and p1 + dp1 is

5

C ‡ =

N

V (cid:20)Z dΓ‡ ρ(cid:0)Γ‡, 0, p1(cid:1)(cid:21) dq1dp1.

(10)

This concentration is indeed equal to the total number N of PRPs multiplied by the probability that each PRP lies
within the phase space volume deﬁned by the reaction coordinate between −dq1 and 0 and its conjugate momentum
between p1 and p1 + dp1, all divided by the volume V of the vessel. The PRPs in the previous phase space volume,
stuck at the TS, are on the way to the products, and therefore, they will cross the TS and become reactive pairs after
an inﬁnitesimal period of time. This is the reason why we have used the subscript ‡ for the concentration on the left
side of the above equation. The concentration dC ‡
of activated complexes per unit length and with momentum p1
lying between p1 and p1 + dp1 thus reads

dq1

dC ‡
dq1

=

N

V (cid:20)Z dΓ‡ ρ(cid:0)Γ‡, 0, p1(cid:1)(cid:21) dp1.

(11)

Following Eyring’s previous statement, the rate is then obtained by multiplying dC ‡
the positive values of p1:

dq1

by p1/m1 and integrating over

This expression can be rewritten as

rate =

N

V Z dΓ‡dp1 ρ(cid:0)Γ‡, 0, p1(cid:1)

p1
m1

Θ(p1).

rate =

N

V Z dΓ ρ (Γ)

p1
m1

δ(q1)Θ(p1).

From Eqs. (7)-(9) and (13), we arrive at:

The rate is also known to satisfy

rate =

d[N ‡]

dt

= −

d[N ]

dt

.

B. Rate constant

rate = K[A][B].

Therefore, one deduces from Eqs. (14) and (15) that

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

Using Eqs. (8) or (9), (16) and the fact that

we arrive at

K =

d[N ‡]

dt

[A][B]

= −

d[N ]

dt

[A][B]

.

[A][B] = [N ]/V,

K = V f.

6

(16)

(17)

(18)

From Eqs. (5)-(7), it may be shown after some steps of simple algebra that Eq. (18) leads to Eyring famous Eq. (3).
A luminous presentation involving these steps has been made by Mahan [15], and therefore, it is needless to detail
them here.

C. Comparison with the existing literature

I wish to emphasize that Eqs. (4), (14) and (16) are not the results of a misinterpretation of Eyring’s develop-

ments [2]. They are indeed found in the following authoritative works:

Reference [9]: Eq. (x) in the derivation by Keck is here denoted K. (x) (Eq. (x) keeps refering to the present work).
Eq. (4) corresponds to K. (2.23), Eqs. (7) and (9) to K. (2.5), Eq. (14) to K. (2.6) and Eq. (16) to K. (2.22). In
K. (2.5), ρ is in fact the canonical distribution (see Eq. (5)) multiplied by N . In K. (2.6), the product over ﬁnal
states f (the products according to Keck) should be replaced by a sum. However, in the present work, the back
reaction from f to the initial state i (the reagents) does not take place, so K. (2.6) reduces to dN (i)/dt = −R(f, i).
From this equation and K. (2.22), one gets Eq. (16).

Reference [15]: Eq. (x) in the derivation by Mahan is here denoted M. (x). Five lines before M. (4), Mahan states:
“The quantity N is the total number of A-B pairs, and so can be replaced on the right side of eqn. (3) by NANB,
the product of numbers of individual A and B molecules”. This is exactly the deﬁnition corresponding to Eq. (4). It
is explicitely stated in the paragraph between M. (4) and M. (5) containing two non numbered equations that the
rate is “the rate of disappearance of reactant pairs expressed in terms of concentration units”. This corresponds to
Eq. (14). The left equality of M. (5) is to be compared with Eq. (16).

Reference [17]: Eq. (x) in the derivation by Fern´andez-Ramos, Miller, Klippenstein and Truhlar is here denoted
FMKT. (x). Eq. (4) corresponds to a synthesis of FMKT. (2.4.19) and FMKT. (2.4.23) (see the paragraph in
between). Their left-hand-sides are indeed equal. Eq. (16) corresponds to FMKT. (2.4.22), FMKT. (2.4.15) and
FMKT. (2.4.14) [F (T )/V in FMKT. (2.4.22) appears to be equal to -d[N R]/dt]. That the rate is given by -d[N R]/dt,
in agreement with Eq. (14), is thus implicit in their developments.

Reference [18]: Eq. (x) in the derivation by Petersson is here denoted P. (x). When dividing both sides of P. (12) by
V , one gets the probability ﬂux f (see Eq. (18)). One thus deduces that the right-hand-side of P. (11) is NANBf = N f .
Therefore, one recovers Eq. (8). Remember that f is the amount of probability crossing the TS per unit time, so N f
is the rate of disappearence of N . Consequently, one also recovers Eq. (9). Eqs. (14) and (16) are then implicit.

These comparisons should convince the reader that Eqs. (4), (14) and (16) are formal expressions of TST widely
admitted since its birth. This clariﬁcation is important, as the paradox discussed in the next subsection relies on
them.

7

D. Contradiction regarding the rate law

According to Eq. (14), the TST reaction rate is given by −d[N ]/dt. However, the real rate is a priori −d[A]/dt.
Consequently, Eq. (16) cannot lead to the second order rate law, i.e., Eq. (2). If one uses Eq. (4) to replace N by
NANB in Eq. (16) and the fact that

dNA
dt

=

dNB
dt

(everytime one molecule A disappears, one molecule B disappears too), one indeed gets

d[A]
dt

=

K
V

[A][B]

[A] + [B]

,

in obvious disagreement with Eq. (2). This is the contradiction raised in ref. [19].

IV. OVERCOMING THE PARADOX

(19)

(20)

Suppose we do not want to use Eq. (2) as a prerequisite in the derivation of Eyring equation (3), but instead,
wish to ﬁnd a derivation from ﬁrst principles which provides both Eqs. (2) and (3) at the same time.
In such a
case, we cannot use Eq. (15), which derives from Eq. (2), and consequently, we must give up on the reasoning
developped in Section III. On the other hand, we know that Eq. (9) is exact provided that, of course, the TST
assumptions discussed in Section II are satisﬁed (validity of classical mechanics for the nuclei, no recrossing of the TS
and canonical distribution of the PRP states). We thus start our new derivation from Eq. (9) and introduce a new
ingredient that has been ignored in the developments until now: as a matter of fact, reactive pairs and potentially
reactive pairs are correlated. To understand the nature of this statement, let us number the NA molecules A and
NB molecules B and assume that A1-B1 and A1-B2 are two potentially reactive pairs wandering about the reagent
part of the phase space. If one of these two pairs, say A1-B1, becomes a reactive pair, i.e., crosses the TS and reacts,
A1-B2 ceases to be a potentially reactive pair at the exact time of crossing for the simple reason that A1 does no
longer exist beyond this time. The same is true for A1-B3, ..., A1-BNB , and also for A2-B1, ..., ANA-B1. Therefore,
the total number of potentially reactive pairs lost for the reaction whenever A1-B1 reacts is 1 + (NB − 1) + (NA − 1)
= NA + NB − 1 (see Figure 1 in ref. [19]). Since both NA and NB are of the order of 1023, -1 can be dropped from
the previous number. Of course, the same is true for any A-B pair crossing the TS. The rate of disappearance of the
PRPs is thus considerably larger than expected from statistical thermodynamical arguments when the correlation
between reactive and potentially reactive pairs is taken into account. The actual rate of disappearance of N is ﬁnally
obtained by multiplying the right-hand-side of Eq. (9) by (NA + NB):

−

dN
dt

= N f (NA + NB).

(21)

Using Eq. (19), we arrive at Eq. (2) with K given by Eq. (18), i.e., Eyring equation (3). In other words, the usual

assumptions of TST and the correlation between reactive and potentially reactive pairs suﬃce to get at the same time
the second order rate law and Eyring equation for the rate constant. All becomes clear.

Note that the paradox discussed in this work will be met for any process involving a molecularity larger than 1.
On the other hand, for unimolecular reactions of the type A −→ P roducts at high pressure [21], N = NA and the
ﬁrst order rate law is straightforwardly obtained from Eq. (9) by dividing both sides of the latter by V .

8

V. CONCLUSION

The transition state theory (TST) of bimolecular reactions [2–17] was developped in order to predict the value of
the rate constant K appearing in the second order rate law (see Eq. (2)). This prediction is routinely made since 1935
by using the central result of TST, i.e., Eyring famous equation [2] (see Eq. (3)). However, the historical derivation
of this expression [2, 4], reported many times in the literature for about 80 years, is disturbing in two respects: (i)
in molecular collision theory, the derivation of the second order rate law on one hand, and the rate constant K on
the other hand (K is given by the Boltzmann average of the product of the reaction cross section and the reagent
velocity vector), are inseparable and thus made at the same time [22]. In contrast, the second order rate law is a
prerequisite for the derivation of K in TST [2, 9, 14, 15, 17], which is unsatisfactory ; (ii) even more disturbing is
the fact that Eyring’s developpements lead to a rate law diﬀerent from the second order one. However, everything
becomes clear when taking into account, in addition to the usual assumptions of TST, what we called the correlation
between reactive and potentially reactive pairs. Like in molecular collision theory, Eyring equation and the second
order rate law are then intimately related and derived at the same time [19]. The contribution of this work has been
to strengthen the material of ref. [19] so as to make it more convincing. In particular, the distinction made in ref. [19]
between the standard and dynamical derivations of Eyring equation has been abandoned, for it is confusing and not
justiﬁed. Moreover, we have carefully compared the developments implying the previously outlined contradictions
with those of authoritative works in the literature, starting with Eyring’s paper. Boths sets of developments were
found to match (see Section III). We thus hope that the new derivation of Eyring equation proposed in Section 2.11
of ref. [19] and Section IV of the present work will meet with a favourable response from the readers interested in
formal aspects of reaction rate theory.

References

[1] An elementary reaction is assumed to occur in a single step and to pass through a single transition state. See IUPAC,

Compendium of Chemical Terminology, 2nd ed. (the ”Gold Book”) (1997).

[2] Eyring H. The Activated Complex in Chemical Reactions. J. Chem. Phys. 1935, 3, 107-115.
[3] Laidler K. J.; King M. C. The Development of Transition-State Theory. J. Phys. Chem. 1983, 87, 2657-2664.
[4] Evans M. G.; Polanyi M. Some Applications of the Transition State Method to the Calculation of Reaction Velocities,

especially in Solution. Trans. Faraday Soc. 1935, 31, 857-894.

[5] Wigner E. Calculation of the Rate of Elementary Association Reactions. J. Chem. Phys. 1937, 5, 720-725.
[6] Wigner E. The Transition State Method. Trans. Faraday Soc. 1938, 34, 29-41.
[7] Horiuti J. On the Statistical Mechanical Treatment of the Absolute Rate of Chemical Reaction. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jap.

1938, 13, 210-216.

[8] Keck J. C. Variational Theory of Chemical Reaction Rates Applied to Three-Body Recombinations. J. Chem. Phys. 1960,

32, 1035-1050.

[9] Keck J. C. Variational Theory of Reaction Rates. Adv. Chem. Phys. 1967, 13, 85-121.

[10] Nakamura T. J. C. Dividing Surface in Transition State Theory of Reaction Rates: Note on Horiuti’s Paper, “On the
Statistical Mechanical Treatment of the Absolute Rate of Chemical Reaction”. J. Res. Inst. Catalysis, Hokkaido Univ.
1980, 28, 293-304.

[11] Gladsstone S.; Laidler K.; Eyring H. The Theory of Rate Processes; McGraw-Hill Book Co.: New York, 1941.

9

[12] Levine I. N. Physical Chemistry; McGraw-Hill, Inc.: New York, 1979.
[13] Smith I. W. M. Kinetics and Dynamics of Elementary Gas Reactions; Butterworths: London, 1980.
[14] Steinfeld J. I.; Francisco J. S.; Hase W. L. Chemical Kinetics and Dynamics; Prentice Hall: New Jersey, 1989.
[15] Mahan B. Activated Complex Theory of Bimolecular Reactions. J. Chem. Ed. 1974, 51, 709-711.
[16] Truhlar D. G.; Garrett B. C.; Klippenstein S. J. Current Status of Transition State Theory. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100,

12771-12800.

[17] Fern´andez-Ramos A.; Miller J. A.; Klippenstein S. J.; Truhlar D. G. Modeling the Kinetics of Bimolecular Reactions.

Chem. Rev. 2006, 106, 4518-4584.

[18] Petersson G. A. Perspective on “The activated complex in chemical reactions”. Theor. Chem. Acc. 2000, 103, 190-195.
[19] Bonnet L.; Rayez J.-C. Dynamical Derivation of Eyring Equation and the Second-Order Kinetic Law. Int. J. Quantum
Chem. 2010, 110, 2355-2359. At the second line of Section 2.11, H and J should be replaced by 2.8 and 2.10, respectively.

[20] The rate is frequently called speciﬁc rate by Eyring.
[21] Gilbert R. G.; Smith S. C. Theory of Unimolecular and Recombination Reactions; Black Well Scientiﬁc Publications:

Oxford, 1990.

[22] Greene E. F.; Kuppermann A. Chemical Reaction Cross Sections and Rate Constants. J. Chem. Ed. 1968, 45, 361-369.

