6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
5

 

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
3
8
6
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dielectric constant of water in the interface
Mohammadhasan Dinpajooh1 and Dmitry V. Matyushov1, a)
Department of Physics and School of Molecular Sciences, Arizona State University, PO Box 871504, Tempe,
Arizona 85287

We deﬁne the dielectric constant (susceptibility) that should enter the Maxwell boundary value problem when
applied to microscopic dielectric interfaces. The dielectric constant (susceptibility) of the interface is deﬁned
by exact linear-response equations involving correlations of statistically ﬂuctuating interface polarization and
the Coulomb interaction energy of external charges with the dielectric. The theory is applied to the interface
between water and spherical solutes of altering size studied by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The
eﬀective dielectric constant of interfacial water is found to be signiﬁcantly lower than its bulk value, and it
also depends on the solute size. For TIP3P water used in MD simulations the interface dielectric constant
changes from 9 to 4 when the eﬀective solute radius is increased from ∼ 5 ˚A to 18 ˚A.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The Maxwell ﬁeld has played a prominent role in the
theories of dielectrics for two mostly disconnected rea-
sons. First, in the case of a homogeneous ﬁeld produced
by a planar capacitor, one gets the direct experimental
access to the Maxwell ﬁeld E through the voltage on the
plates V and the distance between them d: E = V /d.
The response of the dielectric to the external ﬁeld is
therefore most conveniently represented in terms of the
susceptibility to the Maxwell ﬁeld. The second reason is
that the scalar electrostatic potential φ is the solution of
the dielectric boundary problem when local consecutive
relations are applied and the ﬁeld E follows directly from
that solution as E = −∇φ.1

The ﬁrst reason for the importance of E can be viewed
as both an advantage and disadvantage since E itself is
never accessible experimentally and only the line integral

R E·dℓ = V , producing the voltage V , can be measured.2

In the case of an inhomogeneous ﬁeld there is no way to
extract the ﬁeld from the integral and experiment gener-
ally does not have direct access to inhomogeneous ﬁelds.
The problem was realized already at the time of birth of
the electromagnetic theory. Since inhomogeneous ﬁelds
cannot be accessed directly, Thompson suggested using
small cavities to measure internal ﬁelds inside dielectrics3
to map inhomogeneous ﬁelds. This approach has in fact
been realized by modern-day spectroscopy, which allows
one to evaluate the local ﬁeld acting on a dye molecule
through the ﬁeld-induced shift of its spectral line.4,5 How-
ever, the connection between such a local ﬁeld and the
macroscopic Maxwell ﬁeld has been elusive beyond the
standard prescriptions of the dielectric theory.6 In addi-
tion, the ability to spatially resolve the distribution of
the electric ﬁeld and inhomogeneous polarization within
molecular systems of nanometer scale has been limited.7
From the theoretical perspective, the Maxwell ﬁeld is
well deﬁned by the Coulomb law. The starting point is
the overall microscopic electric ﬁeld Em, combining the
ﬁeld E0 of the external charges with the electric ﬁeld of

a)Electronic mail: dmitrym@asu.edu

all molecular bound charges distributed with the charge
density ρb (“b” stands for the bound charge). The result
is obviously

Em = E0 + Eb,

where

Eb = −∇Z |r − r′|−1 ρ′

bdr′.

(1)

(2)

The primes here and below denote vector and scalar ﬁelds
taken at the point r′, e.g., ρ′
b = ρb(r′). The Maxwell
ﬁeld is produced from this equation as the result of two
steps: (i) statistical average hEi of the instantaneous Em
over the conﬁgurations of a statistical ensemble and (ii)
coarse graining of hEi over a “physically small” volume
averaging out the microscopic correlations between the
molecules of the material.8 This volume is not precisely
deﬁned and, in fact, is never explicitly involved. The the-
ory, as it is formulated for bulk dielectrics and interfaces,
instead introduces coarse graining through constitutive
relations as we discuss next.

By taking the divergence of Em and substituting ∇ ·
E0 = 4πρ0 for the density of the external charge ρ0,
one arrives at ∇ · Em = 4π(ρ0 + ρb). Further, due to
the conservation of charge, the instantaneous density of
bound charge can be replaced with the divergence of the
polarization vector ﬁeld Pm, such as ρb = −∇· Pm.8 One
arrives at the equation for instantaneous ﬁelds

∇ · (Em + 4πPm) = 4πρ0,

(3)

which looks very much like the standard Maxwell equa-
tion, except that the ﬁelds in this equation refer to an ar-
bitrary statistical conﬁguration of the system. Of course,
this equation is just a diﬀerent form of the Coulomb law,
which applies to microscopic dimensions and arbitrary
conﬁgurations of charges. The two-step averaging and
coarse graining procedure mentioned above will produce
the average smoothed-out ﬁelds E and P and the cor-
responding electric displacement vector D = E + 4πP.
The Maxwell equation for this coarse grained displace-
ment vector follows from Eq. (3) as ∇ · D = 4πρ0.

Equation (3) and its coarse grained version still cannot
be solved without applying a closure relation between Pm

and Em or between P and E. The connection between
microscopic ﬁelds Pm and Em is a complex problem of
statistical mechanics of liquids.9 It is therefore assumed
that coarse graining helps in eliminating this complexity
and leads to local constitutive relations between coarse
grained ﬁelds

P = χE.

(4)

This constitutive relation thus establishes the direct pro-
portionality between the vector ﬁelds P and E through
the susceptibility χ, which is a scalar for isotropic ma-
terials. Empirical evidence suggests that this approxi-
mation, when used for macroscopic dielectrics, yields the
bulk dielectric susceptibility χs, which is a material prop-
erty, i.e., a parameter characterizing bulk dielectric and
independent of the sample shape (the surface eﬀects die
oﬀ in the macroscopic limit). Correspondingly, the di-
electric constant of bulk dielectric ǫs = 1 + 4πχs is a
material property as well.

This result is quite non-trivial since even for coarse
grained vector ﬁelds the susceptibility χ0 to the ﬁeld of
external charges E0 does not share insensitivity to the
surface eﬀects (boundary conditions). χ0 is not a mate-
rial property and it depends on the shape of the sample
through the dielectric boundary value problem. Given
that the inhomogeneous Maxwell ﬁeld E is not accessible
experimentally, most problems of interest for applications
involving inhomogeneous ﬁelds (solvation of molecules,
solvent-induced shifts of spectral lines, interfacial prob-
lems, etc.) are formulated in terms of the response to an
inhomogeneous external electric ﬁeld E0. Nevertheless,
the Maxwell ﬁeld has to be introduced in order to solve
the problem since only this ﬁeld is believed to provide
local constitutive relations between E and P required
to arrive at the Laplace equation. The locality of the
Maxwell ﬁeld for inhomogeneous external ﬁelds does not
have ﬁrm experimental support and is likely to be an
approximation. This diﬃculty is responsible for many
problems arising in the general problem of electric polar-
ization of interfaces.10

The problem of interfacial polarization is solved in di-
electric theories by replacing the microscopic ﬁelds Em
and Pm in each point of the interface with the corre-
sponding coarse grained ﬁelds and then applying the lo-
cal constitutive relation (4) to each point of the interface.
When substituted to Eq. (3), it leads to the Laplace equa-
tion for E fully speciﬁed in terms of external charges.
However, there is no factual coarse graining when this
procedure is applied to microscopic problems, and it is
nearly impossible even to deﬁne an algorithm of volume
coarse graining when ﬁelds are changing on the scale
of molecular dimensions. The Laplace equation is ob-
tained in such cases by direct substitution Em → E and
Pm → P and the subsequent use of the constitutive equa-
tion. As mentioned, coarse graining of microscopic ﬁelds
is not achieved directly by averaging over a judiciously
chosen volume, but is produced by applying a speciﬁc
local form of the constitutive relation. The smooth func-

2

tion E obtained from the solution of the Laplace equation
then leads to a smooth P, instead of a highly oscillatory
function characteristic of interfaces.11,12 It is the consti-
tutive relation that replaces coarse graining over a small
volume in converting the microscopic into macroscopic
ﬁelds.

Since coarse graining is in fact not performed, one can
adopt a somewhat diﬀerent form of the constitutive re-
lation involving only the statistical averaged ﬁelds in the
interface

hPi = χhEi.

(5)

Of course, Eq. (5) is an approximation. The question we
address here is how to build a consistent theory of inter-
facial polarization when this approximation is applied.
The advantage of Eq. (5) over Eq. (4) is that statistical
averages are well-deﬁned even on the microscopic scale
and one can proceed with ensemble-based algorithms of
deﬁning susceptibilities. In other words, in contrast to
smoothly varied functions P and E in Eq. (4) the cor-
responding ﬁelds in Eq. (5) will be highly oscillatory, as
usually produced by liquid-state theories and numerical
simulations. We do not intend to apply Eq. (5) to the
entire interface, but only to the dividing surface separat-
ing the solute from the solvent. In this way we connect
the microscopic calculations to the electrostatic bound-
ary value problem.

If the constitutive relation is the only step separating
the microscopic Coulomb law in Eq. (3) from the dielec-
tric boundary value problem, one wonders if this proce-
dure can be supplemented with susceptibilities reﬂecting
the microscopic structure of the polarized interface, i.e.,
the susceptibility χ in Eq. (5). The standard Maxwell di-
electric boundary value problem in fact implements one
additional approximation of replacing χ in Eq. (5) with
the susceptibility χs of bulk dielectric.1 This approxima-
tion is not required and any scalar susceptibility can be
used in solving the boundary value problem. Not sur-
prising, the idea of an eﬀective susceptibility or interfa-
cial dielectric constant has been actively discussed in the
literature.11,13–16

interfaces,

Some of phenomenological recipes proposed to deal
the popular
with microscopic
such as
distance-dependent dielectric constant
for
solvation
problems,17 do not withstand the scrutiny of micro-
scopic formulations.18 The problem with such formu-
lations is that spatial correlation functions describing
microscopic interfacial polarization are typically highly
oscillatory11,12 and do not allow deﬁning simple distance-
dependent susceptibilities. If any meaningful microscopic
susceptibility has a chance to enter the standard bound-
ary value problem, it should be consistently derived from
the microscopic Coulomb law in Eq. (3) and not intro-
duced as ad hoc phenomenological recipe justiﬁed by ﬁt-
ting to experimental data or results of numerical simula-
tions. Providing such a consistent approach is the goal
of this article.
In other words, the main question ad-
dressed here is what is the dielectric constant, absorbing

_

_

_

+

_

_

_

Figure 1. Surface charge density at the interface between a
spherical cavity and a dielectric with the dielectric constant
ǫs. The polarization density ﬁeld P is aligned with the radial
ﬁeld of a positive charge q placed at the center of the cav-
ity. The surface charge density σ is opposite in charge to q
to screen its interactions with charges placed outside of the
cavity. ˆn denotes normal to the interface and ˆr = −ˆn is the
unit radial vector.

into itself the microscopic properties of the interface, that
should enter the standard dielectric boundary value prob-
lem? We provide a general formulation of the problem,
followed by speciﬁc calculations of the dielectric response
of water interfacing a spherical solute.

II. BOUNDARY VALUE PROBLEM

When one takes the statistical average in Eq. (3), one
arrives at ∇ · hDi = 0 inside the dielectric where there
are no external charges. This relation translates, through
Gauss’ theorem, into the condition of continuity of the
projection of hDi on the unit vector ˆn normal to the
interface. This condition can be written as8

ˆn · (∇hφ1i − ∇hφ2i) = 4πσ,

(6)

where σ is the surface charge density determined by the
normal projections of the polarization density Pni = ˆn·Pi
(i = 1, 2) in two media in contact in the interface

σ = Pn1 − Pn2.

(7)

In the standard dielectric theories, the surface charge
density σ screens the external charge. It means that if
a probe charge is placed at a large distance from the in-
terface, the eﬀective force between the external charge q
and the probe charge is reduced by the opposite charge
of the interface polarization and an eﬀective charge qeﬀ,
instead of q, is measured by the force. This is illustrated
in Fig. 1 for the simple case of a spherical cavity of radius
a with a charge q placed at its center, as discussed in the
numerical simulations of aqueous solutions below. The
positive charge q will, in dielectric theories, create the op-
posite in sign surface charge density σ = −(1−ǫ−1
s )(q/S),
where S = πa2 is the area of the cavity. The eﬀective

3

charge producing the measurable force on an external
probe charge, qeﬀ = q + σS = q/ǫs, is then reduced by
the dielectric constant of the dielectric ǫs.

When the constitutive relation (5) is applied to statisti-
cally averaged ﬁelds hEi and hPi in Eq. (3), hEi = −∇hφi
satisﬁes the Poisson equation ∆hφi = 0 inside the dielec-
tric where there are no external charges. The properties
of the interface enter the problem through the bound-
ary condition in Eq. (7). Therefore, the goal of refor-
mulating the standard Maxwell boundary value problem
needs to focus on introducing microscopic properties of
the interface into the boundary conditions of the Poisson
equation. This is the goal we are pursuing here.

Equation (7) suggests that the only property of the in-
terface one needs to supply to the solution of the Poisson
equation is the surface charge density or the normal pro-
jection of the polarization density. The linear response
approximation9 provides the desired property in terms of
a non-local susceptibility function χ0(r, r′) (generally a
tensor) depending on two coordinates in the interface

hPn(r)i = Z ˆn · χ0(r, r′) · E′

0dr′,

where the 2-rank tensor of susceptibility is

χ0(r, r′) = βhδP(r)δP(r′)i.

(8)

(9)

Here, β = 1/(kBT ) and δP = P − hPi. The two-
point tensor χ0(r, r′) depends on two positions, r and
r′, separately to reﬂect its interface character and the
involvement of three-body solvent-solvent-solute correla-
tions. This needs to be contrasted with the non-local
susceptibility of bulk dielectrics depending only on r − r′.
One can further assume that the length of polariza-
tion correlations in the interface is much shorter than the
characteristic dimension of the interfacial region and ap-
ply the local approximation neglecting such correlations
altogether15

χ0(r, r′) = δ(r − r′)χ0(r′).

(10)

This approximation obviously eliminates the integral in
Eq. (8) shifting the focus to the inhomogeneous suscep-
tibility χ0(r). It can be obtained by integrating Eq. (9)
over r′

χ0(r) = βhδP(r)δMi,

(11)

where M is the total dipole moment of the dielectric.
Analogues of this equation for diﬀerent symmetries of
the interface have been proposed by Ballenegger and
Hansen11,15 and extensively used in a number of recent
simulations of interfacial polarization.16,19–21

Even though the local approximation provides a fast
resolution of the problem, it is not required.22 One can
take into account the longitudinal character of the ﬁeld
0dr′ = 0
for the transverse projection of the polarization ﬁeld PT
(Helmholtz theorem2). Therefore, only the longitudinal

of external charges E0 and the fact that R P′

T · E′

projection of the polarization P′ = P′
L enters χ0 in Eqs.
(8) and (9). The longitudinal projection of the polariza-
tion is in turn connected to the potential of the bound
charge as22 4πPL = −Eb, where Eb is given by Eq. (2).
Given that Eb = −∇φb, one can apply the Gauss theo-
rem to eliminate the integral in Eq. (8). The result is the
exact relation for Pn not requiring the use of the local
approximation

Here,

hPni = −βhδPnδEC i.

δEC = Xi

qiδφbi

(12)

(13)

is the ﬂuctuation of the Coulomb interaction energy of
the dielectric with the external charges qi; φbi is the po-
tential of the bound charges of the dielectric at the loca-
tion of the charge qi, δφbi = φbi − hφbii.

Equation (12) is the exact solution for the problem of
the surface charge density in the interface assuming lin-
ear response to the ﬁeld of external charges. Deriving it
does not require constitutive relations. If the constitu-
tive relation (5) is adopted, one can ﬁnd the statistically
averaged electrostatic potential of the interface hφi from
the solution of the Laplace equation and, in addition, ask
the question of what susceptibility, or dielectric constant,
can be assigned to the interface. Such scalar interface
susceptibility can be deﬁned by the equation

hPni = χ0nE0n.

(14)

It is important to emphasize that no speciﬁc assump-
tions regarding either the origin of the polarization den-
sity Pn or the electrostatic energy EC have been intro-
duced in deriving Eq. (12). Both parameters can be
microscopic quantities sampled by numerical computer
simulations. For instance, a polar liquid with molecular
dipoles mj with coordinates rj will have the polarization
mjδ (r − rj ). Correspondingly,
EC can be viewed as the energy of Coulomb interactions
of all atomic partial charges of the dielectric with the ex-
ternal charges. This property is routinely provided by
numerical simulations.

density Pn(r) = ˆn · Pj

III.

INTERFACE OF A SPHERICAL SOLUTE

Here we apply the arguments presented above to the
problem of water polarization at the interface of a spheri-
cal solute. The normal to the interface is deﬁned outward
from the dielectric,8 ˆn = −ˆr, ˆr = r/r (Fig. 1). A fur-
ther simpliﬁcation of the geometry is achieved by locating
the external charges at the center of the solute. All sus-
ceptibility tensors become scalars with the only non-zero
diagonal radial component χrr
0 = ˆr · χ0 · ˆr. We will drop
the indexes for brevity with the notation χ0(r) = χrr
0 (r).

4

 exact
 local

  

 
 

4

3

2

1

)
r
(
0
χ
 
 

0
4

8

12

  r, Å

16

20

Figure 2. Comparison of the local [Eq. (15)] and exact [Eq.
(16)] formulas for the interface susceptibility of TIP3P water
interfacing Kihara solutes of diﬀerent size. The Kihara solutes
are characterized by the hard-sphere core of the radii RHS = 2
and 10 ˚A and the Lennard-Jones (LJ) diameter of σLJ = 3
˚A for the LJ interaction between the solute and water’s oxy-
gen. The position of the ﬁrst peak of the radial distribution
function is approximately located at RHS + σLJ.

For this speciﬁc type of interface, the local approximation
leads to

χ0(r) = βhδPr(r)δMri,

(15)

where Pr = −Pn and Mr = −Mn denote the radial pro-
jections of the corresponding vectors (Fig. 1).

Since the electric ﬁeld of the central charge q is E0n =
−q/r2, one can deﬁne the distance-dependent linear in-
terfacial susceptibility χ0n(r) analogous to the one in Eq.
(14)

χ0n(r) = −βr2hδPr(r)δφbi,

(16)

where φb is the electrostatic potential produced by the
dielectric at the center of the spherical solute where the
external charge is placed. The interfacial susceptibility
χ0n follows from this function by adopting r = a, i.e.,
the radius of the spherical surface separating the solute
from the surrounding dielectric.

The deﬁnition of the position of the dividing dielectric
surface presents a major diﬃculty for all dielectric the-
ories, and it is not going to go away in our formulation
recasting the problem of a microscopic polarized inter-
face as the dielectric boundary problem. The question
we are addressing here is what is the susceptibility or the
surface charge density that needs to enter the boundary
conditions once such a dividing surface is deﬁned. How-
ever, the question relevant to this goal is how sensitive
such a deﬁnition would be to possible variations of the
position of the dividing surface. One ideally wants a ro-
bust deﬁnition, little sensitive to changes in the cavity
radius a.

Figure 2 shows χ0(r) in the local approximation [Eq.
(15)] and the exact χ0n(r) [Eq. (16)] calculated from

〉

b

 

Å
V
e
 
,

φ
δ
)
r
(

M
δ
〈

 
-
 

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

5

10

15
  r, Å

20

25

Figure 3. Deﬁnition of the interface susceptibility χ0n in
terms of the slope of −hδMr(r)δφbi according to Eq. (17).
The dashed lines show linear ﬁts to −hδMr(r)δφbi calculated
from MD simulations of Kihara solutes interfacing TIP3P wa-
ter. The hard-sphere core of the Kihara solutes was varied in
simulations: RHS = 2 (red), 5 (blue), 7.5 (cyan), 10 (green),
and 15 (black) ˚A.

molecular dynamics (MD) simulations performed in this
study. The simulations are done for TIP3P water23 inter-
facing spherical solutes of varying diameter and interact-
ing with the oxygen of water by the Kihara potential (a
hard-sphere repulsion core with the radius RHS combined
with a surface layer of soft Lennard-Jones potential).24,25
One has to keep in mind that correlation functions in
Eqs. (12) and (16) are fundamentally three-particle cor-
relations involving two solvent molecules and the solute.
Relatively long MD simulations, ∼ 200 ns, were there-
fore required to converge them for each solute studied
here. More detail on the simulation protocol is given in
the supplementary material,26 and here we discuss the
results.

It is clear from the calculations that the local [Eq. (15)]
and exact [Eq. (16)] formulations for the radial interface
susceptibility generally agree with each other. The ex-
act formulation is obviously preferable since it is free of
the locality assumption. Both results show an oscillatory
behavior of the interface susceptibility, leading to poten-
tial uncertainties when the cavity radius is altered. Some
type of averaging over the oscillations is needed to arrive
at a robust deﬁnition of interfacial susceptibility and the
corresponding dielectric constant. An approach devel-
oped previously22 and adopted here is to deﬁne χ0n as
the slope of the integrated correlation function involving
the instantaneous dipole moment Mr(r) of water within
the sphere of radius r and the electrostatic potential φb.
The resulting expression provides the scalar susceptibil-
ity of the interface, averaged over the oscillations caused
by molecular granularity,

χ0n = −

β
4π

d
dr

hδMr(r)δφbi.

(17)

Figure 3 shows that indeed the slope can be well deﬁned
from the correlation function hδMr(r)δφbi.

The susceptibility χ0n to a radial external ﬁeld E0n

5

t
n

i

ε

 

9

6

3
4

8

12
a,  

16

Figure 4.
Interface dielectric constant ǫint plotted against
the cavity radius a = rmax deﬁned as the distance rmax to
the ﬁrst peak of the solute-oxygen pair distribution function.
Circles refer to neutral Kihara solutes, while diamonds refer to
anion and cation Kihara solutes (RHS = 10 ˚A, rmax = 11.05
˚A) with charges q = ±1 placed at the solute’s center (not
distinguishable on the scale of the plot). The dashed line is a
linear regression through the points.

should be associated with the interface dielectric con-
stant ǫint according to the relation (ǫint − 1)/(4πǫint) =
χ0n,11,22 which leads to

ǫint = [1 − 4πχ0n]−1 .

(18)

These values, obtained from the slopes of the radial cor-
relation functions shown in Fig. 3, are presented in Fig.
4. We ﬁnd that ǫint decreases slowly from ∼ 9 to 4 as the
eﬀective size of the solute increases from ∼ 5.5 ˚A to 18.5
˚A. Overall, the value of the interface dielectric constant
is much smaller than the bulk value for TIP3P water,
ǫs ≃ 97.27

The results shown by circles in Fig. 4 are obtained
for neutral Kihara solutes. Even though Eq. (12) con-
tains the electrostatic interaction energy with the exter-
nal charge of the ion, which is proportional to the charge
magnitude, charge cancels out when the surface suscep-
tibility is deﬁned by dividing the surface polarization by
the ion ﬁeld in Eq. (14). We therefore operate in the lin-
ear response domain, when one can assume that the pres-
ence of the external charge does not alter the structure
of the interface used to perform the statistical averages.
That this is indeed the case is demonstrated by simu-
lating Kihara solutes with positive and negative charges
placed at their centers. These results are shown by dia-
monds in Fig. 4 and are indistinguishable from the results
obtained for neutral solutes (see supplementary material
for more detail26). Our simulations are indeed consistent
with the linear response approximation.

The small value of the interface dielectric constant
of water has potentially dramatic consequences for the
problem of hydration. Our formalism anticipates that ǫint
is used in the dielectric boundary value problem. There-
fore, the solvation free energy of a spherical ion carrying
charge q and assigned the cavity radius a is given by the
standard Born equation28,29 F = −(1/2)χBq2, where the

6

Born solvation susceptibility is

REFERENCES

χB =

1

a (cid:18)1 −

1

ǫint(a)(cid:19) .

(19)

Here, ǫint(a) indicates that the dependence of the Born
solvation susceptibility on the cavity radius can be more
complex than the traditionally anticipated a−1 scaling.
The reasons for the relative success of the Born equa-
tion in predicting the free energy of solvation and its dra-
matic failure in describing entropy of solvation have long
been known.30–33 Both are related to the low sensitivity
of the Born formula to the solvent properties when the
bulk dielectric constant ǫs ≫ 1 is used instead of ǫint in
Eq. (19). The traditional form of the Born equation sig-
niﬁcantly underestimates the entropy of solvation30 since
the term ǫ−2
s ∂ǫs/∂T , appearing in the entropy, is too
small. This deﬁciency can be potentially remedied if, ac-
cording to our calculations, ǫint ≪ ǫs. The ﬁnal verdict
requires knowledge of ǫint(T ), which is currently unavail-
able.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We discuss here a formalism connecting the Maxwell
boundary value problem with the microscopic structure
of the interface. In other words, the paper asks the ques-
tion: What is the dielectric constant that should enter
the boundary conditions in the Laplace equation describ-
ing a polarized dielectric interface? The problem is for-
mulated in terms of the interface susceptibility or, alter-
natively, the interface dielectric constant. This property
is calculated from an exact equation statistically averag-
ing correlated ﬂuctuations of the interface polarization
density and the electrostatic energy of external charges
interacting with the polarized dielectric. Evaluated by
MD simulations of water interfacing spherical solutes, the
interface dielectric constant is found to be signiﬁcantly
lower than the corresponding bulk value.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation (CHE-1464810) and through XSEDE (TG-
MCB080116N). The authors are grateful to Daniel Mar-
tin for his help with the setup of simulations.

1J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, New York,
1999).
2L. Eyges, The Classical Electromagnetic Field (Dover Publica-
tions, Ney York, 1972).
3W. Thompson Lord Kelvin, Reprint of Papers on Electrostatics
and Magnetism, 2nd ed. (MacMillan and Co., London, 1884, sec
479).
4W. Liptay, in Modern quantum chemistry, edited by O. Sinano˘glu
(Academic Press, New York, 1965).
5S. D. Fried and S. G. Boxer, Acc. Chem. Res. 48, 998 (2015).
6D. R. Martin, A. D. Friesen, and D. V. Matyushov, J. Chem.
Phys. 135, 084514 (2011).
7M. A. Steﬀen, K. Lao, and S. G. Boxer, Science 264, 810 (1994).
8L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Electrodynamics of Continuous
Media (Pergamon, Oxford, 1984).
9J. P. Hansen and I. R. McDonald, Theory of Simple Liquids (Aca-
demic Press, Amsterdam, 2003).

10G. Jeanmairet, M. Levesque, R. Vuilleumier, and D. Borgis, J.

Phys. Chem. Lett. 4, 619 (2013).

11V. Ballenegger and J.-P. Hansen, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 114711

(2005).

12L. Horv´ath, T. Beu, M. Manghi, and J. Palmeri, J. Chem. Phys.

138, 154702 (2013).

13V. Ballenegger and J.-P. Hansen, Europhys. Lett. 63, 381 (2003).
14H. A. Stern and S. E. Feller, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 3401 (2003).
15V. Ballenegger, R. Blaak, and J.-P. Hansen, in Computer simu-
lations in condensed matter systems : from materials to chemical
biology, Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 2, edited by M. Ferrario,
G. Ciccotti, and K. Binder (Springer, Berlin, 2006) pp. 45–63.

16D.

J.

Bonthuis

and

R.

R.

Netz,

J. Phys. Chem. B 117, 11397 (2013).

17R. M. Noyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 84, 513 (1962).
18M. Dinpajooh and D. V. Matyushov, J. Chem. Phys. 143, 044511

(2015).

19D. J. Bonthuis, S. Gekle, and R. R. Netz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107,

166102 (2011).

20A. Ghouﬁ, A. Szymczyk, R. Renou,

and M. Ding,

EPL (Europhysics Letters) 99, 37008 (2012).

21R. Renou, A. Szymczyk, G. Maurin, P. Malfreyt, and A. Ghouﬁ,

J. Chem. Phys. 142, 184706 (2015).

22D. V. Matyushov, J. Chem. Phys. 140, 224506 (2014).
23W. L. Jorgensen, J. Chandrasekhar, J. D. Madura, R. W. Impey,

and M. L. Klein, J. Chem. Phys. 79, 926 (1983).

24T. Kihara, Adv. Chem. Phys. 1, 267 (1958).
25A. D. Friesen and D. V. Matyushov, Chem. Phys. Lett. 511, 256

(2011).

26See supplementary material at [URL will be inserted by AIP] for

details of calculations and experimental procedures.

27B. Guillot, J. Mol. Liq. 101, 219 (2002).
28M. Born, Z. Phys. 1, 45 (1920).
29G. Hummer, L. R. Pratt, and A. E. Garcia, J. Phys. Chem. 100,

1206 (1996).

30B. Roux, H.-A. Yu, and M. Karplus, J. Phys. Chem. 94, 4683

(1990).

31S. W. Rick and B. J. Berne, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116, 3949 (1994).
32R. M. Lynden-Bell and J. C. Rasaiah, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 1981

(1997).

33S. Rajamani, T. Ghosh, and S. Garde, J. Chem. Phys. 120, 4457

(2004).

