EUROPEAN ORGANISATION FOR NUCLEAR RESEARCH (CERN)

CERN-PH-EP-2015-323
8th March 2016

Measurement of total and diﬀerential W+W− production cross

√

sections in proton-proton collisions at

s = 8 TeV with the ATLAS

detector and limits on anomalous triple-gauge-boson couplings

The ATLAS Collaboration

Abstract

√

The production of W boson pairs in proton-proton collisions at
s = 8 TeV is studied using
data corresponding to 20.3 fb−1 of integrated luminosity collected by the ATLAS detector
during 2012 at the CERN Large Hadron Collider. The W bosons are reconstructed using
their leptonic decays into electrons or muons and neutrinos. Events with reconstructed jets
are not included in the candidate event sample. A total of 6636 WW candidate events are ob-
served. Measurements are performed in ﬁducial regions closely approximating the detector
acceptance. The integrated measurement is corrected for all acceptance eﬀects and for the
W branching fractions to leptons in order to obtain the total WW production cross section,
which is found to be 71.1±1.1(stat) +5.7−5.0(syst) ±1.4(lumi) pb. This agrees with the next-to-
next-to-leading-order Standard Model prediction of 63.2+1.6−1.4(scale)±1.2(PDF) pb. Fiducial
diﬀerential cross sections are measured as a function of each of six kinematic variables.
The distribution of the transverse momentum of the leading lepton is used to set limits on
anomalous triple-gauge-boson couplings.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
5

 

 
 
]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
2
0
7
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

c(cid:13) 2016 CERN for the beneﬁt of the ATLAS Collaboration.
Reproduction of this article or parts of it is allowed as speciﬁed in the CC-BY-3.0 license.

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Analysis overview

3 The ATLAS detector

4 Data and Monte Carlo samples

5 Object reconstruction and event selection

5.1 Pre-selection of events
5.2 Lepton selection
5.3
5.4 Reconstruction of missing transverse momentum
5.5 WW selection

Jet selection

6 Determination of backgrounds

6.1 Background from top-quark production
6.2 Background from W+jets production
6.3 Other diboson processes and validation of diboson and W+jets backgrounds
6.4 Background from Drell–Yan production
6.5 Other background contributions
6.6 WW candidate events and estimated background yields

7 Cross-section determination

7.1 Fiducial and total cross sections
7.2 Measurement of the diﬀerential cross sections

8 Systematic uncertainties

8.1 Experimental uncertainties
8.2 Modelling uncertainties

9 Cross-section results

9.1 Theoretical predictions
9.2 Cross-section measurements and comparisons with theoretical predictions

10 Limits on anomalous triple-gauge-boson couplings

10.1 Theoretical parameterisation
10.2 Conﬁdence intervals for the aTGC parameters

11 Conclusions

A Tables of diﬀerential cross sections

A.1 Diﬀerential cross section measurements
A.2 Normalised diﬀerential cross sections
A.3 Bin-to-bin correlation matrices for the diﬀerential measurements
A.4 Bin-to-bin correlation matrices for the normalised diﬀerential measurements

2

3

3

5

6

7
7
8
9
9
10

12
12
14
15
16
17
18

18
18
22

23
23
24

27
27
28

34
34
36

44

51
51
54
57
59

1. Introduction

The measurement of the production of pairs of electroweak gauge bosons plays a central role in tests of
the Standard Model (SM) and in searches for new physics at the TeV scale [1]. The WW production cross
√
section would grow arbitrarily large as a function of the centre-of-mass energy of the production process,
ˆs, were it not for the cancellations of s- and t-channel W +W− (henceforth denoted WW) processes. New
physics phenomena can occur as deviations from the gauge structure of the Standard Model in the triple-
gauge-boson couplings ZWW or γWW [2], termed anomalous triple-gauge-boson couplings (aTGCs).
As the cross section for WW production is one of the largest among those involving a triple-gauge-
boson vertex, it allows tests of the self-interaction of the gauge bosons to be made with high precision
through measurements of diﬀerential kinematic distributions. Studies of the WW production process are
particularly important as it constitutes a large irreducible background to searches for physics beyond the
SM as well as to resonant H → W +W− production.
A precise measurement of WW production also tests the validity of the theoretical calculations. Per-
turbative quantum chromodynamics (pQCD) is the essential ingredient in all these calculations and a
recent calculation of non-resonant WW production has been performed up to next-to-next-to-leading or-
der (NNLO) [3]. However, ﬁxed-order calculations may fail to describe eﬀects that arise from restrictions
imposed on the phase space of the measurement. In this analysis, it is required that there be no jets above
a certain transverse momentum threshold, which introduces an additional momentum scale in the theor-
etical calculation. Resumming the resulting large logarithms can improve the accuracy of the prediction.
Several calculations including resummation eﬀects up to next-to-next-to-leading logarithms (NNLL) have
appeared recently in the literature [4–6]. Both the ﬁxed-order and resummed predictions are compared to
the measurements in this paper.

s = 7 TeV by the ATLAS Collaboration [11] and for centre-of-mass energies of

The existence of a non-zero self-coupling of the Standard Model gauge bosons has been proved by meas-
urements of WW production in electron–positron collisions at LEP [7]. The ﬁrst measurement of the pro-
duction of W boson pairs at a hadron collider was conducted by the CDF experiment using Tevatron Run
I data [8]. Since then, more precise results have been published by the CDF [9] and DØ experiments [10].
The WW production cross sections have already been measured at the LHC for a centre-of-mass energy
s = 7 TeV and
of
8 TeV by the CMS Collaboration [12, 13]. Limits on anomalous couplings have been reported in these
publications as well and, in several cases, are comparable to the most stringent aTGC limits set by the
LEP experiments [7].
The present analysis uses a data sample with an integrated luminosity of 20.3 fb−1 at a centre-of-mass
s = 8 TeV. The total and ﬁducial WW production cross sections are measured using W → eν
energy of
and W → µν decays. Furthermore, measurements of diﬀerential cross sections are presented and limits
on anomalous triple-gauge-boson couplings are reported.

√

√

√

2. Analysis overview

The production of WW signal events takes place dominantly through quark–antiquark t-channel scattering
and s-channel annihilation, denoted by q¯q → W +W−,1 and are shown in Figures 1(a) and 1(b), where
the latter process involves a triple-gauge-boson vertex. In addition, W boson pairs can be produced via
1 In the following, q¯q → W +W− is taken to also include qg initial states contributing to t-channel and s-channel WW production.

3

gluon fusion through a quark loop; these are the non-resonant gg → W +W− and the resonant Higgs boson
gg → H → W +W− production processes in Figures 1(c) and 1(d). All of these are considered as signal
processes in this analysis.

(a) t- channel

(b) s- channel (TGC vertex)

(c) gluon fusion

(d) Higgs boson production

Figure 1: (a) The SM tree-level Feynman diagram for WW production through the qq initial state in the t-channel.
(b) The corresponding tree-level diagram in the s-channel, which contains the WWZ and WWγ TGC vertices. (c)
The gluon fusion process, which is mediated by a quark loop. (d) The Higgs boson production process through
gluon fusion and the subsequent decay of the Higgs boson to WW.

The WW candidate events are selected in fully leptonic decay channels, resulting in ﬁnal states of
e±(−)
νeµ∓(−)
νµ, e+νee−¯νe and µ+νµµ−¯νµ. In the following, the diﬀerent ﬁnal states are referred to as eµ, ee
and µµ.
Backgrounds to these ﬁnal states originate from a variety of processes. Top-quark production (t¯t and the
associated production of a single top quark and a W boson) also results in events with W pairs. In this
case, the W bosons are, however, accompanied by b-quarks that hadronise into jets. To enhance the purity
of the signal candidates, events are rejected if any jets above a certain transverse momentum threshold are
present in the ﬁnal state. The Drell–Yan background is suppressed by requirements on missing transverse
momentum, caused in WW events by ﬁnal-state neutrinos. For ﬁnal states with same-ﬂavour leptons,
a veto on dilepton invariant masses close to the Z pole mass is used. Other backgrounds stem from
the W+jets or multijet production processes where one or more jets are misidentiﬁed as leptons. Diboson
processes such as production of a heavy boson with an oﬀ- or on-shell photon or a Z boson, WZ(γ∗), W/Z+
γ and ZZ production, where one of the leptons falls outside the acceptance of the detector or a photon
converts to an electron–positron pair, are additional sources of backgrounds. Backgrounds stemming from
top-quark, Drell–Yan, W+jets and multijet production are evaluated using partially data-driven methods,
where simulated event samples are only used to describe the shape of kinematic distributions or to validate
the methods. The background from diboson production processes is modelled using Monte Carlo samples
normalised to the expected production cross section using theoretical calculations at the highest available
order. Other processes, such as double parton interactions, vector-boson fusion processes or associated
WH production, resulting in eµ, ee and µµ ﬁnal states are not considered explicitly in the analysis as their
contribution to the selected event sample is expected to be negligible (<0.6%).

The eµ, ee and µµ measurements of the total WW production cross section are combined using a likelihood
ﬁt that includes the branching fractions into electrons or muons, whereas the ﬁducial cross sections are
calculated per ﬁnal state. Contributions from leptonic τ-decays are not included in the deﬁnitions of the
ﬁducial cross sections in order to allow comparisons with existing theoretical predictions. Because of its
larger signal acceptance and smaller background, only the eµ ﬁnal state is used to measure diﬀerential
cross sections and to set limits on anomalous triple-gauge-boson-couplings.

The diﬀerential cross sections are reported as a function of the transverse momentum of the leading lepton,

4

¯q′qq′′WW¯qqWWZ/γ∗ggWWggWWHplead
T , the transverse momentum of the dilepton system, pT((cid:96)(cid:96)), and the dilepton invariant mass, m(cid:96)(cid:96), all of
which are correlated with the centre-of-mass energy of the interaction and thus sensitive to contributions
ˆs. Diﬀerential cross sections are also reported as a
from new physics processes at high values of
function of the azimuthal angle between the decay leptons, ∆φ(cid:96)(cid:96), which is correlated with the polarisation
of the W bosons and plays a special role in the extraction of the scalar Higgs boson signal. Additional
measurements are presented as a function of the rapidity of the dilepton system, |y(cid:96)(cid:96)|, and the observable
|cos (θ∗)|, which is deﬁned using the diﬀerence between the pseudorapidities of the leptons, ∆η(cid:96)(cid:96), as
follows:

√

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)cos(cid:0)θ

∗(cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) =

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)tanh

(cid:32) ∆η(cid:96)(cid:96)

(cid:33)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ,

(1)
where the pseudorapidity is deﬁned as η = − ln tan(θ/2) with θ being the polar angle.2 These variables
are correlated with the rapidity and the boost of the WW system along the z-axis. The |cos (θ∗)| variable
has been suggested for searches for new physics in WW production in the low-pT regime [14].

2

3. The ATLAS detector

The ATLAS detector is a general-purpose detector that is used to study collisions at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC). A detailed description can be found in Ref. [15].

The inner detector (ID) is used to measure trajectories and momenta of charged particles within the central
region of the ATLAS detector with pseudorapidities of |η| < 2.5. The ID is located inside a solenoid that
provides a 2 T axial magnetic ﬁeld. The ID consists of three sub-detector systems: a three-layer silicon-
pixel tracker, a four-layer silicon-strip detector built of modules with pairs of single-sided sensors glued
back-to-back, and a transition radiation tracker consisting of straw tubes. In the central region these sub-
detectors are constructed in the shape of cylinders, while in the forward and backward regions, they take
the form of disks. The innermost pixel layer of the ID is located just outside the beam-pipe.

Electromagnetic (EM) energy deposits are measured using a liquid-argon calorimeter with accordion-
shaped electrodes and lead absorbers. The EM calorimeter is divided into a barrel part (|η| < 1.475) and
two end-cap components (1.375 < |η| < 3.2). The transition region between the barrel and the end-caps
of the calorimeter, 1.37 < |η| < 1.52, has a large amount of material in front of the ﬁrst active calorimeter
layer; therefore electromagnetic objects measured in this region suﬀer from worse energy resolution and
are not considered in this analysis.
For hadronic calorimetry, three diﬀerent technologies are used. In the barrel region (|η| < 1.7), scintillator
tiles with steel absorbers are used. Liquid argon with copper absorber plates are used in the end-cap
region (1.5 < |η| < 3.2). The forward calorimeter (3.1 < |η| < 4.9) consists of liquid argon with tungsten
and copper absorbers and has separate electromagnetic and hadronic sections.
The muon spectrometer (MS) provides precise measurements of the momentum of muons within |η| < 2.7
using three layers of precision tracking stations, consisting of drift tubes and cathode strip chambers.

2 The ATLAS experiment uses a right-handed coordinate system with its origin at the nominal pp interaction point at the centre
of the detector. The positive x-axis is deﬁned by the direction from the interaction point to the centre of the LHC ring, with
the positive y-axis pointing upwards, while the beam direction deﬁnes the z-axis. The azimuthal angle φ is measured around
the beam axis and the polar angle θ is the angle from the z-axis. The distance in η − φ space between two objects is deﬁned as

(∆η)2 + (∆φ)2. Transverse energy is computed as ET = E · sin θ.

∆R = (cid:112)

5

Resistive plate and thin-gap chambers are used to trigger on muons in the region |η| < 2.4. The magnetic
ﬁelds for the MS are produced by one barrel and two end-cap air-core toroid magnets surrounding the
calorimeter. Each magnet consists of eight superconducting coils arranged symmetrically in φ.

The ATLAS trigger system uses three consecutive stages to decide whether an event is selected to be read
out for permanent storage. The ﬁrst level of the trigger is implemented using custom-made electronics
and operates at a design rate of at most 75 kHz. It is complemented by two software-based high-level
triggers (HLT). The second level consists of fast online algorithms to inspect regions of interest ﬂagged
by the ﬁrst trigger level. At the third level, the full event is reconstructed using algorithms similar to those
in the oﬄine event selection.

4. Data and Monte Carlo samples

The analysis is based on data collected by the ATLAS experiment during the 2012 data-taking period.
Only runs with stable proton–proton (pp) beam collisions at
s = 8 TeV in which all relevant detector
components were operating normally are used. This data sample corresponds to an integrated luminosity
of L = 20.3 fb−1, determined with an uncertainty of ±1.9% following the same methodology as that
detailed in Ref. [16] and derived from beam-separation scans performed in November 2012.

√

The kinematic distributions of both the signal and background processes are modelled using Monte Carlo
(MC) samples. The additional pp collisions accompanying the hard-scatter interactions (pile-up) are
modelled by overlaying minimum-bias events generated using Pythia 8 [17]. To simulate the detector
response, the MC events are passed through a detailed simulation of the ATLAS detector [18] based on
GEANT4 [19].
For the WW signal events, three diﬀerent MC samples are generated. The q¯q → W +W− events are
generated using the Powheg-Box 1.0 generator (referred to as Powheg below) [20–23]. It is interfaced
to Pythia 8.170 for the simulation of parton shower and hadronisation processes. The non-resonant gg-
induced WW signal events are generated using the gg2ww program (version 3.1.3) [24] interfaced to
Herwig 6.5 and Jimmy 4.31 [25, 26] for parton showering, hadronisation and underlying event simula-
tion. The resonant WW production via a Higgs boson with a mass of mH = 125 GeV is modelled using
Powheg+Pythia 8.170. For these three samples, the CT10 NLO [27] parton distribution function (PDF)
is employed in the event generation. Photos [28] is used to model the radiation of photons, and AU2 [29]
and AUET2 [30] are used as the parameter tunes for the underlying event in the Powheg+Pythia and
the Herwig+Jimmy samples, respectively. To calculate acceptances (see Section 8.2) or make diﬀerential
predictions for the WW signal process, these samples are combined according to their respective cross sec-
tions as listed in Table 1. Next-to-leading-order electroweak (EW) contributions of O(α3
EW) are described
in Refs. [31–34] and the corrections derived in Ref. [35] are applied as scale factors to q¯q → W +W−
production in the acceptance calculation and in the setting of limits on anomalous triple-gauge-couplings
(see Section 10), but not for any other purpose or distribution shown in this paper.

The tt background is modelled with MC@NLO 4.03 [36] using the CT10 NLO PDF interfaced with
Herwig 6.5+Jimmy 4.31 with the AUET2 tune. The same generators and settings are used to simulate
s-channel single-top production and the associated production of a top quark with a W boson, while
the AcerMC 3.7 [37] MC generator interfaced to Pythia 6 [38] with the AUET2B tune [39] and the
CTEQ6L1 PDF [40] is employed for the single-top-t-channel process. Alternative samples employing

6

Powheg+Pythia 8 and Powheg+Herwig 6.5+Jimmy 4.31 are used to determine systematic uncertainties
in the data-driven estimate.

Drell–Yan and W+jets events are modelled using Alpgen 2.14 [41] which is either interfaced to Pythia 6
(W+jets and Z → ee/µµ samples with m(cid:96)(cid:96) > 60 GeV) or to Herwig 6.5 [25] and Jimmy 4.31 ( Z → ττ and
remaining Z → ee/µµ samples) for the simulation of parton showering, hadronisation and the underlying
event modelling. The AUET2 tune is used for the underlying event. The CTEQ6L1 PDF is employed
in the event generation and for the parton shower. The MLM [42] matching scheme is used to remove
overlaps between events with the same parton multiplicity generated by the matrix element and the parton
shower.
The ZZ and WZ(γ∗) diboson background processes are generated with Powheg interfaced to Pythia 8
using the AU2CT10 tune with the CT10 NLO PDF. The lower limit on the invariant mass of the decay
leptons of the Z(γ∗) in the ZZ sample is set to m(cid:96)(cid:96) > 4 GeV, while for the WZ(γ∗) it is m(cid:96)(cid:96) > 7 GeV. For
γ∗ masses below 7 GeV, dedicated Wγ∗ samples are produced using the Sherpa 1.4.2 generator [43] with
its built-in parton shower and hadronisation using the CT10 NLO PDF. Events from Wγ production can
also mimic the WW signature when the photon is misidentiﬁed as an electron. These events are generated
using Alpgen interfaced to Herwig+Jimmy. The CTEQ6L1 PDF and the AUET2 tune are used for this
sample.

The MC samples used in this analysis are summarised in Table 1, where the total cross sections, σtotal,
times the branching fractions, B, into leptons are reported. The total cross sections are taken from the-
oretical calculations and the perturbative order of each calculation is also given in the table. The total
cross sections are used to normalize the MC samples, which are essential for the modelling of kinematic
distributions.

5. Object reconstruction and event selection

5.1. Pre-selection of events

Fast selection algorithms based on the detection of electrons or muons are used to trigger the readout of
the events [51, 52]. The trigger selection algorithms are based on the transverse momentum of the leptons
and use certain object quality criteria. These object quality criteria vary for the diﬀerent triggers and are
generally looser and more eﬃcient for dilepton triggers as opposed to single-lepton triggers, which are
designed to yield larger rate reductions. Another important consideration is the coverage of the ﬁrst-level
muon trigger, which is only about 80% in the central region (|η| < 1.05) of the detector [52]. In the ee and
µµ ﬁnal states, highly eﬃcient dilepton triggers are used, which impose loose identiﬁcation criteria on
both electrons for the dielectron trigger and for the dimuon trigger only a single muon in the ﬁrst trigger
level. In the eµ ﬁnal state the optimal signal yield is achieved by combining single-lepton triggers with
the eµ dilepton trigger, as the latter is aﬀected by the limited coverage for muons at the ﬁrst trigger level
and, due also to the trigger requirements on the electrons, yields a low eﬃciency.
For the single-electron trigger, the HLT criterion for the transverse momentum is either pe
accompanied by track-based isolation requirements, or pe
transverse momentum threshold of pµ
T
satisﬁed, or a transverse momentum threshold of pµ
T
requires pµ

T > 24 GeV,
T > 60 GeV. The single-muon trigger has a
= 24 GeV when a loose track-based isolation requirement is
= 36 GeV. The combined electron–muon trigger
T > 12 GeV for the electron. The dielectron trigger requires two

T > 8 GeV for the muon and pe

7

Process

WW Signal

qq → W +W−
gg → W +W− (non-resonant)
gg → H → W +W−

Top quark

t¯t
Wt
Single top t-channel
Single top s-channel
Drell–Yan
Z → ee/µµ
Z → ττ
Z → (cid:96)(cid:96)
W±γ
W±Z(/γ∗)
W±Z(/γ∗)
ZZ → 4(cid:96)
ZZ → (cid:96)(cid:96) νν

Other dibosons (VV)

(pγ
T > 8 GeV)
(m(cid:96)(cid:96) > 7 GeV)
(m(cid:96)(cid:96) < 7 GeV)
(m(cid:96)(cid:96) > 4 GeV)
(m(cid:96)(cid:96) > 4 GeV)

(m(cid:96)(cid:96) > 60 GeV)
Alpgen +Pythia 6
(m(cid:96)(cid:96) > 60 GeV)
Alpgen +Herwig
(10 GeV < m(cid:96)(cid:96) < 60 GeV) Alpgen +Herwig

Alpgen +Herwig
Powheg+Pythia 8
Sherpa
Powheg+Pythia 8
Powheg+Pythia 8

MC generator
+parton shower
+hadronisation

Calculation

Powheg+Pythia 8
gg2ww +Herwig
Powheg+Pythia 8

NLO [44]
LO† [24]
NNLO [45]

MC@NLO+Herwig
MC@NLO+Herwig
AcerMC+Pythia 6
MC@NLO+Herwig

NNLO+NNLL [46]
NNLO+NNLL [47]
NNLO+NNLL [48]
NNLO+NNLL [49]

σtotal·B
[pb]

5.58
0.153
0.435

26.6
2.35
28.4
1.82

16500

369.0
12.7
12.9
0.733
0.504



NNLO [50]

NLO [44]
NLO [44]
NLO [44]
NLO [44]
NLO [44]

√

Table 1: Monte Carlo samples used to model the signal and background processes. The total cross sections times
branching fractions, σtotal·B, are quoted at
s = 8 TeV using higher-order calculations. The branching fractions B
include the decays t→Wq, W → (cid:96)ν, and Z→(cid:96)(cid:96), while the decay of one Z boson to neutrinos is considered for the
process ZZ→(cid:96)(cid:96) νν. Here, (cid:96) refers to e, µ, or τ for signal and background processes, and all three lepton ﬂavors are
considered in B. The q¯q → W +W− process also includes qg initial states contributing to t-channel and s-channel
WW production. The Higgs mass is taken to be mH = 125 GeV.
†The process itself is calculated at LO, however it contributes only at NNLO to the total WW cross section.

electrons with a transverse momentum of pe
T > 12 GeV while the dimuon trigger applies a transverse
momentum requirement of pµ
T > 8 GeV for the second muon. With the chosen
trigger scheme, the trigger eﬃciency deﬁned with respect to the oﬄine selection criteria is 99-100% for
all three channels.

T > 18 GeV for one and pµ

5.2. Lepton selection

Electrons are reconstructed from energy deposits in the EM calorimeter with an associated track. Elec-
trons must satisfy |ηe| < 2.47, excluding the calorimeter transition region 1.37 < |ηe| < 1.52. To eﬃ-
ciently reject multijet background, they are required to pass a very tight likelihood-based identiﬁcation
criterion [53] that uses discriminating variables based on calorimetric shower shapes and track paramet-
ers of the electron candidates. Electrons are required to be unaﬀected by known instrumental problems
such as coherent noise in the calorimeters. Stringent requirements are placed on track impact parameters

8

and electron isolation to reject electrons from multijet background events. These isolation and track-
ing requirements are the same as those utilised in Ref. [54]. To reject electrons reconstructed from a
bremsstrahlung photon emitted by a muon traversing the calorimeter, any electron candidate reconstruc-
ted at a distance ∆R < 0.1 from a selected muon is removed.

Muons are reconstructed by combining tracks reconstructed separately in the ID and the MS. Muons are
required to be within the pseudorapidity region |ηµ| < 2.4. To reject backgrounds, quality criteria are
applied to the muon candidates as described in detail in Ref. [55]. As in the case of electrons, the track
parameter and isolation selection criteria applied to muons follow that in Ref. [54]. For the rejection of
muons from heavy-ﬂavour decays, muons are removed if they are found within a cone of ∆R = 0.3 to a
selected jet.

5.3. Jet selection

Jets are reconstructed using the anti-kt algorithm [56] with radius parameter R = 0.4 implemented in
the FastJet package [57]. The inputs to the jet-ﬁnding algorithm are calibrated topological clusters [58].
The calibration of topological clusters to the hadronic energy scale depends on their local energy density
and total energy [59]. A jet-area-dependent correction is applied to correct the jet energy for contributions
from additional pp collisions based on an estimate of the pile-up activity in a given event using the method
proposed in Ref. [60]. The reconstructed jets are further calibrated using jet-energy-scale corrections from
simulation. Their calibration is reﬁned using data-driven corrections to account for residual diﬀerences
between data and MC simulation [61, 62].
T > 25 GeV and pseudorapidity |ηjet| < 4.5. Jets
Jets are required to have a transverse momentum of pjet
are removed if they are found within a cone of ∆R = 0.3 around a selected electron. For jets with
T < 50 GeV and |ηjet| < 2.4, an additional requirement is applied to reject jets from pile-up interactions
pjet
in the event. The scalar sum of the transverse momenta of the tracks associated with both the primary
vertex and the jet must be larger than one-half of the scalar sum of the momenta of all the tracks associated
with the jet; jets with no associated tracks are also removed [63]. This selection criteria is henceforth
denoted as requirement on the jet vertex fraction (JVF).

Selected b-jets are used in the estimation of the top-quark background described in Section 6.1. Jets con-
taining b-hadrons are identiﬁed within the central region of the detector, |ηjet| < 2.5, using a multivariate
approach based on track impact-parameter signiﬁcance, secondary vertex reconstruction and other track-
ing variables described in Refs. [64, 65]. In this analysis the requirement on the multivariate discriminant
is chosen to have a b-jet identiﬁcation eﬃciency of 85%, which has been veriﬁed using a t¯t data sample.
This corresponds to a rejection factor of 10 for light-ﬂavour jets [65].

5.4. Reconstruction of missing transverse momentum

The reconstruction of missing transverse momentum is optimised to reject backgrounds without neutrinos
in the ﬁnal state.
Calorimeter-based missing transverse momentum, Emiss
, is reconstructed as the magnitude of the negative
vectorial sum of all measured and identiﬁed physics objects, denoted as Emiss
T , where the bold notation
indicates a vector throughout this paper. Additionally, energy deposits in the calorimeter not associated
with any high-pT objects are also included as described in Ref. [66].

T

9

The relative missing transverse momentum, Emiss

T, Rel, is deﬁned as

(cid:40) Emiss
T × sin (∆φ(cid:96))
Emiss
T

Emiss
T, Rel

=

if ∆φ(cid:96) < π/2
if ∆φ(cid:96) ≥ π/2,

(2)

T

T

is used, which is the magnitude of the negative vectorial sum (pmiss

and the nearest lepton. With this deﬁn-
T, Rel is less aﬀected by the mis-measurement of the energy of a lepton leading to spurious large

where ∆φ(cid:96) is the diﬀerence in azimuthal angle φ between Emiss
ition, Emiss
calorimeter-based missing transverse momentum.
Additionally, track-based pmiss
T ) of
all identiﬁed and calibrated leptons and all tracks not associated with any lepton in the event. These
tracks are required to have pT > 0.5 GeV and be associated to the reconstructed primary vertex, which
makes pmiss
robust against additional pile-up interactions in the same bunch-crossing. A more detailed
description of the pmiss
In events with genuine missing transverse momentum due to undetected neutrinos, Emiss
are
complementary estimators of the total missing transverse momentum vector. A large diﬀerence between
Emiss
indicates a mis-reconstruction of either of these two quantities in the context of this
T
analysis.

reconstruction can be found in Ref. [67].

and pmiss

and pmiss

T

T

T

T

T

5.5. WW selection

The WW candidate events are required to contain two oppositely charged leptons fulﬁlling the iden-
tiﬁcation criteria, isolation and track impact-parameter requirements speciﬁed earlier. The leading and
sub-leading leptons have to satisfy transverse momentum requirements of p(cid:96)
T > 20 GeV,
respectively. To suppress other diboson backgrounds, events are rejected if additional leptons with p(cid:96)
T >
7 GeV fulﬁlling the above described selection criteria are present.

T > 25 GeV and p(cid:96)

The event selection criteria are optimised to enhance the WW signal purity. The invariant mass of the
dilepton pair is required to be greater than 15 GeV for ee/µµ ﬁnal states to reject J/ψ, Υ and other low-
mass resonances, while eµ ﬁnal states are required to have an invariant mass above 10 GeV to remove
multijet events. Figure 2 shows the invariant mass distributions of these selected dilepton events for the
same-ﬂavour and eµ ﬁnal states. The backgrounds shown here are based purely on MC predictions, which
are normalised to L = 20.3 fb−1 using the cross section times branching fractions shown in Table 1. In
Figure 2, Drell–Yan production is the largest background for the ee and µµ ﬁnal states, and it is therefore
further suppressed by rejecting events that are reconstructed with an invariant mass closer than 15 GeV to
the Z boson mass mZ [68].
The Drell–Yan background in the same-ﬂavour channel is still signiﬁcant after this more restrictive in-
variant mass requirement, so stringent conditions are imposed using selection criteria related to missing
transverse momentum. The requirements are less strict for eµ ﬁnal states, where Drell–Yan production
contributes only through Z/γ∗ → ττ. The selection requirements are as follows. The relative missing
transverse momentum, Emiss
T, Rel, is required to be larger than 15 GeV for the eµ and larger than 45 GeV
for the ee and µµ ﬁnal states. Track-based missing transverse momentum, pmiss
, is further required to be
larger than 20 GeV for the eµ and larger than 45 GeV for the ee and µµ ﬁnal states. The azimuthal angle
between Emiss
T ) < 0.6 must be met in the eµ ﬁnal
T
state, while ∆φ(Emiss

is calculated and the condition ∆φ(Emiss
T ) < 0.3 must be satisﬁed for the ee and µµ ﬁnal states.

T , pmiss

T , pmiss

and pmiss

T

T

10

Figure 2: The invariant mass distributions are shown for dilepton pairs in selected events for eµ (left) and ee + µµ
(right) ﬁnal states after the dilepton selection and the m(cid:96)(cid:96) requirements described in the text. The points represent
data and the stacked histograms are the MC predictions, which are normalised to L = 20.3 fb−1 using the cross
section times branching fractions shown in Table 1. The last bin is an overﬂow bin. Only statistical uncertainties
are shown.

The jet multiplicity distributions for data, the signal MC simulation and the diﬀerent background con-
tributions after applying these requirements are shown in Figure 3. In order to suppress the dominant
top-quark background, events are required to contain no selected jets. This requirement is referred to as
the jet-veto requirement. The visible excess of events without selected jets at this stage is still subject to
changes from data-driven reﬁnements in the background estimate as discussed in Section 6. Furthermore,
there is a signiﬁcant uncertainty in WW signal predictions as discussed in Section 9.

A summary of all applied selection criteria is given in Table 2.

Figure 3: Jet multiplicity distributions for eµ (left) and ee + µµ (right) events before the jet-veto requirement is
applied. The points represent data and the stacked histograms are the MC predictions, which are normalised to
L = 20.3 fb−1 using the cross section times branching fractions shown in Table 1. For the t¯t production process the
NNLO+NNLL theoretical calculation from Ref. [46] is used. Only statistical uncertainties are shown.

11

 [GeV]llm50100150200250300Events / 5 GeV10210310410ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channeln–m n–e Data Top Quark MC Drell-Yan MC WW MC other diboson MC W+jets MCstat. unc. [GeV]llm50100150200250300Events / 5 GeV10210310410510610710810910ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channelsn-m n+m + n- en+e Data Drell-Yan MC Top Quark MC WW MC other diboson MC W+jets MCstat. unc.Jet multiplicity01234567Events20004000600080001000012000ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channeln–m n–e Data Top Quark MC WW MC Drell-Yan MC W+jets MC other diboson MCstat. unc.Jet multiplicity01234567Events50010001500200025003000ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channelsn-m n+m + n- en+e Data Top Quark MC WW MC other diboson MC Drell-Yan MC W+jets MCstat. unc.p(cid:96)
T (leading/sub-leading)
|η(cid:96)|

eµ

ee/µµ

> 25 / 20 GeV

|ηµ| < 2.4 and |ηe| < 2.47,
excluding 1.37 < |ηe| < 1.52

Number of additional leptons with
pT > 7 GeV
m(cid:96)(cid:96)
|mZ − m(cid:96)(cid:96)|
Emiss
T, Rel
pmiss
T
∆φ(Emiss
Number of jets with
pT > 25 GeV, |η| < 4.5

T , pmiss
T )

0

> 10 GeV

—

> 15 GeV
> 20 GeV

< 0.6

0

> 15 GeV
> 15 GeV
> 45 GeV
> 45 GeV

< 0.3

0

0

Table 2: Criteria used to select WW candidate events in data.

6. Determination of backgrounds

After applying all selection requirements, the resulting WW candidate sample has signiﬁcant background
contributions from top-quark (t¯t and single top) production, which is the dominant background. In the eµ
ﬁnal state, W+jets production and Drell–Yan production of τ-leptons have similar contributions. Drell–
Yan production is much larger than W+jets for the same-ﬂavour ﬁnal states. Diboson (WZ(γ∗), ZZ, Wγ)
production constitutes a smaller background contribution for all ﬁnal states.

6.1. Background from top-quark production

The dominant background contribution to the selected WW candidate events originates from top-quark
(t¯t and single top) production. Top quarks decay into a real W boson and a b quark, such that top-quark
events contain a pair of W-bosons accompanied by typically two jets. Even after rejecting events with
reconstructed jets with pT> 25 GeV, a small fraction of top-quark events remains if the jets fall outside
the acceptance. This small fraction however still constitutes the largest background to the selected WW
candidate events. Background from top-quark production is estimated using a data-driven method ﬁrst
suggested in Ref. [69], in which the top-quark contribution is extrapolated from a control region (CR) to
the signal region (SR). The method does not rely on the possibly imperfect theoretical modelling of the
low-pT spectrum of jets in top-quark production, reducing signiﬁcantly the uncertainty in the top-quark
background estimate compared to MC-driven estimates.

The CR is selected by applying the WW signal selection with the sole exception of the jet-veto require-
ment, hence the SR is a subsample of the CR. The majority of events in the CR stem from top-quark
production, while the dominant non-top-quark contribution originates from the WW signal process. In
order to reduce the signal contamination and to reduce the overlap between the SR and CR, an additional
control region, CR + HT is selected by requiring the scalar sum of the transverse momenta of leptons and

12

jets, HT > 130 GeV. In the resulting sample, the signal contamination is only about 9%, while top-quark
events contribute about 90%. The number of top-quark events in the CR, Ntop
CR, is calculated as the number
of data events in the CR + HT region from which the non-top-quark contribution, estimated using MC, is
subtracted, Ndata
) is corrected for the HT cut eﬃciency HT es-
timated from top-quark MC samples. With the eﬃciency jet-veto for top-quark events to pass the jet-veto
requirement, the top-quark background contribution in the SR can be calculated as:

− Nnon−top

− Nnon−top

. Then (Ndata

CR+HT

CR+HT

CR+HT

CR+HT

(cid:16)

Ntop
SR

=

Ndata

CR+HT

− Nnon−top
HT

CR+HT

× jet-veto.

(3)

(cid:17)

(cid:32) pdata

(cid:33)2

pMC

T

T, Rel and pmiss

The jet-veto eﬃciency jet-veto is calculated as the MC eﬃciency MC
jet-veto multiplied by a correction factor
deﬁned in Eq. (4) and obtained from events with two leptons, the same requirements on missing transverse
momentum, Emiss
, as for the signal selection, and at least one b-tagged jet in the central region
of the detector, |ηjet| < 2.5. This b-tagged sample has a high purity of top-quark events and the small
contribution from non-top-quark processes is subtracted. The probability p that a jet in a top-quark event
fails the jet-selection requirements can be evaluated as the fraction of top-quark events that contain no
jets other than the b-tagged jet. The correction factor takes into account the diﬀerence between pdata and
pMC, and the square of the ratio of data to MC probabilities accounts for the presence of on average two
b-jets within the acceptance for the selected top-quark events. The jet-veto eﬃciency can be calculated
as

jet-veto = MC

jet-veto ×

.

(4)

The systematic uncertainty in Ntop
SR in Eq. 3 is studied using MC simulation. The largest contribution
to the total uncertainty in the top-quark background estimate arises from the MC ratio MC
jet-veto/(pMC)2.
The uncertainty from the reconstruction of objects and events for the MC ratio is about ±5%, domin-
ated by the systematic uncertainties in the determination of jet energy scale, jet energy resolution and
b-tagging eﬃciency. The modelling uncertainty for the MC ratio is around ±7% and the dominant contri-
bution comes from comparing the estimates from diﬀerent parton shower and hadronisation models and
diﬀerent generators, while the PDF uncertainty and QCD scale variations have smaller eﬀects. Further
eﬀects have been studied, but were found to be negligible. Among these eﬀects is the uncertainty on the
fraction due to single-top production which accounts for almost 40% of the total top-quark background
contribution after the jet-veto requirement. To account for potential diﬀerences between the single-top
and t¯t processes, additional uncertainties are assigned by scaling the single-top cross section by a con-
servative 30% (measurements of this cross-section at the LHC have uncertainties just below 20% [70]).
However, the resulting eﬀect on the MC ratio and consequently on the top-quark background estimate
are very small. Interference eﬀects between Wt and t¯t have also been considered and similarly to the
variations of the single-top cross section, the impact is found to be minor. An additional cross-check is
performed by changing the exponent in the correction factor
the average jet multiplicity in top-quark background events (see Figure 3). The resulting change in the
estimated yield of top-quark background is found to be less than 1%. This indicates that the result does
not strongly depend on how one assumes the correction factor should account for the two jets in the ﬁnal
state. The value of
ranges between 0.982 and 1.009 with an uncertainty of 1.5–5% for the

pdata/pMC(cid:17)2 to be 1.5 or 2.5, which reﬂects

pdata/pMC(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

13

diﬀerent ﬁnal states, thus indicating good modelling of top-quark events in MC simulation. The uncer-
tainty on this ratio is propgated to the total uncertainty on the top-quark background estimate. Apart from
the MC ratio, further terms play a role in Eq. 3 and need to be studied: The HT cut eﬃciency HT is 95%
with about ±1% uncertainty taken as the diﬀerence between the eﬃciencies determined in data and MC
simulation. Uncertainties that range from ±15% (diboson production) to ±50% (Z/W+jets) are assigned
to the subtracted non-top-quark contributions in the CR, Nnon−top
SR resulting
from Nnon−top
and pdata are
negligible.

and HT is found to be about 2%, and the statistical uncertainties of Ndata

. The systematic eﬀect on Ntop

CR+HT

CR+HT

CR+HT

While the normalisation of the top-quark background is determined from data, the shape information used
in the diﬀerential measurements relies on MC modelling. The bin-by-bin uncertainties in the diﬀerential
distributions are evaluated by propagating (1) the uncertainties of the jet energy scale and resolution, (2)
the uncertainties determining by taking the diﬀerence in the diﬀerential distributions found with diﬀerent
MC generators and parton shower models and (3) the uncertainties due to the QCD scale and parton
distribution functions. All these uncertainties are added in quadrature and are treated as uncorrelated with
the uncertainties for the top-quark background normalisation.

6.2. Background from W+jets production

In this paper, the W+jets background contribution also includes backgrounds from multijet production
since they are determined together as explained below. The determination of background from W+jets
production relies on comparing in data the number of events with leptons satisfying either of two altern-
ative sets of selection requirements, namely the so-called loose (L) and tight (T) selection criteria, where
the tight sample is a subset of the loose sample. The tight selection criteria are the same as those used for
the signal selection. Loose electrons are selected by relaxing some of the particle identiﬁcation criteria
placed on tracking variables and calorimetric shower shapes and also by removing the requirements made
on the electron isolation and impact parameters in the tight selection. For loose muons, the requirements
on isolation and impact parameters are removed. Leptons satisfying the tight selection criteria can origin-
ate from real prompt leptons or fake background leptons, which are either due to non-prompt leptons from
semileptonic decays of heavy-ﬂavour hadrons, hadrons misidentiﬁed as electrons, or photon conversions
producing electrons. The same applies to leptons satisfying the loose selection criteria. The total number
of events with two leptons satisfying diﬀerent combinations of loose and tight criteria is the sum of four
terms:

+ NLL

NLL = NLL
fake,fake
NLT = fakeNLL
NTL = fakeNLL
NTT = 2
fakeNLL

fake,fake

fake,fake

fake,fake

+ NLL

real,fake

real,fake
+ fakeNLL
+ realNLL
real,fake
+ realfakeNLL

fake,real

real,real

+ NLL
+ realNLL
+ fakeNLL

fake,real

fake,real

+ realNLL
+ realNLL

real,real

real,real
+ 2

real,fake

+ fakerealNLL

fake,real

realNLL

real,real.

(5)

Here, the number of events that have exactly one loose lepton and one tight lepton (NLT and NTL), two
loose leptons (NLL), or two tight leptons (NTT) are used. The ﬁrst and second indices correspond to the
qualities of the highest-pT lepton and the lepton sub-leading in pT respectively; real and fake in the above
formulae are the probabilities for prompt and fake background leptons selected with the loose criteria to
satisfy the tight selection criteria. The sample with two tight leptons, described by Eq. (5), consists of

14

contributions from multijet events with two fake leptons, W+jets events with one fake and one prompt
lepton and ﬁnally events with two prompt leptons including the WW signal events. If the numbers of
events with loose and tight leptons as well as the eﬃciencies real and fake are known, the numbers of
events with one prompt and one fake lepton (NLL
fake,fake) for the
loose selection criteria can be obtained by solving the above system of equations. The numbers of W+jets
and multijet events in the signal region, which are selected using the tight criteria, can then be extracted
using the following relations:

fake,real) and two fake leptons (NLL

+NLL

real,fake

NW+jets = realfakeNLL
Nmultijet = 2

fakeNLL

fake,fake

real,fake

+ fakerealNLL

fake,real

(6)
(7)

The eﬃciency for real prompt leptons, real, is evaluated using MC simulation, where data-to-MC correc-
tion factors extracted from Z → (cid:96)(cid:96) events [53, 55] are applied. The eﬃciency for fake leptons, fake, is
measured using a data control region enriched with fake leptons from multijet production. This control
sample is selected using a lepton trigger which does not bias the loose selection. The sample must contain
a jet that is opposite in azimuthal angle (∆φ > 2.0) to a lepton satisfying the loose selection criteria to
enhance the contribution of multijet events. The fraction of these selected loose leptons that satisfy the
tight selection criteria is fake. Prompt leptons from W and Z decay contaminate this multijet sample. To
remove these prompt leptons, which would bias the determination of fake, it is required that the missing
transverse momentum is small, Emiss
is
below 40 GeV, mW
T < 40 GeV. Only one lepton is allowed in the event. Up to 35% of the selected multijet
control sample consists of prompt leptons from W+jets and Drell–Yan events, which are subtracted using
MC simulation.

T < 25 GeV, and that the transverse mass of the lepton and Emiss

T

Both real and fake are determined separately for muons and electrons and also diﬀerentially as functions
of pT and η of the lepton. The main uncertainty in the fake-lepton eﬃciency comes from the fact that
the composition of the various sources of fake leptons, e.g. heavy ﬂavour decays, charged hadrons or
conversions, might not be the same in the sample used to measure the fake-lepton eﬃciency as in the
sample these fake-lepton eﬃciencies are applied to. The eﬀect is estimated using a comparison between
the fake-lepton eﬃciency predicted using the above described W+jets MC sample and a simulated multijet
MC sample, generated and showered using Pythia 8. The sample-dependence uncertainty is determined
to be ∼30–50%, depending on the lepton ﬂavour and the event kinematics. Furthermore, systematic
uncertainties from the prompt lepton subtraction and statistical uncertainties are propagated to the W+jets
background estimate. The total W+jets and multijet contribution to the ﬁnal selected WW candidate
sample is summarised in Table 3. A qualitative check of the estimated W+jets background and multijet
yield is performed using events with two leptons of the same charge, as described in Section 6.3 below.

The diﬀerential W+jets distributions needed for a diﬀerential cross-section measurement are also determ-
ined in a fully data-driven way, by evaluating the system of linear equations Eqs. (5) in each bin of the
diﬀerential distributions.

6.3. Other diboson processes and validation of diboson and W+jets backgrounds

All backgrounds from diboson production are estimated using MC simulation. The main systematic
uncertainties are due to the theoretical uncertainties of predicted cross sections used for normalisation
and the description of the jet-veto requirement.

15

The predicted contributions for backgrounds from diboson production, W+jets and multijets are validated
using a data control sample in which the two selected leptons are required to have the same electric charge
(same-sign) and satisfy all the other selection requirements. The electron pseudorapidity is restricted to
lie within |ηe| < 2.1 to suppress contributions from WW signal events where the electron is reconstructed
with a wrong charge assignment, which become signiﬁcant for the high-|ηe| region due to the increase in
material in the inner tracking detector. Since the rate of charge-misidentiﬁcation is negligible for muons,
they are accepted if |ηµ| < 2.4. This selection only yields a suﬃcient number of events for comparisons in
the eµ channel. Figure 4 shows the Emiss
and m(cid:96)(cid:96) distributions for this same-sign control sample, which is
dominated by WZ(γ∗) production, that is estimated using the simulated MC samples described above, and
W+jets events that are estimated from data, as described in Section 6.2. Both statistical and systematic
uncertainties are shown for the W+jets estimate. For the diboson samples the theoretical uncertainty in
the cross-section predictions are included but their experimental uncertainties have not been evaluated in
this control region. The predictions and the data agree well.

T

T

Figure 4: Distributions of Emiss
and m(cid:96)(cid:96) for the same-sign control sample in the eµ channel. The last bin is an
overﬂow bin. The selected leptons are required to have the same electric charge. The uncertainties shown include
statistical and systematic uncertainties in the W+jets estimate as well as statistical uncertainties in all MC predic-
tions. For the diboson contributions, the theoretical uncertainties in the cross-section predictions are also included.
The experimental systematic uncertainties for the diboson production processes are not included. Contributions
from processes with two opposite-sign ﬁnal-state leptons, where one of them is reconstructed with a wrong charge
assignment, are denoted by “charge mis-ID”.

6.4. Background from Drell–Yan production

The Drell–Yan background normalisation is constrained by an auxiliary ﬁt. It is based on a proﬁle like-
lihood approach where the numbers of signal and background events in signal and control regions are
described by a Poisson probability density function. For the W+jets and multijet backgrounds, the nor-
malisation and shape from the data-driven estimates described above are used. Similarly, the top-quark
and diboson contributions are obtained as described above. The input template shapes for signal and
Drell–Yan events are obtained from MC simulation. The diﬀerent sources of experimental and theoretical
systematic uncertainties are included as nuisance parameters in the ﬁt. Both the WW signal and Drell–
Yan normalisation factors are ﬁtted, but only the Drell–Yan background normalisation is used further for

16

 [GeV]missTE020406080100120Events / 10 GeV10203040506070ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channeln–m n–e Data W+jets WZ MC MC*g W MCg W charge mis-ID ZZ MCstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat.  [GeV]llm50100150200250Events / 20 GeV10203040506070ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channeln–m n–e Data W+jets WZ MC MC*g W MCg W charge mis-ID ZZ MCstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. the cross-section determination. The WW cross section measured in Section 9 is fully compatible with
the WW normalisation factor extracted here.
For the ﬁt, a control region dominated by Drell–Yan events is deﬁned by inverting the pmiss
requirement of
5 < pmiss
T < 20(45) GeV for the eµ (ee+µµ) ﬁnal states, where the minimum requirement of 5 GeV ensures
that there is a well-deﬁned pmiss
T ) requirement. The ﬁt is
T
T , pmiss
performed on the ∆φ(Emiss
T ) distribution in ﬁve bins of equal size for both the control region and the
signal region simultaneously. In addition, a validation region dominated by Drell–Yan events is deﬁned
by inverting both the calorimetric and the track-based missing transverse momentum requirements but
keeping the requirement on ∆φ(Emiss
T , pmiss
T ). The result of the ﬁt is extrapolated to this validation region
where good data–MC agreement is observed.

direction, and removing the ∆φ(Emiss

T

T , pmiss

In addition to the experimental uncertainties, theoretical uncertainties (QCD scale, PDF, parton-shower
modelling in the simulation) are considered. For the uncertainties in the diﬀerential distributions of back-
ground events from Drell–Yan production, the constraints on the nuisance parameters from the likelihood
ﬁt are used. This information is propagated to the MC simulation, and predictions for Drell–Yan events
are extracted for each bin with their uncertainties.
The largest uncertainties arise from the description of the jet and Emiss
energy scale and resolution in
the MC simulation and from the MC parton shower modelling. The latter is estimated by the diﬀerence
between using the Herwig/Jimmy and Pythia approaches in the MC simulation.
Figure 5 shows the ∆φ(Emiss
T , pmiss
T ) distributions for eµ ﬁnal states in the control and validation regions
before and after the proﬁle likelihood ﬁt of the Drell–Yan background. Good agreement between the data
and the post-ﬁt prediction is seen.

T

Figure 5: Distributions of ∆φ(Emiss
T ) are shown for data and MC predictions for the Drell–Yan control region
(left) and the validation region (right). The MC predictions for Drell–Yan and WW signal have been scaled from
the pre-ﬁt predictions to reﬂect the results of the ﬁt. The ﬁt improves the description of the data by the simulated
Drell–Yan events as compared to the MC pre-ﬁt prediction.

T , pmiss

6.5. Other background contributions

The background contributed by WW pairs from vector-boson scattering, Higgs boson production via
vector-boson fusion, as well as WH and ZH associated production with H → WW is evaluated using

17

)missT,pmissT(EfD00.511.522.53Events / 0.6320040060080010001200140016001800ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channel, Z CRn–m n–e Data Drell-Yan WW Top Quark other diboson W+jetssyst. unc.¯stat. MC Pre-Fit)missT,pmissT(EfD00.10.20.30.40.50.6Events / 0.132004006008001000ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channel, Z VRn–m n–e Data Drell-Yan WW W+jets other diboson Top Quarksyst. unc.¯stat. MC Pre-FitMC simulation. The sum of these processes contributes typically 0.3–0.6% to each ﬁnal state at detector
level for the selection considered in this analysis and is therefore neglected. The contributions from these
processes are neither subtracted as backgrounds nor included explicitly as signal in the calculation of the
cross section.

The background contributed by W pair production in double parton interactions is evaluated using a
Pythia 8 MC sample scaled to a theoretical cross section obtained by combining the NNLO prediction for
single W boson production and the measured eﬀective-area parameter for double parton interactions [71].
The contribution in the signal region is found to be around 0.3%. To increase the impact of double parton
interactions on the dominant eµ channel beyond the percent level would require an increase of the eﬀective
cross section by more than ten times its uncertainty. This background contribution is neglected.

6.6. WW candidate events and estimated background yields

The data event yields and the estimated background contributions are summarised in Table 3. The MC
predicts that 93% of all signal events selected in the sample are produced via the q¯q → W +W− process,
while 4% stem from non-resonant gg → W +W− and 3% from resonant H → WW production. Kinematic
distributions comparing the selected data to the signal and backgrounds are shown in Figures 6 and 7. The
W+jets and multijet backgrounds are determined using fully data-driven methods, while for top-quark and
Drell–Yan production the normalisation is determined from data, but their diﬀerential shapes are taken
from MC predictions. The diboson background and the WW signal are taken from MC simulation.

The signal contribution is normalised to the integrated luminosity using the nNLO cross-section predic-
tion, which is deﬁned in Section 9.1. The transverse momentum of the leading lepton, plead
T , invariant
mass of the dilepton system, m(cid:96)(cid:96), and its transverse momentum, pT((cid:96)(cid:96)), the diﬀerence in azimuthal angle
between the decay leptons, ∆φ(cid:96)(cid:96), their combined rapidity, |y(cid:96)(cid:96)|, as well as the observable |cos (θ∗)|, deﬁned
in Eq. (1), are shown. For all distributions, an excess of the data over the signal and background is ob-
served, and this is discussed in more detail in Section 9.

7. Cross-section determination

7.1. Fiducial and total cross sections
After determining the background-subtracted number of signal candidate yields, Ndata − Nbkg, the ﬁducial
WW production cross section is extracted using a likelihood ﬁt based on the following equation:

σ(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)
ﬁd (WW) =

Ndata − Nbkg
CWW × L ,

(8)
where L is the integrated luminosity. The correction factor CWW is determined from MC simulation and
accounts for detector eﬃciency, resolution eﬀects and contributions from τ-lepton decays. It is deﬁned
as the ratio of the number of reconstructed WW events after the ﬁnal selection with electrons or muons
in the ﬁnal state (including electrons or muons from τ decays) to the number of WW events generated
in the ﬁducial region where only direct decays of W bosons to electrons and muons are allowed. The
measured ﬁducial cross section σ(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)
ﬁd thus describes WW production with only prompt decays into eµ, ee

18

Figure 6: Kinematic distributions of the selected data events after the full event selection for the eµ ﬁnal state.
Data are shown together with the predictions of the signal and background production processes. The transverse
momentum of the leading lepton, plead
T , the invariant mass, m(cid:96)(cid:96), and the transverse momentum of the dilepton
system, pT((cid:96)(cid:96)), as well as the diﬀerence in azimuthal angle between the decay leptons, ∆φ(cid:96)(cid:96), the dilepton rapidity,
|y(cid:96)(cid:96)|, and the observable |cos (θ∗)| are shown (from left to right and top to bottom). The last bin of the plead
T , m(cid:96)(cid:96)
and pT((cid:96)(cid:96)) distributions is an overﬂow bin. Statistical and systematic uncertainties in the predictions are shown as
bands in hatched style.

19

 (leading lepton) [GeV]Tp406080100120140Events / 5 GeV100200300400500600700800900ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channeln–m n–e Data WW Top Quark W+jets Drell-Yan other dibosonstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat.  [GeV]llm50100150200250300Events / 10 GeV100200300400500600700ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channeln–m n–e Data WW Top Quark W+jets Drell-Yan other dibosonstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. (ll) [GeV]Tp020406080100120Events / 5 GeV100200300400500600700ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channeln–m n–e Data WW Top Quark W+jets Drell-Yan other dibosonstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. llfD00.511.522.53Events / 0.16100200300400500600700ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channeln–m n–e Data WW Top Quark W+jets Drell-Yan other dibosonstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. |ll|y00.511.522.5Events / 0.150100150200250300350400450ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channeln–m n–e Data WW Top Quark W+jets Drell-Yan other dibosonstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. *)|q|cos(00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Events / 0.0550100150200250300350400450ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channeln–m n–e Data WW Top Quark W+jets Drell-Yan other dibosonstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. Figure 7: Kinematic distributions of the selected data events after the full event selection for the combined ee and
µµ ﬁnal states. Data are shown together with the predictions of the signal and background production processes.
The transverse momentum of the leading lepton, plead
T , the invariant mass, m(cid:96)(cid:96), and the transverse momentum of
the dilepton system, pT((cid:96)(cid:96)), as well as the diﬀerence in azimuthal angle between the decay leptons, ∆φ(cid:96)(cid:96), their
combined rapidity, |y(cid:96)(cid:96)|, and the observable |cos (θ∗)| are shown (from left to right and top to bottom). The last bin
of the plead
T , m(cid:96)(cid:96) and pT((cid:96)(cid:96)) distributions is an overﬂow bin. Statistical and systematic uncertainties in the predictions
are shown as bands in hatched style.

20

 (leading lepton) [GeV]Tp406080100120140Events / 5 GeV50100150200250300ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channelsn-m n+m + n- en+e Data WW Top Quark other diboson Drell-Yan W+jetsstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat.  [GeV]llm50100150200250300Events / 10 GeV50100150200250ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channelsn-m n+m + n- en+e Data WW Top Quark other diboson Drell-Yan W+jetsstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. (ll) [GeV]Tp30405060708090100110120Events / 5 GeV50100150200250300ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channelsn-m n+m + n- en+e Data WW Top Quark other diboson Drell-Yan W+jetsstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. llfD00.511.522.5Events / 0.1620406080100120140160180ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channelsn-m n+m + n- en+e Data WW Top Quark other diboson Drell-Yan W+jetsstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. |ll|y00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.822.22.4Events / 0.120406080100120140160180ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channelsn-m n+m + n- en+e Data WW Top Quark other diboson Drell-Yan W+jetsstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. *)|q|cos(00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Events / 0.0520406080100120140160180ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs channelsn-m n+m + n- en+e Data WW Top Quark other diboson Drell-Yan W+jetsstat. unc. syst. unc.¯stat. Final state
Observed events

Total expected events
(Signal + background)

WW signal (MC)

Top quark (data-driven)
W+jets (data-driven)
Drell–Yan (data-driven)
Other dibosons (MC)

Total background

eµ

5067
4420 ± 30 ± 320

ee

594
507 ± 9 ± 39

µµ

975
820 ± 10 ± 65

3240 ± 10 ± 280
609 ± 18 ± 52
250 ± 20 ± 140
175 ± 3 ± 18
150 ± 4 ± 30
1180 ± 30 ± 150

346 ± 3 ± 33
92 ± 7 ± 8
14 ± 5 ± 14
28 ± 0 ± 13
27 ± 1 ± 5
161 ± 9 ± 21

613 ± 5 ± 60
127 ± 9 ± 11
6 ± 5 ± 12
33 ± 0 ± 17
38 ± 1 ± 5
205 ± 11 ± 24

Table 3: Summary of observed events and expected signal and background contributions in three dilepton channels.
The ﬁrst uncertainty is statistical, the second one corresponds to the systematic uncertainty and includes the uncer-
tainty due to the integrated luminosity (where used in the normalisation). The systematic uncertainties in the total
background and total expectation are calculated as the sum in quadrature of the uncertainties of the individual com-
ponents. The MC simulation of the WW signal predicts that 93% of the events are produced via the q¯q → W +W−
process, while 4% stem from non-resonant gg → W +W− and 3% from resonant H → WW production.

eµ

ee/µµ

p(cid:96)
T (leading/sub-leading)
|η(cid:96)|

m(cid:96)(cid:96)
|mZ − m(cid:96)(cid:96)|
Number of jets with
pT > 25 GeV, |η| < 4.5
|Σpνi
|Σpνi
(Emiss
Transverse magnitude of the vectorial sum of all neutrinos, |Σpνi
(pmiss

T| if ∆φ(cid:96) > π/2
T| × sin (∆φ(cid:96)) if ∆φ(cid:96) < π/2
T, Rel)

)

T

> 25 / 20 GeV

|ηµ| < 2.4 and |ηe| < 2.47,
excluding 1.37 < |ηe| < 1.52
> 10 GeV

> 15 GeV
> 15 GeV

—

0

0

> 15 GeV

> 45 GeV

T| > 20 GeV

> 45 GeV

ﬁd(WW).
Table 4: Deﬁnitions of the respective ﬁducial regions used in the calculation of σ
In these deﬁnitions, (cid:96) is the charged lepton from the decays W → eν and W → µν, and sin(∆φ(cid:96)) is the minimum
diﬀerence in azimuthal angle between the vector sum of the momenta of the neutrinos and any of the selected
generator-level charged leptons.

ﬁd(WW) and σµµ

eµ
ﬁd(WW), σee

and µµ ﬁnal states. The correction for contributions with intermediate W → τν decays only relies on
the correct relative acceptance and the well-known relative branching fractions [68], not on the absolute
normalization of the signal cross section.

21

The ﬁducial cross sections are measured separately in eµ, ee and µµ ﬁnal states in regions closely approx-
imating the experimental selection. The ﬁducial regions are summarised in Table 4.

To deﬁne the ﬁducial region, the following selection is applied to events from the MC generator before
passing them through the detector simulation. Leptons are required to originate directly from W decays
and be oppositely charged. They are recombined with any ﬁnal-state photons from QED radiation that
fall within ∆R = 0.1 of the respective lepton to form so-called ‘dressed-leptons’. The lepton kinematic
requirements are imposed on these dressed leptons. Particle-level jets are constructed from stable particles
with a lifetime of τ > 30 ps, excluding muons and neutrinos, using the anti-kt algorithm with a radius
parameter of 0.4. To remove jets reconstructed from signal electrons, jets lying a distance ∆R < 0.3 from
any signal electrons are removed. The four-momentum sum of the neutrinos stemming from the W boson
decays is used for the calculation of both pmiss

and Emiss

T

T, Rel.

The total cross section of WW production is deﬁned to include all decay modes of the W bosons and all
jet multiplicities. It is obtained by extrapolating the ﬁducial cross section for the eﬀects of all acceptance
cuts listed in Table 4 with an additional acceptance factor, AWW, and correcting for the leptonic branching
fraction of W bosons B(W → (cid:96)ν) = 0.108 [68]:

σtot(pp → WW) =

ﬁd (pp → WW)
σ(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)
AWW × B2(W → (cid:96)ν)

=

Ndata − Nbkg

CWW × AWW × B2(W → (cid:96)ν) × L ,

(9)

where AWW is deﬁned as the ratio of the MC signal event yield within the ﬁducial region to the total
number of generated signal MC events. The numerical values for the diﬀerent ﬁnal states are given in
Table 5. For the eµ ﬁnal state, the right-hand side of Eq. (9) contains an additional combinatorial factor
of 1/2.

The total cross sections for the individual ﬁnal states, eµ, ee and µµ, are then combined. The combination
procedure is based on a likelihood ﬁt where the systematic uncertainties, including the uncertainties due
to backgrounds, are included as nuisance parameters. The minimisation of the negative log-likelihood
function and the error calculation are performed using the Minuit package [72]. Several independent
sources of systematic uncertainty are treated as correlated among the diﬀerent ﬁnal states, while the
statistical uncertainties in the background estimates are treated as uncorrelated.

The numerical values of the correction factors CWW and AWW are shown in Table 5, while the uncertainties
are listed in Table 7. These values are derived by adding the samples for all the WW production processes
according to their cross sections as detailed in Section 4. The same holds for the determination of their
uncertainties. Table 5 also gives the values of the correction factors for the diﬀerent WW production
processes. The value for CWW is largest for the eµ ﬁnal state because events with W decays to τ-leptons,
which only contribute to the numerator, make up a larger fraction of events in the eµ channel. This is due
to less stringent requirements on Emiss
. The diﬀerence in the CWW values between ee and µµ is due to the
diﬀerent lepton identiﬁcation eﬃciencies.

T

7.2. Measurement of the diﬀerential cross sections

Diﬀerential cross sections are deﬁned in the ﬁducial regions and are measured as a function of the kin-
ematic variables described in Section 2. The measurement is carried out in the eµ ﬁnal state, which has
a larger signal acceptance and lower relative background contamination compared to the same-ﬂavour
channels. The reconstructed spectra are corrected for background contributions and then unfolded to the

22

Total
q¯q → W +W−
gg→W +W− (non-resonant)
gg→H → W +W−

CWW [%]

ee
29.1
29.2
33.4
21.8

µµ
47.4
47.7
48.2
39.3

eµ
22.8
23.5
30.6
10.4

AWW [%]

ee
8.6
8.7
14.7
4.1

µµ
9.3
9.5
16.3
4.6

eµ
51.2
51.4
53.6
43.5

CWW × AWW [%]
eµ
11.7
12.1
16.4
4.5

µµ
4.4
4.5
7.8
1.8

ee
2.5
2.6
4.9
0.9

Table 5: Central values of CWW, AWW and CWW × AWW used in the calculation of the cross section. The numbers are
derived using the weighted average of the numbers for the diﬀerent WW production processes which are weighted
according to their cross sections as detailed in Section 4.

ﬁducial phase space by correcting for detector resolution and reconstruction eﬃciencies. The iterative
Bayesian approach [73, 74] with three iterations is employed in this analysis. The choice of three itera-
tions is optimised to minimise the statistical uncertainties and the dependence on the prior Monte Carlo
distribution in the unfolded spectra.

The measured diﬀerential cross sections are calculated from the unfolded signal spectra divided by the
integrated luminosity and the corresponding bin widths. For the measurement, statistical uncertainties
and the same systematic uncertainties as for the ﬁducial cross-section measurements are considered. In
addition, the uncertainty due to the theoretical modelling is evaluated using a data-driven method that
was introduced in Ref. [75], in which the kinematic distributions of the MC signal events are corrected
to match those from data and the uncertainty is considered as the diﬀerence between the unfolded data
spectra derived with the modiﬁed MC distributions and those using the original MC simulation. The
modelling uncertainty is found to be small (±1%) for most variables.

8. Systematic uncertainties

Systematic uncertainties in the measured WW cross section arise from the object reconstruction, the
background determination, the procedures used to correct for detector eﬀects, and the usage of theory
predictions in correction and extrapolation procedures.

8.1. Experimental uncertainties

The relative systematic uncertainties from the reconstruction of the events in the detector and the back-
ground subtraction are summarised in Table 6 for the ﬁducial and total cross-section measurements. The
dominant systematic uncertainties in the combined measurement are the uncertainties due to the jet energy
scale (∼4%), the W+jets background (∼3%) and the luminosity (∼2%).
The uncertainties due to pile-up are estimated by varying the reweighting procedure for the MC samples
used to reproduce the distributions of the number of primary vertices in data. The uncertainties in the cor-
rection factors to match the simulated eﬃciencies to the measured ones for the electron and muon trigger
requirements [51, 52] as well as for the reconstruction, identiﬁcation and isolation requirements [53, 55,
76, 77] are propagated to the measurement. A similar procedure is used to assess the uncertainty due to
the lepton momentum scale and resolution [55, 78].

23

Uncertainties related to the selection and measurement of jets aﬀect the measurement primarily via the
deﬁnition of jets for the jet-veto requirement, but also via the Emiss
reconstruction. The impact on the
cross-section measurements is evaluated by varying each of these in the simulation within their respective
uncertainties as determined from data [61]. The main sources of uncertainty for jets are the jet energy
scale (JES) and the jet energy resolution (JER). Uncertainties of the lepton and jet momentum scales
and resolutions are propagated to the Emiss
due
to jets reconstructed with momenta below pT < 20 GeV and calorimeter cells not associated with any
reconstructed objects are accounted for separately and denoted “soft terms” in Table 6. An uncertainty
in the pmiss
scale and resolution is estimated from a comparison between data and MC simulation in Z
boson events with muonic decays.

reconstruction. Additional uncertainties in the Emiss

T

T

T

T

Backgrounds are determined as discussed in Section 6, and the uncertainties from the background sub-
traction are also given in Table 6. For each of the top-quark and Drell–Yan background estimates, and
the W+jets and the multijet background estimate, the total systematic uncertainty is given. The statistical
uncertainties stem from the limited size of the MC samples used for the background estimates of the dibo-
son production processes and from the limited size of the data samples used for data-driven estimations.
The uncertainty in the integrated luminosity is ±1.9% and aﬀects the cross-section determination through
Eqs. (8) and (9) and the normalisation of background from other diboson processes.

8.2. Modelling uncertainties

The modelling uncertainty in the WW signal enters the cross-section determination through the calcula-
tion of the correction factor CWW and the acceptance correction factor AWW. The dominant uncertainties
in AWW stem from the jet-veto requirement (3.4%), the parton shower model and the choice of gener-
ators (∼2.5%), while the uncertainties due to other sources (PDF choice, NLO electroweak correction,
residual QCD scale dependence) are found to be small (<1%). In contrast to AWW, which has a sizeable
theory dependence, CWW is mainly aﬀected by the detector resolution and only has a small theoretical
uncertainty (∼1%). The product of CWW × AWW and its corresponding uncertainties are evaluated taking
into account correlations between the uncertainties in CWW and AWW. Table 7 gives an overview of the
theoretical uncertainties used in the cross-section calculation. They are determined independently for the
diﬀerent WW signal processes as detailed below and added according to the respective contribution of
q¯q → W +W− and resonant and non-resonant gg-induced W +W− production.
The PDF uncertainty is estimated as the envelope of the CT10 [27] prediction and the predictions obtained
using MSTW2008 [79] and NNPDF2.3 [80] and their respective PDF uncertainties at 68% conﬁdence
level following Ref. [81]. The PDF uncertainties for q¯q and gg-induced WW production are combined
assuming full correlation.
The eﬀect of the next-to-leading-order EWK contributions of O(α3
process only, but the resulting uncertainty in CWW and AWW is minor.
The uncertainties of the perturbative calculations can be estimated by varying the choice of renormal-
isation and factorisation scales and quoting the maximum diﬀerence between results from the central
value and the alternative scale choices. However, it is suggested in Ref. [82] that this approach may
underestimate the uncertainty in the case a jet-veto requirement is applied and therefore a more conser-
vative approach is proposed. In this approach, the scale variation uncertainties are treated as uncorrelated
between cross sections for diﬀerent inclusive jet multiplicities and predictions for exclusive jet multipli-
cities are obtained from the diﬀerence between the inclusive predictions. The uncertainty in the diﬀerence

EW) is considered for the q¯q → W +W−

24

±2.0
±1.35
±0.43
±0.42
±0.04
±0.99
±0.22
±0.10
±0.56
±0.09
±0.41
±0.59
±0.22
±4.1
±1.35
±1.12
±0.31
±0.23
±0.13

ee
Sources of uncertainty
Experimental uncertainties in ﬁducial and total cross sections [%]
±2.0
Integrated luminosity
±2.00
Pile-up
±2.8
Trigger
±1.45
Electron energy scale
±0.23
Electron energy resolution
±2.19
Electron identiﬁcation and reconstruction
±0.47
Electron isolation
—
Muon momentum scale
Muon momentum resolution (ID)
—
—
Muon momentum resolution (MS)
—
Muon identiﬁcation and reconstruction
—
Muon isolation
±0.26
Jet vertex fraction (JVF)
±3.9
Jet energy scale
±1.30
Jet energy resolution
±2.07
Emiss
scale soft terms
T
±0.38
Emiss
resolultion soft terms
T
±0.38
pmiss
scale soft terms
T
±0.19
pmiss
resolution soft terms
T
Background uncertainties in ﬁducial and total cross sections [%]
±1.82
Top-quark background
±3.1
W+jets & multijet background
±3.00
Drell–Yan background
±2.03
MC statistics (top-quark, W+jets, Drell–Yan)
±1.01
Other diboson cross sections
±0.32
MC statistics (other diboson)

eµ

±1.35
±3.6
±0.46
±0.61
±0.70
±0.10

µµ

Combined

±2.0
±2.03
±3.0
—
—
—
—
±0.39
±1.67
±0.21
±0.82
±1.20
±0.24
±4.4
±1.47
±1.85
±0.53
±0.35
±0.14

±1.42
±2.0
±2.26
±1.39
±0.55
±0.18

±2.0
±1.48
±0.75
±0.43
±0.05
±0.91
±0.21
±0.14
±0.67
±0.11
±0.43
±0.62
±0.23
±4.1
±1.35
±1.28
±0.35
±0.25
±0.13

±1.39
±2.8
±0.86
±0.53
±0.69
±0.09

Table 6: Uncertainty sources and associated relative systematic uncertainties for the reconstruction and background
subtraction for the WW cross sections measured in the eµ, ee and µµ ﬁnal states as well as for the combined cross
section. The uncertainties apply to both the ﬁducial and total cross sections. In cases where no uncertainties are
quoted they do not aﬀect the speciﬁc ﬁnal state (e.g. electron energy scale uncertainties for muon ﬁnal states).

is then used to estimate the perturbative uncertainty due to the jet-veto requirement. This uncertainty is
found to be about ±2.9% for the q¯q → W +W− process when using the NNLO predictions [3]. The un-
certainty due to the jet-veto requirement for the H → W +W− production process has been determined
to be ±11% [54] and the same uncertainty is assumed for the non-resonant gg → W +W− process. The
combined uncertainty due to the jet-veto requirement for the WW signal is about ±3.4%, assuming full
correlation of the q¯q- and gg-induced processes. Without the jet-veto requirement, the residual perturb-
ative uncertainty in AWW due to the scale choice for the perturbative calculations is estimated using an

25

approach in which the renormalisation (µR) and factorisation (µF) scales are varied independently by a
factor of two or one-half. The uncertainty in AWW due to the scale choice is calculated when not applying
the jet-veto requirement to avoid double counting with the above described perturbative uncertainty due
to the jet-veto requirement. It is found to be ±0.2%. The uncertainty in CWW due to the perturbative
calculations, including the jet-veto requirement, is found to be about ±0.6%.
Parton shower, hadronisation and underlying-event uncertainties (collectively called “soft QCD” in the
following), and generator uncertainties, have eﬀects that are estimated by comparing various MC signal
samples. For qq → W +W− production, the generator uncertainty is evaluated by comparing samples
generated using Powheg and MC@NLO both interfaced with Herwig+Jimmy, whilst the soft QCD un-
certainties are calculated using two samples generated with Powheg and interfaced with Herwig+Jimmy
and Pythia 8, respectively. This yields an uncertainty of 1.3% dominated by the uncertainty in AWW due
to the choice of generator. The CWW uncertainties are estimated to be 0.4–0.9% for the q¯q → W +W− pro-
cess and are applied to all production channels. The uncertainties in AWW for non-resonant gg → W +W−
production due to soft QCD eﬀects and the choice of the generator are evaluated by comparing the res-
ults obtained from samples generated with gg2ww and MCFM both interfaced to Herwig+Jimmy, and
two samples generated with MCFM interfaced either to Herwig+Jimmy or Pythia 8. This gives an un-
certainty of about 30% in AWW, which is dominated by a 28–29% uncertainty coming from the parton
shower. Uncertainties in the modelling of resonant H → W +W− production are taken from Ref. [54] and
amount to 6.9% for AWW.

σ(CWW) [%]

σ(AWW) [%]

PDF
EWK corrections (SFEW)
Jet veto
Scale
Soft QCD
Total

ee
0.34
0.06

eµ
eµ
0.81
0.10
0.46
0.01
— — — 3.4
0.22
0.62
2.5
0.35
0.70
4.3

0.62
0.92
1.2

µµ
0.13
0.04

0.62
0.80
1.0

σ(CWW × AWW) [%]
eµ
0.85
0.47
3.4
0.66
2.5
4.4

µµ
0.98
0.40
3.4
0.66
2.9
4.6

ee
1.3
0.34
3.4
0.66
3.0
4.8

ee
0.94
0.41
3.4
0.22
2.6
4.4

µµ
0.93
0.43
3.4
0.22
2.7
4.5

Table 7: Relative uncertainties of CWW, AWW and CWW × AWW, due to the theoretical modelling of the WW signal
processes, which include qq → W +W− and non-resonant and resonant gg → W +W− production. The total un-
certainties are calculated as the quadratic sum of the uncertainties from each source. The combined CWW × AWW
uncertainties take into account the correlation between CWW and AWW.

26

9. Cross-section results

9.1. Theoretical predictions

Various calculations for WW diboson production, involving higher loop QCD corrections, electroweak
corrections, or involving resummation of soft gluon terms are available, with diﬀerent approaches taken
to approximate these eﬀects [3, 4, 6]. Hence, when comparing experimental results with theoretical pre-
dictions, these corrections play a relevant role.

s ) [45].3 Neither of the loop processes interferes at O(α2

Figure 1 illustrates the diagrams of the leading processes for WW production. The cross section of the
q¯q → W +W− process is known to O(α2
s ) [3]. The loop-induced gg processes that include the non-resonant
gg and resonant Higgs boson production processes start contributing at O(α2
s ). The non-resonant gg
process is only predicted at lowest order, O(α2
s ), while the Higgs boson production cross section has been
s ) with the q¯q → W +W− process
calculated to O(α4
and the interference between the gg-induced processes is small and can be neglected. The resonant Higgs
boson production process makes up 6.6% of the total cross section, while non-resonant gg production
contributes 2.2%.
The combination of the above processes calculated to O(α2
to O(α4
NNLO accuracy in perturbative QCD.

s ) for the q¯q and non-resonant gg processes and
s ) for the resonant gg contribution yields a prediction for the total WW production that is valid to

These theoretical calculations are available only for the total production cross section; the kinematic
distributions for the q¯q → W +W− process are predicted only at order O(αs) [44]. Therefore, ﬁducial cross
sections are estimated by applying the acceptance correction AWW as calculated from the MC samples
described in Section 4 to the total cross sections. The ﬁrst prediction for the ﬁducial cross section is that
for WW production predicted partially at NNLO in αs (nNLO) neglecting O(α2
s ) contributions to the q¯q
process. The nNLO prediction for the total cross section is about 8% lower than the NNLO prediction, and
as a consequence, the nNLO ﬁducial cross section, σ(nNLOﬁd), is also lowered by the same amount.
An approximate NNLO ﬁducial cross section, σ(approx. NNLOﬁd), can be derived by using the total
NNLO prediction [3, 45] and multiplying it by the ﬁducial acceptance and the branching fractions,
σNNLO

× AWW × B2.

tot

These calculations can be reﬁned by considering further eﬀects. Logarithmic contributions from soft
gluon emission from the initial state can be resummed at next-to-next-to-leading logarithmic (NNLL) ac-
curacy, yielding a theoretical prediction with reduced scale uncertainties and a more accurate description
of the transverse momentum of the WW system, pWW
An approximate NNLO+NNLL prediction of ﬁducial cross sections, σ(approx. NNLO + NNLLﬁd), is
provided in Ref. [6], and is about 15–18% higher than the nNLO prediction and around 7–10% higher
than the approximate NNLO prediction.

, and the jet multiplicity.

T

The use of resummation calculations also aﬀects the calculation of the acceptance AWW and this eﬀect
was investigated in Ref. [4]. Based on Ref. [4] an alternative approximation for the ﬁducial cross sec-
tion including NNLL eﬀects, σ(NNLO pT-Resumﬁd), is calculated as the product of σ(NNLOtot), the
branching fraction, and a corrected ﬁducial acceptance factor ApT−ResumWW . The corrected ApT−ResumWW is

3 A more recent 3-loop calculation of the theoretical prediction for the resonant gg process to O(α5
of the total WW production cross section with respect to the calculation to O(α4

s ) but it is not considered here.

s ) [83] yields a 0.15% increase

27

derived by reweighting the shape of the pWW
predicted NLO+NNLL shape given in Ref. [4].

T

distribution in the MC samples described in Section 4 to the

The uncertainty in the NNLO calculation of the total cross section accounts for the eﬀects of QCD scale
and PDF uncertainties, which are added linearly, while the theoretical uncertainties of the ﬁducial cross
sections include the parton shower uncertainty in addition to the QCD scale and PDF uncertainties, the
eﬀects of which are again added linearly.

9.2. Cross-section measurements and comparisons with theoretical predictions

The measured ﬁducial and total cross sections are compared to theoretical calculations evaluated at dif-
ferent orders in αs, as summarised in Tables 8 and 9, respectively.
The cross-section measurements in their ﬁducial phase spaces, deﬁned in Table 4, are minimally depend-
ent on theory corrections, since the ﬁducial volumes correspond closely to the detector-level selection.
The measured ﬁducial cross sections are summarised in Table 8, including statistical and systematic un-
certainties. They are about two standard deviations higher than the nNLO prediction, and about 1.4
standard deviations larger than σ(approx. NNLOﬁd), while they are found to be compatible with the
predictions that consider resummation corrections. A graphical comparison between the ﬁducial cross-
section measurements and various theoretical predictions is shown in Figure 8.

The total cross sections are measured separately in the three diﬀerent ﬁnal states and then combined.
The results for the individual measurements and the combined cross section are summarised in Table 9.
The combined cross section is found to be compatible with the NNLO prediction within about 1.4 stand-
ard deviations. A graphical comparison between the individual measurements and their combination is
shown in Figure 9. The result is fully compatible with the recently published measurement by the CMS
Collaboration [13].

The measured unfolded diﬀerential cross sections are shown in Figure 10. They are compared to predic-
tions obtained using Powheg+Pythia for the q¯q → W +W− and gg → H → W +W− production processes
and gg2ww+Herwig+Jimmy for non-resonant gg-induced WW production. These predictions are added
as described in Section 4. The data are also compared to an alternative prediction, where the q¯q → W +W−
contribution is reweighted using the approximated resummed calculation from Ref. [4] described above.
For a third prediction, the q¯q → W +W− contribution is replaced using MC@NLO+Herwig+Jimmy. All
three predictions are normalised to the NNLO theoretical prediction for the total cross section.

The predictions generally undershoot the data, except for high pT of the leading lepton, at high m(cid:96)(cid:96)
and for high values of ∆φ(cid:96)(cid:96), where there is a small deﬁcit in data compared to the expectation from
either MC prediction. A small discrepancy between the MC predictions and the data is visible for the
unfolded diﬀerential distribution of the transverse momentum of the leading lepton, plead
T , which diﬀers
between Powheg and MC@NLO. The full diﬀerence between the two MC predictions is accounted for
in Section 10, when limits on anomalous couplings are extracted. The diﬀerences between data and MC
simulation for the unfolded diﬀerential distributions in |y(cid:96)(cid:96)| and |cos (θ∗)| are mostly constant as a function
of these variables.
In general, the shapes of the unfolded data distributions agree with either prediction at the level of ±15%.
The H → W +W− contribution to the diﬀerential predictions is typically 2% to at most 8.5% per bin, and
therefore has a small impact on the comparison.

28

Prediction

eµ
ﬁd(WW)

ﬁd(WW)

Measured σ
σ(nNLOﬁd,eµ)
σ(approx. NNLOﬁd,eµ)
σ(approx. (NNLO + NNLL)ﬁd,eµ)
σ(NNLO pT-Resumﬁd,eµ)
Measured σee
σ(nNLOﬁd,ee)
σ(approx. NNLOﬁd,ee)
σ(approx. (NNLO + NNLL)ﬁd,ee)
σ(NNLO pT-Resumﬁd,ee)
Measured σµµ
σ(nNLOﬁd,µµ)
σ(approx. NNLOﬁd,µµ)
σ(approx. (NNLO + NNLL)ﬁd,µµ)
σ(NNLO pT-Resumﬁd,µµ)

ﬁd(WW)

tot

= (σnNLO
= (σNNLO
[6]
= (σNNLO

tot

tot

× AWW × B2) [44]+[45]
× AWW × B2) [3]+[45]
× ApT−ResumWW × B2) [4]

[44]+[45]
[3]+[45]
[6]
[4]

[44]+[45]
[3]+[45]
[6]
[4]

Fiducial cross section
pp → WW → (cid:96)(cid:96)νν [fb]

374 ±7(stat) +25−23(syst) +8−7(lumi)

311 ± 15
335 ± 18
358 ± 14
349 ± 19

73.4+4.2−4.1(stat) +6.5−5.6(syst) ±1.5(lumi)

58.5 ± 2.8
63.0 ± 3.4
69.0 ± 2.7
65.5 ± 3.6

80.2+3.3−3.2(stat) +6.4−5.5(syst) ±1.6(lumi)

63.7 ± 3.1
68.6 ± 3.7
75.1 ± 3.0
71.2 ± 4.0

Table 8: Measured cross sections in the ﬁducial region for each channel as deﬁned in Table 4, compared with various
theoretical predictions described in the text of Section 9.1.

Final state

eµ

ee

µµ

Combined

σ(NNLOtot) theory prediction [3]+[45]

Total cross section pp → WW [pb]
70.6±1.3(stat) +5.8−5.1(syst) ±1.4(lumi)
73.6+4.2−4.1(stat) +7.5−6.4(syst) ±1.5(lumi)
74.0±3.0(stat) +7.1−5.9(syst) ±1.5(lumi)
71.1±1.1(stat) +5.7−5.0(syst) ±1.4(lumi)
63.2+1.6−1.4(scale)±1.2(PDF)

Table 9: Measured total WW production cross sections in each ﬁnal state together with the combined value, com-
pared to the σ(NNLOtot) theory prediction.

Tables 13 to 18 in the appendix give an overview of the measured unfolded diﬀerential cross sections
and the statistical, experimental and background uncertainties in the measurement. The bin-to-bin cor-
relations are preserved for each source of systematic uncertainty and the correlation matrices are made
available in the appendix. The systematic uncertainties are treated as fully correlated. This includes the
background uncertainties, except the uncertainties due to the limited statistics of the MC simulation and
the uncertainties related to the W+jets estimate, speciﬁcally the uncertainties on the measured fake lepton
eﬃciencies and the sample dependence, since both these uncertainties have a large statistical component.
The background uncertainties are added in quadrature to the statistical and experimental uncertainties to

29

obtain the total uncertainty in each bin. The total uncertainties range from 10% to 30%. Normalised
unfolded diﬀerential cross-section distributions are also measured, as these are more suited to analysis of
the shapes of diﬀerential distributions. Results and tables are made available in the appendix.

30

Figure 8: Comparison of the measured ﬁducial cross sections with various theoretical predictions. The comparison
is made for all ﬁnal states, eµ (top left), ee (top right) and µµ (bottom left). The bottom right ﬁgure shows the
measured and predicted ﬁducial cross sections normalised to the respective measured values for all ﬁnal states.
Theoretical predictions are indicated as black markers with grey error bands, while the central value of the measured
cross sections is indicated by a blue line with red lines showing the statistical uncertainty and blue bands for the
total uncertainty including statistical and systematic uncertainties.

31

 [fb]WWfids260280300320340360380400420440460 tot.)– stat. –Data ( fb -25+27I7–I374stat.stat.+syst.[arXiv:1410.4745]approx. NNLO+NNLL[arXiv:1408.5243]approx. NNLO[arXiv:1407.4481]-ResumTNNLO pATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsn–m n– eﬁWW Fiducial cross section [fb]WWfids5060708090100 tot.)– stat. –Data ( fb -7.1+7.8I  -4.1+4.2I73.4 stat.stat.+syst.[arXiv:1410.4745]approx. NNLO+NNLL[arXiv:1408.5243]approx. NNLO[arXiv:1407.4481]-ResumTNNLO pATLAS -1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsn- en+ eﬁWW Fiducial cross section [fb]WWfids5060708090100110 tot.)– stat. –Data ( fb -6.7+7.4I  -3.2+3.3I80.2 stat.stat.+syst.[arXiv:1410.4745]approx. NNLO+NNLL[arXiv:1408.5243]approx. NNLO[arXiv:1407.4481]-ResumTNNLO pATLAS -1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsn-m n+m ﬁWW Fiducial cross sectionRatio of predictions to measurement0.40.60.811.21.4Normalized Datastatstat+syst[arXiv:1410.4745]approx. NNLO+NNLL[arXiv:1408.5243]approx. NNLO[arXiv:1407.4481]-ResumTNNLO pATLAS -1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsn- en+ eﬁWW n-m n+m ﬁWW n–m n– eﬁWW Figure 9: The WW cross sections measured at
the measurement show the statistical as well as the total uncertainty including the luminosity uncertainty.

s = 8 TeV compared to the NNLO prediction. The uncertainties in

√

32

 [pb]WWtots4550556065707580859095(MSTW 2008 PDF)SM prediction  pb (PDF) 1.2– (Scale) 1.4- 1.6+ =63.2Theorys[arXiv:1408.5243], [arXiv:1307.1347] WWﬁTotal cross section pp n–m n–en- en+en-m n+mCombinedATLAS -1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsFigure 10: Measured unfolded diﬀerential cross sections of WW production in the eµ ﬁnal state for the transverse
momentum of the leading lepton, plead
T , the invariant mass, m(cid:96)(cid:96), and the transverse momentum of the dilepton
system, pT((cid:96)(cid:96)), as well as the diﬀerence in azimuthal angle between the decay leptons, ∆φ(cid:96)(cid:96), their combined rapidity,
|y(cid:96)(cid:96)|, and the observable |cos (θ∗)|. The measured cross-section values are shown as markers with error bars giving
the statistical uncertainty and blue bands indicating the size of the total uncertainty. The MC predictions are shown
as red lines. The solid lines give the nNLO predictions that are derived using MC samples, while the dashed
lines represent the approximate NNLO predictions that are calculated as σNNLO × AWW × B2. For the top three
histogramms, double red lines indicate changes in the x-axis scale.

33

 [fb/GeV]T / dpWWfidσd246810121416ATLAS(cid:173)1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs Data, stat. uncertainty Data, total uncertainty Powheg Powheg+Resumm MC@NLO (leading lepton) [GeV]Tp406080100120140Pred. / Data0.40.60.811.21.41.6500 [fb/GeV]ll / dmWWfidσd12345ATLAS(cid:173)1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs Data, stat. uncertainty Data, total uncertainty Powheg Powheg+Resumm MC@NLO [GeV]llm50100150200Pred. / Data0.40.60.811.21.41.6650(ll) [fb/GeV]T / dpWWfidσd246810ATLAS(cid:173)1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs Data, stat. uncertainty Data, total uncertainty Powheg Powheg+Resumm MC@NLO(ll) [GeV]Tp020406080Pred. / Data0.40.60.811.21.41.6500 [fb]llfD / dWWfidsd50100150200250300ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs Data, stat. uncertainty Data, total uncertainty Powheg Powheg+Resumm MC@NLOllfD00.511.522.53Pred. / Data0.40.60.811.21.41.6| [fb]ll / d|yWWfidsd50100150200250300350ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs Data, stat. uncertainty Data, total uncertainty Powheg Powheg+Resumm MC@NLO|ll|y00.511.522.5Pred. / Data0.40.60.811.21.41.6*)| [fb]q / d|cos(WWfidsd100200300400500600ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs Data, stat. uncertainty Data, total uncertainty Powheg Powheg+Resumm MC@NLO*)|q|cos(00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Pred. / Data0.40.60.811.21.41.610. Limits on anomalous triple-gauge-boson couplings

10.1. Theoretical parameterisation

gV

 ,

µ W−

λV
m2
W

The non-Abelian self-couplings of W and Z bosons and photons can be probed via the WWV vertex,
where V = Z or γ, present when the bosons are produced via the s-channel exchange of a Z or γ as shown
in Figure 1(b). The SM, with its SU(2) × U(1) structure, makes deﬁnite predictions for these triple-
gauge-boson couplings [84]. The SM Lagrangian can be extended with additional degrees of freedom
that modify the couplings. Considering only terms that conserve charge conjugation (C) and parity (P)
separately, the modiﬁed Lagrangian can be written as:

L = igWWV

1 (W +
= ∂µW±

µνW−µ − W +µW−
ν − ∂νW±

µν)V ν + kVW +

(10)
µ ; Vµν = ∂µVν − ∂νVµ. The overall coupling constants gWWV are

ν V µν +

where V = Z or γ; W±
given by gWWγ = −e and gWWZ = −e cot θW, where θW is the weak mixing angle.
Electromagnetic gauge invariance requires that gγ
1
non-zero in the SM are gZ
1

= 1, kZ = 1, and kγ = 1. Deviations from the SM are introduced as

= 1. The three other coupling parameters that are

W +ν

µ W

−ρ
ν V µ
ρ

µν

∆gZ
1

= 1 − gZ
1 ;

∆kZ = 1 − kZ;

∆kγ = 1 − kγ.

(11)

The remaining couplings are zero in the SM, λγ = λZ = 0. A signiﬁcant non-zero value for any of the
parameters ∆gZ

1 , ∆kZ, ∆kγ, λγ and λZ would be evidence of new interactions not included in the SM.

If anomalous couplings occur, these extra terms in the Lagrangian would contribute and would induce
a violation of unitarity at suﬃciently high energies. Therefore, form factors are introduced to dampen
the rise of the WW production cross section so that it takes physical values even at the highest partonic
centre-of-mass energies relevant for 8 TeV pp collisions:

1 +

1 → ∆gV
1
∆gV
ˆs
Λ2

2 ,

1 +

∆kV → ∆kV
ˆs
Λ2

2 ,

λV → λV

1 +

2 ,

(12)

ˆs
Λ2

where ˆs is the square of the invariant mass of the vector boson pair. The form-factor scale, Λ, is typically
taken to be in the TeV range. Upper bounds on the size of the anomalous gauge boson couplings can be
derived as a function of Λ based on unitarity considerations [85].

Several restrictions can be put on the couplings and are explored in this paper in addition to the scenario
where none of the couplings is restricted per se: the Equal Couplings constraint assumes the coupling
parameters for the WWZ and WWγ vertices to be equal. Hence, gZ
= 1, which leaves only two
1
independent parameters: ∆kγ = ∆kZ and λγ = λZ. The so-called LEP constraint [86] reduces the number
of free anomalous coupling parameters to three by requiring SU(2) × U(1) gauge invariance,

= gγ
1

= ∆kZ + tan2 θW ∆kγ,

∆gZ
1
λγ = λZ,

(13)

34

where θW is the weak mixing angle. Assuming the absence of cancellations between tree-level and one-
loop contributions, leads to the Hagiwara–Ishihara–Szalapski–Zeppenfeld (HISZ) constraint scenario [2]
with three free parameters where the following relations hold:

∆kZ

cos2 θW − sin2 θW
cos2 θW

,

cos2 θW − sin2 θW

∆gZ
1

=

∆kγ = 2∆kZ

λγ = λZ.

,

(14)

An alternative way to parameterise new physics in diboson production processes is based on eﬀective
ﬁeld theory (EFT) [87]. It removes two complications of the generalised Lagrangian described above: it
respects SU(2) × U(1) gauge invariance and does not introduce arbitrary form factors, though it assumes
In the eﬀective
that higher-dimensional operators are suppressed by the mass scale of new physics.
ﬁeld theory approach, the eﬀective Lagrangian is an expansion in operators that are SU(2) × U(1) gauge
invariant and conserve charge conjugation and parity. The dimensionless coeﬃcients, Ci, parameterise
the strength of the coupling between new physics and SM particles:

L = LSM +

Ci
Λ2Oi.

(15)

There are ﬁve dimension-six operators, Oi, but only three of those conserve C and P and are considered
in the following:

(cid:88)

i

OWWW = Tr[WµνW νρW µ
ρ ],

(cid:16)
(cid:16)

Dµφ0(cid:17)†
Dµφ0(cid:17)†

Dνφ0(cid:17)
W µν(cid:16)
Dνφ0(cid:17)
Bµν(cid:16)

,

,

OW =
OB =

where φ0 is the Higgs boson doublet ﬁeld and

Dµ = ∂µ +

(cid:48)Bµ,
+ gIJKW J

µ

µ W K

ν

µ

i

+

2 gτI(cid:16)
(cid:48)(cid:16)

i
i
2 gτIW I
2 g
(cid:17)
ν − ∂νW I
∂µW I
∂µBν − ∂νBµ

,

i
2 g

Wµν =

Bµν =

(cid:17)

,

(16)

(17)

with I = 1, 2, 3 and similarly for J and K. The free parameters of the eﬀective ﬁeld theory approach
used here are CWWW /Λ2, CW /Λ2 and CB/Λ2. The parameter CW /Λ2 also aﬀects the Higgs production
processes predicted to contribute at the 3% level in the SM. Possible enhancements of the Higgs produc-
tion process are neglected in the subtraction of the resonant gg-induced H → WW production process as
background and are fully attributed to the q¯q → W +W− process in the limit setting.

35

10.2. Conﬁdence intervals for the aTGC parameters

Anomalous triple-gauge-boson couplings (aTGCs) can modify the WW production cross section at large
ˆs. A number of variables were investigated, and the transverse momentum of the leading lepton, plead
T , was
found to be particularly sensitive to aTGCs and is therefore used to extract limits on the aTGC parameters.
The extraction is based on detector-level distributions. A proﬁle-likelihood-ratio test statistic [88] is used
to check whether the data and predictions with aTGCs are compatible. Then a frequentist method [89] is
used to determine the 95% conﬁdence interval for the aTGC parameters. The eµ ﬁnal state constitutes a
major fraction of the selected data sample and has a higher signal-to-background ratio than the ee and µµ
ﬁnal states; therefore only the eµ events are used in the limit extraction.

The likelihood function used in the test statistic is the product of Poissonian probability density functions
over the considered plead
bins (150–250 GeV, 250–350 GeVand 350–1000 GeV) that are optimised for
maximum sensitivity. The number of observed data events and the prediction for the signal and back-
ground processes are used to construct the Poissonian probability density functions, in which systematic
uncertainties are considered as nuisance parameters each constrained with a Gaussian distribution. A
reweighting procedure implemented in MC@NLO [36] is used to obtain the signal predictions for ar-
bitrary values of aTGCs; therefore in the study of aTGCs the SM q¯q → W +W− events are modelled
using MC@NLO interfaced to Herwig+Jimmy. Only the q¯q → W +W− process is considered as signal.
The process gg → WW, which includes resonant H → W +W− production, is considered as background,
where the eﬀects of possible anomalous couplings on the H → W +W− vertex are neglected.
Next-to-leading-order electroweak corrections to SM WW production are considered in the extraction of
aTGC limits [31–34]. The correction is negative and becomes more signiﬁcant in the high-plead
region.
Table 10 gives the relative size of the correction and its uncertainty. An additional systematic uncertainty
distribution for the q¯q → W +W− process is estimated by comparing
in modelling the shape of the plead
the predictions from MC@NLO and Powheg+Pythia 8. The diﬀerence can be as large as 20% in the high
plead
distribution is found to be less dependent on other theoretical modelling
T
uncertainties that are described in Section 8. Experimental resolution and background uncertainties are
fully accounted for.

bins. The shape of the plead

T

T

T

T

[GeV]

plead
T
SFEW
δSFEW

75–150
25–75
−4%
< 1%
0.1% <0.5%

150–250
−10%
2%

250–350
−16%
4%

350–1000
−24%
7%

Table 10: Size of the next-to-leading-order EWK correction scale factor [35], SFEW, and its systematic uncertainty
(δSFEW) in each bin of plead
T .

Figure 11 compares the detector-level plead
distribution with the SM prediction as well as the predictions
for non-zero aTGC parameters, which are deﬁned in the no constraints scenario that assumes no cor-
relation between the parameters. In the left plot the predictions with arbitrarily large aTGC parameters
are shown to demonstrate the eﬀect of anomalous-triple-gauge-boson couplings on the distribution. In
comparison, the right plot shows the predicted shapes with the values of aTGC parameters corresponding
to the upper bounds of the observed 95% conﬁdence interval.

T

To derive the conﬁdence interval for some speciﬁc anomalous coupling parameters in any of the described
scenarios, the other parameters are set to their SM values. Table 11 gives the expected and observed 95%
conﬁdence interval for each of the anomalous coupling parameters deﬁned in the no constraints, LEP,
HISZ and Equal Couplings scenarios. The limits are obtained with both Λ = ∞ and Λ = 7 TeV. A

36

Figure 11: The leading lepton transverse momentum, plead
T , for eµ ﬁnal states is compared for data and MC-
generated events using diﬀerent arbitrary values for aTGC parameters (left). The detector-level distributions are
shown using values of aTGC parameters corresponding to the upper bounds of the observed 95% conﬁdence inter-
val (right). The aTGC parameters are deﬁned in the no constraints scenario, and the form-factor scale is set to be
inﬁnity. The next-to-leading-order EWK correction scale factors from Table 10 have been applied here. Except for
the anomalous coupling parameter under study, all others are set to zero.

form-factor scale of 7 TeV is chosen as the largest value allowed by the unitarity requirement [85] for
most aTGC parameters. The conﬁdence intervals for the eﬀective ﬁeld theory approach are given in
Table 12. Figure 12 shows the expected and observed limits at 95% conﬁdence level (C.L.), in red and
black respectively, and the theoretical constraint due to the unitarity requirement (shown as blue dashed
lines) as a function of form-factor scales from Λ = 2 TeV to Λ = 10 TeV. The largest value of form-factor
scales that can preserve unitarity is ∼7–9 TeV for most aTGC parameters, while it is only about 3 TeV for
∆gZ
1 . All observed limits are more stringent than the expected limits because the data distribution falls
more steeply than expected and a deﬁcit of events is observed for the highest pT bins.

Scenario

Parameter

Expected

Observed

Expected

Observed

Λ = ∞

[−0.498, 0.524]
[−0.053, 0.059]
[−0.039, 0.038]
[−0.109, 0.124]
[−0.081, 0.082]
[−0.033, 0.037]
[−0.037, 0.035]
[−0.031, 0.031]
[−0.026, 0.030]
[−0.031, 0.031]
[−0.041, 0.048]
[−0.030, 0.030]

[−0.215, 0.267]
[−0.027, 0.042]
[−0.024, 0.024]
[−0.054, 0.092]
[−0.051, 0.052]
[−0.016, 0.027]
[−0.025, 0.020]
[−0.019, 0.019]
[−0.012, 0.022]
[−0.019, 0.019]
[−0.020, 0.035]
[−0.019, 0.019]

Λ = 7 TeV

[−0.519, 0.563]
[−0.057, 0.064]
[−0.043, 0.042]
[−0.118, 0.136]
[−0.088, 0.089]
[−0.035, 0.041]
[−0.041, 0.038]
[−0.033, 0.033]
[−0.028, 0.033]
[−0.033, 0.034]
[−0.045, 0.052]
[−0.034, 0.033]

[−0.226, 0.279]
[−0.028, 0.045]
[−0.026, 0.025]
[−0.057, 0.099]
[−0.055, 0.055]
[−0.017, 0.029]
[−0.027, 0.021]
[−0.020, 0.020]
[−0.013, 0.024]
[−0.020, 0.020]
[−0.021, 0.037]
[−0.020, 0.020]

No constraints
scenario

LEP

HISZ

Equal Couplings

∆gZ
1
∆kZ
λZ
∆kγ
λγ
∆gZ
1
∆kZ
λZ
∆kZ
λZ
∆kZ
λZ

Table 11: The expected and observed 95% conﬁdence intervals for the anomalous coupling parameters deﬁned in
the no constraints scenario, LEP, HISZ and Equal Couplings scenarios. The results are shown with Λ = ∞ and
Λ = 7 TeV.

37

 (leading lepton) [GeV]Tp1002003004005006007008009001000Events / bin110210310410DataBackgroundSM = 0.6Z1gD = 0.2ZkD = 0.2Zl = 0.2gkD = 0.2glATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs (leading lepton) [GeV]Tp1002003004005006007008009001000Events / bin110210310410DataBackgroundSM = 0.267Z1gD = 0.042ZkD = 0.024Zl = 0.092gkD = 0.052glATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsScenario

EFT

CB/Λ2
CW /Λ2

Parameter Expected [TeV−2] Observed [TeV−2]
CWWW /Λ2

[−7.62, 7.38]
[−35.8, 38.4]
[−12.58, 14.32]

[−4.61, 4.60]
[−20.9, 26.3]
[−5.87, 10.54]

Table 12: The expected and observed 95% conﬁdence intervals for the EFT approach.

The limits in the plane of two coupling parameters are shown for the no constraints and LEP scenarios
in Figure 13 and Figure 14, respectively. Further limits obtained for the Equal Couplings and HISZ
scenarios are shown in Figure 15. Finally, the 95% conﬁdence-level contours for linear combinations of
aTGC parameters deﬁned in the eﬀective ﬁeld theory approach are shown in Figure 16.

√

The new limits are more stringent by up to 50% than those previously published by the ATLAS Collabor-
s = 7 TeV [11]. The constraints derived in the LEP scenario are similar to the
ation using data taken at
combined results of the LEP experiments and in a few cases the derived limits exceed the bounds placed
1 obtained in this analysis range from −0.016 to 0.027
by LEP. The 95% conﬁdence-level limits on ∆gZ
whilst the limits from LEP cover values from −0.021 to 0.054. The 95% conﬁdence intervals derived in
this analysis are similar, or up to 20% more restrictive than those obtained by the CMS Collaboration in
Ref. [13].

38

Figure 12: The expected and observed intervals at 95% conﬁdence level (C.L.), in red and black respectively, and
the theoretical constraint [85] due to the unitarity requirement (shown as blue dashed lines) as a function of form-
factor scales from Λ = 2 TeV to Λ = 10 TeV. The plots are made for the aTGC parameters deﬁned in the no
constraints scenario. Except for the anomalous coupling parameter shown, all others are set to zero.

39

 [TeV]L2345678910Z1gD95% C.L. Interval on 1.5-1-0.5-00.511.5ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsExpectedObservedUnitarity Bound [TeV]L2345678910ZkD95% C.L. Interval on 0.3-0.2-0.1-00.10.20.3ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsExpectedObservedUnitarity Bound [TeV]L2345678910Zl95% C.L. Interval on 0.3-0.2-0.1-00.10.20.3ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsExpectedObservedUnitarity Bound [TeV]L2345678910gkD95% C.L. Interval on 0.5-0.4-0.3-0.2-0.1-00.10.20.30.40.5ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsExpectedObservedUnitarity Bound [TeV]L2345678910gl95% C.L. Interval on 0.5-0.4-0.3-0.2-0.1-00.10.20.30.40.5ATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbsExpectedObservedUnitarity BoundFigure 13: The expected and observed 95% conﬁdence-level contours for limits in the plane of two simultaneously
non-zero parameters in the no constraints scenario. Except for the two anomalous coupling parameters under study,
all others are set to zero.

40

ZkD0.1-0.05-00.050.1Z1gD0.5-00.51ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with no constraintsZkD0.05-00.05Zl0.05-00.05ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with no constraintsZl0.05-00.05Z1gD0.5-00.51ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with no constraintsgkD0.1-00.1Z1gD0.5-00.51ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with no constraintsgl0.1-0.05-00.050.1Z1gD0.5-00.51ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with no constraintsZkD0.1-0.05-00.050.1gkD0.1-00.10.2ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with no constraintsZkD0.05-00.05gl0.1-00.1ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with no constraintsZl0.05-00.05gkD0.1-00.10.2ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with no constraintsZl0.05-00.05gl0.1-00.1ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with no constraintsgkD0.1-00.1gl0.1-00.1ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with no constraintsFigure 14: The expected and observed 95% conﬁdence-level contours for limits in the plane of two simultaneously
non-zero parameters in the LEP scenario. Except for the two anomalous coupling parameters under study, all others
are set to zero.

41

ZkD0.1-0.05-00.050.1Z1gD0.05-00.050.1ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with LEP ScenarioZkD0.05-00.05Zl0.05-00.05ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with LEP ScenarioZl0.05-00.05Z1gD0.05-00.05ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. with LEP ScenarioFigure 15: The expected and observed 95% conﬁdence-level contours for limits in the plane of two simultaneously
non-zero parameters in the Equal Couplings (left) and the HISZ scenario (right).

42

ZkD0.05-00.05Zl0.05-00.05ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. in Equal Couplings ScenarioZkD0.04-0.02-00.020.04Zl0.05-00.05ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. in HISZ ScenarioFigure 16: The expected and observed 95% conﬁdence-level contours for limits in the plane of two simultaneously
non-zero parameters in the eﬀective ﬁeld theory framework.
In each case, only the two eﬀective ﬁeld theory
couplings under study are allowed to diﬀer from zero.

43

]-2  [TeV2L/BC50-050]-2  [TeV2L/WC10-0102030ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. in EFT Scenario]-2  [TeV2L/BC40-20-02040]-2  [TeV2L/WWWC10-010ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. in EFT Scenario]-2  [TeV2L/WC20-10-01020]-2  [TeV2L/WWWC10-010ExpectedObservedATLAS-1 = 8 TeV, 20.3 fbs95% C.L. in EFT Scenario11. Conclusions

√

s = 8 TeV is measured using data corresponding
The WW production cross section in pp collisions at
to an integrated luminosity of 20.3 fb−1 collected by the ATLAS detector at the LHC during 2012. The
measurement is conducted in three dilepton ﬁnal states (eµ, ee and µµ) that are all accompanied by
missing transverse momentum due to the neutrinos produced in the leptonic W decays. Fiducial and total
cross sections are measured and limits on anomalous triple gauge couplings are derived. The uncertainty
of the ﬁducial cross-section measurement is dominated by systematic uncertainties due to reconstruction
and background estimation, while the total cross-section uncertainty is subject to signiﬁcant contributions
from the modelling of the extrapolation from the ﬁducial to the full phase space.
The measured total WW production cross section is measured to be 71.1±1.1(stat) +5.7−5.0(syst) ±1.4(lumi) pb,
from the combination of the three analysed ﬁnal states extrapolated to the full phase space. This is about
1.4 standard deviations higher than the NNLO prediction of 63.2 +1.6−1.4(scale) ±1.2(PDF) pb.
The ﬁducial cross sections for the three ﬁnal states are about two standard deviations higher than the
partial NLO predictions. However, the diﬀerence is reduced by taking into account higher-order eﬀects
that increase the cross-section prediction by 5–10%. The measured ﬁducial cross sections are found to
be consistent with predictions that include both the NNLO and resummed QCD corrections up to NNLL
accuracy. Diﬀerential cross sections are measured in the ﬁducial region using events in the eµ ﬁnal state.
The shapes of the measured unfolded diﬀerential cross section distributions agree with the predictions
at the level of 15%, and the discrepancy is mainly caused by the overall normalization oﬀset. Larger
deviations at the 20% level are observed in the unfolded distribution of the leading lepton pT for large
transverse momenta. All measured cross sections are consistent within 1.5-2 standard deviations with the
predictions.
The distribution of the transverse momentum of the leading lepton, plead
T , is used to investigate anomalous
triple-gauge-boson coupling parameters. The data show no indications of anomalous couplings and are
fully compatible with the SM, hence limits on these parameters are set. Due to the increased integrated
luminosity and the higher centre-of-mass energy, the derived limits are more stringent than those previ-
s = 7 TeV. They are also competitive
ously published by the ATLAS Collaboration using data taken at
with the results obtained at the LEP collider [7].

√

44

Acknowledgements

We thank CERN for the very successful operation of the LHC, as well as the support staﬀ from our
institutions without whom ATLAS could not be operated eﬃciently.

We acknowledge the support of ANPCyT, Argentina; YerPhI, Armenia; ARC, Australia; BMWFW and
FWF, Austria; ANAS, Azerbaijan; SSTC, Belarus; CNPq and FAPESP, Brazil; NSERC, NRC and CFI,
Canada; CERN; CONICYT, Chile; CAS, MOST and NSFC, China; COLCIENCIAS, Colombia; MSMT
CR, MPO CR and VSC CR, Czech Republic; DNRF and DNSRC, Denmark; IN2P3-CNRS, CEA-
DSM/IRFU, France; GNSF, Georgia; BMBF, HGF, and MPG, Germany; GSRT, Greece; RGC, Hong
Kong SAR, China; ISF, I-CORE and Benoziyo Center, Israel; INFN, Italy; MEXT and JSPS, Japan;
CNRST, Morocco; FOM and NWO, Netherlands; RCN, Norway; MNiSW and NCN, Poland; FCT, Por-
tugal; MNE/IFA, Romania; MES of Russia and NRC KI, Russian Federation; JINR; MESTD, Serbia;
MSSR, Slovakia; ARRS and MIZŠ, Slovenia; DST/NRF, South Africa; MINECO, Spain; SRC and
Wallenberg Foundation, Sweden; SERI, SNSF and Cantons of Bern and Geneva, Switzerland; MOST,
Taiwan; TAEK, Turkey; STFC, United Kingdom; DOE and NSF, United States of America. In addition,
individual groups and members have received support from BCKDF, the Canada Council, CANARIE,
CRC, Compute Canada, FQRNT, and the Ontario Innovation Trust, Canada; EPLANET, ERC, FP7, Ho-
rizon 2020 and Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions, European Union; Investissements d’Avenir Labex and
Idex, ANR, Région Auvergne and Fondation Partager le Savoir, France; DFG and AvH Foundation, Ger-
many; Herakleitos, Thales and Aristeia programmes co-ﬁnanced by EU-ESF and the Greek NSRF; BSF,
GIF and Minerva, Israel; BRF, Norway; the Royal Society and Leverhulme Trust, United Kingdom.

The crucial computing support from all WLCG partners is acknowledged gratefully, in particular from
CERN and the ATLAS Tier-1 facilities at TRIUMF (Canada), NDGF (Denmark, Norway, Sweden),
CC-IN2P3 (France), KIT/GridKA (Germany), INFN-CNAF (Italy), NL-T1 (Netherlands), PIC (Spain),
ASGC (Taiwan), RAL (UK) and BNL (USA) and in the Tier-2 facilities worldwide.

References

[1] M. Baak et al., “Working Group Report: Precision Study of Electroweak Interactions”,

Community Summer Study 2013: Snowmass on the Mississippi (CSS2013) Minneapolis, MN,
USA, July 29-August 6, 2013, 2013, arXiv:1310.6708 [hep-ph].

[2] K. Hagiwara et al., Low energy eﬀects of new interactions in the electroweak boson sector,

Phys. Rev. D 48 (1993) 2182.

[3] T. Gehrmann et al.,

W +W− Production at Hadron Colliders in Next to Next to Leading Order QCD,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 212001, arXiv:1408.5243 [hep-ph].

[4] P. Meade, H. Ramani and M. Zeng,

Transverse momentum resummation eﬀects in W +W− measurements,
Phys. Rev. D 90 (2014) 114006, arXiv:1407.4481 [hep-ph].

[5] P. Jaiswal and T. Okui, Explanation of the WW excess at the LHC by jet-veto resummation,

Phys. Rev. D 90 (2014) 073009, arXiv:1407.4537 [hep-ph].

45

[6] P. F. Monni and G. Zanderighi, On the excess in the inclusive W +W− → l+l−νν cross section,

JHEP 05 (2015) 013, arXiv:1410.4745 [hep-ph].

[7] ALEPH, DELPHI, L3 and OPAL Collaborations and the LEP Electroweak Working Group,

S. Schael et al.,
Electroweak Measurements in Electron-Positron Collisions at W-Boson-Pair Energies at LEP,
Phys. Rept. 532 (2013) 119–244, arXiv:1302.3415 [hep-ex].

[8] CDF Collaboration, F. Abe et al.,

Evidence of W +W− production in ¯pp collisions at
Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 (1997) 4536–4540.

√

s = 1.8 TeV,

[9] CDF Collaboration, T. Aaltonen et al., Measurement of the W +W− Production Cross Section and

√

s = 1.96 TeV,

Search for Anomalous WWγ and WWZ Couplings in p ¯p Collisions at
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (2010) 201801, arXiv:0912.4500 [hep-ex].

[10] D0 Collaboration, V. Abazov et al.,

√

s

Measurement of the WW production cross section with dilepton ﬁnal states in p ¯p collisions at
= 1.96 TeV and limits on anomalous trilinear gauge couplings,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009) 191801, arXiv:0904.0673 [hep-ex].

[11] ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of W +W− production in pp collisions at

s =7 TeV with the

√

ATLAS detector and limits on anomalous WWZ and WWγ couplings,
Phys. Rev. D 87 (2013) 112001, [Erratum: Phys. Rev.D88,no.7,079906(2013)],
arXiv:1210.2979 [hep-ex].

[12] CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the W +W− Cross section in pp Collisions at

√
and Limits on Anomalous WWγ and WWZ couplings, Eur. Phys. J. C 73 (2013) 2610,
arXiv:1306.1126 [hep-ex].

[13] CMS Collaboration, Measurement of the W +W− cross section in pp collisions at

√

[14]

limits on anomalous gauge couplings (2015), arXiv:1507.03268 [hep-ex].
J. S. Kim et al., ’Stop’ that ambulance! New physics at the LHC?, JHEP 12 (2014) 010,
arXiv:1406.0858 [hep-ph].

s = 7 TeV

s = 8 TeV and

[15] ATLAS Collaboration, The ATLAS experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider,

JINST 3 (2008) S08003.

√

[16] ATLAS Collaboration, Improved luminosity determination in pp collisions at

s = 7 TeV using
the ATLAS detector at the LHC, Eur. Phys. J. C 73 (2013) 2518, arXiv:1302.4393 [hep-ex].

[17] T. Sjöstrand, S. Mrenna and P. Skands, A Brief Introduction to PYTHIA 8.1,

Comput. Phys. Commun. 178 (2008) 852–867, arXiv:0710.3820 [hep-ph].

[18] ATLAS Collaboration, The ATLAS Simulation Infrastructure, Eur. Phys. J. C 70 (2010) 823–874,

arXiv:1005.4568 [physics.ins-det].

[19] S. Agostinelli et al., GEANT4: A Simulation toolkit, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 506 (2003) 250–303.
[20] P. Nason, A New method for combining NLO QCD with shower Monte Carlo algorithms,

JHEP 11 (2004) 040, arXiv:hep-ph/0409146.

[21] S. Frixione, P. Nason and C. Oleari,

Matching NLO QCD computations with Parton Shower simulations: the POWHEG method,
JHEP 11 (2007) 070, arXiv:0709.2092 [hep-ph].

46

[22] S. Alioli et al., A general framework for implementing NLO calculations in shower Monte Carlo

programs: the POWHEG BOX, JHEP 06 (2010) 043, arXiv:1002.2581 [hep-ph].

[23] S. Alioli et al., NLO vector-boson production matched with shower in POWHEG,

JHEP 07 (2008) 060, arXiv:0805.4802 [hep-ph].

[24] T. Binoth et al., Gluon-induced W-boson pair production at the LHC, JHEP 12 (2006) 046,

arXiv:hep-ph/0611170.

[25] G. Corcella et al., HERWIG 6.5: an event generator for hadron emission reactions with

[26]

interfering gluons (including supersymmetric processes), JHEP 01 (2001) 010,
arXiv:hep-ph/0011363.
J. M. Butterworth, J. R. Forshaw and M. H. Seymour,
Multiparton interactions in photoproduction at HERA, Z. Phys. C 72 (1996) 637–646,
arXiv:hep-ph/9601371.

[27] H.-L. Lai et al., New parton distributions for collider physics, Phys. Rev. D 82 (2010) 074024,

arXiv:1007.2241 [hep-ph].

[28] P. Golonka and Z. Was,

PHOTOS Monte Carlo: A Precision tool for QED corrections in Z and W decays,
Eur. Phys. J. C 45 (2006) 97–107, arXiv:hep-ph/0506026.

[29] ATLAS Collaboration, Summary of ATLAS PYTHIA 8 tunes, ATL-PHYS-PUB-2012-003, 2012,

url: http://cds.cern.ch/record/1474107.

[30] ATLAS Collaboration, New ATLAS event generator tunes to 2010 data,

ATL-PHYS-PUB-2011-008, 2011, url: http://cds.cern.ch/record/1345343.
[31] A. Bierweiler et al., Electroweak corrections to W-boson pair production at the LHC,

JHEP 11 (2012) 093, arXiv:1208.3147 [hep-ph].

[32] M. Billoni et al., Next-to-leading order electroweak corrections to pp -> W+W- -> 4 leptons at the

[33]

LHC in double-pole approximation, JHEP 12 (2013) 043, arXiv:1310.1564 [hep-ph].
J. Baglio, L. D. Ninh and M. M. Weber,
Massive gauge boson pair production at the LHC: a next-to-leading order story,
Phys. Rev. D 88 (2013) 113005, arXiv:1307.4331 [hep-ph].

[34] A. Bierweiler et al., Vector-boson pair production at the LHC to O(α3) accuracy,

JHEP 12 (2013) 071, arXiv:1305.5402 [hep-ph].

[35] S. Gieseke, T. Kasprzik and J. H. Kühn,

Vector-boson pair production and electroweak corrections in HERWIG++,
Eur. Phys. J. C 74 (2014) 2988, arXiv:1401.3964 [hep-ph].

[36] S. Frixione and B. R. Webber, Matching NLO QCD computations and parton shower simulations,

JHEP 06 (2002) 029, arXiv:hep-ph/0204244.

[37] B. P. Kersevan and E. Richter-Was, The Monte Carlo event generator AcerMC versions 2.0 to 3.8

with interfaces to PYTHIA 6.4, HERWIG 6.5 and ARIADNE 4.1,
Comput. Phys. Commun. 184 (2013) 919–985, arXiv:hep-ph/0405247.

[38] T. Sjöstrand et al., High-energy physics event generation with PYTHIA 6.1,

Comput. Phys. Commun. 135 (2001) 238–259, arXiv:hep-ph/0010017.
[39] ATLAS Collaboration, ATLAS tunes of PYTHIA 6 and Pythia 8 for MC11,

ATL-PHYS-PUB-2011-009, 2011, url: https://cds.cern.ch/record/1363300.

47

[40]

J. Pumplin et al.,
New generation of parton distributions with uncertainties from global QCD analysis,
JHEP 07 (2002) 012, arXiv:0201195 [hep-ph].

[41] M. L. Mangano et al.,

ALPGEN, a generator for hard multiparton processes in hadronic collisions,
JHEP 07 (2003) 001, arXiv:hep-ph/0206293.

[42] M. L. Mangano, M. Moretti and R. Pittau, Multijet matrix elements and shower evolution in

hadronic collisions: Wb¯b + n jets as a case study, Nucl. Phys. B 632 (2002) 343–362,
arXiv:hep-ph/0108069.

[43] T. Gleisberg et al., Event generation with SHERPA 1.1, JHEP 02 (2009) 007,

[44]

arXiv:0811.4622 [hep-ph].
J. M. Campbell, R. K. Ellis and C. Williams, Vector boson pair production at the LHC,
JHEP 07 (2011) 018, arXiv:1105.0020 [hep-ph].

[45] LHC Higgs Cross Section Working Group,

Handbook of LHC Higgs Cross Sections: 3. Higgs Properties (2013),
arXiv:1307.1347 [hep-ph].

[46] M. Czakon and A. Mitov,

Top++: A Program for the Calculation of the Top-Pair Cross-Section at Hadron Colliders,
Comput. Phys. Commun. 185 (2014) 2930, arXiv:1112.5675 [hep-ph].

[47] N. Kidonakis,

Two-loop soft anomalous dimensions for single top quark associated production with a W- or H-,
Phys. Rev. D 82 (2010) 054018, arXiv:1005.4451 [hep-ph].

[48] N. Kidonakis, Next-to-next-to-leading-order collinear and soft gluon corrections for t-channel

single top quark production, Phys. Rev. D 83 (2011) 091503, arXiv:1103.2792 [hep-ph].

[49] N. Kidonakis, NNLL resummation for s-channel single top quark production,

Phys. Rev. D 81 (2010) 054028, arXiv:1001.5034 [hep-ph].

[50] S. Catani and M. Grazzini, An NNLO subtraction formalism in hadron collisions and its
application to Higgs boson production at the LHC, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (2007) 222002,
arXiv:hep-ph/0703012.

[51] ATLAS Collaboration,

Performance of the ATLAS Electron and Photon Trigger in pp Collisions at
ATLAS-CONF-2012-048, 2012, url: http://cds.cern.ch/record/1450089.
[52] ATLAS Collaboration, Performance of the ATLAS muon trigger in pp collisions at

Eur. Phys. J. C 75 (2015) 120, arXiv:1408.3179 [hep-ex].

√

s = 7 TeV in 2011,

√

s = 8 TeV,

[53] ATLAS Collaboration, Electron eﬃciency measurements with the ATLAS detector using the 2012

LHC proton-proton collision data, ATLAS-CONF-2014-032, 2014,
url: https://cds.cern.ch/record/1706245.

[54] ATLAS Collaboration,

Observation and measurement of Higgs boson decays to WW∗ with the ATLAS detector,
Phys. Rev. D 92 (2015) 012006, arXiv:1412.2641 [hep-ex].

[55] ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the muon reconstruction performance of the ATLAS

detector using 2011 and 2012 LHC proton–proton collision data, Eur. Phys. J. C 74 (2014) 3130,
arXiv:1407.3935 [hep-ex].

48

[56] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam and G. Soyez, The anti-kt jet clustering algorithm, JHEP 04 (2008) 063,

arXiv:0802.1189 [hep-ph].

[57] M. Cacciari and G. P. Salam, Dispelling the N3 myth for the kt jet-ﬁnder,

Phy. Lett. B 641 (2006) 57–61, arXiv:hep-ph/0512210.

[58] ATLAS Collaboration, Calorimeter clustering algorithms: Description and performance,

ATL-LARG-PUB-2008-002, 2008, url: http://cds.cern.ch/record/1099735.

[59] T. Barillari et al., Local Hadronic Calibration, ATL-LARG-PUB-2009-001, 2008,

url: http://cds.cern.ch/record/1112035.

[60] M. Cacciari and G. P. Salam, Pileup subtraction using jet areas,
Phys. Lett. B 659 (2008) 119–126, arXiv:0707.1378 [hep-ph].

[61] ATLAS Collaboration, Jet energy measurement and its systematic uncertainty in proton-proton

s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Eur. Phys. J. C 75 (2015) 17,

√

collisions at
arXiv:1406.0076 [hep-ex].

[62] ATLAS Collaboration, Monte Carlo Calibration and Combination of In-situ Measurements of Jet

Energy Scale, Jet Energy Resolution and Jet Mass in ATLAS, ATLAS-CONF-2015-037, 2015,
url: https://cds.cern.ch/record/2044941.

[63] ATLAS Collaboration, Pile-up subtraction and suppression for jets in ATLAS,

ATLAS-CONF-2013-083, 2013, url: http://cds.cern.ch/record/1570994.

[64] ATLAS Collaboration, Performance of b-Jet Identiﬁcation in the ATLAS Experiment,

submitted to JINST (2015), arXiv:1512.01094 [hep-ex].

[65] ATLAS Collaboration,

Calibration of the performance of b-tagging for c and light-ﬂavour jets in the 2012 ATLAS data,
ATLAS-CONF-2014-046, 2014, url: https://cds.cern.ch/record/1741020.

[66] ATLAS Collaboration, Performance of Missing Transverse Momentum Reconstruction in ATLAS
studied in Proton-Proton Collisions recorded in 2012 at 8 TeV, ATLAS-CONF-2013-082, 2013,
url: http://cds.cern.ch/record/1570993.

[67] ATLAS Collaboration, Pile-up Suppression in Missing Transverse Momentum Reconstruction in

√
the ATLAS Experiment in Proton-Proton Collisions at
2014, url: http://cds.cern.ch/record/1702055.

s = 8 TeV, ATLAS-CONF-2014-019,

[68] Particle Data Group, Review of Particle Physics (RPP), Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 010001.
[69] B. Mellado, X. Ruan and Z. Zhang, Extraction of Top Backgrounds in the Higgs Boson Search

with the H → WW (cid:63) → (cid:96)(cid:96) + Emiss
Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011) 096005, arXiv:1101.1383 [hep-ph].

T Decay with a Full-Jet Veto at the LHC,

[70] ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of the production cross-section of a single top quark in

association with a W boson at 8 TeV with the ATLAS experiment, JHEP 01 (2016) 064,
arXiv:1510.03752 [hep-ex].

[71] ATLAS Collaboration, Measurement of hard double-parton interactions in W(→ lν)+ 2 jet events

√

s=7 TeV with the ATLAS detector, New J. Phys. 15 (2013) 033038,

at
arXiv:1301.6872 [hep-ex].

[72] F. James and M. Roos, Minuit: A System for Function Minimization and Analysis of the

Parameter Errors and Correlations, Comput. Phys. Commun. 10 (1975) 343–367.

49

[73] T. Adye, Unfolding algorithms and tests using RooUnfold (2011) 313–318,

arXiv:1105.1160 [physics.data-an].

[74] G. D’Agostini, Improved iterative Bayesian unfolding (2010),

arXiv:1010.0632 [physics.data-an].

[75] B. Malaescu, An Iterative, Dynamically Stabilized (IDS) Method of Data Unfolding (2011),

arXiv:1106.3107 [physics.data-an].

[76] ATLAS Collaboration, Muon reconstruction eﬃciency and momentum resolution of the ATLAS
s = 7 TeV in 2010, Eur. Phys. J. C 74 (2014) 3034,

√

experiment in proton-proton collisions at
arXiv:1404.4562 [hep-ex].

[77] ATLAS Collaboration, Electron reconstruction and identiﬁcation eﬃciency measurements with

the ATLAS detector using the 2011 LHC proton-proton collision data,
Eur. Phys. J. C 74 (2014) 2941, arXiv:1404.2240 [hep-ex].

[78] ATLAS Collaboration, Electron performance measurements with the ATLAS detector using the

2010 LHC proton-proton collision data, Eur. Phys. J. C 72 (2012) 1909,
arXiv:1110.3174 [hep-ex].

[79] A. D. Martin et al., Parton distributions for the LHC, Eur. Phys. J. C 63 (2009) 189–285,

arXiv:0901.0002 [hep-ph].

[80] R. D. Ball et al., Parton distributions with LHC data, Nucl. Phys. B 867 (2013) 244–289,

arXiv:1207.1303 [hep-ph].

[81] S. Alekhin et al., The PDF4LHC Working Group Interim Report (2011),

[82]

arXiv:1101.0536 [hep-ph].
I. W. Stewart and F. J. Tackmann,
Theory Uncertainties for Higgs and Other Searches Using Jet Bins,
Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 034011, arXiv:1107.2117 [hep-ph].

[83] C. Anastasiou et al., Higgs Boson Gluon-Fusion Production in QCD at Three Loops,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 212001, arXiv:1503.06056 [hep-ph].

[84] K. Hagiwara et al., Probing the Weak Boson Sector in e+e− → W +W−,

Nucl. Phys. B 282 (1987) 253.

[85] H. Aihara et al., Anomalous gauge boson interactions (1995), arXiv:hep-ph/9503425.
[86] G. Gounaris et al., Triple gauge boson couplings (1996), arXiv:hep-ph/9601233.
[87] C. Degrande et al., Eﬀective Field Theory: A Modern Approach to Anomalous Couplings,

Annals Phys. 335 (2013) 21–32, arXiv:1205.4231 [hep-ph].

[88] G. Cowan et al., Asymptotic formulae for likelihood-based tests of new physics,

Eur. Phys. J. C71 (2011) 1554, [Erratum: Eur. Phys. J.C73,2501(2013)],
arXiv:1007.1727 [physics.data-an].

[89] G. J. Feldman and R. D. Cousins,

A Uniﬁed approach to the classical statistical analysis of small signals,
Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998) 3873–3889, arXiv:physics/9711021 [physics.data-an].

50

A. Tables of diﬀerential cross sections

A.1. Diﬀerential cross section measurements

51

0
0
5
–
0
5
1

0
5
1
–
0
0
1

0
0
1
–
0
8

0
8
–
0
7

0
7
–
0
6

0
6
–
0
5

0
5
–
0
4

0
4
–
5
3

5
3
–
0
3

0
3
–
5
2

%

%

0
3

4
2

%
9
7

.

%

7
1

7
6
8
0
0
0

.

%

3
1

3
6
3
0

.

%
6
8

.

%
0
6

.

%
4
8

.

%

5
1

0
2
1

.

%
9
7

.

%
3
6

.

%

1
1

%

6
1

5
3

.

2

%
0

.

8

%
5

.

5

%

3
1

%

3
1

7
9

.

3

%
1

.

6

%
6

.

5

%
5

.

9

%
6

.

7

%
8

.

4

%
4

.

5

%
4

.

2

5
6

.

6

%
4

.

9

%
0

.

4

%
2

.

5

%
8

.

6

0
3

.

9

%

2
1

7

.

0
1

%
7

.

5

%
3

.

5

%
2

.

9

%

6
1

5
0

.

7

%
6

.

7

%
3

.

6

%

3
1

%

%

3
2

2
1

%
7

.

6

%

8
1

9
4

.

3

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D

i

]

V
e
G
/
b
f
[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

]

V
e
G

[

d
a
e
l
p

T

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t

S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

,
d
a
e
l
p

T

-

m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
T

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
d
e
t
a
l
e
r
d
n
a

,

n
o
t
p
e
l
g
n
i
d
a
e
l

e
h
t

f
o
m
u
t
n
e
m
o
m
e
s
r
e
v
s
n
a
r
t

e
h
t

f
o
s
n
i
b
n
i
y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d
d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c
d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
3
1
e
l
b
a
T

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.

y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a

l
a
n
g
i
s

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

c
i
t
a

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o

o
t

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

n
i

.
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.

n
i
b

h
c
a
e
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

0
0
5
–
0
8

0
8
–
0
7

0
7
–
0
6

0
6
–
0
5

0
5
–
0
4

0
4
–
5
3

5
3
–
0
3

0
3
–
5
2

5
2
–
0

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D

i

%
4
7

.

%
8
7

.

%
4
7

.

%

3
1

1
0
6
0
0

.

%

0
1

0
0
3

.

%
0
7

.

%
5
5

.

%
8
4

.

%
4
9

.

%
2
5

.

%
6
5

.

%
5
5

.

4
8
4

.

%

1
1

4
8

.

6

%
3

.

4

%
1

.

5

%
5

.

8

%

0
1

1
8

.

6

%
6

.

4

%
2

.

5

%
2

.

7

%

4
1

9
5

.

6

%
2

.

7

%
3

.

5

%

0
1

%

4
1

1
1

.

6

%
7

.

7

%
8

.

5

%

1
1

%

3
1

0
6

.

5

%
5

.

8

%
6

.

5

%
9

.

8

%

9
2

9
6

.

1

%
9

.

8

%
4

.

6

%

7
2

]

V
e
G
/
b
f
[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

]

V
e
G

[

)
(cid:96)
(cid:96)
(
T
p

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t

S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

52

e
h
T

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

d
n
a

,
)
(cid:96)
(cid:96)
(
T
p

,

m
e
t
s
y
s

n
o
t
p
e
l
i
d

e
h
t

f
o
m
u
t
n
e
m
o
m
e
s
r
e
v
s
n
a
r
t

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
i
b

n
i

y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
4
1

e
l
b
a
T

-
r
e
c
n
U

n
i
a
t
b
o

.

y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a

l
a
n
g
i
s

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

o
t

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.

n
i
b
h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

0
5
6
–
0
1
2

0
1
2
–
5
7
1

5
7
1
–
5
5
1

5
5
1
–
5
3
1

5
3
1
–
5
1
1

5
1
1
–
0
0
1

0
0
1
–
5
8

5
8
–
0
7

0
7
–
0
6

0
6
–
0
5

0
5
–
0
4

0
4
–
0
3

0
3
–
0
2

0
2
–
0
1

%

6
1

1
0
5
0
0

.

%
6
7

.

%
1
6

.

%

3
1

%

1
2

8
9
4
0

.

%
8
8

.

%
6
5

.

%

8
1

%

%

4
2

0
1

%
7
5

.

%

0
2

1
6
7
0

.

%

1
1

2
2
1

.

%
6
7

.

%
4
5

.

%
5
6

.

%

4
1

3
6
1

.

%
8
6

.

%
3
5

.

%

1
1

%

3
1

6
8

.

1

%
8

.

7

%
8

.

5

%
7

.

8

%
8

.

8

%
6

.

5

%
5

.

5

%
9

.

3

2
9

.

2

%
4

.

9

%
5

.

5

%
6

.

5

%
3

.

5

5
4

.

3

%

2
1

2
3

.

3

%
5

.

7

%
5

.

5

%
1

.

8

%

%

7

2
1

0
5

.

3

%
6

.

5

%
3

.

8

%

2
2

2
6

.

2

%
8

.

7

%
5

.

5

%

9
1

%

2
1

4
8

.

1

%
9

.

8

%
7

.

5

%
5

.

5

%

%

2
1

0
1

0
4
1

.

%
8
5

.

%
2
2

.

%

%

2
1

0
1

9
1
1

.

%
8
5

.

%
7
3

.

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D

i

]

V
e
G
/
b
f
[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

]

V
e
G

[

(cid:96)
(cid:96)

m

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t

S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
T

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o

o
t

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

n
i

.
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.

n
i
b

h
c
a
e
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

d
n
a

,
(cid:96)
(cid:96)

m

,

m
e
t
s
y
s

n
o
t
p
e
l
i
d

e
h
t

f
o

s
s
a
m

t
n
a
i
r
a
v
n
i

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
i
b

n
i

y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
5
1

e
l
b
a
T

.

y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a

l
a
n
g
i
s

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

π
–
8
/
π
7

8
/
π
7
–
4
/
π
3

4
/
π
3
–
8
/
π
5

8
/
π
5
–
2
/
π

2
/
π
–
8
/
π
3

8
/
π
3
–
4
/
π

4
/
π
–
8
/
π

8
/
π
–
0

%

6
1

.

8
8
9

%
3
7

.

%
9
5

.

%

3
1

%
0
8

.

%
0
4

.

%
2
5

.

%
5
4

.

7
1
2

%
5
7

.

%
9
3

.

%
4
5

.

%
5
3

.

3
9
1

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D

i

%
5

.

9

%
6

.

4

%
1

.

5

%
5

.

6

0
4
1

%

5
1

%
4

.

5

%
3

.

5

%

3
1

2
0
1

%
5

.

9

%
1

.

6

%
3

.

5

%
1

.

5

6

.

1
8

%
0

.

9

%
3

.

6

%
5

.

5

%
3

.

3

7

.

0
7

%

1
1

3

.

7
4

%
0

.

8

%
0

.

6

%
2

.

5

]
b
f
[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t

S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

(cid:96)
(cid:96)
φ
∆

,
|
(cid:96)
(cid:96)
y

|

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

d
n
a

.

y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a

l
a
n
g
i
s

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
T

,

m
e
t
s
y
s

n
o
t
p
e
l
i
d

e
h
t

f
o

y
t
i
d
i
p
a
r

e
h
t

f
o

e
u
l
a
v

e
t
u
l
o
s
b
a

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
i
b

n
i

y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
7
1

e
l
b
a
T

o
t

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.
n
i
b
h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o

1
–
8
0

.

8

.

0
–
7
0

.

.

7
0
–
6
0

.

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D

i

6

.

0
–
5

.

0

5

.

0
–
4

.

0

4

.

0
–
3

.

0

3

.

0
–
2

.

0

2

.

0
–
1

.

0

.

1
0
–
0

%

4
1

%
3
5

.

%
4
5

.

%

2
1

1
1
2

%

2
1

7
8
3

%
4
5

.

%
1
5

.

%
6
9

.

%

0
1

5
0
4

%
5
5

.

%
2
5

.

%
8
6

.

%

0
1

3
0
4

%
6

.

5

%
5

.

5

%
0

.

7

%

5
1

%
1

.

6

%
2

.

5

%

3
1

1
7
3

%

0
1

2
0
4

%
8

.

5

%
5

.

5

%
0

.

6

%
4

.

8

%
1

.

5

%
6

.

5

%
6

.

3

0
7
4

%

8
1

%
7

.

5

%
3

.

5

%

7
1

9
1
4

%

0
1

0
6
4

%
4

.

5

%
4

.

5

%
7

.

6

]
b
f
[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t

S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

|
)

∗

θ
(
s
o
c

|

|
)

∗

|

s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
T

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

d
n
a

θ
(
s
o
c

e
l
b
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
i
b

n
i

y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
8
1

e
l
b
a
T

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b
d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
e
h
t
n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.

y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l
e
h
t
g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a
l
a
n
g
i
s
e
h
t
n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

e
h
T

.

n
i
b

h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o

o
t

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

.
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

d
n
a

.

y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
(cid:96)
(cid:96)
φ
∆

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a

l
a
n
g
i
s

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
T

,
s
n
o
t
p
e
l

y
a
c
e
d

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
l
g
n
a

h
t
u
m
i
z
a

n
i

e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
i
b

n
i

y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
6
1

e
l
b
a
T

o
t

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.
n
i
b
h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o

.

5
2
–
2

2
–
8
1

.

8

.

1
–
6
1

.

6

.

1
–
4
1

.

4

.

1
–
2

.

1

.

2
1
–
1

1
–
8

.

0

8

.

0
–
6

.

0

6

.

0
–
4

.

0

4

.

0
–
2

.

0

.

2
0
–
0

|
(cid:96)
(cid:96)
y

|

%

5
2

.

5
5
3

%
5
8

.

%
4
5

.

%

2
2

%

1
1

.

4
7
9

%
4
8

.

%
6
5

.

%
5
5

.

%

9
1

%
3
8

.

%
5
5

.

%

6
1

2
0
1

%

4
1

%
3
7

.

%
4
5

.

%

1
1

6
2
1

%

6
1

%
9

.

6

%
3

.

5

%

4
1

6
4
1

%
8

.

8

%
7

.

5

%
3

.

5

%
1

.

4

4
9
1

%
3

.

8

%
5

.

5

%
1

.

5

%
4

.

3

6
1
2

%
5

.

9

%
9

.

5

%
5

.

5

%
1

.

5

7
0
2

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D

i

%
9

.

8

%
4

.

5

%
5

.

5

%
4

.

4

2
3
2

%
2

.

9

%
8

.

5

%
5

.

5

%
6

.

4

3
2
2

%
9

.

8

%
2

.

5

%
4

.

5

%
8

.

4

7
3
2

]
b
f
[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t

S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

53

A.2. Normalised diﬀerential cross sections

54

0
0
5
–
0
5
1

0
5
1
–
0
0
1

0
0
1
–
0
8

0
8
–
0
7

0
7
–
0
6

0
6
–
0
5

0
5
–
0
4

0
4
–
5
3

5
3
–
0
3

0
3
–
5
2

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

%

%

8
2

4
2

%
0

.

5

%

3
1

2
3
2
0
0
0
0

.

0

%

1
1

1
7
9
0
0
0

.

0

%

1
1

2
2
3
0
0

.

0

%

3
1

8
2
6
0
0

.

0

6
0
1
0

%
4

.

8

.

0

%
5

%
1

%
6

.

.

.

8

2

6

%
7

%
8

%
1

.

.

.

7

1

7

%
8

%
4

%

.

.

7

1

0
1

%
9

%
3

%
0

.

.

.

5

1

6

%

%

%

1

.

5

5

3

.

.

.

4

0

2

%
9
7

8
7
1
0

.

0

%

%

%

%
7
6

6

4

.

.

.

3

0

3

%
4

%
2

%
0

.

.

.

5

2

6

%
2

%
2

%

.

.

7

3

7
1

9
4
2
0

.

0

.

5

0

5
8
2
0

%
3

.

8

.

0

%

9
1

8
8
1
0

.

0

%

%

5
2

2
1

%
3

.

3

%

2
2

3
3
9
0
0

.

0

]
1
−

V
e
G

[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t
S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

]

V
e
G

[

d
a
e
l
p

T

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
T

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

d
n
a

f
o
m
u
t
n
e
m
o
m
e
s
r
e
v
s
n
a
r
t

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
i
b

n
i

h
t
d
i
w
n
i
b

e
s
r
e
v
n
i

e
h
t

h
t
i

w
d
e
l
a
c
s

d
n
a

y
t
i
n
u

o
t

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

,
y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
9
1

e
l
b
a
T

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.
n
i
b

h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o

o
t

.
y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a

l
a
n
g
i
s

n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

,
d
a
e
l
p

T

,

n
o
t
p
e
l

g
n
i
d
a
e
l

e
h
t

e
h
t

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

0
0
5
–
0
8

0
8
–
0
7

0
7
–
0
6

0
6
–
0
5

0
5
–
0
4

0
4
–
5
3

5
3
–
0
3

0
3
–
5
2

5
2
–
0

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

2
8
1
0

.

0

6

.

6

%

1
1

6
7
1
0

.

0

%

2
1

3
6
1
0

.

0

%

2
1

0
5
1
0

.

0

%

1
3

3
5
4
0
0

.

0

]
1
−

V
e
G

[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

]

V
e
G

[

)
(cid:96)
(cid:96)
(
T
p

%
6

.

9

1
6
1
0
0
0

.

0

%
5

.

7

3
0
8
0
0

.

0

%
5

.

6

9
2
1
0

.

0

%
2

%
6

%
2

.

.

.

7

3

5

%
8

%
6

%
8

.

.

.

6

1

2

%
0

%
6

%
8

.

.

.

5

1

3

%

%

%

5

.

7

1

2

.

.

.

4

0

6

%
0
9

3
8
1
0

.

0

%

%

%

%
5
8

2

0

.

.

.

4

0

5

%
0

%
5

%
3

.

.

.

7

1

8

%
5

%
0

%
3

.

.

.

7

2

9

%
3

%
2

%
9

.

.

.

8

2

7

%
2

%
9

%

.

.

8

2

9
2

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t
S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

55

f
o
m
u
t
n
e
m
o
m
e
s
r
e
v
s
n
a
r
t

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
i
b

n
i

h
t
d
i
w
n
i
b

e
s
r
e
v
n
i

e
h
t

h
t
i

w
d
e
l
a
c
s

d
n
a

y
t
i
n
u

o
t

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

,
y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
0
2

e
l
b
a
T

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
T

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

d
n
a

,
)
(cid:96)
(cid:96)
(
T
p

,

m
e
t
s
y
s

n
o
t
p
e
l
i
d

e
h
t

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.
n
i
b

h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o

.
y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a

l
a
n
g
i
s

e
h
t

n
i

o
t

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

0
5
6
–
0
1
2

0
1
2
–
5
7
1

5
7
1
–
5
5
1

5
5
1
–
5
3
1

5
3
1
–
5
1
1

5
1
1
–
0
0
1

0
0
1
–
5
8

5
8
–
0
7

0
7
–
0
6

0
6
–
0
5

0
5
–
0
4

0
4
–
0
3

0
3
–
0
2

0
2
–
0
1

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

%

9
1

4
3
1
0
0
0

.

0

%

4
2

3
3
1
0
0

.

0

%
5

%
6

%

.

.

7

1

7
1

%
7

%
3

%

.

.

8

1

2
2

%

%

3
2

0
1

%
8

.

1

%

0
2

3
0
2
0
0

.

0

%
4

%
1

%
9

.

.

.

7

2

4

%

%
5

%
4

.

.

6

1

7

%
6

%
6

%
2

.

.

.

7

2

7

%
3

%
8

%

.

.

5

1

1

%
1

.

9

7
2
3
0
0

.

0

%
9

.

9

5
3
4
0
0

.

0

%

1
1

7
9
4
0
0

.

0

%
7

.

5

1
8
7
0
0

.

0

%

%

%

3
2
9
0
0

.

0

5

.

5

%
5

.

8

9
8
8
0
0

.

0

%
1

.

8

5
3
9
0
0

.

0

%

8
1

2
0
7
0
0

.

0

%
0

.

9

3
9
4
0
0

.

0

%

1
1

4
7
3
0
0

.

0

%

0
1

9
1
3
0
0

.

0

%
4
9

2

6

.

.

.

5

0

1

%
1

%
1

%
0

.

.

.

7

2

4

%
7

%
5

%
2

.

.

.

6

1

4

%
6

%
1

%

.

.

7

1

6
1

%
7

%
4

%
7

.

.

.

8

1

1

%
8

%
7

%
3

.

.

.

9

1

5

%

%
0

%
1

.

.

2

2

0
1

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t

S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

]
1
−

V
e
G

[

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

]

V
e
G

[

(cid:96)
(cid:96)

m

n
o
t
p
e
l
i
d
e
h
t

f
o
s
s
a
m

t
n
a
i
r
a
v
n
i

e
h
t

f
o
s
n
i
b
n
i
h
t
d
i
w
n
i
b
e
s
r
e
v
n
i

e
h
t
h
t
i

w
d
e
l
a
c
s
d
n
a
y
t
i
n
u
o
t
d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
n
,
y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d
d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c
d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
1
2
e
l
b
a
T

l
a
n
g
i
s

e
h
t

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.
n
i
b

h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o

o
t

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.
y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
T

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

d
n
a

,
(cid:96)
(cid:96)

m

,

m
e
t
s
y
s

π
–
8
/
π
7

8
/
π
7
–
4
/
π
3

4
/
π
3
–
8
/
π
5

8
/
π
5
–
2
/
π

2
/
π
–
8
/
π
3

8
/
π
3
–
4
/
π

4
/
π
–
8
/
π

8
/
π
–
0

%

2
1

5
6
2
0

.

%
8
6

.

%
6
1

.

%
7
9

.

%

%

9
3

.

5
3

.

%
4
8
0

.

%

7
1

.

2
8
5
0

.

%

%

1
4

.

5
3

.

%
0
6
0

.

%

2
2

.

6
1
5
0

.

%

%

9

.

4

3

.

4

%
8
5

.

0

%

3

.

2

6
7
3

.

0

%

%

9

.

9

1

.

5

%
7
7

.

0

%

4

.

8

3
7
2

.

0

%

%

9

.

5

1
1

9
1
2

.

0

%
7
9

.

0

%

5

.

9

%
8

.

6

%
1

.

6

%
1

.

1

%
7

.

2

%
0

.

8

%
8

.

7

%
4

.

1

%
1

.

1

9
8
1

.

0

7
2
1

.

0

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d
d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t

S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

(cid:96)
(cid:96)
φ
∆

h
t
u
m
i
z
a

n
i

e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
i
b

n
i

h
t
d
i
w

n
i
b

e
s
r
e
v
n
i

e
h
t

h
t
i

w

d
e
l
a
c
s

d
n
a

y
t
i
n
u

o
t

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

,
y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
2
2

l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
T

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

d
e
t
a
l
e
r

d
n
a

,
(cid:96)
(cid:96)
φ
∆

,
s
n
o
t
p
e
l

y
a
c
e
d

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.

n
i
b

h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o

o
t

.
y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

e
h
t

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a

l
a
n
g
i
s

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

e
l
b
a
T

e
l
g
n
a

.

5
2
–
2

2
–
8
1

.

8

.

1
–
6
1

.

6

.

1
–
4
1

.

4

.

1
–
2

.

1

.

2
1
–
1

1
–
8

.

0

8

.

0
–
6

.

0

6

.

0
–
4

.

0

4

.

0
–
2

.

0

2

.

0
–
0

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d
d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

|
(cid:96)
(cid:96)
y

|

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a
l
a
n
g
i
s
e
h
t
n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s
e
h
T

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
d
e
t
a
l
e
r
d
n
a

,

m
e
t
s
y
s
n
o
t
p
e
l
i
d
e
h
t

f
o
y
t
i
d
i
p
a
r
e
h
t

f
o
s
n
i
b
n
i
h
t
d
i
w
n
i
b
e
s
r
e
v
n
i
e
h
t
h
t
i

w
d
e
l
a
c
s
d
n
a
y
t
i
n
u
o
t
d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
n
,
y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d
d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c
d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
3
2
e
l
b
a
T

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s
d
n
a
d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s
n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c
d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b
d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t
n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.

y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
h
t
g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
|
(cid:96)
(cid:96)
y

|

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.
n
i
b

h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o
o
t

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q
n
i

d
e
d
d
a

1
–
8
0

.

8

.

0
–
7
0

.

7

.

0
–
6
0

.

6

.

0
–
5

.

0

5

.

0
–
4

.

0

4

.

0
–
3

.

0

3

.

0
–
2

.

0

2

.

0
–
1

.

0

.

1
0
–
0

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d
d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

|
)

∗

θ
(
s
o
c

|

%

%

0
5

.

7
1

%
3
8
0

.

5
6
5
0

.

%

%

2
5

.

4
1

%
1
7
0

.

3
0
1

.

%

7
1

%

3
1

%

%

9
6

.

3
5

.

%
7
8
0

.

%

4
4

.

8
0
1

.

%

%

1

.

6

4

.

5

%
2
7

.

0

%

9

.

2

7
0

.

1

%

%

7

.

5

1
1

3
9
9

.

0

%
6
6

.

0

%

1

.

9

%

%

9

.

5

4

.

5

%
5
7

.

0

%

2

.

2

8
0

.

1

%

%

1

.

5

8

.

4

%
0
7

.

0

%

8

.

1

5
2

.

1

%

%

3

.

5

4
1

%
9
4

.

0

%

3
1

2
1

.

1

%

%

0

.

6

1

.

5

%
2
7

.

0

%

9

.

2

4
2

.

1

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t

S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

d
n
a

,
|
)

∗

|

g
n
i
d
u
l
c
n
i

,
e
c
n
a
t
p
e
c
c
a
l
a
n
g
i
s
e
h
t
n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
l
a
c
i
t
e
r
o
e
h
t
d
n
a
n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c
e
r

t
n
e
v
e
m
o
r
f

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
s
e
d
u
l
c
n
i
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
s
e
h
T

.
s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
d
e
t
a
l
e
r

n
i

d
e
d
d
a

e
r
a

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

d
n
a

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

,
c
i
t
a
m
e
t
s
y
S

.
y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

n
w
o
h
s

e
r
a

s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
u
o
r
g
k
c
a
b

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

n
i

s
e
i
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.

y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
l

e
h
t

θ
(
s
o
c

,
e
l
b
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
i
b

n
i

h
t
d
i
w
n
i
b

e
s
r
e
v
n
i

e
h
t

h
t
i

w
d
e
l
a
c
s

d
n
a

y
t
i
n
u

o
t

d
e
s
i
l
a
m
r
o
n

,
y
l
l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
s

s
s
o
r
c

d
e
d
l
o
f
n
U

:
4
2

e
l
b
a
T

.

y
l
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
d
a
m

s
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

r
o
f

x
i
r
t
a
m
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c

e
h
T

.
n
i
b

h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
l
a
t
o
t

e
h
t

n
i
a
t
b
o
o
t

e
r
u
t
a
r
d
a
u
q

%

1
2

0
5
9
0
0

.

%
4
8

.

%
4
1

.

%

9
1

1
6
2
0

.

2
7
2
0

.

%
3
9

.

%
2
8

.

%
2
1

.

%
2
4

.

%

%

%

%

1
8

.

0
1

.

3
1

5
1

%

%

1
7

.

0
1

8
3
3
0

.

%
5
9
0

.

%

5
7

.

%

%

7

.

6

3
1

%
4
8

.

0

%

1
1

0
9
3

.

0

%

%

5

.

5

4

.

5

%
8
6

.

0

%

1

.

1

%

%

5

.

5

2

.

5

%
9
6

.

0

%

6

.

1

%

%

2

.

6

5

.

5

%
3
8

.

0

%

7

.

2

8
1
5

.

0

8
7
5

.

0

4
5
5

.

0

%

%

2

.

9

1

.

5

%
6
7

.

0

%

6

.

7

2
2
6

.

0

%

%

%

%

8

.

5

4

.

5

0

.

1

9

.

1

%

%

3

.

9

9

.

4

%
3
7

.

0

%

9

.

7

6
9
5

.

0

5
3
6

.
0

.
c
n
U

l
a
t
o
T

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
c
n
U

.
t
a
t

S

.
t
s
y
S

.

g
k
B

s
t
l
u
s
e
R

56

A.3. Bin-to-bin correlation matrices for the diﬀerential measurements

plead
T

[GeV]
25– 30
30– 35
35– 40
40– 50
50– 60
60– 70
70– 80
80–100
100–150
150–500

25–30
1
0.13
0.091
0.14
0.20
0.11
0.094
0.13
0.12
0.092

30–35
0.13
1
0.060
0.17
0.24
0.12
0.091
0.14
0.15
0.078

35–40
0.091
0.060
1
0.22
0.32
0.20
0.15
0.19
0.22
0.088

40–50
0.14
0.17
0.22
1
0.39
0.27
0.22
0.28
0.30
0.15

50–60
0.20
0.24
0.32
0.39
1
0.33
0.28
0.39
0.43
0.21

60–70
0.11
0.12
0.20
0.27
0.33
1
0.16
0.25
0.29
0.17

70–80
0.094
0.091
0.15
0.22
0.28
0.16
1
0.19
0.25
0.14

80–100
0.13
0.14
0.19
0.28
0.39
0.25
0.19
1
0.33
0.21

100–150

0.12
0.15
0.22
0.30
0.43
0.29
0.25
0.33
1
0.21

150–500
0.092
0.078
0.088
0.15
0.21
0.17
0.14
0.21
0.21
1

Table 25: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the unnormalised unfolded distribution of the leading
lepton pT, including all sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

pT((cid:96)(cid:96)) [GeV]
0– 25
25– 30
30– 35
35– 40
40– 50
50– 60
60– 70
70– 80
80–500

0–25
1
0.084
0.082
0.086
0.12
0.10
0.13
0.12
0.14

25–30
0.084
1
0.14
0.16
0.24
0.20
0.22
0.23
0.24

30–35
0.082
0.14
1
0.13
0.24
0.21
0.24
0.22
0.25

35–40
0.085
0.16
0.13
1
0.19
0.20
0.22
0.22
0.22

40–50
0.12
0.24
0.24
0.19
1
0.26
0.34
0.33
0.38

50–60
0.10
0.20
0.21
0.20
0.26
1
0.28
0.29
0.35

60–70
0.13
0.23
0.24
0.23
0.34
0.29
1
0.34
0.46

70–80
0.12
0.23
0.22
0.22
0.33
0.29
0.33
1
0.43

80–500

0.14
0.24
0.24
0.22
0.37
0.35
0.45
0.43
1

Table 26: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the unnormalised unfolded pT((cid:96)(cid:96)) distribution, including
all sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

m(cid:96)(cid:96) [GeV]

10– 20
20– 30
30– 40
40– 50
50– 60
60– 70
70– 85
85–100
100–115
115–135
135–155
155–175
175–210
210–650

10
–20
1
0.19
0.23
0.12
0.22
0.17
0.26
0.30
0.13
0.18
0.23
0.10
0.14
0.17

20
–30
0.19
1
0.20
0.13
0.23
0.19
0.33
0.31
0.20
0.20
0.23
0.13
0.15
0.20

30
–40
0.23
0.20
1
0.10
0.25
0.22
0.31
0.30
0.22
0.19
0.23
0.13
0.12
0.17

50
40
–60
–50
0.23
0.12
0.23
0.13
0.25
0.11
0.10
1
1
0.10
0.18
0.13
0.31
0.17
0.32
0.18
0.21
0.13
0.20
0.11
0.13
0.24
0.071 0.12
0.082 0.15
0.093 0.17

60
–70
0.19
0.21
0.23
0.13
0.19
1
0.27
0.26
0.26
0.20
0.22
0.13
0.14
0.16

70
–85
0.26
0.33
0.31
0.17
0.31
0.27
1
0.38
0.30
0.26
0.31
0.15
0.19
0.22

85
–100
0.32
0.33
0.31
0.18
0.33
0.26
0.38
1
0.22
0.26
0.35
0.17
0.20
0.25

100
–115
0.15
0.23
0.23
0.13
0.22
0.26
0.31
0.23
1
0.18
0.19
0.12
0.15
0.17

115
–135
0.18
0.20
0.19
0.11
0.20
0.20
0.26
0.25
0.18
1
0.17
0.13
0.13
0.16

135
–155
0.24
0.24
0.24
0.13
0.24
0.21
0.31
0.34
0.18
0.17
1
0.085
0.16
0.19

155
–175
0.10
0.13
0.13
0.071
0.12
0.13
0.15
0.16
0.12
0.13
0.085
1
0.070
0.10

175
–210
0.14
0.15
0.12
0.081
0.15
0.13
0.18
0.20
0.14
0.13
0.16
0.070
1
0.12

210
–650
0.17
0.20
0.17
0.093
0.17
0.16
0.22
0.25
0.16
0.17
0.19
0.10
0.12
1

Table 27: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the unnormalised unfolded m(cid:96)(cid:96) distribution, including all
sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

57

∆φ(cid:96)(cid:96)
0– π/8
π/8– π/4
π/4–3π/8
3π/8– π/2
π/2–5π/8
5π/8–3π/4
3π/4–7π/8
7π/8– π

0–π/8

1
0.35
0.34
0.23
0.33
0.43
0.38
0.24

π/8–π/4
0.35
1
0.38
0.25
0.36
0.47
0.42
0.25

π/4–3π/8

3π/8–π/2

π/2–5π/8

5π/8–3π/4

3π/4–7π/8

0.34
0.38
1
0.23
0.32
0.45
0.40
0.22

0.23
0.25
0.23
1
0.22
0.30
0.28
0.16

0.33
0.36
0.32
0.22
1
0.45
0.43
0.24

0.43
0.48
0.45
0.30
0.45
1
0.57
0.33

0.38
0.42
0.40
0.28
0.43
0.57
1
0.32

7π/8–π
0.24
0.25
0.22
0.16
0.24
0.33
0.32
1

Table 28: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the unnormalised unfolded ∆φ(cid:96)(cid:96) distribution, including
all sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

|y(cid:96)(cid:96)|
0 –0.2
0.2–0.4
0.4–0.6
0.6–0.8
0.8–1.0
1.0–1.2
1.2–1.4
1.4–1.6
1.6–1.8
1.8–2.0
2.0–2.5

0–0.2
1
0.46
0.49
0.46
0.46
0.44
0.22
0.26
0.21
0.35
0.15

0.2–0.4

0.4–0.6

0.6–0.8

0.46
1
0.44
0.48
0.45
0.43
0.24
0.25
0.22
0.35
0.14

0.49
0.44
1
0.43
0.45
0.44
0.23
0.25
0.21
0.34
0.14

0.46
0.48
0.43
1
0.42
0.42
0.22
0.26
0.20
0.34
0.14

0.8–1
0.46
0.44
0.45
0.42
1
0.41
0.23
0.26
0.21
0.34
0.14

1–1.2
0.44
0.43
0.44
0.42
0.41
1
0.20
0.25
0.22
0.33
0.14

1.2–1.4

1.4–1.6

1.6–1.8

0.22
0.24
0.23
0.22
0.23
0.20
1
0.13
0.11
0.19
0.075

0.26
0.25
0.25
0.26
0.26
0.25
0.13
1
0.12
0.19
0.098

0.21
0.22
0.21
0.20
0.21
0.22
0.11
0.12
1
0.16
0.081

1.8–2
0.35
0.34
0.34
0.33
0.34
0.33
0.18
0.19
0.16
1
0.13

2–2.5
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.075
0.098
0.081
0.13
1

Table 29: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the unnormalised unfolded |y(cid:96)(cid:96)| distribution, including
all sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

|cos (θ∗)|
0 –0.1
0.1–0.2
0.2–0.3
0.3–0.4
0.4–0.5
0.5–0.6
0.6–0.7
0.7–0.8
0.8–1.0

0–0.1
1
0.20
0.44
0.36
0.23
0.33
0.33
0.26
0.22

0.1–0.2
0.20
1
0.24
0.21
0.14
0.19
0.18
0.14
0.12

0.2–0.3

0.3–0.4

0.44
0.24
1
0.44
0.29
0.42
0.40
0.32
0.29

0.36
0.21
0.44
1
0.25
0.34
0.33
0.28
0.23

0.4–0.5
0.23
0.14
0.29
0.25
1
0.23
0.21
0.18
0.15

0.5–0.6

0.6–0.7

0.33
0.19
0.42
0.34
0.23
1
0.32
0.26
0.22

0.33
0.18
0.40
0.33
0.21
0.32
1
0.25
0.21

0.7–0.8
0.26
0.14
0.32
0.28
0.18
0.26
0.25
1
0.17

0.8–1
0.22
0.12
0.29
0.23
0.15
0.22
0.21
0.17
1

Table 30: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the unnormalised unfolded |cos (θ∗)| distribution, includ-
ing all sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

58

A.4. Bin-to-bin correlation matrices for the normalised diﬀerential measurements

plead
T

[GeV]
25– 30
30– 35
35– 40
40– 50
50– 60
60– 70
70– 80
80–100
100–150
150–500

25–30

1
0.74
−0.66
−0.59
0.35
−0.63
−0.47
−0.54
0.12
−0.26

30–35
0.74
1
−0.71
−0.60
0.35
−0.65
−0.49
−0.57
0.11
−0.30

35–40
−0.66
−0.71
1
0.35
−0.39
0.45
0.31
0.33
−0.23
0.17

40–50
−0.59
−0.60
0.35
1
−0.50
0.39
0.14
0.22
−0.18
0.15

60–70
−0.63
−0.65
0.45
0.39
−0.45
1
0.19
0.34

70–80
50–60
−0.47
0.35
−0.49
0.35
−0.39
0.31
−0.50
0.14
−0.21
1
−0.45
0.19
−0.21
1
−0.30
0.35
−0.049 −0.080 −0.26
−0.22
0.020

0.27

80–100
−0.54
−0.57
0.33
0.22
−0.30
0.34
0.35
1
−0.12
0.21

100–150

0.12
0.11
−0.23
−0.18
−0.049
−0.080
−0.26
−0.12
1
0.087

150–500
−0.25
−0.29
0.16
0.15
−0.22
0.27
0.020
0.21
0.087
1

Table 31: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the normalised unfolded leading lepton pT distribution,
including all sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

0–25
1

pT((cid:96)(cid:96)) [GeV]
25–30
−0.20
0– 25
25– 30 −0.20
1
30– 35 −0.42
0.41
35– 40 −0.72
0.12
−0.19
40– 50 −0.63
50– 60 −0.82
0.12
60– 70 −0.23
−0.37
70– 80 −0.078 −0.26
0.016 −0.21
80–500

30–35
−0.42
0.41
1
0.25
−0.048
0.35
−0.31
−0.25
−0.16

35–40
−0.72
0.12
0.25
1
0.37
0.60
0.096
−0.0072
−0.15

40–50
50–60
−0.63
−0.82
−0.19
0.12
−0.048
0.35
0.37
0.60
1
0.43
0.43
1
0.30
0.072
−0.030
0.12
−0.050 −0.11

70–80
−0.078
−0.26
−0.25

80–500
60–70
−0.23
0.016
−0.21
−0.37
−0.31
−0.16
0.096 −0.0072 −0.15
−0.050
0.30
0.12
0.072 −0.030
−0.11
0.048
0.080
1
−0.021
0.080
1
0.048 −0.021
1

Table 32: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the normalised unfolded pT((cid:96)(cid:96)) distribution, including
all sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

m(cid:96)(cid:96) [GeV]

10

30

20
–30

1

–20

–40
−0.025 −0.011
10– 20
−0.15
20– 30 −0.025
1
30– 40 −0.011 −0.15
1
40– 50 −0.074 −0.43
0.063
50– 60 −0.069 −0.28
0.065
60– 70 −0.093 −0.27
0.0067
70– 85 −0.10 −0.060 −0.049
0.0042 0.042 −0.059
85–100
100–115 −0.13
0.018 −0.013
115–135 −0.052 −0.32
0.0089
135–155 −0.041
155–175
175–210
210–650

0.016 −0.026 −0.075
0.39 −0.17
0.063
0.40 −0.14
0.049

135

100
–115

115
–135

40
–50

50
–60

60

–70

0.37
1
0.11

0.018 −0.32

175
–210
0.063
0.39

155
–175
0.016
−0.026

85
–100
–155
0.0042 −0.13 −0.052 −0.041
0.021

210
70
–650
–85
−0.074 −0.069 −0.093 −0.10
0.049
−0.43 −0.28 −0.27 −0.060 0.042
0.40
0.0089 −0.000 94 −0.075 −0.17 −0.14
0.063 0.065 0.0067 −0.048 −0.059 −0.013
0.49 −0.078
−0.053 −0.80 −0.79
−0.079
1
−0.15 −0.49 −0.46
0.18 −0.046
0.014
0.37
−0.18 −0.44 −0.41
0.020
0.048
0.37
0.14
−0.22 −0.15 −0.11
0.067 −0.11
0.039 −0.012 −0.094
0.046
−0.14 −0.16 −0.17 −0.20
−0.10 −0.20 −0.0095 −0.060
0.098
0.12
−0.59 −0.054
−0.079 0.014 0.048
1
0.12
0.38 −0.45 −0.58
−0.41
0.49
0.30 −0.39
−0.52 −0.034
0.12
0.15 −0.088
1
0.15
1
0.75
−0.088
1
0.75

−0.053 −0.15 −0.18 −0.22 −0.060 −0.59
−0.80 −0.49 −0.44 −0.15
−0.79 −0.46 −0.41 −0.11

0.039 −0.14
0.37
0.11 −0.012 −0.16
−0.094 −0.17
1
−0.20
1
1

0.067 −0.10
0.14 −0.11 −0.20

0.38 −0.52
0.098 −0.054 −0.45 −0.034
0.12
0.12

0.12 −0.58

0.30
−0.39
1

−0.41
1

0.18

0.021 −0.000 94 −0.078 −0.046 0.020

0.046 −0.0095

Table 33: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the normalised unfolded m(cid:96)(cid:96) distribution, including all
sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

59

∆φ(cid:96)(cid:96)
0– π/8
π/8– π/4
π/4–3π/8
3π/8– π/2
π/2–5π/8
5π/8–3π/4
3π/4–7π/8
7π/8– π

0–π/8

1
−0.071
−0.052
0.024
−0.034
−0.11
−0.16
−0.055

π/8–π/4
−0.071
1
0.24
−0.27
−0.13
0.065
−0.076
−0.25

π/4–3π/8
−0.052
0.24
1
−0.70
−0.32
0.36
0.14
−0.41

3π/8–π/2
0.024
−0.27
−0.70
1
0.23
−0.45
−0.27
0.16

π/2–5π/8
−0.034
−0.13
−0.32
0.23
1
−0.24
−0.13
−0.21

5π/8–3π/4

3π/4–7π/8

−0.11
0.065
0.36
−0.45
−0.24
1
−0.0077
−0.41

−0.16
−0.076
0.14
−0.27
−0.13
−0.0077
1
−0.42

7π/8–π
−0.055
−0.25
−0.41
0.16
−0.21
−0.41
−0.42
1

Table 34: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the normalised unfolded ∆φ(cid:96)(cid:96) distribution, including all
sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

|y(cid:96)(cid:96)|
0 –0.2
0.2–0.4
0.4–0.6
0.6–0.8
0.8–1.0
1.0–1.2
1.2–1.4 −0.39
1.4–1.6 −0.60
1.6–1.8 −0.58
1.8–2.0
2.0–2.5 −0.75

0.2–0.4
0–0.2
0.037
1
1
0.037
0.087
0.62
0.069
0.027
−0.070
0.14
0.0066 −0.078
−0.28
−0.13
−0.26
0.088 −0.12
−0.13

0.8–1
0.14

1.2–1.4

1–1.2
0.6–0.8
0.4–0.6
0.0066 −0.39
0.027
0.62
0.069 −0.070 −0.078 −0.28
0.087
0.038 −0.57
0.14
0.11
1
−0.094 −0.063 −0.38
1
0.11
−0.19
−0.094
1
0.14
−0.063 −0.11
−0.20
0.038
−0.38
−0.19 −0.20
−0.57
1
−0.026 −0.19 −0.066
−0.47
0.054
−0.25 −0.13
−0.69
−0.33
0.64
0.000 76 −0.16
−0.055 −0.086
0.089
−0.033 −0.23 −0.064
−0.61
0.17

−0.11
1

1.4–1.6
−0.60
−0.13
−0.47
−0.026
−0.19
−0.066
0.054
1
0.28
−0.23
0.63

1.6–1.8
−0.58
−0.26
−0.69
−0.33
−0.25
−0.13
0.64
0.28
1
−0.028
0.44

1.8–2
2–2.5
0.088 −0.75
−0.12
−0.13
0.000 76−0.61
−0.16
−0.033
−0.055 −0.23
−0.086 −0.064
0.089
0.17
−0.23
0.63
−0.028
0.44
−0.22
1
−0.22
1

Table 35: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the normalised unfolded |y(cid:96)(cid:96)| distribution, including all
sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

0–0.1
1
0.30

0.1–0.2
0.30
1

|cos (θ∗)|
0 –0.1
0.1–0.2
0.2–0.3 −0.25 −0.35
0.047
0.23
0.3–0.4
0.74
0.27
0.4–0.5
0.38
0.5–0.6
0.065
0.6–0.7 −0.25
0.0026
0.7–0.8 −0.47 −0.79
0.8–1.0 −0.29 −0.83

0.2–0.3
−0.25
−0.35
1
−0.27
−0.34
−0.26
−0.023
0.27
0.22

0.3–0.4
0.047
0.23
−0.27
1
0.20
0.014
−0.23
−0.35
−0.21

0.4–0.5
0.27
0.74
−0.34
0.20
1
0.33
−0.071
−0.75
−0.74

0.5–0.6

0.6–0.7

0.065 −0.25
0.0026
0.38
−0.023
−0.26
0.014 −0.23
−0.071
0.33
−0.076
1
−0.076
1
−0.44
0.17
−0.26
−0.43

0.7–0.8
−0.47
−0.79
0.27
−0.35
−0.75
−0.44
0.17
1
0.61

0.8–1
−0.29
−0.83
0.22
−0.21
−0.74
−0.43
−0.26
0.61
1

Table 36: Correlation matrix for the total uncertainties for the normalised unfolded |cos (θ∗)| distribution, including
all sources of systematic and statistical uncertainties.

60

The ATLAS Collaboration

G. Aad87, B. Abbott115, J. Abdallah153, O. Abdinov11, R. Aben109, M. Abolins92, O.S. AbouZeid160,
H. Abramowicz155, H. Abreu154, R. Abreu118, Y. Abulaiti148a,148b, B.S. Acharya164a,164b,a,
L. Adamczyk39a, D.L. Adams26, J. Adelman110, S. Adomeit102, T. Adye133, A.A. Aﬀolder76,
T. Agatonovic-Jovin13, J. Agricola55, J.A. Aguilar-Saavedra128a,128f, S.P. Ahlen23, F. Ahmadov67,b,
G. Aielli135a,135b, H. Akerstedt148a,148b, T.P.A. Åkesson83, A.V. Akimov98, G.L. Alberghi21a,21b,
J. Albert169, S. Albrand56, M.J. Alconada Verzini73, M. Aleksa31, I.N. Aleksandrov67, C. Alexa27b,
G. Alexander155, T. Alexopoulos10, M. Alhroob115, G. Alimonti93a, L. Alio87, J. Alison32, S.P. Alkire36,
B.M.M. Allbrooke151, P.P. Allport18, A. Aloisio106a,106b, A. Alonso37, F. Alonso73, C. Alpigiani140,
B. Alvarez Gonzalez31, D. Álvarez Piqueras167, M.G. Alviggi106a,106b, B.T. Amadio15, K. Amako68,
Y. Amaral Coutinho25a, C. Amelung24, D. Amidei91, S.P. Amor Dos Santos128a,128c, A. Amorim128a,128b,
S. Amoroso49, N. Amram155, G. Amundsen24, C. Anastopoulos141, L.S. Ancu50, N. Andari110,
T. Andeen32, C.F. Anders59b, G. Anders31, J.K. Anders76, K.J. Anderson32, A. Andreazza93a,93b,
V. Andrei59a, S. Angelidakis9, I. Angelozzi109, P. Anger45, A. Angerami36, F. Anghinolﬁ31,
A.V. Anisenkov111,c, N. Anjos12, A. Annovi126a,126b, M. Antonelli48, A. Antonov100, J. Antos146b,
F. Anulli134a, M. Aoki68, L. Aperio Bella18, G. Arabidze92, Y. Arai68, J.P. Araque128a, A.T.H. Arce46,
F.A. Arduh73, J-F. Arguin97, S. Argyropoulos64, M. Arik19a, A.J. Armbruster31, O. Arnaez31,
H. Arnold49, M. Arratia29, O. Arslan22, A. Artamonov99, G. Artoni122, S. Artz85, S. Asai157, N. Asbah43,
A. Ashkenazi155, B. Åsman148a,148b, L. Asquith151, K. Assamagan26, R. Astalos146a, M. Atkinson166,
N.B. Atlay143, K. Augsten130, M. Aurousseau147b, G. Avolio31, B. Axen15, M.K. Ayoub119,
G. Azuelos97,d, M.A. Baak31, A.E. Baas59a, M.J. Baca18, H. Bachacou138, K. Bachas156, M. Backes31,
M. Backhaus31, P. Bagiacchi134a,134b, P. Bagnaia134a,134b, Y. Bai34a, J.T. Baines133, O.K. Baker176,
E.M. Baldin111,c, P. Balek131, T. Balestri150, F. Balli86, W.K. Balunas124, E. Banas40, Sw. Banerjee173,e,
A.A.E. Bannoura175, L. Barak31, E.L. Barberio90, D. Barberis51a,51b, M. Barbero87, T. Barillari103,
M. Barisonzi164a,164b, T. Barklow145, N. Barlow29, S.L. Barnes86, B.M. Barnett133, R.M. Barnett15,
Z. Barnovska5, A. Baroncelli136a, G. Barone24, A.J. Barr122, F. Barreiro84,
J. Barreiro Guimarães da Costa34a, R. Bartoldus145, A.E. Barton74, P. Bartos146a, A. Basalaev125,
A. Bassalat119, A. Basye166, R.L. Bates54, S.J. Batista160, J.R. Batley29, M. Battaglia139,
M. Bauce134a,134b, F. Bauer138, H.S. Bawa145, f , J.B. Beacham113, M.D. Beattie74, T. Beau82,
P.H. Beauchemin163, R. Beccherle126a,126b, P. Bechtle22, H.P. Beck17,g, K. Becker122, M. Becker85,
M. Beckingham170, C. Becot119, A.J. Beddall19b, A. Beddall19b, V.A. Bednyakov67, C.P. Bee150,
L.J. Beemster109, T.A. Beermann31, M. Begel26, J.K. Behr122, C. Belanger-Champagne89, W.H. Bell50,
G. Bella155, L. Bellagamba21a, A. Bellerive30, M. Bellomo88, K. Belotskiy100, O. Beltramello31,
O. Benary155, D. Benchekroun137a, M. Bender102, K. Bendtz148a,148b, N. Benekos10, Y. Benhammou155,
E. Benhar Noccioli176, J.A. Benitez Garcia161b, D.P. Benjamin46, J.R. Bensinger24, S. Bentvelsen109,
L. Beresford122, M. Beretta48, D. Berge109, E. Bergeaas Kuutmann165, N. Berger5, F. Berghaus169,
J. Beringer15, C. Bernard23, N.R. Bernard88, C. Bernius112, F.U. Bernlochner22, T. Berry79, P. Berta131,
C. Bertella85, G. Bertoli148a,148b, F. Bertolucci126a,126b, C. Bertsche115, D. Bertsche115, M.I. Besana93a,
G.J. Besjes37, O. Bessidskaia Bylund148a,148b, M. Bessner43, N. Besson138, C. Betancourt49,
S. Bethke103, A.J. Bevan78, W. Bhimji15, R.M. Bianchi127, L. Bianchini24, M. Bianco31, O. Biebel102,
D. Biedermann16, N.V. Biesuz126a,126b, M. Biglietti136a, J. Bilbao De Mendizabal50, H. Bilokon48,
M. Bindi55, S. Binet119, A. Bingul19b, C. Bini134a,134b, S. Biondi21a,21b, D.M. Bjergaard46,
C.W. Black152, J.E. Black145, K.M. Black23, D. Blackburn140, R.E. Blair6, J.-B. Blanchard138,
J.E. Blanco79, T. Blazek146a, I. Bloch43, C. Blocker24, W. Blum85,∗, U. Blumenschein55, S. Blunier33a,
G.J. Bobbink109, V.S. Bobrovnikov111,c, S.S. Bocchetta83, A. Bocci46, C. Bock102, M. Boehler49,

61

J.A. Bogaerts31, D. Bogavac13, A.G. Bogdanchikov111, C. Bohm148a, V. Boisvert79, T. Bold39a,
V. Boldea27b, A.S. Boldyrev101, M. Bomben82, M. Bona78, M. Boonekamp138, A. Borisov132,
G. Borissov74, S. Borroni43, J. Bortfeldt102, V. Bortolotto61a,61b,61c, K. Bos109, D. Boscherini21a,
M. Bosman12, J. Boudreau127, J. Bouﬀard2, E.V. Bouhova-Thacker74, D. Boumediene35,
C. Bourdarios119, N. Bousson116, S.K. Boutle54, A. Boveia31, J. Boyd31, I.R. Boyko67, I. Bozic13,
J. Bracinik18, A. Brandt8, G. Brandt55, O. Brandt59a, U. Bratzler158, B. Brau88, J.E. Brau118,
H.M. Braun175,∗, W.D. Breaden Madden54, K. Brendlinger124, A.J. Brennan90, L. Brenner109,
R. Brenner165, S. Bressler172, T.M. Bristow47, D. Britton54, D. Britzger43, F.M. Brochu29, I. Brock22,
R. Brock92, G. Brooijmans36, T. Brooks79, W.K. Brooks33b, J. Brosamer15, E. Brost118,
P.A. Bruckman de Renstrom40, D. Bruncko146b, R. Bruneliere49, A. Bruni21a, G. Bruni21a,
M. Bruschi21a, N. Bruscino22, L. Bryngemark83, T. Buanes14, Q. Buat144, P. Buchholz143,
A.G. Buckley54, I.A. Budagov67, F. Buehrer49, L. Bugge121, M.K. Bugge121, O. Bulekov100,
D. Bullock8, H. Burckhart31, S. Burdin76, C.D. Burgard49, B. Burghgrave110, S. Burke133,
I. Burmeister44, E. Busato35, D. Büscher49, V. Büscher85, P. Bussey54, J.M. Butler23, A.I. Butt3,
C.M. Buttar54, J.M. Butterworth80, P. Butti109, W. Buttinger26, A. Buzatu54, A.R. Buzykaev111,c,
S. Cabrera Urbán167, D. Caforio130, V.M. Cairo38a,38b, O. Cakir4a, N. Calace50, P. Calaﬁura15,
A. Calandri138, G. Calderini82, P. Calfayan102, L.P. Caloba25a, D. Calvet35, S. Calvet35,
R. Camacho Toro32, S. Camarda43, P. Camarri135a,135b, D. Cameron121, R. Caminal Armadans166,
S. Campana31, M. Campanelli80, A. Campoverde150, V. Canale106a,106b, A. Canepa161a, M. Cano Bret34e,
J. Cantero84, R. Cantrill128a, T. Cao41, M.D.M. Capeans Garrido31, I. Caprini27b, M. Caprini27b,
M. Capua38a,38b, R. Caputo85, R.M. Carbone36, R. Cardarelli135a, F. Cardillo49, T. Carli31,
G. Carlino106a, L. Carminati93a,93b, S. Caron108, E. Carquin33a, G.D. Carrillo-Montoya31, J.R. Carter29,
J. Carvalho128a,128c, D. Casadei80, M.P. Casado12,h, M. Casolino12, D.W. Casper66,
E. Castaneda-Miranda147a, A. Castelli109, V. Castillo Gimenez167, N.F. Castro128a,i, P. Catastini58,
A. Catinaccio31, J.R. Catmore121, A. Cattai31, J. Caudron85, V. Cavaliere166, D. Cavalli93a,
M. Cavalli-Sforza12, V. Cavasinni126a,126b, F. Ceradini136a,136b, L. Cerda Alberich167, B.C. Cerio46,
A.S. Cerqueira25b, A. Cerri151, L. Cerrito78, F. Cerutti15, M. Cerv31, A. Cervelli17, S.A. Cetin19c,
A. Chafaq137a, D. Chakraborty110, I. Chalupkova131, Y.L. Chan61a, P. Chang166, J.D. Chapman29,
D.G. Charlton18, C.C. Chau160, C.A. Chavez Barajas151, S. Che113, S. Cheatham74, A. Chegwidden92,
S. Chekanov6, S.V. Chekulaev161a, G.A. Chelkov67, j, M.A. Chelstowska91, C. Chen65, H. Chen26,
K. Chen150, L. Chen34d,k, S. Chen34c, S. Chen157, X. Chen34f, Y. Chen69, H.C. Cheng91, Y. Cheng32,
A. Cheplakov67, E. Cheremushkina132, R. Cherkaoui El Moursli137e, V. Chernyatin26,∗, E. Cheu7,
L. Chevalier138, V. Chiarella48, G. Chiarelli126a,126b, G. Chiodini75a, A.S. Chisholm18, R.T. Chislett80,
A. Chitan27b, M.V. Chizhov67, K. Choi62, S. Chouridou9, B.K.B. Chow102, V. Christodoulou80,
D. Chromek-Burckhart31, J. Chudoba129, A.J. Chuinard89, J.J. Chwastowski40, L. Chytka117,
G. Ciapetti134a,134b, A.K. Ciftci4a, D. Cinca54, V. Cindro77, I.A. Cioara22, A. Ciocio15, F. Cirotto106a,106b,
Z.H. Citron172, M. Ciubancan27b, A. Clark50, B.L. Clark58, P.J. Clark47, R.N. Clarke15,
C. Clement148a,148b, Y. Coadou87, M. Cobal164a,164c, A. Coccaro50, J. Cochran65, L. Coﬀey24,
L. Colasurdo108, B. Cole36, S. Cole110, A.P. Colijn109, J. Collot56, T. Colombo59c, G. Compostella103,
P. Conde Muiño128a,128b, E. Coniavitis49, S.H. Connell147b, I.A. Connelly79, V. Consorti49,
S. Constantinescu27b, C. Conta123a,123b, G. Conti31, F. Conventi106a,l, M. Cooke15, B.D. Cooper80,
A.M. Cooper-Sarkar122, T. Cornelissen175, M. Corradi134a,134b, F. Corriveau89,m, A. Corso-Radu66,
A. Cortes-Gonzalez12, G. Cortiana103, G. Costa93a, M.J. Costa167, D. Costanzo141, D. Côté8, G. Cottin29,
G. Cowan79, B.E. Cox86, K. Cranmer112, S.J. Crawley54, G. Cree30, S. Crépé-Renaudin56, F. Crescioli82,
W.A. Cribbs148a,148b, M. Crispin Ortuzar122, M. Cristinziani22, V. Croft108, G. Crosetti38a,38b,
T. Cuhadar Donszelmann141, J. Cummings176, M. Curatolo48, J. Cúth85, C. Cuthbert152, H. Czirr143,
P. Czodrowski3, S. D’Auria54, M. D’Onofrio76, M.J. Da Cunha Sargedas De Sousa128a,128b, C. Da Via86,

62

W. Dabrowski39a, A. Daﬁnca122, T. Dai91, O. Dale14, F. Dallaire97, C. Dallapiccola88, M. Dam37,
J.R. Dandoy32, N.P. Dang49, A.C. Daniells18, M. Danninger168, M. Dano Hoﬀmann138, V. Dao49,
G. Darbo51a, S. Darmora8, J. Dassoulas3, A. Dattagupta62, W. Davey22, C. David169, T. Davidek131,
E. Davies122,n, M. Davies155, P. Davison80, Y. Davygora59a, E. Dawe90, I. Dawson141,
R.K. Daya-Ishmukhametova88, K. De8, R. de Asmundis106a, A. De Benedetti115, S. De Castro21a,21b,
S. De Cecco82, N. De Groot108, P. de Jong109, H. De la Torre84, F. De Lorenzi65, D. De Pedis134a,
A. De Salvo134a, U. De Sanctis151, A. De Santo151, J.B. De Vivie De Regie119, W.J. Dearnaley74,
R. Debbe26, C. Debenedetti139, D.V. Dedovich67, I. Deigaard109, J. Del Peso84, T. Del Prete126a,126b,
D. Delgove119, F. Deliot138, C.M. Delitzsch50, M. Deliyergiyev77, A. Dell’Acqua31, L. Dell’Asta23,
M. Dell’Orso126a,126b, M. Della Pietra106a,l, D. della Volpe50, M. Delmastro5, P.A. Delsart56,
C. Deluca109, D.A. DeMarco160, S. Demers176, M. Demichev67, A. Demilly82, S.P. Denisov132,
D. Derendarz40, J.E. Derkaoui137d, F. Derue82, P. Dervan76, K. Desch22, C. Deterre43, K. Dette44,
P.O. Deviveiros31, A. Dewhurst133, S. Dhaliwal24, A. Di Ciaccio135a,135b, L. Di Ciaccio5,
A. Di Domenico134a,134b, C. Di Donato134a,134b, A. Di Girolamo31, B. Di Girolamo31, A. Di Mattia154,
B. Di Micco136a,136b, R. Di Nardo48, A. Di Simone49, R. Di Sipio160, D. Di Valentino30, C. Diaconu87,
M. Diamond160, F.A. Dias47, M.A. Diaz33a, E.B. Diehl91, J. Dietrich16, S. Diglio87, A. Dimitrievska13,
J. Dingfelder22, P. Dita27b, S. Dita27b, F. Dittus31, F. Djama87, T. Djobava52b, J.I. Djuvsland59a,
M.A.B. do Vale25c, D. Dobos31, M. Dobre27b, C. Doglioni83, T. Dohmae157, J. Dolejsi131, Z. Dolezal131,
B.A. Dolgoshein100,∗, M. Donadelli25d, S. Donati126a,126b, P. Dondero123a,123b, J. Donini35, J. Dopke133,
A. Doria106a, M.T. Dova73, A.T. Doyle54, E. Drechsler55, M. Dris10, Y. Du34d, J. Duarte-Campderros155,
E. Dubreuil35, E. Duchovni172, G. Duckeck102, O.A. Ducu27b, D. Duda109, A. Dudarev31, L. Duﬂot119,
L. Duguid79, M. Dührssen31, M. Dunford59a, H. Duran Yildiz4a, M. Düren53, A. Durglishvili52b,
D. Duschinger45, B. Dutta43, M. Dyndal39a, C. Eckardt43, K.M. Ecker103, R.C. Edgar91, W. Edson2,
N.C. Edwards47, W. Ehrenfeld22, T. Eifert31, G. Eigen14, K. Einsweiler15, T. Ekelof165,
M. El Kacimi137c, M. Ellert165, S. Elles5, F. Ellinghaus175, A.A. Elliot169, N. Ellis31, J. Elmsheuser102,
M. Elsing31, D. Emeliyanov133, Y. Enari157, O.C. Endner85, M. Endo120, J. Erdmann44, A. Ereditato17,
G. Ernis175, J. Ernst2, M. Ernst26, S. Errede166, E. Ertel85, M. Escalier119, H. Esch44, C. Escobar127,
B. Esposito48, A.I. Etienvre138, E. Etzion155, H. Evans62, A. Ezhilov125, L. Fabbri21a,21b, G. Facini32,
R.M. Fakhrutdinov132, S. Falciano134a, R.J. Falla80, J. Faltova131, Y. Fang34a, M. Fanti93a,93b, A. Farbin8,
A. Farilla136a, C. Farina127, T. Farooque12, S. Farrell15, S.M. Farrington170, P. Farthouat31, F. Fassi137e,
P. Fassnacht31, D. Fassouliotis9, M. Faucci Giannelli79, A. Favareto51a,51b, L. Fayard119, O.L. Fedin125,o,
W. Fedorko168, S. Feigl121, L. Feligioni87, C. Feng34d, E.J. Feng31, H. Feng91, A.B. Fenyuk132,
L. Feremenga8, P. Fernandez Martinez167, S. Fernandez Perez12, J. Ferrando54, A. Ferrari165,
P. Ferrari109, R. Ferrari123a, D.E. Ferreira de Lima54, A. Ferrer167, D. Ferrere50, C. Ferretti91,
A. Ferretto Parodi51a,51b, F. Fiedler85, A. Filipˇciˇc77, M. Filipuzzi43, F. Filthaut108, M. Fincke-Keeler169,
K.D. Finelli152, M.C.N. Fiolhais128a,128c, L. Fiorini167, A. Firan41, A. Fischer2, C. Fischer12,
J. Fischer175, W.C. Fisher92, N. Flaschel43, I. Fleck143, P. Fleischmann91, G.T. Fletcher141, G. Fletcher78,
R.R.M. Fletcher124, T. Flick175, A. Floderus83, L.R. Flores Castillo61a, M.J. Flowerdew103,
G.T. Forcolin86, A. Formica138, A. Forti86, D. Fournier119, H. Fox74, S. Fracchia12, P. Francavilla82,
M. Franchini21a,21b, D. Francis31, L. Franconi121, M. Franklin58, M. Frate66, M. Fraternali123a,123b,
D. Freeborn80, S.T. French29, S.M. Fressard-Batraneanu31, F. Friedrich45, D. Froidevaux31,
J.A. Frost122, C. Fukunaga158, E. Fullana Torregrosa85, T. Fusayasu104, J. Fuster167, C. Gabaldon56,
O. Gabizon175, A. Gabrielli21a,21b, A. Gabrielli15, G.P. Gach18, S. Gadatsch31, S. Gadomski50,
G. Gagliardi51a,51b, P. Gagnon62, C. Galea108, B. Galhardo128a,128c, E.J. Gallas122, B.J. Gallop133,
P. Gallus130, G. Galster37, K.K. Gan113, J. Gao34b,87, Y. Gao47, Y.S. Gao145, f , F.M. Garay Walls47,
C. García167, J.E. García Navarro167, M. Garcia-Sciveres15, R.W. Gardner32, N. Garelli145,
V. Garonne121, C. Gatti48, A. Gaudiello51a,51b, G. Gaudio123a, B. Gaur143, L. Gauthier97,

63

I.L. Gavrilenko98, C. Gay168, G. Gaycken22, E.N. Gazis10, Z. Gecse168, C.N.P. Gee133,
Ch. Geich-Gimbel22, M.P. Geisler59a, C. Gemme51a, M.H. Genest56, C. Geng34b,p, S. Gentile134a,134b,
S. George79, D. Gerbaudo66, A. Gershon155, S. Ghasemi143, H. Ghazlane137b, B. Giacobbe21a,
S. Giagu134a,134b, P. Giannetti126a,126b, B. Gibbard26, S.M. Gibson79, M. Gignac168, M. Gilchriese15,
T.P.S. Gillam29, D. Gillberg31, G. Gilles35, D.M. Gingrich3,d, N. Giokaris9, M.P. Giordani164a,164c,
F.M. Giorgi21a, F.M. Giorgi16, P.F. Giraud138, P. Giromini58, D. Giugni93a, C. Giuliani103, M. Giulini59b,
B.K. Gjelsten121, S. Gkaitatzis156, I. Gkialas156, E.L. Gkougkousis119, L.K. Gladilin101, C. Glasman84,
J. Glatzer31, P.C.F. Glaysher47, A. Glazov43, M. Goblirsch-Kolb103, J.R. Goddard78, J. Godlewski40,
S. Goldfarb91, T. Golling50, D. Golubkov132, A. Gomes128a,128b,128d, R. Gonçalo128a,
J. Goncalves Pinto Firmino Da Costa138, L. Gonella22, S. González de la Hoz167, G. Gonzalez Parra12,
S. Gonzalez-Sevilla50, L. Goossens31, P.A. Gorbounov99, H.A. Gordon26, I. Gorelov107, B. Gorini31,
E. Gorini75a,75b, A. Gorišek77, E. Gornicki40, A.T. Goshaw46, C. Gössling44, M.I. Gostkin67,
D. Goujdami137c, A.G. Goussiou140, N. Govender147b, E. Gozani154, L. Graber55, I. Grabowska-Bold39a,
P.O.J. Gradin165, P. Grafström21a,21b, J. Gramling50, E. Gramstad121, S. Grancagnolo16, V. Gratchev125,
H.M. Gray31, E. Graziani136a, Z.D. Greenwood81,q, C. Grefe22, K. Gregersen80, I.M. Gregor43,
P. Grenier145, J. Griﬃths8, A.A. Grillo139, K. Grimm74, S. Grinstein12,r, Ph. Gris35, J.-F. Grivaz119,
S. Groh85, J.P. Grohs45, A. Grohsjean43, E. Gross172, J. Grosse-Knetter55, G.C. Grossi81, Z.J. Grout151,
L. Guan91, J. Guenther130, F. Guescini50, D. Guest66, O. Gueta155, E. Guido51a,51b, T. Guillemin5,
S. Guindon2, U. Gul54, C. Gumpert31, J. Guo34e, Y. Guo34b,p, S. Gupta122, G. Gustavino134a,134b,
P. Gutierrez115, N.G. Gutierrez Ortiz80, C. Gutschow45, C. Guyot138, C. Gwenlan122, C.B. Gwilliam76,
A. Haas112, C. Haber15, H.K. Hadavand8, N. Haddad137e, P. Haefner22, S. Hageböck22, Z. Hajduk40,
H. Hakobyan177,∗, M. Haleem43, J. Haley116, D. Hall122, G. Halladjian92, G.D. Hallewell87,
K. Hamacher175, P. Hamal117, K. Hamano169, A. Hamilton147a, G.N. Hamity141, P.G. Hamnett43,
L. Han34b, K. Hanagaki68,s, K. Hanawa157, M. Hance139, B. Haney124, P. Hanke59a, R. Hanna138,
J.B. Hansen37, J.D. Hansen37, M.C. Hansen22, P.H. Hansen37, K. Hara162, A.S. Hard173, T. Harenberg175,
F. Hariri119, S. Harkusha94, R.D. Harrington47, P.F. Harrison170, F. Hartjes109, M. Hasegawa69,
Y. Hasegawa142, A. Hasib115, S. Hassani138, S. Haug17, R. Hauser92, L. Hauswald45, M. Havranek129,
C.M. Hawkes18, R.J. Hawkings31, A.D. Hawkins83, T. Hayashi162, D. Hayden92, C.P. Hays122,
J.M. Hays78, H.S. Hayward76, S.J. Haywood133, S.J. Head18, T. Heck85, V. Hedberg83, L. Heelan8,
S. Heim124, T. Heim15, B. Heinemann15, L. Heinrich112, J. Hejbal129, L. Helary23, S. Hellman148a,148b,
C. Helsens31, J. Henderson122, R.C.W. Henderson74, Y. Heng173, C. Hengler43, S. Henkelmann168,
A.M. Henriques Correia31, S. Henrot-Versille119, G.H. Herbert16, Y. Hernández Jiménez167, G. Herten49,
R. Hertenberger102, L. Hervas31, G.G. Hesketh80, N.P. Hessey109, J.W. Hetherly41, R. Hickling78,
E. Higón-Rodriguez167, E. Hill169, J.C. Hill29, K.H. Hiller43, S.J. Hillier18, I. Hinchliﬀe15, E. Hines124,
R.R. Hinman15, M. Hirose159, D. Hirschbuehl175, J. Hobbs150, N. Hod109, M.C. Hodgkinson141,
P. Hodgson141, A. Hoecker31, M.R. Hoeferkamp107, F. Hoenig102, M. Hohlfeld85, D. Hohn22,
T.R. Holmes15, M. Homann44, T.M. Hong127, B.H. Hooberman166, W.H. Hopkins118, Y. Horii105,
A.J. Horton144, J-Y. Hostachy56, S. Hou153, A. Hoummada137a, J. Howard122, J. Howarth43,
M. Hrabovsky117, I. Hristova16, J. Hrivnac119, T. Hryn’ova5, A. Hrynevich95, C. Hsu147c, P.J. Hsu153,t,
S.-C. Hsu140, D. Hu36, Q. Hu34b, X. Hu91, Y. Huang43, Z. Hubacek130, F. Hubaut87, F. Huegging22,
T.B. Huﬀman122, E.W. Hughes36, G. Hughes74, M. Huhtinen31, T.A. Hülsing85, N. Huseynov67,b,
J. Huston92, J. Huth58, G. Iacobucci50, G. Iakovidis26, I. Ibragimov143, L. Iconomidou-Fayard119,
E. Ideal176, Z. Idrissi137e, P. Iengo31, O. Igonkina109, T. Iizawa171, Y. Ikegami68, M. Ikeno68,
Y. Ilchenko32,u, D. Iliadis156, N. Ilic145, T. Ince103, G. Introzzi123a,123b, P. Ioannou9,∗, M. Iodice136a,
K. Iordanidou36, V. Ippolito58, A. Irles Quiles167, C. Isaksson165, M. Ishino70, M. Ishitsuka159,
R. Ishmukhametov113, C. Issever122, S. Istin19a, J.M. Iturbe Ponce86, R. Iuppa135a,135b, J. Ivarsson83,
W. Iwanski40, H. Iwasaki68, J.M. Izen42, V. Izzo106a, S. Jabbar3, B. Jackson124, M. Jackson76,

64

P. Jackson1, M.R. Jaekel31, V. Jain2, K.B. Jakobi85, K. Jakobs49, S. Jakobsen31, T. Jakoubek129,
J. Jakubek130, D.O. Jamin116, D.K. Jana81, E. Jansen80, R. Jansky63, J. Janssen22, M. Janus55,
G. Jarlskog83, N. Javadov67,b, T. Jav˚urek49, L. Jeanty15, J. Jejelava52a,v, G.-Y. Jeng152, D. Jennens90,
P. Jenni49,w, J. Jentzsch44, C. Jeske170, S. Jézéquel5, H. Ji173, J. Jia150, H. Jiang65, Y. Jiang34b,
S. Jiggins80, J. Jimenez Pena167, S. Jin34a, A. Jinaru27b, O. Jinnouchi159, P. Johansson141, K.A. Johns7,
W.J. Johnson140, K. Jon-And148a,148b, G. Jones170, R.W.L. Jones74, T.J. Jones76, J. Jongmanns59a,
P.M. Jorge128a,128b, K.D. Joshi86, J. Jovicevic161a, X. Ju173, A. Juste Rozas12,r, M.K. Köhler172,
M. Kaci167, A. Kaczmarska40, M. Kado119, H. Kagan113, M. Kagan145, S.J. Kahn87, E. Kajomovitz46,
C.W. Kalderon122, A. Kaluza85, S. Kama41, A. Kamenshchikov132, N. Kanaya157, S. Kaneti29,
V.A. Kantserov100, J. Kanzaki68, B. Kaplan112, L.S. Kaplan173, A. Kapliy32, D. Kar147c,
K. Karakostas10, A. Karamaoun3, N. Karastathis10,109, M.J. Kareem55, E. Karentzos10, M. Karnevskiy85,
S.N. Karpov67, Z.M. Karpova67, K. Karthik112, V. Kartvelishvili74, A.N. Karyukhin132, K. Kasahara162,
L. Kashif173, R.D. Kass113, A. Kastanas14, Y. Kataoka157, C. Kato157, A. Katre50, J. Katzy43,
K. Kawade105, K. Kawagoe72, T. Kawamoto157, G. Kawamura55, S. Kazama157, V.F. Kazanin111,c,
R. Keeler169, R. Kehoe41, J.S. Keller43, J.J. Kempster79, H. Keoshkerian86, O. Kepka129,
B.P. Kerševan77, S. Kersten175, R.A. Keyes89, F. Khalil-zada11, H. Khandanyan148a,148b, A. Khanov116,
A.G. Kharlamov111,c, T.J. Khoo29, V. Khovanskiy99, E. Khramov67, J. Khubua52b,x, S. Kido69,
H.Y. Kim8, S.H. Kim162, Y.K. Kim32, N. Kimura156, O.M. Kind16, B.T. King76, M. King167,
S.B. King168, J. Kirk133, A.E. Kiryunin103, T. Kishimoto69, D. Kisielewska39a, F. Kiss49, K. Kiuchi162,
O. Kivernyk138, E. Kladiva146b, M.H. Klein36, M. Klein76, U. Klein76, K. Kleinknecht85,
P. Klimek148a,148b, A. Klimentov26, R. Klingenberg44, J.A. Klinger141, T. Klioutchnikova31,
E.-E. Kluge59a, P. Kluit109, S. Kluth103, J. Knapik40, E. Kneringer63, E.B.F.G. Knoops87, A. Knue54,
A. Kobayashi157, D. Kobayashi159, T. Kobayashi157, M. Kobel45, M. Kocian145, P. Kodys131, T. Koﬀas30,
E. Koﬀeman109, L.A. Kogan122, S. Kohlmann175, Z. Kohout130, T. Kohriki68, T. Koi145, H. Kolanoski16,
M. Kolb59b, I. Koletsou5, A.A. Komar98,∗, Y. Komori157, T. Kondo68, N. Kondrashova43, K. Köneke49,
A.C. König108, T. Kono68,y, R. Konoplich112,z, N. Konstantinidis80, R. Kopeliansky154, S. Koperny39a,
L. Köpke85, A.K. Kopp49, K. Korcyl40, K. Kordas156, A. Korn80, A.A. Korol111,c, I. Korolkov12,
E.V. Korolkova141, O. Kortner103, S. Kortner103, T. Kosek131, V.V. Kostyukhin22, V.M. Kotov67,
A. Kotwal46, A. Kourkoumeli-Charalampidi156, C. Kourkoumelis9, V. Kouskoura26, A. Koutsman161a,
R. Kowalewski169, T.Z. Kowalski39a, W. Kozanecki138, A.S. Kozhin132, V.A. Kramarenko101,
G. Kramberger77, D. Krasnopevtsev100, M.W. Krasny82, A. Krasznahorkay31, J.K. Kraus22,
A. Kravchenko26, M. Kretz59c, J. Kretzschmar76, K. Kreutzfeldt53, P. Krieger160, K. Krizka32,
K. Kroeninger44, H. Kroha103, J. Kroll124, J. Kroseberg22, J. Krstic13, U. Kruchonak67, H. Krüger22,
N. Krumnack65, A. Kruse173, M.C. Kruse46, M. Kruskal23, T. Kubota90, H. Kucuk80, S. Kuday4b,
S. Kuehn49, A. Kugel59c, F. Kuger174, A. Kuhl139, T. Kuhl43, V. Kukhtin67, R. Kukla138, Y. Kulchitsky94,
S. Kuleshov33b, M. Kuna134a,134b, T. Kunigo70, A. Kupco129, H. Kurashige69, Y.A. Kurochkin94,
V. Kus129, E.S. Kuwertz169, M. Kuze159, J. Kvita117, T. Kwan169, D. Kyriazopoulos141, A. La Rosa139,
J.L. La Rosa Navarro25d, L. La Rotonda38a,38b, C. Lacasta167, F. Lacava134a,134b, J. Lacey30, H. Lacker16,
D. Lacour82, V.R. Lacuesta167, E. Ladygin67, R. Lafaye5, B. Laforge82, T. Lagouri176, S. Lai55,
L. Lambourne80, S. Lammers62, C.L. Lampen7, W. Lampl7, E. Lançon138, U. Landgraf49,
M.P.J. Landon78, V.S. Lang59a, J.C. Lange12, A.J. Lankford66, F. Lanni26, K. Lantzsch22, A. Lanza123a,
S. Laplace82, C. Lapoire31, J.F. Laporte138, T. Lari93a, F. Lasagni Manghi21a,21b, M. Lassnig31,
P. Laurelli48, W. Lavrijsen15, A.T. Law139, P. Laycock76, T. Lazovich58, O. Le Dortz82, E. Le Guirriec87,
E. Le Menedeu12, M. LeBlanc169, T. LeCompte6, F. Ledroit-Guillon56, C.A. Lee147a, S.C. Lee153,
L. Lee1, G. Lefebvre82, M. Lefebvre169, F. Legger102, C. Leggett15, A. Lehan76, G. Lehmann Miotto31,
X. Lei7, W.A. Leight30, A. Leisos156,aa, A.G. Leister176, M.A.L. Leite25d, R. Leitner131, D. Lellouch172,
B. Lemmer55, K.J.C. Leney80, T. Lenz22, B. Lenzi31, R. Leone7, S. Leone126a,126b, C. Leonidopoulos47,

65

S. Leontsinis10, C. Leroy97, C.G. Lester29, M. Levchenko125, J. Levêque5, D. Levin91, L.J. Levinson172,
M. Levy18, A. Lewis122, A.M. Leyko22, M. Leyton42, B. Li34b,ab, H. Li150, H.L. Li32, L. Li46, L. Li34e,
S. Li46, X. Li86, Y. Li34c,ac, Z. Liang139, H. Liao35, B. Liberti135a, A. Liblong160, P. Lichard31, K. Lie166,
J. Liebal22, W. Liebig14, C. Limbach22, A. Limosani152, S.C. Lin153,ad, T.H. Lin85, B.E. Lindquist150,
J.T. Linnemann92, E. Lipeles124, A. Lipniacka14, M. Lisovyi59b, T.M. Liss166, D. Lissauer26,
A. Lister168, A.M. Litke139, B. Liu153,ae, D. Liu153, H. Liu91, H. Liu26, J. Liu87, J.B. Liu34b, K. Liu87,
L. Liu166, M. Liu46, M. Liu34b, Y. Liu34b, M. Livan123a,123b, A. Lleres56, J. Llorente Merino84,
S.L. Lloyd78, F. Lo Sterzo153, E. Lobodzinska43, P. Loch7, W.S. Lockman139, F.K. Loebinger86,
A.E. Loevschall-Jensen37, K.M. Loew24, A. Loginov176, T. Lohse16, K. Lohwasser43, M. Lokajicek129,
B.A. Long23, J.D. Long166, R.E. Long74, K.A. Looper113, L. Lopes128a, D. Lopez Mateos58,
B. Lopez Paredes141, I. Lopez Paz12, J. Lorenz102, N. Lorenzo Martinez62, M. Losada20, P.J. Lösel102,
X. Lou34a, A. Lounis119, J. Love6, P.A. Love74, H. Lu61a, N. Lu91, H.J. Lubatti140, C. Luci134a,134b,
A. Lucotte56, C. Luedtke49, F. Luehring62, W. Lukas63, L. Luminari134a, O. Lundberg148a,148b,
B. Lund-Jensen149, D. Lynn26, R. Lysak129, E. Lytken83, H. Ma26, L.L. Ma34d, G. Maccarrone48,
A. Macchiolo103, C.M. Macdonald141, B. Maˇcek77, J. Machado Miguens124,128b, D. Macina31,
D. Madaﬀari87, R. Madar35, H.J. Maddocks74, W.F. Mader45, A. Madsen43, J. Maeda69, S. Maeland14,
T. Maeno26, A. Maevskiy101, E. Magradze55, K. Mahboubi49, J. Mahlstedt109, C. Maiani138,
C. Maidantchik25a, A.A. Maier103, T. Maier102, A. Maio128a,128b,128d, S. Majewski118, Y. Makida68,
N. Makovec119, B. Malaescu82, Pa. Malecki40, V.P. Maleev125, F. Malek56, U. Mallik64, D. Malon6,
C. Malone145, S. Maltezos10, V.M. Malyshev111, S. Malyukov31, J. Mamuzic43, G. Mancini48,
B. Mandelli31, L. Mandelli93a, I. Mandi´c77, J. Maneira128a,128b, L. Manhaes de Andrade Filho25b,
J. Manjarres Ramos161b, A. Mann102, A. Manousakis-Katsikakis9, B. Mansoulie138, R. Mantifel89,
M. Mantoani55, S. Manzoni93a,93b, L. Mapelli31, L. March147c, G. Marchiori82, M. Marcisovsky129,
M. Marjanovic13, D.E. Marley91, F. Marroquim25a, S.P. Marsden86, Z. Marshall15, L.F. Marti17,
S. Marti-Garcia167, B. Martin92, T.A. Martin170, V.J. Martin47, B. Martin dit Latour14, M. Martinez12,r,
S. Martin-Haugh133, V.S. Martoiu27b, A.C. Martyniuk80, M. Marx140, F. Marzano134a, A. Marzin31,
L. Masetti85, T. Mashimo157, R. Mashinistov98, J. Masik86, A.L. Maslennikov111,c, I. Massa21a,21b,
L. Massa21a,21b, P. Mastrandrea5, A. Mastroberardino38a,38b, T. Masubuchi157, P. Mättig175,
J. Mattmann85, J. Maurer27b, S.J. Maxﬁeld76, D.A. Maximov111,c, R. Mazini153, S.M. Mazza93a,93b,
G. Mc Goldrick160, S.P. Mc Kee91, A. McCarn91, R.L. McCarthy150, T.G. McCarthy30,
K.W. McFarlane57,∗, J.A. Mcfayden80, G. Mchedlidze55, S.J. McMahon133, R.A. McPherson169,m,
M. Medinnis43, S. Meehan140, S. Mehlhase102, A. Mehta76, K. Meier59a, C. Meineck102, B. Meirose42,
B.R. Mellado Garcia147c, F. Meloni17, A. Mengarelli21a,21b, S. Menke103, E. Meoni163, K.M. Mercurio58,
S. Mergelmeyer16, P. Mermod50, L. Merola106a,106b, C. Meroni93a, F.S. Merritt32, A. Messina134a,134b,
J. Metcalfe6, A.S. Mete66, C. Meyer85, C. Meyer124, J-P. Meyer138, J. Meyer109,
H. Meyer Zu Theenhausen59a, R.P. Middleton133, S. Miglioranzi164a,164c, L. Mijovi´c22, G. Mikenberg172,
M. Mikestikova129, M. Mikuž77, M. Milesi90, A. Milic31, D.W. Miller32, C. Mills47, A. Milov172,
D.A. Milstead148a,148b, A.A. Minaenko132, Y. Minami157, I.A. Minashvili67, A.I. Mincer112,
B. Mindur39a, M. Mineev67, Y. Ming173, L.M. Mir12, K.P. Mistry124, T. Mitani171, J. Mitrevski102,
V.A. Mitsou167, A. Miucci50, P.S. Miyagawa141, J.U. Mjörnmark83, T. Moa148a,148b, K. Mochizuki87,
S. Mohapatra36, W. Mohr49, S. Molander148a,148b, R. Moles-Valls22, R. Monden70, M.C. Mondragon92,
K. Mönig43, C. Monini56, J. Monk37, E. Monnier87, A. Montalbano150, J. Montejo Berlingen31,
F. Monticelli73, S. Monzani134a,134b, R.W. Moore3, N. Morange119, D. Moreno20, M. Moreno Llácer55,
P. Morettini51a, D. Mori144, T. Mori157, M. Morii58, M. Morinaga157, V. Morisbak121, S. Moritz85,
A.K. Morley152, G. Mornacchi31, J.D. Morris78, S.S. Mortensen37, A. Morton54, L. Morvaj150,
M. Mosidze52b, J. Moss145, K. Motohashi159, R. Mount145, E. Mountricha26, S.V. Mouraviev98,∗,
E.J.W. Moyse88, S. Muanza87, R.D. Mudd18, F. Mueller103, J. Mueller127, R.S.P. Mueller102,

66

T. Mueller29, D. Muenstermann74, P. Mullen54, G.A. Mullier17, F.J. Munoz Sanchez86,
J.A. Murillo Quijada18, W.J. Murray170,133, H. Musheghyan55, A.G. Myagkov132,a f , M. Myska130,
B.P. Nachman145, O. Nackenhorst50, J. Nadal55, K. Nagai122, R. Nagai159, Y. Nagai87, K. Nagano68,
Y. Nagasaka60, K. Nagata162, M. Nagel103, E. Nagy87, A.M. Nairz31, Y. Nakahama31, K. Nakamura68,
T. Nakamura157, I. Nakano114, H. Namasivayam42, R.F. Naranjo Garcia43, R. Narayan32,
D.I. Narrias Villar59a, T. Naumann43, G. Navarro20, R. Nayyar7, H.A. Neal91, P.Yu. Nechaeva98,
T.J. Neep86, P.D. Nef145, A. Negri123a,123b, M. Negrini21a, S. Nektarijevic108, C. Nellist119, A. Nelson66,
S. Nemecek129, P. Nemethy112, A.A. Nepomuceno25a, M. Nessi31,ag, M.S. Neubauer166,
M. Neumann175, R.M. Neves112, P. Nevski26, P.R. Newman18, D.H. Nguyen6, R.B. Nickerson122,
R. Nicolaidou138, B. Nicquevert31, J. Nielsen139, N. Nikiforou36, A. Nikiforov16, V. Nikolaenko132,a f ,
I. Nikolic-Audit82, K. Nikolopoulos18, J.K. Nilsen121, P. Nilsson26, Y. Ninomiya157, A. Nisati134a,
R. Nisius103, T. Nobe157, L. Nodulman6, M. Nomachi120, I. Nomidis30, T. Nooney78, S. Norberg115,
M. Nordberg31, O. Novgorodova45, S. Nowak103, M. Nozaki68, L. Nozka117, K. Ntekas10, E. Nurse80,
F. Nuti90, F. O’grady7, D.C. O’Neil144, V. O’Shea54, F.G. Oakham30,d, H. Oberlack103, T. Obermann22,
J. Ocariz82, A. Ochi69, I. Ochoa36, J.P. Ochoa-Ricoux33a, S. Oda72, S. Odaka68, H. Ogren62, A. Oh86,
S.H. Oh46, C.C. Ohm15, H. Ohman165, H. Oide31, W. Okamura120, H. Okawa162, Y. Okumura32,
T. Okuyama68, A. Olariu27b, S.A. Olivares Pino47, D. Oliveira Damazio26, A. Olszewski40,
J. Olszowska40, A. Onofre128a,128e, K. Onogi105, P.U.E. Onyisi32,u, C.J. Oram161a, M.J. Oreglia32,
Y. Oren155, D. Orestano136a,136b, N. Orlando156, C. Oropeza Barrera54, R.S. Orr160, B. Osculati51a,51b,
R. Ospanov86, G. Otero y Garzon28, H. Otono72, M. Ouchrif137d, F. Ould-Saada121, A. Ouraou138,
K.P. Oussoren109, Q. Ouyang34a, A. Ovcharova15, M. Owen54, R.E. Owen18, V.E. Ozcan19a, N. Ozturk8,
K. Pachal144, A. Pacheco Pages12, C. Padilla Aranda12, M. Pagáˇcová49, S. Pagan Griso15, E. Paganis141,
F. Paige26, P. Pais88, K. Pajchel121, G. Palacino161b, S. Palestini31, M. Palka39b, D. Pallin35,
A. Palma128a,128b, Y.B. Pan173, E.St. Panagiotopoulou10, C.E. Pandini82, J.G. Panduro Vazquez79,
P. Pani148a,148b, S. Panitkin26, D. Pantea27b, L. Paolozzi50, Th.D. Papadopoulou10, K. Papageorgiou156,
A. Paramonov6, D. Paredes Hernandez176, M.A. Parker29, K.A. Parker141, F. Parodi51a,51b,
J.A. Parsons36, U. Parzefall49, V. Pascuzzi160, E. Pasqualucci134a, S. Passaggio51a, F. Pastore136a,136b,∗,
Fr. Pastore79, G. Pásztor30, S. Pataraia175, N.D. Patel152, J.R. Pater86, T. Pauly31, J. Pearce169,
B. Pearson115, L.E. Pedersen37, M. Pedersen121, S. Pedraza Lopez167, R. Pedro128a,128b,
S.V. Peleganchuk111,c, D. Pelikan165, O. Penc129, C. Peng34a, H. Peng34b, B. Penning32, J. Penwell62,
D.V. Perepelitsa26, E. Perez Codina161a, M.T. Pérez García-Estañ167, L. Perini93a,93b, H. Pernegger31,
S. Perrella106a,106b, R. Peschke43, V.D. Peshekhonov67, K. Peters31, R.F.Y. Peters86, B.A. Petersen31,
T.C. Petersen37, E. Petit43, A. Petridis1, C. Petridou156, P. Petroﬀ119, E. Petrolo134a, F. Petrucci136a,136b,
N.E. Pettersson159, R. Pezoa33b, P.W. Phillips133, G. Piacquadio145, E. Pianori170, A. Picazio88,
E. Piccaro78, M. Piccinini21a,21b, M.A. Pickering122, R. Piegaia28, D.T. Pignotti113, J.E. Pilcher32,
A.D. Pilkington86, A.W.J. Pin86, J. Pina128a,128b,128d, M. Pinamonti164a,164c,ah, J.L. Pinfold3, A. Pingel37,
S. Pires82, H. Pirumov43, M. Pitt172, C. Pizio93a,93b, L. Plazak146a, M.-A. Pleier26, V. Pleskot85,
E. Plotnikova67, P. Plucinski148a,148b, D. Pluth65, R. Poettgen148a,148b, L. Poggioli119, D. Pohl22,
G. Polesello123a, A. Poley43, A. Policicchio38a,38b, R. Polifka160, A. Polini21a, C.S. Pollard54,
V. Polychronakos26, K. Pommès31, L. Pontecorvo134a, B.G. Pope92, G.A. Popeneciu27c, D.S. Popovic13,
A. Poppleton31, S. Pospisil130, K. Potamianos15, I.N. Potrap67, C.J. Potter29, C.T. Potter118,
G. Poulard31, J. Poveda31, V. Pozdnyakov67, M.E. Pozo Astigarraga31, P. Pralavorio87, A. Pranko15,
S. Prasad31, S. Prell65, D. Price86, L.E. Price6, M. Primavera75a, S. Prince89, M. Proissl47,
K. Prokoﬁev61c, F. Prokoshin33b, E. Protopapadaki138, S. Protopopescu26, J. Proudfoot6,
M. Przybycien39a, D. Puddu136a,136b, E. Pueschel88, D. Puldon150, M. Purohit26,ai, P. Puzo119, J. Qian91,
G. Qin54, Y. Qin86, A. Quadt55, D.R. Quarrie15, W.B. Quayle164a,164b, M. Queitsch-Maitland86,
D. Quilty54, S. Raddum121, V. Radeka26, V. Radescu43, S.K. Radhakrishnan150, P. Radloﬀ118, P. Rados90,

67

F. Ragusa93a,93b, G. Rahal178, S. Rajagopalan26, M. Rammensee31, C. Rangel-Smith165, F. Rauscher102,
S. Rave85, T. Ravenscroft54, M. Raymond31, A.L. Read121, N.P. Readioﬀ76, D.M. Rebuzzi123a,123b,
A. Redelbach174, G. Redlinger26, R. Reece139, K. Reeves42, L. Rehnisch16, J. Reichert124, H. Reisin28,
C. Rembser31, H. Ren34a, M. Rescigno134a, S. Resconi93a, O.L. Rezanova111,c, P. Reznicek131,
R. Rezvani97, R. Richter103, S. Richter80, E. Richter-Was39b, O. Ricken22, M. Ridel82, P. Rieck16,
C.J. Riegel175, J. Rieger55, O. Rifki115, M. Rijssenbeek150, A. Rimoldi123a,123b, L. Rinaldi21a, B. Risti´c50,
E. Ritsch31, I. Riu12, F. Rizatdinova116, E. Rizvi78, S.H. Robertson89,m, A. Robichaud-Veronneau89,
D. Robinson29, J.E.M. Robinson43, A. Robson54, C. Roda126a,126b, A. Rodriguez Perez12, S. Roe31,
C.S. Rogan58, O. Røhne121, A. Romaniouk100, M. Romano21a,21b, S.M. Romano Saez35,
E. Romero Adam167, N. Rompotis140, M. Ronzani49, L. Roos82, E. Ros167, S. Rosati134a, K. Rosbach49,
P. Rose139, O. Rosenthal143, V. Rossetti148a,148b, E. Rossi106a,106b, L.P. Rossi51a, J.H.N. Rosten29,
R. Rosten140, M. Rotaru27b, I. Roth172, J. Rothberg140, D. Rousseau119, C.R. Royon138, A. Rozanov87,
Y. Rozen154, X. Ruan147c, F. Rubbo145, I. Rubinskiy43, V.I. Rud101, C. Rudolph45, M.S. Rudolph160,
F. Rühr49, A. Ruiz-Martinez31, Z. Rurikova49, N.A. Rusakovich67, A. Ruschke102, H.L. Russell140,
J.P. Rutherfoord7, N. Ruthmann31, Y.F. Ryabov125, M. Rybar166, G. Rybkin119, N.C. Ryder122,
A. Ryzhov132, A.F. Saavedra152, G. Sabato109, S. Sacerdoti28, H.F-W. Sadrozinski139, R. Sadykov67,
F. Safai Tehrani134a, P. Saha110, M. Sahinsoy59a, M. Saimpert138, T. Saito157, H. Sakamoto157,
Y. Sakurai171, G. Salamanna136a,136b, A. Salamon135a, J.E. Salazar Loyola33b, M. Saleem115, D. Salek109,
P.H. Sales De Bruin140, D. Salihagic103, A. Salnikov145, J. Salt167, D. Salvatore38a,38b, F. Salvatore151,
A. Salvucci61a, A. Salzburger31, D. Sammel49, D. Sampsonidis156, A. Sanchez106a,106b, J. Sánchez167,
V. Sanchez Martinez167, H. Sandaker121, R.L. Sandbach78, H.G. Sander85, M.P. Sanders102,
M. Sandhoﬀ175, C. Sandoval20, R. Sandstroem103, D.P.C. Sankey133, M. Sannino51a,51b, A. Sansoni48,
C. Santoni35, R. Santonico135a,135b, H. Santos128a, I. Santoyo Castillo151, K. Sapp127, A. Sapronov67,
J.G. Saraiva128a,128d, B. Sarrazin22, O. Sasaki68, Y. Sasaki157, K. Sato162, G. Sauvage5,∗, E. Sauvan5,
G. Savage79, P. Savard160,d, C. Sawyer133, L. Sawyer81,q, J. Saxon32, C. Sbarra21a, A. Sbrizzi21a,21b,
T. Scanlon80, D.A. Scannicchio66, M. Scarcella152, V. Scarfone38a,38b, J. Schaarschmidt172,
P. Schacht103, D. Schaefer31, R. Schaefer43, J. Schaeﬀer85, S. Schaepe22, S. Schaetzel59b, U. Schäfer85,
A.C. Schaﬀer119, D. Schaile102, R.D. Schamberger150, V. Scharf59a, V.A. Schegelsky125, D. Scheirich131,
M. Schernau66, C. Schiavi51a,51b, C. Schillo49, M. Schioppa38a,38b, S. Schlenker31, K. Schmieden31,
C. Schmitt85, S. Schmitt59b, S. Schmitt43, S. Schmitz85, B. Schneider161a, Y.J. Schnellbach76,
U. Schnoor49, L. Schoeﬀel138, A. Schoening59b, B.D. Schoenrock92, E. Schopf22,
A.L.S. Schorlemmer55, M. Schott85, D. Schouten161a, J. Schovancova8, S. Schramm50, M. Schreyer174,
N. Schuh85, M.J. Schultens22, H.-C. Schultz-Coulon59a, H. Schulz16, M. Schumacher49,
B.A. Schumm139, Ph. Schune138, C. Schwanenberger86, A. Schwartzman145, T.A. Schwarz91,
Ph. Schwegler103, H. Schweiger86, Ph. Schwemling138, R. Schwienhorst92, J. Schwindling138,
T. Schwindt22, E. Scifo119, G. Sciolla24, F. Scuri126a,126b, F. Scutti90, J. Searcy91, G. Sedov43,
P. Seema22, S.C. Seidel107, A. Seiden139, F. Seifert130, J.M. Seixas25a, G. Sekhniaidze106a, K. Sekhon91,
S.J. Sekula41, D.M. Seliverstov125,∗, N. Semprini-Cesari21a,21b, C. Serfon31, L. Serin119,
L. Serkin164a,164b, M. Sessa136a,136b, R. Seuster161a, H. Severini115, T. Sﬁligoj77, F. Sforza31, A. Sfyrla50,
E. Shabalina55, L.Y. Shan34a, R. Shang166, J.T. Shank23, M. Shapiro15, P.B. Shatalov99, K. Shaw164a,164b,
S.M. Shaw86, A. Shcherbakova148a,148b, C.Y. Shehu151, P. Sherwood80, L. Shi153,a j, S. Shimizu69,
C.O. Shimmin66, M. Shimojima104, M. Shiyakova67,ak, A. Shmeleva98, D. Shoaleh Saadi97,
M.J. Shochet32, S. Shojaii93a,93b, S. Shrestha113, E. Shulga100, M.A. Shupe7, P. Sicho129, P.E. Sidebo149,
O. Sidiropoulou174, D. Sidorov116, A. Sidoti21a,21b, F. Siegert45, Dj. Sijacki13, J. Silva128a,128d,
S.B. Silverstein148a, V. Simak130, O. Simard5, Lj. Simic13, S. Simion119, E. Simioni85, B. Simmons80,
D. Simon35, M. Simon85, P. Sinervo160, N.B. Sinev118, M. Sioli21a,21b, G. Siragusa174,
S.Yu. Sivoklokov101, J. Sjölin148a,148b, T.B. Sjursen14, M.B. Skinner74, H.P. Skottowe58, P. Skubic115,

68

M. Slater18, T. Slavicek130, M. Slawinska109, K. Sliwa163, V. Smakhtin172, B.H. Smart47, L. Smestad14,
S.Yu. Smirnov100, Y. Smirnov100, L.N. Smirnova101,al, O. Smirnova83, M.N.K. Smith36, R.W. Smith36,
M. Smizanska74, K. Smolek130, A.A. Snesarev98, G. Snidero78, S. Snyder26, R. Sobie169,m, F. Socher45,
A. Soﬀer155, D.A. Soh153,a j, G. Sokhrannyi77, C.A. Solans Sanchez31, M. Solar130, J. Solc130,
E.Yu. Soldatov100, U. Soldevila167, A.A. Solodkov132, A. Soloshenko67, O.V. Solovyanov132,
V. Solovyev125, P. Sommer49, H.Y. Song34b,ab, N. Soni1, A. Sood15, A. Sopczak130, B. Sopko130,
V. Sopko130, V. Sorin12, D. Sosa59b, M. Sosebee8, C.L. Sotiropoulou126a,126b, R. Soualah164a,164c,
A.M. Soukharev111,c, D. South43, B.C. Sowden79, S. Spagnolo75a,75b, M. Spalla126a,126b,
M. Spangenberg170, F. Spanò79, W.R. Spearman58, D. Sperlich16, F. Spettel103, R. Spighi21a, G. Spigo31,
L.A. Spiller90, M. Spousta131, R.D. St. Denis54,∗, A. Stabile93a, S. Staerz31, J. Stahlman124,
R. Stamen59a, S. Stamm16, E. Stanecka40, R.W. Stanek6, C. Stanescu136a, M. Stanescu-Bellu43,
M.M. Stanitzki43, S. Stapnes121, E.A. Starchenko132, J. Stark56, P. Staroba129, P. Starovoitov59a,
R. Staszewski40, P. Steinberg26, B. Stelzer144, H.J. Stelzer31, O. Stelzer-Chilton161a, H. Stenzel53,
G.A. Stewart54, J.A. Stillings22, M.C. Stockton89, M. Stoebe89, G. Stoicea27b, P. Stolte55, S. Stonjek103,
A.R. Stradling8, A. Straessner45, M.E. Stramaglia17, J. Strandberg149, S. Strandberg148a,148b,
A. Strandlie121, M. Strauss115, P. Strizenec146b, R. Ströhmer174, D.M. Strom118, R. Stroynowski41,
A. Strubig108, S.A. Stucci17, B. Stugu14, N.A. Styles43, D. Su145, J. Su127, R. Subramaniam81,
S. Suchek59a, Y. Sugaya120, M. Suk130, V.V. Sulin98, S. Sultansoy4c, T. Sumida70, S. Sun58, X. Sun34a,
J.E. Sundermann49, K. Suruliz151, G. Susinno38a,38b, M.R. Sutton151, S. Suzuki68, M. Svatos129,
M. Swiatlowski32, I. Sykora146a, T. Sykora131, D. Ta49, C. Taccini136a,136b, K. Tackmann43, J. Taenzer160,
A. Taﬀard66, R. Taﬁrout161a, N. Taiblum155, H. Takai26, R. Takashima71, H. Takeda69, T. Takeshita142,
Y. Takubo68, M. Talby87, A.A. Talyshev111,c, J.Y.C. Tam174, K.G. Tan90, J. Tanaka157, R. Tanaka119,
S. Tanaka68, B.B. Tannenwald113, S. Tapia Araya33b, S. Tapprogge85, S. Tarem154, F. Tarrade30,
G.F. Tartarelli93a, P. Tas131, M. Tasevsky129, T. Tashiro70, E. Tassi38a,38b, A. Tavares Delgado128a,128b,
Y. Tayalati137d, A.C. Taylor107, F.E. Taylor96, G.N. Taylor90, P.T.E. Taylor90, W. Taylor161b,
F.A. Teischinger31, P. Teixeira-Dias79, K.K. Temming49, D. Temple144, H. Ten Kate31, P.K. Teng153,
J.J. Teoh120, F. Tepel175, S. Terada68, K. Terashi157, J. Terron84, S. Terzo103, M. Testa48,
R.J. Teuscher160,m, T. Theveneaux-Pelzer87, J.P. Thomas18, J. Thomas-Wilsker79, E.N. Thompson36,
P.D. Thompson18, R.J. Thompson86, A.S. Thompson54, L.A. Thomsen176, E. Thomson124,
M. Thomson29, M.J. Tibbetts15, R.E. Ticse Torres87, V.O. Tikhomirov98,am, Yu.A. Tikhonov111,c,
S. Timoshenko100, E. Tiouchichine87, P. Tipton176, S. Tisserant87, K. Todome159, T. Todorov5,∗,
S. Todorova-Nova131, J. Tojo72, S. Tokár146a, K. Tokushuku68, K. Tollefson92, E. Tolley58,
L. Tomlinson86, M. Tomoto105, L. Tompkins145,an, K. Toms107, E. Torrence118, H. Torres144,
E. Torró Pastor140, J. Toth87,ao, F. Touchard87, D.R. Tovey141, T. Trefzger174, L. Tremblet31, A. Tricoli31,
I.M. Trigger161a, S. Trincaz-Duvoid82, M.F. Tripiana12, W. Trischuk160, B. Trocmé56, C. Troncon93a,
M. Trottier-McDonald15, M. Trovatelli169, L. Truong164a,164c, M. Trzebinski40, A. Trzupek40,
C. Tsarouchas31, J.C-L. Tseng122, P.V. Tsiareshka94, D. Tsionou156, G. Tsipolitis10, N. Tsirintanis9,
S. Tsiskaridze12, V. Tsiskaridze49, E.G. Tskhadadze52a, K.M. Tsui61a, I.I. Tsukerman99, V. Tsulaia15,
S. Tsuno68, D. Tsybychev150, A. Tudorache27b, V. Tudorache27b, A.N. Tuna58, S.A. Tupputi21a,21b,
S. Turchikhin101,al, D. Turecek130, D. Turgeman172, R. Turra93a,93b, A.J. Turvey41, P.M. Tuts36,
A. Tykhonov50, M. Tylmad148a,148b, M. Tyndel133, I. Ueda157, R. Ueno30, M. Ughetto148a,148b,
F. Ukegawa162, G. Unal31, A. Undrus26, G. Unel66, F.C. Ungaro90, Y. Unno68, C. Unverdorben102,
J. Urban146b, P. Urquijo90, P. Urrejola85, G. Usai8, A. Usanova63, L. Vacavant87, V. Vacek130,
B. Vachon89, C. Valderanis85, N. Valencic109, S. Valentinetti21a,21b, A. Valero167, L. Valery12,
S. Valkar131, S. Vallecorsa50, J.A. Valls Ferrer167, W. Van Den Wollenberg109, P.C. Van Der Deijl109,
R. van der Geer109, H. van der Graaf109, N. van Eldik154, P. van Gemmeren6, J. Van Nieuwkoop144,
I. van Vulpen109, M.C. van Woerden31, M. Vanadia134a,134b, W. Vandelli31, R. Vanguri124,

69

A. Vaniachine6, F. Vannucci82, G. Vardanyan177, R. Vari134a, E.W. Varnes7, T. Varol41, D. Varouchas82,
A. Vartapetian8, K.E. Varvell152, F. Vazeille35, T. Vazquez Schroeder89, J. Veatch7, L.M. Veloce160,
F. Veloso128a,128c, T. Velz22, S. Veneziano134a, A. Ventura75a,75b, D. Ventura88, M. Venturi169,
N. Venturi160, A. Venturini24, V. Vercesi123a, M. Verducci134a,134b, W. Verkerke109, J.C. Vermeulen109,
A. Vest45,ap, M.C. Vetterli144,d, O. Viazlo83, I. Vichou166, T. Vickey141, O.E. Vickey Boeriu141,
G.H.A. Viehhauser122, S. Viel15, R. Vigne63, M. Villa21a,21b, M. Villaplana Perez93a,93b, E. Vilucchi48,
M.G. Vincter30, V.B. Vinogradov67, I. Vivarelli151, S. Vlachos10, D. Vladoiu102, M. Vlasak130,
M. Vogel33a, P. Vokac130, G. Volpi126a,126b, M. Volpi90, H. von der Schmitt103, H. von Radziewski49,
E. von Toerne22, V. Vorobel131, K. Vorobev100, M. Vos167, R. Voss31, J.H. Vossebeld76, N. Vranjes13,
M. Vranjes Milosavljevic13, V. Vrba129, M. Vreeswijk109, R. Vuillermet31, I. Vukotic32, Z. Vykydal130,
P. Wagner22, W. Wagner175, H. Wahlberg73, S. Wahrmund45, J. Wakabayashi105, J. Walder74,
R. Walker102, W. Walkowiak143, V. Wallangen148a,148b, C. Wang153, F. Wang173, H. Wang15, H. Wang41,
J. Wang43, J. Wang152, K. Wang89, R. Wang6, S.M. Wang153, T. Wang22, T. Wang36, X. Wang176,
C. Wanotayaroj118, A. Warburton89, C.P. Ward29, D.R. Wardrope80, A. Washbrook47, C. Wasicki43,
P.M. Watkins18, A.T. Watson18, I.J. Watson152, M.F. Watson18, G. Watts140, S. Watts86, B.M. Waugh80,
S. Webb86, M.S. Weber17, S.W. Weber174, J.S. Webster6, A.R. Weidberg122, B. Weinert62,
J. Weingarten55, C. Weiser49, H. Weits109, P.S. Wells31, T. Wenaus26, T. Wengler31, S. Wenig31,
N. Wermes22, M. Werner49, P. Werner31, M. Wessels59a, J. Wetter163, K. Whalen118, A.M. Wharton74,
A. White8, M.J. White1, R. White33b, S. White126a,126b, D. Whiteson66, F.J. Wickens133,
W. Wiedenmann173, M. Wielers133, P. Wienemann22, C. Wiglesworth37, L.A.M. Wiik-Fuchs22,
A. Wildauer103, H.G. Wilkens31, H.H. Williams124, S. Williams109, C. Willis92, S. Willocq88,
J.A. Wilson18, I. Wingerter-Seez5, F. Winklmeier118, B.T. Winter22, M. Wittgen145, J. Wittkowski102,
S.J. Wollstadt85, M.W. Wolter40, H. Wolters128a,128c, B.K. Wosiek40, J. Wotschack31, M.J. Woudstra86,
K.W. Wozniak40, M. Wu56, M. Wu32, S.L. Wu173, X. Wu50, Y. Wu91, T.R. Wyatt86, B.M. Wynne47,
S. Xella37, D. Xu34a, L. Xu26, B. Yabsley152, S. Yacoob147a, R. Yakabe69, M. Yamada68,
D. Yamaguchi159, Y. Yamaguchi120, A. Yamamoto68, S. Yamamoto157, T. Yamanaka157, K. Yamauchi105,
Y. Yamazaki69, Z. Yan23, H. Yang34e, H. Yang173, Y. Yang153, Z. Yang14, W-M. Yao15, Y.C. Yap82,
Y. Yasu68, E. Yatsenko5, K.H. Yau Wong22, J. Ye41, S. Ye26, I. Yeletskikh67, A.L. Yen58, E. Yildirim43,
K. Yorita171, R. Yoshida6, K. Yoshihara124, C. Young145, C.J.S. Young31, S. Youssef23, D.R. Yu15,
J. Yu8, J.M. Yu91, J. Yu65, L. Yuan69, S.P.Y. Yuen22, A. Yurkewicz110, I. Yusuﬀ29,aq, B. Zabinski40,
R. Zaidan34d, A.M. Zaitsev132,a f , J. Zalieckas14, A. Zaman150, S. Zambito58, L. Zanello134a,134b,
D. Zanzi90, C. Zeitnitz175, M. Zeman130, A. Zemla39a, J.C. Zeng166, Q. Zeng145, K. Zengel24,
O. Zenin132, T. Ženiš146a, D. Zerwas119, D. Zhang91, F. Zhang173, G. Zhang34b,ab, H. Zhang34c,
J. Zhang6, L. Zhang49, R. Zhang34b,k, X. Zhang34d, Z. Zhang119, X. Zhao41, Y. Zhao34d,119, Z. Zhao34b,
A. Zhemchugov67, J. Zhong122, B. Zhou91, C. Zhou46, L. Zhou36, L. Zhou41, M. Zhou150, N. Zhou34f,
C.G. Zhu34d, H. Zhu34a, J. Zhu91, Y. Zhu34b, X. Zhuang34a, K. Zhukov98, A. Zibell174, D. Zieminska62,
N.I. Zimine67, C. Zimmermann85, S. Zimmermann49, Z. Zinonos55, M. Zinser85, M. Ziolkowski143,
L. Živkovi´c13, G. Zobernig173, A. Zoccoli21a,21b, M. zur Nedden16, G. Zurzolo106a,106b, L. Zwalinski31.

1 Department of Physics, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
2 Physics Department, SUNY Albany, Albany NY, United States of America
3 Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton AB, Canada
4 (a) Department of Physics, Ankara University, Ankara; (b) Istanbul Aydin University, Istanbul; (c)
Division of Physics, TOBB University of Economics and Technology, Ankara, Turkey
5 LAPP, CNRS/IN2P3 and Université Savoie Mont Blanc, Annecy-le-Vieux, France
6 High Energy Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne IL, United States of America
7 Department of Physics, University of Arizona, Tucson AZ, United States of America

70

8 Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington TX, United States of America
9 Physics Department, University of Athens, Athens, Greece
10 Physics Department, National Technical University of Athens, Zografou, Greece
11 Institute of Physics, Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences, Baku, Azerbaijan
12 Institut de Física d’Altes Energies (IFAE), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology,
Barcelona, Spain, Spain
13 Institute of Physics, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
14 Department for Physics and Technology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
15 Physics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and University of California, Berkeley CA,
United States of America
16 Department of Physics, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany
17 Albert Einstein Center for Fundamental Physics and Laboratory for High Energy Physics, University
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
18 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom
19 (a) Department of Physics, Bogazici University, Istanbul; (b) Department of Physics Engineering,
Gaziantep University, Gaziantep; (c) Department of Physics, Dogus University, Istanbul, Turkey
20 Centro de Investigaciones, Universidad Antonio Narino, Bogota, Colombia
21 (a) INFN Sezione di Bologna; (b) Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università di Bologna,
Bologna, Italy
22 Physikalisches Institut, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
23 Department of Physics, Boston University, Boston MA, United States of America
24 Department of Physics, Brandeis University, Waltham MA, United States of America
25 (a) Universidade Federal do Rio De Janeiro COPPE/EE/IF, Rio de Janeiro; (b) Electrical Circuits
Department, Federal University of Juiz de Fora (UFJF), Juiz de Fora; (c) Federal University of Sao Joao
del Rei (UFSJ), Sao Joao del Rei; (d) Instituto de Fisica, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil
26 Physics Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton NY, United States of America
27 (a) Transilvania University of Brasov, Brasov, Romania; (b) National Institute of Physics and Nuclear
Engineering, Bucharest; (c) National Institute for Research and Development of Isotopic and Molecular
Technologies, Physics Department, Cluj Napoca; (d) University Politehnica Bucharest, Bucharest; (e)
West University in Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania
28 Departamento de Física, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina
29 Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
30 Department of Physics, Carleton University, Ottawa ON, Canada
31 CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
32 Enrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago IL, United States of America
33 (a) Departamento de Física, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago; (b) Departamento de
Física, Universidad Técnica Federico Santa María, Valparaíso, Chile
34 (a) Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing; (b) Department of
Modern Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui; (c) Department of Physics,
Nanjing University, Jiangsu; (d) School of Physics, Shandong University, Shandong; (e) Department of
Physics and Astronomy, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Particle Physics and Cosmology, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai; (also aﬃliated with PKU-CHEP); ( f ) Physics Department, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China
35 Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, Clermont Université and Université Blaise Pascal and
CNRS/IN2P3, Clermont-Ferrand, France
36 Nevis Laboratory, Columbia University, Irvington NY, United States of America
37 Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Kobenhavn, Denmark

71

38 (a) INFN Gruppo Collegato di Cosenza, Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati; (b) Dipartimento di Fisica,
Università della Calabria, Rende, Italy
39 (a) AGH University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science,
Krakow; (b) Marian Smoluchowski Institute of Physics, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland
40 Institute of Nuclear Physics Polish Academy of Sciences, Krakow, Poland
41 Physics Department, Southern Methodist University, Dallas TX, United States of America
42 Physics Department, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson TX, United States of America
43 DESY, Hamburg and Zeuthen, Germany
44 Institut für Experimentelle Physik IV, Technische Universität Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany
45 Institut für Kern- und Teilchenphysik, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
46 Department of Physics, Duke University, Durham NC, United States of America
47 SUPA - School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
48 INFN Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Frascati, Italy
49 Fakultät für Mathematik und Physik, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität, Freiburg, Germany
50 Section de Physique, Université de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland
51 (a) INFN Sezione di Genova; (b) Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Genova, Genova, Italy
52 (a) E. Andronikashvili Institute of Physics, Iv. Javakhishvili Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi; (b) High
Energy Physics Institute, Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi, Georgia
53 II Physikalisches Institut, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Giessen, Germany
54 SUPA - School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom
55 II Physikalisches Institut, Georg-August-Universität, Göttingen, Germany
56 Laboratoire de Physique Subatomique et de Cosmologie, Université Grenoble-Alpes, CNRS/IN2P3,
Grenoble, France
57 Department of Physics, Hampton University, Hampton VA, United States of America
58 Laboratory for Particle Physics and Cosmology, Harvard University, Cambridge MA, United States of
America
59 (a) Kirchhoﬀ-Institut für Physik, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg; (b)
Physikalisches Institut, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg; (c) ZITI Institut für
technische Informatik, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany
60 Faculty of Applied Information Science, Hiroshima Institute of Technology, Hiroshima, Japan
61 (a) Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong; (b)
Department of Physics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong; (c) Department of Physics, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
62 Department of Physics, Indiana University, Bloomington IN, United States of America
63 Institut für Astro- und Teilchenphysik, Leopold-Franzens-Universität, Innsbruck, Austria
64 University of Iowa, Iowa City IA, United States of America
65 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames IA, United States of America
66 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California Irvine, Irvine CA, United States of
America
67 Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, JINR Dubna, Dubna, Russia
68 KEK, High Energy Accelerator Research Organization, Tsukuba, Japan
69 Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan
70 Faculty of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
71 Kyoto University of Education, Kyoto, Japan
72 Department of Physics, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
73 Instituto de Física La Plata, Universidad Nacional de La Plata and CONICET, La Plata, Argentina
74 Physics Department, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom

72

75 (a) INFN Sezione di Lecce; (b) Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica, Università del Salento, Lecce,
Italy
76 Oliver Lodge Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
77 Department of Physics, Jožef Stefan Institute and University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
78 School of Physics and Astronomy, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom
79 Department of Physics, Royal Holloway University of London, Surrey, United Kingdom
80 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, London, United Kingdom
81 Louisiana Tech University, Ruston LA, United States of America
82 Laboratoire de Physique Nucléaire et de Hautes Energies, UPMC and Université Paris-Diderot and
CNRS/IN2P3, Paris, France
83 Fysiska institutionen, Lunds universitet, Lund, Sweden
84 Departamento de Fisica Teorica C-15, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
85 Institut für Physik, Universität Mainz, Mainz, Germany
86 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom
87 CPPM, Aix-Marseille Université and CNRS/IN2P3, Marseille, France
88 Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst MA, United States of America
89 Department of Physics, McGill University, Montreal QC, Canada
90 School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
91 Department of Physics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI, United States of America
92 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing MI, United States of
America
93 (a) INFN Sezione di Milano; (b) Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Milano, Milano, Italy
94 B.I. Stepanov Institute of Physics, National Academy of Sciences of Belarus, Minsk, Republic of
Belarus
95 National Scientiﬁc and Educational Centre for Particle and High Energy Physics, Minsk, Republic of
Belarus
96 Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA, United States of
America
97 Group of Particle Physics, University of Montreal, Montreal QC, Canada
98 P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
99 Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics (ITEP), Moscow, Russia
100 National Research Nuclear University MEPhI, Moscow, Russia
101 D.V. Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow,
Russia
102 Fakultät für Physik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Germany
103 Max-Planck-Institut für Physik (Werner-Heisenberg-Institut), München, Germany
104 Nagasaki Institute of Applied Science, Nagasaki, Japan
105 Graduate School of Science and Kobayashi-Maskawa Institute, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan
106 (a) INFN Sezione di Napoli; (b) Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Napoli, Napoli, Italy
107 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque NM, United States
of America
108 Institute for Mathematics, Astrophysics and Particle Physics, Radboud University Nijmegen/Nikhef,
Nijmegen, Netherlands
109 Nikhef National Institute for Subatomic Physics and University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
Netherlands
110 Department of Physics, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb IL, United States of America
111 Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia

73

112 Department of Physics, New York University, New York NY, United States of America
113 Ohio State University, Columbus OH, United States of America
114 Faculty of Science, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan
115 Homer L. Dodge Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Oklahoma, Norman OK,
United States of America
116 Department of Physics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater OK, United States of America
117 Palacký University, RCPTM, Olomouc, Czech Republic
118 Center for High Energy Physics, University of Oregon, Eugene OR, United States of America
119 LAL, Univ. Paris-Sud, CNRS/IN2P3, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
120 Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
121 Department of Physics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
122 Department of Physics, Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom
123 (a) INFN Sezione di Pavia; (b) Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy
124 Department of Physics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia PA, United States of America
125 National Research Centre "Kurchatov Institute" B.P.Konstantinov Petersburg Nuclear Physics
Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia
126 (a) INFN Sezione di Pisa; (b) Dipartimento di Fisica E. Fermi, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy
127 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA, United States of
America
128 (a) Laboratório de Instrumentação e Física Experimental de Partículas - LIP, Lisboa; (b) Faculdade de
Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa; (c) Department of Physics, University of Coimbra, Coimbra;
(d) Centro de Física Nuclear da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa; (e) Departamento de Fisica,
Universidade do Minho, Braga; ( f ) Departamento de Fisica Teorica y del Cosmos and CAFPE,
Universidad de Granada, Granada (Spain); (g) Dep Fisica and CEFITEC of Faculdade de Ciencias e
Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal
129 Institute of Physics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Praha, Czech Republic
130 Czech Technical University in Prague, Praha, Czech Republic
131 Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University in Prague, Praha, Czech Republic
132 State Research Center Institute for High Energy Physics (Protvino), NRC KI, Russia
133 Particle Physics Department, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom
134 (a) INFN Sezione di Roma; (b) Dipartimento di Fisica, Sapienza Università di Roma, Roma, Italy
135 (a) INFN Sezione di Roma Tor Vergata; (b) Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Roma Tor Vergata,
Roma, Italy
136 (a) INFN Sezione di Roma Tre; (b) Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica, Università Roma Tre, Roma,
Italy
137 (a) Faculté des Sciences Ain Chock, Réseau Universitaire de Physique des Hautes Energies -
Université Hassan II, Casablanca; (b) Centre National de l’Energie des Sciences Techniques Nucleaires,
Rabat; (c) Faculté des Sciences Semlalia, Université Cadi Ayyad, LPHEA-Marrakech; (d) Faculté des
Sciences, Université Mohamed Premier and LPTPM, Oujda; (e) Faculté des sciences, Université
Mohammed V, Rabat, Morocco
138 DSM/IRFU (Institut de Recherches sur les Lois Fondamentales de l’Univers), CEA Saclay
(Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives), Gif-sur-Yvette, France
139 Santa Cruz Institute for Particle Physics, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz CA, United
States of America
140 Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle WA, United States of America
141 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sheﬃeld, Sheﬃeld, United Kingdom
142 Department of Physics, Shinshu University, Nagano, Japan

74

143 Fachbereich Physik, Universität Siegen, Siegen, Germany
144 Department of Physics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby BC, Canada
145 SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford CA, United States of America
146 (a) Faculty of Mathematics, Physics & Informatics, Comenius University, Bratislava; (b) Department
of Subnuclear Physics, Institute of Experimental Physics of the Slovak Academy of Sciences, Kosice,
Slovak Republic
147 (a) Department of Physics, University of Cape Town, Cape Town; (b) Department of Physics,
University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg; (c) School of Physics, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa
148 (a) Department of Physics, Stockholm University; (b) The Oskar Klein Centre, Stockholm, Sweden
149 Physics Department, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
150 Departments of Physics & Astronomy and Chemistry, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook NY,
United States of America
151 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom
152 School of Physics, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
153 Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
154 Department of Physics, Technion: Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
155 Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel
156 Department of Physics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
157 International Center for Elementary Particle Physics and Department of Physics, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
158 Graduate School of Science and Technology, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, Japan
159 Department of Physics, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
160 Department of Physics, University of Toronto, Toronto ON, Canada
161 (a) TRIUMF, Vancouver BC; (b) Department of Physics and Astronomy, York University, Toronto
ON, Canada
162 Faculty of Pure and Applied Sciences, and Center for Integrated Research in Fundamental Science
and Engineering, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan
163 Department of Physics and Astronomy, Tufts University, Medford MA, United States of America
164 (a) INFN Gruppo Collegato di Udine, Sezione di Trieste, Udine; (b) ICTP, Trieste; (c) Dipartimento di
Chimica, Fisica e Ambiente, Università di Udine, Udine, Italy
165 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden
166 Department of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana IL, United States of America
167 Instituto de Física Corpuscular (IFIC) and Departamento de Física Atómica, Molecular y Nuclear
and Departamento de Ingeniería Electrónica and Instituto de Microelectrónica de Barcelona
(IMB-CNM), University of Valencia and CSIC, Valencia, Spain
168 Department of Physics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC, Canada
169 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Victoria, Victoria BC, Canada
170 Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom
171 Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan
172 Department of Particle Physics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
173 Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison WI, United States of America
174 Fakultät für Physik und Astronomie, Julius-Maximilians-Universität, Würzburg, Germany
175 Fakult¨[a]t für Mathematik und Naturwissenschaften, Fachgruppe Physik, Bergische Universität
Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany
176 Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven CT, United States of America

75

177 Yerevan Physics Institute, Yerevan, Armenia
178 Centre de Calcul de l’Institut National de Physique Nucléaire et de Physique des Particules (IN2P3),
Villeurbanne, France
a Also at Department of Physics, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom
b Also at Institute of Physics, Azerbaijan Academy of Sciences, Baku, Azerbaijan
c Also at Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russia
d Also at TRIUMF, Vancouver BC, Canada
e Also at Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States of
America
f Also at Department of Physics, California State University, Fresno CA, United States of America
g Also at Department of Physics, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland
h Also at Departament de Fisica de la Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
i Also at Departamento de Fisica e Astronomia, Faculdade de Ciencias, Universidade do Porto, Portugal
j Also at Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russia
k Also at CPPM, Aix-Marseille Université and CNRS/IN2P3, Marseille, France
l Also at Universita di Napoli Parthenope, Napoli, Italy
m Also at Institute of Particle Physics (IPP), Canada
n Also at Particle Physics Department, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom
o Also at Department of Physics, St. Petersburg State Polytechnical University, St. Petersburg, Russia
p Also at Department of Physics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI, United States of America
q Also at Louisiana Tech University, Ruston LA, United States of America
r Also at Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avancats, ICREA, Barcelona, Spain
s Also at Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
t Also at Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
u Also at Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX, United States of
America
v Also at Institute of Theoretical Physics, Ilia State University, Tbilisi, Georgia
w Also at CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
x Also at Georgian Technical University (GTU),Tbilisi, Georgia
y Also at Ochadai Academic Production, Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan
z Also at Manhattan College, New York NY, United States of America
aa Also at Hellenic Open University, Patras, Greece
ab Also at Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
ac Also at LAL, Univ. Paris-Sud, CNRS/IN2P3, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
ad Also at Academia Sinica Grid Computing, Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
ae Also at School of Physics, Shandong University, Shandong, China
a f Also at Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology State University, Dolgoprudny, Russia
ag Also at Section de Physique, Université de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland
ah Also at International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Trieste, Italy
ai Also at Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of South Carolina, Columbia SC, United
States of America
a j Also at School of Physics and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
ak Also at Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy (INRNE) of the Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences, Soﬁa, Bulgaria
al Also at Faculty of Physics, M.V.Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia
am Also at National Research Nuclear University MEPhI, Moscow, Russia
an Also at Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford CA, United States of America

76

ao Also at Institute for Particle and Nuclear Physics, Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Budapest,
Hungary
ap Also at Flensburg University of Applied Sciences, Flensburg, Germany
aq Also at University of Malaya, Department of Physics, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
∗ Deceased

77

