6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
5

 

 
 
]
x
e
-
l
c
u
n
[
 
 

1
v
3
2
7
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nuclear fusion induced by X-rays in a crystal

V.B. Belyaev1 ∗ , M.B. Miller2, J. Otto3, S.A. Rakityansky3 †

1 Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, Russia
2 Institute for Physical and Technical Problems, Dubna, Russia
3 Dept. of Physics, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa

March 8, 2016

Abstract

The nuclei that constitute a crystalline lattice, oscillate relative to each other with a very
low energy that is not suﬃcient to penetrate through the Coulomb barriers separating
them. An additional energy, which is needed to tunnel through the barrier and fuse, can
be supplied by external electromagnetic waves (X-rays or the synchrotron radiation).
Exposing to the X-rays the solid compound LiD (lithium-deuteride) for the duration of
111 hours, we have detected 88 events of the nuclear fusion d + 6Li → 8Be∗. Our
theoretical estimate agrees with what we observed. One of possible applications of
the phenomenon we found, could be the measurements of the rates of various nuclear
reactions (not necessarily fusion) at extremely low energies inaccessible in accelerator
experiments.

1

Introduction

Fusion of two atomic nuclei
is possible if they approach each other to a short distance
(∼ 10−13 cm). To come that close, they need to go through a Coulomb barrier of the height
of few MeV. The penetration probability for such a barrier at room temperature (energy of
relative motion ∼10 meV) is practically zero (∼10−2600 [1]), but this probability rapidly grows
when the kinetic energy of the nuclei increases. For example, for the dd system at the energy

∗Passed away in March 2015
†e-mail: rakitsa@up.ac.za

1

of 30 keV the penetration probability becomes ∼10−3 [1]. Therefore, the obvious way to fuse
the nuclei is to raise the temperature of their mixture. In this way the so called thermo-nuclear
reactions happen in the stellar bodies, in nuclear weapons, and in the TOKAMAK [2].

Alternatively, the nuclei (which we want to fuse) can be put in a bound system such as
a molecule, where they sit next to the barrier relatively long.
In such a case, even at zero
relative energy, the nuclei are separated by a thinner barrier. For example, the two deuterons
sitting at rest near each other at a distance of 1˚A, have to overcome the same barrier as two
free moving deuterons with relative energy of 14 eV (which is equivalent to the temperature
of ∼ 1.6 × 105 ◦K).

This, however, does not help much. For a deuterium molecule D2 in its ground state the
penetration probability is still too low, namely, ∼10−82 [1] and the fusion rate is ∼10−62 s−1 [3].
These numbers can be signiﬁcantly increased if we make the size of the molecule smaller. This
can be achieved if one electron in the molecule is replaced with the muon, which is approx-
imately 200 times heavier. As a result, the nuclei ﬁnd themselves at a distance that is 200
times smaller [4,5]. For the deuterons, the thickness of the barrier becomes the same as at the
collision energy almost equal to 3 keV (this corresponds to the temperature of ∼ 30× 106 ◦K).
This is already a signiﬁcant gain. The penetration probability for the muonic molecule ddµ
is ∼10−6 [1,6]. With such a probability, one muon can help to fuse, i.e. can catalyze the fusion
of many nuclear pairs before it decays (muon lifetime is ∼ 2 × 10−6 s). The muon-catalyzed
fusion has been observed and well studied both experimentally and theoretically (see, for ex-
ample, Refs. [6,7]), but turned out to be ineﬃcient as a new source for the energy production.

In the present paper, we suggest and experimentally explore yet another possible approach
to fusion of light nuclei. The idea is to make a crystal out of the atoms whose nuclei we want
to fuse.
In this crystal, the nuclei sit next to each other at an atomic distance and oscillate
around the equilibrium positions. A crystal is just a huge molecule and of course the proba-
bility of spontaneous fusion of neighbouring nuclei is negligible, the same as in the ordinary
molecules. An experiment aimed to observe the spontaneous fusion in the lithium deuteride
crystal put an upper bound on the fusion rate per nuclear pair as ∼ 10−48 s−1 [8].

However, we can try to shake the crystalline lattice by an external force (electromagnetic
wave, for example). The nuclei swayed around their equilibrium positions, acquire kinetic
energy relative to each other. As a result, the original Boltzmann distribution of the nuclei
over the oscillation levels is changing and the higher levels are populated. From these higher
energy levels the nuclei can tunnel through the Coulomb barrier and fuse. This is what we

2

observed when irradiated the LiD crystal with the X-rays. The rate of such a fusion turned
out to be very low (one event every half an hour), but still easily measurable.

2 Nuclear subsystem

2.1 Fusion channels

The nuclei we want to fuse, are the isotopes of hydrogen and lithium, namely, 2H and 6Li.
Their compound nucleus, 8Be, has no stable states. The threshold energies for its sponta-
neous disintegration in various pairs of fragments are shown in Fig. 1 (the data are taken from
Ref. [9]). As is seen, the d-6Li threshold lies 22.2808 MeV above the ground state (which is

2+(22.2 MeV, Γ ≈ 800 keV)

)
.
s
.
g
(
e
B
8

o
t

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

,
)
V
e
M

(

s
d
l
o
h
s
e
r
h
T

d 6Li
t 5Li
3He 5He

n 7Be

p 7Li

22.2808
21.688
21.380

18.8997

17.2551

∼

∼

α α

8Be

−0.0918

Figure 1: Threshold energies (in MeV) for various two-cluster arrangements of the nucleons
constituting 8Be nucleus. The energies are shown relative to the ground state of 8Be. A wide
meta-stable state (2+) of this nucleus is shown around the d 6Li threshold.

also unstable). And this is above the thresholds for all the other two-body channels, namely,

3

t 5Li, 3He 5He, n 7Be, p 7Li, and α α.

When sitting at the nodes of a crystalline lattice, the nuclei oscillate around their equilib-
rium positions, but the oscillation energy is negligible on the nuclear scale. They therefore can
be considered as being at rest relative to each other. In other words, the nuclear pair d 6Li in
a crystal is practically at the threshold energy.

If d and 6Li in the crystal, overcome huge Coulomb barrier and fuse, then there is no
way back for them. Indeed, for the resulting excited (resonant) state 8Be∗ to decay back into
the channel d + 6Li, the deuteron and lithium nuclei must overcome the same huge Coulomb
barrier, while they have practically zero relative kinetic energy. It is much more easier to decay
into one of the channels whose thresholds are below and where the kinetic energy is above the
Coulomb barrier. For example, in the channel α + α (which lies 0.0918 MeV below the ground
state of the compound nucleus) the relative kinetic energy is greater than in the d 6Li channel
by the amount of 22.2808 MeV + 0.0918 MeV = 22.3726 MeV, i.e. is always well above the
barrier.

If we restrict our model consideration to only the two-body channels, then our 8-body

problem involves six-channels, namely,

d + 6Li

t + 5Li + 0.5928 MeV

3He + 5He + 0.9008 MeV

n + 7Be + 3.3811 MeV

p + 7Li + 5.0257 MeV

α + α + 22.3726 MeV

(1)




d + 6Li →

and all of these channels are open. In other words, if d and 6Li fuse, the ﬁnal outcome would
be one of the pairs on the right hand side of Eq. (1) with the energy release shown for each
channel.

Around the (d + 6Li)-threshold, the compound nucleus 8Be has several very wide and
overlapping meta-stabele states (resonances). The one that is located most closely to the
threshold, has the quantum numbers: (total spin and parity) J π = 2+, (isospin) T = 0,

4

E = 22.2 MeV, and Γ ≈ 0.80 MeV [9]. This wide state is shown in Fig. 1 as a strip of
verdical bars.

Recent analysis of experimental data, based on the R-matrix parametrization [10], showed
that at the near-threshold energies the inelastic collision of d and 6Li mainly leads to forma-
tion of that resonance 8Be∗(2+, 0, 22.2 MeV). The authors of Ref. [10] also showed that this
resonance predominantly decays into the αα-channel. They found that the partial width for
such a decay is Γα = 0.77 MeV, which gives Γα/Γ ≈ 0.96. In other words, after its formation,
this resonance decays in the αα-channel with the probability of 96%.

Ignoring the remaining 4%, we can assume that, if the fusion of our d and 6Li happens,

almost the only outcome is the αα pair,

d + 6Li −→ α + α .

(2)

The resulting α-particles equally share the energy and momentum. Therefore the fusion event
could be identiﬁed by detecting at least one of the two α-particles moving in the opposite
directions with the energies of 11.1863 MeV.

2.2 Fusion rate
Nuclear reactions at extremely low energies (E ∼ 10 keV) are signiﬁcantly suppressed by the
repelling Coulomb forces. The probability T (E) that the colliding nuclei tunnel through the
Coulomb barrier is equal to the ratio |ψE(0)|2/|ψE(Rc)|2, where ψE(r) is the wave function of
their relative motion at the distance r, and Rc is the classical turning point. It can be shown
(see Eq. (134.10) of Ref. [11]) that for a pure Coulomb potential, the ratio of |ψE(0)|2 to
absolute square of the plane wave is given by

T (E) =

where

2πη exp(−2πη) ,

(3)

(4)

is the Sommerfeld parameter that involves the nuclear charges, Z1 and Z2, and the reduced
mass µ of the nuclear pair. For the purpose of estimating, we can assume that for distances
r > Rc the relative motion of the nuclei in the crystalline cell is described by a plane wave,
and thus Eq. (3) gives us the penetration probability for the Coulomb barrier.

2πη

exp(2πη) − 1 −→E→0
 r µ

Z1Z2e2

η =

2E

5

In our problem, the nuclei are conﬁned to ﬁnite volumes of space in the crystal. Within
its cell, a nucleus moves to and fro, periodically colliding with the barriers. Each of these
collisions is an attempt to tunnel through.
If the size of the cell is D and velocity of the
nucleus is v, then the attempts are repeated with the period 2D/v, i.e. with the frequency
ν = v/2D.

Therefore, the number of transitions through the barrier per second (i.e. the transition
rate) is T ν. As we mentioned in Sec. 2.1, if the deuteron (or 6Li) manages to pass to the
other side of the barrier, there is no way back (for that, it needs to tunnel once more through
the same barrier, while the penetration probability is very small). This means that if the
penetration takes place, the nuclear system ends up in one of the inelastic channels given
by Eq. (1). Among these channels, the reaction (2) has the highest probability, γα = 0.96.
Therefore, if a deuteron in the crystal oscillates with the energy E, the reaction (2) happens
with the rate

Wd(E) =

T (E)γα

2D s2E

µd

,

(5)

where µd is the mass of deuteron. Apparently, the same is valid for the tunneling of a lithium
nucleus, and the corresponding reaction rate WLi(E) can be obtained in the same way.

3 Crystal

3.1 Structure

Lithium hydride is an ionic crystal with simple cubic structure. In each pair of Li and D atoms,
one electron is transferred from the lithium to the deuterium. As a result, the crystal consists
of positive ions of lithium and negative ions of deuterium. The extra electron is loosely bound
to the deuterium, which makes the radius of the ion D− approximately twice as much as the
radius of Li+ (see, for example, Ref. [12]). Schematically, the structure of lithium deuteride
crystal is depicted in Figures 2 and 3.

3.2

Inter-nuclear potential

If we consider just bare nuclei sitting at the nodes of the lattice, they repel each other with
the Coulomb forces and at short distances attract each other with the strong forces. The
surrounding electrons make the conﬁguration stable and partly screen the Coulomb repulsion.
For a deuteron nucleus, the neighbouring 6Li nuclei create the potential proﬁle schematically
shown in Fig. 4. There are three orthogonal axes along which the deuteron moves in such

6

2.04 ˚A

1.36 ˚A

r

r

Li+

D−

Figure 2: Schematic picture of one layer of LiD crystal. The indicated distances are taken
from Ref. [12].

a potential.
potential barriers surrounding it.

In order to fuse with 6Li, the deuteron have to tunnel through one of the six

The height Vmax of the barrier can be estimated as the Coulomb repulsion energy of
the charges Z1 = 1 and Z2 = 3 at the distance r1 + r2, where r1 = 2.1424 fm [13] and
r2 = 2.5432 fm [14] are the nuclear radii of the deuteron and 6Li, respectively. This gives

Vmax ≈

Z1Z2e2
r1 + r2 ≈ 0.922 MeV .

Apparently, the central minimum of the potential shown in Fig. 4, is not the same as the zero
potential energy for an isolated d 6Li pair.
Indeed, the deuteron is pushed away from both
sides. This eﬀectively lifts the deuteron up against the barrier.

If R0 = 2.04 ˚A is the distance between the nuclei d and 6Li in the crystal [12], and x is
the shift of the deuteron from its equilibrium position, then the Coulomb forces acting on it
from the neighbouring lithium nuclei, generate the potential energy:

V (x) =

Z1Z2e2
R0 − x

+

Z1Z2e2
R0 + x

.

7

(6)

Figure 3: Schematic 3-dimensional picture of LiD crystal.

At the equilibrium point (x = 0) the potential is

Vmin =

2Z1Z2e2

R0

≈ 42.35 eV .

(7)

This is how much the deuteron in the crystal is lifted up against the free-space Coulomb
barrier. Actually, the deuteron energy is even a bit higher. This additional energy, however, is
associated with the thermal oscillations and therefore is small, namely, of the order of ∼ kBT ,
i.e. ∼ 25 meV at room temperature.

The deuteron sitting in the central well of the potential shown in Fig. 4, oscillates around
its equilibrium point. In order to estimate the fusion rate, we need to know the energy levels
(spectrum) of its oscillations, as well as the distribution of the statistical ensemble of the
deuterons over these levels. For the estimation purpose, this problem can be simpliﬁed if
we approximate the central well by another potential for which both the spectrum and wave
functions are known analytically.

8

Vd

x

R0

①
6Li

✉
d

①
6Li

Figure 4: Schematic picture of the potential energy of a deuteron nucleus in the Coulomb
and nuclear ﬁelds of the two neighbouring lithium atoms. The potential energy is considered
along the line connecting the centers of these atoms.

Looking at Fig. 4, one might guess that the best approximation would be a parabola,
i.e. a harmonic oscillator potential. This however is wrong because the curve shown in
that ﬁgure is schematic. Actually, if we accurately plot the function (6) on the interval
−R0 + (r1 + r2) 6 x 6 R0 − (r1 + r2), it is practically ﬂat everywhere except for the left and
right ends of this interval, where it quickly raises to Vmax. The reason is that R0 is too large
as compared to the range of distances where the Coulomb potential is comparable with Vmax.
Actual potential-well looks as is shown in Fig. 5, where we removed the central part, which is
long and almost ﬂat.

Of course, in addition to the Coulomb ﬁelds generated by the nuclei, there are also electric
ﬁelds due to the electron shells of the ions. However, these ﬁelds are weak as compared to the
height Vmax ≈ 0.922 MeV of the Coulomb barriers. Indeed, the binding energy of an electron
to the nucleus (and therefore of the nucleus to the shell) in a hydrogen atom is ∼ 13 eV,
which is ﬁve orders of magnitude smaller than the height of the barrier. The reason of relative
weakness of the electron ﬁeld in the crystal is that, in contrast to the nuclei, the electrons

9

Vmax

R0 ≈ 2 × 105 fm

Vd (MeV)

0.7

0.5

0.3

0.1
. . .

. . .

x

20(r1 + r2) ≈ 94 fm

Figure 5: The potential energy of a deuteron nucleus in the Coulomb ﬁelds of the two
neighbouring lithium nuclei. The potential energy is considered along the line connecting the
centers of these nuclei. There are shown only the leftmost and rightmost segments of this line.
The central part (which is three orders of magnitude longer) is cut out because it is practically
ﬂat.

act not as point-like charges but as a space charge of the electron cloud distributed within a
volume of few Angstrom size.

For the purpose of estimating, we can assume that the electron cloud is a uniformly charged
sphere. For a charge Z1e, the interaction potential with the charge Ze uniformly distributed
within a sphere of radius R, is (see Eq. (2-104) of Ref. [15])

Vsphere(r) =

Z1Ze2

2R (cid:18)3 −

r2

R2(cid:19) ,

r 6 R ,

(8)

where r is the distance of charge Z1e from the centre of the sphere. If we assume (for the sake
of estimating) that the electron shell of the ion D− is a uniformly charged sphere (Z = 2) of
the radius RD = 1.36 ˚A (RD = 2RLi: see Fig. 2), then the strongest attraction (at r = 0) for
the deuteron from its own electron shell is 3e2/RD ≈ 32 eV.
In other words, the bottom of
the potential shown in Fig. 5, is not exactly ﬂat. At its centre, it has an additional shallow
“dent” (potential well) of the depth ∼ 30 eV, which is spherically spread to a distance of
∼ 1.36 ˚A.

10

Vd

Vmax

x

Figure 6: The potential energy of a deuteron nucleus in the Coulomb ﬁelds of the two
neighbouring lithium nuclei modiﬁed by the attractive ﬁelds of the electronic shells. This is
a schematic picture: the scale is distorted for the sake of showing the eﬀect of the electron
clouds. As a result of the distortion, this eﬀect is exaggerated here.

Similarly, within the electron cloud of the Li+ ion, there is another “dent” on the potential
curve of the depth ∼ 60 eV (because the radius of this cloud is half of the deuterium radius).
Therefore the potential energy of the deuteron nucleus in the crystal (along the line connecting
two neighbouring lithium nuclei) looks like is schematically shown in Fig. 6.

It should be noted that despite its depth, the bottom of the lithium “dent” is a bit higher
relative to the deuterium one because it is superimposed on the center of the Coulomb repul-
sion. It is clear that such a superposition slightly reduces both the height and the thickness of
the Coulomb barrier. Of course the curve shown in Fig. 6, is an exaggeration. Actual depths
of the “dents” are ﬁve orders of magnitude smaller than the height Vmax of the barrier. This
means that, if plotted correctly, actual curve looks practically as a square-well potential of
the depth Vmax and width 2R0.
It should be emphasized that we can only ignore the elec-
tron “dents” when consider the motion of the deuteron along any of the three orthogonal
lines, i.e. directly towards one of the neighbouring lithium nuclei, and when the excitations
are E & 60 eV. In all other directions and at lower oscillation energies the central “dent” is
important because it holds the deuteron in its place.

Therefore, a good approximation for the potential Vd(x) is a square well. Moreover, we
can replace it with an inﬁnitely deep square well, because the excitations that we are going
to consider (E . 100 keV) are very small as compared to Vmax ∼ 1 MeV. The advantage of

11

using the inﬁnite square well is that we know both the spectrum and wave functions for such
a potential analytically:

En =

π22n2
8µdR2
0

,

ψn(x) =

1
√R0

sin

πn(R0 + x)

2R0

,

n = 1, 2, 3, . . . ,

(9)

where µd is the deuteron mass. Apparently, everything that was said about the potential well
for the deuteron, is valid for the lithium nucleus as well. The only parameter that is diﬀerent
in such a case, is the mass of the nucleus. The ground-state energies for both nuclei in the
corresponding potential wells are very low, namely, E1(d) ≈ 0.6 meV and E1(Li) ≈ 0.2 meV.
The excitation levels are very dense. On the interval E ∈ [0, 100] keV there are 12,746 and
22,030 levels for the deuteron and 6Li, respectively (see Fig. 7).

100 keV

s
l
e
v
e
l

0
3
0
,
2
2

:

i

L
6

s
l
e
v
e
l

6
4
7
,
2
1

:

H

2

Figure 7: On the interval E ∈ [0, 100] keV, there are 12,746 levels for the deuteron and
22,030 levels for 6Li in their potential wells.

3.3 Crystal under X-rays

As we have seen, in the lithium deuteride crystal the deuteron is eﬀectively lifted up against
the Coulomb barrier to the energy of ∼ 42 eV. This gives for the exponential (Gamow) factor
in Eq. (3) a negligible value,

E = 42 eV −→ exp(−2πη) ∼ 10−345 .

12

Such a small value means that the spontaneous fusion in the crystal (although is possible in
principle) is far beyond our capacity to detect it.

g
n

i
l
e
n
n
u
t

Em

g
n

i
l
e
n
n
u
t

excitation ←

Eγ = ωmn

En

Figure 8: The deuteron gets the energy from the X-rays and tunnels through the Coulomb
barrier towards the 6Li nucleus.

The main idea of the experiment that we describe in the present paper, is to irradiate the
crystal with X-rays, which may excite the oscillations of the nuclei (near their equilibrium po-
sitions) to such a level where they could tunnel through the Coulomb barrier as is shematically
shown in Fig. 8. Apparently, the higher the excitation energy is, the greater the penetration
probability would be.

3.3.1 Stimulated transitions

Under the inﬂuence of an electromagnetic wave, the stimulated excitation (or de-exitation)
rate pmn, i.e. the probability of transition from a state |ψni to another state |ψmi per second,
can be found as (taking into account only the dominant dipole transitions) [16]:

pmn =

4π2Z 2e2

2

|hψm|x|ψni|2 cos2 θρ(ωmn) ,

(10)

where Z = 1 (for deuteron) or Z = 3 (for lithium), θ is the angle between the x-axis and
the polarization of the photon, ωmn = |Em − En|/, and ρ(ω) is the volume density of elec-
tromagnetic energy per unit frequency interval. Since we use lithium deuteride in the form of
powder, the angle θ is random. Relative to the photon polarization, the x-axis can have any
orientation uniformly distributed within full 4π solid angle. The averaging of cos2 θ over this
solid angle gives a factor of 1/3.

13

The dipole matrix element in Eq. (10) can be found using the wave functions (9),

hψm|x|ψni =

2R0

π2 (cid:2)(−1)m+n − 1(cid:3)(cid:20)

1

(m − n)2 −

1

(m + n)2(cid:21) .

(11)

As it should be, this matrix element is non-zero only if m and n have diﬀerent parities.
such a case (−1)m+n − 1 = −2 and

In

hψm|x|ψni = −

16R0mn

π2(m2 − n2)2 .

(12)

Using the ﬁrst of Eqs. (9), we can replace m and n with the corresponding energies Em and
En,

hψm|x|ψni = −

22
µdR0 ·

√EmEn
(Em − En)2 ,

(13)

which gives the following stimulated transition rate (averaged over the photon polarizations):

pmn =

16π2Z 2e22

3µ2

dR2
0

·

EmEn

(Em − En)4 ρ(ωmn) .

(14)

As is seen, the rate of high-energy excitations (Em ≫ En) diminishes as ∼ E−3
m .

3.3.2 Population of energy levels

The statistical ensemble of deuterons in the crystal is in the thermodynamical equilibrium, and
thus the population Pn of each level (i.e. the probability that a particular deuteron occupies
the level n) can be found using the Boltzmann distribution,

Pn =

exp (−En/kBT )
P∞
j=1 exp (−Ej/kBT )

.

(15)

At the room temperature, T = 300 ◦K, this distribution gives the following average energy for
the oscillations of the deuteron in the square well potential:

hEid =

∞

Xn=1

EnPn ≈ 14.2 meV .

(16)

The corresponding energy for the 6Li-nucleus is almost the same, hEiLi ≈ 13.6 meV . These
small values are obtained because only a couple of dozens of the lowest levels are populated

14

with appreciable probabilities.

When the crystal is exposed to X-rays, the statistical ensemble of deuterons (or similarly
6Li nuclei) is not in the thermodynamical equilibrium anymore.
Its distribution over the en-
ergy levels is changing. The deuterons jump up and down due to absorption and emission of
photons.

If the ﬂux of external photons is steady, a new dynamical equilibrium is formed with
constant population Pm(t) = const for each level m = 1, 2, 3, . . . . The time-evolution of the
populations can be described by the so called master equation (see, for example, Ref. [17]),

dPm
dt

= Xn6=m

pmnPn − Xn6=m

pnmPm + Xn>m

psp

mnPn − Xn<m

psp
nmPm ,

(17)

where pmn is the rate of (m ← n)-transition stimulated by the external radiation, and psp
mn
is the rate of spontaneous transition from a higher level n to a lower level m. The stim-
ulated transition rate is given by Eq. (14), and the spontaneous rate (in the same dipole
approximation) can be found as [16]

psp
mn =

4ω3

mnZ 2e2
3c3

|hψm|x|ψni|2 ,

(18)

involving the same matrix (13). As we said before, the elements of this matrix are non-zero
only if m and n have diﬀerent parities, i.e. (−1)m+n = −1.

Using Boltzmann distribution (15) as the initial conditions at t = 0, we can, in principle,
numerically solve the system of diﬀerential equations (17) up to such time t when all the
populations reach constant values.
In practice, however, this is diﬃcult to do. The reason
is that the system (17) consists of too many equations (see Fig. 7) and therefore becomes
numerically unstable.

If we manage to solve the diﬀerential equations (17), we obtain much more information
than we actually need. Indeed, such a solution would give us the full history of how the initial
Boltzmann distribution evolves with time. But we only need the ﬁnal stationary distribution,
when all Pn(t) reach their constant values and their derivatives on the left hand sides of these
equations become zero. This gives a homogeneous system of linear equations,

AmnPn = 0 ,

Xn

15

(19)

with the normalisation condition

Pn = 1 ,

(20)

Xn

where the matrix Amn is composed of the transition rates pmn and psp

mn as is given in Eq. (17).

It is easy to proof (using the method of mathematical induction) that the symmetry of the
transition rates with respect to permutations of their subscripts implies that for each column
of matrix A, the sum of its elements is zero. These means that the lines of this matrix are
linearly dependent and thus det A = 0.
In other words, the linear system (19) always has a
unique non-trivial solution, no matter what the initial distribution is.

A homogeneous linear system with the additional condition (20) and the symmetry prop-
erties described above, can be transformed to an equivalent non-homogeneous system, which
can be numerically solved using the Gauss-Seidel iterative procedure. An algorithm for such a
solution can be found in Ref. [18].

hNγi(cm2 · s · keV)−1

1011

1010

109

108

107

106

105

average intensity of
X-rays in the sample

10

30

50

70

Eγ(keV)

Figure 9: Number of photons in the unit energy interval, bombarding 1 cm2 of the target
cross section during one second. The number is averaged over the thickness of the sample.

In our experiment, we irradiated the sample with the X-rays whose spectrum covered the

16

energy interval of [15, 100] keV. The sample consisted of many layers of lithium deuteride
alternated with polymer detectors (for details, see Sec. 4.1). The total depth of the sample
along the direction of the radiation was 13 cm. The radiation intensity attenuated in the sam-
ple due to absorption and the divergence of the rays. In our calculations, we used the intensity
averaged over the depth of the sample. The averaged spectrum of X-rays is shown in Fig. 9.
It is given in terms of the number Nγ of photons in the unit energy interval falling on the area
of 1 cm2 per second.

Using this spectrum, Nγ(E), we calculated the corresponding volume density ρ(ω) of elec-
tromagnetic energy per unit frequency interval as follows. In one cubic centimeter, there are
those photons that fall on 1 cm2 of its side during the time 1 cm/c needed for the ﬁrst bunch
of photons to reach the opposite side of the 1 cm cube. The total electromagnetic energy in
the cube is the number of photons multiplied by ω. Dividing this by ω, we obtain the energy
density per unit frequency, ρ(ω) = Nγ /c.

This density is needed in ﬁnding the stimulated transition rates (14). With these rates
and the rates (18) of the spontaneous transitions, we solved the linear system (19) and thus
found the stationary probability distribution for occupying various energy levels in the potential
square-well. This was done for both the deuteron and 6Li nuclei (the only diﬀerence is the
mass). The resulting distributions are shown in Fig. 10.

3.4 Fusion induced by X-rays in the crystal

When the crystal is exposed to the X-rays, the nuclei oscillating within the square-well poten-
tials, acquire some kinetic energy. As a result, the probability for them to penetrate through
the Coulomb barrier increases. The corresponding fusion rate for a deuteron (and similarly for
lithium) is given by Eq. (5).

In that equation, the energy E does not have a deﬁnite value, but can be any En of the
square-well spectrum for the deuteron (or lithium, which is diﬀerent), with the probability
distributions Pd(E) and PLi(E) shown in Fig. 10. This is similar to the reactions in stellar
plasma [19], where velocities of the colliding nuclei are distributed according to Maxwell’s
probability density. Therefore the observable fusion rate is the following average

where i stands for either d or Li.

hWii =Xn

Wi(E(i)

n )Pi(E(i)

n ) ,

(21)

17

P (keV−1)

100

≀

Occupation probabilities
of the square-well levels

10−35

10−36

10−37

10−38

10−39

10−40

10−41

10−42

10−43

10−44

d

6Li

10

30

50

70

E(keV)

Figure 10: Probabilities (per unit energy interval) of populating the levels in the square-well
potential for the deuteron and 6Li nuclei, when the crystal is exposed to the X-rays with the
spectrum shown in Fig. 9.

Each deuteron has six neighbouring lithium nuclei and similarly each lithium nucleus has six
hydrogen isotopes surrounding it. However, the crystal is not pure D6Li compound. In some
nodes of the lattice it can be a proton (instead of d) or 7Li (instead of 6Li). In our experiment,
it was used a sample containing M = 0.61 g of lithium hydride powder with natural isotope
composition of lithium (mass fractions of 6Li and 7Li being f6 = 0.0759 and f7 = 0.9241,
respectively) and enriched with the hydrogen isotope 2H (f1 = 0.02 and f2 = 0.98).

18

Therefore, if you ﬁnd a hydrogen atom in the crystal, it is a deuterium with the probability
of f2. And a lithium atom has in its centre the 6Li isotope with the probability of f6. There-
fore, a deuteron can ﬁnd around itself a 6Li nucleus with the probability of 6f6, and for a 6Li
isotope the probability to ﬁnd a deuteron nearby is 6f2.

Since there are two possibilities for the same fusion event to happen: either the deuteron
or the lithium gets through the barrier, the total (“bulk”) fusion rate for the whole crystal can
be found as a sum of the corresponding contributions:

where Nd and NLi are the numbers of available deuterons and 6Li nuclei.

R = 6f6NdhWdi + 6f2NLihWLii .

The eﬀective molar mass m of our crystal-powder is

m = f11 g + f22 g + f66 g + f77 g .

(22)

(23)

The number of hydrogen and lithium atoms (any isotopes) is the same, namely, (M/m)NA,
where NA is the Avogadro number. This gives

Nd =

M
m

NAf2 ,

NLi =

M
m

NAf6 ,

and therefore

R = 6

M
m

NAf2f6(cid:16)hWdi + hWLii(cid:17) .

(24)

(25)

Numerical calculations with the X-ray spectrum shown in Fig. 9, give the following results for
the single-nucleus rates:

hWdi ≈ 2.4 × 10−26 s−1 ,

hWLii ≈ 4.6 × 10−27 s−1 .

The corresponding “bulk” rate for the whole sample is

R ≈ 5.2 × 10−4 s−1 .

(26)

(27)

For the total exposure time in our experiment, t = 111.466 hours, we therefore should have
expected to register N ∼ 207 fusion events.

19

4 Experiment

As it follows from the theoretical estimate (see previous Section), the fusion events we are
looking for, are rare (roughly, one event every half an hour). This fact determines the sample
design and the choice of the way of registering the events. The low rate of the reaction implies
that we need to expose the sample to the X-rays for a relatively long time (at least a hundred
hours) to get a statistically meaningful result. The detector should be able to eﬃciently distin-
guish the fusion events from all possible background signals and to accumulate the information
during whole exposure period.

Based on this, we used the polymer track detectors CR-39 in direct contact with the active
material (lithium hydride). Each fusion event results in a pair of α-particles moving in the
opposite directions with the same energy of 11.1863 MeV. These particles leave tracks in
the polymer material, which can be identiﬁed after the experiment is completed. Since only
few hundred events are expected, the probability that diﬀerent tracks overlap each other is
practically zero. The background tracks left by other charged particles, can be easily excluded
using speciﬁc properties of the tracks belonging to the α-particles from the fusion events (see
Sec. 4.4).

4.1 Sample preparation

Lithium hydride (LiH) is a solid crystalline compound, usually available in the form of chunks
or powder. It is extremely hygroscopic, absorbing water from the air, via the chemical reaction

LiH + H2O −→ LiOH + H2 .

For our experiment, this is a destructive process and therefore we avoided the contacts of LiH
with atmospheric air by all available means. All the manipulations with the crystals were done
in an anaerobic chamber (glove-box) ﬁlled with dry CO2 gas. Besides that, some desiccants
were present in the chamber.

The crystalline chunks were ground into powder form. This powder was placed between
square plates (1 cm2 each) of the plastic detectors (CR-39), as is schematically shown in
Fig. 11. We put in parallel several units like the one shown in this Figure, and the whole
assembly was enclosed in a hermetic PVC container. The total number of the detector plates
was 85.

The lithium hydride we used, was not pure D6Li-compound. The isotope composition of

20

CR-39 detectors

←

←

←

X-rays

LiH powder

Figure 11: Schematic picture of a sample unit composed of alternating layers of lithium-
deuteride powder and the plastic detectors (CR-39). Whole assembly includes several units
like this, placed parallel to each other inside a hermetic PVC container. The distance between
the detector plates is 1 cm. The total number of the detectors in whole assembly is 85. Each
detector plate is a square of the area 1cm×1cm with 1 mm thickness. The X-rays are directed
perpendicular to the plates.

lithium atoms was practically natural, namely, 92.41% of 7Li and 7.59% of 6Li. As far as the
hydrogen atoms are concerned, the substance was enriched with deuterium up to 98%.

4.2 X-ray source and spectrum

To generate the X-rays, we used a XYLON Y.TU 225-D02 tube. The tube was operated with
a potential diﬀerence of 100 kV and the current of 30 mA. In order to ﬁnd out what was the
spectrum of the rays, we used available data for the spectrum of this source, measured at the
same voltage, but with a much lower current, namely, 0.1 µA, and at a diﬀerent distance. We
simply scaled these data to actual current and distance, used in our experiment.

The length of our sample was 13.2 cm. Passing through the sample, the X-rays attenuate
both because of interaction with the material and because of spreading (the rays are not
collinear). As a result the intensity of the radiation is not uniform through the sample. In our
theoretical estimate, we used average intensity of the X-rays in the sample. The corresponding
spectrum (obtained by scaling the original data and averaging them) is shown in Fig. 9.

4.3 Background

We identify the fusion events by registering the α-particles that emerge from the decay of
the resulting 8Be∗(22.2 MeV) resonance. However, there are other (background) sources

21

of α-particles that might be distorting our counting. Among them the most common is
radon (and its decay products) that is present practically everywhere.
In addition to that,
our measurements were done at the premises of NECSA (Nuclear Energy Corporation South
Africa) near Pretoria, where a nuclear reactor was operating. Although an appropriate radiation
shielding was used, we cannot exclude that some thermal neutrons from the reactor could reach
our sample and generate α-particles in collisions with 6Li via the reaction

n + 6Li −→ α + t + 4.78 MeV .

(28)

Our detectors were kept isolated from the atmospheric air all the time. And since α-
particles cannot penetrate through a plastic container, we can safely ignore the possibility of
counting false events due to radon and its progeny. The only source of possible false events
is the reaction (28). However, the α-particles from the fusion events have a much higher
energy (11.1 MeV) than those from this reaction. This fact provides us with a reliable way of
distinguishing the fusion and false events. When analysing the detectors, we only counted the
tracks left by particles with the energy higher than 6 MeV (for the details see Sec. 4.4).

4.4 Detector processing

The fusion events were registered by identifying the appropriate tracks left by α-particles in
the solid state nuclear track detectors CR-39. Original tracks are very narrow channels where
the structure of the plastic material is damaged by the particle. These channels become much
wider and visible under a microscope magniﬁcation, after etching. For etching, we used a 6.25
mol/ℓ solution of NaOH at 70 ◦C.

This solution removes the plastic material not only from the channels, but from all the
surfaces. However the rate of etching at the damages is higher. There are certain empirical
formulae that enable one to calculate the etching rates at various conditions (see Ref. [20] and
the references therein). It is therefore possible to numerically model the shapes of the tracks
for diﬀerent etching times. For such a modelling, we used the standard code TRACK TEST
developed by the authors of Ref. [21].

Depending on its kinetic energy, the α-particle penetrates into the plastic material and
damages it to a certain depth (typically a dozen of microns). When etched, such a track
forms a pit in the shape of a sharp cone, as is shown in Fig. 12(a). The longer we etch it, the
deeper and wider this cone becomes. This goes on until the depth of the pit becomes equal
to the penetration length. After that the pit only becomes wider and retains practically the
same depth. As a result, the bottom of the pit transforms from a sharp cone to a smooth

22

original surface

etched surface

original track

(a)

(b)

Figure 12: Schematic representation of the etching process for two diﬀerent durations: (a)
Etching time is not suﬃcient to reach the bottom of the original track; (b) Rounding of the
bottom of the pit after the track end has been reached.

spherically concave surface, as is schematically shown in Fig. 12(b).

The sharp cone and concave shapes have diﬀerent optical properties. A smooth concave
surface reﬂects the light and even focus it to a small dot, which is not possible for a sharp cone.
Therefore just looking into the etched tracks, we can distinguish “ﬁnished” (track end has
been reached) and “unﬁnished” tracks. Using the TRACK TEST software, we can calculate
the length of the track for any given energy Eα of the α-particle as well as calculate the depth
of the pit for a given etching time t. Therefore we can choose t such that all the tracks for
Eα higher than certain threshold Emin, form sharp cone pits, while for Eα < Emin the pits
reﬂect the light.

Since we need to exclude the tracks resulted from the reaction (28), where the maximal
energy is 4.78 MeV, we could choose the threshold energy to be 5 MeV. However, to be
absolutely sure, we used Emin = 6 MeV. This corresponds to etching time t = 8 hours. After
the etching, we looked for completely dark pits (sharp cones) with certain diameter of the
opening. These tracks could not be done by anything else but the α-particles from the fusion
reaction.

4.5 Eﬃciency of the detecting

It should be noted that we cannot register all the fusion events that occur in the sample. First
of all, the α-particles from the reactions that take place far away from a detector plate, cannot
reach the detector because the distance they can go through in any solid media is very short.

23

Moreover, even if they reach a detector surface from afar, they loose a signiﬁcant part of the
kinetic energy and thus cannot be registered if the remaining energy is less than Emin = 6 MeV.

Our calculations show that in the lithium-hydride the original energy of 11.1 MeV of
the α-particle is reduced to the minimally acceptable energy of 6 MeV on the distance of
xmax = 0.095 mm. This means that, when we count the events, we can only register the
events happening within a thin layer of the lithium-hydride of 0.095 mm thickness, which is
in contact with the detector. Since in total we have 85 detectors and for each of them the
surface area in contact with LiH is 0.95×0.95 cm2 (most of them have LiH on both sides), the
total volume of LiH, from which we register the α-particles, is 0.77 cm3 and the corresponding
mass is 0.61 g. This eﬀective mass of the active material was used in our theoretical estimate
of the fusion rate.

This is not the end of the story. The eﬃciency of the detection is reduced further by the
fact that the α-particles are emitted isotropically in all directions. For example, if the fusion
event happens at the maximal acceptable distance from the detector and the α-particle moves
at a non-zero angle relative to the normal to the detector surface, the actual distance it has
to pass in LiH is greater than the xmax and thus it looses too much energy. Similar losses take
place at any distance within the thin layer, when the angle is too large. Moreover, the tracks
with the angle to the normal greater that 45◦ cannot be identiﬁed using our simple method.

Estimating all possible losses, we conclude that we can only register of about 40% of the
events happening in 0.61 g of the material. This means that from the number of detected
events we can only derive a lower bound for the reaction rate. This is suﬃcient for a ﬁrst and
simple experiment. Actually, the main goal of our experiment was to establish if the fusion in
the crystal could be induced by X-rays or not.

5 Results and discussion

The sample composed of alternating layers of lithium-hydride and the plastic detector-plates
(as is described in Sec. 4.1), was exposed to the X-ray radiation for the duration of 111.466
hours. Then, after the etching of the detectors, we identiﬁed (in total on all 85 plates) 88
tracks that belonged to the α-particles from the fusion reaction (2). Since we could not
register all the fusion events (some of them were missing as is explained in Sec. 4.5), actual
number N of the events (happened in 0.61 g of LiH) is greater, N > 88. Taking into account
that the substance we used was not pure lithium-deuteride (see Sec. 3.4 for explanations), we
conclude that under the used electromagnetic radiation (the spectrum is given in Fig. 9) the

24

fusion rate for a single d − 6Li pair is

Rd6Li > 1.19 × 10−26 s−1 .

This result is of the same order of magnitude as was predicted by our theoretical estimate (26).
The total number of events N = 207, theoretically expected for our experimental conditions
and duration, is in accordance with the actual observation, N > 88.

Apparently, the fusion rate turned out to be too low for any possible applications of this
process in the energy production. However, the electromagnetically induced nuclear reactions
in crystals can be used in a diﬀerent way. In principle, this oﬀers a new way of measuring the
cross sections (or the astrophysical S-factors) of such reactions (not only fusion) at extremely
low energies, which are not accessible in the direct collision experiments.

Of course, such an approach would require a more rigorous theoretical description of all
the processes involved. In particular, the electron screening has to be taken into account in a
proper way. This could be done by appropriately modifying the barrier penetration factor and
using an accurate model (instead of the square well) for the potential schematically shown in
Fig. 6. There is no doubt that taking into account the electron clouds is not an easy task.
Indeed, the conﬁguration of their space charge is dynamically changing when the nuclei move.
It is therefore needed some theoretical eﬀort before the nuclear reactions in crystals could be
used for measuring the corresponding cross sections at low energies.

At present, the only alternative to the direct collision experiments at low energies is the
so called “Trojan Horse” method, where the projectile is carried to the close proximity of the
target as a cluster inside another nucleus (the “horse”). This “horse” may have the kinetic
energy well above the Coulomb barrier and thus neither its penetrability nor the screening
eﬀects play any role. When near the target, the projectile is detached from the “horse” and
interacts with the target at a low energy while practically all the original kinetic energy is taken
away by the “empty horse” (see [22], and the references therein).

Although in the “Trojan Horse” method the complicated screening eﬀects are avoided, it
still relies on an involved theoretical analysis. Therefore, an additional experimental method
for determining the S-factors would be of help. The “Trojan Horse” and the crystal methods
would complement each other.

Experimentally, the main advantage of using crystals is the fact that here the eﬀective ﬂux
Indeed, roughly the Avogadro number of projectiles collide

of the nuclei is extremely dense.

25

with the Avogadro number of target nuclei. With such a density (as we have seen in our
experiment) even the reactions with very low probabilities can be observed. In order to narrow
the interval of the collision energies, a synchrotron radiation can be used instead of the X-rays.

References

[1] R. Balian, J.-P. Blaizot, P. Bonche, “Cold fusion in a dense electron gas”, J.Phys.

France, 50, 2307-2311 (1989)

[2] A.C. Sips, G. Giruzzi, S. Ide, C. Kessel, T.C. Luce, J.A. Snipes, J.K. Stober, “Progress in
preparing scenarios for operation of the International Thermonuclear Experimental
Reactor”, Physics of Plasmas, 2015, 22(2), pp. 1-24 (2015).

[3] H. S. Picker, “On the fusion of hydrogen isotopes in ordinary molecules”, Nucleonica,

25, 1491-1494 (1980)

[4] J. D. Jackson, “Catalysis of nuclear reactions between hydrogen isotopes by µ−

mesons”, Phys. Rev., 106, 330-339 (1957)

[5] H.E. Rafelski, D. Harley, G.R. Shin, J. Rafelski, “Cold fusion: muon-catalysed fusion”,

J.Phys. B: At.Mol.Opt.Phys., 24, pp. 1469-1516 (1991).

[6] D.V. Balin et al., “High Precision Study of Muon Catalyzed Fusion in D2 and HD

Gases”, Physics of Particles and Nuclei (JINR, Dubna), v. 42(2), pp. 361-414 (2011).

[7] S. E. Jones, “Muon-catalysed fusion revisited”, Nature, 321, pp. 127-133 (1986).

[8] V. B. Belyaev, M. B. Miller, Yu. G. Sobolev, A. V. Sermyagin, I. V. Kuznetzov, and
E. Bialkovski, “Molecular-Nuclear Transition 6LiD → 6Be∗: Search with a Paired
∆E − E Telescope”, Few-Body Systems, 38, pp. 103-107 (2006).

[9] D. R. Tilley, J. H. Kelley, J. L. Godwin, D. C. Millener, J. E. Purcell, C. G. Sheu, H. R.
Weller, “Energy levels of light nuclei A = 8, 9, 10”, Nucl. Phys., A745, pp. 155-362
(2004).

[10] J. Grineviciute, L. Lamia, A.M. Mukhamedzhanov, C. Spitaleri, M. La Cognata, “Low-
energy R-matrix ﬁts for the 6Li(d, α)4He S factor”, Phys. Rev., C91, 014601 (2015).

[11] L. D. Landau, E. M. Lifshitz, “Quantum Mechanics”, Pergamon Press, (1965).

26

[12] D. Laplaze, “Lattice dynamics of lithium hydride and lithium deuteride: eﬀect of
long-range tree-body forces”, J.Phys.C: Solid State Phys., C10, pp. 3499-3520 (1977).

[13] Table XLI of: P. J. Mohr, B. N. Taylor, D. B. Newell, “CODATA recommended values
of the fundamental physical constants: 2010”, Rev.Mod.Phys., 84(4), pp. 1527-1605
(2012).

[14] E. G. Nadjakov, K. P. Marinova, Yu. P. Gangrsky, “Systematics of nuclear charge radii”,

Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables, 56, pp. 133-157 (1994).

[15] A. Bohr, B. R. Mottelson, “Nuclear Structure”, Volume I, p.173, W. A. Benjamin, inc.,

New York, Amsterdam (1969).

[16] D. I. Blokhintsev, “Quantum Mechanics”, D. Reidel Publishing company, Dordrecht,

Holland (1964).

[17] N. G. Van Kampen, “Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry”, Third Edition,

NORTH-HOLLAND (2007).

[18] http://www.mathpages.com/home/kmath175/kmath175.htm

[19] C. E. Rolfs, W. S. Rodney, “Cauldrons in the Cosmos”, The University of Chicago Press,

Chicago, (1988).

[20] A. A. Azooz, S. H. Al-Niaemi, M. A. Al-Jubbori, “A parameterization of nuclear track
proﬁles in CR-39 detector”, Computer Physics Communications, vol. 183, pp. 2470-2479
(2012).

[21] D. Nikezic, K. N. Yu, “Computer program TRACK TEST for calculating parame-
ters and plotting proﬁles for etch pits in nuclear track materials”, Computer Physics
Communications, vol. 174, pp. 160-165 (2006).

[22] C. Spitaleri et al., “Measurement of the 10 keV resonance in the 10B(p, α0)7Be reaction

via the Trojan Horse method”, Phys. Rev., C90, 035801 (2014).

27

