6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
5

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
5
7
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Probe of Multi-electron Dynamics in Xenon

by Caustics in High Order Harmonic Generation

D. Faccial`a,1, 2 S. Pabst,3, 4 B. D. Bruner,5 A. G. Ciriolo,1, 2 S. De Silvestri,1, 2
M. Devetta,2 M. Negro,2 H. Soifer,5 S. Stagira,1, 2 N. Dudovich,5 and C. Vozzi2, ∗

1Dipartimento di Fisica, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
2Istituto di Fotonica e Nanotecnologie - CNR, Milan, Italy

3Center for Free-Electron Laser Science DESY, Hamburg, Germany

4ITAMP Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge (MA), USA

5Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

We investigated the giant resonance in Xenon by high-order harmonic generation spectroscopy
driven by a two-color ﬁeld. The addition of a non-perturbative second harmonic component parallel
to the driving ﬁeld breaks the symmetry between neighboring sub-cycles resulting in the appearance
of spectral caustics at two distinct cut-oﬀ energies. By controlling the phase delay between the two
color components it is possible to tailor the harmonic emission in order to amplify and isolate the
spectral feature of interest. In this paper we demonstrate how this control scheme can be used to
investigate the role of electron correlations that give birth to the giant resonance in Xenon. The
collective excitations of the giant dipole resonance in Xenon combined with the spectral manipulation
associated with the two color driving ﬁeld allow to see features that are normally not accessible
and to obtain a quantitative good agreement between the experimental results and the theoretical
predictions.

High order harmonic generation (HHG) has proved to
be a valuable spectroscopic tool for probing the elec-
tron structure [1, 2] and dynamics [3–5] of atoms and
molecules. In this process an electron wave packet can be
detached from the atom by tunnel ionization at each half-
cycle of the driving laser ﬁeld. This electron wave packet
is then accelerated by the external ﬁeld and can recollide
with the parent ion, releasing its excess energy through
the emission of an XUV burst [6, 7]. Each burst has the
duration of a few hundreds of attoseconds, which makes
HHG the cornerstone for the generation of the shortest
events ever created. The photon energy ω is linked to
the time of birth of the electron in the continuum ti and
to its recombination time tr, deﬁning a quantum trajec-
tory [8]. Since these processes occur on time scale shorter
than the laser electric ﬁeld cycle, and owing to the map-
ping between photon energies and electron trajectories,
attosecond time resolution can be inferred through the
analysis of HHG spectra.

One of the main challenges in Attosecond Science is the
ability to manipulate the optical properties of the HHG
spectrum, such as the spectral shape, polarization and
phase. Such manipulations are the basic building blocks
in a broad range of applications where the attosecond
pulse served as a pump or a probe of a fast evolving
process. In this paper we show how an accurate manip-
ulation of the HHG spectrum ampliﬁes and isolates the
spectral features associated with the attosecond dynam-
ics under study. When the HHG is generated by a two
color ﬁeld, an accurate control over its spectral shape can
be achieved. Such control leads to the appearance of a
spectral caustic [9], allowing a tunable enhancement of
a narrow spectral band. We engineered the HHG spec-
trum and tuned the caustic such that it overlaps with

the spectral feature associated with the giant resonance
in Xe, demonstrating for the ﬁrst time how the appli-
cation of such control serves as a valuable tool in HHG
spectroscopy.

In a single color driving ﬁeld, two trajectories con-
tribute to the HHG signal for each photon energy, namely
the short and long trajectories [8]. The spectrum extends
up to the cutoﬀ energy ωcutoﬀ = 1.32Ip + 3.17Up, where
Ip is the ionization potential of the target and Up is the
ponderomotive energy of the free electron in the ﬁeld.
Approaching the cutoﬀ, these two trajectories merge and
only one trajectory is physically allowed [8, 10]. When
HHG is driven by the combination of the fundamental
ﬁeld with its second harmonic in parallel polarization, the
symmetry between neighboring sub-cycles is broken and
each trajectory is split in two distinct ones that recollide
with the ion from opposite sides. This eventually leads to
the presence of two distinct cut-oﬀ energies [11–13]. Fig.
1(a) shows the two semiclassical cutoﬀs as a function of
the phase delay ϕ between the two colors. The cutoﬀ
energy is shown for diﬀerent values of the ratio between
the two ﬁeld components, α, ranging from 0 to 0.5 with
step ∆α = 0.05. We can identify a lower branch (lower
cutoﬀ, dashed line) and an upper branch (upper cutoﬀ,
solid line). Approaching the cutoﬀ the spectral density
diverges to inﬁnity [9], leading to the appearance of a
spectral caustic and allowing an enhancement of a nar-
row bandwidth in this spectral region. When more than
two trajectories coalesce in the same spectral region this
produces a dramatic enhancement as predicted by catas-
trophe theory. By changing ϕ and α, the appearance of
the caustic can then be tuned to overlap with the spectral
region of interest. However, in the experiment the visibil-
ity of the caustic also depends on the ionization probabil-

ity and electron wave packet spreading of the associated
cutoﬀ trajectory.
In Fig. 1(b) and 1(c) the ionization
probabilities and the excursion times of the recolliding
electron for the two cutoﬀ trajectories are reported. It is
possible to observe that the lower branch has, for most
of the values of ϕ, a higher ionization probability than
the upper branch. In the remaining regions, namely for
ϕ approximately between 0.4 rad and 1.2 rad, the excur-
sion time is higher, which leads to a higher spreading of
the electronic wavefunction and a lower recombination
probability [11]. For these reasons, the upper branch has
never been clearly observed in the experiments. However
if the caustic overlaps a shape resonance of the target
sample, the spectral focusing associated with the caus-
tic combined with the enhanced cross section could eﬃ-
ciently counteract the reduction of the intensity making
the full spectral features available for being probed.

As a benchmark case, we applied two-color HHG for
probing the giant resonance in xenon, a very broad en-
hancement in the harmonic spectrum around 100 eV that
has been predicted by Frolov et al. [15] and experimen-
tally observed by Shiner et al.
[16]. This enhancement
was attributed to the multi-electron inelastic scattering
that takes place during the recombination of the elec-
tron with the parent ion. The electron ionized from the
5p valence shell can recombine to the ground state by
two possible channels. Either it can directly recombine
with the 5p hole or it can exchange energy by inelas-
tic scattering with one of the underlying 4d electrons,
which is promoted to the 5p valence shell, leaving a hole
in the 4d state. Eventually, the electron recombines
with the 4d hole. This recombination channel can be
accessed if the kinetic energy of the recolliding electron
exceeds the energy diﬀerence between the two orbitals in-
volved. This interpretation has been conﬁrmed by time-
dependent conﬁguration-interaction singles (TDCIS) cal-
culations taking into account the many-body interaction
between diﬀerent inner-shell orbitals [17, 18]. TDCIS is a
many-body theory that can capture multi-orbital eﬀects
in the attosecond [19, 20] and strong-ﬁeld regimes [20–
22], and has been successfully applied to capture the be-
havior of the collective dipole resonance in xenon in the
presence of an intense XUV [23] and IR pulses [24].

The quantitative comparison between experimental re-
sults and single atom predictions is usually very diﬃcult.
One of the main problems arises from the fact that the
intensity of the HHG spectrum can be shaped by phase
matching eﬀects [25–27]. HHG is in fact the coherent
build up of the single atom emissions of a macroscopic
sample excited by a laser pulse.[28]. For low pressure
target media, phase-matching is essentially determined
by the balancing between two terms:
the geometrical
phase shift (Gouy phase) and the dipole phase, which
depends linearly on the driving intensity I, through a
constant that takes diﬀerent values according to the tra-
jectory considered [29, 30]. This leads to a diﬀerent con-

2

version eﬃciency for the two families of trajectories in
the plateau. Two color HHG is particularly favorable
since at the caustic two trajectories coalesce in a single
one, making it possible to analyze the resonance ruling
out the interference of short and long trajectories that
takes place in the plateau. Spectral focusing enhances
the contribution of the cutoﬀ trajectory with respect to
the others, allowing to easily detect and probe a speciﬁc
spectral region that can be tuned around a wide spectral
range.

The experimental setup is described in detail in [31].
The HHG driving pulse is a carrier envelope phase sta-
bilized pulse at λ1 = 1550 nm with a time duration of
25 fs [32]. The second ﬁeld component is the second
harmonic of the fundamental pulse, generated inside a β-
Barium Borate crystal. We used a calcite plate to correct
the group delay between the two pulses and a birefrin-
gent retardation plate for rotating the polarization of the
fundamental ﬁeld, thus switching to parallel polarization
conﬁguration. A pair of fused silica wedges was used to
ﬁne tune the phase delay between the two laser ﬁelds.
The harmonics were generated by focusing the two color
driving ﬁeld into a pulsed gas jet. In order to reduce the
phase-mismatch of the harmonics in the cutoﬀ region of
the spectrum, where the Xenon giant resonance is lo-
cated, the backing pressure of the gas behind the valve
was kept below 1 bar. The harmonic ﬁeld was acquired
by a XUV ﬂat-ﬁeld spectrometer [33] followed by a micro
channel plate and a phosphor screen coupled to a CCD
camera.

Figure 2(a) shows a sequence of harmonic spectra ac-
quired in Xenon as a function of the two color phase
delay ϕ. Both caustics corresponding to the lower and
the upper branches are clearly visible. The strong en-
hancement of the lower caustic at ϕ ≈ 2.1 rad around
45 eV is due to the coalescence of 4 trajectories. The
unique behavior of the two caustics as a function of ϕ
and α allows the estimation of α and of the driving peak
intensity of the fundamental color I in the interaction
region with a high-level of accuracy from the comparison
with the semiclassical calculations in Fig. 1. The best ﬁt
corresponds to I = 7 × 1013 W/cm2 and α = 0.404. The
calculated cutoﬀ according to the semiclassical model are
reported on top of the color map.

Figure 2(b-c) shows the calculated HHG spectrum
based on TDCIS method with (b) only the 5pz orbital
active and (c) with all orbitals in the 4d, 5s, and 5p shells
active. HHG is calculated using the time-dependent
dipole moment (cid:104)z(cid:105)(t). Restricting the manifold of active
occupied orbitals to 5pz mimics the single-active elec-
tron picture where the returning electron can only re-
combine with the originally occupied 5pz orbital. Figure
2(b) shows the upper branch is basically not visible in
the HHG spectrum in the single-active electron (SAE)
picture due to the spreading of the electron wavepacket
and especially due to the reduced ionization probability

of the corresponding electron trajectories. The experi-
mental results in Fig. 2(a) show that major parts of the
upper branch are visible, which is inconsistent with the
SAE picture. Including the 4d, 5s, and 5p shells and their
interaction in the calculations leads to a very good agree-
ment between theory and experiment [see Fig. 2(a,c)].
This upper branch has been hardly observed in other
atoms where collective resonance eﬀects are not present.
For example in Neon, Ishii et al. [34] observed a similar
separation of the two cutoﬀs performing two color driven
HHG experiments with the fundamental wavelength of
800 nm. However the conversion eﬃciency of the upper
branch was very low in that case, due to the suppression
already discussed in the single active electron picture.
Our results demonstrate that the enhanced recombina-
tion amplitude, due to the coupling between the 4d and
5p shells, counter acts the reduction in the tunnel ioniza-
tion probability, and enables the measurement of spectral
features that are normally inaccessible in HHG.

In our measurements it is possible to clearly distin-
guish the two caustics of the upper and lower branch
and tune their spectral position with a high level of ac-
curacy. In these conditions is also possible to quantita-
tively compare the experimental results with the TDCIS
calculations. In Fig. 3 the maximum HHG intensity with
respect to the phase delay ϕ from the experimental data
is shown as a function of the photon energy as solid line.
The predicted HHG intensities from TDCIS calculations
with (dashed line) and without (dotted line) the contribu-
tion of the 4d and 5s orbitals are also shown. The calcula-
tions are in very good agreement with the experimental
data both from a qualitative and quantitative point of
view only if the multi-electron eﬀects are taken into ac-
count. The aforementioned results show that the analysis
of the caustics in non-perturbative two-color HHG can be
considered a reliable probe for quantitatively comparing
the experimental results with single-atom theories. In-
deed in correspondence of the caustic the spectral focus-
ing allows the detection of a speciﬁc trajectory that can
be tuned around a wide spectral range.

In conclusion, we studied high-order harmonics in
Xenon driven by a non-perturbative two-color ﬁeld. With
this technique, we have shown how one can reveal and
enhance a number of features in the HHG spectrum of
Xe that are often hidden in other types of HHG spec-
troscopy. The relatively strong second harmonic ﬁeld
breaks the symmetry between neighboring half-cycles
leading to two cutoﬀs that are energetically well sep-
arated and enhanced by spectral focusing. The upper
branch, which is normally not visible in the experiments
due to the strongly reduced tunneling and recombination
rates, is clearly visible in xenon because of the collective
excitation involving the 4d, 5s, and 5p shells. The quan-
titative agreement of the experimental and theoretical
results conﬁrms that the upper branch is only visible due
to the collective dipole excitation in xenon. The analysis

3

of the spectrum at the caustic oﬀers a reliable probe for
comparing the experiment with single atom predictions.
We expect that this results can be extended beyond in-
vestigations of the structure of the giant resonance in
Xenon [35], and can pave the way toward more general
HHG measurements of electron correlations and struc-
tural features such as shape resonances in many other
atomic and molecular systems.

The research leading to these results has received
funding from the ERC Starting Research Grant UDYNI
(grant agreement n 307964, EC Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme) and from the Italian Ministry of Research and
Education (ELI project—ESFRI Roadmap).
is
funded by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation and
by the NSF through a grant to ITAMP. N. D. acknowl-
edges the Minerva Foundation, the Israeli Science Foun-
dation, the Israeli Centers of Research Excellence pro-
gram, the Crown Photonics Center and the European
Research Council Starting Research Grant MIDAS.

S.P.

%

∗ caterina.vozzi@ifn.cnr.it
[1] J. Itatani, J. Levesque, D. Zeidler, H. Niikura, H. P´epin,
J. C. Kieﬀer, P. B. Corkum, and D. M. Villeneuve, Na-
ture 432, 867 (2004).

[2] C. Vozzi, M. Negro, F. Calegari, G. Sansone, M. Nisoli,
S. D. Silvestri, and S. Stagira, Nat Phys 7, 822 (2011).
[3] W. Li, X. Zhou, R. Lock, S. Patchkovskii, A. Stolow,
H. C. Kapteyn, and M. M. Murnane, Science 322, 1207
(2008).

[4] O. Smirnova, Y. Mairesse, S. Patchkovskii, N. Dudovich,
D. Villeneuve, P. Corkum, and M. Y. Ivanov, Nature
460, 972 (2009).

[5] D. Shaﬁr, H. Soifer, B. D. Bruner, M. Dagan,
Y. Mairesse, S. Patchkovskii, M. Y. Ivanov, O. Smirnova,
and N. Dudovich, Nature 485, 343 (2012).

[6] K. J. Schafer, J. L. Krause, and K. C. Kulander, in Short-
Pulse High-Intensity Lasers and Applications II , edited
by H. A. Baldis (SPIE-Intl Soc Optical Eng, 1993).

[7] P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994 (1993).
[8] M. Lewenstein, P. Balcou, M. Y. Ivanov, A. L’Huillier,

and P. B. Corkum, Phys. Rev. A 49, 2117 (1994).

[9] O. Raz, O. Pedatzur, B. D. Bruner, and N. Dudovich,

Nature Photonics 6, 170 (2012).

[10] B. Shan and Z. Chang, Phys. Rev. A 65, 011804 (2001).
and
[11] C. F. de Morisson Faria, M. Dorr, W. Becker,

W. Sandner, Phys. Rev. A 60, 1377 (1999).

[12] C. F. de Morisson Faria, D. B. Miloˇsevi´c, and G. G.

Paulus, Phys. Rev. A 61, 063415 (2000).

[13] M. V. Frolov, N. L. Manakov, A. A. Silaev, and N. V.

Vvedenskii, Phys. Rev. A 81, 063407 (2010).

[14] M. V. Ammosov, N. B. Delone, and V. P. Krainov, in
High Intensity Laser Processes, edited by J. A. Alcock
(SPIE-Intl Soc Optical Eng, 1986).

[15] M. V. Frolov, N. L. Manakov, T. S. Sarantseva, M. Y.
Emelin, M. Y. Ryabikin, and A. F. Starace, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 102, 243901 (2009).

[16] A. D. Shiner, B. E. Schmidt, C. Trallero-Herrero, H. J.

W¨orner, S. Patchkovskii, P. B. Corkum, J.-C. Kieﬀer,
F. L´egar´e, and D. M. Villeneuve, Nat Phys 7, 464 (2011).
[17] L. Greenman, P. J. Ho, S. Pabst, E. Kamarchik, D. A.
and R. Santra, Phys. Rev. A 82, 023406

Mazziotti,
(2010).

[18] S. Pabst, Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. 221, 1 (2013).
[19] S. Pabst, L. Greenman, P. J. Ho, D. A. Mazziotti, and

R. Santra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 053003 (2011).

[20] S. Pabst, A. Sytcheva, A. Moulet, A. Wirth, E. Gouliel-
makis, and R. Santra, Phys. Rev. A 86, 063411 (2012).
[21] S. Pabst, L. Greenman, D. A. Mazziotti, and R. Santra,

Phys. Rev. A 85, 023411 (2012).

[22] S. Pabst and R. Santra, J. Phys. B 47, 124026 (2014).
[23] S. Pabst, D. Wang, and R. Santra, Phys. Rev. A 92,

053424 (2015).

[24] S. Pabst and R. Santra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 233005

(2013).

[25] P. Sali`eres, A. L’Huillier, and M. Lewenstein, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 74, 3776 (1995).

[26] P. Balcou, P. Sali`eres, A. L’Huillier, and M. Lewenstein,

Phys. Rev. A 55, 3204 (1997).

[27] C. Jin, H. J. W¨orner, V. Tosa, A.-T. Le, J. B. Bertrand,
R. R. Lucchese, P. B. Corkum, D. M. Villeneuve, and

4

C. D. Lin, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 44, 095601
(2011).

[28] C. Vozzi, M. Negro, F. Calegari, S. Stagira, K. Kov´acs,
and V. Tosa, New Journal of Physics 13, 073003 (2011).
and
A. L’Huillier, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 32, 2973
(1999).

[29] P. Balcou, A. S. Dederichs, M. B. Gaarde,

[30] M. Lewenstein, P. Sali`eres, and A. L’Huillier, Phys. Rev.

A 52, 4747 (1995).

[31] H. Soifer, B. D. Bruner, M. Negro, M. Devetta, D. Fac-
cial`a, C. Vozzi, S. de Silvestri, S. Stagira, and N. Du-
dovich, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 47, 204029
(2014).

[32] C. Vozzi, F. Calegari, E. Benedetti, S. Gasilov, G. San-
sone, G. Cerullo, M. Nisoli, S. D. Silvestri, and S. Sta-
gira, Optics Letters 32, 2957 (2007).

[33] L. Poletto, Optical Engineering 40, 178 (2001).
[34] N. Ishii, A. Kosuge, T. Hayashi, T. Kanai, J. Itatani,
S. Adachi, and S. Watanabe, Opt. Express 16, 20876
(2008).

[35] Y.-J. Chen, S. Pabst, A. Karamatskou, and R. Santra,

Phys. Rev. A 91, 032503 (2015).

5

FIG. 1. (color online) Photon energies (a), ionization rates (b) and excursion times (c) associated to the cutoﬀ trajectories as a
function of the phase diﬀerence between the two ﬁelds for diﬀerent values of α ranging from 0 to 0.5 with step ∆α = 0.05. The
dashed line represents the lower branch and the solid line represents the upper branch. The two cutoﬀ energies are calculated
with the semiclassical three-step model; the ionization rates of the two cutoﬀ trajectories are calculated with the ADK model
[14]; the excursion time of the two cutoﬀ trajectories is normalized to the period of the fundamental ﬁeld. The intensity of the
fundamental ﬁeld is equal to I = 7 × 1013 W/cm2.

(color online) HHG spectra as a function of the phase delay between the two colors - linear scale colormap.

FIG. 2.
(a)
Experiment (b) TDCIS simulations with only the 5pz orbital being active. (c) TDCIS simulations with all 5p, 4d and 5s
orbitals being active. The solid and the dashed curves represent the two cutoﬀs for the upper and lower branches, respectively,
associated with the semiclassical calculations.

6

FIG. 3. (color online) Maximum value of HHG intensity with respect to the phase delay as a function of the photon energy.
(solid line) Experiment.
(dashed line) TDCIS simulations
including all 5p, 4d, and 5s orbitals.

(dotted line) TDCIS simulations considering only 5p orbitals.

