6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
5

 

 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
5
7
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

]

Eﬃciency calculation of thermoelectric generator by extracting waste heat,
for practical applications

Kumar Gaurav1, a) and Sudhir K Pandey1, b)
School Of Engineering, Indian Institute Of Technology Mandi, Kamand, Himachal Pradesh, India,
175005

(Dated: 8 March 2016)

Accurate measurement of eﬃciency for thermoelectric generator (TEG) is of great importance for materials
research and development. Approximately all the parameters of a material are temperature dependent, so we
can’t directly apply the ηmax formula for eﬃciency calculation in large temperature range. To overcome that
problem, we tried to calculate eﬃciency of TEG by dividing large working temperature range into a number
of small temperature diﬀerence. The aim is to make temperature dependent parameter to be constant for
that temperature range thereafter by using some thermodynamic formulation we found out overall eﬃciency.
This method gives us approximately close to the actual eﬃciency of TEG. We took value of z ¯T for diﬀerent
materials suitable in diﬀerent temperature range and after validating with experimental results, we directly
applied the same concept in real life application, i.e. automobile sector. The eﬃciency calculation method
adopted by us is a prominent method to calculate the eﬃciency of a TEG. Finally we came with a bridge
between theoretical calculation done by scientiﬁc community with real life application.
keywords: Waste heat recovery; Thermoelectric generator (TEG); Power generation; Automobile; Eﬃciency;

I.

INTRODUCTION

Now a day, due to heavy industrialization and in-
creased demand of power for day to day life applications,
we need to supply an enormous amount of energy. Mostly
energy is being produced by coal, petroleum, hydro, so-
lar, wind, nuclear, etc., where globally around 65% of
electrical energy is being produced by coal and petroleum
only. We can see the extent of our dependency on non-
renewable natural resources, where stocks are limited. If
we keep on using these non renewable sources with the
same pace, currently available stocks are going to be ex-
hausted in next 50 years. If we take the example of India,
where around 70% of power is being produced by thermal
plant1, which fully depends on the limited resources of
fossil fuels. These thermal plants operate at around 32%
eﬃciency, which means approximately 68% of energy is
being wasted out. Same situation is also with automotive
sector where around two third of energy is being wasted
out2. So if there is any possibility to extract some useful
energy from that waste heat, then it will help us to re-
duce our dependencies over coal and petroleum to some
extent3. For extracting energy from waste heat, we have
thermoelectric generators (TEG) made of thermoelectric
materials are the best candidate. TEG has many novel
qualities such as it is Eco-friendly, it has no having mov-
ing parts that’s why it needs less maintenance, etc.

In spite of the above mentioned novelty of TEG, there
are certain challenges in developing a good TEG for a

a)Electronic mail: kumargauravmenit@gmail.com; also at School
of Engineering. Indian Institute Of Technology Mandi, Kamand,
Himachal Pradesh, India, 175005
b)Electronic mail: skpiuc@gmail.com

particular application and one of them is eﬃciency. As
we know that the TEG works on the principle4 of tem-
perature diﬀerence between two ends of sample, which
creates a potential diﬀerence between hot and cold ends
of sample. Consequently, electrical energy is produced.
The eﬃciency in general is deﬁned as:-

η =

Net power output

Heat Input

(1)

The maximum eﬃciency5 of a TEG using thermoelectric
materials, also includes the materials related parameter,
which is deﬁned as,

(2)

ηmax =

Th − Tc

Th

√
√

1 + z ¯T − 1
1 + z ¯T + Tc
Th

Where ¯T = Th+Tc
, Th and Tc are source and sink tem-
perature, respectively. z ¯T is called as ﬁgure of merit6
where z is deﬁned as

2

z =

s2σ
λ

(3)

In above equation s, σ, λ are Seebeck coeﬃcient, electri-
cal conductivity and thermal conductivity respectively, of
material used for making TEG7. Above formula for ηmax
gives us criterion for selecting a material for fabricating
TEG, which suggests that higher the z ¯T higher will be
the ηmax for a ﬁxed value of Th and Tc. Here z ¯T appears
as constant, however z ¯T has temperature dependence8
through equation (3). If z ¯T has appreciable temperature
dependence in a given temperature range of application,
then direct use of equation will not give accurate value
for ηmax. Although it appears to be simple, but because
of its temperature dependence through equation (3), use

1

of equation (2) becomes tricky if z varies appreciably in
a given temperature range. So to overcome that problem
we have formulated a technique of segmentation of sam-
ple and successfully reached to reasonable results. First,
we took Be2T e3 under consideration within ﬁxed tem-
perature diﬀerence and found out eﬃciency within that
region. Simultaneously, we calculated eﬃciency of TAGS
and SiGe for some operating temperature range. Keep-
ing application point of view in mind, we can think about
automobile sector9 where usually higher temperature re-
mains as ﬁxed. For that we calculated temperature de-
pendent eﬃciency of Bi2T e3, T AGS and SiGe keeping
higher temperature ﬁxed and varying lower temperature
as per their favorable operating temperature range where
their z ¯T value is more.

TABLE I. Validation of our theoretically calculated result
with experimentally observed results.

Materials Th K Tc K Calculated% Experimental%
Bi2T e3
T AGS
SiGe

305
590
830
580
1260 870

7.10
8.94
3.50

7
8.9
—

respectively. Considering all the individual segmented
eﬃciency10 that are in series, we can apply the funda-
mental law of thermodynamics for eﬃciency calculation
of cascaded system11,12. Which gives overall eﬃciency of
TEG as13
ηoverall = 1 − (1 − η1)(1 − η2)(1 − η3)......(1 − ηn)

(5)

II. METHODOLOGY

.

In order to calculate the ηmax from the temperature
dependence data of z ¯T , we have divided working tem-
perature range in ”n” number of segments as shown in
ﬁgure 1. Where Th and Tc denotes the temperature of
hot and cold ends, respectively. For that small segmented
temperature diﬀerence we can assume ﬁxed value of z ¯T .
This temperature diﬀerence of each segment can be de-
cided by looking at the temperature dependent behavior
of z ¯T for the sample. The number of slicing will depend
on the temperature range of our sliced part. If ∆T is a
temperature diﬀerence across each slice which gives an
almost constant value of z ¯T in that region. Then the
number of segments will be = T h−T c
∆T .

FIG. 1. schematic of imaginarily segmenting of the sample,
considering 1-D ﬂow of heat.

First, consider segment 1, for which ∆T = Th−T1, where
2 , T 1 = ¯T − ∆T
Th and T1 are deﬁned as T h = ¯T + ∆T
2
and z ¯T is the ﬁgure of merit for this segment, which is
assumed to be constant for ∆T . By putting z ¯T , Th and
T1 in equation (2), we get the eﬃciency of segment (1),
i.e,

(4)

η1 =

∆T

¯T + ∆T
2

√

√

1 + z ¯T − 1
¯T− ∆T
2
¯T + ∆T
2

1 + z ¯T +

Similarly, by using the above procedure for each seg-
ment, we can get the eﬃciency of all individual segments,
which are η1, η2, η3.....ηn for 1st, 2nd, 3rd....nth segment,

2

III. RESULT AND DISCUSSION

It is clear from above discussed method that one can
calculate the eﬃciency of a TEG works in a given tem-
perature range where z ¯T has temperature dependence.
Now we want to verify the accuracy of the calculated
eﬃciency using above method by comparing with exper-
imentally observed eﬃciency. First of all we apply the
method for Bi2T e3 in the temperature range of Th=585
K and Tc= 310 K. Here we have considered ∆T = 10
and used the temperature dependent z ¯T data from the
literature. Consequently segmentation of sample is done,
which are 28 in number. For the ﬁrst segment ¯T = 580K.
Using the value of ¯T , ∆T and z ¯T = 0.125 at 580 K in
equation 4, we get η1 = 0.000509%. Using the similar
procedure, we got the eﬃciency of the consecutive layers
which are η2 = 0.000581%......η28 = 0.004472%. Using
all these segmented eﬃciencies in equation (5), we got
ηoverall = 7.1%14. The result obtained through this ap-
proach is close to the experimental value of 7% in the
temperature range of 585-310 K. Using this procedure,
we have also calculated the overall eﬃciency for TAGS
material, in the temperature range of 830-580 K. The
calculated value comes out to be 8.95%, which is in good
agreement with the experimental result15. In this case
we have used the z ¯T data reported in ref16. Here we
considered the total number of segments is 25. The ex-
perimental and calculated eﬃciency of Bi2T e3 and TAGS
along with the operating temperature is given in table 1.
Here we have also calculated the eﬃciency for SiGe for
operating temperature range of 1260-870 K. In this tem-
perature range total number of segment come out to be
39. The value of z ¯T in each segment is taken from ﬁg.(2)
of ref16. In this case the calculated eﬃciency comes out
to 3.5%.
In the absence of experimental eﬃciency, we
could not compare the calculated result with the experi-
ment. Hence our result suggests that SiGe is not a good
material for TEG in this temperature range.
It is clear from the above discussion that by using the

temperature dependent data of z ¯T one can calculate the
eﬃciency of a TEG operates in a particular tempera-
ture range. This method can also be used to calculate
the temperature dependent eﬃciency of TEG when the
temperature of one end is ﬁxed and that of other end is
varying. We have calculated the temperature dependent
eﬃciency for Bi2T e3 when temperature of cold end is
ﬁxed at 310 K and the temperature of hot end is varying
in the step of 10 K, up to 590 K. The eﬃciency when
higher temperature is T with Tc is ﬁxed, can be written
as
ηT = 1 − (1 − ηn)(1 − ηn−1)(1 − ηn−2)......(1 − ηi) (6)
Where T = Tc + ∆T (n − i + 1) and ∆T is the tempera-
ture diﬀerence across each segment. Temperature depen-
dent eﬃciency obtained through this formula is plotted in
Fig.(2). Salzgeber er.al15 have also reported experimen-
tal temperature dependent eﬃciency of TEG made up of
Bi2T e3 for ﬁxed Tc = 310K. Our data is in good agree-

Finally, it will help in selecting a proper thermoelectric
materials for a particular application.
Here we will apply our method on Bi2T e3 , TAGS and
SiGe materials for low, medium and high temperature
range17, respectively to evaluate the applicability in au-
tomobile sectors. In automobile sector enormous amount
of energy is being wasted out through exhaust port18.
Extracting some useful energy from that waste heat will
reduce our dependencies over natural resources. In au-
tomobile case, upper temperature is governed by type
of engine installed in that vehicle (keeping other param-
eter such as velocity, road condition, engine power,etc.
constant). So, exhaust port temperature will vary from
low, medium, high for LMV (light motor vehicle), LTV
(light transport vehicle), HMV (heavy motor vehicle), re-
spectively. In this case the temperature of the hot end
will be decided by the exhaust temperature of particu-
lar type of vehicles. Thus, here we have estimated the
temperature dependent eﬃciency of TEG with hot end
is kept at ﬁxed temperature by varying cold end temper-
ature, which is presented in ﬁgure (3). It is important
to note that in X-axis, we have taken the relative tem-
perature of the cold end with respect to the hot end.
For calculating the absolute temperature of the cold end,
we have to subtract the relative temperature from the
temperature of hot end. Above calculation is drawn in
ﬁgure (3). At ﬁrst we know that hot end temperature

FIG. 2. showing eﬃciency v/s temperature diﬀerence through
sample, keeping lower temperature ﬁxed at 310 K

ment with the data of Salzgeber et.al. It is clear from
ﬁg.(2) that the rate of increase of eﬃciency decreases with
increase in temperature. Thus, such graph is expected to
be very useful in deciding the economical operating tem-
perature range.
The fairly good agreement between our calculated re-
sults with the experimental results obtained from TEG
suggests the utility of our methods in predicting the eﬃ-
ciency of TEG under various condition by using material
properties like s, σ, λ on which ﬁgure of merit z ¯T de-
pends. It is clear from above discussion that the present
method provides us a reliable tool to predict the eﬃciency
of a TEG by using temperature dependent material prop-
erties s, σ, λ on z parameter depends through equation
(3). Since the temperature dependent data of s, σ, λ for
various materials are available in the literature, so this
method provides a cheap and eﬃcient way for evaluating
the eﬃciency of a TEG made up of particular materials.

FIG. 3. variation of eﬃciency with varying temperature dif-
ference in diﬀerent materials

is ﬁxed and cold side temperature is surrounding depen-
dent, so for diﬀerent conditions there will be diﬀerent
cold side temperature. Here calculating temperature dif-
ference between two ends of cylindrical Bi2T e3 sample
having 0.5 cm diameter and 2 cm long, convective heat
transfer coeﬃcient as 5 W/(m2K) by considering conduc-
tive as well as convective loss through sample, we found
out cold end temperature as 492 K, keeping hot end tem-
perature ﬁxed at 585 K. Similarly, only by doubling the
length of sample, we found out Tc = 388K. Through this
calculation we can tell about eﬃciency, only by knowing

3

temperature diﬀerence using graph obtained in ﬁgure (3)
as 1% and 4% respectively for two cases. Consequently,
there will be diﬀerent temperature diﬀerences between
two ends of TEG for diﬀerent lengths. For this situa-
tion, we have temperature dependent eﬃciency for dif-
ferent ambient condition. Here cold side temperature is
varying from 305-590 K, 580-830 K and 870-1260 K for
Bi2T e3, TAGS and SiGe, respectively. These types of
curve are very useful for design engineers as it directly
provides information about eﬃciency by knowing tem-
perature diﬀerence between hot and cold end. Simul-
taneously to judge the best possible temperature range
for maximizing eﬃciency of a TEG at various operating
temperature range.

IV. CONCLUSION

In this study, we formulated an alternate and precise
way to measure eﬃciency of TEG for power generation
as well as an approach for direct calculation of eﬃciency
for a particular temperature diﬀerence. We applied one
dimensional model for calculating eﬃciency after consid-
ering temperature dependent parameter. Here we imag-
inarily segmented our sample and used fundamental law
of thermodynamics behind cascaded system for calcula-
tion of eﬃciency. This approach allows to do straightfor-
ward computation of TEG eﬃciency for automotive de-
sign engineer to fabricate TEG. Whatever approach we
applied, that is validated with experimental published re-

sults. The basic understanding of eﬃciency calculation
will give us some clue for material selection in designing
of TEG, consequently our time and money get saved.

1Ministry of power. Technical report, government of india, 2015.
2Jyrki Tervo, Antti Manninen, Risto Ilola, and Hannu H¨anninen.
Ju lkaisija-Utgivare Publisher, Finland, pages 6–7, 2009.
3Saniya LeBlanc. Sustainable Materials and Technologies, 1:26–
35, 2014.
4Peter Rodgers. Nature nanotechnology, 3(2):76–76, 2008.
5B Sherman, RR Heikes, and RW Ure Jr. Journal of Applied
Physics, 31(1):1–16, 1960.
6David Michael Rowe. CRC press, 2005.
7Roy Taylor. CRC Handbook of Thermoelectrics edited by DM
Rowe, CRC Press LLC, Boca Raton, pages 165–180, 1995.
8Terry M Tritt and MA Subramanian. MRS bulletin, 31(03):188–
198, 2006.
9G Jeﬀrey Snyder.
17(3):54, 2008.

The Electrochemical Society Interface,

10Okamoto et.al. Applied physics letters, 89(8):1912, 2006.
11L Chen, F Meng, and F Sun. Proceedings of the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers, Part A: Journal of Power and Energy,
223(4):329–339, 2009.

12Lihua Zhang, Tsuyoshi Tosho, Noriyuki Okinaka, and Tomohiro

Akiyama. Materials transactions, 49(7):1675–1680, 2008.

13LJ Ybarrondo. Solid-State Electronics, 10(6):620–622, 1967.
14Seijiro Sano, Hiroyuki Mizukami, and Hiromasa Kaibe. Komaisu

technical report, 49(152), 2003.

15K Salzgeber, P Prenninger, A Grytsiv, P Rogl, and E Bauer.

Journal of electronic materials, 39(9):2074–2078, 2010.

16G Jeﬀrey Snyder. Applied physics letters, 84(13):2436–2438,

2004.

17G Jeﬀrey Snyder and Eric S Toberer. Nature materials, 7(2):105–

114, 2008.

18Gregory P Meisner.

In Proceedings of the 2d Thermoelectrics

Applications Workshop, 2011.

4

