Spatially long range nonlinear protein backbone torsional pair correlations executed

by loops

Shiyang Long† and Pu Tian∗,†,‡

School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, China 130012, and MOE Key Laboratory of Molecular

Enzymology and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun, China 130012

Received March 8, 2016; E-mail: tianpu@jlu.edu.cn

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
6

 

 
 
]

.

M
B
o
i
b
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
9
8
7
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract: Dynamical structural correlations are essential for pro-
teins to realize allostery. Based on analysis of extensive molecular
dynamics (MD) simulation trajectories of eleven proteins with differ-
ent sizes and folds, we found that signiﬁcant spatially long-range
backbone torsional pair correlations exist extensively in some pro-
teins and are dominantly executed by loop residues. Further exami-
nations suggest that such correlations are inherently non-linear and
are associated with aharmonic torsional state transitions. Corre-
spondingly, they occur on widely different and relatively longer time
scales. In contrast, pair correlations between backbone torsions in
stable a helices and b strands are dominantly short-ranged, inher-
ently linear, and are associated mainly with harmonic torsional dy-
namics. Challenges and implications inspired by these observations
are discussed.

Allostery in protein molecules is deﬁned by their response to ex-
ternal stimuli on distal site(s). Most biologically relevant allostery
are spatially long-ranged. 1–5 Therefore, understanding of dynami-
cal structural correlations, especially long-range ones, are essential
for elucidation and manipulation of protein allostery. Earlier com-
putational characterization of dynamical correlations, 6–8 despite
limited time scales, provide insightful information on the inherent
correlated motion and response of a transmembrane helical peptide
to an exerted local conformational change. Li et. al. 9 analyzed a
700-ns molecular dynamics (MD) simulation trajectory of ubiquitin
and calbindin D9k, and concluded that long-range pair correlations
are rather rare and network of short-ranged coherent motions likely
contribute to transmission of information in allostery. By combin-
ing NMR and computational ensemble, Fenwick et. al. 10 con-
cluded that observed limited long-range correlations in ubiquitin
are likely to be transmitted by network of hydrogen bonds. Along
the same line, Fenwick et. al. 11 provided evidence that hydrogen
bonds across b -sheets mediates concerted motions, which are can-
didates for transfer of structural information over relatively long
distances. Papaleo et. al. combined a description of the protein as a
network of interacting residues and dynamical cross-correlation to
detect communication pathways from MD simulation trajectories
of E2 enzymes. 12 Mainly linear correlations are analyzed in these
studies. 6–12 It is well-recognized that non-linear correlations ex-
ist in protein dynamics and a generalized correlation measure was
developed to be within the range of [0,1] based on non-linear trans-
formation of mutual information (MI). 13 Pandini et. al. described
signal transmission of allostery as information exchange through a
network of correlated local motions, which were modeled as tran-
sitions between canonical states of protein fragment. 14 One impor-
tant aspect not addressed in these studies is the energetic relevance
of presented correlation data. As being evident from the full cor-

†School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, China 130012
‡MOE Key Laboratory of Molecular Enzymology and Engineering, Jilin Uni-

versity, Changchun, China 130012

1

relation expansion, 15 mutual information in its original form is an
inherent component of entropy, thus is strictly linearly correlated
with free energy at a given temperature. Therefore, utility of mutual
information to characterize dynamical correlation makes more en-
ergetic sense than both linear correlations or the generalized corre-
lation method. To elucidate how linear correlations relate to mutual
information, and consequently free energy, we calculated second
order mutual information (MI) and linear correlation coefﬁcients r
(see Methods in supporting info) for all pairs of backbone dihedrals
f and y
for 11 proteins (see Fig. ?? and Fig. ??). MI vs. r plots
of four proteins were presented in Fig. ?? (see Fig. ?? for similar
plots of the remaining 7 proteins). Parabolic contours of these scat-
ter plots reﬂect relationship between MI and r, while data points
far from contour lines indicate that signiﬁcant non-linear correla-
tions exist for corresponding backbone dihedral pairs. Again, note
that MI is linearly related to entropy by the Boltzmann constant.
Therefore, entropic cost for initial increase of r from 0 to 0.3 is
only ???, while an increase of r from 0.4 to 0.7 corresponds to
approximately ???kB. Additionally, while the theoretical range of
MI goes from 0 to inf, thermodynamics dictates that we will not
observe huge values in practical biomolecular systems, which op-
erate under ambient conditions. Indeed, as shown in Fig. ?? (and
Fig. S??), the maximum MI we observed is 1.5??? and MI value
beyond 1.0 is extremely rare. Therefore, utility of MI to character-
ize dynamical correlation provides both practical convenience and
physical intuition.

To illustrate the distribution of both linear correlations and MI
of backbone torsional pairs in primary sequence, correlation ma-
trix was created for each protein and presented in Fig. ?? (see Fig.
S?? for the remaining 7 proteins). For convenience of presentation
on the same matrix, r was ﬁrst transformed into proper mutual in-
formation (denoted as MIr) by utilize a parabola constructed from
ﬁtting the contour in the corresponding MI-r plots in Fig. ?? (a uni-
versal parabola ﬁts bottom part of contours well for all MI-r plots).
Between sequentially long-range pairs (off diagonal points in cor-
relation matrices), the full MI (presented in left-upper half matrix),
which including both linear and nonlinear contributions, is signif-
icantly larger than MIr. In contrast, on the diagonal line and its
immediate neibourghing region, MI and MIr exhibit similar large
values. The observation suggests that non-linear contributions are
increasingly more important over longer distances in the primary
sequence. However, the extent of difference between full MI and
MIr varies for different proteins. Additionally, a common feature
shared by all proteins is that signiﬁcant MI in off-diagonal region
is primarily associated with various loop residues (all residues that
were neither in a a helix nor in a b strand).

In three dimensional protein structures, large distances in pri-
mary sequence correspond not necessarily to long distances in
space. To analyze spatial variance of backbone torsional pair cor-
relations, the calculated MI and MIr were plotted with respect to
spatial distances as shown in Fig. ?? (and in Fig. ??). Two major
consistent features were observed in all of studied proteins. Firstly,

spatially long-range (SLR) correlations have signiﬁcant nonlinear
contributions since MI are larger than corresponding MIr. Sec-
ondly, loop-loop (L-L) residue pairs exhibit the largest, a helix
and b strand (a /b -a /b ) residue pairs have the smallest, and a /b -
loop (a /b -L) residue pairs manifest intermediate SLR correlations.
Regarding the second feature, signiﬁcant variation was observed
among different proteins (e.g. XXX exhibits more extensive SLR
backbone torsional correlations than XXX.). From a functional
point of view, proteins with diverse and signiﬁcant SLR correla-
tions may be utilized to transmit widely different signals upon dif-
ferent stimuli, and proteins with few SLR correlations may not be
versatile in transmitting information over long distances, or at most
transmit highly speciﬁc and dedicated signals.

Qualitatively, correlation matrices for studied proteins (see Fig.
??) suggest that for those relatively large sequentially non-local cor-
relations (off-diagonal region), nonlinear contributions are signiﬁ-
cant. Similarly, distance vs. correlation plots in Fig. ?? indicate
that SLR correlations have signiﬁcant nonlinear contributions and
this is especially true for some L-L residue pairs. To further clarify
relative importance of nonlinear correlations for different types of
backbone torsion pairs (i.e. L-L, a /b -L, a /b -a /b ) and different
spatial distances, we constructed MI vs. r plots for spatially local
(with distances equal or smaller than 5) and non-local of each type
of backbone torsion pairs and presented the results in Fig. ?? (and
Fig. S???). For most proteins, a /b -a /b backbone torsional pairs
exhibit essentially pure linear correlations with the overwhelming
majority of data points fall on a parabola, L-L pairs have the most
number of data points exhibit signiﬁcant nonlinear correlations, and
a /b -L pairs stays in between. Spatial locality, while makes decisive
differences in correlation strength, plays an essentially negligible
role in relative importance of linear and non-linear contributions.
However, human sulfertransferase seems to be an outlier. A sig-
niﬁcant proportion of a /b -a /b pairs locate much higher than the
relatively blurred parabolic contour (Fig. ???). Nonetheless, even
for this seemingly special protein, spatial locality remains to be an
nonsigniﬁcant factor in determining relative importance of nonlin-
ear contributions to the overall correlation.

It is noted that even for L-L pairs, the majority fall on or locate
closely to the parabolic contour line (Fig. ???). Linear correla-
tion contributes dominantly for most of backbone torsional pairs
regardless of the speciﬁc secondary structures in which the partici-
pating torsion locate. It is only that L-L pairs are the mostly likely,
and a /b -a /b pairs are the least likely to have signiﬁcant nonlin-
ear contributions to their pair correlations, with a /b -L pairs being
the intermediate scenario in this regard. Based on these observa-
tion, we ﬁgure that the causal factor of signiﬁcant nonlinear con-
tribution in correlations between backbone torsional pairs is some
other property that is most likely to associate with loop residues and
is least likely to associate with residues in stable secondary struc-
tures, but not the identity of belonging secondary structures per se.
For loop backbone dihedrals, one outstanding feature is high prob-
ability of having multiple torsional states on various time scales.
In contrast, most backbone dihedrals in stable secondary structures
remain in one speciﬁc torsional state for native proteins. To test for
possible association between torsional state transition of backbone
dihedrals and nonlinear contribution to pair correlation, we ﬁrst se-
lect a number of human sulfertransferase a /b -a /b pairs that devi-
ate signiﬁcantly from the parabolic contour in MI vs. r plot (Fig.
???), and examined distributions of participating backbone dihe-
drals. Indeed, at least one backbone dihedral of such pair exhibit
torsional transitions (see Fig. ???), or partial unfolding of local he-
lical structures. We also selected some pairs that fall on the contour
parabolic line in MI vs. r plot, and all participating backbone dihe-
drals exhibit single peak distribution and no sign of torsional state

2

transition in the MD trajectory set(see Fig. ??). These observations
suggest that it is likely aharmonic torsional state transitions under-
lie nonlinear contributions to backbone torsional pairs. Conversely,
harmonic torsional dynamics essentially exclusively associate with
linear correlations (data not shown???). However, since there are
many possible differences between two backbone torsional pairs in
addition to existence of torsional state transitions, we may not be
conclusive. To test further this hypothesis, we selected some L-L
pairs that manifest strong nonlinear contributions (locate far from
the parabola contour in relevant MI-r plot) to pair correlations from
each protein and carried out the following analysis. Firstly, we split
the original trajectory set into ??? equally sized subsets. Secondly,
both MI and linear correlation coefﬁcients (r) were calculated for
each of selected L-L pair on each of the trajectory subsets, subse-
quently, r were transformed into corresponding MIr by utilizing
r plots in Fig. ?? (and Fig.
the parabola derived from MI vs.
S??). As shown in Table S1, for each selected pair, MI and MIr
calculated from trajectory subset where no torsional state transi-
tion is observed are essentially the same. Correspondingly, MI and
MIr differ signiﬁcantly for trajectory subsets where one or both ex-
hibit non-negligible torsional state transitions. The observations
unequivocally demonstrate that aharmonic torsional state transi-
tions are the causal factor of nonlinear contributions to backbone
torsional pair correlations. These results were lumped together and
shown in Fig. ??, ????, which suggest that such association is a
universal feature for the wildly different proteins analyzed.

The biological implication is that for a protein of diverse sig-
niﬁcant SLR backbone torsional correlations executed by loop
residues, plenty of opportunity exist for designing molecular agent
to modulate its functions allosterically. Considering the paramount
importance of ﬂexible loop residues in coordinating and participat-
ing a wide variety allosteric interactions, 5,16,17 and the emerging
superiority of drug targeting allosteric sites, 3,4,18–21 the SLR non-
linear correlations of loop residues are of far reaching potential im-
portance in future manipulation of biological systems. However, to
realize the full potential of such versatile SLR, one need to have
the capability of predicting such correlations on the one hand, and
to understand the mechanism of how information transmit from
one site to a distal site in a non-linear way. Both are signiﬁcant
challenges that need to be addressed and are brieﬂy discussed be-
low. Firstly, despite the fact that with steady expected increase of
computational power, sub-millisecond to milliseconds MD simu-
lations are soon to be routine, the fact that we identiﬁed associ-
ation between aharmonic torsional transitions and SLR nonlinear
correlations does not implicate that we may accurately predict such
correlations through extensive MD simulations. The major con-
cern is the quality of force ﬁelds in describing such SLR dynamical
correlations since we essentially have no reliable reference to per-
form corresponding optimizations, in contrast to the availability of
highly accurate small molecule experimental data for validation of
parameters describing bonded-interactions. The other possible way
is to utilize machine learning technique once we have sufﬁcient re-
liable data of such SLR nonlinear torsional correlations, which is
not available for the time being and the worse news is that we do
not even have a well-validated methodology to generate such data.
Secondly, backbone torsions in stable secondary structures mainly
exhibit harmonic dynamics and linear correlations that are on rel-
atively short time scales (nanoseconds or shorter), while nonlin-
ear SLR backbone torsional pair correlations are associated with
aharmonic torsional state transitions that occur on much longer and
widely different time scales (ranging from tens of nanoseconds up
to multiple micron-seconds and beyond as observed in MD simula-
tions). Therefore, if distal backbone torsional correlations were in-
deed transmitted through stable secondary structures, it should not

(28) Mitternacht, S.; Berezovsky, I. N. PLoS Computational Biology 2011, 7,

(29) England, J. L. Structure 2011, 19, 967–975.
(30) Gerek, Z. N.; Ozkan, S. B. PLoS Computational Biology 2011, 7, 18–25.
(31) Sfriso, P.; Emperador, A.; Orellana, L.; Hospital, A.; Orozco, M. 2012,
(32) Long, D.; Brüschweiler, R. Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2012, 3,

22174669.

1722–1726.

(33) Panjkovich, A.; Daura, X. Bioinformatics 2014, 30, 1314–1315.
(34) Morra, G.; Genoni, A.; Colombo, G. Journal of Chemical Theory and

Computation 2014, 10, 5677–5689.

(35) McLeish, T. C. B.; Cann, M. J.; Rodgers, T. L. Biophysical Journal 2015,

109, 1240–1250.

be harmonic vibrational motions that contribute predominantly to
pair correlations among on-path backbone torsions in correspond-
ing secondary structures. Of course, SLR linear correlations are
likely to be transmitted by strong linear correlations among local
backbone torsional pair correlations in stable secondary structures.
However, as shown in Fig. ?? and Fig. ??..., signiﬁcant SLR back-
bone torsional correlations are predominantly nonlinear. Despite
many insightful studies that have been carried out to understand
mechanistic understanding of the signal transmission in allostery
and to identify involved residues, 18,21–35 this time scale difference
issue remain to be tackled for improved understanding of how SLR
non-linear correlations are mediated.

In summary, we analyzed extensive MD simulation trajectories
of eleven proteins of different sizes and folds, and found that signif-
icant SLR backbone torsional pair correlations are predominantly
nonlinear and are associated with aharmonic torsional state transi-
tions. The ﬁndings implicate rich novel possibilities in modulation
of biological activities. Meanwhile, time scale difference between
SLR nonlinear correlations and local harmonic dynamics warrants
further investigations on transmission of allosteric signals across
single or multiple protein structural domains.

Acknowledgement This

supported by Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China under grant number
31270758, and by the Research fund for the doctoral program of
higher education under grant number 20120061110019.

research was

References

(1) Brunori, M. Protein Science 2011, 20, 1097–1099.
(2) Roy, a.; Post, C. B. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2012,

109, 5271–5276.

169–89.

(3) Nussinov, R.; Tsai, C.-J. Cell 2013, 153, 293–305.
(4) Nussinov, R.; Tsai, C.-J.; Ma, B. Annual review of biophysics 2013, 42,

(5) Motlagh, H. N.; Wrabl, J. O.; Li, J.; Hilser, V. J. Nature 2014, 508, 331–

339.
Ichiye, T.; Karplus, M. Proteins 1991, 11, 205–217.

(6)
(7) Hünenberger, P.; Mark, A.; van Gunsteren, W. Journal of Molecular Biol-

(8) Garnier, N.; Genest, D.; Genest, M. Biophysical Chemistry 1996, 58, 225–

ogy 1995, 252, 492–503.

237.

Society 2009, 131, 14610–1.

(9) Li, D.-W.; Meng, D.; Brüschweiler, R. Journal of the American Chemical

(10) Fenwick, R. B.; Esteban-Martín, S.; Richter, B.; Lee, D.; Walter, K. F. a.;
Milovanovic, D.; Becker, S.; Lakomek, N. a.; Griesinger, C.; Salvatella, X.
Journal of the American Chemical Society 2011, 133, 10336–9.

(11) Fenwick, R. B.; Orellana, L.; Esteban-Martín, S.; Orozco, M.; Sal-

vatella, X. Nature Communications 2014, 5.

(12) Papaleo, E.; Lindorff-Larsen, K.; De Gioia, L. Physical Chemistry Chemi-

cal Physics 2012, 14, 12515.

(13) Lange, O. F.; Grubmüller, H. Proteins 2006, 62, 1053–61.
(14) Pandini, A.; Fornili, A.; Fraternali, F.; Kleinjung, J. FASEB journal : ofﬁ-
cial publication of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental
Biology 2012, 26, 868–81.

(15) Matsuda, H. Physical Review E - Statistical Physics, Plasmas, Fluids, and

Related Interdisciplinary Topics 2000, 62, 3096–3102.

(16) Ma, B.; Tsai, C. J.; HaliloÇ˘glu, T.; Nussinov, R. Structure 2011, 19, 907–

917.

43–48.

(17) Fuxreiter, M.; T??th-Petr??czy, g.; Kraut, D. A.; Matouschek, A. T.;
Lim, R. Y. H.; Xue, B.; Kurgan, L.; Uversky, V. N. Chemical Reviews
2014, 114, 6806–6843.

(18) Panjkovich, A.; Daura, X. BMC bioinformatics 2012, 13, 273.
(19) Goncearenco, A.; Mitternacht, S.; Yong, T.; Eisenhaber, B.; Eisenhaber, F.;

Berezovsky, I. N. Nucleic acids research 2013, 41, 266–272.

(20) Pei, J.; Yin, N.; Ma, X.; Lai, L. 2014,
(21) Di Paola, L.; Giuliani, A. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2015, 31,

(22) Bouvignies, G.; Bernadó, P.; Meier, S.; Cho, K.; Grzesiek, S.;
Brüschweiler, R.; Blackledge, M. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 2005, 102, 13885–90.

(23) Dubay, K. H.; Bothma, J. P.; Geissler, P. L. PLoS computational biology

2011, 7, e1002168.

(24) Selvaratnam, R.; Chowdhury, S.; VanSchouwen, B.; Melacini, G. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
2011, 108, 6133–8.

(25) Cukier, R. I. J Chem Phys 2011, 135, 225103.
(26) Long, D.; Brüschweiler, R. Journal of the American Chemical Society

(27) Mitternacht, S.; Berezovsky, I. N. PLoS Computational Biology 2011, 7,

2011, 133, 18999–19005.

21935347.

3

