Remote plasmon–induced heat transfer probed by the electronic

transport of a gold nanowire

M.-M. Mennemanteuil, M. Buret, N. Cazier, G. Colas-Des-Francs, and A. Bouhelier

Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire Carnot de bourgogne, CNRS-UMR 6303,

Universit´e Bourgogne Franche-Comt´e, 21078 Dijon, France

M. Besbes and P. Ben-Abdallah

Laboratoire Charles Fabry, Institut d’Optique Graduate School,

CNRS, Universit´e Paris-Saclay, 91127 Palaiseau, France.

(Dated: March 8, 2016)

Abstract

We show in this paper that the heat generated by the optical excitation of resonant plasmonic

antennas and diﬀusing along a simple glass/air interface disturbs the electron transport of a nearby

conductive element. By probing the temperature-dependent resistance of a gold nanowire Rnw(T ),

we quantitatively analyze the impact of a resonant absorption of the laser by the antennas. We ﬁnd

that the temperature rise at the nanowire induced by the laser absorption of a distant nanopar-

ticle may exceed that of a direct illumination of the nanowire itself. We also ﬁnd that a global

temperature calibration underestimates the heat generated locally by the laser. The temperature

deduced from resistance variations are veriﬁed by numerical simulations with a very satisfactory

agreement.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
6

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
1
8
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The optical interaction cross-sections of gold nanostructures play a central role for im-

proving the emission characteristics of light-emitting devices [1] and are at the core of highly-

sensitive nanoscale biosensors [2–4]. This plasmonic technology is gaining ground in the de-

velopment of novel optoelectronic components [5–7] and is now utilized to engineer thermal

landscapes [8–11]. For instance, heat resulting from the resonant absorption of an incident

radiation at the plasmon frequency is exploited in photothermal cancer therapy [12, 13] and

is applied to initiate local catalytic reactions [8, 11, 14]. A quantitative measurement of

the local elevation of the temperature is typically obtained by measuring the subtle change

of the refractive index of the surrounding medium [15], the anisotropy of polarization of a

ﬂuorescent specie [16] or its temperature-dependent lifetime [17]. These measurements rely

on a medium embedding the nanoheaters and an estimation of the temperature is restricted

to a few hundred nanometers corresponding to the water or polymer shell surrounding the

nanoparticle [18–20]. The temperature elevations inferred from these investigations suggest

that the thermal relaxation to the substrate is a factor that should not be neglected [21–23],

in particular when operating plasmonic optoelectrical components. While bolometric and

thermocouple measurements are used for temperature at the nanoscale [24, 25], the heat

generated by optical pumping of an electrically connected plasmonic device may disturb

the ﬂow of current by increasing the device’s resistance [25] and is a source of undesired

thermo-voltages [6, 26, 27].

In this paper, we investigate the impact of a remote plasmon-induced heating on the

electronic transport of a Au nanowire. By probing the change of resistance of the nanowire,

we quantify the local temperature variation resulting from the optical absorption of distant

Au nanodisks. We ﬁnd that for a resonant photothermal excitation, the electron transport

in the nanowire senses the heat produced by nanodisks displaced as far as 6 µm away. We

also ﬁnd that the temperature rise at the nanowire induced by the optical pumping of a

remote nanoheater may exceed that of a direct illumination of the nanowire itself.

2

II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

A. Nanofabrication

The gold nanowires and nanodisks are fabricated by electron beam lithography on a

standard glass coverslip. The nanowire has a nominal length of 10 µm and a width of

75 nm. The nanodisks are placed adjacent to the nanowire with varying diameters ranging

from 90 nm to 410 nm. The structures are constituted of a 5 nm thick Cr adhesion layer and

a 60 nm thick layer of Au, which are both deposited by thermal evaporation. The nanowire

is electrically connected to a set of macroscopic Au electrodes produced by standard photo-

lithography and thermal deposition. Figure 1(a) shows a scanning electron micrograph of a

typical sample used in this work. It consists on four macroscopic electrodes connecting the

nanowire and used to measure its resistance in a 4-probe conﬁguration. The nanowire and

the nearby nanodisks are readily seen at the center of the image. Figure 1(b) is a close-up

image of the nanodisks. At the bottom of the nanowire, we design nanodisks with increasing

diameters from left to right whereas at the top of the nanowire, the same set of diameters is

randomly ordered. The center-to-center distance between the nanowire and the nanoparticle

is constant at 1 µm and the interparticle edge separation is 500 nm to avoid short-range

mutual coupling. The nanodisks are placed over a restricted distance of 5 µm with respect

to the center of the nanowire to mitigate the inﬂuence of the large contact electrodes on the

local temperature perceived by the nanowire.

B. Electrical measurements

We use the following procedure to measure the electrical properties of the Au nanowire. A

function generator (Fran¸caise d’instrumentation) produces an AC voltage applied across the

nanowire with an amplitude VAC = 20 mV and a frequency F = 12.6 kHz. This frequency is

used as an external reference for a lock-in ampliﬁer (UHFLI, Zurich Instrument). A current-

to-voltage converter (DLPCA-200, Femto GmbH) detects the current ﬂowing through the

device, and the voltage output is sent to the lock-in ampliﬁer as shown in Fig. 2. The output

of the lock-in provides a voltage signal proportional to the amplitude of the modulated

current oscillating at F . The diﬀerential resistance of the nanowire Rnw is then estimated

by normalizing VAC by the lock-in signal. We perform a 4-probe measurement [28–30] to

3

FIG. 1. (a) Scanning electron image of a contacted Au nanowire decorated by adjacent Au nan-

odisks in a 4-probe resistance measurement.

(b) Close-up image of the gold nanodisks placed

nearby the nanowire. At the upper row, the diameters of the nanodisk are randomly arranged. At

the bottom row, the diameters are increasing from left to right. The circled nanodisks are resonant

with the laser wavelength.

remove the contributions of the macroscopic electrodes and their contacts in the estimation

of the nanowire resistance Rnw. The parasitic resistances are successively evaluated by

applying the AC voltage Vij to each pair of electrodes and we measure the corresponding

lock-in output signals. i, j = 1 to 4 are the contact labels, as deﬁned in Fig. 1(a). The partial

resistance of the sole nanowire writes RLij where Lij is the distance between the electrode
labeled i and the electrode labeled j. The contact resistance of each electrodes is Rc
i . The
j + RLij. The measurement follows the sequence below:

total resistance is thus Rij = Rc

i + Rc

R13 =

R14 =

V13
I13

V14
I14

,

,

R23 =

R24 =

V23
I23

V24
I24

,

.

(1)

with this procedure, we estimate the resistance of the nanowire Rnw = RL24 correspond-

ing to the central portion of the nanowire without the contact contributions using the rela-

tion [29]:

Rnw =

(R13 − R14) + (R24 − R23)

2

4

.

(2)

For the structures fabricated in this work, the resistance of the nanowires may vary be-

tween processed samples. Otherwise noted, the nanowire considered in the following has a

resistance Rnw = 175 Ω, which corresponds to a metal resistivity for the evaporated layers
of ρ = Rnw × Lnw/S = 6.5 µΩ cm where S is the section of the nanowire. This value is
consistent with the gold’s resistivity reported from mesoscopic structures [31].

During the optical measurements discussed below, the bias VAC is applied across the

contacts labeled 1 and 3 in a 2-probe conﬁguration. The diﬀerential resistance R estimated

from the output of the lock-in-ampliﬁer is then equal to the sum of the resistance of the two

unknown electrical contacts Rc

1 and Rc

3 and the resistances RL14, Rnw and RL23 corresponding

to the relevant portions of the nanowire. Assuming a constant resistivity ρ,

R = R13

= Rc

1 + Rc

3 + RL14 + Rnw + RL23

(3)

= Rc

1 + Rc

3 +

ρ
S

(L14 + L23) + Rnw.

L14 and L23 are the length between the contacts 1–4 and 2–3, respectively. Knowing the

resistance of the nanowire Rnw = 175 Ω (Eq. 2), the normalized output of the lock-in R13
and ρ(L14 + L23)/S = 63 Ω, the resistance of the contacts can be inferred Rc

3 = 409 Ω.
The total contribution of the connection to the resistance amounts to 472 Ω. This value is

1 + Rc

subtracted from the resistance estimated from the 2-probe lock-in measurement.

C. Local optical heating of the gold nanodisks

Figure 2 shows a schematic of the setup used in this study. The nanodisks are excited

by a tightly focused Ti:Sapphire laser beam emitting a 180 fs pulses at a repetition rate

of 80 MHz (Chameleon, Coherent). The wavelength is kept constant at 810 nm. The

sample is placed on an inverted optical microscope (Eclipse, Nikon) equipped with a two-

axis piezoelectric actuator (NanoLP-100, MadCity Labs) raster scanning the sample in the
focal region. A 100× objective with a numerical aperture of 1.49 focuses the laser beam in
a diﬀraction limited spot and collects the nonlinear two-photon luminescence produced by

the Au nanostructures [32, 33]. The nonlinear signal is detected by an avalanche photodiode

(Excelitas). The luminescence is used for imaging and analysis purposes. The average laser

5

intensity at the sample is 420 kW cm−2 and the polarization of the focused laser beam is
linearly polarized perpendicularly to the nanowire in order to homogenize the response along

the object. We veriﬁed that the conclusions described below do not depend on the use of a

pulsed laser. Leaving aside the nonlinear activity, similar results were consistently obtained

for a constant-wave laser of the same power and emitting at 785 nm.

FIG. 2. Sketch of the experimental setup. The sample is scanned in the focus of a pulsed laser

emitting 180 fs pulses with a repetition rate of 80 MHz

centered at a wavelength of 810 nm.

The nonlinear optical response (two-photon luminescence) is detected by an avalanche photodiode.

The inﬂuence of the optical excitation on the electronic transport of the nanowire is recorded by

a current-to-voltage converter feeding a lock-in ampliﬁer. The lock-in ampliﬁer is synced to the

frequency of the AC bias applied to the nanowire by the function generator.

Upon local illumination, the absorbed energy is converted to heat. For the irradiated

nanodisks, the heat transported through the substrate may reach the nanowire. The amount

of heat perceived by the distant nanowire induces a drop of the electronic transport, which

depends linearly on the nanowire temperature [34]. The diﬀerential resistance and the

nonlinear signal emitted by the structures are recorded for each sample position in the focus

of the laser to form the images depicted in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3(a) a positive variation of the

resistance of the nanowire is clearly observed when the metal structures are optically excited.

The contrast is constant when the nanowire is directly excited by the laser with a modest

increase of the resistance. However, when the nanodisks are scanned through the focus,

6

the variation of the nanowire’s resistance ∆Rnw becomes dependent on the diameter of the
nanodisks. Variations of ∆Rnw up to 1.4 % are recorded for the ∼210 nm nanodisks as
indicated by the arrows. These nanodisks are the elements circled in Fig. 1. For nearly all

diameters, the variation of the nanowire’s resistance is larger when the laser irradiates the

isolated nanodisks than for a direct illumination of the nanowire itself.

FIG. 3. (a) Image of the variation of the nanowire’s resistance ∆Rnw for a lateral scan of the

sample in the focal spot of the laser. Heat generated by the laser on the diﬀerent part of the

sample provides an increase in of the nanowire’s resistance. (b) Simultaneously acquired nonlinear

two-photon luminescence emitted by the Au structures. The nanodisks in resonance with the

laser (arrows) are inducing the largest variation of the resistance and the strongest nonlinear

photoluminescence.

Heat transferred during the optical excitation of nanodisks depends directly on their

absorbing capacity, which is enhanced at the surface plasmon resonance. The occurrence of

the resonance is readily identiﬁed in the nonlinear two-photon luminescence produced by the

nanodisks [33, 35]. as illustrated in the confocal map of Fig. 3(b). The strongest response is

observed for the 210 nm nanodisk (arrows). The red curve in Fig. 4 (a) shows the nonlinear

photoluminescence dependence with the size of the nanodisks obtained from three diﬀerent
samples. At the laser wavelength used in this study, the ∼ 210 nm nanodisk sustains a
marked resonance. The largest ∆Rnw in Figure 3(a) is also observed for this diameter.

The resonance is numerically conﬁrmed by the evolution of the simulated scattering

absorption cross-section σa of a nanodisk as a function of its diameter. The absorption

7

cross-section of the Au structures writes:

σa(ω) =

Pa(ω)
ψi(ω)

.

(4)

σa(ω) is deﬁned for an incident monochromatic plane wave of frequency ω as the ratio of

the absorbed power

by the incident ﬂux

Pa(ω) =

ω
2

ψi(ω) =

1
2

(cid:90)
(cid:18) 0

v

µ0

|E|2 Im(ε)dV

(cid:19)1/2 |E|2 .

(5)

(6)

Here ε denotes the electric permittivity of the absorber of volume V , E is the local electric

ﬁeld and 0 and µ0 are the vacuum permittivity and permeability, respectively. The absorp-

tion cross-sections of the nanodisks and of the nanowire are calculated by solving Maxwell’s

equations with a ﬁnite-element method combined to an analytical description of the ﬁeld

scattered at the interface of the substrate [36]. The absorption cross-section is represented

by the blue curve in Fig. 4 (b) after a normalization by the surface of the absorbers. The

presence of the glass substrate is taken into account in the calculations. The simulation
clearly indicates an enhanced absorption eﬃciency for a particle diameter ∼200 nm. The
red curve in Fig. 4 (b) is the calculated absorption eﬃciency for a nanowire with varying

widths. The structure is assumed invariant along the nanowire axis and the calculation

is performed for a linear polarization aligned with the short axis. For the experimental
width considered here (75 nm), σa is ∼ 5 times weaker than for a resonant nanodisk (blue
curve) and explains the dimmer contrast observed for a direct illumination of the nanowire

in Fig. 3(a) despite the fact that the nanodisks are laterally shifted by 1 µm. These consis-

tent results conﬁrm the unambiguous role of the surface plasmon resonance at generating an

absorption enhancement and the subsequent rise of the temperature-dependent resistance

of the nanowire [25].

Interestingly, the variation of the resistance follows a diﬀerent trend than the nonlinear

photoluminescence as illustrated by the blue curve in Fig. 4(a). ∆Rnw increases to reach a
maximum at 3.5 Ω for ∼220 nm nanodisks and then reduces to reach a plateau at 2 Ω for
diameter larger than 350 nm. This diameter corresponds to the approximate size of the

focal spot. The evolution of ∆Rnw is thus the convolution of a proﬁle related to the plasmon

8

resonance with a size dependence related to the saturation of the optical absorption for

nanodisks larger than the focal spot.

FIG. 4.

(a) Evolution of diﬀerential resistance and the two-photon luminescence (TPL) with

nanodisk diameter. A plasmon resonance is clearly identiﬁed for nanodisks with a diameter of

210 nm. The graph gathers measurements obtained from three diﬀerent samples. (b) Blue curve:

Simulated evolution of the absorption eﬃciency of a Au nanodisk placed on a glass substrate
as a function of its diameter. The simulated resonant absorption occurs for ∼200 nm nanodisk.

Red curve: Absoprtion eﬃciency for a nanowire as a function of its width. The polarization is

perpendicular to the main axis of the nanowire.

We veriﬁed numerically that mutual interactions between nanodisks can be neglected

with the interparticle distance considered in this work. Figure 5 describes the evolution of

the optical absorption σa of an excited nanodisk in the presence of a second gold nanodisk

placed at a distance d from the ﬁrst, and that for two crossed polarizations. The dashed line

is the edge-to-edge distance used in the experiment. Interestingly, the calculations predict

that the absorption of a nanodisk can be enhanced or reduced by adjusting either of the three

parameters. However, for the case considered here the optical absorption and therefore all

related phenomena, such as the temperature dissipated in the substrate, are not disturbed

by the presence of other nanodisks.

D. Temperature calibration

On order to estimate the rise of the nanowire’s temperature, we calibrate the temperature-

dependent resistance of the nanowire Rnw(T ) by placing the sample on a controlled heating

9

FIG. 5. (a) and (b) Dependence of the power absorbed by a nanodisk in the presence of a sec-

ond one for varying edge-to-edge distances d and disk diameters. The maps are calculated for a

TE polarization and a TM polarization, respectively. The absorbed power is normalized to the

absorption of a single isolated nanodisk. The excitation is a plane wave normally incident to the

interface with a wavelength λ = 810 nm. The dashed line corresponds the minimum experimental

distance between the nanodisks in Fig. 1.

module in the line with the reports by Herzog and co-workers [25] and Stolz et al

[6].

Figure 6(a) shows the linear variation of the resistance as a function of the temperature
Tglobal heating the entire sample. The resulting coeﬃcient dRnw/dTglobal = 0.41 Ω K−1
depends on the resistivity of the nanowire and its characteristic dimensions. The variation

∆Rnw recorded during the lateral scan of the nanowire in the focal spot (Fig. 3(a)) may
be linked to a ﬁrst approximation to the temperature variation ∆Tglobal = ∆T global

evenly

nw

distributed over the nanowire. The black curve in Fig. 6(b) is the inferred temperature

elevation of the nanowire ∆T global

nw = 2.3 K considering the rise of resistance ∆Rnw measured

in Fig. 3(a) when the laser irradiates directly the nanowire.

This approximation is however not representative of a local excitation induced by a tightly

focused laser beam. To motivate this point, we show in Fig. 6(b) a ﬁnite-element simulation

(Comsol multiphysics) of the longitudinal distribution of ∆T local

nw

produced by a simulated

heat source located at the center of the nanowire and with a dimension corresponding to the

focal spot. The geometry of the nanowire and of the nanodisks used in the computation is
that of the experimental structures without the adhesion layer. Two 500 nm× 20 µm gold
pads mimicking the electrodes are placed at the extremities of the nanowire. The nanowire,

10

the nanodisks and the pads are deposited on a 50 µm×50 µm×50 µm cube of glass. The ma-
terial properties used in the calculations are for the thermal capacity; C Au = 129 J kg−1 K−1
and C glass = 730 J kg−1 K−1, for the thermal conductivity: κAu = 317 W m−1K−1 and
κglass = 1.4 W m−1 K−1, and for the electrical conductivity: σAu = 45.6 × 106 S m−1 and
σglass = 1 × 10−14 S m−1. The initial temperature at the boundaries of the calculation
window is 296.15 K. The surface emissivity for Au is Au = 0.02, and for glass glass = 0.94.

To estimate the local temperature of the heat source we equalize the resistance variation

due to an homogeneous heating with a rise of temperature ∆T global

nw

using the Peltier module

and the resistance change by a local heating with a temperature ∆T local

nw (x). x is the coor-
dinate along the nanowire length Lnw. For a temperature-dependent resistivity ρ(T ) this

equality writes

∆Rnw =

ρ(∆T global

nw
S

)Lnw

=

(cid:90) Lnw

0

From the linear relationship between Rnw and T global
if the surface integrals of the proﬁles ∆T local

nw

nw

ρ(∆T local

nw (x))
S

dx.

(7)

depicted in Fig. 6(a), Eq. 7 is satisﬁed

and ∆T global

nw

along the nanowire are equal. We

thus compute the maximum local temperature ∆T local,max

nw

to satisfy the equality. In Fig. 6

(b), we set ∆T local,max

nw

= 7.2 K to have identical areas under the two curves. For the same

change of resistance the maximum temperature reached by the nanowire ∆T local,max

nw

is thus

three times higher for a diﬀraction-limited local heat source than for a global heating of

the system. This approach is valid for a local heating of the nanowire, but would fail at

describing a situation where a local rise of the temperature would be compensated by a local

cooling of the system. In this particular case, Rnw would remain unchanged.

This approach is applied to estimate the temperature distribution along the nanowire for

a laser excitation of the gold nanodisks. Under this conﬁguration heat must diﬀuse through

the substrate to impact the nanowire’s resistance. An example of the procedure is shown in

Fig. 7(a) for the resonant disk identiﬁed in the ∆Rnw map of Fig. 3(a). The curve is simulated

using the following steps. We ﬁrst determine the experimental value of ∆Rnw of the nanowire

when the nanodisk is irradiated. For the example considered here ∆Rnw = 2.8 Ω. Using
the global temperature coeﬃcient dRnw/dTglobal = 0.41 Ω K−1, we estimate what would
be the necessary global temperature required to increase the resistance by 2.8 Ω, that is

∆Tglobal = 6.9 K. This hypothetical temperature is homogeneously distributed along the

nanowire (dashed curve in Fig. 7(a)). To take into account the local illumination of the

11

FIG. 6. (a) Evolution of nanowire resistance Rnw with a global increase of the sample temperature.

The entire sample is heated with a Peltier Module. (b) Black curve: longitudinal distribution of

the temperature along the nanowire estimated from the dRnw/dTglobal coeﬃcient deduced from (a)

and the ∆Rnw recorded by the lock-in ampliﬁer during laser illumination. Red curve: simulated

distribution of the temperature along the nanowire for a local heating element centered on the

nanowire. The maximum temperature is computed to set the surface integral of the red curve

equals to that of the black curve.

nanodisk by the focused laser beam, we compute the two-dimensional distribution of the

temperature in the system considering a heated nanodisk (see inset in Fig. 7(a)). A proﬁle

of the temperature distributed along the nanowire is illustrated by the red curve in Fig. 7(a).

We then adjust the temperature of the heat source in the ﬁnite-element simulation of the

system to obtain equal surface integrals between the temperature proﬁles perceived by the

nanowire. For a temperature rise of the nanodisk of 108 K, the surfaces behind the two

curves in Fig. 7(a) are identical and the maximum temperature rise at the nanowire is

about ∆T local,max

nw

= 13 K. Conducting this analysis for the range of diameters considered

in this study, we show in Fig. 7(b) that ∆T local,max

nw

remains signiﬁcant even for optically

pumped nanodisks laterally shifted by 1 µm.

In the following, we estimate the rise of the temperature in the nanowire purely from a

simulation stand point. The objective is to verify the reliability of the temperature variations

deduced from the approach exposed above. To do so, the problem is solved by a ﬁnite-

element analysis of the combined physical processes at play. The temperature of the nanodisk

is no longer derived from the variation of the nanowire’s resistance. It is directly computed

12

FIG. 7. (a) Estimated temperature gradient along the nanowire when a 210 nm diameter nanodisk

is heated at a distance of 1 µm and introduces a 2.8 Ω rise of the nanowire’s resistance. Dashed

line: global temperature required to change the resistance by the same amount. Inset: Spatial

distribution of the simulated temperature in the computed system. (b) Maximum temperature

deduced from the experimental variation of the nanowire’s resistance as a function of the nanodisk’s

diameter.

from the electromagnetic problem consisting at calculating the power absorbed by the Au

nanodisks upon illumination of a simulated focused beam.

We compute the steady-state longitudinal distribution of the temperature along the

nanowire for the diﬀerent nanodisks considered experimentally. The results are reported

in Fig. 8. The highest computed temperature variation ∆T local,max

nw

= 12 K is in very good

agreement with the temperature determined from the ﬂuctuations of nanowire electron trans-

port (Fig. 7(b)). Furthermore, the full calculation reproduces the plateau observed for large

diameters in Fig. 7(b). These similarities demonstrate the consistency of the resistance

analysis used to deduce the local elevation of the temperature ∆T local,max

nw

.

For diameters exceeding the size of the laser beam, the simulated ∆T local,max

nw

is a factor

two lower than the experimentally inferred value. The proﬁle of the temperature along the

nanowire used for the calculation of ∆T local,max

nw

is obtained by the diﬀusion of a homogeneous

heat source through the glass substrate. This approximation is correct when the plasmonic

nanodisk is smaller than the laser beam. For larger diameters, the optical excitation of

nanodisk can no longer be approximated to a homogeneous heat source and is the probable

source of the discrepancy.

13

FIG. 8. Computed temperature variation along the nanowire for varying nanodisk diameters placed

at a distance of 1 µm. The nanodisks are the source of heat. The graph is calculated by a ﬁnite-

element analysis taking into account the experimental conditions (focused beam, incident power

and size of the structures).

III. LONG RANGE HEAT TRANSFER

Thus far we considered illuminated nanodisks laterally displaced by 1 µm from the

nanowire and estimated a 13 K rise of the local temperature when resonant nanodisks are

illuminated. In the following we investigate the distance dependence of the heat transfer via

the glass substrate.

In this experiment, we place resonant nanodisks at distances from the nanowire ranging

from 800 nm to 6 µm. The study is conducted on a nanowire with a resistance Rnw =

138 Ω and we maintain constant the optical conditions. Figure 9(a) is a two-dimensional

distribution of the resistance Rnw when the sample is laterally scanned through the focus.

We observe the same contrast as in Fig. 3(a) with an increase of the nanowire’s resistance

when the Au structures are heated by the laser. We plot in the left axis of Fig. 9(b) the

variation of the resistance ∆Rnw as a function of the lateral displacement of the nanodisks.

The heat generated by the laser incident on a nanodisk remotely placed as far as 6 µm and

diﬀusing through the glass substrate imparts a measurable rise of the nanowire resistance.

14

FIG. 9.

(a) Two-dimensional evolution of the nanowire’s resistance when the structure is scanned

through the focus. The resistance increases whenever the laser is heating the nanostructures in

the scanned area. On the left side of the nanowire, the distance of the resonant nanodisks is

increasing step wise. On the right side, nanodisks are randomly shifted from the nanowire. (b)

Left axis: (circle) variation of the nanowire’s resistance ∆Rnw as a function of the distance between

the nanodisks and the nanowire. Solid black line: Best-ﬁt exponential curve to the experimental

data points with a characteristic decay length of 1.7 µm. Right axis: (square) Estimated variation

of the maximum temperature perceived by the nanowire. Blue dashed line: computed maximum

variation of the temperature.

The exponential ﬁt to the data provides a decaying diﬀusion with a characteristic length of

1.7 µm.

Following the procedure described above, we calculate the maximum temperature varia-

tion ∆T local,max

nw

via the calibration coeﬃcient dRnw/dTglobal determined by a global heating

(Fig. 6(a)) and the spatial distribution of temperature determined by the ﬁnite-element

analysis (Fig. 6(a)). The maximum temperature ∆T local,max

nw

is plotted in the right axis of

Fig. 9(b). At a distance of 800 nm from the nanowire, the excitation of a resonant structure

rises the nanowire’s temperature by about 14 K. For the same nanodisk placed at 6 µm,

∆T local,max

nw

drops to 2 K. The dashed blue curve is the calculated ∆T local,max

nw

and is in very

good agreement with the points (square) deduced from the experimental ∆Rnw.

15

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have investigated the eﬀect of a remote resonant plasmonic photothermal excitation on

the electronic transport of a Au nanowire. Upon focusing light on isolated Au nanodisks, the

heat locally produced diﬀuses through the substrate and induces a change of the nanowire’s

resistance. We estimate the temperature rise at the nanowire by taking into account the local

nature of the excitation, the experimental data and ﬁnite-element calculations. We estimate
a local temperature rise at the nanowire of 13 K for a laser intensity of 420 kW cm−2
focused on a resonant plasmonic nanoparticle located 1 µm away from the nanowire. The

photothermal excitation of an electrically contacted metal nanowire resting on the glass

surface is usually considered negligible. While the macroscopic electrodes connected to the

nanowire act as heat sinks and the physical contact to the substrate contributes to an eﬃcient

cooling of the nanowire by thermal conduction [37], we determine a maximum temperature

signiﬁcantly exceeding the average temperature inferred from a global calibration of the

temperature-dependent resistivity of the nanowire [5, 6, 25]. Interestingly, we demonstrate

that the rise of temperature for a direct optical excitation of the nanowire is weaker than

for a laterally displaced isolated resonant nanoparticle. The thermal diﬀusion through the

glass substrate follows an exponential decay of about 2 µm, and illuminated nanodisks

located as far as 6 µm generate a temperature variation of 2 K at the nanowire. While

all the experiments are conducted in the steady-state regime, the protocol can be readily

extended to a time-dependent thermoplasmonic modulation of the electronic transport of the

nanowire. To conclude, we demonstrate that relatively simple electrical measurement can be

implemented to remotely probe the plasmon-induced photothermal activity of an illuminated

device. By extension, measuring the resistance variations of a network of such heat probes

may enable a diﬀusion-based thermal tomography of a local heat source. We believe that

thermal diﬀusion through the substrate may be mitigated or conversely enhanced by a

careful control of the electromagnetic interaction between an ensemble of nanoparticles. In

line with this concluding remark, a phononic engineering [38] of the substrate’s local thermal

conductivity would also oﬀer a leverage to control the directional ﬂow of the heat produced

by the resonant absorption.

16

V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Research

Council under the European Community’s Seventh Framework Program FP7/ 2007-2013

Grant Agreement No. 306772. This project is in cooperation with the Labex ACTION

(Contract No. ANR-11-LABX-01-01) and the regional PARI programs. The authors are

grateful to O. Demichel for valuable discussions.

[1] C.-Y. Cho, S.-J. Lee, J.-H. Song, S.-H. Hong, S.-M. Lee, Y.-H. Cho, and S.-J. Park, Appl.

Phys. Lett. 98, 051106 (2011).

[2] G. J. Nusz, S. M. Marinakos, A. C. Curry, A. Dahlin, F. H¨o¨ok, A. Wax, and A. Chilkoti,

Anal. Chem. 80, 984 (2008).

[3] S. K. Dondapati, T. K. Sau, C. Hrelescu, T. A. Klar, F. D. Stefani, and J. Feldmann, ACS

Nano 4, 6318 (2010).

[4] J. Nyagilo, S.-H. Chang, J. Wu, Y. Hao, and D. P. Dav´e, Sens. Actu. B: Chem. 212, 225

(2015).

[5] D. R. Ward, F. H¨user, F. Pauly, J. C. Cuevas, and D. Natelson, Nature Nanotech. 5, 732

(2010).

[6] A. Stolz, J. Berthelot, M.-M. Mennemanteuil, G. Colas des Francs, L. Markey, V. Meunier,

and A. Bouhelier, Nano Lett. 14, 1 (2014).

[7] M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas, and P. Nordlander, Nature Nanotech. 10, 25 (2015).

[8] G. Baﬀou, C. Girard, and R. Quidant, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 136805 (2010).

[9] A. Sanchot, G. Baﬀou, R. Marty, A. Arbouet, R. Quidant, C. Girard, and E. Dujardin, ACS

Nano 6, 3434 (2012).

[10] G. Baﬀou and R. Quidant, Las. & Phot. Rev. 7, 171 (2013).

[11] G. Baﬀou and R. Quidant, Chem. Soc. Rev. 43, 3898 (2014).

[12] W. Chen, C. Ayala-Orozco, l. N. C. Biswa, C. Perez-Torres, M. Bartels, R. Bardhan, G. Stin-

net, X. D. Liu, B. Ji, A. Deorukhkar, L. V. Brown, S. Guha, R. G. Pautler, S. Krishnan, N. J.

Halas, and A. Joshi, Nanomedi. 9, 1209 (2001).

17

[13] E. B. Dickerson, E. C. Dreaden, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, H. Chu, S. Pushpanketh, J. F.

McDonald, and M. a. El-Sayed, Cancer Lett. 269, 57 (2008).

[14] S. Mukherjee, L. Zhou, A. M. Goodman, N. Large, C. Ayala-Orozco, Y. Zhang, P. Nordlander,

and N. J. Halas, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 64 (2014).

[15] G. Baﬀou, P. Bon, J. Savatier, J. Polleux, M. Zhu, M. Merlin, H. Rigneault, and S. Monneret,

ACS Nano 6, 2452 (2012).

[16] G. Baﬀou, M. P. Kreuzer, F. Kulzer, and R. Quidant, Opt. Express 17, 3291 (2009).

[17] Z. J. Coppens, W. Li, D. G. Walker, and J. G. Valentine, Nano Lett. 13, 1023 (2013).

[18] V. Kotaidis and A. Plech, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 213102 (2005).

[19] A. O. Govorov, W. Zhang, T. Skeini, H. Richardson, J. Lee, and N. A. Kotov, Nanosc. Res.

Lett. 1, 84 (2006).

[20] A. N. Volkov, C. Sevilla, and L. V. Zhigilei, Appl. Surf. Sci. 253, 6394 (2007).

[21] M. Tschikin, S.-A. Biehs, F. Rosa, and P. Ben-Abdallah, Eur. Phys. J. B - Cond. Matt.

Compl. Syst. 85, 253 (2012).

[22] M. T. Carlson, A. J. Green, A. Khan, and H. H. Richardson, J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 8798

(2012).

[23] B. Desiatov, I. Goykhman, M. Tzur, and U. Levy, in Lasers and Electro-Optics (2013).

[24] J.-C. Weeber, K. Hassan, A. Bouhelier, G. Colas-des Francs, J. Arocas, L. Markey, and

A. Dereux, Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 031113 (2011).

[25] J. B. Herzog, M. W. Knight, and D. Natelson, Nano Lett. 14, 499 (2014).

[26] B. Y. Zheng, H. Zhao, A. Manjavacas, M. McClain, P. Nordlander, and N. J. Halas, Nature

Comm. 6, 7797 (2015).

[27] F. L´eonard, E. Song, Q. Li, B. Swartzentruber, J. A. Martinez, and G. T. Wang, Nano Lett.

15, 8129 (2015).

[28] H. Okino, I. Matsuda, R. Hobara, Y. Hosomura, S. Hasegawa, and P. A. Bennett, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 86, 233108 (2005).

[29] W. Gu and K. Kim, in IEEE Nanotechnology Materials and Devices Conference, Vol. 1 (2006)

pp. 304–305.

[30] A. S. Walton, C. S. Allen, K. Critchley, M. L. Gorzny, J. E. McKendry, R. M. D. Brydson,

B. J. Hickey, and S. D. Evans, Nanotech. 18, 065204 (2010).

[31] P. van Attekum, P. Woerlee, G. Verkade, and A. Hoeben, Phys. Rev. B 29, 645 (1984).

18

[32] M. R. Beversluis, A. Bouhelier, and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. B 68, 115433 (2003).

[33] A. Bouhelier, R. Bachelot, G. Lerondel, S. Kostcheev, P. Royer, and G. P. Wiederrecht, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 95, 267405 (2005).

[34] A. Pir´oth and J. S´olyom, Fundamentals of the Physics of Solids: Volume II: Electronic Prop-

erties, Fundamentals of the Physics of Solids (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008).

[35] P. Ghenuche, S. Cherukulappurath, T. H. Taminiau, N. F. van Hulst, and R. Quidant, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 101, 116805 (2008).

[36] J.-M. Jin, The Finite Element Method in Electromagnetics (Wiley-IEEE Press, 2014).

[37] B. Kopp, Z. Yi, D. Benner, F. Q. Xie, C. Obermair, T. Schimmel, J. Boneberg, P.Leiderer,

and E. Scheer, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 3, 703 (2012).

[38] M. Maldovan, Nature 503, 209 (2013).

19

