Preprint typeset in JINST style - HYPER VERSION

A Brief Technical History of the Large-Area
Picosecond Photodetector (LAPPD) Collaboration

B. W. Adamsa,∗, K. Attenkofera,†, M. Bogdanc,K. Byruma, A. Elaginc, J. W. Elama, H.
J. Frischc, J.F.Genatc, H. Grabasc,‡, J. Gregara, E. Hahnd, M. Heintzc, Z. Insepova, V.
Ivanov f , S. Jelinskyg, S. Jokelaa, S. W. Leea, A. U. Manea, J. McPhateg, M. J. Minote,
P. Muratd, K. Nishimurah,§, R. Northropc, R. Obaidc,¶, E. Oberlac, E. Rambergd, A.
Ronzhind, O. H. Siegmundh, G. Sellbergd, N. T. Sullivanb, A. Tremsing, G. Varnerh, I.
Veryovkina,(cid:107), A. Vostrikovc, R. G. Wagnera, D. Waltersa, H.-H. Wanga, M. Wetsteinc,∗∗,
J. Xiea, Z. Yusofa,††, A. Zinoveva
a Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne IL, 60439
b Arradiance Inc., Sudbury MA, 01776
cEnrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago IL 60637
d Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia IL, 60510
e Incom, Inc, Charlton MA 01507
f Muons,Inc; Batavia IL 60610
gSpace Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley CA. 94720
h University of Hawaii, Honolulu HI, 96822
E-mail: frisch@hep.uchicago.edu

ABSTRACT: The Large-Area Picosecond PhotoDetector (LAPPD) Collaboration was formed in
2009 to develop large-area photodetectors capable of time resolutions measured in pico-seconds
(psec, 10−12 s), with accompanying sub-millimeter spatial resolution. During the next three and
one-half years the Collaboration developed the LAPPDTM design of 20 × 20 cm2 modules with
gains greater than 107 and non-uniformity less than 15%, time resolution less than 50 psec for single
photons and spatial resolution of 700 µm in both lateral dimensions. We describe the R&D per-
formed to develop large-area micro-channel plate glass substrates, resistive and secondary-emitting
coatings, large-area bialkali photocathodes, and RF-capable hermetic packaging. In addition, the
Collaboration developed the necessary electronics for large systems capable of precise timing, built
up from a custom low-power 15-GigaSample/sec waveform sampling 6-channel integrated circuit
and supported by a two-level modular data acquisition system based on Field-Programmable Gate
Arrays for local control, data-sparciﬁcation, and triggering. We discuss the formation, organiza-
tion, and technical successes and short-comings of the Collaboration. The Collaboration ended in
December 2012 with a transition from R&D to commercialization.

KEYWORDS: pico-second time-of-ﬂight; large-area photodetectors; MCP-PMTs; waveform
sampling ASICs; photon and charged particle detectors.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
6

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
4
8
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Contents

1.

Introduction

2. Motivation and Selection of the Technology for Psec Timing

2.1 The Critical Roles of Seed Funding and Fermilab Test Beam Results
2.2 Proposal to the Ofﬁce of High Energy Physics, Department of Energy

3. Organization of the Collaboration

3.1 Management
3.2 Photodetector Module Development
3.3 Parallel Development of Ceramic and Glass Designs: "The Portfolio of Risk"

4. Goals

5. R&D Achievements

5.1 Microchannel Plates: Substrates and Coatings
5.2 Hermetic Packaging

5.2.1 The Brazed Ceramic Package
5.2.2 The Glass Hermetic Package

5.3 Photocathodes
5.4 Electronics
5.5 Performance

6. Goals Achieved and Not Achieved

6.1 Major Goals Achieved
6.2 Opportunities Missed: What We Did Not Get Done

6.2.1 A Sealed Functioning LAPPDTM Module
6.2.2 ALD-enabled High Performance Advanced Designs

6.3 Spin-offs from LAPPD R&D

7. Major Constructed Facilities

8. The Role of DUSEL in LAPPD

∗Present Address:Incom, Inc. 294 Southbridge Road, Charlton, MA 01507
†Present Address:Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton NY, 11973
‡Present Address: Univ. of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz CA 95064
§Present Address: Ultralytics LLC, Arlington VA 22203
¶Present Address: University of Connecticut, Storrs CT, 06269
(cid:107)Present Address: University of Illinois, Chicago IL 60607
∗∗Present Address: Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011
††Present Address: Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL 60616

– 1 –

2

3
4
4

5
5
6
7

7

12
12
14
15
16
18
19
21

22
22
23
23
25
25

26

31

9. Communicating Technical Information in a Multi-Disciplinary Effort

9.1 Collaboration Meetings
9.2 Designing an Effective Review Process
9.3 Collaborative Cross-Community Workshops
9.4 Web-based Documentation for Collaborators, Vendors, and Adopters
9.5 Areas of Application and Early Adopters: the LAPPD Strategy
9.6 Publishing
9.7 Mentoring, Awards, Careers

10. End of Collaboration: Path to Commercialization and Adoption

31
32
32
33
33
33
34
35

36

1. Introduction

The Large-Area Picosecond PhotoDetector Collaboration (LAPPD) was formed in 2009 to develop
photodetectors capable of making time measurements measured in pico-seconds (psec, 10−12 s)
with sub-mm spatial resolution over areas measured in square-meters [1]. Micro-channel plates
(MCPs) consist of pores with the small spatial dimensions necessary for psec timing [2, 3, 4].
MCPs also naturally provide homogeneity over large areas, excellent spatial resolution, high gain,
and low noise. Here we summarize the R&D undertaken by LAPPD to realize an MCP-based 20
× 20 cm2 photodetector module with gain greater than 107, dark noise less than 0.1 counts/cm2-s,
time resolution less than 50 psec for single photons, and spatial resolution of 700 µm in each of the
two lateral dimensions. In addition, LAPPD developed the necessary electronics for large systems
capable of precise timing, built up from a custom low-power 15-GigaSample/sec (GS/sec) wave-
form sampling 6-channel integrated circuit and supported by a two-level modular data acquisition
system based on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) for local control, data-sparciﬁcation,
and triggering.

The project beneﬁted from the availability of funding from the American Recovery and Rein-
vestment Act (ARRA) [5] through the Department of Energy (DOE). The ARRA funding, which
came to LAPPD via Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), allowed supporting collaborating in-
stitutions with expertise in the needed technologies. Strong support from the DOE based on the
possibility of large cost-savings at the proposed Deep Underground Science and Engineering Lab-
oratory (DUSEL) [6, 7] facility was crucial.

The LAPPD Collaboration was formed with participants from each of three complemen-
tary kinds of institution, national laboratories, universities, and US companies, each with its own
strengths, culture, and limitations. Industry brought speciﬁc manufacturing facilities and industrial
techniques; the national laboratories brought access to a wide range of facilities and expertise for
the synthesis and characterization of materials; the universities brought speciﬁc photodetector and
electronics expertise. The project gained enormously from having experts in many unanticipated
areas of material science and electronics, for example, who might not have become involved in a
more conventional collaboration.

– 2 –

The objectives of this paper are: 1) to provide a review of the major technical accomplish-
ments of LAPPD; 2) to provide guidance based on experience for starting and sustaining a major
joint Laboratory-Industry-University effort; and 3) to provide the historical context. The organi-
zation of the paper is as follows. The science motivation, early technical ideas, and formation of
the Collaboration are described in Section 2. The organization into ﬁve major technical areas and
the corresponding multi-disciplinary management structure are described in Section 3. The Col-
laboration goals, divided into those corresponding to each of the ﬁve technical areas, are presented
in Section 4. Section 5 summarizes technical R&D. Section 6 assesses the achievement of the
goals, including the failure to make a fully-functional sealed LAPPDTM module before the transi-
tion to commercialization. Section 7 brieﬂy describes the facilities that the individual institutions
constructed or otherwise brought to bear on the development of capillary substrates, resistive and
emissive coatings, performance characterization, UHV-hermetic mechanical packaging, and GHz
electronics. The motivating role played by the joint proposal from the DOE and the National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF) for a large underground neutrino facility, the Deep Underground Science
and Engineering Laboratory (DUSEL), is summarized in Section 8. Section 9 presents the in-
frastructure developed to communicate technical information in many disciplines both within and
external to the collaboration. Section 10 describes the end of the project in Dec. 2012 and the
subsequent transition to commercialization [8], with continuing R&D under the DOE detector and
SBIR/STTR programs and private funding. The author list and executive summary from the 2009
DOE proposal are shown in Appendix A.

2. Motivation and Selection of the Technology for Psec Timing

The need for very precise timing, with a nominal goal of 1 psec, grew out of the recognition of
the inability to extract all the measurable information (i.e. 4-vectors) from multi-TeV particle col-
lisions at the Fermilab Tevatron in 2003 [9]. A detector capable of psec-resolution timing1 must
have physical dimensions small enough so that variations in the fastest transit times of the photons
or electrons forming the ampliﬁed signal correspond to a time jitter smaller than the desired reso-
lution [3]. Using Cherenkov light generated by charged particles traversing a transparent radiator
on the front face of a Micro-Channel Plate was recognized in 2004 as a promising method to cover
large areas with sub-mm resolution [2].

A second motivation was the suggestion by H. Nicholson [11] that large-area inexpensive
panels of photodetectors could provide substantial cost savings by replacing hundreds of millions
of dollars of conventional photomultipliers in the large water Cherenkov neutrino detector proposed
for DUSEL [6]. The number of these new photodetectors needed for DUSEL was also ﬁnancially
attractive to companies with existing facilities capable of producing large volumes of the tubes, as
described in Section 8.

Commercially available micro-channel plate detectors [12, 13] had not been considered for
large-area applications due to their small size, with the largest being 5 × 5 cm2 [14]; high-cost
per area; long fabrication cycle; and concerns about lifetime due to ion feedback. Any new effort

1For convenience, we refer to the measurement of time-of-arrival of photons in the deep sub-nsec range, i.e. from
10’s of psec to several hundred fsec, as ‘psec’. More information on factors that determine the ultimate limit on timing
resolution in these technologies can be found in Ref [10].

– 3 –

required making detectors with at least an order-of-magnitude larger sensitive area at comparable
or lower unit cost, and a new process for fabricating the ampliﬁcation section that eliminated the
source of the ion feedback. In addition, the supporting electronics systems to exploit the fast timing
capabilities for large psec-capable systems needed to be deﬁned and developed.

2.1 The Critical Roles of Seed Funding and Fermilab Test Beam Results

Seed funding was essential. The experimental program was started in 2005 with a modest grant
from the Physical Science Division at the University of Chicago, followed by a three-year Lab-
oratory Directed Research and Development (LDRD) program at ANL [15], a two-year grant
from the joint ANL-Fermilab-Chicago program [16], and two years of travel support from the
Chicago-France Center of the University of Chicago for US-France collaboration on the electron-
ics [17]. The seed funding allowed a group from ANL, Chicago, Fermilab, Hawaii, Saclay/IRFU,
and the Stanford Linear Accelerator Laboratory (SLAC) to test proof-of-principle in 2008 in a
small experiment [18] at the Fermilab MTEST facility [19] using commercial Planacon MCP-
PMTs [14] and custom RF anodes [20]. The test conﬁrmed the earlier work of Inami et al [21] that
Cherenkov light generated in the front window of an MCP-PMT easily gave time resolutions below
10 psec [21, 18, 22, 23]. The measured timing resolution supported the case that precision time-of-
ﬂight measurements could be made over large areas using micro-channel-plate photodetectors with
transmission-line readouts and custom psec-resolution digitizing electronics, but would require sig-
niﬁcant R&D. This conclusion led to the formation of the Collaboration and the development of a
proposal to the DOE for a 3-year development program.

2.2 Proposal to the Ofﬁce of High Energy Physics, Department of Energy

The summer and fall of 2008 were devoted to deﬁning the goals, identifying the tasks and desired
groups and individuals to address them, and then on deﬁning and writing a proposal to the Ofﬁce
of High Energy Physics of the Department of Energy.

The Collaboration was self-assembled from three kinds of institutions: National Laborato-
ries, US-based industry, and universities. The list of authors and institutions from the 2009 DOE
proposal is given in Appendix A. Because the proposal was self-generated by the group and not
programmatically driven, it was based on a ‘bottom-up’ intellectual interest by individual partici-
pants in their own areas of expertise.

The effort at the Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) involved six Divisions each with its
own expertise and facilities: High Energy Physics, X-ray Sciences, Chemistry, Mathematics and
Computer Science, Energy Systems, and Material Science. In addition, the Physical Sciences and
Engineering Directorate supported the ANL Glass Shop. Fermilab provided expertise in photomul-
tipliers, bialkali photocathodes, micro-assembly of detectors and test facilities, and a facility for the
evaporation of large-area precision metal coatings, as well as test-beam facilities; SLAC (Stanford
Linear Accelerator Center) provided deep expertise in photodetectors, test beam measurements,
and timing measurements at the outset.

US industry also played an essential role. Arradiance [24] provided expertise in ALD-functionalized

MCPs. Muons, Inc [25], working closely with the Mathematics and Computer Science Division
at ANL, supplied code and expertise in simulation of shower development in MCPs. Synkera

– 4 –

Technologies [26] applied their expertise in Anodic Aluminum Oxide (AAO) capillary substrates,
working closely with the Material Science Division of ANL.

Researchers from four university groups were authors of the initial proposal. The Space Sci-
ence Laboratory at UC, Berkeley brought extensive experience in the manufacture of MCP-based
detectors, a large UHV-capable facility for tube manufacture and characterization, and expertise in
electronics, testing, and end-use. The Enrico Fermi Institute at the University of Chicago provided
expertise in front-end electronics and large electronics systems, mechanical design and engineer-
ing, detector testing and characterization, computer support for integration and documentation,
and, working closely with personnel at the Advanced Photon Source, the capability of testing
LAPPDTM photodetectors with psec-time resolution. The University of Hawaii brought extensive
experience with Application Speciﬁc Integrated Circuit (ASIC), front-end electronics, and large
systems design. The group from the University of Washington brought expertise in photodetectors
and applications.

The project summary page from the proposal submission to the DOE in 2009 is also repro-
duced in Appendix A. The three areas singled out for development are: 1) high quantum efﬁciency
photocathode development; 2) use of Atomic Layer Deposition to apply resistive and emissive sur-
face coatings to the walls of the pores of the large area capillary plates to produce high-gain low-
noise electron ampliﬁcation; and 3) the development of custom fast low-power waveform sampling
integrated circuits coupled to transmission lines for readout of micro-channel-based photomultipli-
ers. The technical developments and associated published papers and patents in each of these areas
and others addressed during LAPPD are discussed below in Section 5.

3. Organization of the Collaboration

The formation of a multi-disciplinary collaboration to develop a broad set of new detector technolo-
gies crossing many areas of thin-ﬁlm technology and material science presented an unusual chal-
lenge in the context of traditional High Energy Physics (HEP) support. Experts in non-traditional
HEP areas were often self-selected by their interest in the problems in their own ﬁeld; the non-HEP
Divisions at ANL in particular proved to be a fertile ground for expertise and facilities. However
key expertise and facilities were also provided by the industrial partners and the universities. We
describe the project organization below.

3.1 Management

The LAPPD project was managed through the ANL HEP Division, with subcontracts to the indus-
trial partners and universities. H. Frisch was Spokesperson and held a joint appointment at ANL,
reporting to H. Weerts as Division Director. K. Byrum and Frisch were Co-PI’s on the proposal; R.
G. Wagner was the Program Physicist.

The structure of the collaboration is shown graphically in Figure 1. The photodetector devel-
opment tasks were organized as four parallel structures, with co-leaders from the appropriate areas
of expertise. Integration was identiﬁed as a separate parallel task, as shown. These ﬁve areas are
described in more detail below in Section 3.2.

In order to reduce the risk inherent in a project that had so many new technologies, the hermetic
packaging task was split into two separate solutions, an evolutionary ceramic package by the Space

– 5 –

Figure 1. The organization chart for the LAPPD Collaboration as of Feb. 2010. The effort was orga-
nized into ﬁve areas: Hermetic Packaging, Micro-channel plates, Photocathodes, Electronics, and Integra-
tion. Twice-yearly ’Godparent’ Review Committee meetings and Collaboration Meetings and a weekly
‘All-collaboration’ meeting provided the necessary communication between the groups.

Sciences Laboratory (SSL) group of O. Siegmund, and a ‘frugal’ all-glass package by Chicago,
ANL, and collaborators, as described in Section 3.3.

Communication of information across the many areas of technical development in the collab-
oration was provided by bi-annual ‘Godparent reviews’ and Collaboration Meetings, a web blog
and library of ﬁgures, technical speciﬁcations (prints), and documents, and a weekly meeting using
the blog for agenda and talks, as described in Section 9.

3.2 Photodetector Module Development

The primary photodetector R&D was divided up into the four areas shown in Figure 1. Hermetic
Packaging refers to the development of a thin, robust, economical sealed tube housing that can
maintain ultra-high vacuum for decades. The Micro-channel Plate Group was responsible for the
development of robust large-area capillary substrates and the resistive and secondary-emitting coat-
ings necessary to convert them into high-gain low-noise MCPs. The Electronics/Integration Group
was responsible for developing digitizing electronics capable of psec resolution, scalable multi-

– 6 –

channel systems, and the interface to the electrical and mechanical aspects of the package. The
Photocathode Group was formed to transfer photocathode fabrication techniques to the large ﬂat-
panel format speciﬁc to LAPPD. In addition to these four narrowly-focused groups, the Integration
Group was responsible for the Collaboration-wide tasks of simulation, testing, system integration,
and documentation.

The major necessary R&D developments in each area are listed below in Section 4.

3.3 Parallel Development of Ceramic and Glass Designs: "The Portfolio of Risk"

The Collaboration adopted a two-pronged approach to the hermetic package, a ceramic package
design, inspired by smaller MCP-PMT designs, and a more radical, all-glass design. The original
motivation was risk mitigation, with the “conventional” ceramic module perceived as being lower
risk, but more expensive, and the novel glass module design viewed as higher risk, but ultimately
with fewer parts and a simpler assembly. The parallel efforts allowed a coordinated program to
develop resistive and emissive coatings at the ANL facility with continuous access to MCP testing
at Space Sciences Laboratory and ANL/Chicago, and a ﬂow of expertise from SSL on the highly
specialized handling and treatment of MCP-PMT components and test equipment. As the two
paths became better established the complementary performance characteristics in space and time
resolution emerged, as shown in Figure 2.

4. Goals

At the time of the proposal the basic issues such as choice of capillary substrate, feasibility of
resistive and emissive coatings for such large areas, feasibility of large systems of psec electronics,
and many others, were wide open. For example, although we knew we needed a small pore size for
fast timing, both glass capillary and Anodic Aluminum Oxide substrates seemed viable options.
Whether one could uniformly coat large substrates containing large aspect-ratio capillary pores
was an open question. The feasibility of building an electronics system capable of maintaining
psec resolution over large areas while limiting the power consumption and channel count was a
subject of debate.

Basic questions such as these informed the formation of the Collaboration and the organization
of the R&D. We list below the initial goals for each of the areas in Tables 1-4. For each goal we
have tabulated the LAPPD papers published describing the results of the R&D. A discussion of the
successes and failures is given in Section 6.

– 7 –

Figure 2. The contrasting performance optimizations in time and space resolution of the ceramic and glass
implementations of the LAPPDTM module. The Micro-Channel Plates that form the ampliﬁcation section
of both detectors are identical; the difference comes from choices made for the resolution of the anode that
collects the charge. The anode of the glass package consists of high bandwidth micro-strip transmission
lines, optimized for time resolution; the ﬁner-detailed anode of the ceramic package has been optimized for
spatial resolution. (credit: J. McPhate)

– 8 –

10-610-710-810-910-1010-1110-1210-13Temporal Resolution (sec)10-610-510-410-310-210-1Spatial Resolution (m)Ceramic Package(XDL/XS Anode)Glass Package(Stripline Anode)JBM - 12/28/12Goals: Microchannel Plates

Goal

Suitability (uniformity, open-area, manufacturability) of drawn glass capillary sub-
strates as MCP’s

References
[27, 28]

Suitability (uniformity, open-area, manufacturability) of AAO etched aluminum
substrates as MCPs

[29]

Down-selection decision between glass and AAO substrates

Development of Atomic Layer Deposition Resistive coatings

Development of Atomic Layer Deposition secondary-emitting coatings

NA

[30, 31, 32]

[33, 34, 34, 35,
36, 37]

Development of high-yield manufacturing techniques for 8" glass substrates

[27, 28]

Implementation of facilities for characterization of the 8" LAPPDTM MCPs for
robustness, gain, uniformity, life-time, and time and position resolution

[38], [39]

Table 1. The goals (Column 1) and published references (Column 2) for achievements of the LAPPD Mi-
crochannel Plate Group. The reader is encouraged to access the references in the Bibliography for technical
details. In the Reference column we have indicated achievements not suitable for publication in a peer-
reviewed journal by the abbreviation ’NA’; details for these are available from the Collaboration Library
web pages or by request.

Goals: Photocathodes

Goal

Transfer of Space Sciences Laboratory techniques for K2NaSb photocathodes to
8"-square photocathodes on borosilicate glass

References
[39]

Development/acquisition of equipment and transfer of techniques for K2CsSb pho-
tocathodes to 8"-square photocathodes on borosilicate glass

[40]

Establishing collaborative efforts within and outside of the Collaboration to de-
velop ‘theory-based’ photocathodes with reproducible quantum efﬁciency near the
predicted limit

[41, 42, 43]

Table 2. The goals (Column 1) and published references (Column 2) for achievements of the LAPPD
Photocathode Group.

– 9 –

Goals: Hermetic Packaging

Goal

Design of a ‘frugal’ glass package using widely-available ﬂoat glass

Design of a ceramic package evolved from the widely-used Space Sciences Labo-
ratory designs for smaller MCP-PMT packages

Development and characterization of inexpensive GHz microstrip anodes with good
(few psec) time resolution for the glass package

Development and characterization of high spatial resolution (sub-mm) microstrip
anodes for the ceramic package

References
[44]

[39]

[45]

[39]

Development of the anode seal over the microstrips for the glass package

[27, 28, 44]

Development of electrical contacts and pin structure for the ceramic package

Finite-element analysis of mechanical stresses to determine anode and window
thicknesses and support structure layout

Development of the window seal for the glass package

Development of the window seal for the ceramic package

Identiﬁcation of reliable and committed vendors for parts and subsystems

[39]

NA

[27, 28]

[39]

NA

Production of a hermetic sealed LAPPDTM module with photocathode

See § 6.2.1

Table 3. The goals (Column 1) and published references (Column 2) for achievements of the LAPPD Her-
metic Packing Group. We note that the goal of a top seal for the glass package has now been demonstrated.
In the References column the abbreviation ’NA’ indicates developments not appropriate for peer-reviewed
publication.

– 10 –

Goals: Electronics and System Integration

Goal

Development and characterization of a multi-channel CMOS Application-Speciﬁc
Integrated Circuit (ASIC) capable of wave-form sampling at greater than 10 GS/sec

References
[46]

Development of a corresponding scalable electronics system with multi-mode trig-
gering, FPGA local control and readout, and a simple low-rate generic DAQ inter-
face

Development of a large-area economical multi-module ’Supermodule’ using GHz-
bandwidth anodes, fast waveform sampling, robust mechanical packaging, and an
optical-ﬁber readout

Development of test stands for full system testing and characterization

[47]

[45]

[38]

Characterization, including gain, uniformity, lifetime, and time and space resolu-
tions, of the performance of the glass and ceramic packages

[48, 39, 3]

Table 4. The goals (Column 1) and published references (Column 2) for achievements of the LAPPD
Electronics and Integration Groups.

– 11 –

5. R&D Achievements

The LAPPD goals were set out in annual milestones. All the milestones were achieved, with the
(glaring) exception of the production of a self-standing hermetically sealed LAPPDTM module,
which only occurred after the Collaboration had ended (see Section 6). Here we list some of the
essential R&D outcomes.

5.1 Microchannel Plates: Substrates and Coatings

The Collaboration started with two alternatives for the large-area microchannel-plate substrate,
anodic aluminum oxide (AAO), and glass. The AAO program was ended in a down- selection to
conserve resources, with a patent issued [29]. For the glass substrate, Incom [49] undertook the
development, drawing hollow glass tubes down to an inner diameter of 20 microns, assembling
and fusing them into a solid block large enough to provide 8"-square plates, and cutting them
on an 8o bias into 1.2 mm-thick wafers to produce a ratio of pore length to diameter of 60:1.
The substrates were then manufactured to size and surface ﬁnish. The seemingly simple tasks of
cleaning adequately for subsequent coating and then characterizing the capillary substrates, each
of which has a surface area of 6.5 m2, required extensive development before being successfully
incorporated into the production process. Figure 3 shows an Incom 8” substrate; the transparency
is due to an open-area ratio exceeding 65%.

The use of ALD to coat passive substrates was demonstrated by Arradiance before the start of
LAPPD [50], and was instrumental in the LAPPD interest in ALD for coating large-area arrays.
Figure 4 shows the resistivity of ALD tunable resistance coatings developed in the Energy Systems
Division at Argonne. These coatings comprise conducting metallic nano-particles (tungsten (W) or
molybdenum (Mo)) in an amorphous dielectric matrix (Al2O3). The resistivity drops exponentially

Figure 3. Left: An 8”× 8” glass capillary substrate developed by the Incom corporation. Each substrate
contains approximately 80 million 20-micron-diameter capillary pores. The open-area ratio is typically
greater than 65%, making the plate appear transparent. Right: A close-up of a similar glass substrate showing
the 20-micron capillary structure.

– 12 –

Figure 4. Resistivity of the Argonne ALD tunable resistance coatings used for functionalizing capillary glass
arrays to produce MCPs versus the number of metal cycles. The resistivity of the molybdenum ﬁlms has an
exponential slope versus the metal cycle percentage twice that of the tungsten ﬁlms because the amount of
Mo deposited in a single Mo ALD cycle is approximately twice that of the W ALD [30, 31].

with metal content, and the metal content is controlled by adjusting the percentage of ALD metal
cycles during the deposition of the coatings. The plot shows the exponential behavior versus the
number of metal cycles, a mixed blessing in that the behavior allows covering a large range, but
also has a high sensitivity to the metal content. The resistivity of the molybdenum ﬁlms is more
sensitive to the metal cycle percentage than that of the tungsten ﬁlms because the amount of Mo
deposited in a single Mo ALD cycle is approximately twice that of the W ALD [30, 31]

The emission of secondary electrons versus electron energy is an essential input into simu-
lations of the cascade in the capillary pores, used to predict the voltage needed, gain, and pulse
behavior [51, 36]. A dedicated facility for the measurement of secondary emission yield (SEY)
vs incident electron energy was constructed in the Materials Science Division (MSD) at ANL.
Figure 5 shows the measurements of SEY for two standard ALD thin ﬁlm coatings, MgO and
Al2O3 [33, 34, 35]. In addition to higher gain, a higher SEY contributes to a narrower transit time
distribution due to smaller ﬂuctuations in yield in the ﬁrst strike (the initiation of the shower by the
photoelectron from the cathode).

An image from the SSL test facility that measures gain and uniformity over the full area of
a pair of ALD-functionalized LAPPD MCP plates is shown in Figure 6. The gain uniformity is
within the ±15% requirement.

Figure 7 shows SSL measurements of the stability of the ALD-coated MCP plates compared
to conventional lead glass plates versus the amount of charge extracted. The conventional plates
show the loss with ‘scrubbing’, a long (and hence expensive) burn-in process of drawing current

– 13 –

Figure 5. Measurements of the secondary emission of MgO and Al2O3 versus incident electron energy [33,
34].

from the plates during production to achieve a quasi-stability [48, 39].

5.2 Hermetic Packaging

The complementary packaging efforts in ceramic and glass are described below in Section 5.2.1
and Section 5.2.2, respectively.

Figure 6. Left: A gain map measured at SSL of a pair of fully functionalized 20-cm-square capillary plates.
The mean gain of the pair is 7× 106. Right: The one-dimensional projections show a gain uniformity within
the speciﬁcation (±15%) adequate for track reconstruction in neutrino events [48, 39].

– 14 –

Figure 7. Measurements at the Space Sciences Laboratory of the stability versus charge extracted of an
ALD-coated MCP from the ANL ESD group compared to commercial plates [48].

5.2.1 The Brazed Ceramic Package

In order to stay close to their own proven techniques, the SSL group developed a package design
that was a direct evolution from their long string of successful designs using well-tried techniques,
in particular a brazed high-purity ceramic-metal package, a captured ampliﬁcation section of MCP
plates and spacers that could be electrically tested before the window was sealed, and an indium-
bismuth low temperature capillary pressure window seal.

The ceramic anode that forms the bottom surface of the SSL module is shown in the left-hand
panel of Figure 8. The right-hand panel shows the lower module assembly, consisting of the anode
brazed to a ceramic sidewall with a copper well on top that holds the indium-bismuth eutectic that
forms the low temperature seal to the window.

Figure 9 shows the mechanical design of the full SSL module, including the University of

Hawaii electronics package that connects to the anode pins on the back.

A test of the fully-assembled SSL LAPPDTM module with photocathode shortly after the Col-

laboration ended is described in Section 6.2.1.

Figure 8. Left: the Space Sciences Lab ceramic anode; Right: a complete SSL module base assembly of
anode, sidewall, and copper well for the molten In-Bi solder seal.

– 15 –

5.2.2 The Glass Hermetic Package
The glass module design was driven by the goal of achieving time resolutions in the psec range.
The mechanical design considerations were consequently inseparable from the high-frequency
(multi-GHz signals) requirements; bringing these high-frequency signals out of the glass vacuum
package was identiﬁed very early as a challenge. Figure 10 shows the solution, demonstrated at
Minotech [52] and at the ANL Glass Shop. The microstrips on the anode are run under the glass
sidewall, and the hermetic seal between the sidewall and the anode is made with a glass frit selected
for a match in thermal expansion with borosilicate glass.

The left-hand panel of Figure 11 shows a window, in this case with an aluminum cathode,
hermetically sealed to the glass sidewall. The right-hand panel shows a closeup of the hermetic
seal between the window and the sidewall. This seal is ’ﬂat’ (i.e. has no well) and uses pure
indium instead of the In-Bi alloy.

Figure 9. Left: The ceramic module base prior to loading into the large SSL tank for photocathode deposi-
tion and sealing of the window. The black surface is the ALD coating on the top MCP. The top ‘X’ spacer is
also visible. Right: The ceramic module package with the University of Hawaii electronics attached to the
anode pins on the back. The SSL module uses a Na2KSb cathode, a spacer design consisting of a cross with
an embedded getter, and an anode design optimized for position resolution.

– 16 –

Figure 10. A glass module base assembly showing the microstrip anode, and the glass frit joint between the
glass sidewall and the anode. The two ports on this assembly are speciﬁc to the Demountable test facility
at the Argonne Advanced Photon Source, in which the module is sealed with an O-ring and the cathode is a
thin aluminum layer. (credit: Joseph Gregar, ANL Glass Shop)

Figure 11. A glass LAPPDTM package with a hermetic indium ’ﬂat’ seal between the glass sidewall and
the glass top window under test. Right: A close-up of the indium ﬂat seal, taken through a top window with
no photocathode. The photo shows the NiCr metalization on the top surface of the sidewall; a Cu layer is
visible where the indium has not taken it into solution. The Cu/NiCr ”ﬁnger” extending towards the bottom
of the frame is for distribution of current towards the center of the cathode.

– 17 –

5.3 Photocathodes

Figure 12 shows the ﬁrst full-size photocathode made in the large-tank facility at the Space Sci-
ences Laboratory. The SSL cathodes are chosen to be K2NaSb for temperature stability, good
conductance, and low background. Figure 13 shows the quantum efﬁciency versus wavelength of
an 8" K2NaSb photocathode made in the large-tank facility at SSL on a B33 glass substrate [39].

Figure 12. A K2NaSb photocathode synthesized on an LAPPD window in the large fabrication tank at the
Space Sciences Laboratory [48, 39].

Figure 13. The quantum efﬁciency versus wavelength of an 8" K2NaSb photocathode made in the large-tank
facility at the Space Sciences Laboratory on a B33 glass substrate [39].

– 18 –

5.4 Electronics

The electronics for the ceramic package was based on the University of Hawaii waveform sampling
ASICs [53]. Figure 9 shows the University of Hawaii electronics package integrated with the anode
pins on the back of the ceramic module.

A custom integrated circuit, the PSEC4 chip [46], and supporting electronics, capable of time
resolution measured in psec and scalable to large systems, were developed in parallel with the
photodetector systems. A front-end printed circuit card, the ACDC card, containing ﬁve 6-channel
PSEC4 chips is shown in the left-hand panel of Figure 14. Up to eight of the 30-channel ACDC
cards can be controlled by the Central Card, shown in the right-hand panel. A system of two ACDC
cards and one Central Card, i.e. 60 channels, was used in the Demountable test setup, as shown in
Figure 16.

Figure 14. Left: The ACDC front-end card, with ﬁve 6-channel 15 GigaSample/sec PSEC4 digitizing
chips. Right: A Central Card, used to read out and control up to eight ACDC cards, showing the connection
to a single ACDC card. The system is now scalable up to 1920 channels per Central Card in a modular
Master/Slave conﬁguration.

For the glass module, the integration of electronics readout with a large-area mechanical design
(the ‘Supermodule’) is illustrated in Figures 14 and 15. GigaHz signals require an integrated
treatment of mechanical packaging and signal acquisition. The LAPPDTM glass package design
is modular, allowing serial connection of the anode strips from one unit to the next, with readout
on the ends of the package. Measurements of bandwidth and crosstalk were made with up to four
modules [45].

At the APS lab at Argonne [38], a full detector assembly made from preproduction glass body
parts, ALD-functionalized glass capillary MCP’s, an internal resistive High Voltage (HV) divider
implemented with ALD-coated spacers [44], and a microstrip anode was operated with the laser.
The test setup (called the ‘Demountable’) differed from a true LAPPDTM in that the top-window
seal was made with an O-ring rather than an indium solder seal, the photocathode was a thin ﬁlm
of aluminum rather than a bialkali ﬁlm, and the tube was actively pumped rather than hermetically
sealed. Figure 16 shows the Demountable in the APS lab. The blue cables are the readout on the
ends of the anode microstrips and go to 60 channels (30 each end) of PSEC4 ASICs which digitize
the signals at 10 GS/sec [46]. The data are then read out via the FPGA-based ACDC and Central

– 19 –

Figure 15. Left: The design of an integrated system of 12 LAPPDTM modules consisting of three 4-module
panels, each read-out on the ends by ACDC cards. Right: A possible integration of the ACDC front-end
electronics and Central Card system on the 12-module system. The modularity of the anode-strip readout
and electronics allows application-speciﬁc variations on this basic structure, with trade-offs in area coverage,
bandwidth, and cost.

Figure 16. The ‘Demountable’ LAPPD module, mounted on a 30-strip anode that is 90 cm long to accom-
modate 4 LAPPDTM modules [45]. The active module is read out on both ends of the 4-module anode using
60-channels of PSEC4 waveform sampling and data acquisition [46]. Three such assemblies would form the
Supermodule.

Card PSEC4 DAQ system [47]. The Demountable test setup, shown in Figure 16, represents one
of three sub-assemblies of the Supermodule (Figure 15).

– 20 –

5.5 Performance

Figure 17 shows the response to a single photon from an LAPPD stackup consisting of a metal
photocathode, ALD-coated microchannel plates, resistive spacers, and LAPPD module base with
microstrip anode, assembled in the Demountable test stand at the ANL Advanced Photon Source
femto-second laser lab 2 [38]. Here the electron cascade has formed a pulse that propagates in
both directions on the microstrip anode away from the initial charge deposition. Both ends of
each of the 30 strips are digitized using 60 channels of the PSEC4 custom waveform sampling
ASIC system [46]. The difference in arrival times at the two ends gives the position with sub-mm
precision; the average of the times gives the time of arrival.

Figure 18 shows the time difference measured in the APS laser lab between the two ends of
the module striplines versus the position of the laser spot projected on the module. The relationship
is linear as expected; the measured resolutions in both transverse directions are ∼ 700 microns [3].
Figure 19 shows the time difference measured in the APS laser lab between the two ends of
the module striplines versus the inverse of the signal-to-noise ratio. Noise at the APS laser lab was
dominated by pickup from the laser pulse generation itself; the typical noise level of PSEC4 is 700
micro-volts, negligible in this environment. Later measurements decreased the intercept, which
corresponds to large pulses such as would be generated by a particle generating Cherenkov light in
the detector window, to ∼ 1 psec [3].

2The Demountable is a complete LAPPD glass module, but with an O-ring top seal and metal photocathode.

Figure 17. The detector response to a single photon, digitized by the PSEC4 waveform sampling ASIC
system, from a complete LAPPD stackup of metal photocathode, ALD-coated microchannel plates, resistive
spacers, and LAPPD module base with microstrip anode, assembled in the Demountable test stand at the
ANL Advanced Photon Source femto-second laser lab. The red trace is the pulse measured on one end of
the microstrip transmission line under the laser spot position; the black trace is the same pulse measured on
the other end. The other two traces are neighboring striplines not excited by the laser. [38, 3].

– 21 –

Figure 18. The time difference measured in the APS laser lab between the two ends of the module striplines
versus the position of the laser spot projected on the module [3]. Because the position in the strip direction
is calculated from the difference in times measured at the strip ends [45], one expects a linear behavior,
as observed. The position in the orthogonal direction is measured from the charge sharing on neighboring
strips. The resolution in each direction is ∼ 700 micron [3].

6. Goals Achieved and Not Achieved

The LAPPD Collaboration ended in Dec. 2012, and the R&D effort largely moved to technology
transfer for commercialization [56], as described in Section 10). Here we brieﬂy summarize the
major goals achieved, the opportunities we identiﬁed as viable but were unable to explore, and the
failure to produce a sealed LAPPDTM module during the R&D.

6.1 Major Goals Achieved

Major goals achieved include:

1. Establishment of the production capability for high-quality 8”-square capillary glass sub-
strates, including fusing into large blocks, slicing and ﬁnishing the blocks into uniform
smooth wafers, post-manufacturing cleaning, and quality control, documentation, and han-
dling techniques;

2. Development of ALD reactor conﬁgurations and processes to produce adequately uniform

ALD coatings for both the resistive and SEY layers;

3. Demonstration of deposition of 8”-square photocathodes on B33 glass substrates for both

K2NaSb and K2CsSb alkali photocathodes.

4. Development of large-area test facilities that have been carried over into commercial produc-

tion facilities;

– 22 –

Figure 19. The time difference measured in the APS laser lab between the two ends of the module striplines
versus the inverse of Signal-to-Noise in the 8" test chamber in 2012 (black circles) [3]. The error bars are
smaller than the symbols. The signals are large due to the high gain; the resolution is dominated by noise
from the femto-second laser. The red squares show data taken in 2014 with the Demountable chamber. The
intercept of the ﬁtted line intersects at 1.6 psec. With smaller capillary pores [54] and a signal-to-noise ratio
dominated by the intrinsic noise of the PSEC4 chip we would expect sub-psec resolution [46, 3, 55].

5. Extensive measurements of the performance of 8”-square ALD-coated MCP pairs, modules,

including uniformity, gain, time and space resolution, and lifetime.

6. Development of the low-cost low-power 6-channel CMOS 15 GS/sec PSEC-4 ASIC;
7. Integration and operation with an LAPPDTM detector of the PSEC-4-based 60-channel wave-
form sampling digitizing system with 10 GS/sec at 10.5 bits and 1.6 GHz bandwidth from
cathode to DAQ;

8. Development of an FPGA-based scalable front-end and DAQ system of 30-channel (5 PSEC-

4 ASICs) PC cards and a master control card capable of several psec resolution;

9. Operation of both the pre-production ceramic and glass LAPPDTM module packages; the
ceramic with full photocathode- the glass with a metal cathode. The ceramic module was
complete but operated in UHV; the glass module was O-ring sealed and externally pumped 3.
10. Demonstration of LAPPDTM performance: gain > 107, time resolution of < 50 psec for

single photons, spatial resolutions of ∼ 700 microns.

11. Coordination of and securing funding for the transition to commercial LAPPDTM production.

6.2 Opportunities Missed: What We Did Not Get Done
6.2.1 A Sealed Functioning LAPPDTM Module
LAPPD was not able to successfully fabricate a leak-free sealed LAPPDTM module with a bialkali
photocathode in the R&D period, which ended in December 2012. One trial of making a complete

3The ceramic module tests were done not long after the end of the Collaboration.

– 23 –

noise-over-signal0.0050.010.0150.02differential time resolution (psec)0246810tube with photocathode was made shortly after the end of the Collaboration. That ﬁrst attempt
(July 2013) to seal a complete ceramic tile failed when a spot-weld gave way on one corner of the
tile, creating a leak. However extensive testing done with the tile still in the UHV tank showed that
the tube was fully functional with resolutions in time and space, gain, and noise rates at or beyond
speciﬁcations.

Figure 20 shows the characterization of the 20 cm (Na2KSb) photocathode on the ﬁrst fully-
assembled LAPPDTM module while still under vacuum in the SSL tank (see Figure 25). The
left-hand panel shows the quantum efﬁciency as a function of wavelength. The right-hand panel
demonstrates the uniformity of the photocathode response over the 20 cm by 20 cm area.

Figure 20. Left: Quantum efﬁciency as a function of wavelength for the 20 × 20 cm2 (Na2KSb) photocath-
ode on the ﬁrst fully-assembled LAPPDTM module while still under vacuum in the SSL tank. The tube was
fully functional, with good gain and uniformity. When brought up to air one corner of the seal between the
module assembly and the window leaked due to misalignment.

Figure 21 shows the output pulses from the delay-line anode of the fully-assembled tube il-
luminated by a pulsed laser while under vacuum in the SSL tank. The bandwidth is limited by
the UHV-compatible electrical connections to the anode; otherwise the performance of the tube in
photocathode response, gain, and spatial mapping was as expected.

We believe that it is important to understand the sealing trial history, as it can easily be mis-
construed as a fundamental problem with the design or the sealing technique. Instead, we believe
that scaling a highly-tuned commercial recipe, such as a low-temperature indium seal of a window
with a bialkali photocathode, by a factor of four from the Planacon dimensions to the LAPPDTM di-
mensions will always require many trials. The lessons learned have now been transferred from SSL
to the commercialization effort at Incom.

Fully integrated trials had been scheduled to be earlier, but were delayed by unforeseen dif-
ﬁculties, overcome, but with a cost in time. Particular problems that were solved by the R&D,
but turned out to be appreciably more difﬁcult than anticipated at the time of the proposal were:
a) the cleaning and handling of the capillary substrates as the processing techniques were being

– 24 –

Figure 21. The pulses on the anode delay line from the ﬁrst trial of a fully-assembled module while still
under vacuum in the SSL tank, with the photocathode illuminated by a pulsed 610nm laser.

developed across multiple geographically-separated institutions; b) the consistent synthesis of uni-
form SEY and resistive layers on the 6.5 m2 surface-area capillary wafer, particularly in an ALD
facility shared with other users using different chemistries; c) subtle packaging problems related
to thermal differential expansion over the much larger dimensions during vacuum bakeout; and d)
slowness/inability by the leadership in re-allocating resources for the transition from R&D to pro-
duction in a wide-spread diverse organization, well-suited for the required individual R&D efforts,
but not easily transitioned in budget or expertise onto one primary task.

6.2.2 ALD-enabled High Performance Advanced Designs

The LAPPD R&D effort concentrated on the basic issues of ﬁnding at least one solution to each
problem. In such a process, if successful, one ﬁnds that there are better solutions as well as new
opportunities that were not previously realistically within reach. We can imagine a future program
dedicated to following up on these, or, perhaps more realistically, a steady chipping away by inter-
ested parties (academic, national labs, industry) with funding from a wide variety of sources. In
particular, the exploitation of the ALD process to use higher-SEY materials at the pore entrance
and discrete dynode structures [57]; and pushing the limit on the measurements of timing resolution
below 1 psec [10] remain promising areas in this technology.

6.3 Spin-offs from LAPPD R&D

There were other opportunities that spun off parallel R&D efforts involving individual institutions
from the LAPPD Collaboration, supported by the DOE SBIR/STTR program or, in the case of
medical imaging, a private foundation:

1. High quantum efﬁciency theory-based bialkali photocathode synthesis [41, 58];

– 25 –

2. High bandwidth microstrip and pixel anodes [59];
3. Large-area ALD-functionalized MCPs with smaller capillary pores for better time resolu-

tion [54];

4. Technology transfer for commercial production [56];
5. Uniform high-gain ALD coatings [60];
6. Use of fast timing for reconstruction of particle tracks using Cherenkov light [61, 47];
7. Use of fast timing for reconstruction of gamma-ray interactions in water-based PET detec-

tors [62].

7. Major Constructed Facilities

The prior existence of major facilities at the collaborating institutions was essential to the project,
for reasons of both time, money, and, most importantly, the availability of expert personnel. In ad-
dition, major facilities dedicated to LAPPD R&D were constructed at Argonne, the Space Sciences
Laboratory at Berkeley, Incom, and Fermilab, and diagnostic equipment and software tools were
upgraded at Chicago and Hawaii. Figure 22 shows the facilities at Incom [49] for drawing the glass
capillary tubes used in the MCP substrates. After multiple drawings, fusing into a block, slicing
into wafers on a bias, and ﬁnishing, each 20-cm-square substrate contains ∼80-million pores.

Figure 22. The capillary drawing facilities at Incom. The capillaries are cut, stacked and fused into a solid
block, which is then sliced into wafers that are ground, polished, and trimmed to become the MCP substrates.

– 26 –

The top and bottom surfaces of the wafers were metalized with NiCr at a custom UHV facility
constructed at Fermilab to allow uniform evaporation onto 20 × 20 cm2 plates while rotating them
about an axis parallel to the pores for proper end-spoiling [63]. The left-hand panel of Figure 23
shows the UHV evaporation facility constructed to deposit NiCr electrodes on the top and bottom
surfaces of LAPPDTM capillary wafers; In the right-hand panel we reproduce a Fermilab chart of
the number of 8”-square micro-channel wafers metalized on both sides versus time.

Figure 23. Left: The Fermilab UHV evaporation facility constructed to deposit NiCr electrodes on the top
and bottom surfaces of LAPPDTM capillary wafers; Right: A chart of the number of wafers metalized on
both sides at the Fermilab evaporation facility versus time.

The coating of the glass capillary substrates with resistive and emissive layers using Atomic
Layer Deposition (ALD) was done in the Energy Systems Division (ESD) at ANL. Several existing
custom reactors and a large commercial reactor [64], acquired at the start of the project, were shared
by LAPPD with other ANL programs for the development of the secondary-emitting and resistive
layers. Figure 24 shows the Beneq reactor installed in the ESD labs at ANL.

The large process chamber at the Space Sciences Laboratory, shown in Figure 25, was de-
signed, procured,and commissioned for the LAPPD program. Large-area photocathode develop-
ment using a K2NaSb process established by SSL was done in the photocathode sub-assembly. The
facility is highly instrumented for process control and subsequent in-situ detector testing. Modiﬁ-
cations were made to other existing facilities at SSL, including the processing oven, vacuum baking
chamber, the MCP metallizing evaporator, and cleaning equipment.

The development and characterization of high-quality, reproducible, glass substrates with uni-
form high-gain stable ALD coatings required the building at SSL of extensive testing vacuum
facilities to accommodate the large module format. Testing was initially done with a standard 33
mm circular format allowing use of ﬁxturing from prior SSL programs, and quickly evolved to
the LAPPDTM 20 × 20 cm2 plates. Plates were fabricated at Incom, sent to Argonne where they
were checked and further documented, and then transported to Fermilab for metalization, and then
transported back to Argonne, where the ALD resistive and emissive coatings were applied. Plates
were then either sent to SSL for tests of gain, uniformity, and lifetime, or to the test facility at the
Argonne APS for timing measurements, as well as uniformity and position linearity and resolution
with the LAPPD electronics. At each step in the ‘pipeline’ an effort was made to perform quality

– 27 –

  Figure 24. The Beneq Atomic Layer Deposition facility installed in the Energy Systems Division at ANL,
used to functionalize the Incom capillary plates with resistive and secondary-emitting layers. The precursor
ﬂow path required extensive modiﬁcation in order to establish uniformity over the 6.5 m2 surface area of
each capillary plate.

Figure 25. The UHV photocathode and detector assembly facility constructed for LAPPD at the Space
Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley .

control and to enter the details in a database that recorded the history of each microchannel plate.
Figure 26 shows two test facilities constructed at SSL for LAPPD that were essential in the
development of uniform high-gain low-noise ALD coatings on glass substrates of high uniformity
and very few blemishes. The left-hand panel shows the ‘Dual Chamber Vacuum Test Chamber’
used for rapid turnaround testing of ALD coatings on the 33 mm circular glass substrates, of which
many could be made from a single 8” wafer. The right-hand panel shows the ‘8”-demountable’

– 28 –

Figure 26. Left:: The Dual Chamber Vacuum Test Chamber at Space Sciences Laboratory, University of
California, Berkeley for rapid turnaround testing of ALD coatings on 33 mm circular glass substrates as the
processes for both were being developed at the Argonne Energy Systems Division and Incom, respectively.
This ‘double barrel test chamber’ employs both phosphor screen detectors for single MCP characterization
and crossed-delay-line detectors for double MCP stack testing. Right: The SSL ‘8”-demountable’ vacuum
facility designed and built for characterizing the performance of 8” ALD-coated MCPs. The detector em-
ploys a 200mm cross-delay-line anode for signal readout, achieving sub-100 µm spatial resolution, and is
designed for easy MCP replacement to facilitate rapid test cycling.

detector, consisting of a high resolution cross-delay-line anode mounted on a large vacuum vessel,
designed for rapid test cycling. This instrument was the ‘work-horse’ facility for the development
of the 8” Incom glass substrates and the Argonne ALD coatings, providing measurements of gain
uniformity, resolution, and noise.

The Chicago group had been working with commercial Photonis Planacons [65] in the Fermi-
lab beam tests, and so it was natural to work on the extension of the Planacon K2CsSb cathodes
to the 16-times larger area LAPPDTM format. Figure 27 shows the Burle/Photonis photocathode
deposition facility purchased by LAPPD and installed in a new lab created in the HEP Division at
ANL for photocathode formation and characterization. In order to make 8”-square cathodes, the
manifold that held multiple conventional PMT’s was replaced by a large glass vessel, created by J.
Gregar of the ANL Glass Shop, that contained the Sb beads, alkali sources, and that held the win-
dow on which the cathode was deposited. Diagnostic and characterization equipment were added
to the installation, as shown in Figure 27.

In addition to the ‘pipeline’ program of MCP development at Space Sciences Laboratory [48,
39], MCP testing was done at the Advanced Photon Source [38, 3], with the emphasis at SSL being
gain, uniformity and lifetime, and with Chicago/ANL concentrating on fast timing. Figure 28
shows the femto-second laser laboratory at the APS that was built up as the test facility for fast
timing [38]. A Ti-Sapphire laser capable of 30 fsec pulses and enough intensity to excite a metal
cathode was refurbished by LAPPD at a modest cost.

– 29 –

Figure 27. The commercial Photocathode Deposition facility, purchased from Burle/Photonis, installed
in the High Energy Physics Division at ANL. The instrumentation used for measuring ﬁlm thickness and
quantum efﬁciency is in the foreground.

Figure 28. The timing lab constructed at the ANL APS [38] The Ti-Sapphire laser is on the lower right;
two vacuum test chambers are visible on the middle left. The laser beam can be transported to several test
chambers as well as the ‘Demountable’ prototype module by components on the optical bench.

– 30 –

Figure 29. A 2008 conceptual drawing of a large water Cherenkov counter such as was proposed for
DUSEL, in this case instrumented with LAPPDs. Note the use of time and position measurements on each
Cherenkov photon to locate the track [47]. (credit: Constantinos Melachrinos)

8. The Role of DUSEL in LAPPD

The US joint DOE-NSF proposal for a large underground water Cherenkov neutrino detector to
be installed in the DUSEL laboratory required a large investment in photodetectors, more than
100M$ [6, 7]. This served as an impetus for developing large-area ‘frugal’ planar detectors made
of inexpensive glass components, and given the large payoff for success, was a key motivation for
DOE funding of a high-risk endeavor such as LAPPD [11].

Figure 29 shows a 2008 conceptual drawing of a large water Cherenkov counter such as was
proposed for DUSEL, in this case instrumented with LAPPDs. Note the use of time and position
measurements on each Cherenkov photon that allow using the photon drift times to reconstruct the
track [47].

The large water Cherenkov counter for DUSEL was important in another aspect as well: the
large amount of money involved for photodetectors attracted the attention of a company that had
a facility that could accommodate the size of the LAPPD tubes, and produce them in volume.
The resulting proposal, from a company already producing a similar product, provided a strong
conﬁrmation of the goals and methods of LAPPD [66]. Figure 30 shows a slide from the proposal.
Unfortunately, the large neutrino detector for DUSEL was canceled by the US National Science
Board [6] and the commercial interest ended [7].

9. Communicating Technical Information in a Multi-Disciplinary Effort

A non-technical but critical goal of LAPPD was to convince the scientiﬁc and commercial commu-
nities of the feasibility of large area timing with resolution measured in psec. This was necessary
to secure funding, to enable commercialization, and to build a fast-timing community intellectually
invested in understanding and developing the detector and supporting technologies such as low-
power psec electronics digitization systems, and clock distribution. This communication effort was

– 31 –

Figure 30. A slide from a proposal for production of LAPPDs for DUSEL [6] by a company experienced
in vacuum phototube production. The proposal was to modify an existing production line and then replicate
it to produce 20,000 LAPPD modules per year. The commercial interest ended with the cancellation of the
DUSEL project. The arrow is to emphasize that the quantities are in units of one thousand modules.

time-intensive, with multiple weekly meetings, international workshops, interfacing to phototube
and other vendors, and extensive web pages, as described below.

9.1 Collaboration Meetings

The LAPPD Collaboration was often described as a ’pick-up ball game’, in that the group was
self-assembled based on interest, and covered a very wide range in cultures and methods of work-
ing. An unusual amount of effort was consequently needed to make efﬁcient progress. LAPPD
Collaboration Meetings were held twice-yearly to cover the broad range of material science R&D,
proprietary knowledge, and education of those from other ﬁelds. The agendas and slides are avail-
able on the LAPPD web page [67].

9.2 Designing an Effective Review Process

In addition to the collaboration meetings, each of the four areas of R&D reported to its own review
committee, dubbed ’Godparent Review Panels’. The panels met twice per year, out-of-phase with
the twice-yearly Collaboration meetings. Each panel was made up of both outside experts and, in an

– 32 –

effort to avoid the typical reviewer/reviewee dynamics, LAPPD members who were not participants
in the area under review, bringing to the conversation both outside experience and some knowledge
of why internal choices that may have been different from conventional wisdom were made. In
addition, an effort was made to bring in critics of the overall concept.

The godparent reports and makeup of the initial round of godparent panels are posted on the

psec web Library page [68]; the procedure called for a written response by the proponents.

9.3 Collaborative Cross-Community Workshops
A homogeneous ampliﬁcation section with a dimension measured in tens of microns should provide
fast pulses capable of psec-level time measurements [9, 2, 21, 69]. However there remained many
detailed questions. A series of workshops, held alternately in the Chicago area and in France, was
intended to provide answers to these speciﬁc questions one-at-a-time; we ﬁrst determined the talks
needed, and then worked to identify the most expert speakers to that topic, often inviting specialists
we did not know. Rather than having speakers report on their own work, the workshop focused on
bringing to bear their expertise on the questions and problems. The result was a broadening of the
base of both knowledge and community.

The agendas and talks at the Workshops are available on the PSEC Library web page [70]. The
workshop on Limitations on Fast Timing and the two workshops on bialkali photocathodes in the
300-500 nm range are particularly good examples of the effectiveness of the top-down assignment
of titles and speakers. Figure 31 shows, as an example, the agenda of the second workshop on
photocathodes.

9.4 Web-based Documentation for Collaborators, Vendors, and Adopters
In addition to being the repository for proceedings of the Godparent Review Committees, the Col-
laboration Meetings, and the Workshops, the LAPPD web pages provided the basis of the weekly
status reports, papers and conference proceedings, and often-used information on materials and
techniques. The Library web pages [71] also serve as a convenient easily-accessed source for ex-
ternal material that is often referred to by detector developers, such as tables of CTE’s and moduli
of materials, relevant literature on MCP’s, photocathodes, and detector performance.

Three custom web-based tools, open to the public, turned out to be heavily used for documen-
tation and communication. The Collaboration Blog provided a forum and archive for test results,
schedules, and presentations viewed during the weekly phone meetings [72]. In addition, three
‘libraries’ were linked to the web page: the Document Library for the Collaboration papers, talks,
and internal notes [73]; the Image Library for discussing technical speciﬁcations with vendors and
archiving prints for reference [74]; and the Figures Library for use in talks and papers [75]. Fig-
ure 32 shows a sample page from the Document Library. The Electronics Group, consisting of
members from the University of Chicago and University of Hawaii, met separately weekly (the
meeting was open to all members, however) and also maintained dedicated web documentation
and its own blog [76].

9.5 Areas of Application and Early Adopters: the LAPPD Strategy
The model for LAPPD involvement in applications was to let individual members follow their
interests, often with prior external associations. Figure 33 shows a pictorial representation from

– 33 –

Figure 31. The web page for the Second Workshop on Photocathodes: 300-500nm, held at UC in June
2012, one of a bi-annual series held in collaboration with P. LeDu and other French colleagues. Note the
participation from many communities who normally have little interaction. The two cathode workshops have
been followed up by several collaborative efforts [41, 58].

2010 of this strategy for feedback from, and information ﬂow to, areas of possible application
of LAPPD photodetectors.
In 2013, after the Collaboration had concluded, Incom organized a
meeting of ‘Early Adopters’ from these areas to better understand speciﬁcations and uses [77]
as part of their commercialization plan. Speciﬁc areas that followed this pattern are the Optical
Time Projection Chamber [47], ANNIE [78], Positron-Emission Tomography [79, 80, 81], and
non-proliferation monitoring detectors [82].

9.6 Publishing

While the development of large-area psec photodetectors and electronics has been the subject of a
large program, there are many areas that are fertile for further development. We encountered many
industrial ‘recipes’ ripe for a deeper understanding of the underlying material science, chemistry,
and physics. LAPPD has consequently put a high premium on publishing technical details of the
development, including papers on the glass/ALD MCPs [29, 30, 31, 32, 51, 36, 37, 33, 83], fast
timing and electronics [38, 46, 84, 45, 53], and packaging [39, 44, 45, 27, 28]. Conference reports
from throughout the R&D can also be found in the Document Library.

In addition to published papers, patents were ﬁled on the technical developments in the MCP
and packaging areas, and in uses for HEP/Nuclear Physics and medical imaging [85, 29, 32, 86, 87].

– 34 –

Figure 32. A sample page from the Document Library. The data base is searchable by author, topic,
and document type. The Document Library serves both as an archive of results, and has proved useful in
interactions with potential adopters, other groups working on fast timing or photodetectors, and prospective
students, postdocs, and employees.

9.7 Mentoring, Awards, Careers

Detector development is both critical to the future of hard sciences and medical care, and yet is
widely considered a second-tier and hence dangerous career path for young scientists. This para-
dox is often discussed, but funding pressures, particularly on universities from which the young
scientists come, severely constrain any change. One of the products of the LAPPD project was
the recognition of several young scientists: LAPPD postdoctoral fellows were awarded the Lee
Grodzins Award (Wetstein), the Charles Townes Fellowship (Ertley), and the Grainger Postdoc-

– 35 –

Figure 33. A pictorial representation made in 2010, shortly after the start of the Collaboration, of the strat-
egy for matching user requirements with projected detector capabilities in areas of possible application of
LAPPD photodetectors. The LAPPD core effort was focused on the photodetector R&D; speciﬁc applica-
tions were pursued by individual collaborators working with outside interested groups. In 2013, after the
Collaboration had ended, a meeting of ‘Early Adopters’ from these areas was organized by Incom [77].

toral Fellowship (Wetstein); an LAPPD graduate student (Oberla) won the Grainger Graduate Fel-
lowship; and a high school student working with LAPPD took second place in the national Intel
Science Competition (Credo). Senior members were awarded an R&D 100 award. In addition, a
large number of REU and SULI students took part in hands-on research in the summer, with several
returning as graduate students or postdocs working on LAPPD.

10. End of Collaboration: Path to Commercialization and Adoption

The conclusion of the ARRA funding in 2012 ended the Collaboration structure of university sup-
port through subcontracts from ANL and the organization structure shown in Figure 1. Figure 34,
from the ﬁnal review of the Collaboration in Dec. 2012, shows the transition to four parallel, sepa-
rately funded, and individually managed paths. The purpose of two of the paths was the transition
to commercialization: Incom [49], under a DOE Technology Transfer Opportunity award [56], has
moved forward on commercial production of both the MCP’s and also the LAPPDT M detectors [8],
and the SSL group continued on the ceramic package program under separate funding. The goals
of the other two paths, the subject of collaborative efforts with industry, were to continue R&D
on technical avenues that had been identiﬁed in the LAPPD project: the bulk synthesis of pure
bialkali photocathode material for sputtering onto substrates [41], higher bandwidth glass capillary

– 36 –

Figure 34. Slide from the DOE review at ANL on Dec. 12, 2012, showing the end of the collaborative R&D
and the transition to four parallel, separately funded, and individually managed efforts.

substrates [54], higher-bandwidth anodes [59], and developing techniques for bringing the yield up
and the price down through adopting techniques for conventional PMT production [86].

Lastly, the applications of psec timing have become much better understood, with growing
interest in many scientiﬁc and commercial applications. The use of the measurement of the coor-
dinates of arrival of photons or charged particles in both time and space has been explored in water
Cherenkov counters [47], medical imaging [79, 80, 81, 87], searches for neutrino-less double-beta
decay [61], and non-proliferation reactor monitoring [82]. At Fermilab the ANNIE experiment [78]
is being constructed to make ﬁrst tests of the use of LAPPDT M modules, much as was envisaged
for DUSEL.

Acknowledgments

We thank Glen Crawford, Division Director of the Ofﬁce of High Energy Physics of the DOE
for his essential support, Howard Nicholson and Peter Kim for their contributions as involved and
knowledgeable DOE program ofﬁcers. The University of Chicago group is grateful for funding
from the Driskill and Grainger Foundations and support for University of Chicago personnel by
the National Science Foundation. Robert Fefferman, Dean of the University of Chicago Physical

– 37 –

Sciences Division, provided the critical seed money at the start of the project. We are also deeply
grateful to Michael Detarando, President of Incom, who provided crucial support and resources.

We thank Alfred Sattelberger (Associate Laboratory Director, Physical Sciences and Engineer-
ing Directorate) for a crucial rescue of the ANL Glass Shop, and to Harry Weerts (Director, High
Energy Physics Division) and Marcel Demarteau (Detector Group Leader, High Energy Physics
Division) for their support during this phase of the project. We thank J. V’avra for his many intel-
lectual contributions to the project in the early stages. We are also grateful to Michael Pellin, who
provided essential wisdom and knowledge on material science throughout the project, and Eric
Delanges and Stefan Ritt who volunteered their expertise on fast sampling electronics. We thank
Dmitri Routkevich for his contributions to the AAO substrate effort at the start of the project. We
are grateful to Jeffrey Defazio and Emil Schyns of Photonis for their interest and help, and to our
excellent vendors who supported the ceramic and glass packaging efforts. Lastly, we deeply thank
the many staff members at our home institutions who made the overall effort possible.

Appendix A

Figure 35 is the page from the 2009 proposal submission to the DOE Ofﬁce of High Energy Physics
listing authors and institutions. The LAPPD Collaboration was unusual in that it was formed with
participants from three complementary kinds of institution, national laboratories, universities, and
US companies as equal partners. In addition, the self-generated inception and the strong support
from the Ofﬁce of High Energy Physics of the DOE attracted expertise in many unanticipated
scientiﬁc or technological areas, talent that might not have become involved in a more conventional
collaboration.

Figure 36 is the project summary page from the proposal submission. The three areas sin-
gled out for emphasis are: 1) high quantum efﬁciency photocathode development; 2) coating of
the plates by Atomic Layer Deposition to produce high-gain low-noise micro-channel plates; and
3) the development of custom fast low-power waveform sampling integrated circuits coupled to
transmission lines for readout of micro-channel-based photomultipliers.

– 38 –

Figure 35. The original set of LAPPD institutions and authors on the 2009 Proposal to the DOE. The
Collaboration was self-assembled from three kinds of institutions: National Laboratories, US-based industry,
and universities. Because the proposal was self-generated by the group and not programmatically driven, it
was based on a ‘bottoms-up’ intellectual interest in speciﬁc aspects in their own areas of expertise.

– 39 –

TheDevelopmentofLarge-AreaFastPhoto-detectorsApril16,2009JohnAnderson,KarenByrum,GaryDrake,EdwardMay,AlexanderParamonov,MaylySanchez,RobertStanek,HendrikWeerts,MatthewWetstein1,ZikriYusofHighEnergyPhysicsDivisionArgonneNationalLaboratory,Argonne,Illinois60439BernhardAdams,KlausAttenkoferAdvancedPhotonSourceDivisionArgonneNationalLaboratory,Argonne,Illinois60439ZekeInsepovMathematicsandComputerSciencesDivisionArgonneNationalLaboratory,Argonne,Illinois60439JeﬀreyElam,JosephLiberaEnergySystemsDivisionArgonneNationalLaboratory,Argonne,Illinois60439MichaelPellin,IgorVeryovkin,HauWang,AlexanderZinovevMaterialsScienceDivisionArgonneNationalLaboratory,Argonne,Illinois60439DavidBeaulieu,NealSullivan,KenStentonArradianceInc.,Sudbury,MA01776MirceaBogdan,HenryFrisch1,Jean-FrancoisGenat,MaryHeintz,RichardNorthrop,FukunTangEnricoFermiInstitute,UniversityofChicago,Chicago,Illinois60637ErikRamberg,AnatolyRonzhin,GregSellbergFermiNationalAcceleratorLaboratory,Batavia,Illinois60510JamesKennedy,KurtisNishimura,MarcRosen,LarryRuckman,GaryVarnerUniversityofHawaii,2505CorreaRoad,Honolulu,HI,96822RobertAbrams,ValentinIvanov,ThomasRobertsMuons,Inc552N.BataviaAvenue,Batavia,IL60510JerryVa’vraSLACNationalAcceleratorLaboratory,MenloPark,CA94025OswaldSiegmund,AntonTremsinSpaceSciencesLaboratory,UniversityofCalifornia,Berkeley,CA94720DmitriRoutkevitchSynkeraTechnologiesInc.,Longmont,CO80501DavidForbush,TianchiZhaoDepartmentofPhysics,UniversityofWashington,Seattle,WA981951JointappointmentArgonneNationalLaboratoryandEnricoFermiInstitute,UniversityofChicago1Figure 36. The Project Summary page of the 2009 Proposal to the DOE.

– 40 –

TheDevelopmentofLarge-area,Fast,Time-of-FlightDetectorsPROJECTSUMMARYWeproposeaprogramtodevelopabasicfamilyofeconomicalrobustlarge-areaphoto-detectorsthatcanbetailoredforawidevarietyofapplicationsthatnowusephotomultipliers.Advancesinmaterialsscienceandnano-technology,complementedbyrecentinnovationsinmicroelectronicsanddataprocessing,giveusanopportunitytoapplythebasicconceptofmicro-channelplatedetectorstothedevelopmentoflarge-areaeconom-icalphoto-detectorswithquantumeﬃcienciesandgainssimilartothoseofphoto-tubes,andwithinherentgoodspaceandtimeresolution.Thenewdevicesaredesignedtocoverlargeareaseconomically,beingasandwichofsimplelayersratherthananassemblyofdiscreteparts.TheplanofR&Dthatfollowsisintendedtosolvethecriticaltechnicalissuesandtodeliverproto-typesthatarereadytobecommercializedwithin3years.TheinitialuseofglasscapillaryMCPsubstratesandconventionalphoto-cathodetechnologyprovidesaprovensolutionforeachofthesecomponentsonthecriticalpath.Mechanicalassemblyandtheextensionofexistingphoto-cathodetechnologytolargeareaplanarapplications,whileformidabletasks,arewithinthescopeofcurrentindustrialpractice.WehavethecapabilitiesandfacilitiesatArgonne,theSpaceSciencesLaboratory(SSL),andourindustrialpartnerstoextendtheknowntechnologies.Wehavealsoidentiﬁedthreeareasinwhichnewtechnologieshavethepotentialfortransformationaldevelopments.First,thedevelopmentofhigherquantumeﬃciencyphoto-cathodesbasedonnano-sciencemor-phologywithcustomizedwork-functionsandtheadaptationoftechniquesfromthesolar-energysectorwouldallowlargeareadetectorsandpossiblycheaperassemblytechniques.Second,AtomicLayerDeposition(ALD)providesapowerfultechniqueforcontrolofthechemistryandsurfacecharacteristicsofnewphoto-cathodes.ALDalsocanbeusedtoformthesecondaryemissionsurfacesofthechannelsonemolecularlayeratatime,includingcontrollingthegeometryoftheelectroncascadeitself,toenablefunctionalizationofchannel-platesubstrateswithhighgainandlownoise.Thiscapabilityallowstheseparationofthepropertiesofthesubstratematerialfromtheampliﬁcationfunctionality.Wehaveexperienceinself-organizednanoporousceramic(AnodicAluminumOxide,AAO)thatwouldprovidelow-costbatch-producedsubstrates,andalsoareinvestigatingsubstratesmadefromglasscapillaries.Lastly,wehavealreadydemonstratedthatfastwaveformsamplingusingCMOSASICsatbothendsoftransmissionlineanodesallowsthecoverageoflargeareaswithsmallnumbersofchannels,permittingexcellenttimeandspaceresolutionandabuilt-innoiseidentiﬁcationandreductionmechanism.DesignworkhasstartedonanASICwith2-4timesthenumberofchannelsperchipthanpresentchips.Large-area,robust,andaﬀordablephoto-detectorswouldbetransformationalinawidevarietyofar-eas.PossibleapplicationsincludecheaperandmoreprecisePositronEmissionTomography(PET)camerasinmedicalimaging,scannersfortransportationsecurity,andparticledetectorsinhigh-energyneutrinoandcolliderphysics,astrophysics,andnuclearphysics.Therewouldalsobemanypossibilitiesfornewproductsandspin-oﬀtechnologies.Becausethenewdevicesareplanar,relativelythin,andphysicallyrobust,theywillrequirelessvolumeandinfrastructureinlarge-areaapplicationsforwhichphotomultipliersarepresentlythecurrentsolution,providingadditionaleconomiesandoﬀeringnewmeasurementopportunities.Tomeetthechallengeswehaveassembledanexperiencedcross-disciplinaryteamthatintegratesex-pertiseandfacilitiesofnationallaboratories,universities,andindustry,andthatincludesexpertiseinboththebasicandtheappliedsciences.References

[1] The original LAPPD institutions include Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), Arradiance Inc., the
University of Chicago, Fermilab, the University of Hawaii, Muons,Inc, Stanford Linear Accelerator
Laboratory , Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley , and Synkera
Corporation. More detail can be found at http://psec.uchicago.edu/.

[2] T. Credo, H. Frisch, H. Sanders, R. Schroll, and F. Tang; Picosecond Time-of-Flight Measurement for
Colliders Using Cherenkov Light Proceedings of the IEEE, Rome, Italy, Oct. 2004; Nuclear Science
Symposium Conference Record, 2004 IEEE, Volume 1.

[3] B. Adams, A. Elagin, H. J Frisch, R. Obaid, E. Oberla, A. Vostrikov, R. G. Wagner, M. Wetstein and

J. Wang Timing Characteristics of Large Area Picosecond Photodetectors; Nucl. Inst. Meth. Phys.
Res. A. , Vol. 795, pp 1-11 (Sept. 2015); published online June 5, 2015. Note that for high-gain
detectors such as the LAPPDTM , with signals consisting of multiple photons, such as from
Cherenkov light, the determining factor is the length of time before the ﬁrst photoelectron strikes the
√
emissive surface. The photon statistics are consequently binomial and not Gaussian, providing a much
N.
faster improvement of time resolution than 1/

[4] J.L. Wiza, Micro-channel Plate Detectors. Nuclear Instruments and Methods 162, 1979, pp 587-601

[5] The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA); Public Law 111-5, 111th Congress;

http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-111publ5/html/PLAW-111publ5.htm

[6] The LAPPD project received a proposal from a large company with detector experience to

commercialize the LAPPD design for the DUSEL neutrino detector. The proposal was to produce
7000 units per year, upgrading after several years to 21,000 per year. The proposal included a detailed
schedule and costing. It was abandoned when DUSEL was canceled. See, for example, A. Lankford,
Status of the NRC DUSEL Study,
http://science.energy.gov/hep/hepap/meetings/previous-meetings/hepap-agenda-june-2011/. The
proposal has since been superseded by the DUNE experiment [7].

[7] The Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE), based on liquid argon, is the successor to the

DUSEL water-Cherenkov proposal. See http://www.dunescience.org/.

[8] The University of Chicago has trademarked the LAPPD 8”-square module, with licensing to Incom

Inc., to distinguish it from small-format MCP-PMTs or fundamentally different designs.

[9] H. J. Frisch, Aspen Winter Conference, Jan. 2003

[10] See the talks by D. Breton, E. Delanges, and S. Ritt in The Factors that Limit Time Resolution in

Photodetectors; Workshop, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL; 28-29 April 2011. See
http://psec.uchicago.edu/workshops/.

[11] H. Nicholson, private communication

[12] Photonis/Burle Industries, 1000 New Holland Ave., Lancaster PA, 17601.

[13] Hamamatsu Photonics K.K. See www.hamamatsu.com/us/en/3008.html.
[14] Photonis, PlanaconT M; see the Planacon link at http://www.photonis.com/en/product/.

[15] Laboratory Directed Research and Development, Ofﬁce of the Director, Argonne National

Laboratory; Project Number 2006-075-R2, Large-Area Detector with Pico-Second Time Resolution.

[16] Strategic Collaborative Initiative Seed Grants, administered by the Ofﬁce of the VP for Research and

for National Laboratories, The University of Chicago

– 41 –

[17] France and Chicago Collaborating in the Sciences (FACCTS), The University of Chicago. See

http://faccts.uchicago.edu/

[18] Argonne National Laboratory, Fermi National Laboratory, Saclay/IRFU, Stanford Linear Accelerator

Center, University of Chicago, University of Hawaii; Fermilab Experiment T979; H. Frisch,
Spokesperson; Memorandum of Understanding, PSEC Collaboration; Fermilab, Batavia IL; Feb,
2008.

[19] Fermilab Test Beam Facility, Fermilab National Laboratory. See http://ftbf.fnal.gov/

[20] F. Tang, C. Ertley, J.-F. Genat, J. Anderson, K. Byrum, G. Drake, E. May, and G. Sellberg

Transmission-Line Readout with Good Time and Space Resolutions for Planacon MCP-PMTs, in
Topical Workshop on Electronics for Particle Physics, CERN, pp. 579-583, 2008

[21] K. Inami, N. Kishimoto, Y. Enari, M. Nagamine, and T. Ohshima; A 5-ps Tof-counter with an

MCP-PMT; Nucl. Instr. Meth. A560, p.303, 2006

[22] J. Va’vra, D.W.G.S. Leith, B. Ratcliff, E. Ramberg, M. Albrow, A. Ronzhin, C. Ertley, T. Natoli, E.

May, K. Byrum; Beam Test of a Time-of-Flight Detector Prototype; Nucl. Instr. Meth. A606, 404
(2009).

[23] A. Ronzhin et al., Development of a 10 ps level time of ﬂight system in the Fermilab Test beam

facility; Nucl. Instr. Meth. A623,931(2010).

[24] Arradiance Inc., Sudbury MA 01776

[25] Muons, Inc 552 N. Batavia Ave., Batavia IL 60510

[26] Synkera Technologies Inc., Longmont CO 80501

[27] C.A. Craven, et al. Large Area Micro-Channel Plates for LAPPD

http://pos.sissa.it/archive/conferences/213/077/TIPP2014_077.pdf, 2014

[28] M.J. Minot, et al., Pilot production & Commercialization of LAPPD Nuclear Instruments and

Methods in Physics Research A 787 (2015) 78

[29] US Patent: Anodized Aluminum Oxide With Atomic Layer Deposition As Micro-plate Detector

US Patent Number 9,139,905. Issued September 22, 2015. Inventors: Jeffrey W. Elam, Hsien-Hau
Wang, Michael J. Pellin, Karen Byrum, Henry J. Frisch

[30] J. W. Elam, A. U. Mane, J. A. Libera, J. N. Hryn, O. H. W. Siegmund, Jason McPhate, M. J. Wetstein,
A. Elagin, M. J. Minot, A. O’Mahony, R. G. Wagner, W. M. Tong, A. D. Brodie, M. A. McCord, and
C. F. Bevis; Synthesis, Characterization, and Application of Tunable Resistance Coatings Prepared by
Atomic Layer Deposition; ECS Transactions, 58 (10) 249-261 (2013)

[31] A. U. Mane, W. M. Tong, A. D. Brodie, M. A. McCord, and J. W. Elam,; Atomic Layer Deposition of
Nanostructured Tunable Resistance Coatings: Growth, Characterization, and Electrical Properties;
ECSTransactions, 64 (9) 3-14 (2014)

[32] US Patent: Tunable Resistance Coatings; US Patent Number 8,921,799 B2, Issued December 30,

2014; US Patent Number 9,105,379 B2, issued August 11, 2015 Inventors: Jeffrey W. Elam, Anil U.
Mane

[33] Z. Insepov, V. Ivanov, S. J. Jokela, I. V. Veryovkin and A. V. Zinovev; Comparison of secondary

electron emission simulation to experiment; Nucl. Instr. Meth A639, 155 (2011)

– 42 –

[34] S. J. Jokela, I. V. Veryovkin, A. V. Zinovev, J. W. Elam, A. U. Mane, Q. Peng, Z. Insepov et al. (the

Large Area Picosecond Photodetector Collaboration); Secondary electron yield of emissive materials
for large-area micro-channel plate detectors: surface composition and ﬁlm thickness dependencies;
TIPP 2011, Physics Procedia 37, 740 (2012)

[35] Z. Insepov, V. Ivanov, S. J. Jokela, I. Veryovkin, A. Zinovev, H. Frisch Comparison of Secondary

Electron Emission Simulation to Experiment Nucl. Instr. Meth. A639, 155 (2011)

[36] Z. Insepov, V. Ivanov Comparison of candidate secondary electron emission materials; Nucl. Instr.

and Meth. B268(20):3315 (Oct. 2010)

[37] S. V. Baryshev, J. A. Klug, A. V. Zinovev, C. E. Tripa, Q. Peng, J. W. Elam and I. V. Veryovkin;

Measuring the roughness of buried interfaces by sputter depth proﬁling; Nanotechnology 24, 015708
(Jan. 2013)

[38] B. Adams, M. Chollet, A. Elagin, A. Vostrikov, M. Wetstein, R. Obaid, and P. Webster A Test-facility

for Large-Area Microchannel Plate Detector Assemblies using a Pulsed Sub-picosecond Laser
Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 84, 061301 (2013)

[39] O.H.W. Siegmund, J.B. McPhate, J.V. Vallerga, A.S. Tremsin, H. Frisch, J. Elam, A. Mane, and R.

Wagner; Large Area Event Counting Detectors with High Spatial and Temporal Resolution, JINST 9
C04002, pp. 1748-0221; April 2014
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/9/04/C04002, (Dec. 2014)

[40] J. Xie et al., Instrumentation for Theory-Inspired Photocathode Development within the Large Area

Picosecond Photodetector (LAPPD) Project; Physics Procedia 00 (2011) 000-000 (TIPP 2011)

[41] The theory-based photocathode development started within the LAPPD Collaboration has continued

with a collaboration of Brookhaven National Laboratory, the University of Chicago, and Radiation
Monitoring Devices, Inc., Watertown, MA 02472, and has demonstrated the bulk synthesis of high
purity K2CsSb in nano-crystalline powder form. Theory-based High-QE Photocathode Development;
Award: DE-SC0009540; PI- Vivek Nagarkar Corporation: Radiation Monitoring Devices, (Feb.
2013).

[42] L. Cultrera, H. Lee, I.V. Bazarov, "Alkali antimonides photocathodes growth using pure metals

evaporation from effusion cells", Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology B 34 (2016) 011202

[43] L. Cultrera, M. Brown, S. Karkare, W. Schaff, I. Bazarov, B. Dunham, "Alkali azide based growth of

high quantum efﬁciency photocathodes", Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology 32 (2014)
031211

[44] B. W. Adams, A. Elagin, J. W. Elam, H. J. Frisch, J.-F. Genat, J. S. Gregar, A. U. Mane, M. J. Minot,

R. Northrop, R. Obaid, E. Oberla, A. Vostrikov, M. Wetstein; An Internal ALD-Based High Voltage
Divider and Signal Circuit for MCP-based Photodetectors; Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res. A; Vol. 780,
Pages 107-113 (21 April 2015)

[45] H. Grabas, R. Obaid, E. Oberla, H. Frisch J.-F. Genat, R. Northrop, F. Tang, D. McGinnis, B. Adams,

and M. Wetstein RF Strip-line Anodes for Psec Large-area MCP-based Photodetectors, Nucl. Instr.
Meth. A71, pp124-131, May 2013

[46] E. Oberla, J.-F. Genat, H. Grabas, H. Frisch, K. Nishimura, and G Varner A 15 GSa/s, 1.5 GHz

Bandwidth Waveform Digitizing ASIC, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A735, 21 Jan., 2014, 452;

[47] E. Oberla and H. Frisch, The design and performance of a prototype water Cherenkov optical

time-projection chamber, to be published, Nucl. Instr. Meth., Jan. 2016

– 43 –

[48] O.H.W. Siegmund, J.B. McPhate, J.V. Vallerga, A.S. Tremsin, R.Hemphill, H. Frisch, R. G. Wagner,
J. Elam, A. Mane; Development of Large Area Photon Counting Detectors Optimized for Cherenkov
Light Imaging with High Temporal and Sub-mm Spatial Resolution; IEEE Nuclear Symposium
Record; DOI:10.1109/NSSMIC.2011.6154420 (2011)

[49] Incom Inc. Charlton Mass. See http://www.incomusa.com/

[50] Arradiance has pioneered resistive coatings for micro-channel plates; See

http://www.arradiance.com/Index_Files/ALD_Coatings.htm

[51] Valentin Ivanov, Zeke Insepov, Sergey Antipov; Simulation of gain and timing resolution in saturated

pores Nucl. Instr. Meth A639, 158 (2011).

[52] MinoTech Engineering, Inc; P.O. Box 1539, Andover MA 01810

[53] J.V. Vallerga, A.S. Tremsin, J.B. McPhate, O.H.W. Siegmund, G. Varner, Large format, high spatial

and temporal resolution cross-strip readout MCP detectors for UV astronomy, SPIE 2010 - SPIE
Astronomical Instrumentation, 27 June - 2 July 2010 - San Diego, CA, Proc. SPIE 773203

[54] Further Development of Large-Area Micro-Channel Plates for a Broad Range of Commercial

Applications; DOE Award DE-SC0011262; Incom, Inc.; Feb. 2014

[55] S. Ritt, in The Factors that Limit Time Resolution in Photodetectors; Workshop, Univ. of Chicago,

Chicago, IL; 28-29 April 2011. See http://psec.uchicago.edu/workshops/. Note that of the values
needed of the four parameters to achieve a time resolution of 100 fsec (the bottom row of the table of
extrapolations), we have achieved or exceeded three: sampling rate, noise, and signal size. Only the
analog bandwidth falls short at present.

[56] LAPPD Commercialization- Fully Integrated Sealed Detector Devices, Technology Transfer

Opportunity, DOE Award DE-SC00009717; Incom, Inc.; Apr. 2014

[57] J.W. Elam, J. A. Libera, M.J. Pellin, and P.C. Stair, Spatially Controlled Atomic Layer Deposition in

Porous Materials, Applied Physics Lett., 2007 91 (24)

[58] I. Bazarov and L. Cultrera, New Methods of Synthesizing High Quantum Efﬁciency Photocathode

Layers for Very Large Area Picosecond Photo Detectors, DOE-supported program, 2013

[59] High Bandwidth LAPPD Anodes; Award: DE-SC0009706; Innosys, Inc.; Nov. 2013

[60] Large Area Detector Development; DOE Award: DE-SC0004193; Arradiance Inc. Aug. 2013

[61] C. Aberle, A. Elagin, H.J. Frisch, M. Wetstein, L. Winslow. Measuring Directionality in Double-Beta

Decay and Neutrino Interactions with Kiloton-Scale Scintillation Detectors; Journal of
Instrumentation Volume 9 (June 2014) JINST 9 P06012 doi:10.1088/1748-0221/9/06/P06012 e-Print
arXiv:1307.5813

[62] The Driskill Foundation; 430 West Erie Street, Suite 301; Chicago, Illinois 60654

[63] See Ref. [4], Section 3.

[64] Beneq Thin Film Equipment; Beneq Oy, P.O. Box 4, FI-02201 Espoo, Finland

[65] O. Siegmund was a designer of the Planacon; this is one of a number of areas where prior expertise

was brought directly into LAPPD.

[66] The details of the proposal are covered by a Non-Disclosure Agreement.

[67] The web documentation is available at http://psec.uchicago.edu/collabMtg/

[68] See http://psec.uchicago.edu/library/

– 44 –

[69] J. Milnes and J. Howorth, Photek Ltd; Proc. SPIE vol 5580 (2005) pp 730-740.

[70] See http://psec.uchicago.edu/workshops/

[71] See http://psec.uchicago.edu/library/index.php

[72] See http://psec.uchicago.edu/blogs/

[73] See http://psec.uchicago.edu/library/doclib/

[74] See http://image-library.uchicago.edu/

[75] See http://lappd-ﬁgures.uchicago.edu/

[76] See http://psec.uchicago.edu/library/#Electronics

[77] First Meeting of Early Adopters, Incom, Inc; Charlton Mass; Nov. 2013. The meeting attracted

twenty-four technical leaders and Principal Investigators, representing seventeen High Energy and
Nuclear Physics programs. Each program provided a synopsis of their program objectives, status of
funding, device speciﬁcations, schedule, number of required detector modules, and program success
criteria.

[78] See http://annie.uchicago.edu and

http://annie.uchicago.edu/lib/exe/fetch.php?media=pacmeeting_v2.1.pdf

[79] H. Kim, H. J. Frisch, C.-M. Kao, Q. Xie, C.-T. Chen, L. Zhou, F. Tang, W.W. Moses, W.S. Choong; A

Multi-Threshold Sampling ;Method for TOF PET Signal Processing; Nuclear Instrument and
Methods in Physics Research, A, 602, p. 618, 2009.

[80] H. Kim, H. J. Frisch, C.-T. Chen J.-F. Genat, F. Tang, W.W. Moses, W. S. Choong, and C.-M. Kao; A

Design of a PET Detector Using Micro-Channel Plate Photo-Multipliers with Transmission-Line
Readout; Nucl. Inst. and Meth. A622, p628 (2010)

[81] H. Kim, H. J. Frisch, C.-T. Chen J.-F. Genat, F. Tang, W.W. Moses, W. S. Choong, and C.-M. Kao; A

Prototype TOF PET Detector Module Using a Micro-Channel Plate Photomultiplier Tube with
Waveform Sampling; Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A662 (2012) 26-32

[82] G. Jocher, S. Usman, M. Wetstein, to be submitted for publication.

[83] Z. Insepov, V. Ivanov and H. J. Frisch; Comparison of candidate secondary electron emission

materials Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 268 (2010)

[84] J.-F. Genat,G. Varner, F. Tang, H. Frisch; Signal Processing for Pico-second Resolution Timing

Measurements; Nucl.Instrum.Meth.A607:387-393,Oct., 2009. e-Print:arXiv:0810.5590

[85] Large Area, Pico-second Resolution, Time of Flight Detectors;

US Patent US 2007/0187596 A1; Aug 16, 2007; Inventors: Henry J. Frisch, Harold Sanders, Fukun
Tang, Tim Credo

[86] US Patent: Use of Flat Panel Microchannel Photomultipliers in Sampling Calorimeters with Timing;

US Patent 8,604,440 B2, Dec. 10 2013.
Chin-Tu Chen, Woon-Seng Choong, Henry J. Frisch, Jean-Francois Genat, Chien-Min Kao, Heejong
Kim, and Fukun Tang, Inventors;

[87] U.S. Patent Appl. US 62/146,780, April 13, 2015

Positron-emission Tomography Detector Systems Based on Low-density Liquid Scintillators and
Precise Time-resolving Photodetectors; Henry J. Frisch, Eric J. Oberla, Hee-Jong Kim, Minfang Yeh,
Inventors

– 45 –

