Open Questions On Nuclear Collective Motion

S. Frauendorf1,a)

1Department of Physics, University Notre Dame, IN 46557, USA

a)sfrauend@nd.edu

Abstract. The status of the macroscopic and microscopic description of the collective quadrupole modes is reviewed, where limits
due to non-adiabaticity and decoherence are exposed. The microscopic description of the yrast states in vibrator-like nuclei in the
framework of the rotating mean ﬁeld is presented.

INTRODUCTION

The year 2016 celebrates the 40th Anniversary of the Nobel Prize for A. Bohr, B. Mottelson and L. Rainwater, which
was awarded for their discovery that nuclei may have a non-spherical shape. Bohr and Mottelson casted this innovative
concept into the Uniﬁed Model (UM), which allows us to classify the low-lying states of open shell nuclei. Their
monograph Nuclear Structure Vol. II: Nuclear Deformations [1] exposes this invaluable tool in great detail. The UM
bases on the dichotomy of the ”collective” degrees of freedom, which describe the shape of the nucleus, and the
”intrinsic” degrees of freedom, which are particle-hole conﬁgurations or quasiparticle conﬁgurations. Any number of
bosonic collective excitations can be superimposed on the fermionic intrinsic states. Clearly this is an idealization.
Nuclei are composed of a relative small number number of nucleons compared to other many-body systems. As a
consequence, the ”granular structure” of the collective degrees of freedom appears already after the excitation of
few quanta, which results in a progressive decoherence of the collective modes. The right side of Fig. 1 illustrates the
point in a schematic way for a vibrational nucleus: The multi-phonon excitations move very soon into the region of the
quasiparticle excitations to which they couple. The collectively enhanced E2 transitions between the members of the
vibrational multiplets will fragment over the increasingly dense background quasiparticle excitations. The collectively
enhanced transitions are restricted to the white adiabatic region of the ﬁgure, i. e. to the one- and two-phonon states
and to the yrast region for larger spin.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
6

 

 
 
]
h
t
-
l
c
u
n
[
 
 

1
v
6
5
8
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

FIGURE 1. Left: The limits of the Uniﬁed Model. Right: Schematic representation of the location of the collective quadrupole
vibrational excitations relative to the quasiparticle excitations. The darker shades indicate higher densities of quasiparticle states.
From Ref. [2].

Low-energy, large-amplitude collective modes: Unified model traditional dichotomy: collective and quasiparticle excitations can be super imposed   adiabatic approximation   Limits: Time scales Tcoll/Tqp<3                            adiabaticity ? Small number of  correlated nucleons                                  coherence length?  n = 2n = 3EnergyIQuasiparticle statesn = 4Tidal Waven = 10246810n = 5The purely collective models assume adiabaticity of the collective motion explicitly or implicitly. Their realm
is restricted to the white adiabatic area in Fig. 1. Two models are widely used to describe the collective excitations
of even-even nuclei: the Bohr Hamiltonian (BH) and the Interacting Boson Model (IBM). I restrict to the quadrupole
mode, although both models have also been been applied to the octupole mode. I will brieﬂy review the status of both
models. Outside, the coupling between the quasiparticle and collective degrees of freedom must be treated in a non-
perturbative way. There are two diﬀerent aspects to be taken into consideration: non-adiabaticity and decoherence.
Near yrast line the level density remains low, and the study of individual quantal states is appropriate. Their structure
can be well understood as interplay between collective and single particle degrees of freedom. The collective and the
nucleonic motion are strongly coupled, because the time scales of the collective and the single particle motion are the
same. The collective motion, which is of rotational type, can be treated in the framework of mean-ﬁeld theory. Tidal
Waves in weakly deformed nuclei are new phenomenon of this regime, which I will discuss in this context. Finally
I will address the question to what extend the nucleonic underpinning supports the collective degrees of freedom.
The question arises when approaching shell closures or when moving away from the yrast line, where the collective
modes fragment among the rapidly increasing number of quasiparticle excitations. The concept of coherence length
is introduced to quantify the resolution limit of the collective degrees of freedom. Part of the presented material is
published in the recent review [2].

The Bohr Hamiltonian

The collective states are represented by wave functions of the components αµ (µ = −2, . . ., 2) of the scale-free
quadrupole deformation tensor which are expressed by the ﬁve-dimensional spherical polar coordinates

(cid:34)
cos γD(2)

αµ = β

(cid:105)(cid:35)

0,M(Ω) +

1√
2

sin γ

2,M(Ω) + D(2)−2,M(Ω)

,

(1)

where Ω are the Euler angles specifying the orientation of the shape.

The Geometric Collective Model

(cid:104)D(2)

(cid:35)

The Geometric Collective Model (GCM) is a parametrized version of the BH based on an expansion into scalars of
increasing power constructed from the coordinate αµ and their conjugate momenta πµ. Only the quadratic term in πµ
is kept. In terms of the quadrupole deformation variables β and γ and Euler angles Ω, the Bohr Hamiltonian is given
by

HGCM2 =

Tββ +

ˆΛ2
β2

+ V(β, γ),

where

Tββ = − 1
β4

∂
∂β

β4 ∂
∂β

,

ˆΛ2 = −

∂
∂γ

sin 3γ

∂
∂γ

− 1
4

sin 3γ

(cid:33)

.

(2)

(3)

(cid:88)

i=1,2,3

ˆL(cid:48)2
sin2(γ − 2

i

3 πi)

The properties of the experimental 2+

collective potential contains only three terms,

1 , 4+

1 , 6+

1 , 2+

2 , 3+

1 , 4+

2 , 0+

2 , 4+

3 states can be classiﬁed by assuming that the

(cid:34)

2√
5B2
(cid:32)

1

(cid:114)

VA(β, γ) =

C2β2 −

1√
5

2
35

C3β3 cos 3γ +

1
5

C4β4.

(4)

Caprio [3] demonstrated that the structure of the collective wave function is determined by two dimensionless pa-
rameters, which provides a more complete scheme than the traditional classiﬁcation into rotational and vibrational
nuclei. He provides ﬁgures of the ratios E(I)/E(2+
1 ), which allows one to extract
the parameters, and discusses ﬁtting strategies. Fig. 2 shows 102Pd which exempliﬁes the general quality of the GCM
phenomenology.

1 ) and B(E2; I → I(cid:48))/B(E2; 2+

1 → 0+

FIGURE 2. Left: Experimental level scheme and B(E2) strengths for 102Pd. The number in parenthesis under the transition energies
(keV) are the B(E2) values (e2 fm4) for the transitions. Data from [4]. Right: GCM predictions[4] of the energies and B(E2)
strengths for 102Pd normalized to the experimental E(2+
1 ) values. The number in parenthesis under the
transition energies (keV) are the B(E2) values (e2 fm4) for the transitions. From Ref. [2]

1 ) and and B(E2; 2+

1 → 0+

Microscopic Bohr Hamiltonian

The GCM is a useful way to classify the collective quadrupole excitations of even-even nuclei. To predict their prop-
erties, the BH is derived from the nuclear mean ﬁeld. The derivation and subsequent calculation of the collective
excitations has been carried out for all popular mean ﬁeld approaches. The derivation of the BH from the various
mean ﬁeld approaches has been detailed reviewed in Ref. [2]. Fig. 3 left summarizes the work in a schematic way.
The potential V(β, γ) is the energy of constrained mean-ﬁeld solutions generated from the diﬀerent energy density
functionals (EDF). The kinetic energy T is obtained in two diﬀerent ways. The adiabatic time dependent mean ﬁeld
approach (ATDMF) calculates the increase of the energy when the shape is slowly changed via time-dependent con-
straints, where only the leading term of time-dependent perturbation theory is kept. The use of perturbation theory
indicates the adiabatic nature of the approach. The second approach starts from the Hill-Wheeler equation for the
weight function of the Generator Coordinate Method (GCM), which describes the collective wave function as a su-
perposition of the diﬀerent constraint mean-ﬁeld solutions. Approximating the overlap between the non-orthogonal
mean-ﬁeld solutions by a Gaussian (GOA) allows one to cast the Hill-Wheeler equation into the diﬀerential form of
the BH. It needs to be underlined that the restriction to the zero quasiparticle solutions in the GCM and the use of of
the GAO implicitly introduce an adiabatic approximation. The BH and its eigenfunctions are obtained numerically on
a deformation grid.

Large scale calculations of the lowest collective excitations have been carried out for various commonly used
mean-ﬁeld approaches (see review [2]). In a bench mark study, Ref. [5] carried out calculations for all even-even
with 10 ≤ Z ≤ 100 and 20 ≤ A ≤ 200. The results for the energies and E2 and E0 matrix elements for the yrast
levels with I ≤ 6, the lowest excited 0+ states, and the two next yrare 2+ states are accessible in the form of a table as
supplemental material to the publication. Fig. 3 right shows 102Pd as an example, which illustrates the typical accuracy
of the predictions. A thorough statistical analysis of the merits of performance has been carried out. The authors state:
”Many of the properties depend strongly on the intrinsic deformation and we ﬁnd that the theory is especially reliable
for strongly deformed nuclei. The distribution of values of the collective structure indicator R42 = E(4+
1 ) has a
very sharp peak at the value 10/3, in agreement with the existing data. On average, the predicted excitation energy and
transition strength of the ﬁrst 2+ excitation are 12% and 22% higher than experiment, respectively, with variances of
the order of 40-50%. The theory gives a good qualitative account of the range of variation of the excitation energy of
the ﬁrst excited 0+ state, but the predicted energies are systematically 50% high. The calculated yrare 2+ states show
a clear separation between γ and β excitations, and the energies of the 2+, γ vibrations accord well with experiment.
The character of the 0+
2 state is interpreted as shape coexistence or β-vibrational excitations on the basis of relative
quadrupole transition strengths. Bands are predicted with the properties of β vibrations for many nuclei having R42
values corresponding to axial rotors, but the shape coexistence phenomenon is more prevalent.”

1 )/E(2+

In addition they observe that the 0+

2 states are generally too vibrational. The discrepancy is particularly precarious

FIGURE 3. Left: Scheme of microscopic derivations of the Bohr Hamiltonian. Right: The spectrum of 102Pd. calculated by means
of the 5DBH-GI [5]. The number in parenthesis under the transition energies (keV) are the B(E2) values (e2 fm4) for the transitions.
From Ref. [2].

2 states in 166Er and 178Hf do not show the enhanced E2 transition prob-
for well deformed nuclei. For example, the 0+
ability expected for a β vibration, which is predicted by the BH. Instead some collective enhancement for transitions
from higher 0+ states is observed, which indicates the fragmentation or absence of the collective β vibration [6, 7].

INTERACTING BOSON MODEL

The collective quadrupole mode is described by means of the creation operators for nucleon pairs with spins 0 and 2,
which are called s- and d- bosons and denoted by s† and d†, respectively, form the closed Lie algebra of the SU(6)
group. In the simplest version, the Hamiltonian contains two IBM parameters and the energy scale, such that:

(cid:18)
(1 − ζ)ˆnd − ζ
4NB

HIBMA(ζ, χ) = g

(cid:19)

ˆQχ · ˆQχ

,

(5)

1 , 4+

1 , 2+

µ = [s† ˜d + d†s](2)

where ˆnd = d† · ˜d, and ˆQχ
µ . The Hamiltonian is diagonalized within the space of ﬁxed
number of bosons, NB = ns + nd, which is taken to be half the number of valence nucleons. The matrix elements of the
charge quadrupole moments are taken to be proportional to ˆQχ, with an eﬀective boson charge ﬁxing the scale. As in
the case of the GCM, the two parameters ζ and χ determine the character of the collective states. The two-parameter
ﬁts usually well account for the relative energies of the 2+
3 states and the relative B(E2) for
the transitions between them. The quality of the ﬁts is comparable with the two-parameter version of the GCM.

µ + χ[d† ˜d](2)

1 , 6+

2 , 3+

1 , 4+

2 , 0+

2 , 4+

It has become custom to classify the collective states on the ”symmetry triangle”, which is a polar plot generated
from the two parameters ζ and χ. The three corners of the triangle are parameter combinations that generate additional
symmetries with respect to the subgroups U(5), O(6), SU(3), which correspond to the harmonic vibrator, the γ -
independent, axial rotor limits of the GCM approach. It is an attractive feature of the IBM that simple algebraic
expressions describe the energies and reduced transition probabilities of the three symmetry limits. Examples are
displayed in Fig. 4. Left shows the classiﬁcation of some isotope chains. Right demonstrates the quality of IBM
for 102Pd. Comparing with Fig. 2 demonstrates that both the GCM and the IBM reproduce the low-spin part of the
spectrum equally well.

The IBM has been conceived as an approximation to the Shell Model. The conﬁguration space of the valence
nucleons between two closed shells is truncated to the subspace of pairs coupled to spin zero and two, which are then
mapped to the space of the s and d bosons. The number NB of such pairs is taken one half of the number of valence
particles below the middle of the open shell or one half of the valence holes above the middle. The ﬁniteness of the
boson number is the major diﬀerence between the IBM and the GCM. The consequences of the boson number limit
are not well studied because the IBM is usually applied to low-spin states that correspond to bosons numbers far

  Microscopic BH derived from EDF TDMF is solved by perturbation theory: ATDMF GCM uses Gaussian Overlap Approximation  (GAO)   Existence of a substantial pair gap is crucial.      € EDF + constraints to fix the shape  Q20, Q22 or β,γ € Bohr HamiltonianH(β,γ)=Trot(β,γ)+Tvib(β,γ)+V(β,γ) Diagonalization € ground state correlations: energies, radiienergies and B(E2) of excited states       ATDMF +quantization GCM+GOA € Hill-Wheeler equationsfq'qH−Eq'=0q'∑ FIGURE 4. Left:The IBM parameters of selected isotope chains arranged in the Symmetry Triangle. The symmetry limits of the
subgroups are indicated at the three corners. The ”transition point symmetry” X(5) marks the transition from the vibrational regime
(limit U(5)) to axial deformation (limit SU(3) and E(5) marks the transition to the γ - soft deformed regime (limit O(6)). Right:
IBM-1 ﬁt to the spectrum of 102Pd. The number in parenthesis under the transition energies (keV) are the B(E2) values (e2 fm4) for
the transitions. The IBM parameters are ζ = 0.61, χ = 0.58, NB = 5. From Ref. [2]

below the limit. The recent measurement of the life times of the yrast states in 102Pd in Ref. [8] provides such test. As
illustrated by Fig. 5, the yrast levels form a regular sequence of collective excitations with increasing B(E2, I → I − 2)
values up to I = 14. The data are compared with the GCM and IBM calculations that give the spectra shown in
Figs. 2 and 4. According to the IBM counting rule, 102
46 Pd56 has a boson number of NB = 5: four valence proton
holes and six valence neutrons with respect to Z = N = 50. The boson number limits the regular yrast sequence at
I = 10, which is the maximum that can be generated by ﬁve d bosons. The B(E2) values decrease toward the limit
where they are zero. These consequences of the ﬁnite boson number are in clear contradiction with experiment. The
GCM calculation, which does not assume a boson limit reproduces the experiment quite well. On the other hand,
Figs. 2 and 4 demonstrate that both the GCM and the IBM describe the spectrum comparably well. The study of E2
transition matrix elements in 168Er provides evidence that the IBM systematically underestimates their collectivity
for the highest spins as a consequence of the boson number cut-oﬀ [10]. Although these are only two examples, they
may indicate a general problem of the IBM. Testing the consequences of the ﬁnite boson number assumption in a
systematic way would be an important test of the corner stone of the IBM.

IBM assumes that the s and d bosons represent valence nucleon pairs in spherical orbitals that are coupled to spin
0 or 2. A microscopic derivation of the IBM parameters starting from this concept has not been succeeded for nuclei
located far in the open shell. An alternative approach has provided encouraging results. The IBM parameters are de-
termined by adjusting an IBM potential energy surface EIBM(βB, γB) generated from the coherent-state representation
of the IBM Hamiltonian (5) to the potential energy surface Em f (βF, γF) calculated by means of constraint mean ﬁeld
theory. For references and an extended presentation see Ref. [2].

ROTATING MEAN FIELD

Although the excitation energy is high for large spin, the levels density remains low near the yrast line. There, uniform
rotation prevails, which is the yrast solutions of the BH. Uniform rotation can be studied in a non-adiabatic way by
means of the rotating mean-ﬁeld approximation. The method is used for all versions of modern mean-ﬁeld approaches.
In essence, one ﬁnds quasiparticle conﬁgurations that are generated by the quasiparticle Routhian

h(cid:48)(β, γ, ω) = h(β, γ) − (cid:126)ω · (cid:126)j, hqp = h(β, γ) + ∆(P† + P) − λ ˆN,

(6)
The cranking term (cid:126)ω · (cid:126)j transforms to the frame that rotates with the angular velocity (cid:126)ω. The rotational axis is usually
taken as one of the principal axes the deformed single particle Hamiltonian h(β, γ). However for a class of solutions

U(5)	  X(5)	  SU(3)	  E(5)	  O(6)	  ρ	  θ	  FIGURE 5. Energies (left) and B(E2, I → I − 2) values (right) of 102Pd. The GCM calculation, denoted by ACM, is the same as
the one shown in Fig. 2 and the IBM calculation is the same as in Fig. 4. Data from Ref. [8].

FIGURE 6. Left part: Experimental moments of inertia of the ground band of 102Pd, where ω = (E(I) − E(I − 2))/2 and J = I.
Right part: Experimental B(E2, I → I − 2) values of 102Pd. The blue lines WS-SCTAC show the calculations by means of the
cranking model [14]. From Ref. [2].

the rotational axis titled with repeat to the principal axes (Tilted Axes Crankinng). Each quasiparticle conﬁguration
is associated with a rotational band. The details of deformed single particle Hamiltonian depend on the mean-ﬁeld
approach of choice. Simple and popular are the Woods-Saxon or the Nilsson potentials, which are combined with the
shell correction (or micro-macro) method to calculate the energy in the rotating frame E(cid:48)(β, γ, (cid:126)ω) and the expectation
value of the angular momentum J(β, γ, (cid:126)ω). The deformation parameters β, γ and the orientation of the rotational axis
ˆ(cid:126)ω) = E(cid:48) + ωJ under the constraint of ﬁxed angular momentum J.
ˆ(cid:126)ω are found be minimizing the energy E(β, γ,
The pair-ﬁeld ∆ is determined by various prescriptions and λ ﬁxes the particle number. Semiclassically, the intraband
transition matrix elements are obtained by calculating the expectation values of the transition operators, as e.g. the
quadrupole moments. In my talk a I can only address few aspects of this wide ﬁeld. Recent reviews, which expose the
details, have been given by Frauendorf [11] and Satuła and Wyss [12].

The rotating mean-ﬁeld (RMF) opened new perspectives because it is non-perturbative and completely micro-
scopic. It allows one to address the question of the appearance of the rotational modes away from closed shells and
their disappearance with excitation energy above the yrast line.

04812160300060009000IEngeryKeVexibmACM048121601000200030004000IBE2e2b2exibmACMTidal Waves

Frauendorf, Gu and Sun introduced the Tidal Wave concept in Ref. [14] (and Ref. [13] with complimentary material).
Consider the phenomenological BH (2) with mass parameters Bββ = Bγγ = Bi =
5/2D. Uniform rotation about the
axis with the maximal moment of inertia has the lowest energy for a given angular momentum, i. e. it corresponds to
the yrast states when quantized. In the co-rotating frame, the deformation parameters β and γ do not depend on time.
Their values are given by minimizing the energy

√

E(β, γ) =

J2

2J(β, γ)

+ V(β, γ), J = 4Bβ2 sin2 γ.

In the case of a harmonic vibrator V = C

2 β2. Minimizing the energy one ﬁnds

(cid:114)

γe =

π

2 , β2
e =

J
√
BC

2

, J = 4Bβ2

e =

2J√
BC

, ω =

J
J =

1
2

C
B , E = ωJ = Ω

J
2

= Cβ2
e.

(7)

(8)

The wave travels with an angular velocity ω being one half of the oscillator frequency Ω. The angular momentum is
generated by increasing the deformation β2, while the angular velocity stays constant. These are the yrast states of
the vibrator multiplets described in a semiclassical way. This mode has been called ”Tidal Wave” (TW), because it
has wave character: the energy and angular momentum increase with the wave amplitude while the frequency stays
constant. Using a potential like Eq. (4) one can easily incorporate anharmonicities and cover the transition to stable
rotation.

FIGURE 7. Left part: Experimental moments of inertia of the ground band and 0+
2 band (black dots) of 110Cd, where
ω = (E(I) − E(I − 2))/2 and J = I compared with the calculations by means of the Cranking model [14] (black circles). Right
part: Experimental B(E2, I → I − 2) values of 110Cd compared with the calculations (black circles without red circle with quantal
correction, see Ref. [14]). From Ref. [2].

The yrast states of 102Pd shown in Fig. 5 are a beautiful example of a slightly anharmonic TW. Ayangeakaa et
al.[8] interpreted it as a condensate of d bosons. Accordingly, up to seven bosons are observed, which align their
angular momenta. If the bosons were free, the function J(I) would be a straight line out of the coordinate origin (FB
in Fig. 6). The displacement by Θ0 was attributed to an interaction between the bosons (IB in Fig. 6) that is quadratic
in the boson number [9].

The fact that the TW is static in the co-rotating frame of reference allows one to microscopically calculate its
properties by means of the RMF approaches. Frauendorf, Gu, and Sun [13, 14] calculated the energies of the yrast
states and the B(E2) of the intra band transitions up to spin I = 16 for the nuclides with Z = 44 − 48, N = 65 − 66.
Figs. 6 and 7 exemplify the accuracy of the parameter-free calculations. In particular the change of the yrast states
from the purely collective tidal wave (g band) to the conﬁguration with two rotational aligned h11/2quasiparticles (s
band) is reproduced in detail. In the case of 102Pd (Fig. 6) the collective g band can be followed up to I = 14, where it

νh11/22€ νd5/2g7/2J=I/ω[MeV-1] is at higher energy than the s band. This is a consequence of almost no mixing of the two conﬁgurations. In the case
of 110Cd (Fig. 7) the collective g band is crossed by the s band earlier and the two bands interact stronger. The two
aligned h11/2 quasiparticles in the s band reduce the deformation but stabilizes it such that the sequence becomes more
rotational. The method applies to odd-A and odd-odd nuclei without any further sophistication.

Coherence Of Rotational Motion

The nucleus increases its angular momentum in two diﬀerent ways. One is coherent rotation of the nucleus, which
results in regular rotational bands. The other is exciting quasiparticles that align they individual angular momentum,
which appear in an irregular way. Fig. 7 shows an example for the competition of the two modes. The RMF accounts
for both on equal footing. It is important to realize that the quasiparticle Routhian (6) derives from an eﬀective two-
body Routhian that is invariant with respect to rotation about the (cid:126)ω axis. Rotational invariance implies that there is a
family RMF solutions related by rotation about (cid:126)ω by the angle ψ. All of them have the same energy. In the space ﬁxed
coordinate system these mean ﬁeld states rotate uniformly about the (cid:126)ω axis. In the spirit of semi classical quantum
mechanics this motion is quantized, i. e. wave functions are associated with the angle that speciﬁes the orientation of
the degenerate mean-ﬁeld solutions. They are the microscopic realization of the collective wave functions of a rotor.
The orientation angle ψ exists only if the mean-ﬁeld solution breaks rotational symmetry with respect to the (cid:126)ω axis.
One calls this ”spontaneous symmetry breaking” because the original two-body Routhian preserves the symmetry.

To quantify the degree of symmetry breaking it is instructive to introduce the notation of a ”coherence length”,
which is used in other ﬁelds of many-body physics. It is the minimal length that a collective wave function can
resolve. In the case of superconductivity the coherence length ξ = π∆/p f is the size of a Cooper pair. The wave
function of the pair condensate cannot more rapidly change than ξ. When the pair condensate ﬂows through a wire, its
wave function acquires the phase ipx/. The phase cannot change more rapidly than ξ, that is p < pmax = /ξ.
When the current through the wire is increased, superconductivity breaks down at the critical current density
jmax = eρpmax/2m = 103 − 104A/m2.

In analogy, there exists a coherence angle ∆ψ that limits the resolution of the wave functions of collective rotation,
which are called ”coherent” because the nucleons are correlated such that a common orderly motion results. The
coherence angle can be determined from the overlap between the diﬀerent mean-ﬁeld solutions |ψ(cid:105) that specify the
angle ψ. The overlap is usually well approximated by a Gaussian, |(cid:104)ψ|ψ(cid:48)(cid:105)|2 ≈ exp
, which allows one
to calculate ∆ψ. The correlation angle sets the limit how much phase ψJ/ the rotational wave can function acquire
and such it restricts the number of states in the rotational band to ∆I ∼ 2/∆ψ. ( The 2 is chosen such that the number
of band members correspond to the observed ones) Ref. [11] provided an extended of discussion of the coherence of
rotation, which formulated additional criteria for the appearance of regular rotational bands.

(cid:104)−(ψ − ψ(cid:48))2/∆β2(cid:105)

deformation

J (2)
∆J
∆ψ
Qt
µt
Z
N
ε
∆p
∆n

super
97
28
4o
5.2
0
64
88
0.6
0
0

normal weak
14
6
20o
0.7
3.5
82
117
0.1
0
0.75

56
14
8o
2.6
0
72
104
0.3
0.75
0.70

FIGURE 8. Left: Character of the diﬀerent types of nuclear rotational bands. The moments of inertia J (2) are in 2MeV−1, the
transition quadrupole moments Qt in eb, the transition magnetic moments µt in µN and the pair gaps ∆ in MeV. The parameter ε
measures the deformation (ε ≈ 0.95β for β < 0.2). Right: Numerical calculation of the overlap for the case of weak deformation.
From [11].

Δψ coherence angleψ 2π0FIGURE 9. Left: Energies of the modiﬁed oscillator as function of the deformation parameter ε. From Ref. [15]. Right: Shell
Model Calculation for 62Ni. The width of the bars is proportional to the B(E2) value of the connecting transition. From Ref. [16].
The collectively enhanced transitions of the Shell Model calculation are associated with the enhanced transitions of the harmonic
vibrator limit of the BH.

The table in Fig. 8 provides three examples of diﬀerent types of rotational bands found in nuclei. The super de-
formed deformed nuclei are found at high spin. They are characterized by long regular bands. The normal deformation
case illustrates how the ﬁnite length of the bands materializes in well deformed nuclei (e. g. the rare-earth region).
The regular level sequence of the state band stops around I = 12, where it is crossed by another band containing a pair
of i13/2 neutrons that aligned their spins with the rotational axis. The alignment causes an sudden decrease of the tran-
sition energy, called back bending. Crossings with bands containing an increasing number of aligned quasiparticles
recur at intervals of the order of ∆I.

The weak deformation case is an example for magnetic rotation in the near-spherical Pb isotopes. Magnetic
rotation is carried by few high-j nucleons on orbits that are arranged in a highly anisotropic way, which results in the
largest coherence angle of the three examples. As seen in Fig. 8, it is still a small fraction of 2π, enough to support
phase changes of ∼ 2π/6. As indicated by the small value of Qt and the large value of µt in the table of Fig. 8, the
rotational band appears as a regular sequence of strong M1 transitions while the E2 transitions are suppressed.

Band termination is a second phenomenon how the ﬁnite length of bands materializes in transitional nuclei.
Along the band the valence nucleons gradually align their spins with the rotational axis. The band terminates when
all spins are aligned in accordance with the Pauli Principle. The terminating conﬁguration is spatially symmetric with
respect to the angular momentum, e. g not E2 radiation is possible. The B(E2) values fall oﬀ while approaching
termination along the band. Termination competes with band crossings with varying prevalence.

Magnetic rotation and band termination are a phenomena beyond the classical UM, which appear naturally as
consequence of spontaneous symmetry breaking of the rotating mean ﬁeld. Ref. [11] discusses these aspects in detail
together with the consequences of spontaneous breaking of discrete symmetries.

COHERENCE OF THE DEFORMATION DEGREES OF FREEDOM

(cid:104)−(β − β(cid:48))2/∆β2(cid:105)

It appears in the overlap of

the collective wave function of deformation degree of

freedom β is also limited by
The resolution of
two mean-ﬁeld solutions with diﬀerent deformation
a coherence length.
|(cid:104)β|β(cid:48)(cid:105)|2 ≈ exp
. The overlap plays a central role in describing the shape dynamics by means of the
Generator Coordinate Method. To my knowledge, the resolution aspect has not yet been paid much attention so far.
Here I address it only in a qualitative way.

The left part of Fig. 9 shows the single particle levels as function of the deformation variable β. The overlap
falls oﬀ the stronger the more the occupation of the states near the Fermi surface changes over an interval of β. For
Z ≈ 60 and N ≈ 90 many up-sloping levels cross many down-sloping. This results in a considerable re-occupation
over the indicated β interval. A relatively small coherence length ∆β is expected. For Z ≈ 66 and N ≈ 98 there is no

ε≈0.95β(60 90 Z=66 N=98large Δβ, node not supportedZ=60 N=90small Δβ, node supportedε≈0.95β I E n=1 n=0 n=2 n=3 n=4 0 2 4 6 8 Harmonic vibrator Shell model re-occupation within the deformation interval. The overlap will still be smaller than one, because the single particle
wave functions change with β. A relatively large value ∆β will result. The diﬀerence accounts for the following. In
the transitional nuclei around N = 90 there is a low-lying 0+
2 state with the properties of the collective one-phonon β
vibration, but no evidence for the two-phonon state. The coherence length ∆β is small enough to resolve one node of
the vibration but too large to resolve two nodes. For the well deformed nuclei around N = 98 there is no evidence for
a collective β vibration. The coherence length ∆β is too large to even resolve one node.

1 and 0+

The right part of Fig. 9 shows the E2 transitions obtained in a Shell Model calculation for spherical nucleus 62Ni.
They are compared with the pattern of transition strength of the harmonic vibration limit of the BH. As discussed in
the Introduction (c. f. Fig. 1) the quadrupole vibrations become increasingly de-coherent when moving way from the
yrast line. The Shell Model gives a collective 2+ state interpreted as the one phonon state and at twice the energy the
states 0+, 2+, 4+ interpreted as the two-phonon triplet. As expected for the harmonic vibrator, the transition strengths
2 → 2+
to the one- phonon star are enhanced and there are not transitions to the zero phonon state. In contrast the 2+
1 → 0+
1
transition is much weaker than the 4+
1 transitions, which are not twice as strong as the 2+
1
transition. The transition between the yrast states of the Shell Model are strong and may be accounted for by an
anharmonic tidal wave. The Shell Model calculation shows enhanced transitions parallel to the yrast sequence, which
correspond to the rare members of the vibrational multiplets. An extension of the tidal wave approach to describe
these states seems promising. The remaining part of the Shell Model transition pattern looks chaotic. The coherence
of the vibrational motion is lost.

1 → 2+

2 → 2+

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Numerical solutions of the phenomenological Bohr/IBM Hamiltonian with few parameters provide an advanced
classiﬁcation scheme for collective states. Experimental B(E2) values for the transitions within the ground state
band contradict the ﬁnite-boson number assumption of IBM. The Bohr/IBM Hamiltonian derived from various
mean-ﬁeld approaches within the adiabatic approximation reasonably well describes 2+
2 states in even-even
nuclei across mass table. The coupling between the collective and quasiparticle degrees of freedom becomes strong
for higher states and in odd-A nuclei. The rotating mean ﬁeld approach provides a versatile non-adiabatic description
of the yrast region. It microscopically describes tidal waves, which represent yrast states of vibrator-like nuclei.
The coherence length is introduced, which quantiﬁes the degree of collectivity. In case of rotation, the coher-
ence angle limits the number of states in a rotational band, which is cut-oﬀ by band crossing or band termination.
The large coherence length for β vibrations supports only one node in transitional and no node in well deformed nuclei.

1 , 2+

1 , 4+

The work was supported by the U.S. DOE under Contract Nos. DEFG02- 95ER-40934.

REFERENCES

[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

A. Bohr and B. Mottelson Nuclear Structure Vol. II. Nuclear Deformations, (W. A. Benjamin Inc., Lon-
don/Amsterdam; Don Mils, Ontario/Sydney/Tokyo; 1975).
S. Frauendorf, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 38, 1541001 (2015).
M. A. Caprio Phys. Rev. C 68 (2003) 054303.
N. V. Zamﬁr et al., Phys. Rev. C 65 (2002) 044325.
J. P. Delaroche et al., Phys. Rev. C 81 (2010) 014303.
P. E. Garrett et al., Phys. Lett. B 400, 250 (19970.
S. R. Lesher et al., Phys. Rev. C 76, 034318 (2007).
A.D. Ayangeakaa et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013) 102501.
A. O. Macchiavelli et al., Phys. Rev. C 90, 047304 (2014)
B. Kotili´nski et al., Phys. Rev. C 517, 365 (1990).
S. Frauendorf, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 463 (2001).
Satuła, W., Wyss, R. A., Rep. on Progress in Phys. 68, 131 (2005).
S. Frauendorf, Y. Gu, J. Sun, arXiv-id: 0709.0254 (2010).
S. Frauendorf, Y. Gu, J. Sun, Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 20, 465 (2011).
S. G. Nilsson and I. Ragnarsson, Shapes and Shells in Nuclear Structure, (Cambridge U. Pub.; 1995).
A. Chakroborty et al., Phys. Rev. C 83, 034316 (2011).

