6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
2
0
9
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

1

Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

Sylvain Carrozza

Univ. Bordeaux, LaBRI, UMR 5800, 33400 Talence, France

E-mail: sylvain.carrozza@labri.fr

Abstract. We provide a non–technical overview of recent extensions of renormalization
methods and techniques to Group Field Theories (GFTs), a class of combinatorially non–
local quantum ﬁeld theories which generalize matrix models to dimension d ≥ 3. More
precisely, we focus on GFTs with so–called closure constraint, which are closely related to
lattice gauge theories and quantum gravity spin foam models. With the help of modern
tensor model tools, a rich landscape of renormalizable theories has been unravelled. We
review our current understanding of their renormalization group ﬂows, at both perturbative
and non–perturbative levels.

2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 81T15; 81T16; 83D27; 83C45

1

Introduction

From a purely mathematical perspective, a GFT [39, 67, 69, 57, 8] is a quantum ﬁeld theory
deﬁned on d copies of a compact Lie group G, in which point–like interactions are replaced
by non–trivial combinatorial objects. At the level of the ﬁeld theory action, this translates
into peculiar non–localities of the interactions, which are given by pairwise identiﬁcations and
integrations of individual group variables of the elementary ﬁelds. One could thus say that a
given GFT interaction is local in each pair of copies of the group G thus identiﬁed, but non-
local from the point of view of the full conﬁguration space Gd. This leads to subtleties in the
construction and analysis of such models, which for a long time precluded the deﬁnition of
renormalizable theories.

Alternatively, GFTs can be seen as generalized matrix and tensor models, with group–valued
rather than discrete indices. Progress in tensor models (see e.g. [55, 19, 53, 20] and references
therein) can therefore be directly imported into the GFT formalism. The continuous structure
of the group allows to considerably enrich this purely combinatorial background and deﬁne
more general classes of tensorial theories. First, the introduction of derivative couplings, and in
particular of non–trivial propagators, leads to Tensorial Field Theories (TFTs) [13, 9, 15, 10, 12,
46, 43, 80, 73, 44], which are proper ﬁeld theories whose (perturbative) deﬁnitions require a non–
trivial renormalizability analysis. Second, the group structure can be used to impose particular
constraints on the elementary ﬁelds, which endow Feynman amplitudes with the structure of
generalized lattice gauge theories. This latter class of models is usually referred to as Tensorial
Group Field Theories (TGFTs) to emphasize the central importance of the group, or simply
group ﬁeld theories whenever a more general combinatorial structure than that of modern tensor
models is allowed.

GFTs were originally introduced in the context of Loop Quantum Gravity (LQG) [34, 75] for
the purpose of resumming Spin Foam amplitudes1 [74, 1] and hence completing the deﬁnition
of the dynamics of LQG [79, 82]. While LQG aims at solving the quantum gravity conundrum
through a mere quantization of General Relativity (GR), it naturally leads to deﬁnitions of the
quantum geometry of space in which discrete structures such as graphs are center stage. Such
structures percolate to the dynamical level and lead to interesting quantizations of discretized
GR [37, 41, 7, 36], but the question of whether a smooth space–time structure can be recovered

1Spin foam amplitudes fall in the class of generalized lattice gauge theories which may be generated by a GFT.

2

S. Carrozza

in some limit remains a great challenge. In order to address this question, it is in particular
crucial to develop new renormalization tools, which should allow to eﬃciently explore the phase
space of spin foam models. Two renormalization programmes have recently emerged to meet this
challenge. One is based on an interpretation of spin foam models as direct space regularizations
of quantum gravity [35, 3], and therefore explores generalizations of lattice renormalization
techniques. The other one interprets spin foam amplitudes as Feynman contributions in the
perturbative expansion of a speciﬁc GFT [68, 40, 77], and therefore requires generalizations of
local ﬁeld theory renormalization techniques to non–local ﬁeld theories such as (T)GFTs. We
here review this second research programme, in the particular context of TGFTs with gauge
invariance condition (or equivalently closure constraint), which have been extensively studied
in the literature [33, 32, 81, 72, 25, 26, 27, 63, 62, 61, 16, 45, 59, 60]. Though not as sophisticated
as tentative GFT models for 4d quantum gravity [6, 7], such theories generate non-trivial spin
foam amplitudes and require key generalizations of ordinary renormalization methods. They
therefore provide a natural test bed for future and more challenging studies of quantum gravity
models.

Our goal is to present the reader with a bird’s eye view on the recent literature, and to clearly
explain the motivations and the status of the subject. We will as much as possible refrain from
delving into technical details.

The plan of this review is as follows. In section 2 we motivate further the GFT renormal-
ization programme, as well as the speciﬁc class of models which has been investigated up to
now. Perturbative renormalizability is reviewed in detail in section 3. A full classiﬁcation of
renormalizable model based on rigorous power-counting arguments is in particular provided. We
then go on to investigations of the properties of the renormalization group ﬂows of these models
in section 4. Emphasis is put on functional renormalization methods and truncations, which are
of great practical interest even though they lack a full mathematical justiﬁcation.

2 From simplicial to tensorial GFTs

2.1 Renormalization of GFTs: motivations and basic ingredients

We begin with the introduction of basic GFT structures, which may not be general enough to
encompass all models relevant to full 4d quantum gravity, but will be suﬃcient in the present
context. We deﬁne a GFT as a quantum ﬁeld theory for a single complex scalar ﬁeld ϕ leaving
on d copies of a ﬁxed compact Lie group G. Unless speciﬁed otherwise, we will use a vector
notation for conﬁguration space variables and its Haar measure:

dg = dg1 . . . dgd .

We will also use the short-hand notation:

g = (g1, . . . , gd) ∈ Gd ,
ϕ1 · ϕ2 =(cid:90) dg ϕ1(g)ϕ2(g) ,

for any two square-integrable functions ϕ1 and ϕ2 on Gd. The dynamics of the GFT ﬁeld is
speciﬁed by a probability measure

dµCΛ(ϕ, ϕ) exp (−SΛ[ϕ, ϕ])

or equivalently a generating functional:

ZΛ[J, ¯J] =(cid:90) dµCΛ(ϕ, ϕ) exp(cid:0)−SΛ[ϕ, ϕ] + ¯J · ϕ + ϕ · J(cid:1) .

(1)

(2)

Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

3

The measure dµCΛ is the Gaussian measure associated to the covariance CΛ, which is a positive
operator with kernel:

CΛ(g; g

(cid:48)

) =(cid:90) dµCΛ(ϕ, ϕ) ϕ(g)ϕ(g

(cid:48)

) .

(3)

In other words, CΛ is the propagator of the GFT, or equivalently its free 2-point function. We
explicitly introduced an extra regularization or scale parameter Λ > 0, as the covariance is in
general plagued with divergences. The role of this parameter is central in our renormalization
programme; we will describe it in greater details once a speciﬁc choice of propagator is made.
Perturbations around the Gaussian theory are introduced through the (interaction part of the)
GFT action SΛ[ϕ, ϕ], which we will parametrize as:

SΛ[ϕ, ϕ] =(cid:88)b∈B

tb(Λ) Ib[ϕ, ϕ] ,

(4)

where B is a set of elementary interactions, Ib is the speciﬁc monomial in the ﬁelds associated to
the interaction b, and tb(Λ) is the running coupling constant associated to b at scale Λ. One main
objective of renormalization is to determine how these coupling constants should be adjusted
to compensate for a change in the cut-oﬀ Λ. More precisely, as in ordinary ﬁeld theory, we will
require that the infrared content of the connected 2k-point functions (or Schwinger functions)

S(2k)
Λ (g1, . . . , gk, g

(cid:48)
1, . . . , g

(cid:48)

k) =(cid:32) k(cid:89)i=1

δ

δ ¯J(gi)

δ
δJ(g(cid:48)

i)(cid:33) lnZΛ[J, ¯J](cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)J= ¯J=0

,

(5)

which also characterize the random measure (1), is invariant under a change of Λ. Unlike
ordinary ﬁeld theories, we do not have any prior notion of energy scale which we can rely on to
determine what ’infrared’ means in the GFT context. We will therefore need to adopt a more
abstract notion of scale, a priori unrelated to familiar space–time concepts.

For speciﬁc choices of group, propagator and basic interactions, the formal Feynman expan-

sion of (for instance) the partition function

ZΛ := ZΛ[0, 0] =(cid:88)G (cid:89)b∈B

(−tb(Λ))nb(G) AG(Λ) ,

(6)

generates Feynman diagrams G which are in one-to-one correspondence with speciﬁc (closed)
2-complexes and are weighted by spin foam amplitudes AG 2. We remind the reader that, more
generally, spin foams are combinatorial objects interpolating between spin–network boundary
states, whose amplitudes are constructed as discrete gravity path–integrals taking the form of
generalized lattice gauge theory amplitudes. They are therefore interpreted as quantum space–
time processes encoding the dynamics of loop quantum gravity spin–network functionals. In
this review, we ignore the extra combinatorial structure provided by properly closed boundary
spin–network states, since they do not play an essential role in what we want to discuss: the
renormalization of such quantum gravity amplitudes is a particular case of that of general n-
point functions (associated to n open boundary spin–network vertices), we can therefore focus
entirely on the latter. In view of equation (6), the GFT formalism provides natural prescriptions
for resumming inﬁnite classes of spin foam amplitudes, with weights parametrized by the GFT
coupling constants. This is the sense in which GFTs allow to complete the deﬁnition of spin
foam models, which cannot be claimed to fully specify a dynamics for quantum gravity unless an
extra organization principle for its amplitudes is clearly spelled out. The summing prescription

2Note that symmetry factors may have to be included in formula (6), depending on the detailed deﬁnition of

the model and of the Feynman amplitudes. They are not relevant to the present discussion.

4

S. Carrozza

implemented through GFT is one such possible organization principle, which eﬀectively removes
a large class of discretization ambiguities entering the deﬁnition of spin foam models (but not
all). What remains to be checked is: 1) whether this formal procedure is mathematically consis-
tent; and 2) whether it is physically relevant, in the sense that general relativity can be recovered
in some limit. Renormalization will presumably play an important role in order to meet both
of these challenges.
The formal relation between GFTs and spin foam models being an intrinsically perturbative
statement, checking its validity and consistency is essentially equivalent to proving renormaliz-
ability of the GFT. At the very least one needs to check that – again formally – the set of GFT
interactions Ib is stable under a shift of the cut-oﬀ Λ. This translates into a formal stability of the
set of spin foams summed over on the right-hand-side of equation (6). But turning this rather
vague statement into a sensible perturbative deﬁnition requires that the same stability holds
with only ﬁnitely many GFT interactions turned on, and that is equivalent to the perturba-
tive renormalizability of the GFT. The relevant GFT interactions will then uniquely determine
which (ﬁnitely many) elementary spin foam interaction vertices dominate in this perturbative
phase. This is a more concrete and more rigorous illustration of how the GFT formalism may
be powerfully used to remove spin foam discretization ambiguities and make predictions.
Furthermore, assuming that general relativity may only be recovered in a phase in which macro-
scopically large spin–network boundary states acquire large amplitudes, addressing the second
open problem will presumably require to go beyond perturbation theory. This suggests that the
GFT phase space should be more systematically explored away from its perturbative regime, and
the existence of non-trivial ﬁxed points of the renormalization group investigated. It is important
to realize that such non-trivial ﬁxed points would correspond to non-perturbative resummations
of spin–foam amplitudes and would therefore be very hard to grasp without recourse to GFT.
They will generate new vacua, supporting new and possibly inequivalent representations of the
GFT, and therefore leading to new GFT phases and phase transitions. The mechanism of Bose–
Einstein condensation has in particular been investigated in this context, leading to interesting
reconstructions of smooth homogeneous and spherically symmetric space–time geometries from
the GFT formalism, with fascinating applications to cosmology [47, 71, 48] and black holes [70].
If such a scenario based on a collective reorganization of the spin foam amplitudes is correct,
the ﬁeld theory language provided by GFT and the powerful eﬀective methods it entails seems
hardly avoidable.

The speciﬁc GFTs which generate quantum gravity spin foam amplitudes require G to be
a local symmetry group of space–time (or space), e.g. the Lorentz group SO(1, d − 1) or its
universal covering. In this review, we will only consider Euclidean groups – in particular SU(2)
in dimension d = 3 – and ignore complications arising from the Lorentzian signature3. Another
important ingredient is the so-called gauge invariance condition, deﬁned as a global symmetry
of the GFT ﬁeld under simultaneous translation of its group variables:

∀h ∈ G,

ϕ(g1h, . . . , gdh) = ϕ(g1, . . . , gd) .

(7)

This condition is common to all known proposals of GFT models for quantum gravity, and is
responsible for the generalized lattice gauge theory form of the amplitudes appearing on the
right-hand-side of equation (6). Within the general GFT formalism spelled out at the beginning
of this section, we implement this symmetry by requiring that the covariance CΛ is of the form

CΛ = P ˜CΛP ,

(8)
where ˜CΛ is again a positive operator, and P is the projector on translation invariant GFT ﬁelds
3The renormalization of GFTs with Lorentzian signature remains largely open and will likely become an active

ﬁeld of research in the close future.

Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

with kernel

P(g, g

(cid:48)

) =(cid:90)G

dh

d(cid:89)(cid:96)=1

δ(g(cid:96)hg

(cid:48)-1
(cid:96) ) .

5

(9)

Hence CΛ is degenerate and its image lies within the space of ﬁelds verifying (7). The gauge
invariance condition, also called closure constraint, is the main dynamical ingredient of GFT
models for quantum BF theory in arbitrary dimension. In dimension 3, it turns out that SU(2)
BF theory can be interpreted as a theory of Euclidean gravity, and therefore SU(2) GFT with
closure constraint provides a natural arena in which to formulate 3d Euclidean quantum gravity
models. A typical example is the Boulatov model [24] (which generates Ponzano–Regge spin
foam amplitudes), a modern version of which will be introduced below. In higher dimensions,
further conditions on the GFT ﬁelds – which are known as simplicity constraints – need to be
implemented, possibly leading to further degeneracies of the covariance. In what follows, we will
however ignore such constraints and focus on examples in which ˜CΛ is non-degenerate. Finally,
in most of the quantum-gravity literature, the 2-complexes supporting spin foam amplitudes
are assumed to be dual to simplicial decompositions of manifolds. This is a simpliﬁcation
entering the construction of discrete gravity path–integrals which, though very natural, is as
far as we can tell not very well motivated. At the GFT level, this corresponds to a choice of
action SΛ comprising a unique type of monomials Ib, which are of order (d + 1) and contract
the ﬁeld variables pairwise following the pattern of a d-simplex. Such models have very rigid
combinatorial structure, and therefore very little chance to be stable under renormalization. In
other words, radiative corrections which are not of the simplicial type are in general generated
by the renormalization group ﬂow, and therefore need to be added to SΛ from the outset.
The importance of this simple realization should not be underestimated: in ordinary quantum
ﬁeld theory, a similar argument implies that one should in principle allow any number of local
interactions in the action; it is then left to the renormalization group to identify a ﬁnite relevant
subset of local operators among all possible interactions. Likewise, a renormalization programme
for GFTs requires the prior identiﬁcation of an inﬁnite reservoir of allowed interactions, providing
a suitable generalization of ordinary locality.

The purpose of the next three subsections is to explain how recent developments in ten-
sor models made such a generalized notion of locality available and allowed to launch a GFT
renormalization programme. We will more speciﬁcally focus on GFTs with gauge invariance
condition, and explain (including an unpublished heuristic argument) in which sense so-called
colored GFTs [50] – which are a modern versions of the simplicial GFTs brieﬂy mentioned before
– can be embedded in a larger and ﬂexible enough class of models. These theories are known as
tensorial GFTs and are the main focus of the rest of the review.

2.2 Simplicial GFT models and tensorial theory space

Colored tensor models [55] and GFTs were introduced in 2009 by Gurau [50] and have since then
overcome two important caveats of older simplicial constructions [24, 66]: 1) in dimension d ≥ 3,
the combinatorial data of Feynman diagrams failed to unambiguously encode the combinatorial
structure and topology of the simplicial complexes generated in perturbative expansion; 2) no
organization principle for the perturbation expansion – such as an analogue of the celebrated
1/N expansion of matrix models – could be deﬁned, which remained highly formal and of little
practical interest. We therefore decided to gloss over the original simplicial models and work
instead with colored structures from the outset.

Within the general GFT set-up we have described, the deﬁnition of a colored GFT model in
d dimensions requires the introduction of d auxiliary complex GFT ﬁelds {ϕc|c = 1, . . . , d}, with

6

S. Carrozza

covariance ¯CΛ not necessarily identical to CΛ. The label c is called color, and we conventionally
associate the color 0 to the original ﬁeld ϕ ≡ ϕ0. The action SΛ is then implicitly deﬁned by:

exp (−SΛ[ϕ, ϕ]) =(cid:90) [
d(cid:89)c=1

dµ ¯CΛ(ϕc, ϕc)] exp(cid:16)−Scol

where the colored GFT action is

Scol

Λ [ϕ0, ϕ0; ϕc, ϕc] = λ(Λ)(cid:90) [ (cid:89)0≤(cid:96)<(cid:96)(cid:48)≤d

dg(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)]

d(cid:89)(cid:96)=0

Λ [ϕ, ϕ; ϕc, ϕc](cid:17) ,
ϕ(cid:96)(g(cid:96)) + ¯λ(Λ)(cid:90) [ (cid:89)0≤(cid:96)<(cid:96)(cid:48)≤d

(10)

dg(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48)]

d(cid:89)(cid:96)=0

ϕ(cid:96)(g(cid:96)) (11)

and we have used the convention that g(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48) = g(cid:96)(cid:48)(cid:96) together with the notation

g(cid:96) = (g(cid:96)(cid:96)−1, . . . , g(cid:96)0, g(cid:96)d, . . . , g(cid:96)(cid:96)+1) .

(12)

The two interactions are interpreted as pairwise gluings of (d + 1) (d − 1)-simplices along (d −
1)-subsimplices, following to the shape of a d-simplex. This pattern of contractions can be
pictorially represented by white (resp. black) nodes where (d + 1) colored half-edges meet as in
Figure 1. An half-edge of color (cid:96) is associated to a GFT ﬁeld ϕ(cid:96) (resp. ϕ(cid:96)), and is dual to a

(d− 1)-simplex of color (cid:96). A pair of edges of colors (cid:96) and (cid:96)(cid:48) in turn encodes the integral over the
variable g(cid:96)(cid:96)(cid:48) in formula (11); it is interpreted as a pairwise gluing of two dual (d − 1)-simplices
along a (d − 2)-subsimplex. In Figure 2, we provide an equivalent stranded representation of
the pattern of contractions associated to the 3d vertices, and illustrate how the dual tetrahedra
can be reconstructed from the colored vertices: half-lines are dual to triangles, which are glued
pairwise along their boundary edges.

Figure 1. Colored interaction vertices in dimension d = 3 (left) and d = 4 (right).

Figure 2. Stranded representation of the interactions in dimension d = 3 (left) and dual simplicial
picture (right). Colors of boundary triangles are left implicit, except for green ones.

Note that half-lines associated to ﬁelds ϕ and ϕ (with color 0) are dashed. This is to emphasize
that the latter are the true dynamical variables of the theory; for instance, in equation (2) we
remark that only them ave been coupled to external sources. The colored ﬁelds ϕc for c = 1, . . . , d
can therefore be (formally) integrated out. This yields eﬀective interactions Ib parametrized by

012313200011223344010203021202321310131232313001230123Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

7

d-colored graphs b involving colors c = 1 to d. These graphs are also called bubbles in the
literature (e.g. in [49, 19]; examples in d = 3 are provided in Figure 3. The coupling constant
tb is moreover proportional to4 (λ¯λ)Nb/2, with Nb the number of nodes in the colored graph b.

Figure 3. Bubble interactions up to order 6 in d = 3.

The precise form of the eﬀective interaction Ib highly depends on the auxiliary covariance ¯CΛ

and is in general quite involved. Let us discuss the special and simple situation in which

CΛ(g; g

(cid:48)

) =

δΛ(g(cid:96)g

(cid:48)-1
(cid:96) ) ,

d(cid:89)(cid:96)=1

(13)

where δΛ is a regularized version of the delta function on G. More precisely, we assume that Λ
is a sharp cut-oﬀ in the Fourier expansion of δ5. Under this condition, it can be shown that the
eﬀective Ib are nothing but tensor invariants (up to constant factors and powers of the cut-oﬀ Λ
that we ignore for the moment). We refer the reader to [49], in which tensor invariants were ﬁrst
introduced and where their derivation is described in greater details. Following the literature
and by analogy with matrix models, we will use in this case a trace notation Ib ≡ Trb. A
monomial Trb(ϕ, ϕ) is uniquely determined by its d-colored bubble b, under the following rules:

• a white (resp. black) node of b is associated to a ﬁeld ϕ (resp. ϕ);
• an edge of color (cid:96) represents a convolution of two ﬁeld variables, both appearing in the (cid:96)th

copy of the group G.

An example is provided in Figure 4. In this simpliﬁed context, tensor invariant interactions gen-
erate an inﬁnite dimensional GFT theory space in which colored simplicial models are embedded
as a one-parameter family of models. Bubble interactions therefore provide a generalized notion
of locality of the type we have been arguing for. Topologically, they represent elementary but
non-simplicial cells with triangulated boundaries. A suggestive 3d example is given in Figure 56.
Note however that bubbles may also be dual to topologically singular elementary cells, such as
e.g. a topological cone over a non–spherical (d − 1)-dimensional manifold. This is precisely the
case for the rightmost bubble of Figure 3, which is dual to a topological cone over the 2-torus.
The relevance of the tensorial theory space for GFT renormalization has been ﬁrst pointed
out in a seminal paper of Ben Geloun and Rivasseau [13], who proved renormalizability of a
tensorial GFT without gauge invariance condition. This is a context in which the argument we
have just presented is applicable, and the relation between tensor invariant models and colored

4The proportionality factor depends on the combinatorial structure of the bubbles alone, not on the other

ingredients of the model.

5For instance, when G = SU(2), one may deﬁne:

(cid:88)

j∈ N

2

|j(j+1)≤Λ2

δΛ(g) :=

(2j + 1)χj(g) ,

(14)

where χj are the characters of SU(2).

6Note that the boundary edges of the double pyramid on the right can be canonically colored. This illustrates
it allows to canonically identify all subsimplices in the

one of the main advantages of the colored structure:
complex, and therefore faithfully encode its topology. See e.g. [38, 55]

8

S. Carrozza

Figure 4. A four-valent 3d bubble and its corresponding tensor invariant.

Figure 5. A 3d bubble of valency 8 dual to a double pyramid, which can equivalently be viewed as a
gluing of 8 colored tetrahedra.

simplicial ones is therefore clear. The situation is more ambiguous as soon as one introduces
gauge invariance or other quantum gravity ingredients. In this case one can make two a priori
inequivalent choices.

1. The ﬁrst possibility is to choose the covariances CΛ and ¯CΛ equal. Both are in particular
degenerate, and the eﬀective interactions Ib become quite complicated and hard to manip-
ulate in concrete calculations. From the point of view of known spin foam models, which
are derived from simplicial discretizations of formal quantum gravity path–integrals, this
is however the most natural construction.

2. The second possibility is to assume, as we have done before, that the auxiliary colored
ﬁelds ϕc have trivial covariance ¯CΛ. One may argue in this case that imposing suitable
spin foam constraints on the remaining dynamical ﬁeld ϕ will again lead to legitimate
discrete gravity path–integrals, however based on non–simplicial cellular complexes.

Which of these two alternatives is the most appropriate remains an open question, and we will
not attempt to resolve it in the present article. We will stick to the second alternative, as GFT
renormalization has only been substantially explored in this framework. But before that, we
outline an additional heuristic calculation which provides a better grasp of the relation between
the two approaches, at least in the context of 3d Euclidean quantum gravity.

2.3 Large N expansion and extended tensorial theory space: heuristic deriva-

tion

The colored Boulatov model (studied in e.g. [50, 51, 5, 30, 4]) is a GFT for Euclidean quantum
gravity in space–time dimension d = 3. The group G is therefore taken as the (universal covering)
of the local symmetry group of Euclidean space: G = SU(2). The cut-oﬀ propagator may be
deﬁned as

CN (g1, g2, g3; g

(cid:48)
1, g

(cid:48)
2, g

(cid:48)

3) =(cid:90)SU(2)

dh

3(cid:89)(cid:96)=1

K1/N 2(g(cid:96)hg

(cid:48)-1
(cid:96) ) −→N→+∞ P(g1, g2, g3; g

(cid:48)
1, g

(cid:48)
2, g

(cid:48)
3) ,

(15)

ϕ112233b=Trb(ϕ,ϕ)=R[dgi]6ϕ(g1,g2,g3)ϕ(g1,g2,g4)×ϕ(g5,g6,g3)ϕ(g5,g6,g4)ϕϕϕFlowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

9

where Kα is the heat–kernel on SU(2) at time α7, and we denote the cut-oﬀ by N instead of Λ in
reference to the original literature [51, 54, 52]. The auxiliary covariances appearing in formula
(10) are furthermore taken equal to the propagator: ¯CN = CN . In [51] Gurau showed that,
under the assumption that the coupling constant asymptotically behaves like

λ(N ) ∼N→+∞

λ0

N 3/2

(17)

for some ﬁxed λ0, the colored Boulatov model admits a 1/N -expansion.
partition function can be expanded as

In particular, the

ZN = N 6 Z0(λ0¯λ0) + N 3 Z1(λ0¯λ0) + O(1) ,

(18)

where Z0 and Z1 sum over speciﬁc inﬁnite families of Feynman diagrams representing spherical
manifolds8. What is of crucial interest for us is that singular topologies, and hence singular
eﬀective interactions, are all convergent. This clear separation between the ﬁrst leading con-
tributions in N and the ﬁrst topologically singular spin foam structures, already established in
[51], was more systematically investigated in [30, 31] by means of diﬀerent methods9. Singular
topologies having no natural space–time interpretation, this is a welcomed property of the 1/N
expansion.

Now, this means that we can truncate the eﬀective action deﬁned in equation (10) to non–
singular bubbles without aﬀecting Z0 and Z1. By deﬁnition, such non–singular bubbles have
moreover spherical boundaries, which implies that they lead to bulk amplitudes which are peaked
around trivial holonomies. Let us give an illustration of what this means by focusing on the
simplest possible bubble: the one with 2 nodes shown on the leftmost side of Figure 3. It can
be shown that it generates a term in the action SN of the form

I2(ϕ, ϕ) =(cid:90) dgdg

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

ϕ(g)ϕ(g

)(cid:90) [dhi]3K1/N 2(h1h-1

2 )K1/N 2(h1h-1

3 )K1/N 2(h2h-1
3 )

K1/N 2(gihig

(cid:48)-1
i ) .

(19)

×

3(cid:89)i=1

Using the gauge invariant condition (7), one is free to translate the gi variables by (say) h-1
3 . This
reduces the hi dependence of the last line to a dependence in h-1
3 h2. Performing the
change of variables h1 → h3h1 and h1 → h3h2, we hence obtain an integral which is completely
independent of h3. By normalization of the Haar measure, the new expression of I2 is thus

3 h1 and h-1

I2(ϕ, ϕ) =(cid:90) dgdg

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

ϕ(g)ϕ(g

)(cid:90) dh1dh2K1/N 2(h1h-1

× K1/N 2(g1h1g

2 )K1/N 2(h1)K1/N 2(h2)
(cid:48)-1
1 )K1/N 2(g2h2g

(cid:48)-1
2 )K1/N 2(g3g

(cid:48)-1
3 ) .

(20)

This procedure is nothing else than a gauge ﬁxing and is quite general: there is a gauge freedom
associated to each node in the bubble, which allows to trivialize the holonomies along a tree of

7This deﬁnes a regularization of the delta function in which high spin representations are smoothly cut-oﬀ:

Kα(g) =

−αj(j+1)(2j + 1)χj(g) .
e

(16)

(cid:88)

j∈ N

2

8The family summed over by Z0 – the melonic graphs – has been extensively studied in tensor models (see
e.g. [18, 55, 56] as well as in the present context [4]. The partition function Z1 has as far as we know not been
studied in more detail.
9In particular, tighter bounds were derived, showing that singular topologies are suppressed in at least N 3(1−S),
where S is the number of singular bubbles. A similar result was shown to hold also in the case of the 4d colored
Ooguri model [31].

10

S. Carrozza

colored edges [42]. Now, in the large N limit, one realizes that: the heat-kernels appearing in
the ﬁrst line of equation (20) render the integrand sharply peaked around h1 = h2 = 1l; together
with the second line, this implies that the integrand is also sharply peaked around gi = g(cid:48)
i. This
simple fact entitles us to expand ϕ(g(cid:48)) in Taylor expansion around g:

d

dt(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t=0

d2

dt2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t=0

(cid:48)

ϕ(g

) = ϕ(g) +

ϕ(g(t)) +

1
2

ϕ(g(t)) + . . .

(21)

where g(cid:48)(t) is an aﬃnely parametrized geodesic from g to g(cid:48) in SU(2)3. This reduces I2 to an
inﬁnite sum over tensor invariant contractions of the ﬁelds and their derivatives. More precisely,
this procedure can only generate SU(2)-invariant diﬀerential operators acting on each copy of
SU(2) and one therefore obtains:

I2(ϕ, ϕ) = a(Λ)(cid:90) dg ϕ(g)ϕ(g) + b(Λ)(cid:90) dg ϕ(g)(cid:32)−

∆(cid:96)(cid:33) ϕ(g) + . . .

3(cid:88)(cid:96)=1

(22)

where ∆(cid:96) is the Laplace operator acting on the (cid:96)th copy of SU(2), and a(Λ), b(Λ) are computable
functions. Higher order term will involve invariant diﬀerential operators of arbitrary order.

The previous argument can be applied in full generality. Any eﬀective vertex Ib associated to
a non-singular bubble b can be expanded into tensor invariant contractions of the ﬁelds and their
derivatives. Moreover, only invariant diﬀerential operators are allowed. By picking up a basis of
such operators, one can thus deﬁne a generalized space of bubbles B ⊃ B labelling generalized
trace invariants Trb(ϕ, ϕ). The original bubble interactions Trb(ϕ, ϕ) (with b ∈ B) therefore
generate a small subset of generalized tensor invariants, those which do not involve any non–
trivial diﬀerential operator. What our analysis proves is that, up to convergent and topologically
singular contributions in the 1/N expansion (18), the colored Boulatov model generates a one-
parameter family of eﬀective actions in the space of generalized tensor invariants. They therefore
provide a suitable GFT theory space for the implementation of the ﬁrst strategy proposed at the
end of the previous subsection, and also shows that the second approach is actually a truncation
of the ﬁrst.

Finally, we point out that the same argument can be implemented for the colored Ooguri
model, and leads to the deﬁnition of generalized tensor invariant interactions for Spin(4) in
dimension 4. It remains however to understand how this heuristic calculation may be gener-
alized to 4d models with simplicity constraints, which have not yet been shown to admit 1/N
expansions.

3 Perturbatively renormalizable TGFTs with closure constraint

3.1 A general class of models: local ’potential’ approximation

We are now ready to introduce the class of TGFTs with gauge invariant condition, as deﬁned
in the literature. We are still in the general set-up introduced at the beginning of the preceding
section. Namely, we consider a complex GFT ﬁeld ϕ over d ≥ 3 copies of a compact Lie group
G. Its free 2-point function is assumed to be of the form

CΛ(g; g

(cid:48)

) =(cid:90) +∞

1/Λ2

dα(cid:90)G

dh

d(cid:89)(cid:96)=1

Kα(g(cid:96)hg

(cid:48)-1
(cid:96) ) ,

(23)

which is a regulated version of the formal operator C = P(cid:16)−(cid:80)d

P, Kα and ∆(cid:96) being
respectively heat-kernels and Laplace operators on G. Equation (23) is known as the Schwinger

(cid:96)=1 ∆(cid:96)(cid:17)−1

Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

11

representation of the propagator, and α is accordingly called a Schwinger parameter. As for the
interaction action SΛ, we assume that it is generated by tensor invariants10:

SΛ[ϕ, ϕ] =(cid:88)b∈B

tb(Λ) Trb[ϕ, ϕ] .

(24)

Furthermore, since color labels have been introduced as purely auxiliary objects, we will also
assume that the action is invariant under permutations of the colors. This implies speciﬁc
dependences between some of the coupling constants tb appearing in equation (24).

From the point of view of the extended GFT space described at the end of the last section,
this is the exact analogue of a local potential approximation in ordinary quantum ﬁeld theory.
Indeed, locality is here embodied by tensor invariance, which entitles us to call the action SΛ
a local potential11. The only non–local terms are restricted to the ﬁrst non–trivial diﬀerential
operators appearing in the Taylor expansion of the most general propagator (see equation (22)):
the Laplace operators ∆(cid:96).

In order to legitimize the class of TGFTs thus deﬁned as a perfectly honest arena for renor-
malization, we need to comment a bit more on the notion of scale in this context. For deﬁ-
niteness, let us specialize to G = SU(2), which is the most relevant example as far as quantum
gravity is concerned. The heat–kernel regularization we have introduced amounts to a smooth
regularization of the quantity

p2 =

d(cid:88)(cid:96)=1

j(cid:96)(j(cid:96) + 1) ,

(25)

where {j(cid:96)} are the spin labels associated to the harmonic expansion of the ﬁelds. Modes asso-
ciated to p ≥ Λ are exponentially suppressed, while the theory is essentially untouched at small
p. By analogy with ordinary ﬁeld theories, we may call p momentum. The fact that we need
to regularize large momenta is dictated by the theory itself: this region of the GFT state space
is where most of the degrees of freedom lie, and where they produce divergences. Therefore
the renormalization group may only ﬂow from large to small cut-oﬀ12. Because of that, and by
analogy with high energy particle physics, it is conventional in the TGFT literature to dub large
(resp. small) momenta ’ultraviolet’ (resp. ’infrared’); we will stick to this nomenclature.

The purpose of our renormalization programme may now be explicitly stated: the goal is to
develop the necessarily tools for determining the functional dependence of the coupling constants
tb(Λ), under the condition that the infrared sector of the GFT is kept ﬁxed. We will in particular
aim at a complete classiﬁcation of perturbatively renormalizable models. This programme is
interesting per se, in the sense that it proposes to extend the scope of renormalization theory
to quantum ﬁeld theories with exotic notions of locality. From a quantum gravity perspective
its relevance is on the other hand conditioned by a key conjecture: that it is possible to assume
that there is a large separation of scales between the cut-oﬀ and the support of interesting 3d
Euclidean quantum gravity states. It is reassuring to see that this hypothesis is at least su-
perﬁcially consistent. Given that spins label the eigenvalues of the LQG length operator in 3d
and that small spins are associated to small lengths, we may for example expect that smooth
quantum gravity states can be approximated by (large superpositions of) spin–networks com-
prising a large number of nodes and edges (or, equivalently, dual triangles and dual edges), but

10Note that in this review we will always include mass terms in the action rather than the covariance, but the

opposite convention is sometimes found in the literature.

11Even though we cannot deﬁne a potential function, due to the combinatorially non–trivial nature of tensorial

locality.

12We remind the reader that the renormalization group is actually not a group: it has a fundamentally directed

character since its whole purpose is to erase (irrelevant) physical information.

12

S. Carrozza

Figure 6. Example of TGFT Feynman graph with N = 4, V = 4 and L = 9 in 3d (left). The amplitude
is reconstructed from the drawing by means of the Feynman rules given on the right-hand-side.

only bounded spins. This also suggests that the study of these smooth quantum gravity states
will necessitate a non–perturbative treatment of the GFT renormalization group13. The present
section is devoted entirely to perturbative questions, while some non–perturbative aspects will
be discussed in the following one.

3.2 Power–counting theorem and classiﬁcation of models

We now outline the power–counting arguments leading to the full classiﬁcation of renormalizable
TGFTs with closure constraint. A very nice feature of TGFTs is that they are amenable to
general multiscale methods developed in the context of constructive ﬁeld theory [76], allowing
rigorous proofs of renormalizability at all orders.

The Feynman amplitudes of these models are labelled by (d + 1)-colored graphs in which
only dashed (or, equivalently, color-0) lines may be open. The d-colored connected components
without dashed lines, in other words the bubbles, are the interaction vertices, while dashed
lines are propagators. Given a Feyman graph G, we will denote by L(G), V (G) and N (G) its
set of (internal) dashed lines, bubble vertices and external legs14. Accordingly, the amplitude
associated to a graph G is determined by the following Feynman rules: each node is associated
to an integration over Gd; each colored line internal to a bubble represents a delta function on
G; and ﬁnally, dashed lines must be replace by kernels of CΛ. We provide a 3d example in Figure
6.

The multiscale analysis15 relies on a discrete slicing of the propagator:

CΛ = CM ρ = (cid:88)i∈N|i≤ρ

Ci ,

where

dh

1

C0 :=(cid:90) +∞
dα(cid:90)G
∀i ≥ 1 , Ci :=(cid:90) M 2(i−1)
dα(cid:90)G

M−2i

d(cid:89)(cid:96)=1

dh

Kα(g(cid:96)hg

(cid:48)-1
(cid:96) ) ,

Kα(g(cid:96)hg

(cid:48)-1
(cid:96) ) .

d(cid:89)(cid:96)=1

(26)

(27)

(28)

13Another related observation is that quantum gravity may require the inclusion of diﬀerential operators of

arbitrary orders, as found in the generalized tensor invariant space evoked previously.

14As is customary in the literature, we will allow ourselves to use the same notation for the cardinals of these

sets.

15In the present context, see for instance [33, 32, 81, 25]. For a more general and in-depth discussion in local

ﬁeld theory, [76] is recommended.

g1g2g3=Rdg1dg2dg3...=δ(g˜g−1)g˜gg1˜g1g2g3˜g3˜g2=CΛ(g1,g2,g3;˜g1,˜g2,˜g3)Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

13

M > 1 is a ﬁxed but arbitrary slicing parameter and we have assumed that the UV cut-oﬀ is
of the form Λ = M ρ with ρ ∈ N. Each covariance Ci is then essentially responsible for the
propagation of the modes with M i−1 (cid:46) p (cid:46) M i. This procedure induces a decomposition of
Feynman amplitudes
AG,µ ,

(29)

AG =(cid:88)µ

according to scale attributions µ := {il ∈ N , l ∈ L(G)}: AG,µ is the amplitude in which each
propagator line l with scale index i is interpreted as a propagator Ci. The multiscale strategy
then consists in looking for estimates of each of the amplitudes AG,µ separately, rather than of
the full amplitude AG. The scale attributions µ have the considerable advantage that they allow
to optimize the naive bounds one would derive for AG, and as a consequence to more precisely
understand the origin of the divergences. For instance, given a graph G with scale attribution
µ, one can realize that divergences may only be generated by high subgraphs: these are deﬁned
as subgraphs H ⊂ G which have internal scales higher than the scales of their external legs. In
order to implement a renormalization procedure, one ﬁrst and foremost needs to understand
the structure of divergent high subgraphs, and study their behaviour in the limit in which the
separation of scales between internal lines and external legs is large.

Without going too much into the details, a general Abelian power–counting theorem [11, 32,
81] can be derived which, when G is commutative, provides a combinatorial characterization of
the divergent subgraphs. When G is non-Abelian, further subtleties enter the picture because,
although the Abelian power–counting still holds as a bound [21, 22, 23], it is not necessarily
optimal in this case. However, since it turns out a posteriori that all the divergent graphs
encountered in TGFTs do saturate the Abelian bounds16, we will simply ignore this subtlety,
and the interested reader is referred to [32, 25] for more details.

Before introducing the notion of degree of divergence, we need to deﬁne the very central
notion of face. In the present context, a face f of a graph G is deﬁned as a maximal bicolored
path in G, with the restriction that one of the two colors must be 0. We will say that a line
l ∈ L(G) pertains to f (l ∈ f ) if it coincides with one of the dashed lines of the path. Faces can
furthermore be open (or, equivalently, external ) or closed (or, equivalently, internal ), depending
on whether they are connected to external legs of G or not. We will denote by F (G) (resp.
Fext(G)) the set of closed (resp. open) faces of G. Conventionally, we may also orient dashed
lines positively from white to black nodes, and orient the faces accordingly. This allows to
introduce an adjacency matrix εlf , of size L × F and with only 0 or 1 entries: εlf = 1 if
l ∈ f , and εlf = 0 otherwise. Faces are particularly important because, given the form of the
propagator and the Feynman rules, the integrand of an amplitude factorizes over its faces. More
precisely, each closed face f yields a factor

K(cid:80)

l∈f

αl−→(cid:89)l∈f

hl ,

(30)

where αl and hl are respectively the Schwinger parameter and holonomy associated to the
propagator line l, and the product over holonomies is taken accordingly to the orientation of f .
See Figure 7 for an example.
Proposition 1. A (non-vacuum) graph G is divergent if and only if

ω(G) := −2L(G) + D (F (G) − R(G)) ≥ 0 ,

(31)
where R(G) is the rank of the adjacency matrix εlf of G, and D is the dimension of G. The
quantity ω is called degree of divergence.

16This is due to the fact that the associated 2-complexes are simply connected, see again [21, 22, 23].

14

S. Carrozza

Figure 7. An internal face of color 1 and length 3, and its associated amplitude integrand.

The degree of divergence captures the UV asymptotic behaviour of the amplitudes. For a
single–slice amplitude at scale i (i.e. µ = {i(cid:96) = i , l ∈ L(G)}), one can show that AG,µ has an
exponential scaling of the form M ω(G)i when i → +∞17. This corresponds to the situation in
which G contains a single high subgraph – itself. The fact that the divergences are in this case
essentially controlled by the combinatorial quantity (F − R) was already proven in [11], though
in a slightly diﬀerent context. The analysis of more general scale attributions is based on a
step-by-step estimation of the contributions of high subgraphs, from higher to smaller scales,
and was ﬁrst detailed in [32, 81]. We will not need to go into such details here, which are only
relevant for the full rigorous proof of renormalizability. We only point out that the concept of
high subgraphs allows a very natural treatment of overlapping divergences, which otherwise lead
to somewhat challenging combinatorial problems.

Once one understands how Feynman amplitudes diverge in the UV, one may try to devise
simple criteria of renormalizability, for instance in terms of the dimensions d (space–time) and D
(group). To this eﬀect, it is important to ﬁnd a more practical expression of the divergence de-
gree, which puts combinatorial quantities such as the number of external legs N to the forefront.
The presence of the rank R, which is a direct consequence of the gauge invariance condition we
imposed on the ﬁelds, makes it more involved than in TGFTs without this ingredient. Invoking
elementary combinatorial relations, one easily proves that:

ω = D(d − 2) −

D(d − 2) − 2

2

N + (cid:88)k∈N∗

[(D(d − 2) − 2) k − D(d − 2)] n2k + Dρ ,

(32)

where N is the number of external legs and n2k the number of bubbles of valency k. The whole
non-trivial dependence in the rank has been included in the combinatorial quantity

ρ := F − R − (d − 2) (L − V + 1) .

(33)

The key missing ingredient leading to a general classiﬁcation of models is a bound on ρ. The
following proposition, which was ﬁrst derived in [32], serves this purpose.

Proposition 2. Let G be a non-vacuum graph. Then:

ρ(G) ≤ 0 ,

(34)

and ρ(G) = 0 if and only if G is a melonic graph.
We refer the reader to e.g. [14, 32] for a more precise combinatorial characterization of melonic
graphs in this context. As illustrated in Figure 8, melonic graphs tend to maximize the number
of internal faces. Proposition 2 can alternatively be taken as a deﬁnition of melonic graphs. We

17When ω(G) = 0 the divergences are logarithmic.

f111α1,h1α3,h3α2,h2←→Kα1+α2+α3(h1h2h3)Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

15

Figure 8. Melonic (right) and non–melonic (left) 4-point graphs in d = 3. F = 2 for the former and
only 1 for the latter.

only mention two important properties. First, melonic graphs are associated to and generated
by a speciﬁc subset of bubbles, which are accordingly called melonic bubbles. In Figure 3, all
bubbles are melonic except for the rightmost one, showing that in dimension d = 3 the ﬁrst
non-trivial interactions are necessarily melonic. Second, melonic graphs and melonic bubbles
have both trivial topology: in dimension d they represent d-balls, and are therefore topologically
suitable building blocks of (d + 1)-dimensional space–time.

Proposition 2 shows that melonic bubbles and melonic graphs lead to the most severe di-
vergences. Following the literature, we now proceed with a classiﬁcation of what we may call
melonic models. We deﬁne them as TGFTs which: 1) include melonic interactions; and 2)
are perturbatively consistent under renormalization. We emphasize that the ﬁrst hypothesis is
non–trivial, and is somewhat implicitly assumed in the literature. We will come back to this
interesting aspect below.

Power–counting renormalizability requires the degree of divergence to be bounded from above.
Moreover, in the presence of divergences, ω should decrease with the number of external legs,
in such a way that only ﬁnitely many n-point functions need to be renormalized. From these
conditions alone, one can derive a full classiﬁcation of melonic models allowed by the power–
counting analysis, in terms of the dimensions d and D, and the maximal valency vmax of the
renormalizable bubbles. The complete list, established in [32]18, is reported in Table 1. Models
of type A to E are candidate just-renormalizable GFTs, and are in principle the most inter-
esting ones: they have inﬁnitely many divergent Feynman amplitudes, which leads to universal
properties of the ﬂows. Models of type F and G are on the other hand super-renormalizable,
which means that their divergences are generated by a ﬁnite family of single–vertex graphs (also
known as tadpoles). Finally, models of type H are ﬁnite and are therefore not very interesting
from the point of view of renormalization: the renormalization group is in this case unable to
provide a physical hierarchy for the amplitudes and interactions, which may well all contribute
with roughly the same intensity.

A striking feature of this classiﬁcation is that the only combination of d and D which is
compatible with a quantum space–time interpretation of the amplitudes is d = D = 3. Indeed,
only in this case is the would-be space–time dimension d consistent with the dimension D of the
local symmetry group G. This is quite remarkable: we have ﬁrst motivated the general class of
TGFTs with gauge invariance condition from Euclidean quantum gravity in three dimensions,
and reciprocally, pure quantum ﬁeld theory arguments allow us to in a sense derive dimension
3 as the only consistent one.
This prompted an in-depth study of the d = 3 model with G = SU(2), which was proven renor-
malizable at all orders in [32]. Its ﬂow equations were then studied in greater details in [26]. Note
that, because of the subtleties associated to non–Abelian amplitudes, this particular example
required extra care, which we are glossing over in this review. Still in d = 3, a renormalizable
model of type B based on the group SU(2) × U(1) has been considered in [27]. Examples of
18The classiﬁcation of [32] includes only just-renormalizable models, we have added super-renormalizable and

ﬁnite models for completeness.

ρ=−1ρ=016

S. Carrozza

Type

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H

d D
3
3
4
3
2
4
5
1
1
6
2
3
1
4
3
1

vmax

ω

6
4
4
6
4

arbitrary
arbitrary
arbitrary

3 − N/2 − 2n2 − n4 + 3ρ

4 − N − 2n2 + 4ρ
4 − N − 2n2 + 2ρ
4 − N − 2n2 + ρ

3 − N/2 − 2n2 − n4 + ρ

2 − 2V
2 − 2V

1 − L − V < 0

Explicit examples
G = SU(2) [32, 26]
G = SU(2) × U(1) [27]

–

G = U(1) [81, 72]

G = U(1) [81, 72, 16]

–

G = U(1) [33, 61]

G = U(1) [62]

Table 1. List of power-counting renormalizable melonic models.

Abelian U(1) models of type D and E were proposed in [81] and also proven renormalizable at
all orders. Interestingly, and as is clearly allowed by the power–counting arguments we have
reviewed, the ϕ6 model of type D requires the inclusion of a non–melonic and non-connected
interaction of the form (ϕ · ϕ)2, sometimes called ”anomalous”. The model of type E, which
according to our power–counting arguments might also have necessitated the inclusion of non–
melonic bubbles19, remains consistent with only melonic bubbles included20. The beta functions
of these two models were then studied in [72], and the functional renormalization group of the
model of type D was investigated in [16].
Abelian super-renormalizable models of type G actually provided the ﬁrst examples of renor-
malizable TGFTs with gauge invariance [33]. Since only ﬁnitely many divergent graphs are
generated in this case, renormalization could be implemented by means of a generalization of
the standard Wick ordering prescription. Constructive aspects of a ϕ4 model of this type, as
well as of a ﬁnite model of type H, were more recently studied in [62, 61]. This led in both cases
to a Borel resummation of the perturbative expansion, thus proving its analytical existence. It is
a very interesting step towards a full non–perturbative deﬁnition of just–renormalizable TGFTs
with closure constraint, including the more physically relevant d = 3 and G = SU(2) situation.
Examples of renormalizable models of type C and F have not been explicitly exhibited in the
literature. There is however no doubt that such example exists, for instance with the group
G = U(1)2. Indeed, the arguments and tools from [33] and [81] are directly applicable to this
Abelian group.
In particular, the analysis of non-melonic graphs proposed in [81] allows to
demonstrate that melonic bubbles alone lead to a consistent model in situation C. We further
conjecture that it is also possible to consistently include ϕ4 necklace bubbles [17] in this context,
which will generate divergent but non-melonic 2-point graphs (with ρ = −1). See Figure 9.

3.3 Renormalization, subtraction schemes and contractible graphs

Once power–counting renormalizability has been checked, several standard quantum ﬁeld theory
techniques may be applied to prove full-ﬂedged renormalizability. The main physical idea is to
re-express the Feynman expansion in terms of new physically meaningful perturbative param-
eters. The bare coupling constants are indeed associated to processes occurring at arbitrarily
large energies, and have therefore no empirical content. Instead, one should parametrize the
theory with the values of n-point functions at an arbitrarily chosen but physically accessible low
energy scale. In this new expansion, Feynman amplitudes converge, and the divergences of the
bare amplitudes are interpreted as spurious eﬀects resulting from a misplaced parametrization

19Graphs with ρ = −1 or −2 might in principle still lead to divergences.
20Note that we are not claiming that non–melonic bubbles cannot be consistently included, only that the model
is consistent without them. The construction of non–melonic phases remains a largely unexplored and interesting
research direction.

Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

17

Figure 9. Non-melonic 2-point graph with ρ = −1 in d = 4. Its single vertex is a necklace bubble,
which suggests that such an interaction may consistently be included in a TGFT model of type C. The
graph has a degree ω = 0 and is therefore logarithmically divergent in this case.

of the ﬁeld theory.
Diﬀerent renormalization prescriptions may be used, leading to slightly diﬀerent (but equivalent)
deﬁnitions of renormalized quantities. One can for example rely on the celebrated Bogoliubov-
Parasiuk-Hepp-Zimmermann (BPHZ) scheme, which amounts to using p2 = 0 as a reference
energy scale. This standard textbook procedure is rather simple at ﬁrst loop orders, but may
appear somewhat mysterious when it comes to overlapping divergences21. The eﬀective expan-
sion, based on multiscale methods, is more in the spirit of Wilson’s brilliant reformulation of
renormalization. It consists in a step-by-step recursive deﬁnition of eﬀective coupling constants
tb,i, which measure the amplitudes of physical processes associated to the index scale i. The
contributions of divergent graphs at a given scale are reabsorbed into the coupling constants at
lower scales, resulting in a discrete renormalization group ﬂow from higher to lower scales:

tb,i−1 − tb,i = βi({tb(cid:48),j|i ≤ j ≤ ρ}) .

(35)

The n-point functions may then be expressed as formal multi-series in the tb,i’s, with convergent
coeﬃcients in the limit ρ → +∞. Moreover, the eﬀective expansion provides a new perspective
on the more standard renormalized BPHZ expansion: at ﬁxed multiscale parameter µ (29),
divergent graphs can simply not overlap, and this simple realization greatly clariﬁes the reason
why the BPHZ procedure converges at all orders in perturbation theory. We refer the reader
to [76] for a detailed discussion of both the BPHZ expansion and the eﬀective expansion in the
context of local scalar ﬁeld theories.

Both eﬀective and renormalized expansions have been successfully generalized and applied
to TGFTs with gauge invariance condition [33, 32, 81]. Reviewing these constructions in detail
would take us too far into technicalities, we therefore only expose the core argument explaining
why these techniques can be applied at all. In ordinary quantum ﬁeld theory, renormalization re-
lies on the key realization that high energy processes look essentially local (as seen by an observer
operating at much lower energy scales). This is true irrespectively of how complicated these high
energy processes are, and is the main reason why the contributions of high divergent subgraphs
at a given scale can always be absorbed into redeﬁnitions of the coupling constants at lower
momenta. Possibly severe complications arise in our TGFT context: ﬁrst, the non–standard
notion of locality encapsulated in tensor invariant interactions renders the analysis obviously
more intricate; second, and more importantly, the main combinatorial building blocks of the
amplitudes generated by TGFTs with closure constraint are the faces, which are intrinsically
non–local objects.

For concreteness, let us consider the example of Figure 10. On the left one ﬁnds a typical
eﬀective contribution to the 4-point function generated by a melonic graph in 3d. In terms of

21We remind the reader that, given a graph G, two divergent subgraphs H1,H2 ∈ G are said to overlap if neither

of the three relations is veriﬁed: H1 ∩ H2 = ∅, H1 ⊂ H2, H2 ⊂ H1.

ρ=−118

S. Carrozza

the Schwinger parameters α1 and α2, the integrand of its amplitude is:

(cid:90) dh1dh2 [Kα1+α2(h1h2)]2(cid:90) [(cid:89)i<j

× δ(g12g-1

dgij] Kα1(g11h1g-1

31)Kα2(g-1

21h2g41)

22)δ(g13g-1

22)δ(g42g-1

32)δ(g43g-1

33) ϕ(g1) ϕ(g2) ϕ(g3) ϕ(g4)

(36)

The question is whether this expression can be approximated by an elementary tensor invariant
in the sector α1, α2 → 022. Though it is not that obvious at ﬁrst sight, the answer is yes. We
can resort to a similar line of arguments as the one which led us to the expansion (22). The
gauge symmetry associated to the amplitudes allows to gauge–ﬁx one of the two holonomies and
reduce this expression to:

(cid:90) dh [Kα1+α2(h)]2(cid:90) [(cid:89)i<j

× δ(g12g-1

dgij] Kα1(g11hg-1

31)Kα2(g-1

21g41)

22)δ(g13g-1

22)δ(g42g-1

32)δ(g43g-1

33) ϕ(g1) ϕ(g2) ϕ(g3) ϕ(g4)

(37)

It is then obvious that, in the large scale limit, h is peaked around the identity and therefore g11
(resp. g21) is identiﬁed to g31 (resp. g41). A Taylor expansion of the external variables of color
1 along their external faces then allows to approximate the amplitude by the tensor invariant
(and melonic) interaction shown on the right-hand-side of ﬁgure (10), up to a scale–dependent
constant ν(α1, α2).

Figure 10. Approximation of a tracial graph as an eﬀective trace invariant contribution plus corrections.

We say that a graph is contractible if its bulk holonomies can be trivialized in the UV region,
as illustrated in the example before23. Only if all divergent graphs are contractible can we
reabsorb UV divergences into tensor invariant eﬀective interactions. It may however happen
that disconnected eﬀective bubbles are generated in this way. A contractible graph generating
a connected tensor invariant interaction is furthermore called tracial. We now understand that
the reasons why renormalization theory meaningfully applies to all the candidate models we
have introduced in the previous subsection are that: 1) melonic graphs are tracial; and 2) all
non–melonic divergent corrections are contractible. It is important to understand that these are
highly non–trivial facts, which rely on intimate relations between the topology of colored graphs
and the scaling of their amplitudes. On the one hand, trivial topology in the bulk of divergent
graphs ensures that our tensor invariant truncation is stable under renormalization. But there
is more as, in return, this consistent renormalization scheme guarantees that no topological
singularities can be generated by radiative corrections. For instance, the rightmost interaction
of Figure 3 can be consistently set to 0 in the d = 3 model on SU(2), even though it is allowed
by our power–counting arguments [32]. Interestingly, divergent non–melonic graphs with non–
melonic bubbles such as the one shown in Figure 9 are also tracial, which suggests again that
necklace terms may sometimes be consistently included into the picture.

22We remind the reader that the Schwinger parameters should be thought of as inverse squared momenta p−2.
23This is equivalent to simple–connectedness of the 2-complex i.e. ﬂat connections are trivial up to gauge.

ϕ(g1)ϕ(g2)ϕ(g3)ϕ(g4)∼ϕ(g3)ϕ(g4)ϕ(g1)ϕ(g2)+···h1,α1h2,α2123ν(α1,α2)×Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

19

4 Renormalization group and non-trivial ﬁxed points

The purpose of this section is to illustrate some of the interesting properties of the renormal-
ization group ﬂows of TGFTs with gauge invariance condition. The goal of renormalization
group investigations is two-fold: 1) understand the fate of the renormalized coupling constants
in the deep UV, and hence determine whether the theory is consistent to arbitrary high scales
or not; 2) systematically explore the theory space away from the perturbative ﬁxed point, and
investigate in particular the existence of non–trivial ﬁxed points. The ﬁrst objective can be
ﬁrst addressed within a perturbative scheme, and is embodied in this context by the question
of asymptotic freedom.
In the unfavourable case in which asymptotic freedom does not hold
(which means that the renormalized coupling constants do not converge to 0 in the UV), there
is still the possibility that the theory may be UV completed by means of a non–perturbative UV
ﬁxed point. The second objective is central to the whole GFT approach to quantum gravity and
requires a non–perturbative treatment anyway. We therefore decide to focus on the Functional
Renormalization Group (FRG), and more precisely on the Wetterich equation, which can con-
veniently be used to address both types of questions and will presumably play an important role
in the future. The related Polchinski equation was on the other hand investigated in [58, 59, 60].

4.1 Eﬀective average action and Wetterich equation

Irrespectively of one’s preferred formulation of the renormalization group, consistent ﬂow equa-
tions may only be formulated for dimensionless coupling constants ub(Λ), which are appropriate
rescalings of tb(Λ) by powers of Λ. This important aspect may be formalized by the notion
of canonical dimension db of tensor invariant bubbles, which has been discussed at length in
[26, 16, 59] and is deﬁned (in models with closure constraint) as:

db := D(d − 2) − (D(d − 2) − 2)

Nb
2

,

where Nb is the valency of the bubble b (i.e.
coupling constants are deﬁned as

its number of nodes). Hence the dimensionless

(38)

ub(Λ) :=

tb(Λ)
Λdb

,

(39)

and b is renormalizable (or, equivalently, perturbatively relevant) if and only if db ≥ 0. In view
of the expression (32) for the divergence degree ω, it appears that the most divergent graphs
contributing to the running of tb diverge like Λdb, and yield corrections to the dimensionless
couplings ub of order 1 (as they should).

We emphasize that the notion of canonical dimension just deﬁned is well–suited to melonic
models only, as we have implicitly assumed that the most divergent contributions come from
melonic graphs. A model which would for instance contain only necklace interactions would
bring us out of the melonic world described in this review, and henceforth yield a diﬀerent
notion of canonical dimension24.

In the Wetterich–Morris [65, 83] approach to the functional renormalization group, a one–

parameter family of deformed generating functionals is introduced

ZΛ,k[J, ¯J] :=(cid:90) dµCΛ(ϕ, ϕ) exp(cid:0)−SΛ[ϕ, ϕ] − ϕ · Rk · ϕ + ¯J · ϕ + ϕ · J(cid:1) .

24This possibility is actively explored in the context of 4d models with Barrett–Crane simplicity constraints

(40)

[29].

20

S. Carrozza

The new operator Rk has the function of regularizing the ﬁeld modes below an infrared cut–oﬀ k
while leaving the high energy sector unaﬀected. This allows the introduction of a new generating
functional, the eﬀective average action Γk, which is the Legendre transform of Wk[J, ¯J] :=
ln(Zk,Λ[J, ¯J]), appropriately shifted by the 2-point counter–term ϕ· Rk · ϕ (see [16] for a detailed
discussion). Interestingly, for suitable choices of Rk, Γk can be shown to interpolate between the
bare action SΛ = ΓΛ in the UV, and the full eﬀective action Γ0 (or in other words the generating
functional of one–particle irreducible graphs) in the infrared, which we illustrated in Figure 11.

Figure 11. The eﬀective average action interpolates between the bare action in the ultraviolet and the
full eﬀective action in the infrared.

Finally, as derived in detail in [16] for TGFTs with gauge invariant condition, the eﬀective

average action veriﬁes a Wetterich equation

k∂kΓk[ϕ, ϕ] =(cid:90) dg1dg2dg3 k∂kRk(g1; g2) (Γ(2)

k + Rk)

−1(g2, g3)P(g3; g1) ,

where

Γ(2)
k [ϕ, ϕ](g; g

(cid:48)

) :=

δ2Γk

δϕ(g)δϕ(g(cid:48))

[ϕ, ϕ]

(41)

(42)

is the full interacting propagator at scale k and P is as before the projector onto gauge in-
variant ﬁelds. Equation (41) deﬁnes a formal ﬂow in an inﬁnite dimensional space of theories,
a rigorous mathematical deﬁnition of which is for the time being out of reach. The standard
procedure used in the literature to make sense of the Wetterich equation consists in choosing a
ﬁnite–dimensional ansatz for the eﬀective average action, and then systematically projecting the
formal ﬂow equation down to this ﬁnite dimensional subspace of theories. The local potential
approximation introduced in the previous section is one such possible ansatz, and yields a system
of one-loop ﬂow equations. Standard one-loop perturbative equations may be recovered with
a truncation which only includes renormalizable interactions, while the computation of higher
order loops requires the inclusion of non–renormalizable corrections to the potential. The same
method can be used in the non–perturbative regime, with the important caveat that truncations
are much harder to justify in this case. The functional renormalization group equation provides
little analytical control over error terms, and one must therefore resort to more empirical justi-
ﬁcations, based mainly on numerical tests of convergence of the truncation procedure. It turns
out at the end of the day that the FRG provides reliable and eﬀective methods for discovering
and computing the properties of non–trivial ﬁxed points in ordinary statistical ﬁeld theories (see
e.g. [2]). This is what makes them particularly precious in GFTs, as they have the potential to
unravel new and more physical phases. Applications of the FRG to TGFTs being rather recent,
only the simplest truncations have been considered so far, and the question of their reliability
remains to be further explored.

4.2 Example: perturbative treatment of rank-3 models

Let us start with a perturbative application of the formalism just introduced, which already
suggests a variety of diﬀerent properties for the renormalization group ﬂows of TGFTs. We

UVIRSΛΓkEﬀectiveaverageactionBareactiontb(Λ)=ub(Λ)Λdbtb(k)=ub(k)kdbEﬀectiveactionΓ0Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

21

restrict our attention to d = 3 renormalizable models of the type A (D = 3) and B (D = 4).
Interestingly, the situation is very similar to that of an ordinary local scalar ﬁeld, which is renor-
malizable up to quartic interactions in space–time dimension 4, and up to order 6 interactions in
dimension 3. The same statement holds for d = 3 melonic models once the space–time dimen-
sion is traded for the group dimension D. This remarkable fact allows a simple but informative
comparison between ordinary local ﬁeld theories and TGFTs.

Let us start with a model of type B and choose for instance the group SU(2) × U(1) as in
[27]. This theory is renormalizable up to order 4, therefore a natural ansatz for the eﬀective
average action is25:

Γk(ϕ, ϕ) = −Z(k) ϕ · ∆ϕ + Z(k) u2(k) k2

+ Z(k)2 u4(k)

,

(43)

where for convenience we directly represented tensor interactions by their associated colored
graphs26, and we have introduced a wave–function parameter Z(k). In this group dimension,
the mass term has canonical dimension 2 and the marginal ϕ4 interactions have as they should
dimension 0. It was shown in [27] that the perturbative renormalization group ﬂow reduces in
this truncation to



k

k

∂u2(k)

∂k

∂u4(k)

∂k

= −2 u2(k) − 3π u4(k) ,
= −2π u4(k)2 .

(44)

One notices a major diﬀerence with ordinary scalar ﬁeld theories: the derivative of the ϕ4
coupling is negative, which means that it decreases towards 0 in the ultraviolet. We therefore
obtain an asymptotically free and UV complete perturbative deﬁnition of the theory! This is
due to a quite general and remarkable property of TGFTs at large. As was ﬁrst remarked in
[9] in the context of TGFTs without gauge invariance condition, and later on generalized to
models with closure constraint in [72], wave–function counter–terms generally dominate over
vertex renormalization ones, and are ultimately responsible for changes in the signs of some of
the coeﬃcients of the ﬂow equations. A beautiful explanation based on a symmetry argument
has been furthermore proposed in [78], thereby proving that asymptotic freedom is a completely
general feature of quartic renormalizable TGFTs. In particular, Abelian models of type E are
asymptotically free, as argued for in [72].

Let us now move on to the d = 3 model with G = SU(2), which is renormalizable up to order
6 interactions. Accordingly, one can choose the following ansatz for the eﬀective average action:

Γk(ϕ, ϕ) = −Z(k) ϕ · ∆ϕ + Z(k) u2(k) k2

+ Z(k)2 u4(k) k

+ Z(k)3 u6,1(k)

+ Z(k)3 u6,2(k)

,

(45)

25We use the short-hand notation ∆ :=(cid:80)3

(cid:96)=1 ∆(cid:96).

26Note that each colored graph in this equation is to be thought of as representing the equivalent class of
bubbles with the same combinatorial structure up to permutation of the color labels. There is for instance a sum
of three distinct melonic interactions at order 4, corresponding to three inequivalent permutations of the color
labels.

22

S. Carrozza



and we note the change of dimensionality of the ϕ4 interactions with respect to the previous
situation. The one-loop perturbative ﬂow can in this case be approximated by27:

k

k

∂u2(k)

∂k ≈ −2 u2(k) − 7.5 u4(k) ,
∂u4(k)
∂k ≈ − u4(k)2 − 5.0 u6,1(k) − 10.0 u6,2(k) ,

k

k

∂u6,1(k)

∂k

∂u6,2(k)

∂k

≈ −1.4 u4(k) u6,1(k) ,
≈ −3.1 u4(k) u6,2(k) .

(46)

This is a rather complicated system of equations, but we notice again the negative signs in
the last two equations. It is therefore tempting to conjecture that, if one assumes that all the
coupling constants are positive, then the marginal constants u6,1 and u6,2 both converge to 0 in
the ultraviolet. As shown in [26]28, this is actually misleading because, given the form of the ﬂow
equations, it can be proven that u4(k) necessarily reaches negative values for large k, which has
the eﬀect of making the ϕ6 interactions grow again (see [26]). Hence, one is forced to conclude
that this model cannot be asymptotically free if we assume that both positive marginal coupling
constants are positive29. This example shows that the question of asymptotic freedom can be
tricky in ϕ6 renormalizable models, because the ϕ4 super-renormalizable coupling constants have
a non-trivial inﬂuence on the marginal ϕ6 interactions. In particular, the combinatorial TGFT
of [9] and the type D model of [72], which have both been argued to be asymptotically free on
the basis of an analysis which neglected the ﬂow of super-renormalizable constants, may possibly
suﬀer from a similar back-reaction eﬀect.

As mentioned already, if a model is not asymptotically free, one may still contemplate the
idea of ﬁnding a non–perturbation UV completion of it. This is an interesting but notoriously
hard question to investigate, since this requires to establish the existence of a non–perturbative
ﬁxed point of the renormalization group. An elementary standard method often invoked in
statistical physics to test this assumption is the ε–expansion [84], which has the advantage
of being essentially perturbative. In scalar ﬁeld theories for instance, one can formally deﬁne
statistical models in dimension 4 − ε, which smoothly interpolate between dimension 4 and
dimension 6. A TGFT generalization of this construction was proposed in [27]. The procedure
consists in deﬁning a d = 3 TGFT on the group SU(2)× U(1)D−3 for arbitrary D ≥ 3, and then
analytically continue the parameter D := 4 − ε to the interval 3 ≤ D ≤ 4. When ε is small
enough, one may assume that the ϕ4 truncation remains pertinent:

Γk(ϕ, ϕ) = −Z(k) ϕ · ∆ϕ + Z(k) u2(k) k2

+ Z(k)2 u4(k) kε

.

(47)

Note that u4 acquired a small canonical dimension ε. This has the eﬀect of slightly modifying
the ﬂow equations (44) to

k

k

∂u2(k)

∂k ≈ −2 u2(k) − 3π u4(k) ,
∂u4(k)
∂k ≈ −ε u4(k) − 2π u4(k)2 .

(48)

27These ﬂow equations were not explicitly evaluated in [27], but they immediately follow from the computations



reported there.

28This paper relied on diﬀerent methods, in the language of the multiscale expansion. It also went further in
6,1 and u6,1u6,2) which have

that 2-loop contributions were included to account for quadratic terms (in u2
been neglected in (46). The main conclusions are however the same.

6,1, u2

29The situation is a more subtle when u6,1u6,2 < 0, we do not exclude the possibility that one could deﬁne an

asymptotically free theory with positive action in this particular case.

Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

23

Accordingly, one formally ﬁnds a new solution to the ﬁxed point equation:

∗
2 ≈
u

3
4

ε + O(ε2) ,

∗
4 ≈ −
u

1
2π

ε + O(ε2) .

Qualitatively, the renormalization group ﬂow (48) is therefore as represented in Figure 12. Ex-
trapolating to ε = 1, this suggests the existence of a TGFT analogue of the Wilson–Fisher ﬁxed
point of 3d local scalar ﬁeld theory in the SU(2) model of [32]. This hypothesis should of course
be taken with a grain of salt, since the ﬁrst terms in the ε–expansion may only give a crude
idea of what is really going on at ε = 1. Note also that u∗
4 has the ’wrong’ sign (again because
wave–function counter–terms dominate in TGFT), which might be taken as a sign that the
formal ﬁxed point we found is only a spurious eﬀect. This anyway provides solid motivations for
performing a non–perturbative study of the Wetterich equation directly in the case ε = 1 [28].

Figure 12. Qualitative phase portrait of the renormalization group ﬂow equations (48), with arrows
oriented from high to small scales.

4.3 Non–perturbative aspects and truncations

As far as TGFTs with gauge invariance are concerned, the non–perturbative aspects of the
Wetterich equation have been studied in two complementary papers [16, 45].

In [16], the role of gauge invariance was carefully analyzed and the Wetterich equation (41)
was formally derived. The d = 6 melonic model on U(1) (type E) was studied in the ϕ4 melonic
truncation

Γk(ϕ, ϕ) = −Z(k) ϕ · ∆ϕ + Z(k) u2(k) k2

+ Z(k)2 u4(k)

.

(49)

For such Abelian models, it is convenient to use a Litim cut–oﬀ operator Rk [64] which, in
momentum space, is deﬁned by the kernel

Rk(p; p) = Z(k)(k2 − p2)Θ(k2 − p2)

δp(cid:96)p(cid:48)

(cid:96)

,

(50)

where p(cid:96) ∈ Z label U(1) representations. The merit of this type of cut–oﬀ is that it greatly

simpliﬁes the structure of the truncated ﬂow equations, leading to beta functions which are

6(cid:89)(cid:96)=1

u2u4u∗2u∗424

S. Carrozza

algebraic fractions in the coupling constants. In the perturbative regime one can check again than
the model is asymptotically free, as ﬁrst proven in [72] with diﬀerent methods. An important
aspect of TGFTs on compact Lie groups is that, because of ﬁnite size eﬀects, the renormalization
group ﬂow is not autonomous. The beta functions explicitly depend on the infrared cut–oﬀ k,
which complicates the search for non–trivial ﬁxed points. The UV (k (cid:29) 1) and IR (k → 0)
asymptotic regimes were analyzed separately in [16]. One ﬁnds in both a non–perturbative ﬁxed
point analogous to the Wilson–Fisher ﬁxed point of statistical ﬁeld theory. The quantitative
values of the coupling constants are slightly diﬀerent in the two regimes, but the qualitative
structure of the phase portrait is the same.
In particular, and unlike the formal ﬁxed point
found in the ε–expansion of 3d models, the coupling constant u4 at the ﬁxed point is positive
(and u2 is negative).

A non–compact version of this model, based on the Abelian group R, was investigated in
[45]. The renormalization group analysis requires in this case a further regularization of inﬁnite
volume divergences. This was implemented by a compactiﬁcation of R into U(1), thus resulting
in a regularized theory identical to [16]. The authors could then deﬁne an appropriate thermo-
dynamic limit, capturing the properties of the model in the limit in which the volume of U(1)
is scaled to inﬁnity. Once more, a ﬁxed point of the Wilson–Fisher type is found in this trunca-
tion, consistently with the results of [16]. This result is interpreted as a strong hint of a phase
transition between a symmetric and a broken phase of a condensate type, in which the ﬁeld ϕ
acquires a vacuum expectation value. In view of recent applications of Bose–Einstein condensa-
tion, which is a phase transition with order parameter of the same type, these are particularly
interesting results. They may help justifying scenarii which have been recently proposed in the
GFT literature, with important applications in cosmology [47, 71, 48] and black hole physics
[70].

Non–Abelian models may also be explored in this formalism, and a particularly interesting
one is again the d = 3 theory on SU(2) [32]. Checking its perturbative behaviour requires to
push the truncation to order 6 at least, and even to higher orders if one wants to also account
for perturbative 2-loop contributions. Moreover, the Litim cut-oﬀ is not very convenient in
this setting, because of the gauge invariant condition. There was no diﬃculty in the Abelian
model mentioned before because the closure constraint translates into a simple momentum
constraint p1 + . . . + p6 = 0, which can be explicitly dealt with. With SU(2) the situation is
not so simple: the gauge invariance condition encodes complicated recoupling relations among
the SU(2) harmonic modes, and results in quite challenging expressions. It is therefore better
to work in direct space and to rely on a heat–kernel regularization, as was already done in the
perturbative section 3. Such a construction is under way [28]: even if the ﬂow equations obtained
within this renormalization scheme are not algebraic fractions, they are nonetheless computable
and can be integrated out numerically. We should therefore soon be able to directly compute
the properties of the ﬂow of model [32] in a ϕ6 truncation, and compare them with the features
we extrapolated from the formal ε-expansion.

5 Summary and outlook

We hope we have managed to convince the reader that GFT renormalization is an active ﬁeld
of research which has already bared interesting fruits. For one thing, the fact that such non–
local ﬁeld theories can be deﬁned and analyzed by means of renormalization methods may at
ﬁrst sound like a contradiction in the terms. Locality is indeed a primary concept in relativistic
quantum ﬁeld theories, and is absolutely key to the formulation of renormalization theory. While
at the fundamental level, GFT in a sense goes away with space–time altogether, it is remarkable
that tensor invariance may successfully be used as a substitute for locality. On top of providing

Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

25

a (for a long time missing) structure encoding the topology of GFT interactions and Feynman
diagrams, it introduces just enough of ﬂexibility to allow for a GFT theory space which is stable
under renormalization.

The inclusion of the GFT gauge invariance condition (7) into renormalizable tensor ﬁeld
theories was a necessary and by no means obvious step in the direction of quantum gravity
applications. We have explained in some detail the remarkable interplay between topology
and renormalization which makes it possible (section 3.3): in perturbative expansion, the most
divergent spin foam amplitudes turn out to be supported on simply connected 2-complexes,
which allows to trivialize the bulk holonomies associated to ultraviolet scales, and therefore
reabsorb the associated divergences into eﬀective tensor invariant coupling constants.

This produced a rather large class of renormalizable TGFTs with closure constraint (Ta-
ble 1), and consequently a natural test bed for GFT renormalization. Renormalization group
studies have in particular shown that asymptotic freedom is a generic feature of ϕ4 perturbative
models, which may therefore be interpreted as ultraviolet complete theories. Moreover, the non–
perturbative truncations investigated so far suggest that non–trivial ﬁxed points with properties
analogous to that of the Wilson–Fisher ﬁxed point of local scalar ﬁeld theories are generic. This
opens the way to the study of GFT phases and phase transitions.

We conclude with a non–exhaustive list of open problems which we consider particularly

interesing.

Inclusion of non–melonic interactions. The renormalizable models presented in this review are
governed by melonic interactions and melonic radiative corrections. We have however pointed
out on several occasions that non–melonic bubbles (such as the necklace bubble of Figure 9)
may also be included and potentially lead to the deﬁnition of yet other perturbative phases.
This question deserves to be explored more systematically, as it should in particular help us
understand to which extent the polymer phases typically generated by melonic families of graphs
– which have a tree-like structure – may be escaped [56].

Local potential approximation and beyond. A heuristic derivation of an extended tensor theory
space, which includes interactions with arbitrary G-invariant diﬀerential operators, has been
proposed in section 2.3. This suggests to interpret all the renormalizable models studied so far
as local potential approximations within this extended tensor theory space, and therefore to
explore the properties of more general truncations. Our heuristic argument also shows that in
3d and with G = SU(2), the generalized tensor theory space contains in principle the colored
Boulatov model. This might open the way to a proper quantum gravity interpretation of this
three-dimensional theory.

Lorentzian signature. The whole literature on GFT and GFT renormalization is focused on
models with compact Lie groups, which may at best result in consistent formulations of Euclidean
quantum gravity. The GFT formulation of quantum gravity models with Lorentz signature
necessitates to go beyond this framework. While a renormalization scheme taking the additional
infrared divergences associated to non–compact linear groups is already available [44, 45], the
physically relevant SL(2, R) and SL(2, C) are much more challenging.
Indeed, the invariant
Laplace operators on such groups are not positive, leading to complications associated to the
deﬁnition of natural propagators. To a large extent, these theories resemble quantum ﬁelds
on Minkowski space–time, therefore Euclidean multiscale methods are not easily applicable.
Alternative techniques, based for instance on Epstein–Glaser renormalization (as it is applicable
in any signature) or on a Wick rotation, will be necessary to explore this question in greater
detail.

4d quantum gravity constraints. Eventually one will need to check whether the now well–
understood closure constraint can be consistently complemented with spin foam simplicity con-

26

S. Carrozza

straints. If a renormalizable 4d model can be deﬁned in this context, we will obtain a consistent
perturbative sum over spin foam transition amplitudes, and therefore a tentative deﬁnition of
the dynamics of LQG. All the renormalization group methods that have been developed for and
tested on our simpler toy–models will then be of great practical use, in particular to determine
whether a sector of the quantum dynamics reproduces general relativity in a suitably deﬁned
classical limit.

Acknowledgements

The author acknowledges support from the ANR JCJC CombPhysMat2Tens grant.

References

[1] Alexandrov S., Geiller M., Noui K., Spin Foams and Canonical Quantization, SIGMA 8 (2012), 055,

arXiv:1112.1961.

[2] Bagnuls C., Bervillier C., Exact renormalization group equations. An Introductory review, Phys. Rept. 348

(2001), 91, arXiv:hep-th/0002034.

[3] Bahr B., On background-independent renormalization of spin foam models (2014),, arXiv:1407.7746.

[4] Baratin A., Carrozza S., Oriti D., Ryan J., Smerlak M., Melonic phase transition in group ﬁeld theory,

Lett.Math.Phys. 104 (2014), 1003–1017, arXiv:1307.5026.

[5] Baratin A., Girelli F., Oriti D., Diﬀeomorphisms in group ﬁeld theories, Phys. Rev. D83 (2011), 104051,

arXiv:1101.0590.

[6] Baratin A., Oriti D., Quantum simplicial geometry in the group ﬁeld theory formalism: reconsidering the

Barrett-Crane model, New J. Phys. 13 (2011), 125011, arXiv:1108.1178.

[7] Baratin A., Oriti D., Group ﬁeld theory and simplicial gravity path integrals: A model for Holst-Plebanski

gravity, Phys. Rev. D85 (2012), 044003, arXiv:1111.5842.

[8] Baratin A., Oriti D., Ten questions on Group Field Theory (and their tentative answers), J. Phys. Conf.

Ser. 360 (2012), 012002, arXiv:1112.3270.

[9] Ben Geloun J., Two and four-loop β-functions of

rank 4 renormalizable tensor ﬁeld theories,

Class.Quant.Grav. 29 (2012), 235011, arXiv:1205.5513.

[10] Ben Geloun J., Renormalizable Models in Rank d ≥ 2 Tensorial Group Field Theory, Commun. Math. Phys.

332 (2014), 117–188, arXiv:1306.1201.

[11] Ben Geloun J., Krajewski T., Magnen J., Rivasseau V., Linearized Group Field Theory and Power Counting

Theorems, Class.Quant.Grav. 27 (2010), 155012, arXiv:1002.3592.

[12] Ben Geloun J., Livine E.R., Some classes of renormalizable tensor models, J.Math.Phys. 54 (2013), 082303,

arXiv:1207.0416.

[13] Ben Geloun J., Rivasseau V., A Renormalizable 4-Dimensional Tensor Field Theory, Commun.Math.Phys.

318 (2013), 69–109, arXiv:1111.4997.

[14] Ben Geloun J., Rivasseau V., Addendum to ’A Renormalizable 4-Dimensional Tensor Field Theory’, Com-

mun. Math. Phys. 322 (2013), 957–965, arXiv:1209.4606.

[15] Ben Geloun J., Samary D.O., 3D Tensor Field Theory: Renormalization and One-loop β-functions, Annales

Henri Poincare 14 (2013), 1599–1642, arXiv:1201.0176.

[16] Benedetti D., Lahoche V., Functional Renormalization Group Approach for Tensorial Group Field Theory:

A Rank-6 Model with Closure Constraint (2015),, arXiv:1508.06384.

[17] Bonzom V., Delepouve T., Rivasseau V., Enhancing non-melonic triangulations: A tensor model mixing

melonic and planar maps, Nucl. Phys. B895 (2015), 161–191, arXiv:1502.01365.

[18] Bonzom V., Gurau R., Riello A., Rivasseau V., Critical behavior of colored tensor models in the large N

limit, Nucl. Phys. B853 (2011), 174–195, arXiv:1105.3122.

[19] Bonzom V., Gurau R., Rivasseau V., Random tensor models in the large N limit: Uncoloring the colored

tensor models, Phys.Rev. D85 (2012), 084037, arXiv:1202.3637.

[20] Bonzom V., Gurau R., Ryan J.P., Tanasa A., The double scaling limit of random tensor models, JHEP 09

(2014), 051, arXiv:1404.7517.

Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

27

[21] Bonzom V., Smerlak M., Bubble divergences from cellular cohomology, Lett. Math. Phys. 93 (2010), 295–

305, arXiv:1004.5196.

[22] Bonzom V., Smerlak M., Bubble divergences from cellular cohomology, Lett. Math. Phys. 93 (2010), 295–

305, arXiv:1004.5196.

[23] Bonzom V., Smerlak M., Bubble divergences: sorting out topology from cell structure, Annales Henri

Poincare 13 (2012), 185–208, arXiv:1103.3961.

[24] Boulatov D.V., A Model of three-dimensional lattice gravity, Mod. Phys. Lett. A7 (1992), 1629–1646,

arXiv:hep-th/9202074.

[25] Carrozza S., Tensorial Methods and Renormalization in Group Field Theories, Springer Theses, 2014.

[26] Carrozza S., Discrete Renormalization Group for SU(2) Tensorial Group Field Theory, Ann. Inst. Henri

Poincar´e Comb. Phys. Interact. 03 (2015), 49–112, arXiv:1407.4615.

[27] Carrozza S., Group ﬁeld theory in dimension 4 − , Phys. Rev. D91 (2015), 065023, arXiv:1411.5385.
[28] Carrozza S., Lahoche V., in preparation .

[29] Carrozza S., Lahoche V., Oriti D., in preparation .

[30] Carrozza S., Oriti D., Bounding bubbles: the vertex representation of 3d Group Field Theory and the

suppression of pseudo-manifolds, Phys. Rev. D85 (2012), 044004, arXiv:1104.5158.

[31] Carrozza S., Oriti D., Bubbles and jackets: new scaling bounds in topological group ﬁeld theories, JHEP

06 (2012), 092, arXiv:1203.5082.

[32] Carrozza S., Oriti D., Rivasseau V., Renormalization of a SU(2) Tensorial Group Field Theory in Three

Dimensions, Commun.Math.Phys. 330 (2014), 581–637, arXiv:1303.6772.

[33] Carrozza S., Oriti D., Rivasseau V., Renormalization of Tensorial Group Field Theories: Abelian U(1)

Models in Four Dimensions, Commun.Math.Phys. 327 (2014), 603–641, arXiv:1207.6734.

[34] De Pietri R., Freidel L., Krasnov K., Rovelli C., Barrett-Crane model from a Boulatov-Ooguri ﬁeld theory

over a homogeneous space, Nucl.Phys. B574 (2000), 785–806, arXiv:hep-th/9907154.

[35] Dittrich B., The continuum limit of loop quantum gravity - a framework for solving the theory, in 100 Years

of General Relativity, World Scientiﬁc series, arXiv:1409.1450.

[36] Dupuis M., Livine E.R., Holomorphic Simplicity Constraints for 4d Spinfoam Models, Class. Quant. Grav.

28 (2011), 215022, arXiv:1104.3683.

[37] Engle J., Livine E., Pereira R., Rovelli C., LQG vertex with ﬁnite Immirzi parameter, Nucl. Phys. B799

(2008), 136–149, arXiv:0711.0146.

[38] Ferri M., Gagliardi C., Grasselli L., A graph-theoretical representation of PL-manifolds: a survey on crys-

tallizations, Aequationes mathematicae 31 (1986), 121–141.

[39] Freidel L., Group ﬁeld theory: An Overview, Int.J.Theor.Phys. 44 (2005), 1769–1783, arXiv:hep-th/0505016.

[40] Freidel L., Gurau R., Oriti D., Group ﬁeld theory renormalization - the 3d case: Power counting of diver-

gences, Phys. Rev. D80 (2009), 044007, arXiv:0905.3772.

[41] Freidel L., Krasnov K., A New Spin Foam Model for 4d Gravity, Class. Quant. Grav. 25 (2008), 125018,

arXiv:0708.1595.

[42] Freidel L., Louapre D., Ponzano-Regge model revisited I: Gauge ﬁxing, observables and interacting spinning

particles, Class. Quant. Grav. 21 (2004), 5685–5726, arXiv:hep-th/0401076.

[43] Geloun J.B., A power counting theorem for a p2aφ4 tensorial group ﬁeld theory (2015),, arXiv:1507.00590.

[44] Geloun J.B., Martini R., Oriti D., Functional Renormalization Group analysis of a Tensorial Group Field

Theory on R3, Europhys. Lett. 112 (2015), 31001, arXiv:1508.01855.

[45] Geloun J.B., Martini R., Oriti D., Functional Renormalisation Group analysis of Tensorial Group Field

Theories on Rd (2016),, arXiv:1601.08211.

with kinetic term(cid:80)

[46] Geloun J.B., Toriumi R., Parametric representation of rank d tensorial group ﬁeld theory: Abelian models

s |ps| + µ, J. Math. Phys. 56 (2015), 093503, arXiv:1409.0398.

[47] Gielen S., Oriti D., Sindoni L., Cosmology from Group Field Theory Formalism for Quantum Gravity,

Phys.Rev.Lett. 111 (2013), 031301, arXiv:1303.3576.

[48] Gielen S., Sindoni L., Quantum cosmology from group ﬁeld theory condensates:

a review (2016),,

arXiv:1602.08104.

28

S. Carrozza

[49] Gurau R., A generalization of the Virasoro algebra to arbitrary dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B852 (2011),

592–614, arXiv:1105.6072.

[50] Gurau R., Colored Group Field Theory, Commun.Math.Phys. 304 (2011), 69–93, arXiv:0907.2582.

[51] Gurau R., The 1/N expansion of colored tensor models, Annales Henri Poincare 12 (2011), 829–847,

arXiv:1011.2726.

[52] Gurau R., The complete 1/N expansion of colored tensor models in arbitrary dimension, Annales Henri

Poincare 13 (2012), 399–423, arXiv:1102.5759.

[53] Gurau R., Universality for random tensors, Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincar´e, Probabilit´es et Statistiques

50 (2014), 1474–1525, arXiv:1111.0519.

[54] Gurau R., Rivasseau V., The 1/N expansion of colored tensor models in arbitrary dimension, Europhys.Lett.

95 (2011), 50004, arXiv:1101.4182.

[55] Gurau R., Ryan J.P., Colored Tensor Models - a review, SIGMA 8 (2012), 020, arXiv:1109.4812.

[56] Gurau R., Ryan J.P., Melons are branched polymers, Annales Henri Poincare 15 (2014), 2085–2131,

arXiv:1302.4386.

[57] Krajewski T., Group ﬁeld theories, PoS QGQGS2011 (2011), 005, arXiv:1210.6257.

[58] Krajewski T., Toriumi R., Polchinski’s equation for group ﬁeld theory, Fortsch.Phys. 62 (2014), 855–862.

[59] Krajewski T., Toriumi R., Polchinski’s exact renormalisation group for tensorial theories: Gaussian univer-

sality and power counting (2015),, arXiv:1511.09084.

[60] Krajewski T., Toriumi R., Exact renormalisation group equations and loop equations for tensor models

(2016),, arXiv:1603.00172.

[61] Lahoche V., Constructive Tensorial Group Field Theory II: The U (1)− T 4
[62] Lahoche V., Constructive Tensorial Group Field Theory I:The U (1) − T 4
[63] Lahoche V., Oriti D., Rivasseau V., Renormalization of an Abelian Tensor Group Field Theory: Solution

3 Model (2015),, arXiv:1510.05050.

4 Model (2015),, arXiv:1510.05051.

at Leading Order, JHEP 04 (2015), 095, arXiv:1501.02086.

[64] Litim D.F., Optimization of the exact renormalization group, Phys. Lett. B486 (2000), 92–99, arXiv:hep-

th/0005245.

[65] Morris T.R., The Exact renormalization group and approximate solutions, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A9 (1994),

2411–2450, arXiv:hep-ph/9308265.

[66] Ooguri H., Topological lattice models in four-dimensions, Mod. Phys. Lett. A7 (1992), 2799–2810, arXiv:hep-

th/9205090.

[67] Oriti D., The Group ﬁeld theory approach to quantum gravity (2006),, arXiv:gr-qc/0607032.

[68] Oriti D., Group ﬁeld theory as the microscopic description of the quantum spacetime ﬂuid: A New perspec-

tive on the continuum in quantum gravity, PoS QG-PH (2007), 030, arXiv:0710.3276.

[69] Oriti D., The microscopic dynamics of quantum space as a group ﬁeld theory, in Foundations of space and

time, Cambridge University Press, 2011, 257–320, arXiv:1110.5606.

[70] Oriti D., Pranzetti D., Sindoni L., Horizon entropy from quantum gravity condensates (2015),,

arXiv:1510.06991.

[71] Oriti D., Sindoni L., Wilson-Ewing E., Bouncing cosmologies from quantum gravity condensates (2016),,

arXiv:1602.08271.

[72] Ousmane Samary D., Beta functions of U (1)d gauge invariant just renormalizable tensor models, Phys.Rev.

D88 (2013), 105003, arXiv:1303.7256.

[73] Ousmane Samary D., P´erez-S´anchez C.I., Vignes-Tourneret F., Wulkenhaar R., Correlation functions of a
just renormalizable tensorial group ﬁeld theory: the melonic approximation, Class. Quant. Grav. 32 (2015),
175012, arXiv:1411.7213.

[74] Perez A., The Spin Foam Approach to Quantum Gravity, Living Rev.Rel. 16 (2013), 3, arXiv:1205.2019.

[75] Reisenberger M.P., Rovelli C., Space-time as a Feynman diagram: The Connection formulation,

Class.Quant.Grav. 18 (2001), 121–140, arXiv:gr-qc/0002095.

[76] Rivasseau V., From perturbative to constructive renormalization, Princeton University Press, 1991.

[77] Rivasseau V., Quantum Gravity and Renormalization: The Tensor Track, AIP Conf.Proc. 1444 (2011),

18–29, arXiv:1112.5104.

Flowing in group ﬁeld theory space: a review

29

[78] Rivasseau V., Why are tensor ﬁeld theories asymptotically free?, Europhys. Lett. 111 (2015), 60011,

arXiv:1507.04190.

[79] Rovelli C., Quantum gravity, Cambridge University Press, 2004.

[80] Samary D.O., Closed equations of the two-point functions for tensorial group ﬁeld theory, Class.Quant.Grav.

31 (2014), 185005, arXiv:1401.2096.

[81] Samary D.O., Vignes-Tourneret F., Just Renormalizable TGFT’s on U (1)d with Gauge Invariance, Com-

mun.Math.Phys. 329 (2014), 545–578, arXiv:1211.2618.

[82] Thiemann T., Modern canonical quantum general relativity, Cambridge University Press, 2007.

[83] Wetterich C., Exact evolution equation for the eﬀective potential, Phys.Lett. B301 (1993), 90–94.

[84] Wilson K.G., Kogut J., The renormalization group and the ? expansion, Physics Reports 12 (1974), 75–199.

