Viewpoint: A New Twist in Simulating Solar Flares

Axel Brandenburg1, 2

1Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, JILA, and Department of Astrophysical and

Planetary Sciences, Box 440, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303, USA

2Nordita, KTH Royal Institute of Technology and Stockholm University, and
Department of Astronomy, Stockholm University, 10691 Stockholm, Sweden

(Dated: March 8, 2016)

Simulations show for the ﬁrst time how the magnetic ﬁelds that produce solar ﬂares can extend out
of the Sun by acquiring a twist.1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
7
1
9
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Protecting humans and their technologies from the
harmful eﬀects of space weather is nothing new. Yet
a recent event demonstrated how fateful such events can
be. On November 4, 2015, an active region on the Sun
known as NOAA 12443 unleashed a ﬂare—a gust of high-
speed charged particles—whose radiation deactivated the
radars at Sweden’s airports,2 grounding all of the coun-
try’s commercial ﬂights. Such events underscore our need
to be able to predict when the next solar ﬂare will occur
and how much energy it might release. This longstanding
goal of astrophysics will rely heavily on numerical simu-
lations. Now, Piyali Chatterjee of the University of Oslo,
Norway, and her collaborators have taken a signiﬁcant
step towards improving such simulations by developing
the ﬁrst numerical model that explains how magnetic
ﬁelds from below the Sun’s surface can produce ener-
getic ﬂares in the corona [1]. Researchers have assumed
that this was the mechanism for ﬂares, but it has been
diﬃcult to demonstrate with simulations. Chatterjee et
al. do so by making very simple, yet physically realistic,
assumptions.

Solar ﬂares occur when giant “tubes” of magnetic ﬂux
in the Sun’s outer envelope, or corona, become unsta-
ble, releasing their stored energy in an explosive burst.
The magnitude of this energy is around 1023 J, which is
roughly equivalent to the energy delivered by the impact
of a 10-km-wide asteroid, such as the one causing the
mass extinction on Earth, 66 million years ago. Only a
fraction of the ﬂare’s energy strikes the Earth, but it can
be enough to destroy electronics on Earth and is a po-
tential health risk to those who travel frequently by air,
particularly near the Arctic.

Although solar ﬂares occur in the corona, the tubes of
ﬂux that give rise to solar ﬂares originate from the move-
ment of ions and electrons in the Sun’s interior. In fact,
it is widely believed that the tubes form deep within the
Sun, up to 200,000 km below its surface (the bottom of
the convection zone). What is unclear is how they are
able to pass through the Sun’s turbulent interior and to

1Viewpoint article on the paper by Chatterjee, Hansteen, & Carls-
son [1], to be published in Physics. Edited by Jessica Thomas.
2

http://www.thelocal.se/20151104/solar- storm- grounds- swedish- air- traffic

Simulating a solar ﬂare. The magnetic ﬁelds in
FIG. 1:
Chatterjee et al.’s simulations begin as a ﬂat sheet of mag-
netized plasma (shown in light blue). This sheet of magnetic
ﬂux breaks into tubes of ﬂux, which rise to the surface (dark
blue and green slab), releasing energy at speciﬁc points (the
ﬂare). Each ﬂare is associated with a high-speed jet of charged
particles that squirts outward between reconnecting ﬁeld lines
followed by a moderate decline in magnetic energy. The color
of a ﬂux tube indicates the plasma velocity along the tube:
red means upwards, blue downwards, and green tubes have
plasma velocities close to zero. (P. Chatterjee/Univ. of Oslo)

its surface with enough energy density left to produce
a ﬂare. One postulate is that the tubes survive the as-
cent if their ﬁeld lines twist around like the strands in a
braid. This twist provides an inward force that opposes
the expansion of the axial ﬁeld during the tube’s ascent.
So far, twist has been treated as a free parameter in
simulations. Chatterjee et al. show that it can emerge
naturally in simulations that incorporate the Sun’s rota-
tion. When a ﬂux tube forms, the pressure associated
with its ﬁeld displaces (or dilutes) plasma. This makes
the region within the tube lighter than its surroundings,
giving rise to an upwards force—an eﬀect known as mag-
netic buoyancy. As the tube rises, the trajectories of its
constituent ions “swerve” because of the Sun’s rotation
(the Coriolis eﬀect), causing the ﬁeld lines to become
twisted.

The researchers have recreated this process in their
simulations. They start with a sheet of magnetized

2

ing pressure is smaller [3].

twist

The advantage of the authors’ approach is that
the emergence of
is anchored in a physical
phenomenon—the Sun’s rotation. However, the time it
takes a ﬂux tube to rise to the surface because of mag-
netic buoyancy is only a few hours, which is short com-
pared with the Suns rotation period of 25 days. One can
therefore reasonably ask: How could suﬃcient twist be
generated in such a short time? The answer might be
that the Sun is highly stratiﬁed—the density of plasma
and its pressure change rapidly while moving from the
center to the surface. Rising plasma therefore expands
rapidly over a short distance, and since the Coriolis eﬀect
on the plasma depends on the amount of expansion, this
enhances the eﬀect of the Sun’s rotation.

The simulations provide an estimate of the maximum
ﬂare energy that the Sun, or another star, could poten-
tially produce. Chatterjee et al. ﬁnd that their model
predicts ﬂares with energies as high at 1023 J, but the Ke-
pler spacecraft has detected many so-called superﬂares-
ﬂares producing energies above 1026 J—from stars like
our Sun [4]. Since there is no tight correlation between
ﬂare frequency and stellar rotation rate [5], superﬂares
might be possible even for the relatively slowly rotating
Sun [6]. The consequences of superﬂares for people and
their technologies on the Sun-facing side of the Earth are
extreme, and future simulations based on the model of
Chatterjee et al. might now be able to put realistic limits
on just how bad a worst-case scenario could be.

A. Brandenburg acknowledges partial support from
the Swedish Research Council grant 2012-5797 and the
FRINATEK grant 231444 under the Research Council of
Norway.

[1] P. Chatterjee, V. Hansteen, and M. Carlsson, “Modeling
Repeatedly Flaring δ Sunspots,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 116,
arXiv:1601.00749 (2016).

[2] P. Syntelis, V. Archontis, C. Gontikakis, and K.
Tsinganos, “Emergence of Non-Twisted Magnetic Fields
in the Sun: Jets and Atmospheric Response,” Astron. As-
trophys. 584, A10 (2015).

[3] J. Warnecke, A. Brandenburg, and D. Mitra, “Magnetic
Twist: A Source and Property of Space Weather,” J.
Space Weather Space Clim. 2, A11 (2012).

[4] H. Maehara, T. Shibayama, S. Notsu, Y. Notsu, T. Nagao,
S. Kusaba, S. Honda, D. Nogami, and K. Shibata, “Super-
ﬂares on Solar-Type Stars,” Nature 485, 478 (2012).

[5] S. Candelaresi, A. Hillier, H. Maehara, A. Brandenburg,
and K. Shibata, “Superﬂare Occurrence and Energies on
G-, K-, and M-type Dwarfs,” Astrophys. J. 792, 67 (2014).
[6] K. Shibata et al., “Can Superﬂares Occur on Our Sun?”

Publ. Astron. Soc. Jpn 65, 49 (2013).

FIG. 2: Two types of twist with diﬀerent helicities. At left,
a ribbon taped to a surface on both ends has a twist that
only winds in one sense (here, a right-handed twist). It has
a net helicity because the only way to remove the twist is to
untape one of the ends. At right, a ribbon has both a left-
handed twist and a right-handed twist.
Its helicity is zero
because the twist can be undone without undoing either end.
(APS/Alan Stonebraker, http://alanstonebraker.com/)

plasma that lies about 8000 km below the Suns surface
and has a ﬁeld strength (parallel to the sheet) of 20,000
G. After 30 min of solar time, the sheet breaks into
(energetically more favorable) separated tubes of ﬂux,
which become highly twisted by the Sun’s rotation by
the time they reach the corona. The authors show that
ﬂares, with energies of some 1023 J, occur at localized
sites where magnetic energy is converted into kinetic en-
ergy and eventually into heat (see Fig. 1). These events
are associated with magnetic reconnection, where ﬁeld
lines of opposite polarity break and reconnect. Chatter-
jee et al. also show that these ﬂares can occur multiple
times when segments of the coronal ﬁeld suddenly be-
come “overtwisted” and release energy.

Up to now, simulations have initialized twist in an ad
hoc and unrealistic way; speciﬁcally, the twist only wound
in one sense (like a spiral staircase), as in the left side of
Fig. 2. However, in Chatterjee et al.’s simulations, when
a twist that winds in one sense appears, it is always ac-
companied by a counterwinding twist, as in the right side
of Fig. 2. This conserves what is known as the magnetic
helicity, which is a measure of twist integrated over vol-
ume. And it may be the factor that helps the reconnec-
tion process associated with a ﬂare, because it increases
the chance that a twisted ﬁeld will be surrounded by an
oppositely wound ﬁeld, allowing the two to easily recon-
nect.

Several groups have simulated the emergence of mag-
netic ﬁelds from below the convection zone into the
corona. But in many of these simulations, the magnetic
ﬁelds were untwisted. Most of the ﬂux therefore “accu-
mulated” just beneath the surface without actually pen-
etrating it [2], so no ﬂares were produced. But a twisted
magnetic ﬁeld, like that emerging in Chatterjee et al.’s
simulations, wants to untwist. It can do so much more
easily once it is close to the surface, where the surround-

