Japan SKA Consortium (2016)
Preprint typeset using PASJ LATEX format v.1.0

1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
8
3
9
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Formation, Evolution, and Revolution of Galaxies
by SKA: Activities of SKA-Japan Galaxy
Evolution Sub-SWG

Tsutomu T. Takeuchi1, Kana Morokuma-Matsui,2, Daisuke Iono2,3,
Hiroyuki Hirashita4, Wei Leong Tee4,5, Wei-Hao Wang4, Rieko Momose2,6,7,
on behalf of the SKA-Japan Galaxy Evolution sub-Science Working Group

1Division of Particle and Astrophysical Science, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
464–8602, Japan.
2National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo, Japan
3SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies)
4Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Academia Sinica, P.O. Box 23-141, Taipei 10617,
Taiwan
5Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
6National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 30013, Taiwan
7The Institute for Cosmic Ray Research, the University of Tokyo, Japan

∗E-mail: takeuchi.tsutomu@g.mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp, kana.matsui@nao.ac.jp, d.iono@nao.ac.jp,
hirashita@asiaa.sinica.edu.tw, momose.rieko@nao.ac.jp

Abstract

Formation and evolution of galaxies have been a central driving force in the studies of galaxies and
cosmology. Recent studies provided a global picture of cosmic star formation history. However, what
drives the evolution of star formation activities in galaxies has long been a matter of debate. The
key factor of the star formation is the transition of hydrogen from atomic to molecular state, since
the star formation is associated with the molecular phase. This transition is also strongly coupled
with chemical evolution, because dust grains, i.e., tiny solid particles of heavy elements, play a
critical role in molecular formation. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of neutral–molecular
gas transition, star formation and chemical enrichment is necessary to clarify the galaxy formation
and evolution. Here we present the activity of SKA-JP galaxy evolution sub-science working group
(subSWG) Our activity is focused on three epochs: z ∼ 0, 1, and z > 3. At z ∼ 0, we try to construct
a uniﬁed picture of atomic and molecular hydrogen through nearby galaxies in terms of metallicity
and other various ISM properties. Up to intermediate redshifts z ∼ 1, we explore scaling relations
including gas and star formation properties, like the main sequence and the Kennicutt–Schmidt law
of star forming galaxies. To connect the global studies with spatially-resolved investigations, such
relations will be plausibly a viable way. For high redshift objects, the absorption lines of HI 21-cm
line will be a very promising observable to explore the properties of gas in galaxies. By these studies,
we will surely witness a real revolution in the studies of galaxies by SKA.

Key words: Galaxies: evolution — galaxies:
neutral gas — hydrogen

formation — stars:

formation — ISM: metallicity — ISM:

c(cid:13) 2016 Japan SKA Consortium

2

1 Introduction

Galaxies evolve. This fact has been a driving force of
the studies on galaxies from late 70’s when the galactic
physics started kicking in, until today. However, how
galaxeis formed and evolved still remains far from full
understanding. The evolution of galaxies is a change of
their various complicated physical properties with time.
To be precise, there are two diﬀerent aspects in galaxy
evolution: the individual evolution of a certain galaxy,
say, a “personal” history of a galaxy, and the statistical
evolution of galaxies at a certain cosmic time, or a “so-
cial” history of galaxies. We use one of these diﬀerent
aspects depending on the issue we are concerned. From
a cosmological point of view, the dark matter interacts
gravitationally to form dark halos, and galaxies form and
evolve in the halos. In this case, the dynamical properties
are most important. However, the most enthusiastically
studied subject of galaxy evolution is the evolution of star
formation (SF) activities: stars form in a ﬁrst gas clump,
and ﬁrst generation stars die and expel the ﬁrst heavy
elements in the Universe, and the formation of the next
generation stars is accelerated, and so on. The chemical
composition of the interstellar medium (ISM) in galaxies
changes with time (chemical evolution: Tinsley 1980).
In addition to the snapshot of the SF, the accumulated
stellar mass became of interest recently. Not only the
evolution of galaxies, but also the mass accretion in the
form of dwarf galaxies and remnant gas infall from ﬁl-
amentary structures in the Large-Scale Structure in the
Universe change the structure of galaxies. Galaxy merg-
ing drastically changes the morphology of galaxies, which
is also one of the important aspects of galaxy evolution.
There often exists a massive black hole at the center of a
galaxy. The activity of an active galactic nucleus (AGN)
evolves with the change of the accretion rate to the black
hole. A mysterious correlation between the masses of the
spheroid component and central black hole in galaxies
(Magorrian et al. 1998). This suggests a hidden connec-
tion of the evolution of black holes and galaxies, known
as “the co-evolution”.

During the recent decade, multiwavelength deep
galaxy surveys brought us a dramatic view of very high-
z Universe. They seem to show that the properties of
galaxies are mainly determined by their stellar mass and
environment, among others. According to the standard
cold dark matter (CDM) scenario, the structure forma-
tion proceeds hierarchically, i.e., small halos form tend
to form early and they merge each other to form larger,
heavier objects. Before galaxy formation, baryons are
mostly in gas phase. Then, they fall onto the gravita-
tional potential of halos and form dense molecular clouds.

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

This is the ﬁrst onset of star formation. Dying stars in-
ject metals and dust into the ISM, which accelerate the
next star formation. At the same time, they also provide
thermal and kinetic energy to the ISM which hamper the
cooling of gas. Thus, the star formation is self-regulating,
very complicated process determined by the interplay of
DM and baryons. Hence, in order to understand the SF,
we must observe the neutral gas in galaxies in various
environment as a function of the cosmic time, as many
as possible.

However, previous studies on galaxy evolution were
dominantly focused on the snapshot of the SF activities
in galaxies. The star formation rate (SFR) is observa-
tionally estimated by various observables related to mas-
sive stars [recombination lines of Hii regions, non-ionizing
ultraviolet (UV) luminosity, dust emission heated by
UV from massive stars, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
(PAH) band emission, radio continuum, etc.], but all of
them can only give the information of the SFR, and noth-
ing about the transition from gas to stars, the fundamen-
tal key process of the SF. In radio astronomy, in contrast,
traditionally the molecular emission lines have been ob-
served to obtain the information of the material to form
stars. Combining the SFR and molecular gas mass, we
can discuss the gas–star transition. But still the molec-
ular lines can tell us only about gas in molecular form,
and if we want to go further to have a global view of
the SF, we must observe the neutral gas. Up to now,
because of the limitation of the current instruments, the
observation of neutral gas was limited to nearby galaxies,
and the properties of neutral gas in galaxies have been
rarely discussed in the context of galaxy evolution. The
advent of the square kilometre array (SKA) will bring
the ultimate, revolutionary breakthrough to the studies
on galaxy evolution.

This article is organized as follows:

in Section 2, we
overview the role of atomic hydrogen (Hi) in the con-
text of galaxy evolution. We also summarize the SKA-
related researches on galaxy evolution in this section. In
Section 3, we introduce the activity of the SKA-JP galaxy
evolution sub-science WG. Section 4 is devoted to sum-
mary.

2 Current Status of the Studies on Galaxy

Evolution — Atomic Hydrogen in Galaxies
—

2.1 Atomic and molecular hydrogen

Molecular gas is the key ingredient for star formation in
galaxies. Roughly 10% of the mass of the interstellar
medium is composed of molecular hydrogen (H2) in the

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

3

Milky Way galaxy (Kalberla & Kerp 2009; Nakanishi &
Sofue 2016). This subsection describes the processes re-
sponsible for the formation and destruction of molecular
hydrogen, and the fractional abundance of atomic and
molecular hydrogen. While the principle target line for
SKA will be atomic hydrogen, both atomic and molecu-
lar lines are intimately connected as seen in the following
section. Deep understanding of both phases of the ISM
is critical.

which the fmol is described by the pressure, UV radiation
ﬁeld, and metalicity in the molecular cloud. Krumholz
et al. (2008) expanded Elmegreen (1993)’s model using
a spherically symmetric multi-dementional model, and
added the formation of molecular hydrogen from inter-
stellar dust as a new parameter. These models reproduce
the observations of nearby galaxies and our own galaxy
(Sofue et al. 1995; Honma et al. 1995; Blitz & Rosolowsky
2004; Leroy et al. 2008).

2.1.1 Formation of molecular hydrogen

The basic formation path of molecular hydrogen in galax-
ies is the coupled reaction between two hydrogen atoms,
which occurs using electrons and protons as a catalyst.
This reaction is accompanied by a signiﬁcant amount of
exothermic energy release. Unless this exothermic en-
ergy is deposited into some form of energy, the reaction
will reverse and molecules will not form. Therefore, a
third atomic hydrogen that will collisionaly remove the
excess energy is necessary in order to form the hydro-
gen molecule. This three hydrogen-atom reaction is ef-
ﬁcient in very dense (nH > 108 cm−3) environments. In
the more diﬀuse galactic ISM (nH ∼ 105 cm−3), molecu-
lar hydrogen forms using interstellar dust as the catalyst
(Gould & Salpeter 1963; Hollenbach & Salpeter 1971).
It is believed that the excess energy generated from the
bonding of the two hydrogen atoms is absorbed by the
random motion of the interstellar dust.

2.1.2 Dissociation of molecular hydrogen

Molecular hydrogen can be dissociated and it can result
in two atomic hydrogen. There are three mechanism for
this dissociation process. First is the photo-dissociation
due to UV photons (Lyman-Werner photons) that are
emitted from O or B type stars in the range of 11.2 - 13.6
eV. The second process is the photo-dissociation due to
cosmic rays that have 1–100 MeV of energy. The third
process is the collisional dissociation in high tempera-
ture high density regions. However, it is thought that
the collisional dissociation process itself has a minor con-
tribution to the dissociation of molecular hydrogen. This
is because molecular hydrogen formation occurs more ef-
ﬁciently than dissociation, due to the eﬃcient depositing
of thermal energy generated by molecular hydrogen dis-
sociation and cooling by metals in the ISM.

2.1.3 Atomic and molecular hydrogen in galaxies

The fraction between atomic and molecular gas (fmol =
ρH2 /ρtotal, ρtotal = ρH2 + ρHI) is determined by the bal-
ance between formation and dissociation of molecular
hydrogen. Elmegreen (1993) proposed a 1-D model in

Observational check of fmol is mainly performed using
the 12CO (J=1–0) line (2.6 mm) emission and the H I
(21 cm) line emission. The 12CO (J=1–0) line allows us
to derive the line strength and the molecular hydrogen
surface density via the conversion factor (XCO [cm−2(K
km s−1)−1]), and the H I line allows us to obtain the
surface density of atomic hydrogen. The fmol is derived
from these surface densities. The fmol is 25–30 % in
late type galaxies (Boselli et al. 2002). Furthermore, the
radial distribution of the fmol decreases as a function of
radius (e.g., Bigiel & Blitz 2012; Tanaka et al. 2014).

We now describe the density that is required for the
transition from atomic to molecular gas. According to
analytical models, shielding of atomic hydrogen from
photodissociation occurs eﬀectively at ΣHI ∼ 10 M⊙ pc−2
(NH ∼ 1021 cm−2) in a spherical molecular cloud with
solar metalicity (Krumholz et al. 2009). In galaxy evo-
lution simulations including molecular hydrogen forma-
tion and dissociation, almost all of the atomic hydrogen
becomes molecular at NH ∼ 1021 cm−2 in galaxies with
similar metallicities (e.g., Pelupessy et al. 2006; Gnedin
et al. 2009). Observations of late type galaxies with so-
lar metallicities show similar results to these theoretical
predictions (e.g., Wong & Blitz 2002; Bigiel et al. 2008).

The required column density for molecular gas for-
mation depends on the metallicity. Gnedin et al. (2009)
suggest that the required column density is higher for low
metallicity environments. In their simulations, the dust
particles required for shielding from photo-dissociation
decreases at low metallicity environments. Therefore,
the column density required for shielding becomes higher.
Similar results are obtained from other theoretical mod-
els and observations of nearby galaxies (e.g., Krumholz
et al. 2009; McKee & Krumholz 2010; Fumagalli et al.
2010; Wong et al. 2013; Richings et al. 2014), and thus
the metallicity appears to be the key parameter that con-
trols the process that converts from atomic to molecular
hydrogen.

4

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

2.2 Atomic hydrogen in spiral galaxies

of material into the galaxy.

Observations of atomic hydrogen gas (H I gas) in spi-
ral galaxies goes back to the 1950’s. Ever since, a large
number of galaxies have been observed from very nearby
(∼ 50 kpc) to distances larger than 100 Mpc (z > 0.024),
using single dish and interferometers. A summary of the
physical understanding of atomic gas in galaxies obtained
through H I observations in spiral galaxies is presented in
this subsection.

2.2.1 Spatial distribution
There are three major characteristics in the distribution
of H I in spiral galaxies. First is the decrease in the
galactic center, where the density of the ISM is high.
Therefore, most of the hydrogen is in molecular form,
and the abundance of H I gas is very low.

The second characteristic is that the H I gas is more
extended than the optical disk (e.g., Sancisi 1983; Leroy
et al. 2008)). As such, H I gas is often 2-3 times more
extended than disk stars in many of the spiral galax-
ies (e.g., Sancisi 1983). The H I gas seen in the out-
skirts of spiral galaxies are called circum-galactic medium
(CGM). Theoretically, the CGM is thought to be related
to large scale gas accretion or gas outﬂow (e.g., Mori
et al. 2002; Mori & Umemura 2006; Dekel et al. 2009a,
2009b; Scannapieco et al. 2005), and they are intimately
connected to the mass accretion process and star forma-
tion history in galaxies. It is diﬃcult to directly detect
the gas in the CGM, mainly because the column den-
sity of H I gas in the CGM is lower than the disk gas
(NHI < 1019 cm−2). However, the advancement in re-
cent receivers have allowed deep and sensitive H I obser-
vations, and the diﬀuse H I gas (NHI ∼ 1018 cm−2) in
the CGM has been detected (Wolfe et al. 2013; Pisano
2014). Possibility of gas inﬂow onto spiral galaxies have
been proposed based on these new data.

The third characteristics is that the surface density
(ΣHI [M⊙ pc−2]) of H I in the exterior of spiral galaxies
are fairly constant and decreases at the exterior. The
ΣHI is low at the center, and increases as a function of
radius, peaking at some radius (Σmax
HI ). The ΣHI beyond
this peak radius is fairly ﬂat and constant (e.g., Sofue
& Rubin 2001; Leroy et al. 2008; Bigiel & Blitz 2012).
HI only goes as high as ∼ 10 M⊙ pc−2 because atomic
Σmax
hydrogen becomes molecular when Σmax
HI > 10 M⊙ pc−2.

2.2.2 H I gas mass
The observed H I gas mass in spiral galaxies is MHI ∼
108−10 M⊙ (Walter et al. 2008). In particular, sources
with MHI ∼ 1010 M⊙ are often colliding galaxies, and
therefore galaxy interaction can bring signiﬁcant amount

It is known that the total H I mass and the disk size
in spiral galaxies show a correlation. As described in
§4.3.2, ΣHI in the exteriors of spiral galaxies is almost
constant. If we assume that ΣHI is constant across the
galaxy disk, then the total H I mass of a spiral galaxy is
roughly proportional to the area of the galaxy. In fact,
it is suggested from observations that the total H I mass
correlates with the radius of the stellar disk (e.g., Bigiel
& Blitz 2012)).

2.2.3 Kinematical information

One can determine the mass distribution of the galaxy
from the kinematical information provided by HI obser-
vations. While the rotation velocity varies from 150 -
300 km s−1 on average, the basic characteristic is that the
rotation increases as a function of radius until some ra-
dius, beyond which the velocity is nearly constant (vmax)
(e.g., Rubin et al. 1980, 1985; Bosma et al. 1981; Sancisi
& van Albada 1987a, 1987b), due to dark matter.

2.2.4 Tully–Fisher relation

The rotation velocity and the brightness of spiral galax-
ies are correlated, in what is called the Tully-Fisher re-
lation (Tully & Fisher 1977, TF relation:). It is known
that the scatter in the TF relation is larger at the low
mass end. This is due to the fact that the fraction
of gas mass becomes non-negligible for low mass spiral
galaxies. The correlation becomes tighter when the total
baryon mass (Mbaryon = Mstar + Mgas) is used instead
of the stellar mass (e.g., Bell & de Jong 2001). This is
called the baryon-Tully-Fisher relation (BTF relation).
Observational conﬁrmation of the BTF relation is cur-
rently ongoing, using the recent gas survey observations
of spiral galaxies (e.g., McGaugh 2012).

The TF relation is used to measure the distance to
spiral galaxies. The true brightness of the galaxy can
be estimated from the TF relation and the H I rotation
curve. On the other hand, the apparent brightness of
the galaxy depends on the distance. Therefore, the dif-
ference between the apparent and the true brightnesses
allows us to determine the distance to the spiral galaxy.
Up to now, the H I velocity and the stellar spectroscopy
were used to estimate the distances. More recently, the
BTF relation has been used to get an accurate measure
of the distances (e.g., Bell & de Jong 2001). However,
signiﬁcant uncertainties are present in the derivation of
the stellar and gas masses, and therefore uncertainties in
the derived distances (e.g., Zaritsky et al. 2014).

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

5

2.3 Atomic hydrogen in early-type galaxies

Early type galaxies (ETGs, elliptical and lenticular galax-
ies) have been considered to be characterized by higher
bulge-to-disk ratio and older stellar population compared
to late type galaxies (LTGs, spiral galaxies). Recent ob-
servations revealed the variety of ETGs in morphology,
e.g. existence of ETGs with bulge-to-disk ratio compara-
ble to LTGs (Spitzer & Baade 1951; Sandage et al. 1970;
van den Bergh 1976), as well as in star formation ac-
tivity (e.g., Kuntschner et al. 2010). In this section, we
take a look back to simple histories of H I observations
targeting ETGs and introduce some science outputs from
ATLAS3D, one of the largest surveys toward ETGs.

2.3.1 Single-dish studies
ETGs have been observed in H I since 1960 era. Although
interferometric observation can achieve higher angular
resolution than single-dish observation, single-dish H I
observations enable us to measure total amount of atomic
gas and line-width of galactic H I spectra without so-
called “missing-ﬂux” problem (interferometer does not
have a sensitivity on extended structure). In 1960s, H I
observations of ETGs revealed that the ratios of H I mass
to B-band luminosity of ETGs are lower than those of
LTGs (e.g., Gouguenheim et al. 1969). Based on these
observations, H I gas masses of 15 % of ∼ 150 ellipticals
and 25 % of ∼ 300 lenticulars were successfully measured
with a typical detection mass limit of a few times 108 M⊙
(Knapp et al. 1985; Wardle & Knapp 1986).

In 2000s and beyond, H I blind surveys, such as
HIPASS (Barnes et al. 2001) and ALFALFA (Giovanelli
et al. 2005) have revealed a strong environmental depen-
dence of H I detection rate: a few % in the galaxy cluster
environment whereas 40 % in the ﬁeld environment (di
Serego et al. 2007; Grossi et al. 2009). These results are
consistent with the idea of Giovanelli & Haynes (1983)
that H I gas is easily stripped from galaxies in cluster en-
vironment as well as the other recent observations show-
ing that star-forming ETGs reside in low galaxy density
region (Thomas et al. 2010).

2.3.2 Interferometric studies
In 1980s, detailed spatial distribution of H I gas in
ETGs have been investigated using interferometric data.
Despite the appearance in optical images, ETGs show a
wide variety of H I spatial distribution, such as large disk
extending to tens of kpc, low-density disk, ring struc-
ture, and unsettled gas distributions indicating recent gas
accretion, gas stripping, galaxy interaction and merging
(van Gorkom & Schiminovich 1997; Hibbard et al. 2001,
and reference therein). These study revealed that H I gas

is one of the ideal tracers of recent mass assembly history
of ETGs.

With Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope (WSRT),
Morganti et al. (2006) and Oosterloo et al. (2010) con-
ducted deep H I imaging observations of 33 ETGs selected
from SAURON project1, which is deep enough to detect
H I mass down to ∼ (2−3) ×106 M⊙. They conﬁrmed en-
vironmental dependence of H I detection rate, where H I
emissions are detected from 10 % and 2/3 of all ETGs
inside and outside the Virgo cluster, respectively. They
revealed that the faintest signature of H I accretion is pre-
sented in most H I-detected ETGs. In addition, they ﬁnd
that all ETGs with a settled H I distribution host ionized
and molecular gas, suggesting recent star formation.

2.3.3 H I survey towards ATLAS3D galaxies
Serra et al. (2012) observed 170 ETGs in H I with WSRT
as a part of ATLAS3D project. The ATLAS3D project
combines multi-wavelength surveys specialized in ETGs
(Cappellari et al. 2011). This project targets a com-
plete sample of 260 early-type galaxies with K-band ab-
solute magnitude of brighter than −21.5 within the local
Universe (42 Mpc). The achieved H I mass sensitivity is
down to (5 − 50) × 106 M⊙ and H I emissions were de-
tected from 53 ETGs. Based on this data, they revealed
the properties of H I gas in ETGs as follows:

• A wide variety of H I morphology: H I-detected ETGs
shows disk and ring structures (∼ 64 %), unsettled
structure including a tail structure which is indicative
of tidal eﬀect or gas accretion (∼ 26 %), and clumpy
structure distributed over the entire galaxy (∼ 9 %).
ETGs with extended H I disk (> 3.5 × Re) have large
amount of H I gas (5 × 109 M⊙) and diﬀerent kinemat-
ics to stellar component, whereas ETGs with small H I
disk have small amount of H I gas (< 108 M⊙) and the
same kinematics with stellar component.

• Signature of star formation: 70 % of ETGs with H I
gas within ∼ 1Re region show star formation activity,
and their central regions are dominated by molecular
gas.

• H I mass function: The characteristic mass is ∼ 2 × 109
M⊙ and the slope at lower mass is −0.7, when the H I
mass function is ﬁtted with a Schechter function.

• Comparison with LTGs: H I mass of ETGs is mostly
lower than that of LTGs but some ETGs have H I mass
comparable to that of LTGs. The high-H I-column-
density component observed in bright stellar disk of

1 SAURON (Spectroscopic Areal Unit for Research on Optical Nebulae) is
a name of the panoramic integral ﬁeld spectrograph as well as a name of
the scientiﬁc project whose main goal is to understand the formation and
evolution of elliptical and lenticular galaxies and of spiral bulges from 3D
observations (Bacon et al. 2001).

6

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

LTGs is not seen in ETGs.

• Environmental eﬀect on the nature of ETGs: The en-
vironmental eﬀect on H I gas mass in ETGs was con-
ﬁrmed, where cluster ETGs tend to have lower detec-
tion rate of H I emission (∼ 10 %) compared to ﬁeld
ETGs (∼ 40 %). The H I gas mass and MHI/LK de-
crease as the number density of galaxies increases.
In addition, H I morphology correlate with the num-
ber density of galaxies, where ETGs with larger H I
disk and ring structures tend to reside in lower galaxy
density and ETGs with unsettled H I structure tend to
reside in typical galaxy density of rich group. This re-
sults indicate that processes working in galaxy-cluster
scale are important for ETG evolution.

2.4 Atomic hydrogen in dwarf galaxies

Understanding star formation in dwarf galaxies is im-
portant step for understanding star formation in early
Universe. Dwarf galaxies are considered to reside in low-
mass dark matter halos (DHs), and that the ﬁrst star
has been formed in such low mass DHs in ΛCDM model
(Yoshida et al. 2006, 2008).
In addition, revealing the
nature of dwarf galaxies is also important for galaxy evo-
lution since dwarf galaxies are considered to be a building
block of larger galaxies.

Large galaxy surveys have been conducted mainly in
optical and near infrared wavelengths, while these sur-
veys tends to be biased to relatively bright and massive
galaxies. Recent H I galaxy surveys, on the other hand,
have discovered a lot of gas-rich dwarf galaxies. In this
section, H I surveys specialized in dwarf galaxies are in-
troduced.

2.4.1 H I survey toward dwarf galaxies

In the past 10 years, detailed kinematics and stellar pop-
ulation of dwarf galaxies with H I mass of > 108 M⊙
have been investigated. ALFALFA (Arecibo Legacy Fast
ALFA Survey, Giovanelli et al. 2005), which is a large
and unbiased H I survey, discovered a few times 100 dwarf
galaxies with H I mass < 108 M⊙, and provided us a sta-
tistically reliable H I mass function of galaxies for the ﬁrst
time (Martin et al. 2010). In the following paragraphs,
four representative H I surveys towards dwarf galaxies
with lower H I gas mass are introduced.

The FIGGS (Faint Irregular Galaxies GMRT Survey,
Begum et al. 2008), LITTLE THINGS (Local Irregulars
That Trace Luminosity Extremes, The H I Nearby
Galaxy Survey, Hunter et al. 2012), and VLA-ANGST
(VLA A High-resolution H I Survey of Nearby Dwarf
Galaxies, Ott et al. 2012) target dwarf galaxies with rela-

tively small H I mass, 8.5×107, 2.7×107 and 2.3×107 M⊙
as a median value, respectively. 21 dwarf galaxies with
H I mass of < 107 M⊙ were also observed in those sur-
veys (5, LITTLE THINGS; 7, FIGSS; 9, VLA-ANGST).
SHIELD (Survey of H I in Extremely Low-mass Dwarfs,
Cannon et al. 2011) targets dwarf galaxies with 106 −107
M⊙. The scientiﬁc meanings of studying H I gas in dwarfs
are as follows:

• Gas-rich dwarf galaxies: H I surveys toward dwarf
galaxies revealed the existence of gas-rich systems
(Begum et al. 2008; Hunter et al. 2012; Ott et al. 2012).
The existence of such gas-rich galaxies with very shal-
low potential wells poses interesting puzzles for the
ΛCDM paradigm. This is because that cold gas in
shallow potential wells is expected to be easily striped
by ram pressure (e.g., Lewis et al. 2002; Grebel et al.
2003), be blown out by star formation activity (e.g.,
Mac Low & Ferrara 1999; Ferrara & Tolstoy 2000), and
be vaporized by hot intergalactic medium (Benson et
al. 2002). In addition, the UV radiation ﬁeld inhibits
gas accretion and cooling in low-mass halos (Rees 1986;
Babul & Rees 1992; Benson et al. 2002; Hoeft et al.
2006). Studying such gas-rich dwarfs lead to the un-
derstanding of the gas deﬁciency processes of galaxies
described above.

• Star formation under the extreme environment: Star
formation is often induced by gas compression due to
external perturbations such as galactic shock at the
spiral arms in disk galaxies and galaxy mergers. Dwarf
galaxy is a suitable object to study star formation with-
out these external perturbations.

• Baryonic Tully-Fisher relation: Dwarf galaxies do not
follow the same Tully-Fisher relation of spiral galax-
ies. However, once the baryon mass is used instead of
galaxy luminosity, i.e., baryonic Tully-FIsher relation,
they follow the same relation (McGaugh et al. 2000,
2005), suggesting a close link between dark matter halo
and baryonic components of galaxies. Studying bary-
onic Tully-Fisher relation leads to the understanding
of the relationship between evolutions of dark matter
and baryonic components of galaxies.

• Dark matter proﬁle: Dwarf galaxies are suitable tar-
gets to study the density proﬁle of dark matter ha-
los. Cosmological simulations of hierarchical galaxy
formation predict a “universal” cusped density core
for the dark matter haloes of galaxies (e.g., Navarro
et al. 2004). Although some observation support the
theoretical prediction (e.g., van den Bosch & Swaters
2001; de Blok et al. 2005), other observations indicate a
constant-density core for their dark matter haloes (e.g.,
de Blok et al. 2003; Weldrake et al. 2003). This is a

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

7

so-called “core-cusp problem”. Dark matter proﬁles es-
timated by observations generally contain a signiﬁcant
error originated in the estimation of M/L. However,
it is possible to estimate dark matter proﬁle of dwarf
galaxy with a small contribution from stellar compo-
nent.

2.5 H I surveys covering various population of galaxies

Investigating statistical properties of galaxies is also im-
portant for understanding galaxy evolution as well as de-
tailed studies on individual galaxies. In the previous sub-
sections, we focused on the H I studies on spiral (sec. 2.2),
early-type (sec. 2.3) and dwarf galaxies (sec. 2.4). In this
subsection, we ﬁrst introduce one of the largest H I survey
of local galaxies, GASS project, and then two pioneering
H I surveys targeting galaxies in the ranges of 0.1 < z < 1,
BUDHIES and CHILES projects.

2.5.1 GALEX Arecibo SDSS Survey (GASS)

The bimodal distribution of galaxies in stellar mass ver-
sus u − r color plot (“galaxy bimodality”, Struve &
Conway 2012) is one of the important scientiﬁc output
from large galaxy surveys in optical wavelength, such
as SDSS (Sloan Digital Sky Survey, York et al. 2000):
“blue clouds” galaxies which are actively forming stars
(< 3 × 1010 M⊙); “red sequence” galaxies which are not
currently forming stars (> 3 × 1010 M⊙). Galaxies dis-
tributed between the two sequences are referred to as
“green valley” galaxies.

GALEX Arecibo SDSS Survey (GASS) is an H I sur-
vey speciﬁcally designed to measure H I mass of ∼ 1000
galaxies in the local Universe (0.025 < z < 0.05) with stel-
lar masses 1010 < M⋆ < 1011.5 M⊙. The stellar mass
range is determined to straddles the “transition mass” of
3 × 1010 M⊙ between blue cloud and red sequence galax-
ies. This is because that one of the main goal of GASS
project is to identify and quantify the incidence of galax-
ies that are transitioning between the blue, star-forming
cloud and the red sequence of passively evolving galax-
ies (“transition galaxies”). Here, main seven scientiﬁc
outputs of the project are introduced:

• H I gas mass fraction (Cantinella et al. 2010, 2012a):
Cantinella et al. suggested that candidates of “tran-
sition galaxies” can be identiﬁed as outliers from the
mean scaling relations between H I gas mass fraction
(MHI/M⋆, where MHI is H I gas mass) and other galaxy
properties. They found a scaling relation of galaxies
among H I gas mass MHI, surface density of stellar
mass µ⋆, and N U V − r color and interesting outliers
from this plane: gas-rich red sequence galaxies that

may be in the process of regrowing their discs, as well
as blue, but gas-poor spirals.

• Star formation eﬃciency (Schiminovich et al. 2010):
Schiminovich et al.
suggested candidates of “transi-
tion galaxies” are identiﬁed as (1) H I-rich but low-
SFR and (2) H I-poor but high-SFR galaxies. They ex-
plored the global scaling relations associated with the
bin-averaged ratio of the SFR over the H I mass (i.e.
ΣSFR/ΣMHI ), which is the H I-based star formation
eﬃciency (SFE). They found that the H I-based SFE
remains relatively constant across the sample with a
value of 10−9.5 yr−1 (or an equivalent gas consumption
time-scale of ∼ 3 × 109 yr) while 10 % of galaxies have
higher or lower SFE than the average value. Such out-
liers are expected to have potential for a change (either
decrease or increase) in their sSFR in the near future.
• Inside-out formation of Galactic discs (Wang et al.
2011): Wang et al. found an observational evidence in-
dicating “inside-out” formation of galactic disks. They
showed that galaxies with larger H I fraction have
bluer, more actively star-forming outer disks compared
to the inner part of the galaxy. They also found H I
fraction and galaxy asymmetry do not have intrin-
sic connection, which suggests that gas is accreted
smoothly on to the outer disc.

• Baryonic mass-velocity-size relations (Cantinella et al.
2012b): Cantinella et al.
found a generalized bary-
onic Faber-Jackson (BFJ) relation that holds for all the
galaxies in their sample, regardless of morphology, in-
clination or gas content, and has a scatter smaller than
0.1 dex. They compared baryonic Tully-Fisher (BTF)
and BFJ relations for GASS sample, and investigated
how galaxies scatter around the best ﬁts obtained for
subsets of disk-dominated and bulge-dominated sys-
tems. They demonstrated that by applying a simple
correction to the stellar velocity dispersions that de-
pends only on the concentration index of the galaxy,
disks and spheroids distribute on to the same dynam-
ical relation. This generalized BFJ relation indicates
that there is a fundamental correlation between the
global dark matter and baryonic content of galaxies
regardless of morphology.

• H I content and metal enrichment at galactic outskirts
(Moran et al. 2012): Moran et al. found that H I-rich
galaxies tend to have larger metallicity drops in their
outer disks, suggesting the accretion or radial trans-
port of relatively pristine gas from beyond the galax-
ies’ stellar disks. They investigated radial metallicity
proﬁle of 174 star-forming galaxies using long-slit spec-
tra and found that ∼ 10 % of their sample exhibit a
sharp downturn in metallicity. They also found that

8

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

the magnitude of the outer metallicity drop is well cor-
related with the total H I content of the galaxy.

function
• Bivariate neutral hydrogen-stellar mass
(Lemonias et al. 2013): Lemonias et al.
investi-
gated the bivariate neutral atomic hydrogen (H I)-
stellar mass function (HISMF) φ(MHI, M⋆) for 480
GASS galaxies. Based on the ﬁtting to HISMF with
Schechter function, they found that the slope of the
HISMF at moderate H I masses correlate with stel-
lar mass and SFR, whereas the characteristic H I mass
varies weakly with them.

• Environmental

eﬀect

et

al.

(Cantinella

2013):
Cantinella et al. claimed the importance of stripping
of the cold interstellar medium in galaxy groups for
galaxy evolution, which has not been considered in
semi-analytic models of galaxy formation. They found
that massive galaxies located in haloes with masses
of 1013 − 1014 M⊙ have at least 0.4 dex less H I than
objects in lower density environments.

2.5.2 Blind Ultra Deep H I Survey (Verheijen et

al. 2007, BUDHIES,)

BUDHIES is a deep H I survey of galaxies in two clus-
ters in intermediate redshifts, Abell 2192 (z = 0.187) and
Abell 963 (z = 0.206), and the large-scale structure of the
Universe around them with WSRT. Abell 963 is a mas-
sive lensing Butcher-Oemler (Butcher & Oemler 1978)
cluster with a large fraction of blue galaxies (fB = 0.19,
Butcher et al. 1983), and a total X-ray luminosity of
LX ≃ 3.4 ± 1 × 1044h−2 erg s−1 (Allen et al. 2003).
Abell 2192 is a less massive cluster in the process of
forming, with a high degree of substructure (Jaﬀ´e et
al. 2012). This cluster is barely detected in X-rays
(LX ≃ 7 × 1043h−2 erg s−1; Voges et al. 1999).

The survey aims at understanding where, how, and
why star-forming spiral galaxies get transformed into pas-
sive early-type galaxies.
In this project, H I emissions
were successfully detected in 127 galaxies of Abell 963
and 36 of Abell 2192 with H I masses of 2 × 109 M⊙.
In Abell 2192, Jaﬀ´e et al.
found that the incidence of
H I-detections signiﬁcantly correlates with environment
(Jaﬀ´e et al. 2012, 2013): at large clustercentric radii
(> 2 − 3 virial radii), many galaxies are detected in H I,
while at the core of the forming cluster, none of the galax-
ies are H I-detected. They found that this eﬀect starts to
become signiﬁcant in low-mass groups that pre-process
the galaxies before they enter the cluster, so that by the
time the group galaxies fall into the cluster they may
already be H I deﬁcient or even devoid of H I.

2.5.3 COSMOS H I Large Extragalactic Survey

(CHILES, Fern´andez et al. 2013)

CHILES is a 1000-hrs Very Large Array (VLA) project
to produce the ﬁrst H I deep ﬁeld. The observations are
carried out with the VLA in B conﬁguration and cover
a redshift range of 0 < z < 0.45. The ﬁeld is centered at
the COSMOS ﬁeld (Cosmic Evolution Survey, Scoville et
al. 2007), which has been already observed in from radio
to X-ray. This project will provide H I images of at least
300 galaxies spread over the entire redshift range to in-
vestigate the following topics: 1) H I content, morphology
and kinematics of individual galaxies, 2) H I mass func-
tion, 3) Cosmic Neutral Gas Density, 4) Environmental
suppression of star formation, and 5) Dark haloes and
baryons. Fern´andez et al. (2013) presented initial results
based on 50-hrs observations. They detected H I emis-
sions from 33 galaxies within 34′ × 34′ ﬁeld for now, in-
cluding three without a previously known spectroscopic
redshift. The highest redshift of galaxies with H I mea-
surement is z = 0.176.

2.6 Toward higher-redshifts: revealing galaxy evolution

through H I absorption line systems

In observing distant galaxies, because of limited sensi-
tivities of observational facilities, the sample is always
biased to the brightest populations. Moreover, since the
emission from a galaxy is often related to its star for-
mation activity, it is relatively easy to detect a growing
galaxy population whose star formation rate is high or
a grown galaxy population which has already built up
its stellar mass. This means that the observations of the
emission from distant or high-redshift (high-z) galaxies
tend to miss ones which have not yet converted a signif-
icant fraction of the ISM to stars.

Such galaxies with gas-rich and low-stellar-mass prop-
erties can be sampled if we directly sample galaxies with
its gas content. The most common method of sampling
this kind of galaxies is to observe gas absorption lines in
bright continuum spectra of background quasars [quasi-
stellar objects (QSOs)]. In particular, Lyα absorption in
the continuum spectra of QSOs is useful to identify the
foreground (intervening) neutral hydrogen (H I) in the
ISM and the intergalactic medium (IGM) over a wide
column density range. A sample taken by this method is
called Lyα absorption-line systems or Lyα forest (Sargent
et al. 1980; Smith et al. 1986; Wolfe et al. 1986).

Damped Lyman α systems (DLAs) are the QSO
absorption-line systems whose H I column density is
higher than 2 × 1020 cm−2 (Prochaska & Wolfe 2000).
Because of the prominent Lyα absorption in bright QSO

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

9

tion of 21 cm absorption detection as a large covering
fraction of the warm neutral medium with temperature
>
∼ 103 K in the DLA host galaxies (see also Kanekar et
al. 2013, 2014). Even for the detected cases, the derived
spin temperatures are mostly high (∼ 103 K) (see also
Wolfe & Davis 1979; Wolfe et al. 1985; de Bruyn, O’Dea,
& Baum 1996; Carilli et al. 1996; Briggs, Brinks, & Wolfe
1997; Kanekar et al. 2006).

It has been pointed out that DLAs may be biased to
systems with low dust extinction:
if a foreground sys-
tem has high dust extinction, the ultraviolet (UV) con-
tinuum of the background QSO can become too faint
to be detected by optical telescopes (Fall & Pei 1993).
The detection rate of high-NHI DLAs may be signiﬁ-
cantly suppressed by dust extinction (Vladilo & P´eroux
2005). This bias could be avoided if we sample back-
ground QSOs at radio frequencies, where the eﬀect of
dust extinction is negligible. In fact, systematic studies
of DLAs for radio-selected QSOs have been performed
(e.g., Akerman et al. 2005; Ellison et al. 2005). Although
these samples did not show the presence of a signiﬁ-
cant bias caused by dust extinction, the sample size is
not large enough. In particular, the number of systems
rapidly declines as NHI becomes large. Sampling of a
large number of QSO in the radio will be one of the most
important goal of SKA surveys in the future. With a
large-area (∼10,000 deg2) survey with SKA1-MID pro-
posed by Morganti et al. (2015), 5σ detection of typi-
cal DLAs with τ21 cm ∼ 0.015 would be possible against
background sources > 30 mJy (τ21 cm ∼ 0.05 against ∼10
mJy and τ21 cm ∼ 0.1 against ∼2–3 mJy) up to z ∼ 3,
which is limited by the lowest frequency of SKA-MID
(350 MHz). Surveys with SKA1-LOW would extend the
redshift range towards higher z.

Before SKA, the following pathﬁnder observations are
planned (Morganti et al. 2015). The Australian Square
Kilometre Array Pathﬁnder (ASKAP) has a wide ﬁeld of
view (FoV ∼ 30 deg2) and frequency coverage down to
700 MHz. The ASKAP First Large Absorption Survey
in H I (FLASH) will be able to detect bright QSOs and
radio galaxies, and will open up systematic studies of
intervening 21 cm absorption at 0.5 < z < 1. With the
planned integration time of 2 hours per ﬁeld, the 5 σ
detection limit for the 21 cm absorption optical depth
is τ21 cm ∼ 0.01 for 1 Jy background sources while it is
τ21 cm ∼ 0.3 for 50 mJy sources. Apertif and MeerKAT
will achieve deeper τ21 cm limits with smaller survey ar-
eas.

Fig. 1. H I 21 cm absorption optical depth τ21 cm as a function of H I column
density NHI with various spin temperatures (Ts = 300, 1,000, 3,000, and
6,000 K for the solid, dotted, dashed, and dot-dashed lines, respectively).
The velocity dispersion is ﬁxed as ∆v = 10 km s−1.

continuum, DLAs provide us with unique opportunities
to trace high-z galaxy evolution. The statistics of H I
column density in DLAs is expected to reﬂect the to-
tal H I abundance contained in high-z objects (P´eroux
et al. 2003) and the density structure of the interstellar
medium (ISM) in them (Razoumov et al. 2006).

The hyperﬁne transition of H I at a wavelength of
21 cm is also known to be a good tracer of H I. While the
Lyα absorption is determined by the H I column density,
NHI, along the line of sight, the 21 cm optical depth,
τ21 cm, depends on the spin temperature as well (e.g.,
Furlanetto et al. 2006):

τ21 cm = 0.054(cid:16) Ts

103 K(cid:17)

−1(cid:18) ∆v

10 km s−1(cid:19)−1

(cid:16) NHI
1021 cm−2(cid:17) ,

(1)

where Ts is the spin temperature of hydrogen atoms and
∆v is the velocity dispersion. Therefore, combination of
Lyα and 21 cm optical depths enables us to derive both
column density and temperature. In Figure 1, we show
τ21 cm as a function of NHI for various Ts with ∆v = 10
km s−1.

There have been some attempts to detect 21 cm
line absorption in the radio continuum of DLA-bearing
quasars. The fraction of DLAs with detection of 21 cm
absorption is, however, low (e.g. Curran et al. 2010). A
systematic 21 cm absorption surveys of DLAs has been
carried out by Srianand et al. (2012) using the Giant
Metrewave Radio Telescope (GMRT) and the Green
Bank Telescope (GBT), but 21 cm absorption is detected
for only one out of ten DLAs at 2 < zabs < 3.4 (zabs is the
absorption redshift of the DLA). They further included
samples in the literature, and interpreted the small frac-

10

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

2.7 Galaxy evolution history through radio continuum

Radio continuum emission from galaxies is composed of
thermal free–free radiation from H II regions and non-
thermal synchrotron radiation from supernova remnants
(Condon 1992) (for the simplicity of discussion, we do
not consider radio emission from AGNs in this section).
Since both of these emission sources are related to mas-
sive stars, the luminosity of radio continuum is known
to be a good indicator of star formation rate (Condon
1992). Unlike UV–optical star formation indicators, ra-
dio continuum is not aﬀected by dust extinction, so that
no correction for dust extinction is required in the conver-
sion from radio continuum luminosity to star formation
rate. If we detect radio continuum emission from galax-
ies up to high redshifts, we can in principle clarify the
cosmic star formation history.

Another extinction-free star formation indicator is far-
infrared (FIR) continuum luminosity (Kennicutt 1998;
Inoue et al. 2000). It is known that radio and FIR con-
tinuum luminosities are tightly correlated (Condon 1992;
Yun et al. 2001). This radio–FIR correlation holds very
well for nearby star-forming galaxies. However, whether
or not galaxies keep the radio–FIR correlation over their
evolution is not obvious. It is rather expected that the
radio–FIR relation changes as galaxies evolve, since FIR
emission depends on the dust content and radio emission
is aﬀected by interstellar magnetic ﬁeld strength and pro-
duction/diﬀusion of high-energy electrons. The diﬀerent
time-scales of these processes may indicate a possibility
that the radio–FIR relation changes at high redshifts.
It has been clariﬁed observationally that the radio–FIR
hold with a factor of 2–3 times smaller FIR/radio ratio at
z <
∼ 2 (e.g., Garrett 2002; Gruppioni et al. 2003; Ibar et al.
2008; Murphy 2009). Micha lowski et al. (2010) reported
a similar relation to z ∼ 2 holds even at z ∼ 5.

The understanding of dust emission in high-redshift
galaxies is rapidly progressing because of advanced ob-
servational facilities such as Herschel (e.g., Rowlands et
al. 2014). ALMA, with its unprecedented sensitivity, is
starting to reveal the high-redshift star formation activi-
ties through dust emission. However, the narrow FoV of
ALMA makes the survey eﬃciency low. At radio wave-
lengths, on the other hand, although some surveys are
planned using the Jansky Very Large Array (JVLA), fu-
ture SKA observations are crucial to detect “normal”
star-forming galaxies whose star formation rate is ∼ 10
M⊙ yr−1 (Murphy 2009; Jarvis et al. 2015). The wide
FoV of SKA will provide a unique opportunity of trac-
ing the cosmic star formation history at wavelengths free
from dust extinction.

MID/Band 5 reference survey (Prandoni & Seymour
2015) at a frequency range of 4.6–13.8 GHz. Most pre-
vious surveys targeted low frequencies such as 1.4 GHz
because FoVs are wider and galaxies are brighter. For
example, Seymour et al. (2008) derived the cosmic star
formation history at z < 3 using Multi-Element Radio-
LInked Network (MERLIN) and the Very Large Array
(VLA) at 1.4 GHz as well as the VLA at 4.8 GHz, ob-
taining a consistent star formation history with various
optical surveys (see also Morrison et al. 2010). Smolˇci´c et
al. (2009) derived the cosmic star formation history and
the evolution of radio luminosity function out to z = 1.3
by observing the COSMOS ﬁeld with the VLA at 1.4
GHz. Smolˇci´c et al. (2014) observed the same ﬁeld at
an even lower frequencies (324 MHz) by the VLA, and
found objects with steep spectral slopes at z >

∼ 1.

Compared to those surveys, Murphy et al. (2015) focus
on higher frequencies for SKA, since the high sensitivity
of SKA enables us to perform a survey deep enough even
at frequencies >
∼ 10 GHz. According to their expectation,
about 30 and 85 sources per arcmin2 are detected. Such
a high frequency has an advantage of high angular reso-
lution. If we can take a 200 km baseline, an angular res-
olution of < 0.03 arcsec can be achieved at >10 GHz (yet
with enough short-baseline data to prevent galaxies from
being resolved out), which means that we can resolve
250 pc at z >
∼ 1. This angular resolution matches what is
achieved by future space optical–near-infrared telescopes
such as James Webb Space Telescope (JWST )2. Another
advantage of high-frequency surveys is that the contribu-
tion from free–free emission is relatively large compared
to low frequencies (such as 1.4 GHz). At high redshift, it
is expected that high-energy electrons lose their energy
through inverse Compton scattering of the cosmic back-
ground radiation, which means that synchrotron emis-
sion may not be a good indicator of the star formation
activities at high redshift (Murphy 2009).

It is worth mentioning the comparison with Next
Generation Very Large Array (ngVLA) (Casey et al.
2015). The ngVLA will achieve a factor of 5–10 times
improvement over the current JVLA. By assuming 10
times better sensitivity than VLA, ngVLA it will achieve
a 5σ detection limit of 0.06 µJy for 1000 hr of integration
time (we multiplied 0.1 to the detection limit estimated
for JVLA by Murphy et al. 2015) at 10 GHz. As cited in
Section 3.4.2, SKA1-MID and SKA2-MID will achieve a
5 σ detection limit of 0.2 and 0.02 µJy, respectively, with
1000 hr of integration . Therefore, ngVLA will have an
intermediate capability between SKA1-MID and SKA2-
MID. For convenience, we show the detection limit at

Murphy et al. (2015) focused on the ultra-deep SKA1-

2 http://www.jwst.nasa.gov/

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

11

as well as theoretical predictions, we can also make a
quick comparison when less luminous and/or more dis-
tant galaxies are detected by SKA and ALMA.

For the studies of galaxy formation and evolution, we
consider three representative redshift ranges. First is the
early Universe, in which stars are formed from gas and
galaxies grow. namely the nepionic period of galaxies,
at z > 3.
In particular, direct observation of a system
with an enormous amount of gas just before the ﬁrst
starburst is crucial to examine the physics of galaxy for-
mation. Second is the epoch in which galaxies establish
their global properties through the hierarchical structure
formation at 1 < z < 2. Galaxy morphology emerges in
this period. Also the average SFR, fraction of SF ac-
tivity hidden by dust, and merging rate of dark halos
and galaxies peak around this redshift range. Then this
is a tumultuous time of galaxy evolution. The last but
not least, the important epoch is z = 0. Though it looks
paradoxical, the evolution can be discussed only when
the zero-point, the property of nearby galaxies, is well
deﬁned. The Local Universe is also important to make
a crossover of the ISM physics and extragalactic physics,
to construct a large ﬂow of ISM–nearby galaxies–high-z
galaxies. We introduce our scientiﬁc themes related to
these three epochs in the following.

3.1 Nearby Galaxies: Evolution and Characteristics of

the ISM and Uniﬁed Understanding of Star
Formation

Here we describe the science targets that Japan will pur-
sue using SKA in the subject of nearby (∼ 10 Mpc) galaxy
studies. In particular, we focus on (1) the understanding
of ”dark gas”, which is believed to be the dominant com-
ponent in the transition phase between the atomic and
molecular gas, and (2) formation of stars from atomic gas
in low metallicity environments. The discussion provided
here is naturally linked to the SKA-JP ISM subgroup.

3.1.1 Dark Gas

The 21 cm line has been used as a gas mass tracer
under the assumption that the line is optically thin.
Contrary to this assumption, Fukui et al. (2015) sug-
gests the presence of optically thick atomic gas in
about 50% of the gas traced in 21 cm observations,
based on their detailed comparison between the distri-
bution of dust (from Planck) and H I data. They fur-
ther suggest that this optically thick gas is the com-
ponent that dominates the density range of 100 - 1000
cm−3, and undetected in CO or 21 cm observations
(”dark gas”). The important future direction is to

Fig. 2. The total FIR luminosity corresponding to the 5σ detection limits
of SKA2-MID and SKA1-MID (solid and dashed lines, respectively), as a
function of redshift.

various redshifts in Fig. 2, where the galaxy luminosity
is indicated by the far-infrared (FIR) luminosity (the to-
tal luminosity emitted by dust, which could be compared
to the 8–1000 µm luminosity). The FIR–radio correla-
tion in Totani & Takeuchi (2002) is used for the relation
between FIR and radio luminosities (see Section 3.4.2 for
details).

Although we emphasized high-frequency surveys
above, we must mention that tracing both free–free and
synchrotron components is the strong point of the wide
frequency coverage of SKA. The synchrotron component
provides independent information from the free–free com-
ponent, since it depends on the magnetic ﬁeld strength
in the ISM. Therefore, decomposing those two compo-
nents serves as a tracer of not only star formation but
also ampliﬁcation of magnetic ﬁeld.

3 Studies by SKA-Japan Members

We introduce the strong point in the studies of galax-
ies in Japan. Observationally the rich and deep knowl-
edge and experience of radio astronomy accumulated by
Nobeyama Radio Observatory etc. Especially we have
a practical advantage to have an access to the ALMA
observation time. As being very well-known, ALMA is
suitable for observing emissions from dust and various
molecules. The combination of such observations and HI
data from SKA, we can obtain a global picture of the re-
cycling of the ISM from atomic gas to the SF and metal
enrichment via molecular gas. As for the theoretical side,
we have a strong point for the simulation of galaxy for-
mation and chemical evolution theory. Thanks to this,

12

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

Fig. 3. The four processes for molecular gas formation on dust particles (adopted from Takahashi 2000).

compare the amount/distribution/kinematics of the ion-
ized/atomic/molecular gas (including dark gas) in galac-
tic and extra galactic sources. Pioneering studies have
been conducted using the Nobeyama 45m telescope (e.g.
Nakanishi et al. 2006; Tosaki et al. 2011; Kaneko et al.
2013), The Milky Way galaxy is the best target for a de-
tailed comparison between the galactic structure and the
characteristics of the ISM, but our location in the Galaxy
prevents us to conduct such a detailed study. The large
scale structure such as spiral arms or bar structure can
have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the physical condition of the
galactic ISM. SKA will allow us to study a typical grand-
design spiral galaxy located at 10 Mpc using ∼ 0.1 arcsec
(5 pc) angular resolution. An important science synergy
is to compare the atomic gas distribution obtained with
SKA, and the dust distribution obtained with ALMA in
nearby spiral galaxies.

The metallicity, which is proportional to the amount
of dust, aﬀects the physical condition of the ISM in galax-
ies, in addition to the kinematical disturbance mentioned
above. From recent theoretical studies, it is found that
the molecular ISM is not the necessary condition for star
formation, but the atomic gas can also lead to star forma-
tion in low metallically environments. Therefore, detailed
understanding of the atomic gas in the diﬀuse outskirts of
galaxies or dwarf galaxies can be one of the science goals
of SKA. We summarize the current understanding of the
atomic to molecular transition and the associated star
formation, following the review provided by Krumholz
(2013), in what follows.

3.1.2 Formation of Stars From Atomic Gas in

Low Metallicity Environments

In nearby galaxies, the star formation rate is well corre-
lated with molecular gas, but the correlation with atomic
gas is rather poor (Wong & Blitz 2002; Kennicutt et al.
2007; Bigiel et al. 2008; Leroy et al. 2008). The gas deple-
tion time scale tdep, which is the ratio between molecular
gas mass and star formation rate, is nearly constant in
nearby galaxies (∼ 2 Gyr; Bigiel et al. (2011)).

sociation determines the chemical condition of the inter-
stellar hydrogen (Omukai et al. 2012). Molecular gas for-
mation occurs on the surface of dust if the metallically is
higher than 1/100,000 of the solar value. The dissocia-
tion rate under a typical solar UV radiation is 5 × 10−11
s−1 per one hydrogen molecule (Draine & Bertoldi 1996),
while the formation rate under a molecular hydrogen col-
umn of 100 cm−3 is 3 × 10−15 s−1 per one hydrogen
molecule. Therefore, the predicted molecular hydrogen
abundance is only 10−4, if this formation and dissociation
balance is maintained. In reality, the Lyman-Werner UV
photons are eﬃciently shielded by the presence of dust,
allowing molecular clouds to form. Thus atomic hydro-
gen dominates the exterior region where the eﬀect of dust
attenuation is negligible, while the inner regions are more
dominated by the molecular gas due to the abundance of
dust (e.g., van Dishoeck & Black 1986; Sternberg 1988;
Neufeld & Spaans 1996; Liszt 2002; Glover & Mac Low
2007; Krumholz et al. 2008; Gnedin et al. 2009; McKee
& Krumholz 2010; Mac Low & Glover 2012).

The chemical and thermal condition of the interstel-
lar hydrogen gas are both related to the shielding of UV
light due to interstellar dust, and this may be the rea-
son for the good correlation between molecular gas and
star formation. The chemical condition is determined by
the balance between molecular hydrogen formation on
dust particles and the photo dissociation due to UV pho-
tons. The thermal condition is determined by the bal-
ance between the combination of photoelectric heating
due to UV photons and the thermal exchange of dust/gas
and the cooling due to line emission after collisional ex-
citation. Therefore, the dependence of thermal/chemical
process to the volume/column density and the UV radia-
tion ﬁeld are extremely similar. The cooling rate and the
formation rate are both proportional to the density and
metallically (n2Z ′), because the cooling due to line emis-
sion and the formation of molecular hydrogen are both
due to collisions. The UV dissociation and photoelectric
heating are both dependent on the UV radiation ﬁeld and
dust attenuation in the same way.

The balance between molecular gas formation and dis-

Because of this similarity, the correlation holds well

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

13

in a wide range of gas densities, dust attenuation, and
metallicity. The transition from atomic to molecular gas
occurs at > 100 K to 10 K, and this is determined by
the attenuation of dust: the temperature is low in re-
gions where dust attenuation is eﬃcient whereas the tem-
perature is high in regions with little dust attenuation.
Therefore, molecular hydrogen and star formation show
a good correlation: the transition from atomic to molec-
ular hydrogen is not directly related to the triggering of
star formation, but it is rather related to the decrease in
gas temperature.

In low metallicity environments, the timescale for the
transition from atomic to molecular hydrogen is com-
parable to the dynamical timescale, but the timescale
to reach thermodynamical equilibrium is 1/1000 shorter.
The chemical and thermal timescales both depend on the
metallicity, and they are longer in low metallicity envi-
ronments. On the other hand, the timescale for star for-
mation does not depend on metallicity. Therefore there
must exist a certain value of metallicity that satisﬁes
a condition in which (thermal timescale) < (dynamical
timescale) < (chemical timescale). This suggests that
star formation occurs before interstellar hydrogen be-
comes molecular, if the process that governs star forma-
tion is indeed the chemical condition and not the thermal
condition. In such a condition, the star formation rate
should correlate better with atomic hydrogen rather than
atomic hydrogen. This is also suggested in the numerical
simulations by Glover & Clark (2012), and further sug-
gested in the analytical model by Krumholz (2012) that
this eﬀect is seen in the ISM with metallicities of 1-10%
of the solar value.

The SKA-JP galaxy evolution subgroup will collab-
orate with the ALMA group, and investigate the spa-
tial distribution of the atomic-molecular transition as a
function of metallicity and galaxy evolution stage with a
future goal to compare the physical processes with the
galaxies in the high-z universe.

3.2 Construction and understanding of the extended
scaling laws of galaxies connecting gas, dust, and
SF

Once the main body of a galaxy has established, a
tight relation between some global properties of galaxies
emerges. This is referred to as the scaling relation, play-
ing an important role to study the evolution of galaxies.
The best-known scaling relation may be the above men-
tioned TF and BTF relations. There are also many other
scaling relations. However, we should note that most
of them are heuristic relations without physical explana-

tion. Here we introduce some scaling relations tightly
connected to the galaxy evolution, and discuss the way
to a synthesis and theoretial reasoning of these relations.

As we mentioned, the SFR is the most interested phys-
ical quantity from the point of view of galaxy evolution.
In 2015, the relation that gathers researchers’ attention is
the so-called “the main sequence of SF galaxies” . This is
a tight linear sequence of SF galaxies on the (logarithms
of) stellar mass M∗–SFR plane. Historically this is an
equivalent to the color–magnitude relation, but since it
is presented with more physical quantities like M∗ and
SFR, the scaling relation of SF galaxies appears very
prominently (e.g., Schiminovich et al. 2007, among oth-
ers).
It is not surprising that a trivial scaling relation
exists since both are global properties of galaxies. What
we should pay attention is that the slope of the linear re-
lation is shallower than unity, meaning the more massive
a galaxy is, the less eﬃcient the SF activity becomes.
This trend is referred to as the downsizing, which was
recognized in late 1980’s but has not been physically un-
derstood until now.

Starburst galaxies like ultraluminous infrared galaxies
(ULIRGs) do not locate on the main sequence, but dis-
tribute more than an order of magnitude above it (e.g.,
Buat et al. 2005, 2007). This implies that the main se-
quence is the relation of quiescently evolving SF galaxies,
or the staying time is long in the sequence. Galaxies that
already stopped their SF has SFR ∼ 0 and do not appear
on this plane. Therefore, studies from various point of
view are necessary to understand the relation. Genzel
et al. (2012) examined the amount of molecular gas in
the SF main sequence galaxies. The redshifts of their
sample is at 0 < z < 2, but it is not yet a systematic
statistical study. Magnelli et al. (2012) and Magnelli et
al. (2014) examined the relation between the tempera-
tures of dust and molecular gas in the main sequence
galaxies. However since the observational data of Hi is
limited to z < 0.5 at this moment, it is diﬃcult to dis-
cuss its evolutionary aspect. Also in relation between the
main sequence and the Kennicutt–Schmidt law discussed
in the following, a spatially resolved analysis of galaxies
is necessary (e.g., Teruya & Takeuchi 2014). Studies to
reveal the mechanism which shapes the main sequence
of SF galaxies in terms of the ISM physics will only be
possible with ALMA and SKA.

The SF is mainly determined by relatively local con-
ditions of the ISM in galaxies However, it has been well
known that the SF and integrated properties of a galaxy
are correlated (e.g., Roberts & Haynes 1994; Kennicutt
& Evans 2012). The existence of a correlation between lo-
cal properties, like the spiral arms, molecular clouds, Hii

14

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

regions, etc., and global properties like the morphology,
total mass, etc., is not a trivial phenomenon at all but an
important problem to be solved by the astrophysics. A
relation between the (surface) densities of gas and SFR,
which appears in various spatial scales, is the Kennicutt–
Schmidt (KS) law (see e.g., Kennicutt & Evans 2012, as
a review). The KS law is expressed as follows:

ΣSFR ∝ Σn

gas .

(2)

This relation is a single power law for more than six or-
ders of magnitude. The index n is observationally in a
range of 1 < n < 2. Whether n is closer to 1 or 2 deter-
mines the plausible scenario of the physical process in a
molecular gas to form stars (e.g., Momose et al. 2013).
The KS law is an important ingredient in the theory of
chemical evolution in galaxies, and gives a great impact
if it will be physically understood. Thus, the KS law is
of great interests from ISM to the extragalactic physics.
However, we should point out that still the KS law is
a purely empirical relation. Further, the debate on the
index n is not yet converged. In order to derive the KS
law from physical processes like the gravitational collapse
and/or collision of molecular clouds, a large galaxy sam-
ple with neutral and molecular gas information selected
by a homogeneous criterion is necessary to present the
relation with errors as small as possible. SKA will play
a unique role utterly impossible with other instruments.
With the sample obtained by SKA, we can explore the
spatially resolved KS law up to z ∼ 1 and clarify the gov-
erning physical processes. By synthesizing the all scaling
laws, we will ﬁnd a uniﬁed scaling law of galaxies. We
try to derive this uniﬁed relation from a ﬁrst principle.
Studies on galaxy evolution will be mature by such an
approach.

3.3 Exploration of galaxy evolution through H I 21-cm

absorption lines

As discussed in Section 2.6, gas absorption in the lines of
sight of bright continuum sources such as QSOs will en-
able us to trace the ISM and IGM at various redshifts. In
particular, Lyα absorption line systems are often used for
such studies. There have been some attempts of detect-
ing 21 cm absorption in DLAs (Lyα absorption systems
with NHI > 2 × 1020 cm−2), but most of the DLAs are
not detected, indicating small τ21 cm. This suggests that
a large fraction of the area of the ISM in the interven-
ing systems is covered by the warm ISM, whose typical
temperature is higher than 1,000 K (equation 1).

A high covering fraction of the warm ISM in DLA
hosts is also suggested by Hirashita et al. (2003, hereafter
H03), who interpreted the small fraction of H2 (Lyman-

Werner band absorption) detection for DLAs as due to
the predominant warm medium in which the equilibrium
H2 fraction (fH2 : the fraction of hydrogen nuclei in the
form of H2) is as low as <
∼ 10−6. Indeed, from some ob-
servations, although the H2 fraction is largely enhanced
<
∼ 10−7–10−5)
for some DLAs, stringent upper limits (fH2
are laid on a signiﬁcant fraction of DLAs (Black, Chaﬀee,
& Foltz 1987; Petitjean, Srianand, & Ledoux 2000). This
can also be interpreted as due to a low formation rate of
H2 in dust-poor environments relative to the Milky Way
(Levshakov et al. 2000; Ledoux, Petitjean, & Srianand
2003; Petitjean et al. 2006) or a high H2 dissociation rate
by strong UV radiation (Petitjean et al. 2000). However,
we should keep in mind that such upper limits do not ex-
clude the existence of molecule-rich clouds in these sys-
tems, because such clouds may have a very low volume
ﬁlling factor and may be rarely located in the line of
sight as shown by our study above (H03). Therefore, it
appears that the ISM structures, in which dense regions
are localized while most of the volume is occupied by the
warm diﬀuse medium, provide a common interpretation
for the lack of detections in both H I 21 cm absorption
and H2 in DLAs.

One of the possible contributions from the SKA-Japan
community is to provide a numerical simulation scheme
which can predict the statistics of 21 cm line optical
depth based on high-resolution density and temperature
structures and chemical reactions (especially H2 forma-
tion on dust). High-resolution simulations of the ISM in
the cosmological structure formation scenario have been
performed by e.g., Saitoh et al. (2009), Okamoto (2013),
and Yajima et al. (2015). These simulations will en-
ables us to obtain a tool for interpreting the statistics of
τ21 cm through its dependence on NHI and Ts (equation
1). We could also implement chemical reactions of other
species such as CO based on the formulation by Inoue
et al. (2007), who considered gamma-ray bursts instead
of QSOs for background sources. Moreover, the treat-
ment of H2 formation on dust could be reﬁned based on
recent eﬀorts on implementing dust enrichment and H2
formation in galaxy evolution simulations (Bekki 2015).
Detailed modeling of dust enrichment by Asano et al.
(2013) could be implemented in the simulations. These
lines of modeling will enable us to make a unique contri-
bution to H I absorption studies by SKA.

In the following, we demonstrate that modeling of the
ISM based on a high-resolution simulation is useful to in-
terpret the 21 cm absorption statistics. We use our pre-
vious 2-dimensional model in H03 for a ﬁrst step, since it
was used in our previous studies to interpret the paucity
of H2 detection in DLAs. The results will be used as a

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

15

basis for a future development using the state-of-the-art
simulations mentioned above. Braun (2012) adopted the
observational H I maps of nearby galaxies with a typical
spatial resolution of 15–100 pc and predicted the statis-
tics of τ21 cm for DLAs. However, we are also interested
in the H2 abundance, and it is diﬃcult to get observa-
tional H2 map down to the level of fH2 ∼ 10−6 (typical
detection limit for DLAs) even for nearby galaxies. The
theoretically made H2 map by H03 can serve to overcome
this diﬃculty. Since H2 formation is related to the dust
abundance (see e.g. Fynbo et al. 2011), we can also in-
clude the bias in the optical selection of QSOs caused
by dust extinction in a self-consistent way. We use the
same values as in H03 for the cosmological parameters:
(h, Ωm, ΩΛ, Ωb) = (0.7, 0.3, 0.7, 0.02h−2).

3.3.1 Simulation of the ISM structures in a DLA

host galaxy

We brieﬂy review the hydrodynamical simulation in H03.
It is a 2-dimensional hydrodynamical simulation of a
galactic disc based on Wada & Norman (2001). We chose
the parameter values appropriate for formation redshift
zvir = 3 and virial mass Mvir = 8.0 × 1010 M⊙. A 1 kpc ×
1 kpc area is simulated with 2048 × 2048 grids. We refer
the interested reader to H03 for the simulated hydrogen
column density (NH) and gas temperature (Tgas) maps.
Although they concentrate on H2 fraction in DLAs, the
same framework is applicable for 21 cm optical depth.
To avoid the eﬀect of the boundary conditions we only
use the central 450 pc radius. Although the host galaxies
of DLAs are not necessarily large disk galaxies, we only
use the simulation to model the structures of the ISM
created by hydrodynamical evolution. We assume that
such hydrodynamical structures are common for possible
DLA hosts.

To choose the possible lines of sight for DLAs, we only
adopt the grids where NH ≥ 2 × 1020cm−2. We also in-
troduce the dust extinction eﬀect, since if the extinction
is so large that the background QSO is obscured, such
a line of sight cannot sample DLAs. Vladilo & P´eroux
(2005) showed strong lack of DLAs with zinc column den-
sity NZn > 1013.2cm−2, which they explained with the
eﬀect of extinction in metal-rich environments. For each
of the grids in our simulated galaxy, we calculate NZn
as NZn = 10−7.35(Z/Z⊙)NH, where the factor 10−7.35 is
the number ratio of Zn to H in the solar composition
(Anders & Grevesse 1989) and Z/Z⊙ is the metallicity
normalized to the solar metallicity. We treat the metal-
licity as a free parameter. We exclude those grids where
NZn > 1013.2 cm−2, consistent with the observed extinc-
tion bias mentioned above.

We calculate the optical depth of 21 cm absorption
τ21 cm on each grid using equation (1). We assume that
Ts = Tgas, since the density is high enough for the spin
temperature to approach the kinetic temperature (Field
1958). We also assume that all hydrogen is in atomic
form; i.e. NHI = NH. We adopt ∆v = 10 km s−1 based on
the typical nonthermal velocity dispersions observed in
galaxies (Braun et al. 2009). We also calculate a quantity
free from the assumptions on ∆v by integrating τ21 cm
over the entire line proﬁle:

Z τ21 cm dv = 0.54(cid:16) Ts

103 K(cid:17)−1(cid:16)

NH

1021 cm−2(cid:17) km s−1.

(3)

Under a given NH and Tgas at each grid, we evalu-
ate fH2 = 2nH2 /nH, where nH and nH2 are the number
densities of hydrogen nuclei and H2, respectively. The
formulae are summarized in section 2.1 of Hirashita &
Ferrara (2005). We assume the following equilibrium con-
dition: Rdust = Rdiss, where Rdust and Rdiss are the rates
of H2 formation on dust grains and H2 dissociation by
UV radiation per unit volume, respectively. We adopt
a dust grain radius of 0.1 µm, a dust material density
of 3 g cm−3, and the typical UV radiation ﬁeld in the
solar neighbourhood. The local hydrogen number den-
sity is related to the column density as nH = NH/H (the
thickness of disk is assumed to be H = 100 pc). Since
the dependence of Rdust on the dust temperature (Td)
is weak, we simply adopt Td = 20 K. For the dust-to-gas
ratio, we adopt a scaling relation with the metallicity as
D = 0.01(Z/Z⊙).

3.3.2 Results and Comparison with Observations

Fig. 4. Probability distribution function ofR τ21 cm dv with various extinc-

tions scaled with the metallicity. The solid, dotted, dashed, and dot-dashed
lines show the results for Z = 0, 0.1, 0.3, and 1 Z⊙, respectively. The upper
horizontal axis shows τ21 cm with ∆v = 10 km s−1.

16

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

We show the probability distribution function of
τ21 cm in Fig. 4. The probability distribution is calcu-
lated by counting the number of grids in each logarith-
mic bin of τ21 cm and normalizing the total probability
to unity. For the case without extinction, we clearly ﬁnd

two peaks around R τ21 cm dv ∼ 0.1 and 10. The higher

peak around τ21 cm ∼ 0.01 is originating from the warm
diﬀuse medium where column density is relatively small
(but larger than 2 × 1020cm−2; Section 3.3.1) with high
temperature (Tgas >
∼ 103 K), while the lower peak around
τ21 cm ∼ 1 is due to cool and dense regions. We em-
phasize that the dominant contribution of the warm dif-
fuse component is due to the natural consequence of the
compressible hydrodynamical evolution (see also Wada
& Norman 2001), not due to the stellar feedback, which
we neglected.
In other words, the dominant warm dif-
fuse ISM is a natural consequences of the compressible
hydrodynamical evolution of the ISM.

We also show the distribution of τ21cm with the dust
extinction eﬀect for Z = 0.1, 0.3, and 1 Z⊙ in Fig. 4. It
is obvious that the abundance dramatically decreases at
large τ21cm originating from high column density regions
where the extinction is large. The peak at τ21cm ∼ 0.01
is relatively enhanced as the extinction bias becomes
stronger.

Some features in Fig. 4 match the observational prop-
erties of 21 cm absorption in DLAs. A large fraction of
DLAs are not detected in 21 cm absorption and typical

upper limits of τ21 cm is roughly ∼ 0.02 (or R τ21 cm dv ∼

0.2 km s−1) (Srianand et al. 2012; Kanekar et al. 2014).
The peak of the distribution is at τ21cm ∼ 0.01, explain-
ing well the non-detection. Therefore we conclude that
the lack of 21 cm absorption detection for DLAs is due
to the combination of two eﬀects: a large covering frac-
tion of the warm diﬀuse medium and an extinction bias
against large τ21 cm(>
∼ 1). The possible overestimate of
the area of dense regions (Section 3.3.1) strengthens our
conclusion of the signiﬁcance of the lines of sight with
small τ21 cm.

In Fig. 5, we show the cumulative distribution of

R τ21 cm dv. The cumulative distribution P (<R τ21 cm dv)

is deﬁned as the probability of having the integrated
τ21 cm smaller than a given value. For the observational
data, we refer to Srianand et al. (2012) and Kanekar et
al. (2014) with total 48 available DLAs. Since a large
fraction of them only have upper limits of τ21 cm, we use
the upper limits for the observed value (solid line in Fig.
5). Thus, the real distribution should be on the left side
of the solid line. Note that these data are not aimed
at complete sampling so that our attempt of compari-
son here provides only a ﬁrst step for quantitative test.

Fig. 5. Cumulative distribution ofR τ21cm dv. The solid line shows the ob-

servational distribution constructed by the samples in Srianand et al. (2012)
and Kanekar et al. (2014). Note that most of the observational data are
upper limits, which are plotted as detected; thus, the real observational dis-
tribution should be on the left side of the solid line. The dotted, dashed, and
dot-dashed lines show our theoretical results with Z = 0.1, 0.3, and 1 Z⊙,
respectively. The result for Z = 0 is almost identical with that for Z = 0.1
Z⊙.

From the ﬁgure, we conclude that at low R τ21cm dv, the

theoretical predictions are consistent with the observa-
tion, since they lie on the left side of the solid line. This
again conﬁrms that the lack of detection of 21 cm ab-
sorption for DLAs is due to the large area covered by
small τ21 cm. However, the theoretical prediction over-

produces the probability distribution at large R τ21cm dv.

The case with the highest metallicity is the most consis-
tent with the data, since the extinction bias enhances the
abundance of DLAs with small τ21 cm. The discrepancy
may be due to the possible overestimate of the covering
fraction of dense regions as mentioned in Section 3.3.1.

3.3.3 Relation between fH2 and τ21 cm
Figure 6a shows the probability distribution function of
fH2 for various ranges of τ21 cm. We simply adopt Z =
0.1 Z⊙, but the metallicity does not change the trend
between τ21 cm and fH2 . As expected, there is a trend
that large fH2 appears as τ21 cm becomes larger.

At τ21 cm > 0.02 for which the current typical sensi-
tivity could detect 21 cm absorption, the scatter of fH2
is large as shown in Fig. 6a. Moreover, the peak still lies
at fH2 < 10−6 even for τ21 cm > 0.02. On the other hand,
a small τ21 cm implies a low fH2 (<
∼ 10−6). Fig. 6b shows
the probability distribution function of τ21 cm for various
ranges of fH2 . We observe that the distribution shifts to-

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

17

Fig. 6. (a) Distribution function of fH2 for τ21 cm < 0.01 (solid line), 0.01 < τ21 cm < 0.02 (dashed line), and τ21 cm > 0.02 (dot-dashed line). (b)
Distribution function of τ21 cm for fH2 < 10−7 (solid line), 10−7 < fH2 < 10−5 (dotted line), 10−5 < fH2 < 10−3 (dot-dashed line), and fH2 > 10−3.

ward larger τ21 cm as fH2 becomes larger. This indicates
>
∼ 10−3, there is a large
that, if we choose DLAs with fH2
probability of detecting 21 cm absorption. On the other
hand, small fH2 < 10−5 does not necessarily mean that
detection of 21 cm absorption is hard, since there is a
signiﬁcant tail toward τ21 cm > 0.02 even for fH2 < 10−5.

Our theoretical predictions are summarized as follows:
(i) non-detection of 21 cm absorption (τ21 cm <
∼ 0.02) in-
<
∼ 10−6). As a corol-
dicates a small H2 fraction (fH2
>
∼ 10−3)
lary of this, a large H2 fraction (especially fH2
(ii) Detection
favours a detectable 21 cm absorption.
of 21 cm (τ21 cm >
∼ 0.02) does not necessarily mean a
large H2 fraction. As a corollary of this, a small H2
<
∼ 10−5) does not necessarily lead to a non-
fraction (fH2
detection of 21 cm absorption. These two predictions are
broadly supported by the existing sample in Srianand et
al. (2012) and Kanekar et al. (2014), although the num-
ber of sample (∼ 10) is small. The exception for (i) is the
DLAs associated with J040718.0−441013 (zabs = 2.59475;

R τ21 cmdv < 1.61 km s−1 and log fH2 = −2.61) and with
J053007.9−250330 (zabs = 2.81115; R τ21 cmdv < 0.58 km

s−1 and log fH2 = −2.83). However, the upper limits for
τ21 cm is still large (0.16 and 0.058, respectively, if we as-
sume ∆v = 10 km s−1). The prediction (ii) is supported
by the current sample. We need to test these predictions
by a larger sample, which would be a critical test for our
theory.

3.3.4 Requirement for future 21-cm absorption

observations of DLAs

As shown above, a large part of DLAs are predicted to
have τ21 cm <
∼ 0.01 down to 10−3. Therefore, in order to
detect 21 cm absorption of a major part of DLAs with 3
σ, we need to achieve a signal-to-noise ratio of 3000 (i.e.,
a spectral dynamic range of 35 dB). Assuming a typical
ﬂux of 100 mJy for background QSOs (Srianand et al.
2012), a root-mean-square (rms) noise level of 33 nJy is
required. The current rms achieved by GBT and GMRT
is typically a few mJy for an integration time of ∼ 10 h
(e.g., Srianand et al. 2012). A 100 times larger collecting
area compared with the currently available large radio
telescopes, the same integration time would achieve an
rms of a few ×10 nJy. SKA would have this kind of large
collecting area.

3.4 Tracing the star formation activities with radio

continuum

We have been contributing to the studies of galaxy evo-
lution in the radio through modeling of galaxy number
count (Takeuchi et al. 2001) and of spectral energy dis-
tribution (SED) (Totani & Takeuchi 2002; Hirashita &
Hunt 2006). We also plan a survey observation based on
our submillimetre galaxy survey being or to be planned.

3.4.1 SED models of young starbursts

As mentioned in Section 2.7, SKA is sensitive enough
to conduct wide-area surveys at >
∼ 10 GHz, a relatively
high frequency unexplored for wide-area deep surveys. At

18

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

such a high frequency, the relative contribution of free–
free emission to synchrotron emission is larger than at
lower frequencies. In particular, the importance of trac-
ing free–free emission is pronounced if we target young
starbursts.
Indeed, some authors have shown that the
radio SEDs of nearby young starbursts have ﬂat slopes,
which can be interpreted as being dominated by free–
free emission (Deeg et al. 1993; Roussel et al. 2003; Hunt
et al. 2005). However, the dependence of radio spectral
index on age has not been clariﬁed yet, especially for
high-redshift galaxies. The wide-band coverage of SKA
is suitable to systematically survey the evolution of radio
spectral index as a function of redshift.

One of the ongoing activities of SKA-Japan is to model
the radio SED based on an empirical approach using the
radio–FIR relation (Takeuchi et al. 2001) or based on
a theoretical approach treating the evolution of H ii re-
gions and supernova remnants in a consistent manner
with the star formation history (Hirashita & Hunt 2006;
Hirashita 2011). One of the results applied to the cen-
tral starburst in a nearby blue compact dwarf galaxy,
II Zw 40, is shown in Figure 7. We give the total gas
mass M0 and initial hydrogen number density nH0, and
evaluate the star formation rate as a function of time
as ψ(t) = (ǫSFM0/tﬀ)e−ǫSFt/tﬀ , where we adopt the star
foramtion eﬃciency ǫSF = 0.1 and the free-fall time tﬀ
estimated by nH,0. The emission measure of the ionized
region, which is necessary to calculate the free–free com-
ponent, is estimated consistently with the total number
of ionizing photons produced by massive stars and the
change of hydrogen number density nH by the pressure-
driven expansion. The synchrotron component is also
included based on the calculated number of supernova
remnants. Free–free absorption, which is important at
low frequencies, is also considered.

In Figure 7a, we show the radio SEDs at t = 1, 3, and
5 Myr with nH0 = 105 cm−3 and M0 = 3×106 M⊙. As the
age becomes older, the peak shifts to lower frequencies,
because the free-free optical depth becomes smaller as
the H ii region expands (the decline of the ﬂux at low
frequencies is due to free–free absorption). At t = 1 and
3 Myr, the emission is completely dominated by free–free
emission, and at t = 5 Myr, the synchrotron component
begins to contribute to the emission and the spectrum
slope changes. For comparison, the VLA ‘matched’ data
whose (u, v) coverage is restricted to baselines greater
than 20kλ (i.e., sensitive to structures smaller than 4′′)
are adopted (three triangles in Fig. 7) as representative
ﬂuxes from the central star-forming region.

The density strongly aﬀects the frequency at which
the ﬂux peaks because free–free absorption is sensitive

Fig. 7. Radio SEDs for the central (4′′) starburst in II Zw 40 (Hirashita
2011). (a) Solid, dotted, and dashed lines show the SEDs calculated by
the theoretical model for ages 1, 3, and 5 Myr, respectively. The initial
hydrogen number density and the total mass converted into stars are ﬁxed
with nH0 = 105 cm−3 and M0 = 3 × 106 M⊙, respectively. The ﬁlled
square represents our Submillimeter Array (SMA) measurement at 880 µm
for the central star-forming region (Hirashita 2011). Diamonds show single-
dish measurements by Jaﬀe et al. (1978), Klein et al. (1984), and Klein et al.
(1991), while asterisks at 6 and 3.6 cm are the VLA ﬂuxes synthesized by all
the (u, v) data, which are sensitive to structures up to 10 arcsec and 7 arcsec,
respectively (Beck et al. 2002): these data are also senstive to emissions
more extended than the central star-forming region. The triangles at 6, 3.6,
and 2 cm are the matched VLA ﬂuxes obtained by restricting (u, v) data to
baselines greater than 20kλ (i.e., sensitive to the structures smaller than 4′′)
(Beck et al. 2002). We compare the models with these data (triangles). (b)
Same as Panel (a) but for the SEDs at 3 Myr with various initial densities.
Solid, dotted, and dashed lines are for nH0 = 3 × 104, 105, and 3 × 105
cm−3, respectively (nH = 1.8 × 103, 3.2 × 103, and 5.4 × 103 cm−3 at 3
Myr, respectively; since we consider the expansion of H ii region, the density
becomes lower than the initial value). (c) Same as Panel (a) but for the best-
ﬁt model parameters (M0 [M⊙], nH0 [cm−3]) = (1.1 × 107, 2.2 × 104),
(3.5 × 106, 1.2 × 105), and (4.1 × 106, 1.2 × 105) at three given ages,
1, 3, and 5 Myr, for the solid, sotted, and dashed lines, respectively. The
ﬁtting is applied for the three triangles (the matched VLA ﬂuxes).

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

19

to the density. In Fig. 7b, we show the SEDs at t = 3
Myr for various initial densities (nH0) with M0 = 3 ×
106 M⊙. We observe that the peak position of the SED
is indeed sensitive to the density. The rising spectrum of
the matched data (triangles) is consistent with free–free
absorption.

It is possible to search for the best-ﬁt values of M0 and
nH0 for each age. The matched VLA data are adopted
(three triangles in Fig. 7) for the χ2 ﬁtting, since our
models are applicable to the central star-forming region.
The best-ﬁt solutions are shown in Fig. 7c. As seen in
Fig. 7c, the spectral slope at ν >
∼ 15 GHz at t = 5 Myr is
diﬀerent from that at t ≤ 3 Myr because of the contribu-
tion from the synchrotron component.

If the age is about 3 Myr as suggested from the optical
and near-infrared observations (Vanzi et al. 2008), 75 per
cent of the 880 µm ﬂux obtained in the SMA observation
(Hirashita 2011), which is sensitive to the central star-
burst, is explained by free–free emission according to the
best-ﬁt SED at 3 Myr (the ﬂux at 880 µm is 10.2 mJy in
the model, while the observed ﬂux is 13.6 mJy). The dif-
ference (≃ 3.4 mJy) is likely to be due to the dust and/or
diﬀuse (i.e., not associated with the compact H ii region)
free–free emission.

The above example indicates that, if we focus on the
young starburst, the radio emission can be dominated by
free–free emission. At the same time, if the starburst is
occuring in a dense and compact region, which is likely
because of the short free–fall time-scale, emission at <
∼ 10
GHz could be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by free–free absorp-
tion. Therefore, if we would like to trace a young star-
burst, it would be desirable to target frequencies > 10
GHz.

3.4.2 Radio survey and combination with submm

data

Utilizing the galaxy survey data already taken by ALMA
could make a strong scientiﬁc case, especially because
Japan has access to ALMA. Submm surveys, which will
be conducted by ALMA, are always aﬀected by some bias
caused by dust temperature, as shown below. In contrast,
radio surveys at frequencies that SKA can access have an
advantage of avoiding a bias caused by dust temperature,
if we assume that the radio–FIR relation always holds.
(In fact, we should keep in mind that there are other
complications at radio wavelengths such as the variation
of spectral slope, or the relative ratio between free–free
and synchrotron emissions.)

Before considering an SKA survey, we investigate
what kind of preparatory survey can be performed by
ALMA. We focus on 350 GHz (λ = 850 µm) for the tar-

get frequency, but using a wavelength around 1 mm does
not change the conclusions below. A shorter wavelength
has much lower eﬃciency because of a smaller ﬁeld of
view (FoV) and less chance of suitable atmospheric con-
ditions. The largest disadvantage of ALMA is a narrow
FoV ∼ 0.047 arcmin2 at 350 GHz (assuming a primary
beam of 12-m dish), which makes the survey eﬃciency
extremely low. On the contrary, SKA has a wide FoV.
SKA-MID has a FoV ∼ 37 arcmin2 (assuming a primary
beam of 15-m dish). Therefore, ALMA needs 790 point-
ings to cover a FoV of SKA.

Now let us assume that an on-source observational
time is 1,000 hr for both SKA and ALMA. Such a long
observational time may be appropriate for future legacy
observations of both telescopes. Then, we can spend 1.3
hours per ﬁeld by ALMA. Using the ALMA sensitivity
calculator3, root mean squeare σ ≃ 16 µJy is achieved
with 60 antennas at 350 GHz. Therefore, we adopt 80
µJy (5σ) for the detection limit. On the other hand,
we adopt a 5σ detection limit of 0.2 µJy at 10 GHz for
SKA1-MID and 0.02 µJy at 10 GHz for SKA2-MID (e.g.,
Murphy et al. 2015), for an integration time of 1,000 hr.
The detection limit ﬂux of SKA1-MID is 10 times larger.
To clarify the population expected to be detected at
the ALMA survey described above, we show the rela-
tion between the dust temperature, Td, and the total
IR luminoisity (total luminosity emitted by dust, which
could be compared to the 8–1000 µm luminosity), LFIR,
in Figure 8, adopting the 5σ detection limit, 80 µJy, at
350 GHz. We adopt the FIR–radio SED model by Totani
& Takeuchi (2002), who give the SED under given Td and
LFIR. They also empirically included radio emission by
assuming the observed radio–FIR correlation in nearby
galaxies.4 In Figure 8 (upper panel), we plot the mini-
mum LFIR detected for an object with a dust tempera-
ture Td; that is, objects with the FIR luminosity larger
than the minimum (or the right side of the curve) can be
detected. From Figure 8, we observe that the ALMA 350
GHz survey does not have strong redshift dependence for
the dust temperatures usually observed (> 20 K), which
is due to the so-called negative K-correction, and that
the sample is strongly biased against high Td. This kind
of bias was already pointed out by Chapman et al. (2005).
On the other hand, SKA2-MID 10 GHz detection limit
does not depend on dust temperature, and is only deter-

3 https://almascience.eso.org/proposing/sensitivity-calculator
4 If we simply use the radio–FIR relation to estimate the radio luminosity
from the total FIR luminosity, the radio ﬂux should not depend on the
dust temperature. However, Totani & Takeuchi (2002)’s model, which we
adopt, has a weak dependence of dust temperature through their equation
11. To avoid this dependence we always adopt a ﬁxed value for Tdust = 30
K in calculating the 10 GHz ﬂux.

20

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

unsolved problems in this ﬁeld. At z ∼ 0, we try to con-
struct a uniﬁed picture of atomic and molecular hydrogen
through nearby galaxies in terms of metallicity and other
various ISM properties. In previous studies, the knowl-
edge from the ISM physics was not eﬃciently used in
extragalactic stuies, mainly because of the limitation of
the angular resolution in radio observations today. The
ultimately high high angular resolution of SKA at cm
wavelengths will bring us the unprecedented information
of the physical state of the ISM in galaxies. By SKA, we
will be able to push forward the H I–H2 transition toward
signiﬁcantly high-z and discuss its evolution.

Up to intermediate redshifts z ∼ 1, we explore scal-
ing relations including gas and star formation properties,
like the main sequence and the Kennicutt–Schmidt law
of star forming galaxies. To connect the global stud-
ies with spatially-resolved investigations, such relations
will be plausibly a viable way. Especially in relation to
the H I–H2 topic, the Kennicutt–Schmidt law provides
a unique opportunity, since this relation holds both for
resolved (local) and global galaxy properties. If we can
trace the evolution (or constancy) of these scaling rela-
tions, we can constrain the star formation scenarios in
galaxy evolution. It is particularly important since it is
the way how to connect the ISM physics and extragalac-
tic physics and organize them on the common basis. Only
SKA can achieve such observations.

At high redshift, it would be very diﬃcult to detect the
H I emission of galaxies, even with SKA2. Instead, the
absorption lines of HI 21-cm line will be a very promis-
ing observable to explore the properties of gas in galaxies.
We are interested in the physical processes going on dur-
ing the galaxy formation. One of the ideal proves for
this is a high column density system like DLAs. Though
DLAs are alreacy extensively studied in the ﬁeld of galaxy
formation and cosmology, one possible bias was pointed
out.
If a DLA contains even a tiny amount of dust,
it would bias the detection probability of background
quasars. This plausible bias can be compensated by se-
lecting radio-loud quasars and explore the 21-cm absorp-
tion line system. Since the cross section of such system
is small, we can examine their physical properties even if
the column density is extremely high.

Apart from H I, we have yet another great probe for
the star formation history in the whole range of the cos-
mic time. The radio continuum at ν >
∼ 10 GHz consists
of thermal free-free and synchrotron emission. Both of
these radiation processes are related to the star forma-
tion activity in galaxies, and work as a good tracer of the
SFR. Since the feasibility of the radio continuum by SKA
is much higher than that of H I 21-cm line, the radio con-

Fig. 8. Dust temperature (Td) vs. total FIR luminosity (LFIR) correspond-
ing to the detection limits for ALMA (350 GHz) and SKA2-MID (10 GHz)
under the condition that a FoV of SKA2-MID (30 arcmin2) is surveyed in
an on-source integration time of 1,000 hr. The solid, dotted, dashed, dot-
dashed, triple-dot-dashed lines present the 5σ detection limits galaxies at
z = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively. Objects whose total FIR luminosity is
larger than (i.e., on the right side of) each line are detected. The thick
curves are for ALMA and the thin vertical lines are for SKA2-MID. The de-
tection limit for SKA1-MID can be easily estimated by shifting each line for
SKA2-MID by 10 times towards larger LFIR.

mined by FIR luminosity in our model.

In Figure 8, we observe that SKA2-MID has a similar
sensitivity to ALMA in terms of LFIR at z >
∼ 3 if we as-
sume a normal dust temperature (20–40 K). Therefore,
the combination of these two surveys are suitable to in-
vestigate the evolution of radio–FIR survey at z >
∼ 3. At
the same time, SKA2-MID is also capable of studying a
<
∼ 1011 L⊙) galaxies with
population of low-LFIR (LFIR
>
high dust temperature Tdust
∼ 30 K, which are missed by
ALMA surveys. SKA1-MID, which has a ten times worse
sensitivity than SKA2-MID, is suitable to study galaxies
at z <

∼ 2 detected by ALMA surveys.

4 Summary

Galaxies have been formed from a homogeneous neutral
gas in the early Universe, and evolved with forming stars
from the gas in them. Then the key factor of the galaxy
formation and evolution is the transition from atomic to
molecular hydrogen. This transition is also strongly cou-
pled with chemical evolution, because dust grains play a
critical role in molecular formation. Therefore, a com-
prehensive understanding of neutral–molecular gas tran-
sition, star formation and chemical enrichment is neces-
sary to clarify the galaxy formation and evolution.

The SKA-Japan galaxy evolution subSWG is working
on the following topics among vast variety of interesting

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

21

tinuum is very suitable for the exploration of the cosmic
SFR from the very early phase of galaxy formation.

By these studies, we will surely witness a real revolu-

tion in the studies of galaxies by SKA.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to K. Kohno for useful comments. TTT has
been supported by the Grant-in-Aid for the Scientiﬁc Research
Fund (23340046) commissioned by the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) of Japan. HH
thanks the support from the Ministry of Science and Technology
(MoST) grant 102-2119-M-001-006-MY3.

References

Kalberla, P. M. W., & Kerp, J., 2009, ARA&A, 47, 27
Kaneko, H., et al., 2013, PASJ, 65, 20
Nakanishi, H. & Sofue, Y., 2016, PASJ, 68, 5
Nakanishi, H. et al., 2006, ApJ, 651, 804
Sofue, Y. & Rubin, V., 2001, ARA&A, 39, 137
Tosaki, T. et al., 2011, PASJ, 63, 1171
Akerman, C. J., Ellison, S. L., Pettini, M., & Steidel, C. C.

2005, A&A, 440, 499

Allen, S. W. et al. 2003, MNRAS, 342, 2887
Anders E., Grevesse N., 1989, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 53,

197

Asano, R. S., Takeuchi, T. T., Hirashita, H., Nozawa, T. 2013,

MNRAS, 432, 637

Asano, R. S., Takeuchi, T. T., Hirashita, H., & Nozawa, T.

2014, MNRAS, 440, 134

Babul A. & Rees M. J., 1992, MNRAS, 255, 346
Bacon R. et al., 2001, MNRAS, 326, 23
Barnes J. E. et al., 2001, MNRAS, 322, 486
Beck, S. C., Turner, J. L., Langland-Shula, L. E., Meier, D. S.,

Crosthwaite, L. P., & Gorjian, V. 2002, AJ, 124, 2516

Begum A. et al., 2008, MNRAS, 386, 1667
Benson A. J., et al., 2002, MNRAS, 333, 156
Bell, E. F. & de Jong, R. S., 2001, ApJ, 550, 212
Bekki, K. 2015, MNRAS, 449, 1625
Bigiel, F. et al., 2008, AJ, 136, 2846
Bigiel, F., et al., 2011, ApJ, 730, 13
Bigiel, F. & Blitz, L., 2012, ApJ, 756, 183
Black J. H., Chaﬀee F. H. Jr., Foltz C. B., 1987, ApJ, 317, 442
Blitz, L. & Rosolowsky, E., 2004, ApJ, 612, 29
Boselli, A. et al., 2002, A&A, 564, 66
Bosma, A., 1981, AJ, 86, 1791
Briggs F. H., Brinks E., Wolfe A. M., 1997, AJ, 113, 467
Braun R., 2012, ApJ, 749, 87
Braun R., Thilker D. A., Walterbos R. A. M., Corbelli E. 2009,

ApJ, 695, 937

Buat, V., Iglesias-P´aramo, J., Seibert, M., et al. 2005, ApJ, 619,

L51

Buat, V., Takeuchi, T. T., Iglesias-P´aramo, J., et al. 2007,

ApJS, 173, 404

Butcher, H. and Oemler, Jr., A. 1978, ApJ, 219, 18
Butcher, H., Wells, D. C. and Oemler, Jr., A. 1983, ApJS, 52,

183

Cannon J. M. et al., 2011, ApJ, 739, 22
Cantinella B. et al., 2010, MNRAS, 403, 683
Catinella B. et al., 2012b, A&A, 544, 65
Catinella B. et al., 2012a, MNRAS, 420, 1959
Catinella B. et al., 2013, MNRAS, 436, 34
Cappellari M. et al., 2011, MNRAS, 416, 1680
Carilli C. L., Lane W., de Bruyn A. G., Braun R., Miley G. K.,

1996, AJ, 111, 1830

Casey, C. M., et al. 2015, Next Generation Very Large Array

Memos Series, No. 8 (arXiv:1510.06411)

Chapman, S. C., Blain, A. W., Smail, I., & Ivison, R. J. 2005,

ApJ, 622, 772

Condon, J. J. 1992, ARA&A, 30, 575
Curran S. J., Tzanavaris P., Darling J. K., Whiting M. T., Webb
J. K., Bignell C., Athreya R., Murphy M. T., 2010, MNRAS,
402, 35

Dave R., Oppenheimer B. D. & Finlator K., 2011, MNRAS,

415, 11

de Blok W. J. G. et al., 2003, MNRAS, 340, 657
de Blok W. J. G., 2005, ApJ, 634, 227
de Bruyn A. G., O’Dea C. P., Baum S. A., 1996, A&A, 305, 450
Deeg, H.-J., Brinks, E., Duric, N., Klein, U., & Skillman, E.

1993, ApJ, 410, 626

Dekel A. et al., 2009a, Nature, 457, 451
Dekel A., Sari R. & Ceverino D., 2009b, ApJ, 703, 785
Draine B. T., Bertoldi F., 1996, ApJ, 468, 269
Ellison, S. L., Hall, P. B., & Lira, P. 2005, AJ, 130, 1345
Elmegreen, B. G., 1993, ApJ, 411, 170
Fall, S. M., & Pei, Y. C. 1993, ApJ, 402, 479
Fern´andez, X. et al., 2013, ApJ, 770, 29
Ferrara A. & Tolstoy E., 2000, MNRAS, 313, 291
Field G. B., 1958, Proc. I.R.E., 46, 240
Fumagalli, M., Krumholz, M. R. & Hunt, L. K., 2010, ApJ, 722,

919

Fukui, Y. et al., 2015, ApJ, 798, 6
Furlanetto S. R., Oh S. P., Briggs F. H., 2006, Phys. Rep., 433,

181

Fynbo J. P. U., et al., 2011, MNRAS, 413, 2481
Garrett, M. A. 2002, A&A, 384, L19
Genzel, R., Tacconi, L. J., Combes, F., et al. 2012, ApJ, 746,

69

Giovanelli R. & Haynes M. P., 1983, AJ, 88, 881
Giovanelli R. et al., 2005, AJ, 130, 2598
Glover, S. C. O. & Mac Low, M., 2007, ApJ, 659, 1317
Glover, S. C. O. & Clark, P. C., 2012, MNRAS, 421, 9
Gnedin, N. Y., Tassis, K. & Kravtsov, A. V., 2009, ApJ, 697,

55

Gouguenheim L., 1969, A&A, 3, 281
Gould, R. J. & Salpeter, E. E., 1963, ApJ, 138, 393
Grebel E. K. et al., 2003, AJ, 125, 1926
Grossi M. et al., 2009, A&A, 498, 407
Gruppioni, C., Pozzi, F., Zamorani, G., Ciliegi, P., Lari, C.,
Calabrese, E., La Franca, F., Matute, I. 2003, MNRAS, 341,
L1

Hibbard J. E. et al., 2001, ASPC, 240, 657
Hirashita H., Ferrara A., Wada K., Richter P., 2003, MNRAS,

341, L18 (H03)

Hirashita H., Ferrara A., 2005, MNRAS, 356, 1529

22

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

Hirashita H., & Hunt, L. K. 2006, A&A, 460, 67
Hirashita, H. 2011, MNRAS, 418, 828
Hirashita, H., et al. 2015, PASJ, submitted
Hoeft M. et al., 2006, MNRAS, 371, 401
Hollenbach D. J., McKee C. F., 1979, ApJS, 41, 555
Hollenbach, D. & Salpeter, E. E., 1971, ApJ, 163, 155
Honma, M., Sofue, Y. & Arimoto, N., 1995, A&A, 304, 1
Hunt, L. K., Dyer, K. K., & Thuan, T. X. 2005, A&A, 436, 837
Hunter D. A. et al., 2012, AJ, 144, 134
Ibar, E., et al. 2008, MNRAS, 386, 953
Inoue, A. K., Hirashita, H., & Kamaya, H. 2000, PASJ, 52, 539
Inoue, S., Omukai, K., & Ciardi, B. 2007, MNRAS, 280, 1715
Jaﬀe, W. J., Perola, G. C., & Tarenghi, M. 1978, ApJ, 224, 808
Jaﬀ´e, Y. L. et al. 2012, ApJ, 756, L28
Jaﬀ´e, Y. L. et al., 2013, MNRAS, 431, 2111
Jarvis, M. J., et al. 2015,

in Proceednigs of Advancing
Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14),
68

Johnsen, R. & Guberman, S. L., 2010, Elsevier Inc., ”Advances

In Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics”, 59, 75

Kanekar N., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 438, 2131
Kanekar N., Ellison S. L., Momjian E., York B. A., Pettini M.

2013, MNRAS, 428, 532

Kanekar N., Subrahmanyan R., Ellison S. L., Lane W. M.,

Chengalur J. N., 2006, MNRAS, 370, L46
Kennicutt, R. C., Jr. 1998, ARA&A, 36, 189
Kennicutt, R. C., & Evans, N. J. 2012, ARA&A, 50, 531
Kennicutt, R. C., et al., 2007, ApJ, 671, 333
Klein, U., Weiland, H., & Brinks, E. 1991, A&A, 246, 323
Klein, U., Wielebinski, R., & Thuan, T. X. 1984, A&A, 141,

241

Knapp G. R. et al., 1985, AJ, 90, 454
Krumholz, M. R., McKee, C. F. & Tumlinson, J., 2008, ApJ,

689, 865

Krumholz, M. R., McKee, C. F. & Tumlinson, J., 2009, ApJ,

693, 216

Krumholz M. R., 2012, ApJ, 759, 9
Krumholz M. R., 2013, IAUS, 292, 227
Kuntschner H. et al., 2010, MNRAS, 408, 97
Kwan. J., 1977, ApJ, 216, 713
Ledoux C., Petitjean P., Srianand R., 2003, MNRAS, 346, 209
Lemonias J. J. et al., 2013, ApJ, 776, 74
Leroy, A. K. et al., 2008, AJ, 136, 2782
Levshakov S. A., Molaro P., Centuri´on M., D’Odorico S.,

Bonifacio P., Vladilo G., 2000, A&A, 361, 803

Lewis I. et al., 2002, MNRAS, 334, 673
Liszt, H., 2002, A&A, 389, 393
London. R., McCray. R. & Chu, S.-I., 1977, ApJ, 217, 442
Mac Low M. & Ferrara A., 1999, ApJ, 513, 142
Mac Low, M. & Glover, S. C. O., 2012, ApJ, 746, 135
Magnelli, B., Saintonge, A., Lutz, D., et al. 2012, A&A, 548,

AA22

McGaugh S. S., 2005, ApJ, 632, 859
McGaugh, S. S., 2012, AJ, 143, 40
McKee, C. F. & Krumholz, M. R., 2010, ApJ, 709, 308
Micha lowski, M. J., Watson, D., & Hjorth, J. 2010, ApJ, 712,

942

Momose, R., Koda, J., Kennicutt, R. C., Jr., et al. 2013, ApJ,

772, LL13

Moran S. M. et al., 2012, ApJ, 745, 66
Morganti R. et al., 2006, MNRAS, 371, 157
Morganti, R., Sadler, E. M., & Curran, S. 2015, in Proceednigs
of Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array
(AASKA14), 134

Mori M., Ferrara A. & Madau P., 2002, ApJ, 571, 40
Mori M. & Umemura M., 2006, Nature, 440, 644
Morrison, G. E., Owen, F. N., Dickinson, M., Ivison, R. J., &

Ibar, E. 2010, ApJS, 188, 178

Murphy, E. J. 2009, ApJ, 706, 482
Murphy, E. J., et al. 2015,

in Proceednigs of Advancing
Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14),
85

Navarro J. F. et al., 2004, MNRAS, 349, 1039
Neufeld, D. A. & Spaans, M., 1996, ApJ, 473, 894
Okamoto, T. 2013, MNRAS, 428, 718
Omukai K., 2000, ApJ, 534, 809
Omukai, K., et al., 2010, ApJ, 722, 1793
Oosterloo T. et al., 2010, MNRAS, 409, 500
Ott J. et al., 2012, AJ, 144, 123
Pelupessy, F. I., Papadopoulos, P. P. & van der Werf, P., 2006,

ApJ, 645, 1024

P´eroux C, McMahon R. G., Storrie-Lombondi L. L., Irwin M.

J., 2003, MNRAS, 346, 1003

Petitjean P., Ledoux C., Noterdaeme P., Srianand R., 2006,

A&A, 456, L9

Petitjean P., Srianand R., Ledoux C., 2000, A&A, 364, L26
Pisano, D. J., 2014, AJ, 147, 48
Prandoni, I., & Seymour, N. 2015, in Proceednigs of Advancing
Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14),
67

Prochaska J. X., Wolfe A. M., 2002, A&A, 566, 68
Razoumov, A. O., Norman, M., Prochaska, J. X., & Wolfe, A.

M. 2006, ApJ, 645, 5

Rees M. J., 1986, MNRAS, 218, 25
Richings, A. J., Schaye, J. & Oppenheimer, B. D., 2014,

MNRAS, 442, 2780

Roberts, M. S., & Haynes, M. P. 1994, ARA&A, 32, 115
Roussel, H., Helou, G., Beck, R., Condon, J. J., Bosma, A.,

Matthews, K., & Jarrett, T. H. 2003, ApJ, 593, 733

Rowlands, K., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 441, 1017
Rubin, V. C., Thonnard, N. & Ford, W. K. Jr., 1980, ApJ, 238,

471

Rubin, V. C. et al., 1985, ApJ, 289, 81
Sargent, W. L. W., Young, P. J., Boksenberg, A., & Tytler, D.

Magnelli, B., Lutz, D., Saintonge, A., et al. 2014, A&A, 561,

1980, ApJS, 42, 41

AA86

Magorrian, J., Tremaine, S., Richstone, D., et al. 1998, AJ, 115,

2285

Martin A. M. et al., 2010, ApJ, 723, 1359
McGaugh S. S. et al., 2000, ApJ, 533, 99

Saitoh, T. R., Daisaka, H., Kokubo, E., Makino, J., Okamoto,
T., Tomisaka, K., Wada, K., & Yoshida, N. 2009, PASJ, 61,
481

Sancisi, R., 1983, IAU symposium, 100, 55
Sancisi, R. & van Albada, T. S., 1987, IAU symposium, 117, 67

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

23

Sancisi, R. & van Albada, T. S., 1987, ”Dark matter” IAU sym-

Yajima, H., Shlosman, I., Romano-D´ıaz, E., & Nagamine, K.

posium, 124, 699

2015, MNRAS, 451, 418

York D. G. et al., 2000, AJ, 120, 1579
Yoshida N. et al., 2006, ApJ, 652, 2
Yoshida N. et al., 2008, Science, 321, 669
Yun, M. S., Reddy, N. A., & Condon, J. J. 2001, ApJ, 554, 803
Zaritsky, D. et al., 2014, AJ, 147, 134

Sandage A. et al., 1970, ApJ, 160, 831
Scannapieco E., Silk J. & Bouwens R., 2005, ApJ, 635, 13
Schiminovich, D., Wyder, T. K., Martin, D. C., et al. 2007,

ApJS, 173, 315

Scoville, N., et al. 2007, ApJS, 172, 1
di Serego Alighieri S. et al., 2007, A&A, 474, 851
Seymour, N., et al. 2008, MNRAS, 386, 1695
Serra P. et al., 2012, MNRAS, 422, 1835
Schiminovich D. et al., 2010, MNRAS, 408, 919
Smith, H. E., Cohen, R. D., & Bradley, S. E. 1986, ApJ, 310,

583

Smolˇci´c, V., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 443, 2590
Smolˇci´c, V., et al. 2009, ApJ, 690, 610
Sofue, Y., Honma, M. & Arimoto, N., 1995, A&A, 296, 33
Spitzer L. Jr. & Baade W., 1951, ApJ, 113, 413
Srianand, R., Gupta, N., Petitjean, P., Noterdaeme, P., Ledoux,

C., Salter, C. J., & Saikia, D. J. 2012, MNRAS, 421, 651

Sternberg, A., 1988, ApJ, 332, 400
Struve, C., & Conway, J. E. 2012, A&A, 546, 22
Symeonidis, M., Vaccari, M., Berta, S., et al. 2013, MNRAS,

431, 2317

Takahashi, J., Masuda, K. & Nagaoka, M., 1999, MNRAS, 306,

22

Takahashi, J. 2000, Astronomical Herald, 93, 191
Takeuchi, T. T., Kawabe, R., Kohno, K., Nakanishi, K., Ishii,
T. T., Hirashita, H., & Yoshikawa, K. 2001, PASP, 113, 783

Tanaka, A. et al., 2014, PASJ, 66, 66
Teruya, N. & Takeuchi, T. T., 2014, in “The Impact of Galactic

Structure on Star Formation”, Sapporo, Japan

Thomas D. et al., 2010, MNRAS, 404, 1775
Tinsley, B. M. 1980, Fundam. Cosm. Phys., 5, 287
Tinsley, B. M., & Danly, L. 1980, ApJ, 242, 435
Totani, T., & Takeuchi, T. T. 2002, ApJ, 570, 470
Tully, R. B. & Fisher, J. R., 1977, A&A, 54, 661
van den Bergh S., 1976, ApJ, 206, 883
van den Bosch F. C. & Swaters R. A., 2001, MNRAS, 325, 1017
van Dishoeck, E. F. & Black, J. H., 1986, ApJS, 62, 109
van Gorkom J. & Schiminovich D., 1997, ASPC, 116, 310
Vanzi, L., Cresci, G., Telles, E., & Melnick, J. 2008, A&A, 486,

393

Verheijen, M. et al., 2007, ApJ, 668, 9
Vladilo G., P´eroux C. 2005, A&A 444, 461
Voges, W. et al. 1999, ApJ, 756, L28
Wada K., Norman C. A., 2001, ApJ, 546, 172
Walter, F. et al., 2008, AJ, 136, 2563
Wang J. et al., 2011, MNRAS, 412, 1081
Wardle M. & Knapp G. R., 1986, AJ, 91, 23
Weldrake D. T. F. et al., 2003, MNRAS, 340, 12
Wolfe, A. M., & Davis M. M. 1979, AJ, 84, 699
Wolfe A. M., Briggs F. H., Turnshek D. A., Davis M. M., Smith

H. E., Cohen R. D. 1985, ApJ, 294, L67

Wolfe, A. M., Turnshek, D. A., Smith, H. E., & Cohen, R. D.

1986, ApJS, 61, 249

Wolfe, S. A. et al., 2013, Nature, 497, 224
Wong, T. & Blitz, L., 2002, ApJ, 569, 157
Wong, T. et al., 2013, ApJ, 777, 4

