6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
1
4
9
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Density Functional Theory based Study of Chlorine Doped WS2-metal
Interface

Anuja Chanana and Santanu Mahapatra1, a)
Nanoscale Device Research Laboratory, Department Of Electronic Systems Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru,
Karnataka 560012, India

(Dated: 8 March 2016)

Investigation of a TMD-metal interface is essential for the effective functioning of monolayer TMD based ﬁeld effect
transistors (FETs). In this work, we employ Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations to analyze the modulation
of the electronic structure of monolayer WS2 with chlorine doping and the relative changes in the contact properties
when interfaced with gold and palladium. We initially examine the atomic and electronic structures of pure and doped
monolayer WS2 supercell and explore the formation of mid gap states with band splitting near the conduction band edge.
Further we analyze the contact nature of the pure supercell with Au and Pd. We ﬁnd that while Au is physiosorped
and forms n-type contact, Pd is chemisorped and forms p-type contact with a higher valence electron density. Next, we
study the interface formed between the Cl-doped supercell and metals and observe a reduction in the Schottky barrier
height (SBH) in comparison to the pure supercell. This reduction found is higher for Pd in comparison to Au which is
further validated by examining the charge transfer occurring at the interface. Our study conﬁrms that Cl doping is an
efﬁcient mechanism to reduce the n-SBH for both Au and Pd which form different types of contact with WS2.

2,3, WSe2

5 and MoTe2

After the fabrication of FET using monolayer MoS2,1 2D
layered transition metal dichalcogenides(TMDs) have gar-
nered enormous attention in the electron devices commu-
4,
nity. Apart from MoS2, other TMDs as such WS2
6 are also explored as channel material for
MoSe2
FET’s. In the absence of efﬁcient doping techniques, these
transistors exhibit SBH at source/drain contact which leads to
low ON current. Tremendous efforts are dedicated to reduce
the contact resistance at TMD-metal interface by employing
different techniques both theoretically and experimentally.7–12
However, most of these efforts are focused towards MoS2
and WSe2 and a minimum study is devoted to other TMD’s-
metal contact interfaces. A study using ballistic MOSFET
model reveals that WS2 outperforms all other TMD’s13. Ex-
perimental reports of WS2 device fabrication2 and Cl doping
technique for reducing WS2-metal contact resistance are also
reported14. However, theoretical investigations of WS2 metal
contact interface using ﬁrst principles is still lacking in the lit-
erature. Since ﬁrst principles are extensively used to analyze
the graphene-metal15,16, MoS2-metal17 and WSe2-metal18, it
is believed that it will efﬁciently describe the contact nature
with other TMD’s as well. For WS2, chlorine doping, which is
done by replacing sulfur atoms is the ﬁrst ever method demon-
strated experimentally to reduce the WS2-contact resistance,
exhibiting both high drain current and ﬁeld-effect mobility.14
In this work we employ density function theory (DFT) to
study the electronic structure of the interface between WS2
and one physiosorped (Au) and one chemisorped (Pd) metal.
We then examine the effect of chlorine doping by substitut-
ing sulfur atoms to address the SBH mitigation at WS2-metal
interface.

We start by analyzing the electronic dispersion character-
istics of pure and Cl-doped WS2 and explore the shifts in
the energy bands with respect to Fermi level (Ef ) and fur-
ther analyze the mid gap states formed near the conduction

a)santanu@dese.iisc.ernet.in

band (CB) edge. To preserve the stability in the 5x5 WS2 su-
percell, the number of chlorine dopants substituting the sulfur
atoms is kept one. We perform the formation energy calcula-
tions (EF orm) to ﬁnd the stability of the chlorine doped struc-
ture. Next, this supercell is interfaced with <111> cleaved
surfaces of Au and Pd respectively and the contact nature is
studied. The Schottky barrier height (SBH) is evaluated us-
ing the projected bandstructure and the density of states. The
charge transfer across the interface is analyzed using valence
electron density and charge density difference. Electron local-
ization function (ELF) is employed to study the localization of
electrons at the WS2-metal interface. A thorough examination
of all the above analysis leads to a conclusion that n-type dop-
ing of WS2 using chlorine as an effective substitute, results in
lowering of n-SBH at the WS2-metal interface.

We carry out the DFT simulations employing Atomistix
Tool Kit (ATK)19 with Local Density Approximation (LDA)-
Perdew Zung (PZ)20 as the exchange correlation to investigate
the WS2 (pure and doped) - metal (Au and Pd) interfaces.
The pseudopotentials of various elements (Tungsten, Sulfur,
Chlorine, Gold and Palladium) as generated by Hartwingster-
Goedecker-Hutter21 based on the concept of fully relativistic
all electron calculation are used for the present study. The
orbital contribution in Tier 4 basis set is found to be appro-
priate for generating the band gap of monolayer WS2. It is
worth noting that in transition metals (e.g W and Pd) the over-
lap between core and valence electrons is substantial. The
commoonly used double zeta polarized (DZP) basis func-
tion generated using FHI pseudopotential does not consider
the semicore electrons and might not yield results of con-
siderable accuracy. On the other hand HGH pseudopoten-
tials include semi core electrons and thus are expected to pro-
duce the electronic structure of the TMD-metal interface pre-
cisely. However, their usage signiﬁcantly enhances the com-
putational budget since they require a larger number of basis
functions as compared to DZP. The density mesh cut off is 75
Hartree with a Monkhorst Pack k-point22 sampling of 9x9x1
mesh. The convergence criteria of the self consistent loop is

set at a value of 10−5 Hartree.

We ﬁrst conﬁrm the band gap of WS2 unit cell and ﬁnd
the value to be 2.07 eV, nearly consistent with the ear-
lier reports23,24. A 5x5 supercell is formed using the opti-
mized unit cell which is computationally appropriate to study
the doping similar to the one reported here25. The inter-
face strain between the pure and doped WS2 supercell with
<111> cleaved surface of gold and palladium is found to
be 1.3% and 2.1% respectively. Doping is achieved by re-
placing one sulfur atom with chlorine atom in the supercell
which amounts to 2% of the total sulfur atoms. For evaluat-
ing EF orm for sulfur substitution, X2 dimers of each Cl2 and
S2 are taken and then the total energy of the substitutional
atoms and host atoms in the formation energy equation26
are calculated. Four layers of <111> cleaved surface of
metal are then interfaced with the WS2 supercell and is found
relevant to study the MoS2-metal interface.27 To minimize
false interactions between the periodic interfaced geometries,
vacuum length of 20 ˚A is considered. A force optimiza-
tion of (0.001eV/ ˚A) is performed for both unit cell and su-
percell (pure and doped) of the WS2 using limited memory
BroydenFletcher-GoldfarbShannon (LBFGS) method. The
volume of the structure is allowed to change using a stress
optimization of (0.001eV/ ˚A−3) in both unit cell and supercell
of WS2.

Figure 1 (a) shows the stable atomic structure of chlorine
doped 5x5 supercell of WS2. We perform formation energy
calculations to ﬁnd the thermodynamically stable position for
sulfur substitution by chlorine atoms with EF orm values as
2.92 eV. This supercell is interfaced with <111> cleaved sur-
face of Au and Pd respectively. While interfacing the lattice
constant of WS2 is ﬁxed and the metal slab is subjected to
match with it. Figure 1 (c) and (d) shows the ball and stick
model of the doped 5x5 WS2-Au and WS2-Pd interface. Total
energy calculations reveal 2.7 ˚A and 2.2 ˚A as the equilibrium
interlayer separation between the WS2 (pure and doped) with
Au and Pd metal slabs. The binding energy values obtained
per sulfur atom is -0.18 eV (pure) and -0.19 eV (doped) for
gold and -0.39 eV (pure) and -0.4 eV (doped) for palladium re-
spectively. We calculate the work function of pure and doped
WS2 and metals Au and Pd and are shown in Figure 1(f).

Substitution by chlorine doping amounts to 2% of total sul-
fur atoms which leads to a very high doping concentration in
5x5 supercell of WS2. However, to realize the substitution by
considering the experimental doping concentration value of 6
x 1011 cm−2 studied here Ref.(14), a much bigger supercell is
required leading to further increase in computational burden.
To reduce the computational cost and study the effect of dop-
ing on SBH reduction we limit ourselves with a 5x5 supercell.
The electronic structures of both pure and doped WS2 along
with the density of states are compared in Figure 2 to high-
light the effect of doping. The band gap of pure WS2 is 2.07
eV. The positions of CB and Valence Band (VB) is veriﬁed
with PDOS kept along the side of bandstructure. We see that
substitution of single chlorine dopant shifts the energy bands
towards the EF and creates midgap states in the vicinity of
EF . The number of midgap states is 2 , one of which splits
into two bands between the high symmetry points of brillouin

2

FIG. 1. (a) Chlorine substituted 5x5 supercell of WS2 presented us-
ing the ball-stick model. Atomic model of the pure WS2 5x5 su-
percell (b),(c) and doped supercell (d),(e) interfaced with <111>
cleaved surface of face centered cubic (FCC) metals Gold and Pal-
ladium. The conﬁguration is stable when the interlayer distance is
2.7 ˚A for gold and 2.2 ˚A for palladium. dint denotes the equilib-
rium distance with minimum binding energy along the z-direction.
(f) Work function values of pure and doped WS2 along with the met-
als Au and Pd calculated using DFT simulations.

zone shown in the inset of Figure 2 (c). The two mid gap
states have signiﬁcant contribution in the PDOS as well. The
main contributor of these states is chlorine which is shown in
inset of Figure 2 (d) with purple color. The energy level is
0.184 eV for the mid gap state near the conduction band min-
ima (CBM). The splitting of bands leads to two energy levels
0.028 eV and 0.020 eV respectively. These defect states orig-
inate from the hybridization of the Cl 3p and the W 5d states.
There exists one unpaired extra electron due to n-type dop-
ing by chlorine. As tungsten lies in the 6th period of periodic
table, chlorine, which has an extra negative charge, leads to
the energy splitting of W d-orbitals and thus contribute to an
extra mid gap state. The band gap in doped WS2 is also differ-
ent as compared to the pure supercell (by 0.05 eV), which is
attributed to the hybridization and change in the atomic struc-
ture due to chlorine substitution.

We then perform simulations to evaluate the nature of con-
tact formed with WS2 (pure and doped) with Au and Pd. The
Schottky barrier height is assessed using the electronic struc-
ture and DOS of projected WS2. Valence electron density and
charge density difference are used to estimate the charge trans-
fer across the interface. The localisation of electrons at the
WS2-metal interface is studied using the ELF.

Both p-type and n-type SBH of projected WS2 (pure and
doped) with Au and Pd are shown in Figure 3 (a)-(d). Since
the interface involves two different atomic structures, the na-
ture band gap is lost and projected band structure comprises

3

FIG. 4. 1D projection of average valence electron density along the
z-direction for pure (a) WS2-Au and (b) WS2-Pd interface. The
value of valence electron density is evaluated between the nearest
sulfur atomic layer of WS2 and the nearest layer of metal formed at
the WS2-metal interface geometry and is shown by black horizontal
lines. The position of atoms are shown by black dotted lines.

energy values quoted earlier conﬁrm this nature. Moreover,
the band gap regime also consists of less interface states in
Au as compared to Pd (Figure 3 (a,c)).

For a pure WS2-Au interface, the amount of complexity in
the bandstructure is less, but for a doped interface it is very
high. This happens because the atoms in the doped supercell
already hybridize with the substitutional impurity. The dif-
ference is visible in Figure 3 (b) and (d) with respect to Fig-
ure 3 (a) and (c). It further makes the determination of band
gap edges difﬁcult. However, density of states along with the
electronic structure of projected WS2, can be used to identify
the CBM and valence band maxima (VBM) as demonstrated
in Ref.8 The difference between the CBM and VBM of all
the interfaces differs from the band gap of pure WS2 by 0.04
eV. Strong interface hybridization causes emergence of more
mid gap states for both the pure and doped supercells as vis-
ible in Figure 3 (c)-(d) for Pd due to its chemisorption nature
with WS2. We observe that Au shows a n-type SBH and Pd
shows p-type SBH when interfaced with WS2. The values of
SBH are 0.78 eV and 0.76 eV respectively. In the complete
band structure shown by grey lines, we see that the for Au the
band lines are more dispersed in comparison to Pd. This in-
dicates strong bonding of WS2 with Pd. Moreover, below the
Fermi level, we see a complete metallization for Pd leading
to the formation of p-type contact. Here, we see a similarity
in the nature of contact between WS2 and WSe2 while form-
ing an interface with Au and Pd.18 With the introduction of
n-type impurity, the n-SBH exhibits a reduction for both met-
als. The n-SBH reduction attained is 0.09 eV for Au and 0.11
eV for Pd. We see the reduction in the n-SBH is higher for
Pd in comparison to Au. Pd showing a p-type contact with
WS2 also exhibits a reduction in the n-SBH and increase in
p-SBH. This validates the observation that the chlorine is ef-
fective in reducing n-SBH for both the type of metals forming
p-type and n-type SBH with WS2, and is equally competent
for chemisorped and physiosorped metal interface with WS2.
A slight variance in the band gap value of WS2 2.07 (for pure
WS2 bandstructure) - 2.1 and 2.09 (projected WS2 bandstruc-
ture) is also observed due to heterogeneous atomic interface.
We also evaluate the valence electron density for WS2-
metal interface as shown in Figure 4. The value of valence

FIG. 2. Projected bandstructure and DOS of (a)-(b) pure WS2 and
(c)-(d)chlorine doped WS2. PDOS placed along the side veriﬁes the
position of CB and VB. Doping with chlorine leads to appearance of
mid gap states in the WS2 band gap and their contribution is stud-
ied using the DOS. The number of mid gap states is 2 for doped
WS2.The inset in (c) shows the exact position of CBM and the mid
gap states. The purple line in (d) shows the chlorine contribution in
PDOS and is highlighted in the inset. The contribution of mid gap
states is conﬁrmed by the PDOS and peaks in PDOS occurs at the
same energy level as in bandstructure. CB, VB, EF , and Eg denotes
conduction band edge, valence band edge, Fermi Level and band gap
respectively. Fermi level is at zero energy. Dashed brown lines joins
the CBM and VBM in bandstructure and DOS.

FIG. 3. Projected electronic bandstructure of WS2-metal (Au and
Pd) interface for (a)-(c) pure (b)-(d) doped supercells. The projected
bandstructure (wine color lines) is superimposed on the total band-
structure WS2-metal systems(grey lines). Au forms an n-type SB
contact whereas Pd forms a p-type SB contact. φSB,P and φSB,N
are the p-type and n-type Schottky barrier heights. Eg is the total
band gap measured from the CBM and VBM. EF is the Fermi Level.

of interface states. The origin of these states lies in the com-
plex electronic hybridization occurring at the WS2-metal in-
terface. Au is found to be physiosorped with WS2 where as Pd
is chemisorped. Au, being an s-electron metal shows less hy-
bridization as compared to Pd which is a d-electron metal and
this effect is similar to MoS2-metal interface27. The binding

4

FIG. 5. 1D projection of average charge density difference along the
z-direction for pure WS2 with (a) Au (b) Pd interface geometry. To
study the charge transfer at the interface thoroughly, we show only
single layer of gold atoms out of four. The relative positions of atoms
are shown by dotted lines along the y axis. The ﬁlled green area indi-
cates the accumulation region and the yellow indicates the depletion
region. Values on the y-axis show that the charge accumulation in Pd
is nearly double as compared to Au.

electron density is calculated as the minimum electron den-
sity at the metal-semiconductor interface. Higher values of
electron density at the interface implies a better electron injec-
tion efﬁciency. The values with Au are for pure 0.10727 ˚A−3
and 0.10816 ˚A−3 for doped supercell. For pure and doped
supercell with Pd they are 0.21888 ˚A−3 and 0.2212 ˚A−3 re-
spectively. The high values for Pd indicate that more charge
transfer has occurred when it is interfaced with WS2. More-
over the difference in the density values of doped and pure
interface is higher for Pd as compared to Au.

To substantiate the observations made in the above analy-
sis, we examine the charge density difference of the respec-
tive geometries. Figure 5 shows the average charge density
difference of WS2-metal interface for (a) Au and (b) Pd. A
dipole gets created at the interface since both accumulation
and depletion regions exist. Both the regions are shown by
dissimilar colors to highlight the difference between them. At
the junction between the nearest sulfur atom and metal atom,
two peaks exist for depletion region and one peak for accu-
mulation region. Moreover the accumulation shows a higher
charge difference in Pd as compared to Au. A higher deple-
tion regime implies that the charge carriers are repelled back
from the surface and evinces a probability of least transmis-
sion across the interface. On the other hand, a higher accumu-
lation regime implies that more charge is transferred across
the interface. Hence we observe more hybridization for Pd
rather than Au. The area calculated between the nearest S
and metal atom using the methodology exhibited in Ref.8 is
0.03181 x 10−3 for Au and 0.06031 x 10−3 for Pd respec-
tively and thus afﬁrms the charge transfer is high for Pd. For
pure and doped supercell-metal interface, the charge density
difference curve shows a similar nature and the difference in
areas for pure and doped case is higher for Pd. Because of
this difference, a greater reduction on n-SBH is observed in
Pd with respect to Au.

To study the localization of electrons at the WS2-metal in-
terface, we study ELF which is dimensionless quantity.
It
is deﬁned as the possibility of ﬁnding an electron in the
neighborhood of a reference electron. Its value ranges from

FIG. 6. 1D projection of average electron localization function along
the z-direction of pure WS2 with (a) Au (b) Pd contact. The positions
of atoms are shown by black dotted lines along the y-axis. The blue
line indicates the value of ELF of the nearest sulfur atom in WS2
monolayer.

0<ELF<1, with the maximum limit ELF=1 corresponding to
prefect localization and ELF=0.5 corresponding to electron-
gas like pair probability28. Figure 6 shows the value of ELF
for WS2-Au and WS2-Pd interface. The value obtained for
Pd is less in comparison to Au. This implies that Au is more
localized than Pd indicating a better bonding for WS2-Pd in-
terface.

It is interesting to note that for TMD channel based tran-
sistors, in a top contact device structure, two types of inter-
faces exist. One interface is between the TMD-metal and
the other is between the TMD underneath the metal contact
and TMD forming the channel18. Here we ﬁnd the SBH
formed at the ﬁrst interface. For calculating the SBH at the
second interface, transport simulations need to be conducted
along the device length. The effective SBH combining both
the interfaces can then be determined using LDOS distri-
bution. However, carrying transport simulations employing
pseudopotentials with basis functions having higher orbital
contribution requires powerful computing system, as the num-
ber of atoms increase manifold from bulk-conﬁguration to
device-conﬁguration. Nevertheless while discussing SBH and
the associated contact resistance in the context of ON current
of the MOSFET, the gate current is kept high and the channel
is inverted. In this condition, the CBM of the TMD channel
region (not touching the metal) can be assumed to be lower
than CBM of the other TMD regime. Hence, the SBH evalu-
ated in this work can be considered as the effective SBH.

In the above study we investigate the contact nature of pure
and Cl doped monolayer WS2 with Au<111> and Pd<111>.
First the electronic structures of pure and doped supercells are
investigated. We ﬁnd that band energies near to the conduc-
tion band edge align close to Fermi level with the formation
of mid gap states and band splitting. Further, the pure and
doped optimized supercell are adsorbed on the metals. Inter-
face with pure supercell determines that Au is physiosorped
with WS2 and has an n-type SBH while Pd is chemisorped
with WS2 having a p-type SBH. Adsorption with Cl doped su-
percell shows a reduction of n-type SBH for both the metals.
All the results are validated by studying charge redistribution
at the WS2-metal interface. The above understandings may
further contribute to explore other TMD-metal interfaces, as
well as in investigating various possible dopants for chalco-

genide substitution.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The work was supported by Science Engineering and
Research Board -Department of Science and Technol-
ogy (SERB DST), Govt.
India, under Grant no.
SR/S3/EECE/0151/2012. The authors would like to thank
Quantumwise support staff for their useful discussions.

of

1B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti,
and A. Kis,
“Single-layer mos2 transistors,” Nature nanotechnology 6, 147–150 (2011).
2W. Sik Hwang, M. Remskar, R. Yan, V. Protasenko, K. Tahy, S. Doo Chae,
P. Zhao, A. Konar, H. (Grace) Xing, A. Seabaugh, and D. Jena, “Transis-
tors with chemically synthesized layered semiconductor ws2 exhibiting 105
room temperature modulation and ambipolar behavior,” Applied Physics
Letters 101, 013107 (2012).
3X. Liu, J. Hu, C. Yue, N. D. Fera, Y. Ling, Z. Mao, and J. Wei, “High
performance ﬁeld-effect transistor based on multilayer tungsten disulﬁde,”
ACS Nano 8, 10396–10402 (2014).
4S. Das and J. Appenzeller, “Wse2 ﬁeld effect transistors with enhanced
ambipolar characteristics,” Applied Physics Letters 103, 103501 (2013).
5S. Larentis, B. Fallahazad, and E. Tutuc, “Field-effect transistors and in-
trinsic mobility in ultra-thin mose2 layers,” Applied Physics Letters 101,
223104 (2012).
6N. R. Pradhan, D. Rhodes, S. Feng, Y. Xin, S. Memaran, B.-H. Moon,
H. Terrones, M. Terrones, and L. Balicas, “Field-effect transistors based
on few-layered -mote2,” ACS Nano 8, 5911–5920 (2014).
7W. S. Leong, X. Luo, Y. Li, K. H. Khoo, S. Y. Quek, and J. T. Thong, “Low
resistance metal contacts to mos2 devices with nickel-etched-graphene
electrodes,” ACS nano 9, 869–877 (2014).
8A. Chanana and S. Mahapatra, “Theoretical insights to niobium-doped
monolayer mos2 gold contact,” Electron Devices, IEEE Transactions on
62, 2346–2351 (2015).
9S. Das, H.-Y. Chen, A. V. Penumatcha, and J. Appenzeller, “High perfor-
mance multilayer mos2 transistors with scandium contacts,” Nano Letters
13, 100–105 (2013).

10J. Kang, W. Liu, and K. Banerjee, “High-performance mos2 transistors
with low-resistance molybdenum contacts,” Applied Physics Letters 104,
093106 (2014).

11M. R. Laskar, D. N. Nath, L. Ma, E. W. Lee II, C. H. Lee, T. Kent, Z. Yang,
R. Mishra, M. A. Roldan, J.-C. Idrobo, et al., “P-type doping of mos2 thin
ﬁlms using nb,” Applied Physics Letters 104, 092104 (2014).

12J. Suh, T.-E. Park, D.-Y. Lin, D. Fu, J. Park, H. J. Jung, Y. Chen, C. Ko,
C. Jang, Y. Sun, R. Sinclair, J. Chang, S. Tongay, and J. Wu, “Doping

5

against the native propensity of mos2: Degenerate hole doping by cation
substitution,” Nano Letters 14, 6976–6982 (2014).

13L. Liu, S. Bala Kumar, Y. Ouyang, and J. Guo, “Performance limits of
monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide transistors,” Electron Devices,
IEEE Transactions on 58, 3042–3047 (2011).

14L. Yang, K. Majumdar, H. Liu, Y. Du, H. Wu, M. Hatzistergos, P. Y. Hung,
R. Tieckelmann, W. Tsai, C. Hobbs, and P. D. Ye, “Chloride molecular
doping technique on 2d materials: Ws2 and mos2,” Nano Letters 14, 6275–
6280 (2014).

15P. A. Khomyakov, G. Giovannetti, P. C. Rusu, G. Brocks, J. van den Brink,
and P. J. Kelly, “First-principles study of the interaction and charge transfer
between graphene and metals,” Phys. Rev. B 79, 195425 (2009).

16C. Gong, G. Lee, B. Shan, E. M. Vogel, R. M. Wallace,

and
interfaces,”

K. Cho,
Journal of Applied Physics 108, – (2010).

“First-principles

study

of metalgraphene

17I. Popov, G. Seifert, and D. Tom´anek, “Designing electrical contacts to
mos2 monolayers: A computational study,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 156802
(2012).

18J. Kang, W. Liu, D. Sarkar, D. Jena, and K. Banerjee, “Computational
study of metal contacts to monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenide semi-
conductors,” Phys. Rev. X 4, 031005 (2014).
v.15.beta

19“Atomistix

Quantumwise

ToolKit

,”

http://quantumwise.com/.

20J. P. Perdew and A. Zunger,
density-functional
approximations
Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048–5079 (1981).

“Self-interaction
for many-electron

correction

to
systems,”

21C. Hartwigsen, S. Goedecker, and J. Hutter, “Relativistic separable dual-
space gaussian pseudopotentials from h to rn,” Phys. Rev. B 58, 3641–3662
(1998).

22H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, “Special points for brillouin-zone integra-

tions,” Physical Review B 13, 5188 (1976).

23H. Jiang, “Electronic band structures of molybdenum and tungsten
dichalcogenides by the gw approach,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry
C 116, 7664–7671 (2012).

24A. Kumar and P. Ahluwalia, “Electronic structure of transition metal
dichalcogenides monolayers 1h-mx2 (m= mo, w; x= s, se, te) from ab-initio
theory: new direct band gap semiconductors,” The European Physical Jour-
nal B 85, 1–7 (2012).

25K. Dolui,

I. Rungger, C. Das Pemmaraju,

and S. Sanvito, “Pos-
sible doping strategies for mos2 monolayers: An ab initio study,”
Phys. Rev. B 88, 075420 (2013).

26C. G. Van de Walle and J. Neugebauer, “First-principles calcu-
to iii-nitrides,”

lations
Journal of Applied Physics 95, 3851–3879 (2004).

and impurities:

Applications

for defects

27C. Gong, L. Colombo, R. M. Wallace, and K. Cho, “The unusual mecha-
nism of partial fermi level pinning at metal–mos2 interfaces,” Nano letters
14, 1714–1720 (2014).

28a. D. Becke and K. E. Edgecombe, “A simple measure of electron localiza-

tion in atomic and molecular systems,” J. Chem. Phys. 92, 5397 (1990).

