Japan SKA Consortium (2016)
Preprint typeset using PASJ LATEX format v.1.0

1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
4
2

 
 
]

.

O
C
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

2
v
9
5
9
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

RESCEU-2/16, KEK-TH-1893, KEK-Cosmo-192

Cosmology with the Square Kilometre Array by
SKA-Japan
Daisuke YAMAUCHI1,*, Kiyotomo ICHIKI2,3, Kazunori KOHRI4,5, Toshiya
NAMIKAWA6,7, Yoshihiko OYAMA8, Toyokazu SEKIGUCHI9, Hayato
SHIMABUKURO2,10, Keitaro TAKAHASHI10, Tomo TAKAHASHI11, Shuichiro
YOKOYAMA12, Kohji YOSHIKAWA13, on behalf of SKA-Japan Consortium
Cosmology Science Working Group
1Research Center for the Early Universe, Graduate School of Science, The University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan
2Department of Physics and Astrophysics, Nagoya University, Aichi 464-8602, Japan
3Kobayashi-Maskawa Institute for the Origin of Particles and the Universe, Nagoya University,
Aichi 464-8602, Japan
4Theory Center, IPNS, KEK, Tsukuba 305-0801, Japan
5Sokendai, Tsukuba 305-0801, Japan
6Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
7Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
8Institute for Cosmic Ray Research, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8582, Japan
9Institute for Basic Science, Center for Theoretical Physics of the Universe, Daejeon 34051,
South Korea
10Faculty of Science, Kumamoto University, 2-39-1 Kurokami, Kumamoto 860-8555, Japan
11Department of Physics, Saga University, Saga 840-8502, Japan
12Department of Physics, Rikkyo University, 3-34-1 Nishi-Ikebukuro, Toshima, Tokyo

171-8501, Japan

13Center for Computational Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1, Tennodai, Tsukuba,

Ibaraki 3058577, Japan

∗E-mail: corresponding author; yamauchi@resceu.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In the past several decades, the standard cosmological model has been established and its
parameters have been measured to a high precision, while there are still many of the funda-
mental questions in cosmology; such as the physics in the very early Universe, the origin of
the cosmic acceleration and the nature of the dark matter. The future world’s largest radio
telescope, Square Kilometre Array (SKA), will be able to open the new frontier of cosmology
and will be one of the most powerful tools for cosmology in the next decade. The cosmological
surveys conducted by the SKA would have the potential not only to answer these fundamental
questions but also deliver the precision cosmology.
In this article we brieﬂy review the role
of the SKA from the view point of the modern cosmology. The cosmology science led by the
SKA-Japan Consortium (SKA-JP) Cosmology Science Working Group is also discussed.

c(cid:13) 2016 Japan SKA Consortium

2

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

1 Introduction
In the past several decades, by accurately measuring the statis-
tical properties of the cosmic microwave background (CMB)
anisotropies,
large-scale structures, supernovae and gravita-
tional lensing, a simple standard cosmological model has been
estabilished and its parameters have been measured to a high
precision. Our Universe is well described by a spatially ﬂat,
Λ cold dark matter (CDM) model with nearly scale-invariant,
adiabatic and Gaussian primordial ﬂuctuations. But the high-
precision measurements have revealed that only 5% in the enegy
budget of the Universe seems to be made of the ordinary atomic
matter (Planck Collaboration XIII 2015). In other words, the re-
maining 95% seems to be composed of exotic dark components
such as dark matter and dark energy.

Even though the standard cosmological model has been esta-
bilished, there are still many fundamental questions in cosmol-
ogy. The remaining issues in cosmology would be as follow:
What type of the inﬂationary model is actually realized in the
very early Universe? What is the mechanism of generating pri-
mordial ﬂuctuations? What is the dark matter? What is the
physical origin of the cosmic acceleration, namely the dark en-
ergy or the modiﬁcation of gravity theory?

Although the CMB has been one of powerful observational
tools for cosmology in the past decades, the next step towards
a precision cosmology will require extra information. The fu-
ture world’s largest radio telescope, Square Kilometre Array
(SKA) 1, will provide the three-dimensional information by
measuring the large scale strucuture, and will be one of the most
powerful tools for cosmology and play an important role in ad-
dresing these issues.

The purpose of this document is to introduce Japanese sci-
entiﬁc interests in the SKA project and to report results of our
investigation. It is still in progress, so that the document may
not fully cover previous works related to the SKA. We wish that
the document becomes an interface for future communications,
collaborations, and synergies with worldwide communities.

1.1 Inﬂation

Inﬂation, which leads to an epoch of exponential expansion in
the very early Universe, was proposed as a solution to several
problems in Big Bang cosmology, such as the horizon, ﬂatness,
and monopole problems. Furthermore, it naturally sets the ini-
tial conditions required by the standard Big Bang cosmology. A
promising way to access the very early stage of the Universe is
to measure the spatial pattern of the density ﬂuctuation, because
quantum ﬂuctuations of ﬁelds during the inﬂationary epoch can
seed the primordial density ﬂuctuations and different inﬂation-
ary models predict different amplitude and scale-dependence of
the primordial density ﬂuctuations. Hence observing density

1 See http://www.skatelescope.org

ﬂuctuations provides us the rich information about not only the
evolution of the late-time Universe but also the primordial na-
ture of the Universe, namely the inﬂation models as a mecha-
nism for generating primordial ﬂuctuations.

Although in the standard cosmology the primordial ﬂuctua-
tions are assumed to be Gaussian, recently possible small devi-
ations from a purely Gaussian primordial density ﬂuctuations,
so-called primordial non-Gaussianity, have been investigated.
Since primordial non-Gaussianity reﬂects the fundamental in-
teractions and nonlinear processes involved during and/or im-
mediately after the inﬂation, it can bring insights into the fun-
damental physics behind inﬂation. Hence this is one of the
most informative ﬁngerprints of inﬂation and is more gener-
ally key to understanding the extremely high-energy physics.
Among the several types of primordial non-Gaussianity, the
local-type fNL has been studied widely. To quantify primor-
dial non-Gaussianity of the local form we can parametrize the
Bardeen potential Φ with a random Gaussian ﬁeld φ as (Gangui
et al. 1993; Komatsu and Spergel 2001),

Φ = φ + fNL(cid:0)φ2 − hφ2i(cid:1) ,

(1)

where h· · ·i denotes the ensemble average. If the distribution
of density perturbations does not obey Gaussian statistics, we
rather need not only the power spectrum but also the higher-
order statistics such as the bispectrum (three-point functions).
It has been shown that even the simplest inﬂationary mod-
els predict small but nonvanishing deviation from Gaussianity;
fNL of O(0.01) (Maldacena 2003). Primordial non-Gaussianity
has primarily been constrained from the bispectrum in CMB
temperature ﬂuctuations and polarizations. Recently, Planck
(Planck Collaboration XVII 2015) obtained a tight constraint of
fNL = 0.8 ± 5.0 at 1σ statistical signiﬁcance, implying that the
inﬂationary models predicting too large fNL were already ruled
out. Although current CMB experiments are already close to
cosmic-variance-limited ones, it is still rather weak to distin-
guish the inﬂationary models. A complementary way to access
primoridal non-Gaussianity is to measure its impact on large-
scale structure. While galaxy surveys are expected to constrain
fNL to the level comparable to CMB anisotropies, the current
constraint from the large-scale structure is about σ(fNL) ≈ 50
due to the unknown systematics (Ho et al. 2015; Giannantonio
et al. 2014).

In addition to primordial density ﬂuctuations, inﬂation pre-
dicts the existence of primordial gravitational waves, or ten-
sor perturbations, while there is no evidence of the presence
of primordial gravitational waves yet. The odd-parity spatial
pattern (B-modes) in the CMB polarization has been consid-
ered as a prime observation to probe primordial gravitational
waves (Kamionkowski et al. 1997). The amplitude of tensor
perturbations is conventionally parametrized by the tensor-to-
scalar ratio, r, at a ﬁducial scale, and importantly the constraint

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

3

on r can be translated into the upper bound on the energy-
scale of inﬂation. The constraint on the tensor-to-scalar ratio in-
fered from the current CMB observations is r < 0.07(95%C.L.)
(BICEP2 and Planck Collaboration 2016; BICEP2 and Planck
Collaboration 2015), which corresponds to the upper bound of
the inﬂationary energy scale of 1016GeV. Hence the detec-
tion and/or measurement of the signals generated by primor-
dial gravitational waves offers an important clue to probe the
extremely high-energy physics behind inﬂation.

While it is often claimed that inﬂationary models predict
a spatially perfect ﬂat geometry, investigating the nonvanish-
ing spatial curvature as an extension to the standard cosmol-
ogy is still theoretically of interest. The spatial curvature is
not prohibited as the consequence of the inﬂation, and indeed
large amount of negative spatial curvature (Gott 1982; Gott and
Staler 1984) can be introduced in the open inﬂation scenario,
namely the inﬂationary model with bubble nucleation by false-
vacuum decay (Coleman 1977; Coleman and De Luccia 1980).
This type of models is recently attracting a renewed atten-
tion in the context of the string landscape paradigm (Susskind
2003; Feivogel and Susskind 2004). Hence a search for the
imprint of the false-vaccum decay in current/future observa-
tions such as CMB anisotropies is still very interesting.
It is
then shown that we are already testing the inﬂationary model
with false-vacuum decay, which naturally predicts the spa-
tially curved geometry, against observations (Yamauchi et al.
2011; Sugimura et al. 2012).

1.2 Dark energy and modiﬁcation of general

relativity

It
is one of the biggest challenges of modern cosmology
to understand the physical origin of the cosmic accelera-
tion of the Universe, discovered by observations of super-
novae (Supernova Search Team Collaboration 1998; Supernova
Cosmology Project Collaboration 1999). It might eventually re-
quire the presence of a new type of matter, usually called dark
energy.

The simplest model for dark energy is a cosmological con-
stant, Λ, originally introduced by Einstein a hundred years ago.
However, in this model there is a theoretical problem, the so-
called cosmological constant problem. Based on naive argu-
ments in quantum ﬁeld theory, the vacuum energy density due
to the cosmological constant can be theoretically estimated from
the sum of the contributions from quantum ﬁelds below an ul-
traviolet cutoff at the Planck scale. On the other hand, cosmo-
logically observed value is many orders of magnitude smaller
than this theoretical estimates by a factor of 10120. So far it
is still hard to naturally explain why such vanishingly small
Λ can be realized as a result of a cancellation of more than
10120. As the alternative form of the dark energy, quintessence,

more precisely a scalar ﬁeld rolling down its potential, has been
discussed (Wetterich 1987; Ratra and Peebles 1988). Unlike
the cosmological constant, the quintessence is dynamic and the
equation of state for the quintessence dark energy generally
varies with time.

In another scenario, the accelerated expansion might arise
alternatively due to a modiﬁcation of general relativity on cos-
mological scales, which is often referred as modiﬁed gravity
theories. In addition to the standard tensor modes, this type of
models often involves a new degree of freedom that accounts
for cosmic accerelation. Among them, the simple modiﬁcation
is described by a scalar-tensor theory where a single scalar de-
gree of freedom is added. A number of modiﬁed gravity the-
ories consistent with current observations have been proposed
so far as alternatives to dark energy. The f (R) gravity (De
Felice and Tsujikawa 2010), DGP gravity (Dvali et al. 2000),
Galileons (Nicolis et al. 2008), and massive gravity (Fierz and
Puli 1939; de Rham et al. 2010) (see also, e.g., Kimura and
Yamauchi 2013 for its extension) are possible candidates to ex-
plain the cosmic acceleration due to the additional degree of
freedom. Moreover, a very general class of modiﬁed gravity
theories, called Horndeski theory (Horndeski 1974) and its ex-
tension (Gleyzes et al. 2015; Gao 2014), includes a large num-
ber of concrete models as speciﬁc cases. Since modiﬁcation
of gravity are strongly constrained by precise tests of gravity
on small scales such as one in the Solar system, for a modi-
ﬁed theory of gravity to be consistent, any of those involving an
additional propagating degree of freedom must include a mech-
anism that suppresses any potential ﬁfth force that might appear
on small scales. A wide class of models can be shown to ex-
hibit screening in the vicinity of a gravity source (Kimura et
al. 2012; Kobayashi et al. 2014) and some observational im-
plications were suggested in (Narikawa et al. 2013; Saito et al.
2015). A variety of theoretical scenarios have been proposed in
literature and need to be carefully compared with observational
data.

To elucidate the nature of the dark energy and test gravity
theory on cosmological scales, we need to introduce parameters
to describe non-standard cosmological models. The simplest
parametrization of background-level cosmological quantities is
the equation-of-state parameter, which is deﬁned as

w =

p
ρ

,

(2)

where p and ρ are the spatially averaged background dark en-
ergy pressure and energy density. In the cosmological constant
model, the equation-of-state parameter is w = −1, but if the dark
energy is not a cosmological constant, w 6= −1, w in general can
vary in time. In order to test a time-varying equation-of-state,
we for instance expand w as w(z) = w0 + wa z/(1 + z). The
current constraints on w0 and wa have been obtained from the
combinations among data of CMB, supernovae, baryon acoustic

4

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

oscillation and gravitational lensing and so on. At the moment,
there is no evidence for a departure from the standard ΛCDM
model (Planck Collaboration XIV 2015 ). However, we should
note that since there are vast possibilities to model the land-
scape of models, there is no general framework to parametrize
the equation-of-state parameter. Hence more extensive studies
of dark energy and modiﬁed gravity models are needed. We
expect that investigating the deeper Universe in future observa-
tions can help to break the degeneracy between dark energy and
modiﬁed gravity.

1.3 Dark matter, neutrino, and evolution of

large-scale structure

Dark matter is crucial for the concordance cosmological model
as a component which plays the central role in modeling of cos-
mic structure formation and galaxy formation in the Universe.
The growth of the large-scale structure is rather sensitive to the
properties of the dark matter and neutrinos. Current observa-
tions on large scales are in good agreement with the prediction
from the standard cosmological model, based on the cold dark
matter, which is the matter composed of particles with the free-
streaming length much smaller than galaxy scales, and mass-
less neutrinos. However, the concordance model should yet be
tested with observations on smaller scale.

As a simple alternative to CDM, warm dark matter with
its mass in the keV range has been proposed (Dodelson and
Widrow 1994; Markovi and Viel 2013). While above the spe-
ciﬁc scales charactering its mass the behavior of warm dark
matter is very similar to CDM and is indistingushable from
CDM, it erases density perturbations and drasticaly suppresses
the power spectrum below this scale through its free stream-
ing. On the other hand, the neutrino oscillation expetiments
by Super Kamiokande revealed that neutrinos must have small
but nonvanishing masses, which indicates the existence of the
physics beyond the standard model of the particle physics.
So far only mass-squared difference of neutrinos have been
measured (MINOS Collaboration 2008; SNO Collaboration
2008), suggesting that their masses are at least O(0.01)eV.
Massive neutrinos affect the evolution of the density perturba-
tions and erases density perturbations through their free stream-
ing. Therefore, observing the small-scale power spectrum is of
great interest not only for cosmology but also particle physics.

2 Cosmological surveys with the SKA

Observing the large-scale structure in the Universe provides us
the rich information about not only the late-time but also the pri-
mordial nature of the Universe. However, a wide area of the sky
and a signiﬁcant redshift depth is essential to achieve the pre-
cision at and beyond CMB levels. Among the next-generation

cosmological experiments, the SKA will be able to probe a vast
volume of the Universe and is expected to deliver the very pre-
cise cosmological measurements and lead to the new frontier of
cosmology science. In this section, we brieﬂy introduce major
cosmology science partly developed by the international SKA
cosmology science working group, and partly presented in the
international SKA Science Book (2015).

2.1 HI galaxy survey

Neutral hydrogen (HI) in the Universe can be a prime candi-
date to observe as the tracer of the underlying dark matter and
has a characteristic line emission whose wavelength is given by
21cm. Since after the Universe has reionized, the HI is thought
to mainly live inside galaxies, the HI is therefore essentially
a biased tracer of the galaxy distributions (Yahya et al. 2015).
The redshifting of HI (21cm) line provides the redshift informa-
tion of galaxies and helps to reconstruct the three-dimensional
matter distributions over a range of redshifts and scales. This
is called HI galaxy redshift survey. However the line is quite
weak, we require highly sensitive telescopes such as the SKA
to perform large HI galaxy survey across a wide redshift range,
while so far only galaxies up to z ∼ 0.2 have been detected in
Arecibo (Catinella and Cortese 2015).

Detection of a HI galaxy relies on the measurement of its
corresponding HI line proﬁle. The choice of source detection
algorithm for the HI galaxy surveys is crucial and determines
the total number of galaxies and how well spurious detections,
e.g., due to radio frequency interference (RFI), can be rejected.
In the simple approach, which has been often studied (e.g., see
(Abadalla et al. 2015; Santos et al. 2015a; Yahya et al. 2015)),
we require that at least two points on the HI line are measured.
This is because expected HI galaxies show the typical signals
of the double peak due to their rotation and this method will re-
move any face-on galaxy showing a single narrow peak, which
could be confused with RFI.

that

Based on this method, we expect

the HI galaxy
redshift survey provided by SKA has the potential
to be
competitive with other cosmological experiments in the next
decade (Abadalla et al. 2015; Santos et al. 2015a; Yahya et al.
2015). Assuming 104 hours of survey time, the SKA phase 1
(SKA1) covers 5, 000 deg2 out to z ∼ 0.5, while SKA phase 2
(SKA2) should probe the available full-sky, 30, 000 deg2 up to
z ∼ 2. For SKA1 with ﬂux sensitivity 70 − 100µJy, we will ﬁnd
about 5 × 106 HI galaxies, which is slightly smaller than one
expected in planed galaxy surveys in optical and infrared band,
such as Euclid 2 and LSST 3. For comparison, the SKA precur-
sors, MeerKAT and ASKAP, with the sky coverage 5, 000 deg2
and ﬂux density ∼ 700µJy are expected to ﬁnd 5×105 galaxies.

2 See http://www.euclid-ec.org
3 http://www.lsst.org

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

5

Table 1. Speciﬁcations for SKA cosmology-oriented surveys.

survey

HI galaxy

HI IM

continuum

phase

coverage
(deg2)
SKA1 MID(B1+2)
5, 000
SKA2
30, 000
SKA1 MID(B1+2)/LOW 30, 000
SKA2
30, 000
SKA1 MID(B2)
30, 000
SKA2
30, 000

sensitivity

(µJy)
≃ 70
≃ 5
–
–
≃ 1
≃ 0.1

resolution
(arcsec)

∼ 10

<
∼ 1
<
∼ 0.1
<
∼ 1/ <
<
∼ 0.1
<
∼ 1
<
∼ 0.1

obs. time

redshift

galaxy number

(hr)
104
104
104
104
104
104

z <
∼ 0.7
z <
∼ 2
z <
∼ 3
z <
∼ 3.7
z <
∼ 6
z <
∼ 6

≃ 5 × 106

≃ 109

–
–

≃ 108
≃ 109

When the SKA2 is constucted, the ﬂux threshold will be drasti-
cally improved and can reach ∼ 5µJy over the available full-sky,
providing that the spectroscopic survey of ∼ 1 billion HI galax-
ies, that is, “billion galaxy survey”, can be delivered. Yahya et
al. (2015) shows that the number density and the bias for the
HI galaxy survey conducted by the SKA can be well described
by the ﬁtting function with several parameters depending on the
ﬂux cut. Therefore the SKA cosmology survey will provide an
unprecedented number of galaxies, compared with any planned
galaxy surveys in 2020s.

The SKA HI galaxy survey in its both phase will be able to
provide very accurate measurements for the expansion history
of the Universe via baryon acoustic oscillation (BAO) (Bull et
al. 2015a), which is imprinted in the galaxy correlation function
as the standard ruler, and the growth of structure via redshift
space distortion (RSD) (Raccanelli et al. 2015). It is shown that
the growth rate of the observed density contrast is sensitive to
the dark energy models and the theory of gravity (see Sec. 1.2).
Hence the precise RSD measurement then provides a test for
deviations from general relativity on large scales.

2.2 HI intensity mapping survey

In addition to the HI galaxy redshift survey, the SKA will be
also able to deliver competitive cosmology by the HI intensity
mapping (IM) survey (Santos et al. 2015b) (see also Battye et al.
2004; Wyithe and Loeb 2007; Chang et al. 2007; Peterson et al.
2009), which offers novel technique of probing the large-scale
structure of the Universe. For the HI galaxy survey, in order
to detect individual galaxies, we indeed need sufﬁciently long
integration time of the highly sensitive telescope. Instead of re-
solving individual galaxies, the HI IM survey can measure the
intensity of the integrated HI line emission of several galaxies
in one angular pixel on the sky. For the SKA, the pixel size is
usually assumed to be <
∼ 1deg2 (Santos et al. 2015b). Similar to
the CMB map, the result of the HI IM survey is a map of large-
scale ﬂuctuations in HI intensity. By not requiring the detection
of individual galaxies and combining with the high resolution of
radio telescope, even for the SKA1, the HI IM survey can cover
the extremely large survey volume that is larger than that of fu-

ture planed ones. When the SKA1-MID IM survey operating
for 104 hours with the bandwidth 350 − 1050 MHz is consid-
ered, the SKA1 can probe the available full-sky 30, 000 deg2
out to z ∼ 3. We note that pushing to higher redshifts brings
in issues of angular resolution and foreground, while the detec-
tion of IM at lowest redshifts is known to be difﬁcult due to the
RFI (Bull et al. 2015b). When the whole sample is assumed to
be further subdivided into constant frequency bins of ∼ 10MHz
width, more than 50 redshift bins can be used.

Even though individual galaxies are not detected, the HI IM
survey has a sufﬁcient potential to deliver precise measurements
of the BAO (Bull et al. 2015a) and RSD (Raccanelli et al. 2015)
in the matter power spectrum even in the era of SKA1. These
surveys provide powerful tests of dark energy and modiﬁcations
to general relativity, which are discussed in Sec. 1.2. Moreover,
the very large survey volume provided by the HI IM survey
provides us the possibility to probe the physics on extremely
large-scales (Camera et al. 2015), which carries the information
of the possible signature of the primordial inﬂation in the very
early Universe (see Sec. 1.1). In addition to these, the HI IM
survey could allow the measurements of the power spectrum
for the lensing potential at higher redshifts (Brown et al. 2015)
(see also Poutsidou and Metcalf 2014), mainly because gravi-
tational magniﬁcation due to weak gravitational lensing affects
the clustering properties of galaxies. The radio weak lensing
survey would map the dark matter distributions (see Sec.1.3) in
the independent way from optical counterparts.

Observing the HI

signals emitted at

the Epoch of
Reionization (EoR) can also be used to deliver the very precise
cosmology. During the EoR, the ﬁrst stars and galaxies release
ionizing photons into the intergalactic medium (IGM), creating
ionized bubbles whose geometry reﬂects the large-scale cluster-
ing of the dark matter. Since the HI gas survives not only inside
galaxies in the ionized bubble but also in the neutral IGM during
the EoR, a survey of the HI brightness temperature ﬂuctuations
can be treated as another biased tracer of the underlying dark
matter distribution (Santos et al. 2015b), as with galaxy surveys.
In addition, the HI IM survey before and during EoR can also
be used to measure the weak gravitational lensing of the red-
shifted HI emissions to reconstruct the high-redshift matter den-

6

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

sity ﬂuctuations along the line-of-sight (Zahn and Zaldarriaga
2006).

Since the astrophysical processes during the EoR are poorly
understood and they lead to large uncertainties, a number of
parameters to model the systematics should be included and
the marginalizations of the contributions from the astrophysi-
cal process is needed. Furthermore, the HI signals are heavily
contaminated by various sources such as our galaxy and ex-
tragalactic point sources. One of the important challenges for
the HI IM survey is to develop the cleaning method to remove
the foregrounds that are orders of magnitude stronger than the
signals to be measured. Although many works concerning the
cleaning techniques have alreadly been done, e.g., (Woltz et al.
2015; Shaw et al. 2013; Chapman et al. 2012; Santos et al. 2005)
(see Ichiki et al. 2013 for the CMB foreground removal), it is
still challenging to remove the everything that is not what we
actually want to observe.

2.3 Radio continuum survey

Although in the past decades the radio continuum survey has
provided distribution of the large scale structure in low redshift,
the studies from cosmological point-of-view has been restricted,
e.g. the cross-correlations with the CMB to ﬁnd the integrated
Sachs-Wolfe effect (e.g., Giannantonio et al. 2008), mainly be-
cause the source density in radio continuum survey is relatively
lower than that in ongoing optical surveys. When the SKA is
constructed, the radio continuum survey will be expected to
provide a sufﬁcient number of sources to be comparable to or
relatively larger than expected in forthcoming surveys in other
wavelength (Jarvis et al. 2015). Synchrotron radiation is emit-
ted from all galaxies with ongoing star formation or acceretion
and dominates the extragalactic radio background emission in
low frequency regime. Moreover, since the synchrotron radio
emission from galaxies is known to be unaffected by dust, the
radio continuum survey is advantageous to detect high-redshift
galaxies. Because the semi-empirical extragalactic sky simula-
tion performed in (Wilman et al. 2008) is so far in good agree-
ment with latest radio observations such as JVLA (Condon et al.
2012), the resultant redshift distributions of various source pop-
ulations with several detection thresholds can be used to fore-
cast future constraints on cosmological parameters. In addition,
the radio continuum survey from SKA will cover the available
full-sky 30, 000 deg2 out to z ∼ 6, which can probe extremely
large survey volume. On the other hand, since the radio con-
tinuum survey provides the featureless spectrum, the redshift
information for idividual galaxies is not available and can be ob-
tained from other wavelength observations or HI line surveys.
For instance, using observational data from optical surveys, the
host galaxies of low-redshift radio sources will be expected to
be identiﬁed, while radio sources at high redshifts, say z > 2,

will not be identiﬁed by optical surveys (McAlpine et al. 2012).
The SKA1 has the potential to perform a radio continuum
survey over the available full-sky down to the ﬂux threshold
1 µJy, which corresponds to the detection of ∼ 5 × 108 galax-
ies. The SKA2 with the ﬂux limit 0.1µJy can reach 109 galax-
ies. In the absence of redshift information, the continuum sur-
vey mainly observes the angular power spectrum for the num-
ber density contrast of radio sources. Even without redshift in-
formation for indivisual galaxies, the deep and wide surveys
are advantageous to constrain the information of the primordial
Universe, e.g., the primordial non-Gaussianity (see Sec. 1.1), as
shown in the following section.

The radio continuum survey will also measure the deforma-
tion of the distant-galaxy images, providing the high-precision
measurements of cosmic shear (Brown et al. 2015). It directly
offers an oppotunity to probe intervening total matter ﬂuctua-
tions along a line-of-sight. The cosmic shear measurement of
background source has been widely studied and now been ac-
cepted as a standard cosmological tool. The SKA1 will survey
5, 000 deg2 and the SKA2 can reach 30, 000 deg2. We will ﬁnd
galaxy number densities of about 3 galaxies per steradian for
SKA1 and about 10 galaxies per steradian for SKA2. While the
number of galaxies is relatively lower, the radio continuum sur-
vey can extend to higher redshift than the optical weak lensing
surveys that will be conducted on comparable timescales.

3 Cosmology with the SKA by SKA-Japan

consortium

As introduced in the previous section, the SKA has the po-
tential to deliver the very precise cosmological measurements
through the HI galaxy survey, HI intensity mapping survey and
radio continuum survey. We expect that the cosmological sur-
vey conducted by the SKA will yield tranformational science
across a wide range of cosmology.
In this section, we sum-
marize the SKA-oriented cosmological scientiﬁc challenges in
which the cosmologists in Japanese research community, called
SKA-Japan consortium (SKA-JP) cosmology science working
group, have a deep interest. We have wide expertise in both the-
oretical/observational cosmology and are particularly interested
in the studies of the very early stage of the Universe, the ob-
servational tests of the general relativity on cosmological scales
and the particle physics such as the neutrinos and the beyond-
standard-model physics. While observing the small-scale is of
great interest from various perspectives for both cosmology and
particle physics, it is hard to provide the accurate predictions on
such scales, mainly because density perturbations grow signiﬁ-
cantly and enter within highly nonlinear regime. Moreover, the
feedback of the baryonic physics is poorly understood and in-
volves large uncertainties. In order to obtain the unprecedented
constraints on the parameters for the fundamental physics, we

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

7

)

L
N
f
(
σ

 16

 8

 4

 2

Mest>1011Msun/h
0.7<z<1.2
15,000 deg2
mass bin : same number density

 2

 1

)

L
N
f
(
σ

1-tracer 2-tracers 3-tracers 4-tracers 5-tracers

 0.25

Euclid

SKA1 Euclid+SKA1 SKA2 Euclid+SKA2

 0.5

5-tracers

Euclid : same number density
SKA : galaxy type

Fig. 1. The marginalized error on fNL as the function of the number of
tracers in the single redshift bin 0.7 < z < 1.2. The mass bins are divided
such that they have the equal shot noise. Even 2 tracers drastically improve
the constraint, because the multitracer technique does not take effect for the
one tracer case. (Yamauchi et al. 2014)

Fig. 2. The expected marginalized constraints on fNL for each survey and
combinations. Constraints σ(fNL) <
∼ 1.8 and 0.7 can be obtained with a
single survey of SKA1 and Euclid, respectively. The combination of SKA and
Euclid can provide a stronger constraint σ(fNL) <
∼ 0.65 for SKA1+Euclid
and an unprecedented constraint σ(fNL) <
∼ 0.5 for SKA2+Euclid. (Yamauchi
et al. 2014)

need to focus on the observation on the speciﬁc redshifts and
scales. This section is a brief overview of the science that SKA
can achieve and our community is currently playing an impor-
tant role.

3.1 Ultra-large scale cosmology with multitracer

technique

One of the possible ways to overcome the issues discussed
above is to focus on the observations on the ultra-large cosmo-
logical scales. Although it is hard to access ultra-large scales,
theoretical prediction on such scales can be very precise, be-
cause in superhorizon scale, the growth of the density perturba-
tion fully remains within the linear regime and the effects of the
baryonic physics feedback due to the astrophysical processes
are sufﬁciently suppressed. However, the clustering analysis
at large scales are limited due to cosmic-variance, due to the
lack of enough independent measurements. A promising way
to access the ultra-large scales is to reduce the cosmic-variance
with so-called multitracer technique (Seljak 2009; Hamaus et
al. 2011), in which the availability of multiple tracers with the
different biases allows signiﬁcant improvements in the statisti-
cal error.

3.1.1 Multitracer technique and synergy with Euclid survey
Among various cosmological parameters characterizing the pri-
mordial Universe, we focus on the primordial non-Gaussianity.
Many members of Japanese cosmology community have been
extensively working on the inﬂationary model-building and the
theoretical studies of the mechanism of generating the primor-
dial non-Gaussianity during the inﬂationary epoch. Although

primordial non-Gaussianity has primarily been constrained
from measurements of CMB so far, the resultant constraint has
almost saturated to the observational limit predicted by ideal
observations. Large scale halo/galaxy distributions provide dis-
tinct information on the primordial non-Gaussianity. Luminous
sources such as galaxies must be most obvious tracers of the
underlying dark matter distributions with a bias. For the stan-
dard Gaussian initial conditions, the halo bias is often assumed
to be linear, deterministic, and scale-independent. However, it
was found that the non-Gaussianity in primordial ﬂuctuations
effectively introduces a scale-dependent clustering of galaxies
on large scales. The modiﬁcation appears in a biased tracer of
the underlying matter distribution. The non-Gaussian correc-
tion to the large-scale Gaussian bias of a biased tracer, induced
by the local-type non-Gaussianity fNL, is given by (Dalal et al.
2008; Matarrese and Verde 2008).

∆b =

3H 2

0 Ωm,0δc(bG − 1)
k2T (k)D+(z)

fNL −

1
δc

1

d ln ν (cid:18) dn/dM

dnG/dM(cid:19) , (3)

where ν = δc/σ(M ), D+(z) is the growth factor and T (k) is the
matter transfer function normalized to unity at large scales. The
effect of the local type primordial non-Gaussianity on the halo
bias is prominent on large scales and at high redshifts. Thus, in
the large-scale limit, the non-Gaussian correction become dom-
inant, and the enhancement of clustering amplitude becomes
signiﬁcant. With the help of this property, the constraint on pri-
mordial non-Gaussianity has been obtained.

D. Yamauchi and K. Takahashi, who are members of SKA-
JP, have discussed the potential power of the multitracer tech-
nique with future galaxy surveys in Yamauchi et al. (2014).
Before showing expected constraints from SKA, the speciﬁc

8

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

galaxy survey with single redshift bin 0.7 < z < 1.2, the sky
coverage 15,000deg2 and the observed halo mass range Mest >
1011M⊙/h is considered to investigate the efﬁciency of the
multitracer technique. We found that the constraints on fNL
drastically improved even when a number of nuisance parame-
ters for estimates of the halo mass are included to model sys-
tematic errors see Fig. 1. Even for the case of 2 tracers, the
constraint of σ(fNL) ≈ 4, which is severer than the Planck one
σ(fNL) ≈ 5, can be obtained.

We then focus on the SKA radio continuum survey
(Sec. 2.3). In our treatment, the speciﬁc population of galaxies
is considered to match the extragalactic simulation performed
in Wilman et al. (2008). assuming that the sensitivity limit of
1 (0.1)µJy and applying a 5σ detection for SKA1(2). In this
case, they correspond to the detection of 5 × 108 and 109 galax-
ies, respectively. Moreover, to split the galaxy samples into the
subsamples by the inferred halo mass and redshift, ﬁve radio
galaxy types such as star-forming galaxies, radio quite quasars,
radio-loud AGN and starbursts are considered to infer the halo
mass. We actually have shown that the SKA radio continuum
survey can constrain up to the accuracy of σ(fNL) ≈ 0.7 for
SKA2, and σ(fNL) ≈ 1.6 for SKA1.

At the time when the SKA is operational,

there will be
additional survey from a number of ground-based telescopes
and space missions. Euclid is expected to be launced in 2020
and will perform imaging and spectroscopic surveys in opti-
cal and infrared bands. While the number of galaxies (∼ 108)
and covered sky area (∼ 15, 000 deg2) for Euclid are relatively
smaller than these for SKA, we consider Euclid photometric
galaxy survey as a future representative survey that will be con-
ducted on comparable time scales. Fig. 2 shows that constraints
σ(fNL) <
∼ 0.7 can be obtained with a single survey
of SKA1 and Euclid, respectively. The combination of SKA
and Euclid can provide a stronger constraint σ(fNL) <
∼ 0.65 for
SKA1+Euclid and an unprecedented constraint σ(fNL) <
∼ 0.5
for SKA2+Euclid, implying that most inﬂationary models with
even small primordial non-Gaussianity can be excluded by the
combination of future galaxy surveys (see also Kitching et al.
2015; Takahashi et al. 2015).

∼ 1.8 and <

3.1.2 Higher-order primordial non-Gaussianity and their

consistency relation

Constraining various properties of primordial non-Gaussianity
is expected to provide the oppotunity to break the degener-
acy of inﬂationary models, because its amplitude, shape, and
scale-dependence encode much information of the primordial
Universe.
In other words, different nonlinear parameters are
linked to distinctive meachnisms that can generate such non-
Gaussianity during/after the inﬂationary epoch.

One of the major theoretical discoveries from the studies of
inﬂationary models is that all inﬂationary models predict the

SKA1
Euclid
Euclid+SKA1
SKA2
Euclid+SKA2

SKA:lmin=2(solid),lmin=3(dashed)

L
N
g

 20000

 10000

 0

-10000

-20000

L
N

τ

 20

 10

 0

-10

-20

-4 -3 -2 -1  0  1  2  3  4

-20000-10000  0  10000 20000

fNL

gNL

Fig. 3. Forecast 1σ marginalized contours in (fNL, τNL), (gNL, τNL) and
(fNL, gNL) planes with the vanishing ﬁducial values of the nonlinear pa-
rameters. To see the dependence on the minimal multipole we also plot the
results for SKA with ℓSKA
(Yamauchi and Takahashi
2015)

min = 3 in dashed line.

presence of the consistency relation between nonlinear param-
eters. For the simplest scenarios, if there is the nonvanish-
ing local-form bispectrum, the trispectrum must necessarily ex-
ist with τNL = ((6/5)fNL)2, where τNL denotes the local-type
nonlinear parameter charactering the amplitude of the primor-
dial trispectrum (Okamoto and Hu 2002; Boubekeur and Lyth
2006). Even in a general situation, one can show that there is a
universal relation,

τNL ≥(cid:16) 6

5

fNL(cid:17)2

,

(4)

which is often refereed to the Suyama-Yamaguchi inequal-
ity (Suyama and Yamaguchi 2008; Suyama et al. 2010).
Primordial trispectrum is also usually characterized by another
nonlinear parameter, gNL, which corresponds to the strength of
the intrinsic cubic nonlinearities of primordial ﬂuctuations. A
detection of the higher-order primordial non-Gaussianity and
the conﬁrmation of the inequality from large-scale structure
measurements would indicate the presence of more complicated
dynamics, e.g., multi-ﬁeld inﬂationary models (see Lyth and
Wands 2002; Moroi and Takahashi 2001; Enqvist and Sloth
2002 for curvaton model), in the primordial Universe. Thus, the
detection and conﬁrmation should be the target in future experi-
ments (see Biagetti et al. 2012). Furthermore, we could rule out
not only the simplest single-ﬁeld but also the multiﬁeld inﬂation
models if we ﬁnd the breaking of the consistency inequality.

When τNL > ((6/5)fNL)2, the halo density contrast is not
fully correlated to the matter linear density ﬁeld even in the
absence of the shot noise. Namely, the simple bias relation
δh = bhδ should be modiﬁed due to the stochasticity. This
provides the unique oppotunity of large-scale scale-dependent
stochastic bias as a probe of the primordial Universe associated

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

9

L
N

τ

 1000

 100

 10

Planck constraint

Euclid+SKA2
Euclid+SKA1
Euclid
SKA2
SKA1

l

P
a
n
c
k
 
c
o
n
s
t
r
a
n

i

t

τ
NL<((6/5)fNL)2

 1

 2

 4

 8

fNL

Fig. 4. Parameter space to conﬁrm the consistency relation, fNL/σ(fNL)
and τNL/σ(τNL). For comparison, the inconsitent region and the con-
straints from Planck are also shown in gray color. When fNL <
∼ 1.5, the
conﬁrmation of the consistency inequality is rather challensing for a single
survey. Combining SKA2 and Euclid drasically improves the constraint to
reach the conﬁrmation even for fNL ≈ 0.9 and τNL ≈ 8. (Yamauchi and
Takahashi 2015)

with complicated dynamics (Baumann et al. 2012; Smith and
LoVerde 2010; Adhikari et al. 2014) .

D. Yamauchi and K. Takahashi have discussed the required
survey level needed to probe the higher-order primordial non-
Gaussianity such as τNL , gNL and test the consistency rela-
tion with future galaxy surveys (Yamauchi and Takahashi 2015)
(see also Hashimoto et al. 2015 ). In order to see the impact
of the higher-order primordial non-Gaussianity on the param-
eter estimation, the 1σ marginalized contour obtained through
the Fisher analysis is shown in Fig. 3. Assuming the speciﬁc
distribution of galaxies introduced in the previous subsubsec-
tion, as for τNL, the SKA radio continuum survey can reach
σ(τNL) ≈ 4(11) for the SKA2(1), which is an improvement by
a factor of 100 (25) compared with the Planck constraint, sug-
gesting that the deep survey and large sky coverage provided
by SKA are advantageous to constrain τNL, and the information
even from the early stage of SKA is quite essential to break the
degeneracy between these nonlinear parameters. The constraint
on gNL from SKA is also several tens of times severer than that
obtained from Planck. Concentrating on fNL and τNL, the de-
pendence of our forecast on the choice of the ﬁducial values is
studied in Fig. 4, where we show the region in which both fNL
and τNL are detected at 1σ signiﬁcance. When fNL is small, say
<
∼ 1.5, the conﬁrmation at >
∼ 1σ level is rather challenging for
a single survey, even when we apply the multitracer technique.
However, the combination of SKA and Euclid drastically im-
proves the constraints and can detect the consistency relation
in the wide parameter region. These results shows that the SKA

radio continuum survey combined with the future optical galaxy
surveys such as Euclid offers an unique oppotunity to probe the
detail dynamics in the primoridial Universe.

3.1.3 Halo/galaxy bispectrum
The primordial bispectrum and the higher-order moments mea-
sure the fundamental interactions and nonlinear processes oc-
curing during and/or immediately after inﬂation. Not only the
amplitude but also the shape of the bispectrum encodes much
physical information of the primordial Universe. Different
shape can be also linked to different mechanism for gen-
erating non-Gaussian ﬂuctuations.
It would be very inter-
esting to try further constraining various types of primor-
dial non-Gaussianity by precise large-scale structure measure-
ments, which are expected to contain much more informa-
tion than CMB. It is, however, shown that the scale-dependent
clustering due to non-local type models is weaker than the
local-type (Matsubara 2012; Schmidt and Kamionkowski 2010;
Verde and Matarrese 2009; Taruya et al. 2008),
implying
that the measurements of the scale-dependent clustering in
the galaxy power spectrum is irrelevant. The effect of the
scale-dependent bias sourced by primordial non-Gaussianity
appears not only in the galaxy power spectrum but also in the
galaxy bispectrum (Yokoyama et al. 2013).
Indeed, the am-
plitude of the galaxy bispectrum sourced by the equilateral-
type primordial bispectrum and trispectrum, which do not lead
to an enhancement in the galaxy power spectrum, is shown
to be enhanced on large scales (Sefusatti and Komatsu 2007;
Mizuno and Yokoyama 2015). Although the late-time nonlin-
ear gravitational evolution effectively gives the nonvanishing
contributions to the observed galaxy bispectrum, the different
scale-dependence on large scales is expected to give stringent
constraints on the non-local type primordial non-Gaussianity.
Hence our community will try to constrain the non-local type
primordial non-Gaussianity with the help of the multitracer
technique.

3.2 Exploring the dark Universe with 21-cm survey

As we saw in the Sec. 2.2, in recent years, observations of HI
signals (i.e. 21 cm line) emitted at the EoR have attracted much
attention because the observations will open a new window to
the early phases of cosmological structure formations. Since
there are a lot of hydrogen gas in the IGM at the very high red-
shift Universe (6 >
∼ z), by observing the redshifted 21 cm line
with SKA-low we can survey such very past epochs, and not
only study how the Universe was ionized but also obtain infor-
mation about density ﬂuctuations of matters.

The 21 cm line results from hyperﬁne splitting of the 1S
ground state due to an interaction of magnetic moments of
proton and electron, and we can deﬁne the spin tempera-

10

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

ture TS through a ratio between number densities of hydro-
gen atom in the 1S triplet and 1S singlet states, n1/n0 ≡
(g1/g0) exp(−T⋆/TS), where T⋆ ≡ hc/kBλ21 = 0.068 K with
λ21(≃ 21 cm) being the wave length of the 21 cm line at a rest
frame, and g1/g0 = 3 is the ratio of spin degeneracy factors of
the two states. A difference between the observed 21 cm line
brightness temperature at redshift z and the CMB temperature
TCMB is given by

∆Tb (r, z) ≃ 26.8xHI(1 + δb)(cid:18) Ωbh2

1 + z

×(cid:16) 1 − Yp

1 − 0.25(cid:17)(cid:16) TS − TCMB

TS

Ωmh2

0.023(cid:19)(cid:16) 0.15
(cid:17)(cid:18) H(z)/(1 + z)

10 (cid:17)1/2
dvk/drk (cid:19) mK, (5)

where r is the comoving coordinate, xHI is the neutral fraction
of hydrogen, Yp is the primordial 4He mass fraction, δb is the
hydrogen density ﬂuctuation, and dvk/drk is the gradient of the
proper velocity along the line of sight due to both the Hubble
expansion and the peculiar velocity. Through the contribution
of δb in the differential brightness temperature of 21 cm line, we
can obtain the information of matter density ﬂuctuations.

The growth of the density ﬂuctuations depends on cosmo-
logical parameters, and we can use the 21 cm line surveys for
constraining them like CMB observations or galaxy surveys.
Since the redshifted frequency of 21 cm line corresponds to
each past era, the 21 cm line surveys enable us to observe very
wide redshift ranges (21 cm tomography). Therefore, we can
obtain a large number of Fourier samples and information about
time evolution of density ﬂuctuations. Additionally, in such
high redshift eras, non-linear growth of density ﬂuctuations is
less effective in comparison with that in later epochs, and we
can treat their time evolution with linear theory up to relatively
small scales. For this reason, in the 21 cm line surveys, theoret-
ical uncertainties due to the growth of density ﬂuctuations are
much smaller than those in galaxy surveys. These features are
advantages of the 21 cm line surveys.

In a work studied by K. Kohri, Y. Oyama, T. Sekiguchi,
T. Takahashi, who are members of SKA-JP (Kohri et al., 2013),
they found that by using combinations of CMB and 21 cm line
we can precisely measure the primordial curvature perturba-
tions, which are generated by inﬂation.
In the previous sec-
tion, we take account of higher correlation functions, but in
this work they focus on the two point correlation function (i.e.
power spectrum) of the primordial curvature perturbations. The
two point and higher correlation functions are complementary
to each other, and both correlation functions are important in or-
der to discriminate inﬂation models. In most of previous works
about discriminating the inﬂation models, mainly focused pa-
rameters were spectral index ns of the power spectrum and the
dependence of ns on the wave number (i.e. spectral running
αs). However, these parameters are not insufﬁcient to distin-
guish the inﬂation models in some cases, and we need higher
order wave number dependence of the power spectrum, e.g. the

Fig. 5. Contours of 95% C.L. forecasts by combinations of CMB (Planck
(upper) and COrE (lower)) and SKA (phase 1 and phase 2) in the ns–αs
(left) and αs–βs (right) planes. We set the observed redshift range to be
6.75 < z < 10.05. SKA can strongly constraint on ns, αs and βs in com-
parison with cases of CMB only. For comparison, we also plot forecasts
by Omniscope, which is a future square-kilometer collecting area array op-
timized for 21 cm line survey (Tegmark and Zaldarriaga 2009, Tegmark and
Zaldarriaga 2010). (Kohri et al. 2013)

wave number dependence of αs (i.e. running of running βs).
Though generally the running of running is very small and it is
difﬁcult to measure its value, in that work, they found that we
can strongly improve its constraints by combining CMB exper-
iments with precise 21 cm line surveys such as SKA (see Fig. 5,
and assumed speciﬁcations of 21 cm line surveys are listed in
Table 2).

Also, we can study elementary particle physics by the 21 cm
line surveys. For example, K. Kohri and Y. Oyama have investi-
gated how well we can constrain properties of neutrino; the sum
of the neutrino masses Σmν, the effective number of neutrino
species Nν, and the hierarchy of neutrino masses (Oyama et al.
2013, Oyama et al. 2015). Neutrinos are elementary particles
with neutral electric charge, and interact only through the weak
interaction with other particles.

Since the discoveries of neutrino masses by Super-
Kamiokande through neutrino oscillation experiments in 1998,
the standard model of particle physics has been forced to change
to theoretically include the neutrino masses. So far, only mass-
squared differences of neutrinos have been measured by neu-
trino oscillation experiments. However, the absolute values of
neutrino masses and hierarchical structure of them (normal or
inverted) have not been measured yet although their informa-
tion is indispensable to build new particle physics models. On
the other hand, such nonzero neutrino masses affect cosmol-

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

11

Fig. 6. Contours of 95% C.L. forecasts in the Σmν -Nν plane by combina-
tions of CMB (Planck, POLARBEAR-2 (PB-2), Simons Array (SA)) and SKA
(Phase 1 and Phase 2). Fiducial values of neutrino parameters, Nν and
Σmν , are taken to be Nν = 3.046 and Σmν = 0.1 eV. We set the ob-
served redshift range to be 6.75 < z < 10.05. POLARBEAR-2 and Simons
Array are ground-based precise CMB polarization observations, and DESI is
a future baryon acoustic oscillation (BAO) observation. (Oyama et al. 2015)

ogy signiﬁcantly because relativistic neutrinos erase the gravi-
tational potential up to the free streaming scale. Additionally,
the effective number of neutrino species contributes to an ex-
tra radiation component and affects the expansion rate of the
Universe. Besides, the hierarchical structure of neutrino masses
affects both the free-streaming scales and the expansion rate.
Therefore, we can obtain constraints of the neutrino masses, the
effective number of neutrino species and the hierarchy of neu-
trino masses from cosmological observations.

By using SKA1, we can strongly constrain on the sum of
the neutrino masses Σmν and the effective number of neutrino
species Nν (see Fig. 6, and assumed speciﬁcations of 21 cm
line surveys are listed in Table 3). In future, by using SKA2,
there is a possibility of distinguishing the hierarchy of neutrino
masses unless the mass structure is degenerated (see Fig. 7, and
assumed speciﬁcations of 21 cm line surveys are listed in the
Table 3). Moreover, they found that we can also obtain strong
constraints of the lepton number asymmetry of the Universe
(Kohri et al., 2014), which may become a relatively large value
in some models of elementary particle physics. From Fig. 8,
adding 21 cm line surveys by SKA to CMB observations, we see
that constraints of the lepton number asymmetry are greatly im-
proved in comparison with those of CMB only (assumed speci-
ﬁcations of 21 cm line surveys are listed in Table 2).

Thus far, physicists have investigated properties of elemen-
tary particles by ground-based experiments. However, as stated
above, by using 21 cm line surveys, we can measure detailed be-
haviors of matter ﬂuctuations, and information of them enables
us to clarify properties of elementary particles. This point is
specialties of the works stated above. Therefore, in our research
plans, we aspire for obtaining strong constraints of cosmolog-
ical parameters by observing the high redshift Universe with

Fig. 7. Contours of 95% C.L. forecasts in the Σmν − rν plane by combina-
tions of CMB (Planck, POLARBEAR-2 (PB-2), Simons Array (SA)) and SKA
(Phase 1 and Phase 2), where rν ≡ (m3 − m1)/Σmν . We assume that
an observed redshift range is 6.75 < z < 10.05. Allowed parameters on rν
by neutrino oscillation experiments are also plotted as two bands for the in-
verted and the normal hierarchies, respectively (the name of each hierarchy
is written in the close vicinity of each band). (Oyama et al. 2015)

the use of the 21 cm line surveys by SKA. In particular, the
members of SKA-JP are world leading scientists in the research
about particle cosmology by using 21cm line surveys.

In the previous section, we focus attention on biased density
ﬂuctuations at super horizon scales. On the one hand, in this
section, we take particular note of the behavior of density ﬂuc-
tuations at relatively small scales, and both research are com-
plementary to each other. Also, for the 21 cm line surveys, we
plan to investigate how precisely 21 cm line observations can
constrain models of the dark energy and the primordial non-
Gaussianity, which have been the focus of the study in the pre-
vious section. Moreover, we also pay attention to surveys of
HI intensity mapping. Thus far, research about the HI inten-
sity mapping with the motivation to study elementary particle
physics are not considered so much, and we expect that this
method by using the intensity mapping will develop hereafter.
Also, signals of 21 cm line strongly depend on astrophysi-
cal processes in the epoch of reionization. However, we do not
know sufﬁciently about the reionization history yet.
In addi-
tion, foregrounds of 21 cm line surveys are very strong radia-
tion and removal of them is one of the most important subjects.
Members of the reionization group of SKA-JP particularly fo-
cus on the astrophysical processes in the epoch of reionization
and the removal of foregrounds. Therefore, by working with

12

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

Nant Ae(z = 8) Lmin Lmax
[km]

[m2]
443
1

[m]
35
1

SKA1

Omniscope

911
106

6
1

z

FoV(z = 8)

t0

[deg2]

[hour per ﬁeld]

SKA1

Omniscope

13.12 × 4 × 4
2.063 × 104

4000
16000

6.8 − 10
6.8 − 10

Table 2. Speciﬁcations for interferometers of 21 cm experiments
adopted in the analyses (Kohri et al., 2013, and Kohri et al.,
2014). Here, Nant is the number of antennae, Ae is the effec-
tive collecting area per a antenna, Lmin and Lmax are the min-
imum and maximum baseline, respectively, FoV is the ﬁeld of
view, and t0 is the observation time. The re-baselining of SKA1
is not considered. For Omniscope, we assume the effective col-
lecting area Ae and ﬁeld of view are ﬁxed in the surveyed redshift
range. For SKA2, we assume that it has the 10 times larger total
collecting area than that of SKA1.
In addition, for SKA, we as-
sume it uses 4 multi-beaming, and its total observation time is the
same value as that of Omniscope (16000 hours), but it observes
4 places in the sky (i.e. 4 times larger FoV and one fourth t0).

Nant

SKA1
SKA2

911 × 1/2
911 × 4

Ae(z = 8) Lmin Lmax
[km]

[m2]
443
443

[m]
35
35

6
6

z

FoV(z = 8)

t0

SKA1
SKA2

[deg2]
13.12
13.12

[hour per ﬁeld]

1000
1000

6.8 − 10
6.8 − 10

for SKA1 (re-baseline design),

Table 3. Speciﬁcations for interferometers of 21 cm experi-
ments adopted in the analyses (Oyama et al., 2015). We
the number of
assume that
the originally planned
antennae is half as many as that of
SKA1, which has 911 antennae, and for SKA2,
the number
of antennae is 4 times as many as that of originally planned
SKA1. Additionally,
for SKA 1 and 2, we assume that mul-
tiple ﬁelds are observed by using these experiments, and the
number of ﬁelds is Nﬁeld = 4 in these analyses.
Then,
the effective ﬁeld of view is FoVSKA = 13.21 × Nﬁeld deg2.

Fig. 8. Contours of 95% C.L. forecasts in the Σmν –ξ plane, where ξ ≡
µν /Tν represents the lepton asymmetry of the Universe, µν is the neutrino
chemical potential, and Tν is the temperature of relic neutrinos. As CMB
data, the Planck and CMBPol surveys are adopted in the left and right pan-
els, respectively.
In order from top to bottom, the ﬁducial values of ξ are
set to be 0.05 and 0.01. We assume that an observed redshift range is
6.75 < z < 10.05. For comparison, we also plot forecasts by Omniscope.
(Kohri et al. 2014)

the members of the reionization group, we can obtain more ac-
curate theoretical models of 21 cm line signals and methods for
the removal of foregrounds. The models and methods enables
us to reduce theoretical uncertainties in the 21 cm line surveys.

3.3 Cosmic shear measurements with SKA

Precision weak lensing measurement in cosmology is a key ob-
servable for revealing the late-time evolution of density per-
turbations. The weak lensing mesurement conducted by the
SKA radio continuum survey will probe the galaxy population
to higher redshift that the lensing signal becomes larger. The
shape (or shear) of galaxies modiﬁed by gravitational lensing
can be characterized by even and odd-parity modes (E- and B-
mode, respectively) (Stebbins 1996; Kamionkowski et al 1997),
deﬁned as

±2g(n) =Xℓm

(Eℓm ± iBℓm) ±2Yℓm(n) ,

(6)

where ±2g denotes the spin− ± 2 component of the reduced
shear ﬁeld, which can be expanded by the spin− ± 2 spherical
harmonics ±2Yℓm. Here Eℓm and Bℓm represent the two par-
ity eigenstates with electric-type (−1)ℓ and the magnetic-type
(−1)ℓ+1 parities, respectively. The symmetric argument im-
plies that the density perturbations at linear-order produce only
the E-mode of the cosmic shear ﬁeld (see e.g. Yamauchi et
al. 2013). Hence, non-vanishing B-mode signals on large an-

gular scales immediately imply the presence of non-scalar per-
turbations. Although the amplitude of these signals is small,
it is known that there are a variety of generating mechanism.
Possible subdominant components in the Universe, such as ac-
tive vector modes generated by topological defects (Yamauchi
et al. 2012), primordial gravitational waves (Dodelson et al.
2003) and secondary vector/tensor modes generated by density
perturbations (Saga et al. 2015; Sarkar et al. 2008), rather than

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

13

)
π
2
(
/
 
 
 

B
B
C
)
1
+

l

l
(
l

10-6
10-8
10-10
10-12
10-14
10-16
10-18
10-20
10-22

SKA

PGW (r = 0.1)
Analytic tensor
Analytic vector
Exact vector

 10

 100

 1000

l

Fig. 9. Angular power spectrum of the weak lensing B-mode. For com-
parision, the black solid line shows the expected statistical error estimated
by the shot noise for the weak lensing measurement conducted by SKA2.
The second-order vector mode dominates the expected signals on small
scales (Saga et al. 2015).

ﬁrst-order density perturbations, can induce the B-mode shear.
A search for those tiny signals from the B-mode shear is a key
to explore subdomiant components of the Universe.

The angular power spectra of the B-mode cosmic shear,

ℓ =Pmh|Bℓm|2i/(2ℓ + 1), gen-

which is deﬁned through C BB
erated by primordial gravitational waves and the second-order
vector/tensor modes induced by the linear-order density pertur-
bations are shown in Fig. 9, implying that the total B-mode
shear signals cannot exceed the expected noise level even for
the weak lensing measurement conducted by the SKA2 (Saga et
al. 2015), while the signal induced by the second-order vector
mode turns out to dominate on almost all scales. On the other
hand, the weak lensing measurement in the HI IM survey is
expected to substantially improve the signal-to-noise ratio and
provide the observable signals, because the angular power spec-
trum of the brightness temperatures do not have diffusion scale
unlike CMB and measures the ﬂuctuations at different epochs.
We leave this for future investigations.

3.4 Synergy between SKA and CMB experiments:

primordial gravitational-waves

Measurements of the odd-parity pattern (B-modes) in the CMB
polarization on large angular scales have been considered as
the best avenue to probe the primordial gravitational-waves as
a smoking gun of the cosmic inﬂation (Kamionkowski et al.
1997). Still, there is no evidence for the presence of the pri-
mordial gravitational-waves, and the amplitude of the primor-
dial gravitational-waves relative to the primordial density ﬂuc-
tuations, usually referred to as the tensor-to-scalar ratio r, is
constrained as r < 0.07 (95% C.L.) from the Joint analysis of
BICEP2, Keck Array and Planck Collaborations (BICEP2 and
Planck Collaboration 2016; BICEP2 and Planck Collaboration

2015). The detection of the gravitational-wave (primary) B-
modes is one of the main targets in ongoing and future CMB
experiments.

On large angular scales, B-modes from Galactic foreground
emission are expected to dominate over the primary B-modes.
Multiple studies (e.g., Dunkley et al. 2009; Betoule et al. 2009;
Katayama et al. 2011) have been devoted for foreground clean-
ing techniques (see Ichiki 2014 for a resent review). Katayama
et al. (2011) showed that the foreground contamination would
be possible to be subtracted enough to detect the primordial
B-modes at r ∼ 0.001. However, even if the foreground con-
tamination is successfully mitigated, there is still a signiﬁcant
contamination from the gravitational lensing effect on the CMB
polarization caused by the gravitational potential of the large
scale structure (Zaldarriaga and Seljak 1998). Precise estimate
and subtraction of the lensing B-modes, usually referred to as
delensing (Seljak and Hirata 2004; Smith et al. 2012; Namikawa
and Nagata 2015), will be required in ongoing and future CMB
experiments such as BICEP/Keck Array series (BICEP2 and
Keck Array Collaboration 2015) and LiteBIRD (Matsumura et
al. 2014).

The lensing B-modes can be estimated from measure-
ments of the CMB-lensing mass ﬁelds or using Cosmic
Infrared Background (CIB) intensity map. The CMB-lensing
mass ﬁelds have been precisely reconstructed from CMB po-
larization experiments (POLARBEAR Collaboration 2014b;
ACT Collaboration 2014; SPT Collaboration 2015a; Planck
Collaboration XV 2015) (see Namikawa 2014 for a recent re-
view), and the lensing B-modes estimated from the CMB-
lensing mass ﬁelds have been detected with high signiﬁcance
very recently (Planck Collaboration XV 2015). Detections of
the lensing B-modes from the CIB observations have been also
reported in several CMB experiments (SPTpol Collaboration
2013; ACT Collaboration 2014; Planck Collaboration XV
2015). These lensing B-modes are, however, measured at scales
where the primary B-modes have negligible contribution. The
delensing with these lensing B-modes therefore does not im-
prove the sensitivity to the primary B-modes.

The estimate of the lensing B-modes would be also possi-
ble using any CMB-lensing mass tracers such as halos/galaxies
at high redshifts which generate the most part of the gravi-
tational potential of the CMB lensing (Marian and Bernstein
2007; Simard et al. 2015; Sherwin and Schmittfull 2015). The
SKA radio continuum survey (Jarvis et al. 2015) will provide
a two-dimensional intensity map of the synchrotron radiations
from halos/galaxies integrated along the line of sight. These
sources would be located at high redshifts (z ∼ 2). Since the
CMB lensing is mostly generated by inhomogeneities of the
mass distribution at such redshifts, ﬂuctuations in the intensity
map measured from the radio continuum survey would effec-
tively trace the gravitational potential of the CMB lensing. The

14

3.0

0
0
1
<
L

(cid:0)

2.5

s
b
o

L
C
/

l
e
d

,
s
b
o

L
C

LiteBIRD + SA(6µK-arcmin) + SKA
LiteBIRD + SA(6µK-arcmin)
LiteBIRD + SA(12µK-arcmin) + SKA
LiteBIRD + SA(12µK-arcmin)

(cid:1)

 
:
)
r
(
σ
 
o
t
 
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

I

2.0

1.5

1.0
101

100

Flux cut [µJy]

10-1

Fig. 10. Delensing improvement to constraints on the tensor-to-scalar ratio
as a function of the ﬂux cut of the SKA radio continuum survey. The solid
lines show the delensing improvement by combining the LiteBIRD, Simons
Array (SA) and SKA, while the horizontal dashed lines show the case with
CMB experiments alone. The red (green) lines show the case if the polar-
ization sensitivity of the Simons Array becomes 6µK-arcmin (12µK-arcmin).
(see Namikawa et al. 2015)

intensity map is therefore possible to be used for estimating part
of the lensing B-mode contributions, and subtracting it from the
observed B-modes on large scales.

Namikawa et al. (2015) explored expected delensing per-
formance in future CMB experiments using the intensity map
of the SKA radio continuum survey. Fig. 10 shows the im-
provement to the constraints on the tensor-to-scalar ratio of the
LiteBIRD by performing the delensing analysis (for details, see
Namikawa et al. 2015). We assume that the large-scale lensing
B-modes of the LiteBIRD are delensed using the CMB-lensing
mass ﬁelds reconstructed from the LiteBIRD and Simons Array
(SA) (Arnold et al. 2014), and the intensity map of the SKA
radio continuum survey. The improvement is computed with
varying the ﬂux cut of the radio continuum survey. Since the fu-
ture polarization sensitivity of the SA is uncertain, we show two
possible cases of the SA polarization sensitivity. The inclusion
of the SKA1-delensing will signiﬁcantly increase the improve-
ment to the constraints on the tensor-to-scalar ratio by 80–120%
compared to the case without the delensing analysis. With the
SKA2 (0.1–1µJy) and CMB observations, the improvement to
the constraints becomes 130–160 %. Note that the additional
improvement by the inclusion of the SKA2 to the CMB data
is approximately 100 %. The intensity map from the SKA ra-
dio continuum survey would be quite useful for the future CMB
delensing analysis, especially for the LiteBIRD observation.

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

4 Summary

In summary, the SKA will yield transformational science aross a
wide range of cosmology in the next decades. In particular, the
SKA has several cosmological surveys such as the HI galaxy,
HI intensity mapping and radio continuum survey, which have
the potential to open the new frontier of cosmology and deliver
the precision cosmology (see Sec. 2). The cosmology science
that the SKA has the potential to provide is of great interest for
SKA-Japan consortium (SKA-JP) cosmology science working
group. In this paper, we have brieﬂy reviewed the cosmology
science with the SKA and have highlighted some examples of
speciﬁc topics that Japanese cosmologists are currently playing
an important role.

Our analysis has revealed that the SKA should possess the
extremely-large survey volume, e.g. all-sky, to enhance the
study of the mechanism for generating the primordial density
ﬂuctuations through the scale-dependent bias (see Sec. 3.1). In
this treatment, the precise estimate of halo mass of each galaxy
infered from available observables is quite essential to take the
advantage of the multitracer technique. Hence, the properties
of individual galaxies, such as mass and redshift, infered from
available data by other surveys may provide the further im-
provement in the constraints.

We also expect that the SKA should explore the very high-
redshift dark Universe, such as the cosmic dawn and dark
age, with the 21-cm surveys (see Sec. 3.2). However, as al-
ready mentioned,
the signals of the 21-cm line during the
EoR strongly depends on the astrophysical processes, which
are poorly understood and include the large uncertainties. We
should further improve the cleaning method to remove the
foregrounds by working with the members of the reionization
group.

Finally, we emphasize that in the SKA era the cosmolog-
ical surveys will be limited by systematic errors and cosmic-
variance noises rather than statistical errors, because future
planned surveys will be able to probe the huge number of sam-
ples, implying that the synergy with other wavelengths is quite
important and possible synergy with multiwavelength data from
e.g., optical/infrared and CMB measurements, will have the po-
tential to reduce these noises. The Japanese astronomical re-
searchers are currently leading cosmology-oriented surveys in
other wavelengths such as HSC and LiteBIRD, and participat-
ing in ongoing and upcoming experiments. By working with
members of these surveys, the Japanese commity has the poten-
tial to provide the powerful tools for cosmology in next decade.
The involvement of SKA-JP in the SKA will beneﬁt our com-
munity by enlarging their expertises in cosmology science.

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to International SKA cosmology sci-
ence working group members for providing us opportunities
of open discussion and cooperation. We would like to thank
M. Oguri for useful discussions. We also thank T. Akahori and
T. Takeuchi for carefully reading our manuscript. D.Y. is sup-
ported by Grant-in-Aid for the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Fellows (No. 259800). T.N. is supported
by JSPS fellowshop for abroad (No. 26-142). The works of
K.K., K.T., and T.T. are partially supported by Grand-in-Aid
from the JSPS and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology (MEXT) of Japan, No. 26105520
(K.K.), No. 26247042 (K.K.), No. 15H05889 (K.K.),
No. 24340048 (K.T.), No. 26610048 (K.T.), No. 15H05896
(K.T.), No. 15K05084 (T.T.), No. 15H05888 (T.T.). The work
of K.K. is also supported by the Center for the Promotion of
Integrated Science (CPIS) of Sokendai (1HB5804100).

References
F. B. Abdalla et al. [Cosmology SWG Collaboration], arXiv:1501.04035

[astro-ph.CO].

A. van Engelen et al. [ACT Collaboration], Astrophys. J. 808, no. 1, 7

(2015) [arXiv:1412.0626 [astro-ph.CO]].

S. Adhikari, S. Shandera and N. Dalal, JCAP 1406, 052 (2014)
[astro-

[arXiv:1402.2336

doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2014/06/052
ph.CO]].

Arnold, K., Stebor, N., Ade, P. A. R., et al. 2014, Proc. SPIE, 9153,

91531F

D. Baumann, S. Ferraro, D. Green and K. M. Smith, JCAP 1305,
001 (2013) doi:10.1088/1475-7516/2013/05/001 [arXiv:1209.2173
[astro-ph.CO]].

R. A. Battye, R. D. Davies and J. Weller, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.

355, 1339 (2004)

M. Betoule, E. Pierpaoli, J. Delabrouille, M. L. Jeune and J. F. Cardoso,
[arXiv:0901.1056 [astro-

Astron. Astrophys. 503, 691 (2009)
ph.CO]].

P. A. R. Ade et al. [BICEP2 and Keck Array Collaborations], Astrophys.

J. 811, no. 2, 126 (2015) [arXiv:1502.00643 [astro-ph.CO]].

P. A. R. Ade et al. [BICEP2 and Planck Collaborations], Phys. Rev. Lett.

114, 101301 (2015) [arXiv:1502.00612 [astro-ph.CO]].

P. A. R. Ade et al. [BICEP2 and Keck Array Collaborations], Phys.
Rev. Lett. 116, 031302 (2016) doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.031302
[arXiv:1510.09217 [astro-ph.CO]].

M. Biagetti, V. Desjacques and A. Riotto, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron.
Soc. 429, 1774 (2013) doi:10.1093/mnras/sts467 [arXiv:1208.1616
[astro-ph.CO]].

L. Boubekeur and D. H. Lyth, Phys. Rev. D 73, 021301 (2006)

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.73.021301 [astro-ph/0504046].

15

no. 1, 21 (2015) doi:10.1088/0004-637X/803/1/21 [arXiv:1405.1452
[astro-ph.CO]].

B. Catinella and L. Cortese 2015, MNRAS, 446, 3526
S. Camera et al., arXiv:1501.03851 [astro-ph.CO].
T. C. Chang, U. L. Pen, J. B. Peterson and P. McDonald, Phys. Rev. Lett.

100, 091303 (2008)

E. Chapman et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 423, 2518 (2012)

[arXiv:1201.2190 [astro-ph.CO]].

J. J. Condon et al., Astrophys. J. 758, 23 (2012) [arXiv:1207.2439 [astro-

ph.CO]].

S. R. Coleman, Phys. Rev. D 15, 2929 (1977) [Erratum-ibid. D 16, 1248

(1977)].

S. R. Coleman and F. De Luccia, Phys. Rev. D 21, 3305 (1980).
N. Dalal, O. Dore, D. Huterer and A. Shirokov, Phys. Rev. D 77, 123514

(2008) [arXiv:0710.4560 [astro-ph]].

A. De Felice and S. Tsujikawa, Living Rev. Rel. 13, 3 (2010)

[arXiv:1002.4928 [gr-qc]].

C. de Rham, G. Gabadadze and A. J. Tolley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 231101

(2011) [arXiv:1011.1232 [hep-th]].

S. Dodelson, E. Rozo and A. Stebbins, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 021301 (2003)

[astro-ph/0301177].

S. Dodelson and L. M. Widrow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 17 (1994) [hep-

ph/9303287].

G. R. Dvali, G. Gabadadze and M. Porrati, Phys. Lett. B 485, 208 (2000)

[hep-th/0005016].

J. Dunkley et al., AIP Conf. Proc. 1141, 222 (2009) [arXiv:0811.3915

[astro-ph]].

K. Enqvist and M. S. Sloth, Nucl. Phys. B 626, 395 (2002) [hep-

ph/0109214].

B. Freivogel and L. Susskind, Phys. Rev. D 70, 126007 (2004) [arXiv:hep-

th/0408133].

M. Fierz and W. Pauli, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A 173, 211 (1939).
A. Gangui, F. Lucchin, S. Matarrese and S. Mollerach, Astrophys. J. 430,

447 (1994) [astro-ph/9312033].

X. Gao, Phys. Rev. D 90, 081501 (2014) [arXiv:1406.0822 [gr-qc]].
T. Giannantonio, A. J. Ross, W. J. Percival, R. Crittenden, D. Bacher,
M. Kilbinger, R. Nichol and J. Weller, Phys. Rev. D 89, 023511
(2014) [arXiv:1303.1349 [astro-ph.CO]].

T. Giannantonio, R. Scranton, R. G. Crittenden, R. C. Nichol,
S. P. Boughn, A. D. Myers and G. T. Richards, Phys. Rev. D 77,
123520 (2008) [arXiv:0801.4380 [astro-ph]].

J. Gleyzes, D. Langlois, F. Piazza and F. Vernizzi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,

no. 21, 211101 (2015) [arXiv:1404.6495 [hep-th]].

J. R. Gott, Nature 295, 304 (1982).
J. R. Gott and T. S. Statler, Phys. Lett. B 136, 157 (1984).
N. Hamaus, U. Seljak and V. Desjacques, Phys. Rev. D 84, 083509
(2011) doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.083509 [arXiv:1104.2321 [astro-
ph.CO]].

I. Hashimoto, A. Taruya, T. Matsubara, T. Namikawa and S. Yokoyama,

arXiv:1512.08352 [astro-ph.CO].

S. Ho et al., JCAP 1505, no. 05, 040 (2015) [arXiv:1311.2597 [astro-

M. L. Brown et al., PoS AASKA 14, 023 (2015) [arXiv:1501.03828

ph.CO]].

[astro-ph.CO]].

P. Bull, S. Camera, A. Raccanelli, C. Blake, P. G. Ferreira, M. G. Santos
and D. J. Schwarz, PoS AASKA14 (2015) 024 [arXiv:1501.04088
[astro-ph.CO]].

G. W. Horndeski, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 10, 363 (1974).
K. Ichiki, PTEP 2014, no. 6, 06B109 (2014).
K. Ichiki, R. Kaji, H. Yamamoto, T. T. Takeuchi and Y. Fukui, Astrophys.

J. 780, 13 (2014) [arXiv:1303.0075 [astro-ph.CO]].

P. Bull, P. G. Ferreira, P. Patel and M. G. Santos, Astrophys. J. 803,

M. J. Jarvis, D. Bacon, C. Blake, M. L. Brown, S. N. Lindsay,

16

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

A. Raccanelli, M. Santos and D. Schwarz, arXiv:1501.03825 [astro-
ph.CO].

M. Kamionkowski, A. Babul, C. M. Cress and A. Refregier, Mon. Not.

Roy. Astron. Soc. 301, 1064 (1998) [astro-ph/9712030].

[arXiv:1205.5223 [astro-ph.CO]].

Y. Oyama, K. Kohri and M. Hazumi, arXiv:1510.03806 [astro-ph.CO].
J. B. Peterson, R. Aleksan, R. Ansari, K. Bandura, D. Bond, J. Bunton,

K. Carlson and T. C. Chang et al., arXiv:0902.3091 [astro-ph.IM].

M. Kamionkowski, A. Kosowsky and A. Stebbins, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78,

P. A. R. Ade et al. [Planck Collaboration], arXiv:1502.01589 [astro-

2058 (1997) [astro-ph/9609132].

ph.CO].

N. Katayama and E. Komatsu, Astrophys.

J. 737, 78 (2011)

P. A. R. Ade et al. [Planck Collaboration], arXiv:1502.01590 [astro-

[arXiv:1101.5210 [astro-ph.CO]].

ph.CO].

R. Kimura, T. Kobayashi and K. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. D 85, 024023

P. A. R. Ade et al. [Planck Collaboration], arXiv:1502.01591 [astro-

(2012) [arXiv:1111.6749 [astro-ph.CO]].

ph.CO].

R. Kimura and D. Yamauchi, Phys. Rev. D 88, 084025 (2013)

P. A. R. Ade et al. [Planck Collaboration], arXiv:1502.01592 [astro-

[arXiv:1308.0523 [gr-qc]].

ph.CO].

T. D. Kitching, D. Bacon, M. L. Brown, P. Bull, J. D. McEwen, M. Oguri,
R. Scaramella and K. Takahashi et al., arXiv:1501.03978 [astro-
ph.CO].

P. A. R. Ade et al. [POLARBEAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 112,

131302 (2014) [arXiv:1312.6645 [astro-ph.CO]].

P. A. R. Ade et al. [POLARBEAR Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,

T. Kobayashi, Y. Watanabe and D. Yamauchi, Phys. Rev. D 91, no. 6,

021301 (2014) [arXiv:1312.6646 [astro-ph.CO]].

064013 (2015) [arXiv:1411.4130 [gr-qc]].

A. Pourtsidou and R. B. Metcalf, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 439, L36

K. Kohri, Y. Oyama, T. Sekiguchi and T. Takahashi, JCAP 1310, 065

(2014) [arXiv:1311.4484 [astro-ph.CO]].

(2013) [arXiv:1303.1688 [astro-ph.CO]].

K. Kohri, Y. Oyama, T. Sekiguchi and T. Takahashi, JCAP 1409, 014

(2014) [arXiv:1404.4847 [astro-ph.CO]].

A. Raccanelli et al., arXiv:1501.03821 [astro-ph.CO].
B. Ratra and P. J. E. Peebles, Phys. Rev. D 37, 3406 (1988).
S. Saga, D. Yamauchi and K. Ichiki, Phys. Rev. D 92, no. 6, 063533

E. Komatsu and D. N. Spergel, Phys. Rev. D 63, 063002 (2001) [astro-

(2015) [arXiv:1505.02774 [astro-ph.CO]].

ph/0005036].

D. H. Lyth and D. Wands, Phys. Lett. B 524, 5 (2002) [hep-ph/0110002].
K. McAlpine, D. J. B. Smith, M. J. Jarvis, D. G. Bonﬁeld and
S. Fleuren, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20715.x arXiv:1202.1958
[astro-ph.IM].

J. M. Maldacena, JHEP 0305, 013 (2003) [astro-ph/0210603].
L. Marian and G. M. Bernstein, Phys. Rev. D 76, 123009 (2007)

[arXiv:0710.2538 [astro-ph]].

R. Saito, D. Yamauchi, S. Mizuno, J. Gleyzes and D. Langlois, JCAP

1506, 008 (2015) [arXiv:1503.01448 [gr-qc]].

M. G. Santos, A. Cooray and L. Knox, Astrophys. J. 625, 575 (2005)

[astro-ph/0408515].

M. G. Santos, D. Alonso, P. Bull, M. Silva and S. Yahya,

arXiv:1501.03990 [astro-ph.CO].

M. G. Santos et al., arXiv:1501.03989 [astro-ph.CO].
D. Sarkar, P. Serra, A. Cooray, K. Ichiki and D. Baumann, Phys. Rev. D

K. Markovi and M. Viel, Publ. Astron. Soc. Austral. 31, e006 (2014)

77, 103515 (2008) [arXiv:0803.1490 [astro-ph]].

[arXiv:1311.5223 [astro-ph.CO]].

F. Schmidt and M. Kamionkowski, Phys. Rev. D 82, 103002 (2010)

S. Matarrese

and L. Verde, Astrophys.

J. 677, L77 (2008)

[arXiv:1008.0638 [astro-ph.CO]].

[arXiv:0801.4826 [astro-ph]].

E. Sefusatti and E. Komatsu, Phys. Rev. D 76, 083004 (2007)

T. Matsubara, Phys. Rev. D 86, 063518 (2012) [arXiv:1206.0562 [astro-

[arXiv:0705.0343 [astro-ph]].

ph.CO]].

U. Seljak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 021302 (2009) [arXiv:0807.1770 [astro-

T. Matsumura et al., Journal of Low Temperature Physics September
2014, Volume 176, Issue 5-6, pp 733-740 [arXiv:1311.2847 [astro-
ph.IM]].

ph]].

U. Seljak and C. M. Hirata, Phys. Rev. D 69, 043005 (2004) [astro-

ph/0310163].

P. Adamson et al. [MINOS Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 131802

J. R. Shaw, K. Sigurdson, U. L. Pen, A. Stebbins and M. Sitwell,

(2008) [arXiv:0806.2237 [hep-ex]].

Astrophys. J. 781, 57 [arXiv:1302.0327 [astro-ph.CO]].

S. Mizuno and S. Yokoyama, Phys. Rev. D 91, no. 12, 123521 (2015)

B. D. Sherwin and M. Schmittfull, Phys. Rev. D 92, no. 4, 043005 (2015)

[arXiv:1504.05505 [astro-ph.CO]].

[arXiv:1502.05356 [astro-ph.CO]].

T. Moroi and T. Takahashi, Phys. Lett. B 522, 215 (2001) [Erratum-ibid.

G. Simard, D. Hanson and G. Holder, Astrophys. J. 807, 166 (2015)

B 539, 303 (2002)] [hep-ph/0110096].

[arXiv:1410.0691 [astro-ph.CO]].

T. Namikawa, PTEP 2014, no. 6, 06B108 (2014) [arXiv:1403.3569 [astro-

K. M. Smith, D. Hanson, M. LoVerde, C. M. Hirata and O. Zahn, JCAP

ph.CO]].

1206, 014 (2012) [arXiv:1010.0048 [astro-ph.CO]].

T. Namikawa and R. Nagata,

JCAP 1510, no. 10, 004 (2015)

K. M. Smith and M. LoVerde, JCAP 1111, 009 (2011) doi:10.1088/1475-

[arXiv:1506.09209 [astro-ph.CO]].

7516/2011/11/009 [arXiv:1010.0055 [astro-ph.CO]].

T. Namikawa, D. Yamauchi, B. Sherwin

and R. Nagata,

B. Aharmim et al. [SNO Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 111301

arXiv:1511.04653 [astro-ph.CO].

(2008) [arXiv:0806.0989 [nucl-ex]].

T. Narikawa, T. Kobayashi, D. Yamauchi and R. Saito, Phys. Rev. D 87,

K. T. Story et al. [SPT Collaboration], Astrophys. J. 810, no. 1, 50 (2015)

124006 (2013) [arXiv:1302.2311 [astro-ph.CO]].

[arXiv:1412.4760 [astro-ph.CO]].

A. Nicolis, R. Rattazzi and E. Trincherini, Phys. Rev. D 79, 064036 (2009)

R. Keisler et al. [SPT Collaboration], Astrophys. J. 807, no. 2, 151 (2015)

[arXiv:0811.2197 [hep-th]].

[arXiv:1503.02315 [astro-ph.CO]].

T. Okamoto and W. Hu, Phys. Rev. D 66,

063008 (2002)

D. Hanson et al. [SPTpol Collaboration], Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, no. 14,

doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.66.063008 [astro-ph/0206155].

141301 (2013) [arXiv:1307.5830 [astro-ph.CO]].

Y. Oyama, A. Shimizu and K. Kohri, Phys. Lett. B 718, 1186 (2013)

A. Stebbins, astro-ph/9609149.

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

17

K. Sugimura, D. Yamauchi and M. Sasaki, Europhys. Lett. 100, 29004

(2012) [arXiv:1208.3937 [astro-ph.CO]].

A. G. Riess et al. [Supernova Search Team Collaboration], Astron. J. 116,

1009 (1998) [astro-ph/9805201].

S. Perlmutter et al. [Supernova Cosmology Project Collaboration],

Astrophys. J. 517, 565 (1999) [astro-ph/9812133].

L. Susskind, in Universe or Multiverse?, edited by B. Carr (Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, England, 2007), p247

T. Suyama, T. Takahashi, M. Yamaguchi and S. Yokoyama, JCAP 1012,

030 (2010) [arXiv:1009.1979 [astro-ph.CO]].

T. Suyama and M. Yamaguchi, Phys. Rev. D 77, 023505 (2008)

[arXiv:0709.2545 [astro-ph]].

K. Takahashi et al., arXiv:1501.03859 [astro-ph.CO].
A. Taruya, K. Koyama and T. Matsubara, Phys. Rev. D 78, 123534 (2008)

[arXiv:0808.4085 [astro-ph]].

M. Tegmark and M. Zaldarriaga, Phys. Rev. D 79, 083530 (2009)

[arXiv:0805.4414 [astro-ph]].

M. Tegmark and M. Zaldarriaga, Phys. Rev. D 82, 103501 (2010)

[arXiv:0909.0001 [astro-ph.CO]].

L. Verde

and S. Matarrese, Astrophys.

J. 706, L91 (2009)

[arXiv:0909.3224 [astro-ph.CO]].

C. Wetterich, Nucl. Phys. B 302, 668 (1988). doi:10.1016/0550-

3213(88)90193-9

R. J. Wilman, L. Miller, M. J. Jarvis, T. Mauch, F. Levrier, F. B. Abdalla,
S. Rawlings and H. -R. Kloeckner et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc.
388, 1335 (2008) [arXiv:0805.3413 [astro-ph]].

L. Wolz et al., PoS AASKA 14, 035 (2015) [arXiv:1501.03823 [astro-

ph.CO]].

S. Wyithe and A. Loeb, arXiv:0708.3392 [astro-ph].
S. Yahya, P. Bull, M. G. Santos, M. Silva, R. Maartens, P. Okouma and
B. Bassett, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 450, no. 3, 2251 (2015)
doi:10.1093/mnras/stv695 [arXiv:1412.4700 [astro-ph.CO]].

D. Yamauchi, A. Linde, A. Naruko, M. Sasaki and T. Tanaka, Phys. Rev.

D 84, 043513 (2011) [arXiv:1105.2674 [hep-th]].

D. Yamauchi, T. Namikawa and A. Taruya, JCAP 1210, 030 (2012)

[arXiv:1205.2139 [astro-ph.CO]].

D. Yamauchi, T. Namikawa and A. Taruya, JCAP 1308, 051 (2013)

[arXiv:1305.3348 [astro-ph.CO]].

D. Yamauchi and K. Takahashi, arXiv:1509.07585 [astro-ph.CO].
D. Yamauchi, K. Takahashi and M. Oguri, Phys. Rev. D 90, no. 8, 083520

(2014) [arXiv:1407.5453 [astro-ph.CO]].

S. Yokoyama, T. Matsubara and A. Taruya, Phys. Rev. D 89, no. 4, 043524

(2014) [arXiv:1310.4925 [astro-ph.CO]].

O. Zahn and M. Zaldarriaga, Astrophys. J. 653, 922 (2006) [astro-

ph/0511547].

M. Zaldarriaga and U. Seljak, Phys. Rev. D 58, 023003 (1998) [astro-

ph/9803150].

