Japan SKA Consortium (2016)
Preprint typeset using PASJ LATEX format v.1.0

1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

M

I
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
1
5
9
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

SKA-Japan Pulsar Science with the Square
Kilometre Array
Keitaro TAKAHASHI1, Takahiro AOKI2, Kengo IWATA3, Osamu KAMEYA4,
Hiroki KUMAMOTO1, Sachiko KUROYANAGI3, Ryo MIKAMI5, Atsushi
NARUKO6, Hiroshi OHNO7, Shinpei SHIBATA8, Toshio TERASAWA5, Naoyuki
YONEMARU1, Chulmoon YOO3 (SKA-Japan Pulsar Science Working
Group)
1Kumamoto University, Japan
2Waseda University, Japan
3Nagoya University, Japan
4National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, Japan
5Institute for Cosmic Ray Research, University of Tokyo, Japan
6Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
7Tohoku Bunkyo College, Japan
8Yamagata University, Japan

∗E-mail: keitaro@sci.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
The Square Kilometre Array will revolutionize pulsar studies with its wide ﬁeld-of-view, wide-
band observation and high sensitivity, increasing the number of observable pulsars by more
than an order of magnitude. Pulsars are of interest not only for the study of neutron stars
themselves but for their usage as tools for probing fundamental physics such as general rela-
tivity, gravitational waves and nuclear interaction. In this article, we summarize the activity and
interests of SKA-Japan Pulsar Science Working Group, focusing on an investigation of modi-
ﬁed gravity theory with the supermassive black hole in the Galactic Centre, gravitational-wave
detection from cosmic strings and binary supermassive black holes, a study of the physical
state of plasma close to pulsars using giant radio pulses and determination of magnetic ﬁeld
structure of Galaxy with pulsar pairs.

1 Introduction

wavelength observations from radio to gamma-rays.

Pulsars are rapidly rotating neutron stars with strong magnetic
ﬁelds (∼ 108−1014 G) and strongly collimated emission. Their
masses are typically solar mass and they are considered to be
formed as a remnant of supernova explosion. So far more
than 2,500 pulsars have been found and there is a wide vari-
ety of distinct observational classes such as milli-second pul-
sars (MSPs) with rotation periods ∼ 10 msec, magnetars with
magnetic ﬁelds of ∼ 1014 G and intermittent pulsars which are
active only for a few days between periods of a month. Pulsars
are extreme objects and their emission mechanism, the prop-
erties of magnetosphere and evolution are studied with multi-

On the other hand, thanks to the long-term stability of ro-
tation period, pulsars have been used to probe fundamental
physics. For example, gravitational waves passing through
Earth and pulsars slightly change the arrival times of pulses.
Then very precise measurement of the arrival times of pulses
from MSPs with very stable rotation periods allows us to de-
tect gravitational waves directly. This method is called pul-
sar timing array (PTA) and is sensitive to gravitational waves
with frequencies 10−9 − 10−7 Hz, depending on the cadence
and period of observation. Thus, PTA plays a part of multi-
wavelength gravitational-wave astronomy, together with ground

c(cid:13) 2016 Japan SKA Consortium

2

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

and space laser interferometers which covers much higher fre-
quencies.
In fact, the recent direct detection of gravitational
waves of ∼ 100 Hz from a binary black hole merger opened a
new window for astronomy (Abbott et al. 2016a; Abbott et al.
2016b).

The sources of gravitational waves of the frequencies cov-
ered by PTA include supermassive black hole binary and cos-
mic strings. Currently, three projects, Parkes Pulsar Timing
Array (PPTA)1, North American Nanohertz Observatory for
Gravitational Waves (NANOGrav)2 and European Pulsar
Timing Array (EPTA)3, are ongoing and beginning to set con-
straints on stochastic gravitational-wave background from su-
permassive black hole binaries formed by galaxy collision
(Shannon et al. 2015).

Another important application is the test of general relativ-
ity in strong gravitational ﬁeld with neutron star-neutron star
and neutron star-black hole binary. Because general relativistic
effects appear more strongly for phenomena with larger space-
time curvature, tests with these binaries could put stronger con-
straints on gravitational theory, compared to conventional weak-
ﬁeld tests. For example, long-term observation of Hulse-Taylor
binary PSR B1913+16 revealed its orbital decay, which is in
precise agreement with the loss of energy due to gravitational
waves predicted by general relativity. This is an indirect detec-
tion of gravitational waves. One of the most important target is
the binary system of Sgr A∗ and a pulsar orbiting it. In order to
perform tests of gravity around the black hole, we need to ﬁnd
a pulsars as close as ∼ 1mpc (∼ 0.2yr in period) from the black
hole.

Further, the structure of Galactic ISM and magnetic ﬁelds
have also been studied with rotation measure and dispersion
measure of pulsars. Thus, pulsars are of great interest for a
wide community of astronomers and astrophysicists.

The Square Kilometre Array (SKA)4 is a next-generation
radio telescope and will bring transformational progress in
many ﬁelds of astronomy with its overwhelming sensitivity and
survey speed. The SKA consists of SKA-low which covers
50 − 350 MHz and will be built in Australia and SKA-mid
which covers 0.35 − 10 GHz and will be built in South Africa.
Construction of Phase 1 (SKA1) will begin in 2018 and early
science will start from 2020 and it will be scaled up to the full
SKA (SKA2) by the late 2020s. The SKA will increase drasti-
cally the number of observable pulsar and will revolutionize the
study of pulsars themselves and their usage as tools for funda-
mental physics (Kramer & Stappers 2015).

The purpose of this article is to show Japanese interests on
the pulsar science with the SKA. This article is based on the
discussion in the pulsar science working group of SKA-Japan

1 http://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/ppta/
2 http://nanograv.org
3 http://www.epta.eu.org
4 https://www.skatelescope.org

and summarizes our studies and prospects for the SKA pulsar
science, focusing on investigation of modiﬁed gravity theory
with the supermassive black hole in the Galactic Centre, grav-
itational waves from cosmic strings and binary supermassive
black holes, study of the physical state of plasma close to pul-
sars with giant radio pulses and determination of magnetic ﬁeld
structure of Galaxy with pulsar pairs.
In section 2, we sum-
marize the observation strategy of pulsars with the SKA and
science objectives developed by the international SKA pulsar
science working group. In section 3, we show our studies and
interests on the pulsar science with the SKA.

2 Pulsar Studies with the SKA

In this section, ﬁrst we brieﬂy summarize the strategy for pul-
sar survey and timing observations with the SKA and then in-
troduce the science targets developed by the international SKA
pulsar Science Working Group.

2.1 Observation Strategy

In order to advance the pulsar sciences, ﬁrst of all, it is necessary
to discover as many pulsars as possible. There are two ways for
pulsar search: all-sky survey and targeted searches. Further,
for a PTA, high-precision timing will be performed to selected
MSPs with high luminosities and stable orbital periods. In this
chapter, we summarize the strategy of the SKA for pulsar search
and observation. For detail, see Keane et al. (2015).

2.1.1 All-sky survey
To determine the optimum frequency for pulsar survey, the fol-
lowing consideration should be taken into account.
• Pulsars have steep spectra S ∝ ν −1.6 so that they are much

brighter at low frequencies.

• For ﬁxed aperture size or baseline length, the Field of View

(FoV) is larger at low frequencies (∝ ν −2).

• Dispersive delay due to free electrons along the line of sight
to the pulsar is smaller at high frequencies (∝ ν −2), although
this effect can be removed if the channel bandwidth is enough
narrow.

• Multi-path propagation due to scattering broadens the pulse
proﬁle frequency-dependently and is not correctable. This
scales as ∝ ν −4.

Thus, the SKA-low and SKA-mid can perform complemen-
tary surveys and it is proposed that the SKA-low surveys high
Galactic latitudes (|b| > 5 degrees) where dispersive delay and
scattering are relatively small, and low Galactic latitudes are
surveyed by the SKA-mid.
It is known that young pulsars
(< 107 year) are located mostly in the Galactic plane, while old
pulsars like MSPs spread across the entire sky. The surveys with
the SKA-low and SKA-mid are complementary in this sense as

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

3

(1.65− 3.05 GHz) or 4 (2.80− 5.18 GHz), and 5 (4.6−
13.8 GHz), respectively. Pulsars as close as ∼ 1 mpc
from the supermassive black hole provide unique probes
of the spacetime around it and allow us to probe general
relativity in strong gravitational ﬁeld. Especially, Cosmic
Censorship Conjecture and no-hair theorem can be tested
precisely by measuring its spin and quadrupole moment.

Extragalactic (Keane et al. 2015) Currently, the only pulsars
beyond the disk of the Galaxy are discovered in glob-
ular clusters and in the Magellanic Clouds. The SKA
will be able to discover pulsars in local group galaxies
and will reach even farther galaxies (∼ 1 Mpc for gi-
ant radio pulses. Extragalactic pulsars allow us to probe
intergalactic medium through their dispersion measures,
rotation measures and scattering.

globular cluster (Hessels et al. 2015) The stellar density is so
high in globular clusters that pulsars there have much
larger chance to experience encounters compared to in
lower density environments. Thus, the fraction of MSPs
is much larger and exotic binaries such as MSP-MSP
or MSP-black hole would be formed. Because globular
clusters are compact (<
∼ a few arcmin), a single pointing
is enough to cover a whole globular cluster so that pul-
sar searches in globular clusters are well suitable for the
early science.

2.1.3 Pulsar timing array

A stochastic
A PTA consists of a number of MSPs.
gravitational-wave background causes a change in the time-of-
arrival (TOA) of the pulses. In order to extract the gravitational-
wave signal from noisy TOA data, the TOAs of each pulsar are
correlated to those of other pulsars and the correlated data is
analyzed to search for the unique correlation pattern from the
quadrupole nature of gravitational waves.

The noise level of the pulse TOAs is essential for the sensi-
tivity to a gravitational-wave background. The best MSPs with
high ﬂux density, narrow pulses and timing stability are selected
for the precise timing measurements and observed over many
years (∼ 10 yrs). Usually, only 5 − 10% of the discovered pul-
sars have sufﬁcient quality necessary for the PTA.

The pulsar timing with the SKA is expected to reach the
noise level of TOA down to ∼ 100 nsec by increasing the num-
ber of the best MSPs and by reducing the noise levels of plasma
propagation effects with the use of multiple telescopes oper-
ating in different frequency bands. The SKA1 will monitor
50 MSPs and measure the TOAs once a week for 15 minutes
each (Janssen et al. 2015). The observations will be carried out
with bands 2, 3 and 4 of SKA-mid while SKA-low will be used
for the precise measurement of the variation of dispersion mea-
sures.

Fig. 1. Distribution of pulsars expected to be found with the SKA1 and SKA2,
and the currently known pulsars, projected onto the Galactic plane (Keane
et al. 2015).

well.

Keane et al. (2015) performed a series of simulations to es-
timate the number and distribution of pulsars which the SKA-
low and SKA-mid can discover, assuming a ﬁxed integration
time of 600 sec per pointing as described in the baseline de-
sign. Further, the SKA-low and SKA-mid are assumed to have
500 and 1500 beams, respectively. They found that SKA1-mid
would detect about 9,000 normal pulsars and about 1,400 MSPs,
while SKA1-low would detect about 7,000 normal pulsars and
about 900 MSPs. On the other hand, with SKA2-low we will
ﬁnd a total of 11,000 pulsars including about 1,500 MSPs, while
SKA2-mid will ﬁnd between 24,000 and 30,000 pulsars, of
which between 2,400 and 3,000 will be MSPs depending on
the exact improvement in sensitivity. In Fig. 1, distribution of
pulsars expected to be found with the SKA1 and SKA2, and the
currently known pulsars, projected onto the Galactic plane.

2.1.2 Targeted search
Galactic Centre (Eatough et al. 2015) The Galactic Centre is
thought to be abundant in pulsars and they could be pow-
erful probes of supermassive black hole, Sgr A∗. The
number density of pulsars around Sgr A∗ is estimated to
be ∼ 1000 pc3 (Wharton et al. 2012; Chennamangalam
& Lorimer 2014), and recently an X-ray and radio
loud magneter, PSR J1745-2900, was discovered just
0.1 pc from Sgr A∗ (Kennea et al. 2013; Mori et al.
2013). Because scattering would be serious due to the
dense interstellar medium (ISM) for these pulsars, nor-
mal pulsars and MSPs need observations with Band 3

4

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

2.2 Tests of Gravity Theory

The tests of gravitational theory is one of high-priority issues
in science with SKA. The main project in the international
SKA pulsar Science Working Group in this topic is the test of
validity of general relativity with binary pulsars based on the
parametrized post-Keplerian formalism.

Observation of Type Ia supernovae (Perlmutter et al. 1999;
Riess et al. 1998) and other cosmological observations (Adam
et al. 2015; Ade et al. 2015a; Ade et al. 2015b) strongly sup-
port the current accelerated expansion of the universe. In the
Einstein’s general relativity, in order to realize such accelerated
expansion of the universe we have to introduce matter ﬁelds
with negative pressure, called dark energy. On the other hand,
there is another possibility that the law of gravity is modiﬁed
from that of general relativity on large, that is, cosmological
scales. The existence of the underlying fundamental gravita-
tional theory beyond general relativity is widely believed for
the following reasons. One reason is that, while three among
four fundamental forces are described by renormalizable theo-
ries, only gravity is not renormalizable. Another reason is that,
due to the singularity theorem, general relativity itself predicts
the appearance of a singularity where the theory breaks down.
The existence of visible singularities, such as big bang singu-
larity or naked singularity might not be resolved without intro-
ducing more fundamental theory of gravity. In this situation,
modiﬁed gravity theory itself draw much attention in various
energy scales.

It is also important to test the theory by observation (Will
1993; Will 2014; Koyama 2015) while the general relativity
itself is an elegant theory as a theory of gravity.
In fact the
general relativity has already passed various observational tests,
for example the precession of mercury’s perihelion. However,
these tests mainly focused on limited aspects of the theory es-
pecially in its weak ﬁeld regime and hence it is also neces-
sary to test other aspects particularly in its strong ﬁeld regime.
Interestingly, observation of pulsars gives us an invaluable op-
portunity for it (Shao et al. 2015). This is quite important be-
cause testing gravity in the strong ﬁeld regime can be regarded
as an independent test in the weak ﬁeld regime. Moreover, we
can test the behavior of gravity outside our solar system using
pulsars while aforementioned tests are limited to our neighbor-
hood, namely within our solar system.

In the test of gravity with pulsars, our main focus is on “no-
hair theorem of black hole” (Israel 1967; Carter 1971; Hawking
1973; Robinson 1975; Hansen 1974). In general relativity in
vacuum, a black hole is parametrized only in terms of its mass
and angular momentum. This theorem implies that all the multi-
pole moments of a black hole are also described by these two
parameters. On the other hand, with observation of pulsars, we
can independently determine the value of mass, angular mo-
mentum and higher multi-pole moments of a black hole. And

then it enables us to test the general relativity, especially its as-
pects in its strong ﬁeld regime because black hole has strong
gravity.

We summarize how various basic parameters of a black hole
such as the mass, angular momentum and higher multi-pole mo-
ments are determined through the observation of a black hole
pulsar binary system. It is known that pulsars emit pulse waves
very precisely with certain intervals. However when we observe
those pulse waves in reality, those intervals are not constant.
Some waves can arrive a little bit earlier and some of others
later. This is caused by several reasons. One of the reasons is
that if a pulsar rotates around a black hole, the arrival time of
pulse waves can be modulated depending on the position of the
pulsar where each of the pulse waves is emitted. There are other
effects which are associated with astrophysical origins in course
of the propagation of pulse wave. Since the general relativistic
effects mainly affect the motion of pulsars, we shall focus on it
(Damour & Deruelle 1985; Damour & Deruelle 1986).

Mathematically, we can parametrize the orbital motion of a
pulsar around a black hole in terms of ﬁnite number of param-
eters. For example, in the Newton’s gravity, binary motion or
Keplerian motion is characterized only by 6 constant parameters
such as orbital period, eccentricity and so on. These 6 parame-
ters are called as Keplerian parameters. However once we take
into account general relativistic effects, for example the effect
of emission of gravitational waves, the orbital period gets de-
creased. Related to these facts, we can introduce additional 12
parameters to completely parametrize generic motion of a pul-
sar beyond Keplerian motion from a phenomenological point
of view. Those additional parameters are called post-Keplerian
parameters. This fact is crucially important since it enables us
to parametrize the motion of a pulsar without assuming under-
lying theory of gravity and hence the result can be applied to
any kind of theory of gravity. Then based on this kinematical
argument, we can predict the arrival time of pulse waves, which
is referred to as “time of arrival formula”, or in short “TOA for-
mula” (Damour & Deruelle 1985; Damour & Deruelle 1986).

On the other hand, once we specify a theory of gravity,
those post-Keplerian parameters are determined as a function
of Keplerian parameters and the mass of pulsar and black hole.
And hence we will be able to observationally determine those
post-Keplerian parameters through the information of pulsar ar-
rival time. By choosing one of post-Keplerian parameters we
can draw a curve in a plane composed by the mass of pulsar
and that of black hole. Then after choosing another two param-
eters one can further draw two more curves on the same plane.
If three curves coincide at one single point, this indicates the
theory used is correct. This is how the theory of gravity can be
tested with observation of pulsars.

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

2.3 Gravitational Waves

Detection of gravitational waves by PTAs will open an exciting
new observational frontier in astronomy and cosmology. The
most sensitive frequency of gravitational waves in pulsar tim-
ing is determined by the period of observation and is typically
10−9 to 10−7Hz. Gravitational-wave sources accessible in this
frequency range are supermassive black hole binaries. Although
there are many observational evidence for the existence of su-
permassive black holes even at high redshifts (z ∼ 6), the de-
tailed mechanism of their formation is far from clear, and is one
of the biggest challenges in cosmology. If a PTA succeeds in
detecting gravitational waves from supermassive black hole bi-
naries, it would greatly help us to deepen our understanding of
the black hole formation history.
The most promising signal

in PTA experiments is the
stochastic gravitational-wave background from supermassive
black hole binaries, which is a superposition of the signals from
high-redshift sources to low-redshift sources. The spectrum and
amplitude of the background reﬂect the evolution and popu-
lation of supermassive black holes and the merger history of
galaxies. The current constraints on the strain amplitude by
the ongoing PTAs have reached ∼ 10−15 at f ∼ 0.1 yr−1 and
have already excluded some models for the evolution of super-
massive black holes (Shannon et al. 2015). Five-year observa-
tion of SKA1 PTA will improve the constraint by one order of
magnitude and is very likely to detect the gravitational-wave
background. If the gravitational waves from nearby sources are
strong enough, one may be able even to detect them as individ-
ual sources and extract rich astrophysical information by com-
bining data from other observations (Yardley et al. 2010; Zhu
et al. 2014; Arzoumanian et al. 2014; Babak et al. 2016). Even
in case the signals are not strong enough for the source identi-
ﬁcation, we may be able to extract information of source dis-
tribution by measuring anisotropies in the gravitational wave
background (Taylor & Gair 2013).

Pulsar timing can also be used to search for gravitational
waves from cosmic strings. Cosmic strings are one-dimensional
topological defects, which arise naturally in ﬁeld theories as
well as in scenarios of the early Universe based on superstring
theory. Strings emit strong gravitational wave bursts from sin-
gular structures, called cusps and kinks, and produce a gravi-
tational wave background over a wide range of frequencies, in-
cluding the sensitivity window of pulsar timing. Currently, there
are a few methods to test the existence of cosmic strings such
as the gravitational lensing and cosmic microwave background,
but the constraint is not very strong since cosmic strings interact
with matter only through the gravitational force. Thus, gravita-
tional waves are expected to be a new and powerful observa-
tional tool to search for cosmic stings. Their detection or even
non-detection of them can be used to constrain cosmic string
properties, such as the energy scale of the string and string net-

5

work evolution, which would provide important insights into
particle physics.

2.4 Galactic ISM and Magnetic Fields

Radio wave measurements from pulsars make it possible to
study the magnetoionic component of the ISM. In this subsec-
tion we brieﬂy summarize the current status of research in the
free electron distribution, turbulence in the ISM and magnetic
ﬁelds in the Galaxy following Han et al. (2014).

2.4.1 Free electron distribution
The free electron distribution in the Galaxy is not uniform. A
large fraction of the Galactic disc is ﬁlled with diffuse ionized
gas (DIG) whose electron density is ne ∼ 10−3 − 10−2 cm−3.
HII regions are another ionized regions which are distributed
following the spiral arms. The range of the electron density in
HII regions is large, ne ∼ 10− 106 cm−3.

If distances to pulsars are determined independently, we can
obtain the line-of-sight average electron density from dispersion
measures (DMs) of pulsars. Since lots of pulsars are distributed
in the Galactic disc, it is possible to construct a model of the
electron density. Cordes & Lazio (2002) developed the detail
model (NE2001) which is widely used. Fig. 2 shows the elec-
tron density distribution on the Galactic plane(z = 0) according
to this model with the original parameters. The Sun is located
at (X,Y ) = (−8.5,0) in kpc. This model contains the following
components: thick and thin discs, spiral arms, a Galactic center,
a local ISM, and individual clumps and voids.

We will obtain DMs of a large number of new pulsars which
will be found by SKA. Furthermore, distances to the pulsars
will be obtained from parallax measurements with SKA-VLBI
astrometry (Paragi et al. 2014). Consequently, it will be possible
to improve the electron density distribution model.

2.4.2 Turbulence in the ISM
Radio waves which propagate through the turbulent interstellar
plasma are scattered by density irregularities. When we use a
thin screen model, an angle of scattering is calculated as θscat ∼
(1/2π)pD/are∆neλ2, where D is the screen thickness, ∆ne

is the electron density ﬂuctuation, a is a typical dimension of
the irregularities, re is the classical radius of the electron, and λ
is the radio wave length (Lyne & Smith 1990).

We can study the interstellar turbulence through observable
effects caused by the interstellar scattering. As a result of multi-
path propagation of the radio waves, observed pulses are broad-
ened particularly at low radio frequencies. By using the thin
screen approximation, the pulse broadening time τ is calculated
scat/(4c) ∝ ν −4, where L is the distance to the pul-
as τ ∼ Lθ2
sar. When the density ﬂuctuations follow a Kolmogorov spec-
trum, the pulse broadening time is proportional to ν −4.4 (Lee &

6

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

]
c
p
k
[
Y

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-20

-15

-10

-5

 0

X[kpc]

 5

 10

 15

 20

 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15

 0.2

ne[cm-3]

Fig. 2. Electron density distribution according to the NE2001 model.

Jokipii 1975). The observed properties of the broadening time
are generally consistent with that with the Kolmogorov spec-
trum (L¨ohmer et al. 2004). The number of pulsars for which
pulse broadening has been measured is ∼ 150 as noted in Han
et al. (2014). Because pulse broadening will be measured for
a large number of pulsars distributed in the Galaxy with SKA
wide-band observations, it will be possible to study the ISM
turbulence in different regions in the Galaxy.

Pulsar scintillation is intensity variations caused by density
irregularities. A dynamic spectrum and a secondary spectrum
of the scintillations are powerful tools for studying the struc-
ture of the random irregularities. The dynamic spectrum is a
pulse intensity proﬁle in time and frequency space. We can es-
timate the distribution in size of the irregularities from the dy-
namic spectrum by using an autocorrelation analysis. The sec-
ondary spectrum is the Fourier power spectrum of the dynamic
spectrum. The observed secondary spectra show parabolic arcs
(Stinebring 2006). We can determine the location of the scatter-
ing screen from the curvature of the arcs. Dynamic spectra have
been obtained for a few tens of pulsars whose pulse intensity is
strong as noted in Han et al. (2014). It will be possible to ob-
tain dynamic spectra and secondary spectra for lots of pulsars
through highly sensitive observations by SKA.

2.4.3 Structure of galactic magnetic ﬁelds
Observations of synchrotron radio emission from spiral galax-
ies show the existence of magnetic ﬁeld structures of ∼ µG in
strength. Since the energy density of the magnetic ﬁelds is com-
parable to the internal energies of thermal gas and cosmic rays,
the roles of the magnetic ﬁelds on interstellar gases are impor-
tant. The magnetic ﬁelds are thought to have a large-scale com-

ponent and a random component. The large-scale ﬁeld has been
modelled by using an axisymmetric (e.g., M31) or bisymmet-
ric conﬁguration (e.g., M51) (Ruzmaikin, Shukurov & Sokoloff
1988). Fletcher et al. (2011) represented the magnetic ﬁeld
in the disc of M51 as a combination of two azimuthal modes
exp(imφ) with m = 0 + 2, where φ is the azimuthal angle.

sources. The RM (rad/m2) is given by RM = 0.81R d

The magnetic ﬁeld in our Galaxy has been studied by us-
ing rotation measures (RMs) of pulsars and extragalactic radio
0 neBkdl,
where d is the distance to the source in pc, ne is the number
density of the free electrons in cm−3, and Bk is the line of sight
component of the magnetic ﬁelds in µG.

Previous studies by using the RM distribution along the
Galactic plane show that the local ﬁeld is directed toward the
Galactic longitude l ∼ 70◦ - 90◦, and ﬁeld reversals interior to
the solar circle (e.g., Han et al. 2006; Van Eck et al. 2011).
The global ﬁeld strength has been estimated to be ∼ 2 µG,
and the amplitude of the random ﬁeld has been estimated to
be ∼ 4− 6 µG. Pshirkov et al. (2011) searched for the Galactic
magnetic ﬁeld models which reproduce the observed distribu-
tion of the RMs of extragalactic radio sources. They found that
the magnetic ﬁeld in the Galactic disc is symmetric with respect
to the Galactic plane, and in contrast, the ﬁeld in the halo region
is antisymmetric.

Because of the large amplitude of the random ﬁeld, distinc-
tion between axisymmetric and bisymmetric structures is hardly
made. In section 3.4 we will explain the method to estimate
the Galactic ﬁeld structure by using pulsar pairs. Further back-
ground of galactic magnetic ﬁelds is described in a separate,
SKA-JP Magnetism Chapter.

3 Japanese Science

In this section, we present the scientiﬁc interests of the Japanese
pulsar group and our research for the future SKA observations.

3.1 Supermassive black hole and modiﬁed gravity

Black hole is one of the most fascinating objects predicted
in gravitational theories. There are various indirect observa-
tional evidences for the existence of black holes in our uni-
verse. Environments around such black hole candidates provide
us testing sites for new physics under strong gravitational ﬁelds.
In the international SKA science working group, simulation for
gravity test by using the parametrized post-Keplerian formalism
has been done (Shao et al. 2015). Since the post-Keplerian pa-
rameters are purely phenomenological parameters for the binary
orbits, even if we detect a deviation from prediction of general
relativity in this formalism, the origin or physical interpretation
is not immediately clear. Here, we propose two approaches to
provide possible origins and physical interpretations for devia-

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

tion from general relativity. Especially, we focus on the test of
gravity around Sgr A* with nearby pulsars which would be dis-
covered by the SKA (see Shao et al. (2015) for details of testing
gravity with pulsars in the SKA).

3.1.1 Probe for black hole hair
As is mentioned in the previous section, SKA enable us to test
gravity theories and no hair theorem of black hole by using mul-
tipole moment of the black hole. As in general relativity, a mod-
iﬁed gravity theory also predict a set of multipole moments of
a black hole, which will be in general different from those in
general relativity because additional parameters of the theory
can enter among such relations. To derive multipole relations
we ﬁrst need to provide rotating black hole solutions in alter-
native gravitational theories. Apart from general relativity, ro-
tating black hole solutions in modiﬁed gravity theories are not
so much known (except for few examples e.g. Yagi, Yunes, &
Tanaka 2012). And hence our ﬁrst task is to ﬁnd such solutions
and theories.

In general, it is very hard to ﬁnd rotating black hole solu-
tions in modiﬁed gravity theories due to the complexity of ﬁeld
equations. In fact, even in the case of general relativity, it took
almost half century for the discovery of the Kerr solution after
the advent of general relativity and soon after the discovery of
non-rotating black hole solution. Although there is a possibility
that the Kerr solution also describes a rotating black hole so-
lution in a speciﬁc modiﬁed gravity theory, apart from such a
special case, we need to develop general formalism to construct
solutions for rotating black holes in modiﬁed gravity theories.
We shall tackle this problem with the aid of perturbative expan-
sion method by which approximated solutions with slow rota-
tion can be generated from a non-rotating solution. It should
be noted that non-rotating black hole solutions have been al-
ready found in a number of modiﬁed gravity theories. Once
such slowly rotating solutions are constructed, invaluable indi-
cations for rapidly rotating solutions might be given.

To this end, let us ﬁrst choose a speciﬁc model of modiﬁed
gravity theory to explicitly construct a solution. While there
is a bunch of modiﬁed gravity theories proposed so far, one of
interesting and representative classes of those theories is scalar-
tensor theory. The scalar-tensor theory is composed by met-
ric and a scalar ﬁeld. Due to the presence of a scalar ﬁeld,
the accelerated expansion of the universe can be easily real-
ized. This is why the scalar-tensor theory is often invoked to
account for inﬂation and dark energy. Hence it is interesting
if any further observational constraint/veriﬁcation is given for
such a theory. Among them, we are particularly interested in the
so-called Horndeski’s theory (or Generalized Galileon theory),
which was originally invented by Horndeski in 1974 (Horndeski
1974; Deffayet et al. 2011; Kobayashi et al. 2011).

In Planck units, the action of the Horndeski’s theory is given

by the following set of equations

5

Xi=2Z d4x√−gLi

S =

with

L2 = K(φ , X)
L3 = −G3(φ , X)✷φ
1
∂G4
∂X h(✷φ)2 − (∇µ∇ν φ)2i
L4 = G4(φ , X)R−
2
L5 = G5(φ , X)Gµν∇µ∇ν φ

7

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

+

1
12

∂G5
∂X h(✷φ)3 − 3(✷φ)(∇µ∇ν φ)2 + 2(∇µ∇ν φ)3i(5)

where φ represents a scalar ﬁeld and X the derivative of the
scalar scalar ﬁeld, that is X ≡ gµν∂µφ∂νφ. Here K ,G3 ,G4 and
G5 are arbitrary functions of φ and X speciﬁed by each model.
The Horndeski’s theory is dubbed as the most general scalar-
tensor theory with second order differential equations for metric
as well as the scalar ﬁeld. Then the dynamics of metric and the
scalar ﬁeld is uniquely determined once those initial values and
velocities are speciﬁed. Since this theory includes various inter-
esting models such as canonical scalar ﬁeld, K-essence, f (R)
gravity models, it is interesting enough to investigate this par-
ticular but still generic class of theory.

In a speciﬁc model of the Horndeski’s theory, there ex-
ist non-rotating black hole solutions (Babichev & Charmousis
2014; Sotiriou & Zhou 2014; Minamitsuji 2014; Kobayashi
et al. 2012; Kobayashi et al. 2014; Kobayashi & Tanahashi
2014; Ogawa et al. 2015). Based on one of those solutions,
we have introduced perturbations around a background solu-
tion. After consistently solving linearized equations, it can be
seen that the solution at the linear order is completely same as
that in general relativity (Maselli et al. 2015). And hence there
is no deviation from general relativity at this order. However,
at the next leading order, there must be difference affecting no-
hair relations since the quadrupole moment is a second order
quantity. After solving second order equations and analyzing
the solution, we will be able to test the theory of gravity, which
is our ongoing project right now.

As for future projects, we plan to apply thus developed tech-
niques to other modiﬁed gravity theories. It is also interesting
if we can ﬁnd an exact solution with rapid rotation. Once it is
done, we can read multipole relations of black hole spacetime
with arbitrary angular momentum (spin).

3.1.2 Another approach to probe exotic physics around a

black hole

Well-known conventional approaches to probe gravitational
theories are the parametrized post-Newtonian (PPN) (Poisson
& Will 2014) and the parametrized post-Keplarian (PPK)
(Damour & Deruelle 1986; Damour & Taylor 1992) ap-
proaches. Observational constraints on the parameters which

8

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

characterize deviation from general relativity (GR) in these ap-
proaches can be seen in (Will 1993; Will 2014). If the devia-
tion from GR is found around a black hole in the PPN frame-
work, it constraints the alternate gravity theory to some extent.
However, in PPN framework, one usually does not take into ac-
count effects of possible matter ﬁelds around the black hole,
so the deviation might come from effects of the matter. This
possibility would not be excluded using PPN framework alone.
The story of Vulcan might be repeated again for the black hole
at the galactic center. Here, based on Iwata & Yoo (2016), we
take another phenomenological approach to see how the system
deviates from vacuum system in GR.

We attack this problem in analogy with the dark energy prob-
lem in cosmology. It is often assumed that, for simplicity, the
dark energy is a perfect ﬂuid with the equation of state p = wε,
where p and ε are the pressure and the energy density of the
dark energy. In order to explain the accelerated expansion of
the universe, w < −1/3 must be satisﬁed in GR. However, one
may wonder the origin of such exotic matter, and often relies
on a modiﬁed gravity theory in stead of introducing such ex-
otic matter.
In such point of view, indication of existence of
the exotic matter may build up our expectation about discovery
of new gravitational physics. Following the strategy similar to
introducing the dark energy, we consider environment around a
black hole based on GR with an exotic matter. Here we note that
the exotic matter around a black hole is not necessarily identical
to the dark energy in cosmology. We introduce an exotic mat-
ter in a purely phenomenological point of view, and do not care
about its origin.

As a ﬁrst step, let us consider the spherically symmetric
system composed of a black hole and surrounding perfect ﬂu-
ids with the equation of state being p = wε. Then, we take
the post-Newtonian approximation, assuming the perfect ﬂuid
can be relativistic, that is, pressure p can make comparable
contributions to the curved geometry with the matter density
ε. Although, in the usual post-Newtonian expansion, ε makes
Newtonian order contribution at the leading order, we assume
that ε and p make only post-Newtonian contributions. In other
word, we treat a sufﬁciently sparse and relativistic perfect ﬂuid
component so that it can be regarded as a small perturbation
around the black hole. The main contribution in the curved
geometry comes from the Newtonian term associated with the
mass of the central black hole.

In the phenomenological point of view, we may not inter-
ested in the global distribution of the perfect ﬂuid, but only local
distribution near the region of our interest. When we consider
a trapped test-particle motion around this system, we need to
specify the ﬂuid distribution at least in a spherical shell domain
with the ﬁnite width within which the particle moves around.
The distribution should be determined by the Hydrostatic equi-
librium equation, which is derived from the ﬂuid equation of

motion, as follows:

GM
c2
1 + w

dp
dr ≃ −(1 + w)
dε
dr ≃ −

⇔
⇔ ε ≃ εRh1 +

w

ε
r2
GM
c2
1 + w

w

ε
r2
GM

c2 (cid:16) 1
r −

1

R(cid:17)i ,

(6)

where M, R are the black hole mass and the reference radius,
and εR = ε(R). We assume that this distribution is approxi-
mately valid only in the spherical shell domain of our interest.

We introduce the following small parameters:

ǫ =

GM
c2R

, α =

4πR3εR
3c2M

.

(7)

Then, performing the post-Newtonian iteration and by applying
a usual perturbation scheme, we can calculate the value of the
pericenter shift. At each order, the contribution to the pericenter
shift for 1 period can be estimated as

10−8g/cm3(cid:19)
∆ωα ∼ 10−2(cid:18) εR/c2
106M⊙(cid:19)−1
×(cid:18) M
100 AU(cid:17)3
(cid:16) R
10−8g/cm3(cid:19)(cid:16) R
∆ωǫα ∼ 10−6(cid:18) εR/c2
100 AU(cid:17)2

[rad],

[rad].

(8)

(9)

It is worthwhile to compare this value with the effect of the
black hole spin parameter χ := cS/(GM 2), where S is the black
hole angular momentum. The pericenter shift due to the spin
effect ∆ωspin can be estimated as

∆ωspin ∼ 10−6χ(cid:18) M

106M⊙(cid:19)3/2

100 AU(cid:17)−3/2
(cid:16) R

[rad].

(10)

The spin parameter of Sgr A* could be measured with precision
of ∼ 0.1% with the SKA. Therefore, our estimates suggest that,
if εR/c2 ∼ 10−12 g/cm3, we can measure the value of εR with
precision of ∼ 0.1%. If εR/c2 ∼ 10−8 g/cm3, we can measure
the value of w with precision of ∼ 0.1% by using the SKA.

The observational evidence of εR < 0 or w < 0 suggests, with
GR to be valid, the existence of an exotic matter, and it might
lead up to discovery of new gravitational physics. In order to
accurately estimate the measurement precision for εR and w,
we need to perform detailed simulation as is done in Liu et al.
(2012). Further extensions would be possible, e.g., stationary
matter conﬁguration, black hole-pulsar system, non-spherically
symmetric conﬁguration, higher-order contribution, and so on.
These are our future works as a part of SKA Japan projects.

3.2 Gravitational waves

Detection of gravitational waves by PTAs will provide us with
rich and unique opportunities to explore new astronomy and
cosmology. As the Japanese member of SKA experiment, we
will ﬁrst aim at providing theoretical predictions to lead the
pulsar timing data analysis using extant implications for the

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

9

existence of supermassive black hole binaries obtained from
optical observations. Candidates of supermassive black hole
binaries have been found in nearby galaxies (Batcheldor et
al. 2010; Schutz & Ma 2015) as well as quasars (Liu et al.
2014; Graham et al. 2015). Since optical observations deter-
mine the positions and masses of the sources, such predictions
would help to identify individual sources in PTAs. We will
make detailed predictions taking into account the uncertainty
in the orbital eccentricity, which affects the amplitude and fre-
quency of the gravitational waves (Yonemaru et al. 2016).

We will also explore the use of information on anisotropy.
Anisotropy in the gravitational wave background may be pro-
duced if there is a strong gravitational wave source in a nearby
galaxy. A previous work has shown that the anisotropy level de-
pends on the number of nearby sources (Taylor & Gair 2013).
We will investigate whether it is possible to estimate the ra-
tio of galaxies having black hole binaries by combining the in-
formation of the gravitational-wave background anisotropy and
optical observations, and whether it can be connected with the
history of black hole formation.

We also plan to work on gravitational waves from cos-
mic string using our knowledge and expertise which we pre-
viously developed in our previous works (Kuroyanagi et al.
2012; Kuroyanagi et al. 2013). In the papers, we have estimated
the amplitude of the gravitational wave background from cusps
on string loops for all the frequencies. Based on these estimates,
we have shown the accessible parameter space by several types
of future experiments including pulsar timing. As seen in Fig.
3, the parameter space of Gµ (the string tension or the energy
density of the cosmic string) and α (the typical length of string
loops normalized by the Hubble length at the time of loop for-
mation) can be explored largely with many types of future grav-
itatioanl wave experiments. The SKA (cyan line) would provide
the best constraint on Gµ for large values of α among the near-
future gravitational wave experiments. We have also shown that
different types of gravitational wave experiments can break de-
generacies in cosmic string parameters, and provide better con-
straints than those from each measurement.

Cusps on string loops are usually considered to be the dom-
inant source of gravitational wave background in pulsar tim-
ing sensitivity. However, the main source can be kinks on in-
ﬁnite strings, when the typical initial string loop size in the
cosmic string network is small. There are very few estimates
for the amplitude of the gravitational wave background from
kinks (Kawasaki et al. 2010). We will improve the previous
estimate by including the existence of Y-junctions of cosmic
super-strings as predicted by super-string theory. This will en-
able us to provide more precise predictions on detectability of
gravitational waves from cosmic strings.

In addition, we will consider an application of the anisotropy
test also to the gravitational wave background of a cosmic string

Fig. 3. Accessible parameter space in the Gµ − α plane (string tension
vs.
initial loop size) for cosmic strings of a phase-transition origin where
the reconnection probability is assumed to be unity (Kuroyanagi et al.
2012; Kuroyanagi et al. 2013). The colored regions are excluded by cur-
rent experiments or cosmological considerations. The region above the solid
or dashed lines is reachable by each future experiment. Solid lines are for
background searches, and dashed lines are for burst searches.

origin. The anisotropy level provides information on the num-
ber of cosmic-string bursts, which depends on the evolution of
the cosmic string network. While the gravitational wave back-
ground consists of bursts from different redshifts in the case of
a cusp origin, gravitational waves emitted from a nearby inﬁnite
string always dominated in the case of a kink origin. We will
investigate both cases and compare the differences. Using ad-
ditional information from anisotropy, we will be able to remove
the degeneracies of cosmic string parameters, which would give
us a better understanding of properties of cosmic strings.

3.3 Giant radio pulse

Radio pulses which are stronger than the normal pulses by a
factor of 103 - 106 are occasionally observed for some pulsars.
They are called Giant Radio Pulses (GRPs) and only about 10
pulsars are reported to have GRPs including the Crab pulsar
Argyle & Gower 1972 and a mili-second pulsar PSR B1937+21
(Cognard et al. 1996).

The physical mechanism of GRP emission have not been un-
derstood, although some theoretical models have been proposed
(Petrova 2004; Lyutikov 2007). For the Crab pulsar, the correla-
tion between GRPs and pulses in other wavelengths were stud-
ied. It was reported that optical pulses coincident with GRPs
have statistically signiﬁcant increase in the luminosity of ∼ 3%
(Shearer et al. 2003; Strader et al. 2013). The correlation with
X-ray emission was studied in Mikami et al. (2014) and upper
bounds on the increase in X-ray luminosity of O(10)% were
obtained. Because the mechanism of high energy emission is
relatively well understood (Takata et al. 2007), the correlation
between the GRPs and high energy emission will enhance the

10

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

understanding of the emission mechanism of the GRPs.

Strong variability within a GRP of nano-second scale was
observed for the Crab pulsar (Hankins et al. 2003; Hankins &
Eilek 2007). The nano-second variability corresponds to a spa-
tial scale of O(10) cm so that observations of GRPs with high
time resolution allows us to probe the physical state of the emis-
sion region of the pulsar with this spatial resolution. Signiﬁcant
progress on the understanding of GRPs is expected with this
kind of observations and numerical simulations of particle ac-
celeration in the magnetosphere (Timokhin & Arons 2013).

The Japanese pulsar group is focusing on the investigation
of the density structure of magnetosphere along the path of ra-
dio pulses through wideband observations of GRPs. There is
an implication that a large amount of high-energy charged par-
ticles (∼ 3 × 1040 sec−1 for the Crab pulsar) are emitted from
the pulsar magnetosphere. However, there has been no clear ex-
planation on the mechanism of the acceleration of the charged
particles. We expect the study of the density structure of mag-
netosphere will provide useful information on the particle ac-
celeration mechanism.

Let us explain the details of the methodology. Due to the
dispersive delay in the interstellar plasma, the arrival time of
pulses at low frequencies is delayed and the time difference be-
tween two frequencies f1 and f2 can be written as (Lorimer &
Kramer 2005),

0

ds

ds

cp1− (fp/f2)2

∆t =Z L

0
where fp is the plasma frequency,

cp1 − (fp/f1)2 −Z L
πme ∼ 9pne[cm−3][kHz]

fp ≡r neq2
and this can be expanded, under a condition fp ≪ f1,2, as,
∆t ∼ 4.15 × 10−3s(cid:0)f −2
+0.25 × 10−12s(cid:0)f −4

2,GHz(cid:1) DMpc/cm3
2,GHz(cid:1) EMpc/cm6.

1,GHz − f −2

1,GHz − f −4

Here,

DM ≡Z L

0

neds, EM ≡Z L

0

n2

eds

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

are Dispersion Measure and Emission Measure, respectively.

In the past studies, the second term in Eq. (13) was often
neglected. However, it is not negligible if there is a localized
high-density region along the line of sight, because it is propor-
tional to the square of the plasma density. In fact, Kuz’min et al.
(2008) reported the time difference which cannot be explained
by the ﬁrst term for the GRPs of the Crab pulsar and obtained
an average EM value of ∼ 4 × 106 pc/cm6 from the simulta-
neous observations at 44, 63 and 111 MHz. This result implies
the possible contribution of the second term in Eq. (13) from a
high-density region in the Crab Nebula. Considering the vari-
ability of the DM value5, the effect of EM may also have a

variability which reﬂects the dynamics of the density structure.
Simultaneous and wide-band observations with the SKA
will allow us to measure DM and EM more precisely. Below,
we roughly estimate the minimum value of EM which can be
measured by the SKA observations. From Eq. (13), we see the
effect of the EM term is stronger at low frequencies. Therefore,
we consider a simple strategy that we determine the DM from
the SKA-mid observations of GRPs and then, ﬁxing the DM
value, we see if the effect of the EM can be seen in the GRP ar-
rival time for the SKA-low observations. We neglect the effect
of the scattering due to inhomogeneous ISM, which is also sig-
niﬁcant at low frequencies, on the determination of EM. Let us
denote the observation error in DM as δDM. Then we deﬁne
the difference in the time of arrival of pulses at the minimum
and maximum frequencies (fmin and fmax) subtracted by the
contribution from DM as ∆t′. From Eq. (13), we can write

∆t′ = 0.25 × 10−12s(cid:0)f −4
±4.15 × 10−3s(cid:0)f −2

min,GHz − f −4
min,GHz − f −2

max,GHz(cid:1) EMpc/cm6
max,GHz(cid:1) δDMpc/cm3 ,(15)

and we obtain,

EMpc/cm6 =

∆t′
min,GHz − f −4
min,GHz − f −2

0.25 × 10−12(cid:0)f −4
4.15 × 10−3(cid:0)f −2
±

max,GHz(cid:1)
max,GHz(cid:1) δDMpc/cm3
min,GHz − f −4

max,GHz(cid:1)

(16)

.

0.25 × 10−12(cid:0)f −4

By evaluating the second term of Eq.
(16), we estimate the
minimum measurable value of EM with SKA. Adopting fmin =
0.05 GHz, fmax = 0.35 GHz and δDM = 0.001 pc/cm3,

EMmin,SKA ≃ 4.1 × 104 [pc/cm6],
while the same argument for the observation in Kuz’min et al.
(2008) leads to

(17)

(18)

EMmin,Kuz′min ≃ 1.4 × 105 [pc/cm6].
Thus, the SKA observations can constrain EM more accurately
by a factor of 3 compared to the current observation even if we
assume the same error in DM. The effect of EM has not been
studied for GRPs of other pulsars. In particular, since intrinsic
duration of GRPs of milli-second pulsars are short (Soglasnov
et al. 2004; Bilous et al. 2015), the SKA-mid will be necessary
to study their DM and EM.

For observations of GRPs, we can expect much larger signal-
to-noise ratio than normal pulses and a single GRP can be ob-
served without integration. Thus, we can measure DM and
EM for each GRP and their variability of min-hour time scales
can be probed. These information can put constraints on the
size of high-density region and will provide us a hint to under-
stand the physical state of the magnetosphere. Further, as the
density of the dense region increases, the plasma frequency fp

5 “JODRELL

BANK CRAB

PULSAR MONTHLY

EPHEMERIS”,

http://www.jb.man.ac.uk/ pulsar/crab.html

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

11

approaches to the observation frequency f and the group veloc-
ity of the radio wave approaches to zero. In this case, a cutoff
would be observed at the low frequency side.

As we saw above, wide-band observations with the SKA will
allow us to investigate the physical structure of pulsar magne-
tosphere with an unprecedented depth. Correlation of this with
other quantities such as the pulsar age and spin-down luminos-
ity will also be of interest.

3.4 Galactic magnetic ﬁeld analysis using pulsar

pairs

In this section we explain the method to estimate the Galactic
magnetic ﬁeld structure by using pulsar pairs.

When we use a pair of two pulsars which are seen in al-
most the same direction. The electron density weighted mag-
netic ﬁeld Bk (µG) along the line of sight in the region between
the pair is obtained in terms of differences between their RMs
(∆RM) and DMs (∆DM),

Bk =

∆RM

0.81∆DM

(19)

(Ohno & Shibata 1993). Since many subspaces between the
paired pulsars are distributed in the Galaxy, we may obtain a
three dimensional structure of the large scale ﬁeld.

When a pair has no angular separation on the sky ∆θ = 0,
Eq.(19) represents the correct ﬁeld strength of the subspace be-
tween the paired pulsars, because two radio waves emitted by
the paired pulsars propagate through common interstellar space
between the closer pulsar and the observer. Since observed pair
pulsars have ﬁnite angular separation ∆θ, ∆RM and ∆DM
do not represent exact RM and DM between the paired pulsars.
Therefore, Bk calculated by eq. (19) deviates from exact Bk
as discussed in Ohno & Shibata (1993). In order to reduce this
effect, Han et al. (2004) used the following criterion for ∆θ,

D1 sin(∆θ) < 0.1S

(20)

where D1 is the distance between the Sun and the pulsar which
is assumed to be closer to the Sun and S is the distance between
the paired pulsars (Han et al. 2004).

We show ∆RM distribution along the Galactic longitude in
Fig. 4. The cross symbols represent ∆RMs for the observed
pulsar pairs taken from the pulsars located at the Galactic lat-
itude |b| < 5◦ and the distance d < 12 kpc. We have used the
condition eq.(20) for ∆θs. The pulsar data are drawn from the
Australia Telescope National Facility (ATNF) Pulsar Catalogue
(Manchester et al. 2005). The upper panel is for the case of 121
pairs which are located in the region with the distance 4 kpc
< d < 8 kpc, and the lower panel is for the case of 404 pairs
with 2 kpc < d < 6 kpc.

We will compare the observed ∆RM distribution with that
calculated by assuming the global ﬁeld distribution and the elec-
tron density distribution in the Galactic disc. We calculate RMs

for virtual pulsars, which have the same positions (l, b, d) as
the observed pulsars, and calculate ∆RMs for the same pulsar
pairs as the observed pairs. We used the NE2001 model as the
electron density distribution (Cordes & Lazio 2002). The dis-
tance between the Sun and the Galactic center is assumed to be
8.5 kpc.

The ﬁlled circles in Fig. 4 represent the calculated ∆RMs
in the case when we assume the ring ﬁeld in the Galactic disc.
We set the radial and the vertical components Br = 0, Bz = 0.
The azimuthal component is given by

Bφ = B0 sin(πR/Rrev),

(21)

where R is the radial distance, and Rrev is the radial distance
at which the ﬁeld reversal occurs. We adopt Rrev = 8 kpc and
B0 = 2µG.

Fig. 5 shows the case when we assume the bisymmetric spi-
ral (BSS) ﬁeld model. The radial and azimuthal components are
given by

1

tan(χ)

Br = B0 sin(χ) cos(cid:20)
Bφ = B0 cos(χ) cos(cid:20)

1

tan(χ)

ln(cid:16) R
ln(cid:16) R

Rsun − φ + φ0(cid:17)(cid:21) ,
Rsun − φ + φ0(cid:17)(cid:21) ,

(22)

(23)

where χ is the pitch angle and the φ0 is an arbitrary phase. The
pitch angle is χ = 15◦ in this calculation. The arbitrary phase
φ0 is taken as 270◦ so that the local ﬁeld is directed toward
l ∼ 70◦ − 90◦.

The lower panels of Figs.4 and 5 (the case with the distance
2 kpc < d < 6 kpc) show the similar variation of ∆RM along
the Galactic longitude between the ring ﬁeld model and the BSS
model, because the local ﬁeld direction is toward l ∼ 70◦ − 90◦
in both ﬁeld models. However, we can ﬁnd a difference be-
tween two models in the upper panels of Figs.4 and 5 (the case
with the distance 4 kpc < d < 8 kpc). The ∆RM distribution
with the ring ﬁeld model is antisymmetric with respect to l = 0,
because the magnetic ﬁelds in R < 8 kpc are counterclockwise
when we view from the north Galactic pole.
In contrast, the
∆RM distribution with the BSS ﬁeld model is symmetric with
respect to l ∼ 0, because this BSS ﬁelds in R < 5 kpc are coun-
terclockwise in l > 0 and clockwise in l < 0.

The calculated ∆RM distributions vary depending on the
magnetic ﬁeld models. However, because the observed ∆RMs
have large scatter, distinction between the ring and BSS models
is not possible. If ∆RMs are obtained from a large number of
pulsar pairs, we can determine the global ﬁeld structure from
a proﬁle of ∆RM distribution, but also we can estimate the
random ﬁeld strength from dispersion of ∆RM distribution.

When we use pulsar pairs, it is possible to study ∆RM dis-
tributions of different samples with different distances as shown
in Figs.4 and 5. This is one of advantages of this method. We
will discover more than 10,000 pulsars through SKA all-sky
survey. A large data set of RMs and DMs provided by SKA

"drm-3.dat" u 2:7
"drm-3.dat" u 2:8

the gravitational-wave detection.

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

12

M
R
∆

 

M
R
∆

 

 1000

 500

 0

-500

-1000

180

 1000

 500

 0

-500

-1000

180

90

90

0

Galactic longitude

270

"drm-2.dat" u 2:7
"drm-2.dat" u 2:8

0

Galactic longitude

270

Fig. 4. ∆RM distribution along the Galactic longitude. The cross symbols
represent ∆RMs for the observed pulsar pairs. The ﬁlled circles represent
the calculated ∆RMs with the ring ﬁeld model. The upper panel is for the
case of 121 pairs which are located in the region with the distance 4 kpc
< d < 8 kpc, and the lower panel is for the case of 404 pairs with 2 kpc
< d < 6 kpc.

"drm-2.dat" u 2:7
"drm-2.dat" u 2:8

Bilous, A. V., Pennucci, T. T., Demorest, P., & Ransom, S. M., Astrophys.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to the international SKA pulsar Science Working
Group for providing us opportunities of open discussion and coopera-
tion. The work of K.T. is supported by Grand-in-Aid from the Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, and Science and Technology (MEXT) of
Japan, No. 24340048, No. 26610048 and No. 15H05896. The work of
A.N. was supported in part by the JSPS Research Fellowship for Young
Scientists No. 263409.

References
Abbott, B. P. et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 061102 (2016a)
Abbott, B. P. et al., arXiv:1602.03840 (2016b)
Adam, R. et al. 2015, arXiv:1502.01582
Ade, P. A. R. et al., arXiv:1502.01589 (2015a)
Ade, P. A. R. et al., arXiv:1502.01590 (2015b)
Argyle, E., & Gower, J. F. R., Astrophys. J. 175, L89 (1972)
Arzoumanian, Z., et al. [NANOGrav Collaboration], Astrophys. J. 794,

no. 2, 141 (2014)

Babak, S., et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 455, 1665 (2016)
Babichev, E. and Charmousis, C., JHEP, 08, 106 (2014)
Batcheldor, D., Robinson, A., Axon, D. J., Perlman, E. S. and Merritt, D.,

Astrophys. J., 717, L6 (2010)

J., 803, 83 (2015)

Carter, B., Phys. Rev. Lett., 26, 331 (1971)
Chennamangalam, J. and Lorimer, D. R., MNRAS, 440, L86-L90 (2014)
Cognard, I., Shrauner, J. A., Taylor, J. H., & Thorsett, S. E., Astrophys.

J., 457, L81 (1996)

Cordes, J. M. and Lazio, T. J. W., arXiv:astro-ph/0207156v3 (2002)
Damour, T. & Deruelle, N., Annales de l’IHP Physique th´eorique, 43, 107

(1985)

Damour, T. & Deruelle, N., Annales de l’IHP Physique th´eorique, 44, 263

(1986)

Damour, T., and Taylor, J. H., Phys. Rev. D, 45, 1840 (1992)
Deffayet, C., Gao, X., Steer, D. A. and Zahariade, G., Phys. Rev. D, 84,

064039 (2011)

Eatough, R., et al., Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre

Array (AASKA14), 45 (2015)

Fletcher, A., Beck, R., Shukurov, A., Berkhuijsen, E. M., & Horellou, C.,

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 412, 2396 (2011)

Graham, M. J., et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., 453, 1562 (2015)
Han, J. L., Ferriere, K., and Manchester, R. N., Astrophys. J., 610, 820

(2004)

Han, J. L., Manchester, R. N., Lyne, A. G., Qiao, G. J. and van Straten,

W., Astrophys. J., 642, 868 (2006)

Han, J.L., van Straten, W., Lazio, J., et al., PoS(AASKA14), 041 (2014)
Hankins, T. H., & Eilek, J. A. 2007, Astrophys J., 670, 693
Hankins, T. H., Kern, J. S., Weatherall, J. C., et al., 2003, Nature, 422,

141

Hansen, R. O. 1974, J. Math. Phys., 15, 46
Hawking, S. W. 1973, proceedings of the 1972 Les Houches Summer

School

Hessels, J., et al., Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre

M
R
∆

 

M
R
∆

 

 1000

 500

 0

-500

-1000

180

 1000

 500

 0

-500

-1000

180

90

90

"drm-3.dat" u 2:7
"drm-3.dat" u 2:8

0

Galactic longitude

270

0

Galactic longitude

270

Fig. 5. The same as Fig. 4, but for the BSS ﬁeld model.

will bring signiﬁcant progress in the study of the Galactic mag-
netic ﬁeld with the analysis using pulsar pairs. Especially, new
ﬁndings on turbulent ﬁelds at short wavelength will come out.

4 Summary

In this article, we gave an overview of Japanese scientiﬁc in-
terests on SKA pulsar research, based on the discussion in the
SKA-Japan pulsar Science Working Group. The unprecedented
sensitivity and survey speed of the SKA will enable transforma-
tional pulsar sciences which have a signiﬁcant impact on both
astrophysics and fundamental physics. In particular, we focused
on probing modiﬁed gravity through supermassive black hole
at Galactic Centre, gravitational waves from cosmic strings and
their anisotropy, giant radio pulses to probe physical state of
pulsar magnetosphere and Galactic magnetic ﬁelds through pul-
sar pairs. Beside these topics, our pulsar group is considering
a possible collaboration with the VLBI group, especially pulsar
astrometry to enhance the sensitivity of pulsar timing array on

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

13

Array (AASKA14), 47 (2015)

Pshirkov, M. S., Tinyakov, P. G., Kronberg, P. P., & Newton-McGee, K.

Horndeski, G. W., Int. J. Theor. Phys., 10, 363-384 (1974)
Israel, W. 1967, Phys. Rev., 164, 1776
Iwata, K. and Yoo, C.-M., in preparation
Janssen, G., et al., Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre

Array (AASKA14), 37 (2015)

Kawasaki, M., Miyamoto, K. and Nakayama, K., Phys. Rev. D, 81,

103523, 2010.

Keane, E. F., et al., Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre

J., Astrophys. J., 738,192 (2011)

Riess, A. G. et al. 1998, Astron. J., 116, 1009
Robinson, D. C. 1975, Phys. Rev. Lett., 34, 905
Ruzmaikin, A. A., Shukurov, A. M. and Sokoloff, D. D., Magnetic Fields

of Galaxies. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht (1988)

Schutz, K. and Ma, C. P., arXiv:1510.08472 (2015)
Shannon, R. M., et al., Science, 349, 1522 (2015)
Shao, L., et al., Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array

Array (AASKA14), 40 (2015)

(AASKA14), 42 (2015)

Kennea, J. A., et al., Astrophys. J., 770, L24 (2013)
Kobayashi, T., Motohashi, H. and Suyama, T., Phys. Rev. D 85, 084025

Shearer, A., Stappers, B., O’Connor, P., et al., 2003, Science, 301, 493
Soglasnov, V. A., Popov, M. V., Bartel, N., et al., 2004, Astrophys J. 616,

(2012)

439

Kobayashi, T., Motohashi, H. and Suyama, T., Phys. Rev. D 89, 084042

(2014)

Kobayashi, T. and Tanahashi, N., PTEP, 2014, 073E02 (2014)
Kobayashi, T., Yamaguchi, M. and Yokoyama, J., Prog. Theor. Phys., 126,

511-529 (2011)

Koyama, K., arXiv:1504.04623 (2015)
Kramer, M. and Stappers, B., Advancing Astrophysics with the Square

Kilometre Array (AASKA14), 36 (2015)

Sotiriou, T. P. and Zhou, S.-Y., Phys. Rev. Lett., 112, 251102 (2014)
Stinebring, D. R., Chin. J. Astron. Astrophys. Vol.6, Suppl.2, 204 (2006)
Strader, M. J., Johnson, M. D., Mazin, B. A., et al., 2013, Astrophys J.,

779, L12

Takata, J., Chang, H. -K. & Cheng, K. S. 2007, Astrophys J., 656, 1044
Taylor, S. R. and Gair, J. R., Phys. Rev. D, 88, 084001 (2013)
Timokhin, A. N., & Arons, J., 2013, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 429, 20
Van Eck, C. L., Brown, J. C., Stil, J. M., Rae, K., Mao, S. A., et al.,

Kuroyanagi, S., Miyamoto, K., Sekiguchi, T., Takahashi, K. and Silk, J.,

Astrophys. J., 728, 97 (2011)

Phys. Rev. D 2012, 86:023503, 2012.

Kuroyanagi, S., Miyamoto, K., Sekiguchi, T., Takahashi, K. and Silk, J.,
Phys. Rev. D 87, 023522 (2013): [Erratum: Phys. Rev.D 87, 069903
(2013)]

Kuz’min, A. D., Losovskii, B. Ya., Logvinenko, S. V., et al., 2008, Astron.

Rep., 52, 910

Lee, L. C. and Jokipii, J. R., Astrophys. J., 201, 532 (1975)
Liu, K., Wex, N., Kramer, M., Cordes, J. M. and Lazio, T. J. W.,

Astrophys. J., 747, 1 (2012)

Wharton, R. S., Chatterjee, S., Cordes, J. M., Deneva, J. S. and Lazio, T.

J. W., Astrophys. J., 753, 108 (2012)

Will, C. M., Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics (1993)
Will, C. M., Living Rev. Rel. 9, 3 (2006)
Will, C. M., Living Rev. Rel. 17 (2014)
Yagi, K., Yunes, N. and Tanaka, T., Phys. Rev. D 86, 044037 (2012)

[Erratum: Phys. Rev. D 89,049902 (2014)]

Yardley, D. R. B., et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 407, 669 (2010)
Yonemaru, N., Kumamoto, H., Kuroyanagi, S., Takahashi, K. and Silk, J.,

Liu, X., Shen, Y., Bian, F., Loeb A. and Tremaine, S., Astrophys. J., 789,

arXiv:1601.08082 (2016)

Zhu, X.-J., et al., Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 444, 3709 (2014)

140 (2014)

Lorimer, D. & Kramer, M. 2005, ”Handbook of Pulsar Astronomy”
L¨ohmer, O., Mitra, D., Gupta, Y., Kramer, M., & Ahuja, A., A&A, 425,

569 (2004)

Lyne, A. G., Pritchard, R. S. & Graham-Smith, F. 1993, Mon. Not. R.

Astron. Soc., 265, 1003

Lyne, A. G., & Smith, F. G., Pulsar astronomy, Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press (1990)

Lyutikov, M. 2007, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 381, 1190
Manchester, R. N., Hobbs, G. B., Teoh, A., et al., Astron. J., 129, 1993

(2005)

Maselli, A., Silva, H. O., Minamitsuji, M.

and Berti, E.,

arXiv:1508.03044 (2015)

Mikami, R., Terasawa, T., Kisaka, S., et al., Suzaku-MAXI 2014:
Expanding the Frontiers of the X-ray Universe, proceedings of a
conference held 19-22 February, 2014 at Ehime University, Japan.
Edited by M. Ishida, R. Petre, & K. Mitsuda, 2014., p.180

Minamitsuji, M., Phys. Rev. D, 89, 064017 (2014)
Mori, K., Gotthelf, E. V., Zhang, S., et al., Astrophys. J., 770, L23 (2013)
Ogawa, H., Kobayashi, T. and Suyama, T., arXiv:1510.07400 (2015)
Ohno, H. and Shibata, S., MNRAS, 262, 953 (1993)
Perlmutter, S. et al. 1999, Astrophys. J., 517, 565
Petrova, S. A., A & A, 424, 227 (2004)
Paragi, Z., Godfrey, L., Reynolds, C., et al., PoS(AASKA14), 143 (2014)
Poisson E. and Will, C. M., Gravity: Newtonian, Post-Newtonian,

Relativistic (2014).

