6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
9
9
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Perspective: How good is DFT for water?

M. J. Gillan∗

London Centre for Nanotechnology, Gordon St., London WC1H 0AH, UK

Thomas Young Centre, University College London, London WC1H 0AH, UK and

Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK

D. Alf`e

Dept. of Earth Sciences, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK

London Centre for Nanotechnology, Gordon St., London WC1H 0AH, UK

Thomas Young Centre, University College London, London WC1H 0AH, UK and

Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK

A. Michaelides

Dept. of Chemistry, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK

London Centre for Nanotechnology, Gordon St., London WC1H 0AH, UK and

Thomas Young Centre, University College London, London WC1H 0AH, UK

Kohn-Sham density functional theory (DFT) has become established as an in-

dispensable tool for investigating aqueous systems of all kinds, including those im-

portant in chemistry, surface science, biology and the earth sciences. Nevertheless,

many widely used approximations for the exchange-correlation (XC) functional de-

scribe the properties of pure water systems with an accuracy that is not fully sat-

isfactory. The explicit inclusion of dispersion interactions generally improves the

description, but there remain large disagreements between the predictions of dif-

ferent dispersion-inclusive methods. We present here a review of DFT work on

water clusters, ice structures and liquid water, with the aim of elucidating how the

strengths and weaknesses of diﬀerent XC approximations manifest themselves across

this variety of water systems. Our review highlights the crucial role of dispersion in

describing the delicate balance between compact and extended structures of many

diﬀerent water systems, including the liquid. By referring to a wide range of pub-

lished work, we argue that the correct description of exchange-overlap interactions

is also extremely important, so that the choice of semi-local or hybrid functional

2

employed in dispersion-inclusive methods is crucial. The origins and consequences

of beyond-2-body errors of approximate XC functionals are noted, and we also dis-

cuss the substantial diﬀerences between diﬀerent representations of dispersion. We

propose a simple numerical scoring system that rates the performance of diﬀerent

XC functionals in describing water systems, and we suggest possible future develop-

ments.

∗ Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail: gillan.mike@gmail.com

I.

INTRODUCTION

3

Water is an endlessly fascinating substance with many anomalous properties, of which

its expansion on freezing and its density maximum at 4 ◦C are just two of the most famous.

The fascination is only deepened by the apparent simplicity of the H2O molecule itself.

Because of its importance for life, for the Earth’s geology and climate, and for innumerable

domestic and industrial processes, water in all its forms has been one of the most widely

studied of all substances. From the theoretical viewpoint, it oﬀers unrivaled opportunities

to deepen our understanding of hydrogen bonding (H-bonding). A little over 20 years ago,

the ﬁrst attempts were reported to derive and interpret the properties of liquid water from

electronic-structure calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) [1–3]. This idea

has proven immensely productive, and has been developed by many research groups, but

the search for a fully satisfactory DFT description of water systems has been unexpectedly

arduous, and is not yet complete. Our aim here is to review what has been learnt so far,

and to assess the challenges that remain. An important feature of the review is that we aim

to cover DFT work not only on the liquid, but also on clusters and ice structures.

The ﬁrst ever DFT simulations of liquid water, pioneered by Parrinello, Car and co-

workers [1–5], followed a long history of water modeling based on force ﬁelds (see e.g.

Refs. [6–11]). It was recognized over 80 years ago that the bent shape of the H2O molecule

and the electronegativity of oxygen make electrostatic forces very important [6]. The earli-

est force ﬁelds represented the Coulomb interactions in terms of point charges, with overlap

repulsion and dispersion modeled by simple potentials, the molecules being assumed rigid

and unpolarizable. Such elementary models can be remarkably successful for the ambient

liquid [12, 13], but their transferability is poor. The dipole moment of the H2O molecule

is known to increase by 40 − 50 % from the gas phase to the ice and liquid phases [14–

17], so that the neglect of polarizability is a serious limitation. A large research eﬀort has

been devoted to the development of accurate models that treat the molecules as polariz-

able and ﬂexible [18–22] and include the weak intermolecular covalency that has often been

thought signiﬁcant [23–26]. The most sophisticated of these models have the declared aim

of describing all water systems, from clusters through ice structures to the liquid (see e.g.

Refs. [27, 28]). Reviews of the many force ﬁelds that have been proposed can be found

elsewhere, e.g. Refs. [12, 29, 30].

4

By deﬁnition, close approximations to the true exchange-correlation (XC) functional of

DFT would automatically deliver everything oﬀered by force-ﬁelds and more. The search

for such approximations for pure water systems is important for several reasons. DFT gives

direct access to electronic charge distributions, which are important for the interpretation of

experimental observables such as infra-red spectra [31, 32], dielectric properties [33], x-ray

scattering intensities [34], surface potentials [35], etc. It also provides a way of investigating

water systems completely independent of force-ﬁelds, so that it gives the possibility of fruitful

dialog between the approaches. Although our review is restricted to pure water systems, the

development of improved XC approximations reviewed here is highly relevant to the DFT

description of more general aqueous systems, including solutions and acid-base systems [36–

46], as well as conﬁned water [47–49] and water adsorbed on surfaces [50–56]. The crucial

role of H-bonding in the cohesion of water systems [57, 58] makes them an outstanding

paradigm of this bonding mechanism, which is so widespread in many other molecular

systems, including those important in biology [59]. This means that the challenges to DFT

to be described here for pure water systems will have a wide relevance.

The XC functionals known as generalized gradient approximations (GGAs) are among the

most popular and successful for a great variety of condensed-matter systems, and they were

used for the ﬁrst DFT simulations of liquid water. Appropriately chosen GGAs were found

to give quite satisfactory binding energies for the water dimer [60–63] and the common form

of ice [64, 65], and when used in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations gave a reasonable

structure for the liquid [1, 3, 5]. The early successes prompted a surge of interest in the

use of GGA-based simulations to explore a wide range of important questions concerning

water itself, such as H-bond dynamics, electronic properties, and the structure and diﬀusion

of hydronium and hydroxyl ions. Simulations of this kind have also been very widely used

to probe the solvation shells around a variety of ions and other neutral solutes in water. A

review of DFT-based MD work both on pure water and on a wide range of aqueous systems

can be found in Ref. [46]. The widespread use of DFT for simulating interfaces involving

aqueous systems and water adsorbed on surfaces is also noteworthy (see e.g. Refs. [50–

53, 66, 67]). The new insights gained in these investigations would in many cases have

been diﬃcult or impossible to achieve with force-ﬁeld methods, and the enormous value of

DFT-based simulations of aqueous systems is beyond dispute.

Nevertheless, it became clear over 10 years ago that the description of liquid water given

5

by GGAs was not completely satisfactory [68–72]. Fortuitous cancelation of errors in the ear-

lier work had made the approximations seem more accurate than they really were [69, 73, 74].

It was also discovered that GGA predictions of energy diﬀerences between extended and com-

pact structures of some water systems, including larger clusters and ice, are qualitatively

wrong [75–78]. These discoveries stimulated a re-examination of XC approximations for

pure water systems that continues to this day, and we shall try to decribe what has been

learnt from this. An important outcome will be that dispersion is crucially important, and

that some of the errors of GGAs come from their failure to describe dispersion correctly. It

has been recognized for many years that H-bonding is the dominant mechanism of cohesion

in water systems [57, 58]. However, H-bonding is a complex phenomenon, which can be

analyzed into electrostatic attraction, polarization, dispersion and partial covalency [79],

though the relative contributions of these components in water remain controversial, de-

pending signiﬁcantly on deﬁnition [26]. The contribution of partial covalency (often termed

charge transfer), for example, has been particularly contentious [23, 24, 80, 81]. In addition,

good XC functionals must correctly describe exchange-repulsion and monomer deformation.

Our point of view here will be that all these energy components can be in error, and our

review of the research will try to assess where the main errors lie. The evidence will indicate

that dispersion is far from being the only culprit.

We will start by reviewing DFT work on the water monomer and water clusters. The

DFT description of the monomer (Sec. II) is important for the electrostatic, polarization

and monomer deformation parts of the energy, while the dimer (Sec. III) provides tests of H-

bonding, where exchange-repulsion, dispersion and weak covalency also play a role. Energies

of the dimer in non-H-bonding geometries may help in separating the covalency contribution.

DFT work on clusters from the trimer to the pentamer (Sec. IV) gives further information

about polarizability, while the isomers of the hexamer (Sec. V) and larger clusters (Sec. VI)

help to separate dispersion and exchange repulsion. We shall see that the energetics of

ice structures (Sec. VII) is vital in assessing the roles of these energy components. The

lessons learnt up to this point form the background to our review of DFT work on the liquid

(Sec. VIII). In the ﬁnal Sec. IX, we draw together the evidence from all the water systems to

assess the ability of current XC functionals to account for all the components of the energy.

We summarize by proposing a simple scoring scheme, which assigns a numerical score to any

given XC functional, based on the quality of its predictions for clusters and ice structures.

The scheme may help to gauge the likely performance of the functional on the liquid. We

should note at the outset that water is a vast subject, so that our review will inevitably be

incomplete, as well as reﬂecting our own personal perspective. We provide in the Appendix

a brief survey of the main XC approximations that will be relevant.

6

II. THE WATER MONOMER

Since electrostatic interactions are very important in all water systems, we need to know

that available XC functionals reproduce the charge distribution of the free H2O monomer, or

at least its leading multipole moments. This will ensure the correctness of the so-called ﬁrst-

order electrostatic energy, i.e. the Coulomb interaction energy of an assembly of molecules

when the monomer charge distributions are taken to be those of free monomers. In reality,

the electric ﬁelds of the monomers distort each other’s charge distributions, so it is important

that XC functionals reproduce the polarizabilities of the free monomers, and ideally this

should mean the response of the dipole and higher multipole moments to dipolar and higher

multipolar ﬁelds.

Almost all published DFT work on the charge distribution of the free H2O monomer re-

ports only the dipole moment µ, though some information is available for the quadrupole mo-

ments. Only a limited number of GGAs appear to have been studied, but the BLYP [82, 83]

and BP86 [82, 84] functionals reproduce the benchmark value of µ to within ∼ 3 %, and

the hybrid functionals B3LYP [85, 86] and PBE0 [87, 88] are even better than this [88–90].

The rather sparse results for the quadrupole moments indicate that these are also correct

to within a few percent [91]. So far as we are aware, DFT calculations have been reported

only for the components of the dipolar polarizability, and there is general agreement that

GGAs always overestimate them by ∼ 10 % [88, 89, 91–93, 95]. (The overestimation of

molecular polarizabilities by GGAs is a general phenomenon, which arises from the under-

estimation of the energies of virtual Kohn-Sham states relative to those of occupied states,

which in turn is related to the incorrect behavior of the Kohn-Sham potential in the asymp-

totic region far from the molecule [93, 94].) Hybrid functionals do much better, with the

average polarizability from B3LYP and PBE0 being in error by ∼ 2 % and less than 1 %

respectively [88, 93, 95, 96].

The water monomer is ﬂexible, and a correct description of its deformation energetics

7

is likely to be important, for two reasons. One is that, in water clusters and condensed

phases, formation of a H-bond weakens and lengthens the OH bond of the donor, and these

eﬀects help to determine the strength of the H-bond. The other reason is that the spectrum

of intramolecular vibrations is an important experimental diagnostic of H-bond formation,

which it is desirable to reproduce in simulations.

The ability of GGA and hybrid functionals to describe monomer deformation was inves-

tigated by Santra et al. [97], who showed that the energy cost of stretching the O-H bonds

of the monomer is signiﬁcantly underestimated by PBE and BLYP but is very accurately

given by PBE0. This is shown in panel (a) of Fig. 1 which plots the deformation energy E1b

in the symmetric mode as a function of the departure δRO−H of the O-H bond length from

its equilibrium value, E1b being computed with the PBE, BLYP and PBE0 approximations

and with the benchmark CCSD(T) technique (coupled-cluster with single and double ex-

citations and a perturbative treatment of triples [98]). (We note that the small oﬀsets of

the minima of the plots of E1b vs δRO−H are due to the fact that δRO−H is computed in all

cases relative to the equilibrium bond length given by PBE, which is slightly greater than

the bond lengths given by PBE0 and CCSD(T).) The deviations of the GGA values of E1b

from the benchmark values (inset of panel (a)) are ca. 100 meV for a bond stretch δRO−H
of 0.1 ˚A, but the errors of PBE0 are much smaller. The authors examined the consequences

of this for the liquid by drawing a large sample of monomers from an MD simulation of

liquid water performed with ﬂexible monomers. They found that bond stretches of up to
ca. 0.1 ˚A are very common, and they conﬁrmed the accuracy of PBE0 and the substantial

underestimates of the deformation energy given by PBE and BLYP (see panel (b) of Fig. 1).

This underestimate by GGAs, also noted by other authors [99–101], correlates with an erro-

neous softening of the intramolecular OH stretch frequencies, which are underestimated by

∼ 3 % and ∼ 4.2 % with PBE and BLYP respectively, but are reproduced almost exactly

by PBE0 [97].

The comparisons for the monomer thus help us to assess the accuracy of XC function-

als for three important parts of the energy in general water systems, namely ﬁrst-order

electrostatics, polarization and monomer deformation. For all three, GGAs appear to give

reasonable, but far from perfect accuracy, while the accuracy of hybrid functionals is con-

siderably better.

8

III. TESTING HYDROGEN-BONDING: THE DIMER

The dimer is the simplest water system we can use to test the accuracy of XC functionals

for the energy of interaction between H2O monomers in H-bonding and other geometries.

The (H2O)2 system has been thoroughly studied by very accurate CCSD(T) calculations,

which are believed to give the interaction energy in any geometry with errors relative to

the exact value of no more than ∼ 5 meV [102, 103]. We know from such calculations

that the geometry having the global minimum energy is the conﬁguration labeled SP1 in

Fig. 2. This is a typical H-bonding geometry, with the OH bond of the donor directed

towards the O atom of the acceptor. We deﬁne the dimer binding energy Edim

b

as twice

the energy of an isolated equilibrium monomer minus the energy of the dimer in its global-

minimum geometry. According to CCSD(T), Edim

is 217.6 ± 2.0 meV, the equilibrium O-O
OO being 2.909 ˚A [103]; these values are consistent with the somewhat uncertain

distance Rdim

b

experimental values [104–106].

Acceptable DFT approximations must reproduce benchmarks for the binding energy Edim

b

and the geometry of the global minimum, and in fact most DFT work on the water dimer

has focused exclusively on this conﬁguration. However, this is not enough, because both

in the liquid and in compressed ice phases water monomers approach each other closely in

non-H-bonded geometries, and the energetics of such geometries is very important. A simple

way of going beyond the global minimum is to study the set of conﬁgurations on the energy

surface of the dimer known as the Smith stationary points (Fig. 2) [107], some of which

resemble geometries found in dense ice structures. We also review here assessments of XC

functionals made using large statistical samples of dimer geometries designed to be relevant

to condensed phases.

We discuss ﬁrst local and semi-local XC functionals, including the local density approxi-

mation (LDA [108–110]), GGAs of diﬀerent kinds, and hybrids, conﬁning ourselves initially

to the global minimum geometry. (See the Appendix for information about the relevant

XC approximations.) Several extensive surveys have been published on the predictions of

semi-local functionals for the water dimer [63, 99, 111]. In some work on the dimer, full

basis-set convergence was not achieved, so that the accuracy of the functionals themselves

was not completely clear. However, Ref. [63] reported calculations very close to the complete

basis set (CBS) limit for 16 semi-local functionals applied to the dimer and other small water

9

clusters. Table I reproduces some of the Edim

OO values from that work, supplemented
with results from Ref. [112] and from our own calculations performed in the present work.

and Rdim

b

We performed our own calculations using the molpro [113] and vasp [114] codes, following

the procedures described elsewhere [115]. The wide spread of predicted binding energies is

striking. The LDA is clearly unacceptable, since it overbinds the dimer by nearly a factor

of 2 [116, 117], and there are other functionals, such as PBEsol [118], which also overbind

signiﬁcantly. At the other extreme, functionals such as BLYP and revPBE [119] underbind

quite seriously. Among the best functionals for Edim

b

are PBE and its hybrid version PBE0.

It will become clear below that functionals predicting a good Edim

b

can still give a poor de-

scription of larger clusters, ice structures and liquid water. The wide variability of Edim

b with
diﬀerent semi-local functionals will turn out to be crucial for the understanding of extended

water systems.

The reason why diﬀerent semi-local functionals give such diﬀerent binding energies in

dimers of small molecules such as water is well known.

It was recognized long ago [120]

that the gross overbinding given by LDA arises from a spurious exchange attraction.

In

GGAs, this spurious attraction is suppressed by the exchange-enhancement factor FX(s),

which depends on the reduced gradient x = |∇ρ|/ρ4/3 of the electron density ρ through the

quantity s = x/(2(3π2)1/3). Roughly speaking, the exchange-overlap interactions of BLYP

and revPBE are strongly repulsive and those of PBE and PW91 are weakly repulsive because

of the very diﬀerent behavior of their FX(s) factors in the region of large s where the tails

of the monomer densities overlap [121–126]. This important diﬀerence between GGAs will

be referred to again several times.

Dispersion plays a vital role in the energetics of water systems, as we shall see later,

but is not correctly described by the semi-local functionals discussed above. The past 20

years have seen the introduction of several diﬀerent ways of accounting for dispersion (see the

Appendix, and recent reviews [127, 128]). One approach consists of the addition of potentials

of various kinds to existing functionals, ﬁrst explored nearly 20 years ago (see e.g. Refs. [123,

129, 130]) and then extensively developed by Grimme [131–133], Tkatchenko and Scheﬄer

(TS) [134] and others. An alternative is the incorporation of explicitly non-local correlation

functionals, pioneered by Lundqvist, Langreth and others [135–137]. The DCACP method

of Rothlisberger and co-workers [138] and the closely related DCP method of Ref. [139]

are also noteworthy. In all these methods, a representation of non-local correlation energy

10

is added to a chosen semi-local functional. The naming of these diﬀerent approaches is

not completely uniform in the literature, so we summarize brieﬂy the nomenclature used

throughout this review. The approach now generally known as the Grimme method comes

in three versions, which we denote by func-D1, func-D2 and func-D3, where “func” is the

name of the semi-local or hybrid functional to which dispersion is added. Similarly, we

denote TS methods by func-TS, and methods based on the non-local functional of Ref. [135]

by func-DRSLL (the acronym DRSLL stands for the authors of Ref. [135]). We denote by

rPW86-DF2 the method of Ref. [140] (sometimes known as LMKLL after the authors of this

Ref.), which employs a modiﬁed form of the DRSLL non-local correlation functional added

to a revised version of the PW86 semi-local functional [84].

We summarize in Table I the dimer binding energies Edim

b

and equilibrium O-O distances

predicted for the global minimum geometry by some of these schemes. This shows that

the addition of dispersion to a semi-local functional always increases Edim

b

, as expected. For

BLYP and revPBE, which signiﬁcantly underestimate Edim

b

, the dispersion-inclusive versions

BLYP-D3 and revPBE-DRSLL give improved values of Edim

b

, though the latter functional

is still signiﬁcantly underbound. By contrast, the addition of TS dispersion to PBE and

PBE0, which already gave accurate values of Edim

b

, inevitably worsens the predictions. The

DRSLL-type functionals are particularly instructive in this regard. Their original form [135],

based on revPBE, generally underbinds molecular dimers, so the underestimate of Edim

b

for

the H2O dimer by revPBE-DRSLL comes as no surprise.

It was pointed out

[136, 141]

that better binding energies are obtained if less repulsive semi-local functionals are used

in place of revPBE. It turns out that PBE is too weakly repulsive, so that PBE-DRSLL

generally overbinds molecular dimers, including (H2O)2. However, if the exchange functional

is appropriately tuned, much better approximations can be obtained. This is illustrated in

the Table by the optPBE-DRSLL and optB88-DRSLL approximations, which are based on

tuned forms of the PBE and B88 functionals. Similar arguments underlie the rPW86-DF2

non-local functional [140]. The comparisons shown in the Table indicate that the addition

of dispersion increases Edim

b

by up to ∼ 35 meV. This is comparable with the variation

of Edim

b

resulting from diﬀerent choices of semi-local or hybrid functional. We shall see in

Sec. VIII that addition of dispersion to a semi-local functional can bring large changes in

the structure and equilibrium density of the liquid, so that errors as large as 35 meV in Edim

b

are important.

11

We noted earlier the importance of accuracy for conﬁgurations other than the global

minimum, and many authors have drawn attention to the role of non-H-bonded pair conﬁg-

urations in condensed phases of water [111, 112, 123, 142–144]. The Smith stationary points

(Fig. 2) provide some relevant geometries, but the only systematic studies of DFT errors in

these conﬁgurations appear to be those of Refs. [101, 145]. Anderson and Tschumper [145]

studied 10 diﬀerent GGA and hybrid methods. All approximations gave the correct en-

ergy ordering, but most of them overestimated the energies relative to that of the global

minimum, particularly for conﬁgurations SP4, SP5 and SP6, which closely resemble con-

ﬁgurations in ice VIII. Relative energies for some semi-local and hybrid functionals are

summarized in Table II, which shows that PBE and BLYP both overestimate the relative

energy of conﬁguration SP6 by over 30 meV. Hybrid approximations are appreciably better,

but still overestimate the relative energies. Calculations of the energies relative to the global

minimum with dispersion-inclusive methods do not appear to have been published, so we

have made our own (see Table II). We ﬁnd that optPBE-DRSLL and rPW86-DF2 are both

quite satisfactory, their errors in the relative energies all being less than 15 meV. However,

both PBE-TS and PBE0-TS are less satisfactory, giving relative energies of conﬁgurations

4, 5 and 6 in error by ∼ 30 meV.

A characterization of XC errors for the global minimum and some special geometries is

illuminating and useful, but a full characterization should cover all relevant O-O distances

and monomer orientations. One way of doing this is to analyze the errors for large samples

of dimers drawn from a MD simulation of the liquid, as has been done by Santra et al. [97]

and Gillan et al. [101]. For this purpose, we must separate 1-body and 2-body errors in the

sense of the many-body expansion (MBE) [146–148], which will also be important later. In

general, the total energy E(1, 2, . . . N) of a system of N monomers can be exactly expressed

as:

E(1, 2, . . . N) = Xi

E(1)(i) +

′

1
2Xi,j

E(2)(i, j) +

′

1

6Xi,j,k

E(3)(i, j, k) + . . . .

(1)

Here, E(1)(i) is the 1-body energy of monomer i in free space, with the argument i being

short-hand for the set of coordinates specifying its geometry. Similarly, E(2)(i, j) is the

2-body energy of dimer (i, j), i.e.

its total energy minus the 1-body energies of monomers

i and j, with the arguments i and j being short-hand for the geometries of the monomers

(the prime on the summation indicates the omission of terms i = j). The 3-body and

12

higher terms needed for systems larger than the dimer are deﬁned analogously. The zero of

energy is conveniently taken as N times the energy of an isolated equilibrium monomer. To

analyze the errors of a chosen XC functional, the total energy of each dimer in the sample

and the 1-body energies of its monomers are computed, and the 2-body energy is obtained

by subtracting from the total dimer energy the sum of the two monomer energies. The 1-

and 2-body errors are then obtained by subtracting benchmark values of the 1- and 2-body

energies, typically computed with CCSD(T).

Santra et al. [97] analyzed the errors of the BLYP, PBE and PBE0 functionals for dimers

drawn from the liquid. BLYP values of the 2-body energies were underbound by an average

of ∼ 40 meV, while PBE and PBE0 values were overbound by ∼ 10 meV. Interestingly, the

errors of all three functionals showed a scatter of around ±15 meV about their averages at
typical O-O nearest-neighbor distances of ∼ 2.8 ˚A. There may be a link here with the errors

in the relative energies of the Smith stationary points. An interesting ﬁnding from the same

work [97] was that the known enhancement of H-bond energy by elongation of the donor

OH bond is signiﬁcantly exaggerated by both GGA functionals. The work of Ref. [101]

examined the 2-body errors computed with semi-local functionals for a thermal sample of
dimers covering a range of O-O distances from 2.5 to over 7.0 ˚A. This revealed the expected

systematic underbinding of BLYP over this range, and the much smaller errors of PBE,

as illustrated in Fig. 3. We also present in this Figure calculations on the same thermal

sample performed with the BLYP-D3, PBE-D3, PBE-TS and PBE-DRSLL functionals.

We see that the excessive repulsion of BLYP is largely eliminated by BLYP-D3, which
becomes slightly overbound between 3.0 and 4.0 ˚A. However, the PBE-based functionals

are all overbound, with the overbinding errors of PBE-DRSLL being particularly strong in

this range.

Interestingly, the typical diﬀerence of 2-body energy between the BLYP and

PBE functionals is comparable with the shifts due to dispersion, so that addition of D3

dispersion to BLYP brings its 2-body energy rather close to that of uncorrected PBE. The

typical energy diﬀerence between the dispersion-corrected functionals BLYP-D3 and PBE-

DRSLL is on the same scale as the energy shifts due to dispersion, so that the robustness of

the methods clearly needs discussion. It is notable that the substantive diﬀerences between
the various PBE-based methods in the region 3.0 − 4.0 ˚A exist despite the close agreement

between their global-minimum binding energies (Table I).

It has been shown by Bart´ok et al. [149] that machine-learning techniques operating

13

on very large thermal samples of dimers can be used to create very accurate, but rapidly

computable representations of the 1- and 2-body errors of chosen XC functionals. These

techniques, based on the GAP (Gaussian approximation potential) method of machine learn-

ing [150], give a way of compensating almost exactly for the 1- and 2-body errors of any

chosen XC functional. We review below (Secs. VI and VII) work on large water clusters and

ice based on XC functionals corrected in this way.

In summary, we have seen that both semi-local and dispersion-inclusive functionals vary

quite widely in their predictions of the H-bond energy. The variability aﬀects the 2-body
energy in the important region of O-O separation extending from 2.5 to at least 4.0 ˚A.

We have noted the importance of the exchange-enhancement factor as one cause of this

variability. The variation between diﬀerent functionals is comparable with the increase

of binding energy resulting from the addition of dispersion. The energies of the Smith

stationary points relative to the global minimum are signiﬁcantly overestimated by both

semi-local and dispersion-inclusive functionals.

IV. COOPERATIVE HYDROGEN-BONDING IN SMALL CLUSTERS

It has long been known that hydrogen bonding in water and in many other molecular

systems is a cooperative eﬀect: if molecule A donates a H-bond to molecule B, the propen-

sity of molecule B to donate a H-bond to molecule C is thereby enhanced [59, 151–154].

The cooperativity manifests itself in the non-additivity of H-bond energies.

In suitable

geometries, an assembly of water molecules is stabilized by the mutual enhancement of

H-bonds [146, 147, 155, 156], so that the overall binding energy is greater than the sum

of dimer binding energies. This non-additivity of binding energies can be understood as

resulting from molecular polarizability: the electron cloud on each monomer is distorted

by the electric ﬁelds of its neighbors, and this changes its electrostatic interaction with

other monomers. We noted in the Introduction that this is a strong eﬀect, since molecular

polarizability enhances the dipole moment of water monomers in ice and liquid water by

40 − 50 % above that of monomers in free space [5, 14, 15, 17]. It was suggested by Frank

and Wen [151] that the cooperativity would play an important role in the dynamical mak-

ing and breaking of H-bonds in liquid water, and subsequent calculations and experiments

have fully conﬁrmed the importance of H-bond cooperativity in water systems of all kinds,

14

including ice and clusters (see e.g. Ref. [157]). It is clearly important to know whether DFT

approximations reproduce these cooperative eﬀects.

Fortunately, H-bond cooperativity is already important in small water clusters, where it

has been extensively studied both experimentally and theoretically [25, 26, 63, 147, 156, 158–

165]. These systems provide a simple way of testing the accuracy of DFT approximations in

describing non-additivity, since very accurate benchmarks are readily available. We discuss

here the trimer, tetramer and pentamer, leaving till Sec. V the hexamer, which raises issues

beyond H-bond cooperativity. Experiments and accurate quantum chemistry calculations

show that the most stable conﬁgurations of the (H2O)n clusters with n = 3, 4 and 5 are

quasi-planar and cyclic [147, 156, 158, 160]. An important indication of the progressive
strengthening of the H-bonds is that the O-O distance shortens from ∼ 2.91 ˚A in the dimer
to 2.72 ˚A in the pentamer [63, 160]. Another commonly used measure for the strength of a

H-bond is the red-shift of the intramolecular stretching frequency of the donor O-H bond.

Theory and experiment both ﬁnd an increasing red-shift on passing from the trimer to the

pentamer [166].

For reference data on the non-additivity of the binding energies, we rely on benchmark

MP2 and CCSD(T) calculations near the CBS limit, since accurate experimental data is not

available. (MP2 is the second-order Møllet-Plesset approximation [98], which is often nearly

as accurate as CCSD(T) for water systems.) The non-additivity can be quantiﬁed using

the many-body expansion (MBE) introduced above in eqn (1). The non-additive parts of

the energy are characterized by the 3-body and higher-body terms E(n). For a small cluster

(H2O)n in a given geometry, it is straightforward to compute benchmark total energies of all

the monomers, dimer, trimers, etc. that can be formed from the cluster, and from these the

terms E(1)(i), E(2)(i, j), E(3)(i, j, k) etc. of the MBE can be extracted. It has been shown

by Xantheas [156] that the 3-body and higher components of the energy play a vital role

in determining the relative energies of diﬀerent conformations of the water trimer, tetramer

and pentamer.

The performance of a wide variety of semi-local and hybrid XC functionals on the binding

energies of the water trimer, tetramer and pentamer in their most stable geometries has been

assessed by Santra et al. [63]. MP2 energies near the CBS limit were used as reference, the

evidence being that these energies should diﬀer from CCSD(T) values by no more than a

few meV per H-bond. The functionals studied included the popular GGAs PBE, PW91 and

15

BLYP and some less common ones such as XLYP, PBE1W, mPWLYP and BP86, the hybrid

functionals PBE0, B3LYP and X3LYP, and the meta-GGA functional TPSS (references to

the deﬁnitions of these functionals can be found in Ref. [63]). As expected from their

performance on the dimer, BLYP was found to be always quite strongly underbound, and

PBE and PW91 always overbound. The B3LYP functional was a considerable improvement

on BLYP, while the hybrids PBE0 and X3LYP gave almost perfect binding energies. The

TPSS meta-GGA turned out to be somewhat worse than its parent functional PBE.

For present purposes, the most important ﬁnding of Ref. [63] is that all the functionals

reproduce semi-quantitatively the cooperative enhancement of the H-bond energies given

by the MP2 benchmarks. According to the benchmarks, the binding energy per H-bond

is enhanced by a modest 6 % in the trimer, increasing to a more impressive 46 % in the

pentamer. With very few exceptions, all the functionals give enhancements between 4 and

8 % in the trimer and between 45 and 55 % in the pentamer. Notably, the enhancement is

overestimated by almost all the functionals in the tetramer and pentamer, perhaps because

most functionals overestimate the polarizability of the water monomer (see Sec. II). It is

also noted in Ref. [63] that for all the functionals the error in the binding energy per H-

bond is almost independent of cluster size, though the error becomes more positive (more

strongly bound) for some functionals, including PBE. This suggests that for a given DFT

functional its error in the H-bond energy of the dimer is likely to be a good guide to its

error in the H-bond energy in larger water aggregates. The authors also note that the

known shortening of the equilibrium O-O distance with increasing cluster size is also semi-

quantitatively reproduced by all the functionals.

To summarize, the work on small clusters up to the pentamer shows that H-bond cooper-

ativity becomes a strong eﬀect as we go to larger aggregates, but most XC functionals appear

to describe the non-additivity of energies fairly accurately. Semi-local functionals generally

overestimate the enhancement of H-bond strength, but hybrid functionals do better than

GGAs.

V. COMPACT VERSUS EXTENDED GEOMETRIES: THE HEXAMER

The hexamer occupies a special place in water studies, because it is the smallest cluster for

which three-dimensional structures compete energetically with the two-dimensional cyclic

16

structures just discussed for the trimer, tetramer and pentamer. There are many local

minima on its complex energy surface [167–169], but here we pay particular attention to

four of them, known as the prism, the cage, the book and the ring (Fig. 4). In the ring, each

monomer is H-bonded to two neighbors, and all six H-bonds are of canonical form, with

the donor O-H bond pointing directly at the acceptor O atom. In the prism, by contrast,

each monomer is 3-fold coordinated, but the nine H-bonds are strongly distorted. In their

coordination and H-bond count, the cage resembles the prism and the book resembles the

ring. Are the extended ring and book structures with fewer but stronger H-bonds more

or less stable than the compact cage and prism with more but weaker bonds? This is an

important question, because the competition between compact and extended structures is

central to the energetics of solid and liquid water phases.

In fact, CCSD(T) calculations close to the CBS limit leave no doubt that the energy

ordering from lowest to highest is prism < cage < book < ring [77, 101, 170–172]. This

ordering is conﬁrmed by diﬀusion Monte Carlo (DMC) calculations [173, 174], which give

total binding energies relative to free monomers and total energy diﬀerences between the

isomers in accord with CCSD(T) to within ∼ 5 meV/monomer [75]. The fact that the

compact prism and cage are more stable than extended structures such as the ring was

already suggested by early MP2 calculations [148, 167, 175]. It is now established that MP2

in the CBS limit gives the same stability ordering as CCSD(T) for the prism, cage, book and

ring, though MP2 underestimates the diﬀerence of total binding energy of the ring and prism

by ∼ 25 meV [75, 77, 170, 171]. The prism and cage isomers are very close in energy, but

CCSD(T) makes the prism more stable by ∼ 10 meV [171]. (We note that this statement

refers to energy-minimized structures; in the real world, zero-point and thermal vibrational

energies appear to be large enough to reverse the stabilities of these two isomers [176, 177].)

Several detailed studies have investigated the accuracy of DFT approximations for the

relative energies of the diﬀerent isomers and also for their overall binding energies with

respect to free monomers. Between them, these studies cover a wide variety of methods.

The works of Dahlke et al. [77] and Santra et al. [75] investigated respectively 11 and 12

diﬀerent functionals, including GGAs, meta-GGAs, hybrids and hybrid-meta-GGAs. Later

studies [101, 172, 178, 179] covered a range of GGAs and hybrids, and Ref. [179] studied a

number of dispersion-inclusive methods. The remarkable outcome of these studies is that

almost all the semi-local approximations erroneously make the ring or book more stable than

17

the prism and cage. The only exceptions reported in these papers are the three Minnesota

functionals M06-L, M05-2X and M06-2X [77]. On the positive side, a number of commonly

used functionals (e.g. PBE, PBE0) give quite accurate values for the average binding energies

of the four isomers, though others (e.g. BLYP, revPBE) are seriously underbound. The

problems of semi-local XC functionals are illustrated in Table III, where we compare their

predicted binding energies with the CCSD(T) and DMC benchmarks.

The semi-local functionals just referred to do not explicitly describe dispersion, and it

is natural to assume that this is the main cause of the erroneous stability ordering of the

hexamers. This makes physical sense, because compact structures will be more strongly

stabilized than extended structures by a pairwise attraction. The importance of dispersion

has been conﬁrmed by several studies of the hexamer [75, 180, 181], showing that diﬀerent

dispersion-inclusive DFT methods all correct the wrong stability ordering and bring the

relative energies of the isomers into respectable agreement with the benchmarks, as can be

seen from the illustrative examples given in Table III.

In spite of this compelling evidence, there are clear indications that dispersion is not the

only source of errors in the XC functionals. These indications come from the many-body

analyses reported in several papers. We saw in previous Sections how the binding energies

of clusters can be separated into their 1-body, 2-body, and beyond-2-body components.

The same approach can be applied to the errors of XC functionals, i.e.

the deviations

of approximate DFT energies from benchmarks.

If the errors of XC approximations for

the hexamer were entirely due to poor dispersion, we would expect them to be mainly

2-body errors, because beyond-2-body dispersion is generally much less signiﬁcant than

2-body dispersion in water systems.

(See e.g. Ref. [182], which indicates that 3-body

dispersion contributes ca. 100 times less than 2-body dispersion to the cohesive energy of

ice Ih.) However, the reality is more complex. For the energy diﬀerences between the

isomers, the errors of the BLYP and revPBE approximations are indeed mainly 2-body

errors, but it turns out that the errors of PW91, PBE and PBE0 are largely beyond-2-body

errors [101, 172, 178, 183]. The importance of beyond-2-body errors in the energetics of the

hexamer has been noted in Ref. [179]. On the other hand, the average binding energy of

the four isomers is quite accurately given by PBE and PBE0 (see above), which reproduce

both its 2-body and beyond-2-body components. (By “average binding energy” we mean

the sum of the binding energies of the four isomers divided by 4.) However, the large error

18

in the average binding energy given by BLYP arises from its excessive 2-body repulsion

together with a smaller but still signiﬁcant beyond-2-body overbinding [101, 183]. These

facts indicate that the errors cannot be explained by incorrect dispersion alone.

It has been proposed recently [178] that the many-body errors of GGAs for water (and

other molecular systems) are closely linked to the choice of exchange-enhancement factor FX,

which we know has an important inﬂuence on the 2-body interaction energy (see Sec. III). It

appears that an FX that gives excessive exchange-overlap repulsion in the dimer also tends

to produce an overly attractive 3-body interaction, while an FX whose 2-body exchange-

overlap repulsion is too weak produces a spurious 3-body repulsion. The suggestion is that

the accurate dimer binding energy given by PBE results from an overly weak exchange-

repulsion mimicking the missing dispersion, the indirect consequence being the erroneous

stability ordering in the hexamer due to the exaggerated 3-body repulsion. Conversely, the

excessive 2-body repulsion of BLYP, to which dispersion should be added, is linked to the

unduly attractive 3-body interaction noted above. The idea of an inverse correlation between

the 2-body and beyond-2-body errors of semi-local functionals is conﬁrmed by recent work

on a wide range of molecular trimers [184].

The extensive work on the hexamer teaches us several lessons. First, good accuracy for

the dimer (and other clusters smaller than the hexamer) is no guarantee of even qualitative

correctness for the relative stability of compact and extended conformations. Second, many-

body errors may be at least as important as 2-body errors, but the relative importance of the

two kinds of error depends strongly on the exchange-correlation functional. Third, dispersion

is crucial, and demands to be correctly described. Fourth, dispersion is not the only source

of errors, and there is evidence that the many-body errors are associated with exchange. We

shall see in the following how these lessons are reinforced by DFT work on larger clusters,

ice structures and the liquid.

VI. LARGER CLUSTERS

For many years, quantum-chemistry benchmark calculations were feasible only on rather

small clusters, with the hexamer representing the practical limit for basis-set converged

CCSD(T). However, technical innovations are now helping to extend the calculations to much

larger clusters without signiﬁcant loss of accuracy. In fact, well converged MP2 calculations

19

were possible on clusters of 20 - 30 monomers several years ago, but with the development of

linear-scaling methods, they can now be applied to even larger systems [185, 186]. Correc-

tions for the diﬀerence between CCSD(T) and MP2 can then be made using the many-body

expansion for this diﬀerence [187]. In addition, there is growing evidence that the accuracy

of quantum Monte Carlo methods [173, 174] rivals that of CCSD(T) for non-covalent inter-

actions [78, 101, 188–191], and the mild scaling of these methods with system size and their

high eﬃciency on parallel computers make it practical to compute benchmarks for water

systems containing 30 or more monomers [192, 193].

The availability of very accurate benchmark energies for large clusters opens the inter-

esting possibility of tracing out the development of DFT errors as a function of cluster size.

The notion here is that as we go to ever larger clusters the errors should come to resemble

ever more closely those seen in ice structures and the liquid. Furthermore, an analysis of the

errors into their 2-body and beyond-2-body components, similar to that discussed above for

the hexamer, allows us to deepen our understanding of the continuous connections between

these errors in clusters and in condensed phases.

These ideas have been explored [192] for thermal samples of water clusters containing up

to 27 monomers, the benchmark energies being computed with the DMC technique. The

sets of conﬁgurations for each water cluster were drawn from MD simulations performed

with a realistic force ﬁeld that treats the monomers as ﬂexible and polarizable. For large

enough clusters, these conﬁgurations should be roughly typical of those found in small water

droplets. The time-varying radius of a cluster of N monomers can be characterized by the

quantity Rgyr(t) deﬁned by:

Rgyr(t)2 =

1
N

N

Xi=1

|ri(t) − ¯r(t)|2 ,

(2)

where ri(t) is the position of the O atom of monomer i at time t, and ¯r(t) is the centroid

of these O positions. This “radius of gyration” Rgyr(t) ﬂuctuates in time as the cluster

spontaneously breathes in and out, exploring compact and extended conﬁgurations. We

saw in Sec. V that the errors of GGAs for the hexamer grow more positive as we pass

from extended to compact isomers, and one might expect a similar dependence on Rgyr for

thermal clusters.

This expectation is amply fulﬁlled for the GGAs examined so far, namely BLYP and PBE.

The analysis of the errors of these approximations has been reported [115, 192] for thermal

20

clusters containing N = 6, 9, 15 and 27 monomers, with the GAP techniques mentioned

above (Sec. III) used to correct almost exactly for 1- and 2-body errors. If only 1-body errors

are corrected (the resulting approximations are called BLYP-1 and PBE-1), it is found for

all the clusters that BLYP-1 has large positive errors, while PBE-1 has much smaller errors,

the errors in both cases growing more positive with decreasing Rgyr (see Fig. 5). After

correction for both 1- and 2-body errors (approximations BLYP-2 and PBE-2), BLYP-2

has negative errors showing a weak downward trend with decreasing Rgyr, while PBE-2 has

almost the same errors as PBE-1, trending upwards with decreasing Rgyr (Fig. 5). All these

trends are very much the same as for the isomers of the hexamer, though the magnitude of

the errors increases markedly with cluster size. Exactly as for the hexamers, the erroneous

destabilization of compact relative to extended conﬁgurations is mainly a 2-body eﬀect with

BLYP, but mainly a beyond-2-body eﬀect for PBE. We shall see exactly the same patterns

of erroneous energetics in the ice structures.

VII.

ICE STRUCTURES

Water ice exhibits a rich and complex phase diagram. Besides the hexagonal Ih structure,

familiar as the ice and snow found in colder regions of the Earth’s surface, and the closely re-

lated cubic ice Ic, there are 15 other experimentally known structures [194]. Ice Ih and some

of the other phases are “proton disordered”, meaning that the molecular orientations show a

degree of randomness, with a corresponding orientational entropy. However, at low temper-

atures the proton-disordered phases all undergo transitions to proton-ordered structures; for

example, ice Ih transforms to proton-ordered ice XI at ca. 72 K [195, 196]. Quite moderate

pressures of up to a few kbar are enough to stabilize a series of well characterized structures.

The energy diﬀerences between the structures are remarkably small, being considerably less

than “chemical accuracy” of 1 kcal/mol (43.4 meV). This means that ice energetics provides

an exquisitely delicate test of DFT methods. We will concentrate here mainly on the sub-

limation energies and equilibrium volumes predicted by DFT approximations, with some

comments also on proton order-disorder energetics and the relative energies of the Ih and Ic

phases. When we refer to a computed “sublimation energy” Esub here, we mean the energy

of an isolated, relaxed, static water monomer minus the energy per monomer of a relaxed,

static ice structure, with no account taken of zero-point vibrational energy. (A greater Esub

21

signiﬁes a more strongly bound ice structure.) When we compare a computed Esub with

experiment, a calculated or estimated value of the zero-point vibrational contribution must

ﬁrst be removed from the experimental value.

The performance of LDA and GGAs for the sublimation energy and equilibrium volume

of ice Ih was ﬁrst investigated by Hamann [64]. To deal with the proton-disorder, Hamann

followed Bernal and Fowler [6] in representing the structure approximately by a 12-molecule

repeating cell, a procedure that is known to incur only very small errors (see e.g.

ref.

[197]). His calculations showed that LDA overbinds ice Ih by ∼ 70 % and underestimates its

equilibrium volume by ∼ 20 %, these very large errors being expected from its poor treatment

of the water dimer. The GGAs studied by Hamann performed better, though substantial

over- or under-binding was found in some cases. More accurate DFT calculations on ice

Ih were reported later by Feibelman [65], who studied a rather broad set of GGAs, ﬁnding

that the predicted sublimation energies come in the order revPBE < RPBE < BLYP <

PBE < AM05 < PW91 < PBEsol < LDA. (We gave references for most of these functionals

earlier, but we note here the references for RPBE [198], AM05 [199] and PW91 [200, 201].)

Of the GGAs considered, PBE predicts a sublimation energy of ca. 640 meV/H2O, which

is only ca. 30 meV/H2O larger than the experimental value of 610 meV/H2O [202]. This

experimental value, which excludes zero-point contributions, was reported many years ago

by Whalley [202], but has since been corroborated by two kinds of high-level electronic

structure calculations. These consist of DMC calculations [78], which gave Esub = 605 ±

5 meV/H2O, and CCSD(T) calculations [183] implemented with an embedded many-body

expansion, which gave 601 meV/H2O. The substantial spread of Esub values found in the

GGA calculations of Feibelman has been conﬁrmed by other, more recent studies [203, 204],

as we show in Table IV, where we summarize the Esub values obtained from a range of

semi-local functionals. (The Table also reports dispersion-inclusive predictions, which will

be discussed later in this Section.)

The ordering of sublimation energies of ice Ih given by the GGAs in Table IV is reminis-

cent of the ordering of GGA dimer energies (Table I) and ring-hexamer energies (Table III).

To bring out the close relationship between these diﬀerent manifestations of H-bond energy

in water, we show in Fig. 6 plots of the GGA errors of the ice Ih sublimation energy and

the ring-hexamer binding energy vs the corresponding error in the binding energy of the

dimer in its global-minimum geometry. The close relationship between the three kinds of

22

error is immediately apparent, and the smoothness of the curves indicates that for GGAs

a knowledge of the error in the dimer energy suﬃces to predict the errors in the hexamer

and ice Ih energies. It is noteworthy that the plots in Fig. 6 pass almost exactly through

zero, something that would presumably not happen if GGA errors of polarizability caused

a serious mis-description of the cooperative enhancement of H-bonding (see also Sec. IV).

Hybrid approximations give more accurate polarizabilities than GGAs (Sec. II), so it is in-

teresting to compare hybrids with their parent GGAs for the sublimation energy of ice Ih.

Published information on this is very sparse, but we include in Fig. 6 the sublimation energy

from PBE0, which is smaller than from PBE by ca. 40 meV. This diﬀerence is certainly not

negligible but only a part of this appears to be due to errors of cooperative enhancement.

We turn now to the energetics of compressed ice structures. Experiment tells us that

as the pressure increases from atmospheric to ∼ 3 GPa, the most stable low-temperature

structures of ice pass through the series known for historical reasons as Ih, IX, II, XIII, XIV,

XV, VIII. Fortunately, only a few key features of these structures need concern us here.

The ﬁrst is that the H2O monomers retain their integrity in all the structures, though there

are small changes in the intramolecular geometries. A second feature is that the number of

H-bonds per monomer does not change, each monomer donating two H-bonds and accepting

two from four of its neighbors. Even the O-O distance in each H-bond changes only a little

through the series, the surprising fact being that it is slightly longer in the more compressed

structures. Nonetheless, the volume per monomer decreases strongly from Ih to VIII, the

volume in ice VIII being about two thirds that of ice Ih at zero pressure [202]. This dramatic

compression is entirely due to the ever closer approach of monomers that are not H-bonded

to each other as we progress through the series. The coordination number is four in ice Ih but

is eight in ice VIII, the O-O nearest-neighbor distance for the four non-H-bonded neighbors

in ice VIII being slightly shorter than for the four H-bonded neighbors. Remarkably, in spite

of the enormous compression, extrapolation of experimental data shows that the energies

per monomer in the Ih and VIII structures, when both are at zero pressure, diﬀer by a mere

33 meV. This very small experimental energy diﬀerence is corroborated by both DMC and

CCSD(T) calculations, which concur in predicting an energy diﬀerence between Ih and VIII

of ca. 30 meV/H2O [78, 183].

Semi-local XC functionals completely fail to reproduce the small energy diﬀerences be-

tween compressed ice structures and ice Ih, as can be seen from the calculated sublimation

23

energies of ice VIII at zero pressure summarized in Table IV. With PBE and BLYP, the

energy diﬀerences per monomer between zero-pressure ice VIII and Ih are calculated to be

177 and 208 meV respectively, which are ∼ 6 times the experimental value of 33 meV.

We show in Fig. 7 plots of the errors of selected functionals for the sublimation energies of

the sequence of increasingly compressed ice structures Ih, IX, II and VIII, reproduced from

Ref. [205]. The rapidly growing errors of PBE along the sequence are striking, and we note

that the hybrid functional PBE0 shows a very similar trend. Since PBE0 gives much bet-

ter polarizabilities than PBE, the large semi-local errors clearly cannot stem mainly from

errors of polarizability. The energies of compressed ice structures relative to ice Ih have

been computed with a very wide range of semi-local functionals in Refs. [203, 206]. The

functionals studied include the GGAs PW91, PBE, PBEsol, BLYP, RPBE and revPBE,

the hybrid functionals PBE0 and B3LYP, the range-separated hybrid HSE06 and the meta-

GGAs TPSS and M06L. In almost every case, the energy diﬀerence betwen ice Ih and VIII

was found to be grossly overestimated. This indicates that essentially all semi-local and

hybrid functionals suﬀer from the same kind of problem.

Why do semi-local and hybrid approximations incorrectly destabilize the compact, high-

pressure ice structures relative to the more extended low-pressure structures? There appears

to be a connection here with their behavior for the compact and extended conﬁgurations

of the hexamer (Sec. V) and the larger water clusters (Sec. VI). For the hexamer, we saw

the clear evidence that lack of dispersion is one of the main reasons for the wrong compact-

extended balance given by semi-local approximations, and we will see the same for the ice

structures. However, before reviewing dispersion-inclusive approximations for ice, we recall

the many-body evidence that dispersion is not the only cause of trouble for the compact-

extended balance in the hexamer. A similar many-body analysis has been reported for

the errors of BLYP and PBE for the relative energies of high- and low-pressure ice struc-

tures [183]. The outcome was that for BLYP the enormous overestimate of the energy

diﬀerence between VIII and Ih is mainly a 2-body error, and that good relative energies are

obtained once this error is corrected. However, the same is not true of PBE, where there

appears to be a large beyond-2-body contribution to the error in relative energies.

A variety of dispersion-inclusive DFT approaches have been used to study the energetics

of ambient and compressed ice phases, including Grimme DFT-D methods [203, 204, 206],

TS dispersion paired with PBE and PBE0 [78, 205], and DRSLL-type approximations [204,

24

205, 207–209]. Most of these have paid particular attention to the energy diﬀerences between

compressed structures and ice Ih, and in some cases have studied the equilibrium volumes

of the structures and the transition pressures between them. All the diﬀerent ways of

including dispersion give a large improvement in the relative energies of the extended and

compact structures. However, not all the methods are equally good, because in some cases

the improvement in the relative energies is accompanied by a worsening of the sublimation

energy of the ice Ih structure.

The range of results that can be given by diﬀerent dispersion-inclusive methods is illus-

trated by the work of Ref. [205], where the performance of diﬀerent versions of the TS and

DRSLL-type schemes was compared (see Fig. 7). The work showed that the original version

of DRSLL based on revPBE [135], referred to here as revPBE-DRSLL, gives very satisfac-

tory energies of the structures IX, II and VIII relative to ice Ih, but that all the structures

are underbound compared with experiment by ∼ 50 meV. This is expected, because the

excessive exchange-repulsion of revPBE-DRSLL generally gives underbinding in H-bonded

systems, as we saw for the water dimer and ring-hexamer in Secs. III and V. The optPBE-

DRSLL approximation has weaker exchange-repulsion, and performs better for H-bonding

energies, giving much better dimer and ring-hexamer energies. It also gives accurate energies

of the IX, II and VIII structures relative to Ih, but all these structures are now overbound.

However, the revised version of DRSLL due to Lee et al. [140], which we refer to as rPW86-

DF2, performs very well for both the relative energies and the sublimation energies of the

the ice structures, (Fig. 7), as was also found by Murray and Galli [209]. Not reported in

Fig. 7 but given in Table IV are results for optB88-DRSLL. As with optPBE-DRSLL, it

describes the energy diﬀerence between ice I and VIII well but overbinds both phases.

Predictions from the scheme of Tkatchenko and Scheﬄer [134] in which dispersion is added

to PBE or PBE0 provide an instructive contrast. Since ice Ih is already somewhat overbound

with PBE, it is no surprise that PBE-TS overbinds this structure by over 100 meV/monomer.

Nevertheless, PBE-TS gives a considerable improvement over PBE itself for the relative

energies, though it is not as good as any of the DRSLL-type methods. The PBE0-TS

approximation also overbinds ice Ih, but only by ∼ 60 meV, and the diﬀerence between the

energies of the VIII and Ih structures is also slightly better than with PBE-TS. Also included

in Fig. 7 are the predictions obtained by adding many-body dispersion [210] to PBE0. These

diﬀer only slightly from PBE0-TS, so that the eﬀects of beyond-2-body dispersion appear

25

to be very small for these ice structures, as might be expected from previous work on the

contribution of 3-body dispersion to the energetics of ice [182].

Insight into the performance of the DFT-D methods of Grimme et al. for the energetics

of ice structures can be gained from Refs. [203, 206], both of which demonstrate the major

improvements brought by the inclusion of dispersion. In the ﬁrst of these papers, the binding

energies of 10 ice structures were computed with Grimme D3 dispersion added to a variety

of semi-local functionals. These DFT-D3 approximations give reasonably good binding

energies of ice Ih, except for PBE-D3, which is overbound by an unacceptable ∼ 140 meV.

The PBE-D3 approximation also gives a greatly overestimated value of ∼ 130 meV for the

energy diﬀerence between the ice VIII and Ih structures, which is also overestimated by the

other DFT-D3 approximations, though less seriously.

Turning now to the equilibrium volumes, we report in Table V results for ice I and VIII

from a selection of GGAs, PBE0, and several dispersion inclusive functionals. By and large,

the trends found for sublimation energies are mirrored in the predictions of equilibrium

volumes. For example, at the GGA level the sublimation energies decrease from PBE to

BLYP to revPBE, while the equilibrium volumes show the opposite trend, with revPBE >

BLYP > PBE. The errors in the volumes for ice Ih predicted by GGAs are less than 4 %,

but they are much larger for ice VIII, in the range 9 - 28 %, as might be expected from the

substantial under-binding of ice VIII predicted by GGAs. It has been shown that in ice VIII

zero-point eﬀects increase the equilibrium volume by ca. 5 % [203, 205, 209], so in assessing

the errors in the predicted volumes we compare with the experimental volume reduced

by this amount. Zero-point corrections to the equilibrium volume are much smaller for

ice Ih [203, 205, 209], so for this phase we simply compare with the uncorrected experimental

value. As shown in Table V, accounting for exact exchange by going from PBE to PBE0

does little to reduce the errors in the volumes. By contrast, dispersion has a signiﬁcant

impact on the volumes, generally decreasing them, as one would expect. However, the

results are very sensitive to the particular choice of dispersion inclusive functional. Of the

functionals reported, BLYP-D3, revPBE-D3, optPBE-DRSLL do reasonably well for the

two phases, while revPBE-DRSLL stands out as oﬀering the worst performance (volume

of ice VIII overestimated by 20%). Despite performing very well in terms of sublimation

energies, the volumes predicted by rPW86-DF2 are rather disappointing. Overall, it is clear

that for predictions of equilibrium volumes in the ice phases there is still considerable room

26

for improvement.

We noted at the start of this Section that proton-disordered ice phases such as Ih trans-

form to proton-ordered structures at low temperatures. This is a subtle phenomenon in

both experiment and theory. The very slow kinetics of molecular reorientation at low tem-

peratures makes it diﬃcult to measure the true thermodynamic transition temperatures

accurately, and unambiguous identiﬁcation of the symmetry of the proton-ordered phase

has sometimes been controversial. Widely used force ﬁelds sometimes yield completely er-

roneous predictions for these transitions [211], so that there has been considerable interest

in DFT treatments [197, 212–219].

The transformation of ice Ih to a low-temperature ordered phase was conjectured over

60 years ago [220], but the experimental evidence for a transition near 72 K appeared only

more recently [195, 196]. Simple electrostatic arguments [211, 220, 221] suggest that the low-

temperature phase ice XI should be antiferroelectric, but this expectation is contradicted by

diﬀraction and thermal depolarization experiments [222, 223], which indicate that it is ac-

tually ferroelectric, though the interpretation of the experiments has been challenged [224].

DFT calculations based on the BLYP functional [213], in conjunction with graph-theoretic

methods used to enumerate H-bonding topologies [225, 226], support the ferroelectric assign-

ment. The parameterized models produced in the course of this computational approach,

when used in statistical-mechanical calculations, yield a transition temperature of 98 K [213]

in respectable agreement with the experimental value. It was shown later [214, 216, 217]

that this outcome is not signiﬁcantly altered if other XC functionals are used in place of

BLYP. Remarkably, even the unsophisticated LDA functional yields essentially the same

result [216]. It has been argued from this that the electrostatic part of the energy domi-

nates the energetics of proton ordering, as originally proposed by Bjerrum [220], and that

the inability of common force ﬁelds to describe the energetics correctly arises from their

failure to reproduce the high multipole moments of the charge distribution of the H2O

monomer [216, 217]. Another approach to the transformation between ice Ih and XI was

taken by Ref. [227]. There, MC sampling based on the dispersion-inclusive functionals PBE-

D2 and BLYP-D2, and also their hybrid counterparts PBE0-D2 and B3LYP-D2 was used

to compute the static dielectric constant ǫ and the ice Ih/XI transition temperature. It was

found that PBE0-D2 at T = 273 K gives ǫ roughly 20 % greater than the experimental value

of 95, while the value with PBE-D2 is roughly 50 % greater, so that the over-polarizability of

27

the H2O molecule with PBE (see Sec. II) is clearly signiﬁcant. The transition temperature

computed with PBE0-D2 in this work was in the range 70 − 80 K, in satisfactory agreement

with experiment.

Calculations combining DFT with graph-theoretic methods have also been successful in

treating the transformation of other proton-disordered phases to their low-temperature or-

dered counterparts, including ice VII to VIII [214, 216], XII to XIV [215] and V to XIII [228].

Where comparison with experiment is possible, the symmetries of the ordered phases are cor-

rectly predicted, and the transition temperatures are approximately correct. However, there

appears to be one exception, namely the transition from ice VI to XV, where experiment

shows the ordered phase to be antiferroelectric [229], while DFT calculations consistently

make the most stable structure ferroelectric [219, 230]. Hybrid and dispersion-inclusive

functionals give the same result, as do calculations based on MP2 and the random phase

approximation (RPA) [219], which are expected to be even more accurate. In discussion of

the possible origins of this paradox, it was suggested in Ref. [219] that the so-called “tin-

foil” boundary conditions implicitly used in conventional electronic-structure calculations

on periodic systems may not be appropriate for the ice VI-XV transition.

It was shown

that if instead the boundary conditions are allowed to reﬂect the electrostatic environment

in which ice XV grows, then the ferroelectric phase may be suﬃciently disfavored for the

antiferroelectric phase to become more stable. The experimental work of Ref. [231] appears

to oﬀer support for this idea.

Although hexagonal ice Ih is the naturally occurring form under ambient conditions, there

is evidence that the cubic variant known as ice Ic can form in the upper atmosphere [232, 233],

though it is not yet clear whether pure ice Ic or only a disordered mixture of ice Ic and Ih

is formed [234, 235]. In either case, the question of the energy diﬀerence between the two

forms of ice is of some importance for environmental science. Raza et al. [236] tackled

this question by performing DFT calculations on the lowest-energy proton-ordered forms of

the two crystal structures, using the XC functionals PBE, PBE0, BLYP-D3 and optPBE-

DRSLL; accurate reference calculations with DMC were also reported. The conclusion from

their work was that the two structures are isoenergetic within the technical tolerances of the

calculations, the indication being that the energy diﬀerence is less than 1 meV/monomer.

This conclusion is supported by later work from Geiger et al. [237]. It has been shown very

recently [238] that the clear preference for ice Ih over ice Ic observed in nature may be due

28

to the diﬀerence of anharmonic vibrational energy between the two phases.

We conclude this Section by commenting brieﬂy on the inﬂuence of isotope eﬀects on

the properties of ice.

In almost solids, the replacement of a heavier isotope by a lighter

one causes an expansion of the equilibrium volume. The reason is that expansion normally

reduces the vibrational frequencies and hence the zero-point energy, the reduction being

greater for lighter isotopes. It therefore comes as a surprise that the equilibrium volume of

the H2O form of ice Ih is less than the D2O form [239]. It was shown recently [240] that

this anomalous isotope eﬀect occurs because expansion of ice weakens the H-bonds, which in

turn strengthens the intramolecular O-H bonds, thus increasing their frequency. However,

the consequences of this increase are partially canceled by the softening of other vibrational

modes. Some of the common force-ﬁelds for water wrongly predict a normal isotope eﬀect,

but DFT calculations generally give the observed anomalous isotope eﬀect, at least with the

XC functionals examined so far. It has been noted recently [241] that the same mechanism

leads to an interesting isotope eﬀect on the temperature of the transition from ice Ih to XI.

VIII. DFT SIMULATION OF LIQUID WATER

Our review of DFT work on liquid water will be concerned with the structure of the

liquid, its thermodynamic properties, and the dynamics of the molecules. We shall pay

particular attention to the three radial distribution functions (rdfs) gαβ(r), the density ρeq

of the liquid at near-ambient pressure, and the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient D, all of which are

available from experiment. Some aspects of the DFT simulation of the liquid have recently

been reviewed by Khaliullin and K¨uhne [242].

As initial orientation, we refer to panel (a) of Fig. 8, showing the O-O rdf gOO(r) from

recent high-energy x-ray diﬀraction measurements [243] performed at temperatures close to

297 K. (The simulation results shown in the Figure will be discussed later.) It is worth

commenting here that there have been many experimental measurements of gOO(r) over

the years (see literature cited in Ref. [243]), and there has been considerable controversy

about the height of the ﬁrst peak, but the measurements we compare with here are generally
accepted to supersede earlier work. The ﬁrst peak at O-O separation ROO = 2.80 ˚A and the
second peak at ROO = 4.5 ˚A correspond rather closely to the ﬁrst- and second-neighbor O-O

distances in ice Ih. The ﬁrst-neighbor coordination number N1 in the liquid is not uniquely

deﬁned, but is conventionally taken to be the integral N1 = 4πnR rmin
the ﬁrst peak (n is the bulk number density) up to the radius rmin

0

29

dr r2gOO(r) under

OO of the ﬁrst minimum.

The diﬀraction experiments all give a coordination number N1 in the region of 4.3, which is

consistent with roughly fourfold tetrahedral bonding. However, there is clearly considerable

disorder, since the experimental gOO(r) is quite close to unity over the range 3.0 < ROO <
4.0 ˚A, throughout which there are no neighbors in ice Ih; all diﬀraction measurements agree

that the value of gOO(r) at its ﬁrst minimum is gmin

OO = 0.84 ± 0.02. This means that there
is substantial penetration of molecules from the second shell into the shell of H-bonded ﬁrst

neighbors.

The phenomenon of cross-shell penetration is crucially important in liquid water, and is

closely linked to the density increase on melting. The amount of penetration is sensitive

to pressure, and diﬀraction experiments [244–246] show that a pressure of only ∼ 1 GPa

(10 kbar) is enough to increase the O-O coordination number from ca. 4 to ca. 8, an eﬀect

that occurs by collapse of the second shell into the region of the ﬁrst shell, without signiﬁcant

breaking of H-bonds [244]. This implies that the penetration in the liquid is closely related

to changes of ice structure with increase of pressure, exempliﬁed by the presence of non-

H-bonded ﬁrst neighbors at approximately the same distance as the H-bonded neighbors

in ice VIII. Cross-shell penetration also appears to be intimately linked to diﬀusion, which
requires molecules to cross the region 3.0 < ROO < 4.0 ˚A; since the lifetime of H-bonds

under ambient conditions is estimated to be in the region of 1 ps [247, 248], this crossing

must be frequent.

We saw in Sec. VII that GGAs grossly exaggerate the energy diﬀerence betwen the

extended ice Ih structure and compact structures such as ice VIII. They make it too diﬃcult

for a molecule to approach another molecule that is already H-bonded to four others, and the

problem is cured by accounting for dispersion. We can anticipate that the same mechanisms

will operate in the liquid, so that GGAs will generally hinder penetration, making the

liquid over-structured and under-diﬀusive, with a high pressure needed to maintain the

experimental density. Accordingly, a leading theme of our survey of DFT work on the

liquid will be the concerted eﬀorts of the past few years to address the diﬃculties of liquid

structure, thermodynamics and dynamics with dispersion-inclusive methods. We shall see

that these eﬀorts have enjoyed considerable success, but it will also become apparent that

current dispersion-inclusive methods are still immature, and that over-correction can be as

much of a peril as under-correction. We shall also see that purely technical issues have

sometimes made it diﬃcult to judge the true capabilities of any given DFT method.

30

A. Technical issues

It is not trivial to assess how well an XC functional performs for the liquid, because the

ﬁrst-principles simulation of the liquid raises many tricky technical issues that are completely

absent from the study of clusters or static ice structures. Thermodynamic, structural and

dynamical quantities such as the pressure P , the radial distribution functions gαβ(r) and

the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient D are all calculated as time averages over the duration of the

simulation, which must be long enough to yield useful statistical accuracy. Furthermore,

collection of the data to be averaged can only begin after the system has been ‘equilibrated’,

i.e. simulated for long enough to ensure that memory of the initial conditions has been

lost. The problems of equilibration and time averaging are exacerbated in water by the wide

separation of timescales between intramolecular and intermolecular motions, which hinders

energy transfer between these degrees of freedom. Memory times can be reduced by the use

of thermostats, but dynamical quantities may then be falsiﬁed. In MD simulations of water

based on force ﬁelds, the equilibration and production phases commonly have durations of

100 ps or more (see e.g. Refs. [27, 249, 250]), but such durations have been impractical

in DFT simulations until recently [242, 251]. (In the earliest ﬁrst-principles simulations of

water [1–3, 5, 16], these durations were between 2 and 10 ps.)

First-principles simulations can be performed by Born-Oppenheimer MD (BOMD), in

which the Kohn-Sham orbitals are relaxed to the self-consistent ground state at every time

step, or by Car-Parrinello MD (CPMD), in which the orbitals are treated as dynamical de-

grees of freedom, their dynamics being governed by a ﬁctitious mass µ. The method known

as second-generation CPMD [251–253] combines the strengths of these two techniques. In

addition, ﬁrst-principles Monte Carlo simulation is also feasible [73]. If rigorously imple-

mented, all these techniques should be equivalent, but practical compromises in the setting

of technical parameters can cause diﬀerences. It took several years to discover that the close

agreement with experiment reported in some early papers [5, 16, 254] was partly due to

simulation errors caused by µ being set too high [68–74]. Signiﬁcant discrepancies may also

arise from the use of diﬀerent statistical-mechanical ensembles, which are expected to yield

31

identical results in the thermodynamic limit, but not in ﬁnite systems. Inadequate basis sets

too can be a source of inaccuracy. System-size errors present yet another hazard: ideally,

the size of the periodically repeated simulation cell should be systematically increased at

constant density until the observables of interest settle to converged values, but in practice

the cell size is constrained by the computer budget.

These and other technical diﬃculties plagued much of the pioneering DFT work on water,

but the problems started to be clearly identiﬁed and addressed around 10 years ago [68–

73] and it is now understood in principle how to bring most of them under ﬁrm control.

The conditions necessary for adequate equilibration, statistical averaging and thermostat-

ing were analyzed in Ref. [74]. The equivalence of Car-Parrinello and Born-Oppenheimer

dynamics and the range of ﬁctitious mass needed to ensure this equivalence were estab-

lished in Refs. [70, 255]. System-size errors have turned out to be only a minor concern for

many thermodynamic and structural quantities, provided systems of 64 molecules or more

are used [74, 251], although substantial (but well understood) size corrections are needed

for the diﬀusivity [251].

Increasing computer power has made it much less necessary to

compromise on basis-set completeness. Nevertheless, technical uncertainties continue to be

troublesome even now, as will become clear below.

B. Quantum nuclear eﬀects

In addition to the technical issues just outlined, there is also the physical phenomenon of

quantum nuclear eﬀects (QNE). Almost all ﬁrst-principles simulations of water have treated

the nuclei classically, but it is well known from diﬀraction experiments [256] and force-

ﬁeld simulations [27, 250] that QNE due to the light mass of hydrogen are not negligible.

Path-integral simulation [257–260] allows QNE to be included almost exactly, at least for

thermodyamics and structure, but the computational cost then escalates still further. (We

note, however, that recent algorithmic developments [261] mitigate the additional cost.) If

QNE are not included in simulations of the liquid, then perfect agreement with experimental

data cannot be expected, but it is not straightforward to separate errors due to neglect of

QNE from those due to inaccuracy of the XC functional. We will note the possible inﬂuence

of QNE where appropriate in the following, but we do not aim to treat this important

matter in depth in this review, since QNE in water have recently been reviewed by Ceriotti

et al. [262].

32

C. GGAs and hybrids

We start our survey of DFT methods for liquid water by focusing on GGAs, and since

BLYP and PBE have been the most widely used GGAs we discuss these ﬁrst. After this,

we summarize the rather few simulations that have been performed with other GGAs and

with hybrid functionals. Most simulations have been performed at constant volume, cor-

responding to an experimental density close to 1 g/cm3, and these conditions apply unless

we mention otherwise. A summary of the main features of the simulations reviewed here is

provided in Tables VI and VII.

Well over 20 substantial simulations of the near-ambient liquid have been reported with

the BLYP functional since the resolution of the technical diﬃculties mentioned above (refer-

ences in Table VI). Most of these simulations appear to be free of major technical limitations,

and there is now a reasonable consensus about the properties predicted by BLYP. Compar-

ison of the O-O rdf gOO(r) with neutron and x-ray diﬀraction data is generally regarded

as the cleanest way of testing the liquid structure, since this rdf is much less aﬀected by

QNE than gOH(r) and gHH(r) [27, 250]. An example of the comparison between BLYP and

experiment is shown in panel (a) of Fig. 8. As in most BLYP-based simulations published

over the past 10 years, the liquid is somewhat over-structured, the height of the ﬁrst peak

and the depth of the ﬁrst minimum being somewhat exaggerated, but the radial positions of

all the main features agree well with experiment (see Table VI). Many of the BLYP-based

simulations have reported values of the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient D, for which accurate exper-

imental values are available over a range of temperatures for both light and heavy water. As

might be expected from the over-structuring, the values of D given by BLYP (see Table VI)

are lower than the experimental values, usually by a factor of ∼ 3.

Some BLYP-based studies have also reported the O-H and H-H rdfs gOH(r) and gHH(r).
The O-H rdf is instructive, because its peak at r ≃ 1.75 ˚A directly probes the H-bond

between the donor H and the acceptor O. All the BLYP-based simulations that reported

gOH(r) (see e.g. Refs. [69, 149, 248, 258, 263]) found the height of this H-bond peak to be

overestimated by ∼ 30 %. Both force-ﬁeld and DFT-based simulations that have accounted

for QNE by the path-integral technique [27, 258] suggest that the quantum nature of the

33

proton might explain as much as half of this overstructuring. However, there is little doubt

that the other half is due to errors of the BLYP functional. The overstructuring also aﬀects

gHH(r) [69, 149, 258, 263].

The disagreements with experiment are more severe with the PBE functional. All the

PBE-based simulations reported over the past 10 years (references in Table VII) give a sub-

stantially over-structured liquid, the height of the ﬁrst peak and the ﬁrst minimum in gOO(r)

being typically gmax

OO ≃ 3.4 and gmin

OO ≃ 0.4 respectively, compared with the experimental val-

ues of 2.57 and 0.84 (Fig. 8 and Table VII). The very deep ﬁrst minimum is particularly

signiﬁcant, since it indicates a strong suppression of close approaches by non-H-bonded

monomers. The overstructuring is even more striking in gOH(r) and gHH(r) [70, 264], with
the height of the H-bond peak in gOH(r) at r ≃ 1.75 ˚A being overestimated by ∼ 50 % and

similarly large errors in gHH(r) (see Fig. 8). Correspondingly, the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient

is grossly underestimated, being too low compared with experiment by about a factor of

10. The only other GGAs that have seen more than occasional use in water simulations are

revPBE and the closely related RPBE (references in Table VII). Almost all the simulations

reported with these functionals agree that they yield a liquid with much less structure (see

Fig. 8) and a higher diﬀusivity than BLYP and PBE (but see Ref. [251]).

The foregoing comparisons show that the structure and diﬀusivity of the liquid diﬀer

substantially for diﬀerent GGAs. It would be surprising if this were not so, since we saw

in Secs. III, V and VII that the H-bond energy depends strongly on the choice of GGA,

and Fig. 6 demonstrates the close relationship between the errors in GGA binding energies

of clusters and ice. The properties of the liquid at speciﬁed density and temperature pre-

sumably depend on the H-bond energy, and it is natural to ask if the trends in predicted

structure and diﬀusivity correspond in some way to the trends illustrated in Fig. 6. The

paper of Mattsson and Mattsson [265] appears to be the only one that has systematically

addressed this important question, and we reproduce in Fig. 9 their O-O rdfs computed at

T = 300 K with the series of semi-local functionals RPBE, BLYP, PBE, AM05, PBEsol,

LDA. The functionals that yield highly overstructured water are likely to give a glassy state

at 300 K, but the trend of increasing structural ordering along this series is nonetheless

clear, as is the steady leftward shift of the ﬁrst-peak position rmax

OO . The order of this trend is

also the order of increasing dimer binding energy (see Table I), with the possible exception

of the AM05 approximation, which appears to give a slightly lower dimer binding energy

34

than PBE [265]. We return later to the close correlation between structural ordering in the

liquid and H-bond energy.

As noted in Secs. II and IV, GGAs generally overestimate the polarizability of the water

molecule by ∼ 10 %, so that they might be expected to exaggerate the cooperative enhance-

ment of H-bonding in condensed phases. Furthermore, they underestimate the stretching

frequencies of the water monomer by 3 − 5 %, and the excessive ﬂexibility of the intramolec-

ular OH bonds may further strengthen H-bonding. These are reasons for expecting hybrids

to soften the structure of the liquid, since they give better polarizabilities and monomer

frequencies. The evidence on this point is not entirely unanimous. The early simulations of

Todorova et al. [266], performed at T = 350 K, showed a substantial softening when the PBE

functional is replaced by PBE0, with gmax

OO increasing
from 0.47 to 0.73. Subsequent work of Zhang et al. [100, 112] and DiStasio et al. [267] also

OO decreasing from 2.99 to 2.58 and gmin

found that PBE0 produces a softer structure than PBE, but the softening found in the latter

work is fairly weak, with gmax

OO increasing from 0.38 to
0.52. Simulations reported by Guidon et al. [268, 269] found very little change in structure

OO decreasing from 3.22 to 2.98 and gmin

from PBE to PBE0 even when the fraction of exact exchange in PBE0 is increased from its

normal value of 25 % all the way to 100 %. However, there is very recent evidence [270] that

basis-set errors in the ADM (Auxiliary Density Matrix) technique employed in Ref. [269]

may have had the eﬀect of slightly hardening the structure, so that the small softening due

to exact exchange was perhaps masked.

All the comparisons we have presented so far for GGA and hybrid functionals have

been for ﬁxed densities very close to the experimental value. However, a major failing

of GGAs is that they give very inaccurate pressure-volume relations for the liquid. One

manifestation of this is that if simulations are performed at zero pressure, for example by

working with the (NP T ) ensemble, then the average density ρeq deviates markedly from

the experimental value. Equivalently, in simulations at ﬁxed volume, the average pressure

is poorly predicted. Since pressure is routinely calculated (though not always reported) in

constant-volume simulations, these errors are straightforward to detect.

The simulations of Kuo et al. [271], in which BLYP-based simulations were used to study

the density proﬁle in a water slab with free surfaces, suggested that BLYP underestimates

ρeq by ∼ 15 %, giving a value of ∼ 0.85 g/cm3. An underestimate of this order was

conﬁrmed soon afterwards by simulations performed in the (N, P, T ) ensemble using MC

35

sampling [272], which also employed the BLYP functional. These indicated an equilibrium

density at T = 298 K of ca. 0.80 g/cm3. This substantial underestimate has since been

conﬁrmed by many studies [149, 192, 273–277], though the numerical values have been sur-

prisingly variable, with ρeq ranging from 0.74 g/cm3 [273] to 0.92 g/cm3 [275, 276]. Related

work has shown that revPBE gives even lower densities [144, 276], with ρeq ranging from

0.69 to 0.85 g/cm3. PBE also underestimates the density [144, 273, 276, 278–280], but more

modestly, with ρeq varying from 0.86 to 0.96 g/cm3 in diﬀerent studies. One of the few DFT

studies of the moderately compressed liquid is that of Ref. [115], which reported BLYP and

PBE simulations at a density of 1.245 g/cm3, and T = 420 K, where the experimental pres-

sure is 15 kbar. As would be expected from the predictions of these GGAs near ambient

conditions, BLYP was found to give a greatly overestimated pressure of 32 kbar, while the

PBE value of 24 kbar was less in error. Values of the equilibrium density from GGA simula-

tions are summarized in Tables VI and VII, and we note that all studies that compare values

of ρeq predicted by diﬀerent functionals agree that the estimated densities come in the order

revPBE < BLYP < PBE < expt. This trend is consistent with the natural supposition that

ρeq computed with GGAs will tend to increase with increasing H-bond energy.

The large body of work based on semi-local and hybrid functionals thus indicates that

increasing the H-bond energy enhances the ordering of the liquid and reduces the diﬀusivity,

and also (slightly more tentatively) increases the equilibrium density. However, functionals

that give a more realistic degree of ordering and diﬀusivity also severely underestimate the

equilibrium density. This comes as no surprise, since the work on clusters and ice structures

taught us that to get both good H-bond energies and a correct extended-compact balance,

dispersion is needed.

D. Dispersion-inclusive approximations

With these ideas in mind, we now turn to simulations of the liquid performed with

dispersion-inclusive DFT approximations, which have been reported using various represen-

tations of dispersion added to a number of diﬀerent GGAs and hybrids. The main features of

the simulations reviewed here are summarized in Tables VIII and IX. We start by discussing

the very popular approach in which correction potentials are added to the BLYP func-

tional [143, 248, 273–277, 281–283]. As noted in the Sections on clusters and ice structures

36

and in the Appendix, there are a number of methods of this type, including the diﬀerent

versions of BLYP-D due to the Grimme group [131–133], and DCACP-corrected BLYP as

developed by Rothlisberger and co-workers [138]. It is convenient to include here simulations

based on BLYP+GAP [149, 192], which corrects almost exactly for the 1- and 2-body errors

of BLYP and therefore accounts for dispersion, which is expected to be mainly a 2-body

interaction in water systems [182]. We already know that all these methods give a much

better description of clusters and ice structures than BLYP itself, so there is good reason to

hope for improvements in the liquid as well.

Almost all the simulations based on corrected BLYP agree that the addition of dispersion

substantially increases the equilibrium density ρeq, softens the liquid structure, and increases

the diﬀusivity. Since uncorrected BLYP considerably underestimates ρeq, somewhat over-

structures the liquid, and suppresses diﬀusion, this means that the changes brought by

dispersion are all in the right direction. The large diﬀerences in the liquid properties given

by diﬀerent simulations based on uncorrected BLYP (see above) carry over to dispersion-

corrected BLYP, as can be seen in Table VIII. Focusing on the areas of agreement ﬁrst,

we note from the Table that all the correction methods increase ρeq by between 0.10 and

0.25 g/cm3 [192, 273–277]. Taken together, the calculations suggest that with dispersion-

corrected BLYP ρeq is slightly overestimated, perhaps by ∼ 5 %. This is not unexpected,

since we saw that BLYP corrected for 1- and 2-body errors using GAP overbinds both water

clusters and ice structures, and tends to compress both. The liquid structure is softened in

similar ways by the diﬀerent forms of dispersion-corrected BLYP, the value of gmax

OO being

lowered by ∼ 0.30 and the value of gmin

OO being raised by ∼ 0.20. Perhaps most important

is that most of the simulations give gmin

experimental value of 0.84 and is very much better than the value of gmin

OO ≃ 0.78, which is close to the well established
OO ≃ 0.60 given

by uncorrected BLYP. An example of the softening eﬀect of adding dispersion to BLYP is

shown in Fig. 10. (We include in this Figure gOO(r) obtained from the recent high-energy

x-ray data of Ref. [243], which is expected to be more accurate than earlier experimental

measurements of gOO(r).) As expected from the structural softening, all the simulations

agree that correcting BLYP for dispersion increases the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D by a factor

of 2 − 3, thus bringing it into fair agreement with experiment (correction for system-size

errors is essential in making this comparison, as emphasized above). The general consensus

is that BLYP corrected for dispersion, whether in the form of BLYP-D, BLYP-DCACP or

37

BLYP+GAP is a considerable improvement over BLYP itself, as might be hoped from the

reasonable performance of these approximations for clusters and ice structures.

Two caveats should be noted, however. First, the BLYP-D2 simulation of Ma et al. [275],

which gave a high ρeq of 1.07 g/cm3, predicted a signiﬁcant under-structuring of the liquid.

The authors of Ref. [275] stress that their simulations are performed very close to the CBS

limit, and they suggest that the basis sets used to generate Grimme’s D2 representation of

dispersion may not have been large enough to guarantee compatibility with their own basis

sets. This suggestion appears to deserve further investigation. Second, dispersion-corrected

BLYP cannot be regarded as fully satisfactory, since we know that it suﬀers from beyond-2-

body over-binding, which is presumably the reason why its value of ρeq is too high by a few

percent in most of the simulations.

The PBE approximation has rivalled BLYP in popularity as a starting point for adding

dispersion, with a wide variety of techniques used to represent the dispersion. Simu-

lations of liquid water have been published using the representations of dispersion due

to Grimme [264, 273, 277, 280] and Tkatchenko-Scheﬄer [267], as well as the DCACP

method [276]. Furthermore, several simulations have been reported in which the non-

local correlation functional pioneered by Lundqvist, Langreth and co-workers is paired with

PBE [100, 112, 144]. We also refer here to a simulation of the compressed liquid based

on GAP-corrected PBE [115]. As expected, the addition of dispersion to PBE generally

increases ρeq, though this leads to an overestimate by ∼ 13 % in the case of PBE-DRSLL

(see Table VIII). Interestingly, the almost exact GAP correction for 1- and 2-body errors

gives very little change of pressure in the compressed liquid at density 1.245 g/cm3 [115], so

that the error in the pressure given by PBE appears to be mainly a beyond-2-body eﬀect.

With PBE as the starting approximation, the eﬀect of dispersion on the liquid structure

depends strongly on the method used to represent dispersion. The simulations based on

Grimme PBE-D [248, 264, 273, 277, 280] all show that the addition of dispersion does not

cure the marked over-structuring given by PBE itself.

In these simulations, the values

of gmax

OO and gmin

OO are 3.2 - 3.4 and 0.4 - 0.5 respectively, compared with the experimental

values 2.57 and 0.84 (see Table VIII), as we illustrate for the case of PBE-D3 in Fig. 10.

The same lack of structural softening was found with PBE-DCACP [276], but the PBE-

TS approximation appears to produce a modest softening [267], the dispersion-corrected

values of gmax

OO and gmin

OO being 2.99 and 0.54. However, with DRSLL the softening is much

38

stronger [100, 112, 144, 248, 278], the corrected values of gmax

OO being typically ∼ 2.6
and ∼ 0.8 (see Fig. 10). Such large diﬀerences between the PBE-based methods seem less

OO and gmin

surprising if one recalls (Sec. III) the strong overbinding produced by PBE-DRSLL in the
range of O-O distances 3.0 − 4.0 ˚A compared with PBE-D3 and PBE-TS. We note also

our earlier comments about the wisdom of adding 2-body dispersion to PBE, given that

PBE already slightly overbinds ice Ih and is known to suﬀer from signiﬁcant beyond-2-body

errors. We return to this question later.

We know from our discussion of ice energetics that the success of the Lundqvist-Langreth

approach depends very much on the underlying exchange functional with which dispersion

is coupled.

In addition to the PBE-DRSLL work just discussed, there have been several

other simulations of the liquid in which DRSLL-type representations of dispersion are used

in conjunction with diﬀerent GGAs. The original version of DRSLL [135] was based on

the revPBE approximation, and simulations employing this version, referred to here as

revPBE-DRSLL, have been reported by Wang et al. [144]. We recall that uncorrected

revPBE and RPBE are the only GGAs discussed earlier that do not suﬀer from signiﬁcant

overstructuring, their O-O rdfs at a density of 1.00 g/cm3 being in fair agreement with

experiment, though revPBE gives an unacceptably high pressure at this density. According

to the simulations [144], the use of DRSLL dispersion in conjunction with revPBE corrects

the large error in pressure, but seriously worsens the liquid structure. In particular, revPBE-

DRSLL produces a completely spurious peak in gOO(r) in the region where the ﬁrst minimum

should be. The poor performance of this functional is not unexpected, since we know that

it binds the water dimer and ice Ih structure much too weakly. We have also found [284]

that the 2-body energy given by revPBE-DRSLL is signiﬁcantly overbound in the important
region 3.0 < ROO < 4.0 ˚A, and this presumably worsens the liquid structure still further.

The eﬀect of adding Grimme D2 or D3 dispersion to revPBE has been studied by Lin et

al. [276] and Bankura et al. [248], who both found moderate agreement with experiment

(see Fig. 10). Strangely, revPBE-DCACP appears to be somewhat more structured than

revPBE [276], though the authors caution that the DCACP parameters may be unphysical

in the case of revPBE [276].

The known underbinding of revPBE-DRSLL and overbinding of PBE-DRSLL make it

interesting to investigate versions of DRSLL that give better H-bond energies, examples

of which are the optB88-DRSLL and optPBE-DRSLL functionals proposed by Klimeˇs et

39

al. [136], and the rPW86-DF2 approximation [140]. Simulations of the liquid based on

optB88-DRSLL and rPW86-DF2 have been described by Zhang et al. [112], who found

that the former gave a gOO(r) in rather close agreement with experiment, while the latter

produced a somewhat understructured liquid. The rPW86-DF2 approximation was also

employed by Møgelhøj et al. [285], who found a more severe understructuring, with the

second shell of gOO(r) almost completely washed out. The same authors also performed

simulations based on optPBE-DRSLL, which also gave a seriously understructured liquid,

with gOO(r) in poor agreement with experiment. It should be noted that the simulations

of Møgelhøj et al. [285] may not give a true indication of the performance of rPW86-DF2

and optPBE-DRSLL for the liquid, since they were performed with the intramolecular O-

H bond length held ﬁxed at a value close to the gas-phase value. It is known that ﬁxing

the O-H distance in this way can substantially soften the liquid structure and increase the

diﬀusivity [286, 287]. On the other hand, the simulations of Zhang et al. were performed on

systems of only 32 monomers, which may have the eﬀect of hardening the liquid structure,

according to Ref. [251]. More recently, simulations employing optB88-DRSLL with a 64-

molecule cell, reported by Bankura et al. [248], conﬁrm that this functional gives a gOO(r)

in quite close agreement with experiment (Fig. 10).

It has been argued in recent papers [267, 277, 280] that the most accurate XC functionals

for water will need to include both dispersion and a fraction of exact exchange. We noted

above the evidence that the over-structuring of the liquid predicted by PBE is reduced both

by adding the TS form of dispersion and by replacing PBE by the hybrid functional PBE0,

and DiStasio et al. [267] have shown that PBE0-TS produces an O-O rdf that agrees fairly

closely with diﬀraction data, if allowance is made for QNE. However, one should bear in

mind the deﬁciencies of PBE0-TS for ice energetics, and particularly its overbinding of ice Ih

and its substantial overestimate of the energy diﬀerence between ice VIII and ice Ih. There

is evidence that PBE0-D3 gives a satisfactory equilibrium density of the liquid [277, 280].

Several things are clear from our survey of DFT simulations of the liquid. First, no GGA

can simultaneously describe its structure, dynamics and thermodynamics; second, a fraction

of exact exchange appears to help, but does not solve the essential problem; third, there

are promising signs that a fully satisfactory description may be achievable by dispersion-

inclusive DFT, if the large inconsistencies between diﬀerent approaches can be understood

and resolved. In the following Section, we try to draw together the main lessons that can

be learnt from DFT work on all the water systems discussed in this review. In the light of

those lessons, we will then oﬀer a more detailed interpretation of DFT approximations for

the liquid in Sec. IX C.

40

IX. DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK

A. Overview

The extensive DFT work on water systems reviewed here contains a wealth of information

about the strengths and weaknesses of a wide variety of XC approximations. Encouragingly,

there are now dispersion-inclusive methods among them that describe fairly accurately the

properties of water clusters, ice structures and the liquid. One of our aims here has been

to aid further progress by elucidating the main reasons why some approximations are more

successful than others. We have approached our task by attempting to analyze the perfor-

mance of XC functionals in describing the main components of the energy, namely ﬁrst-order

electrostatics, polarization (induction), dispersion, and weak covalency (charge transfer), all

acting in concert with exchange-overlap interactions. In addition, we have noted that the

energetics of intra-molecular deformation can be important. We try to summarize here what

we have learnt.

B. Components of the energy

Since ﬁrst-order electrostatics depends only on the charge distributions of unperturbed

molecules, it is accurately reproduced by a functional that describes the monomer correctly.

Likewise, the polarizability part of the energy is correct if the functional describes the

response of the monomer to appropriate electric ﬁelds. We saw in Sec. II that GGAs generally

describe the dipole and quadrupole moments of the monomer quite well. However, they

somewhat overestimate polarizabilities, the predicted dipolar polarizability being typically

10 % too large. Hybrid functionals such as PBE0 and B3LYP give much more accurate

polarizabilities. As noted in Sec. IV, the GGA errors of polarizability would be expected

to exaggerate the cooperative enhancement of H-bond energies, which should be better

described by hybrids, and this is indeed the case for small clusters. In line with this, we

saw in Sec. VII that the PBE binding energy of ice Ih is stronger than the PBE0 binding

41

by nearly 40 meV/monomer, which is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence. We comment below on the

eﬀect of GGA polarizability errors in the liquid. We saw in Sec. II that the intramolecular

vibrational frequencies provide an important measure of the deformability of the monomer

from its gas-phase geometry. The O-H stretch frequencies are appreciably underestimated

by GGAs, so that the monomer is too easily deformable, but hybrid functionals are more

accurate. The eﬀect of deformability errors on the liquid will be noted later.

We now turn to dispersion, which has been the focus of much of the more recent work

reviewed here. We have shown that semi-local functionals are generally incapable of ac-

counting for the energy balance between extended and compact structures of water systems.

They incorrectly favor the ring and book isomers of the hexamer over the prism and cage

(Sec. V), and they grossly exaggerate the energy diﬀerences between compressed ice struc-

tures such ice VIII and the ambient Ih structure (Sec. VII). We have reviewed work based

on a variety of dispersion-inclusive approaches, including those based on true non-local

functionals [135–137, 140], those that add heuristic dispersion potentials to chosen semi-

local functionals [131–134], and those employing parameterized electron-ion potentials to

mimic dispersion eﬀects [138]. Our survey has shown that all these approaches achieve

greatly improved energy diﬀerences between extended and compact structures in clusters

and ice structures. The crucial role of dispersion is thus beyond doubt. However, not all

the dispersion-inclusive methods are equally good, because some of them achieve their im-

provements at the expense of worse H-bond energies in the dimer, the ring-hexamer and ice

Ih. These problems are connected with the description of exchange-overlap interactions. We

have also seen (Sec. III) that there can be substantial diﬀerences in the distance dependence

of the 2-body energy predicted by diﬀerent dispersion-inclusive methods, even when these

are based on exactly the same semi-local functional.

We have shown that H-bond energies predicted by GGAs and hybrids in the dimer, the

ring hexamer and ice Ih vary over a wide range, their strength being underestimated by

∼ 25 % by revPBE and overestimated by ∼ 30 % by PBEsol.

(LDA overestimates by

∼ 80 %.) We noted that this wide variation is mainly due to the very diﬀerent behavior

of the exchange-enhancement factor at large reduced density gradient, and we recalled that

this mechanism was ﬁrst recognized many years ago as a general eﬀect for dimers of closed-

shell atoms and molecules. Some approximations such as PBE give an attractive interaction

between closed-shell systems that mimics dispersion, but is in fact a mis-description of the

42

exchange-overlap interaction. More strongly repulsive GGAs such as BLYP give no such

attraction. This means that in order to reproduce the H-bond energy while also obtaining

the correct extended-compact balance, dispersion should be added to a semi-local functional

whose overlap interaction is given by an appropriately designed exchange-enhancement fac-

tor. This idea underlies the design of improved versions of the dispersion-inclusive func-

tionals [136, 140] based on the approach of Dion et al. [135], and the general importance of

the choice of semi-local functional in constructing dispersion-inclusive approximations has

been stressed by a number of authors [140, 144, 181, 288]. An interesting example of this is

that the good accuracy of the PBE approximation for the H-bond energies of the dimer, the

ring hexamer and ice Ih is due to its spurious exchange attraction mimicking the missing

dispersion.

If dispersion could be mimicked by spurious exchange attraction without other errors,

the failure of PBE to describe the extended-compact energy balance would be paradoxical.

However, we saw in our discussion of the hexamer, the larger thermal clusters and the

ice structures that the paradox is resolved by many-body errors. Exchange-enhancement

factors that create a spurious 2-body exchange attraction also give a spurious beyond-2-body

repulsion, and this explains why PBE incorrectly destabilizes the prism and cage isomers

of the hexamer; the same mechanism contributes to its destabilization of compressed ice

structures. The same beyond-2-body errors are seen in the large thermal clusters (Sec. VI).

By contrast, the BLYP approximation exaggerates 2-body exchange repulsion and beyond-

2-body exchange attraction, so that correction for its 2-body errors gives a moderate degree

of overbinding, as we saw for the ice structures. The implication is that to obtain both

correct binding energies of extended structures and correct relative energies of compact and

extended structures, it is essential to use functionals that give both correct dispersion and

correct exchange-overlap interactions. This is the message that emerges from the work on

clusters and ice structures.

The ﬁnal energy component needing comment is weak covalency, sometimes referred to

as “charge transfer” or “delocalization” energy. We noted in the Introduction that the

contribution of this mechanism to H-bonding in water systems has been much debated. It

has been claimed [23] that Compton scattering can be used to characterize the strength

of partial covalency in ice Ih, but subsequent analysis [80, 81] suggests that this is not

the case. However, later experimental work based on photoelectron and x-ray absorption

43

spectroscopy [24] has been interpreted to indicate that electron transfer between monomers

plays a signiﬁcant part in determining charge redistribution in ice, and by implication in

liquid water. It seems clear that quantitative statements about partial covalency depend

signiﬁcantly on the deﬁnition adopted. However, whatever deﬁnition is used, it appears to

us that the self-interaction error committed by most practical XC approximations is likely

to exaggerate the degree of partial covalency, as has been noted in the general context of

H-bonding in Ref. [289]. This may be the reason why GGAs, and to a lesser extend hybrids,

systematically overestimate the energy diﬀerence between non-H-bonded geometries of the

water dimer and its global minimum. We noted in Sec. VII that this error may contribute

to the destabilization of compressed ice structures. This possibility merits further study.

To summarize our analysis of DFT errors in the various energy components: The most

important deﬁciencies of conventional GGAs and hybrids lie in their poor description of

dispersion and exchange-overlap interactions; dispersion-inclusive methods must describe

both correctly if binding energies and the extended-compact energy balance are to come out

right. Accurate polarizabilities and monomer deformation energies are also not unimportant,

so the incorporation of an appropriate fraction of exact exchange is desirable. Errors in

describing partial covalency may not be entirely negligible.

C.

Interpreting DFT simulations of the liquid

The strengths and weaknesses of XC approximations for clusters and ice structures that

we have just outlined help to explain the characteristic features of DFT simulations of the

liquid. We noted in Sec. VIII that a key structural feature of the ambient liquid is the degree

of cross-shell penetration (CSP), i.e. the probability of ﬁnding molecules at O-O separations
in the range between 3.0 and 4.0 ˚A that is unoccupied in ice Ih. We can characterize CSP
OO , the value of gOO(r) at its ﬁrst minimum. We saw that gmin
OO
depends strongly on XC approximation, ranging from ∼ 0.4 for uncorrected PBE to ∼ 0.9

crudely by the value of gmin

for dispersion-inclusive revPBE-DRSLL, compared with the experimental value of 0.84 at

ambient conditions. The diﬀusion coeﬃcient D correlates with gmin

OO , being too small by a
OO ≃ 0.4 and being in reasonable agreement with experiment when

factor of ∼ 10 when gmin

gmin
OO ≃ 0.8.

Two important energies would be expected to govern the degree of CSP. The ﬁrst is the

44

H-bond energy, characterized roughly by the sublimation energy EIh

sub of ice Ih, which is
of the dimer (Fig. 6). If the H-bond energy

closely correlated with the binding energy Edim

b

is too strong, it will be too diﬃcult to break H-bonds in the liquid, which will become too

ordered, with too little CSP. But we must also consider the energy change associated with

the close approach of molecules that are not H-bonded to each other, which can be crudely

characterized by the diﬀerence of sublimation energy ∆EIh−VIII

sub

between ice VIII and ice

Ih. Even if an XC approximation gives EIh

sub correctly, the liquid can still be over-structured
is too large, as is the case with uncorrected PBE. In addition to these

because ∆EIh−VIII

sub

two key energies, the distance dependence of the 2-body energy is also important.

By varying the semi-local functional and the dispersion that is added to it, we control both
sub and ∆EIh−VIII

. We saw in Sec. VIII that as we pass through the series of GGAs in order

sub

EIh

of increasing EIh

sub, the values of gmin

OO and D systematically decrease, while the equilibrium

density ρeq increases. However, good values of all three quantities cannot be obtained
simultaneously with any GGA, and in addition ∆EIh−VIII

is always seriously in error. If we

sub

add suitable dispersion to an appropriately chosen GGA, we can ensure that both EIh
∆EIh−VIII

are correct, as we know from the work on ice structures (Sec. VII). We saw in

sub and

sub

Sec. VIII that there are functionals that are not far from satisfying these conditions, while

also giving a good description of the liquid: optB88-DRSLL is one example. This encourages

optimism that satisfactory practical XC functionals for water systems are achievable.

We consider that correct values for EIh

sub and ∆EIh−VIII

sub

are necessary for an XC functional

to be satisfactory, but they may still not be suﬃcient to guarantee good liquid properties.

We saw in Sec. III that the PBE-D3, PBE-TS and PBE-DRSLL functionals give almost

the same dimer binding energy, but the distance dependences of their 2-body energies diﬀer

greatly, and this appears to explain their very diﬀerent liquid structures. This may be

an example of a general problem concerning the distance dependence of dispersion, which

deserves closer scrutiny. For the water systems we have reviewed, correctness of the 2-body
energy over the range of O-O distances out to ∼ 4.0 ˚A appears to be essential.

Compared with the large eﬀects of dispersion and exchange-overlap errors, the errors

of polarizability and monomer deformability on the properties of the liquid appear to be

less important. Nevertheless, we have noted that the overestimated polarizability found

with GGAs will tend to enhance the H-bond strength, and we reviewed the evidence for

a small resulting suppression of CSP. A similar overstructuring may well be caused by the

overestimated monomer deformability given by GGAs, though as far we know this possible

eﬀect has never been quantiﬁed. The errors of both polarizability and deformability are much

smaller with hybrid functionals, which should ideally be used as the basis for dispersion-

inclusive simulations, if the computer budget permits.

45

D. A scoring scheme

In order to characterize the errors of XC functionals for water systems, we have devised

a scoring scheme, which assigns a percentage score to any chosen approximation, according

to its performance for the properties of the water monomer, the dimer, the hexamer, and

ice structures. The physical quantities employed in the present form of our scoring scheme

are as follows. We score the binding energy of the dimer Edim
monomer of the ring-hexamer Ering
characterize the H-bond energy. The diﬀerence per monomer ∆Eprism−ring

and the sublimation energy EIh

b

b

b

, the binding energy per

sub of ice Ih, because these
− Ering

≡ Eprism

b

b

between the binding energies of the prism and ring isomers of the hexamer, and the diﬀerence
∆EIh−VIII

sub of the sublimation energies of ice Ih and ice VIII are also crucial,

sub − EVIII

≡ EIh

sub

as we have seen. In addition, we regard the equilibrium O-O distance Rdim

and the equilibrium volumes per monomer V Ih

eq and V VIII

eq

OO of the dimer,
of ice phases Ih and VIII as

important. Since the O-H bond-stretch energetics of the H2O monomer may be important,

we characterize this by the symmetric stretch frequency f mono

ss

of the monomer. We have

seen that errors in the distance dependence of the 2-body energy of the dimer can also be

troublesome, and these should clearly be scored, but we prefer not to attempt this until we

have been able to report on a more detailed examination of dimer energetics with dispersion-

inclusive functionals [284].

For each of the scored quantities, the chosen XC functional gives some value x, which

generally deviates from the benchmark value xbench. We assign a score of 100 % if the

magnitude of the deviation is less than a chosen tolerance δxtol. Otherwise, we deduct

10 % for each successive increment δxtol in |x − xbench|.

If |x − xbench| > 11δxtol, a zero

score is given. For the binding energies Edim
diﬀerences ∆Eprism−ring
case of Eprism−ring
prediction of the wrong sign gets a score of zero. For the equilibrium
O-O distance of the dimer, the tolerance is 0.01 ˚A and for the equilibrium volumes of the

sub, and for the compact-extensive
we adopt a tolerance of 10 meV, except that in the

and EIh−VIII

and EIh

sub

b

b

b

b

, Ering

46

ice Ih and VIII phases our tolerance is a 1 % error. We allow a tolerance of 20 cm−1 for

the monomer frequency f mono

ss

. Finally, the overall percentage score for a given functional is

simply the average of all the individual scores.

We present in Table X the individual and overall scores for the local and semi-local func-

tionals LDA, PBE, BLYP and PBE0 and for a selection of dispersion-inclusive functionals.

The XC functionals scored here are those for which data is readily available, but in the

future it would be useful to score a wider range of functionals. We see from the Table that

the local, semi-local and hybrid functionals all score rather poorly because they completely
fail to reproduce the energy diﬀerences ∆Eprism−ring

, and they also struggle

b

and ∆EIh−VIII

sub

with the volume per monomer of ice VIII. Some of the dispersion-inclusive functionals score

much better, but others, such as revPBE-DRSLL, PBE-TS and BLYP-D3 do poorly, be-

cause of problems with ice energetics and volumes. Overall, the highest scoring functionals

are optPBE-DRSLL, optB88-DRSLL, PBE0-TS and rPW86-DF2, although even they have

notable deﬁciencies. It is striking that some functionals that score well for the binding en-

ergies of the dimer and the ring hexamer and for the relative energy of the ring and prism

isomers of the hexamer can still do poorly for the energies and volumes of ice structures.

This may be due to errors in the distance dependence of dispersion.

Any recommendation of the “best” functional must be tentative, since our scoring table

shows that all the functionals assessed here have faults. The optB88-DRSLL functional

appears to be the most satisfactory, since it has the highest score and also gives a good

liquid structure, according to Refs. [112, 248] (see also Table IX). Its strong overbinding of

ice Ih is a cause for concern, but this may be due to the excessive long-range attraction of

the 2-body energy, which seems to be a feature of DRSLL non-local correlation. Of the next

highest scorers, rPW86-DF2 appears to give an understructured liquid [112], and optPBE-

DRSLL may do the same [285]. Next in the scoring comes the hybrid-based PBE0-TS, which

gives a good liquid structure, but would be expensive for general use.

It may be worth commenting that our scheme has something in common with the methods

developed by Vega et al. [29, 30] for characterizing the ability of force ﬁelds to describe water

systems, but diﬀers from them in important ways. Most signiﬁcantly, our scheme works only

with simple and readily computable energies and structures that characterize clusters and

ice structures, focusing on those quantities highlighted in the present review. By contrast,

the scheme of Vega et al. employs quantities such as the temperature of the maximum

47

density and the surface tension of the liquid, whose calculation by DFT methods would be

very demanding. Our approach to scoring is based on the idea that an XC functional should

be required to work well for clusters and ice structures before being seriously considered for

the liquid. However, we stress that a high score in our scheme may not be either necessary

or suﬃcient to ensure success in describing the liquid at ambient conditions, since even

simple, unpolarizable force ﬁelds can succeed for the ambient liquid [29] in spite of their

poor description of clusters, and our scheme may not yet capture all the key features of

XC functionals. On the other hand, a low score alerts one to the failure of a functional to

describe at least some parts of the energy adequately. We should also note that our scheme

is not meant to be deﬁnitive, and it can be extended and modiﬁed to suit diﬀerent purposes.

E. Outlook

Kohn Sham DFT is now 50 years old, and is one of the great success stories of molecular

simulations.

It has been extremely productive in furthering our understanding of water.

However, here we have deliberately dwelt on the diﬃculties faced by current functionals in

describing water systems, because we think that an analysis of these diﬃculties is needed

for future progress. The past 10 years have been immensely fruitful in highlighting the

crucial role of dispersion. However, some representations of dispersion are clearly not under

satisfactory control, since diﬀerent dispersion-inclusive methods can produce very diﬀerent

results. We have also emphasized here the sensitivity of predictions to the choice of the

semi-local part of the XC functional.

The erratic diﬀerences beween the various representations of dispersion already manifest

themselves in the energetics of the dimer, and we think that satisfactory functionals should

be required to reproduce this energetics accurately. In fact, the parameterization of some

types of dispersion-inclusive functional, including Grimme DFT-D and the TS functionals,

is explicitly based on benchmark data for molecular dimers such as the S22 set [290]. But for

water the distance dependence of the dispersion damping is vitally important, and this has

sometimes not been considered. The recent development of “extended” benchmark datasets

which include a range of inter-monomer distances and/or monomer orientations [291, 292]

is therefore very welcome. We plan to report elsewhere on a more detailed study of the

energetics of the water dimer than has been possible here.

48

Good dimer energetics is, of course, not enough for water, because some functionals suf-

fer from substantial many-body errors, which are unrelated to polarizability or many-body

dispersion, and which depend strongly on the choice of semi-local functional. Until fairly

recently, such many-body errors for molecular systems have attracted rather little attention.

However, the situation is now changing, with publications appearing that explicitly investi-

gate these errors [178, 184, 293, 294]. The study of molecular trimers is already enough to

quantify some beyond-2-body errors, and in the case of water the energetics of the hexamer

is very informative. We believe that the question of how to achieve small errors in both the

2-body and beyond-2-body energies of molecular systems in general and water in particular

will repay deeper study.

This review has focused on the strengths and weaknesses of XC functionals for a fairly

limited set of properties: mostly energies, structures and to some extent dynamics. Get-

ting these basic issues right is a prerequisite to more detailed study of e.g. the electronic

properties of water in the condensed phases, dissociation and proton transfer, the anoma-

lies mentioned in the Introduction, and, of course, a mapping of the entire phase diagram

of water with DFT. Although some important work has been done with DFT in some of

these areas recently (see e.g. Refs. [209, 227, 253, 295, 296]), much more work is needed

with a broad range of functionals before we can provide a full answer to the question “How

good is DFT for water?”. The computational cost of DFT is the main factor that slows

progress when it comes to establishing all the thermodynamic properties needed to map out

the phase diagram of water. With this in mind, the development of DFT-based machine

learning potentials such as the GAP approach discussed here or the neural networks from

Behler and co-workers [297] allow a wider range of water properties to be explored more

rapidly with DFT-level accuracy.

As a ﬁnal comment, it is worth noting that benchmark electronic-structure calculations

based on MP2, CCSD(T) and quantum Monte Carlo are playing an increasingly important

role in assessing DFT methods for clusters and ice structures, but until now experiment has

been the only source of accurate data for the liquid. The recent publication of simulations of

liquid water based both on MP2 [277] and on variational quantum Monte Carlo [298] suggests

the exciting future possibility of obtaining benchmark liquid-state data for quantities that

cannot be measured experimentally.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

49

A.M.’s work is supported by the European Research Council under the European Union’s

Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013)/ERC Grant Agreement No. 616121 (Het-

eroIce project) and the Royal Society through a Wolfson Research merit Award. We thank

M. L. Klein, A. Gross and A. E. Mattsson for providing numerical data of rdfs from their

simulations. This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Fa-

cility, which is a DOE Oﬃce of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-AC05-

00OR22725. We are grateful to a number of people for reading and commenting on an earlier

version of this manuscript, including M. Tuckerman, B. Santra, B. Slater, J. VandeVondele,

G. Sosso and A. Zen.

APPENDIX: OVERVIEW OF EXCHANGE-CORRELATION FUNCTIONALS

While this is primarily a review on DFT for water, we include here a brief summary of

the main features of some of the key XC functionals discussed in the review. Our aim here

is not to provide a comprehensive overview of XC functionals, but rather to provide some

useful background information for those less well versed in the details of the functionals we

refer to. We assume here a spin unpolarized system, whose distribution of electron number

density is ρ(r).

Local functionals

The local density approximation (LDA) [108] was the original approximation used in all

the earliest applications of DFT. Its exchange-correlation (XC) energy ELDA

xc

[ρ] is the sum of

the exchange energy ELDA

x

and the correlation energy ELDA

c

, which are expressed in terms of

the exchange energy and the correlation energy per electron ǫ0

x(ρ) and ǫ0

c(ρ) in the uniform

electron gas (sometimes called “jellium”) of density ρ. The approximation takes the form:

ELDA

xc = ELDA

x + ELDA

c

= Z dr ρ(r)ǫ0

x(ρ(r)) + Z dr ρ(r)ǫ0

c(ρ(r)) .

(3)

The exchange energy ǫ0

x(ρ) is given by the Hartree-Fock formula (atomic units): ǫ0

x(ρ) =

− 3

4 (3/π)1/3ρ1/3. Approximations for ǫ0

c(ρ) typically employ parameterized ﬁts to quantum

Monte Carlo data for the uniform electron gas, these ﬁts being constrained to reproduce the

50

leading terms of the high-density expansion. For dimers of closed-shell atoms and molecules

(e.g. rare gases), the LDA gives an attraction that resembles the dispersion interaction but

is in fact an artefact due to the approximation made for exchange [120].

Generalized gradient approximations

In generalized gradient approximations (GGAs) [299], the XC energy depends locally on

the gradient of the density ∇ρ as well as the density ρ. The magnitude of the local gradient

can be speciﬁed by the so-called “reduced gradient”, deﬁned as the dimensionless quantity

x ≡ |∇ρ|/ρ4/3 or sometimes as s ≡ x/(2(3π2)1/3), so that GGAs have the general form:

EGGA

xc = EGGA

x

+ EGGA

c

= Z dr fx(ρ(r), s(r)) + Z dr fc(ρ(r), s(r)) ,

(4)

where fx and fc specify the local exchange and correlation parts. However, the exchange part

can be simpliﬁed, using an exact condition that it must obey [300] under uniform scaling of

the density, as a result of which the exchange part can be expressed as:

EGGA

x

[ρ(r)] = Z dr ǫ0

x(ρ(r))Fx(s(r)) ,

(5)

where Fx, the so-called exchange-enhancement factor, depends only on s. Many diﬀer-

ent GGAs have been proposed, diﬀering in their exchange-enhancement factors and the

approximations for fc(ρ, s). We note that the form of Fx(s) at large reduced gradient is

particularly important for non-covalent interactions in molecular systems such as water, be-

cause exchange-overlap interactions depend strongly on the behavior of Fx(s) in the regions

where electron densities overlap, which is where s has large values [121–126]. We note next

the main features of the GGAs relevant for this review.

BLYP: This functional has been extensively used for water systems, and consists of the

B88 and LYP approximations for exchange and correlation respectively [82, 83]. The B88

approximation of Becke [82] has an exchange enhancement factor designed to reproduce

exactly the exchange energy density in the limit of long distance from an isolated atom. It

depends on a single parameter, which is adjusted to minimize the errors of the exchange

energies of rare-gas atoms. For molecular systems, this exchange functional has the desirable

feature [124] that it eliminates the spurious exchange attraction between rare-gas atoms

exhibited by the LDA. The LYP correlation functional, so named for the paper by Lee,

51

Yang and Parr where it was introduced [83], is derived from an older formula for correlation

due to Colle and Salvetti [301], who approximated it in terms of the electron density and

the non-interacting kinetic-energy density. The LYP functional is a pure GGA constructed

by replacing the kinetic-energy density by its second-order gradient expansion.

BP86: This consists of exactly the same B88 functional [82] for exchange as the BLYP

functional, but replaces LYP correlation by the correlation functional known as P86. The

latter functional was constructed by Perdew [84] so as to reproduce accurately the correlation

energy of both the uniform electron gas and the electron gas with small gradients of the

reduced density, and it also known to give accurate correlation energies for free atoms and

ions.

PBE: This widely used approximation [302] adopts a simple functional form for the exchange

enhancement factor Fx(s) proposed earlier by Becke [299] to ensure satisfactory behavior in

the long-distance tails of free atoms. However, the parameters appearing in this functional

form are not regarded as empirically adjustable, as was done by Becke, but are determined

by requiring that exact conditions be satisﬁed. The form of the correlation energy density

fc(ρ, x) is also chosen so as to satisfy exact conditions on its behavior for small and large

reduced gradients, and the parameters appearing in this form are likewise determined by

the requirement that they satisfy exact conditions. PBE is therefore one of the few XC

functionals whose parameters are all (or almost all) fundamental constants, rather than

being adjusted to ﬁt empirical data. However, the form of the exchange enhancement factor

at large reduced gradient produces a spurious exchange binding of closed-shell atoms and

molecules [125].

PW91: This approximation [200, 201] is a forerunner of the better known PBE functional.

It diﬀers from PBE in employing more complicated functional forms for the exchange and

correlation energies. These functional forms and the parameters that enter them attempt to

satisfy a wider range of exact conditions. The energy predictions of PW91 are often close to

those of PBE. However, the forms of their exchange enhancement factors at large reduced

gradient are substantially diﬀerent [124], and PW91 produces a spurious exchange binding

of closed-shell atoms and molecules that is larger than that of PBE.

revPBE: This is a modiﬁcation of the PBE functional. The modiﬁcation was proposed

by Zhang and Yang [119], and consists solely of changing the value of one of the constants

appearing in the exchange enhancement factor. This change achieves considerably improved

52

values of atomic total energies and molecular atomization energies. For molecular systems

such as water, the change is important because it greatly increases the overlap-repulsion

between pairs of molecules [124].

RPBE: This functional [198] resembles revPBE in being a modiﬁcation of PBE formed

by changing the exchange enhancement factor, while leaving the correlation functional un-

changed. However, in the case of RPBE, the functional form of Fx(s) is modiﬁed. The

resulting Fx(s) is almost identical to that of revPBE for small and moderate values of s, but

increases more slowly at large s values [198]. Physical properties predicted with RPBE and

revPBE generally diﬀer rather little.

PBEsol: This is a modiﬁcation of the PBE functional designed to improve predictions for

the energetics of densely packed solids and their surfaces [118]. It achieves this by keeping

the functional forms used for the exchange and correlation energies of PBE, while modifying

the two coeﬃcients specifying the expansion of these energies to second order in the density

gradient.

AM05: This functional, proposed by Armiento and Mattsson [199], may be classiﬁed as a

GGA, but the principles on which it is based diﬀer from those used to develop conventional

GGAs.

Its aim is to improve predictions for surface properties, which are often poorly

predicted by functionals such as PBE. It has the unique feature that it is constructed to

reproduce exactly the exchange-correlation energies of two types of model system: uniform

jellium and the jellium surface.

Hybrids

A hybrid XC functional is one formed by addition of a fraction of exact Hartree-Fock

exchange to a chosen linear combination of local or semi-local functionals. For this purpose,

the Hartree-Fock exchange energy is deﬁned to be:

EHF

x = −

1

2 Xi,j

Z Z dr dr′ ψ⋆

i (r)ψj(r)

1

|r − r′|

ψi(r′)ψ⋆

j (r′) ,

(6)

where ψi(r) are the Kohn-Sham orbitals of DFT, and the double sum goes over all pairs of

occupied orbitals. Some justiﬁcation [85] for mixing in a fraction of EHF

x

is supplied by the

adiabatic connection theorem [303, 304], which underpins DFT methods. We provide here

brief notes about the hybrid methods that are relevant to this review.

PBE0: This approximation is a hybrid version of the semi-local PBE functional, deﬁned

53

by [87, 88]:

EPBE0

xc =

1
4

EHF

x +

3
4

EPBE

x + EPBE

c

,

(7)

so that the exchange part of the functional is a linear combination of EHF

x

and the usual

PBE for exchange, EPBE

x

, while the correlation part of the functional has the normal PBE

form.

B3LYP: This widely used hybrid is somewhat more complicated than PBE0, since the

semi-local parts of the XC functional themselves involve a linear combination of GGAs and

LDA. It is deﬁned as [85, 86]:

EB3LYP

xc

= a0EHF

x + axEB88

x + (1 − a0 − ax)ELDA

x + acELYP

c + (1 − ac)ELDA

c

.

(8)

Here, EB88

x

and ELYP

c

are the exchange and correlation parts of the BLYP functional (see

above), and the numerical values of the mixing coeﬃcients are: a0 = 0.20, ax = 0.72, and

ac = 0.81.

Dispersion-inclusive methods

Dispersion refers to the attraction between atoms or molecules due to the Coulomb inter-

action between correlated quantum ﬂuctuations of their electron densities. These are also

known as London forces and in the DFT functional community often referred to as van der

Waals forces. At long distances, where overlap of these densities is negligible, the dispersion

energy falls oﬀ as the inverse 6th power of the intermolecular distance R. At distances where

the overlap between the electron distributions vanishes, local, semi-local and hybrid func-

tionals account only for interactions due to electrostatics and polarization, and are incapable

of describing the 1/R6 behavior of dispersion. Several approaches have been developed for

overcoming this problem, as described in recent reviews [127, 128].

One possible approach is simply to ignore the “asymptotic” region where dispersion

falls oﬀ as 1/R6, and to treat only the intermediate and short-range region where non-

local correlation is expected to contribute most to bonding. This is the approach of the

so-called Minnesota functionals [305], in which meta-GGAs and their hybrids are carefully

parameterized to reproduce both covalent and non-covalent binding energies, reaction-barrier

energies, etc. An alternative approach, which also aims to treat only intermediate and short

54

distances, involves the addition of artiﬁcial nucleus-electron potentials designed to mimic the

energetics of non-local correlation, as in the DCACP and DCP methods. The Minnesota

functionals, as well as the DCACP [138] and DCP [139] methods, have enjoyed some success

for molecular systems, and have been used to a limited extent for water systems.

The simplest methods capable of accounting for dispersion in the asymptotic 1/R6 region

involve the introduction of atom-atom pair potentials of the form −CAB/R6 between every

pair of atoms A, B, which are added to chosen semi-local or hybrid functionals, referred to

here as “base” functionals. This idea goes back nearly 20 years [123, 129, 130], and has

been extensively developed by Grimme and co-workers [131–133]. The 1/R6 form must be

damped at intermediate and short distances, and Grimme proposed a damping scheme, as

well as a procedure for assigning values to the coeﬀﬁcients CAB for several choices of base

functional. This approach, known as DFT-D or DFT-D2 [132], has seen widespread use and

achieves major improvements in the description of non-covalent interactions in molecular

systems.

One deﬁciency of DFT-D2 is that it does not account for the dependence of atom-atom

dispersion interactions on the chemical state and environment of the atoms. For exam-

ple, the electron distribution on an atom may be compressed by its neighbors, so that

its polarizability and hence its dispersion interaction with other atoms are reduced. The

Tkatchenko-Scheﬄer (TS) scheme [134] is in the same general spirit as Grimme’s DFT-D2

method, but it accounts for the dependence of dispersion interactions on changes of electron

density, using the Hirshfeld partitioning scheme [306, 307] to assign a density distribution

to each atom, which can vary as the atoms move. The dependence of dispersion on the

chemical state of the atoms is also accounted for in a later development of the Grimme

scheme, known as DFT-D3 [133]. In principle, both the Grimme and the TS schemes can be

used in conjunction with any base functional. We have referred to the use of the DFT-D3

and the TS methods for water systems throughout the present review, and in relation to

ice we also referred to a modiﬁed version of the TS scheme that accounts for many-body

dispersion [210].

A rather diﬀerent approach to the representation of dispersion is to include in the XC

functional a non-local correlation term Enl

c depending explicitly on electron densities at

spatially separated positions [135, 308–310]. When paired with a conventional GGA repre-

sentation of semi-local exchange-correlation, the total XC functional then becomes:

Exc = EGGA

x

+ ELDA

c + Enl
c

.

The general form assumed for the non-local correlation term has usually been:

c = Z dr1 dr2 n(r1)φ(r1, r2)n(r2) ,
Enl

55

(9)

(10)

where the kernel φ is itself a functional of the density, but ensures the correct asymptotic

behavior of the dispersion interaction by falling oﬀ as 1/|r1−r2|6 at large separations |r1−r2|.

The earliest forms of this approach [308–310] were restricted to interactions between atoms

or molecules whose densities do not overlap, but an important advance came with the

proposal by Dion et al. [135] of a functional form valid for overlapping molecules in arbitrary

geometries. The base functional proposed in that paper consisted of revPBE exchange and

LDA correlation, and we refer to the entire functional here as revPBE-DRSLL.

It was shown later that the particular choice of base functional made by Dion et al.

substantially underbinds molecular dimers [136, 141], and that the performance can be

greatly improved by choosing other base functionals. If PBE is paired with the DRSLL form

of non-local correlation, giving the functional referred to here as PBE-DRSLL, molecular

dimers are signiﬁcantly overbound [136]. However, if the exchange parts of PBE of BLYP

are appropriately modiﬁed, giving base functionals known as optPBE and optB88 [136],

then the resulting dispersion-inclusive functionals, here called optPBE-DRSLL and optB88-

DRSLL, give much improved binding energies for dimers. Similar arguments underlie the

modiﬁed version of the DRSLL approach known as rPW86-DF2 [140], in which a revised

form of PW86 exchange is paired with a new form of the non-local correlation functional

Enl
c .

A simpliﬁed version of the non-local correlation kernel φ(r, r′) known as VV10 has been

developed by Vydrov and van Voorhis [137]. This contains a free parameter b, which allows

the short-range damping of dispersion to be adapted to the base functional. Technical

developments due to Sabatini et al. [311] allow this approach to be implemented at a cost not

much greater than that of standard GGAs. The base functional originally recommended for

VV10 consisted of revised PW86 exchange and PBE correlation, but other base functionals

could also be used.

And ﬁnally: computational cost

56

Although it is diﬃcult to be precise, we comment on the relative approximate compu-

tational cost of the various functionals discussed. In brief, there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence

between the cost of LDA and the GGAs. Dispersion correction schemes such as the var-

ious generations of the DFT-D approach or the TS method also do not incur any major

computational overhead compared to the base GGA they are added to. Methods based on

non-local correlation functionals can lead to a slow-down of no more than ca. 50% com-

pared to a GGA calculation, when implemented eﬃciently [312]. The hybrid functionals,

when employed in periodic boundary conditions, as done for liquid water simulations, can

be signiﬁcantly (roughly an order of magnitude) more expensive than a GGA.

[1] K. Laasonen, M. Sprik, M. Parrinello, and R. Car, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 9081 (1993).

[2] M. E. Tuckerman, K. Laasonen, M. Sprik, and M. Parrinello, J. Phys: Condens. Matter 6,

A93 (1994).

[3] M. Sprik, J. Hutter, and M. Parrinello, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 1142 (1996).

[4] P. L. Silvestrelli, M. Bernasconi, and M. Parrinello, Chem. Phys. Lett. 277, 478 (1997).

[5] P. L. Silvestrelli and M. Parrinello, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 3572 (1999).

[6] J. D. Bernal and R. H. Fowler, J. Chem. Phys. 1, 515 (1933).

[7] J. S. Rowlinson, Trans. Faraday Soc. 47, 120 (1951).

[8] J. A. Barker and R. O. Watts, Chem. Phys. Lett. 3, 144 (1969).

[9] A. Rahman and F. H. Stillinger, J. Chem. Phys. 55, 3336 (1971).

[10] H. J. C. Berendsen, J. P. M. Postma, W. F. van Gunsteren, and J. Hermans, Interaction

models for water in relation to protein hydration, in Intermolecular forces, edited by B. Pull-

man, volume 14 of Jerusalem Symposia on Quantum Chemistry and Biochemistry, page 331,

Reidel, 1981.

[11] W. L. Jorgensen, J. Chandrasekhar, J. D. Madura, R. W. Impey, and M. L. Klein, J. Chem.

Phys. 79, 926 (1983).

[12] B. Guillot, J. Molec. Liq. 101, 219 (2002).

[13] J. L. F. Abascal and C. Vega, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 234505 (2005).

57

[14] C. A. Coulson and D. Eisenberg, Proc. R. Soc. A 291, 445 (1966).

[15] E. R. Batista, S. S. Xantheas, and H. J´onsson, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 4546 (1998).

[16] P. L. Silvestrelli and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3308 (1999).

[17] Y. S. Badyal et al., J. Chem. Phys. 112, 9206 (2000).

[18] L. X. Dang and T.-M. Chang, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 8149 (1997).

[19] C. J. Burnham and S. S. Xantheas, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 5115 (2002).

[20] P. Ren and J. W. Ponder, J. Phys. Chem. B 107, 5933 (2003).

[21] S. Habershon and D. E. Manolopoulos, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13, 19714 (2011).

[22] K. T. Wikfeldt, E. R. Batista, F. D. Vila, and H. J´onsson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 15,

16542 (2013).

[23] E. D. Isaacs, A. Shukla, P. M. Platzman, D. R. Hamann, B. Barbielini, and C. A. Tulk,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 600 (1999).

[24] A. Nilsson, H. Ogasawara, M. Cavalleri, D. Nordlund, M. Nyberg, Ph. Wernet, and L. G. M.

Pettersson, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 154505 (2005).

[25] E. D. Glendening, J. Phys. Chem. A 109, 11936 (2005).

[26] E. A. Cobar, P. R. Horn, R. G. Bergman, and M. Head-Gordon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.

14, 15328 (2012).

[27] G. S. Fanourgakis and S. S. Xantheas, J. Chem. Phys. 128, 074506 (2008).

[28] V. Babin, G. R. Medders, and F. Paesani, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 3, 3765 (2012).

[29] C. Vega, J. L. F. Abascal, M. M. Conde, and J. L. Aragones, Faraday Disc. 141, 251 (2009).

[30] C. Vega and J. L. F. Abascal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13, 19663 (2011).

[31] M. Sharma, R. Resta, and R. Car, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 187401 (2005).

[32] C. Zhang, D. Donadio, F. Gygi, and G. Galli, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7, 1443 (2011).

[33] M. Sharma, R. Resta, and R. Car, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 247401 (2007).

[34] M. Krack, A. Gambirasio, and M. Parrinello, J. Chem. Phys. 117, 9409 (2002).

[35] S. M. Kathmann, I. F. W. Kuo, C. J. Mundy, and G. K. Schenter, J. Phys. Chem. B 115,

4369 (2011).

[36] K. Laasonen and M. L. Klein, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 116, 11620 (1994).

[37] M. Tuckerman, K. Laasonen, M. Sprik, and M. Parrinello, J. Phys. Chem. 99, 5749 (1995).

[38] M. Tuckerman, K. Laasonen, M. Sprik, and M. Parrinello, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 150 (1995).

[39] J. A. White, E. Schwegler, G. Galli, and F. Gygi, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 4668 (2000).

58

[40] M. M. Naor, K. Van Nostrand, and C. Dellago, Chem. Phys. Lett. 369, 159 (2003).

[41] R. Iftimie and M. E. Tuckerman, Angew. Chemie. Intl. Ed. 45, 1144 (2006).

[42] R. Iftimie, V. Thomas, S. Plessis, P. Marchand, and P. Ayotte, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 130,

5901 (2008).

[43] D. Marx, ChemPhysChem 7, 1848 (2006).

[44] D. Marx, A. Chandra, and M. E. Tuckerman, Chem. Rev. 110, 2174 (2010).

[45] A. Hassanali, F. Giberti, J. Cuny, T. D. K¨uhne, and M. Parrinello, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.

U.S.A. 110, 13723 (2013).

[46] A. A. Hassanali, J. Cuny, V. Verdolino, and M. Parrinello, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 372,

20120482 (2014).

[47] F. X. Coudert, R. Vuilleumier, and A. Boutin, ChemPhysChem 7, 2464 (2006).

[48] G. Cicero, J. C. Grossman, E. Schwegler, F. Gygi, and G. Galli, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 130,

1871 (2008).

[49] D. Mu˜noz Santiburcio, C. Wittekindt, and D. Marx, Nature Commun. 4, 2349 (2013).

[50] P. J. D. Lindan, N. M. Harrison, and M. J. Gillan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 762 (1998).

[51] J. Carrasco, B. Santra, J. Klimeˇs, and A. Michaelides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 026101 (2011).

[52] J. Carrasco, A. Hodgson, and A. Michaelides, Nature Mater. 11, 667 (2012).

[53] M. Sulpizi, M. P. Gaigeot, and M. Sprik, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 8, 1037 (2012).

[54] J. Cheng and M. Sprik, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 6, 880 (2010).

[55] J. Wang, L. S. Pedroza, A. Poissier, and M. V. Fern´andez-Serra, J. Phys. Chem. C 116,

14382 (2012).

[56] B. C. Wood, E. Schwegler, W. I. Choi, and T. Ogitsu, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 135, 15774

(2013).

[57] L. Pauling, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 57, 2680 (1935).

[58] F. H. Stillinger, Science 209, 451 (1980).

[59] G. A. Jeﬀrey, An Introduction to Hydrogen Bonding, Oxford University Press, New York,

1997.

[60] F. Sim, A. Stamant, I. Papai, and D. R. Salahub, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 114, 4391 (1992).

[61] K. Laasonen, F. Csajka, and M. Parrinello, Chem. Phys. Lett. 194, 172 (1992).

[62] K. Laasonen, M. Parrinello, R. Car, C. Y. Lee, and D. Vanderbilt, Chem. Phys. Lett. 207,

208 (1993).

59

[63] B. Santra, A. Michaelides, and M. Scheﬄer, J. Chem. Phys. 127, 184104 (2007).

[64] D. R. Hamann, Phys. Rev. B 55, R10157 (1997).

[65] P. J. Feibelman, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 10, 4688 (2008).

[66] A. Michaelides, Appl. Phys. A -Mat. Sci. Proc. 85, 415 (2006).

[67] E. Skulason et al., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 9, 3241 (2007).

[68] D. Asthagiri, L. R. Pratt, and J. D. Kress, Phys. Rev. E 68, 041505 (2003).

[69] J. C. Grossman, E. Schwegler, E. W. Draeger, F. Gygi, and G. Galli, J. Chem. Phys. 120,

300 (2004).

[70] E. Schwegler, J. C. Grossman, F. Gygi, and G. Galli, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 5400 (2004).

[71] M. V. Fern´andez-Serra and E. Artacho, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 11136 (2004).

[72] P. H. L. Sit and N. Marzari, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 204510 (2005).

[73] I. F. W. Kuo et al., J. Phys. Chem. B 108, 12990 (2004).

[74] J. VandeVondele et al., J. Chem. Phys. 122, 014515 (2005).

[75] B. Santra et al., J. Chem. Phys. 129, 194111 (2008).

[76] G. C. Shields and K. N. Kirschner, Synth. React. Inorg. Metal-Org. Nano-Metal Chem. 38,

32 (2008).

[77] E. E. Dahlke, R. M. Olson, H. R. Leverentz, and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. A 112, 3976

(2008).

[78] B. Santra et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 185701 (2011).

[79] E. Arunan et al., Pure Appl. Chem. 83, 1637 (2011).

[80] T. K. Ghanty, V. N. Staroverov, P. R. Koren, and E. R. Davidson, J. Amer. Chem. Soc.

122, 1210 (2000).

[81] A. H. Romero, P. L. Silvistrelli, and M. Parrinello, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 115 (2001).

[82] A. D. Becke, Phys. Rev. A 38, 3098 (1988).

[83] C. Lee, W. Yang, and R. G. Parr, Phys. Rev. B 37, 785 (1988).

[84] J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B 33, 8822 (1986).

[85] A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 5648 (1993).

[86] P. J. Stephens, F. J. Devlin, C. F. Chabalowski, and M. J. Frisch, J. Phys. Chem. 98, 11623

(1994).

[87] J. P. Perdew, M. Ernzerhof, and K. Burke, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 9982 (1996).

[88] C. Adamo, M. Cossi, G. Scalmani, and V. Barone, Chem. Phys. Lett. 307, 265 (1999).

60

[89] P. Calaminici, K. Jug, and A. M. Koster, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 7756 (1998).

[90] P. A. Fantin, P. L. Barbieri, A. C. Neto, and F. E. Jorge, J. Molec. Struc.-Theochem 810,

103 (2007).

[91] A. J. Cohen and Y. Tantirungrotechai, Chem. Phys. Lett. 299, 465 (1999).

[92] S. A. C. McDowell, R. D. Amos, and N. C. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett. 235, 1 (1995).

[93] D. J. Tozer and N. C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 10180 (1998).

[94] D. J. Tozer and N. C. Handy, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 2545 (1998).

[95] C. Van Caillie and R. D. Amos, Chem. Phys. Lett. 328, 446 (2000).

[96] J. R. Hammond, N. Govind, K. Kowalski, J. Autschbach, and S. S. Xantheas, J. Chem.

Phys. 131, 214103 (2009).

[97] B. Santra, A. Michaelides, and M. Scheﬄer, J. Chem. Phys. 131, 124509 (2009).

[98] T. Helgaker, P. Jorgensen, and J. Olsen, Molecular Electronic Structure Theory, Wiley, New

York, 2000.

[99] X. Xu and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem. A 108, 2305 (2004).

[100] C. Zhang, L. Spanu, and G. Galli, J. Phys. Chem. B 115, 14190 (2011).

[101] M. J. Gillan, F. R. Manby, M. D. Towler, and D. Alf`e, J. Chem. Phys. 136, 244105 (2012).

[102] W. Klopper, J. G. C. M. van Duijneveldt-van de Rijdt, and F. B. van Duijneveldt, Phys.

Chem. Chem. Phys. 2, 2227 (2000).

[103] G. S. Tschumper et al., J. Chem. Phys. 116, 690 (2002).

[104] L. A. Curtiss, D. J. Frurip, and M. Blander, J. Chem. Phys. 71, 2703 (1979).

[105] J. A. Odutola and T. R. Dyke, J. Chem. Phys. 72, 5062 (1980).

[106] E. M. Mas et al., J. Chem. Phys. 113, 6687 (2000).

[107] B. J. Smith, D. J. Swanton, J. A. Pople, and H. F. Schaeﬀer III, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 1240

(1990).

[108] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, 1133 (1965).

[109] D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 566 (1980).

[110] J. P. Perdew and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048 (1981).

[111] E. E. Dahlke and D. G. Truhlar, J. Phys. Chem. B 109, 15677 (2005).

[112] C. Zhang, J. Wu, G. Galli, and F. Gygi, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7, 3054 (2011).

[113] H.-J. Werner et al., MOLPRO version 2012.1, a package of ab initio programs; see

www.molpro.net .

[114] G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996); see VASP web-site at

www.vasp.at .

[115] D. Alf`e, A. P. Bart´ok, G. Cs´anyi, and M. J. Gillan, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 014104 (2014).

61

[116] C. Lee, H. Chen, and R. Fitzgerald, J. Chem. Phys. 101, 4472 (1994).

[117] C. Lee, H. Chen, and G. Fitzgerald, J. Chem. Phys. 102, 1266 (1995).

[118] J. P. Perdew et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 136406 (2008).

[119] Y. Zhang and W. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 890 (1998).

[120] J. Harris, Phys. Rev. B 31, 1770 (1985).

[121] D. J. Lacks and R. G. Gordon, Phys. Rev. A 47, 4681 (1993).

[122] Y. Zhang, W. Pan, and W. Yang, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 7921 (1997).

[123] X. Wu, M. C. Vargas, S. Nayak, V. Lotrich, and G. Scoles, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 8748 (2001).

[124] F. O. Kannemann and A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 5, 719 (2009).

[125] E. D. Murray, K. Lee, and D. C. Langreth, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 5, 2754 (2009).

[126] Y. Kanai and J. Grossman, Phys. Rev. A 80, 032504 (2009).

[127] J. Klimeˇs and A. Michaelides, J. Chem. Phys. 137, 120901 (2012).

[128] G. A. DiLabio and A. Otero-de-la Roza, arXiv:1405.1771 (2014) .

[129] E. J. Meijer and M. Sprik, J. Chem. Phys. 105, 8684 (1996).

[130] F. A. Gianturco and F. Paesani, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 3011 (2000).

[131] S. Grimme, J. Comput. Chem. 25, 1463 (2004).

[132] S. Grimme, J. Comput. Chem. 27, 1787 (2006).

[133] S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich, and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys. 132, 154104 (2010).

[134] A. Tkatchenko and M. Scheﬄer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 073005 (2009).

[135] M. Dion, H. Rydberg, E. Schr¨oder, D. C. Langreth, and B. I. Lundqvist, Phys. Rev. Lett.

92, 246401 (2004).

[136] J. Klimeˇs, D. R. Bowler, and A. Michaelides, J. Phys: Condens. Matter 22, 022201 (2010).

[137] O. A. Vydrov and T. Van Voorhis, J. Chem. Phys. 133, 244013 (2010).

[138] O. von Lilienfeld, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, and D. Sebastiani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,

153004 (2004).

[139] E. Torres and G. A. DiLabio, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 3, 1738 (2012).

[140] K. Lee, E. D. Murray, L. Z. Kong, B. I. Lundqvist, and D. C. Langreth, Phys. Rev. B 82,

081101 (2010).

62

[141] A. Gulans, M. J. Puska, and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. B 79, 201105 (2009).

[142] J. Ireta, J. Neugebauer, and M. Scheﬄer, J. Phys. Chem. A 108, 5692 (2004).

[143] I. C. Lin, A. P. Seitsonen, M. D. Coutinho-Neto, I. Tavernelli, and U. Rothlisberger, J. Phys.

Chem. B 113, 1127 (2009).

[144] J. Wang, G. Rom´an-P´erez, J. M. Soler, E. Artacho, and M. V. Fern´andez-Serra, J. Chem.

Phys. 134 (2011).

[145] J. A. Anderson and G. S. Tschumper, J. Phys. Chem. A 110, 7268 (2006).

[146] D. Hankins, J. W. Moskowitz, and F. H. Stillinger, J. Chem. Phys. 53, 4544 (1970).

[147] S. S. Xantheas, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 7523 (1994).

[148] J. M. Pedulla, K. Kim, and K. D. Jordan, Chem. Phys. Lett. 291, 78 (1998).

[149] A. P. Bart´ok, M. J. Gillan, F. R. Manby, and G. Cs´anyi, Phys. Rev. B 88, 054104 (2013).

[150] A. P. Bart´ok, M. C. Payne, R. Kondor, and G. Cs´anyi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 136403 (2010).

[151] H. S. Frank and W. Y. Wen, Disc. Faraday Soc. 24, 133 (1957).

[152] M. J. Elrod and R. J. Saykally, Chem. Rev. 94, 1975 (1994).

[153] A. Karpfen, Adv. Chem. Phys. 123, 469 (2002).

[154] H. F. Xu, H. A. Stern, and B. J. Berne, J. Phys. Chem. B 106, 2054 (2002).

[155] J. C. White and E. R. Davidson, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 8029 (1990).

[156] S. S. Xantheas, Chem. Phys. 258, 225 (2000).

[157] W. A. P. Luck, J. Molec. Struct. 448, 131 (1998).

[158] S. S. Xantheas and T. H. Dunning, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 8774 (1993).

[159] R. J. Saykally and G. A. Blake, Science 259, 1570 (1993).

[160] K. Liu, J. D. Cruzan, and R. J. Saykally, Science 271, 929 (1996).

[161] J. K. Gregory and D. C. Clary, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 18014 (1996).

[162] F. N. Keutsch, J. D. Cruzan, and R. J. Saykally, Chem. Rev. 103, 2533 (2003).

[163] V. S. Bryantsev, M. S. Diallo, A. C. T. van Duin, and W. A. Goddard, J. Chem. Theory

Comput. 5, 1016 (2009).

[164] Y. I. Neela, A. S. Mahadevi, and G. N. Sastry, J. Phys. Chem. B 114, 17162 (2010).

[165] J. M. Guevara-Vela et al., Chem. Eur. J. 19, 14304 (2013).

[166] U. Buck and F. Huisken, Chem. Rev. 100, 3863 (2000).

[167] C. J. Tsai and K. D. Jordan, Chem. Phys. Lett. 213, 181 (1993).

[168] E. S. Kryachko, Chem. Phys. Lett. 314, 353 (1999).

63

[169] G. Hincapi´e, N. Acelas, M. Casta˜no, J. David, and A. Restrepo, J. Phys. Chem. A 114,

7809 (2010).

[170] R. M. Olson, J. L. Bentz, R. A. Kendall, M. W. Schmidt, and M. S. Gordon, J. Chem.

Theory Comput. 3, 1312 (2007).

[171] D. M. Bates and G. S. Tschumper, J. Phys. Chem. A 113, 3555 (2009).

[172] F. F. Wang, G. Jenness, W. A. Al-Saidi, and K. D. Jordan, J. Chem. Phys. 132, 134303

(2010).

[173] W. M. C. Foulkes, L. Mitas, R. J. Needs, and G. Rajagopal, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 33 (2001).

[174] R. J. Needs, M. D. Towler, N. D. Drummond, and P. L. Rios, J. Phys: Condens. Matter 22,

023201 (2010).

[175] S. S. Xantheas, C. J. Burnham, and R. J. Harrison, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 1493 (2002).

[176] K. Liu et al., Nature 381, 501 (1996).

[177] Y. Wang, V. Babin, J. M. Bowman, and F. Paesani, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 134, 11116 (2012).

[178] M. J. Gillan, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 224106 (2014).

[179] S. R. Pruitt, S. S. Leang, P. Xu, D. G. Fedorov, and M. S. Gordon, Comput. Theor. Chem.

1021, 70 (2013).

[180] A. K. Kelkkanen, B. I. Lundqvist, and J. K. Nørskov, J. Chem. Phys. 131, 046102 (2009).

[181] P. L. Silvestrelli, Chem. Phys. Lett. 475, 285 (2009).

[182] O. A. von Lilienfeld and A. Tkatchenko, J. Chem. Phys. 132, 234109 (2010).

[183] M. J. Gillan, D. Alf`e, P. J. Bygrave, C. R. Taylor, and F. R. Manby, J. Chem. Phys. 139,

114101 (2013).

[184] J. ˇRez´a´c, Y. H. Huang, P. Hobza, and G. J. O. Beran, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11, 3065

(2015).

[185] H. J. Werner, F. R. Manby, and P. J. Knowles, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 8149 (2003).

[186] B. Doser, D. S. Lambrecht, J. Kussmann, and C. Ochsenfeld, J. Chem. Phys. 130, 064107

(2009).

[187] U. Gora, R. Podeszwa, W. Cencek, and K. Szalewicz, J. Chem. Phys. 135 (2011).

[188] I. G. Gurtubay and R. J. Needs, J. Chem. Phys. 127, 124306 (2007).

[189] J. Ma, D. Alf`e, A. Michaelides, and E. Wang, J. Chem. Phys. 130, 154303 (2009).

[190] M. Dubecky et al., J. Chem. Theory Comput. 9, 4287 (2013).

64

[191] A. Ambrosetti, D. Alf`e, R. A. DiStasio, and A. Tkatchenko, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 5, 849

(2014).

[192] D. Alf`e, A. P. Bart´ok, G. Cs´anyi, and M. J. Gillan, J. Chem. Phys. 138, 221102 (2013).

[193] M. A. Morales et al., J. Chem. Theory Comput. 10, 2355 (2014).

[194] V. F. Petrenko and R. W. Whitworth, Physics of Ice, Oxford University Press, Oxford,

1999.

[195] S. Kawada, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 32, 1442 (1972).

[196] Y. Tajima, T. Matsuo, and H. Suga, Nature 299, 810 (1982).

[197] D. Pan et al., J. Phys: Condens. Matter 22, 074209 (2010).

[198] B. Hammer, L. B. Hansen, and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. B 59, 7413 (1999).

[199] R. Armiento and A. E. Mattsson, Phys. Rev. B 72, 085108 (2005).

[200] J. P. Perdew et al., Phys. Rev. B 46, 6671 (1992).

[201] J. P. Perdew et al., Phys. Rev. B 48, 4978 (1993).

[202] E. Whalley, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 8047 (1984).

[203] J. G. Brandenburg, T. Maas, and S. Grimme, J. Chem. Phys. 142, 124104 (2015).

[204] Y. Fang, B. Xiao, J. Tao, J. Sun, and J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B 87, 214101 (2013).

[205] B. Santra et al., J. Chem. Phys. 139, 154702 (2013).

[206] O. Kambara, K. Takahashi, M. Hayashi, and J.-L. Kuo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 14, 11484

(2012).

[207] I. Hamada, J. Chem. Phys. 133, 214503 (2010).

[208] B. Kolb and T. Thonhauser, Phys. Rev. B 84, 045116 (2011).

[209] E. D. Murray and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 105502 (2012).

[210] A. Tkatchenko, R. A. DiStasio, R. Car, and M. Scheﬄer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 236402

(2012).

[211] V. Buch, P. Sandler, and J. Sadlej, J. Phys. Chem. B 102, 8641 (1998).

[212] J. L. Kuo and M. L. Klein, J. Phys. Chem. B 108, 19634 (2004).

[213] S. J. Singer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 135701 (2005).

[214] C. Knight et al., Phys. Rev. E 73, 056113 (2006).

[215] G. A. Tribello, B. Slater, and C. G. Salzmann, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 128, 12594 (2006).

[216] G. A. Tribello and B. Slater, Chem. Phys. Lett. 425, 246 (2006).

65

[217] X. F. Fan, D. Bing, J. Y. Zhang, Z. X. Shen, and J. L. Kuo, Comput. Mater. Sci. 49, S170

(2010).

[218] S. J. Singer and C. Knight, Adv. Chem. Phys. 147, 1 (2011).

[219] M. Del Ben, J. VandeVondele, and B. Slater, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 5, 4122 (2014).

[220] N. Bjerrum, Science 115, 385 (1952).

[221] E. R. Davidson and K. Morokuma, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 3741 (1984).

[222] S. M. Jackson and R. W. Whitworth, J. Chem. Phys. 103, 7647 (1995).

[223] S. M. Jackson, V. M. Nield, R. W. Whitworth, M. Oguro, and C. C. Wilson, J. Phys. Chem.

B 101, 6142 (1997).

[224] M. J. Iedema et al., J. Phys. Chem. B 102, 9203 (1998).

[225] J. L. Kuo, J. V. Coe, S. J. Singer, Y. B. Band, and L. Ojam¨ae, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 2527

(2001).

[226] J. L. Kuo and S. J. Singer, Phys. Rev. E 67, 016114 (2003).

[227] M. Sch¨onherr, B. Slater, J. Hutter, and J. VandeVondele, J. Phys. Chem. B 118, 590 (2014).

[228] C. Knight and S. J. Singer, J. Chem. Phys. 129, 164513 (2008).

[229] C. Salzmann, P. Radaelli, E. Mayer, and J. Finney, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 105701 (2009).

[230] C. Knight and S. J. Singer, J. Phys. Chem. B 109, 21040 (2005).

[231] J. J. Shephard and C. G. Salzmann, Chem. Phys. Lett. 637, 63 (2015).

[232] W. X. Zhang, C. He, J. S. Lian, and Q. Jiang, Chem. Phys. Lett. 421, 251 (2006).

[233] B. J. Murray and A. K. Bertram, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 186 (2006).

[234] T. L. Malkin, B. J. Murray, A. V. Brukhno, J. Anwar, and C. G. Salzmann, Proc. Nat.

Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 1041 (2012).

[235] W. F. Kuhs, C. Sippel, A. Falenty, and T. C. Hansen, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109,

21259 (2012).

[236] Z. Raza et al., Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13, 19788 (2011).

[237] P. Geiger et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 118, 10989 (2014).

[238] E. A. Engel, B. Monserrat, and R. J. Needs, Phys. Rev. X 5, 021033 (2015).

[239] K. R¨ottger, A. Endriss, J. Ihringer, S. Doyle, and W. F. Kuhs, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. B 50,

644 (1994).

[240] B. Pamuk, J. M. Soler, R. Ram´ırez, C. P. Herrero, P. W. Stephens, P. B. Allen, and M.-V.

Fern´andez-Serra, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 193003 (2012).

66

[241] B. Pamuk, P. B. Allen, M.-V. Fern´andez-Serra, Phys. Rev. B 92, 134105 (2015).

[242] R. Z. Khaliullin and T. D. K¨uhne, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 15, 15746 (2013).

[243] L. B. Skinner et al., J. Chem. Phys. 138, 074506 (2013).

[244] T. Str¨assle et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 067801 (2006).

[245] G. Weck et al., Phys. Rev. B 80, 180202 (2009).

[246] Y. Katayama et al., Phys. Rev. B 81, 014109 (2010).

[247] A. Luzar and D. Chandler, Nature 379, 55 (1996).

[248] A. Bankura, A. Karmakar, V. Carnevale, A. Chandra, and M. L. Klein, J. Phys. Chem. C

118, 29401 (2014).

[249] R. G. Fern´andez, J. L. F. Abascal, and C. Vega, J. Chem. Phys. 124, 144506 (2006).

[250] S. Habershon, T. E. Markland, and D. E. Manolopoulos, J. Chem. Phys. 131, 024501 (2009).

[251] T. D. K¨uhne, M. Krack, and M. Parrinello, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 5, 235 (2009).

[252] T. K¨uhne, M. Krack, F. R. Mohamed, and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 066401 (2007).

[253] T. D. Kuhne and R. Z. Khaliullin, Nature Commun. 4, 1450 (2013).

[254] S. Izvekov and G. A. Voth, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 10372 (2002).

[255] I. F. W. Kuo, C. J. Mundy, M. J. McGrath, and J. I. Siepmann, J. Chem. Theory Comput.

2, 1274 (2006).

[256] A. Soper and C. Benmore, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 065502 (2008).

[257] B. Chen, I. Ivanov, M. L. Klein, and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 215503 (2003).

[258] J. Morrone and R. Car, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 017801 (2008).

[259] M. Ceriotti, J. Cuny, M. Parrinello, and D. E. Manolopoulos, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.

110, 15591 (2013).

[260] L. Wang, M. Ceriotti, and T. E. Markland, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 104502 (2014).

[261] M. Ceriotti, J. More, and D. E. Manolopoulos, Comput. Phys. Commun. 185, 1019 (2014).

[262] M. Ceriotti et al., submitted .

[263] H.-S. Lee and M. E. Tuckerman, J. Chem. Phys. 125, 154507 (2006).

[264] K. Forster-Tonigold and A. Gross, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 064501 (2014).

[265] A. E. Mattsson and T. R. Mattsson, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 5, 887 (2009).

[266] T. Todorova, A. P. Seitsonen, J. Hutter, I. F. W. Kuo, and C. J. Mundy, J. Phys. Chem. B

110, 3685 (2006).

67

[267] R. A. DiStasio, B. Santra, Z. F. Li, X. F. Wu, and R. Car, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 084502

(2014).

[268] M. Guidon, F. Schiﬀmann, J. Hutter, and J. VandeVondele, J. Chem. Phys. 128, 214104

(2008).

[269] M. Guidon, J. Hutter, and J. VandeVondele, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 6, 2348 (2010).

[270] M. Del Ben, J. Hutter, and J. VandeVondele, J. Chem. Phys. 143, 054506 (2015).

[271] I. F. W. Kuo and C. J. Mundy, Science 303, 658 (2004).

[272] M. J. McGrath et al., ChemPhysChem 6, 1894 (2005).

[273] J. Schmidt et al., J. Phys. Chem. B 113, 11959 (2009).

[274] M. D. Baer et al., J. Chem. Phys. 135, 124712 (2011).

[275] Z. Ma, Y. Zhang, and M. E. Tuckerman, J. Chem. Phys. 137, 044506 (2012).

[276] I. C. Lin, A. P. Seitsonen, I. Tavernelli, and U. Rothlisberger, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 8,

3902 (2012).

[277] M. Del Ben, M. Schoenherr, J. Hutter, and J. VandeVondele, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 4, 3753

(2013).

[278] F. Corsetti, E. Artacho, J. M. Soler, S. S. Alexandre, and M. V. Fern´andez-Serra, J. Chem.

Phys. 139, 194502 (2013).

[279] G. Miceli, S. de Gironcoli, and A. Pasquarello, J. Chem. Phys. 142, 034501 (2015).

[280] A. P. Gaiduk, F. Gygi, and G. Galli, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6, 2902 (2015).

[281] R. Jonchiere, A. P. Seitsonen, G. Ferlat, A. M. Saitta, and R. Vuilleumier, J. Chem. Phys.

135, 154503 (2011).

[282] M. J. McGrath, I. F. W. Kuo, and J. I. Siepmann, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13, 19943

(2011).

[283] S. Yoo and S. S. Xantheas, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 121105 (2011).

[284] D. Alfe and M. J. Gillan, in preparation .

[285] A. Møgelhøj et al., J. Phys. Chem. B 115, 14149 (2011).

[286] M. Allesch, E. Schwegler, F. Gygi, and G. Galli, J. Chem. Phys. 120, 5192 (2004).

[287] K. Leung and S. B. Rempe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 2153 (2006).

[288] I. Hamada, Phys. Rev. B 89, 121103 (2014).

[289] J.-P. Piquemal, A. Marquez, O. Parisel, and C. Giessner-Prettre, J. Comput. Chem. 26,

1052 (2005).

68

[290] P. Jureˇcka, J. ˇSponer, J. ˇCerny, and P. Hobza, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 1985 (2006).

[291] J. ˇRez´a´c, K. E. Riley, and P. Hobza, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7, 2427 (2011).

[292] J. ˇRez´a´c, K. E. Riley, and P. Hobza, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7, 3466 (2011).

[293] A. Tkatchenko and O. von Lilienfeld, Phys. Rev. B 78, 045116 (2008).

[294] Y. H. Huang and G. J. O. Beran, J. Chem. Phys. 143, 044113 (2015).

[295] N. Bonnet and N. Marzari, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 245501 (2014).

[296] B. Santra, R. A. DiStasio, F. Martellia,

and R. Car,

Molec. Phys. doi:

10.1080/00268976.2015.1058432 (2015). .

[297] T. Morawietz, A. Singraber, C. Dellago, and J. Behler, unpublished .

[298] A. Zen, Y. Luo, G. Mazzola, L. Guidoni, and S. Sorella, J. Chem. Phys. 142, 144111 (2015).

[299] A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 4524 (1986).

[300] M. Levy and J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. A 32, 2010 (1985).

[301] R. Colle and O. Salvetti, Theor. Chim. Acta 37, 329 (1975).

[302] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

[303] J. Harris and R. O. Jones, J. Phys. F: Metal Phys. 4, 1170 (1974).

[304] O. Gunnarsson and B. I. Lundqvist, Phys. Rev. B 13, 4274 (1976).

[305] Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 3, 289 (2007).

[306] F. L. Hirshfeld, Theor. Chim. Acta 44, 129 (1977).

[307] E. R. Johnson and A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 024101 (2005).

[308] K. Rapcewicz and N. W. Ashcroft, Phys. Rev. B 44, 4032 (1991).

[309] Y. Andersson, D. C. Langreth, and B. I. Lundqvist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 102 (1996).

[310] H. Rydberg et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 126402 (2003).

[311] R. Sabatini, T. Gorni, and S. de Gironcoli, Phys. Rev. B 87, 041108 (2013).

[312] G. Rom´an-P´erez and J. M. Soler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 096102 (2009).

[313] M. V. Fern´andez-Serra, G. Ferlat, and E. Artacho, Molec. Simul. 31, 361 (2005).

[314] M. J. McGrath et al., J. Phys. Chem. A 110, 640 (2006).

[315] H.-S. Lee and M. E. Tuckerman, J. Chem. Phys. 126, 164501 (2007).

[316] A. Z. Panagiotopoulos, Mol. Phys. 61, 813 (1987).

[317] S. B. Rempe, T. R. Mattsson, and K. Leung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 10, 4685 (2008).

[318] X. Xu and W. A. Goddard, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 2673 (2004).

[319] A. K. Soper, J. Phys: Condens. Matter 19, 335206 (2007).

semi-local

disp-inclusive

69

method Edim

OO method

b Rdim
380c 2.72c

LDA

Edim

b Rdim
OO

PBEsol 265c 2.81c

PBE

220a 2.90c PBE-D3

239c 2.89c

PBE-DRSLL

245c 2.94c

PBE-TS

BLYP 181a 2.95c BLYP-D3

241c 2.89c

219c 2.94c

revPBE 156c 3.01c revPBE-DRSLL 183c 3.03c

PBE0

215a 2.89b PBE0-TS

234c 2.89c

optPBE-DRSLL 215c 2.95c

optB88-DRSLL 212c 2.96c

rPW86-DF2

217c 2.97c

TABLE I. Binding energies Edim

b

(meV units) and equilibrium O-O distances Rdim

OO (˚A units)

of the H2O dimer in its global minimum conﬁguration computed with a variety of semi-local,

hybrid and dispersion-inclusive XC approximations. Benchmark values from CCSD(T) calculations

are Edim

b = 217.6 meV, Rdim

OO = 2.909 ˚A. References to semi-local functionals: LDA [109, 110],

PBE [302], revPBE [119], PBEsol [118], BLYP [82, 83], PBE0 [88, 302]. References to numerical

values: a: [63], b: [112], c: this work.

70

s.p. bench PBE BLYP PBE0 PBE-TS PBE0-TS revPBE-DRSLL optPBE-DRSLL

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0

21

25

30

41

44

79

0

25

35

46

65

74

96

0

23

32

49

65

73

96

0

24

30

44

60

65

92

154

160

155

160

77

95

95

90

10

117

132

125

127

0

24

35

48

68

78

93

149

92

130

0

23

29

47

63

70

90

151

88

125

0

17

24

35

45

49

66

121

63

92

0

20

28

36

49

54

79

143

77

112

TABLE II. Energies (meV units) of the Smith stationary points of the water dimer relative to the

energy of the global-minimum geometry given by benchmark CCSD(T) calculations (bench) and

by a selection of semi-local and dispersion-inclusive exchange-correlation functionals. Benchmark

values and values computed with PBE, BLYP and PBE0 are taken from Ref. [101]; dispersion-

inclusive values were obtained within the present work. Geometries of the stationary points are

shown in Fig. 2.

71

Method

Prism Cage

Book

Ring

CCSD(T) [171]

337 335 (2)

329 (8)

324 (13)

DMC [75]

332 330 (2)

328 (4)

321 (11)

PBE [75]

336

339 (-3) 346 (-10) 344 (-8)

BLYP [75]

274

277 (-3) 288 (-14) 290 (-16)

PBE0 [75]

323

325 (-2) 331 (-8) 331 (-8)

B3LYP [75]

294

297 (-3) 305 (-11) 307 (-13)

PBE-D [75]

378 380 (-2) 378 (0)

367 (11)

BLYP-D [75]

360 360 (0)

356 (4)

345 (15)

BLYP-D3 [179]

353 347 (6)

344 (9)

339 (24)

PBE-TS [75]

370 373 (-3) 371 (-1)

361 (9)

PBE0-TSz

353 356 (-3) 354 (-1)

347 (6)

PBE0-D [75]

361 362 (-1) 359 (2)

351 (10)

revPBE-DRSLLz

275

275 (0) 276 (1)

272 (3)

rPW86-DF2z

329 328 (1)

325 (4)

316 (13)

optPBE-DRSLL [136] 335 334 (1)

332 (3)

323 (13)

optB88-DRSLL [136] 347 347 (0)

344 (3)

334 (13)

TABLE III. Binding energies (meV/monomer) of the prism, cage, book and ring isomers of the H2O

hexamer according to CCSD(T) and DMC benchmark calculations and a selection of semi-local,

hybrid and dispersion-inclusive exchange-correlation functionals. The lowest energy structure(s)

for each approach is indicated in bold. Energies relative to the prism are given in parenthesis. z:

this work. Geometries of the isomers are shown in Fig. 4.

72

Method

Expt. [202]

DMC [78]

EIh
sub

610

605

EVIII
sub

∆EIh−VIII

577

575

33

30

LDA [204]

943 (333) 813 (233) 130 (97)

PBE [205]

636 (26) 459 (118) 177 (143)

BLYP [203]

555 (-55) 347 (-230) 208 (175)

revPBE [203]

499 (-111) 291(-286) 208 (175)

PBE0 [205]

598 (-12) 450 (-127) 148 (115)

PBE-TS [205]

714 (114) 619 (42)

95 (62)

PBE0-TS [205]

672 (62)

596 (19)

76 (43)

PBE-D3 [203]

755 (145) 624 (47)

131 (98)

BLYP-D3 [203]

690 (80)

594 (17)

96 (63)

revPBE-D3 [203]

659 (49)

555 (-22)

104 (71)

revPBE-DRSLL [205] 559 (-51) 517 (-60)

42 (9)

rPW86-DF2 [205]

619 (9)

586 (9)

33 (0)

optPBE-DRSLL [205] 668 (58)

630 (53)

38 (5)

optB88-DRSLL [204] 696 (86)

670 (93)

26 (7)

TABLE IV. Sublimation energies (meV units) EIh

sub and EVIII

sub of ice Ih and VIII (zero-point vibra-

tional energies omitted) from experiment, DMC and a number of XC functionals. Also reported

is the diﬀerence of sublimation energies ∆EIh−VIII

sub

between ice Ih and VIII. The deviation of each

computed value from experiment is given in parenthesis.

73

Method

Ih

VIII

Expt. [202]

32.05

19.1 [20.09]

DMC [78]

31.69

19.46

PBE [205]

30.79 (3.9) 20.74 (8.6)

BLYP [203]

32.2 (0.5) 22.0 (15.2)

revPBE [203]

33.1 (3.3) 24.5 (28.3)

PBE0 [205]

30.98 (3.3) 20.27 (6.1)

PBE-TS [205]

29.67 (7.4) 20.13 (5.4)

PBE0-TS [205]

29.88 (6.8) 19.70 (3.1)

PBE-D3 [203]

29.1 (9.2)

19.1 (0.0)

BLYP-D3 [203]

30.4 (5.1)

19.4 (1.6)

revPBE-D3 [203]

30.4 (5.1)

19.7 (3.1)

revPBE-DRSLL [205] 34.38 (7.3) 22.96 (20.2)

rPW86-DF2 [205]

33.69 (5.1) 21.27 (11.4)

optPBE-DRSLL [205] 31.63 (1.3) 20.55 (7.6)

optB88-DRSLL [296] 30.2 (5.8)

19.1 (0.0)

TABLE V. Comparisons of the calculated and experimental equilibrium volumes (˚A3/H2O) of ice

Ih and VIII. Note that calculations with a range of XC functionals [203, 205, 209] suggest that

zero-point energy eﬀects are ca. 5% in ice VIII. The experimental value has therefore been corrected

by removing this 5% zero-point expansion, with the uncorrected value given in square brackets.

In ice Ih, the zero-point expansion is much less and varies by several percent from one functional

to the next [203, 205, 209], so we have not corrected the volume of this phase. The percentage

deviation of each computed value from experiment is given in parenthesis.

ref

sim-alg

N T

ρeq

tpr

rmax
OO

gmax
OO

rmin
OO

gmin
OO

BLYP functional

[69]

[271]

N V E/CP

32 293

-

N V T /CP/slaba

256 300 0.85

[73] N V E/N V T /CP/BO/MC 64 323

74

D

0.1

-

0.4

0.2

-

0.5

-

-

-

0.48

12

0.6

-

-

-

-

-

0.20

-

-

1.0

−

-

-

-

1.14

-

2.73

3.60

3.33

0.39

20

5

10

-

2.76

11-32 2.78

17-32 2.78

20

2.75

-

2.98

3.20

3.30

3.03

-

3.32

3.33

3.30

3.28

-

0.60

0.60

0.55

0.55

-

-

30

10

30

60

13

2.80 ∼ 2.70

3.40 ∼ 0.65

2.80

2.80

2.79

2.80

2.80

3.10

2.90

3.00

2.30

2.88

3.45

3.65

3.31

3.6

3.35

0.50

0.60

0.48

0.75

0.62

2.75 3.20(2.83) 3.32 0.42(0.60)

15-50 2.73

< 250 2.79

20

57

15

?

2.77

2.80

2.82

2.82

50-117 2.77

20

25

20

-

40

-

2.77

2.77

2.82

2.83

2.77

2.83

3.40

2.92

3.18

2.94

3.30

3.17

2.25

2.86

3.16

3.20

2.90

2.44

2.99

3.04

3.25

3.33

3.50

3.30

3.40

3.53

3.50

3.31

3.40

3.30

3.50

3.46

3.27

3.46

0.43

0.57

0.35

0.60

0.40

0.23

0.95

0.66

0.45

0.57

0.48

0.35

0.62

0.44

[71]

[313]

[74]

[272]

[314]

[263]

[266]

[255]

[315]

[258]

[265]

[251]

[273]

[143]

[281]

[274]

[283]

[276]

[275]

[149]

[192]

[277]

[248]

[270]

64 300

32 300

32 324

-

-

-

-

64 298 0.79

64 323 0.84

32 300

32 350

64 423

32 309

64 300

64 300

64 300

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

N V E/BO

N V E/BO

N V E/CP,BO

N P T /MC
Gibbs/MCb
N V T /CP

N V T /CP
N V E/CPc
N V E/CP

N V T /CP(PI)d

N V T /BO

N V T /BO

N P T /BO

N V E/CP

N V T /BO

64 330 0.77

25-45 2.83

64 316

128 317

-

-

N V T /BO/slabe

216 300 ∼ 0.8

N V T /BO

N V E/CP

N P T /CP

N V E/BO
N V T /BOf
N P T /MC

N V E/BO

N P T /MC

125 436

64 319

-

-

64 300 0.92

64 308

-

64 350 0.78

64 295 0.78

64 353

-

64 295 0.80

TABLE VI. Summary of DFT simulations of liquid water performed with BLYP functional.

Columns show: literature reference, simulation-algorithm (ensemble and sampling technique: BO

= Born-Oppenheimer, CP = Car-Parrinello, MC = Monte Carlo), number N of monomers in cell,

temperature T (K), equilibrium density ρeq (g/cm3), duration of production run tpr (ps) (MD

simulations only), distance to ﬁrst maximum rmax

OO (˚A), height of ﬁrst maximum gmax

OO , distance

to ﬁrst minimum rmin

OO (˚A) and height of ﬁrst minimum gmin

OO in O-O rdf, diﬀusion coeﬃcient

D (10−9 m2/s). All constant-volume simulations performed at density close to 1.0 g/cm3, unless

otherwise noted. a: slab with free surfaces; b: Gibbs ensemble [316], ρeq density of liquid in

coexistence with vapor; c: density of simulated system 0.71 g/cm3; d: performed with and without

path-integral (PI) representation of quantum nuclear eﬀects, values with PI in parentheses; e: slab

with free surfaces; f: density of simulated system 0.78 g/cm3 gives pressure close to 0.

ref

sim-alg

N T

ρeq

tpr

PBE functional

OO gmax
rmax

OO rmin

OO gmin

OO D

75

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

N V E/CP
N V E/CP
N V T /BO
N V T /CP

[286]
54 291
[69]
54 295
[70]
64 306
[72]
32 325
[74] N V E/CP,BO 32 337
N V T /CP
32 350
[266]
N V T /BO
54 320
[287]
N V T /BO
[317]
64 300
64 313
N V E/BO
[268]
64 300
[265]
N V T /BO
[251] N V T /BOa
64 300
64 330 0.87
N P T /BO
[273]
[269]
N V T /BO
64 330
32 297
N V E/BO
[112]
32 367
[32]
N V E/BO
[285] N V E/BOb
64 299
[276]
N V E/CP
64 314
64 334
N V E/BO
[264]
64 300
N V T /CP
[267]
64 349 0.87
N P H/BO
[279]
[280]
N V T /BO
64 400 0.81

-
-
-
-
-
-
-

20
20
20
20
20
10
20
15
13

15-50
< 250
25-45

30
20
17
10

50-117

17
20
20

2.70
2.71
2.72
2.70
2.71
2.70
2.78
2.72
2.70
2.70
2.73
2.76
2.70
2.71
2.70
2.75
2.72
2.72
2.69
2.75

8 × 20

-

revPBE functional

[266]
N V T /CP
[251] N V T /BOa
[144] N V E/BOc
[276]
N V E/CP

N V E/BO
[313]
[265]
N V T /BO
[251] N V T /BOa
N V E/BO
[264]

32 350
64 300
64 341
64 323

32 300
64 300
64 300
64 295

-
-
-
-

10

< 250

20

50-117

2.81
2.77
2.83
2.80

RPBE functional

-
-
-
-

17-32
15-50
< 250

17

PBE0 functional

3.35
3.27
3.83
3.32
3.18
2.99
3.0
3.57
3.40
3.50
3.25
3.54
3.55
3.67
3.35
2.93
3.19
3.30
3.28
3.40

-

2.29
3.01
2.35
2.38

2.50
2.60
3.19
2.80

2.58
3.30
3.45
3.01
2.95
2.96

-

3.27
3.32
3.25
3.30
3.25
3.29
3.30
3.22
3.28
3.25
3.28
3.40
3.30
3.24
3.33
3.38
3.27
3.27
3.28
3.40

-

3.34
3.31
3.45
3.34

3.40
3.27
3.32
3.30

3.35
3.30
3.30
3.31
3.37
3.30

-

0.45
0.46
0.33
0.27
0.42
0.47
0.60
0.30
0.38
0.40
0.44
0.30
0.35
0.28
0.40
0.63
0.43
0.37
0.37
0.30

-

0.80
0.50
0.85
0.90

0.95
0.70
0.42
0.68

0.73
0.40
0.40
0.58
0.60
0.53

-

0.3
0.1
0.1
0.12
0.6
0.47

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.3
-

0.20

-
-

1.8
-
2.7
2.1

-
-
-
-

2.8
-
-
-
-

0.67

-
-

2.82
2.78
2.75
2.76

2.74
2.70
2.70
2.68
2.73
2.71

[266]
[268]
[269]
[112]
[32]
[267]
[280]
[270]

N V T /CP
N V E/BO
N V T /BO
N V E/BO
N V E/BO
N V T /CP
N V T /BO
N P T /MC

-
-
-
-
-
-

32 350
64 325
64 330
32 330
32 374
64 300
64 400 0.71
64 295 0.83

10
13
30
20
17
20

8 × 20

-

-

2.78

3.28

3.42

0.35

TABLE VII. Summary of simulations of liquid water performed with PBE, revPBE, RPBE and

PBE0 functionals. Columns as in Table VI. All constant-volume simulations performed at density

close to 1.0 g/cm3, unless otherwise noted. a: employs a form of coupled electron-ion dynamics

that maintains the system close to the BO surface; b: intramolecular O-H bond-lengths ﬁxed at

gas-phase value; c: density of simulated system 0.95 g/cm3.

ref

disp

sim-alg

N

T

ρeq

tpr

OO gmax
rmax

OO rmin

OO gmin

OO D

76

based on BLYP functional

N P T /BO

64

330

0.99

25-45

N P T /CP

1.07
N V T /BO/slaba 216 330 ∼ 1.0

300

64

[273]

[275]

[274]

[276]

[248]

[281]

[283]

[277]

[248]

[270]

D1

D2

D2

D2

D2

D3

D3

D3

D3

D3

[143] DCACP

[276] DCACP

[149]

[192]

GAP

GAP

[273]

[276]

[277]

[264]

[248]

[280]

[270]

D1

D2

D3

D3

D3

D3

D3

[276] DCACP

[267]

TS

[144] DRSLL

[112] DRSLL

[278] DRSLL

[248] DRSLL

N V E/CP

N V E/BO

N V T /BO

N V T /BO

N P T /MC

N V E/BO

N P T /MC

N V E/CP

N V E/CP

N V E/BO
N V T /BOb

N P T /BO

N V E/CP

N P T /MC

N V E/BO

N V E/BO

N V T /BO

N P T /MC

N V E/CP

N V T /CP

N V E/BO

N V E/BO

N V E/BO

N V E/BO

64

64

321

328

128 322

125 385

64

64

64

64

64

64

64

295

330

295

325

308

308

350

-

-

-

-

1.07

-

1.07

-

-

-

1.05

64

64

64

64

64

64

64

64

64

64

32

330

324

295

348

324

400

295

323

300

304

295

1.06

-

-

1.02

1.06

-

-

1.13

-

128 301

1.18

64

328

-

based on PBE functional

0.94

25-45

-

50-117

2.80

2.73

2.77

2.78

2.76

2.85

2.79

2.78

2.79

2.78

2.79

2.79

2.79

2.75

2.76

2.72

2.73

2.72

2.72

20

15

50-117

40

122

13

-

40

-

20

50-117

25

20

-

17

40

8 × 20

-

-

50-117

20

20

20

20

40

2.73

2.71

2.71

2.83

2.80

2.80

2.82

2.78

2.84

2.87

2.83

3.17

2.76

2.40

3.01

2.80

2.78

2.67

2.72

2.85

2.60

3.35

3.23

3.24

3.30

3.38

-

3.07

3.27

2.99

2.17

2.77

2.51

2.41

3.45

3.50

3.35

3.44

3.40

3.50

3.65

3.51

3.47

3.51

3.38

3.36

3.35

3.50

3.35

3.30

3.15

3.27

3.29

-

3.25

3.28

3.27

3.38

3.34

3.40

3.58

0.80

1.00

0.52

0.77

0.63

0.80

0.90

1.00

0.80

0.92

0.85

0.85

0.76

0.90

0.45

0.47

0.73

0.42

0.42

-

0.69

0.40

0.54

0.92

0.71

1.00

1.03

-

-

-

1.6

0.71

1.6

-

-

1.81

-

-

1.7

1.7

-

-

0.6

-

-

0.39

-

-

0.5

0.44

2.08

-

1.7

2.57

TABLE VIII. Summary of DFT simulations of liquid water performed with dispersion-inclusive

functionals based on BLYP and PBE. Columns as in Tables VI and VII, but with column 2

showing dispersion type. All constant-volume simulations performed at density close to 1.0 g/cm3,

unless otherwise noted. Dispersion types: D1, D2, D3 are Grimme dispersion of Refs. [131–133]

respectively; DCACP (dispersion-correcting atomic-centered potentials) is technique of Ref. [138];

TS is Tkatchenko-Scheﬄer technique [134]; DRSLL is non-local correlation technique of Dion et

al. [135]; GAP (Gaussian approximation potential) is technique of Refs. [149, 150]. a: slab with

free surfaces; b: density of simulated system 1.05 g/cm3 gives pressure close to 0.

ref

disp

sim-alg

N

T

ρeq

tpr

based on revPBE functional

OO gmax
rmax

OO rmin

OO gmin

OO D

[276]

[248]

[276]

[144]

D2

D3

N V E/CP 64

N V E/BO 64

DCACP

N V E/CP 64

322

316

331

-

-

-

50-117

40

50-117

DRSLL

N V E/BO 64

300 1.02

20

2.80

2.81

2.74

2.92

2.34

2.54

2.94

2.35

3.55

3.51

3.35

3.46

0.95

0.83

0.76

1.10

3.4

1.85

1.6

2.63

77

based on RPBE functional

[264]

D3

N V E/BO 64

314

-

17

2.80

2.58

3.40

0.83

based on optB88 functional

[112]

[248]

[270]

DRSLL

DRSLL

DRSLL

N V E/BO 32

N V E/BO 64

326

341

-

-

N P T /MC 64

295 1.08

20

40

-

2.78

2.76

2.74

2.83

2.75

2.94

3.33

3.33

3.34

0.73

0.75

0.80

[285]

DRSLL

N V E/BO 64

276

-

10

2.88

2.32

-

-

based on optPBE functional

based on rPW86 functional

[112]

rPW86-DF2 N V E/BO 32

[285]

rPW86-DF2 N V E/BO 64

291

283

-

-

VV10

N V E/BO 200 300 1.19

rVV10-b9.3 N P H/BO 64

342 0.99

rVV10

N P T /MC 64

295 1.08

[278]

[279]

[270]

[267]

[277]

[280]

[270]

TS

D3

D3

D3

20

10

20

20

-

2.84

2.90

2.75

2.75

2.73

2.72

2.74

2.54

2.50

3.1

2.95

3.22

2.76

3.23

-

3.56

0.94

-

3.3

3.30

3.32

3.31

3.30

-

-

0.60

0.63

0.79

0.70

0.67

-

based on PBE0 functional

N V T /CP 64

300

-

N P T /MC 64

295 1.02

20

-

N V T /BO 64

400 0.96

8 × 20

-

N P T /MC 64

295 1.05

-

2.74

2.88

3.29

0.79

-

-

1.57

-

-

-

-

-

1.5

-

0.98

-

-

-

TABLE IX. Summary of DFT simulations of liquid water performed with dispersion-inclusive

functionals based on revPBE, RPBE, optB88, optPBE, rPW86 and PBE0. Columns as in Ta-

ble VIII. All constant-volume simulations performed at density close to 1.0 g/cm3, unless otherwise

noted. Dispersion types: D2, D3 are Grimme dispersion of Refs. [132, 133] respectively; DCACP

(dispersion-correcting atomic-centered potentials) is technique of Ref. [138]; TS is Tkatchenko-

Scheﬄer technique [134]; DRSLL is non-local correlation technique of Dion et al. [135]; rPW86-DF2

is revised form of DRSLL due to Lee et al. [140]; VV10 is non-correlation technique of Vydrov and

Van Voorhis [137]; rVV10-b9.3 is revised form of VV10 due to Sabatini et al. [311].

method

LDA

PBE

BLYP

PBE0

revPBE-DRSLL

optPBE-DRSLL

optB88-DRSLL

rPW86-DF2

PBE-TS

PBE0-TS

BLYP-D3

f mono
ss
60

Edim

b
0

Ering

b
–

sub ∆Eprism−ring
EIh
–

0

b

EIh−VIII

sub
10

Rdim

eq V VIII
OO V Ih
0
0

eq
–

50

20

80

30

40

60

20

50

80

20

100

70

100

70

100

100

100

80

90

100

90

70

100

50

100

100

100

70

80

90

80

50

90

50

50

20

100

0

40

30

0

0

0

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

0

0

0

100

100

100

100

40

60

40

100

70

60

90

0

60

50

70

90

90

70

100

70

30

90

50

50

30

40

50

20

0

40

0

30

100

0

50

70

90

78

Total

8

57

41

63

48

74

76

71

57

72

66

TABLE X. Percentage scores of selected XC functionals computed using the scheme explained

in Sec. IX D. Physical quantities scored are: monomer symmetric stretch frequency f mono

ss

, dimer

, ring-hexamer binding energy per monomer Ering

, ice Ih sublimation energy

b

b

binding energy Edim
sub, diﬀerence ∆Eprism−ring
EIh
hexamer, diﬀerence ∆EIh−VIII

b

sub

of binding energies per monomer of prism and ring isomers of the

of sublimation energies of ice Ih and VIII, equilibrium O-O distance

Rdim

OO in dimer, and equilibrium volumes per monomer V Ih

eq , V VIII

eq

of ice Ih and VIII. The total

score in the ﬁnal column is the average of the nine individual scores. Numerical values leading to

the individual scores are taken from earlier Tables in this paper, except for the stretch frequencies

f mono
ss

. These frequencies were computed as part of this work, apart from those predicted by LDA,

BLYP and BLYP-D3 functionals. For LDA the value is taken from Ref.

[318], for BLYP the value

is taken from Ref. [97] and the BLYP-D3 and BLYP values are assumed to be the same. Note that

data is not available for LDA for all criteria but from the limited data available it is clear that it

is abysmal.

79

FIG. 1. a) Variation of the monomer deformation energy E1b with deviation δRO−H of the O-

H bond length of an H2O molecule from its equilibrium value in the symmetric stretch mode,

calculated with CCSD(T), PBE, BLYP and PBE0. Inset shows the errors ∆E1b of the deformation

energy with the three XC functionals relative to CCSD(T) (benchmark minus DFT value of E1b).

(Note that δRO−H is computed relative to the equilibrium value of the O-H bond length given by

PBE, which is slightly greater than that calculated with PBE0 and CCSD(T).) (b) Errors ∆E1b for

deformed monomers drawn from a simulation of liquid water as a function of the longest O-H bond

of each monomer. The vertical dashed line indicates the gas-phase equiibrium O-H bond length

(0.97 ˚A) of a monomer (optimized with PBE) and the horizontal solid, dashed and dash-dotted

lines represent the average errors of PBE, BLYP and PBE0 respectively. Note that a positive error

∆E1b indicates that it is too easy to stretch O-H bonds of the monomers with a given XC functional

compared with CCSD(T). Reproduced with permission from J. Chem. Phys. 131, 124509 (2009).

Copyright 2009, American Institute of Physics.

80

FIG. 2. Geometries of the 10 Smith stationary points SPn (n = 1, 2, . . . 10) of the water dimer,

with their point-group symmetries.

)

V
e
m

(
 
r
o
r
r
e

 
y
d
o
b
-
2

 60

 40

 20

 0

-20

-40

PBE
BLYP

(a)

)

V
e
m

(
 
r
o
r
r
e

 
y
d
o
b
-
2

 60

 40

 20

 0

-20

-40

81

BLYP-D3
PBE-D3
PBE-TS
PBE-DRSLL

(b)

 4

 7
 3
O-O distance (Angstrom)

 5

 6

 4

 7
 3
O-O distance (Angstrom)

 6

 5

FIG. 3. Errors of (a) semi-local functionals PBE and BLYP and (b) dispersion-inclusive functionals

BLYP-D3, PBE-D3, PBE-TS and PBE-DRSLL for the 2-body energies of a sample of dimer

geometries drawn from a MD simulation of liquid water [101].

82

FIG. 4. Isomers of the water hexamer: (a) prism, (b) cage, (c) book and (d) ring.

83

PBE-1
PBE-2
BLYP-1
BLYP-2

 200

 150

 100

 50

 0

-50

)
r
e
m
o
n
o
m
V
e
m

/

(
 
r
o
r
r
e
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

 12

 14

 16

 18

 20

sq rad gyr (A2)

FIG. 5. Errors in computed binding energy per monomer (meV units) of the water 27-mer as a

function of radius of gyration (see text). Binding energies are computed with the PBE and BLYP

functionals, corrected for 1- and 2-body errors, with benchmark values from diﬀusion Monte Carlo

(DMC) calculations. Adapted with permission from J. Chem. Phys. 141, 014104 (2014) .

84

LDA

PW91

BLYP

revPBE

PBE

PBE0

B3LYP

-50

 0

 50

 100

 150

dimer (meV)

)

V
e
m

(
 
)
h

I
(
 

e
c
i
 

d
n
a

 
)
g
n
i
r
(
 
r
e
m
a
x
e
h

 500

 400

 300

 200

 100

 0

-100

-200

FIG. 6. Errors of sublimation energy per monomer of ice Ih crystal (blue squares) and binding

energy per monomer of ring-hexamer (red circles) plotted against error of dimer binding energy

for chosen semi-local and hybrid exchange-correlation functionals.

85

FIG. 7. Diﬀerences Esub(Exp) − Esub(Calc) between experimental and calculated values of the

zero-pressure sublimation energies of the ice Ih, IX, II and VIII structures. Calculated values

employ the semi-local functionals PBE and PBE0, a selection of dispersion-inclusive functionals,

and diﬀusion Monte Carlo (DMC). Zero-point vibrational contributions to the experimental values

have been subtracted. Adapted with permission from J. Chem. Phys. 139, 154702 (2013).

86

PBE
BLYP
RPBE
expt

 3

 4

r (Angstrom)

 5

 6

PBE
RPBE
expt

 2

 3

 4

 5

r (Angstrom)

PBE
RPBE
expt

 2

 3

r (Angstrom)

 4

 5

(a)

 3

 2

 1

)
r
(
O
O
g

 0

 2

 2

(b)

)
r
(
H
O
g

 1

(c)

 0

 2

 1

 0

 1

)
r
(
H
H
g

FIG. 8. Panels (a), (b) and (c) show O-O, O-H and H-H radial distribution functions (rdfs) of liquid

water at ambient temperature and experimental density from experiment and from MD simulations

based on the PBE and RPBE approximations (results from BLYP are also shown for gOO(r)).

Simulation rdfs with PBE and RPBE are from Ref. [264] and results with BLYP from Ref. [248].

Experimental rdf gOO(r) is from high-energy x-ray diﬀraction measurements [243], and rdfs gOH(r)

and gHH(r) are from joint reﬁnement of neutron and x-ray diﬀraction measurements [319].

87

LDA
PBEsol
AM05
PBE
BLYP
RPBE

 3

 4

r (Angstrom)

 5

)
r
(
O
O
g

 4

 3

 2

 1

 0

 2

FIG. 9. The O-O rdf of liquid water at experimental density and T = 300 K computed with a

series of semi-local functionals. Adapted from Ref. [265], with permission.

(a)

 3

 2

 1

)
r
(
O
O
g

 0

 2

(b)

)
r
(
O
O
g

 3

 2

 1

 0

 2

88

BLYP
BLYP-D3
PBE-D3
expt 1
expt 2

 3

 4

r (Angstrom)

 5

 6

revPBE-D3
PBE-DRSLL
optB88-DRSLL
expt 1
expt 2

 3

 4

r (Angstrom)

 5

 6

FIG. 10. Oxygen-oxygen rdf gOO(r) of liquid water from BLYP and dispersion-inclusive DFT

approximations, compared with experiment. Simulation results are from Ref. [248]. Experimental

results are from joint reﬁnement of neutron and x-ray measurements [319] (expt 1: solid black

curve) and from high-energy x-ray diﬀraction measurements [243] (expt 2: dashed black curve).

