6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
3
9
9
1
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the
Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

Abstract Tidal streams from existing and destroyed satellite galaxies populate the
outer regions of the Andromeda galaxy (M31). This inhomogeneous debris can be
studied without many of the obstacles that plague Milky Way research. We review
the history of tidal stream research in M31, and in its main satellite galaxies. We
highlight the numerous tidal streams observed around M31, some of which reside at
projected distances of up to ∼ 120 kpc from the center of this galaxy. Most notable
is the Giant Stellar Stream, a signature of the most recent signiﬁcant accretion event
in the M31 system. This event involved an early-type progenitor of mass ∼ 109 M⊙
that came within a few kpc of M31’s center roughly a gigayear ago; almost all of
the inner halo (R ≤ 50 kpc) debris in M31 can be tied either directly or indirectly
to this event. We draw attention to the fact that most of M31’s outer halo globular
clusters lie preferentially on tidal streams and discuss the potential this offers to
use these systems as probes of the accretion history. Tidal features observed around
M33, M32, NGC 205 and NGC 147 are also reviewed. We conclude by discussing
future prospects for this ﬁeld.

1 Introduction

Within the context of the cold dark matter paradigm, structure formation proceeds
hierarchically and galaxies like the Milky Way and Andromeda (M31) are predicted
to arise from the merger and accretion of many smaller sub-systems as well as from

A. M. N. Ferguson
Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Blackford Hill, Edinburgh EH9 3HJ, UK
e-mail: ferguson@roe.ac.uk

A. D. Mackey
Research School of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Australian National University, Mount Stromlo
Observatory, Cotter Road, Weston Creek, ACT 2611, Australia
e-mail: dougal.mackey@anu.edu.au

1

2

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

the smooth accretion of intergalactic gas (e.g White & Rees, 1978; White & Frenk,
1991). Galaxy outskirts are of particular interest since the long dynamical timescales
in these regions mean that coherent debris from past accretion events has the great-
est longevity. The discovery of the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy and associated tidal
stream (see Law & Majewski, this volume) demonstrated beyond a doubt that satel-
lite accretion played an important role in the growth of the Milky Way’s halo, but
the veracity of this aspect of the hierarchical model could not rest solely on a single
event observed within a single galaxy. In this spirit, the late 90s saw the quest begin
to identify other galactic systems which were visibly in the process of devouring
smaller satellites.

Our nearest giant neighbour, M31, provides the most obvious target for such
studies. Lying at ∼ 780 kpc, it is in many respects a sister galaxy to the Milky Way.
It has a similar total mass (e.g. Diaz et al., 2014; Veljanoski et al., 2014), is of a
similar morphological type, and it resides in the same low-density environment –
one which is deemed typical for much of the present-day galaxy population. M31’s
proximity means that individual stars near the tip of the red giant branch (RGB)
can be resolved from the ground; this offers a powerful method for probing very
low effective surface brightnesses, such as those expected for tidal debris streams.
Furthermore, its high inclination to the line-of-sight (i ∼ 77◦) means that it is ideally
suited for studies of its halo regions.

There are some disadvantages to studying tidal streams in M31 as opposed to
our own Milky Way. Even with the world’s largest telescopes, ground-based studies
of M31’s halo are limited to using luminous giant stars whereas Milky Way studies
can harness the power of the much more numerous main sequence turn-off popula-
tion (e.g. Belokurov et al., 2006). Additionally, in M31 we are mainly conﬁned to
analysis of projected positions on the sky (although occasionally some line-of-sight
distance information is available), and we can only measure radial velocities. This
can be contrasted with the situation in the Milky Way where it is possible to addi-
tionally determine line-of-sight distances1 and proper motions, and thus probe the
full six dimensional phase space. In effect, these differences imply that in M31 we
are sensitive to tidal streams that are of higher surface brightness than those we can
uncover in the Milky Way, and moreover typically only the subset retaining a high
degree of spatial and/or kinematical coherence.

On the other hand, there are some clear advantages to studying an external system
such as M31. Our vantage point largely alleviates complicated line-of-sight projec-
tion and extinction effects, such as must be endured in studies of the Milky Way.
This means that we have a better understanding of the morphology of tidal features
and where stellar substructures lie (at least in projection) with respect to each other,
and with respect to additional halo tracers such as globular clusters (GCs) and dwarf
satellites. Our bird’s-eye view also makes it fairly straightforward to construct in situ
samples of halo stars at various radii. Remarkably, we currently know more about
the outer halo (R ∼> 50 kpc) of M31 than we do of the Milky Way. In the Milky Way,

1 In practice, individual distances to large samples of stars in the Milky Way are crude at the
moment. ESA’s Gaia mission will change this when it starts to deliver data in 2016 but the most
accurate distances will be limited to stars within roughly 10 kpc of the Sun.

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

3

the outer halo is obscured by a dense veil of foreground stars making the robust
identiﬁcation of the low density population of outer halo stars difﬁcult. In addition,
while the main sequence turn-off method so extensively used by the Sloan Digi-
tal Sky Survey (SDSS) teams has probed out to distances of ∼ 40 kpc, such stars
are not detected in SDSS imaging at distances beyond this. While some outer halo
substructures have been uncovered using other tracers (e.g. Newberg et al., 2003;
Watkins et al., 2009), the inhomogeneous and sparse nature of these studies pre-
cludes any meaningful conclusions about the global properties of the Milky Way’s
outer halo. In M31, we also have a far clearer view of the low latitude regions of
the galaxy, enabling discrimination between perturbed disk features and accreted
substructures.

Over the last 15 years, a multitude of studies have targeted the outskirts of M31;
this chapter reviews the tremendous progress and exciting results that have emerged
from this work.

2 Historical Studies

While the ﬁrst detailed studies of faint structure and substructure in M31 did not
appear until the early 2000s, there were a number of studies prior to this which are
of particular note.

Baade & Gaposchkin (1963) were the ﬁrst to comment on the strong warp
present in the outer parts of M31’s stellar disk. Baade (p. 73) notes that the disk
signature is still present at a major axis distance of 2◦ but that the opposing sides
of the disk have “swirled” off in anti-symmetric directions by a radius of 2.25◦
– an observation he speculates could be due to the tidal action of the Milky Way
on M31. The existence of the prominent stellar warp was further conﬁrmed by
Innanen et al. (1982) who stacked digital Palomar Schmidt plates to reach surface
brightnesses in M31 of m V ∼> 25.8 mag arcsec−2. Early H I studies of M31 also re-
vealed a strong warp in the neutral hydrogen disk (e.g. Roberts & Whitehurst, 1975;
Newton & Emerson, 1977; Cram et al., 1980). While the stellar and H I disks are
warped in the same direction, the stellar warp appears to begin at a smaller radius
than the H I warp and it exhibits a greater deviation from the disk plane; this holds
true along both major axes but seems especially apparent in the north-east.

Walterbos & Kennicutt (1988) conducted the deﬁnitive study of the light distri-
bution in M31 before the era of wide-ﬁeld resolved star mapping, including a ﬁrst
quantitative exploration of the peripheral disk. They constructed multi-band images
from digitised Burrell Schmidt plates and analysed surface brightness and color
proﬁles across the disk. They also detected a clear warp, but speculated that the
north-eastern warp, due to its faintness and extreme bend, may actually be a galactic
reﬂection nebula and not a stellar feature associated with M31. This issue was set-
tled by Morris et al. (1994) who resolved the stellar populations in the north-eastern
warp (which they termed the ‘Spur’) for the ﬁrst time and showed they lay at the
distance of M31. Fig. 1 of Walterbos & Kennicutt (1988) shows beyond doubt that

4

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

the north-eastern half of the disk is far more perturbed than the south-western half,
and, in hindsight, one can even see a slight luminosity enhancement in the direction
of the Giant Stellar Stream.

Equally inﬂuential were the ﬁrst studies of M31’s resolved stellar halo. Mould & Kristian

(1986), Crotts (1986) and Pritchet & van den Bergh (1988) all presented colour-
magnitude diagrams (CMDs) of small regions located at several kpc along M31’s
minor axis, a region perceived at the time to be dominated by pure halo. These stud-
ies revealed a moderate metallicity population ([Fe/H] ∼ −1) with a large metallic-
ity spread, in stark contrast to the metal-poor halo of the Milky Way. The disparity
of the halo populations in two galaxies that were otherwise considered rather similar
remained a signiﬁcant puzzle throughout the following decade.

3 Wide-Field Mapping Surveys of M31

The relative proximity of M31, while advantageous for detailed study, also poses
a problem in that even the main body of the galaxy subtends a substantial angle
on the sky. In the mid-to-late 90s, wide-format CCD detectors became increasingly
available on medium-sized telescopes and this development opened up new possi-
bilities for surveying the faint outlying regions of M31. With a distance modulus of
m − M = 24.47 ± 0.07 (McConnachie et al., 2005), stars near the tip of M31’s RGB
(MI ≈ −4) have I ≈ 20.5 and thus could be easily detected in modest exposures with
a 2-m class telescope. As a result, it became feasible to contiguously map resolved
stars at the bright end of the luminosity function over very large areas.

RGB stars are the evolved counterparts of low to intermediate mass (M ∼ 0.3 − 8
M⊙) main-sequence stars with ages of at least ∼> 1 Gyr. While asymptotic giant
branch stars and high mass main sequence stars can be even more luminous than
RGB stars, RGB stars are the most interesting in the context of tidal stream research
since they are long-lived and can be used to trace the old stellar components of
galaxies, where signatures of hierarchical assembly are expected to be most preva-
lent. Additionally, for a ﬁxed age, the colour of an RGB star depends almost entirely
on its metallicity; thus, for a roughly uniform age for a stellar population, individual
stellar metallicities can be derived purely from photometry.

Resolved star surveys map the spatial distribution of individual RGB stars which
can in turn be used to infer the surface brightness distribution of the underlying
light. This technique allows much lower surface brightness levels to be reached than
typically achievable with conventional analyses of diffuse light. As a simplistic il-
lustration of how the method works, consider a population of M31 RGB tip (TRGB)
stars with I0 ∼ 20.5 and (V −I)0 ∼ 1.5. A surface density of 105 such stars per square
degree corresponds to m V ≈ 27 mag arcsec−2 while a surface density of 103 stars per
square degree corresponds to m V ≈ 32 mag arcsec−2. This calculation is crude since
it neglects the fact that there is a range of RGB luminosities within a population,
and also that some sizeable fraction of the total light will come from stars fainter
than the magnitude limit, but these are corrections that can be easily calculated for

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

5

any given survey (e.g. Pritchet & van den Bergh, 1994; McConnachie et al., 2010).
Nonetheless, it is sufﬁcient to demonstrate that, in the low crowding outer regions of
M31 (and external galaxies in general), the resolved RGB star technique is clearly
the optimal means to search for and map very faint structures. The main challenges
in using this method are to image to sufﬁcient depth to detect a statistically sig-
niﬁcant population of RGB halo stars, and to disentangle genuine RGB stars from
contaminating populations, which typically consist of foreground Milky Way dwarf
stars and unresolved background galaxies (see the left panel of Fig. 1).

The breakthrough in our ability to search for low surface brightness structure in
the outskirts of M31 led to the discovery of a plethora of faint streams and substruc-
ture in the the inner halo, including the dominant Giant Stellar Stream. The pioneer-
ing INT Wide Field Camera survey (e.g. Ibata et al., 2001; Ferguson et al., 2002;
Irwin et al., 2005) mapped ≈ 40 square degrees (163 contiguous pointings) around
M31 in the V and i passbands, reaching to ∼ 3 magnitudes below the TRGB (see
the right panel of Fig. 1). M31 was also targeted by the SDSS (Zucker et al., 2004a),
where stars near the TRGB were mapped to large distances along the major axis.
These surveys also uncovered several previously-unknown M31 dwarf satellites and
globular clusters (e.g. Zucker et al., 2004b, 2007; Irwin et al., 2008; Huxor et al.,
2008).

In parallel to these efforts to survey RGB stars, other groups began to explore the
halo and outer disk populations using planetary nebulae (PNe) (e.g. Merrett et al.,
2003, 2006; Morrison et al., 2003; Kniazev et al., 2014). Although PNe offer some
advantages over RGB stars as tracers of halo light (for example, they are more lu-
minous, suffer much reduced sample contamination, and can provide simultaneous
information on radial velocities), they are far rarer. From a survey of PNe in the
M31 bulge, Ciardullo et al. (1989) found that the ratio between the number of PNe
in the top 2.5 magnitudes of the luminosity function and the V -band luminosity was
a 2.5 ∼ 30.8 × 10−9 PNe per L⊙. This leads to the expectation of ≈ 50 PNe per
square degree at m V ∼ 24 mag arcsec−2 but only ≈ 1 per square degree at m V ∼ 28
mag arcsec−2. This makes surveys for resolved RGB stars far more efﬁcient than
those for PNe in the outer regions of M31. However, the situation changes for more
distant galaxies, where RGB stars become too faint to resolve while PNe can still
be detected (e.g. Coccato et al., 2013; Foster et al., 2014).

Based on the success of these early studies, exploration of the M31 outer halo
began in the mid 2000s. Due to the lower stellar density in these parts, deeper pho-
tometry was required in order to sufﬁciently sample the RGB luminosity function
and this in turn required larger telescopes. The Pan-Andromeda Archaeological Sur-
vey (PAndAS) was conducted using the MegaCam instrument on the 3.8-m CFHT
to contiguously map over 380 square degrees around the M31-M33 region and de-
tect stars to ∼ 4 mag below the TRGB (e.g. Ibata et al., 2007; McConnachie et al.,
2009; Ibata et al., 2014). Other wide-ﬁeld ground-based work concentrated on deep
pencil beam studies of the outer halo (e.g. Ostheimer, 2003; Tanaka et al., 2010).

6

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

Fig. 1: (Left) A Hess diagram of the point sources in the PAndAS survey at distances
beyond 2◦ of M31 (reproduced from Ibata et al., 2014) . A series of ﬁducial tracks
spanning [Fe/H]= −1.91, −1.29, −0.71 and −0.2 are superimposed on the RGB
while contaminating Milky Way foreground disk and halo sequences are indicated
by dashed boxes. Blueward of (g − i)0 ∼ 1 and fainter than i0 ∼ 23, unresolved
background galaxies become the primary contaminant. The orange box shows the
adopted colour-magnitude selection for M31 RGB stars. (Right) An early map of
metal-poor RGB star counts around M31 from the INT/WFC survey (reproduced
from Ferguson et al., 2002). The outer ellipse has a ﬂattening of 0.6 and a semimajor
axis length of 55 kpc.

4 Major Tidal Features in the Halo of M31

Figs. 2 and 3 show maps from the PAndAS survey of RGB stars in the inner and
outer halo regions of M31, displayed to highlight prominent substructures. Addi-
tionally, Fig. 4 shows the distribution of RGB stars in four different metallicity bins,
revealing how the morphology of the tidal debris changes as a function of metal-
licity. A striking feature of all of these visualisations is the non-uniformity of the
stellar distribution in the outer regions. The most metal-poor map presented in Fig.
4 has a smoother appearance than the others, but it still exhibits a substantial degree
of substructure.

The inner halo (R < 50 kpc) of M31 appears as a ﬂattened structure (axis ratio
∼ 0.5) in Fig. 2, around the edge of which bright tidal features (e.g. streams, clumps,
spurs, shelves) can be seen. In the outer halo (R ≥ 50 kpc), the most prominent fea-
tures are a multitude of faint narrow streams and arcs. Based on their appearance in
Fig. 4, these outer streams are also considerably more metal-poor than the substruc-
tures which dominate the inner halo. Lewis et al. (2013) searched for a correlation
between the tidal structures seen in stars, and features in the H I gas around M31.

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

7

Interestingly, they found a general lack of spatial correlation between these two
components on all scales, with very few potential overlaps.

A brief description of some of the most prominent tidal features seen around

M31 is given below:

• Giant Stellar Stream (GSS): Discovered in the ﬁrst quadrant of M31 that was
mapped by the INT/WFC survey, the GSS is the most prominent overdensity
in M31’s halo and covers a large fraction of its south-east quadrant (Ibata et al.,
2001). It can be traced as a coherent structure to a projected galactocentric radius
of ∼ 100 kpc, and spans a width of ∼ 25 kpc. The stream has a linear morphol-
ogy with a sharp eastern edge and an estimated absolute V -band magnitude of
MV ≈ −14 (Ibata et al., 2001). However, this is a crude estimate based on only
that part of the stream which is visible in the earliest INT maps. As the stream
is now known to be more than twice as long as this, and other debris features
have been identiﬁed as forward wraps of the structure, the total luminosity of the
GSS could easily be 1–2 magnitudes higher. Ibata et al. (2007) show that there is
a large-scale stellar population gradient present, with the high surface brightness
core region of the stream having relatively more metal-rich stars than the periph-
eral regions. Both photometric and spectroscopic studies reveal the core stream
to have a moderately high metallicity of [Fe/H] ≥ −0.5 to −0.7, with the en-
velope dropping to [Fe/H] ∼ −1.4 (Guhathakurta et al., 2006; Ibata et al., 2007;
Gilbert et al., 2009).

• G1 Clump: This feature was ﬁrst recognised in the INT map published by
Ferguson et al. (2002) and appears as a rather round clump of stars located at a
projected radius of ∼ 30 kpc along the south-western major axis of M31. It has
dimensions of 0.5◦ × 0.7◦, or 7 × 10 kpc at the distance of M31. Ferguson et al.
(2002) estimate an absolute magnitude of MV ≈ −12.6 and a V -band surface
brightness of ≈ 28.5 mag arcsec−2. The feature was originally named because
the luminous M31 globular cluster G1 lies nearby. This star cluster is notable
because it has been argued to have both an internal metallicity spread as well
as an intermediate-mass black hole, characteristics that suggest it could be the
remnant core of a nucleated dwarf elliptical galaxy (e.g. Meylan et al., 2001;
Gebhardt et al., 2005). While the detection of tidal debris in the vicinity of this
enigmatic object was very exciting, subsequent observations of the properties
of stars in the G1 Clump appear to rule out any association between the two
(Rich et al., 2004; Reitzel et al., 2004; Ibata et al., 2005; Faria et al., 2007).

• North-East Clump (NE Clump): Located at a projected radius of ∼ 40 kpc
and near the north-eastern major axis, this substructure is one of the most neb-
ulous features in the inner halo of M31. It subtends a diameter of ∼ 1◦ or
∼ 14 kpc at the distance of M31, and appears to connect to the main body of
the galaxy by a faint ﬁlament. It is estimated to have an absolute g-band mag-
nitude of Mg ≈ −11.6 and a g-band surface brightness of ≈ 29.0 mag arcsec−2
(Zucker et al., 2004a). Although it was initially suggested that the NE Clump
was a disrupting dwarf satellite, subsequent observations have disfavoured this
interpretation (Ibata et al., 2005; Richardson et al., 2008; Bernard et al., 2015a),
since the stellar populations are more representative of the disk.

8

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

• North-Eastern (NE) and Western (W) Shelves: The NE Shelf is a diffuse but
fairly sharp-edged extension lying north-east of M31’s center, while the Western
Shelf is a fainter feature of similar morphology and size on the opposite side of
the galaxy. On the basis of their comparably high metallicities, Ferguson et al.
(2002) suggested the NE Shelf could be an extension of the GSS. Using in-
ferences from N-body simulations, Fardal et al. (2007) argued that both the NE
and W Shelves were forward continuations of the stream, representing material
stripped off during successive pericentric passages.

• Streams B, C, D:

Identiﬁed by Ibata et al. (2007), Streams B–D are a se-
ries of approximately parallel tangential streams which cross the southern mi-
nor axis of M31 inside a radius of 100 kpc. Their metallicities are in the range
−1.5 ≤ [Fe/H] ≤ −0.5. The eastern portions of Streams C and D appear to over-
lap in projection and all of the streams seem to terminate, or at least dramati-
cally fade, once they reach the GSS. Stream C has been shown to be particularly
complex, consisting of two distinct (but overlapping) metallicity and kinematic
components (Chapman et al., 2008; Gilbert et al., 2009). Along with the GSS,
the metal-rich component of Stream C is the only other outer halo feature visible
in the most metal-rich maps of Fig. 4.

• Far Outer Halo Streams (R ∼> 100 kpc): Figs. 3 and 4 show that the outer
halo is littered with various faint streams and clumps, including Stream A,
the North-West (NW) Stream, the South-West (SW) Cloud))) and the (((East-
ern (E) Cloud (Ibata et al., 2007; McConnachie et al., 2009; Richardson et al.,
2011; Carlberg et al., 2011; Bate et al., 2014). With m V ≥ 31.5 mag arcsec−2,
these streams represent the faintest spatially-coherent debris yet identiﬁed around
M31. Stream A crosses the minor axis at a projected radius of ∼ 120 kpc and
aligns with the inner network of tangential streams. The E and SW Clouds ap-
pear as stellar arcs at slightly smaller radii on either side of Stream A. The NW
Stream is a long (∼ 100 kpc) and narrow (∼ 3 kpc) radial feature; although there
is no visible connection between the upper and lower branches of the stream, the
fact that both trace out segments of a single ellipse and have a similar metallicity
has supported the notion they are related (Carlberg et al., 2011). Although part
of the NW Stream was also seen in the deep pencil beam study of Tanaka et al.
(2010) (their (Stream F), their Stream E was not recovered in the PAndAS survey.

5 Understanding the Nature and Origin of Tidal Features in M31

Following the initial discovery of tidal features in the M31 halo, concerted follow-
up observations and detailed modelling have been carried out in order to develop a
complete understanding of this material. In this section, we review and summarise
some highlights from this work.

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

9

Fig. 2: The PAndAS map of metal-rich RGB stars in the inner halo of M31, upon
which a typical textbook image of M31 is superposed. The map is constructed from
stars with i0 ≤ 23.5, having −1 ≤ [Fe/H] ≤ 0. The large white ellipse has a semi-
major axis of 27 kpc and delineates the full extent of the bright disk; the dashed
blue circle has a radius of 50 kpc. Prominent inner halo substructure is outlined and
labelled, as are the dwarf satellites M32 and NGC 205.

5.1 The Giant Stellar Stream

Over the last decade, the GSS has been the subject of intense study. On the observa-
tional side, efforts have concentrated on deriving quantities (e.g. distance, velocity)
that can be used to model the orbit of the progenitor and on stellar populations con-
straints that can be used to establish its nature. On the theoretical side, work has
focused on reconstructing the orbital history of the progenitor and using this knowl-
edge to measure the halo mass of M31.

Line-of-sight distances to the stream are one of the key inputs for GSS orbit
models. McConnachie et al. (2003) used measurements of the TRGB in a series of
CFHT12K pointings to show that the GSS lies ∼> 100 kpc behind M31 at a projected
radial distance of 60 kpc and moves progressively closer to galaxy at smaller radii,
with their distances being indistinguishable (within the uncertainties) at ≤ 10 kpc.

10

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

Fig. 3: A map of metal-poor RGB stars across the full extent of the PAndAS survey
(i0 ≤ 23.5 and −2.5 ≤ [Fe/H] ≤ −1.1). The white ellipse is the same as in Fig. 2
while the dashed circles surrounding M31 have radii of 50 kpc (yellow) and 150 kpc
(blue) respectively and that surrounding M33 has a radius of 50 kpc. Prominent outer
halo substructure is outlined and labelled, as are tidal streams associated with the
satellite galaxies M33 and NGC 147.

These authors were also able to detect the stream in two ﬁelds on the northern side
of M31, where it lies ∼ 40 kpc in front of the galaxy, but no further, suggesting that
the stream wraps fairly tightly around the M31 center towards the north-east.

Another key observable is the radial velocity distribution of stream stars. Individ-
ual RGB stars at the distance of M31 are sufﬁciently faint that an 8-m class telescope
is required in order to measure their line-of-sight velocities; the DEIMOS multi-
object spectrograph on the Keck II telescope has been the source of almost all the
GSS radial velocity measurements to date (Ibata et al., 2004; Guhathakurta et al.,
2006; Kalirai et al., 2006; Gilbert et al., 2009). These studies have shown that the
radial velocity of the GSS becomes increasingly positive with increasing distance
from the center of M31, ranging from vhelio = −320 km s−1 at a projected dis-

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

11

Fig. 4: The PAndAS map of RGB stars, as in Fig. 3, but presented this time as a
function of metallicity. The two high metallicity bins (top panels) are dominated
by the Giant Stellar Stream, although note that this structure changes morphology
slightly between the two panels. While the low metallicity bottom left panel is dom-
inated by numerous streams, the more metal-poor right-hand panel appears much
smoother. Reproduced from Ibata et al. (2014).

tance of 60 kpc to vhelio = −524 km s−1 at a projected distance of 17 kpc. In
all ﬁelds studied so far, the velocity dispersion is quite narrow – in the range of
10 − 30 km s−1. Intriguingly, a second cold kinematic component has been detected
at several locations along the GSS (Kalirai et al., 2006; Gilbert et al., 2009). It has
the same velocity gradient (and dispersion) as the primary GSS over the range in
which the two have been mapped (∼ 7 kpc) but it has a radial velocity that is offset
by ∼ +100 km s−1. It is presently unclear whether this component is due to M31’s
disturbed disk or a forward wrap or bifurcation of the main stream.

The combination of line-of-sight distance and radial velocity measurements in-
dicates that the GSS progenitor fell almost straight into M31 from behind. These

12

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

data have motivated a variety of efforts to model the accretion of a dwarf satel-
lite galaxy on a highly radial orbit (Ibata et al., 2004; Font et al., 2006; Fardal et al.,
2006, 2008, 2013; Mori & Rich, 2008; Sadoun et al., 2014). While these models
differ in various aspects, they generally agree on the fact that the progenitor’s initial
stellar mass was in the range 1 − 5 × 109 M⊙ and that its ﬁrst pericentric passage
came within a few kpc of the M31 center less than 1-2 Gyr ago. Some properties of
the observed GSS, in particular the asymmetric distribution of stars along the stream
cross section and the internal population gradient, are better reproduced in N-body
models in which the progenitor possessed a rotating disk (e.g. Fardal et al., 2008;
Sadoun et al., 2014).

In this near head-on collision, the progenitor experiences signiﬁcant destruction
at the ﬁrst pericentric passage. Much of the satellite’s mass is stripped off to form
leading and trailing tidal streams, and a generic prediction is that much of M31’s
inner halo should be littered with this debris. Fig. 5 shows the sky distribution of
debris in a set of recent N-body models of the GSS’s orbit within the M31 potential
(Fardal et al., 2013). Each panel differs in the adopted values of M200, the M31 mass
inside a sphere containing an average density 200 times the closure density of the
universe, and Fp, the orbital phase of the progenitor at the present day. Although
the exact pattern of debris depends on these (and a few other) parameters, all pan-
els exhibit a similar morphology and show remarkable consistency with some of
the features seen in Figs. 2 and 3. The GSS, the NE Shelf and the W Shelf are all
naturally reproduced in this scenario, with the GSS representing the trailing stream
of material torn off in the progenitor’s ﬁrst pericentric passage while the NE and
W shelf regions contain material torn off in the second and third passages, respec-
tively. These predictions are in excellent agreement with observations of the stellar
populations of these substructures – which show striking similarities in their star
formation histories (SFHs) and metallicity distributions to those of the GSS (e.g.
Ferguson et al., 2005; Richardson et al., 2008) – as well as with the observed kine-
matics of the shelves (e.g. Gilbert et al., 2007; Fardal et al., 2012). The extensive
pollution of M31’s inner halo by material stripped from the GSS progenitor pro-
vides at least a partial explanation for why this region is dominated by more metal-
rich stellar populations compared to the Milky Way (e.g. Mould & Kristian, 1986;
Ibata et al., 2014).

Based on the projected positional alignment with the GSS, M31’s luminous
dwarf elliptical satellites M32 and NGC 205 were initially considered as prime can-
didates for the progenitor (Ibata et al., 2001; Ferguson et al., 2002). Indeed, both
these systems possess unusual properties and, as will be discussed in Section 7,
are tidally distorted in their outer regions (Choi et al., 2002; Ferguson et al., 2002).
However, even the earliest attempts at orbit models ruled out a straightforward con-
nection between the GSS progenitor and either of these two satellites (Ibata et al.,
2004)2. Current models agree that any existing remnant should lie in the region of
the NE Shelf, although thus far no candidate has been identiﬁed.

2 Meanwhile, Block et al. (2006) argue that a head-on collision between M31 and M32 about 200
million years ago could be responsible for the formation of two off-center rings of ongoing star
formation seen in the M31 disk.

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

13

Although the location of the GSS progenitor remains a mystery, analysis of the
stellar populations in the stream has provided important insight into its nature. Fig.
6 shows deep HST CMDs of a variety of tidal debris ﬁelds in the inner halo of M31,
including those associated with the GSS. One can clearly see two predominant CMD
morphologies – those which contain a narrow tilted red clump and a prominent
horizontal branch extending quite far to the blue (labelled ‘SL’ in Fig. 6), and those
which contain a rounder red clump, a well-populated blue plume and exhibit no
horizontal branch (labelled ‘DL’ in Fig. 6). Those pointings which directly sample
material associated with the GSS progenitor uniformly exhibit the morphology of
the former type (Ferguson et al., 2005; Richardson et al., 2008). A third category,
labelled ‘C’, appears to be a composite of the previous morphologies.

Quantitative measures of the SFH and age-metallicity relation (AMR) of the
GSS have been derived from deep CMDs using synthetic modelling techniques
(Brown et al., 2006; Bernard et al., 2015a). The bottom panels of Fig. 7 show the
most extensive analysis carried out to date, based on the 5 ﬁelds lying on GSS
debris located throughout the inner halo. It appears that star formation in the pro-
genitor got underway early on and at a fairly vigorous pace, peaking 8–9 Gyr ago.
Star formation remained active until about 6 Gyr ago when there was a very rapid
decline; this ‘quenching’ may indicate the time when the progenitor ﬁrst entered
the halo of M31. Roughly 50% of the stellar mass in the GSS ﬁelds was in place
∼ 9 Gyr ago, and the metallicity had reached the solar value by 5 Gyr ago, consis-
tent with direct spectroscopy constraints from RGB stars (e.g. Guhathakurta et al.,
2006; Kalirai et al., 2006; Gilbert et al., 2009). In addition, all the GSS ﬁelds probed
thus far reveal a large spread in metallicity (≥ 1.5 dex). Taken together, these prop-
erties suggest an early-type progenitor, such as a dwarf elliptical galaxy or spiral
bulge. This further supports inferences from N-body modelling which suggest that
the GSS progenitor was a fairly massive object with some degree of rotational sup-
port. Indeed, Fardal et al. (2013) argue it was likely the fourth or ﬁfth most massive
Local Group galaxy as recently as 1 Gyr ago.

5.2 Other Inner Halo Substructure

While tidal debris from the GSS progenitor can explain the origin of some of the
M31 inner halo substructure, other features require a different origin. In particular,
the substructures lying near the major axis – such as the NE and G1 Clumps and the
Claw – do not arise naturally in models of the dissolution of the stream progenitor.
A ﬁrst step to understanding this low latitude substructure was taken by Ibata et al.
(2005) who analysed the kinematics of stars in numerous ﬁelds around M31, includ-
ing the G1 and NE Clumps. They noted a strong signature of rotation in almost all
ﬁelds out to a galactocentric radius of ∼ 40 kpc, with some further detections out
to 70 kpc. Stars are observed to move with velocities close to those expected for
circular orbits in the plane of the M31 disk and with a typical velocity dispersion of

14

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

Fig. 5: Spatial distribution of stellar debris from the tidal disruption of the GSS
progenitor, as predicted by a set of 9 N-body simulations. The dashed lines show
the observed boundaries of the NE and W shelves. In each case, different combi-
nations of M200, the virial mass of M31, and Fp, the orbital phase of the progenitor
at the present epoch, are adopted. While all panels share similar morphologies and
resemble the main features seen in Figs. 2 and 3, some systematic differences can be
seen as a function of the parameters. The present-day state of the progenitor varies
from being tightly bound to highly dispersed; in all models shown here, it lies in the
region of the NE shelf. Reproduced from Fardal et al. (2013).

30 km s−1. Based on stacked spectra, Ibata et al. (2005) estimated the mean metal-
licity of these rotating outer populations to be [Fe/H] ∼ −0.9.

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

15

The irregular morphology yet coherent rotation observed in the outer disk re-
gions led Ibata et al. (2005) to speculate that a vast disk-like structure was being as-
sembled as a result of multiple accretion events. However, this interpretation faced a
number of challenges, such as the homogeneity of the constituent stellar populations
and the need for the accreted satellites to be sufﬁciently massive so that dynamical
friction could circularise their orbits before disruption.

An alternative explanation is that much of the inner halo substructure is material
that has either been torn off of the M31 outer disk or dynamically heated from
the disk into the halo. It has long been known that the accretion of a low mass
companion can have rather a disruptive effect on a stellar disk (e.g. Quinn et al.,
1993; Walker et al., 1996) and more recent work has quantiﬁed the way in which
disk stars can get ejected into the halo through such events (e.g. Zolotov et al., 2009;
Purcell et al., 2010). Kazantzidis et al. (2008) demonstrated how the accretion of a
population of satellites with properties drawn from a cosmological simulation can
produce distinctive morphological features in the host galaxy’s disk, similar to the
inner halo substructures seen in M31. Additionally, they conﬁrmed earlier work that
showed the ﬁnal distribution of disk stars exhibits a complex vertical structure that
can be decomposed into a thin and thick disk (see also Villalobos & Helmi, 2008).
Examination of the constituent stellar populations in the non-GSS debris ﬁelds
supports the idea that this material has originated in the disk (e.g. Ferguson et al.,
2005; Brown et al., 2006; Richardson et al., 2008; Bernard et al., 2015a). The ‘DL’
ﬁelds in Fig. 6 are rather homogeneous in appearance, all displaying a round red
clump with signiﬁcant luminosity width, a well-populated blue plume and no ap-
parent horizontal branch – features that indicate continuous star formation and a
moderately young mean age. The quantitative SFHs and AMRs of the ‘disk-like’
debris ﬁelds further strengthen this assertion; roughly ∼ 65% of the stars formed
in the last 8 Gyr and chemical evolution proceeded at a modest pace, starting from
a pre-enriched level (see top panels of Fig. 7). Most importantly, these trends are
strikingly similar to those that have been measured for populations in the M31 outer
disk (Bernard et al., 2012, 2015b).

It is also notable that both the stream-like and disk-like ﬁelds in Fig. 7 show
evidence for an enhancement in the rate of star formation roughly 2 Gyr ago. This
is surprising given that the constituent stellar populations in these ﬁelds have very
different origins, and that many of them are substantially displaced from the main
body (and the gas disk) of M31. There is now strong evidence that the M31 outer
disk underwent a burst of star formation around this epoch, likely triggered by the
relatively close passage of M33 (Bernard et al., 2012, 2015b). The existence of trace
populations from this episode scattered throughout the inner halo, including up to
20 kpc along the minor axis, argues for a redistribution of disk material in the inter-
vening time. It would thus appear that, in addition to being heavily polluted by GSS
debris, the M31 inner halo also contains a widespread component of heated disk
stars (Bernard et al., 2015a). This idea was independently raised by Dorman et al.
(2013) who ﬁnd that a non-negligible fraction of the inner halo stars identiﬁed kine-
matically in M31 show a luminosity function consistent with an origin in the disk.

16

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

Both the highly structured nature of the outer disk and the presence of displaced
disk stars in the halo could be explained by one or more violent accretion events.
Given the likely transitory nature of the outer disk substructures (Ibata et al., 2005)
and the fact that stars as young as 2 Gyr have been displaced into the halo, the
event responsible for disrupting the disk must have been rather a recent one and it
is tempting to speculate that it has been the head-on impact of the GSS progenitor
roughly 1 Gyr ago (e.g. Mori & Rich, 2008; Sadoun et al., 2014). If this scenario
is correct, it implies that, in spite of its extremely messy appearance, all of M31’s
inner halo substructure can be traced to the direct and indirect effects of a single
event.

5.3 Outer Halo Substructure

The outer halo debris features in M31 are much more poorly understood than those
of the inner halo. While the inner halo is populated by tidal debris with a variety
of morphologies and moderate metallicities, the outer halo is dominated by fairly
narrow stellar streams and arcs which are, with the exception of the metal-rich com-
ponent of Stream C, only apparent in maps constructed from metal-poor stars (see
Fig. 3). The outer halo streams are of such low surface brightness that detailed char-
acterisation of their stellar populations and kinematics has thus far been difﬁcult. As
will be discussed in the following section, GCs offer a very exciting way to probe
the tidal features in these parts.

There are the four main structures visible in the far outer halo – Stream A, the E
Cloud, the SW Cloud and the NW Stream. All of these features lie at radii ∼> 100 kpc
from the center of M31 and subtend at least a few tens of kpc in length. Their
CMDs indicate a similar metallicity of [Fe/H] ∼ −1.3 (Ibata et al., 2007, 2014;
Carlberg et al., 2011; Bate et al., 2014). The most luminous of the outer halo struc-
tures is the SW Cloud which Bate et al. (2014) estimate contains ∼ 5.6 × 106 L⊙ or
equivalently MV ≈ −12.1. This luminosity is approximately 75% of that expected
for the feature on the basis of its measured metallicity and the Kirby et al. (2011)
luminosity-metallicity relation. While this might indicate that a sizeable fraction of
the luminosity of the parent object has been detected, it remains unclear at present
whether these most distant halo features originate from distinct accretion events or
material torn off from a single progenitor. Indeed, an interesting question is whether
any of the outer halo debris can be traced to the accretion of the GSS progenitor.
Although the metallicity of these features is considerably lower than that of the core
of the GSS, it is a good match to that of the stream envelope (Ibata et al., 2007;
Gilbert et al., 2009).

It is curious to note that the dwarf spheroidal satellite And XXVII appears pro-
jected on the upper segment of the NW Stream. Discovered by Richardson et al.
(2011), this faint (MV ≈ −7.9) system is highly morphologically disturbed and it is
tempting to speculate that it may be the source of the NW Stream debris. However,
the metallicity of the stream stars appears somewhat higher than that of the dwarf

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

17

galaxy which complicates the interpretation (Carlberg et al., 2011; Collins et al.,
2013). Furthermore, Collins et al. (2013) note additional kinematic substructure in
the vicinity of And XXVII which is not yet understood.

Ibata et al. (2014) have recently conducted a global analysis of the large-scale
structure of the M31 halo using data from the PAndAS survey. Despite the pres-
ence of copious substructures throughout, they ﬁnd that the stellar halo popula-
tions closely follow power-law proﬁles that become steeper with increasing metal-
licity. The smooth metal-poor halo component (deﬁned as the population with
[Fe/H] < −1.7 that cannot be resolved into spatially distinct substructures with
PAndAS), has a global (3D) power-law slope of g = −3.08 ± 0.07 and an almost
spherical shape, but accounts for a mere ∼ 5% of the overall halo luminosity. By
far, most of the luminosity of the halo out to the edge of the PAndAS survey resides
in moderate-metallicity substructure. Ibata et al. (2014) estimate that the total stel-
lar mass of the M31 halo at distances beyond 2◦ is ∼ 1.1 × 1010 M⊙ and that the
mean metallicity decreases from [Fe/H] = −0.7 at R = 30 kpc to [Fe/H] = −1.5 at
R = 150 kpc for the full sample. An alternative approach to studying the outer halo
in M31 has been taken by the SPLASH team who have obtained spectroscopy of
RGB stars in many pencil-beam ﬁelds extending out to 175 kpc (Guhathakurta et al.,
2006; Kalirai et al., 2006; Gilbert et al., 2006, 2012, 2014). In contrast to photomet-
ric studies, their approach allows them to identify and remove kinematic substruc-
ture in their ﬁelds, at least out to 90 kpc. Although it is not possible to directly
compare the results of the PAndAS and SPLASH surveys, which are based on very
different sample selections, their inferences on the global halo properties of M31
appear to be largely consistent (Ibata et al., 2014; Gilbert et al., 2014).

6 Globular Clusters as Probes of Tidal Streams in M31

An intriguing question regarding the substructures seen in the halo of M31 is
whether they show any degree of spatial correlation with members of the M31 GC
system. This is motivated in part by the long-held suspicion that a substantial num-
ber of the GCs in the Milky Way halo did not form in situ, but rather in small
satellite dwarf galaxies that subsequently fell into the Galactic potential well and
disintegrated. This idea was ﬁrst suggested in the seminal paper by Searle & Zinn
(1978) and was spectacularly veriﬁed in the early 1990s with the discovery of
the disrupting Sagittarius dwarf, which is in the process of depositing at least
ﬁve GCs into the outer halo of the Milky Way (e.g. Bellazzini, Ferraro, & Ibata,
2003; Law & Majewski, 2010). Modern studies of the Galactic GC system have
only served to add further weight to the assertion – it is now known that the abun-
dances, velocities, ages, horizontal branch morphologies, and sizes of perhaps up to
a third of Milky Way GCs are consistent with an external origin (e.g., Zinn, 1993;
Mackey & Gilmore, 2004; Mackey & van den Bergh, 2005; Mar´ın-Franch et al., 2009;
Forbes & Bridges, 2010; Dotter et al., 2010, 2011).

18

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

Historically almost all work on the M31 GC system has been conﬁned to re-
gions comparatively close to the galactic center, typically within R ∼ 20 − 25 kpc;
however the situation has changed thanks to the aforementioned wide-ﬁeld map-
ping surveys of M31. In particular, the INT/WFC and PAndAS surveys, but also to
some extent the SDSS, have facilitated the ﬁrst detailed and uniform census of the
outer halo GC system of M31 (Huxor et al., 2005, 2008, 2011, 2014; Martin et al.,
2006; di Tullio Zinn & Zinn, 2013, 2014). Remote clusters are abundant in M31;
there are now more than 90 objects known to reside at projected radii beyond 25
kpc, 13 of which sit outside 100 kpc in projection, with the most the most distant
at ∼ 140 kpc in projection and up to 200 kpc in three dimensions (Mackey et al.,
2010a, 2013b). This is many more than is seen in the outskirts of the Milky Way –
while the disparity in the number of GCs in the Milky Way and M31 within ∼ 25
kpc is roughly 3:1 in favour of M31, outside this radius it is more like 7:1 in favour
of M31 (Huxor et al., 2014).

Figure 8 shows the positions of all known M31 GCs plotted on top of the PAndAS
spatial density map of metal-poor RGB stars. In the outer parts of the halo, where
large, coherent tidal debris streams are readily distinguished, there is a striking cor-
relation between these features and the positions of a large fraction (∼ 50 − 80%)
of the GCs. Substantial numbers of clusters are seen projected onto the NW Stream,
the SW Cloud, the E Cloud, and the overlapping portion of Streams C and D. There
is, in addition, a statistically signiﬁcant overdensity of clusters (“Association 2”)
sitting near the base of the NW Stream, that cannot (as of yet) be identiﬁed with a
visible tidal stream in the ﬁeld halo.

Mackey et al. (2010b) have demonstrated that the probability of this global align-
ment between clusters and streams arising randomly is low – well below 1% for a
GC system possessing an azimuthally uniform spatial distribution. This implies that
the observed coincidence represents a genuine physical association and hence direct
evidence that much of the outer M31 GC system has been assembled via accre-
tion. Moreover, at least some of the properties of the accreted M31 GCs appear to
be consistent with those exhibited by ostensibly accreted Galactic members – par-
ticular examples being those of younger ages (Mackey et al., 2013a) and extended
structures (Huxor et al., 2011; Tanvir et al., 2012).

The argument made by Mackey et al. (2010b) is based entirely on statistical
grounds; to determine on an object-by-object basis which GCs are associated (or
not) with a given substructure requires kinematic information. The most extensive
kinematic study of the M31 outer halo GC system to date is by Veljanoski et al.
(2013, 2014), who acquired spectra for 71 clusters outside a projected radius of 30
kpc (representing 86% of the known population in these parts); the velocities of
these objects in the M31-centric frame are color-coded in Fig. 8. It can be readily
seen that GCs projected onto a given outer halo substructure tend to exhibit corre-
lated velocities (see left panel of Fig. 9 for an example). Those objects on the NW
Stream and SW Cloud reveal strong velocity gradients from one end of the sub-
structure to the other, while clusters on the E Cloud form a close group in phase
space. Members of the Stream C/D overlap area, and those in Association 2 split
into additional sub-groups by velocity. A remarkable feature of many of the ensem-

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

19

bles considered by Veljanoski et al. (2014) is the coldness of their kinematics, with
all GC groupings exhibiting velocity dispersions consistent with zero given the in-
dividual measurement uncertainties. These results strongly reinforce the notion that
a substantial fraction of the outer halo GC population of M31 has been accreted,
and that these clusters trace the velocities of the tidal streams from their progeni-
tor systems. Indeed, while deﬁnitive measurements have thus far only been possible
for two substructures, the velocities of the GCs sitting on Stream C and on the SW
Cloud have been shown to be in excellent agreement with those of the underlying
stream stars (Collins et al., 2009; Mackey et al., 2014).

Fig. 8 also demonstrates the surprising result that the M31 GC system as a whole
possesses bulk rotation – those GCs to the west of M31 appear to systematically
possess negative velocities in the M31-centric frame, while those to the east typi-
cally have positive velocities. Veljanoski et al. (2014) compared a variety of kine-
matic models to the data and found a rotation amplitude of 86 ± 17 km s−1 around
an axis aligned with the M31 optical minor axis provided the best match. This ro-
tation velocity is quite substantial – for comparison, Veljanoski et al. (2014) also
found evidence that the velocity dispersion in the cluster system decreases from
129+22
−24 km s−1 at 30 kpc to roughly 75 km s−1 at 100 kpc. The right panel of Figure
9 further elucidates this rotation by showing the GC velocities in the M31-centric
frame as a function of projected radius along the major axis. It is apparent that
the rotation of the outer halo GC system is in the same sense as for the inner halo
clusters (and indeed the M31 disk), albeit with smaller amplitude. Importantly, the
rotation does not seem to be driven purely by clusters that sit on the particular halo
substructures nor by those sitting well away from any underlying halo feature – both
groups apparently share in the pattern equally.

Understanding the origin of the angular momentum in the outer halo GC system
of M31 presents a signiﬁcant challenge. One possibility is if a large fraction of the
halo GC system was brought into M31 by just one relatively massive host galaxy on
a low inclination orbit. However, in this scenario it is difﬁcult to explain the observed
presence of distinct dynamically cold subgroups of GCs as well as the typically nar-
row stellar debris streams in the halo. Another possibility is that the outer halo GC
system results from the assimilation of several dwarf galaxies, but that these were
accreted onto M31 from a preferred direction on the sky. This scenario might well be
related to the recent discovery that many dwarf galaxies, both in the Milky Way and
M31, appear to lie in thin rotating planar conﬁgurations such that their angular mo-
menta are correlated (Ibata et al., 2013; Pawlowski, Pﬂamm-Altenburg, & Kroupa,
2012). In this context it is relevant that almost all of the dwarf galaxies thought to be
members of the planes presently observed in both M31 and the Milky Way are in-
sufﬁciently massive to host GCs, and furthermore that the rotation axes of the M31
outer halo GC system and the M31 dwarf plane are misaligned with each other by
∼ 45◦.

20

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

7 Tidal Streams from M31’s Satellite Galaxies

M31 has a substantially richer satellite system than the Milky Way. Not only does
it possess more dwarf companions, but it also possesses several moderately lu-
minous ones: M33 with MV = −18.8 and the four dwarf ellipticals (dEs) M32,
NGC 205, NGC 147 and NGC 185 with MV = −15.5 to −16.5 (McConnachie,
2012; Crnojevi´c et al., 2014). Tidal features are now known around nearly all of
these systems, indicating that they are in the process of depositing tidally-stripped
stars into the M31 halo.

The innermost satellites of M31 are M32 and NGC 205, which lie at M31-centric
distances of 25 kpc and 42 kpc, respectively (McConnachie, 2012). These systems
overlap the main body of M31 in projection, a fact that has greatly complicated
detailed analyses of their outer structures. Nonetheless, diffuse light studies in-
dicate that both systems exhibit breaks in their surface brightness proﬁles which
are accompanied by sharp changes in isophotal ellipticity and position angle; such
behaviour is consistent with expectations for systems undergoing tidal interaction
and stripping (Choi et al., 2002; Johnston et al., 2002). Additionally, Ferguson et al.
(2002) present isopleth maps from a scanned deep photographic plate which reveal
the characteristic “S”-shape of tidal distortion in their peripheral regions. It is there-
fore curious that kinematic studies support the existence of unbound stars at large
radii in NGC 205 but not in M32 (Geha et al., 2006; Howley et al., 2013).

Using resolved star count data from the INT/WFC survey, McConnachie et al.
(2004) detected a 15 kpc long stellar arc that emanates from the northern side of
NGC 205 before bending eastward back to the M31 disk. This discovery resulted
from the fact that the stellar loop consists of RGB stars that are slightly bluer than
the M31 inner halo stars and hence have enhanced contrast on metal-poor star count
maps. Unfortunately, the true nature of this feature remains controversial. While
McConnachie et al. (2004) detected a kinematic feature centered at −160 km s−1
with a dispersion of 10 km s−1 that they attributed to the NGC 205 loop, subsequent
re-examination of the data by Ibata et al. (2005) did not recover this cold compo-
nent. Instead, they argued that the kinematic properties of this feature were consis-
tent with the bulk motion of M31’s disk. Furthermore, Richardson et al. (2008) and
Bernard et al. (2015a) ﬁnd that deep HST CMDs of this feature can be explained
naturally by a combination of heated disk and GSS debris, without requiring any
additional component of stars, while Howley et al. (2008) ﬁnd the most likely orbit
of NGC 205 to be incompatible with the location of the arc.

More recently, data from the the PAndAS survey has been used to explore the
outer regions of the dE satellites NGC 147 and NGC 185 to extremely faint surface
brightness levels using resolved stars. Projected ∼ 100 kpc north of M31, and ly-
ing at M31-centric distances of 120 kpc and 180 kpc, respectively (McConnachie,
2012), these systems are sufﬁciently remote that contamination from M31 itself is
minimal and the main complication is the presence of substantial foreground Galac-
tic populations along their sightlines. Crnojevi´c et al. (2014) trace both systems to
m g ≈ 32 mag arcsec−2 and show that they have much greater extents than previously
recognized. As can be seen in Figs. 3 and 4, NGC 185 retains a regular shape in its

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

21

peripheral regions while NGC 147 exhibits pronounced isophotal twisting due to
the emergence of long symmetric tidal tails. Even neglecting these tails, NGC 147
appears more distended with an effective radius almost three times that of NGC 185.
In contrast to NGC 185, it also exhibits no metallicity gradient. These differences
in the structure and stellar populations of the dEs suggest that tidal inﬂuences have
played an important role in governing the evolution of NGC 147, but not NGC 185.
On the assumption that NGC 147, NGC 185 and nearby dwarf spheroidal CassII
form a bound subgroup, Arias et al. (2016) show that it is possible to ﬁnd orbits
around M31 which result in substantial tidal disruption to NGC 147 but not the
other two systems.

M31’s most massive satellite is the low-mass spiral M33, lying almost 210 kpc
away (McConnachie, 2012). Although no unusual structure was detected around
M33 in the early INT/WFC survey (Ferguson et al., 2007), the deeper PAndAS data
led to the discovery of a gigantic “S”-shaped substructure that surrounds the main
body of the galaxy (McConnachie et al., 2009, 2010). Traced to a projected radius of
40 kpc and m g ≈ 33 mag arcsec−2, this feature coincides with a similar feature that
was detected in H I (Putman et al., 2009). McConnachie et al. (2009) used N-body
simulations to conduct a preliminary exploration of the idea that this is the signa-
ture of M33’s tidal disruption as it orbits around M31. They found that a relatively
close recent encounter could explain the appearance of this low surface brightness
substructure while satisfying the known phase space constraints of the two systems.
Speciﬁcally, they suggest that M31 and M33 came within 40–50 kpc of each other
roughly 2.5 Gyr ago, a hypothesis which is also consistent with the more recent
Local Group orbit modelling work of van der Marel et al. (2012). This timescale is
particularly interesting since the outer disks of both systems appear to have experi-
enced strong bursts of star formation at this time and there is evidence to suggest the
inﬂow of metal-poor gas (Bernard et al., 2012, 2015b). Thus, while more detailed
modelling of this interaction is clearly required, there is tantalising evidence to sug-
gest that it could explain a number of puzzling aspects about the M31-M33 system,
such as the strong warps in both galaxies and the unusual synchronous burst of star
formation.

8 Summary and Future Prospects

The vast amount of work on the M31 halo over the past 15 years has led to an
exceptional situation where, in many ways, our knowledge of the peripheral regions
of that system far exceeds our knowledge of those regions in our own Milky Way.
Studies have been able to identify and characterise coherent debris streams in the
M31 halo out to projected galactocentric distances of ∼ 120 kpc, and detect and
map the properties of the ‘smooth’ halo out to ∼ 150 − 200 kpc. Even in the inner
halo (∼< 50 kpc), we have a much clearer understanding of the nature and origin of
the tidal debris, thanks to our external perspective. This can be contrasted with the
situation in the Milky Way where many of the inner halo/outer disk structures are

22

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

very poorly understood (e.g. the Monoceros, Hercules-Aquila, Tri-And, and Virgo
overdensities; see Chapters 3 & 4).

In comparison to the Milky Way, the M31 inner halo is littered with metal-rich
debris. Some of this material has been stripped from the GSS progenitor, while the
rest is likely to be material from the M31 disk heated by the recent impact of this
satellite. M31 may also have more outer halo tidal streams than the Milky Way,
although most Milky Way surveys to date have not had the sensitivity to detect
substructures in these parts. Additionally, M31 (1) has a higher fraction of its to-
tal light in the halo component compared to the Milky Way (e.g. Ibata et al., 2014;
Gilbert et al., 2012), (2) is characterised by a smooth density proﬁle unlike the bro-
ken power-law of the Milky Way (Deason et al., 2013) and (3) has a substantially
larger population of halo GCs, many of which lie along streams (Mackey et al.,
2010b; Veljanoski et al., 2014). It is likely that these differences result from the
unique accretion histories experienced by the two systems. M31 may have expe-
rienced more accretions than the Milky Way, or it may simply have experienced
a more prolonged history of accretion. Indeed, there is a tantalising similarity be-
tween the properties of the Sagittarius dwarf and those inferred for the GSS pro-
genitor – both are early-type galaxies with estimated initial masses in the range
0.5 − 1 × 109 M⊙. The major building blocks of these halos may well have been
comparable, but their orbits and accretion times rather different. In this spirit, it is
interesting to speculate how the Milky Way and M31 halos would have compared
to each other ∼ 2 Gyr ago, before the GSS progenitor entered M31’s inner halo.

A number of outstanding questions remain regarding the M31 system, and much
exciting progress can be expected over the next decade. Some of the most pressing
issues that remain to be addressed include:

• The development of a deﬁnitive understanding of M31’s most signiﬁcant recent
accretion event: what was the true nature of the GSS progenitor and where is the
remnant now? How did it come to be on such an extreme orbit and how did it
survive in this state until ∼ 1 Gyr ago? What is the explanation for the second
velocity component in the GSS and is there any connection between the GSS
progenitor and the similarly metal-rich component of Stream C?

• Understanding the origin of the outer halo debris. What and where are the pro-
genitors of the outer halo debris streams? Do these features result from one or
many accretion events? The associated GCs are likely to play an important role
in answering these questions, and also in using these streams to derive reﬁned es-
timates of the mass and potential of M31. While line-of-sight distances to stream
GCs are possible with HST observations, proper motion measurements may be
possible for the most compact objects with Gaia.

• Understanding the origin of the coherent rotation in the outer GC population, and
how it can be reconciled with the supposedly chaotic accretion of parent dwarf
galaxies into the halo. Additionally, do the underlying debris streams and the
smooth ﬁeld halo also exhibit this rotation? Given the sparse nature of the stellar
populations in these parts, very large-scale spectroscopy campaigns covering a
signiﬁcant fraction of the halo will be required to answer these questions.

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

23

• Developing a holistic picture of M31’s evolution that links its accretion history
to its global evolution and current structure. There are fascinating hints that the
recent interaction and accretion history of M31 can explain a variety of puz-
zling observations. The close passage of M33 could excite the strong asymmetric
warps and bursts of star formation observed in both systems, while the accretion
of the GSS progenitor could further disrupt the M31 outer disk, displace some
fraction of the disk stars into the halo and deposit a substantial amount of metal
rich debris in the inner halo. Much work is required to verify and ﬁne-tune these
ideas and there is a particular need for further detailed N-body modelling.

• Searching for the edge of the M31 stellar halo. Tidal streams, ﬁeld stars and
GCs have been found to the very edge of the PAndAS survey, suggesting that
they could extend yet further. New wide-ﬁeld mapping facilities such as Hyper-
Suprime Cam on the Subaru telescope will be required to efﬁciently explore be-
yond the limit of PAndAS and may beneﬁt from the use of specialised ﬁlters to
discriminate between foreground and M31 populations.

Acknowledgements We thank Edouard Bernard and Jovan Veljanoski for their help in creating
Figs. 7 and 8. AMNF acknowledges support from an STFC Consolidated Grant (ST/J001422/1)
and the hospitality of the Instituto de Astroﬁsica de Canarias while completing this chapter. ADM is
grateful for support from the Australian Research Council through Discovery Projects DP1093431,
DP120101237 and DP150103294.

References

Arias, V., Guglielmo, M., Nuwanthika, N., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 1654
Baade, W., & Gaposchkin, C. H. P. 1963, Evolution of stars and galaxies., Cambridge, Harvard

University Press.

Bate, N. F., Conn, A. R., McMonigal, B., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 437, 3362
Bellazzini, M., Ferraro, F. R., Ibata, R. A. 2003, A. J., 125, 188
Belokurov, V., Zucker, D. B., Evans, N. W., et al. 2006, ApJ, 642, L137
Bernard, E. J., Ferguson, A. M. N., Barker, M. K., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 420, 2625
Bernard, E. J., Ferguson, A. M. N., Richardson, J. C., et al. 2015a, MNRAS, 446, 2789
Bernard, E. J., Ferguson, A. M. N., Chapman, S. C. et al. 2015b, MNRAS, 453, L113
Block, D. L., Bournaud, F., Combes, F., et al. 2006, Nature, 443, 832
Brown, T. M., Smith, E., Ferguson, H. C., et al. 2006, Ap. J., 652, 323
Carlberg, R. G., Richer, H. B., McConnachie, A. W., et al. 2011, Ap. J., 731, 124
Chapman, S. C., Ibata, R., Irwin, M., et al. 2008, MNRAS, 390, 1437
Choi, P. I., Guhathakurta, P., & Johnston, K. V. 2002, A. J., 124, 310
Ciardullo, R., Jacoby, G. H., Ford, H. C., & Neill, J. D. 1989, Ap. J., 339, 53
Coccato, L., Arnaboldi, M., & Gerhard, O. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 1322
Collins, M. L. M., Chapman, S. C., Rich, R. M., et al. 2013, Ap. J., 768, 172
Collins, M. L. M., Chapman, S. C., Irwin, M. J., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 396, 1619
Cram, T. R., Roberts, M. S., & Whitehurst, R. N. 1980, A&AS, 40, 215
Crnojevi´c, D., Ferguson, A. M. N., Irwin, M. J., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 445, 3862
Crotts, A. P. S. 1986, A. J., 92, 292
Deason, A. J., Belokurov, V., Evans, N. W., & Johnston, K. V. 2013, Ap. J., 763, 113
Diaz, J. D., Koposov, S. E., Irwin, M., Belokurov, V., & Evans, N. W. 2014, MNRAS, 443, 1688

24

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

di Tullio Zinn, G., & Zinn, R. 2013, A. J., 145, 50
di Tullio Zinn, G., & Zinn, R. 2014, A. J., 147, 90
Dotter, A., Sarajedini, A., Anderson, J., et al. 2010, Ap. J., 708, 698
Dotter, A., Sarajedini, A., Anderson, J. 2011, Ap. J., 738, 74
Dorman, C. E., Widrow, L. M., Guhathakurta, P., et al. 2013, Ap. J., 779, 103
Fardal, M. A., Babul, A., Geehan, J. J., & Guhathakurta, P. 2006, MNRAS, 366, 1012
Fardal, M. A., Guhathakurta, P., Babul, A., & McConnachie, A. W. 2007, MNRAS, 380, 15
Fardal, M. A., Babul, A., Guhathakurta, P., Gilbert, K. M., & Dodge, C. 2008, Ap. J. Lett., 682,

L33

Fardal, M. A., Guhathakurta, P., Gilbert, K. M., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 423, 3134
Fardal, M. A., Weinberg, M. D., Babul, A., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 2779
Faria, D., Johnson, R. A., Ferguson, A. M. N., et al. 2007, AJ, 133, 1275
Ferguson, A. M. N., Irwin, M. J., Ibata, R. A., Lewis, G. F., & Tanvir, N. R. 2002, A. J., 124, 1452
Ferguson, A. M. N., Johnson, R. A., Faria, D. C., et al. 2005, Ap. L. Lett., 622, L109
Ferguson, A., Irwin, M., Chapman, S., et al. 2007, Island Universes - Structure and Evolution of

Disk Galaxies, 239

Font, A. S., Johnston, K. V., Guhathakurta, P., Majewski, S. R., & Rich, R. M. 2006, A. J., 131,

1436

Forbes, D. A., Bridges, T. 2010, MNRAS, 404, 1203
Foster, C., Lux, H., Romanowsky, A. J., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 442, 3544
Gebhardt, K., Rich, R. M., & Ho, L. C. 2005, Ap. J., 634, 1093
Geha, M., Guhathakurta, P., Rich, R. M., & Cooper, M. C. 2006, A. J., 131, 332
Gilbert, K. M., Guhathakurta, P., Kalirai, J. S., et al. 2006, Ap. J., 652, 1188
Gilbert, K. M., Fardal, M., Kalirai, J. S., et al. 2007, Ap. J., 668, 245
Gilbert, K. M., Guhathakurta, P., Kollipara, P., et al. 2009, Ap. J., 705, 1275
Gilbert, K. M., Guhathakurta, P., Beaton, R. L., et al. 2012, Ap. J., 760, 76
Gilbert, K. M., Kalirai, J. S., Guhathakurta, P., et al. 2014, Ap. J., 796, 76
Guhathakurta, P., Rich, R. M., Reitzel, D. B., et al. 2006, A. J., 131, 2497
Howley, K. M., Geha, M., Guhathakurta, P., et al. 2008, Ap. J., 683, 722
Howley, K. M., Guhathakurta, P., van der Marel, R., et al. 2013, Ap. J., 765, 65
Huxor, A. P., Tanvir, N. R., Irwin, M. J., et al. 2005, MNRAS, 360, 1007
Huxor, A. P., Tanvir, N. R., Ferguson, A. M. N., et al. 2008, MNRAS, 385, 1989
Huxor, A. P., Ferguson, A. M. N., Tanvir, N. R., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 770
Huxor, A. P., Mackey, A. D., Ferguson, A. M. N., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 442, 2165
Ibata, R., Irwin, M., Lewis, G., Ferguson, A. M. N., & Tanvir, N. 2001, Nature, 412, 49
Ibata, R., Chapman, S., Ferguson, A. M. N., et al. 2004, MNRAS, 351, 117
Ibata, R., Chapman, S., Ferguson, A. M. N., et al. 2005, Ap. J., 634, 287
Ibata, R., Martin, N. F., Irwin, M., et al. 2007, Ap. J., 671, 1591
Ibata, R. A., Lewis, G. F., Conn, A. R., et al. 2013, Nature, 493, 62
Ibata, R. A., Lewis, G. F., McConnachie, A. W., et al. 2014, Ap. J., 780, 128
Innanen, K. A., Kamper, K. W., van den Bergh, S., & Papp, K. A. 1982, Ap. J. , 254, 515
Irwin, M. J., Ferguson, A. M. N., Ibata, R. A., Lewis, G. F., & Tanvir, N. R. 2005, Ap. J. Lett., 628,

L105

Irwin, M. J., Ferguson, A. M. N., Huxor, A. P., et al. 2008,Ap. J., 676, L17
Johnston, K. V., Choi, P. I., & Guhathakurta, P. 2002, A. J., 124, 127
Kalirai, J. S., Guhathakurta, P., Gilbert, K. M., et al. 2006, Ap. J., 641, 268
Kazantzidis, S., Bullock, J. S., Zentner, A. R., Kravtsov, A. V., & Moustakas, L. A. 2008, Ap. J.,

688, 254

Kirby, E. N., Lanfranchi, G. A., Simon, J. D., Cohen, J. G., & Guhathakurta, P. 2011, Ap. J., 727,

78

Kniazev, A. Y., Grebel, E. K., Zucker, D. B., et al. 2014, A. J., 147, 16
Law, D. R., Majewski, D. R. 2010, Ap. J., 718, 1128
Lewis, G. F., Braun, R., McConnachie, A. W., et al. 2013, Ap. J., 763, 4
Mackey, A. D., Gilmore, G. F. 2004, MNRAS, 355, 504

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

25

Mackey, A. D., van den Bergh, S. 2005, MNRAS, 360, 631
Mackey, A. D., Ferguson, A. M. N., Irwin, M. J., et al. 2010a, MNRAS, 401, 533
Mackey, A. D., Huxor, A. P., Ferguson, A. M. N., et al. 2010b, Ap. J. Lett., 717, L11
Mackey, A. D., Huxor, A. P., Ferguson, A. M. N., et al. 2013a, MNRAS, 429, 281
Mackey, A. D., Huxor, A. P., Martin, N. F., et al. 2013b, Ap. J. Lett., 770, L17
Mackey, A. D., Lewis, G. F., Collins, M. L. M., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 445, L89
Mar´ın-Franch, A., Aparicio, A., Piotto, G., et al. 2009, Ap. J., 694, 1498
Martin, N. F., Ibata, R. A., Irwin, M. J., et al. 2006, MNRAS, 371, 1983
McConnachie, A. W., Irwin, M. J., Ibata, R. A., et al. 2003, MNRAS, 343, 1335
McConnachie, A. W., Irwin, M. J., Lewis, G. F., et al. 2004,MNRAS, 351, L94
McConnachie, A. W., Irwin, M. J., Ferguson, A. M. N., et al. 2005, MNRAS, 356, 979
McConnachie, A. W., Irwin, M. J., Ibata, R. A., et al. 2009, Nature, 461, 66
McConnachie, A. W., Ferguson, A. M. N., Irwin, M. J., et al. 2010, Ap. J., 723, 1038
McConnachie, A. W. 2012, A.J., 144, 4
Merrett, H. R., Kuijken, K., Merriﬁeld, M. R., et al. 2003, MNRAS, 346, L62
Merrett, H. R., Merriﬁeld, M. R., Douglas, N. G., et al. 2006, MNRAS, 369, 120
Meylan, G., Sarajedini, A., Jablonka, P., et al. 2001,A. J., 122, 830
Morris, P. W., Reid, I. N., Grifﬁths, W. K., & Penny, A. J. 1994, MNRAS, 271, 852
Mori, M., & Rich, R. M. 2008, Ap. J. Lett., 674, L77
Morrison, H. L., Harding, P., Hurley-Keller, D., & Jacoby, G. 2003, Ap. J. Lett., 596, L183
Mould, J., & Kristian, J. 1986, Ap. J., 305, 591
Newberg, H. J., Yanny, B., Grebel, E. K., et al. 2003, Ap. J. Lett., 596, L191
Newton, K., & Emerson, D. T. 1977, MNRAS, 181, 573
Ostheimer, J. C., Jr. 2003, Ph.D. Thesis,
Pawlowski, M. S., Pﬂamm-Altenburg, J., Kroupa, P. 2012, MNRAS, 423, 1109
Pritchet, C. J., & van den Bergh, S. 1988, Ap. J., 331, 135
Pritchet, C. J., & van den Bergh, S. 1994, A.J., 107, 1730
Purcell, C. W., Bullock, J. S., & Kazantzidis, S. 2010, MNRAS, 404, 1711
Putman, M. E., Peek, J. E. G., Muratov, A., et al. 2009, Ap. J., 703, 1486
Quinn, P. J., Hernquist, L., & Fullagar, D. P. 1993, Ap. J., 403, 74
Reitzel, D. B., Guhathakurta, P., & Rich, R. M. 2004, A. J., 127, 2133
Rich, R. M., Reitzel, D. B., Guhathakurta, P., Gebhardt, K., & Ho, L. C. 2004, A. J., 127, 2139
Richardson, J. C., Ferguson, A. M. N., Johnson, R. A., et al. 2008, A. J., 135, 1998
Richardson, J. C., Irwin, M. J., McConnachie, A. W., et al. 2011, Ap. J., 732, 76
Roberts, M. S., & Whitehurst, R. N. 1975, ApJ., 201, 327
Sadoun, R., Mohayaee, R., & Colin, J. 2014, MNRAS, 442, 160
Searle, L., Zinn, R. 1978, Ap. J., 225, 357
Tanaka, M., Chiba, M., Komiyama, Y., et al. 2010, Ap. J., 708, 1168
Tanvir, N. R., Mackey, A. D., Ferguson, A. M. N., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 422, 162
van der Marel, R. P., Besla, G., Cox, T. J., Sohn, S. T., & Anderson, J. 2012, Ap. J., 753, 9
Veljanoski, J., Ferguson, A. M. N., Mackey, A. D., et al. 2013, Ap. J. Lett., 768, L33
Veljanoski, J., Mackey, A. D., Ferguson, A. M. N., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 442, 2929
Villalobos, ´A., & Helmi, A. 2008, MNRAS, 391, 1806
Walker, I. R., Mihos, J. C., & Hernquist, L. 1996, Ap.J., 460, 121
Walterbos, R. A. M., & Kennicutt, R. C., Jr. 1988, A&A, 198, 61
Watkins, L. L., Evans, N. W., Belokurov, V., et al. 2009, MNRAS, 398, 1757
White, S. D. M., & Rees, M. J. 1978, MNRAS, 183, 341
White, S. D. M., & Frenk, C. S. 1991, Ap. J., 379, 52
Zinn, R. 1993, in Smith, G. H., Brodie, J. P., eds, ASP Conf. Ser. 48, The Globular Cluster-Galaxy

Connection. Astron. Soc. Pac., San Francisco, p. 38

Zolotov, A., Willman, B., Brooks, A. M., et al. 2009, Ap. J., 702, 1058
Zucker, D. B., Kniazev, A. Y., Bell, E. F., et al. 2004a, Ap. J. Lett., 612, L117
Zucker, D. B., Kniazev, A. Y., Bell, E. F., et al. 2004b, Ap. J. , 612, L121
Zucker, D. B., Kniazev, A. Y., Mart´ınez-Delgado, D., et al. 2007, Ap. J. , 659, L21

26

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

Fig. 6: HST/ACS Hess diagrams of 14 ﬁelds in the inner halo of M31, many of
which lie on substructures seen in Fig. 2. The ridge line of 47 Tuc ([Fe/H]=-0.7 and
age 12.5 Gyr) has been shifted to the distance of M31 and overlaid in each case.
Based on their CMD morphologies, the ﬁelds can be segregated into two classes;
stream-like (SL) ﬁelds with tilted red clumps and extended horizontal branches
and disk-like (DL) ﬁelds with round red clumps and a population of blue plume
stars. Composite (C) ﬁelds have features in common with both and likely represent
cases where different material is projected along the line-of-sight. Reproduced from
Richardson et al. (2008).

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

27

R
F
S
d
e
z

 

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

R
F
S
d
e
z

 

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00
0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00
0

Disk-like

Stream-like

]

/

H
e
F

[

]

/

H
e
F

[

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

Disk-like

Stream-like

5

10
Look-back time [Gyr]

15

0

5

10
Look-back time [Gyr]

15

Fig. 7: (Left) The star formation histories (SFHs) and (Right) age-metallicity rela-
tions (AMRs) of M31 inner halo substructure ﬁelds, derived from quantitative ﬁtting
of the CMDs in Fig. 6. The SFHs for the individual ﬁelds are shown in light grey
and are normalised to the total mass of stars formed in each ﬁeld. Overlaid in bold
are the average behaviours of the normalised SFHs. The ﬁlled circles in the AMRs
show the median metallicity in each age bin, with grey circles indicating those bins
which contain ≤1% of the total stellar mass and hence carry signiﬁcant uncertain-
ties. There is more star formation at early (late) times in the stream (disk) ﬁelds and
the stream ﬁelds also exhibit a more rapid early chemical evolution.

28

Annette M. N. Ferguson and A. D. Mackey

Fig. 8: Map showing extant radial velocity measurements for M31 outer halo GCs,
projected on top of the PAndAS metal-poor RB map. Most of the outer halo GCs
can be seen to preferentially lie along stellar streams. Inner halo GCs from the Re-
vised Bologna Catalogue are shown as grey points. The GCs are colour-coded by
their radial velocity in the M31-centric frame (white points indicate those objects
with no radial velocity measurement), and the inner and outer dashed circles cor-
respond to radii of 30 and 100 kpc. A clear rotational signature is seen with GCs
in the NE side of the galaxy receding while those in the SW quadrant approach us.
Additionally, coherent velocities are seen for GCs which lie along speciﬁc debris
features, strongly suggesting that the GCs have been brought into M31 along with
their host galaxies.

Substructure and Tidal Streams in the Andromeda Galaxy and its Satellites

29

l

]
1
−
s
 
m
k
[
 
y
t
i
c
o
e
v
 
c
i
r
t
n
e
c
o
t
c
a
a
G
 
d
e
t
c
e
r
r
o
c
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r

l

0

−50

−100

−150

−200

−250

−300

20

Eastward

Westward

400

200

0

−200

−400

]
1
−
s
 
m
k
[
 

1
3
M
V
R
-
V
R
 
c
i
r
t
n
e
c
o
t
c
a
a
G

l

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

−600

100

projected radius [kpc]

fit through all points
outliers removed
GC velocities

RBC
This work
North-West stream
stream D
stream C/D (overlap)
stream C
association 2
South-West Cloud
Eastern Cloud

50

−50
projected radius along the major axis [kpc]

0

−100

Fig. 9: (Left) Radial velocities for seven GCs that lie along the NW Stream. A
clear signature of radial infall is evident. (Right) GC velocities, in the Galactocentric
frame and corrected for the M31 systemic motion, versus distance along the M31
major axis. GCs which lie along speciﬁc debris features in the outer halo are colour-
coded accordingly, while inner GC velocities taken from the literature are shown in
light grey. The outer halo GCs rotate in the same sense as the inner GCs but with
a somewhat smaller amplitude. The rotation is exhibited by the ensemble system
of outer halo GCs and is not driven by speciﬁc stream features. Both panels are
reproduced from Veljanoski et al. (2014).

