6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

G
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
0
0
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eurographics Workshop on 3D Object Retrieval (2016), pp. 1–4
A. Ferreira, A. Giachetti, and D. Giorgi (Editors)

Towards an observer-oriented theory of shape comparison

Position paper:

P. Frosini

University of Bologna, Italy

ARCES, Bologna, Italy

Abstract
In this position paper we suggest a possible metric approach to shape comparison that is based on a mathematical formalization
of the concept of observer, seen as a collection of suitable operators acting on a metric space of functions. These functions
represent the set of data that are accessible to the observer, while the operators describe the way the observer elaborates the
data and enclose the invariance that he/she associates with them. We expose this model and illustrate some theoretical reasons
that justify its possible use for shape comparison.

Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.5 [Computer Graphics]: Computational Geometry and Object
Modeling—Curve, surface, solid, and object representations

1. Introduction

The poem “The Blind Men and the Elephant” by John Godfrey
Saxe begins with these verses:

“It was six men of Indostan
To learning much inclined,
Who went to see the Elephant
(Though all of them were blind),
That each by observation
Might satisfy his mind.”

This famous Indian story describes a group of blind men that
touch an elephant and totally disagree about what it is like, because
each one touches a different part of the body. In literature, art and
philosophy the theme of multiperspectivity (i.e., the existence of
many different interpretations of the same perceptual phenomenon)
is a well-known issue [Mau11].

Beautiful examples of this fact can also be found in artworks.
The fascinating sculptures by Guido Moretti displayed in Figures
1 and 2 show in a direct and clear way how the concept of shape
cannot be deﬁned and treated independently from the choice of an
observer. Shape is indeed in the beholder’s eyes, and phenomena
such as camouﬂage and optical illusions depend on this basic prin-
ciple (cf., e.g., [Koe90, Fro09, GFSF10]).

It is indeed well-known that in many contexts the concept of
shape is not a property of objects but of the pairs (object, observer)
that are involved in perception, since changing the observer can
drastically transform the perception of reality.

submitted to Eurographics Workshop on 3D Object Retrieval (2016)

In the past these observations were mostly conﬁned to the philo-
sophical and epistemological debate, but nowadays they start to
be quite relevant also in several scientiﬁc applications involving
Information Technology [Sta07]. In particular, geometrical shape
comparison often requires approaches that take into account the
role of the observer. Trying to avoid this problem by consider-
ing shapes just as subsets, topological subspaces or submanifolds
of an Euclidean space contributes to the semantic gap between
the geometrical descriptions and their perceptual meanings (cf.
[HF07, SWS∗00]). This semantic gap cannot be closed focusing
just on the objects and disregarding the chosen observer.

In this position paper we intend to consider this issue and pro-
pose a possible solution, framing it in the emerging ﬁeld of Topo-
logical Data Analysis [Car09].

We are interested in these questions:

• Is there a general metric model to compare data in TDA?
• What is the role of the observer in this comparison?
• How could we approximate the observer’s judgement by means

of a computable metric?

2. Our theoretical model
In the next two sections we will describe both the principles ac-
counting for our model and its mathematical formalization.

2.1. An informal description of our model
The model we propose to consider is based on these general as-
sumptions:

2

P. Frosini / Towards an observer-oriented theory of shape comparison

Figure 1: Different observers can perceive different shapes in the
presence of the same object. This image depicts three views of the
bronze sculpture “Impossible Ring and Parallelepipeds” by Guido
Moretti.

Figure 2: Three views of the bronze sculpture “Impossible Ring
and Pillars” by Guido Moretti.

1. No object can be studied in a direct and absolute way. Any ob-
ject is only knowable through acts of measurement made by an
observer.

2. Any act of measurement can be represented as a function de-

ﬁned on a topological space.

3. The observer usually acquires measurement data by applying

operators to the functions describing them.

4. Only the observer is entitled to decide about shape similarity.

Assumption 1. is justiﬁed by the fact that according to the sci-
entiﬁc paradigm, we cannot refer to properties of reality that are
intrinsically impossible to detect by measurement processes.

Assumption 2. is based on the fact that when we make a mea-
surement, we usually obtain a function as a result. For example, a
grayscale image can be considered as a function from a rectangle
to the real numbers (or, in the discrete case, from the set of cells
of a matrix to a set of integers). The result of a CT scanning can
be seen as a function from S1 (or, more precisely, a helix going
around a body) to the real numbers, where S1 represents the topo-
logical space of all directions that are orthogonal to a given axis and
the real numbers are the metric space of all possible quantities of
matter encountered by the X-ray beam in the considered direction.
A weight measurement is just a function from a singleton to the
real numbers, taking the only available point in the domain to the
weight of the object we are examining. We also observe that many
kinds of data that are not usually represented as functions can in
fact be described by means of functions. For example, every cloud
C of points in a metric space M is equivalent to the function that
takes each point of M to its distance from C.

The requirement that the domain of the function be a topological
space is important in applications where we need to assume that our

data are continuous. However, in the presence of discontinuities, it
is usually required that they be localized at “small” subsets of the
domain, so that we still need to use a topology on it. For example,
we usually assume that the color of the points of an object changes
continuously, possibly apart from a set of null measure. The for-
malization of this assumption cannot be made without the use of a
topology.

Assumption 3. is supported by the fact that in most of the ex-
periments, data are not used directly, but after an elaboration that
makes easier (or simply feasible) their analysis. This elaboration
is usually done by means of suitable operators, which are some-
times embedded in the measurement process. Building the body of
a simplicial n-complex from a cloud of points or blurring an image
are examples of two such operators among many possible others.
These operators transform functions into other functions that are
usually simpler to manage.

It is important to underline that the observer cannot usually
choose the functions representing the measurement data, but can
often choose the operators that will be applied to those functions.
Moreover, the choice of the operators reﬂects the invariances that
are relevant for the observer.

Assumption 4. is based on what we previously said about multi-

perspectivity.

According to this model, instead of directly focusing on the ob-
jects we are interested in, we should focus on the functions de-
scribing the measurements we make on the objects, and on the
“glasses” that we use to “observe” the functions. In our approach,
these “glasses” are invariant operators which act on the functions.

These operators represent the observer’s perspective and, in

some sense, deﬁne the observer.

Figure 3: In the proposed model, each observer can be represented
as a collection of (suitable) operators Fi, which act on the functions
that represent the measurement data and are endowed with the in-
variance that the observer has chosen.

2.2. A mathematical framework to formalize our model

The previous epistemological model has led to the mathematical
framework that will be described in this section (cf. [FJ16]).

Let us consider a compact space X and a subset Φ of the set
C0(X,Rk) of all continuous functions from X to Rk. The space Φ
represents the space of the functions that the observer considers
as acceptable data. In our previous example about CT scanning, Φ
would be the set of all functions that we can obtain by associating
each X-ray beam with the quantity of matter it can encounter.

submitted to Eurographics Workshop on 3D Object Retrieval (2016)

P. Frosini / Towards an observer-oriented theory of shape comparison

3

The observer usually takes some invariance into account. This

invariance can be usually represented by a group.

Let G be a subgroup of the group Homeo(X) of all homeomor-
phisms f : X → X. We assume that the group G acts on Φ by com-
position on the right, i.e. by taking every ϕ ∈ Φ to the function
ϕ◦ g ∈ Φ, for each g ∈ G.

We can deﬁne a pseudo-distance dG : Φ× Φ → R by setting

dG(ϕ1,ϕ2) = inf
g∈G

max
x∈X

(cid:107)ϕ1(x)− ϕ2(g(x))(cid:107).

The function dG is called the natural pseudo-distance associated
with the group G. We recall that a pseudo-distance is just a distance
d without the property d(a,b) = 0 =⇒ a = b.

In plain words, the deﬁnition of dG is based on the attempt
of ﬁnding the best correspondence between the functions (i.e.
observations) ϕ1,ϕ2 by means of homeomorphisms in G. If
dG(ϕ1,ϕ2) = 0, ϕ1 and ϕ2 are equivalent w.r.t. G. For example,
if Φ is the space of all normalized grayscale images, represented as
the set of all compact-supported functions from the real plane to the
interval [0,1], we can choose G to be the group of rigid motions of
the plane. In this case the equality dG(ϕ1,ϕ2) = 0 means that there
is a rigid motion taking the image ϕ1 to the image ϕ2. The choice
of the invariance group G is assigned to the observer, which is the
only judge of similarity in shape comparison.

The natural pseudo-distance dG represents our ground truth.
When the observer has chosen the set Φ of signals he/she can per-
ceive and the invariance group G he/she uses to deﬁne which sig-
nals are considered equivalent, dG endows Φ with a pseudo-metric
structure. Unfortunately, in many cases dG is difﬁcult to compute.
This is also a consequence of the fact that we can easily ﬁnd sub-
groups G of Homeo(X) that cannot be approximated with arbitrary
precision by smaller ﬁnite subgroups of G (i.e. G = group of rigid
motions of X = R3).

Nevertheless, dG can be approximated with arbitrary precision
by means of a dual approach based on persistent homology and
G-invariant non-expansive operators.

We recall that persistent homology is a theory describing the m-
dimensional holes (components, tunnels, voids, ... ) of the sublevel
sets of a topological space X endowed with a continuous function
ϕ : X → Rk. In the case k = 1, persistent homology is described by
suitable collections of points called persistence diagrams [EH10].
These diagrams can be compared by a suitable metric dmatch, called
bottleneck (or matching) distance. The simplest version of this the-
ory counts the components of the sub-level sets of ϕ [VUFF93].

For the sake of simplicity, in the rest of this paper we will assume
that k = 1. For technical reasons, let us also assume that the topo-
logical space X is ﬁnitely triangulable and has nontrivial homology
in degree m, and that the set Φ contains the set of all constant func-
tions.

Now, let us consider the set F all(Φ,G) of all G-invariant non-

expansive operators (GINOs) from Φ to Φ.
In plain words, F ∈ F all(Φ,G) means that

1. F : Φ → Φ
2. F(ϕ◦ g) = F(ϕ)◦ g. (F is a G-operator)

submitted to Eurographics Workshop on 3D Object Retrieval (2016)

3. (cid:107)F(ϕ1)− F(ϕ2)(cid:107)∞ ≤ (cid:107)ϕ1 − ϕ2(cid:107)∞. (F is non-expansive)

The symbol (cid:107)·(cid:107)∞ denotes the sup-norm.
In the example where Φ is the space of all normalized grayscale
images and G is the group of rigid motions of the plane, a sim-
ple example of operator F ∈ F all(Φ,G) is given by the Gaussian
blurring ﬁlter, i.e. the operator F taking ϕ ∈ Φ to the function
ψ(x) = 1
2πσ2

(cid:82)R2 ϕ(y)e− (cid:107)x−y(cid:107)2

dy.

2σ2

Now, let us assume that F is a subset of F all(Φ,G). For every
ϕ1,ϕ2 ∈ Φ we can consider the supremum DF
match(ϕ1,ϕ2) of the
bottleneck distances between the persistence diagrams (in the ﬁxed
degree m) of the functions F(ϕ1),F(ϕ2), when F varies in F.

Since DF

match(ϕ1 ◦ g,ϕ2) = DF

match is the supremum of a set of pseudo-metrics, it is
itself a pseudo-metric. Furthermore, for every ϕ1,ϕ2 ∈ Φ and ev-
ery g ∈ G the equalities DF
match(ϕ1,ϕ2 ◦ g) =
DF
match(ϕ1,ϕ2) hold.
We remark that the pseudo-distance DF

match and the natural
pseudo-distance dG are deﬁned in quite different ways. In spite of
this, the following result can be proved [FJ16].
Theorem 2.1 If F = F all(Φ,G), then the pseudo-distance DF
coincides with the natural pseudo-distance dG.

match

This fact suggests to study DF
We can prove that if Φ is a compact metric space with respect
to the sup-norm, then F all(Φ,G) is a compact metric space with
respect to the distance d deﬁned by setting

match instead of dG.

d(F1,F2) := max
ϕ∈Φ

(cid:107)F1(ϕ)− F2(ϕ)(cid:107)∞

for every F1,F2 ∈ F [FJ16].

As a consequence, we can also prove that if the metric space
Φ is compact with respect to the sup-norm and F is a subset of
F all(Φ,G), then for every ε > 0 a ﬁnite subset F∗ of F exists,
such that

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)DF∗

match(ϕ1,ϕ2)− DF

match(ϕ1,ϕ2)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ≤ ε

for every ϕ1,ϕ2 ∈ Φ.

This statement implies that the pseudo-distance DF

match (and
hence also dG) can be approximated computationally, at least in the
case that Φ is compact. As we have just seen, this is done by means
of a collection F∗ of suitable operators, which takes the place of
the observer in our model.

It is important to highlight that in the framework we have de-
scribed the invariance group G is a variable of our problem, and
that its choice is completely assigned to the observer, according
to the statement that only the observer is entitled to decide about
shape similarity.

Many interesting questions remain open. The most important is
probably the one of devising methods to build families F∗ of G-
invariant non-expansive operators that are small and simple to com-
pute, but still able to guarantee that the associated pseudo-metric
DF∗
match is a good approximation of the natural pseudo-distance dG.

4

P. Frosini / Towards an observer-oriented theory of shape comparison

2.3. A simple case study in this model

In order to show the use of our approach, we have realized (jointly
with Grzegorz Jabło´nski and Marc Ethier) a simple demonstrator
that illustrates how our model based on collections of G-invariant
non-expansive operators (GINOs) could make available new meth-
ods for image comparison. The demonstrator (named GIPHOD–G-
Invariant Persistent HOmology Demonstrator) is available at the
web page http://giphod.ii.uj.edu.pl/. The program
asks the user to choose an invariance group in a list and a query
image in a dataset Φ∗ of quite simple synthetic images obtained by
adding a small number of bell-like functions. After that, GIPHOD
provides ten images that are judged to be the most similar to the
proposed query image with respect to the chosen invariance group.
In this case study, the dataset Φ∗ is a subset of the set Φ of all
continuous functions from the square [0,1] × [0,1] to the interval
[0,1]. Each of them represents a grayscale image on the square
[0,1]× [0,1] (1=white, 0=black).

GIPHOD works by using a collection of GINOs for each invari-
ance group G. This demonstrator tries to approximate dG by means
of the previously described technique, based on the persistent ho-
mology of the functions F(ϕ) for ϕ ∈ Φ and F varying in our set
of operators.

2.4. Conclusions

The model that we have proposed to study is based on the idea that,
from the mathematical point of view, a shape should not be con-
sidered as a subset or a submanifold of a Euclidean space, but as
a quotient of the space Φ of the signals that can be perceived by
the chosen observer with respect to the action of a given invariance
group G. According to this model, each observer should be repre-
sented by a collections of group-invariant non-expansive operators
acting on Φ. This idea is supported by some formal results showing
how the emerging theory of persistent homology could be used to
study the approach to shape comparison that we have proposed in
this position paper. We suggest that this approach could possibly
contribute to bridge the semantic gap by means of the framework
of topological data analysis.

Developments of the proposed model are presently the object of
research. In particular, the extension of the model to the case of
operators taking measurement data belonging to a space Φ to func-
tions belonging to a different space Ψ is under study. This extension
seems promising for applications.

Another present research project concerns the study of the alge-

braic and topological properties of the spaces of GINOs.

Acknowledgement

The author thanks Sergio Rajsbaum for his valuable suggestions
and advice concerning multiperspectivity. Special thanks to Marc
Ethier, Massimo Ferri and Grzegorz Jabło´nski for their precious
help. The research described in this article has been partially sup-
ported by GNSAGA-INdAM (Italy), and is based on the work re-
alized by the author within the ESF-PESC Networking Programme
“Applied and Computational Algebraic Topology”.

References
[Car09] CARLSSON G.: Topology and data. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 46, 2
(2009), 255–308. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-09-01249-X. 1
[EH10] EDELSBRUNNER H., HARER J. L.: Computational Topology.
An introduction. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, USA,
2010. 3

[FJ16] FROSINI P., JABŁO ´NSKI G.:

Combining persistent homol-
ogy and invariance groups for shape comparison. Discrete & Com-
putational Geometry 55, 2 (2016), 373–409.
doi:10.1007/
s00454-016-9761-y. 2, 3

[Fro09] FROSINI P.: Does intelligence imply contradiction? Cogni-
tive Systems Research 10, 4 (2009), 297–315. doi:10.1016/j.
cogsys.2007.07.009. 1

[GFSF10] GIORGI D., FROSINI P., SPAGNUOLO M., FALCIDIENO
B.:
3D relevance feedback via multilevel relevance judgements.
The Visual Computer 26, 10 (2010), 1321–1338. doi:10.1007/
s00371-010-0524-0. 1

[HF07] HAVEMANN S., FELLNER D. W.: Seven research challenges of
generalized 3D documents. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
27, 3 (2007), 70–76. doi:10.1109/MCG.2007.67. 1

[Koe90] KOENDERINK J. J.: Solid shape. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,

USA, 1990. 1

[Mau11] MAUSFELD R.: Intrinsic multiperspectivity: Conceptual forms
In Interdis-
and the functional architecture of the perceptual system.
ciplinary Anthropology: Continuing Evolution of Man, et al. W. W.,
(Ed.). Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, ch. 2, pp. 19–54. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-11668-1. 1

[Sta07] STAHL B. C.: Positivism or non-positivism - tertium non-datur.
In Ontologies - A
a critique of ontological syncretism in is research.
Handbook of Principles, Concepts and Applications in Information Sys-
tems, Kishore R., Ramesh R., (Eds.), Integrated Series in Information
Systems. Springer US, 2007, ch. 5, pp. 115–142. doi:10.1007/
978-0-387-37022-4_5. 1

[SWS∗00] SMEULDERS A. W., WORRING M., SANTINI S., GUPTA A.,
JAIN R.: Content-based image retrieval at the end of the early years.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 22, 12
(2000), 1349–1380. doi:10.1109/34.895972. 1

[VUFF93] VERRI A., URAS C., FROSINI P., FERRI M.: On the use of
size functions for shape analysis. Biological Cybernetics 70, 2 (1993),
99–107. doi:10.1007/BF00200823. 3

submitted to Eurographics Workshop on 3D Object Retrieval (2016)

