6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
2
1
0
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–?? (2016)

Printed 8 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

Chemical abundances in the multiple sub-giant branch of
47 Tucanae: insights on its faint sub-giant branch component

A. F. Marino1, A. P. Milone1, L. Casagrande1, R. Collet1,2, A. Dotter1, C. I. Johnson3,
K. Lind4, L. R. Bedin5, H. Jerjen1, A. Aparicio6, L. Sbordone7,8
1Research School of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2611, Australia
2Stellar Astrophysics Centre, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Aarhus University, Ny Munkegade 120, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark
3Harvardâ ˘A¸SSmithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street, MS-15, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
4Max-Planck-Institut fuer Astronomie, Koenigstuhl 17, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany
5INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Padova, Vicolo dellâ ˘A ´ZOsservatorio 5, I-35122 Padova, Italy
6Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias, La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
7Department of Electrical Engineering, Center for Astro-Engineering, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Av. Vicuña Mackenna 4860, 782-0436 Macul, Santiago, Chile
8The Milky Way Millennium Nucleus, Av. Vicuña Mackenna 4860, 782-0436 Macul, Santiago, Chile

Draft Version Mar, 2016

ABSTRACT
The globular cluster 47 Tuc exhibits a complex sub-giant branch (SGB) with a faint-SGB
comprising only about the 10% of the cluster mass and a bright-SGB hosting at least two dis-
tinct populations. We present a spectroscopic analysis of 62 SGB stars including 21 faint-SGB
stars. We thus provide the ﬁrst chemical analysis of the intriguing faint-SGB population and
compare its abundances with those of the dominant populations. We have inferred abundances
of Fe, representative light elements C, N, Na, and Al, α elements Mg and Si for individual
stars. Oxygen has been obtained by co-adding spectra of stars on diﬀerent sequences. In ad-
dition, we have analysed 12 stars along the two main RGBs of 47 Tuc.

Our principal results are: (i) star-to-star variations in C/N/Na among RGB and bright-
SGB stars; (ii) substantial N and Na enhancements for the minor population corresponding
to the faint-SGB; (iii) no high enrichment in C+N+O for faint-SGB stars. Speciﬁcally, the
C+N+O of the faint-SGB is a factor of 1.1 higher than the bright-SGB, which, considering
random (±1.3) plus systematic errors (±0.3), means that their C+N+O is consistent within
observational uncertainties. However, a small C+N+O enrichment for the faint-SGB, similar
to what predicted on theoretical ground, cannot be excluded. The N and Na enrichment of the
faint-SGB qualitatively agrees with this population possibly being He-enhanced, as suggested
by theory. The iron abundance of the bright and faint-SGB is the same to a level of ∼0.10 dex,
and no other signiﬁcant diﬀerence for the analysed elements has been detected.

Key words: globular clusters: general – individual: NGC 104 (47 Tucanae) – techniques:
spectroscopy

1 INTRODUCTION

The presence of multiple stellar populations in globular clusters
(GCs) has been widely demonstrated both photometrically and
spectroscopically (see Piotto et al. 2015 and references therein).
Hubble Space Telescope (HST ) photometry has revealed that the
phenomenon of multiple sequences along the color-magnitude di-
agrams (CMDs) is not exclusive to ω Centauri. Many chemical
abundance studies from diﬀerent groups have shown the presence
of intrinsic variations in p-capture elements (e.g., Kraft 1994; Ivans
et al. 1999; Gratton et al. 2001; Marino et al. 2008). Evidence for
C-N, O-Na (and in some cases Mg-Al) anticorrelations among
GC stars suggest that the pollution from high-mass asymptotic gi-

ant branch stars (AGB) and/or fast-rotating massive stars has oc-
curred in a self-pollution scenario (e.g., Ventura et al. 2001; De-
cressin et al. 2007), or alternatively from early accretion disks in
pre-main-sequence binary systems (Bastian et al. 2013, see Renzini
et al. 2015 for a critical discussion on the diﬀerent scenarios).

A few GCs, so-called anomalous GCs, are known to have in-
trinsic metallicity variations (see Tab. 10 in Marino et al. 2015,
and reference therein). On the photometric side, these GCs show
multiple sub-giant branches (SGBs). While the presence of mul-
tiple main sequences (MSs) and red-giant branches (RGBs) in
UV bands, as well as in some cases extended horizontal branches
(HBs), are in general good indicators for variations in light ele-
ments (including He for the HB; see Milone et al. 2014), multiple

2

A. F. Marino et al.

SGBs are observed in many of the clusters with Fe variations inde-
pendently on the photometric band (e.g., Milone et al. 2008; Piotto
et al. 2012).

Many attempts have been made in the past years to connect the
CMD multiple sequences with the GC chemical variations in order
to understand how successive stellar generations could have formed
(e.g., Marino et al. 2008; Yong et al. 2008; Milone et al. 2012a).
While the RGB-chemistry connection has been assessed through
chemical abundances studies of bright RGB stars, the chemistry
of multiple MSs and SGBs remains more unexplored. Evolution-
ary models suggest that the appearance of multiple MSs is consis-
tent with stellar populations of diﬀerent He (e.g., Bedin et al. 2004;
Norris 2004; D’Antona et al. 2005). Given that the nucleosynthe-
sis processes responsible for producing the N/Na/Al enhanced and
C/O depleted stars in GCs are also expected to produce He, con-
necting multiple photometric sequences with varying levels of He
enrichment is a reasonable assumption.

Instead of what was predicted for the MS, He diﬀerences can-
not account for the size of the observed SGB splits in anomalous
GCs (Milone et al. 2008; Piotto et al. 2012), that could be explained
either by age variations among stellar populations and/or by dif-
ferences in the overall C+N+O (Cassisi et al. 2008). In support of
the latter scenario, variations in the total CNO were found among
RGB stars of NGC 1851 (Yong et al. 2009, 2015), M 22 (Marino
et al. 2011), and ω Centauri (Marino et al. 2012a). Spectroscopic
studies have been conducted on SGB stars in M 22 and NGC 1851,
showing that fainter SGB stars are more enriched in Fe and s-
elements than brighter ones, consistent with being also C+N+O
(Marino et al. 2012b; Gratton et al. 2012).

High-accuracy photometry from the HS T has revealed a dou-
ble MS in NGC 104 (47 Tuc, Milone et al. 2012a). Multiple popu-
lations on the SGB were identiﬁed by Anderson et al. (2009) who
found at least two distinct branches: a brighter SGB with an intrin-
sic broadening in luminosity, and a fainter one populated by a small
fraction of stars. Theoretical models by Di Criscienzo et al. (2010)
can reproduce the lower luminosity of the less populous SGB only
by assuming either a C+N+O overall enhancement, or an age dif-
ference of about 1 Gyr.

Early spectroscopic studies have shown that 47 Tuc is bimodal
in the distribution of the CN bands strengths (e.g., Norris & Free-
man 1979; Cannon et al. 1998), but no evidence for a variation in
the total C+N+O were revealed. However, stars that are predicted
to be CNO enhanced constitute only 10% of the SGB stars, and
none of them is included in previous studies on 47 Tuc subgiants
(e.g., Carretta et al. 2005). Furthermore, 47 Tuc is not among the
newly deﬁned class of anomalous GCs, e.g., clusters with clear in-
ternal variations in s-process elements and iron. Only one star has
been found to be enhanced in the s-process composition, but it is
interpreted as due to binarity (Cordero et al. 2015).

In this paper we explore the chemical composition of diﬀer-
ent photometric sequences along the SGB and the RGB of 47 Tuc,
from the MS up to the low RGB, with more focus on the SGB sub-
populations. The paper is organised as follows: Sect. 2 presents
the photometric and spectroscopic data that we used; Sect. 3 ex-
plains how atmospheric parameters have been derived, and Sect. 4
the chemical abundances we were able to infer; our results are pre-
sented and discussed in Sect. 5 and Sect. 7; Sect. 8 is a summary of
the main results.

2 DATA

Recent studies, based on both ground-based and HST photometry
have shown that 47 Tuc hosts two main populations, that can be
identiﬁed in appropriate CMDs and colour-colour diagrams, traced
continuously along the MS, the SGB, the RGB and the HB (Milone
et al. 2012a). The two most prominent populations of 47 Tuc are
clearly visible in the mF336W vs. mF336W − mF395N Hess diagram plot-
ted in the left panel of Fig. 1. In the CMD shown in the right panel
of Fig. 1 we have used the green and magenta colours to represent
MS, SGB, RGB, and HB stars of the population-A and population-
B stars identiﬁed by Milone et al. (2012a), respectively. Spectro-
scopic and photometric studies have shown that population-A is
made of stars with primordial helium, high oxygen and low sodium
and includes ∼20% of all stars in the cluster core, while the four
times larger population-B is enhanced in He and Na and depleted
in O (see Milone et al. 2012a).

A third population has been detected along the SGB-B only.
It is distributed at fainter magnitudes and includes only the ∼10%
of the total number of cluster stars (Anderson et al. 2009; Piotto
et al. 2012). Its chemical composition is still unknown. In the fol-
lowing subsections we will use both photometry and spectroscopy
to characterize the multiple stellar populations of 47 Tuc along the
SGB and the RGB, focusing on the minor SGB steller population
detected by Anderson et al. (2009) and Piotto et al. (2012).

2.1 The photometric dataset

The photometric dataset used in our study of 47 Tuc con-
sists of HST photometry for the innermost ∼3×3 arcmins and
ground-based photometry for the outer cluster region. Speciﬁcally,
we have used the catalogs published by Milone et al. (2012a)
that include photometry in the F336W (30s+1160s images from
GO 11729, PI. Holtzmann), F395N bands (90s+2×1120s images
from GO 11729, PI. Holtzmann) from the Ultraviolet and Visual
Channel of the Advanced Camera for Surveys 3 (UVIS/WFC3)
and in the F435W (9×105s images from GO 9281, PI. Grindlay),
F606W (3s+4×50s images from GO 10775, PI. Sarajedini), and
F814W (3s+4×50s images from GO 10775, PI. Sarajedini) band
from the Wide Field Channel of the Advanced Camera for Surveys
(WFC/ACS) on board of HST. We refer to the paper by Milone and
collaborators and references therein for details on the data and the
data reductions.

Moreover, we have used ground-based photometry in the U,
B, V, and I ﬁlters from the archive maintained by Peter Stetson.
The photometric catalog has been obtained by Stetson (2000) from
856 CCD images, including 480 images taken with the Wide-Field
Imager of the ESO/MPI 2.2 m telescope, and 200 with the 1.5 m
telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory. The remain-
ing 176 images come from various other telescopes. All the images
were reduced using the method described by Stetson (2005) and are
calibrated on the Landolt (1992) photometric system. We refer to
the paper by Bergbusch & Stetson (2009) for further details on this
dataset. The CMDs from HST and ground-based photometry are
plotted in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 respectively, where the spectroscopic
targets are marked with red crosses in Fig. 2.

Ground-based photometry has been used to select the tar-
gets, derive the atmospheric parameters and to identify multiple
populations along the RGB and the SGB. HST photometry has
been exploited to illustrate the multiple populations of this clus-
ter and to constrain the age and the overall CNO abundance of the

3

Figure 1. mF336W vs. mF336W − mF395N Hess diagram of 47 Tuc from UVIS/WFC3 photometry (left panel). Right panels is a zoom of the CMD in the region
where the two main populations of 47 Tuc, namely A and B, have been colored green and magenta, respectively.

Figure 2. V vs. B − I CMD from ground-based photometry (from Stetson 2000, and Bergbush & Stetson 2009). The spectroscopic targets analyzed in this
paper are indicated with red crosses.

faint and the bright SGB by comparing the CMD with appropriate
isochrones.

2.2 The spectroscopic dataset

Our spectroscopic data consist of FLAMES/GIRAFFE spectra
(Pasquini et al. 2002) observed under the program 089.D-0579(A)
(PI. Marino). The HR02, HR04 and HR19A GIRAFFE setups were
employed, which cover spectral ranges ∼3854-4049 Å, ∼4188-
4392 Å, and ∼7745-8335 Å, and have resolving powers R ≡
λ/∆λ ∼19,600-20,350-13,900, respectively.

Our sample of stars, which is represented in Fig. 2, has been
accurately selected to sample the diﬀerent SGBs and RGBs of

47 Tuc and is made up of 12 RGB stars, with 15.5. V .17.0 and 62
SGB stars with 17.0. V .17.5. All the targets were observed with
the same FLAMES plate in 3-13-17 diﬀerent exposures of 46 min-
utes for HR02, HR04, and HR19A, respectively. The typical S/N
of the fully reduced and combined GIRAFFE spectra ranges from
∼30 to ∼60 at 4300 Å (HR04), ∼50 to ∼130 at 8180 Å (HR19A),
depending on the brightness of the star. Given the lower priority
given to the HR02 setup, not all our requested exposures were exe-
cuted and we could not reach S/N higher than 10, and we decided
to not use this setup.

Data reduction involving bias-subtraction, ﬂat-ﬁeld correc-
tion, wavelength-calibration, sky-subtraction, continuum normali-

4

A. F. Marino et al.

Figure 3. Observed spectra for the SGB star N104e-5623 around the CH (left panel) and CN (right panel) molecular bands. For each band, we represent the
best-ﬁt synthesis (solid-bold red line), the synthesis with [C/Fe] and [N/Fe] varied by 0.20 dex and 0.30 dex for CH and CN (solid-light red lines), respectively,
and the synthesis with no C or N (aqua line). The spectral regions used to derive the chemical abundances have been shown with shaded regions.

sation, has been done by using the dedicated pipelines1 and IRAF
standard procedures. Telluric absorptions strongly aﬀect the H19A
setup, in particular in the range 8100-8335Å. We have removed
tellurics by using the software MOLECFIT2 (Smette et al. 2015;
Kausch et al. 2014). But, even with such procedure, we caution that
residual telluric feature contamination might be still of concern for
the analysis of the spectral lines in the contaminated spectral re-
gion.

Radial velocities (RVs) were derived separately from each
setup using the IRAF@FXCOR task, which cross-correlates the
object spectrum with a template. For the template we used a syn-
thetic spectrum obtained through MOOG (Sneden C. 1973, ver-
sion February, 20143). This spectrum was computed with a model
stellar atmosphere interpolated from the Castelli & Kurucz (2004)
grid4, adopting parameters (Teﬀ, log g, ξt, [Fe/H]) = (5600 K,
3.8, 1.0 km s−1, −0.72). Each spectrum was corrected to the rest-
frame system, and observed RVs were then corrected to the he-
liocentric system. We do not ﬁnd strong systematic diﬀerences
among the average RVs obtained from the three diﬀerent se-
tups, being the mean oﬀsets RVHR19−RVHR4=+0.5 ± 0.1 km s−1
and RVHR19−RVHR2=−0.2 ± 0.9 km s−1. The ﬁnal RVs listed in
Tab. 1 were computed from the weighted mean of the RVs from
the HR4 and HR19 setups, neglecting the HR2 data which give
higher internal uncertainties. Deriving the RV also served as an in-
dependent check of cluster membership. We ﬁnd a mean RV of
−16.73±0.77 km s−1, with rms=6.66 km s−1, consistent with the lit-
erature results (Alves-Brito et al. 2005; Koch & McWilliam 2008;
Dobrovolskas et al. 2014). Coordinates, basic BV photometry and
RVs for the all the analysed stars are listed in Tab. 1.

3 MODEL ATMOSPHERES

The spectral range covered by the HR04+HR19A setups provides
a relatively low number of Fe lines to ensure an optimal determina-
tion of atmospheric parameters. Furthermore, at the relatively high-
metallicity of 47 Tuc ([Fe/H]=−0.72, Harris 1996, 2010), the HR04
spectral range is crowded and most of the lines are blended.

We interpolated isochrones from Dotter et al. (2008), and used

1 See http://girbld-rs.sourceforge.net
2 http://www.eso.org/sci/software/pipelines/skytools/molecﬁt
3 http://www.as.utexas.edu/∼chris/moog.html
4 http://kurucz.harvard.edu/grids.html

a E(B − V)=0.025, (m − M)V =13.42, in agreement with values from
Harris (1996, updated as in 2010), and age=12.0 Gyr. In the sub-
sequent analysis we adopted photometry corrected for diﬀerential
reddening (see Milone et al. 2012b for details on the procedure)
plus a mean reddening of E(B − V)=0.025 in all instances. We ﬁnd
that the average reddening variation of stars in the spectroscopic
sample is E(B −V)=0.003, with the minimum and maximum values
corresponding to E(B − V)=−0.007 and E(B − V)=+0.009, respec-
tively.

Given the diﬃculties in the determination of the atmospheric
parameters from spectral lines, we take advantage of our BV
photometry (see Sect. 2.1). For the SGB stars, we derive eﬀec-
tive temperatures (Teﬀ) from the (B − V)-Teﬀ relation provided
in Casagrande et al. (2010), which is suitable for dwarfs and sub-
giants with surface gravities (log g) higher than 3.5. Then, we com-
pared these Teﬀ values with the ones obtained from the isochrone
that best ﬁts our CMD. We obtained a mean diﬀerence among the
two sets of temperatures of Teﬀ isochrone−Teﬀ (B−V)=−33 ±3 K for sub-
giants, with rms < 30 K. This spread suggests that the internal
uncertainties associated with the photometric Teﬀ values is likely
small, so we assume an error of 50 K.

For red giants JHK magnitudes from 2MASS are more accu-
rate than for subgiants, so that for the former stars we could apply
the IRFM directly, by using BV IJHK photometry (Casagrande et
al. 2010, 2014) In this case, the mean diﬀerence with the Teﬀ values
given by the best-ﬁt isochrone is Teﬀ isochrone−Teﬀ (IRFM)=−51 ± 26 K,
with rms of 82 K. Our Teﬀ values were then corrected to the best-ﬁt
isochrone scale, which means we added to the IRFM and (B − V)
colour-based temperatures the oﬀsets calculated for the giants and
sub-giants.

Surface gravities were obtained from the apparent V mag-
nitudes, corrected for diﬀerential reddening, the Teﬀ from above,
bolometric corrections from Alonso et al. (1999), and an apparent
distance modulus of (m − M)V =13.42. We assume masses taken
from the best-ﬁt isochrone, which range from 0.81 to 0.88 M⊙. We
notice that our adopted masses agree with the empirical estimate
of the mass of turn-oﬀ stars in 47 Tuc measured from an eclipsing
binary, which is 0.8762 M⊙ for the primary and 0.8588 M⊙ for the
secondary (Thompson et al. 2010).

For microturbulent velocities (ξt), we adopted the appropriate
relation used in the Gaia-ESO survey (GES, Gilmore et al. 2012) 5,

5 For clarity, we used: ξt = 0.94 +2.2e −5 ×(Teﬀ −5500) −0.5e −7 ×((Teﬀ −
5500)2)−0.1×(log g−4.00)+0.04×((log g−4.00)2)−0.37×[Fe/H]−0.07×

that depends on Teﬀ, log g and metallicity. Temperatures and grav-
ities were already set from above, while for the metallicity we as-
sumed [A/H]=−0.72 (Harris 1996, as updated in 2010). For both
log g and ξt we assumed an internal error of 0.20.

4 CHEMICAL ABUNDANCES ANALYSIS

Chemical abundances were derived from a local thermodynamic
equilibrium (LTE) analysis by using the line analysis code MOOG
(Sneden 1973, version Feb. 2014). We also used the α-enhanced
model atmospheres of Castelli & Kurucz (2004) and the parameters
described in Sect. 3. Reference solar abundances are from Asplund
et al. (2009).

Elements involved in proton-capture reactions: Carbon was
inferred from spectral synthesis of the CH G-band (A2∆ − X2Π)
heads near 4312 and 4323 Å. Nitrogen was derived from synthesis
of the CN blue system (B2Σ − X2Σ) bandhead at ∼4215 Å. The syn-
thesis linelists for the CH G band are from Masseron et al. (2014),
while for the blue CN band we used the Kurucz linelist6. As an ex-
ample of the molecular band synthesis we show synthetic/observed
spectral matches of the CH and CN for the SGB star N104e-5623 in
Fig. 3. Superimposed on the observed spectra are best-ﬁt synthetic
models, synthetic models where C and N have been varied by 0.2
and 0.3, respectively, and models with no C and N.

We determined Na abundances from the doublet at ∼8190Å,
Mg from the line at ∼8213 Å, and the features at ∼7931 and 8099 Å.
Aluminum was inferred from the doublet at ∼7836 Å. The Na
abundances were corrected for NLTE eﬀects adopting the correc-
tions from Lind et al. (2011). For oxygen we analysed the triplet at
∼7770 Å.

Heavy iron-peak elements: Ni abundances have been inferred

from the line at ∼7798 Å detectable only in our RGB sample.

α elements: For the α elements we determined only abun-
dances of Si from a single line at ∼7944 Å. We note that silicon
can also be aﬀected by p-capture, as well as Mg, which has been
commented with the other p-capture elements.

Internal uncertainties in chemical abundances due to the
adopted model atmospheres were estimated by varying the stel-
lar parameters, one at a time, by the amounts discussed in Sect. 3,
namely ±50 K/±0.20 dex/±0.05 dex/±0.20 km s−1. The impact on
the chemical abundances due to changes in the various stellar pa-
rameters are listed in Tab. 3. The limited S/N of our spectra in-
troduces signiﬁcative internal uncertainties to our chemical abun-
dances. To estimate these uncertainties in the spectral synthesis we
computed a set of 100 synthetic spectra for two stars representative
of the sample (the SGB star N104e-51475 and the RGB star N104e-
31450). These set of synthetic spectra were calculated by using the
best-ﬁt inferred abundances, and were then degraded to the S/N of
the observed spectra. We then analysed the chemical abundances of
all these synthetic spectra in the same manner as the observed spec-
tra. The scatter in the abundance measurements that we obtain from
the 100 synthetic spectra corresponding to a given star, is a fair es-
timate of the uncertainty introduced by the ﬁtting procedure, due
to the S/N, the pixel size and the continuum estimate. These error
estimates are listed in Tab. 3 as σﬁt, and, of course, are higher for
SGB stars than RGB stars and for elements whose abundance has

[Fe/H]2 for giants (Teﬀ <5250 and log g<3.5); and ξt = 1.15+2e−4×(Teﬀ −
5500)+3.95e−7×(Teﬀ −5500)2 −0.13×(log g−4.00)+0.13×(log g−4.00)2
for MS and SGB stars (Teﬀ >5250 and log g>3.5).
6 http://kurucz.harvard.edu/linelists.html

5

been inferred by one or two lines only. The last column of Tab. 3
lists the total internal errors in our chemical abundances, due to the
stellar parameters and the quality of data (σtot). Other contributions
to the errors are due to eﬀects of C and N, so the σtot values are an
underestimation of the real error (see Sect. 4.1).

Systematic uncertainties are likely higher, and may be intro-
duced by various sources, such as: (i) systematics in atmospheric
parameters; (ii) adopted atomic data; (iii) possible 3D eﬀects in the
case of molecular bands; (iv) NLTE eﬀects. Most of these eﬀects
are likely to aﬀect systematically the abundances of all the stars
with similar parameters. So, they are not expected to strongly im-
pact on our results based on star-to-star internal variations. Some
of these eﬀects may aﬀect stars at various evolutionary stages, e.g.,
SGB and RGB stars, in a diﬀerent manner. We will discuss these
eﬀects below, when we judge them to possibly be relevant.

4.1 The eﬀect of C and N

One of the most serious eﬀects that might alter our results is the
presence of molecular bands in the HR19A GIRAFFE setup, which
is aﬀected by CN features. The analysis of star-to-star internal
chemical variations would not be aﬀected if the analysed stars have
the same CN abundances, as, in that case, all the abundances would
be only systematically shifted. However, in the case of a GC, the
diﬀerent abundances of C and N can potentially aﬀect the results in
a diﬀerent way for the ﬁrst and second population stars, that have
diﬀerent C and N abundances.

To evaluate if and how CN molecular bands, present around
∼8000 Å, aﬀect our results for abundances other than CN, we ran
the spectral synthesis of each analysed spectral feature by using
diﬀerent C and N compositions. Speciﬁcally, we used the average
composition for stars in diﬀerent locations of our observed C-N an-
ticorrelation, which will be discussed in Sect. 5. For the SGB stars
we chose two diﬀerent sets of compositions for C and N ([C/Fe],
[N/Fe])=(−0.2,+0.6),(−0.4,+1.4), as well as for the RGB ([C/Fe],
[N/Fe])=(−0.10,+0.27),(−0.22,+0.90), matching the extreme val-
ues observed on the [C/Fe]-[N/Fe] plane.

We found that, while the Na and Fe results are almost unaf-
fected by the diﬀerent C and N composition, the eﬀect of molecular
bands is not negligible for other elements, the most aﬀected feature
being the Si line at ∼7944 Å. In Fig. 4 we represent two observed
spectra, one for a C-poorer/N-richer RGB star (N104e-4647), and
the other for a C-richer/N-poorer RGB star (N104e-32271), around
the Si line. Two spectral synthesis have been super-imposed to the
observed spectra, one with the average C and N abundances of N-
poorer stars (ﬁrst generation, I-G), and the other with the average
abundances for N-richer stars (second-generation, II-G). It is clear
that the spectral features around the Si line are best reproduced by
a I-G C and N composition in the case of N104e-32271, and by a
II-G composition for N10e-4647. The best-ﬁt Si abundance is dif-
ferent depending on the C and N assumed in the synthesis: for both
stars we get a diﬀerent [Si/Fe], depending on what set of C and N
abundances (I-G or II-G) we assume. The diﬀerence between the
Si abundances is ∼0.15 dex, depending on which C and N compo-
sition we assume.

Another unaccounted eﬀect for the RGB stars is that, since the
most common C diatomic molecule is CO, the amount of C free to
form CH and CN is dependent on O abundance, which we are not
able to measure and has been ﬁxed to a value of [O/Fe]=+0.30
for all the stars. In reality, stellar populations in GCs have diﬀer-
ent O abundances. To test how our assumption of equal O aﬀect
our results we have performed some spectral synthesis of CH and

6

A. F. Marino et al.

Figure 4. Observed spectra of the RGB stars N104e-4647 (upper panel)
and N104e-32271 (lower panel) around the Si line at ∼7944 Å. For both
stars two best-ﬁt synthesis models have been super-imposed to the observed
spectra: one computed with the mean CN abundance of ﬁrst-generation (I-
G, green) stars (as obtained from our analysis), and the other with the mean
CN abundance for the second-generation (II-G, magenta) stars. In both pan-
els, the synthesis that we used is represented with a solid line, the other with
a dashed line. The abundance of Si and Fe used in the synthesis is quoted in
each panel.

Figure 5. Box and whisker plot of our SGB (black) and RGB (red) abun-
dances. For the non-Fe species, their [X/Fe] relative abundances are shown,
for Fe we plotted [Fe/H]. For a given element, the box represents the in-
terquartile range (middle 50% of the data) and the median is indicated by
the horizontal line. The vertical tails extending from the boxes indicate the
total range of abundances determined for each element, excluding outliers.
Outliers (those 1.5 times the interquartile range) are denoted by open cir-
cles.

CN bands for typical SGB and RGB stars by assuming a variation
in [O/Fe] of 0.5 dex, between [O/Fe]=−0.10 and [O/Fe]=+0.40,
which is what is typically observed in GCs. Our synthesis suggest
that this variation in [O/Fe] does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the C and N
abundances in our SGB sample as the diﬀerences between the syn-
thetic spectra determined with [O/Fe]=−0.10 and [O/Fe]=+0.40
are undetectable. On the other hand, diﬀerences in the C abun-
dances are larger in our sample of giants: speciﬁcally, the O-poor
model requires a [C/Fe] lower by ∼0.1 dex from the G band; the N
abundances are less aﬀected (∼0.05 dex) as the combined variations
in C and O cancel out in the synthesis of the CN band.

In the spectral range represented in Fig. 4 falls a Fe line, which
we used. Noticeably, both the synthetic spectra have the same Fe
abundance, that means this line is not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by CN
variations (our tests suggest that, in general, all our used lines are
not signiﬁcantly aﬀected).

For SGB stars, CN variations have a smaller impact, being
the mean diﬀerence in [Si/Fe] abundance between the synthesis
computed by assuming a I-G or II-G composition of 0.05 dex. Our
abundance analysis accounts for CN variation only for RGB stars.
This means that our RGB sample, once we got guess information
on C and N abundances, we run the synthesis of the Si line a sec-
ond time by using the mean C and N abundances of the two RGB
populations.

The impact of CN molecules on other chemical species is
smaller than that on Si. Magnesium and aluminum are mildly af-
fected at a level of ∼0.05 dex. In conclusion, we can assume a tenth
of dex as a realistic total internal error on Mg and Al. For Si we con-
sider a total uncertainty of 0.15 dex, while for the other elements
the σtot values listed in Tab. 3 are fair estimates of our internal er-
rors.

5 THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION ALONG THE CMD

The mean metallicity obtained from our GIRAFFE sample
of 47 Tucanae probable members, composed by 74 stars,
is
[Fe/H]=−0.73±0.01 dex, with a dispersion σ=0.09 dex. We do not
observe any signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the Fe content between RGB
and SGB stars: the mean abundances for these two subsamples are
[Fe/H]RGB = −0.77±0.02 (rms=0.08) and [Fe/H]SGB = −0.72±0.01
(rms=0.09), which are the same within 2 σ.

We have inferred abundances for C, N, Na, Al, Si and Mg, all
involved in the H-burning at various temperatures, and Ni for the
RGB only. Our elemental abundance results are illustrated in Fig. 5,
where we plot separately results for RGB and SGB stars.

No large diﬀerences are present in the abundances of the SGB
and RGB stars. The most notable diﬀerences are observed in N and
marginally in C, which are lower and higher, respectively, on the
RGB. At a ﬁrst glance, these oﬀsets appear the opposite than ex-
pected if processed material has reached the surface after the ﬁrst
dredge-up at the base of the RGB. On the other hand, these eﬀects
are predicted to be higher at lower metallicity, and negligible at the
metallicity of 47 Tuc. Indeed, our RGB stars are all ∼1.5 mag in
the V band below the RGB bump, and, except in very metal-poor
GCs the evidence of deep-mixing, CN-cycle on the RGB is mainly
observed above the bump (e.g., Denissenkov & VandenBerg 2003).
We performed a diﬀerential abundance study of CH and NH lines
using classical 1D hydrostatic and 3D hydrodynamic model stel-
lar atmospheres from the Stagger grid (Collet et al. 2011; Magic
et al. 2013). We veriﬁed that 3D eﬀects do not play an important
role in generating these diﬀerences. Furthermore, these diﬀerences
diminish after a proper analysis of stellar population is done, as
discussed in Sect. 7. In the following subsections we will investi-
gate the chemical composition of diﬀerent photometric sequences
by combining results from spectroscopy and photometry.

7

separation between the faint SGB and the bulk of SGB stars is al-
most constant at all the analyzed magnitudes. For this reason, to
minimize the magnitude error and highlight the faint SGB, in the
middle panel of Fig. 7 we show the average (U + B + V + I)/4
magnitude as a function of the (U − V) color. In order to explore
the chemical composition of diﬀerent SGB branches, we have se-
lected a sample of stars whose position on the CMD can be more
clearly associated with the bright and faint SGB component in the
(U + B + V + I)/4-(U − V) diagram. In the lower panel of Fig. 7
we represent the selected bright and faint SGB stars, with blue dots
and red triangles, respectively. Two SGB stars fall in the HST ﬁeld,
and their location on the mF435W-(mF435W − mF814W) CMD is shown
in the lower panel of Fig. 7. These symbols are used consistently
throughout the paper.

Note that in the selection of bright and faint SGBs in Fig. 7 we
have excluded stars with large values of the photometric r.m.s and
stars that are not well ﬁtted by the PSF according to their values
of chi and sharp. Furthermore, we exclude the possibility that faint
SGB stars are blended bright SGBs, as a blend between a SGB star
and a MS, SGB, RGB or HB star will result in brighter magnitudes
than a single SGB star. The photometric error of the selected bright
SGB and faint SGB stars in the adopted (U + B + V + I)/4 are on
average 0.02 mag and never exceed 0.03 mag. Hence we can safely
exclude that most of faint SGB candidates are actually bright SGB
stars. Nevertheless, we cannot exclude some contamination in the
selected groups of faint and bright SGBs from the other SGB. In
order to address this point we have performed 1,000,000 monte-
carlo simulations by randomly adding to each star an error in the
(U −V) color and in the (U + B+V +I)/4 pseudo-magnitude equal to
the observed one. We have found that the contamination of bright
SGB stars in the faint SGB sample is smaller than 2, 4, and 5 in the
68.27%, 95.45% and 99.73% of the simulations, respectively.

In Fig. 8 we represent the distribution of the inferred chem-
ical abundances for the selected faint and bright SGB stars (red
and blue, respectively), with the RGB abundances for compari-
son (black). Overall, we note that C abundances are on average
lower for the faint-SGB, while the bright-SGB average value better
agrees with the RGB average abundances. The mean N abundance
is higher for faint-SGB stars than bright-SGB ones, while N for
the bright-SGB is closer to the value observed on the RGB. This is
not surprising, as the progeny of the faint-SGB on the RGB should
only account for a tiny fraction of stars. However, although the sep-
aration in the two SGB populations weakens the diﬀerence in N
between the RGB and the bright-SGB stars, the mean abundance
of the bright SGB is still higher. This is likely due to biases in our
SGB sample with available N abundances. Indeed, due to the weak
CN band for SGB stars with low N we were unable to infer abun-
dances for the stars with the lowest N abundances. The presence
of this bias is suggested by the mean of the C abundances for the
bright SGB stars with missing N abundances [C/Fe]=−0.20±0.03
(rms=0.08), which is approximately the mean abundance of the N
poor SGB stars. We note that the rms in [C/Fe] for these SGB stars
with unavailable N abundance, 0.08 dex, is relatively small (com-
pared to the values listed in Tab. 4), further suggesting that they
belong to the same populations with similar N abundances.

In the upper panels of Fig. 7, we show the bright- and
faint-SGB stars in the [N/Fe]-[C/Fe], [Na/Fe]-[C/Fe] and [Al/Fe]-
[Mg/Fe] planes. Bright-SGB stars span a large range in C, N, and
Na, being this sequence consistent with internal N-C and Na-C an-
ticorrelations in light elements. We note that the estimated internal
error in N for SGB stars is quite large, and the observed internal
dispersion in the bright-SGB stars only marginally larger. However,

Figure 6. Left panel: V vs. CU,B,I diagram from ground-based photometry.
Right panels: Sodium and Nitrogen abundance relative to iron as a function
of [C/Fe]. RGB-A and RGB-B target stars ere represented with green and
magenta starred symbols, respectively.

5.1 Multiple stellar populations along the red-giant branch

Multiple stellar populations can be easily distinguished from pho-
tometry of RGB stars, when CMDs made with U −B and B−I colors
are used (e.g., Marino et al. 2008). The reason is that the U −B color
is very sensitive to the abundance of N and C, through the CN and
CH molecular bands, while B − I is sensitive to the helium content.
Indeed stars with the same luminosity but diﬀerent helium con-
tent have also diﬀerent eﬀective temperature. Recent studies have
demonstrated that appropriate combinations of the U, B, I (or the
similar HST ﬁlters) provide eﬃcient tools to identify multiple stel-
lar populations in GCs. These include the U − B vs. U − I two-color
diagram and the B vs. U − B + I diagram (Milone et al. 2012a) and
the B vs. CU,B,I = U − 2B + I diagram introduced by Milone et
al. (2013) by using HST ﬁlters F336W, F438W (or F410M) and
F814W.

Figure 6 shows V vs. CU,B,I for stars in 47 Tuc obtained from
the photometric catalog by Stetson (2000), where the two main
RGBs and HBs are clearly visible. We have used green and ma-
genta starred symbols to represent the seven RGB-A and the ﬁve
RGB-B stars studied in this paper.

As shown in the right panels of Fig. 6, RGB-B stars are en-
hanced in Na, N, and depleted in C with respect to population-A
stars. Note that, as discussed in Sect. 4.1, we have assumed the
same [O/Fe] for all the stars, which would mostly translate into the
RGB-B stars having lower [C/Fe] abundances by ∼0.1 dex. Con-
ﬁrming previous results, when we consider the entire sample of
analyzed RGB stars, C, N, and Na are (anti)-correlated, while no
signiﬁcant variations in Mg have been detected, and the rms for Al
is only marginally higher than expected from observational errors.

5.2 Multiple stellar populations along the sub-giant branch

In Fig. 1 we have shown that population-A and population-B stars
can be observed photometrically along all the evolutionary stages,
the HB, RGB, SGB, and MS. In contrast, the stellar population
associated to the faint SGB has been never identiﬁed in any other
region of the CMD except for the SGB.

By analysing multi-wavelength HST photometry of 47 Tuc,
Piotto et al. (2012) concluded that, at ﬁxed color, the magnitude

8

A. F. Marino et al.

Figure 8. Box and whisker plot of the bright (blue) and faint SGB (red)
abundances. The black box plot represents RGB stars. For the non-Fe
species, their [X/Fe] relative abundances are shown, for Fe we plotted
[Fe/H]. For a given element, the box represents the interquartile range (mid-
dle 50% of the data) and the median is indicated by the horizontal line.
The vertical tails extending from the boxes indicate the total range of abun-
dances determined for each element, excluding outliers. Outliers (those 1.5
times the interquartile range) are denoted by open circles.

Na, as suggested by Fig. 7, although we should keep in mind that
they can be due to photometric errors causing the contamination
of the two selected bright- and faint-SGB samples from stars be-
longing to the other sequence. We do not observe any Al-Mg anti-
correlation, and no signiﬁcant variations in Mg. On the other hand,
our results suggest that faint-SGB stars show higher Al abundances
than stars distributing on the bright-SGB (right panel).

Dobrovolskas et al. (2014, hereafter D14) have used medium-
resolution GIRAFFE spectra to determine the sodium abundance
for a sample of 110 MS turn-oﬀ stars in 47 Tuc. In Fig. 9 we pro-
vide a comparison of our Na abundances for SGB stars and those
from turn-oﬀ stars provided by D14. The Na histograms for our
stars have been plotted separately for bright and faint-SGB stars.
The distribution for the bright-SGB spans a very similar range of
that found by D14, with a possible systematic of ∼0.10 dex between
our data and theirs. On the other hand, the faint-SGB distribution
is clearly shifted towards higher abundances, with the presence of
high Na values not reached in the D14 sample. This is mostly due
to the signiﬁcantly lower fraction of stars corresponding to the pop-
ulation observed in the SGB as a fainter component, which causes
a lack/paucity of this population in blind spectroscopic surveys.
Furthermore, the D14 target selection of turn-oﬀ stars might suﬀer
from a “photometric bias” towards brighter stars, while the faint
SGB turn-oﬀ stars lie at higher magnitudes. We note however that
the D14 Na abundance distribution overlaps with the lower half
of the faint SGB one, suggesting that a few faint SGB progenitors
might be present in their sample.

6 COMPARISON WITH THE LITERATURE

47 Tucanae is one of the most widely spectroscopically studied GC.
However, most of the studies rely on spectral features present in
the optical, so our abundances of many elements have been derived
from spectral features that are not commonly used. Though results
obtained from diﬀerent lines are subject to systematic diﬀerences,
it is worth to perform a comparison with some literature work. For
the comparison with our results, here we chose some of the most
recent studies on 47 Tuc or those based on large sample of stars.

Figure 7. The CMDs plotted in lower panels are obtained from ground-
based (middle panel) and HST photometry (lower panel). The ground-based
photometry CMD shows the average of the U, B, V, I magnitudes as a func-
tion of the (U − V) color for SGB stars of 47 Tuc. The space-based diagram
shows the mF435W-(mF435W − mF814W) CMD. Blue dots and red triangles
mark the target stars that, on the basis of their position in the CMD, have
been classiﬁed as bright and faint SGB, respectively. The same colors and
symbols are used to represent the same stars in the upper paneles where
we plot [N/Fe] vs. [C/Fe] (left), [Na/Fe] vs. [C/Fe] (middle), and [Al/Fe]
vs. [Mg/Fe] (right).

the concomitant variation in C is an indication of C-N anticorrela-
tion among bright-SGB stars.

As represented in the lower panel of Fig. 7, the faint SGB and
bright SGB populations are distinct sequences, hence their loci in
the Teﬀ-log g plane are expected to be diﬀerent. According to our
results, at a given temperature, faint SGB stars have log g higher
by a few cents of dex (<0.05 dex). At a given surface gravity, the
diﬀerence in Teﬀ is around 50 K, with the faint SGB being warmer.
Based on the mean chemical abundance diﬀerences listed in Tab. 4,
only a systematic error of ∼300 K on the faint SGB towards lower
values can cancel the observed diﬀerence in N. Our analysis indi-
cates that a large systematic Teﬀ error in the direction required to
removed the observed chemical diﬀerences to be unlikely.

Faint-SGB stars are more clustered around quite high values
of N and Na, and lower C abundances. We cannot exclude the pos-
sibility of a few faint-SGB stars having higher C, and lower N and

9

towards faint-SGB stars. Furthermore, for Si, our uncertainties are
much higher (∼0.15 dex) than in previous studies as discussed in
Sect. 4.1. Iron abundances agree very well among the compared
studies, and ﬁnally our Ni abundances are in good agreement with
Cordero at al., and lower than in Thygesen et al.

7 THE SGB AND THE TOTAL CNO

7.1 Oxygen abundances of the two SGBs

Measurements of individual oxygen abundances from the permit-
ted triplet at ∼7770 Å were not possible due to the weakness of
these lines and the limited S/N of our spectra. So, individual to-
tal C+N+O abundances could not be inferred, given that we lack
information on the actual oxygen abundance of our stars.

It is possible, however, to get an estimate of the average O
chemical content for the bright and faint SGBs. To this aim, we
combined the observed spectra for the stars whose positions on the
CMD is more certainly associated with the bright and faint SGB
stars, as represented in Fig. 7. The total number of selected stars in
the two sub-samples is 41 and 21, respectively for the bright and
faint SGB. Not all of these stars have spectra with suﬃcient quality
to infer individual C and N abundance, but we average all of them
with the same weight, so that we obtained two spectra with higher
S/N.

Then, we generated MOOG synthetic spectra for each used
star, by assuming the appropriate atmospheric parameters of
Sect. 3, and constructed two mean synthetic spectra by averaging
them: one for the bright SGB and the other for the faint SGB. Syn-
thetic spectra pairs have been produced for a grid of oxygen abun-
dances from −0.4 to 0.8 dex, spaced by 0.1. Finally, we computed
the spectral synthesis for the observed mean bright and faint SGB
spectra by using the constructed grid of synthetic spectra, in the
same manner of what was done for the individual spectra (Sect. 4).
For the bright SGB we obtain <[O/Fe]>=+0.54, and for the faint
SGB <[O/Fe]>=+0.25.

The O triplet is aﬀected by strong NLTE eﬀects. Three-
dimensional atmospheric eﬀects impact with minor corrections of
a few hundredths of dex (e.g., Dobrovolskas et al. 2014). By con-
sidering combined 3D-NLTE eﬀects on the O triplet, in the regime
of the atmospheric parameters of our stars, the abundances of O
decreases by ∼0.15 dex (inspect-stars.com; Amarsi et al. 2016).
Hence, we obtain <[O/Fe]>3D−NLT E=+0.39 for the bright SGB, and
<[O/Fe]>3D−NLT E=+0.10, for the faint SGB.

The comparison between the [O/Fe] distribution obtained for
TO stars by D14 in 3D-NLTE and the mean values for the bright
and faint SGBs is shown in Fig. 11. Our O mean value for the
bright SGB is consistent with the mean [O/Fe] of the stars anal-
ysed by D14, which exhibit a O-Na anticorrelation. The average
O abundance of the faint SGB is much lower. Compared with the
distribution obtained by D14 the faint SGB stars have an O slightly
lower than the peak of the O-poor/Na-rich stars. The sample of TO
stars studied by D14 does not have any selection on the various
photometric sequences, so they mostly belong to the main popu-
lation corresponding to our bright SGB. Their data likely include
only a few stars corresponding to the minor faint SGB population,
possibly including the few stars with low [O/Fe]<0. According to
our results, this population should have the highest Na abundances.
used to infer mean O
to C and
and

abundances, we
N,

<[C/Fe]>=−0.26/<[N/Fe]>=+0.61

To validate our procedure

applied the

same

technique

and

found

Figure 9. Histogram distributions of the sodium abundance derived by Do-
brovolskas et al. (2014) for their sample of turn-oﬀ stars of 47 Tucanae (up-
per panel), and derived in this paper for stars in the bright- (middle panel)
and the faint-SGB (lower panel). The black dashed line represents the mean
value of [Na/Fe] from Dobrovolskas et al. (2014), while the blue (middle
panel) and the red (lower panel) solid lines are the means obtained for the
two SGB populations in this work.

In Fig. 10 we compare our abundance distribution with those
obtained in previous work. Speciﬁcally for C and N we compare
with results obtained by Briley et al. (2004) based on a large sample
of stars mostly on the MS, and Carretta et al. (2005) based on 12 TO
and SGB stars. Carbon abundances, obtained in all the cases from
the CH G band, appear in reasonable agreement, though the Bri-
ley et al. sample span a larger range with some stars having lower
abundances. Both Briley et al. and Carretta et al. inferred N abun-
dances from the CN UV system at ∼3880 Å. The N abundances
from Briley et al. span a larger range than ours, while the Carretta
et al. ones are on average lower by ∼0.6 dex.

In Sect. 7 we have compared the Na abundances, corrected for
NLTE, for the samples of bright plus faint SGB stars with those
from D14, and notice a possible systematic oﬀset of ∼0.10 dex
among the two sets of data. In Fig. 10 we have also plotted the
sample of RGBs stars studied by Cordero et al. (2014), whose re-
sults are based on the doublet λ6154-6160 Å. Our results lie in
between the Na abundances reported by Dobrovolskas et al. (2014)
and Cordero et al. (2014).

It is worth noticing here, that in Fig. 10 we plot our entire
sample, which comprises SGBs, including many faint SGB, and
RGBs. We expect that our average abundances in those elements
like N or Na are higher than those obtained from other unbiased
samples, given the relative large number of faint SGB stars in our
sample.

Our average Mg abundance is lower than that reported by
Thygesen et al. (2014), being their value [Mg/Fe]=+0.43±0.01
(based on 13 RGB stars), and our value [Mg/Fe]=+0.29±0.01. Part
of this diﬀerence is probably due to NLTE eﬀects. Indeed, Zhao
& Gehren (2000) reported higher NLTE corrections, by ∼0.15 dex
for a star with Teﬀ/log g/[A/H]=5780 K/3.50/−1.0, for the λ8213 Å
Mg line with respect to the lines in the optical used in most of the
studies.

For Al and Si the higher resolution data used in Thygesen
et al. gives much smaller abundance ranges. However the larger
range that we get might be in part due to the bias of our sample

10

A. F. Marino et al.

Figure 10. Box and whisker plot of our abundances for the complete sample (black), and from literature studies (gray). For the non-Fe species, their [X/Fe]
relative abundances are shown, for Fe we plotted [Fe/H]. For a given element, the box represents the interquartile range (middle 50% of the data) and the
median is indicated by the horizontal line. The vertical tails extending from the boxes indicate the total range of abundances determined for each element,
excluding outliers. Outliers (those 1.5 times the interquartile range) are denoted by open circles.

the bright

<[C/Fe]>=−0.38/<[N/Fe]>=+1.20 for
and faint
SGB, respectively. These values are remarkably similar to the
mean C and N abundances derived from the mean of the individual
abundances obtained for the stars with available abundances:
<[C/Fe]>=−0.23±0.01/<[N/Fe]>=+0.79±0.05 for
bright
SGB, and <[C/Fe]>=−0.36±0.02/<[N/Fe]>=+1.31±0.08 for the
faint SGB.

the

We recall that the averaged spectrum was obtained by using all
the stars, even those with missing individual abundances. Speciﬁ-
cally, out of 41 bright and 21 faint SGB stars, we have C indi-
vidual abundances for 40 bright and 18 faint SGBs, and N abun-
dances for only 29 bright SGBs and 15 faint SGBs. As the N in-
dividual abundances are likely not available for the most N-poor
bright SGB stars, we expect that the average value for these stars,
<[N/Fe]>=+0.79±0.05, is over-estimated. Indeed the most rele-
vant discrepancy between the mean abundances from the individual
spectra, and the abundances from the averaged spectra, is for the N
content of the bright SGB. For this reason, we consider the abun-
dances obtained from the averaged spectra as the best estimate of
the C and N abundances of the two SGB populations.

7.2 C+N+O abundances

With the mean abundances of C, N, and O inferred from
the averaged spectra, we obtain logǫ(C + N + O)=8.48 and
logǫ(C + N + O)=8.54 for the bright SGB and faint SGB, respec-
tively. To estimate internal errors for these values, we can assume
that the uncertainties associated with the C and N is similar to the
errors associated with the average abundances obtained from the in-
dividual abundances, e.g. errC,N =0.01, 0.08, and errC,N =0.02, 0.05
for the bright and faint SGB, respectively. As the N individual
abundances are likely not tracing all the entire N distribution for
the bright SGB, as discussed above, we have increased the er-
ror for this population by 0.01, i.e. errN=0.08+0.01. Oxygen in-
ferred from the O triplet is sensitive to temperature and surface

gravity, and insensitive to metallicity and microturbolence. How-
ever, if we consider the uncertainty in the mean Teﬀ for the av-
eraged 41 bright and 21 faint SGB stars, assuming that the error
associated with each star is 50 K in Teﬀ and 0.20 dex in log g,
we get very small errors in these parameters. Taken together these
errors aﬀect the mean O abundance by 0.02 dex. The dominant
source of error in our O abundances is the limited S/N, which in-
troduces an uncertainty of ∼0.08 dex. The combined internal er-
rors associated to each element, plus the error associated with the
solar abundances for C, N and O, which is 0.05 dex (Asplund et
al. 2009), result in internal uncertainties in logǫ(C + N + O) of 0.07
and 0.08 dex for the bright and the faint SGB, respectively. Hence,
we get logǫ(C + N + O) = 8.48 ± 0.07 for the bright SGB and
logǫ(C + N + O) = 8.54 ± 0.08 for the faint SGB, which means
they are consistent within one sigma.

In Fig. 12 we represent the C+N+O abundance for the bright
and faint SGBs as a function of diﬀerent [C/Fe], [N/Fe], and [O/Fe]
values. In each panel, only the abundance of one element has been
varied, while the other two elements have been ﬁxed to the abun-
dances obtained from the averaged spectra for the two SGBs. The
inferred values of C, N, O, and CNO have been highlighted. Con-
sidering internal errors, represented as shaded regions, the two
SGBs clearly have diﬀerent C, N, and O. The CNO value of the
faint SGB is slightly higher than that of the bright SGB but our
internal errors do not allow us to put ﬁrm conclusion on this issue.

Systematic errors in C, N, and O are likely to aﬀect the two
SGB populations in similar manner, but not the C+N+O. Figure 12
illustrates that, at the chemical content of 47 Tuc, C abundances
do not impact signiﬁcantly on the CNO total abundance. If a sys-
tematic of ∼0.20 dex aﬀects our inferred C abundances, in the
range between -0.6 and 0.0, the CNO content will change by no
more than ∼0.02 dex, and the eﬀect is similar for the two SGBs.
Systematics in N and O, that have higher abundances, more sig-
niﬁcantly aﬀect the CNO abundance of 47 Tuc. A systematic in
N by 0.2 dex for the bright SGB (around [N/Fe]∼0.6 dex) will

change the CNO by ∼0.03 dex, while the CNO of the faint SGB
(around [N/Fe]∼1.2 dex) will be aﬀected by ∼0.11 dex. Systemat-
ics in oxygen, of course, are more important for the bright SGB,
with a quite large eﬀect of ∼0.15 dex for a variation in [O/Fe]
by ±0.2 dex, while the same variation changes the CNO of the
faint SGB by ∼0.06 dex. Taken into account possible systemat-
ics in C, N or O, the CNO values for the bright and faint SGB
will be: logǫ(C + N + O) = 8.48 ± 0.07(±0.02 ± 0.03 ± 0.15) and
logǫ(C + N + O) = 8.54 ± 0.08(±0.02 ± 0.11 ± 0.06), respectively.
Hence, a positive systematic in N and a negative systematic in O
would enhance the CNO diﬀerence between the two SGBs, with
the fainter being more enhanced in CNO by ∼0.15 dex. In this case
the diﬀerence in CNO would be at a level of 2 σ. On the other hand,
a negative systematic in N or a positive systematic in O would di-
minish the diﬀerence in CNO between the two SGB populations.
A systematic in O as large as 0.20 dex is unlikely, given that O
abundances for RGB from high-resolution spectroscopy and dif-
ferent spectral features give similar values as our ones. We cannot
exclude however such large systematics can occur for nitrogen.

This discussion einlights the range that our CNO abundances
might span due to various errors. This is more a qualitative discus-
sion, as we are not able to evaluate the exact systematics and their
signs. For instance, diﬀerent systematics aﬀecting the two SGB
populations might also occur, e.g. due to 3D-NLTE eﬀects depend-
ing on the abundance and/or to the some uncounted population-
eﬀect which could aﬀect our atmospheric parameters derived from
photometry. Of course, we can also have combined systematics in
C, N, O abundances.

7.3 The split SGB

Based on our average C+N+O values, the faint SGB is enhanced
by a factor ∼1.1 with respect to the bright SGB, which is within
1 σ. Considering possible systematic errors, the maximum diﬀer-
ence we can obtain between the two SGBs is 0.15 dex in log(ǫ),
which means the faint SGB is enhanced in total C+N+O by a fac-
tor of ∼1.4 compared to the bright SGB.

Theoretical work considering the photometric split on the
SGB of 47 Tuc predicts that the two SGBs are populated by stars
with diﬀerent C+N+O, with the faint SGB being enhanced by a fac-
tor 1.4 and diluted by 50% with pristine material. At the relatively
high metallicity of 47 Tuc, the dependence of the SGB location on
helium becomes important for the models, and the shape of the faint
SGB is consistent with Y =0.28 (Di Criscienzo et al. 2010).

Assuming the faint SGB is enhanced by a factor of 1.1 with
respect to the bright SGB, and that the material out of which the
faint SGB formed was diluted by the 50% with pristine material,
as interpreted by Di Criscienzo et al., then, the pure material, prior
to any dilution, from which faint SGB stars would have been en-
hanced in C+N+O by a factor of 1.3 with respect to the primordial
abundance of the bright SGB, consistent with the factor 1.4 pre-
dicted by Di Criscienzo et al. Considering our C+N+O average
values, and the maximum variation allowed within the systematic
errors, which is a factor of 1.4 diﬀerence between the two SGBs,
the pure material out of which the faint SGB stars formed would
have been enhanced in C+N+O by a larger factor, 1.8, then diluted
by the 50% with pristine matter.

Furthermore, the higher N and Na, and the lower C and O
for the faint SGBs stars is qualitatively consistent with these stars
being enhanced in helium by some degree. The isochrones used in
Di Criscienzo et al. are consistent with a faint SGB matter being
composed of 28% He by mass.

11

Figure 11. Distribution of [O/Fe] from Dobrovolskas et al. (2014). The
dashed black line indicates the mean oxygen abundance of this distribu-
tion. The blue and red lines are placed on the mean [O/Fe] obtained from
the bright and the faint SGB, respectively.

Di Criscienzo et al. (2010) also suggested that the spread
within the brighter SGB is likely due to a spread in He mass frac-
tion of 0.02 that can account at the same time for the HB luminos-
ity spread, which is larger than expected from photometric errors.
Qualitatively, the presence of internal variations in light elements
among bright SGB stars is consistent with this picture.

To further investigate the role of the CNO abundance on the
SGB morphology of 47 Tuc we have compared the observed CMD
with isochrones similar to those of Dotter et al. (2008). Speciﬁ-
cally, we have generated two sets of isochrones with [Fe/H]=−0.73,
[α/Fe]=0.2 and with the same C+N+O average abundances in-
ferred for bright SGB and faint SGB stars. We assumed for both
isochrones a distance modulus (m − M)0=13.29, reddening E(B −
V)=0.01, primordial helium and age of 13.0 Gyr that provide a
good match between the isochrones and the CMD as shown in
Fig. 13. The fact that the magnitude and color diﬀerence between
the bright and the faint SGB of 47 Tuc are well reproduced by two
coeval isochrones with the same CNO abundances inferred from
spectroscopy corroborates the conclusion that the CNO variation is
the main factor responsible for the SGB split. We recall here that
the two isochrones have been computed with the same Y, while the
faint SGB population is likely He-enhanced. To account for this
eﬀect would mostly aﬀect the MS and RGB, whose separation in
color would be decreased.

8 CONCLUSIONS

We have presented a spectroscopic analysis of a sample of 74 stars
in the GC 47 Tuc, distributed from the SGB up to the base of the
RGB. The stars are chosen to lie on both sides of the split SGB
in order to investigate their light-element chemical composition.
Following the CMD we found:

• SGB: The major SGB component, the bright SGB, is a nor-
mal component, as observed in all Milky Way GCs, i.e., it is pop-
ulated by stars with diﬀerent light elements, and has its own abun-
dance (anti-)correlations. The less-populous, faint SGB compo-
nent, which accounts for ∼10% of stars in the CMD, is consis-
tent with being composed of stars with higher abundances in the

12

A. F. Marino et al.

Figure 12. Chemical abundance of the C+N+O for the bright (solid blue line) and faint SGB (solid red line). From the left to the right the abundance of C,
N, and O, have been varied by keeping the other two elements equal to the mean values for the two SGB populations. The dashed lines indicate the obtained
total CNO values, and the abundances of C, N, and O inferred from the averaged spectra. Shaded regions represent the estimated internal uncertainties to the
various abundances.

Figure 13. mF435W vs. mF435W − mF814W CMD from Milone et al. (2012a) with overimposed the CNO-poor (blue line) and CNO-rich (red line) isochrones
corresponding to the same average CNO abundances derived for bright- and faint-SGB stars. The inset shows a zoom of the CMD around the SGB.

elements produced via hot H-burning, with N and Na abundances
being on average higher than the those observed in the bright SGB
stars. There is weak evidence for a small C+N+O enrichment of the
faint SGB. The C+N+O enrichment experienced by this anomalous
SGB component is, on average, a factor of ∼1.1±1.3±0.3 (random
plus systematics) over the bright SGB.

• RGB: The two sequences identiﬁed by using the CU,B,I index
have diﬀerent content in C, N and Na, and we conﬁrm that the
RGB-A and -B are populated by relatively C-rich/N-poor/Na-rich
and C-poor/N-rich/Na-poor stars, respectively.

Our results qualitatively agree with theoretical predictions by
Di Criscienzo et al. (2010) who interpreted the faint SGB as popu-
lated by stars enriched in He, with Y =0.28, and slightly enriched in

C+N+O by a factor of 1.4 and diluted by 50% with pristine mat-
ter. We do not ﬁnd any evidence for variations in Fe, as found on
the SGBs in M 22 and NGC 1851 (Marino et al. 2012; Gratton et
al. 2012). Given our observational errors, we cannot exclude small
enrichments in Fe, by a few hundredths of dex. We note however
that 47 Tuc is a quite metal-rich GC, hence if its faint SGB com-
ponent has experienced the same enrichment as the faint SGBs
of M 22 and NGC 1851, more pristine Fe-enriched material would
have been required to observe the same variations observed in M 22
and NGC 1851.

13

Harris, W. E. 1996, AJ, 112, 1487
Harris, W. E. 2010, arXiv:1012.3224
Gilmore, G., Randich, S., Asplund, M., et al. 2012, The Messen-
ger, 147, 25
Gratton, R. G., Bonifacio, P., Bragaglia, A., et al. 2001, A&A,
369, 87
Gratton, R. G., Villanova, S., Lucatello, S., et al. 2012, A&A, 544,
A12
Ivans, I. I., Sneden, C., Kraft, R. P., et al. 1999, AJ, 118, 1273
Kausch, W., Noll, S., Smette, A., et al. 2014, Astronomical Soci-
ety of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, 485, 403
Kraft, R. P. 1994, PASP, 106, 553
Koch, A., & McWilliam, A. 2008, AJ, 135, 1551
Lind, K., Asplund, M., Barklem, P. S., & Belyaev, A. K. 2011,
A&A, 528, A103
Magic, Z., Collet, R., Asplund, M., et al. 2013, A&A, 557, A26
Marino, A. F., Villanova, S., Piotto, G., et al. 2008, A&A, 490,
625
Marino, A. F., Sneden, C., Kraft, R. P., et al. 2011, A&A, 532, A8
Marino, A. F., Milone, A. P., Piotto, G., et al. 2012a, ApJ, 746, 14
Marino, A. F., Milone, A. P., Sneden, C., et al. 2012b, A&A, 541,
A15
Marino, A. F., Milone, A. P., Karakas, A. I., et al. 2015, MNRAS,
450, 815
Masseron, T., Plez, B., Van Eck, S., et al. 2014, A&A, 571, A47
Milone, A. P., Bedin, L. R., Piotto, G., et al. 2008, ApJ, 673, 241
Milone, A. P., Piotto, G., Bedin, L. R., et al. 2012a, ApJ, 744, 58
Milone, A. P., Piotto, G., Bedin, L. R., et al. 2012b, A&A, 540,
A16
Milone, A. P., Marino, A. F., Piotto, G., et al. 2013, ApJ, 767, 120
Milone, A. P., Marino, A. F., Dotter, A., et al. 2014, ApJ, 785, 21
Norris, J., & Freeman, K. C. 1979, ApJ, 230, L179
Norris, J. E. 2004, ApJ, 612, L25
Pasquini, L., Avila, G., Blecha, A., et al. 2002, The Messenger,
110, 1
Piotto, G., Milone, A. P., Anderson, J., et al. 2012, ApJ, 760, 39
Piotto, G., Milone, A. P., Bedin, L. R., et al. 2015, AJ, 149, 91
Renzini, A., D’Antona, F., Cassisi, S., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 454,
4197
Smette, A., Sana, H., Noll, S., et al. 2015, A&A, 576, A77
Sneden, C. A. 1973, Ph.D. Thesis,
Stetson, P. B. 2000, PASP, 112, 925
Stetson, P. B. 2005, PASP, 117, 563
Thompson, I. B., Kaluzny, J., Rucinski, S. M., et al. 2010, AJ,
139, 329
Thygesen, A. O., Sbordone, L., Andrievsky, S., et al. 2014, A&A,
572, A108
Ventura, P., D’Antona, F., Mazzitelli, I., & Gratton, R. 2001, ApJ,
550, L65
Yong, D., Grundahl, F., Johnson, J. A., & Asplund, M. 2008, ApJ,
684, 1159
Yong, D., Grundahl, F., D’Antona, F., et al. 2009, ApJ, 695, L62
Yong, D., Grundahl, F., & Norris, J. E. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 3319
Zhao, G., & Gehren, T. 2000, A&A, 362, 1077

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the anonymous referee for his/her helpful suggestions. AFM,
APM and RC have been supported by the Australian Research Coun-
cil through Discovery Early Career Researcher Awards DE150101816,
DE160100851 and DE120102904. C.I.J. gratefully acknowledges support
from the Clay Fellowship, administered by the Smithsonian Astrophysical
Observatory. AD is supported by the Australian Research Council under
grant FL110100012.

REFERENCES

Alonso, A., Arribas, S., & Martínez-Roger, C. 1999, A&AS, 140,
261
Alves-Brito, A., Barbuy, B., Ortolani, S., et al. 2005, A&A, 435,
657
Amarsi, A. M., Asplund, M., Collet, R., & Leenaarts, J. 2016,
MNRAS, 455, 3735
Anderson, J., & King, I. R. 2006, Instrument Science Report ACS
2006-01, 34 pages, 1
Anderson, J., Sarajedini, A., Bedin, L. R., et al. 2008, AJ, 135,
2055
Anderson, J., Piotto, G., King, I. R., Bedin, L. R., & Guhathakurta,
P. 2009, ApJ, 697, L58
Asplund, M., Grevesse, N., Sauval, A. J., & Scott, P. 2009,
ARA&A, 47, 481
Bastian, N., Lamers, H. J. G. L. M., de Mink, S. E., et al. 2013,
MNRAS, 436, 2398
Bedin, L. R., Piotto, G., Anderson, J., et al. 2004, ApJ, 605, L125
Bedin, L. R., Cassisi, S., Castelli, F., et al. 2005, MNRAS, 357,
1038
Bergbusch, P. A., & Stetson, P. B. 2009, AJ, 138, 1455
Briley, M. M., Harbeck, D., Smith, G. H., & Grebel, E. K. 2004,
AJ, 127, 1588
Cannon, R. D., Croke, B. F. W., Bell, R. A., Hesser, J. E., &
Stathakis, R. A. 1998, MNRAS, 298, 601
Carretta, E., Gratton, R. G., Lucatello, S., Bragaglia, A., & Boni-
facio, P. 2005, A&A, 433, 597
Casagrande, L., Ramírez, I., Meléndez, J., Bessell, M., & As-
plund, M. 2010, A&A, 512, A54
Casagrande, L., Portinari, L., Glass, I. S., et al. 2014, MNRAS,
439, 2060
Cassisi, S., Salaris, M., Pietrinferni, A., et al. 2008, ApJ, 672,
L115
Castelli, F., & Kurucz, R. L. 2004, arXiv:astro-ph/0405087
Collet, R., Magic, Z., & Asplund, M. 2011, Journal of Physics
Conference Series, 328, 012003
Cordero, M. J., Pilachowski, C. A., Johnson, C. I., et al. 2014,
ApJ, 780, 94
Cordero, M. J., Hansen, C. J., Johnson, C. I., & Pilachowski, C. A.
2015, ApJ, 808, L10
D’Antona, F., Bellazzini, M., Caloi, V., et al. 2005, ApJ, 631, 868
Decressin, T., Meynet, G., Charbonnel, C., Prantzos, N., & Ek-
ström, S. 2007, A&A, 464, 1029
Denissenkov, P. A., & VandenBerg, D. A. 2003, ApJ, 593, 509
di Criscienzo, M., Ventura, P., D’Antona, F., Milone, A., & Piotto,
G. 2010, MNRAS, 408, 999
Dobrovolskas, V., Kuˇcinskas, A., Bonifacio, P., et al. 2014, A&A,
565, A121
Dotter, A., Chaboyer, B., Jevremovi´c, D., et al. 2008, ApJS, 178,
89

14

A. F. Marino et al.

Table 1: Coordinates, basic photometric data and radial velocities for the stars in
the ﬁeld of view of 47 Tucanae. The listed magnitudes are corrected for diﬀeren-
tial reddening.

ID
N104e-51475
N104e-31450
N104e-4888
N104e-21122
N104e-11207
N104e-51104
N104e-4647
N104e-1610
N104e-1716
N104e-11887
N104e-11495
N104e-41810
N104i-200149
N104e-31517
N104e-11211
N104e-42244
N104e-52565
N104e-52434
N104e-12252
N104e-12344
N104e-32006
N104e-52518
N104e-52196
N104e-52589
N104e-12303
N104e-32271
N104e-52066
N104e-32766
N104e-12977
N104e-53309
N104e-42442
N104e-13038
N104e-53193
N104e-22676
N104e-23387
N104e-12681
N104e-52912
N104e-52849
N104e-32404
N104e-52324
N104e-22622
N104e-12978
N104e-52983
N104e-52203
N104e-12511
N104e-51107
N104e-12576
N104e-11195
N104e-11459
N104e-11473
N104e-21389
N104e-11602
N104e-11897
N104e-1828
N104e-11004
N104e-11197

RA (J2000) DEC (J2000)
−71:59:58.2
00:24:01.80
−72:01:07.5
00:24:00.23
00:23:21.40
−72:00:21.8
−72:01:54.2
00:23:36.22
−72:01:20.1
00:23:42.16
−71:57:13.2
00:23:34.59
00:23:04.49
−71:57:34.1
−71:56:35.9
00:23:01.41
−71:59:45.7
00:23:10.13
−71:55:36.4
00:24:30.21
−72:02:41.6
00:24:03.08
00:24:25.55
−71:58:17.3
−72:04:05.5
00:24:20.13
−71:58:33.4
00:24:04.32
−71:59:44.7
00:23:42.44
00:24:50.95
−71:59:45.5
−71:56:25.6
00:25:12.42
−71:56:17.2
00:25:02.43
−71:57:39.4
00:24:51.09
−71:53:36.6
00:24:56.73
00:24:37.19
−71:57:45.1
−72:03:40.8
00:25:10.24
−72:03:38.1
00:24:48.20
−72:01:15.9
00:25:14.19
−72:01:13.8
00:24:55.25
00:24:52.69
−72:00:52.7
−72:01:24.3
00:24:41.10
−72:03:19.8
00:25:28.86
−72:05:10.8
00:25:45.44
00:26:19.82
−72:04:16.9
−72:04:32.4
00:25:04.12
−72:02:38.2
00:25:49.98
−72:02:01.4
00:26:04.04
−72:07:26.3
00:25:22.31
00:26:36.15
−72:07:43.2
−72:05:24.7
00:25:22.34
−72:07:05.1
00:25:41.95
−72:06:14.7
00:25:37.34
00:25:01.75
−72:05:33.4
−72:11:49.7
00:24:57.63
−72:08:52.0
00:25:18.29
−72:12:18.5
00:25:46.64
−72:09:38.0
00:25:46.68
00:24:49.32
−72:09:24.1
−72:12:08.5
00:25:10.52
−72:08:34.6
00:23:35.37
−72:13:36.4
00:25:15.00
00:23:41.62
−72:11:38.6
−72:09:34.3
00:24:01.46
−72:10:55.3
00:24:02.37
−72:07:11.9
00:23:56.57
−72:13:37.3
00:24:11.54
00:24:32.01
−72:12:56.0
−72:08:02.4
00:23:17.95
−72:11:49.7
00:23:28.34
00:23:41.68
−72:10:53.8

B

17.915
16.658
16.913
17.805
17.851
17.928
16.869
17.931
17.869
17.911
17.856
16.818
17.425
16.860
17.892
16.874
17.890
17.928
17.887
17.869
16.692
17.877
17.926
17.955
17.919
16.560
17.916
16.888
17.864
17.956
16.717
17.918
17.921
17.816
17.857
17.835
17.904
17.914
16.768
17.918
17.780
17.888
17.927
17.896
17.826
17.887
17.886
17.876
17.874
17.838
17.914
17.924
17.864
17.856
17.914
17.823

V

17.267
15.811
16.094
17.172
17.122
17.255
16.042
17.176
17.134
17.196
17.156
15.989
16.648
16.030
17.207
16.071
17.272
17.208
17.147
17.101
15.856
17.253
17.277
17.240
17.227
15.706
17.217
16.062
17.166
17.382
15.900
17.176
17.268
17.172
17.213
17.135
17.251
17.230
15.924
17.327
17.170
17.172
17.215
17.251
17.152
17.246
17.144
17.169
17.115
17.127
17.327
17.170
17.164
17.134
17.201
17.125

RV [km s−1]

−15.90
−27.28
−24.53
−28.20
−10.74
−19.24
−11.53
−13.65
−10.44
−24.72
−25.53
−26.21
−6.47
−23.23
−10.60
−23.40
−19.00
−29.52
−14.54
−23.57
−26.42
−13.35
−9.21
−18.56
−13.45
−7.45
−21.55
−14.85
−18.73
−14.26
−25.17
−16.31
−20.16
−15.40
−20.20
−20.67
−10.96
−22.55
−21.11
−17.52
−20.26
−18.91
−9.20
−7.08
−19.12
−11.22
−23.05
−32.06
−12.28
−18.76
−9.20
−19.24
−16.50
−4.26
−10.08
−16.59

15

Table 1: continued.

ID
N104e-1626
N104e-11119
N104i-201037
N104e-11040
N104e-2799
N104e-1765
N104e-5249
N104e-5383
N104e-1544
N104e-2739
N104e-1326
N104e-1509
N104e-1781
N104e-1830
N104e-1148
N104e-5134
N104e-5623
N104e-11060
N104e-2717

RA (J2000) DEC (J2000)
−72:03:43.6
00:23:03.00
−72:10:32.0
00:23:36.36
−72:05:40.6
00:23:48.81
−72:09:52.6
00:23:30.28
00:23:16.18
−72:07:34.7
−72:10:44.0
00:23:13.59
−72:06:42.5
00:22:22.46
−72:06:40.2
00:22:36.97
−72:07:53.5
00:22:55.04
00:23:11.86
−72:07:31.5
−72:10:09.2
00:22:30.86
−72:10:29.8
00:22:51.54
−72:03:32.4
00:23:14.72
00:23:18.04
−72:07:07.5
−72:04:31.3
00:22:08.79
−72:05:50.0
00:22:04.08
−72:02:04.7
00:23:02.50
−72:03:11.4
00:23:31.33
00:23:10.22
−72:00:59.1

B

17.882
17.891
17.811
17.861
17.805
17.858
17.899
17.891
17.892
17.769
17.845
17.863
17.873
17.868
17.856
17.890
17.879
17.893
17.835

V

17.196
17.173
17.112
17.141
17.216
17.189
17.256
17.276
17.173
17.162
17.153
17.109
17.127
17.183
17.169
17.212
17.230
17.190
17.225

RV [km s−1]

−4.29
−24.60
−5.29
−20.89
−9.07
−14.82
−7.82
−20.20
−12.02
−13.44
−27.96
−12.41
−16.15
−4.95
−21.53
−12.52
−11.32
−18.29
−13.24

16

A. F. Marino et al.

Table 2: Adopted atmospheric parameters and inferred chemical abundances of
47 Tucanae.

ID
N104e-51475
N104e-31450
N104e-4888
N104e-21122
N104e-11207
N104e-51104
N104e-4647
N104e-1610
N104e-1716
N104e-11887
N104e-11495
N104e-41810
N104i-200149
N104e-31517
N104e-11211
N104e-42244
N104e-52565
N104e-52434
N104e-12252
N104e-12344
N104e-32006
N104e-52518
N104e-52196
N104e-52589
N104e-12303
N104e-32271
N104e-52066
N104e-32766
N104e-12977
N104e-42442
N104e-13038
N104e-53193
N104e-22676
N104e-23387
N104e-12681
N104e-52912
N104e-52849
N104e-32404
N104e-52324
N104e-22622
N104e-12978
N104e-52983
N104e-52203
N104e-12511
N104e-51107
N104e-12576
N104e-11195
N104e-11459
N104e-11473
N104e-21389
N104e-11602
N104e-11897
N104e-1828
N104e-11004
N104e-11197
N104e-1626
N104e-11119
N104i-201037

Teﬀ
5621
5234
5059
5670
5367
5540
5064
5290
5349
5409
5455
4920
5216
5102
5502
5141
5721
5394
5334
5253
5075
5701
5617
5409
5480
4981
5458
5076
5461
5098
5328
5604
5634
5634
5455
5604
5505
5069
5814
5748
5406
5418
5631
5537
5644
5328
5434
5279
5421
5829
5293
5455
5388
5415
5461
5499
5400
5488

log g
3.90
3.17
3.20
3.88
3.74
3.86
3.19
3.73
3.74
3.79
3.79
3.10
3.50
3.20
3.83
3.23
3.93
3.79
3.74
3.69
3.12
3.92
3.90
3.81
3.83
3.01
3.82
3.20
3.80
3.14
3.75
3.89
3.86
3.88
3.78
3.89
3.84
3.14
3.99
3.90
3.78
3.80
3.89
3.82
3.90
3.74
3.79
3.70
3.77
3.99
3.73
3.79
3.76
3.79
3.78
3.82
3.78
3.79

ξt
1.07
1.22
1.18
1.08
1.02
1.05
1.18
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.18
1.22
1.19
1.04
1.19
1.09
1.02
1.02
1.01
1.19
1.09
1.06
1.02
1.04
1.18
1.03
1.18
1.04
1.19
1.02
1.06
1.07
1.07
1.04
1.06
1.04
1.19
1.11
1.10
1.03
1.03
1.07
1.05
1.07
1.02
1.03
1.01
1.03
1.12
1.01
1.04
1.03
1.03
1.04
1.04
1.03
1.05

[Fe/H]
−0.72
−0.58
−0.78
−0.65
−0.70
−0.71
−0.72
−0.71
−0.72
−0.56
−0.82
−0.84
−0.89
−0.78
−0.66
−0.69
−0.68
−0.73
−0.71
−0.73
−0.79
−0.78
−0.60
−0.59
−0.61
−0.80
−0.66
−0.79
−0.75
−0.82
−0.70
−0.69
−0.92
−0.40
−0.76
−0.63
−0.75
−0.74
−0.72
−0.71
−0.66
−0.69
−0.79
−0.84
−0.79
−0.79
−0.74
−0.72
−0.76
−0.98
−0.76
−0.87
−0.71
−0.76
−0.79
−0.63
−0.62
−0.82

[C/Fe]
−0.38
−0.03
−0.13
−0.24
−0.17
−0.39
−0.28
−0.23
−0.21
−0.20

–

−0.17
−0.33
−0.10
−0.18
−0.29
−0.38
−0.36
−0.31
−0.37
−0.12
−0.38
−0.38
−0.23

–

−0.10
−0.42
−0.12
−0.22
−0.25
−0.30
−0.36
−0.12
−0.32
−0.43
−0.50
−0.21
−0.16
−0.41
−0.33
−0.23
−0.21
−0.34
−0.19
−0.48
−0.31
−0.27
−0.28
−0.32

–

−0.27
−0.19
−0.22

–

−0.17
−0.19
−0.20
−0.22

[N/Fe]
1.52
0.41
0.68

–

0.40
1.28
0.90
0.50

–

0.70

–

0.50
0.85

–

0.90
1.00

–

0.82
0.83

–

0.00
1.43
1.45
0.72

–

0.20
1.55
0.00
0.81
0.90
0.40
1.35

–

1.00
1.20

–
–
–

1.50
1.44

–
–

1.31

–

1.47
0.48
0.73

–

0.81

–

0.42
0.69
0.40

–
–

0.84
0.62
0.80

[Na/Fe]LTE

0.78
0.55
0.49
0.61
0.35
0.88
0.53
0.32
0.38
0.37
0.70
0.38
0.71
0.42
0.44
0.64
0.67
0.64
0.52
0.40
0.41
0.64
0.77
0.57
0.68
0.39
0.80
0.36
0.40
0.66
0.37
0.69
0.27
0.67
0.60
0.83
0.49
0.47
0.77
0.65
0.42
0.42
0.62
0.26
0.86
0.50
0.54
0.44
0.63
0.79
0.35
0.47
0.44
0.65
0.29
0.44
0.38
0.59

[Na/Fe]NLTE
0.41
0.13
0.11
0.21
−0.03
0.56
0.16
−0.05
0.01
−0.01
0.35
0.01
0.36
0.02
0.05
0.27
0.27
0.29
0.17
0.04
0.00
0.24
0.41
0.21
0.33
−0.01
0.47
−0.04
0.02
0.30
0.00
0.32
−0.15
0.29
0.25
0.48
0.11
0.08
0.39
0.25
0.04
0.04
0.24
−0.15
0.51
0.14
0.17
0.08
0.27
0.40
−0.01
0.09
0.07
0.30
−0.11
0.05
0.00
0.23

[Mg/Fe]

[Al/Fe]

0.35
0.32
0.33
0.24
0.41
0.43
0.43
0.31
0.17
0.36
0.35
0.27
0.22
0.32
0.24
0.40
0.41
0.33
0.41
0.34
0.36
0.26
0.36
0.47
0.32
0.33
0.48
0.28
0.34
0.25
0.33
0.38
0.18
0.55
0.39
0.38
0.40
0.43
0.30
0.27
0.47
0.42
0.35
0.23
0.31
0.36
0.26
0.40
0.37
0.26
0.26
0.08
0.26
0.24
0.25
0.40
0.38
0.10

0.28
0.24
0.21
0.45
0.17
0.32
0.31

–
–
–

0.21
0.33
0.36
0.40

–

0.43

–

0.34

–
–

0.32
0.61
0.68
0.42
0.69
0.26

–

0.14

–

0.26
0.20

–
–
–
–
–
–

0.11

–
–
–

0.21
0.29

–

0.34

–
–
–

0.34

–
–
–
–

0.55

–
–

0.12
0.31

[Si/Fe]
0.67
0.39
0.45
0.15
0.37
0.77
0.50
0.54
0.21
0.68
0.33
0.36
0.23
0.34
0.34
0.49
0.64
0.50
0.65

–

0.26
0.46
0.57
0.50
0.62
0.42
0.35
0.33
0.35
0.36
0.62
0.14

–
–
–

0.47
0.65
0.30
0.29
0.24
0.44
0.38
0.44

–

0.49
0.32
0.17
0.41
0.45

–
–
–

0.17
0.72

–

0.49
0.22
0.06

[Ni/Fe]
–
0.17
−0.04
–
–
–
−0.19
–
–
–
–
−0.04
–
−0.03
–
0.08
–
–
–
–
−0.20
–
–
–
–
−0.12
–
0.12
–
−0.23
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
−0.05
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Table 3. Sensitivity of derived GIRAFFE abundances to the uncertainties in atmospheric parameters, the limilted S/N (σﬁt) and the total error due to these
contributions (σtot). Two entries correspond to diﬀerent contributions for SGB/RGB stars.

17

∆Teﬀ
±50 K

∆log g
±0.20

∆ξt

±0.20 km s−1

∆[A/H]
0.10 dex

σﬁt

σtotal

[C/Fe]
[N/Fe]
[Na/Fe]
[Mg/Fe]
[Al/Fe]
[Si/Fe]
[Fe/H] i
[Ni/Fe]

±0.04/±0.03
±0.08/±0.04

∓0.01/±0.01
±0.01/∓0.05

±0.04
±0.03

±0.00/±0.03

±0.01
±0.05
±0.01

∓0.06
∓0.03
∓0.01

∓0.01/±0.02
∓0.01/±0.01

±0.02

±0.00
±0.00

∓0.03/∓0.05

∓0.02
∓0.01
∓0.03

∓0.04/∓0.06

∓0.07

∓0.02/±0.00
∓0.02/±0.00

±0.00
±0.00
∓0.01
∓0.01
±0.00
±0.00

±0.03/±0.01
±0.25/±0.08
±0.06/±0.03
±0.04/±0.02
±0.05/±0.02
±0.06/±0.04
±0.06/±0.02

±0.06

0.05/0.03
0.26/0.10
0.10/0.09
0.06/0.04
0.05/0.04
0.07/0.06
0.09/0.08

0.10

Table 4. Mean chemical abundances for all the analysed SGB and RGB stars, for the subsamples of bright and faint SGBs and for the RGB stars. Average
values are listed together with their associated errors, rms and the number of stars used for the means.

average

rms

#

all stars

average

rms
bright-SGB

[C/Fe]
[N/Fe]
[Na/Fe]
[Mg/Fe]
[Al/Fe]
[Si/Fe]
[Fe/H] i
[Ni/Fe]

−0.26±0.01
+0.88±0.06
+0.16±0.02
+0.33±0.01
+0.34±0.02
+0.40±0.02
−0.73±0.01
−0.05±0.04

0.11
0.41
0.17
0.09
0.15
0.17
0.09
0.13

70
54
74
74
40
62
74
11

−0.23±0.01
+0.78±0.05
+0.08±0.02
+0.31±0.02
+0.28±0.03
+0.35±0.03
−0.73±0.01

–

0.09
0.27
0.13
0.10
0.12
0.16
0.09

–

#

40
29
41
41
15
32
41
–

average

rms

#

average

rms

#

faint-SGB

RGB

−0.36±0.02
+1.31±0.08
+0.34±0.03
+0.35±0.02
+0.45±0.04
+0.48±0.04
−0.72±0.02

–

0.08
0.28
0.12
0.07
0.15
0.18
0.09

–

18
15
21
21
13
19
21
–

−0.17±0.03
+0.54±0.13
+0.12±0.04
+0.33±0.02
+0.28±0.03
+0.38±0.02
−0.77±0.02
−0.05±0.04

0.09
0.38
0.13
0.07
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.13

12
10
12
12
12
11
12
11

Table 2: continued.

ID
N104e-11040
N104e-2799
N104e-1765
N104e-5249
N104e-5383
N104e-1544
N104e-2739
N104e-1326
N104e-1509
N104e-1781
N104e-1830
N104e-1148
N104e-5134
N104e-5623
N104e-11060
N104e-2717

Teﬀ
5394
5821
5553
5637
5731
5397
5759
5480
5293
5317
5502
5496
5524
5617
5446
5748

log g
3.76
3.94
3.84
3.90
3.94
3.77
3.90
3.80
3.71
3.72
3.82
3.81
3.84
3.88
3.80
3.92

ξt
1.03
1.12
1.06
1.07
1.09
1.03
1.11
1.04
1.01
1.02
1.04
1.04
1.05
1.07
1.03
1.10

[Fe/H]
−0.70
−0.80
−0.80
−0.83
−0.73
−0.69
−0.87
−0.77
−0.71
−0.83
−0.62
−0.75
−0.63
−0.59
−0.73
−0.78

[C/Fe]
−0.41
−0.04
−0.08
−0.24
−0.40
−0.16
−0.08
−0.25
−0.40
−0.20
−0.23
−0.14
−0.30
−0.40
−0.21
−0.13

[N/Fe]
0.99
1.05
0.95
1.37
1.60
0.50

–

0.65
1.00
0.75
1.11
0.50
1.10
1.47
0.83

–

[Na/Fe]LTE

0.56
0.53
0.37
0.57
0.77
0.47
0.44
0.31
0.56
0.21
0.63
0.37
0.65
0.74
0.52
0.50

[Na/Fe]NLTE
0.20
0.11
−0.03
0.18
0.38
0.09
0.01
−0.09
0.22
−0.17
0.27
−0.02
0.28
0.38
0.16
0.08

[Mg/Fe]

[Al/Fe]

0.36
0.23
0.21
0.38
0.23
0.30
0.22
0.42
0.44
0.22
0.28
0.31
0.37
0.45
0.36
0.33

0.35

–

0.19
0.55

–

0.27

–
–

0.43
0.15

–

0.29
0.54
0.43
0.31

–

[Si/Fe]
0.55
0.12
0.33

–

0.23
0.32
0.25

–

0.48
0.16
0.51
0.33
0.38
0.54
0.14
0.23

[Ni/Fe]
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

