6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

V
C
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
2
0
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Adaptive Visualisation System for Construction

Building Information Models Using Saliency

Hugo Martin, hug.martin@bouygues-construction.com

Sylvain Chevallier, sylvain.chevallier@uvsq.fr

Eric Monacelli, eric.monacelli@uvsq.fr

March 8, 2016

Abstract

Building Information Modeling (BIM) is a recent construction pro-
cess based on a 3D model, containing every component related to the
building achievement. Architects, structure engineers, method engi-
neers, and others participant to the building process work on this
model through the design-to-construction cycle. The high complex-
ity and the large amount of information included in these models raise
several issues, delaying its wide adoption in the industrial world. One
of the most important is the visualization: professionals have diﬃ-
culties to ﬁnd out the relevant information for their job. Actual so-
lutions suﬀer from two limitations: the BIM models information are
processed manually and insigniﬁcant information are simply hidden,
leading to inconsistencies in the building model. This paper describes
a system relying on an ontological representation of the building infor-
mation to label automatically the building elements. Depending on the
user’s department, the visualization is modiﬁed according to these la-
bels by automatically adjusting the colors and image properties based
on a saliency model. The proposed saliency model incorporates several
adaptations to ﬁt the speciﬁcities of architectural images.

Keywords:

Saliency, Building Information Modeling, Virtual Reality, Building Architecture,
Data Visualization, Immersion, Knowledge Representation.

1 Introduction

In architecture, the construction process underwent a major shift in the
past 5 years with the increasing adoption of Building Information Modeling
process (BIM) to design and achieve all kind of structures. These processes
are based on a 3D model containing the information required to achieve
the building. The model could be used to observe the construction project
in term of design and architecture with lightings simulations or rendering

1

pictures, but it is mostly used in a technical approach [Ernstrom, 2006] [for
Construction Innovation, 2007] Kymmell [2008]. Several distinct experts are
contributing to BIM models, each one modifying or adding its own objects
and notes on the 3D model. As shown in Fig. 1, this 3D model gathered
all the information coming from diﬀerent user proﬁles (architect, method,
structure, . . .).

All user proﬁles do not require all information from the model; e.g. the
position of electric cables is mostly irrelevant for a structure engineer, but
it is needed at some point to check interactions between electric cables and
structures. To improve the eﬃciency and quality of the BIM work, it is im-
portant to adapt the visibility of each object depending of the user’s proﬁle.
The actual industrial process is to manually hide with a transparency eﬀect
all the unimportant objects. This method is the cause of major problems,
as the manual operations are known to be error-prone and time consuming.
Also completely hiding objects often lead to clashes between elements, for
example a cable going through a water pipe, which is a common issue in
BIM processes.

This paper proposes an assistive system for construction engineers and
BIM users. This system uses an ontology to represent the building infor-
mation and enhance the identiﬁcation of 3D models. It classiﬁes automat-
ically BIM components in real time and adapts their colors regarding the
user’s interest. Our system proposes a visualization method where the most
important components capture the visual attention while maintaining all
components on screen.

An eye tracking device could be used to accurately capture the gaze of the
user during their interaction with the system, however this approach suﬀers
from two limitations. Firstly, the design and parametrization of a system
based on eye-tracking recordings is a time-consuming process. It implicates
that building experts spend a lot of time calibrating the system, thus the
eﬀective cost will be very high. Secondly, with eye-tracking device it is not
possible to produce an online system, i.e. which automatically adapts the
visualization depending on the properties of the visual scene. For example,
under a certain point of view, an object could require an enhancement to
be salient, while it could already be salient when looking at it from another
point of view.

Saliency models are mostly used for image analysis and capturing the
focus of human perception. In this work, we make use of saliency model for
image synthesis and we exploit the eﬃciency of these models to propose an
online system. The visualization of the 3D model is thus modiﬁed to enforce
the saliency of the relevant objects for a speciﬁc user proﬁle.

Most of the saliency models are assessed on natural images, such as land-
scapes, portraits, etc. The architectural images generated by 3D building
models display some strong properties and diﬀerent from natural images.
The most visible property is the strong presence of vanishing points and the

2

second one is the importance of depth in those images. We proposed speciﬁc
adaptations of the saliency models to suit those properties of architectural
images. This work will then be integrated in an industrial BIM viewer for
Bouygues Construction and applied on the design of real projects.
Thus, the contributions of our system could be summarized as:
• Ontology of building information models: from the knowledge of BIM
managers, we propose an ontology and a classiﬁcation of BIM elements
depending of their interest for each profession department.

• Adaptation of the saliency model to architectural images: Notable
saliency systems are mostly based on 2D images. BIM and architec-
tural images present particularities that we take into account.

• Online and real-time visualization system: We propose a system which
modify colors depending of the user proﬁle. The system works in real
time and is integrated in a BIM viewer to assist users.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the state of the
art on building management ontology and deﬁnes our goals for the system.
The application of saliency methods are also justiﬁed and the speciﬁcities
of architectural images are pointed out. Section 3 introduces our model and
explain our contributions. Section 4 details the experiments and in Sect. 5
a discussion about beneﬁts of the proposed system is proposed.

Figure 1: Sketch of BIM process. All professions work on the same model.
Each user needs an adaptation of his visualisation of the model.

3

2 State of the Art

2.1 Building Management Ontology

Two diﬀerent approaches could be identiﬁed in the literature on ontology
applied to building management. The ﬁrst approach is task-centric and
aims at assessing the beneﬁt of BIM versus non-BIM technologies, relying
on a complete description of the tasks taking place in the building design
process Li et al. [2014]. The work developed in this paper follows a second
approach, user proﬁle-centric : all 3D model objects are classiﬁed depending
on their relation with the users proﬁle. This classiﬁcation is either based on
the intrinsic properties of the object Aksamija and Grobler [2007] or from
a model of interaction between diﬀerent actors Lee et al. [2014] Costa and
Lima [2014]. As such, an element of the 3D model, for example a wall,
is relevant for the work of a structure engineer, but is not for a plumbing
engineer who is concerned by pipes and water circulation.

2.2 Saliency

Many computational models have been proposed to predict the visual at-
tention through saliency map, such as Tsotsos et al. [1995] Itti and Koch
[2000] Huang and Ahuja [2012]. A comprehensive review could be found
in Zhao and Koch [2013] and an assessment of the existing models is pro-
posed on the MIT saliency benchmark Bylinskii et al. [2012]. A commonly
found methodology in saliency-based models is to analyze the contrast of
an image in term of intensity, color and orientation. Saliency models are an
easy and fast way of analyzing images and predicting an accurate map of
visual attention. Hence saliency models could analyze an image coming from
a BIM scene and determine the visually attractive elements of the scene.

In the context of architectural images, the visual scene often display
strong depth information and vanishing point. It has been shown that the
depth clues are highly informative and have a strong inﬂuence on object
saliency Lang et al. [2012], He and Nakayama [1995]. Several works linking
vanishing point and visual attention have been conducted. Stentiford Sten-
tiford [2006] has proposed to detect vanishing points based on the visual
attention. Itti and Koch model integrated the orientation analysis following
constant axes (vertical, horizontal, diagonal). Architecture pictures contain
important vanishing points which are easily detectables Van Den Heuvel
[1998], Rother [2002] as most of the shapes follow the projection of vanish-
ing points. If an object does not contribute to the global perspective, its
visual saliency is increased.

4

3 Ontology-based Visualization System

3.1 Description of the Proposed System

The majority of the saliency models are developed using standard 2D pic-
tures. These models consider orientations in ﬂat images, the visual saliency
is computed for all constant angles. Our system implement a method that
detects vanishing points and compute orientation map from a projection of
these points, described in Sect. 3.2. In BIM case, all images are generated
by a 3D viewer software with engineer colors only chosen to make a contrast
between elements. The employed color codes do not contain major informa-
tion; often colors are chosen randomly. We used saliency model for image
synthesis, guiding the color choice to maximize the saliency of important
BIM components in the scene. Combined to a color selection algorithm, our
system selects colors which keep the visual attention of the user on impor-
tant elements without hiding or deleting others. Our algorithm is described
in Sect. 3.3.

3.2 Vanishing Point-Sensitive Computation

This paper proposes a method to take into account vanishing point in
saliency model. The orientation detection was replaced by a vanishing point
projection process. Our system relies on the work of Feng et al.
for the
detection of the vanishing points Feng et al. [2010] Tardif [2009]. As an
illustration, we applied our algorithm on a sample image and the result is
shown Fig. 2. From an input image, the vanishing point are detected with
the Feng algorithm, the projection from this vanishing point is computed.
The projection image (Fig. 2, top right) is then analyzed in its vertical con-
trast (Fig. 2, bottom right). An inverse transform of the result is added to
the global model as the orientation conspicuity map, as shown on the right
part of Fig. 3. This ﬁgure displays the saliencies computed with the original
Itti model Itti and Koch [2000] on the left and the saliencies obtained with
our model on the right.

The saliency model of the proposed system takes also into account the
contrast of depth. The 3D software computes a depth map associated with
each generated image. We have implemented the work of Jost et al. Jost
et al. [2004] to include the information extracted from a depth conspicuity
map in the system. In the proposed saliency model, other features map are
computed as in the Itti model Itti and Koch [2000]. Thus four conspicuity
maps are built, i.e. the perspective orientation map, the intensity map, the
color map and the depth map, and are then combined in the saliency map,
shown on Fig. 4.

5

Figure 2: Left: original image with obvious vanishing point. Top right:
result image after vanishing point projection. Bottom right: the vertical
orientation map.

Figure 3: Left: orientation conspicuity map computed from 0, 45, 90, 135
orientations, as in Itti et al. Itti and Koch [2000]. Right: orientation con-
spicuity map computed with our model. Edges that do not contribute to
the perspectivity stood out.

3.3 Enhancing Visual Attention

The proposed system implements an online adaptation the image visualiza-
tion. The aim is to choose colors that emphasize the visual saliency of the
relevant elements. The works of Ware Ware [2004] and Healey Healey and
Enns [2012] describe links between visual attention, visualization and col-
ors. The thorough experiments of Wolfe Wolfe [2000] caracterize the links
between colors and visual attention. Colors of BIM model do not convey
information, and are chosen semi-randomly only to create a diﬀerence be-
tween several elements. In the proposed approach, most of the adaptation
of the original image is done on the color channels, as it is a lossless trans-
formation regarding the BIM model. It should be noted that as BIM models
become more complex and include more elements, the probability of ﬁnding
two diﬀerent objects with a similar color drastically increase, thus producing
incomprehensible visualization of BIM models. Our system does not alter
the user-deﬁned colors, but could modify the color of any element label as
unimportant with respect to the user proﬁle.

6

Figure 4: Architecture of the saliency model: conspicuity maps of intensity,
colors and 3D orientations are extracted from the 3D snapshot. Depth
conspicuity map is computed from depth information of the model. The
saliency map combines all the conspicuity maps. Salient locations are used
to adapt the color scheme of the original image to enhance object relevant
to the user proﬁle.

As shown on Fig. 4, the saliencies are computed from a screenshot
provided by the 3D real time viewer. From the obtained saliency map,
regions belonging to relevant and irrelevant elements are tagged as such.
Rr = {pa}a∈A and Ri = {pb}b∈B are respectively the set of relevant and
irrelevant regions in the image, where A and B are the indexed set of pixel
pa and pb belonging to relevant and irrelevant objects. Sky and gound’s
pixel are considered as irrelevant objects. The average saliency Sr and Si of
Rr and Ri regions is computed to evaluate which set is the most salient.

SrSr + Si

Ge =
Si = pa ∩ pi : a ∈ A, i ∈ I

(1)

(2)

(3)
The colors are altered if Ge < 0, 5, that is if the Rr region does not
represent the majority of the image saliency. The color modiﬁcations rely
on the average saturation, intensity and color (in the HSV sense), denoted
Ge, measured on Rr. Depending on the average element color, a target
color T is deﬁned (see Table 1). This target color is the opposite of the Rr
pixel color, as the main idea is to reinforce the color contrast of the image
depending on the relevant image elements.

7

Average Color Target (T )
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue

Green
Blue
Red

Yellow

Table 1: Target color T of the algorithm modifying the visualization to
enhance the saliency of relevant element w.r.t the user proﬁle.

The proposed algorithm applies a color ﬁlter to turn the less important
pixels depending of the user’s proﬁle (pb ⊂ Ri) in the target hue, resulting
in a new pixel ˜pb. The same ﬁlter is applied to the black and white pixels.

˜pb = pb + Ge(T − pb)

(4)

A new saliency map is computed with the updated color map. If the
average saliency of the Rr failed to represent the majority of the image
saliency, the algorithm is applied iteratively until the majority is reached.

Figure 4 displays an example of such color adaptation. The image is
adapted for a method engineer, the position of the crane and its access are
a crucial information for the construction site. Other elements represent
structure components such as concrete walls, metal beams and frames. On
the original image, the crane is red and the structure is orange, on the
modiﬁed image the structure is green, the opposite colors of the crane.

4 Experimental Validation

4.1 Methodology and Experiments

An experiment in real condition was setup, based on three real BIM mod-
els of Bouygues Construction projects from France, in the cities of Paris,
Nantes and Lyon. Two of them, Paris and Nantes, mix structure elements
(wall, roof, beam, ...) and construction methods elements (crane, scaﬀold,
formwork). The third one, Lyon, includes plumbing elements (pipes). The
three models were created on 3D building design software “Revit” and then
exported in the real time 3D engine Unity3D R(cid:13). Each element got a name
and information about their color or kind of materials (concrete, metal,
cloth...). In Unity3D R(cid:13), these elements are automatically classiﬁed as struc-
ture, method or plumbing elements using the building ontology developed
for the system.

Four visual scenes were taken for each model, and their associated depth
maps were computed. Our system determines the color modiﬁcation for
each user proﬁles available with the 3D model. As the Paris and the Nantes

8

models mix structural and method elements, four images with enhanced col-
ors for structure engineers and four images with enhanced colors for method
engineer were created. For the Lyon model, the same process is applied to
obtain four images. There is a total of 20 enhanced color pictures.

The experiments aim at evaluating the beneﬁts of our method with build-
ing experts. A questionnaire was proposed to construction engineers, as il-
lustrated on Fig. 5. In the experiments, the user proﬁle (structure, method
or plumbing engineer) is recorded. Two images of the same visual scene are
displayed on screen, chosen randomly from the 3D models: one image is the
original, the other one is the color enhanced version. The position, left or
right, of the original and modiﬁed image is also chosen randomly for each
presentation. The expert is then asked to choose which image is the most
confortable to work with. The questionnaire have 5 possible choices:
left
image, probably left image, indiﬀerent, probably right image and right im-
age. The response time for each image is also recorded. An example of the
setup is shown on Fig. 6. The structure and method experts are tested with
8 images extracted from the Paris and Nantes models, while the plumbing
experts are tested on 4 images issued form the Lyon model. A total of 17
experts have participated to these experiments: 6 are method engineers, 7
are structure engineers and 4 are plumbing engineers.

Figure 5: Test protocol for the assessment of the proposed system.

4.2 Results

The results obtained from the experiments are shown on Fig. 7. The results
are consistent across projects and user proﬁles. They do not indicate a
bias for speciﬁc model or for a speciﬁc profession. In average, the saliency-
enhanced image is chosen in 59.4% of all cases, to be compared with the
19% of expert response selecting the original image. The results conﬁrm

9

Figure 6: Example of an image of the experiment. Experts are asked to
answered the following question: ”Considering that your are mostly inter-
ested by your profession’s elements. In your opinion, which picture seems
the more visually pleasant?” Five choices are allowed for the experts: “left”,
“probably left”, “indiﬀerent”, “probably right” or “right”. The right image
is the original one; on the left one, the colors are enhanced by our saliency
processing. The luminance are the same, only the color coded information
are changed to emphasize the method objects (here the red crane in the mid-
dle). The blue and yellow elements from original image (right) are changed
to green in the saliency-enhanced image (left).

that our system improved the visualization quality while maintaining all
information on screen. Nonetheless, the “indiﬀerent” answers indicate that
there is room to improve the sytem. The experts have conﬁrmed that the
have seen the advantage of the system and are waiting for the industrial
BIM viewer version.

We applied Wilcoxon’s Signed-Rank test. For each picture, we count the
number of engineers who chose the modiﬁed or probably modiﬁed for the
ﬁrst sample, and those who chose probably the original or the original for
the second sample. For the p-value decided to take 0.05 as limit, the p-value
result is 0.001 which conﬁrm the signiﬁance of the experimentation.

A limitation appeared during the experiments: the method experts in-
specting the Paris model have shown some trouble deciding which image is
the more comfortable. This model contains blue/green scaﬀolds and secu-
rity fences were red which is the opposite color. None of the two colors is
dominant so the saliency-enhanced picture is not so diﬀerent from the origi-
nal. This problem is caused by elements of opposite colors belonging to the
same category, due to the fact that the original elements colors are chosen
randomly. This limitation could simply be addressed by modify the original
colors prior to the processing.

5 Conclusion and perspectives

This paper describes a system for enhancing the visualization of BIM model,
using saliencies to bias the visual focalization on the most relevant elements,
given a speciﬁc user proﬁle. From the knowledge of BIM managers, we pro-

10

Figure 7: Histograms of experts’ answers. Bottom: Results for Paris,
Nantes, Lyon. Top: Results for structure engineers, method engineers and
plumbing engineers.

posed a classiﬁer to sort elements of the model depending of their category
regarding per building departments. We described an adapted saliency sys-
tem to architectural images which implements a perspectivity integration
for the orientations map and integrated depth clues. Finally the system will
be used in an application for the assistance for BIM engineers. The system
adapts model colors to keep the visual attention of the important elements
for the user proﬁle. An experimentation was realized and show positively
signiﬁcant results and perspectives for the global improvement.

Future works will be dedicated to extending the system with other type of
transformation for improving the visualization. Possible candidates includes
transparency and spatial position. It should be noted that the building on-
tology embedded in this system allows to speciﬁes which transformation are
allowed and which are not. The ontology could be improved, to include el-
ements deﬁned as crucial for several departments. Also, the ontology could
include some priority information for the visualization of complex objects.
The last improvement concerns the position and orientation of the virtual
camera (the user’s view), which can help to deﬁne more appropriate en-
hancement.

11

Acknowledgments

This work was made with the collaboration of Bouygues Construction. The
resulting application will be integrated in the future BIM immersive room.
The research has been ﬁnanced in partnership with the ANRT (Association
Nationale de Recherche et Technologie).

References

References

A. Aksamija and F. Grobler. Architectural ontology: development of
machine-readable representations for building design drivers. pages 168–
175, 2007.

Z. Bylinskii, T. Judd, F. Durand, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba. Mit saliency

benchmark. http://saliency.mit.edu/, 2012.

R. Costa and C. Lima. Knowledge representations with ontology support
for collaborative engineering in architecture engineering and construction,
2014.

J. W. Ernstrom. The contractors’ guide to BIM. Associated General Con-

tractors of America, 2006.

C. Feng, F. Deng, and V. Kamat. Semi-automatic 3d reconstruction of piece
planar building models from single image. International Conference on
Construction Applications of Virtual Reality, 2010.

Cooperative Research Center for Construction Innovation, editor. Adopting
BIM for facilities management: Solutions for managing the Sydney Opera
House. Brisbane, Australia, 2007.

Z.J. He and K. Nakayama. Visual attention to surfaces in three-dimensional
space. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), 92(24):
11155–11159, 1995.

C.G Healey and J.T. Enns. Attention and visual memory in visualization and
computer graphics. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Trans-
actions on, 18(7):1170–1188, 2012.

J.-B. Huang and N. Ahuja. Saliency detection via divergence analysis: A
uniﬁed perspective. In Int. Conf. on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pages
2748–2751, November 2012.

L. Itti and C. Koch. A saliency-based search mechanism for overt and covert

shifts of visual attention. Vision research, 40(10-12):1489–1506, 2000.

12

T. Jost, N. Ouerhani, R.v. Wartburg, R. Muri, and H. Hugli. Contribution
of depth to visual attention: comparison of a computer model and human
behavior, 2004.

W. Kymmell. Building information modeling: planning and managing con-
struction projects with 4D CAD and simulations. McGraw-Hill, New York,
2008.

C. Lang, T.V. Nguyen, H. Katti, K. Yadati, M. Kankanhalli, and S. Yan.
Depth matters: Inﬂuence of depth cues on visual saliency. In Computer
Vision–ECCV 2012, pages 101–115. Springer, 2012.

J. Lee, Y. Jeong, M. Oh, and S.W. Hong. A ﬁlter-mediated communication
model for design collaboration in building construction. The Scientiﬁc
World Journal, 2014, 2014.

J. Li, L. Hou, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Guo, S. Zhang, and Y. Jiao. A project-
based quantiﬁcation of BIM beneﬁts. International Journal of Advanced
Robotics Systems, 123(11), 2014.

C. Rother. A new approach to vanishing point detection in architectural

environments. Image and Vision Computing, 20(9):647–655, 2002.

F. Stentiford. Attention-based vanishing point detection.

In Image Pro-
cessing, 2006 IEEE International Conference on, pages 417–420. IEEE,
2006.

J-P Tardif. Non-iterative approach for fast and accurate vanishing point
detection. In Computer Vision, 2009 IEEE 12th International Conference
on, pages 1250–1257. IEEE, 2009.

J.K. Tsotsos, S.M. Culhane, W.Y.K. Winky, Y. Lai, N. Davis, and F. Nuﬂo.
Modeling visual attention via selective tuning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 78
(1-2):507–545, October 1995.

F.A Van Den Heuvel. Vanishing point detection for architectural photogram-
metry. International archives of photogrammetry and remote sensing, 32:
652–659, 1998.

Ware. Foundation for a Science of Data Visualization. 2004.

J. Wolfe. Visual attention. Seeing, 2:335–386, 2000.

Q. Zhao and C. Koch. Learning saliency-based visual attention: A review.

Signal Processing, 93(6):1401–1407, June 2013.

13

