6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
4
0
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dynamical Lamb eﬀect versus dissipation in superconducting quantum circuits

A. A. Zhukov1,3, D. S. Shapiro1,2, W. V. Pogosov1,4, Yu. E. Lozovik1,5,6

1N. L. Dukhov All-Russia Research Institute of Automatics, 127055 Moscow, Russia

2V. A. Kotel’nikov Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics,

Russian Academy of Sciences, 125009 Moscow, Russia

3National Research Nuclear University (MEPhI), 115409 Moscow, Russia

4Institute for Theoretical and Applied Electrodynamics,
Russian Academy of Sciences, 125412 Moscow, Russia

5Institute of Spectroscopy, Russian Academy of Sciences, 142190 Moscow region, Troitsk, Russia and

6Moscow Institute of Electronics and Mathematics,

National Research University Higher School of Economics, 101000 Moscow, Russia

Superconducting circuits provide a new platform to study nonstationary cavity QED phenomena.
An example of such a phenomenon is a dynamical Lamb eﬀect which is a parametric excitation of an
atom due to the nonadiabatic modulation of its Lamb shift. This eﬀect has been initially introduced
for a natural atom in a varying cavity, while we suggested its realization in a superconducting qubit-
cavity system with dynamically tunable coupling.
In the present paper, we study the interplay
between the dynamical Lamb eﬀect and the energy dissipation, which is unavoidable in realistic
systems. We ﬁnd that despite of naive expectations this interplay can lead to unexpected dynamical
regimes. One of the most striking results is that photon generation from vacuum can be strongly
enhanced due to the qubit relaxation, which opens a new channel for such a process. We also
show that dissipation in the cavity can increase the qubit excited state population. Our results
can be used for the experimental observation and investigation of the dynamical Lamb eﬀect and
accompanying quantum eﬀects.

PACS numbers: 42.50.Ct, 42.50.Dv, 85.25.Am

I.

INTRODUCTION

Superconducting circuits can be exploited for experi-
mental investigation of cavity quantum electrodynamical
(QED) eﬀects [1]. This possibility is due to the recent
progress in fabrication methods and quantum ﬁelds con-
trol which allows one to use superconducting systems in
quantum information and computation [2–7]. The trans-
fer of information can be eﬃciently implemented pro-
vided dissipation eﬀects and external noise are ruled out,
while this problem is known to be quite diﬃcult to solve
[8]. Obviously, similar requirements have to be fulﬁlled
for QED eﬀects to be observed in experiments.

Several years ago a ﬁrst observation of one of the most
intriguing nonstationary QED phenomena known as the
dynamical Casimir eﬀect was reported [9, 10]. It is quite
remarkable that it was observed for the ﬁrst time in su-
perconducting systems although it has been predicted for
systems seemingly very distinct from such circuits [11].
Being nonstationary, the dynamical Casimir eﬀect diﬀers
from static Casimir eﬀect. Static Casimir eﬀect is man-

ifested as an attraction of two static mirrors due to the
zero-point ﬂuctuations of photon ﬁeld conﬁned between
them. These vacuum ﬂuctuations contribute also to an-
other well known static QED eﬀect – Lamb shift of atom
spectrum. Such a shift exists not only for natural atoms,
but also for artiﬁcial superconducting ”atoms” (qubits)
coupled to resonators [12]. Moreover, in contrast to nat-
ural atoms, the eﬀect can be signiﬁcantly enhanced, since
a regime of strong qubit-cavity coupling is achievable in
such systems.

Dynamical Casimir eﬀect was initially predicted to oc-
cur provided mirrors are moving with respect to each
other. This motion leads to a modulation of allowed pho-
ton wave vectors, as dictated by quantization conditions.
As a result, real photons are generated from a vacuum
between the mirrors thus parametrically amplifying vac-
uum ﬂuctuations. In order to produce a feasible photon
emission rate, one has to move mirrors with velocities ap-
proaching a speed of light. For massive mirrors, this re-
quirement is challenging for nowadays experimental facil-
ities. That is why various indirect schemes have been sug-

gested [13–16], among which we mention modulation of
electromagnetic properties of the cavity walls, the usage
of acoustic waves and nanomechanical resonators. One
of such proposals was to modulate an inductance of the
superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID)
connected to the coplanar waveguide [17]. Such a modu-
lation can be treated as a change of the electrical length
of the waveguide which is accompanied by a desired varia-
tion of boundary conditions. Since no motion of massive
objects is involved, a very fast modulation rate can be
achieved.

We wish to stress that the dynamical Casimir eﬀect is
just one of the examples of a large class of nonstationary
QED eﬀects in which vacuum ampliﬁcation is expected
to play a major role [1]. The most known eﬀects of this
kind are the Unruh eﬀect [18] and the Hawking radiation
[19]. None of these phenomena has been observed so far
except of the dynamical Casimir eﬀect.

A very rich behavior is also demonstrated by nonsta-
tionary cavities containing a single atom or an ensem-
ble of such atoms thanks to the matter-light coupling,
see, e.g., Refs.
[20–27]. The simplest possible system
of such kind is a single-mode cavity with time depen-
dent frequency, which contains a two-level system. A
nonadiabatic modulation of cavity frequency leads to the
generation of Casimir photons. These photons can natu-
rally be absorbed by the atom resulting in its excitation
[22]. A precise analysis [23], however, shows that there
is another channel of atom excitation which is due to the
nonadiabatic modulation of its Lamb shift. This eﬀect is
related to the static Lamb shift in a similar way, as the
dynamical Casimir eﬀect is related to the static Casimir
eﬀect. For this reason, it was suggested in Ref.
[23] to
term this phenomenon as the ”dynamical Lamb eﬀect”.
Unfortunately, experimentally it seems to be quite dif-
ﬁcult to isolate the channel of atom excitation due to
the absorption of Casimir photons from the mechanism
due to the dynamical Lamb eﬀect, since these two ex-
citation channels always appear together in experiments
with nonstationary cavities, in which their frequencies
experience external variations.

Fortunately, instead of real atoms it is possible to use
artiﬁcial ”atoms” made of superconducting circuits with
Josephson junctions. This opportunity is very attractive
because of the high ﬂexibility of such circuits. Two-level
superconducting artiﬁcial ”atoms” are used nowadays
as qubits for purposes of quantum computation. Being

2

macroscopic in their sizes, they can demonstrate quan-
tum behavior on rather long time scales, approaching
hundreds of microseconds for state-of-art devices. Qual-
ity factors of available microwave resonators are of the or-
der of 106, so that a coupled qubit-cavity system can be-
have quantum mechanically during time intervals needed
to perform hundreds or thousands of quantum gates [5].
Moreover, it is known that coupled systems of super-
conducting resonators and qubits can be fabricated as
dynamically tunable in-situ during experiments. It was
demonstrated that not only the resonator frequency and
the qubit excitation energy can be modulated but one
can also change a vacuum Rabi frequency determined by
the strength of a qubit-resonator coupling. Such a mod-
ulation can be achieved using either ﬂux qubits with an
additional SQIUD or two strongly coupled charge qubits
(transmons) out of which a single eﬀective two-level sys-
tem can be created, see, e.g., Refs.
[28–30]. Thus it
is possible not only to change several parameters simul-
taneously by perturbing the whole system, but also to
modulate a particular single parameter.

This remarkable opportunity opens a possibility for
the full isolation of the mechanism of qubit excitation
due to the dynamical Lamb eﬀect from the channel of
its excitation due to the absorption of Casimir photons
[31]. Indeed, if one modulates only the qubit-resonator
coupling and does not change a resonator frequency, no
Casimir photons appear. Nevertheless, a qubit can be
parametrically excited since it somehow ”feels” a nona-
diabatic change of its Lamb shift. In order to enhance
the eﬀect and to increase qubit excited state population,
it was suggested in [31] to modulate the resonator-qubit
coupling periodically with twice the resonator frequency,
while qubit and resonator are in a full resonance. How-
ever, in [31] a dissipation in the qubit-resonator coupled
system was completely ignored.

The major aim of the present paper is to treat an in-
terplay between the dynamical Lamb eﬀect and the dis-
sipation. The naive expectation is that dissipation must
always suppress this purely quantum eﬀect, as well as the
process of photon generation from vacuum. In particu-
lar, relaxation in qubit is opposite to the qubit excitation
process, induced by the dynamical Lamb eﬀect, since it
leads to a qubit de-excitation. In reality, we ﬁnd that the
eﬀect of dissipation is far more complex and it results in
several highly unexpected dynamical regimes. Our major
conclusion is that the qubit excited state population in

presence of dissipation depends crucially on the character
of the vacuum Rabi frequency modulation. Note that we
assumed that qubit and resonator in the initial moment
were not excited. We also took into account that a decay
of photon states in superconducting circuits is typically
much weaker than relaxation in a qubit which allows for
the separation of characteristic time scales of two types
of dissipation.

We ﬁnd that some types of periodic modulation of the
vacuum Rabi frequency lead to the decay with time of the
qubit excited state population, while the mean number of
generated photons tends to be stabilized around some ﬁ-
nite number. However, other types of parametric driving
of the same quantity lead to completely diﬀerent behav-
ior. In this case, the qubit excited state population state
becomes stabilized near the large value of 1/2, while the
number of photons in the system grows nearly linearly
with time until it also becomes stabilized by photon ﬁeld
relaxation. Hence, in this case, the dynamical Lamb ef-
fect is much more robust with respect to the dissipation
in a qubit.

We would like to stress that this striking increase of
photon number is possible only when ﬁnite dissipation
in a qubit is taken into account, since such a dissipa-
tion adds a new channel of photon generation from vac-
uum via qubit degrees of freedom. These results show
that there are two competing processes in our system.
Which one prevails, depends on the character of a mod-
ulation. We also demonstrate that this competition can
be described by the balance of two parameters which are
nothing but two ﬁrst Fourier components of a vacuum
Rabi frequency as a function of time. The second regime
is possible only for strong driving, such that the coupling
constant changes its sign during the modulation. A mod-
ulation of this sort seems to be possible for present or
near-future technologies. Thus, we hope that the change
of the behavior we here predict can be observed in ex-
periments.

We also analyze in a more detail the eﬀect of cavity
relaxation. We ﬁnd that the diﬀerence between the two
regimes is smeared out, since in both cases the stabi-
lization is ﬁnally achieved, but at long enough times.
Moreover, the nonzero cavity relaxation always leads to
the enhancement of qubit excited state population at
long times. Hence, by increasing this quantity, one can
also increase the dynamical Lamb eﬀect. This increase
is stronger for those types of modulation which lead to

3

the decay of this probability in the dissipation-free case.
Thus, an increase of cavity relaxation provides an alter-
native method to enhance an eﬀect. This method is of
importance because it does not require the usage of sign-
alternating modulations which can be technically diﬃcult
to implement.

The investigation of responses of quantum systems on
nonadiabatic modulation of their parameters is of inter-
est not only from the viewpoint of realization of various
fundamental QED eﬀects, but also for purposes of quan-
tum computation. Indeed, high-speed gates can induce
various nonstationary QED eﬀects related to vacuum am-
pliﬁcation and parametric generation of excitations from
vacuum. Therefore, both the understanding and the con-
trol of such eﬀects is of great importance.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
describe the system under consideration and outline our
theoretical model.
In Section III, we present a simple
toy model which allows us to understand some impor-
tant features of the dynamical behavior of our system
without performing numerical simulations and under the
assumption that the decay rate in the cavity can be ne-
glected. The results of such simulations under the same
assumption are then presented in Section IV. Section V
deals with the analysis of the eﬀect of cavity relaxation.
In Section VI we apply an alternative method to solve
a problem applicable for the stationary limit after the
stabilization in order to crosscheck our main results. We
conclude in Section VII.

II. HAMILTONIAN AND BASIC EQUATIONS

We are focused on superconducting circuits which con-
sist of ﬂux or charge qubit (transmon). This two-level
system is coupled dynamically to high quality coplanar
waveguide, playing a role of single mode cavity in optical
systems. Qubit and waveguide are spatially separated
on a chip, indeed, coupling between them can be orga-
nized by auxiliary SQUID or by means of other methods
[28, 30]. Current superconducting technologies allow to
realize architectures where qubit-cavity coupling can be
switched on and oﬀ or tuned at GHz frequencies, while
the amplitude can be varied at values up to 100 MHz.
As can be expected, near-future technologies will be able
to impose even more adjustable modulations.

We describe the photon mode and qubit (at frequencies

ω and  respectively which are of the order of several
GHz) by means of the Rabi model [32, 33], known from
quantum optics, taking into account dynamically tunable
coupling energy g(t). Total Hamiltonian of this system
reads

H(t) = ωa†a +

1
2

(1 + σ3) + V (t),

(1)

where a† and a are secondary quantized photon creation
and annihilation operators and σ3 = 2σ+σ− − 1, σ+, σ−
are Pauli operators related to qubit degrees of freedom.
The non-stationary operator V (t) describes dynamical
qubit-cavity coupling

V (t) = g(t)(a + a†)(σ− + σ+),

(2)
where (a + a†) and (σ− + σ+) are related to electric ﬁeld
and dipole moment operators, respectively.

This qubit-cavity interaction operator can be divided

into two parts

where

V (t) = V1(t) + V2(t),

V1(t) = g(t)(aσ+ + a†σ−)

(3)

(4)

is responsible for the well known rotating wave approxi-
mation (RWA), provided V2 is dropped, while V2 is given
by

V2(t) = g(t)(a†σ+ + aσ−).

(5)

This counter-rotating wave term (CRT) is usually ne-
glected.

The term V1 in the Hamiltonian conserves total num-
ber of excitations in the system and in stationary
case V1(t) = const it provides exactly solvable Jaynes-
Cummings model, which is well justiﬁed near the reso-
nance, ω (cid:39) , and for weakly interacting system, g (cid:28) ω.
Counter rotating wave term V2 violates the conserva-
tion of excitation number, while conserves their parity.
This term plays a central role in our treatments because
it leads to the dynamical Lamb eﬀect. Namely, non-
adiabatic modulation of V2(t) provides qubit excitation
with simultaneous photon creation [23, 31].

In our previous paper [31] we took into account instan-
taneous and periodic switching of g(t) of particular rect-
angular shapes. In the context of dynamical Lamb eﬀect
we considered both single switching as g(t) = gθ(t) and

4

FIG. 1: The structure of bare energy spectrum in the case
of a full cavity-qubit resonance and main processes induced
between bare states due to interaction terms in Hamiltonian,
as well as due to the decay of qubit excited state (see in the
text).

periodic one as g(t) = gθ(cos 2ωt), where the last mod-
ulations resulted in a parametric pumping of the system
leading to the dramatic increase of the eﬀect in the case
of a full resonance ω = . This behavior has some simi-
larities with the so called Anti-Jaynes-Cummings regime
described in Ref. [26], in which a single photon and one
atomic excitation are created. In the present work, we
are focused on the same most eﬃcient 2ω-periodic mod-
ulations, whereas a particular shape of g(t) can be ar-
bitrary. In our solution, a major role is played by two
Fourier components of the g(t): q = g0 and p = g2ω. For
the above modulation containing periodic switching on
and oﬀ, these two parameters are p = 0.5, q = 1/π. We
also assume that relaxation in qubit exceeds losses in the
photon mode, i.e. γ (cid:29) κ, which might be related to an
experimental situation with γ ∼ 1 MHz for transmons
and κ ∼ 10 kHz for cavity.

The dynamics of our system in presence of energy dissi-
pation can be found from Lindblad equation, which reads
as

∂tρ(t) − Γ(ρ(t)) = −i[H(t), ρ(t)],

(6)

where relaxation is described by means of the following
matrix

Γ(ρ) = κ(2aρa† − a†aρ − ρa†a) +
γ(2σ−ρσ+ − σ+σ−ρ − ρσ+σ−).

(7)

In superconducting systems, dissipation in qubit degrees

of freedom is typically much stronger than the cavity
relaxation. We focus mostly on this situation, while the
eﬀect of cavity relaxation is analyzed in Section V.

In the explicit form, master equations on density ma-
trix operator ρ(t) neglecting cavity relaxation κ read as

5

i ˙ρgg

m,nω(n − m) + iγρee

m,n + g(t)(cid:0)√
m,n [ω(n − m) − iγ] + g(t)(cid:0)√
m,n [ω(n − m) − ε − iγ/2] + g(t)(cid:0)√
m,n [ω(n − m) + ε − iγ/2] + g(t)(cid:0)√

m,n = ρgg
i ˙ρee
m,n = ρeg
m,n = ρge

m,n = ρee

i ˙ρeg
i ˙ρge

nρge
nρeg
nρee
nρgg

m,n−1 +
m,n−1 +
m,n−1 +
m,n−1 +

√
n + 1ρge
√
n + 1ρeg
√
n + 1ρee
√
n + 1ρgg

m,n+1 − √
m,n+1 − √
m,n+1 − √
m,n+1 − √

m−1,n − √
m−1,n − √
m−1,n − √
m−1,n − √

mρeg
mρge
mρgg
mρee

m + 1ρeg
m + 1ρge
m + 1ρgg
m + 1ρee

m+1,n

m+1,n

m+1,n

m+1,n

(cid:1) ,
(cid:1) ,
(cid:1) ,
(cid:1) ,

(8)

where upper indices of density matrix components stand
for qubit ground (g) and excited (e) states, while lower
indices correspond to photon numbers. These equations
can be solved numerically by truncating the basis for pho-
ton states and taking into account some reasonable num-
ber of these states. The accuracy can be veriﬁed by in-
creasing the number of states in the basis and comparing
the results with the results for a smaller basis.

However, before treating these equations, we consider
a general structure of bare energy levels and processes in
which they participate. These processes are due to the
interaction terms V1 and V2 in the Hamiltonian, as well
as due to the decay of the qubit excited state. Fig. 1
illustrates the dynamics of the system upon the action of
the external driving in the resonant case ω = ε.

In general, it may be expected that there should be
a competition between various processes in our system.
Namely, there is a purely coherent process of paramet-
ric qubit excitation tending to populate the states |n, e(cid:105),
n being odd, via the term V2 of the Hamiltonian which
does not conserve the excitation number (solid lines) and
the excitation-number conserving term V1 (dashed lines).
Such a process has been considered in our preceding pa-
per [31]. Qubit excitation due the dynamical Lamb ef-
fect occurs during this process thanks to V2. There is
also a process of a decay of the qubit excited state (wav-
ing doted curves), which may tend to return the system
in the initial state via V1. This latter process tries to
suppress the dynamical Lamb eﬀect. However, instead
of returning to the initial state, the system can again be
excited via V2 leading to the nonzero populations of the
states |n, e(cid:105), n being even. A toy model is proposed in
the next Section in order to describe some aspects of this

behavior on simplest grounds.

III. TOY MODEL

Let us take into account only four bare levels, which
have the lowest energy. These are the levels |0, g(cid:105), |0, e(cid:105),
|1, g(cid:105), and |1, e(cid:105). We choose them because the system of
these four states already supports two of the most impor-
tant processes mentioned above, which are (i) an excita-
tion of the system via V2: |0, g(cid:105) → |1, e(cid:105); (ii) a subsequent
decay |1, e(cid:105) → |0, e(cid:105) accompanied by oscillations between
|0, e(cid:105) and |1, g(cid:105) due to V1. It does not take into account,
however, the possibility of qubit to be excited again by
V2 after the decay of its excited state, since a larger basis
is needed to treat it. This process leads to important
modiﬁcations, as demonstrated in the next Section.

The system of these four levels is described by a set
of 10 equations for the density matrix components. Ac-
tually, in the context of the dynamical Lamb eﬀect, the
most important components of the density matrix are
those ones which are responsible for the populations of
the above levels. It can be seen from the full set of equa-
tions that this set splits into two uncoupled subsets. The
subset relevant for the occupation probabilities of two
qubit states are

0,1 = ρeg
i ˙ρeg
i ˙ρge
0,1 = ρge

i ˙ρgg
0,0 = iγρee
0,0 = −iγρee
i ˙ρee
i ˙ρgg
1,1 = iγρee
1,1 = −iγρee
i ˙ρee

0,0 + g(t)(cid:0)ρge
0,0 + g(t)(cid:0)ρeg
1,1 + g(t)(cid:0)ρge
1,1 + g(t)(cid:0)ρeg
0,1 (ω − ε − iγ/2) + g(t)(cid:0)ρee
0,1 (ω + ε − iγ/2) + g(t)(cid:0)ρgg

0,1 − ρge∗
0,1 − ρeg∗
1,0 − ρge∗
1,0 − ρeg∗
0,0 − ρgg
0,0 − ρee

1,1

1,0

0,1

0,1

1,0

(cid:1) ,
(cid:1) ,
(cid:1) ,
(cid:1) ,
(cid:1) ,
(cid:1) .

1,1

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

We hereafter consider the qubit and cavity in a full
0,1 by a product of

resonance, ω = ε. Let us represent ρge
fast and slow oscillating factors as

0,1 =(cid:101)ρge

ρge

0,1 exp(−2iωt),

(15)

as suggested by Eq. (14). All other components of the
density matrix are free from fast oscillations as seen from
Eqs. (9)-(13).

(15) to Eqs.

Next, we insert Eq.

(9)-(14) and per-
form an approximate averaging over time. For the time
averaged quantities appearing in the right hand sides of
resulting equations we use the following uncouplings

(cid:10)g(t)(cid:101)ρge
(cid:10)g(t) exp(−2iωt)(cid:101)ρge
(cid:11)

0,1

t

0,1

(cid:11)
0,1 ≡ p(cid:101)ρge
(cid:39) (cid:104)g(t)(cid:105)t(cid:101)ρge
(cid:39) (cid:104)g(t) exp(−2iωt)(cid:105)t(cid:101)ρge
≡ q(cid:101)ρge

0,1
0,1,

0,1,

t

(16)

which are further utilized to separate fast and slow os-
cillations. It can be proved that they are valid provided
g(t) (cid:28) ω. Then we are going to look for a stationary solu-
tion that implies that the left hand sides of Eqs. (9)-(14)
must vanish. Note that we assume the time invariance of
g(t): g(−t) = g(t).

We ﬁnally obtain the following set of linear equations

for the stationary solution

iγρee
−iγρee
−iγρee
iγρee

0,0 + q(cid:0)(cid:101)ρge
0,0 + p(cid:0)ρeg
1,1 + p(cid:0)ρeg
1,1 + q(cid:0)(cid:101)ρge
0,1 + p(cid:0)ρee
0,1 + q(cid:0)ρgg
2 (cid:101)ρge

0,1 − c.c.(cid:1) = 0,
0,1 − c.c.(cid:1) = 0,
0,1 − c.c.(cid:1) = 0,
0,1 − c.c.(cid:1) = 0,
(cid:1) = 0,
(cid:1) = 0.

0,0 − ρgg
0,0 − ρee

− iγ
2
− iγ

ρeg

1,1

1,1

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

By solving this linear system of equations, we readily
express populations of the states through the population
of the ground state

ρee
0,0 = ρee

1,1 =

ρgg
1,1 =

4q2

4q2 + γ2 ρgg
0,0,
q2
p2 ρgg
0,0,

γ2 + 4p2
γ2 + 4q2

(23)

(24)

while ρgg

0,0 can be found from the normalization condition.
Let us analyze some limiting cases. We start from the
case of a low dissipation, γ (cid:28) p, q. In this case, popula-
tions of four states are all the same which is expectable.

In the opposite limit, γ (cid:29) p, q, we have:
0,0 (cid:28) ρgg
γ2 ρgg
0,0,
1,1 (cid:39) q2
ρgg

1,1 (cid:39) 4q2

0,0 = ρee
ρee

p2 ρgg
0,0.

6

(25)

(26)

We see that in this case the population of the qubit ex-
cited state becomes very small, while by tuning the ratio
of Fourier components q/p one can redistribute the occu-
pation probability between the state with 0 photons and
1 photon. The higher this ratio the larger occupation of
the state with 1 photon. This is a natural result in the
view of the fact that q is responsible for the excitation
from the ground state. What is not so obvious is that
ρgg
1,1 is dissipation-independent despite of the fact that
dissipation is needed for this state to be occupied. It is
also of interest that qubit excited state does play a cru-
cial role in such a process, nevertheless it turns out to be
essentially empty when a stationary regime is achieved.
In order to achieve a ratio q/p exceeding 1, one has to
use high-amplitude modulations of g(t) thus changing its
sign.

We also consider intermediate cases. The ﬁrst one is

q (cid:29) γ (cid:29) p. In this case, we obtain
1,1 (cid:39) ρgg
0,0,
0,0 (cid:29) ρgg
0,0.

ρee
0,0 = ρee
4p2 ρgg

1,1 (cid:39) γ2
ρgg

(27)

(28)

The ﬁrst relation is expectable, since we are dealing with
the strong excitation limit. However, the second one is
not so trivial. It can be understood by the fact that the
occupation probability is accumulated in the state |1, g(cid:105)
due to the smallness of p which is responsible for the link
with |0, e(cid:105).

The second intermediate case is p (cid:29) γ (cid:29) q. It gives

ρee
0,0 = ρee

1,1 (cid:39) ρgg

1,1 (cid:39) 4q2

γ2 ρ (cid:28) ρgg

0,0.

(29)

This situation is rather trivial.
It corresponds to the
weak excitation, so that the occupation probability is
accumulated in the state |0, g(cid:105).

The toy model presented in this Section is useful since
it indicates the general trend in the behavior of our sys-
tem. Nevertheless, an analysis involving larger basis of
bare states is certainly needed.

Note that by using an interplay between diﬀerent
Fourier components of the external electromagnetic sig-
nal, one can also achieve a synchronization of a qubit

ensemble [34] despite of the unavoidable disorder in ex-
citation energies of Josephson qubits [35].

IV. FULL NUMERICAL ANALYSIS

In this Section, we present the results of our numerical
simulations of the full set of equations (8) taking into
account 80 photon states. We veriﬁed the accuracy of
this approximation by increasing the number of states
taken into account and comparing the results.

(Color online) The qubit excited state population
FIG. 2:
(a) and the mean photon number (b) as functions of time
after the external parametric driving with p = 0.5, q = 1/π
is turned on at gmax = 0.05ω. Solid blue lines correspond to
γ = 0.01ω, while dashed green lines provide similar quantities
for γ = 0.

We ﬁrst consider

the same modulation g(t) =

7

gθ(cos 2ωt), as in our preceding paper [31], for which
p = 0.5 < q = 1/π.
In Fig. 2 we plot the time de-
pendencies of the qubit excited state population we (a)
and the mean photon number nph (b) after the external
driving is turned on at gmax ≡ max g(t) = 0.05ω, while
the initial state had zero excitations, |0, g(cid:105). The time
is measured in TR = π/gmax. Solid lines correspond to
the case γ = 0.01ω, while dashed lines provide a similar
quantity for γ = 0. These dependencies are actually su-
perpositions of fast and slow oscillations with frequencies
of the order of ω and gmax, respectively. Fast oscillations
are not shown in Fig. 2 because of their small amplitude
in the limit gmax/ω (cid:28) 1.

It is seen from Fig. 2 that both the qubit excited state
population and the mean photon number tend to experi-
ence Rabi-like oscillations in agreement with the results
of [31], but they decay if nonzero γ is taken into account.
Despite of the external driving the qubit ﬁnally satu-
rates in its ground state. This implies that the dynamical
Lamb eﬀect becomes suppressed at long times. However,
the mean photon number nph tends to some nonzero con-
stant value (under the approximation neglecting losses in
a photon mode). The characteristic time of the decay of
the Rabi-like oscillations is given approximately by 1/γ.
The nonzero nph(t → ∞) can be treated as a residue of
the dynamical Lamb eﬀect, since the photons in the ini-
tially empty cavity in the system we study can appear
only due to the qubit excitation with simultaneous pho-
ton creation (term V2) and subsequent creation of an ad-
ditional photon and qubit transition to the ground state
(term V1).

The statistics of photons states after their stabilization
turns out to be rather peculiar and it is deﬁnitely dictated
by a parametric excitation of photons. In Fig. 3 we plot
a histogram for the dependence of the mean number of
photons in the n-photon state on n. We see that only
the states with even values of n are populated after the
stabilization. Fig. 4 shows how photon states become
stabilized after the parametric driving is turned on. The
set of parameters for these two ﬁgures is the same as in
the case of Fig. 2.

Figs. 2 and 3 evidence that only low-energy photon
states and ground state energy of a qubit are populated
after the stabilization, i.e., the states |n, g(cid:105) with n ∼ 1.
This is due to the competition between two processes, as
can be seen already from the simple toy model presented
in the preceding Section. The fact that we do have a

stabilization in our system with qubit being in its ground
state means that the process, involving decay, is stronger.
Nevertheless, in order to achieve such a stabilization, as
shown in Figs. 2 and 4, certain intermediate dynamical
regime is needed for which qubit can be in its excited
state.

These results obtained by numerical simulations are in
a qualitative agreement with the results of our toy model
in the strong γ limit at p > q. Namely, we see that qubit
excited state tends to become empty, while photon states
with lower energy have larger populations. Of course, the
toy model is unable to correctly describe other important
features because of the very strong truncation of the basis
encoded in it.

Note that only even states are also populated under the
action of the dynamical Casimir eﬀect. Thus, if genera-
tion of Casimir photons is not completely ruled out dur-
ing an experiment due to some drawbacks of experimen-
tal setup, this fact makes it not easy to distinguish be-
tween the dynamical Lamb eﬀect and dynamical Casimir
eﬀect via photons, provided photon states are studied in
experiments at t (cid:38) 1/γ. Hence, one has to perform mea-
surements within the time interval (cid:46) 1/γ, when both
even and odd photon states are populated (as well as
qubit excited state), in contrast to the photon statistics
due to the dynamical Casimir eﬀect.

FIG. 3:
(Color online) A histogram for the mean number
of photons in the n-photon states after the stabilization at
γ = 0.01ω, gmax = 0.05ω. The parameters of a modulation
of g(t) are p = 0.5, q = 1/π.

Nevertheless, there is a method to make a dynamical

8

Lamb eﬀect much more pronounced at t (cid:38) 1/γ. We
can see that our toy model predicts some change of the
behavior for those types of the external drive, for which
q exceeds p, which implies a usage of sign-alternating
time dependences of coupling constant. We now examine
this threshold in numerical simulations.
In Fig. 5 we
plot the mean photon number in the n-photon state as
a function of n in three diﬀerent moments of time after
the switching of parametric driving at p = 0.3, q = 1.
We see no stabilization at this ratio of p/q. Namely the
maximum of this dependence increases with time, so that
the total mean photon number also grows. This feature
can be again traced from our toy model which predicts,
in the strong γ limit, certain change of the behavior. The
diﬀerence is that the toy model includes only four states,
so that there is a boundary above which the maximum
cannot move. Within the toy model, we see a tendency
to maximize the probability of ﬁnding a system in the
one-photon state, while in reality this maximum starts
to move further. Again, this change of the behavior at
p = q can be tested in experiments.

Fig. 6 shows the time evolution of the qubit excited
state population (a) and mean photon number (b) af-
ter the turning on the parametric driving characterized
by parameters p = 0.3, q = 1 and at gmax = 0.05ω.
Solid lines correspond to the dissipative system with
γ = 0.01ω, while dashed curves provide similar depen-
dencies for γ = 0. We see that ﬁnite value of γ leads
to the decay of the Rabi-like oscillations for the qubit
excited state population which tends to be stabilized at
the value 1/2 and does not vanish. Thus, the dynamical
Lamb eﬀect is much more robust with respect to the dissi-
pation in this case. The most striking feature is that after
some initial oscillations, the mean photon number starts
to grow linearly which shows that there is no stabiliza-
tion at this type of parametric driving. It is remarkable
that this counterintuitive growth is only possible if energy
dissipation due to the decay of the qubit excited state is
present in the system. Indeed, such a growth is absent
if γ = 0, as seen from Fig. 6. This happens because a
new channel of photon generation is open provided γ is
ﬁnite, see Fig. 1. Such a channel does not exists within
our toy model because of the basis truncation. It con-
sist in excitation of the initial conﬁguration via V2, the
subsequent decay of the qubit excited state, and again
in excitation of the qubit from the ground to the excited
state with simultaneous photon creation. Hence, both

9

FIG. 5:
(Color online) The dependence of the mean photon in
the n-photon state number as a function of n in three diﬀerent
moments of time after the switching on the parametric driving
at γ = 0.01ω, gmax = 0.05ω. The parameters of modulation
of g(t) are p = 0.3, q = 1. Solid black, dashed blue, and
dotted green lines correspond to the moments of time TR,
5TR, and 10 TR, respectively.

We then equate these quantities to zero in the new set of
equations, as well as time derivatives ∂ρ/∂t. This leads
to following recurrent relations

(cid:114) m
(cid:114) n

m + 1

m+1,n = −ξ
ρgg
m,n+1 = −ξ
ρgg

ρgg
m−1,n,

ρgg
m,n−1.

n + 1

(30)

(31)

(32)

(34)

These equations readily yield the identity:

n+2,n+2 = ξ2 n + 1
ρgg
n + 2

ρgg
n,n.

Starting from ρgg

0,0, we obtain:

2j,2j = ξ2j (2j − 1)!!

ρgg

ρgg
0,0,

(33)
j = 1, 2, . . .∞. This recurrent relation is in a full agree-
ment with our results of numerical simulations for density
matrix diagonal components.

(2j)!!

In order to determine ρgg

dition Sp ρ ≡ 1, which can be rewritten as

0,0, we use a normalization con-

1 +

∞(cid:88)

j=1

 ρgg

0,0 ≡ 1.

ξ2j (2j − 1)!!

(2j)!!

This series converges provided ξ < 1 or equivalently q <
p, otherwise the normalization is impossible. In the case

FIG. 4:
(Color online) Dynamics of mean photon numbers
in n-photon states with even (a) and odd (b) values of n at
γ = 0.01ω, gmax = 0.05ω. The parameters of the modulation
of g(t) are p = 0.5, q = 1/π. Solid black, dashed blue, and
dotted green lines in (a) correspond to 2-, 4-, and 6-photon
states, respectively, while similar lines in (b) correspond to
1-, 3-, and 5-photon states.

even- and odd-number photon states become populated.
Thus, because of the strong increase of the mean photon
number, a dissipation-assisted parametric ampliﬁcation
of vacuum occurs.

Let us discuss in a more detail a crossover between the
two types of behavior which occurs at p = q, as deduced
from numerics. We continue the set of equations (9)-(14)
by taking into account all photon states. We also know
that for ξ = q/p < 1 at long time t (cid:29) 1/γ only ρgg
2n,2n is
nonzero, while all remaining relevant components vanish.

ξ < 1, the result of the summation is

1 +

(cid:112)1 − ξ2

(cid:16)

ξ2

1 +(cid:112)1 − ξ2

(cid:17)

 ρg,g

0,0 ≡ 1,

(35)

as can be directly checked by performing a Taylor expan-
sion.

Thus, the stationary solution indeed exists if the con-
dition ξ < 1 is satisﬁed, while there is no stationary so-
lution at q ≥ p.

FIG. 6:
(Color online) The dependence of the qubit excited
state population (a) and mean photon number (b) on time af-
ter the switching on the parametric driving at gmax = 0.05ω,
p = 0.3, q = 1 at nonzero dissipation γ = 0.01ω (solid blue
lines) and γ = 0 (dotted green line).

10

V. EFFECT OF CAVITY RELAXATION

In this section, we take into account cavity dissipa-
tion, which is typically much smaller than dissipation
in qubit degrees of freedom in available superconducting
qubit-cavity systems. Nevertheless, its eﬀect can be of
importance in the view of the fact that diﬀerent types of
dissipation may open various channels in the dynamics
of the system, as we have seen in the preceding sections.
Thus, we take into account nonzero κ in the Lindblad
equation, as given by Eqs. (6), (7).

FIG. 7:
(Color online) The qubit excited state population
at p = 0.5, q = 1/π, gmax = 0.05ω, γ = 0.01ω and at three
diﬀerent values of κ/γ, which are 0.01 (solid black line), 0.1
(dashed blue line), and 1 (dotted green line).

We start with the consideration of the modulation with
q < p, for which the qubit excited state population van-
ishes at κ = 0 and at t → ∞. Fig. 7 shows this quantity
as a function of time at p = 0.5, q = 1/π, gmax = 0.05ω,
γ = 0.01ω and at three diﬀerent values of κ/γ, which
are 0.01 (solid black line), 0.1 (dashed blue line), and 1
(dotted green line). Remarkably, ﬁnite cavity dissipation
leads to the nonzero qubit excited state population at
long time. This happens because cavity relaxation tends
to decrease the mean photon number without changing
the state of the qubit. Therefore, if the qubit is in ex-
cited state, instead of its relaxation to the ground state
controlled by γ, the state of the whole system can be
changed by decreasing the photon number and keeping
qubit excited. In other words, there is a certain compe-
tition between γ and κ in this case. Hence, higher cavity

dissipation can also help to increase the qubit excited
state population at t → ∞ thus supporting the dynami-
cal Lamb eﬀect.

11

FIG. 9:
(Color online) The qubit excited state population at
p = 0.3, q = 1, gmax = 0.05ω, γ = 0.01ω and at two diﬀerent
values of κ/γ, which are 1 (solid blue line) and 0.1 (dashed
green line).

We now consider modulations with q > p. Fig. 9
shows we(t) at two diﬀerent values of κ. We again see
that we(t → ∞) grows, as κ increases, but this growth is
rather weak at κ/γ (cid:28) 1. This is also due to the processes
which change photon number without aﬀecting qubit de-
grees of freedom. We again arrive at the same conclusion,
as in the case q < p that cavity dissipation increase the
dynamical Lamb eﬀect within our scheme at t → ∞. Ac-
tually, these two diﬀerent cases, q > p and q < p, become
not so distinct when nonzero κ is taken into account, as
can be expected.
Indeed, Fig. 10 shows mean photon
number as a function of time for three diﬀerent values of
κ. The nearly linear growth of this quantity at t → ∞
found for κ = 0 is replaced by its saturation. Its ﬁnal
value drops, as κ grows. However, it still can be much
larger than the same quantity in absence of any dissipa-
tion, which implies that an additional channel of photon
generation from vacuum with assistance of qubit relax-
ation, as discussed in the preceding Section, still exists
in this κ (cid:54)= 0 case.

The major result of this Section is that nonzero cavity
dissipation increases the qubit excited state population at
t → ∞. This feature can be used as an alternative tool to
increase the eﬀect without switching to sign-alternating
modulations which can be not easy to implement in ex-
periments.

Let us mention that some aspects of the temporary

FIG. 8:
(Color online) Histograms for the mean number of
photons in the n-photon states after the stabilization at γ =
0.01ω, gmax = 0.05ω, and at two diﬀerent values of κ/γ, which
are 0.1 (a) and 1 (b). The parameters of a modulation of g(t)
are p = 0.5, q = 1/π. Dark grey (green) bars correspond to
odd n, while light grey (blue) bars refer to even n.

Fig. 8 shows histograms for the mean number of pho-
tons in the n-photon states after the stabilization at
γ = 0.01ω, gmax = 0.05ω, p = 0.5, q = 1/π and at two
diﬀerent values of κ/γ, which are 0.1 (a) and 1 (b). We
see that states with odd values of n start to be populated
because of the processes, which change photon number
without changing qubit state. However, populations of
these state remain small at κ/γ (cid:28) 1.

as with the dynamical Lamb eﬀect.

12

VI. NUMERICAL SOLUTION FOR STEADY

STATE LIMIT

In this Section, we provide an alternative approach
to the problem, which enables us to directly attain the
steady state limit achieved after the stabilization of the
system and to crosscheck our results.

Solution for the density matrix elements in the steady
state limit, i.e. on time scales exceeding signiﬁcantly re-
laxation times, can be found numerically without direct
integration over the entire evolution period. This calcu-
lation can be performed by means of an integration of the
Lindblad equation over a single period of time-dependent
Hamiltonian H(t), i.e. within the interval 0 < t < π/ω.
In this solution we do not perform integrating out of fast
oscillating terms and do not use transition to rotating
frames.

The Lindblad equation can be rewritten through the
supermatrix A(t) acting on vector (cid:126)ρ(t) combined from
elements of the density matrix ρ(t)

d(cid:126)ρ(t)/dt = A(t)(cid:126)ρ(t).

(36)

In the steady state limit we assume that this solution is
periodic (cid:126)ρ(t + π/ω) = (cid:126)ρ(t) with the period T = π/ω of
Hamiltonian H(t) and A(t). We ﬁnd numerically matrix
of evolution U which relates (cid:126)ρ(T ) and (cid:126)ρ(0)

(cid:126)ρ(T ) = U (cid:126)ρ(0).

(37)

Eigenvector of the (cid:126)ρ0 = U (cid:126)ρ0 gives steady state solution
(cid:126)ρ0 = (cid:126)ρ(N T ) realized at inﬁnite limit of N . Integration of
the Lindblad equation over 0 < t < π/ω with the initial
condition (cid:126)ρ0 provides periodic steady solution ρst(t). Av-
eraging of the diagonal elements of ρst(t) over the time
provides levels populations in qubit and photon channels.
This solution gives mean photon numbers, which are fully
identical to the above results of a time-dependent numer-
ical solution.

VII. CONCLUSIONS

A coupled system of a superconducting qubit and mi-
crowave resonator can be used for experimental obser-
vation of the dynamical Lamb eﬀect [31] which can be

FIG. 10:
(Color online) Mean photon number at p = 0.3,
q = 1, gmax = 0.05ω, γ = 0.01ω and at three diﬀerent values
of κ/γ, which are 0.01 (black solid line), 0.1 (blue dashed
line), and 1 (green dotted line).

evolution of systems with dynamically tunable light-
matter interaction were already studied in literature, see,
e.g., Refs. [25–27, 36–39]. This interaction was assumed
to be either variated along or simultaneously with other
parameters, such as a cavity frequency. In most of these
studies, however, only a regime of weak modulation was
considered. In general, it was also implicitly suggested
that dissipation rates of both qubit and photon states are
of the same order. Due to these assumptions, a rich dy-
namical picture, predicted in the present paper, has not
been revealed up to now, to the best of our knowledge.
Moreover, these studies were mainly focused on the anal-
ysis of properties of photons generated upon the modu-
lation of system parameters. For instance, in Ref.
[27]
the interaction between the Casimir photons and matter
was shown to be responsible for a nonlinear in photon
number term of purely photonic eﬀective Hamiltonian
in certain limits. The latter was obtained by exclusion
of atomic degrees of freedom from the full ”microscopic”
system Hamiltonian. Within this approach, a term ”non-
linear dynamical Casimir eﬀect” was introduced in Ref.
[27].
In contrast, the present paper as well as preced-
ing articles [22, 23, 31] are concentrated mostly on what
goes on with qubit (atom) degrees of freedom. From this
perspective, the nonlinear dynamical Casimir eﬀect in a
nonstationary cavity is intrinsically related with the atom
excitation due to absorption of Casimir photons as well

treated as a parametric excitation of an atom due to the
nonadiabatical modulation of its Lamb shift [23]. This
can be achieved by dynamically tuning the vacuum Rabi
frequency (the strength of the coupling between the qubit
and resonator) without changing all other parameters,
such as a resonator frequency. Under these conditions,
no generation of Casimir photons takes place, which is a
crucial condition for the isolation of the dynamical Lamb
eﬀect from other nonstationary QED phenomena also
leading to the parametric excitation of a qubit. Such a
modulation of vacuum Rabi frequency in superconduct-
ing circuits is possible thanks to several approaches pro-
posed recently [28–30]. Notice that in contrast to natural
systems, it is also possible to achieve a regime of strong
or even ultra-strong light-matter coupling in artiﬁcial su-
perconducting systems.

In the present paper we studied an inﬂuence of en-
ergy dissipation on qubit excitation due to the dynamical
Lamb eﬀect. An inﬂuence of dissipation in a qubit is of
particular importance since it leads to qubit de-excitation
and it also far exceeds cavity relaxation in typical super-
conducting qubit-cavity systems.

13

the type of vacuum Rabi frequency modulation. While
weak modulation is indeed accompanied by the suppres-
sion of both these quantities by qubit relaxation, strong
sign-alternating modulation leads to the dramatic in-
crease of the mean photon number. The latter phe-
nomenon can be treated as dissipation-assisted paramet-
ric ampliﬁcation of vacuum, since a new channel of pho-
ton generation from vacuum opens due to the relaxation
in a qubit. Namely, after a relaxation, qubit can be ex-
cited again by the counter-rotating wave process accom-
panied by the photon generation. This leads to occupa-
tion of both even- and odd-photon number states of the
cavity. The qubit excited state population is also high
in this regime. We also found that cavity relaxation in-
creases this population, but the eﬀect in this case is not
so strong. The increase is due to the fact that instead
of being relaxed to the ground state, qubit can stay in
its excited state, while the photon number is decreased.
These features can be used in experiments to facilitate
the observation of the dynamical Lamb eﬀect.

Acknowledgments

We found that, despite of the naive expectations, dissi-
pation results in a rather rich dynamical behavior. Both
the qubit excited state population and the mean number
of photons generated from vacuum depend crucially on

The authors acknowledge useful comments by A. V.
Ustinov, K. V. Shulga, and L. V. Bork. This work was
supported by RFBR (project no. 15-02-02128). Yu. E.
L. is supported by the Program of Basic Research of HSE.

[1] P. D. Nation, J. R. Johansson, M. P. Blencowe, and F.
Nori, ”Colloquium : Stimulating uncertainty: Amplify-
ing the quantum vacuum with superconducting circuits”,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1 (2012).

[2] M. H. Devoret, S. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf, ”How
strong can the coupling between a Josephson junction
atom and a transmission line resonator be?”, Ann. Phys.
(Leipzig) 16, 767 (2007).

[3] O. Astaﬁev, A. M. Zagoskin, A. A. Abdumalikov Jr., Yu.
A. Pashkin, T. Yamamoto, K. Inomata, Y. Nakamura,
and J. S. Tsai, ”Resonance Fluorescence of a Single Ar-
tiﬁcial Atom”, Science 327, 840 (2010).

[4] G. Oelsner, P. Macha, O. V. Astaﬁev, E. Il’ichev, M. Gra-
jcar, U. H¨ubner, B. I. Ivanov, P. Neilinger, H.-G. Meyer,
”Dressed-State Ampliﬁcation by a Single Superconduct-
ing Qubit”, Phys. Rev. Lett 110, 053602 (2013).

A. Dunsworth, I.-C. Hoi, C. Neill, P. J. J. OMalley, C.
Quintana, P. Roushan, A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, E.
Solano, and J. M. Martinis, ”Digital quantum simulation
of fermionic models with a superconducting circuit”, Nat.
Commun. 6, 7654 (2015).

[6] A. D. Crcoles, E. Magesan, Srikanth J. Srinivasan, A. W.
Cross, M. Steﬀen, Jay M. Gambetta, and J. M. Chow,
”Demonstration of a quantum error detection code using
a square lattice of four superconducting qubits”, Nat.
Commun. 6, 6979 (2015).

[7] J. Braum¨uller, M. Sandberg, M. R. Vissers, A. Schneider,
S. Schl¨or, L. Gr¨unhaupt, H. Rotzinger, M. Marthaler, A.
Lukashenko, A. Dieter, A. V. Ustinov, M. Weides, and
D. P. Pappas, ”Concentric transmon qubit featuring fast
tunability and an anisotropic magnetic dipole moment”,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 032601 (2016).

[5] R. Barends, L. Lamata, J. Kelly, L. Garcia-Alvarez, A.
G. Fowler, A Megrant, E Jeﬀrey, T. C. White, D. Sank,
J. Y. Mutus, B. Campbell, Yu Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro,

[8] Yu. Makhlin, G. Sch¨on, and A. Shnirman, ”Quantum-
state engineering with Josephson-junction devices”, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 73, 357 (2001).

[9] P. L¨ahteenm¨aki, G. S. Paraoanu, J. Hassel, and P.
J. Hakonen, ”Dynamical Casimir eﬀect in a Josephson
metamaterial”, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 4234
(2013).

[10] C. M. Wilson, G. Johansson, A. Pourkabirian, J. R. Jo-
hansson, T. Duty, F. Nori, and P. Delsing, ”Observation
of the dynamical Casimir eﬀect in a superconducting cir-
cuit”, Nature 479, 376 (2011).

[11] G. T. Moore, ”Quantum Theory of the Electromagnetic
Field in a Variable-Length One-Dimensional Cavity”, J.
Math. Phys. 11, 2679 (1970).

[12] A. Fragner, M. Goppl, J. M. Fink, M. Baur, R.
Bianchetti, P. J. Leek, A. Blais, and A. Wallraﬀ, ”Re-
solving vacuum ﬂuctuations in an electrical circuit by
measuring the Lamb shift”, Science 322, 1357 (2008).

[13] E. Yablonovitch, ”Accelerating reference frame for elec-
tromagnetic waves in a rapidly growing plasma: Unruh-
Davies-Fulling-De Witt radiation and the nonadiabatic
Casimir eﬀect”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1742 (1989).

[14] Yu. E. Lozovik, V. G. Tsvetus, and E. A. Vinogradov,
”Parametric excitation of vacuum by use of femtosecond
laser pulses”, Phys. Scr. 52, 184 (1995).

[15] A. V. Dodonov, E. V. Dodonov, and V. V. Dodonov,
”Photon generation from vacuum in nondegenerate cav-
ities with regular and random periodic displacements of
boundaries”, Phys. Lett. A 317, 378 (2003).

[16] C. Braggio, G. Bressi, G. Carugno, C. Del Noce, G.
Galeazzi, A. Lombardi, A. Palmieri, G. Ruoso, and D.
Zanello, ”A novel experimental approach for the detec-
tion of the dynamical Casimir eﬀect”, Europhys. Lett.
70, 754 (2005).

[17] B. Abdo, O. Suchoi, E. Segev, O. Shtempluck, M.
Blencowe, and E. Buks, ”Prospects of employing super-
conducting stripline resonators for studying the dynam-
ical Casimir eﬀect experimentally”, Phys. Lett. A 370,
202 (2007).

[18] W. G. Unruh, ”Notes on black-hole evaporation”, Phys.

Rev. D 14, 870 (1976).

[19] S. W. Hawking, ”Particle creation by black holes”, Com-

mun. Math. Phys. 43, 199 (1975).

[20] D.J. Heinzen and M.S. Feld, ”Vacuum Radiative Level
Shift and Spontaneous-Emission Linewidth of an Atom in
an Optical Resonator”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2623 (1987).
[21] A. A. Belov, Yu. E. Lozovik, and V. L. Pokrovsky, ”Lamb
shift of Rydberg atoms in a resonator”, J. Phys. B 22,
L101-L105 (1989).

[22] A. M. Fedotov, N. B. Narozhny, and Yu. E. Lozovik,
”’Shaking’ of an atom in a non-stationary cavity”, Phys.
Lett. A 274, 213 (2000).

14

Phys. Rev. A 64, 053807 (2001).

[24] H. Walther, B. T. H. Varcoe, B. G. Englert, and T.
Becker, ”Cavity quantum electrodynamics”, Rep. Prog.
Phys. 69, 1325 (2006).

[25] V. V. Dodonov, ”Current status of the dynamical

Casimir eﬀect”, Phys. Scr. 82, 038105 (2010).

[26] D. S. Veloso and A. V. Dodonov, ”Prospects for observing
dynamical and anti- dynamical Casimir eﬀects in circuit
QED due to fast modulation of qubit parameters”, J.
Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 48, 165503 (2015).

[27] I. M. de Sousa and A. V. Dodonov, ”Microscopic toy
model for the cavity dynamical Casimir eﬀect”, J. Phys.
A: Math. Theor. 48, 245302 (2015).

[28] S. J. Srinivasan, A. J. Hoﬀman, J. M. Gambetta, and
A. A. Houck, ”Tunable Coupling in Circuit Quantum
Electrodynamics Using a Superconducting Charge Qubit
with a V -Shaped Energy Level Diagram”, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 106, 083601 (2011).

[29] A. J. Hoﬀman, S. J. Srinivasan, J. M. Gambetta, and A.
A. Houck, ”Coherent control of a superconducting qubit
with dynamically tunable qubit-cavity coupling”, Phys.
Rev. B 84, 184515 (2011).

[30] S. Zeytino˘glu, M. Pechal, S. Berger, A. A. Abduma-
likov Jr., A. Wallraﬀ, and S. Filipp, ”Microwave-induced
amplitude- and phase-tunable qubit-resonator coupling
in circuit quantum electrodynamics”, Phys. Rev. A 91,
043846 (2015).

[31] D. S. Shapiro, A. A. Zhukov, W. V. Pogosov, and Yu. E.
Lozovik, ”Dynamical Lamb eﬀect in a tunable supercon-
ducting qubit-cavity system”, Phys. Rev. A 91, 063814
(2015).

[32] I. I. Rabi, ”Space Quantization in a Gyrating Magnetic

Field”, Phys. Rev. 51, 652 (1937).

[33] E. T. Jaynes and F. W. Cummings, ”Comparison of
quantum and semiclassical radiation theories with appli-
cation to the beam maser”, Proc. IEEE 51, 89 (1963).

[34] S. V. Remizov, D. S. Shapiro, and A. N. Rubtsov, ”Syn-
chronization of qubit ensembles under optimized π-pulse
driving”, Phys. Rev. A 92, 053814 (2015).

[35] D. S. Shapiro, P. Macha, A. N. Rubtsov, and A. V. Usti-
nov,”Dispersive Response of a Disordered Superconduct-
ing Quantum Metamaterial”, Photonics 2, 449 (2015).

[36] S. De Liberato, D. Gerace, I. Carusotto, and C. Ciuti,
”Extracavity quantum vacuum radiation from a single
qubit”, Phys. Rev. A 80, 053810 (2009).

[37] L. Garziano, A. Ridolfo, R. Stassi, O. Di Stefano, and
S. Savasta, ”Switching on and oﬀ of ultrastrong light-
matter interaction: Photon statistics of quantum vacuum
radiation”, Phys. Rev. A 88, 063829 (2013)

[23] N. B. Narozhny, A. M. Fedotov, and Yu. E. Lozovik, ”Dy-
namical Lamb eﬀect versus dynamical Casimir eﬀect”,

[38] G. Benenti, S. Siccardi, and G. Strini, ”Exotic states
in the dynamical Casimir eﬀect”, Eur. Phys. J. D 68,

(2014).

[39] W. Kopylov, C. Emary, E. Sch¨oll, and T. Brandes,
”Time-delayed feedback control of the Dicke-Hepp-Lieb

superradiant quantum phase transition”, New J. Phys.
17, 013040 (2015).

15

