Japan SKA Consortium (2016)
Preprint typeset using PASJ LATEX format v.1.0

1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
2
4
0
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Radio Astrometry towards the Nearby Universe
with the SKA
Hiroshi Imai1, Ross A. Burns1, Yoshiyuki Yamada2, Naoteru Goda3, Tahei
Yano3, Gabor Orosz1, Kotaro Niinuma4 and Kenji Bekki5 (SKA Japan
Astrometry Science Working Group)

1Science and Engineering Area of the Research and Education Assembly , Kagoshima University
2Kyoto University
3JASMINE Project Oﬃce, National Astronomical Observatory of Japan
4Yamaguchi University
5International Centre for Radio Astronomy Research, the University of Western Australia

∗E-mail: hiroimai@sci.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

Abstract

This chapter summarizes radio astrometry in relation to current very long baseline interferometry
(VLBI) projects and describes its perspectives with the SKA. The scientiﬁc goals of the astrometry
with the SKA have been discussed in the international and Japanese communities of researchers,
whose major issues are shown here. We have demonstrated some of the issues, such as censuses of
possible targets and the technical feasibility of astrometry in the SKA frequency bands. The prelim-
inary results of our case studies on SKA astrometry are also presented. In addition, possible synergy
and commensality of the SKA astrometric projects with those in the optical and infrared astromet-
ric missions, especially JASMINE (Japan Astrometry Satellite Mission for INfrared Exploration) are
discussed.

Key words: Astrometry — VLBI — galaxies: the Milky Way, the Local Group — masers

1 Introduction: Radio Astrometry as

Astronomical Basis and New Challenges

Astrometry serves as a backbone of astronomy and as-
trophysics.
It has yielded trigonometric measurements
of sources in the nearby universe including our Milky
Way Galaxy (MWG) and the Local Group (LG) of galax-
ies. Annual parallax provide a crucial rung on the “dis-
tance ladders” on which other distance estimates and
standard candles are calibrated. The inﬂuences of as-
trometry can therefore reach cosmic scales and some-
times provides great impact on astrophysics.It has also
provided precise celestial coordinate systems such as the
International Celestial Reference Frame (ICRF) in radio
astrometry basing on extragalactic quasars.

Fig.

2 shows the present to future view of astro-
metric missions. Radio astrometry is at a unique po-
sition with regards to other approaches to astrometry.

c(cid:13) 2016 Japan SKA Consortium

The numbers of the targeted sources in the present radio
astrometry missions (N ∼ 103 radio sources) are much
smaller than those in optical and infrared astrometry,
such as the Gaia mission (∼ 109 stars)(e.g. Lindegren et
al. 2012). However, the former targets “exotic” sources
emitting non-thermal emission such as pulsars, black-
holes, and masers, complementing well to the latter. One
also would remember the great impact on the distance
scale controversy of the Pleiades Cluster (Fig. 1, Melis
et al. 2014). The annual parallaxes measured in the
cluster in radio ﬁnally gave a strong constraint on the
distance scale (D ≈136 pc), which had an unacceptable
uncertainty among diﬀerent results from optical astrom-
etry. Because radio emission is relatively transparent,
even taking into account stronger interstellar scattering
and poorer angular resolution in longer wavelengths, it
has a unique beneﬁt to astrometry for sources embed-

2

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

Spectroscopic 
parallax method
(isochrone fitting)

)
s
a
m

Annual parallax method

VLBI

Binary orbit 
model fitting method

Moving cluster method

(
 
t
e
s
f
f
o
W
E

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
)
s
a
m

(
 
t
e
s
f
f
o
S
N

 

110

120

130

140

150

Distance to the Pleiades Cluster (pc)

Year

Fig. 1. Results of the distance measurement of the Pleiades Cluster summarized in Melis et al. (2014). Left: Summary of the distances derived from diﬀerent
techniques. Right: Annual parallax modulations derived from ﬁve radio stars in the cluster, which was measured with the VLBA. The motions of the ﬁve
stars are superimposed so that the derived modulations are best superimposed.

ded in gas and dust in the Galactic plane. The ra-
dio astrometry projects in very long baseline interfer-
ometry (VLBI), using the Very Long Baseline Array
(VLBA) (e.g., Bessel project, Brunthaler et al. 2011),
the European VLBI Network (EVN), the Long Baseline
Array (LBA), and Japanese VLBI Exploration of Radio
Astrometry (VERA) (Kobayashi et al. 2003) have deter-
mined the locations of a few hundred maser sources in the
MWG, which trace the spiral arm patterns of the galaxy,
and investigated the dynamics of the galactic disk (Reid
& Honma 2014).

In the era of the SKA, which will detect much fainter
radio sources, we expect that one to two orders of magni-
tude higher number of the radio sources will be targeted
in radio astrometric observations and they will cover a
much larger variety of sources, including compact sources
of thermal emission.
In this chapter, we describe the
plausible future of astrometry in the SKA era. Note that
this chapter also aims to highlight uses of the SKA from
a Japanese point of view, some of which focuses our in-
terest on possible synergy with the JASMINE (Japan
Astrometry Satellite Mission for INfrared Exploration)
project (i.e. Gouda 2015).

2 Technical concepts of the SKA Astrometry

2.1 General technical requirement for the SKA VLBI for

high precision astrometry

(Turner

The technical speciﬁcations of the SKA VLBI are
summarized in several documents, e.g., SKA PHASE 1
VLBI CLARIFICATION ECP 140008 ANALYSIS
DOCUMENT
Community
2014);
SKA PHASE 1 SYSTEM (LEVEL 1)
REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION (Cornwell 2014;
Paragi et al. 2015). Here we revisit those issues from
a point of view of high precision radio astrometry to
consider possible science goals (discussed in 3) which
may be approached with the SKA.

VLBI

and

The astrometric accuracy, σθ, which is determined by
the sensitivity (signal-to-noise ratio on the image RSN)
and the longest baseline Bmax is described as (Moran et
al. 1993)

λ/[10 cm]

θbeam
RSN ≈ 1000

(Bmax/1000 km)(RSN/10)

σθ ≈ 0.5
In SKA astrometry, λ =1–100 cm (ν = 300 MHz–
30 GHz) is expected1. For the state-of-the-art astrom-
etry (σθ ≤10 µas), very high sensitivity (RSN >>100) is
needed.

[µas].(1)

The position-reference sources should have very high
brightness temperatures (>> 106 K), as seen in quasars.
As quasars emit continuum emission, their detection sen-
sitivity is improved by using signal recorders with larger

1 The higher frequency in SKA1-MID is determined to be 15 GHz, but the
SKA Advanced Instrumentation Program (AIP) considers up to 25 GHz.

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

3

Wavelength

visible light
(~0.5 micron)

infrared
(~2 micron)

radio
(sub-mm)

radio
(microwave)

radio (VHF)

star parallax(105)
(HIPPARCOS)

star parallax(109)(GAIA)

star proper motion
(GAIA)

bulge star parallax(107)
(JASMIN)

pulsar/BH/YSO/pulsating star 
parallax (103)(VLBI)

pulsar/BH/massive YSO/
supergiant proper motion (VLBI)

Celestial
reference
frame

pulsar/BH/YSO/pulsating star 
parallax (105)(SKA)

pulsar/BH/
massive YSO/supergiant
proper motion (SKA)

Transparency
towards the 
Galactic Disk

         1 kpc                       8 kpc                  50 kpc               800 kpc
(Solar neiborhood)     (Galactic Center)   (Magellanic Clouds)    (M31)

Scale of astrometry for stars and point-like objects

Fig. 2. Present to future view of astrometric missions. One can see optical, infrared, and radio astrometric missions, which target the diﬀerent orders of
magnitude of and diﬀerent sorts of celestial objects. These missions shall link to each other with common targets, i.e., extragalactic quasars in the celestial
reference frames and nearby bright stars emitting a wide range of electromagnetic waves such as radio stars and young and evolved stars.

band widths. The number density of quasars on the sky
(section 2.5) allows calculation of the band widths re-
quired for high precision astrometry.

One also considers the detectable ﬂux densities and
brightness temperatures independently for continuum
and spectral line sources. The former sources include
pulsars, the main targets in the SKA, and non-thermal
sources associated with blackholes and a variety of ra-
dio stars in the MWG (section 3.2.2), super nova explo-
sions, and active galactic nuclei in the nearby universe.
The latter sources include maser sources: hydroxyl (OH);
methanol (CH3OH), water (H2O), ammonia (NH3), as-
sociated with young and evolved stars in the MWG and
the LG.Regarding SKA astrometry, in addition, we can
consider not only such non-thermal sources but also ther-
mal emission sources by tracking their clumpy structures.
They include radio recommbination lines and molecular
lines that are relatively isolated. Although they will be
detectable only with the SKA core telescopes (Bmax ≤160
km) and the astrometric accuracy will be limited, mea-
surement of their secular motions and statistical-parallax
distances should be scientiﬁcally attractive. This will
showcase the diversity of SKA astrometry. Fig. 2 shows

the numbers of target sources in radio astrometry mis-
sions, which should be more precisely evaluated in ob-
servations with the “SKA Pathﬁnders” and “Precursors”.
Note that the thermal sources may be brighter at shorter
wavelengths, however going to shorter wavelengths con-
tracts the ﬁeld of view, reducing the number of available
in-beam reference sources. Receiver sensitivity may also
decrease.

For VLBI, one has to consider two types of sensitivity.
The ﬁrst is a baseline sensitivity, the minimum detectable
ﬂux density above 10-σ noise level Smin, which is neces-
sary to obtain solutions of visibility calibration. In the
SKA, it is calculated between the core and a remote sta-
tion as,

Smin = RSN

√SEF DcoreSEF Drmt

√2∆ντ

≈ 0.55p[SEF Dcore/3 Jy][SEF Drmt/100 Jy]

[mJy],

p[τ /100 s]

where Dcore and Drmt are the eﬀective diameters of
the core and remote stations, respectively, RSN = 10
is the signal-to-noise ratio, SEF D the system equiva-

4

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

lent ﬂux density [Jy], meaning the antenna sensitivity,
∆ν ≈ 5× 108[Hz] the recording bandwidth (for a contin-
uum reference), and τ the coherent integration time. The
second is an array sensitivity, which is approximated to
that yielded by baselines between the core and the re-
mote stations. In the case of a maser line, it is calculated
as,

Sline = Smin,∆tr ∆t

Ttotal

1

√Nrmt

≈ 16 p[SEF Dcore/3 Jy][SEF Drmt/100 Jy]
p[∆ν/10 kHz])[Ttotal/600 s])[Nrmt/10]

[mJy],

where Nrmt is the number of the remote stations and
Ttotal the total integration time. We expect that even
the SKA Phase 1 (SKA1) VLBI will be able to make
astrometry for maser sources as faint as 0.1 Jy, fainter by
a factor of 10 than the MWG maser sources targeted by
the present astrometric VLBI projects. The sensitivity
is improved by a factor of 1.7 when including baselines
between Nrmt =40 remote stations.

Table 1 gives the basic speciﬁcation parameters rele-

vant to SKA VLBI and astrometry.

Table 1. Parameters expected in astrometry with the SKA MID

band. See also Dewdney (2015).

Frequency coverage
Coherence time1
Spectral resolution ∆ν
FoV radius2
SEF Dcore,SKA1
SEF Dcore,SKA2
SEF Dremote,2016
SEF Dremote,SKA2
Nbase,SKA2

4

6

7

3

5

Band 2
0.95–1.76 GHz
200 s
3.9 kHz
0.49◦
3.0 Jy
1.0 Jy
100 Jy
16 Jy
40

Band 5
4.6–13.8 GHz
100 s
9.7 kHz
0.07◦
4.0 Jy
1.3 Jy
390 Jy
21 Jy
40

the

core

the collecting area of

Assumptions:
1Empirically selected.
2FoV before beam-forming.
360% of
(Bmax ≤100 km).
430% of the SKA2 collecting area, 10 times as large as
SKA1.
560 m (Band 2) and 30 m (Band 5) of antennas in diam-
eter, which are commissioned in 2016, with an aperture
eﬃciency of 50% and a system temperature of 50 K.
6Remote stations composed of 25 15 m antennas.
7To use half of SKA2 antennas to form the remotes.

station

2.2 Special features of VLBI equipment in the SKA

In the SKA, we consider either “in-beam astrometry”,
in which target and reference sources shall be observed
in a common ﬁeld of view or antenna beam, or “multi-
view astrometry” (Dodson et al. 2013), in which they
are observed simultaneously in multiple antenna beams.
Here some expected special features of VLBI equipment
in the SKA are described.
Wide band receiving system: The SKA Advanced
Instrumentation Program (AIP) considers new designs
for wide-band single pixel feeds (WBSPF) to cover as
wide frequency coverage as possible in a single band. It
is important to expand to lower (down to 1 GHz) as well
as higher frequencies for calibrating the eﬀects of the
ionosphere in astrometry. The state-of-the-art technol-
ogy covers frequency ranges of 1–20 GHz and 2–20 GHz
in feeds and receivers (e.g., Dubrovka & Dolzhenko 2010;
Komiak et al. 2011; Ujihara et al. 2014).
It is requested to form at least four
Beam forming:
beams2 in each station to simultaneously observe a tar-
get and at least three references for calibrating the ef-
fects of the atmosphere (mainly the ionosphere and the
wet component in the troposphere). This is always nec-
essary, even for the in-beam astrometry, for solving the
dependence of these eﬀects on antenna elevation3. Note
that the pulsar timing array (PTA) in the SKA considers
a similar beam forming concept, therefore that for VLBI
should have compatibility with that for the PTA.
Frequency standards: Dark ﬁber networks shall be
deployed to the whole core station (within 100 km) and
nearby remote stations to provide reference signals of the
frequency standards in the core center. One must con-
sider a cost-performance trade-oﬀ between putting the
standards in the individual remote stations and deploying
a ﬁber network over thousand kilometers in the future.
Recorders The signal recording rate gives a constraint
on an available bandwidth. A total bandwidth of 1 GHz
or larger may be available in the SKA VLBI, but the
bandwidth will be determined by the sensitivity of the
receivers at a lower frequency band and the speciﬁcation
of the optical ﬁber networks for the intercontinental re-
mote stations.

2.3 Data calibration and astrometry

The present calibration schemes in VLBI are considered,
including standard procedures such as amplitude cali-

2 the SKA1 Level 1 System Requirement revised recently mentions four VLBI
beams at maximum, therefore submission of an Engineering Change
Proposal (ECP) will be considered.

3 This concept was also considered in the 1990’s plan of VERA(VLBI for

Earth Rotation and Astrometry)

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

5

zHG 4.1

s
e
c
r
u
o
S
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

Flux density [Jy]

Fig. 3. left: Number of possible radio sources in the SKA-MID antenna beam (Godfrey, Bignall, & Tingay 2011). The gradient of the number count function,
which includes radio loud sources such as QSOs (N ∝ S−0.9
), can be used for estimating the number of possible reference sources with VLBI. Right:
Cumulative histogram of the VLBI calibrators registered by 2015 July (rfc2015c, astrogeo.org) at δ ≥ −30◦. The dot-dashed lines have the same slope as on
the left (solid green). One can estimate the total number of VLBI calibrators brighter than 1 mJy by extrapolating using this line (∼105.4 ≈ 250 000 sources
at the S-band).

ν

bration, fringe ﬁtting, and self-calibration, and advanced
ones speciﬁc to high precision astrometry. The latter cal-
ibrations should take into account the ionosphere and the
troposphere, whose eﬀects depend on antenna elevation,
using the multiple ﬁelds of view. Installation of GPS sys-
tems in the individual remote stations may be beneﬁcial
as seen in the VERA astrometry (Honma et al. 2008)
even if the multiple beams and in-beam astrometry will
be realized.

Moreover, further analysis of radio images is needed
for high accuracy astrometry. In optical / infrared space
astrometry such as JASMINE, we solve characteristics of
instruments and astrometric parameters simultaneously.
For instruments, we make a precise model of a point
spread function (PSF), evaluate the position of stellar
center on the detector in order of 1/100 pixel accuracy,
and also apply enough accurate models of deformation of
focal plane, characteristics of the detector and its degra-
dation by cosmic rays, characteristics of read/out elec-
tronics, orbit and attitude of the satellite. By solving all
these models simultaneously, we can estimate parallax
and proper motion with high accuracy. In such a compli-
cated situation, one will have to consider new techniques
of true images such as the “sparse modeling” (Honma et
al. 2014).

Furthermore, there are issues for both optical and ra-
dio astormetry. For estimating stellar position, we can
only use the photo (brightness) center. If there are mis-
alignment between the center of star and the photo cen-

ter, it will cause a modeling error. We should repel un-
resolved binaries and stars which is aﬀected by gravita-
tional lensing.
If the residual of an estimate does not
decrease as √N , where N is number of observations, it
means there are systematic errors. For example, a radius
of a super giant becomes sometimes 1AU. If the super
giant has star spots, it will introduce a bias in the astro-
metric position.

2.4 Feasibility of astrometry at long wavelength bands

Beside of the calibration issue described in the previous
sections, one must consider the limits of SKA astrome-
try encountered at relatively long wavelength bands. A
major limiting factor is interstellar scattering by plasma
in the Galactic plane. This eﬀect is severe towards the
Galactic center (Kramer & Stappers 2015), and astrom-
etry at 8 GHz or higher is suggested (e.g., Bower et
al. 2015). Another major factor is the intrinsic size
of the targeted radio source, especially maser sources.
Empirically, OH masers at 1.6 GHz are spatially resolved
out on intercontinental baselines (Imai et al. 2013b,
2013c). We expect that the trade-oﬀ between a better
signal-to-noise ratio of source detection and a better an-
gular resolution will lead to a preferable baseline length
of 2000–3000 km for the OH maser sources, comparable
to the whole scale of the SKA Phase 2.

6

2.5 Reference sources

The number of available VLBI reference sources at a
given ﬂux density level can be estimated based on the
presently available radio fundamental catalog (rfc2015c,
astrogeo.org), with the emphasis that these estimates are
all based on the northern hemisphere coverage, which is
denser due to a higher number of available radio tele-
scopes.
It is therefore crucial to mention that the on-
going southern VLBI surveys have to continue in order
to densify the reference frame for the SKA (e.g. Petrov
et al. 2011). Based on the right panel of Fig. 3, the level
at the 100% completeness of the present calibrator cat-
alog is estimated to be ∼200 mJy in S-band (2.3 GHz)
and ∼150 mJy in X-band (8.4 GHz), where the cumu-
lative count deviates from the logN –logS linear depen-
dence seen up to that point.

ν

However, it cannot be assumed that the faint, but
compact population at the expected SKA sensitivity of
∼1 mJ follows the same logN –logS relation seen for
brighter AGNs. According to Godfrey, Bignall, & Tingay
(2011), the number of faint radio-loud AGNs N are pro-
portional to S−0.9
, where Sν is the ﬂux density at fre-
quency ν (the left panel of Fig. 3). By using this relation,
we can estimate the total number of VLBI calibrators
brighter than 1 mJy by extrapolating from the presently
available catalog, which gives ∼105.4 ≈ 250000 sources at
S-band. This gives a mean number density of calibrators
on the sky to be 6 sources per square degree. An upper
estimate of all observable radio sources can also be cal-
culated from the NRAO VLA Sky Survey (NVSS) and
the VLA FIRST survey. On a ∼1 mJy level, they both
give an unresolved source density around ∼50 sources per
square degree. This means that the maximum number of
reference sources observable with the SKA must be <
∼106
sources, which also agrees with our estimate.

2.6 Building a radio celestial reference frame

The accuracy of alignment between Hipparcos coordi-
nates and ICRF at present is about 0.5 mas (Feissel &
Mignard 1998). The relation between the two coordinate
systems also varies in time. Gaia in optical astormetry,
and VERA and VLBA in radio astrometry will achieve
10 µas accuracy. By using common sources, we will
achieve 10 µas alignment accuracy between optical and
radio coordinates. The problem is that at such an ac-
curacy, one cannot consider QSOs to be at ﬁxed points.
The photo centers of radio soruces are not always the cen-
ters of mass, and will move in time if their spatial struc-
tures change(Bourda et al. 2008).
In addition, due to
the diﬀerence in optical depth, the position of AGN jets

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

appear to change depending on the observing frequency
(core shift eﬀect, Hada et al. 2012). The Gaia mis-
sion aims to achieve statistically-determined 0.3 µas yr−1
non-rotating coordinates by using 500 000 QSOs. In or-
der to achieve a radio reference frame compatible with
that of the Gaia mission, we must therefore deduce pre-
cise models of jet structures, and obtain a statistical sam-
ple of astrometric results for QSOs so that we may ap-
proach a 10 µas-level accuracy for the constructed ref-
erence frame.

3 Science in SKA astrometry

The science of SKA VLBI will have great diversity,
thanks to its exceptional sensitivity and excellent an-
gular resolution, from the compact objects to key top-
ics in astronomy, from planetary science to cosmology,
which is summarized in SKA1 LEVEL 0 SCIENCE
REQUIREMENTS (SKA-SCI-LVL-001X) and Advanced
Astrophysics with the SKA(AASKA14). This section
focuses on scientiﬁc themes based on astrometry. We
discuss the topics that have already been described in
AASKA14, which was published through the interna-
tional meetings on the SKA during 2014–2015. Here
new topics discussed and demonstrated in Japanese as-
tronomical community (especially those in sect. 3.2.2,
3.4, 3.5.2, 3.7) are added.

3.1 Pulsar astrometry

The discussion of pulsar astrometry in detail is omitted
although it is one of the key science topics in pulsar stud-
ies with the SKA, which has already been summarized
(Kramer & Stappers 2015). Pulsar astrometry shall make
measurements of trigonometric parallax distances and
secular proper motions independently of pulsar timing.
The astrometric approach enables us to reduce free pa-
rameters such as annual modulations and orbital param-
eters, which should be determined in the pulsar timing
data used for detecting gravitational waves. The present
pulsar astrometry has achieved 10 µas-level astrometry
with the in-beam astrometry technique (e.g., Deller et al.
2013), which provides a good guide for the astrometry at
long wavelength bands, including those for OH masers
discussed in this chapter.

3.2 Mapping the Milky Way

3.2.1 The backbone structure of the Milky Way
In this subsection, we expand on the previous VLBI as-
trometry projects dealing with the MWG which were
mentioned in 1. Accurate distance measurements for

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

7

massive star forming regions (MSFRs) in the MWG have
been made in these projects and enable us to visualize the
spiral arms. The exclusivity of the 6.7 GHz maser line
to MSFRs (Breen et al. 2013) makes it an ideal tracer
of the spiral structures (Reid et al. 2014). The 22 GHz
water maser sources are also commonly associated with
MSFRs, though not so exclusively. Together, these maser
sources cover a wide area of the MWG (see Fig. 4).

Currently,

the number of astrometry candidate
sources is typically limited by the availability of bright
radio continuum sources in the nearby sky which can be
used as phase reference. The increase in sensitivity with
the SKA will enable in-beam astrometry for a larger num-
ber of target–reference pairs in common antenna beams
and faster astrometric surveys. Eventually, one order of
magnitude higher number of sources or more will become
available targets for SKA astrometry. Also note that the
most active VLBI arrays for astrometry at present are all
located in the northern hemisphere, therefore our current
best maps of the MWG are incomplete in the southern
sky. SKA VLBI will be instrumental in mapping the
southern sky of the MWG for solving the selection bias
in determining the MWG structure.

3.2.2 Measuring Ωp and the “spiral arm tomog-

raphy”

One of the plausible models to explain the spiral struc-
tures is the ‘density wave’ model (Lin & Shu 1967).
It proposes that a spiral pattern of a galaxy is not a
permanent structure populated with stars, but is actu-
ally a spiral-shaped wave where the galactic interstel-
lar medium (ISM) is compressed. As the ISM travels
through the wave, the increased gas density proliferates
star formation which results in the creation of short-lived,
massive stars. In this model, the ISM exhibits diﬀerential
rotation in the galaxy, but is not directly coupled to the
pattern rotation speed of the spiral, Ωp, which is thought
to rotate like a solid body; this property is required to
solve the ‘winding problem’ of galaxy evolution.

The (diﬀerential) rotation curve of the MWG traced
by the ISM and the solid rotation pattern speed intecept
at a Galactocentric radius called the ‘corotation radius’,
Rcr. As is shown in the radial velocity proﬁle of the
MWG evaluated by Barros et al. (2013) (see Fig. 5),
the MWG ISM rotates more quickly than the pattern
speed for R ≤ Rcr. Subsequently, the pattern speed is
faster than the rotation speed of the ISM for R ≥ Rcr.
Therefore, we can expect that star formation that began
in the spiral density wave should be seen to evolve away
from the density wave in the leading direction (in-front
of the arm) for R ≤ Rcr while it should trail behind the

Fig. 4. Galactic spiral structure as evaluated using VLBI astrometric ob-
servations of star-forming regions hosting H2O and CH3OH maser sources
(Reid et al. 2014). Colored solid curves represent the spiral arm patterns.
The gray scale schematically indicates the mean stellar density.

Fig. 5. Galactic rotation curve (a red curve) and a pattern speed of a spiral
(a dotted line)(Barros et al. 2013). A green curve indicate a valley of the
rotation curve, which should be formed by a possible density gap between the
Perseus and the Local Arms. Two vertical dashed lines indicate an assumed
co-rotation radii around Rcr[kpc] = R0 + 1.

arm for R ≥ Rcr.

In practice, we cannot directly measure its shape of
dynamics, especially Ωp; we must infer its nature from
its interaction with the ISM (i.e. Gerhard 2011). The
most direct approach is to observe the evolutionary se-
quence of objects that form in the arm and move away
from it. This was tried by Dias & L´epine (2005) us-
ing a sample of 599 open clusters. By using the known
age of the clusters and by reversing pure circular rota-
tion dictated by the Galactic rotation curve, they found

8

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

that most open clusters formed in arms and that the spi-
ral pattern rotates like a solid body with Ωp = 24 − 26
km s−1 kpc−1, and Rcr = (1.06± 0.08)R0 kpc. However,
one clear caveat is that the authors used the photomet-
ric distances to sources, which can be improved upon by
measurement of trigonometric parallax distances.

Any plan to repeat this kind of study using current
VLBI networks is hindered because the accuracy of the
parallactic distances obtained (typically 5 ∼ 20 % ) is not
accurate enough to probe for the internal distribution of
sources within and around the arms. Moreover, the cur-
rent sample size of trigonometric distances to MSFRs
may be less than 1000 in total. On the other hand, the
capabilities of the SKA (during phase: SKA1-MID), with
the inclusion of existing VLBI networks (SKA-VLBI),
will provide astrometric accuracy of 1% out to sources at
2 kpc (Green et al. 2015), meaning an uncertainty of 20
pc. Since the width of the arms themselves are about 400
pc (Vall´ee 2014), the SKA will allow astronomers to study
the evolution of star forming regions along a line through
the spiral arm. MSFRs are traced by a variety of ra-
dio sources such as CH3OH, H2O, and OH masers, radio
recombination lines, and thermal and non-thermal con-
tinuum emission (e.g., Loinard 2013), which may be pre-
dominant at diﬀerent evolutionary stages and become the
targets of astrometry with the SKA. Although we must
ﬁrst precisely establish the chronology of these sources,
we will be able to see the evolution through a spiral arm
if the diﬀerent evolutionary stages of a sample of objects
are physically separated by a distance larger than the un-
certainty in our parallax measurements (∼20 pc). Such a
situation is expected if we consider the sequential star for-
mation mode, in which new generation star forming cores
are created in the swept-up material around the HII re-
gions associated with older generation stars (Elmegreen
& Lada 1977). The SKA will allow astronomers to study
the evolution of star forming regions along a line through
the spiral arm. This scheme of study is called “spiral
arm tomography”. The diﬀerent evolutionary stages of
MSFRs will become spatially resolvable in the where the
physical separation is larger than the uncertainty in dis-
tance estimates, i.e. (Θ − Ωp) × tevol > 20 pc. Here Θ is
the velocity of the rotating ISM and tevol is the evolu-
tionary timescale of our sample. In the case of MSFRs,
tevol may be deﬁned by the diﬀerence between early and
late massive star formation.

Generally, the evolution from massive star forming
cores to extended HII regions takes about tevol = 106
years. Therefore we can expect to see the evolution of
MSFRs within an arm in the MWG where (Θ − Ωp) ≥
(20 pc)/(106 yrs) ≥20 km s−1. This value increases from

zero at the corotation radius (Fig. 5). Therefore this
kind of study is feasible for Galactocentric radii at least
0.8 kpc of the corotation radius, which is derived from
(Θ−Ωp)/Ωp ≃ (20km s−1)/(25 km s−1kpc−1) = 0.8 kpc.
Here we assume Ωp = 25 km s−1 kpc−1, taken from
Gerhard (2011). Furthermore, with the arrival of Gaia
data it may be possible to substitute the late evolution-
ary phase objects with MWG OB stars, thus increasing
our value of tevol and allowing us to probe Ωp close to
the corotation radius. When a large enough sample is
acquired, we can reverse this investigation to estimate
Ωp at various points in the MWG to conﬁrm whether it
really does rotate like a solid body. The number den-
sity of the astrometric targets is also important to judge
the models, such as the density wave model mentioned
above and the spontaneous formation of spiral patterns
(e.g., Baba et al. 2009).

3.3 Circumstellar maser sources as probes of the

dynamics of the whole Milky Way

VLBI astrometry at low frequency bands has the spe-
cial diﬃculties described in sect. 2.3 and 2.4. To cor-
rect the errors introduced by the ionosphere, we shall use
an in-beam calibrator and several secondary calibrators
to measure short-term dynamic variations and the two-
dimensional phase gradient around the maser, respec-
tively (the MultiView method, Rioja et al. 2009; Dodson
et al. 2013). In fact, using this technique, we could de-
termine the parallaxes and proper motions of OH masers
around OH/IR stars. Fig. 6 shows the preliminary re-
sults of our astrometry (Orosz et al.
in prep.), which
was yielded by our monitoring program of the 1612 MHz
OH masers associated with the OH/IR star OH138.0+7.2
for a year with the VLBA. Although systematic ef-
fects still remain from the ionosphere (estimated to be
∼0.15 mas; cf. Asaki et al. 2007), we can set a sub-mas
upper limit to the parallactic motion, the smallest de-
tected up to date using OH masers (c.f., van Langevelde
et al. 2000; Vlemmings et al. 2003; Vlemmings & van
Langevelde 2007). 1612 MHz OH masers as seen toward
OH138.0+7.2 have a double-peaked spectrum (left panel
of Fig. 7). The velocity separation between the two peaks
equals to twice as large as the expansion velocity of the
circumstellar envelope. For some of these sources, ﬂux
density variations of these peaks have been precisely de-
termined, enabling determination of the source distances
using the phase-lag technique (Engels & Bunzel 2015),
therefore, this technique can be tested by independently
derived parallax distances.

Besides the technical considerations, the distance mea-

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

9

OH 16.1-0.2

Orion KL

Fig. 7. Typical spectra of OH masers towards a long-period variable star (at 1612 MHz, left panel) and a MSFR (1665 MHz, right panel) (Etoka et al. 2015).

 25

N

 20

 15

 10

 5

 0

11

interstellar OH (in SFRs)

1665 MHz

1667 MHz

1612 MHz

stellar OH (around evolved stars)

1612 MHz

1667 MHz

1665 MHz

 250

N

 200

 150

 100

 50

 0

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

log(Peak luminosity) [Watt Hz   ]

-1

log(Peak luminosity) [Watt Hz   ]-1

Fig. 8. Luminosity functions derived from known OH maser sources (Etoka et al. 2015).

Fig. 9. Survey area of GASKAP (Dickey et al. 2013). The background grey-scale diagram shows the HI emission taken in an angular resolution of
≈600′′(Kalberla et al. 2010). The survey area will contain the Galactic thick disk as well as a wide area of the Magellanic Cloud system.

10

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

sociated with MSFRs as mentioned in Sect. 3.2, OH
masers, especially the 1612 MHz OH masers, are associ-
ated with evolved stars that are widely distributed in the
MWG including its bulge and halo. They are contrasted
with the main line OH masers at 1665 and 1667 MHz
associated with MSFRs, whose spectral proﬁles are dif-
ferent from those of the 1612 MHz line (right panel of
Fig. 7). Because the luminosity functions have been well
established (Fig. 8, Etoka et al. 2015), the number of
detectable OH maser sources can be estimated for con-
sideration of the SKA astrometry.

There are ≈5 000 circumstellar OH maser sources
(Engels & Bunzel 2015), and this number will increase
in the near future. In fact, the unbiased, wide area sur-
vey with ASKAP, GASKAP (Galactic ASKAP Spectral
LIne Survey) program (see Fig. 9, Dickey et al. 2013)
will start in 2016, and is expected to detect more than
10 000 OH maser sources along the Galactic plane.
In fact, the results of the pilot survey of OH emis-
sion, SPLASH (Southern Parkes Large Area Survey for
Hydroxyl, Dawson et al. 2014) suggests that there are
≈5 000 1612 MHz OH maser sources that are detectable
with the SPLASH sensitivity (5-σ ≈400 mJy) along the
Galactic plane (|b| ≤ 2◦)(Shinano et al. in prep.).

3.4 The Galactic center and the bulge: synergy of radio

and near-infrared astrometry

A super massive black hole (SMBH) resides in the cen-
tral region of the Galactic bulge. SMBHs were ﬁrst rec-
ognized as an origin of the energy at the galactic nuclei
around 1960s. Subsequently it has been understood after
the continuous observation that SMBHs exist universally
within large galaxies. Several decades after SMBHs have
been discovered, it has yet to be established as to how the
SMBHs form. This makes it one of the most important
problems of present-day astronomy. There are considered
to be two possible formation mechanisms: gas accretion
onto a seed black hole or a merger of black holes. However
it is still unclear which one is the plausible explanation.
From a viewpoint of the standard scenario for galaxy for-
mation, it is natural to regard a SMBH as an end result
of a BH merger.

In addition, to understand the formation and growth
process of a SMBH, it is crucial to unravel the physi-
cal processes of transferring gas, stars, and intermediate-
mass BHs from a bulge to a central part of a galaxy
though losing their angular momenta and energy. Since
this process is essentially determined by the gravitational
potential of the bulge, we need to place a high priority to
the assessment of the gravitational potential of the cen-

Fig. 6. A ﬁtted parallactic motion of OH138.0+7.2 (red curve) in right as-
cension (top) and declination (bottom), after subtracting the linear proper
motions of maser spots (Orosz et al. in preparation). The maser spots in
these panels are included in the maser feature with the blue-shifted peak
of the spectrum and they likely correspond to the ampliﬁed stellar image of
the background star (van Langevelde et al. 2000). Larger errors in decli-
nation are due to the characteristics of the VLBA with shorter baselines in
the north–south direction. The accuracy is similar to the values from pulsar
astrometry (see Fig. 1 of Kirsten et al. 2015.

surement of OH/IR stars is interesting in two major
scientiﬁc issues. The ﬁrst is the determination of the
period–luminosity (P − L) relation for long-period vari-
ables (LPVs) in the MWG. So far the handful of parallax
measurement all targeted short-period Mira and semi-
regular variables (P<500 days, Nakagawa et al. 2014
and references therein), while the present experiment
would be the ﬁrst to determine the parallaxes of OH/IR
stars with longer pulsation periods (P =1410 days for
OH138.0+7.2). This enables a comparative study of var-
ious types of asymptotic giant branch (AGB) stars in-
cluding the LPVs and post-AGB stars. The second is
the comprehensive study on the dynamics of the whole
MWG. While CH3OH and bright H2O masers are as-

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

11

Fig. 10. Radio emission in the Central Molecular Zone
of the MWG (@NRAO).

tral region of the MWG. In order to unravel these prob-
lems, it is important to search for observational relics of
a sequential merger of multiple black holes to form the
SMBH at the Galactic center (GC). This clariﬁcation is
expected to contribute a better understanding of the co-
evolution of the SMBHs and bulges in external galaxies.

Furthermore, containing models of the gravitational
potential in the MWG nuclear bulge region (within 200–
300 pc away from the MWG center), which includes the
Central Molecular Zone (CMZ) (Fig. 10) is also impor-
tant. The gravitational potential plays an important role
in determining types of stellar orbits (Fig. 12) which are
related to the physical processes of SMHB growth men-
tioned above. The reorganization of the gravitational
potential will make it possible to predict whether gas
and/or stars are transferred to the central part and the
GC will be active in the future.

In the JASMINE, an infrared astrometric satellite
project designed mainly at the National Astronomical
Observatory of Japan, Small-JASMINE (SJ, planned to
launch in 2020’s) will measure the positions and motions
of stars on the surface of the celestial sphere, which are lo-
cated around the GC (the nuclear bulge region). SJ will
survey, at near infrared wave-lengths, the region which
consists of two areas (Fig. 11): one of the areas covers
a circular region with a radius of 0.7◦ centering around
the GC, corresponding to a radius of 100 pc at the dis-
tance of 8 kpc from us. The other covers a rectangular
area with the Galactic longitude −1◦≤ l ≤1.5◦, and the
Galactic latitude 0.2◦≤ b ≤0.5◦, including the CMZ. The
number of stars measured by SJ with annual parallax er-
rors of less than 20 µas and proper motion errors of less
than 50 µas yr−1, which are located within the observing
region, is about the order of 104.

SJ will clarify the formation process of the SMBH at
the GC. In particular, SJ will determine whether the
SMBH was formed by a sequential merging of multiple

black holes. The clariﬁcation of this formation process of
the SMBH will contribute to a better understanding of
the merging process of satellite galaxies into the Galaxy,
which is suggested by the standard galaxy formation sce-
nario. A numerical simulation (Tanikawa & Umemura
2014) suggests that if the SMBH was formed by the merg-
ing process, then the dynamical friction caused by the
multiple black holes have inﬂuenced the spatial and ve-
locity distribution, that is, the phase space distribution,
of stars located in the region within the circle with a ra-
dius of 100 pc centering around the SMBH at the GC.
The phase space distribution measured by SJ will make
it possible to determine the occurrences of the merging
process. SJ will determine whether the SMBH at the GC
was formed through merging process of multiple black
holes with 99.7% conﬁdence level.

Furthermore, SJ will constrain models of the gravita-
tional potential in the Galactic nuclear bulge to predict
the activity of the GC in the future. In particular, SJ will
determine whether the pattern speed of the gravitational
potential has a value larger than 155 km s−1kpc−1 with
99.7% conﬁdence level. It should be remarked that this
pattern speed corresponds to the critical pattern speed
above which gas has been transferring eﬀectively from the
Galactic bulge to the central part of the MWG though
losing their angular momentums and the GC will be ac-
tive in the future.

There are common target sources, which are mainly
circumstellar OH maser sources, between the JASMINE
and the SKA. Their astrometric results will be cross-
checked. For stars in the innermost part of the nuclear
disk, where it is diﬃcult for JASMINE to access due to
severe interstellar extinction, the SKA astrometry will
compensate the sample of those stars.

12

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

proﬁles of the dark halos of M31 and the MWG should
aﬀect the evolutions of the satellites orbiting in these
halos (Mayer et al. 2001). Thus the relative 3D motions
between M31 and the MWG should be a key parameter
to elucidate the dynamics of the LG through determining
the cosmological parameter and the dark halo proﬁles.

3.5.1 Proper motion of M31

The measurement of the transverse speed (proper mo-
tion, PM) of M31 is much more diﬃcult than that of
the relative line-of-sight velocity of M31 with respect to
the MWG in practice. The M31’s PM has been mea-
sured by using the motions of stars in 5–7 years in the
outer disk, the stream, and the halo with respect to the
background distant galaxies on the HST images (Sohn
et al. 2012; van der Marel et al. 2012a, 2012b), yield-
ing a proper motion (µR.A., µdecl.) = 42.2 ± 12.3, 30.9 ±
11.7)[ µas yr−1]. This corresponds to a transverse speed
of M31 of Vtan ≈17 km s−1(after subtracting the rotation
and the peculiar motion of the Sun), or Vtan ≤34 km s−1
in 1-σ uncertainty level. These results suggest that M31
will collide with the MWG almost straightforwardly in 4
billion years. However, possible systematic errors in the
PMs due to the internal motions stars in M31 should be
further removed by monitoring a larger number of ﬁelds
of view.

Independently, the PMs of M31 and M33 have been
measured using H2O and CH3OH masers in the galaxies.
Brunthaler et al. (2005) detected a proper motion of M33
to be µ ∼30 µas yr−1. The measurement of M31’s PM is
ongoing after the discovery of H2O and CH3OH masers
in the galaxy (Sjouwerman et al. 2010; Darling 2011).
Because the number of these masers are still small (<
10), we will have to wait for the SKA-VLBI with higher
sensitivity. M31 and M33 are still observable from the
SKA cores in South Africa. Even if the SKA has to
spend tens of hours per epoch per ﬁeld, therefore, such
extragalactic PM measurement should be conducted as
one of Key Science Programs in the SKA.

Fig. 11. Stellar orbits around the Galactic center. Only closed orbits (X1,
X2, and inner orbits) are displayed.

Fig. 12. Observing region of the Small-JASMINE.

3.5 The dynamics of the Local Group of galaxies

3.5.2 Large and Small Magellanic Clouds and

their surroundings

The MWG is a major member of the Local Group (LG)
of galaxies, together with the Andromeda galaxy (M31).
The LG also contains M33 and smaller satellite galaxies
such as the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds (LMC
and SMC, respectively) highlighted later. Because the
LG has gravitationally formed against the expansion of
the universe, the density parameter of the total energy at
present, Ω0 is expected to determine the transverse speed
of M31 and the MWG (Peebles 1990, 1994). The density

The LMC and SMC are a pair of gas-rich dwarf galaxies
interacting with each other and with the MWG. The two
Clouds (MCs) have long served as the best astrophysical
laboratory for studies of their unique chemical evolution
and star formation histories, evolution processes of in-
terstellar medium, and the global dynamical evolution of
gas-rich irregular galaxies in general, as seen in Fig. 13.
One of the most important parameters for the evolution
of MCs is their three-dimensional (3D) motions around

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

13

the Galaxy, because their interaction histories with the
MWG and thus their evolution processes are determined
in this way. Although many observational studies of
proper motions (PMs) for the MCs have been done since
1970s, the 3D motions have not been well constrained.
Recent PM studies of the LMC by HST (e.g., Kallivayalil
et al. 2006) have revealed that the LMC is currently mov-
ing around 380 km s−1, which is signiﬁcantly faster than
previously thought (∼300 km s−1). Other ground-based
PM studies of the LMC have shown that the LMC’s space
velocities around 300 km s−1, which disagrees with the
HST results. So, which observational result is close to
the true value of the LMC’s velocity?

In order to address this important question, we need
to know the PMs of the LMC and the SMC much more
precisely.
Such precise PM measurements could not
be done in any previous optical observations because
of the relatively large error bars via PM measurement
(∼40 km s−1), but, it can be done with the error of less
than 10 km s−1 by the SKA PM measurement. Using
the SKA, astronomers will be able to measure the PMs
of maser source within the LMC and the SMC so that
they can estimate the 3D motions of the MCs very pre-
cisely. This SKA PM measurement using OH masers has
a number of great advantages over previous optical PM
estimation. The most important factor is that a much
larger number of masers sources (≥ 200) are available to
the SKA, which enables astronomers to distinguish the
secular PMs and the 3D internal kinematics of the MCs.
It also should be noted that these masers are located close
to the galactic disks and well follow the galactic rotation.
This has a great advantage over the previous HST PM
measurement, in which only 17 data points were used to
derive the PM of the LMC (e.g., Kallivayalil et al. 2013).

Thanks to these advantages of the SKA PM measure-
ments, astronomers can much better understand the past
dynamical histories of the MCs around the Galaxy as well
as the impact of the SMC-LMC-MWG interaction on the
evolution of the MWG.

3.6 Science using the radio celestial reference frame

Gaia and the SKA will provide precise optical and ra-
dio celestial reference frames (CRF), respectively, both of
which are based on thousands of extragalactic quasars,
at 10 µas-level accuracy.
(e.g., Mignard 2003). Gaia
performs large-angle (up to 90◦) astrometry in order to
globally determine astrometric parameters of individual
(∼ 109) stars, while the SKA will do both large-angle
and narrow-ﬁeld astrometry using multiple beams and
wide ﬁelds of view, respectively. Note that the former as-

Magellanic Stream

SMC

Magellanic Bridge

LMC

Fig. 13. Simulated distribution of gas in the Magellanic Stream (left, Diaz
& Bekki 2012) and the corresponding observational one (right, traced by HI
emission, Putman et al. 2003). These observational and theoretical results
show the column density of neutral hydrogen around the Stream. The orbits
of the MCs in the simulation are consistent with the orbital velocity of
∼ 300 km s−1 (‘bound orbit’) for the LMC. The ﬁne and fainter-extended
structures in the ISM distribution such as spurs are of course the targets of
the SKA.

trometry is sensitive to the global distortion of the CRF,
such as the “Galactic aberration” (Titov et al. 2011),
and the latter one is sensitive to local eﬀects such as
binary and star cluster systems, “micro-lensing” events
(e.g., Hosokawa et al. 1997), and interstellar scintillation
(e.g. Jauncey et al. 2003). Although the accuracy of
the CRF will be limited by those eﬀects, reversely they
will enable new space-time explorations of the universe
for study on an unprecedented variety of the celestial ob-
jects.

3.6.1 Galactic aberration

Independently of the astrometry for the MWG maser
sources (Sect. 3.2), direct measurement of the centripetal
acceleration of the Sun toward the GC will determine
the rotation speed of the Sun in the MWG. This accel-
eration should cause secular aberration drifts of extra-
galactic quasars, in which their acceleration vectors con-
verge into dipoles on the sky, one of which should be to-
wards the GC. The amplitude of the apparent proper mo-
tions of quasars due to the aberration is ∆µ = V 2
c /R0c ≈
5 µas yr−1, where Vc is the rotation speed of the Sun
in the MWG, R0 the galactocentric distance to the Sun.
Note that ∆µ can be derived independently of the pecu-
liar (non-circular) motion of the Sun.

14

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

Titov et al. (2011) obtained ∆µ = 6.4 ± 1.5 µas yr−1
by using the data of 555 quasars taken during 1990–2010,
with the distribution pattern of the proper motions that
converges roughly into the GC. The SKA astrometry will
yield a much larger size of sample and a time baselines
longer than 30 years, leading to more precisely derive the
Galactic abberration.

3.6.2 Astrometric micro-lensing events

Optical photometric observations have found photomet-
ric micro-lensing events, in which a background star is
temporarily brightened by the foreground object by a
gravitational lensing eﬀect. These events are useful for
elucidating the characteristics of the foreground sources
such as their masses, distances, proper motions, and bi-
nary motions aﬀected by the existence of planets. In the
case of low mass foregrounds, however, the photometric
micro-lensing events are rare (40 MACHOs, Alcock et al.
1997).

In an astrometric micro-lensing event, on the other
hand, a temporary distortion of a proper motion of the
background source is found. Because a cross section of
the astrometric micro-lensing is much larger than that
of the photometric one (1′′ for ∼7 µas deviation, e.g.,
Yano 2012), the former events will be much more fre-
quently detected. Towards the present ICRF sources be-
hind the Galactic bulge, about one astrometric micro-
lensing event of 10 µas per year is expected, while those
of 1 µas will occur much more frequently, giving limita-
tion to the accuracy of the ICRF (Hosokawa et al. 1997).
One can expect more astrometric micro-lensing events to-
wards a large variety of the astrometric targets, not only
MACHOs but also extra-planets, towards the Galactic
bulge and the Magellanic Clouds.

3.7 Identiﬁcation of un-identiﬁed radio transients by

accurate position measurement

Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), which are the most extreme
high-energy transient phenomena in the universe, were
discovered by continuous all sky monitor by space tele-
scopes. Additionally, immediate follow-up observations
by X-ray and optical telescopes clariﬁed that they are
associated with distant galaxies. It means that they are
cosmological phenomena (e.g., Kawai et al. 2006). Also
conducting multi-wavelength observations and theoreti-
cal study on the afterglow of GRBs resulted in signiﬁcant
progress of study on the progenitors and the emission
mechanism of GRBs.

At radio band, there are also several interesting tran-
sient phenomena (radio transients) such as the super-

nova explosions and radio bursts as seen in Cyg-X3 (e.g.,
Gregory & Kronberg 1972). However most of radio tran-
sients have been studied by focusing on the targets, e.g.,
dense monitoring of several sources and the Galactic cen-
ter region, or triggered by alert signals from observations
at other wavelengths, because it is quite diﬃcult to con-
duct wide ﬁeld monitors simultaneously with existing ra-
dio telescopes.

Time series analysis without images at radio bands
(especially low frequency) has succeeded to detect tran-
sient signals, which were not well known by previous
radio observations. The most characteristic property
of such radio transients is their various time scales on
each event. It is well known that there are two-types of
lifetimes on such transient signals. One is shorter du-
ration (τ <∼sec), and another one is longer duration
(τ >∼min). As the case of short duration radio tran-
sients, Rotating RAdio Transients (RRATs: McLaughlin
et al. 2006) and Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs: e.g., Lorimer
et al. 2007), which were discovered by the pulsar sur-
vey project mainly led by Parkes radio observatory, are
well known. The origin of RRATs is thought to be from
neutron stars in the MWG, and it shows recurrent and
non-periodic strong radio pulse. On the FRBs, they are
thought to have an extragalactic origin because of their
large dispersion measure at high Galactic latitude. On
the other hand, several types of long duration radio tran-
sients have also been discovered by several radio monitor-
ing programs in the GC region (e.g., Hyman et al. 2005)
and at high Galactic latitude (e.g., Jaeger et al. 2012).

Since the origin of these radio transients except
RRATs are still unknown, the origin and the emission
mechanism are strenuously investigated by both obser-
vation and theory. Especially FRBs discovered by time-
series analysis were expected to be cosmological phenom-
ena because of its large dispersion measure at high galac-
tic latitude. Since these radio transients are often found
in archival data, and since they suﬀer from large posi-
tional uncertainties (0.05− 0.2◦) on account of being de-
tected with single dish telescopes, it is often diﬃcult to
identify the progenitor (e.g., host galaxies).

Therefore,

in order to identify the origin and to
understand emission mechanism of unidentiﬁed radio
transients, in addition to the collaboration with multi-
wavelength, radio telescopes which have wide ﬁelds of
view, high angular resolution, and high time resolution,
are desired. For example, to specify the host galaxy in
which the radio transients occurred at 3 Gpc, the angu-
lar resolution of 2′′ is required. To identify the detailed
location in the host galaxy, very high angular resolution
less than 0.1′′ is essential.

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

15

The speciﬁcation of SKA mentioned in Sect. 2, will
make it possible to specify the location of bright objects
with an accuracy of ∼ 10 mas even if it is transient phe-
nomenon. SKA will ensure not only higher accuracy on
positional measurement to identify the counterpart but
also wide ﬁeld of view to search for them eﬀectively. It is
expected that the groundbreaking observational ability
of SKA will give us unexpected knowledge on the origin
of radio transients.

4 Summary

The SKA will become an ultimate tool of time-space
measurement in the universe, which enables us to un-
derstand ourselves through the measurement of distances
and proper motions of hundreds of thousand celestial ob-
jects in the nearby universe; where we are and where
we will go. We have to note that the the clocks and
scales themselves in the universe, which are indispens-
able for astrometry, are referenced to distant quasars but
aﬀected by a variety of general relativistic eﬀects. We
will expect further development of the present-day radio
astrometry and astrophysics for the nearby universe in
the next decades at the µas-level accuracy. However,
we are simultaneously meeting new challenging issues
regarding the time-space reference frame as mentioned
above. The dramatic increase in the number of target
sources for radio astrometry is necessary to open a new
window through those diﬃculties. This is the basis of
our motivation to consider the future global and near-
ﬁeld astrometry with the SKA.

References
Alcock, C., et al. 1997, ApJ, 479, 119
Asaki, Y., Sudou, H., Kono, Y., et al. 2007, PASJ, 59, 397
Baba, J., Asaki, Y., Makino, J., et al. 2009, ApJ, 706, 471
Barros, D. A., L´epine, J. R. D., & Junqueira, T. C. 2013,

MNRAS, 435, 2299

Blommaert, J. A. D. L., van der Veen, W. E. C. J., van
Langevelde, H. J., Habing, H. J., & Sjouwerman, L. O. 1998,
A&A, 329, 991

Bourda, G., Charlot, P., Porcas, R., & Garrington, S. 2008, IAU

Dawson, J. R., Walsh, A. J., Jones, P. A., et al. 2014, MNRAS,

439, 1596

Deller, A. T., Boyles, J., Lorimer, D. R., et al. 2013, ApJ, 770,

145

Dewdney, P. E. 2015, SKA-TEL-SKO-0000308
Diaz, J. D., & Bekki, K. 2012, ApJ, 750, 36
Dias, W. S., & L´epine, J. R. D. 2005, ApJ, 629, 825
Dickey, J. M., McClure-Griﬃths, N., Gibson, S. J., et al. 2013,

PASA, 30, 3

Dodson, R., Rioja, M., Asaki, Y., et al. 2013, AJ, 145, 147
Dubrovka, F. F., & Dolzhenko, D. S. 2010, in 5th International
Conference on Ultrawideband and Ultrashort Impulse Signals
(UWBUSIS), p220

Elmegreen, B. G., & Lada, C. J. 1977, ApJ, 214, 725
Engels, D., & Bunzel, F. 2015, A&A, 582, A68
Engels, D., G´erard, E., & Hallet, N. 2012, IAU Symposium,

287, 254

Engels, D., & Jim´enez-Esteban, F. 2007, A&A, 475, 941
Engels, D. 2012, IAU Symposium, 287, 256
Etoka, S., Engels, D.,

Imai, H., et al. 2015, Advancing
Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14),
125

Feissel, M., & Mignard, F. 1998, A&A, 331, L33
Gardiner, L. T., & Noguchi, M. 1996, MNRAS, 278, 191
Gerhard, O. 2011, Memorie della Societa Astronomica Italiana

Supplementi, 18, 185

Gouda, N. 2015, IAU General Assembly, 22, 2247720
Godfrey, L., Bignall, H., & Tingay, S. 2011, SKA memo 135
Green, J., Van Langevelde, H. J., Brunthaler, A., et al. 2015,
Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array
(AASKA14), 119

Gregory, P. C., & Kronberg, P. P. 1972, Nature, 239, 440
Hada, K., Doi, A., Kino, M., Nagai, H., Hagiwara, H., &

Kawaguchi, N. 2011, Nature, 477, 185

Hobbs, G., Lyne, A. G., & Kramer, M. 2003, Radio Pulsars,

302, 215

Honma, M., Akiyama, K., Uemura, M., & Ikeda, S. 2014, PASJ,

66, 95

Honma, M., Tamura, Y., & Reid, M. J. 2008, PASJ, 60, 951
Hosokawa, M., Ohnishi, K., & Fukushima, T. 1997, AJ, 114,

1508

Hyman, S. D., Lazio, T. J. W., Kassim, N. E., et al. 2005,

Nature, 434, 50

Imai, H., Katayama, Y., Ellingsen, S. P., & Hagiwara, Y. 2013a,

MNRAS, 432, L16

Imai, H., Deguchi, S., Nakashima, J.-I., Kwok, S., & Diamond,

P. J. 2013b, ApJ, 773, 182

Imai, H., Nakashima, J.-i., Yung, B. H. K., et al. 2013c, ApJ,

Symposium, 248, 324

771, 47

Bower, G. C., Deller, A., Demorest, P., et al. 2015, ApJ, 798,

Jaeger, T. R., Hyman, S. D., Kassim, N. E., & Lazio, T. J. W.

120

2012, AJ, 143, 96

Breen, S. L., Ellingsen, S. P., Contreras, Y., et al. 2013,

Jauncey, D. L., Bignall, H. E., Lovell, J. E. J., et al. 2003, New

MNRAS, 435, 524

technologies in VLBI, 306, 383

Brunthaler, A., Reid, M. J., Falcke, H., Greenhill, L. J., &

Kalberla, P. M. W., McClure-Griﬃths, N. M., Pisano, D. J., et

Henkel, C. 2005, Science, 307, 1440

al. 2010, A&A, 521, A17

Brunthaler, A., Reid, M. J., Menten, K. M., et al. 2011,

Kallivayalil, N., van der Marel, R. P., Besla, G., Anderson, J.,

Astronomische Nachrichten, 332, 461

Cornwell, T. 2014, SKA-OFF.SE.ARC-SKO-SRS-001 3
Darling, J. 2011, ApJL, 732, LL2

& Alcock, C. 2013, ApJ, 764, 161

Kallivayalil, N., van der Marel, R. P., Alcock, C., et al. 2006,

ApJ, 638, 772

16

Japan SKA Consortium (2016)

Kawai, N., Kosugi, G., Aoki, K., et al. 2006, Nature, 440, 184
Kirsten, F., Vlemmings, W., Campbell, R. M., Kramer, M., &

Sevenster, M. N., van Langevelde, H. J., Moody, R. A., et al.

2001, A&A, 366, 481

Chatterjee, S. 2015, A&A, 577, A111

Shirai, T., Oyama, T., Imai, H., & Abe, S. 2004, Bioastronomy

Kramer, M., & Stappers, B. 2015, Advancing Astrophysics with

2002: Life Among the Stars, 213, 423

the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14), 36

Sjouwerman, L. O., Murray, C. E., Pihlstr¨om, Y. M., Fish,

Kobayashi, H., Sasao, T., Kawaguchi, N., et al. 2003, New tech-

V. L., & Araya, E. D. 2010, ApJL, 724, L158

nologies in VLBI, 306, 48P
Komiak, J. J., et al. 2011,

Symposium Digest, p1

in IEEE MTT-S International

Habing, H. J. 1998, A&AS, 128, 35

Smits, R., Tingay, S. J., Wex, N., Kramer, M., & Stappers, B.

Sjouwerman, L. O., van Langevelde, H. J., Winnberg, A., &

Lin, C. C., & Shu, F. H. 1967, Radio Astronomy and the

2011, A&A, 528, AA108

Galactic System, 31, 313

Sohn, S. T., Anderson, J., & van der Marel, R. P. 2012, ApJ,

Lindegren, L., Lammers, U., Hobbs, D., et al. 2012, A&A, 538,

753, 7

A78

Lorimer, D. R., Bailes, M., McLaughlin, M. A., Narkevic, D. J.,

Tanikawa, A., & Umemura, M. 2014, MNRAS, 440, 652
Titov, O., Lambert, S. B., & Gontier, A.-M. 2011, A&Ap, 529,

& Crawford, F. 2007, Science, 318, 777

AA91

Loinard, L. 2013, IAU Symposium, 289, 36
Mayer, L., Governato, F., Colpi, M., et al. 2001, ApJ, 559, 754
McLaughlin, M. A., Lyne, A. G., Lorimer, D. R., et al. 2006,

Nature, 439, 817

Melis, C., Reid, M. J., Mioduszewski, A. J., Stauﬀer, J. R., &

Bower, G. C. 2014, Science, 345, 1029

Mignard, F. 2003, ASP Conf. Ser. 298, ed. Munari, U.et al., p25
Moran, J. M., Reid, M. J., & Gwinn, C. R. 1993, Astrophysical

Masers, 412, 244

Turner, W., & VLBI Community 2014, SKA-TEL-SKO-000044
Ujihara, H., Takefuji, K., & Sekido, M. 2014, IVS NICT-TDC

News, 34, 28

Vall´ee, J. P. 2014, AJ, 148, 5
van der Marel, R. P., & Kallivayalil, N. 2014, ApJ, 781, 121
van der Marel, R. P., Besla, G., Cox, T. J., Sohn, S. T., &

Anderson, J. 2012a, ApJ, 753, 9

van der Marel, R. P., Fardal, M., Besla, G., et al. 2012b, ApJ,

753, 8

Morimoto, M., Hirabayashi, H., & Jugaku, J. 1978, Nature, 276,

van Langevelde, H. J., Vlemmings, W., Diamond, P. J., Baudry,

694

A., & Beasley, A. J. 2000, A&A, 357, 945

Nakagawa, A., Omodaka, T., Handa, T., et al. 2014, PASJ, 66,

Vlemmings, W. H. T., & van Langevelde, H. J. 2007, A&A, 472,

101

547

Namekata, D., Habe, A., Matsui, H., & Saitoh, T. R. 2009,

Vlemmings, W. H. T., van Langevelde, H. J., & Diamond, P. J.

ApJ, 691, 1525

Oyama, T., Kono, Y., Suzuki, S., et al. 2012, 7th General
Meeting (GM2012) of the international VLBI Service for
Geodesy and Astrometry (IVS), Eds: D. Behrend and
K.D. Baver, National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
p. 91

Paragi, Z., Godfrey, L., Reynolds, C., et al. 2015, Advancing
Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14),
143

2002, A&A, 393, L33

Vlemmings, W. H. T., van Langevelde, H. J., Diamond, P. J.,

Habing, H. J., & Schilizzi, R. T. 2003, A&A, 407, 213

Yano, T. 2012, ApJ, 757, 189

Peebles, P. J. E. 1994, ApJ, 429, 43
Peebles, P. J. E. 1990, ApJ, 362, 1
Perryman, M.

2009,

âĂĲAstronomical Application of
AstrometryâĂİ, Cambridge University Press ISBN 978-
1-107-40700-8

Perryman, M. A. C., Lindegren, L., Kovalevsky, J., et al. 1997,

A&A, 323, L49

Petrov, L., Phillip, C., Bertarini, A., Murphy, T.,& Sadler, E.

M. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 2528

Petrov, L., Phillips, C., Bertarini, A., et al. 2009, PASA, 26, 75
Putman, et al. 2003, ApJ, 586, 170
Ransom, S. M., Stairs, I. H., Archibald, A. M., et al. 2014,

Nature, 505, 520

Reid, M. J., Braatz, J. A., Condon, J. J., et al. 2013, ApJ, 767,

154

Reid, M. J., & Honma, M. 2014, ARAA, 52, 339
Reid, M. J., Menten, K. M., Brunthaler, A., et al. 2014, ApJ,

783, 130

Rioja, M., Dodson, R., Porcas, R. W., et al. 2009, 8th

International e-VLBI Workshop, 14

