6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
h
t
-
l
c
u
n
[
 
 

1
v
7
7
0
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The hard-sphere model of strongly interacting
fermion systems

Scuola di Dottorato Vito Volterra
Dottorato di Ricerca in Fisica – XXVIII Ciclo

Candidate
Angela Mecca
ID number 696270

Thesis Advisor
Prof. Omar Benhar

Co-Advisor
Dr. Alessandro Lovato

A thesis submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Physics
December 2015

Thesis defended on 22 January 2016
in front of a Board of Examiners composed by:
Prof. Luciano Maria Barone (chairman)
Prof. Cinzia Da Vià
Prof. Teresa Rodrigo

The hard-sphere model of strongly interacting fermion systems
Ph.D. thesis. Sapienza – University of Rome

© 2015 Angela Mecca. All rights reserved

This thesis has been typeset by LATEX and the Sapthesis class.
Author’s email: lelamecca@gmail.com

Abstract

ii

The formalism based on Correlated Basis Functions (CBF) and the cluster-
expansion technique has been recently employed to derive an eﬀective interaction
from a realistic nuclear Hamiltonian. One of the main objectives of the work de-
scribed in this Thesis is establishing the accuracy of this novel approach—that
allows to combine the ﬂexibility of perturbation theory in the basis of eigenstates
of the noninteracting system with a realistic description of short-range correlations
in coordinate space—by focusing on the hard-sphere fermion system.

The properties of the hard-sphere ﬂuid—which has long been recognized as
a valuable model for investigating concepts and approximations employed in the
study of strongly correlated systems, whose structure and dynamics are largely
driven by the presence of a short-ranged and strongly repulsive interaction—have
been extensively analyzed within perturbative approaches yielding exact results in
the low-density limit. To gauge the reliability of CBF eﬀective interaction scheme,
we have performed a systematic comparison between the results of its application
to the Fermi hard-sphere systems and the predictions obtained form low-density
expansions, as well as form other many body techniques.

As a ﬁrst application of the formalism, the quasiparticle properties of hard
spheres of degeneracy four have been determined from the two-point Green’s func-
tion. The calculation has been performed carrying out a perturbative expansion of
the self-energy, up to the second order in the CBF eﬀective interaction. The main
results of this study are the momentum distributions, the quasiparticle spectra and
their description in terms of eﬀective mass. The analysis of these properties shows
that the eﬀective interaction approach is quite accurate, thus suggesting that it may
be employed to achieve a consistent description of the structure and the dynamics
of nuclear matter in the density region relevant to astrophysical applications.

The investigation of the hard-sphere fermion ﬂuid has been extended to study
the shear viscosity and thermal conductivity coeﬃcients of the system with degen-
eracy two, that can be regarded as a model of pure neutron matter. The resulting
transport coeﬃcients, evaluated taking into account perturbative contributions up
to second order in the CBF eﬀective interaction, show a strong sensitivity to the
quasiparticle eﬀective mass, reﬂecting the eﬀect of second order contributions to
the self-energy which are not taken into account in nuclear matter studies available
in the literature. The diﬀerence between ﬁrst and second order results is likely
to play an important role in astrophysical applications and needs to be carefully
investigated extending our analysis to nuclear matter.

Contents

1 Theory of strongly interacting fermion systems

1.1 Low-density expansions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Correlated Basis Functions formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.1 Variational method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.2 Correlated Basis Functions (CBF)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.3 CBF perturbation theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 Cluster expansion formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.1 Ground-state energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 The CBF eﬀective interaction

2.1 Deﬁnition of the CBF eﬀective interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 CBF eﬀective interaction for the fermion hard-sphere systems . . . .
2.2.1 The CBF eﬀective interaction ansatz
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.2 Determination of the correlation function . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.3 Determination of veﬀ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Equilibrium properties of the fermion hard-sphere systems

3.1.1

3.1 Self-Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Imaginary part . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Quasiparticle spectrum and eﬀective mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Momentum distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Transport properties of the fermion hard-sphere systems

4.1 Landau–Abrikosov–Khalatnikov formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Calculation of the transport coeﬃcients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.1 Eﬀective interaction for the hard-sphere system with ν = 2 .
4.2.2 Quasiparticle spectrum and eﬀective mass . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.3
Scattering probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Numerical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Shear viscosity and thermal conductivity . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3.1

Summary and Prospects

A Low-density expansion of the momentum distribution

iii

1
1
5
6
7
8
9
10

13
13
14
14
16
18

21
21
23
26
28

36
36
38
38
40
41
46
46

49

51

Contents

B Cluster expansions

B.1 Energy at two-body cluster level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B.2 Expectation value of the eﬀective interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . .

C Euler-Lagrange equation

D Calculation of the self-energy

D.1 Direct and exchange diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D.2 The matrix element
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D.3 The polarisation term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D.4 The correlation term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D.5 Numerical evaluation of the real part . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

E The scattering amplitude in a Fermi ﬂuid

E.1 The generalised Bethe-Salpeter equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E.2 The low-denstity hard-sphere system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

List of Figures

Bibliography

iv

53
53
56

58

60
60
60
63
63
64

65
65
65

68

69

1

Chapter 1

Theory of strongly interacting fermion
systems

The theoretical treatment of the many-body problem, which amounts to describing
a quantum mechanical system of N interacting non relativistic particles, involves
daunting challenges. The Schrödinger equation associated with the Hamiltonian

H =X

t(i) +X

v(ij) ,

(1.1)

i

j>i

where t(i) = −∇2
i /2m, m being the particle mass, is the kinetic energy operator, and
v(ij) denotes the interaction potential, can be solved exactly, using deterministic
methods, only for N < 4 and selected interactions.

In addition to the computational issues associated with the treatment of a large
number of particles, in strongly correlated systems—such as liquid helium and nu-
clear matter—one has to confront the diﬃculties arising from the strongly repulsive
nature of the interaction, which makes the use of standard approximation methods,
based on perturbation theory, highly problematic. In order to make perturbative
calculations feasible, one has to either replace the bare potential with a well behaved
interaction, such as the scattering matrix, or replace the basis of eigenfunctions of
the non interacting system with a basis of states suitably modiﬁed to take into ac-
count the eﬀects of the repulsive core of the potential. In this chapter, we provide
a brief outline of both approaches.

Section 1.1 will be devoted to the discussion of the perturbative methods, leading
to low-density expansions which have been widely employed to study the properties
of the fermion hard-spheres system. The alternative approach based on formalism of
correlated basis functions, and the cluster expansion technique needed to compute
matrix elements involving correlated states, will be discussed in Sections 1.2 and
1.3, respectively.

1.1 Low-density expansions
A low-density, a Fermi gas consists of point-like spin one-half particles interacting
via a strongly repulsive pair potential, which can be chosen to be the inﬁnite hard-
core potential deﬁned in the Introduction. The restriction to a purely repulsive

1.1 Low-density expansions

2

interaction prevents the possible formation of Cooper pairs, leading to the appear-
ance of a superconducting or superﬂuid phase. The hard-sphere model provides a
reasonable approximation of systems such as nuclear matter and liquid 3He over
a broad range of density, and has been analysed by several authors using diﬀerent
methods.

A seminal study was carried out in the 1950s by Huang, Lee and Yang within
the framework of Fermi’s pseudopotential method, which amounts to solving a
Schrödinger equation for the wave function, in which the interaction is replaced
by suitable boundary conditions [1, 2]. These authors obtained an expression for
the ground state energy in terms of the low-energy parameters, e.g.
scattering
length and eﬀective range.

In his pioneering work of Ref. [3], Galitskii applied the methods of quantum
ﬁeld theory to determine the energy spectrum of the system, i.e. the energy and
lifetime of quasiparticle states, described by the complex poles of the two-point
Green’s function. The approach of Ref. [3] is based on an expansion in powers of
the dimensionless parameter c = kF a, where kF is the Fermi momentum—trivially
related to the particle density ρ through kF = (6π2ρ/ν)1/3, ν being the degeneracy
of the momentum eigenstates—and a is the hard-core radius1. The resulting ground
state energy and the spectrum of quasiparticles of degeneracy ν = 2 carrying mo-
menta close to the Fermi momentum, computed including terms of order up to c2,
are given by

(cid:20)
1 + 10
9π

21π2 (11 − 2 ln 2) c2(cid:21)

c + 4

,

E0 = 3
5

k2
F
2m

and

e(k)
k2
F

= 1
2 x2 + 2
3π

c + 2

15π2 c2(11 − 2 ln 2) − 8

15π2 c2(7 ln 2 − 1)(x − 1) ,

where x = k/kF . The knowledge of the single particle spectrum allows one to obtain
the eﬀective mass, deﬁned as

(1.2)

(1.3)

(1.4)

(1.5)

m?(k) =

At second order in c one ﬁnds

(cid:19)−1

(cid:18)1

k

de
dk

.

m?(kF )

m

= 1 + 8

15π2 c2(7 ln 2 − 1) .

Similar expressions have been derived for all quasiparticle properties, ranging from
the lifetime to the chemical potential and the Green’s function renormalisation
constant Z, to be identiﬁed with the discontinuity of the momentum distribution
at the Fermi surface [4]. These results agree with those obtained by Abrikosov and
Khalatnikov in Ref. [5].

1In the original formulation, the dimensionless parameter was deﬁned as the product between
kF and the real part of the scattering amplitude at small momentum, f0, which for the hard-sphere
systems is given by the hard-sphere radius a.

1.1 Low-density expansions

3

The same procedure has been applied in Ref. [6, 7] to obtain the expansion of
the momentum distribution, describing the occupation probability of single particle
states of momentum k, for a broad range of momenta. The analytic results of
Ref. [7], including terms of order up to c2, have been carefully investigated by
Mahaux and Sartor in 1980 [8,9]. The explicit expression reported in Ref. [8,9] can
be found in Appendix A.

In the 1970s, Bishop carried out a systematic analysis of the existing results using
diﬀerent computational schemes [10]. He analysed two-body scattering in vacuum,
as well as scattering in the presence of a ﬁlled Fermi sea using both Goldstone time
ordered diagrams (Goldstone method) and Feynman diagrams (Green’s function
method). The expression of the ground state energy was obtained including the
ﬁrst four terms of the expansion in powers of the dimensionless parameter c.
It
turned out that the ﬁrst three terms can be completely derived in terms of the low-
energy scattering parameters [3,5,11,12], while the eﬀect of including three-particle
collisions is the appearance of a term logarithmically dependent on c [13–16].

The analysis of two-body scattering in free space demonstrates that for highly
repulsive interactions the perturbation series in powers of the potential requires a
large number of terms to be at best asymptotically convergent, as shown by the
author of Ref. [17]. However, in the presence of a singular hard-core potential
this procedure is not viable. In analogy with scattering in free space, where the
bare interaction is replaced by the t-matrix describing the entire Born series of
multiple scattering processes, the formalism for the calculation of the ground-state
energy requires the rearrangement of the perturbation series in terms of suitable
new operators. These are the K- and T-matrix, representing the sum of ladder
diagrams associated with scattering in the Fermi sea, obtained using time ordered
(Goldstone) or standard (Feynman) perturbation theory, respectively.

Figure 1.1. Diagrammatic representation of the generic T matrix, sum of ladder diagrams

in free space or in the Fermi sea.

The diagrammatic representation of the generic matrix T (hereafter, T denotes
t, K, or T) is illustrated in Fig. 1.1. The only diﬀerence between the three cases
arises from the interpretation of the internal lines, representing the particle prop-
agators, which determines the explicit form of the integral equation deﬁning the
three matrices.

In free space the propagators are written as

E − p2 − iη

,

(1.6a)

f ree(p) =(cid:16)

G0

(cid:17)−1

with η = 0+.

If the presence of the ﬁlled Fermi sea is taken into account, the

T==p!1p1p2p!2p1p!1p!2p2+p1p!1p1−qp2+qp2p!21.1 Low-density expansions

4

Goldstone propagator, describing particles outside the Fermi sea, reads

(cid:17)−1

E − p2 − iη

,

(1.6b)

while the internal lines in Feynman diagrams, describing both particles outside the
Fermi sea and holes inside the Fermi sea, correspond to

G0

G(p) = θ(p − kF )(cid:16)
F (p) =h

G0

E − p2 + iη sgn(p − kF )i−1

.

(1.6c)

Summing up ladder diagrams in free space is equivalent to solving the Lippman-
Schwinger equation. The same procedure with time-ordered and Feynman diagrams
leads to the Bethe-Goldstone and Bethe-Salpeter equations, respectively. These
equations have both exact solutions, well behaved even in the case of singular in-
teractions, provided the potential is replaced by the t-matrix.

The relevant T matrices are the key elements of the diagrammatic perturbative
approach for the calculation of the ground-state energy. To derive the expansion
of the energy to order c3, diagrams containing up to three T interactions must be
taken into account. In such diagrams no more than two particles are interacting
at a given time and only two body scattering parameters are involved in the ﬁnal
expression, while in diagrams with more than four T interactions intermediate
states with three or more than three particles are allowed.
Some of the diagrams containing more than three T interactions involve diver-
gent integrations. Since the singularities come from high momenta (k (cid:29) kF ) and
the hole lines are restricted to momenta less than kF , the leading divergence will
show up in the diagrams containing the maximum number of particle lines. It turns
out that diagrams containing four T interactions and minimal number of hole lines
are logarithmically dependent on the density of the system, or equivalently on the
parameter c = kF a.

The ﬁnal result for the ﬁrst four terms of the expansion of the ground-state
energy in the presence of a generic repulsive potential can be expressed in terms
of the two body scattering parameters a0 and a1, describing the S- and P-wave
scattering lengths, and the S-wave eﬀective range r0 [18]

E
N

(cid:20) 2

(cid:26)3
= k2
5 + (ν − 1)
F
2m
+ 1
(kF r0) (kF a0)2+
10π
+ (ν − 1) (ν − 2) 16
27π3

3π

(kF a0) + 4
(cid:18)
(cid:16)4π − 3

35π2 (11 − 2 log 2) (kF a0)2
(kF a0)3 + 1
3(cid:17) (kF a0)4 log(kF a0) + . . . .
5π

0.076 + 0.057 (ν − 3)

(cid:19)

√

(ν + 1) (kF a1)3(cid:21)
(cid:27)

(1.7)

,

For the hard-sphere case, where the scattering lengths and the eﬀective range are
related to the hard-core radius a through the relations a0 = a1 = a and r0 =
2a/3, the ﬁnal expressions for the energy per particle, in terms of the dimensionless

1.2 Correlated Basis Functions formalism

parameter c ≡ (kF a), read

ν =2 : E
N

= k2
F
2m

ν =4 : E
N

= k2
F
2m

(cid:20)3
5 + 2
3π
(cid:20)3
5 + 2

π

c + 4

c + 12

35π2 (11 − 2 log 2) c2 + 0.230c3 +O(c4)i
35π2 (11 − 2 log 2) c2 + 0.780c3
c4 log c +O(c4)i

(cid:16)4π − 3

3(cid:17)

√

+ 32
9π3

5

,
(1.8a)

.
(1.8b)

In the above expansions, the linear term describes the eﬀects of forward scat-
tering, the quadratic term takes into account Pauli’s exclusion principle and the
higher-order terms arise from the occurrence of processes involving al least three
particles. Note that the logarithmic term vanishes identically for ν < 3. This term,
in fact, arises from three body correlations at high momentum, or small relative
distance. Because for a system of degeneracy ν = 2 at least two of the three parti-
cles must be identical, three body correlations at small relative distances can only
appear at higher degeneracy, ν > 2.

As for the eﬀective mass, the generalization of Eq. (1.5) for a system of degen-

eracy ν can be written as

m?(kF )

m

= 1 + 8(ν − 1)
15π2

c2(7 ln 2 − 1) .

(1.9)

1.2 Correlated Basis Functions formalism
Conceptually, low-density expansions are perturbative solutions of the many-body
problem. A well established alternative scheme, originally proposed by Jastrow in
1955 [19], is based on a variational treatment in which the trial ground-state wave
function is built using two-body correlation functions.

The idea underlying Jastrow’s approach is that, in the presence of a potential
exhibiting a strongly repulsive core of radius rc, the ground state wave function,
Ψ0, must be such that, for any i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N}

rij = |ri − rj| < rc =⇒ |Ψ0(r1, . . . , rN)|2 ≈ 0 ,

(1.10)

implying that the probability of ﬁnding any two particles within a distance rc of
one another is negligibly small. The above condition can be easily fulﬁlled writing
the trial wave function in the form

Ψ0(r1, . . . , rN) ∝ NY

j>i=1

f(rij) ,

(1.11)

where the two-particle correlation function is deﬁned in such a way that f(r) ≈ 0
at r < rc.

1.2 Correlated Basis Functions formalism

6

In principle, the expectation value of the Hamiltonian in the state described
by the correlated wave function provides an upper bound to the ground state en-
ergy of the system. However, the corresponding 3N-dimensional integration is not
factorisable into integrals involving the coordinates of only one-particle. There-
fore, its calculation involves severe diﬃculties and, in general, requires the use of
approximations that may spoil the upper bound property of the result.

In spite of the above diﬃculty, the variational approach and the formalism based
on correlated wave functions have reached a remarkable degree of accuracy, and
have been widely and successfully employed to study the properties of a variety of
interacting many-body systems, from liquid helium to neutron star matter.

In the following sections we will brieﬂy discuss the elements of the variational
treatment and its generalisation, based on an extension of the Jastrow ansatz al-
lowing one to build a complete set of correlated states. The main tenet underlying
this approach, the validity of which needs to be thoroughly investigated, is that the
correlation structure of the ground and excited states be the same.

1.2.1 Variational method
A variety of many body systems, e.g.
liquid helium and atomic nuclei, are char-
acterised by strong correlations between their constituents, that cannot be taken
into account within the mean ﬁeld (MF) approximation at the basis of the inde-
pendent particle model. For example, there is ample experimental evidence that,
as pointed out by the authors of Ref. [20], nucleon-nucleon correlations lead to a
sizeable depletion of the occupation probability of the shell model orbitals.

The correlated ground-state wave function is deﬁned through the transformation

(see, e.g., Ref. [21])

|0) ≡

F|Φ0]

[Φ0|F †F|Φ0]1/2 ,

(1.12)
where the model function |Φ0] describes the system ground-state in the absence of
correlations, which are taken into account by the operator F.
In translationally
invariant fermion systems |Φ0] is a Slater determinant of single particle states com-
prising a plane wave and Pauli spinors describing the spin and isospin degrees of
freedom. All energy levels corresponding to |k| < kF , belonging to the Fermi sea,
are occupied with unit probability.

The accuracy of the variational estimate provided by the expectation value

Ev0 = (0| H |0) ,

(1.13)
depends on the choice of the correlation operator determining the form of the trial
wave function. Its main role is producing an excluded region in conﬁguration space,
in which the particles penetrate with small probability because of the strong repul-
sive core of the interaction potential.

The operator F is usually deﬁned as the product of pair correlation operators,

F = SY

Fij, according to

The structure of Fij must reﬂect the properties of the potential. Hence, for spin-
isospin dependent interactions [Fij, Fik] 6= 0, and the right hand side of the above

j>i

Fij .

(1.14)

1.2 Correlated Basis Functions formalism

7

equation needs to be properly symmetrized through the action of the operator S.
In the case of spherically symmetric and spin-isospin-independent interactions, on
the other hand, the two-particle correlation function depends on the interparti-
cle distance only, and Eq.(1.11) is recovered. The simple radial correlation func-
tion is usually referred as (Bijil-Dingle)-Jastrow correlated wave function, or DBJ
ansatz [19,22–24]. Its shape is often determined by functional minimization of the
expectation value of the Hamiltonian in the correlated ground state.

As mentioned above, however, the calculation of Ev0 involves serious diﬃculties.
For a system of N particles, the right side of Eq.(1.13) includes 3N-dimensional in-
tegrations, whose evaluation requires a computational eﬀort that rapidly increases
with N. A viable option to overcome this problem is the use of the Variational
Monte Carlo method (VMC) [25, 26], a stochastic technique allowing—at least
in principle—to perform exact calculations of the Hamiltonian expectation value.
However, in practice VMC is aﬀected by the intrinsic uncertainty arising from the
fact that the system is modelled as a collection of a ﬁnite number of particles en-
closed in a box of ﬁnite size.

Very large uniform systems are often treated within a formalism derived from
the approach originally proposed by Jastrow [19], which essentially amounts to
expanding the Hamiltonian expectation value in powers of the particle density. The
terms of the resulting series can be conveniently represented by diagrams, that can
be classiﬁed according to their topological structure and summed up to all orders
solving a system of integral equations dubbed Fermi Hyper-Netted Chain (FHNC)
equations. While not being exact—because it does not included all topological
classes—the FHNC summation scheme has been shown to provide accurate results
for many strongly-interacting fermion systems [27,28].

1.2.2 Correlated Basis Functions (CBF)
The Correlated Basis Functions (CBF) approach [29, 30] extends the basic idea
underlying the variational method, and uses the correlation operator F determined
by the variational calculation of Ev0 to generate not only the correlated ground state,
but a complete set of basis functions spanning the N-particle Hilbert space. The
transformation

| n) ≡

(1.15)

F|Φn]

[Φn|F †F|Φn]1/2 .

establishes a direct correspondence between the true excited states of the system
| n) and the uncorrelated states |Φn] constructed by moving n particles from states
belonging to the Fermi sea to excited states, corresponding to momenta larger than
kF . These states are referred to as n-particle-n-hole (np-nh) states. By using the
second quantization formalism, creation and annihilation operators of correlated
states can be deﬁned and the full Fock space of correlated states can be constructed,
with np-nh correlated states mapped onto the np-nh uncorrelated ones2.

2 Following Ref. [31], creation and annihilation operators of correlated states α

by their action on the basis states |m) through the following relations

†
k, αk are deﬁned

k|m) =
†
α

k|Φm]
†
FN+1a
k|Φm]1/2
†
†
N+1FN+1a

[Φm|akF

, αk|m) =

FN−1ak|Φm]
N−1FN−1ak|Φm]1/2
[Φm|a
†
†
kF

.

(1.16)

1.2 Correlated Basis Functions formalism

8

The diagonal matrix elements of the Hamiltonian between correlated states

Hnn ≡ ( n| H | n) ≡ Ev
n,

(1.17)
are referred to as variational energies, Ev
n, although only the ground state energy
has been variationally estimated. They all are of order N, while the excitations
energies Ev

n − Ev0 are of order 1.

1.2.3 CBF perturbation theory
The variational energies of Eq. (1.17), the oﬀ-diagonal elements of Hamiltonian

Hnm ≡ ( n| H | m) ,

(1.18)

and the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the unit operator, or metric matrix

Nnm ≡ (n|m) ,

(1.19)
are the building blocks of CBF perturbation theory. This approach is based on
the observation that, if the correlation function is determined in such a way that
correlated states have large overlaps with the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian, H is
nearly diagonal in the correlated basis. As a consequence, the oﬀ-diagonal matrix
elements can play the role of small parameters of a perturbative expansion.

Following the scheme of standard perturbation theory, the Hamiltonian is de-
composed into the sum of unperturbed and interaction contributions, deﬁned in
terms of their matrix elements according to

H = H0 + HI ,

with

H0,nm = ( n| H0 | m) ≡ ( n| H | n) δnm = Ev

n δnm ,

(1.20)

(1.21)

and

quantities

(1.22)
If the correlated states are close to the true eigenstates of the Hamiltonian, the

HI,nm = ( n| HI | m) = (1 − δnm) Hnm .

Wmn(n) = ( m| H − En | n) = Hmn − EnNmn ,

(1.23)
can be treated as a perturbation. The resulting expansion can be employed to
calculate corrections to the variational estimate of the energies, which in this context
can be seen as zeroth-order approximations.

The energy shift between CBF and variational energies can be written in the

form [29]

∆En = En − Ev

n

=X

p6=n

+ X

En − Ev

Wnp(n)Wpn(n)

Wnp(n)Wpq(n)Wqn(n)
q ) + . . . .
(En − Ev
p)(En − Ev
†
They obey the same anticommutation rules as the uncorrelated ones ak, a
k, but are not Hermitian
conjugates of one another, as the states in Eqs. (1.16) involve a (N + 1) and a (N − 1) correlation
operator, respectively. As a consequence the number operator is not hermitian and its eigenstates
corresponding to diﬀerent eigenvalues, i.e. the Fock states, are not mutually orthogonal.

(1.24)

p6=q6=n

p

1.3 Cluster expansion formalism

Substitution of
Wmn(n) = Hmn − Ev

nNmn − (En − Ev

and

1

En − Ev

p

=

1
n − Ev
p + ∆Ev
Ev

n

=

9

(1.25)

nNmn ,

mn(n) − ∆Ev
n) Nmn ≡ W v
!i
 
X
− ∆En
n − Ev
Ev

1
n − Ev
Ev

p

p

i

,

(1.26)

in Eq. (1.24) allows one to identify perturbative corrections order by order. Note
that the appearance of an additional dependence on En in the perturbative se-
ries, besides the one arising from the energy denominators, is a peculiar feature of
perturbation theory in a non-orthogonal basis.

CBF perturbation theory has been extensively applied to nuclear matter, to
obtain second order corrections to the ground state energy [32, 33], the real and
imaginary part of the energy dependent optical potential [32, 33], the momentum
distribution [34] and the two-point Green’s function [35, 36]. A major diﬃculty
associated with these calculations is the presence of spurious terms, arising from
the non orthogonality of the basis states. A fully consistent—although quite de-
manding from the computational point of view—procedure to generate a basis of
orthogonalised correlated states has been developed in Ref. [37].

1.3 Cluster expansion formalism
The use of correlated states and the resulting CBF formalism entails the issue of the
numerical calculation of matrix elements of many body operators in the correlated
basis. The problem of evaluating multidimensional integrals for a large number of
particles has been eﬀectively dealt with in the study of the classical imperfect gas,
in which the partition function is developed in cluster integrals, each one deﬁned
on a subsystem of increasing number of particles. If the density is not too high and
the correlation range is short enough, an accurate evaluation of, e.g., the energy of
the system can be obtained in terms of few clusters. Having this picture in mind,
in this section we outline the main elements of the cluster expansion formalism and
discuss its application to the evaluation of the energy.
Both the diagonal and oﬀ-diagonal elements of the Hamiltonian and metric ma-
trices are built form matrix elements of the operators F †HF and F †F between
uncorrelated Fermi gas states. We assume that the correlation operator F is sym-
metric in its argument and translationally invariant. In addition, because of the
short-range nature of the interaction, it is required to exhibit the cluster decompo-
sition property, implying that if any subset, say i1 . . . im, of the particles is moved
away from the rest, F decomposes into a product of two factors according to

(1.27)
If, for the sake of simplicity, we limit ourselves to the case of Jastrow correlations,

F(1 . . . N) = Fm(i1 . . . im)FN−m(im+1 . . . iN) .

the operators F †HF and F †F can expanded in terms of the quantity h(rij)3

(1.28)
3In nuclear matter, where the correlation operators Fij and Fik do not commute, one needs to

h(rij) = f 2(rij) − 1 ,

carefully take into account the ordering of correlations.

1.3 Cluster expansion formalism

and the one-body density matrix

ρ(i, j) = X

n∈{F}

10

(1.29)

n(i)φn(j) .
φ?

where φn are the single particle wave functions and the sum is restricted to the
occupied states within the Fermi sea. The label i refers to both space and spin
coordinates.

The cluster expansion formalism and its application for the calculation of the
ground state energy will be discussed in the next section. Note that we will use non
normalized correlated states | n) = F|Φn].

1.3.1 Ground-state energy
The main quantity needed to obtain the cluster expansion of the ground state energy
is the generalized normalization integral, deﬁned as

(1.30)
where TF is the ground state energy of the non interacting Fermi Gas. The desired
energy expectation value may be recovered via the well-known formula

I (β) = (0| exp [β (H − TF )]|0) ,

E0 = TF + ∂
∂β

log I(β)

.

(1.31)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)β=0

This ﬁrst derivation—referred to as IY cluster expansion—was carried out by Iwamoto
and Yamada rearranging the terms of the expansion according to the powers of the
X
smallness parameter η, deﬁned as [38]
[ij|F

†
2(12)F2(12) − 1|ij]a ,

η = 1

(1.32)

N

j>i

F2(ij) being the two-particle correlation operator. Hereafter, the symbol |i] will
√
denote a Fermi gas state, and |ij]a = (|ij] − |ji])/

We will focus on a slightly diﬀerent formulation, known as Factorized-Ywamoto-
Yamada (FYI) [30], where the n-th cluster collects all contributions involving, in a
linked manner, n Fermi sea orbitals.
N!/(N − n)!n! subnormalization integrals deﬁned as

The starting point is the deﬁnition, for each n-particle subsystem, of a set of

2.

Ii (β) = [i| exp(cid:8)β[t(1) − e0

i ](cid:9)|i] = 1 ,

2(12) exp(cid:8)β[t(1) + t(2) +v(12) − e0
j](cid:9)F2(12)|ij]a ,
3(123) exp(cid:8)β[t(1) + t(2) + t(3) + v(12) + v(23) + v(31)
k](cid:9)F3(123)|ijk]a ,

i − e0

j − e0

i − e0

− e0

†
Iij (β) = [ij|F
Iijk (β) = [ijk|F

†

...

Ii1i2i3...iN = I (β) ,

is the kinetic energy of the Fermi gas state |i], t(i) = −∇2

where e0
i
kinetic energy operator and v(ij) is the two-body potential.

(1.33)
i /2m is the

1.3 Cluster expansion formalism

11

The observation that in the absence of interactions and correlations Iij reduces
to the product Iij = IiIj suggests to introduce the deviations from this simple
expression within a multiplicative scheme, which amounts to writing Iij = IiIjYij
[39]. Following this procedure one obtains

Ii (β) = Yi ,
Iij (β) = YiYjYij ,
Iijk (β) = YiYjYkYijYikYjk . . . ,

...

Ii1i2i3...iN =Y

Y

Y

Yi

Yij

i

i<i

i<j<k

Yijk . . . Y1...N .

(1.34)
(1.35)

Within the factor-cluster decomposition, log I(β) can be expressed as a sum of
logarithms, each of them involving exactly n orbitals in a connected manner, that
can therefore be identiﬁed as n-body cluster contributions.

Collecting the above results, the expectation value of the Hamiltonian can be

written as an expansion in the number of the correlated particles

E0 = TF +

(∆E)n ,

(∆E)n = X
Y

i1<...<in

log Yi1...in

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)β=0
Y

NX

n=2

∂
∂β

Y

(1.36)

(1.37)

.

with

Substituting the expression of the Y ’s in terms on the subnormalization integrals
(1.38)

Yi1...in = Ii1...in/

Ii1...in ,

Iij . . .

Ii

the n-body cluster contribution to the energy can be ﬁnally cast in the form

"

(∆E)n = X

i1<...<in

1

Ii1...in

∂
∂β

i

i<j

Ii1...in − nX

k=1

#

1

Ii1...ik

∂
∂β

Ii1...ik

.

β=0

(1.39)

We note that the terms accounting for the deviation of Ii1...in|β=0 from unity
are all O (1/N), or smaller, in the N → ∞ limit. Substituting the expression for
the I’s, expanding in powers of (1/N) and retaining the leading term, one obtains
the linked cluster expansion for the energy in the thermodynamic limit.

By way of example, we report the two-body cluster contribution

(∆E)2 = 1
2

X
t(1) + t(2), F2(12)i +h

ij

[ij|w2|ij]a ,

2(12), t(1) + t(2)i

F
†
+ F
2(12)v(12)F2(12) .

†

F2(12)

(1.40)

(1.41)

where

2(12)h

†

w2 = 1
2 F

1.3 Cluster expansion formalism

12

Each term of the expansion (1.36) can be represented by a diagram with n
vertices, representing the particles in the cluster, connected by lines corresponding
the dynamical and statistical correlations. As pointed out above, the terms in the
resulting diagrammatic expansion can be classiﬁed according to their topological
structure, and selected classes of diagrams can be summed up to all orders solving
the system of FHNC integral equations [27,28].

13

Chapter 2
The CBF eﬀective interaction

The approaches described in Chapter 1 can be merged. An eﬀective interaction can
in fact be derived within the formalism of correlated basis functions, and employed
to perform perturbative calculations in the basis of eigenstates of the non interacting
system. This procedure allows to properly take into account correlation eﬀects in a
simple manner, avoiding at the same time the problems arising from the use of non
orthogonal perturbation theory.

In Section 2.1 we will discuss the derivation of the CBF eﬀective interaction and
the central assumptions involved in this approach, while Section 2.2 will be focused
on the explicit derivation of the eﬀective interaction for the hard-sphere system.

2.1 Deﬁnition of the CBF eﬀective interaction
The formalism based on correlated basis functions and the cluster expansion tech-
nique, discussed in the previous chapter, has been recently employed to derive an
eﬀective interaction from a realistic nuclear Hamiltonian1.

As pointed out in Chapter 1, correlated states provide a non-orthogonal basis,
that can be orthogonalized using a complex procedure at the cost of introducing a
number of additional terms in the evaluation of matrix elements. The strategy un-
derlying the eﬀective interaction approach, aimed at simplifying the calculations and
circumventing the problem of non orthogonality corrections, amounts to exploiting
the correlated states to construct a well-behaved eﬀective interaction, whose matrix
elements between states of the non interacting system can be used in perturbation
theory.

The CBF eﬀective interaction

Veﬀ =X

j>i

veﬀ(rij) ,

is deﬁned through the relation
hHi ≈ 1

1
N

(0|H|0) ≡ TF + 1

[0F G|Veﬀ|0F G] ,

N

N

1 Realistic nucleon-nucleon potentials provide an accurate description of the properties of the

two-particle system, in both bound and scattering states.

(2.1)

(2.2)

2.2 CBF eﬀective interaction for the fermion hard-sphere systems

14

where N denotes the particle number, hHi is the true ground-state energy of the
system the and |0) is the correlated ground state deﬁned in Section 1.2. The ﬁrst
contribution to the right-hand side of Eq.(2.2) is the expectation value of the ki-
netic energy in the non interacting ground state, which in translationally invariant
systems reduces to a fully degenerate Fermi gas. In this case, TF = 3k2

The eﬀective interaction, deﬁned by Eq. (2.2), is designed to obtain the ground
state expectation value of the Hamiltonian at ﬁrst order of perturbation theory in
the Fermi gas basis. The procedure to construct veﬀ is based on the tenets that:

F /10m.

(i) an accurate estimate of hHi/N can be obtained using an advanced many-body

technique, e.g. the FHNC summation scheme;

(ii) the FHNC results, identiﬁed with hHi/N, can be reproduced expanding (0|H|0)

at two-body cluster level.

In the next section we will show that under the above conditions Eq. (2.2) is

fulﬁlled by construction.

The deﬁnition of veﬀ, requiring the equivalence between matrix elements, im-
plies that the eﬀective interaction incorporates the eﬀects of correlations. As a
consequence, unlike the bare potential, veﬀ is ﬁnite and well-behaved. It has to be
pointed out, however, that Eq. (2.2) deﬁnes the CBF eﬀective interaction not in
operator form, but in terms of its expectation value in the FG ground state.

The calculations discussed in this Thesis are largely based on the assumption—
that will be ultimately tested comparing our results to those obtained from al-
ternative many-body approaches—that perturbative calculations involving matrix
elements of between Fermi gas states provide accurate estimates of all properties of
the Fermi hard-sphere system.

2.2 CBF eﬀective interaction for the fermion hard-sphere

systems

In this section we describe the derivation of the eﬀective interaction of the Fermi
hard-sphere system obtained in Ref. [40], which will then be applied to the calcu-
lation of a variety of properties, including the energy per particle, the self-energy,
the eﬀective mass, the momentum distribution and the transport coeﬃcients.

2.2.1 The CBF eﬀective interaction ansatz
Because the hard-core potential only depends on the magnitude of the distance
between the interacting particles, an accurate description of correlation eﬀects can
be achieved using a simple Jastrow-type wave function, deﬁned as in Eq. (1.12) with

NY

j>i=1

F =

f(rij) ,

where f(r) satisﬁes the boundary conditions

f(rij ≤ a) = 0 ,

lim
rij→∞ f(rij) = 1 .

(2.3)

(2.4)

2.2 CBF eﬀective interaction for the fermion hard-sphere systems

15

The eﬀective interaction is derived following the procedure originally proposed
in Refs. [41,42]. The expectation value of the Hamiltonian in the correlated ground
state appearing in left-hand side of Eq. (2.2) is expanded keeping the two-body
cluster contribution only, which amounts to setting

1
N

(0|H|0) = TF + (∆E)2 .

(2.5)

Since the correlation operator is assumed to be hermitian, the two-body operator
appearing in Eq. (1.40) reduces to

F2(12), [t(1) + t(2), F2(12)]i + F2
h
h[∇f(r)]2 + v(r)f 2(r)i(cid:20)
Z

d3r

1
m

2(12)v(12) ,

(cid:21)

,

‘2(kF r)

1 − 1

ν

w2 =1
2

(∆E)2 = ρ
2

implying (F2(12) = f(r) , r = r12)

(2.6)

(2.7)

where the Slater function ‘(x)—trivially related to the density matrix of the non
interacting Fermi gas, deﬁned according to Eq. (1.29)—is given by

‘(x) = 3

x3 (sin x − x cos x) .

(2.8)

The details of the calculations leading to Eq. (2.7) are given in Appendix B.

On the other hand, the expectation value of the eﬀective potential Veﬀ in the
FG ground-state, the calculation of which is also discussed in Appendix B, can be
written in the form

Z

1
N

[0F G|Veﬀ|0F G] = ρ
2

(cid:20)
1 − 1

ν

(cid:21)

d3r veﬀ(r)

‘2(kF r)

.

(2.9)

From Eqs. (2.5), (2.7) and (2.9), it follows that, to the extent to which for a

suitable choice of the correlation function

1
N

hHi = TF + (∆E)2 ,

Eq. (2.2), can be fulﬁlled with veﬀ given by

veﬀ(r) = 1

m

[∇f(r)]2 + v(r)f 2(r) .

(2.10)

(2.11)

In the case of the hard-sphere system, because the correlation function is nonzero
only in the region where v(r) = 0, the above equation reduces to

veﬀ(r) = 1

m

[∇f(r)]2

,

r > a .

(2.12)

We emphasise again that the procedure leading to Eq.(2.12) rests on the premise
that the true ground state energy of the system can be accurately evaluated using
some advanced many-body technique.
In the following, hHi will be obtained using the variational FHNC scheme or
Monte Carlo (MC) techniques. Within the FHNC approach, based on the cluster

2.2 CBF eﬀective interaction for the fermion hard-sphere systems

16

expansion formalism, the calculation of hHi requires the solution of a set of integral
equations taking into account the relevant cluster contributions to all orders. The
MC approach, on the other hand, allows for a brute-force calculation of the Hamil-
tonian expectation value in the correlated ground state (Variational Monte Carlo,
or VMC) as well for the determination of the true ground-state energy (Diﬀusion
Monte Carlo, or DMC). The main features of the VMC and DMC schemes will be
outlined in Chapter 4.

The advantage of the eﬀective interaction is that it can be used to obtain a
variety of properties whose calculations within the FHNC approach involves severe
diﬃculties.

2.2.2 Determination of the correlation function
Equation (2.12) clearly shows that the eﬀective interaction of the hard-sphere system
is completely determined by the correlation function f(r).

The shape of f(r) is obtained by functional minimization of the expectation
value of the Hamiltonian in the correlated ground state. Within the two-body
cluster approximation, this procedure yields an Euler–Lagrange equation, to be
solved with the boundary conditions dictated by the hard-core potential, as well as
by the requirement that correlation eﬀects vanish for large separation distances

f(r ≤ a) = 0 ,

f(r ≥ d) = 1 .

The additional constraint

f0(d) = 0

(2.13)

(2.14)

that can be fulﬁlled introducing a Lagrange multiplier λ, enforces continuity of the
derivative of the correlation function at r = d.

The details of the procedure of functional minimization can be found in Ap-

pendix C. Here, we report the resulting Euler–Lagrange equation

(cid:20)Φ00(r)
Φ(r) + mλ

(cid:21)

= 0 ,

g00(r) − g(r)

(2.15)

(2.16)

(2.17)

where

with

g(r) = f(r)Φ(r) ,

r

Φ(r) ≡ r

1 − 1

ν

‘2(kF r) .

For any given values of density and correlation range, d, Eq.(2.15) can be solved
numerically to obtain the correlation function f(r), with the lagrange multiplier
λ adjusted so that Eq.(2.14) is satisﬁed. The interaction range d is the only free
parameter.
It is usually referred to as healing distance, since at r = d the two-
particle wave-function “heals”, smoothly reducing to the wave function describing
non interacting particles.

2.2 CBF eﬀective interaction for the fermion hard-sphere systems

17

Within the variational approach, d is determined minimising the FHNC ground
state energy. This scheme has provided accurate upper bounds to the energies of
a variety of interacting many-body systems, including liquid helium [43], nuclear
and neutron matter [44] and the Fermi hard-sphere system [45,46]. Based on these
results, we have have carried out FHNC calculations of the expectation value (0|H|0)
of the hard-sphere system, to be used for the determination of the corresponding
CBF eﬀective interaction from Eq.(2.2).
We have considered a system of particles of mass m = 1 fm−1 and degeneracy

ν = 4, and set the hard core radius to a = 1 fm.

Figure 2.1 shows the radial dependence of the correlation functions obtained
from minimisation of the FHNC ground state energy at diﬀerent densities, corre-
sponding to c = kF a =0.3, 0.5 and 0.7, respectively. It clearly appears that, as it
was to be expected, the correlation range d is a decreasing function of density.

Figure 2.1. Radial dependence of the correlation functions obtained from the solution of
the Euler-Lagrange equation (2.15). The solid, dashed and dot-dash lines correspond
to c = kF a =0.3, 0.5 and 0.7, respectively.

As mentioned above, the ground state energy of the hard-sphere system has
been evaluated solving the FHNC integral equations, in which the contribution of
the class of diagrams referred to as “elementary diagrams” is neglected.

Following Ref. [45], the ground state energy can be conveniently written in terms
of the dimensionless quantity ζ, parametrizing the deviation from the corresponding
FG result, deﬁned through the equation
E0 = 3k2
F
10m

(1 + ζ) .

(2.18)

Figure 2.2 reports a comparison between the density dependence of ζ obtained
within the FHNC scheme and that predicted by the perturbative low-density ex-

2.2 CBF eﬀective interaction for the fermion hard-sphere systems

18

pansion of Eq. (1.8b)
c + 12

ζ = 5
3

35π2 (11 − 2 ln 2) c2 + 0.78c3 + 32
9π3

(cid:20) 2

π

(cid:16)4π − 3

3(cid:17)

√

(cid:21)

c4 ln c

.

(2.19)

For reference, we also show, by the diamonds, the perturbative values of ζ obtained
including only contributions up to order c3.

It clearly appears that at low c, corresponding to low density, the predictions of
the two approaches are very close to one another. At c = 0.2 (0.3), the diﬀerence in
ζ turns out to be less than 5% (7%), which translates into an energy diﬀerence of
less than 1% (2%). The more signiﬁcant discrepancies observed at higher values of c
may be ascribed to a failure of the low-density expansion, although the observation
that including the term of order c4 log c leads to a decrease of ζ suggests that the
contribution of cluster terms not taken into account within the FHNC scheme may
also play a role. Note, however, that the full line representing the FHNC results lies
consistently above the perturbative results. This pattern supports the assumption
that the approximations involved in the FHNC calculation of the ground state
expectation value of the Hamiltonian do not spoil its upper bound character.

Figure 2.2. The full line shows the c-dependence of the dimensionless quantity ζ, deﬁned
by Eq. (2.18), obtained within the FHNC approach for the system of hard spheres of
radius a = 1 fm, mass m = 1 fm−1 and degeneracy ν = 4. The results obtained from
the low-density expansion of Eq. (2.19) are represented by the dashed line, while the
diamonds correspond to the perturbative estimates of ζ computed neglecting terms of
order higher than c3.

2.2.3 Determination of veﬀ
As pointed out above, the determination of the CBF eﬀective interaction and the
many-body technique employed to obtain the ground state energy are conceptually

2.2 CBF eﬀective interaction for the fermion hard-sphere systems

19

independent. The FHNC summation scheme is , in fact, just one of the possible
methods that can be employed to estimate the left hand side of Eq. (2.5). It should
be kept in mind that, while it turned out to be well suited in the range of densities
considered in our study, its accuracy is likely to worsen at higher values of ρ.

Within our scheme, the eﬀective interaction must reproduce the FHNC ground
state energy at ﬁrst order of perturbation theory in the Fermi gas basis. This goal
is achieved by adjusting the range of the correlation function entering the deﬁnition
of veﬀ, Eq. (2.12), in such a way that hHi/N, deﬁned by Eqs. (2.5)-(2.7), coincide
with the FHNC result.

In Fig. 2.3, the correlation range resulting from minimisation of the FHNC
ground state energy is compared to that employed to obtain the CBF eﬀective
interaction, as a function of the dimensionless variable c. The range of the eﬀective
interaction turns out to be sizeably smaller than the correlation range obtained from
the variational calculation for all values of c, the diﬀerence being ∼ 35 ÷ 40%. This
result is consistent with the observation that the two-body cluster approximation
underestimates the FHNC energy. Therefore, reproducing the FHNC result at two-
body cluster level requires a shorter correlation range, leading a steeper correlation
function which in turn corresponds to a stronger eﬀective interaction.

Figure 2.3. The full line shows the c-dependence of the correlation range, d, resulting from
minimisation of the ground state energy of the hard-sphere system computed within
the FHNC approach. The dashed line corresponds to the correlation range employed
to obtain the CBF eﬀective interaction of Eq. (2.12).

The radial dependence of the eﬀective interaction deﬁned by Eq. (2.12) is illus-
trated in Fig. 2.4 for three diﬀerent values of the dimensionless variable c. Note
that the region (r/a) < 1, where veﬀ(r) = 0, is not shown. The shape of veﬀ sim-
ply reﬂects the fact that, as the Fermi momentum increases, the correlation range,
displayed in Fig. 2.3, decreases, and the slope of the correlation function increases.

2.2 CBF eﬀective interaction for the fermion hard-sphere systems

20

Figure 2.4. Radial dependence of the eﬀective interaction deﬁned by Eq. (2.12). The
dot-dash, solid and dashed lines correspond to c = kF a = 0.3, 0.5 and 0.7, respectively.
The region (r/a) < 1, where veﬀ(r) = 0, is not shown.

21

Chapter 3
Equilibrium properties of the
fermion hard-sphere systems

The eﬀective interaction deﬁned in Chapter 2 is designed to reproduce the ground-
state expectation value of the Hamiltonian at ﬁrst order of perturbation theory in
the Fermi gas basis. As pointed out above, the CBF eﬀective interaction approach is
based on the assumption that all properties of the system can be obtained through
perturbative calculations in the Fermi gas basis employing the eﬀective potential
veﬀ. This amounts to assuming that, while being deﬁned from the expectation value
of the Hamiltonian in the correlated ground state, the eﬀective interaction can be
also employed in calculations of matrix elements involving excited states. To gauge
the reliability of this scheme, we have studied a number of equilibrium properties of
the fermion hard-sphere system, and compared our results to those obtained from
diﬀerent many-body approaches.

Section 3.1 will be devoted to the discussion of the two-point Green’s function
and to the perturbative calculation of the real and imaginary parts of the self-energy.
The numerical results of the calculations of the quasiparticle spectrum, the eﬀective
mass and the momentum distribution will be reported and analysed in Sections 3.2
and 3.3, respectively.

3.1 Self-Energy
The two-point Green’s function G, embodying all information on single-particle
properties of many-body systems, is obtained from Dyson’s equation [47,48]

G(k, E) = G0(k, E) + G0(k, E)Σ(k, E)G(k, E) ,

(3.1)
where G0 is the Green’s function of the non interacting Fermi gas, the expression
of which reads

G0(k, E) = θ(k − kF )
E − e0(k) + iη

+ θ(kF − k)
E − e0(k) − iη

.

(3.2)

In the above equation, η = 0+, e0(k) = k2/2m, θ(x) is the Heaviside step function,
and the two terms in the right-hand side describe the propagation of particles (k >
kF ) and holes (k < kF ).

3.1 Self-Energy

22

The irreducible, or proper, self-energy Σ(k, E) takes into account the eﬀect of
interactions.
In the language of the diagrammatic representation of the Green’s
function, the self-energy corresponds to any part of a diagram which is connected
to the rest by two G0-lines. The diagrams contributing to the irreducible self-energy,
on the other hand, are those that cannot be divided into two parts joined by only
one G0-line.

Dyson’s equation leads to the following expression of the full Green’s function

G(k, E) =

1

E − e0(k) − Σ(k, E) .

(3.3)

As we will see, the singularities of Eq.
(3.3) fully determine the single-particle
spectrum of the system. The proper self-energy, also referred to as mass operator,
can be evaluated in perturbation theory carrying out an expansion in powers of the
interaction potential, whose terms can be conveniently represented by diagrams.
The resulting expression can be written in the form

Σ(k, E) = Σ(1)(k) + Σ(2)(k, E) + . . . .

(3.4)

Note that the insertion of any ﬁnite order approximation to Σ in Dyson’s integral
equation (3.1) leads to a Green’s function including interactions at all orders.

The diagrammatic representation of the irreducible self-energy expansion up to
second order terms is reported in Fig. 3.1. For the sake of simplicity, we only show
the contribution of direct diagrams (see below).

(a) ΣHF (k)

(b) Σ2p1h(k, E)

(c) Σ2h1p(k, E)

Figure 3.1. Diagrammatic representation of the direct part of the ﬁrst and second order
contributions to the irreducible self-energy. Panels (a), (b) and (c) correspond to the
Hartree-Fock, polarisation and correlation terms, respectively. Dashed lines represent
the CBF eﬀective interaction, while upward and downward oriented solid lines depict
the free propagation of particle and hole states, respectively.

The ﬁrst order term, represented by diagram (a), is the usual Hartree Fock con-
tribution, while the second order terms, corresponding to diagrams (b) and (c),
involve two-particle–one-hole or two-hole–one-particle intermediate states. They
are referred to as polarization and correlation contributions, respectively.

k!qk!q!qk!q!3.1 Self-Energy

23

The Hartree-Fock approximation for the self-energy leads to a real and energy

independent contribution, whose analytical expression reads

<(k0)[kσ k0σ0|veﬀ|kσ k0σ0]a ,
n0

(3.5)

ΣHF (k) = 1

ν

X

σ,k0σ0

<(k) = θ(kF − k), the two-particle state is antisymmetrised according to
2, and the index σ labels the discrete quantum numbers

where n0
√
|α βia = (|α βi − |β αi)/
specifying the state of a particle carrying momentum k.

The explicit expression of the polarisation and correlation contributions are (see

Fig. 3.1)

Σ2p1h (k, E) = m
ν

and

Σ2h1p (k, E) = m
ν

X

σ,k0σ0,qτ,q0τ0

X

σ,k0σ0,qτ,q0τ0

|[qτ q0τ0|veﬀ|kσ k0σ0]a|2
q2 + q02 − k02 − 2mE − iη

|[qτ q0τ0|veﬀ|kσ k0σ0]a|2
k02 − q2 − q02 + 2mE − iη

n0
>(q)n0

>(q0)n0

<(k0) ,

(3.6)

n0
<(q)n0

<(q0)n0

>(k0) ,

(3.7)
>(k) = θ(k − kF ). Equations (3.6) and (3.7) show that, as the eﬀective
with n0
interaction is diagonal in the space of the discrete quantum numbers, the self-energy
does not depend on σ.

Imaginary part

3.1.1
The above contributions to the self-energy are complex quantities. The correspond-
ing real and imaginary parts can be easily identiﬁed using the relation

= P

∓ iπδ(x) ,

(3.8)

1

x ± iη
X

σ,k0σ0,
qτ,q0τ0

X

σ,k0σ0,
qτ,q0τ0

The resulting imaginary part of Eq. (3.6)

Im Σ2p1h (k, E) = π

m
ν

|[qτ q0τ0|veﬀ|kσ k0σ0]a|2 δ(q2 + q02 − k02 − 2mE)

<(k0) ,
is non vanishing in the energy range E > F , with F = k2
On the other hand, the imaginary part of Σ2h1p of Eq. (3.7)

>(q0) n0

>(q) n0

× n0

F /2m.

(3.9)

Im Σ2h1p (k, E) = π

m
ν

|[qτ q0τ0|veﬀ|kσ k0σ0]a|2 δ(k02 − q2 − q02 − 2mE)

× n0

<(q) n0

<(q0) n0

>(k0) ,

(3.10)

(cid:18) 1

(cid:19)

x

is not vanishing for E < F .

3.1 Self-Energy

The details of the calculation of the matrix element

[qτ q0τ0|veﬀ|kσ k0σ0]a ,

24

(3.11)

as well as the explicit expression of the imaginary part of the polarization and
correlation contributions to the self-energy can be found in Appendix D. They
have been evaluated numerically, using the multidimensional integration routines
provided in the CUBA library [49]. We have emptied the VEGAS Monte Carlo
algorithm, exploiting a variance-reduction technique based on importance sampling.
Figure 3.2 shows the behaviour of the imaginary part of Σ(k, E) corresponding to
c = 0.3, computed at E = k2/2m and displayed as a function of the dimensionless
variable k/kF . For comparison, we also show the same quantities computed by
Sartor and Mahaux using the low-density expansion and including terms up to
order c2 [8].

Figure

3.2.

Imaginary part

of

(cid:0)k > kF , k2/2m(cid:1), computed at c = 0.3 and displayed as a function of the dimen-

Σ2p1h
sionless variable k/kF . The solid and dashed lines correspond to the results obtained
from the CBF eﬀective interaction and from the low-density expansion of Ref. [8], re-
spectively.

the quantities Σ2h1p

(cid:0)k < kF , k2/2m(cid:1)

and

The energy dependence of the imaginary part of the second order contributions
to the self-energy is illustrated in Fig. 3.3, showing the results at c = 0.5 for three
diﬀerent values of momentum, corresponding to k/kF =1/2 (solid line), 1 (dashed
line) and 3/2 (dot-dash line).

3.1 Self-Energy

25

Figure 3.3. Energy dependence of the imaginary part of the polarisation (2mE/k2

F > 1)
F < 1) contributions to the self-energy of the Fermi hard-sphere
and correlation (2mE/k2
system at c = 0.5. The dashed, solid and dot-dash lines correspond to k/kF = 0.5, 1
and 1.5, respectively.

3.2 Quasiparticle spectrum and eﬀective mass

26

3.2 Quasiparticle spectrum and eﬀective mass
The self-energy computed at second order in the CBF eﬀective interaction, discussed
in the previous section, has been used to obtain the single particle spectrum, eﬀective
mass and momentum distribution of the Fermi hard-sphere system of degeneracy
ν=4.

The conceptual framework for the identiﬁcation of single particle properties in
interacting many-body systems is laid down in Landau’s theory of liquid 3He (see,
e.g. Ref. [50]), based on the tenet that there is a one-to-one correspondence between
the elementary excitations of a Fermi liquid, dubbed quasiparticles, and those of
the non interacting Fermi gas.
their energy, e(k) and lifetime τk = Γ−1
k .
function describing the propagation of quasiparticles can be written in the form

In unpolarized systems, quasiparticle states of momentum k are speciﬁed by
In the limit of small Γk, the Green’s

G(k, E) =

Zk

E − e(k) + iΓk

.

(3.12)

A comparison between the above expression and Eq.(3.3) clearly shows that quasi-
particle properties can be readily related to the real and imaginary parts of the
self-energy.

The energy of a quasiparticle of momentum k, e(k), is obtained solving the

equation

e(k) = e0(k) + Re Σ[k, e(k)] .

(3.13)

Substitution of Eq. (3.5) in Eq. (3.13) yields the Hartee-Fock spectrum, represented
by the dashed lines of Fig. 3.4, while the results obtained including the second
order corrections to the self-energy are displayed by full lines. For comparison, the
dot-dash lines show the kinetic energy spectrum.

From Eqs. (3.3) and (3.12) it also follows that the quasiparticle lifetime is related

to the self-energy through

where

τ−1
k = Γk = ZkIm Σ[k, e(k)] ,
(cid:20)
1 − ∂
∂E

Re Σ(k, E)

(cid:21)−1

E=e(k)

Zk =

(3.14)

(3.15)

,

is the residue of the Green’s function of Eq. (3.12) at the quasiparticle pole.

Equations (3.13) and (3.14) are obtained expanding the energy of the quasi-
particle pole in powers of Γk, and keeping the linear term only. Note that the
resulting expressions of e(k) and Γk obtained using the second order self-energy are
not second order quantities.

The quasiparticle spectrum is conveniently parametrized in terms of the eﬀective
mass m?, deﬁned by Eq. (1.4). The total derivative of e = e(k) is performed
using Eq. (3.13), and keeping in mind that, since Re Σ(k, E) is evaluated at the

3.2 Quasiparticle spectrum and eﬀective mass

27

Figure 3.4. Quasiparticle energy, computed from Eq. (3.13) at c = 0.2 [panel (A)] and 0.5
[panel(B)]. The dashed and solid lines correspond to the ﬁrst order (i.e. Hartree-Fock)
and second order approximations to the self-energy, respectively. For comparison, the
dot-dash lines show the kinetic energy spectrum.

3.3 Momentum distributions

28

quasiparticle pole, k and E are not independent of one another. As a consequence,
one ﬁnds

implying

de
dk

(cid:20) k

m

de
dk

=

= k
m

+ ∂
∂k

Re Σ(k, e) + ∂
∂e

Re Σ(k, e) de
dk

,

(3.16)

(cid:21)(cid:20)

1 − ∂
∂E

+ ∂
∂k

Re Σ(k, E)

(cid:21)−1

E=e(k)

Re Σ(k, E)

.

(3.17)

At ﬁrst order the self-energy depends on k only, and the above equation reduces to

de
dk

= k
m

+ ∂ΣHF (k)

∂k

,

(3.18)

with ΣHF given by Eq. (3.5).

The dot-dash and solid lines of Fig. 3.5 show the c-dependence of the ratio
m?(kF )/m, evaluated using the self energy computed at ﬁrst and second order in the
CBF eﬀective interaction, respectively. It is apparent that inclusion of the energy-
dependent contributions to the self-energy, resulting in a moderate correction to
the spectra of Fig. 3.4, leads instead to a drastic change in the behaviour of the
eﬀective mass. While in the Hartee-Fock approximation the ratio m?(kF )/m is less
than one and monotonically decreasing with c, the full result turns out to be larger
than one and monotonically increasing.

The dashed line of Fig. 3.5, representing the ratio obtained from the low-density
expansion at order c2, Eq. (1.9), exhibits the same features as the solid line. The
low-density expansion appears to provide quite accurate results for c <∼ 0.3. A
comparison with Fig. 2.2 suggests that in the case of the ground state energy the
inclusion of higher order contributions extends the range of applicability of the
expansion to c <∼ 0.4.

It is worth pointing out that the striking diﬀerences between the eﬀective masses
computed using the ﬁrst and second order expressions of the self-energy are a con-
sequence of their diﬀerent functional dependences. While the former is a function
of momentum only, the latter depends on both momentum and energy. Because
the enhancement of the eﬀective mass, as well as the modiﬁcation of its behaviour
as a function of density, arise from the appearance of the energy dependence, it is
arguable that the inclusion of higher order terms would result in small corrections.

3.3 Momentum distributions
In translationally invariant systems, the momentum distribution, n(k), describes
the occupation probability of the single-particle state of momentum k.

The connection between n(k) and the Green’s function, or the self-energy, can
be best understood introducing the spectral functions appearing in the Lehmann
representation of the two-point Green’s function (see, e.g., Refs. [6,48])

dE0 (cid:20)

Z ∞

0

G(k, E) =

Pp(k, E)

E − E0 − µ + iη

+

Ph(k, E)

E + E0 − µ − iη

,

(3.19)

(cid:21)

3.3 Momentum distributions

29

Figure 3.5. c-dependence of the ratio m?(kF )/m, obtained from Eqs. (1.4) and (3.13).
The dot-dash and solid lines represent the results of calculations carried out using the
ﬁrst and second order approximations to the self-energy. For comparison, the dashed
line shows the results computed using the low-density expansion of Eq. (1.9).

where µ = e(kF ) denotes the chemical potential.

The particle (hole) spectral function Pp(k, E) [Ph(k, E)] yields the probability
of adding to (removing from) the ground state a particle of momentum k, leaving
the resulting (N + 1)- [(N − 1)-] particle system with energy E. It follows that

n(k) =

dEPh(k, E) = 1 −

dEPp(k, E) .

(3.20)

Z ∞

0

Z ∞

0

The momentum distribution obtained from Eq. (3.20), with
Ph(k, E) = 1
= 1

Im G(k, µ − E)

ImΣ(k, µ − E)

[µ − E − e0(k) − ReΣ(k, µ − E)]2 + [ImΣ(k, µ − E)]2 ,

π

π

and

Pp(k, E) = − 1
= − 1

π

π

Im G(k, µ + E)

[µ + E − e0(k) − ReΣ(k, µ + E)]2 + [ImΣ(k, µ + E)]2 ,

ImΣ(k, µ + E)

can be cast in the form [51]

n(k) = Zkθ(kF − k) + δn(k) .

(3.21)

(3.22)

(3.23)

The ﬁrst term in the right-hand side of the above equation, with Zk deﬁned by
Eq. (3.15), originates from the quasiparticle pole in Eq. (3.12), while δn(k) is a
smooth contribution, extending to momenta both below and above kF , arising from

3.3 Momentum distributions

30

more complex excitations of the system. Equation (3.23) shows that the disconti-
nuity of n(k) at k = kF is given by

(3.24)
At second order in the eﬀective interaction, the momentum distribution obtained

n(kF − η) − n(kF + η) = ZkF = Z .

from Eqs.(3.19)-(3.22) can be conveniently written in the form

where n<(k > kF ) = n>(k < kF ) = 0, and

n(k) = n<(k) + n>(k) ,

n<(k < kF ) = 1 +

n>(k > kF ) = −

(cid:20) ∂
(cid:20) ∂

∂E

(cid:21)

ReΣ2p1h(k, E)

∂E
ReΣ2h1p(k, E)

(cid:21)

E=e0(k)

.

E=e0(k)

(3.25)

(3.26)

(3.27)

,

Note that the above equations imply that within the Hartree-Fock approximation
n(k) = θ(kF − k), and Z = 1.

Figure 3.6. Momentum distributions computed at second order in the CBF eﬀective
interactions, for three diﬀerent values of c = kF a. The values of the discontinuity
corresponding c = 0.3, 0.5 and 0.7 are 0.92, 0.72 and 0.28, respectively.

Figure 4.9 shows the momentum distributions obtained including contributions
up to second order in the CBF eﬀective interaction, for three diﬀerent values of the
dimensionless parameter c. It clearly appears that the deviation from the Fermi gas
result rapidly increases with density. A measure of interaction eﬀects is provided
by the discontinuity Z, shown in Fig. 3.7 as a function of c.

3.3 Momentum distributions

31

Figure 3.7. Discontinuity of the momentum distribution of the Fermi hard-sphere system,

as a function of c = kF a.

In Fig. 3.8 we compare the momentum distribution resulting from our calcula-
tion, represented by the solid line, to those reported in Ref. [45] for c = 0.4. The
dashed line shows the results computed using the variational wave function obtained
from minimisation of the ground state energy within the FHNC scheme, while the
crosses correspond to the predictions of the the low-density expansion discussed in
Refs. [3, 7–9] (see Appendix A), including contributions up to order c2. Note that
the values of n(k > kF ) are multiplied by a factor 10.

It clearly appears that the variational approach sizeably underestimates inter-
action eﬀects, and fails to provide the correct logarithmic behaviour at k close to
the Fermi momentum. On the other hand, the momentum distributions obtained
from the CBF eﬀective interaction and from the low-density expansion are in close
agreement at k < kF and exhibit discontinuities that turn out to be within ∼ 3%
of one another.

The kinetic energy computed using the variational n(k) exactly agrees with the
variational energy. On the other hand, the result obtained from the perturbative
momentum distribution does not necessarily reproduce the kinetic energy calculated
using the eﬀective interaction, Eq. (2.2), which coincides with the variational energy
by deﬁnition.

In Fig. 3.9, the diﬀerence between the momentum distribution computed using
the eﬀective interaction and that obtained from the low-density expansion is illus-
trated for diﬀerent values of c, ranging from 0.2 to 0.6. The emerging picture is
consistent with that observed in Figs. 2.2 and 3.5, and suggests that the low density
expansion provides accurate predictions for c <∼ 0.3. Sizable discrepancies appear at

3.3 Momentum distributions

32

Figure 3.8. Momentum distribution of the Fermi hard-sphere system at c = 0.4. Solid
line: results obtained at second order in the CBF eﬀective interaction; dashed line:
variational results of Ref. [45]; crosses: results of the low-density expansion at order c2.
All values of n(k > kF ) are multiplied by a factor 10.

3.3 Momentum distributions

33

larger values of c, most notably in the vicinity of the Fermi surface.

Figure 3.9. Comparison between the momentum distribution obtained from the CBF
eﬀective interactions (crosses) and the low-density expansion discussed in Refs. [3, 8]
(diamonds), for diﬀerent values of the dimensionless parameter c = kF a. Panels (A)
and (B) correspond to the regions k < kF and k > kF , respectively.

In order to establish a correspondence between the hard-sphere system and
isospin symmetric nuclear matter at equilibrium density, we have analysed the cor-
responding momentum distributions. In Fig. 3.10 the results of our calculations at
c = 0.55 are compared to the results of the the calculation of Fantoni and Pandhari-
pande [52], carried out using a correlated wave function and including second order
contributions in CBF perturbation theory. Note that the approach of Ref. [52] is
conceptually very similar to ours, although the eﬀects of correlations are taken into
account modifying the basis states, instead of replacing the bare potential with an
eﬀective interaction.
It appears that, as far as the momentum distribution is concerned, the system of
hard spheres of radius a = 1 fm and kF = 0.55 fm−1 corresponds to nuclear matter
at density ρNM = 0.16 fm−3, or Fermi momentum kF = 1.33 fm−1. Because
n(k) is mainly determined by the dimensionless parameter c = kF a, the results
of Fig. 3.10 suggest that nucleons in nuclear matter behave like hard spheres of
radius a = 0.55/1.33 ≈ 0.4 fm. A comparison with nuclear matter momentum
distributions obtained from other methods [53] leads to the same conclusion.

Note that, because the momentum distribution provides a measure of the occu-

3.3 Momentum distributions

34

Figure 3.10. Comparison between the momentum distribution of the Fermi hard-
sphere system obtained from the eﬀective interaction approach discussed in this article
(squares) and that of isospin symmetric nuclear matter at equilibrium density reported
in Ref. [52] (solid line), computed using correlated wave functions and second order
CBF perturbation theory.

3.3 Momentum distributions

35

pation probability of single particle levels, the deviations of n(k) from the prediction
of the Fermi gas model reﬂect the occurrence of virtual scattering processes involv-
ing pairs of strongly correlated particles, leading to their excitation to states outside
the Fermi sea. Therefore, our results suggest that these processes are mainly driven
by the short-range repulsive core of the nucleon-nucleon interaction. On the other
hand, the crude description in terms of hard spheres is not expected to explain
nuclear matter properties driven by low momentum, i.e. long distance, physics. In
this context, it is worth mentioning that the discussion of the hard-core model of
nuclear matter of Ref. [47], based on the solution of the Bethe-Goldstone equation,
also assumes a hard-core radius a = 0.4 fm.

36

Chapter 4
Transport properties of the
fermion hard-sphere systems

In this chapter we will discuss the application of the approach based on the CBF
eﬀective interaction to the calculation of transport coeﬃcients, focusing on shear
viscosity and thermal conductivity. Because these properties are of paramount
importance in astrophysical applications, we will concentrate on the hard-sphere
system of degeneracy ν = 2, which can be seen as a model of pure neutron matter.
It should be kept in mind, however, that this analogy is limited to densities below
the solidiﬁcation point. The analysis of Ref. [54] indicates that for ν=2 solidiﬁca-
tion occurs at a density ρs such that ρsa=0.23. Moreover, at subnuclear densities
nuclear matter is known to undergo transitions to superﬂuid and/or superconduct-
ing phases, which are not allowed by the purely repulsive interaction. Theoretical
studies suggest that neutron matter becomes superﬂuid at density <∼0.08 fm−3 [55].
As in the previous chapters, the mass of the particles and the hard-core radius
will be set to m = 1 fm−1 and a = 1 fm, respectively.

4.1 Landau–Abrikosov–Khalatnikov formalism
We follow the approach based on Landau’s theory of normal Fermi liquids (see, e.g.,
Ref. [56]), originally developed by Abrikosov and Khalatnikov [57,58]. Within this
scheme, the shear viscosity and thermal conductivity coeﬃcients—denoted η and κ,
respectively—are determined from the momentum and energy ﬂuxes obtained from
the kinetic equation for the distribution function, nk, which can be written in the
form

∂nk
∂t

+ ∂nk

∂r · ∂k

∂k − ∂nk

∂k · ∂k

∂r = I[nk] ,

(4.1)

In the above equation, k is the energy of a quasiparticle carrying momentum k,
while I[nk] is the collision integral, the deﬁnition of which involves the in medium
scattering probability W.

In general, the scattering probability depends on the initial and ﬁnal momenta
of the particles participating in the process. In the low-temperature limit, however,
the system is strongly degenerate, and only quasiparticles occupying states in the

4.1 Landau–Abrikosov–Khalatnikov formalism

37

vicinity of the Fermi surface can be involved in interactions. As a consequence, the
magnitudes of their momenta can be all set equal to the Fermi momentum, and
W reduces to a function of only two angular variables, θ and φ. The former is
the angle between the initial momenta, whereas the latter is the angle between the
planes speciﬁed by the initial and ﬁnal momenta, respectively.

The above procedure leads to the expressions [57,58]

and

ηAK = 16
15

1
T 2

k5
F
m?4

1

hWi(1 − λη) ,

κAK = 16
3

1
T

π2k3
F
m?4

1

hWi(3 − λκ)

where T is the temperature,

and the angular average is deﬁned according to

λη = hW[1 − 3 sin4(θ/2) sin2 φ]i
Z dΩ

hWi

hWi =

W(θ, φ)
cos θ/2 ,

2π

λκ = hW(1 + 2 cos θ)i

hWi

,

,

(4.2)

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

with dΩ = sin θdθdφ. Note that, as we are considering a system of identical particles,
the angular integration is normalised to 2π.

In the above equations, corresponding to the leading terms of low-temperature
expansions, m? denotes the quasiparticle eﬀective mass evaluated at momentum
such that |k| = kF . Note that the shear viscosity and thermal conductivity coeﬃ-
cients exhibit diﬀerent T-dependence.

The quasiparticle lifetime τ can also be written in terms of the angular average

of the scattering probability, Eq. (4.5), according to

τ = 1
T 2

8π4
m?3

1
hWi .

(4.6)

Corrections to the Abrikosov-Khalatnikov results were derived by Brooker and

Sykes in the late 1980 [59]. Their ﬁnal results can be cast in the form

and

η = ηAK

κ = κAK

1 − λη

4

3 − λκ

4

4k + 3

(k + 1)(2k + 1)[(k + 1)(2k + 1) − λη] ,

4k + 5

(k + 1)(2k + 3)[(k + 1)(2k + 3) − λκ] .

(4.7)

(4.8)

∞X
∞X

k=0

k=0

The eﬀect of the corrections, measured by the ratio between the results of Ref. [59]
and those of Ref. [57, 58], while being small to moderate on viscosity, turns out
to be large on thermal conductivity. One ﬁnds 0.750 < (η/ηAK) < 0.925, and
0.417 < (κ/κAK) < 0.561.

Equations (4.7) and (4.8) show that the input required to obtain η and κ in-
cludes the eﬀective mass, the calculation of which has been discussed in Chapter 3,
and the in medium scattering probability, which can be readily obtained in Born
approximation using the CBF eﬀective interaction.

4.2 Calculation of the transport coeﬃcients

38

4.2 Calculation of the transport coeﬃcients
Before focusing on the eﬀective masses and scattering probabilities employed in the
calculation of the transport coeﬃcients, we brieﬂy discuss the derivation of the CBF
eﬀective interaction for the hard-sphere system of degeneracy ν = 2, which turned
out to exhibit a signiﬁcant distinctive feature, with respect to the case ν = 4.

4.2.1 Eﬀective interaction for the hard-sphere system with ν = 2
The CBF eﬀective interaction is fully determined from the correlation function f(r),
which is in turn obtained solving the Euler–Lagrange equation (2.15). Equations
(2.16) and (2.17) clearly show that f(r) depends on the degeneracy of the system
through the coeﬃcient of the Slater function describing statistical correlations. The
lower the degeneracy of the system the larger the eﬀect of these correlations, the
range of which monotonically increases as the density of the system decreases. As a
consequence, in the low-density region the determination of f(r) from the numerical
solution of Eq. (2.15) with ν = 2 is hindered by the presence of long-range statistical
correlations, whose eﬀect is much larger than in the case ν = 4.

Owing to the above diﬃculty, at c < 0.5, the ground-state energy computed
within the FHNC scheme does not develop a clear minimum as a function of the
variational parameter d. To overcome this problem, and obtain the accurate es-
timate of hHi needed to determine the CBF eﬀective interaction at all densities,
we have replaced the FHNC variational estimate with the ground state expectation
value of the Hamiltonian resulting from Diﬀusion Monte Carlo (DMC) calculations.
In addition, we have used the results of the Variational Monte Carlo (VMC) ap-
proach to gauge the accuracy of the FHNC approach at c ≥ 0.5.

Within VMC, the multidimensional integrations involved in the calculation of
the expectation value of the Hamiltonian in the correlated ground-state is evaluated
using Metropolis Monte Carlo quadrature [60]. The trial wave function, chosen to
be the same as in the FHNC calculation, is deﬁned in terms of the Jastrow-type
correlation functions of Eq. (2.3) and the Fermi gas ground state

ΨT (R) = hR|Y

j<i

f(rij)|0F G] .

(4.9)

In the above equation, R ≡ {r1, . . . , rN} denotes the set of coordinates specifying
the system in conﬁguration space, and |Ri is the corresponding eigenstate.

The inﬁnite system is modeled by considering a ﬁnite number of particles in a
box and imposing periodic boundary conditions. As a consequence, the spectrum
of eigenvalues of the wave vector k is discretized. For a cubic box of side L, one
ﬁnds the familiar result
ki = 2π

i = x, y, z , ni = 0,±1,±2, . . . .

(4.10)

ni

,

L

In order for the wave function to describe a system with vanishing total momentum
and angular momentum, all shells corresponding to momenta such that |k| < kF
must be ﬁlled. This requirement determines a set of “magic numbers”, which are
commonly employed in simulations of periodic systems. For example, the VMC—as

4.2 Calculation of the transport coeﬃcients

39

well as the DMC—calculation whose results are used in this Thesis have been ob-
tained with 132 particles, corresponding to 66 and 33 momentum states for degen-
eracy ν = 2 and 4, respectively.

The expectation value of the Hamiltonian in the state described by the the trial

wave function of Eq. (4.9) can be cast in the form

Z

hΨT|H|ΨTi =

dR EL(R)P(R) ,

(4.11)

(4.12)

where the local energy EL(R) is deﬁned as

EL(R) = HΨT (R)
ΨT (R)

,

and we have introduced the probability density P(R) ≡ Ψ∗
T (R)ΨT (R). Within
VMC, the above integral is estimated by a sum over the set {R}, consisting of Nc
conﬁgurations sampled from the distribution P(R) using the Metropolis algorithm

hΨT|H|ΨTi ≈ 1

Nc

Ψ∗
T (Ri)HΨT (Ri)

P(Ri)

.

(4.13)

X

Ri∈{R}

The VMC approach can be seen as an alternative to the cluster expansion tech-
nique underlying the FHNC approach, allowing for a stringent test of the approxi-
mation implied by the neglect of cluster contributions associated with the so-called
elementary diagrams [61].

The main drawback of VMC, obviously shared by FHNC, is that the accuracy
of the result entirely depends on the quality of the trial wave function. The DMC
method [62, 63] overcomes the limitations of the variational approach by using a
projection technique to enhance the true ground-state component of the trial wave
function. This result is achieved expanding |ΨTi in eigenstates of the Hamiltonian
according to

cn|ni

,

H|ni = En|ni ,

(4.14)

|ΨTi =X

n

which implies

τ→∞ e−(H−E0)τ|ΨTi = c0|0i ,
lim

(4.15)
with τ being the imaginary time. Provided |ΨTi it is not orthogonal to the true
ground state, i.e. for c0 6= 0, in the limit of large τ the above procedure projects
out the exact lowest-energy state.
Beacuse the direct calculation of exp[−(H − E0)τ] involves prohibitive diﬃcul-
ties, the imaginary-time evolution is broken into N small imaginary-time steps, and
complete sets of position eigenstates are inserted, in such a way that only the calcu-
lation of the short-time propagator is required. This procedure yields the expression
hRN+1|e−(H−E0)τ|R1i =

Z
× hRN|e−(H−E0)∆τ|RN−1i . . .hR2|e−(H−E0)∆τ|R1i , (4.16)
where, for the sake of simplicity, the dependence on the discrete degrees of freedom
has been omitted. Monte Carlo techniques are used to sample the paths Ri in the

dR2 . . . dRNhRN+1|e−(H−E0)∆τ|RNi

4.2 Calculation of the transport coeﬃcients

40

propagation. Note that, although Eq. (4.16) is only exact in the ∆τ → 0 limit,
its accuracy can be tested performing several simulations with smaller and smaller
time step and extrapolating to zero.

In Fig. 4.1 the results of DMC calculations of the quantity ζ of Eq. (2.18),
yielding the deviation of the ground state energy from the Fermi gas result, are
compared to the values obtained from the VMC and FHNC approaches—which are
only available at c ≥ 0.5—as well as to the predictions of the low-energy expansions
(1.8a) and (1.8b). It clearly appears that the VMC and FHNC results are very close
to one another, thus showing that at c ≥ 0.5 the FHNC approximation does provide
an upper bound to the ground state energy. The accuracy of the variational result
is measured by the diﬀerence between the VMC—or, equivalently, FHNC—values
of ζ and those obtained from DMC. In the case of degeneracy ν = 2, illustrated in
the left panel, this diﬀerence ranges between 2% and 9% at 0.2 < c < 1. Note that
a 9% diﬀerence in ζ translates in a diﬀerence of less that 3% in the ground state
energy E0. The low-density expansion turns out to be quite accurate, its predictions
being within 5% of the DMC results at c < 0.5. The right panel of Fig. 4.1 shows
the results corresponding to ν = 4, which exhibit the same pattern.

Figure 4.1. c-dependence of the quantity ζ, deﬁned by Eq. (2.18), for degeneracy ν =2
(left panel) and 4 (right panel). The solid and dashed lines show the results obtained
from the low-density expansions (1.8a) and (1.8b) and the variational FHNC approach,
respectively. The VMC and DMC results are represented by diamonds and squares.
Monte Carlo error bars are not visible on the scale of the ﬁgure.

The CBF eﬀective interaction has been computed from Eq. (2.12) choosing the
correlation range d in such a way as to to reproduce the ground-state expectation
value of the Hamiltonian obtained using the DMC technique.

4.2.2 Quasiparticle spectrum and eﬀective mass
Once the eﬀective interaction has been determined, the calculation of the quasipar-
ticle energy and eﬀective mass can be performed following the procedure described
in Chapter 3 for the case of degeneracy 4.

The resulting spectrum, deﬁned by Eq. (3.13), is displayed in Fig. 4.2, while
Fig. 4.3 shows the corresponding eﬀective mass, obtained from of Eq. (1.4). Second
order corrections to the self-energy have the same eﬀects observed in the case ν = 4.

4.2 Calculation of the transport coeﬃcients

41

The inclusion of the energy-dependent contributions results in small modiﬁcations
of the quasiparticle spectrum, but dramatically aﬀects both the magnitude and the
density dependence of the eﬀective mass at |k| = kF .

For reference, Fig 4.3 also shows the eﬀective mass computed using the low-
density expansions, Eq. (1.9). The diﬀerence between the value of m?(kF ) evaluated
using the CBF eﬀective interaction and the one obtained from Eq. (1.9) turns out
to be ≤ 2% for c ≤ 0.6, and grows up to 5.5% as the value of c increases up to
c = 1.0.

Figure 4.2. Quasiparticle energy of the fermion hard-sphere system of degeneracy ν = 2
at c = 0.3 [panel (B)] and 0.6 [panel(A)]. The meaning of the lines is the same as in
Fig. 3.4: the dashed and solid lines correspond to the ﬁrst order (i.e. Hartree-Fock)
and second order approximations to the self-energy, respectively. For comparison, the
dot-dash lines show the kinetic energy spectrum.

4.2.3 Scattering probability
The scattering probability W(θ, φ) appearing in the collision integral of Eq. (4.1)
is trivially related to the scattering amplitude f(θ, φ) through the relation

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)4π

m

W(θ, φ) = 2π
2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2

f(θ, φ)

.

(4.17)

The scattering amplitude is in turn related to the diﬀerential cross section according
to

dσ

dΩ = |f(θ, φ)|2 .

(4.18)

4.2 Calculation of the transport coeﬃcients

42

Figure 4.3. c-dependence of the ratio m?(kF )/m of the hard-sphere system of degeneracy
ν = 2. The meaning of the lines is the same as in Fig. 3.5: the dot-dash and solid
lines represent the results of calculations carried out using the ﬁrst and second order
approximations to the self-energy. For comparison, the dashed line shows the results
computed using the low-density expansion of Eq. (1.9).

Combining the above equations one ﬁnds1

W(θ, φ) = 16π3
m2

(cid:19)

(cid:18) dσ

dΩ

.

(4.19)

The scattering cross section is usually expressed in either the laboratory (L) or
the center-of-mass (CM) frame. However, the Abrikosov–Khalatnikov formalism is
derived in a diﬀerent frame, referred to as AK frame, in which the Fermi sphere is
at rest.

To clarify the connection betweel AK and CM frame, let us consider the process
in which two particles carrying momenta k1 and k2 scatter to ﬁnal states of momenta
k0
1 and k0

2. The total energy of the initial state
+ k2
2
2m

E = k2
1
2m

(4.20)

can be conveniently rewritten in terms of the center of mass and relative momenta,
K = k1 + k2 and k = (k1 − k2)/2, as
+ k2
2µ

E = K2
2M

= E + Erel ,

(4.21)

with M = 2m and µ = m/2. In the CM reference frame, in which the center of
mass of the system is at rest, E = Ecm = Erel, while in the L frame, in which k2 = 0,
E = EL = 2Erel.

1 Note that the relation between scattering probability and cross section reported in Ref. [42],

in which the factor 16π3/m2 is replaced by 16π2/m2, is incorrect.

4.2 Calculation of the transport coeﬃcients

43

In strongly degenerate systems, the magnitude of all momenta playing a a role
in the determination of the transport coeﬃcients is equal to the Fermi momentum,
and conservation of energy requires that the angle between the momenta of the
particles participating in the scattering process be the same before and after the
collision.
In general, however, the angle φ between the initial and ﬁnal relative
momenta, k and k0 = (k0

2)/2, deﬁned through

1 − k0

cos φ = (k · k0)
|k||k0|

,

(4.22)

does not vanish. Hence, for any given Fermi momentum, i.e. for any given matter
density, the scattering process in the AK frame is speciﬁed by the center of mass
energy

EAK = k2
F
2m

(1 + cos θ) ,

(4.23)

and the two angles θ and φ.

The AK-frame variables can be easily connected to those of the CM reference
frame. Since the relative kinetic energy, i.e. the energy in the CM reference frame
Ecm, is the same in any frame, we have

Ecm = EAK

rel = k2
F
2m

(1 − cos θ) ,

(4.24)

where we have used again the condition that scattering processes involve particles
in momentum states close to the Fermi surface. Moreover, the angle between the
planes containing ingoing and outgoing momenta, φ , is nothing but the angle
between the initial and ﬁnal relative momenta, and can therefore be identiﬁed with
the scattering angle in the CM frame, setting
Θcm = φ .

(4.25)
Through the above relations, the diﬀerential cross section in the CM frame, written
as a function of the two variables Ecm and Θcm, can be transformed into the corre-
sponding quantity in the AK frame, depending on the two angular variables θ and
φ, needed for the calculation of the transport coeﬃcients. We can write

(4.26)

dΩ(θ, φ) ,
with Ecm(θ) and Θcm(φ) given by Eqs. (4.24) and (4.25).

dΩ[Ecm(θ), Θcm(φ)] = dσ

dσ

In the pioneering works of Refs. [64, 65], the scattering probability in neutron
star matter was computed from Eq.(4.19) replacing the bare nucleon mass with an
eﬀective mass and using the nucleon-nucleon scattering cross section in free space,
obtained from the measured phase shifts. This procedure accounts for the fact that
both the incoming ﬂux and the phase space available to the ﬁnal state particles
are aﬀected by the presence of the medium. However, it neglects possible medium
modiﬁcations of the scattering probability.

The authors of Ref. [42] improved upon the approximation of Refs. [64,65], using
the CBF eﬀective interaction to obtain both the eﬀective mass and the in medium
scattering cross section of pure neutron matter within a consistent framework.

4.2 Calculation of the transport coeﬃcients

44

In this Thesis, we have applied the approach of Ref. [42] to the fermion hard
sphere system. The in medium scattering probability has been computed in Born
approximation using the CBF eﬀective interaction and the deﬁnition

W(θ, φ) = π(cid:12)(cid:12)[k0

1, k0

2|veﬀ|k1, k2]a

,

(4.27)

where ki and k0
i are the initial and ﬁnal momenta, respectively. The calculation of
the matrix element is essentially the same as that performed to obtain the second
order contributions to the self-energy, described in Appendix D. The only diﬀerences
stem from the fact that, because here we are considering a scattering process, in
Eq. (D.4) we need to average over the two spins of the initial state particles. The
result can be written in the form
2|veﬀ|k1, k2]a

(cid:12)(cid:12)2 = M 2(u) + M 2(v) − 2

M(u)M(v) .

(cid:12)(cid:12)[k0

X

(4.28)

1, k0

1
ν2

σ,σ0

Following the notation of Appendix D, in the above equation M(u) and M(v) denote
the Fourier transforms of the eﬀective potential for arguments given by the following
combination of initial and ﬁnal relative momenta, k and k0
(1 − cos θ)(1 − cos φ)
(1 − cos θ)(1 + cos φ) .

u = |k − k0| = kF
v = |k + k0| = kF

(4.29)

(cid:12)(cid:12)2

ν

q
q
Z

(cid:18) dσ

(cid:19)

dΩ

The density dependence of the total cross section

σtot =

dΩ

,

(4.30)

√

resulting from our calculations is shown in Fig. 4.4 for center of mass energies
0 ≤ Ecm ≤ 140 MeV. For any given value of Ecm, Eq. (4.24) implies that the Fermi
momentum must satisfy the constraint kF >
mEcm. Note that σtot is normalized
to the low-energy limit obtained from the partial wave expansion of the cross section
in vacuum, σtot = 2πa2. In Fig. 4.5, the same quantity is shown as a function of
CM energy, with Ecm < k2

F /m, for diﬀerent densities in the range 0.4 ≤ c ≤ 1.

The in medium scattering probability, deﬁned as in Eq. (4.17), has been also
studied within the framework of “standard” perturbation theory [66, 67]. The au-
thors of Ref. [66] were able to obtain the expression of W(θ, φ) by solving the
generalised Bethe–Salpeter equation for the scattering amplitude of a dilute gas of
Fermi hard spheres, including terms up to order c, corresponding to order c2 for
the scattering probability. A more detailed description of the work of Ref. [66] can
be found in Appendix E. For comparison, in Fig. 4.4 the corresponding results at
Ecm = 10 MeV are shown by the diamonds.

The results displayed in Figs. 4.4 and 4.5, showing that σtot increases with den-
sity, can be explained considering that the range of the eﬀective interaction—that
takes into account screening arising form dynamical correlations—is larger than the
hard-sphere radius a, and grows with c (see Fig. 2.4).

4.2 Calculation of the transport coeﬃcients

45

Figure 4.4. c-dependence of the in-medium total cross section of the fermion hard-sphere
system with ν=2—normalized to the low-energy limit in vacuum—computed using the
CBF eﬀective interaction for diﬀerent values of the CM energy Ecm. For comparison,
the diamonds show the results of the low-density expansion derived in Ref. [66].

Figure 4.5. Ecm-dependence of the in-medium total cross sections of the fermion hard-
sphere system with ν=2—normalized to the low-energy limit in vacuum—computed
using the CBF eﬀective interaction for diﬀerent values of c = kF a.

4.3 Numerical results

46

4.3 Numerical results
The shear viscosity coeﬃcient of the fermion hard-sphere system of degeneracy ν=2,
η, has been obtained from Eqs. (4.2), (4.4) and (4.7) with the eﬀective mass and
the in-medium scattering probability computed using the CBF interaction. Before
analyzing the shear viscosity and thermal conductivity, in Fig. 4.6 we illustrate the
c-dependence of the time independent quantity τ T 2, where τ is the quasiparticle
lifetime of Eq. (4.6), computed using the CBF eﬀective interaction. For comparison
the prediction of the low-density expansion of Ref. [67] is also shown. Overall, the
emerging pattern reﬂects the one observed in Fig. 4.3. As expected, the large
corrections to the Hartee-Fock estimate of the eﬀective mass translate into large
corrections to the quasiparticle lifetime.

Figure 4.6. c-dependence of the temperature-independent quantity τ T 2, where τ is the
quasiparticle lifetime of the fermion hard-sphere system of degeneracy ν=2. The dot-
dash and solid lines represent the results of calculations carried out using the ﬁrst and
second order approximations for the eﬀective mass, respectively, while the dashed line
shows the results of the low-density expansion of Ref. [67], including terms of order up
to c.

4.3.1 Shear viscosity and thermal conductivity
The shear viscosity coeﬃcient of the fermion hard-sphere system of degeneracy
ν = 2, η, has been obtained from Eqs. (4.2), (4.4) and (4.7) with the eﬀective mass
and the in medium scattering probability computed using the CBF interaction.

Figure 4.7 shows the c-dependence of the T-independent quantity ηT 2. The
most relevant feature of the results displayed in the ﬁgure is, again, the sizable
eﬀect of second order contributions to the eﬀective mass. As shown in Fig 4.3,
these corrections lead to sharp increase of m?, which in turn implies a decrease of
the shear viscosity coeﬃcient η.

4.3 Numerical results

47

Figure 4.7. c-dependence of the temperature-independent quantity ηT 2, where η is the
shear viscosity coeﬃcient of the fermion hard-sphere system of degeneracy ν = 2. The
dot-dash and solid lines represent the results of calculations carried out using the ﬁrst
and second order approximations for the eﬀective mass, respectively, while the dashed
line shows the results of the low-density expansion of Ref. [67], including terms of order
up to c.

The T-independent quantity κT, where κ is the thermal conductivity deﬁned by
Eqs. (4.3), (4.4) and (4.8), is shown in Fig. 4.8 as a function of the dimensionless
parameter c. Overall, the pattern is close to the one observed in Fig. 4.7.

In order to establish a connection between our results and those correspond-
ing to neutron matter, in Fig. 4.9 we compare the momentum distribution of the
fermion hard-sphere system at density corresponding to c = 0.4—computed with
the CBF eﬀective interaction following the procedure described in Sec. 3.3—to those
reported in Ref. [68], obtained using a quantum Monte Carlo technique. The shaded
region illustrates the variation of the momentum distribution of Ref. [68] in the den-
sity range 0.08≤ ρ ≤0.24 fm−3. The corresponding values of the renormalisation
constant are Z=0.9566 for the hard-sphere system and 0.9579 ≤ Z ≤ 0.9378 for
neutron matter. The appreciably higher values of n(0) obtained from the Monte
Carlo approach reﬂect the softness of the chiral neutron-neutron potential employed
by the authors of Ref. [68]. The results of Fig. 4.9 suggest that neutrons in pure
neutron matter behave similarly to hard spheres of radius <∼ 0.3 fm. The same
analysis for isoscalar nucleons, performed in Sec. 3.3, leads to a radius of ∼0.4 fm.

4.3 Numerical results

48

Figure 4.8. c-dependence of the temperature-independent quantity κT, where κ is the
thermal conductivity of the fermion hard-sphere system of degeneracy ν = 2. The dot-
dash and solid lines represent the results of calculations carried out using the ﬁrst and
second order approximations for the eﬀective mass, respectively, while the dashed line
shows the results of the low-density expansion of Ref. [67], including terms of order up
to c.

Figure 4.9. Comparison between the momentum of the fermion hard-sphere system of
degeneracy ν=2 at c = 0.4 (diamonds) and those reported in Ref. [68], corresponding
to the density range 0.08 ≤ ρ ≤ 0.24 fm−3 (shaded area).

49

Summary and prospects

This Thesis reports the results of perturbative calculations of a variety of properties
of the Fermi hard-sphere system, carried out using an eﬀective interaction derived
within the CBF formalism and the cluster expansion technique. Our study, while
being very interesting in its own right, is mainly aimed at establishing the accuracy
of the proposed approach in view of future applications to neutron star matter. To
achieve this goal, we have performed a systematic comparison between its results
and those obtained from perturbative calculations, providing exact predictions in
the low-density limit.

The main advantage of our scheme is the ability to combine the eﬀectiveness
of including correlation eﬀects through a modiﬁcation of the basis states with the
ﬂexibility of perturbation theory in the Fermi gas basis. This feature is fully ap-
parent in the calculated momentum distribution, which, unlike the one obtained
using correlated wave functions in the context of the variational method, exhibits
the correct logarithmic behavior in the vicinity of the Fermi surface. Attaining the
same result using the bare interaction and a correlated basis involves non-trivial
diﬃculties, arising from the use of non-orthogonal perturbation theory [52].

The quasiparticle properties obtained from the self-energy computed using the
CBF eﬀective interaction turn out to be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by second order con-
tributions to Σ(k, E), exhibiting an explicit energy dependence. In the case of the
eﬀective mass at momentum k = kF , the inclusion of these contributions leads to
a dramatic change of both the magnitude and the density-dependence of the ra-
tio m?(kF )/m, with respect to the predictions of the Hartree-Fock approximation.
Similar results had been previously found in nuclear matter calculations, carried out
within G-matrix [69,70], Self Consistent Green’s Function [71] and non orthogonal
CBF perturbation theory [32].

Overall, the comparison between the results reported in this Thesis and those
obtained from low-density expansions suggests that the latter provide accurate pre-
<∼ 0.3 − 0.4 fm−1. Based on
dictions in the density range corresponding to kF
the argument made in Section 3.3, these values of kF correspond to densities of
isospin symmetric nuclear matte in the range 0.2 <∼ (ρ/ρN M) <∼ 0.4, ρN M being the
equilibrium density.

In order to gauge the accuracy of the eﬀective interaction approach in a diﬀerent
context, we have extended our study to the calculation of quasiparticle scattering,
the description of which is needed to obtain the transport coeﬃcients from Boltz-
mann’s equation. At low density, the resulting shear viscosity and thermal con-
ductivity coeﬃcients turn out to agree with those obtained from Landau’s kinetic
theory [66,67]. However, in this case the range of applicability of the perturbative

4.3 Numerical results

50

expansion is somewhat limited, since it only includes terms linear in the parameter
c = kF a.

The enhancement of the eﬀective mass resulting from the inclusion of second
order contributions to the self-energy has important implications for the calcula-
tion of the in medium scattering cross section, and consequently of the transport
coeﬃcients, since the value of the eﬀective mass aﬀects both the incoming ﬂux and
the phase-space available to the particles in the ﬁnal state. The enhanced ratio
m?(kF )/m > 1 brings about an increase of the cross section, resulting in turn in
a decrease of the shear viscosity and thermal conductivity coeﬃcients (see, e.g.,
Ref.
[42]). This feature is potentially very important, because all existing cal-
culations of the transport coeﬃcients of neutron star matter use eﬀective masses
obtained within the Hartee–Fock approximation.

As pointed out above, the ultimate goal of our study is the application of the
approach based on the CBF eﬀective interaction to the description of dense matter
of astrophysical interest. The formalism discussed in this Thesis can be readily
generalised, along the line discussed in Ref. [72,73], to obtain a number of nuclear
matter properties, such as the spectral functions deﬁned by Eq.
(3.19) and the
density and spin-density responses [72, 73]. In this context, the CBF eﬀective in-
teraction is a unique tool, allowing to describe short- and long-range correlations,
associated with the appearance of collective excitations, in a fully consistent fash-
ion. Comparison between the results obtained from the CBF eﬀective interaction
and those derived from diﬀerent many-body techniques and using diﬀerent nuclear
Hamiltonians [35, 36, 72–76] will allow to ﬁrmly assess the potential of this new
approach.

51

Appendix A
Low-density expansion of the
momentum distribution

For the sake of completeness, we report the explicit expression of the momentum
distribution obtained from the low-density expansion including terms of order up
to c2 = (kF a)2. As pointed out in Section 3.3, n(k) can be conveniently written in
terms of two contributions, associated with hole and particle states, according to

where

n(k) = n<(k) + n>(k) ,

n<(k) = 0 for k > kF ,
n>(k) = 0 for k < kF .

(A.1)

(A.2)

At x = k/kF < 1, the algebraic expression of n<(k), derived by the authors of

Refs. [7,8], reads

n<(k) = 1− ν − 1
3π2x

c2 [ (7 ln 2 − 8)x3 + (10 − 3 ln 2)x

+2 ln 1 + x
1 − x

− 2(2 − x2)3/2 ln (2 − x2)1/2 + x
(2 − x)1/2 − x

#

,

(A.3)

where ν denotes the degeneracy of the momentum eigenstates. The form of n>(k),
reported in Refs. [8,9], depends on the range of x. For 1 < x <

√

2

n>(k) = ν − 1
6π2x

c2 { (7x3 − 3x − 6) ln x − 1
+6x − 24 + 2(2 − x2)3/2
+ ln 1 + (2 − x2)1/2

x + 1 + (7x3 − 3x + 2) ln 2 − 8x3 + 22x2

"
ln 2 + x + (2 − x2)1/2
#)
2 + x − (2 − x2)1/2

1 − (2 − x2)1/2 − 2 ln x + (2 − x2)1/2
x − (2 − x2)1/2

,

(A.4)

while for

√

2 < x < 3

52

n>(k) = ν − 1
6π2x

tan−1

(x + 2)
(x2 − 2)1/2

x + 1 + (7x3 − 3x + 2) ln 2 − 8x3 + 22x2

c2 { (7x3 − 3x − 6) ln x − 1
+6x − 24 − 4(x2 − 2)3/2(cid:20)
+ tan−1(x2 − 2)−1/2 − 2 tan−1 x(x2 − 2)−1/2io
c2(cid:26)
x − 1 − 2x + (x2 − 2)3/2h2 tan−1 x(x2 − 2)−1/2
2 ln x + 1
− tan−1(x − 2)(x2 − 2)−1/2 − tan−1(x + 2)(x2 − 2)−1/2io

Finally, in the domain x > 3
n>(k) = 2 ν − 1
3π2x

.

(A.5)

.

(A.6)

53

Appendix B
Cluster expansions

B.1 Energy at two-body cluster level
The factorized cluster expansion of the ground state expectation value of the Hamil-
tonian, discussed in Section 1.3, reads

E0 = TF +

(∆E)n ,

with

(∆E)n = X

i1<...<in

"

1

Ii1...in

∂
∂β

#

.

β=0

1

Ii1...ik

∂
∂β

Ii1...ik

Equation (1.39) can be rewritten in terms of the n-body operator wn in the form

(1.36)

(1.39)

(B.1)

(∆E)n = 1
n!

i1...in

[i1 . . . in|wn|i1 . . . in]a .

n=1

NX
Ii1...in − nX
X

k=1

NY

j,i=1

The wn are obtained from Eq. (1.39), exploiting the property that the normalization
factors Ii1...in|−1
β=0 diﬀer from by quantities O (1/N) at most, which can be neglected
in the limit N → ∞.

The hermiticity of the Jastrow-type correlation function

F =

f(rij) ,

(2.3)

makes the two-body operator w2 reducible to the simple form to

with F2(12) = f(r12), yielding the explicit formula for two-body cluster contribution

h

F2(12), [t(1) + t(2), F2(12)]iΦn1n2

h
F2(12), [t(1) + t(2), F2(12)]i + F2
w2 = 1
2
Z
X
(∆E)2 =1
X
2
+ 1
2

1
2
n1n2v(12)F2

dx1dx2 Φ?

dx1dx2 Φ?

Z

n1n2

n1n2

n1n2

2(12)Φn1n2 .

(B.3)

2(12)v(12) ,

(B.2)

B.1 Energy at two-body cluster level

54

In the above equation, dxi denotes both integration over the spatial coordinates
ri and trace over the unices associated with the discrete degrees of freedom. The
two-particle Fermi gas state Φn1n2 is obtained as Slater determinant of two single
particle wave-functions φni(xi)

φni(xi) = 1√

V

eikniriχσiχτi ,

(B.4)

where ni ≡ {ki, σi, τi} and the χ’s are Pauli spinors in spin(σi)-isospin(τi) space.
The antisymmetric product of any number p of sinlge-particle wave functions
can be written in a compact way introducing the antisymmetrisation operator A
(B.5)

Φn1...np = A(cid:2)φn1(x1) . . . φnp(xp)(cid:3) ,

whose expression, involving the the pair exchange operator Pij, is

A = 1 −X

Pij + X

i<j

i<j<k

(PijPjk + PikPjk) + . . .

.

(B.6)

It follows that for a system of two particles A = 1 − P12.

The pair exchange operator P12 can in turn by deﬁned by the result of its action

on the two-particle state

P12 [φn1(x1)φn2(x2)] = φn1(x2)φn2(x1) ,

(B.7)
and can be factorized into the product of the operator that exchanges the coor-
dinates, P r12, and the operator acting on discrete degrees of freedom, P στ12 . The
resulting expression is

(B.8)

(B.9)

(B.10)

P12 = P r12 × P στ12 ,

P r12 = exp [−i (k1 − k2) · (r1 − r2)] ,

with

and

P στ12 = 1

4 (1 + σ12) (1 + τ12) ,
where σ12 and τ12 denote the products of Pauli matrices
σ12 = ~σ1 · ~σ2 , τ12 = ~τ1 · ~τ2 .

(B.11)
Since the Pauli matrices are traceless, and the potential and the correlation functions
are both diagonal in spin-isospin space, after summation over the discrete degrees
of freedom, the operator P12 implied in Eq. (B.3) reduces to the the expression

P r12 → 1

ν

exp [−i (k1 − k2) · (r1 − r2)] .

(B.12)

In addition, because of translation invariance, in Eq. (B.3) we can conveniently use
the center of mass and relative coordinates

r = r1 − r2 , R = 1

2 (r1 + r2) .

(B.13)

B.1 Energy at two-body cluster level

55

over all possible occupied states the term T rP

Using the above variable transformation, the trace operation and the summation
n1n2Φn1n2 in Eq. (B.3) can be

n1n2 Φ?

cast in the form

X

n1n2

T r

n1n2Φn1n2 = X

Φ?

kn1 kn2≤kF

(cid:20)
1 − 1

e−i(k1−k2)·r(cid:21)

ν

ν2
V 2

.

(B.14)

In addition, from the relation between the Slater function ‘(kF r) and the non diag-
onal density matrix of Eq. (1.29)

one obtains

‘(kF r) = 1

ρ

ρ(x1, x2) ≡ ρ‘(kF r) ,
X

n(x1)φn(x2) = ν
φ?
N

n∈{F}

X

kn≤kF

eikn ·r ,

with the explicit expression of ‘(x) reported in Eq. (2.8)
x3 (sin x − x cos x) .

‘(x) = 3
The ﬁnal result for Eq. (B.14) reads
X

n1n2Φn1n2 = ρ2(cid:20)
Z

drf 2(r)v(r)

(cid:21)

.

(cid:21)

1 − 1

ν

‘2(kF r)

(cid:20)
1 − 1

ν

T r

Φ?

n1n2

hV i2b = 1

2 N ρ

(B.15)

(B.16)

(2.8)

(B.17)

Finally, the potential energy contribution to the two-body cluster approximation to
the ground state energy can be evaluated from

‘2 (kF r)

.

(B.18)

As for the kinetic term of the Hamiltonian, the sum of the single particle operators

t(i) = − 1
2m

∇2

ri ,

can be written, after the transformation into the variables of Eq. (B.13), as a sum
of center of mass and relative kinetic energies
R − 1
∇2

∇2
r ≡ T(R) + t(r) .

t(1) + t(2) = − 1
4m

(B.19)

m

Because [T(R), f(r)] = 0, it follows that

[t(1) + t(2), F2(12)] = [t(r), f(r)] .

(B.20)
The calculation of the kinetic energy contribution at two-body cluster level amounts
to evaluating the expectation value of the commutator in Eq. (B.2) in the two-body
wave function of the non interacting system, Φn1n2, involving the quantity
2 [f(r), [T(r), f(r)]] = − 1
1
2m

r, f(r)i −h∇2

f(r)o Φn1n2 .

n
f(r)h∇2

r, f(r)i

Φ?

n1n2

(B.21)

B.2 Expectation value of the eﬀective interaction

56

After simple algebraic manipulations, the above expression can be reduced to the
form

yielding the two-body cluster approximation to the kinetic energy

1
m

Z

ij [∇rf]2 Φij ,
Φ?

[∇rf]2(cid:20)

1 − 1

ν

hTi2b = 1

2 N ρ

dr 1

m

(cid:21)

‘2(kF r)

.

(B.23)

(B.22)

Collecting the above results we can ﬁnally write the corresponding approximation
to the ground-state energy in the form

(cid:21)(cid:20)
1 − 1
(∇rf)2 + v2(r)f 2(r)

(cid:20) 1

m

(cid:21)

‘2(kF r)

.

(B.24)

ν

1
N

(∆E)2 = 1
2 ρ

dr

B.2 Expectation value of the eﬀective interaction
The expectation value of the eﬀective interaction, or of a any two-body operator of
the form

(B.25)

Ω =X

i<j

ω(rij) ,

Z

Z

X

in the Fermi gas ground state can be evaluated from its explicit expression
[0F G|Ω|0F G] =1
2
=1
2 N(N − 1)

dx1 . . . dxNΦ?(x1 . . . xN)ω(rij)Φ(x1 . . . xN)

dx1 . . . dxNΦ?(x1 . . . xN)ω(r12)Φ(x1 . . . xN) , (B.26)

Z

ij

where Φ(x1 . . . xN) is the N-particle ground state wave-function, represented by a
Slater determinant of single particle states deﬁned as in Eq. (B.4). Extraction of
two particles of coordinates x1, x2 from the Slater determinant allows one to isolate
the two-particle state by writing the N-particle wave function as

Φ(x1 . . . xN) =

=

1pN(N − 1)
1pN(N − 1)

X
X

n1n2

n1n2

(−)n1+n2+1A [φn1(x1)φn2(x2)] ˜Φn1n2(x3 . . . xN)

(−)n1+n2+1Φn1n2(x1, x2)˜Φn1n2(x3 . . . xN) . (B.27)

Z

In the above equation, Φn1n2(x1, x2) is the two-particle state obtained through the
antisymmetric combination of the orbitals n1 and n2, while ˜Φn1n2(x3 . . . xN) is the
Slater determinant describing (N − 2) particles, which does not include the states
n1 and n2. The orthonormality relations obeyed by the states of ˜Φn1n2(x3 . . . xN)

dx3 . . . dxN ˜Φ?

n1n2(x3 . . . xN)˜Φp1p2(x3 . . . xN) = δn1p1δn2p2 ,

(B.28)

impliesZ

dx3 . . . dxN |Φ(x1 . . . xN)|2 =

1

N(N − 1)

X

n1n2

|Φn1n2(x1, x2)|2

.

(B.29)

B.2 Expectation value of the eﬀective interaction

57

Substitution of the above result and Eq. (B.17) in Eq. (B.26) leads to the ﬁnal
expression of the expectation value of the two-body operator Ω in the Fermi gas
ground state

1
N

[0F G|Ω|0F G] = 1
2N
=1
2 ρ

Z

T r

n1,n2
dr ω(r)

X

Z

dr1dr2 ω(r12)|Φn1n2|2
(cid:20)
1 − 1

‘2(kF r)

(cid:21)

.

ν

(B.30)

58

Appendix C
Euler-Lagrange equation

The functional minimization of the two-body cluster approximation to the ground
state energy, discussed in Appendix B, leads to a Euler-Lagrange equation deter-
mining the shape of the correlation function f(r).

The satrting point of this procedure is the functional deﬁned by the Eq. (2.7)

(C.1)

(C.2)

(2.17)

(C.3)

(C.4)

(C.5)

(C.6)

(C.7)

1
N

(∆E)2 = 2πρ

where f0 = (df /dr) and

F(cid:2)f, f0(cid:3) ≡

with Φ(r) deﬁned as

(cid:20) 1

m

Z

drF(cid:2)f, f0(cid:3) ,
(cid:21)
f0(r)2 + f 2(r)v(r)
r
(cid:18) ∂F

‘2(kF r) .

(cid:19)

Φ2(r),

1 − 1
(cid:18) ∂F
(cid:19)
In order to obtain the Euler-Lagrange equation

Φ(r) ≡ r

ν

d
dr

=

∂f0

∂f

one has to compute the derivatives of the function F

∂F
∂f

= 2f(r)v(r)Φ2(r)

m

∂F

∂f0 = 2
(cid:19)
(cid:18) ∂F

= 2

∂f0

d
dr

m
yielding the diﬀerential equation

f0(r)Φ2(r)
h

f00(r)Φ2(r) + 2f0(r)Φ(r)Φ0(r)i

f00(r)Φ(r) + 2f0Φ(r)Φ0(r)

Φ(r) = mv(r)f(r)Φ(r) .

In terms of the function g(r), deﬁned as

the Euler-Lagrange equation can be conveniently rewritten in the form

g(r) ≡ f(r)Φ(r) ,
(cid:20)Φ00(r)
(cid:21)
Φ(r) + mv(r)

g00(r) −

g(r) = 0 .

59

(2.16)

(C.8)

In the case of the hard-sphere system, the interaction potential vanishes in the
region r ≥ a, while the correlation function is zero inside the core. Therefore, the
boundary conditions to be fulﬁlled by the correlation function are

f(a) = 0 , f(d) = 1 ,

(C.9)

with the additional requirement that the derivative of f be continuous at r = d

The above constraints translate into a set of boundary conditions to be satisﬁed by
the the function g(r)

(C.10)

(C.11)

(C.12)

f0(cid:12)(cid:12)r=d = 0 ,

g(a) = 0 , g(d) = Φ(d) .

g0(cid:12)(cid:12)r=d = φ0(r)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=d ,
(cid:21)

(cid:20)Φ00(r)
Φ(r) + mλ

The additional requirement

is fulﬁlled introducing a Lagrange multiplier, denoted λ. The resulting Euler-
Lagrange equation reads

g00(r) − g(r)

= 0 .

(2.15)

60

Appendix D
Calculation of the self-energy

D.1 Direct and exchange diagrams
The second order contributions to the self-energy of Fig. 3.1 can be represented
in two diﬀerent ways, depending on whether the ingoing momentum is k > kF or
k < kF .

The diagram associated with the term Σ2p1h of Fig. D.1a has a simple physical
interpretation. It represents the interaction between a particle of momentum k and
energy E and a hole of momentum k0, belonging to the Fermi sea, which leads to the
excitation of a two-particle–one-hole state of the (N + 1)-particle system. In other
words, the particle carrying momentum k polarises the N-body system through the
excitation of a one particle-one hole state. Because of energy conservation, these
excitations can only take place for E > F , where F denotes the Fermi energy.

On the other hand, for hole states (k < kF ) the classiﬁcation as polarisation
contribution is misleading. The diagram of Fig. D.1b is in fact associated with
ground-state correlations, taking place before the creation of the hole of momentum
k and energy E, leaving the (N −1)-particle system in a two-particle–one-hole state.
The physical polarisation eﬀect for hole states is described by the the diagram in
Fig. D.2b, which is the second order term of the self-energy of Fig. 3.1c for k < kF .
Finally, Fig. D.2a describes the modiﬁcation of ground-state correlations due to the
introduction of an additional particle of momentum k > kF .

In spite of the above considerations, Σ2p1h and Σ2h1p are referred to as po-
larisation and correlation terms, respectively. Owing to their diﬀerent analytical
properties, the corresponding contributions to the momentum distribution n(k) are
determined by Σ2p1h, for k < kF , and Σ2h1p, for k > kF , as shown by Eqs. (3.26)
and (3.27) [77].

D.2 The matrix element
The calculation of the second order contribution to the self-energy involves the
evaluation of the matrix element

M = [qτ, q0τ0|veﬀ|kσ, k0σ0]a .

(D.1)

D.2 The matrix element

61

(a)

(b)

Figure D.1. The self-energy contribution of Σ2p1h, Eq. (3.6), for particle states (k > kF )

in the left panel and for hole states (k < kF ) in the right panel.

(a)

(b)

Figure D.2. The self-energy contribution of Σ2h1p, Eq. (3.7), for particle states (k > kF )

in the left panel and for hole states (k < kF ) in the right panel.

qk!q!kkkkqk!q!qk!q!kkkkqk!q!qk!q!kkkkqk!q!qk!q!kkkkqk!q!D.2 The matrix element

62

The antisymmetric combination of single particle states speciﬁed by the quantum
numbers kσ, kσ0 can be easily obtained using the operators A and P12 deﬁned in
Appendix B

|kσ, kσ0]a = A|kσ, kσ0] = (1 − P12)|kσ, kσ0] .

(D.2)

Let us ﬁrst expand the squared matrix element of the eﬀective interaction
|M|2 = [kσ, k0σ0|veﬀ(1 − P12)|qτ, qτ0][qτ, q0τ0|veﬀ(1 − P12)|kσ, kσ0] .

(D.3)

Exploiting completeness of the spin-isospin basis states, we obtain
e Md + ν|Me|2 ,

|M|2 = ν|Md|2 − M ?

d Me − M ?

X

σ,σ0τ,τ0

1
ν

where the direct Md and exchange Me matrix elements are deﬁned as

Md = [k, k0|veﬀ|q, q0] ,
Me = [k, k0|veﬀP r12|q, q0] .

The explicit expressions of Md and Me are

dr1dr2 e−ik·r1 e−ik0·r2 veﬀ(r12) eiq·r1 eiq0·r2 ,

(D.6)

(D.7)
In terms of the center of mass [R = (r1 + r2)/2] and relative [r = r1 − r2]

dr1dr2 e−ik·r1 e−ik0·r2 veﬀ(r12) eiq0·r1 eiq·r2 .

coordinates , the direct term Md can be rewritten in the form

Md = 1

V

(D.8)
where the Kronecker δ accounts for conservation of the total momentum, and u is
deﬁned as

δq+q0−k−k0M(u) ,

δq+q0−k−k0

V

dr eiu·rveﬀ(r) = 1

Z

Z
Z

Md = 1
V 2
Me = 1
V 2

Performing the angular integrations in both Eqs. (D.8) and (D.10) we obtain

where

v ≡ 1

2(−q + q0 − k + k0) .
Z
M(t) = 4π
t
Note that, since M(t) is real, M∗
e = Me and M∗
Eqs. (D.8) and (D.10) in Eq. (D.4), we can write

dr r sin(tr)veﬀ(r) .

(D.12)
d = Md. Hence, substituting

|M|2 = 1
V 2 δq+q0−k−k0[νM(u)2 − 2M(u)M(v) + νM(v)2]
≡ 1
V 2 δq+q0−k−k0M(u, v) .

(D.13)

X

σ,σ0τ,τ0

1
ν

(D.4)

(D.5)

(D.9)

(D.10)

(D.11)

The same procedure can be followed for the exchange term, wit the result

u ≡ 1

2(q − q0 − k + k0) .

Me = 1

V

δq+q0−k−k0M(v) ,

D.3 The polarisation term

63

D.3 The polarisation term
Substituting Eq. (D.13) in Eq. (3.6) and carrying out the sum over k0 with the
Kronecker delta function, the polarisation term Σ2p1h term can be cast in the form

X

q,q0

Σ2p1h (k, E) = m
V 2

M(u, v)

q2 + q02 − (q + q0 − k)2 − 2mE − iη

where, owing to momentum conservation, u = q − k and v = q0 − k.

× n>(q)n>(q0)n<(q + q0 − k) ,
In the continuum limitP
Z

R dk, and

k → V
(2π)3

M(u, v)

Σ2p1h (k, E) = m
(2π)6

dq dq0
× n>(q)n>(q0)n<(q + q0 − k) .

−2mE + q2 + q02 − (q + q0 − k)2 − iη

The above equation can then be transformed using the variables {u, v}, with the
result

Z

Σ2p1h (k, E) = m
(2π)6

M(u, v)

−2mE + |k + u|2 + |k + v|2 − |k + u + v|2 − iη

dudv
× n> (k + u) n> (k + v) n< (k + u + v) .

(D.14)

(D.15)

(D.16)

(D.17)

(D.18)

The denominator can be further rewritten using the relations

|k + u|2 = k2 + u2 + 2k · u ,
|k + v|2 = k2 + v2 + 2k · v ,
|k + u + v|2 = k2 + u2 + v2 + 2k · u + 2k · v + 2u · v .

Z

Exploiting Eq. (3.8), the imaginary part of Eq. (D.16) reads

Im Σ2p1h (k, E) = π

dudvM(u, v)δ
n>(k + u)n>(k + v)n<(k + u + v) ,
and the real part, obtained from a dispersion relations, turns out to be

m
(2π)6

(cid:16)2mE − k2 + 2u · v(cid:17)×

Re Σ2p1h (k, E) = 1
= 1

π

π

P

P

Im Σ2p1h (k, E0)

E − E0

dE0

Im Σ2p1h (k, E0)

E − E0

dE0 .

(D.19)

Z ∞
Z ∞

−∞

F

D.4 The correlation term
Following the same steps described in the previous section, the correlation term of
the self energy Σ2h1p can be written in the form

Z

Σ2h1p (k, E) = m
(2π)6

M(u, v)

2mE − |k + u|2 − |k + v|2 + |k + u + v|2 − iη

dudv
× n<(k + u)n<(k + v)n>(k + u + v) ,

(D.20)

D.5 Numerical evaluation of the real part

the imaginary part of which is given by

Im Σ2h1p (k, E) = π

dudvM(u, v) δ

(cid:16)2mE − k2 + 2u · v(cid:17)

Z

m
(2π)6

× n<(k + u)n<(k + v)n>(k + u + v) .

Using again a the dispersion relation, the real part can be evaluated from

Re Σ2h1p (k, E) = 1
= 1

π

π

P

P

Im Σ2h1p (k, E0)

Im Σ2h1p (k, E0)

E − E0

E − E0

dE0

dE0 .

Z ∞
Z F

−∞

−∞

64

(D.21)

(D.22)

D.5 Numerical evaluation of the real part
In order to evaluate the real part of the self-energy using dispersion relations, one
needs to integrate the oﬀ-shell imaginary parts of the polarisation and correlation
terms over a wide range of energies. Although the imaginary part is a decreasing
function of |E|, for E → ∞ the term Im Σ2p1h approaches zero very slowly, and
the computational eﬀort required for the evaluation of the real part turns out to be
huge, particularly for particle states (k > kF ). This diﬃculty is not alleviated by
the use of the subtracted dispersion relations.

The above problem has been circumvented carrying out a direct calculation of

the real parts from the equations

Re Σ2p1h (k, E) = lim
η→0

m
(2π)6

Z

Re Σ2h1p (k, E) = lim
η→0

m
(2π)6

q2 + q02 − k02 − 2mE

dq dq0 M(u, v)
× n>(q)n>(q0)n<(q + q0 − k) ,

(q2 + q02 − k02 − 2mE)2 + η2

(D.23)

2mE + k02 − q2 − q02

dq dq0 M(u, v)
× n<(q)n<(q0)n<(q + q0 − k) ,

(2mE + k02 − q2 − q0)2 + η2

(D.24)

Z

where k0 = q + q0 − k, u = q − k and v = q0 − k.

65

Appendix E
The scattering amplitude in a
Fermi ﬂuid

E.1 The generalised Bethe-Salpeter equation
In order to calculate the scattering probability, the authors of Ref. [66] have derived
an expression for the scattering amplitude of two quasiparticles in a Fermi ﬂuid.
They followed closely Landau’s original derivation of Ref. [78], but were able to go
beyond Landau’s approximation of small momentum transfer in the collision. By
using the diagrammatic techniques, they obtained an integral equation for the scat-
tering amplitude similar to the one yielding the T-matrix, discussed in Section 1.1.
The diagrammatic representation of the so called generalised Bethe-Salpeter
equation is shown in Fig. E.1, where the vertex Γ, depicting the complete sum of
all linked and topologically distinct diagrams contributing to the scattering ampli-
tude, is obtained in terms of the irreducible vertex Γ(1), representing the sum of all
diagrams that cannot be broken into two parts by cutting two internal lines.

The physical scattering amplitude is directly related to the vertex Γ through a
volume factor and the renormalisation constant of quasiparticle states. The ﬁnal
integral equation for the scattering amplitude involves a generalization of Landau’s
f -function, suitable to describe processes taking place at arbitrary momentum trans-
fer. Solving this integral equation, written in terms of the scattering amplitude and
the generalized function f , involves severe diﬃculties. However, some explicit solu-
tions can be found for systems at zero temperature.

E.2 The low-denstity hard-sphere system
In Ref. [66] the generalised Bethe-Salpeter equation has been solved for a low-density
Fermi Gas of hard spheres at T = 0. The solution includes corrections—linear in
the parameter c = kF a —to the free two-particle scattering amplitude, which is in
turn related to the S-wave scattering length a. The resulting scattering amplitude
has been obtained for any values of the momenta, for particles in triplet (spin-
symmetric, AT ) and singlet (spin-antisymmetric, AS) states.

The transport coeﬃcients have been derived in Ref. [67] using the same for-
malism. Here, we only outline the evaluation of the amplitude associated with

E.2 The low-denstity hard-sphere system

66

(a) Partial sum of the irreducible vertex

Γ(1)

(b) Complete sum of all the diagrams,

deﬁning an integral equation

Figure E.1. Diagrammatic representation of the generalised Bethe Salpeter equation

scattering between particles on the Fermi surface, because this is the kinematical
setup relevant for the determination of transport properties.

As pointed out in Chapter 3, when all four momenta are on the Fermi surface,
the variables that play a role in the description of the system are the two angles θ
and φ deﬁned in Section 4.2.3. The scattering probability is then given by

n3 [AT (θ, φ)]2 + [AS(θ, φ)]2o

W(θ, φ) = π
16

with the scattering amplitudes for the triplet and the singlet states given by

,

(E.1)

(E.2)

(E.3)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:21)(cid:27)

.

AT (θ, φ) = 42a c
(

m

AS(θ, φ) = 16π2a

m

[U(θ, φ) − U(θ, φ + π)] ,
"

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1 + sin θ

3 − sin θ
1 + c
2
2 log
1 − sin θ
π
2
+ 1
4 U(θ, φ) + 1
4 U(θ, φ + π)
"1 − sin2 θ

#

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1 + sin θ

2
1 − sin θ
2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) .

2 cos2 φ
2
2 cos φ
2

sin θ

log

U(θ, φ) =

The function U(θ, φ) appearing in the above equations reads

Note that the singlet-state AS features a contribution linear in the hard-core
radius a, corrected by terms of order c = kF a, while the corresponding triplet-state
quantity, AS, does not exhibit a contribution of zero order in c. This is consistent
with the results of the partial-wave analysis, showing that the amplitude associ-
ated with the ‘-th partial wave is proportional to (ka)‘+1, k being the momentum

Γ++Γ(1)Γ(1)Γ(1)Γ(1)Γ(1)Γ(1)=+...Γ+Γ(1)ΓΓ(1)=E.2 The low-denstity hard-sphere system

67

transfer. As a consequence, the a-dependence in triplet states must be at least
quadratic.

The ﬁnal expression for the scattering probability for the hard-sphere system,

(cid:26)

W(θ, φ) = 16π33a2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1 + sin θ
including corrections of order c, reads
1 + 2c
3 − sin θ
(cid:21)
2
2 log
1 − sin θ
2
+ 1
4 U(θ, φ) + 1
4 U(θ, φ + π)

"

m2

π

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
+ O(c)2(cid:27)

.

(E.4)

The angular averages of the scattering probability, required for the calculation of
the transport coeﬃcients, can be evaluate in closed form. The resulting expressions
are

m2

"

 
3 + π2
(cid:20)
iE = 512π33a2

1 + c
π

!
4 − 4G
(cid:18)111
32 − 75
16 G

1 + c
π

15m2

+ O(c)2

,

#
+ O(c)2(cid:21)

(cid:19)

(E.5)

,

(E.6)

hWi = 32π33a2

D

W

h(1 − cos θ)2 sin φ2φ

where G is the Catalan’s constant G = 0.915996 [67].

List of Figures

1.1 Diagrammatic representation of the T matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1 Correlation functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 The ground state energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 The correlation range
2.4 Radial dependence of veﬀ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1 First and second order irreducible self-energy . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 On-shell imaginary part of Σ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Oﬀ-shell imaginary part of Σ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Quasiparticle spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5 The eﬀective mass m?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.6 Momentum distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.7 Discontinuity of n(k) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.9 CBF and low-density expansion n(k) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.10 HS and nuclear matter n(k) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

veﬀ and CBF n(k)

4.1 HS ground state energy for ν =2 and ν =4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Quasiparticle spectrum for ν = 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 The eﬀective mass m? for ν = 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4
c-dependence of in-medium total cross section . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5 Ecm-dependence of in-medium total cross section . . . . . . . . . . .
c-dependence of the quasiparticle lifetime
4.6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
c-dependence of the shear viscosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.7
4.8
c-dependence of the thermal conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.9 HS and neutron matter n(k)

D.1 The polarisation term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D.2 The correlation term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

E.1 Generalised Bethe Salpeter equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

68

3

17
18
19
20

22
24
25
27
29
30
31
32
33
34

40
41
42
45
45
46
47
48
48

61
61

66

69

Bibliography

[1] Kerson Huang and C. N. Yang: Quantum-mechanical many-body problem with
hard-sphere interaction. Phys. Rev., 105:767, Feb 1957. http://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.105.767. 2

[2] T. D. Lee and C. N. Yang: Many-body problem in quantum mechanics and
quantum statistical mechanics. Phys. Rev., 105:1119, Feb 1957. http://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.105.1119. 2

[3] V.M. Galitskii: The energy spectrum of a non-ideal Fermi gas. Sov. Phys.
http://www.jetp.ac.ru/cgi-bin/dn/e_007_01_

JEPT, 7 (1):104, 1958.
0104.pdf. 2, 3, 31, 33

[4] A.B. Migdal: The momentum distribution of interacting Fermi particles. Sov.
Phys. JEPT, 5(2):333, 1957. http://www.jetp.ac.ru/files/Migdal1957_
en.pdf. 2

[5] A.A. Abrikosov and I.M. Khalatnikov: Concerning a model for a non-ideal
http://www.jetp.ac.ru/

Fermi gas. Sov. Phys. JEPT, 6(5):888, 1958.
cgi-bin/dn/e_006_05_0888.pdf. 2, 3

[6] W. Czyż and K. Gottfried: The momentum distribution in a dilute Fermi gas
at zero temperature. Nuclear Physics, 21:676, 1960, ISSN 0029-5582. http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0029558260900857. 3, 28
[7] V.A. Belyakov: The momentum distribution of particles in a dilute Fermi gas.
Sov. Phys. JEPT, 13(4):850, 1961. http://www.jetp.ac.ru/cgi-bin/dn/e_
013_04_0850. 3, 31, 51

[8] R. Sartor and C. Mahaux: Self-energy, momentum distribution, and eﬀective
masses of a dilute Fermi gas. Phys. Rev. C, 21:1546, Apr 1980. http://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevC.21.1546. 3, 24, 31, 33, 51

[9] R. Sartor and C. Mahaux: Erratum: Self-energy, momentum distribution, and
eﬀective masses of a dilute Fermi gas. Phys. Rev. C, 25:677, Jan 1982. http:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevC.25.677. 3, 31, 51

[10] R.F. Bishop: Ground-state energy of a dilute Fermi Gas.

Annals of
Physics, 77(1–2):106, 1973, ISSN 0003-4916. http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0003491673904119. 3

Bibliography

70

[11] C. DeDominicis and P. C. Martin: Energy of interacting Fermi systems. Phys.
Rev., 105:1417, Feb 1957. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.
105.1417.2. 3

[12] V.N. Eﬁmov and M.Ya. Amusia: Ground state of a rareﬁed Fermi gas of rigid
spheres. Sov. Phys. JEPT, 20(2):388, 1965. http://jetp.ac.ru/cgi-bin/
dn/e_020_02_0388. 3

[13] G.A. Baker: Study of the perturbation series for the ground state of a many-
fermion system. iii. Phys. Rev., 140:B9, Oct 1965. http://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRev.140.B9. 3

[14] V.N. Eﬁmov: The logarithmic term in the ground-state energy formula
1965,
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

of a Fermi-gas of hard spheres.
ISSN 0031-9163.
0031916365911248. 3

Physics Letters, 15(1):49,

[15] V.N. Eﬁmov: A rereﬁed Fermi gas and the two-body scattering problem. Sov.
Phys. JEPT, 22(1):135, 1966. http://jetp.ac.ru/cgi-bin/dn/e_022_01_
0135. 3

[16] M.Ya. Amusia and V.N. Eﬁmov: Pair collisions in a low-density Fermi
http://www.

gas. Annals of Physics, 47(2):377, 1968, ISSN 0003-4916.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0003491668902935. 3

[17] G.A. Baker: Singularity structure of the perturbation series for the ground-
state energy of a many-fermion system. Rev. Mod. Phys., 43:479, Oct 1971.
http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.43.479. 3

[18] M. L. Goldberger and K. M. Watson: Collision Theory. John Wiley & Sons,

1964. 4

[19] R. Jastrow: Many-body problem with strong forces. Phys. Rev., 98:1479, Jun

1955. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.98.1479. 5, 7

[20] V.R. Pandharipande, I. Sick, and P.K.A. deWitt Huberts: Independent particle
motion and correlations in fermion systems. Rev. Mod. Phys., 69:981, Jul
1997. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.69.981. 6

[21] E. Feenberg: Theory of Quantum Fluids. Academic Press, New York, 1969. 6
[22] A. Bijl: The lowest wave function of the symmetrical many particles system.
Physica, 7(9):869 – 886, 1940, ISSN 0031-8914. http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0031891440901665. 7

[23] R.B. Dingle: LI. the zero-point energy of a system of particles. The Lon-
don, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science,
40(304):573, 1949. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14786444908521743. 7

[24] S. D. Drell and Kerson Huang: Many-body forces and nuclear saturation. Phys.
Rev., 91:1527, Sep 1953. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.91.
1527. 7

Bibliography

71

[25] W. L. McMillan: Ground state of liquid 4He. Phys. Rev., 138:A442, Apr 1965.

http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.138.A442. 7

[26] D. Ceperley, G. V. Chester, and M. H. Kalos: Monte Carlo simulation of a
many-fermion study. Phys. Rev. B, 16:3081, Oct 1977. http://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.16.3081. 7

[27] S. Fantoni and S. Rosati: Calculation of the two-body correlation function for
fermion systems. Lettere al Nuovo Cimento (1971-1985), 10(13):545–551, 1974.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02784779. 7, 12

[28] E. Krotscheck and M.L. Ristig: Hypernetted-chain approximation for dense
fermi ﬂuids. Physics Letters A, 48(1):17, 1974, ISSN 0375-9601. http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0375960174902072. 7, 12

[29] S. Fantoni and A. Fabrocini: Correlated basis function theory for fermion sys-
tems. In J. Navarro and A. Polls (editors): Microscopic Quantum Many-Body
Theories and Their Applications, volume 510 of Lecture Notes in Physics,
pages 119–186. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998, ISBN 978-3-540-64471-2.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0104526. 7, 8

[30] J.W. Clark and P. Westhaus: Method of correlated basis functions. Phys. Rev.,
141:833, Jan 1966. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.141.833.
7, 10

[31] E. Krotscheck: Theory of correlated basis functions.

In Fabrocini. A., S.
Fantoni, and E. Krotscheck (editors):
Introduction to Modern Methods of
Quantum Many-Body Theory and Their Applications, volume 7 of Series on
Advances in Quantum Many-Body Theory, chapter 7, page 265. WORLD
SCIENTIFIC, 2002. http://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/
9789812777072_0007. 7

[32] S. Fantoni, B.L. Friman, and V.R. Pandharipande: Correlated basis theory of
nucleon optical potential in nuclear matter. Nuclear Physics A, 399(1):51,
1983, ISSN 0375-9474. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0375947483905936. 9, 49

[33] A. Fabrocini and S. Fantoni: Correlated basis function results for the Ar-
Physics Letters B, 298(3):263, 1993,
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

gonne models of nuclear matter.
ISSN 0370-2693.
0370269393918177. 9

[34] S. Fantoni and V.R. Pandharipande: Momentum distribution of nucleons in
nuclear matter. Nuclear Physics A, 427(3):473, 1984, ISSN 0375-9474. http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0375947484902264. 9

[35] O. Benhar, A. Fabrocini, and S. Fantoni: The nucleon spectral function in
nuclear matter. Nuclear Physics A, 505(2):267, 1989, ISSN 0375-9474. http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0375947489903746. 9, 50

Bibliography

72

[36] O. Benhar, A. Fabrocini, and S. Fantoni: Nuclear-matter green func-
Nuclear Physics A, 550(2):201, 1992,
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

tions in correlated-basis theory.
ISSN 0375-9474.
037594749290679E. 9, 50

[37] S. Fantoni and V.R. Pandharipande: Orthogonalization of correlated states.
http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/

Phys. Rev. C, 37:1697, Apr 1988.
PhysRevC.37.1697. 9

[38] F. Iwamoto and M. Yamada: Cluster development method in the quantum me-
chanics of many particle system, i. Progress of Theoretical Physics, 17(4):543,
1957. http://ptp.oxfordjournals.org/content/17/4/543.abstract. 10

[39] M.L. Ristig and J.W. Clark: The Iwamoto-Yamada cluster expansion:

Its
Nuclear Physics A, 199(2):351, 1973,
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

structure and renormalization.
ISSN 0375-9474.
037594747390554X. 11

[40] A. Mecca, A. Lovato, O. Benhar, and A. Polls: Eﬀective-interaction approach
to the Fermi hard-sphere system. Phys. Rev. C, 91:034325, Mar 2015. http:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevC.91.034325. 14

[41] S. Cowell and V.R. Pandharipande: Weak interactions in hot nucleon matter.
Phys. Rev. C, 73:025801, Feb 2006. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevC.73.025801. 15

[42] O. Benhar and M. Valli: Shear viscosity of neutron matter from realistic
nucleon-nucleon interactions. Phys. Rev. Lett., 99:232501, Dec 2007. http:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.232501. 15, 42, 43, 44, 50

[43] S. Moroni, S. Fantoni, and A. Fabrocini: Deep-inelastic response of liquid he-
lium. Phys. Rev. B, 58:11607, Nov 1998. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevB.58.11607. 17

[44] A. Lovato, O. Benhar, S. Fantoni, and K. E. Schmidt: Comparative study of
three-nucleon potentials in nuclear matter. Phys. Rev. C, 85:024003, Feb 2012.
http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevC.85.024003. 17

[45] A. Fabrocini, S. Fantoni, A. Polls, and S. Rosati: Variational approach to
Il Nuovo Cimento A, 56(1):33–43, 1980,

the fermi hard-sphere system.
ISSN 0369-3546. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02729977. 17, 31, 32

[46] F. Arias de Saavedra, F. Mazzanti, J. Boronat, and A. Polls: Ferromag-
netic transition of a two-component Fermi gas of hard spheres. Phys. Rev.
A, 85:033615, Mar 2012. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.85.
033615. 17

[47] A.L. Fetter and J.D. Walecka: Quantum Theory of Many-Particle Systems.

Dover Publications, New York, 1971. 21, 35

[48] W.H. Dickhoﬀ and D. Van Neck: Many-Body Theory Exposed! World Scientiﬁc,

Singapore, 2008. 21, 28

Bibliography

73

[49] T. Hahn: Cuba—a library for multidimensional numerical integration. Com-
puter Physics Communications, 168(2):78, 2005, ISSN 0010-4655.
http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010465505000792. 24
[50] A.A. Abrikosov, L.P. Gorkov, and I.E. Dzyaloshinski: Methods of Quantum

Field Theory in Statistical Physics. Dover, New York, 1975. 26

[51] O. Benhar, A. Fabrocini, and S. Fantoni: Occupation probabilities and hole-
state strengths in nuclear matter. Phys. Rev. C, 41:R24, Jan 1990. http:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevC.41.R24. 29

[52] S. Fantoni and V.R. Pandharipande: Momentum distribution of nucleons in
nuclear matter. Nuclear Physics A, 427(3):473, 1984, ISSN 0375-9474. http://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0375947484902264. 33, 34,
49

[53] A. Rios, A. Polls, and W.H. Dickhoﬀ: Depletion of the nuclear Fermi sea.
Phys. Rev. C, 79:064308, Jun 2009. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevC.79.064308. 33

[54] M.H. Kalos, D. Levesque, and L. Verlet: Helium at zero temperature with hard-
sphere and other forces. Phys. Rev. A, 9:2178, May 1974. http://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.9.2178. 36

[55] A. Fabrocini, S. Fantoni, A.Y. Illarionov, and K.E. Schmidt: 1S0 superﬂuid
phase transition in neutron matter with realistic nuclear potentials and modern
many-body theories. Phys. Rev. Lett., 95:192501, Nov 2005. http://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.192501. 36

[56] G. Baym and C. Pethick: Landau Fermi-Liquid Theory. John Wiley & Sons,

1991. 36

[57] A.A. Abrikosov and I.M. Khalatnikov: Theory of kinetic phenomena in liquid
He3. Sov. Phys. JEPT, 5(5):887, 1958. http://www.jetp.ac.ru/cgi-bin/
dn/e_005_05_0887.pdf. 36, 37

[58] A.A. Abrikosov and I.M. Khalatnikov: The theory of a fermi liquid (the prop-
erties of liquid 3He at low temperatures). Reports on Progress in Physics,
22(1):329, 1959. http://stacks.iop.org/0034-4885/22/i=1/a=310. 36, 37
[59] G. A. Brooker and J. Sykes: Transport properties of a Fermi liquid. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 21:279, Jul 1968. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
21.279. 37

[60] N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller, and E. Teller:
Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines. The Journal of
Chemical Physics, 21(6):1087, 1953. http://scitation.aip.org/content/
aip/journal/jcp/21/6/10.1063/1.1699114. 38

[61] J.W. Clark: Variational theory of nuclear matter. Progress in Particle and Nu-
clear Physics, 2:89 – 199, 1979. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/0146641079900048. 39

Bibliography

74

[62] M.H. Kalos: Monte Carlo Methods in Quantum Problems. Nato Science Se-
ries C:. Springer Netherlands, 2012, ISBN 9789400963849. https://books.
google.com/books?id=FTnqCAAAQBAJ. 39

[63] R.C Grimm. R.C. and R.G. Storer: Monte-Carlo solution of Schrödinger’s equa-
tion. Journal of Computational Physics, 7(1):134, 1971, ISSN 0021-9991. http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0021999171900544. 39

[64] E. Flowers and N. Itoh: Transport properties of dense matter. I. Astrophys.
J., 206:218, June 1976. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1976ApJ...206.
.218F. 43

[65] E. Flowers and N. Itoh: Transport properties of dense matter. II. Astrophys.
J., 230:847, June 1979. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1979ApJ...230.
.847F. 43

[66] F. Mohling and J. C. Rainwater: Quasiparticle scattering in Fermi ﬂuids.
Journal of Low Temperature Physics, 20(3-4):243, 1975, ISSN 0022-2291.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00117796. 44, 45, 49, 65

[67] J. C. Rainwater and F. Mohling: Transport properties of Fermi ﬂuids at ﬁ-
nite temperatures. Journal of Low Temperature Physics, 23(5-6):519, 1976,
ISSN 0022-2291. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00116293. 44, 46, 47, 48,
49, 65, 67

[68] A. Roggero, A. Mukherjee, and F. Pederiva: Quantum Monte Carlo calcula-
tions of neutron matter with nonlocal chiral interactions. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
112:221103, Jun 2014. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
112.221103. 47, 48

[69] J.P. Jeukenne, A. Lejeune, and C. Mahaux: Many-body theory of nuclear
http://www.

matter. Physics Reports,
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/037015737690017X. 49

f
25(2):83, 1976, ISSN 0370-1573.
¯

[70] W. Zuo, I. Bombaci, and U. Lombardo: Asymmetric nuclear matter from an
extended Brueckner-Hartree-Fock approach. Phys. Rev. C, 60:024605, Jul 1999.
http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevC.60.024605. 49

[71] A. Rios, A. Polls, and I. Vidaña: Hot neutron matter from a self-consistent
Green’s-functions approach. Phys. Rev. C, 79:025802, Feb 2009. http://
link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevC.79.025802. 49

[72] A. Lovato, C. Losa, and O. Benhar: Weak response of cold symmetric nu-
clear matter at three-body cluster level. Nuclear Physics A, 901:22, 2013,
ISSN 0375-9474.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0375947413000419. 50

[73] A. Lovato, O. Benhar, S. Gandolﬁ, and C. Losa: Neutral-current interactions
of low-energy neutrinos in dense neutron matter. Phys. Rev. C, 89:025804,
Feb 2014. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevC.89.025804. 50

Bibliography

75

[74] A. Ramos, A. Polls, and W.H. Dickhoﬀ: Single-particle properties and short-
range correlations in nuclear matter. Nuclear Physics A, 503(1):1, 1989,
ISSN 0375-9474.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0375947489902522. 50

[75] M. Baldo, A. Polls, A. Rios, H. J. Schulze, and I. Vidaña: Comparative study of
neutron and nuclear matter with simpliﬁed Argonne nucleon-nucleon potentials.
Phys. Rev. C, 86:064001, Dec 2012. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevC.86.064001. 50

[76] A. Carbone, A. Polls, and A. Rios: Symmetric nuclear matter with chiral three-
nucleon forces in the self-consistent Green’s functions approach. Phys. Rev.
C, 88:044302, Oct 2013. http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevC.88.
044302. 50

[77] C. Mahaux, P.F. Bortignon, R.A. Broglia, and C.H. Dasso: Dynamics of the
shell model. Physics Reports, 120(1):1 – 274, 1985, ISSN 0370-1573. http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0370157385901000. 60

[78] L.D. Landau: On the theory of the Fermi liquid. Sov. Phys. JEPT, 8(1):70,

1959. http://www.jetp.ac.ru/cgi-bin/dn/e_008_01_0070.pdf. 65

