6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
2
8
0
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Autonomous quantum thermal machines in atom-cavity systems

Mark T. Mitchison,1, 2, ∗ Marcus Huber,3, 4 Javier Prior,5 Mischa P. Woods,6, 7 and Martin B. Plenio8, 1

1Quantum Optics and Laser Science Group, Blackett Laboratory,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2BW, United Kingdom

2Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, United Kingdom

3Group of Applied Physics, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland

4Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain

5Universidad Polit´ecnica de Cartagena, C/Dr Fleming S/N 30202 Cartagena, Spain

6University College of London, Department of Physics & Astronomy, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom

7QuTech, Delft University of Technology, Lorentzweg 1, 2611 CJ Delft, Netherlands

8Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Albert-Einstein Allee 11, Universit¨at Ulm, 89069 Ulm, Germany

An autonomous quantum thermal machine comprising a trapped atom or ion placed inside an
optical cavity is proposed and analysed. Such a machine can operate as a heat engine whose working
medium is the quantised atomic motion, or as an absorption refrigerator which cools without any
work input. Focusing on the refrigerator mode, we predict that it is possible with state-of-the-art
technology to cool a trapped ion almost to its motional ground state using a thermal light source such
as sunlight. We nonetheless ﬁnd that a laser or similar reference system is necessary to stabilise the
cavity frequencies. Furthermore, we establish a direct and heretofore unacknowledged connection
between the abstract theory of quantum absorption refrigerators and practical sideband cooling
techniques. We also highlight and clarify some assumptions underlying several recent theoretical
studies on self-contained quantum engines and refrigerators. Our work indicates that cavity quantum
electrodynamics is a promising and versatile experimental platform for the study of autonomous
thermal machines in the quantum domain.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Cooling of atomic motion is an essential precursor to a
broad range of experiments with trapped atoms and ions.
The development of laser cooling techniques represents a
major achievement of late 20th century physics, having
enabled spectacular advances in our ability to study and
manipulate quantum systems in the laboratory. More
recently, researchers have begun to investigate quantum
absorption refrigerators: machines which can cool using
only a source of heat, without the need for work supplied
by an external ﬁeld, such as a laser. However, the ap-
plication of such devices to practical tasks in quantum
technology, such as the refrigeration of trapped atoms,
has barely been studied thus far.

Absorption refrigerators belong to the class of au-
tonomous thermal machines (ATMs), i.e. those which op-
erate without external control or work. Although such
devices have existed since the dawn of thermodynam-
ics, they have attracted renewed interest from quantum
physicists [1, 2] for several reasons. ATMs are attrac-
tive to the theorist because they dispense of the need for
externally supplied work, whose precise deﬁnition in a
quantum setting is debatable [3–5]. Furthermore, natu-
rally occurring biological ATMs, such as photosynthetic
complexes, have been found to exhibit quantum coher-
ent dynamics [6, 7]. Most importantly, ATMs potentially
oﬀer tremendous practical reductions in energy expendi-
ture. This is because work is usually performed on a
quantum system using a coherent ﬁeld, which consumes

∗ marktmitchison@gmail.com

a macroscopic quantity of power merely in order to con-
trol microscopic degrees of freedom. Conversely, an ab-
sorption chiller may be powered by ubiquitous sources of
thermal energy, such as excess heat generated by another
process, or indeed sunlight. In principle, absorption re-
frigerators can therefore function at no additional energy
cost beyond that required to build the device in the ﬁrst
place.

In the recent theoretical literature, a number of quan-
tum absorption refrigerator (QAR) models have been
proposed and studied [8–16]. In many cases, these models
exhibit new, occasionally controversial, behaviours that
are absent from their classical counterparts. Quantum
correlations have variously been argued to increase eﬃ-
ciency [17], or to play no operational role [18], depending
on the model considered. Performance advantages due to
non-equilibrium [15, 19] or spatially correlated [16] states
of the heat reservoirs have been discussed.
Interesting
eﬀects have also been predicted in the transient regime,
where quantum oscillations may facilitate fast cooling be-
low the steady-state temperature [20, 21]. On the other
hand, only a handful of concrete experimental proposals
for QARs have been put forward [22–24]. It is therefore
of interest to explore other systems which could realise
QARs, in order to better understand their physical limi-
tations and capabilities in a practical context.

With this goal in mind, we introduce and study a novel
design for a QAR in a cavity optomechanical set-up using
trapped atoms [25–28] or ions [29–31]. We identify the
necessary ingredients for the construction of such a ma-
chine, which include high-ﬁnesse optical cavities whose
line width is smaller than the oscillation frequency of
the trapped atom, although neither strong coupling nor

high cooperativity are needed. Assuming that the neces-
sary conditions are met, we show that driving the cavity
with incoherent thermal light leads to signiﬁcant cool-
ing of the atomic motion. In particular, we predict that
sunlight may be used to cool a trapped ion down to its
motional ground state with high ﬁdelity.
Interestingly,
we ﬁnd that a laser is indispensable even in this context,
however its role in our set-up is not to perform work,
but rather to provide a stable frequency reference. Fur-
thermore, the refrigeration cycle in our scheme can be
easily understood by direct analogy with laser sideband
cooling. This establishes a direct connection between the
abstract theory of QARs and practical cooling techniques
that are well known in atomic physics.

Trapped-ion systems have already proved to be a suc-
cessful experimental testing ground for quantum thermo-
dynamics, with the recent proposal and subsequent real-
isation of a heat engine using a single ion as the working
medium [32, 33]. However, it is not yet clear how useful
work could be extracted from such a device. In contrast,
we focus on cooling, a task that has a clear practical ap-
plication in quantum state preparation. We also note
that several practical laser cooling schemes for trapped
atoms using optical cavities already exist [34–37]. Our
proposal diﬀers from all of these, primarily because the
energy for cooling is provided by a thermal source such as
sunlight. Finally, we mention a closely related recent arti-
cle [23], describing a QAR comprising a nano-mechanical
oscillator interacting with a pair of optical resonators.
Our scheme works by a similar mechanism, but relies
on a diﬀerent interaction Hamiltonian, and is capable of
achieving temperatures lower by many orders of magni-
tude, even with much less intense thermal light input.
We aim to elucidate the connections between schemes
such as that of Ref. [23], conventional sideband cooling,
and other QAR models discussed in the recent theoretical
literature.

This paper is arranged as follows.

In Section II we
outline the general theory of the three-body quantum ab-
sorption refrigerator and introduce some basic concepts.
Section III is concerned with an idealised model involving
a trapped atom inside a single optical cavity, which serves
to illustrate some of the physical principles and limita-
tions in a simpliﬁed context. In Section IV we describe
our main proposal to build an absorption refrigerator us-
ing trapped atoms or ions inside a pair of optical cavities,
and analyse the performance of the refrigerator in detail.
We discuss our results and conclude in Section V. Math-
ematical details are provided in the appendices.

2

FIG. 1. Illustration of a quantum absorption refrigerator com-
prising three mutually interacting subsystems, each possess-
ing a transition of energy Ej, such that EA + EB = EC.
Subsystem B couples to a heat reservoir at temperature Th
while the others interact with the environment at room tem-
perature Tr. Red arrows show the direction of steady-state
heat ﬂow through the machine.

We also take this opportunity to introduce the useful
concepts of virtual qubits and virtual temperatures, and
to justify the ﬁgures of merit used to characterise re-
frigerator performance in subsequent sections. Readers
familiar with the literature on QARs may wish to skip to
Section III, where we specialise to atom-cavity systems.
Unless otherwise indicated, we use units of energy and
temperature such that  = 1 and kB = 1.

A. Description of the model

The three-body quantum absorption refrigerator com-

prises three subsystems with Hamiltonian

H = Xj=A,B,C

Hj,

(1)

where the operators Hj act non-trivially on subsystem j
only. Subsystem A is the body to be cooled. We assume
that it has an equally spaced energy spectrum with level
splitting EA, i.e.

HA = EA

D−1

Xn=0

n |nihn| ,

(2)

where D is the local Hilbert space dimension (possibly
inﬁnite). This general form may describe a qubit, a spin
or a harmonic oscillator. We also assume that HB and
HC each possess at least one pair of eigenstates diﬀering
in energy by Ej , such that

II. THREE-BODY QUANTUM ABSORPTION

REFRIGERATOR

EA + EB = EC .

(3)

In this section we introduce some fundamental con-
cepts which form the basis for our work. In particular,
we provide a concise, general exposition of the abstract
model of the three-body QAR introduced in Refs. [8, 9].

The form of HB and HC is otherwise arbitrary. The sub-
systems are coupled together by a three-body interaction

V = g(cid:16)LALBL†

BLC(cid:17) ,

C + L†

AL†

(4)

where g is the interaction energy and Lj is a lowering op-
erator connecting pairs of Hamiltonian eigenstates sepa-
rated by an energy Ej, i.e.

[H, Lj] = −EjLj,

(5)

while L†
j is the corresponding raising operator. The con-
dition (3) ensures that [H, V ] = 0, so that the interac-
tion (4) enacts resonant transitions between degenerate
energy eigenstates of H.

Cooling is achieved by coupling subsystem B to a hot
thermal bath at temperature Th > Tr, while subsystems
A and C remain coupled to the environment at temper-
ature Tr. Energy exchange between the subsystems then
allows heat to naturally ﬂow from the hot reservoir to the
colder environment. However, due to the speciﬁc form of
the interaction (4), subsystem C can only absorb a quan-
tum of energy from the hot body B by simultaneously
absorbing energy from A, thus leading to cooling. The
heat ﬂow through the refrigerator is illustrated in Fig. 1.

B. Virtual qubits and virtual temperatures

The concepts of virtual qubits and virtual tempera-
tures provide a convenient and intuitive way to analyse
autonomous thermal machines [38]. A virtual qubit is
a pair of states in the composite Hilbert space of sub-
systems B and C which directly couples to the target
subsystem A. By choosing the parameters of the system
appropriately, the virtual qubit can be placed at an ef-
fective virtual temperature which may be lower than Tr.
The operation of the refrigerator can then be understood
as a simple thermalisation process between A and the
virtual qubit.

To make this notion explicit, we observe that the in-

teraction Hamiltonian (4) can be written as

v + L†

V = g(cid:16)LAL†
BLC . Eqs. (3) and (5) together imply that

ALv(cid:17) ,

(6)

where Lv = L†

[H, Lv] = −EALv.

(7)

This means that Lv is a lowering operator connecting
pairs of states diﬀering by an energy EA in the composite
Hilbert space of B and C. Each of these pairs of states is
called a virtual qubit. The interaction (6) then describes
resonant energy exchange between the virtual qubits and
A.

When each subsystem is at thermal equilibrium with
its respective bath, the populations of the virtual qubit
states are thermally distributed at a virtual temperature

3

the refrigerator are chosen so that Tv < Tr, subsystem A
will be pushed towards a lower temperature as it equili-
brates with the virtual qubits under the interaction (6).
This eﬀect is counteracted by the thermalising inﬂuence
of the reservoir interacting with A, thus establishing a
heat current ﬂowing from the environment surrounding
A into the refrigerator. See Ref. [38] for a more complete
discussion of virtual qubits and temperatures.

To conclude this section, we brieﬂy mention that if the
assumption that Th > Tr is relaxed, one can arrange for
Tv to take any value by adjusting the bath temperatures
and energy splittings. If Tv > Tr, then the steady-state
temperature of A is increased and the system operates as
a heat pump. On the other hand, if Tv < 0 the machine
tries to induce population inversion in the state of A,
which can be thought of as the quantum analogue of a
classical heat engine lifting a weight [38]. In the following,
we restrict our attention to the absorption chiller mode,
where Th ≫ Tr. However, our results could be applied
equally well to the construction and study of autonomous
quantum heat pumps and engines.

C. Figures of merit

In order to analyse the performance of a refrigerator,
one must choose ﬁgures of merit. The appropriate ﬁgure
of merit depends on the problem at hand, as we now
explain.

1. Coeﬃcient of performance and cooling power

From one viewpoint, the refrigerator can be seen as
a device which extracts heat from the environment sur-
rounding subsystem A. Thus, the refrigerator perfor-
mance is characterised by the stationary heat currents
ﬂowing to and from the reservoirs. The cooling power
˙QA gives the heat current into the refrigerator from the
environment of A, while ˙QB gives the input power cor-
responding to the heat current ﬂowing in from the hot
reservoir. Therefore, the relevant ﬁgure of merit is the
coeﬃcient of performance ǫ = ˙QA/ ˙QB.

Note that this point of view makes sense only if the
reservoirs connected to subsystems A and C are consid-
ered as separate entities. If subsystems A and C are in
fact connected to the same environment, the net eﬀect of
the machine is simply to dump ˙QB energy per unit time
from the hot reservoir into this environment.

Assuming that the reservoirs connected to A and C are
independent, we can estimate the coeﬃcient of perfor-
mance using the equations of motion for the mean local
energies of subsystems A and B,

Tv =

EA

EC /Tr − EB/Th

.

(8)

dhHj i

dt

= ˙Qj + igEj DLALBL†

C − L†

AL†

BLCE

(9)

That is to say, each pair of virtual qubit states is popu-
lated in the ratio e−EA/Tv . As long as the parameters of

for j = A, B, where the second term on the right-hand
side (RHS) follows from the Heisenberg equation gener-

ated by the interaction Hamiltonian (4). In the station-
ary state, the derivatives of the mean energies vanish,
leading to the following simple expression for the coeﬃ-
cient of performance

ǫ =

EA
EB

.

(10)

We see that the coeﬃcient of performance grows without
limit as EA is increased while holding EB ﬁxed (assum-
ing that Eq. (3) is always satisﬁed). It is important to
note that our approximate analysis ignores the contribu-
tion of the interaction energy to the heat currents, and is
therefore only strictly correct in the weak-coupling limit
of vanishingly small g [18].

2. Achievable temperature and cooling time

In the above scenario, one uses a microscopic machine
to cool a macroscopic body, namely the reservoir con-
nected to A. Perhaps a more appropriate application
of a quantum refrigerator is to cool a microscopic sys-
tem, namely subsystem A itself. From this viewpoint,
the most important ﬁgure of merit is the achievable tem-
perature (or more generally, the achievable energy and
entropy) of subsystem A [20].

The achievable steady-state temperature can be esti-
mated from the virtual temperature given by Eq. (8).
This takes its minimal value when the temperature of
the hot bath is large, from which we ﬁnd

lim

Th→∞

Tv =

EA
EC

Tr =

ǫ

1 + ǫ

Tr,

(11)

where we have used Eqs. (3) and (10) to rewrite the vir-
tual temperature in terms of the coeﬃcient of perfor-
mance ǫ. We ﬁnd that the virtual temperature is min-
imised when ǫ is small. This illustrates that the stan-
dard thermodynamic measures of steady-state refrigera-
tor performance are essentially irrelevant when the task
at hand is to cool a quantum system having a ﬁnite en-
ergy.

Since the refrigerator is out of equilibrium, the thermo-
dynamic temperature of A may not be strictly deﬁned.
For our purposes, it is suﬃcient to adopt the mean energy
hHAi as a ﬁgure of merit, rather than the temperature.
This also provides an adequate measure of entropy, since
the von Neumann entropy of a state with mean energy
hHAi is upper-bounded by that of a Gibbs state having
the same mean energy. If the cooling is subject to time
constraints, the relaxation time (the time taken for hHAi
to reach its stationary value) is also a measure of perfor-
mance. However, the relaxation time is a non-universal
ﬁgure of merit since it may depend on the initial condi-
tions.

Throughout the remainder of this article we adopt the
present framework, where the objective is to cool sub-
system A. This viewpoint is particularly appropriate for

4

FIG. 2. Schematic of the single cavity set-up. The trap poten-
tial minimum coincides with an electric-ﬁeld node of a cavity
mode with frequency ω = ε − ν. Dissipation leads to line
widths Γ and κ for the electronic transition and the cavity
mode, respectively, while λ is the intrinsic heating rate of the
atomic motion in the trap.

quantum technology applications. Here, the motivation
for cooling a quantum system is typically to maximise
the eﬃciency of subsequent control operations by reduc-
ing uncertainty over the initial conditions, i.e. by min-
imising the entropy of the quantum system. We therefore
neglect traditional eﬃciency measures such as the coef-
ﬁcient of performance ǫ, choosing rather to focus on the
mean energy of the subsystems constituting the refriger-
ator, in particular that of the target body A.

III. SINGLE-CAVITY CONFIGURATION

In this section we introduce an idealised model of a
quantum absorption refrigerator comprising a trapped
atom inside a single optical cavity. In order to simplify
the analysis, several details are disregarded in this sec-
tion. Nevertheless, this simpliﬁed model is suﬃcient to
illustrate the physical principles involved. The present
toy model also has the advantage of making the connec-
tion with laser sideband cooling obvious, while demon-
strating some of the practical limitations which arise in
the cavity quantum electrodynamics (CQED) setting.

A. Description of the system

We consider a single atom or ion of mass M conﬁned
in the x direction by a harmonic potential with oscilla-
tion frequency ν/2π. The atom is assumed to possess
a pair of relevant internal electronic states |↓i and |↑i
separated by an energy ε. The trap is placed inside an
optical cavity whose axis is aligned in the x direction.
The minimum of the harmonic potential is placed at a
node of the electric ﬁeld of a cavity mode with frequency
ω/2π chosen such that ω = ε − ν. We assume that ω ∼ ε
and ε, ω ≫ ν, as appropriate for typical optical and vi-
brational frequencies. The geometry of the problem is
depicted schematically in Fig. 2.

The free Hamiltonian of the system is

H1 = νa†a + ωb†b + εσ+σ−,

(12)

where the bosonic ladder operators a† and b† respectively
create motional quanta (phonons) and light quanta (pho-
tons), while σ− = |↓ih↑| = (σ+)† is the atomic lower-
ing operator. We have assumed that all other electronic
states and vibrational or cavity modes are far oﬀ-resonant
and can be neglected.

The interaction between the atom and the cavity ﬁeld

in the dipole approximation reads as

(13)

V1 = g sin(cid:2)η(cid:0)a + a†(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:0)b + b†(cid:1)(cid:0)σ− + σ+(cid:1) ,
Dicke parameter is deﬁned as η = ω/p2M c2

where g is the cavity coupling constant and the Lamb-
0ν, with c0
the speed of light in vacuum. The form of the inter-
action (13) reﬂects the symmetry of the problem when
the harmonic potential minimum coincides exactly with
an electric ﬁeld node. The electric ﬁeld operator then
changes sign under a parity transformation of the atomic
centre-of-mass coordinate. This gives rise to a selection
rule allowing only transitions between motional states of
opposite parity. Since the vibrational energy eigenstates
have deﬁnite parity, the absorption or emission of a pho-
ton must therefore be accompanied by a change in the
number of phonons.

We now show that the system approximately realises
a QAR, and estimate its virtual temperature. We work
in the limit η ≪ 1, which requires that the cavity mode
wavelength is much larger than the characteristic length
scale of atomic motion. We can therefore invoke the
Lamb-Dicke approximation (LDA) and expand Eq. (13)
to ﬁrst order in η. We also make the rotating wave ap-
proximation (RWA) by discarding counter-rotating terms
at optical frequency, leading to

V1 ≈ gη(cid:0)a + a†(cid:1)(cid:0)bσ+ + b†σ−(cid:1) .

(14)

Assuming that terms counter-rotating at frequency ±2ν
can also be neglected, we ﬁnally obtain

5

FIG. 3. Level scheme showing the manifold of electronic and
vibrational states for the single-cavity conﬁguration. Thermal
cavity photons resonant with the red sideband transition are
absorbed, then the electronic state is reset by spontaneous
emission, driving the system down the ladder of vibrational
states.

Since Th ≫ Tr and ν ≪ ε, we ﬁnd that

Tv
Tr

≈

ν
ε

.

(17)

The ratio of frequencies is typically ν/ε ∼ 10−8 or less,
implying that very low virtual temperatures are achiev-
able.

The refrigerator operation can be understood by a
straightforward analogy with laser sideband cooling. The
optical cavity behaves as a ﬁlter which singles out fre-
quencies close to the red sideband ωred = ε − ν. Pump-
ing the cavity with thermal light increases the number of
photons with the correct frequency to drive the red side-
band transition. Spontaneous emission then resets the
electronic state, completing the cooling cycle (see Fig. 3).
So long as the blue sideband frequency ωblue = ε + ν is
far oﬀ-resonant, the absorption of thermal cavity photons
drives the motion towards its ground state.

(15)

B. Master equation

V1 ≈ gη(cid:0)abσ+ + a†b†σ−(cid:1) ,

We therefore ﬁnd under these assumptions that the sys-
tem exhibits a three-body interaction of the type (4).
Note that the approximation leading to Eq. (17) is valid
only when gη ≪ 2ν. Eq. (17) also assumes that the line
widths of relevant transitions are much smaller than the
trap frequency ν, as discussed in detail in Section III C.
The heat reservoir is provided by coupling thermal
light at a high temperature Th into the cavity resonator.
Assuming that the thermal light source is well collimated,
the electronic transition couples only to the ambient ra-
diation ﬁeld at room temperature Tr ≪ Th, which leads
to spontaneous emission. Meanwhile, the motion of the
atom undergoes intrinsic heating in the trap, for example
due to ﬂuctuations of the trapping potential.

The virtual qubit states in the machine are the pairs
{|nb, ↓i , |nb − 1, ↑i}, where |nbi denotes a Fock state with
nb quanta in the cavity mode. The virtual temperature
of the refrigerator is therefore

Tv =

ν

ε/Tr − ω/Th

.

(16)

In order to study the dynamics of the model, we employ
a quantum master equation for the density operator ρ of
the form

dρ
dt

= −i[H1 + V1, ρ] + Xj=a,b,σ

Lj ρ.

(18)

The superoperators Lj are dissipative contributions due
to the coupling of each subsystem to its respective reser-
voir. The term La describes motional heating, Lb corre-
sponds to the thermal pumping of the cavity, while Lσ
relates to spontaneous emission.

Introducing the general notation for a Lindblad dissi-

pator

D[L]ρ = LρL† −

1
2

{L†L, ρ},

the motional heating is described by

La = λ(1 + ¯n−1

a )D[a] + λD[a†],

(19)

(20)

where ¯na = (eν/Tr −1)−1 is the equilibrium phonon num-
ber at room temperature. Since ¯n−1
a ≈ 0 to an excellent
approximation under typical laboratory conditions, the
dissipator (20) describes approximately linear growth of
the phonon number at a constant heating rate λ. Pump-
ing of the cavity with thermal light is described by

Lb = 2κ(1 + ¯nb)D[b] + 2κ¯nbD[b†],

(21)

where κ is the cavity line width and ¯nb = (eω/Th − 1)−1 is
the equilibrium photon number at temperature Th. For
simplicity, we have assumed here that the thermal driv-
ing is applied to both sides of the cavity. Spontaneous
emission is described by the Liouvillian

Lσ = Γ(1 + ¯nσ)Z 1

−1

du Π(u)D[eiηu(a+a†)σ−]

+ Γ¯nσZ 1

−1

du Π(u)D[e−iηu(a+a†)σ+]

(22)

with ¯nσ = (eε/Tr − 1)−1, while Π(u) is the angular dis-
tribution of emitted photons as a function of u = cos θ,
where θ is the angle subtended from the x axis by the
photon wave vector. Note that ¯nσ ≈ 0 at optical frequen-
cies and room temperature, and therefore the absorption
term on the second line of Eq. (22) is typically negligible.

C. Line broadening and other constraints

Unfortunately, the single-cavity refrigerator suﬀers
from several severe practical limitations. The most im-
portant of these is due to line broadening. The picture
illustrated in Fig. 3, described by the Hamiltonian (15),
is valid when the sideband transitions are “sharp”, in the
sense of having a well-deﬁned frequency. However, ther-
mal dissipation implies some unavoidable energy uncer-
tainty due to the ﬁnite lifetime of the states involved. Sig-
niﬁcant cooling is only possible in the sideband-resolved
regime, where the frequency uncertainty of the relevant
transitions is much less than ν. Otherwise, line broad-
ening brings the blue sideband transition partially onto
resonance, leading to heating rather than cooling.
In
particular, this means that we must have λ, κ, Γ < ν for
eﬀective refrigeration.

In order to illustrate the eﬀect of line broadening, we
compute the steady-state phonon occupation na(∞) =
Tr[a†aρ∞], where ρ∞ is the stationary quantum state
satisfying dρ∞/dt = Lρ∞ = 0, with L given by the RHS
of Eq. (18). The problem is simpliﬁed by taking the inter-
action Hamiltonian (14) under the LDA and RWA, and
making the approximation ¯n−1
a ≈ 0 ≈ ¯nσ, leaving just
ﬁve free parameters governing the phonon population dy-
namics: λ, η, κ, ¯nb and Γ. We compute the stationary
state by representing L as a matrix and solving the eigen-
value equation Lρ∞ = 0. The integral in Eq. (22) is nu-
merically approximated by a trapezoidal rule. We take
Π(u) = 3(1 + u2)/8, as appropriate for a point dipole

6

FIG. 4. Qualitative dependence of the steady-state phonon
occupation na(∞) on the spontaneous emission rate Γ and
the cavity decay constant κ, with η = 0.05, g = ν, ¯nb = 10−3
and λ = 0. The scale for na(∞) goes from blue (cold) to red
(hot).

aligned perpendicularly to the cavity axis. Sampling a
grid of 100 evenly spaced points in the interval u ∈ [−1, 1]
is suﬃcient to obtain convergence. The resulting Liouvil-
lian matrix has low sparsity and is therefore challenging
to diagonalise, which limits the achievable Hilbert space
dimension considerably. We use 21 phonon states and 4
cavity photon states in total. The results are therefore
quantitatively inaccurate, but suﬃce to obtain qualita-
tive trends.

The qualitative dependence of na(∞) on the dissipa-
tion rates κ and Γ is plotted for some example parameters
in Fig. 4. We see that the optimum operating regime is
κ, Γ ≪ ν, as expected. The performance deteriorates
rapidly as Γ or κ is increased above the trap frequency
ν. Increasing the spontaneous emission rate has a par-
ticularly adverse eﬀect, because the recoil momentum of
emitted photons leads to further motional heating (see
Eq. (22)). This is highly problematic, because the spon-
taneous emission rate in atomic two-level systems is ﬁxed
by Nature, and may be much larger than a typical vi-
brational frequency, on the order of tens or hundreds of
megaherz.

The deleterious eﬀect of line broadening is worsened
when the trapping potential minimum is not placed ex-
actly on the electric-ﬁeld node of the cavity. Outside
of the sideband-resolved regime, we have found that the
system is remarkably sensitive to small misalignments of
the trapping potential: displacements of a few nanome-
tres away from the cavity ﬁeld node lead to an almost
complete disappearance of the cooling eﬀect. This can
be understood as follows. Away from the node, cavity
photons may be emitted and absorbed without aﬀecting
the vibrational state of the atom. Photon absorption in
particular depletes the cavity ﬁeld and reduces the ef-
fective temperature of the hot reservoir. Although these

transitions, which occur at the so-called carrier frequency
ε, are oﬀ-resonant in principle, they become important
when levels are broadened.

Finally, in order to enforce the resonance condition
ω = ε − ν, it is necessary to stabilise the length of the
cavity to prevent frequency drift. This may be achieved,
for example, by continuously driving the cavity with a
laser ﬁeld and using the Pound-Drever-Hall technique
[39].
Importantly, this stabilisation can be performed
using other polarisation modes or diﬀerent cavity har-
monics from those directly relevant for the refrigerator’s
operation. Of course, this use of an external laser ﬁeld
means that the machine is not truly autonomous. How-
ever, the laser does not supply any work used directly for
cooling. Rather, its role is to provide a stable frequency
reference.

IV. CROSSED-CAVITY CONFIGURATION

In this section we describe a detailed model of a quan-
tum absorption refrigerator comprising a trapped atom
within a pair of perpendicular optical cavities. The pur-
pose of the additional cavity is to ameliorate the adverse
eﬀects of spontaneous emission. We predict that such a
machine powered by sunlight can cool a trapped ion to
near its motional ground state, and explicitly delineate
the parameter regime in which this is possible.

A. Description of the model

As in Section III A, we consider a harmonically trapped
atom or ion of mass M , possessing a pair of electronic
states |↓i and |↑i separated by energy ε. In this section
we explicitly model the atomic motion in both the x and
y directions, although it will shortly be shown that the y
coordinate decouples from the dynamics for our chosen
conﬁguration. For simplicity of presentation, we make
the inessential assumption of equal oscillation frequencies
in both the x and y directions, given by ν/2π.

The atom is placed inside a pair of optical cavities b and
c, with axes aligned in the x and y direction, respectively.
These cavities have relevant modes at frequencies ωb/2π
and ωc/2π. The minimum of the trap potential is placed
a distance db from a node of the electric ﬁeld in cavity
b, and a distance dc from an anti-node of cavity c. The
geometry of the problem is indicated in Fig. 5.

The free Hamiltonian of the system is

H2 = νa†

xax + νa†

yay + ωbb†b + ωcc†c + εσ+σ−,

(23)

where a†
x (ay) creates motional excitations in the x direc-
tion (y direction), b† (c†) creates photons in the cavity
parallel to the x axis (y axis), and σ− = |↓ih↑| = (σ+)†.

7

FIG. 5. Schematic of the crossed-cavity set-up. An atom is
trapped close to an electric-ﬁeld node of cavity mode b and
an anti-node of cavity mode c. Pumping mode b with thermal
light results in cooling of the atomic motion. A similar conﬁg-
uration was studied in Ref. [40], in the context of dissipative
entanglement generation.

The light-matter interaction Hamiltonian reads as

V2 = gb sin(cid:2)δb + ηb(cid:0)ax + a†
+ gc cos(cid:2)δc + ηc(cid:0)ay + a†

x(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:0)b + b†(cid:1)(cid:0)σ− + σ+(cid:1)
y(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:0)c + c†(cid:1)(cid:0)σ− + σ+(cid:1) ,

(24)

where gj is the coupling constant, ηj = ωj/p2M c2

0ν
is the Lamb-Dicke parameter, and δj = djωj/c0 is the
dimensionless misalignment for cavity j = b, c. As be-
fore, all other cavity and vibrational modes and electronic
states are assumed be far oﬀ-resonant.

Assuming that ηj, δj ≪ 1, we expand Eq. (24) to ﬁrst
order in small quantities and make the RWA, which yields

V2 ≈ ˜gbηb(cid:0)ax + a†

x(cid:1)(cid:0)bσ+ + b†σ−(cid:1) + ˜gc(cid:0)cσ+ + c†σ−(cid:1)

(25)

+ hb(cid:0)bσ+ + b†σ−(cid:1) ,

where ˜gb/c = gb/c cos δb/c and hb = gb sin δb. We see
that to lowest order, the excitation of phonons in the y
direction is suppressed close to the anti-node of cavity
c. The motion in the y direction is therefore neglected
from here on. In order to simplify the notation we also
set ax = a and ηb = η.

We demand that the cavities be tuned to two-photon
resonance with the red sideband, ωc − ωb = ν, yet de-
tuned from the carrier by an amount ∆ = ωc − ε, where
ε ≫ |∆| ≫ gb/c. Direct excitation of the internal state
of the atom, and the associated spontaneous emission, is
thus strongly suppressed. However, due to the resonance
condition ωc = ωb + ν, the cavities can coherently ex-
change photons, assisted by the creation or destruction
of phonons.
In the following subsection, we show that
this process is described by an eﬀective interaction

Veﬀ = k(cid:0)abc† + a†b†c(cid:1) ,

(26)

where k = ˜gb˜gcη/∆. This obviously corresponds to the
general form (4).

8

where La and Lσ are respectively deﬁned by Eqs. (20)
and (22). The coupling of cavity b to the external elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld is described by

Lb = κb (2 + ¯nb) D[b] + κb¯nbD[b†],

(29)

where κb is the cavity line width and ¯nb = (cid:0)eωb/Th − 1(cid:1)−1

is the equilibrium photon number at temperature Th.
Eq. (29) represents thermal driving applied to only one
side of cavity b, while the other side couples to the vac-
uum (which approximates the electric ﬁeld at room tem-
perature). Cavity c couples to the environment via the
Liouvillian

Lc = 2κc(1 + ¯nc)D[c] + 2κc¯ncD[c†],

(30)

where κc is the corresponding line width, and ¯nc =
(eωc/Tr − 1)−1, with ¯nc ≈ 0 for optical frequencies at
room temperature.

We note that direct excitation of the electronic degrees
of freedom is suppressed by the large detuning |∆| ≫
˜gb/c, hb. Furthermore, Γ will typically be the largest dissi-
pative frequency scale in the system, so that correlations
between the electronic degrees of freedom and the rest of
the system decay rapidly on the time scales relevant for
the dynamics of the atomic motion. These assumptions
enable us to simplify the model by adiabatically elimi-
nating the excited electronic state within a Born-Markov
approximation.

Using standard projection operator techniques [41–44],
a master equation describing the reduced density matrix
ρ(t) = Trσ[χ(t)] of the motional and cavity modes in the
electronic ground state manifold is derived in Appendix
A. The result is

dρ
dt

= −i[Habc + δHabc + Veﬀ , ρ] + Lseρ + Xj=a,b,c

Ljρ, (31)

where

Habc = νa†a + ωbb†b + ωcc†c.

(32)

The Hamiltonian δHabc is a small Lamb-shift contribu-
tion which renormalises the energy levels of Habc. The
interaction term is of the form

Veﬀ = k(cid:0)abc† + a†b†c(cid:1) .

(33)

In the limit |∆| ≫ Γ, the eﬀective coupling constant is
found to be k = ˜gb˜gcη/∆. The generator Lse describes
additional dissipative processes due to spontaneous emis-
sion from the excited state, which are suppressed by a
factor of order Γ/∆ relative to the coherent coupling k.
Full expressions for all parameters entering Eq. (31) can
be found in the appendix.

We now summarise the approximations underlying
Eq. (31). The assumption of negligible population of the
excited electronic state is valid so long as the detuning is
suﬃciently large, i.e.

˜gbη, hb, ˜gc ≪ |∆|.

(34)

FIG. 6. Level scheme for the crossed-cavity conﬁguration
showing the direct analogy with Raman sideband cooling.
Cooling on the red sideband occurs via a two-photon tran-
sition in which photons are exchanged between the two cav-
ities. Spontaneous emission from the excited electronic state
is suppressed by the detuning ∆.

The refrigerator is powered by pumping cavity mode
b with hot thermal light at temperature Th, while cavity
mode c couples to the radiation ﬁeld at room temperature
Tr. The virtual qubit states for this system are the pairs
{|nb, nci , |nb − 1, nc + 1i}. The virtual temperature is
given by

Tv =

ν

ωc/Tr − ωb/Th

≈

ν
ωc

Tr,

(27)

since Th ≫ Tr and ωc ≫ ν, and we see again that very
low virtual temperatures can be obtained.

The operation of the refrigerator can be understood by
analogy with Raman laser sideband cooling (see Fig. 6).
Addressing the red sideband with a two-photon tran-
sition avoids populating the fast-decaying excited elec-
tronic state. The line width of the transition is therefore
determined by the cavity decay rates, which in principle
may be made much smaller than the spontaneous emis-
sion rate. This makes achieving the sideband-resolved
regime a feasible prospect in this system.

The cavity lengths must be actively stabilised in order
to avoid frequency drift away from the resonance condi-
tion ωc − ωb = ν. As described in Section III C, this sta-
bilisation can be performed non-invasively using a laser.
This makes the double-cavity refrigerator not truly au-
tonomous. However, we emphasise again that the role of
the laser is to provide a frequency reference, rather than
to directly perform work used for cooling.

B. Master equation

We write the density operator of the full system includ-
ing the electronic degrees of freedom as χ. This satisﬁes
the master equation

dχ
dt

= −i[H2 + V2, χ] + Xj=a,b,c,σ

Ljχ,

(28)

(a)

(b)

9

FIG. 7. Steady-state phonon occupation of the crossed-cavity absorption refrigerator driven by sunlight. Parameters are given
in Table I, with (a) ﬁxed ∆/2π = 100 MHz and variable g and κ, and (b) ﬁxed κ/2π = 0.5 MHz and variable k and ∆.

We have also neglected the motional recoil due to spon-
taneous emission. This is justiﬁed when the spontaneous
emission is isotropic and the system is deep in the Lamb-
Dicke regime, so that

η2Γ . ˜gbη, hb, ˜gc.

(35)

The Born-Markov assumption requires the memory time
of the electronic degrees of freedom to be much shorter
than the characteristic time scales of the eﬀective evolu-
tion, which implies

k, κb/c, δE ≪ Γ,

(36)

where δE represents any energy shift appearing in δHabc.
Finally, in order to put the master equation (31) into
Lindblad form, we must perform a rotating-wave approx-
imation, valid when

k, κb/c, δE ≪ ν,

(37)

which corresponds to the deﬁnition of the sideband-
resolved regime for this system.

dρ∞/dt = Lρ∞ = 0, with L deﬁned by the RHS of
Eq. (31). We use a truncated Hilbert space with 71
phonon states and 4 states per cavity mode. Such a small
Hilbert space dimension for the cavity modes is justiﬁed
since the mean number of cavity photons in the steady
state is nb(∞) ≈ 10−3 and nc(∞) < 10−4 in cavities
b and c, respectively, for all parameters considered. We
have checked that decreasing the Hilbert space dimension
leads to negligible changes in the results.

Our predictions for na(∞) are shown in Fig. 7. We
observe that sunlight at Th = 5800 K is suﬃcient to
drive the phonon almost to its ground state, so long as
the eﬀective coupling constant k is suﬃciently large. In
Fig. 7(a) we show that, in the regime of eﬀective cool-
ing, the steady-state phonon occupation is reduced by
increasing κ for ﬁxed g. Nevertheless, κ must remain
smaller than ν for the system to remain in the sideband-
resolved regime (Eq. (37)), which represents a key factor
limiting the achievable steady-state phonon occupation.
In Fig. 7(b) we demonstrate that increasing ∆ for ﬁxed
k can improve performance by suppressing incoherent ef-

C. Phonon dynamics

In this subsection we characterise the performance of
the refrigerator in terms of the steady-state phonon oc-
cupation na(∞), focussing speciﬁcally on cooling using
sunlight as an energy source. We take representative pa-
rameters pertaining to 171Yb+ (listed in Table I). This
species is a good choice due to its low mass and corre-
spondingly small photon recoil, in addition to the exis-
tence of a closed dipole-allowed cooling transition. How-
ever, one could equally well consider other species of ion
or neutral atom.

From here on we set gb/c = g and κb/c = κ for sim-
plicity. We compute na(∞) = Tr[a†aρ∞] by solving

Symbol

Th
Tr

Parameter
Hot temperature
Room temperature
Trap frequency
Lamb-Dicke parameter
Carrier frequency
ε/2π
Spontaneous emission rate Γ/2π
Trap heating rate
Cavity misalignment

ν/2π

η

λ

db = dc

Value
5800 K
300 K
5 MHz
0.041
810 THz
20 MHz
10 quanta/s
10 nm

TABLE I. Table of parameters used in numerical calculations.

fects associated with spontaneous emission.

In the limit of |∆| ≫ Γ and k ≪ κ, we can give a
rough analytical estimate of the relaxation time. In this
regime we can derive an eﬀective evolution equation for
the motional degrees of freedom by tracing over the cav-
ity modes, as shown in Appendix B. This approximate
equation of motion can be solved to give the phonon pop-
ulation as a function of time

na(t) = n∞ + e−γt (n0 − n∞) ,

(38)

where n∞ = λ/γ is the steady-state phonon number,
n0 = na(0) is the initial population, and the relaxation
rate is γ = k2¯nb/κ.

D. Collective coupling enhancement in many-ion

systems

In this subsection we generalise to the scenario where
multiple atoms are trapped inside the cavities. We focus
in particular on ion-trap systems, where the Coulomb in-
teraction couples the motion of the diﬀerent ions. The
normal vibrational modes of the system are thus small
collective oscillations about the mechanical equilibrium.
We now show that if N ions of the same species are placed
inside the crossed-cavity refrigerator, an N -fold enhance-
ment of the coupling between photons and phonons can
be obtained.

The free Hamiltonian of the system is

H2 = νa†a + ωbb†b + ωcc†c +

N

Xj=1

εjσ+

j σ−
j .

(39)

Here, a† creates a phonon of a normal mode with fre-
quency ν/2π, σ−
is the atomic lowering operator for
j
atom j and we have allowed for variations of the elec-
tronic transition frequencies εj, due to inhomogeneous
magnetic ﬁelds, for example. All other modes and elec-
tronic states are assumed to be oﬀ-resonant. The inter-
action Hamiltonian in the LDA and RWA reads as

N

V2 =

Xj=1(cid:8)˜gb(rj )ηj (cid:0)a + a†(cid:1)(cid:0)bσ+
+ ˜gc(rj)(cid:0)cσ+

j + b†σ−
j (cid:1)
j (cid:1) + hb(rj )(cid:0)bσ+
j + b†σ−

j + c†σ−

j (cid:1)(cid:9) ,

(40)

where ˜gb/c(rj) = gb/c(rj ) cos δb/c(rj ), hb(rj) =
gb(rj ) sin δb(rj), with gb/c(rj) the cavity coupling con-
stants for the ion with equilibrium position rj , while
ηj are the Lamb-Dicke parameters and δb/c(rj) =
db/c(rj )ωb/c/c0 are the dimensionless misalignments,
where db(rj ) (dc(rj)) is the distance in the x direction
(y direction) between rj and the ﬁeld node of cavity b
(anti-node of cavity c).

We assume again that the cavities are detuned from
the electronic transition frequencies, ωc = εj + ∆j =

10

ωb + ν, with εj ≫ |∆|j ≫ gb/c(rj). After adiabatically
eliminating the electronic excited states according to the
procedure in Appendix A, we ﬁnd an eﬀective interaction
of the form

Veﬀ = kcol(cid:0)abc† + a†b†c(cid:1) .

(41)

In the limit |∆j| ≫ Γ, the collective coupling constant is
found to be

kcol =

N

Xj=1

˜gb(rj)˜gc(rj )ηj

∆j

.

(42)

The eﬀective collective coupling can be either enhanced
or suppressed compared to the single-particle case, de-
pending on the symmetry of the normal mode in ques-
tion. For example, let us take N = 2 and assume that
˜gb/c(r1) = ˜gb/c(r2) = ˜gb/c and ∆1 = ∆2 = ∆. For the
stretch mode, with η1 = −η2, we ﬁnd that kcol = 0.
On the other hand, for the centre-of-mass mode, with
η1 = η2 = η, we ﬁnd a two-fold enhancement of the cou-
pling, i.e. kcol = 2k, where k = ˜gb˜gcη/∆ is the single-ion
eﬀective coupling. In general, the centre-of-mass oscilla-
tions experience enhanced collective coupling, since for
this vibrational mode ηj = η is constant. Therefore, it is
possible to improve the refrigerator’s performance when
cooling the centre-of-mass mode by incorporating many
ions inside the cavities.

Note that the heating rate may also increase with the
number of ions. However, the estimate given by Eq. (38)
indicates that the collective coupling enhancement still
leads to an improvement in the achievable temperature
and relaxation time so long as the heating rate increases
slower than N 2.

V. CONCLUSION

To summarise, we have analysed the possibility of cre-
ating an autonomous thermal machine (ATM) in the set-
ting of cavity quantum electrodynamics (CQED). In par-
ticular, we have shown that it is possible to construct a
refrigerator which cools the motion of a trapped atom us-
ing sunlight. This would constitute perhaps the ﬁrst ex-
ample of a quantum absorption chiller which can achieve
technologically useful temperatures.

In principle, such a refrigerator powered by sunlight
costs nothing to operate in daylight hours (under clement
weather conditions). This is clearly an improvement on
power-hungry and thermodynamically ineﬃcient cooling
lasers.
In practice however, we ﬁnd that the technical
diﬃculty of stabilising the cavity frequencies makes the
use of a laser, or similar frequency reference system, un-
avoidable with present technology.

Commercially available laser systems enjoy stability,
reliability and ﬂexibility, spanning a range of optical and
ultra-violet frequencies. These properties are unmatched
by optical cavities currently available in CQED exper-
iments. Therefore, absorption chillers of the kind we

envisage are unlikely to supersede laser-driven cooling
schemes in the near future. Nevertheless, our results
demonstrate that if the intrinsic stability of optical res-
onators can be improved, ATMs could in principle play
a useful role in quantum state preparation.

A more immediately relevant feature of our proposal is
that it oﬀers a versatile experimental platform to study
the physics of ATMs. One advantage of our scheme is
that the frequencies of — and the couplings between —
diﬀerent degrees of freedom are tunable by means of ex-
ternal control ﬁelds, or by modifying the cavity lengths
mechanically. We have also shown that the coupling can
be enhanced N -fold when N ions of the same species
are incorporated inside the refrigerator. Note that ex-
periments demonstrating collective cavity coupling en-
hancement in trapped-ion systems have already achieved
N ∼ 500 [45, 46], implying that very large three-body
interaction energies could be obtained. In such a regime,
our simple local dissipation model is invalid, and delo-
calised dissipation eﬀects should become important [18].
Another attractive feature of the CQED setting is the
wide variety of measurements that are available. For ex-
ample, a diﬀerent species of ion placed inside the trap
could be used to make non-demolition measurements of
steady-state properties, such as the phonon number [47].
One could also continuously and non-destructively mon-
itor the state of the cavity ﬁelds using appropriately
placed photodetectors. This would yield direct informa-
tion on the rate of energy dissipation into the environ-
ment, as well as opening up a new potential arena for
exploring quantum thermodynamics with measurement
feedback [48, 49]. Non-thermal or non-Markovian reser-
voirs could be engineered by modifying the spectrum or
statistics of the radiation incident on the cavity [50], or
by tickling the ion-trap electrodes with suitably ﬁltered
electrical noise [51]. We also note that analogous set-
ups using diﬀerent kinds of quantum emitters such as
superconducting qubits, quantum dots or diamond color
centers may be envisaged.

On a conceptual level, our study provides a number of
further insights. We found a simple and intuitive inter-
pretation of quantum absorption refrigerators in terms
of sideband transitions. The present context of atomic
cooling makes the connection between these two concepts
manifest, however this link is in fact completely general.
Any three-body absorption refrigerator can be under-
stood in terms of a red sideband transition, which is ex-
cited by the absorption of quanta from a thermally pop-
ulated auxiliary system, itself connected to a hot reser-
voir. The role of the second, colder reservoir is to then
quickly reset the state of the refrigerator by a transition
at the carrier frequency (that is, at frequency ε), leaving
the target system with one less quantum of energy. Thus,
sideband transitions provide an alternative framework for
understanding quantum ATMs which is complementary
to the standard picture in terms of virtual qubits and
temperatures.

We also found that, just as in laser sideband cool-

11

ing, the existence of blue sideband transitions limit the
thermal dissipation rates and the three-body interaction
strength to be less than the frequency of the target sub-
system, i.e. one must be in the sideband-resolved regime.
This constraint is rather general, because blue sideband
transitions (or more generally, oﬀ-resonant transitions)
exist for any absorption refrigerator governed by an in-
teraction Hamiltonian composed of a single product of
Hermitian operators (rather than a sum of such prod-
ucts). We thus expect a similar sideband-resolved con-
dition to generically constrain the achievable power and
other relevant thermodynamic quantities describing these
machines.

As we have shown, an absorption refrigerator trans-
ferring energy from motional degrees of freedom to opti-
cal photons can achieve remarkably low temperatures in
principle. This results from the huge separation between
vibrational and optical frequencies, leading to extremely
small virtual temperatures (see Eq. (27)). The same prin-
ciple underlies other recent proposals to build thermal
machines using cavity optomechanical systems [23, 52].
However, this separation of frequency scales also implies
an instability of the system to relatively small ﬂuctua-
tions or drifts of the optical frequencies. This suggests
that a practical operating regime for truly autonomous
quantum thermal machines will be such that the natural
frequencies of the constituent subsystems are commensu-
rate with each other.

In the present example, the eﬀects of frequency drift
can be overcome by weakly driving the cavity with a
laser. This indicates that the truly essential resource for
cooling in the quantum regime is a stable frequency ref-
erence, or equivalently an accurate clock. Given such a
frequency reference, we have shown that chaotic thermal
energy suﬃces to cool the system almost to its ground
state. If one adopts the view that the heat energy driving
the absorption refrigerator is a free resource, the perfor-
mance of the machine is then ultimately limited by the
eﬃciency of the frequency reference or clock. A natu-
ral question thus arises regarding the fundamental ther-
modynamic limitations on clocks, accounting for the en-
ergy required to measure the clock [53] and any eﬀect of
correlations between the clock and the thermal machine
[54, 55]. This intriguing problem will be tackled in future
publications.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We gratefully acknowledge edifying conversations with
Nikolai Kiesel, Alexander Kubanek, Joseph Randall, Jo-
hannes Roßnagel, Kilian Singer, Raam Uzdin and Mi-
hai Vidrighin. MTM and MPW were ﬁnanced by EP-
SRC. MH acknowledges support from the Swiss National
Science Foundation (AMBIZIONE PZ00P2 161351) and
the MINECO project FIS2013-40627-P, with the sup-
port of FEDER funds, and by the Generalitat de
Catalunya CIRIT, project 2014-SGR-966. JP was sup-

ported by Minister´ıo de Econom´ıa y Competitividad
Project No. FIS2015-69512-R and the Fundaci´on S´eneca

Project No. 19882/GERM/15. MBP was supported by
an Alexander von Humboldt Professorship, the ERC Syn-
ergy grant BioQ and the EU STREP EQUAM.

12

[1] R. Kosloﬀ and A. Levy. Quantum heat engines and re-
frigerators: Continuous devices. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem.,
65(1):365–393, 2014.

[2] J. Goold, M. Huber, A. Riera, L. del Rio, and
P. Skrzypczyk. The role of quantum information in
thermodynamics — a topical review.
J. Phys. A,
49(14):143001, 2016.

[3] M. Campisi, P. H¨anggi, and P. Talkner. Colloquium :
Quantum ﬂuctuation relations: Foundations and appli-
cations. Rev. Mod. Phys., 83:771–791, 2011.

[4] M. Horodecki and J. Oppenheim. Fundamental limita-
tions for quantum and nanoscale thermodynamics. Nat.
Commun., 4:2059, 2013.

[5] P. Skrzypczyk, A. J. Short, and S. Popescu. Work extrac-
tion and thermodynamics for individual quantum sys-
tems. Nat. Commun., 5:4185, 2014.

[6] S. F. Huelga and M. B. Plenio. Vibrations, quanta and

biology. Cont. Phys., 54(4):181–207, 2013.

[7] N. Killoran, S. F. Huelga, and M. B. Plenio. Enhancing
light-harvesting power with coherent vibrational interac-
tions: A quantum heat engine picture. J. Chem. Phys.,
143(15), 2015.

[8] N. Linden, S. Popescu, and P. Skrzypczyk. How small can
thermal machines be? The smallest possible refrigerator.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 105:130401, 2010.

[9] A. Levy and R. Kosloﬀ. Quantum absorption refrigera-

tor. Phys. Rev. Lett., 108:070604, 2012.

[10] A. Levy, R. Alicki, and R. Kosloﬀ. Quantum refrigerators
and the third law of thermodynamics. Phys. Rev. E,
85:061126, 2012.

[11] D. Gelbwaser-Klimovsky and G. Kurizki. Heat-machine
control by quantum-state preparation: From quantum
engines to refrigerators. Phys. Rev. E, 90:022102, 2014.
[12] L. A. Correa. Multistage quantum absorption heat

pumps. Phys. Rev. E, 89:042128, 2014.

[13] R. Silva, P. Skrzypczyk, and N. Brunner. Small quantum
absorption refrigerator with reversed couplings. Phys.
Rev. E, 92:012136, 2015.

[14] J. Wang, Y. Lai, Z. Ye, J. He, Y. Ma, and Q. Liao.
Four-level refrigerator driven by photons. Phys. Rev. E,
91:050102, May 2015.

[15] B. Leggio, B. Bellomo, and M. Antezza. Quantum ther-
mal machines with single nonequilibrium environments.
Phys. Rev. A, 91:012117, 2015.

[16] P. Doyeux, B. Leggio, R. Messina, and M. Antezza.
Quantum thermal machine acting on a many-body quan-
tum system: Role of correlations in thermodynamic
tasks. Phys. Rev. E, 93:022134, Feb 2016.

[17] N. Brunner, M. Huber, N. Linden, S. Popescu, R. Silva,
and P. Skrzypczyk. Entanglement enhances cooling
in microscopic quantum refrigerators. Phys. Rev. E,
89(3):32115, 2014.

[18] L. A. Correa, J. P. Palao, G. Adesso, and D. Alonso. Per-
formance bound for quantum absorption refrigerators.
Phys. Rev. E, 87:042131, 2013.

[19] L. A. Correa, J. P. Palao, D. Alonso, and G. Adesso.
Quantum-enhanced absorption refrigerators. Sci. Rep.,
4, 2014.

[20] M. T. Mitchison, M. P. Woods, J. Prior, and M. Huber.
Coherence-enhanced single-shot cooling by quantum ab-
sorption refrigerators. New J. Phys., 2015.

[21] J. B. Brask and N. Brunner. Small quantum absorp-
tion refrigerator in the transient regime: Time scales,
enhanced cooling, and entanglement. Phys. Rev. E,
92:062101, Dec 2015.

[22] Y.-X. Chen and S.-W. Li. Quantum refrigerator driven

by current noise. Europhys. Lett., 97(4):40003, 2012.

[23] A. Mari and J. Eisert. Cooling by heating: Very hot ther-
mal light can signiﬁcantly cool quantum systems. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 108:120602, 2012.

[24] D. Venturelli, R. Fazio, and V. Giovannetti. Minimal self-
contained quantum refrigeration machine based on four
quantum dots. Phys. Rev. Lett., 110:256801, 2013.

[25] J. Ye, D. W. Vernooy, and H. J. Kimble. Trapping of
single atoms in cavity QED. Phys. Rev. Lett., 83:4987–
4990, Dec 1999.

[26] J. McKeever, J. R. Buck, A. D. Boozer, A. Kuzmich,
H.-C. N¨agerl, D. M. Stamper-Kurn, and H. J. Kimble.
State-insensitive cooling and trapping of single atoms in
an optical cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett., 90:133602, Apr 2003.
[27] K. M. Birnbaum, A. Boca, R. Miller, A. D. Boozer, T. E.
Northup, and H. J. Kimble. Photon blockade in an opti-
cal cavity with one trapped atom. Nature, 436(7047):87–
90, July 2005.

[28] K. M. Fortier, S. Y. Kim, M. J. Gibbons, P. Ahmadi,
and M. S. Chapman. Deterministic loading of individual
atoms to a high-ﬁnesse optical cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
98:233601, Jun 2007.

[29] C. Russo, H. G. Barros, A. Stute, F. Dubin, E. S. Phillips,
T. Monz, T. E. Northup, C. Becher, T. Salzburger,
H. Ritsch, P. O. Schmidt, and R. Blatt. Raman spec-
troscopy of a single ion coupled to a high-ﬁnesse cavity.
App. Phys. B, 95(2):205–212, 2009.

[30] J. D. Sterk, L. Luo, T. A. Manning, P. Maunz, and
C. Monroe. Photon collection from a trapped ion-cavity
system. Phys. Rev. A, 85:062308, Jun 2012.

[31] A. Stute, B. Casabone, B. Brandst¨atter, D. Habicher,
H. G. Barros, P. O. Schmidt, T. E. Northup, and
R. Blatt. Toward an ionphoton quantum interface in an
optical cavity. App. Phys. B, 107(4):1145–1157, 2012.

[32] O. Abah, J. Roßnagel, G. Jacob, S. Deﬀner, F. Schmidt-
Kaler, K. Singer, and E. Lutz. Single-ion heat engine
at maximum power. Phys. Rev. Lett., 109:203006, Nov
2012.

[33] J. Roßnagel, S. T. Dawkins, K. N. Tolazzi, O. Abah,
E. Lutz, F. Schmidt-Kaler, and K. Singer. A single-
atom heat engine.
arXiv:1510.03681 [cond-mat.stat-
mech], 2015.

[34] P. Horak, G. Hechenblaikner, K. M. Gheri, H. Stecher,
and H. Ritsch. Cavity-induced atom cooling in the strong
coupling regime. Phys. Rev. Lett., 79:4974–4977, Dec

13

1997.

[35] P. Maunz, T. Puppe, I. Schuster, N. Syassen, P. W. H.
Pinkse, and G. Rempe. Cavity cooling of a single atom.
Nature, 428(6978):50–52, March 2004.

[36] S. Nuszmann, K. Murr, M. Hijlkema, B. Weber, A. Kuhn,
and G. Rempe. Vacuum-stimulated cooling of single
atoms in three dimensions. Nat. Phys., 1(2):122–125,
November 2005.

[37] D. R. Leibrandt, J. Labaziewicz, V. Vuleti´c, and I. L.
Chuang. Cavity sideband cooling of a single trapped ion.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 103:103001, 2009.

[38] N. Brunner, N. Linden, S. Popescu, and P. Skrzypczyk.
Virtual qubits, virtual temperatures, and the foundations
of thermodynamics. Phys. Rev. E, 85:051117, 2012.

[39] E. D. Black. An introduction to Pound-Drever-Hall laser
frequency stabilization. Am. J. Phys., 69(1):79–87, 2001.
[40] M. B. Plenio and S. F. Huelga. Entangled light from

white noise. Phys. Rev. Lett., 88:197901, Apr 2002.

[41] C. W. Gardiner and P. Zoller. Quantum Noise. Springer,

3rd edition, 2004.

[42] H. P. Breuer and F. Petruccione. The Theory of Open
Quantum Systems. Oxford University Press, 1st edition,
2007.

[43] N. G. Van Kampen. Stochastic Processes in Physics and

Chemistry. Elsevier, 3rd edition, 2007.

[44] ´A. Rivas, A. D. K. Plato, S. F. Huelga, and M. B. Plenio.
Markovian master equations: A critical study. New J.
Phys., 12(11):113032, 2010.

[45] P. F. Herskind, A. Dantan, J. P. Marler, M. Albert, and
M. Drewsen. Realization of collective strong coupling
with ion Coulomb crystals in an optical cavity. Nat.
Phys., 5(7):494–498, July 2009.

[46] M. Albert, J. P. Marler, P. F. Herskind, A. Dantan,
and M. Drewsen. Collective strong coupling between ion
Coulomb crystals and an optical cavity ﬁeld: Theory and
experiment. Phys. Rev. A, 85:023818, Feb 2012.

[47] A. Bermudez, M. Bruderer, and M. B. Plenio. Controlling
and measuring quantum transport of heat in trapped-ion
crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett., 111:040601, Jul 2013.

[48] K. Brandner, M. Bauer, M. T. Schmid, and U. Seifert.
Coherence-enhanced eﬃciency of feedback-driven quan-
tum engines. New J. Phys., 17(6):065006, 2015.

[49] M. D. Vidrighin, O. Dahlsten, M. Barbieri, M. S. Kim,
V. Vedral, and I. A. Walmsley. Photonic Maxwell’s de-
mon. Phys. Rev. Lett., 116:050401, Feb 2016.

[50] K. W. Murch, U. Vool, D. Zhou, S. J. Weber, S. M.
Girvin, and I. Siddiqi. Cavity-assisted quantum bath en-
gineering. Phys. Rev. Lett., 109:183602, Oct 2012.

[51] C. J. Myatt, B. E. King, Q. A. Turchette, C. A.
Sackett, D. Kielpinski, W. M. Itano, C. Monroe, and
D. J. Wineland. Decoherence of quantum superposi-
tions through coupling to engineered reservoirs. Nature,
403(6767):269–273, 2000.

[52] K. Zhang, F. Bariani, and P. Meystre. Quantum op-
tomechanical heat engine. Phys. Rev. Lett., 112:150602,
2014.

[53] K. Micadei, R. M. Serra, and L. C. C´eleri. Thermo-
dynamic cost of acquiring information. Phys. Rev. E,
88:062123, Dec 2013.

[54] A. S. L. Malabarba, A. J. Short, and P. Kammerlander.
Clock-driven quantum thermal engines. New J. Phys.,
17(4):045027, 2015.

[55] R. Silva, M. P. Woods, and J. Oppenheim. In prepara-

tion.

14

Appendix A: Projection onto the electronic ground state

In this appendix we explain how to perturbatively eliminate the excited electronic state from the equations of motion.
Our approach closely follows the treatment of Refs. [42, 44]; similar analyses can also be found in Refs. [41, 43].
Although much of the following is textbook material, an additional complication is introduced by the dissipative
coupling between the motional and electronic degrees of freedom due to momentum recoil from spontaneously emitted
photons. We therefore present each step of the derivation in detail.

Our starting point is the master equation describing the motional, cavity, and electronic degrees of freedom, which

can be written as

The objective is to trace over the electronic variables, leaving an eﬀective master equation describing the density
matrix ρ = Trσ[χ] of the remaining degrees of freedom. We write the local Hamiltonian as H2 = Habc + Hσ, where

dχ
dt

= Lχ.

(A1)

Habc = νa†a + ωbb†b + ωcc†c,

Hσ = εσ+σ−.

The interaction in the Lamb-Dicke and rotating-wave approximations is

We use the following symbols to denote commutation superoperators

V2 = ˜gbη(cid:0)a + a†(cid:1)(cid:0)bσ+ + b†σ−(cid:1) + hb(cid:0)bσ+ + b†σ−(cid:1) + ˜gc(cid:0)cσ+ + c†σ−(cid:1) .

Hσχ = −i[Hσ, χ],

Habcχ = −i[Habc, χ],

Vχ = −i[V2, χ].

(A2)

(A3)

(A4)

(A5)

The Liouvillian can be decomposed into three contributions as L = L0 + L1 + V, with L0 = Habc + Hσ + Lσ and
L1 = La + Lb + Lc. In the following we set ¯nσ = 0 in Lσ (see Eq. (22)), which is an excellent approximation for
optical frequencies at room temperature.

We now introduce a projector onto the electronic ground state Pχ = Trσ[χ]⊗ |↓i h↓|, and its orthogonal complement
Q = 1 − P. We assume that the electron is in its ground state at t = 0, and uncorrelated with S, which implies that
Qχ(0) = 0. Now we move to a dissipation picture deﬁned by

˜χ(t) = e−L0tχ(t),

V(t) = e−L0tVeL0t,

L1(t) = e−L0tL1eL0t.

(A6)

(A7)

It is important to note that the action of the superoperators L0, L1 and V is not associative: they are deﬁned to
operate on everything that appears to their right. We also note the following useful identities

L0P = HabcP,

PV(t)P = 0,
PL1(t)P = L1(t)P,

PL1(t)V(t′)P = 0.

(A8)
(A9)
(A10)
(A11)

These expressions can be proved by considering their action on a general quantum state.

In terms of their typical eigenvalues, we have that L0 ≫ L1, V. This allows us to perturbatively eliminate the
irrelevant part of the density operator Qχ(t). In order to do this, we write the master equation in the dissipation
picture

and insert the identity 1 = P + Q on both sides, ﬁnding

d ˜χ
dt

= L1(t) ˜χ(t) + V(t) ˜χ(t),

dP ˜χ

dt

dQ ˜χ

dt

= L1(t)P ˜χ(t) + PL1(t)Q ˜χ(t) + PV(t)Q ˜χ(t),

= QL1(t)Q ˜χ(t) + QV(t)Q ˜χ(t) + V(t)P ˜χ(t),

(A12)

(A13)

(A14)

where Eqs. (A9) and (A10) have been used. Eq. (A14) can be formally solved by introducing the propagator

G(t, t′) = T exp(cid:18)Z t

t′

ds Q [L1(s) + V(s)] Q(cid:19) ,

where the symbol T denotes the usual time ordering. The solution for Q ˜χ is

Q ˜χ(t) = G(t, 0)Qχ(0) +Z t

0

dt′ G(t, t′)V(t′)P ˜χ(t′),

15

(A15)

(A16)

and the ﬁrst term on the RHS vanishes for our choice of initial conditions. Substituting the solution Eq. (A16) into
Eq. (A13), we obtain an exact evolution equation for P ˜χ

dP ˜χ

dt

= L1(t)P ˜χ(t) +Z t

0

dt′ P [L1(t) + V(t)] G(t, t′)V(t′)P ˜χ(t′).

(A17)

At this stage we approximate Eq. (A17) by expanding the RHS up to second order in the small quantities L1 and

V, which yields

dP ˜χ

dt

= L1(t)P ˜χ(t) +Z t

0

dt′ PV(t)V(t′)P ˜χ(t′),

where we have used Eq. (A11). We also note that

Lσ = ΓD[σ−] + O(η2Γ),

(A18)

(A19)

assuming that the angular emission distribution is symmetric, Π(u) = Π(−u), which holds true for spontaneous
emission in an isotropic environment. We assume that η2Γ is on the same order as L1 and V, which is the case deep
in the Lamb-Dicke regime η ≪ 1. To second order in small quantities, it is therefore suﬃcient to retain only the
leading-order contribution Lσ ≈ ΓD[σ−] in evaluating the second term on the RHS of Eq. (A18).

We now invoke the Markov approximation by extending the lower integration limit to t′ = −∞ and making the
replacement ˜χ(t′) → ˜χ(t) . These steps are justiﬁed because the memory kernel PV(t)V(t′)P decays rapidly to zero.
In particular, this decay is approximately exponential in time with decay constant 2/Γ, which is much shorter than
the characteristic time scales of the reduced system dynamics. After a change of variables to s = t − t′, we obtain the
Markovian master equation

dP ˜χ

dt

= L1(t)P ˜χ(t) +Z ∞

0

ds PV(t)V(t − s)P ˜χ(t).

(A20)

To evaluate this expression explicitly, is convenient to introduce a decomposition of the interaction Hamiltonian as

V = Xα XΩ

Lα(Ω) ⊗ Rα,

(A21)

where the sum over Ω in Eq. (A21) runs over all Bohr frequencies of HS, while the Lα(Ω) are lowering operators for
these frequencies, i.e.

and the operators Rα act only on the electronic degrees of freedom. Substituting Eq. (A21) into Eq. (A20) and tracing
over the electronic variables, we obtain

[HS, Lα(Ω)] = −ΩLα(Ω),

(A22)

Trσ(cid:20)Z ∞

0

ds PV(t)V(t − s)P ˜χ(t)(cid:21) = Xα,β XΩ,Ω′

Gαβ(Ω)ei(Ω′−Ω)thLα(Ω)˜ρ(t)L†

β(Ω′) − L†

β(Ω′)Lα(Ω)˜ρ(t)i + h.c.,

where ˜ρ(t) = eiHabctTrσ[χ(t)]e−iHabct, and we deﬁned the spectral correlation matrix

Gαβ(Ω) = Z ∞

0

dt eiΩt h↓| R†

β(t)Rα |↓i .

(A23)

(A24)

16

Here, R†
The correlation functions can be decomposed as

β(t) = eK+

β], where Kσ− = Hσ + ΓD[σ−] and its adjoint K+

σ t[R†

σ is deﬁned by Tr{K†

σ[A]B} = Tr{AKσ[B]}.

γαβ(Ω) = Gαβ(Ω) + G∗

βα(Ω),

Sαβ(Ω) =

1

2i (cid:0)Gαβ (Ω) − G∗

βα(Ω)(cid:1) .

(A25)

(A26)

The ﬁnal step is the rotating wave approximation, in which rapidly oscillating contributions with Ω 6= Ω′ are neglected.
Transforming back to the Schr¨odinger picture yields the Lindblad master equation

dρ
dt

= −i[Habc + HL, ρ] + L1ρ +Xα,β XΩ

γαβ(Ω)(cid:18)Lα(Ω)ρL†

β(Ω) −

1
2

β(Ω)Lα(Ω), ρ}(cid:19) ,
{L†

with

HL = Xα,β XΩ

Sαβ(Ω)L†

β(Ω)Lα(Ω).

The master equation is then placed into Lindblad form by diagonalising the matrix γαβ [42].

The non-vanishing components of the spectral correlation matrix are proportional to

Z ∞

0

dt eiΩt h↓| σ−(t)σ+ |↓i =

2Γ + 4i(Ω − ε)
Γ2 + 4(Ω − ε)2 .

The Lamb-shift Hamiltonian is given as HL = δHabc + Veﬀ , where

δHabc =(cid:20)

˜g2
b η2∆

Γ2/4 + ∆2 +

˜g2
b η2(∆ − 2ν)

Γ2/4 + (∆ − 2ν)2(cid:21) a†ab†b +(cid:20) ˜g2

b η2(∆ − 2ν)

Γ2/4 + (∆ − 2ν)2 +

h2
b(∆ − ν)

Γ2/4 + (∆ − ν)2(cid:21) b†b

+

˜g2
c ∆

Γ2/4 + ∆2 c†c,

Veﬀ =

˜gb˜gcη∆

Γ2/4 + ∆2 (cid:0)abc† + a†b†c(cid:1) .

(A27)

(A28)

(A29)

(A30)

(A31)

We also ﬁnd the following incoherent contributions associated with spontaneous emission from the excited state

Lse =

b η2 + ˜g2
c

Γp˜g2
Γ2/4 + ∆2 D[˜gbηab + ˜gcc] +

˜g2
b η2Γ

Γ2/4 + (∆ − 2ν)2 D[a†b] +

h2
bΓ

Γ2/4 + (∆ − ν)2 D[b].

(A32)

We see that for |∆| > Γ, the contributions from spontaneous emission Lse are suppressed by a factor of order Γ/∆
with respect to the coherent contribution of HL. In the limit |∆| ≫ Γ, ν, and after dropping terms of second order in
the small quantities η and δb/c, we obtain simply

δHabc ≈

˜g2
c
∆

c†c,

Veﬀ ≈

˜gb˜gcη

∆ (cid:0)abc† + a†b†c(cid:1) ,

Lse ≈

Γp˜g2

b η2 + ˜g2
c
∆2

D[˜gbηab + ˜gcc].

(A33)

(A34)

(A35)

Finally, we comment on the case where multiple trapped ions are placed inside the refrigerator system. Assuming
that the environmental ﬂuctuations seen by each ion are uncorrelated, then the derivation is essentially unchanged.
One ﬁnds separate, additive contributions from each ion of the same form as Eqs. (A30), (A31) and (A32). The full
time evolution generator is given by a sum over these contributions, in addition to the free Hamiltonian Habc. In
particular, summing over the contributions corresponding to Eq. (A31) leads directly to Eq. (40), in the limit |∆| ≫ Γ.

17

Appendix B: Approximate motional dynamics

In this appendix we derive a simple approximate model for the dynamics of the atomic motion that is easy to solve
analytically. We start from the master equation (A27), and aim to derive an evolution equation for the motional
density matrix ρa(t) = Trbc[ρ(t)] obtained by tracing out the cavity modes. The procedure is similar to that of
Appendix (A). For simplicity, we work in the limit of large detunings, so that Lse can be neglected. We also ignore
higher-order corrections contributed by δHabc.

The derivation proceeds as follows. We deﬁne a projection operator Pρ = Trbc[ρ] ⊗ ρb ⊗ ρc, where ρb/c are thermal
states of modes b and c at temperatures Th and Tr, respectively. We also assume that the initial quantum state
factorises such that Qρ(0) = (1 − P)ρ(0) = 0. We split the Liouvillian into parts as L = L0 + La + Veﬀ, where
L0 = Habc + Lb + Lc, while Veﬀ is the commutation superoperator generated by the eﬀective interaction (A34).
Moving to a dissipation picture generated by L0

˜ρ(t) = e−L0tρ(t),

Veﬀ(t) = e−L0tVeﬀ eL0t,

La(t) = e−L0tLaeL0t.

one readily veriﬁes the following properties

L0P = HaP,

PVeﬀ(t)P = 0,
[P, La(t)] = 0,
[La(t), Veﬀ (t′)] = 0.

(B1)

(B2)

(B3)
(B4)
(B5)
(B6)

where Ha is the commutation superoperator associated with Ha = Habc − Hbc = νa†a.

We assume that λ ≪ κb/c and k ≪ κb/c, meaning that the term L0 dominates and the other contributions La and
Veﬀ can be accounted for perturbatively. Using the projection operators and the properties (B4), (B5) and (B6), we
derive a closed equation of motion for the relevant part of the density matrix

dP ˜ρ
dt

= La(t)P ˜ρ(t) +Z ∞

0

ds PVeﬀ (t)Veﬀ (t − s)P ˜ρ(t).

(B7)

Here we have made a Born-Markov approximation, which is justiﬁed in the limit k ≪ κb/c. The subsequent formal
manipulations proceed exactly as in Appendix A, in particular the part following Eq. (A20). The relevant elements
of the spectral correlation matrix are

dt eiνthb†(t)b(0)c(t)c†(0)i ≈

¯nb

κb + κc

0

Z ∞
Z ∞

dt e−iνthb(t)b†(0)c†(t)c(0)i ≈ 0.

0

(B8)

Here, the time evolution of the operators is given by b(t) = eL†
0tc, while the angle brackets denote an
average with respect to a thermal product state of the cavities, i.e. ρb ⊗ ρc, and we used the fact that ¯nc ≈ 0. The
ﬁnal master equation thus takes the form

0tb and c(t) = eL†

dρa
dt

= −i[νa†a, ρa] + (λ + γ)D[a]ρa + λD[a†]ρa,

(B9)

where γ = 2k2¯nb/(κb + κc), and we used the fact that ¯n−1

a ≈ 0.

