6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

.

R
G
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
2
1
1
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Inﬁnite sharply multiply transitive groups

Katrin Tent∗

March 8, 2016

Abstract

The ﬁnite sharply 2-transitive groups were classiﬁed by Zassenhaus
in the 1930’s. They essentially all look like the group of aﬃne linear
transformations x 7→ ax + b for some ﬁeld (or at least near-ﬁeld) K.
However, the question remained open whether the same is true for
inﬁnite sharply 2-transitive groups. There has been extensive work on
the structures associated to such groups indicating that Zassenhaus’
results might extend to the inﬁnite setting. For many speciﬁc classes
of groups, like Lie groups, linear groups, or groups deﬁnable in o-
minimal structures it was indeed proved that all examples inside the
given class arise in this way as aﬃne groups. However, it recently
turned out that the reason for the lack of a general proof was the
fact that there are plenty of sharply 2-transitive groups which do not
arise from ﬁelds or near-ﬁelds! In fact, it is not too hard to construct
concrete examples (see below). In this note, we survey general sharply
n-transitive groups and describe how to construct examples not arising
from ﬁelds.1

1 Historic background

Groups often arise from symmetries of certain objects, like polyeders, geome-
tries, manifolds etc. In these examples, the groups automatically come with
an action on the underlying object and can thus be considered as permuta-
tion groups. It is a natural question what restrictions occur in these groups

∗Partially supported by SFB 878
1 Keywords: sharply 2-transitive, free product, nearﬁeld, MS classiﬁcation: 20B22

1

and their corresponding actions and to characterize those actions with a very
high degree of symmetry.

One criterion to measure symmetry is the degree of transitivity of the
group: recall that a group G acting on a set X is called n-transitive if for
any two n-tuples (x1, . . . , xn), (y1, . . . , , yn) of distinct elements from X there
is some g ∈ G such that xg
i = yi, i = 1, . . . , n. An n-transitive group action is
sharply n-transitive if for any two such pairs of n-tuples this g ∈ G is unique.

The following observations are easy, but important:

1. A group action of G on X is sharply n-transitive if and only if for any
x ∈ X, the stabilizer Gx = {g ∈ G : xg = x} acts sharply (n − 1)-
transitively on X \ {x}.

2. If the action of G on X is sharply n-transitive, then for any distinct

elements x1, . . . , xn ∈ X the stabilizer Gx1,...,xn is trivial.

A sharply 1-transitive action is also called regular. It is easy to see that,
after naming an element x ∈ X, a regular action induces a bijection between
the elements of X and the elements of G: simply identify y ∈ X with the
unqiue g ∈ G such that xg = y. After this identiﬁcation the action of G
on X = G is nothing but the right regular action of the group on itself by
right multiplication. Conversely, right multiplication yields a regular action
of the group on itself. Thus we see that any regular action arises in this way
from right multiplication and there are no restrictions on the groups. The
situation changes drastically when one looks at higher degrees of transitivity.
Finite sharply 2- and 3-transitive groups were classiﬁed by Zassenhaus
in [Z1] and [Z2] in the 1930’s and were shown to arise from so-called near-
ﬁelds, as explained below. They essentially look like the groups of aﬃne
linear transformations x 7→ ax + b or Moebius transformations x 7→ ax+b
cx+d ,
respectively.

For n ≥ 4, the restrictions are even more severe: Jordan proved in 1872
[Jo] that apart from the symmetric and alternating group of degree n and
n + 2, respectively, the only ﬁnite sharply n-transitive groups are the Math-
ieu groups M11 and M12, which are sharply n-transitive for n = 4 and 5,
respectively.

This was generalized by J. Tits and M. Hall, who proved that there are
no inﬁnite sharply n-transitive groups for n ≥ 4. However, it remained an
open problem whether a classiﬁcation similar to the one in the ﬁnite situation

2

holds for inﬁnite sharply 2- and 3-transitive groups. Much literature on this
topic is available, see [RST] for background and more recent references. In
[RST] the ﬁrst construction of sharply 2-transitive groups without nontrivial
abelian normal subgroup is given. This was then extended in [Te2] to sharply
3-transitive actions.

These examples might inspire fresh interest in the classiﬁcation problem
and the aim of the article is to survey the background on sharply multiply
transitive permutation groups.

2 A closer look at the classical examples

Let us start with a closer look at the easiest examples:

The case n = 2. Let K be a (not necessarily commutative) ﬁeld and
consider the group G = AGL(1, K) ∼= K+ ⋊ K ∗ of aﬃne linear transfor-
mations x 7→ ax + b, a, b ∈ K, a 6= 0, which acts sharply 2-transitively on
(the aﬃne line of) K. Then G has a regularnormal subgroup A ∼= (K, +),
i.e. a normal subgroup acting regularly on the underlying set, consisting of
the translations x 7→ x + b, b ∈ K, and we see that the point stabilizer G0
of 0 ∈ K is the group of homotheties x 7→ ax, a 6= 0, which is obviously
isomorphic to the multiplicative group (K ∗, ·) of the underlying ﬁeld.

Since A is normal in G, the elements of the point stabilizer G0 act by
conjugation on the elements of A. The action of any g ∈ G0 on A is given
by an automorphism of A. In other words, writing the group A additively,
for all n1, n2 ∈ A, g ∈ G0 we have

(n1 + n2)g = ng

1 + ng
2.

Thus, even without knowing that the group G = AGL(1, K) ∼= A ⋊
G0 arises from a ﬁeld, the right distributivity appears automatically as a
consequence just from the group action. For this distributivity, we do not
even have to assume that the regular normal subgroup in G is abelian: if a
sharply 2-transitive group G (acting on a set X) contains a regular normal
subgroup N, then for any x ∈ X the point stabilizer Gx acts by conjugation
on the normal subgroup N and since the sharp 2-transitivity implies that
N ∩ Gx = 1 we necessarily have

G ∼= N ⋊ Gx.

Now for g ∈ Gx, n1, n2 ∈ N the action of g on N satisﬁes

3

(n1 · n2)g = ng

1 · ng
2.

The point stabilizer Gx thus acts as a group of automorphisms of N which
is regular on the nontrivial elements of N. This already implies (among other
things) that all elements of N have the same order.

What we have just seen is that any sharply 2-transitive group G which
has a regular normal subgroup gives rise to a near-ﬁeld in the sense of the
following deﬁnition:

Deﬁnition 2.1. A (right) near-ﬁeld is a structure Q, together with two bi-
nary operations, + (addition) and · (multiplication), satisfying the following
axioms:

1. (Q, +) is a group with identity element 0 (we do not need to assume

the group to be abelian);

2. (Q \ {0}, ·) is a group with identity element 1;

3. (a + b) · c = a · c + b · c for all elements a, b, c ∈ Q, c 6= 0 (The right

distributive law).

It is also easy to see that any near-ﬁeld Q gives rise to a sharply 2-
transitive group exactly in the same way in which AGL(1, K) arises from a
ﬁeld K and that this group will again have a regular (and in fact abelian)
normal subgroup isomorphic to the additive group of Q. Namely for a, b ∈
Q, a 6= 0, the group of transformations

ϕa,b : Q −→ Q, x 7→ a · x + b

acts sharply 2-transitively on Q.
In this way, there is an one-to-one cor-
respondence between near-ﬁelds and sharply 2-transitive groups having a
regular normal subgroup.

In the ﬁnite case, Zassenhaus proved that every sharply 2-transitive group
has a regular (and abelian) normal subgroup, but the question remained open
whether this remains true without the assumption of ﬁniteness.

It is interesting to note that while there are no ﬁnite (proper) skew ﬁelds,

ﬁnite near-ﬁelds do exist:
Example: Let K be the ﬁnite ﬁeld of order 9 and denote the ﬁeld mul-
tiplication on K by ∗. Using the action of the Frobenius automorphism

4

F rob3 : K −→ K : x 7→ x3 we deﬁne a new binary operation ‘·’ on K by the
following rule: For a ∈ K we put

a · b = a ∗ b if b ∈ K is a square, and
a · b = F rob3(a) ∗ b = a3 ∗ b if b ∈ K is not a square.
Then K is a near-ﬁeld with this new multiplication and the same addition
as before. Near-ﬁelds arising in this way from a commutative ﬁeld through
twisting the multiplication by an automorphism of the ﬁeld are called Dickson
near-ﬁelds.

In fact, Zassenhaus classiﬁed all ﬁnite near-ﬁelds by characterizing those
ﬁnite (linear) groups that can act regularly on the set of non-zero vectors of
a ﬁnite vector space. He proved:

Theorem 2.2. Any ﬁnite sharply 2-transitive group has a nontrivial abelian
normal subgroup and thus arises from a near-ﬁeld. All but seven ﬁnite near-
ﬁelds are Dickson near-ﬁelds.

This gives rise to the following

Question: Does every sharply 2-transitive group contain a regular normal
subgroup?

Before answering this question we introduce the characteristic of a sharply

2-transitive group:

3 The characteristic of a sharply 2-transitive

group

Any sharply 2-transitive group G acting on a set X contains plenty of invo-
lutions: for any x, y ∈ X, x 6= y, there is a unique element t swapping x and
y. Since swapping twice ﬁxes x and y, we see from part 2. of the observation
above that t2 = 1 and hence t is an involution.

Given two involutions t1, t2 consider pairs xt1

2 = y2 with xi 6=
yi, i = 1, 2. By 2-transitivity there is some g ∈ G such that xg
1 = y2.
Thus the conjugate tg
1 = g−1t1g of t1 under g will swap x2 and y2. Since t2 is
the only element from G swapping x2 and y2 by G being sharply 2-transitive,
we see that tg

1 = y1, xt2

1 = x2, yg

1 = t2.

This shows that all involutions in G are conjugate, so the set

J = {t ∈ G \ {1} : t2 = 1}

5

of involutions in G forms a single conjugacy class.

In fact, if t1, t2 both do not ﬁx x1, we could have chosen x1 = x2 and

concluded that all involutions that do not ﬁx x1 are conjugate under Gx1.

In particular, it follows that either all involutions of G have a ﬁxed point
(and if they do each involution has a unique ﬁxed point) or no involution has
a ﬁxed point.

Let us ﬁrst consider the case that involutions in G have ﬁxed points.

Lemma 3.1. If G is sharply 2-transitive on X and involutions in G have
ﬁxed points, there is an obvious bijection

J −→ X, t 7→ F ix(t)

where F ix(t) denotes the ﬁxed point of t.

Proof. Since the elements are conjugate, this map is certainly surjective. It
is also injective: suppose t1, t2 ∈ J have the same ﬁxed point x, say. Let
z ∈ X be diﬀerent from x and let zt1
1 = z = zt2
2 . Now by 2-transitivity there
is some h ∈ Gz ﬁxing z and with zh
1 = z2. Then as above considerations we
have th

1 = t2. From

we obtain

xh−1t1h = xt2 = x

xh−1t1 = (xh−1

)t1 = xh−1

showing that t1 ﬁxes xh−1

. Since t1 has x as its unique ﬁxed point, this
implies that that h−1 and hence h must ﬁx x. But then h ﬁxes two distinct
points, x, z ∈ X, and so h = 1 by sharp 2-transitivity.

Obviously, the map from J to X given above is G-equivariant where the
action of G on J is given by conjugation. Thus in the case where involutions
have ﬁxed points we have the following consequences:

Corollary 3.2. If G is sharply 2-transitive on X and involutions in G have
ﬁxed points, then

1. every point stabilizer Gx contains a unique involution t, and this invo-

lution is central in Gx;

2. the set of products of two distinct involutions forms a conjugacy class.

6

The second part follows since an element g ∈ G taking the pair (x1, y1) of
distinct elements of X to the pair (x2, y2) will conjugate the (ordered) pair
of involutions with ﬁxed points x1, y1 to the pair with ﬁxed point x2, y2.

If involutions have no ﬁxed points, then not only does the previous argu-
ment not work, but in fact we will see below that J 2 \{1} does not necessarily
form a single conjugacy class.

In the group AGL(1, K) the involutions are exactly the elements of the

form x 7→ −x + b. Thus the set

J 2 = {t1t2 : t1, t2 ∈ J}

equals the set of translations x 7→ x + b, which is isomorphic to the additive
group of the ﬁeld K. Note that if the ﬁeld K is of characteristic 2, then the
involutions x 7→ −x + b are ﬁxed point free (and commute pairwise). This
explains and motivates the following deﬁnition

Deﬁnition 3.3. Let G be a sharply 2-transitive group.

1. If involutions in G have ﬁxed points, we say that G has characteristic p
if the elements of J 2 \ {1} have order p and characteristic 0 if their
order is inﬁnite.

2. If involutions in G are ﬁxed point free, we say that G has characteris-

tic 2.

If G is sharply 3-transitive on X, then the characteristic of G is that of a
point stabilizer Gx, x ∈ X.

Note that the characteristic of a sharply 2-transitive group is necessarily
a prime p and the case p = 2 occurs if and only if involutions are ﬁxed point
free (as otherwise two distinct involutions cannot commute). Note however,
that if the characteristic of G is 2, then the involutions in G commute if and
only if J 2 is a (commutative) subgroup.

A result of B. Neumann [Ne] now gives a partial answer to the above

question or at least a clear criterion:

Theorem 3.4. If G acts sharply 2-transitively on the set X, then G contains
a regular normal subgroup N if and only if for some (or any) involution t ∈ G
the set

tJ := {tt1 : t1 ∈ J}

is a subgroup. In this case we have N = tJ = J 2 and the group is abelian.

7

A group in which tJ is a subgroup is called a split sharply 2-transitive
group. The split sharply 2-transitive groups are special cases of Moufang sets
and there is extensive literature on these as well, see e.g. [dMW].

Note that Neumann’s result says in particular that addition in nearﬁelds
is always commutative. Thus, any regular normal subgroup of a sharply 2-
transitive group is abelian. Conversely, any non-trrivial abelian normal sub-
group of a 2-transitive group is regular. Therefore we may just ask whether
any sharply 2-transitive group contains a non-trivial abelian normal sub-
group.

It is easy to see that the set tJ – whether it forms a subgroup or not –
acts regularly on the set X, where in slight abuse of terminology we call the
action of a subset of G regular on X if for any x, y ∈ X there is a unique
element in the subset taking x to y.

Together with the (multiplicative) action of a point stabilizer Gx on the
set tJ we obtain the concept of a near domain, weakening the assumptions
of a near-ﬁeld:

Deﬁnition 3.5. A structure (D, +, ·) is a near-domain if (D∗, ·) is a group,
(D, +) is a loop (so not necessarily associative) and the structure is right-
distributive.

Note that a near-domain (D, +, ·) is a near-ﬁeld if and only if (D, +) is

a group.

What we have just seen is that to any sharply 2-transitive group G –
whether split or non-split – one can associate a near domain D, so that G
arises from D exactly as AGL(1, K) arises from the ﬁeld K. Conversely, any
near domain gives rise to a sharply 2-transitive group.

The near-domain D associated to a sharply 2-transitive group G is a

near-ﬁeld if and only if G contains a regular normal subgroup.
So we can reformulate the above question and ask instead:

Question: Is any near-domain a near-ﬁeld?

By Zassenhaus’s work the answer is ’yes’ for ﬁnite near-domains. How-
ever, for inﬁnite sharply 2-transitive groups, it was a long standing open
problem whether or not they all split. Here are some splitting results in
certain special cases:

• In [Ti] J. Tits proved that if G is locally compact connected, then G

splits.

8

• In [W] it was shown that if G is locally ﬁnite, then G splits.

• In [Te1] it was shown that if G is deﬁnable in an o-minimal structure,

then G splits.

• In [GlGu] it was shown that if G is linear (with certain additional

restrictions) then G splits.

• In [GMS] it was shown that if G is locally linear (with some additional

restrictions) then G splits.

• In [Ke, Thm. 9.5, p. 42] it was shown that if the characteristic of G is

three, then G splits (see also [Tu]).

• In [M] it was shown that if the exponent of the point stabilizer is 3 or

6, then G splits.

(See also [BN] for further splitting results.) However, it turns out that
the answer to the guiding question is ’no’ ! Not every sharply 2-transitive
group has a non-trivial abelian normal subgroup!

4 New examples in characteristic 2

It turns out that not only is the answer to the above question ’No’, but in
fact it is very far from being even ’close to yes’: it is shown in [RST] that in
the inﬁnite case, any group can be embedded into a group that acts sharply
2-transitively on an appropriate set.

Suppose we have a group G acting on a set X. How can we extend the
group action (extending both the group and the set if necessary) in such
a way that the given action is preserved and the extended action becomes
sharply 2-transitive?

Obviously, in order for this to work we must necessarily have to assume
that two-point stabilizers are trivial as otherwise this resulting group could
not be sharply 2-transitive.

Deﬁnition 4.1. A group G acting on a set X is called a Frobenius group
(action) if the action is transitive, but not regular and no nontrivial element
ﬁxes two elements from X.

This turns out to be the only restriction! In [RST] we show

9

Theorem 4.2. Every Frobenius or regular permutation group which is not
sharply 2-transitive, and whose involutions act without ﬁxed points has a
non-split sharply 2-transitive extension of characteristic 2.

Here, by an “extension” we mean an extension of both the given group and
the underlying set in such a way that the original group action on the original
set is preserved. As pointed out in the beginning, any group acts regularly
on itself by right multiplication. So any group is a subgroup of a sharply
2-transitive group.

The idea of the extension is rather simple: we need to make the action 2-
transitive and we have to make sure that the Frobenius condition is satisﬁed.
In the case of a free completion of a projective plane one adds new lines
joining two given points and new points as interesections for two given lines
until in the limit we obtain the required projective plane.

Incidentally, the examples constructed in [RST] show that in character-
istic 2 the set J 2 \ {1} of products of two distinct involutions does not nec-
essarily form a single conjugacy class.

As a special case we may start with the cyclic group C2 of order 2 and

obtain:

Theorem 4.3. (see [TZ] for the general case) The group G = (C2 × Fω) ∗
Fω acts sharply 2-transitively in characteristic 2 (on some appropriate set),
where Fω denotes the free group of countably inﬁnite rank.

Here, the ∗ denotes the free product of two groups: any element in the
free product can be written as a word whose letters alternate between ele-
ments from the diﬀerent factors of the product. The construction uses partial
actions: we start with the cyclic group G0 = C2 = hti generated by the in-
volution t and assume that it acts on a four element set X0. We then extend
both the group G0 and the underlying set X0 in steps. At any given point,
the involution t acts everywhere on the given set X0, and we assume that
there are always inﬁnitely many generators for the free groups that do not
yet act anywhere on the set. Let us ﬁx inﬁnite generating sets R and S for
the free groups to write

G = (C2 × F (R)) ∗ F (S).

We here do much the same as in the case of a free completion of a pro-
jective plane: we ﬁx one pair of distinct points (x, y) of the original set. We

10

may assume that they are swapped by the involution t. In order to make
the group action sharply 2-transitive we have to make sure that for any pair
(w, z) of distinct elements from X there is a group element - and a unique
one - taking (x, y) to (w, z).

If such a group element already exists, there is nothing to do. Otherwise
we distinguish two cases:
if the pair (w, z) is not yet swapped by an invo-
lution, we add a new element r to the group in form of a generator for an
extension of the original group by a new free factor and we extend the group
action by letting a previously unused r ∈ R take the pair (x, y) to the pair
(w, z).

If on the other hand the pair (w, z) is already swapped by the involution
t, we add a new element s ∈ S to the group in form of a generator for an
extension of the original group and we ask that s commutes with t. We then
again extend the group action by letting s take the pair (x, y) to the pair
(w, z).

We then also have to extend the underlying set X0 in order to let the new
generators from R and S be deﬁned everywhere. This is essentially all. The
details can be found in [RST] in a group theoretic language and in [TZ] in a
more direct approach using partial group actions.

Using the criterion by B. Neumann, it is not hard to show that the result-
ing group does not contain an abelian normal subgroup. Thus, the question
raised above is answered negatively, at least in characteristic 2. However,
in characteristic 2 we do not have an easy description of the set that the
sharply 2-transitive group acts on. Nevertheless we may ask whether these
sharply 2-transitive groups can occur as the point stabilizer of some sharply
3-transitive group.

5 Sharply 3-transitive groups

As in the case of sharply 2-transitive groups, we ﬁrst take a closer look at
the standard example of a sharply 3-transitive group:

The case n = 3: For any commutative ﬁeld K the group G = PGL(2, K)
acts sharply 3-transitively on the projective line of K via x 7→ ax+b
cx+d.

Note that the point stabilizer G∞ in G is (isomorphic to) the group
AGL(1, K). So as before we can ask what we need of the group PGL(2, K) to
make a sharply 3-transitive group. As point stabilizers of sharply 3-transitive

11

groups are sharply 2-transitive, we know from the previous section that there
is a near-domain associated to any sharply 2-transitive group and hence –
via point stabilizers - also to any 3-transitive group. By [Ke] Section 11, a
near-domain D gives rise to a sharply 3-transitive group if and only if there
is an an involutory automorphism σ of the multiplicative group (D+, ·) of D
which satisﬁes the functional equation

σ(1 + σ(x)) = 1 − σ(1 + x) for all x ∈ D \ {0, 1}.

Unfortunately, it is not easy to describe the near-domains associated to
the construction of sharply 2-transitive groups in [RST, TZ]. However, it
turns out that we can construct sharply 3-transitive groups directly:

Suppose that we have a group G acting on a set X in such a way that
3-point stabilizers are trivial and that involutions ﬁx a unique point. Then
we can extend G and X to a sharply 3-transitive action. As before we pick a
triple of distinct elements (a, b, c) and we want to join this triple to any other
triple (x, y, z) of distinct elements by a unique group element. For simplicity
we assume that the setwise stabilizer of {a, b, c} in the group G acts on the
triple (a, b, c) as Sym(3) = S3, the symmetric group on three letters. We also
assume that for any triple (x, y, z) whose setwise stabilizer is isomorphic to
S3 there already exists a (unique) g ∈ G with (a, b, c)g = (x, y, z).

In order to construct the extension of G and X, we here have to dis-
tinguish several cases: if the triple (x, y, z) is not invariant under any group
element, we extend the group G by a free generator taking (a, b, c) to (x, y, z).
If (x, y, z) is invariant under a single involution ι, we extend G by an HNN-
extension conjugating one of the involutions of G(a,b,c) to ι.
If (x, y, z) is
invariant under an element τ of order three, we take an HNN-extension con-
jugating an element of G(a,b,c) of order three to τ . In the limit, the group we
obtain will be sharply 3-transitive of characteristic 2 on some appropriate set
(see [Te2] for details).

It is tempting to try to construct sharply 4-transitive groups with a similar
method. So one could ﬁx a quadrupel of points, assume that the stabilizer of
this quadrupel is S4 and try to extend the group. However – luckily! – this
method fails: if we consider two other quadrupels of points which are not yet
joined to the ﬁxed one, each invariant under some involution, then we need
to join them by HNN-extensions that respect both relations and this cannot
be done in a free way.

12

6 Other characteristics and further directions

So far, the constructions described all lived in characteristic 2.
In other
characteristics we have to take the ﬁxed points of involutions into account. In
the construction of sharply 2-transitive groups described above if involutions
have ﬁxed points, then we cannot just extend the group action freely.
In
characteristic 0, recent progress shows [RT] that this works. Since in this
case, the action of the group G on the underlying set is equivalent to the
action by conjugation on the involutions of G, the situation is more canonical.
On the other hand, the problem is that if G acts sharply 2-transitively on
X, then by the equivariant bijection between the set of involutions of G and
the underlying set X we see that G acts transitively on the set of products
of two distinct involutions.

If the characteristic is diﬀerent from 2, then in particular all pairs of dis-
tinct involutions generate isomorphic dihedral groups. Adding free factors
will necessarily force the dihedral groups to be inﬁnite. This allows us to con-
struct sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic 0 with a similar approach
as in the characteristic 2 case.

However, in characteristic p > 2, the situation is much more diﬃcult:
not only are there no non-split sharply 2-transitive groups in characteristic
p = 3 by Kerby’s result mentioned above. But in the open cases with p > 3,
if we start with a group in which any pair of distinct involutions generates
a dihedral group D2p of order 2p for some prime p > 3, then extending the
group in such a way that this property is preserved demands great care as it
bears similarity to the restricted Burnside problem.

The examples constructed so far suﬃce to conclude that the classes of
sharply 2- and 3-transitive groups, respectively, are wild as they include free
constructions. As far as classiﬁcations are concerned, this forces us to look in
more detail at more speciﬁc settings, as the list of splitting results shows that
there are many natural classes in which sharply 2-transitive groups split. One
of the most urgent maybe the question whether there are non-split sharply
2-transitive groups of ﬁnite Morley rank. This question might even have
direct connections with the existence of so-called ’bad’ groups, i.e. simple
groups of ﬁnite Morley rank which are not isomorphic to algebraic groups
over algebraically closed ﬁelds.

We hope that the recent constructions of these examples inspire new

interest and a fresh look at these natural questions.

13

References

[BN] A. Borovik, A. Nesin, Groups of ﬁnite Morley rank, Oxford Logic
Guides, 26. Oxford Science Publications. The Clarendon Press, Oxford
University Press, New York, 1994.

[dMW] T. de Medts, R. Weiss, Moufang sets and Jordan division algebras,

Math. Annalen 335 (2006), 415-433.

[GMS] G. Glauberman, A. Mann, Y. Segev, A note on groups gen-
erated by involutions and sharply 2-transitive groups, to appear in
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.

[GlGu] Y. Glasner, D. Gulko, Sharply two transitive linear groups, to appear

in Int. Math. Res. Not.

[Ca] Peter J. Cameron, Bases in permutation groups in: Automorphisms of
ﬁrst-order structures. Edited by Richard Kaye and Dugald Macpherson.
Oxford Science Publications. The Clarendon Press, Oxford University
Press, New York, 1994. xiv+386 pp

[DM] J. D. Dixon, B. Mortimer, Permutation groups, Graduate Texts in

Mathematics, 163. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1996. xii+346 pp.

[Ha] M. Hall, On a theorem of Jordan, Paciﬁc J. of Math. 4 (1954) 219 –

226.

[Jo] C. Jordan, Recherches sur les substitutions, J. Math. Pures Appl. (2)

17 (1872) 351-363.

[Ke] W. Kerby, On inﬁnite sharply multiply transitive groups, Hamburger
Mathematische Einzelschriften, Neue Folge, Heft 6. Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, G¨ottingen, 1974. 71 pp.

[MaKS] W. Magnus, A. Karrass, and D. Solitar, Combinatorial group theory,

Interscience, 1966.

[M] P. Mayr, Sharply 2-transitive groups with point stabilizer of exponent 3

or 6, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 134 (2006), no. 1, 9–13.

[MK] The Kourovka notebook. Unsolved problems in group theory 18, Edi-

tors: V. D. Mazurov and E. I.Khukhro, arXiv:1401.0300 (2014)

14

[Ne] B. H. Neumann, On the commutativity of addition, J. London Math

Soc. 15 (1940), 203–208.

[RT] E. Rips, K. Tent, Sharply 2-transitive group in characterstic 0, preprint.

[RST] E. Rips, Y. Segev, K. Tent, A sharply 2-transitive group without a

non-trivial abelian normal subgroup, to appear in JEMS.

[TZ] K. Tent, M. Ziegler, Sharply 2-transitive groups, Adv. Geom. 16 (2016),

no. 1, 131 - 134.

[Te1] K. Tent, Sharply n-transitive groups in o-minimal structures, Forum

Math. 12 (2000), no. 1, 65 - 75.

[Te2] K. Tent, Sharply 3-transitive groups, Advances in Mathematics 286

(2016) 722 - 728.

[Ti] J. Tits, Groupes triplement transitifs et generalisations. Algebre et The-
orie de nombres, Coll. Int. du Centre Nat. de la Rech. Sci. no. 24 (1950)
207 – 208.

[Ti] J.

Tits

Sur

les

groupes

doublement

transitifs

continus,

Comm. Math. Helv. 26 (1952), 203–224.

[Tu] S. T¨urkelli, Splitting of sharply 2-transitive groups of characteristic 3,

Turkish J. Math. 28 (2004), no. 3, 295–298.

[W] H. W¨ahling, Lokal endliche, scharf zweifach transitive Permutations-
gruppen, (German) [Locally ﬁnite, sharply doubly transitive permuta-
tion groups] Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg 56 (1986), 107–113.

[Z1] H. Zassenhaus, ¨Uber endliche Fastk¨orper, Abh. Math. Sem. Hamburg,

11 (1936), 187 – 220.

[Z2] H. Zassenhaus, Kennzeichnung endlicher linearer Gruppen als Permu-

tationsgruppen, Abh. Math. Sem. Hamburg, 11 (1936), 17 – 40.

15

Katrin Tent,
Mathematisches Institut,
Universit¨at M¨unster,
Einsteinstrasse 62,
D-48149 M¨unster,
Germany,
tent@wwu.de

16

