Q-factor enhancement in all-dielectric anisotropic

nanoresonators

Wei Liu,∗,†,‡ Andrey E. Miroshnichenko,‡ and Yuri S. Kivshar‡

College of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, National University of Defense

Technology, Changsha, Hunan 410073, China, and Nonlinear Physics Centre, Research

School of Physics and Engineering, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 0200,

Australia

E-mail: wei.liu.pku@gmail.com

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
s
c
i
t
p
o

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
1
1
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗To whom correspondence should be addressed
†College of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Chang-

sha, Hunan 410073, China

‡Nonlinear Physics Centre, Research School of Physics and Engineering, Australian National University,

Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia

1

Abstract

It is proposed and demonstrated that Q-factor of optical resonators can

be signiﬁcantly enhanced by introducing an extra anisotropic cladding. We

study the optical resonances of all-dielectric core-shell nanoresonators and

reveal that radially anisotropic claddings can be employed to squeeze more

energy into the core area, leading to stronger light conﬁnement and thus sig-

niﬁcant Q-factor enhancement. We further show that the required homoge-

nous claddings of unusual anisotropy parameters can be realized through

all-dielectric multi-layered isotropic structures, which oﬀers realistic extra

ﬂexibilities of resonance manipulations for optical resonators.

Keywords: Q-factor Enhancement; Mie Scattering; All-Dielectric Nanoresonators.

2

Optical resonators serve almost ubiquitously as an indispensable platform for eﬃcient

light-matter interactions and constitute the cornerstone of many related ﬁelds. 1 Diﬀerent

kinds of optical resonators correspond to diﬀerent light conﬁning mechanisms, which can be

roughly categorized as: total internal reﬂection for whispering gallery resonators, 1–3 photonic

bandgap for photonic crystal cavities, 4,5 Anderson localization for random resonators, 6,7 elec-

tromagnetic surface waves for plasmonic and graphene resonators, 8–13 etc. For optical res-

onator based fundamental research and applications, such as cavity-enhanced spectroscopy

and sensing, 14,15 cavity optomechanics, 16 a nonlinear and quantum optics, 17–19 high-Q res-

onators are required to achieve a signiﬁcant ﬁeld conﬁnement and low scattering loss rate,

thus providing an eﬃcient platform for strong light-matter interactions.

To support high-Q resonances, the aforementioned mechanisms have diﬀerent speciﬁc

problems: photonic bandgap and random resonators are limited by fabrication and can not

function beyond the diﬀraction limit; plasmonic and graphene resonators can be scaled down

to the subwavelength spectral regime but, unfortunately, their performance is restricted by

intrinsic losses of materials employed. Though extremely high-Q whispering gallery resonator

is almost free from intrinsic loss and can be easily fabricated, it relies on the excitation of

the high-order modes (higher-order mode corresponds to larger transverse light momentum,

which leads to lower radiation losses and higher Q-factor 2,12,20) and, thus, is inevitably

compromised by large footprint of the resonator and also large mode volume. It was found

that the principle of total internal reﬂection (TIR) can be extended to the interface of

isotropic and anisotropic materials 21,22 (or the so-called relaxed total internal refection, 23,24

RTIR) and has been demonstrated that material anisotropy can be employed to accelerate

the decay rate of evanescent waves, resulting in stronger light conﬁnement capability in

waveguiding systems. 22–24

In this paper, we study the resonances of all-dielectric core-shell cylindrical nanores-

onators of nanowires from new perspectives of the total internal reﬂection at the interface

of anisotropic media. To take advantage of the faster evanescent wave decay induced by

3

Figure 1: (a) Schematic of the core-shell cylindrical resonator consisting of an isotropic core
(refractive index n1 and radius R1) and a radially anisotropic cladding layer (radial index n2r,
transverse index n2t and radius R2). The anisotropy parameter is deﬁned as η2 = n2t/n2r
and the incident plane wave to excite the TM resonances is polarized along x direction.
(b) Conventional TIR: the evanescent wave (dashed curve) resides within the lower-index
(n2) isotropic medium and decays exponentially away from the boundary. (c) RTIR: the
evanescent wave decays much faster away from the boundary, which is due to the anisotropy
of the medium involved.

the RTIR condition, we study a resonator that consists of an isotropic core and radially

anisotropic cladding layer (the refractive index of the core is larger and smaller than the

radial and transverse refractive index of the cladding layer, respectively). We show that

such an anisotropic cladding can squeeze more energy of the mode into the core area, which

results in stronger ﬁeld conﬁnement and thus larger Q-factors for resonances of various orders

of the resonator. We further demonstrate that the cladding layer of naturally inaccessible

anisotropy can be substituted by realistic multi-layered isotropic metamaterial structures

without compromising the property of signiﬁcant Q-factor enhancement. The principle we

have revealed is general and renders new possibilities for manipulations of resonances in terms

of Q-factor enhancement, which can play a critical role in many related research directions

and applications, such as cavity-enhanced spectroscopy and sensing, cavity optomechanics,

resonant quantum and nonlinear optics, lasing and imaging, etc.

4

Results and Discussions

We begin with one of the most fundamental structures of two-dimensional (2D) nonmagnetic

cylindrical resonator as is shown in Figure 1(a): the core layer (of radius R1) is isotropic and

the refractive index is n1; the cladding layer (of radius R2) is radially anisotropic on the x−z

plane with radial index of n2r and transverse (along the azimuthal direction) index of n2t;

the anisotropy parameter is deﬁned as η2 = n2t/n2r. The resonant modes of 2D cylindrical

resonators can be classiﬁed into two sets: (i) the transverse-magnetic (TM) modes with no

magnetic ﬁeld in the z direction of propagation, and (ii) the transverse-electric (TE) modes

with no electric ﬁelds along the z direction. 25–27 Since the TE resonances are not aﬀected by

the radial anisotropy of the shell layer, here we study only the TM resonances with electric

ﬁelds in the x−z plane. As a result, the incident plane wave is ﬁxed to be polarized along the

x direction (in terms of the electric ﬁeld). According to the proposed principle of RTIR, 23,24

the radial anisotropy of the cladding layer can reduce the skin depth of the evanescent waves,

as is shown schematically in Figure 1(b) and (c): Figure 1(b) shows the conventional TIR,

where an evanescent wave (dashed curve) resides within the lower index media, and it decays

exponentially away from the boundary; Figure 1(c) shows the RTIR geometry, where the

evanescent waves decays faster, which is induced by the anisotropic layer employed.

As a ﬁrst step, we study the scattering properties of the structure shown in Figure 1(a).

This problem can be solved analytically, 25,28,29 and the scattering eﬃciency (scattering cross-

section divided by the geometrical cross-section of the structure) can be expressed as:

Γsca =

2

kR X∞

m=−∞

|am|2,

(1)

where k is the angular wave number in the background material (vacuum in our work); R

is the radius of the outmost layer; a0 and am (am = a−m) are the scattering coeﬃcients,

which depend on the anisotropy parameter (see the Methods section for more details). To

be more speciﬁc, a0 corresponds to the magnetic dipole (MD), which has all the electric ﬁelds

5

Figure 2: (a) Scattering eﬃciency spectra for a homogeneous (η = 1) and isotropic cylindrical
resonator (n = 3.5 and R = 300 nm). Both the total scattering eﬃciency spectrum (black
curve) and those contributions from ED (red curve), MD (green curve) and EQ (blue curve)
are shown. Two points D (λD = 1046 nm) and Q (λQ = 821 nm), which corresponds to the
resonant positions of ED and EQ respectively, are marked in (a) and the corresponding near
ﬁelds (partial electric ﬁeld intensity: |E|2) are shown in (b) and (c). (d) The refractive index
dependence of the Q-factors for the ED and EQ supported. The curves corresponds to the
Q-factors obtained through Eq.(2) while circles correspond to Q-factors calculated based on
FWHM of the scattering spectra.

6

along the transverse direction on the x − z plane. 26 As the result, the MD resonance is only

dependent on the transverse (azimuthal) refractive index of the cylindrical resonator, and

consequently it is not aﬀected by the radial anisotropy. While am (m 6= 0) corresponds to the

electric resonance of the m−th order [e.g., a1 and a2 correspond to the electric dipole (ED)

and electric quadrupole (EQ), respectively]. In Figure 2(a) we show the scattering eﬃciency

spectra for a homogenous and isotropic cylinder (radius R = 300 nm and refractive index

n = 2) in terms of the total scattering together with the contributions from the ﬁrst three

dominant resonances: MD (green curve), ED and EQ. As MD is not aﬀected by the radial

anisotropy, throughout this work we focus only on the ED and EQ resonances which are

both anisotropy sensitive. The indicated points D and Q in Figure 2(a) correspond to the

resonant positions of ED and EQ respectively: λD = 1046 nm and λQ = 821 nm. The

corresponding near-ﬁeld distributions |E|2 at those two points are shown in Figure 2(b) and

(c). We show here only the partial ﬁelds of the ED and EQ resonances (ﬁelds associated

with other multipoles are neglected), which as a result exhibit typical pure ED and EQ

characteristics respectively.

Then, we study the Q-factors of the ED and EQ resonances of the homogeneous cylindri-

cal nanowire. If we use ωm=ω ′

m+iω ′′

m to denote the complex resonant angular-frequency of

the m−th order resonance, which corresponds to the singular point of the scattering matrix

of the resonator, then the corresponding Q-factor can be expressed as: 3,25

Qm =

ω ′
m
2ω ′′
m

.

(2)

It is worth noticing that for a homogenous cylindrical resonator, the scattering matrix is

dependent only on the normalized radius ρ = kR and refractive index n. That is to say, for

ﬁxed mode order m, ωm is proportional to the resonator radius. As a result, according to

Eq.(2), Qm is R-independent and depends only on the refractive index n. The dependence

of the Q-factors of ED and EQ on refractive index n is shown in Figure 2(d). As is expected,

7

Figure 3: (a) Scattering eﬃciency spectra for both ED (red curve) and EQ (blue curve)
supported by the isotropic core-anisotpric shell cylindrical resonator of inner radius R1 =
200 nm (n1 = 2) and outer radius R2 = 300 nm (η2 = 4, n2t = 4). For comparison, the
ED and EQ scattering eﬃciency spectra for the homogenous and isotropic (n = 2) resonator
of radius 300 nm are also shown as dashed curves. The total scattering eﬃciency spectrum
are shown as black curves (dashed for the isotropic case and solid for the anisotropic case).
Four resonant points for both cases D, D′ and Q, Q′ (λD = 1046 nm, λD′ = 1213 nm, λQ =
821 nm, λQ′ = 734 nm) are indicated and the corresponding total near-ﬁeld distributions
(|E|2) are shown in (c)-(f). (b) The dependence of the Q-factor for both ED and EQ on
anisotropy parameter. The indexes of the cladding layer is constrained by n2rn2t = n2
1 = 4
and thus the anisotropy parameter is η2 = (n2t/n1)2. (g) The dependence of Ut and Uc/Ut
for ED on the anisotropy parameter.

8

with increasing n the Q-factors of both ED and EQ increases monotonically, since larger

momentum mismatch between the resonator and the background leads to stronger energy

conﬁnement capability. 3,12,25,30 We note that besides the deﬁnition shown in Eq.(2) [the

results have been shown by curves in Figure 2(d)], Q-factors can be also obtained via calcu-

lating the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the scattering spectrum: 3 Qω = ω0/∆ω1/2,

where ω0 denotes the central resonant scattering frequency [such as the points indicated in

Figure 2(a)]; and ω1/2 is width of the scattering spectrum curve measured between the points

where the magnitudes are half of the maximum amplitude at the central resonant position.

The calculated results through scattering spectrum are shown also in Figure 2(d) by circles

and it is obvious they agree well with those obtained through Eq.(2). Throughout this paper,

we focus on the ED and EQ resonances of the lowest frequency [besides the resonant peaks

shown in Figure 2(a), there are other scattering peaks for ED and EQ at higher frequen-

cies 25,31] and calculate the Q-factor through Eq.(2). Nevertheless, it should be reminded

that for ED and EQ of higher frequencies and for other ways to deﬁne and/or calculate the

Q factors (or non-Lorentzian asymmetric line-widths of the scattering spectrum 32,33), the

conclusions drawn in our work are still valid.

As a next step, we switch to the cylindrical resonator with an anisotropic cladding and

demonstrate how the RTIR mechanism can be employed to enhance the Q-factor and energy

conﬁnement ability of the resonances. Firstly we study the core-shell resonator with an

isotropic core (R1 = 200 nm) and an anisotropic cladding. For better comparison with the

homogenous resonator investigated above, we set the core index as n1 = 2, cladding layer

radius as R2 = 300 nm and the indexes of the cladding satisfy: n2rn2t = n2

1. As a result,

the anisotropy parameter can be expressed as: η2 = (n2t/n1)2. The scattering spectra of

η2 = (n2t/n1)2 = 4 is shown in Figure 3(a), where only the contributions from ED and EQ

are shown [for clearer comparison, results of homogenous case with the same outmost layer

radius R = 300 nm shown already in Figure 2(a) are re-plotted here by dashed curves]. As is

expected from the RTIR principle, the anisotropic cladding improves the energy conﬁnement

9

and thus can enhance the Q-factor for both ED and EQ, which can be justiﬁed by the presence

of sharper and narrower scattering curves with anisotropy materials incorporated. 3,25 To

quantitatively characterize the Q-factor enhancement, in Figure 3(b) we show the dependence

of Q-factors of both resonances on the anisotropy parameter, which further veriﬁes the

anisotropy-origin of such enhancement. In principle, higher Q-factor indicates better energy

conﬁnement capability of the resonator. To conﬁrm this directly, in Figure 3(a), the positions

of the ED and EQ resonances for both isotropic and anisotropic cases are indicated by

D, D′ and Q, Q′ (λD = 1046 nm, λD′ = 1213 nm, λQ = 821 nm, λQ′ = 734 nm) and the

corresponding total electric ﬁeld (combining the contributions of all multipoles) intensity

(|E|2) are shown in Figure 3(c)-(f). Compared to the isotropic case [Figure 3(c) and (e)],

when anisotropy is introduced [Figure 3(d) and (f)] more energy of the mode is squeezed

into the core-layer, indicating better energy conﬁnement and as a result leading to more

signiﬁcant ﬁeld enhancement [we note that to make the ﬁeld distributions clearer, diﬀerent

scales of the color-bars for the ﬁelds at diﬀerent points are employed in Figure 3(c)-(f)]. It

worth mentioning that compared to the symmetric ﬁeld distributions shown in Figure 2,

those shown in 3 are asymmetric as here we show the total ﬁelds contributed by all the

multipoles. This is also the case for 4-5.

To further quantify the capability of better energy conﬁnement and more signiﬁcant ﬁeld

enhancement, we denote the energy stored inside the core and shell cladding as Uc and Us,

which can be deﬁned respectively as:

Uc = ZZZ

n2

1|E(r)|2d3r, Us = ZZZ

core

shell

(n2

2r|Er(r)|2 + n2

2t|Et(r)|2)d3r,

(3)

where Er(r) and Et(r) correspond to electric ﬁelds along the radial and transverse direction

respectively, which can be calculated analytically; 25,28,34 the total stored energy inside the

resonator is Ut = Uc + Us; and the core energy ratio is Uc/Ut. In Figure 3(g) we show the

dependence of Ut and Uc/Ut on the anisotropy parameter η2 for the ED resonance. As is

10

clearly shown, with larger η2 both the total stored energy and the core energy ratio would

increase, which proves convincingly tighter energy conﬁnement and larger ﬁeld enhancement

inside the resonator that accompany the eﬃcient Q-factor enhancement shown in Figure 3(a).

In the discussions above, we ﬁxed the overall resonator radius to investigate the Q-factor

dependence on anisotropy parameter. Now we ﬁx the anisotropy parameter η2 = 4 (with

R1 = 200 nm, n1 = 2 and n2t = 4) and study the relationship between Q-factor and the

shell cladding radius R2. The results are summarized in Figure 4(a) as solid curves for both

ED and EQ resonances. It is clear that the Q-factor does not increase monotonically with

increasing cladding radius, and there is actually an optimal radius of the shell to achieve the

highest Q-factor for each resonance. To reveal the mechanism behind, we select three points

for both ED [R2(i) = 250 nm, R2(ii) = 330 nm (optimal radius for EQ), R2(iii) = 600 nm]

and EQ [R2(iv) = 250 nm, R2(v) = 300 nm (optimal radius for ED), R2(vi) = 600 nm],

and show the corresponding total near-ﬁeld distributions (|E|2) in Figure 4(b)-(g).

It is

shown that before the optimal radius, for both resonances more energy is squeezed into

the core region with increasing cladding radius, which leads to both Q-factor and near-ﬁeld

enhancement. In a sharp contrast, after the optimal radius, with increasing R2 more and

more energy will leak out from the core, reducing both the Q-factor and the ﬁeld intensity

within the resonator. This is due to the fact that when the cladding layer is becoming

suﬃciently large, resonances can be formed within the cladding layer, with comparably

negligible energy distributed within the core layer [see Figure 4(d) and (g)]. To conﬁrm

directly this process of mode distribution transformation between the core and the shell

cladding, we plot the Q-factor-radius relationship of a homogeneous anisotropic cylindrical

resonator with η = 4 and n2t = 4 for both ED (dashed red curve) and EQ (dashed blue

curve) in Figure 4(a): it is obvious that for suﬃciently large R2 the Q-factor would converge

to that of a homogeneous anisotropic cylinder [it is worth mentioning that similar to the

isotropic case studied in Figure 2, the Q-factor of an anisotropic homogeneous resonator is

also independent on the radius]. The results presented here could be confusing at a ﬁrst

11

glance, as it is taken for granted that increasing the anisotropic layer width would not break

the condition of RTIR and thus would not result in reduced Q-factor or near-ﬁeld intensity.

But one has to keep in mind that RTIR (and TIR itself) is a concept of geometric optics,

and thus cannot be applied in a universal way. When the cladding layer is suﬃciently

large, potential distributions for photons would be changed drastically, 20 resulting in more

energy conﬁnement within the cladding layer and undermining the features of Q-factor and

near-ﬁeld enhancement.

Figure 4: (a) Dependence of Q-factor (solid red curve for ED and solid blue curve for
EQ) on the shell cladding radius R2 with the following ﬁxed parameters: R1 = 200 nm,
n1 = 2, η2 = 4 and n2t = 4. The dashed curves corresponds to the Q-factors (which is
radius independent) for both ED (red) and EQ (blue) of the homogeneously anisotropic
cylindrical resonator of η = 4 and nt = 4. Three points have been indicated for the core-
shell conﬁguration [ED resonance: R2(i) = 250 nm, R2(ii) = 330 nm, R2(iii) = 600 nm;
EQ resonance:R2(iv) = 250 nm, R2(v) = 300 nm, R2(vi) = 600 nm] and the total near-ﬁeld
distributions in terms of electric ﬁeld intensity |E|2 at those points are shown in (b)-(g)
where R = 600 nm.

.

Up to now, we have demonstrated the eﬃcient Q-factor enhancement based on anisotropic

materials. Unfortunately, for natural materials the anisotropy parameters employed here may

not be realistic. Such a problem is not insurmountable considering the recent development

in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial metamaterials, where other extreme refractive indices and anisotropy

parameters can be achieved. 30,34–39 Here, we employ a cladding layer consisting of multilayers

12

Figure 5: (a) Schematic of the cylindical resonator consisting of an isotropic core (refractive
index n1 = 2 and radius R1 = 200 nm) and a multi-layered cladding made of alternate
n = 1 and n = 4 isotropic layers and the width of both layer is 10 nm. There are ﬁve
layers of each medium, which leads to f = 0.5 and R2 = 300 nm. (b) Scattering eﬃciency
spectra of the cylindrical resonator shown in (a) for both ED (red solid curves) and EQ (red
solid curves). The circles corresponds to the scattering eﬃciency spectra of a two-layered
cylindrical resonator with the same core as that shown in (a) and a homogenous anisotropic
cladding layer of n2r = 1.37, n2t = 2.92 and R2 = 300 nm: both the spectra of ED (red
circles) and EQ (blue circles) are shown. The total scattering eﬃciency spectrum is also
shown by black curve (multilayer) and black circles (anisotropic cladding). Two points ˜D
(λ ˜D = 1191 nm) and ˜Q (λ ˜Q = 791 nm), which correspond to the resonant positions of ED
and EQ respectively, are marked in (b) and the corresponding total near-ﬁeld distributions
(|E|2) are shown in (c) and (e) for the multi-layered isotropic cylindrical resonator, and in
Figure 5(d) and (f) for thetwo-layered core-shell resonator with a homogenous anisotropic
cladding.

13

of two kinds of realistic isotropic materials (n′ and n′′ respectively and n′ < n′′ ) to substitute

the homogeneous anisotropic layer, as shown in Figure 5(a). According to the eﬀective

medium theory, 34,39,40 the eﬀective indexes for the multi-layered cladding in the x − z plane

are:

n2r = n′n′′/p(1 − f )n′2 + f n′′2, n2t = pf n′2 + (1 − f )n′′2,

(4)

where f is the ﬁlling factor of the layer of index n′. When f = 0.5 the largest anisotropy

parameter can be achieved: η2 = (n′2 + n′′2)/2n′n′′ for positive n′ and n′′, and n2rn2t = n′n′′.

As a proof of concept, we set n′ = 1 and n′′ = 4 (e.g. for Germanium), which leads to the

following parameters for f = 0.5: n2r = 1.37, n2t = 2.92 and η2 = 2.13. The structure we

employ is shown schematically in Figure 5(a), where the cladding is made of alternate n′

and n′′ layers and the width of both layer is 10 nm [which is far smaller then the eﬀective

wavelength and then the eﬀective medium theory Eq.(4) can be applied]. There are ﬁve layers

of each medium, which makes f = 0.5 and the overall cladding layer of radius R2 = 300 nm

(for direct comparisons with the previous discussions, the core is set to be isotropic with

radius R1 = 200 nm and of n1 = 2). The scattering eﬃciency spectra of such isotropic

11-layered cylindrical resonator can be calculated analytically 25 and the results are shown in

Figure 5(b) by solid curves for both ED and EQ resonances. It is worth mentioning that here

the periodicity of the cladding is not important as far as the layer width is far smaller than

the wavelength when the eﬀective medium theory can be applied. This distinguishes our

design from those based on photonic bandgap structures. 4,5 To verify the eﬀective medium

theory applied for the multi-layered cladding, we also show in Figure 5(b) by circles the

scattering eﬃciency spectra when the multi-layered cladding is replaced by a homogenous

anisotropic layer [according to Eq.(4)] of n2r = 1.37, n2t = 2.92, and n2rn2t = n2

1 = 4.

It is obvious that both sets of results agree excellently well, indicating the same Q-factor

for both cases [this has already been included in Figure 3(b)]. The two indicated points

˜D and ˜Q in Figure 5(a) correspond to the resonant position of ED and EQ respectively:

14

λ ˜D = 1191 nm and λ ˜Q = 791 nm. The corresponding total near-ﬁeld distributions (|E|2)

are shown in Figure 5(c) and (e) for the multi-layered isotropic cylindrical resonator, and in

Figure 5(d) and (f) for the core-shell anisotropic resonator. The strong ﬁeld conﬁnement is

clearly demonstrated by comparing Figure 5(c-f) with Figure 3(c) and (e). Although the ﬁeld

distributions within the cladding layer are contrastingly diﬀerent (the ﬁelds are signiﬁcantly

enhanced within the n = 1 layers due to the continuity condition along the radial direction,

which is similar to that shown in Ref. 41), the ﬁelds inside the core and outside the resonator

are almost the same, proving further the feasibility of applying the RTIR principle to obtain

high-Q cavity resonators.

Conclusion and Outlook

In summary, based one the recently proposed principle of light localization in anisotropic me-

dia, we have studied all-dielectric cylindrical resonators with an isotropic core and anisotropic

cladding, focusing on the Q-factor enhancement of the resonances supported. Due to the

RTIR eﬀect, we have demonstrated that more energy can be conﬁned within the core-layer

structure, which leads to simultaneous Q-factor and near-ﬁeld enhancement for the reso-

nances. We have also shown that with a ﬁxed radial anisotropy parameter of the cladding,

there exist optimal cladding layer widths to achieve the highest Q-factors for resonances of

diﬀerent orders, thus succeeding in revealing the limitation of the RTIR principle. To verify

the feasibility of our approach to achieve high-Q resonators, we have shown that naturally in-

accessible anisotropy parameters of the cladding can be realized by employing multi-layered

isotropic metamaterial structures with the property of signiﬁcant Q-factor enhancement pre-

served.

It is worth mentioning that though in this work we conﬁne our study to the two low-

est order of modes (dipole and quadruple modes) of cylindrical structures, the principle we

have demonstrated is quite general. The Q-factor enhancement can certainly be achieved

15

in spherical resonators and resonators of other shapes, for other kinds of anisotropy such as

magnetic anisotropy and for modes of higher orders. Actually the higher the mode order

is, the stronger the Q-factor enhancement eﬀect would be [see Figure 3(b)]. Since more

energy is conﬁned within the core of the resonator by the RTIR eﬀect, it is expected that

for a cluster of such resonators the near-ﬁeld coupling between them can signiﬁcantly be

reduced. 42,43 For the proof of concept demonstration, we have employed the multi-layered

positive-index isotropic cladding with modest anisotropy parameter of η2 = 2.125. Other

more unusual anisotropy parameters, even including those complex ones, can be made avail-

able for realistic applications relying on the artiﬁcial metamaterials. 30,34–39 We believe that

our work of employing eﬀective anisotropic media to enhance the Q-factor opens a new di-

mension of freedom for manipulations of various resonators, which can incubate many new

resonator based fundamental research and applications in the ﬁelds of cavity-enhanced spec-

troscopy and sensing, cavity optomechanics, resonant quantum and nonlinear optics, lasing

and imaging, etc.

Methods

The seminal problem of two-dimensional (2D) plane wave scattering by cylindrical resonators

(single or multilayered) consisting of isotropic materials has been studied analytically 25 [e.g.,

for the scattering conﬁguration shown in 5(a) with the corresponding scattering eﬃciency

shown in 5(b) by solid curves]. Such analytical investigations have also been extended to

2D cylindrical resonators made of radially anisotropic materials 28,29 [e.g., for geometries

shown in 1(a)]. It has been revealed that for both isotropic and radially-anisotropic cases,

the expressions for the ﬁeld expansion coeﬃcients (both inside and outside the resonator)

and far-ﬁeld scattering properties are identical [see Eq.(1)], except that in the anisotropic

case the orders of some Bessel and Hankel functions need to be modiﬁed by the anisotropy

parameter.

16

To be more speciﬁc, we take for example the simplest case of a homogeneous radially

anisotropic cylinder (radius R and anisotropy parameter η) in vacuum. The scattering

eﬃciency can be expressed by Eq.(1) where the scattering coeﬃcients for the incident plane

waves of TM polarizations can be expressed as : 25,28

am = a−m =

ntJ ˜m(ntkR)J ′
ntJ ˜m(ntkR)H ′

m(kR) − Jm(kR)J ′
m(kR) − Hm(kR)J ′

˜m(ntkR)
˜m(ntkR)

(m ≥ 0),

(5)

where ˜m is the modiﬁed function order ˜m = mη, J and H are the Bessel and Hankel functions

of the ﬁrst kind 25 and the accompanying primes indicate their diﬀerentiation with respect

to the entire argument. Obviously the results will be reduced to the those of isotropic case

when η = 1. It is clear that the MD mode of m = 0 is independent of the anisotropy, which

is consistent with our former argument based on ﬁeld distribution. Similar to Eq.(5), all the

ﬁeld expansion coeﬃcients within the resonator can be obtained in all the layers through

simply modifying the function order when the radially anisotropic materials are present. As

a result the energy stored within the resonator [see 3] can also be calculated analytically.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge a ﬁnancial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China

(Grant number: 11404403), the Australian Research Council and the Basic Research Scheme

of College of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, National University of Defence Tech-

nology. W. L. thanks the Nonlinear Physics Centre for a warm hospitality during his visit

to Canberra.

References

(1) Vahala, K. Optical microcavities; World Scientiﬁc, 2004.

(2) Lam, C. C.; Leung, P. T.; Young, K. Explicit asymptotic formulas for the positions,

17

widths, and strengths of resonances in Mie scattering. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 1992, 9,

1585.

(3) Yariv, A.; Yeh, P. Photonics: optical electronics in modern communications; Oxford

University Press, Inc., 2006.

(4) Akahane, Y.; Asano, T.; Song, B. S.; Noda, S. High-Q photonic nanocavity in a two-

dimensional photonic crystal. Nature 2003, 425, 944.

(5) Joannopoulos, J. D. Photonic crystals : molding the ﬂow of light, 2nd ed.; Princeton

University Press: Princeton, 2008.

(6) Abrahams, E. 50 years of Anderson Localization; World Scientiﬁc, 2010; Vol. 24.

(7) Segev, M.; Silberberg, Y.; Christodoulides, D. N. Anderson localization of light. Nat.

Photon. 2013, 7, 197.

(8) Boardman, A. D. Electromagnetic surface modes; Wiley: Chichester; New York, 1982.

(9) Maier, S. A. Plasmonics : fundamentals and applications; Springer: New York, 2007.

(10) Min, B.; Ostby, E.; Sorger, V.; Ulin Avila, E.; Yang, L.; Zhang, X.; Vahala, K. High-Q

surface-plasmon-polariton whispering-gallery microcavity. Nature 2009, 457, 455.

(11) Koppens, F. H.; Chang, D. E.; Garcia de Abajo, F. J. Graphene plasmonics: a platform

for strong light-matter interactions. Nano letters 2011, 11, 3370.

(12) Liu, W.; Oulton, R. F.; Kivshar, Y. S. Geometric interpretations for resonances of

plasmonic nanoparticles. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 12148.

(13) Li, R.; Lin, X.; Lin, S.; Liu, X.; Chen, H. Tunable deep-subwavelength superscattering

using graphene monolayers. Opt. Lett. 2015, 40, 1651.

(14) Gagliardi, G.; Loock, H. P. Cavity-Enhanced Spectroscopy and Sensing; Springer, 2014.

18

(15) Zhu, J.; Ozdemir, S. K.; Xiao, Y. F.; Li, L.; He, L.; Chen, D. R.; Yang, L. On-chip single

nanoparticle detection and sizing by mode splitting in an ultrahigh-Q microresonator.

Nat. Photon. 2010, 4, 4649.

(16) Aspelmeyer, M.; Kippenberg, T. J.; Marquardt, F. Cavity optomechanics. Rev. Mod.

Phys. 2014, 86, 1391.

(17) Slusher, R.; Hollberg, L.; Yurke, B.; Mertz, J.; Valley, J. Observation of squeezed states

generated by four-wave mixing in an optical cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1985, 55, 2409.

(18) Haroche, S.; Raimond, J. M. Exploring the Quantum: Atoms, Cavities, and Photons;

Oxford Univ. Press, 2006.

(19) Srinivasan, K.; Painter, O. Linear and nonlinear optical spectroscopy of a strongly

coupled microdisk-quantum dot system. Nature 2007, 450, 862.

(20) Johnson, B. R. Theory of morphology-dependent resonances: shape resonances and

width formulas. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 1993, 10, 343.

(21) Chew, W. C. Waves and ﬁelds in inhomogeneous media; IEEE Press New York, 1995.

(22) Catrysse, P. B.; Fan, S. Transverse electromagnetic modes in aperture waveguides con-

taining a metamaterial with extreme anisotropy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, 223902.

(23) Jahani, S.; Jacob, Z. Transparent subdiﬀraction optics: nanoscale light conﬁnement

without metal. Optica 2014, 1, 96.

(24) Jahani, S.; Jacob, Z. Photonic skin-depth engineering. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 2015, 32,

1346.

(25) Kerker, M. The scattering of light, and other electromagnetic radiation; Academic Press:

New York, 1969.

19

(26) Liu, W.; Miroshnichenko, A. E.; Oulton, R. F.; Neshev, D. N.; Hess, O.; Kivshar, Y. S.

Scattering of Core-Shell Nanowires with the Interference of Electric and Magnetic Res-

onances. Opt. Lett. 2013, 38, 2621.

(27) Liu, W.; Zhang, J.; Lei, B.; Hu, H.; Miroshnichenko, A. E. Invisible nanowires with

interfering electric and toroidal dipoles. Opt. Lett. 2015, 40, 2293.

(28) Chen, H.; Gao, L. Anomalous electromagnetic scattering from radially anisotropic

nanowires. Phys. Rev. A 2012, 86, 033825.

(29) Chen, H.; Gao, L. Tunablity of the unconventional Fano resonances in coated nanowires

with radial anisotropy. Opt. Express 2013, 21, 23619.

(30) Yang, X.; Yao, J.; Rho, J.; Yin, X.; Zhang, X. Experimental realization of three-

dimensional indeﬁnite cavities at the nanoscale with anomalous scaling laws. Nat. Pho-

ton. 2012, 6, 450.

(31) Liu, W. Ultra-directional super-scattering of homogenous spherical particles with radial

anisotropy. Opt. Express 2015, 23, 14734.

(32) Ruan, Z.; Fan, S. Temporal Coupled-Mode Theory for Fano Resonance in Light Scat-

tering by a Single Obstacle? J. Phys. Chem. C 2009, 114, 7324.

(33) Tribelsky, M. I.; Miroshnichenko, A. E. Giant In-Particle Field Concentration and Fano

Resonances at Light Scattering by High-Refractive Index Particles. arXiv:1511.02931

2015,

(34) Kim, K. H.; No, Y. S.; Chang, S.; Choi, J. H.; Park, H. G. Invisible Hyperbolic Meta-

material Nanotube at Visible Frequency. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 16027.

(35) Soukoulis, C. M.; Wegener, M. Past Achievements and Future Challenges in the Devel-

opment of Three-Dimensional Photonic Metamaterials. Nat.Photon. 2011, 5, 523.

20

(36) Zheludev, N. I.; Kivshar, Y. S. From metamaterials to metadevices. Nat. Mater. 2012,

11, 917.

(37) Choi, M.; Lee, S. H.; Kim, Y.; Kang, S. B.; Shin, J.; Kwak, M. H.; Kang, K. Y.;

Lee, Y. H.; Park, N.; Min, B. A terahertz metamaterial with unnaturally high refractive

index. Nature 2011, 470, 369.

(38) Wu, C.; Salandrino, A.; Ni, X.; Zhang, X. Electrodynamical

light trapping using

Whispering-Gallery resonances in hyperbolic cavities. Phys. Rev. X 2014, 4, 021015.

(39) Poddubny, A.; Iorsh, I.; Belov, P.; Kivshar, Y. Hyperbolic metamaterials. Nat. Photon.

2013, 7, 948.

(40) Agranovich, V.; Kravtsov, V. Notes on crystal optics of superlattices. Solid State Com-

mun. 1985, 55, 85.

(41) Oulton, R. F.; Sorger, V. J.; Genov, D. A.; Pile, D. F. P.; Zhang, X. A hybrid plasmonic

waveguide for subwavelength conﬁnement and long-range propagation. Nat. Photon.

2008, 2, 496.

(42) Liu, W.; Miroshnichenko, A. E.; Neshev, D. N.; Kivshar, Y. S. Broadband Unidirec-

tional Scattering by Magneto-Electric Core-Shell Nanoparticles. ACS Nano 2012, 6,

5489.

(43) Miroshnichenko, A. E.; Kivshar, Y. S. Fano Resonances in All-Dielectric Oligomers.

Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 6459.

21

