Conditions for Lorentz-invariant superluminal information

transfer without signaling

Gerhard Gr¨ossing,∗ Siegfried Fussy, Johannes Mesa Pascasio, and Herbert Schwabl

Austrian Institute for Nonlinear Studies,

Akademiehof, Friedrichstr. 10, 1010 Vienna, Austria

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
3
2
1
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

We understand emergent quantum mechanics in the sense that quantum mechanics describes

processes of physical emergence relating an assumed sub-quantum physics to macroscopic boundary

conditions. The latter can be shown to entail top-down causation, in addition to usual bottom-up

scenarios. With this example it is demonstrated that deﬁnitions of “realism” in the literature are

simply too restrictive. A prevailing manner to deﬁne realism in quantum mechanics is in terms of

pre-determination independent of the measurement. With our counter-example, which actually is

ubiquitous in emergent, or self-organizing, systems, we argue for realism without pre-determination.

We refer to earlier results of our group showing how the guiding equation of the de Broglie–

Bohm interpretation can be derived from a theory with classical ingredients only. Essentially, this

corresponds to a “quantum mechanics without wave functions” in ordinary 3-space, albeit with

nonlocal correlations.

This, then, leads to the central question of how to deal with the nonlocality problem in a rela-

tivistic setting. We here show that a basic argument discussing the allegedly paradox time ordering

of events in EPR-type two-particle experiments falls short of taking into account the contextuality

of the experimental setup. Consequently, we then discuss under which circumstances (i.e. physical

premises) superluminal information transfer (but not signaling) may be compatible with a Lorentz-

invariant theory. Finally, we argue that the impossibility of superluminal signaling – despite the

presence of superluminal information transfer – is not the result of some sort of conspiracy (´a la

“Nature likes to hide”), but the consequence of the impossibility to exactly reproduce in repeated

experimental runs a state’s preparation, or of the no-cloning theorem, respectively.

∗ Corresponding author: ains@chello.at; http://www.nonlinearstudies.at

1

1. EMERGENT QUANTUM MECHANICS: REALISM WITHOUT

PRE-DETERMINATION

The term “Emergent Quantum Mechanics” (EmQM) has been used in the literature for

several years by now, albeit with diﬀerent meanings regarding the word “emergence”. As a

major option, the term refers to the possibility that quantum theory might be a (very good)

approximation to some “deeper level theory”. To some, though, EmQM just stands for

quantum theory as a special case for a particular set of parameters of a more encompassing

theory. The term would thus refer to the emergence of a theory. However, the meaning of

EmQM may also be more speciﬁc in that it refers to physical emergence, i.e., to the modeling

of quantum systems as emergent systems. It is the latter option that our group has dealt

with throughout the last couple of years.

There is, however, a communication problem in getting the relevant ideas across, mainly

because the quantum physics and the self-organization/emergence communities, respectively,

hardly communicate with each other. Speciﬁcally, the problem of accepting physical emer-

gence as a possibility within the quantum physics community seems to be the rather exotic

looking theme of top-down causation (next to bottom-up causation). Despite the fact that

there are numerous examples in hydrodynamics, self-organizing systems, etc., for top-down

causation, most quantum physicists seem unaﬀected by the possibility of this “unusual” type

of causality, although the usual understanding of causality is apparently insuﬃcient for a

description and understanding of quantum processes. To give just one example, consider the

Rayleigh–B´enard cells of hydrodynamics. There, one witnesses microscopic random move-

ment that spontaneously becomes ordered on a macroscopic level. The top-down causality is

manifest in that emergent particle trajectories depend crucially on the boundary conditions

of the system.

Certainly, this classical example of top-down causation is neither “weird” (as quantum

mechanics is claimed to be), nor “surreal” (as the trajectories’ behaviors in the convection

cells might be called, did one not have a perfectly rational explanation for it). Rather, this

example must by necessity be covered by any deﬁnition of realism that one would claim as

being generally applicable to any physical system. However, in the recent literature, def-

initions of realism have been proposed in the context of quantum foundations that would

deny the above-mentioned examples of top-down causation to be considered “real”. In other

2

words, the phenomena of Rayleigh–B´enard cells in particular, but also all other processes

of self-organizing, or emergent, systems, are actually counter-examples to recent deﬁnitions

of “realism” in the quantum foundations literature, such as the following: “all measure-

ment outcomes are determined by pre-existing properties of particles independent of the

measurement (realism).” [1]

This is now to be contrasted with our proposal for a physical EmQM, i.e., realism without

pre-determination. Instead of pre-determination, in the systems of interest we consider the

case of co-evolution, i.e., permanently updated co-determination, with essential inﬂuences

on the microphysics by changing boundary conditions, or measurement arrangements, re-

spectively. With this perspective, it becomes clear that via importing ill-deﬁned concepts

of “realism” into the debate about Bell’s theorems, all sorts of wrong conclusions become

possible. After all, in this scenario “realism” eﬀectively just becomes a “red herring”, with

the task of killing all proposals of thus understood “realistic” hidden variable theories – an

exercise that in the end is rather fruitless. Looking back on the development of quantum

foundations throughout the last decades, one actually may get the impression that this kind

of strategy to exclude realism in this way has kept a lot of people busy. A historian of science

might be well advised to consider a study on “A Brief History of Red Herrings”, or the like

– this might turn into quite a voluminous book.

To give just one more example of such a red herring, not of recent times, but of half a

century ago, consider the following passage from Richard Feynman’s famous description of

electrons passing a double slit:

“We now make a few remarks on a suggestion that has sometimes been made to try

to avoid the description we have given [i.e., of the double slit experiment with electrons]:

‘Perhaps the electron has some kind of internal works – some inner variables – that we do

not yet know about. Perhaps that is why we cannot predict what will happen. If we could

look more closely at the electron, we could be able to tell where it would end up.’ So far

as we know, that is impossible. We would still be in diﬃculty. Suppose we were to assume

that inside the electron there is some kind of machinery that determines where it is going

to end up. That machine must also determine which hole it is going to go through on its

way. But we must not forget that what is inside the electron should not be dependent on

what we do, and in particular upon whether we open or close one of the holes.

So, if an electron, before it starts, has already made up its mind (a) which hole it is going

3

to use, and (b) where it is going to land, we should ﬁnd P1 for those electrons that have

chosen hole 1, P2 for those that have chosen 2, and necessarily the sum P1 + P2 for those

that arrive through the two holes. There seems to be no way around this. But we have

veriﬁed experimentally that this is not the case. And no one has ﬁgured a way out of this

puzzle. So at the present time we must limit ourselves to computing probabilities. We say

‘at the present time,’ but we suspect very strongly that it is something that will be with us

forever – that it is impossible to beat that puzzle – that this is the way nature really is.” [2]

It is interesting to see how strongly Feynman insists on his conclusion about “the way

nature really is”, although the logic his argument is based on depends on the unquestioned

assumption that the electron’s behavior is pre-determined, and independent of the measure-

ment. This assumption, however, is in stark contrast to an alternative scenario which is

proposed in our EmQM, i.e., that the electron does not propagate in a completely empty

space, but is embedded in a “medium”. The latter we identify as the vacuum’s zero-point

ﬁeld, which can mediate information about the boundary conditions as given by the source

and the measurement apparatus. The zero-point ﬁeld is also the decisive agent in describing

the electron’s behavior in stochastic electrodynamics [3], with which our ansatz shares some

characteristics, and a prototype to illustrate wave-particle duality via particle-medium inter-

actions is given by the famous experiments with oil droplets “walking” on an oil bath [4–6].

So, there is one essential characteristic that radically contrasts particle behavior in our

EmQM to that insinuated by above-quoted deﬁnition of “realistic” hidden variable theories:

Instead of pre-determined velocities of the latter, the particles in our EmQM exhibit emer-

gent velocities stemming from the constant interplay of the particle forward velocity at a

particular instant in time with the wave-like embedding surroundings of the zero-point ﬁeld.

Said constant interplay, or mutual inﬂuencing, of particle and wave dynamics (which has

its classical analogy in Couder’s oil droplets, or “walkers”), is a manifestation of what we

call relational causality: the interlocking of bottom-up and top-down causalities. Assuming

local microscopic interactions in a sub-quantum domain, these form – together with the

macroscopic boundary conditions – emergent structures in the quantum domain which may

exhibit spontaneous nonlocal order.

In turn, the thus created emergent structures aﬀect

the local microscopic interactions in a top-down manner, which thus closes the causal circle

relating vastly diﬀerent spatial scales at the same time (Fig. 1.1).

We have applied the concept of relational causality to the situation of double-slit in-

4

Figure 1.1. Scheme of relational causality: mutual (bottom-up and top-down) processes at the

same time.

terference (Fig. 1.2). Considering an incoming beam of, say, electrons with wave number

k impinging on a wall with two slits, two beams with wave numbers kA and kB, respec-

in pre-determined velocities vI = 1

tively, are created, which one may denote as “pre-determined” quantities, resulting also
mkI, I =A or B. The deﬁnition of “realism” (but also
Feynman’s dictum) that we criticized above would now imply that any realistic hidden vari-

able theory just has these pre-determined velocities at its disposal for modeling double-slit

interference. This, however, would constitute a very naive form of realism which, to our

knowledge, nobody in the quantum physics community supports (. . .

thus making it a

classical red herring)!

However, if one considers that the electrons are not moving in empty space, but in an

undulatory environment created by the ubiquitous zero-point ﬁeld “ﬁlling” the whole ex-

perimental setup, a very diﬀerent picture emerges. For then one has to combine all the

velocities/momenta at a given point in space and time in order to compute the resulting,
mκi, i=1 or 2 (Fig. 1.2), where i is a book-

or “emergent”, velocity/momentum ﬁeld vi = 1

5

keeping index not necessarily related to the particle coming from a particular slit [7]. The

relevant contributions other than the particle’s forward momentum mv originate from the

so-called osmotic (or diﬀusive) momentum mu. The latter is well known from Nelson’s

stochastic theory [8], but its identical form has been derived by one of us from an assumed

sub-quantum nonequilibrium thermodynamics [9, 10]. Introducing the osmotic momentum

in a sub-quantum hidden variable theory constitutes a decisively concrete step beyond the

much older, but only rather general proposal by one of us of “quantum systems as ‘order-

out-of-chaos’ phenomena” [11]. For now it becomes possible to model double slit interference

in more detail, with momentum conservation guaranteed as soon as one takes both the co-

evolving forward and the osmotic velocity ﬁelds into account [7, 12]. This constitutes, among

others, a viable causal model with its implied violation of what is called “causal parameter

independence”. The latter would state that in EPR-type scenarios Alice’s measurement

outcomes would not depend on Bob’s measurement settings. However, as local changes of

boundary conditions such as the settings of an apparatus nonlocally aﬀect the whole system,

our relationally causal model does describe said dependence and is therefore not excluded

by recent no-go principles for certain causal hidden variable theories [13]. Not only that,

our model also provides an understanding and deeper-level explanation of the microphysical,

causal processes involved, i.e., of the “guiding law” [14], which also happens to be identical

with the central postulate of the de Broglie–Bohm theory.

2.

IDENTITY OF THE EMERGENT KINEMATICS OF N BOUNCERS IN REAL

3-DIMENSIONAL SPACE WITH THE CONFIGURATION-SPACE VERSION OF

DE BROGLIE–BOHM THEORY FOR N PARTICLES

As in our model the “particle” is actually a bouncer in a ﬂuctuating wave-like envi-

ronment, i.e. analogously to the Couder’s bouncers, one does have some (e.g. Gaussian)

distribution, with its center following the Ehrenfest trajectory in the free case, but one also

has a diﬀusion to the right and to the left of the mean path which is just due to that stochas-

tic bouncing. Thus the total velocity ﬁeld of our bouncer in its ﬂuctuating environment is

given by the sum of the forward velocity v and the respective diﬀusive (or “osmotic”) ve-

locities uL and uR to the left and the right. As for any direction α the diﬀusion velocity
uα = D ∇αP

P , α = L or R, does not necessarily fall oﬀ with the distance, one has long ef-

6

Figure 1.2. Scheme of interference at a double slit. Considering an incoming beam of electrons

with wave number k impinging on a wall with two slits, two beams with wave numbers kA and

kB, respectively, are created, which one may denote as “pre-determined” quantities, resulting also

in pre-determined velocities vI = 1

mkI , I =A or B. Recent deﬁnitions of “realism” in the quantum
foundations literature would now imply that any realistic hidden variable theory just has these pre-

determined velocities at its disposal for modeling double-slit interference. However, if one considers

that the electrons are not moving in empty space, but in an undulatory environment created by the

ubiquitous zero-point ﬁeld “ﬁlling” the whole experimental setup, a very diﬀerent picture emerges.

For then one has to combine all the velocities/momenta at a given point in space and time in

order to compute the resulting, or “emergent”, velocity/momentum ﬁeld vi = 1

mκi, i = 1 or 2.
The relevant contributions diﬀering from the particle’s forward momentum mv originate from the

so-called osmotic (or diﬀusive) momentum ﬁeld mu. Thus it becomes possible to model double slit

interference in microscopic detail, as can be seen from the lower plane where intensity distributions

and average trajectories are shown. Local momentum conservation is thereby guaranteed as soon

as one takes both the co-evolving forward and the osmotic velocity ﬁelds into account.

fective tails of the distributions which contribute to the nonlocal nature of the interference

7

pre-determinedvelocities:vI=1mkIemergentvelocities:vi=1mκiκ1κ2κ1κ2r0kBAδκ1κ2κ1κ2φ=π^nAφAkA^nBφBkBφ=0xzphenomena [15]. In sum, one has three, distinct velocity (or current) channels per slit in an

n-slit system.

We have previously shown [7, 16] how one can derive the Bohmian guidance formula

from our bouncer/walker model. Introducing classical wave amplitudes R(wi) and gener-

alized velocity ﬁeld vectors wi, which stand for either a forward velocity vi or a diﬀusive

velocity ui in the direction transversal to vi, we account for the phase-dependent amplitude

contributions of the total system’s wave ﬁeld projected on one channel’s amplitude R(wi)

at the point (x, t) in the following way: We deﬁne a conditional probability density P (wi) as

the local wave intensity P (wi) in one channel (i.e. wi) upon the condition that the totality
of the superposing waves is given by the “rest” of the 3n − 1 channels (recalling that there
are 3 velocity channels per slit). The expression for P (wi) represents conditions which we

describe as “relational causality”: any change in the local intensity aﬀects the total ﬁeld,

and vice versa, any change in the total ﬁeld aﬀects the local one. In an n-slit system, we thus

obtain for the conditional probability densities and the corresponding currents, respectively,

i.e. for each channel component i,

P (wi) = R(wi) ˆwi · 3n(cid:88)

ˆwjR(wj)

j=1

J(wi) = wiP (wi),

i = 1, . . . , 3n,

with

cos ϕi,j := ˆwi · ˆwj.

Consequently, the total intensity and current of our ﬁeld read as

(cid:33)2

3n(cid:88)
3n(cid:88)

i=1

(cid:32) 3n(cid:88)
3n(cid:88)

i=1

Ptot =

P (wi) =

ˆwiR(wi)

Jtot =

J(wi) =

wiP (wi),

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

(2.5)

i=1

i=1

leading to the emergent total velocity ﬁeld

vtot =

Jtot
Ptot

=

3n(cid:88)
3n(cid:88)

i=1

wiP (wi)

P (wi)

i=1

8

.

(2.6)

In [7, 16] we have shown with the example of n = 2, i.e. a double slit system, that

Eq. (2.6) can equivalently be written in the form

R2

1v1 + R2

2v2 + R1R2 (v1 + v2) cos ϕ + R1R2 (u1 − u2) sin ϕ

.

(2.7)

vtot =

R2

1 + R2

2 + 2R1R2 cos ϕ

The trajectories or streamlines, respectively, are obtained in the usual way by integration.

As ﬁrst shown in [17], by re-inserting the expressions for convective and diﬀusive velocities,
respectively, i.e. vi = ∇Si
Bohmian guidance formula. Naturally, employing the Madelung transformation for each

, one immediately identiﬁes Eq. (2.7) with the

m , ui = − 

∇Ri
Ri

m

path j (j = 1 or 2),

j = |ψj|2 = ψ∗

and thus Pj = R2
metric identities such as cos ϕ = 1
2

ψj = RjeiSj /,

(2.8)
j ψj, with ϕ = (S1 − S2)/, and recalling the usual trigono-

(cid:0)eiϕ + e−iϕ(cid:1), one can rewrite the total average current

immediately in the usual quantum mechanical form as

Jtot = Ptotvtot

= (ψ1 + ψ2)∗(ψ1 + ψ2)

(cid:18)

(cid:20) 1

m

1
2

−i

∇(ψ1 + ψ2)
(ψ1 + ψ2)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

i

+

1
m

∇(ψ1 + ψ2)∗
(ψ1 + ψ2)∗

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(2.9)

= − i
2m

[Ψ∗∇Ψ − Ψ∇Ψ∗] =

Re{Ψ∗(−i∇)Ψ} ,

1
m

where Ptot = |ψ1 + ψ2|2 =: |Ψ|2.

Eq. (2.6) has been derived for one particle in an n-slit system. However, it is straight-

forward to extend this derivation to the many-particle case [14]. Therefore, what looks like

the necessity in the de Broglie–Bohm theory to superpose wave functions in conﬁguration

space, can equally be obtained by superpositions of all relational amplitude conﬁgurations

of waves in real 3-dimensional space. The central ingredient for this to be possible is to

consider the emergence of the velocity ﬁeld from the interplay of the totality of all of the

system’s velocity channels.

It can also be shown that the average force acting on a particle in our model is the

same as the Bohmian quantum force. For, due to the identity of our emerging velocity ﬁeld

9

with the guidance formula, and because they essentially diﬀer only via the notations due

to diﬀerent forms of bookkeeping, their respective time derivatives must also be identical.

Thus, from Eq. (2.6) one obtains the particle acceleration ﬁeld (using a one-particle scenario

for simplicity) in an n-slit system as



3n(cid:88)
3n(cid:88)

i=1



wiP (wi)

P (wi)

(cid:20)

i=1

 3n(cid:88)

i=1

atot (t) =

dvtot

dt

=

d
dt

=

1

(cid:33)2

P (wi)

(cid:32) 3n(cid:88)

i=1

(cid:33)

P (wi)

(2.10)

dt

(cid:21)(cid:32) 3n(cid:88)
(cid:33)(cid:32) 3n(cid:88)

i=1

P (wi)

dwi
dt

+ wi

dP (wi)

(cid:32) 3n(cid:88)

i=1

−

wiP (wi)

dP (wi)

dt

i=1

(cid:33) .

3n(cid:88)

Note in particular that (2.10) typically becomes inﬁnite for regions (x, t) where Ptot =

P (wi) → 0, in accordance with the Bohmian picture.

i=1

From (2.10) we see that even the acceleration of one particle in an n-slit system is a highly

complex aﬀair, as it nonlocally depends on all other accelerations and temporal changes in

the probability densities across the whole experimental setup! In other words, this force is

truly emergent, resulting from a huge amount of bouncer-medium interactions, both locally

and nonlocally. This now leads to the central question of how to deal with the nonlocality

problem in a relativistic setting. We shall discuss this problem by considering EPR-type

experiments.

3. NONLOCALITY AND RELATIVITY: A CASE FOR LORENTZ INVARIANT

SUPERLUMINAL INFORMATION TRANSFER

As is well known, in an EPR-type experiment, where two photons are emitted in opposite

directions from one spin-zero state, two diﬀerent observers would form mutually inconsistent

pictures of reality (Fig. 3.1).

However, Maudlin has correctly pointed out that “Relativity also reveals some of the

10

(a)

(b)

Figure 3.1. (a) An EPR-correlated particle pair is emitted at source 0 and later simultaneously

registered by detectors (symbolized by black circles) in the laboratory rest frame. However, an

observer in a reference frame moving to the right, would see the right-hand particle registered at a

time t’ at which the left-hand particle is located at spacetime point A. Thus, a “state jump” would

occur at A before the particle is registered. (b) Same as in (a), but with observer in a reference

frame moving to the left. The latter will see the left-hand particle registered at time t’ at which

the right-hand particle is located at spacetime point A, so that a “state jump” would occur at A

before the particle is registered. Taken together, (a) and (b) point at a conﬂict as to which order

of events “really” is happening in a realistic world view.

apparent contradictions between frames to be merely matters of equivocation.” [18] He

explains: “The unprimed (here:

l.h.s.) frame says that the right-hand photon is detected

before the left while the primed (here: r.h.s.) frame has it the other way around. How

could they both be right? In this case the answer is clear: they are simply talking about

diﬀerent things. The unprimed frame notes precedence in its t-coordinate, which we might

call ‘time’, while the primed frame is concerned with precedence in its own t-coordinate,

which we could call ‘primetime’. There is no more contradiction between saying that the

right detection event precedes the left in time but follows it in primetime than there is

in saying that Idaho precedes New Jersey in geographical area but follows it in terms of

11

ctxct′x′t′=const.A0=0′ctxlct′x′t′=const.A0=0′population.” [18]

So, the riddle posed in Fig. 3.1 is solved by realizing that there does not exist the one

“true time ordering”. All that matters is the Lorentz invariance of the theory. Paraphras-

ing Maudlin, we add “space” and “primespace” in the scenario, just to obtain frames of

“spacetime” and “prime-spacetime”. Then, our two diﬀerent viewpoints are two versions of

a Lorentz invariant behavior in space and time, which can be transformed into each other

via simple rotation, as required by the Lorentz transformations (Fig. 3.2).

(a)

(b)

Figure 3.2. As Lorentz transformations correspond to simple rotations in spacetime diagrams, the

two situations of Fig. 3.1 just correspond to two diﬀerent viewpoints. However, what is crucially

important to be able to show this, is that one has to take into account the whole experimental

arrangement including the source 0 and the detectors 1 and 2 , in each reference frame. Then,

even nonlocal correlations (symbolized by the green line) are part of a relativistically invariant

description. Moreover, this renders obsolete the question of which of the options (a) and (b) was

the “true” time ordering.

Again, we agree with Maudlin as to the consequences of this insight. He argues that

many would agree that “Relativity prohibits something from going faster than light:

Matter or energy cannot be transported faster than light.

Signals cannot be sent faster than light.

12

ctxct′x′t′=const.11′0=0′22′ctxlct′x′t′=const.11′0=0′22′Causal processes cannot propagate faster than light.

Information cannot be transmitted faster than light.”

But, alternatively, one just needs to require that theories must be Lorentz invariant:

“This requirement is compatible with the violation of every one of the prohibitions listed

above.” [18] However, in order to clearly see the implications of the required Lorentz invari-

ance, one must appreciate that the whole experimental arrangement has to be taken into

account, i.e., including the source 0 and the detectors 1 and 2, in each reference frame.

Then, even nonlocal correlations (symbolized by the green line in Fig. 3.2) are part of a

relativistically invariant description.

An especially interesting scenario is given for the case that the two frames meet such that

the spacetime points at the origin coincide, i.e. 1 =1’ (Fig. 3.3). In the resting laboratory

frame, the experiment is arranged along an area between points 1 and 2, with the source 0
emitting photon pairs at time t0 ≥ 0. Imagine now that to each element of the experimental
setup is attached a traﬃc light that shows “red” when the preparation is not yet completed,

and “green” when it is. In the rest frame, the totality of all traﬃc lights showing “green”

will occur at some ﬁrst instance, i.e., at some time t0 = const. Now, what would a moving

observer see? The answer is given by Rindler’s “wave of simultaneity”: whereas the green

lights will light up in a “ﬂash” which in the rest frame occurs simultaneously at the time

t0 = 0, in the moving observer’s frame they will light up simultaneously at some time
(cid:48)
0 = 0. (For a more detailed description, with arguments involving a “rigged Hilbert space”,
t
see [19].) This has the strict consequence that the photon pairs can be emitted from source
0 ≥ 0. And this is also the source of misleading arguments in the literature.
For, although the lightcone is deﬁned uniquely in all reference frames, this is true only as

(cid:48)
0’ only at times t

to its spreading in spacetime due to the universality of the vacuum speed of light. However,

the timing of the emission of the photon pairs must in general be diﬀerent for two observers

moving with relative velocities to each other.

In other words, one has to consider the

relativity of simultaneity of the whole experimental setup including the source and the

extension of the apparatus. Note also that if the moving observer would register at A a

photon that was emitted at 0, we would have the same kind of dilemma as in Figs. 3.1 (a)

and (b). For then the “state jump” of the left-hand photon would occur at A, i.e., before its

arrival at the detector B. However, if one correctly describes the source 0’ of the particle

pair in the moving observer’s rest frame, then the detectors at points 1’ and 2’, respectively,

13

would always simultaneously register the corresponding photons. Thus, by relating the axis

of equitemporality to the whole extension of an experimental apparatus in spacetime, which

is diﬀerent for each reference frame, one avoids the error of attributing some “idealistic”
time to the system (like, e.g., t(cid:48) = const in Figs. 3.1 (a) and (b)).

Figure 3.3. In the laboratory rest frame, the EPR-correlated particle pair is emitted at source 0

and later simultaneously registered by detectors (symbolized by green circles). If, under the wrong

assumption, the moving observer would register at A a photon that was emitted at 0 , then the

“state jump” of the left-hand photon would occur at A, i.e., before its arrival at the detector at B.

However, since the preparation of an entangled photon pair requires the preparation of the whole

experimental setup, and not just of the source, the world lines of all elements of the apparatus

must be considered as forming one unseparable whole. Therefore, the photon pairs can be emitted
0 ≥ 0. Consequently, also in the moving frame will the photons arrive

from source 0’ only at times t

(cid:48)

simultaneously at the respective detectors, and Lorentz invariance is again established.

We have thus shown that even nonlocal correlations can be part of a relativistically invari-

ant description of events in spacetime. The conditions for Lorentz-invariant superluminal

information transfer are essentially given by the evolution in spacetime of the whole, en-

compassing system (i.e., quantum system plus macroscopic apparatus, including source and

detectors). A crucial question then arises as to interventions in such a system, which lead

to the phenomenon of dynamical nonlocality [20]. In the above-mentioned paper by one of

14

ctxlct′x′l′AAB1=1′00′22′us [11], a type of experiment called “late choice experiment” was proposed that we then be-

lieved would provide an eﬀect with dramatic consequences. The question was clariﬁed for us

only fairly recently in the paper by Tollaksen et al. [20], with the consequence that although

the eﬀect exists its measurable consequences are not dramatic at all. We shall here only

refer to the variant that Tollaksen et al. discuss, for it is the relevant one. Essentially, the

authors ask what happens in a realistic scenario (where one electron goes through just one

of two slits present) if at the very moment the particle passes the slit, the other slit is being

closed (or opened, in case it was closed before). The authors show within the Heisenberg

picture that the opening or closing of a slit results in the nonlocal transfer of (what they call

“modular”) momentum. (Our group has shown that this eﬀect can also be demonstrated

when using the Schr¨odinger picture [15].)

However, there is an in-principle uncontrollability of that momentum transfer: Tollaksen

et al. [20] speak of “complete uncertainty” in this regard. This means that here one has the

case of a nonlocal transfer of information (i.e., from a slit to the particle), which, however,

cannot be used for signaling: due to the necessary uncertainty of the location of the particle

before the intervention, the nonlocal momentum transfer just shifts the particle within the

wave packet, ﬁguratively speaking, so that its detection at some location cannot in principle

give any indication of whether or not that information transfer has happened.

A corollary to this concerns an implication of the no-cloning theorem. Opening or closing

of a slit amounts to the preparation of a new state with a certain phase relative to the

one associated with the path of the particle through the other slit. Considering many

runs with such an intervention highlights an important feature of the system: it cannot be

controlled. In other words, the identical phase can never be reproduced, which means that

the no-cloning theorem is here ultimately responsible for the impossibility of superluminal

signaling. (For, if one could control the phase during intervention at a slit, one could do this

massively in parallel, and thus on average steer the electron to a desired position.)

Thus, both the consistencies of relativity and of quantum theory are conﬁrmed, despite

the superluminal information transfer involved. In other words, complete uncertainty makes

it possible to have nonlocal information transfer without superluminal signaling. The latter is

exactly the option shown in [21] to remain valid for viable nonlocal hidden variable theories.

15

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Jan Walleczek for many enlightening discussions, and the Fetzer Franklin Fund

of the John E. Fetzer Memorial Trust for partial support of the current work.

[1] S. Gr¨oblacher, T. Paterek, R. Kaltenbaek, C. Brukner, M. Zukowski, M. Aspelmeyer, and

A. Zeilinger, “An experimental test of non-local realism,” Nature 446 (2007) 871–875,

arXiv:0704.2529 [quant-ph].

[2] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics: Quantum

Mechanics, vol. 3. Addison-Wesley, 1966.

[3] L. de la Pe˜na, A. M. Cetto, and A. Vald´es-Hern´andes, The Emerging Quantum: The Physics

behind Quantum Mechanics. Springer, Berlin, 2014.

[4] Y. Couder, S. Proti`ere, E. Fort, and A. Boudaoud, “Dynamical phenomena: Walking and

orbiting droplets,” Nature 437 (2005) 208–208.

[5] J. W. Bush, “Pilot-wave hydrodynamics,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 47 (2015) 269–292.

[6] H. Batelaan, E. Jones, W. C.-W. Huang, and R. Bach, “Momentum exchange in the electron

double-slit experiment,” J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. (2016) . In press.

[7] S. Fussy, J. Mesa Pascasio, H. Schwabl, and G. Gr¨ossing, “Born’s rule as signature of a

superclassical current algebra,” Ann. Phys. 343 (2014) 200–214, arXiv:1308.5924

[quant-ph].

[8] E. Nelson, “Derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation from Newtonian mechanics,” Phys. Rev.

150 (1966) 1079–1085.

[9] G. Gr¨ossing, “The vacuum ﬂuctuation theorem: Exact Schr¨odinger equation via

nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” Phys. Lett. A 372 (2008) 4556–4563, arXiv:0711.4954

[quant-ph].

[10] G. Gr¨ossing, “On the thermodynamic origin of the quantum potential,” Physica A 388

(2009) 811–823, arXiv:0808.3539 [quant-ph].

[11] G. Gr¨ossing, “Quantum systems as (cid:28)order out of chaos(cid:29) phenomena,” Nuov. Cim. B 103

(1989) 497–509.

[12] G. Gr¨ossing, S. Fussy, J. Mesa Pascasio, and H. Schwabl, “Emergence and collapse of

16

quantum mechanical superposition: Orthogonality of reversible dynamics and irreversible

diﬀusion,” Physica A 389 (2010) 4473–4484, arXiv:1004.4596 [quant-ph].

[13] M. Ringbauer, C. Giarmatzi, R. Chaves, F. Costa, A. G. White, and A. Fedrizzi,

“Experimental test of nonlocal causality,” (2016) , arXiv:1602.02767 [quant-ph].

[14] G. Gr¨ossing, S. Fussy, J. Mesa Pascasio, and H. Schwabl, “Implications of a deeper level

explanation of the deBroglie–Bohm version of quantum mechanics,” Quantum Stud.: Math.

Found. 2 (2015) 133–140, arXiv:1412.8349 [quant-ph].

[15] G. Gr¨ossing, S. Fussy, J. Mesa Pascasio, and H. Schwabl, “’Systemic nonlocality’ from

changing constraints on sub-quantum kinematics,” J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 442 (2013) 012012,

arXiv:1303.2867 [quant-ph].

[16] G. Gr¨ossing, S. Fussy, J. Mesa Pascasio, and H. Schwabl, “Relational causality and classical

probability: Grounding quantum phenomenology in a superclassical theory,” J. Phys.: Conf.

Ser. 504 (2014) 012006, arXiv:1403.3295 [quant-ph].

[17] G. Gr¨ossing, S. Fussy, J. Mesa Pascasio, and H. Schwabl, “An explanation of interference

eﬀects in the double slit experiment: Classical trajectories plus ballistic diﬀusion caused by

zero-point ﬂuctuations,” Ann. Phys. 327 (2012) 421–437, arXiv:1106.5994 [quant-ph].

[18] T. Maudlin, Quantum Non-Locality and Relativity: Metaphysical Intimations of Modern

Physics. Wiley-Blackwell, West Sussex, UK, 3 ed., 2011.

[19] G. Gr¨ossing, Quantum Cybernetics: Toward a Uniﬁcation of Relativity and Quantum Theory

via Circularly Causal Modeling. Springer, New York, NY, 2000.

[20] J. Tollaksen, Y. Aharonov, A. Casher, T. Kaufherr, and S. Nussinov, “Quantum interference

experiments, modular variables and weak measurements,” New J. Phys. 12 (2010) 013023,

arXiv:0910.4227v1 [quant-ph].

[21] J. Walleczek and G. Gr¨ossing, “Nonlocal quantum information transfer without

superluminal signalling and communication,” Found. Phys. (2016) , arXiv:1501.07177

[quant-ph]. in press.

17

