High-pressure melt growth and transport properties of SiP, SiAs, GeP, and GeAs

2D layered semiconductors

C. Barreteau1, B. Michon, C. Besnard, E. Giannini

Department of Quantum Matter Physics, University of Geneva, 24 Quai Ernest-Ansermet, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
3
1
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract
Silicon and Germanium monopnictides SiP, SiAs, GeP and GeAs form a family of 2D layered semiconductors. We have succeeded
in growing bulk single crystals of these compounds by melt-growth under high pressure (0.5-1 GPa) in a cubic anvil hot press. Large
(mm-size), shiny, micaceous crystals of GeP, GeAs and SiAs were obtained, and could be exfoliated into 2D ﬂakes. Small and brittle
crystals of SiP were yielded by this method. High-pressure sintered polycrystalline SiP and GeAs have also been successfully used
as a precursor in the Chemical Vapor Transport growth of these crystals in the presence of I2 as a transport agent. All compounds
are found to crystallize in the expected layered structure and do not undergo any structural transition at low temperature, as shown
by Raman spectroscopy down to T=5 K. All materials exhibit a semiconducting behavior. The electrical resistivity of GeP, GeAs
and SiAs is found to depend on temperature following a 2D-Variable Range Hopping conduction mechanism. The availability of
bulk crystals of these compounds opens new perspectives in the ﬁeld of 2D semiconducting materials for device applications.

Keywords: A2. High-pressure melt growth, B2. Semiconducting materials, A1. Low dimensional structures, A2. Growth from
vapor

1. Introduction

2D materials are of great interest for the novel electronic
properties that can arise from the reduced dimensionality and
the quantum conﬁnement of charge carriers, and have become
more and more appealing for applications in modern electronic
devices. After the epoch-making discovery of graphene [1], the
search for stable free-standing atomic layers of semiconduct-
ing materials has experienced a rush and a fast improvement of
the processing techniques. The wide family of transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMDs) has proven to be the most promising,
oﬀering quite a large variety of compounds, large tunability of
properties and ﬂexibility in potential practical applications [2].
Electronic and optoelectronic devices based on various TMDs
have been demonstrated [3, 4, 5]. The search for other families
of 2D materials exhibiting the same properties, existing in sta-
ble atomic layers and oﬀering similar potential for applications
together with a natural abundance and a low production cost is
still very active and deserves a strong eﬀort. Chemically stable
atomic layers with no surface dangling bonds can be obtained
from other layered materials and the van der Waals-like bond
between layers with diﬀerent chemical compositions opens new
perspectives for new heterostructures to be realized in a wide
range of materials. Besides graphene, examples of pure ele-
ments from group IV (Si and Ge) and group V (P) have been
found to form atomically thin layers (silicene [6], germanene
[7] and phosphorene [8], respectively) that can be obtained
through either chemical deposition on substrate [9] or mechan-
ical exfoliation of bulk 3D crystals [10]. Binary compounds of

1Celine.Barreteau@unige.ch

Preprint submitted to Journal of Crystal Growth

a group IV element (Si, Ge, Sn) and a group V pnictogens (P,
As,) are also known to form layered structures in which 2D
strongly covalent layers are stacked onto each other through
weak van der Waals like bonds, as well as in TMDs. Silicon
and germanium phosphides and arsenides have been reported
since decades to crystallize in various layered structures with
either orthorhombic (Cmc21 space group, SiP [11], Pbam space
group, SiP2 and GeAs2 [12]) or monoclinic (C2/m space group,
GeP, GeAs and SiAs [12, 13, 14]) symmetries. After the initial
investigations of their crystal structures and phase equilibria,
during the sixties and seventies, this family of compounds has
been rather overlooked, and attracts today our interest as being a
potential class of 2D materials, alternative to TMDs. The equi-
librium phase diagrams assessed so far predict the existence of
a limited number of stable compositions and polytypes [15].
Few more have been synthesised at high pressure (cubic GeP,
cubic GeP2, rhombohedral GeP3 [16, 17]) or suggested to exist
according to structural investigations, even though not present
in the equilibrium phase diagram (orthorhombic SiP2[12] and
cubic SiP2 [18]). Recently, the phase diagram of the Si-P has
been theoretically revisited under high pressure and suggested
to be substantially diﬀerent from that drawn under equilibrium
conditions at ambient pressure [19]. First principle calcula-
tions of phase stability in the Si-P system have predicted the
existence of at least three new stable SixPy compounds with
a layered structure that could be stable in single atomic layer
forms [20]. Bulk crystals of these materials have been seldom
if ever grown: SiAs was reported to crystallize from the melt
by Sudo [21] and from the vapor phase by Kutzner et al. [22];
SiP and SiAs crystals were grown by the physical vapor trans-

March 8, 2016

port (PVT) method [23], but resulted not to crystallize in the
expected space group; very recently GeP was reported to grow
in crystalline form by using a solution growth method in a ﬂux
of Bi and Sn [24]. As a matter of fact, the volatility and the
strong reactivity and toxicity of pnictogens require the use of
close reactors in order to prevent the vapor phase from escap-
ing. Here we report about crystal growth of the four members of
the family, namely SiP, SiAs, GeP and GeAs, from the self-ﬂux
under high pressure, using a cubic anvil hot pressure apparatus.
Large, micaceous, and easy-to-cleave crystals were obtained in
the case of GeP, GeAs, and SiAs. Small and brittle crystals
were obtained in the case of SiP. Polycrystalline binary sam-
ples, processed in the same high-pressure furnace, were used as
a precursor material for CVT growth experiments with iodine
as a transport agent. This method was found to favor the growth
of SiP and GeAs. This article reports on materials processing,
crystal growth, structural and physical characterization of SiP,
SiAs, GeP and GeAs. The crystals have the expected layered
structure and can be exfoliated. These materials exhibit semi-
conducting behavior and conﬁrm to have high potential as 2D
materials for novel nano-engineered semiconducting devices.

2. Experimental

2.1. Thermodynamic considerations

The phase diagrams of the four systems under investiga-
tion have been assessed and are reported in the Pauling Files
database [15]. Only two stable compounds are reported to exist
in the Si-P and Ge-P diagrams, SiP and GeP, whose decompo-
sition occurs at 1160◦C and 750◦C, respectively, via peritectic
decomposition into elements P and Si, or Ge. According to
those diagrams, SiP is reported to transform into a mixed solid-
liquid-vapor phase [25], whereas GeP is claimed to decompose
into solid Ge and liquid P [26]. At ambient pressure this ap-
pears quite unlikely, the sublimation temperature of P being as
low as 430◦C. The Si-P phase diagram has been recently re-
futed and corrected by Liang et al. [19]. On the other hand,
no recent thermodynamical investigations of the Ge-P system,
or diagram updates, have been undertaken. Undoubtedly, the
decomposition into a vapor phase of phosphorous at ambient
pressure prevents from processing SiP and GeP by conventional
techniques.

The phase diagrams of the systems containing As have been
investigated by various authors (see [15] for a complete collec-
tion), and all agree on a congruent melting of SiAs and GeAs
into a liquid phase at ambient pressure. This allows processing
the compounds and growing the crystals under more conven-
tional conditions. As a matter of fact, arsenic melts into liquid
at ambient pressure and its vapor pressure is more than two or-
ders of magnitude lower than that of P at the same temperature.
In the case of SiAs and GeAs, the growth from the melt can
be made more diﬃcult by the presence of monoarsenide and
diarsenide phases, both congruently melting in the same tem-
perature range, which can grow into one another in the case of
composition ﬂuctuations and element segregation. Crystals of
SiAs have been grown successfully from the melt under ambi-
ent pressure [23], as well as from the vapor phase under vacuum

[22]. Only µm-size crystals of GeAs have been obtained so far
[13].

As a result of the above considerations, we have chosen a
melt-growth method under high-pressure (in the GPa range) for
all compounds. The calculated phase diagram of Si-P at 0.1
GPa [19], showing a solid-liquid equilibrium at the SiP compo-
sition, supports this choice. Moreover, high pressure has also
been successfully used for growing crystals of black phospho-
rous preventing both its sublimation and the transformation into
dangerous white phosphorous [27]. The use of pressures as
high as 0.5-1 GPa is expected to make the growth of SiP and
GeP from the melt possible. In the presence of As, the high
pressure impedes the toxic vapor of As from reacting with the
atmosphere, and speeds up the growth kinetics.

2.2. High-pressure melt growth (HP)

All crystals were grown in a high pressure cubic anvil press.
Pure elements Si (6N), Ge (5N), P (5N) and As (5N) were used
as reactants. They were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio and
pressed into pellets of approximately 7 mm of diameter and
3 mm of thickness under uniaxial stress (3 tons). The pellets
were then placed in a cylindrical boron nitride crucible sur-
rounded by a graphite sleeve resistance heater and inserted into
a pyrophyllite cube as a pressure transmitting medium. The py-
rophyllite cell was then placed inside the high-pressure set-up,
which consists of six WC anvils. For each composition, the
cell was cold pressurized, then fast brought to high temperature
(T1) at 1200◦C/hours, held for 30 min at this temperature and
then slowly cooled to a temperature T2 before being quenched
to room temperature, while maintaining a constant pressure (see
Table 1 for details). The temperature T1 was chosen to be above
the complete melting of the precursors. The quench temper-
ature was chosen to be above any possible decomposition or
phase transition. The slow cooling rate allows crystals to nu-
cleate and grow.

Sample

SiP
SiAs
GeP
GeAs

Pressure
0.5/1 GPa

1 GPa
1 GPa
1 GPa

T1(◦C) T2(◦C) Cooling (◦C/h)
1050
1200
900
900

925
1000
600
650

25
50
100
50

Table 1: HP growth conditions

2.3. Chemical Vapor Transport (CVT)

As mentioned above, vapor transport techniques are the most
common way to obtain single crystals of these materials. How-
ever, owing to the large diﬀerence between the vapor pressure
of the pnictogen and the group-IV element, very large temper-
ature gradients (∼25◦C/cm) [28] were employed to achieve the
right stoichiometry. In order to reduce such a strong technical
constraint, we tried to grow crystals by vapor transport using
smaller temperature gradients (5-7◦C/cm).

For the Physical Vapor Transport (PVT), the pure elements
were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio, with a total mass of 0.2-
0.3 g. The mixture was then placed in a quartz ampoule with an

2

internal diameter of 8 mm and a length of 120 mm and sealed
under vacuum (5x10−6 mbar). For the Chemical Vapor Trans-
port (CVT), a transport agent (I2) was added to the pure ele-
ments according to a molar ratio n(I2)/n(Group IV) = 0.05. In
both cases, the sealed reactor was placed in a two-zone furnace
in the presence of a thermal gradient dT/dx ≈ 5-7◦C/cm, and
heated up to Thot at the hot end, equal to 1100◦C and 900◦C
for SiP and GeAs, respectively. After few days, the furnace
was switched oﬀ and the temperature decreased to room tem-
perature. Preliminary results conﬁrmed the diﬃculties in main-
taining the wanted stoichiometry during crystallization in both
techniques, more dramatically in the PVT case, due to the rapid
sublimation of the pnictogen element during heating. The ad-
dition of the transport agent proved to be insuﬃcient to suc-
cessfully control the growth process. According to these obser-
vations, we decided to start from diﬀerent reactants and grow
single crystal only by the CVT technique. Instead of using a
mixture of pure elements, we started from high-pressure pre-
reacted binary precursors mixed with the transport agent. This
processing route proved to be successful to grow single crystals
of SiP and GeAs.

Figure 1: Crystals of GeP (a), GeAs (b), SiP (c) and SiAs (d) from HP melt
growth; SEM images of GeAs (e) and SiAs (f) evidencing the lamellar structure
and the easy cleavability.

3

2.4. Structural and Physical characterization

As-grown crystals were characterized by X-Ray diﬀraction
(XRD), SEM-EDX analysis, Raman Spectroscopy, and elec-
trical transport. XRD patterns were acquired in a Philips
X’Pert four-circle diﬀractometer and a Philips PW1820 pow-
der diﬀractometer, both using Cu Kα radiation. Thanks to their
better quality, only GeP and GeAs crystals could also be mea-
sured in an Agilent Super Nova single crystal diﬀractometer
using MoKα radiation. SEM-EDX analysis were carried out in
a LEO 438VTP electron microscope coupled to a Noran Pio-
neer X-Ray detector. Raman spectroscopy was performed with
a homemade micro Raman spectrometer equipped with an ar-
gon laser (λ = 514.5 nm, spectral resolution of ≈1 cm−1) and a
helium-ﬂow cryostat working from 300K to 4 K. The electri-
cal resistivity was measured by the standard four-probe method
using a Quantum Design PPMS (physical properties measure-
ment system) from 300 K to 2 K under a magnetic ﬁeld from 0
to 7 T.

3. Results and Discussion

Pictures of single crystals of SiP, SiAs, GeP and GeAs grown
by the HP method are presented in Fig. 1. As shown in these
pictures, it is easier to grow the pnictides of germanium than
those of silicon. Single crystals of GeP, GeAs and in a lesser
measure SiAs are large, shiny and present grey ﬂakes that can
be easily cleaved into thinner ﬂakes. On the other hand, SiP
crystals are signiﬁcantly smaller, less shiny, and very brittle.
The peculiar lower quality of SiP crystals is ascribable to var-
ious facts: SiP is the only monopnictide that crystallizes in
the orthorhombic space group Cmc21 instead of the monoclinic
C2/m, which is common to the other compositions. Moreover,
according to the phase diagram reported by Liang et al. [19],
the temperature range suitable for nucleation and growth of SiP
is rather narrow. Besides, the isostatic pressure can only be in-
creased over a little range for avoiding the formation of other
HP metastable SixPy phases [29]. Congruent melt conditions
were achieved for all systems: SEM-EDX analysis conﬁrms
the expected 1:1 chemical composition of the crystals and nei-
ther composition ﬂuctuations nor secondary phases have been
noticed in the core of the HP-grown bulk. SEM images, ﬁgure
1(e-f), evidence the lamellar structure of these crystals and their
suitability for fabricating 2D devices. The same analysis on the
GeAs and SiP crystals grown by the CVT method also conﬁrms
the 1:1 stoichiometry, with no traces of the transport agent I2.

Crystals cleave easily in the plane corresponding to the van
der Waals gap (see Fig. 2) and clean powder diﬀraction pat-
terns, with a strong preferred orientation, were obtained. This
is conﬁrmed by the θ-2θ scans shown in Fig. 3, which are com-
patible with a monoclinic symmetry C2/m with strong pre-
ferred orientation along the [2 0 -1] direction. For GeP and
GeAs, good quality single crystals could be cleaved to con-
ﬁrm the crystal structure (the reciprocal space reconstruction
for the plane [0 k l] for GeP is shown as an inset in Fig. 3). The
powder diﬀraction pattern for SiP presents broader reﬂections
but agrees with the orthorhombic space group Cmc21 with pre-
ferred orientation along the [0 0 1] direction.

a 1mm	b1mm	c0.5mm	d0.5mm	100μm	e 50μm	f Figure 2: Crystal structure of monoclinic GeP, GeAs and SiAs (left) and or-
thorhombic SiP (right). Grey arrows indicate the cleavage plane.

Figure 4: Raman spectra of SiP, SiAs, GeP and GeAs (top to battom) grown by
HP. The bottom pattern compares GeAs grown by either HP or CVT (red and
magenta lines, respectively).

crystals grown by diﬀerent techniques (HP and CVT): the re-
producibility of the Raman spectrum conﬁrms the quality of
the samples and the reliability of the processing routes. Index-
ation of the Raman modes of GeAs, GeP and SiP is not known
at this stage. DFT calculations of the phonon spectra are in
progress. The Raman study as a function of temperature shows
no signiﬁcant changes down to 5 K, indicating that no structural
transitions occur and the symmetry is preserved.

Electrical resistivity measurements were performed on sev-
eral HP-grown single crystals of each composition from room
temperature to 5K. Small deviations in the resistivity from one
sample to another with the same composition are consistent
with the diﬃculty in correctly estimating the thickness of these
small, layered crystals. As pointed out in Fig. 5 , the four pnic-
tides exhibit semiconducting behavior. The values of electrical
resistivity at room temperature are in the same range for the
monoclinic compounds, GeP (0.02 Ω·cm), SiAs (0.038 Ω·cm),
GeAs (0.071 Ω·cm). On the other hand, for the orthorhombic
SiP the electrical resistivity is four order of magnitude larger
(141 Ω·cm), as shown in the inset of Fig. 5 ; the high resistance
of SiP prevents the complete characterization over the whole
temperature range. The large electrical resistivity of SiP, as
compared to the other members of the family, was reproducible
over samples from various batches and is likely to be related to
the structural diﬀerence between SiP and the other monopnic-
tides. No magnetoresistance eﬀect is observed by repeating the
ρ(T) measurements under magnetic ﬁelds up to 7 tesla.

Despite their evident semiconducting behavior, a simple ther-
mally activated Arrhenius law does not ﬁt to the experimental
resistivity of the monoclinic compounds. As a matter of fact
the dependence of the resistivity on temperature is very well
described by a Variable-Range-Hopping model [30]. Accord-

Figure 3: XRD patterns: θ-2θ diﬀraction from the crystal surface of the four
monopnictides (main panel), and reciprocal space reconstruction in the [0 k l]
plane from single crystal diﬀraction on GeP (bottom-right inset). The sec-
ondary small peak labelled with a star in the pattern of SiAs is due to the sample
holder. The high background noise of the SiP diﬀraction pattern is due to the
very small size of the sample.

The diﬀraction patterns obtained from the cleavage planes of
the two diﬀerent structures in the same Bragg-Brentano geom-
etry are very similar. This is accounted for by the similar local
symmetry in the planes and the (Si,Ge)-(P,As) polyhedra that
order in similar chains in these planes, as described in ref. [11].
All samples were also characterized by Raman spectroscopy.
The narrow, well deﬁned peaks of the Raman shift, as well as
the very low level of background proved the general good qual-
ity of the crystals. Fig. 4 shows the Raman spectra of SiP, SiAs,
GeP and GeAs (from top to bottom, respectively). The Ra-
man shift in SiAs is in good agreement with the previous Ra-
man study reported by Kutzner et al.[22]. The three compounds
with a monoclinic structure exhibit similar Raman spectra (sim-
ilar groups of modes, red-shifting when going from lighter to
heavier compounds). Unequivocally, the Raman shift of SiP is
diﬀerent from the others, conﬁrming the diﬀerent crystal struc-
ture of SiP. The bottom-most plot shows two patterns of GeAs

4

abcabcdimensional system. This is consistent with the 2D-like struc-
ture of these materials and conﬁrms that the electrical conduc-
tion involves only the (Ge,Si)-pnictide bonds in the quasi-2D
slab oriented in the [2l 0 -l] direction. This behavior is expected
on the base of the calculation of the Electron Localization Func-
tion (ELF) in GeP reported by Lee et al. [24] that predicts the
absence of covalent bonds between the layers and strong cova-
lent Ge-Ge and Ge-P bonds in the layer.
The slope of the linear dependence of ln(ρT−1/2) on T−1/3
shown in Fig. 6 is higher in SiAs than in the two Ge-pnictides
(for which it is the same). Such slope, that is T0 in equation (1),
is proportional to the hopping distance and inversely propor-
tional to the density of state at the Fermi level, N(EF) [31]. The
higher T0 would indicate that in SiAs the density of growth-
induced defects is lower. On the other hand, the equal slope ob-
served in GeP and GeAs VRH-linear regression suggests that
the origin of localized impurity states in the gap cannot be as-
cribed to occupation vacancies or substitutional defects on the
pnictogen site, but are more likely related to the slightly disor-
dered local coordination of Ge, predicted by ELF calculations
[24].

Figure 5: Electrical resistivity as a function of temperature for the four single
crystals (darkblue: GeP, green: GeAs, red: SiAs and, in the inset, orange: SiP).
The drawing shows the standard four-probe geometry used, with the current
ﬂowing in the cleavage plane.

4. Conclusions

With the aim of searching for 2D layered semiconducting
materials that can be exfoliated down to atomically thin layers,
we have investigated the family of Si- and Ge-monopnictides
(SiP, SiAs, GeP, GeAs). Bulk crystals of these compounds were
rarely grown, had small size and never allowed systematic in-
vestigations of their electronic properties. The crystal struc-
ture in which these materials crystallized was object of con-
troversy.
In this work we have shown that high pressure (in
the GPa range) favors the crystal growth of the four Si- and
Ge-monopnictides. Those containing Ge, in particular, can be
grown with a large size (up to 4-5 mm2 in the cleavage plane).
Crystals of SiP and GeAs could also be grown by the vapor
transport technique, provided that high-pressure pre-reacted el-
ements were used as precursors and I2 was used as transport
agent. We have conﬁrmed the monoclinic space group C2/m
for SiAs, GeP and GeAs, and the orthorhombic Cmc21 for SiP.
All compounds exhibit a semiconducting behavior. Neverthe-
less, the electrical resistivity of three of them (SiAs, GeP and
GeAs) is found to follow a 2D Variable Range Hopping con-
duction mechanism at low temperature. These materials can be
mechanically exfoliated and the study of their properties as a
function of the ﬂake thickness is in progress.

Figure 6: Fit of the 2D Variable Range Hopping model to the resistivity of GeP,
GeAs and SiAs .

ing to this model, the resistivity obeys the law

ρ(T) = ρ0 exp

(1)

(cid:19)1/(n+1)

(cid:18) T0

T

where T0 is a constant and ρ0 depends on temperature as the
square root of T [31]. The factor n in the exponent indicates the
dimensionality of the system, so that the exponent 1/(n+1)=1/3
in a two-dimensional system. The plot of ln(ρT−1/2) versus
T(−1/3) shown in Fig.5 for the three compounds GeP, GeAs and
SiAs, evidences a linear trend between T=5 K and T=120 K
and agrees with a Variable-Range-Hopping conduction in a 2-

5. Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully thank J. Teyssier for his precious help
in Raman spectroscopy experiments. This work was partially
supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation through
the ”Sinergia” project n. CRSII2-147607.

5

-4-202	ln(ρ*T(-1/2))	(Ohm·cm)	600500400300200	1000*T(-1/3)	(K)SiAs	GeAs		GeP6. References

References

[1] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V.

Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, A. A. Firsov, Science 80 (2004) 666-669.

[2] M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh, H. Zhang, Nat.

[3] B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti, A. Kis, Nat.

Chem. 5 (2013) 263-75.

Nanotechnol. 6 (2011) 147-150.

[4] H. Wang, L. Yu, Y.-H. Lee, Y. Shi, A. Hsu, M. L. Chin, L.-J. Li, M.

Dubey, J. Kong, T. Palacios, Nano Lett. 12 (2012) 4674-4680.

[5] M. Tosun, S. Chuang, H. Fang, A. B. Sachid, M. Hettick, Y. Lin, 8 (2014)

4948-4953.

[6] P. Vogt, P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C.
Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet, G. Le Lay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012) 1-5.
[7] M. E. D´avila, L. Xian, S. Cahangirov, A. Rubio, G. Le Lay, New J. Phys.

16 (2014) 095002.

[8] L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen, Y.

Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol. 9 (2014) 372-377.

[9] B. Lalmi, H. Oughaddou, H. Enriquez, A. Kara, S. Vizzini, B. Ealet, Appl.

Phys. Lett. 97 (2010) 223109.

[10] A. Kara, H. Enriquez, A. P. Seitsonen, L. C. L. Y. Voon, S. Vizzini, B.

Aufray, Surf. Sci. Rep. 67 (2012) 1-18.

[11] T. Wadsten, Chem. Scripta 8 (1975) 63-69.
[12] T. Wadsten, Acta Chem. Scand. 21 (1967) 593-594.
[13] B. F. Mentzen, Comptes Rendus de l’Acadmie des Sciences S´erie 2 293

(1981) 965.

[14] T. Wadsten, S. Burmester, G. Cederberg, R. B. Jensen, C. T. Pederson, E.

Larsen, Acta Chem. Scand. 19 (1965) 1232-1238.

[15] P. Villars, Pauling Files Binaries Edition, Crystal Impact (2002).
[16] J. Osugi, R. Namikawa, Y. Tanaka, Rev. Phys. Chem. Japan 37 (1967)

[17] J. Gullman, O. Olofsson, J. Solid State Chem. 5 (1972) 441-445.
[18] T. Wadsten, Acta Chem. Scand. 21 (1967) 1374-1376.
[19] S.-M. Liang, R. Schmid-Fetzer, J. Phase Equilibria Diﬀus. 35 (2014) 24-

81-93.

35.

[20] B. Huang, H. L. Zhuang, M. Yoon, B. G. Sumpter, S.-H. Wei, Phys. Rev.

B 91 (2015) 1-5.

[21] I. Sudo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 19 (1980) 755-756.
[22] J. Kutzner, J. Kortus, O. Ptzold, U. Wunderwald, G. Irmer, J. Raman

Spectrosc. 42 (2011) 2132-2136.

[23] C. G. Beck, R. Stickler, J. Appl. Phys. 37 (1966) 4683-4687.
[24] K. Lee, S. Synnestvedt, M. Bellard, K. Kovnir, J. Solid State Chem. 224

(2015) 62-70.

[25] B. Giessen, R. Vogel, Z. Met. 50 (1959) 274-277.
[26] Y. A. Ugai, L. I. Sokolov, E. G. Goncharov, V. R. Pshenstanchik, Russ. J.

Inorg. Chem. 23 (1978) 1048-1050.

[27] S. Endo, Y. Akahama, S. Terada, S. Narita, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 21 (1982)

[28] T. Wadsten, Acta Chem. Scand. 23 (1969) 331-333.
[29] J. Osugi, R. Namikawa, Y. Tanaka, Rev. Phys. Chem. Jpn 36 (1966) 35-

L482-L484.

43.

[30] N. F. Mott, J. Non Cryst. Solids 1 (1968)1-17.
[31] N. V. Argiskaya, V. I. Kozub, J. Exp. Theor.Phys. 79 (1994) 466-472.

6

