Direct observation of local Rashba spin polarization and

spin-layer locking in centrosymmetric monolayer PtSe2

Wei Yao,1 Eryin Wang,1 Huaqing Huang,1 Ke Deng,1 Mingzhe Yan,1

Kenan Zhang,1 Taichi Okuda,2 Linfei Li,3 Yeliang Wang,3, 4 Hongjun

Gao,3, 4 Chaoxing Liu,5 Wenhui Duan,1, 4 and Shuyun Zhou1, 4, ∗

1State Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics and Department of Physics,

Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

2Hiroshima Synchrotron Radiation Center (HSRC),

Hiroshima University, 2-313 Kagamiyama,

Higashi-Hiroshima 739-0046, Japan

3Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics,

Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190

4Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing, P.R. China

5Department of Physics, The Pennsylvania State University,

University Park, Pennsylvania 16802-6300, U.S.A.

(Dated: Feb. 18, 2016)

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
4
1
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Abstract

The generally accepted view that spin polarization is induced by the asymmetry of

the global crystal space group has limited the search for spintronics [1] materials to

non-centrosymmetric materials. Recently it has been suggested that spin polarization

originates fundamentally from local atomic site asymmetries [2], and therefore cen-

trosymmetric materials may exhibit previously overlooked spin polarizations. Here by

using spin- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (spin-ARPES), we report

helical spin texture induced by local Rashba eﬀect (R-2) in centrosymmetric mono-

layer PtSe2 ﬁlm. First-principles calculations and eﬀective analytical model support

the spin-layer locking picture: in contrast to the spin splitting in conventional Rashba

eﬀect (R-1), the opposite spin polarizations induced by R-2 are degenerate in energy

while spatially separated in the top and bottom Se layers. These results not only

enrich our understanding of spin polarization physics, but also may ﬁnd applications

in electrically tunable spintronics.

∗Email: syzhou@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

2

FIG. 1: Illustration of conventional Rashba (R-1) and local Rashba (R-2) eﬀects with

diﬀerent symmetries. a, R-1 Rashba eﬀect in non-centrosymmetric materials. The inversion

symmetry is broken and there is a net dipole ﬁeld. The right graph is the typical spin-resolved

band structure induced by R-1 Rashba eﬀect with a spin splitting in energy. b, R-2 Rashba eﬀect

in centrosymmetric materials. The inversion symmetry is preserved and there is a site dipole ﬁeld

in spite of the vanishing total dipole ﬁeld. The right graphs illustrate the spin texture of R-2

Rashba eﬀect. The two kinds of spins with opposite directions are spatially separated in diﬀerent

layers, resulting in overall zero spin polarization.

The new insight that spin polarization in nonmagnetic materials originates from rela-

tivistic spin-orbit coupling (SOC) from the local asymmetry (atomic site group) [2–5] rather

than the global asymmetry (bulk space group) has revolutionized our understanding of spin

polarization physics. This has led to two forms of hidden spin polarization in centrosym-

metric materials, R-2 (by site dipole ﬁeld) and D-2 (by site inversion asymmetry) to be

distinguished from the conventional Rashba (R-1, by dipole ﬁeld) [6–13] and Dresselhaus

(D-1, by bulk inversion asymmetry) [14] eﬀects previously discovered in non-centrosymmetric

materials. Diﬀerent from the R-1 eﬀect with a net spin polarization, the R-2 eﬀect is char-

acterized by compensated spin polarizations of opposite signs that are spatially segregated

into two real space sectors forming the inversion partners, e.g. top and bottom layers (see

3

FIG. 2: Crystal structure and electronic structure of monolayer PtSe2. a, Crystal struc-

ture of monolayer PtSe2 (top: unit cell, bottom: top view). b, Band dispersions along the K-Γ-M-K

direction from ﬁrst-principles calculations. The color and line width distinguish the contribution

from Pt and Se (Red for Se and green for Pt). c, LEED pattern of as-grown monolayer PtSe2 on

Pt(111). The peaks from PtSe2 are pointed by blue arrows. Additional diﬀraction spots rotated

from the PtSe2 spots are much weaker and they do not have signiﬁcant contribute to ARPES

measurements. d, ARPES data measured along M-Γ-M direction. e, ARPES data measured along

the K-Γ-K direction. f, Energy distribution curves (EDCs) for data shown in d for momentum

range between the arrows. The EDC at Γ point is enlarged at the bottom panel, from which we

can resolve the four bands. g, Constant energy maps at selected energies. The contours of the top

four bands at positive kx are highlighted by colored lines.

schematic cartoon in Fig. 1). Compared to the R-1 eﬀect with a large internal electric ﬁeld

which is diﬃcult to be reversed by an external ﬁeld, the spins induced by R-2 might have

advantages for electrically tunable spintronics devices due to the easy manipulation via the

application of an external electric ﬁeld [15, 16]. Layered transition metal dichalcogenides

(TMDs) [17–20] are good candidates for realizing the R-2 eﬀect due to the large SOC and

large site dipole ﬁeld. Although hidden spin polarization has been recently reported in the

bulk crystal of WSe2 [4] and predicted in other layered materials, e.g. LaOBiS2 [15, 16] and

(LaO)2(SbSe2)2[21] ﬁlms, so far stable semiconducting thin ﬁlms with large spin polarization

induced by the R-2 eﬀect still remain to be realized experimentally.

4

Monolayer PtSe2 contains one Pt layer sandwiched between two Se layers, forming trigonal

structure when projected onto the (001) plane (Fig. 2(a)). It has centrosymmetric space
group P¯3m1 for bulk structure, polar point group C3 for both Pt and Se sites, and it is

semiconducting [22]. These properties make it a promising candidate for realizing electrically

tunable spintronics by R-2 eﬀect [2]. First-principles calculations (Fig. 2(b)) show that the

top three valence bands (labeled by α, β and γ) are mostly contributed by the p orbitals

of Se, and the fourth valence band (labeled by δ) is mainly contributed by the d orbitals

of Pt. From the calculations, all the bands should be doubly degenerate without any net

spin polarization since monolayer PtSe2 has both inversion and time-reversal symmetries.

Here, by combining a full three-dimensional spin analysis using spin-ARPES and theoretical

calculations, we report the hidden helical spin texture and spin-layer locking in monolayer

PtSe2 induced by R-2 eﬀect.

Figure 2(c) shows the low energy electron diﬀraction (LEED) pattern of the high quality

monolayer PtSe2 thin ﬁlm grown on Pt(111) substrate [22]. The semiconducting property of

monolayer PtSe2 has been reported [22]. ARPES data measured along two high symmetry

directions M-Γ-M (Fig. 2(d)) and K-Γ-K (Fig. 2(e)) show similar dispersions, suggesting

that the electronic structure is overall rather isotropic. Correspondingly, circular shape is

observed in the constant energy maps (Fig. 2(g)) for all the bands, and hexagonal warping is

observed at relatively high binding energy. Analysis from energy distribution curves (EDCs)

shows that the measured dispersions are in good agreement with ﬁrst-principles calculations

(Fig. 2(b)) and the four valence bands are separated from each other at the Γ point.

Figure 3 shows the three dimensional spin analysis for data measured along the M-Γ-

M direction. A large spin contrast is observed along the tangential direction (θ) for β, γ
and δ bands at emission angle of 7.5° (dashed line in Fig. 3(a)) with up to 50% polarization
(Fig. 3(c)), while negligible spin contrast is observed along the radial (r) and out-of-plane (⊥)
directions (Figs. 3(b,d)). The spin directions are illustrated by blue crosses (into the plane)

and red dots (out of the plane) in Fig. 3(a). We extend the in-plane tangential spin analysis

to other momenta along the M-Γ-M direction. Figure 3(e) shows the intensity distribution

at diﬀerent emission angles for spin-up and spin-down states along the tangential direction,

and the spin polarization is shown in Fig. 3(f). When approaching the Γ point from M

point, the degree of spin polarization decreases and it becomes negligible at the Γ point.

On the other side of the Γ point, the spin polarization is reversed. The observation of spin

5

FIG. 3: Spin polarization for the bands along the M-Γ-M direction. a, ARPES data

measured at diﬀerent emission angles. The inset shows the position of this cut in the Brillouin

zone, and the dot marks the position for EDCs shown in b-d. The red dots and blue crosses

stand for the spin directions. b-d, Spin-resolved EDCs of 3 spin components (in-plane radial,
tangential directions, and out-of-plane direction) at emission angle of 7.5° (along the dashed line

in a). The EDCs have been corrected by Shirley background (broken lines). Lower panels are

extracted spin polarizations. e, EDCs of spin-up and spin-down states at diﬀerent emission angles.

f, Spin polarization at diﬀerent emission angles. Red indicates spin-up states, and blue indicates

spin-down states along tangential direction.

polarization along the in-plane tangential direction with opposite signs on the two sides of

the Γ point suggests that these bands may exhibit helical spin texture.

Figure 4 shows the spin analysis for data measured along the K-Γ-K direction. A large

spin polarization is also observed for the tangential component (Figs. 4(b, c)), in agreement

with helical spin texture. The α band shows negligible spin polarization near the Γ point.

When moving to a large emission angle along the Γ-K direction, the α band is separated

from other bands and we can resolve its spin polarization more easily here. In Fig. 4(d),

spin polarization is observed in the α band and its direction is determined to be the same

6

FIG. 4: Spin texture measured along the K-Γ-K direction and the overall spin texture.

a, ARPES data measured at diﬀerent emission angles. b and c, Spin-resolved EDCs for the in-
plane tangential direction at emission angles of 8° and -8°
respectively. d, Spin-resolved EDCs
for the in-plane tangential direction at emission angle of 22°. e, Spin-resolved EDCs along the
out-of-plane direction at emission angle of 8°. f and g, Spin-resolved EDCs for the radial direction
at emission angles of 8° and -8° respectively. h, Overview of the spin texture of monolayer PtSe2

from Spin-ARPES measurements.

as β band. Considering that the electronic structure is rather isotropic, the observed large

spin polarization for the tangential direction along both Γ-K and Γ-M directions suggests

that the spin polarization has an overall helical texture. Diﬀerent from the Γ-M direction,
a small yet detectable spin polarization of ≈ 5% is observed in the radial component for
β and γ bands with opposite spin directions (Figs. 4(f, g)), and its polarization does not

reverse for opposite sides of the Γ point. This suggests that the spin structures near the
K and K(cid:48) points in Brillouin zone are not equivalent. This could be related to the defects
in sample or other underlying mechanism such as ﬁnal-state eﬀect. Combining all spin-

ARPES measurements discussed above, monolayer PtSe2 on Pt(111) shows overall helical

spin textures with diﬀerent helicities in the four bands as summarized in the schematic

7

FIG. 5: The unconventional spin-layer locking by R-2 eﬀect proposed for monolayer

PtSe2. a, Spin texture of the two Se layers from ﬁrst-principles calculation for the four bands

respectively. Spins with opposite helicities are spatially separated in the top and bottom Se layers.

b, The diagram of Se p orbitals and Pt d orbitals, which dominate the spin texture of bands near

Fermi level. c, The schematic diagram for the new spin-locking mechanism of monolayer PtSe2

thin ﬁlm on Pt(111).

drawing in Fig. 4(h).

The observed helical spin texture is fundamentally diﬀerent from that of the R-1 eﬀect.

For the conventional R-1 Rashba eﬀect, two spin-splitting bands possess opposite spin helici-

ties and their eigen-energies become degenerate at the Γ point (k = 0) due to TR symmetry,

as shown in Fig. 1(a).

In contrast, all these four bands are well split at the Γ point, as

clearly shown in Fig. 2(f). In additional, the α and β bands share the same spin helicities,

completely diﬀerent from the R-1 eﬀect. Compared to the ﬁrst-principles calculations in

Fig. 2(b), it seems confusing that although energy dispersion agrees well between theory

and experiments, spin texture does not appear in the calculations due to double degeneracy

8

of two spin bands. This discrepancy can be understood by recognizing the fact that the

light for ARPES measurements has a limited penetration depth and thus the top Se layer

contributes more signiﬁcantly to the observed spin polarization. To test this idea, we project

spin polarization into the top and bottom Se layers and helical spin textures indeed emerge

in each Se layer, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Strikingly, the obtained spin textures on the top

Se layer in Fig. 5(a) reproduce qualitative features observed in spin-ARPES measurements

for all four bands. For example, the α and β bands indeed have the same spin polarization

while those of γ and δ bands are opposite. For the α band, the spin polarization is negli-

gible compared to that of the β band close to the Γ point. The consistency between the

calculations and experiments suggests that layer-dependent spin texture (Fig. 5(c)), which

was also theoretically proposed in other layered materials including LaOBiS2 [2, 15] and

(LaO)2(SbSe2)2 [21] thin ﬁlms, plays an essential role in understanding our spin-ARPES

results. The existence of spin-layer locking can be understood as a natural consequence of

the common sandwich type of crystal structures in all these materials, in which local electric

ﬁelds are expected to point from the two outer Se layers to the central Pt layer.

More theoretical understanding can be obtained by analyzing the orbital natures of these

four bands at the Γ point (the atomic limit), as shown in Fig. 5(b). It is found that the p

orbitals of Se atoms dominates the bands near the Fermi energy and the d orbitals of Pt

atoms are fully occupied. The strong anisotropy introduce a strong energy splitting between

the px,y orbitals and the pz orbital of Se atoms, pushing Se pz orbitals to lower energy. As

a result, the conduction and valence bands around the band gap mainly consist of the px,y

orbitals of Se atoms. The hybridization of the Se px,y orbitals between the top and bottom

Se layers can be mediated by the central Pt layer and leads to a band gap opening between

the conduction and valence bands, which are formed by the bonding and anti-bonding states

of Se px,y orbitals, respectively. After taking into account SOC, we ﬁnd that the α and β

bands correspond to the bonding states of Se px,y orbitals with total z-direction angular
momentum ± 3
2, respectively. We explicitly show the atomic orbital form of the
basis wave function and construct the corresponding low energy eﬀective Hamiltonian for

2 and ± 1

the α and β bands based on the symmetry principle in the Supplementary Information.

The eﬀective Hamiltonian clearly shows layer dependent spin textures for the β bands. In

addition, it is found that the vanishing spin texture of the α band at a small momentum
results from the ± 3

2 angular momentum, in contrast to the ± 1

2 angular momentum of the β

9

band.

In summary, for the ﬁrst time, we report the experimental realization of unconventional

R-2 Rashba eﬀect in a centrosymmetric monolayer PtSe2 thin ﬁlm. Considering that the

monolayer PtSe2 sample is very stable, only monolayer thick and semiconducting, growth

or transfer of such thin ﬁlm onto insulating substrates may provide exciting opportunities

to realize electrically controllable spintronics devices.

Methods

Experiments. The PtSe2 thin ﬁlm was grown by direct selenization of Pt(111) [22]. The

growth stops when the substrate is covered by one monolayer of PtSe2. Spin-ARPES mea-

surements were performed at ESPRESSO endstation [23] of HiSOR. The normal and spin

ARPES measurements were both taken at 20 K, using photon energies of 21.2 eV (UV lamp)

and 20 eV (Synchrotron radiation). These two light sources give the same spin structures.
Spin polarizations are calculated by P = A/Sef f , where A = (I+ − I−)/(I+ + I−) is the
intensity asymmetry for diﬀerent magnetization directions of the detector target, and Sef f

is the eﬀective Sherman function for the spin detector. For radial and out-of-plane com-

ponents, the eﬀective Sherman function is 0.3, and for tangential component, the eﬀective

Sherman function is 0.235.

Calculations. The ﬁrst-principles calculations are performed using the density functional

theory as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package [24] with the projector

augmented-wave method. Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof parametrization of the generalized gra-

dient approximation is used for the exchange-correlation potential [25]. We adopt a default
plane-wave energy cutoﬀ, and the Brillouin zone is sampled by a Γ-centered 6× 6× 1 k-point
mesh. The monolayer structure of PtSe2 is modeled with a vacuum region more than 15
˚A thick to eliminate the spurious interaction between neighboring layers. A perpendicular
electric ﬁeld of 0.1 eV/˚A was applied to simulate the eﬀect of the substrate. Spin-orbit

coupling (SOC) is included in all electronic structure calculations.

[1] Datta, S. & Das, B. Electronic analog of the electro-optic modulator. Appl. Phys. Lett. 56,

665 (1990).

10

[2] Zhang, X., Liu, Q., Luo, J.-W., Freeman, A. J. & Zunger, A. Hidden spin polarization in

inversion-symmetric bulk crystals. Nature Phys. 10, 387 (2014).

[3] Partoens, B. Hide and seek. Nature Phys. 10, 333 (2014).

[4] Riley, J. et al. Direct observation of spin-polarized bulk bands in an inversion-symmetric

semiconductor. Nature Phys. 10, 835 (2014).

[5] Schaibley, J. & Xu, X. A lucky break. Nature Phys. 10, 798 (2014).

[6] Rashba, E. I. Properties of semiconductors with an extremum loop. 1. cyclotron and combi-

national resonance in a magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the plane of the loop. Sov. Phys. Solid

State 2, 1109 (1960).

[7] Manchon, A., Koo, H., Nitta, J., Frolov, S. & Duine, R. New perspectives for Rashba spin-

orbit coupling. Nature Mater. 14, 871 (2015).

[8] LaShell, S., McDougall, B. & Jensen, E. Spin splitting of an Au(111) surface state band

observed with Angle Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3419 (1996).

[9] Koroteev, Y. et al. Strong spin-orbit splitting on Bi surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 046403

(2004).

[10] Kimura, A. et al. Strong Rashba-type spin polarization of the photocurrent from bulk con-

tinuum states: Experiment and theory for Bi(111). Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 076804 (2010).

[11] Varykhalov, A. et al. Ir(111) surface state with giant Rashba splitting persists under graphene

in air. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 066804 (2012).

[12] Ishizaka, K. et al. Giant Rashba-type spin splitting in bulk BiTeI. Nature Mater. 10, 521

(2011).

[13] Bahramy, M., Arita, R. & Nagaosa, N. Origin of giant bulk rashba splitting: application to

bitei. Phys. Rev. B 84, 041202 (2011).

[14] Dresselhaus, G. Spin-orbit coupling eﬀects in zinc blende structures. Phys. Rev. 100, 580

(1955).

[15] Liu, Q., Guo, Y. & Freeman, A. J. Tunable Rashba eﬀect in two-dimensional LaOBiS2 ﬁlms:

Ultrathin candidates for spin ﬁeld eﬀect transistors. Nano Lett. 13, 5264 (2013).

[16] Liu, Q. et al. Search and design of nonmagnetic centrosymmetric layered crystals with large

local spin polarization. Phys. Rev. B 91, 235204 (2015).

[17] Chhowalla, M. et al. The chemistry of two-dimensional layered transition metal dichalcogenide

nanosheets. Nature Chem. 5, 263 (2013).

11

[18] Liu, G., Xiao, D., Yao, Y., Xu, X. & Yao, W. Electronic structures and theoretical modelling

of two-dimensional group-VIB transition metal dichalcogenides. Chem. Soc. Rev. 44 (2015).

[19] Kim, J. et al. Ultrafast geneation of pseudo-magnetic ﬁeld for valley excitons in WSe2 mono-

layers. Science 346, 1205 (2014).

[20] Jones, A. M. et al. Spin-layer locking eﬀects in optical orientation of exciton spin in bilayer

WSe2. Nature Phys. 10, 130 (2014).

[21] Dong, X.-Y. et al. Electrically tunable multiple Dirac cones in thin ﬁlms of the (LaO)2(SbSe2)2

family of materials. Nature Commun. 6 (2015).

[22] Wang, Y. et al. Monolayer PtSe2, a new semiconducting transition-metal-dichalcogenide,

epitaxially grown by direct selemnization of Pt. Nano Lett. 15, 4013 (2015).

[23] Okuda, T. et al. Eﬃcient spin resolved spectroscopy observation machine at Hiroshima Syn-

chrotron Radiation Center. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 82, 103302 (2011).

[24] Kresse, G. & Furthm¨ullerb, J. Eﬃciency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and

semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Comput. Mater. Sci. 6, 15 (1996).

[25] Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized gradient approximation made simple.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant

No. 11274191, 11334006 and 11427903), Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grant

No. 2015CB921001). Spin-ARPES experiments at HiSOR have been performed under the

proposal No. 14-A-15.

Author Contributions

S.Z. designed the research project. W.Y. and K.D. prepared the samples. W.Y., E.W.,

K.D., M.Y., K.Z. and S.Z. performed the spin-ARPES measurements and data analysis

with assistance from T.O. H.H. and W.D. performed the ﬁrst-principles calculations and

C.L. worked out the eﬀective analytical model. W.Y., C.L. and S.Z. wrote the manuscript,

and all authors commented on the manuscript.

12

