6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
5
1
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Piezoresistive Foam Sensor Arrays for Marine Applications

Jeﬀ E. Duseka,1,∗, Michael S. Triantafylloua, Jeﬀrey H. Langb

aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge,

bElectrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave.,

Massachusetts 02139

Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

Abstract

Spatially-dense pressure measurements are needed on curved surfaces in marine environments to provide
marine vehicles with the detailed, real-time measurements of the near-ﬁeld ﬂow necessary to improve per-
formance through ﬂow control. To address this challenge, a waterproof and conformal pressure sensor array
comprising carbon black-doped-silicone closed-cell foam (CBPDMS foam) was developed for use in marine
applications. The response of the CBPDMS foam sensor arrays was characterized using periodic hydrody-
namic pressure stimuli from vertical plunging, from which a piecewise polynomial calibration was developed
to describe the sensor response.
Inspired by the distributed pressure and velocity sensing capabilities of
the ﬁsh lateral line, the CBPDMS foam sensor arrays have signiﬁcant advantages over existing commercial
sensors for distributed ﬂow reconstruction and control. Experimental results have shown the sensor arrays
to have sensitivity on the order of 5 Pascal, dynamic range of 50-500 Pascal; are contained in a waterproof
and completely ﬂexible package, and have material cost less than $10 per sensor.

Keywords: Pressure Sensors, Carbon Black, Smart-skins, Hydrodynamics, Foam

1. Introduction

Operating in the marine environment places unique
challenges on unmanned systems that require novel
approaches to sensing and control. Marine vehicle
performance is largely inﬂuenced by interactions with
the ﬂow around their hull, both self-generated and
environmentally-driven. To improve performance
through ﬂow control, a detailed, real-time measure-
ment of the near-ﬁeld ﬂow is necessary, yet such sens-

∗Corresponding author
Email address: jdusek1@mit.edu (Jeﬀ E. Dusek)
1This work is based on a portion of the author’s doctoral

thesis [1].

Abbreviations CB: Carbon Black, PDMS: Poly-
dimethylsiloxane, CBPDMS: Carbon black-PDMS Composite,
Ag-CBPDMS: Silver-carbon black-PDMS composite

ing capability is presently unavailable. In nature, ﬁsh
have overcome this sensory deﬁcit by utilizing feed-
back from the lateral line sensory organ. Compris-
ing two subsystems that act as distributed velocity
and pressure sensor arrays, respectively, the lateral
line has been shown to mediate such complex be-
haviors as obstacle detection and avoidance, organ-
ism tracking, vortex wake synchronization, and co-
operative schooling. When considering the ability of
ﬁsh to thrive in the inhospitable marine environment,
achieving even a portion of their capabilities with
engineering systems would have tremendous bene-
ﬁts to oceanographic research, marine vehicle per-
formance, and undersea exploration. To address the
challenges associated with obtaining spatially-dense
pressure measurements on curved surfaces in marine
environments, a new waterproof and conformal pres-

Preprint submitted to Sensors and Actuators A: Physical

March 8, 2016

sure sensor array was developed based on a closed-cell
piezoresistive foam comprising carbon black-doped-
silicone composite (CBPDMS foam).

2. Bringing Lateral Line Inspired Capabilities

to Marine Vehicles

1.1. A Biological Solution: The Lateral Line

Solutions to complex engineering problems can of-
ten be found by looking to nature for inspiration,
especially when considering the marine environment
which is inhospitable to humans, but contains an in-
credible degree of bio-diversity. The ability of ﬁsh to
navigate the undersea world at high speeds and in
close proximity to obstacles and other individuals is
particularly attractive to ocean engineers seeking to
enhance the performance of marine vehicles. The lat-
eral line system found in all species of ﬁsh and some
amphibians is a hair-cell based mechanosensory or-
gan comprising two primary subsystems: superﬁcial
neuromasts and canal neuromasts. While the two
subsystems share physiological elements, they pro-
vide diﬀerent information to the ﬁsh about the sur-
rounding ﬂuid ﬂow, allowing for a wide variety of
behaviors.

1.1.1. Lateral Line Physiology

The main building block of the distributed lat-
eral line system is neuromasts, small epithelial organs
which comprises both mechanosensory hair cells and
non-sensory cells. Superﬁcial neuromasts are located
on the surface of the skin and are generally consid-
ered as velocity sensors [2, 3], where stimulation is
caused by deﬂections due to viscous drag [4].

The canal subsystem comprises a series of canals
beneath the skin and connected to the surface
through an array of pores. When exposed to a pres-
sure gradient between adjacent pores, a local ﬂow is
induced in the canal, stimulating canal neuromasts
located within the canal and between the pores [4, 5].
The deﬂection of the canal neuromasts is propor-
tional to the velocity within the canal, which is pro-
portional to the pressure diﬀerence between pores
[4, 5]. In this way, the trunk canal subsystem acts in
a similar fashion to an array of diﬀerential pressure
sensors mounted on the animal’s body in hydrody-
namically sensitive regions [6].

In order to achieve the lateral line mediated ca-
pabilities observed in ﬁsh with marine vehicles, ad-
vancements are needed in the characterization and
utilization of near-body hydrodynamic pressure sig-
nals, as well as in the development of bio-inspired dis-
tributed sensor arrays. The ﬁsh lateral line and the
behaviors it mediates provides an excellent motiva-
tion for the development of distributed sensor arrays,
however the design requirements for arrays intended
for marine vehicle use must be scaled appropriately
to the hydrodynamic stimuli of interest.

To elucidate the design guidelines for a distributed
hydrodynamic pressure sensor array, a series of tow-
ing tank and ﬁeld experiments were conducted us-
ing arrays of commercially available pressure sensors.
Experiments with an instrumented model sailboat
hull of length L=1 m were conducted in the MIT
towing tank [7]. An array of 10 Honeywell 19mm se-
ries pressure sensors were connected to taps along the
length of the model’s hull and it was found that the
pressure measurements could be used to accurately
estimate the hull’s angle of attack. Similarly, Honey-
well 19mm pressure sensors were utilized to study the
formation and shedding of leading edge vortices from
a hydrofoil towed at large angles of attack [8]. The
utility of near-body ﬂow sensing on a surface vehicle
was investigated experimentally using an unmanned
kayak vehicle equipped with an array of 20 Honeywell
SPT series pressure sensors mounted inside the vehi-
cle hull, necessitating the drilling of holes through
the hull to access the ﬂow [9]. It was found that the
vehicle dynamics in pitch and roll were measurable
by the pressure sensor array, as well as the initiation
of vehicle maneuvers due to a characteristic pressure
signature consistent with added mass eﬀects during
unsteady vehicle motions. The magnitude and fre-
quency of dynamic pressure signals measured during
these experiments, and analysis of the sensor spacing
on the foil and hull surfaces, lead to the development
of design guidelines for distributed pressure sensor
arrays given in Section 2.1.

2

2.1. Guidelines for Hydrodynamic Pressure Sensor

Arrays

In general, the sensors used in the studies out-
lined in Section 2 were rigid and too large for sur-
face mounting applications, and were not designed
for prolonged exposure to moisture. Based on the
results of these studies, the attributes of a pressure
sensor array designed speciﬁcally for marine use were
developed as follows.
Flexibility Pressure sensor arrays to be surface
mounted on curved surfaces with radius of cur-
vature ∼5-10 cm, consistent with unmanned ve-
hicle hulls [8, 9, 7].

Form Factor Sensor spacing should be less than 5
cm for vehicles on the 1-3 m scale. Sensor thick-
ness should be < 5 mm to avoid vortex shedding
[8, 6, 7].

Robustness Sensor arrays are meant for sustained
underwater or exposed operation and may be
subject to impacts.
Dynamic Range For marine vehicles of length ∼1-
3 m, dynamic pressure stimuli range from ∼10-
400 Pa [8, 9, 6, 7].
Sensitivity For marine vehicles of length ∼1-3 m,
sensitivity of ∼10 Pa is desired to characterize
hydrodynamic stimuli [8, 9, 6, 7].
Cost Sensor cost should be reduced from ∼ $100 per
sensor to ∼ $10 per sensor [9].

2.2. Doped-Polymer ‘Smart-Skins’ for Marine Appli-

cations

Based on the operational requirements for use
in distributed pressure sensing on marine vehicles,
doped polymer ‘smart-skin’ arrays oﬀer the best com-
bination of performance characteristics for marine
use. Doped polymers allow for the development of a
completely waterproof, stretchable, and ﬂexible sen-
sor array through the careful selection of bulk matrix
material and conductive dopant. The ﬂexibility, ro-
bustness, and resistance to moisture of bulk matrix
materials like PDMS (silicone) make doped compos-
ites well suited for prolonged environmental exposure
while surface mounted on marine vehicle hulls. Ad-
ditionally, controlling the material properties of the
bulk matrix through the introduction of porosity has

been shown to increase sensitivity in carbon black-
PDMS composites, allowing for piezoresistive com-
posites to be optimized for pressure ranges consis-
tent with hydrodynamic stimulus [10]. Finally, doped
polymers make use of cheap and easy to work with
component materials, allowing for the scaling of dis-
tributed pressure sensor arrays to spatially-dense ap-
plications.

3. Carbon Black-PDMS Composite Sensor

Development

Carbon black-PDMS foam pressure sensor arrays
rely on the piezoresitivity, or variation in resistance
with strain, of carbon black doped PDMS (silicone)
to provide an indirect measurement of pressure stim-
ulus. Carbon black-PDMS (CBPDMS) composite
has been studied as an active material for pressure
and shear sensors due to its low Young’s modulus,
ease of fabrication, and low cost [11, 12, 13, 14, 15].
Each component composite in the sensor array uti-
lizes PDMS as the matrix material, ensuring strong
bonding between sensor components while retaining
overall array ﬂexibility. By varying the carbon black
doping and Young’s modulus between sections of the
sensor array, a linear four by one array of sensor chan-
nels was created here. Electrodes were fabricated us-
ing a silver-carbon black-PDMS (Ag-CBPDMS) com-
posite with a high mass fraction of silver to ensure
high conductance and low piezoresistivity, as a dis-
cussed in Section 4.1.2. Sensing elements were fab-
ricated using a closed-cell CBPDMS foam (Section
4.1.3) with a low Young’s modulus and carbon black
concentration near the percolation threshold to en-
hance piezoresistivity and improve the sensitivity of
the array to hydrodynamic stimuli.

3.1. Models of CBPDMS Piezoresistivity

Above a mass fraction of carbon black known as
the percolation threshold, carbon black doped PDMS
forms a conductive composite. When the percola-
tion threshold is reached, continuous chains of carbon
black particles create conductive pathways through
the PDMS bulk material; while below the percolation
threshold, CBPDMS composite behaves like an insu-
lator. The piezoresistive behavior of CBPDMS relies

3

on the formation and breakdown of these conductive
chains as the PDMS matrix material is deformed due
to external stimulus.

The resistance change of CBPDMS composite
when subjected to an external pressure stimulus
has been primarily described using two models, the
compressible and incompressible models [14]. Both
piezoresistive eﬀects have been observed in CBPDMS
composites, and the relationship between resistance
and strain is highly dependent on the ﬁller material,
the type of polymer matrix, and the nature of the
loading [14]. For the CBPDMS foam pressure sen-
sor array using four-point probe measurements and
responding to isotropic hydrodynamic stimuli, the re-
sistance change was found to be consistent with the
compressible model.

The compressible model of CBPMS piezoresistiv-
ity, shown in Figure 1, states that as the PDMS ma-
trix is compressed due to external pressure stimulus,
the volume fraction of CB particles within the com-
posite is increased, allowing for the formation of new
continuous conductive pathways and decreasing the
resistance of the composite [14, 16, 17]. When the
external pressure stimulus on the composite is de-
creased, the material relaxes, and the newly formed
conductive pathways are broken, leading to a recov-
ery of the composite resistance.

3.2. DC Response of CBPDMS Composite

Carbon black-PDMS composites provide a re-
versible piezoresistive response to dynamic pressure
stimulus, but are not well suited for low frequency,
DC type stimulus. Over time at a continuous strain,
conductive pathways relax and resistance changes, ef-
fectively acting as a high pass ﬁlter [18]. Eﬀorts have
been made to characterize the low frequency behavior
of CBDPMS composites through the use of Burger
models and modiﬁcations of the Burger model by
Yaul [13] and Lacasse [14]. The hydrodynamic pres-
sure stimuli of interest to marine vehicles typically
have frequencies ranging from 0.5 Hz (water waves,
vortex shedding) to 35 Hz (predator and prey de-
tection), and the dynamic response of the CBPDMS
foam sensor arrays will be the focus of this study.

Figure 1: The compressible model of CBPDMS piezoresistivity
in which the PDMS matrix is compressed under load, leading
to an increased volume fraction of CB particles in the compos-
ite and the formation of new conductive pathways, decreasing
resistance. The light grey boxes represent the PDMS foam
bulk material, and dark grey circles represent free carbon black
(CB) particles that have not formed conductive chains. The
gold circles represent CB particles that have linked together to
form continuous conductive pathways through the bulk PDMS
foam matrix.

3.3. Addition of Porosity to CBPDMS for Increased

Sensitivity

Version one ‘smart-skin’ pressure sensors were de-
veloped utilizing a solid CBPDMS composite ar-
ranged in a strain-gauge arrangement on solid PDMS
substrates [13, 19]. To achieve the sensitivity required
for the measurement of hydrodynamic stimuli, strain
enhancing diaphragms were molded into the PDMS
substrates, complicating the sensor fabrication and
reducing array reliability. To achieve the sensitivity
provided by the strain enhancing diaphragms with-
out the need for additional molded features, the in-
troduction of porosity into PDMS through the use of
a sacriﬁcial sugar scaﬀold, as demonstrated by King
and Cha [20, 21], was chosen as a viable method to
lower Young’s modulus and increase piezoresistivity.
Using a sacriﬁcial sugar scaﬀold with CBPDMS
composite, version two open-cell CBPDMS foam
pressure sensor arrays were developed for hydrody-
namic sensing applications [10]. The Young’s modu-
lus of the CBPDMS active material was reduced by
two orders of magnitude, leading to a 25 times in-
crease in sensitivity over the version one strain-gauge
based ‘smart-skin’ arrays. The open-cell CBPDS

4

A B foam sensor arrays were tested in the MIT Towing
Tank using the dynamic pressure signal generated by
surface water waves, demonstrating the utility of the
arrays in hydrodynamic sensing applications.

The beneﬁts of the strain enhancing diaphragms
were largely retained in a robust and ﬂexible sim-
pliﬁed geometry by introducing porosity into the
CBPDMS composite to create an open-cell
foam
[10].However, the introduction of porosity introduced
diﬀerent problems, particularly the time consuming
need to soak the CBPDMS for 24 hours to dissolve
the sugar scaﬀold, and the requirement to waterproof
the open-cell foam. It was also found that the version
two CBPDMS open cell foam sensors were thicker
than desired, and required special attention to be
paid to electrical connections because of the reduced
contact area between the porous material and the
wires. Despite these challenges, the improvement in
sensitivity shown by the CBPDMS foam motivated
a continued eﬀort to develop the material for use in
hydrodynamic pressure sensing applications.

3.4. Sensor Array Development Goals

The goals of version three sensor development are

summarized below:

1. Retain or improve upon sensitivity of open-cell

CBPDMS foam

2. Eliminate the need for additional waterprooﬁng

layers

3. Improve contact between electrodes and piezore-

sistive material

4. Improve robustness of the sensor array and as-

sociated electrical wiring

4. Closed-Cell CBDPMS Foam Sensor Arrays

Carbon black-PDMS closed-cell foam pressure sen-
sor arrays were fabricated using alternating segments
of piezoresistive CBPDMS foam and silver-carbon
black-PDMS (Ag-CBPDMS) electrodes, as seen in
Figure 2. A four point probe arrangement was used to
create a 4x1 linear array of sensor channels, with each
channel deﬁned as the voltage diﬀerence between the
electrodes on either side of a closed-cell CBPDMS
foam block. The overall footprint of the array was 80

mm by 20mm, with each piezoresistive foam sensor
channel having a width of 5 mm, and Ag-CBPMS
electrodes having a width of 4 mm as seen in Fig-
ure 2(b). Each sensor array comprised three layers,
a pure PDMS base layer, a middle active layer that
contained the electrodes and CBPDMS foam sensor
channels, and a thin CBPDMS foam top layer, as seen
in Figures 2(a) and 2(c). The height of the middle
active layer was varied to create a thick sensor with
a 4.76 mm active layer and overall thickness of 7.80
mm, and a thin sensor with a 3.18 mm active layer
and overall sensor thickness of 6.20 mm. To supply
current to the sensor array and allow for voltage mea-
surements, ribbon cable ends were embedded in the
Ag-CBDPMS electrodes, as seen in Figure 2(a).

4.1. Sensor Array Fabrication

4.1.1. Electrode Layout and Material Selection

Electrode layout and material selection were driven
by the need to eliminate the eﬀects of contact resis-
tance and maximize the conduction between the elec-
trodes and the CBPDMS foam active sensing mate-
rial while retaining overall array ﬂexibility. To elim-
inate contact resistance, a four point probe arrange-
ment was utilized. In a four point probe, a pair of
outside leads are driven by a constant current source,
while inner lead pairs are used to take voltage mea-
surements, as seen in Figure 3.
In this arrange-
ment, virtually no current ﬂows in the measurement
leads, meaning the voltage drop due to the contact
resistance between the measurement leads and the
CBPDMS foam is negligible, allowing the resistance
variation with strain of the CBDMS foam to be iso-
lated.

When making electrical connections to CBPDMS
foam, the contact area between the electrode and the
foam sensing material played a large role in the qual-
ity of voltage measurements [10]. To maximize con-
tact between the electrodes and the CBPDMS foam,
electrodes spanned the full height of the sensor ar-
ray and were embedded within the foam, as seen in
Figure 4. To retain array ﬂexibility and maximize
adhesion between the electrodes and the CBPDMS
foam, electrodes were fabricated from a silver-carbon
black-PDMS composite (Ag-CBPDMS). The use of

5

(a) The top of the CBPDMS foam sensor array was covered
with a thin layer of CBPDMS foam. The ends of a ribbon cable
were embedded in a Ag-CBPDMS electrodes during fabrication.

Figure 3: A four point probe measurement, described in sec-
tion 4.1.1, was used to eliminate the impact of contact resis-
tance on voltage measurements.

(b) The overall footprint of the CBPDMS foam array was 80
mm by 20mm, and each sensor channel was 5 mm wide while
electrodes and non-sensor foam sections were 4 mm wide

Figure 4: To maintain overall sensor array ﬂexibility while pro-
viding maximum adhesion with the CBPDMS foam piezoresis-
tive material, electrodes were fabricated from a Ag-CBPDMS
composite with high conductivity and low piezoresistivity.

silver and a high carbon black concentration within
the electrode ensured a composite with high conduc-
tivity that was insensitive to strain. By retaining
PDMS as the bulk material in the composite, the
electrodes remained ﬂexible and excellent adhesion
was observed between the electrodes and CBPDMS
foam.

To allow for communication with the sensor arrays,
ribbon cables were embedded in the AG-CBPDMS
electrodes. Prior the embedding the stripped wire
ends in the composite, the wires were tightly wound
into coils, which both maximized the contact area be-
tween the wire and the AG-CBPDMS and enhanced
the mechanical bond between the components.

4.1.2. Electrode Fabrication

To prepare the AG-CBPDMS, silver powder (Num-
ber 11402 from Alfa Aesar) was mixed with PDMS

(c) Each CBPDMS foam array was composed of three layers.
A 2 mm layer of pure PDMS provided a ﬂexible base to the
array. The active middle layer was composed of CBPDMS foam
sensor channels and Ag-CBPDMS electrodes.The top layer of
the device was a 1 mm thick layer of CBPDMS foam created
during the foam expansion process.

Figure 2: Carbon black- PDMS closed-cell foam pressure
sensor arrays were fabricated using alternating segments of
piezoresistive CBPDMS foam and silver-carbon black-PDMS
(Ag-CBPDMS) electrodes with a pure PDMS base layer to
preserve ﬂexibility.

6

Top CBPDMS Foam Layer Ribbon Cable to Electronics 80 mm 17 mm 12 mm 8 mm 4 mm 5 mm 20 mm Channel 1 Channel 2 Channel 3 Channel 4 80 mm Thick: 7.8 mm Thin: 6.2 mm CBPDMS Foam Active Layer Pure PDMS CBPDMS Foam Ag-CBPDMS Electrode  Channel 1 Channel 2 Channel 3 Channel 4 VVoltmeter RMaterial Constant Current Source Rcontact 1 Rcontact 2 (Sylgard 184 from Dow Corning) and carbon black
(from Denka Elastomer and Performance Plastics) at
a composition of 72.94% AG, 3.79% CB, and 23.27%
PDMS by mass in a Kurabo Mazerustar KK series
mixer. The uncured AG-CBPDMS mixture was man-
ually spread into a delrin mold with an aluminum
base plate. Wires with pig tails were embedded in
each uncured electrode, and the mold was capped
with an aluminum top plate before being cured in an
oven at 120◦c for approximately two hours.

Following curing and cooling, excess AG-CBPMS
was carefully trimmed using a razor, and the elec-
trodes were individually removed from the delrin
mold, allowing any excess material to be trimmed us-
ing a razor blade. After the delrin mold was cleaned,
electrodes were reinserted, and a 2 mm layer of pure
PDMS was applied over the electrodes to serve as a
structural base for the sensor array. After curing the
pure PDMS in the oven for approximately 20 min-
utes, the completed electrode layer was able to be
removed from the mold, as seen in Figure 4.

4.1.3. CBPDMS Foam Fabrication

The CBPDMS foam used in the pressure sensor
arrays was fabricated using Soma Foama 15 from
Smooth-On. Soma Foama is a two-component plat-
inum silicone casting foam that is available in both
240 kg/m3 (15 lb/ft3) and 400 kg/m3 (25 lb/ft3) den-
sities. The Soma Foama 15 was found to expand 3-
4 times its initial volume when mixed, and because
the foaming reaction was rapid, advanced prepara-
tion of all molds was required to ensure successful
fabrication. Soma Foama 15 used a 2:1 ratio of the
A:B silicone components by volume or weight, and
carbon black particles were mechanically mixed into
Part A in advance of the foaming reaction using the
Mazerustar mixer at a ratio of 5% by mass carbon
black.

When ready to mold the CBPDMS foam sensing
layer, Soma Foama Part B was mixed into the Soma
Foama Part A-carbon black mixture by hand, taking
care to ensure thorough mixing of the two compo-
nents. The mixture was then spread into the gaps
between the AG-CBPDMS electrodes, and the molds
were capped with an aluminum plate. A small gap
was maintained between the electrode layer and the

top plate, allowing the foam mixture to expand out
the sides of mold after the electrode gaps were ﬁlled
and leaving a uniform layer of foam across the top of
the array, as seen in Figure 2(a). After allowing the
completed array to cure for approximately 12 hours,
the excess foam was trimmed away from the array,
and the edges of array were coated in a thin layer of
pure PMDS to insulate the exposed electrode edges
from the environment, producing the ﬁnal sensor ar-
ray shown in Figure 2(a).

5. CBPDMS Foam Sensor Array Characteri-

zation

To characterize the performance of the CBPDMS
foam sensor arrays, a time-varying hydrostatic pres-
sure was created by oscillating the sensor arrays verti-
cally in the water column using a computer controlled
linear stage. From these experiments the basic oper-
ating characteristics of the sensor arrays including the
repeatability and dynamic range were studied, and a
sensor calibration was developed.

5.1. Sensor Power and Ampliﬁcation Electronics

For the CBPDMS foam sensor array characteriza-
tion experiments, custom electronics were designed
to provide a current source for the four-point probe
arrangement discussed in Section 4.1.1, and to am-
plify voltage measurements from the array. The cur-
rent source and ampliﬁcation circuits were built on
a custom PCB board designed and printed for the
experiments. Signal ampliﬁcation was provided for
each sensor channel by an AD620 operational am-
pliﬁer with an ampliﬁcation gain of 2.66. Following
ampliﬁcation, signals were ﬁltered using an RC low
pass ﬁlter with a cutoﬀ frequency of 112.88 Hz.

Constant Voltage Source. During the plunging ex-
periments, the sensor arrays were inadvertently pow-
ered with a constant voltage of 24 volts. The
CBPDMS foam sensor array was found to have a
total resistance of ∼28 kΩ which can be largely at-
tributed to the contact resistance between the ribbon
cables and the Ag-CBPDMS electrodes. With the ∼
28 kΩ array resistance in series with a 112 kΩ resis-
tor, the current through the sensor array was ∼ 0.17

7

Console software. The position of the linear stage
was written to an output ﬁle throughout each exper-
iment to allow the hydrostatic pressure acting on the
arrays to be determined. The output voltage from
the the pressure sensor arrays was recorded using an
NI USB-6218 data acquisition board and National In-
struments Labview software running on a laboratory
laptop.

Figure 5: Vertical oscillation of the sensor arrays was provided
by a computer-controlled Zaber T-Series linear stage mounted
above the large vehicle testing tank on the CREATE campus
in Singapore.

mA. Because the voltage source was constant in this
arrangement, variations in the sensor array resistance
could lead to variations in the current being supplied
to the array. It was observed that during a typical ex-
periment, the variation in CBPDMS foam resistance
could cause an ∼ 1% change in supply current. Be-
cause the potential change in current was found to
be minor, it will be noted as a source of experimental
measurement error, as discussed in Section 5.4.3.

5.2. Plunging Experimental Setup

To allow for vertical plunging of the sensor arrays, a
Zaber T-Series linear stage (Model T-LSQ300B) was
mounted vertically above the testing tank, as seen in
Figure 5. The CBPDMS foam pressure sensor arrays
were mounted in a 3-D printed holder which was at-
tached to the linear stage using an aluminum plate.
Because the aluminum plate was thin, oscillation of
the sensor holder due to actuator vibrations or ﬂuid
interactions was a consideration, but were found to
be negligible for the low frequencies (0.5-1 Hz) being
investigated.

The motion of the linear stage was controlled us-
ing proprietary Zaber Console software running on
a laboratory laptop, and connected to the stage via
a USB-serial converter. Motion of the Zaber stage
was provided by a stepper motor, and stage posi-
tion and velocity values were reported by the Zaber

5.3. Experiment Description and Parameters

To characterize the dynamic response of the
CBPDMS foam pressure sensor arrays, oscillatory
plunging motions were used to generate a time-
varying hydrostatic stimulus. Because of the limita-
tions of the Zaber stage, and to minimize the impact
of spurious vibrations on the experimental results,
experiments were restricted to frequencies of 0.5 Hz
and 1 Hz. In each experiment, the stage was posi-
tioned with the still waterline level with the top of
the array, as seen in Figure 5. To allow time syn-
chronization between the stage position and the sen-
sor voltage output, a step in the positive z direction
was executed at the beginning of each experiment to
create an easily identiﬁable feature in both signals.
Following the step move, ten oscillatory cycles were
executed with peak-to-peak amplitudes ranging from
10mm to 30mm.

The total time-varying pressure (PT ) during the
plunging experiments comprised both a hydrostatic
pressure component (PH ) and a dynamic pressure
component (PD), as shown in Equation 1. In Equa-
tion 1, φ is the velocity potential, ρ is the ﬂuid den-
sity, and z is the vertical position of the sensor array
midpoint. When considering the time-varying pres-
sure from a simulated sinusoidal motion with a 30mm
peak-to-peak amplitude at 1 Hz, the dynamic pres-
sure component was found to be at least two orders of
magnitude smaller than the hydrostatic component,
and therefore the dynamic pressure component was
neglected from future analysis.

8

x z Zaber T-Series linear stage CBPDMS foam sensor arrays 3-D printed array holder resistance and pressure remained consistent and re-
peatable, and it was concluded that for isotropic hy-
drodynamic stimulus, the CBPDMS foam sensor ar-
rays follow the compressible model of piezoresistivity.

(1)

PT = PH + PD
PH = −ρ ∗ g ∗ z
PD = −ρ

(cid:18) ∂φ

+

∂t

(cid:19)

|∇φ|2

1
2

It was observed during the course of the experi-
mental program that the sinusoidal motion created
by the Zaber stage was not always consistent in am-
plitude and frequency. This was particularly evident
during low frequency motions were the stage would
occasionally hesitate at the peak or trough of a cy-
cle. These slight errors in amplitude and frequency
were accounted for by utilizing the actual position
output recorded from the stage during each experi-
ment instead of relying on the anticipated frequency
and amplitude values.

5.4. Plunging Experiment Results

The voltage output signals from the CBPDMS
foam sensor were bandpass ﬁltered using the ideal-
ﬁlter function in Matlab. The ﬁlter is non-causal
with sharp cutoﬀs in the frequency domain and non-
realizable in real time. The bandpass interval was
chosen to be 0.2 to 3.0 Hz for the plunging experi-
ments in order to remove any low frequency DC drift
from the signals, as well as high frequency electrical
noise.

5.4.1. Inverse Pressure-Resistance Relationship

Figure 6 shows an inverse relationship exists be-
tween voltage output and pressure magnitude when
the CBPDMS foam arrays were subjected to an os-
cillatory pressure stimulus. For a constant current,
channel voltage is proportional to resistance through
Ohm’s law, so it follows that the resistance change in
the CBPDMS foam sensing material was inversely
related to pressure. The inverse relationship be-
tween pressure and resistance follows the compress-
ible model of CBPDMS piezoresistivity discussed in
Section 3.1. Throughout extensive testing of the
CBPDMS foam sensor array using multiple hydrody-
namic stimuli, the inverse relationship between the

9

5.4.2. Sensor Array Repeatability

To evaluate the repeatability of the CBPDMS
foam arrays, voltage was plotted versus hydrostatic
pressure for the periodic plunging experiments. To
be considered repeatable, the pressure-voltage pairs
from multiple plunging cycles should fall on the same
curve.

As mentioned previously, the oscillatory motion of
the Zaber stage varied slightly in amplitude and pe-
riod throughout an experiment. To account for these
variations, sensor output voltage values were selected
for the times corresponding to the position outputs
from the Zaber stage, as seen in Figure 6(b). In this
way, an accurate picture of the pressure-voltage rela-
tionship for the array could be found.

A qualitative assessment of sensor array repeata-
bility was found by plotting the results from six inde-
pendent plunging experiments with the 7.8 mm thick
sensor array on the same pressure vs. voltage axes,
as seen in Figure 7(a). Within each experiment, the
data points were found to follow a consistent trend,
qualitatively fulﬁlling the requirement of repeatabil-
ity within a given experiment. Although the dynamic
response of the sensor array appeared consistent be-
tween independent experiments, variations in the DC
oﬀset voltage were observed,
leading to a distinct
spread in the data points.

DC Oﬀset Voltage. When the results from six inde-
pendent plunging experiments with the 7.8 mm thick
sensor array were plotted on the same pressure vs.
voltage axes, it was observed that the DC voltage oﬀ-
set varied between independent experiments, as seen
in Figures 7(a). Because the CBDPSM foam sensor
array is intended for the measurement of AC pres-
sure signals, the dynamic response of the array is of
primary concern. In order to verify the repeatabil-
ity of the dynamic response of the sensor array be-
tween independent experiments, the DC voltage oﬀ-
sets were adjusted for consistency, as seen in Figures

7(b). With the DC voltage oﬀset corrected, the re-
sults from all six independent experiments were found
to have a repeatable non-linear pressure vs. voltage
response.

5.4.3. Experimental Error in Plunging Results
Error in Voltage Measurement. During the plunging
experiments, the CBPDMS foam sensor array was
powered using a constant voltage source, as described
in Section 5.1. It was found that the supply current
to the sensor array could vary by ∼1% if the total
resistance of the sensor array was a summation of
the resistance of each individual electrode and sensor
channel resistance. To account for this possible vari-
ation, the error in voltage, given by the red shaded
boxes in Figure 8, was found by scaling each voltage
measurement based on a supply current increase and
decrease of 1%, as given in Equation 2. For the 6.2
mm thick (Thin) sensor array, the magnitude of volt-
age ﬂuctuation was found to be approximately twice
that of the 7.8 mm (Thick) array for the same pres-
sure stimulus.

verror = (1 ± 0.01) ∗ v

(2)

Error in Theoretical Hydrostatic Pressure. The pres-
sure used to generated pressure-voltage pairs in Fig-
ures 6 and 7 was the hydrostatic component of pres-
sure based on the position output from the Zaber
linear stage. Two likely sources of error in the theo-
retical hydrostatic pressure were the presence of sur-
face waves in the tank generated by the motion of the
sensor holder beneath the surface, and measurement
error in the initial position of the sensor.

The possible error in hydrostatic pressure due to
free surface ﬂuctuations in the tank was characterized
by considering the voltage measurements from the
CBPDMS foam array after the motion of the stage
had completed it’s motion. Because the stage mo-
tion was complete and the array was at rest, ﬂuctua-
tions in the voltage measurements were likely due to
residual free surface motion in the tank. After apply-
ing the calibration described in Section 5.5.3 to the
raw voltage measurements, the pressure ﬂuctuations
were found to be <∼10 Pa for the 30 mm peak-to-
peak case, where maximum free surface disturbances

(a) Plotting the hydrostatic pressure stimulus (black line) and
the CBPDMS foam sensor voltage output (solid colored lines)
together shows that an inverse relationship exists between hy-
drostatic pressure and output voltage for the CBPDMS foam
sensing material. Because output voltage is proportional to re-
sistance, it follows that the resistance change in the material is
inversely proportional to pressure.

(b) To form pressure vs. voltage pairs for use in sensor array
calibration, the channel voltages were resampled at times corre-
sponding to Zaber stage position outputs (designated by circles,
squares, and diamonds). The mean voltage has been removed
from each channel voltage.

Figure 6: The voltage output from the CBPDMS foam sensor
array during oscillatory plunging revealed an inverse relation-
ship between pressure and resistance. The voltage time series
was sampled at discrete times corresponding with position out-
puts from the Zaber stage in order to generate pressure-voltage
pairs for use in sensor calibration. Sensor array channel 1 was
not operational and is not shown.

10

01020Time [s]-0.01-0.00500.0050.01Filtered Output Voltage [v]Inverse Press.-Volt. Relationship50100150200250Theoretical Pressure [Pa]Ch. 2Ch. 3Ch. 4PH5101520Time [s]-0.006-0.004-0.00200.0020.0040.006Output [v]Sensor Output and Sample TimesCh. 2Ch. 3Ch. 4(a) Foam array channel 2 pressure vs. voltage pairs from plung-
ing experiments without DC oﬀset voltage adjustment.

(b) When the DC oﬀset was adjusted for data sets ‘10mm-2’
(light blue diamonds) and ‘30mm-2’ (green circles), the spread
in data points between the six plunging experiments was re-
duced.

Figure 7: Pressure-voltage pairs from independent plunging
experiments at 10 mm, 20 mm, and 30 mm peak-to-peak am-
plitudes (App). Two experiments were conducted at each am-
plitude, and are designated as App-1 and App-2.

Figure 8: Plunging data for 7.8 mm thick array channel 2.
The light red shaded boxes designate the experimental error
in pressure and voltage. Data is plotted as voltage vs. pres-
sure to reﬂect the orientation of the data for calibration of the
CBPDMS foam array.

were expected. Because the maximum submergence
depth in the plunging experiments was 40 mm, the
decay of the pressure ﬂuctuations due to free surface
deformation was found to be small, and a constant
±10 Pa error was applied to the pressure values in
Figure 8. Additional error in the theoretical hydro-
static pressure may have been present due to errors
in the initial measurement of sensor array position,
and measurement error was assumed to be of similar
magnitude or less than the ±10 Pa error assumed for
free surface deformations.

5.5. Calibration of 7.8 mm (Thick) CBPDMS Foam

Array

5.5.1. Polynomial Fits for Full Data Set

Using the curve ﬁtting function ﬁt in Matlab, ro-
bust polynomial ﬁts of order 2-4 were found for the
7.8 mm thick CBPDMS foam plunging data, as seen
in Figure 9(a) for sensor channel 2.
It was ob-
served that while the 2nd (red) and 3rd (black) de-
gree ﬁts were very similar in shape, the 4th degree
ﬁt displayed non-physical characteristics at the high-
pressure extreme of the calibration data range due

11

0100200300400500Pressure [Pa]0.280.2850.290.2950.3Sensor Output [v]Calibration Data: Channel 2Data: 10mm-1Data: 10mm-2Data: 20mm-1Data: 20mm-2Data: 30mm-1Data: 30mm-20100200300400500Pressure [Pa]0.280.2850.290.2950.3Sensor Output [v]Calibration Data: Channel 2Data: 10mm-1Data: 10mm-2Data: 20mm-1Data: 20mm-2Data: 30mm-1Data: 30mm-20.2740.2780.2820.2860.290.2940.298Sensor Output [v]100200300400Pressure [Pa]Experimental ErrorDataErrorn
2
3
4

R2

0.8823
0.8853
0.8882

RMSE [Pa] NRMSE [%]

33.73
33.32
32.92

9.14
9.02
8.92

Channel
2
3
4

R2

0.8881
0.8551
0.8752

RMSE [Pa] NRMSE [%]

32.80
37.54
34.49

8.89
10.17
9.34

Table 1: Goodness of ﬁt measures for the 7.8mm CBPDMS
foam sensor array Channel 2 with outliers included.

Table 2: Reﬁned third degree polynomial goodness of ﬁt mea-
sures for the 7.8mm CBPMDS foam sensor array

to the inﬂuence of outliers at particularly low volt-
age values. The RMS error between the expected
pressure values and polynomial ﬁt, RMS error nor-
malized by the pressure range (Equation 3), and R2
values can be found in Table 1. Based on the results
for second, third, and fourth degree polynomials, it
was decided that the third degree polynomial pro-
vided the best representation of the voltage-pressure
relationship without the end eﬀects observed for the
fourth degree ﬁt.

physical behavior at the low pressure and high volt-
age end of the training data set. While the slope of
the polynomial curve changes from negative to pos-
itive, the pressure-voltage relationship in the phys-
ical sensor is always inverse with a sensitivity that
decreases at high levels of strain (pressure). To bet-
ter represent the physical performance of the sensor
array, a ﬁrst-order correction of the form shown in
Equation 4 was added to the calibration curve in the
low pressure region to create a piecewise calibration.

N RM SE =

RM SE

Pmax − Pmin

× 100

(3)

5.5.2. Identiﬁcation and Removal of Outliers

When considering the CBPDMS foam array plung-
ing data, outliers were considered samples that fell
greater than 1.5 standard deviations away from the
third degree polynomial ﬁt found using the complete
data set in Section 5.5.1. In Figure 9(b), the points
that satisﬁed the outlier criteria are designated with
large red asterisks, and were removed from the train-
ing data set when generating the reﬁned curve ﬁts
shown in black. The third degree polynomial coeﬃ-
cients and the goodness of ﬁt metrics for the reﬁned
curves can be found in Table 2. The outliers present
in the experimental data were attributed to the ﬁrst
oscillation of each plunging experiment which consis-
tently produced a lower sensor output voltage than
subsequent oscillations. The source of this transient
behavior in the output voltage is unknown, an con-
sidered as a direction for future study.

5.5.3. Piecewise Calibration with First-Order Cor-

rection

The third order polynomial curve shown for chan-
nel 2 in Figure 9(b) was observed to exhibit non-

P = C3 ∗ v3 + C2 ∗ v2 + C1 ∗ v + C0, v ≤ vin
P = D1 ∗ v + D0, v > vin

(4)

To determine the curve ﬁt for the ﬁrst-order cor-
rection, the inﬂection point (vin, Pin) in the reﬁned
third degree polynomial ﬁt was found. A linear ﬁt
was then performed on the subset of the data for
v > vin with a condition put on the linear ﬁt that it
needed to pass through the point (vin, Pin) from the
third degree polynomial. The linear ﬁt was found us-
ing the slmengine function in Matlab which allows
for curve ﬁtting with prescriptions on shape, piece-
wise segments, etc. The calibration curve with ﬁrst
and third degree polynomial regions for channel 2 of
the 7.8 mm thick CBPDMS foam array can be seen
in Figure 9(c), and the calibration curve parameters
are given in Table 3.

5.6. Application of Calibration Curve to Time Series

Data

The piecewise polynomial calibration curves found
for each of the three operational sensor array chan-
nels were tested by applying the calibration to the
voltage output measurements from plunging experi-
ments at 10 mm, 20 mm, and 30 mm peak-to-peak

12

Ch. C3 ∗ 107 C2 ∗ 107
12.8
2
-1.24
3
4
32.0
Ch.
2
3
4

-14.3
1.15
-28.5
vin [v]
0.291
0.432
0.376

Pin [Pa]

89.25
86.46
84.99

C1 ∗ 107
-3.81
0.43
-12.0
D1

-2362.43
-553.09
- 3437.60

C0 ∗ 106
3.79
-0.46
15.0
D0

775.74
325.23
1377.53

(a) Second, third, and fourth order polynomial curve ﬁts
were found for CBPDMS foam sensor array channel 2.

Table 3: Coeﬃcients and break points for the piecewise polyno-
mial calibration of the thick array. For channel 4, an inﬂection
point did not occur within the training data range, so a lin-
ear correction was added for v > 0.376 to ensure extrapolated
values followed expected behavior.

Ch.
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4

Exp.
10 mm
20 mm
30 mm
10 mm
20 mm
30 mm
10 mm
20 mm
30 mm

RMSE [Pa] NRMSE [%]

19.78
35.20
47.41
22.04
47.77
55.08
32.58
38.14
71.82

12.84
12.73
13.34
12.52
15.09
16.43
15.27
12.66
24.92

Table 4: RMS error and normalized RMS error for the piece-
wise polynomial calibration applied to time series plunging re-
sults for the 7.8 mm thick array.

(b) Outliers were designated as samples falling further
than 1.5 standard deviations away from the third degree
polynomial ﬁt.

(c) Piecewise polynomial calibration for 7.8 mm thick
CBPDMS foam array Channel 2.

Figure 9: The CBPDMS foam sensor arrays were calibrated by
reﬁning a third degree polynomial ﬁt through the elimination
of outlier points and the addition of a linear correction for the
low pressure regime.

13

0.280.2850.290.295Sensor Output [v]0200400600800Pressure [Pa]Sensor Calibration: Ch 22nd Poly fit3rd Poly Fit4th Poly Fit0.280.2850.290.295Sensor Output [v]0200400600800Pressure [Pa]Refined Calibration: Ch 23rd Poly No OutliersOutliers > 1.5*STD0.280.2850.290.295Sensor Output [v]0200400600800Pressure [Pa]Piecewise Calibration: Ch 23rd Poly No OutliersLinear CorrectionOutliers > 1.5*STDtrodes were composed of a silver-carbon black-PDMS
composite that displayed high conductivity with low
piezoresistivity. The array utilized a pure PDMS base
layer to provide support during the fabrication pro-
cess, and to allow for surface mounting using silicone
adhesives. The array utilized a four-point probe mea-
surement technique to mitigate the eﬀects of contact
resistance, and electrical connections were provided
by a ribbon cable embedded in the Ag-CBPDMS elec-
trodes. Overall sensor array dimensions were 80mm
x 20mm with thicknesses of 7.8 and 6.2 mm, and four
sensor channels were contained in the array.

Sensor characterization experiments using time-
varying pressure from vertical plunging revealed fun-
damental characteristics of the CBPDMS foam ar-
ray performance. Primary among these was the
non-linear and inverse relationship between hydro-
dynamic pressure and sensor voltage output that is
consistent with the compressible model of CBPDMS
piezoresistivity presented in Section 3.1. The re-
sponse of the sensor arrays across multiple plunging
experiments with increasing amplitude was found to
be repeatable, and using the results from the plung-
ing experiments, a piecewise polynomial calibration
was developed for each channel of the 7.8 mm and
6.2 mm thick arrays.

The success of the CBDPMS foam arrays as a hy-
drodynamic sensor for use on unmanned marine vehi-
cles can be evaluated by comparing the performance
of the arrays during plunging to results from previ-
ous studies using distributed arrays of commercially
available sensors. Based on previous experiments in
vortex tracking on an AUV shaped body [6] and a
single-element hydrofoil [8], sensor spacing of less
than 5 cm was recommended in order to properly
resolve vortex location. The spacing of individual
sensor channels in the CBPDMS foam arrays is 1.7
cm, satisfying the sensor spacing guidelines for the
unmanned vehicle applications presented. From pre-
vious experiments, example hydrodynamic pressure
stimuli were found to have dynamic pressure ampli-
tudes between 10 and 200 Pa. During the plunging
experiments, the dynamic range demonstrated by the
CBPDMS foam pressure sensor array was approxi-
mately 50-500 Pa, with a resolution of ∼10 Pa. In
these experiments, the low end of the dynamic range

Figure 10: The piecewise polynomial calibration was applied
to experimental time series data from plunging experiments
(solid colored lines) and compared to the theoretical hydro-
static pressure based on the stage position (black dashed lines)
for sensor array channel 2.

amplitude, as seen in Figure 10. The RMS error
(RMSE) and Normalized RMS error (NRMSE) were
then calculated between the theoretical hydrostatic
pressure determined by the vertical location of the
Zaber stage, and the calibrated sensor results, as
given in Table 4. The ﬁrst oscillation of the stage
was removed from each data set as discussed in Sec-
tion 5.5.2. Using the piecewise polynomial calibration
curves, time-varying hydrostatic pressure was repro-
duced from sensor voltage measurements with ∼15%
NMRSE for the 7.8 mm thick sensor array, and ∼13%
NMRSE for the 6.2 mm thick array when compared
to the theoretical hydrostatic pressure based on sen-
sor depth.

6. Conclusions

Conformal pressure sensor arrays for use in a ma-
rine environment were fabricated using a silicone-
based material set. The pressure sensitive compo-
nents of the array utilized a closed-cell piezoresis-
tive CBPDMS foam, while the sensor array elec-

14

681012140200400Calibration Applied to 30mm Case: Ch. 2Calibrated ExperimentRMS ErrorTheory681012140200400Pressure [Pa]Calibration Applied to 20mm Case: Ch. 2Calibrated ExperimentRMS ErrorTheory68101214Time [s]0100200Calibration Applied to 10mm Case: Ch. 2Calibrated ExperimentRMS ErrorTheorywas limited by the experimental setups and the min-
imum depth necessary to fully submerge the sensor
array.

For use in real-world ocean engineering applica-
tions, CBPDMS foam sensor arrays must be robust
enough for prolonged exposure to ﬂuids and able to
withstand repeated handling and potential impacts.
The CBPDMS foam sensor arrays discussed in this
study were surface mounted on both ﬂat and curved
surfaces using double sided tape and silicone adhe-
sive. To speciﬁcally test the robustness of the 7.8 mm
thick CBPDMS foam array, the array was left sub-
merged in the small towing tank at MIT for over 24
hours, and no impact was observed on performance.
To bring distributed pressure sensing with high
spatial resolution to full-scale ocean engineering sys-
tems, pressure sensors must be low cost. The cost of
current commercially available sensors was illustrated
by the unmanned kayak vehicle which was equipped
with an array of 20 Honeywell SPT series sensors at
a total cost of ∼$5000, or ∼$250 per sensor [9]. The
CBPDMS foam sensor arrays were fabricated using
approximately ∼$40 worth of materials for a 4x1 ar-
ray, or ∼$10 per sensor. With modiﬁcations to the
sensor electronics and data acquisition technique, the
array could be converted to a 7x1 array, reducing the
cost per sensor to ∼$6. The largest contributor to the
material cost was the silver used in the fabrication of
the sensor array electrodes. With a modiﬁcation to
the materials used in the electrodes, the sensor cost
could be reduced further, representing a greater ben-
eﬁt over commercially available sensors for large-area
distributed applications.

7. Acknowledgments

The authors would like to acknowledge the support
of a grant from NOAA’s MIT SeaGrant program, The
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology
(SMART), and the William I. Koch chair for mak-
ing this work possible. Special thanks to Matthew
D’Asaro and Jessica Herring for their help in the de-
velopment of doped-silicone sensor materials, and Vi-
gnesh Subramaniam for his experimental assistance
at the CENSAM laboratory and testing tank in Sin-
gapore.

References

[1] J. E. Dusek, Development of bio-inspired dis-
tributed pressure sensor arrays for hydrody-
namic sensing applications, Ph.D. thesis, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology (Oct 2015).

[2] H. Bleckmann, A. Klein, G. Meyer, Nature as a
model for technical sensors, Frontiers in Sensing
(2012) 1–16.

[3] S. Coombs, H. Bleckmann, R. R. Fay, A. N. Pop-
per, The lateral line system, Springer Hando-
book of Auditory Research (2014) 1–360.

[4] S. P. Windsor, M. J. McHenry, The inﬂuence
of viscous hydrodynamics on the ﬁsh lateral-
line system, Integrative and Comparative Biol-
ogy 49 (6) (2009) 691–701. doi:10.1093/icb/
icp084.

[5] M. Rapo, H. Jiang, M. Grosenbaugh, Using com-
putational ﬂuid dynamics to calculate the stim-
ulus to the lateral line of a ﬁsh in still water, J
Exp Biol.
URL http://www.whoi.edu/cms/files/Rapo_
et_al_2009_51084.pdf

[6] V.

I. Fernandez, Performance analysis

for
lateral-line-inspired sensor arrays, Ph.D. the-
sis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Oct
2011).

[7] V. Fernandez,

J. Dusek,

J. Schulmeister,
A. Maertens, S. Hou, K. Srivatsa, J. Lang,
M. Triantafyllou, Pressure sensor arrays to opti-
mize the high speed performance of ocean vehi-
cles, 11th International Conference on Fast Sea
Transportation (2011) 1–8.

[8] J. Dusek, Leading edge vortex detection using
bio-inspired on-body pressure sensing, Master’s
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(Jan 2011).

[9] J. Dusek, A. G. P. Kottapalli, M. E. Woo,
M. Asadnia, J. Miao, J. H. Lang, M. S.
Triantafyllou, Development and testing of bio-
inspired microelectromechanical pressure sensor

15

arrays for increased situational awareness for
marine vehicles, Smart Materials and Structures
22 (2013) 014002–014015.
URL
0964-1726/22/1/014002

http://iopscience.iop.org/

[10] J. Dusek, M. E. Woo, J. H. Lang, M. S.
Triantafyllou, Carbon black-pdms composite
conformal pressure sensor arrays for near-body
ﬂow detection, IEEE Oceans 2014- Taipeidoi:
10.1109/OCEANS-TAIPEI.2014.6964479.
URL
abs_all.jsp?arnumber=6964479

http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/

[11] W. Luheng, D. Tianhuai, W. Peng, Inﬂuence
of carbon black concentration on piezoresistiv-
ity for carbon-black-ﬁlled silicone rubber com-
posite, Carbon 47 (14) (2009) 3151–3157. doi:
10.1016/j.carbon.2009.06.050.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.
2009.06.050

[12] J. C. Lotters, W. Olthuis, P. H. Veltink,
P. Bergveld, The mechanical properties of the
rubber elastic polymer polydimethylsiloxane for
sensor applications, Journal of Micromechanics
and Microengineering 7 (1997) 145–147.
URL
0960-1317/7/3/017

http://iopscience.iop.org/

[13] F. M. Yaul, V. Bulovic, J. H. Lang, A ﬂexible
underwater pressure sensor array using a con-
ductive elastomer strain gauge, Journal or Mi-
croelectromechanical Systems 21 (4) (2012) 897–
907.

[14] M. Lacasse, V. Duchaine, C. Gosselin, Charac-
terization of the electrical resistance of carbon-
black-ﬁlled silicone: Application to a ﬂexible and
stretchable robot skin, 2010 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (2010)
4842–4848.

[15] N. Ryvkina,

I. Tchmutin,

J. Vilcakova,
M. Peliskova, P. Saha, The deformation behav-
ior of conductivity in composites where charge
carrier transport is by tunneling:
theoretical
modeling and experimental results, Synthetic

Materials 148 (2) (2005) 141–146.
URL
science/article/pii/S0379677904004308

http://www.sciencedirect.com/

[16] M. Hussain, Y. Choa, K. Niihara, Fabrication
process and electrical behavior of novel pressure-
sensitive composites, Composites: PartA 32
(2001) 1689–1696.

[17] D. T. Beruto, M. Capurro, G. Marro, Piezoresis-
tance behavior of silicone–graphite composites in
the proximity of the electric percolation thresh-
old, Sensors and Actuators A 117 (2005) 301–
308. doi:10.1016/j.sna.2004.06.027.

[18] T. Ding, L. Wang, P. Wang, Changes in electri-
cal resistance of carbon-black-ﬁlled silicone rub-
ber composite during compression, Journal of
Polymer Science: Part B: Polymer Physics 45
(2007) 2700–2706.

[19] V. I. Fernandez, A. Maertens, F. M. Yaul,
J. Dahl, J. H. Lang, M. S. Triantafyllou,
Lateral-line-inspired sensor arrays
for nav-
identiﬁcation, Marine
igation and object
Technology Society Journal 45 (4)
(2011)
130–146.
URL
com/content/mts/mtsj/2011/00000045/
00000004/art00015

http://www.ingentaconnect.

[20] M. G. King, A. J. Baragwanath, M. C. Rosa-
mond, D. Wood, A. J. Gallant, Porous pdms
force sensitive resistors, Procedia Chemistry
1 (1) (2009) 568–571. doi:10.1016/j.proche.
2009.07.142.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.proche.
2009.07.142

[21] K. J. Cha, D. S. Kim, A portable pressure
pump for microﬂuidic lab-on-a-chip systems
using a porous polydimethylsiloxane (pdms)
sponge, Biomed Microdevices 13 (5) (2011) 877–
883. doi:10.1007/s10544-011-9557-z.

16

