CondensedMatterPhysics,2016,Vol.19,No1,13606:1–10
DOI:10.5488/CMP.19.13606
http://www.icmp.lviv.ua/journal

Self-sortingintwo-dimensionalassembliesofsimple
chiralmolecules
A.Woszczyk,P.Szabelski∗
DepartmentofTheoreticalChemistry,Maria-CurieSklodowskaUniversity,
Pl.M.C.Sklodowskiej3,20-031Lublin,Poland
ReceivedSeptember29,2015,innalformDecember30,2015
Structural modication of adsorbed overlayers by means of external factors is an important objective in the
fabrication of stimuli-responsive materials with adjustable physicochemical properties. In this contribution we
present a coarse-grained Monte Carlo model of the connement-induced chiral self-sorting of hockey stick-
shaped enantiomers adsorbed on a triangular lattice. It is assumed that the adsorbed overlayer consists of
“normal” molecules that are capable of adopting any of the six planar orientations imposed by the symmetry
ofthelatticeandmoleculardirectorshavingonlyonepermanentorientation,thatreectthecouplingofthese
specieswithanexternaldirectionaleld.Ourinvestigationsfocusontheinuenceoftheamountfractionofthe
molecular directors, temperature and surface coverage on the extent of the chiral segregation. The simulated
results demonstrate that the molecular directors can have a signicant effect on the ordering in enantiopure
overlayers,whileforthecorrespondingracematestheirroleislargelydiminished.Thesendingscanbehelpful
in designing strategies to improve methods of fabrication of homochiral surfaces and enantioselective adsor-
bents.
Keywords:self-assembly,chiralmolecules,MonteCarlosimulations,chiralresolution
PACS:64.75.Yz,68.43.Hn,81.05.Xj,02.70.Uu

1. Introduction
Achievingcontroloverthestructureofmolecularsystems,andtuningtheirpropertiesusingexternal
inputshasbeenonethemostintensivelystudiedtopicsinmaterialscienceduringtherecentyears.Acon-
siderableinterestinsuchadjustablemolecularstructuresresultsmainlyfromthepossibilityofchanging
their physico-chemical characteristics in a reversible manner by means of noninvasive external factors
including, for example, electric or magnetic elds. These directional inputs have been found to be ca-
pable of triggering the ordering in bulk systems comprising molecules and particles, which results in
substantialchangesinoptical,magneticorrheologicalproperties[1–4].
Another class of systems in which the structure formation can be guided by an external bias are the
adsorbedoverlayerscomprisingdifferent,oftenfunctionalized,organicmolecules.Inthiscase,corruga-
tionofthemolecule-substrateinteractionpotentialthatisprovidedbyatomicstepsorgroovesofmetallic
crystalshasbeenoftenusedtodirecttheself-assemblyofmolecularbuildingblocks[5,6].Moreover,this
method, when combined with covalent linkage of the adsorbed molecules, has been effectively used to
producepersistentmacromolecularstructuresincludingwires,ribbonsandnetworks[7,8].
Regardingthedirectionalexternaleldsactingon2Dmolecularassemblies,ithasbeendemonstrated
recently by Berg et al. that the structure of the adsorbed overlayer comprising prochiral functionalized
biphenyl molecules can be imposed through the chiral imprinting process occurring at the liquid-solid
interface[3,4].Inthisapproach,theprochiralmoleculesofthebulkliquidcrystal(LC)phasewereindi-
rectcontactwiththegraphitesurface.TheuniaxialorderingoftheLCmoleculesthatwasinducedbythe
∗E-mail:szabla@vega.umcs.lublin.pl
©A.Woszczyk,P.Szabelski,2016

13606-1

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
8
1
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A.Woszczyk,P.Szabelski
directionalmagneticeldwasthesourceoforientationalconnementoftheadsorbingmoleculesform-
ing mirror-image homochiral domains on graphite. Systematic changes in the orientation of the applied
eld resulted in the variation of the relative population of the homochiral domains making it possible
tocreateextendedmolecularassemblieswithonehandedness.TheexperimentsbyBergandcoworkers
have clearly demonstrated that steering the chiral organization of adsorbed molecules can be achieved
usingentirelyachiralinputssuchasdirectionalmagneticelds.Thisideaseemsparticularlyinteresting
fromtheperspectiveofchiralseparationsandfabricationofhomochiralsurfaces.Forexample,theeld-
inducedorientationalconnementofadsorbedenantiomerscanbeusedtotriggertheirmixingorchiral
resolution. These processes are relevant to the on-surface separation of enantiomers as well as to the
creation of 2D molecular overlayers with adjustable adsorptive (enantioselective), optical and catalytic
properties.
In order to explore the structure formation in adsorbed systems comprising chiral molecules, dif-
ferent theoretical approaches have been proposed including computer simulations and statistical me-
chanical calculations. In those studies, simplied molecular shapes, such as hard bent needles [9, 10],
tetrominoes [11], tripods [12, 13] or patchy disks [14] have been usually employed, and the inuence
of anisotropic intermolecular interactions and molecular shape on the miscibility of the model enan-
tiomers has been explored. Recently, more advanced approaches have been also proposed in which
the adsorbed chiral molecules were presented in a more detailed way, accounting for atomic charges,
Lennard-Jones parameters of the composite atoms or functional groups as well as for corrugation of the
substrate[15–17].
Even though the inuence of intrinsic properties of chiral molecules on their performance in the 2D
self-sorting process has been studied systematically, the effect of external anisotropic inputs has not yet
beenthoroughlyexplored.Thisrefersespeciallytotheroleoftheaforementionedorientationalconne-
ment of adsorbed enantiomers, which can be induced, for example, by external elds. Recently, using
MC simulations, we have demonstrated the connement-induced 2D chiral segregation of simple molec-
ulartectonswhosecompositesegmentswereallowedtooccupyverticesofasquarelattice[18–20].These
theoretical predictions suggest that the unidirectional positioning of surface enantiomers can be used
to trigger the chiral resolution also on the surfaces having different symmetry. In this contribution we
extendourMCinvestigationsandexplorethepossibilityofsteeringthechiralsegregationthatoccurson
atriangularlattice.Tothatend,weconsidersimplehockey-stick-shapedmolecules[10]whicharechiral,
thatis,theyarecapableofadoptingmirror-imageconformationswhenadsorbed.Moreover,inthiswork
we study adsorbed overlayers in which only a part of the molecules is orientationally conned, playing
the role of directors (sergeants) for the remaining molecules (soldiers). The main objective of our sim-
ulations is to determine the effect of such parameters as the amount fraction of the director molecules,
surface coverage and temperature on the extent of the ordering and chiral resolution in the systems
investigated.
2. Simulation
Thechiralmoleculesofourmodelwereassumedtoconsistoffourinterconnectedsegmentsarranged
in a hockey-stick shape shown schematically in gure 1. These molecules were allowed to adopt mirror-
imagecongurations(RandSenantiomers)whenadsorbed.EachmolecularsegmentofRandSoccupied
one site on a triangular lattice. The molecules were neither allowed to overlap nor to change chirality.
Dependingontheconsideredversionofthemodel,themoleculescouldtakeanyofthesixplanarorienta-
tionsshowninthegure(isotropic)ortheorientationofsomeofthemwasxedtomimicthecouplingof
thesespecieswiththedirectionalexternaleld(seethemoleculesinblack,unidirectional).Themolecules
withxedorientationarefurtherreferredtoasdirectors.Inthesimpliedapproachpresentedhere,the
directormoleculeshavespecialpropertieswhichmakethemcouplestronglywithadirectionalexternal
eldwhiletherestofthemoleculesremaininert.Inrealsituations,allofthemoleculescanbeenergeti-
callycoupledtotheeldandhaveorientationallydependentenergies.Inthiscase,thechiralsegregation
would depend on the individual energetic parameters which characterize each type of molecules. To
minimizethenumberofparametersinourmodel,weconsideredanextremecase,inwhichthecoupling
energy of the director molecules is always large enough to orient these molecules parallel to the eld.
On the other hand, we also assumed that the coupling of the rest of the molecules is weak enough to
13606-2

Self-sortingintwo-dimensionalassemblies

Figure1.Schematicstructureofthefour-memberedenantiomersRandSadsorbedonatriangularlattice.
The preferred orientation assumed for the director molecules is marked in black while the orientations
accessibletotheremainingmoleculesareshowningrey.Thedashedlinerepresentsthemirrorsymmetry
plane.Theblackarrowindicatesthepreferredorientation(longmoleculararm)assumedinthemodel.

be neglected. This approach permits to study the potential guiding role of the director molecules having
a denite shape, without going into details of chemical composition of these species. Accordingly, the
number of intermolecular interaction parameters of the model can be minimized. It was assumed that
the interaction between adsorbed enantiomers can be described by an attractive short-range segment-
segmentinteractionpotentialwhoserangewaslimitedtothenearestneighborsonthelattice.Theenergy
ofelementarysegment-segmentinteractionwascharacterizedbythedimensionlessparameter  = −1.
TheMCsimulationswereperformedona100by100rhombicfragmentofatriangularlatticeimpos-
ing periodic boundary conditions in both planar directions. The calculations were carried out using the
conventionalMCmethodwithMetropolissampling[18–22],andtheywereadditionallycoupledwiththe
cooling procedure in which the overlayer was equilibrated in a sequence of decreasing temperatures.
The simulation protocol was organized as follows. In the rst step N molecules in total were randomly
distributed on the surface. Depending on the assumed composition of the overlayer, homochiral (R) and
racemic (R+S, 1:1) assemblies were modelled. Moreover, in each of these cases, the fraction of director
molecules, f, was systematically changed, and for the racemate, the directors contributed equally to R
and S. At the beginning of the MC run, the director molecules were randomly distributed on the surface
togetherwiththeremainingmoleculesandtheirorientationwasselectedatrandom.Thiscorrespondsto
asituationinwhichthedirectormoleculesarenotinitiallyorientationallyconned.Suchaconnement,
meaning a strong tendency to orient in one direction, can result from, for example, the coupling of the
director molecules with external directional eld parallel to the surface. During the simulation, when
theconnementwasimposed,thedirectormoleculeswereallowedtotranslatebuttheirorientationwas
changed (in case it was different from the original one) to the selected one shown in black in gure 1.
Toequilibratethesystem,aseriesofrandomdisplacementmoveswasperformed.Inthisprocedure,the
orientation of the director molecules was always xed and the orientation of the remaining molecules
was randomly changed by a multiple of 60 degrees. To accept or reject the move, the energies in the
new Un and old Uo positions were calculated for the selected molecule by summing up the segment-
segment interactions with the neighboring molecules. Next, a random number r ∈ (0,1) was generated
and compared with the probability p = min[1,exp(−∆U /kBT )] where ∆U = Un −Uo and kB and T are
theBoltzmannconstantandtemperature,respectively.If r < p,themovewasaccepted;otherwiseitwas
rejected.Inthesimulations,weuseddimensionlessunits,i.e.,theenergiesareexpressedinunitsof and
temperature in units of ||/k. In these calculations we used 2× 108 × N MC steps with one MC being a
single attempt to move (and rotate if allowed) an adsorbed molecule. In such a MC run, the cooling pro-
cedure was realized within 200 temperature decrements of equal length; from T = 4.2 down to T = 0.2.
Specically,ateachtemperature,thesystemwasequilibratedduring 106× N stepsofwhichthelast10%
were used for averaging. The adsorbed conguration equilibrated at one temperature was used for the
subsequent lower temperature run. The cooling sequence was also used to calculate the corresponding
specic heat capacities based on the uctuations of the internal energy of the adsorbed overlayer [23].
Alltheresultsdiscussedinthemanuscriptaretheaveragesovertenindependentsystemreplicas.

13606-3

A.Woszczyk,P.Szabelski

3. Resultsanddiscussion
Toexaminetheeffectoforientationalconnementonthestructureformationinoursystems,werst
performed simulations for the enantiopure overlayers. Top part of gure 2 shows exemplary snapshots
obtainedfor1600moleculesRat T = 0.2.Asitcanbeeasilynoticedinpanel(a),therotationalfreedomof
theadsorbedmoleculesisresponsiblefortheformationofacompactdisordereddomainwithsparsevoid
defects. Although the obtained structure lacks a long-range order, some clustering of uniformly aligned
molecules,shownintheinset,canbeobserved.Similartopuzzletiles,theRclustershavingdifferentori-
entationsarecapableofpackingdenselyandcreatingdiversiedlocalmotifs.ThetendencyofRtoform
the uniformly aligned local molecular structures becomes evident when the orientational connement
is switched on. In this case [panel (b)], we can observe an extended lamellar pattern characterized by a
rectangular (1× 2

(cid:112)
3)unitcell.

Figure2.(Coloronline)Snapshotsoftheoverlayerscomprising1600moleculesadsorbedona100by100
triangular lattice; T = 0.2. Panels (a) and (b) correspond to the enantiopure (R) systems while panels (c)
and (d) show the results obtained for the corresponding racemates (800 R + 800 S). The effect of orienta-
tional connement, indicated by the black arrow, on the structure formation is shown in the right-hand
panels (b) and (d). The inset in panel (a) shows a magnied fragment of the overlayer in which clusters
ofuniformlyalignedmoleculescanbenoticed(encircledwithblacklines).
Regarding the racemic mixtures, in the case of unrestricted model, we can observe the formation of
randomlymixedoverlayersinwhichtheenantiomersRandSexhibitsometendencytoformhomochiral
clusters with uniform orientation [panel (c)]. However, this trend is much less pronounced compared to
the enantiopure overlayer and it results mainly from the increased number of local tightly-packed mo-
tifs which can be formed by R and S adsorbed together. The increased structural diversity of molecular
packingsintheracemicassemblypreventsanecientpropagationoftheenantiopurelamellardomains.
These domains, as clearly seen in panel (d), are formed when the orientational connement is imposed
on the enantiomers, leading to a complete demixing of R and S. The main source of the observed chi-
ral resolution is the shape incompatibility of unlike enantiomers which are not capable of creating a
dense mixed overlayer when uniformly oriented. The demixing is energetically favorable because it al-
lows each molecule (R or S) to reach a maximum coordination (except for the phase boundary regions)
characterizedbytheinteractionenergyequalto 9.
To quantify the differences between phase transformations occurring in the homochiral (a), (b) and
racemic(c),(d)overlayersfromgure2,wecalculatedthemeanpotentialenergyoftheadsorbedphase,
〈U〉andtheassociatedspecicheat, Cv asfunctionsoftemperature.Theseresultsareshowningure3.
As it is seen in the left-hand panels of gure 3, for the enantiopure systems we can observe a consid-
erable shift in the position of the 〈U〉 and Cv curves when the orientational connement is switched
on (dashed lines). Specically, both 〈U〉 and Cv move towards higher temperatures, from about 1.38 to
2.19, as estimated from the corresponding peak maxima. In this case, a strong tendency for the forma-
tion of an ordered overlayer that is inherent to the unidirectional model enhances the propagation of
13606-4

Self-sortingintwo-dimensionalassemblies

Figure 3. Temperature dependence of the average potential energy of an adsorbed molecule (top) and
specicheatcapacitycalculatedfortheisotropic(solid)andunidirectional(dashed)model,fortheenan-
tiopureandracemicoverlayerscomprising1600molecules.Theseresultsaretheaveragesoverteninde-
pendentsystemreplicas.

uniaxially aligned molecular pattern. Consequently, the transition is capable of occuring yet at higher
temperatures. On the contrary, for the isotropic model, the increased orientational freedom of the ad-
sorbed molecules lowers the temperature needed to reach the self-assembly. The results obtained for
theenantiopureoverlayersarequalitativelysimilartothosesimulatedforthecorrespondingracemates.
However,fortheracemicmixtures(right-handpanels),theanalogousshiftsinthepositionofthecurves
from the left-hand panels are much smaller. Here, the peak maximum in Cv shifts from about 1.36 to
1.74 and, interestingly, the position of the transition corresponding to the isotropic model (solid line) is
very close to that observed for the enantiopure system. The proximity of the transition points observed
in Cv forbothtypesofisotropicmodelsislikelytooriginatefromthesimilarstructureoftheassemblies
shown in the left-hand part of gure 2 (a), (c). For both these structures, we are dealing with randomly
oriented, densely packed multimolecular clusters which t in a way that a minimal number of void de-
fects is created. In that sense, the presence of the other enantiomer (S) does not signicantly change the
mechanismofself-assembly.Fortheunidirectionalmodel(dashedlines),however,theotherenantiomer
isresponsibleforanincreasednumberofmixedmolecularcongurations(R-S)whichcanpreventsome-
what the formation of separated homochiral domains. For this reason, the ordering transition shifts to
lowertemperatures.
To trace the extent of chiral segregation in the racemic systems, we introduced the parameter h,
which is equal to the average number of heterogeneous R-S intermolecular interactions per adsorbed
enantiomer. In other words, this parameter provides the number of bonds that can be drawn between
the composite segments of an R(S) molecule, and the neighboring segments belonging to S(R) molecules.
Theparameter hcharacterizestheR-Sinterfacelengthand,asitcanbeeasilypredicted,shouldbecloseto
zerowhenthedemixingoccurs.Ontheotherhand,forcompletemixingoftheenantiomers, hshouldtake
the values close to 9, since in a compact racemic R-S domain, statistically half of 18 bonds of a molecule,
sayR(fullcoordination),areformedwithS-segments.Tovisualizethesedependenciesingure4weplot-
ted the parameter h as a function of temperature, for both versions of the model, for different surface
coverages.Fromtheresultsplottedingure4,itclearlyfollowsthatthephasetransformationsinthesys-
temsfromgures2(c)and2(d)aremanifestedinthetotallydifferentshapesofthecorresponding h(T )
curves. Namely, for the unidirectional model, we can observe a gradual decrease of h with a decreasing
13606-5

A.Woszczyk,P.Szabelski

Figure 4. The average number of heterogeneous interactions per molecule, h, as a function of temper-
ature, calculated for the isotropic and unidirectional model, for a different number of adsorbed enan-
tiomers(racemicoverlayers).Theseresultsaretheaveragesovertenindependentsystemreplicas.

temperaturedowntoaboutzero,regardlessofthesurfacecoverage.Thisbehaviorisaclearindicationof
the chiral segregation and the residual value of h ≈ 0.2 comes from the inter-domain R-S contacts in the
demixed racemic systems. On the other hand, for the unrestricted model, h increases with a decreasing
temperature reaching a plateau at about 8. This value is consistent with the result of the simple mean
eld considerations made previously, meaning that the overlayer is randomly mixed with statistically
halfofthebondsofamoleculebeingoftheheterogeneous(R-S)type.Obviously,theobtainedvalue h ≈ 8
is lower than the ideal one (9) due to the clustering tendency of like molecules and due to the presence
of peripheral molecules with fractional coordination. The relative position of the curves, in which the
onecorrespondingtothemixingisalwaysplacedabovetheothercurve,isanaturalconsequenceofthe
increasednumberofbimolecularR-Scongurationsallowedintheunrestrictedmodel.Thiscanbeseen
evenathightemperatures,closeto4.
To explore the possibility of triggering the ordering transition using the director molecules we per-
formedadditionalsimulationsinwhichtheamountfraction, f,ofthesespecieswassystematicallychan-

Figure 5. Relative gain in the number of vertically oriented molecules, α, as a function of temperature,
calculated for different amount fractions of the director molecules. The results of the gure correspond
toenantiopureoverlayerswithadifferentnumberofadsorbedmoleculesindicatedineachpanel.These
resultsaretheaveragesovertenindependentsystemreplicas.

13606-6

Self-sortingintwo-dimensionalassemblies
ged. Figure 5 presents the effect of the active dopant on the parameter α, calculated for the enantiopure
overlayers.Thisparameterisdenedasfollows:

α = ˆf − f
1− f

(3.1)
in which ˆf is the actual fraction of molecules with an upward orientation (the same orientation as the
one assumed for the directors, see gure 1). The parameter α measures the relative gain in the number
ofverticallyorientedmoleculesthatisinducedbyinjectingthedirectormoleculesatfraction f.Fromg-
ure5,itfollowsthatintheenantiopureoverlayers,below T ≈ 2,theincreaseintheparameter αbecomes
noticeablylarge(>0.5)whenthefractionofthedirectormoleculesexceedsaboutonehalf.Forexample,
for f = 0.6, the fraction of vertically oriented molecules among all the remaining molecules (which are
not the director ones) reaches over 90 % highlighting quite effective guided ordering mechanism. This
alsoreferstotheoverlayersinwhichthecoverageislower(seetheright-handpanel),andforwhichthe
obtained dependencies are very similar to those shown in the left-hand panel. To compare these results
withthecorrespondingdependenciescalculatedfortheracemates,ingure6weplottedtwoadditional
sets of data. These, apart from the parameter α, also include the average number of heterogeneous in-
teractionspermolecule, h.Theresultsoftheleft-handpanelofgure6clearlydemonstrateadiversied

Figure 6. The average number of heterogeneous interactions per molecule, h, and relative change in
the number of molecules with upward orientation, α, as functions of temperature calculated for the
recamic overlayers for different amount fractions of the director molecules, f; N = 1600. These results
areaveragesovertenindependentsystemreplicas.

phase behaviour of the racemate upon adding the director molecules at a different fraction. Specically,
for f lowerthan0.6,weobserveadistinctincreasingtrendintheaveragenumberofR-Sheterogeneous
interactions when the temperature drops. Here, we are dealing with an enhanced tendency to form a
mixedR-Spattern.However,anincreaseof f above0.6doesnotleadtoasignicantdropof h (i.e.,down
to zero, see gure 4) at low temperatures where, for example, at f = 0.7, h is equal to about 4.7 which
meansanincompleteresolutionoftheenantiomers.Toshowthisincompletedemixingoccurringevenat
relatively high amounts of the director molecules, let us analyse the curves α from the right-hand panel
of gure 6. In this case, we can observe that the relative increase in the fraction of vertically aligned
molecules remains lower than 0.2 even for f = 0.6. A further increase of f, however, does not lead to a
signicantgrowth(upto1)oftheparameter α.Onthecontrary,evenatasignicantamountofthedirec-
tor molecules (f = 0.8), the relative content of the new molecules with upward orientation is still lower
than 50 %. To illustrate how the director molecules contribute to the uniaxial ordering in gure 7, we
showed an exemplary initial and nal adsorbed conguration obtained for the system comprising 1600
molecules of which 60 % were the director molecules (dark grey). The results obtained for the racemic
mixturesshowthattheroleofthedirectormoleculesintheorderinginthecorresponding2Dassemblies
is much smaller than for the enantiopure systems. In other words, a much larger amount of the direc-
tor molecules should be added to the racemate in order to induce its complete uniaxial ordering and
13606-7

A.Woszczyk,P.Szabelski

Figure 7. (Color online) The initial (a) and nal (b) conguration obtained for the racemic mixture com-
prising1600molecules(800R+800S)ofwhich60%werethedirectormolecules(darkgrey, f = 0.6).

theresultingchiralresolution.Asmentionedpreviously,thiseffectoriginatesmainlyfromtheincreased
numberoftightlypackedmolecularmotifswhichcanbeformedinthequasi-twocomponentR-Ssystem.
In the next gure 8, we presented the effect of the surface coverage (the number of adsorbed mole-
cules)ontheextentofchiralresolutionintheracemicoverlayers.Asitfollowsfromtheleft-handpanel,
at a high director content, the curves calculated for the two lower coverages (N = 1200 and N = 800)
exhibit a noticeable increase at moderate temperatures followed by steep drops after passing through
the transition temperature (about 1.5). In these cases, the number of R-S interactions is naturally low
at higher temperatures where we deal with 2D gas phase. A further cooling of the adsorbed overlayer
inducesnucleation(increaseinthenumberofR-Sinteractions),whichisaccompaniedbytheself-sorting
effect leading to a decrease in h. Such a transition is not observed when f is small (see the right-hand
panel),andthenucleatingaggregatespreservetheirmixedstructureintheextendedR-Sdomainformed
atlow T,whichmeansthatthedirectorcontentistoolowtoinducethesortingprocess.
Theaboveresultsindicatethat,regardlessofthesurfacecoverage,theself-sortingprocessisthemost
effective when the majority of the molecules of the racemate are forced to adopt one planar orienta-
tion. On the contrary, the role of the director molecules is found to be much larger for the enantiopure
assemblies,whichturnedouttobemoresensitivetotheguidinginuenceoftheactivedopant.
4. Conclusions
In summary, using the coarse-grained MC modelling we have demonstrated that the orientational
connement of adsorbed chiral molecules can lead to their on-surface resolution producing homochi-
ral ordered patterns. The calculations performed for the hockey-stick-shaped molecules, resembling the

Figure8.Effectofsurfacecoverage(numberofadsorbedmolecules, N)ontheaveragenumberofhetero-
geneous interactions per molecule, h, calculated for racemic mixtures differing in the amount fraction
of the director molecules, f indicated in each panel. These results are averages over ten independent
systemreplicas.

13606-8

Self-sortingintwo-dimensionalassemblies
tetraphene, revealed the capability of this building block to form extended mirror-image domains upon
2D orientational connement. It was found that the onset of phase transformation, in both enantiopure
and racemic overlayers, shifts towards higher temperatures when the connement is imposed on the
molecules. However, this effect was more profound in the case of enantiopure systems highlighting the
enhancedcooperativityofthelikeenantiomersinthestructureformation.Separatesimulations,inwhich
onlyapartofthemoleculeswasorientationallyconned,showedthatthechiralresolution(racemic)can
be somewhat enhanced using the guiding dopant molecules with a xed in-plane orientation. However,
in this case, nearly all of the adsorbed molecules, R and S, should be capable of aligning uniaxially and
preservingthisorientation.
The results of our theoretical investigations can help understand the role of a directional bias in the
chiralresolutionofenantiomersinadsorbedoverlayers.Thesendingscanbealsousefulindeveloping
themethodsoffabricationofhomochiralsurfaces,suchasindesigningstrategiestoimproveanadsorp-
tiveseparationofchiralmolecules.
References
1. HuL.,ZhangR.,ChenQ.,Nanoscale,2014,6,14064;doi:10.1039/c4nr05108d.
2. BhartiB.,VelevO.D.,Langmuir,2015,31,7897;doi:10.1021/la504793y.
3. BergA.M.,PatrickD.L.,Angew.Chem.Int.Ed.,2005,44,1821;doi:10.1002/anie.200461833.
4. MougousJ.D.,BrackleyA.J.,FolandK.,BakerR.T.,PatrickD.L.,Phys.Rev.Lett.,2000,84,2742;
5. CunH.,WangY.,YangB.,ZhangL.,DuS.,WangY.,ErnstK.-H.,GaoH.J.,Langmuir,2010,26,3402;
6. HankeF.,HaqS.,RavalR.,PerssonM.,ACSNano,2011,5,9093;doi:10.1021/nn203337v.
7. Klappenberger F., Zhang Y.-Q., Björk J., Klyatskaya S., Ruben M., Barth J.V., Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2140;
8. FanQ.,GottfriedJ.M.,ZhuJ.,Acc.Chem.Res.,2015,48,2484;doi:10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00168.
9. PerusquíaR.,PeónJ.,QuintanaJ.,PhysicaA,2005,345,130;doi:10.1016/j.physa.2004.05.089.
10. Martínez-González J.A., Pablo-Pedro R., Armas-Pérez J.C., Chapela G.A., Quintana-H J., RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20489;
11. BarnesB.C.,SideriusD.W.,GelbL.D.,Langmuir,2009,25,6702;doi:10.1021/la900196b.
12. MedvedI.,TrníkA.,HuckabyD.A.,Phys.Rev.E.,2009,80,011601;doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.80.011601.
13. MedvedI.,TrníkA.,HuckabyD.A.,J.Stat.Mech.,2010,12,12027;doi:10.1088/1742-5468/2010/12/P12027.
14. Martínez-GonzálezJ.A.,ChapelaG.A.,Quintana-HJ.,J.Chem.Phys.,2014,140,194505;doi:10.1063/1.4876575.
15. PaciI.,SzleiferI.,RatnerM.A.,J.Am.Chem.Soc.,2007,129,3545;doi:10.1021/ja066422b.
16. PopaT.,PaciI.,SoftMatter,2013,9,7988;doi:10.1039/C3SM50312G.
17. PopaT.,PaciI.,J.Phys.Chem.C,2015,119,9829;doi:10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b00380.
18. SzabelskiP.,WoszczykA.,Langmuir,2012,28,11095;doi:10.1021/la301763k.
19. WoszczykA.,SzabelskiP.,AnnalesUMCSChem.,2013,68,133;doi:10.2478/umcschem-2013-0011.
20. WoszczykA.,SzabelskiP.,RSCAdv.,2015,5,81933;doi:10.1039/C5RA15192A.
21. RomáF.,Ramirez-PastorA.J.,RiccardoJ.L.,Langmuir,2003,19,6770;doi:10.1021/la0209785.
22. Ramirez-PastorA.J.,NazarroM.S.,RiccardoJ.L.,ZgrablichG.,Surf.Sci.,1995,341,249;
23. Frenkel D., Smit B., Understanding Molecular Simulation from Algorithms to Applications, 2nd Edn., Academic

doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.84.2742.
doi:10.1021/la903193a.

doi:10.1016/0039-6028(95)00665-6.
Press,SanDiego,2002.

doi:10.1021/acs.accounts.5b00174.

doi:10.1039/C4RA00617H.

13606-9

A.Woszczyk,P.Szabelski

Самосортуванняудвовимiрнихансамбляхпростих
хiральнихмолекул
A.Вощик,П.Шабельський
Вiддiлтеоретичноїхiмiї,УнiверситетМарiїКюрi-Складовської,20-031Люблiн,Польща
Структурна модифiкацiя адсорбованих покриттiв за рахунок зовнiшнiх факторiв є важливим завданням
при виготовленнi стимуло-чутливих матерiалiв з регульованими фiзико-хiмiчними властивостями. У да-
нiй статтi представлено огрублену модель iндукованого просторовим обмеженням хiрального самосор-
тування енантiомерiв iз формою хокейної ключки, адсорбованих на трикутнiй гратцi, яка дослiджується
методомМонтеКарло.Зробленоприпущення,щоадсорбованепокриттяскладаєтьсяз“нормальних”мо-
лекул, якi здатнi прийняти будь-яку з шести планарних орiєнтацiй завдяки симетрiї гратки i молекуляр-
них директорiв, що мають лише одну постiйну орiєнтацiю, яка вiдображає їх зв’язок iз зовнiшнiм полем
певного напрямку. Дане дослiдження описує вплив фракцiї молекулярних директорiв, температури та
покриття поверхнi на ступiнь хiральної сегрегацiї. Результати моделювання показують, що молекуляр-
нi директори можуть мати значний вплив на впорядкування в енантiчистих покриттях, в той час як для
вiдповiдних расематiв їх роль значно знижена. Данi дослiдження можуть бути корисними для розробки
стратегiївдосконаленняспособiввиготовленнягомохiральнихповерхоньтаенантiо-селективнихадсор-
бентiв.
Ключовiслова:самовпорядкування,хiральнiмолекули,моделюванняМонтеКарло,
хiральнароздiльнiсть

13606-10

