Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning

and Large-Scale Data Collection

6
1
0
2

 
r
p
A
2

 

 
 
]

G
L
.
s
c
[
 
 

3
v
9
9
1
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Sergey Levine
Peter Pastor
Alex Krizhevsky
Deirdre Quillen
Google

Abstract

We describe a learning-based approach to hand-
eye coordination for
robotic grasping from
monocular images. To learn hand-eye coordi-
nation for grasping, we trained a large convo-
lutional neural network to predict the probabil-
ity that task-space motion of the gripper will re-
sult in successful grasps, using only monocular
camera images and independently of camera cal-
ibration or the current robot pose. This requires
the network to observe the spatial relationship
between the gripper and objects in the scene,
thus learning hand-eye coordination. We then
use this network to servo the gripper in real time
to achieve successful grasps. To train our net-
work, we collected over 800,000 grasp attempts
over the course of two months, using between 6
and 14 robotic manipulators at any given time,
with differences in camera placement and hard-
ware. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates
that our method achieves effective real-time con-
trol, can successfully grasp novel objects, and
corrects mistakes by continuous servoing.

1. Introduction
When humans and animals engage in object manipulation
behaviors, the interaction inherently involves a fast feed-
back loop between perception and action. Even complex
manipulation tasks, such as extracting a single object from
a cluttered bin, can be performed with hardly any advance
planning, relying instead on feedback from touch and vi-
sion. In contrast, robotic manipulation often (though not
always) relies more heavily on advance planning and anal-
ysis, with relatively simple feedback, such as trajectory
following, to ensure stability during execution (Srinivasa
et al., 2012). Part of the reason for this is that incorpo-
rating complex sensory inputs such as vision directly into

SLEVINE@GOOGLE.COM
PETERPASTOR@GOOGLE.COM
AKRIZHEVSKY@GOOGLE.COM
DEQUILLEN@GOOGLE.COM

Figure 1. Our large-scale data collection setup, consisting of 14
robotic manipulators. We collected over 800,000 grasp attempts
to train the CNN grasp prediction model.

a feedback controller is exceedingly challenging. Tech-
niques such as visual servoing (Siciliano & Khatib, 2007)
perform continuous feedback on visual features, but typi-
cally require the features to be speciﬁed by hand, and both
open loop perception and feedback (e.g. via visual servo-
ing) requires manual or automatic calibration to determine
the precise geometric relationship between the camera and
the robot’s end-effector.
In this paper, we propose a learning-based approach to
hand-eye coordination, which we demonstrate on a robotic
grasping task. Our approach is data-driven and goal-
centric: our method learns to servo a robotic gripper to

Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

poses that are likely to produce successful grasps, with end-
to-end training directly from image pixels to task-space
gripper motion. By continuously recomputing the most
promising motor commands, our method continuously in-
tegrates sensory cues from the environment, allowing it to
react to perturbations and adjust the grasp to maximize the
probability of success. Furthermore, the motor commands
are issued in the frame of the robot, which is not known to
the model at test time. This means that the model does not
require the camera to be precisely calibrated with respect to
the end-effector, but instead uses visual cues to determine
the spatial relationship between the gripper and graspable
objects in the scene.
Our method consists of two components: a grasp success
predictor, which uses a deep convolutional neural network
(CNN) to determine how likely a given motion is to pro-
duce a successful grasp, and a continuous servoing mecha-
nism that uses the CNN to continuously update the robot’s
motor commands. By continuously choosing the best pre-
dicted path to a successful grasp, the servoing mechanism
provides the robot with fast feedback to perturbations and
object motion, as well as robustness to inaccurate actuation.
The grasp prediction CNN was trained using a dataset of
over 800,000 grasp attempts, collected using a cluster of
similar (but not identical) robotic manipulators, shown in
Figure 1, over the course of several months. Although the
hardware parameters of each robot were initially identi-
cal, each unit experienced different wear and tear over the
course of data collection, interacted with different objects,
and used a slightly different camera pose relative to the
robot base. These differences provided a diverse dataset for
learning continuous hand-eye coordination for grasping.
The main contributions of this work are a method for learn-
ing continuous visual servoing for robotic grasping from
monocular cameras, a novel convolutional neural network
architecture for learning to predict the outcome of a grasp
attempt, and a large-scale data collection framework for
robotic grasps. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates
that our convolutional neural network grasping controller
achieves a high success rate when grasping in clutter on
a wide range of objects, including objects that are large,
small, hard, soft, deformable, and translucent. Supplemen-
tal videos of our grasping system show that the robot em-
ploys continuous feedback to constantly adjust its grasp,
accounting for motion of the objects and inaccurate actu-
ation commands. We also compare our approach to open-
loop alternative designs to demonstrate the importance of
continuous feedback, as well as a hand-engineering grasp-
ing baseline that uses manual hand-to-eye calibration and
depth sensing. Our method achieves the highest success
rates in our experiments.

2. Related Work
Robotic grasping is one of the most widely explored areas
of manipulation. While a complete survey of grasping is
outside the scope of this work, we refer the reader to stan-
dard surveys on the subject for a more complete treatment
(Bohg et al., 2014). Broadly, grasping methods can be cat-
egorized as geometrically driven and data-driven. Geomet-
ric methods analyze the shape of a target object and plan a
suitable grasp pose, based on criteria such as force closure
(Weisz & Allen, 2012) or caging (Rodriguez et al., 2012).
These methods typically need to understand the geometry
of the scene, using depth or stereo sensors and matching
of previously scanned models to observations (Goldfeder
et al., 2009b).
Data-driven methods take a variety of different forms, in-
cluding human-supervised methods that predict grasp con-
ﬁgurations (Herzog et al., 2014; Lenz et al., 2015) and
methods that predict ﬁnger placement from geometric cri-
teria computed ofﬂine (Goldfeder et al., 2009a). Both types
of data-driven grasp selection have recently incorporated
deep learning (Kappler et al., 2015; Lenz et al., 2015; Red-
mon & Angelova, 2015). Feedback has been incorporated
into grasping primarily as a way to achieve the desired
forces for force closure and other dynamic grasping cri-
teria (Hudson et al., 2012), as well as in the form of stan-
dard servoing mechanisms, including visual servoing (de-
scribed below) to servo the gripper to a pre-planned grasp
pose (Kragic & Christensen, 2002). The method proposed
in this work is entirely data-driven, and does not rely on
any human annotation either at training or test time, in con-
trast to prior methods based on grasp points. Furthermore,
our approach continuously adjusts the motor commands to
maximize grasp success, providing continuous feedback.
Comparatively little prior work has addressed direct visual
feedback for grasping, most of which requires manually de-
signed features to track the end effector (Vahrenkamp et al.,
2008; Hebert et al., 2012).
Our approach is most closely related to recent work on
self-supervised learning of grasp poses by Pinto & Gupta
(2015). This prior work proposed to learn a network to pre-
dict the optimal grasp orientation for a given image patch,
trained with self-supervised data collected using a heuris-
tic grasping system based on object proposals. In contrast
to this prior work, our approach achieves continuous hand-
eye coordination by observing the gripper and choosing the
best motor command to move the gripper toward a suc-
cessful grasp, rather than making open-loop predictions.
Furthermore, our approach does not require proposals or
crops of image patches and, most importantly, does not re-
quire calibration between the robot and the camera, since
the closed-loop servoing mechanism can compensate for
offsets due to differences in camera pose by continuously

Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

adjusting the motor commands. We trained our method us-
ing over 800,000 grasp attempts on a very large variety of
objects, which is more than an order of magnitude larger
than prior methods based on direct self-supervision (Pinto
& Gupta, 2015) and more than double the dataset size of
prior methods based on synthetic grasps from 3D scans
(Kappler et al., 2015).
In order to collect our grasp dataset, we parallelized data
collection across up to 14 separate robots. Aside from the
work of Pinto & Gupta (2015), prior large-scale grasp data
collection efforts have focused on collecting datasets of ob-
ject scans. For example, Dex-Net used a dataset of 10,000
3D models, combined with a learning framework to acquire
force closure grasps (Mahler et al., 2016), while the work
of Oberlin & Tellex (2015) proposed autonomously col-
lecting object scans using a Baxter robot. Oberlin & Tellex
(2015) also proposed parallelizing data collection across
multiple robots. More broadly, the ability of robotic sys-
tems to learn more quickly by pooling their collective ex-
perience has been proposed in a number of prior works, and
has been referred to as collective robot learning and an in-
stance of cloud robotics (Inaba et al., 2000; Kuffner, 2010;
Kehoe et al., 2013; 2015).
Another related area to our method is visual servoing,
which addresses moving a camera or end-effector to a de-
sired pose using visual feedback (Kragic & Christensen,
2002). In contrast to our approach, visual servoing meth-
ods are typically concerned with reaching a pose relative to
objects in the scene, and often (though not always) rely on
manually designed or speciﬁed features for feedback con-
trol (Espiau et al., 1992; Wilson et al., 1996; Vahrenkamp
et al., 2008; Hebert et al., 2012; Mohta et al., 2014). Pho-
tometric visual servoing uses a target image rather than
features (Caron et al., 2013), and several visual servoing
methods have been proposed that do not directly require
prior calibration between the robot and camera (Yoshimi &
Allen, 1994; J¨agersand et al., 1997; Kragic & Christensen,
2002). To the best of our knowledge, no prior learning-
based method has been proposed that uses visual servoing
to directly move into a pose that maximizes the probability
of success on a given task (such as grasping).
In order to predict the optimal motor commands to maxi-
mize grasp success, we use convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) trained on grasp success prediction. Although
the technology behind CNNs has been known for decades
(LeCun & Bengio, 1995), they have achieved remarkable
success in recent years on a wide range of challenging
computer vision benchmarks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), be-
coming the de facto standard for computer vision systems.
However, applications of CNNs to robotic control problems
has been less prevalent, compared to applications to passive
perception tasks such as object recognition (Krizhevsky

et al., 2012; Wohlhart & Lepetit, 2015), localization (Gir-
shick et al., 2014), and segmentation (Chen et al., 2014).
Several works have proposed to use CNNs for deep rein-
forcement learning applications, including playing video
games (Mnih et al., 2015), executing simple task-space
motions for visual servoing (Lampe & Riedmiller, 2013),
controlling simple simulated robotic systems (Watter et al.,
2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016), and performing a variety of
robotic manipulation tasks (Levine et al., 2015). Many
of these applications have been in simple or synthetic do-
mains, and all of them have focused on relatively con-
strained environments with small datasets.

3. Overview
Our approach to learning hand-eye coordination for grasp-
ing consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part is a prediction net-
work g(It, vt) that accepts visual input It and a task-space
motion command vt, and outputs the predicted probabil-
ity that executing the command vt will produce a success-
ful grasp. The second part is a servoing function f (It)
that uses the prediction network to continuously control
the robot to servo the gripper to a success grasp. We de-
scribe each of these components below: Section 4.1 for-
mally deﬁnes the task solved by the prediction network and
describes the network architecture, Section 4.2 describes
how the servoing function can use the prediction network
to perform continuous control.
By breaking up the hand-eye coordination system into
components, we can train the CNN grasp predictor using a
standard supervised learning objective, and design the ser-
voing mechanism to utilize this predictor to optimize grasp
performance. The resulting method can be interpreted as
a type of reinforcement learning, and we discuss this in-
terpretation, together with the underlying assumptions, in
Section 4.3.
In order to train our prediction network, we collected over
800,000 grasp attempts using a set of similar (but not iden-
tical) robotic manipulators, shown in Figure 1. We discuss
the details of our hardware setup in Section 5.1, and discuss
the data collection process in Section 5.2. To ensure gener-
alization of the learned prediction network, the speciﬁc pa-
rameters of each robot varied in terms of the camera pose
relative to the robot, providing independence to camera cal-
ibration. Furthermore, uneven wear and tear on each robot
resulted in differences in the shape of the gripper ﬁngers.
Although accurately predicting optimal motion vectors in
open-loop is not possible with this degree of variation, as
demonstrated in our experiments, our continuous servoing
method can correct mistakes by observing the outcomes of
its past actions, achieving a high success rate even without
knowledge of the precise camera calibration.

Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

I0

It

Figure 2. Example input image pair provided to the network,
overlaid with lines to indicate sampled target grasp positions. Col-
ors indicate their probabilities of success: green is 1.0 and red is
0.0. The grasp positions are projected onto the image using a
known calibration only for visualization. The network does not
receive the projections of these poses onto the image, only offsets
from the current gripper position in the frame of the robot.

4. Grasping with Convolutional Networks and

Continuous Servoing

In this section, we discuss each component of our ap-
proach, including a description of the neural network ar-
chitecture and the servoing mechanism, and conclude with
an interpretation of the method as a form of reinforcement
learning, including the corresponding assumptions on the
structure of the decision problem.

4.1. Grasp Success Prediction with Convolutional

Neural Networks

The grasp prediction network g(It, vt) is trained to pre-
dict whether a given task-space motion vt will result in a
successful grasp, based on the current camera observation
It. In order to make accurate predictions, g(It, vt) must be
able to parse the current camera image, locate the gripper,
and determine whether moving the gripper according to vt
will put it in a position where closing the ﬁngers will pick
up an object. This is a complex spatial reasoning task that
requires not only the ability to parse the geometry of the
scene from monocular images, but also the ability to inter-
pret material properties and spatial relationships between
objects, which strongly affect the success of a given grasp.
A pair of example input images for the network is shown
in Figure 2, overlaid with lines colored accordingly to the
inferred grasp success probabilities. Importantly, the move-
ment vectors provided to the network are not transformed
into the frame of the camera, which means that the method
does not require hand-to-eye camera calibration. However,
this also means that the network must itself infer the out-
come of a task-space motor command by determining the
orientation and position of the robot and gripper.
Data for training the CNN grasp predictor is obtained by at-

I i
t

pi
t
pi
T
vi
t

pi
t

pi
T

Figure 3. Diagram of the grasp sample setup. Each grasp i con-
sists of T time steps, with each time step corresponding to
t and pose pi
an image I i
t. The ﬁnal dataset contains samples
T − pi
t, (cid:96)i) that consist of the image, a vector from the cur-
(I i
rent pose to the ﬁnal pose, and the grasp success label.

t , pi

T − pi

t , pi

t and the current pose pi

tempting grasps using real physical robots. Each grasp con-
sists of T time steps. At each time step, the robot records
t, and then
the current image I i
chooses a direction along which to move the gripper. At the
ﬁnal time step T , the robot closes the gripper and evaluates
the success of the grasp (as described in Appendix B), pro-
ducing a label (cid:96)i. Each grasp attempt results in T training
t, (cid:96)i). That is, each sample
samples, given by (I i
includes the image observed at that time step, the vector
from the current pose to the one that is eventually reached,
and the success of the entire grasp. This process is illus-
trated in Figure 3. This procedure trains the network to
predict whether moving a gripper along a given vector and
then grasping will produce a successful grasp. Note that
this differs from the standard reinforcement-learning set-
ting, where the prediction is based on the current state and
motor command, which in this case is given by pt+1 − pt.
We discuss the interpretation of this approach in the context
of reinforcement learning in Section 4.3.
The architecture of our grasp prediction CNN is shown in
Figure 4. The network takes the current image It as input,
as well as an additional image I0 that is recorded before
the grasp begins, and does not contain the gripper. This ad-
ditional image provides an unoccluded view of the scene.
The two input images are concatenated and processed by
5 convolutional layers with batch normalization (Ioffe &
Szegedy, 2015), following by max pooling. After the 5th
layer, we provide the vector vt as input to the network. The
vector is represented by 5 values: a 3D translation vector,
and a sine-cosine encoding of the change in orientation of

Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

Figure 4. The architecture of our CNN grasp predictor. The input image It, as well as the pregrasp image I0, are fed into a 6 × 6
convolution with stride 2, followed by 3 × 3 max-pooling and 6 5 × 5 convolutions. This is followed by a 3 × 3 max-pooling layer. The
motor command vt is processed by one fully connected layer, which is then pointwise added to each point in the response map of pool2
by tiling the output over the special dimensions. The result is then processed by 6 3 × 3 convolutions, 2 × 2 max-pooling, 3 more 3 × 3
convolutions, and two fully connected layers with 64 units, after which the network outputs the probability of a successful grasp through
a sigmoid. Each convolution is followed by batch normalization.

the gripper about the vertical axis.1 To provide this vec-
tor to the convolutional network, we pass it through one
fully connected layer and replicate it over the spatial di-
mensions of the response map after layer 5, concatenating
it with the output of the pooling layer. After this concate-
nation, further convolution and pooling operations are ap-
plied, as described in Figure 4, followed by a set of small
fully connected layers that output the probability of grasp
success, trained with a cross-entropy loss to match (cid:96)i, caus-
ing the network to output p((cid:96)i = 1). The input matches are
512 × 512 pixels, and we randomly crop the images to a
472 × 472 region during training to provide for translation
invariance.
Once trained the network g(It, vt) can predict the proba-
bility of success of a given motor command, independently
of the exact camera pose. In the next section, we discuss
how this grasp success predictor can be used to continuous
servo the gripper to a graspable object.

4.2. Continuous Servoing

In this section, we describe the servoing mechanism f (It)
that uses the grasp prediction network to choose the motor
commands for the robot that will maximize the probabil-
ity of a success grasp. The most basic operation for the
servoing mechanism is to perform inference in the grasp
predictor, in order to determine the motor command vt
given an image It. The simplest way of doing this is to
randomly sample a set of candidate motor commands vt
and then evaluate g(It, vt), taking the command with the

1In this work, we only consider vertical pinch grasps, though
extensions to other grasp parameterizations would be straightfor-
ward.

highest probability of success. However, we can obtain bet-
ter results by running a small optimization on vt, which
we perform using the cross-entropy method (CEM) (Ru-
binstein & Kroese, 2004). CEM is a simple derivative-free
optimization algorithm that samples a batch of N values
at each iteration, ﬁts a Gaussian distribution to M < N of
these samples, and then samples a new batch of N from this
Gaussian. We use N = 64 and M = 6 in our implementa-
tion, and perform three iterations of CEM to determine the
best available command v(cid:63)
t and thus evaluate f (It). New
motor commands are issued as soon as the CEM optimiza-
tion completes, and the controller runs at around 2 to 5 Hz.
One appealing property of this sampling-based approach is
that we can easily impose constraints on the types of grasps
that are sampled. This can be used, for example, to incor-
porate user commands that require the robot to grasp in a
particular location, keep the robot from grasping outside of
the workspace, and obey joint limits. It also allows the ser-
voing mechanism to control the height of the gripper during
each move. It is often desirable to raise the gripper above
the objects in the scene to reposition it to a new location,
for example when the objects move (due to contacts) or if
errors due to lack of camera calibration produce motions
that do not position the gripper in a favorable conﬁguration
for grasping.
We can use the predicted grasp success p((cid:96) = 1) produced
by the network to inform a heuristic for raising and lower-
ing the gripper, as well as to choose when to stop moving
and attempt a grasp. We use two heuristics in particular:
ﬁrst, we close the gripper whenever the network predicts
that (It,∅), where ∅ corresponds to no motion, will succeed
with a probability that is at least 90% of the best inferred
motion v(cid:63)
t . The rationale behind this is to stop the grasp

3 channels64 filtersconv1image inputs6x6 conv + ReLUstride 24724723 channels4724723x3 max pool64 filterspool164 filtersconv25x5 conv + ReLU64 filtersconv73x3 max pool64 filterspool23x3 conv + ReLU64 filtersconv864 filtersconv132x2 max pool64 filterspool33x3 conv + ReLU64 filtersconv1464 filtersconv1664 units64 unitsgraspsuccessprobability+64tiledvectorspatialtiling64 unitsfully conn. + ReLUfully conn. + ReLUfully conn.ReLUmotor commandrepeated5x5 conv + ReLUrepeated3x3 conv + ReLUrepeated3x3 conv + ReLUmotor commandvtItI0Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

early if closing the gripper is nearly as likely to produce a
successful grasp as moving it. The second heuristic is to
raise the gripper off the table when (It,∅) has a probabil-
ity of success that is less than 50% of v(cid:63)
t . The rationale
behind this choice is that, if closing the gripper now is sub-
stantially worse than moving it, the gripper is most likely
not positioned in a good conﬁguration, and a large motion
will be required. Therefore, raising the gripper off the ta-
ble minimizes the chance of hitting other objects that are
in the way. While these heuristics are somewhat ad-hoc,
we found that they were effective for successfully grasping
a wide range of objects in highly cluttered situations, as
discussed in Section 6. Pseudocode for the servoing mech-
anism f (It) is presented in Algorithm 1. Further details on
the servoing mechanism are presented in Appendix A.

monocular RGB
camera

7 DoF robotic
manipulator

2-ﬁnger
gripper

object
bin

t using g and CEM.

Algorithm 1 Servoing mechanism f (It)
1: Given current image It and network g.
2: Infer v(cid:63)
3: Evaluate p = g(It,∅)/g(It, v(cid:63)
t ).
4: if p = 0.9 then
5:
6: else if p ≤ 0.5 then
7: Modify v(cid:63)
8: else
9:
10: end if

Output ∅, close gripper.

t to raise gripper height and execute v(cid:63)
t .

Execute v(cid:63)
t .

4.3. Interpretation as Reinforcement Learning

One interesting conceptual question raised by our approach
is the relationship between training the grasp prediction
network and reinforcement learning.
In the case where
T = 2, and only one decision is made by the servoing
mechanism, the grasp network can be regarded as approxi-
mating the Q-function for the policy deﬁned by the servo-
ing mechanism f (It) and a reward function that is 1 when
the grasp succeeds and 0 otherwise. Repeatedly deploy-
ing the latest grasp network g(It, vt), collecting additional
data, and reﬁtting g(It, vt) can then be regarded as ﬁtted Q
iteration (Antos et al., 2008). However, what happens when
T > 2? In that case, ﬁtted Q iteration would correspond
to learning to predict the ﬁnal probability of success from
tuples of the form (It, pt+1 − pt), which is substantially
harder, since pt+1 − pt doesn’t tell us where the gripper
will end up at the end, before closing (which is pT ).
Using pT − pt as the action representation in ﬁtted Q itera-
tion therefore implies an additional assumption on the form
of the dynamics. The assumption is that the actions induce
a transitive relation between states:
that is, that moving
from p1 to p2 and then to p3 is equivalent to moving from
p1 to p3 directly. This assumption does not always hold
in the case of grasping, since an intermediate motion might
move objects in the scene, but it is a reasonable approxima-
tion that we found works quite well in practice. The major

Figure 5. Diagram of a single robotic manipulator used in our data
collection process. Each unit consisted of a 7 degree of freedom
arm with a 2-ﬁnger gripper, and a camera mounted over the shoul-
der of the robot. The camera recorded monocular RGB and depth
images, though only the monocular RGB images were used for
grasp success prediction.

advantage of this approximation is that ﬁtting the Q func-
tion reduces to a prediction problem, and avoids the usual
instabilities associated with Q iteration, since the previous
Q function does not appear in the regression. An interest-
ing and promising direction for future work is to combine
our approach with more standard reinforcement learning
formulations that do consider the effects of intermediate
actions. This could enable the robot, for example, to per-
form nonprehensile manipulations to intentionally reorient
and reposition objects prior to grasping.

5. Large-Scale Data Collection
In order to collect training data to train the prediction net-
work g(It, vt), we used between 6 and 14 robotic manipu-
lators at any given time. An illustration of our data collec-
tion setup is shown in Figure 1. This section describes the
robots used in our data collection process, as well as details
of the data collection procedure.

5.1. Hardware Setup

Our robotic manipulator platform consists of a lightweight
7 degree of freedom arm, a compliant, underactuated, two-
ﬁnger gripper, and a camera mounted behind the arm look-
ing over the shoulder. An illustration of a single robot is
shown in Figure 5. The underactuated gripper provides
some degree of compliance for oddly shaped objects, at
the cost of producing a loose grip that is prone to slipping.
An interesting property of this gripper was uneven wear
and tear over the course of data collection, which lasted

Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

Figure 6. Images from the cameras of each of the robots during training, with each robot holding the same joint conﬁguration. Note
the variation in the bin location, the difference in lighting conditions, the difference in pose of the camera relative to the robot, and the
variety of training objects.

started with random motor command selection and T = 2.2
When executing completely random motor commands, the
robots were successful on 10% - 30% of the grasp attempts,
depending on the particular objects in front of them. About
half of the dataset was collected using random grasps, and
the rest used the latest network ﬁtted to all of the data col-
lected so far. Over the course of data collection, we up-
dated the network 4 times, and increased the number of
steps from T = 2 at the beginning to T = 10 at the end.
The objects for grasping were chosen among common
household and ofﬁce items, and ranged from a 4 to 20 cm
in length along the longest axis. Some of these objects are
shown in Figure 6. The objects were placed in front of
the robots into metal bins with sloped sides to prevent the
objects from becoming wedged into corners. The objects
were periodically swapped out to increase the diversity of
the training data.
Grasp success was evaluated using two methods: ﬁrst, we
marked a grasp as successful if the position reading on the
gripper was greater than 1 cm, indicating that the ﬁngers
had not closed fully. However, this method often missed
thin objects, and we also included a drop test, where the
robot picked up the object, recorded an image of the bin,
and then dropped any object that was in the gripper. By
comparing the image before and after the drop, we could
determine whether any object had been picked up.

6. Experiments
To evaluate our continuous grasping system, we conducted
a series of quantitative experiments with novel objects that
were not seen during training. The particular objects used
in our evaluation are shown in Figure 8. This set of objects
presents a challenging cross section of common ofﬁce and
2The last command is always vT = ∅ and corresponds to clos-

ing the gripper without moving.

Figure 7. The grippers of the robots used for data collection at the
end of our experiments. Different robots experienced different de-
grees of wear and tear, resulting in signiﬁcant variation in gripper
appearance and geometry.

several months. Images of the grippers of various robots
are shown in Figure 7, illustrating the range of variation in
gripper wear and geometry. Furthermore, the cameras were
mounted at slightly varying angles, providing a different
viewpoint for each robot. The views from the cameras of
all 14 robots during data collection are shown in Figure 6.

5.2. Data Collection

We collected about 800,000 grasp attempts over the course
of two months, using between 6 and 14 robots at any given
point in time, without any manual annotation or supervi-
sion. The only human intervention into the data collection
process was to replace the object in the bins in front of the
robots and turn on the system. The data collection process

Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

ﬁrst 20
(N = 80)
70.0%
35.0%
38.7%
17.5%

ﬁrst 30
(N = 120)
72.5%
50.8%
33.7%
17.5%

failure rate (N = 100)

without
ﬁrst 10
replacement
(N = 40)
random
67.5%
hand-designed 32.5%
open loop
27.5%
10.0%
our method
with
replacement
random
69%
hand-designed 35%
43%
open loop
20%
our method

Table 1. Failure rates of each method for each evaluation condi-
tion. When evaluating without replacement, we report the failure
rate on the ﬁrst 10, 20, and 30 grasp attempts, averaged over 4
repetitions of the experiment.

jects. To address this shortcoming of the replacement con-
dition, we also tested each system without replacement, as
shown in Figure 8, by having it remove objects from a bin.
For this condition, which we refer to as “without replace-
ment,” we repeated each experiment 4 times, and we report
success rates on the ﬁrst 10, 20, and 30 grasp attempts.

6.2. Comparisons

The results are presented in Table 1. The success rate of
our continuous servoing method exceeded the baseline and
prior methods in all cases. For the evaluation without re-
placement, our method cleared the bin completely after 30
grasps on one of the 4 attempts, and had only one object
left in the other 3 attempts (which was picked up on the
31st grasp attempt in 2 of the three cases, thus clearing the
bin). The hand-engineered baseline struggled to accurately
resolve graspable objects in clutter, since the camera was
positioned about a meter away from the table, and its per-
formance also dropped in the non-replacement case as the
bin was emptied, leaving only small, ﬂat objects that could
not be resolved by the depth camera. Many practical grasp-
ing systems use a wrist-mounted camera to address this is-
sue (Leeper et al., 2014). In contrast, our approach did not
require any special hardware modiﬁcations. The open-loop
baseline was also substantially less successful. Although
it beneﬁtted from the large dataset collected by our paral-
lelized data collection setup, which was more than an or-
der of magnitude larger than in prior work (Pinto & Gupta,
2015), it was unable to react to perturbations, movement of
objects, and variability in actuation and gripper shape.3

3The absolute performance of the open-loop method is lower
than reported by Pinto & Gupta (2015). This can be attributed to
differences in the setup: different objects, grippers, and clutter.

Figure 8. Previously unseen objects used for testing (left) and the
setup for grasping without replacement (right). The test set in-
cluded heavy, light, ﬂat, large, small, rigid, soft, and translucent
objects.

household items, including objects that are heavy, such as
staplers and tape dispensers, objects that are ﬂat, such as
post-it notes, as well as objects that are small, large, rigid,
soft, and translucent.

6.1. Experimental Setup

The goal of our evaluation was to answer the following
questions: (1) does continuous servoing signiﬁcantly im-
prove grasping accuracy and success rate? (2) how well
does our learning-based system perform when compared
to alternative approaches? To answer question (1), we
compared our approach to an open-loop method that ob-
serves the scene prior to the grasp, extracts image patches,
chooses the patch with the highest probability of a suc-
cessful grasp, and then uses a known camera calibration to
move the gripper to that location. This method is analogous
to the approach proposed by Pinto & Gupta (2015), but uses
the same network architecture as our method and the same
training set. We refer to this approach as “open loop,” since
it does not make use of continuous visual feedback. To an-
swer question (2), we also compared our approach to a ran-
dom baseline method, as well as a hand-engineered grasp-
ing system that uses depth images and heuristic positioning
of the ﬁngers. This hand-engineered system is described
in Appendix C. Note that our method requires fewer as-
sumptions than either of the two alternative methods: un-
like Pinto & Gupta (2015), we do not require knowledge
of the camera to hand calibration, and unlike the hand-
engineered system, we do not require either the calibration
or depth images.
We evaluated the methods using two experimental proto-
cols. In the ﬁrst protocol, the objects were placed into a bin
in front of the robot, and it was allowed to grasp objects
for 100 attempts, placing any grasped object back into the
bin after each attempt. Grasping with replacement tests the
ability of the system to pick up objects in cluttered settings,
but it also allows the robot to repeatedly pick up easy ob-

Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

Figure 9. Grasps chosen for objects with similar appearance but
different material properties. Note that the soft sponge was
grasped with a very different strategy from the hard objects.

without
ﬁrst 10
replacement
N = 40
12%: M = 182,249
52.5%
25%: M = 407,729
30.0%
50%: M = 900,162
25.0%
100%: M = 2,898,410 10.0%

ﬁrst 20
N = 80
45.0%
32.5%
22.5%
17.5%

ﬁrst 30
N = 120
47.5%
36.7%
25.0%
17.5%

Table 2. Failure rates of our method for varying dataset sizes,
where M speciﬁes the number of images in the training set, and
the datasets correspond roughly to the ﬁrst eighth, quarter, and
half of the full dataset used by our method. Note that performance
continues to improve as the amount of data increases.

6.3. Evaluating Data Requirements

In Table 2, we evaluate the performance of our model under
the no replacement condition with varying amounts of data.
We trained grasp prediction models using roughly the ﬁrst
12%, 25%, and 50% of the grasp attempts in our dataset, to
simulate the effective performance of the model one eighth,
one quarter, and one half of the way through the data col-
lection process. Table 2 shows the size of each dataset in
terms of the number of images. Note that the length of the
trajectories changed over the course of data collection, in-
creasing from T = 2 at the beginning to T = 10 at the end,
so that the later datasets are substantially larger in terms
of the total number of images. Furthermore, the success
rate in the later grasp attempts was substantially higher, in-
creasing from 10 to 20% in the beginning to around 70% at
the end (using -greedy exploration with  = 0.1, meaning
that one in ten decisions was taken at random). Nonethe-
less, these results can be informative for understanding the
data requirements of the grasping task. First, the results
suggest that the grasp success rate continued to improve as
more data was accumulated, and a high success rate (ex-
ceeding the open-loop and hand-engineered baselines) was
not observed until at least halfway through the data collec-

Figure 10. Examples of difﬁcult objects grasped by our algo-
rithm, including objects that are translucent, awkardly shaped,
and heavy.

tion process. The results also suggest that collecting addi-
tional data could further improve the accuracy of the grasp-
ing system, and we plan to experiment with larger datasets
in the future.

6.4. Qualitative Results

Qualitatively, our method exhibited some interesting be-
haviors. Figure 9 shows the grasps that were chosen for
soft and hard objects. Our system preferred to grasp softer
objects by embedding the ﬁnger into the center of the ob-
ject, while harder objects were grasped by placing the ﬁn-
gers on either side. Our method was also able to grasp a
variety of challenging objects, some of which are shown
in Figure 10. Other interesting grasp strategies, correc-
tions, and mistakes can be seen in our supplementary video:
https://youtu.be/cXaic_k80uM

7. Discussion and Future Work
We presented a method for learning hand-eye coordina-
tion for robotic grasping, using deep learning to build a
grasp success prediction network, and a continuous servo-
ing mechanism to use this network to continuously control
a robotic manipulator. By training on over 800,000 grasp
attempts from 14 distinct robotic manipulators with varia-
tion in camera pose, we can achieve invariance to camera
calibration and small variations in the hardware. Unlike
most grasping and visual servoing methods, our approach
does not require calibration of the camera to the robot, in-
stead using continuous feedback to correct any errors re-
sulting from discrepancies in calibration. Our experimental
results demonstrate that our method can effectively grasp a
wide range of different objects, including novel objects not
seen during training. Our results also show that our method
can use continuous feedback to correct mistakes and repo-
sition the gripper in response to perturbation and movement
of objects in the scene.
As with all learning-based methods, our approach assumes

Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

that the data distribution during training resembles the dis-
tribution at test-time. While this assumption is reason-
able for a large and diverse training set, such as the one
used in this work, structural regularities during data collec-
tion can limit generalization at test time. For example, al-
though our method exhibits some robustness to small vari-
ations in gripper shape, it would not readily generalize to
new robotic platforms that differ substantially from those
used during training. Furthermore, since all of our train-
ing grasp attempts were executed on ﬂat surfaces, the pro-
posed method is unlikely to generalize well to grasping on
shelves, narrow cubbies, or other drastically different set-
tings. These issues can be mitigated by increasing the di-
versity of the training setup, which we plan to explore as
future work.
One of the most exciting aspects of the proposed grasping
method is the ability of the learning algorithm to discover
unconventional and non-obvious grasping strategies. We
observed, for example, that the system tended to adopt a
different approach for grasping soft objects, as opposed to
hard ones. For hard objects, the ﬁngers must be placed
on either side of the object for a successful grasp. How-
ever, soft objects can be grasped simply by pinching into
the object, which is most easily accomplished by placing
one ﬁnger into the middle, and the other to the side. We
observed this strategy for objects such as paper tissues and
sponges. In future work, we plan to further explore the re-
lationship between our self-supervised continuous grasping
approach and reinforcement learning, in order to allow the
methods to learn a wider variety of grasp strategies from
large datasets of robotic experience.
At a more general level, our work explores the implications
of large-scale data collection across multiple robotic plat-
forms, demonstrating the value of this type of automatic
large dataset construction for real-world robotic tasks. Al-
though all of the robots in our experiments were located
in a controlled laboratory environment, in the long term,
this class of methods is particularly compelling for robotic
systems that are deployed in the real world, and there-
fore are naturally exposed to a wide variety of environ-
ments, objects, lighting conditions, and wear and tear. For
self-supervised tasks such as grasping, data collected and
shared by robots in the real world would be the most rep-
resentative of test-time inputs, and would therefore be the
best possible training data for improving the real-world per-
formance of the system. So a particularly exciting avenue
for future work is to explore how our method would need
to change to apply it to large-scale data collection across
a large number of deployed robots engaged in real world
tasks, including grasping and other manipulation skills.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Kurt Konolige and Mrinal Kalakr-
ishnan for additional engineering and insightful discus-
sions, Jed Hewitt, Don Jordan, and Aaron Weiss for help
with maintaining the robots, Max Bajracharya and Nico-
las Hudson for providing us with a baseline perception
pipeline, and Vincent Vanhoucke and Jeff Dean for support
and organization.

References
Antos, A., Szepesvari, C., and Munos, R. Fitted Q-Iteration
in Continuous Action-Space MDPs. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems, 2008.

Bohg, J., Morales, A., Asfour, T., and Kragic, D. Data-
Driven Grasp Synthesis A Survey. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, 30(2):289–309, 2014.

Caron, G., Marchand, E., and Mouaddib, E. Photometric
visual servoing for omnidirectional cameras. Autonou-
mous Robots, 35(2):177–193, October 2013.

Chen, L., Papandreou, G., Kokkinos, I., Murphy, K., and
Yuille, A.L. Semantic Image Segmentation with Deep
Convolutional Nets and Fully Connected CRFs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.7062, 2014.

Espiau, B., Chaumette, F., and Rives, P. A New Approach
to Visual Servoing in Robotics. IEEE Transactions on
Robotics and Automation, 8(3), 1992.

Girshick, R., Donahue, J., Darrell, T., and Malik, J. Rich
feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and se-
mantic segmentation. In IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2014.

Goldfeder, C., Ciocarlie, M., Dang, H., and Allen, P.K. The
Columbia Grasp Database. In IEEE International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1710–1716,
2009a.

Goldfeder, C., Ciocarlie, M., Peretzman, J., Dang, H., and
Allen, P. K. Data-Driven Grasping with Partial Sensor
Data. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems, pp. 1278–1283, 2009b.

Hebert, P., Hudson, N., Ma, J., Howard, T., Fuchs, T., Ba-
jracharya, M., and Burdick, J. Combined Shape, Appear-
ance and Silhouette for Simultaneous Manipulator and
Object Tracking. In IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, pp. 2405–2412. IEEE, 2012.

Herzog, A., Pastor, P., Kalakrishnan, M., Righetti, L.,
Bohg, J., Asfour, T., and Schaal, S.
Learning of
Grasp Selection based on Shape-Templates. Autonomous
Robots, 36(1-2):51–65, 2014.

Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

Hudson, N., Howard, T., Ma, J., Jain, A., Bajracharya, M.,
Myint, S., Kuo, C., Matthies, L., Backes, P., and Hebert,
P. End-to-End Dexterous Manipulation with Deliberate
In IEEE International Confer-
Interactive Estimation.
ence on Robotics and Automation, pp. 2371–2378, 2012.

Inaba, M., Kagami, S., Kanehiro, F., and Hoshino,
Y. A platform for robotics research based on the
International Journal
remote-brained robot approach.
of Robotics Research, 19(10), 2000.

Ioffe, S. and Szegedy, C. Batch Normalization: Acceler-
ating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Co-
In International Conference on Machine
variate Shift.
Learning, 2015.

J¨agersand, M., Fuentes, O., and Nelson, R. C. Experimen-
tal Evaluation of Uncalibrated Visual Servoing for Pre-
cision Manipulation. In IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, 1997.

Kappler, D., Bohg, B., and Schaal, S. Leveraging Big Data
for Grasp Planning. In IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, 2015.

Kehoe, B., Matsukawa, A., Candido, S., Kuffner, J., and
Goldberg, K. Cloud-based robot grasping with the
google object recognition engine. In IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2013.

Kehoe, B., Patil, S., Abbeel, P., and Goldberg, K. A sur-
vey of research on cloud robotics and automation. IEEE
Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering,
12(2):398–409, April 2015.

Kragic, D. and Christensen, H. I. Survey on Visual Servo-
ing for Manipulation. Computational Vision and Active
Perception Laboratory, 15, 2002.

Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E.

Im-
ageNet Classiﬁcation with Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, pp. 1097–1105, 2012.

Kuffner, J. Cloud-enabled humanoid robots. In IEEE-RAS
International Conference on Humanoid Robotics, 2010.

Lampe, T. and Riedmiller, M. Acquiring Visual Servoing
Reaching and Grasping Skills using Neural Reinforce-
In International Joint Conference on
ment Learning.
Neural Networks, pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2013.

LeCun, Y. and Bengio, Y. Convolutional networks for im-
ages, speech, and time series. The Handbook of Brain
Theory and Neural Networks, 3361(10), 1995.

Leeper, A., Hsiao, K., Chu, E., and Salisbury, J.K. Using
Near-Field Stereo Vision for Robotic Grasping in Clut-
tered Environments. In Experimental Robotics, pp. 253–
267. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014.

Lenz, I., Lee, H., and Saxena, A. Deep Learning for De-
tecting Robotic Grasps. The International Journal of
Robotics Research, 34(4-5):705–724, 2015.

Levine, S., Finn, C., Darrell, T., and Abbeel, P. End-to-end
Training of Deep Visuomotor Policies. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.00702, 2015.

Lillicrap, T., Hunt, J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa,
Y., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D. Continuous control with
In International Confer-
deep reinforcement learning.
ence on Learning Representations, 2016.

Mahler, J., Pokorny, F., Hou, B., Roderick, M., Laskey,
M., Aubry, M., Kohlhoff, K., Kr¨oger, T., Kuffner, J., and
Goldberg, K. Dex-Net 1.0: A cloud-based network of
3D objects for robust grasp planning using a multi-armed
bandit model with correlated rewards. In IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2016.

Mnih, V. et al. Human-level control through deep rein-
forcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.

Mohta, K., Kumar, V., and Daniilidis, K. Vision Based
Control of a Quadrotor for Perching on Planes and Lines.
In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation, 2014.

Oberlin, J. and Tellex, S.

instance-based object models from experience.
ternational Symposium on Robotics Research, 2015.

Autonomously acquiring
In In-

Pinto, L. and Gupta, A.

Supersizing self-supervision:
Learning to grasp from 50k tries and 700 robot hours.
CoRR, abs/1509.06825, 2015. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/1509.06825.

Redmon, J. and Angelova, A. Real-time grasp detection
In IEEE Inter-
using convolutional neural networks.
national Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp.
1316–1322, 2015.

Rodriguez, A., Mason, M. T., and Ferry, S. From Caging
to Grasping. The International Journal of Robotics Re-
search, 31(7):886–900, June 2012.

Rubinstein, R. and Kroese, D.

The Cross-Entropy
Method: A Uniﬁed Approach to Combinatorial Opti-
mization, Monte-Carlo Simulation, and Machine Learn-
ing. Springer-Verlag, 2004.

Siciliano, B. and Khatib, O.

Springer Handbook of
Robotics. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Secaucus,
NJ, USA, 2007.

Srinivasa, S., Berenson, D., Cakmak, M., Romea, A. C.,
Dogar, M., Dragan, A., Knepper, R. A., Niemueller,
T. D., Strabala, K., Vandeweghe, J. M., and Ziegler, J.

Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasping with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection

HERB 2.0: Lessons Learned from Developing a Mobile
Manipulator for the Home. Proceedings of the IEEE,
100(8):1–19, July 2012.

Vahrenkamp, N., Wieland, S., Azad, P., Gonzalez, D., As-
four, T., and Dillmann, R. Visual Servoing for Humanoid
Grasping and Manipulation Tasks. In 8th IEEE-RAS In-
ternational Conference on Humanoid Robots, pp. 406–
412, 2008.

Watter, M., Springenberg, J., Boedecker, J., and Riedmiller,
M. Embed to Control: A Locally Linear Latent Dynam-
ics Model for Control from Raw Images. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.

Weisz, J. and Allen, P. K. Pose Error Robust Grasping from
Contact Wrench Space Metrics. In IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 557–562,
2012.

Wilson, W. J., Hulls, C. W. Williams, and Bell, G. S.
Relative End-Effector Control Using Cartesian Position
Based Visual Servoing. IEEE Transactions on Robotics
and Automation, 12(5), 1996.

Wohlhart, P. and Lepetit, V. Learning Descriptors for Ob-
ject Recognition and 3D Pose Estimation. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 3109–3118, 2015.

Yoshimi, B. H. and Allen, P. K. Active, uncalibrated visual
servoing. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, 1994.

A. Servoing Implementation Details
In this appendix, we discuss the details of the inference
procedure we use to infer the motor command vt with the
highest probability of success, as well as additional details
of the servoing mechanism.
In our implementation, we performed inference using three
iterations of cross-entropy method (CEM). Each iteration
of CEM consists of sampling 64 sample grasp directions
vt from a Gaussian distribution with mean µ and covari-
ance Σ, selecting the 6 best grasp directions (i.e. the 90th
percentile), and reﬁtting µ and Σ to these 6 best grasps.
The ﬁrst iteration samples from a zero-mean Gaussian cen-
tered on the current pose of the gripper. All samples are
constrained (via rejection sampling) to keep the ﬁnal pose
of the gripper within the workspace, and to avoid rotations
of more than 180◦ about the vertical axis. In general, these
constraints could be used to control where in the scene the
robot attempts to grasp, for example to impose user con-
straints and command grasps at particular locations.

Since the CNN g(It, vt) was trained to predict the suc-
cess of grasps on sequences that always terminated with the
gripper on the table surface, we project all grasp directions
vt to the table height (which we assume is known) before
passing them into the network, although the actual grasp di-
rection that is executed may move the gripper above the ta-
ble, as shown in Algorithm 1. When the servoing algorithm
commands a gripper motion above the table, we choose the
height uniformly at random between 4 and 10 cm.
In our prototype,
the dimensions and position of the
workspace were set manually, by moving the arm into each
corner of the workspace and setting the corner coordinates.
In practice, the height of the table and the spatial extents of
the workspace could be obtained automatically, for exam-
ple by moving the arm until contact, or the user or higher-
level planning mechanism.

B. Determining Grasp Success
We employ two mechanisms to determine whether a grasp
attempt was successful. First, we check the state of the
gripper after the grasp attempt to determine whether the
ﬁngers closed completely. This simple test is effective
at detecting large objects, but can miss small or thin ob-
jects. To supplement this success detector, we also use an
image subtraction test, where we record an image of the
scene after the grasp attempt (with the arm lifted above the
workspace and out of view), and another image after at-
tempting to drop the grasped object into the bin. If no ob-
ject was grasped, these two images are usually identical. If
an object was picked up, the two images will be different.

C. Details of Hand-Engineered Grasping

System Baseline

The hand-engineered grasping system baseline results re-
ported in Table 1 were obtained using perception pipeline
that made use of the depth sensor instead of the monocu-
lar camera, and required extrinsic calibration of the camera
with respect to the base of the arm. The grasp conﬁgura-
tions were computed as follows: First, the point clouds ob-
tained from the depth sensor were accumulated into a voxel
map. Second, the voxel map was turned into a 3D graph
and segmented using standard graph based segmentation;
individual clusters were then further segmented from top
to bottom into “graspable objects” based on the width and
height of the region. Finally, a best grasp was computed
that aligns the ﬁngers centrally along the longer edges of
the bounding box that represents the object. This grasp
conﬁguration was then used as the target pose for a task-
space controller, which was identical to the controller used
for the open-loop baseline.

