The COSINUS project - perspectives of a NaI scintillating calorimeter for dark

matter search

G. Angloher,1 D. Hauﬀ,1 L. Gironi,2, 3 C. Gotti,2 G. Pessina,2 A. Gütlein,4 M. Maino,2 S.S. Nagorny,5

L. Pagnanini,5 F. Petricca,1 S. Pirro,6 F. Pröbst,1 F. Reindl,1, ∗ K. Schäﬀner,5, † J. Schieck,4 and W. Seidel1

1Max-Planck-Institut für Physik, D-80805 München - Germany

2INFN - Sezione di Milano Bicocca, Milano I-20126 - Italy

3Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Milano-Bicocca, Milano I-20126 - Italy

4Institut für Hochenergiephysik der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, A-1050
Wien - Austria and Atominstitut, Vienna University of Technology, A-1020 Wien - Austria

5Gran Sasso Science Institute, I-67100 L’Aquila - Italy

6INFN - Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso, Assergi (AQ) I-67010 - Italy

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
1
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The R&D project COSINUS (Cryogenic Observatory for SIgnatures seen in Next-generation Un-
derground Searches) aims to develop a cryogenic scintillating calorimeter using NaI as target crystal
for direct dark matter search. Dark matter particles interacting with the detector material generate
both a phonon signal and scintillation light. While the phonon signal provides a precise determi-
nation of the deposited energy, the simultaneously measured scintillation light allows for a particle
identiﬁcation on an event-by-event basis, a powerful tool to study material-dependent interactions,
and to suppress backgrounds. Using the same target material as the DAMA/LIBRA collaboration,
the COSINUS technique may oﬀer a unique possibility to investigate and contribute information to
the presently controversial situation in the dark matter sector. We report on the dedicated design
planned for the NaI proof-of-principle detector and the objectives of using this detection technique
in the light of direct dark matter detection.

I.

INTRODUCTION

In the era of precision cosmology we know that dark
matter [1] is ﬁve times more prevalent than baryonic mat-
ter in the Universe, and experimental evidence of dark
matter so far solely relies on gravitational interaction.
Among a long list of hypothetical new particles WIMPs
(Weakly Interacting Massive Particles) provide com-
pelling arguments as this class of candidates, with a mass
in the (GeV-TeV)/c2 region and weak-scale interactions,
may provide for a relic density that matches observation.
Participation of such particles in weak-scale interactions
would also allow for a direct detection in earth-bound
detectors via the process of elastic scattering oﬀ atomic
nuclei [2].
Since the expected recoil energies are in the sub-keV to
keV regime, depending on the mass of the dark matter
particle and the target material, the challenge of such di-
rect searches is to combine an ultra-low background with
a highly sensitive detection apparatus.

Present-date, the ﬁeld of direct dark matter search is
very active, with numerous experiments all over the world
aiming for further increase in size and sensitivity within
the next years.
Direct searches are designed to register signals in the de-
tector induced by the interacting particles. The involved
detection channels induced by such scattering processes
include light, charge and/or phonon signals. Experi-
ments are either based on a single or on a dual channel

∗ corresponding author:ﬂorian.reindl@mpp.mpg.de
† corresponding author:karoline.schaeﬀner@lngs.infn.it

readout. Which of the three channels are taken in consid-
eration depend on the respective target and the applied
detection technique. From the ﬁrst channel the energy
of the interacting particle is determined. In most cases
the second channel serves to identify the nature of the
interacting particle, thereby providing a powerful tool to
discriminate dark matter signals from background.
Dark matter searches may be further divided with re-
spect to the approach they use for detection: A numer-
ous class of experiments is optimized to look for nuclear
recoil events in a certain energy window where dark mat-
ter particles can induce signals. The number of observed
recoil events is consequently combined with model as-
sumptions, concerning e.g. the density of dark matter,
in order to derive properties of dark matter particles, as
e.g. their mass and scattering cross-section. Somewhat
diﬀerent therefrom, dark matter may also be identiﬁed
via an annual modulation signal caused by the seasonal
variation of the Earth’s velocity with respect to the dark
matter halo [3].
At present the situation in the sector of direct dark mat-
ter detection is controversial and a deﬁnite discovery
is still absent. Several experiments [4–6] detect events
above the known background level which allow to infer
properties of a dark matter particle. In particular, the
DAMA/LIBRA collaboration observes in more than 13
annual cycles a statistically robust modulation signal us-
ing a total of up to 250 kg of radiopure sodium iodide
(NaI(Tl)) crystals operated as room temperature scin-
tillating detectors in the Laboratori Nazionali del Gran
Sasso (LNGS), a deep underground site in central Italy.
At the same time, the DAMA/LIBRA signal is not con-
sistent, in the standard elastic scattering scenario, with
the null results of other direct detection experiments as

Light
detector

Phonon
detector

Thermal link
TES - light detector
Light absorbing beaker

NaI(undoped) crystal

Reﬂective and
scintillating foil

Interface
Carrier crystal
TES - crystal
Thermal link

FIG. 1. Concept of a COSINUS detector module consisting
of an undoped NaI target crystal and a beaker-shaped light
detector. Both detectors, operated at milli-Kelvin tempera-
tures, are read out by transition edge sensors (TES) and are
surrounded by a reﬂective and scintillating foil.

listed in legend and caption of 3. However,
in order
to compare the results of these experiments with the
DAMA/LIBRA modulation signal one has to take into
account astrophysical assumptions as well as assump-
tions on the physics of the scattering process of the dark
matter particle with the respective target materials. A
pure modulation signal instead can be considered model-
independent and, thus, has the potential to give a unique
and robust signature of new particles. Nonetheless, fu-
ture investigations are of pivotal importance to under-
stand the origin/composition of the modulation signal
observed by the DAMA/LIBRA collaboration either be-
ing due to dark matter or a diﬀerent, so far not under-
stood, physics phenomenon or background.

II. DETECTOR DESIGN

The objective of COSINUS (Cryogenic Observatory
for SIgnatures seen in Next-generation Underground
Searches) is the development of a cryogenic scintillat-
ing calorimeter using a NaI crystal as target - thereby
providing a NaI detector with the possibility for active
particle identiﬁcation on an event-by-event basis thanks
to the dual channel detection approach.
Particles scattering in NaI crystals do not only create
phonons, but also scintillation photons. At temperatures
of few milli-Kelvin, both the phonon signal in the crystal
and the signal arising from the absorption of scintilla-
tion photons in a suitable light absorber can be detected
by the use of superconducting thin ﬁlm thermometers:
As thin ﬁlm technology is diﬃcult to be directly ap-
plied to the hygroscopic NaI crystal, a carrier disk made
of a more robust scintillating material (e.g. CdWO4) is
planned to be used instead. The carrier disk (diam-
eter of (40-50) mm and about 1 mm thickness) is de-
signed to exceed in diameter the size of the NaI crystal

2

and carries the thermometer: A transition edge sensor
(TES) of CRESST-type consisting of a thin tungsten ﬁlm
(200 nm, W-TES) directly evaporated onto the carrier
crystal. The target crystals of undoped NaI can weigh
up to ∼200 g, depending on the achievable performance
in function of the crystal mass.
In order to eﬃciently reject any α-related background,
e.g. a recoiling nucleus, which could mimic a dark mat-
ter signal [7], there must not be any non-active surfaces
in the line-of-sight of the target crystal. An elegant way
to tag and reject such backgrounds is a completely active
surrounding of the crystal. Thus in COSINUS, the light
detector is planned to consist of a beaker-shaped work-
piece made from high purity silicon serving two purposes:
Scintillation light detection and a fully active surround-
ing of the target crystal. The beaker will exhibit dimen-
sions of about (40-50) mm in diameter and height, the
wall-thickness will be about 600 µm. The front face of the
polished silicon beaker will be equipped with a W-TES,
optimized in size for the purpose of light detection. De-
spite being quite macroscopic devices, such kind of light
detectors have shown to be highly performing, achieving
a baseline noise of below σ (cid:39) 10 eV1 [8]. For optimal
resolution and because of their low impedance, TESs are
usually read out with SQUID ampliﬁers [9].
With the help of a dedicated copper structure the target
crystal will be held inside the beaker-shaped light de-
tector. Since the carrier crystal is chosen to be slightly
larger in diameter than the target crystal and the light
detector, an almost 100% coverage of the target crystal
should be achievable. A schematic drawing thereof can
be seen in ﬁgure 1.

A particle interaction in the target crystal mainly in-
duces a thermal signal detected by the W-TES. This so-
called phonon-signal provides a precise measurement of
the deposited energy, independent of the type of particle
[7, 10], often referred to as unquenched channel.2 Inter-
actions which take place in the carrier crystal itself can
be discriminated from energy deposits in the NaI crystal
by pulse-shape analysis [8, 11].
Simultaneously to the phonon signal a small fraction of
the energy deposited in the NaI crystal is emitted in form
of scintillation light and detected by the high-purity sil-
icon light-absorbing beaker. The light signal allows to
identify the type of interacting particle, as the amount
of scintillation light strongly depends on it. Therefore,
the light to phonon ratio, referred to as light yield, is
characteristic for each type of event. Betas and gam-
mas produce the most light and get assigned a light yield
value of one by deﬁnition. Other types of particles (e.g.
α-particles, neutrons inducing nuclear recoils oﬀ iodine

1 Two beaker-shaped light detectors were operated in CRESST-II

phase 2.

2 The measured energy in the crystal is independent of the par-
ticle, when the small fraction of the energy, escaping in form of
scintillating light, is taken into account.

and sodium) exhibit a lower light yield quantiﬁed by the
so-called quenching factor [12, 13]. The QF is deﬁned as
the ratio of scintillation light produced by an interacting
particle of type X to the scintillation light produced by
a gamma of the same deposited energy.

The dual channel detection approach of COSINUS
aims to allow for a highly eﬃcient discrimination and
rejection of background events (e−/γs, α-particles) from
potential signal events (nuclear recoils) in the NaI target.
The low temperatures required for detector operation will
be supplied by a 3He/4He-dilution refrigerator. The test
cryostat of the Max-Planck-Institute is the favored choice
for all the measurements necessary for the ﬁrst basic pro-
totype testing. The hall C CUORE/CUPID R&D dilu-
tion refrigerator, since equipped with passive shielding
for means of background reduction, is considered for ﬁnal
prototype testing and a longer performance run. Both re-
frigerators are located in the LNGS underground site for
obvious reasons of shielding against cosmic radiation.
The results from CsI measurements give a ﬁrst refer-
ence point on the already achieved performance of an
alkali halide crystal operated as cryogenic calorimeter.
With a sequence of tests we commissioned the car-
rier crystal - absorber crystal concept and we achieved,
with two diﬀerent CsI crystals, an energy resolution of
0.95 keV/0.70 keV, corresponding to a trigger threshold
of 4.7 keV/ 3.5 keV [11].3

III. PERFORMANCE FROM SIMULATED

DATA

We base the performance estimate of a COSINUS de-

tector module on the following assumptions:

• light detector energy resolution from standard per-
formance of silicon beaker light detector operated
in CRESST-II phase 2 (σ = 0.11 keVee)

• phonon detector resolution of σ=0.2 keV (corre-

sponding to a threshold of 5σ = 1 keV),

• 4% of deposited energy in the NaI detected in the

light detector,

• a gross exposure (before cuts) of 100 kg-days.
Based on results from CRESST-II [14, 15], we con-
servatively estimate an eﬃciency of 50 % down to
an energy of 2 keV and a linear decrease to 20 %
eﬃciency at the threshold of 1 keV,

• a ﬂat background contribution down to energy
threshold of 1 count / (keV kg d) and an additional
contribution from 40K at a level of 600 µBq.

3 However, a standard CRESST-sized W-TES was used leaving
room for future sensitivity improvements via the optimization of
the W-TES for the given application.

3

FIG. 2. Simulated data for an exposure before cuts of 100 kg-
days applying certain performance assumptions as discussed
in detail in the text. The bands correspond to the following
event classes: electron recoils in black, scatterings oﬀ Na and
I in blue and green. Depicted in black dots are events origi-
nating from a ﬂat background contribution of 1 c/(keV kg d)
and a 40K contamination with an activity of 600 µBq. The
contribution from 40K is visible as a line at around 3 keV in
the e−/γ-band. A hypothetical WIMP scattering oﬀ I and Na
nuclei yields the events marked in red. In addition, the ma-
genta boxes indicate the regions which may contribute, apart
from the e−/γ-band, to the DAMA/LIBRA energy range of
positive modulation detection corresponding to 2-6 keVee.

In the following the above assumptions will be motivated
in more detail.
In COSINUS we aim to bring the performance of a NaI-
based detector in line with other scintillating bolomot-
ers, rendering an energy resolution of σ = 0.2 keV, corre-
sponding to an energy threshold of 1 keV, feasible. From
our understanding the key points to be addressed are the
optimization of the sensitivity of the TES itself and of
the interface between NaI crystal and carrier crystal.
In [11] we measured two CsI-crystals; in average around
7 % of the energy deposited in the crystal were deter-
mined as scintillation light (for an e−/γ-event). From
measurements in [16] it is known that CsI roughly emits
3.5 times more energy in form of scintillation light as
NaI. However, for COSINUS beaker-shaped light detec-
tors will be used which are found to collect more than
twice as much light the light detector of conventional
CRESST design used for the measurement in [11]. Thus,
in total we expect 7 %/3.5 · 2 = 4 % of the deposited en-
ergy in a NaI crystal to be detected in the light detector.
Using the above assumptions a simulation is carried
out - the outcome is depicted in the light yield-energy
plane in ﬁgure 2 with data points arising from simulated
contributions of e−/γ-events in black and a potential sig-
nal in red. To stick to the DAMA/LIBRA background
budget, an overall ﬂat background contribution of 1 count
/ (keV kg d) is assumed.
NaI crystals typically show a contamination with 40K
which undergoes an electron capture, either directly to

Energy (keV)10203040506070Light Yield-0.4-0.200.20.40.60.811.21.4 bandge/Na-recoilsI-recoilsBq) and flat background 1 c/(keV kg d)mK contribution (60040WIMP events from simulationthe ground state of 40Ar (0.2% branching ratio) or to an
excited state of 40Ar de-exciting by the emission of an
1.46 MeV gamma (10.55% branching ratio). Both pro-
cesses are accompanied by the energy releases of 3.2 keV
and 3 keV, respectively. This contamination makes up
for the line at about 3 keV in the e−/γ-band in ﬁgure 2
corresponding to a 40K-activity of 600 µBq as measured
by the DAMA/LIBRA collaboration [17].
The bands in ﬁgure 2 are calculated on the basis of the
bands determined in the CsI measurement (a detailed de-
scription on the underlying model is e.g. given in [12]),
the experience of beaker-shaped light detectors operated
in CRESST and the assumptions listed above. Thereby,
the lines depict the lower and upper 90%-boundaries for
the bands corresponding to diﬀerent event classes to be
observed in NaI (electron recoils in black, nuclear recoils
of Na and I in blue and green, respectively). Thus, in
between two corresponding lines 80% of the events of the
respective event class are expected. The widths of the
bands is dominated by two eﬀects: Firstly by ﬁnite base-
line resolution of phonon and light detector and secondly
by Poissonian ﬂuctuations in the number of scintillation
photons produced. The mean of a band obviously de-
pends on the type of particle and the respective quench-
ing factor. For scatterings oﬀ Na and I we use the energy-
dependent values reported by Tretyak et al. [13].
In summary, the overall e−/γ-background (black dots)
is given by the 40K contamination on top of the con-
stant background level of 1 count / (keV kg d). With the
performance and backgrounds assumed, we expect ﬁve
counts below the mean of the Na-band for a gross ex-
posure of 100 kg-days and an energy threshold of 1 keV.
Thereby, one half of the counts originate from the con-
stant background and the other half from the 40K con-
tamination, which roughly corresponds to 0.9% of the
activity in the full double-peak. The expected leak-
age quickly drops with increasing energy, due to the
enhanced separation between e−/γ-band and Na-band.
Additionally, the above numbers show that the leakage
is to a large extent caused by the 40K contamination
yielding a considerably diminishing leakage for energies
above 3 keV, where we expect less than one leakage event
(for 100 kg-days before cuts), which is commonly denoted
background-free. Considering leakage to the full 80%
Na-band (as depicted in ﬁgure 2) the values change to
26 events expected above the threshold of 1 keV, out of
which 13 events are attributed to 40K-origin. For the
complete Na-band the anticipated leakage drops below
one event at 3.9 keV.
Because of this high discrimination power we can tolerate
a moderate level of e−/γ-background, in particular orig-
inating from 40K, while still maintaining high sensitivity
for a nuclear recoil signal - a distinct feature of COSI-
NUS compared to other NaI-based dark matter searches
[6, 18–20].
The red events in ﬁgure 2 result from a contribution of a
hypothetical WIMP of 10 GeV/c2 and 0.0002 pb which is
consistent with the interpretation of the DAMA/LIBRA

4

modulation signal by Savage et al. [21]. The blue-colored
islands in ﬁgure 3 correspond to the DAMA/LIBRA sig-
nal regions for scatterings of Na and I. For clarity we
indicated the assumed dark matter particle mass and nu-
cleon cross-section for the simulated data presented here
in form of a blue benchmark point (see ﬁgure 2).
What concerns the distribution of the hypothetical
WIMP events we ﬁnd in the simulation a total of 2386
events in the energy window (1-6) keV. About 45% of
these events are present in the energy interval from (1-
2) keV and about 53% within (2-6) keV. These numbers
clearly show the beneﬁt of a low threshold. Despite
the conservative assumption on the cut eﬃciency being
20 % at threshold energy, the number of expected events
roughly doubles when lowering the threshold from 2 keV
to 1 keV, which is attributed to the anticipated exponen-
tial rise of the dark matter recoil spectrum. Above an
energy of 6 keV (up to 100 keV) we ﬁnd a total of 46
events.
Since WIMPs are expected to scatter coherently oﬀ the
nucleus as a whole, the cross-section scales quadratically
with the atomic mass number (A2), thus preferring the
heavy I over the light Na. As a consequence, the WIMP
events in ﬁgure 2 appear almost symmetric to the I recoil
band. However, the energy transferred in a scattering for
the rather light WIMP considered here is enhanced for
light nuclei due to kinematic reasons. Consequently, the
majority of the 46 events above 6 keV is found in the Na
recoil band. For this reason, cryogenic detectors provid-
ing low thresholds in combination with light target nuclei
currently lead the ﬁeld of direct dark matter searches in
the low mass regime [15, 22].
At last we want to discuss and underline the promi-
nent
in con-
trast to a purely scintillating detector considering the
DAMA/LIBRA experiment as representative. In ﬁgure 2
we display magenta colored boxes indicating the diﬀerent
regions that may contribute to the positive modulation
signal observed by DAMA/LIBRA in an energy window
from (2-6) keVee. Due to the lack of particle discrim-
ination it remains unknown if the positive modulation
signal is made from particles scattering oﬀ the electrons
or purely oﬀ the nuclei in NaI(Tl).
For interactions with electrons the box extends from
(2-6) keV (e−/γ-band), the same energy range as for
DAMA/LIBRA.
interactions on nuclei are
quenched in the light channel, hence the energy inter-
val for Na and I recoil events has to be corrected for by
the respective quenching factor (energy-dependent QF
are taken from [13]). For Na-recoils (QF≈0.3) the region
is restricted to about (6-20) keV as qualitatively indicated
by the magenta box in the Na-recoil band. For I-recoils,
due to the even higher light quenching eﬀect (QF≈0.1),
the box is conﬁned in an energy region of about (20-
60) keV.
As already mentioned, a distinctive feature of the COS-
INUS technology is the unquenched phonon channel di-
rectly measuring the deposited energy quasi independent

such COSINUS detector

features of

Instead,

of the type of interacting particle. Taking into account
the aimed for energy threshold of 1 keV, this would result
in an improvement in detection threshold by a factor of
about 6 for Na-recoil events and a factor of about 20 for
I-recoils in comparison to the sensitivity demonstrated
by DAMA/LIBRA.
It deserves mentioning that we already achieved, by op-
erating two scintillating calorimeters based on CsI an en-
ergy threshold as low as 4.7 keV and 3.5 keV, respectively
[11]. Thus, such detectors already indicate an increased
sensitivity for nuclear recoil events in comparison to the
DAMA/LIBRA experiment with further reﬁnements an-
ticipated for the future [11].

IV. PERSPECTIVE AND CONCLUSION

To estimate the sensitivity of the COSINUS detector
technology in the standard elastic scattering scenario we
simulate 10,000 data sets following the strategy outlined
in section III. Thereby, we assume e−/γ-backgrounds
only, with a constant background level of 1 count / (keV
kg d) and a 40K-contamination of 600 µBq. 4 For each
simulated data set a limit on spin-independent WIMP-
nucleus scattering is calculated.

Figure 3 depicts the result in the blue colored band
(1 σ conﬁdence level), together with results from other
direct dark matter search experiments (see caption and
legend). As can be seen, competitive sensitivity to other
cryogenic experiments in the range of (1 to 10) GeV/c2
may be reached. To further gain for WIMP masses be-
low that range a signiﬁcantly reduced threshold would be
mandatory, the sensitivity above O(10 GeV/c2) is clearly
limited by exposure.
The comparison of results from diﬀerent experiments, as
depicted in ﬁgure 3, only holds under certain assumptions
concerning the dark matter halo and the interaction of
dark matter with Standard Model particles. This consid-
eration is further augmented by the use of diﬀerent target
materials, as the impact of the mentioned uncertainties
signiﬁcantly depends on the target material.
Obviously, material dependences will be ruled out in
the evaluation of COSINUS and DAMA/LIBRA data as
both are using a NaI-target. As ﬁgure 3 clearly shows, the
anticipated sensitivity of a COSINUS detector is about
two orders of magnitude below the interpretation of the
DAMA/LIBRA claim, assuming a standard dark mat-
ter halo and elastic WIMP-nucleus scattering (light-blue
regions in 3 corresponding to recoils oﬀ Na and I, respec-
tively [21]).
The enhanced sensitivity, thereby, is driven by two key

4 Such would acquire a dilution refrigerator in an underground site
furnished with adequate passive shielding to signiﬁcantly reduce
amongst others the neutron background. Furthermore, an ac-
tive muon veto is mandatory to reject any muon-related induced
backgrounds in the experimental set-up and the detectors itself.

5

FIG. 3. Projected sensitivity for a NaI-based experiment us-
ing COSINUS detector technology (solid blue band, 1 σ con-
ﬁdence level (C.L.)) for spin-independent elastic dark matter
nucleus scattering. Recent results from experiments using
silicon and germanium targets are drawn in green [4, 22–
27], results from CRESST-II (CaWO4) are depicted in red
[14, 15, 28, 29] and exclusion limits using liquid noble gases in
magenta [30–33]. Limits drawn in cyan correspond to bubble
chamber technology and experiments with CsI target [34–36].
The light blue shaded regions correspond to the interpretation
of the DAMA/LIBRA (NaI(Tl)) modulation signal by Savage
et al.
[21]. The benchmark point (blue cross) indicates the
mass and cross-section chosen for the simulated WIMP con-
tribution presented in III. Gray-shaded regions in parameter
space will be aﬀected by coherent neutrino nucleus scattering
on NaI mainly originating from solar neutrinos [37].

factors. Firstly, the particle discrimination via the si-
multaneous measurement of phonon signal and scintilla-
tion. Secondly, the better energy resolution going along
with a lower threshold (of 1 keV,
independent of the
type of particle). The latter is of special beneﬁt due
to the expected exponential rise of the dark matter re-
coil spectrum towards low energies. Thus, even with a
moderate exposure, COSINUS technology has the po-
tential to add knowledge on the underlying nature of
the DAMA/LIBRA signal, in particular on the question
whether the signal originates from nuclear recoils or not.
For a hypothetical dark matter particle interacting with
the electrons of the target material the advantage of
particle discrimination vanishes, as the dominant back-
ground will also be found in the e−/γ-band. However,
the excellent energy resolution and the low threshold still
persist. Thus, a potential future dark matter experiment,
increased in target mass and based on COSINUS tech-
nology, has promising prospects to give new insight on
the long-standing DAMA/LIBRA claim.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Fisica Nucleare (INFN) in the Commissione Scientiﬁca
Nazionale 5 (CSN5).

This work was carried out in the frame of the COS-
INUS R&D project funded by the Istituto Nazionale di

6

[1] Planck Collaboration, R. Adam et al., accepted by A&A

(2015), arXiv: 1502.01582.

[2] M. W. Goodman and E. Witten, Phys. Rev. D 31, 3059

(1985).

D 33, 3495 (1986).

Astroparticle and Underground Physics, TAUP 2013.

[21] C. Savage, G. Gelmini, P. Gondolo, and K. Freese, Jour-
nal of Cosmology and Astropart. Phys. 2009, 010 (2009).
[22] SuperCDMS Collaboration, R. Agnese et al., Phys. Rev.

[23] CDEX Collaboration, Q. Yue et al., Phys. Rev. D 90,

[3] A. K. Drukier, K. Freese, and D. N. Spergel, Phys. Rev.

Letters 116, 071301 (2016).

[4] CDMS Collaboration, R. Agnese et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.

091701 (2014), arXiv:1404.4946.

111, 251301 (2013), arXiv:1304.4279.

[24] SuperCDMS Collaboration, R. Agnese et al., Phys. Rev.

[5] CoGeNT Collaboration, C. E. Aalseth et al., Phys. Rev.

Lett. 112, 241302 (2014).

D 88, 012002 (2013).

[6] R. Bernabei et al., Eur. Phy. J. C 73 (2013).
[7] R. Strauss et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 75, 1 (2015).
[8] F. Reindl et al., Astroparticle, Particle, Space Physics
and Detectors for Physics Applications - Proceedings of
the 14th ICATPP Conference 8, 290 (2014).

[9] F. Pröbst et al., Journal of Low Temperature Physics

100, 69 (1995).

arXiv:1005.1239.

[10] C. Arnaboldi et al., Astropart. Phys. 34, 143 (2010),

[11] G. Angloher et al., (2016), arXiv:1602.08884.
[12] R. Strauss et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 74, 1 (2014).
[13] V. Tretyak, Astropart. Phys. 33, 40 (2010).
[14] CRESST-II Collaboration, G. Angloher et al., Eur. Phys.

J. C 74, 3184 (2014), 1407.3146.

[15] G. Angloher et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 76, 1 (2016).
[16] P. Nadeau et al., Astropart. Phys. 67, 62 (2015).
[17] R. Bernabei et al., Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers,
Detectors and Associated Equipment 592, 297 (2008).

[18] J. Amaré et al., AIP Conference Proceedings 1672

(2015).

D 90, 092005 (2014).

[20] E. Shields, J. Xu, and F. Calaprice, Physics Procedia 61,
169 (2015), 13th International Conference on Topics in

[25] CoGeNT Collaboration, C. E. Aalseth et al., Phys. Rev.

D 88, 012002 (2013), arXiv:1208.5737.

[26] The DAMIC Collaboration, A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al.,

(2013), arXiv:1310.6688.

[27] EDELWEISS Collaboration, E. Armengaud et al., Phys.

Rev. D 86, 051701 (2012), arXiv:1207.1815.

[28] A. Brown, S. Henry, H. Kraus, and C. McCabe, Phys.

Rev. D 85, 021301 (2012), arXiv:1109.2589.

[29] G. Angloher et al., Eur. Phys. J. C 72, 1971 (2012).
[30] P. Agnes et al., Physics Letters B 743, 456 (2015).
[31] LUX Collaboration, D. S. Akerib et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.

112, 091303 (2014), arXiv:1310.8214.

[32] PandaX Collaboration, X. Xiao et al., Phys. Rev. D 92,

[33] XENON100 Collaboration, E. Aprile et al., Phys. Rev.

052004 (2015).

Lett. 109, 181301 (2012).

Letters 114, 231302 (2015).

Letters 108, 181301 (2012).

[34] PICO Collaboration, C. Amole et al., Physical Review

[35] KIMS Collaboration, S. C. Kim et al., Physical Review

[36] H. S. Lee et al., Physical Review D 90 (2014), arXiv:

1404.3443.

1408.2357.

[19] DM–Ice Collaboration, J. Cherwinka et al., Phys. Rev.

[37] A. Gütlein et al., Astropart. Phys. 69, 44 (2015), arXiv:

