6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
9
2
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF

TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

NORBERT A’CAMPO, LIZHEN JI

AND ATHANASE PAPADOPOULOS

Abstract. In his 1944 paper Ver¨anderliche Riemannsche Fl¨achen,
Teichm¨uller deﬁned a structure of complex manifold on the set of
isomorphism classes of marked closed Riemann surfaces of genus
g. The complex manifold he obtained is the space called today
Teichm¨uller space. In the same paper, Teichm¨uller introduced the
so-called universal Teichm¨uller curve – a space over Teichm¨uller
space where the ﬁber above each point is a Riemann surface repre-
senting that point. In fact, Teichm¨uller proved the existence of the
Teichm¨uller curve as a space of Riemann surfaces parametrized
by an analytic space, with an existence and uniqueness theorem
establishing this analytic structure. This result was later reformu-
lated and proved by Grothendieck in a series of ten lectures he gave
at Cartan’s seminar in 1960-1961. In his approach, Grothendieck
replaced Teichm¨uller’s explicit parameters by a general construc-
tion of ﬁber bundles whose base is an arbitrary analytic space.
This work on Teichm¨uller space led him to recast the bases of an-
alytic geometry using the language of categories and functors. In
Grothendieck’s words, the Teichm¨uller curve becomes a space rep-
resenting a functor from the category of analytic spaces into the
category of sets.
In this survey, we comment on Grothendieck’s
series of lectures.

The survey is primarily addressed to low-dimensional topolo-
gists and geometers. In presenting Grothendieck’s results, we tried
to explain or rephrase in more simple terms some notions that are
usually expressed in the language of algebraic geometry. However,
it is not possible to short-circuit the language of categories and
functors.

The survey is also addressed to those algebraic geometers who
wish to know how the notion of moduli space evolved in connection
with Teichm¨uller theory.

Explaining the origins of mathematical ideas contributes in dis-
pensing justice to their authors and it usually renders the theory
that is surveyed more attractive.

AMS classiﬁcation: 32G13, 32G15, 14H15, 14C05, 18A22.
Keywords: Teichm¨uller space, representable functor, Hilbert scheme,

moduli space.

The ﬁnal version of this paper will appear as a chapter in Volume VI
of the Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory. This volume is dedicated to the
memory of Alexander Grothendieck.
1

2

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Contents

Introduction

1.
2. A note on Alexander Grothendieck and on Cartan’s seminar
3. An introduction to the major ideas
4. A review of Grothendieck’s Expos´e I: Teichm¨uller space

representing a functor

5. A quick survey of Grothendieck’s Expos´es II to IX
6. A review of Grothendieck’s Expos´e X: The construction of

moduli space and of Teichm¨uller space
In way of a conclusion

7.
References

2
5
8

19
26

33
36
37

1. Introduction

One of the last works of Teichm¨uller is his paper [46] published in
1944, in which he constructs Teichm¨uller space as a universal object
and deﬁnes the Teichm¨uller (or universal) curve, and where he equips
these spaces with complex-analytic structures. Compared to its im-
portance, this paper remains very poorly known. A translation and
a commentary were recently published, see [46] and [2]. Teichm¨uller’s
remarkable result was very inﬂuential on Alexander Grothendieck, who
reformulated it at the end of the 1950s and who presented in the aca-
demic year 1960-1961 a new construction of this space, in a series of
ten lectures he gave at Cartan’s1 seminar in Paris. Cartan used to ask
the speakers at his seminar to provide written versions for their talks.
These written texts were usually distributed as mimeographed notes at
the subsequent seminar meetings.2 Thus, we have at our disposal a se-
ries of papers by Grothendieck on Teichm¨uller theory ([21] to [30]). We

1Although this will seem obvious to everybody, we point out that all the occur-
rences of the name Cartan in this chapter refer to Henri Cartan. (This will exempt
us from adding the ﬁrst initial H. each time we write his name, as is usually required
in the mathematical literature, to distinguish him from his father Elie Cartan.)

2Talking about Cartan and his seminar, Douady writes in [13]: “He did not
tolerate the slightest inaccuracy, the slightest imprecision, and he criticized the
speaker to the point of destabilizing him. [...] But what really mattered for Cartan
were the notes of the expos´es. Again, he would tolerate no imprecision.
It was
out of the question to say that two groups were isomorphic without specifying an
isomorphism between them, or to say that a diagram commuted up to sign: this
sign had to be given. Above all he wanted the text to be perfectly clear. For this
he asked you to revise the text as many times as necessary. Vingt fois sur le m´etier
remettez votre ouvrage (Redo your work twenty times) said Boileau. With Cartan
it was rather thirty than twenty times. His point was that a text should have at
least thirty readers, otherwise there’s no point in writing it. Therefore, if you spend
half an hour to spare the reader a minute of perplexity, then it’s well worth it. He
would return your manuscript covered with annotations made with a red pen in his
small, curly handwriting. Then you would revise it and give him back again.

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

3

shall present them brieﬂy, saying a few words on each paper, at some
places providing some details on deﬁnitions and important concepts.

Grothendieck formulated Teichm¨uller’s theorem using the languages
of categories, of algebraic geometry and of analytic geometry. It is al-
ways good to remember that Riemann surfaces themselves are at the
same time analytic and algebraic objects, and therefore it is natural
that they have been studied using methods of analytic as well as al-
gebraic geometry. We recall in this respect that any closed Riemann
surface (that is, a complex one-dimensional manifold) of genus g ≥ 2
admits holomorphic embedding in the projective space CP5g−5, using
the Riemann-Roch theorem for the third tensor power of the canon-
ical bundle. By a theorem of Chow [9], this image is deﬁned by ho-
mogeneous polynomial equations. By post-composing with a generic
projection we obtain an embedding in CP3. The case g = 0 is part of
Riemann’s uniformization theorem. The case g = 1 is the one of elliptic
curves and uses the Weierstrass p- function ℘ to yield an embedding in
CP2.

In the course of his work on the subject, Grothendieck considered
that classical algebraic geometry did not have enough tools for formu-
lating and proving the existence of Teichm¨uller space as a universal
object carrying a complex structure, and for giving an algebraic model
for moduli spaces. In the introduction to the ﬁrst lecture [21], he writes:
“In doing this, the necessity of reshaping the foundations of analytic
geometry, inspired by the theory of schemes, will be manifest.”3 In par-
ticular, the notion of schemes which he had newly introduced turned
out to be useful in dealing with the problems of moduli of Riemann sur-
faces and in other moduli problems. At the same time, Grothendieck
also brought new ideas into Teichm¨uller theory.

The general title of Grothendieck’s 10 papers is Techniques de con-
struction en g´eom´etrie analytique (Construction techniques in analytic
geometry), and each paper carries its own title.

In these papers, Grothendieck constructs Teichm¨uller space as a com-
plex space representing a functor. Grothendieck worked essentially in
the analytic setting, because the required passage to quotient by a
group acting properly was available in analytic, but not in algebraic
geometry. In this analytic geometry setting, it is not unusual that the
existence of some moduli space amounts to the representability of some
functor. Grothendieck’s papers also contain the deﬁnition of and the
existence theorem for the universal Teichm¨uller curve equipped with its
complex structure. In Section 4 below, we shall describe at length the
content of the ﬁrst paper, titled Description axiomatique de l’espace de
Teichm¨uller (Axiomatic description of Teichm¨uller space) [21], because
it contains the motivating ideas and an outline of the whole theory. We

3[Chemin faisant, la n´ecessit´e deviendra manifeste de revoir les fondements de la

g´eom´etrie analytique.]

4

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

shall also describe in detail the last paper (Expos´e X), titled Construc-
tion de l’espace de Teichm¨uller (Construction of Teichm¨uller space),
which contains the proofs of the main results.

Grothendieck, in constructing Riemann’s moduli space and other
moduli spaces, used extensively Teichm¨uller’s idea of enhancing the
structures by markings in order to overcome the diﬃculties that are
caused by nontrivial automorphism groups of the objects representing
points in moduli spaces. In a letter to Serre written on November 5,
1959 (see [10]), Grothendieck writes:

I have already come to the practical conclusion that ev-
ery time that my criteria show that no modular variety
(or rather, moduli scheme) for the classiﬁcation of (global
or inﬁnitesimal) variations of certain structures (complete
non-singular varieties, vector bundles, etc.) cannot exist,
despite good hypotheses of ﬂatness, properness, and if nec-
essary non-singularity, the only reason is the existence of
automorphisms of the structure which prevent the descent
from working.
[...] The remedy in moduli theory seems to
me to be to eliminate bothersome automorphisms by intro-
ducing additional structures on the objects being studied:
points or diﬀerential forms, etc. on the varying varieties (a
process is already used for curves), trivializations at suﬃ-
ciently many points of the vector bundles one wants to vary,
etc.4

One important consequence of this work which results in viewing the
enhanced Riemann moduli space as a space representing a functor,
besides providing an analytic structure on this space, is that the same
methods apply to other moduli whic can be realized as quotients of
Hermitian symmetric spaces by some discrete groups.

In this survey, while we present Grothendieck’s ideas, we try to ex-
plain a few notions of algebraic geometry, relating them when possible
to notions which are familiar to Teichm¨uller theorists, but without en-
tering into the technical details, often at the expense of being too vague
for an expert in algebraic geometry who would read this text. All the
displayed results in the following sections (Theorem, Proposition, etc.)

4[La conclusion pratique `a laquelle je suis arriv´e d`es maintenant, c’est que chaque
fois que, en vertu de mes crit`eres, une vari´et´e de modules, (ou plutˆot, un sh´ema
de modules) pour la classiﬁcation des vari´et´es (globales, ou inﬁnit´esimales) de
certaines structures (vari´et´es compl`etes non singuli`eres, ﬁbr´es vectoriels etc.) ne
peut exister, malgr´e de bonnes hypoth`eses de platitude, propret´e et non singu-
larit´e ´eventuellement, la raison en est seulement l’existence d’automorphismes de
la structure qui empˆeche la descente de marcher.
[...] La panac´ee en th´eorie des
modules me semble alors, si les automorphismes nous embˆetent, de les ´eliminer en
introduisant des donn´ees suppl´ementaires sur les objets qu’on ´etudie : points ou
formes diﬀ´erentielles etc. sur les vari´et´es qu’on fait varier (proc´ed´e d´ej`a utilis´e pour
les courbes), trivialisations en suﬃsamment de points des ﬁbr´es vectoriels qu’on
veut faire varier, etc.]

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

5

are, with very few exceptions, contained as such in Grothendieck’s Car-
tan seminars.

We end this introduction by stressing the fact that the point of view
of Grothendieck on deﬁning the Teichm¨uller space as a space repre-
senting a functor not only led to the standard modern formulation and
construction of other moduli spaces in algebraic geometry and to other
generalizations, but it also deepened our understanding of Teichm¨uller
space and clariﬁed some aspects of the nature of this space which is
more than a space of points, but a space of Riemann surfaces and their
deformations.

Acknowledgements.— The authors acknowledge support from the U.S.
National Science Foundation grants DMS 1107452, 1107263, 1107367
“RNMS: GEometric structures And Representation varieties” (the GEAR
Network). Part of this work was done during a stay of the three authors
at Galatasaray University (Istanbul) and at the Erwin Schr¨odinger In-
stitute (Vienna). We are grateful to Pierre Deligne, Antoine Ducros,
H´el`ene Esnault and Hiroaki Nakamura for a careful reading of a previ-
ous version of this chapter and for suggesting several improvements.

2. A note on Alexander Grothendieck and on Cartan’s

seminar

We start with a personal touch, from the ﬁrst author of the present
chapter. During my undergraduate studies at the University of Mont-
pellier I, I worked, in the autumn of 1962, as vintage helper, during the
grape harvesting period, in the village of Vendargues. During a meal
with the farmers – I remember their names: the farmer Jean-Henri
Teissier, his wife Annette, their son Jean-Louis and their daughter
Yvette – and other vintage workers, the farmer, who knew that I was
studying mathematics, asked me if I was familiar with a mathematician
called Grothendieck. I had never heard of this name and my answer
was a clear “no.” Two years later, my teacher, Professor Jean-Pierre
Laﬀon, suggested that I read the paper Sur quelques points d’alg`ebre
homologique, by Alexander Grothendieck, which was published in 1957
in the Tˆohoku Mathematical Journal. I was amazed to hear for the
second time in France this Dutch sounding name under so diﬀerent cir-
cumstances. When I went back to the family Teissier in Vendargues, I
got the following explanation: Grothendieck had lived with his mother
in Mairargues, in a house at walking distance from the house of the
farmers’ family.5

5In R´ecoltes et semailles § 2.1, Note 1, Grothendieck mentions this place (The
translation from this writing of Gorthendieck’s is ours): “Between 1945 and 1948,
I used to live, with my mother, in a small hamlet, at about a dozen kilometers
from Montpellier, Mairargues (by Vendargues), lost among the vines. (My father
had disappeared in Auschwitz, in 1942.) We were living meanly, on my student’s
scholarship. To help make both ends meet, I used to work in harvesting, every year,

6

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Cartan’s seminar lasted 16 years, from 1948 to 1964. The principle
was the following: every year, a new theme was chosen, and the seminar
talks were supposed to start from scratch and give complete proofs.
The seminar was attended by several talented mathematicians and it
certainly was a major element in the fact that Paris became at that time
the world mathematical capital. Another major element was IH´ES,
the Institut des Hautes ´Etudes Scientiﬁques, founded in 1958. Cartier
writes in [8] that “Grothendieck dominated the ﬁrst ten years of the
institute,” and Serre writes in [43] that the “impressive” S´eminaire de
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique of Grothendieck at IH´ES, which lasted 10 years
(1960-1969), was the successor of Cartan’s seminar. The ten seminar
talks that Grothendieck gave at the Cartan seminar in 1960-1961 were a
very important step in his major work on the foundations of algebraic
geometry. Hubbard recalls, in [32], that Douady, who was present
at this series of talks, told him: “Adrien described to me Cartan’s
resentment when Grothendieck started his ﬁrst talk saying ‘In this talk
and in the next ones, I will present ...’; Cartan felt that his seminar
did not belong to him any more.”6

In his personal and mathematical autobiographyR´ecoltes et semailles,
(1986) Grothendieck, at several times, mentions Cartan’s seminar, as
well as his own seminar, which he started in the 1960s, and which was

and after the vintage, in that of the “vin de grapillage” [a non-commercial table
wine] (which, as I was told, was illegal...) Furthermore, there was a garden which,
without any eﬀort from our part, provided us with ﬁgs, spinach, and (towards
the end) tomatoes, planted by an indulgent neighbor, right in the middle of an
ocean of magniﬁcent poppies. This was the life! But sometimes too short in the
joints, when it came to replacing a spectacle frame, or a pair of threadbare shoes.
Fortunately, for my mother, weak and ill after her long stay in the concentration
camps, we were entitled to free medical assistance. We would never had been able
to pay any doctor...” [Entre 1945 et 1948, je vivais avec ma m`ere dans un petit
hameau `a une dizaine de kilom`etres de Montpellier, Mairargues (par Vendargues),
perdu au milieu des vignes. (Mon p`ere avait disparu `a Auschwitz, en 1942.) On
vivait chichement sur ma maigre bourse d’´etudiant. Pour arriver `a joindre les deux
bouts, je faisais les vendanges chaque ann´ee, et apr`es les vendanges, du vin de
grapillage, que j’arrivais `a ´ecouler tant bien que mal (en contravention, paraˆıt-il,
de la l´egislation en vigueur. . . ) De plus il y avait un jardin qui, sans avoir `a le
travailler jamais, nous fournissait en abondance ﬁgues, ´epinards et mˆeme (vers la
ﬁn) des tomates, plant´ees par un voisin complaisant au beau milieu d’une mer de
splendides pavots. C’´etait la belle vie - mais parfois juste aux entournures, quand
il s’agissait de remplacer une monture de lunettes, ou une paire de souliers us´es
jusqu’`a la corde. Heureusement que pour ma m`ere, aﬀaiblie et malade `a la suite
de son long s´ejour dans les camps, on avait droit `a l’assistance m´edicale gratuite.
Jamais on ne serait arriv´es `a payer un m´edecin. . .]

6[Adrien m’a d´ecrit le d´epit de Cartan lorsque Grothendieck a commenc´e son
, et que

premier expos´e disant : Dans cet expos´e et les suivants j’exposerai ...
Cartan a senti son s´eminaire lui ´echapper.]

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

7

known under the nickname SGA (S´eminaire de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique),7
reporting on the diﬀerences between the two seminars, but also the
common points. In § 18, he writes: “That which was common to the
two seminars seems to me more important, and above all, that which
was their essential function, their raison d’ˆetre. As a matter of fact,
I see two points. One function of these seminars, which is close to
Bourbaki’s purpose, was to prepare and to provide to everybody texts
which are easily accessible (I mean, essentially complete), developing
in an elaborate manner important themes which are diﬃcult to ac-
cess.8 The other function of these two seminars is to provide a place
where young and motivated researchers were sure, even without being
geniuses, to be able to learn the craft of a mathematician for what
concerns present date questions, in contact with eminent and caring
men. To learn the craft – that is, to put the shoulder to the wheel, and
henceforth, to ﬁnd the occasion of being known.”9

One may also add that Grothendieck, before these ten lectures at
Cartan’s seminar, had already given lectures on moduli. Mumford,
in his paper [37], remembers Grothendieck’s lectures at Harvard, in
1958, two years before the Cartan seminar lectures. He writes: “My
involvement came about because I had been studying the construction
of varieties classifying families of algebraic structures, especially moduli
spaces of vector bundles and of curves. Whereas I had thought loosely
of such a classifying space as having a ‘natural’ one-one correspondence
with the set of objects in question (just as Riemann and Picard had),
Grothendieck expressed it with functors. This was clearly the right
perspective. There were ‘ﬁne’ moduli spaces which carried a universal
family of objects, e.g. a universal family of curves from which all other

7We learned from Deligne that the name “S´eminaire de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique
du Bois Marie” came later, and that what is now called SGA3 was called SGAD
(D for Demazure) and SGA4: SGAA (A for Artin).

8Grothendieck’s footnote: “Diﬃcult to access, either because these themes re-
mained imperfectly understood, or because they were known only to rare initiates,
and such that the scattered relevant publications gave an inadequate image of them.
[”D’acc`es diﬃcile,” soit parce que ces th`emes restaient imparfaitement compris, soit
qu’ils n’´etaient connus que de rares initi´es, et que les publications ´eparpill´ees qui
en traitaient n’en donnaient qu’une image inad´equate.]

9[Plus important me paraˆıt ce qui ´etait commun aux deux s´eminaires, et surtout,
ce qui me semble avoir ´et´e leur fonction essentielle, leur raison d’ˆetre. `A vrai dire
j’en vois deux. Une des fonctions de ces s´eminaires, proche du propos de Bourbaki,
´etait de pr´eparer et de mettre `a la disposition de tous des textes ais´ement accessi-
bles (j’entends, essentiellement complets), d´eveloppant de fa¸con circonstanci´ee des
th`emes importants et d’acc`es diﬃcile. L’autre fonction de ces s´eminaires, ´etait de
constituer un lieu o`u des jeunes chercheurs motiv´es ´etaient sˆurs, mˆeme sans ˆetre des
g´enies, de pouvoir apprendre le m´etier de math´ematicien sur des questions de pleine
actualit´e, au contact d’hommes ´eminents et bienveillants. Apprendre le m´etier –
c’est `a dire, mettre la main `a la pˆate, et par l`a-mˆeme, trouver l’occasion de se faire
connaˆıtre.]

8

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

families were unique pull-backs. Therefore they represented the functor
of all such families. And there were also ‘coarse’ moduli spaces, the
best possible representable approximation to the desired functor (the
approximation being caused e.g. by the fact that some curves had
automorphisms).”

Several comments on the life and work of Alexander Grothendieck

are made in other chapters of this volume, [38] and [3].

3. An introduction to the major ideas

The results to which Grothendieck refers in his work on Teichm¨uller
space and which may have been his motivation in giving these lectures
at Cartan seminar are contained in one of the the last papers that
Teichm¨uller published [46]. Let us start by recalling the content of
that paper. This is the paper in which Teichm¨uller equipped the space
that carries his name10 with a complex structure and computed its
dimension, thus giving a precise meaning to Riemann’s moduli prob-
lem and solving it. This complex-analytic structure is characterized
by a certain universal property, and Teichm¨uller constructed a ﬁber
bundle over that space, which was called later on the Teichm¨uller uni-
versal curve. This construction is diﬀerent from the construction of
Teichm¨uller space as a metric space, which was given by Teichm¨uller
in his 1939 paper [44] (see also the commentary [4]).

Teichm¨uller’s paper [46] contains several new ideas, including the

following:

(1) The idea of rigidifying Riemann surfaces (or non-singular alge-
braic curves) by introducing markings, for the construction of
a non-singular moduli space.

(2) The idea of a ﬁne moduli space. This is a moduli space to-
gether with a universal family over it, such that every family of
curves is a pull-back from that universal family by a uniquely
determined map from the base into the moduli space.

(3) The idea that Teichm¨uller space is deﬁned by the functor it
represents. It is contained in the deﬁnition given by Teichm¨uller
of Teichm¨uller space as a complex space satisfying a universal
property. This idea was developed and generalized to other
moduli spaces by Grothendieck, for whom the idea of a universal
property should be replaced by that of the representability of a
certain functor.

(4) The existence and uniqueness of the universal Teichm¨uller curve.
This curve, after Teichm¨uller and Grothendieck, was rediscov-
ered by Ahlfors and by Bers. The existence and uniqueness
result introduced at the same time the ﬁrst ﬁber space over
Teichm¨uller space.

10The name “Teichm¨uller space” was given by Andr´e Weil.

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

9

In fact, Teichm¨uller’s paper is the ﬁrst paper where families

of Riemann surfaces are studied.

(5) The proof of the fact that the automorphism group of the uni-
versal Teichm¨uller curve is the extended mapping class group.
(6) The idea of using the period map to deﬁne the complex struc-

ture of Teichm¨uller space.

(7) A precise meaning to Riemann’s heuristic count of the “num-
ber of moduli”. The 3g − 3 moduli that Riemann announced
become, in Teichm¨uller’s work, a complex dimension.

The ﬁrst ﬁve items in this list are investigated again in the papers by
Grothendieck that we are reporting on here.

Teichm¨uller’s statement in [46] is the following:

Theorem 3.1. There exists an essentially unique globally analytic fam-
ily of topologically determined Riemann surfaces H[c], where c runs over
a τ -dimensional complex analytic manifold C such that for any topolog-
ically determined Riemann surface H of genus g there is one and only
one c such that the Riemann surface H is conformally equivalent to an
H[c] and such that the family H[c] satisﬁes the following universal prop-
erty: If H[p] is any globally analytic family of topologically determined
Riemann surfaces with base B, there is a holomorphic map f : B → C
such that the family H[p] is the pull-back by f of the family H[c].

A few remarks are in order. In this statement, C is the space that we
call today Teichm¨uller space and H[c] is a ﬁber bundle over C, H[c] → C,
where the ﬁber above each point in C is a marked Riemann surface
representing this point. The expression “topologically determined,”
in Teichm¨uller’s vocabulary, means, “marked.” The marking here is a
topological enhancement of the structure which distinguishes it from
other surfaces which are conformally equivalent to it.
In general in
Teichm¨uller’s work, several sorts of markings are used, and not only
the notion of a marking as we intend it today (that is, a homotopy
class of homeomorphisms between the given Riemann surface and a
ﬁxed topological surface).11 We shall see below examples of markings.12
Finally, τ is the complex dimension, given by τ = 0 if g = 0, 1 is g = 1
and 3(g − 1) if g > 1. This is Riemann’s “number of moduli.” The ﬁber
bundle H[c] → C is the Teichm¨uller universal curve.

Thus, the theorem says that if H[p] → B is any analytic family
of marked Riemann surfaces, then it is obtained from the universal

11The work “marking” in this chapter does not refer to the choice of a marked

point, as this term is sometimes used in algebraic geometry.

12Teichm¨uller was aware of the equivalence of the various notions of markings.
In his paper [45] (see also the commentary [1]), he uses three sorts of markings:
homotopy classes of homeomorphisms, isotopy classes of homeomorphisms, and the
choice of a basis of the fundamental group. These equivalences are deep theorems
in the topology of surfaces, and Teichm¨uller attributes them to Mangler [36].

10

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Teichm¨uller curve H[c] → C as a pull-back by some holomorphic map
f : B → C. From the context, and stated in modern terms, the
essential uniqueness of H[c] → C announced at the beginning of the
statement of the theorem means that the family is unique up to the
action of the mapping class group. In other words, the map is unique
up to the choice of a marking.

For an English translation and a commentary of Teichm¨uller’s paper

we refer the reader to [46] and [2].

Teichm¨uller’s paper is diﬃcult to read, both for analysts and for low-
dimensional topologists and geometers, because of its very concise style,
and also because it uses heavily the language of algebraic geometry
(function ﬁelds, divisors, valuations, places, etc.) Grothendieck took up
the idea and developed it using a new language of algebraic geometry.
In turn, Grothendieck’s papers are diﬃcult to read for people not used
to his language. His point of view is based on the fact that Teichm¨uller
space represents the functor of marked families of projective algebraic
curves. Let us quote Grothendieck’s statement:

Theorem 3.2 (Theorem 3.1. of [21]). There exists an analytic space T
and a P-algebraic curve V above T which are universal in the following
sense: For every P-algebraic curve X above an analytic space S, there
exists a unique analytic morphism g from S to T such that X (together
with its P-structure) is isomorphic to the pull-back of V /T by g.

The reader should notice the intertwining of the words “algebraic”
and “analytic” in the expression : “algebraic curve over an analytic
space.” This is a family of algebraic curves which depends analytically
on a parameter. In this statement, the analytic space T is Teichm¨uller
space and the P-algebraic curve V above T is the universal curve. The
term “P-algebraic” refers to a rigidiﬁcation of the curves, and P is a
functor, the so-called rigidifying functor.

There is another formulation by Grothendieck of this existence theo-
rem, which is important, and which uses the language of functors. We
shall give it below, but we start by recalling some basic deﬁnitions on
categories and functors that the reader might need in order to under-
stand the statements. The amount of knowledge needed here is very
small.

A category C is deﬁned by :
(1) A class whose elements are called the objects of C.
(2) For each pair (a, b) of elements of C, there is a set13 Hom(a, b)
whose elements are called the morphisms, or arrows, from a to
b. Given an element f of Hom(a, b), the object a is called the
domain and b the codomain of f . The expression “morphism f
from a to b” is denoted by f : a → b.

13Although these questions will not be of interest for us here, we note that the

morphisms between two elements form a set in the classical sense.

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

11

(3) For each triple (a, b, c) of elements of C, there is a binary oper-
ation Hom(a, b) × Hom(b, c) → Hom(a, c) called composition of
arrows and denoted by (f, g) → gf .

(4) The morphisms and the composition operation are required to

satisfy the following properties:

• For any distinct pairs (a, b) and (a′, b′) the sets of mor-

phisms Hom(a, b) and Hom(a′, b′) are disjoint.

• (Associativity) For any four objects a, b, c and d in C and
for any three morphisms f : a → b, g : b → c and h : c → d,
we have

h(gf ) = (hg)f.

• (Identity element) For any object a in C, there is a mor-
phism ida : a → a satisfying f ida = f for every morphism
f with domain a and idag = g for every morphism g with
codomain a.

A morphism f : a → b is said to be invertible if there is a
morphism g : b → a such that gf = ida and f g = idb. An
invertible morphism is also called an isomorphism.

Categories existed before Gorthendieck; they were introduced by Car-
tan and Eilenberg in the setting of homological algebra [6].
It was
Grothendieck who used them with all their wealth.

There are standard examples of categories, namely, the category of
sets and mappings, the category of groups and group homomorphisms,
the category of topological spaces and continuous maps, etc. Below, we
shall mention several categories that appear in Grothendieck’s work.

Given a category C, one deﬁnes its dual category (also called opposite
category) Co as the category which has the same objects but whose
morphisms are reversed. Thus, Co has the same class of objects and
morphisms, but for any morphism of f of C, its domain in Co is the
codomain of f in C and vice versa. Composition f g of two morphisms
in Co is deﬁned as composition gf in C.

Given two categories C and E, a covariant functor F : C → E is a
function which associates to every object a in C an object F (a) in E and
to each morphism f : a → b in C a morphism F (f ) : F (a) → F (b) in E
satisfying the two identities, concerning composition and the identity
morphism:

• F (Ida) = idF (a) for any object a in C;
• F (gf ) = F (g)F (f ) for any morphisms f : a → b and g : b → c

between objects a, b, c in C.

A contravariant functor F : C → E is a covariant functor Co → E
such that F (gf ) = F (f )F (g) whenever the composition gf is deﬁned
in C.

In category theory, the notion of representable functor is closely re-
lated to the notion of solution of a universal problem. Grothendieck

12

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

gives in [24] a short introduction to representable functors. Teichm¨uller
space is one of the ﬁrst interesting examples – and may be the ﬁrst one
after the elementary examples (projective spaces, Grassmannians, etc.)
– of an analytic space representing a functor.14 Working in the cate-
gory of ﬁber spaces is a tool to deﬁne a functor F , and in this setting
only isomorphisms really matter. The notion of “ﬁbered category” is
required to deﬁne pull-backs. Since these notions are important ele-
ments in the theory, we review them in some detail.

Fibered categories occur in the setting of ﬁber bundles, vector bun-
dles or sheaves over a given topological space.15 For instance, in such
a category, the objects are pairs (X, E) where X is a topological space
and E a ﬁber bundle over X. Morphisms are the ﬁber maps between the
vector bundles. This category is ﬁbered over the category of topolog-
ical spaces. The functoriality amounts to the compatibility of inverse
image operations with the composition of such maps. Grothendieck
introduced ﬁbered categories in his work on the descent technique [17]
[18]. This can be considered as a general “gluing” technique in topology
adapted to the setting of algebraic geometry.

A representable functor is a functor from a given category into the
category of sets which is isomorphic to a functor of a special form,
which we now deﬁne more precisely.

Let C be a category and let X be an object in C. We consider a
contravariant functor hX from C to the category (Ens) of sets16 deﬁned
by the formula

hX (Y ) = Hom(Y, X)

at the level of objects, and as follows at the level of arrows: If Y and
Z are objects in C and f : Y → Z a morphism between them, then
the image of f is the map p 7→ p ◦ f from the set Hom(Z, X) to the

14 Regarding the introduction of representable functors, we quote Deligne, from
a letter he sent us on July 26, 2015: “The principle that a scheme S should be
understood in terms of the functor hS : X 7→ Hom(X, S) owes a lot, I think, to
a conversation with Yoneda. The geometry is obscured when a scheme is viewed
as a ringed space, but clearer on hS. For instance, if S is an algebraic group, the
underlying set is not a group, but hS is a functor in groups. The underlying set
does not see nilpotents, while hS does. I am not sure whether the use of hS to
understand S comes before, or not, the work on Teichm¨uller space.”

15The notion of sheaf over a topological space was introduced in 1950 by Leray
in [35]. Cartan’s seminar for the year 1950-1951 was devoted to the theory of
sheaves. Analytic varieties were then included in the theory of ringed topological
spaces, with their underlying sheaf of holomorphic function (This is mainly due
to Oka and Cartan). It was in 1954, thanks to the work of Serre [41], that this
theory also included algebraic varieties. On p. 455 of R´ecoltes et semailles (§ 2.10),
Grothendieck declares that this paper of Serre, which, as he says, is one of the
few papers he read, has had an enormous inﬂuence on him; the complete quote is
included in the present volume, cf. [3].

16(Ens) stands for the French word “Ensembles.”

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

13

set Hom(Y, X). The functor X → hX is natural with respect to the
operation of taking projective limits.

Deﬁnition 3.3 (Representable functor). Let C be now a category and
let

F : C → (Ens)

be a contravariant functor from C to the category of sets. We say that
F is representable if there exists an object X in C such that the functor
F is isomorphic to the functor hX.

We say that F is represented by the object X.
(In the case where C is a covariant functor, then F is said to be
representable if there exists an object in C such that the functor F is
isomorphic to the functor Y 7→ Hom(X, Y ).)

According to Grothendieck in [18], the “solution of a universal prob-
lem” always consists in showing that a certain functor from a certain
category to the category (Ens) is representable.17 In principle, the fact
that a functor deﬁned over a category C is representable makes this
functor computable in terms of operations belonging to the category
C.

Let us note that the general theory of representable functors applies
to categories of schemes, and that when a scheme represents a functor,
then it is unique as such (a result in category theory known as Yoneda’s
lemma). The fact that a functor is representable makes the scheme that
represents it a ﬁne moduli space for the corresponding moduli problem,
that is, a moduli space carrying a universal family. Conversely, by
Yoneda’s lemma, a ﬁne moduli space is unique up to isomorphism.18

Roughly speaking, in the language of functors, the main result pre-
sented in Grothendieck’s series of lectures [21] to [30] is that the functor
deﬁned on the category of analytic spaces sending a space X to the set
of isomorphism classes of bundle maps E → X is representable and that

17In the letter dated July 26, 2015 which we already mentioned (Footnote 14),
Deligne notes the following: “The idea that interesting objects are solutions of
universal problems is older than Grothendieck and explicit in Bourbaki Ens Ch. IV
(except that Bourbaki has more in mind corepresentable functors [examples: tensor
product of modules, free objects of various kinds, ...] and that values of functors
are viewed as sets of maps, making E(f ) a composition.) But Bourbaki does not
tell that S 7→ hS is fully faithful. He only tells that hS determines S up to a unique
isomorphism.”

18In fact, Yoneda’s lemma is stronger than this statement.

It allows the em-
bedding of an arbitrary category into a category of functors. To an object S in a
category C is associated the contravariant functor hS : C → (Ens) where (Ens) is
the category of sets, which takes the value HomC(X, S) on an arbitrary object X.
Yoneda’s lemma says that this functor S 7→ hS is faithful. Thus, Yoneda’s lemma
replaces the study of a category by that of all functors of that category into the
category of sets with functions as morphisms. In particular, the lemma tells us that
in order to deﬁne a morphism between two objects S → S ′, it suﬃces to deﬁne a
morphism of functors hS → hS ′.

14

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Teichm¨uller space is the analytic space which represents this functor.
We shall be more precise below.

Teichm¨uller space as introduced by Teichm¨uller is probably the ﬁrst
non-trivial example of a complex space representing a functor. The
deﬁnition of Grothendieck ﬁts with this early example of Teichm¨uller.

The Teichm¨uller functor is of the form

S 7→ isomorphism classes of marked X/S.

In [21] p. 7, Grothendieck considers the functor

X/S 7→ the set of rigidiﬁcations

and he considers the rigidifying functors of the following type: for some
group γ,

X/S 7→ a γ − torsor over X.

The Teichm¨uller functor becomes universal in the sense that any rigid-
ifying functor can be deduced from the Teichm¨uller rigidifying functor
([21] p. 7) by push-out of a γ-torsor by γ → γ′ and γ in that case
is what Grothendieck calls the Teichm¨uller modular group (the map-
ping class group). Now we can state Grothendieck’s result in terms of
functors. We use the above notation.

Theorem 3.4 ([21] p. 8). The rigidiﬁed Teichm¨uller functor, P, for
curves of genus g is representable.

Theorems 3.2 and 3.4 are equivalent. We already recalled that ac-
cording to Grothendieck, the best formulation of a universal property
consists in stating that a certain functor is representable. We can quote
here Grothendieck from his Bourbaki seminar [18] that he gave in 1960
(the year where he gave his Cartan seminar talks): “[...] The fact is
at the basis of the notion of “solution of a universal problem”, such a
problem always consisting in examining whether a given functor from
C into (Ens) is representable.”19

In the last paper in the series (Expos´e X), the universal problem
is solved. Grothendieck constructs Riemann’s moduli space. By that
time, Mumford had developed the study of moduli space in the setting
of geometric invariant theory, and the Riemann moduli space appears
as a quasi-projective variety.

We now make a few remarks on the comparison between the proofs by
Teichm¨uller and by Grothendieck of the existence of Teichm¨uller space
as an analytic space. Grothendieck shows, following Teichm¨uller, that
by adding the marking on the ﬁbers, which gives rise to a covering of
the space, moduli space becomes smooth. Teichm¨uller space appears
as an orbifold universal covering of moduli space. (It is known that

19[[...] Ce fait est `a la base de la notion de “solution d’un probl`eme universel”,
un tel probl`eme consistant toujours `a examiner si un foncteur donn´e de C dans
(Ens) est repr´esentable.]

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

15

the orbifold character disappears up to a ﬁnite covering.) Teichm¨uller
ﬁrst constructs Teichm¨uller space, and then moduli space. He does not
construct moduli space directly. Grothendieck builds moduli spaces of
marked Riemann surfaces as a space representing a functor in the alge-
braic category, so that the space is canonically equipped with an alge-
braic structure (and a fortiori an analytic structure). Teichm¨uller used
a topological marking of Riemann surfaces in order to construct Te-
ichm¨uller space. Grothendieck introduced algebraic markings (a mark-
ing by cubical diﬀerentials and a marking through level structures on
the ﬁrst homology). Note that Teichm¨uller space is an inﬁnite cover of
moduli space, and the algebraic structure of moduli space does no lift
to Teichm¨uller space.

The question of what is an algebraic deformation was one of the main
questions formulated in a clear language by Grothendieck. Motivated
by Teichm¨uller space, Grothendieck proposed a general approach to
the construction of moduli spaces of algebraic varieties, in particular
the Hilbert scheme. In fact, the year he gave his Cartan seminar series
of talks on the construction of Teichm¨uller space, Grothendieck gave a
series of talks at the Bourbaki seminar. In one of them, he introduced
the notion of Hilbert scheme [20]. This is a scheme which is a parameter
space for the closed subschemes of some ﬁxed projective space (or more
generally of a projective scheme). Hilbert schemes are the building
blocks of Grothendieck’s theory of families of algebraic varieties. A
Hilbert scheme represents the so-called Hilbert functor.

Let us also note that in the following year, at the Bourbaki seminar
[31], Grothendieck sketched his theory of the Picard scheme, based on
the techniques he developed for the construction of the Hilbert scheme
in [20] and the techniques of passage to the quotients developed in
[19]. This is a “representable-functor version” of the Picard group. We
recall that the (absolute) Picard group of a ringed space X (a topo-
logical space equipped with a structure of sheaf of rings) is the group
of isomorphism classes of invertible sheaves on that space, the group
operation being tensor product. In the case where X is a projective
variety over an algebraically closed ﬁled k, the Picard group of X un-
derlies a natural k-scheme called the Picard scheme. The paper [34]
by S. L. Kleiman contains an exposition of the Picard scheme, with a
fascinating historical introduction.

Teichm¨uller’s idea of marking in the sense of a “rigidiﬁcation” al-
lowed Grothendieck to remove nontrivial automorphism groups of the
varieties under consideration and to construct ﬁne moduli spaces (mod-
uli spaces carrying universal bundles). Rigidiﬁcation has the eﬀect of
a desingularization of moduli spaces by looking at a smooth covering
space or a smooth variety which is mapped onto these moduli spaces,
cf. [21] to [30] and [17], [18].

16

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

In return, Grothendieck applied ideas from algebraic geometry to
give a new point of view on the construction of Teichm¨uller space and
the Teichm¨uller curve, equipped with their complex structures and he
reformulated the theory in his own language. He obtained statements
that are more general than those of Teichm¨uller, and Riemann’s moduli
space Mg,n became the moduli stack of algebraic curves of genus g with
n distinguished points.

Let us be more explicit. Paraphrasing and expanding the introduc-
tion in [21], Grothendieck’s goal in his series of lectures, as announced
in the ﬁrst lecture, is the following:

(1) To introduce a general functorial mechanism for a global theory
of moduli. Teichm¨uller theory is one example to which this
formalism applies, but the theory also applies for instance to
families of elliptic curves (this is the case of genus 1), which so
far (according to Grothendieck) had not been made very explicit
in the literature.20

(2) To give a “good formulation” of a certain number of moduli
problems for analytic spaces. We recall that the expression
“moduli problem” has its origin in Riemann’s observation that
the conformal type of a closed Riemann surface of genus g ≥ 2
depends on 3g − 3 complex parameters, and that the goal of
the so-called “theory of moduli” is to make such a statement
precise and to describe such parameters. In fact, Grothendieck
gave a precise formulation of several moduli problems besides
the one of Riemann surfaces, e.g. moduli of Hilbert schemes
of points or Hilbert schemes of subvarieties, or Hilbert embed-
dings with a given Hilbert polynomial. these moduli problems
were used as step-stones, but they also have an independent in-
terest. According to Grothendieck, the state of the art in most
of the situations is such that one could only “conjecture some
reasonable existence theorems.”

(3) Under some “projectivity hypothesis”21 for the morphisms that
will be considered, to give some existence theorems for the prob-
lems in (2). “This will include in particular the existence theo-
rem for Teichm¨uller space.” 22

20The case of genus 1 is treated in Teichm¨uller’s paper [46]. Also, in the paper
[44], Teichm¨uller showed that Teichm¨uller space, with the Teichm¨uller metric, is
isometric to the hyperbolic plane.

21This projectivity condition is satisﬁed for holomorphic line bundles with
enough sections, since this allows to separate points and tangent vectors. In the
non-singular case, it is equivalent to admitting a K¨ahler structure whose K¨ahler
class is integral (in H 2(X, Z)). The condition is necessary for the question of
representability.

22Grothendieck underlines.

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

17

(4) Grothendieck says that for this purpose, it will be necessary
to reconsider the foundations of analytic geometry by getting
inspiration from the theory of schemes. In particular, it will be
important to admit nilpotent elements in the local rings deﬁning
analytic spaces, and also in more general spaces that consist in
families of spaces, so that the theorems are stated with all their
strength.

To understand Item (4), recall that a classical23 complex analytic
space is deﬁned as a “ringed space,” that is, a system of local rings
(or a sheaf ) of holomorphic functions.24 Likewise, an aﬃne variety is
deﬁned by its ring of “regular” functions. From the point of view of
the theory of schemes, one starts with an arbitrary commutative ring
(with unit) A,25 and one associates to it an aﬃne scheme, namely, the
set of prime ideals of A equipped with a certain topology and with a
sheaf structure whose ﬁbers are the local rings deﬁned by these prime
ideals. The main novelty with the Grothendieck setting is that clas-
sically the sheaf is a sheaf of functions. One may think of this in
analogy with the manifolds deﬁned by local charts, in the diﬀerential
category. A scheme is a locally ringed space, modelled on an aﬃne
scheme. A locally ringed space is a topological space equipped with
a sheaf of commutative rings, called the structural sheaf of the space
whose ring of germs at each point is a local ring. An aﬃne scheme is
a locally ringed space which is the spectrum of a commutative ring,
that is, its set of prime ideals, equipped with the Zariski topology.26
It is equipped with a natural structural sheaf of rings which roughly
correspond to germs of functions around elements. Schemes generalize
algebraic varieties. Grothendieck reviews all these notions in Expos´e
II of his series of talks [22]; cf. §5 below. He introduced schemes
and locally ringed spaces by gluing together spectra of commutative
rings using the Zariski topology. Grothendieck’s development of these
theories was partly motivated by his attempts to prove the Weil con-
jectures. We recall that Grothendieck’s strategy was realized later on
by Deligne, who also introduced new ideas.

23In analytic and algebraic geometry, the term “classical” often refers to the

pre-Grothendieck transformation of these ﬁelds.

24Sheaves already appear in Cartan’s seminar of the year 1948. The theory was
developed by Cartan and Oka, and in the year 1951, the famous Cartan theorems
A and B, concerning a coherent sheaf on a Stein manifold, were proved by Cartan,
based on Oka’s work. In 1954, Serre introduced sheaf theory in algebraic geometry,
for varieties deﬁned over algebraically closed ﬁelds.

25It may be useful to stress that it is after Grothendieck’s ideas that commutative

rings, instead of ﬁelds, played their central role in algebraic geometry.

26The Zariski topology is a topology used in the study of algebraic varieties.
The deﬁnitions in this topology are done in a purely algebraic way. We recall that
Grothendieck introduced later on the ´etale topology, a reﬁnement of the Zariski
topology.

18

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Regarding also Item (4), it is well known that the presence of nilpo-
tent elements in structure rings of schemes turned out to be an essential
ingredient in algebraic geometry, and in particular in the theory of in-
ﬁnitesimal deformations of algebraic varieties. We recall that points in
an analytic space are deﬁned as ideals in rings. Grothendieck discov-
ered that to get the full strength of the theory, we must admit nilpotent
elements in the structure rings. Thus, the equation y2 = 0 deﬁnes a
subscheme of the aﬃne line with coordinate y which is not the same as
the subscheme deﬁned by the equation y = 0. To say it in simple words,
a Riemann surface over the point 0 is just a Riemann surface, but a
Riemann surface deﬁned over the equation y2 = 0 is a Riemann surface
together with a ﬁrst-order deformation.27 In Grothendieck’s theory of
inﬁnitesimal deformations, nilpotent elements play a major role.28 In
general, the inﬁnitesimal deformation theory of algebraic objects (al-
gebraic curves, algebraic surfaces, etc.) deﬁned over a ﬁeld k involves
the study of objects deﬁned over Artinian local rings with residue ﬁeld
k. Grothendieck’s contribution is essential in this theory.

In his construction of Teichm¨uller space, Grothendieck treats the case
of closed surfaces of genus ≥ 2 and he leaves the construction of the
Teichm¨uller space of genus 1 as an exercise. Regarding the latter, he
says that the reader can treat more generally the case of moduli spaces
of complex tori or of complex abelian varieties, by a transcendental
proof which is based on the fact that a complex torus can be regarded
as a quotient of a vector space by a discrete subgroup of maximal
rank, and a “family of complex tori” above an analytic space S as the
quotient of a ﬁber bundle over S associated to a locally free sheaf of

27The fact of admitting nilpotent elements is stressed by Grothendieck in his talk
at the Bourbaki seminar, at about the same period [16] p. 1: “[...] In particular,
whether or not there is a given base ﬁeld, there was no reason to exclude the
case where these rings contain nilpotent elements. Until now, geometers refused to
take into account these indications and persisted in restricting themselves to the
consideration of aﬃne algebras without nilpotent elements, i.e. of algebraic spaces
whose structure sheaves do not contain any nilpotent element (and even, in most
cases, to “absolutely irreducible” algebraic spaces). The speaker considers that this
state of mind was a serious obstacle to the development of truly natural methods
in algebraic geometry.” [[...] En particulier, qu’il y ait ou non un corps de base
donn´e, il n’y avait pas lieu d’exclure le cas o`u ces anneaux contiennent des ´el´ements
nilpotents. Jusqu’`a pr´esent, les g´eom`etres s’´etaient refus´es `a tenir compte de ces
indications et se sont obstin´es `a se resterindre `a la consid´eration d’alg`ebres aﬃnes
sans ´el´ements nilpotents, i.e. d’espaces alg´ebriques dans les faisceaux structuraux
desquels il n’y a pas d’´el´ements nilpotents (et mˆeme le plus souvent, des espaces
alg´ebriques “absolument irr´eductibles”). Le conf´erencier pense que cet ´etat d’esprit
a ´et´e un obstacle s´erieux au d´eveloppement des m´ethodes vraiment naturelles en
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique].

28We note that in his inﬁnitesimal calculus, Leibniz considered “dual numbers,”

which contain the idea of nilpotent elements.

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

19

rank g by a discrete sub-sheaf of maximal rank. We shall say more
about this in §4 below.

In the rest of this survey, we shall review in detail some of the major

ideas expressed in these lectures.

4. A review of Grothendieck’s Expos´e I: Teichm¨uller

space representing a functor

In this section, we review in some detail Grothendieck’s ﬁrst lecture
[21].
In this lecture, he presents his goal, introduces the tools that
he uses, and outlines the method of the proof of the existence and
uniqueness of Teichm¨uller space representing a functor.

It was usual for Grothendieck to give in advance the plan of some-
thing he was going to write several months (sometimes, years) later.
This was one of the characteristics of his broad and long-term vision
and ﬂux. This is the reason for which the outline of the proof that is
given in this ﬁrst lectures is not rigorously the one that he follows in
the later lectures. In the meantime, he introduced new concepts and
changed some steps in the general scheme of the proof. Therefore, the
set of 10 written texts does not follow precisely the plan announced in
the ﬁrst lecture. In the last lecture [30], Grothendieck gives the proof
of the main results announced in the ﬁrst lecture. One must remember
here that the Cartan seminar lecture notes were distributed gradually,
week after week, and they were not altered a posteriori.

Let us make a few preliminary remarks on the proof; some of them

will be expanded in the rest of this text.

One of the main tools is the introduction of categories whose objects
are ﬁbrations over complex spaces whose ﬁbers are complex spaces.
The base space may be ﬁxed or variable, and depending on that, one
gets diﬀerent categories. Some of these categories are obtained as ﬁber
products (or pull-backs) of other categories. The ﬁbers may also be
discrete (in this case the ﬁbrations are covering spaces). There are
several natural functors between these categories, with various proper-
ties. Some of the functors are rigidifying and some are representable
and we shall explain these words. Rigidifying functors are obtained by
equipping the ﬁbers with some extra structure. For instance, when the
ﬁbers are Riemann surfaces, then equipping them with a marking is a
rigidiﬁcation of the structure. This extra structure is transported from
ﬁber to ﬁber by analytic continuation, and in this process appears a
monodromy, which is encoded (in the case in which we are interested)
by the mapping class group action. The rigidiﬁed functor resulting
from the rigidiﬁcation of Riemann surfaces is the so-called Teichm¨uller
functor. This is an example of a representable functor. Grothendieck,
in his series of lectures, proves the existence and uniqueness of the
Teichm¨uller functor. The analytic space that represents it is a ﬁber
bundle over Teichm¨uller space which satisﬁes some universal property.

20

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Let us now state in more precise terms Grothendieck’s deﬁnitions

and results.

In what follows, all morphisms are complex analytic.

Deﬁnition 4.1. An analytic space X over an analytic space S is a
pair (X, f ) where X and S are analytic spaces X and f : X → S is an
analytic map. The map f is called the projection map.

We shall use (like Grothendieck) the notation X/S for an analytic

space over an analytic space S, highlighting the base S.

Given an analytic space X/S, with projection map f : X → S,
and a point s in S, the ﬁber over s is the inverse image f −1(s). The
ﬁber above any point is an analytic space. More precisely, it is the
ﬁber product X ×S {s}. (See below for the general deﬁnition.) The
analytic space X/S over S is sometimes denoted by (X, f ). The pair
(X, f ) is regarded as a family of analytic spaces parametrized by S,
and sometimes, a deformation of one of the ﬁbers of the map f .

In the case at hand, the ﬁbers are Riemann surfaces of the same
genus. Under the technical condition that the map f is ﬂat, we may
think of this map as a deformation of the complex structure of some
ﬁber.

Families of analytic spaces of dimension 2 or more are usually stud-
ied within the theory of Kodaira-Spencer. Grothendieck also developed
a theory that included this deformation theory into the abstract alge-
braic geometry setting. Fiber products and the related theory of “base
change,” in algebraic topology, are central objects in Grothendieck’s
theory.

Given an analytic space X/S and an open set U in S, the restriction
(X|U )/U of X/S to U is the analytic space f −1(U) equipped with its
natural ﬁbration over U.

For a ﬁxed analytic space S, the set of analytic spaces over S form a
category AS. A morphism between the two objects (X, f ) and (X ′, f ′)
is an analytic map g : X → X ′ commuting with the projections and
In other words, we have f ′ ◦ g = f , or the
the identity map on S.
following diagram commutes:

X
f ↓

S

g

−→ X ′
↓f ′
Id−→ S′

For any morphism between analytic spaces

we have a functor

h : S′ → S,

AS → AS ′.

Grothendieck considers this morphism as a base-change functor. It
sends every analytic space f : X → S over S to the analytic space

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

21

X ×S S′ → S′ over S′ where X ×S S′ is the ﬁber product of X and
S′ over S. We recall that as an underlying topological space, this is
the set of pairs (x, y) ∈ X × S′ satisfying f (x) = h(y), where the map
X ×S S′ → S′ is induced from the projection on the second factor. The
introduction of the sheaf deﬁning the analytic structure of this space
needs some care. The ﬁber product X ×S S′ → S′ is also called the
pull-back of X by h and denoted by h∗X. It is an analytic space over
S′.

The notion of ﬁber product is a generalization of the notion of ex-

tension for scalars.

An analytic space X over S is said to be proper if the associated
map f : X → S is proper, that is, if the inverse image by f of any
compact subset of S is a compact subset of X. Note that this is a
topological condition which does not use the analytic structures of the
spaces X and S. The space X is said to be simple if for every x in
X there exists a neighborhood U of s = f (x) and a neighborhood V
of x over U such that V is U-isomorphic to a product U × C where
C is a complex variety. This condition easily implies that there are no
other singularities on the ﬁbers than those that arise from U. The last
statement is a kind of an implicit function theorem `a la Grothendieck.

Deﬁnition 4.2. An analytic curve of genus g over S is an analytic
space X over S which is proper and simple and such that the ﬁbers
(which are compact complex varieties) are connected Riemann surfaces
of genus g.

Lemma 4.3. An analytic curve of genus g over an analytic space S is
a locally trivial topological ﬁber space.

This lemma is easy to prove if S is a manifold,29 but in the present

setting, S might not be a manifold. The lemma is proved by Grothendieck
in a later lecture ([30], Proposition I.8).

With the above deﬁnitions, the main question becomes that of un-
derstanding the space of isomorphism classes of analytic curves over a
given space S.

To do this, Grothendieck introduces several categories. The ﬁrst of
them is the category FS of algebraic curves of genus g over a ﬁxed space
S. The second category, denoted by F, is the category of algebraic
curves of genus g over variable spaces. This is a ﬁbered category, that
is, a category in which the operation of ﬁber product is deﬁned.30 In
Grothendieck’s words, the aim of his seminar talks is “to determine,

29A theorem attributed to Ehresmann says that if π : X → S is a proper
submersion between diﬀerentiable manifolds, then π is locally trivial in the C∞
sense. For our purposes, it is not suﬃcient to consider the case where S is a
manifold, and one must also deal with singular complex spaces.

30The reader may remember that the set-theoretical ﬁber product is always
deﬁned, but that we ask here that the resulting objects are elements of the category,

22

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

in a simple way, the structure of the ﬁbered category F, up to ﬁbered
category equivalence.” In fact, the problem considered by Grothendieck
amounts to that of ﬁnding a universal object, also called a ﬁnal element
in this second category. Roughly speaking, this is an object from which
every other object is obtained by pull-back.31 We shall be more precise
below.

Let A be the set of objects of F up to isomorphism and A(S) the set
of objects of FS up to isomorphism. In other words, A(S) is the set of
curves of genus g up to isomorphism over a ﬁxed space S.

The dependence on S of analytic curves over S is a contravariant

functor

A : (An) → (Ens)

from the category (An) into the category (Ens): to the analytic space
S we associate the set of analytic curves above S, and to a morphism
h : f : S′ → S between analytic spaces we associate the set-theoretic
map which assigns to an analytic curve over S its pull-back by f on
S′. This pull-back is an analytic curve over S′.

The ﬁrst approach to the solution of the moduli problem is to obtain
a representation of the functor A. Grothendieck notes that if no object
of FS had a nontrivial automorphism, then the category FS would
be known, up to equivalence, by the set A(S). In other words, if no
object of FS has non-trivial automorphisms, then the map FS → A(S)
is injective, and the morphisms in FS are also determined by this map.
Thus, the category FS would be known by the set represented. And if
the same condition were satisﬁed for every S, then the ﬁbered category
F would be known up to equivalence from the functor A. If furthermore
the functor A were representable, that is, if it were isomorphic to a
functor of the form

S → Hom(S, M)

from the category (An) of analytic spaces into the category (Ens) of
sets, where M is some appropriate object of (An) (M will be in fact
Teichm¨uller space), then the ﬁbered category F would be known up to
equivalence from that object M, because everything would be obtained
by a pull-back, using a map onto M.

It turns out, as Grothendieck notes right at the beginning (p. 7-03)
that the functor A is not representable, and the reason is that some
curves of genus g may have non-trivial automorphisms. The goal of
the theory is then to eliminate these automorphisms. This leads to the
introduction of another functor, denoted by P. This is a representable
functor from the category of marked curves of genus g over analytic

that is, they are analytic, etc. With this requirement, such an operation does not
exist in an arbitray category.

31For this to hold, the morphisms of F should be deﬁned with care; a morphism
from X → S to X ′ → S ′ is given by a morphism from S to S ′ and an isomorphism
between X and X ′ ×S ′ S (that is, F is a category which is ﬁbered in groupoids).

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

23

spaces to the category of sets, and the object that represents this cat-
egory is the Teichm¨uller curve. This is the content of Grothendieck’s
theorem. The result is equivalent to Teichm¨uller’s theorem (Theorem
3.1) which says that one can reconstruct any globally analytic family
over an analytic space B by taking the pull-back by a map f : B → C
of the Teichm¨uller curve H[c] over C.

With the existence of the functor P, the categories F and FS become

representable ﬁbered categories.

The mapping class group appears now in the construction of principal
coverings of S. We start by describing a general topological construc-
tion which Grothendieck presents; it uses Lemma 4.3.

Let X be a topological space equipped with a locally trivial ﬁbration
over a topological space S, a ﬁber being a ﬁnite simplicial complex C0,
and let G be the extended mapping class group of C0, that is, the group
of homotopy classes of homeomorphisms of this space.

For a given point s in S, let Xs be the ﬁber above it. The space
I(C0, Xs) is the set of homotopy classes of homeomorphisms between
the two spaces. It is a principal homogeneous space for the group G.
The union of the sets I(C0, Xs), for s in S, has a natural structure of a
principal covering above S, with group G. It is denoted by R(X/S). For
a ﬁxed C0, Grothendieck notes the following properties of the operation
R:

(1) For S ﬁxed, this is a functor in X.
(2) It is compatible with the operation of taking pull-backs of ﬁber

spaces.

The group G also acts on the homology and the cohomology groups
of C0, and one obtains the local systems of the homology and the coho-
mology of the ﬁbers of X/S by taking the ﬁber bundles associated to
the principal covering R(X/S), with the various operations described.
Now we specialize to the case where C0 is a topological surface which
underlies the algebraic curves of genus g that we are considering. The
mapping class group of C0 is the group of isotopy classes of orientation-
preserving diﬀeomorphisms of this curve, and it is denoted by γ. It is
an index-2 subgroup of the group G associated to C0 that were deﬁned
above. Grothendieck calls γ the Teichm¨uller group.

Choosing continuously a system of orientations on the ﬁbers Xs is
equivalent to choosing a section of the principal Z/2Z-covering of S
associated to R(X/S), that is, restricting the structure group G to γ.
The result is a principal covering of S, whose group is γ, and which is
denoted by P(X/S).

As already noted, because curves of genus g ≥ 2 may have non-trivial
automorphisms, the functor F is not representable. Furthermore the
theory developed later shows that the existence of such automorphisms
also prevents the functor A of being representable.

24

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

We now recall that in the particular case where the base S is a
point (that is, when the ﬁbered spaces are ordinary curves of genus
g), Teichm¨uller solved the problem of the elimination of nontrivial au-
tomorphisms of Riemann surfaces by introducing a marking, and he
also introduced the mapping class group action on the space of marked
surfaces. The markings that he used for Riemann surfaces are not al-
ways mapping class group elements; he also used be decompositions
of the surface by collections of simple closed curves such that an ele-
ment of the mapping class group which sends each curve to itself up
to homotopy is necessarily the identity mapping class. The non-trivial
automorphisms of the structures considered are the cause of singular-
ities. The elimination of these singularities is also done through the
marking; in this sense the marking is a rigidiﬁcation of the objects by
adding an extra structure. The mapping class group action becomes
part of the structure. The introduction of this group then leads to the
construction of an inﬁnite covering space of moduli space, which is Te-
ichm¨uller space. This is an example of a general idea of a “rigidiﬁcation
by taking a covering space.” It leads to the following deﬁnition due to
Grothendieck:

The Teichm¨uller covering P(X/S) of X/S is a topological covering
of S and the mapping class group γ acts on the ﬁbers by interchanging
sheets over points. This action is discrete and P(X/S) is a principal
bundle over S. The covering P(X/S) is also equipped with an analytic
structure, deﬁned by the property that the local projections are ana-
lytic isomorphisms. The group γ operates analytically on P(X/S) by
S-automorphisms (that is, automorphisms that induce the identity on
S).

The map

X/S 7→ P(X/S)

is a covariant functor between the categories FS and (Ens).
It as-
sociates to a morphism h : X/S → X ′/S a map between coverings
P(X/S) → P(X ′/S) obtained by transporting by the homotopy class
of h a mapping class group action on the ﬁbers of X/S to a mapping
class group action on the ﬁbers of X ′/S.

The passage from X/S to P(X/S) has the following rigidity property

which Grothendieck proves in his later talks:

Theorem 4.4. Any automorphism of an X/S ∈ FS which induces the
identity on P(X/S) is the identity.

An equivalent form of Theorem 4.4 is the following which we shall

see in more detail below:

Theorem 4.5. The functor P is a rigidifying functor.

We recall that this means that every automorphism of an object of

FS which induces the identity on P(X/S) is the identity.

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

25

Deﬁnition 4.6. A Teichm¨uller structure (or a P-structure) on a curve
X of genus g above an analytic space S is a section of the Teichm¨uller
covering P(X/S) over S.

Since γ operates on the right on P(X/S), it also operates on the

right on the set of Teichm¨uller structures.

Deﬁnition 4.7 (P-curve). A P-curve is a curve of genus g equipped
with a P-structure.

The P-curves of genus g form a ﬁbered category, denoted by FP,
which lies above the category of analytic spaces. A P-curve above S
(that is, an element of FP) does not have any nontrivial automorphism.
If S is connected and nonempty and if the set of Teichm¨uller struc-
tures on X/S is nonempty, then this set is a principal homogeneous set
with structural group γ.

Deﬁnition 4.8. A curve of genus g over S, equipped with a Te-
ichm¨uller structure, is called a Teichm¨uller curve of genus g over S.

From Theorem 4.4, we obtain:

Proposition 4.9. An automorphism of a Teichm¨uller curve is the
identity.

Using the notion of pull-back of a Teichm¨uller curve X/S by a mor-

phism S′ → S, we have:

Proposition 4.10. Teichm¨uller curves of genus g form a ﬁbered cat-
egory over the category (An) of analytic spaces.

Grothendieck states several properties valid in a much more general

setting.

Let γ be now a discrete group. We assume that for every analytic

space S we have a covariant functor

P : X/S → P(X/S)

from the category FS of curves of genus g above S to the category of
principal coverings of S of group γ.

The curves are now equipped with a marking such that every au-
tomorphism of the curve over S which preserves the marking is the
identity.

An automorphism of an object in FS induces an automorphism on

its image P(X/S).

In the case where S is a point, the functor associates to a curve a

discrete space on which the group γ acts transitively.

Grothendieck gives the following examples of rigidifying functors.
Suppose we have two groups γ, γ′ and a homomorphism γ → γ′,
and suppose we have a rigidifying functor that uses the group γ, in the
above sense. If the kernel γ → γ′ is small enough, then P′ is also a
rigidifying functor.

26

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

We get a functor called ﬁbering functor (“foncteur ﬁbrant”) from
the ﬁbered category of curves of genus g into the ﬁbered category of
principal coverings of group γ′, by deﬁning:

P′(X/S) = P(X/S) ×γ γ′.
This functor amounts to adding more marking.

Grothendieck shows that any rigidifying functor can be obtained in

the above way from the Teichm¨uller functor.

In the next example, P is Teichm¨uller’s rigidifying functor, and γ is

again the mapping class group.

The group γ acts on the homology group H1(C0, Z) where C0 is a
ﬁber, leaving invariant the symplectic intersection form. Choosing a
basis, we get a representation

We get a ﬁbering functor :

γ → Sp(2g, Z).

X/S 7→ P(X/S) ×γ Sp(2g, Z) = P′(X/S).

If we replace the coeﬃcient group Z by Z/nZ, we get a ﬁbered functor

with respect to the ﬁnite group Sp(2g, Z/nZ):

X/S 7→ P(X/S) × Sp(2g, Z/nZ) = Pn(X/S).

Sections of this ﬁber space over S are Riemann surfaces together
with the choice of a symplectic basis of the homology of the surface
with coeﬃcients in Z/nZ.

Lemma 4.11. There exists an integer n > 0 such that the ﬁbered
functor Pn is rigidifying.

This implies that P′ is rigidifying, and it then implies that P is

rigidifying. This is used in the proof of Theorem 3.2.

FP

S is the functor FS rigidiﬁed by P. For any analytic space S, let

AP(S) be the set of objects of FP

S up to isomorphism. Then,

Theorem 4.12. The contravariant functor

S 7→ AP(S)

is representable.

5. A quick survey of Grothendieck’s Expos´es II to IX

In this section, we brieﬂy describe the content of Expos´es II to IX of

Grothendieck’s lectures at Cartan’s seminar.

Expos´e II. G´en´eralit´es sur les espaces annel´es et les espaces
(General facts on ringed spaces and analytic spaces.)
analytiques.
[22]

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

27

The goal in this talk is to introduce in a natural way the notion
of analytic space. The notion of analytic manifold was already intro-
duced by Cartan and others, and Grothendieck needs to introduce the
more general notion of analytic variety, which may be singular. This
is needed because the moduli space Mg of curves of genus g is not a
smooth manifold. (In fact, it is not even a manifold.) In this expos´e,
Grothendieck explains how to allow nilpotent elements in the structural
sheaf, on the model of what he did for schemes.

Before considering analytic spaces, Grothendieck introduces the more
general notion of ringed space (“espace annel´e”). The main idea is that
points are deﬁned as local functions.

A ringed space is a topological space32 X equipped with a collection
of commutative rings OX that forms the structure sheaf of X. The
elements of these commutative rings can be thought of as functions
deﬁned on open sets of X. In a ringed space, a point is described as
a maximal ideal. Thus, a ringed space has an underlying topological
space but it carries much more information than the topology of this
underlying space.

A local ring is a commutative ring which has a unique maximal ideal.
A typical example is the ring of rational functions on C for which a given
point is not a pole. This is the “local ring of rational functions” at the
given point. Grothendieck then introduces the notion of a locally ringed
space (“espace annul´e par anneaux locaux”) and of (local) morphisms
between such spaces. A ringed space (X, OX ) is locally ringed when
the ﬁbers of the structure sheaf OX are local rings.

An open subset of a locally ringed space X is an open subset U of
the underlying topological space equipped with the restricted sheaf of
rings OX |U . The pair (U, OX|U ) is then itself a locally ringed space.

An example of a locally ringed space is a topological space X with
structure sheaf the sheaf OX of real-valued or complex-valued continu-
ous functions on open subsets of X. Other examples include diﬀeren-
tiable manifolds, complex manifolds and analytic varieties.

The spectrum of a commutative ring A (that is, the set of its prime
ideals) is a locally ringed space. This space is equipped with a topol-
ogy obtained by declaring the closed sets to be the collections of prime
ideals of A that contain a given ideal. We recall that a scheme is a lo-
cally ringed space obtained by gluing together spectra of commutative
rings. The topological space X deﬁned on the spectrum of a commuta-
tive ring has a naturally deﬁned sheaf of rings, its structure sheaf OX ,
and the ringed space (X, OX ) is called an aﬃne scheme. The category
of aﬃne schemes is equivalent to the (dual) category of commutative

32The topology on X may be an unusual topology, for instance the Zariski topol-
ogy of an algebraic variety, which is generally not Hausdorﬀ, or the etale topology
(introduced by Grothendieck).

28

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

rings. One of the goals of Grothendieck was to build a geometric cate-
gory which is equivalent to the (dual) category of commutative rings.
There is a natural notion of morphism between ringed spaces or
locally ringed spaces: If (X, OX ) and (Y, OY ) are two locally ringed
spaces, a morphism between them is given by a continuous map f :
X → Y together with a morphism f ♯ : OY → f ∗OX from the structure
sheaf of Y to the direct image of the structure sheaf of X such that
for every x in X, the ring morphism OY,f (x) → OX,x induced by f ♯ is a
morphism of local rings, that is, it sends the maximal ideal of OY,f (x)
to the maximal ideal of OX,x. Thus, a morphism between (locally)
ringed spaces is speciﬁed by a pair of maps (f, f ♯). Equipped with
these morphisms, ringed spaces and locally ringed spaces form two
categories, the second one being a subcategory of the ﬁrst.

In the analytic case,33 a morphism f : (X, OX) → (Y, OY ) between
locally ringed spaces is said to be unramiﬁed34 if f is a topological
immersion and if for all x in X the ring morphism OY,f (x) → OX,x is
surjective.

A morphism between ringed spaces is not determined by the induced
map on the underlying topological spaces, and as always in this setting,
a morphism in which the underlying topological spaces are points is
already an interesting object. For instance, for every point x in a
locally ringed space (X, OX ), the topological space {x} equipped with
the constant sheaf k(x) is a locally ringed space. We have an immersion
between locally ringed spaces (x, k(x)) → (X, OX ).

Examples of locally ringed spaces include:

• Diﬀerentiable manifolds, equipped with their C-valued diﬀeren-

tiable functions;

• Complex varieties, equipped with their holomorphic functions;
• Algebraic varieties;
• Schemes, which we already encountered.

More precisely, a scheme is a locally ringed space (X, OX ) such that
any point P of X has a neighborhood U such that the restricted locally
ringed space (U, (O)|U ) is an aﬃne scheme.

An important idea in Grothendieck’s theory of schemes is that a
scheme is characterized by the morphisms from other schemes into it.
There is a tangent space associated to a locally ringed space which
generalizes the standard construction for diﬀerentiable manifolds. In-
ﬁnitesimal deformations correspond to enlarging the structural ring.

Let us now review the content of Expos´e II.
Grothendieck declares in the introduction to Expos´e II that his aim
in the series of talks is to give a sketch, as brief as possible, of the

33In the algebraic case, the deﬁniton has to be modiﬁed.
34Algebraic geometers say “unramiﬁed” (and they also talk of a “net morphism”)

for something diﬀerential topologists would call an immersion.

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

29

elements of the foundations of analytic geometry that are needed in
the formulation of the most important existence problems, with the
aim of proving the theorems stated in Expos´e I. The theorems general-
ize the existence and uniqueness theorem of Teichm¨uller (Theorem 3.1
above). Except for some special cases, the results are developed in a
setting which is more general than that of complex algebraic geometry,
namely, they are valid for algebraic geometry over an arbitrary com-
plete ﬁeld equipped with a valuation. This will play an important role
in Grothendieck’s general program on moduli spaces of varieties over
general ﬁelds. The special cases are those of Expos´e VII [27], in which
Grothendieck presents what he considers as “more profound results,”
namely, on the theory (of the type GAGA) of projective morphisms,
due to Grauert-Remmert, and the ﬁniteness theorem of Grauert, which
are special to the case where the base ﬁeld is the ﬁeld C of complex
numbers.

Some pre-requisites are needed in the deﬁnition of an analytic space.

Quoting Grothendieck:

Our immediate goal is to develop certain global existence
theorems and at the same time the language in which they
can be formulated. It appears that the list of result which
we shall need amounts to the following ([39] [40]):
(1) The ring An = k(t1, . . . , tn) of convergent power series
in n variables is a Noetherian local ring whose comple-
tion is isomorphic to the ring of formal power series in
the ti.

(2) Let A → B be a homomorphism of k-analytic local
algebras over k (that is, isomorphic to non-zero quo-
tients of the rings Ai), such that the competed ring
ˆB is a ﬁnite-type module over the completed ring ˆA
(we say that B is quasi-ﬁnite over A). Then B is a
ﬁnite-type module over A.

(3) The sheaf of analytic functions of the space kn is a

coherent ring sheaf.

The result in (1) replaces the implicit function theorem in this non-
smooth setting. The inverse may not exist in the setting of polynomials,
and one uses instead this notion of completion of the rings.

Property (2) is a lifting property.
property (3) is a coherence property. The notion of coherence is close

to the notion of being of ﬁnite type.

These results are used to introduce the following notion of analytic

space.

Given a ﬁeld k equipped with a complete valuation, a positive integer
n and given an open set of kn, an analytic function on U is a map U → k
deﬁned by a convergent power series. When U varies we get a sub-sheaf
from the sheaf of maps from kn to k, called the sheaf of holomorphic

30

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

functions on kn. Equipped with this sheaf, kn becomes a ringed space
denoted by En.

Then Grothendieck makes the following deﬁnition:

Deﬁnition 5.1 (Deﬁnition 2.1 of [22]). An analytic space over a com-
plete ﬁeld k equipped with a valuation is a topological space ringed
by k-algebras, such that every point has a neighborhood which is iso-
morphic, with respect to the induced structure, to a ﬁnitely presented
ringed sub-space of a space En.

There are natural deﬁnitions of analytic subspaces and of morphisms
between them. Analytic spaces form a category. The ﬁrst examples of
analytic spaces are the space En deﬁned above and analytic manifolds.
Grothendieck gives several other examples from algebraic geometry.

Expos´e III. Produits ﬁbr´es d’espaces analytiques.
products of analytic spaces.) [23]

In this Expos´e Grothendieck introduces a functor φ

(Fibered

φ(X) : Hom(X, En) → Γ(X, OX )n,

deﬁned by composing with the coordinate functions. Here, En is the
sheaf of holomorphic functions; this is the “model space” deﬁned in
Expos´e II.

Grothendieck calls this functor the sheaf homomorphism, and he
proves that it is an isomorphism (Theorem 5.2). He then determines
the morphisms from an arbitrary analytic space X to En. The functor
φ is needed to map curves in projective space. This is related to Hilbert
schemes.

For n ≥ 1, the set Γ(X, OX)n is the set of n sections of the structure
sheaf OX of X. For n = 1, this set is simply the set of functions on X.
Grothendieck proves the following.

Theorem 5.2 (Theorem 1.1 of [23]). For any analytic space X, the
sheaf homomorphism φ is an isomorphism.

Corollary 5.3 (Corollary 1.2 of [23]). The contravariant functor

X → Γ(X, OX )n

deﬁned on the category (An) of analytic spaces with values in the cat-
egory (Ens) of sets is representable by the object En.

Theorem 5.4 (Theorem 2.1 of [23]). In the category (An) of analytic
spaces, ﬁnite projective limits exist. The canonical functor

T : (An) → (Top),

which associates to every analytic space the underlying topological space,
commutes to projective limits.

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

31

Grothendieck then proves existence theorems for ﬁber products in
the analytic category, that is, the product of two spaces equipped with
morphisms hitting the same target. These results are needed for base
change, and this is important for comparing families, and also for pass-
ing to ﬁnite covers, and undoing monodromies.

The inﬁnitesimal structure (that is, the local ring structure) on the
ﬁber product is obtained from the inﬁnitesimal structure on each of
the two factors. This is also useful in gluing local deformation spaces.

Expos´e IV. Formalisme g´en´eral des foncteurs repr´esentables
(General formalism of representable functors.) [24] We already outlined
the ideas in this section in §3 of the present chapter.

Expos´e V. Fibr´es vectoriels, ﬁbr´es projectifs, ﬁbr´es en dra-
peaux. (Vector bundles, projective bundles, ﬂag bundles.) [25]

A ﬂag bundle is deﬁned as an increasing sequence of sub-bundles,
each one being locally a direct factor of the next one, generalizing
the usual notion of ﬂag in linear algebra to the setting of ringed spaces.
This leads to the theory of a “relative scheme” over a ringed space. The
algebraic and topological operations and the algebraic and topological
languages enter into the realm of analytic geometry. Grothendieck
explains how to associate to vector bundles, projective bundles and
ﬂag bundle functors which are representable.

The paper starts with some preliminary remarks saying that it is
unfortunate that the language of schemes relative to a ringed space
was not developed in the foundational essay [11] by Dieudonn´e and
Grothendieck, that one has to work in the category of analytic spaces
but that there is a clear necessity to develop a relative35 theory of
analytic spaces over general spaces ringed by topological rings. This
is an instance of Grothendieck’s idea of establishing functors between
theories so that constructions and results in one theory follow from
constructions and results in the other one. In the present setting, the
“relative theory” would be used in the following way:

To each algebraic space X and to each relative scheme of ﬁnite type
over S, one can associate an analytic space Xan such that for any
analytic space over S (that is, an analytic space equipped with an an-
alytic morphism X → S; see deﬁnition 4.1 below) one has a bijection
HomS(T, Xan) → HomS(T, X) which is functorial in T . Here, the ﬁrst
Hom is understood in the category (An) of analytic spaces and the sec-
ond one in the category of ringed spaces with local rings. Grothendieck
declares that “all the operations of vector bundles, ﬂag bundles, etc.
in analytic geometry can be deduced from analogous constructions in
algebraic geometry by applying the functor X → Xan, and their main

35A relative theory is another name for a theory of spaces over spaces. We

already mentioned examples.

32

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

formal properties trivially follow from results in algebraic geometry and
from the elementary properties of the functor X → Xan.”
Expos´e VI. ´Etude locale des morphismes : germes d’espaces
(Local study of
analytiques, platitude, morphismes simples.
morphisms: germs of analytic spaces, ﬂatness and simple morphisms.)
[26]

Grothendieck gives the deﬁnition of a germ of an analytic space and

of morphisms between two such spaces. He then deﬁnes a functor

(germes An)o → (Alg An)

from the category of germs of analytic spaces into the category of ana-
lytic algebras and he proves that this gives an equivalence between the
inverse category of the category of germs of analytic spaces and the
category of analytic algebras.
Expos´e VII. ´Etude locale des morphismes: ´el´ements de calcul
inﬁnit´esimal. (Local study of morphisms: elements of inﬁnitesimal
calculus.) [27]

This expos´e concerns local deformations.
Grothendieck develops the use of ringed spaces with nilpotent ele-
ments. He formulates fundamental geometric notions and the elements
of the inﬁnitesimal geometry of analytic spaces over analytic spaces
with nilpotent elements that appear in the geometric constructions
that will follow.
In particular, he deﬁnes the notion of submersion
in this non-smooth case, in which inﬁnitesimal neighborhoods are de-
scribed by powers of the deﬁning ideals. He also gives a diﬀerential
characterization of local immersions and he provides several examples.

Expos´e VIII. Rapport sur les th´eor`emes de ﬁnitude de Grauert
et Remmert. (Report on the ﬁniteness theorems of Grauert and Rem-
mert.) [27]

The results in this talk, unlike those of the rest of the series, are re-
stricted to the case where the ground ﬁeld is the ﬁeld C of complex num-
bers. Here, Grothendieck presents results of Grauert [14] and Grauert-
Remmert [15] on morphisms between analytic spaces. These results be-
long to a series of “ﬁniteness theorems” in analytic geometry. Grauert’s
ﬁniteness result [14] says that a certain module associated to proper
morphisms between analytic spaces is coherent. The coherence prop-
erty guarantees that certain cohomology groups are ﬁnite-dimensional.
One then deduces the desired ﬁniteness property. Grauert’s ﬁniteness
result is a generalization of the so-called Cartan-Serre ﬁniteness the-
orem [7] and [42] of the type “GAGA,” stating that the cohomology
vector spaces of a compact complex space with values in a coherent
sheaf are ﬁnite-dimensional.

Grothendieck declares that this theorem should be interpreted as
an expression of the equivalence between the “algebraic geometry of

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

33

relative projective schemes over an analytic space Y ” and the theory
of “projective analytic spaces over Y .” He also says that the analogues
of these two theorems in the setting of algebraic geometry were already
known and much more easier to prove. Grothendieck refers to [12].

We note that there is a Bourbaki seminar by Cartan on Grauert’s

results [5].

Expos´e IX. Quelques probl`emes de modules.
problems.) [29]

(Some moduli

In this penultimate talk, Grothendieck reviews some typical “mod-

uli” problems. These include Hilbert moduli and Picard moduli.

For the existence theorem of Hilbert moduli spaces in the setting of
schemes, he refers to [20]. This theorem is the essential tool that is
needed in Expos´e X for the construction of Teichm¨uller space.

6. A review of Grothendieck’s Expos´e X: The

construction of moduli space and of Teichm¨uller space

We now review Grothendieck’s last lecture in the series, [30], in which
he describes the construction of Teichm¨uller space and gives his own
version of Teichm¨uller’s theorem (Theorem 3.1). The proof uses what
Grothendieck calls the “rigidity of the Jacobi functor of level n ≥ 3 .”
The statement of this last result is the following:

Theorem 6.1 (Theorem 3.1 of [30]). For any integer n ≥ 3, the Carte-
sian Jacobi functor of level n deﬁned on the ﬁbered category of curves
of genus g on analytic spaces S is a rigidifying functor.

The Jacobian J(S) of the closed surface S is the torus H1(S, R)/H1(S, Z).

It is equipped with the structure of a projective variety.

The result is often quoted by Teichm¨uller theorists in the following
weak form: For a surface S of genus ≥ 2, if φ : S → S is a holomorphic
and bijective map that induces the identity on H1(S, Z/nZ) for some
n ≥ 3, then φ is the identity map.

Grothendieck attributes this theorem to Serre. The result was an-

nounced in the ﬁrst lecture ([21] , §2.4).

We now review the content of [30].
Grothendieck starts by saying that he will give the construction of
Teichm¨uller space only in the case of genus g ≥ 2. The construction in
the case g = 1 is left to the reader. This case is direct and elementary
and does not use Hilbert schemes. He adds that this construction works
more generally for moduli of tori and of polarized abelian varieties, but
that it is transcendental. The construction that he gives for genus
g ≥ 2 is algebraic and leads to the existence of the moduli spaces (as
schemes) of curves of genus g.

Grothendieck uses cohomology techniques which he did not use in

the previous talks. He introduces the notion of linear rigidiﬁcation.

34

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Let S be as before an analytic space, and X/S a ﬁber space over S,
where the ﬁbers are Riemann surfaces. Let Ω1
X/S be the sheaf over X
whose sections are the holomorphic 1-forms on the ﬁbers. These are
called relative 1-forms. The reason is that they only act on vectors
that are tangent to the ﬁbers.

We ﬁx an integer g ≥ 2 and an integer k ≥ 3. For such a choice
of k and for any Riemann surface of genus g over S, the tensor power
X/S)⊗k is a relatively ample sheaf, that is, it has enough sections to
(Ω1
allow embeddings of each ﬁber in a projective space. The dimension of
the space of global 1-forms on the ﬁbers is independent of the conformal
structure of the surface. It can be computed using the Riemann-Roch
theorem, and it depends only on the genus. For every point on the
Riemann surface, the space of all sections that vanish at this point is
a codimension-one subspace of the vector space of cubic diﬀerentials.
Grothendieck uses this to deﬁne an embedding of the curve in the
projective space. The image has high codimension.

Deﬁnition 6.2 (Linear rigidiﬁcation). Let X be a curve of genus g
over an analytic space S. A linear rigidiﬁcation of X is a sequence of
sections (w1, . . . , wr) of the module EX/S that are pointwise the base of
the k-forms.36

Such a basis plays the role of a marking. This explains the word

“rigidiﬁcation.”

For s in S, the embedding of the ﬁber is obtained by mapping each

element p ∈ f −1(s) to

w1(s)(p) : w2(s)(p) : . . . : wr(s)(p) ∈ Pr−1(C).

For r = 3, this is the so-called tricanonical embedding of the ﬁber.
It commutes with the symmetries of the curve: any symmetry of the
curve is realized as a global projective motion of the projective space.
The set P(EX/S) of linear rigidiﬁcations of X/S is an analytic variety
over S. It is identiﬁed with the set of sections of a locally trivial analytic
principal ﬁber bundle whose structural group is G = GL(r, C). The
automorphisms of the Riemann surface give rise to automorphisms of
this group. Once we ﬁx a basis for the vector space of cubic diﬀerentials,
there are no more symmetries allowed in the group G = GL(3, C).

In conclusion, we get a canonical immersion

X → P(EX/S)

which is functorial in X/S (for a ﬁxed S). This immersion is compat-
ible with base-change and any automorphism of X which induces the
identity on (EX/S) is the identity of X. In other words, the morphism

X → P(EX/S)

36r is determined by Rienamm-Roch r = k(2g − 2) − g + 1

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

35

is a functor. It assigns to X all the diﬀerent ways of putting above S a
Riemann surface with a basis for the cubic (k-)diﬀerentials, everything
varying holomorphically.

The set R(X/S) of linear rigidiﬁcations of S is seen now as a GL(r, C)-
principal bundle. This is a locally trivial analytic principal ﬁber bundle
over S.

The set of isomorphism classes of curves of genus g above S equipped

with a linear rigidiﬁcation is denoted by UR(S). The morphism

UR : S → UR(S)

is a contravariant functor from the category (An) of analytic spaces to
the category (Ens).

Now let B be the contravariant functor from (An) into (Ens) which
assigns to every Riemann surface S the set B(S) of analytic closed
subspaces of the projective space which are curves of genus g above
X. (This is the Hilbert functor, represented by the Hilbert scheme.) It
was proved in Expos´e IX ([29], 1.3) that this functor is representable
and this is where the Jacobi functor is used. One needs to prove that
the functor UR is representable relatively to B ([23], IV, 3.3).

Grothendieck proves the following result which is an analogue of the

result in [21] that concerns the Teichm¨uller curve:

Theorem 6.3. The contravariant functor UR on the category (An)
is representable by an analytic space MR all of whose local rings are
regular of dimension 3g − 3 + dim(G).

Using again the Riemann-Roch theorem, Grothendieck obtains the

following

Corollary 6.4 (Corollary 3.3 of [30]). Let X be a curve of genus g ≥ 2
over S. Then any S-automorphism of X that induces the identity on
the ﬁbres of X is the identity.

Lemma 6.5 (Lemma 3.4 of [30]). Let X be an algebraic curve of genus
g ≥ 2 over a ﬁeld k, let A be its homogenous Jacobian variety and let
u be an automorphism of X that induces the identity on A. Then u is
the identity.

Lemma 6.6 (Lemma 3.5 of [30]). Let A be an abelian variety over
an algebraically closed ﬁeld, let n be an integer ≥ 3 which is relatively
prime to the characteristic of k, and let u be a ﬁnite order automor-
phism of A that ﬁxes the points of order n of A. Then u is the identity.

The paper concludes with the following result on the universal Te-

ichm¨uller curve:

Corollary 6.7 (Corollary 5.4 of [30]). The automorphism group of
the universal Teichm¨uller curve of genus g is reduced to the identity if
g ≥ 3 and it is the group Z/2Z generated by the hyperelliptic symmetry
in the cases g = 1 and g = 2.

36

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

Here, the universal automorphism group is the group of automor-
phisms of the Teichm¨uller universal curve which act trivially on Te-
ichm¨uller space.

Grothendieck concludes from the series of talks that we are reviewing
that the analytic space T equipped with the automorphism group γ
can be considered as a satisfactory solution of the “moduli problem”
for curves of genus g, since it allows to reconstitute completely the
ﬁbered category F that we started with, and thus, to solve, at least
theoretically, all the problems that can be expressed in terms of this
ﬁbered category. This statement is proved in [30].

7. In way of a conclusion

Our aim in this chapter was to present a point of view on Teichm¨uller
theory which is completely ignored by Teichm¨uller theorists. In dis-
cussing with algebraic geometers and in corresponding with them, we
also learned that this part of Grothendieck’s work is also very poorly
known in this community.

It is also a fact that algebraic geometers interested in moduli spaces
have a very poor knowledge of most of the developements that were
worked out by the analysts and the low-dimensional topologists on
Teichm:”uller space.

Let us also note that Grothendieck, in these lectures, raised several
questions, among them the question of whether Teichm¨uller space is
Stein ([21] p. 14).
In 1964, Bers and Ehrenpreis showed that any
Teichm¨uller space can be embedded as a domain of holomorphy in
some CN .

Finally, Grothendieck notes that it would be good to ﬁnd a direct
algebro-geometric description, in terms of universal problems, of the
Baily-Satake compactiﬁcations of various moduli spaces (for curves as
well as for polarized abelian varieties). He says that such a description
would be applicable as well in the context of schemes, and would be the
starting point of a purely geometric theory of automorphic functions,
such as the one developed in [33] by Igusa for genus one. We shall not
attempt to survey the developments of this rich theory, because this
would lead us too far.

In conclusion, Teichm¨uller’s 1944 paper and the corresponding Car-
tan seminar talks by Grothendieck that are considered in this chapter
shed a completely new light on Teichm¨uller space, and they present an
essential aspect about families of Riemann surfaces which is lacking in
the Ahlfors-Bers point of view on this space, which is the most widely
known.

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

37

References

[1] A. A’Campo-Neuen, N. A’Campo, V. Alberge and A. Papadopou-
los, A commentary on Teichm¨uller’s paper Bestimmung der ex-
tremalen quasikonformen Abbildungen bei geschlossenen orientierten Rie-
mannschen Fl¨achen. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopou-
los, ed.), Volume V, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich, 2015.

[2] A. A’Campo-Neuen, N. A’Campo, L. Ji and A. Papadopoulos, A com-
mentary on Teichm¨uller’s paper Ver¨anderliche Riemannsche Fl¨achen. In
Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory, Vol. IV (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Z¨urich,
2014, 805-814.

[3] N. A’Campo, L. Ji and A. Papadopoulos, Actions of the absolute Galois
group. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume
VI, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich, 2016, 397-435.

[4] V. Alberge, A. Papadopoulos and W. Su, A commentary on Teichm¨uller’s
paper Extremale quasikonforme Abbildungen und quadratische Diﬀeren-
tiale, Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory, Volume V (A. Papadopoulos, ed.),
European Mathematical Society Publishing House, Z¨urich, 2016, 486-531.
[5] H. Cartan, Espaces ﬁbr´es analytique. S´eminaire Bourbaki, 1956-1958, ex-

pos´e no. 137, 7-18.

[6] H. Cartan and S. Eilenberg, Homological algebra, Princeton University

Press, 1956.

[7] H. Cartan and J.-P. Serre, Un th´eor`eme de ﬁnitude concernant les vari´et´es

analytiques compactes, C. R. Acad. Sc. Paris, 237 (1953), 128-130.

[8] P. Cartier, A mad day’s work: from Grothendieck to Connes and Kontse-
vich; The evolution of concepts of space and symmetry. Bull. Amer. Math.
Soc. 38 (2001), 389-408.

[9] W.-L. Chow, On compact complex analytic varieties. Amer. J. Math. 71,

(1949). 893¯D914.

[10] P. Colmez

(ed.) and J.-P. Serre, Correspondence Grothendieck-
Serre. (Correspondance Grothendieck-Serre.) Documents Math´ematiques
(Paris). Paris: Soci´et´e Math´ematique de France (2001). American Mathe-
matical Society; Bilingual edition (2003). English translation by Catriona
Maclean.

[11] J. Dieudonn´e and A. Grothendieck, ´El´ements de g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique I. Le
langage des sch´emas. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 4 (1960). Also
as: Die Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften, 166, Springer-
Verlag. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1971.

[12] J. Dieudonn´e and A. Grothendieck, ´El´ements de g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique III,

Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 11 (1961), and 17 (1963).

[13] A. Douady, A tribute to Henri Cartan, Notices of the Amer. Math. Soc.,

Vol. 57 (September 2010), No. 8, 965-967.

[14] H. Grauert, Ein Theorem der analytischen Gerbentheorie und die Mod-
ulr¨aume komplexer Structuren. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 5
(1960).

[15] H. Grauert and R. Remmert, Faisceaux analytiques coh´erents sur le pro-
duit d’un espace analytique et d’un morphisme projectif, C. R. Acad. Sc.
Paris, 245 (1957), 819-822.

[16] A. Grothendieck, G´eom´etrie formelle et g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique S´eminaire

Bourbaki, 5, 1958/1960, Exp. No. 182, 28 p.

38

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

[17] A. Grothendieck, Technique de descente et th´eor`emes d’existence en
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique, I, G´en´eralit´es. Descente par morphismes ﬁd`element
plats. S´eminaire Bourbaki, t. 12, (1959-1960), no. 190.

[18] A. Grothendieck, Technique de descente et th´eor`emes d’existence en
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique, II. Le th´eor`eme d’existence en th´eorie formelle des
modules. S´eminaire Bourbaki 5 (1959-1960) Exp. No. 182, 22 p.

[19] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction et th´eor`emes d’existence
en g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique III : pr´esch´emas quotients. S´eminaire Bourbaki
(1960-1961), Exp. No. 212, 20 p.

[20] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction et th´eor`emes d’existence en
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique. IV. Les sch´emas de Hilbert. S´eminaire Bourbaki 6
(1960-1961), Exp. No. 221, 28 p.

[21] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique.
I. Description axiomatique de l’espace de Teichm¨uller. S´eminaire Henri
Cartan, tome 13, no. 1 (1960-1961), expos´es no. 7 et 8, 1-33.

[22] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique. II.
G´en´eralit´es sur les sespaces annel´es et les espaces analytiques. S´eminaire
Henri Cartan, tome 13, no. 1 (1960-1961), expos´e no. 9, 1-14.

[23] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique. III.
Produits ﬁbr´es d’espaces analytiques. S´eminaire Henri Cartan, tome 13,
no. 1 (1960-1961), expos´e no. 10, 1-11.

[24] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique. IV.
Formalisme g´en´eral des foncteurs repr´esentables. S´eminaire Henri Cartan,
tome 13, no. 1 (1960-1961), expos´e no. 11, 1-28.

[25] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique.
V. Fibr´es vectoiels, ﬁbr´es projectifs, ﬁbr´es en drapeaux. S´eminaire Henri
Cartan, tome 13, no. 1 (1960-1961), expos´e no. 12, 1-15.

[26] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique. VI.
´Etude locale des morphismes: germes d’espaces analytiques, platitude,
morphismes simples. S´eminaire Henri Cartan, tome 13, no. 1 (1960-1961),
expos´e no. 13, 1-13.

[27] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique.
VII. ´Etude locale des morphismes: ´el´ements de calcul
inﬁnit´esimal.
S´eminaire Henri Cartan, tome 13, no. 2 (1960-1961), expos´e no. 14, 1-
27.

[28] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique.
VIII. Rapport sur les th´eor`emes de ﬁnitude de Grauert et Remmert.
S´eminaire Henri Cartan, tome 13, no. 2 (1960-1961), expos´e no. 15, 1-
10.

[29] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique. IX.
Quelques probl`emes de modules. S´eminaire Henri Cartan, tome 13, no. 2
(1960-1961), expos´e no. 16, 1-20.

[30] A. Grothendieck, Techniques de construction en g´eom´etrie analytique. X.
Construction de l’espace de Teichm¨uller. S´eminaire Henri Cartan, tome
13, no. 2 (1960-1961), expos´e no. 17, 1-20. (With and appendix by J. P.
Serre: Rigidit´e du foncteur de Jacobi d’´echelon n ≥ 3).

[31] A. Grothendieck, Technique de descente et th´eor`emes d’existence en
g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique. V. Les sch´emas de Picard : th´eor`emes d’existence.
S´eminaire Bourbaki, 7 (1961-1962), Exp. No. 232, 19 p.

[32] J. H. Hubbard, Souvenirs d’Adrien du temps de ma th`ese, Gazette des

Math´ematiciens, No. 113 (Juillet 2007), 40-44.

ON GROTHENDIECK’S CONSTRUCTION OF TEICHM ¨ULLER SPACE

39

[33] J.-I. Igusa, Kroneckerian model of ﬁelds of elliptic modular functions,

Amer. J. of Math., 81 (1959), 561-577.

[34] S. L. Kleiman, The Picard scheme, In Alexander Grothendieck: A mathe-
matical portrait (L. Schneps, ed.) International Press, Sommerville, 2014,
p. 35-74.

[35] J. Leray, L’anneau spectral et l’anneau ﬁltre d’homologie d’un espace lo-
calement compact et d’une application continue. (French) J. Math. Pures
Appl. S´er. IX, 29 (1950) 1-139.

[36] W. Mangler, Die Klassen von topologischen Abbildungen einer geschlosse-

nen Fl¨ache auf sich, Math. Z. 44 (1938), 541-554.

[37] D. Mumford, My introduction to schemes and functors. In Alexander
Grothendieck: A mathematical portrait (L. Schneps, ed.) International
Press, Sommerville, 2014, p. 75-81.

[38] V. Poenaru, Alexander Grothndieck. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory
(A. Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume VI, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich, 2016,
31-32.

[39] S´eminaire Cartan, t. 4, 1951/52 : Fonctions analytiques de plusieurs vari-

ables complexes.

[40] S´eminaire Cartan, t. 6, 1953/54 : Vari´et´es analytiques complexes et fonc-

tions automorphes.

[41] J.-P. Serre, Faisceaux alg´ebriques coh´erents. Ann. Math. (2) 61 (1955),

197-278.

[42] J.-P. Serre, Espaces ﬁbr´es alg´ebriques. S´eminaire Chevalley, t. 2, 1959,

No. 1, 1-37.

[43] J.-P. Serre, A tribute to Henri Cartan, Notices of the Amer. Math. Soc.,

75, September 2010, No. 8, 946-949.

[44] O. Teichm¨uller, Extremale quasikonforme Abbildungen und quadratische
Diﬀerentiale, Abh. Preuss. Akad. Wiss., Math.-Naturw. Kl. 1940, No. 22,
1-197 (1940). English translation by G. Th´eret, Extremal quasiconformal
mappings and quadratic diﬀerentials. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory,
Volume V (A. Papadopoulos, ed.), European Mathematical Society Pub-
lishing House, Z¨urich, 2016, 322-483.

[45] O. Teichm¨uller, Bestimmung der extremalen quasikonformen Abbildun-
gen bei geschlossenen orientierten Riemannschen Fl¨achen. Abh. Preuss.
Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. 4 (1943), 1–42. English translation by A.
A’Campo-Neuen, Determination of extremal quasiconformal mappings of
closed oriented Riemann surfaces. In Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory (A.
Papadopoulos, ed.), Volume V, EMS Publishing House, Z¨urich, 2016, 533-
567.

[46] O. Teichm¨uller, Ver¨anderliche Riemannsche Fl¨achen. Deutsche Math. 7,
344-359 (1944). English translation by A. A’Campo Neuen, Variable Rie-
mann surfaces, In. Handbook of Teichm¨uller theory, Vol. IV (A. Pa-
padopoulos, ed.), Z¨urich, 2014, 787-803.

40

N. A’CAMPO, L. JI AND A. PAPADOPOULOS

N. A’Campo: Universit¨at Basel, Mathematisches Institut,, Spiegel-
gasse 1, 4051 Basel, Switzerland, and Erwin Schr¨odinger Interna-
tional Institute of Mathematical Physics,, Boltzmanngasse 9, 1090,
Wien, Austria, email: norbert.acampo@gmail.com

L. Ji: Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA, and Erwin Schr¨odinger International Insti-
tute of Mathematical Physics,, Boltzmanngasse 9, 1090, Wien, Aus-
tria, email: lji@umich.edu

A. Papadopoulos: Institut de Recherche Math´ematique Avanc´ee,,
Universit´e de Strasbourg and CNRS,, 7 rue Ren´e Descartes, 67084
Strasbourg Cedex, France, and Erwin Schr¨odinger International Ini-
titute of Mathematical Physics,, Boltzmanngasse 9, 1090, Wien, Aus-
tria, email: papadop@math.unistra.fr

