6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
3

 
 
]
E
N
.
s
c
[
 
 

2
v
8
3
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

On higher order computations and synaptic meta-plasticity

in the human brain: IT point of view

(March, 2016)

Stanis(cid:32)law Ambroszkiewicz

Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences

al. Jana Kazimierza 5, PL-01-248 Warsaw, POLAND,

sambrosz@ipipan.waw.pl

Abstract

Glia modify neuronal connectivity by creating structural changes in the neuronal connec-
tome. Glia also inﬂuence the functional connectome by modifying the ﬂow of information
through neural networks (Fields et al. 2015 [6]). There are strong experimental evidences that
glia are responsible for synaptic meta-plasticity. Synaptic plasticity is the modiﬁcation of the
strength of connections between neurons. Meta-plasticity, i.e. plasticity of synaptic plasticity,
may be viewed as mechanisms for dynamic reconﬁguration of neuron circuits. First order com-
putations in the brain are done by static neuron circuits, whereas higher order computations are
done by dynamic reconﬁgurations of the links (synapses) between the neuron circuits. Static
neuron circuits correspond to ﬁrst order computable functions. Synapse creation correspond to
the mathematical notion of function composition. Functionals are higher order functions that
take functions as their arguments. The construction of functionals is based on dynamic reconﬁg-
urations of the function composition. Perhaps the functionals correspond to the meta-plasticity
in the human brain.

1 Introduction

Gedankenexperiment: a backward time travel of a computer. A contemporary
computer was moved into the XIX-th century so that scientists could make experimen-
tal research. Actually, the idea underlining the functioning of a computer is extremely
simple; it is the von Neumann computer architecture. Would it be possible for the sci-
entists of nineteenth century to discover the idea on the basis of examining the complex
functioning of the working computer system consisting of monitor, a motherboard, a
CPU, a RAM, graphic cards, expansion cards, a power supply, an optical disc drive, a
hard disk drive, a keyboard and a mouse? What about BIOS and operating system as
well as many applications installed?

Perhaps the Gedankenexperiment may serve as a metaphor of the research on (the
human) brain functioning. Although great achievements have been made in the brain
research, the basic mechanisms (idea) underling the human brain functioning are still
a great mystery.

1

The research on computational models of neuron circuits is well established starting
from McCulloch-Pitts networks [12] via the Hopﬁeld model ([8] and [9]) to recurrent
neural networks (RNNs). It seems that RNNs adequately represent the computations
done in the human brain by the real neuron networks. From the Computer Science
point of view, RNNs are Turing complete (Siegelmann and Sontag [17]), i.e., every
computable function may be represented as a RNN. However, Turing machine is a ﬂat
model of computation. There are also higher order computations, i.e. computable
functionals where arguments (input) as well as values (output) are functions.

The Virtual Brain (TVB [16], www.thevirtualbrain.org) project aims at building a
large-scale simulation model of the human brain. It is supposed that brain function
may emerge from the interaction of large numbers of neurons, so that, the research on
TVB may contribute essentially to our understanding of the spatiotemporal dynamics
of the brain’s electrical activity. However, it is unclear how this activity may contribute
to the comprehension of the principles of the human mind functioning.

Adolphs 2015 [1]: “Some argue that we can only understand the brain once we know
how it could be built. Both evolution and development describe temporally sequenced
processes whose ﬁnal expression looks very complex indeed, but the underlying generative
rules may be relatively simple ... ”

Another interesting approach is due to Juergen Schmidhuber: “The human brain is
a recurrent neural network (RNN): a network of neurons with feedback connections”;
see http://people.idsia.ch/ juergen/rnn.html . Indeed, real neural circuits can be mod-
eled as (continuous time) RNNs. Despite the enormous complexity of a hypothetical
RNN modeling the human brain, there is a paradox here because (continuous time)
RNNs are nonlinear dynamic systems. It means that RNNs are high level mathemat-
ical abstractions (of human mind) involving the notion of space-time Continuum that
comprises actual inﬁnity. These very abstractions are created in the human brain (con-
sisting of a ﬁnite number of cells), i.e. the notions related to space-time continuum are
represented (in the brain) in a ﬁnitray way as ﬁnite structures.

The foundations of the mind functioning might be ingenious in its simplicity al-
though the underlying biological mechanism are extremely complex and sophisticated.
Hence, in order to model neuron circuits and the mechanisms responsible for struc-
tural changes in the neuronal connectome, let us use much more simple (than RNN)
primitive notions from Mathematics and Computer Science, i.e. the computable func-
tions and computable functionals. Since Mathematics is a creation of the human mind,
the Foundations of Mathematics may shed some light on the principles of the brain
functioning. That is, the basic mathematical notions can be recognized as concrete
mental structures, and then the corresponding mechanisms of the human brain can be
discovered.

2 Neuron circuits, glia, and computable functions

Before going into details, several assumptions are to be made. The ﬁrst one is that
elementary neuron circuits (corresponding to functional units of the brain) can be
distinguished. The second assumption is that any such circuits (at least temporary)
has clearly identiﬁed input (dendrite spines of some postsynaptic neurons) and output
(axons of some presynaptic neurons). It means that the output is exactly determined
by the input. The third assumption is that such circuits can be composed by a linking
the output of one circuit to the input of another circuit; it may be done by creating a
synapse connecting an axon (of the output of one circuits) to a dendrite spine of the
input of the other circuit. If the above assumptions can be veriﬁed experimentally, then
the following considerations make sense. However, from the conceptual point of view,
they may also be of some interest to Neurobiology.

If the above assumption are taken as granted, then a neural circuit can be repre-
sented as a ﬁrst order function deﬁned on natural numbers. That is, spike sequences
(bursts), generated by a neuron, may be interpreted as natural numbers in the unary
code, input of the circuit as arguments whereas output as values of the function. Note,
that this is a static (one shot) representation of neuron circuits.
It means that one
output is produced form one input.

However, if a circuit is to be considered in a time extent so that for consecutive
inputs it produces a sequence of outputs, then dynamic behavior of the circuit may
be represented either as a RNN or as a sequence of interrelated copies of the function
representing the circuit. However, this is beyond of the scope of this study.

Simple operations on functions may have their counterparts as operations on cir-
cuits. Given two functions f and g (from natural numbers into natural numbers), the
new function h deﬁned as h(x, y) = f (x) + g(y) may serve as an example. If f c, gc and
+c denote corresponding neural circuits, then the circuit corresponding to function h
may be created by establishing (activating) some synapses between input neurons of
+c, and the output neuron of f c and the output neuron of gc. This may correspond
roughly to the synaptic meta-plasticity. It is interesting (however, not surprising) that
this very synapse creation corresponds to a basic notion of Mathematics, i.e. function
composition.

Sockets and plugs. A function consists of input, body and output, see Fig.
1.
Input may consists of multiple sockets, whereas output may consists of multiple
plugs. A plug-socket directed link may correspond to synapse as connection of axon
and dendrite.

There are also higher order functions (called functionals) where arguments as well
as values may be functions. It is also not surprising that these higher level functionals
can be constructed by establishing links in the circuits of plugs and sockets.

Each function is of some type. Since the natural numbers (ﬁnite sequences (bursts)
of spikes) are assumed as the basic type (denoted by N ), the type of ﬁrst order functions
is of the form (N s1; N s2; ...; N sk ) → (N p1; N p2; ...; N pm), where (N s1; N s2; ...; N sk )

Figure 1: Function as input (socket), body, and output (plug). Simple composition of
f , g, and +

Figure 2: Function types, and functions

denotes diﬀerent sockets of the input, whereas (N p1; N p2; ...; N pm) denotes diﬀerent
plugs of the output. This type may be realized as a board consisting of sockets and
plugs, see Fig. 2.

2.1 A short review of the current research on higher order compu-

tations in the brain

Astrocytes are a kind of glial cells (simply glia). Let us cite the recent views of the role
of glia and meta-plasticity in the brain.

Fields et al. 2015 [6]: “Astrocytes have anatomical and physiological properties that
can impose a higher order organization on information processing and integration in
the neuronal connectome. Neurons compute via membrane voltage, but how do astro-
cytes compute? What do glia contribute to information processing that neurons cannot
accomplish? ... In comparison to neurons, glia communicate slowly and over broader

spatial scales. This may make glia particularly well suited for involvement in integra-
tion, in homeostatic regulation, and alterations in structural or functional connectivity
of neural networks taking place over periods of weeks or months.”

Min et al. 2015 [13]: “Many studies have shown that astrocytes can dynamically
modulate neuronal excitability and synaptic plasticity, and might participate in higher
brain functions like learning and memory. ... mathematical modeling will prove crucial
for testing predictions on the possible functions of astrocytes in neuronal networks, and
to generate novel ideas as to how astrocytes can contribute to the complexity of the
brain. ...”

Gilson et al. 2015 [7]: “Experiments have revealed a plethora of synaptic and cellular
plasticity mechanisms acting simultaneously in neural circuits. How such diverse forms
of plasticity collectively give rise to neural computation remains poorly understood. ...
To learn how neuronal circuits self-organize and how computation emerges in the brain
it is therefore vital to focus on interacting forms of plasticity.”

Figure 3: More complex function types

2.2 Higher order computations

Neuron circuits perform computations on the basic level by processing spike bursts,
so that, the circuits correspond to the ﬁrst order computable functions.
It seems
that second (and higher) order computations in the brain are done by dynamic
(re)conﬁgurations of links (synapses) between the neuron circuits. Although the links
are established between concrete neurons, these neurons belong to ﬁxed circuits, so
that (from functional point of view) the links are between circuits.

Let us take as granted that glia are responsible for creating synapses and managing
their activity. Is it only a process dedicated for a single synapse connecting two circuits?
If so, then how these processes are created, managed and controlled? There must be a
generic meta-composition process for doing so, where the parameters are: two circuits

Figure 4: The higher order application of functional F to a function g : A → B. The
result F (g) is an object of type C

(to be composed) presynaptic neurons of one circuit, and postsynaptic neurons of the
second one.

In any case such generic process may be represented as a second order function
(functional) that takes (as input) two ﬁrst order functions, a plug of one function and
a socket of the second function; then it returns (as the output) a ﬁrst order function
as a composition of these two functions. The problem is how such generic process is
realized in the brain. First of all, the circuits to be composed must be discriminated,
and then passed, as parameters, to the composition process. It is interesting how the
discrimination is realized in the brain.

Glia are responsible for higher order computations, i.e. for dynamic creating, com-
posing, and reconﬁguring neuron circuits. At the bottom level it is realized by creating
new synapses; this corresponds to function composition. Since the function composition
is the basis for construction of the higher order functions (functionals), the processes
of dynamic synapse creation correspond to functionals.

Hypothesis. The primitive rules for construction of the computable functionals

may have their counterparts in the human brain.
Boards of plugs and sockets as higher order types. The type of functions
from natural numbers into natural numbers (denoted by N s → N p) may be realized
as a simple board consisting of a socket and a plug, see Fig. 2. Types of higher order
are presented in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. Note that for the type (A → B) → C, the input
A → B becomes the socket. For the type (A → B) → (C → D), the output C → D
becomes the plug.
Application of a functional F : (A → B) → C to a function g : A → B. Note

Figure 5: The functional Comp of type ((A → B); (B → C)) → (A → C). Input
objects are f of type A → B, and g of type B → C. When applied to Comp, the
output object is a function of type A → C

that A → B is the socket of the functional F . The application is done (see Fig. 4)
by establishing appropriate directed connections (links). That is, the link between the
socket A of the socket of F and the socket A of g, and the link between the plug B of
g and the plug of the socket of F .

The functional (denoted by composeA,B,C) for simple composition of two functions
(the ﬁrst function f of type A → B, and the second one g of type B → C) is realized
as two boards with appropriate links shown in Fig. 5. It is easy to check (by following
the links) that applying composeA,B,C to two functions (see Fig. 5) results in their
composition.

Note that a higher order application (i.e. application of a functional to a function),
and a functional for composition are constructed just by providing some links between
sockets and plugs. Since link corresponds to synapse, it might be interesting whether
these functionals have counterparts in the brain.

Each construction, like F (g) and composeA,B,C(f ; g), can be distinguished as an
individual object (notion). Perhaps, in the brain, they correspond to concrete regions.
This corresponds to a new paradigm called radical embodied neuroscience (REN), see
Matyja and Dolega 2015 [11], Kiverstein and Miller 2015 [10].

Generally, discrimination of new notions by the human mind is crucial for reasoning.
Once a notion is distinguished, it may be used in more sophisticated reasoning. This
evidently corresponds to the reﬂective abstraction introduced by Piaget, especially if
the notions emerge as the results of constructions. Note that here constructions mean
dynamic (re)conﬁguration of links between sockets and plugs.

Figure 6: The result of application of the functional IterA to natural number 4 and
function f of type A → A

A functional of special interest is Copy. Once an object a is constructed, repeat
the construction once again. So that Copy(a) returns two object: the original a, and
its copy a(cid:48). Although the meaning of Copy seems to be simple, its realization in the
brain may be quite complex especially if the object a is of a higher order type. If it
is supposed that the construction of object a occupies some well deﬁned region in the
brain, then Copy may be realized by copying this region into a new “free region”. Since
in Biology (living organisms) copying is ubiquitous, let us take the implementation of
the functional Copy as granted.

Iteration as generalization of composition. That is, compose n-times a func-
tion f : A → A with itself. Note that n as a natural number is a parameter. The
iteration is denoted by IterA and it is a functional of type (N ; (A → A)) → (A → A).
So that IterA(n; f ) is the function being n-time composition of f . The realization of
IterA requires Copy for making copies of f , and (n− 1) copies of the composition func-

tional, see Fig. 6, where the construction is done for n equal 4. Since natural numbers
are involved in the functional, it seems that a hypothetical realization of Iter, in the
brain, requires neurons.

Functional Iter is not the same as feedback loop that occurs when outputs of a
circuit are routed back as inputs to the same circuit. The feedback enforces dynamics
of the circuits, whereas Iter is static one shot operation.

Neuron circuits are real dynamic systems where computation is done by consecutive
processing signals (spike bursts). The circuits may be represented statically (without
dynamics) as ﬁrst order functions. Functionals are also static constructions operat-
ing on ﬁrst order functions (circuits) by re(conﬁguring) links inside and between the
circuits.

Note that there are next orders of constructions of functionals. Functionals operate
on functionals (second order functions) are third order functions that operate on the
second order functions by re(conﬁguring) links in the boards of sockets and plugs. By
analogy, this may be continued for the next higher orders of constructions.

Feedback loop can not be realized for higher order functionals where input as well

as output are not electrical signals but higher order constructions.

3 Continuum

It seems that the notion of continuum has a straightforward and natural grounding in
the human brain.

Vision sensory nervous system. The retina consists of about 130 million photo-
receptor cells, however, there are roughly 1.2 million axons of ganglion cells that trans-
mit information from the retina to the brain. It is interesting that a signiﬁcant amount
of visual preprocessing is done between neurons in the retina. The axons form the
optic nerve consisting of ﬁbers (axons). Positions of the ﬁbers in the nerve reﬂect the
spatial and adjacent relations between the corresponding photo-receptors in the retina.
In computations, the bundle of spikes in the nerve is considered together with the ad-
jacent relation between the spikes. It is crucial for comprehending the notion of space
Continuum.

The somatosensory system. Contrary to the vision system, it is spread through
all major parts of a mammal’s body. Spacial and adjacent relations between nerve ﬁbers
of the somatosensory system contribute essentially to the notion of space Continuum.
The streams of spikes, in the nerve ﬁbers delivered from sensory receptors to the
brain, are not independent form each other; they are structured by causal and adjacent
relations. The streams along with the relations are the grounding for the notion of
space-time Continuum.

It is interesting that objects of the primitive types are based on neuron spikes.
Natural number is just an isolated independent spike burst, whereas object of the type
Continuum is a bundle of adjacent spike bursts.

4 Conclusion

Primitive types resulted from the most simple (primitive) and obvious data transfer
methods: spike bursts, and bundles of adjacent spike bursts.

Composition (as link creation) is the basic operation for function constructions as
well as for construction of higher order functions (functionals). This very composition
corresponds to synapse creation in the brain.

The two functionals (Copy and Iter) together with the higher order application,
composition, and the primitive types constitute the cornerstone for building a construc-
tive (intuitionistic) part of Arithmetics and Analysis, see [3] and [2]. According to the
original meaning of L. E. J. Brouwer, Intuitionism is the constructive mental activity
of the human mind.

It seems that there are two essential primitive types; the type of natural numbers,
and the type of Continuum. Both types have their counterparts in the human brain.
The natural numbers may be identiﬁed with individual and independent bursts of neu-
ron spikes. The type Continuum has also the straightforward interpretation in the
human brain. Sensory nervous systems support this view. The ﬁrst order computable
functions (as a static interpretation of the neuron circuits) seems to be justiﬁed. This
may give rise to expect that higher order computable functions (functionals) have coun-
terparts in the human brain.

Let us state the following hypothesis: Glia seems to be the appropriate place where
the mechanisms corresponding to the constructions of computable functionals may be
realized.

Experimental evidences conﬁrming the hypothesis would open a wide area of re-

search in Foundation of Mathematics and Neurobiology.

Since the architecture of human brain is deﬁnitely diﬀerent than von Neuman com-
puter architecture (see von Neumann 1958 [14] and 1966 [15]), the mechanisms of the
meta-plasticity may give rise to develop a non-von Neumann computer architecture
and a corresponding function-level programming language postulated by John Backus
1977 [5]; for more on this subject see [4].

For a mathematical approach to computable and constructive functionals see [3]

and [2] (google arXiv Ambroszkiewicz).

References

[1] Adolphs, R.: The unsolved problems of neuroscience., Trends in cognitive sciences, 19(4),

2015, 173–175.

[2] Ambroszkiewicz, S.: Continuum as a primitive type, arxiv.org/abs/1510.02787, 2015.
[3] Ambroszkiewicz, S.: Types and operations, arxiv.org/abs/1501.03043, 2015.
[4] Ambroszkiewicz, S.: On the notion of “von Neumann vicious circle” coined by John Backus,

http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.02715, 2016.

[5] Backus, J.: Can Programming Be Liberated from the Von Neumann Style?: A Functional
Style and Its Algebra of Programs, Commun. ACM, 21(8), August 1978, 613–641, ISSN
0001-0782.

[6] Fields, R. D., Woo, D. H., Basser, P. J.: Glial regulation of the neuronal connectome

through local and long-distant communication, Neuron, 86(2), 2015, 374–386.

[7] Gilson, M., Savin, C., Zenke, F.: Editorial: Emergent Neural Computation from the
Interaction of Diﬀerent Forms of Plasticity, Frontiers in computational neuroscience, 9,
2015.

[8] Hopﬁeld, J. J.: Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computa-
tional abilities, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 79(8), 1982, 2554–2558.
[9] Hopﬁeld, J. J., Tank, D. W., et al.: Computing with neural circuits- A model, Science,

233(4764), 1986, 625–633.

[10] Kiverstein, J., Miller, M.: The Embodied Brain: Towards a Radical Embodied Cognitive

Neuroscience, Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9(237), 2015, ISSN 1662-5161.

[11] Matyja, J. R., Dolega, K.: Radical Embodied Neuroscience - How and Why? A commen-
tary on: The Embodied Brain: Towards a radical embodied cognitive neuroscience, Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 06 May 2015, http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00237, Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 9(669), 2015, ISSN 1662-5161.

[12] McCulloch, W. S., Pitts, W.: A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity,

The bulletin of mathematical biophysics, 5(4), 1943, 115–133.

[13] Min, R., Santello, M., Nevian, T.: The computational power of astrocyte mediated synaptic

plasticity, Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 6, 2012, 93.

[14] von Neumann, J.: The Computer and the Brain, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT,

USA, 1958, ISBN 0300007930.

[15] von Neumann, J., Burks, A. W., et al.: Theory of self-reproducing automata,

IEEE

Transactions on Neural Networks, 5(1), 1966, 3–14.

[16] Sanz-Leon, P., Knock, S. A., Spiegler, A., Jirsa, V. K.: Mathematical framework for large-
scale brain network modeling in The Virtual Brain, NeuroImage, 111, 2015, 385 – 430,
ISSN 1053-8119.

[17] Siegelmann, H. T., Sontag, E. D.: On the computational power of neural nets, Journal of

computer and system sciences, 50(1), 1995, 132–150.

[18] Yger, P., Gilson, M.: Models of metaplasticity: a review of concepts, Frontiers in compu-

tational neuroscience, 9, 2015.

