6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
7
 
 
]

.

D
C
n
i
l
n
[
 
 

1
v
4
3
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reynolds Number Eﬀects on Mixing Due to Topological Chaos

Spencer A. Smith1 and Sangeeta Warrier1
Department of Physics, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA 01075, USA

Topological chaos has emerged as a powerful tool to investigate ﬂuid mixing. While this
theory can guarantee a lower bound on the stretching rate of certain material lines, it does not
indicate what fraction of the ﬂuid actually participates in this minimally mandated mixing.
Indeed, the area in which eﬀective mixing takes place depends on physical parameters such
as the Reynolds number. To help clarify this dependency, we numerically simulate the eﬀects
of a batch stirring device on a 2D incompressible Newtonian ﬂuid in the laminar regime. In
particular, we calculate the ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent (FTLE) ﬁeld for three diﬀerent
stirring protocols, one topologically complex (pseudo-Anosov) and two simple (ﬁnite-order),
over a range of viscosities. After extracting appropriate measures indicative of both the
amount of mixing and the area of eﬀective mixing from the FTLE ﬁeld, we see a clearly deﬁned
Reynolds number range in which the relative eﬃcacy of the pseudo-Anosov protocol over the
ﬁnite-order protocols justiﬁes the application of topological chaos. More unexpectedly, we see
that while the measures of eﬀective mixing area increase with increasing Reynolds number
for the ﬁnite-order protocols, they actually exhibit non-monotonic behavior for the pseudo-
Anosov protocol.

The intuitive notion of ﬂuid mixing can be quanti-
ﬁed by global measures such as the topological en-
tropy of ﬂow maps, as well as local measures like
ﬁnite-time Lyapunov exponents. Each can be cal-
culated if given suﬃciently detailed knowledge of
the advected ﬂuid-particle trajectories, however,
experimental or computational limitations might
preclude this. Fortunately, if the ﬂuid system has
braid-like topological obstructions, such as stir-
ring rods, then we can use the ideas of topological
chaos to provide a lower bound on the stretch-
ing rate of certain material lines. This, in turn,
forces a lower bound on our mixing measure, the
ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent, on some fraction
of the ﬂuid. This minimally mandated mixing is
computable using the algebraic information asso-
ciated with each braid, and is therefore very use-
ful when confronted with limited ﬂuid ﬂow data.
This great simpliﬁcation comes at a price - the ac-
tual mixing could be much larger than the lower
bound. Additionally, the area where the ﬂuid is
forced to have at least this minimally mandated
mixing is not determined by the topological the-
ory, and could be vanishingly small. Ultimately,
the degree to which these two issues aﬀect the
usefulness of applying topological ideas to ﬂuid
mixing will depend on physical parameters of the
system, such as the Reynolds number.

I.

INITIAL DISCUSSION

Fluid mixing is one of the rare arenas where chaotic
motion is not an unwanted phenomenon. Indeed, chaotic

advection can help to quantify and optimize the mix-
ing in many industrial applications1 where the goal is
to eﬃciently combine two or more substances. Similar
ideas can also enhance the mixing of polymers, biological
samples, or chemicals in microﬂuidic devices2, where low
Reynolds numbers preclude turbulent mixing. Even on
the much larger scale of oceanic ﬂows, chaotic advection
can help to measure the mixing of nutrient concentra-
tion, salinity, and temperature3,4. These diverse exam-
ples demonstrate the broad application of chaotic advec-
tion, which was introduced by Aref5 over three decades
ago.

However, in many systems, the presence of chaotic ad-
vection can be reduced or even outright removed by a
simple change of physical parameters6, and is therefore
not a fully robust attribute. Fortunately, there exists a
large class of systems in which topological barriers force
a certain minimal amount of complexity to be present in
the ﬂuid ﬂow, regardless of the value of physical parame-
ters. This robust, topologically-induced, chaos allows us
to estimate the minimal mixing in the absence of detailed
knowledge of the actual ﬂuid ﬂow. Simple algebraic char-
acteristics of the topological obstructions are suﬃcient to
calculate the lower bound on the mixing forced upon por-
tions of the ﬂuid.
study of

starting with
Boyland7,8, has been very fruitful in the past decade and
a half9–12. It has branched out from systems with obvious
topological obstructions, such as rods in a batch stirring
device13, to more general systems through the recogni-
tion that periodic orbits, acting as “ghost rods”14, can
serve as topological barriers. Even the restriction that
the topological obstructions be part of a strictly peri-
odic motion has been loosened to include quasi-periodic
motion15.
Indeed, the generically non-periodic motion

topological

The

chaos,

of collections of arbitrary advected ﬂuid-particles can be
used to estimate the topological entropy of a natural
ﬂow4. As we will show, topological chaos is most use-
ful in the low Reynolds number regime of Stokes ﬂow,
however it has also been used to great eﬀect in classi-
fying the inviscid ﬂow of collections of point vortices16.
Aside from its many applications, topological chaos is
a beautiful mathematical theory that touches upon var-
ied disciplines such as dynamic systems theory, algebraic
topology, and ﬂuid dynamics.

At the heart of topological chaos are two issues that are
problematic for applying the theory to real ﬂuids. First,
the actual amount of mixing in the ﬂuid could be much
larger than the topological lower bound might suggest.
In the Stokes limit of low Reynolds number, the motion
of the ﬂuid and that of the topological obstructions are
well entrained, and it is natural to expect that the lower
bound is close to the actual mixing. However, as the
Reynolds number is increased, the inertial motion of the
ﬂuid results in excess mixing. To account for this, one
can include successively more periodic orbits in the set of
topological obstructions and the calculated lower bound
on mixing will approach that of the actual ﬂuid14,17. This
requires suﬃcient knowledge of the ﬂuid motion to allow
the calculation of periodic orbits. If only the motion of
the original topological obstructions is known, then it
would be useful to know the range in Reynolds number
over which the topological theory gives a useful lower
bound. The second issue involves the ﬂuid area in which
the mixing is at least that of the lower bound. The topo-
logical theory does not quantify this area, and indeed
the mixing lower bound could be enforced on a vanish-
ingly small fraction of the total ﬂuid domain. Certainly
the topologically induced lower bound is useless if it does
not reﬂect the mixing in the majority of the ﬂuid. Both
Vikhansky18 and Finn, Cox, and Byrne19 have investi-
gated this issue, though only in the Stokes or inviscid
regimes and without a quantitative measure of the area
participating in a high level of mixing.

To investigate both of these issues and their depen-
dance on Reynolds number, we numerically simulated
(see II C) laminar ﬂuid ﬂow due to a batch stirring de-
vice (see II A). We varied the stirring protocol to rep-
resent three diﬀerent braids (see II B), one topologically
complex and two topologically simple (see ﬁg. (2)). Like-
wise, we varied the viscosity of the ﬂuid to give a range
of Reynolds numbers. For each simulation, we calculated
the ﬁnite-time Lyapunov exponent (FTLE) ﬁeld and ex-
tracted measures indicative of the maximum mixing and
the area of eﬃcient mixing (see II D).

II. BACKGROUND

A. Batch Stirring Device

Batch stirring devices consist of a ﬂuid domain and
a set of parallel stirring rods which execute periodic mo-

2

tion. When there is an insigniﬁcant amount of ﬂuid trans-
port in the vertical direction, we can consider the ﬂuid
domain to be eﬀectively two dimensional. Due to its sim-
plicity and its ability to create complex topology through
the braided motion of the stirring rods, this system is
well established as an arena to test out new ideas7. More
speciﬁcally, we consider a 2D incompressible Newtonian
ﬂuid interacting with three stirring rods in a 4×3 rectan-
gular domain. The stirring rods are disks of radius 0.2,
with centers lying on the long axis and separated by a
distance of 1. Note that we do not specify the units of
length, since the absolute size of the system is not impor-
tant. The physics of the ﬂow is dictated by the Reynolds
number, the ratio of a characteristic distance and velocity
to the kinematic viscosity. See ﬁg. (1) for the geometry
of this batch stirring device.

FIG. 1. Batch stirring device geometry and pairwise circular
motion of the rods.

The overall motion of the stirring rods is comprised of
a succession of neighboring pairs of rods switching posi-
tions. For each switch the pertinent pair of rods execute
circular motion about their relative center, either in a
clockwise (CW) or counter-clockwise (CCW) direction.
A stirring protocol with a given number of switches is
then speciﬁed by the location of each switch (left pair
or right pair), the type of each switch (CW or CCW),
and the order in which they occur. We will naturally
identify stirring protocols with an element of the braid
group (see II B). During a switch, each rod moves with
an average speed of 0.5 units/s. However, the rods do
not move at a constant speed, as this would create large
accelerations that are not physically possible when a rod
starts or stops moving. Instead, the distance a rod has
moved along its path during a switch is parameterized
by a rescaled time, t → Tg (1 − cos (πt/Tg)) /2, which
preserves average speed and leads to physically realistic
movement. Here, Tg is the time to execute one switch,
which in our case is π seconds.

B. Topological Theory

The topological structures relevant to the batch stir-
ring device are geometric braids. Consider the direct
product of the 2D ﬂuid domain with a time dimension
ﬂowing downward. In this domain, the periodic motion
of the stirring rods trace out the strands of a braid. Once
we ﬁx the geometric movement of each rod as it switches
position (see II A), all that is left to completely charac-
terize the stirring protocol is the braid topology. We can
compactly specify our stirring protocol by describing each
braid with its Artin braid generators. Switching rods i
and i + 1, labeled left to right, in a counter-clockwise
manner is given by the positive braid generator σi, while
switching them clockwise is given by σ−1
, the inverse of
σi. Now a stirring protocol can be speciﬁed by a string
of generators, read left to right, which constitute a braid
word (e.g. see ﬁg. (2)). Brieﬂy, we must note that there
are many conventions for describing braids. We have fol-
lowed Birman20, whereas others7,9 instead take time to
ﬂow upwards, which is equivalent to switching the associ-
ation of the positive generator from CCW to CW motion
and similarly for its inverse.

i

FIG. 2. Braids from left to right: pseudo-Anosov “golden”
braid, ﬁnite-order (full twist), and ﬁnite-order (isotopic to
the identity).

For a given stirring protocol, the associated simple al-
gebraic braid word carries a lot of information. Among
other things, the braid will determine how much mix-
ing is forced on the surrounding ﬂuid by the movement
of the stirring rods. To make this idea more concrete,
ﬁrst consider the ﬂow map, f T (x0) = x (T ), which takes
points in the ﬂuid domain and maps them to their ﬁnal
position after being passively transported by the ﬂuid

ﬂow for a time T . It is the topological entropy, h(cid:0)f T(cid:1),

or ﬁnite-time Lyapunov exponent ﬁeld, Λ (x0, T ), of this
map which quantiﬁes the amount of mixing that occurs in
this ﬂuid. Including the ﬂow map, there are many maps
that are consistent with the given braid word topology,
and therefore mutually isotopic. We can group all of
these maps together and refer to them collectively as a
mapping class. The space of all maps on our domain is

3

partitioned into disjoint mapping classes, each one asso-
ciated with a diﬀerent braid. Indeed, the mapping class
group20 of our 3-punctured ﬂuid domain is equivalent to
the braid group, B3, on three strands.

In each mapping class there is a particular map, the
minimal representative, f ∗, which has the minimum
amount of complexity. The complexity is measured
by the topological entropy, which tracks the exponen-
tial growth rate of distinguishable orbits as time in-
creases.
Interestingly, a whole class of braids, pseudo-
Anosov (pA) braids, have minimal maps with non-zero
topological entropy. Through Handel’s isotopy stability
theorem21, this means that every map in a pA mapping
class is forced to have a topological entropy at least as
large as that of the minimal map. Most importantly, this
is true of our ﬂow map,

pA(cid:1) .
h(cid:0)f T(cid:1) ≥ h(cid:0)f ∗

(1)

Thus, if we can force our mixing rods to move in a manner
consistent with a pA braid, then the mixing as expressed
by the topological entropy of the ﬂow map, will have a
well deﬁned lower bound.

Through the Thurston-Nielsen classiﬁcation theorem
(TNCT)22–24, every braid can be classiﬁed as being ei-
ther ﬁnite-order (fo), pseudo-Anosov (pA), or reducible
to a well deﬁned combination of fo and pA components.
Finite-order braids have a minimal map with zero topo-
logical entropy, and therefore do not force any complex-
ity on each map in the corresponding mapping class. We
include two fo braids in our analysis as a baseline for
comparison to the pA braid. pseudo-Anosov braids, as
we have mentioned, force a lower bound on the topolog-
ical entropy of every map in the corresponding mapping
class. We will refer to this lower bound as the pA topo-

logical entropy, h(cid:0)f ∗

pA(cid:1). Except for a ﬁnite number of

points, every point in a pA map, f ∗
pA, has an expand-
ing and contracting direction. The common expansion
factor, λpA, is related to the pA topological entropy by

pA(cid:1) = ln (λpA) .
h(cid:0)f ∗

(2)

(3)

The most general method for calculating the pA topo-
logical entropy uses the train-tracks algorithm of Bestv-
ina and Handel25, although an algorithm26 that makes
use of Dynnikov coordinates27 has shown promise4. We
use a simpler method that takes advantage of the Bu-
rau representation28 of the braid group B3. Each braid
generator can be represented by a 2 × 2 matrix,

σ1 =(cid:18)1 1

−1 1(cid:19) .
0 1(cid:19) and σ2 =(cid:18) 1 0

These, along with their matrix inverses, can be used to
create a matrix for every braid word. For example, our

2 σ1(cid:1)3

pA expansion factor, λpA, is given by the largest eigen-
value of this matrix. For βpA, this results in a value of

pA braid, βpA =(cid:0)σ−1
8 13(cid:1). The
λpA = φ6, where φ = (cid:0)1 + √5(cid:1) /2 is the golden ratio.

, is represented by(cid:0) 5 8

This “golden braid” has a pA topological entropy per
generator of

pA(cid:1) /Ng = ln (φ) = 0.4812,
h(cid:0)f ∗

which is the largest of any braid in B3.

(4)

For each map in the mapping class of our pA braid,
there exists21 an invariant subset, X, of the domain on
which the dynamics are as complicated as that of the
minimal representative. It follows that ﬂuid ﬂow maps,
f T , induced by the pA stirring protocol have a topo-

logical entropy h(cid:0)f T(cid:1) ≥ 6 ln (φ). These maps will also

be forced to have have local expansion factors which are
larger than λpA on some subset of X (though this connec-
tion is subtle). Furthermore, this implies that the FTLE,
which is directly related to the local expansion factors
(see eq. (14)), is also bounded from below on some some
subset of X. However, this theory says nothing about
the size of X.
Indeed, the area of X could be vanish-
ingly small, in which case the dynamics on nearly the
entire domain would not be forced to be complex. This
would physically mean that the expected mandatory mix-
ing could have little eﬀect on a real ﬂuid.

C. Numerical Experiment

To numerically solve the Navier-Stokes equations in
our domain, we used a ﬁnite element method (FEM),
with the core of the code coming from the fenics
project29,30. More speciﬁcally, we used a 100 × 75 rect-
angular crossed mesh (3 × 104 elements) to spatially
discretize the pressure ﬁeld (linear scalar Lagrange el-
ements) and velocity vector ﬁeld (quadratic vector La-
grange elements). The stability matrix, used for com-
putation of the FTLE (see. eq. (8)) was also treated as
a ﬁnite element tensor ﬁeld (quadratic tensor Lagrange
elements) and computed in tandem with the pressure
and velocity ﬁelds. A mesh ﬁtted to the rods would be
problematic, as the motion of the rods would exponen-
tially stretch the mesh. Our solution was to use a simple
ﬁxed cartesian mesh with a continuous immersed bound-
ary method31 to enforce the boundary conditions on the
rods. The boundary conditions were no-slip for both the
outer walls and the rods. We used Chorin’s projection
method32 to discretize the equations of motion in time
and decouple the pressure and velocity ﬁelds. The time-
step was chosen using a conservative CFL condition such
that the rods take at least 10 time steps to cross the near-
est neighbor element distance. The Lagrangian quanti-
ties, the positions of particles passively advected by the
velocity ﬁeld and the Jacobian matrix of their orbits (see
eq. (7)), were evolved using a fourth-order Runge-Kutta
solver. The orbits of these advected particles, initially
at the center of each ﬁnite element, and the associated
Jacobian matrices were then used to calculate the ﬁnite
time Lyapunov exponent ﬁeld (see eq. (10)).

The fenics FEM implementation of Corin’s projection
method for an incompressible Newtonian ﬂuid has been

4

tested on several benchmark ﬂows30 (see ch. 21), includ-
ing lid-driven cavity ﬂow, pressure-driven channel ﬂow,
ﬂow past a cylinder, and Beltrami ﬂow. It was shown to
be a good general solver with a nice balance of conver-
gence properties and computational costs. We did our
own convergence study on grids ranging from 60 × 45 to
240×180 (all rectangular crossed grids) for both the ﬁnal
velocity ﬁeld and the FTLE probability density function
(pdf, see II D), at both high and low Reynolds numbers.
The quantities generated with the ﬁnest grid were taken
as a stand-in for the exact solution. The velocity ﬁeld
error (FTLE pdf error) was calculated as the ℓ2-norm
(absolute value) of the diﬀerence between approximate
and exact values of the velocity vector ﬁeld (FTLE pdf)
at a few representative points in the domain (few FTLE
values). In all cases the order of convergence was between
1 and 2. We chose the 100× 75 rectangular crossed mesh
since it was well within the range of asymptotic conver-
gence and had a computational cost that ﬁt within the
time constraints of our study. A relative error of roughly
0.02 for the FTLE pdf calculated on the 100 × 75 rect-
angular crossed mesh (for most FTLE values) indicates
that we can safely draw both quantitative and qualitative
conclusions from our simulations. While the main data
represented in ﬁgures (7-9) were generated on this grid,
ﬁgures (3-6) were created using the 240× 180 rectangular
crossed grid to better highlight the ﬁne structure.
For each simulation we chose a speciﬁc braid and
Reynolds number. We considered three braids (see
ﬁg. (2)), one pseudo-Anosov - βpA and two ﬁnite-order,
full twist - β∆2 & equivalent to the identity - βId.

2 σ1σ−1

2 σ1σ−1

βpA = σ−1
β∆2 = σ2σ1σ2σ1σ2σ1 = (σ2σ1)3
βId = σ2σ1σ2σ−1

2 σ1 =(cid:0)σ−1

1 σ−1

2 σ1(cid:1)3

(5a)

(5b)
(5c)

2 σ1

The pA braid was chosen because it has the largest topo-
logical entropy per generator, ln φ, of any three stranded
braid. This “golden braid,” should look familiar to those
of you who have braided hair before. The two ﬁnite-order
braids are included to provide a baseline against which
we compare the behavior of the pA braid. Each braid
has six generators, which alternate sides to ensure that
the rods return to their original positions, and thus corre-
spond to one period. It is also important to note that for
all three stirring protocols, the total length that the rods
traverse is identical. Therefore, at least for low Reynolds
numbers, the work done by the rods on the ﬂuid is the
same for each braid. Any mixing diﬀerences between the
three braids will be due to topology alone.

For each braid we simulated a range of Reynolds num-
bers (Re : 0.2 − 100), with samples evenly spaced in
log10 Re and double the sampling density near the cen-
ter of this range. We varied the kinematic viscosity to
achieve this range, since Re is calculated from the rod
diameter, average rod speed, and kinematic viscosity.
While this range is squarely in the laminar regime, we
will see that it is large enough to encompass an interest-

Since the Jacobian has the semi-group property, we

can split up the Jacobian and express the FTLE as

5

Λ (x0, T, ˆu0) =

1
T

  NYi=1

ln(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

J∆t (x (T − i∆t))! ˆu0(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

, (9)

where N ∆t = T and ˆu0 is a unit vector. Then Λ (x0, T ) is
found by maximizing over all directions of ˆu0. In practice,
most all ˆu0 will quickly converge, through the action of
J∆t, to the maximum stretching direction. Therefore,
Λ (x0, T, ˆu0) is fairly insensitive to ˆu0, and we can pick a
convenient vector. We can simplify further to arrive at

Λ (x0, T ) =

where

~Si = J∆t (x (i∆t)) ˆui,

1
T

ln(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)~Si(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13) ,
N −1Xi=0
ˆui = ~Si−1/(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)~Si−1(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13) ,

(10)

(11)

and ˆu0 is chosen in some consistent, but unimpor-
tant, direction45. This expression suggests calculating
J∆t (x (i∆t)) and ~Si concurrently with each particle tra-
jectory, and keeping a running sum of lnk ~Sik. The peri-
odic normalization, orthonormalization if keeping track
of the minimum FTLE as well46, obviates the need to
ﬁnd the spectrum of an overall Jacobian that might be
ill-conditioned.

With this algorithm, we computed the FTLE at the
center of each lattice element, resulting in a good approx-
imation of the FTLE map, Λ (x0, T ) (e.g. see ﬁg. (3) or
ﬁg. (4)). In order to capture the entirety of the motion
and make the FTLE comparable to the pA topological
entropy (e.g. see Eq. (14)), the time, T, used in the com-
putation of the FTLE was chosen to be equal to the stir-
ring protocol time of 6π seconds. Note that these maps
give fairly intuitive information about where the mixing
is occurring.

ing range of behavior.

D. Measuring the Mixing

The existence of ﬂuid mixing requires that material
lines experience both stretching and folding33.
In our
ﬂuid, stretching is enforced by topology and folding is
guaranteed by the boundedness of the ﬂuid domain. We
would like to be able to quantify the amount of ﬂuid
mixing that our stirring rods create for each simulation.
While there are many diﬀerent mixing measures to con-
sider, we have taken the dynamic systems point of view34
in informing our choice of measure. A global measure,
such as the topological entropy of the corresponding par-
ticle advection map, does not help us deal with the ques-
tion of what area participates in a high level of mixing.
For this we need a local measure, like the ﬁnite-time Lya-
punov exponent (FTLE), Λ (x, T ), which we can evaluate
throughout the ﬂuid domain.

Roughly, the FTLE measures the maximum exponen-
tial rate of separation between an advected particle’s tra-
jectory and all other particle trajectories that started suf-
ﬁciently close. If the separation between two particles is
|δx0| initially, then their separation after the simulation
time T is |δx (T )| ≃ |δx0| exp (ΛT ). Thus, regions of our
ﬂuid that have a high FTLE will be greatly stretched out
in the course of the stirring protocol. This introduces
ﬂuid parcels to other, initially far away, ﬂuid parcels,
which enhances the mixing due to molecular diﬀusion.

The ﬁnite-time Lyapunov exponent can be connected
to other mixing ideas such as tracer gradients35, advected
particle concentration36, and the advection-diﬀusion
equation37,38. The FTLE has been used to characterize
chaotic ﬂuid ﬂow via its power spectrum39,40 and quan-
tify the performance of micro-mixers41. The FTLE has
even been used to measure the degree of mixing in the
Antarctic polar vortex through observational data42 and
predict the rate of chemical reactions in experiments43.
To make the intuitive notion of a FTLE more con-
crete and computable, consider the Jacobian matrix
Jt
ij (x0) = ∂xi (t) /∂xj (0), which transports linearized
neighborhoods under the ﬂuid ﬂow, δx (t) = Jt (x0) δx0.
One can then use the maximum eigenvalue, λmax, of JT
at each point, x0, to calculate the FTLE ﬁeld,

Λ (x0, T ) =

1
T

ln(cid:0)λmax(cid:0)JT (x0)(cid:1)(cid:1) .

To ﬁnd JT (x0), integrate

dJt (x0) /dt = A (x (t)) Jt (x0)

(6)

(7)

along the trajectory, x (t), of each advected particle,
starting with J0 (x0) = 1. Here,

Aij (x) = ∂ ˙xi (x) /∂xj

(8)

FIG. 3. FTLE ﬁeld for the pA stirring protocol at a Reynolds
number of Re = 0.2.

is the stability matrix, which describes the linear shearing
on a neighborhood of x due the ﬂuid ﬂow44.

To compare the eﬀect of diﬀerent braids and diﬀerent
Reynolds numbers on mixing, we needed to extract from

6

FIG. 4. FTLE ﬁelds. Rows (top to bottom): ﬁnite-order braid (isotopic to identity), ﬁnite-order braid (full twist), and
pseudo-Anosov “golden” braid. Columns (left to right): Reynolds number Re = 0.2, Re = 10, and Re = 80.

each FTLE ﬁeld a few simple measures. As a partial step
in this direction, consider the FTLE probability density
function (PDF), ρ (Λ), for each FTLE map, where the
probability measure is the fractional area. Thus the frac-
tion of the total ﬂuid domain that has FTLE between Λ1
Λ1 ρ (Λ) dΛ. The PDF of each FTLE
map provides useful information in its own right, e.g. see
ﬁgures (5-6), and allows us a convenient way to deﬁne
three useful measures of mixing.

and Λ2 is given byR Λ2

The ﬁrst is the maximum FTLE, Λmax, which is cal-
culated as the FTLE value for which 99% of the ﬂuid by
area has a smaller FTLE value,

Z Λmax

0

ρ (Λ) dΛ = 0.99.

(12)

The value of 0.99 is used instead of something closer to 1,
to ensure that the ﬁnite grid size does not result in widely
ﬂuctuating values of Λmax across diﬀerent Reynolds num-
bers. Thus, the actual maximum value of the FTLE
map, given by the ﬁrst FTLE value, Λ∗
max, such that
ρ (Λ) dΛ = 1, will be slightly larger than Λmax.
0
As we will see, the minimal mixing mandated by the TN
theory will show up most clearly in a plot of the maxi-
mum FTLE.

R Λ∗

max

is simply the ﬁrst moment of the PDF,

The second measure is the area-averaged FTLE,eΛ, and

max

Λρ (Λ) dΛ.

(13)

eΛ =Z Λ∗

0

It provides a way to track the level of mixing in the ma-
jority of the ﬂuid, and is therefore useful for addressing
how much of the ﬂuid is compelled to have a high level
of mixing by the pA stirring protocol .

The ﬁnal measure is the fractional area in which the
FTLE value is larger than the normalized pA topolog-
ical entropy, ApA. To compare the FTLE values with
the pA topological entropy, we must ﬁrst normalize the
latter. Both the pA topological entropy and the FTLE
are given as the logarithm of a stretching factor, ln (λpA)
and ln (λmax) /T respectively. Since we should be able
to compare the two stretching factors, we need to divide
the pA topological entropy by the total time, T = 6π, in
order to make meaningful comparisons to FTLE values.
Thus, the normalized pA topological entropy is

ΛpA ≡ h(cid:0)f ∗

pA(cid:1) /T =

1
π

ln φ = 0.1532.

(14)

Now the ﬁnal measure, ApA, is deﬁned as

max

ApA =Z Λ∗

ΛpA

ρ (Λ) dΛ.

(15)

With the max FTLE, area-averaged FTLE, and frac-
tional area measure in hand, we can now compare them
across diﬀerent Reynolds numbers and diﬀerent braids.

III. RESULTS

Consider the collection of FTLE maps in ﬁg. (4). Just
by visual inspection, it is apparent that at the lowest
Reynolds number, Re = 0.2, the pA stirring protocol has
an appreciably higher level of mixing over a larger area
than either of the ﬁnite-order stirring protocols. The
main reason for this diﬀerence is topology, as we can
see in the FTLE probability density, ﬁg. (5), for each
braiding protocol at this Reynolds number. Notice that
at a FTLE value equal to the normalized pA topological
entropy (ΛpA = 0.1532), there is a “bump” in the pA
PDF caused by the topologically mandated exponential
stretching of material lines.

fo Braid (Identity)
fo Braid (Twist)
pA Braid

 10

 

y
t
i
s
n
e
D
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
P

 1

 0.1

 0

 0.05

 0.1

 0.15
FTLE

 0.2

 0.25

 0.3

FIG. 5. The FTLE probability density function (PDF) at
Re = 0.2, plotted in log-scale, for each braiding protocol. The
normalized pA topological entropy, ΛpA = 0.1532 - Eq. (14),
is shown as a vertical line for reference.

twice as long (pA braid: (cid:0)σ−1

The other bump at Λ ≃ 0.06 is likely due to sub-
exponential stretching associated with ﬂuid outside the
central mixing region. When the simulation was run for
) this bump was still
evident in the PDF, though at a reduced FTLE value of
Λ ≃ 0.04. If this stretching is linear, then repeated appli-
cation of the ﬂuid advection map would cause the FTLE
value of this bump to asymptotically approach zero as
Λ ≃ ln (n) /nT for n compositions of the advection map.
The absence of this Λ ≃ 0.06 bump for the identity ﬁnite-
order stirring protocol reﬂects the fact that on each side

2 σ1(cid:1)6

7

of the stirring rod ensemble there are both CW and CCW
rod movements, unlike the other two stirring protocols.
Thus, in the Stokes regime the rods will stir the ﬂuid
outside the central mixing region in competing directions
over the course of the identity ﬁnite-order protocol, which
reduces the rate of linear stretching.

fo Braid (Identity)
fo Braid (Twist)
pA Braid

 10

 

y
t
i
s
n
e
D
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
P

 1

 0.1

 0

 0.1

 0.2

 0.3
FTLE

 0.4

 0.5

 0.6

FIG. 6. The FTLE probability density function (PDF) at
Re = 80, plotted in log-scale, for each braiding protocol. The
normalized pA topological entropy, ΛpA = 0.1532 - Eq. (14),
is shown as a vertical line for reference. Note the diﬀerence
in FTLE range as compared to ﬁg. (5).

The size of the ΛpA = 0.1532, exponential stretching,
bump is largest in the Stokes regime, where a large quan-
tity of ﬂuid is entrained with the stirring rods. Indeed, at
higher Reynolds numbers, the PDFs for all three stirring
protocols begin to converge (see ﬁg. (6)). This can like-
wise be seen in ﬁg. (4), where the diﬀerence between the
three protocols is less visible for the two higher Reynolds
numbers. To uncover the range of Reynolds numbers over
which the pA stirring protocol retains its advantage, we
must look at the individual measures for each FTLE map,
starting with the maximum FTLE.

The maximum FTLE, Λmax, over the Reynolds num-
ber range is plotted in ﬁg. (7).
It clearly shows that
while the pA stirring protocol has a larger Λmax value
than that of either ﬁnite-order protocol over the entire
Re range, there are distinct regions based on the size of
this gap.

For Re . 2, where this Λmax gap between pA and fo
protocols is largest, we see only a very weak Reynolds
number dependence. This insensitivity to Reynolds num-
ber also shows up in a comparison of FTLE PDFs, and
is reﬂective of the fact that the ﬂuid is in the Stokes
ﬂow regime. In this regime, topological diﬀerences have
their largest eﬀect on mixing. Indeed, the normalized pA
topological entropy, shown in ﬁg. (7), is a lower bound
on Λmax for the pA protocol but not for either of the two
ﬁnite-order protocols. That it is not a tight lower bound
simply reﬂects that along a closed material line which

8

FIG. 8. The area averaged FTLE, eΛ - Eq. (13), of all three
braids for a range of Reynolds numbers.

worry that the mandated high level of mixing only occurs
on a vanishingly small area. In the transitional region,
2 . Re . 8, the area averaged FTLE actually decreases
for the pA protocol. At ﬁrst this might seem unexpected,
as the same is not true of the two ﬁnite-order protocols,
and Λmax did not decrease for the pA protocol. However,
as the Reynolds number increases through this region,
less and less of the ﬂuid is viscously entrained with the
stirring rods, and therefore less of the area is forced to
have the minimal mixing. Eventually, for high enough
Reynolds number, Re & 8, dynamic mixing due to the
greater importance of ﬂuid inertia is the dominant source
of mixing.

FIG. 9. The fractional area, ApA - Eq. (15), in which the
FTLE is larger than the normalized pA topological entropy,
ΛpA = 0.1532 - Eq. (14). This fractional area is plotted for
all three braids and a range of Reynolds numbers.

Finally, we consider directly the area aﬀected by the
pA stirring protocol through a plot, ﬁg. (9), of the frac-

FIG. 7. The maximum FTLE, Λmax - Eq. (12), of all three
braids for a range of Reynolds numbers. The normalized pA
topological entropy, ΛpA = 0.1532 - Eq. (14), is shown for
comparison.

is forced to have the proscribed topological stretching in
aggregate, there will be sections with both larger and
smaller local stretching. This roughly accounts for the
spread in FTLE about the “bump” in probability den-
sity shown in ﬁg. (5).

For slightly larger Reynolds number, there is a transi-
tional region, 2 . Re . 8, where the increasingly impor-
tant inertia of the ﬂuid causes the Λmax of the ﬁnite-order
protocols to rise. The pA protocol has a Λmax that re-
mains ﬂat in this region, indicating that the lower bound
on mixing set by the topology is still large enough to
dictate the maximum mixing.

For the region Re & 8, all three protocols behave sim-
ilarly, and the Λmax is dictated not by topology, but by
the inertial motion of the ﬂuid. As a brief aside, note
that in this regime, Λmax appears to scale linearly with
log Re. Many studies47–50, both experimental and nu-
merical, have shown that mixing due to chaotic advec-
tion increases with Re in the low Reynolds number, near-
Stokes, regime. Interestingly, mixing due to chaotic ad-
vection can actually decreases at high Re in the turbulent
regime51,52.

So far we have seen that the topological lower bound
on mixing is useful for describing the level at which
maximum mixing occurs when the ﬂuid is in the Stokes
regime. However, to get a sense of the size of the ﬂuid
area that participates in a high level of mixing, we must
look at the behavior of the two remaining measures.

ﬂuids that have a larger fraction of their area participat-
ing in a high level of mixing.

First, consider the area averaged FTLE, eΛ, in ﬁg. (8).
While it does not directly measure area, eΛ is larger for
pA stirring protocol forces eΛ to be larger than it is in

In the Re . 2 regime, we see that the topology of the

the ﬁnite-order protocols. Thus, we can put to rest any

tional area, ApA, over which the FTLE is greater than
the normalized topological entropy, ΛpA. This shows that
in the Stokes regime, between 1/6 and 1/5 of the ﬂuid
mixes at or above the level enforced by topology. This
is larger than the area of the ﬂuid which is in the direct
path of the moving rods and smaller than the area in-
closed by this path. We also see a dip in the fractional
area in the 2 . Re . 8 range, which follows from the no-
tion that with increasing Reynolds number, less of the
ﬂuid is entrained with the stirring rods. While the area
of topologically enforced mixing decreases for Re & 2, it
is important to note that the pA stirring protocol still

has higher values of Λmax, eΛ, and ApA, albeit at a much

reduced advantage with respect to the ﬁnite-order proto-
cols.

IV. CONCLUSION

Topological chaos guarantees that the advection map
associated with a pseudo-Anosov stirring protocol will
have a topological entropy at least as large as that of
the minimal representative in the corresponding map-
ping class. This topologically imposed lower bound on
the mixing could potentially be both very loose, and
supported on a vanishingly small fraction of the ﬂuid do-
main. Fortunately, neither of these issues are problematic
in the Stokes regime. For Re . 2, the gap between the
maximum FTLE of the pA and ﬁnite-order protocols is
larger than for any other Reynolds number range tested,
and consistent with the topological lower bound. The
two area related measures, the area averaged FTLE and
the fractional area with a FTLE greater than the nor-
malized pA topological entropy, indicate that the area
of topologically enforced mixing is comparable with the
area enclosed by the stirring rods.

However, at higher Reynolds numbers, Re & 8, topo-
logically enforced mixing is overshadowed by the dynamic
mixing due to the increased importance of ﬂuid inertia.
In this range, the diﬀerences between the three stirring
protocols are minimal. Topological mixing still enforces
larger max and average FTLE values for the pA proto-
col compared to the ﬁnite-order protocols, however the
diﬀerence becomes an increasingly smaller fraction of the
total.

In the transitional region, 2 . Re . 8, a somewhat un-
expected phenomenon occurs. Before the dynamic mix-
ing becomes dominant, the area of support for topological
mixing decreases. This is reﬂected in the dip in average
FTLE and fractional area, ApA, and results when less
ﬂuid is entrained with the string rods due to decreased
viscosity.

Overall, these results aﬃrm that topological chaos is
best suited for investigating ﬂuid mixing in the Stokes
regime. For higher Reynolds numbers, the area of topo-
logically enforced mixing decreases, and is eventually
overcome by dynamic mixing associated with ﬂuid in-
ertia.

9

1M. Finn, S. Cox, and H. Byrne, “Mixing measures for a two-
dimensional chaotic stokes ﬂow,” Journal of Engineering Mathe-
matics 48, 129–155 (2004).
2H. Aref, J. R. Blake, M. Budiˇsi´c, J. H. E. Cartwright, H. J. H.
Clercx, U. Feudel, R. Golestanian, E. Gouillart, Y. Le Guer,
G. F. van Heijst, T. S. Krasnopolskaya, R. S. MacKay, V. V.
Meleshko, G. Metcalfe, I. Mezi´c, A. P. S. de Moura, K. El Omari,
O. Piro, M. F. M. Speetjens, R. Sturman, J.-L. Thiﬀeault, and
I. Tuval, “Frontiers of chaotic advection,” ArXiv e-prints (2014),
arXiv:1403.2953 [nlin.CD].
3R. Samelson, “Lagrangian motion, coherent structures, and lines
of persistent material strain,” Annual Review of Marine Science
5, 137–163 (2013).
4J.-L. Thiﬀeault, “Braids of entangled particle trajectories,” AIP
Chaos 20, 017516 (2010).
5H.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics 143, 1–21 (1984).
6H. Aref, “The development of chaotic advection,” Phys. Fluids
14, 1315–1325 (2002).
7P. Boyland, H. Aref, and M. Stremler, “Topological ﬂuid me-
chanics of stirring,” J. Fluid Mech. 403, 277–304 (2000).
8P. Boyland, “Topological Methods in Surface Dynamics,” Topol-
ogy And Its Applications 58, 223–298 (1994).
9J.-L. Thiﬀeault and M. D. Finn, “Topology, braids and mix-
ing in ﬂuids,” Philosophical Transactions Of The Royal Society
A-Mathematical Physical And Engineering Sciences 364, 3251–
3266 (2006).

advection,”

chaotic

Aref,

“Stirring

by

10J. Thiﬀeault, “Measuring topological chaos,” Phys. Rev. Lett.

94, 084502 (2005).

12M. D. Finn, J.-L. Thiﬀeault,

11J.-L. Thiﬀeault, M. D. Finn, E. Gouillart, and T. Hall, “Topol-
ogy of chaotic mixing patterns,” AIP Chaos 18, 033123 (2008).
and E. Gouillart, “Topological
chaos in spatially periodic mixers,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phe-
nomena 221, 92 – 100 (2006).

13M. D. Finn and J.-L. Thiﬀeault, “Topological optimisation of

rod-stirring ddevices,” SIAM Rev. 53, 723–743 (2011).

14E. Gouillart, J. Thiﬀeault, and M. Finn, “Topological mixing

with ghost rods,” Phys. Rev. E 73, 036311 (2006).

15M. Stremler, S. Ross, P. Grover, and P. Kumar, “Topological
Chaos and Periodic Braiding of Almost-Cyclic Sets,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 106, 114101 (2011).

16P. Boyland, M. Stremler, and H. Aref, “Topological ﬂuid me-
chanics of point vortex motions,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenom-
ena 175, 69–95 (2003).

17P. Grover, S. D. Ross, M. A. Stremler, and P. Kumar, “Topolog-
ical chaos, braiding and bifurcation of almost-cyclic sets.” Chaos
22, 043135 – 043135–16 (2012).

18A. Vikhansky, “Simulation of topological chaos in laminar ﬂows,”

AIP Chaos 14, 14–21 (2004).

19M. D. Finn, S. M. Cox, and H. M. Byrne, “Topological chaos
in inviscid and viscous mixers,” J. Fluid Mech. 493, 345–361
(2003).

20J. S. Birman, Braids, Links, and Mapping Class Groups (Prince-

ton University Press, 1975).

21M. Handel, “Gobal shadowing of pseudo-anosov homeomor-

phisms,” Ergodic Th. Dyn. Sys 5, 373–377 (1985).

22W. P. Thurston, “On the Geometry and Dynamics of Diﬀeomor-
phisms of Surfaces,” Bulletin Of The American Mathematical
Society 19, 417–431 (1988).

23H. Short and B. Wiest, “Orderings of Mapping Class Groups after

Thurston,” LEnseignement Mathmatique 46, 279–312 (2000).

24D. Bernardete, Z. Nitecki, and M. Gutierrez, “Braids and the
Nielsen-Thurston Classiﬁcation,” Journal Of Knot Theory And
Its Ramiﬁcations 4, 549–618 (1995).

25M. Bestvina and M. Handel, “Train-Tracks for Surface Homeo-

morphisms,” Topology 34, 109–140 (1995).

26J.-O. Moussaﬁr, “On computing the entropy of braids,”

Functional Analysis and Other Mathematics 1, 37–46 (2006).

27T. Hall and S. ¨O. Yurtta¸s, “On the topological entropy of fami-
lies of braids,” Topology and its Applications 156, 1554 – 1564

(2009).

28C. Kassel and V. Turaev, Braid Groups (Springer, 2008).
29M. Alns, J. Blechta, J. Hake, A. Johansson, B. Kehlet,
J. Ring, M. Rognes,
1.5,”

A.
and G. Wells,
Archive of Numerical Software 3 (2015), 10.11588/ans.2015.100.20553.

C. Richardson,

project

version

fenics

Logg,

“The

of

the
on the basis

tiﬁcation
ers
Microﬂuidics and Nanoﬂuidics 13, 19–27 (2012).

performance
of ﬁnite

time

of

chaotic micromix-
lyapunov exponents,”

10

42K. P. Bowman,

isentropic mixing proper-
the antarctic polar vortex from analyzed winds,”

ties of
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 98, 23013–23027 (1993).

“Large-scale

30A. Logg, K.-A. Mardal, and G. N. Wells, eds., Automated So-
lutions of Diﬀerential Equations by the Finite Element Method:
The FEniCS Book (Springer, 2012).

31M.-C. Lai and C. S. Peskin, “An immersed boundary method
with formal second-order accuracy and reduced numerical viscos-
ity,” Journal of Computational Physics 160, 705 – 719 (2000).

32A. J. Chorin, “Numerical solution of the navier-stokes equation,”

Math. Comp. 22, 745–762 (1968).

33J. M. Ottino, S. C. Jana,

and V. S. Chakravarthy, “From
reynolds’s stretching and folding to mixing studies using horse-
shoe maps,” Physics of Fluids 6, 685–699 (1994).

43P. E. Arratia and J. P. Gollub, “Predicting the progress of dif-
fusively limited chemical reactions in the presence of chaotic ad-
vection,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 024501 (2006).

44P. Cvitanovi´c, R. Artuso, R. Mainieri, G. Tanner, and G. Vattay,
Chaos: Classical and Quantum (Niels Bohr Institute, Copen-
hagen, 2012) ChaosBook.org.

45G.

Benettin,

L. Galgani,
and

and

numerical

J.-M.

Strelcyn,
experiments,”

“Kolmogorov
Phys. Rev. A 14, 2338–2345 (1976).

entropy

46I. Shimada and T. Nagashima, “A numerical approach
systems,”

to
34J. Ottino, The Kinematics of Mixing: Stretching, Chaos, and Transport ,
Progress of Theoretical Physics 61, 1605–1616 (1979).

ergodic problem of dissipative dynamical

and
exponent

A.
and

Cambridge Texts in Applied Mathematics (Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1989).

35G. Lapeyre,

“Characterization

of

ﬁnite-time

exponents
vectors
Chaos 12, 688–698 (2002).

and

in

two-dimensional

lyapunov
turbulence,”

36G. A. Voth, G. Haller,

and J. P. Gollub, “Experi-
mental measurements of stretching ﬁelds in ﬂuid mixing,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 254501 (2002).
Boozer,

“Finite

Tang

37X.

time

punov
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 95, 283 – 305 (1996).

advection-diﬀusion

38J.-L. Thiﬀeault and A. H. Boozer, “Geometrical constraints on
ﬁnite-time lyapunov exponents in two and three dimensions,”
Chaos 11, 16–28 (2001).

39G.-C. Yuan, K. Nam, T. M. Antonsen, E. Ott, and P. N. Guzdar,
“Power spectrum of passive scalars in two dimensional chaotic
ﬂows,” Chaos 10, 39–49 (2000).

40T. M. Antonsen, Z. Fan, E. Ott, and E. GarciaLopez, “The role
of chaotic orbits in the determination of power spectra of passive
scalars,” Physics of Fluids 8, 3094–3104 (1996).

41A.

Sarkar, A. Narv´aez,

and

J. Harting,

“Quan-

lya-
equation,”

of

the

47H. M. Xia, C. Shu,

reynolds number

spatially
using

S. Y. M. Wan,

“Inﬂuence
in

periodic micromixer

and Y. T.
on chaotic
Chew,
its
mixing
a
characterization
system techniques,”
Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering 16, 53 (2006).
and R. Lueptow, “Inertial
eﬀects on chaotic advection and mixing in a 2d cavity ﬂow,”
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 48, 2436–2442 (2009),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ie800404d.

48J. Wang, L. Feng, J. M. Ottino,

dynamical

and

49D. Hobbs

and

F. Muzzio,

“Reynolds

50M. Cliﬀord,

in the kenics

on laminar mixing

fects
Chemical Engineering Journal 70, 93 – 104 (1998).
and M. Finn,
simple

number
Chemical Engineering Science 59, 3371 – 3379 (2004).

planetary

S. Cox,

eﬀects

in

a

number

ef-
static mixer,”

“Reynolds
mixer,”

51I. Mezic, “Chaotic advection in bounded Navier Stokes ﬂows,”

Journal of Fluid Mechanics 431, 347–370 (2001).

52A. W. Baggaley, C. F. Barenghi,

“Stretching
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 238, 365 – 369 (2009).

a model

in

of

a

and A. Shukurov,
ﬂow,”

turbulent

