6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
6
4
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

A retrocausal model of the quantum

computational speedup

Giuseppe Castagnoli1,2,

∗

1Elsag Bailey ICT Division and Quantum Information Laboratory

2Via Puccini 2, 16154 Genova, Italy

March 16, 2016

Abstract

We extend the representation of quantum algorithms to the prepa-
ration of the problem setting. An initial measurement serves to set the
problem, the ﬁnal one as usual to read the solution. This extension high-
lights the possibility of ascribing the selection of a variable fraction R of
the information that speciﬁes the random outcome of the initial measure-
ment to the ﬁnal measurement. The input state of the quantum algorithm
to the problem solver (Alice), of maximal ignorance of the problem setting
that to her should be hidden, would consequently be projected on a state
of lower entropy where she knows in advance an R-th part of the setting
(i. e. of the information that speciﬁes it). Given the appropriate value of
R, the quantum algorithm turns out to be a sum over classical histories in
each of which Alice knows in advance one of the possible R-th parts of the
problem setting and performs the Q(R) computations (oracle queries) still
needed to ﬁnd the solution. Grover’s search problem can be solved with
any value of R from 0 to about 1
2 , when the solution algorithm becomes
In all the optimal quantum algorithms
the optimal Grover algorithm.
examined, R is close to 1
2 (cid:1) yields the order of magnitude of the
number of queries.
If this held in general, as it seems to be plausible,
given any oracle problem we would know the order of magnitude of the
number of queries needed for its optimal quantum solution.

2 and Q (cid:0) 1

1 Introduction

We consider a simple oracle problem. Bob, the problem setter, hides a ball in
one of four drawers. Alice, the problem solver, is to locate it by opening drawers
(i. e. by querying the oracle). In Grover quantum search algorithm [1], Alice
always solves the problem by opening only one drawer, while in the classical case
she may need to open up to three drawers. This essentially higher eﬃciency of
quantum computation is usually called quantum computational speedup.

∗giuseppe.castagnoli@gmail.com

1

Although there is a signiﬁcant body of literature on the relationship be-
tween speedup and fundamental quantum features, such as entanglement [2, 3]
and discord [4, 5], no fundamental physical explanation nor uniﬁed mathemat-
ical mechanism is known for the speedup. In this work, we apply to quantum
computation a tenet of the time-symmetric quantum mechanics of Aharonov et
al. [6 ÷ 10], that an apparently random event can be caused by an event in the
future.
The usual representation of quantum algorithms is limited to Alice’s problem-
solving action. We extend it to Bob’s action of setting the problem – placing the
ball in the desired drawer. At time t0, there is the initial measurement, required
to to know the initial location of the ball. We assume that the state before mea-
surement is a mixture where this location is completely undetermined. Then
there are two consecutive unitary transformations. In the former, from t0 to t1,
Bob moves the ball into the desired drawer. In the latter, from t1 to t2, Alice
locates the ball by opening drawers. The solution is then acquired by the ﬁnal
measurement.

This extension immediately calls for relational quantum mechanics, where
quantum states are observer dependent. A quantum state can be sharp with
respect to an observer and a quantum superposition, or a mixture, with respect
to another observer.
In the input state of Alice’s problem-solving action, at
time t1, Bob and any external observer know the location of the ball, what
corresponds to a sharp quantum state. This location must naturally be hidden
to Alice, the problem solver. The state to Alice is obtained by retarding the
projection of the quantum state induced by the initial measurement at the end
of the unitary part of her action. Thus the input state to her remains the
mixture where the location of the ball is completely undetermined. For each
possible location, Alice unitarily ﬁnds the corresponding solution by opening
drawers. The quantum state becomes a mixture of tensor products, each the
product of a number of the drawer with the ball and the corresponding solution.
Eventually, Alice reads the solution by the ﬁnal measurement. This projects the
mixed state on a sharp state that encodes the number of the drawer with the
ball chosen by Bob and the respective solution found by Alice.

There is a redundancy between initial and ﬁnal measurement: either one,
performed alone, would select both the initial and ﬁnal measurement outcomes.
We explore the possibility that both measurements contribute to the selection.
This means that the part of the projection of the quantum state ascribed to
the ﬁnal measurement, advanced at time t0 by the inverse of the time-forward
unitary evolution, selects part, say an R-th part, of the information that speciﬁes
the random outcome of the initial measurement. From a purely mathematical
standpoint, R can assume any value in [0, 1].
What is interesting to present ends is the value of this backward propagation
at time t1, immediately before the beginning of Alice’s problem-solving action.
The input state to Alice, where she knew nothing of the number of the drawer
with the ball chosen by Bob, is projected on a state of lower entropy where
she knows an R-th part of the information that speciﬁes it. Alice uses this
knowledge to locate the ball opening fewer drawers. Given the appropriate

2

value of R, the quantum algorithm can be seen as a sum over classical histories
in each of which Alice knows in advance one of the possible R-th parts of the
information that speciﬁes the number of the drawer with the ball (more in
general the problem setting) and opens the drawers still needed to locate the
ball (to ﬁnd the solution).

In the four drawers case, the value of R that explains the speedup is 1

Given a quantum algorithm, this retrocausality model yields the value of
R that explains its speedup. Given an oracle problem, it yields the number of
queries, say Q (R), needed to solve it with retrocausality R.
2 . More
in general, for any number of drawers, Grover’s problem can be solved with any
value of R from 0 to about 1
2 , when the solution algorithm becomes the optimal
It should be noted that problem-solution correlation also
Grover algorithm.
sets an upper bound to the value of R; R = 1 is obviously impossible, it would
mean solving an oracle problem without queries. In all the optimal quantum
algorithms examined, R is in a small right surrounding of 1
2 where the variance
of Q (R) is little. Given the problem and R = 1
2 , the present model gives the
order of magnitude of the number of queries needed to solve it in an optimal
quantum way. If this were true in general, it would solve the open problem of
quantum query complexity.

First we summarize the retrocausal model of the speedup developed through
[11 ÷ 15], in the simplest four drawers case. Then we provide an argument
in favor of the conjecture that R = 1
2 is always attainable. Seeing the two
things together should be important to evaluate the possible bearing of this
unconventional approach to the speedup.

2 Retrocausal model of the speedup

We formalize the four drawers problem – see [14] for further details. Let b ∈
{00, 01, 10, 11} be the number of the drawer with the ball and a ∈ {00, 01, 10, 11}
that of the drawer that Alice wants to open. Checking whether the ball is in
drawer a amounts to evaluating the Kronecker function δ (b, a), which is 1 if
b = a and 0 otherwise. Bob sets a value of b and gives Alice the black box
that computes δ (b, a) – while hiding to Alice the value of b inside it. Alice can
use the black box to evaluate the function δ (b, a) for any desired value of the
argument a. She is to ﬁnd the value of b set by Bob by performing function
evaluations (i. e. oracle queries).

We extend the physical representation of the algorithm to Bob’s process of
choosing b – the number of the drawer containing the ball. We need three quan-
tum registers. A possibly imaginary register B of basis vectors |00iB ,|01iB ,|10iB ,|11iB,
under the control of Bob, contains b, a register A of basis vectors |00iA ,|01iA ,|10iA ,|11iA,
under the control of Alice, contains a, a register V (like value) of basis vectors
|0iV ,|1iV receives the result of function evaluation modulo two added to its
previous content. We assume that, initially, the number of the drawer contain-
ing the ball is completely undetermined. Correspondingly, the state of register

3

B is maximally mixed. Its density operator is then:

ρB =

1
4

(|00ih00|B + |01ih01|B + |10ih10|B + |11ih11|B) .

However, we prefer to keep the usual ket vector representation of quantum
algorithms, representing the state in question with the ket:

|ψiB =

1

2 (cid:0)eiϕ0 |00iB + eiϕ1 |01iB + eiϕ2 |10iB + eiϕ3 |11iB(cid:1) .

(1)

The ϕi are independent random phases with uniform distribution in [0, 2π]. We
will be dealing with a trivial application of this random phase representation
[12]: we can always think that the quantum superposition evolves as a pure
state with the ϕi ﬁxed phases; only when we have to compute its von Neumann
entropy, we should remember that the superposition is dephased and the ϕi are
random variables. The von Neumann entropy of state (1), as that of ρB, is two
bit. The initial state of the three registers, at time t0, is:

1

|ψi =

2√2 (cid:0)eiϕ0 |00iB + eiϕ1 |01iB + eiϕ2 |10iB + eiϕ3 |11iB(cid:1)|00iA (|0iV − |1iV ) .

(2)
The state of registers A and V is that required by Grover algorithm. Bob
measures the content of register B, namely the observable ˆB of eigenstates
|00iB ,|01iB ,|10iB ,|11iB and eigenvalues respectively 00, 01, 10, 11, obtaining
in a completely random way a number of the drawer with the ball, say, b = 01.
State (2) is thus projected, at time t1, on:

1
√2 |01iB |00iA (|0iV − |1iV ) .

(3)

For maximum simplicity, we assume that Bob is content to select the number
of the drawer with the ball at random. Of course he could also unitarily change
the random measurement outcome into the desired problem setting (with the
ball in the desired drawer). We have seen in [14] that this makes no diﬀerence
for what concerns the present retrocausal interpretation of the speedup.

The extension of the physical representation to register B immediately calls
for relational quantum mechanics [17]. Clearly state (3), with register B in
a sharp state, is with respect to Bob and any external observer, it could not
be with respect to Alice. It would tell her, the problem solver, the number of
the drawer with the ball before she opens any drawer. To her, this number
must be hidden. To obtain the quantum state to Alice, it suﬃces to retard the
projection of the quantum state induced by Bob’s measurement at the end of
the unitary part of Alice’s action. As well known, the projection induced by
a quantum measurement can be retarded or advanced at will along a unitary
evolution that respectively follows or precedes it. In this way, the input state
of the quantum algorithm to her, at time t1, is still state (2). The two bit

4

entropy of the state of register B in it represents Alice’s complete ignorance of
the number of the drawer with the ball.

Alice unitarily sends state (2) into:

ℑAUf HA |ψi =

1

2√2 (cid:18) eiϕ0 |00iB |00iA + eiϕ1 |01iB |01iA

+ eiϕ2 |10iB |10iA + eiϕ3 |11iB |11iA (cid:19) (|0iV − |1iV )

(4)
by performing just one function evaluation. HA is the Hadamard transform on
register A, Uf is function evaluation, and ℑA, again only on register A, is the
so called inversion about the mean. We can see that each possible number of the
drawer with the ball, in register B, is multiplied by the corresponding solution
(that same number) in register A. Alice acquires the solution by measuring the
content of A, namely the observable ˆA of eigenstates |00iA ,|01iA ,|10iA ,|11iA
and eigenvalues respectively 00, 01, 10, 11 – note that ˆA and ˆB commute. The
measurement outcome, at time t2, is:

1
√2 |01iB |01iA (|0iV − |1iV ) .

It is unpredictable to Alice as usual – not to Bob and any external observer who
already know that the number of the drawer with the ball is b = 01.

One can see that the initial Bob’s measurement and the ﬁnal Alice’s mea-
surement are redundant with one another to the end of selecting the setting or
identically the solution of the problem. From the mathematical standpoint, the
selection of any part of the information that speciﬁes the random outcome of the
initial measurement can be ascribed to the ﬁnal measurement. In presence of
one another, contextually, the two measurements would reduce to partial mea-
surements such that, together, they select whatever is selected by the complete
measurements and, each performed alone, reduce the entropy of the quantum
state in a complementary and non-redundant way. By this we mean that the
information acquired by one measurement is not acquired by the other: we
give up the customary assumption that everything is selected by the measure-
ment performed ﬁrst, not the economic condition that there are no redundant
selections.

For example, we could ascribe the selection of the right digit of the eigenvalue
01 (common to Bob’s and Alice’s measurements) to Alice’s measurement – Bob’s
measurement would reduce to selecting the left digit of this eigenvalue (or vice-
versa). Thus, Bob’s measurement would reduce to that of ˆB0, the content of the
left cell of register B, Alice’s measurement to that of ˆA1, the content of the right
cell of register A. We should assume that the projection of the quantum state
induced by the selection of the right digit of 01, performed by the measurement
of ˆA1, propagates backward in time by the inverse of ℑAUf HA until selecting
the right digit of the random outcome of the initial measurement.
To present ends, it is interesting to look at the value of this backward prop-
agation at time t1, after the initial measurement and before the unitary part
of Alice’s action. To start with, the ﬁnal measurement of ˆA1, which in present
assumptions selects the eigenvalue 1, projects the output state to Alice (4) on:

5

1

|χi =

2 (cid:0)eiϕ1 |01iB |01iA + eiϕ3 |11iB |11iA(cid:1) (|0iV − |1iV ) .

We should then advance at time t1, by the inverse of ℑAUf HA, the two ends
of this projection. The result is the projection of the input state to Alice (2)
on:

H †

AU †

fℑ†

A |χi =

1

2 (cid:0)eiϕ1 |01iB + eiϕ3 |11iB(cid:1)|00iA (|0iV − |1iV ) .

(5)

This is an outstanding consequence. State (5), the input state to Alice under
the assumption that the selection of the problem setting or the solution equally
shares between Bob’s and Alice’s measurements, tells her, before she performs
any function evaluation, that the number of the drawer with the ball is either
b = 01 or b = 11, namely that b ∈ {01, 11}. We can say that Alice knows in
advance that b ∈ {01, 11}, since this knowledge comes to her from the selection
performed by her future measurement.
We are at a fundamental level where knowing is doing [18]. Alice is the prob-
lem solver, her knowing in advance that b ∈ {01, 11} would simply mean that
the quantum algorithm requires the number of function evaluations classically
required to identify the solution starting from that knowledge.

More in general, given a value of R diﬀerent from zero and one, we need
to reconcile the notion of Alice’s advanced knowledge of an R-th part of the
information in question with the fact that such a part can be taken in a plural-
ity of ways. Moreover, we need an operational interpretation of the advanced
knowledge notion.

We kill two birds with one stone by resorting to Feynman’s path integral
formulation of quantum mechanics [19]. Given the appropriate value of R, the
quantum algorithm can be seen as a sum over classical histories in each of which
Alice knows in advance one of the possible R-th part of the information that
speciﬁes the problem setting (or the solution) and performs the queries still
needed to ﬁnd the solution. The sum covers all the possible ways of taking that
part.
In particular, the number of queries needed to solve the problem with
retrocausality R is simply that of a classical algorithm that knows in advance
the R-th part of the information that speciﬁes the problem setting.
2 explains the speedup, namely the
fact that Alice needs just one function evaluation to ﬁnd the solution. In each
history, Alice knows in advance that the ball is in a pair of drawers. Opening
either drawer allows her to locate it. An example of history is:

In the present quantum algorithm, R = 1

Uf→ eiϕ1 |01iB |11iA |0iV

HA→ eiϕ1 |01iB |11iA |0iV

eiϕ1 |01iB |00iA |0iV
The left-most state is one of the elements of the input state superposition (2).
The state after each arrow is one of the elements of the quantum superposi-
tion generated by the unitary transformation of the state before the arrow; the
transformation in question is speciﬁed above the arrow. In the history we are
dealing with, the problem setting is b = 01. Alice performs function evaluation
for the argument a = 11 (second and third state). Therefore we must assume

ℑA→ eiϕ1 |01iB |01iA |0iV .

6

that Alice’s advanced knowledge is b ∈ {01, 11}B. Since the output of function
evaluation is zero (the state of register V remains unaltered throughout Uf ),
she ﬁnds that the problem setting must be 01.

today, which are all optimal – see [15].

We have computed the value of R for the major quantum algorithms known
R is exactly 1
2 in all the quantum algorithms requiring a single oracle query,
as the seminal Deutsch algorithm [20], Deutsch&Jozsa algorithm [21], Grover
algorithm for database size N = 4 (as checked above), the quantum part of
Simon [22] and the Abelian hidden subgroup algorithms. The latter quantum
algorithms solve the following problems: ﬁnding orders, ﬁnding the period of a
function (the quantum part of Shor [23] factorization algorithm), ﬁnding discrete
logarithms in any group, ﬁnding hidden linear functions and self shift equivalent
polynomials, Abelian stabilizer problem, graph automorphism problem [24].

Grover algorithm is optimal for any number of drawers N . The value of
R given by the present model goes slightly above 1
2 when N goes past 4 (and
more that one query is required) and back to 1
2 when N → ∞. It should also be
noted that, for any value of R between 0 and that of Grover algorithm, there
is a non-optimal quantum algorithm that solves Grover’s problem with Q (R)
queries. This is in fact Long [25] algorithm tuned on Q (R) queries – Long
algorithm can be tuned to provide the solution with certainty with any number
of queries equal to or above that of Grover algorithm.

If, given an oracle problem, Q(cid:0) 1

minimum number of queries required for its quantum solution (as in the cases
examined), we would have a very powerful tool for assessing quantum query
complexity.

2(cid:1) always gave the order of magnitude of the

3 Retrocausality and entanglement

Relating the speedup to a quantitative fundamental feature, entanglement in
[2, 3] and discord in [4, 5], is common to various attempts of unifying the quan-
tum algorithms. These attempts have not yet managed to identify a unifying
element that explains the diﬀerent speedups, which appear to depend on the ex-
act nature of the problem while the reason for the speedup varies from problem
to problem [5].

In the present work, we have replaced entanglement by a quantitative mea-
sure of retrocausality, a perhaps more fundamental feature as far as retrocausal-
ity can explain the non-locality of entanglement [26]. For the time being the
unifying element is that, in all the optimal quantum algorithms examined, the
value of R is in a right surrounding of 1
2 where Q (R) has a little variance. We
have seen that, if this were true in general, it would solve the quantum query
complexity problem. We discuss this possibility focusing on the fundamental
physical level.

Given the extended representation of the quantum algorithm: initial mea-
surement of ˆB in a maximally mixed state, unitary evolution, and ﬁnal mea-
surement of ˆA, we compare entangling and non-entangling evolutions.
It is

7

convenient to assume that Alice ﬁnally measures both ˆA and ˆB. Adding the
measurement of ˆB is indiﬀerent for the present interpretation of the speedup.
In fact the ﬁnal measurement of ˆA also triggers the projection of the quantum
state due to the initial measurement of ˆB, which cannot be retarded beyond the
unitary part of Alice’s action. This is equivalent to ﬁnally measuring both ˆA
and ˆB.

A trivial example of a non-entangling evolution is the identity transformation
of the initial state of registers B and A. In this case R – the fraction of the
information that speciﬁes the random outcome of the initial measurement whose
selection is ascribed to the ﬁnal measurement – can obviously assume any value
between zero and one, including the extremes where this outcome is selected by
only the initial measurement (R = 0) or the ﬁnal one (R = 1). Obviously there
is no propagation of information from register B to register A.
Quantum algorithms instead maximally entangle the contents of the two
registers. During entanglement, information about the content of register B,
which remains unaltered, propagates from B to A. In this case, it comes out a
distinction between past and future – between when the two registers are not
entangled and when they are. While R = 0 is always possible provided one does
not bound the number of oracle queries, as it corresponds to reversible classical
computation, R = 1 is impossible. Alice would know the entire problem setting,
thus also the solution of the problem, in advance. This would mean solving an
oracle problem (what requires moving information from B to A) without oracle
queries (without moving any information). By the way, the idea that, at the
microscopic level, entanglement creates the arrow of time dates back to 1988
[27], was ignored for many years and taken up again in 2006 [28].

Then, in the case of an entangling evolution, there must be an upper bound
to the value of R that can be attained. We know this bound in Grover algorithm.
Since the algorithm is optimal [25], the bound coincides with the value of R that
explains its speedup according to the present model. Thus, at the varying of
N , it ranges over a small right surrounding of 1
2 . In any case the upper bound
to the value of R is not less than 1
2 .
It is reasonable to think that the bound in question is the most stringent
in Grover algorithm. Let I be the fraction of the amount of information about
the random outcome of the initial measurement that propagates from B to
A.
In Grover algorithm we have I = 1: eventually A contains a replica of
the random outcome of the initial measurement. I is smaller in the quantum
algorithms where the problem setting is a many to one function of the random
outcome of the initial measurement or the solution is a many to one function
of the problem setting. Since the upper bound to the value of R is not less
than 1
2 when I = 1 and is 1 when I = 0, it seems reasonable to assume that
a-fortiori it is not less than 1
2 should
be attainable in any quantum algorithm. There would be a possibly important

2 when I < 1. As a consequence, R = 1

technical consequence. Given an oracle problem, Q(cid:0) 1
required with R = 1
bound to the number of queries required for its quantum solution.

2 according to the present model) would give us an upper

2(cid:1) (the number of queries

8

4 Conclusion

Summarizing, given an oracle problem, the present model yields the relation
Q (R), namely the number of queries required to solve it with retrocausality R.
Given a quantum algorithm, it yields the value of R that explains its speedup.
Grover’s search problem can be solved with any value of R between 0 and
that of the optimal Grover algorithm. In all the optimal quantum algorithms
examined, R is in a small right surrounding of 1
2 where the variance of Q (R)
is little – such that Q(cid:0) 1
2(cid:1) always yields the order of magnitude of their number
of queries. If this held in general, it would solve the quantum query complexity
problem.

The creation of entanglement along the unitary part of the quantum algo-
It is reasonable to conjecture
rithm sets an upper bound to the value of R.
that this bound is the most stringent in Grover algorithm, where it is never less
than 1
required for the solution of any oracle problem. Verifying this conjecture should
be the main object of further study.

2(cid:1) would constitute an upper bound to the number of queries

2 . Then Q(cid:0) 1

Another prospect is looking for cross fertilization between the present ap-
proach and the literature that forms the background of it. We mean [6 ÷ 10]
and [29]. In particular, the quantitative measure of retrocausality R has been
inspired by the work of Dolev and Elitzur on the non-sequential behavior of
the wave function highlighted by partial measurement [8]. The temporal non-
locality of quantum computation had been highlighted in [29], which shows that
Grover algorithm violates a temporal Bell inequality.

Acknowledgments

I had useful discussions with David Finkelstein along the entire development

of the present approach to the study of the speedup.

References

[1] L. K. Grover. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search.
Proc. 28th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing (ACM press
New York 1996) pp. 212-219.

[2] R. Jozsa and N. Linden, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 459, 2011 (2003).
[3] D. Gross, S. T. Flammia, and J. Eisert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 190501

(2009).

[4] H. Ollivier and W. H. Zurek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 017901 (2001).
[5] L. Henderson and V. Vedral, J. Phys. A 34, 6899 (2001).
[6] Y. Aharonov, P. G. Bergman, and J. L. Lebowitz, Phys. Rev. B 134,

1410 (1964).

[7] Y. Aharonov and L. Vaidman, The Two-State Vector Formalism: An
Updated Review (Springer series Lecture Notes in Physics), Vol. 734, pp 399-
447

9

[8] S. Dolev, A. C. Elitzur. Non-sequential behavior of the wave function.

2001. arXiv:quant-ph/0102109 v1

[9] Y. Aharonov, S. Popescu, and J. Tollaksen, Physics today, November

issue: 27 (2010).

[10] Y. Aharonov, E. Cohen, D. Grossman , and A. C. Elitzur, Can a Future

Choice Aﬀect a Past Measurement’s Outcome? 2012; arXiv:1206.6224

[11] G. Castagnoli and D. R. Finkelstein, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 457, 1799

(2001).

[12] G. Castagnoli, Phys. Rev. A 82, 052334 (2010).
[13] G. Castagnoli, in Proceedings of the 92nd Annual Meeting of the AAAS
Paciﬁc Division, Quantum Retrocausation: Theory and Experiment, 2011 (un-
published).

[14] G. Castagnoli, Found. Phys, in production (2015).
[15] G. Castagnoli, Quanta ; Vol 5, No 1 34.(2016).
[16] D. Bohm and D. A. Pines, Phys. Rev. 92, 626 (1953).
[17] C. Rovelli, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 35 637 (1996).
[18] D. R. Finkelstein (private communication).
[19] R. Feynman and A. R. Hibbs, Quantum Mechanics And Path Integrals

(New York, McGraw-Hill 1965).

[20] D. Deutsch, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 400, 97 (1985).
[21] D Deutsch and R. Jozsa, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 439, 553 (1992).
[22] D. Simon, in Proceedings of the 35th Annual IEEE Symposium on the

Foundations of Computer Science, 1994, pp. 116-123.

[23] P. W. Shor, in Proceedings of the 35th Annual IEEE Symposium on the

Foundations of Computer Science, 1994, pp. 124-134.

[24] P. Kaye, R. Laﬂamme, and M. Mosca, An Introduction To Quantum

Computing (Oxford University Press, 2007), pp. 146-147.

[25] G. L. Long, Phys. Rev. A 64, 022307 (2001).
[26] H Price and K. Wharton. Disentangling the Quantum World. 2015.

arxiv.org/abs/1508.01140

[27] S. Lloyd. Pure state quantum statistical mechanics and black holes.

2013. arxiv.org/abs/1307.0378v1

[28] S Popescu, A. J. Short A, and A. Winter, Nature Physics 2, 754 (2006).
[29] F. Morikoshi, Phys. Rev. A 73, 052308 (2006).

10

