6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
5
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spin polarization of Majorana zero modes and topological quantum phase transition

in semiconductor Majorana nanowires

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA

Tudor D. Stanescu1 and Sumanta Tewari2

2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634, USA

A number of recent works have discussed the issue of spin polarization of a Majorana zero mode
in condensed matter systems. Here we show that the spin polarization density of a Majorana zero
mode, computed as an average of the spin operator over its wave function, vanishes everywhere. A
single non-degenerate Majorana zero mode, therefore, does not couple to an applied magnetic ﬁeld,
except via hybridization with higher energy excited states (if present), which may perturb its wave
function. If ‘spin’ is deﬁned by considering only the particle components of the wave function, as
has been done in some recent works, Majorana zero modes do have a non-zero spatial proﬁle of
this quantity, measurable in scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) experiments. However, if such a
quantity is measured in spin-resolved tunneling experiments (without spatial resolution), we show
that it cannot be used as a unique signature of Majorana zero modes in the topologically non-trivial
phase. As a byproduct, we show that in spatially inhomogeneous systems, accidental zero energy
modes, which for all practical purposes behave as Majorana zero modes (including giving rise to
a zero bias conductance peak of height ∼ 2e2/h), can appear with increasing magnetic ﬁeld even
in the absence of a topological quantum phase transition (TQPT). But only after gap closing and
the associated TQPT, the modes are localized near the system edges, resulting in the maximum
topological protection. In the light of these considerations, demonstrating the nonlocal character of
the topologically-protected Majorana pair and its emergence after the systems undergo a TQPT,
become critical tasks for the ongoing experimental search for Majorana bound states in condensed
matter systems.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Topological superconductors are deﬁned as systems
with a well deﬁned spectral gap to fermionic excita-
tions in the bulk but topologically protected gapless
excitations on the surface1–3. Due to the supercon-
ducting particle-hole symmetry, the second quantized
operators for Bogoliubov excitations in a gapped spin-
less superconductor, which is a prototype of a topolog-
†
E = γ−E.
ical superconductor1,2, satisfy the property γ
It follows that the gapless zero modes on the surface,
†
should they exist, satisfy the property γ
0 = γ0, imply-
ing particles identiﬁable with their own anti-particles,
ﬁrst proposed by E. Majorana in 1937 in the context
of high energy physics4.
In the context of condensed
matter, the gapless zero energy Bogoliubov excitations,
known as Majorana zero modes, emerge as localized
zero-energy quasiparticles in topological superconduc-
tors bound to defects of the order parameter such as
vortices and sample edges. Aside from being fascinat-
ing non-elementary particles, in two-dimensional systems
Majorana zero modes obey a special type of braiding
statistics known as non-Abelian statistics, which is use-
ful in implementing a fault-tolerant topological quantum
computer2,3. These emergent excitations are said to be
topologically protected, in the sense that their existence
on the surface and other interesting properties are in-
sensitive to perturbations, so long as the system remains
gapped in the bulk.

While Majorana zero modes (also sometimes called
Majorana bound states (MBSs) or simply Majorana
fermions (MFs)) have not yet been conclusively found

in experiments, they have been theoretically shown to
exist in low dimensional spinless p-wave superconducting
systems1,2, as well as other systems which are similar to
them5–14. In particular, the semiconductor heterostruc-
ture scheme, involving a spin-orbit coupled semiconduc-
tor in proximity to a s-wave superconductor and an ex-
ternally applied Zeeman ﬁeld8–14, has motivated tremen-
dous experimental eﬀorts with a number of recent works
claiming to have observed experimental signatures con-
sistent with the existence of Majorana zero modes15–20;
for a review see Ref. [21].

Zero energy Majorana bound states in topological su-
perconductors can be viewed as Andreev bound states22
with an equal admixture of electron- and hole-like compo-
nents of the same spin. The second quantized Majorana
operator, thus, creates and destroys an equal amount of
any physical quantity associated with these operators,
and the excitation carries zero average charge and spin.
Put another way, MBSs, by construction, cannot carry
a non-zero value of an internal quantum number, e.g.,
charge or spin, because if they did, the ﬁeld that couples
to these quantum numbers (e.g., Zeeman ﬁeld) would be
able to remove MBSs locally, which goes against the con-
cept of topological protection2. Despite this, a number of
recent works23–26 have proposed the existence of a spin-
polarization associated with a single MBS in condensed
matter systems.

In this paper we ﬁrst show that the spin polarization
of a MBS, computed as an average of the spin opera-
tor over its wave function, vanishes everywhere. An ap-
plied Zeeman ﬁeld therefore has no eﬀect on an isolated
MBS, consistent with the concept of topological protec-

tion. Not only does the Zeeman ﬁeld have no eﬀect on
the energy of Majorana zero energy state, even the Ma-
jorana wave function is unaﬀected by the Zeeman ﬁeld
provided the gap to the higher energy excited states is
large enough (The change in the Majorana wave function
by an applied Zeeman ﬁeld occurs via hybridization with
the higher energy excited states, and thus disappears for
a truly ‘stand-alone’ MBS). If spin is deﬁned, however, by
taking into account only the particle components of the
Majorana wave function, as has been done in the recent
works23–26, we show that Majorana zero modes do have
a non-zero spatial proﬁle of this quantity, and it can be
measured in scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) ex-
periments. However, if this quantity is measured in spin-
resolved tunneling spectroscopy (without spatial resolu-
tion), we show that it cannot be used as a unique signa-
ture of Majorana bound states in the topological super-
conducting phase of semiconductor-superconductor het-
erostructures. Our conclusion is that although the ‘spin
polarization’ can be probed by spin-resolved tunneling
experiments (such as STM and tunneling spectroscopy
from the ends) no extra information can be gleaned by
spin-resolved tunneling (beyond what is gained by spin-
unresolved tunneling) that can help us discriminate be-
tween zero energy states in the topologically trivial and
non-trivial regimes in the parameter space.

As a byproduct of this work we also show that, in spa-
tially inhomogeneous systems, MBSs can appear with in-
creasing Zeeman ﬁeld even in the absence of a topologi-
cal quantum phase transition (TQPT). When the system
is still topologically trivial, a regular low energy sub-
gap state near a soft boundary can nucleate two spa-
tially separated zero energy states which (for all practi-
cal purposes) behave as Majorana zero modes. So long
as the system remains topologically trivial, these Majo-
rana bound states are localized inside the smooth con-
ﬁnement region, while in the topologically non-trivial su-
perconducting phase (i.e., with Zeeman ﬁeld larger than
the critical ﬁeld required for TQPT) the two Majorana
states are localized near the ends of the wire.
In light
of this ﬁnding we conclude that demonstrating the non-
local character of the topologically-protected MBS pair
and its emergence after the system undergoes a TQPT,
become critical tasks for the ongoing experimental search
for MBSs in solid state structures. In particular, we con-
jecture that observing a zero-bias conductance peak (of
height ∼ 2e2/h ) that sticks to zero energy for a cer-
tain range of Zeeman ﬁelds does not represent a unique
signature of the topologically protected Majorana bound
states (because such a signature can also appear in the
topologically trivial phase, see Fig. 8).

Below in Section II we discuss the issue of spin polar-
ization of MBSs, clearly distinguishing between average
spin computed with respect to the full Majorana wave
function and another quantity (also sometimes called
‘spin polarization’ of MBSs23–26) where the average is
computed with respect to only the particle components of
the wave function. In Section III, we discuss and distin-

2

guish MBSs that appear in the topologically non-trivial
phase of a semiconductor-superconductor heterostruc-
ture with accidental zero energy states in the topolog-
ically trivial phase that can also be considered as a pair
of MBSs. In Section IV we discuss if ‘spin polarization’
of a MBS (understood as an average with respect to
the particle part of the wave function) can help discrim-
inate between the topologically trivial and non-trivial
zero energy states in semiconductor-superconductor het-
erostructures. We summarize and conclude in Section
V.

II. SPIN POLARIZATION OF MAJORANA

BOUND STATES

Our main goal is to answer the following basic ques-
tions:
in what sense can one talk about the spin po-
larization of a Majorana bound state and what are the
observable physical implications of the existence of such
a property? To answer these questions, we start with
the basic equation that describes the quasiparticle dy-
namics in a superconductor at the mean-ﬁeld level, the
Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equation, then we discuss
the concept of Majorana ‘spin density’ and discuss its
possible observable manifestations.

A. Bogoliubov-de Gennes formalism and

microscopic model

The (time independent) BdG equation describing the
mean-ﬁeld dynamics of quasiparticles in a superconduc-
tor has the generic form

HBdG ψn = Enψn,

(1)
where n = 0,±1,±2, . . . is an integer quantum number
that labels the quasiparticle energies En, which, as a con-
sequence of particle-hole symmetry, satisfy the property
E−n = −En and the eigenvectors ψn are 4-component
spinors, ψn = (un↑, un↓, vn↑, vn↓)T . The BdG Hamil-
tonian can be expressed in terms of the ﬁrst-quantized
Hamiltonian H of the (normal state) system as HBdG =
2 (H−HT )τ0+ 1
2 (H+HT )τx+τyσy∆, where τµ and σµ are

1

Pauli matrices associated with the particle-hole and spin
degrees of freedom, respectively, and ∆ is the pairing po-
tential matrix. For concreteness, we will describe a semi-
conductor wire – superconductor hybrid system using a
simple tight-binding model of Ny parallel coupled chains.
The superconductor is not described explicitly (i.e. the
corresponding degrees of freedom were already integrated
out21, but it induces a local (s-wave) pairing potential ∆
in the chains, so that ∆ij = ∆δij, where i = (ix, iy)
and j = (jx, jy) are site labels satisfying the conditions
1 ≤ ix, jx ≤ Nx and 1 ≤ iy, jy ≤ Ny. The (second
†
iσHiσ jσ(cid:48) cjσ(cid:48)
describing the normal state of the coupled chains has the

quantized) Hamiltonian H = (cid:80)

(cid:80)

i.j

σ,σ(cid:48) c

general form

H = H0 + HSOI + HZ + V,

(2)

B. Spin density operator and Majorana spin

density

3

where the the ﬁrst term corresponds to nearest neighbor
hopping along and between the chains, the second de-
scribes spin-orbit coupling, the third describes the Zee-
man coupling to an external magnetic ﬁeld, and the
fourth includes conﬁning and disorder potential terms.
Explicitly, we have
H0 = −tx

†
i+δxσciσ − ty

(cid:88)

†
iσciσ,

c

c

(cid:88)
†
i+δyσciσ − µ
(cid:105)
c

i,σ

σxci + h.c.

,

†
αc
i+δx

σyci − αyc

i,δy,σ
†
i+δy

(cid:88)
(cid:104)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

i,δx,σ

i
2

i,δ

†
i σxci,

c

i

†
iσciσ +
Vc(i)c

(cid:88)

i,σ,σ(cid:48)

†
iσciσ(cid:48),
Wσσ(cid:48)(i)c

(3)

HSOI =

HZ = Γ

(cid:88)

i,σ

V =

where tx and ty are intra- and inter-chain nearest neigh-
bor hopping matrix elements, respectively, µ is the chem-
ical potential, α and αy are the longitudinal and trans-
verse Rashba coeﬃcients, respectively, Γ is the Zee-
man splitting, Vc is a conﬁning potential, W is a spin-
dependend disorder potential and we have used the
spinor notation ci = (ci↑, ci↓)T .

As a consequence of the intrinsic particle-hole redun-
dancy of the BdG theory, the Hamiltonian that describes
the dynamics of the quasiparticles has particle-hole sym-
metry, i.e. it satisﬁes the following relation

HBdG = −τxHT

BdGτx.

This implies that the eigenvectors from Eq. (1) corre-
sponding to n and −n are not independent. Speciﬁcally,
we have ψ−n = eiϕτxψ∗
n, where eiϕ is a constant phase
factor.
In terms of particle and hole components, this
means that the particle component of the eigenvector cor-
responding to energy En is related to the hole component
of the eigenvector corresponding to −En,

(4)

(5)

v−nσ = u∗

nσeiϕ.

For a Majorana bound state, which is a solution of Eq.
(1) corresponding to n = 0, particle-hole imposes the
constraint v0σ = u∗
0σeiϕ. Consequently, the spinor de-
scribing a zero-energy Majorana state has the following
generic form

0↑eiϕ, u∗

ψ0 = (u0↑, u0↓, u∗

0↓eiϕ)T .

(6)
In this equation, u0σ ≡ u0σ(ix, iy) are functions of posi-
tion and eiϕ is a constant phase. We note that Eq. (6)
requires only particle-hole symmetry and the vanishing
of the energy, E0 = 0, i.e.
it holds in the presence of
any type of perturbation (e.g., spin-dependent disorder)
as long as the two requirements are satisﬁed. We also
note that in the presence of additional symmetries, e.g.,
chiral symmetry27,28, which is realized in the absence of
transverse Rashba coupling29, αy = 0, Eq. (6) can be
further simpliﬁed30.

To clarify the concept of ‘Majorana spin density’, let
us start with the expression of the spin density operator
in the BdG formalism. Let us consider the (ﬁrst quan-
tized) spin operator S = ˆexSx + ˆeySy + ˆezSz, where ˆeµ
are unit vectors in a Cartesian coordinate system and

Sµ =
2 σµ are operators for the corresponding spin com-
ponents. The (second quantized) spin density operator
†
†
iσSσσ(cid:48)ciσ(cid:48) −
iσSσσ(cid:48)ciσ(cid:48) = 1
2 [c
can be expressed as Si = c
†
ciσ(ST )σσ(cid:48)c
iσ(cid:48)], where, for simplicity, we have used the
same symbol for the ﬁrst and second quantized spin op-
erators. Introducing the four-component spinor notation
†
†
ˆψi = (ci↑, ci↑, c
i↓)T , we can write the spin density op-
i↑, c
†
iS ˆψi, where the S is the spin operator
ˆψ
erator as Si = 1
2
in the BdG format,

(cid:18) S

S =

0
0 −ST

(cid:19)

.

(7)

Given the wave function ψn(i) of a generic Bogoliubov
quasiparticle, we can write the corresponding spin den-
sity as sn(i) = 1
If we consider now the
case of a zero-energy Majorana state, Eqns. (6) and (7)
imply

n(i)Sψn(i).

2 ψ†

s0(i) =

†
0(i)Sψ0(i) = 0.

ψ

1
2

(8)

We note that a similar conclusion can be reached concern-
ing the charge density of the Majorana state. In other
words, the charge and spin densities of a zero-energy
Majorana state are identically zero. We emphasize that
these are local (rather than global) properties: not only
the total spin and charge of the Majorana vanish, but
the corresponding densities are identically zero.

Our conclusion so far, namely that zero-energy Ma-
jorana states do not carry spin and charge, is certainly
not surprising. However, the key questions concern the
observable physical consequences of this property. More
speciﬁcally, what we want to understand is i) whether
or not a Majorana bound state couples to an external
magnetic ﬁeld and ii) if there is any unique signature of
Majorana bound states in spin-resolved tunneling experi-
ments. Furthermore, our analysis did not distinguish be-
tween Majorana bound states that emerge in a topologi-
cal superconducting state (e.g., as zero-energy states lo-
calized near the ends of a superconducting wire) and reg-
ular zero-energy Bogoliubov quasiparticles, which may
occur in a topologically trivial superconductor. Is there
any spin-related property that can be used to discrimi-
nate between these types of zero-energy states? In the
subsequent sections of this article we will discuss these is-
sues based on a numerical analysis of the eﬀective model
for a system of coupled superconducting chains given by
Eqns. (2) and (3).

Returning to the spin density, let us remark that the
vanishing of s0(i) is due to an exact cancellation be-

tween the particle and hole contributions to this quan-
tity. Taken separately, these contributions are, in gen-
eral, nonzero. Hence, the natural question is, can we
ascribe any physical signiﬁcance to the particle (or hole)
contribution to the spin density? More speciﬁcally, let us
deﬁne the quantity

(cid:104)S(cid:105)(i) =

1
2

u∗
0σ(i)Sσσ(cid:48)u0σ(cid:48)(i).

(9)

Is there a measurement that probes this quantity? The
answer turns out to be aﬃrmative, as has been pointed
out in the recent works23–26, as spin-resolved local den-
sity of states (LDOS) and spin-resolved tunneling spec-
troscopy are related to this quantity.
In the remainder of this article we will call the quan-
tity (cid:104)S(cid:105)(i) given by Eq. (9) ‘spin density’. We empha-
size, however, that this is an abuse of language, as (cid:104)S(cid:105)(i)
represents only the particle component of the spin den-
sity s0(i), which is identically zero. Below, we identify
diﬀerent contexts in which one of these concepts of spin
density or the other are relevant. We focus on the ques-
tion concerning whether or not these concepts are help-
ful when trying to distinguish between topological Ma-
jorana bound states and topologically trivial zero-energy
Andreev bound states.

III. MAJORANA BOUND STATES VERSUS
TOPOLOGICALLY TRIVIAL ZERO-ENERGY

STATES

Discriminating between the Majorana bound states
predicted to emerge in a topologically nontrivial super-
conductor and certain trivial zero-energy Andreev bound
states represents a crucial component of the ongoing
search for Majorana quasiparticles. Below we address
the question if the concept of spin density shed any light
on this problem.

A. Trivial zero-energy states in a superconducting

wire with smooth conﬁnement

There are several diﬀerent scenarios that predict the
occurrence of zero-energy states in a topological triv-
ial superconductor, e.g., in the presence of disorder31,32
or in a system with smooth conﬁnement33. To better
understand the similarities and the diﬀerences between
these trivial states and the topological Majorana modes,
we consider the chain model given by Eqns. 2) and (3)
for a system with hard-wall conﬁnement at one end and
smooth conﬁnement at the other end. Speciﬁcally, we
have

δ+1−ix
δ+1

if 1 ≤ ix ≤ δ,
if δ < ix ≤ Nx,
otherwise.

(10)

 V max

0
∞

c

Vc(i) =

4

FIG. 1. Dependence of the low-energy BdG spectrum on the
applied Zeeman ﬁeld for a system of superconducting chains
with smooth conﬁnement. Only the positive energies are
shown. The conﬁnement potential proﬁle is shown in Fig.
2. Note the vanishing of the bulk gap (blue lines) at the crit-

ical ﬁeld Γc =(cid:112)µ2 + ∆2 ≈ 2.7∆, which signals a topological

quantum phase transition. The zero-energy mode extends
into the topologically trivial phase Γ < Γc.

c

The position dependence of the conﬁning potential is rep-
resented schematically in the upper panel of Fig. 2. The
parameters used in the numerical calculation are δ = 100,
Nx = 400, and V max
= 5∆, where ∆ is the induced
superconducting pairing and will represent our unit for
energy. The values of the other model parameters used
in the calculation are µ = 2.5∆, tx = 50∆, ty = 10∆,
α = 5∆, and αy = ∆. Note that, with a nearest neigh-
bor distance along the chains ax = 10 nm, a separation
between neighboring chains ay ≈ 22 nm and an induced
pairing potential ∆ = 0.4 meV, the hopping parameters
correspond to an eﬀective mass mef f ≈ 0.02m0, where
m0 is the free electron mass, and the Rashba spin-orbit
coupling coeﬃcient is αR ≈ 200 meV˚A, which are typical
values for the semiconductors used in experiments.

In the absence of an applied magnetic ﬁeld, the system
is in a topologically trivial superconducting state and the
corresponding BdG spectrum is characterized by a gap
2∆. To observe a Majorana zero mode, we need to turn
on the Zeeman ﬁeld. More speciﬁcally, we expect the
Majorana bound states to emerge in the topological su-
perconducting state that obtains for values of the applied

ﬁeld above the critical value Γc = (cid:112)µ2 + ∆2 ≈ 2.7∆.

The actual dependence of the quasiparticle energies on
the applied Zeeman ﬁeld is shown in Fig. 1. The key
features are i) the emergence of a zero-energy mode (red
line) for Γ (cid:38) 1.6∆ and ii) the vanishing of the bulk gap
(blue lines) at Γ = Γc. For values of the Zeeman ﬁeld in
the range 1.6∆ (cid:46) Γ (cid:46) 2.7∆ the system is in a topologi-
cally trivial phase but supports a zero-energy mode.

To better understand the nature of the lowest energy

Zeeman field  G/DEnergy En/D5

mode (red line in Fig. 1), we calculate the correspond-
ing wave function for diﬀerent values of the applied ﬁeld.
The results are shown in Fig. 2. For Γ < Γc, i.e.
in
the topologically trivial phase, the lowest energy mode
corresponds to a bound state localized near the softly
conﬁned end of the wire. The corresponding wave func-
tion is characterized by a single peak at low ﬁelds and
splits into two separated components as the strength of
the Zeeman ﬁeld increases. As these these components
become clearly separated (i.e for Γ (cid:38) 1.6∆), the energy
of the mode vanishes. At the critical ﬁeld Γc ≈ 2.7∆ one
of the components becomes delocalized, then (i.e. inside
the topological superconducting phase) the wave function
has two components exponentially localized near the two
ends of the wire (see Fig. 2, lowest panel).

To gain further insight, we note that, due to the intrin-
sic redundancy of the BdG description, the zero-energy
mode is in fact double degenerate. The corresponding
quasiparticles, which represent a single Dirac fermion,
can be viewed as a pair of Majorana modes. The wave
functions of the two Majoranas ψ0α, with α = 1, 2, have
the form given by Eq. (6) and can be obtained by taking
linear combinations of the zero-energy solutions obtained
numerically. In the topological regime (Γ > Γc), the zero-
energy quasiparticles are two Majorana bound states lo-
calized near the ends of the wire, as shown in the lower
panel of Fig. 3. By contrast, the zero-energy bound state
that emerges in the topologically trivial regime (Γ < Γc)
consists of two (weakly overlapping) Majorana bound
states localized in the region with nonuniform, smoothly
varying conﬁnement potential (see Fig. 3, upper panel).
We emphasize that in a superconductor any zero-
energy state can viewed as a linear combination of two
Majorana quasiparticles (or, more generally, an even
number of them). However, the stability of the state, i.e.
whether or not it becomes gapped when a perturbation
is applied to the system, depends on the overlap between
these Majoranas. In principle, perfect stability requires
the absence of any overlap, which in the case of Majo-
rana bound states emerging in a quasi one-dimensional
superconductor corresponds to the ideal limit of inﬁnitely
long wires. The realistic, ﬁnite length system is discussed
below.

B.

Ideal versus eﬀective Majorana bound states

The Majorana bound states localized near the ends
of a topological superconducting wire are characterized
by wave functions that have exponentially decaying en-
velopes (see, for example, the lower panel of Fig. 3). In a
ﬁnite wire, the exponentially small tails generate a ﬁnite
splitting of zero mode that oscillates as a function of the
applied Zeeman ﬁeld34. Hence, the lowest energy mode
(i.e. the red line in Fig. 1) has exactly zero energy only at
a discrete set of Γ values and ﬁnite (although very small)
energy everywhere else. This is illustrated in the upper
panel of Fig. 4. Note that, qualitatively, there is no dif-

FIG. 2. Upper panel: Schematic representation of the conﬁn-
ing potential proﬁle. The system has smooth conﬁnement at
the left end of the chains and hard-wall conﬁnement at the
right end. Lower six panels: Evolution of the wave function
corresponding to the lowest energy mode in Fig. 1 with the
applied Zeeman ﬁeld. The energy of the mode vanishes for
Γ (cid:38) 1.6∆.

FIG. 3. Pair of Majorana bound states associated with the
zero-energy mode. The corresponding wave functions are ψ01
(red ﬁlling) and ψ02 (yellow ﬁlling). In the topologically triv-
ial phase (upper panel) the Majorana bound states are local-
ized inside the smooth conﬁnement region, while in topolog-
ical superconducting phase (lower panel) the two Majorana
states are localized near the ends of the wire.

x (mm)Vc(x)/D|Y(x)|2[a.u.]mG=0.5DG=1.0DG=1.5DG=2.0DG=2.7DG=3.0DG=2.0DG=3.0Dx (mm)|Y0a(x)|2   [a.u.]6

FIG. 5. Overlap as a function of the applied Zeeman ﬁeld for
a wire with soft conﬁnement. The conﬁnement potential has
the same proﬁle as in Fig. 2 but the conﬁnement region is
1.5 µm long. The total length of the wire and the slope of
the conﬁning potential are: Lx = 3.5 µm, θ = 5∆/µm (blue
line); Lx = 3.5 µm, θ = 2.5∆/µm (orange line); Lx = 6.5 µm,
θ = 2.5∆/µm (dashed black line).

ing the BdG Hamiltonian, then we obtain the eﬀec-
tive MBSs by inverting Eq.
(11), after properly ﬁx-
ing the relative phase between ψ+ and ψ−. Note that
we have (cid:104)ψ0i|HBdG|ψ0i(cid:105) = 0, but the matrix element
of the Hamiltonian between the two diﬀerent MBSs is
ﬁnite as a result of them having a nonzero overlap,
(cid:104)ψ01|HBdG|ψ02(cid:105) = . We emphasize that this construc-
tion can be done for arbitrary ﬁnite energy eigenstates of
the BdG Hamiltonian, but the resulting Majorana states
ψ0i will generally be extended, rather than localized. In
other words, the concepts of eﬀective MBS is meaningful
only at low energy, i.e. for  less that than a certain en-
ergy scale associated, for example, with the experimental
energy resolution or the inverse timescale for MBS ma-
nipulation, a key quantity when considering the braiding
of Majorana bound states.

Above, we have mentioned several times the term
‘overlap’ in relation to a pair of eﬀective MBSs, but with-
out being too speciﬁc. Obviously, this cannot refer to the
matrix element (cid:104)ψ01|ψ02(cid:105), which is always zero. What we
actually mean by two MBSs having a nonzero overlap is
that there is a certain region where the corresponding
wave functions are both nonzero. We can quantify this
by deﬁning the following quantity, which we will call the
overlap of ψ01 and ψ02,

(cid:88)

Ω =

(|u01σ(i)||u02σ(i)| + |v01σ(i)||v02σ(i)|).

(12)

i,σ

For a pair of ideal Majorana bound states we have Ω = 0.
In a ﬁnite system, or in the case of topologically trivial
nearly-zero energy states the overlap is ﬁnite, but typi-
cally Ω (cid:28) 1. Fig. 5 shows the dependence of the overlap
on the applied Zeeman ﬁeld for a wire with soft con-

FIG. 4. Lowest energy mode as function of the applied Zee-
man ﬁeld. The continuous red line is the same as in Fig. 1,
while the dashed black line is obtained by applying an addi-
tional local ﬁeld with δΓ0 = 0.25∆ (see main text). The gray
region corresponds to the topological regime.

ference between the topologically trivial and nontrivial
regimes.

The ﬁrst obvious question is the following: can we ac-
tually talk about Majorana bound states for values of the
Zeeman ﬁeld that are diﬀerent from the nodes of the low-
est energy mode? After all, the corresponding excitations
are just regular, ﬁnite energy Bogoliubov quasiparticles?
To answer this question we need a conceptual clariﬁca-
tion. Speciﬁcally, we introduce a distinction between i)
ideal Majorana bound states and ii) eﬀective Majorana
bound states. An ideal Majorana bound state (MBS)
is a zero-energy state localized near the end of an in-
ﬁnitely long quasi-1D topological superconductor. The
ideal MBS does not overlap with its partner at the oppo-
site and, consequently, it is an exact zero-energy eigen-
state of the BdG Hamiltonian regardless of how one per-
turbs the system (as long as the superconducting gap re-
mains open). An eﬀective MBS, on the other hand, has
a small (but ﬁnite) overlap with its partner and is not
an exact eigenstate of the BdG Hamiltonian. However,
the states associated with the nearly-zero, lowest-energy
mode of the system are linear combinations of these ef-
fective MBSs.

Speciﬁcally, let us consider a state ψ+ of energy  > 0
corresponding to the nearly-zero mode (e.g., the red
4) and its negative energy partner ψ−
line in Fig.
of energy −. The corresponding eﬀective Majorana
bound states ψ01 and ψ02 have the generic form given
01eiϕ)T
by Eq.
and ψ02 = (u02,−u∗
02eiϕ)T , where we used the nota-
tion u0i = (u0i↑, u0i↓)T . The wave functions of the
ﬁnite-energy Bogoliubov quasiparticles can be expressed
in terms of the eﬀective MBS wave functions as

(6), more speciﬁcally, ψ01 = (u01, u∗

ψ+ =

ψ− =

1√
2
1√
2

(ψ01 + ψ02),
(ψ01 − ψ02),

(11)

In the calculations, we determine ψ± by diagonaliz-

Zeeman fieldG/DEnergyE/D103Zeeman fieldG/DOverlap W(G)ﬁnement. We note that, as expected, in the topological
regime (Γ > Γc) the overlap can be made arbitrarily small
be increasing the length of the wire. However, one can
also reduce the overlap in the topologically trivial phase
by reducing the slope of the conﬁning potential.

As evident from Fig. 5, the size of overlap is, in gen-
eral, not a good criterion for distinguishing between the
topological and the trivial regimes in ﬁnite systems (e.g.,
the orange curve in Fig. 5). Nonetheless, there is a clear
feature associated with the topological quantum phase
transition at Γ = Γc, namely the sharp drop of Ω(Γ) at
the critical ﬁeld. This feature occurs because the overlap
Ω contains information about the spatial proﬁle of the
eﬀective MBSs. Unfortunately, this information cannot
be captured by probes such as charge (or spin) tunneling
into the end of the wire, which show no signature asso-
ciated with the topological quantum phase transition, as
we will show in Section IV B.

We close this section with a comment concerning
the topological quantum phase transition (TQPT) itself.
The transition is associated with the vanishing of the bulk
gap, as mentioned before. However, in a ﬁnite system the
bulk gap never really closes. Again, we have to distin-
guish between an ideal TQPT, which corresponds to a
point in parameter space (e.g., Zeeman ﬁeld strength)
where the bulk gap is exactly zero and can only take
place in an inﬁnite system, and eﬀective TQPTs, which
occur in ﬁnite topological superconductors and are as-
sociated with a minimum (rather than a zero) of the
bulk gap. Strictly speaking, an eﬀective TQPT is al-
ways a crossover, rather than a true phase transition.
Nonetheless, in certain situations one can identify a nat-
ural energy scale that allows us to consider the bulk gap
as “eﬀectively” zero when it becomes smaller that this
characteristic energy.
In these cases we talk about an
eﬀective TQPT, rather than a crossover. Note, however,
that having eﬀective MBSs does not necessarily imply
that the system has crossed an eﬀective TQPT. These
considerations are particularly relevant when studying
non-homogeneous superconductors, such as the super-
conducting wires with soft conﬁnement discussed here
or various proposed realizations of Majorana states in
trapped ultracold atomic gases.

C. Coupling of Majorana bound states to external

magnetic ﬁelds

Having discussed how the Majorana bound states can
emerge in a superconductor wire, we return to our con-
siderations of the concept of spin density associated with
these state. We have deﬁned the spin density of a MBS
in two diﬀerent ways: in terms of the full wave function
[see Eq. (8)], which gives us a spin density s(i) that is
identically zero, and in terms of the particle component
of the wave function [see Eq.
(9)], which gives us the
nonzero quantity (cid:104)S(cid:105)(i). To clarify the meaning of these
quantities, we couple the system to a local magnetic ﬁeld

7

FIG. 6. Dependence of the change in the Majorana wave func-
tion ψ01 (see Fig. 3) on the additional local magnetic ﬁeld.
The change is due to the lowest energy bound state hybridiz-
ing with ﬁnite energy states that have signiﬁcant amplitude
near the left end of the wire. For small values of the pertur-
bation the slope is inversely proportional to the characteristic
energy of these states. Note the similar slopes associated with
diﬀerent values of Γ, which indicates that ψ01 hybridizes with
ﬁnite energy states that depend weakly on the Zeeman ﬁeld
(see the nearly horizontal modes in Fig. 1).

in the x direction, which is applied to the left end of the
wire and generates an additional Zeeman splitting of the
form

δΓ(x) = δΓ0 e−x/d.

(13)

We choose d = 0.4 µm, so that the additional Zeeman
ﬁeld is signiﬁcant only in the region where the leftmost
MBS ψ01 is located. The energy of any quasiparticle
that possesses a ‘true’ spin polarization is expected to be
shifted by an energy proportional to δΓ0, at least in the
low perturbation limit. This is not the case for a Majo-
rana bound state. For an ideal MBS, the energy remains
unchanged, E0 = 0, showing that the bound state carries
no spin, hence it does not couple to an external mag-
netic ﬁeld. For an eﬀective MBS, there is a small change
in the energy due to induced coupling to higher energy
states, but no direct coupling to the Zeeman ﬁeld. As
a result, the energy shift depends non-monotonically on
δΓ0 and changes sign as function of the overall Zeeman
ﬁeld Γ, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Also note that there is no
qualitative diﬀerence between the eﬀective MBS emerg-
ing in the topological regime and the eﬀective MBS gen-
erated in the trivial regime by the soft conﬁnement. Also
note that the amplitude of the splitting oscillations is not
signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the local perturbation. These
observations hold for local Zeeman ﬁelds with arbitrary
spatial proﬁles and arbitrary orientations. We conclude
that a Majorana bound state has no spin polarization
and that its spin density is properly described by the

dG0 /DdY01G=2.0DG=2.7DG=3.0Dquantity s(x) = 0.

8

In this context, we note that although a local Zeeman
ﬁeld does not aﬀect signiﬁcantly (or at all, in the ideal
case) the energy of a MBS, it can modify its wave func-
tion by coupling it to higher energy states. If ψ01 is the
unperturbed wave function of the MBS and ψ(cid:48)
01 its wave
function in the presence of the local perturbation (13),
we deﬁne the change in the Majorana wave function as

(cid:113)(cid:104)ψ01 − ψ(cid:48)

δψ01 =

01|ψ01 − ψ(cid:48)

01(cid:105).

(14)

Based on second-order perturbation theory one would
expect this quantity to depend linearly on the strength
δΓ0 of the perturbation (in the small perturbation limit),
with a slope that is inversely proportional to the energy
of the ﬁnite energy state that couples to the MBS. This is
conﬁrmed by the numerical results shown in Fig. 6. Note
again that there is no qualitative diﬀerence between the
topological and the trivial regimes. Also note that the
slopes of the curves shown in Fig. 6 are very similar and
are not correlated with the (inverse) bulk gap shown in
Fig. 1. This is due to the fact that the MBS does not
couple eﬀectively to most of the bulk states, which have
negligible amplitudes in the vicinity of the left end of the
wire. Instead, ψ01 coupled to certain modes that have
a weak dependence on the Zeeman ﬁeld (in the relevant
range) and can be identiﬁed as nearly horizontal, ﬁnite
energy lines in Fig. 1.

IV. SIGNATURES OF MAJORANA BOUND

STATES IN SPIN-RESOLVED TUNNELING

Based on the (lack of) coupling to an external magnetic
ﬁeld, we concluded that Majorana bound states have no
spin polarization. Similar considerations involving a lo-
cal electrostatic potential support the fact that Majo-
rana states carry no charge, hence are characterized by
an identically zero charge density. However, a Majorana
bound state can be probed by tunneling charge into the
end of the wire, the characteristic signature being a zero-
bias conductance peak. Similarly, one would expect a
nontrivial signature when tunneling spin-polarized elec-
trons into a superconducting wire that host MBSs. Be-
low, we brieﬂy discuss these signatures and whether or
not they can help to distinguish between the topological
and the trivial superconducting regimes.

A. Spin polarization and spin-resolved STM

measurements

In the low-tunneling limit, the spin-resolved diﬀerential
conductance for tunneling into a speciﬁc small region of
the wire is proportional to the spin-resolved local density
of states (LDOS). If we focus on the zero-energy spin-
resolved LDOS, this is a quantity proportional to spin

FIG. 7. Spin density of zero-energy states as deﬁned by Eq.
(9). In the topologically-trivial regime (upper panel) the two
Majorana bound states have x-components of the spin density
with opposite signs, revealing the fact that two Majoranas are
associated with diﬀerent spin-split sub-bands. By contrast,
the Majorana bound states that emerge in the topological
regime (lower panel) are associated with a single sub-band
and have similar spin polarizations.

density (cid:104)S(cid:105)(x) deﬁned by Eq. (9)23–26. Hence, a spin-
resolved STM measurement of the smoothly-conﬁned
wire with the energy spectrum shown in Fig. 1 and the
low-energy states represented in Figs. 2 and 3 will gen-
erate zero-bias spatial proﬁles similar to the spin density
shown in Fig. 7. Note that in the topologically-trivial
regime (γ = 2∆), the MBSs have opposite spin polar-
izations along the x direction (‘spin’ deﬁned with only
particle components of the wave function). This is a con-
sequence of the fact that the two MBSs are associated
with diﬀerent spin-polarized sub bands of the semicon-
ductor wire. A simple intuitive picture in terms of band
bending due to the smooth conﬁnement corresponds to
the two spin sub-bands crossing the chemical potential
at diﬀerent locations along the wire, which roughly cor-
respond to the locations of the MBSs. By contrast, in
the topological regime the two MBSs have the same spin
polarization, revealing the fact that they correspond to
a single spin sub-band crossing the chemical potential at
the opposite ends of the wire.

We conclude that spin-resolved STM can distinguish
between eﬀective MBSs emerging in the topological and
the trivial superconducting regimes. However, the key to
this in not so much the information associated with the
spin degree of freedom, but the information associated
with the spatial dependence of the measured quantity. A
standard STM measurement could also distinguish be-

G=2.0Dx (mm)G=3.0DSpin density<Sx>(x)tween a double-peak bound state localized near the left
end of the wire (topologically trivial regime) and two
bound states localized near the opposite ends of the sys-
tem (topologically non-trivial regime). Moreover, tunnel-
ing into the bulk of the wire would also provide a clear
signature associated with the closing of the bulk gap at
Γc. Combined with the observation that the overlap Ω
– another quantity that contains information about the
spatial proﬁles of the MBSs – shows a clear signature
associated with the TQPT, we conclude that some infor-
mation about the spatial proﬁles of the Majorana bound
states is absolutely necessary to unambiguously identify
them as quasiparticles emerging in a topological super-
conducting phase.

B. Spin-resolved diﬀerential tunneling conductance

The most common experimental method used so far
in the search for Majorana bound states is charge tun-
neling into the end of a superconducting wire. Unfor-
tunately, this probe does not provide any information
about the spatial proﬁle of the MBS and, consequently,
cannot clearly distinguish between the trivial and topo-
logical regimes. The simplest way to incorporate some
spatial information is to perform tunneling measurements
at both ends of the wire and observe correlated split-
ting oscillations34. The question that we address here is
whether or not performing a spin-resolved measurement
can provide additional information.

To answer this question, we take the superconducting
wire with soft conﬁnement described above and couple it
at the left end to a normal lead, which is also modeled
as a set of Ny coupled chains. A potential barrier with
a Gaussian proﬁle is included between the wire and the
normal lead and the diﬀerential conduactance is calcu-
lated numerically for diﬀerent values of the Zeeman ﬁeld.
First, we consider standard charge tunneling. The re-
sults are shown in Fig. 8. A clear zero-bias peak can be
observed for Γ ≥ 2∆, but, as expected, there is no char-
acteristic signature associated with the TQPT at Γc. In
other words, in the case of wire with soft conﬁnement
there is a serious danger of misinterpreting the meaning
of the zero-bias peak. If in a two-terminal experiment no
correlated splitting oscillations are observed, the zero-
bias peak is likely associated with an eﬀective MBS that
is part of a trivial nearly-zero energy state. We note
that strongly dispersing peaks in Fig. 8 marked by green
arrows are associated with a bound state localized on
the Gaussian tunnel barrier. The energy of this Andreev
bound state can be modiﬁed by tuning the barrier height
and its proﬁle.

Second, we consider spin-polarized tunneling. Specif-
ically, we inject electrons with spin oriented parallel or
anti-parallel to the Zeeman ﬁeld Γ, i.e. along the x di-
rection. The results are shown in Fig. 9. Again, there is
no signature associated with the TQPT, i.e. no possibil-
ity of distinguishing between the topological and trivial

9

FIG. 8. Diﬀerential conductance as a function of the bias po-
tential for diﬀerent values of the Zeeman ﬁeld ranging from
Γ = 0 (lowest curve) to Γ = 3.25∆ (top curve) in steps of
0.25∆. The curves have been shifted for clarity. The red-
ﬁlled curve corresponds to Γ = 2.75∆ ≈ ∆c; note the ab-
sence of any signature associated with the closing of the bulk
gap and the emergence of a zero-bias peak for Γ < ∆c (i.e.
in the topologically-trivial regime). The peaks marked by
blue arrows, which merge into the zero-bias peak, correspond
to the lowest energy mode (red line) in Fig. 1, while the
peaks marked by green arrows are associated with an Andreev
bound states localized inside the potential barrier region.

regimes. However, there is a sharp diﬀerence between
two spin orientations. A spin orientation consistent with
the spin polarization of the state ψ01 shown in Fig. 7
generates a clearly visible zero-bias peak. By contrast,
tunneling electrons with the opposite spin generates no
zero-bias peak. Hence, the spin density deﬁned by Eq,
(9) and the corresponding spin polarization are the rele-
vant quantities in the context of spin-resolved tunneling
measurements.

As a ﬁnal remark, we note that the ﬁnite-energy states
with dominant contribution to dI/dV are those states
that have signiﬁcant amplitudes at the left end of the
wire. As evident from Figs. 8 and 9, these states are
weakly dependent on the applied Zeeman ﬁeld, consis-
tent with our observation related to Fig. 6 about the
‘horizontal modes’ that couple to the Majorana bound
state ψ01.

V. CONCLUSIONS

We discuss the concept of spin polarization of a Majo-
rana bound state in condensed matter systems by clearly
distinguishing between the average of the spin operator
calculated with respect to the full Majorana fermion wave

Bias potential Vsd /DDifferential conductance dI/dV10

tunneling experiments. The question of spin of a MBS,
therefore, is similar to the question of its charge: al-
though absence of coupling to local electrostatic potential
supports the well-known fact that Majorana bound states
carry no charge, and hence are characterized by an iden-
tically zero charge density, a Majorana bound state can
in fact be probed by tunneling charge into the topologi-
cal superconducting wire, the characteristic signature be-
ing a zero-bias conductance peak. By detailed numerical
calculations on the semiconductor-superconductor het-
erostructure platform we show that no extra informa-
tion can be gleaned by spin-resolved tunneling in topo-
logical superconductors (beyond what is gained by spin-
unresolved tunneling) that can help us discriminate be-
tween MBSs in the topological regime and accidental zero
energy states in the topologically trivial regime in the pa-
rameter space.

As an interesting byproduct of this work we also show
that, in spatially inhomogeneous systems, MBSs can ap-
pear with increasing Zeeman ﬁeld even in the absence
of a topological quantum phase transition. When the
system is still topologically trivial, a regular low energy
subgap state near a soft boundary can nucleate two spa-
tially separated zero energy states which (for all practical
purposes) behave as Majorana zero modes. So long as
the system remains topologically trivial, these Majorana
bound states are localized inside the smooth conﬁnement
region, while in the topologically non-trivial supercon-
ducting phase (i.e., with Zeeman ﬁeld larger than the
critical ﬁeld required for TQPT) the two Majorana states
are localized near the ends of the wire. These issues are
particularly important for non-homogeneous topological
superconductors, such as systems with a soft conﬁnement
as discussed here or various schemes for creating topolog-
ical superﬂuid phases in cold atom systems. In the light
of these considerations, demonstrating the nonlocal char-
acter of the topologically-protected Majorana pair and
its emergence after the system undergoes a TQPT, be-
come critical tasks for the ongoing experimental search
for Majorana bound states in solid state structures. In
particular, we conjecture that observing a zero-bias con-
ductance peak (of height ∼ 2e2/h) that sticks to zero en-
ergy for a certain (possibly large) range of Zeeman ﬁelds
does not represent a unique signature of the topologically
protected Majorana bound states, because such a signa-
ture can also appear in the topologically trivial phase
in spatially inhomogeneous systems (see Fig. 8). Ensur-
ing the homogeneity of the chemical potential through-
out the wire on an energy scale lower than the induced
gap, which may be a challenging task in a setup involv-
ing multiple back-gates that control diﬀerent segments
of the wire, represents a critical condition for the suc-
cessful realization and unambiguous demonstration of a
topological superconducting phase that supports a single
pair of Majorana bound states localized near the ends of
the wire.

This work is supported by the National Science
Foundation (grant No. DMR-1414683) and the WV

FIG. 9. Diﬀerential conductance for spin-resolved tunnel-
ing into the end of the wire. The Zeeman ﬁeld ranges from
Γ = 1.5∆ (lowest curves) to Γ = 3.25∆ (top curves) in steps
of 0.25∆. Panel A corresponds to the tunneling of electrons
with spin parallel to the applied Zeeman ﬁeld, while panel B
shows the diﬀerential conductance corresponding to the op-
posite spin orientation. Note that that the zero bias peak is
absent when tunneling electrons with a spin-orientation oppo-
site to the spin polarization of the leftmost Majorana bound
state ψ01 (see Fig. 7).

function (s0(i) deﬁned in Eq. (8)) and the same average
calculated with respect to only the particle component
of the wave function ((cid:104)S(cid:105)(i) given in Eq. (9)). We show
that s0(i), like its charge density counterpart, is identi-
cally zero for a MBS. We emphasize that these are lo-
cal (rather than global) properties: not only the total
spin and charge of the Majorana bound state vanish, but
the corresponding densities are also identically zero ev-
erywhere. Since it is this quantity that couples to an
externally applied magnetic ﬁeld, we show that neither
the MBS energy eigenvalue nor the MBS wave function
are aﬀected by the external ﬁeld (in a realistic system
such as a semiconductor-superconductor heterostructure
the change in the Majorana wave function by an applied
magnetic ﬁeld occurs via hybridization with the higher
energy excited states, and thus disappears for a truly
‘stand-alone’ MBS with large enough gap to the excited
states).

By an abuse of language, however, if ‘spin’ of a MBS
is deﬁned by Eq. (9) (i.e., only with respect to the parti-
cle (or hole) components of the wave function), we show
that this quantity does have a non-zero spatial proﬁle
along certain directions in spin-space. Interestingly, it is
this quantity that appears in spin-resolved local density
of states23–26 and thus it can be probed in spin-resolved

Bias potential Vsd /DSpin-resolved dI/dVABHigher Education Policy Commission (Research Chal-

lenge Grant HEPC.dsr.12.29) and partially by AFOSR.

11

1 N. Read and D. Green, Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267 (2000)
2 A.Y. Kitaev, Physics-Uspekhi 44, 131 (2001).
3 C. Nayak, S. H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman, S. Das

Sarma, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 1083 (2008)

4 E. Majorana, Nuovo Cimento 14 171 (1937).
5 L. Fu, C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407 (2008)
6 C. W. Zhang, S. Tewari, R. M. Lutchyn, S. Das Sarma,

T. Deng, P. Caroﬀ, H. Q. Xu, C. M. Marcus, Phys. Rev.
B 87, 241401(R) (2013)

20 A. D. K. Finck, D. J. Van Harlingen, P. K. Mohseni, K.

Jung, X. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 126406 (2013)

21 T. D. Stanescu, S. Tewari, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 25,

233201 (2013)

22 A. F. Andreev, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 49, 655 (1965) [Sov

Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 160401 (2008).

Phys JETP 22 455 (1966)].

7 M. Sato, Y. Takahashi, S. Fujimoto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103,

23 D. Sticlet, C. Bena, and P. Simon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108,

020401 (2009).

096802 (2012).

8 J. D. Sau, R. M. Lutchyn, S. Tewari, and S. Das Sarma,

24 T. Kawakami and X. Hu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 177001

Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 040502 (2010).

(2015).

9 S. Tewari, J. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, Annals of Physics

25 K. Bjrnson and A. M. Black-Schaﬀer, Phys. Rev. B 91,

325, 219 (2010).

10 J. Alicea, Phys. Rev. B 81, 125318 (2010).
11 J. D. Sau, S. Tewari, R. M. Lutchyn, T. D. Stanescu, and

S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 82, 214509 (2010)

12 R. M. Lutchyn, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 105, 077001 (2010)

13 Y. Oreg, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett.

105, 177002 (2010).

214514 (2015).

26 K. Bjrnson, S. S. Pershoguba, A. V. Balatsky, and A. M.

Black-Schaﬀer, Phys. Rev. B 92, 214501 (2015)

27 A. Schnyder, S. Ryu, A. Furusaki, A. W. W. Ludwig, Phys.
Rev. B 78, 195125 (2008); A. Kitaev, AIP Conf. Proc.
1134, 22 (2009); S. Ryu, A. Schnyder, A. Furusaki, A. W.
W. Ludwig, New J. Phys. 12, 065010 (2010).

28 S. Tewari and J. D. Sau, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 150408

14 T. D. Stanescu, R. M. Lutchyn, and S. Das Sarma, Phys.

(2012).

Rev. B 84 144522 (2011).

15 V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov, S. R. Plissard, E. P. A.
M. Bakkers, L. P. Kouwenhoven, Science 336 1003 (2012)
16 M. T. Deng, C. L. Yu, G. Y. Huang, M. Larsson, P. Caroﬀ

and H. Q. Xu, Nano Lett. 12 6414, (2012)

29 S. Tewari, T. D. Stanescu, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma,

Phys. Rev. B 86, 024504 (2012).

30 E. Dumitrescu, T. D. Stanescu, S. Tewari, Phys. Rev. B

91, 121413 (R) (2015).

31 J. Liu, A. C. Potter, K.T. Law, P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett.

17 Leonid P. Rokhinson, Xinyu Liu & Jacek K. Furdyna, Na-

109, 267002 (2012).

ture Physics 8, 795–799 (2012)

18 Anindya Das, Yuval Ronen, Yonatan Most, Yuval Oreg,
Moty Heiblum & Hadas Shtrikman, Nature Phys. 8, 887
(2012)

19 H. O. H. Churchill, V. Fatemi, K. Grove-Rasmussen, M.

32 D. Roy, N. Bondyopadhaya, S. Tewari, Phys. Rev. B 88,

020502(R) (2013)

33 G. Kells, D. Meidan, P. W. Brouwer, Phys. Rev. B (R) 86,

100503 (2012).

34 S. Das Sarma, J. D. Sau, T. D. Stanescu, Phys. Rev. B 86,

220506 (2012)

