6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

.

 
 
]
E
P
o
i
b
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
4
6
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Prevention versus treatment: A game-theoretic

approach

Romulus Breban∗

Unit´e d’Epid´emiologie des Maladies Emergentes,

Institut Pasteur, Paris, 75724

March 9, 2016

Abstract

We discuss the synergy between voluntary prevention and manda-
tory treatment, in the saga of disease elimination. Previous literature
has focused on the situation where the relative cost of prevention ver-
sus treatment stands as a surrogate for epidemic severity. In this work,
we address the case where this cost is regulated by the public health
authority to optimize epidemic control. We build a paradigm model
combining a utility game for the individual-level dilemma of preven-
tion versus treatment, and a compartmental model for the epidemic
dynamic. We assume that individuals arrive to maximize the utility of
voluntary prevention, as the epidemic reaches an endemic level allevi-
ated by prevention and treatment. We thus obtain an expression for
the asymptotic prevention coverage. Explicating the cost of treatment
in terms of its eﬃcacy, we conclude that the relative cost of successful
versus unsuccessful treatment is bound from above by the probability
of treatment failure.

1

Introduction

Prevention and treatment are complementary strategies for the public health
authority. Allocation of limited resources between these strategies remains
under continuous debate [1, 2]. Beneﬁt-cost analyses for the long and short
term may yield conﬂicting results. In addition, individual-level perceptions
of prevention versus treatment could be biased to jeopardize the imple-
Incentives may be used by
mentation success of public health programs.

∗Email: romulus.breban@pasteur.fr

1

the practitioners to redirect individual’s attention and alleviate this prob-
lem [3].
The issue of prevention versus treatment has been addressed in
the context of particular medical issues such as HIV/AIDS [4], cardiovascu-
lar mortality [5], well-being in work environment [6] and use of ondansetron
against intrathecal morphine-induced pruritus [7]. Surveys studies assessed
overall preference for prevention versus treatment in the general population,
using discrete choice questionnaires for qualitative and monetary apprecia-
tion, as well as propensity to pay [8–10]. The results of these studies show
that preference for prevention or treatment depends on the circumstances.
A diﬀerent approach was to present a policy dilemma of prevention versus
treatment to a random sample of individuals. Their uninformed opinions,
compiled for summary statistics, do not show but a slight preference for
prevention versus treatment [11,12]. Furthermore, a study shows preference
for environmental programs, rather than public health programs altogether,
in a comparison of four program pairs [13].
In this paper, we analyze
the setup where prevention becomes available for a treatable disease with
100% rate of natural recovery. We assume that the use of prevention is not
motivated in the absence of an epidemic. Thus, the speed of adoption of a
voluntary prevention program in the general population would be negligible
in this case. We propose a mathematical model to describe the interplay
of prevention and treatment, where prevention is voluntary and treatment
is mandatory. The model consists of two parts. The epidemic dynamics
is described by a classical SIR model expressed using ordinary diﬀerential
equations. In addition, we use an utility game to describe the individual-
level decisions to join the prevention program. The primary focus of the
paper is to discuss how the prevention coverage reached during an epidemic
depends on the parameters of the prevention and treatment programs.
In
the late nineties, Geoﬀard and Philipson opened the discussion on the setup
where prevention is achieved through voluntary vaccination, in absence of
treatment [14]. They used an SIR model to describe epidemic dynamics
and assumed that an individual’s probability to vaccinate increases with the
perceived utility of vaccination, depending on the probability that a non-
vaccinator is infected during his entire lifetime. They focused on pricing
strategies for vaccines that provide complete immunity, given the law of
supply and demand tuned by disease prevalence in the event of an epidemic.
Their main result is that demand on the vaccine private market decreases
suﬃciently fast toward disease elimination, to make eradication impossible.
Bauch and Earn [15] proposed a diﬀerent modeling approach, assuming that
the individual-level utility is based only on the current state of the epidemic,
and that a typical individual arrives to maximize the utility of vaccination

2

when a new endemic level is achieved in the presence of a vaccination pro-
gram. They also discussed the role of the relative price of vaccination versus
infection morbidity in determining disease prevalence at the endemic state.
Subsequent literature built upon this modeling framework, including new
modeling aspects; see e.g., Refs. [16, 17].

2 Model

Our model consists of two ingredients. First, we use a system of ordinary
diﬀerential equations to mimic epidemic dynamics, not explicitly reported
to the public. Second, we speciﬁcally describe the individual-level process
of making the decision of whether to use treatment or prevention. The pri-
mary goal of individuals is to avoid infection or the impact of infection on
their everyday activity. Individuals may be aware of means of prevention
and treatment, even though they do not not fully understand the corre-
sponding population-level mechanisms. According to game theory, their
decision making skill may be summarized by a utility function comprising
behavioral parameters to describe how individuals perceive the impact of
infection on themselves alone. We assume that the utility function carries
no information on the epidemic dynamics, depending solely on the current
state of the epidemic. A fundamental parameter of the utility function could
be the current prevalence of infection, as a surrogate for the probability of
acquiring infection. This information may be obtained explicitly, through
public health reports, or implicitly, through trial, error and accommodating
personal decisions to collective opinion.
Epidemic severity depends on
the coverage of prevention and treatment programs and, in turn, motivates
individual-level, voluntary decisions to enroll in these programs. We ana-
lyze the situation where prevention is made available during the course of
an epidemic of a treatable disease and, as a result, the epidemic reaches
an endemic level, depending on the prevention coverage. We assume that
the endemic state is reached as individuals maximize their perceived util-
ity function for prevention versus treatment, and solve for the prevention
coverage.

2.1 Compartmental model

We model an infectious disease without natural recovery. However, we as-
sume that treatment is available in unlimited supply, so recovered status
may be achieved through treatment. Although treatment may be oﬀered on
a voluntary basis, we assume that all infectious individuals make the choice

3

of being treated according to the regulations of the public health authority.
This transmission dynamic may be described by an SIR-type model.
In
addition to treatment, we assume that a prevention program is always in
place, whether or not there is an epidemic. We propose the following set of
diﬀerential equations

dP
dt
dS
dt
dI
dt
dT
dt
dR
dt

= pπ − µP,
= (1 − p)π − µS − βSI
N
− (µ + ν + γ)I,

=
= ξγI − µT,
= (1 − ξ)γI + νI − µR,

βSI
N

,

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

where the variables stand for: individuals who participate in the prevention
program (P ), susceptible (S), infectious (I) and recovered (R) individuals,
as well as individuals cured due to treatment (T ); N = P + S + I + T + R.
The parameters are as follows. The symbol p stands for the probability of
using prevention, π for the birth rate, µ for disease-unrelated death rate,
β for disease transmissibility and γ for the recovery rate. The symbols
p and ξ represent the coverage of the prevention program and treatment
eﬃcacy, respectively.
The model has two equilibria, a disease-free state
and an endemic state. The basic reproduction number of the model given by
Eqs. (1)-(5) is (1− p)R0, where R0 ≡ β/(µ + ν + γ) is the basic reproduction
number of the SIR model without prevention. The key result from the
SIR model is the endemic prevalence of infectious individuals, which may
be written as

Π =

(1 − p) − 1/R0
1 + (ν + γ)/µ

,

(6)

where Π > 0 if and only if R0(1 − p) > 1.

2.2 Utility game

Individuals must volunteer to enroll into prevention programs. We model
the process of choice as a utility game, including behavioral assumptions for
how each individual analyzes pros and cons of prevention versus treatment
to make his choice. We assume that individuals do not enroll in prevention

4

programs if treatment, available in unlimited supply, prevented the epidemic.
Hence, individuals would consider that prevention is not useful in this case.
Otherwise, individuals make their decisions based on an ensemble of mixed
strategies of prevention and treatment. In all, we summarize the utility of
prevention versus treatment for a typical individual as follows

U (p, cp, ct) =

p (−cp) − (1 − p)ctΠ,

if R0 ≤ 1;
if R0 > 1.

(7)

(cid:26) 0,

Hence, in the case where R0 > 1, individuals would pay the cost of preven-
tion cp with probability that they use prevention p. Otherwise, they pay for
the cost of treatment ct, which depends on treatment eﬃcacy ξ as follows

ct(ξ) ≡ ξcts(ξ) + (1 − ξ)ctf ,

(8)

where cts(ξ) and ctf stand for the costs of treatment success and failure,
respectively. We assume that individuals act in their own interest to max-
imize the utility of prevention, as the epidemic evolves toward the endemic
level.
For further convenience, we use r for cp/ct, the relative cost of
prevention versus treatment. It is reasonable to assume that prevention is
more cost-eﬀective than treatment, hence 0 ≤ r ≤ 1. We also use U (p, r)
for the rescaled utility function U (p, cp, ct)/ct.

3 Results
For r ∈ [0, 1], maximization of the likelihood U (p, r) yields the following
formula for the probability to enroll in prevention programs

ˆp(r) =

where

if 0 ≤ r < ˆr/R0;
if ˆr/R0 ≤ r ≤ 1;

(cid:26) 1 − r/ˆr,

0,

ˆr ≡

2

1 + (ν + γ)/µ

.

(9)

(10)

We may further assume µ/(ν + γ) < 1, which yields ˆr < 1; in fact, for many
infectious disease µ/(ν + γ) (cid:28) 1; e.g., Ref. [18], p. 31.
The domain of the
function ˆp(r) is divided into two complementary intervals about ˆr/R0 < 1,
corresponding to [1 − ˆp(r)]R0 > 1 and [1 − ˆp(r)]R0 ≤ 1, respectively; see
Fig. 1. The probability of using prevention ˆp(r) decreases linearly with
increasing the relative cost of prevention versus treatment, until, at r =

5

Figure 1: Probability of using prevention ˆp(r) as a function of the relative
cost of prevention versus treatment r. The [0, 1] interval on the horizontal
axis is divided into two, corresponding to whether or not treatment and
prevention together are successful to eradicate the disease. The splitting
point is ˆr/R0, corresponding to fact that the basic reproduction number of
the epidemic controlled by prevention and treatment reaches 1.

ˆr/R0, prevention and treatment drive the epidemic extinct, and prevention
programs are not longer motivated. We obtain ˆp(ˆr) = 1 − R−1
0 , a well-
known result for vaccination models; see Refs. [18], p. 87 and [19], Chapter 6.
The discontinuity at ˆr/R0 is due to the eﬀect of herd immunity, manifested
because disease eradication may be achieved for less than perfect prevention
coverage. Once eradication is achieved, the individual has no motivation to
continue following prevention measures and the prevention coverage drops
to 0.
In the case where prevention is considered in the absence of an
epidemic, the dilemma of prevention versus treatment remains motivated
solely by the relative cost of the two public health strategies. The graph
of ˆp(r) between ˆr/R0 and ˆr, represented by a horizontal continuous line in
Fig. 1, is replaced in this case by the dashed line, extrapolating the linear
dependence on the [0, ˆr/R0] interval to the [ˆr/R0, ˆr] interval.
For the
region where the epidemic persists (i.e., r < ˆr/R0), we may use Eq. (8) to
further explicate the probability to enroll for prevention programs as follows

ˆp(ρ, σ, ξ) = 1 − σ
ˆr

ρ(ξ)/σ

ρ(ξ)/σ + [1 − ρ(ξ)/σ]ξ

,

(11)

6

rp(r)111-R0-10rr/ R0ˆˆˆepidemic is preventedepidemic is not preventedwhere ρ(ξ) ≡ cp/cts(ξ) and σ ≡ cp/ctf denote the cost of prevention ver-
sus successful treatment and unsuccessful treatment, respectively. The ratio
ρ(ξ)/σ > 1 represents the relative cost of unsuccessful treatment to success-
ful treatment. From Eq. (11), we obtain lower and upper bounds for the
probability of going on treatment

σ

ˆr(1 − ξ)

< (1 − p) ≤ ρ(ξ)
ˆr

,

(12)

which obviously imply ρ(ξ)/σ > 1/(1 − ξ). This is a fundamental constrain
for the model parameters, originating from the paradigm modeling frame-
work and weak assumptions about the disease parameters.

4 Discussion and conclusion

In this paper, we address the impact of voluntary prevention versus manda-
tory treatment for controlling an epidemic. Previously, Geoﬀard and Philip-
son [14] argued that, in the case where access to prevention (i.e., vaccination)
is determined by disease prevalence and the law of supply and demand in pri-
vate markets, pricing may render impossible to eliminate the disease through
prevention. However, the public health authority may overrule the law of
supply and demand by, for example, eliminating copayments for health sup-
plies and services.
Bauch and Earn [15] discussed the individual-level
dilemma of to prevent or not prevent using vaccination, in the absence of
treatment, using a mixed model consisting of ordinary diﬀerential equations
and a utility game. This individual-level dilemma rests on the notion of herd
immunity. If an individual uses prevention, he avoids infection. However,
when the individual does not use prevention, he may still avoid infection if
his peers use prevention in suﬃcient numbers such that an epidemic does
not occur. Hence, the choice to use prevention depends on herd immunity
and is a priori unclear. Bauch and Earn obtained that prevention coverage
depends continuously on the relative cost of prevention versus morbidity,
where the epidemic is brought to the brink of extinction for zero cost; see
Ref. [15], Fig. 1. Thus, they conclude that voluntary prevention cannot drive
the epidemic extinct.
Here, we discussed how the prevention coverage
depends on the relative cost of prevention versus treatment, when price does
not change because of epidemic severity. The individual-level dilemma that
occurs in this case rests on the choice of health strategy. An individual may
use prevention to avoid infection starting immediately. Otherwise, he will
eventually get infected and acquire permanent immunity upon treatment or

7

natural recovery. We obtain an understanding of how prevention coverage
depends on price. Notably, according to our modeling framework, volun-
tary prevention may prevent epidemics. The dilemma of whether or not to
immediately use prevention is addressed indirectly and, in our results, it is
manifested through a discontinuity of the prevention coverage versus the rel-
ative price of prevention versus treatment. Explicating the cost of treatment
in terms of treatment eﬃcacy, further reﬁnes the formula for the prevention
coverage. In particular, we obtain that the relative cost of successful versus
unsuccessful treatment is bound from above by the probability of treatment
failure.
Voluntary prevention versus mandatory treatment is a problem
ubiquitous in nature. For example, this paradigm question is paramount to
economics, for pricing insurance policy. Another application is to military
strategy, known as the dilemma of preemptive versus defensive war. In this
work, we focused the discussion in the context of public health policy.

References

[1] Juan G´ervas, Barbara Starﬁeld, and Iona Heath. Is clinical prevention

better than cure? The Lancet, 372(9654):1997–1999, December 2008.

[2] P S Corso. Prevention just in case or treatment just because: measuring

societal preferences. Harvard Health Policy Rev, 2006.

[3] Kris De Jaegher. Physician incentives: Cure versus prevention. Journal

of Health Economics, 29(1):124–136, January 2010.

[4] D W Brock and D Wikler. Ethical Challenges In Long-Term Funding

For HIV/AIDS. Health Aﬀairs, 28(6):1666–1676, November 2009.

[5] Earl S Ford and Simon Capewell. Proportion of the Decline in Cardio-
vascular Mortality Disease due to Prevention Versus Treatment: Public
Health Versus Clinical Care. Annual Review of Public Health, 32(1):5–
22, April 2011.

[6] S Reynolds. Psychological well-being at work: is prevention better than

cure? Journal of psychosomatic research, 43(1):93–102, 1997.

[7] A T Kung, X Yang, Y Li, A Vasudevan, S Pratt, and P Hess. Preven-
tion versus treatment of intrathecal morphine-induced pruritus with
ondansetron. International Journal of Obstetric Anesthesia, 23(3):222–
226, August 2014.

8

[8] Phaedra S Corso, James K Hammitt, John D Graham, Richard C
Dicker, and Sue J Goldie. Assessing Preferences for Prevention ver-
sus Treatment Using Willingness to Pay. Medical Decision Making,
22(suppl 1):s92–s101, September 2002.

[9] Ree M Meertens, Vivian MJ Van de Gaar, Maitta Spronken, and
Nanne K de Vries. Prevention praised, cure preferred:
results of
between-subjects experimental studies comparing (monetary) appreci-
ation for preventive and curative interventions. BMC Medical Infor-
matics and Decision Making, 13(1):136, December 2013.

[10] Jeroen Luyten, Roselinde Kessels, Peter Goos, and Philippe Beutels.
Public Preferences for Prioritizing Preventive and Curative Health
Care Interventions: A Discrete Choice Experiment. Value in Health,
18(2):224–233, March 2015.

[11] M Johannesson and P O Johansson. A note on prevention versus cure.

Health policy, 41(3):181–187, 1997.

[12] P Ubel, M D Spranka, M L Dekay, and J Hershey. Public preferences

for prevention versus cure. Med Decis Mak, 18:141–148, 1998.

[13] Uma Subramanian and Maureen Cropper. Public Choices Between Life
Saving Programs: The Tradeoﬀ Between Qualitative Factors and Lives
Saved. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 21(1):117–149, 2000.

[14] P Y Geoﬀard and T Philipson. Disease eradication: private versus
public vaccination. The American Economic Review, 87(1):222–230,
1997.

[15] Chris T Bauch and David J. D. Earn. Vaccination and the theory of
games. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 101(36):13391–13394, 2004.

[16] Chris T Bauch and Samit Bhattacharyya. Evolutionary game theory
and social learning can determine how vaccine scares unfold. PLoS
Comput Biol, 8(4):e1002452, 2012.

[17] Piero Manfredi, Pompeo Della Posta, Alberto d’Onofrio, Ernesto
Salinelli, Francesca Centrone, Claudia Meo, and Piero Poletti. Op-
timal vaccination choice, vaccination games, and rational exemption:
an appraisal. Vaccine, 28(1):98–109, Dec 2009.

9

[18] Roy M Anderson and Robert May. Infectious diseases of humans: dy-

namics and control. Oxford University Press, New York, 1991.

[19] O Diekmann and J A P Heesterbeek. Mathematical Epidemiology of
Infectious Diseases. Model Building, Analysis and Interpretation. John
Wiley & Sons, April 2000.

10

