Draft version March 9, 2016
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
8
7
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

WHAT A TANGLED WEB WE WEAVE: HERMUS AS THE NORTHERN EXTENSION OF THE PHOENIX

STREAM

Carl J. Grillmair

Infrared Processing and Analysis Center, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125

Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3H4, Canada

Raymond G. Carlberg

Draft version March 9, 2016

ABSTRACT

We investigate whether the recently discovered Phoenix stream may be part of a much longer
structure that includes the previously discovered Hermus stream. Using a simple model of the Galaxy
with a disk, bulge, and a spherical dark matter halo, we show that a nearly circular orbit, highly
inclined with respect to the disk, can be found that ﬁts the positions, orientations, and distances of
both streams. While the two streams are somewhat misaligned in the sense that they do not occupy
the same plane, nodal precession due to the Milky Way disk potential naturally brings the orbit into
line with each stream in the course of half an orbit. We consequently consider a common origin for
the two streams as plausible. Based on our best ﬁtting orbit, we make predictions for the positions,
distances, radial velocities, and proper motions along each stream. If our hypothesis is borne out by
measurements, then at ≈ 183◦ (≈ 235◦ with respect to the Galactic center) and ≈ 76 kpc in length,
Phoenix-Hermus would become the longest cold stream yet found. This would make it a particularly
valuable new probe of the shape and mass of the Galactic halo out to ≈ 20 kpc.
Subject headings: Galaxy: Structure — Galaxy: Halo

1. INTRODUCTION

Recent years have seen the discovery of dozens of stel-
lar debris streams in our Galaxy (see Grillmair & Carlin
(2016) and Smith (2016) for reviews). By virtue of their
very low velocity dispersions, the cold stellar streams we
believe to be the remnants of globular clusters are par-
ticularly well suited to the task of constraining the shape
and size of the Galactic potential. On the other hand,
such streams are far less populous than dwarf galaxy
streams such as Orphan or Sagittarius and are conse-
quently much harder to detect. Perhaps for this reason,
we have yet to ﬁnd a cold stream that even approaches
the length of the Sagittarius stream.

Spanning ≈ 70◦, GD-1 is the longest of the cold
streams discovered to date (Grillmair & Dionatos 2006;
Carlberg & Grillmair 2013), though at a distance of ≃ 10
kpc this corresponds to only 12 kpc in length. Fitting or-
bits, Koposov et al. (2010) used GD-1 to put signiﬁcant
constraints on the circular velocity at the Sun’s radius,
though they were rather insensitive to halo ﬂattening due
to the proximity of the disk. Eyre & Binney (2010) noted
that orbit-ﬁtting is not generally appropriate for stellar
streams in realistic potentials, as stars in streams do not
follow a single orbit. Techniques have recently been de-
veloped to quickly generate mock tidal streams without a
full N-body treatment and to match these steams directly
to observations (Lane et al. 2012; K¨upper et al. 2012;
Fardal et al. 2015). Using such techniques K¨upper et al.
(2015) have once again demonstrated the potential of
cold streams as true “high-precision scales” of the Galac-
tic mass distribution.

carl@ipac.caltech.edu
carlberg@astro.utoronto.ca

Our expectation is that globular cluster streams should
generally be very long. Since tidal stripping will have
begun virtually as soon as globular clusters were born,
then in the absence of major mergers (Wyse 2009), many
streams will have had nearly the age of the Universe
to grow in length. Perturbations by dwarf galaxies,
dark matter subhalos, or disk structures can generate
signiﬁcant gaps in streams (Carlberg 2009; Yoon et al.
2011), or even decollimate large parts of them to the
point of undetectability. However, the existence of GD-1
demonstrates that such events are not common enough
to shorten or destroy all streams, at least in the inner
halo.

From the work of K¨upper et al. (2015) and others we
know that the constraints that can be put on the shape
and size of the Galactic potential depend strongly on the
length of a stream. We would clearly beneﬁt from the
discovery of cold streams that extend completely around
the Galaxy, and at large distances from the Galactic cen-
ter.

In this letter we test the hypothesis that the recently
discovered Phoenix and Hermus streams may be part
of the same structure. We use a simple model of the
Galaxy to ﬁt the streams in Section 2. Based on our
best ﬁt to the streams, we make predictions on observable
quantities in Section 4. Concluding remarks are given in
Section 5.

2. ANALYSIS

2.1. Phoenix

Balbinot (2015, hereafter B15) recently discovered a
cold stream in the Dark Energy Survey Year 1 data that
they dubbed the Phoenix stream. With a width of only
54 pc, this 17.5 kpc-distant, 8◦-long stream is very similar

2

to the Pal 5 stream and presumably also originated in a
globular cluster. From the color-magnitude distribution
of its stars, B15 estimate an age of 11.5 Gyr and a metal-
licity of [Fe/H] < −1.6. Among the several overdensities
along the stream, B15 ﬁnd a pair of peaks somewhat out
of alignment with the rest of the stream that they sug-
gest may be the remnant of the progenitor. If true, then
the positions of these peaks suggest that the stream is
moving from south to north, in a prograde orbit around
the Galaxy.

2.2. Hermus

Grillmair (2014, hereafter G14) discovered a pair of
nearly parallel streams in the northern footprint of data
release 10 of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) (Ahn
2014) that he dubbed Hermus and Hyllus. Both streams
appear to be metal poor, though the color-magnitude
distributions are very noisy and G14 was unable to rule
out [Fe/H] as high as -1.2 for Hermus. G14 estimated
Hermus to be about 20 kpc distant, with the northern-
most end of the stream perhaps as close as 15 kpc. While
the stream appears to be some 50◦ long (limited on both
ends by limits of the SDSS survey footprint), G14 noted
that the southern 20◦ had a somewhat diﬀerent charac-
ter and curvature than the northern 30◦, angling back
towards the west and becoming somewhat stronger and
broader at the southern end.

3. PHOENIX-HERMUS?

To search for possible Phoenix progenitors, B15 ﬁt a
great circle that contained both the Phoenix stream and
the Galactic center. They found no globular clusters with
similar distances along this great circle and concluded
that the stream could not have originated from among
the known clusters. In Panel a of Figure 1 we show this
great circle overplotted on the portion of the SDSS foot-
print containing Hermus. We see that the great circle
passes less than 3◦ from Hermus, and that it is fairly
well aligned with a signiﬁcant portion of the stream.

For

the purposes of demonstrating plausibility,
we generate orbits using the Galactic model of
Allen & Santillan (1991). While assuming a spherical
bulge and halo, this model also includes a disk and is
therefore somewhat aspherical at low |Z|. As noted by
Eyre & Binney (2010), stellar streams are not expected
to follow single orbits in realistic potentials. On the other
hand, the deviations for cold, weakly stripped globular
cluster streams in the nearly spherical potential of the
inner halo (K¨upper et al. 2015) are not expected to be
large.

In Panel b of Figure 1 we show a least-squares ﬁt of an
orbit to the RA, dec, and distances of the northern 30◦
of Hermus. For constraining the orbit, we do not use the
southern 20◦, which departs both from the great circle
of B15, and from the curvature shown by the northern
30◦. G15 noted the diﬀerent character of the southern
20◦ of Hermus, particularly the change in curvature of
this portion of the stream. While not a deﬁnitive test,
we note that an orbit ﬁt to the entire 50◦ of Hermus
yields a reduced χ2 several times higher than a similar
ﬁt to just the northern 30◦, with systematic departures in
position and distance at the southern end. We therefore
admit the possibility that the southern 20◦ of Hermus
is an unassociated structure at the same distance, and

that G14 mistakenly assumed it to be part of the same
structure. This would be in keeping with a common and
perhaps natural tendency to ascribe the complexity of
many small features to a comparatively simple, single
stream.

As in G14, we assume uncertainties of 0.3◦ in the ten
R.A., dec positions along the stream, and 3 kpc uncer-
tainties in the distances at each point. This orbit ﬁt
is shown as the red curves in Figures 1 and 2. Nodal
precession of the orbit due to the Galactic disk natu-
rally brings the Hermus orbit into the plane occupied by
Phoenix. The orbit ﬁt misses Phoenix by several kpc,
but this is entirely attributable to the distance gradient
assumed for Hermus. Assuming a uniform distance of 20
kpc for every point in Hermus, we ﬁnd that a Hermus-
only ﬁt lies only 1-2 kpc from the Phoenix stream. Reex-
amining G14’s ﬁltered surface density map, we ﬁnd that
his 15 kpc estimate at the northern end of Hermus relies
on some very faint structures that may or may not be
part of the stream. A uniform 20 kpc distance along the
northern 30◦ appears almost equally consistent with the
data.

Encouraged by these apparent planar alignments, we
now include 10 positions along the Phoenix stream in the
orbit ﬁt, measured from Figure 3 of B15. We use 10 posi-
tions to give equal weight to both Hermus and Phoenix.
Just as for Hermus, we adopt 0.3◦ uncertainties for the
positions along the stream, and 3 kpc uncertainties in
the distances at each point. The latter would combine
to give the 0.9 kpc uncertainty claimed by B15 for the
entire stream. We also adopt the distance gradient found
by B15, with Phoenix being ≈ 1 kpc closer at its north-
ern end than at the southern end.

This simultaneous ﬁt to the Hermus and Phoenix
streams is shown as the blue curves in Panel b of Figure
1 and in Figure 2. We see that a single orbit is capable
of closely ﬁtting both streams. While the ﬁt is nearly
perfect for Phoenix (including both sky position and dis-
tance gradient), the trajectory in Figure 1 is slightly less
curved than the Hermus stream itself. The maximum
deviation between the model and the stream is ≈ 1.5◦ at
the extreme northern end. Given the simplicity of our
Galactic model, we do not consider this very signiﬁcant.
It may be that a slightly prolate or substructured halo
could easily accommodate the curvature of Hermus.

Similar attempts to simultaneously ﬁt the Hyllus and
Phoenix streams are much less interesting. Though Hyl-
lus lies only 4◦ east of Hermus and appears reasonably
well aligned with B15’s great circle, the minimum re-
duced χ2 is four times larger than for Hermus. Orbital
precession is evidently insuﬃcient to match the trajecto-
ries of both streams simultaneously, and the best-ﬁtting
orbits are clearly out-of-plane for one or the other, typi-
cally missing by several kpc.

The orbit that simultaneously ﬁts Hermus and Phoenix
is fairly circular, with apo- and perigalactica of 19.3+1.7
−0.4
and 17.6+0.2
−0.8 kpc and an eccentricity of only ≈ 0.05. This
is somewhat surprising, given the roughly isotropic or-
bital distribution seen among globular clusters. More-
over, it argues that the progenitor of a putative Phoenix-
Hermus stream must have been rather loosely bound to
have been so signiﬁcantly depleted in such a relatively
benign orbit. The orbit is inclined ≈ 60◦ to the Galactic

plane, and the Phoenix stream is situated very nearly at
the apogalactic point of the orbit. This would be qual-
itatively consistent with the apparent fading out of the
Phoenix stream at its northern end, where the stars are
picking up speed and the stream consequently becomes
more tenuous.

B15 found two overdensities in Phoenix that are
slightly out of alignment with the bulk of the stream
and suggest that these overdensities could be the rem-
nants of the progenitor. If true, then the arrangement of
these overdensities implies that the stream must be mov-
ing from south to north and is in a prograde orbit around
the Galaxy. The orbit that best ﬁts both streams passes
south from Hermus, through the disk on the far side of
the Galactic center, within 15◦ of the south celestial pole,
and then north to Phoenix. If Phoenix and Hermus are
related, then Hermus would constitute the trailing tail of
the Phoenix stream. From the northern end of the lead-
ing (north) arm of the Phoenix stream to the trailing
(northern) end of the Hermus stream, the best-ﬁt or-
bit subtends 183◦ on the sky and 76 kpc through space.
Viewed from the Galactic center, the orbit would sub-
tend 235◦, or two thirds of a complete wrap around the
Galaxy.

The leading arm passes north from Phoenix, through
the anticenter portion of the disk, within 10◦ of the north
celestial pole, and then south to Hermus. However, nodal
precession causes its path to deviate ≈ 9◦ from the or-
bital plane of the stream. This is shown in Figure 3,
where we show a nearly edge-on view of the orbit.

Owing to the near-circularity of the best-ﬁt orbit, the
leading arm ends up at nearly the same distance and
nearly parallel to Hermus in the SDSS footprint. It lies
10◦ west of Hermus on the northern end (right hand side)
of Figure 1 but converges with Hermus near Pal 5. We
have carefully examined this region, and while there are
some faint features that roughly line up with the pre-
dicted orbit of the leading arm, we ﬁnd nothing we would
have identiﬁed as a stream at the outset. This could be
an indication that the leading and trailing arms are of dif-
ferent lengths, that the leading arm is weaker than the
trailing arm, or that the leading arm has been dispersed
by an encounter with one or more massive substructures.
Of course, it could also be an indication that Hermus and
Phoenix are not physically associated.

We have compared our best-ﬁtting orbit with the posi-
tions of all known Galactic globular clusters. The closest
matches are with Pal 1, NGC 1261, and Pal 5. NGC
1261 and Pal 5 are clearly ruled out by B15 and Figure 1
of this work. Similarly, Pal 1 lies ≈ 2.3 kpc laterally from
the nearest branch of the orbit. Owing to Pal 1’s prox-
imity to the Sun, the best-ﬁtting orbit passes no closer
than 12◦ from the cluster. We conclude that none of the
known globular clusters is likely to be the progenitor of
this stream.

4. PREDICTED OBSERVABLES

3

If Hermus and Phoenix are indeed part of the same
stream, then our orbit model can be used to make ap-
proximate predictions for the radial and tangential ve-
locities we would expect to measure. Figure 4 shows po-
sitions, distances, radial velocities, and proper motions
as a function of Galactic longitude for both prograde and
retrograde orbits. We show only the portion of the or-
bit connecting the streams on the far side of the Galac-
tic center, which is the arm that, via nodal precession,
correctly predicts the orientations of both Hermus and
Phoenix.

Uncertainties were estimated using the marginal χ2
distributions for vhel, µαcos(θ), and µδ. Each parame-
ter was oﬀset to its 90% conﬁdence limit and the other
ﬁt parameters were then varied to ﬁnd a new χ2 min-
imum. The shaded regions in Figure 4 encompass the
entire range of observable parameters resulting from this
procedure.

Also shown in Figure 4 are Galactic standard of rest
velocity cuts used by Martin et al. (2016) to kinemati-
cally identify Hermus using blue horizontal branch stars.
The velocities clearly favor a prograde orbit for Hermus
and, if the Phoenix and Hermus streams are part of the
same stream, are completely consistent with our predic-
tions for a prograde orbit.

5. CONCLUSIONS

Having found that the Hermus and Phoenix streams
are nearly coplanar, we have investigated whether a sin-
gle orbit could accommodate both streams. Using a
Galactic model with a disk, bulge, and spherical halo,
we ﬁnd that we can indeed match the trajectories of
both streams with a single orbit. Moreover, this match is
partly facilitated by orbital precession, which naturally
brings the orbital plane into alignment with each stream
within half an orbit around the Galaxy.

B15 identify a possible progenitor within the Phoenix
stream. The misalignment of this feature with the stream
itself suggests that Phoenix is on a prograde orbit around
the Galaxy. If Phoenix and Hermus are part of the same
stream, then Hermus must be a remote part of the trail-
ing arm.

While not proven, we consider the hypothesis that Her-
mus and Phoenix are part of the same stream as entirely
plausible. Conﬁrmation will require spectroscopy of stars
in both Hermus and Phoenix. The kinematic discovery
of Hermus (Martin et al. 2016) already supports a pro-
grade orbit for the stream, and is entirely consistent with
our predictions based on a single-stream orbit.

If radial velocity measurements and/or proper motions
conﬁrm a physical association between the Hermus and
Phoenix streams, then as the longest cold stream yet
discovered, Phoenix-Hermus would provide us with a re-
markable new probe of the Galactic potential.

We thank an anonymous referee for several useful sug-
gestions that improved both the clarity and thoroughness
of the manuscript.

Ahn, C. P., Alexandroﬀ, R., & Allende Prieto, C. et al. 2014,

Allen, C., & Santillan, A. 1991, Rev. Mex. Astron. Astroﬁs., 22,

ApJS, 211, 17

255

Balbinot, E., Yanny, B., Li, T. S. et al. 2015, (B15) ApJ, in press.

REFERENCES

4

Carlberg, R. G., ApJ, 705, 223
Carlberg, R. G., & Grillmair, C. J. 2013, ApJ, 768, 171
Eyre, A., & Binney, J. 2011, MNRAS, 413, 1852
Fardal, M. A., Huang, S., & Weinberg, M. D. 2015, MNRAS, 452,

301

Grillmair, C. J., & Dionatos, O. 2006, ApJ, 643, 17
Grillmair, C. J., & Carlin, J. L. 2016, in Tidal Streams in the

Local Group and Beyond, H. J. Newberg & J. L. Carlin eds.,
Springer

Koposov, S., Rix, H-W, & Hogg, D. W. 2010, ApJ, 712, 260
K¨upper, A. H. W., Lane, R. R., & Heggie, D. C. 2012, MNRAS,

420, 2700

K¨upper, A. H. W., Balbinot, E., Bonaca, A., Johnston, K. V.,

Hogg, D. W., Kroupa, P., & Santiago, B. X. 2015, ApJ, 803, 80

Lane, R. R., K¨upper, A. H. W., & Heggie, D. C. 2012, MNRAS,

423, 2845

Martin, C., et al. 2016, in prep.
Odenkirchen, M. et al. 2003, AJ, 126, 2385
Rockosi, C. M. et al. 2002, AJ, 124, 349
Smith, M. C. 2016, in Tidal Streams in the Local Group and

Beyond, H. J. Newberg & J. L. Carlin eds., Springer

Willet, B. A., Newberg, H. J., Zhang, H., Yanny, B., & Beers, T.

C. 2009, ApJ, 697, 207

Wyse, R. F. G 2009, IAU Symp. 258, 11
Yoon, J. H., Johnston, K. V., & Hogg, D. W. 2011, ApJ, 731, 58

5

Fig. 1.— Panel a: ﬁltered surface density map of the western portion of the northern SDSS footprint, in Galactic coordinates. The stretch
is linear, with lighter areas indicating higher surface densities. The map is the result of a ﬁlter based on the color-magnitude distribution
of stars in the globular cluster M 53, and shifted to a distance of 20 kpc. The map has been smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 0.6◦. The
black curves correspond to the Hermus trajectory of G14, oﬀset ±3◦ in b. The white curve is the Galactocentric great circle ﬁt to Phoenix
by B15. Panel b: The same map with best-ﬁt orbits shown. The red curve shows an orbit ﬁt to only the northern 30◦ of Hermus, while
the blue curve shows a simultaneous ﬁt to both the Hermus and Phoenix streams.

6

X-Y

 

X-Z

 

 

Y-Z

 

 

 

 

 

20

10

0

-10

-20
 

 

10

c
p
k

0

-10

-20
 

 

10

0

-10

-20

-20

-10

0
kpc

10

20

Fig. 2.— Projections of best-ﬁt orbits in Galactic cartesian coordinates. The solar circle and the position of the sun are indicated. The
path of the Hermus stream is shown by the black points, where the error bars correspond to ±3 kpc. The green points and error bars
indicate the path of the Phoenix stream. The red curve is an orbit ﬁt solely to Hermus, while the blue curve shows a simultaneous ﬁt to
both Hermus and Phoenix. Note that orbital precession due to the disk is required to bring the orbit into alignment with the Phoenix
stream.

7

Fig. 3.— A projection of the best-ﬁt orbit viewed nearly in the orbital plane. The leading (dotted) and trailing (solid) tails are at nearly
the same radius, but are inclined by ≈ 9◦ to one another due to nodal precession. Hermus is shown by black asterisks while Phoenix is
shown in green. Scale and orientation are provided by the solar circle, with the Sun at x = 8.5 kpc.

8

Hermus

Phoenix

50

0

-50

 
25

 

20

)

°

(
 
b

)
c
p
k
(
 

d

l

e
h
v

 

15
10
 
100
0
-100
-200

)
r
y
/
s
a
m

(
 
)
δ
(
s
o
c
 
α
µ

)
r
y
/
s
a
m

(
 
δ
µ

 

 
2
0
-2
-4
 
2
0
-2
-4
-6
0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

100

200

l (°)

300

Fig. 4.— Predictions of our model orbit for various observables, as a function of Galactic longitude. The shaded regions encompass the
90% conﬁdence interval in each case. The dark gray shaded regions correspond to a prograde orbit, while the lighter gray regions indicate
expectation values for a retrograde orbit. The endpoints of the Hermus and Phoenix streams are shown by the vertical lines. The hashed
box in the middle panel shows the vGSR limits used by Martin et al. (2016) in kinematically detecting Hermus with blue horizontal branch
stars. In the case of a prograde orbit, both streams would be moving towards lower longitudes, while in the retrograde case they would be
moving to the right towards higher l.

