Detecting Topological Order with Ribbon Operators

Jacob C. Bridgeman,1 Steven T. Flammia,1 and David Poulin2

1Centre for Engineered Quantum Systems, School of Physics, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia

2Department of Physics, Universit´e de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Qu´ebec, Canada

(Dated: March 24, 2016)

We introduce a numerical method for identifying topological order in two-dimensional models
based on one-dimensional bulk operators. The idea is to identify approximate symmetries supported
on thin strips through the bulk that behave as string operators associated to an anyon model. We
can express these ribbon operators in matrix product form and deﬁne a cost function that allows
us to eﬃciently optimize over this ansatz class. We test this method on spin models with abelian
topological order by ﬁnding ribbon operators for Zd quantum double models with local ﬁelds and
Ising-like terms. In addition, we identify ribbons in the abelian phase of Kitaev’s honeycomb model
which serve as the logical operators of the encoded qubit for the quantum error-correcting code.
We further identify the topologically encoded qubit in the quantum compass model, and show that
despite this qubit, the model does not support topological order. Finally, we discuss how the method
supports generalizations for detecting nonabelian topological order.

Despite the apparent simplicity of quantum spin mod-
els, they can exhibit a wide variety of interesting and
potentially useful phenomena. These range from con-
ventional magnetic order to the more novel topological1
and symmetry-protected2 and symmetry-enriched3 topo-
logical orders which are of interest in both condensed
matter physics4 and quantum information theory.5 These
states are disordered in the sense of Landau-Ginzburg-
Wilson, however they do exhibit properties distinct from
the usual disordered phases. For example, topologi-
cal phases possess quasiparticle excitations, known as
anyons, whose braid relations can be far more exotic
than those of fermions or bosons.6 These phases also have
ground state degeneracy which depends on the topology
of the lattice.7 This protected degeneracy has prompted
the investigation of topologically ordered models as quan-
tum memories.5,8 Quantum information stored in the de-
generate subspace can be protected from arbitrary local
noise when error correction techniques are employed.9–11
Distinguishing topological phases can be an especially
challenging task precisely because of their topological na-
ture: there is no broken symmetry and no local order pa-
rameter signalling the phase transition.1 There has been
a large amount of previous work which attempts to iden-
tify topological order (TO). The existing key techniques,
such as the topological entanglement entropy,12–17 the
entanglement Hamiltonian18, topological degeneracy19
and associated properties,16,20 symmetries of particular
representations of the ground states,21–24 and speciﬁc
properties of particular TO states,25,26 have been highly
successful in various domains of applicability. We review
these methods below. A common feature of these meth-
ods is that they utilize the ground state of the model,
which is unfortunately a challenging computational task
in general.

Here we propose a numerical method that we call the
ribbon operators method for identifying TO in the ground
state of a given 2D Hamiltonian using only the Hamilto-
nian, without reference to the ground state. We reduce
the search for TO to a 1D problem through the bulk

of the material, and we present a variational approach
based on standard DMRG27 to identify certain opera-
tors – the ribbon operators – supported in the bulk that
satisfy the commutation relations relevant for a candi-
date anyon model. We demonstrate the power of this
approach by identifying TO in both integrable and non-
integrable models, and contrast this with topologically
trivial Hamiltonians. We also demonstrate the ability to
identify topologically encoded qubits and logical opera-
tors of quantum error-correcting codes, even in a non-
integrable model. All of our calculations are focused on
the case of abelian TO in spin models, however the rib-
bon operators method suggests several natural extensions
beyond this case, which we leave open for future work.

The following subsection reviews prior approaches,
while Sec. I reviews anyon models. The expert reader
can skip to Sec. II.

A. Prior Approaches

One important tool

is the topological entanglement
entropy (TEE)12,13 of the ground state wave function.
Given the reduced density matrix ρR of some many-body
ground state on a region R, the von Neumann entropy
S(ρR) = − Tr (ρR log ρR) typically obeys the area law

S(ρR) = α|∂R| − γ + O

,

(1)

(cid:18) 1

(cid:19)

|R|

where |R| and |∂R| are the number of spins in the region
R and on the boundary of the region R respectively, and
−γ is the TEE.

In a topologically ordered model, a physical argument

suggests that γ = log(cid:0)(cid:112)(cid:80)

(cid:1), where dc is the quan-

c d2
c

tum dimension of the anyon with charge c in the asso-
ciated anyon model. The TEE is clearly nonzero if the
ground state is topologically ordered,12 so γ can be used
as a signal of such ordering.15–17 One can compute γ by
obtaining an explicit ground state wavefunction, for ex-
ample as a PEPS. Additionally, a R´enyi entropy variant

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
2
2
 
 
]
l
e
-
r
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

2
v
5
7
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

of γ14 can be computed by sampling the ground state
wavefunctions using quantum Monte Carlo.15

mension D =(cid:80)

There are two major challenges associated with this
approach. Firstly, there exist examples of topologically
trivial states for which computing γ leads to nonzero
values.28 Secondly, any two topological phases whose as-
sociated anyon models have the same total quantum di-
c will have the same TEE, and so it
cannot be used to distinguish them. This second problem
has already led to diﬃculty in fully identifying the phase
of physically interesting models including the Heisenberg
antiferromagnet on the Kagome lattice, a model thought
to describe the low-energy physics of several naturally
occurring and synthetic minerals.17

c d2

A less coarse approach is to investigate the full entan-
glement spectrum, that is, the spectrum of the eﬀective
Hamiltonian deﬁned by ρR = e−Heff .18 It has been sug-
gested that the universal properties of Heﬀ are intimately
linked to the structure of the physical edge state of the
model, however Heﬀ can undergo phase transitions with-
out the physical model doing so,29 and at least for models
in the same phase as a string-net model30 the spectrum
is expected to contain the same universal information as
the TEE.14

One of the characteristic features of topologically or-
dered models is the topology-dependent ground state
degeneracy.7 After obtaining a full set of ground states,
one can observe transitions out of topological phases via
loss of topological degeneracy,19 and, in the topological
phase, compute the S and U matrices deﬁning the braid-
ing relations in the associated anyon theory.16,20 Unfortu-
nately, demonstrating topology-dependent ground state
degeneracy is not suﬃcient to ensure robust topological
order.31,32

Given a projected entangled pair state (PEPS) descrip-
tion of the ground state, one can identify the topologi-
cal order by understanding the symmetry properties of
the parent Hamiltonian21 or the environment tensor.24
One can also use the PEPS formalism to identify matrix
product operators (MPOs) that ‘pull through’ the PEPS
tensors on the virtual level.22,23 These MPOs are in close
analogy to the physical operators that act to create and
transport anyons. As we will describe, these physical
operators are central to our approach.

Finally, given access to a ground state, speciﬁc struc-
ture such as certain correlation functions or distribution
of bond energies can provide evidence for topological
ordering.25,26

As a prerequisite for each of these methods, one must
obtain an eﬃcient description of the ground space (e.g.
via tensor networks) or obtain expectations with respect
to ground states (e.g. via Monte Carlo sampling). Tensor
network (TN) methods have proven very useful for this
purpose,17,24–26,33 however in many cases the result does
not conclusively determine the topological order.26 The
TN states obtained suﬀer from several drawbacks. In par-
ticular, they are usually computed on inﬁnite cylinders
of small circumference. They can also be biased towards

2

Of these methods,

low-entanglement states.25 Additionally, properties of a
ground state alone are not suﬃcient to identify a gapped
topological phase. For example, a one can obtain a gap-
less Hamiltonian sharing the toric code ground space.34
the ones closest in spirit to
our current approach are the tensor network-based
methods,21–23 however our approach diﬀers substantially
in that we do not require a PEPS description of the
ground state wavefunction. We instead variationally cre-
ate tensor network representations of certain ribbon op-
erators that are supported on 1D strips through the truly
two-dimensional bulk; this dimensional reduction is what
makes our method numerically tractable. In contrast to
state-based variational approaches, where a similar re-
duction is often included for numerical convenience, we
will argue that in our operator-based approach this re-
duction is an expected feature of the operators. Addi-
tionally, if one wishes to use the topologically protected
ground space as a quantum memory, knowledge of these
ribbon operators is required for information manipula-
tion and extraction. Thus, this method could be used to
augment a state-based approach to obtain this additional
data.

This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. I, we review
some of the features of anyon models which describe the
low energy excitations of topologically ordered spin mod-
els. In Sec. II, we deﬁne a ribbon operator, and use the
properties of the anyons to deﬁne a cost function which
quantiﬁes how well a candidate ribbon realizes their be-
havior. We then describe how the cost function can be
minimized numerically in Sec. IV. Using this algorithm,
in Sec. V we obtain ribbon operators in a number of topo-
logically ordered and topologically trivial models. These
numerics demonstrate that the cost function we deﬁne
allows identiﬁcation of abelian topological order in non-
integrable spin models. In Sec. VI, we prove that, under
certain assumptions, ribbon operators can be used as ap-
proximate logical operators in quantum error correcting
codes. We conclude in Sec. VII with a discussion of ex-
tensions of the method to nonabelian topological order
and more complex spin models.

I. PROPERTIES OF ANYONS

In this section, we review the physical properties of
anyon models that characterize a topological phase. Of
course, not all topological phases have an associated
anyon model, for example the cubic code,35 however we
will tailor our method to those phases with anyonic ex-
citations. This discussion of anyon models will motivate
our deﬁnition in the subsequent section of a ribbon op-
erator for a spin model deﬁned by some local Hamilto-
j hj on a lattice in two dimensions. We will
argue that this deﬁnition captures the essential features
outlined below of a topologically ordered model by think-
ing about anyons as quasiparticle excitations of the spin
model. The simplest realization of this is Kitaev’s toric

nian H =(cid:80)

3

is the correlation length. Thus string-like operators with
width proportional to the correlation length can be found
anywhere within the phase.

Since the string operators act as creation operators
for pairs of anyons, we argue that they should be
only slightly entangling operators.37 These are operators
whose Schmidt rank is independent of the system size
on any bipartition that cuts the string into two contigu-
ous pieces. In the LCPC case, the string operators are
known to be slightly entangling.37 Since the quasiparti-
cles are simply dressed by moving away from these ﬁxed
points, we expect this property to remain throughout the
phase; although the required Schmidt rank can increase
substantially, it will still be independent of the system
size. When we remove the dressed quasiparticles from
the lattice (by annihilating them or bringing them out to
inﬁnity), the system returns to its ground space, which is
expected to obey the area law of Eq. (1). This also sup-
ports the slightly entangling nature of such operators.

Some of the deﬁning features of an anyon model are the
relations that are encoded in the topological S matrix
and the R matrices. Let {a, b, c, . . .} label the anyonic
particles in the anyon model describing the low energy
excitations of the Hamiltonian H. The R matrices are
deﬁned by

and the S matrix is

Sab =

1
D

,

,

(2)

(3)

where the lines trace out the worldlines of the particles.
Another approach is to consider the related ˜S matrix
that can be obtained via the twist product.40 If the S
matrix is an object that captures dynamical information
from braiding anyons in 2+1 dimensions, then the ˜S ma-
trix is a static object that captures correlations of ground
states in 2+0 dimensions. If πa is an operator supported
on an annulus that projects onto a state with total charge
a inside, then

dadb

˜Sab = (cid:104)ψ|πa∞πb|ψ(cid:105) =

partite operators X =(cid:80)
(cid:88)

where |ψ(cid:105) is any ground state of the spin model. For bi-
k,l Y A
k ⊗
Y B
, the twist product with respect to the partition A|B
is deﬁned as

i ⊗X B

D Sab ,
j and Y =(cid:80)

i,j X A

(4)

l

X∞Y =

i,j,k,l

X A

i Y A

k ⊗ Y B

l X B
j ,

(5)

where the order is reversed on the B region relative to
the A partition. This is clearly closely related to Eq. (3),

FIG. 1. The prototypical ribbon operators are the string oper-
ators shown above for the toric code. The toric code is deﬁned
by X-type and Z-type four-body interactions on alternate pla-
quettes of a square lattice, and the (exact) ribbon operators
are the string-like products of X and Z shown above. These
ribbon operators commute with the Hamiltonian terms but
anticommute with each other, thus identifying a phase with
Z2 topological order.

code,5,36 and we will refer to that model to clarify key
features.

Creating a pair of anyons, and moving them to the
boundary of the lattice leaves no excitations, and so maps
the vacuum to the vacuum. In the toric code, anyons are
created and transported using string operators, as shown
in Fig. 1. These operators commute with the Hamilto-
nian in the bulk, but have excitations localized to the
ends. In this way, if the anyons are moved oﬀ the edge
of the lattice or are fused together, the system remains
in its ground state.

More generally, we expect anyonic excitations to be
particle like, but to have nontrivial braiding relations. On
suﬃciently large length scales, it is expected that these
braid statistics are governed solely by an anyon model.36
For this reason, the creation operators in this limit should
be one dimensional with the particles localized around
the end points. Away from a renormalization-group ﬁxed
point, we expect these operators to be dressed, and sup-
ported on slightly fattened regions, though still eﬀec-
tively one-dimensional. More precisely, the width of these
ribbons should be set by the microscopic details of the
model, and should not scale with system size.

The family of local commuting projector codes (LCPC)
generalizes the toric code and provides a concrete instan-
tiation of these ideas. The LCPCs are families of Hamil-
tonians where the terms are pairwise commuting projec-
tors onto an unfrustrated ground state. In these mod-
els the string operators described above always exist.37
This class of models includes exactly solvable points of
most known topological phases38 including the Levin-
Wen string nets.30 Away from these exactly solvable
points, we can dress the string operators using quasiadi-
abatic continuation.39 Given a point in a phase for which
an initial string operator exists, such as an LCPC, we
can dress this operator to any other point in the phase.
Generically this operator will have extensive support,
however the error made in truncating the width is ex-
ponentially small in w/ξ, where w is the width and ξ

cba=Rabccba¯abwhere the worldline loops are replaced by the correspond-
ing closed loop operators on the lattice. For abelian mod-
els where da = 1 for all particle types a, the S and ˜S
matrices coincide up to a multiple of D.
Finally, anyonic quasiparticles should be able to move
around the lattice, and the state should not depend upon
any smooth deformations of the path they take. In par-
ticular, when they are fused back together or moved oﬀ
the lattice, the system should return to a vacuum state.
This is realized in the toric code since the string oper-
ators can be deformed by dressing with local operators
that are symmetries of the Hamiltonian. This preserves
commutativity with H and the ˜S matrix and clearly cre-
ates the same particle at the ends.

II. DEFINITION OF RIBBON OPERATORS

Let us summarize the physical intuition that we’ve
gained in the previous section into a few simple prop-
erties that the string-like operators seem to possess in
general. These properties hold for known exactly solv-
able models with TO.

Given a two-dimensional quantum system with TO,
we expect that there are operators R supported on one-
dimensional strips through the bulk where the following
four properties hold, at least approximately:

1. R commutes with the bulk Hamiltonian in the low

energy sector.

2. R is supported on a strip of spins with bounded

width w.

3. Distinct ribbons R and L should respect the data
(e.g. the R or S matrix) for an underlying anyon
model in the low energy sector.

4. R is smoothly deformable, that is, the ability to
satisfy 1-3 should not depend on the chosen strip
of spins deﬁning the support of R, given suﬃcient
width.

Since ﬁnding a low energy projector appears to be
a challenging task, we make the following assumption.
Rather than asking for 1-4 to hold only in the low energy
sector, we ask for them to hold on the whole spectrum.
At ﬁrst glance, this seems to be too strong for character-
izing TO away from an exactly solvable RG ﬁxed point.
Nonetheless, by making this assumption, we can arrive
at an eﬀective numerical procedure for detecting TO in
2D models. Moreover, in Sec. III, we provide a heuristic
physical justiﬁcation of this assumption, and some natu-
ral avenues for relaxing it in Sec. VII.

A. The Method of Ribbon Operators

Here we introduce what we call the ribbon operator
method for detecting TO. The strategy is simple: we will

4

write a cost function that tries to satisfy the above re-
quirements simultaneously. Since the support of a string-
like operator is on a 1D strip, and is expected to be
only slightly entangling, we will use the ansatz class of
MPOs41 to describe candidate operators. We will then
use the highly successful methods of 1D systems such as
DMRG27 for optimizing over this ansatz class to ﬁnd the
lowest cost MPO.

We can then deﬁne a ribbon operator as any MPO sup-
ported on any one-dimensional strip of some ﬁxed width.
By drawing on the lattice Hamiltonian and an underlying
anyon model, we can deﬁne a cost function quantifying
the ﬁtness of candidate ribbons given the above crite-
ria. A good ribbon operator then corresponds to a local
minimum of the cost function.

There is clearly considerable scope within this method
for how to use it. The art will be to choose a cost function
that is tractable to optimize and gives clear signals of
TO when appropriate, such that the distinction between
which local minima are “good” and “bad” is obvious.
We do not claim to have a unique or best choice of cost
function or optimization routine. The remainder of this
section details one particular choice of cost function, and
as we show in Sec. V this particular choice performs quite
well for a variety of simple models.

B. Our Cost Function

teria. Let H = (cid:80)

We now deﬁne our proposed cost function that quan-
tiﬁes how well a candidate ribbon satisﬁes the above cri-
j hj be some local Hamiltonian and
R some candidate ribbon with (cid:107)R(cid:107) = 1 (the Schatten
2-norm, or Frobenius norm (cid:107)R(cid:107)2 = Tr(R†R)) and width
w, which ideally should be chosen to be comparable to
the correlation length. We will also use the symbol R
to denote the region of support of the ribbon R since no
confusion should result.

The ﬁrst condition is that the ribbon should commute
with the Hamiltonian of the model. This gives us two
terms in the cost function. We can quantify the viola-
tion of this condition using (cid:107)[R, H](cid:107)2. This can be de-
composed into two distinct contributions by writing the
Hamiltonian as

H = HR + HRc + H∂R

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

=

hj +

hj +

hj,

(6)

j∈R

j∈Rc

j∈∂R

where the ﬁrst term contains Hamiltonian terms whose
support is completely within the support of R, the sec-
ond contains those whose support has no overlap with R
and are hence supported entirely in the complementary
region Rc. The ﬁnal sum contains all those terms in the
Hamiltonian with support on both R and Rc. Clearly the
second term trivially commutes with R as a consequence
of our second condition.

Commutation with the ﬁrst term cannot be simpliﬁed
further. However, the term on the boundary ∂R can be
simpliﬁed as follows. Let hj be some term on the bound-
ary of the ribbon. Then using the operator Schmidt de-
composition, we can split the operator hj into a sum over
interior and exterior components

hin
j,k ⊗ hout
j,k ,

(7)

(cid:88)

k

hj =

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

where Tr

j,k †hout
hout
j,k(cid:48)

= δk,k(cid:48).

Using the orthonormality of the hout

j,k terms and the

deﬁnition of the Frobenius norm, we ﬁnd that

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2
(cid:13)(cid:13)2

(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

j,k

⊗ hout
⊗ hout

j,k

j,k

j,k

k

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:88)
(cid:2)R, hin
(cid:88)
(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:2)R, hin
(cid:88)
(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:2)R, hin
(cid:17)

k

k

j,k

(cid:107)[R, hj](cid:107)2 =

=

=

(cid:16)

,

(8)

By appropriate grouping of boundary terms, we can en-
= δk,k(cid:48)δj,j(cid:48). (This is equivalent
sure that Tr
to applying the Schmidt decomposition to H∂R instead
of just one term.) Thus, we can express the boundary

j,k †hout
hout
j(cid:48),k(cid:48)

contribution as (cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:2)R, hin

j,k

(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

.

(9)

j∈∂R

k

We ﬁnd that the commutation condition together with
the bounded width condition gives us a term in the cost
function proportional to

(cid:88)

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:2)R, hin

j,k

(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

j,k∈∂R

Because commutation with the Hamiltonian can al-
ways be achieved by choosing the ribbon to be the iden-
tity operator, we require a competing term to enforce the
topological properties such as having a nontrivial S or R
matrix. For the moment, suppose that we already have
a given nontrivial ribbon operator L that crosses R as in
Fig. 1. (We will discuss how to relax this prior-knowledge
assumption below.) We can incorporate anyon data with
the following term in the cost function,

(cid:13)(cid:13)[R, L]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)2

= (cid:107)RL − ηLR(cid:107)2 ,

(11)

ﬁxed total anyon charge c = a × b, we have the relation

5

.

(12)

c and Rba

Thus if η (cid:54)= 1 then Rab
cannot both be 1.
Note that in the abelian case, Sa¯b can be written as36
RabRba/D, so η is related to the S matrix and is there-
fore gauge invariant (invariant under a change of basis of
the fusion space).

c

Since the anyon charge c is ﬁxed already by the la-
bels a and b in an abelian model, this switching relation
should hold even when considering this as just a diﬀerent
operator product order, analogous to the case of a twist
product for the ˜S matrix:

.

(13)

(cid:13)(cid:13)2

(cid:13)(cid:13)[R, L]η

Since there are many equivalent strips on which L and
R can be supported, the cost should be computed for all
possible intersection regions. This is achieved by sum-
over all translates of L, labelled T (L),
ming
that lead to an inequivalent intersection with R. This
translation invariance gives us an additional motivation
for our choice of topological term: we can use translation-
invariant MPOs in our optimization routines. By com-
parison, an a priori equally attractive term would be to
encode the S matrix relations, but then ﬁnite-size eﬀects
from the periodic boundary conditions might add addi-
tional complications to the numerics.

Now, we deﬁne the η-cost of a ribbon R given some

ﬁxed secondary ribbon L as

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

j,k∈∂R

+

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:2)R, hin
(cid:13)(cid:13)[R, L]η

(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:13)2
(cid:19)
(cid:13)(cid:13)2

j,k

T (L)

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

j,k∈∂L

+

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:2)L, hin
(cid:13)(cid:13)[R, L]η

j,k

(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:13)2
(cid:19)
(cid:13)(cid:13)2

T (R)

,

(14)

,

(15)

where |R| is the number of spins on which R is supported.
Note that due to the nonsymmetric nature of [· ,· ]η, it
is convenient to deﬁne the η-cost of L as

C(L; η) =

1
|L|

(cid:107)[L, HL](cid:107)2 +

(cid:107)[R, H](cid:107)2 = (cid:107)[R, HR](cid:107)2 +

.

(10)

C(R; η) =

1
|R|

(cid:107)[R, HR](cid:107)2 +

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

where η is a complex number diﬀerent from 1.

This choice of topological term in the cost function in-
tuitively reminds us of the R matrix relations of Eq. (2).
We can see that such a term is in fact suﬃcient to give a
nontrivial R matrix as follows. Here we specialize to an
abelian model, but the discussion could be generalized.
Using the R matrix relation for an abelian model with a

where the appropriate Hamiltonian terms are taken.
Here the normalization term is chosen so that the cost of
a ribbon is approximately independent of the volume.

One could consider summing these two terms to build
a total cost function for the pair of ribbons, however we
linearize the problem for a ﬁxed L (or ﬁxed R) and in-
stead do an alternating minimization algorithm.

cba=Rabccba=RabcRbaccba=ηcbaLR=ηLRIn the case of the exact toric code, the form of the
cost function is relatively simple and gives a concrete
instantiation of the translation operation T . It is easy
to check that the standard logical operators of this code
have zero η-cost when η = −1, as expected. We present
the explicit cost function derivation in Appendix A for
illustration.

Although this cost function only involves a pair of rib-
bons, it is possible to incorporate braid relations with
other particle types by adding terms of the form of
Eq. (11) with additional ribbon operators. In this way,
it is possible to completely reconstruct the S matrix of
the anyon model up to a column permutation. This am-
biguity is due to the diﬃculty of identifying equivalence
of operators on incomparable supports (i.e. those with
vertical and horizontal supports in Fig. 1). We discuss
possible avenues to removing this freedom in Sec. VII.

III. HEURISTIC JUSTIFICATION FOR THE

NORM

As discussed in Sec. II, a key assumption which en-
ables our method to be numerically eﬃcient is that the
commutation relations, which are expected to hold only
on a topologically ordered ground space, hold on the en-
tire spectrum. While this appears to be a very strong
assumption, we believe that our method should continue
to work even when this assumption breaks. In this sec-
tion, we will provide a physically motivated, heuristic
justiﬁcation for this assumption.

At high energies, we expect a gas of short-range inter-
acting anyons. When ribbon operators are used to create
additional anyons, braid them, and fuse them in a speciﬁc
way, the resulting process will in general be aﬀected by
the presence of the background anyon gas. Speciﬁcally,
the expectation value of the braid can be aﬀected by 1)
dynamical phases acquired from short range interactions
with the background anyons, and 2) topological terms
caused by the background anyons enclosed in the braid.
To eliminate these eﬀects, we need to make sure that 1)
there are no background anyons near the support of the
ribbon operator, and 2) the topological charge enclosed
in the braid is trivial.

It happens that both of these conditions can be en-
Indeed, 1) requires
forced with small width operators.
projecting on the local ground state (LGS), i.e. the pro-
jector onto the support of TrRc ΠGS. Similarly, it is pos-
sible to ﬁx the topological charge of a region using an
operator which acts only on the boundary of this region
and is obtained from a ﬁnite depth quantum circuit.40
Let ΠLGS and ΠC denote the corresponding projectors.
Suppose that R is an MPO ribbon operator which
obeys the right commutation relations on the ground
space, but not on the entire spectrum. Then, R(cid:48) =
ΠCΠLGSRΠLGSΠC should be a slightly wider and larger-
bond-dimension MPO ribbon operator which obeys the
commutation on the entire spectrum. Thus, while our ap-

6

proach cannot ﬁnd R, it should be able to ﬁnd R(cid:48) without
any assumptions.

We stress that the above argument is not key to our
method, and no ground state projectors are incorporated
directly in our algorithm or in the numerical results pre-
sented in Sec. V. One could alter the method to explicitly
make use of information about the low energy space. We
discuss this further in Sec. VII.

IV. FINDING RIBBON OPERATORS

In many exactly solvable models, an analytic form for
the ribbon operators can be found. In more general mod-
els, for example ones with a noncommuting Hamiltonian,
the ribbons must be found numerically. In this section,
we describe how to ﬁnd ribbon operators using DMRG.27
We parameterize a width w ribbon by a block-
translationally invariant inﬁnite MPO. This MPO is
“snaked” along the support of the ribbon to cover the
two-dimensional region. That is, the coordinates of the
ribbon are treated in a linearized lexicographic order
moving along the ribbon lengthwise. This MPO can be
vectorized, i.e. interpreted as a vector instead of a ma-
trix. An MPO is also built for the cost function, with the
same snaking pattern, and standard DMRG can then be
applied to ﬁnd the ribbon that minimizes the constraints.
This vectorization procedure corresponds to the follow-
ing transformation, written in tensor network diagram
notation:

Given any operator O in MPO form, we can explicitly
write the form of the constraint term (cid:107)[R, O](cid:107)2 for one
site of the MPO as

.

.

(16)

By concatenating this expression and closing the bound-
aries appropriately, we see that this is equivalent to
the expectation of some MPO for some matrix product
“state” given by the vectorization of R.

The total cost function can be obtained by summing
up the MPOs deﬁning each cost term, corresponding to
direct sum on the MPO matrices. The cost function
MPO will not generally correspond to a local Hamilto-
nian, which is the regime where DMRG is usually ap-
plied. Indeed, due to the squaring required on the inter-
nal commutator, we will have terms like hjhk for every
pair j, k. Despite this potential challenge, we will demon-
strate that DMRG is an eﬀective algorithm for this min-
imization.

→→ROO†R†−−+A. Optimizing

We attempt to optimize C(R; η) for various choices of
η. In particular, we restrict ourselves to the unit disk as
this is suﬃcient for the models below, although extending
to other η does not change any of the results obtained.

When attempting to optimize a pair, we used alternat-
ing minimization. First C(R1; η) was minimized in the
presence of a random R2. Then C(R2; η) was optimized
given the R1 obtained from the previous optimization.
The R2 obtained was then used to seed the next itera-
tion. This process was repeated until convergence.

For each choice of η, several (usually 5 or 10) ribbons or
pairs of ribbons were optimized from random initial pairs
and the lowest cost pair was retained. This proved neces-
sary to avoid premature convergence to a local minimum,
particularly in the alternating minimization, leading to
a pair that was orthogonal to the optimal solution. In
most cases a total of 5-10 restarts appeared suﬃcient to
ensure that an optimal pair was obtained. For each value
of η, an independent random start was generated, rather
than using a warm start from the previous nearby values
of η.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

In this section we use ribbon operators to study several
standard models that exhibit both topologically ordered
and trivial phases. We demonstrate the eﬃcacy of rib-
bon operators in identifying TO both at exactly solvable
points and away from such points.

A. Zd Quantum Double-Ising model

We deﬁne the Zd Quantum Double-Ising (QDId) model
as follows.5,9 Let Λ be the bicolorable lattice shown in
Fig. 1. Place a qudit (d level quantum system) at each
vertex and deﬁne the generalized unitary Pauli operators
X and Z such that ZX = ωXZ, X d = Z d = 1, and
ω = e2πi/d. We deﬁne plaquette operators a and b as

,

(17)

on the dark and light plaquettes respectively. The Hamil-
tonian is given by

(cid:88)

Pp − J

p∈{ }

p∈{ }

(Xj + X†j )

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

j

(cid:104)j,k(cid:105)

(Zj + Z†j )(Zk + Z†k),

HZd = − J

h
2

λ
4

−

−

Qp

(18a)

(18b)

(18c)

7

FIG. 2. Cost for ribbons in topologically trivial phases the
QDI2 model with η = eiφ. A pair of ribbons were optimized
on two w = 1 strips with bond dimension 1 for the para-
magnet and 2 in the other cases. We observe two distinct
failures to observe topological order. In the case of the para-
magnet, a zero-cost ribbon can be found for all φ. In fact,
this can be extended to all η. In the other cases (closeup in
inset plot), there is no η for which a nontrivial low-cost rib-
bon can be obtained. It is possible that this could be due to
insuﬃcient width, although we have not observed this to be
the case. Note that averaging over many trials (20) to give
a typical picture of the algorithms performance. In the case
where the variational minimum is used instead, still no signal
of topological order is observed.

where at each plaquette p we have the operators

d−1(cid:88)

d−1(cid:88)

P =

ak , Q =

bk .

(19)

k=1

k=1

The Hamiltonian contains the topological terms in
Eq. (18a) with strength J, a transverse onsite X ﬁeld
in Eq. (18b) with strength h, and a ferromagnetic Ising-
type term in Eq. (18c) with strength λ.

When h = λ = 0, this is a topologically ordered
commuting model which reduces to the toric code when
d = 2. This model also captures a number of other mod-
els, including the paramagnet ({J, h, λ} = {0, 1, 0}) and
a ferromagnet ({J, h, λ} = {0, 0, 1}). These latter cor-
respond to distinct topologically trivial phases. At the
ﬁxed point of each of these phases, the model is exactly
solvable. In the d = 2 case, the generic model with J = 0
is given by the Hamiltonian

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

H = −h

Xj − λ

ZjZk .

(20)

j

(cid:104)j,k(cid:105)

either h = 0 or λ = 0), we can set R1 = (cid:81)
R2 = (cid:81)

At the RG ﬁxed points of these phases (corresponding to
|↑(cid:105)(cid:104)↑| and
|↓(cid:105)(cid:104)↓|, where |↑(cid:105)/|↓(cid:105) correspond to the +1/−1
eigenstates of the relevant operator (i.e. the eigenstates of
X when λ = 0 and of Z when h = 0). These ribbons com-
mute with the Hamiltonian. Since R1R2 = R2R1 = 0,
their η-commutation relation is not unique, so they do
not correspond to good ribbon operators. We therefore
expect to be able to ﬁnd zero-cost ribbons for all η at
these points. We note that constraining the ribbons to
be unitary would be a natural way to eliminate these

a=X†XXX†b=ZZZ†Z†0π/2π3π/22π151050φ−log10C(R;eiφ){J,h,λ}={0,1,0}{J,h,λ}={0,1,1}{J,h,λ}={1,1,0}{J,h,λ}={1,1,1}0π/2π3π/22π210−18

FIG. 3. a) Cost for a width 1 ribbon found in the QDI5 model
of Eq. (18) with {J, h, λ} = {1, 0, 0} using bond dimension 5
and plotted with η = eiφ. The other ribbon was kept as a
string of Zs as shown in Fig. 1.
b) Cost for ribbons found using alternating minimization on
the QDI2 model with J = 1.
In the h = 0 case a pair of
w = 1, bond dimension 1 ribbons were sought, in the other
cases, the pair consisted of a w = 1 and a w = 2 ribbon with
bond dimensions 1 and 5 respectively. At the exactly solvable
points (h = 0), we see a dramatic cost decrease at dth roots of
unity, signalling both the presence of and type of topological
order present in these models. This feature remains even with
the addition of an X ﬁeld or Ising type term which destroys
the solvability of the model.

spurious solutions in the trivial phases, but this is com-
putationally expensive; we discuss this point further in
Sec. VII.

Costs for ribbons at various non-topological points in
the QDId model are shown in Fig. 2. We observe two
distinct ways in which trivial order can be signalled. As
we have already discussed, one of these corresponds to
mutually annihilating operators as in the para- and fer-
romagnetic phases. In the other case we simply fail to
observe any low cost ribbons which form a nontrivial al-
gebra. There are two explanations for this. Either there
are no ribbon operators to be found or the chosen width
w is too narrow.

The phase which includes the point {J, h, λ} = {1, 0, 0}
is topologically ordered, and we expect it to show a signal
of Zd-topological order. We therefore expect to observe
low cost ribbons only when η = eiφ is a dth root of 1. This
property is expected to persist away from the exactly
solvable point. In Fig. 3 we show the data obtained at
the ﬁxed points of the Z5 and Z2 models and when an
X ﬁeld is turned on in the latter. As expected, at the
ﬁxed point a very strong signal is observed. Using a large
density of points we see that the cost drops dramatically
over a very narrow region around the dth root of unity.

FIG. 4. Cost for ribbons found using alternating minimization
on the QDI3 model with {J, h, λ} = {1, 0, 0}. A pair of w = 1
ribbons with bond dimension 1 were optimized. We observe
a signal of topological order only at η = e2πik/3.

FIG. 5. Cost for ribbons found using alternating minimiza-
tion on the QDI2 model with {J, h, λ} = {1, 0.05, 0} where
η runs over points in the complex unit disk. A pair of rib-
bons with w = 1 and w = 2 and bond dimensions 1 and 5
respectively were optimized and the total cost is shown. We
observe a signal of topological order at η = −1. Note that
Fig. 3b corresponds to the edge of this disk. The raw data
is displayed, but some contours were subjected to gaussian
smoothing for clarity in the nearly ﬂat region where the noise
in the data and the gradient of the function are comparable
in magnitude.

When we turn on the ﬁeld term, the signal decreases
in magnitude but is still unmistakable, with more than
two orders of magnitude in total contrast. In Fig. 4, we
present cost data for the ﬁxed point of the QDI3 model
over the entire unit disk. As expected, low cost ribbons
can only be found around the third root of unity, with no
minima occurring inside the disk. This property persists
even when an X ﬁeld is turned on as shown in Fig. 5.
This ﬁgure shows the cost of ribbons in the QDI2 model
with {J, h, λ} = {1, 0.05, 0}. Even at this nonintegrable
point, no low cost ribbons can be found anywhere away
from the dth roots of unity.

02π/54π/56π/58π/52π1086420a)φ−log10C(R;eiφ)0π/2π3π/22π420b)φ−log10C(R;eiφ)h=0h=.05λ=.05−1−0.500.51−1−0.500.51ReηImη−3−2−10log10(R;η)−1−0.500.51−1−0.500.51ReηImη−2−10log10(R;η)9

FIG. 7. Subﬁgures a) and b) show the cost of ribbons with
supports oriented as shown in Fig. 6 for two models: a) the
quantum compass model and b) the QDI2 model. The cost is
parameterized with η = eiφ, and all ribbons were found using
bond dimension 5.
a) Cost of ribbons in the quantum compass model of Eq. (21).
Because ribbons in this model are sensitive to their support,
we conclude that they do not represent genuine topological
order.
b) Cost of ribbons in the QDI2 model of Eq. (18) using
{J, h, λ} = {1, 0, 0}. Note that the unit cell in the rotated
case is 4w − 2 rather than 2w for convenience. Low cost rib-
bons can be found on both unrotated and rotated supports
indicating genuine topological order.

To investigate topological order in the QC model, we
seek to ﬁnd logical operators supported on rotated re-
gions as shown in Fig. 6 or widened versions thereof. We
compare this to the Z2 quantum double model where
topological order is well understood.

In Fig. 7 we show the cost for ribbons obtained in these
two models where the vertical ribbons are ﬁxed to be

(cid:81) Zj and a bond dimension ≤ 5 ribbon is optimized with

both horizontal and rotated support. As discussed above,
zero cost ribbons can be obtained for both models in the
unrotated case when η = −1. Thus we see that each
model supports a topologically encoded qubit. Once we
rotate the ribbons, we ﬁnd that in both cases the ribbon
disappears when we restrict to w = 1. In the QDI2, the
ribbon is recovered once we allow the support to grow to
w = 2, however in the QC model there is no indication
of a good ribbon existing even when we allow ribbons of
width 3. This indicates that the low cost ribbons in the
QC model are anomalies associated to lattice symmetries

FIG. 6. Topologically ordered models should support low-cost
ribbons on both the horizontal and the rotated blue regions
(or some widening of them). This corresponds to insensitivity
of the anyon braid relations to the speciﬁc worldlines they
trace out. Models with speciﬁc lattice symmetries such as
the quantum compass model might provide false signatures
of topological order if ribbon operators are sought only on
non-generic strips of the lattice.

B. The Quantum Compass Model

It is interesting to consider the 2D quantum compass
(QC) or Bacon-Shor model42,43 in the context of ribbon
operators. This model is deﬁned on a square lattice Λ
with Hamiltonian

HQC = −J

(Xi,jXi,j+1 + Zi,jZi+1,j) .

(21)

(cid:88)

i,j∈Λ

This model fails to exhibit many of the features ex-
pected of a topologically ordered model. For exam-
ple, the ground state degeneracy does not depend on
the underlying lattice topology. Moreover, this appears
to be a gapless model with exponential ground state
degeneracy.42 Thus, this Hamiltonian is usually described
as not having topological order. However, this model can
be used to encode a qubit which is protected against arbi-
trary local errors, having a code distance extensive in the
(linear) lattice size,43 a property which is clearly required
of a topological code. This qubit can be deﬁned by the
i Xi,j.
These operators commute with each Hamiltonian term,
and intersect at a single point, hence they anticommute,
[ ˜Zi, ˜Xj]−1 = 0, and therefore almost fulﬁll the conditions
we give to be good ribbon operators. We will see below
that they are rigid objects that exist due to special lattice
symmetries, and they are not deformable.

pair of logical operators ˜Zi =(cid:81)

j Zi,j and ˜Xj =(cid:81)

The Hamiltonian Eq. (21) also commutes with all ele-

ments of the stabilizer group

(cid:42)(cid:89)

j

G =

(cid:89)

j

(cid:43)

Zi,jZi+1,j,

Xj,kXj,k+1

.

(22)

It is therefore clear that ˜Zj( ˜Xj) is related to ˜Zk( ˜Xk)
by application of a stabilizer element, and so deﬁnes the
same encoded qubit in the ground space. Hence, the
logical operators can be moved along to parallel strips.

0π/2π3π/22π1086420a)φ−log10C(R;eiφ)w=1Unrot.w=1Rot.w=2Rot.w=3Rot.0π/2π3π/22π1086420b)φ−log10C(R;eiφ)w=1Unrot.w=1Rot.w=2Rot.instead of genuine signatures of topological order.

C. Kitaev’s Honeycomb Model

10

The honeycomb model36 is a frustrated spin model on

the honeycomb lattice with Hamiltonian

H = −JX

XiXj − JY

YiYj − JZ

i,j∈X links

i,j∈Y links

i,j∈Z links

ZiZj , (23)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

where the X, Y , and Z links refer to the three orienta-
tions of edges on the lattice. For 0 < JX + JY < JZ, this
model supports a phase with the same order as the Z2
quantum double model.36 Writing a pair of anticommut-
ing logical operators for this phase is a nontrivial task
however, since they cannot both be symmetries of the
Hamiltonian and will hence not have completely local-
ized support. We can instead attempt to describe them
with ribbons having some width w.

In Fig. 8, we investigate ribbon operators for the hon-
eycomb model. As before, we observe the characteristic
dip at η = −1 signalling a topologically ordered phase
(Fig. 8a). We also observe the eﬀect of increasing the
allowed ribbon width in Fig. 8a. As expected the cost
goes down as the width increases, although this is not a
smooth decrease. We suggest that this is due to the na-
ture of the widening. Each time the width is increased by
three, an additional plaquette lies completely within the
support of R. These plaquettes commute with the Hamil-
tonian, and so correspond to conserved quantities.
In
the perturbative regime, these plaquettes become those
in the toric code model, which are associated with the
location of anyonic charge.

Finally, we examine the eﬀect of

We also investigate how restricting the bond dimen-
sions aﬀects the cost. In Fig. 8b, we use a ﬁxed width
(3) and a ﬁxed strength of JX = JY = JZ/10. At this
point, we see that the cost rapidly saturates to a min-
imum for a small bond dimension of 4-5. This justiﬁes
the relatively small bond dimensions used in this work.
increasing the
strength of J = JX = JY in Fig. 8c. When JX = JY =
JZ/2, the model undergoes a transition from a phase
supporting Z2 topological order to a gapless phase. The
latter supports Ising anyons if a time reversal symme-
try breaking term is added.36 Although we do not see a
strong signal, such as a discontinuity, at this point, we
see that the dip associated with η = −1 becomes very
shallow. We expect the width of the required ribbons to
be comparable to the correlation length, which we expect
to increase as we move out of the perturbative regime.
Thus the width 3 ribbon used here is expected to be in-
adequate for large JX even within the phase. It remains
to be seen whether ribbon operators can be used to iden-
tify phase transitions, possibly using a scaling analysis of
ribbon width and bond dimension.

FIG. 8. Cost of ribbons in the Honeycomb model. Strong
indications of the Z2 topological order known to be present
in this phase are visible. As expected, the cost decreases as
the allowed width or bond dimension is increased, however
the cost rapidly saturates with increasing bond dimension.
a) Cost for a bond dimension 5 ribbon on the honeycomb
model of Eq. (23) with JX = JY = JZ /10 using η = eiφ. A
second ribbon can be obtained analytically, and was ﬁxed as
a product of Zs along the X and Y links of the lattice. The
dip at φ = π is characteristic of Z2 order, and indicates the
topological nature of this phase.
b) Cost for a width 2 ribbon at η = −1 on the Honeycomb
model with JX = JY = JZ /10 as a function of bond dimen-
sion. The cost rapidly saturates to a minimum, justifying our
assumption that only small bond dimension is required.
c) As we increase the strength of J = JX = JY , we eventu-
ally cross a phase transition to a gapless phase at J = JZ /2
(indicated by ×). Approaching this point, the signal of Z2
topological order essentially vanishes. Here the strength of J
is increased in steps of 1/30 from J = 0 (◦) to J = 1 (+).
Note that the line marked by (cid:63) corresponds to plots a, b and
a bond dimension of 4 is used for a width 3 ribbon.

0π/2π3π/22π420a)φ−log10C(R;eiφ)w=1w=2w=3w=4···81234567891012345b)bonddimensionC(R;eiπ)×102π/4π/23π/4π5π/43π/27π/44321c)φ−log10C(R;eiπ)J=0J=JZ10J=JZ2J=JZVI. RIBBONS AS LOGICAL OPERATORS

One of the motivations for the ribbon operator meth-
ods is an application to quantum error correcting codes.
In this section we show how nontrivial ribbon operators
with suﬃciently low cost can be used to certify the exis-
tence of an approximate topological quantum error cor-
recting code in the ground space of the model. The rib-
bon operators function as approximate logical operators
for these approximate codes. For gapped phases, this
will also provide a natural justiﬁcation for the method,
although to apply this justiﬁcation to the numerical re-
sults of Sec. V would require similar proofs with weaker
assumptions than we are currently able to make here.

(cid:13)(cid:13)[R, L]η

Let H be a Hamiltonian with gap ∆ and suppose that
for some  > 0, δ > 0 and η, there exist ribbon operators
L and R such that (cid:107)[H, R](cid:107)op ≤ , (cid:107)[H, L](cid:107)op ≤ , and

(cid:13)(cid:13)op ≤ δ. Here (cid:107)R(cid:107)op = (cid:107)L(cid:107)op = 1, we restrict to

hermitian ribbons, and we let (cid:107)·(cid:107)op denote the operator
norm. Let |g(cid:105) be some ground state of H with energy
E0. Then the expected energy of |h(cid:105) = R|g(cid:105) is

(cid:104)g|R†HR|g(cid:105) = (cid:104)g|R†RH|g(cid:105) + (cid:104)g|R† [H, R]|g(cid:105)

≤ E0 + .

(24)

Thus, |h(cid:105) is a low energy state, and we can interpret R as
a generator for a unitary approximate logical operator.
It is important to check that R is not mapping out of
the ground space, so we need to ensure that there is a
large overlap. Let Π denote the ground space projector
for H. By assumption the model has a spectral gap ∆,
so we ﬁnd that

E0 +  ≥ (cid:104)h|H|h(cid:105)

≥ E0(cid:104)h|Π|h(cid:105) + (E0 + ∆)(cid:104)h|1 − Π|h(cid:105) .

(25)

Rearranging this, and noting that E0 can always be set
to 0, we obtain

(cid:104)h|Π|h(cid:105)
(cid:104)h|h(cid:105) ≥ 1 −



(cid:104)h|h(cid:105)∆

.

(26)

Thus, the action of the ribbon operators approximately
preserves the ground space as long as they approxi-
mately preserve the norm of the individual ground states
((cid:104)h|h(cid:105) ≈ 1). If this condition does not hold, R is annihi-
lating the ground space.
Given an almost commuting pair of hermitian opera-
tors R and H, we can perturb to an exactly commut-
ing hermitian pair ˜R and ˜H such that the following

holds:44,45 (cid:13)(cid:13)R − ˜R(cid:13)(cid:13)op ≤ γ() and (cid:13)(cid:13)H − ˜H(cid:13)(cid:13)op ≤ γ(),

where γ() can be taken to be at most 1/30. It is conve-
nient to work with ˜H and ˜R since they can be simulta-
neously exactly diagonalized. We need to check that the
assumed twisted commutation relation between R and L

is approximately maintained when we consider ˜R and L.

δ ≥ (cid:107)RL − ηLR(cid:107)op

=(cid:13)(cid:13)(R − ˜R + ˜R)L − ηL(R − ˜R + ˜R)(cid:13)(cid:13)op
(cid:13)(cid:13) ˜RL − ηL ˜R(cid:13)(cid:13)op−
(cid:13)(cid:13)(R − ˜R)L − ηL(R − ˜R)(cid:13)(cid:13)op. (27)
(cid:13)(cid:13)op ≤ δ + (1 + |η|)γ,
(cid:13)(cid:13) ˜RL − ηL ˜R

Rearranging and using standard inequalities, we ﬁnd

11

(28)

≥

and so the twisted commutator is approximately pre-
served. The same argument shows that L approximately
commutes with ˜H and thus approximately preserves its
ground space.

We now check that the action of L on eigenstates of ˜R
maps to a nearly orthogonal state and can therefore be
used to manipulate information in the code space. Since
˜H and ˜R exactly commute, we can ﬁnd a joint eigenstate
|˜g(cid:105) such that ˜R|˜g(cid:105) = ˜g|˜g(cid:105) and ˜H|˜g(cid:105) = E0|˜g(cid:105), then

and therefore

δ ≥ |(cid:104)˜g|RL − ηLR|˜g(cid:105)| ,

|(cid:104)˜g|L|˜g(cid:105)| ≤

δ

|˜g||1 − η|

.

(29)

(30)

We have already assumed that R maps a ground state to
an approximately normalized state, so |˜g| ≈ 1. Therefore,
the action of L maps |˜g(cid:105) to an approximately orthogonal
state.
Thus, even approximate ribbon operators preserve the
ground space (or annihilate it). Together, these results
provide a certiﬁcate of topological order, at least when
the strong assumptions of the derivation are met.
In
addition to providing such a certiﬁcate, this also shows
that the method of ribbon operators can be used to ob-
tain approximate logical operators even if the topological
phase is already known. The ribbons can be used to en-
act logical operations on encoded qudits even when the
underlying model is not an exact topological quantum er-
ror correcting code, such as in the case of the honeycomb
model.

VII. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

We have introduced the method of ribbon operators
for detecting topological order. By identifying features
expected in topologically ordered spin models, we have
deﬁned a cost function which quantiﬁes the extent to
which operators on the lattice realize these features.

Using a variational minimization algorithm on this cost
function over the space of matrix product operators, we
have demonstrated that this method can distinguish non-
trivial topological order from non-topological phases in
various models, both integrable and nonintegrable. We
have also shown how, with additional assumptions, rib-
bon operators can be used as approximate logical opera-
tors in topological quantum error correcting codes, which

provides a speciﬁc sense in which they can certify the
presence of topological order.

The most obvious open question is to extend these
methods to other models,
including those with non-
abelian topological order. These nonabelian models are
particularly interesting from a quantum information per-
spective as they can be utilized for universal quantum
computation.5,6 Another open question is whether this
method can be extended to detect symmetry-protected
or symmetry-enriched topological order, but this would
seem to require new ideas.

Even without generalizing the method to deal with
nonabelian models, there are several natural ways in
which our approach can be improved and extended. One
could proceed by either changing the cost function, the
variational class, or the optimization method. We begin
by discussing a natural restriction on the allowed MPOs.
As shown in Sec. V A, some topologically trivial models
support zero-cost ribbon operators when the variational
class is all MPOs of a given bond dimension. These op-
erators corresponded to products of projectors onto local
ground states. Although such operators have low cost,
they are not good signals of topological order, since the
η for which [R, L]η = 0 is not unique because R and L
mutually annihilate. This behavior could be removed by
insisting that the ribbon operators be unitary. In addi-
tion to removing these false signals, a unitary constraint
would ensure that ribbon operators properly preserve the
norm of states on which they act. As discussed in Sec. VI,
this property is important if the ribbons are to be inter-
preted as approximate logical operators for a quantum
error correcting code.

There are various alterations which can be made to
the cost function deﬁned in Sec. II B. Recall that our
cost function used the η-commutator to incorporate the
topological data. This is associated with the R matrix of
the anyon model. A natural replacement for, or addition
to, this term would be a term involving the ˜S matrix. It
is an open question if the current method or any of these
suggested generalizations can be used to obtain the com-
plete S and R matrices of a model. Recall from Sec. II
that in the abelian case, there is a column permutation
of S which cannot be ﬁxed. This could be addressed
by ensuring all ribbons lie on comparable supports, for
example circles or L shaped regions.

As discussed in Sec. II, insisting that a ribbon R com-
mute with the Hamiltonian on all eigenspaces (e.g. us-
ing the Frobenius norm (cid:107)[R, H](cid:107)) is probably too strong
to identify the topological order present in all models.
One usually discusses topological order only with re-

12

spect to the low-energy sector of the model. We propose
that rather than taking the norm of the commutator,
a variational low-energy state, for example in PEPS21
or MERA46 form, could be used to supplement the algo-
rithm. Rather than evaluating norms, one could evaluate
expectation values on these low energy states. This by-
passes problems associated with ﬁnding ground states of
2D Hamiltonians, since the state need only be low energy
and supported on a strip only just wider than the ribbon
itself. Access to a state may be required for the exten-
sion to nonabelian models, where the excited spectrum is
expected to be more exotic than in the abelian case and
reﬂect the structure of the fusion space of the underlying
anyon model.

It would be interesting to apply the method to models
where the topological order is still debated, for example
the Heisenberg model on the Kagome lattice. When our
cost function is encoded into an MPO for minimization
using DMRG, it has a large bond dimensions since it is
quadratic in the Hamiltonian of the model. This makes
it computationally expensive to minimize. To approach
these more complex models, it may be necessary to make
use of properties of this MPO, such as sparsity, to re-
duce this cost. Alternatively, one could modify the cost
function to reduce the bond dimension, or use another
method to minimize it.

The assumptions used in Sec. VI are stronger than the
constraints imposed in our numerical work. Understand-
ing how to weaken these assumptions would provide ad-
ditional justiﬁcation for this method, and may provide
insight into possible additional constraints which a rib-
bon operator should obey to ensure it is truly certifying
topological order.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Matthias Bal, Parsa Bonderson, Christo-
pher Chubb, Andrew Doherty, Christopher Granade,
Jeongwan Haah, Jutho Haegeman, Robert Pfeifer, Sam
Roberts, Norbert Schuch, Tom Stace, Frank Verstraete
and Dominic Williamson for useful and enlightening
discussions. We acknowledge support from the Aus-
tralian Research Council via the Centre of Excellence
in Engineered Quantum Systems (EQuS), project num-
ber CE110001013.
STF also acknowledges support
from an Australian Research Council Future Fellowship
FT130101744. This work was initiated while DP was on
sabbatical leave at The University of Sydney, he acknowl-
edges their hospitality and their International Research
Collaboration Award for partial support.

1 Xiao-Gang Wen, “Topological Order: From Long-Range
Entangled Quantum Matter to a Uniﬁed Origin of Light
and Electrons,” ISRN Condensed Matter Physics 2013,
198710 (2013), arXiv:1210.1281.

2 Xie Chen, Zheng-Cheng Gu, Zheng-Xin Liu, and Xiao-
Gang Wen, “Symmetry protected topological orders and
the group cohomology of their symmetry group,” Physical
Review B 87, 155114 (2013), arXiv:1106.4772.

3 Maissam Barkeshli, Parsa Bonderson, Meng Cheng, and
Zhenghan Wang, “Symmetry, Defects, and Gauging of
Topological Phases,” arXiv:1410.4540 (2014).

4 Phillip W. Anderson, “The Resonating Valence Bond State
in La2CuO4 and Superconductivity,” Science 235, 1196–
1198 (1987).

5 A. Yu Kitaev, “Fault-tolerant quantum computation by
anyons,” Annals of Physics 303, 2–30 (2003), arXiv:quant-
ph/9707021.

6 Chetan Nayak, Steven H. Simon, Ady Stern, Michael
Freedman, and Sankar Das Sarma, “Non-abelian anyons
and topological quantum computation,” Reviews of Mod-
ern Physics 80, 1083 (2008), arXiv:0707.1889.

7 X. G. Wen and Q. Niu, “Ground-state degeneracy of the
fractional quantum Hall states in the presence of a random
potential and on high-genus Riemann surfaces,” Physical
Review B 41, 9377–9396 (1990).

8 Eric Dennis, Alexei Kitaev, Andrew Landahl, and John
Preskill, “Topological quantum memory,” Journal of Math-
ematical Physics 43, 4452 (2002), arXiv:0110143.

9 Benjamin J. Brown, Daniel Loss, Jiannis K. Pachos,
Chris N. Self, and James R Wootton, “Quantum mem-
ories at ﬁnite temperature,” arXiv:1411.6643 (2014).

10 Barbara M. Terhal, “Quantum error correction for quan-
tum memories,” Reviews of Modern Physics 87, 307
(2015), arXiv:1302.3428.

11 Courtney G. Brell, Simon Burton, Guillaume Dauphi-
nais, Steven T. Flammia, and David Poulin, “Thermal-
ization, Error Correction, and Memory Lifetime for Ising
Anyon Systems,” Physical Review X 4, 031058 (2014),
arXiv:1311.0019.

12 Michael Levin and Xiao-Gang Wen, “Detecting Topologi-
cal Order in a Ground State Wave Function,” Physical Re-
view Letters 96, 110405 (2006), arXiv:cond-mat/0510613.
13 Alexei Kitaev and John Preskill, “Topological Entan-
glement Entropy,” Physical Review Letters 96, 110404
(2006), arXiv:hep-th/0510092 [hep-th].

14 Steven T. Flammia, Alioscia Hamma, Taylor L. Hughes,
and Xiao-Gang Wen, “Topological entanglement R´enyi en-
tropy and reduced density matrix structure,” Physical Re-
view Letters 103, 261601 (2009), arXiv:0909.3305.

15 Sergei V. Isakov, Matthew B. Hastings,

and Roger G.
Melko, “Topological entanglement entropy of a Bose-
Hubbard spin liquid,” Nature Physics 7, 772–775 (2011),
arXiv:1102.1721.

16 Yi Zhang, Tarun Grover, Ari Turner, Masaki Oshikawa,
and Ashvin Vishwanath, “Quasiparticle statistics and
braiding from ground-state entanglement,” Physical Re-
view B 85, 235151 (2012), arXiv:1111.2342.

17 Hong-Chen Jiang, Zhenghan Wang,

and Leon Balents,
“Identifying topological order by entanglement entropy,”
Nature Physics 8, 902–905 (2012), arXiv:1205.4289.

18 Hui Li and F. D. M. Haldane, “Entanglement Spectrum as
a Generalization of Entanglement Entropy: Identiﬁcation
of Topological Order in Non-Abelian Fractional Quantum
Hall Eﬀect States,” Physical Review Letters 101, 010504
(2008), arXiv:0805.0332.

19 Simon Trebst, Philipp Werner, Matthias Troyer, Kirill Sht-
engel, and Chetan Nayak, “Breakdown of a Topological
Phase: Quantum Phase Transition in a Loop Gas Model
with Tension,” Physical Review Letters 98, 070602 (2007),
arXiv:cond-mat/0609048.

20 L. Cincio and G. Vidal, “Characterizing topological
order by studying the ground states on an inﬁnite

13

cylinder,” Physical Review Letters 110, 067208 (2013),
arXiv:1208.2623.

21 Norbert Schuch, Ignacio Cirac, and David P´erez-Garc´ıa,
“PEPS as ground states: Degeneracy and topology,” An-
nals of Physics 325, 2153–2192 (2010), arXiv:1001.3807.

22 Mehmet Burak S¸ahino˘glu, Dominic Williamson, Nick Bult-
inck, Michael Mari¨en, Jutho Haegeman, Norbert Schuch,
and Frank Verstraete, “Characterizing Topological Order
with Matrix Product Operators,” arXiv:1409.2150 (2014).
23 Nick Bultinck, Michael Mari¨en, Dominic Williamson,
Mehmet Burak S¸ahino˘glu, Jutho Haegeman, and Frank
Verstraete, “Anyons and matrix product operator alge-
bras,” arXiv:1511.08090 (2015).

24 Fangzhou Liu and Xiao-Gang Wen, “Environment tensor
as order parameter for symmetry breaking and (symmetry-
protected) topological orders,” (2015), arXiv:1504.08365.
25 G. Evenbly and G. Vidal, “Frustrated antiferromagnets
with entanglement renormalization: Ground state of the
spin-1/2 heisenberg model on a kagome lattice,” Physical
Review Letters 104, 187203 (2010), arXiv:0904.3383.

26 S. Yan, D. A. Huse, and S. R. White, “Spin-Liquid Ground
State of the S = 1/2 Kagome Heisenberg Antiferromag-
net,” Science 332, 1173–1176 (2011), arXiv:1011.6114.

27 Ulrich Schollw¨ock, “The density-matrix renormalization
group in the age of matrix product states,” Annals of
Physics 326, 96–192 (2011), arXiv:1008.3477.

28 Liujun Zou, Jeongwan Haah, and Todari Senthil, In prepa-

ration.

29 Anushya Chandran, Vedika Khemani, and S.L. Sondhi,
“How Universal Is the Entanglement Spectrum?” Physical
Review Letters 113, 060501 (2014), arXiv:1311.2946.

30 Michael Levin and Xiao-Gang Wen, “String-net condensa-
tion:A physical mechanism for topological phases,” Physi-
cal Review B 71, 045110 (2005), arXiv:cond-mat/0404617.
31 Zohar Nussinov and Gerardo Ortiz, “Symmetry and Topo-
logical Order,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 106, 16944 (2009), arXiv:cond-mat/0605316.

32 Zohar Nussinov and Gerardo Ortiz, “A symmetry principle
for topological quantum order,” Annals of Physics 324, 977
(2009), arXiv:cond-mat/0702377.

33 J. Ignacio Cirac, Didier Poilblanc, Norbert Schuch, and
Frank Verstraete, “Entanglement spectrum and boundary
theories with projected entangled-pair states,” Physical
Review B 83, 245134 (2011), arXiv:1103.3427.

34 Michael Freedman, Chetan Nayak, and Kirill Shtengel,
“Lieb-Schultz-Mattis theorem for quasi-topological sys-
tems,” Physical Review B 78, 174411 (2008), arXiv:cond-
mat/0608508.

35 Jeongwan Haah, “Local stabilizer codes in three dimen-
sions without string logical operators,” Physical Review A
83, 042330 (2011), arXiv:1101.1962.

36 Alexei Kitaev, “Anyons in an exactly solved model and
beyond,” Annals of Physics 321, 2–111 (2006), arXiv:cond-
mat/0506438.

37 Jeongwan Haah and John Preskill, “Logical-operator
tradeoﬀ for local quantum codes,” Physical Review A 86,
032308 (2012), arXiv:1011.3529.

38 Olivier Landon-Cardinal and David Poulin, “Local Topo-
logical Order Inhibits Thermal Stability in 2D,” Physical
Review Letters 110, 090502 (2013), arXiv:1209.5750.

39 M. B. Hastings and Xiao-Gang Wen, “Quasiadiabatic con-
tinuation of quantum states: The stability of topologi-
cal ground-state degeneracy and emergent gauge invari-
ance,” Physical Review B 72, 045141 (2005), arXiv:cond-

mat/0503554.

40 Jeongwan Haah, “An invariant of topologically ordered
states under local unitary transformations,” Communi-
cations in Mathematical Physics 342, 771–801 (2016),
arXiv:1407.2926.

41 B. Pirvu, V. Murg, J. I. Cirac, and F. Verstraete, “Matrix
product operator representations,” New Journal of Physics
12, 025012 (2010), arXiv:0804.3976.

42 Julien Dorier, Federico Becca, and Fr´ed´eric Mila, “Quan-
tum compass model on the square lattice,” Physical Re-
view B 72, 024448 (2005), arXiv:0501708.

14

43 Dave Bacon, “Operator quantum error-correcting subsys-
tems for self-correcting quantum memories,” Physical Re-
view A 73, 012340 (2006), arXiv:quant-ph/0506023.

44 Huaxin Lin, “Almost commuting selfadjoint matrices and
applications,” in Operator algebras and their applications,
Fields Institute Communications, Vol. 13 (American Math-
ematical Society, 1997) pp. 193–233.

45 M. B. Hastings, “Making Almost Commuting Matri-
ces Commute,” Communications in Mathematical Physics
291, 321–345 (2009), arXiv:0808.2474.

46 G. Vidal, “Class of Quantum Many-Body States That Can
Be Eﬃciently Simulated,” Physical Review Letters 101,
110501 (2008), arXiv:quant-ph/0610099.

Appendix A: Z2 Quantum Double

The cost function for a pair of width 1 ribbon operators in the Z2 quantum double model deﬁned in Eq. (18) (with
(J, h, λ) = (1, 0, 0)) can easily be written. Deﬁne the lattice as in Fig. 1, and let the strings R and L have supports on
the horizontal and vertical strips respectively. Beginning with ribbon R, we see that there are no Hamiltonian terms
contained completely within the support. Thus the ﬁrst term in the cost vanishes. The same happens for ribbon L.
The next term concerns those Hamiltonian terms which cross the boundary. There are two classes, those with
support on a single spin inside R and those supported on a pair of spins in R. Each dark plaquette ( ) contributes
to a term in the ﬁrst class, with each spin j in R being touched by a pair of such plaquettes. Therefore at this stage
we have an initial cost function C0 for the commutator part given by

where N is the number of spins on which R is supported. Each light plaquette ( ) contributes a two-spin term, so
the costs become

2

N(cid:88)

j=1

 ,

(cid:107)[R, Xj](cid:107)2
N(cid:88)

C0(R) =

2

N(cid:88)

j=1

C0(R) =

(cid:107)[R, Xj](cid:107)2 +

(cid:107)[R, ZjZj+1](cid:107)2

j=1

 .

(A1)

(A2)

(A3)

For convenience, assume two-site translationally invariant product operators for both R = ··· abab··· and L =

··· cdcd··· . This cost function becomes

N
2 (cid:107)[ab, ZZ](cid:107)2 +
since N/2 of the sites of R support operator a and N/2 sites support operator b.

N
2 (cid:107)[a, X](cid:107)2 + 2

N
2 (cid:107)[b, X](cid:107)2 +

C0(R) =2

N
2 (cid:107)[ba, ZZ](cid:107)2 ,

There are no more terms contributed by the commutator with the Hamiltonian. It remains to include the twisted
commutator terms. The ribbon L can intersect R with either a c site or a d site. Recall that we require that all
translations of L are considered, so we obtain

,

(A4)

(cid:88)

j

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[rj, c]η
(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[b, c]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2
(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

+

+

j

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[rj, d]η
(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2
(cid:88)
(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[a, d]η
(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

N
2

C1(R; η) =

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[a, c]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

+

N
2

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[b, d]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

+

N
2

C1(R; η) =

N
2

where rj is the operator at site j of ribbon R. Notice that each rj is required to η−commute with both c and d. In
this way, the insensitivity of this term to the particular support of L is ensured. This term gives

Combining these two costs, we obtain the total cost function for ribbon R

C(R; η) =

(C0(R) + C1(R; η))

1
N
=(cid:107)[c, Z](cid:107)2 + (cid:107)[d, Z](cid:107)2 +

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[a, c]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[b, c]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

+

1
2

+

1
2

+

1
2

1
2 (cid:107)[cd, XX](cid:107)2 +

1
2 (cid:107)[dc, XX](cid:107)2

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[a, d]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

+

1
2

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[b, d]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

.

.

(A5)

(A6)

(A7)

The cost for ribbon L can be obtained analogously, giving

C(L; η) =(cid:107)[c, Z](cid:107)2 + (cid:107)[d, Z](cid:107)2 +

1
2 (cid:107)[cd, XX](cid:107)2 +

1
2 (cid:107)[dc, XX](cid:107)2

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[b, c]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

+

1
2

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[a, d]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[b, d]η

+

1
2

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)[a, c]η

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

+

1
2

+

1
2

15

(A8)

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)2

.

Notice that C1(R; η) = C1(L; η). Care should be taken with this term since [· ,· ]η is not symmetric in its arguments.
It is easy to check that, as expected, these cost functions are both zero when we set a = b = X, c = d = Z and
η = −1, corresponding to the known string operators for this model.

