6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

.

V
C
h
t
a
m

[
 
 

1
v
8
8
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

MEROMORPHIC VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED

SOLUTIONS ON COMPLEX SURFACES

ADOLFO GUILLOT

Abstract. We study ordinary diﬀerential equations in the complex domain given by
meromorphic vector ﬁelds on K¨ahler compact complex surfaces. We prove that if such an
equation has a maximal single valued solution with Zariski-dense image (in particular,
if it has an entire one) then, up to a bimeromorphic transformation, either the vector
ﬁeld is holomorphic or it preserves a ﬁbration.

1. Introduction

For algebraic diﬀerential equations in the complex domain, the existence of special
kinds of solutions often imposes very restrictive conditions on the equations themselves.
An instance of this is given by Malmquist’s centennial result [Mal13, Th´eor`eme 1]:

Theorem 1 (Malmquist, 1913). Let R(w, t) be a rational function of w and t with complex
coeﬃcients. Let w(t) be a transcendental meromorphic solution in C to the diﬀerential
equation

w′ = R(w, t).

Then R(t) = A(t)w2 + B(t)w + C(t), with A, B and C rational functions (the equation
is a Riccati one).

Through the years, this theorem has known many proofs, from the early one by Yosida
using Nevalinna theory [Yos33] to the more recent geometric one of Pan and Sebas-
tiani [PS01]. Generalizations of the theorem range from results valid for more general
ﬁrst-order non-autonomous equations (including some by Malmquist himself [Mal20]), to
some valid for higher order non-autonomous equations (although, in general, their con-
clusions are less categorical than that of Malmquist’s original theorem). They go from
fully algebraic to only partially algebraic ones. We refer the reader to [Lai93, Ch. 10]
and [Er¨e82] for a guide through these generalizations.

Our main result is a generalization of Malmquist’s theorem valid for diﬀerential equa-
tions given by meromorphic vector ﬁelds on complex K¨ahler surfaces (which are, in a

The author thanks the ´Ecole Normale Sup´erieure (Paris) for its hospitality during the sabbatical leave
where this work was ﬁnished. He thanks PASPA-DGAPA-UNAM (Mexico), for its support during this
stay. The author was partially funded by PAPIIT-UNAM IN108214 (Mexico).

Keywords: Diﬀerential equation in the complex domain, entire solution, single-valued solution,

Malmquist’s Theorem, Riccati equation.

MSC 2010: 34M05 34M45 37F75.

1

2

ADOLFO GUILLOT

way, autonomous, second-order, algebraic systems). Our result considers not only solu-
tions given by meromorphic functions deﬁned in the whole plane but, more generally,
single-valued ones:

Main Theorem. Let S be a compact K¨ahler surface, X a meromorphic vector ﬁeld on S,
Ω ⊂ C an open subset and Φ : Ω → S a maximal solution of X with Zariski-dense image.
Up to a birational transformation, either

• X is holomorphic; or
• S ﬁbers over a rational or elliptic curve, with rational or elliptic ﬁber, and X

preserves the ﬁbration (the poles of X are contained in ﬁbers).

A solution Φ : Ω → S is maximal if it that has no analytic continuation as a map
from C into S beyond Ω. This notion formalizes that of “single valued solution” and will
be made precise in Deﬁnition 5. From the classiﬁcation of holomorphic vector ﬁelds on
K¨ahler surfaces (see Proposition 18 for a precise statement), it follows that those that
do not preserve a ﬁbration are holomorphic vector ﬁelds on Abelian surfaces (without
Abelian subgroups).
In consequence, in the statement of the Main Theorem, we may
replace the possibility “X is holomorphic” by “X is a holomorphic vector ﬁeld on an
Abelian surface”.

On can interpret the ﬁbered case as the existence a partial separation of variables: there
is one variable that is integrated independently. For example, for the rational ﬁbrations,
we obtain, according to the nature of the vector ﬁeld on the base, Riccati equations over
rational, trigonometric (Clairaut) or elliptic function ﬁelds.

This result generalizes Theorem B of Rebelo and the author in [GR12], that states
that the same conclusion may be obtained under the hypothesis that there is a maximal
solution through every point of S (that vector ﬁeld is semicomplete). A related result is
given by the tandem [Bru04], [BG12]. In the ﬁrst, Brunella studied complete polynomial
vector ﬁelds in C2, giving a complete list of normal forms up to polynomial automor-
phisms, after proving that such a vector ﬁeld must have a ﬁrst integral or preserve a
ﬁbration.
In the second, Bustinduy and Giraldo, taking further Brunella’s approach,
prove that if a polynomial vector ﬁeld in C2 has one entire transcendental solution, it is
actually complete. These results imply that if a polynomial vector ﬁeld has one entire
transcendental solution, it preserves a ﬁbration.

The structure of the surfaces and vector ﬁelds in the Main Theorem imply the existence

of a threshold for the number of maximal solutions that a vector ﬁeld may have:

Corollary 2. Let X be a meromorphic vector ﬁeld in a compact complex K¨ahler surface
having ﬁve diﬀerent Zariski-dense maximal solutions. Then all the solutions are maximal.

(The proof will be given in Section 7.) A vector ﬁeld having exactly four maximal
solutions appears in Example 23. The Main Theorem also implies that, in our context,
the domains where maximal solutions are deﬁned are very special:

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

3

Corollary 3. Let S be a compact K¨ahler surface, X a meromorphic vector ﬁeld on S.
Let Ω ⊂ C and φ : Ω → S a maximal solution. Then Ω = C.

Accordingly, it is not until dimension three that we may witness the existence of natural
boundaries for functions satisfying algebraic diﬀerential equation (and we indeed do, like
in the classical equations of Halphen, Chazy and Ramanujan [Gui07]). These natural
boundaries are inevitably accompanied by rich dynamics:

Corollary 4. Let M be a compact complex algebraic threefold, X a meromorphic vector
ﬁeld on S, φ : Ω → S a maximal solution such of X that Ω 6= C. Then φ(Ω) is Zariski
dense.

(See [Gui07, Thm. A], [MS95] for direct proofs for Halphen’s equations). The last two
corollaries are the direct analogues of Corollaries C and D from [GR12] to the present
setting.

The proof of the Theorem is naturally split into two situations. One of them is when

there is a maximal solution φ : Ω → S that cannot be extended to an entire mapping bφ :
C → S. In this situation we will adapt (and at some points just refer to) the techniques of
Rebelo and the author’s article [GR12]. The idea is to show that such a maximal solution
accumulates the locus of poles of X in a complicated way, and that this imposes severe
restrictions on the nature of this locus. In the K¨ahler setting, these restrictions imply
the existence of the ﬁbration. In the other situation, where all the maximal solutions are

(or can be extended to) entire maps bφ : C → S, we will use McQuillan’s classiﬁcation

of algebraic foliations on surfaces admitting an entire invariant curve (see Theorem 17)
to gain information about the structure of the foliation. This information is then used
together with the existence of the maximal solutions to conclude. Despite the similarity
in the conclusions of McQuillan’s Theorem and of our main one, the conclusion does
not follow in a straightforward way (see Example 24). McQuillan’s classiﬁcation is an
important ingredient in Brunella’s Theorem [Bru04] on the classiﬁcation of complete
polynomial vector ﬁelds in C2; it will play an analogue role in this work.

The reader is supposed to be familiar with general (mainly local) facts about folia-
tions on surfaces, like those in [Bru00, Chapter 1]. For deﬁnitions related to the single-
valuedness of solutions of complex diﬀerential equations, we refer the reader to [GR12,
Section 2] and the following section.

2. Preliminaries

2.1. Maximal solutions. Let X be a holomorphic vector ﬁeld on the complex man-
ifold M, let p ∈ M. By Cauchy’s theorem on the existence of solutions of ordinary
diﬀerential equations, for every p ∈ M there exists an open set U ⊂ C, 0 ∈ U, and a
holomorphic map φ : (U, 0) → (M, p) that is a solution of X in the sense that for ev-
ery t ∈ U, Dφ|p(∂/∂t) = X|φ(t). By considering the maximal domain where the analytic
continuation of φ is deﬁned (as a map from C into M) we obtain a function deﬁned in
some domain that spreads over C but that is not, in general, a subset of C. For example,

4

ADOLFO GUILLOT

the vector ﬁeld ez∂/∂z in C has the multivalued solution t 7→ − log(1 − t), deﬁned in the
Riemann surface of the logarithm. The following formalizes the notion of “single-valued
solution”:

Deﬁnition 5. Let X be a holomorphic vector ﬁeld in the complex manifold M. Let Ω ⊂ C.
A solution φ : Ω → M of X is said to be maximal
if for every sequence {ti} ⊂ Ω,
converging in C but not in Ω, the sequence {φ(ti)} escapes from every compact subset
of M. If X is a meromorphic vector ﬁeld in the complex manifold M, a maximal solution
of X is a maximal solution of the restriction to the open subset where it is holomorphic.

In other words, a solution is maximal if it has no analytic continuation beyond the
domain where it is deﬁned. If φ : C → M is a solution of X, it is automatically maximal.
For a holomorphic vector ﬁeld X on a curve C, the time form of X is the one-form ω
such that ω(X) = 1. An orbit L of a holomorphic vector ﬁeld admits a maximal solution
if every curve γ : [0, 1] → L for which Rγ ω = 0 is closed [Reb96, Prop. 2.7]. If all the

solutions are maximal the vector ﬁeld is said to be semicomplete (following Rebelo [Reb96,
Def. 2.3]) or univalent (following Palais [Pal57, Def. VI, p. 62]).

Lemma 6. If the meromorphic vector ﬁeld X in the curve C admits a maximal solu-
tion, X has no poles (is in fact holomorphic) and has at most two zeros (counted with
multiplicity).

Proof. The solutions of strictly meromorphic vector ﬁelds on curves cannot be single-
valued [GR12, Lemma 2]. Up to a change of coordinates, the zeros of a holomorphic vector
ﬁeld admitting maximal solutions are of the form z2∂/∂z or λz∂/∂z [Reb96, Section 3].
In the ﬁrst case, where the solution is given by t 7→ −1/t, a whole neighborhood of the
point at inﬁnity belongs to the domain of deﬁnition of the solution. In the second case,
the solution is given by t 7→ exp(λt) and a set of the form {t|ℜ(λt) < N} belongs to
this domain. If the vector ﬁeld admits a maximal solution, these sets cannot overlap. In
consequence, there can be at most two zeros counted with multiplicity (furthermore, if
there are two simple ones, the corresponding eigenvalues should have opposite signs). (cid:3)

Remark 7. The same proof shows that if a vector ﬁeld on a curve has 2n zeros (counted
with multiplicity), its solutions have at least n determinations. A vector ﬁeld having a
pole of order n − 1 has a local solutions with n determinations. However, unlike the case
of zeros, this is not cumulative: if Σ is a hyperelliptic curve of genus g and π : Σ → P1
is the quotient by the hyperelliptic involution, the pullback by π of a generic vector ﬁeld
with a double zero on P1 to Σ is a meromorphic vector ﬁeld having two double zeros
and 2(g + 1) simple poles, but whose solutions have only two determinations.

Proposition 8. If a meromorphic vector ﬁeld on a curve has an essential singularity, its
solutions have inﬁnitely many determinations.

Proof. Consider the meromorphic vector ﬁeld f (z)∂/∂z, deﬁned in a punctured neigh-
borhood U ∗ of 0 in C. Suppose its solutions have ﬁnitely many determinations and, in

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

5

particular, that no zeros of f accumulate to 0. The time form ω = 1/f (z)dz is holomor-
phic in U ∗. If the integral of ω around 0 vanishes, consider the function h : U → C given
byR ω. If h has an essential singularity at 0, by Picard’s Great Theorem, it attains most
values inﬁnitely many times: the solutions of f (given by the inverse of h) have inﬁnitely
many determinations. We must suppose that h (and thus f ) is meromorphic at 0. If the
integral of ω around 0 is 2iπ, let h : U → C, h(z) = exp(R z ω). Again, if h has an essen-
tial singularity at 0, by Picard’s Great Theorem, it attains most values inﬁnitely many
times and the solutions of f , given by t 7→ h−1(et), have inﬁnitely many determinations.
Thus, h is meromorphic and, since h′/h = 1/f , f is meromorphic at 0.

(cid:3)

In particular, a holomorphic vector ﬁeld on C whose solutions have ﬁnitely many

determinations extends as a rational vector ﬁeld to P1.

2.2. Aﬃne structures on curves. An aﬃne structure on a complex curve C is an atlas
for its complex structure taking values in C whose changes of coordinates lie in the aﬃne

group Aﬀ(C) = {z 7→ az + b}. With the aﬃne structure come a developing map D : eC →
C and a monodromy mon : π1(C) → Aﬀ(C) satisfying D(α · p) = mon(α)(D(p)).
If the changes of coordinates of an aﬃne structure lie within the group of transla-
tions {z 7→ z + b}, the aﬃne structure is said to be a translation structure. On a complex
curve, translation structures are in correspondence to holomorphic and nowhere vanish-
ing holomorphic vector ﬁelds: the charts of a translation structure are given by the local
integrals of the time form of the corresponding vector ﬁeld.

An aﬃne structure on a curve C is said to be uniformizable if C is aﬃnely equivalent
to the quotient of an open subset of C by a group of aﬃne transformations. In a curve
endowed with a vector ﬁeld, the induced aﬃne structure is uniformizable if and only if
the vector ﬁeld admits a maximal solution.

Given two aﬃne structures in a disk ∆ with corresponding coordinate charts gi : ∆ →

C, i = 1, 2, for the map h = g2 ◦ g−1
(1)

1 , the diﬀerential

h′′(z)
h′(z)

dz

depends only on the aﬃne structures (and not on the coordinate charts). It vanishes if
and only if g1 and g2 deﬁne the same aﬃne structure. It measures the diﬀerence of the
aﬃne structures. Reciprocally, given a holomorphic form η and an aﬃne structure with
on ∆, there is another aﬃne structure such that the diﬀerence with the original one is η.
It will be important to understand the uniformizable aﬃne structures deﬁned in the
complement of some points (aﬃne structures with singularities). Given an aﬃne structure
in ∆∗ = ∆ \ {0} and an aﬃne structure on ∆, their diﬀerence is a form η in ∆∗ having
a singularity at 0 if the aﬃne structure does not extend to ∆. The ramiﬁcation index of
the singular aﬃne structure is

ind(∆, 0) =

1

Res(η, 0) + 1

.

6

ADOLFO GUILLOT

For the aﬃne structure on ∆ whose charts are branches of n√z, n ∈ Z∗, the ramiﬁcation
index is n; for the one having log(z), it is ∞. In both cases the diﬀerence with a regular
aﬃne structure on ∆ has a simple pole. All these local aﬃne structures with singularities
are uniformizable and are in fact the only ones. Moreover, they are characterized by
the invariants of the one-form: an aﬃne structure on ∆∗ with a singularity at 0 is uni-
formizable if and only if for the one-form η measuring its diﬀerence with a regular aﬃne
structure on ∆, η has a simple pole at 0 with residue of the form 1/n− 1, n ∈ Z∗ ∪ {∞}.
This local result globalizes on compact curves as follows:

Proposition 9. The uniformizable aﬃne structures (with singularities) on compact curves
are:

• Rational orbifolds. The rational curve C∪{∞} (with the tautological aﬃne struc-
ture of C) and the quotients of the latter by the cyclic groups of linear transfor-
mations of order n ﬁxing 0 and ∞, realized by z 7→ zn. The ramiﬁcation indices
are n at 0 and −n at ∞.
• Parabolic: The cylinder, C/2iπZ compactiﬁed by exp : C → P1, with two points of
ramiﬁcation index ∞ at 0 and ∞. The orbifold (2, 2,∞), quotient of the latter by
the involution z 7→ −z, compactiﬁed by cos(z), having one point with ramiﬁcation
index 0 and two with ramiﬁcation index 2.
• Elliptic. The curves and orbifolds arising as compact quotients of C under the
action of (crystallographic) subgroups of the aﬃne group. These contain a lattice
as a normal subgroup of ﬁnite index and are thus quotients of elliptic curves.
As curves, they are either elliptic without singularities, or rational curves with

singularities of indices pi, such thatP(1−1/pi) = 2. The possibilities are (2, 3, 6),
• Hyperbolic, tori of the form C∗/G, G ⊂ C∗ a discrete group containing hyperbolic

(2, 4, 4), (3, 3, 3) or (2, 2, 2, 2), the last being a one-parameter family parametrized
by the cross-ratio.

elements (without singularities).

The result is, of course, related to the classiﬁcation of the crystallographic groups of the
plane. We refer to [GR12, Prop. 7] for a proof along the lines of this article (see also [BB55]
for an early appearance of this classiﬁcation among complex diﬀerential equations).

2.3. Foliations and vector ﬁelds on surfaces. We refer to [Bru00, Ch. 1] for a swift
presentation of some general facts about the local theory of foliations and vector ﬁelds in
surfaces, to [Lor06, Section 5.3] for a more detailed one.

A meromorphic vector ﬁeld on a surface induces naturally a holomorphic foliation (with
singularities). In general, the leafs of this foliation are not closed, but some ends of some
leaves may have a particularly mild dynamic behavior. Let L be a leaf of the foliation F .
We will say that an end of L (considering the latter as a curve) is an algebraic isolated
planar end if there exists a holomorphic map γ : ∆ → M (for ∆ = {z;|z| < 1}) such
that, for ∆∗ = ∆ \ {0}, γ(∆∗) ⊂ L, γ(0) /∈ L, and such that γ|∆∗ is a biholomorphism
between ∆∗ and a neighborhood of the corresponding end of L.

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

7

Let X be a meromorphic vector ﬁeld in the complex manifold S. In the open subset
where X is holomorphic and nonzero, the leaves of the induced foliation F are natu-
rally endowed a translation (in particular, aﬃne) structure whose transverse variation is
holomorphic. If C is a component of the locus of zeros or poles of X that is invariant
by F , the leafwise aﬃne structure induced by X in the leaves other than C extends to C
(although the translation structure does not). For example, if X = f (x, y)yq∂/∂x with f
holomorphic and nonzero, on the leaf x = x0, x0 6= 0, the vector ﬁelds X and y−qX
are proportional and induce the same aﬃne structure. The vector ﬁeld y−qX induces a
honest translation structure on the leaf x = 0, whose aﬃne class is well-deﬁned (depends
only on X). In this way, in the complement of the singularities of F and of the curves
of zeros and poles that are not invariant by F , the foliation F admits a leafwise aﬃne
structure. It extends as an aﬃne structure with singularities to the non-singular points
of F lying at the curve of zeros and poles.
Deﬁnition 10. Let X be a meromorphic vector ﬁeld on the complex surface M. The uni-
formizable or univalent locus, denoted by U, is the subset of M\Sing(F ) of leaves carrying
a uniformizable aﬃne structure.

The set U, naturally saturated by F , is closed. Let us sketch a proof of this fact. Lack
of uniformizability of an aﬃne structure in a curve C is equivalent to the existence of a
path γ : [0, 1] → C, γ(0) 6= γ(1) such that the developing map of the aﬃne structure
along γ is not injective. If C is a leaf of the foliation, we can lift the path γ to a path γ ′
in a neighboring leaf C ′ in such a way that the lift extends to a local isomorphism of
the aﬃne structures along neighborhoods of γ and γ ′. But this means that the aﬃne
structure in C ′ is not uniformizable (see also [GR12, Cor. 12]).

Within U, the leafwise geometry conditions the holonomy. This is the content of the
Fundamental Lemma, for the proof of which we refer the reader to [GR12, Section 4.2]:
Lemma 11. Let X be a holomorphic vector ﬁeld on the manifold M. Let U ⊂ M \
Sing(FX) denote the set given by the leaves where the induced aﬃne structure (with
singularities) is uniformizable. Let p ∈ U, let L be the leaf of F passing through p
and suppose that the aﬃne structure at p is non-singular. Let T be a transversal of F
through p, let Σ = T ∩ U. The restricted holonomy representation hol : π1(L, p) →
Homeo(Σ, p) factors through the monodromy representation mon : π1(L, p) → Aﬀ(C).
2.4. Reduced foliations and vector ﬁelds. A foliation F in a surface is said to be
reduced in Seidenberg’s sense if, in the neighborhood every point p, either (i) F is non-
singular at p, (ii) F is tangent to a holomorphic vector ﬁeld whose linear part has two
non-zero eigenvalues whose ratio is not a positive rational or (iii) F is tangent to a vector
ﬁeld having one zero eigenvalue but a non-nilpotent linear part. Seidenberg’s theorem
aﬃrms that every foliation becomes reduced after a locally ﬁnite number of blowups.

A meromorphic vector ﬁeld X in a complex surface inducing the foliation F is said to
be reduced if F is reduced in Seidenberg’s sense and if, at every point p, the curve given
by the union of the curve of zeros and poles of X and the union of separatrices of F

8

ADOLFO GUILLOT

through p (if p is a singularity of F ) or the integral curve of F through p (if F is non-
singular at p), has normal crossings. A meromorphic vector ﬁeld may be transformed, by
a locally ﬁnite number of blowups, to a reduced one.

2.5. Special foliations. Some special foliations adapted to rational or elliptic ﬁbrations
will have a prominent role in our discussion. We refer the reader to [Bru00, Ch. 4] for
details.
2.5.1. Riccati foliations. A foliation F in a compact complex surface M is a Riccati
foliation is there exists a rational ﬁbration Π : M → S that is adapted to F in the sense
that F is transverse to the generic ﬁber of Π. The non-generic ﬁbers {Π−1(pi)} are called
special. There is a monodromy 1 representation ρ : π1(S \ {p1, . . . , pk}) → PSL(2, C).
Some natural transformations for Riccati foliations are given by ﬂips: one may blow
up a point in a ﬁber F0, creating an exceptional divisor D of self-intersection −1 and
making F0 a curve of self-intersection −1, which may then be blown down, making D a
curve of self- intersection 0. In coordinates (z, w) in ∆ × P1 these ﬂips are given by
(2)

(z, w) 7→ (z, zw).

It may be useful to override the condition of a locally trivial ﬁbration in the deﬁnition
of a Riccati foliation, in order to have simpler singularities for F . Up to a birational
transformation, the foliation can be, in the neighborhood of the special ﬁbers, brought,
to of one of the following kinds (see [Bru00, Ch. 4, Prop. 2]):

(3)

Non-singular or transverse: Those given by dw.
Non-degenerate, non parabolic: Given by
λw dz − z dw,

with λ ∈ C\ Q. The monodromy is w 7→ e2iπλw. The ﬂip (2) replaces λ by λ + 1.
Non-degenerate, parabolic: Those given by dz − z dw. The monodromy is w 7→
w + 2iπ.
Dicritical: Those of the form (3) with λ ∈ Q∗ \ N, λ = p/q, (p, q) = 1, q > p > 0.
The foliation has the local ﬁrst integral wq/zp. The monodromy, w 7→ e2iπp/qw, is
periodic with period q. The integer q is also called the multiplicity of the ﬁber.
We may choose to reduce the singularities at the price of complicating the space.
Upon reducing the singularity at (0, 0) we will ﬁnd a chain of rational curves, all
of them invariant by the foliation except one, transverse to the foliation, which
is not one of the two extremal ones. The two invariant chains can be contracted
to produce a ﬁnite quotient singularity each. An alternative description of these
ﬁbers is the following: given a ﬁnite cyclic group acting in the neighborhood of
a transverse ﬁber F preserving the foliation and acting faithfully in the base, the
quotient under this action has two cyclic quotient singularities and a rational curve

1Warning!!! we are using the word monodromy for two diﬀerent concepts. We have the monodromy
representation associated to a developing map of an aﬃne structure and the monodromy representation
of a Riccati (or turbulent) foliation.

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

9

coming from F , transverse to the foliation. The resolution of the two singularities
takes us to the previous description.

Semidegenerate: There are two saddle-node singularities on F whose strong sep-
aratrices are contained in F (in particular, the holonomy of the foliation along F
is tangent to the identity). The weak separatrices may or may not converge.

Nilpotent: There is only one singular point in F , with nilpotent linear part. They
can be seen as quotients of semidegenerate models by an involution exchanging
the two saddle-nodes. Its resolution has three rational divisors: one central divisor
of self-intersection −1 having one saddle-node singularity (with strong separatrix
contained in the divisor) and two saddles where the other two divisors, of self-
intersection −2, intersect (there are no further singularities of F in these).

A Riccati foliation having special ﬁbers as above will be said to be in standard form.

2.5.2. Elliptic ﬁbrations, turbulent foliations. An elliptic ﬁbration on a surface S is a
map Π : S → B onto a curve, with connected ﬁbers, such that the generic ﬁber is an
elliptic curve. Kodaira classiﬁed the ﬁbers of elliptic ﬁbrations that are not elliptic curves
up to a birational transformation. Kodaira’s combinatorial models bear the symbols In
n (n ≥ 0) II∗, III∗, IV∗. They are all divisors of elliptic ﬁber
(n ≥ 0) II, III, IV, I∗
type, eﬀective divisors of the form D = P aiDi such that D · Di = 0 and KS · D = 0.
See [BPVdV84] for details. An elliptic ﬁbration is said to be isotrivial if the ﬁbration is
a holomorphically trivial ﬁbration in the neighborhood of a generic ﬁber. In an isotrivial
ﬁbration the special ﬁbers are restricted to be among Kodaira’s models II, III, IV or II∗,
III∗, IV∗.

A foliation F in a compact complex surface S is a turbulent foliation is there exists an
elliptic ﬁbration Π : S → B that is adapted to F in the sense that F is transverse to the
generic ﬁber of Π. If adapted to a turbulent foliation, an elliptic ﬁbration is necessarily
isotrivial (this limits the special ﬁbers occurring in the ﬁbration: there are no special
ﬁbers of type I∗
n and no ones of type In for n ≥ 1). A turbulent foliation comes with a
monodromy representation ρ : π1(S \ {p1, . . . , pk}) → Aut(F ).
In the neighborhood of a ﬁber, up to a ramiﬁed cover of the base and a bimeromor-
phic transformation, a turbulent foliation is non-singular and adapted to a locally trivial
elliptic ﬁbration. In a turbulent foliation of a locally trivial elliptic ﬁbration, a ﬁber may
be everywhere transverse to the foliation or totally invariant by it. This implies that for
a general turbulent foliation, we have two coarse kinds of special ﬁbers, transverse and
invariant.

We have the following dichotomy:

3. A dichotomy

Proposition 12. Let M be a compact complex manifold, X a meromorphic vector ﬁeld
on M and φ : Ω → M a maximal solution of X deﬁned in a domain Ω ⊂ C. Either:

• Ω = C or φ extends holomorphically to a function φ : C → M; or

10

ADOLFO GUILLOT

• there exists p ∈ φ(Ω), p in the locus of poles of X, such that φ(Ω) is not contained

in a proper analytic subset in a neighborhood of p.

Proof. Let L = φ(Ω). If L does not accumulate the locus of poles of X, there exists a
neighborhood U of this locus that does not intersect L. By the existence theorem for the
solutions of ordinary diﬀerential equations in the complex domain and the compactness
of M \ U, there exists some ǫ > 0 such that any solution of X with initial condition
in M \ U is deﬁned for {|t| < ǫ}. In particular, since φ is maximal and L∩ U = ∅, Ω = C.
Hence, if Ω 6= C, there exists at least one connected component D0 of the locus of
poles of X such that L intersects any neighborhood of D0. Let {ti} ⊂ Ω be a sequence
converging to t∞ ∈ C \ Ω such that {φ(ti)} converges to p ∈ M. The point p belongs
necessarily to the locus of poles of X.
Let V be an analytic subset in a neighborhood U of p containing L∩ U and let V0 ⊂ V
be an irreducible component containing inﬁnitely many of the {φ(ti)}. By Puiseux’s
theorem on the parametrization of analytic sets, there exists a holomorphic parametriza-
tion γ : (∆, 0) → (V0, p).
It compactiﬁes one algebraic isolated planar end of L.
Through γ, X induces a meromorphic vector ﬁeld X0 on ∆∗ (which, by Lemma 6, extends
holomorphically to 0). If X0(0) = 0, in ∆, the solution of X0 takes inﬁnite time to reach 0
(as explained in the proof of Lemma 6). This contradicts the fact that {ti} converges
in C. We must conclude that X0(0) 6= 0. A local parametrization of the solution of X0
through p induces an extension of φ to a neighborhood of t∞ (which, a posteriori, turns
out to be an isolated point of the complement of Ω).

In this way, if φ cannot be extended to a neighborhood of t∞, φ(Ω) is not contained in
(cid:3)

a proper analytic subset of M in a neighborhood of p.

The proof of the Main Theorem will be made separately for each one of the two sit-
uations where Proposition 12 leads. Section 5 will deal with the ﬁrst alternative and
Section 6 with the second one, after some description of the admissible local models in
Section 4.

4. Local models at the limit set

We will now give local models of reduced holomorphic vector ﬁelds in the neighborhood
of points that are accumulation points of U in a non-analytic way. This result is the
analogue of Prop. 17 in [GR12], which concerns semicomplete vector ﬁelds. The local
models that we will obtain here are essentially the same as the ones obtained there,
although our hypothesis are diﬀerent. The proof of the present result will follow a path
not too far from and at times intersecting that of [GR12].

Proposition 13. Let S be a (not necessarily compact) surface, X a reduced meromorphic
vector ﬁeld on S and φ : Ω → S a maximal solution. Let L = φ(Ω) and let p ∈ L. If L
is not algebraic in a neighborhood of p, either

• X is holomorphic and has at most an isolated singularity at p; or

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

11

name

regular

ﬁnite

ramiﬁcation

inﬁnite

ramiﬁcation

saddle node

local model

ord ind

CS

yq ∂
∂x
xpyq(cid:18)mx

∂
∂x − ny
pm − qn = ±1

∂

∂y(cid:19)

xpyq(cid:18)x[q + · · · ]
yq(cid:18)[x + · · · ]

∂
∂x − y[p + · · · ]
∂y(cid:19)
+ yk+1 ∂

∂
∂x

∂

∂y(cid:19)

q

1

0

p

x = 0

x = 0
n −m/n
y = 0
q −m −n/m
p ∞ −q/p
q ∞ −p/q
q ∞
0

y = 0

Table 1. The (semi) local models for Proposition 13 (up to multiplication
by a non-vanishing holomorphic function). In these, p, q ∈ Z, m, n > 0
and k ≥ 0.

• up to multiplication by a non-vanishing holomorphic function, X is locally of one

the forms of Table 1.

We include in Table 1 more information about the local models: the order of the vector
ﬁeld along the curves, the ramiﬁcation index of the aﬃne structure of vector ﬁeld and
the contribution of each singularity to the self-intersection of a curve according to the
Camacho-Sad theorem [CS82].

Let S be a (not necessarily compact) surface, X a meromorphic vector ﬁeld on S

after adding all the algebraic isolated planar ends. By Lemma 6, the restriction of X

and φ : Ω → S a maximal solution, L = φ(Ω). Let bL be the curve obtained from L
to L extends holomorphically to bL and has at most two zeros (counted with multiplicity).
Let L ⊂ bL be the curve where the induced vector ﬁeld is non-vanishing, L ⊂ L ⊂ bL. Upon
adding some isolated points to Ω we can extend φ to obtain a parametrization φ : Ω → L.
(There is no contradiction with the maximal character of φ: the maximal solution φ may
not be maximal as a function from a subset of C into M). Notice that if p ∈ L∩ Sing(F ),
L is a separatrix of F through p.
Let us start with the proof of Proposition 13. Let X be a reduced meromorphic vector
ﬁeld in a neighborhood of 0 in C2 and suppose that the curve of zeros and poles of X
passes though p. Let {pi} be a sequence of points such that limi→∞ pi = 0 but such that
no point belongs to a separatrix of F . We will suppose that the points pi belong to the
same leaf L of F in some bigger ambient surface and that this leaf L corresponds to a
maximal solution. The discussion splits naturally into the following cases, according to
the local nature of F :

12

ADOLFO GUILLOT

4.1. Regular point. Suppose that F is regular at 0. Under the hypothesis that the
vector ﬁeld is reduced, coordinates can be chosen in a way such that X = f (x, y)xpyq∂/∂x,
p, q ∈ Z and f a holomorphic function that does not vanish at 0. The leaf L intersects
inﬁnitely many times {x = 0}. The curve bL has inﬁnitely many points where the vector
ﬁeld is f (x, yi)xp∂/∂x and thus, by Lemma 6, p = 0.

4.2. Non-degenerate singularity. If the foliation has a non-degenerate singularity at 0
(if it can be generated by a vector ﬁeld with an isolated singularity and two non-zero
eigenvalues), in suitable coordinates, the vector ﬁeld is of the form

X = xpyq(cid:20)λxf (x, y)

∂
∂x

+ µyg(x, y)

∂

∂y(cid:21)

(4)

with µ/λ ∈ C∗ \ Q+, p, q ∈ Z, p 6= 0 or q 6= 0 and f and g holomorphic functions that do
not vanish at the origin and such that f (0) = g(0). The separatrices are given by {x = 0}
and {y = 0}.
4.2.1. In the Siegel domain. In this case, when µ/λ ∈ R−, it is not diﬃcult to see that
every closed invariant set invariant by the foliation containing the origin that is not
contained in the separatrix contains both separatrices (see [CR15, Lemma 18]). Thus,
L contains both separatrices in its closure, which belongs to U. Let us study the aﬃne
structure induced by (4) on the separatrix {y = 0}. Let us suppose that λ = 1. We have,
from the proof of Proposition 17 in [GR12], that

ind({y = 0}, 0) = −

1

p + µq

, ind({x = 0}, 0) = −

µ

p + µq

.

If p + µq = 0 then both ramiﬁcation indices equal ∞. We have µ = −p/q ∈ Q (in
particular, p and q are have the same sign). This gives the inﬁnite ramiﬁcation local
model. If p + µq 6= 0, ind({y = 0}, 0) 6= ∞ and thus ind({y = 0}, 0) ∈ Z∗. In particular,
µ ∈ Q−. Let µ = n/m with (m, n) = 1 (notice that m and n must have diﬀerent signs)
and let ∆ = pm+qn ∈ Z∗ so that ind({y = 0}, 0) = −m/∆ and ind({x = 0}, 0) = −n/∆.
Since ∆ divides m and n, ∆2 = 1. If q < 0 and p ≥ 0 then if pm + qn = 1, we necessarily
have n = −1 and p = 0: the curve of zeros and the curve of poles do not intersect at
such a point. The monodromy of the aﬃne structure along the separatrix {y = 0} is
periodic with period m. By Lemma 11, the holonomy of F along the separatrix with
respect to some transversal has periodic points of period dividing m at the intersection of
the transversal with U. The existence of periodic points of this period for the holonomy
forces the holonomy to be periodic with period m. On its turn, this implies that the
foliation is linearizable. Thus, the vector ﬁeld has the sought form. If p < 0 or q < 0,
one can furthermore suppose that f ≡ 1, by following the proof2 of [GR12, Prop. 18].

2 There is a small fault in the proof of Prop. 18 in [GR12]. At some point, the proof aﬃrms that some
period function “must” vanish identically and then uses this vanishing to conclude, although there is not
really any reason for this vanishing to take place in full generality. Nevertheless, in any situation that
implies that the period function is constant, the conclusion of Prop. 18 in [GR12] holds. One of these

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

13

4.2.2. In the Poincar´e domain. In this case, µ/λ /∈ R−, µ/λ /∈ \Q+. The origin attracts
all the orbits that are suﬃciently close to it. The foliation is linearizable, so we may
suppose that (4) is actually of the form

X = f (x, y)xpyq(cid:18)λx

∂
∂x

+ µy

∂

∂y(cid:19) ,

(5)

(6)

with f a holomorphic function such that f (0, 0) = 1. Up to multiplying X by a constant,
we will suppose that ℜ(λ) > 0 and ℜ(µ) > 0 (this is possible because we are in the
Poincar´e domain). Let VN = {z|ℜ(λz) < −N,ℜ(µz) < −N} and consider the map-
ping ρ : VN → C2, ρ(ζ) = (x0eλζ, y0eµζ), parameterizing injectively an orbit of X. For
any neighborhood U of the origin of C2 there exists N > 0 such that VN is in L ∩ U.
We will ﬁrst address the case f ≡ 1. In restriction to ρ(VN ), the vector ﬁeld is, up to
a constant factor, e(λp+µq)ζ∂/∂ζ (notice that λp + µq 6= 0). Integrating the time form, we
ﬁnd that

T (ζ) =Z e−(λp+µq)ζ dζ = −

e−(λp+µq)ζ
λp + µq

.

There is no value of N such that the restriction of T to VN is injective.

Let us now move on to the general case. Let α ∈ R+ and consider, for α ∈ [0, 1],
the transformations hα(x, y) = (αλx, αµy). Notice that h preserves the foliation while
preserving every leaf. Consider the vector ﬁeld

Xα = (αλp+µq)−1hα

∗ X = f (αλx, αµy)xpyq(cid:18)λx

∂
∂x

+ µy

∂

∂y(cid:19) .

Let X0 = limα→0 Xα. The limit exists since ℜ(λ) > 0 and ℜ(µ) > 0. When α 6= 0,
the vector ﬁeld Xα is conjugated to X, up to a constant multiple. When α = 0, it
corresponds to f ≡ 1 in the deﬁnition (5) of X. For that vector ﬁeld, we have shown that
the translation geometry in L is not uniformizable. Let γ : [0, 1] → L be a path joining
two diﬀerent points along where (6), the integral of the time form associated to X0, takes
the same value. For α suﬃciently small, we can slightly deform γ into an open path
(contained in L) along which the integral of the time form of Xα vanishes as well. But
this shows that, for Xα, time in L is not schlicht.
4.3. Saddle-node. A reduced meromorphic vector ﬁeld whose induced foliation is a
saddle node reduces to the form

X = h(x, y)[x − g(y)]nyq(cid:20)f (x, y)

∂
∂x

∂y(cid:21) ,
+ yk+1 ∂

with k ≥ 1, f a holomorphic function such that f (x, 0) = x, g a holomorphic function such
that g(0) = 0, h a non-vanishing holomorphic function and q, n ∈ Z. The term (x − g)n
accounts for a curve of zeros or poles transverse to the strong separatrix {y = 0}. We claim
that n = 0 (this would give the sought local model). As remarked in [CR15, Lemma 19],

situations is the one given by our setting, the existence some maximal orbit accumulating to the origin.
This does not aﬀect in any degree the results in [GR12].

14

ADOLFO GUILLOT

the description of the saddle-node singularity by sectorial normalizations in [HKM61]
implies that with the exception of the central manifold (when it converges), every integral
curve accumulates to the strong separatrix of the saddle-node. Hence, L accumulates to
the strong separatrix, which belongs to U. For the aﬃne structure along {y = 0}, the
strong separatrix, from the proof of Proposition 17 in [GR12] we have ind({y = 0}, 0) =
−1/n and thus n ∈ {−1, 0, 1}. If n = ±1 then, by Lemma 11, the holonomy has ﬁxed
points at the points of U. However, the holonomy of the strong separatrix is tangent to
the identity and has [Lor06, Section 5.3.3] a Leau-Fatou ﬂower dynamics: it cannot have
a ﬁxed point. This contradiction proves that n = 0, giving the sought normal form. In
particular, the central manifold, if convergent, does not belong to the curves of zeros and
poles.

This ﬁnishes the proof of Proposition 13.

5. In the presence of non-entire solutions

We will now prove the Main Theorem in the case where φ : Ω → S is a maximal
solution of a meromorphic vector ﬁeld in the K¨ahler compact complex surface S that
does not extend to C (one of the two cases where Proposition 12 leads us). Mostly, the
proof follows that of Theorem B in [GR12]. We will only sketch some of its lines. The
aim is, ﬁrst, to describe the component the divisor of poles where an orbit accumulates
(Theorem 14 below), and then use the topological information (numerical invariants) of
the divisor along with with the global geometry of the surface to produce a ﬁbration
adapted to the vector ﬁeld.

In the neighborhood of the divisors. We have the following result, direct analogue
of Theorem A in [GR12]:
Theorem 14. Let S be a complex surface, X a meromorphic vector ﬁeld on S, D ⊂ S
a compact connected component of the curve of poles of X, Ω ⊂ C, and φ : Ω → S a
maximal solution of X that accumulates to D in a non-algebraic way. Up to a birational
transformation, either

• D can be collapsed to a point where X is holomorphic;
• D is a rational curve of vanishing self-intersection; or
• D is a non-singular elliptic curve of vanishing self-intersection or, more generally,

supports a divisor Z of elliptic ﬁber type.

The theorem concerns only a neighborhood of D and, for example, does not require the
compactness of S. For the proof, after reducing the vector ﬁeld (as deﬁned in Section 2.4),
the vector ﬁeld is locally described by the local models of Proposition 13. For each
invariant component of the support of the divisor, the induced aﬃne structure is one
of those listed in Proposition 9, there is a has a self-intersection number and the vector
ﬁeld has some vanishing order along it. All of these objects come with some numerical
invariants that are not independent. The above Theorem follows from investigating the
combinatorial relations between all these data while taking into account the fact that we

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

15

can some times blow down a curve without aﬀecting the reduced nature of the divisor.
The proof of Theorem A in [GR12, Section 6] can be used word by word to give a proof
the above Theorem. We will not repeat those arguments here. Let us just mention some
facts that follow from them.

For the rational curves of vanishing self-intersection in Theorem 14, the curve has a
neighborhood (U, D) biholomorphic to a product ∆ × P1 (Savel’ev’s Theorem). In the
neighborhood of D, F is a Riccati foliation, with D being a semidegenerate or nilpotent
ﬁber. Locally, X preserves the rational ﬁbration. For the divisors of elliptic ﬁber type,
the minimal models of the divisors match, from a combinatorial point of view, Kodaira’s
singular ﬁbers of elliptic ﬁbrations. In the minimal models of these divisors, the divisor
of zeros of X is of the form lZ − Zred, l ≤ 0, where Z is the divisor of elliptic ﬁber
type supported in the curve of poles and Zred is the associated reduced divisor [GR12,
Prop. 24]. This implies that the normal bundle of Z is of torsion. Let us repeat some
of the arguments in [GR12, Section 7] that prove this. The canonical bundle of the
surface and the tangent and conormal bundles of the foliation F induced by X satisfy
the relation N ∗

F = KM ⊗ TF . Since TF = OM (lZ − Zred),

(7)

N ∗
F ⊗ OM (Zred) = KM ⊗ OM (Z) ⊗ OM ([l − 1]Z).

For the left-hand side, we have the short exact sequence

0 −→ N ∗

F

i−→ N ∗

F ⊗ OM (Zred) Res−→ OZ −→ 0.

The sheaf N ∗
F ⊗ OM (Zred) is that of meromorphic one-forms deﬁning F with at most
simple poles along Z. The residue map Res is given as follows: if f is a local equation
deﬁning Z (as a divisor) and η a logarithmic form deﬁning F then f η = hdf + f η for
some holomorphic function h and some holomorphic one-form η. The restriction of h
to Z is independent of the chosen decomposition. Deﬁne Res(η) as h|Z. Let us now
restrict (7) to Z. The restriction of the left-hand side of (7) to Z is trivial for Res gives
the restriction of N ∗
F ⊗ OM (Zred) to O(Z). As for the right-hand side, notice that, by
adjunction, [KM ⊗ OM (Z)]|Z = KZ, which is trivial since Z is of elliptic ﬁber type. This
implies that OM ([l − 1]Z)|Z is trivial.
Remark 15. Zeros of semicomplete vector ﬁelds have other combinatorics which do not
seem to admit a simple classiﬁcation as in Theorem 14, although they can be described
in some particular situations [Gui14].

Constructing the ﬁbrations. To prove the Main Theorem out of Theorem 14, one
may follow again the proof of Theorem B in [GR12]. Having at hand divisors that are
natural candidates to be ﬁbers of the ﬁbration in the Main Theorem, one must now
build the ﬁbration out of these divisors: one must show that there exists a (rational or
elliptic) ﬁbration on S having D as a ﬁber. The problem is semilocal in nature, for it
suﬃces to prove that some neighborhood of D has non-constant holomorphic functions.
Since the self-intersection of the divisor vanishes, such a function would give, locally,
the sought ﬁbration, which could be then globalized to all of S. For rational curves of

16

ADOLFO GUILLOT

vanishing self-intersection, the local ﬁbration always exists (Savel’ev’s Theorem). For
the divisors of elliptic ﬁber type, Brunella proved that foliations in algebraic surfaces
having invariant elliptic curves (or, more generally, invariant divisors of elliptic ﬁber
type) are very special ([Bru00, Chapter 9, §3, Corollary 2]). Following Brunella, with
the simpliﬁcations that come with our restricted setting, we may proceed as follows in
order to construct holomorphic functions (that will give locally an elliptic ﬁbration) in
a neighborhood of these divisors. Under the hypothesis that H 1(M,O) = 0, a result of
Sad [Sad99, Section 2] guarantees the existence of non-constant holomorphic functions
on the neighborhood of a divisor of elliptic ﬁber type as soon as its normal bundle is,
as in our case, of torsion. In the absence of this hypothesis, the K¨ahler one implies, by
Hodge decomposition, that there exists a (closed) holomorphic one-form η in M. If the
meromorphic function f = X · η is non-constant, 1/f is holomorphic in a neighborhood
of D. If f ≡ c, c ∈ C, there is a non-constant holomorphic function g in a neighborhood
of D such that η = dg, since, for most points in D, the local model of X is the regular
one, f (x, y)yq∂/∂x (q < 0) with D being y = 0, and the unique primitive of η vanishing
at the point, of the form h(y) + cy−qR x f (s, y)ds, vanishes identically along D.

We thus establish the Main Theorem in the case where there is a maximal single-valued

solution that cannot be extended to all of C.

Remark 16. Following the arguments in [Gui16] (involving classiﬁcation results by Ko-
daira and Enoki), one may show that, still in the case where there is a maximal single-
valued solution that cannot be extended to all of C, the result is also valid in the non-
K¨ahler setting.

6. Entire solutions

Let M be a complex compact K¨ahler surface, X a meromorphic vector ﬁeld on M
and φ : C → M with Zariski-dense image that is almost everywhere a solution to X.
We will further suppose that all the solutions of X in U, the uniformizable locus, can be
extended to entire maps. It is in this setting that we will prove the Main Theorem.

Let L = φ(C), Λ the module of periods of φ. The latter is not a lattice, for L is not an
algebraic curve. If Λ is isomorphic to Z, L is isomorphic to C∗. The curve bL, obtained
from L after adding all the isolated planar ends, is either equal to L or has one extra
point, where the restriction of X has a simple zero (both ends of L cannot be compactiﬁed
in this way, for this would imply that L is contained in an algebraic curve). If Λ is trivial,
φ is one-to-one and bL = L (for otherwise L would be contained in an algebraic curve).
In a series of works, Mendes,
Brunella and McQuillan established a classiﬁcation of foliations in algebraic surfaces,
in the spirit of Kodaira’s classiﬁcation of algebraic surfaces. Given a foliation F in an
algebraic surface S, the Kodaira dimension of F , kod(F ) ∈ {−∞, 0, 1, 2} is deﬁned, and
the classiﬁcation concerns those foliations whose Kodaira dimension is less than two. We
refer the reader to [Bru00], [Bru03] for a detailed presentation. For our study, we will

We will begin with the case where M is algebraic.

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

17

use a remarkable outcome of this classiﬁcation: the description of foliations on algebraic
surfaces admitting an entire curve tangent to them [McQ01], [McQ08], [Bru00]:

Theorem 17 (McQuillan). Let S be an algebraic surface and F a holomorphic foliation
in M. Let φ : C → S be a map tangent to the foliation having Zariski-dense image.
Then the foliation is either Riccati or turbulent, or, up to a birational transformation, F
is induced by a holomorphic vector ﬁeld in a ramiﬁed cover of S.

Our proof of the theorem will follow some case-by-case considerations.

6.1. Covered by a vector ﬁeld. The last possibility in Theorem 17 is that, up to a
birational map on S, there is a ﬁnite ramiﬁed covering Π : M → S of a compact surface M
where the pull-back of F is generated by a holomorphic (hence complete) vector ﬁeld V
with isolated singularities. Up to birational maps, the ramiﬁed covering is Galois, and
acts by preserving the foliation induced by V (but not necessarily V itself) [McQ08,
Fact IV.3.3]. Holomorphic vector ﬁeld on algebraic surfaces are classiﬁed (see [Bru00,
Ch. 6, Props. 5 and 6]):

Proposition 18. The holomorphic vector ﬁelds in projective surfaces that do not have
ﬁrst integrals are:

• constant vector ﬁelds on Abelian surfaces,
• product vector ﬁelds in P1 × P1, or
• vector ﬁelds in ruled surfaces over elliptic curves that project into a holomorphic

vector ﬁeld in the base.

A classiﬁcation of the birational automorphisms of the associated foliations, from which

we will borrow some arguments, appears in [Per05].

The study of foliations in the third case will be postponed until Section 6.2, where they
will be considered among other Riccati foliations (the automorphisms of such foliated
surfaces map ﬁbers to ﬁbers so the quotients are still Riccati foliations). We will now
prove the Main Theorem for meromorphic vector ﬁelds covered by foliations associated to
the ﬁrst two cases. For them, we will denote by R the meromorphic function in M such
that Π−1

∗ X = RV . The Galois group of the ramiﬁed covering acts by preserving RV .

6.1.1. Vector ﬁelds on Abelian surfaces. We will need to understand how do the leaves
of these foliations intersect algebraic curves in the surface.

Lemma 19. Let M be an Abelian surface, F a foliation given by a constant vector ﬁeld V ,
E ⊂ M an algebraic curve which is not invariant by F , L a leaf of F . Either L is closed
or it intersects E inﬁnitely many times.

Proof. Let η be a holomorphic one-form in M such that the restriction of η to V vanishes.
The integral of η in M measures distances to leaves of F :
if ρ : [0, 1] → M is such
that Rρ η = 0, ρ(0) and ρ(1) belong to the same leaf of F . Let γ : [0, 1] → M be a
path joining a point p ∈ E to a point in L. The (ramiﬁed) translation structure induced

18

ADOLFO GUILLOT

by η on E is geodesically complete. Thus, there is a curve bγ : [0, 1] → E, bγ(0) = p,
such that γ ∗η =bγ ∗η. Hence, bγ(1) ∈ E ∩ L. The curve L is dense in its closure L. Thus,
if L 6= L, L will intersect E inﬁnitely many times (at inﬁnitely many diﬀerent points). (cid:3)
Let thus M be an Abelian surface and V a constant vector ﬁeld in M. If V has one
closed orbit then, by translating it by M, we ﬁnd that all orbits of V are closed. This
implies the existence of a ﬁrst integral. Suppose that no orbit of V is closed. Let E an
irreducible component of the curve of zeros of R. Let L be the orbit of V that projects
onto L. Since V has no closed orbit, E is generically transverse to F and L is not closed.
By Lemma 19, L intersects E inﬁnitely many times. But this means that the solution
of Π−1
∗ X taking values in L has inﬁnitely many determinations (Proposition 8) and so
must the solution of X in L. We conclude that Π−1X is a constant multiple of V (in
particular, it is holomorphic), and thus X is holomorphic as well.
6.1.2. Product vector ﬁelds. Product vector ﬁelds in P1 × P1 that do not admit a ﬁrst
integral are, in suitable coordinates and up to a constant factor, of the form z∂/∂z +∂/∂w
or x∂/∂x+µy∂/∂y, µ /∈ Q. Multiplying these by rational functions often produces vector
ﬁelds whose solutions have inﬁnitely many determinations:
Lemma 20. If a meromorphic vector ﬁeld in P1 × P1 admits a transcendental solution
with ﬁnitely many determinations and is of the form
• R(z, w)[z∂/∂z + ∂/∂w], R is a function of w;
• R(z, w)[z∂/∂z + µw∂/∂w], µ /∈ Q, R is constant.

Proof. In the ﬁrst case, consider a transcendental leaf parametrized by s 7→ (z0es, s). The
induced vector ﬁeld is R(z0es, s)∂/∂s. If its solutions have ﬁnitely many determinations,
from Proposition 8, this vector ﬁeld should be rational and thus R is a rational function
In the second, parametrize an orbit of by s 7→
of w (and does not depend upon z).
(x0es, y0eµs), s ∈ C. The induced vector ﬁeld is R(x0es, y0eµs)∂/∂s. By Proposition 8, if
this solution has ﬁnitely many determinations, R(x0es, y0eµs) is a rational function of s.
But since µ /∈ Q, R must be constant.
(cid:3)

To prove the Main Theorem in this situation, consider ﬁrst the case V = z∂/∂z +∂/∂w.
By Lemma 20, Π−1(X) = R(w)[z∂/∂z + ∂/∂w].
In order to understand the group of
birational automorphisms preserving RV , let us begin by describing the larger group
of birational transformations preserving the foliation induced by V . We claim that the
latter is isomorphic to Z/2Z ⋉ (C× C∗), where C acts via the ﬂow of ∂/∂w, C∗ via that
of z∂/∂z and Z/2Z by

(8)

(z, w) 7→ (1/z,−w).

Since the transcendental leaves are Zariski-dense, an automorphism is determined by its
action upon such a leaf. The group C × C∗ acts transitively upon the set of pointed
leaves. If an automorphism acts upon the leaf parametrized by s 7→ (es, s), s ∈ C, ﬁxing
the point s = 0, it is of the form (eas, as), a ∈ C. But if such an automorphism extends

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

19

to C2, it extends as (z, w) 7→ (za, aw), and we must have a2 = 1, proving our claim. The
projection onto w is equivariant with respect to the action of this group, invariant under
the action of C∗. The group acting on w is Z/2Z ⋉ C. All ﬁnite subgroups of the latter
are either trivial or have order two and are generated by a map of the form w 7→ −w + c
(in this case we will suppose that c = 0). If R(w)[z∂/∂z + ∂/∂w] is invariant under the
action of some group acting trivially on w, the projection onto w maps the vector ﬁeld
onto R(w)∂/∂w. If it is invariant under the action of some group acting on w by w 7→ −w,
R(−w) = −R(w) and thus R(w) = wR0(w2). The image of the vector ﬁeld under the
quotient map (z, w) 7→ w2 is, for ξ = w2, 2ξR0(ξ)∂/∂ξ. The poles of the vector ﬁeld are
contained in the ﬁbers of the map and the vector ﬁeld preserves this ﬁbration.
Consider now the case where V = x∂/∂x+µy∂/∂y, µ /∈ Q. By Lemma 20, Π−1(X) is a
constant multiple of V and is thus holomorohic. The Galois group of Π acts by preserving
this vector ﬁeld and thus X is holomorphic as well. This proves the Main Theorem in
this case.

6.2. Riccati. Let Π : S → B be a rational ﬁbration and X a meromorphic vector ﬁeld
on S inducing a Riccati foliation F adapted to Π. Let F1, . . . , Fn be the special ﬁbers
of Π. We will suppose that the Riccati foliation is in standard form, as discussed in
Section 2.5. Let φ : C → S be a map with Zariski-dense image that is almost everywhere
a solution to X.
The vector ﬁeld may preserve the rational ﬁbration Π. For this to happen, it is suﬃcient
for X to be holomorphic in the neighborhood of a generic ﬁber. In this situation, the local
ﬂow will map ﬁbers to ﬁbers (by the maximum principle) and will induce a nowhere zero
holomorphic vector ﬁeld Y in the complement of a ﬁnite set of points in B. By Lemma 6,
Y will extend holomorphically to B, proving the Main Theorem for this case. However,
this is not the only possibility, and there will be cases where the vector ﬁeld will not
preserve the rational ﬁbration. In this case, we will prove the Main Theorem by showing
the existence of another ﬁbration that is invariant under the ﬂow. Example 24 gives an
example of such a situation: a vector ﬁeld with a transcendental maximal solution such
that the foliation is a Riccati one with respect to some rational ﬁbration, but where this
ﬁbration is not preserved by the ﬂow (in this example, there is an elliptic ﬁbration that
is preserved).

j=1 ajFj +Pi biEi,
In general, the divisor of zeros and poles of X is of the form Pn+k
where F1, . . . Fn are special ﬁbers and Fn+1, . . . , Fn+k are transverse ones; the divisors Ei
are irreducible and not supported in ﬁbers (they may or may not be transverse to F ).
For a generic ﬁber F ,

(9)

F ·Xi

biEi = 0

(see [Bru00, Ch. 4, Prop. 6]). Let S ′ = S \ {F1, . . . , Fn}, B ′ = Π(S ′). Let ρ : π1(S ′) →
PSL(2, C) be the monodromy representation, Γ its image. The existence of the entire

20

ADOLFO GUILLOT

map φ implies that B is either rational or elliptic. Let F be a generic ﬁber, u = U ∩ F .
The solution L gives an orbit of Γ within u, which we will denote by ℓ.
If u is big enough, the coexistence of some types of special ﬁbers with some curves of
zeros/poles transverse to Π may be ruled out:

Proposition 21. Let X be a vector ﬁeld in the surface S inducing a Riccati foliation
adapted to the ﬁbration Π : S → B. Let F be a generic ﬁber. Let L be a maximal solution
and ℓ = L ∩ F . If ℓ has at least three points, either

• X preserves the ﬁbration Π or
• all the special ﬁbers are non-degenerate with parabolic monodromy or dicritical.
Proof. Consider a special ﬁber F0. If the vector ﬁeld is holomorphic in the neighborhood
of F0 or if its poles are contained in F0, it preserves the ﬁbration. If not, it has some
component of the locus of poles transverse to Π and, by (9) some components of the curve
of zeros that do so as well. Let E be one such component of the curve of zeros.

If F0 is non-degenerate with hyperbolic monodromy, the foliation is given by the
form (3). Once a branch of L that is not one of the two separatrices (there is at least one,
since ℓ has at least three points) is close enough to F0, it gets trapped by the holonomy
of F along its leaf F0, which is hyperbolic, and the leaf accumulates the singularities of F
in F0, which are in the Poincar´e domain. By Proposition 13, no component of the curve
of zeros and poles may be invariant by the foliation (E is not invariant by F ). Consider
a Puiseux parametrization of E around its intersection with the special ﬁber F0. Up
to a ramiﬁed cover of the base, suppose that, in the neighborhood of its intersection
with F0, E is a section of Π. The parametrization of E has the form (t, tqv(t)), q ∈ Z,
v(0) 6= 0, and is transverse to F0. Up to the birational transformation (z, w) = (z, w/zq),
where the form giving the foliation reads (λ− q)w dz − z dw, E intersects F0 transversely
at a non-singular point and thus intersects every leaf that is not a separatrix inﬁnitely
many times. In particular, since ℓ has more than two points, it is not contained in the
set of separatrices of F0 and must intersect E inﬁnitely many times, contradicting its
maximality.

If F0 is a semi-degenerate ﬁber, the holonomy of the foliation along F0 is tangent to
the identity (but not the identity) and has a Leau-Fatou ﬂower dynamics. The orbit L
accumulates to the two saddle-node singularities of F0. By Proposition 13, E cannot be
a separatrix of F (which are central manifolds of the saddle-nodes). Up to a ramiﬁed
cover of the base, suppose that, in the neighborhood of its intersection with F0, E is a
section of Π (and thus transverse to F0). Up to some ﬂips in F0, we can suppose that E
intersects F0 away from its two singular points. After this, E will be transverse to F0 at a
regular point of F , and must intersect ℓ inﬁnitely many times. As before, this contradicts
the maximality of L. Essentially the same arguments deal with the case where F0 is a
nilpotent ﬁber.

(cid:3)

For the proof of the Main Theorem we now begin a series of cases that will eventually

cover all the possibilities.

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

21

6.2.1. When ℓ is ﬁnite. We begin with the cases where B = P1.
If φ does not have
periods, let ψ : C → P1 be given by ψ = Π ◦ φ. Our assumption is that, for a generic t0,
{t ∈ C|ψ(t) = ψ(t0)} is ﬁnite. This implies that ψ is a rational function of t (for
otherwise it would have an essential singularity at t = ∞ and, by Picard’s Great Theorem,
our ﬁniteness assumption would be violated). Under t 7→ ψ(t), X induces a rational
multivalued vector ﬁeld V in P1. The set of points in S such that Π maps X onto one of
the determinations of V is a closed analytic subset of S which contains the Zariski-dense
curve L. We must conclude that this set is all of S. Along a ﬁber, the projection of the
vector ﬁeld onto B is locally constant and thus constant. We conclude that V is a honest
rational vector ﬁeld. Since it has the single-valued solution ψ, it is a holomorphic vector
ﬁeld and, since ψ is rational, this vector ﬁeld is ∂/∂z in a suitable coordinate. If φ has
the period 2iπ, φ(t) = ρ(et) for some function ρ : C∗ → S. Let ψ : C∗ → B be given
by Π ◦ ρ. The ﬁniteness assumption is that for a generic ζ0, {ζ ∈ C∗|ψ(ζ) = ψ(ζ0)} is
ﬁnite. This implies that ψ is a rational function of ζ (for otherwise it would have an
essential singularity at ζ = 0 or ζ = ∞). The mapping ψ maps the vector ﬁeld ζ∂/∂ζ
to a rational multivalued one V in B. Repeating the previous arguments, we conclude
that V is a holomorphic vector ﬁeld in P1 which in a convenient coordinate reads z∂/∂z.
The case where ℓ is ﬁnite and B is elliptic does not arrive. Suppose that B is an
elliptic curve and that φ has no periods and consider the function ψ : C → B as before.
Let θ : B → P1 be an auxiliary rational map. Since ψ has only ﬁnitely many points
in the preimage of any given one, so does θ ◦ ψ. By Picard’s Great Theorem, θ ◦ ψ
must extend holomorphically to ∞, and so must ψ. This yields a function ψ : P1 → B,
which is impossible. Likewise, if φ(t) = ρ(et), a function ψ : C∗ → B as above extends
holomorphically to 0 and ∞. Again, this is impossible.
We may now proceed to study the cases where ℓ is inﬁnite. The cases of interest are,
according to Proposition 21, the ones where the special ﬁbers are non-degenerate with
parabolic monodromy or dicritical.
If the vector ﬁeld has zeros or poles along a non-

singular ﬁber F then, since ℓ is inﬁnite, bL will have, at its intersections with F , inﬁnitely

many points where the vector ﬁeld has zeros or poles, and we must conclude that X
is holomorphic and non-zero at the generic point of F . For the same reasons, for the
dicritical ﬁbers, the vector ﬁeld is holomorphic and non-zero at the generic point of the
dicritical component of the ﬁber F .

6.2.2. Discrete, elementary monodromy. If the monodromy Γ is discrete, elementary and
inﬁnite, it either [For51, Sections 59–62]

(1) contains a group of translations with ﬁnite index, or
(2) is contained in the group that permutes {0,∞}, contains a subgroup of C∗ with

index at most two.

In the ﬁrst case there is one ﬁxed point for Γ; in the second, two ﬁxed points or an orbit
of size two. In both cases, all orbits accumulate to these ﬁnite ones, which thus belong
to u. We will suppose that there is an invariant algebraic curve E giving such a ﬁnite

22

ADOLFO GUILLOT

orbit (otherwise the ﬁnite orbit would be an orbit of the vector ﬁeld, belonging to the
case where ℓ is ﬁnite). Some maximal solutions accumulate to E. It is endowed with a
uniformizable aﬃne structure with singularities, and belongs to the list of Proposition 9.
We begin with Case 1, where Γ contains a group of translations with ﬁnite index. Each
ﬁber intersects only one point of E, Π identiﬁes E and B. Let γ ∈ π1(E) be a path along
which the monodromy of the aﬃne structure is trivial. By the Fundamental Lemma
(Proposition 11), the holonomy of F along γ will ﬁx pointwise the points of u suﬃciently
close to F ∩ E and, since this set is inﬁnite, the monodromy of the Riccati equation
along γ is trivial. This implies that the ﬁbers of Π corresponding to points of E where
the aﬃne structure is non-singular are transverse ﬁbers, for, according to Proposition 21,
all other special ﬁbers have non-trivial monodromy. Lemma 11 takes here a strong global
form: there is a well-deﬁned (abstract) map from the monodromy of the aﬃne structure
on E to the monodromy of the Riccati equation. The problem is now to represent the
inﬁnite subgroups of the aﬃne group that can be (abstract) images of the monodromies
of the uniformizable aﬃne structures on curves.

We ﬁrst address the cases where E is a parabolic orbifold.

If the aﬃne structure
in E is that of a parabolic cylinder (two singularities with inﬁnite ramiﬁcation indices),
B is P1 and there are two singularities. The monodromy is of inﬁnite order and is
thus parabolic. By placing the singularities of E above 0 and ∞, the foliation is bi-
rationally equivalent to the foliation in P1 × P1 given by zdw − dz, with E being the
curve {w = ∞}. By Lemma 20, X = R(w)[z∂/∂z + ∂/∂w] for some rational function R.
The projection (z, w) 7→ w maps X onto R(w)∂/∂w. If the aﬃne structure makes E an
orbifold (2, 2,∞) then, S and X are quotients of the above vector ﬁeld under (8). Accord-
ing to the results in Section 6.1.2, the function in the quotient induced by (z, w) 7→ w2
maps X into a vector ﬁeld in P1, with the poles are contained in the ﬁbers.
We now deal with the cases where E is an elliptic orbifold, the quotient of C under the
action of a crystallographic group G ⊂ Aﬀ(C). By taking the cover of B according to
this quotient, we get a ramiﬁed cover C × P1 → S, such that, in the coordinates (z, w)
in C× P1, we may suppose that the pull-back of the foliation is given by dw = 0 and the
curve E is the image of w = ∞. The action of G on this space is given by the monodromy
of the aﬃne structure on E in the ﬁrst factor, via the monodromy ρ : G → Aﬀ(C) of
the Riccati foliation in the second. The vector ﬁeld X is the quotient of a meromorphic
vector ﬁeld in C × P1 of the form P (z, w)∂/∂z. Let Λ ⊂ C be the lattice that gives the
smallest ´etale covering of E. The monodromy of the Riccati foliation can be restricted
to Λ, inducing the morphism of abelian groups ρ : Λ → C, for which
P (z + λ, w + ρ(λ)) = P (z, w) for every λ ∈ Λ.
(10)

For each z0 ﬁxed, P (z0, w) has ﬁnitely many zeros and poles and thus

(11)

P (z, w) = µ(z)

wn + an−1(z)wn−1 + · · · + a0(z)
wm + bm−1(z)wm−1 + · · · + b0(z)

,

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

23

with µ, ai and bi meromorphic functions. The curve E does not intersect the curve of
zeros/poles of P for, in that case, all the orbits accumulating to E would gain inﬁnitely
many zeros/poles. Thus, µ, ai and bi are holomorphic, µ without zeros. The invariant
property of P imposes conditions on these. From

= µ(z + λ)

[w + ρ(λ)]n + · · · + a0(z + λ)
[w + ρ(λ)]m + · · · + b0(z + λ)

= µ(z + λ)

wn + · · ·
wm + · · ·

,

µ(z)

wn + · · · + a0(z)
wm + · · · + b0(z)

we have that µ is elliptic and thus constant. We will suppose µ ≡ 1. Both the numerator
and the denominator of P must satisfy (10). For the numerator,

wn + an−1(z)wn−1 + · · · = [w + ρ(λ)]n + an−1(z + λ)[w + ρ(λ)]n−1 + · · ·

= wn + [nρ(λ) + an−1(z + λ)]wn−1 + · · · .

Hence, an−1(z)−an−1(z +λ) = nρ(λ). Derivating, a′
is elliptic, thus constant, an−1(z) = αz + β, for some α, β ∈ C, and ρ(λ) = −(α/n)λ. In
particular, ρ (which was a priori only a morphism of abelian groups) is actually induced by
a C-linear map. Up to a linear change of coordinates in w, we will suppose that ρ(λ) = λ
(this is, α = −n, an−1(z) = −nz + β). The function w− z belongs to the ring of functions
satisfying (10). Since

n−1(z +λ) = 0 and thus a′

n−1(z)−a′

n−1

(wn + an−1wn−1 + · · · + a0) − (w − z)n = βwn−1 + · · · ,

belongs also to this ring, we ﬁnd, recursively, that the numerator of P is a polynomial
of z − w. We conclude that P is a rational function of ξ = z − w.
Let us come back to the full monodromy group. Let g ∈ G be given by z 7→ ωz and
let ρ(g) be given by w 7→ νw + c. Up to a translation, we may suppose that c = 0 (this
does not alter the fact that ρ(λ) = λ). Let τλ ∈ Aﬀ(C) be the translation by λ. Then
τωλ = ρ(gτλg−1) = ρ(g)τλρ(g)−1 = τνλ. We conclude that ω = ν and thus that ρ : G →
Aﬀ(C) is the identity. The condition that P must satisfy in order to induce a vector ﬁeld
in S is that P (ωξ) = ωP (ξ) for every ω ∈ C∗ in the rotation group of G. By Luroth’s
theorem, P (ξ) = ξR(ξk), where R is a rational function and k is the smallest common
order of the rotations in G. The projection onto P1 given by ζ = ξk maps X to the
vector ﬁeld kζR(ζ)∂/∂ζ. We conclude that there is an elliptic ﬁbration from S onto P1
preserved by X (the curves of zeros and poles are contained in the ﬁbers), proving the
Main Theorem in this case.

We address now Case 2, where Γ is in the group that permutes {0,∞}. This group is
the normalizer N(C∗) of C∗ in PSL(2, C). It is the group that, in a convenient coordinate,
σ−→ 1/z. All the elements in σC∗ have order
is generated by C∗ and by the involution z
κ−→ −z. The couples in N(C∗)
two. The center of N(C∗) is generated by the involution z
that commute are either couples in C∗, couples in σC∗ diﬀering by κ or couples where κ
is one of their members.

Let us begin with the cases where Γ is actually a subgroup of C∗. The only uniformiz-
able aﬃne structures on curves admitting inﬁnite representations in the abelian group C∗
are the parabolic cylinder and those supported on elliptic curves.

24

ADOLFO GUILLOT

If one of the curves corresponding to one of the ﬁxed points of Γ is a parabolic cylinder,
the curve has two singularities for its aﬃne structure and the monodromy of the aﬃne
structure is cyclic. The monodromy of the Riccati foliation is cyclic, generated by the
local monodromy around one of the special ﬁbers. Since this monodromy must be inﬁnite,
the special ﬁbers cannot be dicritical. Since the monodromy may not be parabolic, the
special ﬁbers cannot be non-degenerate parabolic. According to Proposition 21, this case
does not occur.

Suppose now that one of the ﬁxed points of Γ corresponds to an elliptic curve E = C/Λ,
(having no singularities for its aﬃne structure). The vector ﬁeld X is a meromorphic
vector ﬁeld inducing a Riccati foliation over the elliptic curve E with holonomy in C∗.
There is a vector ﬁeld V = P (z, w)∂/∂z on C× P1 such that, for some representation ρ :
Λ → C∗, V is invariant under the transformations
(12)
and such that (S, Π, B, X) is bimeromorphic to the quotient of (C× P1, π, C, V ), π : C×
P1 → C denoting the projection onto the ﬁrst factor and E being {w = 0} or {w = ∞}.
Since Γ discrete and inﬁnite, it contains some hyperbolic elements. The vector ﬁeld is
necessarily of the form (11), with µ holomorphic without zeros, ai and bi holomorphic
without zeros or identically zero. In order for V to be invariant under (12), we must have

(z, λ) 7→ (z + λ, ρ(λ)w),

P (z + λ, ρ(λ)w) = P (z, w)

and thus

(13) µ(z + λ)

ρn(λ)wn + ρn−1(λ)an−1(z + λ)wn−1 + · · · + a0(z + λ)
ρm(λ)wm + ρm−1(λ)bn−1(z + λ)wm−1 + · · · + b0(z + λ)

=

= µ(z)

wn + an−1(z)wn−1 + · · · + a0(z)
wm + bn−1(z)wm−1 + · · · + b0(z)

.

Hence, µ(z + λ) = ρ(λ)m−nµ(z). This implies that µ′/µ is elliptic (and thus constant).
We must conclude that µ(z) = eδz for some δ ∈ C∗, and that ρm−n(λ) = eδλ. From (13),
ρi−n(λ)ai(z + λ) = ai(z). This implies that either ai ≡ 0 or that a′
i/ai is elliptic, thus
constant, ai(z) = αiesiz, αi 6= 0, ρn−i(λ) = esiλ. Likewise, bi = βietiz, ρm−i(λ) = etiλ.

Let d be the greatest common divisor of

{n − m} ∪ {n − i|ai 6≡ 0} ∪ {m − i|bi 6≡ 0}.

since

µ(z)

= µ(z)

wn + · · · + a0(z)
wm + · · · + b0(z)

wn(1 +Pj an−jdw−jd)
wm(1 +Pj bm−jdw−jd)

= µ(z)wdk (1 +Pj an−jdw−jd)
(1 +Pj bm−jdw−jd)
we have that P is, as a function of w, a function of wd. There exists σ ∈ C such that
ρd(λ) = edσλ. Thus, si = (n − i)σ, ti = (m − i)σ, δ = (m − n)σ, and
e−nσzwn + αn−1e−(n−1)σzwn−1 + · · · + α0
e−mσzwm + βm−1e−(m−1)σzwm−1 + · · · + β0

P (z, w) =

,

,

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

25

this is, P (z, w) is a rational function of ξd, ξ = we−σz, P = R(ξ). The projection onto P1
given by (z, w) 7→ ξ is invariant under (12) and the image of the vector ﬁeld is

(14)

− σξR(ξ)

∂
∂ξ

.

The poles are contained in the ﬁbers.

We will address now the case where Γ contains a subgroup of C∗ with index two. Let E
be the algebraic curve in S associated to the ﬁnite orbit of Γ. Since the group does not
contain parabolic elements, the special ﬁbers of the Riccati foliation are, as established
previously, dicritical ones. There are two kinds of them, which we will now describe.

We begin with the case where the two ﬁxed points of the local monodromy around a
special ﬁber F0 are the separatrices corresponding to E. Let n be the order of X along E.
Suppose that the vector ﬁeld in the neighborhood of F0 is the quotient of the vector
ﬁeld wnf (z, w)∂/∂z under (z, w) 7→ (ωz, ωkw), where ωp = 1, f is some meromorphic
function, with E corresponding to w ∈ {0,∞}. Notice that f is holomorphic and non-
zero at (0, 0) since any orbit accumulating to E (all of them do) would otherwise gain
inﬁnitely many zeros/poles at the zeros/poles of f . A necessary condition for invariance
is that p|(kn − 1). The same reasoning applies in the coordinates (z, W ) = (z, 1/w): the
vector ﬁeld has the form W ng(z, W )∂/∂z and the cyclic group acts now by (z, W ) 7→
(ωz, ω−kW ). Thus, p|(−kn − 1). We must conclude that p = 2. The local monodromy
around F0 is, w 7→ −w, and is κ, the non-trivial element of the center of the global
monodromy of the Riccati equation. The aﬃne structure induced by wnf (z, w)∂/∂z
on w = 0 is non-singular in the neighborhood of z = 0. Thus, at each one of the two
points where E intersects F0, the aﬃne structure in E will have a ramiﬁcation index that
is a multiple of 2 (Proposition 11).

If the two ﬁxed points of the local monodromy are not the ones coming from E then
the holonomy is one of the elements in Γ of order two that exchanges them. In this case
the restriction of Π to E is locally a ramiﬁed cover of order two.

The ramiﬁed cover Π|E : E → B of order two has r ramiﬁcation points corresponding
to the special ﬁbers of the second type described. By the Riemann-Hurwitz formula,
χ(E) = 2χ(B) − r. Since these curves are both either rational or elliptic, there are three
possibilities:

• E and B are both elliptic, r = 0;
• E and B are both rational, r = 2;
• E, is elliptic, B is rational and r = 4.

In the ﬁrst case, there are no special ﬁbers, for E has no singularities for its aﬃne
structure. The monodromy of F is a representation in N(C∗) of the fundamental group
of E intersecting the class of σ. But such abelian subgroups of N(C∗) are ﬁnite.
The second case cannot arrive. The monodromy would be a representation of the
fundamental group of C\{0, p1, . . . , pk}, where the image of small loops around 0 and ∞

26

ADOLFO GUILLOT

are in the class of σ and that of a small one around pi is κ (assuming pi give points of
the ﬁrst type, and 0 and ∞ of the second one). Such groups are ﬁnite as well.
In the last case, since the aﬃne structure in the elliptic curve has no singularities, the
local holonomy of all of the special ﬁbers permutes the two local branches of E (is of the
second type). Thus, there are four special ﬁbers, the two-point orbit of the monodromy is
an elliptic curve E ramifying above the four points of B. Up to twofold ramiﬁed cover of B
along these points, we have a meromorphic vector ﬁeld inducing a Riccati foliation over the
elliptic curve E with holonomy in C∗. By our previous discussion, it will be given by the
quotient of the vector ﬁeld R(we−σz)∂/∂z in C× P1. In order to be well deﬁned after the
involution, we must have that the vector ﬁeld is also invariant under (z, w) 7→ (−z, 1/w),
which acts upon ξ by ξ 7→ 1/ξ. Since R(ξ)∂/∂z is invariant under this transformation,
we have that R(1/ξ) = −R(ξ). The vector ﬁeld (14) is invariant under the involution,
and well-deﬁned in the quotient. Again, there is an elliptic ﬁbration from S onto P1
preserved by X (the curves of zeros and poles are contained in the ﬁbers).

6.2.3. In the presence of good orbifold coverings. For this part, we borrow some argu-
ments from [Bru04]. Let B ∗ ⊂ B be the union of B ′ plus the dicritical ﬁbers Fi (where
we have seen that the vector ﬁeld is necessarily regular), S ∗ = Π−1(B ∗). Let mi be the
corresponding multiplicity. We will consider B ∗ as an orbifold by aﬀecting pi with the an-
gle 2π/mi. The monodromy Γ is, naturally, a representation of the orbifold fundamental
group of B ∗. Aﬀect the leaves of F in S ∗ with an orbifold structure, by declaring that,
at a dicritical ﬁber of multiplicity m, each one of the two special curves (the separatrices
corresponding to the ﬁxed points of the local monodromy), the angle is 2π/m. (The angle
being 2π for all other points). With respect to these structures, if L is a leaf of F|∗
S, Π|L
is tautologically an orbifold covering map.

We will now suppose that

(15)

L ⊂ S ∗, L has no orbifold points.

cases arise:

In other words, that if L intersects a special ﬁber at ﬁnite time, this special ﬁber
is dicritical, and the point of intersection is not one of the two special points of the
dicritical component. Recall that we have denoted by bL the curve obtained from L
after compactifying all of its algebraic isolated planar ends. Since bL is not algebraic,
either bL = L or bL \ L is a single point, where the vector ﬁeld has a simple zero. Two
When bL \ L /∈ S ∗. When bL \ L is either empty or consists of a single point that is
not in S ∗. The mapping Π|L : L → B ∗ is a (orbifold) covering of B ∗ and thus L
is covered by the (orbifold) universal covering of B ∗. Since L is an entire curve, its
universal covering is biholomorphic to C. Since the group of biholomorphisms of C
preserves (tautologically) an aﬃne structure, this induces an aﬃne structure in B ∗. We
may ﬁnd coordinates (z, w) ∈ ∆×P1 around a regular ﬁber where the vector ﬁeld has the
form f (z, w)∂/∂z, f meromorphic in z and algebraic in w, and where the coordinate z
in the base is an aﬃne one (with respect to the aﬃne structure we just deﬁned). Every

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

27

leaf L is naturally endowed with two aﬃne structure (with singularities), one induced
by X and one by Π|L. We may consider, as in (1), the diﬀerence of these two aﬃne
It vanishes for all the values of w belonging to L, and
structures.
thus vanishes identically: the ﬁbration establishes an isomorphism of aﬃne structures
between the base and the one induced by the vector ﬁeld on every leaf. Up to a ﬁnite

It is −fz/f dz.

above a generic ﬁber of Π, establishing the result in this case.

structures in restriction to a Zariski-dense leaf, h is constant on a Zariski-dense leaf, and

cover ρ : bB → B of the base by a manifold bB, the aﬃne structure on B is induced by a
vector ﬁeld V . Let bΠ : bS → bB the ruled surface obtained by pulling back Π along ρ. It
has a vector ﬁeld bX coming from the natural projection bS → S. There is a meromorphic
function h on bS such that Π∗(hbX) = V . Since the projection is an isomorphism of aﬃne
thus globally constant. The vector ﬁeld eX projects to V via bΠ. But this implies that bX
is holomorphic above a generic ﬁber of bΠ. On its turn, this implies that X is holomorphic
When bL \ L ∈ S ∗. If bL \ L = {p}, p ∈ S ∗. The curve bL is entire and there is a global
coordinate ζ for L, centered at p, where, up to multiplication by a constant, X = ζ∂/∂ζ.
In this coordinate, the aﬃne defect of the aﬃne structure induced by X is ζ −1 dζ. Pairing
this form with X gives the constant function 1. In the coordinate ζ, bL (but not L!) is
a covering of the orbifold S ∗ and gives it an aﬃne structure which, in turn, can be lifted
to any leaf of F . In a leaf, the diﬀerence of this aﬃne structure with the one induced
by X is a one-form, which may be contracted with X. This produces a function whose
restriction to bL equals 1, and that is thus the constant function 1. In open subsets of C,
a vector ﬁeld f (ζ)∂/∂ζ induces an aﬃne structure. The diﬀerence of this aﬃne structure
and the one induced by ζ is −f ′/f dζ, and pairing this form with the vector ﬁeld gives
the function f ′. If f ′ = 1 then f (ζ) = ζ + c for some c ∈ C. Thus, for every leaf where
it makes sense, in the aﬃne coordinate inherited from B, the vector ﬁeld X is linear. In
particular,

intersects transversely every leaf; and

• in the neighborhood of p there is a component E0 of the curve of zeros that
• no curve intersects the curve of poles (which is thus invariant by F ).

From the ﬁrst fact, since L intersects only once the curve of zeros,
it cannot self-
accumulate and, since it intersects inﬁnitely many times each ﬁber, the monodromy of
the equation is discrete. From the second one, since there must be at least one component
of the curve of poles by (9) and since this component is invariant, the monodromy group
of the equation has a ﬁnite orbit. We thus conclude that Γ is discrete and elementary, a
case for which we have already established our result.

If u is uncountable, condition (15) is automatically satisﬁed, for only ﬁnitely many
orbits do not satisfy (15), and thus only countably many elements of u may fail to satisfy
condition (15). The situations where we have proved the Main Theorem are

• when Γ is ﬁnite, for ℓ is ﬁnite;
• when Γ is discrete, inﬁnite and non-elementary;

28

ADOLFO GUILLOT

the limit set of the action of Γ on P1 and is thus uncountable;

• when Γ is discrete and non-elementary, for u, being closed and invariant, contains
• when Γ is not discrete, for u, being the union of orbits of Γ, is either ﬁnite (implying

the ﬁniteness of ℓ) or uncountable.

We have thus proved the Main Theorem in all cases where the induced foliation is a
Riccati one.

6.3. Turbulent. The proof will follow the lines of that of the Riccati case. Let Π : S → B
be an elliptic ﬁbration, X a meromorphic vector ﬁeld on S inducing a turbulent foliation
adapted to Π. Let E be a component of the curve of zeros that is not contained in a ﬁber
(it intersects all the ﬁbers).

If E is invariant, the intersection of E with a generic ﬁber F0 gives a ﬁnite orbit for the
monodromy of the foliation on F0. Since a group of automorphisms of an elliptic curve
with one ﬁnite orbit is ﬁnite, the monodromy must be ﬁnite. Further, all special ﬁbers
must be dicritical, for non-dicritical ﬁbers do not have separatrices. In this case there is
a ﬁrst integral for F .
If E is not invariant, in the neighborhood of the non-dicritical special ﬁbers, every leaf
will intersect E inﬁnitely many times. Hence, all the special ﬁbers are dicritical. If the
monodromy is ﬁnite, there is a ﬁrst integral for F . We will suppose that the monodromy
is inﬁnite and, in particular, that all orbits self-accumulate (in particular, the closure of
any orbit contains uncountably many others). If p ∈ bL \L, p lies at the intersection of bL
with the curve of zeros. But, by the self-accumulation of bL, this would imply that the
orbit intersects inﬁnitely many times the curve of zeros. Thus, L = bL. As previously,
consider B with its orbifold structure. Let us go again through the arguments of the
Riccati case in Section 6.2.3. Up to replacing L by another orbit, the projection Π|L is
a covering of B (in the orbifold sense). Thus, B carries an aﬃne structure making the
restriction of Π to every leaf is an aﬃne map. From the cover ρ : bB → B where the
aﬃne structure of B is induced by a vector ﬁeld, we may construct a cover bS → S where

the induced vector ﬁeld is holomorphic above every ﬁber. But this implies that X is
holomorphic along the generic ﬁber of Π, and this establishes the result.

We thus ﬁnish the proof of our Main Theorem in the case where the surface is algebraic

and the solution is entire.

6.4. The non-algebraic cases. The remaining case is the one where S is K¨ahler but
not algebraic. The classiﬁcation of foliations in such surfaces is due to Brunella [Bru03,
Section 10]. Let a(S) denote the algebraic dimension of S.

Theorem 22 (Brunella). Let S be a non-projective K¨ahler complex surface and F a
holomorphic foliation in M. Either:

(1) a(S) = 1: S is an elliptic ﬁbration and F is turbulent with respect to it.
(2) S is an Abelian surface, a(S) = 0 and F is induced by a constant vector ﬁeld.

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

29

(3) S is a K3 surface with a(S) = 0, there is an Abelian surface A and a covering Π :

A → S such that F is induced through Π by a constant vector ﬁeld in A.

In the ﬁrst case all the algebraic curves are tangent to the ﬁbration and so are the
curves in support of D (one can also repeat the arguments for turbulent foliations in
the algebraic case). In the second case, the ratio between X and a constant vector ﬁeld
inducing F is a meromorphic function on S, which must be constant. The same argument
applies in the third case to the ratio between the pull-back of X and of the constant vector
ﬁeld: X is a holomorphic vector ﬁeld on S.

This ﬁnishes the proof of the Main Theorem.

7. Examples and Comments

For Riccati equations, having a ﬁrst integral implies that the monodromy group is
ﬁnite. The reciprocal is not true. The following example is attributed to Wittich [Hil97,
Section 4.1]. The Riccati diﬀerential equation

y′ = y2 +

has the transcendental solutions

y(t) =(cid:18)t −

y +

t3 + 2
t(t3 − 1)
t2(cid:19) tan(cid:18)t2

1

2

(t3 − 1)2

t4

+ c(cid:19) .

1
t

+

Since all the solutions are single-valued, the monodromy is trivial.

The relation between the maximal solutions and the ﬁxed points of the monodromy

representation in Riccati and turbulent foliations is behind Corollary 2.

Proof of Corollary 2. If the vector ﬁeld X is birationaly equivalent to a holomorphic
vector ﬁeld, all its solutions are maximal. Let us address the case where there is a rational
ﬁbration Π : S → C preserved by Z, let C0 ⊂ C be the image of the non-special ﬁbers.
Let ρ : π1(C0) → PSL(2, C) be the monodromy of the Riccati foliation. Let Y = Π∗Z
and let µ : π1(C0) → C be the monodromy of the translation structure induced by Y |C0.
The maximal solutions of X correspond to the global ﬁxed points of the restriction of ρ
to ker(µ) ⊂ π1(C0). If this representation has three ﬁxed points, it is trivial, and all of
its points are ﬁxed. We proceed similarly for an elliptic ﬁbration: the maximal solutions
are the ﬁxed points of some representation. The corollary follows from the fact that an
automorphism of an elliptic curve having ﬁve ﬁxed points is the identity.
(cid:3)

The elliptic involution of an elliptic curve has four ﬁxed points. We have the following

example:

Example 23. Consider, in C × C, the meromorphic vector ﬁeld
(16)

X =

.

1
2x

∂
∂x −

1
x3

∂
∂y

30

ADOLFO GUILLOT

It is invariant by translations in y and by the order two-mapping σ

(17)

(x, y) σ→ (−x,−y).

It has the ﬁrst integral y − 2/x. Each one of its level curves is may be parametrized
by x and is biholomorphic to C∗. In this global coordinate the restriction of the vector
ﬁeld is (2x)−1∂/∂x. Let Λ ⊂ C be a lattice. Since the vector ﬁeld (16) is invariant by
translations in y, it induces a vector ﬁeld in S = C× (C/Λ), which is an elliptic ﬁbration
with respect to the projection onto the ﬁrst factor. The foliation F induced by X is a
turbulent one. This elliptic ﬁbration is equivariant with respect to the involution induced
by (17) on S and by x 7→ −x on C. The quotient E of S under σ is, after resolution of
the singularities produced by the four ﬁxed points, an elliptic ﬁbration Π : E → C. It is
still endowed with a vector ﬁeld, projecting onto ∂/∂z by the projection (x, y) 7→ x2. For
c ∈ 1
2Λ, the leaf y = c + 2/x of (16) is ﬁxed under the involution and the projection Π
in restriction to this leaf is injective (and corresponds thus to a maximal solution). In
the other leaves the solution is multivalued and has two determinations. This produces
an elliptic ﬁbration Π : E → C endowed with a meromorphic vector ﬁeld preserving it
(inducing a turbulent foliation) having exactly four single-valued solutions.

Some classical examples of algebraic diﬀerential equations on surfaces corresponding to
the ﬁrst possibility of the Main Theorem (giving holomorphic vector ﬁelds on surfaces)
are given, for example, by the Chazy VI equation φ′′′ = φφ′′ + 5(φ′)2 − φ2φ′ and the
Chazy IX equation φ′′′ = 18(φ′ + φ2)(φ′ + 3φ2) − 6(φ′)2. They both have algebraic ﬁrst
integrals and their restriction to a generic level surface integrals respectively, as a linear
vector ﬁeld in P2 or as a constant vector ﬁeld in an Abelian surface (see [Gui12] for
details). Let us now describe some examples related to the second possibility of the Main
Theorem.

Example 24. Consider the vector ﬁeld X in C × P1 given in C × C by (z − w)∂/∂z.
It is invariant under the diagonal action of Aﬀ(C) on C × C. Let Γ ⊂ Aﬀ(C) be a
crystallographic group. Let ν be the smallest natural such that γν is a translation for
every γ ∈ Γ. Let B be the quotient of C under Γ. The quotient of C × P1 under the
diagonal action of Γ on produces a surface S endowed with a rational ﬁbration Π : S → B
with respect to which the foliation induced by X is a Riccati one. Notice that this ﬁbration
is not preserved by the ﬂow of X on S. However, there is an elliptic ﬁbration Ξ : S → P1
induced by (z, w) 7→ (z − w)ν that maps X to the vector ﬁeld νξ∂/∂ξ. This second
ﬁbration is preserved by the vector ﬁeld. There are two special ﬁbers: one dicritical and
one invariant.

The Main Theorem is of a birational nature and applies more generally to vector ﬁelds
on analytic surfaces having a K¨ahler desingularization, like meromorphic vector ﬁelds in
algebraic surfaces. Consider the following example, analogue to Example 30 in [GR12]:

VECTOR FIELDS WITH SINGLE-VALUED SOLUTIONS

31

Example 25. Consider, in C3, the E8 singularity x2 +y3 +z5 = 0, together with the vector
ﬁeld given by the restriction of

It has the maximal solution

(cid:18)1

2

e15t℘′(cid:18) e5t

(15x + 3y2)

∂
∂x

+ (10y − 2x)
5 (cid:19) ,−e10t℘(cid:18)e5t

∂
∂y

+ 6z

∂
∂z

.

5 (cid:19) , e6t(cid:19) ,

for the Weierstrass elliptic function ℘ such that (℘′)2 = 4℘3 − 4. Under the map-
ping (x, y, z) 7→ z, the vector ﬁeld maps to 6z∂/∂z.
Example 26 (Briot-Bouquet [BB55], Ghys-Rebelo [GR97]). Consider the vector ﬁelds

(18)

η

∂

∂ζ − Q(ζ)η2 ∂

∂η

,

where Q is a rational function. It corresponds to the equation ζ ′′ = −(ζ ′)2Q(ξ). Briot
and Bouquet classiﬁed the rational functions giving univalent equations, which correspond
to the uniformizable aﬃne structures with singularities on rational curves. For example,
if Q = (1−n)/ξ the solution is ξ = tn. For S(ζ) = 4ζ 3−g2ζ−g3 and Q(ζ) = −S ′(ζ)/S(ζ),
a solution is the Weierstrass function ℘(t) satisfying (℘′)2 = S(℘). The image of the
homogeneous polynomial vector ﬁeld of degree d in C2 A(x, y)∂/∂x + B(x, y)∂/∂y under
(x, y) 7→ (x/y, [yA − xB]/y2) is (18) for

Q(ζ) =

(2 − d)B − y(Ax − ζBx)

.

A − ζB

The classiﬁcation of semicomplete homogeneous quadratic vector ﬁelds in C2 may be
obtained as a consequence of Briot and Bouquet’s classiﬁcation.

References

[BPVdV84] W. Barth, C. Peters, and A. Van de Ven, Compact complex surfaces, Ergebnisse der Math-

[BB55]

[Bru00]

[Bru03]

[Bru04]

[BG12]

[CR15]

[CS82]

ematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3), vol. 4, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1984.
Briot and Bouquet, Recherches fur les fonctions doublement p´eriodiques, C. R. Hebdo-
madaires des Sc´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences 40 (1855), no. 7, 342–344.
Marco Brunella, Birational geometry of foliations, Monograf´ıas de Matem´atica., Instituto
de Matem´atica Pura e Aplicada (IMPA), Rio de Janeiro, 2000.

, Foliations on complex projective surfaces, Dynamical systems. Part II, Pubbl. Cent.

Ric. Mat. Ennio Giorgi, Scuola Norm. Sup., Pisa, 2003, pp. 49–77.

, Complete polynomial vector ﬁelds on the complex plane, Topology 43 (2004), no. 2,

433–445.
Alvaro Bustinduy and Luis Giraldo, Completeness is determined by any non-algebraic tra-
jectory, Adv. Math. 231 (2012), no. 2, 664–679.
C´esar Camacho and Rudy Rosas, Invariant sets near singularities of holomorphic foliations,
to appear in Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems.
C´esar Camacho and Paulo Sad, Invariant varieties through singularities of holomorphic
vector ﬁelds, Ann. of Math. (2) 115 (1982), no. 3, 579–595.

32

[Er¨e82]

[For51]
[GR97]

[Gui07]

[Gui12]

[Gui14]

[Gui16]
[GR12]

[Hil97]

ADOLFO GUILLOT

A. `E. Er¨emenko, Meromorphic solutions of algebraic diﬀerential equations, Uspekhi Mat.
Nauk 37 (1982), no. 4(226), 53–82, 240.
Lester R. Ford, Automorphic functions, 2nd ed., Chelsea Pub. Co., New York, 1951.
E. Ghys and J.-C. Rebelo, Singularit´es des ﬂots holomorphes. II, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Greno-
ble) 47 (1997), no. 4, 1117–1174.
Adolfo Guillot, Sur les ´equations d’Halphen et les actions de SL2(C), Publ. Math. Inst.
Hautes ´Etudes Sci. (2007), no. 105, 221–294.

, The geometry of Chazy’s homogeneous third-order diﬀerential equations, Funkcial.

Ekvac. 55 (2012), no. 1, 67–87.

, Vector ﬁelds, separatrices and Kato surfaces, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 64

(2014), no. 3, 1331–1361.

, Semicomplete vector ﬁelds in non-K¨ahler surfaces, preprint, 2016.

Adolfo Guillot and Julio Rebelo, Semicomplete meromorphic vector ﬁelds on complex sur-
faces, J. Reine Angew. Math. 667 (2012), 27–65.
Einar Hille, Ordinary diﬀerential equations in the complex domain, Dover Publications Inc.,
Mineola, NY, 1997, Reprint of the 1976 original.

[Lai93]

[HKM61] Masuo Hukuhara, Tosihusa Kimura, and Tizuko Matuda, Equations diﬀ´erentielles ordinaires
du premier ordre dans le champ complexe, Publications of the Mathematical Society of
Japan, 7. The Mathematical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 1961.
Ilpo Laine, Nevanlinna theory and complex diﬀerential equations, de Gruyter Studies in
Mathematics, vol. 15, Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 1993.
Frank Loray, Pseudo-groupe d’une singularit´e de feuilletage holomorphe en dimension deux,
hal-00016434, 2006.
Andrzej J. Maciejewski and Jean-Marie Strelcyn, On the algebraic non-integrability of the
Halphen system, Phys. Lett. A 201 (1995), no. 2-3, 161–166.
J. Malmquist, Sur les fonctions a un nombre ﬁni de branches d´eﬁnies par les ´equations
diﬀ´erentielles du premier ordre, Acta Math. 36 (1913), no. 1, 297–343.

[Mal13]

[Lor06]

[MS95]

[Mal20]

, Sur les fonctions `a un nombre ﬁni de branches satisfaisant `a une ´equation

diﬀ´erentielle du premier ordre, Acta Math. 42 (1920), no. 1, 317–325.

[McQ01] Michael McQuillan, Non-commutative Mori theory, preprint IHES M/01/42, 2001.
[McQ08]

, Canonical models of foliations, Pure Appl. Math. Q. 4 (2008), no. 3, part 2, 877–

[Pal57]

[PS01]

[Per05]

[Reb96]

[Sad99]

[Yos33]

1012.
Richard S. Palais, A global formulation of the Lie theory of transformation groups, Mem.
Amer. Math. Soc. No. 22 (1957), iii+123.
I. Pan and M. Sebastiani, Sur les ´equations diﬀ´erentielles alg´ebriques admettant des solutions
avec une singularit´e essentielle, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 51 (2001), no. 6, 1621–1633.
Jorge Vit´orio Pereira, On the height of foliated surfaces with vanishing Kodaira dimension,
Publ. Mat. 49 (2005), no. 2, 363–373.
Julio C. Rebelo, Singularit´es des ﬂots holomorphes, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 46 (1996),
no. 2, 411–428.
Paulo Sad, Regular foliations along curves, Ann. Fac. Sci. Toulouse Math. (6) 8 (1999),
no. 4, 661–675.
Kosaku Yosida, A generalisation of a Malmquist’s theorem., Jap. J. Math. 9 (1933), 253–256.

Instituto de Matem´aticas, Unidad Cuernavaca, Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de

M´exico, A.P. 273-3 Admon. 3, Cuernavaca, Morelos, 62251, Mexico

E-mail address: adolfo.guillot@im.unam.mx

