Many-body localization phase transition: a new simpliﬁed approximate

renormalization group

Liangsheng Zhang, Bo Zhao, and Trithep Devakul

Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA

Department of Physics, Princeton University and Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, USA

David A. Huse

We present a simpliﬁed strong-randomness renormalization group (RG) that captures some as-
pects of the many-body localization (MBL) phase transition in generic disordered one-dimensional
systems. This RG can be formulated analytically and is mathematically equivalent to a domain
coarsening model that has been previously solved. The critical ﬁxed point distribution and critical
exponents (that satisfy the Chayes inequality) are thus obtained analytically or to numerical pre-
cision. This reproduces some, but not all, of the qualitative features of the MBL phase transition
that are indicated by previous numerical work and approximate RG studies: our RG might serve
as a “zeroth-order” approximation for future RG studies. One interesting feature that we high-
light is that the rare Griﬃths regions are fractal. For thermal Griﬃths regions within the MBL
phase, this feature might be qualitatively correctly captured by our RG. If this is correct beyond
our approximations, then these Griﬃths eﬀects are stronger than has been previously assumed.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The dynamical quantum phase transition between many-body localization (MBL) and thermalization appears to
be a completely new type of quantum phase transition1–22. This phase transition occurs in the thermodynamic limit
of large systems for certain closed quantum many-body systems with quenched disorder. It separates the thermal
phase where the closed system serves as a “bath” for itself and at long times approaches thermal equilibrium at a
nonzero temperature and thus a state described by equilibrium quantum statistical mechanics, from the MBL phase
where these statements are not true and instead the system remains localized near its initial state. Thus it is a phase
transition where the long-time behavior of the system stops being given by equilibrium quantum statistical mechanics.
It is also an “eigenstate phase transition”23, where the nature of the eigenstates of the system’s dynamics changes
from thermal and volume-law entangled, to localized and boundary-law entangled.

Many questions remain unanswered about this MBL phase transition. One theoretical tool that has been highly
successful in understanding more “traditional” classical and quantum phase transitions and critical systems is the
renormalization group (RG). Two recent papers have formulated and studied approximate RG treatments of the MBL
phase transition in one-dimensional systems9,10. In the present paper, we simplify these RG approaches even more,
allowing a more exact study of the resulting ﬁxed point and phase transition within our simpliﬁed RG17. These
approximate RG’s can serve at least two purposes: 1) as examples that suggest possible properties of these phases
and this phase transition, and 2) as ﬁrst steps towards possibly developing a more systematic RG treatment of these
systems.

One feature of our RG that we will highlight, since it was not emphasized in the previous RG studies9,10 nor in
the recent study of Griﬃths eﬀects in the MBL phase15, is the possibility that the thermal Griﬃths regions within
the MBL phase have a fractal dimension df < 1 in these one-dimensional systems. This is a clear result of our RG,
and the mechanism by which this happens seems like it might be more generally valid and not just an artifact of
our approximations. One consequence of such fractal Griﬃths regions is that averaged correlations and entanglement
within eigenstates in the MBL phase can decay with distance x as stretched exponentials: ∼ exp (−(x/x0)df ), instead
of the simple exponentials that one might naively expect.

II. AN APPROXIMATE RG

Now we will present our approximate RG, pointing out and discussing the various assumptions and approximations
that are used. We will refer to the two previous RG studies as VHA9 and PVP10. Like them, we consider a one-
dimensional system whose dynamics is given by a local Hamiltonian, or more generally a local Floquet operator, with
quenched randomness. The system has a MBL phase transition and the system’s parameters are near this critical
point. We assume, as in VHA, that each local region of this system can be classiﬁed either as thermalizing (T) or
insulating (I). This need not be true of the system at the microscopic scale, but we are assuming that under coarse
graining the critical point does ﬂow to an inﬁnite-randomness ﬁxed point where such a “black and white” description

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
5
1

 
 
]
h
c
e
m

-
t
a
t
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

2
v
6
9
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

is correct, and we have already coarse-grained enough for this to be a good approximation. This does happen within
our RG (as well in both VHA and PVP), so this assumption is at least internally consistent. One question for future
investigation is whether all these approximate RG’s are possibly missing some important physics of the transition by
not allowing for some intermediate local behaviors between fully thermalizing and fully insulating to be relevant at
the critical ﬁxed point.

If we have such a one-dimensional system and, as we assume, all regions of it can be classiﬁed as either T or I, then
the system is a chain of “blocks” of various lengths that alternate along the chain between T and I. In the previous RG
studies9,10, each such block was characterized by only two parameters: the typical many-body energy level spacing of
the block, and some rate at which entanglement can spread from one end of the block to the other end. Our RG is
even more “simpliﬁed” and characterizes each block only by whether it is T or I and by its many-body level spacing.
The justiﬁcations for making this approximation of ignoring the precise value of the “entanglement rate” for each
block are: For almost all T blocks the entanglement rate at large (cid:96) is much larger than the level spacing which is
exponentially small with (cid:96). As a consequence it is a reasonable approximation to ignore the precise magnitudes of
these large T-block entanglement rates and just assume they are very fast compared to the many-body level spacing17.
Near the critical point the I blocks at large (cid:96) are almost all near critical and have entanglement rates whose logarithms
are close to that of the level spacing, so we make the approximation that the entanglement rate and the many-body
level spacing are equal for each I block17. These are certainly oversimpliﬁcations, and we know that our RG does get
some of the physics incorrect, as we discuss below. The virtues of our RG are its simplicity and that even with this
simplicity it does appear to get some of the physics of the MBL transition qualitatively correct.
The many body level spacing of a one-dimensional block of length (cid:96) is ∼ exp (−s(cid:96)), where s is the entropy per unit
length (e.g., s = log 2 for a spin-1/2 chain at inﬁnite temperature). We use the block’s length (cid:96) as the parameter that
quantiﬁes its level spacing. The nth block in the chain has length (cid:96)n. Once we have coarse-grained to a scale where
adjacent blocks typically diﬀer substantially in length, we can use a strong-randomness RG approach, justiﬁed by the
typical ratio of many-body level spacings in two adjacent blocks being ∼ exp (−s|(cid:96)n − (cid:96)n+1|) (cid:28) 1. Note that our RG,
like the previous ones9,10, assumes that the dynamic critical scaling is given by the many-body level spacing, which
is consistent with numerical studies on a spin-chain model’s dynamics near its MBL transition4.

(a)TIT rule

(b)ITI rule

FIG. 1: A sketch of the RG rules. (a) shows the TIT rule where a central I (insulating) block is surrounded by two longer T
(thermal) blocks, and after merging the new longer block is thermal. (b) shows the ITI move where a T block is surrounded
by two longer I blocks and the resulting new block is insulating.

A single RG step is simply: Find the shortest remaining block, say it is block n. This is the remaining block with
the largest level spacing. Merge this block with its neighbor blocks on both sides to make a new larger block with
length

(cid:96)new = (cid:96)n−1 + (cid:96)n + (cid:96)n+1 .

(1)

If the shortest block n is an I block, then the new longer block is a T block. A sketch of this “TIT” move is shown
in Fig. 1(a). The neighbor blocks, both of which are T blocks that are longer than I block n, serve as local “baths”
and thermalize the shorter central I block. This relies on the level spacings in both of the longer neighbor T blocks
being much smaller than the rate of entanglement spread across the shorter central I block, so the two T blocks get
strongly entangled across the I block. Thus it is quite plausible that the eigenstates of this new T block of length

	Thermal		Block			Insula1ng		Block			Thermal	Block			Thermal	Block			Insula(ng		Block			Thermal		Block			Insula(ng		Block			Insula(ng	Block		3

(cid:96)new, isolated from its neighbors, are thermal, with thermal “volume-law” entanglement within this new block. In
this case, where two longer T blocks thermalize a shorter I block, the approximations we make in our simple RG seem
plausible near the MBL phase transition. It is for the other case, when block n is a T block, that we have to make
some questionable assumptions to produce a simple RG:

If the shortest block n is a T block, then the two neighbor blocks are I blocks, and we assume the new longer block
that is then made in this RG step is an I block. Fig. 1(b) illustrates this “ITI” rule. The two longer I blocks are
isolating the shorter central T block from other T blocks, and thus localizing it. On one level this seems sensible: the
rate of entanglement spread across the neighbor I blocks is much smaller than the level spacing of the shorter central
T block, so should not mix the eigenstates of the central block. But if we ask about the rate of entanglement spread
across the new long I block of length (cid:96)new, a reasonable estimate would be ∼ exp (−s((cid:96)n−1 + (cid:96)n+1)), since the spread
across the central T block is assumed to be very fast. And this suggests that our new long I block may not really be
insulating, since this rate is much larger than its level spacing. But we will proceed with the assumption that this
new block is indeed I.

One feature of this simple RG that makes it simple is that it is invariant on swapping I and T. This is because we are
treating the process of two T blocks thermalizing a shorter central I block as mathematically the same as two I blocks
localizing a shorter central T block. Unfortunately, we know that the real system does not have such a symmetry.
Facilitating entanglement is very diﬀerent from, and much “easier” than, blocking the spread of entanglement, because
interacting quantum systems generically do get entangled. In the “battle” between thermalization and localization,
thermalization always has “the upper hand”. And we know from all the numerical studies of one-dimensional models
that the properties of the phase transition are very asymmetric between the MBL phase and the thermal phase, with
the critical point appearing very localized and the changes in systems’ properties happening almost all on the thermal
side of the phase transition (see e.g. Refs.5,9,10).

Our approximate RG is mathematically equivalent to a domain coarsening model solved by Rutenberg, Bray and
Derrida24,25. The model they solved is a limiting case of deterministic zero-temperature domain coarsening in a
classical one-dimensional system with short-range interactions and nonconserved Ising-like order parameter. In this
limit the shortest domain disappears ﬁrst, allowing the two adjacent domains to grow, merge and thus produce a new
domain whose length is the sum of the lengths of the original three domains. Our RG is also similar to those of Fisher
for the ground states of certain disordered spin chains26. The diﬀerence from Fisher’s RG is “simply” a sign: his RG
can be written as (cid:96)new = (cid:96)n−1 − (cid:96)n + (cid:96)n+1, where (cid:96) in this case is the logarithm of the renormalized interaction.

III. CRITICAL FIXED POINT DISTRIBUTION

Due to the symmetry between T blocks and I blocks within our RG, the length distributions of these two types of

blocks are identical at the critical ﬁxed point. To derive the RG equations24,26, we deﬁne the length cutoﬀ

and

Λ ≡ min

n

(cid:96)n

ζn ≡ (cid:96)n − Λ

for a block of length (cid:96)n, so ζn ≥ 0. The RG rule (1) becomes (giving the shortest block the label n = 2):

ζnew = ζ1 + ζ2 + ζ3 + 2Λ = ζ1 + ζ3 + 2Λ ,

(2)

(3)

(4)

where ζ2 = 0 because the second block is at the cutoﬀ: (cid:96)2 = Λ. Fisher’s RG does not have the additive 2Λ term,
it is instead ζnew = ζ1 + ζ3. This diﬀerence makes our ﬁxed point rather diﬀerent from Fisher’s, although the same
approach is used to write out the ﬁxed point equation. A key point in both RG’s is that the length of the new
block only depends on the 3 blocks that are removed, so if the lengths of the blocks are initially uncorrelated, no
correlations are generated by this RG24,26. And any short-range correlations between block lengths are suppressed by
the coarse-graining of the RG. Thus the ﬁxed point distribution has the block lengths uncorrelated, so we only need
to study the single-block length distribution.

The probability distribution of ζ at cutoﬀ Λ will be denoted as ρ(ζ, Λ). In order to treat the critical point we now
assume both types of blocks have the same length distribution. At each RG step, when the cutoﬀ Λ changes by dΛ,
all the blocks with ζ in the interval [0, dΛ] are removed and new blocks are formed by combining them with their two
neighboring blocks. The distribution then needs to be re-normalized and shifted back to have ζmin = 0. These steps
all combine to produce the integro-diﬀerential equation:

dζb ρ(ζa, Λ)ρ(ζb, Λ)δ(ζ − ζa − ζb − 2Λ) .

(5)

(cid:90) ∞

(cid:90) ∞

∂ρ
∂Λ

=

∂ρ
∂ζ

+ ρ(0, Λ)

dζa

0

0

As the cutoﬀ Λ gets large, the distribution of ζ becomes broad, and the system thus approaches an inﬁnite-randomness
ﬁxed point. To treat that ﬁxed point, we divide all lengths by the cutoﬀ, thus keeping the rescaled length cutoﬀ at
one:

η ≡ ζ
Λ

,

ρ(ζ, Λ) ≡ 1
Λ

Q(η, Λ) =

1
Λ

Q(

ζ
Λ

, Λ) .

(6)

4

Q(η) is then invariant under the RG ﬂow at the critical ﬁxed point. We thus have the RG equation for the critical
ﬁxed point distribution Q∗(η), independent of Λ, as:

As the total length of system is constant,(cid:80)

d
dη

(1 + η)Q∗(cid:105)
(cid:104)
(cid:88)

+ Q∗(0)Θ(η − 2)

Q∗(ηa)Q∗(η − ηa − 2)dηa = 0 .

(cid:88)

n (cid:96)n is also ﬁxed. At the ﬁxed point, this becomes

(cid:96)i = Λ

(1 + ηi) = ΛN (Λ) (1 + (cid:104)η(cid:105)f.p.)

(cid:90) η−2

0

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

i

i

where N (Λ) is the total number of blocks when the cutoﬀ is Λ and (cid:104)η(cid:105)f.p. is the average value of η at the ﬁxed point,
which is independent of Λ. This implies that the product ΛN is a constant, which results in Q∗(0) = 1/2, and this
acts as a boundary condition for Eq. (7) so that it can be integrated out iteratively. In the interval 0 ≤ η ≤ 2, Eq. (7)
is solved by

Q∗(η) =

1

2(1 + η)

,

for

0 ≤ η ≤ 2 ,

and using this expression, in the interval 2 ≤ η ≤ 4 we have

(cid:104) 1

(cid:90) η

2

−

ln(η(cid:48) − 1)

4η(cid:48)

dη(cid:48)(cid:105)

,

for

2 ≤ η ≤ 4 .

Q∗(η) =

1

1 + η

2

In principle, the analytical form of Q∗(η) for any η ≥ 0 can be obtained in the same way by treating Q∗(η) in
a piecewise manner. This shows that the physical (non-negative at all η ≥ 0) solution to Eq. (7) is unique. The
closed form solution for Q∗(η) is shown in Rutenberg and Bray24. Asymptotically Q∗(η) falls oﬀ exponentially:
Q∗(η) ∼ CQ exp(−λQη) for η (cid:29) 1. The function is exhibited in Fig. 2.

FIG. 2: The scaled ﬁxed point length distribution Q∗(η).

0246810η10-210-1100Q∗(η)IV. CRITICAL EXPONENTS

5

By perturbing the distribution away from Q∗(η), we can study the critical components related to the stability of
this ﬁxed point. Moving away from the critical point generates diﬀerent distributions for T and I blocks: QT (η, Λ)
and QI (η, Λ), and when the critical ﬁxed point is unstable under this perturbation, the diﬀerence grows as the RG
ﬂows, driving the system into either the thermal phase or the localized phase. Similar to the derivation of Q∗(η), the
RG equations for these two distributions can be found as



Λ

∂QT
∂Λ

= QT + (1 + η)

∂QT
∂η

+ QT (η, Λ)

QT (0, Λ) − QI (0, Λ)

+ QI (0, Λ)Θ(η − 2)

Λ

∂QI
∂Λ

= QI + (1 + η)

∂QI
∂η

+ QI (η, Λ)

dηa QT (ηa, Λ)QT (η − ηa − 2, Λ) ;
QI (0, Λ) − QT (0, Λ)

+ QT (0, Λ)Θ(η − 2)

dηa QI (ηa, Λ)QI (η − ηa − 2, Λ) .

(cid:104)
(cid:90) η−2
(cid:104)
(cid:90) η−2

0

0

(cid:105)
(cid:105)

To investigate the critical exponents, we consider a small perturbation away from Q∗(η):

(cid:26) QT (η, Λ) ≡ Q∗(η) + δT (η, Λ) ,

QI (η, Λ) ≡ Q∗(η) + δI (η, Λ) ,

(cid:90) ∞

0

δT,I (η, Λ)dη = 0 .

and for QT,I to still be a probability distribution, δT,I both must satisfy

For simplicity in calculation, we further deﬁne(cid:26) δ+(η, Λ) ≡ δT (η, Λ) + δI (η, Λ) ,
(cid:90) η−2

so to linear order, the equations for δ+ and δ− are:

δ−(η, Λ) ≡ δT (η, Λ) − δI (η, Λ) .

Λ

∂δ+
∂Λ

= δ+ + (1 + η)

∂δ+
∂η
+ Θ(η − 2)

(cid:90) η−2

0

dηa δ+(ηa, Λ)Q∗(η − ηa − 2)

+ δ+(0, Λ)Θ(η − 2)

dηa Q∗(ηa)Q∗(η − ηa − 2)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

and

Λ

∂δ−
∂Λ

= δ− + (1 + η)

∂δ−
∂η
+ Θ(η − 2)

(cid:90) η−2

0

+ 2Q∗(η)δ−(0, Λ) − δ−(0, Λ)Θ(η − 2)

dηa δ−(ηa, Λ)Q∗(η − ηa − 2) .

To ﬁnd the eigenmodes of the RG ﬂow at the critical ﬁxed point, we set
δ+(η, Λ) ≡ Λ1/ν+f+(η) ,
δ−(η, Λ) ≡ Λ1/ν− f−(η) .

Under this standard scaling assumption, we have

0

(cid:40)

(cid:90) η−2

0

dηa Q∗(ηa)Q∗(η − ηa − 2)

f+(η) = f+(η) + (1 + η)

+ f+(0)Θ(η − 2)

1
ν+

df+
dη
+ Θ(η − 2)

(cid:90) η−2

0

dηa f+(ηa)Q∗(η − ηa − 2) .

(cid:90) η−2

0

dηa Q∗(ηa)Q∗(η − ηa − 2)

and

1
ν−

f−(η) = f−(η) + (1 + η)

+ 2Q∗(η)f−(0) − f−(0)Θ(η − 2)

df−
dη
+ Θ(η − 2)

(cid:90) η−2

0

dηa f−(ηa)Q∗(η − ηa − 2) .

(cid:90) η−2

0

dηa Q∗(ηa)Q∗(η − ηa − 2)

6

(19)

The critical exponents can then be found as eigenvalues of these two equations. Note that the solutions also need to

satisfy the normalization constraint from Eq. (13):(cid:90) ∞

On the other hand, integrating both sides of Eq. (18) and Eq. (19) gives

f±(η)dη = 0 .

f±(η)dη = 0

(cid:16) 1

ν±

0

− 1

(cid:17)(cid:90) ∞

0

(20)

(21)

assuming both integrations exist. Therefore the normalization constraint is automatically satisﬁed if the eigenvalue
is not 1; otherwise we do need to check the normalization.

We diagonalized these two eigenvalue equations numerically. The derivative was discretized to second order as a
right derivative to make it well-behaved even at η = 0 where the functions do not exist to the left (for η < 0), and the
integration was discretized with the trapezoidal rule. For f+ all eigenfunctions corresponding to the largest eigenvalue
1 are of the same sign, so are not normalizable and are thus unphysical. The second largest eigenvalue has real part
of about −4.4. This shows that δ+ decays at least as fast as ∼ Λ−4.4 when the RG is ﬂowing, so thus is irrelevant
and associated with the ﬂow on the critical manifold toward the ﬁxed point distribution. This shows that the ﬁxed
point distribution Q∗(η) is stable if QT and QI are perturbed in the same direction.

FIG. 3: The one relevant eigenfunction f−(η) at the critical ﬁxed point (see main text).

1
For f−, again the eigenvalue with the largest real part is
ν− = 1 and its corresponding eigenfunction cannot be
normalized so is unphysical. The eigenvalue with second largest real part is positive and real and is the critical
exponent we are looking for. It is 1/ν− ∼= 0.3994, as obtained by Bray and Derrida25. The next eigenvalue after that
has negative real part ∼= −1.8, so as expected there is only one physical relevant operator at this critical ﬁxed point.
trapezoidal rule gives about −0.0001, which conﬁrms the constraint(cid:82) ∞
The corresponding eigenfunction is shown in Fig. 3 with f−(0) normalized to 1. The numerical integration of it using
0 f−(η) = 0 to the numerical precision we used.
Since this critical exponent is positive, the ﬁxed point distribution is unstable against this perturbation which drives
QT and QI in opposite directions and the system thus ﬂows away from criticality into either the thermal or the MBL
phase. The diﬀerence grows as ∼ Λ1/ν− as the length cutoﬀ increases.
Note that this ν− ∼= 2.50 satisﬁes and does not saturate the Chayes inequality21,27, which in this case of d = 1 is
ν− ≥ 2. This is qualitatively the same as the previous RG’s9,10, although this value of ν− is quantitatively a little

05101520η0.20.00.20.40.60.81.0f− Eigenvector7

smaller than those of VHA and PVP. Some good understanding of “why” this exponent exceeds the Chayes bound
still eludes us.

V. FRACTAL GRIFFITH REGIONS

As the RG ﬂows away from the critical ﬁxed point into one of the phases, the two length distributions become
very diﬀerent in width. If we ﬂow into the thermal phase the chain becomes mostly T, with the remaining I blocks
being rare and almost all of length very close to the length cutoﬀ. The T blocks get an arbitrarily broad length
distribution, with almost all T blocks much longer than the cutoﬀ. Since almost all blocks of length near the cutoﬀ
are I blocks, almost all RG moves are TIT moves and make the already long T blocks even longer; our RG seems
like a safe approximation for these moves. However some small fraction of the RG moves are ITI moves with the
three blocks all being of length near the cutoﬀ. These are the moves that maintain the population of rare I blocks
(the Griﬃths regions). But these are precisely the type of RG moves for which our RG approximations are not to be
trusted, as we discuss above. Thus we do not expect our approximate RG to correctly model the Griﬃths regions of
rare insulating segments in the thermal phase, even qualitatively. We will return to this after examining the Griﬃths
regions in the MBL phase.

As the RG ﬂows from near the critical ﬁxed point to “deep” in the MBL phase, it goes in to the MBL regime where
almost all RG moves are ITI moves that make the already long I blocks even longer. For these moves, our RG is
typically a good approximation, because the T block that is “integrated out” is typically much shorter than the two
adjacent I blocks, so eﬀectively we are just joining two very long I blocks to make an even longer I block. However,
occasionally there remains a rare short I block with length at the cutoﬀ that is slightly shorter than its adjacent T
blocks, and it produces a TIT move and allows the rare T blocks to grow, thus generating the Griﬃths regions, which
are rare long T blocks within the MBL phase. For these moves, our RG seems like a reasonable approximation: the
two T blocks get entangled with each other across the short I block between them.

FIG. 4: A sketch of part of the fractal structure of a rare large Griﬃths T (locally thermalizing) region in the MBL phase.

Now let’s ask what is the most probable way that our RG makes a large T Griﬃths block within the MBL phase
near the transition. This is illustrated in Fig 4. The large T block arose from a TIT move. In this limit where the
RG has ﬂowed from near the critical point to deep within the MBL phase, almost all T blocks have lengths near the
cutoﬀ, so in this TIT move, the I block’s length is at the cutoﬀ and the two T blocks most likely have lengths just
above the cutoﬀ, so all three blocks are of essentially the same length. The I block can be typical, so it typically arose
much earlier in the RG by integrating out a very short T block. The T blocks are themselves rare and each arose
when the cutoﬀ length was roughly 3 times shorter from similar TIT moves. Thus we see that within this RG these
Griﬃths regions are generated from a fractal set of rare T blocks that, on scales much smaller than the ﬁnal rare T
block, happened to be placed just correctly such that they are able, within this approximate RG, to thermalize all

the intervening typical I blocks. This fractal set of rare T blocks has fractal dimension df = log 2/ log 3 ∼= 0.631 in

the limit of the largest such Griﬃths regions.

TTITTTITIITTITITITITITITIT8

FIG. 5: Above shows the numerical results of LT as a function of L in the insulating phase to obtain the fractal dimension
df . Nearby points have been binned and (their logarithm) averaged. Error bars show the standard error of points in each bin,
assuming they are independent.

To test this we have numerically run the RG on a sample with initially 106 blocks, with initial length distributions
QT (η) = eQ∗(eη) and QI (η) = Q∗(η/e)/e, so we start near the transition and ﬂow away into the MBL phase. We
measure LT , which is the total length of each T block that is in the fractal, so it has been in T blocks at all smaller
scales of the RG, and we average LT over the T blocks present when the length cutoﬀ is L. After a short transient,
the results approach the expected LT ∼ Ldf (see Fig. 5), with df = 0.635 ± 0.03, quite consistent with the expected
fractal dimension.

In our simpliﬁed RG, we work only near the critical point, where the entanglement rate across an I block is close to
the block’s many-body level spacing. If the bare system is actually farther into the MBL phase away from the critical
point, then the entanglement rate across a typical I block will decay with block length faster than the many-body
level spacing, and when we grow a fractal Griﬃths region using TIT moves (in a less simpliﬁed RG such as VHA9)
and typical I blocks, then for the two T blocks to become entangled, the I block needs to be shorter than the two T
blocks and as a result its fractal dimension df will be larger, with log 2/ log 3 < df < 1. In the limit where the bare
system is deep in the MBL phase df approaches unity, and df decreases as the transition is approached.

If this proposal of fractal Griﬃths regions within the MBL phase in one dimension is not just an artifact of the
approximations we make, there seem to be at least two possible scenarios: One possibility is that the result is only
partially correct: the microscopic T blocks within the fractal Griﬃths region do get entangled with each other, but
they do not succeed in becoming strongly entangled with, and thus locally thermalizing, the typical I blocks that are
in between them within the Griﬃths region. In this case, there will be resulting correlations and entanglement within
the many-body eigenstates that extend across the Griﬃths regions, so extend to distance (cid:96) with a probability that
falls oﬀ as a stretched exponential function of (cid:96). But the eﬀective many-body level spacing of this Griﬃths region
may be set not by the full length of the region, but only by the length ∼ (cid:96)df that is within the entangled T blocks on
the microscopic scale. This is the scenario that was mentioned and assumed in Ref.15. The other possibility is that
the Griﬃths regions are fully thermal and entangled, and they respond dynamically like they have a many-body level
spacing set by their full length (cid:96). In this case the result of Ref.15 is modiﬁed so the spatially averaged low frequency
conductivity σ(ω) behaves instead as log (σ(ω)/ω) ∼ −| log ω|df . Since df is not much less than one, for small system
data this will be hard to distinguish from the continuously varying power of ω that arises15 from the ﬁrst scenario.
But it would be a modiﬁcation to the conclusions of Ref.15, so that the Griﬃths regions always dominate over the
Mott many-body resonances in the limiting low frequency conductivity of an inﬁnite system.

Our simpliﬁed RG of course also gives fractal insulating Griﬃths regions in the thermal phase, by symmetry. But
this is almost certainly an artifact of the oversimpliﬁcations of this RG: A low density fractal of well-placed rare
insulating regions are not capable of changing an otherwise typical thermal region into an insulator. Thus our results
do not suggest that a revision of the discussions9,12,22 of Griﬃths eﬀects within the thermal phase is needed.

In this paper we introduced a simpliﬁed RG for the MBL phase transition in one-dimensional systems.

It is
mathematically equivalent to an exactly solved domain coarsening model24,25, so the critical ﬁxed point distribution

VI. CONCLUSIONS

1.522.533.5400.511.522.533.5log(LT)log(L)Slope 0.6359

and the critical exponents that characterize the stability of the critical point within our RG are known analytically
or to numerical precision. Even though some over-simpliﬁcations are incorporated to achieve this tractability, our
approximate RG may correctly capture some qualitative features of the phase transition and of the MBL phase, and
might provide a basis for future more systematic RG studies. One particular feature of this RG that we discussed
in some detail is the fractal thermal Griﬃths regions within the MBL phase that it produces, which seem like they
might be a qualitatively correct feature of MBL in one dimension with quenched randomness.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Ehud Altman, Paul Fanto, Vedika Khemani, Sid Parameswaran, Andrew Potter and Ronen Vosk for
helpful discussions, Sarang Gopalakrishnan also for comments on the manuscript, and Cecile Monthus for bringing
Refs.24,25 to our attention. D.A.H. is the Addie and Harold Broitman Member at I.A.S.

1 D. M. Basko, I. L. Aleiner and B. L. Altshuler, Metal-insulator transition in a weakly interacting many-electron system with

localized single-particle states, Annals of Physics 321, 1126 (2006).

2 V. Oganesyan and D. A. Huse, Localization of interacting fermions at high temperature, Phys. Rev. B 75, 155111 (2007).
3 C. Monthus and T. Garel, Many-body localization transition in a lattice model of interacting fermions: statistics of renor-

malized hoppings in conﬁguration space, Phys. Rev. B 81, 134202 (2010).

4 A. Pal and D. A. Huse, Many-body localization phase transition, Phys. Rev. B 82, 174411 (2010).
5 J. A. Kj¨all, J. H. Bardarson and F. Pollmann, Many-body localization in a disordered quantum Ising chain, Phys. Rev. Lett.

113, 107204 (2014).

6 Y. Bar Lev and D. R. Reichman, Dynamics of many-body localization, Phys. Rev. B 89, 220201 (2014).
7 R. Nandkishore and D. A. Huse, Many-body localization and thermalization in quantum statistical mechanics, Ann. Rev.

Cond. Matt. Phys. 6, 15 (2015).

8 E. Altman and R. Vosk, Universal dynamics and renormalization in many-body-localized systems, Ann. Rev. Cond. Matt.

Phys. 6, 383 (2015).

9 R. Vosk, D. A. Huse and E. Altman, Theory of the many-body localization transition in one dimensional systems, Phys. Rev.

X 5, 031032 (2015).

10 A. C. Potter, R. Vasseur and S. A. Parameswaran, Universal properties of many-body delocalization transitions, Phys. Rev.

X 5, 031033 (2015).

11 M. Serbyn, Z. Papic and D. A. Abanin, Criterion for many-body localization-delocalization phase transition, Phys. Rev. X

5, 041047 (2015).

12 K. Agarwal, S. Gopalakrishnan, M. Knap, M. M¨uller and E. Demler, Anomalous diﬀusion and Griﬃths eﬀects near the

many-body localization transition, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 160401 (2015).

13 D. J. Luitz, N. Laﬂorencie, and F. Alet, Many-body localization edge in the random-ﬁeld heisenberg chain, Phys. Rev. B 91,

081103 (2015).

14 E. J. Torres-Herrera and L. F. Santos, Dynamics at the many-body localization transition, Phys. Rev. B 92, 014208 (2015).
15 S. Gopalakrishnan, M. M¨uller, V. Khemani, M. Knap, E. Demler and D. A. Huse, Low-frequency conductivity in many-body

localized systems, Phys. Rev. B 92, 104202 (2015).

16 T. Devakul and R. R. P. Singh, Early breakdown of area-law entanglement at the many-body delocalization transition, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 115, 187201 (2015).

17 Bo Zhao, Eigenstate phase transitions, http://www.princeton.edu/physics/graduate-program/theses/theses-from-2015/
18 J. Goold, C. Gogolin, S. R. Clark, J. Eisert, A. Scardicchio and A. Silva, Total correlations of the diagonal ensemble herald

the many-body localization transition, Phys. Rev. B 92, 180202(R) (2015).

19 W. De Roeck, F. Huveneers, M. M¨uller and M. Schiulaz, Absence of many-body mobility edges, Phys. Rev. B 93, 014203

(2016).

20 M. Serbyn and J. E. Moore, Spectral statistics across the many-body localization transition, Phys. Rev. B 93, 041424 (2016).
21 A. Chandran, C. R. Laumann and V. Oganesyan, Finite size scaling bounds on many-body localized phase transitions,

arXiv:1509.04285.

22 S. Gopalakrishnan, K. Agarwal, E. A. Demler, D. A. Huse and M. Knap, Griﬃths eﬀects and slow dynamics in nearly

many-body localized systems, arXiv:1511.06389.

23 D. A. Huse, R. Nandkishore, V. Oganesyan, A. Pal and S. L. Sondhi, Localization-protected quantum order, Phys. Rev. B

88, 014206 (2013).

24 A. D. Rutenberg and A. J. Bray, Phase-ordering kinetics of one-dimensional nonconserved scalar systems, Phys. Rev. E 50,

1900 (1994).

25 A. J. Bray and B. Derrida, Exact exponent λ of the autocorrelation function for a soluble model of coarsening, Phys. Rev. E

51, R1633 (1995).

26 D. S. Fisher, Random antiferromagnetic quantum spin chains, Phys. Rev. B 50, 3799 (1994).

27 J. T. Chayes, L. Chayes, D. S. Fisher and T. Spencer, Finite-size scaling and correlation lengths for disordered systems,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2999 (1986).

10

