MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

Preprint 9 March 2016

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style ﬁle v3.0

Chaotic motion and the evolution of morphological components in a
time-dependent model of a barred galaxy within a dark matter halo

R. E. G. Machado1,2⋆ and T. Manos3,4
1 Departamento de Ciencias Físicas, Universidad Andrés Bello, Av. República 220, Santiago, Chile.
2 Instituto de Astronomia, Geofísica e Ciências Atmosféricas, Universidade de São Paulo, R. do Matão 1226, 05508-090 São Paulo, Brazil.
3 CAMTP - Center for Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Maribor, Krekova 2, SI-2000 Maribor, Slovenia.
4 School of Applied Sciences, University of Nova Gorica, Vipavska 11c, SI-5270 Ajdovšˇcina, Slovenia.

Accepted 2016 March 7. Received 2016 March 7; in original form 2015 December 27

ABSTRACT
Studies of dynamical stability (chaotic versus regular motion) in galactic dynamics often
rely on static analytical models of the total gravitational potential. Potentials based upon
self-consistent N -body simulations offer more realistic models, fully incorporating the time-
dependent nature of the systems. Here we aim at analysing the fractions of chaotic motion
within different morphological components of the galaxy. We wish to investigate how the
presence of chaotic orbits evolves with time, and how their spatial distribution is associated
with morphological features of the galaxy. We employ a time-dependent analytical potential
model that was derived from an N -body simulation of a strongly barred galaxy. With this
analytical potential we may follow the dynamical evolution of ensembles of orbits. Using
the Generalized Alignment Index (GALI) chaos detection method, we study the fraction of
chaotic orbits, sampling the dynamics of both the stellar disc and of the dark matter halo.
Within the stellar disc, the global trend is for chaotic motion to decrease in time, specially
in the region of the bar. We scrutinized the different changes of regime during the evolution
(orbits that are permanently chaotic, permanently regular, those that begin regular and end
chaotic, and those that begin chaotic and end regular), tracing the types of orbits back to their
common origins. Within the dark matter halo, chaotic motion also decreases globally in time.
The inner halo (r < 5 kpc) is where most chaotic orbits are found and it is the only region
where chaotic orbits outnumber regular orbits, in the early evolution.

Key words: galaxies: kinematics and dynamics – galaxies: structure – galaxies: evolution –
galaxies: haloes – methods: numerical

1 INTRODUCTION

Orbits are generally regarded as the backbone of structure in galax-
ies. Exploring orbital properties in general – and in particular the
evolution of their dynamical stability – is a fundamental aspect
in improving our understanding of galactic structures as a whole.
Our ability to explore the details of orbital stability in galaxies de-
pends considerably on the adequacy of analytical models, which
can be time-independent (TI) or time-dependent (TD). (See e.g.
Vasiliev & Athanassoula 2015 for a versatile method of creating
self-consistent equilibrium models of galaxies using Schwarzschild
orbit superposition). Studying the stability and the phase space
structure via analytical models (see e.g. Manos & Athanassoula
2011) has proven to be quite useful (for a review, see Contopoulos
2002), as long as those potentials are realistic, in the sense of ade-
quately representing the density distributions of real galaxies.

An important aspect of the role of chaos in galactic dy-

⋆ E-mail: rubens.machado@iag.usp.br

c(cid:13) 2016 The Authors

namics is manifested in the form of so-called ‘stickiness’ or
weak chaos (see e.g. Kandrup et al. 2000; Terzi´c & Kandrup 2004;
Contopoulos & Harsoula 2010), a regime in which an orbit may
not ﬁll phase space as thoroughly as in the strongly chaotic
case. As a result, orbits may spend signiﬁcant periods in con-
ﬁned regimes, thus contributing to the rise of stable structures,
rather than hindering it (see e.g. Athanassoula et al. 2009a, 2010,
2009b; Harsoula & Kalapotharakos 2009; Harsoula et al. 2011b,a;
Contopoulos & Harsoula 2013; Kaufmann & Contopoulos 1996;
Patsis et al. 1997; Patsis 2006; Romero-Gómez et al. 2006, 2007;
Tsoutsis et al. 2009; Brunetti et al. 2011; Bountis et al. 2012).

Lyapunov exponents (see e.g. Skokos 2010) have been ex-
tensively used for the detection of chaotic motion in several dif-
ferent models. However, there are often disadvantages which hin-
der their use. Several approaches exist to detect and quantify
chaos, whose differences and efﬁcacies have been thoroughly com-
pared and discussed in the recent literature (see Contopoulos 2002;
Mafﬁone et al. 2011, 2013, and references therein). In Skokos et al.
(2016) the reader may ﬁnd a special volume with a more com-

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
4
9
2
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

2 Machado & Manos

plete and recent review of the several chaos detection methods
broadly used and their predictability as well as all the relevant ref-
erences regarding their theoretical background, numerical imple-
mentation and applications in various models. Weinberg (2015a)
recently studied chaotic orbits in a time-independent model of a
barred galaxy applying a new chaos detection method based on
Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser theory (Weinberg 2015b). We use the
Generalized Alignment Index (GALI) method (Manos et al. 2013;
Skokos & Manos 2016).

Although orbital and dynamical analyses almost always focus
on the stellar disc, detailed studies of the orbital structure of haloes
have also been carried out (e.g. Valluri et al. 2010, 2012), character-
izing the orbital families and investigating the effects that baryons
play on the dark matter halo. Speciﬁcally, Valluri et al. (2013) stud-
ied the orbital structure of the stellar halo and also of the dark
matter halo, and found that tidal debris in cosmological hydro-
dynamical simulations experience more chaotic evolution than in
collisionless simulations. Price-Whelan et al. (2016) recently used
a static triaxial potential (not containing baryons) to represent the
Milky Way and study the presence of chaos in stellar streams result-
ing from tidal debris. Also with an analytical static triaxial model,
Mafﬁone et al. (2015) analysed the chaos onset time of particles in
the stellar halo.

In this paper, we will employ the time-dependent analyti-
cal model previously developed in Manos & Machado (2014). It
was derived from an N-body simulation of a disc galaxy within
a live halo (i.e. both the stellar particles and the halo particles
were responsive to their self-consistent potential). In that simu-
lation (Machado & Athanassoula 2010), interaction between disc
and halo leads to the formation of a strong bar. The measured pa-
rameters were used as input to the analytical model, which was
composed of three components: bar, disc and halo. Among several
simplifying assumptions, we point out for example that the analyt-
ical bar is described as a simple ellipsoid. While sufﬁcient for most
purposes (such as measuring quantities within the bar region), an
ellipsoid is not a faithful representation of the actual shape of an
evolving N-body bar. Nevertheless, the global dynamics of the sys-
tem were quite well reproduced, as indicated by the comparison of
the rotation curves of the N-body simulation and of the analytical
model.

Here, we extend our previous study, focusing on a detailed ex-
ploration of the fractions of chaotic motion both in the disc and
in the halo. We aim to explore not merely the time evolution, but
also the spatial distribution associated with different morphological
components of the galaxy – namely the bar, the ring, the interme-
diate region between the bar and the ring, and the outer disc; and
in the case of the halo, the inner versus outer parts. Let us also
stress the much richer orbital variety that the TD potential carries
compared to the rather simpler TI analytical potentials, or those de-
rived from snapshots of N-body simulations. I.e. orbits that evolve
with such TD models can alternate both their spatial morphology
and their stability (chaotic or regular) in time. This emanates from
the change of stability of the main (but not only) families of stable
(or unstable) periodic orbits, as the main parameters of the poten-
tial evolve simultaneously in a very complex manner in general.
This drastically affects the stability of their nearby phase space
regimes and the global stability in general (see e.g. Manos et al.
2013; Manos & Machado 2014) as well as orbital shape transfor-
mation from one type to another (e.g. a disc-like trajectory can
change to a bar-like or a ring-like, etc). Both the changes of or-
bital shape and stability are features that take place in a typical
N-body simulation and hence it can be very helpful to be able to

study and understand these morphological and dynamical transi-
tions and their effect in the global and local dynamics via such a
simpler TD. Furthermore, once we have characterized the spatially
resolved fractions of chaotic motion at given times, we can inves-
tigate the transitions between different regimes of stability. Finally,
we may use this information to trace orbits back and uncover their
common origins.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we summa-
rize how an analytical potential model was derived from an N-body
simulation, and we review the techniques of chaos detection which
we will be using for our studies here. We present the results for
the disc and for the halo in Sections 3 and 4 respectively, in which
we explore the evolution of the fractions of chaotic orbits and their
spatial distribution in time. In Section 5 we discuss and summarize
our ﬁndings.

2 MODEL AND TECHNIQUES

Before starting the description of the TD model and chaos detec-
tion techniques, let us here mention that regarding this section we
have a twofold aim: (i) to keep this article as self-contained as pos-
sible by providing all the basic information and properties for the
reader to follow the upcoming results in the next sections and (ii) to
avoid redundant repetition of all the details of the model/chaos de-
tection methods which can be found in (Manos & Machado 2014)
for someone more interested in how the model was conceived and
derived at ﬁrst as well as more details and a short review on chaos
detection methods in general. Hence, in the next subsections we
try to give a concise description of the model and the tools used
for the distinction between different dynamical states (regular from
chaotic) of a given orbit.

2.1 Analytical model from an N-body simulation

analytical model was

by
A time-dependent
the gravitational po-
Manos & Machado (2014)
tential of a barred galaxy. Here we brieﬂy summarize the main
features of that model and the reader is referred to that paper for
further details.

to represent

developed

of

the

simulations

it on one

To produce

an astrophysically well-motivated model,
we based
described in
Machado & Athanassoula (2010). We considered an N-body
simulation of a disc galaxy embedded in a live spherical dark
matter halo. The mass of the disc was Md = 5 × 1010 M⊙,
with an exponential density proﬁle having radial scale length
Rd = 3.5 kpc and vertical scale height z0 = 0.7 kpc. The dark
matter halo had a Hernquist (1993) density proﬁle and was ﬁve
times as massive as the disc. That simulation was a typically
representative collisionless simulation of a strongly barred galaxy
and it had been performed with 1.2 million equal-mass particles
and carried out for approximately one Hubble time.

Based on this N-body simulation, we then constructed an
analytical model whose total gravitational potential was given
by the sum of the potentials of the disc, bar and halo as
V = VD(t) + VB(t) + VH (t). All these components were time-
dependent, with parameters evolving in accordance with the be-
haviours measured from the simulation. Each individual compo-
nent is represented as follows:

(a) The disc is expressed by a Miyamoto-Nagai potential

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

Chaotic motion in a time-dependent barred galaxy

3

(Miyamoto & Nagai 1975):

VD(t) = −

GMD(t)

qx2 + y2 + (A + √z2 + B2)2

,

(1)

where A and B are time-dependent parameters and describe its hor-
izontal and vertical scale-lengths while MD(t) is the mass of the
disc. Note that here ‘disc mass’, does not include the bar, i.e. it
only refers to the stellar component described by this axisymmetric
potential.

(b) A triaxial Ferrers bar (Ferrers 1877), whose density is given

by:

ρ(x, y, z) = (cid:26) ρc(1 − m2)2

0

if m < 1,
if m > 1,

(2)

GMB (t)

abc

where ρc = 105
is the central density, MB(t) is the mass
32π
of the bar, which changes in time, and m2 = x2
b2 + z2
c2 ,
a > b > c > 0, with a, b and c being the semi-axes of the ellip-
soidal bar. The corresponding bar potential is:

a2 + y2

VB(t) = −πGabc

ρc

3 Z ∞

λ

du

∆(u)

(1 − m2(u))3,

(3)

x2

b2+u + z2

where G is the gravitational constant (set to unity), m2(u) =
a2+u + y2
c2+u , ∆2(u) = (a2 + u)(b2 + u)(c2 + u), and
λ is the unique positive solution of m2(λ) = 1, outside of the bar
(m > 1), while λ = 0 inside the bar. The analytical expression
of the corresponding forces are given in Pfenniger (1984). In our
model, the shape parameters (i.e. the lengths of the ellipsoid axes
a, b and c are) are also functions of time. By construction, the bar
grows with time in the TD analytical potential, as it does in the
N-body simulation. Hence, the bar mass increases at the expense
of the remainder of the disc mass. However, the total stellar mass
remains always constant: MB(t) + MD(t) = 5 × 1010 M⊙.
(c) The spherical dark matter halo is given by a Dehnen potential
(Dehnen 1993):

VH(t) =

GMH

aH ×


2−γ (cid:20)1 −(cid:16) r
− 1
ln

r+aH(cid:17)2−γ(cid:21)

r

r+aH

,

,

γ 6= 2,
γ = 2.

(4)
where MH is the halo mass, aH is its scale radius and γ (within
0 6 γ < 3) is a dimensionless parameter related to the inner
slope. Contrary to the masses of disc and bar, the halo mass is con-
sidered constant in time. Nevertheless, the parameters aH and γ
are time-dependent. For γ < 2 its ﬁnite central value is equal to
(2 − γ)−1GMH /aH.

We then measured from the N-body simulation the following
parameters as a function of time: halo scale length, halo inner slope,
disc vertical scale length, disc horizontal scale length, bar major
axis, bar intermediate axis, bar minor axis, bar mass and bar pattern
speed. Then we made ﬁts to the time evolution of each of these
parameters and supplied those results into the analytical model.

To provide the reader with some quantitative details about the
model, here we give the approximate ranges of variation of the
aforementioned parameters, as they evolve since t = 0 until t = 12
Gyr. The scale radius of the halo, aH, varies in the approximate
range from 3 to 6 kpc, while γ, the inner slope of the halo, varies
roughly from 0 to 1. The horizontal and vertical scale lengths of the
disc, A and B, respectively go from 2.5 to 0.5 kpc, and from nearly
0 to 0.5 kpc. The bar mass grows from 0 to 3.3 × 1010M⊙. Since
the stellar mass is constant, the remainder of the disc mass conse-
quently decreases by this same amount. The shape parameters of

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

the bar, a, b and c, start at nearly 0 and reach as much as 8, 2.8
and 1.9 kpc respectively. We acknowledge that the actual shape of
the N-body bar is more complicated and thus ellipsoidal ﬁts cannot
be guaranteed to give very good approximations at all times. This
is a convenient approach inasmuch as it allows the use of a triax-
ial Ferrers bar model. Furthermore, the mass encompassed by the
ellipsoid gives an acceptable estimate of the mass of the bar, and
the orientation of the major axis is quite well deﬁned. Finally, as
the bar grows stronger, its pattern speed Ωb decreases greatly, from
more than 70 to nearly 10 km s−1 kpc−1. All of these parameters
– but particularly the bar mass, bar length and bar pattern speed –
undergo their most important changes during the ﬁrst ∼2.5 Gyr of
the evolution.
With the above TD potential, we then construct a 3-degree-of-
freedom (d.o.f.) Hamiltonian function which governs the motion of
a star in a 3-dimensional rotating barred galaxy:

1
2

(p2

y + p2

x + p2

H =

z) + V (x, y, z, t) − Ωb(t)(xpy − ypx). (5)
The x and y refer to the directions along the major axis and in-
termediate axis of the bar respectively. The bar rotates around its
short z-axis. The canonically conjugate momenta are expressed as
px, py and pz, while V is the total TD potential, Ωb(t) represents
the pattern speed of the bar and H is the total energy of the orbit in
the rotating frame of reference1.

This procedure involved numerous idealized simpliﬁcations,
such as approximating the shape of the bar by an ellipsoid, etc.
Nevertheless, these techniques worked in favour of the desired an-
alytical simplicity, and generated a model that was able to repro-
duce several features with excellent agreement. For example, we
found that the rotation curves were well recovered by the analytical
model, indicating the adequacy of the global dynamics. Further-
more, the study of ensembles of orbits indicated that even morpho-
logical details were quite well reproduced. More details and expla-
nations regarding the above TD potential and its parameters can be
found in Manos & Machado (2014).

2.2 Techniques for detecting and measuring amount of chaos

Let us here, for the sake of completeness, brieﬂy recall how the two
main chaos detection methods used throughout the paper, namely
the Maximal Lyapunov Exponent (MLE) and the GALI method, are
deﬁned, calculated and more precisely which numerical procedures
we are using (mainly for the GALI method for the goals of this
work).

Considering the Hamiltonian function (equation 5), we derive
the corresponding equations of motion together with the variational
equations (see Manos & Machado 2014 for more details). The lat-
ter ones govern the evolution of one or more deviation vectors
w = (δx, δy, δz, δpx, δpy, δpz). The time evolution of such vec-
tors constitutes the basic ingredient for the calculation of the MLE
and the GALI chaos detection methods. For this purpose, one has
to (numerically) solve simultaneously both the equations of motion
and the variational equations (providing the time evolution of the
orbit and of the deviation vectors respectively).

1 That would be equivalent to the Jacobi constant for a TI Hamiltonian
function.

4 Machado & Manos

Lyapunov exponents

For the computation of the MLE we follow the formulae and recipe
proposed in Benettin et al.
(1978);
Benettin et al. (1980) and we deﬁne λ1 as (see Skokos 2010 for
a more recent description):

(1976); Contopoulos et al.

λ1 = lim
t→∞

σ1(t),

where:

σ1(t) =

1
t

ln kw(t)k
kw(0)k

(6)

(7)

,

is the so-called ‘ﬁnite-time MLE’, with kw(0)k and kw(t)k repre-
senting the Euclidean norm of the deviation vector at times t = 0
and t > 0 respectively. In general, σ1(t) tends to zero (follow-
ing a power law ∝ t−1) when the motion of an orbit is regular,
and it converges to a non-zero value when the motion is chaotic.
Let us stress here that in the case of conservative (TI) systems
things are to some degree well distinguishable, i.e. orbits can be
either periodic (stable or unstable) or regular or chaotic (see e.g.
Lichtenberg & Lieberman 1992) and hence the evolution and ﬁ-
nal value of the MLE can be well associated with the true nature
of the orbit. Moreover, there is a further classiﬁcation among the
chaotic motion which has to do with the ‘degree’ of dispersion or
the time scale of its manifestation with respect to the system time
scale. Therefore, in the literature one may ﬁnd many studies on the
so-called ‘weak or sticky’ compared to ‘strongly’ chaotic motion.
The former is characterized typically by a smaller relatively pos-
itive MLE and conﬁned (to some extent and/or for a certain time
interval) diffusion in the conﬁguration and/or phase space than the
latter. In our previous article (Manos & Machado 2014) we gave
a brief overview of the recent literature on this particular kinds of
motion emerging in conservative (TI) systems.

In this work, however, we consider a TD potential, a fact that
gives rise to richer dynamics and behaviour for our orbits governed
by it. The orbits can alternate (but not necessarily) their current dy-
namical state, from chaotic (or regular) to regular (or chaotic) over
several time intervals of their evolution. As described more thor-
oughly in Manos et al. (2013) and also later in Manos & Machado
(2014), in such a case, the MLE (equation 6) cannot be used to
safely characterize the asymptotic behavior of an orbit due to strong
ﬂuctuations caused be the dynamical transitions which take place
as the potential evolves in time. Nevertheless, we may show some-
times the MLE for a sample of orbits. The main reason behind this
is to get a more wide overview of the several dynamical transition
taking place and examined by the main chaos detection tool we
will be using, i.e the General Alignment Index (GALI, introduced
in Skokos et al. 2007).

The General Alignment Index (GALI)

In this study, we use the GALI method of chaos detection in the
same manner as in our previous work (Manos & Machado 2014).
For the calculation of the GALI index of order k (GALIk) one has
to follow the evolution of 2 6 k 6 N initially linearly independent
deviation vectors wi(0), i = 1, 2, . . . , k, where N denotes the di-
mensionality of the systems’s phase space. GALIk is then deﬁned
(Skokos et al. 2007) as the volume of the k-parallelogram having
as edges the k unit deviation vectors ˆwi(t) = wi(t)/kwi(t)k,
i = 1, 2, ..., k. This volume can be expressed as the norm of the
wedge product (denoted by ∧) of these vectors:

GALIk(t) =k ˆw1(t) ∧ ˆw2(t) ∧ . . . ∧ ˆwp(t) k,

(8)

while here all the k deviation vectors are normalized but we keep
their directions intact. The general behaviour the GALI method (for
different models and types of stability) as well as its predictabil-
ity properties have been summarized recently in a review article
(Skokos & Manos 2016). In short, and for TI systems the general
evolution of the GALIk(t) is the following: (a) for chaotic orbits, it
tends exponentially to zero with exponents that depend on the ﬁrst
k LEs of the orbit while (b) for regular orbits it remains practically
constant and positive (if k is smaller or equal to the dimensional-
ity of the torus on which the motion occurs) or it decreases to zero
following a power-law decay (if k is larger to the dimensionality of
the torus on which the motion occurs; see e.g. Skokos et al. 2007,
2008). Moreover, in Manos et al. (2012) the behaviour and perfor-
mance of the GALI method was studied in the neighbourhood of
invariant tori surrounding periodic solutions in the vicinity of peri-
odic orbits in TD systems, where the role of sticky chaotic orbits
and their diffusion properties were addressed in particular as well.
Aiming to capture and describe different dynamical time win-
dows of the TD system, we calculate the GALIk as follows. Since
our study refers to 3-dimensional conﬁguration space (3-d.o.f. sys-
tem), we will be using k = 3 (i.e., 3 deviation vectors). The reason
for choosing the k-value to be equal to the number of d.o.f. (as
explained in several previous works; see e.g. Skokos et al. 2007;
Skokos & Manos 2016) is our goal to optimize the total computa-
tion time. This can be achieved by using the minimum number of
deviation vectors (required to be calculated via the variational equa-
tions) which ensures the ‘safe’ distinction between chaotic and reg-
ular motion at the same time. Then, by following the evolution of
the index in time, one will record exponential decay of the GALI3
for time intervals where the motion is chaotic while in any the other
case it will refer to a non-chaotic one.

As explained more in more detail in Manos et al. (2013) and
Manos & Machado (2014) the motion of an orbit in such a TD po-
tential can be rather complicated and keep varying its dynamical
stability from regular to chaotic and vice-versa when experiencing
the changes of the phase space while the parameters of the poten-
tial change in time. So, if for example the deviation vectors of an
orbit under study feel the chaotic dynamics of its regime for some
time, then the volume formed by them will (see the deﬁnition of
the GALI in equation 8) shrink exponentially to very small values
and remain small throughout the whole evolution unless one re-
initializes the deviation vectors and hence their volume. Only then,
they will be able to manifest the current new chaotic (again) or reg-
ular dynamics.

In general, we perform two slightly different procedures in the
GALI3 calculation, namely: (i) whenever we are interested in un-
derstanding more global dynamical trends, like for example how
the amount of chaotic motion of a given galaxy component varies
as a function of time in the TD system, we split the total time of
integration in four ﬁxed time intervals and we re-initialize the de-
viation vectors only in the beginning of each one. We employ this
procedure for all the large samples of disc and halo orbits studied
later on. Hence, we consider such time windows where the GALI3
has enough time (with respect to the time scale of the total system
evolution) to capture the chaotic or not motion of the orbit under
study; and (ii) whenever we wish to plot a sample of orbits and
show its detailed evolution in time, we let the GALI3 evolve and
whenever it reaches very small values (i.e. GALI3 6 10−8) we re-
initialize its computation by taking again k = 3 new (always) ran-
dom orthonormal deviation vectors, which resets the GALI3 = 1.
We then allow these vectors to evolve under the current dynamics.
Let us stress that this procedure has been followed only in cases

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

Chaotic motion in a time-dependent barred galaxy

5

where we wanted to depict individual orbits and show some special
characteristics of the motion accompanied by the chaos detection
tool (GALI and/or MLE). These calculations of the GALI3 were
done separately, i.e. we have rerun smaller samples of typical or-
bits which illustrate several morphological and dynamical proper-
ties associated with the general trends shown together.

2.3 Testing the equilibrium of the initial conditions

In the following sections, we will study the behaviour of ensem-
bles of orbits and in particular we will measure their percentages
of chaotic motion. This will be done by taking the coordinates of
a sample of initial conditions from the beginning of the N-body
simulation, and then evolving them in the presence of the time-
dependent analytical potential.

The analytical potential is a good but imperfect representation
of the actual potential experienced by the N-body particles. If the
samples of initial conditions are not exactly in equilibrium with the
analytical potential, this raises the concern that spurious chaotic
motion could be introduced merely due to this presumed mismatch,
particularly in the early stages of the evolution.

To investigate this possibility, we have performed the follow-
ing test. We selected a random sub-sample of 1000 disc initial con-
ditions from the beginning of the simulation. We then evolved them
under three distinct situations for 2.5 Gyr: (1) The initial conditions
are evolved directly into the time-dependent analytical potential;
(2) The initial conditions are evolved in a frozen potential, i.e. in
the time-independent analytical potential ﬁxed at t = 0; (3) The
output of case 2 is now used as new initial conditions in the pres-
ence of the time-dependent analytical potential.

The evolution in the frozen potential of case 2 conserved en-
ergy to within ∆E/E ∼ 9 × 10−9. One would expect this proce-
dure to dissipate eventual transients caused by lack of equilibrium.
However, we measured the percentages of chaotic motion in the
three cases and found that they are essentially the same, differing
by less than 2.8 percentage points. For the purposes of our analy-
ses, which aim to investigate global dynamical trends, this margin
is certainly tolerable.

The similarity of results between cases 1 and 2 reinforces
the notion that there is no serious departure from equilibrium that
might compromise the results. Furthermore, the agreement between
cases 1 and 3 indicates that the initial conditions can be run directly
into the time-dependent analytical model, without prior application
of step 2. By running such tests, we were unable to ﬁnd indications
that the percentages of chaotic motion could be severely overesti-
mated. Moreover, the initial conditions seem to be in equilibrium
within the potential to a fairly decent degree. For these reasons, we
adopt method 1 directly in the remainder of the paper.

In our approach, the potential varies drastically during this
ﬁrst 2.5 Gyr where one of the main model components, i.e. the
bar, starts to appear. This causes quite radical changes in the phase
space which in turn have a strong impact in the dynamical stabil-
ity of the periodic orbits surrounded by islands which may grow
or shrink and/or (dis)appear simultaneously in the course of time.
Moreover, how our initial conditions are distributed in the phase
space plays a signiﬁcant role as well as their corresponding en-
ergy (see Manos & Machado 2014, for more discussion). Hence,
the most signiﬁcant reason for observing such a large fraction of
chaotic motion in the ﬁrst epoch is due to these rather strong dy-
namical effects taking place while the bar is forming.

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

2.5 Gyr

40

30

20

10

n
o
i
t
o
m
c
i
t
o
a
h
c

f
o

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

5 Gyr

7.5 Gyr

10 Gyr

0
0.50

0.55

0.60

Mbar/Mdisc

0.65

0.70

Figure 1. Fraction of chaotic motion within the bar as a function of relative
bar mass.

3 THE STELLAR DISC

3.1 Fractions of chaotic motion

In Manos & Machado (2014) we had seen that the overall fraction
of chaotic motion in the disc decreases as the bar grows stronger.
Figure 1 indicates the tight correlation between the decrease in
chaos and the growth of the bar, as indicated by the fraction of
chaotic motion – measured within the bar – as a function of relative
bar mass (i.e. the bar-to-disc mass ratio). One also notices that most
of the disappearance of chaos takes place during the ﬁrst half of the
evolution, which is the period of more intense bar growth.

If bar growth is partially driving the rise of regular motion,
the question then arises as to the spatial distribution of regular ver-
sus chaotic motions. In which regions of the stellar disc are reg-
ular and chaotic motion predominantly found? Is the global rise
of regularity accompanied by some spatially localized increase of
chaos? In order to address such questions, we deﬁne four distinct
morphological regions: (i) the bar; (ii) the ring; (iii) the intermedi-
ate low-density region between the bar and the ring, referred to as
the gap region, for brevity; and (iv) the outer disc. These regions
are selected somewhat arbitrarily (via visual inspection of the mor-
phology), but they do reﬂect distinctive structural components, re-
garding density, as can be seen in the two upper rows of Fig. 2 with
face-on and edge-on views, where the ellipses used to deﬁne them
are shown.2

To explore the spatially resolved evolution of chaos through-
out the stellar disc, we resort to the analysis of an ensemble of or-
bits. From the N-body simulation, we select a sample of 1 × 105
disc particles at the time t0 = 1.4 Gyr where the bar has already
started to be formed and starts growing from that point on. Then,
their coordinates are used as an ensemble of initial conditions to
be evolved in the presence of the time-dependent analytical poten-
tial. We evolve these orbits for 10 Gyr and study their dynami-
cal behaviour. In order to avoid confusion, from now on we re-
set the t0 to be zero (starting point of our simulations). Following
Manos & Machado (2014), we divide the total integration time in
four intervals of ∆t = 2.5 Gyr, re-initializing the GALI3 index at
the beginning of each window. The orbit is considered regular (non-
chaotic) if its GALI3 remains greater than 10−8 during a given time

2 In Fig. 2 and in all other such projections, the particles and orbits are
displayed in the reference frame that rotates with the bar. Thus, the bar
major axis always lies along the direction of the x-axis.

6 Machado & Manos

Figure 2. Upper rows: face-on and edge-on views of the ensemble of orbits at the end of each time window. Lower rows: face-on and edge-on views of
projected GALI3 indices for the disc ensemble. Chaotic orbits are those with GALI3 6 10−8. The face-on views also display the ellipses used to deﬁne the
regions referred to as: bar, ring, gap and outer disc. Each frame is 20 kpc wide, and the particles are displayed in the reference frame that rotates with the bar.

window; and it is considered chaotic if it reaches GALI3 6 10−8.
In this manner, we are able to compute fractions of chaotic motion
within each time window. Additionally, at a given instant in time,
we can also compute spatially resolved chaos fractions in different
regions of the disc.

A global picture of the spatial distribution of regular and
chaotic motion in the disc can be seen in the two bottom rows of
Fig. 2, which displays the face-on and edge-on views of the ensem-
ble of disc particles at the end of each time window, coloured by
the GALI3 index (being chaotic towards the blue, and regular to-
wards the yellow). Some major results are already noticeable even
by eye. First, the striking decrease of chaos within the bar region
can be clearly seen. Secondly, even though the gap is a very low

density region, it seems to hold a good portion of the chaotic orbits.
Third, the outer disc – as well as the ring, to a degree – seem quite
dominated by regular motion. Finally, another outstanding feature
is the peanut-shaped view of the bar seen in the edge-on projection
(sometimes called X-shaped bulge). Remarkably, particles that de-
part considerably from the z = 0 plane are mostly chaotic.

In order to quantify in more detail these results, we measure
the fraction of chaotic orbits as a function of time in each region
(i.e. at the end of each time window, we obtain the number of parti-
cles having GALI3 6 10−8 in a region divided by the total number
of particles within that region). The result is shown in Fig. 3. The
fraction of chaotic motion within the bar drops from nearly 40 per
cent to less than 10 per cent. The outer disc remains essentially reg-

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

Chaotic motion in a time-dependent barred galaxy

7

gap

ring

bar

outer
disk

40

30

20

10

n
o
i
t
o
m
c
i
t
o
a
h
c

f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

0

2

4

6

8

10

t (Gyr)

Figure 3. Fraction of chaotic motion as a function of time, measured within
different regions of the disc. These regions are schematically indicated in
the right-hand panels, and more clearly detailed in Fig. 2.

ular, with a non-zero but negligible appearance of chaos throughout
the evolution. The fact that the ring region undergoes an initial in-
crease in chaos can be ascribed in good measure to the edges of the
bar. The gap region displays some interesting behaviour. Between
the ﬁrst and second time windows, the gap becomes depleted in
terms of total number of particles, but at the same time its frac-
tion of chaotic motion increases. From then on, it decreases, but
the gap continues to be the region holding the highest local fraction
of chaotic motion in the disc. The large amount of chaotic motion
seen in the gap region is not unexpected. In fact it is well known
that orbits that oscillate between the Lagrangian points L1 and L2
are unstable and therefore the transition zone between the bar and
the disk is expected to be chaotic (e.g. Harsoula & Kalapotharakos
2009; Athanassoula et al. 2009a).

3.2 Morphology and evolution

In the analyses of the previous section we considered the state
(chaotic or regular) of each particle at speciﬁc instants – the ends of
the four time windows. Now we will consider the changes of state.
For example, one given orbit that was reckoned to be regular at the
end of the evolution might have been chaotic at the beginning, or
it might have been continuously regular. In either case, where did
such particles originate? Do the particles that change dynamical
state (and those that don’t) share a common locus at the beginning
of the evolution? To explore these issues, we will examine sepa-
rately the orbits that change dynamical behaviour and those that
do not. This will allow us, in a sense, to map the origins and the
destiny of regular and chaotic motion.

Let us start by selecting those orbits which are permanently
regular (64.3 per cent) and those which are permanently chaotic
(only 0.9 per cent). The remainder (34.8 per cent) change their na-
ture at least once during the evolution. Let us consider ﬁrst those
orbits that do not undergo any change of regime throughout the
evolution (upper rows of Fig. 4).

Orbits that are permanently regular. As regards morphology,
the permanently regular ones are qualitatively unremarkable, in the

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

sense that they occupy almost any region of the galactic disc. There
is thus little qualitative distinction between them and the entire en-
semble and they merely map the normal evolution of the galac-
tic disc as a whole. The only noticeable structures that are not
quite covered by these orbits are the gap region, and, vertically, the
peanut. (Due to the method employed to create the initial condi-
tions in the N-body simulation of Machado & Athanassoula 2010,
there is a residual transient seen as a vague spiral pattern at t = 0
and it subsides on a short time scale.)

Orbits that are permanently chaotic. The permanently chaotic
orbits, on the the other hand, display peculiar features. They are
tightly restricted to the region of the bar, and partially to the gap. In-
deed, they spend nearly the entire evolution conﬁned within this re-
gion. There is not one single permanently chaotic orbit to be found
in the outer regions of the disc. At the instant t = 0, these particles
– whose future destiny is to be permanently chaotic – are initially
located within a reasonably well-deﬁned ring, i.e. they are mostly
found within 2 kpc < r < 4 kpc.

For the remainder of the orbits, we will focus on two regimes:
those that start regular and end chaotic (6.1 per cent), and those that
start chaotic and end regular (20.8 per cent), regardless of the inter-
mediate states (i.e. the transitions in the second and third time win-
dows). Finally, there is a subset of orbits (7.9 percent) that do un-
dergo two changes of regime, but nevertheless ﬁnish as they started;
these will be disregarded. Let us consider now the two cases where
the ﬁnal state differs from the initial state (lower rows of Fig. 4):

Orbits that begin regular and end chaotic. These start at t = 0
from a similar locus as the permanently chaotic, but here the ring is
slightly larger and more diffuse. This subset also includes some or-
bits very close to the origin (r < 0.5 kpc) in the beginning, which
are not present in the permanently chaotic case. The volume occu-
pied by these orbits contracts gradually, but they are more extended
than the permanently chaotic ones, encompassing the region of the
gap at later times as well. They are also vertically extended, be-
ing the major contributors to the structure of the peanut. In fact,
this is the only subset of particles which signiﬁcantly populates the
peanut, in the regions of about 2.5 kpc < |z| < 5 kpc of height.
The gap region, and mainly the peanut, are regions where chaos
is important. However, it is only the initially regular – and ﬁnally
chaotic – orbits that depart considerably from the plane. The or-
bits that were already chaotic from the beginning do not visit such
heights.

Orbits that begin chaotic and end regular. Interestingly, the
initial locus of this subset is approximately the complement of the
previous case. Here, the orbits at t = 0 occupy the region internal
to the ring deﬁned by the previous case, while avoiding the very
centre. In the third row of Fig. 4, the purple points overlap green
points in the t = 2.5 − 10 Gyr frames. But in the t = 0 frame,
the purple points ﬁll precisely an empty region. Subsequently, the
initially chaotic orbits evolve to be essentially part of the bar and
end regular.

In Fig. 5, we show four representative examples of disc orbits
that illustrate the dynamical transitions described above. Note that
each row displays one given orbit whose time evolution has been
divided in four parts. In more detail, these orbits are a typical sam-
ple of initial conditions that correspond to the four regimes depicted
in Fig. 4. Each row here displays one orbit at four time windows,
coloured by time (from black to yellow at each window). The ﬁfth
column shows the corresponding GALI3 evolution (note that here
GALI3 are re-initialized whenever they reach the value 10−8). Also
shown in the ﬁfth column are the MLE σ1. In the ﬁrst row of Fig. 5,
one sees a permanently regular disc orbit (corresponding to one of

8 Machado & Manos

Figure 4. Evolution of regular/chaotic regimes separated in different conﬁgurations. Upper rows: face-on and edge-on vies of the orbits that are permanently
regular (cyan), and those that are permanently chaotic (red). Bottom rows: face-on and edge-on views of the orbits that start regular and end chaotic (green),
and those that start chaotic and end regular (purple).

the cyan particles of Fig. 4). This orbit does not change its regu-
lar dynamical nature, nor its morphology throughout the total time
evolution. Its GALI3 ﬂuctuates around a positive value until the end
of the integration. In the second row of Fig. 5, we show an example
of a permanently chaotic orbit (corresponding to one of the red par-
ticles of Fig. 4). Its GALI3 decays exponentially to zero consecu-
tive times, and its morphology is distinctively irregular throughout.
In the third row of Fig. 5, we plot an orbit that begins regular and
ends chaotic (corresponding to one of the green particles of Fig. 4).
This orbit initially has a roughly circular morphology but subse-
quently loses its regularity and becomes more elongated along the
direction of the bar. Note its GALI3 evolution: in the very ﬁrst part
of the evolution the index remains non-zero before starting to de-
cay exponentially to zero. This ﬁrst drop is accompanied by the
onset of irregularity, clearly seen in the ﬁrst panel of this orbit, as
the nearly circular motion (black at the beginning of the time win-
dow) already starts giving way to an irregular morphology (yellow
at the end of the time window). Let us here recall that this orbit

was initially characterized as regular (non-chaotic to be more ac-
curate) when employing a global run where we were registering
the ﬁnal value of the GALI3 at the end of each time window, and
from this we derive the conclusion that at least for that time interval
the orbit exhibits more regular behaviour than chaotic (as its pro-
jections supports as well). However, in this ﬁgure we always reset
the GALI3 only when it strictly crosses the threshold, as mentioned
before. Finally, in the fourth row of Fig. 5, we display an orbit that
begins chaotic and ends regular (corresponding to one of the purple
particles of Fig. 4). This orbits begins strongly chaotic, as indicated
by its GALI3, which drops exponentially to zero after only a rather
small number of iterations. Furthermore, its stability is changing
drastically in time and it is becoming gradually regular; its GALI3
at the last part of the evolution ﬂuctuates around a positive value.
Moreover, from a morphological point of view, it is being trans-
formed into a bar orbit under the effect of the TD potential. In the
fourth column of Fig. 5, besides the GALI3, we also display the
MLE in lin-log scale (grey). For the two upper panels, things are

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

Chaotic motion in a time-dependent barred galaxy

9

Figure 5. Typical examples of disc orbits. Each row displays one orbit at four time windows, coloured by time (from black to yellow at each window). The ﬁfth
column shows the corresponding GALI3 evolution, as well as the MLE σ1. First row: a permanently regular orbit. Second row: a permanently chaotic orbit.
Third row: an orbit that begins regular and ends chaotic. Fourth row: an orbit that begins chaotic and ends regular. The orbits are displayed in the reference
frame that rotates with the bar.

quite clear: for the permanently regular orbit (ﬁrst row) the MLE
decays to zero following a power law (which is even more clear in
a log-log scale, not shown here) while for the permanently chaotic
(second row) it tends to a positive value. However, whenever an
orbit experiences more complex dynamical transitions, like the or-
bits shown in the third and fourth rows, the MLE, as an averaging
measure, faces several difﬁculties, described also in Manos et al.
(2013); Manos & Machado (2014). Starting with the fourth row
(an orbit that begins chaotic and ends regular), we may see that
the MLE does not have sufﬁcient time to capture the ﬁrst chaotic
period of the orbit. In the third row (an orbit that begins regular
and ends chaotic), at ﬁrst glance the MLE does not seem to de-
scribe accurately the last half or so of the orbital evolution, since in
the lin-log scale it is not clear that there is a tendency to approach a
positive value. For this reason we have checked its evolution in log-
log scale (not shown here), where a change in the slope becomes
clearer as it approaches a non-zero value, indicating the dynamical
change of the orbit. However, it is already evident that one should

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

integrate for much longer periods to get a convincing information
from the MLE.

Let us here discuss into more detail these orbits that start reg-
ular and end chaotic (green points in Fig. 4). These orbits seem
to populate eventually (and mostly) the gap region around the La-
grangian L1 and L2 points. Thus, it is a reasonable to wonder
whether there is a relation between this transition to chaoticity with
the stickiness that characterizes this region. As a general and typ-
ical trend, when observing the evolution of a sticky chaotic orbit,
one sees a trajectory that has a regular-like morphology for some
time before eventually revealing its chaotic nature (when entering
a strongly chaotic regime). Typically the morphology of these or-
bits is preserved, in the sense that e.g. disc orbits remain disc or-
bits and the bar ones remain bar orbits, but surely with a rather
different rate of diffusion in conﬁguration and phase space in the
two different epochs. In our case, a large fraction of ‘regular →
chaotic’ orbits (green points in Fig. 4) are trajectories that addition-
ally transform their spatial morphology (mostly from disc to bar

10 Machado & Manos

orbits). Such a typical example is given in Fig. 5 (third row), where
an initially almost spherical (regular) disc orbit gradually changes
to a bar (chaotic) orbit. This transition is mostly due to the emer-
gence of the bar component in the potential as the time evolves
and it does not seem to be strongly related to stickiness effects as
in other cases studied broadly in the literature. Hence, a lot of the
transitions from chaotic to regular and/or vice-versa are due to the
changes of the stability of certain regions in the phase space.

In order to investigate further the morphological properties of
these different dynamical transitions, we then examined the distri-
bution of each group of orbits as a function of the positions3 in
terms of the dimensionless quantity m2 = (x/a)2 + (y/b)2 +
(z/c)2, meaning that particles within the bar have m < 1. The
three shape parameters a, b and c are time-dependent and are
looked up at each desired instant to compute m. In the top row
of Fig. 6, we show the histograms of such positions of disc par-
ticles for the permanently regular (cyan) and permanently chaotic
(red). In the bottom row, we plot the corresponding histograms for
the particles that begin regular and end chaotic (green) and particles
that begin chaotic and end regular (purple).

Starting with the top row, we notice that the absolute number
of permanently chaotic orbits is small, and that they are located es-
sentially within the bar or near its edges, at least after t = 2.5 Gyr.
Surely, in the same ranges one may ﬁnd far more regular motion as
well; yet they are more widely spread in the several distances com-
pared to the chaotic ones. The most striking feature of Fig. 6 is the
fact that the purple histograms (chaotic → regular) are almost com-
pletely conﬁned to the bar region (m < 1) at all times after t = 2.5
Gyr. The green histograms (regular → chaotic) show a tendency
in the same direction, but less pronounced, and there are far fewer
such orbits in absolute numbers. Complementing the information
provided by Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, these histograms offer a more quan-
titative overview regarding the spatial distribution of these types of
motion, highlighting not only the preferred locations where each
type of regime is to be found, but also their relative contributions in
number of particles. For example, the comparisons of the green and
purple histograms conﬁrm the visual impression of Fig. 4 – that the
ﬁnally regular orbits become more conﬁned and the ﬁnally chaotic
becomes more spread out – but also displays quantitatively that the
ﬁnally regular are far more prevalent. Also, we see that the initially
chaotic and the permanently chaotic types both spawn from roughly
the same region, although the latter is more rare.

4 THE DARK MATTER HALO

Having characterized the evolution of the fraction of chaotic motion
in the disc, we now turn to the dark matter halo, to evaluate how
halo orbits behave in the presence of an evolving barred galaxy.

Analogously to the disc analysis, we now select a sample of
2 × 105 halo particles from the N-body simulation. This ensemble
is also evolved in the presence of the time-dependent analytical po-
tential, and we use the GALI3 index to study the fraction of chaotic
motion in the halo (in a similar manner as we did for the disc parti-
cles), exploring both the time evolution and the spatial distribution.

4.1 Inner halo

The ensemble of halo initial conditions behave as massless test par-
ticles and cannot be expected to mimic exactly the self-consistent
gravitational evolution of the N-body simulation. Nevertheless,
global morphological features are reproduced with quite good
agreement. That was also the case for the ensemble of disc initial
conditions, as shown in Manos & Machado (2014), and it is one of
the indications that our time-dependent analytical model provides a
remarkably useful approximation of the galactic potential, for sev-
eral purposes.

A distinctive halo feature which is reproduced is the so-called
halo bar, (Athanassoula 2005, 2007; Machado & Athanassoula
2010), also called the dark matter bar (Colín et al. 2006). In N-
body simulations, the inner halo of strongly barred galaxies is
found to become prolate. This halo bar is a structure that rotates
together with the disc bar, but it is not as strong and not as elon-
gated as its stellar counterpart. We found that this peculiar feature
also arose from the ensemble of halo initial conditions in the pres-
ence of our analytical model. One should bear in mind that the halo
analytical potential remains spherically symmetric by construction
throughout the evolution. The bar potential is thus responsible for
inducing the prolateness of the inner halo orbits.

Here we will characterize the halo bar, using the ensemble of
initial conditions and analysing their morphological evolution. The
reader should notice that in the present context, when we speak of
‘the halo’ and its shape, we mean the ensemble of orbits within
the analytical potential. To quantify the shape of the inner halo,
we measure the axis ratios b/a (intermediate-to-major) and c/a
(minor-to-major) as a function of distance from the centre (along
the major axis). This is done employing the same techniques as in
Machado & Athanassoula (2010): we compute the axis ratios using
the eigenvalues of the inertia tensor. To avoid the bias of spherical
shells, the particles are sorted as a function of local density, and the
shapes are measured inside density bins containing equal number
of particles. In this manner, the spheroidal bins naturally follow the
shapes of the isodensity surfaces. The resulting shape proﬁles are
shown in Fig. 7a. The outer shape or the halo (certainly beyond
r & 10 kpc) is globally spherical, as one would expect; both axis
ratios reach values of 0.95–1, i.e. as spherical as possible within the
resolution set by the particle number. In the inner region, however,
b/a drops to ∼0.8–0.85 and c/a to ∼0.6–0.75. This means a halo
bar which is non-circular on the plane of the disc, and even more
ﬂattened in the vertical direction. The relatively steep drops take
place at around ∼5 kpc, which could be regarded as the approxi-
mate size of the halo bar.
Complementary, another way of quantifying the shape of the
inner halo is to use the Fourier components of the bidimensional
mass distribution, namely the relative amplitude of the m = 2
component. This is often used to quantify bar strengths, as it is
quite sensitive to departures from axisymmetry. In Fig. 7b, we show
this relative A2 amplitude measured by projecting the particles on
the (x, y) plane, or else on the (x, z) plane. The amplitudes are
surely much less pronounced than those of stellar bars, but the elon-
gated and ﬂattened morphology of the halo bar is clearly measur-
able, indicating its bar-like nature. Here we see that ∼5 kpc marks
roughly mid-height between the A2 peak and the ﬁrst minimum, so
to speak.

The purpose of characterizing the halo bar is twofold. First,

3 We have also inspected these distributions in terms of the spherical radius
r or cylindrical radius R but they are less clear regarding the bar region.

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

Chaotic motion in a time-dependent barred galaxy

11

Figure 6. Histograms of positions of disc particles in terms of the dimensionless quantity m2 = (x/a)2 + (y/b)2 + (z/c)2, where a, b and c give the shape
of the bar at each time. Particles within the bar have m < 1. Top row: permanently regular (cyan) and permanently chaotic (red). Bottom row: particles that
begin regular and end chaotic (green) and particles that begin chaotic and end regular (purple).

1.0

0.9

a
/
b

0.8

0.7

1.0

0.9

a
/
c

0.8

0.7

0.6

(a)

(b)

0.10

y
x

,
2
A

0.05

0.10

z
x

,
2
A

0.05

0.0 Gyr
2.5 Gyr
5.0 Gyr
7.5 Gyr
10.0 Gyr

100

101

r (kpc)

0.00

100

101

r (kpc)

Figure 7. Shapes of the ensemble of halo orbits at different times: (a) Axis
ratios b/a and c/a as a function of distance from the centre; (b) Relative
amplitude of the m = 2 Fourier component of the mass distribution pro-
jected on the xy and xz planes.

it helps underscore the efﬁcacy of the time-dependent analytical
model developed in Manos & Machado (2014), which is able to
recover even such a detailed morphological feature that was not
deliberately built into the model. Secondly, it provides a well mo-
tivated distinction between ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ halo in the present
context. Contrary to the stellar disc, the halo has no obvious mor-
phological substructures, but the existence of the halo bar suggests
a natural separation. We proceed to study the fractions of chaotic
motion in the halo as a whole, and within the inner and outer parts.

4.2 Fractions of chaotic motion in the halo

In Fig. 8, we show four snapshot maps where the colour at each
point indicates the value of the GALI3 (at a given momentary posi-
tion) for the halo ensemble, at the end of each time window. Chaotic

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

orbits are again those with GALI3 < 10−8. Each frame here is 20
kpc wide. The measurement of the GALI3 indices at the end of
each time window (namely at t = 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 Gyr) allows
us to obtain the fraction of chaotic motion as a function of time.
Furthermore, we are able to measure this fraction with spatial res-
olution. Figure 8 thus displays the prevalence of chaotic or regular
orbits in the halo at four instants: here chaos is represented by the
blue (darker) colors. From this ﬁgure we can already discern the
two main results: (i) chaos decreases globally in the halo and (ii)
chaos is only ever dominant in the inner region (r < 5 kpc).

Now let us quantify these halo trends in more detail. For
brevity we refer here to the expressions ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ halo
in the sense deﬁned in Section 4.1, i.e. ‘inner’ meaning essentially
the region where the halo bar is found, and ‘outer’ being all the re-
mainder of the halo, which is nearly spherical. Figure 9a displays
the radial proﬁle of the fraction of chaotic motion at the end of each
time window. We see that at any given time, considerably more
chaos is to be found in the inner halo than in the outer halo. Within
r < 5 kpc, chaotic orbits even dominate at ﬁrst. The time evolution
of this fraction is shown in Fig. 9b. In the outer halo, the amount of
chaotic motion is always low (∼ 20 per cent) and decreases slightly
with time. If the halo is considered as a whole, the global fraction
of chaotic motion decreases from 30 to 20 per cent, approximately.
But the most pronounced evolution is seen in the region of the halo
bar: from nearly 60 to 30 per cent. So the overall result is that the
global fraction of chaotic motion in the halo decreases monotoni-
cally with time, and at any given radial range. Another result to be
underscored is that in the inner halo, chaotic motion initially dom-
inates over regular motion, i.e. more than 50 per cent, which was
never the case in any of the disc regions.

The fact that chaotic orbits dominate in the inner halo is con-
sistent with the ﬁndings of Valluri et al. (2013), using a halo ex-
tracted from a cosmological hydrodynamical simulation. It would
be interesting to understand whether the large percentages of
chaotic orbits are due to scattering by the time-dependent bar po-
tential (e.g. see Price-Whelan et al. 2016 on the effect of a time-
dependent bar on the Orphiuchus tidal stream) or if it is due to the

12 Machado & Manos

)
c
p
k
(

y

10

5

0

−5

−10

t = 2.5 Gyr

t = 5.0 Gyr

t = 7.5 Gyr

t = 10.0 Gyr

−5

0

5

−5

0

5

−5

0

5

−5

0

5

x (kpc)

x (kpc)

x (kpc)

x (kpc)

0

−8

3
I
L
A
G

0
1
g
o
l

−16

Figure 8. Projected GALI3 values (in logarithmic scale) for the halo ensemble, at the end of each time window. Chaotic orbits are those with GALI3 < 10−8.
Each frame is 20 kpc wide.

(a)

(b)

n
o
i
t
o
m
c
i
t
o
a
h
c

f
o

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

n
o
i
t
o
m
c
i
t
o
a
h
c

f
o

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p

80

60

40

20

0

80

60

40

20

0

2.5 Gyr
5.0 Gyr
7.5 Gyr
10.0 Gyr

all halo
r < 5 kpc
r > 5 kpc

100

r (kpc)

101

2

4

6
t (Gyr)

8

10

Figure 9. Fraction of chaotic motion in the halo: (a) as a function of radius
for different times, and (b) as a function of time for different regions.

deeper central potential. First, to verify that our method does not
overestimate the initial amount of chaos, we performed the same
test described in Section 2.3 also to a random sub-sample of 1000
halo initial conditions. The evolution of this sub-sample in a frozen
potential conserved energy to within ∆E/E ∼ 4 × 10−5. Com-
paring the percentages of chaotic motion in this case, we found
that in the frozen potential there was marginally less chaos (by 3.2
percentage points). That might lead us to speculate that the greater
amount of chaotic motion is indeed due to the time-dependence of
the bar potential. Furthermore, the ﬁrst time window may witness
more chaotic motion because that is the period during which all the
potential parameters undergo their most intense variations. But to
disentangle the role of the central concentration, a systematic com-
parison of models would be needed, which is beyond the scope of
this paper.

4.3 Sample of halo orbits

From the ensemble used to study the halo, we select three orbits
to illustrate characteristic behaviours. In Fig. 10, each row corre-
sponds to one orbit, and each orbit is shown at four time windows,
coloured by time (from black towards yellow at each window). The
ﬁfth column exhibits the GALI3 and the MLE evolution of each
orbit. Note that here, the GALI3 are reset once they reach 10−8,
being then considered chaotic. The ﬁrst row of Fig. 10 shows an
example of an orbit that was chaotic at ﬁrst, but then becomes reg-
ular later. This is seen both by the orbital shape itself and by the
GALI3 drop in the ﬁrst time window. This orbit becomes part of
the halo bar, as evidenced by its orientation, size and shape. In the
fourth time window there is a mild backslide away from regularity,
again discernible both in the morphology and in the GALI3, but
this momentary relapse is insufﬁcient to reach the threshold of be-
ing classiﬁed as chaotic. In the second row of Fig. 10, we present an
example of an orbit that is permanently chaotic, since its morphol-
ogy is consistently irregular and its GALI3 drops repeatedly. Then,
a typical orbit that is permanently regular, being even roughly cir-
cular and its GALI3 never drops signiﬁcantly, can be found in the
third row of Fig. 10. Notice that the ﬁrst and second rows are orbits
from the inner part of the halo, while the third example is an orbit
from an outer region (r ∼ 10 kpc), where the halo is essentially
spherical.
One may notice that the dynamical transitions observed in this
sample of halo orbits, shown in Fig. 10, are generally simpler com-
pared to those disc orbits shown in Fig. 5, i.e. they maintain their
dynamical stability for most of the time integration. That makes it
easier for the MLE to describe accurately the chaotic or regular na-
ture of this orbits in the TD potential. Thus, here we can see a good
match between the GALI3 and MLE.

5 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We employed the time-dependent analytical model developed in
Manos & Machado (2014) to perform a detailed analysis of the
evolution of chaotic and regular orbits in a barred galaxy. The
galaxy model is represented by a gravitational potential composed
of three components – disc, bar and halo – whose parameters are
all fully time-dependent and were derived from a self-consistent
N-body simulation. By directly following the dynamical evolution
of ensembles of orbits within the analytical potential, we were able
to calculate the fractions of chaotic and regular motion resolved in

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

Chaotic motion in a time-dependent barred galaxy

13

Figure 10. Examples of halo orbits. Each row displays one orbit at four time windows, coloured by time (from black to yellow at each window). The ﬁfth
column shows the corresponding GALI3 evolution, as well as the MLE σ1. Notice the different spatial scales: the top and middle rows are orbits from the
innermost parts of the halo, while the bottom row is an orbit from a region (r ∼ 10 kpc) where the halo is essentially spherical. The orbits are displayed in the
reference frame that rotates with the bar.

both time and space. With this information we could evaluate not
only the global trends in time, but also across several regions of the
galactic disc and of the halo, associating them with distinct mor-
phological features. We scrutinized the different changes of regime
during the evolution, tracing the types of orbits back to their com-
mon origins.

Our previous study of the disc was now extended by associ-
ating simultaneously the dynamical and the morphological state of
orbits. The time-dependence of the analytical model ensures rather
realistic dynamical transitions similar to an N-body simulation,
i.e. bar formation and growth, development of a ring, a dynami-
cal halo, etc. At the same time, this setup serves ideally to apply
the GALI chaos detection method and in this way to determine the
current chaotic (or otherwise) dynamical state of any given orbit
at a ﬁxed time interval, something that it is extremely hard to do
in an N-body simulation. Moreover, it has the advantage over a de-
rived frozen potential from an N-body simulation, from the point of
view that it incorporates smooth dynamical evolution via its time-
dependent parameters and allows us to follow the both dynamical
and morphological transitions.

We analysed the fractions of chaotic motion within different
morphological components of the disc, namely the bar, the ring,
the gap region between them, and the outer disc. Then we also in-
vestigated the origins of four different regimes of transitions be-
tween dynamical stability: those orbits that are permanently regu-
lar, those that are permanently chaotic, those that start regular and

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

end chaotic, and those that start chaotic and end regular. Here we
summarize these results pertaining to the disc:

(i) We found that the overall trend in time is a global decrease
of chaotic motion in the disc as a whole. In the bar region, the
decrease is the most intense and it is monotonic, going from nearly
40 to less than 10 per cent of chaotic motion. The outer disk is
overwhelmingly dominated by regular motion throughout the entire
evolution, and its fraction of chaotic motion never exceeds 2 per
cent.

(ii) The ring and the gap show more complicated evolutions.
The gap region is most peculiar in the sense that it is a very low
density region, but although it is sparsely populated, its fraction of
chaotic motion is the highest seen in the disc, reaching more than
40 per cent at one point. The ring also differs from the rest of the
disc regions because it undergoes a net increase of chaotic motion,
locally.

(iii) Regarding the orbits that do not change their dynamical
state during the evolution, we saw that permanently regular orbits
may be found nearly anywhere in the disc. The permanently chaotic
orbits, however, are only found within the bar, and their origin can
be traced back to a conﬁned annular region at t = 0, whose average
radius is comparable to the future length of the bar.

(iv) Regarding the orbits that do change their dynamical state
between the ﬁrst and the last time windows, we see that the ones
that start chaotic and end regular occupy similar regions as the per-

14 Machado & Manos

manently chaotic ones. This means that there is an annular region of
initially chaotic particles that will migrate to constitute the bar, the
majority of which will ultimately become regular. Finally, the orbits
that begin regular and end chaotic can be traced back at t = 0 to
a less well-deﬁned region outside the aforementioned annulus, but
not extending as far as the outer disc. They also contribute to the
bar, but their most noticeable feature is that these are the only kinds
of orbits that signiﬁcantly depart vertically from the z = 0 plane,
populating the so-called peanut, when the bar is viewed edge-on.

Apart from the study of the disc, we also investigated the pres-
ence of chaotic and regular motion in the dark matter halo. For this,
we similarly used an ensemble of halo orbits evolving in the pres-
ence of the time-dependent analytical model. Now we summarize
the main results regarding the halo.

(i) We found that our analytical model was even able to recover
the so-called halo bar, a prolate structure of the inner halo. This
morphological feature is known to arise in self-consistent N-body
simulations of strongly barred galaxies. Here, the halo potential it-
self remains spherically symmetric during the entire evolution, and
yet the bar potential is able to induce the halo orbits to evolve into
the shape of a halo bar. Like its N-body counterpart, the halo bar
that developed in our ensemble of halo orbits is also less elongated
and not as strong as the stellar bar itself. This reinforces the robust-
ness of the analytical model, because the halo bar is quite a detailed
morphological feature that had not been deliberately built into the
model.

(ii) At any given time, chaotic motion is mainly expected to be
found in the inner rather in the outer parts of the halo. Remarkably,
the inner halo (r < 5 kpc) is initially dominated by chaotic motion
(as much as 70 percent chaotic). At later times, regular motion pre-
vails at all radii, but it is still more present in the inner part. Also
worthy of note is the fact that such high fraction of chaotic motion
was not seen in any of the disc regions.

(iii) Globally, the time evolution of the fraction of chaotic mo-
tion in the halo is in the sense of decreasing monotonically, in any
radial range. As with the disc, the tendency is for the halo orbits to
become progressively more regular.

Our analytical model has the advantage of offering a fully
time-dependent and astrophysically realistic galaxy model, as in-
dicated by the fact that it was successful in recovering several dy-
namical and morphological features of a barred galaxy. This work
focused on one particular galaxy simulation, but the method may
be extended to different galaxy types, taking as input the results of
other N-body simulations. Here we focused on a strongly barred
galaxy to maximise the effects we wished to explore. Clearly a nat-
ural development would be to compare the present results with al-
ternative galaxy models of varying bar strengths, disc masses, halo
proﬁles, etc. Such a systematic exploration would reveal to which
parameters the dynamical stability is most sensitive. For example,
given the high fraction of chaotic motion found in the inner halo,
the question arises as to the role of the dark matter proﬁle in de-
termining that behaviour. One might explore whether a more cuspy
inner halo would help or rather hinder the rise of regular motion.
A further development would be the inclusion of models contain-
ing gas (Patsis et al. 2009) and star formation. To this end, the hy-
drodynamical simulations of Athanassoula, Machado & Rodionov
(2013) would be ideally suited, since they already offer a systematic
grid of models for galaxies with different halo triaxialities and dif-
ferent initial gas fractions, thus resulting in a variety of bar strength
evolutions. More broadly, models derived from a fully cosmologi-

cal hydrodynamical simulation of galaxy formation would offer an
even more realistic scenario (e.g Valluri et al. 2013) than the usual
models of isolated galaxies. Finally, a speciﬁc issues that merits
further analysis is the behaviour of the X-shaped (or boxy/peanut)
bulge (Patsis & Katsanikas 2014a,b), particularly in light of the re-
cent interest in the kinematics and structure of the Milky Way’s
own bulge (Saito et al. 2011; Zoccali et al. 2014).

The methods employed here have proven quite useful to the
dynamical analyses of chaotic and regular motion, but this analyti-
cal approach is potentially suitable to various other applications in
orbital studies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the referee for valuable suggestions, which helped im-
prove the paper. This work has made use of the computing facilities
of the Laboratory of Astroinformatics (IAG/USP, NAT/Unicsul),
whose purchase was made possible by the Brazilian agency
FAPESP (grant 2009/54006-4) and the INCT-A. We also acknowl-
edge support from Ciência sem Fronteiras (CNPq, Brazil) and from
the Institut Henri Poincaré for its support through the Research in
Paris program.

REFERENCES

Athanassoula E., 2005, MNRAS, 358, 1477
Athanassoula E., 2007, MNRAS, 377, 1569
Athanassoula E., Romero-Gómez M., Masdemont J. J., 2009a, MNRAS,

394, 67

Athanassoula E., Romero-Gómez M., Bosma A., Masdemont J. J., 2009b,

MNRAS, 400, 1706

Athanassoula E., Romero-Gómez M., Bosma A., Masdemont J. J., 2010,

MNRAS, 407, 1433

Athanassoula E., Machado R. E. G., Rodionov S. A., 2013, MNRAS,

429, 1949

Benettin G., Galgani L., Strelcyn J.-M., 1976, Phys. Rev. A, 14, 2338
Benettin G., Galgani L., Giorgilli A., Strelcyn J.-M., 1980, Meccanica, 15, 9
Bountis T., Manos T., Antonopoulos C., 2012, Celest. Mech. Dyn. Astron.,

113, 63

Brunetti M., Chiappini C., Pfenniger D., 2011, A&A, 534, A75
Colín P., Valenzuela O., Klypin A., 2006, ApJ, 644, 687
Contopoulos G., 2002, Order and Chaos in Dynamical Astronomy.

Springer-Verlag, Berlin

Contopoulos

G.,

Harsoula

M.,

2010,

Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 107, 77

Contopoulos G., Harsoula M., 2013, MNRAS, 436, 1201
Contopoulos G., Galgani L., Giorgilli A., 1978, Phys. Rev. A, 18, 1183
Dehnen W., 1993, MNRAS, 265, 250
Ferrers N. M., 1877, Quart. J. Pure Appl. Math., 14, 1
Harsoula M., Kalapotharakos C., 2009, MNRAS, 394, 1605
Harsoula M., Kalapotharakos C., Contopoulos G., 2011a, Int. J. Bif. Chaos,

21, 2221

Harsoula M., Kalapotharakos C., Contopoulos G., 2011b, MNRAS,

411, 1111

Hernquist L., 1993, ApJS, 86, 389
Kandrup H. E., Pogorelov I. V., Sideris I. V., 2000, MNRAS, 311, 719
Kaufmann D. E., Contopoulos G., 1996, A&A, 309, 381
Lichtenberg A. J., Lieberman M. A., 1992, Regular and Chaotic Dynamics,
2nd edn. No. 38 in Applied Mathematical Sciences, Springer-Verlag,
New York, NY

Machado R. E. G., Athanassoula E., 2010, MNRAS, 406, 2386
Mafﬁone N. P., Darriba L. A., Cincotta P. M., Giordano C. M., 2011,

Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 111, 285

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

Chaotic motion in a time-dependent barred galaxy

15

Mafﬁone N. P., Darriba L. A., Cincotta P. M., Giordano C. M., 2013,

MNRAS, 429, 2700

Mafﬁone N. P., Gómez F. A., Cincotta P. M., Giordano C. M., Cooper A. P.,

O’Shea B. W., 2015, MNRAS, 453, 2830

Manos T., Athanassoula E., 2011, MNRAS, 415, 629
Manos T., Machado R. E. G., 2014, MNRAS, 438, 2201
Manos T., Skokos C., Antonopoulos C., 2012, Int. J. Bif. Chaos, 22,

1250218

Manos T., Bountis T., Skokos C., 2013,

J. Phys. A: Math. Theor.,

46, 254017

Miyamoto M., Nagai R., 1975, PASJ, 27, 533
Patsis P. A., 2006, MNRAS, 369, L56
Patsis P. A., Katsanikas M., 2014a, MNRAS, 445, 3525
Patsis P. A., Katsanikas M., 2014b, MNRAS, 445, 3546
Patsis P. A., Athanassoula E., Quillen A. C., 1997, ApJ, 483, 731
Patsis P. A., Kaufmann D. E., Gottesman S. T., Boonyasait V., 2009,

MNRAS, 394, 142

Pfenniger D., 1984, A&A, 134, 373
Price-Whelan A. M., Johnston K. V., Valluri M., Pearson S., Küpper

A. H. W., Hogg D. W., 2016, MNRAS, 455, 1079

Romero-Gómez M., Masdemont J. J., Athanassoula E., García-Gómez C.,

2006, A&A, 453, 39

Romero-Gómez M., Athanassoula E., Masdemont J. J., García-Gómez C.,

2007, A&A, 472, 63

Saito R. K., Zoccali M., McWilliam A., Minniti D., Gonzalez O. A., Hill

V., 2011, AJ, 142, 76

Skokos C., 2010, Lect. Notes Phys., 790, 63
Skokos C., Manos T., 2016, Lect. Notes Phys., 915,

(in press),

arXiv:1412.7401

Skokos C., Bountis T. C., Antonopoulos C., 2007, Physica D, 231, 30
Skokos C., Bountis T., Antonopoulos C., 2008, Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top.,

165, 5

Skokos C., Gottwald G. A., Laskar J., eds, 2016, Chaos Detection and
Predictability. Lect. Notes Phys.Vol. 915, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-
Heidelberg, doi:10.1007/978-3-662-48410-4

Terzi´c B., Kandrup H. E., 2004, MNRAS, 347, 957
Tsoutsis P., Kalapotharakos C., Efthymiopoulos C., Contopoulos G., 2009,

A&A, 495, 743

Valluri M., Debattista V. P., Quinn T., Moore B., 2010, MNRAS, 403, 525
Valluri M., Debattista V. P., Quinn T. R., Roškar R., Wadsley J., 2012,

MNRAS, 419, 1951

Valluri M., Debattista V. P., Stinson G. S., Bailin J., Quinn T. R., Couchman

H. M. P., Wadsley J., 2013, ApJ, 767, 93

Vasiliev E., Athanassoula E., 2015, MNRAS, 450, 2842
Weinberg M. D., 2015b, preprint, (arXiv:1508.06855)
Weinberg M. D., 2015a, preprint, (arXiv:1508.05959)
Zoccali M., et al., 2014, A&A, 562, A66

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX ﬁle prepared by the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–15 (2016)

