EUROPEAN ORGANIZATION FOR NUCLEAR RESEARCH (CERN)

CERN-EP/2016-044
2016/03/09

CMS-TOP-13-004

Measurement of the t¯t production cross section in the eµ
s = 7 and 8 TeV
channel in proton-proton collisions at

√

The CMS Collaboration∗

Abstract

√

The inclusive cross section for top quark pair production is measured in proton-
s = 7 and 8 TeV, corresponding to 5.0 and 19.7 fb−1, respectively,
proton collisions at
with the CMS experiment at the LHC. The cross sections are measured in the electron-
muon channel using a binned likelihood ﬁt to multi-differential ﬁnal state distribu-
tions related to identiﬁed b quark jets and other jets in the event. The measured
cross section values are 173.6 ± 2.1 (stat)+ 4.5− 4.0 (syst) ± 3.8 (lumi) pb at
s = 7 TeV, and
244.9± 1.4 (stat)+ 6.3− 5.5 (syst)± 6.4 (lumi) pb at
s = 8 TeV, in good agreement with QCD
calculations at next-to-next-to-leading-order accuracy. The ratio of the cross sections
measured at 7 and 8 TeV is determined, as well as cross sections in the ﬁducial regions
deﬁned by the acceptance requirements on the two charged leptons in the ﬁnal state.
The cross section results are used to determine the top quark pole mass via the de-
pendence of the theoretically predicted cross section on the mass, giving a best result
of 173.8+1.7−1.8 GeV. The data at
s = 8 TeV are also used to set limits, for two neutralino
mass values, on the pair production of supersymmetric top squarks with masses close
to the top quark mass.

√

√

√

Submitted to the Journal of High Energy Physics

c(cid:13) 2016 CERN for the beneﬁt of the CMS Collaboration. CC-BY-3.0 license

∗See Appendix A for the list of collaboration members

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
3
0
3
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1 Introduction
The study of top quark pair (t¯t) production in proton-proton (pp) collisions at the CERN LHC
provides an important test of the standard model (SM). The total production cross section,
σt¯t, can be accurately predicted by quantum chromodynamics (QCD) calculations at next-to-
next-to-leading order (NNLO). A measurement of σt¯t can thus provide constraints on essential
ingredients in the calculation, such as the top quark mass, the proton parton distribution func-
tions (PDFs), and the strong coupling αs. Furthermore, deviations from these predictions can
be an indication of physics beyond the SM. For example, in supersymmetric (SUSY) models, t¯t
pairs may appear as decay products of heavier new particles, increasing the t¯t yields.
Studies of the t¯t production cross section, as well as dedicated searches for deviations from the
SM predictions, have been performed in recent years by the ATLAS and CMS collaborations
using a variety of production and decay channels [1–22]. So far, all results are consistent with
the SM.
This paper presents a new measurement of σt¯t in pp collisions at centre-of-mass energies of
7 and 8 TeV. The measurement is performed in the eµ channel, where each W boson from
the top quark decays into a charged lepton and a neutrino. Compared to the previous CMS
analyses in the dilepton channel at 7 TeV [8] and 8 TeV [1], the new measurement is performed
using the complete CMS data samples recorded in the years 2011 and 2012, with integrated
luminosities of 5.0 and 19.7 fb−1 at
s = 7 and 8 TeV, respectively. The restriction to the eµ
channel provides a pure t¯t event sample owing to the negligible contamination from Z/γ∗
processes with same-ﬂavoured leptons in the ﬁnal state. An improved cross section extraction
method is used, performing a template ﬁt of the signal and background contributions to multi-
differential binned distributions related to the multiplicity of b quark jets (referred to as b jets
in the following) and the multiplicity and transverse momenta of other jets in the event. The
results obtained with this method (referred to as the “reference method” in the following) are
cross-checked with an analysis performed using an event counting method.
The cross section is ﬁrst determined in a ﬁducial (“visible”) range, σvis
, deﬁned by require-
t¯t
ments on the transverse momentum and pseudorapidity of the electron and muon. The results
are then extrapolated to obtain the cross section in the full phase space, σt¯t, with an additional
assessment of the extrapolation uncertainties. The ratio of the cross sections at the two centre-
of-mass energies is also presented. The measurements of σt¯t at 7 and 8 TeV are used to deter-
mine, together with the NNLO prediction [23], the top quark pole mass. Following a previous
CMS analysis [24], the mass is determined via the dependence of the theoretically predicted
cross section on the top quark mass.

√

The data are also used to constrain the cross section of pair production of the lightest supersym-
metric partner of the top quark, the top squark, in the context of SUSY models with R-parity
conservation [25]. The study focuses on models predicting the decay of top squarks into a
top quark and a neutralino, ˜t → t ˜χ0
1, with the neutralino
assumed to be the lightest supersymmetric particle (LSP) [26]. The pair production and the
subsequent decays of the top squarks can lead to a ﬁnal state that is very similar to the SM
t¯t events. The search is performed with the 8 TeV data, looking for an excess of the observed
event yields of t¯t events with respect to the SM predictions. Exclusion limits are set with 95%
conﬁdence level (CL) for the SUSY signal strength as a function of the top squark mass for two
neutralino mass hypotheses.

1, and the three-body decay, ˜t → bW ˜χ0

This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 contains a brief description of the CMS detector,
followed by details of the event simulation and theoretical calculations for the t¯t cross section

2

3 Event simulation and theoretical calculations

are given in Section 3. The event selection and the deﬁnitions of the visible and total cross
sections are given in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. The methods used to measure the cross
section are explained in Section 6 and the systematic uncertainties are described in Section 7.
The measured t¯t production cross sections are reported in Section 8, with the extraction of the
top quark mass presented in Section 9. The search for SUSY is described in Section 10 and a
summary is provided in Section 11.

2 The CMS detector
The central feature of the CMS apparatus is a superconducting solenoid of 6 m internal diame-
ter, providing a magnetic ﬁeld of 3.8 T. Within the solenoid volume are a silicon pixel and strip
tracker, a lead tungstate crystal electromagnetic calorimeter (ECAL), and a brass and scintilla-
tor hadron calorimeter (HCAL), each composed of a barrel and two endcap sections. Extensive
forward calorimetry complements the coverage provided by the barrel and endcap detectors.
Muons are measured in gas-ionisation detectors embedded in the steel ﬂux-return yoke outside
the solenoid. A more detailed description of the CMS detector, together with a deﬁnition of the
coordinate system used and the relevant kinematic variables, can be found in Ref. [27].

The particle-ﬂow (PF) [28, 29] event algorithm reconstructs and identiﬁes each individual par-
ticle with an optimised combination of information from the various elements of the CMS de-
tector. The energy of photons is directly obtained from the ECAL measurement. The energy
of electrons is determined from a combination of the electron momentum at the primary in-
teraction vertex as determined by the tracker, the energy of the corresponding ECAL cluster,
and the energy sum of all bremsstrahlung photons spatially compatible with originating from
the electron track. The energy of muons is obtained from the curvature of the corresponding
track. The energy of charged hadrons is determined from a combination of their momentum
measured in the tracker and the matching ECAL and HCAL energy deposits, corrected for
zero-suppression effects and for the response function of the calorimeters to hadronic showers.
Finally, the energy of neutral hadrons is obtained from the corresponding corrected ECAL and
HCAL energy.

3 Event simulation and theoretical calculations
Experimental effects, related to the event reconstruction and choice of selection criteria, to-
gether with the detector resolution, are modelled using Monte Carlo (MC) event generators
interfaced with a detailed detector simulation. Unless speciﬁed, the same generators and par-
ton shower models are used for the samples at 7 and 8 TeV.
The t¯t sample is simulated using the MADGRAPH event generator (v. 5.1.5.11) [30], which im-
plements the relevant matrix elements at tree level with up to three additional partons. The
MADSPIN [31] package is used to incorporate spin correlation effects. The value of the top
quark mass is ﬁxed to 172.5 GeV and the proton structure is described by the CTEQ6L1 [32]
PDF set. The generated events are subsequently processed with PYTHIA (v. 6.426) [33] for
parton showering and hadronisation, and the MLM prescription [34] is used for matching
of matrix-element jets to parton showers. Decays of τ leptons are handled with TAUOLA (v.
2.75) [35]. An additional t¯t signal sample, which is used to determine speciﬁc model uncertain-
ties of the measurement, is obtained with the next-to-leading-order (NLO) generator POWHEG
(v. 1.0 r1380) [36] and also interfaced with PYTHIA. In POWHEG, the value of the top quark
mass is also set to 172.5 GeV, and the CT10 [37] PDF set is used to describe the proton structure.
The PYTHIA Z2* tune, derived from the Z1 tune [38], is used to characterise the underlying

3

event in the t¯t samples at 7 and 8 TeV. The Z1 tune uses the CTEQ5L PDF set, whereas Z2*
adopts CTEQ6L. The propagation of the generated particles through the CMS detector and the
modelling of the detector response is performed using GEANT4 (v. 9.4) [39].
Only t¯t pair decays into e±µ∓ + X in the ﬁnal state are considered signal, including intermedi-
ate leptonic τ decays. The remaining t¯t decay modes are considered background processes and
referred to as “t¯t bkg.”.
The other SM background samples are simulated with MADGRAPH (without the MADSPIN
package), POWHEG, or PYTHIA, depending on the process. The main background contributions
originate from the production of W and Z/γ∗ bosons with additional jets (referred to as W+jets
and Drell–Yan, DY, in the following), single top quark tW channel, diboson (WW, WZ, and
ZZ, referred to as VV in the following), t¯t production in association with a Z, W, or γ boson
(referred to as t¯tV in the following), and QCD multijet events. The W+jets, DY, and t¯tV sam-
ples are simulated with MADGRAPH with up to two additional partons in the ﬁnal state. The
POWHEG [40, 41] generator is used for simulating single top quark production, while PYTHIA
is used to simulate diboson and QCD multijet events. Parton showering and hadronisation
are also simulated with PYTHIA in all the background samples. The PYTHIA Z2* tune is used
s = 8 TeV, while the Z2
to characterise the underlying event in the background samples at
tune [42] is used at

s = 7 TeV.

√

√

The simulated samples are normalised according to their expected total cross sections for in-
tegrated luminosities of 5.0 (19.7) fb−1 for
s = 7 (8) TeV. The expected cross sections are
obtained from NNLO calculations for W+jets [43] and DY [44] processes, NLO+next-to-next-
to-leading-log (NNLL) calculations for top quark tW or ¯tW channel [45], NLO calculations for
VV [46], t¯t+W [47], and t¯t+Z [48] processes, and leading-order (LO) calculations for QCD mul-
tijet events [33].

√

A number of additional pp simulated hadronic interactions (pileup) are added to each simu-
lated event to reproduce the multiple interactions in each bunch crossing in the data taking.
The pileup events are generated using PYTHIA. Scale factors (SFs) described in Section 4 are
applied when needed to improve the description of the data by the simulation.
Calculations of the σt¯t at full NNLO accuracy in perturbative QCD, including the resummation
of NNLL soft-gluon terms [49], are used to normalise the t¯t simulated samples and to extract
the top quark pole mass. Assuming a top quark mass of 172.5 GeV, the predicted cross sections
are:

σt¯t = 177.3+ 4.7− 6.0 (scale) ± 9.0 (PDF+αs) pb,
σt¯t = 252.9+ 6.4− 8.6 (scale) ± 11.7 (PDF+αs) pb,

at
at

√
√

s = 7 TeV and
s = 8 TeV.

The ﬁrst uncertainty is an estimate of the effect of missing higher-order corrections and is de-
termined by independent variations of the factorisation and renormalisation scales, µF and µR,
by factors of two, up and down from their default values (the top quark mass). The second
uncertainty is associated with variations in αs and the PDF, following the PDF4LHC prescrip-
tion with the MSTW2008 68% CL NNLO, CT10 NNLO, and NNPDF2.3 5f FFN PDF sets (as
detailed in Refs. [50, 51] and references therein, as well as in Refs. [52–54]). These values were
calculated using the TOP++2.0 program [49]. The ratio of the cross sections at 7 and 8 TeV com-
= σt¯t(8 TeV)/σt¯t(7 TeV), is 1.437 ± 0.001 (scale) ± 0.006 (PDF)
puted with NNPDF2.3, RNNLO
± 0.001 (αs) [55].

t¯t

4

4 Event selection

4 Event selection
At trigger level, events are required to have one electron and one muon. For the 8 TeV data
set one of the two leptons is required to have pT > 17 GeV and the other pT > 8 GeV. For the
7 TeV data set both leptons are required to have pT > 10 GeV or to fulﬁl the same criterion as
for the 8 TeV data set. The eµ trigger efﬁciency is measured in data with a method based on
triggers that are uncorrelated with those used in the analysis [1, 56]. In particular, the triggers
require jets or missing transverse energy, which is deﬁned as the magnitude of the projection,
on the plane perpendicular to the beam direction, of the vector sum of the momenta of all
reconstructed particles in an event. The trigger efﬁciency for events containing an eµ pair
passing all selection criteria is approximately 96% (93%) at 7 (8) TeV. Using the eµ trigger
efﬁciency measured in data, the corresponding efﬁciencies in the simulation are corrected by
η-dependent data-to-simulation SFs, which have an average value of 0.99 (0.97) at 7 (8) TeV.

An interaction vertex [57] is required within 24 cm of the detector centre along the beam line
direction, and within 2 cm of the beam line in the transverse plane. Among all such vertices,
the primary vertex of an event is identiﬁed as the one with the largest value of the scalar sum
of the p2
Leptons are required to have pT > 20 GeV and |η| < 2.4. The lepton-candidate tracks are
required to originate from the primary vertex.

T of the associated tracks.

√

Lepton candidates are required to be isolated from other PF candidates in the event. For each
electron [58] or muon [59] candidate, a cone with ∆R = 0.3 or 0.4, respectively, is constructed
around the track direction at the primary vertex. Here ∆R is deﬁned as ∆R =
(∆η)2 + (∆φ)2,
where ∆η and ∆φ are the differences in pseudorapidity and azimuthal angle (in radians) be-
tween any PF candidate and the lepton track direction. The scalar sum of the pT of all PF
candidates contained within the cone is calculated, excluding the contribution from the lepton
candidate itself. All charged PF candidates not associated with the chosen primary vertex are
assumed to arise from pileup events, and are excluded from the calculation of the pT deposited
in the cone. The neutral component is also corrected for pileup effects. The relative isolation
discriminant, Irel, is deﬁned as the ratio of this sum to the pT of the lepton candidate. An elec-
tron candidate is selected if Irel < 0.10; the corresponding requirement for muons is Irel < 0.12.
The efﬁciency of the lepton selection is measured using a “tag-and-probe” method in dilep-
ton events enriched with Z boson candidates [8, 60]. The measured values for the combined
identiﬁcation and isolation efﬁciencies are typically 80% for electrons and 90% for muons. The
lepton identiﬁcation efﬁciencies in simulation are corrected to the measured values in data by
pT and η dependent SFs, which have values in the range 0.97–0.99. From all events that contain
oppositely charged lepton pairs, events are selected if the lepton pair with the largest value of
the scalar sum of the pT corresponds to an eµ pair. Candidate events with eµ invariant masses
meµ < 20 GeV are removed to reduce the contamination from QCD multijet processes. This
selection is referred to as “eµ selection”.
Jets are reconstructed using the anti-kT clustering algorithm [61] with a distance parameter
R = 0.5. The algorithm uses the PF candidates as input objects. To minimise the impact of
pileup, charged particle candidates not associated with the primary vertex are excluded. The
jet energy is corrected for pileup in a manner similar to the correction of the total energy inside
the lepton isolation cone. Additional jet energy corrections are also applied as a function of
the jet pT and η [62]. Jets are selected if they have pT > 30 GeV and |η| < 2.4 and the angular
distance between them and the selected leptons satisﬁes ∆R(jet, lepton) > 0.5.
As the t¯t events are expected to contain mainly jets from the hadronisation of b quarks, re-

5

quiring the presence of b jets can reduce background from events without b quarks. Jets are
identiﬁed as b jets (b-tagged) using the combined secondary vertex algorithm [63]. The dis-
criminator threshold chosen for the reference method to extract the cross section corresponds
to an identiﬁcation efﬁciency for b jets of about 50% and a misidentiﬁcation (mistag) probability
of about 10% for c quark jets and 0.1% for light-ﬂavour jets (u, d, s, and gluons). A looser dis-
criminator threshold is chosen for the event counting method such that the efﬁciency is about
70% for jets originating from b quarks and 20% for c quark jets, while the probability of mistag-
ging for jets originating from light ﬂavours is around 1% [63]. For the reference method there
are no constraints on the number of jets and b-tagged jets in the event.
Figures 1 and 2 show for the 7 and 8 TeV data and simulations, respectively, the pT and η distri-
butions of the highest (leading) and second-highest (subleading) pT lepton from the selected eµ
pair, after the eµ selection is applied. The data are compared to the expected distributions for
the t¯t signal and individual backgrounds, which are derived from MC simulated samples. The
contributions from QCD multijet, W+jets, and t¯t background processes arise from events where
at least one jet is incorrectly reconstructed as a lepton or a lepton that does not originate from a
prompt W or Z boson decay fulﬁls the selection criteria. These contributions are referred to as
“non W/Z” background.

In general, the sum of the estimated contributions provides an adequate description of the data,
within uncertainties. However, as observed previously [56], the simulation is seen to have a
somewhat harder pT spectrum than measured. The impact on the measurement is accounted
for by including an additional modelling uncertainty.

Figure 3 shows the number of b-tagged jets in events passing the eµ selection at 7 and 8 TeV.
It should be noted that the size of the uncertainties in Figs. 1–3 does not reﬂect those in the
ﬁnal measurements, which are constrained by the likelihood ﬁt described in Section 6.1. Good
agreement is observed between data and the sum of the expected yields.

5 Cross section deﬁnitions
The t¯t production cross sections are ﬁrst measured in a ﬁducial range, deﬁned within the kine-
matic acceptance of the t¯t decay particles that are reconstructable in the detector. This avoids
the need for extrapolating the cross sections into the unmeasured kinematic phase space of
these particles. In this analysis the ﬁducial range is deﬁned by the pT and η requirements on
the electron and muon in the ﬁnal state. The visible cross section, σvis
, is deﬁned for events
t¯t
containing an oppositely charged eµ pair from the decay chain t → Wb → (cid:96)νb (including
W → τν → (cid:96)ννν) and with both leptons satisfying pT > 20 GeV and |η| < 2.4. This visible
cross section is then extrapolated to obtain the cross section for t¯t production at parton level in
the full phase space using the formula

σt¯t =

σvis
t¯t
Aeµ

.

(1)

Here, Aeµ denotes the acceptance deﬁned as the fraction of all t¯t events fulﬁlling the above
selection criteria for the visible cross section. The acceptance is determined from the simulated
t¯t signal sample, and includes the leptonic branching fraction of the W bosons of 10.86% [64].

6

5 Cross section deﬁnitions

Figure 1: Distributions of pT (left) and η (right) of the leading (top) and subleading (bottom)
leptons, after the eµ selection, for the 7 TeV data. The last bin of the pT distributions includes
the overﬂow events. The hatched bands correspond to the total uncertainty in the sum of the
predicted yields. The ratios of data to the sum of the predicted yields are shown at the bottom
of each plot. Here, an additional solid gray band represents the contribution from the statistical
uncertainty in the MC simulation. The contributing systematic uncertainties are discussed in
Section 7.

Events/GeV100200300400500DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+stat [GeV]TLeading lepton p020406080100120140160180200pred.obs.0.811.2CMS (7 TeV)-15.0 fbEvents/0.24246810310×DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+statηLeading lepton -2-1.5-1-0.500.511.52pred.obs.0.811.2CMS (7 TeV)-15.0 fbEvents/GeV20040060080010001200DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+stat [GeV]TSubleading lepton p020406080100120140160180200pred.obs.0.811.2CMS (7 TeV)-15.0 fbEvents/0.24246810310×DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+statηSubleading lepton -2-1.5-1-0.500.511.52pred.obs.0.811.2CMS (7 TeV)-15.0 fb7

Figure 2: Distributions of pT (left) and η (right) of the leading (top) and subleading (bottom)
leptons, after the eµ selection, for the 8 TeV data. The last bin of the pT distributions includes
the overﬂow events. The hatched bands correspond to the total uncertainty in the sum of the
predicted yields. The ratios of data to the sum of the predicted yields are shown at the bottom
of each plot. Here, an additional solid grey band represents the contribution from the statistical
uncertainty in the MC simulation. The contributing systematic uncertainties are discussed in
Section 7.

Figure 3: Number of b-tagged jets after the eµ selection for 7 TeV (left) and 8 TeV (right). The
hatched bands correspond to the total uncertainty in the sum of the predicted yields. The
ratios of data to the sum of the predicted yields are shown at the bottom of each plot. Here,
an additional solid grey band represents the contribution from the statistical uncertainty in the
MC simulation. The contributing systematic uncertainties are discussed in Section 7.

Events/GeV500100015002000DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+stat [GeV]TLeading lepton p020406080100120140160180200pred.obs.0.811.2CMS (8 TeV)-119.7 fbEvents/0.241020304050310×DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+statηLeading lepton -2-1.5-1-0.500.511.52pred.obs.0.811.2CMS (8 TeV)-119.7 fbEvents/GeV100020003000400050006000DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+stat [GeV]TSubleading lepton p020406080100120140160180200pred.obs.0.811.2CMS (8 TeV)-119.7 fbEvents/0.241020304050310×DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+statηSubleading lepton -2-1.5-1-0.500.511.52pred.obs.0.811.2CMS (8 TeV)-119.7 fbEvents51015310×DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+statNumber of b-tagged jets0123pred.obs.0.511.5CMS (7 TeV)-15.0 fb≥Events204060310×DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+statNumber of b-tagged jets0123pred.obs.0.511.5CMS (8 TeV)-119.7 fb≥8

6 Analysis methods for the measurement of the cross section

6 Analysis methods for the measurement of the cross section
Two methods are used to measure the t¯t production cross section. The reference method is a
binned likelihood ﬁt to multi-differential ﬁnal state distributions, performed in categories of
number of additional and b-tagged jets, as described in Section 6.1. In addition, an analysis is
performed using an event counting technique, as explained in Section 6.2.

6.1 Binned likelihood ﬁt
An extended binned likelihood ﬁt is applied to determine σvis
. The expected signal and back-
t¯t
ground distributions are modelled in the ﬁt by template histograms constructed from the sim-
ulated samples. The free parameters in the ﬁt are σvis
, the background normalisation param-
t¯t
eters (cid:126)ω = (ω1, ω2, ..., ωK) for the K sources of backgrounds, and the M nuisance parameters
(cid:126)λ = (λ1, λ2, ..., λM), representing sources of systematic uncertainties other than the background
normalisation, such as the jet energy scale and the trigger efﬁciency. The likelihood function L,
based on Poisson statistics, is given by

(cid:0)exp [−µi]µ

i /ni!(cid:1) K∏

ni

L = ∏
i

π(ωk)

M∏

m=1

π(λm).

(2)

k=1

Here, i denotes the bin index of the chosen ﬁnal state distribution, and µi and ni are the expected
and observed event numbers in bin i. The terms π(ωk) and π(λm) denote prior probability
density functions for the background and the other nuisance parameters, representing the prior
knowledge of these parameters. The Poisson expectation values µi can be further decomposed
as

µi = si(σvis
t¯t

,(cid:126)λ) +

bMC
k,i ((cid:126)λ) (1 + γkωk).

(3)

K∑

k=1

Here, si denotes the expected number of t¯t signal events, which depends on σvis
t¯t and the nui-
sance parameters (cid:126)λ. The quantity bMC
represents the nominal template prediction of back-
k,i
ground events from source k in bin i, and γk its estimated relative global normalisation uncer-
tainty. In this analysis the background normalisation parameters ωk and the other nuisance
parameters λm are deﬁned such that each prior can be represented by a unit normal distribu-
tion, unless mentioned otherwise.

A suitable differential distribution for the likelihood ﬁt is the number of selected b-tagged jets in
the event. The probability to reconstruct and identify one of the two b jets from the decaying t¯t
pair is nearly independent of the probability to reconstruct and identify the other b jet. Because
of the large mass of the top quark, the kinematic properties of the two b jets are determined to
a large extent by the nearly independent decay topologies of the t and ¯t, and strong kinematic
acceptance correlations arise only for extreme production topologies, such as for t¯t pairs with a
large Lorentz boost.

Under the assumption of the independence of the probabilities to identify the b jets, it is possi-
ble to express the number of expected signal events with exactly one (s1), and exactly two (s2)
b-tagged jets using binomial probabilities [14]:

s1 = seµ 2b(1 − Cbb),
s2 = seµ 2

bCb.

(4)
(5)

Here, seµ is the total number of events after the eµ selection and can be written as seµ = Lσvis
t¯t eµ,
with L being the integrated luminosity and eµ the efﬁciency for events to pass the eµ selection.

6.1 Binned likelihood ﬁt

9

The parameter b comprises the total efﬁciency that a b jet is reconstructed within the kinematic
acceptance and b-tagged. The quantity Cb corrects for the small correlations between the tag-
ging of the two b jets and can be expressed as Cb = 4seµs2/(s1 + 2s2)2.
The remaining signal events with zero or more than two b-tagged jets are considered in a third
category:

(cid:2)1 − 2b(1 − Cbb) − Cb2

(cid:3) .

s0 = seµ

b

(6)

In Ref. [14], two equations similar to Eqs. (4, 5) are directly solved for the t¯t production cross
section and b. In the present analysis, Eqs. (4, 5) are used together with Eq. (6) in the template
ﬁt. The quantities eµ, b, and Cb are directly determined from the t¯t signal simulation, express-
ing b as (s1 + 2s2)/2seµ, and parametrised as a function of the nuisance parameters (cid:126)λ. The
nominal values for the 8 TeV simulated t¯t signal are eµ = 0.51, b = 0.36, and Cb = 0.99, and
the values for the 7 TeV sample are similar. The use of these equations facilitates an accurate
modelling of the expected signal rates as a function of the nuisance parameters, i.e. avoiding
mismodelling effects that could arise from approximating the dependences as linear functions.

In order to improve the sensitivity of the ﬁt, the events are further categorised into four classes
of multiplicity of additional jets in the event (zero, one, two, and three or more additional jets).
This leads, together with the three classes of b-tagged jets, to 12 different categories in total.
Additional jets must be non-b-tagged jets. In case there is no additional jet, the corresponding
event yields are directly used in the likelihood ﬁt, otherwise events are further categorised into
bins of the pT of the least energetic additional jet in the event.
The signal subcategory probabilities, background rates, and values of eµ, b, and Cb are ob-
tained from simulation and depend on the nuisance parameters (cid:126)λ. Each relevant dependency
of a quantity on a parameter λm is modelled by a second-order polynomial, that is constructed
from evaluating the quantity at three values λm = 0, 1,−1, corresponding to the nominal value
of the parameter and to ±1 standard deviation (σ) variations. For a few sources of uncertainty,
only one exact variation is possible, e.g. when there are only two variants of signal generators
available that differ in a certain uncertainty source such as the matrix element calculation; in
such cases, a linear function is chosen to model the dependence of the quantity on the respec-
tive λm. For several nuisance parameters representing systematic modelling uncertainties in
the measurement, a box prior is chosen instead of the standard unit normal prior, with a value
of 0.5 between −1 and +1 and zero elsewhere. Such priors are chosen for the following uncer-
tainties (discussed in Section 7.2): renormalisation and factorisation scales, jet-parton matching
scale, top quark pT modelling, colour reconnection, underlying event, and matrix element gen-
erator.
The likelihood ﬁt is ﬁnally performed using the function χ2 = −2 ln L, where L is the likelihood
function given in Eq. (2). The MINUIT [65] program is used to minimise this χ2 as function of
the free ﬁt parameters σt¯t, (cid:126)ω, and (cid:126)λ. The ﬁt uncertainty in σt¯t is determined using MINOS,
the proﬁle likelihood algorithm which is part of MINUIT. Figures 4 and 5 show the multi-
differential distributions used in the ﬁt. A reasonably good agreement is found between data
and expectations before the ﬁt.

Figures 6 and 7 compare the data with the simulation after the simultaneous ﬁt at 7 and 8 TeV.
The uncertainty bands are calculated taking into account the full correlation matrix. The de-
scription of the data by the simulation has improved with the ﬁt. The best ﬁt values of the
nuisance parameters correspond to variations that are for most cases within 1σ of the prior
uncertainties, about 98% of the cases. The maximum observed variation is about 1.9σ, corre-
sponding to the uncertainty in the mistag SFs, see Section 7. Other uncertainties with variations

10

6 Analysis methods for the measurement of the cross section

Figure 4: Total event yield for zero additional non-b-tagged jets (left) and pT of the non-b-
tagged jet with the lowest pT in the event (right) for events with one, two, and at least three
additional non-b-tagged jets, and with zero or more than two (top row), one (middle row), and
s = 7 TeV. The last bin of the pT distributions includes
two (bottom row) b-tagged jets at
the overﬂow events. The hatched bands correspond to the sum of statistical and systematic
uncertainties in the event yield for the sum of signal and background predictions. The ratios
of data to the sum of the predicted yields are shown at the bottom of each plot. Here, an
additional solid grey band represents the contribution from the statistical uncertainty in the
MC simulation.

√

6.1 Binned likelihood ﬁt

11

Figure 5: Total event yield for zero additional non-b-tagged jets (left) and pT of the additional
non-b-tagged jet with the lowest pT in the event (right) for events with one, two, and at least
three additional non-b-tagged jets, and with zero or more than two (top row), one (middle row),
s = 8 TeV. The last bin of the pT distributions includes
and two (bottom row) b-tagged jets at
the overﬂow events. The hatched bands correspond to the sum of statistical and systematic
uncertainties in the event yield for the sum of signal and background predictions. The ratios
of data to the sum of the predicted yields are shown at the bottom of each plot. Here, an
additional solid grey band represents the contribution from the statistical uncertainty in the
MC simulation.

√

12

6 Analysis methods for the measurement of the cross section

between 1 and 1.5σ are two components of the jet energy scale corrections and the statistical
component of the b tagging SFs.

Figure 6: Fitted total event yield for zero additional non-b-tagged jets (left) and pT of the non-
b-tagged jet with the lowest pT in the event (right) for events with one, two, and at least three
additional non-b-tagged jets, and with zero or more than two (top row), one (middle row), and
s = 7 TeV. The last bin of the pT distributions includes
two (bottom row) b-tagged jets at
the overﬂow events. The hatched bands correspond to the sum of statistical and systematic
uncertainties in the event yield for the sum of signal and background predictions after the ﬁt,
and include all correlations. The ratios of data to the sum of the predicted yields are shown at
the bottom of each plot. Here, an additional solid grey band represents the contribution from
the statistical uncertainty in the MC simulation.

√

The ﬁducial t¯t production cross sections at
s = 7 and 8 TeV are determined simultaneously.
For each centre-of-mass energy, a likelihood is deﬁned as in Eq. (2), respective χ2 functions are
constructed, and the sum of both χ2 functions is minimised. Correlations between systematic
uncertainties are fully taken into account (see Section 7.3).

√

6.2 Event counting method
The t¯t production cross section is also measured by applying an event counting method similar
to the one used in a previous measurement [1]. This method provides a cross-check of the
reference method.

6.2 Event counting method

13

Figure 7: Fitted total event yield for zero additional non-b-tagged jets (left) and pT of the non-
b-tagged jet with the lowest pT in the event (right) for events with one, two, and at least three
additional non-b-tagged jets, and with zero or more than two (top row), one (middle row), and
s = 8 TeV. The last bin of the pT distributions includes
two (bottom row) b-tagged jets at
the overﬂow events. The hatched bands correspond to the sum of statistical and systematic
uncertainties in the event yield for the sum of signal and background predictions after the ﬁt,
and include all correlations. The ratios of data to the sum of the predicted yields are shown at
the bottom of each plot. Here, an additional solid grey band represents the contribution from
the statistical uncertainty in the MC simulation.

√

14

6 Analysis methods for the measurement of the cross section

In this analysis, events are counted after applying the eµ selection described in Section 4 with
additional requirements that help to further suppress the background contribution: the pres-
ence of at least two jets is required, of which at least one has to be b-tagged. Compared with
Ref. [1], tighter requirements on lepton isolation and identiﬁcation, as well as on b tagging, are
applied to further reduce the background contribution.

Techniques based on control samples in data are used to estimate the background contribu-
tion arising from DY and from non-W/Z events. The contributions of the remaining back-
ground processes are estimated from simulation. The DY contribution is estimated using the
“Rout/in” method [1], in which events with e+e−and µ+µ−ﬁnal states are used to obtain a data-
to-simulation normalisation factor. This is estimated from the number of events within the Z
boson mass window in data, and extrapolated to the number of events outside the Z mass
window with corrections based on control regions in data enriched in DY events. The contri-
bution to the background originating from non-W/Z boson events is estimated by subtract-
ing the same-sign prompt-lepton contributions from the same-sign event yields in data and
multiplying by the ratio of opposite-sign over same-sign events. This ratio, originating from
non-prompt lepton backgrounds, is taken from simulation.

Table 1 shows the total number of events observed in data and the numbers of expected signal
and background events fulﬁlling all selection criteria. For both data sets, a good agreement
between data and expected number of events is observed.

Table 1: Number of selected events for the event counting method for the 7 and 8 TeV data sets.
The results are given for the individual sources of background, t¯t signal, and data. The two
uncertainties quoted correspond to the statistical and systematic components (cf. Section 7),
respectively.

Source

DY
Non W/Z
Single top quark (tW)
VV
t¯tV
Total background
t¯t dilepton signal
Data

Number of eµ events

7 TeV
22 ± 3 ± 3
51 ± 5 ± 15
204 ± 3 ± 61
7 ± 1 ± 2
12 ± 1 ± 3
296 ± 6 ± 63
5008 ± 15 ± 188

4970

8 TeV

173 ± 25 ± 26
146 ± 10 ± 44
1034 ± 3 ± 314
35 ± 2 ± 11
84 ± 1 ± 26
1472 ± 27 ± 319
24440 ± 44 ± 956

25441

Figure 8 shows the b jet multiplicity in events passing the full event selection, except for the
b jet requirement, for data collected at 7 and 8 TeV. In both cases the total predicted yields
provide a good description of the measured distributions.
The cross section σt¯t is determined from the number of data events after background subtrac-
tion, and dividing by the integrated luminosity of the data sample and by the product of de-
tector and kinematical acceptance, selection efﬁciency, as estimated from simulation for a top
quark mass of 172.5 GeV, and branching fraction of the selected t¯t dilepton ﬁnal state.

15

Figure 8: Comparison of the b jet multiplicity distributions in the eµ channel for 7 (left) and
8 (right) TeV between the data and simulation for events fulﬁlling the eµ selection and the re-
quirement of having at least two jets. The hatched bands correspond to the sum of statistical
and systematic uncertainties in the event yield for the signal and background predictions. The
ratios of data to the predicted yields are shown at the bottom of each plot. Here, an additional
solid grey band represents the contribution from the statistical uncertainty in the MC simula-
tion.

7 Systematic uncertainties
The measurement of the top quark pair production cross section is affected by systematic un-
certainties that originate from detector effects and from theoretical assumptions. Each source of
systematic uncertainty is assessed individually by suitable variations of the MC simulations or
by varying parameter values within their estimated uncertainties in the analysis. Each source
is represented by a nuisance parameter, which is ﬁtted together with σvis
, as described in Sec-
t¯t
tion 6. For the event counting method, the same sources of systematic uncertainty are evaluated
following the procedure in Ref. [1].

7.1 Experimental uncertainties

The uncertainty in the dilepton trigger (“Trigger”) and lepton identiﬁcation efﬁciencies (“Lep-
ton ID/isolation”) are estimated by varying the data-to-simulation SFs within their uncertain-
ties, which are in the range of 1–2%.

The lepton energies (“Lepton energy scale”) are corrected separately for electrons [58] and for
muons [66]. Their scales are varied by 0.15% for electrons and 0.3% for muons.

The uncertainty due to the limited knowledge of the jet energy scale (“JES”) is determined by
variations of the jet energy in bins of pT and η [62]. For the reference method, these variations
are divided into 27 sources and the effect of each source is evaluated individually. For the event
counting method, the total variation is used to determine the uncertainty.

The uncertainty due to the limited accuracy of the jet energy resolution (“JER”) is determined
by changing the simulated JER by ±2.5%, ±4%, and ±5%, for jets with |η| < 1.7, 1.7 < |η| <
2.3, and |η| > 2.3, respectively [62].
For the normalisation of each background source, an uncertainty of ±30% is assumed. In the
case of the single top quark background (“tW/tW”), the variation covers the uncertainty in
the absolute rate, including uncertainties due to PDFs. The same global variation is applied
to the other dominant background contribution, DY. The predicted cross section has an uncer-
tainty of ≈5%, including PDF uncertainties. The variation used here additionally covers the

Events200040006000DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+statNumber of b-tagged jets012pred.obs.0.911.1CMS (7 TeV)-15.0 fb≥Events102030310×DatattWttW/DYVVnon W/ZVttMC syst+statNumber of b-tagged jets012pred.obs.0.911.1CMS (8 TeV)-119.7 fb≥16

7 Systematic uncertainties

observed differences in heavy-ﬂavour composition between data and simulation in dedicated
CMS analyses and is also suggested by estimates based on data [4, 8].

The uncertainties due to the b tagging efﬁciency (“b tag”) and misidentiﬁcation rate (“Mistag”)
are determined by varying the b tagging SFs of the b jets or the light-ﬂavour jets, respectively,
by the uncertainties quoted in Ref. [63]. For the reference method, the b tagging uncertainties
are divided into 19 individual sources, some of them are correlated to other systematic uncer-
tainties, such as JER or pileup. The remaining sources are evaluated individually.

The effect of pileup events (“Pileup”) is evaluated by weighting the inelastic pp cross section in
simulation to the minimum bias cross section determined in data. The pileup model estimates
the mean number of additional pp interactions to be about 9 events for the data collected at
7 TeV and 21 for the data collected at 8 TeV. These estimates are based on the total inelastic
s = 7 (8) TeV, which are determined to be 73.5 (69.4) mb, following the
pp cross sections at
measurement described in Ref. [67]. The systematic uncertainty is determined by varying the
cross sections within their uncertainty, ±8% at 7 TeV and ±5% at 8 TeV.
The uncertainty in the luminosity (“Luminosity”) measurement is 2.2% [68] at 7 TeV and 2.6% [69]
at 8 TeV.

√

7.2 Theoretical uncertainties

The impact of theoretical assumptions in the modelling is determined by repeating the analysis
and replacing the standard MADGRAPH tt simulation by dedicated simulation samples with
varied parameters.
The uncertainty in modelling of the hard-production process (“Q2 scale”) is assessed through a
simultaneous variation of renormalisation and factorisation scales in the MADGRAPH sample
by factors of 2 and 0.5 relative to their common nominal value, which is set to the µ2
R = Q2
scale of the hard process. In MADGRAPH, it is deﬁned by Q2 = m2
T, where the sum is
over all additional ﬁnal state partons in the matrix element calculations.

t + Σp2

F = µ2

The impact of the choice of the scale that separates the description of jet production through
matrix elements or parton shower (“ME/PS matching”) in MADGRAPH is studied by changing
its reference value of 20 GeV to 40 GeV and to 10 GeV.

The effect of the matrix-element generator choice on the measurement is evaluated by using
POWHEG [36, 40, 41] for the tt simulation instead of MADGRAPH (“MADGRAPH vs POWHEG”).

The ﬂavour-dependent hadronisation uncertainty (“Hadronisation (JES)”) is part of the JES
uncertainty and comes from differences in the jet energy response for different jet ﬂavours. It
is estimated by the differences between using simulations with the Lund fragmentation model
in PYTHIA and cluster fragmentation model in HERWIG ++ [70] and is evaluated for each jet
ﬂavour independently. An additional uncertainty included in this source is the uncertainty
in the b quark fragmentation tune. This is evaluated by varying the Bowler–Lund b quark
fragmentation model in tune Z2* to describe the results by ALEPH [71] and DELPHI [72] for the
b quark fragmentation functions. Another uncertainty included in this source is the uncertainty
in the semileptonic branching fraction of B hadrons, varied between 10.05% and 11.27%, which
is the range of the measurements from B0/B+ decays and their uncertainties [64].
Differential cross section measurements [56] have shown that the pT of the top quark is softer
than predicted by the MADGRAPH simulation. To account for this effect, the difference be-
tween the result obtained with the nominal simulation and using the MADGRAPH prediction
reweighted to describe the measured top quark pT spectrum is taken as a systematic uncer-

7.3 Correlations between systematic uncertainties for the measurements at 7 and 8 TeV

17

tainty (“Top quark pT modelling”).
The uncertainties from ambiguities in modelling colour reconnection effects (“Colour reconnec-
tion”) are estimated by comparing simulations of an underlying event tune including colour
reconnection to a tune without it, the Perugia 2011 (P11) and P11 noCR tunes [73].

The uncertainty in the modelling of the underlying event (“Underlying event”) is estimated
by evaluating the relative variations of two different P11 PYTHIA tunes with respect to the
standard P11 tune: the mpiHi and the TeV tunes with higher and lower underlying event
activity, respectively.

The uncertainty from the choice of PDFs (“PDF”) is determined by reweighting the sample of
simulated t¯t events according to the 52 CT10 error PDF sets [37], scaled to 68% CL.

7.3 Correlations between systematic uncertainties for the measurements at 7

and 8 TeV

√

s = 7 and 8 TeV similarly,
A number of systematic uncertainties affect the measurements at
while others are completely decoupled. In this analysis, systematic uncertainties are treated as
either uncorrelated, partially correlated, or fully correlated between the two measurements. For
fully correlated systematic uncertainties, common nuisance parameters are used in the simul-
taneous likelihood ﬁt to the two data sets. For each partially correlated systematic uncertainty
source, three nuisance parameters are introduced, one for each data set for the uncorrelated
part and one common parameter for the correlated part. The degree of correlation is modelled
by the parameter ρ. The uncertainties of the correlated and the two uncorrelated parameters
1 − ρ2, respectively, of the uncertainty of the original nuisance
are taken to be fractions ρ and
parameter. The ρ values assumed for this analysis are listed in Table 2.

√

For experimental sources, the same procedures are usually employed at the two centre-of-mass
energies for calibration and determination of uncertainties. Also, the same MC generators are
used for the modelling of background processes. Hence, these uncertainties are treated as
100% correlated, however for each source a (usually small) uncorrelated component arises from
statistical ﬂuctuations in the data or simulated samples. The resulting correlation coefﬁcients
are estimated to be 0.9 for several sources and 0.8 for the “Trigger” and “Mistag” sources.
For the “Pileup” source a relatively small correlation of 0.5 is assumed because of the largely
different beam conditions at the two energies.

From the uncertainties related to the JES, the ﬂavour components (“JES: ﬂavour”), owing to the
comparison between different hadronisation models, and components related to the extrapo-
lation from Z → (cid:96)(cid:96) kinematic acceptance to the full phase space using MC simulation (“JES:
absolute extrapolation”) are taken as fully correlated. The JES sources related to pileup (“JES:
pileup”) are treated as uncorrelated, because of different procedures used for the uncertainty
assessment at the two energies, as well as the remaining terms (“JES: other”). The JES compo-
nent of the b tagging uncertainties is ﬁtted independently, assigning a correlation coefﬁcient of
0.2 that reﬂects the amount of correlated JES uncertainty sources.

All modelling uncertainties are assumed to be fully correlated between the two centre-of-mass
energies, including the three remaining JES parts. The integrated luminosity uncertainties are
treated as fully uncorrelated [74]. It has been checked that variations of the assumed correla-
tions within reasonable ranges lead to negligible changes of the extracted cross sections.

18

7 Systematic uncertainties

Table 2: Assumed correlations ρ between systematic uncertainties for the 7 and 8 TeV data sets.
If ρ = 0, the uncertainties are treated as uncorrelated between the two sets.

Uncertainty source
Trigger
Electron ID
Electron energy scale
Muon ID
Muon energy scale
JES: ﬂavour
JES: pileup
JES: absolute extrapolation
JES: other
Jet energy resolution
Each background
b-tag (JES)
b-tag (stat)
b-tag (syst)
Mistag
Pileup
µR, µF scales
ME/PS matching
MADGRAPH vs POWHEG
b quark fragmentation tune
B hadron semileptonic branching fraction
Top quark pT modelling
Colour reconnection
Underlying event
PDF
Integrated luminosity

ρ
0.8
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
1
0
1
0
0.9
0.9
0.2
0
1
0.8
0.5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0

7.4 Final uncertainties

The total uncertainties in the ﬁducial cross sections, as obtained with the binned likelihood ﬁt
(Section 6.1), are +3.6−3.4 % at 7 TeV and +3.7−3.4 % at 8 TeV. The impact of the sources of systematic
uncertainties in this total uncertainty are listed in Table 3. These are estimated by removing
groups of uncertainties one at a time and gauging the difference in quadrature on the total un-
certainty. Signiﬁcant contributions to the total uncertainty spread over many different sources
of experimental and modelling uncertainties with “Lumi, ”, “Lepton ID/isolation”, “Trigger”,
and “DY” being the four largest sources. The observed shifts of the ﬁtted background or other
nuisance parameters compared to their assumed uncertainty before the ﬁt are in general small,
indicating a consistent ﬁt.

7.4 Final uncertainties

19

Table 3: Illustrative summary of the individual contributions to the total uncertainty in the
visible t¯t cross section measurements.

Source

Trigger
Lepton ID/isolation
Lepton energy scale
Jet energy scale
Jet energy resolution
tW/tW
DY
t¯t bkg.
t¯tV
Diboson
W+jets/QCD
b-tag
Mistag
Pileup
µR, µF scales
ME/PS matching
MADGRAPH vs POWHEG
Hadronisation (JES)
Top quark pT modelling
Colour reconnection
Underlying event
PDF
Integrated luminosity
Statistical

Uncertainty [%]
7 TeV
1.3
1.5
0.2
0.8
0.1
1.0
1.4
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.5
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.1
0.4
0.7
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.2
2.2
1.2

8 TeV
1.2
1.5
0.1
0.9
0.1
0.6
1.3
0.1
0.1
0.6
0.2
0.5
0.1
0.3
0.6
0.1
0.5
0.7
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.3
2.6
0.6

20

8 Cross section measurement

8 Cross section measurement
The results of the t¯t cross section measurements in pp collisions at 7 and 8 TeV are presented in
the ﬁducial range and in the full phase space.

8.1 Fiducial cross section
The ﬁducial cross sections are deﬁned for t¯t production with events containing an oppositely
charged eµ pair with both leptons having pT > 20 GeV and |η| < 2.4. The measured cross
sections, using the binned likelihood ﬁt extraction method (Section 6) and assuming a top quark
mass of 172.5 GeV, are

t¯t = 3.03 ± 0.04 (stat)+ 0.08− 0.07 (syst) ± 0.07 (lumi) pb,
σvis
t¯t = 4.23 ± 0.02 (stat)+ 0.11− 0.09 (syst) ± 0.11 (lumi) pb,
σvis

at
at

√
√

s = 7 TeV and
s = 8 TeV.

The uncertainties are due to statistical ﬂuctuations, combined experimental and theoretical sys-
tematic effects on the measurement, and the uncertainty in the measurement of the integrated
luminosity. A summary of the systematic uncertainties is presented in Table 3.

8.2 Full phase space cross section
The full phase space (total) cross sections for t¯t production are calculated from the ﬁducial cross
section results by dividing σvis
t¯t by the acceptance, as in Eq. (1). The quantity Aeµ is determined
from the t¯t signal MC simulation. As it depends on the exact theoretical model used in the
event generation part of the simulation, it is parametrised as a function of the same nuisance
parameters that were used for the modelling uncertainties (Section 7) in the binned likelihood
ﬁt extraction of the ﬁducial cross sections. The ﬁtted values of these nuisance parameters are
used to obtain the best estimates of Aeµ, 1.745 × 10−2 at 7 TeV and 1.728 × 10−2 at 8 TeV, which
are used for the determination of the nominal values of σt¯t. In order to determine the uncer-
tainty in the phase space extrapolation modelled by Aeµ, each relevant nuisance parameter is
iteratively varied from the ﬁtted value by the ±1σ values before the ﬁt, while all other nuisance
parameters are kept at their ﬁtted values. The resulting variations of Aeµ are taken as an addi-
tional extrapolation uncertainty. The sources that are considered here are “µR and µF scales”,
“ME/PS matching”, “Top quark pT modelling”, and “PDF” (see Section 7), and the individ-
ual uncertainties in σt¯t from these sources are added in quadrature. The resulting systematic
uncertainties are listed in Table 4.
Table 4: Individual contributions to the systematic uncertainty in the total t¯t cross section mea-
surements. The total systematic uncertainties in the ﬁducial cross sections σvis
t¯t are given in the
row “Total (visible)”, and those in the full phase space cross section σt¯t in the row “Total”.

Source

Total (visible)
Q2 scale (extrapol.)
ME/PS matching (extrapol.)
Top quark pT (extrapol.)
PDF (extrapol.)
Total

Uncertainty [%]
7 TeV
+3.6−3.4
+0.1−0.4
+0.1−0.1
+0.5−0.3
+0.1−0.1
+3.6−3.5

8 TeV
+3.7−3.4
+0.2−0.1
+0.3−0.3
+0.6−0.3
+0.1−0.1
+3.7−3.5

The measurements of σt¯t at the two centre-of-mass energies are
σt¯t = 173.6 ± 2.1 (stat)+ 4.5− 4.0 (syst) ± 3.8 (lumi) pb,
σt¯t = 244.9 ± 1.4 (stat)+ 6.3− 5.5 (syst) ± 6.4 (lumi) pb,

√
√

at
at

s = 7 TeV and
s = 8 TeV.

21

√

After adding the uncertainties in quadrature, the resulting total uncertainties are 6.2 pb (3.6%)
at

s = 7 TeV and 9.1 pb (3.7%) at

s = 8 TeV.

√

The results obtained with the method based on event counting (see Section 6.2) are

σt¯t = 165.9 ± 2.5 (stat) ± 6.2 (syst) ± 3.6 (lumi) pb,
σt¯t = 241.1 ± 1.6 (stat) ± 10.0 (syst) ± 6.3 (lumi) pb,

at
at

s = 7 TeV and
s = 8 TeV.

√
√

As expected, the statistical and systematic uncertainties are slightly larger than those obtained
with the reference method. The results of the two methods are in agreement.

The cross section measurements agree with previous results [1, 4, 8, 14, 15, 21, 22]. They con-
stitute the most precise CMS measurements of σt¯t to date and have a similar precision to the
most precise ATLAS result [14], obtained in the same decay channel. For both centre-of-mass
energies, the predicted cross sections at NNLO (see Section 3) are in good agreement with the
measurements.

The ratio of cross sections using the results obtained with the reference analysis amounts to

Rt¯t = σt¯t(8 TeV)/σt¯t(7 TeV) = 1.41 ± 0.06.

Here, the correlated uncertainty obtained from the simultaneous likelihood ﬁt (Section 6) of
the ﬁducial cross sections at the two centre-of-mass energies is fully taken into account as well
as the correlated uncertainty on the acceptances arising from model uncertainties, which are
assumed to be fully correlated between the two energies. The total relative uncertainty of the
ratio is 4.2%, indicating a partial cancellation of systematic uncertainties. The predicted ratio
at NNLO (see Section 3) is consistent with the measurement.

9 Determination of the top quark pole mass
The full phase space cross sections are used to determine the top quark pole mass (mt) via the
dependence of the theoretically predicted cross section on mt and comparing it to the measured
cross section. For this purpose, the cross section ﬁt and the extrapolation to the full phase
space (see Sections 6 and 8.2) are repeated for three different hypotheses for the top quark mass
parameter in the MC simulation (mMC
): 169.5, 172.5, and 175.5 GeV. For each mass value a
sample of simulated t¯t events, generated with the corresponding mMC
value, is used in the
ﬁt as a signal model. The dependence of the distributions used in the ﬁt on detector effects
is evaluated individually for each mass value. Their dependence on modelling uncertainties
varies little over the studied mass range and is thus taken from the nominal mass value (mMC
= 172.5 GeV). The obtained cross section dependence on the mass can be parametrised as an
exponential function:

t

t

t

σt¯t(7 TeV, mMC
σt¯t(8 TeV, mMC

t

t

) = exp

) = exp

t /GeV − 178.5)
t /GeV − 185.4)

+ 170.9 pb,

+ 237.0 pb.

(7)

(8)

(cid:104)−0.1718 (mMC
(cid:104)−0.1603 (mMC

(cid:105)
(cid:105)

22

9 Determination of the top quark pole mass

t

To express the measured dependence as a function of mt instead of mMC
, the difference be-
tween mt and mMC
needs to be accounted for. This is estimated to be of the order of 1 GeV [75].
Therefore, an additional uncertainty ∆mt± in the obtained cross section dependence is intro-
duced. It is evaluated by shifting the measured dependence by ±1 GeV in mMC
and recording
the difference in σt¯t. For the determination of mt, this contribution to the total uncertainty is
almost negligible. In consequence, the measurements of σt¯t can be represented by Gaussian
likelihoods as a function of mt of the form

t

t

(cid:34)(cid:0)σt¯t(mt) − σt¯t

−2(∆2 + ∆2

(cid:1)2

(cid:35)

mt±)

Lexp(mt, σt¯t) = exp

,

(9)

where ∆ represents the total uncertainty in each of the cross section measurements and σt¯t(mt)
the measured dependence of the cross section on mt.
The predicted dependence of σt¯t on the top quark pole mass at NNLO+NNLL is determined
with TOP++, employing different PDF sets (NNPDF3.0 [76], CT14 [77], and MMHT2014 [78])
with αs = 0.118 ± 0.001. Additionally, uncorrelated uncertainties of 1.79% (7 TeV) and 1.72%
(8 TeV) are assigned to the predicted cross section values to account for the uncertainty in the
LHC beam energy [79]. The predicted σt¯t is represented by an asymmetric Gaussian function
with width ∆p,±, comprising PDF, αs, and the beam energy uncertainty summed in quadrature.
This function is convolved with a box function to account for the uncertainty in the renormal-
isation and factorisation scales in the prediction [24]. The result of the convolution is given
as

(cid:35)

(cid:34)

(cid:32)

(cid:34)

(cid:35)(cid:33)

Lpred(mt, σt¯t) =

1

C(mt)

erf

(h)

t¯t (mt) − σt¯t
√

σ

2∆p,+

− erf

(l)

t¯t (mt) − σt¯t
√

σ

2∆p,−

,

(10)

and σ

(l)
(h)
t¯t denote the upper and lower predicted cross section values, respectively,
where σ
t¯t
from variations of the renormalisation and factorisation scales. The normalisation factor C(mt)
assures that max(Lpred) = 1 for any ﬁxed mt.
Figure 9 shows the likelihoods for the predicted t¯t cross section employing NNPDF3.0 and the
s = 7 and 8 TeV as a function of mt. The product of the two likelihoods
measurement of σt¯t at
is used to ﬁt the mass value by maximizing the likelihood simultaneously with respect to mt
and σt¯t. The extracted top quark pole masses using different PDF sets are listed in Table 5. The
contributions from uncertainties in the CT14 PDF set are scaled to a 68% CL.
Table 5: Top quark pole mass at NNLO+NNLL extracted by comparing the measured t¯t pro-
duction cross section at 7 and 8 TeV with predictions employing different PDF sets.

√

mt [ GeV ]

7 TeV
173.5+1.9−2.0
173.9+2.0−2.1
174.1+2.2−2.4

8 TeV
174.2+2.0−2.2
174.4+2.1−2.3
174.6+2.3−2.5

NNPDF3.0
MMHT2014
CT14

Finally, a weighted average is calculated, taking into account all systematic uncertainty cor-
relations between the measured cross sections at 7 and 8 TeV, and assuming 100% correlated
uncertainties for the theoretical predictions at the two energies. The resulting top quark pole
masses are listed in Table 6 and are in good agreement with each other and previous measure-
ments [14, 24].

Table 6: Combined top quark pole mass at NNLO+NNLL extracted by comparing the mea-
sured t¯t production cross section with predictions employing different PDF sets.

23

NNPDF3.0
MMHT2014
CT14

mt [ GeV ]
173.8+1.7−1.8
174.1+1.8−2.0
174.3+2.1−2.2

Figure 9: Likelihood for the predicted dependence of the t¯t production cross section on the top
quark pole mass for 7 and 8 TeV determined with TOP++, employing the NNPDF3.0 PDF set.
The measured dependences on the mass are given by the dashed lines, their 1σ-uncertainties
s is indicated by a
are represented by the dotted lines. The extracted mass at each value of
black point, with its 1σ-uncertainty constructed from the continuous contour, corresponding to
−2∆ log(LpredLexp) = 1.

√

10 Limits on top squark pair production
The SUSY models are predicated on the existence of partners for SM particles. A light top
squark could contribute to the cancellation of the quadratic divergences in the Higgs mass
loop corrections [26]. SUSY scenarios with a neutralino as LSP and a nearly degenerate-mass
top squark provide one theoretically possible way to account for the observed relic abundance
of dark matter [80, 81]. There are therefore strong motivations to search for a top squark with a
mass close to, or even below, the TeV scale.
In the following, a SUSY model with R-parity conservation is considered, where top squarks
are pair-produced via the strong interaction. The top squark decays into a top quark and the
LSP, considered here as the lightest neutralino ˜χ0
1. A simpliﬁed model is used, where the pa-
rameters are the top squark and neutralino masses [82, 83]. The branching fraction of top
squark into a top quark and a neutralino is assumed to be 100%, and the top quark polarisation
is assumed to be fully right-handed. A diagram of the process is shown in Fig. 10.

Top squark pair production with the top squarks decaying into a top quark and a neutralino
could produce ﬁnal states very similar those one from t¯t production but with additional miss-
ing transverse energy. If the difference between the masses of the top squark and the neutralino
is close to the top quark mass, the events would have similar topologies to the SM t¯t events.
In such situations, direct top squark searches have low sensitivity because of the overwhelm-
ing t¯t background. However, from a very precise t¯t cross section measurement, top squark

24

10 Limits on top squark pair production

Figure 10: Diagram displaying the top squark pair production at the LHC in the decay mode
where each top squark decays to a top quark and a neutralino ˜χ0
1.

pair events can be searched for by looking for a small excess in the measured cross section
compared to the SM expectation. The study presented here is complementary to the direct
searches performed by CMS [84–86] and ATLAS [87–89], as it is more sensitive in a mass re-
gion, m(˜t) ≈ m( ˜χ0
The 8 TeV data, analysed with the counting method (Section 6.2), are used to derive upper lim-
its on the production cross section for the top squark pair production for different top squark
masses. The number of observed events in data is compared to the sum of SM t¯t and back-
ground events and the expected yields from top squark pair production.

1) + mt, that is not accessible to conventional SUSY searches.

Top squark pair events generated with MADGRAPH with up to two associated partons are
used for this study. The detector response is described using a fast simulation [90]. In order to
account for differences with the full simulation of the CMS detector used for all other samples,
further corrections are applied, especially for b tagging scaling factors. The signal samples
are normalized according to the cross sections calculated at NLO+next-to-leading-logarithmic
accuracy [91–95].
The 95% exclusion limits are calculated from Bayesian and modiﬁed CLs techniques imple-
mented in the THETA framework [96]. The yields of events given in Table 1 (where t¯t MC
events are normalised to the predicted NNLO cross section [23, 49]) are used, accounting for all
the systematic uncertainties described in Section 7. The uncertainty of 3.5% in the theoretical t¯t
cross section is included to account for effects from renormalisation and factorisation scale and
PDF uncertainties in the calculation [23]. Furthermore, a 10% uncertainty on the signal yields
is added to account the differences in lepton and trigger efﬁciencies between the fast and the
full simulations.

The observed and expected limits on the mass of the top squark for neutralino masses of 1
and 12.5 GeV are shown in Fig. 11. Top squarks with masses below 189 GeV are excluded at
95% CL for the neutralino mass of 1 GeV, and in the range 185–189 GeV for the neutralino mass
of 12.5 GeV. The different behaviour in the region m(˜t) < mt with respect to Refs. [97, 98] is
expected because of the tighter selection on the jet multiplicity and differences in the signal
modelling.

The effect of the top quark polarisation on the ﬁnal result is studied by calculating the exclusion
limits assuming that the top quarks are 100% left-handed polarised. No signiﬁcant differences
are observed compared to the case of right-handed polarised top quarks.

P1P2˜t∗˜t¯t˜χ01˜χ01t¯tpp¯t25

Figure 11: Expected and observed limits at 95% CL on the signal strength as a function of the
top squark mass for neutralino masses of 1 GeV (left) and 12.5 GeV (right). The bands show the
68% and 95% CL ranges of the expected limit. The solid thin lines quantify the impact of the
theoretical uncertainty in the cross section of the SUSY signal on the observed limit.

√

11 Summary
A measurement of the inclusive t¯t production cross section in proton-proton collisions at the
s = 7 TeV and 19.7 fb−1
LHC is presented using the full 2011–2012 data samples of 5.0 fb−1 at
s = 8 TeV. The analysis is performed in the eµ channel using an improved cross section
at
extraction method. The cross sections are determined with a binned likelihood ﬁt to the pT
distribution of the non-b-tagged jet with the lowest pT among the selected jets in the event,
using categories of number of b-tagged and additional non-b-tagged jets. Assuming a top
quark mass of 172.5 GeV, the results are

√

σt¯t = 173.6 ± 2.1 (stat)+ 4.5− 4.0 (syst) ± 3.8 (lumi) pb,
σt¯t = 244.9 ± 1.4 (stat)+ 6.3− 5.5 (syst) ± 6.4 (lumi) pb,

at
at

√
√

s = 7 TeV and
s = 8 TeV,

√

in good agreement with recent NNLO QCD calculations. The ratio of the cross sections at the
s is determined to be 1.41 ± 0.06. Moreover, the cross sections are
two different values of
measured in ﬁducial ranges deﬁned by the transverse momentum and pseudorapidity require-
ments on the two charged leptons in the ﬁnal state. The measurements constitute the most
precise CMS results of σt¯t so far, and are competitive with recent ATLAS results [14].
The inclusive cross sections at 7 and 8 TeV are used to determine the top quark pole mass via the
dependence of the theoretically predicted cross section on the mass, employing three different
PDF sets. The values of the mass are consistent between the three sets. The most precise result,
173.8+1.7−1.8 GeV, is obtained using the NNPDF3.0 PDF set.
The 8 TeV data are also used to constrain the cross section of pair production of supersymmetric
top squarks with masses close to the top quark mass. No excess of event yields with respect to
the SM prediction is found, and exclusion limits are presented as a function of the top squark
mass for two different neutralino masses.

 [GeV]t~m15016017018019020095% CL limit on signal strength00.511.522.533.544.5ths1– Observed  Expectedexps1– Expected exps2– Expected ) = 1 GeV01c~, m(01c~ tﬁ t~  (8 TeV)-119.7 fbCMS [GeV]t~m17018019020021095% CL limit on signal strength00.511.522.533.544.5ths1– Observed  Expectedexps1– Expected exps2– Expected ) = 12.5 GeV01c~, m(01c~ tﬁ t~  (8 TeV)-119.7 fbCMS26

11 Summary

Acknowledgements
We congratulate our colleagues in the CERN accelerator departments for the excellent perfor-
mance of the LHC and thank the technical and administrative staffs at CERN and at other
CMS institutes for their contributions to the success of the CMS effort. In addition, we grate-
fully acknowledge the computing centres and personnel of the Worldwide LHC Computing
Grid for delivering so effectively the computing infrastructure essential to our analyses. Fi-
nally, we acknowledge the enduring support for the construction and operation of the LHC
and the CMS detector provided by the following funding agencies: the Austrian Federal Min-
istry of Science, Research and Economy and the Austrian Science Fund; the Belgian Fonds de
la Recherche Scientiﬁque, and Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek; the Brazilian Fund-
ing Agencies (CNPq, CAPES, FAPERJ, and FAPESP); the Bulgarian Ministry of Education and
Science; CERN; the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ministry of Science and Technology, and Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China; the Colombian Funding Agency (COLCIENCIAS);
the Croatian Ministry of Science, Education and Sport, and the Croatian Science Foundation;
the Research Promotion Foundation, Cyprus; the Ministry of Education and Research, Esto-
nian Research Council via IUT23-4 and IUT23-6 and European Regional Development Fund,
Estonia; the Academy of Finland, Finnish Ministry of Education and Culture, and Helsinki
Institute of Physics; the Institut National de Physique Nucl´eaire et de Physique des Partic-
ules / CNRS, and Commissariat `a l’ ´Energie Atomique et aux ´Energies Alternatives / CEA,
France; the Bundesministerium f ¨ur Bildung und Forschung, Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft,
and Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft Deutscher Forschungszentren, Germany; the General Secretariat
for Research and Technology, Greece; the National Scientiﬁc Research Foundation, and Na-
tional Innovation Ofﬁce, Hungary; the Department of Atomic Energy and the Department
of Science and Technology, India; the Institute for Studies in Theoretical Physics and Mathe-
matics, Iran; the Science Foundation, Ireland; the Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Italy;
the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning, and National Research Foundation (NRF),
Republic of Korea; the Lithuanian Academy of Sciences; the Ministry of Education, and Uni-
versity of Malaya (Malaysia); the Mexican Funding Agencies (CINVESTAV, CONACYT, SEP,
and UASLP-FAI); the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, New Zealand; the
Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission; the Ministry of Science and Higher Education and the
National Science Centre, Poland; the Fundac¸ ˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia, Portugal; JINR,
Dubna; the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation, the Federal Agency of
Atomic Energy of the Russian Federation, Russian Academy of Sciences, and the Russian Foun-
dation for Basic Research; the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development
of Serbia; the Secretar´ıa de Estado de Investigaci´on, Desarrollo e Innovaci´on and Programa
Consolider-Ingenio 2010, Spain; the Swiss Funding Agencies (ETH Board, ETH Zurich, PSI,
SNF, UniZH, Canton Zurich, and SER); the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taipei; the
Thailand Center of Excellence in Physics, the Institute for the Promotion of Teaching Science
and Technology of Thailand, Special Task Force for Activating Research and the National Sci-
ence and Technology Development Agency of Thailand; the Scientiﬁc and Technical Research
Council of Turkey, and Turkish Atomic Energy Authority; the National Academy of Sciences
of Ukraine, and State Fund for Fundamental Researches, Ukraine; the Science and Technology
Facilities Council, UK; the US Department of Energy, and the US National Science Foundation.

Individuals have received support from the Marie-Curie programme and the European Re-
search Council and EPLANET (European Union); the Leventis Foundation; the A. P. Sloan
Foundation; the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation; the Belgian Federal Science Policy Of-
ﬁce; the Fonds pour la Formation `a la Recherche dans l’Industrie et dans l’Agriculture (FRIA-
Belgium); the Agentschap voor Innovatie door Wetenschap en Technologie (IWT-Belgium); the

References

27

Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (MEYS) of the Czech Republic; the Council of Sci-
ence and Industrial Research, India; the HOMING PLUS programme of the Foundation for
Polish Science, coﬁnanced from European Union, Regional Development Fund; the OPUS pro-
gramme of the National Science Center (Poland); the Compagnia di San Paolo (Torino); MIUR
project 20108T4XTM (Italy); the Thalis and Aristeia programmes coﬁnanced by EU-ESF and
the Greek NSRF; the National Priorities Research Program by Qatar National Research Fund;
the Rachadapisek Sompot Fund for Postdoctoral Fellowship, Chulalongkorn University (Thai-
land); the Chulalongkorn Academic into Its 2nd Century Project Advancement Project (Thai-
land); and the Welch Foundation, contract C-1845.

√

References
[1] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross section in the dilepton

s = 8 TeV”, JHEP 02 (2014) 024,

channel in pp collisions at
doi:10.1007/JHEP02(2014)024, arXiv:1312.7582. [Erratum:
10.1007/JHEP02(2014)102].
√
doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2014.10.032, arXiv:1407.6643.

[2] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross section in pp collisions at
s = 8 TeV in dilepton ﬁnal states containing one τ lepton”, Phys. Lett. B 739 (2014) 23,

[3] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross section in the all-jets ﬁnal

s = 8 TeV”, (2015). arXiv:1509.06076. Submitted to Eur.

state in pp collisions at
Phys. J. C.

√

√

[4] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross section and the top quark

mass in the dilepton channel in pp collisions at
doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2011)049, arXiv:1105.5661.

s = 7 TeV”, JHEP 07 (2011) 049,

√

[5] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross section in the all-jet ﬁnal

s = 7 TeV”, JHEP 05 (2013) 065,
state in pp collisions at
doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2013)065, arXiv:1302.0508.

√

[6] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross section in the τ+jets

s = 7 TeV”, Eur. Phys. J. C 73 (2013) 2386,
channel in pp collisions at
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2386-x, arXiv:1301.5755.
√
s = 7 TeV with lepton + jets ﬁnal states”, Phys. Lett. B 720 (2013) 83,
doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2013.02.021, arXiv:1212.6682.

[7] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross section in pp collisions at

√

[8] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t cross section in the dilepton channel in pp

s = 7 TeV”, JHEP 11 (2012) 067, doi:10.1007/JEHP11(2012)067,

collisions at
arXiv:1208.2671.
√
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.85.112007, arXiv:1203.6810.

[9] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross section in pp collisions at

s = 7 TeV in dilepton ﬁnal states containing a τ”, Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 112007,

[10] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross section in pp collisions at

7 TeV in lepton + jets events using b-quark jet identiﬁcation”, Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011)
092004, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.092004, arXiv:1108.3773.

28

References

√

[11] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the top-antitop production cross section in pp

s = 7 TeV using the kinematic properties of events with leptons and jets”,

collisions at
Eur. Phys. J. C 71 (2011) 1721, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-011-1721-3,
arXiv:1106.0902.

[12] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurement of the top pair production cross section in 8 TeV
proton-proton collisions using kinematic information in the lepton+jets ﬁnal state with
ATLAS”, Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015) 112013, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.91.112013,
arXiv:1504.04251.

[13] ATLAS Collaboration, “Simultaneous measurements of the t¯t, W+W−, and Z/γ∗ → ττ
s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector”, Phys.
production cross-sections in pp collisions at
Rev. D 91 (2015) 052005, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.91.052005, arXiv:1407.0573.
[14] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross-section using eµ events
s = 7 and 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector”, Eur.

√

√

with b-tagged jets in pp collisions at
Phys. J. C 74 (2014) 3109, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-014-3109-7,
arXiv:1406.5375.
√

[15] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurement of the cross section for top-quark pair production

in pp collisions at
high-pT leptons”, JHEP 05 (2012) 059, doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2012)059,
arXiv:1202.4892.

s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector using ﬁnal states with two

[16] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurement of the t¯t production cross section in the τ+jets

channel using the ATLAS detector”, Eur. Phys. J. C 73 (2013) 2328,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2328-7, arXiv:1211.7205.

[17] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurement of the top quark pair cross section with ATLAS in

√

pp collisions at
hadronically decaying τ lepton”, Phys. Lett. B 717 (2012) 89,
doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2012.09.032, arXiv:1205.2067.

s = 7 TeV using ﬁnal states with an electron or a muon and a

[18] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurement of the top quark pair production cross-section with

ATLAS in the single lepton channel”, Phys. Lett. B 711 (2012) 244,
doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2012.03.083, arXiv:1201.1889.

[19] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurement of the top quark pair production cross section in

pp collisions at
459, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2011.12.055, arXiv:1108.3699.

s = 7 TeV in dilepton ﬁnal states with ATLAS”, Phys. Lett. B 707 (2012)

√

[20] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurement of the top quark-pair production cross section with

√

s = 7 TeV”, Eur. Phys. J. C 71 (2011) 1577,
ATLAS in pp collisions at
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-011-1577-6, arXiv:1012.1792.

[21] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for new phenomena in t¯t events with large missing

transverse momentum”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012) 041805,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.041805, arXiv:1109.4725.

[22] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for anomalous production of prompt like-sign muon pairs
and constraints on physics beyond the Standard Model”, Phys. Rev. D 88 (2012) 032004,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.85.032004, arXiv:1201.1091.

References

29

[23] M. Czakon, P. Fiedler, and A. Mitov, “The total top quark production cross-section at

hadron colliders through O(α4
S)”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013) 252004,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.252004, arXiv:1303.6254.

[24] CMS Collaboration, “Determination of the top-quark pole mass and strong coupling

√

constant from the t¯t production cross section in pp collisions at
728 (2014) 496, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2013.12.009, arXiv:1307.1907.
[Corrigendum: 10.1016/j.physletb.2014.08.040].

s = 7 TeV”, Phys. Lett. B

[25] G. R. Farrar and P. Fayet, “Phenomenology of the production, decay, and detection of

new hadronic states associated with supersymmetry”, Phys. Lett. B 76 (1978) 575,
doi:10.1016/0370-2693(78)90858-4.

[26] H. P. Nilles, “Supersymmetry, supergravity and particle physics”, Phys. Rept. 110 (1984)

1, doi:10.1016/0370-1573(84)90008-5.

[27] CMS Collaboration, “The CMS experiment at the CERN LHC”, JINST 3 (2008) S08004,

doi:10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08004.

[28] CMS Collaboration, “Particle–ﬂow event reconstruction in CMS and performance for jets,

taus, and (cid:54)ET”, CMS Physics Analysis Summary CMS-PAS-PFT-09-001, 2009.

[29] CMS Collaboration, “Commissioning of the particle–ﬂow event reconstruction with the

ﬁrst LHC collisions recorded in the CMS detector”, CMS Physics Analysis Summary
CMS-PAS-PFT-10-001, 2010.

[30] J. Alwall et al., “The automated computation of tree-level and next-to-leading order

differential cross sections, and their matching to parton shower simulations”, JHEP 07
(2014) 079, doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2014)079, arXiv:1405.0301.

[31] P. Artoisenet, R. Frederix, O. Mattelaer, and R. Rietkerk, “Automatic spin-entangled

decays of heavy resonances in Monte Carlo simulations”, JHEP 03 (2013) 015,
doi:10.1007/JHEP03(2013)015, arXiv:1212.3460.

[32] J. Pumplin et al., “New generation of parton distributions with uncertainties from global

QCD analysis”, JHEP 07 (2002) 012, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2002/07/012,
arXiv:hep-ph/0201195.

[33] T. Sj¨ostrand, S. Mrenna, and P. Z. Skands, “PYTHIA 6.4 physics and manual”, JHEP 05

(2006) 026, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2006/05/026, arXiv:hep-ph/0603175.

[34] M. L. Mangano, M. Moretti, F. Piccinini, and M. Treccani, “Matching matrix elements and
shower evolution for top-quark production in hadronic collisions”, JHEP 01 (2007) 013,
doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2007/01/013, arXiv:hep-ex/0611129.

[35] N. Davidson et al., “Universal interface of TAUOLA technical and physics

documentation”, Comput. Phys. Commun. 183 (2010) 821,
doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2011.12.009, arXiv:1002.0543.

[36] S. Alioli, P. Nason, C. Oleari, and E. Re, “A general framework for implementing NLO

calculations in shower Monte Carlo programs: the POWHEG BOX”, JHEP 06 (2010) 043,
doi:10.1007/JHEP06(2010)043, arXiv:1002.2581.

[37] H.-L. Lai et al., “New parton distributions for collider physics”, Phys. Rev. D 82 (2010)

074024, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.82.074024, arXiv:1007.2241.

30

References

[38] R. Field, “Early LHC underlying event data – ﬁndings and surprises”, in Hadron collider
physics. Proceedings, 22nd Conference, HCP 2010, Toronto, Canada, August 23-27, 2010. 2010.
arXiv:1010.3558.

[39] GEANT4 Collaboration, “GEANT4—a simulation toolkit”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 506

(2003) 250, doi:10.1016/S0168-9002(03)01368-8.

[40] S. Alioli, P. Nason, C. Oleari, and E. Re, “NLO single-top production matched with

shower in POWHEG: s- and t-channel contributions”, JHEP 09 (2009) 111,
doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/09/111, arXiv:0907.4076. [Erratum:
doi:10.1007/JHEP02(2010)011].

[41] E. Re, “Single-top Wt-channel production matched with parton showers using the

POWHEG method”, Eur. Phys. J. C 71 (2011) 1547,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-011-1547-z, arXiv:1009.2450.

[42] R. Field, “Min-bias and the underlying event at the LHC”, Acta Physica Polonica B 42

(2011) 2631, doi:10.5506/APhysPolB.42.2631.

[43] K. Melnikov and F. Petriello, “The W boson production cross section at the LHC through
S)”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 231803, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.231803,

O(α2
arXiv:hep-ph/0603182.

[44] K. Melnikov and F. Petriello, “Electroweak gauge boson production at hadron colliders

through O(α2
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.74.114017, arXiv:hep-ph/0609070.

S)”, Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 114017,

[45] N. Kidonakis, “Two-loop soft anomalous dimensions for single top quark associated

production with W− or H−”, Phys. Rev. D 82 (2010) 054018,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.82.054018, arXiv:hep-ph/1005.4451.

[46] J. M. Campbell, R. K. Ellis, and C. Williams, “Vector boson pair production at the LHC”,

JHEP 07 (2011) 018, doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2011)018, arXiv:1105.0020.

[47] J. M. Campbell and R. K. Ellis, “t¯t W± production and decay at NLO”, JHEP 07 (2012)

052, doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2012)052, arXiv:1204.5678.

[48] M. Garzelli et al., “t¯t W± and t¯t Z hadroproduction at NLO accuracy in QCD with parton

shower and hadronization effects”, JHEP 11 (2012) 056,
doi:10.1007/JHEP11(2012)056, arXiv:1208.2665.

[49] M. Czakon and A. Mitov, “Top++: a program for the calculation of the top-pair

cross-section at hadron colliders”, Comput. Phys. Commun. 185 (2014) 2930,
doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2014.06.021, arXiv:1112.5675.

[50] M. Botje et al., “The PDF4LHC Working Group interim recommendations”, (2011).

arXiv:1101.0538.

[51] S. Alekhin et al., “The PDF4LHC Working Group interim report”, (2011).

arXiv:1101.0536.

[52] A. D. Martin, W. J. Stirling, R. S. Thorne, and G. Watt, “Uncertainties on αS in global PDF
analyses and implications for predicted hadronic cross sections”, Eur. Phys. J. C 64 (2009)
653, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-009-1164-2, arXiv:0905.3531.

References

31

[53] J. Gao et al., “CT10 next-to-next-to-leading order global analysis of QCD”, Phys. Rev. D

89 (2014) 033009, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.89.033009, arXiv:1302.6246.

[54] NNPDF Collaboration, “Parton distributions with LHC data”, Nucl. Phys. B 867 (2013)

244, doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2012.10.003, arXiv:1207.1303.

[55] M. Czakon, M. L. Mangano, A. Mitov, and J. Rojo, “Constraints on the gluon PDF from

top quark pair production at hadron colliders”, JHEP 07 (2013) 167,
doi:10.1007/JHEP07(2013)167, arXiv:1303.7215.

[56] CMS Collaboration, “Measurement of the differential cross section for top quark pair

production in pp collisions at
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-015-3709-x, arXiv:1505.04480.

s = 8 TeV”, Eur. Phys. J. C 75 (2015) 542,

√

[57] CMS Collaboration, “CMS tracking performance results from early LHC operation”, Eur.

Phys. J. C 70 (2010) 1165, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-010-1491-3,
arXiv:1007.1988.

√

[58] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of electron reconstruction and selection with the CMS

detector in proton-proton collisions at
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/10/06/P06005, arXiv:1502.02701.
√
arXiv:1206.4071.

s = 7 TeV”, JINST 7 (2012) P10002, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/7/10/P10002,

[59] CMS Collaboration, “Performance of CMS muon reconstruction in pp collision events at

s = 8 TeV”, JINST 10 (2015) P06005,

[60] CMS Collaboration, “Measurements of inclusive W and Z cross sections in pp collisions

s = 7 TeV”, JHEP 01 (2011) 080, doi:10.1007/JHEP01(2011)080,

√

at
arXiv:1012.2466.

[61] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam, and G. Soyez, “The anti-kt jet clustering algorithm”, JHEP 04

(2008) 063, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2008/04/063, arXiv:0802.1189.

[62] CMS Collaboration, “Determination of jet energy calibration and transverse momentum

resolution in CMS”, JINST 6 (2011) P11002,
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/6/11/P11002, arXiv:1107.4277.

[63] CMS Collaboration, “Identiﬁcation of b-quark jets with the CMS experiment”, JINST 8

(2013) 04013, doi:10.1088/1748-0221/8/04/P04013, arXiv:1211.4462.

[64] Particle Data Group, K. A. Olive et al., “Review of Particle Physics”, Chin. Phys. C 38

(2014) 090001, doi:10.1088/1674-1137/38/9/090001.

[65] F. James and M. Roos, “Minuit: a system for function minimization and analysis of the

parameter errors and correlations”, Comput. Phys. Commun. 10 (1975) 343,
doi:10.1016/0010-4655(75)90039-9.

[66] A. Bodek et al., “Extracting muon momentum scale corrections for hadron collider

experiments”, Eur. Phys. J. C 72 (2012) 2194,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-2194-8, arXiv:1208.3710.

[67] TOTEM Collaboration, “First measurement of the total proton-proton cross section at the

√

LHC energy of
doi:10.1209/0295-5075/96/21002, arXiv:1110.1395.

s = 7 TeV”, Europhys. Lett. 96 (2011) 21002,

32

References

[68] CMS Collaboration, “Absolute calibration of the luminosity measurement at CMS:

Winter 2012 update”, CMS Physics Analysis Summary CMS-PAS-SMP-12-008, 2012.

[69] CMS Collaboration, “CMS luminosity based on pixel cluster counting — Summer 2013

update”, CMS Physics Analysis Summary CMS-PAS-LUM-13-001, 2013.

[70] M. B¨ahr et al., “Herwig++ physics and manual”, Eur. Phys. J. C 58 (2008) 639,

doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0798-9, arXiv:0803.0883.

[71] ALEPH Collaboration, “Study of the fragmentation of b quarks into B mesons at the Z

peak”, Phys. Lett. B 512 (2001) 30, doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(01)00690-6,
arXiv:hep-ex/0106051.

[72] DELPHI Collaboration, “A study of the b-quark fragmentation function with the DELPHI
detector at LEP I and an averaged distribution obtained at the Z pole”, Eur. Phys. J. C 71
(2011) 1557, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-011-1557-x, arXiv:1102.4748.

[73] P. Z. Skands, “Tuning Monte Carlo generators: the Perugia tunes”, Phys. Rev. D 82 (2010)

074018, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.82.074018, arXiv:1005.3457.

[74] CMS Collaboration, “Search for the standard model Higgs boson produced in association

with a top-quark pair in pp collisions at the LHC”, JHEP 05 (2013) 145,
doi:10.1007/JHEP05(2013)145, arXiv:1303.0763.

[75] A. Buckley et al., “General-purpose event generators for LHC physics”, Phys. Rept. 504

(2011) 145, doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2011.03.005, arXiv:1101.2599.

[76] NNPDF Collaboration, “Parton distributions for the LHC Run II”, JHEP 04 (2015) 040,

doi:10.1007/JHEP04(2015)040, arXiv:1410.8849.

[77] S. Dulat et al., “The CT14 global analysis of quantum chromodynamics”, (2015).

arXiv:1506.07443.

[78] L. A. Harland-Lang, A. D. Martin, P. Motylinski, and R. S. Thorne, “Parton distributions

in the LHC era: MMHT 2014 PDFs”, Eur. Phys. J. C 75 (2015) 204,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-015-3397-6, arXiv:1412.3989.

[79] J. Wenninger, “Energy calibration of the LHC beams at 4 TeV”, Technical Report

CERN-ATS-2013-040, 2013.

[80] C. Boehm, A. Djouadi, and M. Drees, “Light scalar top quarks and supersymmetric dark

matter”, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 035012, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.62.035012,
arXiv:hep-ph/9911496.

[81] C. Bal´azs, M. Carena, and C. E. M. Wagner, “Dark matter, light stops and electroweak

baryogenesis”, Phys. Rev. D 70 (2004) 015007, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.70.015007,
arXiv:hep-ph/403224.

[82] J. Alwall, P. Schuster, and N. Toro, “Simpliﬁed models for a ﬁrst characterization of new

physics at the LHC”, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 075020,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.79.075020, arXiv:0810.3921.

[83] LHC New Physics Working Group Collaboration, “Simpliﬁed models for LHC new

physics searches”, J. Phys. G 39 (2012) 105005,
doi:10.1088/0954-3899/39/10/105005, arXiv:1105.2838.

References

33

[84] CMS Collaboration, “Search for top-squark pair production in the single-lepton ﬁnal

state in pp collisions at
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-013-2677-2, arXiv:1308.1586.

s = 8 TeV”, Eur. Phys. J. C 73 (2013) 2677,

√

[85] CMS Collaboration, “Searches for third-generation squark production in fully hadronic

ﬁnal states in proton-proton collisions at
doi:10.1007/JHEP06(2015)116, arXiv:1503.08037.

s = 8 TeV”, JHEP 06 (2015) 116,

√

[86] CMS Collaboration, “Search for direct pair production of scalar top quarks in the single-

√

s = 8 TeV ”, (2016).

and dilepton channels in proton-proton collisions at
arXiv:1602.03169. Submitted to JHEP.

[87] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for top squark pair production in ﬁnal states with one

isolated lepton, jets, and missing transverse momentum in
the ATLAS detector”, JHEP 11 (2014) 118, doi:10.1007/JHEP11(2014)118,
arXiv:1407.0583.

s = 8 TeV pp collisions with

√

[88] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for direct pair production of the top squark in all-hadronic
s = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector”, JHEP 09

ﬁnal states in proton-proton collisions at
(2014) 015, doi:10.1007/JHEP09(2014)015, arXiv:1406.1122.

√

[89] ATLAS Collaboration, “Search for direct top-squark pair production in ﬁnal states with

two leptons in pp collisions at
124, doi:10.1007/JHEP06(2014)124, arXiv:1403.4853.

s = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector”, JHEP 06 (2014)

√

[90] S. Abdullin et al., “The fast simulation of the CMS detector at LHC”, J. Phys. Conf. Ser.

331 (2011) 032049, doi:10.1088/1742-6596/331/3/032049.

[91] W. Beenakker, R. H¨opker, M. Spira, and P. M. Zerwas, “Squark and gluino production at

hadron colliders”, Nucl. Phys. B 492 (1997) 51,
doi:10.1016/S0550-3213(97)80027-2, arXiv:hep-ph/9610490.

[92] A. Kulesza and L. Motyka, “Threshold resummation for squark-antisquark and

gluino-pair production at the LHC”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009) 111802,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.111802, arXiv:0807.2405.

[93] A. Kulesza and L. Motyka, “Soft gluon resummation for the production of gluino-gluino

and squark-antisquark pairs at the LHC”, Phys. Rev. D. 80 (2009) 095004,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.80.095004, arXiv:0905.4749.

[94] W. Beenakker et al., “Soft-gluon resummation for squark and gluino hadroproduction”,
JHEP 12 (2009) 041, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/12/041, arXiv:0909.4418.

[95] W. Beenakker et al., “Squark and gluino hadroproduction”, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 26 (2011)

2637, doi:10.1142/S0217751X11053560, arXiv:1105.1110.

[96] T. M ¨uller, J. Ott, and J. Wagner-Kuhr, “THETA - a framework for template-based

statistical modeling and inference”. http://theta-framework.org.

[97] ATLAS Collaboration, “Measurement of spin correlation in top-antitop quark events and

search for top squark pair production in pp collisions at
detector”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 142001,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.142001, arXiv:1412.4742.

s = 8 TeV using the ATLAS

√

34

References

[98] ATLAS Collaboration, “ATLAS Run 1 searches for direct pair production of

third-generation squarks at the Large Hadron Collider”, Eur. Phys. J. C 75 (2015) 510,
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-015-3726-9, arXiv:1506.08616.

35

I. Kr¨atschmer, D. Liko, T. Matsushita,

A The CMS Collaboration
Yerevan Physics Institute, Yerevan, Armenia
V. Khachatryan, A.M. Sirunyan, A. Tumasyan
Institut f ¨ur Hochenergiephysik der OeAW, Wien, Austria
W. Adam, E. Asilar, T. Bergauer, J. Brandstetter, E. Brondolin, M. Dragicevic, J. Er¨o, M. Flechl,
M. Friedl, R. Fr ¨uhwirth1, V.M. Ghete, C. Hartl, N. H¨ormann, J. Hrubec, M. Jeitler1, A. K¨onig,
M. Krammer1,
I. Mikulec, D. Rabady, N. Rad,
B. Rahbaran, H. Rohringer, J. Schieck1, J. Strauss, W. Treberer-Treberspurg, W. Waltenberger,
C.-E. Wulz1
National Centre for Particle and High Energy Physics, Minsk, Belarus
V. Mossolov, N. Shumeiko, J. Suarez Gonzalez
Universiteit Antwerpen, Antwerpen, Belgium
S. Alderweireldt, T. Cornelis, E.A. De Wolf, X. Janssen, A. Knutsson, J. Lauwers, S. Luyckx,
M. Van De Klundert, H. Van Haevermaet, P. Van Mechelen, N. Van Remortel, A. Van Spilbeeck
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium
S. Abu Zeid, F. Blekman, J. D’Hondt, N. Daci, I. De Bruyn, K. Deroover, N. Heracleous,
J. Keaveney, S. Lowette, S. Moortgat, L. Moreels, A. Olbrechts, Q. Python, D. Strom,
S. Tavernier, W. Van Doninck, P. Van Mulders, I. Van Parijs
Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium
H. Brun, C. Caillol, B. Clerbaux, G. De Lentdecker, G. Fasanella, L. Favart, R. Goldouzian,
A. Grebenyuk, G. Karapostoli, T. Lenzi, A. L´eonard, T. Maerschalk, A. Marinov, A. Randle-
conde, T. Seva, C. Vander Velde, P. Vanlaer, R. Yonamine, F. Zenoni, F. Zhang2
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
L. Benucci, A. Cimmino, S. Crucy, D. Dobur, A. Fagot, G. Garcia, M. Gul, J. Mccartin,
A.A. Ocampo Rios, D. Poyraz, D. Ryckbosch, S. Salva, R. Sch¨ofbeck, M. Sigamani, M. Tytgat,
W. Van Driessche, E. Yazgan, N. Zaganidis
Universit´e Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
S. Basegmez, C. Belufﬁ3, O. Bondu, S. Brochet, G. Bruno, A. Caudron, L. Ceard, S. De Visscher,
C. Delaere, M. Delcourt, D. Favart, L. Forthomme, A. Giammanco, A. Jafari, P. Jez, M. Komm,
V. Lemaitre, A. Mertens, M. Musich, C. Nuttens, K. Piotrzkowski, L. Quertenmont, M. Selvaggi,
M. Vidal Marono
Universit´e de Mons, Mons, Belgium
N. Beliy, G.H. Hammad
Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
W.L. Ald´a J ´unior, F.L. Alves, G.A. Alves, L. Brito, M. Correa Martins Junior, M. Hamer,
C. Hensel, A. Moraes, M.E. Pol, P. Rebello Teles
Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
E. Belchior Batista Das Chagas, W. Carvalho, J. Chinellato4, A. Cust´odio, E.M. Da Costa,
D. De Jesus Damiao, C. De Oliveira Martins, S. Fonseca De Souza, L.M. Huertas Guativa,
H. Malbouisson, D. Matos Figueiredo, C. Mora Herrera, L. Mundim, H. Nogima, W.L. Prado
Da Silva, A. Santoro, A. Sznajder, E.J. Tonelli Manganote4, A. Vilela Pereira
Universidade Estadual Paulista a, Universidade Federal do ABC b, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
S. Ahujaa, C.A. Bernardesb, A. De Souza Santosb, S. Dograa, T.R. Fernandez Perez Tomeia,

36

A The CMS Collaboration

J.P. Gomez, B. Gomez Moreno,

E.M. Gregoresb, P.G. Mercadanteb, C.S. Moona,5, S.F. Novaesa, Sandra S. Padulaa, D. Romero
Abadb, J.C. Ruiz Vargas
Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, Soﬁa, Bulgaria
A. Aleksandrov, R. Hadjiiska, P. Iaydjiev, M. Rodozov, S. Stoykova, G. Sultanov, M. Vutova
University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria
A. Dimitrov, I. Glushkov, L. Litov, B. Pavlov, P. Petkov
Beihang University, Beijing, China
W. Fang6
Institute of High Energy Physics, Beijing, China
M. Ahmad, J.G. Bian, G.M. Chen, H.S. Chen, M. Chen, T. Cheng, R. Du, C.H. Jiang, D. Leggat,
R. Plestina7, F. Romeo, S.M. Shaheen, A. Spiezia, J. Tao, C. Wang, Z. Wang, H. Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
C. Asawatangtrakuldee, Y. Ban, Q. Li, S. Liu, Y. Mao, S.J. Qian, D. Wang, Z. Xu
Universidad de Los Andes, Bogota, Colombia
C. Avila, A. Cabrera, L.F. Chaparro Sierra, C. Florez,
J.C. Sanabria
University of Split, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Naval
Architecture, Split, Croatia
N. Godinovic, D. Lelas, I. Puljak, P.M. Ribeiro Cipriano
University of Split, Faculty of Science, Split, Croatia
Z. Antunovic, M. Kovac
Institute Rudjer Boskovic, Zagreb, Croatia
V. Brigljevic, D. Ferencek, K. Kadija, J. Luetic, S. Micanovic, L. Sudic
University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
A. Attikis, G. Mavromanolakis, J. Mousa, C. Nicolaou, F. Ptochos, P.A. Razis, H. Rykaczewski
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
M. Finger8, M. Finger Jr.8
Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador
E. Carrera Jarrin
Academy of Scientiﬁc Research and Technology of the Arab Republic of Egypt, Egyptian
Network of High Energy Physics, Cairo, Egypt
A.A. Abdelalim9,10, E.H. Aly Lilo11, Y. Assran12,13, E. El-khateeb11,11, E. Salama13,11
National Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics, Tallinn, Estonia
B. Calpas, M. Kadastik, M. Murumaa, L. Perrini, M. Raidal, A. Tiko, C. Veelken
Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
P. Eerola, J. Pekkanen, M. Voutilainen
Helsinki Institute of Physics, Helsinki, Finland
J. H¨ark¨onen, V. Karim¨aki, R. Kinnunen, T. Lamp´en, K. Lassila-Perini, S. Lehti, T. Lind´en,
P. Luukka, T. Peltola, J. Tuominiemi, E. Tuovinen, L. Wendland
Lappeenranta University of Technology, Lappeenranta, Finland
J. Talvitie, T. Tuuva

37

DSM/IRFU, CEA/Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
M. Besancon, F. Couderc, M. Dejardin, D. Denegri, B. Fabbro, J.L. Faure, C. Favaro, F. Ferri,
S. Ganjour, A. Givernaud, P. Gras, G. Hamel de Monchenault, P. Jarry, E. Locci, M. Machet,
J. Malcles, J. Rander, A. Rosowsky, M. Titov, A. Zghiche
Laboratoire Leprince-Ringuet, Ecole Polytechnique, IN2P3-CNRS, Palaiseau, France
A. Abdulsalam, I. Antropov, S. Bafﬁoni, F. Beaudette, P. Busson, L. Cadamuro, E. Chapon,
C. Charlot, O. Davignon, R. Granier de Cassagnac, M. Jo, S. Lisniak, P. Min´e, I.N. Naranjo,
M. Nguyen, C. Ochando, G. Ortona, P. Paganini, P. Pigard, S. Regnard, R. Salerno, Y. Sirois,
T. Strebler, Y. Yilmaz, A. Zabi
Institut Pluridisciplinaire Hubert Curien, Universit´e de Strasbourg, Universit´e de Haute
Alsace Mulhouse, CNRS/IN2P3, Strasbourg, France
J.-L. Agram14, J. Andrea, A. Aubin, D. Bloch, J.-M. Brom, M. Buttignol, E.C. Chabert,
N. Chanon, C. Collard, E. Conte14, X. Coubez, J.-C. Fontaine14, D. Gel´e, U. Goerlach,
C. Goetzmann, A.-C. Le Bihan, J.A. Merlin15, K. Skovpen, P. Van Hove
Centre de Calcul de l’Institut National de Physique Nucleaire et de Physique des Particules,
CNRS/IN2P3, Villeurbanne, France
S. Gadrat
Universit´e de Lyon, Universit´e Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS-IN2P3, Institut de Physique
Nucl´eaire de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France
S. Beauceron, C. Bernet, G. Boudoul, E. Bouvier, C.A. Carrillo Montoya, R. Chierici,
D. Contardo, B. Courbon, P. Depasse, H. El Mamouni, J. Fan, J. Fay, S. Gascon, M. Gouzevitch,
B. Ille, F. Lagarde, I.B. Laktineh, M. Lethuillier, L. Mirabito, A.L. Pequegnot, S. Perries,
A. Popov16, J.D. Ruiz Alvarez, D. Sabes, V. Sordini, M. Vander Donckt, P. Verdier, S. Viret
Georgian Technical University, Tbilisi, Georgia
A. Khvedelidze8
Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi, Georgia
Z. Tsamalaidze8
RWTH Aachen University, I. Physikalisches Institut, Aachen, Germany
C. Autermann, S. Beranek, L. Feld, A. Heister, M.K. Kiesel, K. Klein, M. Lipinski, A. Ostapchuk,
M. Preuten, F. Raupach, S. Schael, C. Schomakers, J.F. Schulte, J. Schulz, T. Verlage, H. Weber,
V. Zhukov16
RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut A, Aachen, Germany
M. Ata, M. Brodski, E. Dietz-Laursonn, D. Duchardt, M. Endres, M. Erdmann, S. Erdweg,
T. Esch, R. Fischer, A. G ¨uth, T. Hebbeker, C. Heidemann, K. Hoepfner, S. Knutzen,
M. Merschmeyer, A. Meyer, P. Millet, S. Mukherjee, M. Olschewski, K. Padeken, P. Papacz,
T. Pook, M. Radziej, H. Reithler, M. Rieger, F. Scheuch, L. Sonnenschein, D. Teyssier, S. Th ¨uer
RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut B, Aachen, Germany
V. Cherepanov, Y. Erdogan, G. Fl ¨ugge, H. Geenen, M. Geisler, F. Hoehle, B. Kargoll, T. Kress,
A. K ¨unsken, J. Lingemann, A. Nehrkorn, A. Nowack, I.M. Nugent, C. Pistone, O. Pooth,
A. Stahl15
Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron, Hamburg, Germany
M. Aldaya Martin, I. Asin, K. Beernaert, O. Behnke, U. Behrens, K. Borras17, A. Campbell,
P. Connor, C. Contreras-Campana, F. Costanza, C. Diez Pardos, G. Dolinska, S. Dooling,
G. Eckerlin, D. Eckstein, T. Eichhorn, E. Gallo18, J. Garay Garcia, A. Geiser, A. Gizhko,

38

A The CMS Collaboration

J.M. Grados Luyando, P. Gunnellini, A. Harb, J. Hauk, M. Hempel19, H. Jung, A. Kalogeropou-
los, O. Karacheban19, M. Kasemann, J. Kieseler, C. Kleinwort, I. Korol, W. Lange, A. Lelek,
J. Leonard, K. Lipka, A. Lobanov, W. Lohmann19, R. Mankel,
I.-A. Melzer-Pellmann,
A.B. Meyer, G. Mittag, J. Mnich, A. Mussgiller, E. Ntomari, D. Pitzl, R. Placakyte, A. Raspereza,
B. Roland, M. ¨O. Sahin, P. Saxena, T. Schoerner-Sadenius, C. Seitz, S. Spannagel, N. Stefaniuk,
K.D. Trippkewitz, G.P. Van Onsem, R. Walsh, C. Wissing
University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
V. Blobel, M. Centis Vignali, A.R. Draeger, T. Dreyer, J. Erﬂe, E. Garutti, K. Goebel, D. Gonzalez,
M. G¨orner, J. Haller, M. Hoffmann, R.S. H¨oing, A. Junkes, R. Klanner, R. Kogler, N. Kovalchuk,
T. Lapsien, T. Lenz, I. Marchesini, D. Marconi, M. Meyer, M. Niedziela, D. Nowatschin, J. Ott,
F. Pantaleo15, T. Peiffer, A. Perieanu, N. Pietsch, J. Poehlsen, C. Sander, C. Scharf, P. Schleper,
E. Schlieckau, A. Schmidt, S. Schumann, J. Schwandt, H. Stadie, G. Steinbr ¨uck, F.M. Stober,
H. Tholen, D. Troendle, E. Usai, L. Vanelderen, A. Vanhoefer, B. Vormwald
Institut f ¨ur Experimentelle Kernphysik, Karlsruhe, Germany
C. Barth, C. Baus, J. Berger, C. B¨oser, E. Butz, T. Chwalek, F. Colombo, W. De Boer, A. Descroix,
A. Dierlamm, S. Fink, F. Frensch, R. Friese, M. Giffels, A. Gilbert, D. Haitz, F. Hartmann15,
S.M. Heindl, U. Husemann, I. Katkov16, A. Kornmayer15, P. Lobelle Pardo, B. Maier, H. Mildner,
M.U. Mozer, T. M ¨uller, Th. M ¨uller, M. Plagge, G. Quast, K. Rabbertz, S. R¨ocker, F. Roscher,
M. Schr¨oder, G. Sieber, H.J. Simonis, R. Ulrich, J. Wagner-Kuhr, S. Wayand, M. Weber, T. Weiler,
S. Williamson, C. W¨ohrmann, R. Wolf
Institute of Nuclear and Particle Physics (INPP), NCSR Demokritos, Aghia Paraskevi,
Greece
G. Anagnostou, G. Daskalakis, T. Geralis, V.A. Giakoumopoulou, A. Kyriakis, D. Loukas,
A. Psallidas, I. Topsis-Giotis
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
A. Agapitos, S. Kesisoglou, A. Panagiotou, N. Saoulidou, E. Tziaferi
University of Io´annina, Io´annina, Greece
I. Evangelou, G. Flouris, C. Foudas, P. Kokkas, N. Loukas, N. Manthos, I. Papadopoulos,
E. Paradas, J. Strologas
MTA-ELTE Lend ¨ulet CMS Particle and Nuclear Physics Group
N. Filipovic
Wigner Research Centre for Physics, Budapest, Hungary
G. Bencze, C. Hajdu, P. Hidas, D. Horvath20, F. Sikler, V. Veszpremi, G. Vesztergombi21,
A.J. Zsigmond
Institute of Nuclear Research ATOMKI, Debrecen, Hungary
N. Beni, S. Czellar, J. Karancsi22, J. Molnar, Z. Szillasi
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
M. Bart´ok21, A. Makovec, P. Raics, Z.L. Trocsanyi, B. Ujvari
National Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhubaneswar, India
S. Choudhury23, P. Mal, K. Mandal, A. Nayak, D.K. Sahoo, N. Sahoo, S.K. Swain
Panjab University, Chandigarh, India
S. Bansal, S.B. Beri, V. Bhatnagar, R. Chawla, R. Gupta, U.Bhawandeep, A.K. Kalsi, A. Kaur,
M. Kaur, R. Kumar, A. Mehta, M. Mittal, J.B. Singh, G. Walia

39

University of Delhi, Delhi, India
Ashok Kumar, A. Bhardwaj, B.C. Choudhary, R.B. Garg, S. Keshri, A. Kumar, S. Malhotra,
M. Naimuddin, N. Nishu, K. Ranjan, R. Sharma, V. Sharma
Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata, India
R. Bhattacharya, S. Bhattacharya, K. Chatterjee, S. Dey, S. Dutta, S. Ghosh, N. Majumdar,
A. Modak, K. Mondal, S. Mukhopadhyay, S. Nandan, A. Purohit, A. Roy, D. Roy, S. Roy
Chowdhury, S. Sarkar, M. Sharan
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, India
R. Chudasama, D. Dutta, V. Jha, V. Kumar, A.K. Mohanty15, L.M. Pant, P. Shukla, A. Topkar
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India
T. Aziz, S. Banerjee, S. Bhowmik24, R.M. Chatterjee, R.K. Dewanjee, S. Dugad, S. Ganguly,
S. Ghosh, M. Guchait, A. Gurtu25, Sa. Jain, G. Kole, S. Kumar, B. Mahakud, M. Maity24,
G. Majumder, K. Mazumdar, S. Mitra, G.B. Mohanty, B. Parida, T. Sarkar24, N. Sur, B. Sutar,
N. Wickramage26
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Pune, India
S. Chauhan, S. Dube, A. Kapoor, K. Kothekar, A. Rane, S. Sharma
Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), Tehran, Iran
H. Bakhshiansohi, H. Behnamian, S.M. Etesami27, A. Fahim28, M. Khakzad, M. Mohammadi
Najafabadi, M. Naseri, S. Paktinat Mehdiabadi, F. Rezaei Hosseinabadi, B. Safarzadeh29,
M. Zeinali
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
M. Felcini, M. Grunewald
INFN Sezione di Bari a, Universit`a di Bari b, Politecnico di Bari c, Bari, Italy
M. Abbresciaa,b, C. Calabriaa,b, C. Caputoa,b, A. Colaleoa, D. Creanzaa,c, L. Cristellaa,b, N. De
Filippisa,c, M. De Palmaa,b, L. Fiorea, G. Iasellia,c, G. Maggia,c, M. Maggia, G. Minielloa,b,
S. Mya,b, S. Nuzzoa,b, A. Pompilia,b, G. Pugliesea,c, R. Radognaa,b, A. Ranieria, G. Selvaggia,b,
L. Silvestrisa,15, R. Vendittia,b
INFN Sezione di Bologna a, Universit`a di Bologna b, Bologna, Italy
G. Abbiendia, C. Battilana15, D. Bonacorsia,b, S. Braibant-Giacomellia,b, L. Brigliadoria,b,
R. Campaninia,b, P. Capiluppia,b, A. Castroa,b, F.R. Cavalloa, S.S. Chhibraa,b, G. Codispotia,b,
M. Cufﬁania,b, G.M. Dallavallea, F. Fabbria, A. Fanfania,b, D. Fasanellaa,b, P. Giacomellia,
C. Grandia, L. Guiduccia,b, S. Marcellinia, G. Masettia, A. Montanaria, F.L. Navarriaa,b,
A. Perrottaa, A.M. Rossia,b, T. Rovellia,b, G.P. Sirolia,b, N. Tosia,b,15
INFN Sezione di Catania a, Universit`a di Catania b, Catania, Italy
G. Cappellob, M. Chiorbolia,b, S. Costaa,b, A. Di Mattiaa, F. Giordanoa,b, R. Potenzaa,b,
A. Tricomia,b, C. Tuvea,b
INFN Sezione di Firenze a, Universit`a di Firenze b, Firenze, Italy
G. Barbaglia, V. Ciullia,b, C. Civininia, R. D’Alessandroa,b, E. Focardia,b, V. Goria,b, P. Lenzia,b,
M. Meschinia, S. Paolettia, G. Sguazzonia, L. Viliania,b,15
INFN Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Frascati, Italy
L. Benussi, S. Bianco, F. Fabbri, D. Piccolo, F. Primavera15
INFN Sezione di Genova a, Universit`a di Genova b, Genova, Italy
V. Calvellia,b, F. Ferroa, M. Lo Veterea,b, M.R. Mongea,b, E. Robuttia, S. Tosia,b

40

A The CMS Collaboration

INFN Sezione di Milano-Bicocca a, Universit`a di Milano-Bicocca b, Milano, Italy
L. Brianza, M.E. Dinardoa,b, S. Fiorendia,b, S. Gennaia, R. Gerosaa,b, A. Ghezzia,b, P. Govonia,b,
S. Malvezzia, R.A. Manzonia,b,15, B. Marzocchia,b, D. Menascea, L. Moronia, M. Paganonia,b,
D. Pedrinia, S. Pigazzini, S. Ragazzia,b, N. Redaellia, T. Tabarelli de Fatisa,b
INFN Sezione di Napoli a, Universit`a di Napoli ’Federico II’ b, Napoli, Italy, Universit`a della
Basilicata c, Potenza, Italy, Universit`a G. Marconi d, Roma, Italy
S. Buontempoa, N. Cavalloa,c, S. Di Guidaa,d,15, M. Espositoa,b, F. Fabozzia,c, A.O.M. Iorioa,b,
G. Lanzaa, L. Listaa, S. Meolaa,d,15, M. Merolaa, P. Paoluccia,15, C. Sciaccaa,b, F. Thyssen
INFN Sezione di Padova a, Universit`a di Padova b, Padova, Italy, Universit`a di Trento c,
Trento, Italy
P. Azzia,15, N. Bacchettaa, L. Benatoa,b, D. Biselloa,b, A. Bolettia,b, A. Brancaa,b, R. Carlina,b,
P. Checchiaa, M. Dall’Ossoa,b,15, T. Dorigoa, U. Dossellia, F. Gasparinia,b, U. Gasparinia,b,
A. Gozzelinoa, K. Kanishcheva,c, S. Lacapraraa, M. Margonia,b, A.T. Meneguzzoa,b,
J. Pazzinia,b,15, M. Pegoraroa, N. Pozzobona,b, P. Ronchesea,b, F. Simonettoa,b, E. Torassaa,
M. Tosia,b, M. Zanetti, P. Zottoa,b, A. Zucchettaa,b,15, G. Zumerlea,b
INFN Sezione di Pavia a, Universit`a di Pavia b, Pavia, Italy
A. Braghieria, A. Magnania,b, P. Montagnaa,b, S.P. Rattia,b, V. Rea, C. Riccardia,b, P. Salvinia,
I. Vaia,b, P. Vituloa,b
INFN Sezione di Perugia a, Universit`a di Perugia b, Perugia, Italy
L. Alunni Solestizia,b, G.M. Bileia, D. Ciangottinia,b, L. Fan`oa,b, P. Laricciaa,b, R. Leonardia,b,
G. Mantovania,b, M. Menichellia, A. Sahaa, A. Santocchiaa,b
INFN Sezione di Pisa a, Universit`a di Pisa b, Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa c, Pisa, Italy
K. Androsova,30, P. Azzurria,15, G. Bagliesia,
J. Bernardinia, T. Boccalia, R. Castaldia,
M.A. Cioccia,30, R. Dell’Orsoa, S. Donatoa,c, G. Fedi, L. Fo`aa,c†, A. Giassia, M.T. Grippoa,30,
F. Ligabuea,c, T. Lomtadzea, L. Martinia,b, A. Messineoa,b, F. Pallaa, A. Rizzia,b, A. Savoy-
Navarroa,31, P. Spagnoloa, R. Tenchinia, G. Tonellia,b, A. Venturia, P.G. Verdinia
INFN Sezione di Roma a, Universit`a di Roma b, Roma, Italy
L. Baronea,b, F. Cavallaria, G. D’imperioa,b,15, D. Del Rea,b,15, M. Diemoza, S. Gellia,b, C. Jordaa,
E. Longoa,b, F. Margarolia,b, P. Meridiania, G. Organtinia,b, R. Paramattia, F. Preiatoa,b,
S. Rahatloua,b, C. Rovellia, F. Santanastasioa,b
INFN Sezione di Torino a, Universit`a di Torino b, Torino, Italy, Universit`a del Piemonte
Orientale c, Novara, Italy
N. Amapanea,b, R. Arcidiaconoa,c,15, S. Argiroa,b, M. Arneodoa,c, N. Bartosika, R. Bellana,b,
C. Biinoa, N. Cartigliaa, M. Costaa,b, R. Covarellia,b, A. Deganoa,b, N. Demariaa,
L. Fincoa,b, B. Kiania,b, C. Mariottia, S. Masellia, E. Migliorea,b, V. Monacoa,b, E. Monteila,b,
M.M. Obertinoa,b, L. Pachera,b, N. Pastronea, M. Pelliccionia, G.L. Pinna Angionia,b, F. Raveraa,b,
A. Romeroa,b, M. Ruspaa,c, R. Sacchia,b, V. Solaa, A. Solanoa,b, A. Staianoa
INFN Sezione di Trieste a, Universit`a di Trieste b, Trieste, Italy
S. Belfortea, V. Candelisea,b, M. Casarsaa, F. Cossuttia, G. Della Riccaa,b, B. Gobboa, C. La
Licataa,b, A. Schizzia,b, A. Zanettia
Kangwon National University, Chunchon, Korea
S.K. Nam
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea
D.H. Kim, G.N. Kim, M.S. Kim, D.J. Kong, S. Lee, S.W. Lee, Y.D. Oh, A. Sakharov, D.C. Son

41

Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Korea
J.A. Brochero Cifuentes, H. Kim, T.J. Kim32
Chonnam National University, Institute for Universe and Elementary Particles, Kwangju,
Korea
S. Song
Korea University, Seoul, Korea
S. Cho, S. Choi, Y. Go, D. Gyun, B. Hong, Y. Kim, B. Lee, K. Lee, K.S. Lee, S. Lee, J. Lim,
S.K. Park, Y. Roh
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
H.D. Yoo
University of Seoul, Seoul, Korea
M. Choi, H. Kim, H. Kim, J.H. Kim, J.S.H. Lee, I.C. Park, G. Ryu, M.S. Ryu
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea
Y. Choi, J. Goh, D. Kim, E. Kwon, J. Lee, I. Yu
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania
V. Dudenas, A. Juodagalvis, J. Vaitkus
National Centre for Particle Physics, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
I. Ahmed, Z.A. Ibrahim, J.R. Komaragiri, M.A.B. Md Ali33, F. Mohamad Idris34, W.A.T. Wan
Abdullah, M.N. Yusli, Z. Zolkapli
Centro de Investigacion y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN, Mexico City, Mexico
E. Casimiro Linares, H. Castilla-Valdez, E. De La Cruz-Burelo, I. Heredia-De La Cruz35,
A. Hernandez-Almada, R. Lopez-Fernandez, J. Mejia Guisao, A. Sanchez-Hernandez
Universidad Iberoamericana, Mexico City, Mexico
S. Carrillo Moreno, F. Vazquez Valencia
Benemerita Universidad Autonoma de Puebla, Puebla, Mexico
I. Pedraza, H.A. Salazar Ibarguen, C. Uribe Estrada
Universidad Aut´onoma de San Luis Potos´ı, San Luis Potos´ı, Mexico
A. Morelos Pineda
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
D. Krofcheck
University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand
P.H. Butler
National Centre for Physics, Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan
A. Ahmad, M. Ahmad, Q. Hassan, H.R. Hoorani, W.A. Khan, T. Khurshid, M. Shoaib, M. Waqas
National Centre for Nuclear Research, Swierk, Poland
H. Bialkowska, M. Bluj, B. Boimska, T. Frueboes, M. G´orski, M. Kazana, K. Nawrocki,
K. Romanowska-Rybinska, M. Szleper, P. Traczyk, P. Zalewski
Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
G. Brona, K. Bunkowski, A. Byszuk36, K. Doroba, A. Kalinowski, M. Konecki, J. Krolikowski,
M. Misiura, M. Olszewski, M. Walczak

42

A The CMS Collaboration

I. Pozdnyakov, G. Safronov,

Laborat´orio de Instrumenta¸c˜ao e F´ısica Experimental de Part´ıculas, Lisboa, Portugal
P. Bargassa, C. Beir˜ao Da Cruz E Silva, A. Di Francesco, P. Faccioli, P.G. Ferreira Parracho,
M. Gallinaro, J. Hollar, N. Leonardo, L. Lloret Iglesias, M.V. Nemallapudi, F. Nguyen,
J. Rodrigues Antunes, J. Seixas, O. Toldaiev, D. Vadruccio, J. Varela, P. Vischia
Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, Russia
S. Afanasiev, P. Bunin, M. Gavrilenko, I. Golutvin, I. Gorbunov, A. Kamenev, V. Karjavin,
A. Lanev, A. Malakhov, V. Matveev37,38, P. Moisenz, V. Palichik, V. Perelygin, S. Shmatov,
S. Shulha, N. Skatchkov, V. Smirnov, N. Voytishin, A. Zarubin
Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina (St. Petersburg), Russia
V. Golovtsov, Y. Ivanov, V. Kim39, E. Kuznetsova40, P. Levchenko, V. Murzin, V. Oreshkin,
I. Smirnov, V. Sulimov, L. Uvarov, S. Vavilov, A. Vorobyev
Institute for Nuclear Research, Moscow, Russia
Yu. Andreev, A. Dermenev, S. Gninenko, N. Golubev, A. Karneyeu, M. Kirsanov, N. Krasnikov,
A. Pashenkov, D. Tlisov, A. Toropin
Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics, Moscow, Russia
V. Epshteyn, V. Gavrilov, N. Lychkovskaya, V. Popov,
A. Spiridonov, M. Toms, E. Vlasov, A. Zhokin
National Research Nuclear University ’Moscow Engineering Physics Institute’ (MEPhI),
Moscow, Russia
M. Chadeeva, O. Markin, E. Popova, V. Rusinov, E. Tarkovskii
P.N. Lebedev Physical Institute, Moscow, Russia
V. Andreev, M. Azarkin38, I. Dremin38, M. Kirakosyan, A. Leonidov38, G. Mesyats, S.V. Rusakov
Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow,
Russia
A. Baskakov, A. Belyaev, E. Boos, V. Bunichev, M. Dubinin41, L. Dudko, A. Gribushin,
V. Klyukhin, O. Kodolova, N. Korneeva, I. Lokhtin, I. Miagkov, S. Obraztsov, M. Perﬁlov,
V. Savrin
State Research Center of Russian Federation, Institute for High Energy Physics, Protvino,
Russia
I. Azhgirey, I. Bayshev, S. Bitioukov, V. Kachanov, A. Kalinin, D. Konstantinov, V. Krychkine,
V. Petrov, R. Ryutin, A. Sobol, L. Tourtchanovitch, S. Troshin, N. Tyurin, A. Uzunian, A. Volkov
University of Belgrade, Faculty of Physics and Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences, Belgrade,
Serbia
P. Adzic42, P. Cirkovic, D. Devetak, J. Milosevic, V. Rekovic
Centro de Investigaciones Energ´eticas Medioambientales y Tecnol´ogicas (CIEMAT),
Madrid, Spain
J. Alcaraz Maestre, E. Calvo, M. Cerrada, M. Chamizo Llatas, N. Colino, B. De La Cruz,
A. Delgado Peris, A. Escalante Del Valle, C. Fernandez Bedoya, J.P. Fern´andez Ramos, J. Flix,
M.C. Fouz, P. Garcia-Abia, O. Gonzalez Lopez, S. Goy Lopez, J.M. Hernandez, M.I. Josa,
E. Navarro De Martino, A. P´erez-Calero Yzquierdo, J. Puerta Pelayo, A. Quintario Olmeda,
I. Redondo, L. Romero, M.S. Soares
Universidad Aut´onoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
J.F. de Troc´oniz, M. Missiroli, D. Moran

43

Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain
J. Cuevas, J. Fernandez Menendez, S. Folgueras, I. Gonzalez Caballero, E. Palencia Cortezon15,
S. Sanchez Cruz, J.M. Vizan Garcia
Instituto de F´ısica de Cantabria (IFCA), CSIC-Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, Spain
J.R. Casti ˜neiras De Saa, E. Curras, P. De Castro Manzano,
I.J. Cabrillo, A. Calderon,
M. Fernandez, J. Garcia-Ferrero, G. Gomez, A. Lopez Virto, J. Marco, R. Marco, C. Martinez
Rivero, F. Matorras, J. Piedra Gomez, T. Rodrigo, A.Y. Rodr´ıguez-Marrero, A. Ruiz-Jimeno,
L. Scodellaro, N. Trevisani, I. Vila, R. Vilar Cortabitarte
CERN, European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland
D. Abbaneo, E. Auffray, G. Auzinger, M. Bachtis, P. Baillon, A.H. Ball, D. Barney, A. Benaglia,
L. Benhabib, G.M. Berruti, P. Bloch, A. Bocci, A. Bonato, C. Botta, H. Breuker, T. Camporesi,
R. Castello, M. Cepeda, G. Cerminara, M. D’Alfonso, D. d’Enterria, A. Dabrowski, V. Daponte,
A. David, M. De Gruttola, F. De Guio, A. De Roeck, E. Di Marco43, M. Dobson, M. Dordevic,
B. Dorney, T. du Pree, D. Duggan, M. D ¨unser, N. Dupont, A. Elliott-Peisert, G. Franzoni,
J. Fulcher, W. Funk, D. Gigi, K. Gill, M. Girone, F. Glege, R. Guida, S. Gundacker, M. Guthoff,
J. Hammer, P. Harris, J. Hegeman, V. Innocente, P. Janot, H. Kirschenmann, V. Kn ¨unz,
M.J. Kortelainen, K. Kousouris, P. Lecoq, C. Lourenc¸o, M.T. Lucchini, N. Magini, L. Malgeri,
M. Mannelli, A. Martelli, L. Masetti, F. Meijers, S. Mersi, E. Meschi, F. Moortgat, S. Morovic,
M. Mulders, H. Neugebauer, S. Orfanelli44, L. Orsini, L. Pape, E. Perez, M. Peruzzi, A. Petrilli,
G. Petrucciani, A. Pfeiffer, M. Pierini, D. Piparo, A. Racz, T. Reis, G. Rolandi45, M. Rovere,
M. Ruan, H. Sakulin, J.B. Sauvan, C. Sch¨afer, C. Schwick, M. Seidel, A. Sharma, P. Silva,
M. Simon, P. Sphicas46, J. Steggemann, M. Stoye, Y. Takahashi, D. Treille, A. Triossi, A. Tsirou,
V. Veckalns47, G.I. Veres21, N. Wardle, H.K. W¨ohri, A. Zagozdzinska36, W.D. Zeuner
Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland
W. Bertl, K. Deiters, W. Erdmann, R. Horisberger, Q. Ingram, H.C. Kaestli, D. Kotlinski,
U. Langenegger, T. Rohe
Institute for Particle Physics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
F. Bachmair, L. B¨ani, L. Bianchini, B. Casal, G. Dissertori, M. Dittmar, M. Doneg`a, P. Eller,
C. Grab, C. Heidegger, D. Hits, J. Hoss, G. Kasieczka, P. Lecomte†, W. Lustermann, B. Mangano,
M. Marionneau, P. Martinez Ruiz del Arbol, M. Masciovecchio, M.T. Meinhard, D. Meister,
F. Micheli, P. Musella, F. Nessi-Tedaldi, F. Pandolﬁ, J. Pata, F. Pauss, G. Perrin, L. Perrozzi,
M. Quittnat, M. Rossini, M. Sch¨onenberger, A. Starodumov48, M. Takahashi, V.R. Tavolaro,
K. Theoﬁlatos, R. Wallny
Universit¨at Z ¨urich, Zurich, Switzerland
T.K. Aarrestad, C. Amsler49, L. Caminada, M.F. Canelli, V. Chiochia, A. De Cosa, C. Galloni,
A. Hinzmann, T. Hreus, B. Kilminster, C. Lange, J. Ngadiuba, D. Pinna, G. Rauco, P. Robmann,
D. Salerno, Y. Yang
National Central University, Chung-Li, Taiwan
K.H. Chen, T.H. Doan, Sh. Jain, R. Khurana, M. Konyushikhin, C.M. Kuo, W. Lin, Y.J. Lu,
A. Pozdnyakov, S.S. Yu
National Taiwan University (NTU), Taipei, Taiwan
Arun Kumar, P. Chang, Y.H. Chang, Y.W. Chang, Y. Chao, K.F. Chen, P.H. Chen, C. Dietz,
F. Fiori, U. Grundler, W.-S. Hou, Y. Hsiung, Y.F. Liu, R.-S. Lu, M. Mi ˜nano Moya, E. Petrakou,
J.f. Tsai, Y.M. Tzeng

44

A The CMS Collaboration

Chulalongkorn University, Faculty of Science, Department of Physics, Bangkok, Thailand
B. Asavapibhop, K. Kovitanggoon, G. Singh, N. Srimanobhas, N. Suwonjandee
Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey
A. Adiguzel, M.N. Bakirci50, S. Damarseckin, Z.S. Demiroglu, C. Dozen, S. Girgis, G. Gokbulut,
Y. Guler, E. Gurpinar, I. Hos, E.E. Kangal51, A. Kayis Topaksu, G. Onengut52, K. Ozdemir53,
S. Ozturk50, D. Sunar Cerci54, B. Tali54, H. Topakli50, C. Zorbilmez
Middle East Technical University, Physics Department, Ankara, Turkey
B. Bilin, S. Bilmis, B. Isildak55, G. Karapinar56, M. Yalvac, M. Zeyrek
Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey
E. G ¨ulmez, M. Kaya57, O. Kaya58, E.A. Yetkin59, T. Yetkin60
Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
A. Cakir, K. Cankocak, S. Sen61, F.I. Vardarlı
Institute for Scintillation Materials of National Academy of Science of Ukraine, Kharkov,
Ukraine
B. Grynyov
National Scientiﬁc Center, Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology, Kharkov, Ukraine
L. Levchuk, P. Sorokin
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom
R. Aggleton, F. Ball, L. Beck, J.J. Brooke, D. Burns, E. Clement, D. Cussans, H. Flacher,
J. Goldstein, M. Grimes, G.P. Heath, H.F. Heath, J. Jacob, L. Kreczko, C. Lucas, Z. Meng,
D.M. Newbold62, S. Paramesvaran, A. Poll, T. Sakuma, S. Seif El Nasr-storey, S. Senkin,
D. Smith, V.J. Smith
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom
K.W. Bell, A. Belyaev63, C. Brew, R.M. Brown, L. Calligaris, D. Cieri, D.J.A. Cockerill,
J.A. Coughlan, K. Harder, S. Harper, E. Olaiya, D. Petyt, C.H. Shepherd-Themistocleous,
A. Thea, I.R. Tomalin, T. Williams, S.D. Worm
Imperial College, London, United Kingdom
M. Baber, R. Bainbridge, O. Buchmuller, A. Bundock, D. Burton, S. Casasso, M. Citron,
D. Colling, L. Corpe, P. Dauncey, G. Davies, A. De Wit, M. Della Negra, P. Dunne, A. Elwood,
D. Futyan, Y. Haddad, G. Hall, G. Iles, R. Lane, R. Lucas62, L. Lyons, A.-M. Magnan, S. Malik,
L. Mastrolorenzo, J. Nash, A. Nikitenko48, J. Pela, B. Penning, M. Pesaresi, D.M. Raymond,
A. Richards, A. Rose, C. Seez, A. Tapper, K. Uchida, M. Vazquez Acosta64, T. Virdee15, S.C. Zenz
Brunel University, Uxbridge, United Kingdom
J.E. Cole, P.R. Hobson, A. Khan, P. Kyberd, D. Leslie, I.D. Reid, P. Symonds, L. Teodorescu,
M. Turner
Baylor University, Waco, USA
A. Borzou, K. Call, J. Dittmann, K. Hatakeyama, H. Liu, N. Pastika
The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, USA
O. Charaf, S.I. Cooper, C. Henderson, P. Rumerio
Boston University, Boston, USA
D. Arcaro, A. Avetisyan, T. Bose, D. Gastler, D. Rankin, C. Richardson, J. Rohlf, L. Sulak, D. Zou

45

Brown University, Providence, USA
J. Alimena, G. Benelli, E. Berry, D. Cutts, A. Ferapontov, A. Garabedian, J. Hakala, U. Heintz,
O. Jesus, E. Laird, G. Landsberg, Z. Mao, M. Narain, S. Piperov, S. Sagir, R. Syarif
University of California, Davis, Davis, USA
R. Breedon, G. Breto, M. Calderon De La Barca Sanchez, S. Chauhan, M. Chertok, J. Conway,
R. Conway, P.T. Cox, R. Erbacher, G. Funk, M. Gardner, W. Ko, R. Lander, C. Mclean,
M. Mulhearn, D. Pellett, J. Pilot, F. Ricci-Tam, S. Shalhout, J. Smith, M. Squires, D. Stolp,
M. Tripathi, S. Wilbur, R. Yohay
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
R. Cousins, P. Everaerts, A. Florent, J. Hauser, M. Ignatenko, D. Saltzberg, E. Takasugi,
V. Valuev, M. Weber
University of California, Riverside, Riverside, USA
K. Burt, R. Clare, J. Ellison, J.W. Gary, G. Hanson, J. Heilman, M. Ivova PANEVA, P. Jandir,
E. Kennedy, F. Lacroix, O.R. Long, M. Malberti, M. Olmedo Negrete, A. Shrinivas, H. Wei,
S. Wimpenny, B. R. Yates
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA
J.G. Branson, G.B. Cerati, S. Cittolin, R.T. D’Agnolo, M. Derdzinski, A. Holzner, R. Kelley,
D. Klein, J. Letts, I. Macneill, D. Olivito, S. Padhi, M. Pieri, M. Sani, V. Sharma, S. Simon,
M. Tadel, A. Vartak, S. Wasserbaech65, C. Welke, J. Wood, F. W ¨urthwein, A. Yagil, G. Zevi
Della Porta
University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, USA
J. Bradmiller-Feld, C. Campagnari, A. Dishaw, V. Dutta, K. Flowers, M. Franco Sevilla,
P. Geffert, C. George, F. Golf, L. Gouskos, J. Gran, J. Incandela, N. Mccoll, S.D. Mullin,
J. Richman, D. Stuart, I. Suarez, C. West, J. Yoo
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, USA
D. Anderson, A. Apresyan, J. Bendavid, A. Bornheim, J. Bunn, Y. Chen, J. Duarte, A. Mott,
H.B. Newman, C. Pena, M. Spiropulu, J.R. Vlimant, S. Xie, R.Y. Zhu
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
M.B. Andrews, V. Azzolini, A. Calamba, B. Carlson, T. Ferguson, M. Paulini, J. Russ, M. Sun,
H. Vogel, I. Vorobiev
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, USA
J.P. Cumalat, W.T. Ford, A. Gaz, F. Jensen, A. Johnson, M. Krohn, T. Mulholland, U. Nauenberg,
K. Stenson, S.R. Wagner
Cornell University, Ithaca, USA
J. Alexander, A. Chatterjee, J. Chaves, J. Chu, S. Dittmer, N. Eggert, N. Mirman, G. Nicolas
Kaufman, J.R. Patterson, A. Rinkevicius, A. Ryd, L. Skinnari, L. Sofﬁ, W. Sun, S.M. Tan,
W.D. Teo, J. Thom, J. Thompson, J. Tucker, Y. Weng, P. Wittich
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, USA
S. Abdullin, M. Albrow, G. Apollinari, S. Banerjee, L.A.T. Bauerdick, A. Beretvas, J. Berryhill,
P.C. Bhat, G. Bolla, K. Burkett, J.N. Butler, H.W.K. Cheung, F. Chlebana, S. Cihangir, V.D. Elvira,
I. Fisk, J. Freeman, E. Gottschalk, L. Gray, D. Green, S. Gr ¨unendahl, O. Gutsche, J. Hanlon,
D. Hare, R.M. Harris, S. Hasegawa, J. Hirschauer, Z. Hu, B. Jayatilaka, S. Jindariani, M. Johnson,
U. Joshi, B. Klima, B. Kreis, S. Lammel, J. Lewis, J. Linacre, D. Lincoln, R. Lipton, T. Liu,
R. Lopes De S´a, J. Lykken, K. Maeshima, J.M. Marrafﬁno, S. Maruyama, D. Mason, P. McBride,

46

A The CMS Collaboration

P. Merkel, S. Mrenna, S. Nahn, C. Newman-Holmes†, V. O’Dell, K. Pedro, O. Prokofyev,
G. Rakness, E. Sexton-Kennedy, A. Soha, W.J. Spalding, L. Spiegel, S. Stoynev, N. Strobbe,
L. Taylor, S. Tkaczyk, N.V. Tran, L. Uplegger, E.W. Vaandering, C. Vernieri, M. Verzocchi,
R. Vidal, M. Wang, H.A. Weber, A. Whitbeck
University of Florida, Gainesville, USA
D. Acosta, P. Avery, P. Bortignon, D. Bourilkov, A. Brinkerhoff, A. Carnes, M. Carver, D. Curry,
S. Das, R.D. Field, I.K. Furic, J. Konigsberg, A. Korytov, K. Kotov, P. Ma, K. Matchev, H. Mei,
P. Milenovic66, G. Mitselmakher, D. Rank, R. Rossin, L. Shchutska, M. Snowball, D. Sperka,
N. Terentyev, L. Thomas, J. Wang, S. Wang, J. Yelton
Florida International University, Miami, USA
S. Linn, P. Markowitz, G. Martinez, J.L. Rodriguez
Florida State University, Tallahassee, USA
A. Ackert, J.R. Adams, T. Adams, A. Askew, S. Bein, J. Bochenek, B. Diamond, J. Haas,
S. Hagopian, V. Hagopian, K.F. Johnson, A. Khatiwada, H. Prosper, M. Weinberg
Florida Institute of Technology, Melbourne, USA
M.M. Baarmand, V. Bhopatkar, S. Colafranceschi67, M. Hohlmann, H. Kalakhety, D. Noonan,
T. Roy, F. Yumiceva
University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), Chicago, USA
M.R. Adams, L. Apanasevich, D. Berry, R.R. Betts, I. Bucinskaite, R. Cavanaugh, O. Evdokimov,
L. Gauthier, C.E. Gerber, D.J. Hofman, P. Kurt, C. O’Brien, I.D. Sandoval Gonzalez, P. Turner,
N. Varelas, Z. Wu, M. Zakaria, J. Zhang
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
B. Bilki68, W. Clarida, K. Dilsiz, S. Durgut, R.P. Gandrajula, M. Haytmyradov, V. Khristenko,
J.-P. Merlo, H. Mermerkaya69, A. Mestvirishvili, A. Moeller, J. Nachtman, H. Ogul, Y. Onel,
F. Ozok70, A. Penzo, C. Snyder, E. Tiras, J. Wetzel, K. Yi
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
I. Anderson, B.A. Barnett, B. Blumenfeld, A. Cocoros, N. Eminizer, D. Fehling, L. Feng,
A.V. Gritsan, P. Maksimovic, M. Osherson, J. Roskes, U. Sarica, M. Swartz, M. Xiao, Y. Xin,
C. You
The University of Kansas, Lawrence, USA
P. Baringer, A. Bean, C. Bruner, J. Castle, R.P. Kenny III, A. Kropivnitskaya, D. Majumder,
M. Malek, W. Mcbrayer, M. Murray, S. Sanders, R. Stringer, Q. Wang
Kansas State University, Manhattan, USA
A. Ivanov, K. Kaadze, S. Khalil, M. Makouski, Y. Maravin, A. Mohammadi, L.K. Saini,
N. Skhirtladze, S. Toda
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, USA
D. Lange, F. Rebassoo, D. Wright
University of Maryland, College Park, USA
C. Anelli, A. Baden, O. Baron, A. Belloni, B. Calvert, S.C. Eno, C. Ferraioli, J.A. Gomez,
N.J. Hadley, S. Jabeen, R.G. Kellogg, T. Kolberg, J. Kunkle, Y. Lu, A.C. Mignerey, Y.H. Shin,
A. Skuja, M.B. Tonjes, S.C. Tonwar
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
A. Apyan, R. Barbieri, A. Baty, R. Bi, K. Bierwagen, S. Brandt, W. Busza, I.A. Cali, Z. Demiragli,

47

L. Di Matteo, G. Gomez Ceballos, M. Goncharov, D. Gulhan, D. Hsu, Y. Iiyama, G.M. Innocenti,
M. Klute, D. Kovalskyi, K. Krajczar, Y.S. Lai, Y.-J. Lee, A. Levin, P.D. Luckey, A.C. Marini,
C. Mcginn, C. Mironov, S. Narayanan, X. Niu, C. Paus, C. Roland, G. Roland, J. Salfeld-Nebgen,
G.S.F. Stephans, K. Sumorok, K. Tatar, M. Varma, D. Velicanu, J. Veverka, J. Wang, T.W. Wang,
B. Wyslouch, M. Yang, V. Zhukova
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA
A.C. Benvenuti, B. Dahmes, A. Evans, A. Finkel, A. Gude, P. Hansen, S. Kalafut, S.C. Kao,
K. Klapoetke, Y. Kubota, Z. Lesko, J. Mans, S. Nourbakhsh, N. Ruckstuhl, R. Rusack, N. Tambe,
J. Turkewitz
University of Mississippi, Oxford, USA
J.G. Acosta, S. Oliveros
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, USA
E. Avdeeva, R. Bartek, K. Bloom, S. Bose, D.R. Claes, A. Dominguez, C. Fangmeier, R. Gonzalez
Suarez, R. Kamalieddin, D. Knowlton, I. Kravchenko, F. Meier, J. Monroy, F. Ratnikov,
J.E. Siado, G.R. Snow, B. Stieger
State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, USA
M. Alyari, J. Dolen, J. George, A. Godshalk, C. Harrington, I. Iashvili, J. Kaisen, A. Kharchilava,
A. Kumar, A. Parker, S. Rappoccio, B. Roozbahani
Northeastern University, Boston, USA
G. Alverson, E. Barberis, D. Baumgartel, M. Chasco, A. Hortiangtham, A. Massironi,
D.M. Morse, D. Nash, T. Orimoto, R. Teixeira De Lima, D. Trocino, R.-J. Wang, D. Wood,
J. Zhang
Northwestern University, Evanston, USA
S. Bhattacharya, K.A. Hahn, A. Kubik, J.F. Low, N. Mucia, N. Odell, B. Pollack, M.H. Schmitt,
K. Sung, M. Trovato, M. Velasco
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, USA
N. Dev, M. Hildreth, C. Jessop, D.J. Karmgard, N. Kellams, K. Lannon, N. Marinelli, F. Meng,
C. Mueller, Y. Musienko37, M. Planer, A. Reinsvold, R. Ruchti, N. Rupprecht, G. Smith,
S. Taroni, N. Valls, M. Wayne, M. Wolf, A. Woodard
The Ohio State University, Columbus, USA
L. Antonelli, J. Brinson, B. Bylsma, L.S. Durkin, S. Flowers, A. Hart, C. Hill, R. Hughes, W. Ji,
T.Y. Ling, B. Liu, W. Luo, D. Puigh, M. Rodenburg, B.L. Winer, H.W. Wulsin
Princeton University, Princeton, USA
O. Driga, P. Elmer, J. Hardenbrook, P. Hebda, S.A. Koay, P. Lujan, D. Marlow, T. Medvedeva,
M. Mooney, J. Olsen, C. Palmer, P. Pirou´e, D. Stickland, C. Tully, A. Zuranski
University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, USA
S. Malik
Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA
A. Barker, V.E. Barnes, D. Benedetti, D. Bortoletto, L. Gutay, M.K. Jha, M. Jones, A.W. Jung,
K. Jung, D.H. Miller, N. Neumeister, B.C. Radburn-Smith, X. Shi, I. Shipsey, D. Silvers, J. Sun,
A. Svyatkovskiy, F. Wang, W. Xie, L. Xu
Purdue University Calumet, Hammond, USA
N. Parashar, J. Stupak

48

A The CMS Collaboration

Rice University, Houston, USA
A. Adair, B. Akgun, Z. Chen, K.M. Ecklund, F.J.M. Geurts, M. Guilbaud, W. Li, B. Michlin,
M. Northup, B.P. Padley, R. Redjimi, J. Roberts, J. Rorie, Z. Tu, J. Zabel
University of Rochester, Rochester, USA
B. Betchart, A. Bodek, P. de Barbaro, R. Demina, Y.t. Duh, Y. Eshaq, T. Ferbel, M. Galanti,
A. Garcia-Bellido, J. Han, O. Hindrichs, A. Khukhunaishvili, K.H. Lo, P. Tan, M. Verzetti
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, USA
J.P. Chou, E. Contreras-Campana, Y. Gershtein, E. Halkiadakis, M. Heindl, D. Hidas, E. Hughes,
S. Kaplan, R. Kunnawalkam Elayavalli, A. Lath, K. Nash, H. Saka, S. Salur, S. Schnetzer,
D. Shefﬁeld, S. Somalwar, R. Stone, S. Thomas, P. Thomassen, M. Walker
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, USA
M. Foerster, J. Heideman, G. Riley, K. Rose, S. Spanier, K. Thapa
Texas A&M University, College Station, USA
O. Bouhali71, A. Castaneda Hernandez71, A. Celik, M. Dalchenko, M. De Mattia, A. Delgado,
S. Dildick, R. Eusebi, J. Gilmore, T. Huang, T. Kamon72, V. Krutelyov, R. Mueller, I. Osipenkov,
Y. Pakhotin, R. Patel, A. Perloff, L. Perni`e, D. Rathjens, A. Rose, A. Safonov, A. Tatarinov,
K.A. Ulmer
Texas Tech University, Lubbock, USA
N. Akchurin, C. Cowden, J. Damgov, C. Dragoiu, P.R. Dudero, J. Faulkner, S. Kunori,
K. Lamichhane, S.W. Lee, T. Libeiro, S. Undleeb, I. Volobouev, Z. Wang
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA
E. Appelt, A.G. Delannoy, S. Greene, A. Gurrola, R. Janjam, W. Johns, C. Maguire, Y. Mao,
A. Melo, H. Ni, P. Sheldon, S. Tuo, J. Velkovska, Q. Xu
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA
M.W. Arenton, P. Barria, B. Cox, B. Francis, J. Goodell, R. Hirosky, A. Ledovskoy, H. Li, C. Neu,
T. Sinthuprasith, X. Sun, Y. Wang, E. Wolfe, F. Xia
Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
C. Clarke, R. Harr, P.E. Karchin, C. Kottachchi Kankanamge Don, P. Lamichhane, J. Sturdy
University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI, USA
D.A. Belknap, D. Carlsmith, S. Dasu, L. Dodd, S. Duric, B. Gomber, M. Grothe, M. Herndon,
A. Herv´e, P. Klabbers, A. Lanaro, A. Levine, K. Long, R. Loveless, A. Mohapatra, I. Ojalvo,
T. Perry, G.A. Pierro, G. Polese, T. Ruggles, T. Sarangi, A. Savin, A. Sharma, N. Smith,
W.H. Smith, D. Taylor, P. Verwilligen, N. Woods
†: Deceased
1: Also at Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria
2: Also at State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Technology, Peking University, Beijing,
China
3: Also at Institut Pluridisciplinaire Hubert Curien, Universit´e de Strasbourg, Universit´e de
Haute Alsace Mulhouse, CNRS/IN2P3, Strasbourg, France
4: Also at Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil
5: Also at Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS) - IN2P3, Paris, France
6: Also at Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium
7: Also at Laboratoire Leprince-Ringuet, Ecole Polytechnique, IN2P3-CNRS, Palaiseau, France
8: Also at Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, Russia

49

9: Also at Helwan University, Cairo, Egypt
10: Now at Zewail City of Science and Technology, Zewail, Egypt
11: Now at Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt
12: Also at Suez University, Suez, Egypt
13: Now at British University in Egypt, Cairo, Egypt
14: Also at Universit´e de Haute Alsace, Mulhouse, France
15: Also at CERN, European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland
16: Also at Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University,
Moscow, Russia
17: Also at RWTH Aachen University, III. Physikalisches Institut A, Aachen, Germany
18: Also at University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
19: Also at Brandenburg University of Technology, Cottbus, Germany
20: Also at Institute of Nuclear Research ATOMKI, Debrecen, Hungary
21: Also at MTA-ELTE Lend ¨ulet CMS Particle and Nuclear Physics Group, E¨otv¨os Lor´and
University, Budapest, Hungary
22: Also at University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary
23: Also at Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhopal, India
24: Also at University of Visva-Bharati, Santiniketan, India
25: Now at King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
26: Also at University of Ruhuna, Matara, Sri Lanka
27: Also at Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran
28: Also at University of Tehran, Department of Engineering Science, Tehran, Iran
29: Also at Plasma Physics Research Center, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad
University, Tehran, Iran
30: Also at Universit`a degli Studi di Siena, Siena, Italy
31: Also at Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA
32: Now at Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea
33: Also at International Islamic University of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
34: Also at Malaysian Nuclear Agency, MOSTI, Kajang, Malaysia
35: Also at Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnolog´ıa, Mexico city, Mexico
36: Also at Warsaw University of Technology, Institute of Electronic Systems, Warsaw, Poland
37: Also at Institute for Nuclear Research, Moscow, Russia
38: Now at National Research Nuclear University ’Moscow Engineering Physics
Institute’ (MEPhI), Moscow, Russia
39: Also at St. Petersburg State Polytechnical University, St. Petersburg, Russia
40: Also at University of Florida, Gainesville, USA
41: Also at California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, USA
42: Also at Faculty of Physics, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
43: Also at INFN Sezione di Roma; Universit`a di Roma, Roma, Italy
44: Also at National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece
45: Also at Scuola Normale e Sezione dell’INFN, Pisa, Italy
46: Also at National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece
47: Also at Riga Technical University, Riga, Latvia
48: Also at Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics, Moscow, Russia
49: Also at Albert Einstein Center for Fundamental Physics, Bern, Switzerland
50: Also at Gaziosmanpasa University, Tokat, Turkey
51: Also at Mersin University, Mersin, Turkey
52: Also at Cag University, Mersin, Turkey
53: Also at Piri Reis University, Istanbul, Turkey

50

A The CMS Collaboration

54: Also at Adiyaman University, Adiyaman, Turkey
55: Also at Ozyegin University, Istanbul, Turkey
56: Also at Izmir Institute of Technology, Izmir, Turkey
57: Also at Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey
58: Also at Kafkas University, Kars, Turkey
59: Also at Istanbul Bilgi University, Istanbul, Turkey
60: Also at Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
61: Also at Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
62: Also at Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Didcot, United Kingdom
63: Also at School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, Southampton,
United Kingdom
64: Also at Instituto de Astrof´ısica de Canarias, La Laguna, Spain
65: Also at Utah Valley University, Orem, USA
66: Also at University of Belgrade, Faculty of Physics and Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences,
Belgrade, Serbia
67: Also at Facolt`a Ingegneria, Universit`a di Roma, Roma, Italy
68: Also at Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, USA
69: Also at Erzincan University, Erzincan, Turkey
70: Also at Mimar Sinan University, Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey
71: Also at Texas A&M University at Qatar, Doha, Qatar
72: Also at Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea

