The intercalation chemistry of layered iron chalcogenide superconductors

Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742, United States

Hector K. Vivanco, Efrain E. Rodriguez

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
n
o
c
-
r
p
u
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
4
3
3
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

The iron chalcogenides FeSe and FeS are superconductors composed of two-dimensional sheets held together by van
der Waals interactions, which makes them prime candidates for the intercalation of various guest species. We review the
intercalation chemistry of FeSe and FeS superconductors and discuss their synthesis, structure, and physical properties.
Before we review the latest work in this area, we provide a brief background on the intercalation chemistry of other
inorganic materials that exhibit enhanced superconducting properties upon intercalation, which include the transition
metal dichalcogenides, fullerenes, and layered cobalt oxides. From past studies of these intercalated superconductors, we
discuss the role of the intercalates in terms of charge doping, structural distortions, and Fermi surface reconstruction.
We also brieﬂy review the physical and chemical properties of the host materials—mackinawite-type FeS and β-FeSe.
The three types of intercalates for the iron chalcogenides can be placed in three categories: 1.) alkali and alkaline
earth cations intercalated through the liquid ammonia technique; 2.) cations intercalated with organic amines such
as ethylenediamine; and 3.)
layered hydroxides intercalated during hydrothermal conditions. A recurring theme in
these studies is the role of the intercalated guest in electron doping the chalcogenide host and in enhancing the two-
dimensionality of the electronic structure by spacing the FeSe layers apart. We end this review discussing possible new
avenues in the intercalation chemistry of transition metal monochalcogenides, and the promise of these materials as a
unique set of new inorganic two-dimensional systems.

Keywords:

iron chalcogenides, superconductors, magnetic structure

Contents

1 Introduction

2 History of intercalation chemistry and su-

perconductivity
2.1 Transition metal dichalcogenides
. . . . . .
2.2 Other intercalated superconductors . . . . .

3 Chemistry and physics of the FeCh hosts

3.1 Crystal structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 β-FeSe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Mackinawite FeS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Fe1+xTe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5 Electronic structure of the hosts
. . . . . .

4 Metal intercalation with liquid ammonia

1

2
3
3

4
4
6
6
7
7

8

5 Metal intercalation with organic amines

12

6 Metal hydroxide intercalation under hy-

drothermal conditions

7 Conclusions and future directions

13

15

Email address: efrain@umd.edu (Efrain E. Rodriguez)

8 Acknowledgements

9 References

1. Introduction

16

16

We review the recent work on the intercalation chem-
istry of iron chalcogenide superconductors. Given that
they exhibit zero resistance for electrical currents below
a critical temperature (Tc), superconductors hold great
promise in our future energy needs.[1, 2, 3, 4] Further-
more, superconductors have been proposed for devices that
stabilize the electrical power grid by storing energy me-
chanically in ﬂywheels or electromagnetically in toroidal
magnets.[5, 6] Much as previously known superconducting
materials, the iron-based compounds have a role to play
in our future energy needs.[7, 8]

The iron chalcogenide superconductors remain topical
due to their versatile solid state chemistry that allows
new materials to be discovered and their ability to be
isolated as single layers. Furthermore, the highest Tc so
far observed in any iron-based system has been in sin-
gle layered FeSe where reports vary from 65 K to 100
K.[9, 10, 11] Just like the high-Tc cuprates, the iron-based
systems appear to be unconventional in their supercon-
ducting mechanism[12, 13] and this raises more hope that

Preprint submitted to Journal of Solid State Chemistry

March 9, 2016

tropositive metals in liquid ammonia, 2.) metals and or-
ganic amines, and 3.) extended hydroxides through hy-
drothermal conditions. Each method plus post-synthetic
treatment can lead to guest-host compounds with diﬀerent
structures as shown in Figure 1.

Before presenting the latest studies on the intercalation
of iron-based materials, we brieﬂy review the history of in-
tercalation chemistry of superconductors such as C60 and
metal dichalcogenides. It is also instructive to present the
crystal chemistry and physical properties of the simple bi-
nary iron chalcogenides—FeS, FeSe, and FeTe, which act
as the hosts. The main goals of such chemistry has been to
both prepare new compounds and ultimately control the
physical properties of the binary compounds in order to
discover the underlying mechanism for superconductivity.
We believe the reader will recognize, however, that this
chemistry has broader implications than superconductiv-
ity and could represent a new area for the preparation of
two-dimensional (2D) inorganic materials.

2. History of intercalation chemistry and super-

conductivity

This year, 2016, is a leap year since February has an
extra day. Such an insertion of a day into the calendar
is known as an intercalation, and chemistry has borrowed
this term to analogously describe the expansion in a solid
upon inserting a ’foreign’ species. Intercalation chemistry
in inorganic materials has a long history,[18] and its ap-
plications range from electrochemical energy storage[19]
to the sequestration of waste material in layered clays or
sulﬁdes.[20, 21, 22] It is useful to brieﬂy review the ter-
minology in this ﬁeld and some of the work done on past
superconductors.

Like closely related interstitial compounds,[23]

inter-
calation compounds are inorganic solids in which guest
species such as ions or molecules occupy open crystallo-
graphic sites of the host. Unlike interstitial compounds,
however, intercalation hosts usually consist of structural
elements such as chains and layers that are held together
by weak forces such as those of the van der Waals type.
The guest species, or intercalate can cause the unit cell of
the host to expand upon insertion but it should not change
the crystal structure signiﬁcantly. Furthermore, the inter-
calation and de-intercalation processes should be reversible
and possible at temperatures lower than those typical of
solid state reactions so that no major rearrangement of the
host’s structure occurs.

Given the constraints of the intercalation processes,
two dimensional (2D) materials are the most common
hosts.[22] Materials with one-dimensional (1D) motifs can
facilitate exit and entry of guest species but also undergo
major re-organization upon intercalation. Conversely,
three-dimensional (3D) materials retain their structural
integrity but impede facile intercalation of guests. Classic
inorganic solids in the 2D category include layered mate-
rials such as graphite,[24] graphite oxide,[25] and mont-

Figure 1: The various chemical processes for layered iron chalco-
genides (FeCh) including intercalation of species A, where A can
be a cation, a neutral species such as ammonia, or both. The var-
ious structure types leads to diﬀerent stacking sequences between
the FeCh layers and therefore diﬀerent space groups. The literature
on FeSe has revealed that it is possible to generate all of the above
structures and that each of the three processes have been observed
in the chemistry of iron chalcogenides.

solid state chemists will continue to make signiﬁcant dis-
coveries in this ﬁeld.

Although similar in many respects to the iron-based
pnictides, the chalcogenides do show considerable diﬀer-
ences in their physical and chemical properties. While the
arsenide phases are held together by ionic forces between
the cationic layers, e.g. (LaO)+ and Ba2+, and the an-
ionic (FeAs)− layers, the chalcogenides can be held by van
der Waals interactions alone. These comparatively weaker
interactions make the FeCh layers, where Ch =S2− and
Se2−, ideal hosts for intercalation chemistry such as alkali
metal insertion along with various other types of guest
species such as ammonia. Since the pnictides do not ex-
press intercalation chemistry, we have left them out alto-
gether in this review. The reader curious about the major
diﬀerences between chalcogenides and pnictide supercon-
ductors can ﬁnd several reviews written on these two major
categories.[12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]

We review the chemical techniques for inserting ionic
and molecular species into FeCh hosts and their result-
ing physical properties. An example of the diﬀerent lay-
ered structures we will be reviewing and their intercalation
chemistry is presented in the schematic of Figure 1. We
will examine three major methods for intercalating guest
species, or intercalates, which include insertion of 1.) elec-

2

Lewis bases.

Lerf has raised doubts, however, whether Lewis acid-
base chemistry truly drives the intercalation process in
dichalcogenides.[22] The chief objection from Lerf concerns
the ﬁndings from crystallographic studies showing that the
orientation of the NH3 molecule within the layers is such
that its 3-fold axis is oriented along the layers as opposed
to perpendicular to them as shown in Figure 2 for the case
of TaS2.[29] Similarly, the 2-fold axis of the pyridine ring
is oriented parallel to the dichalcogenide layers.[35] This
would imply that the lone pair on the nitrogen atom is
not oriented towards the layers and is therefore ineﬀective
as a Lewis base.

Besides the electron donating properties upon intercala-
tion, structure-property relationships are also important.
The common structural motif is the 2D layer formed by in-
ﬁnite edge-sharing M Ch6 polyhedra where M = transition
metal and Ch = S, Se, and Te. Polytypism, is common
in these materials, since the coordination of the transition
metal can be either octahedral or trigonal prismatic due
to changes in the ion stacking sequence along the inter-
layer direction (Figure 2). However, only when the metal
is in trigonal prismatic coordination has superconductiv-
ity been observed.[30] In their studies of 50 diﬀerent in-
tercalates of various sizes for TaS2, which increased the
interlayer spacing anywhere between 3 ˚A to 52 ˚A , Gam-
ble et al. found the Tc bears little correlation to interlayer
spacing.[31] Instead, they attributed any enhancement in
Tc to the eﬃcacy of charge transfer from the intercalate to
the host.

Alkali metals can also be intercalated into dichalco-
genide hosts, either in a liquid ammonia solution or elec-
trochemically, which allows for a more direct measure of
electron doping than the Lewis basicity of amines.[30] Fur-
thermore, Sch¨ollhorn,[36, 37, 38, 39] Colombet,[40] and
others[41] have argued that the intercalation of amines
actually occurs through the oxidation of such species so
that the true nature of the intercalates is the amine plus
its conjugate acid (e.g. NH3 and NH+
4 ), which would also
charge dope the dichalcogenide host. The formation of
cationic intercalates, in fact, has been suggested as the
driving force for the intercalation of such species into the
host.[40] Once the cationic form of the amines has been
inserted, the other amines orient themselves in such a way
to direct the lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen atoms
towards the cations.

2.2. Other intercalated superconductors

A more recent example of intercalation chemistry than
that of the dichalcogenides includes the layered NaxCoO2
materials.[44] These cobalt oxides consists of CoO6 octa-
hedra that edge-share to form layers of the brucite-type
structure. Na and Li cations can ﬁll in the interstitial po-
sitions in between and the shuttling of these cations has
made the cobaltates an important cathode material for Li-
rechargeable batteries.[27] In the sodium intercalated case,
when the right amount of Na+ is present along with water

Figure 2: a.) The crystal structure of TaS2·(NH3) where the nitrogen
atoms (blue) are in a hexagonal arrangement between the sulﬁde
sheets. Crystal structure from Ref.
[28] b.) A representation of
the orientation of the ammonia molecule so that the 3-fold axis is
oriented parallel to the TaS2 sheets. Reprinted with permission from
Ref. [29]. Copyright 2008, AIP Publishing LLC.

morillonite – a silicate clay.[26] If the host is redox active,
then the intercalation process is either reductive or oxida-
tive, and this special property has been explored in elec-
trochemical devices such as rechargeable batteries.[19, 27]
In order to raise some key questions from the litera-
ture on iron chalcogenides, we brieﬂy discuss three other
inorganic hosts that enhance their superconducting prop-
erties upon intercalation. These include the layered metal
dichalcogenides, layered cobaltates, and three-dimensional
fullerene crystals. These cases present to us the impor-
tance of charge doping, Lewis acid-base chemistry, and
structure-property relationships on superconductivity, and
guide our understanding of iron chalcogenide intercalation
chemistry.

2.1. Transition metal dichalcogenides

Metal dichalcogenides are redox active hosts with a
van der Waals gap between the layers that allows facile
intercalation.[30] Furthermore, they are semiconducting,
which aids in the insertion and removal of cations by
conducting charge-compensating carriers (i.e.
electrons
and/or holes). In the early 1970’s, several groups demon-
strated that upon intercalation, the superconducting crit-
ical temperature, or Tc, could be raised in dichalcogenides
such as TaS2 and NbSe2.[31, 32, 33, 34] In particular, the
work of Geballe et al. demonstrated how a large array of
organic and inorganic hosts could act as Lewis bases, or
electron donors, and therefore easily intercalate into the
layered materials that act as Lewis acids.[31] The layered
hosts can accept Lewis bases such as ammonia, pyridine,
or even amides with long aliphatic chains such as stear-
amide. Since the metal dichalcogenides act as Lewis acids,
the Tc’s of the ﬁnal adducts were related to relevant pa-
rameters such as interlayer spacing and the pKA’s of the

3

Figure 3: The phase diagram for the layered oxides, NaxCoO2· 1.3
H2O as a function of sodium intercalation. The maximum Tc is
reached for nearly one-third doping and for the hydrated version.
Figure is adapted from Ref. [43] by permission from Macmillan Pub-
lishers Ltd: Nature, copyright 2003.

Figure 4: The crystal structure of the simple binary FeCh with the
anti-PbO type structure. Setting 2 for the origin is represented for
this tetragonal space group. The dashed line represents the unit cell,
and z is the so-called anion height.

molecules, superconductivity is induced. Interestingly, the
anhydrous case is non-superconducting, and the highest Tc
of 4.5 K is found for the stoichiometry of Na0.3CoO2 · 1.3
H2O (see Figure 3).[43] At values for x greater than 1
3 , an-
hydrous NaxCoO2 can exhibit various ordered states for
its charge and spin degrees of freedom.[45] These struc-
tures, much like the metal dichalcogenides, demonstrate
that they can can accommodate more than one type of
guest simultaneously, and that this can be advantageous
for superconductivity.

Another historical example is that of the intercalated
fullerenes. Just as graphite can be easily intercalated,[24]
the molecular allotrope of carbon, C60 can also accommo-
date metal cations within its interstices.
In the 1990’s,
researchers found that when fullerenes are charge-doped
to become fullerides, they are tuned from semiconduct-
ing materials to metals and superconductors.[46, 47] The
molecular nature of the crystal and the relatively weak
interaction between the C60 ‘hard spheres’ make interca-
lation possible not only for alkali metals but also molecular
species such as ammonia.[48] A notable diﬀerence in the
intercalation chemistry of C60 and graphite is the former’s
preference for reductive intercalation whereas graphite can
undergo both oxidative and reductive insertion.[49, 50]
Remarkably, the intercalated fullerenes such as K3C60,
Rb3C60, and Rb2CsC60 exhibit relatively high Tc’s, up to
32 K.[50].

The historical examples given above illustrate some of
the key factors to consider for the iron-based superconduc-
tors. These considerations include the role of the interca-
late in charge doping into the density of states near the
Fermi level, distorting the relevant structural parameters,
and changing the dimensional nature of the Fermi surface.

4

Nevertheless, all of these examples are classiﬁed as con-
ventional superconductors whose underlying physics is sat-
isfactorily described by Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieﬀer (BCS)
theory.[30, 34, 42, 50] Therefore not all lessons learned
from these studies will apply to the iron-based materials.

3. Chemistry and physics of the FeCh hosts

Before discussing the intercalation chemistry of the iron
based superconductors, it is instructive to describe the
structure, bonding, and electronic properties of the host
materials. The FeCh (Ch=S,Se,Te) layers, like the transi-
tion metal dichalcogenides, are held by weak van der Waals
forces that make them susceptible to intercalation. In the
case of the iron telluride, however, the van der Waals gap
is too small on account of the large anionic radius of Te2−
(2.21 ˚A),[51] and this hinders any signiﬁcant intercalation
chemistry. Therefore, this review is focused on the se-
lenides and sulﬁdes, but we do present the electronic and
physical properties of Fe1+xTe (where x represents excess
iron) brieﬂy in order to compare and contrast with those
of FeS and FeSe.

3.1. Crystal structures

Although many binary iron sulﬁdes and selenide phases
are known, we are only interested in those that crystallize
in the anti-PbO type structure. As shown in Figure 4,
the structure is described by the tetragonal space group
P 4/nmm (no. 129), which has two settings. In setting 1,
the iron atoms are located at the origin of the cell while
in setting 2 the origin is located at the center of inversion
symmetry with the iron atoms displaced ( 3
4 , 0) from the
origin.[52] Figure 4 shows setting 2. Either way, the site

4 , 1

x in NaxCoO2 (cid:127)yH2ONaxCoO2 (cid:127)1.3H2OTc (K)9.8 ÅNa+H2OCoO2aaacFeCh Space group P4/nmm(1/4 1/4   z )(3/4  3/4    -z )(1/4  3/4    0)(3/4   1/4    0)FeChzsymmetries of the atoms are such that the Fe cations have
4m2 site symmetry and the Ch2− anions 4mm symme-
try. Furthermore, the n-glide normal to the c-axis leads
to the adjacent layers being staggered by ( 1
2 ) in the ab-
plane, which maximizes the distance between the Ch2−
anions. In the resulting two-dimensional square lattice of
Fe cations, each square is capped by a chalcogenide anion,
either above or below, which leads to tetrahedral coordi-
nation for each iron cation.

2 , 1

The only crystallographic parameters that can be ma-
nipulated include the lattice constants and the Ch anion
z-parameter, also know as the anion height from the iron
square lattice. These two parameters in addition to the
lattice constants are therefore enough to describe impor-
tant properties such as Fe–Se bond distances, Fe–Fe dis-
tances, which inﬂuence the d-orbital dispersion bands, and
the Ch–Fe–Ch bond angle. As shown in Figure 5, the an-
ion height and the variance of the tetrahedral bond angle
both correlate with Tc across the various iron-based super-
conductor families.[54, 53, 52, 55, 56]

Structurally, the layered iron chalcogenides provide a
nice contrast to the transition metal dichalcogenides. The
former is composed of a square planar lattice of d-block
metals whereas the latter is composed of a hexagonal array.
In the iron-based chalcogenides, 2D layers consist of edge-
sharing tetrahedra (Figure 4) whereas in the dichalco-
genides M Ch6 trigonal prisms or octahedra complete the
layers. These two structural distinctions lead to diﬀer-
ences in both the local electronic properties determined by
crystal ﬁeld splitting considerations and to the long-range
electronic properties determined by the band structures.

One of the most studied iron-based superconductors is
iron selenide. In its anti-PbO structure it is known as β-
FeSe. This phase exists in a narrow window of stability
in the iron-selenium binary phase diagram (300 K< T <
450 K),[57] as shown in Figure 6, and its preparation has
mostly consisted of powders through direct reaction of the
constituent elements. Polycrystalline FeSe, however, can
be prepared through hydrothermal routes, and care must
be taken to prevent oxidation, which is detrimental to the
superconducting properties.[58] Since this phase does not
melt congruently, single crystal growth has been challeng-
ing. Several groups have found chemical vapor transport
and salt ﬂux methods, however, as successful techniques
for the preparation of high quality single crystals.[59]

When near stoichiometric, FeSe superconducts below 8
K.[60, 61] Interestingly, under high pressure the Tc in-
creases up to 37 K.[62, 63] Even higher Tc’s have been
observed in FeSe in isolated single layers. Through in
situ electrical resistivity measurements during photoelec-
tron spectroscopy measurements, Tc’s have ranged from
65 K to 100 K in single layered FeSe.[9, 10, 11] This is the
record for any iron-based superconductor, and it raises the
possibility that materials chemists and physicists could de-
velop a new family of high-Tc superconductors.

Above Tc FeSe undergoes a crystallographic phase tran-
sition that may provide clues to its superconducting pair-

Figure 5: Top: The correlation of Tc with the anion height parameter
for various members of the iron arsenide and chalcogenide supercon-
ductors. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [53]. Copyrighted by
the Physical Society of Japan. Bottom: The correlation of Tc with
the tetrahedral bond angle α for the iron arsenide family of super-
conductors. Reprinted with permission from Ref.
[54]. Copyright
IOP Publishing. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved.

ing mechanism. Through various diﬀraction studies,[60,
64, 58] a transition from P 4/nmm to orthorhombic
Cmmm at 90 K in superconducting FeSe was observed.
This lowering of symmetry is accomplished through the
breaking of the four-fold axis and the n-glide plane normal
to the c-direction. However, for the non-superconducting
Fe1.03Se, which contains extra interstitial iron, the symme-
try lowering is not observed, and the driving mechanism
lifting the degeneracy of the xy-plane was proposed to not
be magnetically driven.[64] More recent diﬀraction studies
by Pachmayr et al.[65] have found that FeSe prepared by
hydrothermal conditions as opposed to traditional solid
state techniques actually leads to a triclinic system and
a lower temperature of transition near 60 K. Systematic

5

towards conversion of tetragonal FeS to one of its thermo-
dynamically stable phases.

FeS is typically prepared by solution routes either under
ambient conditions[73, 74, 77] or hydrothermally.[78, 79,
80] As a polycrystalline material, mackinawite can be pre-
pared by oxidation of iron metal in an acetic acid/acetate
buﬀer solution. Afterwards, an aqueous solution of Na2S
hydrate is added to the buﬀer leading to the rapid precip-
itation of tetragonal FeS.[74] According to the Pourbaix
diagram of iron, under basic conditions, Fe3+ species pre-
dominate whereas Fe2+ predominate at lower pH’s.[81, 82]
Therefore, in the initial low-pH solution, the iron is oxi-
dized to evolve Fe2+ species, and the buﬀer serves to min-
imize the amount of Fe3+ species upon adding the sodium
sulﬁde. Lennie et al. have argued that mackinawite is
kinetically stabilized and transforms to other phases only
through oxidation or further sulfurization.[75]

Studies on the physical properties of mackinawite
FeS have been inconsistent with some studies report-
ing a semiconducting ground state[78, 83, 84] and oth-
ers superconductivity.[79, 80] Nanocrystalline FeS, pre-
pared by the crystallization of an amorphous black solid
through a solvothermal method, was found to be semi-
conducting and ferrimagnetic.[78] Likewise Denholme et
al. found their mackinawite to be semiconducting[83] but
upon the application of pressure, the materials become
more metallic.[84] Denholme et al.
suggest that mack-
inawite may indeed be metallic, and that the semicon-
ducting behavior arises from grain boundaries in the poly-
crystalline samples. Ferrimagnetism was also observed in
the magnetization vs. applied ﬁeld curves, and the mag-
netic susceptibility vs. temperature curves indicate that
the N`eel temperature is above room temperature.

A much earlier study, however, had found no long
range magnetic ordering in mackinawite. Bertaut per-
formed neutron diﬀraction studies on powder samples of
mackinawite.[85] In the powder pattern at 10 K, antifer-
romagnetic Bragg peaks were not observed. Bertaut con-
cluded that FeS is not antiferromagnetic and cannot there-
fore be ferrimagnetic. Furthermore, electronic structure
calculations had predicted that, much like its heavier ana-
logues FeSe and FeTe, mackinawite should be a metal or
semimetal.[86, 87, 88] The observation by Lennie et al.
that the surface of mackinawite ﬁrst converts to Fe3S4[76]
could explain the ferrimagnetic behavior in magnetiza-
tion measurements since Fe3S4, which has the spinel-type
structure, is a ferrimagnetic semiconductor.[89]

Very recently, Lai et al.

found mackinawite FeS
to be metallic down to 5 K, below which it becomes
superconducting.[79] Lai et al. prepared a high quality
sample of tetragonal FeS by oxidizing iron metal under
hydrothermal conditions in the presence of Na2S hydrate
(Figure 7). Likewise, Borg et al. demonstrated that single
crystals of KxFe2−yS2 could be de-intercalated hydrother-
mally to prepare single crystals of FeS.[80] The key to ob-
taining superconducting crystals was to maintain the so-
lution under basic conditions and to provide enough iron

Figure 6: The binary phase diagram of iron and selenium, with the
phase space for β-FeSe shown in blue. Reprinted ﬁgure with per-
mission from Ref.
[57]. Copyright 2009 by the American Physical
Society.

diﬀraction studies including neutrons at lower tempera-
tures of various FeSe single crystal samples would help
shed further light on how composition drives the symme-
try lowering transition. Shear-modulus[66] and angle re-
solved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) studies have
proposed that the orthorhombic distortion leads to a so-
called nematic phase where the stripes of elongation are
driven by an orbital-ordering of the d-states.[67] However,
this topic remains unsettled with new results from neutron
studies[68] and theoretical modeling[69, 70] that report the
possible importance of spin ﬂuctuations in FeSe.

3.2. β-FeSe

3.3. Mackinawite FeS

In contrast to β-FeSe, the sulﬁde analogue does not ex-
ist in the thermodynamic phase diagram of iron sulﬁdes.
Within the binary phase diagram of the iron sulfur system,
there are approximately 7 diﬀerent compositions with 10
diﬀerent crystallographic structures.[71, 72] Many of the
phases are well known minerals such as pyrite (FeS2) or
pyrrhotite (Fe1−xS). Therefore tetragonal FeS with the
anti-PbO type structure, also known as mackinawite, is
a metastable phase.

In the early crystallographic studies, the diﬀraction data
set was not of high quality enough due to sample broad-
ening, and the z-parameter of the S2− anion was ﬁxed to
z = 1/4.[73] Subsequent studies by Lennie et al. found z
to be larger than 0.25 in order for the FeS4 tetrahedron to
have more regular tetrahedral angles.[74] The various ther-
mal studies by Lennie et al. found that while well crystal-
lized mackinawite eventually decomposes to pyrotite near
530 - 545 K,[75] powder samples can ﬁrst convert to greig-
ite Fe3S4 at a much lower temperature of 373 K.[76] There-
fore, it is likely that the larger particle sizes and therefore
samples with smaller surface areas have a higher barrier

6

Figure 7: Electron microscopy images of superconducting FeS includ-
ing a.) SEM, b.) TEM, c.) high-resolution TEM, and d.) selected
area electron diﬀraction. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [79].
Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.

powder during the hydrothermal synthesis in order to ﬁll
in the vacancies in the KxFe2−yS2 samples. The single
crystals aﬀorded the true ground state properties of mack-
inawite, which include highly anisotropic superconducting
and normal state properties. This high anisotropy is in-
dicative of the 2D electronic structure of FeS. Above Tc,
FeS is truly a metal with weak Paul paramagnetism.[80]

3.4. Fe1+xTe

While Fe1+xTe is an interesting ’parent’ phase (i.e. not
superconducting until doped ),[90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95] we
have not seen any literature on its intercalation chemistry.
The diﬃculty may arise for several reasons including the
smaller van der Waals gap due to the larger Te2− anionic
radius with respect to its lighter congeners. Furthermore,
intercalation often occurs under highly basic conditions,
and Te is more easily oxidized under these conditions than
Se or S since it is more electropositive. De-intercalation
chemistry on Fe1+xTe and Fe1+xTe0.7Se0.3, however, has
been demonstrated in order to remove the interstitial iron,
x,[96, 97, 98] which has large implications for the magnetic,
transport, and superconducting properties.[99, 100, 101].
Therefore, the iron telluride system may still be an inter-
esting host structure to explore for possible intercalation,
ion exchange, and de-intercalation chemistry.

3.5. Electronic structure of the hosts

Finally, it is important to discuss the electronic struc-
ture of the host structures. The square Fe sublattice has a
strong 2D character in its electronic structure. The FeCh
layers are metallic in nature, and the d-states of the Fe

Figure 8: The Fermi surfaces the binary iron chalcogenides with
the anti-PbO type structure. The zone-centered and corner-centered
surfaces are hole and electron pockets, respectively. The cylindrical
aspect of these surfaces demonstrate the two-dimensional aspect of
their electronic structure. Reprinted ﬁgure with permission from Ref.
[87]. Copyright 2008 by the American Physical Society.

cations form bands near the Fermi level. Unlike the pre-
vious intercalated superconductors, the iron-based mate-
rials are multi-band superconductors. The 2D character
is clearly observed in the cylindrical nature of the Fermi
surfaces as found by density functional theory (DFT)
calculations (Figure 8).[87] In this respect, the chalco-
genides do have some similarities to the iron pnictides,
where nesting between the electron and hole pockets leads
to a spin density wave instability and crystallographic
phase transitions.[13] Upon charge doping, the SDW van-
ishes and the pnictides become superconducting.[12] While
SDW order has been found in the Fe1+xTe phases, no such
order has been observed in FeS and FeSe.

The Fermi surface of FeS and FeSe show several sepa-
rate sets of bands: one set is zone-centered and are hole
carrying, and the other set is corner-centered and electron
carrying.[87] The dispersion curves reveal that these bands
consist of the various Fe d-orbitals while the Ch p-orbitals
are buried deep in energy. According to a recent ARPES
study of FeSe, the bands around the zone center consist
largely of the dxz and dyz orbitals, which are degenerate
in the tetragonal phase, but split upon the orthorhom-
bic distortion near 90 K.[67] The electron pocket mean-
while is dominated by the dxy orbital. From their ARPES
study on high quality crystals, Watson et al. conclude that
orbital-charge ordering of the dxz and dyz bands drive the
crystallographic phase transition near 90 K in FeSe.[67]

A simplistic way to understand the band structure from
a chemical bonding perspective is to consider the ligand

7

properly study the superconducting properties of FeSe.

In contrast to the host structure, the alkali metal in-
tercalated phases crystallize into the ThCr2Si2-type struc-
ture with a body-centered tetragonal cell and space group
I4/mmm as shown in Figure 9. Therefore the relationship
between the two adjacent FeCh layers is diﬀerent from that
of the host. In the latter, the layers are staggered with re-
spect to one another by the n-glide plane ( 1
2 + y, z).
This is not the case in the body centered cell, which is miss-
ing the n-glide, and the Ch2− anions are located directly
over one another. Presumably, ionic forces now dominate
the bonding between the layers as intercalation of the A+
cations reduces the FeCh to become anionic (FeCh)δ− lay-
ers.

2 + x, 1

A serious drawback for these ternary selenides, how-
ever, is that the AxFe2−ySe2 superconducting phase coex-
ist with an insulating phase,[104, 111, 112, 113] which was
later found to be near the stoichiometry of A2Fe4Se5.[114,
115, 116, 117] Since the superconducting and antiferro-
magnetic phases are structurally related, they often coex-
ist when prepared by congruently melting the substituent
elements. Shoemaker et al. demonstrated through their
careful diﬀraction studies that the minority phase in the
samples is superconducting,[115] and several studies have
shown that the amount of x leading to superconductivity
ranges from 0.3 to 1.0.[120, 110, 102, 121] Intercalation at
low temperatures into pristine FeSe layers therefore oﬀer
an opportunity to enhance superconductivity and avoid
the iron vacancy-populated phase.

While several groups have proposed that the stoi-
chiometry of the superconducting phase to be close to
AxFe2Se2,[115] Ding et al. formulated the superconduct-
ing phase from their careful electron microscopy studies as
approximately K2Fe7Se8.[116] Therefore, it is the particu-
lar ordering of vacancies in A2Fe4Se5 that is thought to be
detrimental to superconductivity, favoring instead long-
range antiferromagnetic ordering at 559 K.[118] Svitylk
et al.
further demonstrated that vacancy ordering in it-
self may not be detrimental by ﬁnding superconductiv-
ity in the RbxFe1−ySe2 system, which showed some iron
vacancies.[119] Interestingly, the magnetic moment per
iron cation of 3.31 µB in K2Fe4Se5 suggests that the d6
cations in the tetrahedral crystal ﬁeld may have an orbital
contribution in addition to spin.[118]

In a similar fashion to the intercalation of alkali met-
als into dichalcogenides, FeSe was reduced by an al-
kali metal-liquid ammonia solution, which contains sol-
vated electrons (hence its blue color).[123, 124] Through
this ammonia solution alkali and alkaline earth metals
can be inserted into the FeSe host and the Tc raised
to 43(1) K.[122] Burrard-Lucas et al. have deﬁnitively
demonstrated through neutron diﬀraction studies that this
technique also intercalates ammonia and amide (NH−
2 )
molecules along with Li+ cations in the interstitial po-
sitions to form Li0.6(NH2)y(NH3)1−yFe2Se2. Unlike the
typical ThCr2Si2-type structure, however, the Li cations
are predominately in the 2b Wyckoﬀ position, which is not

Figure 9: The crystal structure of AxFe2−ySe2 where A can be var-
ious species including alkali metal cations or moieties such as NH3
and NH−
2 . The structure is also known as the ThCr2Si2-type struc-
ture.

ﬁeld splitting for the FeSe4 tetrahedra. For tetrahedral
coordination, the doubly degenerate e states consist of the
dx2−y2 and dz2 orbitals. The e-states are lower in energy
than the triply-degenerate t2-states, which consist of the
dxz, dyz, and dxy orbitals. In the case of the layered FeCh
materials, rather than being antibonding the t2-states are
mostly nonbonding. The local geometry around the iron
cations, however is not ideally tetrahedral since the site
symmetry of the cations is 4m2 (or D2d) and therefore
lower than 43m (or Td). This site symmetry lifts the de-
generacy of the t2-manifold, so that the dxz, dyz orbitals
form their own degenerate pair. Perhaps not coinciden-
tally, a reliable structural descriptor for the Tc in iron-
based superconductors is the closeness of the tetrahedral
bond angles to the ideal 109.5◦, with the highest observed
for the arsenide family being Tc (Figure 5b).

4. Metal intercalation with liquid ammonia

Before discussing the ﬁrst attempts at intercalating
FeSe and FeS, we brieﬂy mention that compounds of
the type AxFe2−ySe2 had been prepared before through
solid state techniques (where A+ = alkali metal or Tl1+
cations).[102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108] These materials
exhibit a signiﬁcant increase in the Tc up to approximately
30 K. Since single crystals can readily be grown from con-
gruent melts,[109, 110] we do not consider their prepara-
tion as intercalation chemistry. We brieﬂy describe them,
however, since their crystal structures are related to the
intercalated iron chalcogenides and because their short-
comings highlight the need for intercalation chemistry to

8

acAxFe2Ch2           Space group I4/mmm(0  1/2  1/4)aa(0 0 z)(1/2  1/2  z+1/2)(1/2   0  1/4)Figure 10: The structure of Li0.6(ND2)0.2(ND3)0.8Fe2Se2 where the
Li cations reside mostly between the Se2− anions and the ND3 and
ND−
2 moieties at the cell center. Reprinted from Ref. [122] by per-
mission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature, copyright 2012.

at the unit cell’s body center but between the Se2− anions
as shown in Figure 10. Using deuterated ammonia for the
neutron experiments, Burrard-Lucas found the ND3 and
ND−
2 moieties to be located at the cell center, and the
deuterium atoms disordered at the 16m site.[122]

In a follow up to their neutron diﬀraction study of
Li0.6(NH2)y(NH3)1−yFe2Se2, Sedlmaier et al. found that
an intermediate phase exists with a double layer of am-
monia and amide molecules.[125] Their in situ diﬀraction
experiment revealed that this double layer structure ac-
tually retains the primitive tetragonal cell of the parent
host, but expanded as shown in Figure 11. By ammoni-
ating Li0.6(NH2)−
0.2(NH3)0.8Fe2Se2, Sedlmaier et al. were
also able to prepare Li0.6(NH2.7)1.7Fe2Se2, which lowered
the Tc from 43(1) K to 37(1) K.[125] Since this phase was
identical to the intermediate phase found in the in situ
studies, the intercalation of neutral species such as NH3
into these materials is reversible. For similar compounds,
Shylin et al. demonstrated that the Li cations do indeed
charge dope the FeSe hosts through 57Fe-M¨ossbauer spec-
troscopic studies,[126] therefore conﬁrming that the NH−
2
molecules do not completely charge compensate the Li+
cations.

Several groups soon demonstrated that a host of diﬀer-
ent electropositive metals besides lithium such as potas-
sium, rare earths, and alkaline earths could be interca-

Figure 11: a.) The reversible processes by which Li cations and
ammonia molecules can intercalate into FeSe. b.) The SQUID mag-
netometry curves demonstrating that the structure with the double
layer of ammonia has a lower Tc than the one with the single layer of
NH3, NH−
2 , and Li+ species. Reprinted with permission from Ref.
[125]. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.

lated into the FeSe sheets through the liquid ammonia
method.[128, 129, 130, 131, 132] Ying et al. found that the
amount of K+ cations inserted was more important for af-
fecting Tc than the amount of ammonia intercalated.[127]
In their phase diagram, shown in Figure 12, the supercon-
ducting regime does not have a dome-like appearance but
rather resembles three ﬂat plateaus. Essentially, the high-
est Tc in this system (≈ 44 K) is achieved for a stoichiome-
try of K0.3(NH3)0.47Fe2Se2 and the lower Tc (30 K), which
is coincidentally similar to the one with just alkali species,
is found for the composition of K0.6(NH3)0.37Fe2Se2. An
unidentiﬁed phase superconducts below 36 K, which is
close to the Tc found by Sedlmaier et al.
in their inter-
mediate phase with the primitive cell and a double layer
of ammonia molecules.[125] We can conclude from their
study, that there is an optimal amount of doping into the
FeSe sheets, which is close to 0.15 electrons per iron cation,
and that by overdoping, the Tc is driven down. It is not
clear from this study, however, whether any amide species
also intercalates into the FeSe as found for the lithium
intercalated compounds by the group of Clarke.[122, 125]
in situ X-ray diﬀraction studies,
Yusenko et al. found even more intermediate phases dur-

Through careful

9

Figure 12: The phase diagram for various samples of potassium-
intercalated FeSe with the liquid ammonia method.
the
highest-Tc regime exists for samples with the stoichiometry of
K0.3(NH3)yFe2Se2, the lowest-Tc is for samples with stoichiometry
of K0.6(NH3)yFe2Se2, and the middle regime is an unknown phase.
b.) A clear diﬀerence in the c lattice constant is observed, which
correlates with Tc and amount of charge doping into the FeSe lay-
ers. Reprinted with permission from Ref.
[127]. Copyright 2013
American Chemical Society.

In a.)

ing the intercalation of cations via liquid ammonia.[133]
Initially, a fast intercalation occurs at 200 K with a char-
acteristic time scale, τ1/2, of 2-3 min. The phase prepared
by the fast intercalation includes two layers of Ba2+ cations
with ammonia molecules in between. The slower process
is the rearrangement of the guest species, τ1/2 = 70 min,
to form a phase similar to the one found by Burrard-Lucas
et al. for Li,[122] but with more ammonia positions. Upon
warming, the body-centered phases are not stable and de-
compose to the primitive setting, and upon applying vac-
uum all the NH3 can be removed to reach a ﬁnal composi-
tion of Ba0.28Fe2Se2, which exhibited a Tc of 34 K. Overall,
the highest Tc found was close to 39 K for the ammoni-
ated body-centered phase Ba0.28(NH3)1.92Fe2Se2. The en-
tire sequence of powder patterns and the corresponding
intercalated phases can be found in Figure 13.

Just as FeSe can have its Tc enhanced by the applica-
tion of pressure, Izumi et al. demonstrated that pressure
can also enhance the Tc of the intercalated selenides.[132]
After preparing several samples with doped alkali metals,
Izumi found a correlation between the tetragonality (c/a

Figure 13: a.) The various structures of the barium and ammonia
intercalated FeSe phases. b.) The time resolved X-ray diﬀraction
patterns of the diﬀerent phases.
c.) The XRD powder patterns
corresponding to the various phases represented in a.). Reprinted
with permission from Ref. [133]. Published by The Royal Society of
Chemistry.

ratio) of the unit cell and the Tc. In general, the higher
the tetragonality the higher the Tc, although the aﬀect
seems to plateau beyond a certain c/a ratio. For their
Cs-NH3 intercalated samples, the application of pressure
initially drives down the Tc, eventually wiping out all su-
perconductivity. Above the threshold of 14 GPa, however,
superconductivity re-emerges and Tc reaches to a high of
49 K until it drops to 0 above 21 GPa. The resulting

10

Figure 14: a.) Magnetization as a function of pressure for various
Cs-intercalated iron selenides b-d.) Double dome phase diagrams for
the Cs-intercalated phases with ammonia. Reprinted by permission
from Ref. [132], Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Communication,
copyright 2014.

phase diagram has a double dome appearance for the su-
perconducting regime as shown in Figure 14, and Izumi
et al. ascribe this phenomena to the proximity of a quan-
tum critical point.[132] The authors do not observe any
crystallographic phase transitions upon applying pressure.
While no study has been published on the intercalation
of amines into FeS or FeTe, some groups have attempted
to intercalate mixed anion systems. For example, while
the highest Tc observed for the optimal stoichiometry of
FeSe0.5Te0.5 is 14 K, Sakai et al. demonstrated through
intercalation of Li, Na, and Ca cations via the liquid am-
monia technique that the Tc could be raised to 26 K, 22
K, and 17 K, respectively.[136, 137]. Similarly, Guo et al.
intercalated FeSe1−zSz with Na cations and found that the
Tc could also be enhanced from that of the of host struc-
ture (Tc ≈ 12 K).[134] As more sulﬁde is introduce into
the lattice, the Tc is diminished and the phase no longer
superconducts past a certain amount of S2− substitution.
The phase diagram for their phases is presented in Fig-
ure 15. Similar to the conclusions reached by Sedlmaier et
al. on Li-intercalation,[125] Guo et al. found a clear rela-
tionship between the structure-type and the maximum Tc
(Figure 15).[134]

To understand the various ﬁndings from the experi-
mental work on the intercalated iron selenides, Guterd-
ing performed electronic structure calculations to under-
stand the role of the doping cations and ammonia spacers
on the superconducting properties.[135] Focusing specif-
ically on the Li0.5(NH2)0.5−2r(NH3)0.5+2rFe2Se2 system,
they found that the major determining factor on the char-
acteristics of the Fermi surface was the amount of electron
doping. As shown in Figure 16, when the amount of amide

Figure 15: a.) The XRD powder patterns of the FeSe and and Na-
intercalated phases with either NH3-rich or -poor structures. b.) A
schematic of the structures for the XRD patterns of a.), although
the orientation of the ammonia molecule was not solved from the
diﬀraction data. c.) The SQUID magnetometry data for the Na-
intercalated FeSe, and d.) the phase diagram for the Na-Intercalated
FeSe1−zSz hosts. Reprinted by permission from Ref. [134], Macmil-
lan Publishers Ltd: Nature Communication, copyright 2014.

present is zero (r = 0.25), the Li cations donate approxi-
mately 0.25 electrons per Fe cation. The electron pockets
at the corners expand and the hole pockets at the cen-
ter decrease in size (Figure 16c). When amide is added
so that the charge of the Li is completely compensated,
the opposite occurs and a new hole pocket is created Fig-
ure 16b). What is also evident from these calculations is
that the bands are dominated by the dxy, dxz, and dyz
orbitals. Guterding et al. conclude that the amount of
spacer molecules such as ammonia is not the determining
factor for Tc, but it can aid in making the Fermi surface
more 2D; after that has been accomplished, the amount

11

of electron doping will then enhance the superconducting
properties.

To conclude this section, intercalation of metal cations
in liquid ammonia in FeSe hosts seems to be the best man-
ner to prepare higher Tc (≈ 44 K) phases that are single
phase and therefore free of the insulating antiferromag-
netic iron selenides. The role of the ammonia is not just
as a solvent that allows the FeSe hosts to absorb the sol-
vated electrons, but also as a spacer molecule that facili-
tate the intercalation process. Furthermore, the ammonia
can ionize to form amide in solution with Li+ cations. So
far, no one has reported the formation of the conjugate
acid NH+
4 in these intercalated compounds. During in-
tercalation a series of intermediates are formed as shown
by the various in situ diﬀraction studies, and they can be
identiﬁed on the basis of whether they exhibit primitive or
body-centered lattice symmetry. The spacer aids in fur-
ther enhancing the 2D nature of the Fermi surface, but the
electron doping seems to be the major determining factor
of the maximum Tc observed.

5. Metal intercalation with organic amines

Just as in the transition metal dichalcogenides, the com-
munity soon recognized that other amines besides ammo-
nia could be intercalated into the iron chalcogenides. The
ﬁrst such report was performed by Krzton-Maziopa et al.
where they used anhydrous pyridine as the solvent for a
variety of alkali metals including Li, Na, K, and Rb.[140]
By reacting with pure β−FeSe at 40 ◦C, Krzton-Maziopa
et al. managed to expand the c-axis and enhance the Tc up
to 45 K, close to the observed values for the ammonia in-
tercalated selenides. As shown by powder XRD, the FeSe
sheets are indeed intercalated, but the lattice constants
however are not that diﬀerent from those in the ammonia-
intercalated samples. For example, the Li-pyridine in-
tercalated sample had a c parameter of 16.0549 ˚A,[140]
which is close to the values of 16.1795(6) ˚A and16.4820(9)
˚A observed by Burrard-Lucas et al. for the Li-NH3 interca-
lated samples.[122] Furthermore, the K-intercalated sam-
ples also had a smaller c-parameter, which would be un-
expected for the larger pyridine ring intercalated with the
larger potassium cation. Krzton-Maziopa et al. also ob-
served LiCN as a byproduct from the reaction, which could
indicate that the pyridine rings decomposed and therefore
the nature of the amine intercalate could be something
other than pyridine.[140]

The work by the group of Noji et al. showed that linear
diamines could also be utilized as solvents and intercalates
for FeSe.[141, 138, 142, 143, 139] Starting with the classic
coordination ligand, ethylenediamine (C2H8N2), Hatakeda
et al.
intercalated this ligand along with Li to raise Tc
up to 45 K. The intercalation reaction seems to be slug-
gish with a total of 7 days at 45 ◦C followed by post-
annealing at 150 ◦C and 200 ◦C for several more days
under vacuum.[141] Assuming that the compound crystal-
lized in the body-centered cell, the authors indexed the

Figure 17: Main: The powder XRD patterns of Na- and Li-
intercalated FeSe with ethylenediamine acting as both the host and
intercalate. The low angle (002) reﬂection roughly corresponds to an
interplanar spacing close to 10.4 ˚A. Reprinted with permission from
Ref [138]. A model of the Li-ethylenediamine intercalate in FeSe.
Licensed by IOP Publishing Ltd. Inset: Reprinted ﬁgure with per-
mission from Ref. [139]. Copyright 2015 by the American Physical
Society.

lowest angle peak as the (002) reﬂection and therefore
the interplanar distance to be close to 10.37 ˚A (Figure
17). By expanding to even larger chains such as hexam-
ethylenediamine (C6H16N2), Hosono et al. increased this
interplanar distances to a record 16.225(5) ˚A.[142] This
hyper-expansion of the FeSe host, however, does not seem
to have increased Tc but rather lowered it to 38 K, which
is in line from the previous studies of metal-ammonia in-
tercalation whereby charge doping is more important than
the size of the spacer.

In addition to lithium, other metals can be interca-
lated with ethylenediamine such as sodium. Figure 17
shows the XRD powder patterns of the Li and Na interca-
lated compounds along with the C2H8N2 spacers that lead
to a body-centered cell and an interplanar distance close
to 10.37 ˚A regardless of the choice of alkali metal.[143]
Although the authors claim a T onset
as high as 57 K
from electrical resistivity measurements, the magnetic sus-
ceptibility data shows that the true Tc is closer to 45
K, which is more in line with other intercalated FeSe
superconductors.[138]

c

A systematic study of various linear diamines with either
Na+ or Sr2+ cations was carried out by Hayashi et al. to
understand the role of charge and spacer length.[144] The
linear diamines include (H2N)-CnH2n(NH2) where n = 0,
2, 3, and 6, and Hayashi et al.
found that the interpla-
nar distance could indeed be systematically varied between

12

formulated as LiFeO2Fe2Se2, which was structurally re-
lated to the LnOFeAs superconductors and the ZrCuSiAs-
type structure (Figure 19). An electronic structure cal-
culations study by Heil et al. predicted that the ground
state of this oxide-intercalated FeSe should be that of an
antiferromagnet due to the eﬀect of the d5 states (from
Fe3+) in the oxide layer.[147] However, this work did not
yet have the full experimental details of the chemical com-
position and missed the protons present in the oxide layer,
which would therefore call into question whether Fe3+ is
really present in this layer as opposed to Fe2+.

Soon after the work of Lu et al., Pachmayr et al.
were able to prepare small single crystals from hydrother-
mal methods (Figure 20) and found residual electron
density corresponding to hydrogen from their diﬀrac-
tion measurements.[148] Therefore, Pachmayr et al.
for-
mulated the intercalate to actually be a hydroxide in-
stead of oxide, and their single crystal X-ray diﬀrac-
tion results showed that the composition is close to
(Li0.8Fe0.2OH)(Fe0.915Li0.085Se). The hydroxide interca-
late has a structure very similar to LiOH, which itself
crystallizes in the anti-PbO-type structure. Furthermore,
antisite substitution occurs so that some iron cations sub-
stitute onto the Li site, and vice versa. Pachmayr et al.
also established that the nature of the iron in the hydrox-
ide layer is Fe2+ and not Fe3+ based on the Fe–O distance
of 201.6 pm. The Fe2+ cations act to both electron dope
into the FeSe host and to ﬂatten the (Li/Fe)O4 tetrahedra
since Fe2+ prefers more square planar coordination.[148]

6. Metal hydroxide intercalation under hydrother-

mal conditions

Interestingly, due to the iron substitution onto the hy-
droxide layer, Pachmayr et al.
found the compound
to express both ferromagnetism and superconductivity
at base temperature, which led to an interesting phe-
nomena by which spontaneous vortex lattice forms in
this type-II superconductor.[148] As shown in Figure 20,
the zero-ﬁeld cooled curve in the magnetic susceptibil-
ity shows and a ferromagnetic signal even in the diamag-
netic regime. Through nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
studies of this compound, Lu et al.
found the hydrox-
ide layer to actually exhibit antiferromagnetism instead
of ferromagnetism.[149] A small angle neutron scattering
(SANS) study found that under a small applied magnetic
ﬁeld, a vortex lattice was found in (Li1−xFexOD)FeSe in
the pattern with a characteristic length not unlike in other
superconductors.[150] Lynn et al.
concluded, however,
that the vortex forms only under an applied magnetic ﬁeld
and is not spontaneous.

Several

studies

on the phase diagram of

the
(Li1−xFexOH)FeSe then followed to understand how
the structural and chemical parameters controlled Tc.
Sun et al.
found that instead of preparing the hy-
droxide samples in situ under hydrothermal conditions,

Figure 18: The correlation between Tc and the interlayer spacing, d,
by the intercalation of various species including alkali metal cations,
ammonia, and organic amines. Reprinted from Ref. [143], Copyright
2014, with permission from Elsevier.

8.95 ˚A and 11.16 ˚A for the sodium series of compounds.
No correlation, however, was found between the length of
the diamine chain and Tc.
Instead, the correlation was
strictly between charge doping and Tc. For materials with
the sodium content varying between 0.80 and 0.93 (per
Fe2Se2 unit), the Tc was between 41 K and 46 K, whereas
for the strontium content, the Tc was between 34 K and
38 K. Typically the amount of Sr varied between 0.23 to
0.28 (per Fe2Se2 unit).[144]

Overall, the recent work of intercalating organic amines
with alkali and alkaline earth metals has demonstrated
that the maximum Tc is not enhanced beyond that of am-
monia with alkali and alkaline earth metals. The spacer,
however does seem to have an eﬀect below a threshold
value for the interplanar distance. As shown in Figure 18
for a variety of compounds from FeSe to those with large
interlayer spacers, the Tc plateaus above a distance of ap-
proximately 8 ˚A. It would be interesting for future work
to understand any advantages in utilizing organic amines
over ammonia such as thermal stability or ﬁner control
over electron doping. However, caution must be exercised
since working ethylenediamine can cause fragmentation of
the FeSe layers such as Fe3Se4(en)2.[145]

An interesting development in the intercalation chem-
istry of FeSe was the demonstration by Lu et al. that such
reactions could occur in aqueous solutions as opposed to
ammoniacal ones that were strictly anhydrous.[146] Under
hydrothermal conditions, Lu et al. added a selenide source
in the form of selenourea to a strongly basic solution of
LiOH along with iron metal. The resulting compound was

13

Figure 19: The crystal structure of (LiOH)FeSe, which has a similar
structure to the ZrCuSiAs-type structure. In the superconducting
phases, Fe2+ cations are doped into the Li sites, which charge dopes
the FeSe hosts. The LiOH intercalate has the anti-PbO-type struc-
ture.

that FeSe could act as the source for the prepara-
tion of (Li1−xFexOH)Fe1−ySe where (x ≈ 0.2 and
0.15 > y > 0.02).[152] The samples prepared in this
manner repeatedly led to lower Tc’s, however, so Sun
et al.
performed post-synthetic modiﬁcation of these
powder samples by treating them with an ammoniacal
solution of Li metal.
This reductive post-synthetic
modiﬁcation led to maximal Tc of 45 K, and Sun et
al. explain this result as ﬁlling in iron vacancies in the
FeSe layer.[152] Indeed, the technique of post-synthetic
modiﬁcation is a form of intercalation chemistry. The
large spread in iron deﬁciency found in their samples led
Sun et al. to quantitatively correlate iron occupancy in
the selenide layer to superconductivity and to conclude
that full iron occupancy in the selenide layer along with
iron with an oxidation state below +2 are required for
superconductivity.

The area of soft chemistry can be further expanded be-
yond powder to include the preparation of single crys-
tal samples of (Li1−xFexOH)FeSe. Dong et al.
found
that starting with KxFe2Se2 single crystals prepared at
high temperatures, one could perform a cation exchange
under hydrothermal conditions to prepare LiOHFeSe sin-
gle crystals.[151] Such exchange and the resulting X-ray
diﬀraction patterns are shown in Figure 21 Both the work
of Dong et al. and Sun et al. demonstrate that the iron se-
lenides exhibit considerable soft chemistry that allows for
facile preparation of superconductors with optimal prop-
erties.

Zhou et al. were able to construct two phase diagrams,
one for (LiOH)FeSe and the deuterated (LiOD)FeSe from

electrical

resistivity

crystals prepared by hydrothermal
and magnetic

Figure 20: a.) The SEM image of the (Li0.8Fe0.2OH)Fe0.915Li0.085Se
b.)
single
The
of
(Li0.8Fe0.2OH)Fe0.915Li0.085Se, and the low temperature sig-
nal below 20 K represents a ferromagnetic response that coexists
with superconductivity.
Reprinted with permission from Ref.
[148]. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. KGaA,
Weinheim.

synthesis.
susceptibility

single crystal and powder samples. No isotope eﬀect was
observed from the deuterium substitution. In their phase
diagrams, Zhou et al. correlate the Tc to the tetragonal-
ity of the unit cell (c/a ratio), which might be related to
the overall oxidation state of the iron in the FeSe layer and
therefore to the amount of charge doping from the hydrox-
ide layer.[153] Dong et al. also correlated Tc to the lattice
parameters but added an antiferromagnetic phase for sam-
ples with very small c lattice constant, which they referred
to as the parent compound to the superconductor.[154]
This antiferromagnetic ordering observed by Dong et al.
in their magnetization studies, however, was disputed by
Zhou et al. since they demonstrated that under hydrother-
mal conditions various ferrimagnetic iron oxides such as
magnetite can be prepared. Furthermore, through their
neutron diﬀraction studies of deuterated samples, Zhou et
al. found no evidence for long range antiferromagnetic or-
dering either in superconducting or non-superconducting
samples.[153] This result from Zhou et al. would be in line
with the vast literature on iron selenides, where a parent
compound with long-range antiferromagnetic ordering has
yet to be found.[17]

14

aa(LiOH)FeCh               Space group P4/nmmac(0  0  0)(0 1/2  z)(1/2    0  -z)(1/2   1/2   0)The major parameters that seem to be important across
the entire series of iron chalcogenides include structure and
charge doping. As such, we have gathered the relevant pa-
rameters across various intercalated selenides in Table 1 for
comparison. Although there have been many eﬀorts to cor-
relate Tc with charge doping there are many inconsisten-
cies apparent in Table 1, and this may be on account of the
diﬃculty on determining whether the amines intercalated
are neutral or charged. Furthermore, due to the nature of
the disordered intercalates and sometimes low-quality of
the powder patterns, more detailed crystallographic data
such as anion height and Ch–Fe–Ch bond angles are dif-
ﬁcult to gather and compare presently. Therefore, more
detailed and systematic studies correlating these key pa-
rameters should be carried out in future studies. The
consensus so far is that the intercalates should separate
the FeSe layers suﬃciently in order to enhance the two-
dimensionality of the electronic structure and also charge
dope it enough to enhance the coupling between the elec-
tron and hole pockets of the Fermi surface. The data from
the studies reviewed here suggest that the upper limit for
bulk intercalated-FeSe is 45 K.

From a historical perspective, it is interesting to com-
pare the intercalated iron chalcogenides with that of other
2D hosts such as the transition metal dichalcogenides (see
section 2.1) and the NayCoO2 hydrates. There seems to be
suﬃcient evidence across these 2D materials that hydrogen
bonding has a large role to play in their stability. The am-
monia molecules in both FeSe and the dichalcogenides such
a TaS2 are oriented so that the N–H bonds and not the
lone pair of electrons on N point towards the chalcogenide
anions. In a neutron diﬀraction study of NH3 intercalated
TaS2, Young et al. found evidence for hydrogen bonding in
the form of N–H····S bonds where the S–H interatomic dis-
tances ranged between 2.49 ˚A and 2.66 ˚A.[157] Similarly,
Burrard-Lucas et al. found evidence for N–H····Se bridges
in the Li-NH3 intercalated FeSe.[122] An interesting dif-
ference between the iron chalcogenides and the transition
metal dichalcogenides is that in the iron chalcogenides the
ammonia does not enter the host structure as the conju-

Table 1: Structural parameters for FeSe and various intercalated
FeSe superconductors. Here d refers to the interplanar spacing, or
the spacing between the Fe sublattices, as determined by diﬀraction
experiments at room temperature. In compounds with the primitive
cell, this is the (001) reﬂection, and in those with the body-centered
cell, the (002) reﬂection.

d (˚A)
compound
5.5258(1)
FeSe
7.1329(1)
K0.38(2)Fe2.1(3)Se2
8.2410(5)
Li0.6(ND2)0.2(ND3)0.8Fe2Se2
10.30704(8)
Li0.6(ND2)0.34(ND3)1.36Fe2Se2*
7.78(1)
K0.3(NH3)0.47Fe2Se2
7.42(1)
K0.6(NH3)0.37Fe2Se2
9.060
Ba0.37(NH3)1.04Fe2Se2
9.51
Na1.0(C2H8N2)1.5Fe2Se2
8.91
Sr0.5(N2H4)3.0Fe2Se2
9.3512(2)
(Li0.837Fe0.165OH)FeSe
(Li0.828(1)Fe0.172(1)OH)FeSe*
9.1330(2)
* diﬀraction data taken between 5 K to 7 K

Tc (K)
8
28
43(1)
39(1)
44
31
36
46.5
35
40
37

15

e−/Fe cation Reference
0.00
0.18
0.20
0.13
0.15
0.30
0.37
0.5
0.5
0.165
0.172

[57]
[115]
[122]
[125]
[127]
[127]
[133]
[144]
[144]
[152]
[153]

Figure 21: A schematic of the cation exchange reaction under hy-
drothermal and strongly basic conditions to convert KxFe2−ySe2 to
(LiOH)FeSe. b.) The resulting change in the powder patterns from
a body centered structure to the primitive cell. Reprinted ﬁgure
with permission from Ref.
[151]. Copyright 2015 by the American
Physical Society.

The insertion of hydroxide layers into other hosts has
been accomplished as well, notably mackinawite FeS.
While the host FeS has very recently been shown to be su-
perconducting with a Tc close to 5 K, Pachmayr found the
LiOH-intercalated phase of FeS to be non-superconducting
and instead displays only weak ferromagnetism.[155] Like-
wise, Lu et al.
found that in hosts with mixed anions
such as FeSe1−zSz, lithium hydroxide intercalation could
be achieved but that the Tc drops oﬀ dramatically as the
amount of sulﬁde is introduced into the lattice.[156] This
could be due to the general instability of mackinawite FeS,
which might cause suﬃcient iron vacancies to form upon
intercalation so that they completely disrupt the conduct-
ing properties.

7. Conclusions and future directions

The iron chalcogenides, and in particular FeSe, have
been proven to be versatile hosts for intercalation chem-
istry. Furthermore,
intercalation chemistry aﬀords su-
perconducting samples that are phase pure and there-
fore reveal the true ground state properties. These low-
temperature synthetic techniques are superior to that of
simply melting the constituent elements (alkali metal, iron,
and selenium), since the latter leads to phase separa-
tion and the inclusion of an antiferromagnetic, insulat-
ing phase. The intercalation chemistry of FeSe therefore
demonstrates that solid state chemists will continue to play
a role in furthering our understanding of superconducting
materials.

4 ), but rather as the conjugate base NH−
gate acid (NH+
2
along with neutral ammonia molecules. Favoring amide
formation rather than ammonium makes sense in light of
the fact that the FeSe layers are anionic and therefore have
electron density at the Fermi level to reduce ammonia.

Similar to the cobaltates (see section 2.2), the iron
chalcogenides also have signiﬁcant aqueous chemistry, and
the ability to integrate hydroxides such a LiOH. The weak
van der Waals forces present in the chalcogenides are pre-
sumably replaced by ionic forces from the cationic inter-
calates. However, there might be more than these ionic
forces participating in interlayer bonding. Given the hy-
groscopic nature of NayCoO2 and the orientation of the
hydroxyl groups in (Li1−xFexOH)FeSe, hydrogen bonding
should also play a role in the phase stability of these ma-
terials. Indeed, neutron diﬀraction study by Zhou et al.
(Li1−xFexOD)FeSe found crystallographic evidence for O–
D· · ··Se bonding where the Se–D distance was approxi-
mately 3.03 ˚A.[153]

The intercalation chemistry of FeSe also has similari-
ties with the superconducting fullerenes (see section ??).
The amount of charge doping in both sets of materials
seems to be critical to raising the Tc. In the case of in-
tercalated fullerenes, the alkali metals such as potassium
electron dope the conduction band and since this band is
narrow, the density of states at the Fermi level is high.
Similarly, FeSe requires a certain amount of charge doping
at the Fermi level to enhance its superconducting proper-
ties. Unlike the doped fullerenes, however, the iron chalco-
genides are multi-band superconductors where the Fermi
surface has both hole and electron pockets instead of just
one conduction band. The nesting of these multiple bands
seems to be critical in the case of FeSe.

Even if the maximum Tc has been achieved in FeSe,
there remain multiple future directions for this ﬁeld. One,
the orientation of the of the organic amines intercalates
in FeSe has not been solved nor the nature of the guest
species after intercalation. In other words, are the organic
amines neutral or their conjugate bases upon intercala-
tion? This question is important to establish the correct
electron doping for optimal superconducting properties,
which could help answer the question as to the mecha-
nism for such a high Tc. The coordination of the organic
amines, e.g. pyridine and ethylenediamine, could also be
solved in order to determine the importance of hydrogen
bonding and the intercalated cations in stabilizing these
compounds. The work of Kovnir et al.
in the intercala-
tion of structurally related iron selenides with intercalated
organic amines demonstrates how this problem could be
solved from advanced diﬀraction techniques.[158]

Another set of opportunities in this ﬁeld is to explore
beyond FeSe. The intercalation chemistry of mackinawite
FeS, for example, has not been fully explored. Since it
has just been found to be superconducting at 5 K, there
exists an opportunity to discover higher Tc sulﬁdes. Fi-
nally, other metals besides iron could be investigated such
as cobalt, nickel, and copper, which have similar chalco-

genide chemistry to iron. These new intercalated transi-
tion metal monochalcogenides could represent a new area
of materials chemistry in a similar fashion to the transition
metal dichalcogenides.

8. Acknowledgements

We thank the National Science Foundation CAREER,

DMR-1455118, for ﬁnancial support.

9. References

References

[1] J. M. Carrasco, L. G. Franquelo, J. T. Bialasiewicz, E. Galv´an,
R. C. P. Guisado, M. A. M. Prats, J. I. Le´on, N. Moreno-
Alfonso, Power-electronic systems for the grid integration of
renewable energy sources: A survey, IEEE T. Ind. Electron.
53 (4) (2006) 1002–1016.

[2] C. A. Luongo, Superconducting storage systems: An overview,

IEEE T. Magn. 32 (4) (2002) 2214–2223.

[3] P. F. Ribeiro, B. K. Johnson, M. L. Crow, A. Arsoy, Y. Liu,
Energy storage systems for advanced power applications, P.
IEEE 89 (12) (2002) 1744–1756.

[4] D. Larbalestier, A. Gurevich, D. M. Feldmann, A. Polyanskii,
High-Tc superconducting materials for electric power applica-
tions, Nature 414 (2001) 368–377.

[5] J. W. Bray, Superconducting applications: Present and future,

J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 21 (6) (2008) 335–341.

[6] Z. Deng, Q. Lin, G. Ma, J. Zheng, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, J. Wang,
A double-superconducting axial bearing system for an energy
storage ﬂywheel model, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 97 (2008) 1–6.

[7] H. Hosono, K. Tanabe,

E. Takayama-Muromachi,
H. Kageyama, S. Yamanaka, H. Kumakura, M. Nohara,
H. Hiramatsu, S. Fujitsu, Exploration of new superconductors
and functional materials, and fabrication of superconducting
tapes and wires of iron pnictides, Sci. Tech. Adv. Mat. 16 (3)
(2015) 033503.

[8] T. Katase, Y.

Ishimaru, A. Tsukamoto, H. Hiramatsu,
T. Kamiya, K. Tanabe, H. Hosono, Advantageous grain bound-
aries in iron pnictide superconductors, Nat. Commun. 2 (2011)
409–406.

[9] S. He, J. He, W. Zhang, L. Zhao, D. Liu, X. Liu, D. Mou, Y.-B.
Ou, Q.-Y. Wang, Z. Li, L. Wang, Y. Peng, Y. Liu, C. Chen,
L. Yu, G. Liu, X. Dong, J. Zhang, C. Chen, Z. Xu, X. Chen,
X. Ma, Q. Xue, X. J. Zhou, Phase diagram and electronic
indication of high-temperature superconductivity at 65 K in
single-layer FeSe ﬁlms, Nat. Mater. 12 (7) (2013) 605–610.

[10] S. Tan, Y. Zhang, M. Xia, Z. Ye, F. Chen, X. Xie, R. Peng,
D. Xu, Q. Fan, H. Xu, J. Jiang, T. Zhang, X. Lai, T. Xiang,
J. Hu, B. Xie, D. Feng, Interface-induced superconductivity
and strain-dependent spin density waves in FeSe/SrTiO3 thin
ﬁlms, Nat. Mater. 12 (7) (2013) 634–640.

[11] J.-F. Ge, Z.-L. Liu, C. Liu, C.-L. Gao, D. Qian, Q.-K. Xue,
Y. Liu, J.-F. Jia, Superconductivity above 100 K in single-
layer FeSe ﬁlms on doped SrTiO3, Nat. Mater. 14 (3) (2015)
285–289.

[12] J. Paglione, R. L. Greene, High-temperature superconductivity

in iron-based materials, Nat. Phys. 6 (9) (2010) 645–658.

[13] D. C. Johnston, The puzzle of high temperature superconduc-
tivity in layered iron pnictides and chalcogenides, Adv. Phys.
59 (6) (2010) 803–1061.

[14] Y. Mizuguchi, Y. Takano, Review of Fe chalcogenides as the
simplest Fe-based superconductor, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 79 (10)
(2010) 102001.

[15] K. Ishida, Y. Nakai, H. Hosono, To what extent iron-pnictide
new superconductors have been clariﬁed: A progress report, J.
Phys. Soc. Jpn. 78 (6) (2009) 2001.

16

[16] D.-X. Mou, L. Zhao, X.-J. Zhou, Structural, magnetic and elec-
tronic properties of the iron-chalcogenide AxFe2−ySe2 (A= K,
Cs, Rb, and Tl, etc.) superconductors, Front. Phys. 6 (2011)
410.

[17] A. L. Ivanovskii, New ternary ThCr2Si2-type iron selenide
superconducting materials: Synthesis, properties and simula-
tions, Physica C 471 (13-14) (2011) 409–427.

[18] M. Whittingham, Chemistry of

intercalation compounds:
Metal guests in chalcogenide hosts, Prog. Solid State Ch. 12 (1)
(1978) 41–99.

[19] M. S. Whittingham, Electrical energy storage and intercalation

chemistry, Science 192 (4244) (1976) 1126–1127.

[20] M. J. Manos, M. G. Kanatzidis, Layered metal sulﬁdes capture
uranium from seawater, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134 (39) (2012)
16441–16446.

[21] J. L. Mertz, Z. H. Fard, C. D. Malliakas, M. J. Manos, M. G.
Kanatzidis, Selective removal of Cs+, Sr2+, and Ni2+ by
K2xMgxSn3−−xS6(x = 0.5–1) (KMS-2) relevant to nuclear
waste remediation, Chem. Mater. 25 (10) (2013) 2116–2127.

[22] A. Lerf, Storylines in intercalation chemistry, Dalton T. 43

(2014) 10276–10291.

[23] A. F. Wells, Structural Inorganic Chemistry, Oxford University

Press, 2012.

[24] M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, Intercalation compounds

of graphite, Adv. Phys. 51 (1) (2002) 1–186.

[25] A. Buchsteiner, A. Lerf, J. Pieper, Water dynamics in graphite
oxide investigated with neutron scattering, J. Phys. Chem. B
110 (45) (2006) 22328–22338.

[26] A. Usuki, M. Kawasumi, Y. Kojima, A. Okada, T. Kurauchi,
O. Kamigaito, Swelling behavior of montmorillonite cation ex-
changed for ω-amino acids by -caprolactam, J. Mater. Res. 8
(1993) 1174–1178.

[27] J. B. Goodenough, K.-S. Park, The Li-ion rechargeable bat-
tery: A perspective, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135 (4) (2013) 1167–
1176.

[28] R. R. Chianelli, J. C. Scanlon, M. S. Whittingham, F. R. Gam-
ble, Structural studies of the intercalation complexes titanium
sulﬁde-ammonia (TiS2·NH3) and tantalum sulﬁde-ammonia
(TaS2·NH3), Inorg. Chem. 14 (7) (1975) 1691–1696.

[29] F. R. Gamble, B. G. Silbernagel, Anisotropy of the proton spin-
lattice relaxation time in the superconducting intercalation
complex TaS2(NH3): Structural and bonding implications, J.
Chem. Phys. 63 (6) (1975) 2544–2552.

[30] R. Friend, A. Yoﬀe, Electronic properties of intercalation com-
plexes of the transition metal dichalcogenides, Adv. Phys.
36 (1) (1987) 1–94.

[31] F. R. Gamble, F. J. DiSalvo, R. A. Klemm, T. H. Geballe,
Superconductivity in layered structure organometallic crystals,
Science 168 (3931) (1970) 568–570.

[32] F. J. D. Salvo, R. Schwall, T. H. Geballe, F. R. Gamble, J. H.
Osiecki, Superconductivity in layered compounds with variable
interlayer spacings, Phys. Rev. Lett. 27 (1971) 310–313.

[33] T. H. Geballe, A. Menth, F. J. Di Salvo, F. R. Gamble, Pre-
cursor eﬀects of superconductivity up to 35 K in layered com-
pounds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 27 (1971) 314–316.

[34] D. W. Murphy, F. J. Di Salvo, G. W. Hull, J. V. Waszczak,
S. F. Meyer, G. R. Stewart, S. Early, J. V. Acrivos, T. H.
Geballe, Properties of HxTaS2: Correlation between the su-
perconducting Tc and an electronic instability in layer com-
pounds, J. Chem. Phys. 62.

[35] C. Riekel, C. Fischer, A neutron diﬀraction study on the in-
tercalation of deuteropyridine into tantalumdisulﬁde, J. Solid
State Chem. 29 (2) (1979) 181–190.

[36] R. Sch¨ollhorn, E. Sick, A. Lerf, Reversible topotactic redox
reactions of layered dichalcogenides, Mater. Res. Bull. 10 (10)
(1975) 1005–1012.

[37] A. Lerf, R. Schoellhorn, Solvation reactions of layered ternary
sulﬁdes AxTiS2, AxNbS2, and AxTaS2, Inorg. Chem. 16 (11)
(1977) 2950–2956.
[38] R. Sch¨ollhorn, H.-D. Zagefka, Demonstration of the ionic struc-
ture of the intercalation compound TaS2·NH3, Angew. Chem.

Int. Edit. 16 (3) (1977) 199–200.

[39] R. Sch¨ollhorn, H. Zagefka, T. Butz, A. Lerf, Ionic bonding
model of the pyridine intercalation compounds of layered tran-
sition metal dichalcogenides, Mater. Res. Bull. 14 (3) (1979)
369–376.

[40] P. Colombet, V. Cajipe, Charge transfer and kinetics in inter-
calation compounds of lamellar dichalcogenides with nitrogen-
containing molecules, Eur. J. of Sol. State Inor. 26 (1989) 255–
271.

[41] P. F. McMillan, V. Cajipe, P. Molinie, M. F. Quinton,
V. Gourlaouen, P. Colombet, Proton dynamics in titanium(IV)
sulﬁde-ammonia: a new model for ammoniated transition
metal dichalcogenides, Chem. Mater. 3 (5) (1991) 796–804.

[42] J. M. E. Harper, T. H. Geballe, F. J. DiSalvo, Thermal prop-
erties of layered transition-metal dichalcogenides at charge-
density-wave transitions, Phys. Rev. B 15 (1977) 2943–2951.
[43] R. E. Schaak, T. Klimczuk, M. L. Foo, R. J. Cava, Su-
perconductivity phase diagram of NaxCoO2·1.3H2O, Nature
424 (6948) (2003) 527–529.

[44] K. Takada, H. Sakurai, E. Takayama-Muromachi, F. Izumi,
R. A. Dilanian, T. Sasaki, Superconductivity in two-
dimensional CoO2 layers, Nature 422 (6927) (2003) 53–55.

[45] Q. Huang, M. L. Foo, R. A. Pascal, J. W. Lynn, B. H. Toby,
T. He, H. W. Zandbergen, R. J. Cava, Coupling between elec-
tronic and structural degrees of freedom in the triangular lat-
tice conductor NaxCoO2, Phys. Rev. B 70 (2004) 184110.

[46] P. W. Stephens, L. Mihaly, P. L. Lee, R. L. Whetten, S.-M.
Huang, R. Kaner, F. Deiderich, K. Holczer, Structure of single-
phase superconducting K3C60, Nature 351 (6328) (1991) 632–
634.

[47] F. Diederich, R. L. Whetten, C60: From soot to superconduc-

tors, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit. 103 (1991) 695–697.

[48] M. J. Rosseinsky, D. W. Murphy, R. M. Fleming, O. Zhou, In-
tercalation of ammonia into K3C60, Nature 364 (6436) (1993)
425–427.

[49] M. J. Rosseinsky, Fullerene intercalation chemistry, J. Mater.

Chem. 5 (10) (1995) 1497–1513.

[50] M. J. Rosseinsky, Recent developments in the chemistry and
physics of metal fullerides, Chem. Mater. 10 (10) (1998) 2665–
2685.

[51] R. D. Shannon, Revised Eﬀective Ionic Radii and Systematic
Studies of Interatomic Distances in Halides and Chalcogenides,
Acta Crystall. A: Crys. 32 (1976) 751–767.

[52] J. A. Wilson, A perspective on the Fe-based superconductors,

J. Phys. Condens. Mat. 22 (20) (2010) 203201–28.

[53] Y. Mizuguchi, Y. Hara, K. Deguchi, S. Tsuda, T. Yamaguchi,
K. Takeda, H. Kotegawa, H. Tou, Y. Takano, Anion height
dependence of Tc for the Fe-based superconductor, Supercond.
Sci. Tech. 23 (2010) 054013.

[54] C.-H. Lee, A. Iyo, H. Eisaki, H. Kito, M. T. Fernandez-Diaz,
T. Ito, K. Kihou, H. Matsuhata, M. Braden, K. Yamada, Eﬀect
of structural parameters on superconductivity in ﬂuorine-free
LnFeAsO1−y (Ln = La, Nd), J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 77 (8) (2008)
083704.

[55] C. H. Lee, K. Kihou, A. Iyo, H. Kito, P. M. Shirage, H. Eisaki,
Relationship between crystal structure and superconductivity
in iron-based superconductors, Solid State Commun. 152 (8)
(2012) 644–648.

[56] K. Horigane, H. Hiraka, K. Ohoyama, Relationship between
structure and superconductivity in FeSe1−xTex, J. Phys. Soc.
Jpn. 78 (7) (2009) 074718.

[57] T. M. McQueen, Q. Huang, V. Ksenofontov, C. Felser, Q. Xu,
H. Zandbergen, Y. S. Hor, J. Allred, A. J. Williams, D. Qu,
J. Checkelsky, N. P. Ong, R. J. Cava, Extreme sensitivity of
superconductivity to stoichiometry in Fe1+δSe, Phys. Rev. B
79 (2009) 014522.

[58] J. T. Greenﬁeld, S. Kamali, K. Lee, K. Kovnir, A solution for
solution-produced β-FeSe: Elucidating and overcoming factors
that prevent superconductivity, Chem. Mater. 27 (2) (2015)
588–596.

[59] Y. Hara, K. Takase, A. Yamasaki, H. Sato, N. Miyakawa,

17

N. Umeyama, S. I. Ikeda, Structural and physical properties
of FeSe crystals fabricated by the chemical vapor transport
method, Physica C 470, Supplement 1 (2010) S313–S314.

[60] F.-C. Hsu, J.-Y. Luo, K.-W. Yeh, T.-K. Chen, T.-W. Huang,
P. M. Wu, Y.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Huang, Y.-Y. Chu, D.-C. Yan, M.-
K. Wu, Superconductivity in the PbO-type structure α-FeSe,
P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105 (38) (2008) 14262–14264.

[61] H. Kotegawa, S. Masaki, Y. Awai, H. Tou, Y. Mizuguchi,
Y. Takano, Evidence for unconventional superconductivity in
arsenic-free iron-based superconductor FeSe: A 77Se-NMR
study, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 77 (11) (2008) 113703.

[62] S. Margadonna, Y. Takabayashi, M. T. McDonald,
K. Kasperkiewicz, Y. Mizuguchi, Y. Takano, A. N. Fitch,
E. Suard, K. Prassides, Crystal structure of the new FeSe1−x
superconductor, Chem. Commun. (2008) 5607–5609.

[63] T. Imai, K. Ahilan, F. L. Ning, T. M. McQueen, R. J. Cava,
Why does undoped FeSe become a high-Tc superconductor
under pressure?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009) 177005.

[64] T. M. McQueen, A. J. Williams, P. W. Stephens, T. J., Y. Zhu,
V. Ksenofontov, F. Casper, C. Felser, R. J. Cava, Tetragonal-
to-orthorhombic structural phase transition at 90 K in the su-
perconductor Fe1.01Se, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009) 057002.

[65] U. Pachmayr, N. Fehn, D. Johrendt, Structural transition and
superconductivity in hydrothermally synthesized FeX (X = S,
Se), Chem. Commun. 52 (2016) 194–197.

[66] A. E. B¨ohmer, T. Arai, F. Hardy, T. Hattori, T. Iye, T. Wolf,
H. v. L¨ohneysen, K. Ishida, C. Meingast, Origin of the
tetragonal-to-orthorhombic phase transition in FeSe: A com-
bined thermodynamic and NMR study of nematicity, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 114 (11) (2015) 027001.

[67] M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, A. A. Haghighirad, N. R. Davies,
A. McCollam, A. Narayanan, S. F. Blake, Y. L. Chen, S. Ghan-
nadzadeh, A. J. Schoﬁeld, M. Hoesch, C. Meingast, T. Wolf,
A. I. Coldea, Emergence of the nematic electronic state in FeSe,
Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015) 155106.

[68] M. C. Rahn, R. A. Ewings, S. J. Sedlmaier, S. J. Clarke, A. T.
Boothroyd, Strong (π, 0) spin ﬂuctuations in β-FeSe observed
by neutron spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015) 180501.

[69] J. K. Glasbrenner, I. I. Mazin, H. O. Jeschke, P. J. Hirschfeld,
R. M. Fernandes, R. Valenti, Eﬀect of magnetic frustration on
nematicity and superconductivity in iron chalcogenides, Nat.
Phys. 11 (2015) 953–958.

[70] F. Wang, S. A. Kivelson, D.-H. Lee, Nematicity and quantum

paramagnetism in FeSe, Nat. Phys. 11 (2015) 959–963.

[71] P. Waldner, Thermodynamic modeling of the Fe-S system, J.

Phase Equilb. Diﬀus.

[72] D. J. Vaughan, M. S. Ridout, M¨ossbauer studies of some sul-
phide minerals, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 33 (3) (1971) 741–746.
[73] R. A. Berner, Iron sulﬁdes formed from aqueous solution at
low temperatures and atmospheric pressure, J. Geol. 72 (3)
(1964) 293–306.

[74] A. R. Lennie, S. A. T. Redfern, P. F. Schoﬁeld, D. J. Vaughan,
Synthesis and rietveld crystal structure reﬁnement of macki-
nawite, tetragonal FeS, Mineral. Mag. 59 (2009) 677–683.

[75] A. R. Lennie, K. E. R. England, D. J. Vaughan, Transfor-
mation of synthetic mackinawite to hexagonal pyrrhotite - a
kinetic-study, Am. Mineral. 80 (9-10) (1995) 960–967.

[76] A. R. Lennie, S. A. T. Redfern, P. E. Champness, C. P. Stod-
dart, P. F. Schoﬁeld, D. J. Vaughan, Transformation of mack-
inawite to greigite: An in situ X-ray powder diﬀraction and
transmission electron microscope study, Am. Mineral. 82 (302-
309).

[77] D. Rickard, The solubility of FeS, Geochimi. Cosmochim. Ac.

70 (23) (2006) 5779–5789.

[78] I. T. Sines, D. D. V. II, R. Misra, E. J. Popczun, R. E. Schaak,
Synthesis of tetragonal mackinawite-type FeS nanosheets by
solvothermal crystallization, J. Solid State Chem. 196 (2012)
17–20.

[79] X. Lai, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Lin,
F. Huang, Observation of superconductivity in tetragonal FeS,
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137 (32) (2015) 10148–10151.

[80] C. K. H. Borg, X. Zhou, C. Eckberg, D. J. Campbell, S. R.
Saha, J. Paglione, E. E. Rodriguez, Strong anisotropy in
nearly ideal-tetrahedral superconducting FeS single crystals,
arxiv:1512.01245.

[81] J.-M. R. G´enin, G. Bourri´e, F. Trolard, M. Abdelmoula,
A. Jaﬀrezic, P. Refait, V. Maitre, B. Humbert, , A. Herbil-
lon, Thermodynamic equilibria in aqueous suspensions of syn-
thetic and natural Fe(II)Fe(III) green rusts: occurrences of the
mineral in hydromorphic soils, Envir. Sci. Tech. 32 (8) (1998)
1058–1068.

[82] S. Drissi, P. Refait, M. Abdelmoula, J. G´enin, The preparation
and thermodynamic properties of Fe(II)/Fe(III) hydroxide-
carbonate (green rust 1); Pourbaix diagram of
iron in
carbonate-containing aqueous media, Corros. Sci. 37 (12)
(1995) 2025 – 2041.

[83] S. J. Denholme, S. Demura, H. Okazaki, H. Hara, K. Deguchi,
M. Fujioka, T. Ozaki, T. Yamaguchi, H. Takeya, Y. Takano,
Evidence for non-metallic behaviour in tetragonal FeS (mack-
inawite), Mater. Chem. Phys. 147 (1–2) (2014) 50–56.

[84] S. J. Denholme, H. Okazaki, S. Demura, K. Deguchi, M. Fu-
jioka, T. Yamaguchi, H. Takeya, M. ElMassalami, H. Fujiwara,
T. Wakita, T. Yokoya, Y. Takano, Pressure-dependent mag-
netization and magnetoresistivity studies on tetragonal FeS
(mackinawite): revealing its intrinsic metallic character, Sci.
and Technol. of Adv. Mat. 15 (5) (2014) 055007.

[85] E. F. Bertaut, P. Burlet, J. Chappert, Sur l’absence d’ordre
magnetique dans la forme quadratique de FeS, Solid State
Commun. 3 (10) (1965) 335–338.

[86] K. D. Kwon, K. Refson, S. Bone, R. Qiao, W.-l. Yang, Z. Liu,
G. Sposito, Magnetic ordering in tetragonal FeS: Evidence
for strong itinerant spin ﬂuctuations, Phys. Rev. B 83 (2011)
064402.

[87] A. Subedi, L. Zhang, D. J. Singh, M. H. Du, Density func-
tional study of FeS, FeSe, and FeTe: Electronic structure,
magnetism, phonons, and superconductivity, Phys. Rev. B 78
(2008) 134514.

[88] J. Brgoch, G. J. Miller, Validation of interstitial iron and con-
sequences of nonstoichiometry in mackinawite (Fe1+xS), J.
Phys. Chem. A 116 (9) (2012) 2234–2243.

[89] A. P. Roberts, Magnetic properties of sedimentary greigite

(Fe3S4), Earth Planet. Sc. Lett. 134 (3–4) (1995) 227–236.

[90] M. H. Fang, H. M. Pham, B. Qian, T. J. Liu, E. K. Vehstedt,
Y. Liu, L. Spinu, Z. Q. Mao, Superconductivity close to mag-
netic instability in Fe(Se1−xTex)0.82, Phys. Rev. B 78 (2008)
224503.

[91] Y. Mizuguchi, F. Tomioka, S. Tsuda, T. Yamaguchi,
Y. Takano, Superconductivity in S-substituted FeTe, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 94 (2009) 012503.

[92] W. Bao, Y. Qui, Q. Huang, M. A. Green, P. Zajdel, M. R.
Fitzsimmons, M. Zhernenkov, S. Chang, M. Fang, B. Qian,
E. K. Vehstedt, J. Yang, H. M. Pham, L. Spinu, Z. Q. Mao,
Tunable (δπ,δπ)-type antiferromagnetic order in α-Fe(Te,Se)
superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009) 247001.

[93] P. Zajdel, P.-Y. Hsieh, E. E. Rodriguez, N. P. Butch, J. D.
Magill, J. Paglione, P. Zavalij, M. R. Suchomel, M. A. Green,
Phase separation and suppression of the structural and mag-
netic transitions in superconducting doped iron tellurides,
Fe1+xTe1−ySy, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132 (2010) 13000–13007.
[94] T. J. Liu, J. Hu, B. Qian, D. Fobes, Z. Q. Mao, W. Bao,
M. Reehuis, S. A. J. Kimber, K. Prokes, S. Matas, D. N.
Argyriou, A. Hiess, A. Rotaru, H. Pham, L. Spinu, Y. Qiu,
V. Thampy, A. T. Savici, J. A. Rodriguez, C. Broholm, From
(π,0) magnetic order to superconductivity with (π,π) magnetic
resonance in Fe1.02Te1−xSex, Nat. Mater. 9 (9) (2010) 716–
720.

[95] V. Bhatia, E. E. Rodriguez, N. P. Butch, J. Paglione,
M. A. Green, Phase separation and superconductivity in
Fe1+xTe0.5Se0.5, Chem. Commun. 47 (40) (2011) 11297.

[96] E. E. Rodriguez, P. Zavalij, P.-Y. Hsieh, M. A. Green, Iodine as
an oxidant in the topotactic deintercalation of interstitial iron
in Fe1+xTe, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132 (29) (2010) 10006–10008.

18

[97] E. E. Rodriguez, C. Stock, P.-Y. Hsieh, N. P. Butch,
J. Paglione, M. A. Green, Chemical control of interstitial iron
leading to superconductivity in Fe1+xTe0.7Se0.3, Chem. Sci.
2 (9) (2011) 1782.

[98] C. Stock, E. E. Rodriguez, M. Green, P. Zavalij, J. Rodriguez-
Rivera, Interstitial
iron tuning of the spin ﬂuctuations in
the nonsuperconducting parent phase Fe1+xTe, Phys. Rev. B
84 (4) (2011) 045124.

[99] E. E. Rodriguez, C. Stock, P. Zajdel, K. L. Krycka, C. F.
Majkrzak, P. Zavalij, M. A. Green, Magnetic-crystallographic
phase diagram of the superconducting parent compound
Fe1+xTe, Phys. Rev. B 84 (6) (2011) 064403.

[100] E. E. Rodriguez, D. A. Sokolov, C. Stock, M. A. Green,
O. Sobolev, J. A. Rodriguez-Rivera, H. Cao, A. Daoud-
Aladine, Magnetic and structural properties near the lifshitz
point in Fe1+xTe, Phys. Rev. B 88 (16) (2013) 165110.

[101] C. Stock, E. E. Rodriguez, O. Sobolev, J. A. Rodriguez-Rivera,
R. A. Ewings, J. W. Taylor, A. D. Christianson, M. A. Green,
Soft striped magnetic ﬂuctuations competing with supercon-
ductivity in Fe1+xTe, Phys. Rev. B 90 (12) (2014) 121113.

[102] J. Guo, S. Jin, G. Wang, S. Wang, K. Zhu, T. Zhou, M. He,
X. Chen, Superconductivity in the iron selenide KxFe2Se2
(0 ≤ x ≤ 1.0), Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010) 180520.

[103] M.-H. Fang, H.-D. Wang, C.-H. Dong, Z.-J. Li, C.-M. Feng,
J. Chen, H. Q. Yuan, Fe-based superconductivity with Tc = 31
K bordering an antiferromagnetic insulator in (Tl,K)FexSe2,
Europhys. Lett. 94 (2) (2011) 27009.

[104] R. Hu, K. Cho, H. Kim, H. Hodovanets, W. E. Straszheim,
M. A. Tanatar, R. Prozorov, S. L. Bud’ko, P. C. Can-
ﬁeld, Anisotropic magnetism,
london penetra-
tion depth and magneto-optical imaging of superconducting
K0.80Fe1.76Se2 single crystals, Supercond. Sci. Tech. 24 (6)
(2011) 065006.

resistivity,

[105] H. Lei, M. Abeykoon, E. S. Bozin, C. Petrovic, Spin-glass be-
havior of semiconducting KxFe2−yS2, Phys. Rev. B 83 (18)
(2011) 180503.

[106] H. Lei, M. Abeykoon, E. S. Bozin, K. Wang, J. B. Warren,
C. Petrovic, Phase diagram of KxFe2−ySe2−zSz and the sup-
pression of its superconducting state by an Fe2Se/S tetrahe-
dron distortion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107 (13) (2011) 137002.

[107] C.-H. Li, B. Shen, F. Han, X. Zhu, H.-H. Wen, Transport
properties and anisotropy of Rb1−xFe2−ySe2 single crystals,
Phys. Rev. B 83 (2011) 184521.

[108] A. F. Wang, J. J. Ying, Y. J. Yan, R. H. Liu, X. G. Luo, Z. Y.
Li, X. F. Wang, M. Zhang, G. J. Ye, P. Cheng, Z. J. Xiang,
X. H. Chen, Superconductivity at 32 K in single-crystalline
RbxFe2−ySe2, Phys. Rev. B 83 (2011) 060512.

[109] H.-D. Wang, C.-H. Dong, Z.-J. Li, Q.-H. Mao, S.-S. Zhu, C.-M.
Feng, H. Q. Yuan, M.-H. Fang, Superconductivity at 32 K and
anisotropy in Tl0.58Rb0.42Fe1.72Se2 crystals, Europhys. Lett.
93 (4) (2011) 47004.

[110] J. J. Ying, X. F. Wang, X. G. Luo, A. F. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. J.
Yan, Z. J. Xiang, R. H. Liu, P. Cheng, G. J. Ye, X. H. Chen,
Superconductivity and magnetic properties of single crystals of
K0.75Fe1.66Se2 and Cs0.81Fe1.61Se2, Phys. Rev. B 83 (2011)
212502.

[111] D. M. Wang, J. B. He, T.-L. Xia, G. F. Chen, Eﬀect of vary-
ing iron content on the transport properties of the potassium-
intercalated iron selenide KxFe2−ySe2, Phys. Rev. B 83 (2011)
132502.

[112] L. Li, Z. R. Yang, Z. T. Zhang, W. Tong, C. J. Zhang,
S. Tan, Y. H. Zhang, Coexistence of superconductivity and
magnetism in KxFe2−ySe2−zSz (z = 0,0.4), Phys. Rev. B 84
(2011) 174501.

[113] Liu, R. H., Luo, X. G., Zhang, M., Wang, A. F., Ying, J.
J., Wang, X. F., Yan, Y. J., Xiang, Z. J., Cheng, P., Ye, G.
J., Li, Z. Y., Chen, X. H., Coexistence of superconductivity
and antiferromagnetism in single crystals A0.8Fe2ySe2 (A =
K, Rb, Cs, Tl/K and Tl/Rb): Evidence from magnetization
and resistivity, Europhys. Lett. 94 (2) (2011) 27008.

[114] V. Y. Pomjakushin, D. V. Sheptyakov, E. V. Pomjakushina,

A. Krzton-Maziopa, K. Conder, D. Chernyshov, V. Svit-
lyk, Z. Shermadini, Iron-vacancy superstructure and possible
room-temperature antiferromagnetic order in superconducting
CsyFe2−xSe2, Phys. Rev. B 83 (2011) 144410.

[115] D. P. Shoemaker, D. Y. Chung, H. Claus, M. C. Francisco,
S. Avci, A. Llobet, M. G. Kanatzidis, Phase relations in
KxFe2−ySe2 and the structure of superconducting KxFe2Se2
via high-resolution synchrotron diﬀraction, Phys. Rev. B 86
(2012) 184511.

[116] X. Ding, D. Fang, Z. Wang, H. Yang, J. Liu, Q. Deng, G. Ma,
C. Meng, Y. Hu, H.-H. Wen, Inﬂuence of microstructure on
superconductivity in KxFe2ySe2 and evidence for a new parent
phase K2Fe7Se8, Nat. Commun. 4 (2013) 1897.

[117] P. Zavalij, W. Bao, X. F. Wang, J. J. Ying, X. H. Chen,
D. M. Wang, J. B. He, X. Q. Wang, G. F. Chen, P.-Y. Hsieh,
Q. Huang, M. A. Green, Structure of vacancy-ordered single-
crystalline superconducting potassium iron selenide, Phys.
Rev. B 83 (2011) 132509.

[118] W. Bao, Q.-Z. Huang, C. Gen-Fu, M. A. Green, W. Du-Ming,
H. Jun-Bao, Q. Yi-Ming, A novel large moment antiferromag-
netic order in K0.8Fe1.6Se2 superconductor, Chinese Phys.
Lett. 28 (8) (2011) 086104.

[119] V. Svitlyk, D. Chernyshov, E. Pomjakushina, A. Krzton-
Maziopa, K. Conder, V. Pomjakushin, V. Dmitriev, Tem-
perature and pressure evolution of the crystal structure of
Ax(Fe1ySe)2 (A = Cs, Rb, K) studied by synchrotron pow-
der diﬀraction, Inorg. Chem. 50 (21) (2011) 10703–10708.

[120] G. Wang, T. Ying, Y. Huang, S. Jin, L. Yan, H. Ding, X. Chen,
Growth of (NaxKy)FezSe2 crystals by chlorides ﬂux at low
temperatures, J. Cryst. Growth 405 (2014) 1–5.

[121] Y. Zhang, L. X. Yang, M. Xu, Z. R. Ye, F. Chen, C. He,
H. C. Xu, J. Jiang, B. P. Xie, J. J. Ying, X. F. Wang, X. H.
Chen, J. P. Hu, M. Matsunami, S. Kimura, D. L. Feng, Node-
less superconducting gap in AxFe2Se2 (A=K,Cs) revealed by
angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, Nat. Mater. 10 (4)
(2011) 273–277.

[122] M. Burrard-Lucas, D. G. Free, S. J. Sedlmaier, J. D. Wright,
S. J. Cassidy, Y. Hara, A. J. Corkett, T. Lancaster, P. J. Baker,
S. J. Blundell, S. J. Clarke, Enhancement of the supercon-
ducting transition temperature of FeSe by intercalation of a
molecular spacer layer, Nat. Mater. 12 (1) (2013) 15–19.

[123] E.-W. Scheidt, V. Hathwar, D. Schmitz, A. Dunbar,
W. Scherer, F. Mayr, V. Tsurkan, J. Deisenhofer, A. Loidl,
Superconductivity at Tc = 44 K in LixFe2Se2(NH3)y, Eur.
Phys. J. B 85 (8).

[124] Y. Tian-Ping, W. Gang, J. Shi-Feng, S. Shi-Jie, Z. Han,
Z. Ting-Ting, L. Xiao-Fang, W. Wan-Yan, C. Xiao-Long,
Exploring FeSe-based superconductors by liquid ammonia
method, Chinese Phys. B 22 (8) (2013) 087412.

[125] S. J. Sedlmaier, S. J. Cassidy, R. G. Morris, M. Drakopou-
los, C. Reinhard, S. J. Moorhouse, D. O’Hare, P. Manuel,
D. Khalyavin, S. J. Clarke, Ammonia-rich high-temperature
superconducting intercalates of iron selenide revealed through
time-resolved in situ X-ray and neutron diﬀraction, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 136 (2) (2014) 630–633.

[126] S. I. Shylin, V. Ksenofontov, S. J. Sedlmaier, S. J. Clarke, S. J.
Cassidy, G. Wortmann, S. A. Medvedev, C. Felser, Intercala-
tion eﬀect on hyperﬁne parameters of Fe in FeSe superconduc-
tor with Tc = 42K, Europhys. Lett. 109 (6) (2015) 67004.

[127] T. Ying, X. Chen, G. Wang, S. Jin, X. Lai, T. Zhou, H. Zhang,
S. Shen, W. Wang, Superconducting phases in potassium-
intercalated iron selenides, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135 (8) (2013)
2951–2954.

[128] T. P. Ying, X. L. Chen, G. Wang, S. F. Jin, T. T. Zhou, X. F.
Lai, H. Zhang, W. Y. Wang, Observation of superconductivity
at 30∼46K in AxFe2Se2 (A = Li, Na, Ba, Sr, Ca, Yb, and
Eu), Sci. Rep. 2 (2012) 426.

[129] L. Zheng, M. Izumi, Y. Sakai, R. Eguchi, H. Goto, Y. Tak-
abayashi, T. Kambe, T. Onji, S. Araki, T. C. Kobayashi,
J. Kim, A. Fujiwara, Y. Kubozono, Superconductivity in
(NH3)yCs0.4FeSe, Phys. Rev. B 88 (2013) 094521.

19

[146] X. F. Lu, N. Z. Wang, G. H. Zhang, X. G. Luo, Z. M.
Ma, B. Lei, F. Q. Huang, X. H. Chen, Superconductivity in
LiFeO2Fe2Se2 with anti-PbO-type spacer layers, Phys. Rev. B
89 (2014) 020507.

[147] C. Heil, L. Boeri, H. Sormann, W. von der Linden, M. Aich-
horn, Eﬀect of the iron valence in the two types of layers in
LiFeO2Fe2Se2, Phys. Rev. B 90 (2014) 165122.

[148] U. Pachmayr, F. Nitsche, H. Luetkens, S. Kamusella,
F. Br¨uckner, R. Sarkar, H.-H. Klauss, D. Johrendt, Co-
existence of 3d-ferromagnetism and superconductivity in
[(Li1xFex)OH](Fe1−yLiy)Se, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit. 54 (1)
(2015) 293–297.

[149] X. F. Lu, N. Z. Wang, H. Wu, Y. P. Wu, D. Zhao, X. Z.
Zeng, X. G. Luo, T. Wu, W. Bao, G. H. Zhang, F. Q. Huang,
Q. Z. Huang, X. H. Chen, Coexistence of superconductivity
and antiferromagnetism in (Li0.8Fe0.2)OHFeSe, Nat. Mater.
14 (3) (2015) 325–329.

[150] J. W. Lynn, X. Zhou, C. K. H. Borg, S. R. Saha, J. Paglione,
E. E. Rodriguez, Neutron investigation of the magnetic scat-
tering in an iron-based ferromagnetic superconductor, Phys.
Rev. B 92 (2015) 060510.

[151] X. Dong, K. Jin, D. Yuan, H. Zhou, J. Yuan, Y. Huang,
W. Hua, J. Sun, P. Zheng, W. Hu, Y. Mao, M. Ma, G. Zhang,
F. Zhou, Z. Zhao, (Li0.84Fe0.16)OHFe0.98Se superconduc-
tor: Ion-exchange synthesis of large single-crystal and highly
two-dimensional electron properties, Phys. Rev. B 92 (2015)
064515.

[152] H. Sun, D. N. Woodruﬀ, S. J. Cassidy, G. M. Allcroft, S. J.
Sedlmaier, A. L. Thompson, P. A. Bingham, S. D. Forder,
S. Cartenet, N. Mary, S. Ramos, F. R. Foronda, B. H.
Williams, X. Li, S. J. Blundell, S. J. Clarke, Soft chemical
control of superconductivity in lithium iron selenide hydrox-
ides Li1−xFex(OH)Fe1−ySe, Inorg. Chem. 54 (4) (2015) 1958–
1964.

[153] X. Zhou, C. K. H. Borg, J. W. Lynn, S. R. Saha,
J. Paglione, E. E. Rodriguez, The preparation and phase
diagrams of (7Li1−xFexOD)FeSe and (Li1−xFexOH)FeSe,
arxiv:1512.03399.

[154] X. Dong, H. Zhou, H. Yang, J. Yuan, K. Jin, F. Zhou, D. Yuan,
L. Wei, J. Li, X. Wang, G. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Phase diagram
of (Li1−xFex)OHFeSe: A bridge between iron selenide and
arsenide superconductors, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137 (1) (2015)
66–69.

[155] U. Pachmayr, D. Johrendt, [(Li0.8Fe0.2)OH]FeS and the ferro-
magnetic superconductors [(Li0.8Fe0.2)OH]Fe(S1−xSex) (0 <
x < 1), Chem. Commun. 51 (2015) 4689–4692.

[156] X. F. Lu, N. Z. Wang, X. G. Luo, G. H. Zhang, X. L. Gong,
F. Q. Huang, X. H. Chen, Superconductivity and phase dia-
gram of (Li0.8Fe0.2) OHFeSe1−xSx, Phys. Rev. B 90 (2014)
214520.

[157] V. G. Young, M. J. McKelvy, W. S. Glaunsinger, R. B. V.
Dreele, Structural investigation of lithium-ammonia intercala-
tion compounds of titanium sulﬁde (TiS2), Chem. Mater. 2 (1)
(1990) 75–81.

[158] J. T. Greenﬁeld, C. Pak, S. Kamali, K. Lee, K. Kovnir, Control
over connectivity and magnetism of tetrahedral FeSe2 chains
through coordination Fe-amine complexes, Chem. Commun.
51 (2015) 5355–5358.

[130] F. R. Foronda, S. Ghannadzadeh, S. J. Sedlmaier, J. D.
Wright, K. Burns, S. J. Cassidy, P. A. Goddard, T. Lancaster,
S. J. Clarke, S. J. Blundell, Robustness of superconductivity
to structural disorder in Sr0.3(NH2)y(NH3)1−yFe2Se2, Phys.
Rev. B 92 (2015) 134517.

[131] L. Zheng, X. Miao, Y. Sakai, M. Izumi, H. Goto, S. Nishiyama,
E. Uesugi, Y. Kasahara, Y. Iwasa, Y. Kubozono, Emergence
of multiple superconducting phases in (NH3)yMxFeSe (M: Na
and Li), Sci. Rep. 5 (2015) 12774.

[132] M.

Izumi, L. Zheng, Y. Sakai, H. Goto, M. Sakata,
Y. Nakamoto, H. L. T. Nguyen, T. Kagayama, K. Shimizu,
S. Araki, T. C. Kobayashi, T. Kambe, D. Gu, J. Guo, J. Liu,
Y. Li, L. Sun, K. Prassides, Y. Kubozono, Emergence of
double-dome superconductivity in ammoniated metal-doped
FeSe, Sci. Rep. 5 (2015) 9477–7.

[133] K. V. Yusenko, J. Sottmann, H. Emerich, W. A. Crichton,
L. Malavasi, S. Margadonna, Hyper-expanded interlayer sepa-
rations in superconducting barium intercalates of FeSe, Chem.
Commun. 51 (2015) 7112–7115.

[134] J. Guo, H. Lei, F. Hayashi, H. Hosono, Superconductivity and
phase instability of NH3-free Na-intercalated FeSe1−zSz, Nat.
Commun. 5.

[135] D. Guterding, H. O. Jeschke, P. J. Hirschfeld, R. Valent´ı, Uni-
ﬁed picture of the doping dependence of superconducting tran-
sition temperatures in alkali metal/ammonia intercalated FeSe,
Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015) 041112.

[136] Y. Sakai, L. Zheng, M. Izumi, K. Teranishi, R. Eguchi,
H. Goto, T. Onji, S. Araki, T. C. Kobayashi, Y. Kubozono,
Superconducting phases in (NH3)yMxFeSe1−zTez (M = Li,
Na, and Ca), Phys. Rev. B 89 (2014) 144509.

[137] H. Lei, J. Guo, F. Hayashi, H. Hosono, Emergence of mag-
netism and controlling factors of superconductivity in li/na-
ammonia cointercalated FeSe1−zTez, Phys. Rev. B 90 (2014)
214508.

[138] T. Hatakeda, T. Noji, S. Hosono, T. Kawamata, M. Kato,
Y. Koike, Resistive superconducting transition and eﬀects
of atmospheric exposure in the intercalation superconductor
Ax(C2H8N2)yFe2−zSe2 (A = Li, Na), J. Phys. Conf. Ser.
568 (2) (2014) 022032.

[139] M. M. Hrovat, P. Jegliˇc, M. Klanjˇsek, T. Hatakeda, T. Noji,
Y. Tanabe, T. Urata, K. K. Huynh, Y. Koike, K. Tanigaki,
D. Arˇcon, Enhanced superconducting transition temperature
in hyper-interlayer-expanded FeSe despite the suppressed elec-
tronic nematic order and spin ﬂuctuations, Phys. Rev. B 92 (9)
(2015) 094513.

[140] A. Krzton-Maziopa, E. V. Pomjakushina, V. Y. Pomjakushin,
F. von Rohr, A. Schilling, K. Conder, Synthesis of a new alkali
metal–organic solvent intercalated iron selenide superconduc-
tor with Tc ≈ 45 K, J. Phys. Condens. Mat. 24 (38) (2012)
382202.

[141] T. Hatakeda, T. Noji, T. Kawamata, M. Kato, Y. Koike,
New
superconductor
Lix(C2H8N2)yFe2−zSe2 with Tc = 45 K, J. Phys. Soc.
Jpn. 82 (12) (2013) 123705.

Li-ethylenediamine-intercalated

[142] S. Hosono, T. Noji, T. Hatakeda, T. Kawamata,
M. Kato, Y. Koike, New intercalation superconductor
Lix(C6H16N2)yFe2zSe2 with a very large interlayer-spacing
and Tc = 38 K, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 83 (11) (2014) 113704.

[143] T. Noji, T. Hatakeda, S. Hosono, T. Kawamata, M. Kato,
Y. Koike, Synthesis and post-annealing eﬀects of alkaline-
metal-ethylenediamine-intercalated
superconductors
Ax(C2H8N2)yFe2zSe2 (A = Li, Na) with Tc = 45 K,
Physica C 504 (2014) 8–11.

[144] F. Hayashi, H. Lei, J. Guo, H. Hosono, Modulation eﬀect of
interlayer spacing on the superconductivity of electron-doped
FeSe-based intercalates, Inorg. Chem. 54 (7) (2015) 3346–3351.
[145] C. Pak, S. Kamali, J. Pham, K. Lee, J. T. Greenﬁeld,
K. Kovnir, Chemical excision of tetrahedral FeSe2 chains from
the superconductor FeSe: Synthesis, crystal structure, and
magnetism of Fe3Se4(en)2, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135 (51) (2013)
19111–19114.

20

Figure 16: a.) The crystal model for the electronic structure calculations of Li0.5(NH2)0.5−2r(NH3)0.5+2rFe2Se2. b.) The Fermi surface of
the Li-ammonia-intercalated FeSe host for r = 0, which corresponds to a completely charge compensated Li(NH2) moieties, which do not
charge dope the FeSe host. c.) For r = 0.25, only ammonia is present with Li cations, which contribute 0.25 e− per Fe cation. Upon electron
doping, the corner-centered electron pockets grow, and the zone-centered hole pockets shrink. Reprinted ﬁgures with permission from Ref.
[135]. Copyright 2015 by the American Physical Society.

21

