6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
7

 

 
 
]
t
f
o
s
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
7
3
3
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Swarming in viscous ﬂuids: three-dimensional patterns in swimmer- and force-induced

ﬂows

Yao-Li Chuang

Dept. of Mathematics, California State University, Northridge, Northridge, CA 91330

Depts. of Biomathematics & Mathematics, UCLA, CA 90095-1766

Tom Chou

Dept. of Mathematics, California State University, Northridge, Northridge, CA 91330

Maria R. D’Orsogna

We derive from ﬁrst principles a three-dimensional theory of self-propelled particle swarming in a
viscous ﬂuid environment. Our model predicts emergent collective behavior that depends critically
on ﬂuid opacity, mechanism of self-propulsion, and type of particle-particle interaction. In “clear
ﬂuids” swimmers have full knowledge of their surroundings and can adjust their velocities with
respect to the lab frame, while in “opaque ﬂuids,” they control their velocities only in relation to
the local ﬂuid ﬂow. We also show that “social” interactions that aﬀect only a particle’s propensity
to swim towards or away from neighbors induces a ﬂow ﬁeld that is qualitatively diﬀerent from
the long-ranged ﬂow ﬁelds generated by direct “physical” interactions. The latter can be short-
ranged but lead to much longer-ranged ﬂuid-mediated hydrodynamic forces, eﬀectively amplifying
the range over which particles interact. These diﬀerent ﬂuid ﬂows conspire to profoundly aﬀect
swarm morphology, kinetically stabilizing or destabilizing swarm conﬁgurations that would arise in
the absence of ﬂuid. Depending upon the overall interaction potential, the mechanism of swim-
ming (e.g., pushers or pullers), and the degree of ﬂuid opaqueness, we discover a number of new
collective three-dimensional patterns including ﬂocks with prolate or oblate shapes, recirculating
peloton-like structures, and jet-like ﬂuid ﬂows that entrain particles mediating their escape from
the center of mill-like structures. Our results reveal how the interplay among general physical ele-
ments inﬂuence ﬂuid-mediated interactions and the self-organization, mobility, and stability of new
three-dimensional swarms and suggest how they might be used to kinetically control their collective
behavior.

PACS numbers: 47.10.ad,45.70.Qj,83.10.Rs,89.75.Fb

The collective behavior of self-propelled agents in natu-
ral and artiﬁcial systems has been extensively studied
[1–22]. Many of the lessons learned from experimen-
tal and theoretical work conducted on organisms as di-
verse as bacteria, ants, locusts, and birds [23–36] have
been successfully applied to engineered robotic systems
to help frame decentralized control strategies through ad-
hoc algorithms [37–44]. In most mathematical “swarm-
ing” models, particles are assumed to be self-driven by in-
ternal mechanisms that impart a characteristic speed. A
pairwise short-ranged repulsion and a long-ranged decay-
ing attraction are typically employed as the most realistic
choices when modeling aggregating particles [9, 11, 45].
The interplay between self-propulsion, particle interac-
tions, initial conditions, and number of particles is key
in determining the large scale patterns that dynamically
arise. In two dimensions, rotating mills and translating
ﬂocks are often observed, the latter conﬁguration also
arising in three dimensions [9, 10, 17, 19, 46, 47]. It is
possible to classify swarm morphology in terms of inter-
action strength and length scales, as shown for particles
coupled via conserved forces derived from the Morse po-
tential [17, 19]. Externally applied potentials and noise
can be also used to trigger transitions between coherent
and disordered structures [3, 46, 47].

Although diﬀerent rules for the characteristic speed
have been proposed [9, 10, 17], most studies so far have
focused on self-propelled agents in “vacuum”, ignoring
the medium in which nearly all real systems operate.
One exception is the literature on swimmers wherein
models have been developed for a single or a few organ-
isms that propel themselves in viscous [48–58] and non-
Newtonian ﬂuids [57, 59–67].
In particular, swarming
hydrodynamic theories have been derived wherein swim-
mer densities with or without ﬂuid ﬂows are described as
continuous ﬁelds [4, 19, 68, 69]. These “two ﬂuid” mod-
els however may not always display the rich features ob-
served when particles retain their discreteness, especially
in terms of ﬁnite-sized swarm morphology, stability and
self-organization.

To eﬃciently study the collective dynamics of self-
propelled particles in a ﬂuid medium we derive a mi-
croscopic three-dimensional “agent-based” kinetic the-
ory that incorporates hydrodynamic interactions between
particles. A possible starting point would be to assume
that the ﬂuid medium leads to direct coupling between
particle velocities and build this eﬀect into existing mod-
els using, for example, the Cucker-Smale velocity match-
ing mechanism. Here, particle i is subject to an addi-
tional force due to the presence of particle j, given by

vj − vi and modulated by a distance-dependent prefactor
g(|ri − rj|) [70–72]. Because of its simple mathematical
form, Cucker-Smale type interactions have been used ex-
tensively to study swarming, with coherent morphologies
arising depending on the form of g(|ri − rj|). Although
not explicitly meant to model ﬂuid-mediated couplings,
a heuristic Cucker-Smale-type interaction could be con-
structed by choosing an appropriate form for g(|ri − rj|)
or diﬀerent powers of |vi−vj|. Whether such an approach
would be consistent with more microscopic derivation
of ﬂuid-mediated particle-particle interactions is however
unclear.

The goal of this paper is to derive from ﬁrst princi-
ples a theory of particle swarming in ﬂuids and to un-
derstand the ways viscous ﬂows can arise and aﬀect par-
ticle dynamics and collective behavior.
In order to in-
corporate ﬂuid couplings into discrete particle models,
one must ﬁrst identify the physical origin of the inter-
actions between particles. In typical models of swarm-
ing [9, 12, 16, 17, 20, 35], the propensity of agents to
self-propel themselves towards or away from others is
modulated by an eﬀective “social” interaction potential.
When immersed in low-Reynolds number Newtonian ﬂu-
ids, particle self-propulsion is force-free. Here, the ﬂuid
ﬂows arising from swimming or squirming particles can
be decomposed in terms of force dipoles or higher or-
der force distributions leading to velocities that decay
away from the swimmer as 1/rn, n ≥ 2 [57, 73–77]. The
sign and amplitude of this self-propulsion-induced ﬂow
ﬁeld depend on the speciﬁc details of the “stroke” of the
swimmer [55, 56, 58, 68, 78].

A qualitatively diﬀerent ﬂow arises if the potential is
associated with a true “physical” force, arising from, say,
electrostatic molecular, magnetic, or gravitational inter-
actions. These physical interactions between swimmers
impart an external body force on each of them, ulti-
mately leading to a ﬂow ﬁeld that decays as 1/r [79–81].
Although the physical forces between particles may be
short-ranged, they can be transmitted to the surrounding
ﬂuid [80, 82–86], collectively generating a much longer-
ranged ﬂow ﬁeld, and eﬀectively extending the range of
interactions. Thus, the resulting 1/r Oseen ﬂow ﬁeld can
be even longer ranged than the 1/rn ﬂows arising from
self-propulsion.

The diﬀerent origins of ﬂuid ﬂow can be most easily
understood by considering a single particle moving un-
der a constant chemical gradient or passively sedimenting
under a gravitational potential. A chemoattractant can
be represented by a “social” interaction as it only directs
a force-free self-propeller towards a particular velocity.
A body force resulting from e.g., gravity is a physical
force since it ultimately imparts a force on the ﬂuid. In
both cases, particle trajectories are identical and can be
described by motion under a linear eﬀective potential.
However, within a ﬂuid medium, a chemotactic social in-
teraction generates a diﬀerent ﬂow from that of sedimen-
tation under a physical interaction. As we shall see, the
qualitatively diﬀerent ﬂuid ﬂows arising from social and

2

physical interactions also lead to qualitatively diﬀerent
collective particle behavior. How the details of particle-
particle interactions are modeled and interpreted thus
becomes a critical element in the development and ap-
plication of hydrodynamically coupled particle swarming
theories.

Finally, we also consider two diﬀerent types of ﬂuids:
“clear” and “opaque.” In a clear ﬂuid, particles can “see”
ﬁxed markers and have direct knowledge of their motion
in reference to the rest frame. Their absolute velocities
can be directly controlled by their internal self-propelling
mechanism. Here, the surrounding ﬂuid simply imparts
an additional drag force. In the richer and more inter-
esting case of an opaque ﬂuid, particles only have near-
ﬁeld vision and their velocities can be governed only in
relation to the surrounding ﬂow. For both social and
physical interactions, we systematically derive the eﬀec-
tive particle-particle coupling arising from viscous Stokes
ﬂows and investigate their eﬀects on coherent three di-
mensional swarming structures. These hydrodynamic in-
teractions strongly aﬀect collective dynamics and give
rise to surprising new patterns such as distorted ﬂocks,
pelotons, core-ﬁlled mills, and mills that perpetually dis-
band and reform.

Fluid-coupled equations of motion

We consider a system of N identical particles with mass
m = 1. We can write the equations of motion for particle
i at position ri(t) and lab-frame velocity vi(t) as follows

˙ri = vi,
˙vi = −γ(vi − u(ri)) + fM (vi, u(ri)) + fi

(1)

where u(ri) is the lab-frame ﬂuid velocity generated at
position ri by the motion of all other particles in the ab-
sence of particle i. In Eq. 1 the drag force −γ(vi − u(ri))
on particle i is proportional to its velocity relative to that
of the ﬂuid u(ri). Without loss of generality, we assume
spherical particles with a small radius a and drag coeﬃ-
cient γ = 6πηa. The force term fM(vi, u(ri)) represents
the self-propelling motility force on particle i, which can
depend both on vi and u(ri).
It is usually chosen to
have non-trivial zeros that identify characteristic speeds
of motion. For the purposes of this paper, we adopt a
modiﬁed friction form given by

fM (vi, u(ri)) = (α − β|vi − λu(ri)|2),

(2)

where the parameters α and β quantify self accelera-
tion and deceleration, respectively. Eq. 2 with λ = 0
yields the classical Rayleigh-Helmholtz friction that has
been extensively used to model self-propulsion in vac-
uum [17, 19, 47, 87]. In this case, the natural character-
istic speed arises by setting fM to zero and is given by

|vi| =pα/β. We introduce the “perception coeﬃcient”

λ in Eq. 2 to represent how well particles sense their en-
vironment once they are immersed in a ﬂuid. The choice
λ = 0 represents the case where swimmers can determine
their lab frame velocities vi as if they were in a vacuum
and adjust their speed towards the characteristic velocity

pα/β. Thus λ = 0 indicates a “clear” ﬂuid where any

eﬀects on particle movement imparted to particles by the
ﬂuid will arise only through drag forces. Conversely, the
choice λ = 1 indicates that swimmers have no knowledge
of the lab frame and can determine their motion only in
relation to the local ﬂuid. As a result, swimmers will reg-
ulate their relative velocity vi − u(ri) and not their lab
frame velocity vi toward the characteristic speed. This
is the “opaque” ﬂuid limit. Other values 0 < λ < 1 yield
intermediate regimes. Note that the Rayleigh-Helmholtz
friction is not the only option for modeling swarming self
propulsion. An in-depth discussion about the eﬀects of
choosing diﬀerent functional forms for self propulsion can
be found in [87]; the diﬀerence is particularly profound
in the presence of noise. Finally

fi = −∇iXj6=i

Φ(|ri − rj|)

(3)

is the particle-particle interaction force on particle i,
where ∇i ≡ ∂/∂ri and Φ(|ri − rj|) is the direct pair-
wise interaction potential. While any mathematical form
for Φ(|(ri − rj)| can be used, to be consistent and com-
parative with previous literature, we use the commonly
studied Morse potential [9], given by the superposition
of repulsive and attractive components

Φ (|ri − rj|) = Cre− |ri −rj|

ℓr − Cae− |ri−rj|

ℓa

.

(4)

The coeﬃcients Ca and Cr in Eq. 4 deﬁne the strengths
of the attractive and repulsive potentials, respectively
and ℓa and ℓr specify their eﬀective lengths of interac-
tion. Using this potential, the ﬂuid-free swarming prob-
lem (Eq. 1 with u = 0) has been very well studied es-
pecially in one and two dimensions [9, 17, 19, 20, 88].
Generally, particles are subject to two tendencies: chang-
ing their separations to minimize Φ and adjusting their
velocities to match the characteristic speed. Depending
on initial conditions, dimensionality, number of particles
and/or parameter choices, both tendencies can be simul-
taneously satisﬁed, leading, for example, to rigidly trans-
lating ﬂocks. If only one is satisﬁed, mills, rigid disks, or
random motion arise [19].

For the ﬂuid-coupled equations of motion what now
remains is to specify the source of u. To model u we
note that in classical swarming models the potential Φ
is usually a mathematical representation of socially de-
rived interactions. In this scenario, the only actual force
exerted by the swimming particles on the ﬂuid is via
their self propulsion. In this case, the ﬂuid disturbance
u ≡ us depends only on the microscopic details of the
swimming mechanism and decays as 1/rn, n ≥ 2 [57, 73–
77]. In this paper we assume an eﬀective stroke-averaged

3

self-propulsion whereby the swimmer’s period-averaged
strokes are described as a force dipole acting on the ﬂuid
leading to

us(r) =Xj

Gvj
R2

j (cid:20)3(cid:16) ˆRj · ˆvj(cid:17)2

− 1(cid:21) ˆRj,

(5)

where Rj ≡ (r − rj), Rj ≡ |Rj|, ˆRj ≡ Rj/Rj, vj ≡
|vj|, and ˆvj ≡ vj /vj [68]. Here, the social potential
Φ inﬂuences us(r) through vj which obeys Eq. 1. The
lumped parameter G in Eq. 5 depends on the details of
swimmer geometry such as its length and longitudinal
mass distribution, and carries units of a length squared.
For G > 0, the orientation of the force dipole is parallel to
the swimmer’s velocity, describing a propelling swimmer
or a “pusher”; conversely, G < 0 denotes a contractile
swimmer or a “puller.” This pusher/puller model of self-
propulsion in viscous Stokes ﬂow has been often used in
models of swimmers.

Now, if a true action-at-a-distance physical force arises
between particles, the latter will experience body forces
during the course of their dynamics.
In addition to a
self-generated ﬂow ﬁeld us(r), such particles will transfer
their body force to the ﬂuid resulting in an additional ﬂow
ﬁeld up(r). For incompressible low-Reynolds number ﬂu-
ids, we can ﬁnd up(r) by solving, in the quasi-static limit,
Stokes’ equation with an added interaction-mediated

force density F (r) ≈ −PiPj6=i δ (r − ri)∇iΦ(ri − rj):

ρ

∂up
∂t

= η∇2up − ∇p + F(r).

(6)

Here, ρ and η are the density and the dynamic viscosity
of the ﬂuid, p is the local pressure, and δ (x) is the Dirac
delta-function. In three dimensions, the analytic solution
to up(r) is expressed in terms of the static Oseen tensor

up(r) = −Xj Xk6=j

hI + ˆRj ˆRji

8πηRj

· ∇jΦ(|rj − rk|),

(7)

where I is the identity matrix. Note that in contrast to
the 1/R2 dependence of us(r) in Eq. 5, up(r) is longer
ranged, decaying as 1/R. Also, note that while we neglect
the inertia of the ﬂuid in Eq. 6 we retain particle inertia
in Eq. 1, implicitly assuming that particle mass density
is much higher than ﬂuid mass density.

In general, self-propulsion in a Stokes ﬂuid will only
generate us(r). The longer-ranged ﬂow up(r) arises only
if the interaction potential is associated with a physical
interaction that imparts a body force on particles and
ﬂuid. In this case, the linearity of the Stokes ﬂuid dy-
namics allows us to decompose u(r) ≡ us(r) + χup(r),
where us(r) and up(r) are given by Eqs. 5 and 7, respec-
tively. To separate the eﬀects of the diﬀerent ﬂow ﬁelds,
we introduce the toggle χ = 0 or 1 in the deﬁnition of u
which allows us to switch oﬀ the physical force-induced

ﬂow ﬁeld up (by setting χ = 0). To switch oﬀ swimmer-
induced ﬂows us we can set G = 0 and χ = 1. The
inclusion of both ﬂows requires a non-zero G and χ = 1.
In the remainder of this paper, we investigate swarm-
ing coupled to viscous Stokes ﬂows. Inertial ﬂows given
by the complete time-dependent solution of Eq. 6 can be
expressed in terms of a dynamic Oseen tensor as shown in
the Appendix. In the extreme limit of ν → 0, either the
ﬂuid inertia is too large (ρ → ∞) to induce any ﬂow ﬁeld,
or the ﬂuid becomes inviscid (η → 0). For inviscid ﬂuids
the induced hydrodynamic interaction can be described
as a potential ﬂow and is dipolar, which is even shorter-
ranged than the force-dipole-generated us(r) considered
in this paper. For completeness, we derive interaction-
induced inviscid ﬂuid ﬂow also in the Appendix.

√αβ
m

Henceforth, we non-dimensionalize space and time ac-
cording to r′ =
m t. All other dimension-
less model parameters are given in the Appendix. We
also drop the prime superscripts and deﬁne the full ﬂuid-
coupled swarming model as ˙ri = vi(t) and

r and t′ = α

4

been explored. For the interaction parameters chosen
above, possible coherent states in two-dimensional in-
clude a ﬂock, a single rotating mill, and two counter-
rotating mills [90]. In three dimensions we do not ﬁnd
counter-rotating mills: only simple mills and spherically
shaped ﬂocks can arise from random initial conditions, as
shown in Fig. 1. The absence of counter-rotating mills in
three dimensions can be easily understood. In two dimen-
sions there are only two possible rotating directions, but
in three dimensions there are an inﬁnite number of rota-
tional axes. Reversing rotating directions in two dimen-
sions requires the angular momentum to change signs,
but in three dimensions the rotational axes of a sub-mill
can continuously evolve along the third dimension until
all particles eventually come to rotate about a common
axis. This picture is consistent with diﬀusion of angular
momentum in three-dimensional swarms [46].

˙vi =(cid:16)1 − |vi − λu(ri)|2(cid:17) (vi − λu(ri))
− γ(vi − u(ri)) − ∇iXj6=i

Φ(|ri − rj|).

(8)

We numerically solve Eq. 8 with us(r) given by Eq. 5 and
up(r) given by Eq. 7 using the fourth-order Runge-Kutta
method with an adaptable time-step [89]. Since both
us(r) and up(r) depend on particle positions, they are
updated at each time step. Initial conditions are deﬁned
by still particles placed at uniformly distributed random
positions within a 3ℓ3
a box which is removed after the
start of the simulation. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, we
set dimensionless Morse-potential parameters to Ca =
1.0, ℓa = 2.0, Cr = 2.0, ℓr = 1.0, representing long-
ranged attraction and short-ranged repulsion [8, 9, 19].
The eﬀects of varying potential parameters Cr,a and ℓr,a
are discussed in the Appendix.

Finally, to counter the collapsing tendency between
particle pairs due to the 1/R2 dependence of us(r), we
add to Φ(|ri − rj|) an extremely short-ranged diverging
repulsive potential ∼ 1/R12 to keep particles reasonably
apart. We numerically investigate our model for diﬀerent
values of dynamic viscosity η and swimmer propulsion
strength G.

Results and Discussion

Fluid-free limit – For reference, we ﬁrst consider λ =
γ = 0 where particle and ﬂuid dynamics decouple. Eqs. 1
and 4 now reduce to the three-dimensional version of the
well-studied two-dimensional swarming model presented
in [17, 19]. While studies of three-dimensional swarms
have previously been examined [47], the full dynamics
including the emergence of transient structures have not

FIG. 1: Snapshots of typical three-dimensional swarm pat-
terns for 100 particles. (a) a rotational mill, and (b) a trans-
lating ﬂock.

Most notably, despite being the dominant steady state
in two dimensions, the single rotating mill shown in
Fig. 1(a) is not a true three-dimensional steady state.
Although particles may settle into identiﬁable mills, ex-
tensive simulations performed on a variety of initial con-
ditions show that a mill in three dimensions will eventu-
ally acquire a non-zero center-of-mass velocity and evolve
into a ﬂock as shown in Fig. 1(b). In Fig. 2(a), we plot the
state indicator Is deﬁned in the Appendix to character-
ize the swarming pattern. A value of Is = +1 represents
a perfect unidirectional ﬂock, Is = 0 a random collec-
tion of particles, and Is = −1 a perfect rotating mill.
The red curve in Fig. 2(a) shows particles settling into a
transient mill for a lengthy period of time before evolving
into a translating ﬂock; in contrast, the blue curve shows
particles forming a ﬂock without ﬁrst assembling into a
long-lived mill.
In the latter case Is can ﬁrst decrease
before rising back to Is ≈ 1.
To understand how mills and ﬂocks develop in three
dimensions, in Fig. 2(b) we plot the evolution of the to-
tal interaction energy 1
the two simulations in Fig. 2(a), showing a lower total en-
ergy for the ﬂock state. Note that when assembled into
ﬂocks, particles settle into positions that correspond to
the global minimum of the total potential energy. In con-
trast, when assembled into mills, only a local minimum

2Pi,j Φ (|ri − rj|) associated with

shapes. These deformed ﬂocks are depicted in Fig. 3 for
an opaque ﬂuid.

5

FIG. 2: (a) Three-dimensional simulations of Eqs. 1 without
hydrodynamic interactions. The classiﬁer of swarming pat-
terns Is is deﬁned in the Appendix. The red curve denotes a
swarm that ﬁrst forms a mill before turning into a uniformly
translating ﬂock, while the blue curve shows particles evolving
into a ﬂock without ﬁrst forming a mill. We empirically set
thresholds Is ≤ −0.85 (green) to signal mills and Is ≥ 0.85
(magenta) to identify migrating ﬂocks. We require a swarm
to maintain the Is value in either the two ranges for a period
of 100 time units or more to be classiﬁed as a mill or ﬂock.
This criterion corresponds roughly to the time for a particle
to circle a mill at least 10 times. (b) The total interaction
energy Pi,j Φ (|ri − rj |) /2 corresponding to the two simula-
tions above. The translating ﬂock has a lower interaction
energy than the mill.

of the total potential energy is reached. In this case the
net interaction force on each particle provides the cen-
tripetal force necessary to sustain the rotational move-
ment. Although its energy is lower, for particles starting
from random initial conditions, a ﬂock may be kinetically
less accessible than a mill. A mill is a state of local co-
herence, where particles match velocities with their close
neighbors only, as opposed to a ﬂock where global co-
herence arises from all particles moving in unison. As a
result, three-dimensional mills often emerge ﬁrst out of
a randomized conﬁguration. For the same reason, two-
dimensional mills are not only stable at steady-state, but
also dominate over ﬂocks. However, three-dimensional
mills are unstable since they slowly acquire a transla-
tional momentum along the rotational axis aligned with
the third direction. As particle velocities gradually be-
come aligned with this translational momentum, the ro-
tational unit turns into a spiral with continuously re-
duced angular speed, ﬁnally settling into an equilibrium
lattice formation migrating at a uniform velocity. This
eﬀect cannot arise in two dimensions.

Swimmer-induced ﬂuid ﬂow us – We now investi-
gate how patterns mediated by the us ﬂow ﬁeld alone
diﬀer from those described in the ﬂuid-free case above.
In general, the extensional ﬂow generated in the reference
frame of a puller (G < 0) converges along the direction
of motion and diverges along the perpendicular direc-
tion. Pusher-generated (G > 0) extensional ﬂows move
in the opposite direction, diverging along the direction
of motion and converging laterally. As a result, pullers
tend to ﬂatten existing ﬂocks into oblate shapes while
pushers tend to longitudinally stretch them into prolate

FIG. 3: Snaphots of 50-particle simulations showing the de-
formation of three-dimensional ﬂocks by interacting with us
arising in opaque ﬂuids (λ = 1) when up is absent. (a) For
reference, we show the stable spherically shaped ﬂock arising
in the ﬂuid-free case. This stable spherical ﬂock is used as the
initial conditions for both of the other two simulations before
ﬂuid interactions from us(r) are switched on. (b) A transient
prolate ﬂock forms when G = 0.15 (pusher). (c) A transient
oblate ﬂock arises when G = −0.15 (puller). The red arrows
indicate the direction of us in the frame of the ﬂock center-of-
mass. In these simulations, the prolate ﬂock is transitioning
into a recirculating “peloton,” while the oblate ﬂock is transi-
tioning into a random blob. These deformed ﬂocks are stable
only if |G| is small, but with much less distortion. The emer-
gence of pelotons and random blobs is described below.

In clear ﬂuids (λ = 0), the energy of a swarm dissi-
pates signiﬁcantly through the ﬂuid drag term, slowing
particle motion and reducing us. For very large dimen-
sionless drag γ ≫ 1, the motion of both pushers and
pullers is arrested and us → 0. For intermediate γ, push-
ers align into prolate ﬂocks and move at a reduced speed
of approximately √1 − γ; pullers also move at a reduced
speed, but mostly randomly without any spatial order.
The γ → 0 limit is the ﬂuid-free case.
We observe a more diverse set of swarm morphologies
in opaque ﬂuids (λ = 1) where the self propulsion term
fM imparts suﬃcient energy to the particles to keep them
moving at their preferred self-propulsion speed relative to
the background ﬂow. In this case, the oblate/prolate de-
formation of ﬂocks is more pronounced than in clear ﬂu-
ids. In Fig. 4(a) we show the time evolution of 50 particles
for |G| = 0.096. The red (blue) curves represent pullers
(pushers). For reference we also plot the ﬂuid-free case
(G = 0) in the green curve. For such small G, pusher-
generated ﬂows suppress the transient milling seen in the
ﬂuid-free case leading to a stable prolate ﬂock. However,
unlike the ﬂuid-free case, pusher-generated ﬂocks are not
perfect and Is ≈ 0.75 < 1. Here, the spatial-temporal
variations in us impart ﬂuctuations to the direction of
particle movement, preventing the formation of a per-
fectly aligned ﬂock. Puller-generated ﬂows, on the other
hand, allow for the formation of permanent mills: the
mill-to-ﬂock transition that occurs in the ﬂuid-free case
is blocked by the ﬂuctuating ﬂow ﬁeld allowing mills to
be long-lived.

Since the ﬂow disturbance may be considered as a form

of noise, our ﬁndings are consistent with previous reports
of noise-induced ﬂock-to-mill transitions in three dimen-
sions [46, 87]. The latter show hysteresis in swarm mor-
phology as a function of the noise amplitude, a feature
which we also observe with pullers as the thresholds in G
between a ﬂock and random blob depend on whether G is
increased or decreased. In addition, we note that distur-
bances induced by us lead to particles occasionally devi-
ating from their circulating trajectories and to a striking
intermittent disintegration and re-assembling of mills, a
phenomenon that has not been reported in noise-induced
ﬂock-to-mill transitions. In Fig. 4(b), we conduct a more
thorough investigation of long-time swarming patterns by
varying |G| for pullers (blue) and pushers (red). Push-
ers assemble into ﬂocks as G increases, but patterns are
increasingly disturbed by us, leading to decreased Is.

1

(a)

0.5

IS

0

-0.5

1

0.5

uid-free

pushers
pullers

<IS>

0

(b)

pullers

pushers

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2 0.25

|G|

-0.5

-1

0

-1

0

2000

4000

time

6000

FIG. 4:
(a) Time-dependent swarm morphologies starting
from random initial conditions. Pusher swarms (G = 0.096,
blue curve), evolve directly towards a ﬂuctuating ﬂock, while
puller swarms (G = −0.096, red curve) assemble into rotating
mills; the latter persists indeﬁnitely but is intermittently in-
terrupted by bursts of randomness. For comparison, we also
plot the ﬂuid-free case (G = 0, green curve), where particles
transiently form a mill before eventually assembling into a
ﬂock. (b) Long-time formations (t > 2000) of pushers and
pullers with diﬀerent G values. The indicator hIsi is aver-
aged for all time steps between 2000 ≤ t ≤ 3000 and over
ten simulations. For pullers, persistent mills only occur ap-
proximately in the range of 0.07 ≤ G ≤ 0.1; below this range,
ﬂocks dominate, similarly to the ﬂuid-free case; above this
range, the swarm is in a permanent random state. Pushers
always assemble into ﬂocks; for large G, however, the ﬂow
ﬁeld induces a peloton-like movement within the ﬂock, which
pushes Is towards zero.

For larger G, us is strong enough to induce a novel
“peloton”-like movement, where leading particles contin-
uously recirculate toward the back end of the ﬂock, as
depicted in Fig. 5. When assembled into a peloton, Is
drops to nearly zero, although the majority of particles
are still aligned. Pullers on the other hand tend to keep
milling as |G| increases rather than transition to a ﬂock.
Here Is ≈ −1. For very large values of |G| the strong
ﬂow ﬁeld prevents even mills from forming, and parti-
cle movement remains random. Overall, our results sug-
gest that pusher-generated ﬂow ﬁelds generally promote
particle velocity ordering along a common direction but

6

FIG. 5: A snapshot of a peloton-like formation for G = 0.15.
Particle positions and velocities are represented by the green
arrows, while the blue arrows connected by the red-dashed
line track one particular particle for 15 steps prior to the
snapshot. The selected blue particle is initially near the lead-
ing edge of the ﬂock, gets swept aside by the surrounding ﬂow
ﬁeld, and ﬁnally rejoins the ﬂock near the back end.

that an orthogonal component of the ﬂow prevents per-
fect alignment for small G and ultimately to particles
recirculating for large G. Puller-generated ﬂow ﬁelds in-
stead introduce more randomness preventing the mill to
ﬂock transition for small |G| and completely preventing
a mill from forming for larger |G|.
Physical force-induced ﬂuid ﬂow up – We now ex-
amine the eﬀects of up on swarm dynamics by setting
G = 0 and analyze how patterns diﬀer when compared
to those arising in the ﬂuid-free case. For a clear ﬂuid
(λ = 0) our simulations reveal that at steady state par-
ticles either stop or assemble into a ﬂock. The result-
ing speed can be evaluated by balancing self-propulsion

with drag, yielding a dimensionless ﬂock speed √1 − γ
for γ ≤ 1 and 0 for γ > 1, which are both conﬁrmed
by simulations. In physical units, the friction threshold
for immobilizing a ﬂock is 6πηa > α. Hydrodynamic
coupling in a viscous clear ﬂuid simply slows or stops
translational ﬂock motion. Note that in the a → 0 point-
particle limit, drag is negligible and swarming in a clear
ﬂuid reduces to the canonical ﬂuid-free problem.

As with swimmer-induced ﬂows, the opaque ﬂuid case
is much more interesting. Here steady-state conﬁgura-
tions depend nontrivially on the dimensionless viscosity
η (deﬁned in the Appendix) which measures ratio of the
ﬂuid momentum relaxation time to the time scale of the
particle movement, thus representing an eﬀective Deb-
orah number for the problem [64, 91]. The parameter
η appears in Eq. 8 through up(r) in Eq. 7 and through
γ = 6πηa. We assume small particles and neglect this
latter drag interaction. As can be seen from Eq. 7, up
decreases with η so that as η increases the dynamics re-
sembles that of the ﬂuid-free case. Indeed, we ﬁnd that
for η > 1.2, ﬂocks are the only stable steady-state solu-
tion for all random initial conditions used, similar to the
ﬂuid-free case. However, transient mills can form before
the permanent ﬂock is assembled, with the probability of
transient mills occurring decreasing with η. As shown in
Fig. 6(a), for η = 100 particles form mills before ﬁnally

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
p
 
l
l
i

m

 
t
n
e
i
s
n
a
r
T

(a)

0.5

0.4

(b)

low    regime 

0.3

high    regime 

0.2

1

10

100

0.1

1

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
p
 
k
c
o
l

F

 

7

FIG. 6: Swarm patterns in an opaque ﬂuid as η is varied. Each
point is an average over 100 simulations each initialized with
random conditions. (a) Probability of transient mill formation
for η ≥ 1.2. Although in this high viscosity regime all initial
conditions lead to uniformly translating ﬂocks, the probability
of ﬁrst forming a transient mill decreases with decreasing η.
(b) Probability of permanent ﬂock formation for η ≤ 2. In this
low viscosity regime steady-state ﬂocks are no longer the only
ﬁnal outcome when η < 1.2. Other possible conﬁgurations
are mill-like structures and random blobs.

FIG. 7: (a) A stable mill-like formation of 100 particles in-
duced by hydrodynamic interactions in an opaque ﬂuid with
η = 0.7. The gray shading delineates a disordered core that
grows as η is decreased. (b) A transient mill of 250 particles
with an empty core in an opaque ﬂuid. Such transient mills
may arise when η > 1.2. The induced ﬂow ﬁeld is indicated
by the red arrows and converges toward the central core along
the plane of rotation. To balance the inﬂux, a jet along the
axis of rotation ejects the ﬂuid from the central core. The jet
is normal to the page and depicted by red arrow in panel (b).

settling into ﬂocks for about 50% of the random initial
conditions used; this ratio drops to about 20% at η = 1.2.
Below η ≈ 1.2, swarms experience a qualitative change
in behavior and ﬂocks are no longer the only long-lived
steady-state. Fig. 6(b) shows that the probability of ﬁnal
ﬂock formation decreases from unity at η ≈ 1.2 to zero
at η ≈ 0.1. In this intermediate range of η, two other
long-lived conﬁgurations can arise: a mill-like formation
as shown in Fig. 7(a), and a perpetual random blob.
Unlike the annular- or toroidal-shape of a classical mill,
the hydrodynamically-mediated three-dimensional mill-
like structure has a central core ﬁlled with randomly mov-
ing particles. As the dimensionless viscosity decreases
from η ≈ 1.2, the randomly-moving core particles in a
mill-like swarm expand their boundaries and eventually
swallow the coherent part of the mill. The resulting pat-
tern is a perpetual random blob without any identiﬁable
spatial order. Finally, for η . 0.1, swarms immediately
collapse into the above described blob of perpetual ran-
dom movement. All possible swarming patterns are listed
in Table 1 as a function of the dimensionless viscosity η.
A viscous ﬂow up thus allows for the emergence of per-
sistent mill-like structures not observed in the absence of
ﬂuid ﬂows.
We can also examine the induced ﬂow ﬁelds in relation
to particle velocities, and how they may drive transi-
tions among various swarm morphologies. Starting from
a high-η transient mill regime (η & 1.2), Fig. 7(b) qual-
itatively indicates the instantaneous direction of the hy-
drodynamic velocity ﬁeld up(r) (red arrows) induced
by a mill-like formation of 250 particles.
In a tran-
sient mill, the net particle-particle interactions provide
the centripetal force that sustains rotation. This net
force is imparted on the ﬂuid, inducing an inward ﬂow
along the plane of rotation. The incompressible ﬂuid is
then ejected outward along the rotational axis, resem-

❍

❍

time
❍

❍❍

η
η > 1.2

intermediate t

long t

mill or ﬂock
mill or ﬂock

ﬂock only
ﬂock

0.1 < η < 1.2 mill-like or random mill-like
random
random

random
random

η < 0.1

TABLE I: Swarming structures observed in simulations for
intermediate and long (t > 3000) times under the up ﬂow
ﬁeld and as a function of the dimensionless ﬂuid viscosity
η. Steady state conﬁgurations take longer to assemble here
than under us. In the ﬂuid-free case only ﬂocks arise at long
times. A moderately viscous ﬂuid allows for the emergence of
permanent mill-like structures and random blobs.

bling a “jet” emanating from the center of an accretion
disk. This outward jet entrains particles that wander
into the core region, slowly disrupting the mill. Entrain-
ment arises through the self-propulsion term fM, and if
appreciable, through viscous drag. Moreover, the inward
ﬂow on the rotational plane eﬀectively extends the in-
teraction range among particles, driving the system into
a minimum-energy ﬂock state. As η is decreased, the
induced Stokes accretion ﬂow increases and drives more
particles into the core of the mill. Particle motion then
becomes randomized, disrupting the outward jet and ul-
timately hindering the mill-to-ﬂock transition that would
otherwise occur smoothly. Swarms can thus be trapped
in the mill-like formation shown in Fig. 7(a) indeﬁnitely
as listed in Table 1. At even lower values of η, coher-
ence is lost by an expanding disordered core region. The
ﬂuid ﬂow ﬁelds observed under diﬀerent regimes of η are
plotted in Fig. 8.

8

all flock
flock+mill+random
mill+random
all random

flock+mill-like+random
flock+peloton+random
peloton+random

10

1

0.1

-0.2

-0.1
puller

0
G

0.1

pusher

0.2

FIG. 9: Phase diagram in (G, η)-space delineating possible
persistent structures (t > 3000) in the presence of the total
ﬂow ﬁeld u(r) = us(r) + up(r). Each point summarizes the
possible ﬁnal morphologies from 10 simulations. Flocks are
more likely to emerge for large η, and random blobs are more
prominent for small η. For pullers (G < 0), mills may appear
with increasing |G|, but random blobs dominate at large |G|.
The ﬂow us generated by weak pushers (G & 0) promotes
particle alignment and ﬂock formation. For even larger G,
ﬂocks exhibit peloton-like movement.

ming (or squirming [77]) can only generate ﬂows that
decay as 1/rn, n ≥ 2. When direct action-at-a-distance
physical forces (electrostatic, magnetic, gravitational)
arise between self-propelled particles, an additional Os-
een ﬂow decaying as 1/r can arise [79–81]. Thus, even
short-ranged pairwise physical forces can generate longer-
ranged ﬂuid motion enhancing particle interactions and
greatly aﬀect swarm morphology.

In clear three-dimensional ﬂuid environments we ﬁnd
that only ﬂocks arise, similar to the ﬂuid-free scenario,
albeit with particles moving at reduced speed. Note that
our patterns emerge through direct interactions among
particles, in contrast to the ones observed in previous
studies of inﬁnite or conﬁned systems of swimmers cou-
pled only via the ﬂuid drag [68]. The latter models in-
clude particle density as a ﬁxed, prescribed parameter,
so that high-density particles can be forced to interact
out of equilibrium. As a result, density-dependent tran-
sitions and states, such as nematic orders, may arise.
On the contrary, we consider a ﬁnite number of parti-
cles in an inﬁnite domain, where local particle density
is determined by particles collectively minimizing the in-
teractions amongst them, favoring the low-energy ﬂock
formation. In opaque ﬂuids, pusher generated ﬂows ac-
celerate particle alignment and suppress the emergence
of metastable mills seen in the ﬂuid-free case. Puller-
generated ﬂows, conversely, hinder particle velocity align-
ment, allowing transient mills to persist within certain
viscosity ranges. Suﬃciently strong puller ﬂows disrupt
any spatial order. Flows generated by particle-particle
interactions kinetically accelerate the mill-to-ﬂock tran-

(a) high    mill 

(b) high    dissolving mill 

(c) low    random

FIG. 8: Fluid velocity ﬁelds up(r) associated with particle
swarms concentrated within the green shaded regions.
(a)
For large η, an early ﬂow ﬁeld resembles a jet. (b) At longer
times the jet is eventually disrupted and a ﬂock forms. (c)
For very low η < 0.1, the disordered core region of a transient
mill-like formation will always expand eventually leading to a
random blob.

Combined eﬀects of us and up – In light of the above
discussions, we now consider the eﬀects of superimposing
the two ﬁelds so that u(r) = us(r) + up(r). The mag-
nitudes of us and up can be varied independently, and
are controlled by G and η, respectively. In clear ﬂuids
(λ = 0), the two ﬂows combine to reduce ﬂock speed

to √1 − γ, except in the case of very strong puller ﬂows
(large |G|) that prevent particles from aligning into ﬂocks
and lead to a random blob.
Fig. 9 shows the phase diagram in (G, η)-space of sta-
ble swarm structures arising in opaque ﬂuids (λ = 1). In
opaque ﬂuids for small values of η, up dominates us and
swarms assemble into a random blob. As η increases, up
decreases and the eﬀects of us become more pronounced,
prevailing for large η.
In this case, ﬂows generated by
strong pullers (very negative G) still favor the emergence
of a random blob. However, upon increasing G ﬂuctu-
ating transient mills arise. As G keeps increasing, ﬂows
generated by pushers favor the formation of ﬂuctuating
ﬂocks until for very large G pelotons emerge. As can be
seen in Fig. 9, mill-like patterns exist only when G = 0,
suggesting that such structures are easily disrupted or
prevented from forming by us.

Summary and Conclusions

In the absence of hydrodynamic coupling, our extensive
numerical simulations revealed that three-dimensional
swarms exhibit much less diversity than in two dimen-
sions. This is due to the additional dimension that pro-
vides a pathway for a variety of stable two-dimensional
patterns to transform into energy-minimizing, uniformly
translating ﬂocks in three dimensions. We then carefully
explored the eﬀects of hydrodynamic coupling on three-
dimensional swarming by deriving a discrete model of
self-propelled interacting swimmers in an incompressible
zero-Reynolds-number Newtonian ﬂuid.

An important distinction in the source of ﬂuid ﬂow
is made. Under a force-free assumption, particle swim-

sition. In high-viscosity opaque ﬂuids, the hydrodynamic
ﬂow ﬁelds can form an accretion disk/jet structure asso-
ciated with mills and entrain the self-propelled particles
leading to quicker dissolution of the mill itself. However,
in opaque ﬂuids of intermediate viscosity, stronger hy-
drodynamic interactions may kinetically block the mill-
to-ﬂock transition, allowing a mill-like formation to form
and persist. At even lower ﬂuid viscosity η, swarms are
completely chaotic.

When both swimming- and force-induced ﬂows are
present, steady-state conﬁgurations depend on the rel-
ative strength between the two ﬂows. Mill-like forma-
tions are absent. Our main results pertain to viscous
steady-state Stokes’ ﬂows, but we derive time-dependent
interaction-induced ﬂuid velocities and inertial interac-
tions arising in potential ﬂows in the Appendix. We used
the Morse potential in our simulations to provide a mech-
anistic picture of collective behavior of three-dimensional
swarms and found a rich phase diagram of patterns; how-
ever, the structure of our ﬂuid-coupled swarming model
is suﬃciently general that any eﬀective interaction po-
tential can be used provided the its social or physical
underpinnings are carefully delineated.

Our swarming model can be further reﬁned by address-
ing more microscopic ﬂuid coupling mechanisms. In our
model, Eq. 5 deﬁnes a stroke period-averaged ﬂow ﬁeld
and Eq. 1 describes hydrodynamic coupling under the
period-averaged ﬂow assumption. However, the phase

9

diﬀerence of the microscopic strokes between two swim-
mers has been shown to actively aﬀect the interaction in
unexpected ways, leading to attraction, repulsion, or os-
cillations [92]. How these subtle swimmer-induced pair-
wise interactions [77, 92] inﬂuence the collective behavior
of swarms remains to be investigated. Finally, we have
not considered the eﬀects of external potentials. Our
derivation of the ﬂuid coupling mechanisms suggest the
possibility of more new structures depending on whether
the external potential derives from social interactions
that inﬂuence self-propulsion (e.g., chemotaxis) or phys-
ical ones (e.g., gravity) that result in body forces on the
ﬂuid. The physical and mathematical structure of our
ﬂuid-coupled kinetic models provide a basis for future
investigation of these extensions.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Eric Lauga and Lae Un Kim for
helpful discussions. This work was made possible by sup-
port from grants NSF DMS-1021818 (TC), NSF DMS-
1021850 (MRD), ARO W1911NF-14-1-0472, and ARO
MURI W1911NF-11-10332. MRD also acknowledges in-
sights gained at the NAFKI conference on Collective Be-
havior: From Cells to Societies.

[1] H. Spohn, Large Scale Dynamics of Interacting Particles,

[16] D. Morale, V. Capasso, and K. Oelschl¨ager, J. Math.

Texts and Monographs in Physics (Springer, 1991).

Biol. 50, 49 (2005).

[2] S. A. Kaufmann, The origins of order: self-organization
and selection in evolution (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford,
1993).

[3] T. Vicsek, A. Czir´ok, E. Ben-Jacob, I. Cohen, and

O. Shochet, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1226 (1995).

[4] J. Toner and Y. Tu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 4326 (1995).
[5] E. V. Albano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2129 (1996).
[6] G. Flierl, D. Gr¨unbaum, S. Levin, and D. Olson, J. theor.

Biol. 196, 397 (1999).

[7] N.

Sugawara,

Shimoyama, K.

T. Mizuguchi,
Y. Hayakawa, and M. Sano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76,
3870 (1996).

[17] M. R. D’Orsogna, Y. L. Chuang, A. L. Bertozzi, and L. S.

Chayes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 104302 (2006).

[18] F. Chalub, Y. Dolak-Struss, P. Markowich, D. Oelz,
C. Schmeiser, and A. Soreﬀ, Math. Models and Meth-
ods in Appl. Sci. 16, 1173 (2006).

[19] Y. L. Chuang, M. R. D’Orsogna, D. Marthaler, A. L.

Bertozzi, and L. Chayes, Physica D 232, 33 (2007).

[20] A. J. Bernoﬀ and C. M. Topaz, SIAM rev. 55, 709 (2013).
[21] A. Kaiser and H. L¨owen, Phys. Rev. E 87, 032712 (2013).
[22] S. K. You, J. Korean Phys. Soc. 63, 1134 (2013).
[23] T. Schneirla, Army Ants: A Study in Social Organization

(W.H. Freeman, 1971).

[8] L. Edelstein-Keshet, J. Watmough, and D. Gr¨unbaum,

J. Math. Biol. 36, 515 (1998).

[9] H. Levine, W. J. Rappel, and I. Cohen, Phys. Rev. E 63,

[24] S. Kim and D. Kaiser, Science 249, 926 (1990).
[25] H. Niwa, J. theor. Biol. 171, 123 (1994).
[26] R. Dillon, L. Fauci, and D. G. III, J. theor. Biol. 177,

017101 (2000).

325 (1995).

[10] W. Ebeling and F. Schweitzer, Theor. Biosci. 120, 207

(2001).

[11] J. Parrish, S. V. Viscido, and D. Gr¨unbaum, Biol. Bull.

[27] W. Romey, Ecol. Model. 92, 65 (1996).
[28] A. L. Koch and D. White, Bioessays 20, 1030 (1998).
[29] J. K. Parrish and L. Edelstein-Keshet, Science 284, 99

202, 296 (2002).

(1999).

[12] G. Gr´egoire, H. Chat´e, and Y. Tu, Physica D 181, 157

(2003).

[13] F. Chalub, P. A. Markowich, B. Perthame, and

C. Schmeiser, Monatsh. Math. 142, 123 (2004).

[30] S. Camazine, J.-L. Deneubourg, N. R. Franks, J. Sneyd,
G. Theraulaz, and E. Bonabeau, Self-Organization in Bi-
ological Systems (Princeton University Press, 2003).

[31] A. Ordemann, G. Balazsi, and F. Moss, Nova Acta

[14] I. D. Couzin, J. Krauss, N. R. Franks, and S. A. Levin,

Leopoldina 88, 87 (2003).

Nature 433, 513 (2005).

[15] Y. Dolak and C. Schmeiser, J. Math. Biol. 51, 595 (2005).

[32] A. Oien, Bull. Math. Biol. 66, 1 (2004).
[33] P. G´omez-Mourelo, Ecol. Model. 188, 93 (2005).

10

[34] R. Mach and F. Schweitzer, Bull. Math. Biol. 69, 539

[69] A. P. Solon, J.-B. Caussin, D. Bartolo, H. Chat´e, and

(2006).

[35] C. M. Topaz, A. J. Bernoﬀ, S. Logan, and W. Toolson,

Euro. Phys. J. 157, 93 (2008).

J. Tailleur, Phys. Rev. E 92, 062111 (2015).

[70] F. Cucker and S. Smale, Japan. J. Math. 2, 197 (2007).
[71] F. Cucker and S. Smale, IEEE T. Automat. Contr. 52,

[36] A. M. Hein and S. A. McKinley, PLoS Comput. Biol. 9,

852 (2007).

31003178 (2013).

[37] K. Sugawara and M. Sano, Physica D 100, 343 (1997).
[38] E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Theraulaz, Swarm intel-
ligence: from natural to artiﬁcial systems (Oxford Univ.
Press, Oxford, 1999).

[39] N. E. Leonard and E. Fiorelli, Proc. 40th IEEE Conf.

[72] J. Shen, SIAM J. Appl. Math 68, 694 (2008).
[73] S. Nasseri and N. Phan-Thien, Computational Mechanics

20, 551 (1997).

[74] R. Cortez, N. Cowen, R. Dillon, and L. Fauci, Comp. Sci.

and Eng. 6, 38 (2004).

[75] R. Cortez, L. Fauci, and A. Medovikov, Phys. Fluids 17,

Decision and Control pp. 2968–2973 (2001).

031504 (2005).

[40] V. Gazi and K. Passino, IEEE T. Automat. Contr. 48,

[76] I. Riedel, K. Kruse, and J. Howard, Science 309, 300

692 (2003).

(2005).

[41] D. E. Chang, S. C. Shadden, J. E. Marsden, and
R. Olfati-Saber, Proc. 42nd IEEE Conf. Decision and
Control pp. 539–543 (2003).

[77] T. Ishikawa, M. P. Simmonds, and T. J. Pedley, J. Fluid

Mech. 568, 119 (2006).

[78] A. Najaﬁ and R. Golestanian, Phys. Rev. E 69, 062901

[42] A. Jadbabaie, J. Lin, and A. Morse, IEEE T. Automat.

(2004).

Contr. 48, 988 (2003).

[43] Y. Liu, K. M. Passino, and M. M. Polycarpou, IEEE T.

Automat. Contr. 48, 76 (2003).

[44] Y. L. Chuang, Y. R. Huang, M. R. D’Orsogna, and A. L.
Bertozzi, IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation pp. 2292–2299 (2007).

[79] J. Happel and H. Brenner, Low Reynolds Number Hydro-
dynamics with Special Applications to Particulate Media
(Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ, 1965).

[80] P. Espa˜nol, M. Rubio, and I. Z´u˜niga, Phys. Rev. E 51,

803 (1995).

[81] G. K. Batchelor, An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics

[45] I. D. Couzin, J. Krause, R. James, G. D. Ruxton, and

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2000).

N. R. Franks, J. Theor. Biol. 218, 1 (2002).

[46] J. Streﬂer, U. Erdmann, and L. Schimansky-Geier, Phys.

Rev. E 78, 031927 (2008).

[47] N. H. P. Nguyen, E. Jankowski, and S. C. Glotzer, Phys.

Rev. E 86, 011136 (2012).

[48] G. Taylor, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A (1951).
[49] G. J. Hancock, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 217, 96 (1953).
[50] J. Blake, J. Biomechanics 6, 133 (1973).
[51] A. Shapere and F. Wilczek, J. Fluid Mech. 198, 557

[82] C. W. Oseen, Neuere Methoden und Ergebnisse in der
Hydrodynamik (Leipzig:Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft
m.b.h., 1927).

[83] O. A. Ladyzhenskaya and R. A. Silverman, The math-
ematical theory of viscous incompressible ﬂow (Gordon
and Breach Science Publishers, 1963).

[84] R. Finn, Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 19, 363 (1965).
[85] J. R. Blake, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 70, 303 (1971).
[86] J.-J. Shu and A. T. Chwang, Phys. Rev. E 63, 051201

(1989).

(2001).

[52] G. P. Galdi, Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 148, 53 (1999).
[53] L. E. Becker, S. A. Koehler, and H. A. Stone, J. Fluid

Mech. 490, 15 (2003).

[87] P. Romanczuk, M. B¨ar, W. Ebeling, and B. Lindner, Eur.

Phys. J. Special Topics 202, 1 (2012).

[88] C. M. Topaz and A. L. Bertozzi, SIAM J. Appl. Math.

[54] A. Baskaran and M. C. Marchetti, Phys. Rev. E 77,

65, 152 (2004).

011920 (2008).

[55] S. E. Spagnolie and E. Lauga, J. Fluid Mech. 700, 105

(2012).

[56] C. W. Wolgemuth, Biophys. J. 95, 1564 (2008).
[57] E. Lauga and T. Powers, Rep. Prog. Phys. 72, 096601

(2009).

[58] G. Huber, S. A. Koehler, and J. Yang, Math. Comput.

Model. 53, 1518 (2011).

[89] G. H. Golub and J. M. Ortega, Scientiﬁc Computing
and Diﬀerential Equations: An Introduction to Numeri-
cal Methods (Academic Press, 1987).

[90] J. Carrillo, M. R. D’Orsogna, and V. Panferov, Kin. Rel.

Mod. 2, 363 (2009).

[91] M. Reiner, Physics Today 17, 62 (1964).
[92] C. M. Pooley, G. P. Alexander, and J. M. Yeomans, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 99, 228103 (2007).

[59] S. M. Ross and S. Corrsin, J. Appl. Physiol. 37, 333

[93] J. R. Blake, J. Austral. Math. Soc. Ser. B 30, 127 (1988).

(1974).

[60] T. K. Chaudhury, J. Fluid Mech. 95, 189 (1979).
[61] G. R. Fulford, D. F. Katz, and R. L. Powell, Biorheology

35, 295 (1998).

[62] E. Lauga, Phys. Fluids 19, 083104 (2007).
[63] T. Normand and E. Lauga, Phys. Rev. E 78, 061907

(2008).

[64] E. Lauga, Europhys. Lett. 86, 64001 (2009).
[65] H. C. Fu, R. Powers, and C. W. Wolgemuth, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 99, 258101 (2007).

[66] H. C. Fu, C. W. Wolgemuth, and T. R. Powers, Phys.

Fluids 21, 033102 (2009).

[67] L. Zhu, E. Lauga, and L. Brandt, Phys. Fluids 24, 051902

(2012).

[68] A. Baskaran and M. C. Marchetti, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

USA 106, 15567 (2009).

11

Appendix A: Non-dimensionalization

In the quasistatic limit, the Oseen tensor is

The non-dimensional parameters used in Eq. 8 are de-
ﬁned as

r′ =

√αβ
m

r,

t′ =

α
m

t,

v′i =r β

α

vi,

u′ =r β

α

u,

γ′ =

γ
α

,

1
ρ

T(r, t) ≈

1

8πηr

[I + ˆrˆr] δ(t),

(S12)

which is used in Eq. 7 to provide an analytic form of the
velocity ﬁeld. The solution to the pressure ﬁeld p(r, t)
is also given; however, its eﬀect on swimmers is ignored
since its gradient is negligible across the size a → 0 of
small particles.

η, G′ =

αβ
m2 G,

(S8)

p,

Appendix C: Potential ﬂow

As derived in [93], the ﬂuid velocity potential φ(r) at a
location r from an accelerating spherical particle of radius
a can be approximated in the far-ﬁeld |r| ≫ a limit by
the formula

ρ, η′ =

Φ,

p′ =

ρ′ =

Φ′ =

C′a =

ℓ′a =

m2

pα3β3

β
αm

β
αm
√αβ
m

m

m2

pα3β
pα5β

β
αm
√αβ
m

Ca, C′r =

Cr,

ℓa,

ℓ′r =

ℓr.

Appendix B: Time-dependent Stokes ﬂow

We assume ν → 0 for the dimensionless Stokes Eq. 8 of
the main text and conduct our investigation at the qua-
sistatic limit. More generally, the time-dependent veloc-
ity ﬁeld can be expressed as

and

u(rj, t) =

1

ρXi6=j Z t

0

dt′T(ri − rj ; t − t′) · fi,

(S9)

where ρ is the mass density of the embedding Newto-
nian ﬂuid and T is the three-dimensional dynamic Oseen
tensor given by [80]

T(r, t) =Z d3k

(2π)3 e−νk2t+ik·rhI − ˆkˆki

= p(r, t)I − q(r, t)ˆrˆr,

(S10)

with

φ (r, t) ∼ −

m (t)

4π |r| −

d (t) · r
4π |r|3 + O(cid:16)|r|−3(cid:17) ,

(S13)

where

m (t) =I∂V ∇φ · dS,

d (t) =I∂V

φdS +I∂V

r∇φ · dS

(S14)

(S15)

are obtained by integrating over the boundary ∂V of the
spherical volume V of the source object. The near-ﬁeld
φ in the integrands depends on the shape and swimming
mechanism of the source object. Let us consider the sim-
plest case of solid spherical particles moving through an
inviscid ﬂuid. For a lone particle of radius a traveling at
a velocity v as illustrated in Fig. 10, we may derive the
ﬂuid velocity potential in the laboratory frame as follows

φ(r) = −v

a3

2 |r|2 cos θ,

(S16)

where v = |v|, r is the a spatial position relative to the
center of the particle, and θ is the angle between r and v.
Substituting Eq. S16 into Eqs. S14 and S15, we obtain

m (t) = 0,

and d (t) = 2πa3v (t) .

g(r, t)

r2

3g(r, t)

p(r, t) =(cid:18)1 +
q(r, t) =(cid:18)1 +

2νt

6νt

r2 (cid:19) f (r, t) −
r2 (cid:19) f (r, t) −
4νt(cid:21)
(4πνt)3/2 exp(cid:20)−
√4νt(cid:19) .

erf(cid:18) r

r2

1

4πr

1

f (r, t) =

g(r, t) =

r2

(S11)

As a result, the far-ﬁeld ﬂuid velocity potential of the
moving sphere is

φ (r, t) ∼ −

a3v (t) · r

2 |r|3

,

(S16)

v=vj

θ

r

a
r
j

particle j

r
-r
j

i

a

r
i

particle i

FIG. 10: Hydrodynamic interactions due to potential ﬂow.
Eqs. S13-S16 express the approximated ﬂuid potential at an
arbitrary far-ﬁeld location caused by the acceleration of a par-
ticle at rj . Eq. S21 gives the force induced by the ﬂuid po-
tential on a particle at ri.

Let us now calculate the force induced by a moving par-
ticle at position rj on an identical particle at a position
ri. We assume that |ri − rj| ≫ a, so that the far-ﬁeld
approximation is appropriate. From the Euler equation
of inviscid ﬂow, we know that the ﬂuid velocity potential
φ induces a pressure

p = p0 − ρ

∂φ
∂t −

1
2

ρ|u|2 ,

(S17)

where ρ is the ﬂuid density, u = ∇φ is the ﬂuid velocity,
and p0 is an arbitrary reference point of the pressure.
The resultant force on a spherical object is found from
integrating the pressure variation over its surface:

pdS

Fp.f. =I∂V
= −I∂V

ρ

∂φ
∂t

dS

=

ρ
4π

dd (t)

dt

·I∂V

(r − s)
|r − s|3 ˆsdS.

(S18)

Here, r ≡ rj − ri, s is a vector from the particle center
to the particle surface, and ˆs ≡ s/ |s|. For a spherical
particle of radius a = |s| ≪ |r|, we use the approximation
|r − s|−3 ≃ |r|−3(cid:16)1 + 3 (s · r) / |r|2(cid:17) to ﬁnd
|r|2 − I# .

˙d(t) ·"3

ρa3
3 |r|3

Fp.f. =

(S19)

rr

Substituting Eq. S15 into the above equation, we obtain

Assuming there are N identical particles, the potential
ﬂow induced force on particle i is thus

12

Fi

p.f. =

2πρa6

3

N

Xj6=i

˙vj (t)

|rj − ri|3 ·"3

(rj − ri) (rj − ri)

|rj − ri|2

− I# .

(S21)
Note that the force is short-ranged, of the order

O(cid:16)|rj − ri|−3(cid:17). Moreover, its amplitude is proportional

to a6. As a result, the hydrodynamic interaction force
induced by potential ﬂows does not have signiﬁcant im-
pact on collective behavior particularly when ρ and/or
the volume fraction of particles is small. If ρ is very large,
the ﬂow ﬁeld imposes a repulsion between particles that
encounter each other, potentially preventing them from
forming a coherent structure.

Appendix D: Indicator of the swarming states

Here we deﬁne a metric to describe the state of a
swarm. This quantity will consistently distinguish be-
tween parallel ﬂock, single rotating mill, and random
swarms. To identify the parallel ﬂock state, we note
that all particles are moving at the same velocity as the
Center-of-Mass (CM) velocity. To ﬁnd the rotating mill
state, we take advantage of the fact that all particles
share the same axis of rotation. We combine these prop-
erties into a single quantity Is over the desired range
[−1, 1] where −1 is associated with a perfect mill and +1
indicates a uniformly translating ﬂock. The indicator Is
is decomposed according to

Is ≡ Iﬂock − Imill.

(S22)

Given N particles,

Iﬂock ≡ 1 − Pi |vi − vCM|
Npα/β

.

(S23)

Note that Iﬂock = 1 for a perfect parallel ﬂock and
Iﬂock = 0 for a perfect mill. To deﬁne Imill we ﬁrst com-
pute the rotational axis ˆωi of particle i:

ˆωi (t) =

vi (t) × Fi (t)
|vi (t)||Fi (t)|

.

(S24)

where Fi is the force acting on particle i. We then eval-
uate the degree of alignment between all ˆωi and deﬁne

Imill = PiPj6=i ˆωi · ˆωj
N (N − 1)

.

(S25)

Fp.f. =

2πρa6

3 |r|3 ˙v(t) ·"3

rr

|r|2 − I# .

(S20)

Note that Imill = 1 when the rotations of all the particles
are perfectly aligned and Imill = 0 when all particles are
in a perfect parallel ﬂock formation. Putting Iﬂock and

Imill together in Is (Eq. S22), we ﬁnd Is = −1 for a
perfect mill and Is = +1 for a perfect ﬂock. Finally, since
swarms are seldom in a perfect formation, we considered
thresholds on Is as indicated in Fig. 2.

Distinguishing more subtly diﬀerent structures is not
always unequivocal using the metric Is. In particular, we
prescribe Is > 0.5 to indicate a ﬂock and Is < 0.5 to indi-
cate a peloton where there is more rotational movement
from particle recirculation.

Appendix E: Eﬀects of changing interaction

potentials

All the results presented in the main text were obtained
using a ﬁxed set of potential parameters Cr,a, ℓr,a. The
primary eﬀect of varying these parameters is to change
the spatial size of swarms. For rotational mills, an in-
crease in diameter is accompanied by a decrease in the
magnitude of the centripetal force and weaker destabiliz-
ing ﬂows. A larger swarm is also less sensitive to hydro-
dynamic eﬀects since particles are spaced further apart,
generating weaker interaction forces and hence weaker
ﬂows. In Fig. 11, we explore diﬀerent potentials and test
the robustness of ﬂock formation in the low η regime
where the ﬂock can be broken up by hydrodynamic in-
teractions. Not surprisingly, for potentials that are more

13

“H-stable” [17, 19], the probability of stable ﬂock forma-
tion increases. While H-stability is an equilibrium prop-
erty that is insensitive to hydrodynamics [17, 19], our
results suggest that H-stable ﬂocks are more resistant to
hydrodynamic disruption.

1

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
p

 

k
c
o
l

F

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

C=10, H-stable
C=9, H-stable
C=8, Critical point
C=7, Catastrophic
C=6, Catastrophic

0

1

1.5

2

FIG. 11: The dependence of stable ﬂock formation probability
on potential types and opaque medium viscosity. Here, we
ﬁx ℓa = 1, ℓr = 0.5 and vary C ≡ Cr/Ca = 6 − 10 while
keeping Ca = 100. H-stable ﬂocks are more robust against
hydrodynamic disruption.

