Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

Kenji Fukushima
Department of Physics, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

E-mail: fuku@nt.phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract. Theoretical studies on the early-time dynamics in the ultra-
relativistic heavy-ion collisions are reviewed including pedagogical introductions
on the initial condition with small-x gluons treated as a color glass condensate, the
bottom-up thermalization scenario, plasma/glasma instabilities, basics of some
formulations such as the kinetic equations and the classical statistical simulation.
More detailed discussions follow to make an overview of recent developments on
the fast isotropization, the onset of hydrodynamics, and the transient behavior of
momentum spectral cascades.

Submitted to: Rep. Prog. Phys.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
7
2

 
 
]
h
t
-
l
c
u
n
[
 
 

2
v
0
4
3
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Theoretical Foundations

2.1 Small-x Physics and Color Glass Condensate

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.1 CGC eﬀective theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.2
Initial condition for the relativistic heavy-ion collision . . . . .
2.2 CGC-based Scenarios for Thermalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.1 Bottom-up thermalization scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.2 Plasma and glasma instabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.1 Dilute regime — kinetic equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.2 Dense regime — classical statistical simulation . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Other Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4.1 Kadanoﬀ-Baym equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Stochastic quantization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4.2
2.4.3 Gauge/gravity correspondence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 Real-time Formulations

3 More on Isotropization

3.1 Scaling Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Classical vs. Quantum Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 More on Onset of Hydrodynamics

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1 Basics of Hydrodynamics
4.2 Dissipative Terms and Anisotropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.1 Hydrodynamic interpretation of anisotropy . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.2 Resummed anisotropic hydrodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 More on Spectral Cascade

5.1 CGC-based Scenario and the Bose-Einstein Condensate . . . . . . . .
5.2 Dynamical Evolution of the Spectral Cascade . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.1 Energy cascade vs. particle cascade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Scenario with non-thermal ﬁxed-point . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2.2

6 Further Topics

1. Introduction

2

2

6
6
8
9
12
12
13
17
17
21
25
25
26
27

29
29
30

31
32
33
34
35

36
36
37
37
39

40

Early thermalization is the last and greatest unsolved problem in the ultra-relativistic
heavy-ion collisions that have aimed to create a new state of matter out of quarks
and gluons, i.e. a state called Quark-Gluon Plasma (QGP). As a consequence of non-
perturbative and non-linear nature of the “strong interaction”, quarks and gluons
and any colored excitations in general cannot be detected directly in laboratory
experiments, which is an intuitive description of the color conﬁnement phenomenon:
quarks and gluons must be conﬁned into color-singlet hadrons such as mesons and
baryons.
If the temperature T is comparable to the typical scale of the strong
interaction, i.e. ΛQCD ∼ 0.2 GeV (∼ 2 × 1012 K), however, fundamental degrees of
freedom should become more relevant and we may be able to probe some properties
of hot and dense matter with quarks and gluons manifested. Then, such ambitious

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

3

dreams to create a QGP by our hands have motivated the installation of high-energetic
beams (see an essay [1] about two decades from dreams to beams).
In fact, an
extraordinarily high-energetic collision of two nuclei is a unique tool to realize such
high energy density and temperature. It is widely believed that our wish to create
the QGP has been successfully granted at Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC)
and more activities at even higher energies are continued to Large Hadron Collider
(LHC). There are, however, still some disputes about physical characteristics of the
QGP from the theoretical point of view. All subtleties come from lack of clear-cut
deﬁnition of the QGP from the ﬁrst-principle theory of the strong interaction, i.e.
quantum chromodynamics (QCD).

Perturbative calculations based on QCD have been established as theoretical
descriptions in terms of quasi-particles of quarks and gluons (or “partons” collectively).
Although there is no order parameter for a change from the hadronic phase to the
partonic phase, we may well give a working deﬁnition of the QGP as a state that
satisﬁes following (at least) two conditions. First, the physical degrees of freedom
should be partons rather than hadrons, so that perturbative QCD (pQCD) can be a
good description of the system. Second, the created state should form matter unlike
a simple superposition of each partonic reaction. For this latter condition, for decades
conventionally, a far stronger condition of thermalization had been imposed. Precisely
speaking,
local thermal equilibrium (LTE) had been assumed to link theoretical
modeling to experimental QGP signatures. It is, however, very hard to account for
QCD ∼ 1 fm/c.
the LTE with QCD microscopic processes within a time scale (cid:46) Λ−1
Eventually, after many trials and errors (one of earliest discussions can be found in [2]
and the diﬃculty was revisited in [3]), theoretical ideas went around came around to
the very starting point – what is matter at all? This issue is sometimes discussed in
the context of the origin of collectivity of smaller systems involving proton, deutron,
and light ions at LHC energies.

In this review, we do not discuss experimental and phenomenological studies of
collectivity in small systems, which are currently ongoing, and we still need wait to see
an ordered consensus out from disordered arguments. Here, we would look over purely
theoretical approaches to reveal real-time QCD dynamics during the evolution to the
QGP. Fortunately, we can specify the trustworthy initial condition for the system
right after the heavy-ion collisions using our pQCD knowledge. It is known that the
gluon distribution function has increasing behavior with increasing reaction energy
and classical color ﬁelds give a better description of such an overpopulated state than
individual gluons, which can be understood in analogy to Weizs¨acker-Williams ﬁelds in
quantum electrodynamics (QED). The theoretical framework with coherent classical
color ﬁelds (sometimes called non-Abelian Weizs¨acker-Williams ﬁelds [4]) is known as
the color glass condensate (CGC). Thus, we can say that, for a full understanding
of the QGP physics, the missing link is a bridge between the CGC initial condition
and the QGP described well by hydrodynamic equations.
In other words, using a
more general term, we can deﬁne our theoretical question as follows: How can a full
quantum system get to a LTE state as a solution of the initial value problem starting
with coherent ﬁelds?

Limiting our considerations to a speciﬁc situation in the relativistic heavy-
ion collision, we can categorize the issues of thermalization into three distinct
(and probably related) characterizations — isotropization, hydrodynamization, and
spectral cascades. Let us brieﬂy address them in order. The ﬁrst is the (partial)
isotropization.
In the case of the heavy-ion collision, the system is expanding in

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

4

Figure 1.
Schematic (conceptual) illustration of the isotropization (left),
the hydrodynamization (middle), and the (pre-)thermalization (right), which
respectively picturize initial quantum ﬂuctuations with anisotropic expansion,
smoothened distributions after some time, and emergence of (pre-)thermal
spectra.

time and the interaction should be turned oﬀ for a dilute system as long as we can
neglect running eﬀects of the strong coupling constant or conﬁning forces. Such a
theoretically idealized limit of non-interacting quarks and gluons in an expanding
box is often called the free-streaming limit. The isotropization problem is an issue
of how to explain the fact that the system can resist against a tendency falling
into the free-streaming limit especially when the system is expanding. The second
is the onset where hydrodynamic equations start working well to capture the real-
In some literature this onset is discussed under the
time evolution of the system.
name of the hydronization or hydrodynamization.
If the system sits in the LTE
state, the hydrodynamic model should be valid, and in this sense, the LTE is a
suﬃcient condition but not a necessary one for hydrodynamization. Therefore, we
may take the switching time to hydrodynamics earlier than the genuine LTE time.
Recent developments include a signiﬁcant extension of the hydrodynamic regime once
higher-order derivative (dissipative) terms are implemented. If we knew some optimal
resummation scheme, the hydrodynamic equations may have a validity region even
in the vicinity of the coherent initial conditions. The third is a dynamical evolution
toward the thermal spectrum in momentum space. A very classical problem along
this line is found in the asymptotic solution of the quantum Boltzmann equation. The
detailed balance is satisﬁed with the Bose-Einstein distribution for bosons and the
Dirac-Fermi distribution for fermions. Once those thermal spectra appear, the physical
temperature is well deﬁned, and the LTE is fully justiﬁed. This kind of analysis
can provide us with thorough information on the thermalization problem, namely,
the whole temporal proﬁle of the distribution functions (possibly with some forms
of condensates). More interestingly, besides, a non-trivial and intriguing question is
whether any type of stable solution other than thermal spectra can be possible or not.
Thermal distribution functions show exponential damping at large momenta and the
temperature is nothing but a slope parameter to characterize how fast this exponential
decrease is. In some physical circumstances like a turbulent ﬂow, before reaching such
an exponential shape, a power-law type of distribution may appear as a consequence
of spectral cascade in momentum space. To reiterate this third step, our theoretical
mission is to seek for a possibility of various pre-thermalization stages [5].

Figure 1 is a schematic illustration to picturize ideas of these three steps

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

5

intuitively. The left picture of ﬁgure 1 is about the isotropization of the transverse
pressure PT and the longitudinal pressure PL. The ratio PL/PT does not have to
approach the unity, and nevertheless, it is expected to converge to a certain value
instead of monotonic decrease to zero. For the realization of some time window
in which PL/PT can be approximately constant,
it is crucial to take account of
correct quantum spectrum of initial ﬂuctuations. Although we do not go into
phenomenological challenges in this review, we would note that PL/PT might be
(and should be) constrained by a scrupulous comparison of hydrodynamic simulations
and experimental data from the heavy-ion collisions. The middle picture of ﬁgure 1
visualizes how the hydrodynamization takes place.
In principle, hydrodynamic
equations are conservation laws, and they are always useful as long as we are interested
in slow components in real-time dynamics. For practical purposes, however, we need
close a set of equations to solve them and it should be reasonable to adopt the
hydrodynamic description when spacetime and momentum variations are suﬃciently
smoothened (and interactions are localized).
It is also of pragmatic importance
to resolve the hydrodynamization problem for theorizing hydrodynamics better. A
recent reformulation named aHydro [6] is a clear example to extend the validity of
hydrodynamics with optimal resummation. The right picture of ﬁgure 1 sketches
emergence of some scaling solution that could be identiﬁed as a signature of pre-
thermalization. There are several theoretical speculations such as the turbulent
spectrum, the non-thermal ﬁxed point, and the inverse Kolmogorov cascade and the
resultant formation of a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC), and so on, together with
numerical demonstrations.
It is, so far, not very obvious how these scenarios may
or may not have an impact on heavy-ion collision phenomenology. The most serious
problem lies in a technical diﬃculty in estimating the relevant time scale. Almost all
simulations seem to require unphysically long time, hinting that something important
may be still missing.

This review is organized in the following manner. After this Introduction, in
section 2, we will elucidate some theoretical foundations for readers who would like
to learn quickly what ideas were discussed in the past and what problems still remain
today. We will start with a pedagogical introduction to the CGC theory and explain
characteristic features of the CGC-type initial conditions in section 2.1. Then, as a
classic example of CGC-based arguments of thermalization, in section 2.2, we will
introduce what is called the “bottom-up scenario”, which underlies all thermalization
ideas in contemporary approaches. We also brieﬂy mention on the plasma and glasma
instabilities afterward. In section 2.3 we discuss several theoretical methods for the
real-time quantum simulation. In fact, unlike lattice discretized quantum ﬁeld theories
in Euclidean spacetime for which the Monte-Carlo sampling is useful, there is no
general non-perturbative algorithm applicable for Minkowskian spacetime. What we
can do with QCD at best is to take some limit so that a particular approximation can
be validated. In the dilute limit especially when a quasi-particle approximation makes
sense, the kinetic equation is the most powerful tool even for QCD and, in principle,
systematic estimation of the collision term is perturbatively doable, though the
numerical calculation becomes desperately heavier with higher order terms. We will
ﬂash an earliest argument of thermalization by means of the Boltzmann equation in the
relaxation time approximation. In the opposite case of the dense and overpopulated
limit, the semi-classical approximation would be a natural choice of most suited
descriptions, which consists of the solution of the classical equations of motion and the
Wigner function. In quantum mechanics the semi-classical approximation works for

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

6

many problems, but for quantum ﬁeld theories, the semi-classical approximation or
the classical statistical simulation has delicate subtleties aﬀected by ultraviolet (UV)
modes for which the density is small and the approximation inevitably breaks down.
In section 2.4 we will also give very short remarks on some unconventional approaches
such as the Kadanoﬀ-Baym equations, stochastic quantization, and gauge/gravity
correspondence. Successful examples for speciﬁc problems with these techniques exist
and there may be some potential for the future, but so far the applicability is limited
to rather academic considerations.

We will continue to section 3, section 4, and section 5 to go into more detailed
discussions on the issues of the isotropization, the hydrodynamization, and the pre-
thermalization, respectively. We put our emphasis on the self-contained derivations
of more or less established physics in section 2, while in later sections we will pick
up and outline some of most recent results. Speciﬁcally, we will mainly focus on
selected results on the classiﬁcation of scaling solutions, the success of the aHydro
formulation, and the speculative scenario of a gluonic BEC formation. Readers
interested in hydrodynamic simulations together with a comparison to heavy-ion data
can consult a recent review [7]. Because the thermalization problem is a rapidly
growing subject, new progresses are steadily reported. We will not try to make this
review comprehensive in vain but will take a more pragmatic strategy to explicate the
problems and the progresses rather than to give an answer. For the most state-of-the-
art outcomes, readers are encouraged to study further with proceedings contributions
for Quark Matter conference series.

2. Theoretical Foundations

We will exposit some theoretical formulations based on QCD that are useful to quantify
microscopic processes of the evolution to the QGP. The early time dynamics in the
heavy-ion collision has a universal scale called the saturation momentum (denoted as
Qs) apart from the typical QCD scale, ΛQCD. So, it is indispensable to implement Qs
properly for modern approaches to the thermalization problem.

2.1. Small-x Physics and Color Glass Condensate

An old-fashioned quark model tells us that the nucleon is composed from three valence
quarks. Such a naive picture could hold, however, for the net quantum number
only and there should be a far richer structure with sea quarks and gluons once
quantum corrections are included.
In the inﬁnite momentum frame in which the
nucleon has an inﬁnitely large momentum, the life time of virtual excitations is
elongated due to Lorentz time dilatation, so that the parton distribution functions
including virtual excitations become well-deﬁned physical observables. A parton with
a large momentum can radiate softer partons one after another in quantum processes,
and there should be more abundant partons with smaller momenta. To quantify
this, it is convenient to introduce Bjorken’s x that is a fraction of the longitudinal
momentum carried by a parton over the total momentum of a projectile. According
to the data from Hadron Electron Ring Accelerator (HERA) the gluon distribution
function is about twenty times larger than the quark distribution function already
around x ∼ 10−2, and in the ﬁrst approximation, we can neglect contributions from
quarks.

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

7

For the thermalization problem, we should consider processes involving soft
momenta (cid:46) 1 GeV and then the relevant x is roughly x ∼ 10−2 for RHIC energy
of 200 GeV/nucleon and x ∼ 10−3 for LHC energy of 5.5 TeV/nucleon. In this small-
x regime, we can safely limit our considerations to gluonic contributions only using
the pure Yang-Mills theory instead of full QCD with dynamical quarks. Further
simpliﬁcation occurs at suﬃciently small x: when the gluon distribution function
G(x, Q) where Q represents the transverse momentum is such enhanced, gluons
eventually saturate the transverse area πR2
A of the nucleon or nucleus. We should
note that this happens in a way dependent on x. Actually, the transverse size of the
probed parton is characterized by Q−1 in the Breit frame and thus the corresponding
interaction cross section is ∼ αsNcQ−2. Then, the saturation condition reads:
αsNcG(x, Qs)Qs(x)−2/(N 2
A. It is obvious that the left-hand side is the
total cross section per one color. The solution of this equality yields a qualitative
deﬁnition of the saturation scale Qs(x). The most important implication from the
saturation is that physical quantities should scale with Qs(x) in a universal way. More
concretely, as a consequence of the saturation, the total cross section σγ∗p(x, Q2)
of a proton and a virtual photon (with an electron vertex amputated) should no
longer be a function of x and Q2 independently but is a function of a scaling variable
τ ≡ Q2/Q2
s (x) only. Experimental data from HERA with various combinations of x
and Q2 exhibit beautiful scaling behavior called the “geometric scaling” [8] with the
following parametrization;

c − 1) (cid:39) πR2

Q2

s (x) = Q2

0(x/x0)−λ ,

(1)
where Q0 = 1 GeV is pre-ﬁxed and x0 = 3.04× 10−4, λ = 0.288 have been determined
from the data at x < 10−2. This functional form is also suggested by a solution
of the BFKL equation which is a linear quantum evolution equation with changing
x. Equation (1) provides us with a more quantitative deﬁnition of Qs(x) used for
phenomenological applications such as the prediction of the hadron multiplicity in a
KLN model [9].

It should be noted that the saturation is a suﬃcient condition for the geometric
scaling, but may not be a necessary condition. This means that the geometric scaling
may hold outside of the saturation regime and this is indeed the case in view of the
experimental data: not only τ (cid:46) 1 but larger τ (cid:38) 102 also show the scaling behavior.
This experimental ﬁnding is extremely important for reality of the CGC; for τ (cid:38) 1
the parton transverse size ∼ Q−2 is certainly smaller than necessary for the saturation
∼ Q−2
. Therefore, the validity region of the CGC must be wider than naively
expected. This “extended geometric scaling” could be a consequence from quantum
evolution equations with changing x and Q2 that maintain the geometric scaling even
In discussions in what follows throughout this
beyond the saturation regime [10].
review, we shall require that the kinematic regions involving Q2 ∼ Q2
s (x) dominate
processes of our interested physics.

s

In the case of the nucleus-nucleus collision, the transverse parton density is
signiﬁcantly enhanced with the atomic number A. Because the nuclear thickness
scales with A1/3, as compared to the proton case, Q2
s (x) should be accompanied by
A1/3 which is as a large factor as ∼ 6 for gold and lead ions. This is a tremendously
large factor; the collision energy is ∼ 27 times increased from RHIC to LHC and so
relevant x becomes ∼ 1/27 times smaller. Using (1) we can easily make an estimation
and conclude that Qs(x) is increased by a factor ∼ 2.6 only. Thus, the CGC regime
should be activated much earlier for the heavy-ion collision than for the proton, and

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma
8
in view of the geometric scaling in σγ∗p for x < 10−2, we can be conﬁdent that the
CGC be a trustful description of soft gluons with momenta (cid:46) 1 GeV or even higher.

2.1.1. CGC eﬀective theory The general strategy to obtain an eﬀective theory is
to integrate unwanted degrees of freedom out. We can consider an eﬀective theory
for soft gluons by regarding x as a separation scale of hard and soft gluons. It has
been shown that integrating hard gluons out leads to a classical color source ρ for
soft gluons.
In such a way the probability function Wx[ρ] that characterizes how
ρ is distributed evolves with changing x, and the evolution of Wx[ρ] should follow
from a renormalization group equation. This is actually a contemporary derivation
of the BFKL equation not from each Feynman diagram but from the invariance of
the partition function [11] and its non-linear extension, i.e., the JIMWLK equation
[12, 13, 14, 15] was derived as an extension of this method.

Soft gluons are thus given by a classical solution of the Yang-Mills equations of
motion sourced by ρ whose distribution is dictated by Wx[ρ]. In a frame where the
proton or the heavy-ion is moving at the speed of light in the positive z direction,
the color source is static in terms of the light-cone time, i.e. ρ = ρ(x−, x) where
x± = (t± z)/
2 and x refers to the 2-dimensional transverse coordinates. The Yang-
Mills equations to be solved then read:
DµF µν = δν+ρ(x−, x) .

√

(2)

In this review we consistently use calligraphy letters to represent classical ﬁelds. We
here work in the light-cone gauge with A+ = 0 and we assume A− = 0 to solve (2).
Then, let us take a static color rotation to gauge Ai away. Because of x+ independence,
such a gauge rotation V (x−, x) does not aﬀect A− = 0 (which is conﬁrmed from
V †∂−V = 0, where we should note that ∂− = ∂+ = ∂/∂x+). In this rotated color
basis, hence, (2) is reduced to the standard 2-dimensional Poisson equation for A+ and
it is easy to ﬁnd the solution as A+(x−, x) = −∇−2ρ(x−, x) [4]. We can immediately
rotate this solution back to the light-cone gauge using the rotation matrix V and
ﬁnally we arrive at the following solution:

Ai = αi ≡ − 1
ig

V (x−, x)∂iV †(x−, x) ,

A± = 0 ,

(3)

(cid:90)

V †(x−, x) = P exp

−ig

dξ− ∇−2ρ(ξ−, x)

(4)
Here, P stands for the time ordering. Now we are ready to compute physical
observables such as the energy-momentum tensor given in terms of αi. We can
write the expectation value of an arbitrary operator O[αi] (for example, O[αi] =
tr[V (∞, x)V †(∞, y)] for a dipole scattering amplitude) down as follows:

−∞

.

(cid:104)O[αi](cid:105) =

dρ Wx[ρ]O[αi] .

(5)
The above-mentioned calculational scheme with classical ﬁelds Aµ and the weight
function Wx[ρ] is commonly referred to as the color glass condensate or CGC (for
a review; see [16]); in the ﬁrst approximation ρ is a random color source, which is
reminiscent of the theory of spin glass, and is described by classical ﬁelds as if they
were condensates in scalar theories prescribed by the Gross-Pitaevskii equation, which
explains the name of the color glass condensate.

where the rotation matrix to eliminate A+ is found to be

(cid:20)

(cid:90) x−

(cid:21)

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

9

It should be noted that solving the classical equations of motion is an eﬃcient
resummation technique to take account of
inﬁnite Feynman diagrams at once,
especially for a special case when both terms in the covariant derivative, Dµ =
∂µ − igAµ, are comparable.
In the CGC regime, actually, ∂µ picks up an energy
and momentum scale ∼ Qs. Also, the color source should be as large as ρ ∼ Qs/g and
thus Aµ ∼ Qs/g. Then, the perturbation theory must be reorganized not around the
vacuum but around the CGC background ﬁelds Aµ. Such reorganized perturbative
calculations result in the renormalization group ﬂow of Wx[ρ] and the presence of Aµ
makes an upgrade of the BFKL equation into the JIMWLK equation. We should note
that perturbative calculations can be useful for ∂xWx[ρ] but cannot ﬁgure out Wx[ρ]
itself. So, we need to rely on some empirical parametrization for Wx[ρ] at some initial
x. The simplest choice is a Gaussian Ansatz [17, 18], that is;

(cid:90)

(cid:20)

−

(cid:21)

d2x dx− |ρ(x−, x)|2
x(x−)

2g2µ2

Wx[ρ] = exp

.

(6)

In terms of a color component, ρ = ρata where ta is an element of color-group algebra
in the fundamental representation, the above Gaussian form is equivalent to requiring
the two-point function as (cid:104)ρa(x−, x)ρb(y−, y)(cid:105) = g2µ2
x(x−) δab δ(x− − y−) δ(2)(x− y).
This choice of the weight function in (6) deﬁnes what is known as the McLerran-
Venugopalan (MV) model and, naturally, a unique scale µx(x−) is related to Qs(x):
parametrically Qs ∼ g2µx so that Aµ ∼ Qs/g. Typically µx is chosen around 1 GeV
for RHIC and 2-3 times greater for LHC. The Gaussian choice has an advantage that
we can perform analytical calculations for the color average in (5), which in most cases
simpliﬁes signiﬁcantly in the large Nc limit (see [19] for useful mathematical formulas).

2.1.2.
Initial condition for the relativistic heavy-ion collision The same idea of
saturation physics can be applied to the relativistic heavy-ion collision and in this
case both the target and the projectile are dense objects. To take full account of
non-linear color ﬁelds from both nuclei, the Yang-Mills equations that we must solve
read:

DµF µν = δν+ρ(1)(x−, x) + δν−ρ(2)(x+, x) .

(7)

Here (1) and (2) in the upper subscript refer to the nuclei moving in the positive
and the negative z directions, respectively. Unlike the single-source problem in (2),
we cannot generally solve (7) in an analytically closed form. In the spacelike regions
two sources cannot communicate with each other because of causality, and so the
problem is to be reduced to the one-source problem. Imposing continuity from these
solutions, we can at best write the analytical solution down on the light cone. For the
description of the heavy-ion collision, the Bjorken coordinates (τ, η) are more useful
than the light-cone coordinates x±, which are related as

(8)
Then, in the radial gauge Aτ = x−A+ + x+A− = 0, the solution of (7) on the light
cone at τ = 0 takes a form of [20]
i + α(2)

,

(cid:16)(cid:2)α(1)

Aη = 0 ,
1 , α(2)

1

(cid:3) +(cid:2)α(1)

2 , α(2)

2

(cid:3)(cid:17)

(9)
where E i and E η are the transverse and the longitudinal components of the classical
color electric ﬁelds. It is quite intuitive that Ai is just a linear superposition of α(1)
and

,

i

Ai = α(1)
E i = 0 ,

i

E η = ig

√

2x± = τ e±η .

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

10

Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the glasma initial condition for the heavy-
ion collision. Longitudinal color electric and magnetic ﬁelds stretch between two
nucleus sheets forming a structure with color ﬂux tubes. Figure is taken from
[21].

i

, while E η appears from the non-Abelian character and there is no counterpart
α(2)
in QED. With this initial condition (9), we should solve the Yang-Mills Hamilton
equations in the Bjorken coordinates:

∂τE i =

1
τ

DηFηi + τDjFji ,

∂τE η =

DjFjη ,

1
τ

(10)

with the canonical conjugate momenta deﬁned ordinarily by

E i = τ ∂τAi ,

E η =

∂τAη .

1
τ

(11)
We should note that E η has a correct mass dimension of the electric ﬁeld but E i does
not. In physical terms E i/τ should be interpreted as the genuine transverse electric
ﬁeld which also goes to zero in the τ → 0+ limit. Using Ai in (9) we can readily
calculate the initial color magnetic ﬁeld as

Bi = 0 ,

Bη = F12 = −ig

(cid:16)(cid:2)α(1)

(cid:3) +(cid:2)α(2)

(cid:3)(cid:17)

1 , α(2)

2

1 , α(1)

2

(12)

i

using the fact that α(n)
is a pure gauge and so its ﬁeld strength is vanishing. Although
the combinations of indices for initial E η in (9) and initial Bη in (12) are slightly
diﬀerent, the squared expectation values turn out to be identical after taking the
color average with the Gaussian weight as deﬁned in (6). These identical (cid:104)E ηE η(cid:105) and
(cid:104)BηBη(cid:105) lead us to a very suggestive proﬁle of the initial condition for the heavy-ion
collision as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.

The evolving color ﬁelds starting with the initial condition in (9) are the
foundation of the “glasma” (named in [22] though its physics was known traced back
to the Lund string model) which is a transient state between the color glass condensate
and the quark-gluon plasma – glasma as a coined word from them. The most essential
property associated with the glasma initial condition is, as sketched in ﬁgure 2, the
presence of longitudinal color electric and magnetic ﬁelds with boost invariance (i.e.
η independence), which may be a source for rapidity correlation (ridge structure) [23]
and also local parity violation [24]. Because Qs is the universal scale, each color ﬂux
tube is expected to be localized in a domain whose transverse extent is ∼ Q−1
. In
the MV model, however, it is very diﬃcult to see such a structure by eyes. Recently
the correlation length possibly related to the ﬂux tube structure has been numerically
measured in the MV model by means of spatial Wilson loops and the color ﬂux tube
picture has been partially veriﬁed [25].

s

For our present consideration on the thermalization problem,

it is critically
important to recognize that the longitudinal pressure is inevitably negative with

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

11

Figure 3. Typical evolution of the color electric and magnetic ﬁelds in the MV
model (left) and the transverse and the longitudinal pressure (right). Figures are
taken from [26].

this type of glasma initial condition. We can understand such a negative pressure
intuitively: the longitudinal ﬁelds have positive energy density and so it would cost
a more positive energy to stretch the color ﬂux tubes farther. This implies that two
nucleus sheets feel an attractive force to decrease the ﬂux tube energies, leading to a
negative pressure. On the algebraic level we can see this from
12F a

(cid:104)T xx + T yy(cid:105) =

(13)

,

(cid:68)
tr(cid:2)E ηaE ηa + F a
(cid:68)
tr(cid:2)E iaE ia + F a

ηiF a

ηi

(cid:3)(cid:69)
(cid:3)(cid:69) − PT .

12

PT ≡ 1
2
PL ≡ (cid:104)τ 2T ηη(cid:105) =

1
τ 2

(14)

In the initial stage the contribution from transverse ﬁelds is negligibly small (regardless
of 1/τ 2), and so PT > 0 and PL ∼ −PT < 0 should be simultaneously developing for
ﬁnite but small τ .

We can numerically solve the equations of motion in (10) and (11) on lattice
discretized spacetime.
It is not mandatory to use the link variables for classical
theories, but the conventional lattice formulation in terms of the link variables Uµ
is convenient to stabilize long time simulations. It is then a bit cumbersome to rewrite
the initial condition (9) in terms of Uµ, which was done in [27].

Ideally the results have no dependence on the choice of µx once all variables are
made dimensionless in the unit of µx. In the actual calculation, however, this is not the
case since the color average in (5) is ultraviolet (UV) and infrared (IR) singular and so
the results depend on the lattice spacing a and the system volume L3. Nevertheless,
such unphysical UV and IR sensitivity becomes harmlessly mild once τ gets larger
than 1/a [3, 28, 29] (and this is why a naive expansion in terms of τ as attempted
in [30] completely fails due to singular τ /a terms; see [31] for more details). Figure 3
shows a typical example of the temporal proﬁle of the color electric and magnetic
ﬁelds (left ﬁgure) and also the transverse and the longitudinal pressure (right ﬁgure)
from the MV model simulation. All physical quantities are made dimensionless in
the unit of g2µx ∼ Qs. From these ﬁgures we see that the longitudinal pressure PL
goes negatively at ﬁrst and approaches zero back for g2µxτ (cid:38) 1. The longitudinal
expansion with PL = 0 means free-streaming, which will be closely discussed later in
section 3. To summarize the essential features of the glasma initial condition, the color
ﬁelds are boost invariant (η independent) and the longitudinal pressure is negative.
We need to ﬁnd some mechanism of violating the boost invariance to decohere ﬁelds

00.10.20.30.4 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3g2E2L,T / (g2µ)4,   g2B2L,T / (g2µ)4g2µτEL2BL2ET2BT2-0.0500.050.1 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3g2τ PL / (g2µ)3,   g2τ PT / (g2µ)3g2µττ PLτ PTEvolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

12

Figure 4. Schematic illustration of the bottom-up thermalization scenario.

and to make PL turn back to positive. For this purpose it is indispensable to consider
quantum ﬂuctuations properly beyond the classical approximation.

2.2. CGC-based Scenarios for Thermalization

The early-time dynamics in the heavy-ion collisions has a unique scale Qs, so that
s ∼ 0.2 fm/c for RHIC and ∼ 0.1 fm/c for
the proper unit to measure the time is Q−1
LHC. An interesting and challenging question is whether we can somehow give an
analytical estimate for the thermalization time in terms of αs = g2/(4π) and Qs for
suﬃciently small coupling αs (cid:28) 1. This program was ﬁrst addressed in [32] (see also
[3] for a rather negative conclusion) and the so-called “bottom-up scenario” has grown
popular. Since this picture of the bottom-up thermalization contains important view
points for subsequent developments (as partly seen in discussions in section 5), let us
start this subsection with a review of the bottom-up thermalization.

2.2.1. Bottom-up thermalization scenario The conclusion from the bottom-up
thermalization scenario [32] is that the parametrical expressions of the thermalization
time scale and the maximal temperature are, respectively,

Qsτth ∼ α−13/5

s

,

T /Qs ∼ α2/5

s

.

(15)

To understand these results, we should ﬁrst make it clear how to deﬁne thermalization.
In this scenario hard gluons with momenta ∼ Qs are initially produced and the
thermalization time of soft gluons with momenta ∼ T is deﬁned when the energy of
hard gluons is transferred to soft gluons. Let us ﬁrst consider a branching process
from a hard gluon into gluons with a softer momentum kbr. If there are Nsoft soft
gluons and their population is a thermalized one by Nsoft ∼ T 3, as we explain soon
later, the following relations can be shown:

kbr ∼ α4

sT 3τ 2

th ,

T ∼ α3

s Q2

s τ .

(16)

Then, once these are accepted, the energy ﬂow from hard to soft gluons should
be terminated when kbr ∼ Qs, which, together with T ∼ α3
s τth, means that
th ∼ Qs leading immediately to the thermalization time scale and the
kbr ∼ α13
s τ 5
initial temperature at τ = τth as given in (15).

s Q6

s Q2

To understand the ﬁrst relation in (16) let us consider a formation time τf needed

for one emission process, which is estimated by the uncertainty principle as

τf ∼ 1

k+ ∼ kbr
∆k2⊥

.

(17)

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

13

Then, the energy is deposited to the thermal medium by further hard splitting
processes and the time taken by these processes deﬁnes the thermalization time τth.
Parametrically, τf = αsτth (cid:28) τth. Now, we need to know what ∆k⊥ is, which reﬂects
the thermal properties in the soft sector. Using a diﬀusion constant ˆq ≡ d(cid:104)k2⊥(cid:105)/dt,
it is obvious that ∆k2⊥ ∼ ˆq · τf , and ˆq can be parametrized as ˆq ∼ m2
D/λ with the
D ∼ αsT 2 and
Debye mass mD and the mean-free path λ. In a thermal medium m2
λ ∼ 1/(αsT ), which eventually yields ˆq ∼ α2

s T 3. Therefore, we can have a relation:

∆k2⊥ ∼ kbr
τf

∼ α2

s T 3τf .

(18)

The ﬁrst expression in (16) is a result from plugging τf = αsτth into the above.
The second in (16) originates from the energy balance. In terms of the rate of
the gluon production, dN/dτ , the energy ﬂow per unit time should be kbr · dN/dτ
that is equated to an increase in thermal energy by d(T 4)/dτ . Because softer gluons
are emitted from a hard gluon whose density is ∼ Q3
s /(αsQsτ ) (where the gluon
distribution function in the saturation regime is ∼ 1/αs and Qsτ in the denominator
represents the longitudinal expansion eﬀect), the rate should be characterized as
dN/dτ ∼ Q2
s/(αsτ 2), which
concludes that the temperature grows up linearly as expressed in the second relation in
(16). As discussed in the original work [32] the above-mentioned qualitative derivations
can be more quantiﬁed by means of the Boltzmann equation. The Boltzmann equation
is actually a very useful tool and is widely used for other scenarios like a CGC-driven
BEC, as introduced in details in section 5.

s/(αsτ 2). Therefore, d(T 4)/dτ ∼ T 3dT /dτ ∼ (α4

sT 3τ 2)·Q2

2.2.2. Plasma and glasma instabilities The prefactor of τth from the bottom-up
thermalization scenario is expected to be not much diﬀerent from the unity.
If we
−13/5
∼ 23 for αs ∼ 0.3 and it is diﬃcult
take the parametric estimate literally, α
s
to account for thermalization within a reasonable time scale, namely, a few times
Q−1
or even earlier. There must be some missing mechanism that should accelerate
thermalization.

s

It has been pointed out that a plasma in general has various instabilities and so
the isotropization can be quickly driven by QCD counterparts of them, namely, QCD
plasma instabilities [33]; especially, an instability induced by strong anisotropy in the
momentum distribution is important [34] (see [35] for comprehensive and analytical
arguments on QCD plasma instabilities). Among several instabilities, it is believed
that the Weibel instability is the most relevant for the heavy-ion collisions that
spontaneously forms a ﬁlamentation pattern. It would be instructive to take a look at
the Weibel instability in a QED plasma with the electric current and the magnetic ﬁeld
B. Figure 5 captures the essential idea of the Weibel instability. Suppose that there is
spatial inhomogeneity in B, electron motions are aﬀected by the magnetic ﬁeld. The
upper situation in the ﬁgure shows the electron motion in one direction, and the lower
in the opposite direction. In both cases the same pattern of the electric current appears
as depicted in the right of the ﬁgure. Induced magnetic ﬁelds are sourced by these
electric currents and new B turns out to strengthen the initial spatial inhomogeneity in
B. Since the initial disturbance is ampliﬁed each time the backreaction from electron
motions is taken into account, the ﬁlamentation pattern grows up exponentially fast
that signals for an instability.

In the pure Yang-Mills theory the system has no direct counterpart of electrons,
i.e., (approximately) no quarks in the initial dynamics, and yet, gluons are color

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

14

Figure 5. Schematic illustration of the Weibel instability. Spatial inhomogeneity
of the magnetic ﬁeld is strengthened by the backreaction of electron motions under
the magnetic ﬁeld.

charged particles. Therefore, color magnetic ﬁelds at soft scale and color charged
gluons at hard scale are suﬃcient ingredient for the realization of the non-Abelian
Weibel instability. Let us recall that the CGC initial condition is boost invariant, and
PL is negative as long as boost-invariant color ﬂux tubes are extending between two
nuclei. Thus, it is indispensable to violate boost invariance by breaching color ﬂux
tubes with quantum ﬂuctuations. Actually, this should be physically interpreted as
particle production due to string breaking processes. Because we are interested in the
fate of boost-invariant background ﬁelds Aµ, it would be convenient to introduce a
Fourier transform as

δAµ(τ, ν, k⊥) ≡

dη e−iνηAµ(τ, η, k⊥) .

(19)

(cid:90)

The physical meaning of ν is a dimensionless wave-number to quantify inhomogeneity
along the longitudinal beam axis.
Fields at ν = 0 represent boost-invariant
backgrounds, and the deﬁnition gives a relation; ν = tkz + zk0 (in this review, we
do not distinguish covariant and contravariant vectors; kz = kz simply, except for the
notations for the light-cone and the Bjorken coordinates). Then, using this Fourier
transformed variables, we can write the classical gluon ﬁelds as 2πδ(ν)Aµ(τ, k⊥) +
δAµ(τ, ν, k⊥) with boost-invariant CGC ﬁelds and instability-driven ﬂuctuations. As
long as the latter is smaller than the former, we can investigate the instability using
linearized equations of motion; i.e., in the Bjorken coordinates, the transverse ﬁelds
should satisfy:

∂τ τ ∂τ δAi = − ν2
τ

δAi + τG−1

ij [A]δAj .

(20)

with the full gluon propagator Gµν[A] in the presence of background Aµ. If G−1
ij has
a positive eigenvalue λ, then the solution of the above equation should generally take
the following form [29]:

δAi ∼ c1(cid:60)Iiν(

λτ ) + c2(cid:61)Iiν(

√

√

√

λτ ) ,

(21)

λτ ) is the modiﬁed Bessel function. Given some initial condition, the
where Iiν(
evolution of δAµ(τ ) is deterministic, and its time dependence should be exponential
if c1 (cid:54)= 0 in the above.
Let us take an even closer look at (cid:60)Iiν(x) to have an intuitive feeling about
instabilities in one-dimensional expanding systems. Figure 6 plots [(cid:60)Iiν(x)]2 in two

June 17, 18, 2011 @ Zakopane1BBElectric Currente-e-Net Electric CurrentInduced BEvolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

15

Figure 6. Typical behavior of unstable modes in one-dimensionally expanding
systems. (Left) Squared quantities of the modiﬁed Bessel functions for ν = 1, 5,
and 10. (Right) Squared quantities of the modiﬁed Bessel functions normalized
at x0 = 0.1.

diﬀerent ways. The left ﬁgure shows the values of the functions as they are for
ν = 1, 5, and 10. We see that the oscillatory behavior lasts longer for larger ν,
which can be easily explained from (10). As long as the ﬁrst term enhanced by ν2/τ
overwhelms the right-hand side, no unstable behavior appears. This observation ﬁts
in with our intuition: the expansion tends to inhibit instability. The oscillatory region
itself, however, does not delay the onset of instability as is the case in the left of
ﬁgure 6, showing asymptotic convergence to the same curve. In most physical cases
the weight for larger-ν modes should be more suppressed (otherwise, (cid:60)Iiν(x) becomes
unphysically large as ν increases), and to see this eﬀect, the right of ﬁgure 6 shows
[(cid:60)Iiν(x)/(cid:60)Iiν(x0 = 0.1)]2, so that diﬀerent ν modes are all normalized at x = x0.
Then, for larger ν, the weight is smaller and the waiting time for instability becomes
larger [29, 36]. Because such delaying eﬀects are so sensitive to ν-dependent weight,
we must know the spectrum of initial ﬂuctuations very precisely to locate the onset of
instabilities and to account for early isotropization quantitatively.

Now let us return to discussions on the QCD Weibel instability. There are many
analytical and numerical studies on the Weibel instability and it is not realistic to try
to cover all of them here. As a typical and comprehensible example, let us pick up
one fairly analytical formulation in [37] (see also related numerical works [38, 39]).
The basic setup is a combination of the Yang-Mills equation and the Vlasov equation
(or Wong’s equation in [38]). The color ﬁelds represent the soft components of gluons
as is naturally implemented in the CGC theory. The hard components are split into
the color-neutral part and the colored part. The neutral part is assumed to have
anisotropic distribution,

(cid:113)

(cid:90) d2k⊥ dy

f0(k) = fiso(

k2⊥ + k2

η/τ 2

iso) ,

(22)

where fiso(k) is an isotropic distribution function. The colored part, δf a(k, x), that
represents a counterpart of electrons in ﬁgure 5, should be then determined by the
Vlasov equation that reads (with the collision term neglected):

kαDαabδf b(k⊥, kη) = gkαF αβa ∂

∂pβ f0(k⊥, kη) ,

(23)

in the Bjorken coordinates. Once δf a(k⊥, kη) is solved, the color ﬁelds should satisfy
the Yang-Mills equations with a color source provided by δf a(k⊥, kη), that is,

Dab
α (τF αβb) = jβa =

1
τ

g
2

(2π)3 kβ δf a(k⊥, kη) ,

(24)

251020501041012102010281036251020501109101810271036Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma
16
where y ≡ atanh(k0/kz). The information on the isotropic distribution is totally
encompassed in the Debye mass, which is deﬁned in terms of the distribution function
as

(cid:90) ∞

D ≡ g2
m2

d3k

(2π)32ω(k)

0

fiso(k) .

(25)

It must be noted that fiso(k) in the above is spin-summed and color-averaged one;
if the distribution function is the one per spin and color, the deﬁnition of m2
D
should be multiplied by 2CA = 2Nc, which more often appears in the literature.
The linearized Yang-Mills equations after eliminating δf a(k⊥, kη) should dictate the
temporal evolution of ﬂuctuation modes and, for late time τ (cid:29) τ0 (cid:29) τiso where τ0
represents the initial time, the Yang-Mills equations are reduced to

(cid:2)∂2
(cid:2)∂τ τ−1∂τ + 2µτ−2(cid:3)δAη(τ, ν) = 0 ,

τ τ ∂τ τ ∂τ + ν2∂2

τ τ − µν2τ−1(cid:3)δAi(τ, ν) = 0 ,

τ + µ∂2

(27)

(26)

8 m2

where µ ≡ π
Dτiso, which actually represent the concrete contents of (10). These are
easily solvable using the (modiﬁed) Bessel functions. In fact, δAη(τ, ν) can be given
by a linear superposition of oscillatory Bessel functions and thus it is concluded that
δAη(τ, ν) has no instability in the linear regime.
It is found that, even for ν (cid:29) 1
(which is less unstable according to the previous discussions) δAi(τ, ν) is a linear
superposition of modiﬁed Bessel functions as
√
τ I1(2

τ K1(2
√
which is an exponentially growing function and this diverging behavior manifests the
non-Abelian Weibel instability. The appearance of ∼ In(c
µτ is
typical in one-dimensional expanding systems; the exponential growth is not like ∼ ecτ
but ∼ ec

√
µτ ) ∼ (µτ )−1/4ec

δAi(τ, ν (cid:29) 1) (cid:39) c1

µτ due to expansion.

µτ ) + c2

µτ ) ,

√

√

(28)

√

√

In the approach with the Vlasov and the Yang-Mills equations the separation
between the ﬁeld of soft gluons and the particle of hard gluons seems to be an
artiﬁcial choice.
In principle, the physical results should not depend on where the
separation scale is, but it is quite non-trivial to verify this (see [39] for an example of
explicit check). It would be desirable to build a simple and unifying description to deal
with both soft and hard components within a common framework. Promising results
actually came out from the glasma simulation with initial ﬂuctuations incorporated.
Instead of solving coupled equations for Aµ and δf a(k) and integrating δf a(k)
out, we can directly write down a counterpart of (10) by linearizing the classical Yang-
Mills equations with 2πδ(ν)Aµ(τ, k⊥) + δAµ(τ, ν, k⊥).
In fact, we do not have to
perform the linearization, but we can just solve the full classical Yang-Mills equations
with initial ﬂuctuation seeds δAµ(τ, ν, k⊥) to break boost invariance.
In this way,
unstable behavior has been discovered, which is referred to as glasma instability [40].
Physically speaking, by construction, the origin of the glasma instability should be
the same as that of the plasma (Weibel) instability as emphasized in [41], but there
is no clear correspondence between the glasma and the plasma instabilities on the
algebraic level. In a sense, as numerically observed in ﬁgure 7 for example, the glasma
instability could be understood as a diﬀusion process in ν space from the CGC ﬁeld
at ν = 0 to higher ν modes, which was investigated by mode-by-mode analysis in
[26], and a sort of avalanche behavior was veriﬁed in [42] (see also [39] in which the
UV avalanche was ﬁrst pointed out). This is an example of the self-similarity and the
spectral cascade phenomenon that will be more discussed in section 3 and section 5.

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

17

Figure 7. Spectral decomposition of the CGC electric energy density as a
function of wave-number ν for various time τ . Initially all the energy is stored
only at ν = 0, which diﬀuses to larger ν as the time goes. Figure is taken from
[26].

We also note that the classical Yang-Mills equations are highly non-linear, and so
there may be instabilities associated with chaotic behavior of solutions [43]. In fact,
in some numerical simulations [44, 45], the Lyapunov exponents have been extracted,
which is useful for the computation of the Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy [46].

2.3. Real-time Formulations

We have already previewed some results from the kinetic equation and the classical
ﬁeld. The former is eﬀective for a regime where the gluon distribution is dilute. Once
the gluon amplitude reaches the saturation regime, the expansion of the collision term
with respect to the gluon distribution does not work, and the classical approximation
makes better sense. The semi-classical method has been highly sophisticated into a
form of the classical statistical approximation nowadays, which, however, may suﬀer
the UV singularities. Finally, we will quickly look over some other methods.

2.3.1. Dilute regime — kinetic equation Let us begin with a classical example of
simple scalar ﬁeld theory.
In the dilute regime at weak coupling, the Boltzmann
equation should be an appropriate description of the real-time dynamics. For the
distribution function f (k, x, t) the scalar Boltzmann equation reads:

df
dt

=

+ ˙x

∂
∂x

+ ˙k

∂
∂k

∂t

f (k, x, t) =

,

(29)

(cid:19)

(cid:18) ∂f

(cid:19)

∂t

coll

(cid:18) ∂

(cid:90)

1

×(cid:110)

(cid:18) ∂f (k1)

(cid:19)

where the last term represents the collision term, which can be diagrammatically
calculated at weak coupling. The simplest example is an elastic 2 ↔ 2 process, for
which the collision term should take a conventional expression,

∂t

=

2↔2

4ν ω(k1)

k2,k3,k4

(2π)4δ(4)(k1 + k2 − k3 − k4)|M2↔2(k)|2

f3f4(1 + f1)(1 + f2) − f1f2(1 + f3)(1 + f4)

.

(30)

(cid:111)

10-1010-710-410-110200.0050.01g2τ2 εE (ν) / (g2µ)2ν / g2µτg2µτ201325466623793975116813721585Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

Here we introduced a compact notation; (cid:82)

k ≡ (cid:82) d3k/[2ω(k)(2π)3] with ω(k) = |k|

18

for massless bosons, fi ≡ f (ki), and ν represents the degeneracy factor associated
with internal quantum number (such as spin degeneracy). When the system gets
equilibrated, df /dt = 0 and so the detailed balance is realized, from which the Bose-
Einstein distribution function is derived as follows. Let us require that f3f4(1+f1)(1+
f2)−f1f2(1+f3)(1+f4) = 0 for arbitrary k1, k2, k3, and k4, which is a suﬃcient (but
not necessary) condition to let the collision term vanish. Then, by taking logarithms,
we can show,

(cid:18) 1 + f1

(cid:19)

ln

f1

(cid:18) 1 + f2

(cid:19)

f2

(cid:18) 1 + f3

(cid:19)

f3

(cid:18) 1 + f4

(cid:19)

f4

+ ln

= ln

+ ln

.

(31)

This means that ln[(1 + f )/f ] should be a conserved quantity, and so should be
expressed as a linear combination of basic conserved quantities; 1, k, and k0 = ω(k)
as

(cid:20) 1 + f (k)

(cid:21)

⇒ f (k) =

1

e(kµuµ−µ)/T − 1

.

(32)

− kµuµ
T
Here, uµ represents the ﬂuid four-velocity.

f (k)

µ
T

ln

=

The thermalization problem of the QGP or the isotropization in modern language
was ﬁrst investigated in [2] using the Boltzmann equation with the relaxation time
approximation (RTA). Because the calculations are quite instructive to explain the
basic features of the QGP, below, we shall reiterate the main steps of calculations in
[2]. In the heavy-ion collision the system cannot be homogeneous in the Cartesian
coordinates because the longitudinal velocity is u = z/t and the Lorentz time
dilatation becomes greater for larger z. So, we should keep ∂/∂z in the left-hand
side of (29), while ˙k drops oﬀ without external force. Then, once boost invariance is
imposed, z dependence is uniquely ﬁxed through kz(z) = γ(kz − k0u) where kz and
k0 are the longitudinal momentum and the energy at z = 0. From this, it is easy to
see that ∂/∂z = −(k0/t)∂/∂kz if they act on a function of kz(z). Therefore, in this
case of boost-invariant expansion, the Boltzmann equation takes a form of

(cid:18) ∂

− kz
t

∂
∂kz

∂t

(cid:19)

(cid:18) ∂f

(cid:19)

∂t

coll

f (k⊥, kz, t) =

,

(33)

apart from transverse dynamics that we neglect. Below we drop z from f (k⊥, kz, z, t)
focusing on the mid rapidity region only. In the absence of collision, we have the free-
streaming solution; i.e., f (k⊥, kz, t) = f (k⊥, kzt/t0) solves (33). In the free-streaming
case, the local energy density becomes,

which is a natural consequence from one-dimensional expansion. In the RTA in which
the analytical calculation is feasible, the collision term is assume to be as simple as

ε(t) =

(cid:90) d3k
(2π)3|k| f (k, t) =
(cid:18) ∂f
(cid:19)

= − 1
τrel

∂t

coll

(cid:90) d2k⊥dξ

(cid:113)

(2π)3

t0
t

(cid:2)f (k⊥, kz, t) − feq(k, t)(cid:3) ,

k2⊥ + ξ2 f0(k⊥, ξ) ∝ 1
t

, (34)

(35)

where τrel represents the relaxation time and feq(k, t) is the Bose-Einstein distribution
function at the temperature T (t). Generally speaking, τrel is a function of time and
momenta, but if we adopt a constant τrel, we can analytically solve the Boltzmann
equation under the initial condition of f (k⊥, kz, t = t0) = f0(k⊥, kz) as
f (k⊥, kz, t) = e(t0−t)/τrelf0(k⊥, kzt/t0)+

e(t(cid:48)−t)/τrel feq(

k2⊥ + (kzt/t(cid:48))2, t(cid:48)) .(36)

(cid:90) t

(cid:113)

dt(cid:48)
τrel

t0

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

19

Figure 8. The collisions terms of 2 ↔ 2 scattering (upper) and 1 ↔ 2 scattering
(lower). The reversed processes to increase 1 are omitted.

From this form of the solution, an integral equation for ε(t) can be derived [2], which
can be solved for t (cid:29) τrel (with the energy conservation and an assumption that the
initial distribution is peaked at pz = 0) leading ﬁnally to

(cid:39) 1.22

ε(t)
ε(t0)

t0τ 1/3
rel
t4/3

∝ 1
t4/3

.

(37)

This t dependence makes a sharp contrast to the free-streaming one in (34) and should
be interpreted as the complete isotropization. Actually, the conservation equation in
the expanding system reads:
ε + PL

(38)

dε
dτ

+

= 0 ,

τ

where PL is the longitudinal pressure as deﬁned in (14). If PL = 0 in the free-streaming
case, ε ∼ 1/τ as we have already seen in (34). (It should be noted that we took z = 0
to simplify discussions, so that τ is just t then.) Once PL = PT is realized and the
conformality is approximately realized as ε− 2PT − PL ≈ 0, then PL ≈ ε/3 and we see
that ε ∼ 1/τ 4/3 is concluded from (38). In summary, if the interaction is turned oﬀ,
the free-streaming solution leads to ε ∝ 1/τ , and if the interaction is strong enough
to achieve the complete isotropization, the hydrodynamic scaling (in a sense of old-
fashioned characterization) follows as ε ∝ 1/τ 4/3. In reality it is quite unlikely that
the system can be fully isotropized in the heavy-ion collisions and the exponent should
be something between −1 and −4/3. For the reliable determination of the exponent,
the RTA is a too crude approximation, and the most serious obstacle is that the RTA
would violate conservation laws, which may be cured in the Lorentz model, but it
should be of course much better if the QCD interaction is systematically considered.
For this purpose the eﬀective kinetic theory (EKT) of QCD [47] has been
developed, with which the shear viscosity calculation is performed and also the jet
energy loss is evaluated. The EKT consists of the Boltzmann equation with two
scattering terms; an elastic 2 ↔ 2 scattering and an inelastic 1 ↔ 2 scattering. The
former is easy to ﬁnd from the usual Feynman rule. Because the triple-gluon vertex
has one derivative, for example, the t-channel scattering in the upper left in ﬁgure 8
leads to |(k1+k3)·(k2+k4)/(k3−k1)2| = (s−u)2/t2 = 1−4us/t2 using the Mandelstam
variables, s = (k1 + k2)2, t = (k1 − k3)2, and u = (k1 − k4)2 with four-vector notation.
Summing the u-channel and s-channel contributions up together with the quartic-

123412341234t-channelu-channels-channel123312Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

20

Figure 9.
Schematic paths from the CGC-type initial condition to the
thermalized state. Figure is adapted from a talk by Kurkela at Quark Matter
2015. (The original one plots PT/PL.)

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

gluon vertex term, the 2 ↔ 2 matrix element eventually amounts to

|M2↔2|2 = 16g4dAC 2

A

3 − us

t2 − st

u2 − tu

s2

,

(39)

where dA = N 2

c − 1 and CA = Nc.

In contrast to this, the 1 ↔ 2 scattering is much more complicated because
in this case, if all gluons are massless, only the completely collinear scattering is
kinematically possible, and the quantum destructive interference eﬀect with multiple
scatterings with surrounding media called the Landau-Pomeranchuk-Migdal (LPM)
eﬀect should be taken into account. So, apart from small ﬁnite angles allowed by the
ˆk1 (where ki represents
eﬀective gluon mass, we can postulate k2 = k2
not four-vector but ki = |ki| in expressions below) in the lower processes in ﬁgure 8.
The collision term for the 1 ↔ 2 scattering involves two diﬀerent kinds of contributions
corresponding to two diagrams in ﬁgure 8. Now, since the vector directions of k2 and
k3 are ﬁxed, we can readily take the angle integrations to express the collision term

ˆk1 and k3 = k3

as(cid:18) ∂f (k1)
(cid:19)
×(cid:104)

∂t

(cid:90) ∞

(2π)3
2|k1|2ν

0

=

dk2dk3
1↔2
δ(k1 − k2 − k3)γ(k1; k2, k3)
+ 2δ(k1 + k2 − k3)γ(k3; k1, k2)

(cid:110)

(cid:110)

f2f3(1 + f1) − f1(1 + f2)(1 + f3)

f3(1 + f1)(1 + f2) − f1f2(1 + f3)

.

(40)

(cid:111)

(cid:111)(cid:105)

The scattering rate γ(ki; kj, kk) should contain multiple interactions with media and
should reproduce the leading-order LPM eﬀect. The explicit form is given in [47] in a
form of the integral equation.

It is not easy to solve these functional equations numerically, and the state-of-
the-art numerical simulation with these equations has been carried out in [48]. The
central message from [48] is summarized in a schematic picture in ﬁgure 9, which is
adapted from a picture presented by Kurkela at Quark Matter 2015. We note that
the original ﬁgure plots PT/PL and here the vertical axis is changed to PL/PT which
is more consistent with what we have discussed so far.

According to the scenario in ﬁgure 9, PL/PT initially decreases due to longitudinal
expansion and it would go to the free-streaming limit unless the scattering eﬀects are
taken into account. It is the quantum eﬀect incorporated in the collision terms that

Anisotropy:Occupancy: fOveroccupiedUnderoccupiedClassicalQuantumThermalInitial (CGC)Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

21

derives the system back to non-zero PL/PT and eventually the system approaches a
thermal state. It is actually a vital question what lets the system resist against the
free-streaming limit, and there is not a consensus in the heavy-ion physics community
yet, though the quantum ﬂuctuations certainly play a key role.

Another proﬁtable treatment of the collision term is to take the small angle
limit assuming that massless gluon exchange is most enhanced there. Speciﬁcally,
t- and u-channel terms in the 2 ↔ 2 scattering of (39) become dominant, and in this
limiting situation the collision term takes an amazingly simple form [49], which has
been developed in a context to address the question of the gluonic BEC formation
speculated in [50]. We will discuss this possibility of the BEC formation in details in
section 5 and we here take a quick look at the concrete form of the collision term. In
[49] a variation of the QCD Boltzmann equation that behaves like a Fokker-Planck
equation has been proposed with the collision term,

Ia∇kf (k, t)+ˆkIbf (k, t)(cid:2)1+f (k, t)(cid:3)(cid:27)

(cid:19)θ≈0

(cid:26)
(cid:18) ∂f (k)
s ξ∇k·
k f (k)[1 + f (k)] and Ib ≡ (cid:82)

= 2π2α2

∂t

qmin

2↔2

the IR cutoﬀs; ξ ≡ (18/π)(cid:82) qmax
Here, Ia ≡ (cid:82)

, (41)
where ∇k ≡ ∂/∂k. The overall factor ξ is divergent and requires the UV and
dq/q with qmax ∼ T and qmin ∼ mD(∼ gT ).
k 2f (k)/|k| ∝ mD. Obviously there is no
resummation corresponding to the LPM eﬀect since (41) corresponds to only 2 ↔ 2
scattering. Let us see some interesting properties of (41). First, we can easily check
that the Bose-Einstein distribution function feq(k) leads to a relation, Ia = T Ib, so
that (41) vanishes for feq(k) in equilibrium as it should. Second, the particle number
obtained by the phase-space integral of f (k, x) is conserved manifestly due to the fact
that the right-hand side in (41) is a total derivative. Therefore, even though (41)
looks very simple, it maintains the essence of the genuine 2 ↔ 2 collision term in (30).
In the original discussions in [49] inelastic processes are turned oﬀ (apart from some
qualitative remarks) and the gluon number is assumed to be a conserved quantity,
which inevitably results in overpopulated gluons and an associated BEC formation.
The eﬀect of inelastic scattering has been later investigated and in a recent work
[51] the splitting kernel is simpliﬁed into a form similar to the one in the RTA in
(35). Regarding the BEC scenario and possible scaling solutions, more discussions
will follow in section 5.

The fate of PL/PT has been also extensively investigated not only in the dilute
regime but also in the dense regime in terms of classical ﬁeld simulations. In fact,
when the occupation number becomes as large as f ∼ 1/λ in the λφ4 theory or
f ∼ 1/αs in QCD, it is no longer legitimate to utilize the perturbation theory even
for small coupling. In the dilute regime, usually, many-body scatterings like m ↔ n
processes are higher order with respect to the coupling constant. For example, a 3 ↔ 3
scattering in the λφ4 is of order ∼ λ4 at the tree level, and the collision term involves
ﬁve distribution functions, leading to the order of ∼ 1/λ in the saturated regime,
which is of the same order as 2 ↔ 2 in (30). In this saturated regime we need to use
a non-perturbative method such as the semi-classical approximation.

2.3.2. Dense regime — classical statistical simulation The glasma instability was
found in the purely classical simulation with δAµ(τ, ν (cid:54)= 0), and in the ﬁrst simulation
[40] the initial value of δAµ(τ = τ0, ν) was treated as white noise proportional to some
seed strength ∆. For more quantitative studies, however, we should ﬁgure out what

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

22

(cid:90)

the realistic spectrum of ∆(τ0, ν) is. The ﬁrst attempt along these lines is found in
[52] based on an analogy to the harmonic oscillator problem in quantum mechanics.
It would give us some intuition if we consider the semi-classical approximation
ﬁrst not in quantum ﬁeld theory but in quantum mechanics. Let us explain the idea
with a simple example, which can be easily generalized later to quantum ﬁeld theory
problems. For a given density matrix ˆρ(t), the Wigner function is deﬁned as

1

W (x, p; t) ≡

dδx(cid:104)x − 1

2 δx|ˆρ(t)|x + 1

2 δx(cid:105) e−ip·δx/

.

(2π)3

(42)
If ˆρ is a pure state of the one-dimensional harmonic oscillator ground state |ψ0(cid:105), and
then the wave-function in the x representation is a Gaussian; ψ0(x) ∼ exp(−x2/2b2).
It is then straightforward to conﬁrm W (x, p) ∼ exp(−x2/b2 − b2p2). Thus, roughly
speaking, the Wigner function embodies a probability distribution for classical
conjugate variables in a way consistent with the uncertainty principle.
It should
be mentioned, however, that the Wigner function as deﬁned in (42) could take a
negative value (usually when some quantum entanglement is involved), and so a naive
interpretation as a probability distribution needs caution.
It can be proved that a
smeared Winger function (called the Husimi function) is always non-negative, which
is a quite useful property to make a correspondence between the classical ﬁelds and
the classical particle distributions [53].

From the von Neumann equation, i(∂ ˆρ/∂t) = [ ˆH, ˆρ], the time evolution of the

Wigner function is determined with the Moyal product as

(cid:104) i

2

(cid:0)←−

∂p

(cid:1)(cid:105)

−→
∂x − ←−

∂x

−→
∂p

W (x, p; t) ,

(43)

∂W (x, p; t)

∂t

= H(p, x)

2
i sin

(cid:90)

where the classical Hamiltonian appearing above reads:

dδx(cid:104)x − 1

2 δx| ˆH|x + 1

2 δx(cid:105) e−ip·δx/

H(x, p) =

(44)
We can then expand the above equation of motion in terms of  to ﬁnd that, at the
leading order, the time evolution is described by the classical equation of motion with
the Poisson brackets:

.

W (x, p; t)

= {H(p, x), W (x, p, t)}P + O(2) ,

∂t

(45)
and there is no term of O(). Therefore, at least at the O() accuracy, the initial
Wigner function has all the quantum eﬀects and the classical equations of motion
remain intact. This observation is the theoretical foundation of the classical statistical
simulation.

Historically, the classical statistical simulation has been developed in a wider
context than the heavy-ion collision physics.
A successful example in the
thermalization problem in the Early Universe is found in [54] where turbulent behavior
with self-similar dynamics has been observed in semi-classical λφ4 theory (see also [55]
for a more comprehensive report). On a more academic level, a scalar theory with
high initial occupancy was considered in [56] to quantify classical aspects of real-time
quantum dynamics, and the classical statistical formulation for non-Abelian gauge
theories was given in [57]. There are fruitful outputs from the classical statistical
simulation, especially many insightful indications about the fate of the isotropization
(discussed more in section 3) and the weak wave turbulence in the pure Yang-Mills
theory (discussed more in section 5). Interested readers are guided to the most recent
review [58] on the classical statistical simulation.

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

23

For the rest of this subsubsection, let us explain how the initial Wigner function
should be given for a special geometry in the heavy-ion collisions with longitudinal
expansion. This problem was carefully resolved in [59] and further investigated for a
scalar theory in [60] and for gauge ﬁeld theories in [61]. Here, let us take a close look
at the derivation of ﬂuctuation spectrum in an expanding scalar theory deﬁned with
2 (∂µφ)2 − V (φ). To mimic the glasma background, let
a Lagrangian density, L(φ) = 1
us decompose a scalar ﬁeld φ at small τ into an η-independent background ϕ (which
can be regarded as τ -independent for τ ≈ 0) and η-dependent quantum ﬂuctuations
(cid:90) dν
as
φ(x⊥, η, τ ≈ 0) = ϕ(x⊥) +

dµK eπν/2 cνK eiνηχK(x⊥)H (2)

iν (λKτ ) + c.c. , (46)

√

π
2

2π

and the question is the probability distribution for the weight cνK of each mode. Here,
H (2)
iν (x) is the Hankel function and χK(x⊥) represents the orthogonal basis function
on top of the background ϕ, which is determined by the eigenvalue equation,

(cid:2)−∇2⊥ + V (cid:48)(cid:48)(ϕ)(cid:3)χK(x⊥) = λ2

K χK(x⊥) ,

and K is the quantum number to label diﬀerent eigen-vectors.
If the background
potential V (cid:48)(cid:48)(ϕ) is spatially uniform, K is nothing but a spatial momentum k and
χK(x⊥) is a plane wave. The choices of the eigen-function and the measure dµK are
not independent; a choice proposed in [60] is, using

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(47)

(48)

(49)

δKK(cid:48) ≡

d2x⊥ χ∗

K(x⊥) χK(cid:48)(x⊥) ,

the measure is normalized to satisfy,

dµK δKK(cid:48) = 1 .

Then, the spectrum of initial quantum ﬂuctuations is characterized in the following
form:

(cid:104)cνK cµK(cid:48)(cid:105) = 0 ,

µK(cid:48)(cid:105) = πδ(ν − µ)δKK(cid:48) .
It might be a bit puzzling why (46) involves H (2)
iν (λKτ ) even though we are interested
only in the initial spectrum at τ = 0+. The reason is that there are coordinate
singularities at τ = 0+ and for practical simulations we need to start the numerical
simulation with some initial condition at small but ﬁnite τ .

(cid:104)cνK c∗

(50)

It is non-trivial how to deﬁne the occupation number from the classical ﬁelds. In
other words, because the occupation number is an expectation value of the number
operator in terms of the annihilation and the creation operators, what we need is the
representation of the annihilation and the creation operators using the classical ﬁelds.
This can be done with the projection to free particle basis, i.e. (see [62] for a related
argument in the context of the Schwinger mechanism)
d2x⊥dη e−iνη−ik⊥·x⊥ H (2)∗
fνk⊥ (τ ) = − 1
2

↔
∂ φ(τ, η, x⊥)

(cid:28)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:90)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)2(cid:29)

πτ 2eπν
4S⊥Lη

(k⊥τ )

. (51)

+

iν

This formulation of the classical statistical simulation with correct quantum spectrum
should reproduce at least the one-loop order results. The advantage lies in the stability
for long time simulations, while serious shortcomings are found in the UV sector
when applied for quantum ﬁeld theories. First of all, the zero-point oscillation energy
appears and it should be gotten rid of by some subtraction procedures. In ordinary

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

24

quantum ﬁeld theory the zero-point oscillation energy is just an oﬀset in energy and
safely discarded. The situation gets highly complicated as soon as inhomogeneous
background ﬁelds are involved especially in expanding geometries. One prescription
would be to take a ﬁnite diﬀerence between numerical results with and without the
background ﬁelds, as was implemented in [63]. Secondly, the approximation in the
classical statistical simulation may ruin the renormalizability of theory, which was
shown perturbatively in [64].

To have a deeper insight into ﬁeld theoretical problems inherent in the classical
statistical simulation,
it would be very useful to understand how the classical
description can have a connection to the kinetic equation when the occupation number
gets large. This question was formulated for λφ4 theory in [65] and some subtleties
in the derivation have been clariﬁed in [66]. Here, let us take a quick look over the
arguments in [65]. To make the question well-deﬁned, we should work in a semi-
saturated regime where 1 (cid:28) f (cid:28) 1/λ is assumed.

The key elements are the real-time propagators Gij(x, y) in the so-called ra basis.
In non-equilibrium case the translational invariance could be violated and so, generally
speaking, Gij(x, y) is a function of not only δx = x − y but also X = (x + y)/2.
Assuming that the X dependence is slow, replacing X with x, the Fourier transformed
propagators with respect to δx can be expressed as

Gaa(k, x) = 0 , Gra(k, x) =

, Gar(k, x) =

(cid:20) 1

2

i

k2−m2 +ik0

(cid:21)(cid:0)Gra − Gar

(cid:1) =

(cid:20) 1

2

Grr(k, x) =

+ f (k, x, t)

+ f (k, x, t)

(cid:21)

i

, (52)

k2−m2−ik0
2πδ(k2 − m2) . (53)

These propagators should satisfy the Dyson equation:

2ikµ∂µGrr(k, x) = Grr(Σar − Σra) + Σaa(Gar − Gra) .

(54)

Because f is large now, Grr(p, x) is dominant, and then the Dyson equation leads to
a kinetic equation with the collision term in this approximation given by

(cid:18) ∂f

(cid:19)classical

∂t

coll

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

−i(Σar − Σra)

2k0

=

f +

1
2

+

iΣaa
2k0

.

(55)

The self-energies can be computed according to the ordinary Feynman rule in the
λφ4 theory. Because all self-energies are written in terms of Grr ∝ (1/2 + f ), we
can understand that the collision term for the 2 ↔ 2 scattering is modiﬁed from the
conventional form of (30) into

(cid:90)

λ2

=

4ω(k1)
2 )(f1 + 1

2 )(f4 + 1

(cid:18) ∂f (k1)
×(cid:110)

∂t

(cid:19)classical

2↔2
(f3 + 1
− (f1 + 1

k2,k3,k4
2 ) + (f2 + 1
2 ) − (f4 + 1

(2π)4δ(4)(k1 + k2 − k3 − k4)

2 )(f3 + 1

2 )(f4 + 1
2 )

(cid:111)

2 )(f2 + 1

2 )(f3 + 1

2 )(f1 + 1

2 )(f2 + 1
2 )

, (56)

where the cubic terms and the quadratic terms reproduce the correct ones in (30),
while this above form has extra linear terms, ∝ f3 + f4 − f2 − f1. Surprisingly,
the presence of these linear terms change the structure of theory in the UV region
drastically [67]. To see this, let us consider the equilibrium distribution resulting from
(56), that is easily found to be the Rayleigh-Jeans form:

f (k) → T

ω(k) − µ

− 1
2

,

(57)

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

25

which correctly reproduces ﬁrst two terms from the expansion of the Bose-Einstein
or Planck distribution. Therefore, this is a valid description for f (cid:29) 1 with
ω − µ (cid:28) T . For large |k|, however, f (k) becomes smaller and smaller and eventually
the approximation breaks down. In the genuine thermal equilibrium, f (k) should have
an exponential tail rather than a power-law decay, which cannot be reproduced in the
semi-classical approximation.

This change to (57) is the clearest manifestation of the loss of renormalizability.
In fact, with the distribution function (57), the total particle number and the energy
are both UV divergent (i.e. UV catastrophe, which is a well recognized problem in
the condensation of classical non-linear waves [68]) and a UV cutoﬀ is necessary even
though the underlying theory was originally renormalizable. This implies that the
classical statistical simulation should suﬀer artiﬁcial dependence on a UV cutoﬀ, which
moreover aﬀects the scaling behavior [69], as is the main subject in section 3.

2.4. Other Methods

It would be desirable to invent theoretical methods applicable to both dilute and
dense regimes particularly to investigate the whole dynamics of an expanding system
in the heavy-ion collision. There is unfortunately no such universal method so far, but
theoretical attempts are making some progresses, some selected ones of which will be
introduced in this section.

2.4.1. Kadanoﬀ-Baym equations The quantum upgraded version of the equations
of motion is the Dyson-Schwinger equation. In principle the kinetic equation could
be derived from the Dyson-Schwinger equation. It is still very diﬃcult to solve the
Dyson-Schwinger equation or similar functional equations in Minkowskian spacetime
(see [70] for an attempt based on functional renormalization group equations); a part
of subtlety comes from a technical diﬃculty in imposing a UV cutoﬀ to Minkowskian
four-vector. It would be a better strategy to transform the functional equation into
a more convenient representation such as the 2PI formalism [71]. In the context of
the real-time studies the 2PI formalism has been successful for the 1/N expansion
in O(N ) scalar theories as discussed diagrammatically in [72] and numerically with
instability in [73].

The 2PI eﬀective action (for a bosonic ﬁeld) reads:

(cid:2)ln G−1 + G−1

0 G(cid:3) + Γ2[G] ,

Γ[G] =

i
2

TrC

(58)

where G0 and G represent the free and the full propagators, respectively, and Γ2[G] is
the contribution from 2PI diagrams in terms of bare vertices and full propagators. The
trace TrC is taken along the closed-time path. The full propagator and the self-energy
are determined functionally from stationary conditions,

δΓ[G]

δG

= 0 ,

Π = 2i

δΓ2[G]

δG

,

(59)

which yield the Kadanoﬀ-Baym equations. The propagator and the self-energy are
decomposed into statistical and spectral parts; G(x, y) = GF (x, y) − i
2 signC(x0 −
y0)Gρ(x, y) and Π(x, y) = −iδC(x−y)Π(local)(x)+ΠF (x, y)− i
2 signC(x0−y0)Πρ(x, y),
where signC(x0 − y0) ≡ ΘC(x0 − y0) − ΘC(y0 − x0). The Kadanoﬀ-Baym equations

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

26

read [74]:

(cid:90) x0

0

d4z ΠF (x, z)Gρ(z, y) −

(cid:90) y0
(cid:2)∂2 + M 2(x)(cid:3)GF (x, y) =
(cid:90) x0
(cid:2)∂2 + M 2(x)(cid:3)Gρ(x, y) = −
2 ) and ˜Gρ(X, k) = −i(cid:82) d4δx eikδxGρ(X +
˜GF (X, k) =(cid:82) d4δx eikδxGF (X + δx
quasi-particle approximation, ˜Gρ = π(cid:2)δ(k0 − ε(X, k))− δ(k0 + ε(X, k))(cid:3)/ε(X, k) with

(61)
with M 2(x) ≡ m2 + Π(local)(x). The Wigner transformed propagators are deﬁned as
2 , X − δx
δx
(cid:113)
the distribution function f (X, k) where it is deﬁned from ˜GF = ˜Gρ(f + 1

2 ). The gradient expansion leads to a Boltzmann-type kinetic equation for
2 ) and the

d4z Πρ(x, z)GF (z, y) . (60)

d4z Πρ(x, z)Gρ(z, y)

2 , X − δx

0

y0

ε(X, k) =

k2 + M 2(x), is used.

A qualitative diﬀerence between the Boltzmann equation and the Kadanoﬀ-Baym
equation appears from the quasi-particle approximation, without which the collision
phase space opens for 0 ↔ 4, 1 ↔ 3, 2 ↔ 2 oﬀ-shell processes in the λφ4 theory.
The numerical simulation of the QCD Kadanoﬀ-Baym equation is still an ambitious
challenge. To simplify the treatment of the spectral function, ˜Gρ, a Lorentzian Ansatz
was introduced in some phenomenological approaches (see [75] for a review), and the
more full self-consistent treatment was carried out in [76] with the aim to make a
uniﬁed formalism with the CGC background. This direction of research should deserve
more studies with computer resource invested in the future.

2.4.2. Stochastic quantization The Monte-Carlo integration is useless when the sign
problem is severe, and this is why the direct QCD simulation is so diﬃcult in
Minkowskian spacetime. Then, one idea to overcome the sign problem is to quantize
a ﬁeld theory in a diﬀerent way, using a Langevin equation, which is conceivable
because quantum eﬀects are ﬂuctuations around the classical paths. One of the
oldest attempts along these lines is the derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation from
a Brownian motion by Nelson [77]. It is known that classical noises are inadequate
for correct quantization, but it is possible to reformulate the quantization procedure
by adding a ﬁctitious time or a quantum axis. This method is thus an example of
the so-called holographic principle that states an equivalence between D-dimensional
quantum theory and (D + 1)-dimensional classical theory.

A complete review is available in [78]; here, we simply sketch the idea. For a simple
scalar theory, the Langevin equation to describe the evolution with the ﬁctitious time
θ is written down as

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)φ(x)→φ(x,θ)

∂θφ(x, θ) = i

δS

δφ(x)

+ η(x, θ) ,

(62)

where S is an action to deﬁne the theory and η(x, θ) is a stochastic noise satisfying
(cid:104)η(x, θ)η(x(cid:48), θ(cid:48))(cid:105)η = 2δ(4)(x− x(cid:48))δ(θ − θ(cid:48)). It is claimed that the quantum expectation
value of an operator O[φ(x)] is given by

(cid:104)O[φ(x)](cid:105) = lim

θ→∞(cid:104)O[φ(x, θ)](cid:105)η .

(63)

Using the stochastic diagrams, we can map the above procedures faithfully to the
conventional Feynman diagrams. Therefore, the perturbative equivalence has no doubt
based on diagrammatic considerations, while the non-perturbative simulations could
violate this perturbative equivalence.

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

27

Because the Langevin equation in (62) is complex with an imaginary unit in front
of the drift term, this quantization procedure is nowadays called the complex Langevin
method. The ﬁrst successful report on the real-time quantization is [79], in which the
boundary condition was not correctly implemented, and a more reﬁned simulation
was performed in [80]. The method seemed to be promising apart from a stability
problem in a long-time simulation. Later, the real-time complex Langevin method
was revisited in [81] and it was found that the numerical simulation has a general
tendency to fall into a wrong answer.

New insights to the complex Langevin method have emerged from careful analyses
in comparison to the Lefschetz thimble method that looks similar to the complex
Langevin method but has a ﬁrm mathematical foundation. The relation between
these two methods has been understood numerically [82] and analytically [83], which
was useful to clarify the origin of the convergence problem in the complex Langevin
method. In general, when the Stokes phenomenon occurs in complexiﬁed theories, the
convergence becomes subtle, which can be understood from phase factors of distinct
Lefschetz thimbles [84]. Usually the Stokes phenomenon corresponds to a phase
transition in equilibrium environments and so the complex Langevin method works
poorly only when the system approaches a phase transition [85].
In Minkowskian
spacetime the situation is much worse and the onset of the Stokes phenomenon
is found around the on-shell conditions, and the validity region is tightly limited.
Without some breakthrough, it is unlikely that the complex Langevin method or the
Lefschetz thimble method can capture the correct real-time dynamics of interested
physics problems. An important lesson that we can learn is that some unexpected
complication may appear and a diﬀerent prescription to quantize a theory may change
non-perturbative contents of the theory, which could be understood from a well-known
mathematical fact that many inequivalent functions can happen to have identical
asymptotic series.

2.4.3. Gauge/gravity correspondence The most widely recognized example of the
holographic principle is the correspondence between the gauge theory and the gravity
theory, i.e., the N = 4 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory in the large-Nc limit and
In
the classical solution (anti-de Sitter; AdS5 metric) of the super-gravity theory.
the heavy-ion community this method has become very popular since the successful
calculation of the shear viscosity [86].

The key relation of the correspondence is summarized in a form of the GKP-

Witten relation;(cid:28)

(cid:20)

(cid:90)

(cid:21)(cid:29)

exp

i

d4x φ0(x)O(x)

= eiSgravity[φ0(x)] ,

(64)

where the left-hand side is the expectation value in gauge ﬁeld theory and the right-
hand side is the on-shell action in the classical gravity theory with the boundary
condition φ → φ0 at the boundary. Apart from decoupled and irrelevant coordinates
in S5, the ﬁfth coordinate z in addition to Minkowskian t and x refers to the quantum
axis, which together span AdS5 space. In the gravity side the theory is described by
the equations of motion in a bulk from z = ∞ (UV) toward z = 0 (IR) and the gauge
theory resides in a boundary at z = 0; in this sense, the gauge/gravity correspondence
could be regarded as the bulk/boundary correspondence or the UV/IR correspondence.
The very ﬁrst application of the gauge/gravity correspondence to investigate the
early-time dynamics in the heavy-ion collision is a work by Janik and Peschanski in

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

28

[87], which was re-derived also in [88]. For a pedagogical introduction, a review by
Peschanski [89] should be quite readable for “users” of this string-inspired technique.
Like the lattice-QCD simulation, the gauge/gravity correspondence is a powerful
method to compute an expectation value of gauge invariant operator, and for the
early-time dynamics in the heavy-ion collision, the most informative observable is the
energy-momentum tensor Tµν. What we should do ﬁrst is to obtain the solution of the
5-dimensional gravity equations as ds2 = [gµν(z)dxµdxν + dz2]/z2 in the Feﬀerman-
Graham form (choosing appropriate coordinates). Then, the energy-momentum tensor
is inferred from the relation,

gµν(z ≈ 0, x) = ηµν +

(cid:104)Tµν(x)(cid:105) z4 + ··· .

2π2
N 2
c

(65)

In [87, 88] a black-hole solution has been discovered that corresponds to the one-
dimensional expansion of hydrodynamics (i.e. the Bjorken solution). The most
interesting ﬁnding is that the time dependence of the energy density ε(τ ) is a constant
initially and turns to τ−4/3 later; this latter scaling recovers the fully isotropized
hydrodynamical one in (37). The transitional change from a constant to τ−4/3
behavior should be identiﬁed as the isotropization point, which yields an isotropization
time scale as

(cid:19)3/8

(cid:18) 3N 2

c
2π2e0

τiso =

,

(66)

where e0 is deﬁned through the initial energy density ε0 = e0τ 4/3
If
we consider ε0 ∼ 15 GeV/ fm3 at τ0 = 0.6 fm/c at RHIC energy, we can have an
estimate at strong coupling as τiso (cid:39) 0.3 fm/c, which might be an account for the fast
isotropization.

at τ = τ0.

0

Instead of postulating a black hole solution corresponding to dynamical QGP, the
heavy-ion collision itself could be emulated by a shock-wave collision in the gravity
side, which looks like a CGC-like problem to solve the classical equations of motion
with two colliding sources (and like the CGC setup the one shock-wave problem
is analytical solvable; see a pedagogical review [90] and references therein). The
pioneering numerical work to simulate the horizon (and QGP in a gauge dual side)
formation is found in [91], in which PT and PL have been calculated as functions of
time. Interestingly, right after the collision, PT goes positively and PL goes negatively,
in a way similar to the CGC simulation. This implies that a picture of extending
color ﬂux tubes in the CGC initial condition should be the right physics description
for the very early dynamics. However, in the gauge/gravity numerical simulation,
it has been observed that PL/PT → 1 as quickly as τiso ∼ 0.7/T (cid:39) 0.5 fm/c for
the initial temperature T ∼ 0.35 GeV. Later, in [92], by means of the holographic
numerical solutions, the validity of (ﬁrst-order) viscous hydrodynamics has been tested
in a region where PL/PT < 1, which was such an important test that the way of
thinking in the heavy-ion community was changed. Before [92], there were many
studies on the isotropization, and sometimes it was not clearly distinguished from the
hydrodynamization. Now, we know that the viscous hydrodynamics can work well
even when strong anisotropy still remains.
It might sound a bit puzzling that the
viscous hydrodynamics is required for the system described by a gauge/gravity dual
in which the shear viscosity is as small as the unitarity limit and the bulk viscosity is
vanishing. We will come back to this question in section 4.

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

29

Authors

BMSS [32]
BGLMV [50] −(3 − δs)/7

B [94]

KM [95]

α
−2/3
−3/4
−7/8

β
0
0

γ
1/3
1/4

(1 + 2δs)/7

(1 + 2δs)/7

0

1/8

Table 1. Diﬀerent exponents according to diﬀerent scenarios with one-
dimensional expansion.
If complete thermalization with isotropy is achieved,
α = 0, β = γ = 1/3 should be realized.

3. More on Isotropization

This section is devoted to a status summary of the scaling solution and its classiﬁcation
that includes a possibility going to the free-streaming limit. It is still under dispute
what microscopic dynamics can sustain the system staying away from the vanishing
longitudinal pressure.

3.1. Scaling Properties

To sort various scenarios out, it is quite useful to introduce a scaling form of the
solution for the gluon distribution as a function of time. The self-similarity that has
been conﬁrmed in many classical statistical simulations implies the following scaling
properties for the gluon distribution:
f (k, τ ) = (Qsτ )αfS

(cid:0)(Qsτ )βk⊥, (Qsτ )γkz

(cid:1) ,

(67)

which was systematically studied in [93] (which nicely reviews all technical details
including lattice discretization). The exponents α, β, and γ characterize the non-
equilibrium dynamical evolution, and these are reminiscent of the critical exponents
in the vicinity of IR ﬁxed points on the renormalization ﬂow. This is a new form of
the universality out of equilibrium, and unlike the static situation, there is no simple
classiﬁcation of the universality class only according to the dimensionality and the
global symmetry.

In the case with one-dimensional expansion, a typical value of kz should be
decreased as τ elapses, so that γ is supposed to be positive.
In fact, in the free-
streaming limit, γ = 1 is expected. Quantitative values of α, β, and γ strongly
depend on the interactions or the collision terms in the Boltzmann equation. Table 1
is a list of exponents with one-dimensional expansion as discussed in [93]. Here, we
will not see all the derivations, but focus on the value of BMSS which refers to the
bottom-up thermalization scenario in [32].

As explained in section 2.2 ∆k2⊥ was estimated by ˆq ∼ α2

parametrically depend on the distribution function; that is, ˆq ∼(cid:82) d2k⊥ k2⊥ dΓ/d2k⊥
(cid:82) dkz f 2, and eventually

s T 3 in the bottom-
up thermalization. To identify the scaling exponent, we must know how ˆq should
(cid:82)
where dΓ/d2k⊥ is the scattering rate that scales as ∼ α2
k f 2 ∼ (Qsτ )2α−2β−γ. Because ˆq ∼ ∆k2⊥/dτ , it is conceivable
we have ˆq ∼ α2
to postulate the collision term parametrically scaling as (∂f /∂τ )coll ∼ (∆k2⊥/dτ ) ·
(∂f /∆k2) ∼ ˆq∂2
f ∼ (Qsτ )3α−2β+γ, where the small angle approximation was used
to pick only ∂pz up from ∇p [see also (41)]. From the Boltzmann equation (33), we
can immediately deduce df /dτ ∼ (Qsτ )α−1 ∼ (Qsτ )3α−2β+γ, leading to

pz

s

s

2α − 2β + γ = −1 .

(68)

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

30

in the one-dimensional expanding geometry, (const) ∼ (Qsτ )(cid:82)

As long as the elastic collision is dominant, which is the case for the scattering processes
with kbr ∼ Qs, the gluon number is approximately a conserved quantity. This gives,
k f ∼ (Qsτ )α−2β−γ+1.
In the same way, the energy conservation gives another scaling relation. With an
energy quanta approximated as ω(k) ∼ k⊥, which is true for γ > β in late time, it is
straightforward to see that the energy conservation and the momentum conservation
can be simultaneously satisﬁed only when k⊥ ∼ (const), i.e., β = 0. Therefore, we
have two more conditions as

α − 2β − γ = −1 ,

β = 0 .

(69)

Here, we should note that the number conservation is a robust argument as long as
elastic scatterings are dominant, while the energy conservation is not. An immediate
counter example is the full thermalized system for which α = 0, β = γ = 1/3 should
be expected, which seems to violate the energy conservation. In fact, the energy is
lost by the expansion with non-zero longitudinal pressure, and thus, the above scaling
arguments implicitly assume a situation close to the free-streaming limit. With these
cautions in mind, we can solve these scaling relations to determine the exponents
uniquely as α = −2/3 and γ = 1/3, and this is how BMSS values in table 1 are
obtained.

It is interesting to point out that BMSS, B, and KM satisfy (69), which means
that the total particle number and the energy are strictly conserved and the diﬀerence
in the exponents is attributed to the concrete form of the collision terms; namely, (68)
may be changed by various scenarios. Indeed, if the collision term has another scaling;
(∂f /∂τ )coll ∼ (Qsτ )µ, then (68) should be replaced with µ − α = −1.

Now, a question may well arise from the exception in table 1; what is assumed
in BGLMV that obviously violates either particle number or energy conservation.
Because we can conﬁrm that α− 3β − γ = −1 holds apart from δs that represents the
eﬀect of expansion, the energy is conserved in this scenario, while the particle number
conservation is abandoned. Actually, this scenario accommodates a possibility of the
BEC formation and a ﬁnite fraction of particles condenses at the zero mode. We
discuss this speculative picture in details in section 5.

The classical statistical simulation in the pure Yang-Mills theory favors the BMSS
exponents according to the results in [93]. This idea of the universality classiﬁcation
based on the scaling properties could open a new theoretical scheme to tackle non-
equilibrium statistical physics in general [96] and it would be a challenging problem
to establish a complete list of classiﬁcation, i.e., a counterpart of the classiﬁcation
of the dynamical critical phenomena as summarized in [97]. For our purpose of the
isotropization problem in the heavy-ion collision, though a deviation from γ = 1
certainly suggests non-trivial physics diﬀerent from the free-streaming limit, PL/PT
goes vanishingly small for large τ as long as the scaling (67) with γ > β is the case.

3.2. Classical vs. Quantum Simulations

The most relevant quantity of our interest in the heavy-ion collision is the time-
dependence of PL/PT, and it would make sense to parametrize it as PL/PT ∼
(Qsτ )−βeff , or equivalently,
βeﬀ ≡ −τ

ln(PL/PT) ,

(70)

d
dτ

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

31

Figure 10. Schematic picture of the evolution of the exponent characterizing the
isotropization degree. Figure sketched based on the results in [69].

is to be written as PL/T(τ ) =(cid:82)

which is an exponent introduced in [69]. Because the longitudinal/transverse pressure
k(k2(cid:107)/⊥/(2)|k|)f (k, τ ), we see βeﬀ ∼ 2(γ − β), which
goes to βeﬀ → 2 in the free-streaming limit (β = 0 and γ = 1) and βeﬀ → 2/3 in the
classical statistical simulation or in BMSS (β = 0 and γ = 1/3), and supposedly in
realistic physical systems βeﬀ → 0 should be the right answer. Thus, we can rephrase
the isotropization problem as a puzzle to explain βeﬀ = 0 that has never been realized
in reliable numerical simulations.

A profound insight has been gained in a comparison between results with full
quantum interactions and classical truncations using the Boltzmann equation for λφ4
theory [69]. As explained in the last part in section 2.3.2, when f (cid:29) 1, the cubic
term ∼ f 3 should be dominant among the collision terms in the 2 ↔ 2 processes.
Such an approximation to truncate the collision terms to keep ∼ f 3 only and discard
∼ f 2 should correspond to the approximation employed in the classical statistical
It is therefore intriguing to conﬁrm numerically βeﬀ → 0 from the
simulation.
quantum Boltzmann equation and βeﬀ → 2/3 from the classical truncations. The
practically important question is, in particular, whether βeﬀ (cid:39) 0 could be realized
even transiently or not in the classical approximation, and if the results are aﬃrmative,
there may be still a good chance to utilize the semi-classical approximation to resolve
the isotropization problem. The numerical results are summarized in an illustration
in ﬁgure 10.
It is a striking feature that the semi-classical results monotonically
converge to the so-called classical attractor with βeﬀ = 2/3 and does not come close
to βeﬀ ∼ 0 at all. As a matter of fact, ﬁgure 10 is an apparently diﬀerent but equivalent
representation of the sketch in ﬁgure 9.
It is thus an urgent problem in theory to pursue for some interpolating description
used from the dilute to the dense regimes. Especially in the dense regime, f (cid:29) 1 does
not hold for all the momenta, and so the conventional methods are inadequate for
the large momentum regions. So far, it remains as a tough open question how to
improve the theoretical formulation in the dense regime extrapolatably toward the
dilute regime.

4. More on Onset of Hydrodynamics

It would be a reasonable question to wonder what would happen if the hydrodynamic
equations are forcefully employed when PL (cid:28) PT. If the usage of the hydrodynamic
equations were legitimate even with anisotropic pressures, we do not have to try
to isotropize the system using the plasma/glasma instabilities but simply switch to

02/3full quantumclassicalEvolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

32

hydrodynamics immediately after the glasma initial condition. In an ordinary sense,
anisotropic pressures are accompanied by dissipative terms and if the anisotropy is
large such that the derivative expansion can no longer be justiﬁed, we should not utilize
the hydrodynamic equations. Recently, however, a promising project for resummed
anisotropic hydrodynamic is ongoing under the name of the aHydro [98, 99]. This
section is devoted to a brief summary of this interesting and still developing subject.

4.1. Basics of Hydrodynamics

Here, we would not attempt
the
hydrodynamic equations, but instead, we just take a quick look at some basic
expressions which are later necessary for the understanding of the eﬀect of anisotropic
pressures.

to elucidate the systematic derivation of

We follow the discussions in [100]. The starting point for hydrodynamics is
the energy and the momentum conservation laws expressed in terms of the energy-
momentum tensor as

∂µT µν = 0 .

(71)

If there are some conserved charges such as the electric charge and the baryon number,
the continuity equation for such quantities should be coupled, which we neglect
in this subsection for simplicity. The fundamental variable for the hydrodynamic
description is the velocity vector uµ which is normalized as uµuµ = 1. Then, the
energy momentum tensor can be decomposed as

T µν = εuµuν − (P + Π)∆µν + W µuν + W νuµ + πµν ,

(72)
where ∆µν ≡ gµν − uµuν. The physical interpretation of each term is quite clear; ε
is the energy density, P + Π is the pressure, W µ is the energy ﬂow, and πµν is the
viscous stress tensor, which is deﬁned by πµν = T (cid:104)µν(cid:105) ≡ ∆µν

αβT αβ, where

∆µν∆αβ .

(∆µα∆νβ + ∆να∆µβ) − 1
3

∆µναβ ≡ 1
2
It is easy to show that ∆µ
µ = 0 follows. Because uµ∆µν = 0 by
µαβ = 0, from which πµ
deﬁnition, we easily see uµπµν = 0. For the hydrodynamic description we further need
specify the choice of uµ; in other words, we are supposed to choose which conserved
quantity ﬂows with uµ. For the relativistic theory the energy current would be the
νuν = εuµ follows. Such a frame in which uµ
most convenient choice, so that T µ
represents the energy current is often called the Landau frame. In this frame, W µ = 0
simpliﬁes the structure of the energy-momentum tensor a bit and we should still need
solve Π and πµν.

(73)

These continuity equations do not form a closed set of equations and more
unknown variables are contained in Π and πµν than equations even with an additional
constraint from the equation of state, P = P (ε), given from thermodynamics. To ﬁnd
an explicit form of Π and πµν, a phenomenological argument makes use of the 2nd-
law of thermodynamics (see [101] for more ﬁeld theoretical derivation of relativistic
hydrodynamics), i.e. ∂µsµ ≥ 0 for a given entropy current sµ. The entropy current
could be expressed as

sµ =

1
T

T µνuν +

p
T

uµ + Qµ ,

(74)

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

33

where the last term Qµ represents 2nd-order dissipative terms that are not taken into
account in the 1st-order viscous hydrodynamics. In the 1st-order theory the divergence
of the entropy current turns out to be

T ∂µsµ = −Π · ∇µuµ + πµν · ∂(cid:104)µuν(cid:105) ,

(75)
where ∇µ ≡ ∆µν∂ν. To satisfy ∂µsµ ≥ 0, it would be suﬃcient to require that ∂µsµ
is a sum of squared quantities, which immediately leads to

Π = −ζ∇µuµ ,

πµν = 2η ∂(cid:104)µuν(cid:105)

(76)
with some positive coeﬃcients, ζ and η, which are called the bulk and the shear
viscosities, respectively. These transport coeﬃcients should be given as inputs (from
the linear-response theory, for example) to viscous hydrodynamics.

This framework of the 1st-order hydrodynamic equations has a serious ﬂaw
violating the causality. The problem can be cure by the 2nd-order theory that
incorporates neglected Qµ; we can obtain Qµ in terms of uµ, Π, and πµν, and the
condition for ∂µsµ involves their time derivatives, so that (76) should be replaced
with the equations of motion for Π and πµν with more transport coeﬃcients, namely,
the relaxation times, τΠ for Π and τπ for πµν.
If these relaxation times are large
enough, there is no problem to violate the causality.

It would be useful to write some of the explicit equations down here in a special
case corresponding to the heavy-ion collision as addressed in [102]. Let us focus on
the boost-invariant and conformal case and then we can drop the bulk viscosity eﬀect.
We can then simplify the 2nd-order viscous equations signiﬁcantly as

ε + P

dε
dτ

+

(77)
where Φ ≡ π00 − πzz. (In [102] there was a factor 2/3 error, which was corrected in
an erratum.) Also, there is an equation to determine Φ that reads:

=

τ

,

dΦ
dτ

= − Φ
τπ

− Φ
2

+

T
β2

d
dτ

+

2

3β2τ

(78)

with β2 = τπ/(2η). This equation can be further simpliﬁed with the conformality
assumption in which β2 ∝ T −4 and we can use T ∝ τ−1/3 for the term proportional
to Φ/β2 in the construction of the 2nd-order theory. Then, the τ derivative gives a
factor 5/3, and we eventually have,
− 4Φ
3τ

= − Φ
τπ

4η
3τπτ

dΦ
dτ

(79)

+

.

These are simple but useful equations for the benchmark purpose. Any extension
of the hydrodynamic equations with resummation with respect to anisotropy should
reproduce them once expanded in terms of small anisotropy, which will be checked
later.

4.2. Dissipative Terms and Anisotropy

The ordinary hydrodynamic equations have only single P assuming isotropy. The
tensor decomposition in (72) suggests that PL (cid:54)= PT could be related to some
dissipative terms from πµν, and this is indeed true. Therefore,
if we improve
hydrodynamics from the 1st-order theory to the 2nd-order theory, we may have a
better situation to treat a larger deviation of PL/PT (cid:54)= 1, but eventually, we need
reorganize the derivative expansion shifting the expansion reference point. In general
circumstances such reorganization is a tough problem but the kinetic equation can
provide us with a useful guide to the right path.

Φ
τ

(cid:20) 1

τ

(cid:18) β2

(cid:19)(cid:21)

T

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

34

Schematic picture of

Figure 11.
the evolution of PL/PT and the
hydrodynamization time τhydro which can be taken to be smaller once the
hydrodynamic equations are augmented with large anisotropic eﬀects. Figure
adapted from a talk by Strickland.

4.2.1. Hydrodynamic interpretation of anisotropy Interestingly, (77) is a hydrody-
namic counterpart of (38). We note that (38) is an exact relation regardless of hy-
drodynamics, and this means that, by taking a diﬀerence between (38) and (77), we
have P − Φ = PL. We here assume that P appearing in the previous subsection is
identiﬁable to an average; (2PT + PL)/3. Also, in the 1st-order theory, τπ → 0, and
this implies that two terms in (79) should cancel, leading to a relation; Φ = 4η/(3τ )
[102]. Combining these relations, we ﬁnally reach the following;

PT − PL =

3
2

2η
τ

.

Φ =

(80)
This clearly shows that PL/PT (cid:54)= 1 should be accompanied by a shear viscosity,
and if it substantially remains constant at later time, it would favor a large value
of the shear viscosity, while η could be small for small τ .
In fact, in the classical
statistical simulation with PL/PT ∼ 0.6 the viscosity to the entropy density ratio was
estimated in this way and the result was η/s ∼ 0.3 [63], which is much smaller than
the perturbative estimate (for the coupling g = 0.5 that was adopted in the numerical
simulation).
We can equivalently rewrite (80), using s ∼ ∂P/∂T ∼ 4P/T , into a form of the

ratio as follows:

PL
PT

3τ T − 16(η/s)
3τ T + 8(η/s)

,

=

(81)
which implies PL/PT ≈ 0.5 for initial τ0 ∼ 0.5 fm/c and T0 ∼ 0.4 GeV, if η/s ∼ 1/(4π)
is assumed, at RHIC energy. The reduction of PL/PT suggested by (80) or (81)
gives us a motive to pursue for an improved hydrodynamic formulation that can
incorporate PL/PT (cid:28) 1. The schematic (desirable) picture is illustrated in ﬁgure 11
which is adapted from Strickland’s picture.
It is usually believed that at the
hydrodynamization time τhydro we should switch the theoretical description from the
kinetic equations (Boltzmann-Vlasov equations) to the hydrodynamic ones. If we use
higher-order viscous hydrodynamics, we could take τhydro to be smaller, and ideally,
if we have an optimized resummed scheme, it may be not really hopeless to anticipate

1Anisotropic HydrodynamicsGlasmaBoltzmann--Vlasov TransportViscous Hydro0Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

35

that such resummed hydrodynamics can entirely cover the time evolution superseding
the kinetic equations at all.

4.2.2. Resummed anisotropic hydrodynamics A pioneering work for anisotropic
hydrodynamics is found in [103] by the Krakow group, in which the continuity equation
for the entropy current was assumed. Soon later, the formulation was reﬁned in
[104, 98] where the distribution function was considered with the entropy conservation
replaced by the particle number conservation. Around the same timing, independently
in [105] by the Frankfurt group, the anisotropic parameter, ∆ ≡ PT/PL − 1, was
studied with 2nd-order conformal hydrodynamics. There, also the relation between
∆ and the anisotropic parameter appearing in (22) was clariﬁed in the Appendix. A
systematic presentation in terms of the distribution function was given in [99]. Then,
as argued in [106], it turned out that ADHYDRO (highly-anisotropic and strongly-
dissipative hydrodynamics) of [98] and aHydro of [99] have equivalent physical contents
microscopically.

The hydrodynamic equations are the equations of motion for the energy-
momentum tensor, which can be inferred from the kinetic equations. Then, the
clearest strategy is as follows; using the kinetic equations with an anisotropy parameter
as introduced in (22), we can systematically derive the anisotropic hydrodynamic
equations. Unlike (22) the anisotropy parameter should be a function of τ , which is
denoted here by ξ(τ ), and the distribution function is then parametrized as

(cid:16)

Λ−1(τ )

(cid:113)

(cid:17)

f (k, τ ) = fiso

(82)
In the ξ → 0 limit the distribution is reduced to an isotropic one (here, note that
k2 = k2⊥ + k2
z), and the distribution is prolate and oblate deformed, respectively, for
−1 < ξ < 0 and ξ > 0.

.

k2 + ξ(τ )k2
z

As explained in section 2.3.1 the simplest approximation for the Boltzmann

collision term is the RTA, with which the Boltzmann equation reads:

We could, in principle, deal with the above equations to solve ξ(τ ) and Λ(τ ). Instead,
we can rewrite (83) into a form similar to the hydrodynamic equations by taking the
moments of (83). The 0th moment of (83) leads to

(83)

kα∂αf = −kµuµΓ(cid:2)f (t, z, k) − feq(t, z, k, T (τ ))(cid:3) .
(cid:105)
1 − R3/4(ξ)(cid:112)1 + ξ

(cid:104)

∂τ ξ
1 + ξ

− 2
τ

− 6∂τ log Λ = 2Γ
√
ξ)/

√

,

(84)

(cid:21)

2 [1/(1 + ξ) + (arctan
R(cid:48)(ξ)
R(ξ)

(cid:20)

1
τ

where R(ξ) ≡ 1
and Λ(τ ), we need one more equation from the 1st moment of (83), i.e.

ξ]. Because there are two variables, ξ(τ )

1

− 1

− 1
ξ

ξ(1 + ξ)R(ξ)

∂τ ξ + 4∂τ log Λ =

(85)
When the anisotropy parameter is small; ξ (cid:28) 1, these equations are equivalent to (77)
and (79) once the linearized solution ξ ≈ (45/8)Φ/ε and Γ = 2/τπ are used. Therefore,
these coupled equations for ξ(τ ) and Λ(τ ) are to be regarded as an anisotropic upgrade
of the 2nd-order viscous hydrodynamics, i.e., an aHydro formulation. Remarkably,
these equations in the leading-order aHydro are capable of capturing the expected
features in ﬁgure 11 including the region where PL/PT (cid:46) 0.1 or even smaller.

.

Later, this formalism has been extended including the transverse dynamics,
the next-to-leading order ﬂuctuations [107], and also the mass eﬀects that breaks

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

36

conformal symmetry and thus induces a ﬁnite bulk viscosity [108], which was also
addressed in [109]. The interesting phenomenological implication is that there could
be a diﬀerence in the temperature slopes as well as in the pressures. In (82) Λ(τ )
should correspond to the transverse temperature TT, and in the anisotropic limit
where ξ (cid:29) 1, the longitudinal temperature should be TL = Λ(τ )/ξ(τ ) (cid:28) TT.

The problem in this approach is an ambiguity in specifying the equation of state
for anisotropic matter. As long as the underlying microscopic dynamics is known for
a given distribution function with an anisotropy parameter ξ, no such problem arises
manifestly. If it is ultimately intended to get rid of the kinetic description at all, the
relation between the equation of state and ξ should be a part of unclear assumption.

5. More on Spectral Cascade

The isotropization quantiﬁed by PL and PT in section 3 and the hydrodynamization in
section 4 are both integrated properties of matter, and in this section, we will discuss
more diﬀerential properties, namely, the real-time evolution of the particle distribution
as a function of the momentum. We already ﬂashed some scaling arguments in
section 3 and in this section we will speciﬁcally look at a speculative scenario suggested
from the CGC initial condition (and see also [110] for similar analysis). The question is
the following; the CGC state is saturated with gluons and such abundant gluons seem
to be not really accommodated in a thermal distribution function. This observation
naturally leads to an idea of a transient formation of the gluonic BEC during the
thermalization processes, or a generic picture of dynamical BEC formation with an
overpopulated initial condition.

5.1. CGC-based Scenario and the Bose-Einstein Condensate

It was recognized since [50] that the overpopulated initial condition could generally
have peculiar dynamics, which may be the case for the heavy-ion collisions. In this
scenario there are two characteristic scales; an IR scale Λs(τ ) and a UV scale Λ(τ ).
At the initial time τ = τ0, it is assumed that Λs(τ0) = Λ(τ0) ∼ Qs and the shape of
for |k| < Qs and f (k) ∼ 0
the distribution function is approximated as f (k) ∼ α−1
for |k| > Qs as sketched in the left of ﬁgure 12. This is a simpliﬁed version of the
CGC initial condition that correctly captures the qualitatively essential features. The
important observation is that, as time goes, Λs(τ ) decreases and Λ(τ ) increases and
the thermal distribution arises in the window between Λs(τ ) and Λ(τ ) as depicted in
the right of ﬁgure 12, which is parametrized as

s

f (k) ∼ Λs
αs

·

1

ω(k)

for Λs < |k| < Λ .

(86)

An interesting question is to determine the parametric dependence of Λs(τ ) and
Λ(τ ). According to the arguments in [50] they should parametrically depend on τ /τ0
as

Λs(τ ) ∼ Qs

Λ(τ ) ∼ Qs

,

τ0

(87)
The derivation of the above results is as follows. The total energy ∼ ΛsΛ3 should be
conserved, for which the energy is dominated by a contribution from the window in (86)
with the UV cutoﬀ by Λ. (The contribution from |k| < Λs is suppressed by (Λs/Λ)2.)
Obviously (87) satisﬁes this condition. Another condition comes from the typical

τ0

(cid:18) τ

(cid:19)−3/7

(cid:18) τ

(cid:19)1/7

.

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

37

Figure 12. Schematic picture of the real-time evolution of the distribution
function from the CGC initial condition (left) to late time proﬁle (right).

time scale τscat of the collision, which can be estimated from the scattering amplitude
squared. For example of the 2 ↔ 2 scattering, τ−1
s Λ−1 with
Λs/αs appearing from the distribution. With the concrete form of the kinetic equation,
it is concluded [50] that τ ∼ τscat ∼ Λ−2

s (Λs/αs)2Λ−1 ∼ Λ2

s Λ, from which (87) follows.

scat ∼ α2

If the thermalization occurs, there should be a clear scale separation between
the hard and the soft components by the diﬀerence in terms of the strong coupling
constant, i.e., the thermalization condition could be chosen as Λ ∼ T and Λs ∼ αsT ,
which implies together with (87) that the thermalization time is estimated as

Qsτth ∼ α−7/4

s

,

T /Qs ∼ α−1/4

s

,

(88)

which makes a sharp contrast to (15) in the bottom-up thermalization scenario.

The above-mentioned arguments lead us to an interesting speculation. The
initially adopted distribution of gluons (left of ﬁgure 12) gives the number of gluons
as n0 = ng(τ0) ∼ Q3
s /αs, which evolves as ng(τ ) ∼ Λ2Λs/αs in later time (right of
ﬁgure 12) and at τ = τth the thermal gluon number is naturally ng(τth) ∼ T 3 ∼
−3/4
s Q3
s . If the elastic scatterings are dominant over the inelastic ones (which is the
α
case for f (cid:29) 1), the gluon number can be regarded as a conserved quantity. Then,
the discrepancy between n0 and ng(τth) should be sent to a condensate at zero mode,
that is, the gluonic BEC should develop so that the condensed gluon number,

nc = n0 − ng(τth) ∼(cid:0)1 − α1/4

(cid:1) Q3

s
αs

(89)
can compensate for the mismatch. For a realistic situation with αs ∼ 0.3 for instance,
(89) means that about 26% of initially saturated gluons should fall into a BEC when
thermalization is achieved. Of course, this estimate is based on quite optimistic
simpliﬁcation.

,

s

5.2. Dynamical Evolution of the Spectral Cascade

Let us now consider the evolution of the whole spectral shape.
It is a common
phenomenon that a power-law spectrum appears as a steady solution out of
equilibrium. We can ﬁnd the power index from the kinetic equation arguments.

5.2.1. Energy cascade vs. particle cascade To consider the dynamical evolution of
the power-law spectrum in QCD, it would be very helpful to gain more general
understanding for the spectrum associated with the wave turbulence. Wave turbulence

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

38

is a phenomenon that occurs in random non-linear waves such as gravity-capillary
waves and should be clearly distinguished from the hydrodynamic turbulence.

The theoretical setup is as follows; the system has constant energy pumping at
small k− and energy damping at larger k+ and we can use the kinetic equation in
an interval, k− (cid:28) k (cid:28) k+ to describe the wave turbulence to ﬁnd an index ν of the
Kolmogorov-Zakharov (KZ) spectrum that characterizes the distribution function as

f (k) ∼ 1

kν .

(90)
For a given collision kernel of, for example, 2 ↔ 2 scattering, we can identify the value
of ν, and there may sometimes be multiple solutions; one corresponds to the energy
cascade and the other corresponds to the particle cascade.

It is easier to ﬁnd ν using the continuity equation rather than solving the
Boltzmann equation. Let us consider a scattering process involving p particles (waves),
and suppose the following scaling properties for the energy dispersion relation and the
scattering amplitude as

ω(µk) = µαω(k) ,

M(µk1, µk2, . . .) = µβM(k1, k2, . . .) .

(91)

We ﬁrst consider the energy cascade, as a result of which the energy spectrum becomes
time independent. In terms of the distribution function the one-dimensional energy
spectrum is written down as

Ek(t) =

dΩ kd−1ω(k)f (k, t) .

(92)

(cid:90)

Here, d represents the number of spatial dimensions. The energy conservation is
expressed by the energy continuity equation:

where the energy ﬂow ﬂux is given by

εk =

dq

dΩ qd−1ω(q)

∂Ek
∂t

∂εk
∂k

= 0 ,

(cid:90)

+

(cid:90) k

k+

(cid:18) ∂f

(cid:19)

∂t

coll

(93)

∼ k(p−1)d−pα+2β−ν(p−1) .

(94)

When the system reaches a steady state in terms of the energy, ∂Ek/∂t = 0 is realized,
and then εk must be independent of k. From this condition of εk ∼ k0 (not the zeroth
component but the zeroth power of k), we can get to the KZ spectrum index from the
energy cascade:

2β − pα
p − 1

.

νE = d +

(95)
For 2 ↔ 2 scattering in a (3+1)-dimensional massless scalar theory, d = 3, α = 1, and
β = 0 and thus we have νE = 5/3. We note that the above mentioned derivation of
the index for the KZ spectrum is quite analogous to the famous Kolmogorov spectrum
Ek ∼ k−5/3 for hydrodynamic turbulence for which an energy ﬂow ﬂux is assumed
to be k independent. Diﬀerently from the Kolmogorov spectrum that is ﬁxed by the
dimensional analysis, νE is sensitive to the structure of microscopic interactions as seen
in (95). For example, the capillary waves on deep water has νE = 17/4 (Zakharov-
Filonenko spectrum), the acoustic turbulence νE = 9/2 (Zakharov-Sagdeev spectrum),
etc. Another branch of the solution belongs to the particle cascade. In this case we
should consider the particle number continuity equation:

∂Nk
∂t

+

∂µk
∂k

= 0 ,

(96)

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

39

where Nk is the one-dimensional particle number and µk is the particle ﬂow ﬂux,
which are deﬁned in the same was as the energy cascade with ω(k) removed from (93)
and (94), that after all leads to

2β − (p + 1)α

νN = d +

(97)
Hence, the particle cascade results in the KZ spectrum with f ∼ k−4/3 for 2 ↔ 2
scattering in a massless theory, while it was f ∼ k−5/3 from the energy cascade.

p − 1

.

Generally speaking, the particle cascade occurs in a direction toward smaller k
and the energy cascade toward larger k. Let us recall that we consider the spectral
cascade from k− to k+ (where k− (cid:28) k+) and introduce the one-particle energy ω±
(where ω− (cid:28) ω+) and the particle ﬂow µ± at k = k±. Then, the total quantities are
µ = µ+ + µ− and ε = ω+µ+ + ω−µ−, which leads to

µ (cid:39) µ− ,

ε (cid:39) ω+µ+ .

(98)

This analysis with (98) implies that the dynamical evolution of the spectrum generally
consists of the direct energy cascade (from smaller k to k+) and the inverse particle
cascade (from larger k to k−).

5.2.2. Scenario with non-thermal ﬁxed-point As explained in section 5.1 it is likely
that a certain amount of particles fall into the zero mode if the initial state is
overpopulated and the particle number is approximately conserved. Once this
situation happens the expected spectrum should be changed because a condensate
allows for 1 ↔ 2 scattering. This means that we should plug p = 3 (keeping β = 0
because a scalar condensate does not scale with the momentum) into (95) and (97) to
ﬁnd,

νE =

3
2

,

νN = 1 .

(99)

In this case, there is another possibility, which is referred to as the non-thermal ﬁxed
point [73]. We note that the indices identiﬁed with the Boltzmann equations should
be valid in the perturbative regime only and the collision terms must involve inﬁnite
Feynman diagrams once the interaction goes beyond the perturbatively manageable
range. Such non-perturbative treatments are mandatory once the coupling constant
(λ in a scalar theory) and/or the distribution function f become large. Actually, if
f (cid:38) 1/λ in a scalar theory or f (cid:38) 1/αs in the saturated regime of QCD, there should
be more contributions from terms with more f ’s and a simple counting in (94) breaks
down.

Then, we should switch the theoretical tool from the perturbative Boltzmann
equation to the non-perturbative Dyson-Schwinger (or Kadanoﬀ-Baym) equation to
look for the scaling solution. This question was addressed in [73] within the framework
of the 2PI large-N expansion of O(N ) scalar theory with a condensation ﬁeld. The
analytical solution is either ν = 4 or 5 and the numerical simulation favors ν = 4, and
it has been concluded in [73] that

νnon-thermal = 4 .

(100)

A similar analysis by means of the Dyson-Schwinger equation has been performed
in a pure Yang-Mills theory in [111], and it was found that ν = 2 and 5 and even
intermediate values might be possible.

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

40

Figure 13. Speculated distribution spectrum with a condensate at zero mode
(without expansion). Figure is adapted from [112].

Later, the scenario has been summarized as a diagram in ﬁgure 13 according to
Berges, and this has been conﬁrmed by the classical statistical simulation in [112].
When f (k) (cid:46) 1 quantum ﬂuctuations dissipate high momentum modes into heat and
the tail behaves as f ∼ e−γk. In the regime where 1 (cid:28) f (k) (cid:28) 1/λ, the kinetic theory
works and, as we already saw in the previous subsection, the direct energy cascade
is dominant for the ﬂow to larger k, leading to f ∼ 1/k3/2. For small momenta the
inverse particle cascade is attributed to the BEC formation, but in this regime with
f (k) (cid:29) 1/λ the perturbative kinetic equation is no longer useful. Thus, instead of
ν = 1, the index of the non-thermal ﬁxed point, ν = 4, should be the expected answer.
It is of course the most interesting question what would be the answer for the
It is still unclear whether a
situation relevant for the heavy-ion collision physics.
gluonic BEC could be formed in the classical statistical simulation [113] (see also [114]
for analogous Higgs models).
It is even more non-trivial how the scenario should
be modiﬁed by the expansion eﬀect. So far, all the discussions were focused on the
massless case only, and the mass eﬀect was recently analyzed in [115] in the case
without expansion, and no qualitative diﬀerence was found between the massless and
the massive cases.

6. Further Topics

There are many important topics that could not be covered by this review due to
limitation of the author’s ability. As a ﬁnal remark, here, we would not try to
name all of such uncovered topics, but we shall pay our attention to a particular
problem, that is, the quark production in the very early stage in the heavy-ion
collision. The pictorial view in ﬁgure 2 leads us to the theoretical formulation of the
particle production according to the well-known Schwinger mechanism. In general,
non-perturbatively, the production amplitude is given by a Bogoliubov coeﬃcient
associated with the basis transformation that connects quark states in the asymptotic
past and in the asymptotic future. The Bogoliubov coeﬃcient encompasses all the
perturbative processes, which can be easily conﬁrmed by perturbative expansion of
the coeﬃcient in terms of the coupling constant.
The numerical simulation on top of the glasma conﬁgurations already exists [116]
and it claims that most of quarks are produced in a time scale (cid:46) Q−1
. In fact, in the
limit of inﬁnitely thin nuclear sheets at high energies, the quark production dominantly
occurs at the light-cone singularity where the color sources propagate, and thus, even
at τ = 0+, more than a half of total quarks are produced instantly. In the context of

s

Inverse Particle CascadeEnergy CascadeEvolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

41

Figure 14. Particle production on top of color ﬂux tubes in the presence of
magnetic ﬁeld. Figure taken from [119].

the isotropization that we put our emphasis on in this review, the produced quarks
would hardly change the qualitative properties such as the isotropization and the
universal scaling exponents even though the backreaction from the quark to the gauge
sectors is taken into account [117]. Nevertheless, the problem of quark production
would spice our problem with a new physics opportunity, i.e., the chirality.

The reason why the chirality is such a special character of matter is that it
couples with the quantum anomaly and the QCD θ-vacuum structure. Fortunately,
the heavy-ion collision is an ideal environment for such a study to explore anomaly-
induced novel phenomena; we have the production of (almost) chiral quarks, and
we also have an experimental probe, that is, a strong magnetic ﬁeld. The coupling
between the chirality and the magnetic ﬁeld would generate topological currents from
the chiral magnetic eﬀect, the chiral separation eﬀect, the chiral vortical eﬀect, etc.
A full explanation of those chiral topological eﬀects requires another 30 pages review,
and we would not go into further technical details on this.
Interested readers can
consult a recent status summary [118].

Most importantly, the color ﬂux tube structure in the glasma initial condition
accommodates a bunch of domains with parallel color electric and magnetic ﬁelds.
Because the electric ﬁeld is a vector and the magnetic ﬁeld is an axial vector, the
inner product of them is parity-odd (and charge-parity-odd too). Thus, the initial
condition in the heavy-ion collision has large topological ﬂuctuations (see [120] for
a recent simulation to quantify this eﬀect). Naturally, as sketched in ﬁgure 14, the
momentum distribution f (k) of produced quarks must exhibit some anisotropy under
the inﬂuence of external magnetic ﬁeld. Indeed, such skewed f (k) was observed in
an idealized simulation with homogeneous Abelian ﬁelds [121]. Eﬀorts along these
directions should be appreciated, for the lifetime of the magnetic ﬁeld is known to be
as short as comparable to ∼ Q−1
. Anomalous hydrodynamics and chiral kinetic theory
should be enumerated as outstanding theoretical developments inspired by the chiral
topological eﬀects. However, they both need an initial condition for any practical
application, and the initial condition should be given at the glasma time scale.

s

As stated in the very beginning of this review, early thermalization is the last
and greatest unsolved problem in the heavy-ion collision. We might as well say that
chiral topological eﬀect is the novel and hottest unresolved challenge in the heavy-ion
collision. A marriage of these investigations would produce fruitful oﬀsprings.

K. F. thanks J¨urgen Berges, Jean-Paul Blaizot, Francois Gelis, Alexi Kurkela,
Jinfeng Liao, Larry McLerran, Jan Pawlowski, S¨oren Schlichting, Mike Strickland,
Raju Venugopalan for extremely useful conversations, through which he learnt a lot.

(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

42

This work was supported by Japanese MEXT grant (No. 15H03652 and 15K13479).

References

[1] G. Baym, “RHIC: From dreams to beams in two decades,” Nucl. Phys. A698 (2002)

XXIII–XXXII, arXiv:hep-ph/0104138 [hep-ph].

[2] G. Baym, “Thermal equilibration in ultrarelativistic heavy ion collisions,” Phys. Lett. B138

(1984) 18–22.

[3] Y. V. Kovchegov, “Can thermalization in heavy ion collisions be described by QCD
diagrams?,” Nucl. Phys. A762 (2005) 298–325, arXiv:hep-ph/0503038 [hep-ph].

[4] Y. V. Kovchegov, “NonAbelian Weizsacker-Williams ﬁeld and a two-dimensional eﬀective

color charge density for a very large nucleus,” Phys. Rev. D54 (1996) 5463–5469,
arXiv:hep-ph/9605446 [hep-ph].

[5] J. Berges, S. Borsanyi, and C. Wetterich, “Prethermalization,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004)

142002, arXiv:hep-ph/0403234 [hep-ph].

[6] M. Nopoush, R. Ryblewski, and M. Strickland, “Anisotropic hydrodynamics for conformal

Gubser ﬂow,” Phys. Rev. D91 (2015) no. 4, 045007, arXiv:1410.6790 [nucl-th].
[7] T. Hirano, P. Huovinen, K. Murase, and Y. Nara, “Integrated dynamical approach to

relativistic heavy ion collisions,” Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 70 (2013) 108–158,
arXiv:1204.5814 [nucl-th].

[8] A. M. Stasto, K. J. Golec-Biernat, and J. Kwiecinski, “Geometric scaling for the total γ∗p

cross-section in the low x region,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 (2001) 596–599,
arXiv:hep-ph/0007192 [hep-ph].

[9] D. Kharzeev, E. Levin, and M. Nardi, “Color glass condensate at the LHC: Hadron

multiplicities in pp, pA and AA collisions,” Nucl. Phys. A747 (2005) 609–629,
arXiv:hep-ph/0408050 [hep-ph].

[10] E. Iancu, K. Itakura, and L. McLerran, “Geometric scaling above the saturation scale,” Nucl.

Phys. A708 (2002) 327–352, arXiv:hep-ph/0203137 [hep-ph].

[11] J. Jalilian-Marian, A. Kovner, A. Leonidov, and H. Weigert, “The BFKL equation from the

Wilson renormalization group,” Nucl. Phys. B504 (1997) 415–431, arXiv:hep-ph/9701284
[hep-ph].

[12] E. Iancu, A. Leonidov, and L. D. McLerran, “Nonlinear gluon evolution in the color glass
condensate. 1.,” Nucl. Phys. A692 (2001) 583–645, arXiv:hep-ph/0011241 [hep-ph].

[13] E. Ferreiro, E. Iancu, A. Leonidov, and L. McLerran, “Nonlinear gluon evolution in the color
glass condensate. 2.,” Nucl. Phys. A703 (2002) 489–538, arXiv:hep-ph/0109115 [hep-ph].

[14] Y. Hatta, E. Iancu, L. McLerran, A. Stasto, and D. N. Triantafyllopoulos, “Eﬀective

Hamiltonian for QCD evolution at high energy,” Nucl. Phys. A764 (2006) 423–459,
arXiv:hep-ph/0504182 [hep-ph].

[15] K. Fukushima, “Deriving the Jalilian-Marian-Iancu-McLerran-Weigert-Leonidov-Kovner
equation with classical and quantum source terms,” Nucl. Phys. A775 (2006) 69–88,
arXiv:hep-ph/0603044 [hep-ph].

[16] F. Gelis, “Color glass condensate and glasma,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A28 (2013) 1330001,

arXiv:1211.3327 [hep-ph].

[17] L. D. McLerran and R. Venugopalan, “Computing quark and gluon distribution functions for

very large nuclei,” Phys. Rev. D49 (1994) 2233–2241, arXiv:hep-ph/9309289 [hep-ph].
[18] E. Iancu, K. Itakura, and L. McLerran, “A Gaussian eﬀective theory for gluon saturation,”

Nucl. Phys. A724 (2003) 181–222, arXiv:hep-ph/0212123 [hep-ph].

[19] K. Fukushima and Y. Hidaka, “Light projectile scattering oﬀ the color glass condensate,”

JHEP 06 (2007) 040, arXiv:0704.2806 [hep-ph].

[20] A. Kovner, L. D. McLerran, and H. Weigert, “Gluon production from nonAbelian

Weizsacker-Williams ﬁelds in nucleus-nucleus collisions,” Phys. Rev. D52 (1995)
6231–6237, arXiv:hep-ph/9502289 [hep-ph].

[21] K. Fukushima, “Evolving Glasma and Kolmogorov spectrum,” Acta Phys. Polon. B42 (2011)

2697–2715, arXiv:1111.1025 [hep-ph].

[22] T. Lappi and L. McLerran, “Some features of the glasma,” Nucl. Phys. A772 (2006)

200–212, arXiv:hep-ph/0602189 [hep-ph].

[23] A. Dumitru, F. Gelis, L. McLerran, and R. Venugopalan, “Glasma ﬂux tubes and the near

side ridge phenomenon at RHIC,” Nucl. Phys. A810 (2008) 91–108, arXiv:0804.3858
[hep-ph].

[24] D. Kharzeev, A. Krasnitz, and R. Venugopalan, “Anomalous chirality ﬂuctuations in the

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

43

initial stage of heavy ion collisions and parity odd bubbles,” Phys. Lett. B545 (2002)
298–306, arXiv:hep-ph/0109253 [hep-ph].

[25] A. Dumitru, H. Fujii, and Y. Nara, “Magnetic screening in high-energy heavy-ion collisions,”

Phys. Rev. D88 (2013) 031503, arXiv:1305.2780 [hep-ph].

[26] K. Fukushima and F. Gelis, “The evolving Glasma,” Nucl. Phys. A874 (2012) 108–129,

arXiv:1106.1396 [hep-ph].

[27] A. Krasnitz and R. Venugopalan, “Nonperturbative computation of gluon minijet production

in nuclear collisions at very high-energies,” Nucl. Phys. B557 (1999) 237,
arXiv:hep-ph/9809433 [hep-ph].

[28] T. Lappi, “Energy density of the glasma,” Phys. Lett. B643 (2006) 11–16,

arXiv:hep-ph/0606207 [hep-ph].

[29] K. Fukushima, “Initial ﬁelds and instability in the classical model of the heavy-ion collision,”

Phys. Rev. C76 (2007) 021902, arXiv:0711.2634 [hep-ph]. [Erratum: Phys.
Rev.C77,029901(2007)].

[30] R. J. Fries, J. I. Kapusta, and Y. Li, “Near-ﬁelds and initial energy density in the color glass

condensate model,” arXiv:nucl-th/0604054 [nucl-th].

[31] H. Fujii, K. Fukushima, and Y. Hidaka, “Initial energy density and gluon distribution from

the Glasma in heavy-ion collisions,” Phys. Rev. C79 (2009) 024909, arXiv:0811.0437
[hep-ph].

[32] R. Baier, A. H. Mueller, D. Schiﬀ, and D. T. Son, “‘Bottom up’ thermalization in heavy ion

collisions,” Phys. Lett. B502 (2001) 51–58, arXiv:hep-ph/0009237 [hep-ph].

[33] S. Mrowczynski, “Stream instabilities of the quark-gluon plasma,” Phys. Lett. B214 (1988)

587. [Erratum: Phys. Lett.B656,273(2007)].

[34] S. Mrowczynski, “Plasma instability at the initial stage of ultrarelativistic heavy ion

collisions,” Phys. Lett. B314 (1993) 118–121.

[35] P. B. Arnold, J. Lenaghan, and G. D. Moore, “QCD plasma instabilities and bottom up

thermalization,” JHEP 08 (2003) 002, arXiv:hep-ph/0307325 [hep-ph].

[36] H. Fujii and K. Itakura, “Expanding color ﬂux tubes and instabilities,” Nucl. Phys. A809

(2008) 88–109, arXiv:0803.0410 [hep-ph].

[37] A. Rebhan, P. Romatschke, and M. Strickland, “Hard-loop dynamics of non-Abelian plasma

instabilities,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 102303, arXiv:hep-ph/0412016 [hep-ph].

[38] A. Dumitru and Y. Nara, “QCD plasma instabilities and isotropization,” Phys. Lett. B621

(2005) 89–95, arXiv:hep-ph/0503121 [hep-ph].

[39] A. Dumitru, Y. Nara, and M. Strickland, “Ultraviolet avalanche in anisotropic non-Abelian

plasmas,” Phys. Rev. D75 (2007) 025016, arXiv:hep-ph/0604149 [hep-ph].

[40] P. Romatschke and R. Venugopalan, “Collective non-Abelian instabilities in a melting color
glass condensate,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 062302, arXiv:hep-ph/0510121 [hep-ph].

[41] P. Romatschke and R. Venugopalan, “The Unstable glasma,” Phys. Rev. D74 (2006) 045011,

arXiv:hep-ph/0605045 [hep-ph].

[42] K. Fukushima, “Turbulent pattern formation and diﬀusion in the early-time dynamics in

relativistic heavy-ion collisions,” Phys. Rev. C89 (2014) no. 2, 024907, arXiv:1307.1046
[hep-ph].

[43] T. S. Biro, C. Gong, B. Muller, and A. Trayanov, “Hamiltonian dynamics of Yang-Mills ﬁelds

on a lattice,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. C5 (1994) 113–149, arXiv:nucl-th/9306002 [nucl-th].

[44] U. W. Heinz, C. R. Hu, S. Leupold, S. G. Matinyan, and B. Muller, “Thermalization and

Lyapunov exponents in the Yang-Mills Higgs theory,” Phys. Rev. D55 (1997) 2464–2476,
arXiv:hep-th/9608181 [hep-th].

[45] T. Kunihiro, B. Muller, A. Ohnishi, A. Schafer, T. T. Takahashi, and A. Yamamoto, “Chaotic

behavior in classical Yang-Mills dynamics,” Phys. Rev. D82 (2010) 114015,
arXiv:1008.1156 [hep-ph].

[46] H. Iida, T. Kunihiro, B. Mueller, A. Ohnishi, A. Schaefer, and T. T. Takahashi, “Entropy

production in classical Yang-Mills theory from Glasma initial conditions,” Phys. Rev. D88
(2013) 094006, arXiv:1304.1807 [hep-ph].

[47] P. B. Arnold, G. D. Moore, and L. G. Yaﬀe, “Eﬀective kinetic theory for high temperature

gauge theories,” JHEP 01 (2003) 030, arXiv:hep-ph/0209353 [hep-ph].

[48] A. Kurkela and Y. Zhu, “Isotropization and hydrodynamization in weakly coupled heavy-ion

collisions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (2015) no. 18, 182301, arXiv:1506.06647 [hep-ph].

[49] J.-P. Blaizot, J. Liao, and L. McLerran, “Gluon transport equation in the small angle

approximation and the onset of Bose-Einstein condensation,” Nucl. Phys. A920 (2013)
58–77, arXiv:1305.2119 [hep-ph].

[50] J.-P. Blaizot, F. Gelis, J.-F. Liao, L. McLerran, and R. Venugopalan, “Bose–Einstein

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

44

condensation and thermalization of the Quark Gluon Plasma,” Nucl. Phys. A873 (2012)
68–80, arXiv:1107.5296 [hep-ph].

[51] J.-P. Blaizot, J. Liao, and Y. Mehtar-Tani, “The subtle interplay of elastic and inelastic

collisions in the thermalization of the quark-gluon plasma,” in 25th International
Conference on Ultra-Relativistic Nucleus-Nucleus Collisions (Quark Matter 2015) Kobe,
Japan, September 27-October 3, 2015. 2016. arXiv:1601.00308 [nucl-th].

[52] K. Fukushima, F. Gelis, and L. McLerran, “Initial singularity of the little bang,” Nucl. Phys.

A786 (2007) 107–130, arXiv:hep-ph/0610416 [hep-ph].

[53] T. Kunihiro, B. Muller, A. Ohnishi, and A. Schafer, “Towards a theory of entropy production

in the little and big bang,” Prog. Theor. Phys. 121 (2009) 555–575, arXiv:0809.4831
[hep-ph].

[54] R. Micha and I. I. Tkachev, “Relativistic turbulence: A Long way from preheating to
equilibrium,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003) 121301, arXiv:hep-ph/0210202 [hep-ph].

[55] R. Micha and I. I. Tkachev, “Turbulent thermalization,” Phys. Rev. D70 (2004) 043538,

arXiv:hep-ph/0403101 [hep-ph].

[56] G. Aarts and J. Berges, “Classical aspects of quantum ﬁelds far from equilibrium,” Phys.

Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 041603, arXiv:hep-ph/0107129 [hep-ph].

[57] J. Berges, S. Scheﬄer, and D. Sexty, “Bottom-up isotropization in classical-statistical lattice

gauge theory,” Phys. Rev. D77 (2008) 034504, arXiv:0712.3514 [hep-ph].

[58] J. Berges, “Nonequilibrium quantum ﬁelds: From cold atoms to cosmology,”

arXiv:1503.02907 [hep-ph].

[59] K. Dusling, F. Gelis, and R. Venugopalan, “The initial spectrum of ﬂuctuations in the little

bang,” Nucl. Phys. A872 (2011) 161–195, arXiv:1106.3927 [nucl-th].

[60] K. Dusling, T. Epelbaum, F. Gelis, and R. Venugopalan, “Instability induced pressure

isotropization in a longitudinally expanding system,” Phys. Rev. D86 (2012) 085040,
arXiv:1206.3336 [hep-ph].

[61] T. Epelbaum and F. Gelis, “Fluctuations of the initial color ﬁelds in high energy heavy ion

collisions,” Phys. Rev. D88 (2013) 085015, arXiv:1307.1765 [hep-ph].

[62] K. Fukushima, “Spectral representation of the particle production out of equilibrium -

Schwinger mechanism in pulsed electric ﬁelds,” New J. Phys. 16 (2014) 073031,
arXiv:1402.3002 [hep-ph].

[63] T. Epelbaum and F. Gelis, “Pressure isotropization in high energy heavy ion collisions,”

Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 232301, arXiv:1307.2214 [hep-ph].

[64] T. Epelbaum, F. Gelis, and B. Wu, “Nonrenormalizability of the classical statistical

approximation,” Phys. Rev. D90 (2014) no. 6, 065029, arXiv:1402.0115 [hep-ph].

[65] A. H. Mueller and D. T. Son, “On the Equivalence between the Boltzmann equation and
classical ﬁeld theory at large occupation numbers,” Phys. Lett. B582 (2004) 279–287,
arXiv:hep-ph/0212198 [hep-ph].

[66] S. Jeon, “The Boltzmann equation in classical and quantum ﬁeld theory,” Phys. Rev. C72

(2005) 014907, arXiv:hep-ph/0412121 [hep-ph].

[67] T. Epelbaum, F. Gelis, N. Tanji, and B. Wu, “Properties of the Boltzmann equation in the

classical approximation,” Phys. Rev. D90 (2014) no. 12, 125032, arXiv:1409.0701
[hep-ph].

[68] C. Connaughton, C. Josserand, A. Picozzi, Y. Pomeau, and S. Rica, “Condensation of

classical nonlinear waves,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005) 263901.

[69] T. Epelbaum, F. Gelis, S. Jeon, G. Moore, and B. Wu, “Kinetic theory of a longitudinally

expanding system of scalar particles,” JHEP 09 (2015) 117, arXiv:1506.05580 [hep-ph].
[70] T. Gasenzer and J. M. Pawlowski, “Towards far-from-equilibrium quantum ﬁeld dynamics: A

functional renormalisation-group approach,” Phys. Lett. B670 (2008) 135–140.

[71] J. M. Cornwall, R. Jackiw, and E. Tomboulis, “Eﬀective action for composite operators,”

Phys. Rev. D10 (1974) 2428–2445.

[72] G. Aarts, D. Ahrensmeier, R. Baier, J. Berges, and J. Serreau, “Far from equilibrium

dynamics with broken symmetries from the 2PI–1/N expansion,” Phys. Rev. D66 (2002)
045008, arXiv:hep-ph/0201308 [hep-ph].

[73] J. Berges, A. Rothkopf, and J. Schmidt, “Non-thermal ﬁxed points: Eﬀective weak-coupling

for strongly correlated systems far from equilibrium,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (2008) 041603,
arXiv:0803.0131 [hep-ph].

[74] J. Berges and M. M. Muller, “Nonequilibrium quantum ﬁelds with large ﬂuctuations,” in

285th Heraeus Seminar: Interdisciplinary Workshop on Progress in Nonequilibrium
Greens Functions (Kadanoﬀ-Baym Equations II) Dresden, Gremany, August 19-23, 2002.
2002. arXiv:hep-ph/0209026 [hep-ph].

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

45

[75] W. Cassing, “From Kadanoﬀ-Baym dynamics to oﬀ-shell parton transport,” Eur. Phys. J. ST

168 (2009) 3–87, arXiv:0808.0715 [nucl-th].

[76] Y. Hatta and A. Nishiyama, “Towards thermalization in heavy-ion collisions: CGC meets the

2PI formalism,” Nucl. Phys. A873 (2012) 47–67, arXiv:1108.0818 [hep-ph].

[77] E. Nelson, “Derivation of the Schrodinger equation from Newtonian mechanics,” Phys. Rev.

150 (1966) 1079–1085.

[78] P. H. Damgaard and H. Huﬀel, “Stochastic quantization,” Phys. Rept. 152 (1987) 227.
[79] J. Berges and I. O. Stamatescu, “Simulating nonequilibrium quantum ﬁelds with stochastic

quantization techniques,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005) 202003, arXiv:hep-lat/0508030
[hep-lat].

[80] J. Berges and D. Sexty, “Real-time gauge theory simulations from stochastic quantization

with optimized updating,” Nucl. Phys. B799 (2008) 306–329, arXiv:0708.0779 [hep-lat].
[81] R. Anzaki, K. Fukushima, Y. Hidaka, and T. Oka, “Restricted phase-space approximation in

real-time stochastic quantization,” Annals Phys. 353 (2015) 107–128, arXiv:1405.3154
[hep-ph].

[82] G. Aarts, L. Bongiovanni, E. Seiler, and D. Sexty, “Some remarks on Lefschetz thimbles and

complex Langevin dynamics,” JHEP 10 (2014) 159, arXiv:1407.2090 [hep-lat].

[83] K. Fukushima and Y. Tanizaki, “Hamilton dynamics for Lefschetz-thimble integration akin to

the complex Langevin method,” arXiv:1507.07351 [hep-th].

[84] T. Hayata, Y. Hidaka, and Y. Tanizaki, “Complex saddle points and the sign problem in

complex Langevin simulation,” arXiv:1511.02437 [hep-lat].

[85] H. Fujii, S. Kamata, and Y. Kikukawa, “Lefschetz thimble structure in one-dimensional

lattice Thirring model at ﬁnite density,” JHEP 11 (2015) 078, arXiv:1509.08176
[hep-lat]. [Erratum: JHEP02,036(2016)].

[86] G. Policastro, D. T. Son, and A. O. Starinets, “The Shear viscosity of strongly coupled N=4

supersymmetric Yang-Mills plasma,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 081601,
arXiv:hep-th/0104066 [hep-th].

[87] R. A. Janik and R. B. Peschanski, “Asymptotic perfect ﬂuid dynamics as a consequence of

Ads/CFT,” Phys. Rev. D73 (2006) 045013, arXiv:hep-th/0512162 [hep-th].

[88] Y. V. Kovchegov and A. Taliotis, “Early time dynamics in heavy ion collisions from

AdS/CFT correspondence,” Phys. Rev. C76 (2007) 014905, arXiv:0705.1234 [hep-ph].

[89] R. Peschanski, “Introduction to string theory and gauge/gravity duality for students in QCD

and QGP phenomenology,” Acta Phys. Polon. B39 (2008) 2479–2510, arXiv:0804.3210
[hep-ph].

[90] R. A. Janik, “The dynamics of quark-gluon plasma and AdS/CFT,” Lect. Notes Phys. 828

(2011) 147–181, arXiv:1003.3291 [hep-th].

[91] P. M. Chesler and L. G. Yaﬀe, “Horizon formation and far-from-equilibrium isotropization in

supersymmetric Yang-Mills plasma,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009) 211601,
arXiv:0812.2053 [hep-th].

[92] P. M. Chesler and L. G. Yaﬀe, “Holography and colliding gravitational shock waves in

asymptotically AdS5 spacetime,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 (2011) 021601, arXiv:1011.3562
[hep-th].

[93] J. Berges, K. Boguslavski, S. Schlichting, and R. Venugopalan, “Universal attractor in a

highly occupied non-Abelian plasma,” Phys. Rev. D89 (2014) no. 11, 114007,
arXiv:1311.3005 [hep-ph].

[94] D. Bodeker, “The Impact of QCD plasma instabilities on bottom-up thermalization,” JHEP

10 (2005) 092, arXiv:hep-ph/0508223 [hep-ph].

[95] A. Kurkela and G. D. Moore, “Bjorken ﬂow, plasma instabilities, and thermalization,” JHEP

11 (2011) 120, arXiv:1108.4684 [hep-ph].

[96] J. Berges, K. Boguslavski, S. Schlichting, and R. Venugopalan, “Universality far from

equilibrium: From superﬂuid Bose gases to heavy-ion collisions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114
(2015) no. 6, 061601, arXiv:1408.1670 [hep-ph].

[97] P. C. Hohenberg and B. I. Halperin, “Theory of dynamic critical phenomena,” Rev. Mod.

Phys. 49 (1977) 435–479.

[98] W. Florkowski and R. Ryblewski, “Highly-anisotropic and strongly-dissipative hydrodynamics

for early stages of relativistic heavy-ion collisions,” Phys. Rev. C83 (2011) 034907,
arXiv:1007.0130 [nucl-th].

[99] M. Martinez and M. Strickland, “Dissipative dynamics of highly anisotropic systems,” Nucl.

Phys. A848 (2010) 183–197, arXiv:1007.0889 [nucl-th].

[100] A. Muronga, “Causal theories of dissipative relativistic ﬂuid dynamics for nuclear collisions,”

Phys. Rev. C69 (2004) 034903, arXiv:nucl-th/0309055 [nucl-th].

Evolution to the Quark-Gluon Plasma

46

[101] T. Hayata, Y. Hidaka, T. Noumi, and M. Hongo, “Relativistic hydrodynamics from quantum

ﬁeld theory on the basis of the generalized Gibbs ensemble method,” Phys. Rev. D92
(2015) no. 6, 065008, arXiv:1503.04535 [hep-ph].

[102] A. Muronga, “Second order dissipative ﬂuid dynamics for ultrarelativistic nuclear collisions,”

Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (2002) 062302, arXiv:nucl-th/0104064 [nucl-th]. [Erratum: Phys.
Rev. Lett.89,159901(2002)].

[103] W. Florkowski, “Anisotropic ﬂuid dynamics in the early stage of relativistic heavy-ion

collisions,” Phys. Lett. B668 (2008) 32–35, arXiv:0806.2268 [nucl-th].

[104] W. Florkowski and R. Ryblewski, “Dynamics of anisotropic plasma at the early stages of

relativistic heavy-ion collisions,” Acta Phys. Polon. B40 (2009) 2843–2863,
arXiv:0901.4653 [nucl-th].

[105] M. Martinez and M. Strickland, “Constraining relativistic viscous hydrodynamical evolution,”

Phys. Rev. C79 (2009) 044903, arXiv:0902.3834 [hep-ph].

[106] R. Ryblewski and W. Florkowski, “Highly anisotropic hydrodynamics – discussion of the
model assumptions and forms of the initial conditions,” Acta Phys. Polon. B42 (2011)
115–138, arXiv:1011.6213 [nucl-th].

[107] D. Bazow, U. W. Heinz, and M. Strickland, “Second-order (2+1)-dimensional anisotropic

hydrodynamics,” Phys. Rev. C90 (2014) no. 5, 054910, arXiv:1311.6720 [nucl-th].

[108] M. Nopoush, R. Ryblewski, and M. Strickland, “Bulk viscous evolution within anisotropic

hydrodynamics,” Phys. Rev. C90 (2014) no. 1, 014908, arXiv:1405.1355 [hep-ph].

[109] L. Tinti, “(3+1)-dimensional framework for leading-order nonconformal anisotropic

hydrodynamics,” Phys. Rev. C92 (2015) no. 1, 014908, arXiv:1411.7268 [nucl-th].

[110] A. Kurkela and G. D. Moore, “Thermalization in weakly coupled nonabelian plasmas,” JHEP

12 (2011) 044, arXiv:1107.5050 [hep-ph].

[111] M. E. Carrington and A. Rebhan, “Perturbative and nonperturbative Kolmogorov turbulence

in a gluon plasma,” Eur. Phys. J. C71 (2011) 1787, arXiv:1011.0393 [hep-ph].

[112] J. Berges and D. Sexty, “Bose condensation far from equilibrium,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108

(2012) 161601, arXiv:1201.0687 [hep-ph].

[113] J. Berges, S. Schlichting, and D. Sexty, “Over-populated gauge ﬁelds on the lattice,” Phys.

Rev. D86 (2012) 074006, arXiv:1203.4646 [hep-ph].

[114] T. Gasenzer, L. McLerran, J. M. Pawlowski, and D. Sexty, “Gauge turbulence, topological
defect dynamics, and condensation in Higgs models,” Nucl. Phys. A930 (2014) 163–186,
arXiv:1307.5301 [hep-ph].

[115] J.-P. Blaizot, Y. Jiang, and J. Liao, “Gluon transport equation with eﬀective mass and

dynamical onset of Bose-Einstein condensation,” arXiv:1503.07260 [hep-ph].

[116] F. Gelis, K. Kajantie, and T. Lappi, “Chemical thermalization in relativistic heavy ion

collisions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 032304, arXiv:hep-ph/0508229 [hep-ph].

[117] D. Gelfand, F. Hebenstreit, and J. Berges, “Early quark production and approach to chemical

equilibrium,” arXiv:1601.03576 [hep-ph].

[118] J. Liao, “Chiral magnetic eﬀect in heavy ion collisions,” in 25th International Conference on

Ultra-Relativistic Nucleus-Nucleus Collisions (Quark Matter 2015) Kobe, Japan,
September 27-October 3, 2015. 2016. arXiv:1601.00381 [nucl-th].
https://inspirehep.net/record/1412086/files/arXiv:1601.00381.pdf.

[119] K. Fukushima, D. E. Kharzeev, and H. J. Warringa, “Real-time dynamics of the Chiral

Magnetic Eﬀect,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (2010) 212001, arXiv:1002.2495 [hep-ph].

[120] M. Mace, S. Schlichting, and R. Venugopalan, “Oﬀ-equilibrium sphaleron transitions in the

Glasma,” arXiv:1601.07342 [hep-ph].

[121] K. Fukushima, “Simulating net particle production and chiral magnetic current in a CP -odd

domain,” Phys. Rev. D92 (2015) no. 5, 054009, arXiv:1501.01940 [hep-ph].

