Efﬁcient Optimal Joint Channel Estimation and

Data Detection for Massive MIMO Systems

Haider Ali Jasim Alshamary

Department of ECE, University of Iowa, USA

Weiyu Xu

Department of ECE, University of Iowa, USA

tions fundamentally limit the achievable data rates in massive
MIMO systems.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
8

 

 
 
]
T
I
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
8
3
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient optimal joint
channel estimation and data detection algorithm for massive
MIMO wireless systems. Our algorithm is optimal
in terms
of the generalized likelihood ratio test (GLRT). For massive
MIMO systems, we show that the expected complexity of our
algorithm grows polynomially in the channel coherence time.
Simulation results demonstrate signiﬁcant performance gains of
our algorithm compared with suboptimal non-coherent detection
algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
algorithm which efﬁciently achieves GLRT-optimal non-coherent
detections for massive MIMO systems with general constellations.

I. INTRODUCTION

Massive MIMO wireless systems emerge as an important
potential technology for next generation wireless communi-
cations. Massive MIMO systems aim to meet the growing
demand for higher data rates and wider coverage, by using
hundreds of antennas at base stations (BS). In [1], the author
showed that, in a single-cell massive MIMO system, when

the number of receive antennas N → ∞, we can eliminate

the negative effects of fast fading and non-correlated noise.
Massive MIMO systems can also greatly boost the energy
efﬁciency of cellular wireless communications [2]. Besides
larger capacity and higher energy efﬁciency, massive MIMO
systems can boost the robustness both to unintended man-
made interference and to intentional jamming. These advan-
tages make massive MIMO a promising candidate for new 5G
wireless communications technologies [3, 20].

In this paper, we consider a typical TDD (Time Division
Duplexing) massive MIMO wireless systems. In TDD massive
MIMO systems, user terminals equipped with single antennas
transmit pilot sequences and information data to base stations
in uplink transmissions. Exploiting channel reciprocity in TDD
systems, the base stations use channel estimation from uplink
transmissions for precoding in downlink data transmissions.
One of the most prominent challenges in massive MIMO
systems is timely acquiring the channel state information (CSI)
for a large number of antenna pairs. In fact, unknown CSI is a
bottleneck in achieving the full potentials of massive MIMO
systems [3]. Especially in fast fading environments where the
channels change rapidly, one would need to dedicate a sig-
niﬁcant portion of the coherence interval for pilot sequences,
leaving few times slots for data transmissions. In multi-cell
multi-user massive MIMO systems, due to the scarcity of
resources for orthogonal pilot sequences, pilot sequences from
neighboring cells will inevitably pollute channel estimations
in the current cell, causing the issue of pilot contamination
[3-5]. With the need of obtaining good CSI, pilot contamina-

It is known that joint channel estimation and data detections
can greatly alleviate the issue of pilot contamination, and
enhance system performance for massive MIMO systems
[3, 6-8, 21]. Maximum likelihood (ML) or GLRT-optimal
joint channel estimation and data detection algorithms are
especially attractive due to their optimality, when the channel
statistics are known or unknown. However, existing efﬁcient
joint channel estimation and data detection algorithms for
massive MIMO systems are suboptimal, and cannot achieve
the optimal non-coherent detection performance. It is thus
of great
to design efﬁcient optimal non-coherent
data detection algorithms for massive MIMO. Moreover, it is
important to obtain the performance limits of ML or GLRT-
optimal non-coherent data detection such that they can be used
as benchmarks for evaluating low-complexity suboptimal non-
coherent data detection algorithms.

interest

For special cases of conventional MIMO systems with few
antennas, there exist a few efﬁcient algorithms which can
achieve optimal joint channel estimation and data detection. In
[10-12], the authors introduced sphere decoders to achieve the
exact ML non-coherent signal detection for constant-modulus
constellations (such as BPSK, QPSK). The sphere decoder
demonstrates low computational complexity for high signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) and moderate system dimensions [13].
However, the sphere decoder has exponential complexity at
low or constant SNR [14], and it only works for non-coherent
single input multiple output (SIMO) systems.

Another line of works use the method of channel state
space partition for ML or GLRT-optimal non-coherent data
detection, attaining polynomial complexity in channel coher-
ence time T [15-17, 19]. For example, [17] achieves GLRT-
optimal non-coherent detection for pulse-amplitude modula-
tion (PAM) using auxiliary-angle approach of polynomial-
time complexity. However, these works are only for single-
input single-output systems where the channel coefﬁcient is
a single complex variable, or orthogonal space time block
coded MIMO systems with a single receive antenna. These
algorithms using channel state partition do not work efﬁciently
for general MIMO systems with a few more receive antennas,
not to mention massive MIMO systems with hundreds of
receive antennas.

In [18], the authors proposed an efﬁcient branch-estimate-
and-bound algorithm for GLRT-optimal non-coherent data
detection for conventional MIMO systems with general con-
stellations. Although this algorithm from [18] was the only
known efﬁcient GLRT-optimal algorithm for general MIMO

systems with multiple transmit and receive antennas and
general constellations, this approach does not have a com-
putational complexity polynomial in channel coherence time,
and is only for conventional MIMO systems with few receive
antennas.

In this paper, we propose a novel efﬁcient GLRT-optimal
joint channel estimation and data detection for massive MIMO
systems with general constellations. We show that our algo-
rithm has an expected computational complexity polynomial
in the channel coherence time T for massive MIMO systems.
In its essence, our approach is a branch-and-bound method on
the residual energy of massive MIMO signals after projecting
them onto certain subspaces. To the best of our knowledge,
this framework is the ﬁrst GLRT-optimal non-coherent signal
detection algorithm for massive MIMO systems with low com-
putational complexity and optimal performance. Moreover, our
algorithm can provide benchmark performance against which
we can evaluate suboptimal
low-complexity joint channel
estimation and data detection algorithms.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the system model. In Section III, we introduce the
new GLRT-optimal non-coherent data detection algorithm. The
expected complexity of the algorithm is derived in Section IV.
Section V demonstrates the empirical performance and the
computational complexity of ML algorithm.

II. JOINT CHANNEL ESTIMATION AND SIGNAL

(1)

DETECTION FOR MASSIVE MIMO

N receive antennas at the base station, and M â N user

We consider a TDD massive MIMO wireless system with

X= HS∗+ W,

terminals each equipped with a single antenna. We assume
a discrete-time block ﬂat fading channel model where the
channel coefﬁcients are ﬁxed for a coherence time T . Across
different fading blocks, the channel coefﬁcients take indepen-
dent values from unknown distributions. We model the uplink
transmission of this system within one channel block by

are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) symbols
from a modulation constellation Ω (Ω can be of constant

where X∈CN×T is the received signal at the BS, S∗ is an
M×T matrix representing the transmitted signal, whose entries
or non-constant modulus, such as 16-QAM), W ∈ CN×T
represents additive noises, and H ∈ CN×M represents the
distribution N(0, σ2
w). In each channel coherence block, we

unknown channel matrix. The elements of W are i.i.d. random
variables following circularly symmetric complex Gaussian

further assume that the channel coefﬁcients are deterministic
with no prior statistical information known about them [9, 10].
Since the channel coefﬁcients take unknown deterministic
values, we can formulate the GLRT-optimal
joint channel
estimation and data detection as a mixed optimization problem
over H and S:

where ΩM×T represents the signal lattice of dimension M× T .

H,S∗∈ΩM×T

X− HS∗2,

We remark that the GLRT-optimal detection is equivalent to
ML detection for SIMO systems with constant-modulus mod-
ulations, and for MIMO systems with equal-energy signaling,

min

(2)

(3)

when the channel coefﬁcients are known to take i.i.d. circularly
symmetric complex Gaussian values [16].

min

this into (2), we get

We note that the combinatorial optimization problem in (2)
is a least squares problem in H , while an integer least-squares

problem in S∗, since each element of S∗ is chosen from a
discrete constellation Ω [11]. Hereby, for any given S∗, the
channel matrix H that minimizes (2) is given by ˆH= X(S∗)†,
where (⋅)† denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of a
matrix. Since(S∗)†= S(S∗S)†, ˆH= XS(S∗S)†. Substituting
H,S∗X−HS∗2= min
X(I− S(S∗S)†S∗)2
S∗∈ΩM×T
= min
S∗ tr(X(I− S(S∗S)†S∗)X∗)
= tr(XX∗)− max
tr((S∗S)†S∗X∗XS),
S∗∈ΩM×T
where tr(⋅) is the trace of a matrix. To simplify the mathemat-
of Ξ is Ω M . Then we can rewrite (3) as
where we use tr(X∗X)= tr(XX∗). Now by choosing ρmin to
be the minimum eigenvalue of X∗X, the minimization prob-
tr((S∗S)†S∗(X∗X− ρminI)S),
tr(X∗X− ρminI)− max
S∗∈Ξ1×T
because tr((S∗S)†S∗(ρminI)S) is a constant. Since A =
X∗X − ρminI is positive semideﬁnite, we can factorize
A = R∗R using Cholesky decomposition, where R∗ is the

ical formulation, we deﬁne Ξ to be a new M-dimensional
constellation, each element of which is an M-dimensional
vector with its entries taking values from Ω. So the cardinality

lem in (4) can be equivalently represented by the following
optimization problem,

tr(X∗X)− max
S∗∈Ξ1×T

tr((S∗S)†S∗X∗XS),

lower triangular matrix of Cholesky decomposition. Finally,
using the trace property for product of matrices, (5) can be
transformed as follows:

(5)

(4)

tr(R∗R)− max
tr((S∗S)†S∗R∗RS)
S∗∈Ξ1×T
tr(R(I− S(S∗S)†S∗)R∗)
= min
S∗∈Ξ1×T
= min
  R∗− S(S∗S)†S∗R∗  2.
S∗∈Ξ1×T

(6)

Thus our goal is to minimize (6), based on which our novel al-
gorithm is built. We remark that this approach of transforming
the GLRT-optimal detection to (6) is novel, very different from
existing approaches for GLRT-optimal detection including the
sphere decoder [11] which only works for SIMO wireless

systems. We also note that, the channel estimate ˆH= X(S∗)†

can be used for downlink precoding after solving (6).

III. EFFICIENT GLRT-OPTIMAL JOINT CHANNEL
ESTIMATION AND DATA DETECTION ALGORITHM

since it requires searching over all the  Ω M T hypotheses in

Finding the optimal solution to (6) is a formidable task,

the signal space. The exhaustive search appproach provides the
optimal solution, however, its complexity grows exponentially
in the channel coherence time. In the special case of SIMO
systems, the sphere decoder efﬁciently solves GLRT-optimal

detection (in a different format from (6)) for both constant-
modulus [11] and nonconstant-modulus constellations [12].
However, the sphere decoders from [11] and [12] do not work
for MIMO systems.

(8)

(7)

MS∗
1∶i

layers. At a layer 0, we have one root node. Each tree node

the tree nodes at layer T as leaf nodes, and thus each possible

To describe our algorithm, we ﬁrst introduce a tree repre-
sentation of the signal space. Recall that we use Ξ to represent
the set of signal vectors of length M, where each element of
each vector takes value from the constellation Ω. We can thus

represent the set of possible matrices for S∗ by a tree of T
at layer i, 0≤ i≤(T− 1), has Ξ = Ω M child nodes. We use
S∗
1∶i to represent the ﬁrst i columns of S∗, and each possible
matrix for S∗
1∶i corresponds to a layer-i tree node. And we call
matrix for S∗ is represented by a leaf node. Furthermore, for
each possible matrix value for S∗, we deﬁne its metric by
MS∗=  R∗− S(S∗S)†S∗R∗  2.
For a partial matrix S∗
1∶i, we deﬁne its metric by
1∶iS1∶i)†S∗
=  R∗
1∶i− S1∶i(S∗
1∶i  2,
1∶iR∗
where 1 ≤ i ≤ T , and R∗
1∶i is the ﬁrst i rows of R∗. Thus
solving (6) is equivalent to ﬁnding an ˆS∗ that minimizes MS∗
among all the possible matrix values for S∗.
To develop our algorithm, we have the following lemma
Lemma III.1. For every i≤ T and any matrix value for S∗,
about the comparison between MS∗
and MS∗.
1∶i
≤ MS∗
MS∗
1∶i
Proof: We observe that MS∗ is the residual energy after
projecting the columns of R∗ onto the subspace spanned by
the columns of S; and MS∗
projecting the columns of R∗
1∶i (the ﬁrst i rows of R∗) onto the
1∶i
is the residual energy after
subspace spanned by the columns of S1∶i ( S1∶i is the just the
ﬁrst i rows of S). Since orthogonal linear projections minimize
1∶iS1∶i)†S∗
orthogonal projections S1∶i(S∗
the residual energy among all linear projections, we can show,
at the ﬁrst i indices, the residual energy MS∗
1∶i to R∗
1∶i
1∶i, will be no
after applying
after applying S(S∗S)†S to R∗. Moreover, for the orthogonal
projection S(S∗S)†S applied to R∗, the total residual energy
bigger than these indices’ residual energy (denoted by Q)
over the ﬁrst i indices. Because MS∗≥ Q and Q≥ MS∗
MS∗ over T indices is no smaller than the residual energy Q
, we
have MS∗
1∶i
Lemma III.1 means that MS∗
is a lower bound on MS∗.
1∶i
Intuitively, suppose that MS∗
is too big, then MS∗ must also
be big, and S∗ will not minimize (6). This motivates us to
1∶i
propose the following branch-and-bound algorithm for GLRT-
optimal joint channel estimation and data detection. In this
> r2, this
algorithm, we set a search radius r, and use this radius r
to regulate a depth-ﬁrst search over the signal tree structure
for the optimal solution to (6). In fact, if MS∗
algorithm will not search among the child nodes of S∗
1∶i
1∶i. If
the optimal solution is not found under the current radius r,
we will increase the search radius r for new searches until the
optimal solution is found. The description of our algorithm is
given in Algorithm 1. Algorithm 1 is GLRT-optimal:

≤ MS∗.

1∶i

Theorem III.2. Algorithm 1 gives the optimal solution to (6).

This theorem is a result of Lemma III.1 and the branch-

(9)

and-bound search over the signal space.
A. Metric calculation and initial radius r
To compute MS∗
1∶i
, we can have a constant computational
complexity independent of T , by recursive calculations over
1∶iR1∶i)− tr((S∗
= tr(R∗
1∶iS1∶i)†S∗
1∶iR1∶iS1∶i).
1∶iR∗
tree structure. The metric in (8) is equivalent to
MS∗
1∶i
1∶iR1∶i) can be precomputed. Second, after
the term tr(R∗
From (9), we can calculate the metric MS∗
deﬁning a T× M matrix Ai= R1∶iS1∶i, we can update Ai+1
1∶i
sequentially as Ai+1= Ai+ Ri+1∶i+1Si+1∶i+1. Similarly, we can
deﬁne M× M matrix Bi= S∗
date Bi+1= Bi+ S∗
1∶iS1∶i and then sequentially up-
i+1 is O(M 2) using matrix inversion lemma,
i+1∶i+1Si+1∶i+1. Furthermore, the complexity
i+1∶i+1Si+1∶i+1)†. The complexity of all
i+1=(Bi+ S∗
For large N, we can choose the radius r2 = cN, where

of calculating B†
where B†
these recursive updates do not depend on T (noting that only
i rows of A are nonzero).

efﬁciently. First,

c is any sufﬁciently small constant (please the next section
for justiﬁcations). In fact, one can also use best-ﬁrst tree
search to ﬁnd the optimal solution while avoiding picking an
r beforehand.

IV. EXPECTED COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY

sequences S∗

1∶i for which metric MS∗

The computational complexity of our tree search based
algorithms is mainly determined by the number of visited
nodes in each layer. By “visited nodes”, we mean the partial
is computed. The fewer
the visited nodes, the lower computational complexity of our
tree search algorithm has. In this section, we show that the
expected number of visited nodes will grow linearly with
T under a sufﬁciently large number of receive antennas. To
analyze the expected number of visited nodes, we assume that
the channel coefﬁcients are i.i.d. complex Gaussian random

i

index vector I

1∶i= Ξ(I(i)).

input : radius r, matrix R, constellation Ξ and a 1× T
output: The transmitted signal S∗
1 Set i= 1, I(i)= 1 and set S∗
> r2, go to 3; else, go to 4;
2 (Computing the bounds) Compute the metric MS∗
1∶i
3 (Backtracking) Find the smallest 1≤ j≤ i such that
MS∗
1∶i
I(j)< Ξ . If there exists such j, set i= j and go to 5;
4 If i= T , store current S∗, update r2= MS∗
else set i= i+ 1, I(i)= 1 and S∗
1∶i= Ξ(I(i)), go to 2.
i = Ξ(I(i)). Go to 2. If any
5 Set I(i)= I(i)+ 1 and S∗
sequence S∗ is ever found in Step 4, output the latest

else go to 6.

1∶T

. If

stored full-length sequence as the ML solution;
otherwise, double r and go to 1.
Algorithm 1: ML channel estimation and signal detection
algorithm.

and go to 3;

wI,

(10)

Theorem IV.1.

Proof: (outline) We ﬁrst prove that,

1∶(i−1) such that M̃S∗

We ﬁrst note that, the number of visited nodes at layer i

number of receive antennas N goes to inﬁnity. The tree search

distribution of channel coefﬁcients. Then we show that, when

is any sufﬁciently small positive constant. Then for the tree
search algorithm, the expected number of visited points at

the M users send M orthogonal pilot sequences between time
indices 1 and M.

Due to space limitations, we give an outline of the proof of
the tree search

variables following distributionN(0, 1). We also assume that
Theorem IV.1. Let M be ﬁxed, and let r2 = cN, where c
layer i converges to  Ξ  =  Ω M for i ≥ (M + 1), as the
algorithm only visits one tree node at each layer i<(M+ 1).
algorithm only visits  Ξ  =  Ω M nodes per layer when
X∗X = E[X∗X], where the expectation is taken over the
N→∞, X∗X~N→ E[X∗X]~N in probability and that the
expected number of visited nodes at layer i ((M+ 1)≤ i≤ T )
approaches Ξ .
((M+ 1)≤ i≤ T ) is equal to Ξ , if there is one and only one
sequencẽS∗
1∶(i−1)≤ r2. Let us consider the
true transmitted sequence S∗ . Then we have
E[X∗X]= E[(HS∗+ W)∗(HS∗+ W)]
= SE[H∗H]S∗+ E[W∗W]+ SE[H∗W]+ E[W∗H]S∗
= N SS∗+ N σ2
where the second equality is from E[HH∗] = N I and
E[H∗W]= 0.
Because SS∗ is of rank M with M < T , from (10), the
minimum eigenvalue of E[X∗X]~N is σ2
search algorithm (after scaling A by a constant N), A =
E[X∗X]~N−σ2
wI= SS∗. From the Cholesky decomposition,
we know that A= SS∗= R∗R. This means that the columns
of R∗ span the same subspace as the columns of S. Thus the
metric MS∗= 0, because  R∗− S(S∗S)†S∗R∗  2 is precisely
the residual energy after projecting the columns of R∗ onto the
≤ MS∗,
= 0 for all i.
subspace spanned by the columns of S. Since MS∗
1∶i
Let us instead consider any signal matrix ¯S such that ¯S≠ S
MS∗
1∶i
1∶M= S∗
and ¯S∗
S). For such ¯S, we can show that  R∗− ¯S(¯S∗ ¯S)† ¯S∗R∗  2> 0,
1∶M (namely ¯S shares the same pilot sequences as
1∶i≠ S∗
> 0 for the ﬁrst i such that ¯S∗
1∶i. In fact,
and that M¯S∗
1∶i
M¯S∗
¯S1∶i)† ¯S∗
D=
1∶i  2> 0.
1∶i
1∶iS∗
Thus for a search radius r2 < D, there will be only T tree
nodes (namely those from transmitted signal S∗ ) with metric
will visit at most T Ξ  tree nodes, under the assumption that
X∗X= E[X∗X].
For massive MIMO systems, when N → ∞, X∗X~N →
E[X∗X]~N in probability. In fact, we can show that, as N→
∞, with probability at least(1− ), the tree search algorithm
will visit at most T∗ Ξ  tree nodes, where > 0 is an arbitrary
small number. With probability > 0, the tree search algorithm
will visit at most Ξ T nodes. When N→∞,  can be pushed

no bigger than r2. This means that the tree search algorithm

1∶i− ¯S1∶i(¯S∗
  S∗
1∶i

i>M,S,¯S,S1∶i≠¯S1∶i

w. Then for the tree

is no smaller than

min

have the following theorem.

small fast enough such that the expected number of visited
tree nodes grows linear in T .
Moreover, we only need N to grow polynomially in T , in
order to guarantee that the expected number of visited tree
nodes grows polynomially in T . In fact, using large deviation

bounds for the convergence of X∗X~N to E[X∗X]~N, we
Theorem IV.2. Let M be ﬁxed, and let r2= cN, where c is
i converges to Ξ  for i≥(M+ 1).

any sufﬁciently small positive constant. Then we only need the
number of receive antennas N to grow polynomially in T , to
guarantee that the expected number of visited points at layer

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we numerically simulate the performance
of our new GLRT-optimal tree search algorithm, comparing it
against suboptimal iterative and non-iterative MMSE channel
estimation and data detection schemes. We allow the receiver

to know the ﬁrst M columns of the transmitted signal S∗,

which serve as necessary orthogonal pilot sequences o guaran-
tee good error performance. The non-iterative MMSE channel
estimation scheme ﬁrst uses the pilot sequences to perform
MMSE channel estimation, and then uses the estimated chan-
nel to detect the transmitted information symbols. The iterative
MMSE scheme iteratively exploits the detected data from the
previous iteration to perform channel estimation used for data
detection in the current iteration.

In Figure 2 we evaluate the average number of visited

the symbol error rate (SER) performance, as a function of

dB gain over the iterative MMSE channel estimation scheme.

algorithm guarantees providing the GLRT-optimal solution.

We consider different numbers of users M, different number
sof receive antennas N, and different block lengths T . We de-

ﬁne the SNR as SNR= E  HS∗  2
E  W  2 . In Figure 1, we demonstrate
SNR, for 16-QAM modulation. Here, M= 2, and T = 8. For
10−2 SER and N = 50, our tree search algorithm provides 5
When N= 100, our method holds 6 dB gain over the iterative
MMSE scheme at 10−3 SER. Most importantly, our tree search
Figure 3 also demonstrates signiﬁcant gains for N = 200
nodes of the tree search algorithm. Here T = 8, M = 2, and
N = 100 and SNR= 3dB, exhaustive search requires testing
2.81×1014 hypotheses in each coherence block, while our tree
search algorithm visits only 5.5× 104 tree nodes on average.
exhaustive search would need 3.52× 103 years to compute
of SNR in Figure 4, for QPSK modulation, M = 4, and
T = 10. We observe that increasing N form 50 to 500 will
would need to examine 2.81× 1014 hypotheses and will take

the modulation scheme is 16-QAM . We observe tremendous
reduction in the number of hypotheses that need to be tested,
compared with exhaustive search method. For instance, for

We remark that, using the same computer for simulation,

greatly reduce the number of visited nodes. Exhaustive search

We plot the average number of visited points as a function

the optimal solution for one channel coherence block.

antennas.

2000 years to calculate the optimal solution for one channel
coherence block.

search algorithm. M= 2, T = 8, and 16-QAM constellation.

Fig. 1. SER for iterative MMSE, non-iterative MMSE, and our optimal tree

Average number of visited points for T = 8, and 16-QAM
instead need to test 2.8147× 1014

Fig. 2.
modulation. Exhaustive search will
hypotheses

search algorithm. M= 2, T = 8, N= 200, and 16-QAM modulation.

Fig. 3. SER for iterative MMSE, non-iterative MMSE, and our optimal tree

REFERENCES

[1] T. L. Marzetta, “Noncooperative cellular wireless with unlimited numbers
of base station antennas,” IEEE Transaction on Wireless Comunication,
vol 9, no 11, pp. 3590-3600, Nov. 2003.

[2] E. Bjornson, M. Kountouris and M. Debbah, “Massive MIMO and small
cells: Improving energy efﬁciency by optimal soft-cell coordination,” In
20th International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT), pp.1-5, 6-8
May 2013.

[3] E. G. Larsson, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson and T. L. Marzetta, “Massive
MIMO for next generation wireless systems,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 52, pp. 186-195, Feb 2014.

[4] H. Q. Ngo, E. G. Larsson and T. L. Marzetta, “Massive MU-MIMO
downlink TDD systems with linear precoding and downlink pilots,” 51st
Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing,
2013, pp. 293-298.

[5] J. Hoydis, S. T. Brink and M. Debbah, “Massive MIMO: How many

Average number of visited points for T = 10, M = 4, and
QPSK modulation. Exhaustive search will instead need to test 2.8147× 1014

Fig. 4.

hypotheses.

antennas do we need? ” 49th Annual Allerton Conference on Communi-
cation, Control, and Computing, 2011.

[6] R.R. Muller, L. Cottatellucci and M. Vehkapera, “Blind Pilot Decontam-
ination,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol.8,
no.5, pp.773-786, Oct. 2014.

[7] H. Q. Ngo and E. G. Larsson, “EVD-based channel estimations for
in IEEE
multicell multiuser MIMO with very large antenna arrays,
International Conference on Acoustics, speech and signal processing
(ICASSP), Mar. 2012.

[8] S.G. Wilson, J. Freebersyser and C. Marshall, “Multi-symbol detection
of M-DPSK,” in Global Telecommunications Conference and Exhibition
’Communications Technology for the 1990s and Beyond’ (GLOBECOM),
pp.1692-1697 vol.3, 27-30 Nov 1989.

[9] P. Stoica and G. Ganesan, “Space-time block codes: Trained, blind, and
semi-blind detection, ” Digital Signal Process, vol. 13, pp. 93-105, 2003.
[10] W-K. Ma, B-N. Vo, T. N. Davidson, and P-C. Ching, “Blind ML detec-
tion of orthogonal space-time block codes: High-performance, efﬁcient
implementations,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 54, no.
2, pp. 738-751, Feb. 2006.

[11] H. Vikalo, B. Hassibi and P. Stoica, “Efﬁcient joint maximum-likelihood
channel estimation and signal detection,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol 5, no 7, pp. 1838-1845, Jul 2006.

[12] H. Alshamary, T. Al-Naffouri, A. Zaib, and W. Xu, “Optimal non-
coherent data detection for massive SIMO wireless systems: A polynomal
complexity solution,” Proceedings of IEEE Signal Processing and Signal
Processing Education Workshop (SP/SPE), pp.172-177, 2015.

[13] B. Hassibi and H. Vikalo, “On the sphere-decoding algorithm I. Ex-
pected complexity,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , vol.53,
no.8, pp. 2806-2818, Aug. 2005.

[14] J. Jald´en and B. Ottersten, “On the complexity of sphere decoding
in digital communications,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing ,
vol.53, no.4, pp.1474-1484, April 2005

[15] D.J. Ryan, I.B. Collings and I.V.L. Clarkson, “GLRT-Optimal Noncoher-
ent Lattice Decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , vol.55,
no.7, pp.3773-3786, July 2007

[16] D. Warrier and U. Madhow, “Spectrally efﬁcient noncoherent communi-
cation,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol.48, no.3, pp.651-
668, Mar 2002.

[17] D.S. Papailiopoulos, G.A. Elkheir and G.N. Karystinos, “Maximum-
Likelihood Noncoherent PAM Detection,” IEEE Transactions on Com-
munications , vol.61, no.3, pp.1152-1159, March 2013

[18] W. Xu, M. Stojnic and B. Hassibi, “On exact maximum-likelihood detec-
tion for non-coherent MIMO wireless systems: A branch-estimate-bound
optimization framework,” IEEE International Symposium in Information
Theory, 2008. ISIT, pp.2017-2021, 6-11 July 2008.

[19] I. Motedayen-Aval, A. Krishnamoorthy and A. Anastasopoulos, “Opti-
mal joint detection/estimation in fading channels with polynomial com-
plexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2007.

[20] C. Jeon, R. Ghods, A. Maleki and C. Studer, “Optimality of large MIMO
detection via approximate message passing,” in IEEE International Sym-
posium on Information Theory (ISIT), pp.1227-1231, 14-19 June 2015.
[21] W. Chao-Kai, J. Shi, W. Kai-Kit, W. Chang-Jen and W. Gang, “Joint
channel-and-data estimation for large-MIMO systems with low-precision
ADCs,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT),
pp.1237-1241, 14-19 June 2015.

SNR(dB)0123456SER10-510-410-310-210-1Non-iterative MMSE, N=50Non-iterative MMSE, N=100Iterative MMSE, N=50Iterative MMSE, N=100Optimal, N=50Optimal, N=100SNR(dB)0123456Average number of visited nodes103104105106107N=50N=100N=500SNR(dB)-3-2-10123SER10-410-310-210-1Non-iterative MMSEIterative MMSEOptimalSNR(dB)-5-4-3-2-10Average number of visited nodes103104105106107108N=50N=100N=500