GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LETTERS, VOL. ???, XXXX, DOI:10.1029/,

How important is tropospheric humidity for coastal rainfall in
the tropics?
Martin Bergemann1,2 and Christian Jakob1,2

Recent research has community have shown that tropical
convection and rainfall is sensitive to mid-tropospheric hu-
midity. Therefore it has been suggested to improve the rep-
resentation of moist convection by making cumulus param-
eterizations more sensitive to mid-tropospheric moisture.
Climate models show considerable rainfall biases in coastal
tropical areas, where approx. 33 % of the overall rainfall re-
ceived is associated with coastal land-sea interaction. Build-
ing on an algorithm to objectively identify rainfall that is
associated with land-sea interaction we investigate whether
the relationship between rainfall in coastal regions and at-
mospheric humidity diﬀers from that over the open ocean
or over inland areas. We combine 3-hourly satellite esti-
mates of rainfall with humidity estimates from reanalyses
and investigate if coastal rainfall reveals the well known re-
lationship between area-averaged precipitation and column
integrated moisture. We ﬁnd that rainfall that is associ-
ated with coastal land-sea eﬀects occurs under much drier
mid-tropospheric conditions than that over the ocean and
doesn’t exhibit a pronounced critical value of humidity. In
addition, the dependence of the amount of rainfall on mid-
tropospheric moisture is signiﬁcantly weaker when the rain-
fall is coastally inﬂuenced. Our ﬁndings indicate that the
representation of convection in weather and climate models
must cater for the special character near coasts rather than
rely on a common set of rules across the globe.

precipitation reveals a distinct pattern when it is dominated
by land-sea interaction. The rainfall usually develops in the
afternoon over the coastal land areas, peaks in the early-to-
late evening and then propagates oﬀshore over night pro-
ducing an early-morning peak over the adjacent ocean [e.g
Kousky, 1980; Geotis and Houze, 1985; Mori et al., 2004;
Yang and Slingo, 2001; Rauniyar and Walsh, 2010]. Us-
ing an objective pattern recognition technique Bergemann
et al. [2015] showed that in coastal regions of the tropics,
in particular over the many islands of the Maritime Con-
tinent, coastally inﬂuenced rainfall constitutes more than
a third of the overall annual rainfall received, indicating
its importance for the region and its likely strong eﬀect
on the large-scale circulation through convective heating ef-
fects [Neale and Slingo, 2002]. Several recent studies [Rau-
niyar and Walsh, 2010, 2012; Peatman et al., 2014; Berge-
mann et al., 2015] have presented evidence that the rainfall
characteristics of large-scale tropical circulations, such as
the Madden-Julian-Oscillation [MJO Madden and Julian,
1971, 1972, 1994], are strongly modiﬁed by the presence of
coasts. They showed that in the coastal regions of the Mar-
itime Continent, rainfall is strongly modulated by coastline
eﬀects leading to enhanced precipitation in the suppressed
MJO-Phase and therefore very small diﬀerences in rainfall
between active and suppressed MJO conditions over the land
regions of the Maritime Continent. This is in stark contrast
to the very large diﬀerences over the open ocean. This in-
dicates, that coastal tropical convection might occur under
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent large-scale conditions than its open-
ocean counterpart. It is the purpose of this study to investi-
gate and quantify relationships of the atmospheric state and
rainfall over tropical coastal areas.

D r aft

Rainfall in coastal regions of the tropics is well-known to
show a complex behavior that is strongly shaped by dynami-
cal features that act on meso-scales in response to the topog-
raphy, thermal heating contrast between land and adjacent
ocean and orographically induced wind systems [Pearce,
1982; Crosman and Horel , 2010]. Several studies showed
that coastal convection and rainfall are strongly modulated
by the coastlines [Pielke, 1974; Holland and Keenan, 1980;
Simpson et al., 1980, 1993; Baker et al., 2001]. These modu-
lations are land-sea-breeze circulations that tend to interact
with mountain-valley-breeze systems [Qian, 2008] or grav-
ity waves [Mapes et al., 2003a]. The details of any land-
sea-breeze circulation are dependent on several factors, in-
cluding details of the coastal arrangement, orography, and
variations due to the Coriolis eﬀect [Haurwitz , 1947; Ro-
tunno, 1983]. However, in an overall sense tropical coastal

Global weather and climate models show an overall poor
representation of precipitation [Stephens et al., 2010], with
particularly large errors in coastal regions such as the Mar-
itime Continent [Yang and Slingo, 2001; Neale and Slingo,
2002; Qian, 2008; Nguyen et al., 2015]. Here, rainfall is fre-
quently underestimated over land and overestimated over
the ocean indicating that the complex processes associated
with coastal rainfall are poorly captured [e.g Mapes et al.,
2003b; Slingo et al., 2004; Gianotti et al., 2011]. One reason
for the lack of accuracy in the representation of coastal trop-
ical rainfall can be seen in the need to parameterize the pro-
cesses associated with rainfall in global climate models, in
particular that of atmospheric convection [Arakawa, 2004].
At their most fundamental level, cumulus parameterizations
relate the explicitly resolved state of the atmosphere to con-
vective processes. Most existing parameterizations imple-
ment ideas based on observations over the open ocean [Xu
and Emanuel , 1989; Arakawa, 2004].

Several past studies have documented that atmospheric
moisture plays a key role in the inhibition and generation of
moist atmospheric convection over the tropical oceans [e.g.
Bretherton et al., 2004; Derbyshire et al., 2004; Holloway
and Neelin, 2009; Ahmed and Schumacher , 2015]. As a con-
sequence recent eﬀorts by the climate modeling community
suggest that making cumulus parameterizations more mois-
ture sensitive can improve the representation of tropical con-
vection in climate models [Del Genio et al., 2015; Klingaman

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
8

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
9
3
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1. Introduction

1School of Earth, Atmosphere and Environment, Faculty

of Science, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3000,
Australia

2ARC Centre of Excellence for Climate System Science

Copyright 2016 by the American Geophysical Union.
0094-8276/16/$5.00

1

X - 2

BERGEMANN ET AL.: THE HUMIDITY-RAINFALL RELATIONSHIP NEAR COASTS

Figure 1. The diﬀerent regions considered in the study. The tropical ocean region is marked in blue. The tropical land in
green. The shaded area spans ≈ 150 km on- and oﬀshore. The shading indicates the average fraction of rainfall that can be
attributed as associated with coastal processes (see text for details on the deﬁnition of rainfall due to land-sea interaction).

et al., 2015]. One immediate question then is: does the doc-
umented atmospheric moisture mode to rainfall relationship
in coastal regions diﬀer from those over the open ocean?

The aim of this paper is to investigate if the rainfall to
humidity relationship over the open ocean that has driven
the recent parameterization developments is applicable in
coastal regions. We hypothesize that the occurrence of rain-
fall near coasts in the suppressed phases of the MJO indi-
cates that convection can occur in an atmosphere that is
much drier than over the open ocean.
If true, this would
have profound implications for the design of parameteriza-
tions if they are to represent this important type of convec-
tion. We use the coastal rainfall data set derived by Berge-
mann et al. [2015], to investigate the rainfall to humidity
relationship for coastal and non-coastal rainfall.

Section 2 describes the data used in this study and the
methodology that is applied to combine rainfall observation
with atmospheric moisture observations to compare the con-
vective behavior. Section 3 presents the main results and
shows the uniqueness of coastal convection when compared
to non-coastal convection. This is followed by a summary
and conclusion in Section 4.

D r aft

inﬂuenced rainfall events from those over the open ocean.
To investigate this we ﬁrst require a deﬁnition of what con-
stitutes coastal rainfall. The simplest way of deﬁning coastal
rainfall is to just use all rainfall near the coasts. However,
as shown in Bergemann et al. [2015], a considerable frac-
tion of this rainfall is not likely related to coastal processes,
but simply the result of synoptic-scale features traversing
coastal regions. To identify rainfall that is actually related
to coastal land-sea interaction we use a pattern recognition
technique recently developed by Bergemann et al. [2015].
The method considers only geometrical aspects of satellite
rainfall estimates and ﬁnds meso-scale precipitation pattern
in coastal areas that are aligned with the coastline. The pat-
tern recognition applies four heuristics to ﬁnd precipitation
that is associated with land-sea interaction. These can be
summarized as follows:
• the recognized rainfall has a higher intensity compared
• the precipitation is not synoptic-scale,
• rainfall due to land-sea interaction occurs in a coastal
• the precipitation pattern is aligned with the coastline.
The interested reader might refer to Bergemann et al.
[2015] for a detailed description and results. The algorithm
yields robust results when applied to various satellite based
rainfall products.
In this study we use the estimates of
Climate Prediction Center Morphing Method [CMORPH,
Joyce et al., 2004] at a spatial resolution of 0.25◦. The time
period used is 1998 to 2015. The above described method
separates rainfall in coastal areas into two parts: i) rainfall
events that are associated with land-sea interaction and ii)
events that while they occur in coastal regions are unlikely
to be the result of coastline eﬀects.

For our investigation we consider rainfall occurring over
tropical oceans (oceanic), rainfall over land (land ), total
rainfall in coastal areas (here referred as total near coasts),
rainfall associated with land-sea interaction (coastal ) and
rainfall that is not associated with coastal eﬀects but oc-
cur in coastal areas (non-coastal ). Based on previous stud-
ies [Keenan and Carbone, 2008; Muppa et al., 2012; Li and
Carbone, 2015, a.o] investigating the area that is aﬀected by
coastal phenomena like land-sea breeze circulation systems
we deﬁne the region of ≈ 150 km on- and oﬀ shore as coastal
area (shaded area in Figure 1). Increasing this distance to
250 km does not aﬀect the conclusions of the study.

(cid:90) toa
(cid:90) toa

sf c

to the surrounding,

qs(p)dp

The main variability in space and time of the satura-
tion fraction is a result of humidity variations in the mid-
troposphere, making r a good measure to assess the inﬂuence
of the latter on moist tropical convection. Additionally we
test the mid-tropospheric moisture to rainfall relationship
by analysing the relative humidity (rh) at 600 hPa.

The above measures r and rh are derived from the ERA
Interim reanalysis project [Dee et al., 2011]. The data has a
spatial resolution of 0.75◦ × 0.75◦, the temporal resolution
is six hours. The considered time period is January 1998 to
September 2015.

q(p)dp

r =

sf c

2. Data and Methodology

2.1. Humidity

Bretherton et al. [2004] were one of the ﬁrst to estab-
lish an empirical relationship between vertically integrated
moisture saturation fraction r and rainfall over the tropical
oceans. The measure r is deﬁned by the vertically integrated
speciﬁc humidity normalized by the vertically integrated sat-
uration speciﬁc humidity.

area,

2.2. Rainfall

The goal of this study is to investigate if the relationship
of atmospheric moisture on scales typical for global climate
models with rainfall are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for coastally

We ﬁrst investigate if the well known exponential precip-
itation (P ) to saturation fraction (r) relationship is repro-
duced by the CMORPH dataset. The solid blue line marked

3. Results
3.1. The P -r relationship for coastal rainfall

BERGEMANN ET AL.: THE HUMIDITY-RAINFALL RELATIONSHIP NEAR COASTS

X - 3

Figure 2. a) The P − r relationship for tropical ocean areas (solid blue line), coastal tropics (solid balck), rainfall that
is associated with coastal processes (solid yellow line) and rainfall while occurring near coast that can not be attributed
as coastline associated (solid rad line). The dashed lines show the percentage of the total rainfall that is associated with
the according humidity value. The coastally aﬀected rainfall cases and the non-coastally dirven rain is presented as a
percentage as the total rainfall in coastal areas (the color code is the same as for the solid lines). The percentages given
in brackets in the box show the area-weighted rainfall as a percentage of the total rainfall in coastal areas.

D r aft

in Figure 2-a shows the exponential increase of mean precip-
itation rate with increasing saturation fraction. The pick-up
of rain-rate happens here earlier and the critical atmospheric
humidity is somewhat lower than in Bretherton et al. [2004]
or Ahmed and Schumacher [2015]. This can be explained
by the need in to exclude non-precipitating cases our study.
This need arises from the fact that we can separate rain
events near coasts into those aﬀected and not aﬀected by
the presence of the coastline, but we cannot achieve such
a separation for dry events. To remain consistent between
diﬀerent areas of the globe, we therefore choose to study the
rainfall to humidity relationship only when rain is present.
The P -r relationship for the total rainfall in coastal areas is
very similar when compared to the ocean regions. For very
moist conditions the oceanic rain-rates are higher rain-rates
than those near coasts. Nevertheless the relative amount of
rainfall that is coming from cases that are associated with
high saturation fraction is higher in coastal regions than in
oceanic areas (see the dashed lines in Figure 2-a). It might
be tempting to conclude from this comparison that the P -r
relationships in coastal areas are consistent with those over
the tropical ocean and only the lack of moisture supply over
the coastal land prevents the curve from attaining rain-rates
observed over the ocean. Therefore we now split the rainfall
occurring in coastal areas into events that are associated
with coastal eﬀects (coastal ) and those that aren’t (non-
coastal ). The P -r relationship of the coastal rainfall, in-
dicated by the solid yellow line in Figure 2-a, is strikingly
diﬀerent from both the oceanic rainfall and the non-coastal
rainfall. A considerable amount of rainfall seems to occur
in drier atmospheres and the well documented critical value
for r at which there is a ”pickup” in the precipitation is
not evident. This is in stark contrast to the rainfall that
cannot be associated with any coastal eﬀects but occurs in
coastal areas. Here, the rain-rate increases very slowly un-
til a critical humidity value of rc ≈ 0.5 is reached. The
graph converges for highest humidity rates against the one
for the P − r relationship in coastal areas. From the above
discussion it is clear that relationship of coastally aﬀected
rainfall to atmospheric humidity varies from that for other
rainfall types and regions. Given that about one third or
more of the rain near coasts is associated with coastal ef-
fects [Bergemann et al., 2015], it is important to understand
this relationship better.

3.2. The moisture to rainfall relationship near coasts
The comparison of P − r relationships for diﬀerent lo-
cations can be misleading if the distributions of rainfall

amounts are very diﬀerent between them. Therefore we
now group rainfall events across locations by their strength
as deﬁned by quintiles of the rainfall-when-present over the
entire study domain and compare the distribution of the at-
mospheric humidity as a function for rainfall quintile across
locations. This way we ensure that the atmospheric condi-
tions in diﬀerent areas are compared for rainfall events of
similar strength and therefore truly represent location dif-
ferences. Since recent advances in cumulus parameterization
have speciﬁcally focused on mid-trophospheric humidity we
complement the vertically integrated P − r view by includ-
ing relative humidity at 600 hPa (rh). Figure 3-a) compares
the distributions of r and and rh, for all rainfall events over
coastal regions (black) to those over the open ocean (blue).
Like the P − r relationship in Section 3.1 the comparison of
all rainfall in coastal areas and oceanic rainfall reveals only
small diﬀerences. The r and rh distributions for the oceanic
rainfall tend display slightly longer tails towards drier con-
ditions, especially those for rh. As a result the median val-
ues for the oceanic regions are slightly lower than those for
coastal regions.

Figure 2-b) compares the distributions of rainfall at
coastal locations for events that are not (red) and are (yel-
low) aﬀected by the coastlines (see Section 2). The shape of
the distributions for events not aﬀected by the coastlines is
similar to the distributions for the total rainfall in coastal
locations in Figure 3-a). However, this is not the case for the
distributions of rainfall that is associated with coastal land-
sea interaction. The diﬀerences between the distributions
are tested by applying a two sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
(KS-test). Unless otherwise indicated, the statements made
in the text about distribution diﬀerences are found to be
signiﬁcant at the 99% conﬁdence level.

In all but the no-rain cases coastally inﬂuenced rainfall
categories show lower medians of the two atmospheric hu-
midity measures used. Moreover the distributions are heav-
ily tailed towards lower values especially for the small and
moderate rain cases (0.2-2.1 mm/3h). This indicates that
unlike over the open ocean rainfall is common in dry at-
mospheres when coastal inﬂuences are present, while it is
rare otherwise. The median values change little with rain
category until the highest category is reached, where the
diﬀerence between coastally inﬂuenced and other events is
again small.
For scales that are typical for global climate models
(≈ 75− 150 km) the above results show that coastally inﬂu-
enced precipitation can occur under signiﬁcantly drier con-
ditions than rainfall in the same location when it is not

5101520253035rain-rate [mm/d]non-coastal (67.15%)coastal (32.85%)total near coasts oceanic (88.69%)012345percentage of total rainfall [%]0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9saturation fraction (r) []X - 4

BERGEMANN ET AL.: THE HUMIDITY-RAINFALL RELATIONSHIP NEAR COASTS

D r aft

are diﬀerent from those over the open ocean and over inland
areas. The study was motivated by the recent trend to in-
crease the sensitivity of cumulus parameterization schemes
to mid-tropospheric humidity in those models. We investi-
gated the rainfall relationships to column integrated satu-
ration fraction and mid-tropospheric relative humidity that
are known to be relevant to the presence and strength of
moist cumulus convection. Using an objective algorithm de-
veloped in an earlier study we divided the rainfall at the
coastal locations into two categories:
that inﬂuenced by
coastal eﬀects and that, whilst falling near coasts, not di-
rectly associated with the coast.
We ﬁrst investigated the rainfall to atmospheric humidity
relationship (P −r) for coastal and oceanic rainfall. Oceanic
rainfall shows the exponential dependence on atmospheric
humidity that has been postulated by Raymond [2000] and
documented by Bretherton et al. [2004]; Holloway and Neelin
[2009]; Ahmed and Schumacher [2015, a.o]. When consider-
ing all coastal rainfall, i.e., paying no regard if the rainfall
is associated with the presence of the coastline, a similar
relationship emerges. However, when the rainfall is aﬀected
by coastal eﬀects, its relationship to atmospheric humidity
changes dramatically. The pickup of rainfall with increasing
humidity for coastal rainfall happens in drier atmospheres

Figure 3. Distributions of the column integrated saturative fraction r and the relative humidity at 600 hPa for non-rainy
cases and the 5 quintiles of rainfall intensity (in mm/3h). The upper panels a) show the rainfall distributions of the total
rain cases in coastal areas (black) and the rainfall events over the ocean (blue). The bottom panel b) shows the comparison
for coastal rainfall that is not related to land-sea interaction (red) and coastal precipitation that can be associated with
land-sea interaction (yellow). Medians are indicated by white dots for the left distributions and black crosses for the right
distributions.

directly inﬂuenced by the coast. An immediate question is
whether this result is truly related to coastally driven rain-
fall or is merely a reﬂection of drier atmospheric conditions
over land than over the ocean. We investigate this by com-
paring the distributions for rainfall over land with those for
coastally aﬀected rainfall in Figure 5.

It is evident that the evolution of the humidity dis-
tributions with rainfall over land areas is quite diﬀerent
from those of the coastally aﬀected rainfall. The land dis-
tributions are less long-tailed and more symmetric with
higher medians and a weaker dependence on rainfall. While
stronger in saturation fraction, this signal also exists for the
mid-tropospheric relative humidity. We can conclude that
the behavior of coastally aﬀected rainfall is not merely the
result of the presence of land and it is not a simple fea-
ture of rainfall over land, but that it is the coastal processes
themselves that create this behavior.

4. Conclusions

The purpose of this study was to determine if the hu-
midity to rainfall relationships on scales that are typical for
global climate model resolutions in the tropics near coasts

Saturation fraction []BERGEMANN ET AL.: THE HUMIDITY-RAINFALL RELATIONSHIP NEAR COASTS

X - 5

Figure 5. As Figure 3 but in comparison for land regions (green) and coastal rainfall events that are associated with
coastal eﬀects.

compared to both oceanic and coastal rainfall not associated
with the coastline.

ent mechanisms that can contribute to the growth of deep
convective clouds (Figure 4):

D r aft

To ensure that our ﬁndings are not just the result of rain-
fall intensity diﬀerences across regions, we subdivided the
rainfall data into quintiles of its distribution at all consid-
ered areas. We found that the coastally inﬂuenced precipi-
tation shows a distinctly diﬀerent relationship to humidity
than rainfall over land, oceans and that falling near coasts
without their direct inﬂuence. For weak and moderate cases
coastally aﬀected rainfall occurs in drier conditions than any
other type. A comparison to mid-tropospheric humidity,
that is considered as particularly relevant to the develop-
ment of deep moist convection, reveals similar properties.
By comparing the rainfall behavior to that over land, it be-
came evident that the described characteristic is not simply
due to the presence of land. A possible explanation must
therefore include the presence of the coastline.

We conclude this study by hypothesizing a possible mech-
anisms of why rainfall that is directly aﬀected by coastlines
can become less sensitive to mid-tropospheric humidity on
scales that are explicitly resolved by a global climate model
(Figure 4). We see three possible eﬀects at work: a) a cloud
size eﬀect, b) a humidity-halo eﬀect and c) a vertical veloc-
ity eﬀect. All of them are directly related to the presence
of a land-sea breeze system. During days when the coastal
eﬀects are strong the land exhibits a strong thermal heating
contrast to the adjacent ocean. The turbulent mixing over
land is deeper than over the ocean which initiates the on-
shore propagation of the sea-breeze front and advection of
moist air from the sea (I in Figure 4). The sea-breeze front
organizes shallow cumuli that mix vigorously with the envi-
ronment along the associated convergence line of moist air
(II in Figure 4). At this stage there might be three diﬀer-

Sketch of a possible meso-scale dy-
Figure 4.
namic mechanism that can cause rainfall in direr mid-
tropospheric conditions: I: the thermal heating contrast
(indicated by the diﬀerent sizes of sensible heatﬂux H)
between land and ocean initiates an on-shore propagation
of the sea-breeze front II: The sea-breeze front organizes
convection along a convergence line where moist air is
advected from the sea III: There mechanisms are possi-
ble: a) Clouds that are close together merge and grow. b)
Steady humidity advection by the sea-breeze convergence
slowly moistens the mid-troposphere until deep convec-
tion can occur. c) The meso-scale sea-breeze circulation
causes enhanced updrafts in the clouds.
IV) All three
mechanism can lead to deep precipitating convection

0.00.20.40.60.81.0rain-rate [3 mm/h]0.020406080100rain-rate [3 mm/h]0>0−0.20.2−0.50.5−1.01.0−2.1>2.10>0−0.20.2−0.50.5−1.01.0−2.1>2.1Relative humidity [%]Saturation fraction []X - 6

BERGEMANN ET AL.: THE HUMIDITY-RAINFALL RELATIONSHIP NEAR COASTS

Baker, R. D., B. H. Lynn, A. Boone, W.-K. Tao, and J. Simp-
son (2001), The inﬂuence of soil moisture, coascoast curvature
and land-breeze circulations on sea-breeze-initiated precipita-
tion, Journal of Hydrometerorology, 2, 193–211.

Bergemann, M., C. Jakob, and T. P. Lane (2015), Global de-
tection and analysis of coastline-associated rainfall using an
objective pattern recognition technique, Journal of Climate,
28 (18), 7225–7236.

Bretherton, C. S., M. E. Peters, and L. E. Back (2004), Rela-
tionships between water vapor path and precipitation over the
tropical oceans, J. Climate, 17 (7), 1517–1528.

Crosman, E., and J. Horel (2010), Sea and lake breezes: A review
of numerical studies, Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 137 (1), 1–
29.

Dee, D. P., S. M. Uppala, A. J. Simmons, P. Berrisford, P. Poli,
S. Kobayashi, U. Andrae, M. A. Balmaseda, G. Balsamo,
P. Bauer, P. Bechtold, A. C. M. Beljaars, L. van de Berg,
J. Bidlot, N. Bormann, C. Delsol, R. Dragani, M. Fuentes,
A. J. Geer, L. Haimberger, S. B. Healy, H. Hersbach, E. V.
Hlm, L. Isaksen, P. Kllberg, M. Khler, M. Matricardi, A. P.
McNally, B. M. Monge-Sanz, J.-J. Morcrette, B.-K. Park,
C. Peubey, P. de Rosnay, C. Tavolato, J.-N. Thpaut, and F. Vi-
tart (2011), The era-interim reanalysis: conﬁguration and per-
formance of the data assimilation system, Quarterly Journal
of the Royal Meteorological Society, 137 (656), 553–597.

a) The cloud size eﬀect: The sea-breeze convergence zone
focuses convection to take place in a rather small area. As a
result, the likelihood of clouds merging and biasing the cloud
spectrum to larger cloud sizes increases. As larger clouds
experience a reduced rate of entrainment, their growth be-
comes less aﬀected by the drier mid-troposphere, enabling
them to rise deeper than their oceanic counterparts given
the same atmospheric humidity proﬁle.

c) The vertical velocity eﬀect: In this mechanism we al-
low for the possibility that in-cloud vertical velocities at
cloud base are enhanced by a meso-scale component due to
the sea-breeze. The additional inertia provided by this en-
hancement may be suﬃcient to carry cloud parcels through
the dry mid-tropospheric layers to the freezing level, after
which the enhanced buoyancy due to hydrometeor freezing
allows them to grow deep (Figure 4, IV).

b) The humidity halo eﬀect: As the sea-breeze conver-
gence focuses convection in a particular line, consecutive
generations of clouds grow in roughly the same area. As
a result, later generations grow into the debris of previous
clouds, which will have a higher humidity than the larger-
scale average. As a result, the entrained air reduces the
cloud buoyancy less even though the entrainment rates are
similar to oceanic clouds, thereby promoting more rapid
cloud growth.

D r aft

Our study was motivated by the observed behavior of
rainfall to occur in suppressed MJO conditions over the Mar-
itime Continent as well as the recent push to make convec-
tion representations in climate models more sensitive to mid-
tropospheric humidity. Our results indicate that the pres-
ence of coastal eﬀects can likely explain the rainfall behav-
ior with MJO phase, even though the exact mechanisms re-
quire further study. Our results also have some consequences
for the representation of convection in weather and climate
models, which at its heart consists of a set of rules that trans-
late the large-scale environment into rainfall (amongst other
eﬀects). Commonly these rules are either the same globally,
or contain a land-ocean diﬀerences. To our knowledge, there
is no existing cumulus parameterization that allows for a
diﬀerent behavior near coastlines. The issue is complicated
by the inability of most global models to resolve the coast-
lines. Yet it is evident from our results that it is necessary
to enhance current cumulus parameterizations to be able to
represent the globally important tropical rainfall associated
with coastlines.

Acknowledgments. This research was supported in part
by the Monash University eResearch Centre and eSolutions-
Research Support Services through the use of the high-memory
capability on the Monash University Campus HPC Cluster.
We also acknowledge the Australian Research Council’s Cen-
tre of Excellence for Climate System Science (CE110001028)
for funding this work. The CMORPH satellite based rainfall
estimates were obtained from the Climate Prediction Center
(CPC) of the National Oceanic and Atmosphere Administra-
tion (NOAA). The Era-interim reanalysis data is supplied by
the European Center for Medium Weather Forecast (ECMWF).
The source code and a documentation of the algorithm that
detects coastline associated rainfall can be retrieved from Zen-
odo (http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.44405) or via GitHub
(https://github.com/antarcticrainforest/PatternRecog)

Hill, C. M., P. J. Fitzpatrick, J. H. Corbin, Y. H. Lau, and S. K.
Bhate (2010), Summertime precipitation regimes associated
with the sea breeze and land breeze in southern mississippi
and eastern louisiana, Wea. Forecasting, 25 (6), 1755–1779.

Hill, G. E. (1974), Factors controlling the size and spacing of cu-
mulus clouds as revealed by numerical experiments, J. Atmos.
Sci., 31 (3), 646–673.

Joyce, R. J., J. E. Janowiak, P. A. Arkin, and P. Xie (2004),
Cmorph: A method that produces global precipitation esti-
mates from passive microwave and infrared data at high spatial
and temporal resolution, J. Hydrometeor, 5 (3), 487–503.

Keenan, T. D., and R. E. Carbone (2008), Propagation and diur-
nal evolution of warm season cloudiness in the australian and
maritime continent region, Mon. Wea. Rev., 136 (3), 973–994.
Klingaman, N. P., X. Jiang, P. K. Xavier, J. Petch, D. Waliser,
and S. J. Woolnough (2015), Vertical structure and physi-
cal processes of the madden-julian oscillation: Synthesis and
summary, Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres,
120 (10), 4671–4689.

Holland, G. J., and T. D. Keenan (1980), Diurnal variations of
convection over the ”maritime continent”, Mon. Wea. Rev.,
108 (2), 223–225.

Holloway, C. E., and J. D. Neelin (2009), Moisture vertical struc-
ture, column water vapor, and tropical deep convection, J.
Atmos. Sci., 66 (6), 1665–1683.

Journal of Meteorology, 4 (1), 1–8.

Del Genio, A. D., J. Wu, A. B. Wolf, Y. Chen, M.-S. Yao, and
D. Kim (2015), Constraints on cumulus parameterization from
simulations of observed mjo events, J. Climate, 28 (16), 6419–
6442.

Derbyshire, S. H., I. Beau, P. Bechtold, J.-Y. Grandpeix, J.-M.
Piriou, J.-L. Redelsperger, and P. M. M. Soares (2004), Sen-
sitivity of moist convection to environmental humidity, Quar-
terly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 130 (604),
3055–3079.

Geotis, S. G., and R. A. Houze (1985), Rain amounts near and
over north borneo during winter monex, Mon. Wea. Rev.,
113 (10), 1824–1828.

Gianotti, R. L., D. Zhang, and E. A. B. Eltahir (2011), Assess-
ment of the regional climate model version 3 over the maritime
continent using diﬀerent cumulus parameterization and land
surface schemes, J. Climate, 25 (2), 638–656.

Haurwitz, B. (1947), Comments on the sea-breeze circulation,

References

Kousky, V. E. (1980), Diurnal rainfall variation in northeast

brazil, Mon. Wea. Rev., 108 (4), 488–498.

Ahmed, F., and C. Schumacher (2015), Convective and strat-
iform components of the precipitation-moisture relationship,
Geophysical Research Letters, 42 (23), 10,453–10,462.

Arakawa, A. (2004), The cumulus parameterization problem:

Past, present, and future, J. Climate, 17 (13), 2493–2525.

Li, Y., and R. E. Carbone (2015), Oﬀshore propagation of coastal

precipitation, J. Atmos. Sci., 72 (12), 4553–4568.

Madden, R. A., and P. R. Julian (1971), Detection of a 40-50 day
oscillation in the zonal wind in the tropical paciﬁc, Journal of
the Atmospheric Sciences, 28 (5), 702–708.

BERGEMANN ET AL.: THE HUMIDITY-RAINFALL RELATIONSHIP NEAR COASTS

X - 7

Madden, R. A., and P. R. Julian (1972), Description of global-
scale circulation cells in the tropics with a 40-50 day period,
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 29 (6), 1109–1123.

Madden, R. A., and P. R. Julian (1994), Observations of the 40-
50-day tropical oscillation-a review, Mon. Wea. Rev., 122 (5),
814–837.

Nguyen, H., A. Protat, V. Kumar, S. Rauniyar, M. Whimpey, and
L. Rikus (2015), A regional forecast model evaluation of sta-
tistical rainfall properties using the cpol radar observations in
diﬀerent precipitation regimes over darwin, australia, Q.J.R.
Meteorol. Soc., 141 (691), 2337–2349.

Pearce, R. P. (1982), Meso-scale atmospheric circulations by b.
w. atkinson, academic press (london). 1981. pp. xviii + 469.
32.40, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
108 (458), 992–992.

Peatman, S. C., A. J. Matthews, and D. P. Stevens (2014), Prop-
agation of the madden-julian oscillation through the maritime
continent and scale interaction with the diurnal cycle of pre-
cipitation, Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc., 140 (680), 814–825.

Mapes, B. E., T. T. Warner, and M. Xu (2003a), Diurnal pat-
terns of rainfall in northwestern south america. part iii: Di-
urnal gravity waves and nocturnal convection oﬀshore, Mon.
Wea. Rev., 131 (5), 830–844.

Mapes, B. E., T. T. Warner, and M. Xu (2003b), Diurnal pat-
terns of rainfall in northwestern south america. part ii: Model
simulations, Monthly Weather Review, 131, 813–829.

Mori, S., H. Jun-Ichi, Y.

I. Tauhid, M. D. Yamanaka,
N. Okamoto, F. Murata, N. Sakurai, H. Hashiguchi, and
T. Sribimawati (2004), Diurnal land-sea rainfall peak migra-
tion over sumatera island, indonesian maritime continent, ob-
served by trmm satellite and intensive rawinsonde soundings,
Mon. Wea. Rev., 132 (8), 2021–2039.

Muppa, S. K., V. Anandan, K. A. Kesarkar, S. B. Rao, and P. N.
Reddy (2012), Study on deep inland penetration of sea breeze
over complex terrain in the tropics, Atmospheric Research,
104 (0), 209 – 216.

Neale, R., and J. Slingo (2002), The maritime continent and its
role in the global climate: a gcm study, Journal of Climate,
16, 834–848.

Rauniyar, S. P., and K. J. E. Walsh (2012), Inﬂuence of enso on
the diurnal cycle of rainfall over the maritime continent and
australia, J. Climate, 26 (4), 1304–1321.

Raymond, D. J. (2000), Thermodynamic control of tropical rain-
fall, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
126 (564), 889–898.

Rotunno, R. (1983), On the linear theory of the land and sea
breeze, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 40 (8), 1999–
2009.

Pielke, R. A. (1974), A three-dimensional numerical model of the
sea breezes over south ﬂorida, Mon. Wea. Rev., 102 (2), 115–
139.

Qian, J.-H. (2008), Why precipitation is mostly concentrated over
islands in the maritime continent, J. Atmos. Sci., 65 (4), 1428–
1441.

Rauniyar, S. P., and K. J. E. Walsh (2010), Scale interaction of
the diurnal cycle of rainfall over the maritime continent and
australia: Inﬂuence of the mjo, J. Climate, 24 (2), 325–348.

Simpson, J., N. Westcott, R. Clerman, and R. Pielke (1980),
On cumulus mergers, Archiv f¨ur Meteorologie, Geophysik und
Bioklimatologie, Serie A, 29 (1-2), 1–40.

Simpson, J., T. Keenan, B. Ferrier, R. Simpson, and G. Holland
(1993), Cumulus mergers in the maritime continent region,
Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics, 51 (1-2), 73–99.

Slingo, A., K. I. Hodges, and G. J. Robinson (2004), Simulation
of the diurnal cycle in a climate model and its evaluation using
data from meteosat 7, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteo-
rological Society, 130 (599), 1449–1467.

Stephens, G. L., T. L’Ecuyer, R. Forbes, A. Gettlemen, J.-C. Go-
laz, A. Bodas-Salcedo, K. Suzuki, P. Gabriel, and J. Haynes
(2010), Dreary state of precipitation in global models, Journal
of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 115 (D24), n/a–n/a.

Xu, K.-M., and K. A. Emanuel (1989), Is the tropical atmosphere
conditionally unstable?, Mon. Wea. Rev., 117 (7), 1471–1479.
Yang, G.-Y., and J. Slingo (2001), The diurnal cycle in the trop-

D r aft

ics, Mon. Wea. Rev., 129 (4), 784–801.

Corresponding author:

Martin Bergemann (martin.bergemann@monash.edu)

