6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
8

 

 
 
]

.

A
G
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
8
1
4
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

MNRAS 000, 1–5 (2015)

Preprint 9 March 2016

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style ﬁle v3.0

Alignments of Radio Galaxies in Deep Radio Imaging of
ELAIS N1

A. R. Taylor,1,2(cid:63) P. Jagannathan 1,3
1Department of Astronomy University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, South Africa
2Department of Physic and Astronomy, University of the Western Cape, Street Address, Cape Town Postal Code, South Africa
3National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Socorro, New Mexico, USA

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT
We present a study of the distribution of radio jet position angles of radio galaxies
over an area of 1 square degree in the ELAIS N1 ﬁeld. ELAIS N1 was observed with
the Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope at 612 MHz to an rms noise level of 10 µJy
and angular resolution of 6(cid:48)(cid:48) × 5(cid:48)(cid:48). The image contains 65 resolved radio galaxy jets.
The spatial distribution reveals a prominent alignment of jet position angles along
a “ﬁlament” of about 1◦. We examine the possibility that the apparent alignment
arises from an underlying random distribution and ﬁnd that the probability of chance
alignment is less than 0.1%. An angular covariance analysis of the data indicates
the presence of spatially coherence in position angles on scales > 0.5◦. This angular
scales translates to a co-moving scale of > 20 Mpc at a redshift of 1. The implied
alignment of the spin axes of massive black holes that give rise the radio jets suggest the
presence of large-scale spatial coherence in angular momentum. Our results reinforce
prior evidence for large-scale spatial alignments of quasar optical polarisation position
angles.

Key words: radio continuum: galaxies – galaxies: jets – galaxies: statistics – cosmol-
ogy: large-scale structure of the universe

1 INTRODUCTION

There have been several observational studies to detect de-
viations from isotropy in the orientation of galaxies follow-
ing approaches ﬁrst devised by Hawley & Peebles (1975). If
detected, the presence of alignments and certain preferred
orientations can shed light on the origin and evolution of
the galaxies and the relation to large scale structure. Align-
ment might arise from the large scale environmental inﬂu-
ences during galaxy formation or evolution. Cosmic mag-
netic ﬁelds have been shown to be present on scales of galaxy
clusters and larger Ratra (1992). Eﬀects of seed magnetic
ﬁelds from inﬂation Ratra (1992), axionic ﬁelds post inﬂa-
tion, and cosmic strings are possible candidates that could
eﬀect an alignment in galaxies even on scales larger than
galaxy clusters.

Evidence for very large scale coherent orientations of
quasar polarisation vectors was provided by Hutsem´ekers
(1998), who found large-scale coherence in polarisation po-
sition angles of galaxies around the Northern and Southern
galactic poles from a sample of 170 quasars. Initial Kuiper
tests to show deviations from uniformity proved inconclu-

(cid:63) E-mail: russ@ast.uct.ac.za

c(cid:13) 2015 The Authors

sive on the complete sample. However a statistical analysis
based on nearest neighbours showed evidence for alignments
in quasar sub-samples particularly around the north and
south galactic poles with 99.99% signiﬁcance level. Follow
up observations by Hutsem´ekers & Lamy (2001) indicated
that the alignments in quasars polarisation vectors extends
to comoving scales of 1000h−1Mpc and that alignment of
quasar polarisation angles may be correlated with the large
scale structure it is embedded within.

The tendency for the axes of double-lobed radio quasars
to be aligned with the electric vectors of optical polarisation
in the active galactic nuclei is well known (Stockman et al.
(1979)). Rusk (1990) show that there is a correlation be-
tween the optical polarisation and the structural axis of a
galaxy, and Battye & Browne (2009) show that radio jets are
aligned with the optical minor axis. AGN jets position angles
are thus a proxy for the direction of the major axis of the
host galaxy. Measurements derived from the total intensity
radio emission of AGN jets has the advantage of not being
aﬀected by propagation eﬀects such as scattering, extinction
or Faraday Rotation, which may be an issue for optical and
polarimetric studies.

We have undertaken a deep radio imaging survey of the
ELAIS-N1 region using the Giant Metrewave Radio Tele-

2

A. R. Taylor and P. Jagannathan

scope (GMRT) as part of a larger, low-frequency study of the
properties of faint radio sources at µJy ﬂux densities. Such
sensitive radio images, capable of detecting radio sources in
the µJy regime and covering scales of a degree or more, oﬀer
a ﬁrst opportunity to use radio jets to explore alignments or
radio galaxies on physical scales below a few 100 Mpc. An
angle of 1 degree spans a comoving distance of 40h−1 Mpc
at redshift z = 1 or 64h−1 Mpc at redshift z = 2. In this pa-
per we report an analysis of the spatial correlation of radio
galaxy jet position angles in the deep GMRT image of the
ELAIS-N1 ﬁeld, and the detection of an alignment of the
jets of a sub-sample of radio galaxies over angular scales of
0.5 degrees.

2 OBSERVATIONS

We carried out deep imaging observations of the ELAIS N1
ﬁeld with the Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope (GMRT)
in several observing sessions from 2011 to 2013. An area of
1.2 sq degrees of ELAIS N1 was covered by a mosaic of 7
pointings arranged in a hexagon pattern centred on α = 16h
10m 30s, δ = 54o 35 00(cid:48)(cid:48).

To reduce the noise and mitigate the eﬀect of side-lobes
from oﬀ-axis gain errors in the central regions of the mo-
saic, the separation of the pointings on the sky was closely
spaced at 16(cid:48), or 38% of the FWHM of the GMRT primary
beams at 612 MHz. Each pointing was observed for approx-
imately 30 hours in three 10-hour sessions. Data were taken
in 256 spectral channels in four polarisation states covering
a 32 MHz bandwidth centred at 612 MHz. The ﬂux scale,
bandpass and absolute polarisation position angle calibra-
tion was secured by observations of 3C286 twice in each ob-
serving session. Time dependent complex gains and on-axis
polarisation leakage corrections were measured by frequent
observations of J1549+506.

The visibility data were

calibrated, deconvolved
(CLEANed), self-calibrated,
imaged, and the individual
ﬁelds mosaicked together using the CASA processing soft-
ware. The central 1.1 sq degrees of the GMRT mosaic im-
age are shown in Figure 1. The rms noise in this mosaic is
10.3 µJy/beam before primary beam correction. The angular
resolution (FWHM of the synthesised beam) is 6.1(cid:48)(cid:48)× 5.1(cid:48)(cid:48).

3 ALIGNMENTS OF RADIO SOURCES

3.1 Source Finding

Within the region deﬁned by the half-power point of the 6
outer pointings, there are 2800 sources above a ﬂux density
of 50 µJy. A vast majority of the sources are faint, compact
sources that are unresolved by the 6(cid:48)(cid:48) synthesised beam.
However, the brighter sources in the image are dominated
by objects that exhibit classical FRI or FRII elongated radio
galaxy jet morphologies. These sources were identiﬁed on the
image visually and the coordinates of the two end points of
the jets for each source were measured from the images. This
processed yield a set of 64 radio galaxies that constitutes a
complete sample of jet sources down to the resolution limit of
the observations. This sample forms the basis of our further
analysis.

3.2 The Distribution of Position Angles

Figure 2 shows the positions, directions and lengths of the
64 radio galaxy jet in the ﬁeld. To render the objects more
easily viewable, the size of the vector for each of the jets is
plotted at twice their true length. The plot shows a num-
ber of large jets with similar position angle of about -40◦
running along a locus starting at the lower middle of the
image and extending to upper right. To assess whether such
apparent alignments arises by chance, or whether they re-
ﬂect real spatial correlation in the directions of radio jets we
explore the statistical likelihood of the alignments given an
underlying random distribution of jet directions.

For analysis involving position angles on a sphere, stan-
dard estimators such as the mean need to be redeﬁned. We
can clearly see that 0◦ and 360◦ are the same. Similarly the
mean angle of two sources with position angles 2◦ and 358◦ is
not 180◦. Fisher (1993) provides a comprehensive collection
of methods of dealing with spherical statistics.

We can consider the position angles to be unit vectors
on a circle in which case each angle, φ, can be thought of as
a Cartesian point on the edge of the circle with coordinates
(cos φ,sin φ). To compute the arithmetic mean we could sim-
ply take the arithmetic means of the Cartesian points and
then convert them back into polar form to obtain the mean
angular measure. Given angles φ1, φ2, ..., φn the mean angle is
given by

n(cid:88)

j=1

1
n

¯φ = arg(

eiφ j)

(1)

(2)

and the mean resultant length by

(cid:113)

¯r =

cos φ

2
2 + sin φ

where cos φ and sin φ are the average values of cos φi and
sin φi.

Like polarisation angle, the position angle of radio jet
sources is symmetric to a change by π. Values are thus de-
ﬁned in the range[−π/2, π/2] degrees. For a parent random
distribution of position angles, the probability distribution
of the positions angles on the circle should be a uniform
within this range, with every angle equally likely, implying
that the probability distribution function is

fUC =

dφ
π

.

(3)

Figure 3 shows the distribution of positions angles of the
jets. For 64 sources the expectation value per bin in the case
of a uniform distribution is the same and equal to 3.55. For
position angles greater than about 20◦, the distribution ap-
pears consistent with uniform value. However, on the other
side of the distribution there is a strong peak from position
angle, φ, -50◦ to -30◦, and a paucity of objects around 0◦
and with position angles less than -50◦.
Several of the objects in the excess between −50◦ < φ <
−30◦ are apparent in Figure 2 as the larger jets. This eﬀect
is illustrated in Figure 4 which plots position angle versus
jet length. The short jets (less than about 20(cid:48)(cid:48)) appear to
have a more uniform position angle distribution. The longer
jets appear clustered with a peak around φ ∼ −40◦.

A number of available non-parametric tests are applica-
ble to determine the probability of deviation of an observed

MNRAS 000, 1–5 (2015)

Alignment of Radio Galaxies

3

Figure 1. The GMRT 612 MHz total intensity image if ELAIS N1. The image covers 1.2 × 1.2 degrees with an RMS noise level of
10.3 µJy. Several tens of double-lobed radio galaxies dominate the bright source population in the image. The fainter sources are primarily
compact, point-like objects that are unresolved at the 6(cid:48)(cid:48) resolution of this image, and a mostly radio emission from star-forming galaxies.

distribution given the null hypothesis that the position an-
gles of the jets are uniformly (randomly) distributed. For
the analysis of our data we used the CircStat (Jammala-
madaka & Sengupta 2001) & Circular (Agostinelli & Lund
2013) statistical package in R.

The Rayleigh’s test of uniformity measures the signiﬁ-
cance of the mean resultant length, ¯r, compared to a uniform
distribution with a statistically null mean resultant length.
Since polarisation angle distributions are deﬁned only on the
half circle interval, to populate the full circle for the Rayleigh
test we used the angle doubling technique to test against the
null hypothesis of uniformity of the distribution of 2φ. The
Rayleigh tests assumes the data are unimodal, i.e. there is
at most one signiﬁcant clustering of points around the circle.
The mean resultant value of the observed angle distribution,
¯r, is 0.637, and the probability of this result from a parent
random distribution is < 0.001.

We also carried out two additional tests that examine
the statistics of the diﬀerences between the observed and null
hypothesis distributions. The Kuiper test gives a probability
of random of < 0.01. The Watson U2 test which is similar to
the Kuiper test but uses the mean square deviations rather
than the maximum deviations of the diﬀerence distributions
gives a similar result. The results of all three tests are listed
in Table 1.

MNRAS 000, 1–5 (2015)

Test

Statistic

P-value

Uniformity

Rayleigh’s Test

¯r = 0.6376 <0.001

Non Uniform

Kuiper’s Test

4.1066

< 0.01

Non Uniform

Watson’s U2 Test

1.3819

< 0.01

Non Uniform

Table 1. Test for deviations from the Uniform Distribution (Null
hypothesis)

3.3 Spatial Covariance of Position Angles

Given that distribution of jet position angles is not ran-
dom, it is of interest to explore the angular scale of the non-
uniformity. One approach is to calculate the spatial semi-
variance, or the variogram. In spatial statistics the variogram
is a graphic describing the degree of spatial dependence of a
vector ﬁeld. The semi-variance function is deﬁned as

m(d)(cid:88)
[z(x j)− z(x j + d)]2

γ(d) =

1

2m(d)

j=1

(4)

Here the sum is over m(d) pairs of points separated by a
distance d from each other,and z is the variable being mea-
sured at vector location x j. In the case of stationary and

4

A. R. Taylor and P. Jagannathan

Figure 2. This stick diagram shows the direction and lengths of
radio jets at the positions of radio galaxies in the ELAIS-N1 612
MHz radio image. To enhance visibility, the lengths of the jets
have been expanded by a factor of two.

Figure 3. The distribution of position angles of the radio galaxy
jets shown in Figure 2.

isotropic spatial process the semi-variance reduces to a spa-
tial covariance function.

If the distribution of the position angles of the jets is
random then the semi-variance should be constant over all
angular scales. For a random distribution of angles the distri-
bution of the diﬀerences of any two angles over a range sym-
metric about zero is a triangular distribution with a mean
of zero. We carried out a simple Monte Carlo simulation by
drawing a million pairs of random position angles over the
range [-π/2, π/2], and measuring the variance of the distribu-
tion of diﬀerences. The expectation value of γ(d) for random

Figure 4. The length of the 64 radio jets plotted against jet
position angle. The longest jets are preferentially present in the
excess of object with polarisation angle ∼ −40◦.

angles is 0.82. This value is shown as the dotted line in the
variogram for the observed jet position angles in Figure 5.
The calculations of the semi-variance were carried out in R
using the geoR tools (Jr & Diggle 2001; Diggle & Jr 2007).
The error bars on the data points were determined from the
number of pairs used to calculate the semi-variance in each
angular separation bin. We carried out 10,000 simulations
for each bin, in which we pulled N(d) pairs of random an-
gles, where N(d) is to the number of observed pairs in the
bin with separation d. The error was taken as the standard
deviation about the mean (0.82) of the 10,000 semi-variance
values. There error bars are thus the 1σ error expected for
a random distribution with the same number of pairs.

Angular scales that exhibit deviations from a value of
0.82 indicate a departure of the distribution of angle dif-
ferences from random. Points that lie below the line indi-
cate a smaller dispersion of angle diﬀerences compared to
random, indicating an alignment of angles between sources.
Points above the line have larger dispersion than expect
from random, indicated a preference for large angular dif-
ferences, or anti-alignment. One situation that gives rise to
anti-alignment is the presence of two distinct populations of
aligned objects separated by the angular scale in question.
The low point in Figure 5 suggest an alignment of position
angles on scales of about 0.5 to 0.8 degrees. This is consis-
tent with the angular scale of the ”ﬁlament” of aligned large
jets. The indication of a rise of the semi-variance above 0.82
at larger angular scales tentatively suggests the presence of
two areas of alignment separated by scales larger than 1◦.
However at this scale we reach the limits of the dimension
of the GMRT image. Imaging of a larger region to similar
sensitivity will be required to explore potential spatial cor-
relations on larger scales.

4 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

The analysis of the probability and spatial distributions of
radio galaxy jet position angles in ELAIS-N1 GMRT deep

MNRAS 000, 1–5 (2015)

Alignment of Radio Galaxies

5

interesting to compare this implication with predictions of
angular momentum structure from universe simulations.

Deep radio imaging, in combination with redshift sur-
veys, oﬀers a powerful means for studies of the alignment of
radio galaxies jets to high redshift and the relation of the an-
gular distribution of position angles to large scale structure.
As shown in this study, at sensitivity of a few µJy about
100 radio galaxy jets per square degree are detected, and
the sampling of the population of classical radio galaxies is
virtually complete. The fainter population is dominated by
star-forming galaxies and radio quiet AGN. Combining an-
gular resolution of a few arc seconds with imaging areas of
several square degrees will allow the spatial distribution of
position angles on physical scales of 100’s of Mpc to high
redshifts. Such imaging projects are in the planning stage
for the Square Kilometre Array and its precursor telescopes,
the South African MeerKAT array and the Australian SKA
Pathﬁnder (ASKAP).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank the staﬀ of the GMRT that made these obser-
vations possible. GMRT is run by the National Centre for
Radio Astrophysics of the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research. PJ thanks the US National Radio Astronomy Ob-
servatory for providing support in the form of the Reber
Doctoral Fellowship.

REFERENCES

Agostinelli C., Lund U., 2013, R package circular: Circular
Statistics (version 0.4-7). CA: Department of Environmental
Sciences, Informatics and Statistics, Ca’ Foscari University,
Venice, Italy. UL: Department of Statistics, California Poly-
technic State University, San Luis Obispo, California, USA,
https://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/circular/

Battye R., Browne I., 2009, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-

nomical Society, 399, 1888

Diggle P. J., Jr P. J. R., 2007, Model Based Geostatistics.

Springer, New York

Fisher N.

I., 1993, Statistical Analysis of Circular Data.
Cambridge University Press, http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511564345

Hawley D. L., Peebles P. J. E., 1975, The Astronomical Journal,

80, 477

Hutsem´ekers D., 1998, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 332, 410
Hutsem´ekers D., Lamy H., 2001, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 367,

381

Hutsem´ekers D., Braibant L., Pelgrims V., Sluse D., 2014, A&A,

572, A18

Jammalamadaka S., Sengupta A., 2001, Topics in Circular Statis-

tics. Series on multivariate analysis, World Scientiﬁc

Jr P. J. R., Diggle P. J., 2001, R-NEWS, 1, 14
Mauduit J.-C., et al., 2012, PASP, 124, 1135
Ratra B., 1992, The Astrophysical Journall, 391, L1
Rusk R., 1990, Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of

Canada, 84, 199

Stockman H. S., Angel J. R. P., Miley G. K., 1979, The Astro-

physical Journall, 227, L55

Swinbank A. M., et al., 2007, MNRAS, 379, 1343

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX ﬁle prepared by
the author.

Figure 5. Semi-variance for the AGN sample (Equation 4) as a
function of angular separation in degrees. The horizontal dashed
line indicates the value expected for a random parent distribution
of position angles.

ﬁeld indicates the presence of spatially correlated alignments
on scales greater than about 0.5◦. ELAIS-N1 is one of the
deep ﬁelds covered by the Spitzer Extragalactic Represen-
tative Volume Survey (SERVS) (Mauduit et al. 2012) pho-
tometric redshift catalogue. However only 6 SERVS objects
with redshifts were matched to the radio galaxies, and none
in the major alignment of objects around φ = −40◦. We are
thus unable to directly determine the redshift of the align-
ment feature. From photometric analysis of the UKIDSS
data Swinbank et al. (2007) identiﬁed ﬁfteen cluster candi-
dates within a 0.8 square degrees region of ELAIS N1. Spec-
troscopic follow-up of ﬁve candidates showed signiﬁcant over
densities for all ﬁve candidates at z = 0.89. Swinbank et al.
(2007) infer the presence of a supercluster at this redshift
that extends over the entire ﬁeld. The aligned radio galaxy
jets may arise from AGN hosted by giant elliptical galaxies
associated with components of the supercluster. At redshift
of z = 0.9 an angular scale of 0.5◦ − 1.0◦ corresponds to co-
moving physics scale of 20h−1 − 40h−1 Mpc.
From analysis of optical polarisation position angles of
19 quasars belonging to a quasar group at z ∼ 1.3, Hutsem´ek-
ers et al. (2014) presented evidence of preferential alignment
of the polarisation angles either parallel or perpendicular to
the large scale structure in which they are embedded. The
statistical probability that their result is due to random ori-
entations is or order 1%. Our result provides independent
conﬁrmation of large-scale spatial alignment of AGN axes,
with a tracer that is independent of propagation eﬀects along
the line of site.

The direction of radio galaxy jets is determined by the
direction of the angular momentum axis of the super massive
black hole that drives the AGN activity in the host galaxy.
The observed jet alignment thus implies an alignment of
the angular momentum axes of central black holes on scales
of several 10’s of Mpc or greater. Such an alignment must
arise at the time of formation and would imply spatially
coherent angular momentum features of this scale embedded
in the local large-scale structure at early times. It would be

MNRAS 000, 1–5 (2015)

