6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
8

 

 
 
]

.

R
S
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
3
2
4
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–?? ()

Printed 9 March 2016

(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)

3D-modelling of the stellar auroral radio emission

P. Leto1 ⋆, C. Trigilio1, C. S. Buemi1, G. Umana1, A. Ingallinera1, L. Cerrigone2
1INAF - Osservatorio Astroﬁsico di Catania, Via S. Soﬁa 78, 95123 Catania, Italy
2ASTRON, the Netherlands Institute for Radioastronomy, PO Box 2, 7990 AA Dwingeloo,The Netherlands

ABSTRACT
The electron cyclotron maser is the coherent emission process that gives rise to the radio
lighthouse effect observed in the hot magnetic chemically peculiar star CU Virginis. It has
also been proposed to explain the highly circularly polarized radio pulses observed on some
ultra cool dwarfs, with spectral type earlier than M7. Such kind of coherent events resemble
the auroral radio emission from the magnetized planets of the solar system. In this paper, we
present a tridimensional model able to simulate the timing and proﬁle of the pulses emitted by
those stars characterized by a dipolar magnetic ﬁeld by following the hypothesis of the laminar
source model, used to explain the beaming of the terrestrial auroral kilometric radiation. This
model proves to be a powerful tool to understand the auroral radio-emission phenomenon, al-
lowing us to derive some general conclusions about the effects of the model’s free parameters
on the features of the coherent pulses, and to learn more about the detectability of such kind
of pulsed radio emission.

Key words: masers – polarization – stars: chemically peculiar – stars: magnetic ﬁeld

1 INTRODUCTION

The Electron Cyclotron Maser (ECM) is a coherent emission mech-
anism excited by the inverse velocity distribution that an elec-
tron population propagating along the converging ﬁeld lines of a
density-depleted magnetospheric cavity can develop. This mech-
anism (Wu & Lee 1979; Melrose & Dulk 1982) ampliﬁes the ex-
traordinary magneto-ionic mode, producing almost 100% circu-
larly polarized radiation at frequency close to the local gyro-
frequency (n B (cid:181) B). The maser ampliﬁcation can occur within the
magnetospheric region covering a wide range of magnetic ﬁeld
strength, providing observable ECM emission over a wide fre-
quency range. The ECM is the mechanism responsible for the
broad-band auroral radio emission from the magnetized planets
of the solar system, such as the terrestrial auroral kilometric ra-
diation (AKR), the Jupiter decametre (DAM), hectometre (HOM)
and kilometre (KOM) emission, the Saturn kilometric radiation
(SKR), the Uranus kilometric radiation (UKR) and the Neptu-
nian kilometric radiation (NKR) (Zarka 1998). The angular beam-
ing of the Earth’s AKR, observed with the spacecraft array Clus-
ter (Mutel, Christopher & Pickett 2008), conﬁrms that the Earth
ECM emission pattern is strongly anisotropic. Such terrestrial co-
herent emission is conﬁned within a narrow beam tangentially di-
rected along the walls of the auroral cavity, where the ampliﬁcation
mechanism occurs. In the framework of the laminar source model
(Louarn & Le Queau 1996a,b) such anisotropy of the ECM radia-
tion pattern is a direct consequence of the small thickness of the
In fact, the radiation path in the direction perpendicular
cavity.

⋆ E-mail: pleto@oact.inaf.it

to the cavity walls is too short to give signiﬁcant ampliﬁcation. The
AKR will then be refracted upwards by the highest-density regions,
when it leaves the cavity (Mutel et al. 2008; Menietti et al. 2011).

The auroral radio emission has also been observed in stars. In
particular, such a phenomenon has been well studied in the case
of CU Vir, a magnetic chemically peculiar (MCP) star. The MCPs
are early type main sequence stars, characterized by strong mag-
netic ﬁelds with a mainly dipolar topology, whose axis is tilted
with respect to the rotational axis (oblique rotator). Non-thermal
incoherent radio emission from MCPs has been detected in almost
25% of cases (Drake et al. 1987; Linsky et al. 1992; Leone et al.
1994). In accordance with the oblique rotator model (ORM), the
radio emission is also periodically variable as a consequence of
the stellar rotation (Leone 1991; Leone & Umana 1993), suggest-
ing that the radio emission arises from a stable rigidly co-rotating
magnetosphere (RRM). This variability has been successfully re-
produced by a 3D model able to compute the gyrosynchrotron
emission from a RRM in the framework of the ORM (Trigilio et al.
2004; Leto et al. 2006).

The radio emission from the MCPs is ascribed to a radiatively-
driven stellar wind. Far from the star, speciﬁcally on the magnetic
equator at about the Alfven radius, this wind opens the magnetic
ﬁeld lines, forming current sheets. The reconnection of the low-
strength magnetic ﬁeld lines accelerates electrons up to relativistic
energy. The thin transitional magnetospheric layer between the in-
ner and dense magnetospheric regions (the region where the con-
ﬁned plasma accumulates) and the escaping wind is named ‘middle
magnetosphere’. The energetic electrons that recirculate through
this layer back to the stellar surface radiate radio waves by inco-
herent gyrosynchrotron emission mechanism. The middle magne-

2

P. Leto et al.

tosphere is also the region where the conditions for triggering the
ECM mechanism could be realised. In fact, the relativistic elec-
tron population, accelerated far from the star, moves along the con-
verging dipolar ﬁeld lines toward the high-strength magnetic ﬁeld
regions close to the stellar surface. Moreover, due to magnetic mir-
roring, only energetic electrons with very low pitch-angle (elec-
tron path almost parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld lines) can impact the
stellar surface and will be lost. The reﬂected non-thermal electron
population could then develop the inversion of the velocity distribu-
tion needed to trigger the ECM mechanism. Other kinds of unsta-
ble energy distribution can be developed by the precipitating non-
thermal electron beams, such as the horseshoe distribution, able to
efﬁciently produce ECM emission (Ergun et al. 2000).

In spite of the favourable physical conditions that character-
ize the magnetospheres of the radio MCP stars, only CU Vir and
HD 133880 are so far characterized by broad-band, highly po-
larized and time-stable pulses (Trigilio et al. 2000, 2008, 2011;
Ravi et al. 2010; Lo et al. 2012; Chandra et al. 2015), ascribed to
auroral radio emission detected when the magnetic dipole axis
is almost perpendicular to the line of sight. The frequency of
the ECM emission observed on CU Vir ranges from about 600
MHz (Stevens & George 2010) to 5 GHz (tentative detection re-
ported by Leto et al. 2006), whereas for HD 133880 a detection
of ECM emission at 600 MHz and 1.4 GHz has been reported
(Chandra et al. 2015).

CU Vir is the ﬁrst star where the stellar auroral radio emission
was detected (Trigilio et al. 2000). On this star, the coherent emis-
sion process was mainly observed and extensively studied at the
frequencies of 1.4 and 2.5 GHz (Trigilio et al. 2000, 2008, 2011;
Ravi et al. 2010; Lo et al. 2012). It shows two pulses per spin pe-
riod, almost 100% right hand circularly polarized, with a phase
separation of ≈ 0.4, and characterized by a frequency drift of the
pulse arrival time. Two pulses per period have been detected at 1.4
GHz in every observing epochs, unlike the auroral radio light curve
at 2.5 GHz, which does not always show two pulses per period.
Moreover, left-handed circularly polarized pulses were never de-
tected from CU Vir. This lack of left-hand polarization has been
explained as due to the non-perfectly dipolar topology of its mag-
netic ﬁeld (Kochukhov et al. 2014). The existence of multipolar
magnetic-ﬁeld components makes the behaviour of the two oppo-
site hemispheres asymmetric. In addition, the existence of a mul-
tipolar ﬁeld topology has been indicated as the cause for the ab-
sence of auroral radio emission in s Ori E (Leto et al. 2012), an-
other well-studied radio MCP star characterized by a non-simple
dipole ﬁeld (Oksala et al. 2012).

Similarly to the Earth AKR, the coherent pulses observed from
CU Vir were explained as ECM emission originating in an auroral
cavity, tangentially beamed to the walls and then upward refracted
(Trigilio et al. 2011). This anisotropic beaming is able to success-
fully reproduce the timing and the pulse width of the auroral radio
emission observed in CU Vir (Lo et al. 2012).

At the bottom of the main sequence, coherent pulses, still ex-
plained as auroral radio emission due to the ECM, were also ob-
served in some ultra cool dwarfs (UCDs) with spectral type earlier
than M7 (Berger 2002; Burgasser & Putman 2005; Antonova et al.
2008; Hallinan et al. 2008; Route & Wolszczan 2012, 2013;
Williams et al. 2015), showing in some cases features similar to
those observed in CU Vir. For example, the M8 dwarf DENIS-
P J1048.0 – 3956 shows time-shifted pulses at 5 and 8.4 GHz, both
fully right-hand circularly polarized (Burgasser & Putman 2005)
and the T6.5 brown dwarf 2MASSI J1047539 + 212423 is charac-

Figure 1. Beaming pattern of the loss-cone driven ECM elementary emis-
sion process. The ampliﬁed radiation, displayed by the light-grey vector, is
emitted within an hollow-cone centered on the local magnetic ﬁeld vector
(B) of half-aperture q B, and thickness D

q .

terized by left-hand circularly polarized periodic pulses detected at
6 GHz (Williams et al. 2015).

In the framework of the laminar source model, in this paper we
develop a 3D-model of the auroral radio emission from stars with
a dipole-like magnetic ﬁeld. This model is used to study how the
auroral radio-emission features depend on the stellar geometry and
on the parameters that deﬁne the ECM beam pattern. This study
was able to give a deeper insight about the relationship between the
auroral radio emission detectability and the model parameters.

2 THE AURORAL RADIO EMISSION MODEL

For the ECM emission driven by the loss-cone instability, the ra-
diation ampliﬁed by this kind of coherent emission process is
beamed in a very thin hollow cone centered on the local mag-
netic ﬁeld line (Wu & Lee 1979; Melrose & Dulk 1982). The ra-

diation cone have half-aperture q B ≈ arccos(v/c), where v is the

speed of the unstable electrons population (Hess, Cecconi & Zarka
2008). In the case of 2 KeV energy electrons the hollow cone half-
aperture is ≈ 85◦. To well explain the geometry of the elemen-
q has been
tary emitting process, a thin conical sheet of thickness D
shown in Fig. 1. The frequency n of the ampliﬁed radiation has
to satisfy the cyclotron resonance condition for transverse emis-
sion n = sn B/g , where s is the harmonic number of the local gyro-
frequency (n B = 2.8× 10−3B/G GHz), for mildly relativistic elec-
trons the Lorentz factor g ≈ 1. The fundamental harmonic (s = 1)

has the fastest growth rate, but it is likely suppressed by the gyro-
magnetic absorption as it crosses the more external layer in which
the second harmonic of the local gyro-frequency is equal to the am-
pliﬁed frequency. The layers at s > 2 have a lower optical depth for
gyromagnetic absorption, it is thus reasonable to assume that, when
detected, the ECM emission occurs at n = 2n B (Melrose & Dulk
1982).

In the case of ECM ampliﬁcation occurring in thin magne-
tospheric cavities (laminar source model), the resulting overall ra-
diation diagram can be strongly anisotropic (Louarn & Le Queau
1996a,b) and the axial symmetry of the single electron emission
beam will be lost. In fact, the elementary ECM sources with
similarly-oriented emission beam pattern and located along the line
of sight contribute all together to the maser ampliﬁcation. If the
cavity has a laminar structure, the rays tangent to the walls maxi-
mize the path within the region where the ECM originates. Theo-

Modeling of the stellar auroral radio emission

3

mal and non-thermal electron number density etc., we calculated
at every grid point the local emission and absorption coefﬁcients
for the gyrosynchrotron mechanism, which are needed to integrate
the radiative transfer equation along the line of sight. In the present
work, we do not integrate the radiative transfer equation for the
ECM. We only search for those spatial points that satisfy the physi-
cal conditions required for the electron cyclotron maser generation
at a given frequency and that have the radiation beam pattern ori-
ented along the line of sight. The modelling approach developed in
this paper is only limited to the study of the timing and proﬁle of
the ECM pulses, which depends on those parameters that deﬁne the
geometric conditions able to make such phenomenon detectable.

the tilt of the dipole magnetic axis, and F

As a ﬁrst step, we set the stellar geometry (i is the inclination
of the rotation axis, b
the
rotation phase) and the polar ﬁeld strength. The rotation axis, which
is misaligned with respect to the magnetic polar axis, is displayed in
Fig. 2. In the stellar reference frame, the space surrounding the star
is sampled in a 3D cartesian grid and in each grid point the dipolar
magnetic ﬁeld vector components are calculated. The vectorial ﬁeld
is then rotated in the observer’s reference frame (see appendix A of
Trigilio et al. 2004).

As a second step, we localise the magnetospheric cavity where
the unstable electron population propagates. The inner and outer
boundary dipolar ﬁeld lines are deﬁned by the equation: r =
L cos2 l , where r is the distance to the centre of the star and l
the
magnetic latitude. This space region intercepts the magnetic equa-
torial plane at the distances L and L +D L from the centre of the star,
respectively for the inner and outer boundary. These magnetic ﬁeld
lines are shown in Fig. 2. Within the magnetic shell thus deﬁned,
we can ﬁnd the set of grid points that have the same value of the lo-
cal magnetic ﬁeld strength. Given the frequency n of the observable
coherent emission we are so able to localize those grid points that
have 2n B = n , within a ﬁxed bandwidth D
n . These points are dis-
tributed in polar rings above the magnetic poles. The northern and
southern auroral rings that emit the ECM at an arbitrary frequency
are displayed in Fig. 2. Given the boundary magnetic ﬁeld lines, the
radius and height above the stellar surface of these rings follow the
radial dependence of the magnetic ﬁeld strength B, which deﬁnes
the gyro-frequency.

The third step consists in the deﬁnition of the emission beam
pattern of each grid point belonging to the auroral rings. For clarity,
the side and top view of the ECM emission diagram arising from
the northern ring are displayed in the two panels of Fig. 3. Each
point of the auroral ring, which is the source of ECM emission at
frequency n , has an emission diagram deﬁned by the following an-
gles: the deﬂection angle q ; the opening angle D
q ; the beaming
angle d . The angle q
is deﬁned as the angle between the ray path
vector k and the plane containing the ring (that is perpendicular to
q , set equal to 5◦, is the hollow-cone
the magnetic dipole axis). D
thickness (see Fig. 1) that in the case of the loss-cone driven in-
stability is a function of the emitting electrons speed as D
q ≈ v/c
(Melrose & Dulk 1982), and in accord with Trigilio et al. (2000)
such speed has been ﬁxed equal to 0.09c (electrons energy ≈ 2
KeV), corresponding to an emitting conical sheet just 5◦ thick. The
angle d accounts for the width of the radiation diagram centered on
the plane tangent to the auroral circle and parallel to the magnetic
axis. This angle have the aim to parameterize the number of ele-
mentary ECM sources, located in the auroral rings, with the emis-
sion beams closely aligned with the line of sight (the beam width
is highlighted by the grey planes in Fig. 3). When the line of sight
passing through a given grid point located on the auroral circle is
tilted with respect to the local magnetic ﬁeld vector of an angle

Figure 2. Section of a dipole-like magnetosphere, where the auroral radio
emission can take place. The magnetospheric size is deﬁned by the Alfven
radius rA, whereas the thickness (D L) of the auroral cavity is deﬁned by
the lengths of the current sheet where the free electrons are accelerated up
to relativistic energy. The non-thermal electrons (represented by the small
solid arrows) move toward the stellar surface within a transitional layer
named middle magnetosphere. Above the magnetic poles, close to the stel-
lar surface, the two auroral rings where the ECM arises are located. The
ampliﬁed radiation (the two waves displayed in the northern and southern
hemispheres) is emitted tangentially to the ring and then upward refracted
by the dense thermal plasma trapped inside the inner magnetosphere.

retical simulations also conﬁrm that the auroral radio emission is
mainly ampliﬁed tangentially to the cavity boundary, rather than
along the perpendicular direction (Speir et al. 2014). The resulting
ECM emission is beamed in a strongly directive radiation diagram
and will then be detectable only when our line of sight crosses the
radiation beam pattern, like the pulses of a radio light-house.

We will analyze the auroral radio emission from a dipole-
like magnetospheric cavity in the framework of the laminar source
model described above. The magnetosphere is assumed as a simple
dipole tilted with respect to the rotation axis. Within a ﬁxed value
of the equatorial radius (Alfven radius: rA), the thermal plasma
accumulates (inner magnetosphere), while beyond the Alfven ra-
dius the plasma breaks the magnetic ﬁeld lines giving rise to a
density-depleted magnetospheric cavity (middle magnetosphere),
where the non-thermal electrons can freely propagate, accelerated
by magnetic reconnection (see Fig. 2). This population of non-
thermal electrons can develop an unstable energy distribution, able
to pump the electron cyclotron maser. The overall behavior of the
ECM emission process that can take place in this kind of magne-
tospheric cavity (schematically pictured in Fig. 2) is described as
follows: the ECM radiation arising from a generic point of the au-
roral ring propagates in the plane of the ring; following the lami-
nar source model, the coherent emission is beamed along the plane
parallel to the magnetic axis and tangent to the ring; then the
auroral radio emission is upward refracted by the dense thermal
plasma trapped within the inner magnetosphere. To study the fea-
tures of the ECM pulses arising from such kind of auroral cavity,
we use the same approach followed by Trigilio et al. (2004) and
Leto et al. (2006). In these works, we simulated the incoherent gy-
rosynchrotron brightness distribution and the total ﬂux density by
sampling the space surrounding the star. Given physical parameters
such us the local magnetic ﬁeld strength and orientation, the ther-

P. Leto et al.

4
90◦ − q
(for ECM sources in the northern magnetic hemisphere)
q /2,
or 90◦ + q
and forms an angle lower then | d /2 | with the plane tangent to the

(for sources in the southern hemisphere) within D

auroral ring, the corresponding grid point will be assumed as an
observable source of ECM emission.

To separate the contributions of the ECM emission arising
from the two opposite magnetic hemispheres, we assign the right-
hand circular polarization (RCP) to the emission from sources in
the northern hemisphere and the left-hand circular polarization
(LCP) to the emission from the southern ones. If we repeat the oper-
ations explained above as a function of the stellar rotation phase and
store the number of grid points that are ECM sources, along with
their corresponding polarization sense, then we are able to simu-
late the features of the ECM light curves for the I and V Stokes
parameters (respectively deﬁned as RCP + LCP and RCP− LCP).
As a further output, once we set the stellar parameters that
describe the geometry and strength of the dipolar ﬁeld, the 3D-
model provides us with the effective magnetic ﬁeld curve. In fact,
the simulations of the ECM emission require the calculation of the
vectorial ﬁeld generated by the magnetic dipole. For a given rota-
tional phase, we are able to calculate the longitudinal component of
each magnetic ﬁeld vector located on the stellar surface. The sum
of such longitudinal components, weighted by the limb darkening
law, gives us the theoretical effective magnetic ﬁeld strength (Be)
as a function of the stellar rotation. In detail, such calculation has
been performed as follow:

Be =

x (cid:229)

y (cid:229)

z Bx(x, y, z)I(x, y, z)
y (cid:229)

z I(x, y, z)

x (cid:229)

where Bx is the longitudinal component of the magnetic ﬁeld vector
located at the coordinate (x, y, z) in the side of the stellar surface
facing to the observer, and I is the corresponding limb darkening
parameter. The observing reference frame (Oxyz) is centered on the
stellar center, the x-axis is aligned with the line of sight and oriented
toward the observer, the y and z-axes individuate the plane of the
sky. Each point of the grid is associated to the vector~r ≡ (rx, ry, rz),
and the points located on the stellar surface are those that verify,
within the sampling step, the condition r2
z = 1 (assuming
a unitary stellar radius). For the calculation has been adopted the
simple linear limb darkening law:
I(x, y, z) = 1− k + krx(x, y, z)
with k = 0.45 (Stift 1973). Therefore, with the capability to simul-
taneously simulate the ECM light curve and the magnetic curve, we
can correlate the ECM occurrence with the Be curve.

(0 6 rx 6 1)

y + r2

x + r2

Figure 3. Schematic view of the model of the auroral radio emission de-
veloped in the framework of the laminar source model. Panel a) side view;
panel b) top view. The density-depleted magnetic cavity and the boundary
ﬁeld lines are shown. A representative auroral ring is also displayed above
the north pole, where the ECM emission process originates. The grey planes
passing trough the boundary of the cavity describe the ECM beam pattern,
whose size is given by the angle d . The ECM ray vector (k) is misaligned of
an angle q with respect to the direction perpendicular to the local magnetic
ﬁeld vector (B).

3 MODEL PREDICTIONS

3.1 Dependence on the auroral ring geometry

First of all we analyze if the spatial location and the size of the
auroral regions that are sources to the ECM emission affect the
simulated light curves. To do this, we set the magnetic ﬁeld and
vary the frequency; this is equivalent to simulate ECM emission
from auroral rings of different sizes and locations above the stellar
surface.

We simulated a set of frequencies ranging from 600 MHz to 5
GHz. For this speciﬁc analysis the stellar geometry and the ECM
radiation diagram are ﬁxed. We assumed a dipole with a polar ﬁeld
strength of 3000 gauss, misaligned with respect to the rotation axis
of an angle b = 74◦, the rotation axis inclination (i) has been ﬁxed

to 43◦. The parameters above are equal to the stellar parameters
adopted for CU Vir (the prototype of the stars showing auroral radio
emission) by Trigilio et al. (2000). The thickness of the magnetic
shell that delimits the auroral cavity has been deﬁned setting the L-
shell parameter of the two boundary dipolar magnetic ﬁeld lines, re-
spectively equal to 15 and 18 R∗ (D L = 20%L), in accordance with
the size of the magnetospheric region, where the incoherent radio
emission of CU Vir originates (Leto et al. 2006). The two boundary
magnetic ﬁeld lines have the maximum separation at the magnetic
equator, whereas at the stellar surface these two ﬁeld lines are very
close. For the ECM emission beam pattern, we assume the simple
condition of ampliﬁed radiation propagating perpendicularly to the
local magnetic ﬁeld vector (no refraction, q = 0◦) with a narrow
radiation diagram (opening angle ﬁxed to d = 10◦).

(cid:229)
(cid:229)
Modeling of the stellar auroral radio emission

5

fect) characterized by two peaks per stellar rotation, visible when
Be = 0. The theoretical magnetic curve and the corresponding ECM
light curves for the Stokes I and V are displayed in the three bot-
tom panels of Fig. 4, simulated setting n = 0.6, 1.4, 2.5 and 5 GHz.
As a consequence of the chosen stellar geometry (assumed equal to
the prototype CU Vir), the minimum phase difference between the
two simulated ECM peaks is about 0.4, that is in accordance with
the phase difference between the two coherent events observed on
CU Vir.

By inspecting the simulated light curves for the two Stokes pa-
rameters, we can notice that there is not any Stokes V (RCP−LCP)
contribution, whereas the Stokes I (RCP + LCP) is well observ-
able. This is because the ECM contributions from the two opposite
magnetic hemispheres are exactly the same, as it is evident by the
perfect symmetry of the ECM brightness spatial distribution (top
panel of Fig. 4). Since the ECM radiation arising from the two
hemispheres has opposite polarization senses in the north and in
the south, the Stokes V parameter will be consequently null.

3.2 Dependence on the beam pattern

To assess the effect of the free parameters that control the beam
pattern of the ECM radiation on the auroral radio emission fea-
tures, we simulated the light curves varying the opening angle d ,
and the upward deﬂection angle q , keeping the stellar geometry
previously adopted. In this case, we performed simulations of the
ECM emission at 2.5 and 1.4 GHz. To mitigates the possible band-
width effect that could affect the comparison between the simula-
tions and most of the available observations, these simulations have
been performed within a narrow frequency range, 100 MHz wide,
which is close to the old VLA and ATCA bandwidth set-up. For
the assumed polar ﬁeld strength (Be = 3000 Gauss), the two au-
roral rings are located respectively at ≈ 0.9 and 1.3 R∗ above the
magnetic poles. The results of the simulations for the Stokes pa-
rameter I and V are displayed in Fig. 5, where the right circularly
polarized emission (positive Stokes V) is displayed in white and
the left circularly polarization (negative Stokes V) in black. In each
panel of Fig. 5, for a given angle d , the dynamical simulated light
curves are displayed as a function of the angle q , shown on the
y-axis.

First of all, we notice that the light-curve features of the auro-
ral radio emission at the two simulated radio frequencies - 1.4 and
2.5 GHz - have a closely similar dependence on the two parameters
d and q . This is equivalent to say that the spatial location and the
size of the auroral rings have little or no effect on the main features
of the auroral radio emission, once the auroral cavity is deﬁned.
The timing and the pulse proﬁle are instead signiﬁcantly affected
by the choice of d and q . In particular, the dynamic light curves of
the Stokes I parameter show that the pulse width is directly related
to the angle d , with the narrow peaks associated to the smaller d
values. We also note that the pulses disappear above a deﬂection
angle limit. This trend is observable for each value of the param-
eter d , with the limit value of the angle q growing as d
increases.
It is also evident that, before disappearing, each pulse splits in two,
with phase separation growing with q . By analyzing the Stokes V,
it is clear that each component of the double peak pulses has op-
posite polarization sense. In general, Stokes V has a hybrid polar-
ization, as a consequence of the different contributions to the ECM
emission of the two stellar hemispheres with opposite magnetic po-
larity. As a consequence of the physical processes that are respon-
sible of the generation and propagation of the ECM emission, the
deﬂection angle q could be a function of the frequency. In fact,

Figure 4. Top panels: wide band synthetic brightness spatial distribution of
the ECM emission arising from the two opposite hemispheres of a dipole-
like oblique rotator. The maps have been created for the two stellar orienta-
tions where the longitudinal magnetic ﬁeld is null. The simulated frequen-
cies range between 5 GHz, close stellar regions, and 600 MHz, farther re-
gions. The emission that originates from the northern hemisphere is shown
by the white area, while the dark area is associated to the ECM emission
from the southern hemisphere. Bottom panel a): simulated magnetic curve.
Bottom panel b) and c): ECM light curves simulated at n = 0.6, 1.4, 2.5 and
5 GHz, respectively for Stokes I and V. An arbitrary offset has been added
to each individual light curve to distinguish them.

The spatial distribution of the ECM emission, calculated when
the magnetic dipole axis lies exactly in the sky plane (null value of
the effective magnetic ﬁeld), has been displayed in the top panels of
Fig. 4. The simulated maps were obtained by collecting the ECM
contributions from all grid points (simulation step equal to 0.05
R∗) that have the second harmonic of the local gyrofrequency in
the range from 600 MHz to 5 GHz.
In accordance with the radial dependence of the magnetic ﬁeld
strength, decreasing outward as r−3 for a dipole, the highest fre-
quencies originate in small auroral rings located near the star, the
low frequencies are instead generated in large auroral rings at high
distance above the stellar surface. The simulated frequencies orig-
inate from auroral rings located between ≈ 0.5 and 2 R∗ from the
stellar surface. The ECM emission at 5 GHz is generated within the
thin auroral cavity located close to the star, unlike the ECM radi-
ation at 600 MHz, which arises from the auroral regions far from
the star, and is consequently generated within a larger and thicker
auroral cavity.

The model predicts similar ECM light curves at different sim-
ulated frequencies (small differences are due to the sampling ef-

6

P. Leto et al.

Figure 5. Dynamic ECM light curves results of the 3D model simulations obtained varying the parameters that control the radiation beam pattern. The
simulated frequencies are: 1.4 and 2.5 GHz. The model simulations have been performed as a function of the ray path deﬂection q , y-axis of each panel. The
simulations have been performed for 5 values of the opening angle d . The top panels display the Stokes I parameter, while the bottom panels display Stokes
V; black corresponds to the left handed circularly polarized component, white indicates right hand polarized. The pulse phase location predicted by the ORM
have also been shown; the blue dotted line is related to the ECM pulses arising from the northern hemisphere, the red dashed line is referred to the southern.
The black continuous line in the panel with the simulations performed at n = 1.4 GHz and d = 20◦ is a representative light curve obtained assuming q = 10◦.

the basic processes that drive the ECM, like the loss-cone instabil-
ity, originate ampliﬁed radiation propagating in direction which is
frequency-dependent, or/and the refraction effects, that can be suf-
fered by the ampliﬁed radiation traveling through the cold thermal
plasma layers that are located in the stellar magnetosphere, which
are also function of the frequency. Comparing multi frequency ob-
servations and simulations we will be able to measure the deﬂection
angle of each individual ampliﬁed frequency, and thus we can try to
disentangle among the possible frequency-dependent mechanism
that can affect the propagation direction of this kind of ampliﬁed
emission.

The pulse timing is the result of the oblique rotator model as-
sumption. In fact, the upward deﬂection angle q
is related to the
angle formed by the line of sight with the magnetic dipole axis
(q M) as follows:

Northern Hemisphere
Southern Hemisphere

q M =(cid:26) p /2− q
p /2 + q
Once the ORM geometry (i and b ) is deﬁned, the phase loca-
tion of the ECM pulse is expressed by the following equation
(Trigilio et al. 2000):

F ECM = arccos(cid:18) cosq M − cos b cos i

sinb sin i

(cid:19) /2p

(1)

The tracks of the ECM pulses calculated by the use of Eq. 1 have
been put on top of the simulated light curves in Fig. 5. The compar-
ison between the model simulation and the ORM prediction indi-
cates that the phase location of each ECM peak can be predicted by
Eq. 1, whereas the ECM pulse proﬁle is the result of a complicated
combination of the angles that control the beam of the auroral radio
emission.

To better clarify the above model prediction, the 1.4 GHz

Modeling of the stellar auroral radio emission

7

Figure 6. Synthetic auroral radio light curve (obtained assuming: n = 1.4 GHz, d = 20◦ and q = 10◦), solid line, with superimposed the simulated effective
magnetic ﬁeld curve (Bp = 3000 Gauss, i = 47◦, b = 74◦), dashed line. The pulses have been labelled as in Fig. 4 according to the arrival order and the circular
polarization signs. The cartoons show the magnetosphere orientations corresponding to the beam of the auroral radio emission aligned with the line of sight.
The two unit circles indicate the magnetic longitudes (z ) of the magnetic ﬁeld lines responsible of the auroral radio emission observable from Earth.

stokes V synthetic light curve obtained with d = 20◦ and q = 10◦
has been analysed (it is identiﬁed in Fig. 5 by the black line).
This selected light curve is shown in Fig. 6 along with the stellar
magnetic curve. The stellar orientations associated with the various
pulse components and identiﬁed on this simulated light curve have
also been displayed. For clarity, each pulse component has been
assigned a label related to the order of appearance and to the po-
larization sense. The ECM ray vectors have been tagged according
to the labels of the corresponding simulated coherent pulse compo-
nents.

The ECM emission beam pattern responsible for the ﬁrst right-
hand circularly polarized peak (RCP1) arising from the northern
auroral ring is aligned with the line of sight at phases slightly pre-
ceding the ﬁrst null of the magnetic curve, depending on q (Fig. 6).
As the star rotates, the northern pole will be seen moving away
from the observer and, after the magnetic curve passes the ﬁrst
null, the ECM emission arising from the southern auroral ring will
be visible (ﬁrst left-hand circularly polarized pulse: LCP1). As the
star rotates, after that the magnetic curve has reached its negative
magnetic outermost point, the magnetic north pole will be seen ap-
proaching the observer and a second ECM beam generated from the
southern auroral ring will be aligned with the line of sight. Conse-
quently, the second LCP pulse will be detectable (LCP2). Likewise,
the second RCP pulse will be associated to a second ECM beam
arising from the northern auroral ring (RCP2).

The two ECM beams are not arising from the same points of
the auroral circle. For clarity, in Fig. 6 we also included the auroral

circles showing the magnetic longitudes z (z = 0◦ on the the plane
identiﬁed by the magnetic and rotation axis) of the magnetic ﬁeld
lines responsible for the detectable auroral radio emission. Such
magnetic ﬁeld lines intercept the northern and the southern auroral
rings in the two sectors characterized by ECM beam pattern cross-
ing the observer’s line of sight. In particular, for the speciﬁc case
analysed here, the magnetic longitudes of the ﬁeld lines that have
the most favourable orientation for the auroral radio emission to be

detected are respectively: z ≈ 135◦ and z ≈ 315◦ (peak RCP1);
z ≈ 45◦ and z ≈ 225◦ (peak RCP2); z ≈ 125◦ and z ≈ 305◦ (peak
LCP1); z ≈ 55◦ and z ≈ 235◦ (peak LCP2).

3.3 Dependence on the magnetic shell size

We performed model simulations of the auroral radio emission aris-
ing from magnetic shells with sizes different from the one previ-
ously analysed. The simulated ECM frequency and the radiation
beam pattern were left unchanged (n = 1.4 GHz, d = 20◦ and
q = 10◦). We analyse the cases of auroral cavities delimited by
the inner boundary magnetic ﬁeld lines with the L-shell parameter
ranging from 5 to 100 R∗. In addition, the magnetic shell thickness
at the equatorial plane has been varied in the range from 10% to
50% of the L parameter of the inner boundary magnetic ﬁeld line.
The simulated dynamic ECM light curves (Stokes I and V) as
a function of the auroral cavity size have been displayed in Fig. 7.
Each column panels of Fig. 7 show the simulations performed as-
suming different thickness of the magnetic cavity. Similarly to the

8

P. Leto et al.

Figure 7. Dynamic auroral light curves as a function of the magnetic shell size. Top panels: Stokes I; middle panel: Stokes V. The simulations have been
performed varying the equatorial extension of the magnetospheric cavity where the auroral radio emission takes place (deﬁned by the L-shell parameter), and
the corresponding shell thickness.

previously adopted grey scale for the Stokes V simulations, the
white regions indicate the ECM emission that have a right hand
circular polarization sense, whereas the black areas refer to radia-
tion with left-hand circular polarization.

The result of these simulations highlights that the size of the
auroral cavity signiﬁcantly affects the pulse proﬁle. The simula-
tions of the auroral radio emission for the Stokes I arising from
small magnetic shells are characterized by two large pulses per
stellar rotation, see top panels of Fig. 7. As the size of the mag-
netic shell increases, the two simulated pulses become clearly dou-
bly peaked, each single peak becoming progressively thinner. Each
component is clearly related to a speciﬁc stellar hemisphere, as rec-
ognizable from the sign of the simulated light curves for the Stokes
V in the middle panels of Fig. 7. The thinning of the pulse with the
increasing magnetic shell size is the consequence of the progressive
decrease of the auroral ring radius associated to a speciﬁc radio fre-
quency (as extreme case, for a magnetic shell with inﬁnite L-shell
parameter the auroral region degenerates to a point located on the
magnetic axis), and consequently the number of grid points that are
sources of detectable ECM emission progressively decreases. This
set of simulations highlights that the ECM features do not depend
on the ratio D L/L.

3.4 Dependence on the stellar geometry

To highlight the role of the stellar geometry on the auroral radio
emission detectability, a set of model simulations have been per-
formed by varying the angle b . After setting the auroral shell size
(L = 15 R∗ and D L = 20%L), we performed simulations at n = 1.4
GHz (beam pattern deﬁned by d = 20◦ and q = 10◦), varying the
magnetic axis obliquity (b ) from 0◦ to 360◦ (with a simulation step
of 1◦). The magnetic polar strength and the rotation axis inclination
were left unchanged (Bp = 3000 Gauss, i = 43◦).

The variation of the b parameter signiﬁcantly affects the fea-
tures of the ECM light curves and the stellar magnetic ﬁeld curve.
We then compared the simulated ECM light curves with the corre-
sponding effective magnetic ﬁeld curve. The dynamic light curves
and the magnetic curves are displayed in Fig. 8 as a function of b .
The effective magnetic ﬁeld is displayed in the top panel of the ﬁg-

ure and the other two panels show the Stokes I and V auroral radio
emission (respectively, bottom and middle panels of Fig. 8).

By looking at Fig. 8, it is evident that the ECM light curve
features depend on the adopted stellar geometry. In particular, the
detectability of the auroral radio emission and the phase separa-
tion between the two simulated pulses is a function of b . When
the magnetic axis is aligned with the rotation axis (b = 0◦ or
b = 180◦) the effective magnetic ﬁeld does not vary. The effective
magnetic ﬁeld strength has a positive constant value for b = 0◦
(northern hemisphere prevailing), negative value for b = 180◦
(southern hemisphere prevailing). When the magnetic obliquity in-
creases, the effective magnetic ﬁeld changes as the star rotates. For

b = 90◦ − i = 47◦, the magnetic ﬁeld curve is characterized by one
null at F = 0.5. When b
is close to this value, the light curve of the
auroral radio emission is characterized by only one pulse per stellar
rotation, right-hand circularly polarized, centred at F = 0.5. As the
magnetic obliquity increases, the effective magnetic ﬁeld inverts its
sign twice at every stellar rotation. Therefore, we simulated two
doubly peaked ECM pulses.

At b = 90◦, the pulse separation increases up to D

= 0.5,
where it starts to decrease. For b = 180◦ − i = 133◦, the magnetic
ﬁeld curve has again a single null, but at F = 0. When the misalign-
ment between magnetic and rotation axis is close to this value, the
light curve of the auroral radio emission shows a single large pulse,
left-hand circularly polarized and centred at F = 0. Beyond this
limit of b , the auroral radio emission vanishes. The exact limits of
the range of b able to give detectable auroral radio emission also
depend on the ray path deﬂection q . The simulations performed
when b
lies in the range 180◦–360◦ closely resemble the behaviour
simulated in the range 0◦–180◦, but with the opposite sign of Be.
Consequently, a swap of circular polarization occurs (middle and
top panel of Fig. 8). As a result of the present analysis, it can be
noticed that the capability to detect the ECM radiation is marginal
for those stars that do not change their net polarity of the effective
magnetic ﬁeld on the observer’s line of sight.

The beam pattern chosen to perform the present analysis is
up-ward deﬂected. The simulated ECM radio light curves are then
characterized by contributions from the two opposite hemispheres
that are clearly distinguishable by the sign of the simulated Stokes
V parameter. If the ray path is not deﬂected (q = 0), the simulated

F
Modeling of the stellar auroral radio emission

9

Figure 8. Variations of the effective magnetic ﬁeld curve and of the auroral light curve as a function of the misalignment between the magnetic and the rotation
axis orientations (angle b ). Top panel: dynamic effective magnetic ﬁeld curves. Middle panel: dynamic auroral light curves for the Stokes V. Bottom panel:
dynamic auroral light curves for the Stokes I. The orange dashed lines indicate the values of b
that locate the nulls of the magnetic effective curve at ﬁxed
values of the stellar rotational phase, obtained using the Eq. 2.

auroral radio emission is unpolarized (Stokes V= 0). The Stokes I
light curve is instead characterized by two single peaks occurring
at phases (F 0 and 1− F 0), which represent the stellar orientations
characterized by the magnetic axis being perpendicular to the line
of sight (Be = 0), according to the analysis performed in Sec. 3.1.
In this case, the detection of the auroral radio emission from a star
can be used to ﬁx the oblique rotator geometry (b ), the rotation axis
inclination i being known. In fact, on the basis of the simple dipolar
geometry, from the Eq. 1 the following relation can be derived:

b = arctan(cid:18)−

1

tan icosF 0(cid:19)

(2)

Given the rotation axis inclination, the equation above returns
those value of b
for which the effective magnetic ﬁeld curve is
zero at F 0. The results of the Eq. 2, obtained assuming i = 43◦,
have been superimposed on the model simulation in Fig. 8. It can
be noticed that the curves b versus F 0 are intermediate between
the tracks left by the characteristic double peaks of opposite po-
larity, which are a signature of deﬂected ECM emission (middle
and bottom panels of Fig. 8). Therefore, in the case of auroral ra-
dio emission characterized by ray path deﬂection (q > 0), it is also
possible to obtain the ORM geometry. This is because if the ECM
contributions arising from the two opposite stellar hemispheres are
clearly detected, then the stellar rotational phase related to a null of

the effective magnetic ﬁeld can be located in the middle between
the phases of occurrence of the coherent peaks with opposite Stokes
V sign.

4 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The purpose of the model described in this paper is the simula-
tion of the auroral radio emission from stars characterized by a
dipole-like magnetic ﬁeld. The auroral radio emission is a well-
known phenomenon common to the magnetized planets of the so-
lar system (Zarka 1998), and also present in some kinds of mag-
netic stars (Trigilio et al. 2011; Nichols et al. 2012). The mecha-
nism responsible for this kind of radio emission is the coherent am-
pliﬁcation mechanism known as ECM. The modelling of the ECM
emission has been developed in accordance with the laminar source
model (Louarn & Le Queau 1996a,b). In this case, the auroral radio
emission is constrained within a narrow beam tangentially directed
along the cavity boundary. This kind of anisotropic beaming is able
to successfully reproduce the timing and the pulse width of the au-
roral radio emission observed from the early type star CU Vir (SP
A0V) (Trigilio et al. 2011; Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, at the bottom
of the main sequence, the presence of ECM emission characterized
by strongly anisotropic beaming has been conﬁrmed in the case of
the ultra cool dwarfs (SP > M7) (Lynch, Mutel & G¨udel 2015).

10

P. Leto et al.

The dependence of the auroral radio emission features on the
model parameters has been extensively analysed. Despite the sim-
pliﬁed assumption of a pure dipole characterizing the stellar mag-
netic ﬁeld, this model is a powerful tool to study how the timing and
the pulse proﬁle depend on the parameters that deﬁne the source
geometry and on the parameters that control the beam pattern. The
analysis in this paper allows us to draw some general conclusions
that help us to interpret the features observed in the auroral radio
emission from individual stars.

First of all, we point out how the recurrence phases of the
ECM pulses are related to the features of the magnetic curve. In
the cases of the auroral radio emission propagating perpendicu-
larly to the magnetic ﬁeld vector, we obtain unpolarized coherent
pulses coinciding exactly with the nulls of the effective magnetic
ﬁeld curve, since RCP and LCP rays have the same direction. This
coincidence ceases as the ECM beam pattern deﬂects. In this case,
each single auroral radio pulse becomes doubly peaked, because
the two polarizations are deﬂected differently. As a consequence
of the magnetic polarity of the stellar hemisphere where the ECM
emission arises, the peak components are circularly polarized with
opposite polarization senses.

In particular, the two components of opposite polarization
sense occur at phases slightly preceding or following the effective
magnetic ﬁeld null. The phase separation between the two polar-
ized components can be a function of such model parameters as the
ray path deﬂection, the beam opening angle, or the magnetic shell
size. In all cases, the two components are symmetric with respect
to the magnetic ﬁeld null phase.

As a further result of our simulation, we found that once we
set the size of the magnetic shell where the auroral radio emission
takes place, the distance from the surface, hence the size of the
auroral ring, does not affect the simulated pulse proﬁle and their
localization in phase. It has also been established that the magnetic
shell thickness has negligible effects on the light-curve features.
Moreover, the size of the magnetic shell does not affect the timing
of the auroral pulses, while it does have an inﬂuence on the pulse
proﬁle. In particular, if the auroral radio emission is generated very
close to the magnetic dipole axis, as in the case of the very small
auroral rings related to large magnetospheric shells, the ECM aris-
ing from each stellar hemisphere has a very narrow pulse width.
We can conclude that, once deﬁned the magnetic shell and ﬁxed
the beaming of the ECM emission, all the auroral radio frequen-
cies that originate from regions located at different heights above
the stellar surface are characterized by similar light curves. About
the model parameters analyzed above, we can conclude that the
auroral radio emission features are frequency independent. In the
sense that, once ﬁxed the parameters that control the beam pattern,
the location above the poles of the auroral rings, that are frequency
dependent, have no effect on the modeled auroral radio emission.
However, as discussed below, other frequency dependent effects
can take place on the ECM stellar radio emission. Moreover, the
ECM beam pattern is reasonably related to the auroral ring geome-
try, roughly speaking auroral radio emission detectable in direction
strongly misaligned from the plane tangent to the cavity wall should
be generated in large thickness auroral ring, conversely strongly
beamed ECM emission is related to very thin auroral cavity.

The discovery that the light curve of the auroral radio emission
does not depend on the height above the surface of the auroral ring
where it originates has a direct implication on the parameters that
are able to locate it. These parameters are the polar magnetic ﬁeld
strength and the harmonic of the gyrofrequency ampliﬁed by the
ECM process. From the analysis performed in this paper, it follows

that the above parameters cannot be directly deduced only from the
detection of the auroral radio emission from a given star.

The measurement of possible frequency-dependent effects of
the pulsed auroral radio emission, such as the frequency drift of
the pulses’ arrival time, has to be related to a possible propaga-
tion effect suffered by the auroral radio emission generated at dif-
ferent frequencies (for example, the ambient thermal medium re-
fracts differently the ECM radiation of different frequencies, as
proposed by Trigilio et al. 2011), or to the intrinsic nature of the
basic process that generates the ECM ampliﬁed radiation (for ex-
ample, in case of the loss-cone driven ECM emission the hol-
low cone opening angle is a function of the frequency). In de-
tail, the half-aperture of the hollow cone is deﬁned as follow:

cosq B = v/cp1− n B/n Bmax (Hess et al. 2008), where, following
the resonance condition for the gyromagnetic emission at the s-th
harmonic, n B = n /s (Melrose & Dulk 1982), with n Bmax the gyro-
frequency at the stellar surface. We note how the elementary pro-
cess which gives rise to the ampliﬁed radiation could affect the
propagation direction of the resulting auroral radio emission de-
tected at different frequencies. On the other hand, the ECM radi-
ation, originated in a density depleted region close to the stellar
surface, along its path passes through refracting cold thermal re-
gions that deﬂect the propagation direction. The ray path refrac-
tion is described by the law of Snell: sina r = sina i/nrefr, where
p /(n (n − n B)) is the refraction index of the cold
nrefr = q1− n 2
thermal medium traveled by the ampliﬁed rays, and a i and a r are
the angles that the incident and the refracted rays form with the
line perpendicular to the refractive layer. The refraction plane ori-
entation depends on the shape of such refractive layers, this can
introduce a possible further longitudinal deﬂection to the ray path
giving rise to a possible phase shift of the coherent pulses. More-
over, the plasma frequency depends from the density of the thermal

plasma (Ne) as follow: n p = 9× 10−6√Ne GHz, a possible longi-

tudinal anisotropy of the ambient thermal medium, trapped within
the stellar magnetosphere, could affect the propagation of the two
ECM pulses differently. We highlight that the comparison among
the magnetic curve and the Stokes I and V light curves of the auro-
ral radio emission can be used as a diagnostic tool of the environ-
ment where the ECM is pumped.

Finally, the simulations performed here allow us to highlight
that the main parameter that localizes the auroral radio pulses in
the phase-folded light curve is the obliquity of the stellar magne-
tosphere with respect to the rotation axis. As expected, the timing
of the auroral radio pulses is strictly related to the geometry of the
star. Moreover, the magnetic axis orientation is strictly related to
the possibility to detect such a phenomenon. We can conclude that
the study of the timing of the ECM pulses from stars that show such
an elusive phenomenon could be a very useful tool to obtain hints
about the geometry of the magnetosphere where it takes place, be-
sides its extraordinary importance in the study of the physical con-
ditions able to generate the ECM radiation itself.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the referee for his/her constructive criticism which en-
abled us to improve this paper.

Modeling of the stellar auroral radio emission

11

REFERENCES

Antonova A., Doyle J.G., Hallinan G., Bourke S., Golden A.,
2008, A&A, 487, 317
Berger E., 2002, ApJ, 572, 503
Burgasser A.J., Putman M.E., 2005, ApJ, 626, 486
Chandra P., Wade G.A., Sundqvist J.O., et al., 2015, MNRAS,
452, 1245
Ergun R.E., Carlson C.W., McFadden J.P., Bieging J.H., Delroy
G.T., 2000, ApJ, 538, 456
Drake S.A., Abbot D.C., Bastian T.S., Bieging J.H., Churchwell
E., Dulk G., Linsky J.L., 1987, ApJ, 322, 902
Hallinan G., Antonova A., Doyle J.G., Bourke S., Lane C., Golden
A., 2008, ApJ, 684, 644
Hess S., Cecconi B., Zarka P., 2008, GeoRL, 35, 3107
Kochukhov O., Lftinge T., Neiner C., Alecian E., and the MiMeS
collaboration, 2014, A&A, 565, 83
Leone F., 1991, A&A, 252, 198
Leone F., Umana G., 1993, A&A, 268, 667
Leone F., Trigilio C., Umana G., 1994, A&A, 283, 908
Leto P., Trigilio C., Buemi C.S., Umana G., Leone F., 2006, A&A,
458, 831
Leto P., Trigilio C., Buemi C.S., Leone F., Umana G., 2012, MN-
RAS, 423, 1766
Lynch C., Mutel R.L., G¨udel M., 2015, ApJ, 802, 106
Linsky J.L., Drake S.A., Bastian S.A., 1992, ApJ, 393, 341
Lo K.K., Bray J.D., Hobbs G., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 421, 3316
Louarn P., Le Queau D., 1996a, P&SS, 44, 199
Louarn P., Le Queau D., 1996b, P&SS, 44, 211
Melrose D.B., Dulk G.A., 1982, ApJ, 259, 844
Menietti J.D., Mutel R.L., Christopher I.W., Hutchinson K.A.,
Sigwarth J.B, 2011, JGRA, 116, 12219
Mutel R.L., Christopher I.W., Pickett J.S., 2008, GeoRL, 35, 7104
Nichols J.D., Burleigh M.R., Casewell S.L., et al., 2012, ApJ, 760,
59
Oksala M.E., Wade G.A., Townsend R.H.D., et al., 2012, MN-
RAS, 419, 959
Ravi V., Hobbs G., Wickramasinghe D., Champion D.J., Keith M.,
2010, MNRAS, 408, L99
Route M., Wolszczan A., 2012, ApJ, 747, L22
Route M., Wolszczan A., 2013, ApJ, 773, 18
Stevens I.R., George S.J., 2010, ASPC, 422, 135
Stift, M.J., 1973, A&A, 22,209
Speir D.C., et al., 2014, PRL, 113, 155002
Trigilio C., Leto P., Leone F., Umana G., Buemi C., 2000, A&A,
362, 281
Trigilio C., Leto P., Umana G., Leone F., Buemi C.S., 2004, A&A,
418, 593
Trigilio C., Leto P., Umana G., Buemi C.S., Leone F., 2008, MN-
RAS, 384, 1437
Trigilio C., Leto P., Umana G., Buemi C.S., Leone F., 2011, ApJ,
739, L10
Williams P.K.G., Berger, E., Irwin J., et al., 2015, ApJ, 799, 192
Wu C.S., Lee L.C. 1979, ApJ, 230, 621
Zarka, P, 1998, JGR, 103, 20159

