6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
8

 

 
 
]
h
t
-
p
e
h
[
 
 

1
v
2
4
4
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Conserved charges,

surface degrees of freedom,

and black hole entropy

Ali Seraj

Under supervision of

M.M. Sheikh-Jabbari

A Thesis presented for the degree of

Doctor of Philosophy

Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM)

Department of Physics

Tehran, Iran
February 2016

Abstract

In this thesis, we study the Hamiltonian and covariant phase space description of

gravitational theories. The phase space represents the allowed ﬁeld conﬁgurations and

is accompanied by a closed nondegenerate 2 form- the symplectic form. We will show

that local/gauge symmetries of the Lagrangian formulation will fall into two diﬀerent

categories in the phase space formulation. Those corresponding to constraints in the

phase space, and those associated with nontrivial conserved charges. We argue that

while the former is related to redundant gauge degrees of freedom, the latter leads to

physically distinct states of the system, known as surface degrees of freedom and can

induce a lower dimensional dynamics on the system.

These ideas are then implemented to build the phase space of speciﬁc gravitational

systems: 1) asymptotically AdS3 spacetimes, and 2) near horizon geometries of extremal

black holes (NHEG) in arbitrary dimension.

In the AdS3 phase space, we show that Brown-Henneaux asymptotic symmetries

can be extended inside the bulk of spacetime and hence become symplectic symmetries

of the phase space.

We will show that in the NHEG phase space, surface gravitons form a Virasoro

algebra in four dimensions, and a novel generalization of Virasoro in higher dimensions.

The central charge of the algebra is proportional to the entropy of the corresponding

extremal black hole. We study the holographic description of NHEG phase space and

show that the charges can be computed through a Liouville type stress tensor deﬁned

over a lower dimensional torus. We will discuss whether surface gravitons can serve as

the microscopic origin of black hole entropy.

Keywords: Black hole microstates, Conserved charges, Surface degrees of freedom,

Symplectic mechanics, Holography

Contents

1 Introduction

1.1 Symmetries in physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.2 Diﬀerent notions of conserved charges in Gravitational physics

. . . . .

1.3 The mystery of black hole entropy and approaches . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.4 Outline; What is new in this thesis? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 Hamiltonian formulation of gauge theories and gravity

2.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Constrained Hamiltonian dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3 Hamiltonian dynamics of ﬁeld theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4 Open spacetimes and conserved charges

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.5 Hamiltonian formulation of General Relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Covariant phase space formulation of gauge theories and gravity

3.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 Symplectic Mechanics

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 Covariant phase space formulation of gauge theories

. . . . . . . . . . .

3.4 Local symmetries and their generators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.5 Explicit form of generators and charges in gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.6 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 AdS3 phase space and its surface degrees of freedom

4.1

Introduction and outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Asymptotically AdS spacetimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

iv

2

2

4

5

8

10

10

11

17

22

24

29

29

30

34

37

41

48

52

52

55

Contents

4.3 AdS3 phase space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4 Symplectic symmetries and charges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.5 The two Killing symmetries and their charges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.6 Phase space as Virasoro coadjoint orbits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.7 Extremal phase space and decoupling limit

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.8 Microscopic counting of entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.9 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Near horizon geometries of extremal black holes

5.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 Extremal black holes and near horizon limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3 Quick Review on NHEG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.4 Global charges and ﬁrst law of NHEG mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.5 The Kerr/CFT correspondence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.6 No dynamics in NHEK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.7 NHEG perturbation uniqueness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

v

57

58

65

69

73

77

79

81

81

83

84

91

94

96

99

6 NHEG phase space and its surface degrees of freedom

102

6.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102

6.2 Rationale behind the NHEG phase space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104

6.3 Generator of inﬁnitesimal transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105

6.4 Finite transformations and phase space conﬁgurations . . . . . . . . . . 108

6.5 Symplectic Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112

6.6 Algebra of Charges: the “NHEG Algebra” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115

6.7 Charges on the phase space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117

6.8 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120

7 Summary and Outlook

A Technical Proofs.

125

129

A.1 Proof of proposition 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129

A.2 Charge expression for ﬁeld dependent gauge transformations . . . . . . . 131

A.3 On the generator of Killing horizon in NHEG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133

References

136

Contents

vii

The work in this thesis is based on the results

in the following publications

1. G. Comp`ere, P. Mao, A. Seraj and M.M. Sheikh-Jabbari, “Symplectic and Killing

Symmetries of AdS3 Gravity: Holographic vs Boundary Gravitons”, [arXiv:1511.06079

[hep-th]].

2. G. Comp`ere, K. Hajian, A. Seraj and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, “Wiggling Throat

of Extremal Black Holes,” JHEP 1510, 093 (2015) [arXiv:1506.07181 [hep-th]].

3. G. Comp`ere, K. Hajian, A. Seraj and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, “Extremal Rotating

Black Holes in the Near-Horizon Limit: Phase Space and Symmetry Algebra,”

Phys. Lett. B 749, 443 (2015) [arXiv:1503.07861 [hep-th]].

4. K. Hajian, A. Seraj and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, “Near Horizon Extremal Geom-

etry Perturbations: Dynamical Field Perturbations vs. Parametric Variations,”

JHEP 1410, 111 (2014) [arXiv:1407.1992 [hep-th]].

5. K. Hajian, A. Seraj and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, “NHEG Mechanics: Laws of

Near Horizon Extremal Geometry (Thermo)Dynamics,” JHEP 1403, 014 (2014)

[arXiv:1310.3727 [hep-th]].

6. K. Hajian, A. Seraj, “Symplectic structure of extremal black holes”, Proceedings

of the 2nd Karl Schwarzschild Meeting on Gravitational Physics, 2015, To appear

Dedicated to

My wife

for her patience and encouragement

and to my little daughter

for joining our family in the last 3 months of this project

Acknowledgements

The work presented in this thesis was completed in the Physics department of Institute

for research in fundamental sciences (IPM) during the last three years. I am extremely

grateful to all who helped me ﬁnish this work and apologize anyone I have forgot to

mention below.

I want to specially thank Prof. M. M. Sheikh Jabbari. He was an excellent teacher,

an excellent supervisor, and an excellent collaborator. I can never forget our extended

discussions in his oﬃce during which I learned how to think and research in physical

problems. He was also supportive in many scientiﬁc activities I had during these years.

I also appreciate other professors in the department specially Y. Farzan and A. Naji for

many things I learned in their lectures.

I am grateful to everyone who made IPM a pleasant place for scientiﬁc activities. I

specially thank N. Pilehroudi, M. Babanzadeh, S. Jam, J. Aliabadi, H. Zarei and Ms

Bagheri for making the physics department a lovely place.

I also thank all past and current PhD students and Postdocs at IPM including:

K. Hajian, A. Mollabashi, R. Mohammadi, A. A. Abolhassani, M.H. Vahidinia, M.

Noorbala, H. Afshar, H. Ebrahim, R. Fareghbal, M. Ali-Akbari, P. Bakhti, S. Sadeghian,

A. Maleknejad. and B. Khavari. We had many useful discussions and spent beautiful

moments together. Thanks also to the new students R. Javadinejad, E. Esmaili, H.R.

Safari, J. Ebadi and M. Rajaee.

During our scientiﬁc projects, I enjoyed many discussions with Kamal Hajian. Thanks

to him, and his novel ideas and intuitions. I am also grateful to Hamid Afshar for great

discussions we had in the course of writing this thesis.

I spent 6 months at the “Physique Math´ematique des Interactions Fondamentales”

in “Universit`e Libre de Bruxelles” between Feb. to Aug. 2015. I am specially grateful

ix

Contents

1

to Geoﬀrey Comp`ere for many things I learned from him and for the very nice collab-

orations we had. I also thank all the friendly professors and students there, specially

Prof. G. Barnich, and graduate students B. Oblak, V. Lekeu, P. Mao and A. Ranjbar.

Special thanks go to M. F. Rogge for her great helps during my visit.

In the end, I really appreciate the unconditional love from my parents and my wife

and thank them for all their support and encouragement during the years.

Chapter 1

Introduction

1.1 Symmetries in physics

Symmetry has played a critical role in the development of modern physics. The notion

of symmetry appears in diﬀerent settings. Specially we would like to distinguish two

notions: I) symmetry of a theory, II) symmetry of a special solution.

A symmetry of a solution is a transformation which keeps the ﬁeld conﬁguration

of the solution intact.

In gravitational physics, these symmetries are usually called

isometries and are represented by Killing vectors.

The other notion of symmetry is attributed to a theory which is determined by

its action (or equivalently its ﬁeld equations) together with a set of initial/boundary

conditions. A symmetry in this sense is a transformation in ﬁelds that does not change

the action for all ﬁeld conﬁguration allowed by the initial/boundary conditions. Note

that such a symmetry transformation maps a solution of the theory to another solution.

A symmetry can be labeled by either a discrete or a continuous parameter (or set of

parameters). While the former can also lead to charges with discrete values (like parity,

time reversal, etc.) here we are interested in the latter. Continuous symmetries are best

described by Lie groups, a rigorous construction in mathematics.

Continuous symmetries of a theory can be either global or local. A local symmetry

is by deﬁnition a transformation in ﬁelds parametrized by one or more arbitrary func-

tions of spacetime, while global symmetries are speciﬁed by a set of parameters. For

example any ﬁeld theory in the context of Special Relativity has a global symmetry

2

1.1. Symmetries in physics

3

with Poincar´e algebra, wherein the parameters of transformation are rotation angles,

boost parameters, and displacement vectors. On the other hand, local symmetries ap-

pear in gauge theories like Electrodynamics with a U (1) internal symmetry, or General

Relativity which is invariant under local coordinate transformations (diﬀeomorphisms).

In this thesis we will be concerned with local symmetries of a theory as described

above. In a ﬁeld theory with local symmetries, ﬁeld equations determine solutions up

to an arbitrary local transformation. Since local symmetries involve arbitrary functions

of spacetime, the evolution of the system is not unique, and produces inﬁnitely many

solutions. This is because one can transform the solution using a local symmetry such

that although the initial state of the system is not altered, the future of the ﬁeld is

changed. However, according to the assumption of determinism in theories of physics,

we want physical theories to produce unique evolutions. The only way to circumvent

this problem is to assume that all solutions obtained by such symmetry transformations

are physically equivalent. Therefore solutions of a theory with local degrees of freedom

will fall into equivalence classes called gauge classes. Because of this, local symmetries

are called gauge symmetries, and the theory is called a gauge theory. Gauge symmetries

describe redundant degrees of freedom (gauge freedom) in the theory.

Another concept that is well known since the early stages of Newtonian mechanics

is the notion of “conservation laws” and “constants of motion”. Energy and momentum

are probably the most famous constants of motion that satisfy conservation laws. A

breakthrough of Emmy Noether was to make a direct link between symmetries and con-

servation laws. Noether’s ﬁrst and second theorems [1] relate symmetries to conserved

charges (constants of motion) and constrain the dynamical evolution of the theory under

consideration.

Noether’s ﬁrst theorem associates a conserved charge with any symmetry of the

theory. The main idea is that corresponding to any symmetry of the Lagrangian, there
exists a conserved currentJ µ which is conserved, i.e. ∂µJ µ = 0. The charge deﬁned

by an integration over volume(cid:82) dΣµJ µ is then conserved in time. On the other hand,

Noether’s second theorem applies when the theory possesses gauge symmetries. It puts

strong constraints on the form of ﬁeld equations known as Bianchi identities. Using

this, one can again deﬁne nontrivial charges for a class of gauge symmetries.

There is still a deeper link between symmetries and conserved charges coming from

the Hamiltonian formulation of mechanics. Within the Hamiltonian setup, one can show

that a charge generates a symmetry transformation through the Poisson bracket. More

precisely, a charge is the on-shell value of the generator of a symmetry (either global or

local). Energy is simply the on-shell value of the Hamiltonian, which is the generator

of time translation. We will explain these issues in detail in chapters 2 and 3. It should

be noted that gauge invariance must persist also at the quantum level.

1.2 Diﬀerent notions of conserved charges in Gravitational

physics

There exists an extensive literature on conservation laws and conserved charges in grav-

itational physics. (see [2] for a non-exhaustive review). A natural notion of conserved

charges appeared ﬁrst in the Hamiltonian formulation of general relativity by Arnowitt,

Deser and Misner [3] as the on-shell value of the Hamiltonian. In the same context,

Regge and Teitelboim stressed the role of surface terms in order to make the Hamil-

tonian diﬀerentiable which leads to a unique deﬁnition of charges corresponding to an

asymptotic symmetry. Using this method, Brown and Henneaux investigated the Pois-

son bracket of conserved charges corresponding to asymptotic symmetries and showed

the possibility of a central extension [4, 5]. Applying this to AdS3 led to the appearance

of two Virasoro algebras which can be considered as a ﬁrst evidence for the celebrated

AdS/CFT correspondence.

Later, attempts were made to give a phase space formulation of gravity, without

breaking the covariance of GR, which was essential in Hamiltonian approach. This

was achieved [6, 7] by focusing on the symplectic geometry of Hamiltonian mechanics,

called the covariant phase space. The formulation was later implemented [8, 9, 10, 11]

to study spacetimes with a boundary and led to a robust proof of the ﬁrst law of black

hole mechanics valid for any diﬀeomorphism invariant theory of gravity (see also [12] for

a recent discussion). A covariant version of previous results in Hamiltonian approach

was obtained, and simple formulae for conserved charges, their algebra and the central

extension were given in this approach [13, 14, 15].

In another line of thought, employing the Hamilton Jacobi analysis of action func-

tional, Brown and York introduced the quasilocal charges [16, 17]. This approach gives

1.3. The mystery of black hole entropy and approaches

5

a natural deﬁnition of the quasi local stress tensor of gravity which is further identiﬁed

with the stress tensor of the dual ﬁeld theory in the context of AdS/CFT [18] and

complete consistency was shown.

In a more advanced mathematical point of view, again a completely covariant ap-

proach to conserved charges and asymptotic symmetries was constructed using a vari-

ational bicomplex. The main idea is that asymptotic symmetries correspond to coho-

mology groups of the variational bicomplex pulled back to the surface deﬁned by the

equations of motion [19]. Conservation laws and central extensions were investigated

using BRST techniques [20] and further developed in [21, 22, 23].

Other deﬁnitions for conserved charges still exist. Ashtekar et al. [24, 25] used the

electric part of the Weyl tensor to deﬁne charges in asymptotic AdS spacetimes. Abott

and Deser used the linearized ﬁeld equations and symmetries of the background ﬁeld to

deﬁne charges for the linear theory [26] which can be also used in other gauge theories

[26].

It should be noticed that while there are diﬀerent approaches to the concept of con-

served charges in gravity, they can be linked at least in speciﬁc contexts. For example

an introduction and comparison between diﬀerent notions of charges in AdS is given in

[14], and [27] gives a comparison between covariant phase space methods and countert-

erm methods. Also a comparison of the black hole entropy in covariant phase space and

other methods is given in [10].

1.3 The mystery of black hole entropy and approaches

Singularities are generic endpoints of the evolution of matter through gravitational

interactions. This is due to the universal attractive nature of gravity and is guaranteed

by various singularity theorems [28] (see also [29] and references therein). On the other

hand, the singularity is covered by a hypersurface called the horizon due to the Penrose

“weak cosmic censorship conjecture”, which can be proved by reasonable assumptions

(see [30] for a review). A spacetime containing an “event horizon” that prevents a

part of spacetime to be in causal contact with the asymptotic region, is called a black

hole. Event horizons usually hide a type of singularity (curvature singularity or conical

singularity appearing e.g. in BTZ black holes) from the outside observer. The formation

of a black hole (at least classically) kills all the information about the initial collapsing

matter. As a result, the geometry of black holes are uniquely determined by a few

parameters like mass, angular momenta, and possibly electric/magnetic charges. This

fact is stated in black hole No hair theorems (see [31] for a review). Laws of black

hole mechanics [32] essentially describe the properties of these few parameters and their

relations.

However, this is not the end of the story. Hawking’s study of a quantum ﬁeld

over a black hole geometry revealed that black holes are radiating with a temperature

proportional to their surface gravity. On the other hand, Bekenstein argued that since

the horizon divides spacetime into two parts, requiring laws of thermodynamics forces

an observer living in the outside to attribute an entropy SBH to the black hole, and

revise the second law of thermodynamics as follows [33]

SBH + Smatter is always increasing.

Upon identifying the entropy of black hole with a quarter of the area of its horizon

κ
2π
(κ being the surface gravity of horizon) laws of black hole mechanics exactly coincide

, and its temperature with the Hawking temperature TH =

section, i.e. SBH =

A
4G

,

with laws of thermodynamics. These and other pieces of evidence indicate that black

holes can be considered as thermodynamic systems having temperature, entropy and

other thermodynamic quantities like energy and chemical potentials.

Boltzman’s hypothesis was that thermodynamics originates from the statistical me-

chanical description of an underlying theory. Based on this assumption and that a gas is

built from a large number of pointlike objects (atoms), he succeeded in giving a micro-

scopic description of thermodynamics of a system of gas contained in a box, especially

its entropy. As we mentioned, black holes express thermodynamic behaviors. Therefore

one is tempted to postulate the existence of an underlying theory and try to explain

these thermodynamic properties through the statistical properties of that theory. This

is the aim of an active research in black hole physics and quantum gravity.

Within the context of string theory, Strominger and Vafa used a counting of cer-

tain “BPS states” to give a microscopic derivation of the entropy of speciﬁc extremal

supersymmetric black holes in ﬁve dimensions. This approach was later generalized to

include supersymmetric black holes with angular momentum [34] and supersymmetric

1.3. The mystery of black hole entropy and approaches

7

black holes in four dimensions [35]. In these computations, supersymmetry was a cru-

cial assumption since it allowed them to perform a weak coupling string calculation to

deduce the entropy of the semi-classical black holes which exist in the strong coupling

regime. However interesting black hole solutions like Kerr black hole which is most sim-

ilar to astrophysical black holes are not supersymmetric solutions. On the other hand,

the universality of the area law, and the fact that entropy is related to the horizon, which

involves low energy eﬀects, suggest that the statistical derivation of black hole entropy

should be independent of the details of the microscopic (planck scale) physics. This is

a familiar result. The entropy of a gas in a box is not sensitive to the nature of the un-

derlying atoms. In modern ﬁeld theoretic language, entropy is an IR eﬀect independent

of UV details. A step in this direction was taken in [36] by Strominger. His argument

was based on the work of Brown and Henneaux [5], that any theory of quantum gravity

in AdS3 must be a two dimensional CFT with prescribed central charge. Accordingly

for any black hole whose near horizon geometry is locally AdS3, one can use Cardy

formula for computing the asymptotic growth of states. Upon explicit evaluation for a

non extremal BTZ black hole, he showed that the result coincides with the black hole

entropy.

A logical outcome of the Hamiltonian or the covariant phase space approach to

gravity is the appearance of “boundary gravitons”. These are essentially new degrees of

freedom that appear when the spacetime has a boundary. For an observer living outside

a black hole, horizon can be considered as a boundary, and therefore the appearance

of surface gravitons can be expected. A proposal put forward by Carlip and also in-

dependently in [37] is that the entropy of black hole can originate from these surface

degrees of freedom. If this is the case, then one can reconcile between the uniqueness

theorems mentioned above and the “large number of states” for the black hole suggested

A
4G

by SBH =

. This is simply because surface degrees of freedom are produced by in-

ﬁnitesimal coordinate transformations in the bulk and therefore are neglected by black

hole uniqueness theorems. For the case of BTZ black hole in 3 dimensions, this proposal

can be clearly formulated [38, 39]. Einstein gravity in 3 dimensions can be written as a

Chern Simons theory in vielbein formulation [40]. It is also known [41, 42] that Chern-

Simons theory on a manifold with boundary induces a dynamical Wess-Zumino-Witten

(WZW) theory on the boundary. Carlip argued that the relevant boundary for the black

hole entropy (as seen by an outside observer) is the horizon itself. By using a speciﬁc

fall oﬀ condition on the horizon, he determined the precise form of WZW theory on the

horizon and counted the number of descendants of the “vacuum state” and obtained

the correct black hole entropy.

1.4 Outline; What is new in this thesis?

The contents of the rest of this thesis fall into two parts. The ﬁrst part including

chapters 2,3.

illustrate the theoretical framework of the thesis. Chapter 2 is a review

of the well established Hamiltonian formulation of gauge theories, with an emphasis

on conserved charges, generators of gauge symmetries and the emergence of boundary

degrees of freedom in open spaces. Chapter 3 introduces the covariant phase space

formulation of gauge theories. Although the contents of this chapter already exist in

the literature, they are distributed in diﬀerent references. Here we have tried to give

a coherent picture of the construction and its implications. For example, [6] which

originally introduced the covariant phase space of gauge theories, ignored all boundary

terms due to a restrictive assumption on the boundary conditions. Also later references

focus more on the analysis of conserved charges without paying enough attention to the

symplectic structure of the phase space. We hope that this chapter is a good starter for

the interested reader. We will again stress the appearance of surface degrees of freedom

in this setup.

The second part of the thesis contains essentially the application of the above men-

tioned construction in gravitational physics, with the motivation of attacking the prob-

lem of microscopic description of black hole entropy. These chapters include the new

results of this thesis. In chapter 4, we introduce the notion of asymptotic AdS geom-

etry. We then show that accompanied by a suitable symplectic structure, the set of

asymptotic AdS3 geometries form a phase space. Then we discuss the symplectic sym-

metries of this phase space. Speciﬁcally, we show that the asymptotic symmetries of

Brown-Henneaux can be fully extended into the bulk and thereby become symplectic

symmetries of the phase space. Accordingly, the charges can be computed at any closed

surface in the bulk.

In chapter 5, we will introduce the near horizon geometry of extremal black holes

1.4. Outline; What is new in this thesis?

9

(NHEG). These are geometries that contain the information about thermodynamics of

extremal black holes, specially their entropy. We will exhibit interesting features about

these geometries, e.g.

that they possess Killing vectors generating bifurcate Killing

horizons, whose conserved charge is the entropy of the original extremal black hole.

Moreover, we show that NHEG’s satisfy laws similar to that of black holes. Then we

review the Kerr/CFT proposal, its achievements and shortcomings, especially the fact

that there is no linear dynamics allowed over these geometries.

In chapter 6, having the results of previous chapter in mind, we build the “NHEG

phase space” that overcomes many problems appeared in Kerr/CFT. The construction

works for arbitrary dimensions. We obtain a novel symmetry algebra for the phase

space that reduces to Virasoro algebra in four dimensions. We show that the entropy

appears as the central charge of the algebra. We also obtain interesting results related

to the holographic description. The results here can open a way to the microscopic

description of extremal black hole entropy in four and higher dimensions. We conclude

the thesis by a “Summary and outlook” section. Also some technical computations in

diﬀerent sections are gathered in an appendix.

Chapter 2

Hamiltonian formulation of gauge

theories and gravity

2.1

Introduction

The program of constructing the Hamiltonian formulation of constrained systems and

gauge theories was started by Paul Dirac and P. Bergmann in 50s [?, 43] in order to

obtain a systematic way to quantize gauge theories. The Hamiltonian form of Einstein

gravity was described by Dirac [44, 45] and later by Arnowitt, Deser and Misner [3].

Since the deﬁnition of canonical momenta forced a special choice of time direction, they

used the so called 3+1 decomposition of spacetime which was developed earlier, for

other reasons, e.g. to prove the unique evolution of GR (The Cauchy problem)[46].

Since the Hamiltonian formulation is a ﬁrst order formulation, it was later used exten-

sively in the context of numerical relativity (see [47] for a review). On the theoretical

side, Hamiltonian formulation gives deep insights in the study of gauge theories.

It

turns out that gauge symmetries of the action are related to ﬁrst class constraints in

the phase space. In compact spacetimes, it turns out that the Hamiltonian is a combi-

nation of constraints and therefore weakly vanishing. More interestingly, for spacetimes

with boundaries, although the bulk term is vanishing on shell, there exists a necessary

boundary term that makes the Hamiltonian a nonvanishing variable over the phase

space. This raises the notion of boundary degrees of freedom that we will discuss in

detail later in this chapter. The dynamics of surface degrees of freedom can be given by

10

2.2. Constrained Hamiltonian dynamics

11

a theory in lower dimensions. This resembles (and is indeed an example of) the notion

of holography in gravity.

The organization of this chapter is as follows. We ﬁrst describe the Hamiltonian

formulation of constrained systems in section 2.2. We then present the Hamiltonian

formulation of ﬁeld theories with local (gauge) symmetries in section 2.3 and stress

the relation between local symmetries and constraints. We study the role of spacetime

boundary and show that the existence of boundary for the spacetime, leads to the

emergence of novel and substantial features. In section 2.5, we specialize to the case of

General Relativity as a gauge theory and discuss the notion of asymptotic symmetries.

This chapter closely follows references [48, 49, 50].

2.2 Constrained Hamiltonian dynamics

In this section we analyze the Hamiltonian mechanics of systems in the presence of con-

straints. These systems are also called singular because of the appearance of arbitrary

functions of time in the evolution of the system. This means that the state of the system

is not uniquely speciﬁed given the initial conditions. We will show that gauge theories

which are of great interest in physics correspond to constrained Hamiltonian systems.

Gauge freedom in fundamental ﬁelds of a gauge theory then corresponds to the arbi-

trary functions appearing in the Hamiltonian description. These arbitrary functions in

the evolution of fundamental variables are safe in the sense that observables which are

the physically important quantities are gauge invariant and hence evolve uniquely in

time.

2.2.1 Particle dynamics

Lets start with a Lagrangian L(qi, ˙qi) of a ﬁnite number of variables qi and velocities

˙qi. The state of the system is determined at each instant of time by the set (qi, ˙qi).

In order to transform to the Hamiltonian description, we assume that the state of the
system is given by a conﬁguration in the phase space Γ spanned by the set (qi, pi) where
the conjugate momenta pi replace the velocities ˙qi. The time evolution is then given
through the action principle but this time the Lagrangian is considered as a function of
(qi, pi). To bring the Lagrangian into this form, we use the usual deﬁnition for conjugate

momenta

pi =

∂L
∂ ˙qi

,

i = 1,··· N .

(2.1)

If the above equations can be inverted to give ˙qi = ˙qi(qi, pk), then the equations of
motion can be obtained by varying the action in terms of qi, pi leading to the equations
˙qi = ∂H/∂pi and ˙pi = ∂H/∂qi in which the Hamiltonian function H(qi, pi) is deﬁned as
the Legendre transform of the Lagrangian

H = pi ˙qi − L(qi, ˙qi) .

(2.2)

We regarded the Hamiltonian as a function of corrdinates qi and the conjugate momenta
pi. To justify this, we take a variation of (2.2) with respect to qi, ˙qi

δH = δpi ˙qi + piδ ˙qi −
δqi .

= δpi ˙qi −

∂L
∂qi

∂L
∂qi

δqi −

∂L
∂ ˙qi

δ ˙qi

(2.3)

(2.4)

As we see, the dependence on δ ˙qi has appeared only through δpi. Therefore we can
consider the Hamiltonian as a function of (qi, pi). This is the essence of Legendre
transformation. By expanding the l.h.s of (2.3) with respect to (δqi, δpi) we ﬁnd

(cid:0) ∂H

∂qi

(cid:1)δqi +(cid:0) ∂H

∂pi − ˙qi(cid:1)δpi = 0 .

+

∂L
∂qi

(2.5)

If the variations δpi, δqi are all independent (this is not the case when there are con-
straints as we will explain below), then each term should vanish separately which

leads to the Hamiltonian equations of motion after using the Euler Lagrange equations
∂L
∂qi

∂L
∂ ˙qi

= ˙pi.

d
dt

=

Constraints

Equation (2.1) is invertible if there is a one to one correspondence between the state
space (qi, ˙qi) and the phase space (qi, pi). This happens if an inﬁnitesimal variation of
˙qi induces an inﬁnitesimal nonvanishing variation in the conjugate momenta. Taking a

variaiton of (2.1) with respect to ˙qi we have

dpi =

∂2L
∂ ˙qi∂ ˙qj

d ˙qj .

(2.6)

2.2. Constrained Hamiltonian dynamics

13

∂2L
∂ ˙qi∂ ˙qj

If the Hessian matrix J ≡
there exist an inﬁnitesimal variation d ˙qi that corresponds to no variation in the phase
space. Therefore if detJ = 0 then the set of states qi, ˙qi map to a submanifold Γ1 of
the phase space. This submanifold can be represented by a set of constraints

is degenerate (i.e. its determinant is vanishing) then

φm(qi, pi) = 0,

m = 1··· M

(2.7)

on the phase space. In the presence of constraints, the map (2.1) does not deﬁne an

invertible map. The price of making the Legendre transformation invertible, is to add

new variables to the phase space as we explain below. The point is that in the presence

of constraints, (2.5) is not valid for all variations, but only for those tangent to the

constraint submanifold Γ1, i.e. those preserving the constraints. Now we need the

following theorem (see chapter 1 of [48] for proof),

Theorem 1. If λiδqi + µiδpi = 0 for arbitrary variations δqi, δpi tangent to the con-
straint surface (2.7), then

λi = um ∂φm
∂qi
µi = um ∂φm
∂pi

,

(2.8)

(2.9)

where um are arbitrary funcitons on the phase space.

According to the above theorem, (2.5) in the presence of constraints (2.7) implies the

following relations

˙qi =

∂L
∂qi

−

=

∂H

∂pi + um ∂φm
∂pi
+ um ∂φm
∂qi

∂H
∂qi

.

(2.10)

(2.11)

The ﬁrst equation is particularly important since it implies that if we extend Γ1 by
the new coordinates ui, then one can invert the Legendre map to obtain ˙qi in terms of
pi (constrained by φm = 0) and the new variables um. The above equations together
with the Euler Lagrange equations imply the Hamiltonian equations in the presence of

constraints

˙qi =

∂H

∂pi + um ∂φm
∂pi
+ um ∂φm
∂qi

∂H
∂qi

− ˙pi =
φm(qi, pi) = 0 .
(cid:90)

These equations can be obtained through the following action

S =

dt(pi ˙qi − L − umφm) ,

(2.12)

(2.13)

(2.14)

(2.15)

in which um appear naturally as a set of Lagrange multipliers. As we see, the equations
of motion involve arbitrary functions um. These equations can be written in an elegant

way using the Poisson bracket. The Poisson bracket between two functions on the phase

space is deﬁned as

{f, g} =

∂f
∂qi

∂g
∂pi −

∂f
∂qi

∂g
∂pi .

(2.16)

Using the Poisson bracket, the equations of motion can be written in the compact form

˙f = {f, H} + um{f, φm} ,

(2.17)

where f can be qi or pi or any function of them. However we can still simplify by
introducing the total Hamiltonian HT

Using this, we have

HT = H + umφm .

˙f = {f, HT} .

(2.18)

(2.19)

Note that there is a term {f, um}φm that we neglected because it is multiplied by
constraints and vanish on shell.

Primary and secondary constraints

The constraints appearing in the total Hamiltonian are called primary constraints.

These are the constraints resulting from (2.1). The theory is consistent if the primary

constraints are preserved in time. That is

˙φn = {φn, H} + um{φn, φm} ≈ 0 .

(2.20)

2.2. Constrained Hamiltonian dynamics

15

These equations can lead to further constraints on the phase space. These are called

secondary constraints which involve making use of equations of motion. Note that

secondary constraints should also satisfy (2.20) that can lead to further secondary con-

straints. This procedure should end somewhere and we remain with a set of constraints

denoted by φi where i runs over all primary and secondary constraitns. Since the num-

ber of equations in (2.20) (labeled by n) is equal to the number of all constraints, which

is more than the number of unknown secondary constraints, these equations also re-
strict the form of arbitrary functions um. Assuming that we have the complete set of

constraints at hand, we can view (2.20) as a set of equations for the unknown functions
um. This is an inhomogeneous equation and therefore the solution takes the form

um = U m + vaV m
a ,

(2.21)

where U m is a special solution to the inhomogeneous equation, and V m
a are independent
solutions to the homogeneous equation φn, φmum ≈ 0 and va are arbitrary functions.
Accordingly the total Hamiltonian can be written as

HT = H

(cid:48)

+ va(t)φa,

(cid:48)

H

= H + U mφm

φa = V m

a φm

and the time evolution is given by

(cid:48)

˙f = {f, H

} + va(t){f, φa} .

(2.22)

(2.23)

(2.24)

As we see, the dynamical equations still involve arbitrary functions of time and the

evolution of canonical variables is not unique.

First class and second class constraints

A function f is called ﬁrst class (FC) if its Poisson bracket with all the constraints

weakly vanish

It can be shown that this is equivalent to

{f, φi} ≈ 0 .

{f, φi} = Cijφj .

(2.25)

(2.26)

A function which is not ﬁrst class is called second class. Therefore we can separate the

constraints into ﬁrst class and second class. According to (2.26), the set of ﬁrst class

constraints form a closed algebra

{φI , φj} = f k

ij φk .

(2.27)

On the contrary, for a second class constraint, there exists at least one constraint such

that their Poisson bracket is not a constraint anymore. Since ﬁrst class constraints

form a closed algebra, they are best suited to represent gauge symmetries of a theory,

since gauge symmetries also form an algebra. In the following, we will show that this

is indeed the case. Any gauge symmetry maps to a ﬁrst class constraint in the phase

space.

As we saw, the Hamiltonian involves arbitrary functions of time, va(t) that aﬀect

the time evolution of functions. We want to see how the evolution of a function f is
aﬀected by a gauge transformation va → va + δva. Using (2.24) once with va and once
with va + δva and subtracting, we ﬁnd

δ ˙f = δva{f, φa} .

(2.28)

This indicates that the constraint φa generates the gauge transformation va → va + δva.
Note that H(cid:48) and φa are independent solutions to the equation (2.20), and therefore
they weakly commute with all constraints. This especially implies that φa are ﬁrst class
constraints. Therefore we conclude that gauge transformations are generated by ﬁrst

class constraints.

Dirac bracket and second class constraints

Consider the matrix ∆mn = {χm, χn} where χm denotes second class constraints. If ∆
is degenerate, there exist a vector λn such that ∆mnλn = 0. Therefore

{χm, χn}λn = {χm, λnχn} = 0 ,

(2.29)

which means that there exists a constrain χ = λnχn that commutes with all second
class constraints. Moreover χ commutes with all FC constraints by deﬁnition. But this

is a contradiction since a constraint that commutes with all constraints is a ﬁrst class

2.3. Hamiltonian dynamics of ﬁeld theories

17

constraint. Therefore we conclude that ∆ is nondegenerate and invertible. Denoting

the inverse matrix by upper indices, the Dirac bracket is then deﬁned as

{f, g}DB = {f, g} − {f, χm}∆mn{χn, g} .

(2.30)

It can be checked that this new bracket has all the properties of a bracket. In addition,

the Dirac bracket of a second class constraint with any function is vanishing, while the

Dirac bracket of a ﬁrst class function with any other function is equal to their Poisson

bracket on shell. Therefore by replacing Poisson bracket with Dirac bracket, the second

class constraints are automatically satisﬁed (i.e. we can forget about them), while ﬁrst

class constraints still generate gauge transformations.

2.3 Hamiltonian dynamics of ﬁeld theories

A ﬁeld theory involves a continuous number of degrees of freedom. Therefore the for-

malism developed in previous section should be extended. This can be done formally

by the following replacements

(cid:90)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

→

ddx,

i

i

qi → Φi(x),

Φi(x) is called a ﬁeld over spacetime. The Lagrangian is given by L =(cid:82)

Σ ddxL, where
Σ is the spacelike surface of constant time. Then the momentum density is deﬁned as
πi(x) =

and canonical Hamiltonian by

δj
i → δj

i δ(x − y).

(2.31)

∂
∂qi →

δ

,

δΦi(x)

∂L
∂ ˙Φi(x)

(cid:90)

H =

Σ H,

H = πi(x) ˙Φi(x) − L(x) .

(2.32)

Note that “time” is singled out from scratch, in the deﬁnition of Lagrangian, conjugate

momenta, etc.

2.3.1 Gauge symmetries, constraints, and generators

The unphysical transformations of dynamical variables are referred to as gauge trans-

formations or gauge symmetries. Usually, by gauge symmetry, we mean local gauge

symmetries, i.e. the parameters of the transformations are arbitrary local functions

over spacetime. However, we should declare what is meant by unphysical. The answer

is that unphysical transformations are those not aﬀecting the observables. Again it is

not clear what is meant by an observable. Observables are those quantities that can

be measured in an experiment. Indeed, the set of observables should be speciﬁed as an

input of the theory. For example in Electromagnetism, we postulate that observables
are those quantities that can aﬀect the acceleration of test charges, i.e. electric ﬁeld (cid:126)E
and magnetic ﬁeld (cid:126)B, or equivalently Fµν. Actually it turns out that there are more

observables which are nonlocal. The integral (cid:72) d(cid:96) · (cid:126)A over a closed curve is also an

observable that can be measured e.g. in the Aharanov-Bohm eﬀect. This is an example

of Wilson loops in ﬁeld theory. However, in the Hamiltonian formulation, we have a

more handy deﬁnition of gauge transformations. Remember that in the Hamiltonian

formulation of constrained systems, the time evolution of canonical quantities involve
arbitrary functions of time va(t) (see equation (2.24)). This makes the dynamics of the

system nondeterministic. Therefore in order to cure this problem, we postulate that
observables are those quantities that are not aﬀected by changing va(t). Accordingly,

we deﬁne a gauge symmetry as follows

Deﬁnition 2.1. A gauge symmetry is a local transformation in canonical variables
(δqi, δpi), that map a solution to the Hamiltonian equation (2.24) with the parameters
va to a solution of the same equation with another set of parameters va + δva.

A variation in parameters va is transferred to the canonical variables through the
equations of motion. Therefore corresponding to each parameter va there exists a local
gauge symmetry. Since the number of arbitrary parameters va is equal to the number of

primary ﬁrst class constraints, we see that the number of gauge degrees of freedom is at

least equal to the number of ﬁrst class primary constraints. However, it turns out that

secondary ﬁrst class constraints can also generate a gauge symmetry. Dirac conjecture

was that there is a correspondence between gauge symmetries and ﬁrst class constraints

in phase space. Although this is not true in general, it can be proved with additional

assumptions that are satisﬁed in physically interesting theories [48].

2.3. Hamiltonian dynamics of ﬁeld theories

19

2.3.2 Local symmetries and constraints

Now we show that any gauge symmetry is generated by a combination of constraints.

That is

δf = {f, G} ,

(2.33)

where G is called the generator of the gauge symmetry (δqi, δpi). A systematic way
to construct the generator of all gauge symmetries of the equations of motion from ﬁrst

class constraints was given by Castellani [51]. We state the result without proof here.

(see [51, 49] for a proof.)

Take any primary ﬁrst class constraint G0. Then deﬁne G1 such that

G1 + {G0, HT} = P F C ,

(2.34)

where P F C means a combination of primary ﬁrst class constraints. Then deﬁne G2
such that G2 + {G1, HT} = P F C. We should continue this procedure until we ﬁnd Gk
such that

{Gk, HT} = P F C .

(2.35)

Then the following combination will be the generator of a gauge transformation that

can be easily obtained by (2.33)

where (n) = dn/dtn. In the case of a ﬁeld theory,  = (t, xµ) and the generator of the

gauge transformation is

Gk−1 +  Gk ,

(2.36)

(cid:48)
G = (k)G0 + ··· + 
(cid:90)

G =

ddxG ,

(2.37)

where G is given by (2.36).

Moreover, it should be noted that in the case of a ﬁeld theory with a boundary, there

is in principle a set of boundary conditions over the dynamical ﬁelds. Therefore the
symmetry transformation δΦ = {Φ, G} should also respect the boundary conditions.
This restricts the set of allowed parameters (xµ). We will discuss this in more detail

in the discussion of asymptotic symmetries in section (2.5.1).

2.3.3 Example: Maxwell theory

The Lagrangian of Maxwell theory is given by

L = −

1
4

FµνF µν,

Fµν = ∂µAν − ∂νAµ

(2.38)

with the dynamical ﬁelds Aµ. To employ the Hamiltonian picture, we have to determine

the conjugate momenta

πµ =

∂L
∂ ˙Aµ

= F0µ .

Due to the antisymmetry of Fµν, the conjugate momentum π0 is a constraint

π0 = 0 .

(2.39)

(2.40)

The canonical Hamiltonian after imposing the primary constraint π0 = 0 and deﬁning
Aµ = (V, (cid:126)A) is

H = (cid:126)π · (cid:126)A − L

=

=

1
2
1
2

((cid:126)π2 + (cid:126)B2) − (cid:126)π · ∇V
((cid:126)π2 + (cid:126)B2) + V (cid:126)∇ · (cid:126)π − ∇ · (V (cid:126)π) ,
(cid:90)

(cid:16) 1

(cid:17)

((cid:126)π2 + (cid:126)B2) + V (cid:126)∇ · (cid:126)π

2

where (cid:126)B = (cid:126)∇ × (cid:126)A. The last term is a total derivative and gives no contribution to the
integral (2.32) with the usual assumptions on electromagnetic ﬁelds. Therefore

Hc =

dnx

.

(2.42)

The phase space is now given by the (cid:126)A, its conjugate (cid:126)π = − (cid:126)E together with the Lagrange
multiplier V . The total Hamiltonian is

(cid:90)

HT = Hc +

Σ

The consistency condition (2.20) requires

dnx u π0 .

˙π0 = {π0, HT} = (cid:126)∇ · (cid:126)π = 0

(2.41)

(2.43)

(2.44)

2.3. Hamiltonian dynamics of ﬁeld theories

and the Hamiltonian equations (2.12) read

˙(cid:126)A = −(cid:126)π − (cid:126)∇V = − (cid:126)E − (cid:126)∇V
˙(cid:126)π =

˙(cid:126)E = −(cid:126)∇ × (cid:126)B .

21

(2.45)

(2.46)

We see that one of the Maxwell equations appears as a constraint equation while others

are dynamical equations. Now let us study the generator of gauge symmetries according

to the Castellani construction. Since here we have one primary ﬁrst class constraint
φ1 = π0 and a secondary constraint φ2 = ∇ · (cid:126)π, the generator takes the form

G = ˙ G0 +  G1 .

(2.47)

Since G0 should be primary ﬁrst class constraint, G0 = π0. Then G1 should satisfy

According to (2.43)

G1 + {G0, HT} = P F C .

{G0, HT} = {π0, HT} = ∇ · (cid:126)π = φ2

(2.48)

(2.49)

since {φ2, HT} = 0, the chain stops by choosing G1 = −∇ · (cid:126)π. Therefore the generator
is

(cid:90)

G =

The gauge symmetry generated by G is

δAµ(x) = {Aµ(x), G} =

=

=

dnx(cid:0) ˙ π0 − ∇ · (cid:126)π(cid:1) .
(cid:90)
(cid:90)
(cid:90)

µ δ(x − x

dnx

dnx

(cid:48)(cid:0) ˙{Aµ, π0} − {Aµ,∇ · (cid:126)π}
(cid:48)(cid:0) ˙ δ 0
(cid:1)

(cid:1)
) + ∂i{Aµ, πi}
µ + ∂i δ i
µ

)(cid:0) ˙ δ 0

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

dnx

δ(x − x

(cid:48)

(2.50)

(cid:1)

= ∂µ(x) .

(2.51)

In the second line we have also used an integration by part for the last term. The total

derivative term drops using the usual boundary conditions. This is the well known

gauge symmetry of electrodynamics.

2.4 Open spacetimes and conserved charges

The Hamiltonian formalism relies on the action principle, i.e. that the action should be

stationary over a solution

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

δ

dt

This implies that the Hamiltonian should be a diﬀerentiable functional. That is

(cid:90)

δH =

ddx(πi ˙Φi − H) ≈ 0 .
(cid:90)

(cid:16) δH

ddx

δH
δψ

δψ =

ddx

δΦi +

δΦi

δπi δπi(cid:17)

δH

(2.52)

,

(2.53)

where ψ denotes the collection (Φi, πi) of all canonical ﬁelds and their conjugate mo-
menta. However, if one starts with the canonical Hamiltonian, it can be checked that

the variation δHc is not of the form (2.53), but also includes a boundary integral. This

problem was investigated by Regge and Teitelboim [52]. They argued that for the gen-

erator of any gauge symmetry, (including the Hamiltonian as the generator of time

translation) one has to add a suitable boundary term such that the improved generator

become diﬀerentiable.

Let us start with the generator of a gauge symmetry (2.37) as constructed in (2.3.2)

(2.54)

(cid:90)

G =

Σ

ddxG[ψ] .
(cid:73)

The variation δG under variations allowed by the boundary conditions will generally

(cid:90)

take the form

δG =

Now try to ﬁnd boundary term Q[ψ] =(cid:72)
(cid:73)

ddx

Σ

δG
δψ

δψ +

B[, δψ, ψ] .

∂Σ

(2.55)

∂Σ Q[ψ] such that

δQ = −

B[, δψ, ψ] .

(2.56)

Then the improved generator ˜G is deﬁned as

˜G = G + Q .

(2.57)

By construction, ˜G is diﬀerentiable under allowed variations, and generates the gauge
symmetry with the parameter . This is because the Poisson bracket is a local operator

2.4. Open spacetimes and conserved charges

23

and adding boundary terms does not alter the role of G as the generator of a gauge

symmetry.

The possibility of ﬁnding Q with the property (2.56) relies on the existence of

consistent boundary conditions. A good boundary condition should be deﬁned such that

the generator of all allowed gauge transformations be diﬀerentiable and its corresponding

charge be zero or ﬁnite.

However, the improved generator is not vanishing on-shell anymore.

Its on-shell

value gives the charge Q corresponding to the gauge parameter . Especially the

Hamiltonian will be

H = Hc + Q∂t ,

(2.58)

and hence the on-shell value of Hamiltonian is equal to the energy of the gauge system.
Below we list important properties of G and ˜G

The generator G is a combination of constraints. However, it is not a ﬁrst class

functional anymore. This is because the Poisson bracket of two such generators

(cid:73)

{G1, G2} = δ2G1 = G3 +

B[1, δ2ψ, ψ] ,

(2.59)

does not close the algebra. The existence of boundary for the spacetime, turns the

generators from ﬁrst class constraints into second class constraints.

Thinking in terms of the improved generator ˜G, it was shown [4] that their algebra
closes (up to a central extension [5]) but it should be noted that the improved generators

are not pure constraints anymore. They involve boundary terms that are varying over

the phase space.

The subset of local symmetry transformations that correspond to generators with

nontrivial charges form an algebra. They are called the asymptotic symmetries of the

system. The algebra of improved generators of asymptotic symmetries is a central ex-

tension of the Lie algebra of these local symmetry transformations. The important point

is that ﬁeld conﬁgurations obtained by acting these local symmetry transformations on

a given ﬁeld conﬁguration, can be labeled by the charges associated to asymptotic sym-

metries. Therefore if we consider the charges as observables, then these “diﬀeomorphic”

conﬁgurations are distinct physical states of the system. These facts are stated in the

following proposition.

Proposition 1. In the presence of boundaries for the spacetime, some of the gauge

symmetries that correspond to nontrivial charges are not gauge transformations any-

more. They produce new states of the system. We call these novel states, “boundary

degrees of freedom” (boundary gravitons in GR, or boundary photons in EM, etc.).

We will see examples of these states in chapters (4) and (6). Other examples in ﬂat

holography or in other theories of gravity can be found in e.g. [53, 54, 55].

2.5 Hamiltonian formulation of General Relativity

In order to deﬁne canonical momenta, we need to foliate the spacetime into a family of

spacelike hypersurfaces, each of which representing an instant of time. This is usually

called the 3+1 decomposition (in four dimensional spacetime) and has a long history
dating back to the advent of general relativity. We ﬁrst need a “time function” t(xµ).
The hypersurfaces t = const determine the constant time surfaces. The function t(xµ)
should be such that the hypersurfaces be spacelike, i.e. nµ ∝ ∂µt be a future directed
timelike vector ﬁeld. On each t = const hypersurface, one can deﬁne an independent
coordinate system ya(xµ). However, in order to specify time evolutions of the system,

one should relate these coordinate systems. That is, one should specify which point
does the ya = const determines at each time. In order to do this systematically, we

can deﬁne a timlike congruence of curves γ intersecting each constant time hypersurface

once. The parameter t can be used to parametrize the curves. We postulate that the

intersection of a speciﬁc curve with each constant time hypersurface determines the
same coordinate ya on Σt. Hence deﬁning a coordinate system on one hypersurface
induces a coordinate system on all hypersurfaces. The set (t, ya) can be considered as

a new coordinate system for the spacetime. The tangent vector to the curves is given
by tµ = dxµ

dt and we have

tµ∂µt =

dxµ
dt

dt
dxµ = 1 .

(2.60)

On the other hand, each hypersurface has a normal vector nµ as well as d vectors tangent
to each constant time hypersurface which we call ea, a = 1, 2,··· , d

(ea)µ =

∂xµ
∂ya .

(2.61)

2.5. Hamiltonian formulation of General Relativity

25

Note that the curves γ do not intersect Σt orthogonally, hence we may write

tµ = N nµ + N aeµ
a .

(2.62)

N, N a are called the lapse function and the shift vector respectively. Now we can
use the above construction to write the metric in the coordinate system (t, ya). Since
xµ = xµ(t, ya), we can write

dxµ =

dxµ
dt

dt +

= tµdt + eµ

dxµ
dya dya
a dya

= (N dt)na + (dya + N adt)eµ
a .

(2.63)

Now

ds2 = gµνdxµdxν

= (N dt)2n · n + (dya + N adt)(dyb + N bdt)ea · eb + 2N dt(dya + N adt)n · ea

(2.64)
where n · n = gµνnµnν and so on. However, by construction n · n = −1 and n · ea = 0,
therefore

ds2 = −N 2dt2 + hab(dya + N adt)(dyb + N bdt)
a eν
b is the induced metric on Σt. Using (2.65) one can show that

(2.65)

where hab = gµνeµ
√−g = N√h.

From action to Hamiltonian

We start with the Einstein Hilbert action in d + 1 dimensions accompanied by the

Gibbons-Hawking-York boundary term. The boundary term leads to a well deﬁned

variational principle for the case of Dirichlet boundary conditions δgµν = 0 on the
boundary1. The action is

16πGSG =

M

dd+1x√−g R + 2

∂M

ddy√h K

(2.66)

(cid:90)

(cid:73)

1See section 4.2 for the proper deﬁnition of Dirichlet boundary conditions for the case of AdS space-

time where the metric is degenerate on the boundary

where K is the trace of the extrinsic curvature Kµν of the boundary. In order to deﬁne
the Hamiltonian, we consider the ﬁelds N, N a, hab as the basic phase space coordinates
and rewrite the action in terms of these variables and their derivatives. The conjugate
momentum is deﬁned as usual through pa = ∂L

∂ ˙qa . The conjugate momentum of hab is

πab =

∂LG
∂ ˙hab

=

1

16π

(Kab − Khab)

(2.67)

where LG is the volume part of the gravitational Lagrangian. Note that the boundary
term is independent of ˙hab. On the other hand, since the action does not involve ˙N ,
˙N a,
their conjugate momenta are constrained to zero. These are the primary constraints of

Einstein gravity. Namely

π00 =

∂L
∂ ˙N ≈ 0,

π0a =

∂L
∂ ˙N a ≈ 0 .

(cid:73)

After performing the standard procedure, we ﬁnd the Hamiltonian

(NH + Na Ha)√h dnx + 2

[NP + NaP a]√σ dn−1x

St

(cid:90)

16πHG =

Σt

where

H = KabKab − K2 − (3)R ,

Ha = Db(Kab − Khab) .

(2.68)

(2.69)

(2.70)

Here Kab is the extrinsic curvature of the constant time hypersurface and (3)R is the
Ricci scalar of the induced metric hab. Also

P = k − k0 ,

P a = −rb(Kab − Khab)

(2.71)

where σAB is the induced metric on the sphere St as the boundary of Σt at inﬁnity,
and k = σABkAB is the trace of extrinsic curvature of St as embedded in Σt. k0 is a
regularization term which can be taken as the same quantity computed over a suitable

background geometry. Also ra is the normal vector to the boundary.

Now the consistency conditions ˙p0µ ≈ 0 implies the secondary constraints

˙π00 = {π00, HG} = H ,

˙π0a = {π0a, HG} = Ha .

(2.72)

Therefore Hµ ≡ (H,Ha) appearing in the Hamiltonian are called the Hamiltonian
constraint and momentum constraints respectively which are related to the G00, G0a

2.5. Hamiltonian formulation of General Relativity

27

components of the Einstein equations and hence vanishing on-shell. Note that there are
no further constraints since ˙H = ˙Ha = 0 automatically. Also the constraints are ﬁrst
class since {π0µ,Hν} = 0.

Now that we have the complete set of constraints, we can construct the generator

of gauge transformations by the Castellani procedure as we explained in section (2.3.2).

Since there are n primary constraints, the most general form of the generator involves

n parameters which we denote collectively by ξµ(x). Then the generator is

(cid:90)

(cid:16) ˙ξµπ0µ − ξµHµ(cid:17)

dnx√h

Gξµ =

Σ

and one can check that

(2.73)

(2.74)

{gµν, Gξ} = ∇µξν + ∇νξµ = Lξgµν

which is the gauge symmetry of General Relativity.

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)onshell

(cid:73)

2.5.1 Asymptotic symmetries and conserved charges

Since the choice of the time function, equivalently nµ, eµ
a , and also the vector congruence
tµ is arbitrary, therefore the values of N, N a can be arbitrarily deformed. Therefore
this deformation can be seen as a surface deformation if one deforms the constant time

surfaces, or as a change of Hamiltonian ﬂow if one deforms the congruence. As we saw

above, the on shell value of Hamiltonian is

QT = HG

=

1
8π

St

[NP + NaP a]√σ dn−1x

(2.75)

which explicitly depends on the choice of N, N a. Therefore associated to each choice of

time direction (or equivalently associated to each surface deformation) allowed by the

boundary conditions, one can associate a conserved charge.

Most famously, mass and angular momentum are deﬁned by ADM using the above

equation. Mass is deﬁned when the Hamiltonian vector ﬂow is an asymptotic time
translation. That is when tµ asymptotically coincides with the normal to constant time
surfaces. This is equivalent to N = 1, N a = 0 due to (2.62). Using this in the above

formula leads to the ADM mass

M =

1
8π

(cid:73)

(k − k0)√σ dn−1x .

(2.76)

St

On the other hand, the angular momenta are deﬁned when the Hamiltonian ﬂow is an
asymptotic rotation. That is when tµ → φµ ≡ ∂xµ/∂ϕ where ϕ is a rotation angle near
the boundary. This is equivalent to N = 0, N a = ∂ya/∂ϕ. The corresponding angular

(cid:73)

St

momentum is then deﬁned as

J = −

1
8π

φarb(Kab − Khab)√σ dn−1x .

(2.77)

A set of boundary conditions, restricts the form of allowed metrics and accordingly
restricts the choices of N, N a through (2.65). The set of allowed choices of N, N a

are called the allowed surface deformations. Upon using (2.62), this speciﬁes a set of
allowed Hamiltonian vector ﬂows tµ. Corresponding to each tµ one can associate a

conserved charge Qt using (2.75). These vectors determine the set of symmetries of the

Hamiltonian phase space. Among these, some are associated with zero charge. These

produce the pure gauge transformations since their generator is a constraint. However,

other vectors associated with the nontrivial charges are the nontrivial symmetries of

the phase space. These are sometimes called residual gauge transformations or global
symmetries of the phase space. The set of allowed vectors tµ quotiented by the set of pure
gauge transformations, is called the asymptotic symmetry algebra and the corresponding

ﬁnite transformations are called the asymptotic symmetry group. We will elaborate more

on this in chapters (4) and (6).

Chapter 3

Covariant phase space

formulation of gauge theories and

gravity

3.1

Introduction

In previous chapter, we discussed the Hamiltonian approach to ﬁeld theories. Clearly,

the construction of Hamiltonian formulation involves an explicit choice of time direction.

Therefore in a ﬁeld theory one needs to perform a decomposition of spacetime into

space and time. This breaks the covariant form of general relativity. Therefore it is

very tempting to have a covariant version of Hamiltonian mechanics. Dirac stated in his

lecture notes: “From the relativistic point of view we are thus singling out one particular

observer and making our whole formalism refer to the time for this observer. That, of

course, is not really very pleasant to a relativist, who would like to treat all observers

on the same footing. However, it is a feature of the present formalism which I do not

see how one can avoid if one wants to keep to the generality of allowing the Lagrangian

to be any function of the coordinates and velocities” [56]. Such a covariant formulation

29

was later developed which is called the covariant phase space formalism and is based

on the symplectic structure of Hamiltonian mechanics. In this chapter, we will describe

this approach in detail, and re-derive the results of previous chapter in the more clear

language of covariant phase space.

3.2 Symplectic Mechanics

In this section we will describe the symplectic mechanics of ﬁnite dimensional systems

like a set of particles established by Hamilton, Liouville, and others (see e.g. [57, 58]).

The construction, however, can be generalized to the case of ﬁeld theories as we will

discuss in next section.

A symplectic manifold (or a phase space in physical terminology) is a manifold Γ

equipped with a symplectic form Ω with the following properties:

• it is a two form Ωab = −Ωba,
• it is closed dΩ = 0,
• it is nondegenerate, i.e. det Ωab (cid:54)= 0. Equivalently ΩabX b = 0 ⇒ X a = 0.
We assume that the manifold is covered by the coordinate system xa. A special
coordinate system (called the Darboux chart) is the set (qi, pi) in which the symplectic
i dpi ∧ dqi. Although it is always possible to bring the
symplectic structure over a ﬁnite dimensional manifold to this form (guaranteed by the

structure takes the form Ω =(cid:80)

Darboux theorem), but here we are going to build a covariant formalism in which no

special role is played by any choice of coordinate system.

Note the diﬀerence between symplectic manifolds and Riemannian manifolds which

is instead equipped with a metric, i.e. a symmetric nondegenerate tensor gab. It turns

out that symplectic manifolds are the natural framework for formulating Hamiltonian

mechanics.

The nondegeneracy of the symplectic form implies that its inverse Ωab exists such

that ΩabΩbc = δa
Poisson bracket between two scalar functions f, g over the manifold is deﬁned as

c . The inverse can be used to deﬁne the Poisson bracket over Γ. The

{f, g} ≡ Ωab∂af ∂bg .

(3.1)

3.2. Symplectic Mechanics

31

It can be checked that this deﬁnition satisﬁes the properties of a Poisson bracket. Spe-

ple we can check that for the dynamics of particles, the symplectic form Ω =(cid:80)

cially the closedness of Ω ensures the Jacobi identity for the bracket. As a simple exam-
i dpi∧dqi

leads to the well known Poisson bracket (2.16).

Now the dynamics of any observable f is determined through the Poisson bracket,

once a function H(x) called the Hamiltonian is given, so that

More precisely the Hamiltonian determines a vector ﬁeld T a through

df
dt

= {f, H} .

T a ≡ Ωab∂aH .

(3.2)

(3.3)

The vector ﬁeld T a generates a congruence γ(t) over the phase space such that T a = dxa
dt
where t is a parameter along the congruence. Then (3.2) can be rephrased as

{f, H} = Ωab∂af ∂bg = T a∂af =

.

(3.4)

Given an initial conﬁguration f (¯xa), the observable f evolves as

df
dt

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(cid:90) t1

t0

f (x) − f (¯x) =

dt

df
dt

=

T a∂af =

dxa∂af .

(3.5)

γ

γ

Note that the above result is invariant under reparametrizations t → τ (t).

3.2.1 Symplectic symmetries

The symplectic form Ω can be used to deﬁne the notion of symplectic symmetries over

the phase space. A vector ﬁeld X is called a symplectic symmetry over the phase space

if

LX Ω = 0 ,

(3.6)

where LX is the Lie derivative along X 1. A very useful identity that we will use
throughout this thesis is stated in the following proposition.

1Note that X is a vector tangent to the phase space and should not be confused with a “spacetime”

vector. However, Lie derivative, exterior derivative, interior product, etc. are deﬁned independent of

“metric” and therefore apply in the phase space in the usual manner.

Proposition 2. The Cartan identity. For any vector ﬁeld X and any form σ, the

following identity holds

LX σ = X · dσ + d(X · σ) ,

(3.7)

where the interior product of a vector X and a p-form ω is deﬁned as a p − 1-form

(X · ω)a2···ap ≡ X a1ω[a1a2···ap] .

Using the Cartan identity, we can expand (3.6)

LX Ω = X · dΩ + d(X · Ω)

= d(X · Ω) = 0 .

(3.8)

(3.9)

(3.10)

The fact that X · Ω is closed implies according to the Poincar´e lemma that the one form
X · Ω can be written as an exact form (at least locally), i.e. there exists a function HX
such that

or in index notation ΩabX b = ∂aHX . Multiplying this by the inverse Ωca implies that

X · Ω = dHX ,

(3.11)

X a = Ωab∂bHX .

(3.12)

HX is indeed the generator of evolution along the symmetry vector ﬁeld X, through

the Poisson bracket. To see this take any observable f , then

{f, HX} = Ωab∂af ∂bHX = (Ωab∂bHX )∂af

= X a∂af = LX f .

(3.13)

Hence the function (“functional” in the case of ﬁeld theory) HX is called the generator of
X and its numerical value over a solution to the equations of motion is called the charge

of X over that solution. Note that (3.12) is a generalization of (3.3). While Hamiltonian

is the generator of evolution in time, any symmetry direction of the symplectic form is

produced by a generator.

3.2. Symplectic Mechanics

33

3.2.2 Algebra of symplectic symmetries

The set of symplectic symmetries form an algebra through the Lie bracket. Assume
X, Y are two symplectic symmetries, that is LX Ω = 0 = LY Ω. Then the Lie bracket
[X, Y ] ≡ LX Y is also a symplectic symmetry. The reason is that

L[X,Y ]Ω =(cid:0)

LXLY − LY LX

(cid:1)Ω = 0 .

(3.14)

An interesting result which is of great importance in gravity is described in the following

theorem.

Theorem 2. The algebra of generators HX of symplectic symmetries through the Pois-
son bracket is the same as the algebra of symeplectic symmetries X a through the Lie
bracket, up to a central extension.

Proof. We start by computing

∂aH[X,Y ] = Ωab[X, Y ]b = ΩabLX Y b
= LX (ΩabY b) = LX (dHY )a
= (d(X · dHY ))a
= ∂a(Ωbc(∂bHX ) (∂cHY )) = ∂a({HX , HY })

(3.15)

where in the ﬁrst line we have used the deﬁnitions. In the second line we have used the

fact that X is a symmetry of symplectic form (equation (3.6)) and also the deﬁnition

of HY (equation (3.12)). In the third line we have used the Cartan identity (3.7) to
expand the Lie derivative and also the fact that d2 = 0. In the last line we have used

the deﬁnition of HX and the deﬁnition of the Poisson bracket (3.1). Therefore we have

shown that

{HX , HY } = H[X,Y ] + C ,

(3.16)

such that dC = 0. This is suﬃcient to conclude that the Poisson bracket of C with all

of the charges is zero and therefore C is a central extension of the algebra. Moreover,

it implies that C is constant over any connected patch of the phase space.

The charge HX corresponding to a symplectic symmetry X is a conserved charge if
it is preserved along time, i.e. the Poisson bracket of HX and the Hamiltonian H vanish

{HX , H} = Ωab∂aHX ∂bH
= T a∂aHX = 0 .

However, the above equation can alternatively be written as

{HX , H} = Ωab∂aHX ∂bH
= X a∂aH = 0 .

(3.17)

(3.18)

Therefore conserved charges have two important aspects. On the one hand, they are

constants of motion, and on the other hand they determine symmetries of the Hamil-

tonian.

3.3 Covariant phase space formulation of gauge theories

In this section, we will describe how the symplectic mechanics explained in previous

section can be adapted for ﬁeld theories with local (gauge) degrees of freedom. The

equations in the previous section are then applicable here, after the replacements (2.31).

The construction presented here is developed in [6, 8, 9, 11, 20, 22, 23, 59, 60, 61, 62].

The ﬁrst step is to determine the manifold on which the symplectic geometry is

deﬁned. Next, the symplectic structure has to be identiﬁed. We will investigate the role

of local (gauge) symmetries, and show that generically local symmetries correspond

to ﬁrst class constraints in the phase space.

Interestingly there is an exception:

for

spacetimes having a boundary, there might exist local symmetries that correspond to

second class constraints in phase space. We will then argue that this can lead to a

“lower dimensional dynamics” in the theory produced by surface degrees of freedom. In

later chapters, we will show that these surface degrees of freedom play an important

role in the microscopic understanding of the entropy of BTZ black hole in 3 dimensions,

as well as extremal black holes in higher dimensions.

3.3. Covariant phase space formulation of gauge theories

35

3.3.1 Symplectic structure

Setup and notations. The construction of covariant phase space as done in [6]
proceeds by considering the space F, of all ﬁeld conﬁgurations satisfying a given ini-
tial/boundary conditions. Any ﬁeld conﬁguration Φ(x) in the spacetime corresponds
to a point in F which we denote simply by Φ. The ﬁeld conﬁgurations do not need to
satisfy the ﬁeld equations, hence the set of on-shell ﬁeld conﬁgurations form a subspace
denoted by ¯F. An inﬁnitesimal ﬁeld perturbation δΦ(x) over a conﬁguration Φ(x) then
corresponds to a vector tangent to the phase space at Φ. We denote this vector by [δΦ]A,

where the index A referes to the components of the vector [δΦ] in a chosen coordinate

system on the phase space. Moreover, the variation operator δ can be regarded as the

“exterior derivative” on the phase space manifold once we postulate that the variation

takes care of the anti-symmetrization, i.e.

δF [Φ, δΦ] ←→ δ1F [Φ, δ2Φ] − δ2F [Φ, δ1Φ] .

(3.19)

Since the ﬁelds are assumed to be Bosonic, δ2Φ = δ1δ2Φ − δ2δ1Φ = 0. Hence δ really
plays the role of exterior derivative. These are depicted schematically in ﬁgure 3.1.

The symplectic form. Now a quantity called the “presymplectic structure” is deﬁned
over F. This structure satisﬁes the properties of symplectic structure except that it has
degeneracy directions. This is because the space F is “too large” to serve as a symplectic
manifold. Then a reduction over the degeneracy directions, or in other words, taking a
symplectic quotient of (F,Ω) (see [63]), produces a manifold Γ, on which there exists a
consistent symplectic structure Ω. Therefore (Γ, Ω) serves as the suitable phase space

of the theory. In the following, we will describe these issues in detail.

We assume that a ﬁeld theory with a set of gauge symmetries is given through a

Lagrangian. Let all dynamical ﬁelds in the theory be collectively denoted by Φ. The

Lagrangian L[Φ] (as a top form) is a function of ﬁelds and their derivatives up to ﬁnite
number. Now we deﬁne the presymplectic potential Θ[δΦ, Φ] which is a d− 1 form, via
the variation of the Lagrangian

δL[Φ] = E[Φ]δΦ + dΘ[δΦ, Φ] .

(3.20)

Here EΦ[Φ] = δL
δΦ are the Euler-Lagrange equations for the ﬁelds Φ and summation on
all ﬁelds is understood. All ﬁelds are assumed to be bosonic (Grassmann-even) which

Figure 3.1: Schematic relation between phase space and ﬁelds on

spacetime. The right side is a Schematic depiction of the phase space.

Each point on the phase space corresponds to a ﬁeld conﬁguration on

spacetime. A ﬁeld variation δΦ corresponds to a vector tangent to

the phase space. However, note that the phase space is an inﬁnite

dimensional manifold.

obey δ1δ2Φ − δ2δ1Φ = 0. Hence δ may be viewed as an exterior derivative operator
on the space of ﬁeld conﬁgurations, while d is the exterior derivative operator on the

spacetime. The operator δ commutes with the total derivative operator d. Therefore
we say that Θ is a (d − 1, 1) form - which means that it is a d − 1 spacetime form and
a phase space 1 form. This notation can be implemented for other quantities to be

deﬁned in this chapter.

The general solution of Θ in (3.20) has the following form:

Θ[δΦ, Φ] = Θref [δΦ, Φ] + dY[δΦ, Φ] ,

(3.21)

where Θref is deﬁned by the standard algorithm, which consists in integrating by parts
the variation of the Lagrangian or, more formally, by acting on the Lagrangian with
Anderson’s homotopy operator I d

δΦ [20, 64, 22], deﬁned for second order theories as

(cid:18)

(cid:19) ∂

∂

Θref = I d

δΦL ,

I d
δΦ ≡

δΦ

∂
Φ ,µ − δΦ∂ν

Φ ,νµ

∂(dxµ)

.

(3.22)

Φ ΦΦ +δΦ( ) 3.4. Local symmetries and their generators

37

In equation (3.20) Y[δΦ, Φ] is an arbitrary (d − 2, 1) form. However, it can be ﬁxed
by extra requirements depending on the physical problem. This is what we will do in
next chapters. The presymplectic current (d − 1, 2) form ω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] is deﬁned as
the antisymmetrized variation of the presymplectic potential [6]

ω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] = δ1Θ[δ2Φ, Φ] − δ2Θ[δ1Φ, Φ] .

Under (3.21) we ﬁnd

ω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] = ωref [δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] + d (δ1Y[δ2Φ, Φ] − δ2Y[δ1Φ, Φ]) .

(3.23)

(3.24)

The presymplectic current has the property that if Φ is a solution to the ﬁeld equations,
and δ1Φ, δ2Φ are solutions to the linearized ﬁeld equations around Φ, then dω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] ≈
0. This can be checked easily

dω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] = δ1dΘ[δ2Φ, Φ] − (1 ↔ 2)

= δ1(δ2L[Φ] − E[Φ]δ2Φ) − (1 ↔ 2)
= δ1E[Φ]δ2Φ − δ2E[Φ]δ1Φ ≈ 0 .

(3.25)

The presymplectic form ΩAB contracted with two vectors [δ1Φ], [δ2Φ] tangent to the

ω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ]

(3.26)

where the integral is deﬁned over a spacelike surface Σ. The deﬁnition of presymplectic

form a priori depends on Σ. However, let Σ2 be obtained by a continuous deformation

of Σ when its boundaries are ﬁxed. Then by making use of the Stokes’ theorem, the

Σ

diﬀerence is given by an integral of dω in the spacetime region between the two hyper-

there is no symplectic ﬂux at the boundary, i.e.(cid:82)

surfaces, which is vanishing on shell according to (3.25). Also we always assume that
B ω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] = 0 over any region
of the boundary. Hence we infer by the same argument that the presymplectic form

(and accordingly the symplectic form) is the same for any hypersurface Σ. This result

is necessary for the “covariance” of phase space construction.

3.4 Local symmetries and their generators

The covariant phase space formulation can be used to investigate the relation between

the local symmetries in the space of ﬁeld conﬁgurations, and the constraints on the

phase space is deﬁned as

ΩAB [δ1Φ]A[δ2Φ]B =

(cid:90)

Figure 3.2: Diﬀerent hypersurfaces lead to the same result for the

presymplectic form if the symplectic ﬂux at the boundary B vanishes.

phase space. This is the analogue of what we saw in sections 2.3 and 2.4 but in the

covariant formulation. The result is that local symmetries corresponding to vanishing

charges correspond to constraints in the phase space, and hence they are unphysical

redundant gauge degrees of freedom in the theory. However, more interestingly, there

are residual gauge transformations, that lead to nontrivial charges in the phase space

and therefore they lead to inequivalent physical degrees of freedom in the theory. As we

will see these can be interpreted as surface degrees of freedom which play an important

role in the holographic description of gravity. This fact will be stressed specially in

chapters (4) and (6).

In the following we will denote a gauge transformation in the ﬁelds by δχΦ where

χ is the parameter of the gauge transformation. In case of Electrodynamics the gauge

symmetry is δΛA = dΛ where Λ is an arbitrary scalar function. In General Relativity,
the gauge symmetry is δχgµν ≡ Lχgµν = ∇µχν + ∇νχµ where χµ is an arbitrary vector
ﬁeld.

3.4.1 Construction of generators

Let δχΦ denote an inﬁnitesimal gauge transformation of the ﬁelds. We are interested to
ﬁnd the generator of this gauge transformation, i.e. a function Hχ over the phase space

3.4. Local symmetries and their generators

39

satisfying the following relation

{Φ, Hχ} = δχΦ .

The solution to the above equation is given in the following proposition

Proposition 3. The variation of the “generator” of a gauge transformation δχΦ is
given by

(cid:90)

δHχ =

Σ

ω[δΦ, δχΦ, Φ] .

The generators Hχ are then obtained by an integration in the phase space

(cid:90) Φ

Hχ =

δHχ .

¯Φ

The on-shell value of the generator is the “charge” of that gauge transformation.

Proof. Using the abstract notation (3.26) we can rewrite (3.27) as

which leads to

δHχ = [δΦ]A δ Hχ

[δΦ]A = ΩAB [δΦ]A[δχΦ]B

δ Hχ
[δΦ]A = ΩAB [δχΦ]B .

(3.27)

(3.28)

(3.29)

(3.30)

Using the above result in the deﬁnition of Poisson bracket, reveals that Hχ deﬁned in

(3.27) indeed generates the desired gauge transformation:

{F [Φ], Hχ} = ΩAB δ F

[δΦ]A

δ Hχ
[δΦ]B

= ΩABΩBC [δχΦ]C δ F
[δΦ]A

= [δχΦ]A δ F

[δΦ]A = δχF .

(3.31)

As an example, let us ﬁnd the generator of gauge symmetries of the Maxwell theory
using the covariant phase space method. The Lagrangian density is given by L =

FµνF µν. The symplectic potential is Θµ2···µn[δA, A] = θµµ1···µn where µ1···µn is the

1
4

−
Levi Civita tensor and

θµ[δA, A] = F µνδAν ,

Accordingly, we ﬁnd the presymplectic structure

(cid:16)

(cid:90)

Σ

Ω[A, δ1A, δ2A] =

dΣµ

(cid:17)

.

Due to (3.27), the generator of a gauge transformation δAµ = ∂µ(x) is

δ1F µνδ2Aν − δ2F µνδ1Aν
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

δH =

dΣµ

δF µνδAν − δF µνδAν

dΣµ δF µν ∂ν .

(3.32)

(3.33)

(3.34)

(cid:90)
(cid:90)

Σ

=

Σ

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

(cid:73)

(cid:73)

∂Σ

∂Σ

The last term in the right hand side of ﬁrst line drops since Fµν is gauge invariant. Now

we integrate by part to obtain

δH =

Σ

dΣµ  δ ∂νF µν +

dΣµν  δF µν .

(3.35)

Assuming that the parameter  of gauge transformation is ﬁeld independent, we observe

that the generator H can be extracted directly

H =

Σ

dΣµ  ∂νF µν +

dΣµν  F µν .

(3.36)

We observe that the generator of gauge transformation is composed of a bulk term

which is a combination of equations of motion, and a surface contribution. The charge

deﬁned as the on-shell value of the generator, is hence

Q =

In case where  → 1 near the boundary, we ﬁnd Q =(cid:72)
H =(cid:82) dn−1x  ∂iEi + Q consistent with the result in Hamiltonian formulation (2.50) 2

∂Σ dΣµν F µν which is exactly the
electric charge of the system. Taking the surface Σ to be the t = const surface, we ﬁnd

dΣµν  F µν .

(3.37)

∂Σ

(cid:73)

2As we are concerned in gauge transformation of dynamical ﬁelds, the ﬁrst term in (2.50) is irrelevant,

since it generates only the variation of the non-dynamical ﬁeld A0, explicitly δΛA0 = ∂tΛ.

3.5. Explicit form of generators and charges in gravity

41

3.5 Explicit form of generators and charges in gravity

In this section, we provide an explicit and covariant expression for the generators of

gauge symmetries and related charges. We will show that the generators are given by

two pieces: a bulk integral which is a combination of constraints, and an integral over

a compact codimension 2 surface in the boundary of spacetime. After that, we discuss

the three conditions that should be met so that a conserved charge could be deﬁned

over the phase space: the integrability condition in section 3.5.4, and conservation in

time as well as ﬁniteness in 3.5.6.

As we discussed before, the Lagrangian is invariant under a gauge transformation

up to a total derivative

δχL = dM χ[Φ] .

(3.38)

For gravitational theories, the gauge symmetry is a local coordinate transformation,

generated inﬁnitesimally by an arbitrary vector ﬁeld χ. The transformation in ﬁelds

and accordingly the Lagrangian is given by a Lie derivative along χ

δχL = LχL = χ · d L + d(χ · L) = d(χ · L)

(3.39)

by making use of the Cartan identity (see proposition (2)), and the fact that L is a top
form and hence dL = 0. Therefore for gravity M χ = χ· L. For Maxwell theory M  = 0
since the Lagrangian is invariant under gauge transformations δA = d.

The Noether current for a gauge transformation parameterized by χ is deﬁned as [9]

Jχ = Θ[δχΦ, Φ] − M χ[Φ]

(3.40)

The exterior derivative of Jχ is

dJχ = dΘ[δχΦ, Φ] − dM χ[Φ]

= (δχL − E[Φ] δχΦ) − δχL = −E[Φ] δχΦ

(3.41)

by using (3.20) and (3.38). Therefore we see that the Noether current is closed once the
ﬁeld equations are satisﬁed, i.e. dJχ ≈ 0. Note that this is only an on-shell equality, but
what we need is a stronger result that we obtain by using Noether’s second theorem.

Let us focus on the quantity E[Φ] δχΦ. If one tries to remove all derivatives on χ

by integrating by parts, one would obtain

E[Φ] δχΦ = χ · N (E[Φ], Φ) + dSχ(E[Φ], Φ) .

(3.42)

Noether’s second theorem states that N (E[Φ], Φ) = 0 strongly (i.e. without use of

equations of motion) [1, 65, 15]. Therefore using the Noether’s second theorem in

equation (3.41) we ﬁnd that the combination Jχ + Sχ is closed oﬀ-shell and hence exact

by the Poinca’e lemma

Jχ = −Sχ(E[Φ]) + dQχ .

(3.43)

The d − 2 form Qχ is the Noether charge density associated with χ. The fundamental
identity of the covariant phase space formulation of gravity is the following [8, 20, 11, 15].

Theorem 3. The presymplectic current contracted with a gauge transformation δχΦ,
is equal to a bulk term proportional to the ﬁeld equations and a boundary term

ω[δΦ, δχΦ, Φ] = Gχ(E[Φ], δE[Φ], Φ) + d kχ[δΦ, Φ] .

(3.44)

The bulk term given by

Gχ(E[Φ], δE[Φ], Φ) = δSχ(E[Φ], Φ) + χ · (E[Φ] δΦ)

(3.45)

vanishes provided that the ﬁelds Φ satisfy the equations of motion and the ﬁeld variations
δΦ satisfy the linearized equations of motion around Φ. The boundary d − 2 form
kχ[δΦ, Φ] is given by

kχ[δΦ, Φ] = δQχ[Φ] − χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ] + d(·).

(3.46)

where d(·) refers to possible boundary terms which cancel upon integration over a closed
surface.

Proof. We start by taking a variation of (3.40) and assume that χ is ﬁeld independent,

i.e. does not depend on dynamical ﬁelds Φ. The case where the vector is ﬁeld dependent

is considered in appendix A.2.

δJχ = δΘ[δχΦ, Φ] − χ · δL .

(3.47)

3.5. Explicit form of generators and charges in gravity

43

Now using (3.20) and assuming that the ﬁeld equations are satisﬁed, we have δL ≈
dΘ[δΦ, Φ]. Then using the Cartan identity we have

χ · δL = χ · dΘ[δΦ, Φ] + χ · (E[Φ] δΦ)

= LχΘ[δΦ, Φ] − d (χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ]) + χ · (E[Φ] δΦ) .

(3.48)

(3.49)

Replacing this in (3.47) and using δJχ = −δSχ + d(δQχ) on the left hand side, we
obtain

(cid:16)

−δSχ + d (δQχ) =

δΘ[δχΦ, Φ] − Lχ(Θ[δΦ, Φ])

+ d (χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ]) − χ · (E[Φ] δΦ) .
(3.50)

The term in parantheses on the right hand side is indeed the symplectic current ω(δΦ, δχΦ, Φ).

Therefore

ω(δΦ, δχΦ, Φ) =

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

− δSχ + χ · (E[Φ] δΦ)

+ d

δQχ − χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ]

.

(3.51)

(cid:17)

(cid:73)

(cid:90)

δHχ =

Σ

Now we can read oﬀ the generator of gauge transformations and their corresponding

charges by combining equation (3.27) and the above theorem

(cid:73)

ω[δΦ, δχΦ, Φ] =

Gχ(E[Φ], δE[Φ], Φ) +

kχ[δΦ, Φ] .

(3.52)

Σ

∂Σ

Since we are interested in the generator of a gauge transformation over a solution, we

may use E[Φ] = 0 to simplify the result. Note however, that for the generator we
cannot use the linearized ﬁeld equations since the Poisson bracket {f, g} deﬁned in
(3.1) involves an arbitrary variation in its arguments not only the variations tangent to

the solution space. Hence we can drop the second term in (3.45) and the result is

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

δHχ ≈ −

Σ

∂Σ

δSχ(E[Φ]) +

kχ[δΦ, Φ] .

(3.53)

However, as we discussed before, the charge of χ is deﬁned as the on-shell value of its

generator, through an integration of the above equation on a path in solution space
from a reference ﬁeld conﬁguration ¯Φ to an arbitrary ﬁeld conﬁguration Φ. Since the
path is tangent to the solution space, the bulk term in (3.53) drops and we ﬁnd the

covariant expression of the charge associated with the gauge transformations x → x + χ
in a diﬀeomorphism invariant theory

δQχ ≡

∂Σ

kχ[δΦ, Φ] .

(3.54)

For later use, we note that integrating (3.51) over a hypersurface Σ bounded by two

surfaces S1, S2 yields a relation between charges deﬁned at S1, S2:

(cid:73)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)S2 − Qχ

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)S1

(cid:90)

) ≈

Σ

δ(Qχ

ω(δΦ, δχΦ, Φ)

(3.55)

when Φ solves the ﬁeld equations and δΦ solves the linearized ﬁeld equations.

3.5.1 Explicit charges for Einstein gravity

For Einstein theory which will be the context of next chapters

LEinstein =

1

16πG

R,

(3.56)

and

(16πG)((cid:63)Θref ) µ = ∇νhνµ − ∇µh,

(16πG)((cid:63)Q)µν

χ = ∇νχµ − ∇µχν,

(3.57)

where we denoted hµν ≡ δgµν, hµν = gµαhαβgβν, h = gµνhµν. Therefore

kref
χ ≡ δQχ[Φ] − χ · Θref [δΦ, Φ]

(cid:18)
χν∇µh − χν∇σhµσ + χσ∇νhµσ +

(dd−2x)µν

8πG

=

1
2

h∇νχµ − hρν∇ρχµ

(cid:19)

. (3.58)

Considering the eﬀect of the ambiguity Y in (3.21), the surface charge is explicitly given

by

kχ[δΦ, Φ] = kref

χ +

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

δY[δχΦ, Φ] − δχY[δΦ, Φ]

.

(3.59)

Also the bulk term of the generator (3.53) is the variation of [15]

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

S(E[Φ]) = 2

Σ

Σ

dΣµGµ

ν ξν ,

(3.60)

which is a combination of constraint equations of Einstein gravity Hµ ≡ 2nνGν
ducing exactly the results in (2.69).

µ repro-

3.5. Explicit form of generators and charges in gravity

45

3.5.2 Spatially compact manifolds

The hypersurface Σ over which the presymplectic form was deﬁned in (3.26) can be

either compact or noncompact. In the former case, its boundary ∂Σ is vanishing and

accordingly the charges (3.54) deﬁned on ∂Σ vanish

We can rewrite the above result as

δQχ ≈ 0 .

δQχ = µAT A = 0 ,

(3.61)

(3.62)

where µA = ΩAB[δξΦ]B and T A any vector ﬁeld tangent to the solution submanifold
¯Γ. Note that the symplectic form is nondegenerate and hence the one form µA is
nonvanishing. Therefore the relation µAT A = 0 implies that µA is “normal” to any
vector tangent to ¯Γ in Γ. This means that the codimension of ¯Γ in Γ is at least one.
Each local symmetry δξΦ increases the codimension of ¯Γ in Γ by 1. Since Γ represents
the set of all “kinematically possible” whereas ¯Γ represents the set of all “dynamically
possible” states, each such increase in the codimension of ¯Γ corresponds to a constraint
in the system. Moreover, all these constraints are ﬁrst class, since their algebra is closed.

3.5.3 Spacetimes with a boundary

The discussions of previous section is valid for spacetimes in which Σ is either compart

(having no boundary), or otherwise the boundary conditions are such that no spatial

boundary terms arise from applying Stokes’ theorem. In this case, we showed that all

gauge symmetries correspond to constraints in the phase space. However, the situation

diﬀers when the spacetime has a boundary with suitable boundary conditions such that

nontrivial boundary terms appear due to Stokes’ theorem. In this case, the set of gauge

symmetries break into three classes

• gauge transformaitons which are not allowed by the boundary conditions,
• allowed gauge transformaitons corresponding to vanishing charges,
• allowed transformations corresponding to nontrivial charges.

A gauge transformation η of the second type corresponds to a ﬁrst class constraint (as

we discussed in previous section) and is usually called a trivial gauge symmetry. The

third class however corresponds to a second class constraint in the bulk and a conserved
charge at the boundary. In this case the one form µA = ΩABδχΦB is not a constraint,
but its value on the constraint surface ¯Γ is the variation of charge corresponding to χ
according to (3.27) and (3.26), i.e.

provided that an integrability condition holds which will be discussed in the following.

ΩAB[δχΦ]B ≈ [δQχ]A

(3.63)

3.5.4

Integrability of charges

It is not obvious that the inﬁnitesimal charge deﬁned in (3.54) is really a variation of

a function Qχ over the phase space. This is similar to the usual thermodynamics in
which for example heat transfer (cid:54) δ Q is not an exact variation and the total amount
of heat transfer depends on the path traveled by the system. On ther other hand
δQ
T deﬁnes entropy which is independent of the path, and therefore a function
S can be deﬁned over the phase space. We say that δS is integrable while δQ is not.

∆S =(cid:82)

γ

The necessary and suﬃcient condition for a charge variation to be integrable is that

δ1δ2Qχ − δ2δ1Qχ = 0

(cid:73)

for any two variations δ1, δ2. Therefore the integrability condition is

I[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] ≡ δ1

kχ[δ2Φ; Φ] − (1 ↔ 2) = 0

for arbitrary variations δ1Φ, δ2Φ tangent to the phase space at any arbitrary point in

If the integrability condition holds, then (cid:72) kχ[δΦ; Φ] is an exact

the phase space Φ.

variation. In other words, there exist a function Qχ on phase space satisfying

(3.64)

(3.65)

δQχ =

kχ[δΦ; Φ].

(3.66)

To compute Qχ, one can choose any path γ in the phase space between a reference
conﬁguration ¯Φ (which can be the background ﬁeld conﬁguration) and the ﬁeld of
interest Φ and deﬁne the canonical charge as

Qχ[Φ, ¯Φ] =

δQχ + Nχ[ ¯Φ] .

(3.67)

(cid:73)

(cid:90)

γ

3.5. Explicit form of generators and charges in gravity

47

Note that the integral(cid:82)

γ is an integral over a one parameter family of ﬁeld conﬁgurations
in the phase space. Here, Nχ[ ¯Φ] is the freely chosen charge of the reference conﬁguration
¯Φ.3 Using (3.46) and the fact that δQχ is an exact variation, we ﬁnd the simple
integrability condition [11],

(cid:73)

I[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] ≡ −

χ · ω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] = 0,

(3.68)

for arbitrary variations δ1Φ, δ2Φ and for the χ of interest.

3.5.5

Integrability and symplectic symmetries

Not all nontrivial gauge transformations correspond to integrable charges. There is

a subalgebra of nontrivial gauge transformations that are integrable which form the

algebra of symplectic symmetries of the phase space. This point is less noticed in the

literature of asymptotic symmetries. This is what we will show in this subsection.

Proposition 4. A local symmetry associated with integrable charge, corresponds to a

symplectic symmetry of the phase space.

Proof. As we discussed, an inﬁnitesimal charges is integrable if and only if (3.64) hold.

On the other hand the inﬁnitesimal charge is given by (3.63). Here we use a notation

that treats δ as the exterior derivative operator in phase space which takes care of

antisymmetrization (see (3.19)). Upon using (3.27) in (3.64), the integrability condition

becomes

δ(δQχ) = δ(δχΦ · Ω) = 0 .

(3.69)

Note that δχΦ is a vector tangent to the phase space and Ω is a two form. Now using

the Cartan identity (3.7), we have

LδχΦΩ − δχΦ · δΩ = 0 .

(3.70)

3In the covariant phase space formalism, this reference charge is arbitrary. If a holographic renor-

malization scheme exists, one would be able to deﬁne this reference charge from the ﬁrst principles, as

it is done e.g. in asymptotically AdS spacetimes.

However, since by (3.26), Ω = δΘ, therefore δΩ = δ2Θ = 0 and accordingly the integra-

bility condition corresponds to

LδχΦΩ = 0 .

(3.71)

This is nothing but the deﬁnition of a symplectic symmetry cf. (3.6). This proves the

proposition. Also since symplectic symmetries form a closed algebra, therefore the set

of integrable charges form a closed algebra under the Poisson bracket. Equivalently, if

(3.65) holds for χ1, χ2, then it holds for [χ1, χ2] as well.

3.5.6 Conservation and Finiteness

The charges (3.54) are deﬁned over the boundary of a spacelike hypersurface Σ. For

example Σ can be considered as the surfaces of constant time in some coordinate system.

Then the charge will be conserved if its value does not depend on the chosen hypersurface

Σ. We will obtain a necessary and suﬃcient condition for the conservation of charges.

Take the hypersurfaces Σ1, Σ3 in ﬁgure (3.2). According to the Stokes’ theorem and

the fact that dω ≈ 0 we ﬁnd

δ(Hχ

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)Σ3 − Hχ

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)Σ1

(cid:90)

) ≈

B

ω(δΦ, δχΦ, Φ) .

(3.72)

Therefore the conservation of charge is fulﬁlled if the ﬂux of the symplectic current
through the boundary B is vanishing.

Moreover, the charge Qχ associated with each nontrivial gauge transformation should

be ﬁnite otherwise the boundary conditions is considered as inconsistent.

3.6 Discussion

In this chapter, we discussed the covariant phase space formulation of gauge theories.

We showed how the symplectic form can be obtained from the second variation of the

Lagrangian. Then we discussed the local symmetries and their generators in phase

space. We obtained a covariant form for the generators and charges in diﬀeomorphism

invariant theories like General Relativity.

3.6. Discussion

49

Surface degrees of freedom

The phase space of a gauge theory over a spacetime with boundaries, may contain ﬁeld

conﬁgurations related by residual gauge transformations, i.e. those associated with non-

trivial charges. Using the bulk observables one cannot distinguish between these states,

since by construction, the theory is invariant under gauge transformations. However,

as we showed, the corresponding surface charges can indeed distinguish between such

states. Moreover, charges are the only observables that can do this separation. In this

sense, these states are called surface degrees of freedom or boundary gravitons in the

context of gravity. Surface degrees of freedom play an important role in microscopic

description of black hole entropy as well as holography.

Here we discussed surface degrees of freedom in the context of Hamiltonian formu-

lation. Interestingly, surface degrees of freedom also appear in other approaches like

the path integral formulation of gauge theories [66]. Also they have appeared in the

context of loop quantum gravity [67, 68]. Also in the non-gravitational context it is well

known that Chern-Simons theory on a manifold with boundary induces a dynamical

Wess-Zumino-Witten (WZW) theory on the boundary [69, 42, 70, 71, 72, 73], whose

degrees of freedom correspond to surface degrees of freedom as we described. Since

gravity in 3 dimensions has a Chern-Simons description, which does not possess any lo-

cal dynamics, the only dynamics is related to surface gravitons. The proposal followed

by Carlip , and also Balachandran et al. is that these boundary gravitons are the origin

of BTZ black hole entropy. [38, 74, 75, 76, 39, 37, ?]. Interestingly similar phenomenon

happens in Quantum Hall eﬀect in condensed matter physics [77].

Spacetime with disconnected boundaries

Regarding the covariant phase space method described above, it seems that there is

still a shortage in the construction. We assumed that the spacetime has only one

connected boundary in the asymptotic region. However, many interesting examples

involve spacetimes with two disconnected boundaries. Black holes are a good examples.

A Cauchy surface in black hole geometry has two disjoint asymptotics. Even if we

restrict the study to the region outside black hole (region (I) in the Penrose diagram

below), there will be still an internal boundary on the “horizon”.

Figure 3.3: The surface Σ is used to deﬁne charges. This hypersurface
+, i0−). If we restrict Σ to region I, there are
has two boundaries at (i0
still two boundaries at (i0
+,H).

Accordingly the charges, as deﬁned in (3.54), will get contributions from both bound-

aries

(cid:73)

(cid:73)

(cid:73)

δQχ =

∂Σ

kχ[δΦ, Φ] =

kχ[δΦ, Φ] −

+∞

−∞

kχ[δΦ, Φ]

(3.73)

where +∞,−∞ symbolically refer to the closed surfaces at two boundaries of Σ. How-
ever, the charges are usually computed at only one compact codimension 2 surface. One

resolution is that one assumes a strong boundary condition over one of the boundaries

such that all boundary terms coming from that surface vanishes. This seems to be the

assumption of [8, 9]. But this may not be the appropriate choice in some physical prob-

lems. Examples are AdS2 and the NHEG geometries that we will discuss in 5. As we

will see in chapter 6, if the charges are computed as (3.73), they will be all identically

zero, since the contribution from all surfaces are the same. Therefore we have deﬁned

charges only on one compact codimension 2 surface. This is what is done in [78], and

all related papers.

Indeed there is an alternative deﬁnition of charges.

In this chapter, we deﬁned

charges from (3.27) and we used Stokes’ theorem to convert it to an integral on a
codimension two surface. However, it is legitimate to deﬁne charges from the d− 2 form
kχ in (3.44), that is

kχ[δΦ, Φ] ,

(3.74)

(cid:73)

δQχ ≡

∞

IIIIIIIVΣi0−Hi0+3.6. Discussion

and the bracket of charges can be simply deﬁned using the above equation as

{Qχ, Qη} ≡ δηQχ .

51

(3.75)

However, there is a deﬁciency in this approach. We loose the connection between charge

and the generator of a gauge symmetry. The charge itself is not the generator of a gauge

symmetry, since it does not include the constraint bulk term. The deﬁnition of charges

in spacetimes with disconnected boundaries, seems to be a well deﬁned problem that to

our knowledge is not addressed completely in the literature. We will leave this problem

to later works, although we expect that (3.74) is the correct deﬁnition, since it works

for both case. Also in chapter 4, 6, we will use (3.74) to compute charges.

Chapter 4

AdS3 phase space and its surface
degrees of freedom

4.1 Introduction and outline

It is well known that Einstein gravity in three dimensions admits no propagating degrees

of freedom (“bulk gravitons”), but still admits diﬀerent interesting solutions like black

holes [79, 80], particles [81, 82], wormholes [83, 84, 85] and a novel boundary dynamics

[5, 86, 87]. Moreover, it can arise as a consistent subsector of higher dimensional matter-

gravity theories, see e.g.

[88, 89]. Therefore, three-dimensional gravity can be viewed

as a simpliﬁed and fruitful setup to analyze and address issues related to the physics of

black holes and quantum gravity.

In three dimensions the Riemann tensor is completely speciﬁed in terms of the Ricci

tensor, and hence the equations of motion force the geometry to be locally maximally

symmetric. However, there is still the possibility of having solution with nontrivial

topology that can be obtained by taking a descrete quotient of a globally maximally

symmetric solution. This was used to construct black hole solutions in AdS3 known

52

4.1. Introduction and outline

53

as BTZ black holes [79, 80]. Also solutions with a conical singularity can be ontained

similarly that represent a “particle” in 3 dimensions [82]. Besides these, a new type

of dynamics can arise due to the existence of a boundary for the spacetime, known as

boundary degrees of freedom that was ﬁrst discussed in context of AdS3 in the seminal

work of Brown and Henneaux [5]. There, it was pointed out that one may associate

nontrivial conserved charges, to diﬀeomorphisms which preserve prescribed (Brown-

Henneaux) boundary conditions. The surface charges formed two copies of the Virasoro

algebra. It was realized that the Virasoro algebra should be interpreted in terms of a

holographic dictionary with a conformal ﬁeld theory [36]. These ideas found a more

precise and explicit formulation within the celebrated AdS3/CFT2 dualities in string

theory [90]. Finding a conformal ﬁeld theory dual to asymptotic AdS3 geometries is

still an open problem, although many advances have occured[91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97,

98, 89, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103].

In this chapter, we revisit the Brown-Henneaux analysis from the phase space point

of view, and show that the surface charges and the associated algebra and dynamics can

be deﬁned not only on the circle at spatial inﬁnity, but also on any closed curve inside

the bulk obtained by a smooth deformation which does not cross any geometric defect

or topological obstruction. This was previously known in the Chern-Simons formulation

of 3d gravity in which the radial direction appears as a “gauge” direction and drops

out of all charge computations. However, the point we stress here is that the notion

of asymptotic symmetries can be extended into the bulk and form the set of (local)

symplectic symmetries of the AdS3 phase space.

We start with the set of Ba˜nados geometries [95] which constitute all locally AdS3

geometries with Brown-Henneaux boundary conditions. We show that the invariant

presymplectic current [22] (but not the Lee-Wald presymplectic form [6]) vanishes on-

shell in the entire bulk spacetime. The charges can hence be deﬁned over any closed

curve in the bulk. We generalize this phenomenon by introducing the notion of local

symplectic symmetries and investigate their properties. Local symplectic symmetries

were also observed in the near-horizon region of extremal black holes [104, 105].

Furthermore, we will study in more detail the extremal sector of the phase space.

Boundary conditions are known in the decoupled near-horizon region of the extremal

BTZ black hole which admit a chiral copy of the Virasoro algebra [98]. Here, we

extend the notion of decoupling limit to more general extremal metrics in the Ba˜nados

family and show that one can obtain this (chiral) Virasoro algebra as a limit of the

bulk symplectic symmetries, which are deﬁned from the asymptotic AdS3 region all

the way to the near-horizon region. Quite interestingly, the vector ﬁelds deﬁning the

Virasoro symmetries are distinct from all previous ansatzes for near-horizon symmetries

[106, 78, 98, 104, 107, 105].

Ba˜nados geometries in general have (at least) two global U (1) Killing vectors [101].
We will study the conserved charges J± associated with these two Killing vectors and
show that these charges commute with the Virasoro charges associated with symplectic

symmetries. We then discuss how the elements of the phase space may be labeled
using the J± charges. We then review the coadjoint representations of Virasoro algebra
(see [108, 109]) and show that the phase space classiﬁes into (a direct product of two)
coadjoint representations of Virasoro algebra. The charges J± then turn out to be
invariants on the coadjoint orbits and can be used to label the orbits. . We also discuss

brieﬂy that for geometries having a Killing horizon [101], the entropy is another invariant
of the orbit, which together with J±, satisﬁes a ﬁrst law of thermodynamics.

4.1.1 Outline

In section 4.2, we introduce the notion of asymptotically AdS spacetimes in arbitrary

dimensions in a rigorous way and stress the role of boundary conditions. We then

restrict to 3 dimensions and introduce Ba˜nados geometries. In section 4.3 and 4.4, we

establish that the family of locally AdS3 geometries with Brown-Henneaux boundary

conditions form a phase space with two copies of the Virasoro algebra as symplectic

symmetries. In section 4.5, we show that each metric in the phase space admits two

U (1) Killing vectors which commute with the vector ﬁelds generating the symplectic

symmetries, once we use the appropriately “adjusted (Lie) bracket” [110, 111]. We

show that the charge associated with these two Killing vectors are integrable over the

phase space and commute with the generators of the Virasoro symplectic symmetries.

In section 4.6, we discuss how the phase space falls into Virasoro coadjoint orbits and

how the Killing charges may be attributed to each orbit and discuss the ﬁrst law of

thermodynamics on the black hole orbits. In section 4.7, we focus on a chiral half of the

phase space which is obtained through decoupling limit over the extremal geometries.

4.2. Asymptotically AdS spacetimes

55

We show that this sector constitutes a phase space with symplectic symmetries of its

own.

4.2 Asymptotically AdS spacetimes

In this section, we brieﬂy review the deﬁnition of asymptotic AdS geometries in arbitrary

dimensions. This is a well established subject [112, 92] as it is the ﬁrst step towards

AdS/CFT duality.

An asymptotically AdS spacetime is by deﬁnition a conformally compact Einstein
geometry [113, 92]. This means that the spacetime M possess a boundary and the
metric has a second oder pole at the boundary. Therefore the metric does not induce

a metric on the boundary. However, there is a deﬁning function, say r(x) such that
r(x)2 smoothly extends to the boundary and g(0) = r2g|∂M is nondegenerate.
addition, the metric satisﬁes Einstein equations with a negative cosmological constant,

If in

then this geometry is called an asymptotically AdS geometry (AAdS). Note that if r(x)
is a suitable deﬁning function, then also is rew. Due to the arbitrariness in the choice

of deﬁning function, the metric only deﬁnes a conformal structure on the boundary.

In a d dimensional spacetime, there are d gauge degrees of freedom in the metric.

Therefore one can choose d gauge conditions to ﬁx the form of metric. A suitable choice

of coordinate system is Gaussian normal coordinates emanating from the boundary in

which the metric of an AAdS geometry can be written in the form

ds2 =

1
z2 (dz2 + gij(z, xi)dxidxj)

(4.1)

where z = 0 is the location of the boundary, and xi label the boundary. By deﬁnition,
gij(z, xi) must smoothly extend to the boundary, hence

gij(z, xi) = g(0)ij + zg(1)ij + z2g(2)ij + ···

(4.2)

where g(0)ij is a nondegenerate metric on the boundary. Einstein’s equations become
algebraic and can be solved order by order in the z variable [114].It turns out that in an

(d + 1) dimensional AAdS spacetime, all coeﬃcients multiplying odd powers of r vanish
up to the order rd and the metric can be written as

gij = g(0)

ij + z2g(2)

ij + ··· + zdg

(d)
ij + h

(d)

ij zd log z2 + ···

(4.3)

in which the logarithmic term only appears in d =even and is related to the conformal
anomaly. Einstein equations uniquely determine g(2),··· , g(d−2), h(d) as well as trace and
covariant divergence of g(d) (see appendix A of [115] for explicit expressions). Physically
g(d) is related to the quasilocal stress tensor of the geometry. Notably in 3 dimensions,
the above expansion truncates and we can explicitly express the solutions with suitable

boundary conditions [116, 95]. This is what we will do next.

We use the redeﬁnition r =

so that the boundary is located at r = ∞. Choosing
the Gaussian normal coordinates, then corresponds to the Feﬀerman-Graham gauge

1
z

conditions

grr =

1
r2 ,

gra = 0

and the metric becomes

ds2 =

dr2
r2 + γab(r, xi) dxa dxb .

The boundary is located at r → ∞. Being asymptotic AdS implies that

γab = r2(cid:16)

(0)

ab (xa) +
g

1
r

(1)

ab (xa) + ···
g

(cid:17)

.

(4.4)

(4.5)

(4.6)

Now comes the choice of boundary conditions. Dirichlet boundary conditions amounts

to identifying g(0) with a prescribed boundary metric. The famous Brown Henneaux
boundary conditions [5] are indeed Dirichlet boundary conditions with a ﬂat boundary

metric

g

(0)

ab dxadxb = −dx+dx

−

,

(4.7)

together with the periodic identiﬁcations (x+, x−) ∼ (x+ + 2π, x−
− 2π) which iden-
tify the boundary metric with a ﬂat cylinder (the identiﬁcation reads φ ∼ φ + 2π
upon deﬁning x± = t/(cid:96) ± φ). Other relevant Dirichlet boundary conditions include the

ﬂat boundary metric with no identiﬁcation (the resulting solutions are usually called

“Asymptotically Poincar´e AdS3”), and the ﬂat boundary metric with null orbifold iden-

tiﬁcation (x+, x−) ∼ (x+ + 2π, x−) which is relevant to describing near-horizon geome-

tries [117, 98, 101].1

1Other boundary conditions which lead to diﬀerent symmetries were discussed in [118, 119, 120].

4.3. AdS3 phase space

57

Until now, we have not used the Einstein equation to determine the set of solutions.

It turns out that in pure Einstein gravity with a negative cosmological constant in 3

dimensions, with the following action and ﬁeld equations

S =

1

16πG

d3x√−g(R +

1
(cid:96)2 ),

Rµν = −

2
(cid:96)2 gµν.

(4.8)

(cid:90)

(cid:16)

the set of all asymptotic AdS3 solutions with ﬂat boundary metric take the form [95]

ds2 = (cid:96)2 dr2

r2 −

rdx+ − (cid:96)2 L−(x−)dx−

r

−
rdx

− (cid:96)2 L+(x+)dx+

r

(cid:17)(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(4.9)

where L± are two single-valued arbitrary functions of their arguments. This set contains
interesting solutions. The constant L± cases correspond to better known geometries
[82, 79, 80]: L+ = L− = −1/4 case corresponds to AdS3 in global coordinates, −1/4 <
L± < 0 case corresponds to conical defects (particles on AdS3), L− = L+ = 0 case
corresponds to massless BTZ and generic positive values of L± correspond to generic
BTZ black holes [79] of mass and angular momentum (L+ + L−)/(4G) and (cid:96)(L+ −
L−)/(4G) respectively. The selfdual orbifold of AdS3 [117] belongs to the phase space
with null orbifold identiﬁcation and L− = 0, L+ (cid:54)= 0.

4.3 AdS3 phase space

In this section we will show that the set of Ba˜nados metrics (4.9) forms a well-deﬁned

on-shell phase space. To this end, we need to deﬁne a symplectic structure over this

phase space. The symplectic structure is a two-form acting on vectors tangent to the

phase space. Since we will be interested specially in the form of on-shell perturbations,

we will discuss them ﬁrst. Given that the set of all solutions are of the form (4.9), the

on-shell tangent space is clearly given by metric variations of the form

δg = g(L + δL) − g(L) ,

(4.10)

where δL± are arbitrary single-valued functions. The vector space of all on-shell pertur-
bations δg can be written as the direct sum of two types of perturbations: those which

are generated by diﬀeomorphisms and those which are not, and that we will refer to as

parametric perturbations.

There are two known deﬁnitions for the presymplectic form: the one ωLW by Lee-
Wald [6] (see also Crnkovic and Witten [7]) and invariant presymplectic form ωinv as

deﬁned in [22]. The invariant presymplectic form is determined from ﬁeld equations,

while the Lee-Wald presymplectic form is determined from the action, see [23] for details.
In this chapter we choose to work with ωinv since it turns out that it has the interesting
property that it exactly vanishes on-shell on the phase space, that is,

ωinv[δ1g, δ2g; g] ≈ 0.

(4.11)

This is not the case for the Lee-Wald presymplectic form.

The fact that the invariant presymplectic form vanishes on-shell illustrates the fact

that there are no propagating bulk degrees of freedom in three dimensional vacuum

Einstein gravity. Nevertheless, this does not exclude the existence of a lower dimensional

dynamics as we will show next.

4.4 Symplectic symmetries and charges

As we mentioned earlier, a ﬁeld variation tangent to the phase space takes the form

(4.10). In this section, we are interested in ﬁeld variations in the above class which are

produced by an inﬁnitesimal coordinate transformation along a vector ﬁeld χ. In order

that this variation respects the conditions (4.4), the vector χ should take the form [118]

(cid:90) ∞

r

χr = r σ(xa),

χa = a(xb) − (cid:96)2∂b σ

dr(cid:48)
r(cid:48) γab(r

(cid:48)

, xa)

(4.12)

Moreover, by requiring the boundary metric to be invariant (Dirichlet boundary con-
ditions that we have imposed) the functions σ(xa) and a(xb) are constrained by the

condition δg

(0)

ab ≡ L(cid:126) g

(0)
ab + 2σg

(0)

ab = 0. That is, (cid:126) ≡ (+(x+), −(x−)) should be a con-

formal Killing vector of the ﬂat boundary metric and σ is deﬁned as the Weyl factor in

terms of (cid:126).

Solving the above integral for a given Ba˜nados metric, we arrive at

χ = −

r
2

(cid:48)
(cid:48)
−)∂r +
+ + 
(

+ +

(cid:96)2r2(cid:48)(cid:48)− + (cid:96)4L−(cid:48)(cid:48)
2(r4 − (cid:96)4L+L−)

+

− +

(cid:96)2r2(cid:48)(cid:48)
+ + (cid:96)4L+(cid:48)(cid:48)−
2(r4 − (cid:96)4L+L−)

(cid:17)

∂+ +

(cid:16)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

∂−,

(4.13)

4.4. Symplectic symmetries and charges

59

where ± are two arbitrary single-valued periodic functions of x± and possibly of the
ﬁelds L+(x+), L−(x−), and the prime denotes derivative w.r.t. the argument. As we
see,

1. χ is a ﬁeld-dependent vector ﬁeld. That is, even if the two arbitrary functions ±

are ﬁeld independent, it has explicit dependence upon L±: χ = χ(±; L±).

2. The vector ﬁeld χ is deﬁned in the entire coordinate patch spanned by the Ba˜nados

metric, not only asymptotically.

3. Close to the boundary, at large r, χ reduces to the Brown-Henneaux asymptotic

symmetries [5]. Also, importantly, at large r the ﬁeld-dependence of χ drops out
if one also takes ± ﬁeld-independent.

The variation in metric generated by an inﬁnitesimal diﬀeomorphism along a vector

χ(±) given by (4.13) takes the form

gµν(L+, L−) + δχgµν = gµν(L+ + δ+L+, L− + δ−L−),

(4.14)

where

δ+L+ = +∂+L+ + 2L+∂++ −
δ−L− = −∂−L− + 2L−∂−− −

1
2
1
2

∂3
++,

∂3−−.

(4.15)

A diagonal matrix with components L+, L− hence transforms exactly in the same way
as the energy-momentum tensor of a 2 dimensional conformal ﬁeld theory under generic

inﬁnitesimal conformal transformations. This is probably the ﬁrst entry of the dictio-

nary of AdS3/CFT2 correspondence [88, 90]. Remarkably, the last term related to the

central extension of the Virasoro algebra is a quantum anomalous eﬀect in the CFT

side, while in the gravity side appears classically.

4.4.1 Local symplectic symmetries

Here we review the notion of local symplectic symmetries introduced in [104, 105] (see

also [107] for earlier observations) and show that the vector ﬁeld χ determines local

symplectic symmetries of AdS3 phase space.

Deﬁnition 4.1. A vector χ is called a local symplectic symmetry of phase space if the

presymplectic current contracted with the Lie derivative of the metric with respect to

χ vanishes on-shell everywhere in spacetime. Explicitly it reads

ω[Φ; δΦ,LχΦ] ≈ 0,

(4.16)

for all Φ solving the equations of motion and all δΦ solving the linearized ﬁeld equations

around Φ. Moreover the associated charge should be ﬁnite and conserved.

The above deﬁnition is a local condition and hence very tight. However, as we will

show, they can be realized in interesting gravitational situations. Below we list the nice

properties of local symplectic symmetries in a proposition. We postpone the proof of

these properties to appendix (A.1).

Proposition 5. The set of local symplectic symmetries have the following properties:

1. they form a closed algebra,

2. their corresponding charge is integrable,

3. their corresponding charge can be computed over any codimension 2 closed surface

in the bulk that can be continuously deformed from the asymptotics.

The vectors χ deﬁned in (4.13) clearly satisfy the condition (4.16) as a result of

(4.11). Then according to the above properties, the charges associated to the symplec-

tic symmetries of AdS3 phase space is integrable and can be deﬁned over any closed
codimension two surface S (circles in 3d) anywhere in the bulk. Moreover, as we dis-
cussed before, the symplectic symmetries (4.13) coincide with Brown-Henneaux asymp-

totic symmetries in the asymptotic region. Therefore, the concept of “local symplectic

symmetry” extends the notion of “asymptotic symmetry” inside the bulk.

4.4.2 Charges associated with local symplectic symmetries

A direct computation gives the formula for the inﬁnitesimal charge one-forms as

kχ[δg; g] = ˆkχ[δg; g] + dBχ[δg; g],

(4.17)

4.4. Symplectic symmetries and charges

where

(cid:0)+(x+) δL+(x+)dx+ − −(x

−(cid:1) ,

−

) δL−(x

−

)dx

ˆkχ[δg; g] =

(cid:96)

8πG

is the expected result and

Bχ =

(cid:96)((cid:48)
+ + (cid:48)−)(L+δL− − L−δL+)
32πG(r4 − L+L−)

,

61

(4.18)

is an uninteresting boundary term which drops after integration on a circle. Note also

−(cid:1)
that since ± are assumed to be ﬁeld independent ˆkχ[δg; g] = δHχ where

(cid:0)+(x+) L+(x+)dx+ − −(x

Hχ =

) L−(x

8πG

−

−

)dx

(cid:96)

(4.19)

as required in (A.2). The integrability of charges is also guaranteed by the above

property. In the case of periodic identiﬁcations leading to a cylindrical boundary, we

are then led to the standard Virasoro charges

(cid:73)

Qχ[g] =

S

Hχ[g] =

(cid:96)

8πG

0

(cid:90) 2π

dφ(cid:0)+(x+)L+(x+) + −(x

)(cid:1) ,

−

−

)L−(x

(4.20)

where φ ∼ φ + 2π labels the periodic circle S. The charges are manifestly deﬁned
everywhere in the bulk in the range of the Ba˜nados coordinates. Note that the charges
are normalized to zero for the zero mass BTZ black hole ¯g for which L± = 0 2.
In
AdS3/CFT2, the functions L+, L− (with the right numerical factor) are interpreted as
components of the dual stress-energy tensor of CFT.

4.4.3 Charge algebra and adjusted bracket

According to (3.13), the algebra of conserved charges is deﬁned as

{Qχ1, Qχ2} = −δχ1Qχ2,

(4.21)

Let us denote the charge associated with the vector χ+
and the charge associated with the vector χ−

n = χ(+ = 0, − = einx−

n = χ(+ = einx+

, − = 0) by Ln
) by ¯Ln. From the

2As we will discuss in section (4.6), the zero mass BTZ can only be used as a reference to deﬁne

charges over a patch of phase space connected to it. For other disconnected patches, one should choose

other reference points.

deﬁnition of charges (4.20) and the transformation rules (4.15), we directly obtain the

charge algebra

{Lm, Ln} = (m − n)Lm+n +
{ ¯Lm, Ln} = 0,
{ ¯Lm, ¯Ln} = (m − n) ¯Lm+n +

c
12

c
12

m3δm+n,0,

m3δm+n,0,

where

c =

3(cid:96)
2G

,

(4.22)

(4.23)

is the Brown-Henneaux central charge. These are the famous two copies of the Virasoro

algebra. A term proportional to m can be arbitrarily added to or removed from the

central term by a constant shift in the generator L0 of the algebra. We have ﬁxed the

above form by requiring the charges to be zero for the massless BTZ black hole.

We discussed in chapter 3, theorem (3), that the algebra of charges represents the

algebra of symplectic symmetries up to a central extension. However computing com-

mutator of symplectic symmetries through the Lie bracket, we do not ﬁnd even a closed

algebra. This apparent inconsistency stems from the fact that the symplectic symmetry
vectors (4.13) are ﬁeld dependent, i.e. depend on L±.
of ﬁeld dependent vectors, one should “adjust” the Lie bracket by subtracting oﬀ the

It turns out that in the case

terms coming from the variations of ﬁelds within the χ vectors [111]. Explicitly,

(cid:17)

,

(4.24)

(4.25)

(cid:2)χ(1; L), χ(2; L)(cid:3)

(cid:2)χ(1; L), χ(2; L)(cid:3)

∗ ≡

(cid:16)

L.B −

δL
1χ(2; L) − δL

2χ(1; L)

where the variations δL

 are deﬁned as

δL
1χ(2; L) = δ1L

∂
∂L

χ(2; L).

It can be checked that the adjusted bracket [ , ]∗ satisﬁes all the properties of a bracket.
Interestingly this is precisely the bracket which lead to the representation of the algebra

by conserved charges in the case of ﬁeld-dependent vector ﬁelds. Here the ﬁeld depen-

dence is stressed by the notation χ(; L). Here and in the following we use a compressed
notation by merging the left and right sectors into single symbols,  = (+, −) and
L = (L+, L−).

4.4. Symplectic symmetries and charges

63

Using the adjusted bracket, it can be checked that the vectors χ() form a closed

algebra

Upon expanding in modes χ±

n , one obtains two copies of the Witt algebra

(cid:48)
(cid:48)
2 − 
∗ = χ(1
12; L).

(cid:2)χ(1; L), χ(2; L)(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:2)χ+
(cid:3)
(cid:2)χ+
∗ = (m − n)χ+
(cid:3)
(cid:2)χ
∗ = 0,
∗ = (m − n)χ

m, χ+
n
−
m, χ
n
−
−
m, χ
n

m+n,

−
m+n,

(4.26)

(4.27)

which is then represented by the conserved charges as the centrally extended algebra

(4.22).

4.4.4 Finite form of symplectic symmetry transformations

We discussed in the previous subsections that the phase space of Ba˜nados geometries

admits a set of non-trivial perturbations generated by the vector ﬁelds χ. Then, there

exists ﬁnite coordinate transformations (obtained by “exponentiating the χ’s”) which

map a Ba˜nados metric to another one. That is, there are coordinate transformations

±

x

→ X

±

±

±

(x

, r) ,

= X

r → R = R(x

±

, r),

(4.28)

with X±, R such that the metric ˜gµν = gαβ
∂xβ
∂X ν is a Ba˜nados geometry with ap-
propriately transformed L±. Such transformations change the physical charges. They
are not gauge transformations but are instead solution or charge generating transfor-

∂xα
∂X µ

mations.

Here, we use the approach of Rooman-Spindel [96]. We start by noting that the

technical diﬃculty in “exponentiating” the χ’s arise from the fact that χ’s are ﬁeld
dependent and hence their form changes as we change the functions L±, therefore the
method discussed in section 3.3 of [105] cannot be employed here. However, this feature

disappears in the large r regime. Therefore, if we can ﬁnd the form of (4.28) at large
r we can read how the L± functions of the two transformed metrics should be related.
Then, the subleading terms in r are ﬁxed such that the form of the Ba˜nados metric is

preserved. This is guaranteed to work as a consequence of Feﬀerman-Graham’s theorem

[121]. From the input of the (ﬂat) boundary metric and ﬁrst subleading piece (the

boundary stress-tensor), one can in principle reconstruct the entire metric.

It can be shown that the ﬁnite coordinate transformation preserving (4.4) is

r(cid:112)h(cid:48)

x+ → X + = h+(x+) +
+ O(r
r → R =
(cid:96)2
−
−
−
x
2r2

+h(cid:48)−
= h−(x

→ X

) +

h(cid:48)(cid:48)−
(cid:96)2
h(cid:48)−
2r2
−1),
h(cid:48)(cid:48)
h(cid:48)

+

+

h(cid:48)
+
h+

−4),

+ O(r

h(cid:48)−
h− + O(r

−4),

(4.29)

where h±(x± + 2π) = h±(x±) ± 2π, h± are monotonic (h(cid:48)± > 0) so that the coordinate
change is a bijection. At leading order (in r), the functions h± parametrize a generic
conformal transformation of the boundary metric.

Acting upon the metric by the above transformation one can read how the functions

L± transform:

L+(x+) → ˜L+ = h(cid:48)
L−(x

2L+ −
) → ˜L− = h(cid:48)−2L− −

−

+

1
2
1
2

S[h+; x+],
S[h−; x−],

(4.30)

(4.31)

where S[h; x] is the Schwarz derivative

(4.32)
It is readily seen that in the inﬁnitesimal form, where h±(x) = x± + ±(x), the above
It is also illuminating to explicitly implement the positivity of h(cid:48)±
reduce to (4.15).

S[h(x); x] =

h(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)
h(cid:48) −

3h(cid:48)(cid:48)2
2h(cid:48)2 .

through

(cid:48)
± = eΨ±,
h

(4.33)

where Ψ± are two real single-valued functions. In terms of Ψ ﬁelds the Schwarz deriva-
tive takes a simple form and the expressions for ˜L± become

˜L+[Ψ+, L+] = e2Ψ+L+(x+)+

1
4

(cid:48)2
+−
Ψ

1
2

(cid:48)(cid:48)
Ψ
+,

˜L−[Ψ−, L−] = e2Ψ−L−(x

−

)+

1
4

Ψ

(cid:48)2−−

(cid:48)(cid:48)
1
−.
Ψ
2
(4.34)

This reminds the form of a Liouville stress-tensor and dovetails with the fact that AdS3

gravity with Brown-Henneaux boundary conditions may be viewed as a Liouville theory

[122] (see also [103] for a recent discussion).

4.5. The two Killing symmetries and their charges

65

We ﬁnally note that not all functions h± generate new solutions. The solutions to
˜L+ = L+, ˜L− = L− are coordinate transformations which leave the ﬁelds invariant: they
are ﬁnite transformations whose inﬁnitesimal versions are generated by the isometries.

There are therefore some linear combinations of symplectic symmetries which do not

generate any new charges. These “missing” symplectic charges are exactly compensated

by the charges associated with the Killing vectors that we will discuss in section (4.5).

4.5 The two Killing symmetries and their charges

So far we discussed the symplectic symmetries of the phase space. These are associated

with non-vanishing metric perturbations which are degenerate directions of the on-shell

presymplectic form. A second important class of symmetries are the Killing vectors

which are associated with vanishing metric perturbations. In this section we analyze

these vector ﬁelds, their charges and their commutation relations with the symplectic

symmetries. We will restrict our analysis to the case of asymptotically globally AdS3

where φ is 2π-periodic. We use Feﬀerman-Graham coordinates for deﬁniteness but since

Killing vectors are geometrical invariants, nothing will depend upon this speciﬁc choice.

4.5.1 Global Killing vectors

Killing vectors are vector ﬁelds along which the metric does not change. All diﬀeomor-

phisms preserving the Feﬀerman-Graham coordinate system are generated by the vector

ﬁelds given in (4.13). Therefore, Killing vectors have the same form as χ’s, but with the
extra requirement that δL± given by (4.15) should vanish. Let us denote the functions
± with this property by K± and the corresponding Killing vector by ζ (instead of χ).
Then, ζ is a Killing vector if and only if

(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)
+ − 4L+K
K

(cid:48)
(cid:48)
+ − 2K+L
+ = 0,

(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)
− − 4L−K
K

(cid:48)
(cid:48)
− − 2K−L
− = 0.

(4.35)

These equations were thoroughly analyzed in [101] and we only provide a summary

of the results relevant for our study here. The above linear third order diﬀerential

equations have three linearly independent solutions and hence Ba˜nados geometries in

general have six (local) Killing vectors which form an sl(2, R) × sl(2, R) algebra, as

expected. The three solutions take the form K+ = ψiψj, i, j = 1, 2 where ψ1,2 are the

two independent solutions to the second order Hill’s equations

(cid:48)(cid:48)

ψ

= L+(x+)ψ

(4.36)

where L+(x+ + 2π) = L(x+). Therefore, the function K+ functionally depends upon
L+ but not on L(cid:48)
+, i.e. K+ = K+(L+). This last point will be crucial for computing
the commutation relations and checking integrability as we will shortly see. The same

holds for the right moving sector.
In general, ψi are not periodic functions under
φ ∼ φ + 2π and therefore not all six vectors described above are global Killing vectors
of the geometry. However, Floquet’s theorem [123] implies that the combination ψ1ψ2

is necessarily periodic. This implies that Ba˜nados geometries have at least two global
Killing vectors. Let us denote these two global Killing vectors by ζ±,

ζ+ = χ(K+, K− = 0; L±),

ζ− = χ(K+ = 0, K−; L±),

(4.37)

where χ is the vector ﬁeld given in (4.13). These two vectors deﬁne two global U (1)

isometries of Ba˜nados geometries.

The important fact about these global U (1) isometry generators is that they com-

mute with each symplectic symmetry generator χ (4.13): Since the vectors are ﬁeld-

dependent, one should use the adjusted bracket (4.24) which reads explicitly as

(cid:2)χ(; L), ζ(K; L)(cid:3)

∗ =(cid:2)χ(; L), ζ(K; L)(cid:3)

(cid:16)

L.B. −

δL
 ζ(K; L) − δL

Kχ(; L)

(cid:17)

,

where the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side is the usual Lie bracket. Since K = K(L),

the adjustment term reads as

δL
 ζ(K(L); L) = δL

ζ(K; L) + ζ(δL

 K; L),

δL
Kχ(; L) = δKL

χ(; L) = 0

∂
∂L
∂
∂L

(4.38)

(4.39)

where we used the fact that ζ, χ are linear in their ﬁrst argument as one can see from

(4.13) and we used Killing’s equation. We observe that we will get only one additional

term with respect to the previous computation (4.26) due to the last term in (4.38).

Therefore,

(cid:2)χ(; L), ζ(K(L); L)(cid:3)

∗ = ζ( K

(cid:48)

(cid:48)
− 

K; L) − ζ(δL

 K; L).

(4.40)

4.5. The two Killing symmetries and their charges

67

Now the variation of Killing’s condition (4.35) implies that

(δK)

(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)

(cid:48)
− 4L(δK)

(cid:48)

− 2L

δK = 4δLK

(cid:48)

+ 2(δL)

(cid:48)

K.

Then, recalling (4.15) and using again (4.35) we arrive at

and therefore

δL
 K =  K

(cid:48)

(cid:48)
− 

K,

(cid:2)χ(; L), ζ(K(L); L)(cid:3)

∗ = 0.

(4.41)

(4.42)

The above may be intuitively understood as follows. ζ being a Killing vector ﬁeld does

not transform L, while a generic χ transforms L. Now the function K is a speciﬁc

function of the metric, K = K(L). The adjusted bracket is deﬁned such that it removes

the change in the metric and only keeps the part which comes from Lie bracket of the

corresponding vectors as if L did not change.

It is interesting to compare the global Killing symmetries and the symplectic sym-

metries. The symplectic symmetries are given by (4.13) and determined by functions
±. The functions ± are ﬁeld independent, so that they are not transformed by moving
in the phase space. On the other hand, although the Killing vectors have the same form
(4.13), their corresponding functions ± which are now denoted by K±, are ﬁeld de-
pendent as a result of (4.35). Therefore the Killing vectors diﬀer from one geometry to

another. Accordingly if we want to write the Killing vectors in terms of the symplectic
symmetry Virasoro modes χ±

n (4.27), we have

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

ζ+ =

n (L+)χ+
c+
n ,

ζ− =

−
n (L−)χ
c

−
n .

(4.43)

n

n

For example for a BTZ black hole, one can show using (4.35) that the global Killing
±
vectors are ζ± = χ
0 while for a “BTZ Virasoro descendant”, which is generated by
the coordinate transformations in section (4.4.4), it is a complicated combination of
diﬀerent Virasoro modes. For the case of global AdS3 with L± = − 1
4 (but not for its
descendants), (4.35) implies that there are six global Killing vectors which coincide with
the subalgebras {χ+

−
1,0,−1} of symplectic symmetries.

1,0,−1} and {χ

4.5.2 Conserved charges associated with the U (1) Killing vectors

Similarly to the Virasoro charges (4.18), the inﬁnitesimal charges associated to Killing

vectors can be computed using (3.58), leading to

dφ K+(L+)δL+,

δJ− =

dφ K−(L−)δL−.

(4.44)

(cid:90) 2π

δJ+ =

(cid:96)

8πG

0

(cid:90) 2π

(cid:96)

8πG

0

(cid:73) ∂K

(cid:96)

8πG

∂L

(cid:73)

δ1(δ2J) =

(cid:96)

8πG

Integrability of Killing charges. Given the ﬁeld dependence of the K-functions,
one may inquire about the integrability of the charges J± over the phase space. However,
in the present case, the integrability of J± can be directly checked as follows

δ1K(L) δ2L =

δ1L δ2L,

(4.45)

and therefore δ1(δ2J) − δ2(δ1J) = 0.

Having checked the integrability, we can now proceed with ﬁnding the explicit form

of charges through an integral along a suitable path over the phase space connecting

a reference ﬁeld conﬁguration to the conﬁguration of interest. However, as we will see

in section (4.6), the Ba˜nados phase space is not simply connected and therefore one

cannot reach any ﬁeld conﬁguration through a path from a reference ﬁeld conﬁguration.

As a result, the charges should be deﬁned independently over each connected patch of

the phase space. In section (4.6) we will give the explicit form of charges over a patch

of great interest, i.e. the one containing BTZ black holes and their descendants. We

then ﬁnd a ﬁrst law relating the variation of entropy to the variation of these charges.

Algebra of Killing and symplectic charges. We have already shown in section

(4.5.1) that the adjusted bracket between generators of respectively symplectic and

Killing symmetries vanish. If the charges are correctly represented, it should automat-
ically follow that the corresponding charges Ln, J+ (and ¯Ln, J−) also commute:

{J±, Ln} = {J±, ¯Ln} = 0.

Let us check (4.46). By deﬁnition we have

{J+, Ln} = −δKLn,

(4.46)

(4.47)

where one varies the dynamical ﬁelds in the deﬁnition of Ln with respect to the Killing
vector K. Since K leaves the metric unchanged, we have δKL+(x+) = 0 and therefore

4.6. Phase space as Virasoro coadjoint orbits

69

directly δKLn = 0. Now, let us also check that the bracket is anti-symmetric by also

showing

{Ln, J+} ≡ −δLnJ+ = 0.

(4.48)

This is easily shown as follows:

(cid:90) 2π
(cid:90) 2π

0

δLnJ+ =

=

(cid:96)

8πG

(cid:96)

8πG

0

(cid:90) 2π

0
(cid:48)
+ +

dφ K+δ+

n

L =

(cid:96)

8πG

dφ K+(+

(cid:48)
+ + 2L++
n L
n

(cid:48)
dφ (−L
+K+ − 2L+K

(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)
+ )+,n = 0

K

1
2

(cid:48)

1
2

−

(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)

)

+
n

(4.49)

after using (4.15), integrating by parts and then using (4.35). The same reasoning holds
for J− and ¯Ln.

In general, the Ba˜nados phase space only admits two Killing vectors. An exception is

the descendants of the vacuum AdS3 which admit six globally deﬁned Killing vectors. In
that case, the two U (1) Killing charges are J± = − 1
charges are identically zero. In the case of the decoupled near-horizon extremal phase

4 and the other four SL(2,R)

U (1) × SL(2,R)

U (1)

space deﬁned in section (4.7) we will have four global Killing vectors with the left-
moving U (1)+ charge J+ arbitrary, but the SL(2, R)− charges all vanishing J a− = 0,
a = +1, 0,−1.

4.6 Phase space as Virasoro coadjoint orbits

The symplectic symmetry vectors χ form an adjoint representation of (centerless) Vi-

rasoro algebra. On the other hand, the conserved charges e.g.
(4.19) indeed deﬁne
an interior product between the vectors (x)∂x and a form density L(x)dx2 on a circle
deﬁned by x (x here can be either x+ or x−). Therefore L actually forms the coadjoint
representation of Virasoro algebra. Equation (4.15) is then the coadjoint action of the

Virasoro algebra. As we discussed, each element of the phase space can be labeled by
L+(x+), L−(x−). Accordingly, the AdS3 phase space is isomorphic to the direct prod-
uct of two coadjoint representations of Virasoro algebra. Starting from a representative

function L, e.g. L = const, the elements obtained by the coadjoint action (4.15) form

an orbit of the Virasoro algebra. More precisely. an orbit is deﬁned by the coadjoint

action of Virasoro generators quotiented by the stabilizer subalgebra (4.35). This is

a well-established concept in the literature, see e.g.

[108, 109] and references therein.

What we have shown here is that the phase space is composed of distinct Virasoro
coadjoint orbits and that the Killing charges J± are constants along each orbit, and
hence label the orbits. In the language of a dual 2d CFT, each orbit may be viewed as

a primary operator together with its conformal descendants.

4.6.1 Classiﬁcation of Virasoro orbits

Let us summarize some key results from [108]. We will focus on the orbits of a single

Virasoro algebra, say the + sector (which we refer to as left-movers). The orbits in

general fall into two classes: those orbits with a constant representative, and those which

do not contain any constant element. The constant L+ representatives correspond to

the better studied geometries, e.g.

see [124, 101] for a review. They fall into four

categories:

• Exceptional orbits En with representative L = −n2/4, n = 0, 1, 2, 3,··· . The zero
massless BTZ is a constant representative of the orbit E0 × E0. (The n = 0 case
coincides with the hyperbolic orbit B0(0), see below.) The E1 × E1 orbit admits
global AdS3 as a representative. For n ≥ 2, En × En is represented by an n-fold
cover of global AdS3.

• Elliptic orbits Cn,ν, with representative L = −(n + ν)2/4, n = 0, 1, . . . and 0 <
ν < 1. The geometries with both L± of this form with n = 0, correspond to conic
spaces which can be regarded as particles on AdS3 [82], and geometries in this

orbit may be viewed as “excitations” (descendants) of particles on the AdS3.

• Hyperbolic orbits B0(b), with representative L = b2/4, where b is a real non-
negative number b ≥ 0. The b = 0 case coincides with the E0 orbit. The geometries
with both L± = b2±/4 are BTZ black holes. The extremal BTZ corresponds the
case where one sector is frozen b− = 0 .

• Parabolic orbit P +

0 , with representative L = 0. The geometries associated with
P +
0 × B0(b) orbits correspond to the self-dual orbifold [117] which may also be
obtained as the near horizon geometry of extremal BTZ black holes. In particu-
lar, P +

0 × B0(0) corresponds to null selfdual orbifold [125]. The P +

0 × P +

0 orbit

4.6. Phase space as Virasoro coadjoint orbits

71

corresponds to AdS3 in the Poincar´e patch and its descendants, which in the dual

2d CFT corresponds to vacuum Verma module of the CFT on 2d plane.

The non-constant representative orbits, come into three categories, the generic hyper-
bolic orbits Bn(b) and two parabolic orbits P
orbits are less clear and understood.

±
n , n ∈ N. Geometries associated with these

4.6.2 Killing charges as orbit labels

As shown in (4.49), all the geometries associated with the same orbit have the same J±
charges. In other words, J± do not vary as we make coordinate transformations using
χ diﬀeomorphisms (4.13); J± are “orbit invariant” quantities. One may hence relate
them with the labels on the orbits, explicitly, J+ should be a function of b or ν for the

hyperbolic or elliptic orbits associated to the left-moving copy of the Virasoro group
and J− a similar function of labels on the right-moving copy of the Virasoro group.

The Ba˜nados phase space has a rich topological structure. It consists of diﬀerent

disjoint patches. Some patches (labeled by only integers) consist of only one orbit, while

some consist of a set of orbits with a continuous parameter. On the other hand, note

that the conserved charges in covariant phase space methods are deﬁned through an

integration of inﬁnitesimal charges along a path connecting a reference point of phase

space to a point of interest. Therefore, the charges can be deﬁned only over the piece

of phase space simply connected to the reference conﬁguration. For other patches, one

should use other reference points. In this work we just present explicit analysis for the
B0(b+)×B0(b−) sector of the phase space. Since this sector corresponds to the family of
BTZ black holes of various mass and angular momentum and their descendants, we call

it the BTZ sector. Note that there is no regular coordinate transformation respecting

the chosen boundary conditions, which moves us among the orbits. In particular for the

BTZ sector, this means that there is no regular coordinate transformation which relates

BTZ black hole geometries with diﬀerent mass and angular momentum, i.e. geometries
with diﬀerent b±.

We now proceed with computing the charges J± for an arbitrary ﬁeld conﬁguration
in the BTZ sector of the phase space. Since the charges are integrable, one can choose

any path from a reference conﬁguration to the desired point. We ﬁx the reference

conﬁguration to be the massless BTZ with L± = 0. We choose the path to pass by the
constant representative L± of the desired solution of interest ˜L±(x±). Let us discuss
J+ (the other sector follows the same logic). Then the charge is deﬁned as

(cid:90)

(cid:90) ˜L+

(cid:90) L+

(cid:90) ˜L+

J+ =

δJ+ =

δJ+ =

δJ+ +

δJ+.

γ

0

0

L+

(4.50)

We decomposed the integral into two parts: ﬁrst the path across the orbits, between

constant representatives L+ = 0 and L+ and second the path along (within) a given

orbit with representative L+. Since the path along the orbit does not change the values
J± (δχJ± = 0), the second integral is zero. Accordingly, the charge is simply given by

(cid:90) L+

(cid:73)

(cid:96)

J+ =

8πG

0

dϕK+(L)δL

(4.51)

where L+ is a constant over the spacetime. Solving (4.35) for constant L± and assuming
periodicity of φ, we ﬁnd that K± = const. Therefore the Killing vectors are ∂± up to a
normalization constant, which we choose to be 1. Hence K+(L) = 1, and

J+ =

(cid:96)
4G

L+,

J− =

(cid:96)
4G

L−.

(4.52)

Therefore the Killing charges are a multiple of the Virasoro zero mode of the constant

representative.

4.6.3 Thermodynamics of Ba˜nados geometries

Since the BTZ descendants are obtained through a ﬁnite coordinate transformation

from the BTZ black hole, the descendants inherit the causal structure and other geo-

metrical properties of the BTZ black hole. We did not prove that the ﬁnite coordinate

transformation is non-singular away from the black hole Killing horizon but the fact

that the Virasoro charges are deﬁned all the way to the horizon gives us conﬁdence that

there is no singularity between the horizon and the spatial boundary. The geometry of

the Killing horizon was discussed in more detail in [101].

The area of the outer horizon deﬁnes a geometrical quantity which is invariant

under diﬀeomorphisms. Therefore the BTZ descendants admit the same area along

the entire orbit. The angular velocity and surface gravity are deﬁned geometrically as

well, given a choice of normalization at inﬁnity. This choice is provided for example

4.7. Extremal phase space and decoupling limit

73

by the asymptotic Feﬀerman-Graham coordinate system which is shared by all BTZ
descendants. Therefore these chemical potentials τ± are also orbit invariant and are
identical for all descendants and in particular are constant. This is the zeroth law for

the BTZ descendant geometries.

One may deﬁne more precisely τ± as the chemical potentials conjugate to J± [126].
Upon varying the parameters of the solutions we obtain a linearized solution which obey

the ﬁrst law

δS = τ+δJ+ + τ−δJ−.

(4.53)

This ﬁrst law is an immediate consequence of the ﬁrst law for the BTZ black hole

since all quantities are geometrical invariants and therefore independent of the orbit
representative. In terms of L±, the constant representatives of the orbits in the BTZ
sector, one has (4.52) and [90]

and the entropy takes the usual Cardy form

S =

π
3

c(

L+ +

τ± =

π
√L±

(cid:112)

(cid:112)

L−).

(4.54)

(4.55)

(4.56)

One can also write the Smarr formula in terms of orbit invariants as

S = 2(τ+J+ + τ−J−).

The only orbits which have a continuous label (necessary to write inﬁnitesimal varia-

tions) and which admit a bifurcate Killing horizon are the hyperbolic orbits [101, 126].

The extension of the present discussion to generic hyperbolic orbits (and not just for

the BTZ sector) will be postponed to [126].

4.7 Extremal phase space and decoupling limit

We deﬁne the “extremal phase space” as the subspace of the set of all Ba˜nados ge-

ometries (equipped with the invariant presymplectic form) with the restriction that the
right-moving function L− vanishes identically. The Killing charge J− is therefore iden-
tically zero. Also, perturbations tangent to the extremal phase space obey δL− = 0 but
δL+ is an arbitrary left-moving function.

A particular element in the extremal phase space is the extremal BTZ geometry

with M (cid:96) = J. It is well-known that this geometry admits a decoupled near-horizon

limit which is given by the self-dual spacelike orbifold of AdS3 [117]

(cid:32)
−r2dt2 +

ds2 =

(cid:96)2
4

dr2
r2 +

4|J|
k

(dφ −

2

(cid:112)

r
|J|/k

(cid:33)

dt)2

,

φ ∼ φ + 2π,

(4.57)

where k ≡ (cid:96)
4G . A Virasoro algebra exists as asymptotic symmetry in the near-horizon
limit and this Virasoro algebra has been argued to be related to the asymptotic Vira-

soro algebra deﬁned close to the AdS3 spatial boundary [98]. Since these asymptotic

symmetries are deﬁned at distinct locations using boundary conditions it is not entirely

obvious that they are uniquely related. Now, using the concept of symplectic symme-

tries which extend the asymptotic symmetries to the bulk spacetime, one deduces that

the extremal black holes are equipped with one copy of Virasoro hair. The Virasoro

hair transforms under the action of the Virasoro symplectic symmetries, which are also

deﬁned everywhere outside of the black hole horizon.

One subtlety is that the near-horizon limit is a decoupling limit obtained after

changing coordinates to near-horizon co-moving coordinates. We ﬁnd two interesting

ways to take the near-horizon limit. In Feﬀerman-Graham coordinates the horizon is

sitting at r = 0 and it has a constant angular velocity 1/(cid:96) independently of the Virasoro

hair. Therefore taking a near-horizon limit is straightforward and one readily obtains

the near-horizon Virasoro symmetry. It is amusing that the resulting vector ﬁeld which

generates the symmetry diﬀers from the ansatz in [98], as well as the original Kerr/CFT

ansatz [78] and the newer ansatz for generic extremal black holes [107, 105]. The

diﬀerence is however a vector ﬁeld which is pure gauge, i.e. charges associated with it

are zero.

A second interesting way to take the near-horizon limit consists in working with co-

ordinates such that the horizon location depends upon the Virasoro hair. This happens

in Gaussian null coordinates. Taking the near-horizon limit then requires more care.

This leads to a yet diﬀerent Virasoro ansatz for the vector ﬁeld which is ﬁeld dependent.

After working out the details, a chiral half of the Virasoro algebra is again obtained,

which also shows the equivalence with the previous limiting procedure.

4.7. Extremal phase space and decoupling limit

75

4.7.1 Decoupling limit of the extremal sector

The general metric of the extremal phase space of AdS3 Einstein gravity with Brown-

Henneaux boundary conditions and in the Feﬀerman-Graham coordinate system is given

by

ds2 =

(cid:96)2
−
r2 dr2 − r2dx+dx

+ (cid:96)2L(x+)dx+2

,

±
x

= t/(cid:96) ± φ,

φ ∼ φ + 2π (4.58)

where we dropped the + subscript, L+ = L. It admits two global Killing vectors: ∂−
and ζ+ deﬁned in subsection (4.5.1). In the case of the extremal BTZ orbit, the metrics
(4.58) admit a Killing horizon at r = 0 which is generated by the Killing vector ∂−
[101].

One may readily see that a diﬀeomorphism χ(+, − = 0) deﬁned from (4.13) with

arbitrary +(x+), namely

χext =

(cid:96)2(cid:48)(cid:48)
2r2 ∂− + +∂+ −

+

1
2

(cid:48)
r
+∂r,

(4.59)

is tangent to the phase space. Indeed, it preserves the form of the metric (4.58). Re-

markably, the ﬁeld dependence, i.e. the dependence on L+, completely drops out in

χext. Note however that although χext is ﬁeld independent, the Killing vector ζ+ is

still ﬁeld dependent. From previous discussions, it follows straightforwardly that χext

generates local symplectic symmetries.

One may then take the decoupling limit

(cid:96) ˜t
,
λ

t →

φ → φ + Ωext

(cid:96) ˜t
,
λ

r2 → 2(cid:96)2 λ˜r,

λ → 0

(4.60)

˜t

→ 2

where Ωext = −1/(cid:96) is the constant angular velocity at extremality. As a result x+ → φ
and x−
λ−φ. Functions periodic in x+ are hence well-deﬁned in the decoupling limit
while functions periodic in x− are not. Therefore, the full Ba˜nados phase space does
not admit a decoupling limit. Only the extremal part of the Ba˜nados phase space does.
˜t
λ is dominant with respect to φ in the near-horizon limit, the coordinate
x− eﬀectively decompactiﬁes in the limit while x+ remains periodic. Since −dx+dx− is

Also, since

the metric of the dual CFT, this leads to the interpretation of the decoupling limit as

a discrete-light cone quantization of the dual CFT [98].

In this limit the metric (4.58) and symplectic symmetry generators (4.59) become

ds2
(cid:96)2 =
χext =

d˜r2
4˜r2 − 4˜rd˜tdφ + L(φ)dφ2
(cid:48)(cid:48)(φ)
8˜r

(cid:48)
∂˜t − ˜r

(φ)∂˜r + (φ)∂φ,

(4.61)

(4.62)

where we dropped again the + subscript, + = . As it is standard in such limits,

this geometry acquires an enhanced global SL(2, R)− × U (1)+ isometry [101, 100]. The
sl(2, R)− Killing vectors are given as

ξ1 =

1
2

∂˜t,

ξ2 = ˜t∂˜t − ˜r∂˜r,

ξ3 = [(2˜t2 +

L
8˜r2 )∂˜t +

1
2˜r

∂φ − 4˜t˜r∂˜r].

(4.63)

and obey the algebra

[ξ1, ξ2] = ξ1,

[ξ1, ξ3] = 2ξ2,

[ξ2, ξ3] = ξ3,

(4.64)

The u(1)+ is still generated by ζ+.

As it is explicitly seen from the metric (4.61), absence of Closed Timelike Curves
(CTC) requires L(φ) ≥ 0. This restricts the possibilities for orbits which admit a
regular decoupling limit. The obvious example is the extremal BTZ orbit for which the

decoupling limit is a near-horizon limit. Representatives of these orbits are the extremal
BTZ black holes with L+ ≥ 0 constant and the near-horizon metric (4.61) is precisely
6 L and setting ˜t = √L+t/4
the self-dual orbifold (4.57) after recognizing J = (cid:96)
and ˜r = r.3

4G L = c

From the analysis provided in [108] one can gather that all orbits other than the

hyperbolic B0(b) and the parabolic P +
0 orbits, admit a function L(φ) which can take neg-
ative values. The corresponding geometries therefore contain CTCs. The only regular

decoupling limit is therefore the near-horizon limit of generic extremal BTZ (including

massless BTZ [127]). Therefore, the near-horizon extremal phase space is precisely the

three-dimensional analogue of the phase space of more generic near-horizon extremal

geometries discussed in [104, 105]. In other words, geometries of the form (4.61) which
are free of CTCs are in P +

0 × B0(b), b ≥ 0 orbits.

0 or P +

0 × P +

3For the case of the massless BTZ, one should note that there are two distinct near-horizon limits;

the ﬁrst leads to null self-dual orbifold of AdS3 and the second to the pinching AdS3 orbifold [127].

4.8. Microscopic counting of entropy

Under the action of χext above, one has

δχL(φ) = L(φ)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)
+ 2L(φ)

(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)


1
2

−

77

(4.65)

in the decoupling limit. With the mode expansion  = einφ, one may deﬁne the sym-

plectic symmetry generators ln which satisfy the Witt algebra,

i[lm, ln] = (m − n)lm+n.

(4.66)

The surface charge is integrable and given by

(cid:73)

Hχ[Φ] =

(cid:96)

8πG

dφ (φ)L(φ).

(4.67)

Moreover, one may show that the surface charges associated to the SL(2, R)− Killing
vectors, J a−, vanish. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the ˜t and ˜r components of χext (4.62) do
not contribute to the surface charges. The various ansatzes described in [98, 78, 107, 105]

which diﬀer precisely by the ∂˜t term are therefore physically equivalent to the one in
(4.62).

One may also work out the algebra of charges Hn associated with  = einφ:

{Hm, Hn} = (m − n)Hm+n +
where c is the usual Brown-Henneaux central charge.

c
12

m3δm+n,0,

(4.68)

The charge J+ associated with the Killing vector ζ+ commutes with the Hn’s, as

discussed in general in section (4.5.2). Following the analysis of section (4.6.3), one may

associate an entropy S and chemical potential τ+ which satisfy the ﬁrst law and Smarr

relation

δS = τ+δJ+ ,

S = 2τ+J+.

(4.69)

4.8 Microscopic counting of entropy

We showed that corresponding to a BTZ black hole, there is a family of solutions

obtained by speciﬁc nontrivial coordinate transformations of BTZ. We called these

solutions, the descendants of BTZ. What we naively have in mind, is that this family of

solutions can be mapped to states in the Fock space of a conformal ﬁeld theory. Then

BTZ is represented by a primary ﬁeld in CFT and its entropy is obtained by a counting

on the number of its descendants. Although the number of descendants is inﬁnite,

the result can regularized by deﬁning an appropriate measure or a suitable cutoﬀ. We

postpone this analysis to future works.

Let us brieﬂy review a closely related computation in the literature (see e.g. [95])

which is qualitatively diﬀerent from the one presented above. In this picture, a BTZ

black hole is considered as a thermal ensemble in the dual ﬁeld theory and the vacuum

corresponds to a massless BTZ black hole. The descendants are obtained by acting
Virasoro generators L−n (with negative index) with the energy

L0|n1,··· nr(cid:105) = ∆|n1,··· nr(cid:105) ,

∆ =

ni .

(4.70)

Therefore the density of states with energy ∆ is equal to the number of possible par-

titions of ∆, a well known problem in combinatorics. BTZ is then considered as the
ensemble of states with energy ∆ = L0. For large values of L0, ¯L0, the number of states
is approximated by Ramanujan formula

r(cid:88)

i=1

(cid:18)

(cid:112)

(cid:113)

(cid:19)

2π

L0/6 + 2π

L0/6

.

(4.71)

ρ(L0, ¯L0) = exp

However, this computation leads to

S = log ρ = c

−1/2 A
4G

(4.72)

where c = 3(cid:96)/2G is the central charge of the Virasoro algebra. As we see, this computa-

tion fails to reproduce the entropy of BTZ black hole. Despite from this fact, we think

that this does not present the correct holographic map. The reason is that action of

charges generates an inﬁnitesimal diﬀeomorphism in the bulk and hence the geometry is
moved in its orbit. Accordingly, the state |n1,··· nr(cid:105) represents a geometry in the orbit
of the massless BTZ, while we know that a BTZ black hole with nonvanishing mass

and angular momentum is in another orbit. In other words, there is no diﬀeomorphism

mappling a BTZ black hole to a diﬀerent one.

The above proposals are based on the identiﬁcation of microscopic states. However,

there is a successful microstate counting without trying to identify them. In this ap-

proach, one assumes that the symmetry algebra is not the basic algebra of underlying

ﬁelds, but only a representation thereof. Then based on the assumption that the dual

4.9. Discussion

79

CFT2 is modular invariant, and the Cardy formula is applicable, one can show that

starting from the partition function, one can reproduce exactly the entropy of BTZ

black hole [36, 75]. The partition function is given by

Z(τ ) = Tr(cid:2)exp(cid:0)2πiτ L0 − 2πi¯τ ¯L0

(cid:1)(cid:3)

where τ, ¯τ are modular parameters given by a combination of horizon temperature and

(4.73)

(4.74)

angular velocity. Modular invariance implies

(cid:48)

Z(τ

) = Z(τ ) ,

(cid:48)

τ

=

for integer values of a, b, c, d. Then it follows that the number of states is given by [128]

ρ(L0, ¯L0) = exp

2π

cL0/6 + 2π

cL0/6

(4.75)

aτ + b
cτ + d

(cid:113)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:112)

correctly reproducing the entropy of BTZ black hole.

4.9 Discussion

In this chapter we studied the set of asymptotic AdS3 spacetimes with ﬂat boundary

metric. We showed that this collection considered as a manifold, can be equipped with

a symplectic structure. Therefore we obtained the AdS3 phase space. We showed that

the Brown Henneaux asymptotic symmetries can be extended into the bulk such that

they transform a conﬁguration of the phase space into another nearby conﬁguration.

We demonstrated that these symmetry transformations satisfy in addition properties

that makes them “local symplectic symmetries” (as explained in proposition (5)) of the

AdS3 phase space. The exponentiation of these inﬁnitesimal symmetry transformations

generates one parameter family of conﬁgurations of the phase space. All conﬁgurations

connected to a representative conﬁguration forms an orbit of the Virasoro algebra. Not

all conﬁgurations in the AdS3 phase space are related by a diﬀeomorphism, hence the

AdS3 phase space breaks into diﬀerent orbits of the Virasoro algebra. This gives a good

understanding of the AdS3 phase space. The manifold is not simply connected, but it

consists of many connected patches. We also investigated the extremal sector of the

phase space and studied its decoupling limit, which leads to a phase space of its own

that corresponds to a boundary ﬂat metric with an identiﬁcation on a null circle. We

showed that the generator of symmetries of the near horizon region can be read oﬀ from

the Brown Henneaux asymptotic symmetries extended all the way down to the horizon

by requiring them to be local symplectic symmetries.

Chapter 5

Near horizon geometries of

extremal black holes

5.1

Introduction

A black hole with zero Hawking temperature is called an extremal black hole for which

the two inner and outer horizons coincide. Meanwhile they have non vanishing horizon

area and hence entropy. By the third law of black hole mechanics, an extremal black hole

cannot be formed through a physical process (like a collapse) in a ﬁnite time. Therefore

one might expect that these are not interesting objects to study. However from the

theoretical point of view, it can be argued that in a theory of quantum gravity, an ex-

tremal black hole can be regarded as a “frozen state” in which the excitations related to

Hawking radiation are not present. The fact that the entropy of an extremal black hole

is non vanishing, then implies that the microscopic theory has many degenerate states

corresponding to the extremal black hole. If one can understand the microscopics of

extremal black holes, then it would probably open the way to understand the resolution

for generic non-extremal black holes.

The near horizon geometry of an extremal black hole (to be deﬁned precisely) has

many universal and interesting properties. independent of theory and dimensions. The

study of these geometries (also known as throat geometries) has diﬀerent advantages.

When the thermodynamic properties of black holes are concerned, it can be shown

that almost all the information is encoded in the near horizon geometry. Also diﬀerent

81

approaches show that the entropy of a black hole resides on or at least near its horizon.

Therefore it is proposed that for a statistical description of black hole entropy, it is

enough to study the throat geometry [36, 78, 104, 105]. It is expected that the universal

properties of near horizon geometries can reveal a universal statistical description of

extremal black hole entropy. This will be the context of the next chapter.

In a diﬀerent context, the classiﬁcation of near horizon geometries is a ﬁrst step

towards the classiﬁcation of black hole geometries in higher dimensions. In 4 dimensions,

there are uniqueness theorems that answer the classiﬁcation of black holes in Einstein

Maxwell theory( see [31] for a review). However in 5 dimensions, within pure Einstein

gravity, there are 2 known black hole solutions which are asymptotically ﬂat; namely

the Myers-Perry black hole, and the black rings. Spatial sections of the horizon in the
former case have spherical topology, while the latter is S2 × S1. Although there are
constraints on the topology and symmetries of black holes in 5 and higher dimensions,

the classiﬁcation of black holes in dimensions higher than four remains an open problem.

Therefore a thorough study of near horizon geometries can be helpful in this direction

as well [129, 130, 131, 132].

In this chapter, we will switch to study the problem of black hole entropy in arbitrary
dimensions d ≥ 4. The cost is that we need to restrict to a special but interesting
type of black holes, namely the extremal black holes. The strategy is to focus on the

geometry near the horizon of the black hole. We will show that zooming on the horizon

reveals an independent geometry which contains all the relevant information, and is

called the near horizon geometry of extremal black hole (NHEG). These are interesting

geometries having enhanced isometries compared to the black hole geometry, and hence

more manageable dynamics.

In this chapter, we ﬁrst introduce these geometries and study their geometrical

properties. Specially we show that they have bifurcate Killing horizon structures which

is generated by a speciﬁc Killing vector of the spacetime. This is interesting since the

original extremal black hole geometry does not possess bifurcate Killing horizon. Next

we study the conserved charges corresponding to the global isometries of the geometry

and show that they satisfy laws similar to that of black hole mechanics. In section 5.5, we

study the Kerr/CFT correspondence [78] that proposed a duality between the dynamics

over the near horizon geometry of extremal Kerr (NHEK) and a dual chiral CFT, and its

5.2. Extremal black holes and near horizon limit

83

extensions. We then discuss the problems and challenges in this proposal. Speciﬁcally

we discuss the perturbations over NHEG and show the so called ‘No dynamics” property

of NHEK [133, ?]that extends to other NHEGs by physical assumptions [134]. Based

on these results, we will construct the “NHEG phase space” in the next chapter.

5.2 Extremal black holes and near horizon limit

The most general form of the metric of a stationary and axisymmetric black hole can

be written in the ADM form as

ds2 = −f dτ 2 + gρρdρ2 + ˜gαβdθαdθβ + gij(dψi − ωidτ )(dψj − ωjdτ ) ,

(5.1)

where f, gρρ, ˜gαβ, gij, ωi are functions of ρ, θα and i, j = 1, 2,··· , n and p = n+1,··· , N .
The horizons of black hole are at the roots of gρρ,

gρρ =

1

D2(ρ, θα)∆(ρ)

,

∆ =

(5.2)

(cid:89)
(ρ − rm) × (ρ − r+)2 ,

m

where we assume the function D to be analytic and nonvanishing everywhere. r+ is

the radius of the outer horizon and is a degenerate root of ∆. This implies that the

black hole is an extremal black hole. In four dimensions the black hole has at most two
horizons (e.g. see [31]) and ∆ = (ρ − r+)2. Due to the smoothness of metric on the
horizons f can always be written in the following form:

f = C2(ρ, θ)∆(ρ) .

(5.3)

and the fact that surface gravity is constant on the horizon implies that CD = const

on the horizon.

5.2.1 Near horizon limit of extremal black holes

To take the near horizon limit let us ﬁrst make the coordinate transformations [135]

ρ = re(1 + λr) ,

τ =

αret

λ

,

ϕi = ψi − Ωiτ

(5.4)

where Ωi = ωi(re) is the horizon angular velocity. In the ﬁrst equation we scale ρ − re
by the constant λ to zoom on the horizon. Then in second equation we scale τ inversely

to cancel divergences appearing in the transformed metric, and α is a suitable constant
to get the most simple form for the near horizon metric. The shift in ψi takes us to
the frame co-rotating with the black hole. Finally we take the limit λ → 0. The set of
these transformations and limit is called the near horizon limit, and the resulting near

horizon geometry becomes

ds2 =

1
D2

−r2dt2 +

(cid:21)
dr2
r2 + D2˜gαβdθαdθβ + D2gij(dϕi + (Ωi − ωi)dτ )(dϕj + (Ωj − ωj)dτ )

,

(cid:20)

where we used the fact that CD = const on the horizon and chose

(5.5)

(5.6)

(5.7)

(5.8)

,

.

(cid:21)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ρ=re

Recalling that Ωi = ωi|re, we arrive at the general form:

dr2
r2 + gαβdθαdθβ + γij(dϕi + kirdt)(dϕj + kjrdt)

ds2 = Γ

in which

(cid:20)
−r2dt2 +

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ρ=re

αr2

e =

1

CD

.

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)ρ=re

Γ(θα) =

1
D2

,

γij(θα) = D2gij

,

ki = −

1

CD

∂ωi
∂ρ

It can be shown [136] that smoothness of black hole geometry (5.1) forces ∂ρωi to
be constant on the horizon, and ki are hence constants in the NHEG (see also the

appendix of [137] for a detailed proof). The near horizon limit of an extremal black

hole is a solution to the theory in which the original black hole was a solution. In this

sense, this can be called a decoupling limit. Note that taking the near horizon limit of

a nonextremal black hole does not necessarily lead to a solution. For example the near

horizon limit of a Schwarzschild black hole (as a solution to vacuum Einstein gravity)

is a product of a Rindler space and a sphere which is clearly not a solution to vacuum

Einstein gravity.

5.3 Quick Review on NHEG

The near horizon extremal geometries (NHEG) are generic classes of geometries with

at least SL(2, R) × U (1) isometry group. These geometries, as the name suggests, may

5.3. Quick Review on NHEG

85

appear in the near horizon limit of extremal black holes, while they may also be viewed as

independent classes of geometries. Here we will mainly adopt the latter viewpoint. Also

for concreteness and technical simplicity, we will focus on a special class of the NHEG

which are Einstein vacuum solutions in generic d dimensions with SL(2, R) × U (1)d−3

isometry group. The general metric for this class of NHEG is

γij(θ)(dϕi + kirdt)(dϕj + kjrdt)

(5.9)



−r2dt2 +

d−3(cid:88)

i,j=1

dr2
r2 + dθ2 +

ds2 = Γ(θ)

where

t ∈ (−∞, +∞),

r ∈ {r < 0} or {r > 0},

θ ∈ [0, θM ax],

ϕi ∼ ϕi + 2π,

(5.10)

and ki are given constants. The geometry is a warped ﬁbred product over an AdS2
factor, spanned by t, r, with a Euclidean smooth and compact codimension two surface

H, covered by θ, ϕi; i.e. H are constant t, r surfaces. Notably, due to the SL(2, R)
isometry of the background, constant t = tH, r = rH surfaces for any value of tH, rH,
all give isometric surfaces H.

Let us discuss the Penrose diagram of the geometries by ignoring the directions on
the compact surface H. The ﬁrst two terms of the metric (5.9) form an AdS2 in the
Poincar´e patch; r = 0 is the Poincar´e horizon. This coordinate system covers a triangle

in the penrose diagram of global AdS2. The metric however can be extended beyond
the horizon by allowing negative values for r. Then r = +∞,−∞ cover segments of the
two disjoint boundaries of AdS2 as depicted in ﬁgure 5.1(see also [88]). The range of the
θ coordinate is ﬁxed requiring that H is a smooth and compact manifold. Note that H
can take various topologies [132]. Requiring the geometry to be smooth and Lorentzian

implies Γ(θ) > 0 and the eigenvalues of γij to be real and nonnegative. Moreover,
smoothness and absence of conical singularity of H implies that: (1) At most one of the
eigenvalues of γij(θ) matrix can be vanishing around a given θ = θ0 coordinate; (2) if
at θ0 we have a vanishing eigenvalue, it should behaves as (θ − θ0)2 +O(θ − θ0)3. Note
that the coeﬃcient of (θ − θ0)2 should be exactly one.

The geometry is completely determined by the functions Γ(θ), γij(θ) and the d − 3
constants ki which are determined through the Einstein ﬁeld equations. A complete

r
=
−
∞

II

0

=

r

I

r

=

0

∞
=
r

Figure 5.1: Penrose diagram for NHEG, suppressing the θ, ϕi direc-

tions. The positive and negative r values of the coordinates used in

(5.9) respectively cover I and II regions in the above ﬁgure. The two

boundaries are mapped onto each other by an r–(cid:126)ϕ inversion symmetry

(5.15). The arrows on the boundaries shows the ﬂow of time t. Note

also that ﬂow of time is reversed between regions I and II.

classiﬁcation of vacuum near horizon geometries was given in [132].
It was shown
that there are (d − 2)(d − 3)/2 independent continuous parameters and two discrete
parameters that specify a given NHEG. The discrete parameters specify the topology
of compact surface H which can be either S2 × T d−4, or S3 × T d−5, or quotients thereof
and L(p, q) × T d−5 where L(p, q) is a Lens space.

In four dimensions, there is only

one continuous parameter which is the entropy or angular momentum (remember that
k = 1 in that case) and the topology is S2. In ﬁve dimensions, there are three possible
topologies S2 × S1, S3 and L(p, q) and three continuous parameters.

5.3. Quick Review on NHEG

87

NHEG isometries. The NHEG background (5.9) enjoys SL(2, R) × U (1)d−3 isom-
etry. The SL(2, R) isometries are generated by Killing vectors ξa with a ∈ {−, 0, +},

ξ− = ∂t ,

ki∂ϕi,
and the U (1)d−3 isometries by Killing vectors mi with i ∈ {1,··· , d − 3},

ξ0 = t∂t − r∂r,

(t2 +

ξ+ =

1
r2 )∂t − tr∂r −

1
r

1
2

The isometry algebra is then

mi = ∂ϕi.

(5.11)

(5.12)

[ξ0, ξ−] = −ξ−,

[ξ0, ξ+] = ξ+,

[ξ−, ξ+] = ξ0 ,

[ξa, mi] = 0.

(5.13)

That is, if we view ξ0 as the scaling operator, ξ−, ξ+ are respectively lowering and raising
operators in SL(2, R). We also note that ξ−, ξ0 form a two dimensional subalgebra of
SL(2, R). For further use we deﬁne the structure constants f c
ab ξc.
Notations: Hereafter, we will denote all the d − 3 indices by vector sign; e.g. ki
will be denoted by (cid:126)k, ϕi by (cid:126)ϕ, ∂ϕi by (cid:126)∂ϕ and when there is a summation over i-indices
it will be denoted by dot-product; e.g. ki∂ϕi = (cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕ = (cid:126)k · (cid:126)m.

from [ξa, ξb] = f c

ab

The NHEG also enjoys various Z2

isometries. The two which will be relevant for

our later analysis are r–(cid:126)ϕ and t–(cid:126)ϕ-inversions. The t–(cid:126)ϕ-inversion,

(t, ϕi) → (−t,−ϕi).

(5.14)

is reminiscent of the similar symmetry in the (extremal) black hole (see [138] for a recent

discussion) whose near horizon limit leads to the NHEG. One may readily check that
under the above Z2, ξ0 do not change while ξ−, ξ+, (cid:126)m change sign. Another Z2 isometry
is the r–(cid:126)ϕ-inversion,

(r, ϕi) → (−r,−ϕi).

(5.15)

This Z2 exchanges the two boundaries of AdS2 (cf. Fig. 5.1). Under the r–(cid:126)ϕ-inversion
(5.15), the SL(2, R) Killing vectors (5.11) remain invariant.

NHEG examples in 4d and 5d. As some examples of NHEG, let us consider the

near horizon geometry of extremal Kerr black hole (NHEK) in four dimensions [135]

and extremal Myers-Perry black hole in ﬁve dimensions [129, 130]. For NHEK we have

Γ = J

1 + cos2 θ

2

,

γ11 =

(cid:18) 2 sin θ

(cid:19)2

1 + cos2 θ

,

k = 1,

(5.16)

where J is a constant equal to the angular momentum of the geometry and also the

angular momentum of the corresponding black hole. The range of polar coordinate
is θ ∈ [0, π]. Near the roots of γ11 which occur at θ = 0, π, it clearly satisﬁes the
smoothness condition and the compact surface H, whose area is 4πJ, is topologically a
two-sphere.

For the 5d extremal Myers-Perry near-horizon geometry we have

Γ =

1
4

(a + b)(a cos2 θ
2

+ b sin2 θ
2

),

k1 =

1
2

b
a

,

k2 =

1
2

(cid:114)

(cid:114) a

,

b

γij =

4

(a cos2 θ

2 + b sin2 θ

2 )2

a(a + b sin2 θ

ab cos2 θ

2 sin2 θ

2

2 ) sin2 θ

2

ab cos2 θ

2 sin2 θ

2

b cos2 θ

2 (b + a cos2 θ
2 )

 ,

(5.17)

where a > 0, b > 0 are constants related to the angular momenta, and θ ∈ [0, π].
Note that k1k2 = 1
4 and hence k1 and k2 are not independent. One can compute the
eigenvalues λ1,2(θ) of the matrix γij. Then we observe that one of the eigenvalues is

always positive, while the other eigenvalue (say λ2) vanishes at θ = 0, π. Near these

poles we ﬁnd

λ2 = θ2 + O(θ3),

λ2 = (π − θ)2 + O((π − θ)3)

(5.18)

satisfying the regularity condition. The surface H is topologically S3 and it is area is
2π2 · √ab(a + b)2.

5.3.1 Bifurcate Killing horizons

The Petrov classiﬁcation has been extended to higher dimensions [139]. NHEG is a

Petrov type D spacetime [140].

It has two real principal null directions which turn

out to be congruences of torsion, expansion and twist free geodesics [141]. They are

5.3. Quick Review on NHEG

generated by

(cid:18) 1
(cid:18) 1

r

r

(cid:96)+ =

(cid:96)− =

∂t + r∂r − (cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕ
∂t − r∂r − (cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕ

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

,

.

These vector ﬁelds are respectively normal to the hypersurfaces,

N+ :
N− :

v ≡ t +
u ≡ t −

1
r
1
r

= const ≡ tH +
= const ≡ tH −

1
rH = vH ,
1
rH = uH .

89

(5.19)

(5.20)

One may readily see that (cid:96)+ · dv = (cid:96)− · du = 0 and that N± are therefore null hyper-
surfaces. Intersection of these two hypersurfaces is a d− 2 dimensional compact surface
H, identiﬁed by t = tH, r = rH. Note that both (cid:96)± are normal to H and its binormal
tensor is

⊥ = Γdt ∧ dr =

Γ
2

r2dv ∧ du,

(5.21)

normalized such that ⊥
inversion symmetries (5.14)-(5.15), (cid:96)± ↔ −(cid:96)∓.

µνµν⊥ = −2. We note that under the t–(cid:126)ϕ-inversion or r–(cid:126)ϕ-

In what follows we prove that each surface tH, rH is the bifurcation point of bifurcate
Killing horizon [136, 134]. (Similar arguments can be found in [142] for warped AdS3

geometries.)

Killing Horizon Generator. By deﬁnition, a Killing horizon N is a null hyper-
surface generated by a Killing vector ﬁeld ζ, provided that the vector ζ is normal to
N .

Let us now consider the Killing vector ζH [134]

ζH = na

H ξa − (cid:126)k · (cid:126)m,

(5.22)

H are given by the following functions computed at the constant values t =

where na
tH, r = rH

−

n

t2r2 − 1

2r

,

= −

n0 = t r ,

n+ = −r.

(5.23)

We will discuss the derivation and interesting properties of this vector in appendix A.3.

What is crucial here is that

(cid:12)(cid:12)N± =

ζH

r − rH

r

(cid:96)±.

(5.24)

Since (cid:96)± are null vectors normal to N±, the hypersurface N = N+ ∪ N− is the “Killing
horizon” of ζH , and H is its bifurcation surface. Note also that ζH vanishes at the
bifurcation surface H. Therefore, N . The choice of tH , rH is arbitrary in the above
argument, so there are inﬁnitely many Killing horizons, bifurcating at any compact

surface determined by tH , rH .

It is important to note that although the extremal black hole does not possess

any bifurcate Killing horizon, the corresponding near horizon geometry has an inﬁnite

number of them. This has to do with the enhancement of symmetries in the near horizon
geometry. Note that in construction of the vector ζH we used all the Killing vectors of
the geometry.

Another important feature about the vector ζH is that on H,

⊥
∇[µζH ν] = 
µν

(5.25)

where ⊥ is the binormal tensor (5.21). We can use this fact to compute the surface
gravity on the bifurcation surface of the Killing horizon:

κ2 = −

1
2|∇ζH|2 = 1.

(5.26)

The above gives the value of κ2. As in the usual black hole cases, ζH is the generator of
a bifurcate Killing horizon with future and past oriented branches.1 One can then show
that the value of κ is +1 for the future oriented branch and −1 for the past oriented
branch. As a consequence of SL(2, R) invariance the surface gravity is a constant and
independent of tH and rH . As in the Rindler space, one can associate an Unruh-type

2π and constant

temperature [143] to the Killing horizons. This temperature is simply
over H. We call this the zeroth law of NHEG.

1In the black hole terminology, the future (past) oriented branch of horizons corresponds to the black

(white) hole. However here there is no event horizon.

5.4. Global charges and ﬁrst law of NHEG mechanics

91

Figure 5.2: The ﬂow of vector ζH generates a bifurcate Killing horizon.

5.4 Global charges and ﬁrst law of NHEG mechanics
We showed that the set of NHEG geometries have the isometry group SL(2, R)×U(1)d−3 .

Also we showed that NHEG possess Bifurcate Killing horizons bifurcating at any radius

(except r = 0 which is a degenerate horizon) and hence one can associate them a well

deﬁned entropy which is nothing but the Wald entropy. Now we can run the machinery

developed in chapter 6.5.1 to compute charges associated with symmetries and the re-

lation among them. This way we ﬁnd a ﬁrst law for NHEG geometries similar to ﬁrst

law of black holes derived by Wald.

r=0r=0r=+∞r=0Hr=-∞Consider a set of ﬁeld conﬁgurations that include NHEG geometries (5.9) as solutions

to the ﬁeld equations. We assume that this set accompanied by a consistent symplectic

structure forms a phase space. We do not intend to specify the phase space more

carefully since for the ﬁrst law to be proved below, we only require minimal properties

to hold which we mention during the argument. We start by computing equation

(3.51) on a speciﬁc NHEG solution for a variation δζH Φ where ζH is the Killing vector
generating the horizon, and another arbitrary perturbation δΦ tangent to the phase

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

ω(Φ0, δΦ, δζH Φ) = d

δQζH − ζH·Θ(Φ0, δΦ)

.

(5.27)

We integrate the above “conservation equation” over a timelike hypersurface Σ bounded
between two radii r = rH , r = ∞ where rH is the radius of the bifurcate horizon
generated by ζH . The hypersurface Σ can be simply chosen as a constant time surface

t = tH . Since ζH is a Killing vector and the symplectic current is linear in perturbations,
we have ω(Φ0, δΦ, δζH Φ) = 0. Therefore we obtain

space

(cid:73)
(cid:73)

(cid:16)
(cid:16)

0 =

∂Σ

=

∞

δQζH − ζH·Θ(Φ0, δΦ)
δQζH − ζH·Θ(Φ0, δΦ)

(cid:73)

H

δQζH

(5.28)

−

(cid:17)
(cid:17)

where in the ﬁrst line we have used the Stokes theorem to convert the integral over

Σ to an integral over its boundary ∂Σ and in the second line, we used the fact that
H ξa − kimi vanishes on H. Since the charge perturbation δQζH is linear in the
ζH = na
vector ζH , one can expand the ﬁrst term on RHS of (5.28)

(cid:73)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:73)

(cid:16)

na
H

δQa − ξa·Θ

∞

− ki

δQmi − mi·Θ

−

H

δQζH = 0 .

(5.29)

(cid:17)

(cid:73)

mi is tangent to the boundary surface and hence the pullback of mi·Θ over the surface
r = ∞ vanishes, and we have

(cid:73)

δQmi −

∞

H

δQζH = 0 ,

(5.30)

na
H δEa − ki

where

∞

(cid:73)
(cid:73)

δEa ≡

∞

(δQξa − ξa.Θ) ,

(5.31)

5.4. Global charges and ﬁrst law of NHEG mechanics

93

is the variation of the canonical charge corresponding to SL(2, R) Killing ξa. Also the
conserved charge related to axisymmetry Killing vectors mi are by deﬁnition the angular

momenta associated to NHEG,

−δJi ≡

(cid:73)
(cid:73)

=

∞

∞

δQmi − mi·Θ
δQmi

(5.32)

(5.33)

where in second line, we have used the fact that the pullback of mi·Θ vanishes over any
constant t, r since mi is tangent to that surface. Replacing the above results into (5.30)

we ﬁnd

(cid:73)

δQζH = kiδJi + na

H δEa .

(5.34)

H

To show that the left side of (5.34) is actually the perturbation of entropy δS, we use

the result proved in [9]

Proposition 6. The Noether charge Qξ corresponding to any vector ξ can be decom-
posed as

(cid:73)

αβ∇αξβ + Y µν
where W and dZ are linear in ξ and Y is linear in LξΦ, and

α ξα − 2Eµν

dΣµν[W µν

Qξ =

H

ξ + (dZξ)µν] ,

Eµναβ ≡

δL

δRµναβ

.

(5.35)

(5.36)

Let us use the above decomposition for the Noether charge corresponding to ζH . The

W and dZ terms vanish since they are linear in ζH and by construction ζH vanishes at

surface H. The δY term, which is proportional to variation of ﬁelds δξΦ needs more
attention. Since ζH = 0, at surface H, δζH Φ = 0. This implies that Y vanishes on
background over H, and also that its perturbation is given by

δY (Φ0, δζH Φ) = Y (Φ0, δδζH Φ)

= Y (Φ0, δζH δΦ)

= δζH Y (Φ0, δΦ)
= ζH · dY + d (ζH · Y ) .

(5.37)

In the above we have used the fact that since δζH = 0, hence we can interchange δζH and
δ. Since (5.37) is linear in the generator ζH , it vanishes as well and does not contribute

to the left hand side of (5.34). Therefore

δ

H

QζH = −2δ

H

dΣµνEµν

αβ∇αζ β
H .

(5.38)

Over the background we have ∇[µζH ν] = µν where µν is the binormal tensor of the
bifurcation surface. Also it can be shown [9] that this is also valid on the perturbed

geometry once the above integral is concerned. Therefore

(cid:73)

(cid:73)

(cid:73)

(cid:73)

δ

H

Hence we ﬁnd

QζH = −2δ

H

dΣµνEµν

αβαβ =

δS
2π

.

δS
2π

= kiδJi + na

H δEa .

(5.39)

(5.40)

It can be argued that any suitable boundary condition leads to vanishing Hamiltonian

charge for SL(2, R) isometries [133, 134]. Therefore δEa = 0. By Dropping this term in

(5.40) we arrive at the entropy perturbation law

δS
2π

= kiδJi .

(5.41)

This is an analog of ﬁrst law of black hole mechanics. This result was also obtained

independently [144] using the ﬁrst law of black hole mechanics for an extremal black

hole and a near extremal black hole.

5.5 The Kerr/CFT correspondence

In [78], a duality was conjectured between the dynamics over the near horizon geometry

of extremal Kerr (NHEK), and a chiral two dimensional CFT. In this section, we brieﬂy

review the argument of Kerr/CFT and mention further supports for this conjecture.

First Let us Recall the argument of Brown and Henneaux. They showed that the

asymptotic symmetry algebra of asymptotically AdS3 spacetimes ,i.e. geometries satis-

fying boundary conditions (4.4) and (4.7), is the direct sum of two copies of Virasoro

algebra. Then if a dual theory exists on the boundary of AdS3 , its states should trans-
form in the representations of Vir⊕ Vir. The ﬁeld theory with such a property is nothing

5.5. The Kerr/CFT correspondence

95

but a 2 dimensional CFT. Later, Strominger argued that using the Cardy formula for

the entropy of the dual CFT2 reproduces the entropy of BTZ black hole [36]. In the

same way, the authors of [78] tried to ﬁnd a holographic description for “asymptotic

NHEK” geometries. They ﬁrst step is to provide a suitable boundary condition. In the
coordinate system {t, r, θ, ϕi}, they proposed the following boundary condition near the
boundary r → +∞



 ,

δgµν ∼ O

r2 1/r2

1/r

1
1/r3 1/r2 1/r

1/r

1/r

1

(5.42)

Moreover, they required that the charges associated to SL(2, R) Killing vectors ξ1, ξ2
is not excited [145], i.e δE1,2 = 0. The condition δE1 = 0 especially means that no
excitation of energy is allowed. This is reasonable since a ﬁnite energy excitation in

the near horizon geometry corresponds to an inﬁnite energy excitation in the original

black hole geometry. As a result of the above conditions, it turns out that the set of

nontrivial asymptotic symmetries are then generated by vectors

χ = (ϕ)∂ϕ − r 

(cid:48)

(ϕ)∂r

(5.43)

where (ϕ) is an arbitrary periodic function of ϕ. Now expanding in Fourier modes,
and deﬁning χn = χ( = einϕ) leads to the algebra

[χn, χm] = i(n − m)χn+m .

(5.44)

The corresponding charges are obtained by (3.58) and the algebra of charges is deﬁned
by (3.75). The result after the Dirac quantization rule {,} → i [, ] is

[Qn, Qm] = (n − m)Qn+m +

c
12

n3δn+m,0

where

c =

12J
 .

(5.45)

(5.46)

This means that the asymptotic symmetry algebra is one copy of Virasoro with the

central charge (5.46). The above observation led the authors of [78] to conjecture a

duality between the phase space of “asymptotic NHEK” geometries and chiral CFT2.

The notion of a chiral CFT was made more precise in [98] in relation with discrete light

cone quantization (DLCQ). Moreover, by using Cardy formula for the proposed chiral

CFT and assuming that the state of the black hole is represented by a canonical ensemble
at temperature known as the Frolov Thorne temperature TF.T = 1
2πk reproduces the
entropy of extremal Kerr black hole S = 2πJ/ = A/4G. However, it should be
noticed that the applicability of Cardy formula for this problem is not obvious since the

temperature is not high,but instead the central charge is large. Moreover, the modular

invariance of the dual theory should be assumed which is again not obvious.

The “Kerr/CFT correspondence” proposal was later generalized to include other

extremal black holes [146, 147, 148, 15, 149] (see [150] for a review) e.g. extremal RN and

Kerr-Newmann black holes , Myers-Perry black holes in 5 dimensions, extremal 4d black

holes in higher derivative gravity, extremal black holes in Einstein-Maxwell-scalar in 4

and 5 dimensions, black holes in supergravity, etc. The broad extent of evidence for the

generalized Kerr/CFT proposal was suggesting that there is a holographic description

for near horizon extremal geometries (NHEGs) in general.

However, there appeared a big challenge for Kerr/CFT regarding the dynamics

over NHEG. In two independent papers [133, 151] a thorough analysis of the linear

dynamics allowed by the Kerr/CFT boundary conditions led to the conclusion that

there is “No dynamics” in NHEK with the given boundary conditions. This raised

questions about the dynamical content of Kerr/CFT. A resolution was proposed in

[105, 104], by attributing the dynamics to “surface gravitons”.

5.6 No dynamics in NHEK

In this section we summarize the result of [151, 133]. The question is to study the

solutions to the linearized Eistein equations over the near horizon geometry of Kerr

black hole (NHEK), subject to the Kerr/CFT falloﬀ conditions (5.42).

Perturbations of metric are gauge dependent quantities. So one can either solve the

linearized ﬁeld equations in a ﬁxed gauge, or more systematically to work with gauge

invariant quantities which contain the information about ﬁeld perturbations, similarly

to what is usually done in cosmic perturbation theory (see e.g. [152]).

5.6. No dynamics in NHEK

97

In the context of Petrov type D spacetimes, Teukolsky [153] introduced a set of gauge

invariant scalars built from Weyl tensor and principal null vectors of the space, and used

them to discuss perturbations of Kerr geometry in a series of papers [154, 155]. This

formulation is based on the Newman-Penrose null tetrad [156], and the corresponding

directional derivatives and spin coeﬃcients. Teukolsky then derived a master equation

for the Weyl scalars mentioned above. These scalars contain the physical information

about the metric perturbations .

Hertz Potential.

In our problem we need the explicit form of metric perturbations in

order to compare with the Kerr/CFT falloﬀ conditions. It was shown in [157, 158, 159]

(see [160] for a review) how to construct ﬁeld perturbations using a gauge invariant

scalar, called the “Hertz potential” which is a solution of Teukolsky master equation.

Given the Hertz potential one can construct metric perturbations in a speciﬁc gauge

called the radiation gauge. The explicit form of metric perturbation in terms of the

Hertz potential is given in equation (3.41) of [151].

Performing the above computations, with an outgoing boundary condition, we can

ﬁnd the metric perturbations. Their asymptotic behavior is



r2

r

1

r
1/r2 1/r 1/r

1

1

1



hµν ∼ r(−1±η)/2

(5.47)

where η is determined in terms of the eigenvalues n, l, m of the “spin-weighted spheroidal

harmonic” given in equation 2.20 of [151]. There are two types of solutions

1. Traveling modes with imaginary η,

2. normal modes with real η.

Traveling modes do not respect the the Kerr/CFT falloﬀ conditions and hence are

excluded. For the normal modes, again since the minimum value of η is η = 2.74 for
l = 4,|m| = 3, the positive sign is again excluded. Therefore at the linear level, the
set of normal modes with negative sign for η are allowed. However, an analysis of

charges using the second order Einstein equations show that these modes are associated

with positive energy excitation, and therefore no solution exist satisfying the Kerr/CFT

conditions. This is the essence of No dynamics argument.

As mentioned in [151], there are certain modes which are not captured by the Hertz

inverse map. These are perturbations preserving the type D property of the geometry.

For NHEK, these modes are

• perturbations that are locally gauge, i.e. of the form ∇(µχν)

• a parametric perturbation, i.e. modes corresponding to a deformation towards an

NHEK with slightly perturbed angular momentum. J → J + δJ.

We use this freedom to build the NHEG phase space in next chapter. The latter is

again excluded by Kerr/CFT fall oﬀ conditions.

5.6.1 Kerr/CFT challenges and modiﬁcations

Singular phase space. The set of asymptotic symmetry transformations derived

from the Kerr/CFT fall oﬀ conditions does not lead to a smooth phase space. This is
because an inﬁnitesimal perturbation produced by ¯gµν → ¯gµν +Lχ¯gµν is singular at the
poles θ = 0, π. Let’s assume that it is possible to relax the boundary conditions such

that the asymptotic symmetry vector is modiﬁed to

χ[(ϕ)] = (ϕ)∂ϕ − ∂ϕ(ϕ) (

1
r

∂t + r∂r).

(5.48)

Expanding in Fouriere modes, one can then see that the algebra is still one copy of

Virasoro. Moreover, the phase space transformations produced by this vector is smooth

everywhere.

In the next chapter, we will construct the NHEG phase space realizing

these vectors as symmetries.

Non-conserved charges The symplectic structure was deﬁned using the invariant
symplectic current ωinv introduced in previous chapter (see section 4.3). However, one
can check that the symplectic current has an inﬁnite ﬂux through the boundary r = ∞.
This is a crucial problem to be resolved in our construction of NHEG phase space.

5.7. NHEG perturbation uniqueness

99

5.7 NHEG perturbation uniqueness

In this section we explain a physical argument that restricts the physically relevant per-

turbations over NHEG to a great extent. This works for NHEG in any dimension. Then

by adding a few asymptotic conditions, we prove the “NHEG perturbation uniqueness”

which states that the only allowed perturbation is a parametric perturbation, i.e. an in-

ﬁnitesimal variation in parameters that specify the NHEG. An outcome of this argument

is that the Kerr/CFT falloﬀ conditions are not the physically appropriate conditions

and the symmetry vectors are given by (5.48) (or a straightforward extension in higher

dimensions) instead of (5.43).

Radial dependence of perturbations

The following argument completely ﬁx the r dependence of metric perturbations. It is

not merely an asymptotic falloﬀ expansion. Therefore it leads to a great simpliﬁcation.

Proposition. Perturbations of an extremal black hole which survive the near horizon

limit and are well-behaved under the limit, give rise to perturbations on NHEG which

are invariant under ξ1 and ξ2 diﬀeomorphisms.[134].

The logic is simple. Since we are interested ultimately in the semi classical description

of extremal black hole, we intend to conﬁne the perturbations over NHEG to those

that can originate from a perturbation over the original extremal black. Consider any
perturbation ˜gµν → ˜gµν + ˜hµν over the extremal black hole. The perturbation over
black hole leads to a perturbation over the NHEG geometry -say hµν - after taking

the near horizon limit. We show that if we require to have a ﬁnite (non-vanishing and

non-divergent) perturbation over NHEG, hµν necessarily preserves the ξ1,2 isometries
of the background NHEG, i.e. Lξ1,2hµν = 0.
To see this, consider the generic form of an extremal black hole in coordinates τ, ρ, θ, ψ.

For simplicity, we do this in four dimensions, but the same argument applies to higher

dimensions.

ds2 = − ˜f dτ 2 + ˜gρρdρ2 + ˜gθθdθ2 + ˜gψψ(dψ − ωdτ )2 .

(5.49)

where ˜gρρ has a double root at r = re and near the horizon ˜f ∝ 1/˜gρρ. The near horizon
limit is deﬁned through the transformations

ρ = re(1 + λr) ,

τ =

ret
λ

,

ϕ = ψ − Ωτ ,

λ → 0 ,

(5.50)

where re is the horizon radius, Ω = ω(r = re). For symplicity we set re = 1.

Next, we perturb the extremal black hole geometry by a metric perturbation ˜hµν,

that is the metric for the perturbed geometry is ˜gµν + ˜hµν

˜hµνdxµdxν = ˜hτ τ dτ 2 + 2dτ (˜hτ θdθ + ˜hτ ψdψ + ˜hτ ρdρ)

+ ˜hρρdρ2 + 2dρ(˜hρθdθ + ˜hρψdψ)
+ ˜hθθdθ2 + 2˜hθψdθdψ + ˜hψψdψ2.

(5.51)

We rewrite the above expressions in terms of the near horizon coordinates t, r, θ, ϕ before
taking the limit λ → 0
˜hµνdxµdxν =

+ 2

λdr(˜hτ ρ + Ω˜hρψ) + dθ(˜hτ θ + Ω˜hψθ) + dϕ(˜hτ ψ + Ω˜hψψ)

(cid:16)˜hτ τ + 2Ω˜hτ ψ + Ω2˜hψψ
(cid:16)

(cid:17)
(cid:16)˜hρθdθ + ˜hρψdϕ
(cid:17)

dt2
λ2
dt
λ

+ λ2dr2˜hρρ + 2λ dr

(cid:17)

(cid:16)˜hθθdθ2 + 2˜hθψdθdϕ + ˜hψψdϕ2(cid:17)

.

+

Therefore perturbation induced on the NHEG (which we denote by hµν) is

htt =

˜hτ τ + Ω˜hτ ψ + Ω2˜hψψ

λ2

,

hrr = λ2˜hρρ

htr = ˜hτ ρ + Ω˜hρψ,

htθ =

˜hτ θ + Ω˜hθψ

λ

,

hθθ = ˜hθθ,

hϕϕ = ˜hψψ,

hrθ = λ˜hρθ,

˜hτ ψ + Ω˜hψψ

htφ =

λ
hrϕ = λ˜hρψ,

(5.52)

hθϕ = ˜hθψ .

Solutions to the linearized ﬁeld equations on black hole geometry can be solved by

separation of variables. That is

˜hµν ∼ f (θ)e

−i(ντ−mψ)(ρ − rh)x = f (θ)ei( ν−Ωm

λ

)t eimϕ(λr)x .

(5.53)

according to above equation, perturbations which result in a ﬁnite perturbation after the

near horizon limit should have ν = mΩ, and therefore lead to stationary perturbations
over NHEG, i.e. Lξ1hµν = 0.

5.7. NHEG perturbation uniqueness

101

Using (5.53) in (5.52) and requiring to have ﬁnite hµν in the λ → 0 limit, ﬁxes the

r dependence of the perturbations as:

hµν =

(5.54)

r2



 ,

r

1

r
1/r2 1/r 1/r

1

1

1

in the (t, r, θ, ϕ) basis. Note that higher orders of r lead to terms with positive powers
of λ in hµν so that they disappear in the λ → 0 limit. Also, lower orders of r lead to
divergence in hµν which is excluded. Therefore, (5.54) gives the exact r-dependence of

components (and not just a large r behavior). This r-dependence is exactly dictated by
the condition Lξ2hµν = 0.

If one also assumes that the perturbations satisfy asymptotically the isometries of

background, then it can be proved [134] that the perturbation is restricted to a variation
in NHEG metric with slightly deformed parameters Ji → Ji + δJi. Note the similarities
and diﬀerences between (5.54) and (5.42).

Chapter 6

NHEG phase space and its

surface degrees of freedom

6.1

Introduction

In this chapter we focus on the class of d dimensional Near Horizon Extremal Ge-

ometries, which are solutions to vacuum Einstein gravity and have SL(2, R) × U (1)d−3
isometry. These geometries are speciﬁed by constant parameters ki, i = 1, 2,··· , d− 3,
which will be collectively denoted as (cid:126)k, and a set of functions of the coordinate θ.1
There are then d − 3 conserved charges (cid:126)J, associated with U (1)d−3. The NHEG has an

entropy S which is related to the other parameters as



2π S = kiJi = (cid:126)k · (cid:126)J [161, 136].

According to the absence of dynamical degrees of freedom over NHEG with suitable

boundary conditions that we discussed in previous chapter, we build the phase space of

NHEG (denoted by Γ) as a set of metrics with SL(2, R)×U (1)d−3 isometry diﬀeomorphic

to the background NHEG (5.9). This is similar to the case of AdS3 phase space that

all geometries on an orbit are diﬀeomorphic to each other while they are physically

diﬀerent due to their nontrivial charges. We show that this construction circumvents

all problems encountered by the Kerr/CFT proposal while maintain its achievements.

1The dimensionless vector (cid:126)k physically represents the linear change of angular velocity close to
H ), see e.g. [150, 144].

extremality, normalized using the Hawking temperature, (cid:126)Ω = (cid:126)Ωext + 2π (cid:126)k TH +O(T 2
For the extremal Kerr black hole, k = 1.

102

6.1. Introduction

103

6.1.1 Summary of results

Our main result are:

1. Diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the NHEG phase space are labeled by an arbitrary
periodic function F = F ((cid:126)ϕ) on the d − 3 torus spanned by the U (1) isometries.
We call F the wiggle function.

2. A vector tangent to the phase space is hence deﬁned as an inﬁnitesimal diﬀeo-

morphisms which induces an arbitrary (but inﬁnitesimal) change in the wiggle

function. We show that these vectors are also the symplectic symmetries of the

phase space, and more strongly they are the local symplectic symmetries of the

phase space as deﬁned in section 4.4.1.

3. The phase space is equipped with a consistent symplectic structure through which

we deﬁne conserved surface charges associated with each symplectic symmetry.

4. We work out the algebra of these conserved charges, the NHEG algebra (cid:100)V(cid:126)k,S whose
generators L(cid:126)n, (cid:126)n ∈ Zd−3, satisfy

[L (cid:126)m, L(cid:126)n] = (cid:126)k · ( (cid:126)m − (cid:126)n)L (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n +

S
2π

((cid:126)k · (cid:126)m)3δ (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n,0 .

(6.1)

The NHEG algebra generators commute with the generators of angular momenta

Ji. The algebra is Virasoro in four dimensions but in higher dimensions is a novel

extension thereof that to our knowledge has not appeared in the literature before.

Also interestingly The entropy S appears as the central charge of the algebra.

5. We give an explicit construction of the charges over the phase space from a one-

dimensional “Liouville stress-tensor” for a fundamental boson ﬁeld Ψ, which is

constructed from the wiggle function F ((cid:126)ϕ).

6.1.2 Outline

In section 6.2 we discuss how we construct the family of geometries which will be

promoted as the elements of the NHEG phase space. These geometries are built through

a speciﬁc family of diﬀeomorphisms with one arbitrary function in sections 6.3 and 6.4.

We then specify the symplectic structure on the set of these geometries in section 6.5.

In section 6.6 we compute the algebra of charges and exhibit the central extension.

Moreover, we give an explicit representation of the charges over the phase space in

terms of the wiggle function F ((cid:126)ϕ). We also discuss the quantized version of the NHEG

algebra.

In the last section 6.8, we further discuss the results and the physical implications

of our construction and discuss various ways in which it can be extended.

6.2 Rationale behind the NHEG phase space

Based on the argument in section 5.7, we assume that the No dynamics property contin-

ues to hold for generic NHEG with SL(2, R)×U(1)d−3 isometry (as a solution to vacuum

Einstein gravity) in higher dimensions. Due to the absence of well behaved propagat-

ing degrees of freedom in the NHEG background, we propose to build the NHEG phase

space based on perturbations that escape the No dynamics argument, i.e. perturbations

produced by inﬁnitesimal coordinate transformations. In the discussion, we will discuss

the extension of the phase space by adding parametric perturbations.

To build the phase space, we ﬁrst consider the set of solutions of the form (5.9) with

ﬁxed given value of parameters. We work in pure Einstein gravity in which the metric is
labeled by d− 3 continuous parameters Ji, the angular momenta of the geometry. Note
that according to [132], there can be a couple of discrete parameters as well. These

are related to topological invariants of the geometry. However, since these parameters

cannot be varied continuously, these parameters would produce disconnected patches

of the phase space. Here we discard that possibility and build only the phase space of

geometries simply connected to the background (5.9).

The next step is to feed “surface gravitons” into the phase space. These are per-

turbations produced by inﬁnitesimal coordinate transformations which are associated

with nontrivial surface charges. In contrast to the asymptotic analysis of Brown- Hen-

neaux, we give the form of these coordinate transformations everywhere in the bulk,

not merely in the asymptotic region. Arbitrary ﬁeld conﬁgurations of the phase space

are then produced by ﬁnite coordinate transformations, obtained by the exponentiation

of these inﬁnitesimal coordinate transformations. The set of geometries thus obtained

is the analog of Ba˜nados geometries in 3 dimensions.

6.3. Generator of inﬁnitesimal transformations

105

The so called surface gravitons are obtained by inﬁnitesimal coordinate transfor-
mations generated by a vector ﬁeld χµ through xµ → xµ + χµ. In the following, we
will ﬁrst single out the inﬁnitesimal diﬀeomorphisms around the background using a

set of physical requirements. We denote all dynamical ﬁelds as Φ.

In this chapter

Φ is only the metric, but we keep that notation to facilitate possible generalizations

with additional ﬁelds. An active coordinate transformation generates a perturbation,
denoted as δχΦ, which is the Lie derivative of the dynamical ﬁeld δχΦ = LχΦ. Such
a perturbation automatically obeys the linearized ﬁeld equations as a consequence of

general covariance.

Notations. All quantities associated with the background metric (5.9) will be
deﬁned with an overline. In particular, the metric (5.9) will be denoted as ¯Φ ≡ ¯gµν and
inﬁnitesimal diﬀeomorphisms around the background will be generated by χµ. Instead,

we denote a generic element of the phase space as Φ and an inﬁnitesimal diﬀeomorphism

tangent to the phase space as χ.

6.3 Generator of inﬁnitesimal transformations

In the context of asymptotic symmetry group, the set of symmetry transformations are

obtained by the requirement that they respect the boundary conditions. Therefore that

prescription only ﬁx the asymptotic behavior of the symmetry transformations. Here we

need to ﬁx the form of symmetry transformations at any point of the spacetime. There-

fore we use a couple of local conditions to ﬁx χ. We will bring supporting arguments

for each condition.

We start with the most general diﬀeomorphism around the background ¯x → ¯x + χ

and restrict ¯χ through the six conditions listed below.

(1) [χ, ξ0] = [χ, ξ−] = 0. These conditions are supported as follows:

1.1) Perturbations δχΦ should preserve two isometries ξ−, ξ0. As we argued in
section 5.7 perturbations over NHEG that can be regarded as a perturbation over
the original extremal black hole, have to respect the two isometries ξ−, ξ0 of the
background. These conditions are then rephrased as above.

1.2) H-independent charges. Any conserved charge is deﬁned through integrating
over a d − 2 dimensional surface H. The two isometries discussed above imply
an scaling symmetry in radial direction and a translational invariance in time.

Therefore we expect that the charges computed at any radius and at any time

give the same result. This will be satisﬁed if the above condition is met.

This condition ﬁxes the t and r dependence of all components of χ:

χ =

1
r

t ∂t + rr ∂r + θ ∂θ + (cid:126) · (cid:126)∂ϕ,

(6.2)

where the coeﬃcients  are only functions of θ, (cid:126)ϕ. An outcome of this condition is that
ξ− = ξ− and ξ0 = ξ0 for any element of the phase space. That is ξ−, ξ0 will be Killing
isometries of each element of the phase space.

(2) ∇µχµ = 0. This condition implies that the volume element

√−g

d !

 =

µ1µ2···µddxµ1 ∧ dxµ2 ∧ ··· ∧ dxµd,

is invariant under the coordinate transformations, since

Lχ = χ · d + d(χ · ) = d(χ · ) = (cid:63)(∇µχµ),

where (cid:63) is Hodge dual operator. Therefore, Lχ = 0 is equivalent to ∇µχµ = 0.

(6.3)

(6.4)

(3) δχL = 0, where L = 1
16πG R is the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian d-form evalu-
ated on the NHEG background (5.9) before imposing the equations of motion. (The

functional form of Γ(θ) and γij(θ) is therefore arbitrary except for the regularity con-

ditions.) Since R is a scalar built from the metric, it is invariant under the background

SL(2, R) × U (1)d−3 isometries and only admits θ dependence.

The above properties (2) and (3) then lead to

θ = 0,

r = −(cid:126)∂ϕ · (cid:126) .

(6.5)

6.3. Generator of inﬁnitesimal transformations

107

(4) t = − (cid:126)∂ϕ · (cid:126). This condition can be motivated from two diﬀerent perspectives:
4.1) Regularity of H surfaces. As we will discuss in section 6.4, this condition en-
sures that constant t, r surfaces H are regular without singularities at poles on
each element of the phase space. Dropping the t component of χ instead (as done
in [78]) will lead to surfaces H with singularities at poles.

4.2) Preservation of a null geodesic congruence. As discussed in section 5.3.1,

the NHEG has two expansion, rotation and shear free null geodesic congruences
generated by (cid:96)+ and (cid:96)− which are respectively normal to constant v = t + 1
r and
u = t − 1
r surfaces [141]. We request that Lχv = 0, yielding the above condition.

(5) (cid:126) are θ-independent and periodic functions of ϕi. We impose these condi-
tions as they guarantee (i) smoothness of the t, r constant surfaces H of each element of
the phase space, as we will show below in section 6.4, and (ii) constancy of the angular
momenta (cid:126)J and the volume of H over the phase space, as we will also show in section
6.4.2.

(6) Finiteness, conservation and regularity of the symplectic structure. These

ﬁnal conditions crucially depend on the deﬁnition of the symplectic structure which is

presented in section 6.5. After ﬁxing the ambiguities in the boundary terms of the

symplectic structure, we ﬁnd

(cid:126) = (cid:126)k (ϕ1, . . . ϕd−3)

(6.6)

where  is a function periodic in all its d − 3 variables. There is also another possibility
discussed in [104]. However we discard that possibility since it requires the choice of a

preferred direction on the torus by hand, and the resulting boundary dynamics is much

more restricted.

As a result of the above conditions, we end up with the following vector which

generates the surface gravitons of NHEG phase space through δΦ = Lχ() ¯Φ

χ[((cid:126)ϕ)] = (cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕ − ((cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕ) r∂r −
where  = (ϕi) is a function of all periodic coordinates.

((cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕ)

r

∂t

(6.7)

6.4 Finite transformations and phase space conﬁgurations

We deﬁne the NHEG phase space through the exponentiation of the inﬁnitesimal per-

turbations δΦ. For doing this, we can instead exponentiate the inﬁnitesimal coordinate
transformations x → x(x) to ﬁnd the corresponding ﬁnite form of coordinate transfor-
mations x → x(x). Applying this ﬁnite coordinate transformation on the background
metric, then gives the metric of a generic point of the phase space.

We obtain the form of ﬁnite transformations by postulating that the vector χ be

ﬁeld independent throughout the phase space. That is, it does not depend on the

dynamical ﬁelds, hence χ keeps its functional form under phase space transformations.

More precisely, we require that the coordinate transformation maps the vector χ[(ϕ)]

deﬁned on a generic metric gµν to the vector χ[( ¯ϕ)] deﬁned on the background ¯gµν

χµ[(ϕ)] =

∂xµ
∂ ¯xα χα[( ¯ϕ)].

(6.8)

In this section we multiply the t component of (6.7) with a parameter b. This will allow

us to derive the property (4.2) claimed in the previous subsection. Later we set this

parameter back to 1.

The ﬁnite coordinate transformation corresponding to the inﬁnitesimal transforma-

tions through (6.7) takes the form

¯ϕi = ϕi + kiF ((cid:126)ϕ),

¯r = re

−Ψ((cid:126)ϕ),

¯θ = θ,

¯t = t −

b
r

(eΨ((cid:126)ϕ) − 1),

(6.9)

The vector χ in (6.7) has one arbitrary function, while here we have the two functions
F (ϕi) and Ψ(ϕi) periodic in all of their arguments in order to ensure smoothness. It

was shown in appendix B.3 of [104], that (6.8) implies the following relation between

Ψ, F

eΨ = 1 + (cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕF
¯((cid:126)¯ϕ) = eΨ ((cid:126)ϕ).

(6.10)

(6.11)

Therefore we have found the exact form of ﬁnite transformations. Note that the latter

equation in (6.9) can be rewritten as

¯t +

b
¯r

= t +

b
r

(6.12)

6.4. Finite transformations and phase space conﬁgurations

109

this is because at the inﬁnitesimal level χ commutes with the vector

ηb ≡

b
r

∂t + r∂r .

(6.13)

Using the ﬁnite coordinate transformations we can ﬁnally derive the one-function family
of metrics which constitute the phase space in the (t, r, θ, ϕi) coordinate system:

(cid:104)

(cid:16) dr

(cid:17)2

r − dΨ

ds2 = Γ(θ)

where vb = t + b

− (σ − b dΨ)2 +
r and

+ dθ2 + γij(d ˜ϕi + kiσ)(d ˜ϕj + kjσ)

, (6.14)

(cid:105)

(cid:105)

σ = e

−Ψr dvb + b

dr
r

,

˜ϕi ≡ ϕi + ki(F − bΨ) .

(6.15)

We note that, by virtue of periodicity of F and Ψ, all angular variables ¯ϕi, ϕi and ˜ϕi
have 2π periodicity 2. The collection of geometries with arbitrary wiggle function F can
be considered as a manifold Γ. In the next section, we build the NHEG phase space

over Γ by introducing a suitable symplectic form Ω.

As a cross-check one can readily observe that ξ− = ∂t and ξ0 = t∂t − r∂r are
isometries of the metric (6.14). Moreover, one can check that for |b| = 1, constant vb
are null surfaces at which ∂r becomes null.

The induced metric over the compact surface of constant t, r, called H is

ds2H = Γ(θ)(cid:2)(1 − b2)dΨ2 + dθ2 + γij(θ) d ˜ϕi d ˜ϕj(cid:3) .

(6.16)

For a generic function F ((cid:126)ϕ) (and hence Ψ), the above metric (6.16) has the same
topology as the same surface on the background (5.9) metric if and only if |b| = 1. This
provides the justiﬁcation for the condition (4) in last section.

Finally we set b = 1 and reexpress the main result of this section which is the generic

metric of the NHEG phase space labeled uniquely by the wiggle function F (ϕi)

(cid:104)

ds2 = Γ(θ)

− (σ − dΨ)2 +

σ = e

−Ψr d(t +

1
r

) +

dr
r

,

(cid:17)2

(cid:16) dr
r − dΨ
˜ϕi = ϕi + ki(F − Ψ) ,

+ dθ2 + γij(d ˜ϕi + kiσ)(d ˜ϕj + kjσ)

,

eΨ = 1 + (cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕF.

(6.17)

2Note that ˜ϕi is not considered as coordinate since it would involve a transformation which is not

allowed in the phase space. It is merely a function deﬁned for simplifying the form of metric.

6.4.1 Algebra of generators

One can expand the periodic function ((cid:126)ϕ) in its Fourier modes:

((cid:126)ϕ) = −

−i((cid:126)n·(cid:126)ϕ)

c(cid:126)n e

(6.18)

for some constants c(cid:126)n and (cid:126)n ≡ (n1, n2, . . . , nn), ni ∈ Z.3 Therefore the generator χ

decomposes as

(cid:88)

(cid:126)n

(cid:88)

where

−i((cid:126)n·(cid:126)ϕ)

χ(cid:126)n = −e

c(cid:126)nχ(cid:126)n ,

χ =

(cid:126)n

(cid:18)
i((cid:126)n · (cid:126)k)(

1
r

∂t + r∂r) + (cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕ

The Lie bracket between two such Fourier modes is given by

i [χ (cid:126)m, χ(cid:126)n]L.B. = (cid:126)k · ( (cid:126)m − (cid:126)n)χ (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n .

(cid:19)

.

(6.19)

(6.20)

(6.21)

We will discuss the representation of this algebra by conserved charges in section 6.6.

6.4.2 SL(2, R) × U (1)d−3 isometries of the phase space

Since the whole phase space is constructed by coordinate transformations from the

NHEG background (5.9), all geometries will still have the same isometries. The isome-

tries in the phase space are deﬁned by the pushforward of the background Killing vectors

(cid:18)
under the coordinate transformations. Explicitly,
¯ξν ∂xµ
∂ ¯xν

¯ξ = ¯ξν ∂

∂ ¯xν =

(cid:19) ∂

∂xµ .

As a result, the Killing vectors of a generic geometry in the phase space are given by

ξµ =

∂xµ
∂ ¯xν

¯ξν

(6.22)

where ¯ξν are deﬁned in (5.11). Note that the transformation matrix ∂xµ
∂ ¯xν is a function
of F ((cid:126)ϕ) and hence ξµ are ﬁeld dependent Killing vectors. This is qualitatively diﬀerent

3 The sign conventions are ﬁxed such that the algebra takes the form (6.21) and such that the central

charge takes the form (6.43).

6.4. Finite transformations and phase space conﬁgurations

111

from the symplectic symmetries χ which are ﬁeld independent as shown in previous

section.

ξ− = ∂t ,

(cid:17)

1
2

After a straightforward computation, the SL(2, R)×U (1)d−3 isometries are explicitly
(cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕ(F − Ψ)η+,
(6.23)

ξ0 = t∂t − r∂r,
mi =

−Ψkj ∂iF

(t2 +

ξ+ =

1
r

1
r2 )∂t − tr∂r −

ki∂ϕi +
−Ψ(cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕΨ ∂iF ) η,

1
r

∂ϕj + (∂iΨ − e

(cid:16)

δj
i − e

where η = ηb=1 is deﬁned in (6.13). As a consequence of the construction, ξ−, ξ0 are
not ﬁeld dependent; i.e. they are independent of the function F , but other isometries

are ﬁeld dependent.

Summary of the section. The NHEG phase space Γ is a one-function family of

everywhere smooth metrics given in (6.17). These are obtained through ﬁnite coordinate

transformations (6.9) acting on the NHEG background (5.9), which is the F = 0 element

in the phase space. All the metrics of the form (6.17) have the same angular momentum
and same parameters (cid:126)k. and accordingly the same entropy. This is schematically
depicted in Fig 6.1.

Ji

g[F ]

g[F = 0] = ¯g

Γ

Figure 6.1: A schematic depiction of the NHEG phase space Γ. The vertical axis
shows diﬀerent background NHEG solutions of the form (5.9) speciﬁed by diﬀerent

angular momenta Ji, and the horizontal plane shows the phase space constructed

by the action of the ﬁnite coordinate transformation (6.9). Each geometry in the

phase space is identiﬁed by a periodic function F ((cid:126)ϕ) and admits the same angular

momenta Ji and entropy.

6.5 Symplectic Structure

The set Γ consisting of ﬁeld conﬁgurations (metrics) (6.14), can be viewed as a man-

ifold, where each point of this manifold represents a metric g[F ] over the spacetime,
determined by the functional form of the wiggle function F [ϕi]. In order for Γ to be a
phase space, it should be accompanied by a symplectic structure as duscussed in detail

in section 6.5.1. The aim of this section is to deﬁne a consistent symplectic form on the

set of metrics (6.14).

In the particular case at hand, a complete basis of one-forms at any point of Γ, is

given by the Lie derivative of ﬁelds with respect to generators χ(cid:126)n (6.20). In other words,

we can expand any variation δΦ as

δΦ =

(cid:88)

(cid:126)n

c(cid:126)n Lχ(cid:126)nΦ.

(6.24)

According to (3.26), the presymplectic structure is completely determined when its

action on two arbitrary variations is known. Since according to (6.24), δ (cid:126)mΦ forms a

complete basis for variations tangent to the phase space, the presymplectic form is

completely determined once it is computed for two variations δ (cid:126)mΦ, δ(cid:126)nΦ with arbitrary

(cid:126)m, (cid:126)n. Since any geometry in the phase space and any perturbation tangent to the phase
space is invariant under ξ−, ξ0 (5.11), also is the presymplectic current. Hence there is
no time dependence in the presymplectic structure and the radial dependence is ﬁxed

as

ωt ∝

1
r

,

ωr ∝ r,

ωθ ∝ r0,

ωϕi

∝ r0.

Also, since constant v = t + 1

r surfaces are preserved in the phase space, one has

ωt =

1
r2 ωr.

(6.25)

(6.26)

The conservation of symplectic form requires that ωr (or at least its integral) is vanishing
at the boundary. The above equality then implies that ωt will vanish as well, and the

presymplectic structure computed on a constant time hypersurface will be zero on shell.
Also note that if ωt is not vanishing, the presymplectic form will be logarithmically

divergent. We will see in the next subsection that the usual Lee Wald symplectic

current does not satisfy these properties. Therefore we use the freedom in the deﬁnition

6.5. Symplectic Structure

113

of symplectic form to ﬁnd one that is vanishing on shell so that it is ﬁnite and conserved.

However, it is important to note that we impose these conditions only on-shell. If the

presymplectic structure is zero on-shell but non-zero oﬀ-shell, it still allows to deﬁne

non-trivial surface charges and Poisson bracket.

6.5.1 Lee-Wald symplectic structure

The standard presymplectic structure as deﬁned by Lee-Wald is given by

ω(LW )[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] = δ1Θref [δ2Φ, Φ] − δ2Θref [δ1Φ, Φ],

(6.27)

where for Einstein gravity and for perturbations which preserve the d dimensional vol-
ume, h ≡ gµνδgµν = 0, we have

Θµ

ref =

1
16πG∇νhµν.

(6.28)

It is straightforward to check that ωr
(LW ) is non-vanishing. Therefore the set of metrics
Γ equipped with the Lee-Wald symplectic structure does not deﬁne a well-deﬁned phase

space.

More precisely, in four spacetime dimensions we ﬁnd around the NHEG background

1
r2 ωr[δmg, δng, ¯g],
Γ(−1 + k2γ) r

8πG√γ
Γγ(cid:48)

16πG√γ
Γ(−1 + k2γ)

(6.29)

ei(m+n)ϕ k2mn(m − n)(m + n − ibkγ),

ωt[δmg, δng, ¯g] =
√−gωr[δmg, δng, ¯g] =
√−gωθ[δmg, δng, ¯g] = −i
√−gωϕ[δmg, δng, ¯g] = i
Unfortunately the integral(cid:82)
8πG√γ
Σ ω[δmg, δng, ¯g] over a constant t surface Σ is divergent for
m = −n (cid:54)= 0. Also, ωr ∝ r so the boundary ﬂux is not vanishing and in fact divergent.
Moreover, according to (5.16) √γ = γ11 → 0 at the poles θ = {0, π}, and the Lee Wald

ei(m+n)ϕ b k3mn(m − n),
ei(m+n)ϕ k2mn(m − n).

symplectic current is divergent at the poles. In other words, there is a line singularity

along the z axis of spacetime. We stress again that the only symplectic current which
is not leaking through the boundary and meanwhile maintaining the ξ−, ξ0 isometry of
the phase space, is the one that is vanishing on shell. In the following, we will ﬁnd a

suitable symplectuc form with these properties.

6.5.2 Regularization of symplectic structure

As discussed around (3.24), the presymplectic potential Θ[δΦ, Φ] is ambiguous up to

the addition of boundary terms. The total presymplectic potential therefore has the

form

Θµ[δΦ, Φ] =

1
16πG∇νhµν + ∇µY µν.

(6.30)

where Y µν = Y [µν] deﬁnes a d − 2 form Y[δΦ, Φ] which is linear in the ﬁeld variations
but non-linear in the ﬁelds. This leads to the total presymplectic form

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

ω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] = ω(LW )[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] + d

δ1Y[δ2Φ, Φ] − δ2Y[δ1Φ, Φ]

.

(6.31)

In the following, we will deﬁne Y[δΦ, Φ] in order to cure the problem mentioned in

previous subsection .

We ﬁrst note that η deﬁned as

η =

1
r

∂t + r∂r

(6.32)

satisﬁes [η, χ] = 0. As a result of this, one can check that for any two variations tangent
to the phase space δ1 ¯Φ, δ2 ¯Φ we have

at any element of the phase space. This can be rewritten on-shell as

Lηbω(LW )[δ1 ¯Φ, δ2 ¯Φ, ¯Φ] = ω(LW )[δ1 ¯Φ, δ2 ¯Φ, ¯Φ].

ω(LW )[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] ≈ d(cid:0)η · ω(LW )[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ](cid:1)

(6.33)

(6.34)

after using Cartan’s identity LηX = η · dX + d(η · X) and recalling the fact that the
presymplectic structure is closed on-shell, dω ≈ 0.

Therefore, it is natural to deﬁne

and we obtain from (6.31) and (6.34),

ω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] = ω(LW )[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] + d

Y[δΦ, Φ] = −η · Θ(LW )[δΦ, Φ] + Ycomp[δΦ, Φ]

(6.35)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

≈ d(cid:0)η · ω(LW )[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] − δ1(η · Θ(LW )[δ2Φ, Φ])(cid:1)
+ d(cid:0)δ2(η · Θ(LW )[δ1Φ, Φ]) + δ1Ycomp[δ2Φ, Φ] − δ2Ycomp[δ1Φ, Φ](cid:1)

δ1Y[δ2Φ, Φ] − δ2Y[δ1Φ, Φ]

≈ d(δ1Ycomp[δ2Φ, Φ] − δ2Ycomp[δ1Φ, Φ])

(6.36)

6.6. Algebra of Charges: the “NHEG Algebra”

115

where we used the fact that η does not vary in the phase space. We therefore obtained

that for any Ycomp such that

d(δ1Ycomp[δ2Φ, Φ] − δ2Ycomp[δ1Φ, Φ]) ≈ 0,

(6.37)

the total symplectic structure is vanishing on-shell. A phase space therefore exists for

the set of metrics (6.14) for all symplectic structures deﬁned oﬀ-shell by (6.31)-(6.35)-

(6.37). In particular Ycomp = 0 deﬁnes a symplectic structure. The fact that Ycomp

is not ﬁxed constitutes a remaining dynamical ambiguity that we need to ﬁx through

additional considerations.

We ﬁx the complementary term Ycomp by requiring to have a “correct” central charge.

By this we mean a central charge whose value seems to reproduce the correct entropy

of black hole if one assumes a Cardy like formula. We do not present the details of the

computaion here and only state the last result (see [104] for detailed argument)

(cid:18) 1

Γ

(cid:19)

(16πG)Y µν[δΦ, Φ] = η[µ∇ρhν]ρ −

δgαβ η αη β
2

µν⊥ .

(6.38)

¯r ∂¯t and transform as a vector in phase space, and µν⊥ is the binormal tensor

where η2 = 1
to H.

6.6 Algebra of Charges: the “NHEG Algebra”

In the previous sections we built the NHEG phase space and its symplectic structure. In

this section, we show that the set of vector ﬁelds which generate the phase space indeed

constitutes the set of symplectic symmetries and analyze their conserved charges and

their algebra. To this end, we ﬁrst observe that any symplectic symmetry is integrable,

namely it leads to well-deﬁned charges over the phase space. We then construct the

algebra of charges and provide an explicit representation of the charges in terms of a

Liouville-type stress-tensor on the phase space.

In the previous section we constructed ω such that ω[δ1Φ, δ2Φ, Φ] ≈ 0 for any two
perturbations around an arbitrary element of the phase space Φ. This implies that

the vectors χ are “local symplectic symmetries” of the NHEG phase space as deﬁned

in section 4.4.1. Therefore the charges can be deﬁned at any codimension 2 compact

surface H

(cid:73)

H

δHχ =

kχ[δΦ, Φ].

(6.39)

The integrability of charges is also guaranteed by proposition 5.

6.6.1 Algebra of charges

Let us use the Fourier decomposition (6.19). We denote the surface charge associated

with χ(cid:126)n as H(cid:126)n. As discussed in section 6.4.2, we also have the charges associated with

the Killing vectors mi, Ji, i = 1, . . . d − 3, and charges associated with SL(2, R) Killing

vectors Hξ±,0. Ji are constant over the phase space and Hξ±,0 are vanishing. The bracket
between charges H(cid:126)n is deﬁned as

(cid:73)

{H (cid:126)m, H(cid:126)n} = δ(cid:126)nH (cid:126)m =

H

kχ (cid:126)m[δ(cid:126)nΦ, Φ],

(6.40)

for an arbitrary point in the phase space Φ and ﬁeld variations δ(cid:126)nΦ. The right-hand

side is indeed anti-symmetric as a consequence of the integrability conditions.

Using the representation theorem [4, 22] ( see the discussion around (3.16)), the

charges obey the same algebra as the symmetry generators (6.21) up to a possible

central term, i.e.

{H (cid:126)m, H(cid:126)n} = −i(cid:126)k · ( (cid:126)m − (cid:126)n)H (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n + C (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n
{H(cid:126)p, C (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n} = {H (cid:126)m, Ji} = {H (cid:126)m, Hξ±,0} = 0,

∀(cid:126)p, (cid:126)n, (cid:126)m.

(6.41)

either the fact that the angular momenta are constant, or from the fact that the vector

Note that the vanishing bracket between H (cid:126)m and the angular momenta follows from

ﬁelds mi are Killing symmetries so that(cid:72) kχ[Lmig, g] = 0. Even though the Lie bracket

[χ, mi]L.B. (cid:54)= 0, the vanishing charge bracket is also consistent with the representation
theorem since the total bracket [χ, mi] = [χ, mi]L.B. − δg
χmi = 0. The same reasoning
holds for Hξ+.

As mentioned before, the angular momenta Ji and the SL(2, R) charges are constants

over the phase space (the latter are in fact vanishing). To see this, we note that

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

δJi = −

kmi[δχΦ, Φ] = −

H

H

k ¯mi[δχ ¯Φ, ¯Φ] = 0.

(6.42)

6.7. Charges on the phase space

117

The second equality follows from general covariance of all expressions and the ξ−, ξ0
invariance which allows to freely move the surface H, and the last equality is a result
of the fact that ¯Φ is axisymmetric, and the only ϕi dependence coming from χ makes
the integral vanishing. This argument can also be repeated for SL(2, R) charges.

The central extension C(cid:126)n, (cid:126)m is a constant over the phase space which can be computed

on the background using equations (6.40) and (6.41). The generators can be shifted by
constants in order to cancel terms proportional to ( (cid:126)m − (cid:126)n) in the central term. In this
case, it amounts to ﬁxing the value of all charges on the NHEG background geometry
H(cid:126)n = 0, ∀(cid:126)n (cid:54)= 0 and H(cid:126)0 = (cid:126)k · (cid:126)J. The central extension is then found to be proportional
to the entropy S,

(6.43)
after multiplying and dividing by one power of , cf. section 6.7.1. The fact that entropy
appears as the central element of the algebra dovetails with the fact that the area and

C (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n = −i((cid:126)k · (cid:126)m)3

S
2π

δ (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n,0,

therefore the entropy does not vary over the phase space.

Therefore we ﬁnd the classical NHEG algebra

S
i{H (cid:126)m, H(cid:126)n} = (cid:126)k · ( (cid:126)m − (cid:126)n)H (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n + ((cid:126)k · (cid:126)m)3
2π
{H (cid:126)m, Ji} = {H (cid:126)m, Hξ±,0} = {H (cid:126)m, S} = 0.

δ (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n,0 ,

(6.44)

(6.45)

6.7 Charges on the phase space

As discussed earlier, the phase space Γ consists of the one-function family of metrics

g[F ] given in (6.14) which is speciﬁed by the wiggle function F ((cid:126)ϕ). This wiggle function

deﬁnes an auxiliary quantity Ψ deﬁned in (6.10) which we will interpret in the following.

We have proven so far that the charges H(cid:126)n are well-deﬁned over phase space and

that they obey the algebra (6.44). We now provide an explicit expression for the charges

H(cid:126)n as a functional of Ψ. We can plug in the phase space metric and the symplectic

symmetries χ(cid:126)n into the explicit formula for the charges in Einstein gravity in order

to obtain the explicit expression for the charges H(cid:126)n. This computation is explicitly

H T [Ψ]e

−i(cid:126)n·(cid:126)ϕ,

(6.46)

performed in [104] with the result

(cid:73)

H(cid:126)n =

H

where H is the volume form on H and

T [Ψ] =

1

16πG

(cid:16)

(cid:48)
(Ψ

(cid:48)(cid:48)

)2 − 2Ψ

+ 2e2Ψ(cid:17)

(6.47)

where primes are directional derivatives along the vector (cid:126)k, i.e. Ψ(cid:48) = (cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕΨ. The

charges H(cid:126)n are therefore the Fourier modes of T [Ψ].

In order to understand this result, it is interesting to ﬁrst note how the wiggle

function F transforms under a symplectic symmetry transformation generated by χ[].

To this end, we recall that by construction

Lχ[](gµν[F ]) = gµν[F + δF ] − gµν[F ].

We ﬁnd

δF = (1 + (cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕF ) = eΨ.

The ﬁeld Ψ then transforms as

(cid:48)
δΨ =  Ψ

(cid:48)
+ 

.

(6.48)

(6.49)

(6.50)

where prime denotes again the directional derivative (cid:126)k · (cid:126)∂ϕ. Therefore, Ψ transforms
like a Liouville ﬁeld. In particular note that δeΨ = (eΨ)(cid:48) and hence eΨ resembles a
“weight one operator” in the terminology of conformal ﬁeld theory. It is then natural

to deﬁne the Liouville stress-tensor

(cid:48)(cid:48)
)2 − 2Ψ
with “cosmological constant” Λ which transforms as

T [Ψ] =

16πG

+ Λe2Ψ(cid:17)

(cid:16)

1

(cid:48)

(Ψ

(6.51)

(6.52)

δT = T

(cid:48)

(cid:48)
+ 2

(cid:48)(cid:48)(cid:48)


.

1

8πG

T −

Expanding in Fourier modes as in (6.46), it is straightforward to check from the transfor-

mations law (6.52) that the algebra (6.44) is recovered. Using the explicit computation

for the surface charges (6.46) we identify the cosmological constant to be Λ = 2.

The above resembles the transformation of the energy momentum tensor, a “quasi-

primary operator of weight two”. However, we would like to note that Ψ and hence
T [Ψ] are not function of time but are functions of all coordinates ϕi, in contrast with

the standard Liouville theory.

6.7. Charges on the phase space

119

Given (6.46) and (6.47), one can immediately make the following interesting obser-

vation: The charge associated with the zero mode (cid:126)n = 0, H(cid:126)0, is positive deﬁnite over
the whole phase space. This is due to the fact that the ∂2Ψ term does not contribute

to H(cid:126)0 and the other two terms in (6.51) give positive contributions.

6.7.1 Quantization of algebra of charges: The NHEG algebra

Since the symplectic structure is nontrivial oﬀ-shell and the resulting surface charges

are integrable, we were able to deﬁne physical surface charges H(cid:126)n associated with the

symplectic symmetries χ[(cid:126)n], where (cid:126)n = e−i(cid:126)n·(cid:126)ϕ, ni ∈ Z. The generators of these charges

satisfy the same algebra as χ themselves, but with the entropy as the central extension

in (6.44). One can use the Dirac quantization rules

to promote the symmetry algebra to an operator algebra, the NHEG algebra (cid:100)V(cid:126)k,S

{ } →

and

] ,

(6.53)

1
i [

H(cid:126)n →  L(cid:126)n,

[L (cid:126)m, L(cid:126)n] = (cid:126)k · ( (cid:126)m − (cid:126)n)L (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n +

((cid:126)k · (cid:126)m)3δ (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n,0 .

S
2π

(6.54)

The angular momenta Ji and the entropy S commute with L(cid:126)n, in accordance with

(6.45), and are therefore central elements of the NHEG algebra (cid:100)V(cid:126)k,S. Explicitly, the full
Phase Space Symmetry Algebra = sl(2, R) ⊕ u(1) “d − 3 times” ⊕ (cid:100)V(cid:126)k,S.

symmetry of the phase space is

(6.55)

We reiterate that all geometries in the phase space have vanishing SL(2, R) charges and
U (1) charges equal to Ji.

The case d = 4. For the four dimensional Kerr case, k = 1 and one obtains the

familiar Virasoro algebra

[Lm, Ln] = (m − n)Lm+n +

c
12

m3δm+n,0

(6.56)

2π = 12J , as in [78]. We indeed ﬁxed the dynamical ambiguity
with central charge c = 12 S
in the deﬁnition of the symplectic structure in order that the resulting central charge be

independent of the choice of constant b in the deﬁnition of the generator. Since b = 0

corresponds to the Kerr/CFT generator, we reproduce their central charge.

The cases d > 4.

In higher dimensions, the NHEG algebra (cid:100)V(cid:126)k,S (6.44) is a more gen-

eral inﬁnite-dimensional algebra in which the entropy appears as the central extension.

For d > 4 the NHEG algebra contains inﬁnitely many Virasoro subalgebras. To see
the latter, ﬁrst we note that vectors (cid:126)n construct a d − 3 dimensional lattice. (cid:126)k may or
may not be on the lattice. Let (cid:126)e be any given vector on this lattice such that (cid:126)e · (cid:126)k (cid:54)= 0.
Consider the set of generators L(cid:126)n such that (cid:126)n = n(cid:126)e. Then one may readily observe that

these generators form a Virasoro algebra of the form (6.56). If we deﬁne

(cid:96)n ≡

L(cid:126)n ,

1
(cid:126)k · (cid:126)e

then

[(cid:96)m, (cid:96)n] = [

,

L (cid:126)m
(cid:126)k · (cid:126)e

L(cid:126)n
(cid:126)k · (cid:126)e

] =

= (m − n)(cid:96)m+n +

(cid:126)k · ( (cid:126)m − (cid:126)n)
L (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n
(cid:126)k · (cid:126)e
(cid:126)k · (cid:126)e
c(cid:126)e
m3 δm+n,0 .
12

+

((cid:126)k · (cid:126)m)3
((cid:126)k · (cid:126)e)2

S
2π

δ (cid:126)m+(cid:126)n,0

As a result, the central charge for the selected subalgebra would be:

c(cid:126)e = 12((cid:126)k · (cid:126)e)

S
2π

.

The entropy might then be written in the suggestive form S = π2

3 c(cid:126)e TF.T. where

TF.T. =

1

2π((cid:126)k · (cid:126)e)

(6.57)

(6.58)

(6.59)

(6.60)

is the

[150].

extremal Frolov-Thorne chemical potential associated with (cid:126)e, as reviewed in

We also comment that (cid:100)V(cid:126)k,S contains many Abelian subalgebras spanned by genera-

tors of the form L(cid:126)n where (cid:126)n = n(cid:126)v and (cid:126)v · (cid:126)k = 0, if (cid:126)v is on the lattice.

6.8 Discussion

In this chapter we introduced a consistent phase space for near-horizon rotating extremal

geometries in four and higher dimensions which we dubbed the NHEG phase space

[104, 105]. We identiﬁed its symmetries as a direct product of the SL(2, R) × U (1)d−3

isometries and a class of symplectic symmetries. The symplectic symmetries form a

novel generalized Virasoro algebra which we dubbed the NHEG algebra and denoted

6.8. Discussion

121

as (cid:100)V(cid:126)k,S. The phase space is generated by diﬀeomorphisms corresponding to the sym-

plectic symmetries. All elements of the phase space have the same angular momenta

and entropy. We will comment below on various aspects of our construction, on the

comparison with existing literature and on possible future directions.

Comments on the NHEG algebra. One of our results is the representation of

the inﬁnite dimensional NHEG algebra (cid:100)V(cid:126)k,S (6.54) in the phase space of near-horizon

geometries. Its structure constants are speciﬁed by the vector (cid:126)k obtained from the near-
extremal expansion of the black hole angular velocity (cid:126)Ω = (cid:126)Ωext + 2π (cid:126)k TH + O(T 2
H ). The
central charge is given by the black hole entropy S. The generators of the isometries

SL(2, R) × U (1)d−3 commute with the generators L(cid:126)n and hence the Killing charges are

trivial in this phase space. However, we expect a generalization of the phase space that

excitations of Killing charges are also included as well.

Generalized or higher rank Virasoro algebras have been considered in the mathe-

matics literature [162, 163, 164] but to our knowledge none of these algebras depends
upon a real vector (cid:126)k. It is desirable to explore further various interesting mathematical
aspects of this algebra, including its unitary representations, the corresponding group

manifold and its coadjoint orbits [165].

NHEG phase space vs Kerr/CFT. Our construction shares several features with

the original Kerr/CFT proposal [78]. We both use covariant phase space methods to

describe the microscopics of extremal rotating black holes and (at least) a Virasoro

algebra appears as a symmetry algebra. However, we would like to emphasize that our

results are both conceptually and technically distinct from the Kerr/CFT proposal.

1. As a consequence of invariance under two out of the three generators of SL(2, R),
the NHEG phase space admits a transitive action which maps any codimension
two surface at ﬁxed tH, rH to another such surface at ﬁxed t, r. Therefore, surface
charges are not only deﬁned at inﬁnity but rather on any sphere t, r in the bulk

of spacetime, which leads to the feature that symmetries are symplectic instead

of only asymptotic.

2. We explicitly construct the phase space, with a consistent symplectic structure,

and specify the set of smooth metrics. Specifying the phase space in the Kerr/CFT

setup has faced various issues, including non-smoothness of the candidate metrics

at the poles [78, 133]. We resolve these issues here thanks to the change of sym-

metry ansatz.

3. Our construction in higher dimensions than four provides a democratic treatment
of all U (1) directions by implementing the vector (cid:126)k that already exists in the metric
(5.9). This is advantageous to generalizations of Kerr/CFT to 5 dimensions that

singled out a special circle on the torus and build the Virasoro along it.[15]

Dynamical ambiguity and central charge. As our construction shows, the sym-

plectic structure is determined upon the addition of a speciﬁc class of boundary terms

which might contribute to the central charge. One possible more solid way to ﬁx these

boundary terms would be to study the boundary terms necessary to obtain a well-deﬁned

variational principle [118].

Conserved charges from a Liouville-type stress-tensor. The phase space is
labelled by the periodic wiggle function F ((cid:126)ϕ) over the d − 3 dimensional torus which
allows deﬁning the periodic function Ψ. We showed that the charges deﬁned over the

phase space can be expressed in terms of the Fourier modes of the functional T [Ψ] (6.51)

over the torus. The functional T [Ψ] has a striking resemblance to (a component of)

the energy-momentum tensor of a Liouville ﬁeld theory. However, there are also major

diﬀerences since there is no time dependence here and instead there are multidimensional

circle directions. While the relationship between 3d Einstein gravity and Liouville theory

is well understood using the Chern-Simons formulation [122], to our knowledge, it is

the ﬁrst occurrence of a connection between four and higher dimensional gravity and

Liouville theory. We also remark that the zero mode of the NHEG algebra H(cid:126)0 is positive
deﬁnite over the whole phase space. Therefore, one might be tempted to use H(cid:126)0 as a
deﬁning Hamiltonian for such a Liouville-type theory. It is natural to ask where such a

“holographically dual” theory would be deﬁned. In that regards, we note that a special

role in the construction is played by one null shear-free rotation-free and expansion-

free geodesic congruence [141] which is kept manifest in the phase space and thereby

provides a natural class of null “holographic screens”.

6.8. Discussion

123

Comparison with 3d Einstein gravity.

In section 4.7.1, we studied the near horizon

limit of extremal BTZ and its descendants. This is analogous to the NHEG phase space
we discussed in this section. They both have a global SL(2, R) isometry and an inﬁnite
dimensional symplectic symmetry. While the Killing vectors are the same, there is a

discrepancy in the form of vectors generating symplectic symmetries. The t component

of (4.62) involves second derivative, while the same component in (6.7) involves ﬁrst
derivative. The latter was ﬁxed by the condition that compact surfaces H over which
the charges are deﬁned remain smooth near its poles θ = θ∗ over any conﬁguration of
the phase space . However, in three dimensions, the integration surface H is a circle
and therefore there is no θ. We expect that the symmetry vectors for the phase space

of extremal black rings involve second derivatives as (4.62).

In AdS3 gravity the Virasoro central charge depends upon the theory but does

not depend upon the physical parameters of the black hole solution, unlike the higher

dimensional case where the entropy, an intrinsic property of the NHEG solution, appears

as the central charge. This feature is therefore radically diﬀerent in 3d as compared with

higher dimensions.

A natural question is if, like the AdS3 case, there exists a bigger algebra which

contains the physics before taking the near-horizon limit and/or physics beyond ex-

tremality. The AdS3 example, then suggests that such a generalization may require

a “non-chiral” extension of the NHEG algebra; e.g. by doubling it with left-movers,

which is frozen out as a result of extremality and the near-horizon limit.

Extension to other near-horizon extremal geometries.

In this work we focused

on the speciﬁc example of d dimensional Einstein vacuum solutions with SL(2, R) ×
U (1)d−3 isometry. More general near horizon geometries exist and we expect our con-
struction to be extendible to any such geometries.

Possible relationship with black hole microstates. Understanding the microstates

of extremal black holes was our main motivation in this study. The existence of a large

symmetry algebra in near-horizon geometries together with the application of Dirac

semi-classical quantization rules, imply that black hole quantum states, whatever they

might be, form a representation of the quantized NHEG algebra (cid:100)V(cid:126)k,S (6.54). A stronger

statement would be that the low energy description of these microstates is entirely

captured by a quantization of the phase space (which might be possible thanks to the

existence of a symplectic structure). If such a low energy description is available, H(cid:126)0
would appear as the natural “Hamiltonian” governing the dynamics on this Hilbert

space.

Chapter 7

Summary and Outlook

In this thesis, we stressed on the concept of “surface degrees of freedom” in gauge

theories and especially gravity. These are a class of “would be” gauge degrees of freedom

that become physical when they are large enough near the boundary of spacetime. We

avoid calling them “boundary” degrees of freedom (as is usually done) since these states

are not localized at the boundary and their eﬀect can be captured even deep inside

the bulk of spacetime. Instead “surface” refers to the fact that they produce a lower

dimensional dynamics in the theory.

Surface degrees of freedom show up naturally in the Hamiltonian formulation of

gauge theories, or its covariant version, the covariant phase space. These formulations

were studied in chapters 2 and 3. In these formulations, surface degrees of freedom are

generated by local transformations that correspond to second class constraints while

gauge transformations are generated by ﬁrst class constraints.

In other words, they

correspond to nontrivial “charge”. The charges commute with the constraints and

hence are new observables that can be used to detect and distinguish these new states.

A subtlety appears in the relation between charge and generator in spacetimes with

disconnected boundaries. This issue seems to be not fully addressed in the literature.

We showed in chapters 4 and 6 that surface gravitons indeed play an important role

in interesting problems in gravitational physics. Einstein gravity with negative cosmo-

logical constant in three dimensions, lacks propagating degrees of freedom. Accordingly

nontrivial solutions originate from I) solutions with nontrivial topology which can be

obtained by discrete identiﬁcations of global AdS3 solution, and II) surface degrees of

125

freedom. Local dynamics can be added to these states by either adding matter, or mod-

ifying the Einstein Hilbert action. We also discussed that surface degrees of freedom

can serve as (at least part of) the microstates of the BTZ black hole, producing its

entropy at the semiclassical level.

In four and higher dimensions, we investigated the role of surface gravitons in relation

with extremal black hole. We showed that restricting to the throat geometry of extremal

black holes, again there is no local bulk dynamics respecting the boundary conditions.

Therefore the situation is much similar to the case of AdS3 . As a result, we argued that

the only dynamics is produced by surface gravitons. The phase space thus constructed,
has a rich dynamics and symmetry structure 1.

We argued that these surface gravitons can be related to the microscopic descrip-

tion of extremal black hole. The idea is that their dynamics is governed by a lower

dimensional ﬁeld theory which can be considered as the holographic dual theory. We

took some steps in that direction by showing that the charges can be obtained through

a (component of a) stress tensor similar to that of a Liouville ﬁeld theory (see section

6.7). We also showed that the entropy of the extremal black hole and the central charge

of the algebra ﬁt into a Cardy like formula.

The dual ﬁeld theory mentioned above need to be investigated more. Suggestions

in this directions are

• The charges exhibit only one component of the dual stress tensor. The full stress
tensor can be obtained by computing the Brown York quasi local stress tensor[16].

This is similar to what was done in [18] for asymptotic AdS geometries.

• Another approach is to formulate the problem using the ﬁrst order formulation of
tetrads. Recall that in three dimensions this approach led to the Chern Simons

formulation of gravity [40] that induced a Liouville theory on the boundary [122].

• The ﬁelds in the ﬁeld theory dual the the NHEG phase space are representations of
the NHEG algebra. Accordingly, it is necessary to build and classify the (unitary)

representations of this algebra.

1Regarding the surface degrees of freedom, the more symmetries, the richer dynamics we have. This

is contrary to the usual case where symmetries can be used to restrict the dynamics.

Chapter 7. Summary and Outlook

127

• If it is possible to ﬁnd a counterpart of Cardy formula in ﬁeld theories realiz-
ing NHEG algebra, then we can give in principle give a microscopic counting of

extremal black hole in higher dimensions.

• The NHEG phase space constructed here, is isomorphic to one orbit in the “coad-
joint representation” of the NHEG algebra. Classiﬁcation of the coadjoint orbits

of NHEG algebra hence will be important in extending the phase space, or to

ﬁnd other phase spaces with similar symmetry group. This is similar to the coad-

joint representations of Virasoro algebra that we mentioned in section 4.6. This

classiﬁcation is under investigation in [165].

Recall that the phase space of asymptotic AdS3 geometries admits two types of ﬁeld

variations: I) variations generated by an inﬁnitesimal diﬀeomorphism (surface gravi-

tons), and II) parametric variations (like a perturbation over BTZ to a nearby BTZ

with slightly diﬀerent parameters). However the NHEG phase space constructed here

admits only variations of the ﬁrst type. We expect that this phase space can be gener-

alized to contain NHEGs with diﬀerent angular momenta and entropy. However, this

is not straightforward, since the NHEG algebra as the symmetry algebra of the phase

space contains the information about a speciﬁc NHEG and therefore cannot be the sym-

metry algebra of the extended phase space. This extension is therefore an interesting

open problem.

Surface gravitons can play even a more signiﬁcant role in black hole physics. Recently

Hawking, Perry and Strominger [166] proposed that surface degrees of freedom on the

horizon of black hole geometry can even solve the information paradox and the unitarity

of black hole formation and evaporation can be restored by considering the information

encoded in surface gravitons. Let us brieﬂy explain their idea.

Black hole information paradox is based on the uniqueness theorem of black holes.

That is black holes are uniquely determined by few parameters like mass, angular mo-

menta and electric/magnetic charges. Therefore all information about the initial col-

lapsing matter is lost. However, the uniqueness theorem determines the black hole

geometry up to diﬀeomorphisms. Accordingly surface gravitons can be considered as

the “soft hairs of black hole”. They argue that the existence of zero energy surface gravi-

tons, implies that the vacuum in quantum gravity is not unique and indeed has inﬁnite

degeneracy. The formation and evaporation of black hole then corresponds to a tran-

sition between these degenerate vacua. The ﬁnal state may in principle be correlated

with the Hawking radiation in such a way as to maintain the unitarity of evolution.

Appendix A

Technical Proofs.

A.1 Proof of proposition 5

Proposition 5 states that the set of local symplectic symmetries χ satisfying ω[δΦ, δχΦ, Φ] ≈
0, the following properties are satisﬁed

1. they form a closed algebra.

2. their corresponding charge is integrable.

3. Their corresponding charge can be computed over any codimension 2 closed sur-

face in the bulk that can be continuously deformed from the asymptotics.

Proof. It was shown in 3.4 that the on-shell symplectic current contracted with a Lie

variation along any vector χ is an exact form, that is

ω[δΦ, δχΦ, Φ] = d kχ[δΦ, Φ]

(A.1)

when Φ, δΦ are solutions to the ﬁeld equations and the linearized ﬁeld equations respec-

tively. The existence of local symplectic symmetries depends on the following condition

kχ[δΦ, Φ] = δHχ[Φ] + N [χ, Φ] ,

dN [χ, Φ] = 0

(A.2)

This is a local condition over spacetime and is not satisﬁed in any spacetime. The

logic is that if this condition is satisﬁed for a speciﬁc phase space, then local symplectic

symmetries exist and satisfy the above mentioned properties. Therefore in the following,

129

we assume that (A.2) is satisﬁed. First we present a corollary of (A.2): For two local

symplectic symmetries χ, η satisfying (A.2), we have

δχHη = H[η,χ] + M [Φ, χ, η] ,

dδM [Φ, χ, η] = 0

(A.3)

To see this, note that

LχHη = δχHη + HLχη

(A.4)

This is because δχ acts like a Lie derivative on dynamical ﬁelds Φ but commutes with

non-dynamical ﬁelds, which is η. The last term on the r.h.s then compensates this
diﬀerence by noticing the fact that Hη is linear in η. By deﬁnition [χ, η] = Lχη, hence
we ﬁnd that

δχHη = H[η,χ] + LχHη

It is enough to show that dδLχHη = 0.

dLχHη = d(χ · dHη + d(χ · Hη)) = d(χ · dHη)

(A.5)

(A.6)

Therefore

δ dLχHη = δ d (χ · dHη) = d (χ · dδHη)

= d (χ · dkη[δΦ, Φ]) = d (χ · ω[δΦ, δχΦ, Φ])

(A.7)

Since χ is by deﬁnition a local symplectic symmetry, then the right hand side is zero

and we obtain the desired property.

Closedness. The ﬁrst property states that if χ, η are local symplectic symmetries,

then their Lie bracket is also a local symplectic symmetry; that is

The proof is that

ω[δΦ, δ[η,χ]Φ, Φ] ≈ 0

ω[δΦ, δ[η,χ]Φ, Φ] = d δ H[η,χ][Φ]

= d δ (δχHη − LχHη) = d δ δχHη
= d δ ω[δχΦ, δηΦ, Φ] ≈ 0

(A.8)

(A.9)

(A.10)

(A.11)

A.2. Charge expression for ﬁeld dependent gauge transformations

131

Integrability. A charge Hχ is integrable if

δ1δ2Hχ − δ2δ1Hχ = 0

(cid:73)

(A.12)

(A.13)

For a symplectic symmetry, according to (A.2) the charge variation is δ exact

δHχ =

δHχ

Since the charge variation is δ exact, it is trivially δ closed and therefore the integrability

follows.

Charges everywhere. According to (3.55), the diﬀerence between charges computed

at two diﬀerent closed surfaces is given by an integral of the symplectic current. By

using the property (3.6) for local symplectic symmetries, the relevant component of

symplectic current vanishes on-shell, and we directly see that the charges a priori de-

ﬁned at inﬁnity, can be computed over any closed codimension 2 surface in the bulk.

However, note that the surface should be obtainable from a continuous deformation

of the surface at inﬁnity. In other words, it should preserve holonomies. This will be

important e.g. in the case of multi BTZ solutions, where the geometry has a couple of

disconnected “inner” boundaries.

A.2 Charge expression for ﬁeld dependent gauge transfor-

mations

Assume we have a vector χ which is a function of the dynamical ﬁelds Φ such as the
In our example, the metric dependence reduces to χ = χ(L+, L−). We call
metric.
this a ﬁeld dependent vector. We want to ﬁnd the corresponding charge δQχ and the
integrability condition for such vectors. We proceed using the approach of Iyer-Wald

[9] and carefully keep track of the ﬁeld dependence. We adopt the convention that δΦ

are Grassman even. First deﬁne the Noether current associated to the vector χ as

J χ[Φ] = Θ[δχΦ, Φ] − χ · L[Φ],

(A.14)

ary term in the variation of the Lagrangian,

where L[Φ] is the Lagrangian (as a top form), and Θ[δχΦ, Φ] is equal to the bound-
δΦ δΦ + dΘ[δΦ, Φ]. Using
the Noether identities one can then deﬁne the on-shell vanishing Noether current as
δL
δΦLχΦ = dSχ[Φ]. It follows that J χ + Sχ is closed oﬀ-shell and therefore J χ ≈ dQχ,
where Qχ is the Noether charge density (we use the symbol ≈ to denote an on-shell
equality). Now take a variation of the above equation

i.e δL = δL

δJ χ = δΘ[δχΦ, Φ] − δ(χ · L)

= δΘ[δχΦ, Φ] − χ · δL − δχ · L
≈ δΘ[δχΦ, Φ] − χ · dΘ[δΦ, Φ] − δχ · L .

(A.15)

Using the Cartan identity Lχσ = χ · dσ + d(χ · σ) valid for any vector χ and any form
σ, we ﬁnd

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

δJ χ =

δΘ[δχΦ, Φ] − δχΘ[δΦ, Φ]

+ d(χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ]) − δχ · L.

(A.16)

The important point here is that

δΘ[δχΦ, Φ] = δ[Φ]Θ[δχΦ, Φ] + Θ[δδχΦ, Φ] ,

(A.17)

where we deﬁne δ[Φ] to act only on the explicit dependence on dynamical ﬁelds and its

derivatives, but not on the implicit ﬁeld dependence in χ. Therefore, we ﬁnd

δJ χ =

(cid:17)
δ[Φ]Θ[δχΦ, Φ] − δχΘ[δΦ, Φ]

(cid:16)
= ωLW [δΦ , δχΦ ; Φ] + d(χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ]) + J δχ ,

(cid:16)

+ d(χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ]) +

Θ[δδχΦ, Φ] − δχ · L

(cid:17)

(A.18)

(A.19)

where

ωLW [δΦ , δχΦ ; Φ] = δ[Φ]Θ[δχΦ, Φ] − δχΘ[δΦ, Φ],

is the Lee-Wald presymplectic form [6]. Note that the variation acting on Θ[δχΦ, Φ],
only acts on the explicit ﬁeld dependence. This is necessary in order for ωLW [δΦ , δχΦ ; Φ]
to be bilinear in its variations. Reordering the terms we ﬁnd

ωLW [δΦ , δχΦ ; Φ] = δJ χ − J δχ − d(χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ])

= δ[Φ]J χ − d(χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ]).

(A.20)

A.3. On the generator of Killing horizon in NHEG

133

If δΦ solves the linearized ﬁeld equations, then J χ ≈ dQχ implies δ[Φ]J χ ≈ d(δ[Φ]Qχ).

As a result we obtain

ωLW [δΦ , δχΦ ; Φ] ≈ dkIW

χ [δΦ; Φ]

where kIW

χ

is the Iyer-Wald surface charge form

kIW

χ =

δ[Φ]Qχ − χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ]

(cid:17)

.

(A.21)

(A.22)

(cid:16)

(cid:73)

(cid:73)

S

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
δ[Φ]Qχ − χ · Θ[δΦ, Φ]

Therefore the inﬁnitesimal charge associated to a ﬁeld dependent vector and a codimen-

sion two, spacelike compact surface S is deﬁned as the Iyer-Wald charge

δHχ =

S

kIW

χ [δΦ; Φ] =

.

(A.23)

The key point in the above expression is that the variation does not act on χ. Since this

is what we had assumed in the main text, we conclude that the expression for charges

in Einstein gravity given in (3.58) holds even if χ is ﬁeld dependent, i.e. χ = χ(Φ).

A.3 On the generator of Killing horizon in NHEG

the Killing vector ζH that generates a bifurcate Killing horizon at H is deﬁned as

where na

H are given by the following functions computed at the constant values t =

ζH = na

H ξa − (cid:126)k · (cid:126)m,

(A.24)

tH , r = rH

n+ = −r.
One can obtain this vector by starting from the Killing vector ξ+

n0 = t r ,

= −

2r

−

n

t2r2 − 1

,

ξ+ =

(t2 +

1
2

1
r2 )∂t − tr∂r −

1
r

ki∂ϕi,

One can invert ξ− = ∂t and ξ0 = t∂t − r∂r to ﬁnd

∂t = ξ−,

r∂r = tξ−ξ2

Replacing these in (A.26), and rearranging, we ﬁnd

naξa − kimi = 0

(A.25)

(A.26)

(A.27)

(A.28)

where na is given by (A.25). Note that na are spacetime varying functions. Now if we
deﬁne the constants na
H as the value of na at t = tH , r = rH , we ﬁnd the vector ζH that
is a combination of Killing vectors that vanishes at the surface H. Also interestingly it
can be checked that ∇(µζH ν) = µν where µν is the binormal tensor of H.

It can be shown that the functions na form the coadjoint representation of SL(2, R)
as follows. The space of functions of t, r forms a vector space in R. The SL(2, R) action
is deﬁned by ξaf (t, r) = ξµ
a ∂µf (t, r). Now consider the subspace spanned by the three
functions na (with lower indices) deﬁned as

n+ =

t2r2 − 1

2r

, n0 = t r, n− = r.

(A.29)

One can check that the action of SL(2, R) vectors ξa on the functions nb is given by a
matrix whose components are the SL(2, R) structure constants,

ξanb = f c

ab nc.

(A.30)

Therefore, the subspace spanned by {n+, n0, n−} forms the adjoint representation space
of the SL(2, R) algebra. The functions na are then deﬁned as na = Kabnb, using the
Killing form of SL(2, R) in (−, 0, +) basis

Kab = Kab =

(A.31)

 0

0 −1
0
1
0
−1 0

0

 .

Accordingly the functions na form the coadjoint representation. Since the Killing vectors
ξa (5.11) also form an adjoint representation of SL(2, R), one can consider the direct
product na ⊗ ξb which can be decomposed into 3⊗ 3 = 5⊕ 3⊕ 1. The singlet 1 is given
by the vector na ξ µ
a . This is obviously a singlet representation, since it is
constructed by the contraction of the Killing form with two vectors. Indeed it can be
shown that na ξa = (cid:126)k · (cid:126)m and therefore the Killing vector ζH vanishes on the surface H.
The three vector na can also be interpreted as the position vector of an AdS2 sur-
face embedded in a three dimensional ﬂat space R2,1 with the metric given by −Kab.

a = Kabnbξ µ

Explicitly

n2 ≡ −Kabnanb = 2n+n

−

− (n0)2 = −1.

(A.32)

A.3. On the generator of Killing horizon in NHEG

135

The vector naH is a speciﬁc point on this surface, but any other point can be obtained
by an SL(2, R) group action on this vector.

Bibliography

[1] Emmy Noether. Invariant Variation Problems. Gott. Nachr., 1918:235–257, 1918.

[Transp. Theory Statist. Phys.1,186(1971)].

[2] Laszlo B. Szabados. Quasi-Local Energy-Momentum and Angular Momentum in

GR: A Review Article. Living Rev. Rel., 7:4, 2004.

[3] Richard L. Arnowitt, Stanley Deser, and Charles W. Misner. The Dynamics of

general relativity. Gen. Rel. Grav., 40:1997–2027, 2008.

[4] J. David Brown and M. Henneaux. On the Poisson Brackets of Diﬀerentiable

Generators in Classical Field Theory. J. Math. Phys., 27:489–491, 1986.

[5] J. David Brown and M. Henneaux. Central Charges in the Canonical Realiza-

tion of Asymptotic Symmetries: An Example from Three-Dimensional Gravity.

Commun. Math. Phys., 104:207–226, 1986.

[6] J. Lee and Robert M. Wald. Local symmetries and constraints. J. Math. Phys.,

31:725–743, 1990.

[7] Cedomir Crnkovic and Edward Witten. Covariant description of canonical for-

malism in geometrical theories, 1986, Print-86-1309 (Princeton).

[8] Robert M. Wald. Black hole entropy is the Noether charge. Phys. Rev., D48:3427–

3431, 1993.

[9] Vivek Iyer and Robert M. Wald. Some properties of Noether charge and a proposal

for dynamical black hole entropy. Phys. Rev., D50:846–864, 1994.

136

Bibliography

137

[10] Vivek Iyer and Robert M. Wald. A Comparison of Noether charge and Eu-

clidean methods for computing the entropy of stationary black holes. Phys. Rev.,

D52:4430–4439, 1995.

[11] Robert M. Wald and Andreas Zoupas. A General deﬁnition of ’conserved quan-

tities’ in general relativity and other theories of gravity. Phys. Rev., D61:084027,

2000.

[12] K. Hajian and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari. Solution Phase Space and Conserved

Charges: Charges Associated with Exact Symmetries, A General Formulation.

2015.

[13] Jun-ichirou Koga. Asymptotic symmetries on Killing horizons. Phys. Rev.,

D64:124012, 2001.

[14] Stefan Hollands, Akihiro Ishibashi, and Donald Marolf. Comparison between

various notions of conserved charges in asymptotically AdS-spacetimes. Class.

Quant. Grav., 22:2881–2920, 2005.

[15] Geoﬀrey Compere, Keiju Murata, and Tatsuma Nishioka. Central Charges in

Extreme Black Hole/CFT Correspondence. JHEP, 05:077, 2009.

[16] J. David Brown and James W. York, Jr. Quasilocal energy and conserved charges

derived from the gravitational action. Phys. Rev., D47:1407–1419, 1993.

[17] J. David Brown, S. R. Lau, and James W. York, Jr. Action and energy of the

gravitational ﬁeld. 2000.

[18] Vijay Balasubramanian and Per Kraus. A Stress tensor for Anti-de Sitter gravity.

Commun. Math. Phys., 208:413–428, 1999.

[19] Ian M. Anderson and Charles G. Torre. Asymptotic conservation laws in ﬁeld

theory. Phys. Rev. Lett., 77:4109–4113, 1996.

[20] Glenn Barnich and Friedemann Brandt. Covariant theory of asymptotic symme-

tries, conservation laws and central charges. Nucl. Phys., B633:3–82, 2002.

[21] Glenn Barnich. Boundary charges in gauge theories: Using Stokes theorem in the

bulk. Class. Quant. Grav., 20:3685–3698, 2003.

[22] Glenn Barnich and Geoﬀrey Compere. Surface charge algebra in gauge theories

and thermodynamic integrability. J. Math. Phys., 49:042901, 2008.

[23] Geoﬀrey Comp´ere. Symmetries and conservation laws in Lagrangian gauge the-

ories with applications to the mechanics of black holes and to gravity in three

dimensions. PhD thesis, Vrije U., Brussels, 2007.

[24] A. Ashtekar and A. Magnon. Asymptotically anti-de Sitter space-times. Class.

Quant. Grav., 1:L39–L44, 1984.

[25] Abhay Ashtekar and Saurya Das. Asymptotically Anti-de Sitter space-times:

Conserved quantities. Class. Quant. Grav., 17:L17–L30, 2000.

[26] L. F. Abbott and Stanley Deser. Stability of Gravity with a Cosmological Con-

stant. Nucl. Phys., B195:76, 1982.

[27] Ioannis Papadimitriou and Kostas Skenderis. Thermodynamics of asymptotically

locally AdS spacetimes. JHEP, 08:004, 2005.

[28] S. W. Hawking and R. Penrose. The Singularities of gravitational collapse and

cosmology. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond., A314:529–548, 1970.

[29] Jose M. M. Senovilla.

Singularity theorems in general relativity: Achieve-

ments and open questions. In HGR7: 7th International Conference on the His-

tory of General Relativity: Einstein and the Changing World Views of Physics,

1905/2005 La Orotava, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain, March 9-15, 2005, 2006.

[30] Robert M. Wald. Gravitational collapse and cosmic censorship. In In *Iyer, B.R.

(ed.) et al.: Black holes, gravitational radiation and the universe* 69-85, 1997.

[31] Piotr T. Chrusciel, Joao Lopes Costa, and Markus Heusler. Stationary Black

Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond. Living Rev. Rel., 15:7, 2012.

[32] James M. Bardeen, B. Carter, and S. W. Hawking. The Four laws of black hole

mechanics. Commun. Math. Phys., 31:161–170, 1973.

Bibliography

139

[33] Jacob D. Bekenstein. Generalized second law of thermodynamics in black hole

physics. Phys. Rev., D9:3292–3300, 1974.

[34] J. C. Breckenridge, Robert C. Myers, A. W. Peet, and C. Vafa. D-branes and

spinning black holes. Phys. Lett., B391:93–98, 1997.

[35] Juan Martin Maldacena and Andrew Strominger. Statistical entropy of four-

dimensional extremal black holes. Phys. Rev. Lett., 77:428–429, 1996.

[36] Andrew Strominger. Black hole entropy from near horizon microstates. JHEP,

02:009, 1998.

[37] A. P. Balachandran, L. Chandar, and Arshad Momen. Edge states in gravity and

black hole physics. Nucl. Phys., B461:581–596, 1996.

[38] Steven Carlip. The Statistical mechanics of the (2+1)-dimensional black hole.

Phys. Rev., D51:632–637, 1995.

[39] Steven Carlip. Conformal ﬁeld theory, (2+1)-dimensional gravity, and the BTZ

black hole. Class. Quant. Grav., 22:R85–R124, 2005.

[40] A. Achucarro and P. K. Townsend. A Chern-Simons Action for Three-Dimensional

anti-De Sitter Supergravity Theories. Phys. Lett., B180:89, 1986.

[41] Gregory W. Moore and Nathan Seiberg. Taming the Conformal Zoo. Phys. Lett.,

B220:422, 1989.

[42] Shmuel Elitzur, Gregory W. Moore, Adam Schwimmer, and Nathan Seiberg. Re-

marks on the Canonical Quantization of the Chern-Simons-Witten Theory. Nucl.

Phys., B326:108, 1989.

[43] James L. Anderson and Peter G. Bergmann. Constraints in covariant ﬁeld theories.

Phys. Rev., 83:1018–1025, 1951.

[44] Paul A. M. Dirac. The Theory of gravitation in Hamiltonian form. Proc. Roy.

Soc. Lond., A246:333–343, 1958.

[45] P. A. M. Dirac. Fixation of coordinates in the Hamiltonian theory of gravitation.

Phys. Rev., 114:924–930, 1959.

[46] Y. Choquet-Bruhat and Robert P. Geroch. Global aspects of the Cauchy problem

in general relativity. Commun. Math. Phys., 14:329–335, 1969.

[47] Eric Gourgoulhon. 3+1 formalism and bases of numerical relativity. 2007.

[48] M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim. Quantization of gauge systems. 1992.

[49] M. Blagojevic. Gravitation and gauge symmetries. 2002.

[50] H. R. Afshar. Conformal Gravity in Three Dimensions. PhD thesis, Sharif Uni-

versity of Technology, 2012.

[51] Leonardo Castellani. Symmetries in Constrained Hamiltonian Systems. Annals

Phys., 143:357, 1982.

[52] Tullio Regge and Claudio Teitelboim. Role of Surface Integrals in the Hamiltonian

Formulation of General Relativity. Annals Phys., 88:286, 1974.

[53] Hamid Afshar, Branislav Cvetkovic, Sabine Ertl, Daniel Grumiller, and Niklas

Johansson. Conformal Chern-Simons holography - lock, stock and barrel. Phys.

Rev., D85:064033, 2012.

[54] H. Afshar, M. Gary, D. Grumiller, R. Rashkov, and M. Riegler. Non-AdS holog-

raphy in 3-dimensional higher spin gravity - General recipe and example. JHEP,

11:099, 2012.

[55] Hamid R. Afshar. Flat/AdS boundary conditions in three dimensional conformal

gravity. JHEP, 10:027, 2013.

[56] PAM Dirac. Lecture on quantum mechanics (belfer graduate school of science,

yeshiva university press, new york, 1964); a. Hanson, T. Regge and C. Teitelboim,

Constrained Hamiltonian Systems (Accad. Naz. dei Lincei press, Rome, 1976).

[57] Vladimir Igorevich Arnold. Mathematical methods of classical mechanics, vol-

ume 60. Springer Science & Business Media, 1989.

[58] Gaetano Vilasi and G Vilasi. Hamiltonian dynamics. World Scientiﬁc, 2001.

Bibliography

141

[59] Abhay Ashtekar, Luca Bombelli, and Oscar Reula. THE COVARIANT PHASE

SPACE OF ASYMPTOTICALLY FLAT GRAVITATIONAL FIELDS. 1990.

[60] B. Julia and S. Silva. Currents and superpotentials in classical gauge invariant

theories. 1. Local results with applications to perfect ﬂuids and general relativity.

Class. Quant. Grav., 15:2173–2215, 1998.

[61] B. Julia and S. Silva. Currents and superpotentials in classical gauge theories: 2.

Global aspects and the example of aﬃne gravity. Class. Quant. Grav., 17:4733–

4744, 2000.

[62] Bernard Julia and Sebastian Silva. On covariant phase space methods. 2002.

[63] N. M. J. Woodhouse. Geometric quantization. 1992.

[64] Glenn Barnich, Friedemann Brandt, and Marc Henneaux. Local BRST cohomol-

ogy in gauge theories. Phys. Rept., 338:439–569, 2000.

[65] Steven G. Avery and Burkhard U. W. Schwab. Noether’s Second Theorem and

Ward Identities for Gauge Symmetries. 2015.

[66] Giampiero Esposito, Alexander Yu Kamenshchik, Igor V. Mishakov, and Giuseppe

Pollifrone. One loop amplitudes in Euclidean quantum gravity. Phys. Rev.,

D52:3457–3465, 1995.

[67] John C. Baez, Javier P. Muniain, and Dardo D. Piriz. Quantum gravity Hamil-

tonian for manifolds with boundary. Phys. Rev., D52:6840–6845, 1995.

[68] Lee Smolin. Linking topological quantum ﬁeld theory and nonperturbative quan-

tum gravity. J. Math. Phys., 36:6417–6455, 1995.

[69] Edward Witten. Quantum Field Theory and the Jones Polynomial. Commun.

Math. Phys., 121:351–399, 1989.

[70] Waichi Ogura. Path Integral Quantization of Chern-Simons Gauge Theory. Phys.

Lett., B229:61, 1989.

[71] Steven Carlip. Inducing Liouville theory from topologically massive gravity. Nucl.

Phys., B362:111–124, 1991.

[72] A. P. Balachandran, G. Bimonte, K. S. Gupta, and A. Stern. Conformal edge

currents in Chern-Simons theories. Int. J. Mod. Phys., A7:4655–4670, 1992.

[73] A. P. Balachandran, G. Bimonte, K. S. Gupta, and A. Stern. The Chern-Simons

source as a conformal family and its vertex operators. Int. J. Mod. Phys., A7:5855–

5876, 1992.

[74] Steven Carlip. The (2+1)-Dimensional black hole. Class. Quant. Grav., 12:2853–

2880, 1995.

[75] Steven Carlip. Black hole entropy from conformal ﬁeld theory in any dimension.

Phys. Rev. Lett., 82:2828–2831, 1999.

[76] Steven Carlip. Entropy from conformal ﬁeld theory at Killing horizons. Class.

Quant. Grav., 16:3327–3348, 1999.

[77] A. P. Balachandran, L. Chandar, and B. Sathiapalan. Duality and the fractional

quantum Hall eﬀect. Nucl. Phys., B443:465–500, 1995.

[78] Monica Guica, Thomas Hartman, Wei Song, and Andrew Strominger. The

Kerr/CFT Correspondence. Phys. Rev., D80:124008, 2009.

[79] Maximo Banados, Claudio Teitelboim, and Jorge Zanelli. The Black hole in three-

dimensional space-time. Phys. Rev. Lett., 69:1849–1851, 1992.

[80] Maximo Banados, Marc Henneaux, Claudio Teitelboim, and Jorge Zanelli. Geom-

etry of the (2+1) black hole. Phys. Rev., D48:1506–1525, 1993. [Erratum: Phys.

Rev.D88,069902(2013)].

[81] Stanley Deser, R. Jackiw, and Gerard ’t Hooft. Three-Dimensional Einstein Grav-

ity: Dynamics of Flat Space. Annals Phys., 152:220, 1984.

[82] Stanley Deser and R. Jackiw. Three-Dimensional Cosmological Gravity: Dynam-

ics of Constant Curvature. Annals Phys., 153:405–416, 1984.

[83] Dieter R. Brill. Multi - black hole geometries in (2+1)-dimensional gravity. Phys.

Rev., D53:4133–4176, 1996.

Bibliography

143

[84] Dieter Brill. Black holes and wormholes in (2+1)-dimensions. 1998. [Lect. Notes

Phys.537,143(2000)].

[85] Kostas Skenderis and Balt C. van Rees. Holography and wormholes in 2+1 di-

mensions. Commun. Math. Phys., 301:583–626, 2011.

[86] Abhay Ashtekar, Jiri Bicak, and Bernd G. Schmidt. Asymptotic structure of

symmetry reduced general relativity. Phys. Rev., D55:669–686, 1997.

[87] Glenn Barnich and Geoﬀrey Comp´ere. Classical central extension for asymptotic

symmetries at null inﬁnity in three spacetime dimensions. Class. Quant. Grav.,

24:F15–F23, 2007.

[88] Ofer Aharony, Steven S. Gubser, Juan Martin Maldacena, Hirosi Ooguri, and

Yaron Oz. Large N ﬁeld theories, string theory and gravity. Phys. Rept., 323:183–

386, 2000.

[89] M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari and Hossein Yavartanoo. EVH Black Holes, AdS3 Throats

and EVH/CFT Proposal. JHEP, 10:013, 2011.

[90] Per Kraus. Lectures on black holes and the AdS(3) / CFT(2) correspondence.

Lect. Notes Phys., 755:193–247, 2008.

[91] Juan Martin Maldacena and Andrew Strominger. AdS(3) black holes and a stringy

exclusion principle. JHEP, 12:005, 1998.

[92] Kostas Skenderis. Lecture notes on holographic renormalization. Class. Quant.

Grav., 19:5849–5876, 2002.

[93] Alexander Maloney and Edward Witten. Quantum Gravity Partition Functions

in Three Dimensions. JHEP, 02:029, 2010.

[94] Edward Witten. Three-Dimensional Gravity Revisited. 2007.

[95] Maximo Banados. Three-dimensional quantum geometry and black holes. pages

147–169, 1998. [AIP Conf. Proc.484,147(1999)].

[96] M. Rooman and Ph. Spindel. Uniqueness of the asymptotic AdS(3) geometry.

Class. Quant. Grav., 18:2117–2124, 2001.

[97] Shinsei Ryu and Tadashi Takayanagi. Aspects of Holographic Entanglement En-

tropy. JHEP, 08:045, 2006.

[98] Vijay Balasubramanian, Jan de Boer, M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, and Joan Simon.

What is a chiral 2d CFT? And what does it have to do with extremal black holes?

JHEP, 02:017, 2010.

[99] Glenn Barnich, Andres Gomberoﬀ, and Hernan A. Gonzalez. The Flat limit

of three dimensional asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes. Phys. Rev.,

D86:024020, 2012.

[100] Carmen Li and James Lucietti. Three-dimensional black holes and descendants.

Phys. Lett., B738:48–4, 2014.

[101] M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari and Hossein Yavartanoo. On quantization of AdS3 gravity

I: semi-classical analysis. JHEP, 07:104, 2014.

[102] Alexander Maloney. Geometric Microstates for the Three Dimensional Black Hole?

2015.

[103] Jihun Kim and Massimo Porrati. On a Canonical Quantization of 3D Anti de

Sitter Pure Gravity. JHEP, 10:096, 2015.

[104] G. Comp´ere, K. Hajian, A. Seraj, and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari. Wiggling Throat of

Extremal Black Holes. JHEP, 10:093, 2015.

[105] G. Comp´ere, K. Hajian, A. Seraj, and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari. Extremal Rotating

Black Holes in the Near-Horizon Limit: Phase Space and Symmetry Algebra.

Phys. Lett., B749:443–447, 2015.

[106] Steven Carlip. Quantum gravity in 2+1 dimensions. Cambridge University Press,

2003.

[107] Geoﬀrey Comp´ere, Laura Donnay, Pierre-Henry Lambert, and Waldemar

Schulgin. Liouville theory beyond the cosmological horizon. JHEP, 03:158, 2015.

[108] J. Balog, L. Feher, and L. Palla. Coadjoint orbits of the Virasoro algebra and the

global Liouville equation. Int. J. Mod. Phys., A13:315–362, 1998.

Bibliography

145

[109] Edward Witten. Coadjoint Orbits of the Virasoro Group. Commun. Math. Phys.,

114:1, 1988.

[110] Glenn Barnich and Cedric Troessaert. Aspects of the BMS/CFT correspondence.

JHEP, 05:062, 2010.

[111] G. Barnich. A Note on Gauge Systems from the Point of View of Lie Alge-

broids. In P. Kielanowski, V. Buchstaber, A. Odzijewicz, M. Schlichenmaier, and

T. Voronov, editors, American Institute of Physics Conference Series, volume

1307 of American Institute of Physics Conference Series, pages 7–18, November

2010.

[112] Kostas Skenderis. Asymptotically Anti-de Sitter space-times and their stress en-

ergy tensor. Int. J. Mod. Phys., A16:740–749, 2001. [,394(2000)].

[113] R. Penrose and W. Rindler. SPINORS AND SPACE-TIME. VOL. 2: SPINOR

AND TWISTOR METHODS IN SPACE-TIME GEOMETRY. Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, 1988.

[114] C. Robin Graham. Volume and area renormalizations for conformally compact

Einstein metrics. In Proceedings, 19th Winter School on Geometry and Physics,

1999.

[115] Sebastian de Haro, Sergey N. Solodukhin, and Kostas Skenderis. Holographic re-

construction of space-time and renormalization in the AdS / CFT correspondence.

Commun. Math. Phys., 217:595–622, 2001.

[116] Kostas Skenderis and Sergey N. Solodukhin. Quantum eﬀective action from the

AdS / CFT correspondence. Phys. Lett., B472:316–322, 2000.

[117] Olivier Coussaert and Marc Henneaux. Selfdual solutions of (2+1) Einstein gravity

with a negative cosmological constant. In The Black Hole 25 Years After Santiago,

Chile, January 17-21, 1994, 1994.

[118] Geoﬀrey Comp´ere and Donald Marolf. Setting the boundary free in AdS/CFT.

Class. Quant. Grav., 25:195014, 2008.

[119] Geoﬀrey Comp`ere, Wei Song, and Andrew Strominger. New Boundary Conditions

for AdS3. JHEP, 05:152, 2013.

[120] Cdric Troessaert. Enhanced asymptotic symmetry algebra of AdS3. JHEP, 08:044,

2013.

[121] C. Feﬀerman and R. Graham. Conformal Invariants. Elie Cartan et les

Math´ematiques d’aujourd’hui, Ast´erisque, page 95, 1985.

[122] Oliver Coussaert, Marc Henneaux, and Peter van Driel. The Asymptotic dynamics

of three-dimensional Einstein gravity with a negative cosmological constant. Class.

Quant. Grav., 12:2961–2966, 1995.

[123] Wilhelm Magnus and Stanley Winkler. Hill’s equation. Courier Corporation,

2013.

[124] Alan Garbarz and Mauricio Leston. Classiﬁcation of Boundary Gravitons in AdS3

Gravity. JHEP, 05:141, 2014.

[125] Vijay Balasubramanian, Asad Naqvi, and Joan Simon. A Multiboundary AdS

orbifold and DLCQ holography: A Universal holographic description of extremal

black hole horizons. JHEP, 08:023, 2004.

[126] M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari and Hossein Yavartanoo. On the 3d Geometry of Virasoro

Coadjoint Orbits, Work in progress. 2015.

[127] Jan de Boer, M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, and Joan Simon. Near Horizon Limits of

Massless BTZ and Their CFT Duals. Class. Quant. Grav., 28:175012, 2011.

[128] John L. Cardy. Operator Content of Two-Dimensional Conformally Invariant

Theories. Nucl. Phys., B270:186–204, 1986.

[129] Hari K. Kunduri, James Lucietti, and Harvey S. Reall. Near-horizon symmetries

of extremal black holes. Class. Quant. Grav., 24:4169–4190, 2007.

[130] Hari K. Kunduri and James Lucietti. A Classiﬁcation of near-horizon geometries

of extremal vacuum black holes. J. Math. Phys., 50:082502, 2009.

Bibliography

147

[131] Hari K. Kunduri and James Lucietti. Classiﬁcation of near-horizon geometries of

extremal black holes. Living Rev. Rel., 16:8, 2013.

[132] Stefan Hollands and Akihiro Ishibashi. All vacuum near horizon geometries in

arbitrary dimensions. Annales Henri Poincare, 10:1537–1557, 2010.

[133] Aaron J. Amsel, Gary T. Horowitz, Donald Marolf, and Matthew M. Roberts. No

Dynamics in the Extremal Kerr Throat. JHEP, 09:044, 2009.

[134] K. Hajian, A. Seraj, and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari. Near Horizon Extremal Geometry

Perturbations: Dynamical Field Perturbations vs. Parametric Variations. JHEP,

10:111, 2014.

[135] James M. Bardeen and Gary T. Horowitz. The Extreme Kerr throat geometry:

A Vacuum analog of AdS(2) x S**2. Phys. Rev., D60:104030, 1999.

[136] K. Hajian, A. Seraj, and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari. NHEG Mechanics: Laws of Near

Horizon Extremal Geometry (Thermo)Dynamics. JHEP, 03:014, 2014.

[137] Pau Figueras, Hari K. Kunduri, James Lucietti, and Mukund Rangamani. Ex-

tremal vacuum black holes in higher dimensions. Phys. Rev., D78:044042, 2008.

[138] Joshua S. Schiﬀrin and Robert M. Wald. Reﬂection Symmetry in Higher Dimen-

sional Black Hole Spacetimes. Class. Quant. Grav., 32(10):105005, 2015.

[139] A. Coley, R. Milson, Vojtech Pravda, and A. Pravdova. Classiﬁcation of the Weyl

tensor in higher dimensions. Class. Quant. Grav., 21:L35–L42, 2004.

[140] Mahdi Godazgar and Harvey S. Reall. Algebraically special axisymmetric solu-

tions of the higher-dimensional vacuum Einstein equation. Class. Quant. Grav.,

26:165009, 2009.

[141] Mark Durkee and Harvey S. Reall. Perturbations of near-horizon geometries and

instabilities of Myers-Perry black holes. Phys. Rev., D83:104044, 2011.

[142] Ingemar Bengtsson and Patrik Sandin. Anti de Sitter space, squashed and

stretched. Class. Quant. Grav., 23:971–986, 2006.

[143] W. G. Unruh. Notes on black hole evaporation. Phys. Rev., D14:870, 1976.

[144] Maria Johnstone, M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, Joan Simon, and Hossein Yavar-

tanoo. Extremal black holes and the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics. Phys. Rev.,

D88(10):101503, 2013.

[145] Aaron J. Amsel, Donald Marolf, and Matthew M. Roberts. On the Stress Tensor

of Kerr/CFT. JHEP, 10:021, 2009.

[146] Thomas Hartman, Keiju Murata, Tatsuma Nishioka, and Andrew Strominger.

CFT Duals for Extreme Black Holes. JHEP, 04:019, 2009.

[147] H. Lu, Jianwei Mei, and C. N. Pope. Kerr/CFT Correspondence in Diverse Di-

mensions. JHEP, 04:054, 2009.

[148] David D. K. Chow, Mirjam Cvetic, H. Lu, and C. N. Pope. Extremal Black

Hole/CFT Correspondence in (Gauged) Supergravities. Phys. Rev., D79:084018,

2009.

[149] Tatsuo Azeyanagi, Noriaki Ogawa, and Seiji Terashima. Holographic Duals of

Kaluza-Klein Black Holes. JHEP, 04:061, 2009.

[150] Geoﬀrey Compere. The Kerr/CFT correspondence and its extensions: a compre-

hensive review. Living Rev. Rel., 15:11, 2012.

[151] Oscar J. C. Dias, Harvey S. Reall, and Jorge E. Santos. Kerr-CFT and gravita-

tional perturbations. JHEP, 08:101, 2009.

[152] V. Mukhanov. Physical Foundations of Cosmology. Cambridge University Press,

Oxford, 2005.

[153] Saul A. Teukolsky. Perturbations of a rotating black hole. 1. Fundamental equa-

tions for gravitational electromagnetic and neutrino ﬁeld perturbations. Astro-

phys. J., 185:635–647, 1973.

[154] William H. Press and Saul A. Teukolsky. Perturbations of a Rotating Black Hole.

II. Dynamical Stability of the Kerr Metric. Astrophys. J., 185:649–674, 1973.

Bibliography

149

[155] S. A. Teukolsky and W. H. Press. Perturbations of a rotating black hole. III - In-

teraction of the hole with gravitational and electromagnet ic radiation. Astrophys.

J., 193:443–461, 1974.

[156] Ezra Newman and Roger Penrose. An Approach to gravitational radiation by a

method of spin coeﬃcients. J. Math. Phys., 3:566–578, 1962.

[157] L. S. Kegeles and J. M. Cohen. CONSTRUCTIVE PROCEDURE FOR PER-

TURBATIONS OF SPACE-TIMES. Phys. Rev., D19:1641–1664, 1979.

[158] P. L. Chrzanowski. Vector Potential and Metric Perturbations of a Rotating Black

Hole. Phys. Rev., D11:2042–2062, 1975.

[159] Robert M. Wald. Construction of Solutions of Gravitational, Electromagnetic,

Or Other Perturbation Equations from Solutions of Decoupled Equations. Phys.

Rev. Lett., 41:203–206, 1978.

[160] Larry R Price. Developments in the perturbation theory of algebraically special

spacetimes. PhD thesis, University of Florida, 2007.

[161] Dumitru Astefanesei, Kevin Goldstein, Rudra P. Jena, Ashoke Sen, and Sandip P.

Trivedi. Rotating attractors. JHEP, 10:058, 2006.

[162] J Patera and H Zassenhaus. The higher rank virasoro algebras. Communications

in mathematical physics, 136(1):1–14, 1991.

[163] VS Mazorchuk. On unitarizable modules over generalized virasoro algebras.

Ukrainian Mathematical Journal, 50(9):1461–1463, 1998.

[164] Xiangqian Guo, Rencai Lu, and Kaiming Zhao. Classiﬁcation of irreducible harish-

chandra modules over generalized virasoro algebras. Proceedings of the Edinburgh

Mathematical Society (Series 2), 55(03):697–709, 2012.

[165] R. Javadinedjad and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari. NHEG algebra and its representa-

tions. (Work in progress).

[166] Stephen W. Hawking, Malcolm J. Perry, and Andrew Strominger. Soft Hair on

Black Holes. 2016.

