Tweeting the Mind and Instagramming the Heart:

Exploring Diﬀerentiated Content Sharing on Social Media

Lydia Manikonda

Subbarao Kambhampati

Department of Computer Science, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ 85281

Venkata Vamsikrishna Meduri
{lmanikon, vmeduri, rao}@asu.edu

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
8

 

 
 
]
I
S
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
8
1
7
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Understanding the usage of multiple OSNs (Online Social
Networks) has been of signiﬁcant research interest as it helps
in identifying the unique and distinguishing trait in each so-
cial media platform that contributes to its continued exis-
tence. The comparison between the OSNs is insightful when
it is done based on the representative majority of the users
holding active accounts on all the platforms. In this research,
we collected a set of user proﬁles holding accounts on both
Twitter and Instagram, these platforms being of prominence
among a majority of users. An extensive textual and visual
analysis on the media content posted by these users revealed
that both these platforms are indeed perceived diﬀerently at a
fundamental level with Instagram engaging more of the users’
heart and Twitter capturing more of their mind. These diﬀer-
ences got reﬂected in almost every microscopic analysis done
upon the linguistic, topical and visual aspects.

1

Introduction

Online Social Networks (OSNs) are gaining attention for
being rich sources of information about individuals includ-
ing many aspects of their daily life through the way they
connect, communicate and share information. Over the past
few years, given their ubiquity and accessibility, social me-
dia platforms like Twitter and Instagram have emerged as
very popular microblogging services for web users to com-
municate with each other through text and photos. In 2015,
when Instagram broke the record of having more than 400
million active monthly users, Twitter was projected as its
main rival. In fact according to a recent article by Pew Re-
search,1 28% of American adults use Instagram and 23%
use Twitter. More interestingly, many users have active ac-
counts on both these sites (or platforms) (Lim et al. 2015;
Chen et al. 2014). While research has recognized immense
practical value in understanding the user behavioral char-
acteristics on these platforms separately, there is no exist-
ing research that has examined how the content posted by
individuals diﬀers across these two platforms. Instagram is
a photo-sharing application whereas Twitter emerged as a
text-based application which currently lets users post both
text and multimedia data. Of particular interest is the ques-
tion of why and how individuals use these two sites when
both of them are similar in their current functionalities.

1http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/08/19/the-demographics-of-

social-media-users/

to the content (Honey and Herring 2009),

In this research, we aim to answer the aforementioned
questions by analyzing content from the same set of indi-
viduals across these two popular platforms and quantifying
their posting patterns (we focus on ordinary users who are
common users but not celebrities or popular users or orga-
nizations). By leveraging NLP and Computer Vision tech-
niques, we present some of the ﬁrst qualitative insights about
the types of trending topics, and social engagement of the
user posts across these two platforms. Analysis on the visual
and linguistic cues indicates the dominance of personal and
social aspects on Instagram and news, opinions and work-
related aspects on Twitter. Despite considering the same set
of users on both platforms, we see remarkably diﬀerent cate-
gories of visual content – predominantly eight categories on
Instagram and four categories of images on Twitter. These
results suggest that Instagram is largely a sphere of positive
personal and social information where as Twitter is primarily
a news sharing media with higher negative emotions shared
by users.
Background: Twitter has been explored extensively with
respect
lan-
guage (Hong, Convertino, and Chi 2011), etc and it is es-
tablished that it is primarily a news medium (Kwak et
al. 2010). Research on Instagram has focused mostly on
understanding the user behavior through analyzing color
palettes (Hochman and Schwartz 2012), categories (Hu,
Manikonda, and Kambhampati 2014), ﬁlters (Bakhshi et al.
2015), etc. On the other hand, it has been of signiﬁcant
interest to the researchers to investigate the behavior of a
user (Benevenuto et al. 2009), connect users (Zafarani and
Liu 2013), study how users reveal their personal informa-
tion (Chen et al. 2012), etc all across multiple OSNs. We
extend the current state of the art by examining the nature of
a given user’s behavior manifested across Twitter and Insta-
gram. Close to our work is the work of Bang et al. (Lim et al.
2015) where six OSNs were studied to analyze the temporal
and topical signature (only w.r.t user’s profession) of user’s
sharing behavior but they did not focus on studying the com-
parative linguistic aspects and visual cues across the plat-
forms. Here we employ both textual and visual techniques
to conduct a deeper analysis of content on both Twitter and
Instagram.
Dataset:
In order to investigate and characterize a given
user’s behavior across multiple sites, we use a personal web
hosting service called About.me (http://about.me/) that en-
ables individuals to create an online identity by letting them

international,

Twitter
stories,
angelo, j´a
time, people, love, work, world, social,
life

food, web, n˜ao,

happy, love, home, birthday, weekend,
beautiful, park
m´as, d´ıa, v´ıa, gracias, mi, si, las

#football, #sports, #news, #art,
book, google, iphone

face-

ID
0

1

2

3

4

#belize,
#urbanart,

#brightongrafﬁti,
#hipstamatic,

Instagram
#food, delicious, coffee, sunset, beauti-
ful, happy, #wedding
#streetart,
#sussex,
#lawton
#fashion, #hair, #makeup, #health,
#workout, #vegan, #ﬁt
#instagood,
#photooftheday,
#menswear, #style, #travel, #beach,
#summer
birthday, beautiful,
friends, fun, home

christmas,

love,

Table 1: Words corresponding to the 5 latent topics from Twitter
and Instagram

provide a brief biography, connections to other individuals
and their personal websites. Using its API, we performed
the data collection of 10,000 users and pruned the individu-
als who do not have proﬁles on both Instagram and Twitter.
The ﬁnal crawl includes 1,035,840 posts from Twitter (using
the Twitter API https://dev.twitter.com/overview/
api) and 327,507 posts from Instagram (using the Instagram
API https://www.instagram.com/developer/) for the
same set of users. Each post in this dataset is public and
the data include user proﬁles along with their followers and
friends list, tweets (insta posts), meta data for tweets that in-
clude favorites (likes), retweets (Instagram has no explicit
reshares; so we use comments in lieu of the attention the
post receives), geo-location tagged, date posted, media con-
tent attached and hashtags.

2 Text Analysis

2.1 Latent Topic Analysis
In order to explain the types of content posted by a user
across Twitter and Instagram, we ﬁrst mine the latent top-
ics from the corpus of Twitter (aggregated posts on Twit-
ter of all users) and corpus of Instagram (aggregated posts
on Instagram of all users where we use captions associated
with posts for this analysis). We use TwitterLDA (https://
github.com/minghui/Twitter-LDA) developed for topic
modeling of short text corpora to mine the latent topics. With
the user accounts obtained from About.me, the topic infer-
ence is meaningful as it is pertinent to the bi-platform posts
from users who use both the social media venues.

The topic vocabulary listed for both the platforms in Ta-
ble 1 indicates the unique topics for each site as well as
the overlapping topics. For instance topics 0 and 4 on Insta-
gram are similar to the topics 1 and 2 on Twitter. However,
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence is that Instagram is predominantly
used to post about art, food, ﬁtness, fashion, travel, friends
and family but Twitter hosts a signiﬁcantly higher percent-
age of posts on sports, news and business as compared to
other topics. Another notable diﬀerence is that the vocabu-
lary from non-English language posts like French and Span-
ish is higher on Twitter as compared to the captions on In-
stagram mostly using English as the language medium. The
topic distributions obtained from the two corpora are listed
in Figure 1 which show that friends and food are the most
frequently posted topics on Instagram as against sports and
news followed by work and social life being popular on
Twitter.

To further validate the observations made about the dis-
tinctive topical content across the two platforms, we com-
pared the topic distributions for each individual on the two
platforms by estimating the KL-Divergence (entropy) for

Figure 1: Topic distributions of all the user posts on Twitter and
Instagram

Figure 2: Sorted entropies between the topic distributions of the
user posts on Twitter and Instagram

each user. However for this entropy computation to be pos-
sible, a uniﬁed topic model needed to be built on the com-
bined corpus of tweets and captions of Instagram posts. The
uniﬁed topics are listed in the description of Figure 3. The
resultant entropy plot in Figure 2 follows a power law dis-
tribution showing that most users post on Twitter and Insta-
gram equally diﬀerently barring a few (where the estimated
p-value < 10−15 for each user).
2.2 Social Engagement
Since our ﬁndings revealed that the bi-platform topics are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent and so we wanted to investigate how
these posts made by the same user engage other individu-
als on the two sites. We deﬁne the social engagement as the
attention received by a user’s post on the social media plat-
form and can be quantiﬁed in various ways ranging from the
sum of likes and comments on Instagram and the sum of fa-
vorites and reshares on Twitter. For each topic in the uniﬁed
topic model for both Twitter and Instagram, the logarithmic
frequency of posts is plotted against the magnitude of social
engagement that is binned to discrete ranges in Figure 3.

An interesting observation is that the socially engaging
topics in the combined model are same as the overlapping
topics from the topic models built in isolation on the Twitter
and Instagram posts (Figure 1 in Section 2.1). The dominat-
ing topic on Twitter is about sports, news and business but
the overlapping inﬂuential topic is about social and personal
life comprising friends and family. Surprisingly, we found
that the overlapping topics (Topics 2 and 3) fetched predom-
inant social engagement on both Twitter and Instagram.

A notable diﬀerence between the platforms with respect
to social engagement is that the magnitude of attention re-
ceived for Instagram posts is signiﬁcantly higher than the
level of attention received on Twitter as we can notice from
the ranges plotted on the x-axes in Figure 3. This observation
is consistent regardless of the activity of the user. Even when
a user is more active (Figure 4) on Twitter than Instagram,
the observation of higher social engagement on Instagram
on an absolute scale holds. A possible explanation to this is

(a) Twitter

(b) Instagram

Figure 3: Social Engagement Vs Post Frequency where the top-
ics are – Topic 0:{people, life, world, social, app, game, busi-
ness}, Topic 1:{stories, artists, #lastfm, level, #football, #sports,
news}, Topic 2:{birthday, beautiful, work, weekend, park, dinner,
christmas}, Topic 3:{ yang, run, #ﬁtness, #runkeeper, #art, sale,
#menswear}, Topic 4:{#instagood, #photooftheday, #love, m´as,
#fashion, #travel, #food}

Figure 4: Distributions of Followers/Followings vs Media

that the users on Twitter use it as a news source to read in-
formative tweets but not necessarily all of the content that is
read will be “liked”.

On average, there are 30% more number of hashtags for a
Twitter post compared to an Instagram post (Pearson corre-
lation coeﬃcient = 0.34 between distributions with p-value
< 10−15). This may also indicate that on Instagram since the
main content is image, textual caption may not receive as
much attention from the user.
2.3 Linguistic Nature
To characterize and compare the type of language used on
both platforms, we use the psycholinguistic lexicon LIWC
((http://liwc.wpengine.com/)) on the text associated
with a Twitter post and an Instagram post. We obtain mea-
sures of attributes related to user behavior – emotionality
(how people are reacting to diﬀerent events), social relation-
ships (friends, family, other humans) and individual diﬀer-
ences (attributes like bio, gender, age, etc).

It is clear from Table 2 that posts on Twitter are more neg-
atively emotional and contain more work-related and swear
words where as positive social patterns are more evident
on Instagram. By relating these results to the topic analy-
sis results in the previous section, we identify that on In-
stagram users share less negative content and more light-
hearted happy personal updates. To further support these
claims from the textual data, n-gram analysis indicates that

Platform

Twitter

Instagram

Emotionality

Negemo
Posemo

Social Relationships

home
family
friend
humans

Individual Differences

work
bio
swear
death
gender

0.60
0.19

0.15
0.14
0.05
0.17

0.81
0.6
0.08
0.07
0.16

0.49
0.19

0.30
0.21
0.1
0.21

0.5
0.93
0.06
0.04
0.2

Table 2: Linguistic attributes across Twitter vs Instagram. Each
value indicates the fraction of a post belonging to the corresponding
attribute

users on Instagram focus on things that give them plea-
sure such as, fashion or travel (top bi/Trigrams like last
night, Good morning, right now, fashion design streetwear),
whereas on Twitter they mainly share check-in feeds from
their apps or news (top bi/Trigrams like Stories via, Just
posted, @YouTube video, Just posted photo).

3 Visual Analysis

Extensive studies have been conducted on the textual and
visual content on these two platforms in isolation but to the
best of our knowledge, a comparative content analysis has
never been conducted. Considering this as a main objective,
this section develops a better understanding on the types of
photos individuals post on Twitter in comparison with their
Instagram posts. To achieve this we employ Computer Vi-
sion techniques mainly in terms of – visual categories (kinds
of photos) and visual features (color palettes).
3.1 Visual Categories
We ﬁrst sampled two sets of 5K images from both platforms
separately and using the OpenCV library (http://opencv.
org/) on these two datasets, we extracted Speeded Up Ro-
bust Features (SURF) for each image. We used the vector
quantization approach on these features that eventually con-
verted each image into a codebook format. Using the code-
book, we clustered images using k-means algorithm (best
value of k is found by SSE (Sum of Squared Error)). We
employed the same approach on both datasets separately. To
our surprise the clusters we obtained on Instagram were very
reﬁned compared to the coarse nature of clusters on Twitter
dataset. After computing these clusters, two researchers sep-
arately identiﬁed the overall themes of these two datasets
and agreed upon the ﬁnal visual categories of the photos
from these platforms.

Visual categories on Instagram agree with our previous
work (Hu, Manikonda, and Kambhampati 2014) which de-
tected eight diﬀerent categories of images. We tried to cate-
gorize the Twitter images into the same format as Instagram
images and there are four prominent cluster categories on
Twitter. Figure 7 shows that the percentage of photos in the
activity category outnumbered any other category followed
by captioned photos. To better understand the kinds of activ-
ities and captions shown in these two sections, we sampled
around 200 images and asked the two researchers to label

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 5: Subcategories of activity: a) TV shows, b) Running, c)
Conferences, d) Live shows

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 6: Subcategories of captioned photos: a) Snapshots, b)
Memes, c) Quotes

them manually into diﬀerent sub-categories. Figure 5 indi-
cates the most popular sub-categories in the activity category
– news, events (football games, concerts, conferences) and
races and Figure 6 indicates that majority of the captioned
photos are snapshots, memes, and quotes or opinions. These
categories suggest that the topics of photos on Twitter are
mainly related to news, opinions or other general user in-
terests where as on Instagram they mainly share their joyful
and happy moments of their personal lives.
3.2 Visual Features
Existing literature (Bakhshi et al. 2015) shows that the im-
ages with a single dominant color gain more popularity
on Instagram. To verify this we compared the visual lumi-
nance of all images on these two platforms. We extracted
the grayscale histograms (range from 0 to 259) by utilizing
the OpenCV library as they capture the information about
the brightness, saturation and contrast distribution. The im-
ages with darker pixels were binned into the low intensity
value bins close to 0 and images with brighter pixels were
binned into the high intensity values close to 259. Later we
clustered the images in our dataset by employing k-means
algorithm with the grayscale histograms as features for each
image on both these platforms following which 4 types of
clusters were detected based on their color distributions. We
measured the image distribution across each of these 4 cat-
egories for both the platforms. We noticed that the images
on Instagram containing darker and brighter pixels are neg-
ligible when compared to Twitter as shown in Figure 8. This
suggest that Twitter posts may be less socially engaging than
Instagram owing to a huge presence of captioned photos on
Twitter.

4 Conclusions

In this paper, we presented a detailed comparison of the tex-
tual and visual analysis of the content posted by the same set
of users on both Twitter and Instagram. Some of the insights
obtained from linguistic analysis reveal the fundamental dif-
ferences in the thinking style and emotionality of the users
on these two platforms and how the posts receive varying de-
grees of attention as per the underlying topics. Interestingly,
user posts on Instagram seem to receive signiﬁcantly more
attention than Twitter. The visual analyses with respect to
categories and color palettes indicate that the pictures posted
on Instagram contains more selﬁes and photos with friends
where as Twitter contains more about user opinions in the
form of captioned photos – memes, quotes, etc. We observed
that the diﬀerences are deeply rooted in the very intention

Figure 7: Photo categories on Twitter vs Instagram

Figure 8: Example images corresponding to the four major color
categories obtained by extracting color histograms of images asso-
ciated with the Twitter and Instagram posts.

with which users post on these platforms with Twitter being
a venue for serious posts about news, opinions and business
life where as Instagram acting as the host for light-hearted
personal moments and posts on leisure activities.

References

[Bakhshi et al. 2015] Bakhshi, S.; Shamma, D.; Kennedy, L.; and
Gilbert, E. 2015. Why we ﬁlter our photos and how it impacts
engagement. In Proc. ICWSM.
[Benevenuto et al. 2009] Benevenuto, F.; Rodrigues, T.; Cha, M.;
and Almeida, V. 2009. Characterizing user behavior in online
social networks. In Proc. IMC.
[Chen et al. 2012] Chen, T.; Kaafar, M. A.; Friedman, A.; and
Boreli, R. 2012. Is more always merrier?: A deep dive into on-
line social footprints. In Proc. WOSN.
[Chen et al. 2014] Chen, Y.; Zhuang, C.; Cao, Q.; and Hui, P. 2014.
Understanding cross-site linking in online social networks. In Proc.
SNAKDD.
[Hochman and Schwartz 2012] Hochman, N., and Schwartz, R.
2012. Visualizing instagram: Tracing cultural visual rhythms. In
Proc. ICWSM.
[Honey and Herring 2009] Honey, C., and Herring, S. 2009. Be-
yond microblogging: Conversation and collaboration via twitter. In
Proc. HICSS, 1–10.
[Hong, Convertino, and Chi 2011] Hong, L.; Convertino, G.; and
Chi, E. 2011. Language matters in twitter: A large scale study.
In Proc. ICWSM.
[Hu, Manikonda, and Kambhampati 2014] Hu, Y.; Manikonda, L.;
and Kambhampati, S. 2014. What we instagram: A ﬁrst analysis
of instagram photo content and user types. In Proc. ICWSM.
[Kwak et al. 2010] Kwak, H.; Lee, C.; Park, H.; and Moon, S. 2010.
What is twitter, a social network or a news media? In Proc. WWW,
591–600.
[Lim et al. 2015] Lim, B. H.; Lu, D.; Chen, T.; and Kan, M.-Y.
2015. #mytweet via instagram: Exploring user behaviour across
multiple social networks. In Proc. ASONAM.
[Zafarani and Liu 2013] Zafarani, R., and Liu, H. 2013. Connecting
users across social media sites: A behavioral-modeling approach.
In Proc. KDD.

