AN ERGODIC ALGORITHM FOR GENERATING KNOTS WITH A PRESCRIBED

INJECTIVITY RADIUS

KYLE LELAND CHAPMAN

Abstract. The ﬁrst algorithm for sampling the space of thick equilateral knots, as a function of thickness,
will be described. This algorithm is based on previous algorithms of applying random reﬂections.

To prove the existence of the algorithm, we describe a method for turning any knot into the regular
planar polygon using only thickness non-decreasing moves. This approach ensures that the algorithm has
a positive probability of connecting any two knots with the required thickness constraint and so is ergodic.
This ergodic sampling unlocks the ability to analyze the eﬀects of thickness on properties of the geometric
knot such as radius of gyration.

This algorithm will be shown to be faster than previous methods for generating thick knots, and the data
from this algorithm shows that the radius of gyration increases strongly with thickness and that the growth
exponent for radius of gyration increases with thickness.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
9

 

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

1
v
0
7
7
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1. Introduction

1.1. Discussion of the applications of Equilateral Knots. Knot theory is a discipline which has seen
a large number of applications, particularly in recent years. The study of knots and links is useful for
disciplines such as biology, polymer physics, and materials enginering. Many of the physical properties of
structures in these ﬁelds comes from the knotting and linking of molecules rather than the actual chemical
structure[9]. For example, in the case of polymeric liquids, such as dough or egg whites, the high viscosity
and elasticity is attributable directly to the string like components[5]. In biology, it was ﬁrst discovered that
the bacteriophage ϕX174 has DNA with a closed loop structure[6] and since then numerous other examples
have been found. Further, the large structure of DNA means that even if it is technically possible for two
open chain DNA strands to unlink, it is not feasible. This led to the discovery by James C. Wang of enzymes
called topoisomerases which alter the knotting of DNA allowing for cellular division and indicating that the
knotting of DNA impacts function [3][8]. Most attempts at proving facts about applications of knot theory
have been restricted to topological knots, where we have eliminated physical factors such as friction, rigidity,
torsion, thickness, and arclength. Some work has been done to look at arclength and local homogeneity by
focusing on equilateral knots of a ﬁxed number of edges [11][13][14]. Ideally, however, we would like to study
knots with more of these properties included. Any information could act as a foundation upon which to make
concrete statements about knots with these physical properties. Unfortunately, even randomly sampling the
space of knots with these properties poses an incredible challenge. This paper will provide a step towards a
better sampling of knots with geometric properties, speciﬁcally thickness, homogeneity, and arclength.

1.2. Previous Thickness Free Generation Methods. There are a number of methods available for the
random generation of equilateral knots [1]. Because we seek to have the arc close to give a ring polygon,
we can’t merely generate an arbitrary random walk. Most methods come in two stages, an initialization
stage, and a randomization stage. Two similar methods for initializing a closed polygon are the generalized
hedgehog method, and the triangle method[1]. These involve randomly generating sets of two or three
vectors which add to zero, and then randomly ordering these vectors. Alternatively one can start just with
the regular planar polygon. Any of these methods give a closed loop for a starting position, but fail to
generate an arbitrary polygonal knot. From these initial positions, we can randomize by applying a sequence
of moves to a starting polygon, such as polygonal folds, reﬂections, or crankshafts[1]. All of these moves
preserve the fact that the knot closes, as well as the edge lengths and homogeneity. Unfortunately, none of
these methods of direct generation or movement through knot space have been rigorously shown to give or
converge to the appropriate measure on knot space. There is a method using symplectic geometry which
has been shown by Cantarella and Shonkwiler to converge to the correct measure[2]. All of these generation

1

Figure 1. An electron micrograph of a six crossing knot in DNA[17]

methods allow us to sample closed knots with a ﬁxed edge length. These methods do not, however, allow us
to have any control over the thickness of the knots generated.

1.3. Thickness and Excluded Volume Problem. A knot is traditionally viewed as being an inﬁnitesi-
mally thin strand or loop, represented by mappings of a circle into space. In applications, however, we need
knots which have a thickness, which means that they are maps of cylinders into space. This means that
portions of the knot take up volume, excluding the rest of knot from occupying that space. The natural naive
attempt at sampling knots with a thickness constraint is to merely generate knots using another method,
such as the symplectic method, and then restrict to those samples satisfying the thickness constraint. This
method is extremely ineﬀective in practice. This is because the probability of a knot that is randomly gener-
ated satisfying interesting thickness constraints can be very low. For example, in a sample of 10,000 random
decagons, 6,990 had a thickness less than .01, compared to a maximal thickness of .1539. This problem
only gets worse as the number of edges increases. Even in the case of open chains with thickness, where we
can generate a chain and use that the subchain already generated will have to have satisﬁed the thickness
constraint, we run into diﬃculties as it is possible for such generation methods to become trapped. This is a
direct result of the problem of excluded volumes, as regions in space may become too ﬁlled with portions of
the knot which were previously generated to allow for passage by a tube of the chosen thickness constraint.
This returns us to a problem faced by closed chains, as you must make numerous attempts to generate each
sample. Each of these methods can become extremely time consuming when trying to generate adequate
sample sizes.

1.4. Resolution of this Obstacle and Outline of this Paper. In this paper, we give a method of
generating knots with a thickness constraint. It allows us to check the thickness throughout the generation
procedure. It is built on the standard reﬂection algorithm, which starts with the regular planar polygon, and
applies a sequence of reﬂection moves to generate a random knot. We check the thickness after a speciﬁc
number of reﬂections to make sure the thickness constraint we desire is still maintained. Verifying that this
will randomly sample the whole space of knots of a given thickness is the focus of this paper. While the act
of checking thickness increases computation time, this method is still an improvement over the extremely
low yield of previous algorithms.

In section 2, we outline all the important deﬁnitions, and conclude with a proof of a critical fact about the
behavior of thickness under distance non-decreasing functions. In section 3, we deﬁne and prove the algorithm

2

Figure 2. A sample random 12-gon

for bringing any knot to the regular planar polygon using thickness non-decreasing moves. In section 4, we
use the algorithm from section 3 to prove that a Monte Carlo Markov Chain built from reﬂections is ergodic
for any strictly positive thickness constraint. Finally, in section 5, we begin using this algorithm to assess
the speed of the algorithm and the eﬀect of the thickness on radius of gyration.

2. Definitions

2.1. Knots. In this paper we use the following deﬁnitions. We will be considering knots as piecewise linear
equilateral polygons in 3-space, rather than the more common notion of smooth or topological knots, since
the class of piecewise linear equilateral knots is more useful for simulation and applications to the study of
macromolecules, and is much more tractable for computer based analysis. A knot with n edges will be deﬁned
to be a sequence of n points, called its vertexes, {vi}i∈Zn in R3 with the property that (cid:107)vi+1−vi(cid:107) = 1 for each
index, and for which the line segments connecting pairs of adjacent vertexes intersect in, at most, a common
vertex. The indexing is in Zn so that the result is a closed loop. The space of such knots will be denoted
Equ(n), and be given the subset topology of R3n. Knots in Equ(n) will be considered equivalent if they diﬀer
by an aﬃne transformation, which is a composition of translations and rotations. These transformations are
the orientation preserving component of the isometry group for R3 and so preserve all lengths and angles
of the knot. This equivalence is to account for the fact that the knot properties should be independent of
where the origin is or the choice of oriented orthogonal basis. An arc of the knot is a subsequence of the
knot given by {vi}k
i=j. Due to the cyclic indexing, this corresponds to the traditional notion of a subarc of
a knot. Given an arc a = {vi}k
The interior angle at a vertex, vi is deﬁned to be the angle between the two vectors vi+1−vi and vi−1−vi.
This angle will be called regular if it equals π n−2
n , large if it is larger than regular and small if it is smaller
than regular. The turning angle of a vertex is π minus the interior angle of the vertex. This gives us a means
of discussing the curvature of a piecewise linear knot, as being the turning angle at a vertex.

i=j we will deﬁne the complementary arc to be ac = {vi}j+n
i=k .

2.2. Thickness and Curvature. The polygonal injectivity radius will be as deﬁned by Rawdon in [15],
which is chosen in such a way as to limit upon the injectivity radius of a smooth curve. Recall that for
a smooth curve, the injectivity radius is the largest r such that a disk of radius r perpendicular to the
curve can be centered at every point of the knot simultaneously without intersections between distinct disks.
The two limiting factors to this are the curvature, which will cause close disks to intersect, and long range
interactions. For this reason, there are two types of radii we must consider for polygonal knots, taking their

3

Figure 3. The two angles of importance at each vertex

Figure 4. The left diagram shows the perpendicular bisectors which intersect at a distance
of dv. The middle and right diagram show inscribing an arc of a circle with radius dv and
r < dv.

minimum. For an equilateral knot K, the short range radius, M inRad(K), is deﬁned as the minimum over
all vertexes of dv = 1
2 tan(θv/2), where θv is the interior angle at the vertex v. This is the maximum radius
of disks which can be placed perpendicular to the midpoints of the two adjacent edges without intersection.
This also means that an arc of a circle with radius dv can be inscribed in the pair of edges adjacent to v
and meeting it at the midpoints of the edge. For any radius r < dv, the same can be said, except that the
intersection with the edges will be closer to the vertex.

A pair of points on the knot, a, b will be called a doubly critical pair if a is a local extrema of the distance
function to b and b is a local extrema of the distance function to a. The set of all such pairs is DC(K).
The long range radius is half of the doubly critical self distance dcsd(K) = min(a,b)∈DC(K)((cid:107)a − b(cid:107)). The
injectivity radius is deﬁned by R(K) = min(M inRad(K), dcsd(K)/2). As in the smooth case, thickness is
the injectivity radius divided by the arclength. We will denote the space of equilateral knots with thickness
greater than or equal to t by Equ(n, t).

The total curvature between two points of the realization tc(a, b) is the minimum over the two arcs
connecting a to b of the sum of turning angles for vertexes between a and b, including the turning angles
at a and/or b if either is a vertex. We will use this notion of curvature by applying Schur’s theorem for
sectionally smooth curves.
Theorem 2.1 (Schur’s Theorem for Sectionally Smooth Curves [4]). Suppose C and C∗ are two sectionally
smooth curves of the same length parametrized by arclength, with κ, κ∗ being their curvatures within the
smooth sections, α, α∗ being their turning angles at the vertexes between smooth section and C together with
its chord forming a simple convex planar curve. If κ∗(s) ≤ κ(s) and α∗(v) ≤ α(v), then the end to end
distance of C is less than or equal to the end to end distance of C∗.

One consequence of Schur’s theorem is that if we have an arbitrary curve C∗, and we do not decrease the
pointwise curvatures and turning angles, that moving to a planar convex curve C cannot increase end-to-end
distance. This condition of having a convex planar curve to compare to is certainly satisﬁed if the total

4

viInterior Anglevi-1vi+1Turning AnglevθvdvdvvdvdvvrrFigure 5. The three cases for doubly critical self distance, a pair of skew edges, a pair of
vertexes, and a vertex-edge pair.

curvature between points is less than or equal to π. The set of points which are separated by at least π in
turning angle will be denoted T C(K) = {(a, b)|tc(a, b) > π} ⊆ K × K. This deﬁnition, together with Schur’s
theorem, allows us to state and prove a lemma from [15] which we will use in a couple of places.
Lemma 2.2. If a, b are a pair of vertexes of K on the boundary of T C(K), then (cid:107)a − b(cid:107) ≥ 2M inRad(K).

Proof. Let a, b be a pair of vertexes of on the boundary of T C(K). The fact that a, b is on the boundary
of T C(K), means that the arc connecting a to b consists of vertexes v0, v1, . . . , vk, with v0 = a, vk =
b, tc(v0, vk−1) ≤ π and tc(v0, vk) > π. This allows us to create a planar piecewise linear equilateral curve
C = {wi}k+1
i=−1 with w−1 on the negative x-axis, w0 at the origin, and the turning angles of wi matching
the turning angles of vi proceeding clockwise, except at wk which proceeds parallel to the x-axis. This
curve C is like the arc connecting a to b in that all turning angles are the same but it has been ﬂattened.
The fact that the total curvature including a and b is greater than or equal to π tells us that the ﬁnal
turning angle of C is less than or equal to the turning angle at b. Thus, since no interior angle has shrunk,
M inRad(C) ≥ M inRad(K). Further, Schur’s theorem for sectionally smooth curves tells us that if the
turning angles at vertexes are not increased, the curvature at any regular point is not increased, and the
resulting curve C is convex and planar. Thus the end-to-end distance of C is greater than or equal to that
of the original curve. In our case, this means that (cid:107)a − b(cid:107) ≥ (cid:107)wk − w0(cid:107). We also note that the distance
between wk and w0 is greater than or equal to the diﬀerence in their y coordinate. By the deﬁnition of
M inRad(C), we can inscribe an arc of a circle whose radius is M inRad(C) and whose curvature is the angle
of wi at each vertex wi intersecting the neighboring edges no further than .5 from the vertex wi. Replacing
the neighborhood of each wi with this arc of a circle gives us a new diﬀerentiable curve I. This curve I
consists of a collection of k arcs of a circle of radius M inRad(C) and total angle π, together with a collection
of intermediate intervals. The curve I has an increasing y coordinate, so converting I to I∗ by removing all
intermediate intervals decreases the diﬀerence in y coordinate of the end-points. Finally, this allows us to
observe that I∗ is a circle of radius M inRad(C) giving us the following.

2M inRad(C) ≤(wk)y − (w0)y

≤(cid:107)wk − w0(cid:107)
≤(cid:107)b − a(cid:107)

This lets us prove another lemma, from [15], that will make it much easier to determine when thickness
has not been decreased. It allows us to expand our consideration from pairs of points which are doubly
critical, to those which are separated by enough curvature. This is a much easier collection of points to
directly compare.

Lemma 2.3. For a polygonal knot K with injectivity radius R(K),

R(K) = min(M inRad(K), min(a,b)∈T C(K)((cid:107)a − b(cid:107))/2)

5

(cid:3)

e1e2dde1e2e3e4de1e2e3Proof. Note ﬁrst that if min(a,b)∈T C(K)((cid:107)a − b(cid:107)) is achieved on the interior of T C(K), then it occurs at
If it occurs on the boundary of T C(K), then Lemma 2.2 tells us that (cid:107)a −
a doubly critical point.
b(cid:107) ≥ 2M inRad(K). This gives us two cases.
In the ﬁrst case, min(a,b)∈T C(K)((cid:107)a − b(cid:107)) = dcsd(K) so
min(M inRad(K), dcsd(K)/2) = min(M inRad(K), min(a,b)∈T C(K)((cid:107)a − b(cid:107))/2) and the result is shown. In
the other case,

min(a,b)∈T C(K)((cid:107)a − b(cid:107)) ≤ dcsd(K)
min(a,b)∈T C(K)((cid:107)a − b(cid:107)) ≥ 2M inRad(K)
⇒ R(K) = M inRad(K) = min(M inRad(K), min(a,b)∈T C(K)((cid:107)a − b(cid:107))/2)

Thus, the result is shown in all cases.

(cid:3)

Corollary 2.4. The injectivity radius of a convex planar polygon K is M inRad(K)

Proof. In a convex planar polygon K, T C(K) is empty and so the minimum is determined only by the ﬁrst
(cid:3)
term, M inRad(K).

This deﬁnition of thickness has four nice properties, which indicate that it is an appropriate choice for
our deﬁnition of polygonal thickness. The ﬁrst three of these properties are established in [15] and [12], and
the fourth is a simple but useful corollary of [15] which we will state here as Lemma 2.5. First, we note that
if r is less than the injectivity radius of a knot K, then the r neighborhood of the realization of the knot
is an embedded torus, giving a tubular neighborhood. Second, this thickness well models the situation in
the smooth category, in that a sequence of polygonal knots which limit appropriately on a smooth knot, will
have a thickness which limits on the smooth thickness. Third, thickness is continuous, which in particular
means that Equ(n, t) is compact and has int(Equ(n, t)) consists of knots with thickness strictly greater
than t. Finally, any edge length preserving alteration of a knot which causes distance between points of its
realization to have non-decreasing distance will not decrease thickness.

2.3. Reﬂection Moves. An arc reﬂection or, simply, a reﬂection move consists of making a choice of plane
containing two vertexes xi, xj and reﬂecting the vertexes {xk}j
k=i across that plane to get a new knot. For
many of the planes we will choose in the next section, the full arc {xk}j
k=i lies on one side of the plane of
reﬂection, but this is not required for the move to be deﬁned. If parts of the arc lie on both sides of the
plane of reﬂection, this simply means the vertexes in the arc switch sides of the plane of reﬂection. We also
note that reﬂecting an arc across a plane, and reﬂecting the complementary arc across the same plane diﬀer
by a reﬂection of the whole knot across that plane, which is an aﬃne transformation. Thus, we may choose
with each reﬂection move to reﬂect either arc connecting the chosen vertexes.

The result of a reﬂection move may not in general be a non-singular knot, as self-intersections may be
created, but we will still consider such non-embedded curves as knots with zero thickness. We also will talk
about neighborhoods of a reﬂection move, where the space of reﬂection moves on a knot is given by a disjoint
union of circles. This is because each pair of vertexes deﬁnes a line which the reﬂection plane must contain,
and the planes through a given ﬁxed line form a circle.
Lemma 2.5. If K, K(cid:48) ∈ Equ(n) and there is an arclength preserving function f : K → K(cid:48) such that
d(f (a), f (b)) ≥ d(a, b) for every pair of points a, b ∈ K, then the thickness of K(cid:48) is greater than or equal to
the thickness of K

Proof. First, consider the interior angles. We will examine a pair of points, a, b, one immediately before
and one immediately after a vertex, v. The distance between these two points cannot decrease, while their
distance to the vertex is preserved. These quantities determine the interior angle of that vertex and show
that it cannot decrease. Thus, the interior angles are all non-decreasing.

Second, we use Lemma 2.3 which says that rather than only checking long range thickness at points which
locally minimize distance, we can look at the long range thickness between any pair of points separated by
a total of π turning angles. We have already established that each interior angle is non-decreasing, which
means that the turning angles are non-increasing. This tells us that if tc(a, b) ≤ π then tc(f (a), f (b)) ≤ π,

6

Figure 6. An example of three steps applied to a random hexagon

and so T C(K(cid:48)) ⊆ f (T C(K)). Further, since every pair of points is made no closer, we have the following

min(a,b)∈T C(K)((cid:107)a − b(cid:107)) ≤
min(f (a),f (b))∈T C(K(cid:48))((cid:107)a − b(cid:107)) ≤

min(f (a),f (b))∈T C(K(cid:48))((cid:107)f (a) − f (b)(cid:107)) = min(a,b)∈T C(K(cid:48))((cid:107)a − b(cid:107))

Therefore the long range thickness is non-decreasing. Thus, the result is shown.

(cid:3)

3. The Algorithm

We can consider applying random reﬂection moves to a knot K ∈ Equ(n, t). Sometimes these random
reﬂection moves will result in a new knot in Equ(n, t) and sometimes it will not. We will show that if we apply
random reﬂections, then every neighborhood of the regular planar polygon has a positive probability of being
reached in ﬁnite time from every starting position, without leaving Equ(n, t) for more than 6 reﬂections.
For this, we will show that for any knot K in Equ(n, t), there is a sequence of moves mi consisting of
up to 6 reﬂection moves each, giving a sequence of knots {Ki}N
0 of knots also in Equ(n, t) with K = K0,
KN the regular planar polygon, each Ki+1 = mi(Ki) and each mi having an open neighborhood Mi with
m(Ki) ∈ Equ(n, t) for every m ∈ Mi.

First, we will show that there is a way of spreading out the knot so that it has a projection which is
convex. We then start ﬂattening the knot until it is planar. Finally, we will do moves to make each angle
regular, resulting in the regular planar polygon.

3.1. Convex Projections. Throughout this portion of the algorithm, we would like to know that expanding
the knot does not decrease the thickness. In practice, this amounts to showing the injectivity radius is not
decreased, since throughout the process the arclength is preserved. We will use the following lemma multiple
times.

Lemma 3.1. If r is a reﬂection move on a knot K across a plane P with P not intersecting the interior of
the convex hull of K, then the thickness of r(K) is no less than the thickness of K.

Proof. By Lemma 2.5, it suﬃces to show that the distance between any two points is not decreased by r. We
can also conjugate by an aﬃne transformation, which means that without loss of generality we can choose
P to be the x − y plane, and K living in the upper half space. If both points are ﬁxed or both points move,
then the distance between them is unchanged, so it suﬃces to consider pairs of points where exactly one of
the two is moved. We denote these two points (x, y, z) and (x(cid:48), y(cid:48), z(cid:48)) with z, z(cid:48) ≥ 0. Thus, the lemma has

7

Given ConvexProjectionMade PlanarMade Regularbeen reduced to showing that d((x, y, z), (x(cid:48), y(cid:48), z(cid:48))) ≤ d((x, y, z), (x(cid:48), y(cid:48),−z(cid:48))).

z, z(cid:48) ≥ 0
2zz(cid:48) ≥ −2zz(cid:48)

z2 + 2zz(cid:48) + z(cid:48)2 ≥ z2 − 2zz(cid:48) + z(cid:48)2

(z + z(cid:48))2 ≥ (z − z(cid:48))2

(x − x(cid:48))2 + (y − y(cid:48))2 + (z − (−z(cid:48)))2 ≥ (x − x(cid:48))2 + (y − y(cid:48))2 + (z − z(cid:48))2

d((x, y, z), (x(cid:48), y(cid:48),−z(cid:48)))2 ≥ d((x, y, z), (x(cid:48), y(cid:48), z(cid:48)))2

Thus, the distance between pairs of points is not decreased by r and so the thickness of r(K) is no less than
(cid:3)
the thickness of K.

We now proceed with applying a sequence of reﬂection moves to a knot K so that some projection p(K)
is convex. We choose the orthogonal projection into the x − y plane, giving us p(K) ⊆ R2. We want to
choose a ﬁxed orthogonal projection for two reasons. First, it is useful that a reﬂection in the plane will
correspond to a reﬂection in space, which requires that the projection is orthogonal. Second, it is important
that we have a well deﬁned and consistent set of minimum height vertexes. This means that we may apply a
rotation to the whole knot before beginning, but once we have made a choice of projection, we must stick to
it. This, unfortunately, will prevent us from using arguments about general position, but such methods can
be safely avoided. Because we have done nothing special to the knot beforehand, this map may be terribly
non-injective and perhaps is not even an immersion. Regardless, it is a piecewise linear map into the plane,
about which many results are known. Our preliminary goal will be to apply reﬂection moves to K so as to
make p(K) convex, while maintaining certain properties along the way.

We need a few deﬁnitions for this section speciﬁcally. A vertex of a polygon in R2 is exposed if it is also
a vertex of the convex hull. A pair of vertexes is an exposed pair if they are both exposed and share a line
which does not intersect the interior of the convex hull and which does not contain either arc connecting
them. This means a reﬂection of one of the two arcs connecting an exposed pair of vertexes changes the
polygon. We also need three notions of convexity. We will be considering a function f : S1 → K → R2,
but these deﬁnitions can be applied equally well to any piecwise linear map f : S1 → R2. The ﬁrst of the
deﬁnitions is that a map f : S1 → R2 is convex if it is an embedding onto the boundary of the convex
hull of its image. We will also use a weaker notion, that a map f : S1 → R2 is nearly convex if its image
is contained in the boundary of the convex hull of its image. A nearly convex map might run back and
forth through a proper subset of the boundary of the convex hull or zig zag back and forth within an edge
before continuing, but it will still be useful for our purposes. In between these two notions is the idea of
a polygon being exposed, which means that it is nearly convex and the preimage of every exposed vertex
is connected, meaning that we have eliminated the cases such as moving back and forth through a proper
subset or winding about the convex hull multiple times, but we may still have zig-zagging within an edge of
the boundary of the convex hull. It is also important to acknowledge that a map which is subdimensional,
meaning the convex hull has empty interior, will automatically be nearly convex, and may be exposed. We
will quote a theorem of two-dimensional geometry before proving a three dimensional analog.

3.1.1. Gr¨unbaum-Zaks Theorem. We will be basing our argument about three dimensional knots on the
following theorem.

Theorem 3.2. Every polygon in the plane, not necessarily embedded, can be transformed into an exposed
polygon by a ﬁnite sequence of reﬂections, determined at each step by an exposed pair of vertices

This theorem was proven in 2001 by Gr¨unbaum and Zaks[7], appearing as Theorem 3. We will use the
ability to convexify polygonal loops in the plane in Theorem 3.11 to make the orthogonal projection of the
knot into the x − y plane exposed. We require the argument of this theorem which is stronger than earlier
results such as the Erd˝os-Nagy Theorem[16], which applies to embedded polygons, because we need to be
able to consider intersections in the projection, such as multiple vertexes going to the same point, or edges
intersecting in segments as in Figure 3.1.1. Our needs also require diﬀerent choices of vertexes.

We prove a sequence of lemmas that, when taken together, prove the desired theorem about knots in

space. We ﬁrst show that if the projection of our knot isn’t exposed, it has an exposed pair.

8

Figure 7. Examples of the types of convexity deﬁned in this section. Overlapping edges
are separated for clarity.

Figure 8. An example of a polygonal loop which can be convexiﬁed in 4 reﬂections. Each
reﬂection move is shown using two ﬁgures. The left is the polygon before the reﬂection
with a supporting line connecting exposed vertexes highlighted in blue. The tight polygon
is the result of the move and shows the previous location of the moved arc as a dotted line.
Note that the initial conﬁguration includes a partial doubling back, a type of non-generic
intersection which can be accounted for by the theorem.

Lemma 3.3. If p(K) is a polygon in the plane which is not exposed, then it has an exposed pair.

Proof. First, consider the case where p(K) is not nearly convex. This means that there is some point x of
p(K) on the interior of conv(p(K)). This also means conv(p(K)) is not subdimensional, which means that
p(K) has at least three non-collinear exposed vertexes. This point x need not be a vertex of p(K). From x,
proceed forward to the ﬁrst exposed vertex vi. The vertex vi has two supporting lines of conv(p(K)) coming
out of it. The edge ei coming out of vi cannot lie in both, so choose a supporting line l of conv(p(K)) which
contains vi but does not contain ei. This line must hit a second exposed vertex vj. The line l then does not
contain either arc connecting vi to vj, as it does not contain ei and it does not contain x, and by the choice
of vi as the ﬁrst exposed vertex after x, these must lie in diﬀerent arcs connecting vi to vj. Therefore, vi
and vj form an exposed pair.

Next, consider the case where p(K) is nearly convex but not exposed. This means that there is some
vertex of conv(p(K)) with disconnected preimage. This tells us that there are vi, vj with p(vi) = p(vj) but
with neither arc connecting vi to vj mapped to p(vi). Let l be a line which intersects conv(p(K)) in only
this exposed vertex. Then l is a line which does not intersect the interior of conv(p(K)) and which does not
(cid:3)
contain either arc connecting vi to vj and so vi, vj form an exposed pair.

Deﬁne a plane P to be a boundary plane of K if it is vertical and does not intersect the interior of conv(K).
This means it is the projection preimage of a supporting line of conv(p(K)). We also deﬁne vi, vj in K to
be an edge pair if they share an edge of conv(K) and a boundary plane P which does not contain either arc

9

Non-ConvexNearly ConvexExposedConvex1234Figure 9. An example of a reﬂection of an arc across a boundary plane. The left diagram
is the projection into the plane.

connecting vi to vj. We next show that if the projection of our knot isn’t exposed, then there is an edge
pair.

Lemma 3.4. If K is a knot with p(K) not exposed, then there is an edge pair vi, vj.

Proof. Since p(K) is not exposed, Lemma 3.3 tells us there is an exposed pair of vertexes p(vi), p(vj). This
exposed pair shares a line l with l disjoint from the interior of conv(p(K)), and not containing either arc
connecting p(vi) to p(vj). Looking at projection preimages, this means that there is a boundary plane
P = p−1(l) with P containing vi and vj, but with P not containing either arc connecting them. As their
projections are exposed, they must share a face F of conv(K), and both lie on the boundary of that face.

Choose one arc around the boundary of F . This will contain some number of intermediate vertexes. If
there are no such vertexes, then vi and vj share an edge of conv(K) and we are done. Otherwise, choose an
intermediate vertex vk. Denote the arcs connecting vi to vj by A, B. The vertex vk lies on one of those two
arcs, and so without loss of generality, suppose it is B. Thus, B = B1 ∪ B2, where B1 is an arc connecting vi
to vk and B2 is an arc connecting vk to vj. The arc B does not lie in P so either B1 does not lie in P or B2
does not lie in P . If B1 does not, then vi and vk are a pair of vertexes in P which both lie on a boundary
arc of F but with fewer intermediate boundary vertexes. If B2 is not contained in P , then vk and vj are a
pair of vertexes in P which both lie on a boundary arc of F but with fewer intermediate boundary vertexes.
Thus, in every case where there is an intermediate vertex on the boundary of F , we can choose new vertexes
vi and vj in P with neither arc connecting them in P but with fewer vertexes between them. This allows
us to use induction to reduce to the base case when there are no intermediate vertexes and so the result
(cid:3)
holds.

So far we have shown that if our knot does not have an exposed projection, then there is an edge pair,
and so we can reﬂect one arc connecting the edge pair across a common boundary plane to expands the
projection. We now show that this expansion must have a limiting polygon.

Lemma 3.5. If Ki is a sequence of knots with Ki+1 = Ki or Ki+1 = ri(Ki) where ri is a reﬂection of an
arc connecting an edge pair across a boundary plane, then the sequence Ki converges to a limit polygon K∗.
Proof. Since the plane of reﬂection Pi is vertical, it projects to p(Pi) = li. Reﬂection of an arc across a
line which does not intersect the interior of the convex hull does not decrease the distance between pairs of
points. Thus, each distance between pairs p(vi) and p(vj) is increasing, but it is also bounded above by half
of the arclength of the knot. Thus, each distance between pairs of vertex projections must converge.

10

v2v0v1v3v2v4v5v'2v'3v0v1v'2v3v'3v4v5Figure 10. A model of a triple of points near a vertex which is exposed in the limit, along
with a line separating this exposed vertex from the rest of the knot

We now consider two cases. First suppose there is a collection of three vertexes projections, p(vi), p(vj), p(vk)
whose pairwise distances converge to a strict triangle inequality. Then there exists an N so that for all n ≥ N ,
Kn has p(vi), p(vj), p(vk) satisfying a strict triangle inequality, meaning those three vertex projections are
not collinear. Thus, since the location of a point in a plane can be determined by its distance to any three
non-collinear points, then the position of every other vertex projection converges. Since none of the heights
were changed, the location of every vertex of Ki converges and so there is a limit polygon K∗.

In the second case, every triple of vertex projections p(vi), p(vj), p(vk) have distances which converge to a
triangle equality. This means every triple of projections converge to collinearity, since only collinear points
satisfy triangle equality. Thus, taking a pair p(vi) and p(vj) and the line through them, every other vertex
must converge to a speciﬁc point on that line. Thus, the location of the vertexes projections converge and
the heights of the vertexes were unchanged so the location of the vertexes converge giving a limit polygon
(cid:3)
K∗.

We now know that a limiting polygon exists. We now use information about that limit to get information
about elements of the sequence. We ﬁrst show that vertexes which are exposed in the limit are actually
exposed in ﬁnite time.

Lemma 3.6. If Ki is a sequence of knots with Ki+1 = Ki or Ki+1 = ri(Ki) where ri is a reﬂection of
an arc connecting an edge pair across a boundary plane and vj is a vertex of the knots which has exposed
projection in the limit K∗, then there exists an N with vj having exposed projection in Kn for all n ≥ N .
Proof. Because p(vj) is exposed in the limit, it is a vertex of conv(p(K∗)) so there is a line l which separates
the limit of p(vj) from the limit of all other vertex projections. This line l separates the plane into two open
sets. The convergence of each point, means that for each vertex vk there is a natural number Nk with p(vk)
on the correct side of l in all Kn with n ≥ Nk. Taking N = max(Nk), we get that for all n ≥ N , Kn has
all vertex projections on the same side of l as K∗. This means that for all Kn with n ≥ N , there is a line
(cid:3)
separating p(vj) from all other vertexes, so p(vj) is an exposed vertex of p(Kn).

So far we have allowed any choice of reﬂection of arc connecting an edge pair. We will now show that if
we make a speciﬁc choice of reﬂection, then the limit will be exposed. We deﬁne µ(p(K)) to be the sum over
pairs of vertexes vi, vj of the distance between vi and vj.

Lemma 3.7. Suppose Ki is a sequence of knots with Ki+1 = Ki or Ki+1 = ri(Ki) where ri is a reﬂection of
an arc connecting an edge pair across a boundary plane, with Ki+1 chosen so that the number of vertexes vj
with turning angle at p(vj) = π is reduced if possible, and otherwise chosen so that µ(p(Ki+1)) is maximized.
Then, the limit polygon K∗ is exposed.
Proof. Seeking a contradiction, suppose K∗ has a projection which is not exposed. This means there is a
reﬂection move on K∗. This involves increasing µ(p(K∗)) by an amount δ. Taking the convex hull and the
sums of distances between vertex projections are both continuous operations which means the maximum

11

vJvJ+1vJ-1change in µ(p(Ki)) must converge to a value greater than or equal to δ. Our choice of reﬂections, however,
ensures that the maximum change in µ(p(Ki)) converges to zero. This is a contradiction and so the limit
(cid:3)
K∗ must be exposed.

We now know that if chosen properly, then the reﬂection moves will have an exposed limit. We next show
that the limit is reached in ﬁnite time, ﬁrst by proving it when the limit is full dimensional and then again
when the limit is subdimensional.

is an exposed polygon tells us that K∗ =(cid:83)m

Lemma 3.8. Suppose Ki is a sequence of knots with Ki+1 = Ki or Ki+1 = ri(Ki) where ri is a reﬂection of
an arc connecting an edge pair across a boundary plane, with Ki+1 chosen so that the number of vertexes vj
with turning angle at p(vj) = π is reduced if possible, and otherwise chosen so that µ(p(Ki+1)) is maximized.
If the projection of the limit polygon p(K∗) is full dimensional, then there exists an N so that for any n > N ,
Kn+1 = Kn.
Proof. Lemma 3.7 tells us that the projection of the limit p(K∗) is an exposed polygon. The fact that K∗
l=0 Al, where Al is an arc connecting adjacent exposed vertexes
of K∗. We also know that since K∗ is full dimensional, for any pair of vertexes vl1, vl2 on the interior of
distinct arcs Al1, Al2 , the line segment connecting p(vl1), p(vl2) intersects the interior of the convex hull of
p(K∗). The continuity of taking the convex hull and taking convex combinations of vertexes tells us that
there is a natural number Nl1,l2 so that for every n ≥ Nl1,l2, Kn has the line connecting vl1, vl2 intersects
the interior of the convex hull of p(Kn). Taking N to be the maximum over this ﬁnite number of bounds,
we get that for every n ≥ N , any line connecting vertexes on distinct arcs Al1, Al2 intersects the interior of
the convex hull of p(Kn), and so every edge pair lies in one of the arcs {Al}m
l=1.

The fact that every edge pair lies in one of the arcs {Al}m

l=1 tells us that any reﬂection of arc connecting an
edge pair must have either the reﬂected arc or the stationary arc containing all vertexes which are exposed
in p(K∗). Without loss of generality, we can assume that the stationary arc is the one which contains all
vertexes exposed in p(K∗). Thus, every vertex which is exposed in p(K∗) is ﬁxed for all n > N . For any
vertex vj on the interior of one of the arc Al, we have the triple of vertexes vj, vl0, vlk , where vl0, vlk are
the endpoints of the arc Al. The distance d1 = d(p(vl0), p(vlk )) is ﬁxed, the distances d2 = d(p(vl0), p(vj))
and d3 = d(p(vj), p(vlk )) are non-decreasing, and the limit satisﬁes d1 = d2 + d3 which is the minimum for
d2 + d3, so for every n ≥ N , d1 = d2 + d3 which uniquely determines the location of vj. Thus, for every
n ≥ N , every vertex is ﬁxed. Thus, Kn+1 = Kn.
(cid:3)
Lemma 3.9. Suppose Ki is a sequence of knots with Ki+1 = Ki or Ki+1 = ri(Ki) where ri is a reﬂection of
an arc connecting an edge pair across a boundary plane, with Ki+1 chosen so that the number of vertexes vj
with turning angle at p(vj) = π is reduced if possible, and otherwise chosen so that µ(p(Ki+1)) is maximized.
If the projection of the limit polygon p(K∗) is subdimensional, then there exists an N so that for any n > N ,
Kn+1 = Kn
Proof. Lemma 3.7 tells us that the projection of the limit p(K∗) is an exposed polygon. There can only
be ﬁnitely many ri which reduce the number of turning angle π vertexes so there is a number M so that
for every n > M , no such reﬂection is possible. The fact that p(K∗) is subdimensional means that each
exposed vertex p(vi) has turning angle π, so both edges coming out from p(vi) go in the same direction.
By Lemma 3.6, there is an N with p(vi) exposed in Kn for every n ≥ N . If n > max(N, M ) and p(Kn)
is not subdimensional, then there are two distinct edges of conv(p(Kn)) coming from p(vi), so at least one
l does not contain the edges coming out of p(vi). This means that there is an edge pair made of vi and
another vertex vj with p(vj) on l. Reﬂecting an arc connecting vi to vj reduces the number of vertexes
with turning angle π. This contradicts the choice of M so we know that for all n > max(M, N ), p(Kn)
is subdimensional. Since a subdimensional polygon has exactly its endpoints as exposed vertexes, every
reﬂection move between subdimensional polygons changes which two vertexes are exposed, and for every
n > N the two exposed vertexes of p(K∗) are exposed vertexes of p(Kn), no reﬂection can be applied to Kn.
(cid:3)
Thus, for every n > max(N, M ), Kn+1 = Kn.

Theorem 3.10. For any knot K, there is a ﬁnite number of reﬂections ri of arcs connecting edge pairs
across boundary planes, generating a sequence K = K0, . . . , Kn, with ri(Ki) = Ki+1 and p(Kn) an exposed
polygon.

12

Proof. By Lemma 3.4 there is a reﬂection as long as the result is not yet exposed. By lemmas 3.8 and 3.9 we
know that if those reﬂections are chosen correctly, only ﬁnitely many are required to reach the limit polygon,
(cid:3)
which by Lemma 3.7 is an exposed polygon.

3.1.2. Moving From Exposed to Convex. To reach a convex polygon, we need to make the number of un-
necessary intersections of edge projections go to zero. We measure this distance from being an embedding
by taking the incidence of the knot to be I(K) = |{(ei, ej) such that p(ei) ∩ p(ej) non-trivial }|, where the
ei are edges of the knot. Using the the previous section we can get the following theorem about polygonal
knots with thickness.
Theorem 3.11. Any knot K can be transformed into a knot K(cid:48) whose orthogonal projection into the x − y
plane is an exposed polygon using a ﬁnite number of height preserving, thickness non-decreasing reﬂections
ri, with I(K(cid:48)) ≤ I(K) and each ri in the closure of the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness.
Proof. We ﬁrst take the standard orthogonal projection of K into the x − y plane. This projection gives a
polygonal loop, p(K), with possible intersections. We can apply Theorem 3.10 to ﬁnd a sequence of ﬁnitely
many reﬂections ri of arcs connecting edge pairs across boundary planes Pi which take K to K(cid:48) with p(K(cid:48))
exposed.

Each of these reﬂection moves is across a plane parallel to the z-axis, and so the z coordinate is unchanged,
making the process height invariant. We also are reﬂecting at each step across a plane which does not intersect
the convex hull of the current knot, which means that by Lemma 3.1 the thickness is not decreased by any
reﬂection. The fact that the reﬂection is of an arc connecting an edge pair means that Pi lies in a positive
length interval of planes which contain the same edge pair but do not intersect the interior of the convex
hull. Thus, ri is in the closure of the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness. Finally, if we
have two edges whose projections intersect non-trivially after a reﬂection move, then either both were ﬁxed,
both moved, or exactly one moved. If both moved or both were ﬁxed, then the non-trivial intersection was
present before the reﬂection.
If one moved and the other didn’t, then they each are placed on opposite
sides of p(Pi). Thus, their intersection lies on p(Pi) and was ﬁxed by ri meaning it was present before the
reﬂection. Therefore there can be no newly created incident edge pairs, and so I(K(cid:48)) ≤ I(K). Thus, all the
(cid:3)
properties in the theorem are shown.

Our next step is to ﬁnd reﬂections which decrease the incidence of the knot projection, without increasing
thickness or changing the set of minimal height vertexes. We know that we have injectivity at the vertexes
of the convex hull, so we turn our attention to the edges. Whenever injectivity fails inside an edge, we will
push a part of the preimage of that edge out slightly to remove some of the incidences and continue the
process.

Lemma 3.12. If K is a knot with p(K) an exposed polygon which is not convex, there exists a reﬂection
move or aﬃne transformation r with I(r(K)) < I(K), r(K) having no fewer minimal height vertexes than
K, and r in the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness.

Proof. We ﬁrst consider the special case where p(K) is subdimensional. In that case, K lies in a vertical
plane, so we can apply an aﬃne transformation r moving this plane to horizontal. This means p(r(K)) is
an embedding, so I(r(K)) is zero, r(K) has the same thickness as K, and r(K) has the maximum number
of minimal height vertexes.
We next move to the case where p(K) is full dimensional. Note that if p(K) is an exposed polygon which
is not convex, then there is an edge e of the convex hull of p(K) for which p|p−1(e) is not an injection. The
set p−1(e) is an inﬁnite strip, with K ∩ p−1(e) going from one side of the strip to the other. We will denote
this arc A for simplicity. The fact that A moves from one side of the strip to the other tells us that the
convex hull of A separates the strip into a top and bottom portion. In particular, the doubling back means
that A doesn’t live inside the lower boundary of its convex hull. Thus, there is a line l deﬁning the bottom
portion of the convex hull of A and a subarc a with both ends on l but whose interior misses l. We can
assert this by choosing a point α which lies directly above another, and proceeding forward and back until
we reach the lower boundary of the convex hull of A at the points α+ and α−. The knot being injective
means that the arc connecting α− to α+ through α separates the convex hull, and so anything on the line

13

Figure 11. An example of p−1(e) with the convex hull of A highlighted

segment connecting α− to α+ would be separated from the endpoints of A. We will reﬂect across a plane
containing l.

If we choose the plane of reﬂection to be perfectly vertical, then we have accomplished nothing, but if the
plane of reﬂection is too shallow, we may create problems for thickness or minimal height vertexes. We will
consider a cylindrical coordinate system, where the center of the cylinder is the line l about which we are
rotating. We orient this coordinate system so the angle 0 corresponds to the half plane directly below l and
the angle π to the half plane above l. The fact that l lies on the boundary of the convex hull means we can
assert that the entire knot has angles in [0, π], and the fact that l is a lower boundary of the convex hull
of A means that all angles are greater than 0. The knot K is compact, which means it attains its minimal
angle θmin. This means that if we choose a plane through l at angle 0 <  < θmin, this plane intersects
the convex hull of K only in the line l. In particular, Lemma 3.1 tells us that reﬂecting across this plane
is a reﬂection move r with r(K) having no lower thickness than K, as is any nearby reﬂection ˜r, so r is in
the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness. The height of each vertex after the reﬂection is a
continuous function of the angle , and so for a suﬃciently small , any vertex which was above the minimal
height will stay above the minimal height, and none at the minimal height are moved, so the set of minimal
height vertexes is unchanged. Finally, we seek to show that I(r(K)) < I(K).

Any pair of edges which are both unmoved will have their incidences unchanged. Among those that are
moved, we have at least some non-trivial intersections, by our choice of a. Further, the moved portion a is
moved to a half plane h which is not vertical, and therefore p|h is injective. Thus, there are no incidences
(cid:3)
among pairs of edges where at least one is moved. Thus, I(r(K)) < I(K) and so the result holds.

This allows us to state the theorem which moves us to the next phase of the algorithm.

Theorem 3.13. For any knot K, there is a ﬁnite sequence of knots {Ki}n
the following.

i=0 and reﬂection moves ri satisfying

• K0 = K
• p(Kn) is convex
• The set of minimal height vertexes is nondecreasing as i increases.
• Each reﬂection move ri is in the closure of the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness.
Proof. We induct on I(K). Regardless of the value of I(K), we can apply Theorem 3.11 and get a ﬁnite
sequence which ends in an exposed polygon. If this polygon is convex, then we are done. Otherwise we
apply Lemma 3.12, which reduces the number of incidences, and so the inductive hypotheses completes the
(cid:3)
result.

3.2. Flattening the Knot. In this section our goal is to produce a knot which is convex and planar using
thickness non-decreasing moves. We will do so inductively using the number of vertexes at the minimum
height. This will be done using two theorems.

14

αα-α+lp-1(e)Figure 12. An example of a rotation which increases the number of minimum height
vertexes, shown from a projection which is parallel to the axis of rotation.

Theorem 3.14. If a knot has a convex orthogonal projection into the x − y plane, but is not planar, then
there is a pair of reﬂection moves or a rotation that will increase the number of minimum height vertexes by
at least one, with a neighborhood which does not decreasing the thickness.

Proof. There must be at least one vertex that attains the minimum height among vertexes. Consider ﬁrst
the case where there is exactly one vertex v which is at the minimum height. We can apply a rotation and
change the minimum height vertex into a maximum height vertex. Intermediate value theorem tells us that
for each other vertex, v(cid:48), there is an intermediate rotation which makes the height of v equal the height of
v(cid:48). Since there are ﬁnitely many vertexes, there is a ﬁrst vertex, w for which this happens. Since this is
the ﬁrst vertex to pass the height of v, v must still be a minimum height vertex, and now w is also. Thus,
we have increased the number of minimum height vertexes from one to at least two. As a rotation does not
aﬀect the knot thickness in any way, the result is shown in this case.

Now consider the case where there are at least two vertexes which attain the minimum height. Find a
pair of such vertexes, v1, vn, with the property that there is an arc of the knot connecting them with no
minimum height vertexes, and with at least one vertex. The fact that the knot is not planar guarantees the
existence of such an arc. Since the knot is convex in the projection, there is a vertical plane with the arc
in the closure of one side and the complementary arc in the closure of the other side. We will use the fact
that an arc may be rotated using a pair of reﬂection moves through a common axis. We can then use this
to rotate the arc away from the separating plane. Each of the intermediate vertexes, {vi}n−1
form an angle
θi with the line connecting v1 to vn, oriented so 0 represents a point lying at the height of v1 and vn, and
π/2 representing lying above the line connecting v1 to vn. There is a minimal such angel θj. Thus, if we
rotate the arc connecting v1 to vn down by an angle θj, we add vj to the set of vertexes at the height of v1
and since θj ≤ θi for 2 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, no vertex can have gone below v1 and so we have added a vertex to the
set of minimum height vertexes.
Consider two points in the realization, v, w and a rotation angle θ with 0 ≤ θ ≤ 2θj. We seek to apply
Lemma 2.5 and so we would like to know that the distance between v, w is increased by the rotation, which
means it suﬃces to show that their squared distance is increased. If both are unmoved by the rotation, or
if both are rotated, then the distance between them is unchanged. Thus, we can suppose that v is moved,
and w is ﬁxed. We will consider cylindrical coordinates, with the axis of rotation the center of the cylinder.
This causes the height and radius of both points to be unchanged. Further, since we are rotating about
an axis which includes two vertexes which are absolute minimums, we can presume that the radii are both
non-negative, that the ﬁxed point, w, has angle φw between π and π/2, and that the point being rotated,

2

15

v, has angle φv which starts between π/2 and θj. Let φ be the diﬀerence between φv and φw. The height
coordinates are both constant, so the diﬀerence in the squared distance reduces to the following.

(r1 sin(φ))2 + (r1 cos(φ) − r2)2 = r2

1 − 2r1r2 cos(φ) + r2

2

Because φv > θj, we know that φ < π − θj initially. Since θ < 2θj we can observe that |π − φ| is reduced.
This means that cos(φ) is decreased by the move, so the distance between the points is increased. This
means that every rotation by an angle θ with 0 < θ < 2θj does not decrease thickness, so the particular
(cid:3)
rotation by θj has a neighborhood which does not decrease thickness.

We now combine theorems 3.11 and 3.14 for the following theorem.

Theorem 3.15. Any knot may be made convex and planar using a sequence of ﬁnitely many moves consisting
of aﬃne transformations, reﬂections, or pairs of reﬂections, such that each move is contained in the closure
of the interior of moves which will not increase the thickness.

Proof. We do this using induction on the number of vertexes which fail to attain the minimum height. If
there are no vertexes which fail to attain the minimum height then all vertexes are in a common plane.
Applying Theorem 3.11 gives a ﬁnite sequence of moves which makes it convex, does not change the height,
and is in the closure of the interior of moves which do not decrease the thickness and so we are done. Now
suppose that we can achieve the desired result if there are less than n vertexes which attain the minimum
height, and that K is a knot which has exactly n vertexes which fail to attain the minimum height. We can
then apply Theorem 3.11 to get a ﬁnite sequence of j reﬂections which do not aﬀect the height, are in the
closure of the interior of moves which do not decrease the thickness, and give us a knot conﬁguration K2
which is convex in projection. Since the height is unchanged we still have n vertexes which fail to attain
the minimum height. We can then use Theorem 3.14 to get a pair of reﬂections or a rotation in the closure
of the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness, which will give us a knot K3 with fewer than n
minimum vertexes. Finally, we can use the inductive hypothesis to get a sequence of k moves in the closure
of the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness which results in a convex planar polygon. Thus, K
can be made convex and planar using j + k + 1 moves in the closure of the interior of moves which do not
decrease thickness. Therefore, by induction, any knot can be made convex and planar using a ﬁnite sequence
(cid:3)
of moves in the closure of the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness.

3.3. Convex and Planar made Regular.

3.3.1. The Move. The move will be a sequence of six reﬂections, but the net result can be explained much
more clearly. We will take four vertexes and look at the planar knot as being the quadrilateral joined directly
by those four vertexes, along with up to four ﬂaps.

The result of the move is equivalent to allowing only the distinguished four vertexes to pivot in the plane,
and then pushing two opposite vertexes together, allowing the complementary two to spread apart. This
causes two interior angles to shrink and two interior angles to grow. We will pick two vertexes whose interior
angles are large and two whose interior angles are small so applying this move minimally will make one of
the four regular.

Informally, the way we achieve this type of move using reﬂections is that we reﬂect through a plane
containing two of the ﬂexible vertexes to bring the complementary vertexes closer together, and then use a
reﬂection through the pair we moved to make the four planar. Finally we use up to four more reﬂections to
bring the four ﬂaps back into the common plane.

3.3.2. Picking Verticies. As mentioned above, we ﬁnd a collection of four vertexes, two which have large
interior angle and two which have small interior angle, in an alternating pattern around the knot.

Lemma 3.16. For any convex non-regular polygon in the plane, there exists an ordered set of four vertexes,
v1, w1, v2, w2 with the interior angle of vi smaller than regular, and the interior angle of wi larger than
regular.

Proof. For this, we ﬁrst note that if the polygon is not regular, then it must have a vertex, w1, with an
interior angle which is too big and a vertex, v1, whose interior angle is too small, since the sum of the angles

16

Figure 13. An example of applying the hextuple reﬂection move to a decagon. The initial
diagram has the four distinguished vertexes connected by dotted lines.

is ﬁxed. Without loss of generality, choose v1 and w1 to be separated only by vertexes with regular angles in
at least one of the arcs. Next, we consider the arc consisting of just the two edges connected to w1. This arc
has longer end to end distance than if the polygon was regular. This means that the complementary arc must
also have longer end to end distance. Since we are dealing with a convex polygon, the end to end distance
is an increasing function of the interior angles, and so there must be some second vertex w2 which has an
interior angle which is too large. This vertex cannot be between v1 and w1 so without loss of generality,
choose it to be the closest such vertex to v1 on the other side from w1. Thus, the arc connecting w1 to w2
through v1 consists only of vertexes with angles which are regular or smaller than regular. This means that
this arc has shorter end-to-end distance than in the regular polygon, so the complementary arc has shorter
end-to-end distance than the regular polygon, meaning it must also have a vertex, v2, which has an angle
which is smaller than regular. Thus, we have a sequence of ordered vertexes v1, w1, v2, w2, with v1, v2 having
(cid:3)
angles which are smaller than regular and with w1, w2 having angles which are bigger than regular.
3.3.3. Choosing Reﬂections. We will assume the knot lies in the x − y plane and form a transformation of
the knot T , consisting of up to six reﬂections which result in T (K) begin planar and having more regular
vertexes than K. The ﬁrst reﬂection will reﬂect the arc connecting w1 to w2 through v1 across a plane which
makes an angle of θ to the x− y plane. There are generally two such choices so we will choose the one which
puts the vertex v1 to a non-negative z coordinate. The second will reﬂect the arc connecting v1 to v2 through
w2, and will be chosen in such a way as to make the four vertexes v1, v2, w1, w2 coplanar. There are generally
two such choices so choose the one which maximizes the z coordinate of w2. Finally, the four arcs connecting
the vertexes of our highlighted quadrilateral may be out of alignment, so we will reﬂect them each across a
plane which will bring them into the common plane of v1, v2, w1, w2. Again there are two such choices so we
will choose the one which moves each ﬂap the shortest distance. This gives a family of transformations, Tθ,
for each real number, θ between 0 and π/2, with Tθ(K) continuous in θ. This leads us to the next result.

Theorem 3.17. Any convex planar knot can be made regular using a sequence of ﬁnitely many moves, each
move consisting of at most six reﬂections, with each such move in the interior of moves which do not decrease
thickness.

Proof. We will show that there is a choice of θ for which Tθ(K) has exactly one of the four vertexes have a
regular interior angle without switching any of the other four between larger than regular interior angle and
smaller than regular interior angle. For this, we consider the vectors e1 = w1−v1, e2 = v2−w1, e3 = w2−v2,
and e4 = v2 − w1. These are the four edges of the inscribed quadrilateral formed by those four vertexes. We
then look at the function f (K) = (e1 × e2)· (e3 × e4). For θ = 0, f (Tθ(K)) > 0. For θ = π/2, f (Tθ(K)) < 0.
Thus, since f is a continuous function and Tθ is a continuous function of θ, we use the intermediate value
theorem to observe that there is a choice θ0 for which f (Tθ0(K)) = 0, so e1× e2 and e3× e4 are perpendicular
vectors.. The conﬁguration Tθ(K) is always planar, so the vectors e1 × e2 and e3 × e4 are parallel. This
means that the two vectors are both parallel and perpendicular, which can only be the case if one of them

17

is the zero vector. Thus, either e1 × e2 is zero or e3 × e4 is zero, so in Tθ0(K), one of the vi is collinear with
w1 and w2.
For the remainder of the proof θ ≤ θ0. This means that in particular Tθ(K) is still an embedding. Thus,
we have a well deﬁned notion of the sign of a turning angle, where the sign of all turning angles in T0(K)
are positive. The fact that the interior angle of vi in T0(K) is smaller than regular, the turning angle at vi
in T0(K) is larger than regular. Because vi is collinear with w1 and w2 in Tθ0 (K), the turning angle of vi in
Tθ0(K) is negative. This means that by the intermediate value theorem, there exists an angle θ1 with the
turning angle of vi in Tθ1 (K) regular.

There may be multiple choices of θ with Tθ(K) having a greater number of regular angles than K.
We then choose the smallest θ which makes at least one of the four changing angles regular. Thus, one
particular angle is made regular, and the remainder stay on the same side of regular, either staying larger
than regular or staying smaller than regular. We note that from corollary 2.4, the long range thickness need
not be considered. One possibility is that the smallest angle is unchanged, which means that for any T in
a neighborhood of Tθ, the thickness of T (K) is the same as the thickness of K. The other possibility is
that the smallest angle is one of the vi and so is larger, meaning that Tθ(K) is thicker than K and so since
thickness is continuous, a neighborhood of Tθ does not decrease thickness. Therefore we have increased the
number of regular vertexes using a move on the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness. Applying
this up to n times, where n is the number of vertexes, we can guarantee that the end result has at least n
(cid:3)
regular vertexes, and so is the regular planar polygon.

3.4. Result.

Theorem 3.18. Any equilateral polygonal knot can be made into a regular convex planar polygon using a
ﬁnite number moves, consisting only of rigid motions, or up to six reﬂections, with each move in the closure
of the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness.

Proof. This is a simple combination of the above theorems. First, Theorem 3.15 shows that a ﬁnite number
of such moves can make any equilateral polygonal knot planar and convex, and then Theorem 3.17 allows
another ﬁnite number of such moves to make any equilateral polygonal planar and convex knot regular. This
(cid:3)
gives us the desired result.

In this section, we will prove that we can build an ergodic Markov chain for sampling the space of

equilateral knots with thickness. The above algorithm will be necessary in showing ergodicity.

4. Monte-Carlo Markov Chains

4.1. The Markov Chain. The general deﬁnition of a Markov chain is a sequence in a state space X where
each entry in the sequence of states is independent of every state before the immediate predecessor. We will
refer to our Markov chain as Φ. Our Markov chain is given by a set of states X in Rn, a noise parameter
W which is an open subset of Rp with a probability measure µW , and a function F : X × W → X. The
space of states will be X = Equ(n, t). The noise parameter W will be a product of reﬂection moves. The
space of reﬂection moves R is of the form (x, v1, v2, θ), where x is a real number in (0, 1) used to determine
if we check the thickness, v1, v2 are a random pair of vertexes, and θ is an angle. While this R isn’t clearly
an open subset of Rp, it can be modeled in that way by choosing the continuous variables from a rectangle,
and selecting the discreet variables by using a disjoint collection of rectangles. Thus, we use

(cid:91)

[0, 2π] × [2(n ∗ i + j), 2(n ∗ i + j) + 1]

R =

0≤i<j≤n

where n is the number of edges. This space R is a disjoint collection of rectangles. The y coordinate is an
angle. The width of each rectangle is 1. Which rectangle a point is in determines the i, j which represents a
pair of distinct vertexes. The complete noise space is W = RN , where N is a cap on how many reﬂections we
are allowed between checking the thickness. We require that N ≥ 6 so that we may use Theorem 3.18. The
probability measure on W is just a multiple of the Lebesgue measure on this bounded space, which means
that it has a constant probability distribution γW which is supported on all of W and is lower semi-continuous
since W is open.

18

A+(x) = (cid:83)∞

∼= R we are in and θ = yk from Wk

The function F in our Markov chain Φ will be deﬁned as follows. We have a collection of N probabilities
pk which represent the probability of applying the kth reﬂection if we already applied the k − 1st reﬂection.
∼= R.
Given a w ∈ W = RN we ﬁnd a sequence of variables ak = xk−(cid:98)xk(cid:99), where xk is the x coordinate of Wk
These ak live in (0, 1). We ﬁnd m which is one less than the ﬁrst k with ak > pk, or m = N if no such k
exists. This m is how many reﬂections we will apply. When we apply a reﬂection to a knot K ∈ Equ(n, t),
we reﬂect the arc connecting the vertexes vi and vj across a plane determined by the angle θ, where i, j are
∼= R. Thus, we get a reﬂection
indicated by which component of Wk
move rk for each k. This lets us deﬁne F (K, w) = rmrm−1 . . . r1(K) if rmrm−1 . . . r1(K) ∈ Equ(n, t) and K
otherwise. This means F is a piecewise function with two pieces, one is the identity and the other is smooth.
+(x) ⊆ X to denote the set of states y for which there is a sequence
4.2. Forward Accessible. We will use An
of exactly n moves on the interior of a smooth section starting at x and ending at y. We will also deﬁne
n=1 An(x). One useful property a Markov chain can have is forward accessibility. A Markov
chain is forward accessible if A+(x) is a set with non-empty interior, for every value of x. When the motion
of the Markov chain is smooth, then the set An
+(x) reduces to simply points reachable in n steps, but since
our function is merely piecewise smooth we need the more general deﬁnition. We will prove our Markov
chain is forward accessible. This will be a direct continuation of the conclusion of the previous chapter.
Lemma 4.1. For every knot K, there is a ﬁnite sequence of moves mi, 0 ≤ i < N giving a ﬁnite sequence
of knots Ki, such that K0 = K, KN is the regular planar polygon, and each mi has a neighborhood of moves
Mi, with m(Ki) ∈ Equ(n, t) for every m ∈ Mi.
Proof. By Theorem 3.18, there is a sequence of N1 moves m1
the regular planar polygon,
and each move m1
i in the closure of the interior of moves which do not decrease thickness. This means that for
any open neighborhood of the regular planar polygon, such as int(Equ(n, t)), there is a sequence of N1 moves
m2
i on the interior of moves which do not
i with m(Ki) ∈ Equ(n, t) for every
decrease thickness, and so in particular has a neighborhood of moves M 2
m ∈ M 2
, K 3
N2
i not decreasing thickness. Since each K 3 is on the interior of
the regular planar polygon and each move m3
Equ(n, t), there is a neighborhood M 3
i . Concatenating
(cid:3)
these two sequences of moves, we get the desired result.
Theorem 4.2. The Markov chain Φ is forward accessible with int(Equ(n, t)) ⊆ A+(K) for every knot K in
Equ(n, t).
Proof. Let K ∈ Equ(n, t) and K(cid:48) ∈ int(Equ(n, t)). Then K(cid:48) ∈ Equ(n, t(cid:48)) where t(cid:48) > t. By Lemma 4.1,
there is a sequence of N1 moves m1
i in an open
i with m(Ki) ∈ Equ(n, t) for all m ∈ Mi. By the same lemma there is also a sequence of
neighborhood M 1
in Equ(n, t(cid:48)) ⊆ int(Equ(n, t)).
0 = K(cid:48), K 2
N2 moves m2
Each reﬂection move can be repeated on the image knot, which means that each move m2
i has an inverse
move m3
i is in int(Equ(n, t)).
Since each m3
i ) in
Equ(n, t) for every m ∈ M 3
i . Concatenating these two sequences of moves gives a sequence of N moves m4
i
i with m( ˆKi) ∈ Equ(n, t)
with K 4
for all m ∈ M 4
i is on the interior of a smooth section, and so
(cid:3)
its image K(cid:48) is in A+(K).

i has an image in the interior of Equ(n, t), there is a neighborhood of each, M 3

i . We also can use the same theorem to generate a sequence of N2 moves m3

i with K 3

0 = K, KN1 the regular planar polygon, and each m1

N2−i. Thus, K 3

0 is the regular planar polygon, K 3
N2

i . This tells us that the sequence of moves m4

i ) ∈ Equ(n, t) for every m ∈ M 3

0 = K, K 4

N = K(cid:48), and each move m4

the regular planar polygon, and each K 2
i

N2

i with K 2

0 = K, K 2
N1

in the open set int(Equ(n, t)), and each m2

= K(cid:48), and each K 3

i with m(K 3

i with K 1

i with K 2

i := (m2)−1

i having a neighborhood of moves M 4

i with K 1

0 = K, K 1
N1

i of each m3

i with m(K 3

0 = K 2
N1

4.3. T-Chains. A very useful property for a Markov chain to have is being a T -chain. The precise deﬁnition
requires a couple of preliminaries, but we will deﬁne it precisely in this section. To motivate it, a T -chain
has moves of the Markov chain respecting the topology of the state space. We ﬁrst deﬁne the transition
probabilities P n(x, S) which is the probability of starting in x, and ending in S after n steps. These are
examples of transition kernels which are functions κ : X × B(X) → [0, 1] with B(X) the Borel sets. A
transition kernel κ is stochastic if κ(x, X) = 1 for all x ∈ X and is substochastic if κ(x, X) ≤ 1 for all
x ∈ X. This allows us to note that P n(x, X) is the probability of staying in the total state space after n
steps, and so these standard probability transition functions are stochastic. From the standard transition

19

This ﬁnally allows us to deﬁne a T -chain as a Markov chain for which there is a substochastic transition
kernel T and a sampling distribution a with Ka(x, S) ≥ T (x, S), T (·, S) lower semicontinuous, and T (x, X) >
0 for every x. The lower semicontinuity is what lets us refer to T as the continuous piece of Ka, while
T (x, X) > 0 for every x tells us that there is a signiﬁcant continuous piece of Ka. With these we utilize
Propositions 7.1.5 and 6.2.4 from Meyn and Tweedie’s book[10].

Theorem 4.3. Any Markov chain which is forward accessible and has a noise space W with a lower semi
continuous probability density function γW , then for each x in the state space X, there is a sampling distri-
bution ax : N → [0, 1] and a transition kernel Tx with Tx(x, X) (cid:54)= 0, Tx(x,·) ≤ Kax (x,·) and Tx(·, S) lower
semi-continuous for every S.

This theorem amounts to taking a neighborhood of the smooth path that starts at x and ends in an open

set, and using the implicit function theorem to pull that information back into a neighborhood of x.
Theorem 4.4. Suppose a Markov chain whose state space X is a subset of Rn and has for every x ∈ X, there
is a transition kernel Tx and sampling distribution ax : N → [0, 1] with Tx(x, X) (cid:54)= 0, Tx(x,·) ≤ Kax (x,·)
and Tx(·, S) lower semi-continuous for every S. Then the Markov chain is a T -chain
Proof. For each x ∈ X there is a transition kernel Tx given by the hypothesis of the theorem. These
kernels have sets Ox = {y ∈ X|Tx(y, X) > 0} which are open since Tx(·, X) is lower semi-continuous.
By assumption, x ∈ Ox so {Ox}x∈X forms an open cover. By Lindel¨of’s theorem, this open cover has a
countable subcover {Oi}i∈N. This countable subcover corresponds to a countable set of states {xi}i∈N with
i∈N 2−iai.

corresponding transition kernels Ti and sampling distributions ai. Let T =(cid:80)

i∈N 2−iTi and a =(cid:80)

This tells us the following.

T =

i∈N

(cid:88)
≤(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

j∈N

i∈N

i∈N

=

=

=

j∈N

2−iTi

2−iKai

2−i(cid:88)
P j(cid:88)

j∈N

i∈N

ai(j)P j

2−iai(j)

P ja(j) = Ka

probability and a sampling on the natural numbers a : N → [0, 1], we can build the stochastic transition

kernel Ka(x, S) :=(cid:80)∞

n=0 P n(x, S)a(n).

Further, T (x, X) > 0 for every x since the Oi form an open cover and T (·, S) is lower semi-continuous
(cid:3)

since each Ti is lower semi-continuous and the series converges uniformly.

We can combine these two results to get the following.

Corollary 4.5. The Markov chain Φ is a T -chain.

Proof. By Theorem 4.3 and Theorem 4.4, Φ is a T -chain since it is forward accessible and has a density
function which is supported and constant on an open set, and so in particular is lower semi-continuous. (cid:3)

A sequence of probability distributions µk is tight if for every  > 0, there is a compact set C with

lim inf(µk(C)) > 1 − .
Lemma 4.6. Any sequence of probability distributions on a compact space is tight.

Proof. Let µk be a sequence of probability distributions on a compact space C. Since they are probability
(cid:80)k
distributions, µk(C) = 1 which means that lim inf(µk(C)) = 1 > 1 −  for every  > 0.
(cid:3)
n=1 P n(x,·) is tight.

A Markov chain is bounded in probability on average if the sequence Pk(x,·) := 1

k

20

Corollary 4.7. The Markov Chain Φ has a compact state space, and so is bounded in probability on
average.

4.4. Positive Harris Recurrent. We can talk about the number of times a Markov chain lies in a particular
set of states as η({xi}∞
i=0, S) = |{i|xi ∈ S}|. This allows us to deﬁne Harris recurrent. A Markov chain Φ
is Harris recurrent if every set S with positive Borel measure has P (η(Φ, S) = ∞) = 1. A Markov chain
is positive if there is a probability measure on the state space X which is invariant under iteration by the
Markov process. Both of these properties are extremely useful, and a Markov chain which satisﬁes both is
called positive Harris recurrent.
n=0 P n(x, O) > 0 for every open set O containing x∗. We note that the regular
polygon is reachable using Theorem 3.18. We again can utilize the book by Meyn and Tweedie by quoting
proposition 18.3.2[10].

A state x∗ is reachable if(cid:80)∞

Theorem 4.8. Suppose that Φ is a T -chain with a reachable state. Then Φ is positive Harris if and only if
it is bounded in probability on average.

This tells us that our Markov chain Φ is positive Harris recurrent.

4.5. Ergodic. We seek to ﬁnish by using the main theorem from Meyn and Tweedies book[10].

Theorem 4.9 (Aperiodic Ergodic Theorem). Suppose that Φ is an aperiodic Harris recurrent chain, with
invariant measure π. Then Φ being positive Harris recurrent is equivalent to the following.

For every initial condition x ∈ X,

supS∈B(X)|P n(x, S) − π(S)| → 0
as n → ∞, and moreover for any two regular initial distributions λ, µ,

(cid:90) (cid:90)

∞(cid:88)

λ(dx)µ(dy)supS∈B(X)|P n(x, S) − P n(y, S)| < ∞.

n=1

We have already shown that Φ is a positive Harris recurrent T-chain, so the aperiodic ergodic theorem
shows that if the chain is aperiodic then it is ergodic. A chain is aperiodic if there is no period greater
than one. A chain is periodic with period d if there is a collection of disjoint closed sets {Ci}i∈Zd with the
probability of going from Ci to Ci+1 in exactly one step is one.

Theorem 4.10. The Markov chain Φ is aperiodic and therefore ergodic

Proof. Note that if the pair of points through which a potential reﬂection will take place is chosen to be
distance exactly two from each other, then there is a choice of plane which contains the length two arc
connecting them. This means that there is a choice of noise parameter which leaves the equilateral knot
ﬁxed. Thus, for any set C, there is a move which takes a state in C to itself. Suppose Ci and Ci+1 are
disjoint non-empty closed sets. Then for each x in Ci there is a move m which ﬁxes x and so takes x to
m(x) ∈ X \ Ci+1. This complement is an open set and m(x) is a continuous function of m so there is a
positive probability of going from Ci to X \ Ci+1. This ensures that no collection of multiple disjoint sets
can satisfy the periodicity condition. This shows aperiodicity which then allows us to apply the aperiodic
(cid:3)
ergodicity theorem to conclude that the Markov chain is ergodic.

5. Efficacy of the Algorithm

In order to show the value of the algorithm presented in the previous section, we analyze a few aspects
of data generated by the algorithm. We will look at two aspects of the data. First, in order to motivate the
usefulness of this algorithm over previous algorithms, we will be looking at the expected number of reﬂection
moves required to generate knots of a ﬁxed thickness. Second, in order to motivate the value of thickness
analysis, we will look at is the radius of gyration, a measure of how spread out a knot is, and analyze how
much of an eﬀect thickness has on radius of gyration.

21

Figure 14. These graphs show the thicknesses and injectivity radii which correspond to
various probabilities using random sample of 250000 knots of each edge length.

5.1. Expected Number of Reﬂections. We can compute the expected number of reﬂections required to
generate each sample of a knot with a thickness constraint using the standard naive reﬂection algorithm and
for the algorithm in this paper, and compare. The standard reﬂection algorithm is the same as our algorithm
except we wait until the very end of the generation process before checking the thickness. We need to have
a cut oﬀ for how many reﬂections are required before the result is suﬃciently independent of the starting
position, and so for the purposes of this paper we will be applying n2 reﬂections, where n is the number of
edges. Thus, if pt is the probability of a randomly generated knot having thickness greater than or equal to
t, then the expected number of reﬂections is n2/pt. We can also note that the expected number of times we
need to check the thickness of a knot is 1/pt. This means it is important to get a sense of how pt behaves as
a function of t. Using ﬁgure 14 we can see that pt rapidly decreases to an asymptote of zero. We also can
observe that pt and pn∗t, the corresponding probability for injectivity radius, are decreasing functions of the
edge length.

We will speciﬁcally look at the expected number of reﬂections and expected number of thickness checks
for generating dodecagons. We want to compare the standard reﬂection algorithm, where we do all 144
reﬂections before checking the thickness, versus an implementation of this algorithm where we check the
thickness constraint for 24 blocks of 6 reﬂections each. If pt is the probability of the thickness being greater

22

00.010.020.030.040.050.060.070.080.090.1dodecagonsdecagonsoctagons010.5Thickness00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8dodecagonsdecagonsoctagons010.5InjectivityRadiusFigure 15. The expected number of reﬂections and checks of the thickness in dodecagons,
respectively, graphed on a logarithmic scale against the corresponding thickness. The dashed
(blue) line represents checking only at the end of the generation, while the solid (red) line
represents checking every six reﬂections.

Figure 16. A graph showing the Radius of Gyration as a function of the number of edges
for various Injective Radius constraints

than or equal to t after 144 reﬂections, and qt is the probability after only 6 reﬂections, then we can see
the expected number of reﬂections are 144/pt and 24 · (6/qt), while the expected number of checks of the
thickness are 1/pt and 24/qt. These quantities quickly grow as both pt and qt will rapidly approach zero,
so we have graphed in ﬁgure 15 each quantity on a logarithmic scale. We see that the method of hexagonal
reﬂections presented in this paper will require fewer expected reﬂections at any positive thickness, and for
suﬃciently large thicknesses, even the expected number of checks of the thickness is less. This implies that
for suﬃciently large thicknesses the hexagonal method is faster, and for lower thicknesses it is faster if the
savings in time doing reﬂections is greater than the cost in time doing thickness checks.

23

00.0050.010.0150.020.0250.030.03522.533.544.555.56Figure 17. The ratio of the expected radius of gyration to the corresponding value when
thickness constraints are removed

5.2. Radius of Gyration. The radius of gyration is standard deviation of vertexes. This is the standard
measure how spread out a knot is. One thing that should be true, intuitively, is that adding a thickness
constraint will remove tightly bound knots, and so should increase the expected radius of gyration.
In
ﬁgure 16, we see that as the required injective radius is increased, the radius of gyration curve increases,
matching the intuition

While this diagram is useful, it is still diﬃcult to see exactly what role the injective radius constraint
has had since the eﬀect of the constraint is being overwhelmed by the eﬀect of the number of edges. For a
clearer picture, we instead look at the ratio of the expected radius of gyration with each constraint to the
corresponding value without the constraint. In ﬁgure 17 we see two things. As with the earlier graph we
see that addition of a constraint increases the radius of gyration. We also see that the radius of gyration is
growing faster when a constraint is added, as indicated by the fact that these ratios are increasing with the
number of edges.

6. Conclusion and Future Work

The reﬂection algorithm with the use of intermediate checks that we have presented here provides a greatly
expanded means of analyzing knots with a thickness. This algorithm is shown to be signiﬁcantly faster for
suﬃciently large thicknesses. Further, the proof that this method is ergodic for every positive thickness
ensures that it can be used to analyze every possible feature of geometric knots and get accurate probability
distributions. With this algorithm, we have observed a number of facts about small equilateral knots with
thickness. We were able to verify that the addition of thickness constraints, even small ones, results in greatly
increased radius of gyration. Additionally, the increase in radius of gyration is more powerful for larger edge
lengths, as indicated by the increase in growth exponent. This new algorithm provides the means for the
careful study of the eﬀects of excluded volume across the entire range of lengths and thicknesses.

References

[1] Sotero Alvarado, Jorge Alberto Calvo, and Kenneth C. Millett, The generation of random equilateral polygons, Journal of

Statistical Physicis 143 (2011), 102–138.

[2] Jason Cantarella and Clayton Shonkwiler, The symplectic geometry of closed equilateral random walks in 3-space.
[3] James J. Champoux, Dna topoisomerases: structure, function and mechanism, Annual Review of Biochemistry 70 (2001),

369–413.

[4] S.S Chern, Studies in global geometry and analysis, Prentice-Hall, 1970.
[5] M. Doi and S. F. Edwards, The theory of polymer dynamics, Claredon Press, 1986.

24

[6] W. Fiers and R. L. Sinsheimer, The structure of the dna of bacteriophage phi x174. iii. ultracentrifugal evidence for a ring

structure, Journa of Molecular Biology 5 (1962), 424–434.

[7] Branko Gr¨unbaum and Joseph Zaks, Convexiﬁcation of polygons by ﬂips and by ﬂipturns, Discrete Mathematics 241

(2001), no. 13, 333 – 342.

[8] L. F. Liu, R. E. Depew, and J. C. Wang, Knotted single strand dna formed by treatment with escherichia coli w protein,

Journal of Molecular Biology 106 (1976), no. 2, 439–452.

[9] T. McLeish, A tangled tale of topological ﬂuids, Physics Today 61 (2008), no. 8, 40–45.

[10] S.P. Meyn and R.L. Tweedie, Markov chains and stochastic stability, Springer-Verlag, 1993.
[11] Ken Millett, Knotting of regular polygons in 3-space, Journal of Knot Theory and its Ramiﬁcations 3 (1994), no. 3, 263–278.
[12] Kenneth C. Millett, Michael Piatek, and Eric Rawdon, Polygonal knot space near ropelength-minimized knots, Journal of

Knot Theory and Its Ramiﬁcations 17 (2008), no. 05, 601–631.

[13] Richard Randell, Conformation spaces of molecular rings, Physical and Theoretical Chemistry 54 (1988), 125–140.
[14]
[15] Eric J. Rawdon, Approximating smooth thickness, Journal of Knot Theory and Its Ramiﬁcations 09 (2000), no. 01, 113–145.
[16] Godfried Toussaint, The Erd˝os − Nagy theorem and its ramiﬁcations, Computational Geometry 31 (2005), no. 3, 219 –

, A molecular conformation space, Physical and Theoretical Chemistry 54 (1988), 125–140.

236.

[17] S.A. Waserman, J.M. Dungan, and N.R. Cozzerelli, Discovery of a predicted dna knot substantiates a model for site-speciﬁc

recombination, Science 229 (1985), no. 4709, 171.

Department of Mathematics, University of California Santa Barbara, 6607 South Hall, 93106
E-mail address: kyle.chapman.topology@gmail.com

25

