6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
9

 

 
 
]

.

C
N
o
i
b
-
q
[
 
 

1
v
3
7
7
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Kim et al.

RESEARCH

Onset, timing, and exposure therapy of stress
disorders: mechanistic insight from a
mathematical model of oscillating neuroendocrine
dynamics
Lae Kim†, Maria D’Orsogna† and Tom Chou*

*Correspondence:
tomchou@ucla.edu
3Dept. of Biomathematics, Univ of
California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, USA
Full list of author information is
available at the end of the article
†Equal contributor

Abstract
The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is a neuroendocrine system that
regulates numerous physiological processes. Disruptions in the activity of the HPA
axis are correlated with many stress-related diseases such as post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) and major depressive disorder. In this paper, we characterize
“normal” and “diseased” states of the HPA axis as basins of attraction of a
dynamical system describing the inhibition of peptide hormones such as
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
by circulating glucocorticoids such as cortisol (CORT). In addition to including
key physiological features such as ultradian oscillations in cortisol levels and
self-upregulation of CRH neuron activity, our model distinguishes the relatively
slow process of cortisol-mediated CRH biosynthesis from rapid trans-synaptic
eﬀects that regulate the CRH secretion process. Crucially, we ﬁnd that the slow
regulation mechanism mediates external stress-driven transitions between the
stable states in novel, intensity, duration, and timing-dependent ways. These
results indicate that the timing of traumatic events may be an important factor
in determining if and how patients will exhibit hallmarks of stress disorders. Our
model also suggests a mechanism whereby exposure therapy of stress disorders
such as PTSD may act to normalize downstream dysregulation of the HPA axis.

Keywords:

HPA-axis; PTSD; Stress Disorders; Dynamical system

Introduction
Stress is an essential component of an organism’s attempt to adjust its internal
state in response to environmental change. The experience, or even the percep-
tion of physical and/or environmental change, induces stress responses such as the
secretion of glucocorticoids hormones (CORT) – cortisol in humans and corticos-
terone in rodents – by the adrenal gland. The adrenal gland is one component
of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, a collection of interacting neu-
roendocrine cells and endocrine glands that play a central role in stress response.
The basic interactions involving the HPA axis are shown in Fig. 1. The paraven-
tricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus receives synaptic inputs from various
neural pathways via the central nervous system that are activated by both cog-
nitive and physical stressors. Once stimulated, CRH neurons in the PVN secrete

Kim et al.

Page 2 of 30

corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which then stimulates the anterior pitu-
itary gland to release adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) into the bloodstream.
ACTH then activates a complex signaling cascade in the adrenal cortex, which ulti-
mately releases glucocorticoids (Fig. 1B). In return, glucocorticoids exert a negative
feedback on the hypothalamus and pituitary, suppressing CRH and ACTH release
and synthesis in an eﬀort to return them to baseline levels. Classic stress responses
include transient increases in levels of CRH, ACTH, and cortisol. The basic compo-
nents and organization of the vertebrate neuroendocrine stress axis arose early in
evolution and the HPA axis, in particular, has been conserved across mammals [1].

Figure 1: Schematic of HPA axis. (A) Stress is processed in the central nervous
system (CNS) and a signal is relayed to the PVN in the hypothalamus to activate CRH
secretion into the hypophyseal portal system. (B) CRH diﬀuses to the pituitary gland
and activate ACTH secretion. ACTH travels down to the adrenal cortex to activate
cortisol (CORT) release. Cortisol inhibits both CRH and ACTH secretion to down-
regulate its own production, forming a closed loop. In the pituitary gland, cortisol binds
to glucocorticoid receptors (GR) (yellow box) to inhibit ACTH and self-upregulate GR
production. This part of the axis comprises the PA subsystem. (C) Negative feedback of
cortisol aﬀects the synthesis process in the hypothalamus, which indirectly suppresses
the release of CRH. External inputs such as stressors and circadian inputs directly
aﬀect the release rate of the CRH.

Dysregulation in the HPA axis is known to correlate with a number of stress-
related disorders. Increased cortisol (hypercortisolism) is associated with major de-
pressive disorder (MDD) [2, 3], while decreased cortisol (hypocortisolism) is a fea-
ture of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), post infectious fatigue, and chronic
fatigue syndrome (CFS) [4–7]. Since PTSD develops in the aftermath of extreme
levels of stress experienced during traumatic incidents like combat, sexual abuse, or
life-threatening accidents, its progression may be strongly correlated with disrup-
tion of the HPA axis caused by stress response. For example, lower peak and nadir
cortisol levels were found in patients with combat-related PTSD [8].

Kim et al.

Page 3 of 30

Mathematical models of the HPA axis have been previously formulated in terms
of dynamical systems of ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs) [9–12] or delay
diﬀerential equations (DDEs) [13–15] that describe the time-evolution of the key
regulating hormones of the HPA axis: CRH, ACTH, and cortisol. These models
[13, 14, 16] incorporate positive self-regulation of glucocorticoid receptor expression
in the pituitary, which may generate bistability in the dynamical structure of the
model [17]. Of the two stable equilibrium states, one is characterized by higher levels
of cortisol and is identiﬁed as the “normal” state. The other is characterized by lower
levels of cortisol and can be interpreted as one of the “diseased” states associated
with hypocortisolism. Stresses that aﬀect the activity of neurons in the PVN are
described as perturbations to endogenous CRH secretion activity. Depending on
the length and magnitude of the stress input, the system may or may not shift from
the basin of attraction of the normal steady state towards that of the diseased one.
If such a transition does occur, it may be interpreted as the onset of disease. A later
model [16] describes the eﬀect of stress on the HPA axis as a gradual change in
the parameter values representing the maximum rate of CRH production and the
strength of the negative feedback activity of cortisol. Changes in cortisol secretion
pattern are assumed to arise from anatomical changes that are mathematically
represented as changes to the corresponding parameter values [16].

Both classes of models imply qualitatively diﬀerent time courses of disease pro-
gression [16, 17]. The former suggests that the abnormal state is a pre-existing basin
of attraction of a dynamical model that stays dormant until a sudden transition is
triggered by exposure to trauma [17]. In contrast, the latter assumes that the abnor-
mal state is reached by the slow development of structural changes in physiology due
to the traumatic experience [16]. Although both models [16, 17] describe changes
in hormonal levels experienced by PTSD patients, they both fail to exhibit stable
ultradian oscillations in cortisol, which is known to play a role in determining the
responsiveness of the HPA axis to stressors [18].

In this study, we consider a number of distinctive physiological features of the
HPA axis that give a more complete picture of the dynamics of stress disorders and
that have not been considered in previous mathematical models. These include the
eﬀects of intrinsic ultradian oscillations on HPA dysregulation, distinct rapid and
slow feedback actions of cortisol, and the correlation between HPA imbalance and
disorders induced by external stress. As with the majority of hormones released
by the body, cortisol levels undergo a circadian rhythm, starting low during night
sleep, rapidly rising and reaching its peak in the early morning, then gradually
falling throughout the day. Superposed on this slow diurnal cycle is an ultradian
rhythm consisting of approximately hourly pulses. CRH, ACTH, and cortisol are all
secreted episodically, with the pulses of ACTH slightly preceding those of cortisol
[19].

As for many other hormones such as gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH),
insulin, and growth hormone (GH), the ultradian release pattern of glucocorticoids
is important in sustaining normal physiological functions, such as regulating gene
expression in the hippocampus [20]. It is unclear what role oscillations play in
homeostasis, but the time of onset of a stressor in relation to the phase of the
ultradian oscillation has been shown to inﬂuence the physiological response elicited
by the stressor [21].

Kim et al.

Page 4 of 30

To distinguish the rapid and slow actions of cortisol, we separate the dynamics
of biosynthesis of CRH from its secretion process, which operate over very diﬀerent
timescales [22]. While the two processes are mostly independent from each other, the
rate of CRH secretion should depend on the synthesis process since CRH peptides
must be synthesized ﬁrst before being released (Fig. 1C). On the other hand, the rate
of CRH peptide synthesis is inﬂuenced by cortisol levels, which in turn, are regulated
by released CRH levels. We will investigate how the separation and coupling of these
two processes can allow stress-induced dysregulations of the HPA axis.

The mathematical model we derive incorporates the above physiological features
and reﬂects the basic physiology of the HPA axis associated with delays in signal-
ing, fast and slow negative feedback mechanisms, and CRH self-upregulation [23].
Within an appropriate parameter regime, our model exhibits two distinct stable
oscillating states, of which one is marked by a larger oscillation amplitude and
a higher base cortisol level than the other. These two states will be referred to
as normal and diseased states. Our interpretation is reminiscent of the two-state
dynamical structure that arises in the classic Fitzhugh-Nagumo model of a single
neuron, in which resting and spiking states emerge as bistable modes of the model
[24], or in models of neuronal networks where an “epileptic brain” is described in
terms of the distance between a normal and a seizure attractor in phase-space [25].

Models
Models of HPA dynamics [13, 14, 16, 17, 26] are typically expressed in terms of
ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs):

=pCI(T )fC(O) − dC(C),
=pACfA(OR, O) − dA(A),
=pOA(T ) − dO(O),
=pRgR(OR) − dR(R),

dC
dT
dA
dT
dO
dT
dR
dT

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

where C(T ), A(T ), and O(T ) denote the plasma concentrations of CRH, ACTH,
and cortisol at time T , respectively. R(T ) represents the availability of glucocor-
ticoid receptor (GR) in the anterior pituitary. The amount of cortisol bound GR
is typically in quasi-equilibrium so concentration of the ligand-receptor complex
is approximately proportional to the product O(T )R(T ) [17]. The parameters pα
(α ∈ {C, A, O, R}) relate the production rate of each species α to speciﬁc factors
that regulate the rate of release/synthesis. External stresses that drive CRH release
by the PVN in the hypothalamus are represented by the input signal I(T ). The func-
tion fC(O) describes the negative feedback of cortisol on CRH levels in the PVN
while fA(OR, O) describes the negative feedback of cortisol or cortisol-GR complex
(at concentration O(T )R(T )) in the pituitary. Both are mathematically character-
ized as being positive, decreasing functions so that fA,C(·) ≥ 0 and f(cid:48)
A,C(·) < 0. On
the other hand, the function gR(OR) describes the self-upregulation eﬀect of the
cortisol-GR complex on GR production in the anterior pituitary [27]. In contrast

Kim et al.

Page 5 of 30

to fA,C(·), gR(·) is a positive but increasing function of OR so that gR(·) ≥ 0 and
R(·) > 0. Finally, the degradation functions dα(·) describe how each hormone and
g(cid:48)
receptor is cleared and may be linear or nonlinear.

Without including the eﬀects of the glucocorticoid receptor (neglecting Eq. 4 and
assuming fA(OR, O) = fA(O) in Eq. 2), Eqs. 1-3 form a rudimentary “minimal”
model of the HPA axis [9, 28]. If fA,C(·) are Hill-type feedback functions depen-
dent only on O(T ) and dα(·) are linear, a unique global stable point exists. This
equilibrium point transitions to a limit cycle through a Hopf bifurcation but only
within nonphysiological parameter regimes [9]. The inclusion of GR and its self-
upregulation in the anterior pituitary [17] creates two stable equilibrium states of
the system, but still does not generate oscillatory behavior. More recent studies
extend the model (represented by Eq. 1-4) to include nonlinear degradation [16] or
constant delay to account for delivery of ACTH and synthesis of glucocorticoid in
the adrenal gland [13]. These two extended models exhibit only one intrinsic circa-
dian [16] or ultradian [13] oscillating cycle for any given set of parameter values,
precluding the interpretation of normal and diseased states as bistable oscillating
modes of the model.

Here, we develop a new model of the HPA axis by ﬁrst adapting previous work
[13] where a physiologically-motivated delay was introduced into Eq. 3, giving rise
to the observed ultradian oscillations [13]. We then improve the model by dis-
tinguishing the relatively slow mechanism underlying the cortisol-mediated CRH
biosynthesis from the rapid trans-synaptic eﬀects that regulate the CRH secretion
process.This allows us to decompose the dynamics into slow and fast components.
Finally, self-upregulation of CRH release is introduced which allows for bistabil-
ity. These ingredients can be realistically combined in a way that leads to novel,
clinically identiﬁable features and are systematically developed below

Ultradian rhythm and time delay
Experiments on rats show a 3-6 minute inherent delay in the response of the adrenal
gland to ACTH [29]. Moreover, in experiments performed on sheep [30], persistent
ultradian oscillations were observed even after surgically removing the hypothala-
mus, implying that oscillations are inherent to the PA subsystem. Since oscillations
can be induced by delays, we assume, as in Walker et al. [13], a time delay Td in the
ACTH-mediated activation of cortisol production downstream of the hypothalamus.
Eq. 3 is thus modiﬁed to

= pOA(T − Td) − dOO.

dO
dT

(5)

Walker et al. [13] show that for ﬁxed physiological levels of CRH, the solution to
Eqs. 2, 4 and 5 leads to oscillatory A(T ), O(T ), and R(T ). In order to describe the
observed periodic cortisol levels in normal and diseased states, the model requires
two oscillating stable states. We will see that dual oscillating states arise within
our model when the delay in ACTH-mediated activation of cortisol production is
coupled with other known physiological processes.

Kim et al.

Page 6 of 30

Synthesis of CRH
CRH synthesis involves various pathways, including CRH gene transcription and
transport of packaged CRH from the cell body (soma) to their axonal terminals
where they are stored prior to release. Changes in the steady state of the synthesis
process typically occur on a timescale of minutes to hours. On the other hand, the
secretory release process depends on changes in membrane potential at the axonal
terminal of CRH neurons, which occur over millisecond to second timescales.

To model the synthesis and release process separately, we distinguish two com-
partments of CRH: the concentration of stored CRH within CRH neurons will be
denoted Cs(T ), while levels of released CRH in the portal vein outside the neurons
will be labeled C(T ) (Fig. 1C). Newly synthesized CRH will ﬁrst be stored, thus
contributing to Cs. We assume that the stored CRH level Cs relaxes toward a target
value set by the function C∞(O):

dCs
dT

=

C∞(O) − Cs

TC

.

(6)

Here, TC is a characteristic time constant and C∞(O) is the cortisol-dependent
target level of stored CRH. Eq. 6 also assumes that the relatively small amounts of
CRH released into the bloodstream do not signiﬁcantly deplete the Cs pool. Note
that the eﬀects induced by changing cortisol levels are immediate as the production
term C∞(O)/TC is adjusted instantaneously to current cortisol levels. Our model
thus does not exclude cortisol rapidly acting on the initial transcription activity,
as suggested by CRH hnRNA (precursor mRNA) measurements [31]. On the other
hand, the time required to reach the steady state for the completely synthesized
CRH peptide will depend on the characteristic time scale constant TC. Ideally,
TC should be estimated from measurements of the pool size of releasable CRH
at the axonal terminals. To best of our knowledge, there are currently no such
measurements available, so we base our estimation on mRNA level measurements.
We believe this is a better representation of releasable CRH than hnRNA levels since
mRNA synthesis is a further downstream process. Previous studies have shown that
variations in CRH mRNA due to changes in cortisol levels take at least twelve hours
to detect [32]. Therefore, we estimate TC (cid:38) 12hrs = 720min. The negative feedback
of cortisol on CRH levels thus acts through the production function C∞(O) on
the relatively slow timescale TC. To motivate the functional form of C∞(O), we
invoke experiments on rats whose adrenal glands had been surgically removed and
in which glucocorticoid levels were subsequently kept ﬁxed (by injecting exogenous
glucocorticoid) for 5-7 days [22, 33]. The measured CRH mRNA levels in the PVN
were found to decrease exponentially with the level of administered glucocorticoid
[22, 33]. Assuming the amount of releasable CRH is proportional to the amount of
measured intracellular CRH mRNA, we can approximate C∞(O) as a decreasing
exponential function of cortisol level O.

Secretion of CRH
To describe the CRH secretion, we consider the following three factors: synaptic
inputs to CRH cells in the PVN, availability of releasable CRH peptide, and self-
upregulation of CRH release.

Kim et al.

Page 7 of 30

CRH secretion activity is regulated by synaptic inputs received by the PVN from
multiple brain regions including limbic structures like the hippocampus and the
amygdala, that are activated during stress. It has been reported that for certain
types of stressors, these synaptic inputs are modulated by cortisol independent of,
or parallel to, its regulatory function on CRH synthesis activity [34]. On the other
hand, a series of studies [35–37] showed that cortisol did not aﬀect the basal spiking
activity of the PVN. We model the overall synaptic input, denoted by I(T ) in Eq. 1,
as follows

I(T ) = Ibase + Iext(T ),

(7)

where Ibase and Iext(T ) represent the basal ﬁring rate and stress-dependent synaptic
input of the PVN, respectively. As the eﬀect of cortisol on the synaptic input during
stress is speciﬁc to type of stressor [38–40], we assume Iext(T ) to be independent
of O for simplicity and generality. Possible implications of cortisol dependent input
function Iext(T, O) on model behavior will be discussed in the Additional File.

The secretion of CRH will also depend upon the amount of stored releasable CRH,
Cs(T ), within the neuron and inside the synaptic vesicles. Therefore, Cs can also
be factored into Eq. 1 through a source term h(Cs) which describes the amount
of CRH released per unit of action potential activity of CRH neurons. Finally,
it has been hypothesized that CRH enhances its own release [23], especially when
external stressors are present. The enhancement of CRH release by CRH is mediated
by activation of the membrane-bound G-protein-coupled receptor CRHR-1 whose
downstream signaling pathways operate on timescales from milliseconds to seconds
[41, 42]. Thus, self-upregulation of CRH release can be modeled by including a
positive and increasing function gC(C) in the source term in Eq. 1.

Combining all these factors involved in regulating the secretion process, we can

rewrite Eq. 1 by replacing fC(O) with h(Cs)gC(C) as follows

= pCI(T )h(Cs)gC(C) − dCC.

dC
dT

(8)

In this model (represented by Eqs. 6,8,2,5, and 4), cortisol no longer directly sup-
presses CRH levels, rather, it decreases CRH synthesis through Eq. 6, in turn sup-
pressing Cs. The combination h(Cs)gC(C) in Eq. 8 indicates the release rate of
stored CRH decreases when either Cs or C decreases. We assume that inputs into
the CRH neurons modulate the overall release process with weight pC.

Complete delay-diﬀerential equation model
We are now ready to incorporate the mechanisms described above into a new, more
comprehensive mathematical model of the HPA axis, which, in summary, includes

(i) A delayed response of the adrenal cortex to cortisol (Eq. 5).
(ii) A slow time-scale negative feedback by cortisol on CRH synthesis (through

the C∞(O) production term in Eq. 6).

(iii) A fast-acting positive feedback of stored and circulating CRH on CRH release

(through the h(Cs)gC(C) term in Eq. 8);

Kim et al.

Page 8 of 30

Our complete mathematical model thus consists of Eqs. 2, 4, 5, 6, and 8. We hence-
forth assume fA(OR, O) = fA(OR) depends on only the cortisol-GR complex and
use Hill-type functions for fA(OR) and gR(OR) [13, 14, 16, 17]. Our full theory is
characterized by the following system of delay diﬀerential equations:

dCs
dT
dC
dT
dA
dT
dO
dT
dR
dT

C∞(O) − Cs

,

TC

=
=pCI(T )h(Cs)gC(C) − dCC,
− dAA,

(cid:18) KA

(cid:19)

KA + OR

=pAC
=pOA(T − Td) − dOO,

(cid:19)

− dRR.

(cid:18)

=pR

1 −

µRK 2
R
R + (OR)2

K 2

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

The parameters KA,R represent the level of A and R at which the negative or
positive eﬀect are at their half maximum and 1−µR represents the basal production
rate for GR when OR = 0.

Of all the processes modeled, we will see that the slow negative feedback will
be crucial in mediating transitions between stable states of the system. The slow
dynamics will allow state variables to cross basins of attraction associated with each
of the stable states.

Nondimensionalization
To simplify the further development and analysis of our model, we nondimensional-
ize Eqs. 9-13 by rescaling all variables and parameters in a manner similar to that
of Walker et al. [13], as explicitly shown in the Additional File. We ﬁnd

c∞(o) − cs

,

tc

=
= q0I(t)h(cs)gc(c) − q2c,

=

c

1 + p2(or)

− p3a,

= a(t − td) − o,
p4 + (or)2 + p5 − p6a,

(or)2

=

dcs
dt
dc
dt
da
dt
do
dt
dr
dt

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

where cs, c, a, r, o are the dimensionless versions of the original concentrations
Cs, C, A, R, O, respectively. The dimensionless delay in activation of cortisol pro-
duction by ACTH is now denoted td. All dimensionless parameters qi, pi, td, and
tc are combinations of the physical parameters and are explicitly given in the Ad-
ditional File. The functions c∞(o), h(cs), and gc(c) are dimensionless versions of
C∞(O), h(Cs), and gC(C), respectively, and will be chosen phenomenologically to
be

Kim et al.

Page 9 of 30

c∞(o) =¯c∞ + e−bo,
h(cs) =1 − e−kcs,
gc(c) =1 −
µc

1 + (q1c)n .

(19)

The form of c∞(o) is based on the above-mentioned exponential relation observed
in adrenalectomized rats [22, 33]. The parameters ¯c∞ and b represent the minimum
dimensionless level of stored CRH and the decay rate of the function, respectively.
How the rate of CRH release increases with cs is given by the function h(cs). Since
the amount of CRH packaged in release vesicles is likely regulated, we assume
h(cs) saturates at high cs. The choice of a decreasing form for c∞(o) implies that
increasing cortisol levels will decrease the target level (or production rate) of cs in
Eq. 14. The reduced production of cs will then lead to a smaller h(cs) and ultimately
a reduced release source for c (Eq. 15). As expected, the overall eﬀect of increasing
cortisol is a decrease in the release rate of CRH. Finally, since the upregulation of
CRH release by circulating CRH is mediated by binding to CRH receptor, gc(c)
will be chosen to be a Hill-type function, with Hill-exponent n, similar in form to
the function gR(OR) used in Eqs. 13 and 18. The parameter 1 − µc represents the
basal release rate of CRH relative to the maximum release rate and q−1
represents
the normalized CRH level at which the positive eﬀect is at half-maximum.

1

Fast-slow variable separation and bistability
Since we assume the negative feedback eﬀect of cortisol on synthesis of CRH operates
over the longest characteristic timescale tc in the problem, the full model must be
studied across two separate timescales, a fast timescale t, and a slow timescale
τ = t/tc ≡ εt. The full model (Eqs. 14-18) can be succinctly written in the form

= ε(c∞(o) − cs),

= F(cs, x),

dcs
dt
dx
dt

(20)

(21)

where x = (c, a, o, r) is the vector of fast dynamical variables, and F(cs, x) denotes
the right-hand-sides of Eqs. 15-18. We refer to the fast dynamics described by
dx/dt = F(cs, x) as a fast ﬂow. In the ε → 0 limit, it is also easy to see that to
lowest order cs is a constant across the fast timescale and is a function of only the
slow variable τ .

Under this timescale separation, the ﬁrst component of Eq. 21 (Eq. 15) can be

written as

= q(cs(τ ), I)gc(c) − q2c,

dc
dt

(22)

where q(cs(τ ), I) ≡ q0Ih(cs(τ )) = q0I(1 − e−kcs(τ )) is a function of cs(τ ) and I.
Since cs is a function only of the slow timescale τ , q can be viewed as a bifurcation

Kim et al.

Page 10 of 30

parameter controlling, over short timescales, the fast ﬂow described by Eq. 22. Once
c(t) quickly reaches its non-oscillating quasi-equilibrium value deﬁned by dc/dt =
qgc(c) − q2c = 0, it can be viewed as a parametric term in Eq. 16 of the pituitary-
adrenal (PA) subsystem.

Due to the nonlinearity of gc(c), the equilibrium value c(q) satisfying qgc(c) = q2c
may be multi-valued depending on q, as shown in Figs. 2A and 2B. For certain values
of the free parameters, such as n, 1 − µc, and q1, bistability can emerge through a
saddle-node bifurcation with respect to the bifurcation parameter q. Fig. 2B shows
the bifurcation diagram, i.e., the nullcline of c deﬁned by qgc(c) = q2c.

Figure 2: Nonlinear gc(c) and bistability of fast variables. (A) The stable states of
the decoupled system in Eq. 22 can be visualized as the intersection of the two functions
qgc(c) (dashed curve) and q2c (gray line). For a given Hill-type function gc(c), Eq. 22
can admit one or two stable states (solid circles), depending on function parameters.
The unstable steady state is indicated by the open circle. (B) Bifurcation diagram of
the decoupled system (Eq. 22) with q as the bifurcation parameter. Solid and dashed
segments represent stable and unstable steady states of the fast variables, respectively.
L and U label basins of attraction associated with the lower and upper stable branches
of the c-nullcline. Left and right bifurcation points (qL, cL) and (qR, cR) are indicated.
Fixed points of c appear and disappear through saddle node bifurcations as q is varied
through qL and qR.

For equilibrium values of c lying within a certain range, the PA-subsystem can
exhibit a limit cycle in (a, o, r) [13] that we express as (a∗(θ; c), o∗(θ; c), r∗(θ; c)),
where θ = 2πt/tp(c) is the phase along the limit cycle. The dynamics of the PA-
subsystem depicted in Fig. 3 indicate the range of c values that admit limit cycle
behavior for (a, o, r), while the fast c-nullcline depicted in Fig. 2B restricts the range
of bistable c values. Thus, bistable states that also support oscillating (a, o, r) are
possible only for values of c that satisfy both criteria.
Since in the ε → 0 limit, circulating CRH only feeds forward into a, o, and r, a
complete description of all the fast variables can be constructed from just c which
obeys Eq. 22. Therefore, to visualize and approximate the dynamics of the full ﬁve-
dimensional model, we only need to consider the 2D projection onto the fast c and
slow cs variable. A summary of the time-separated dynamics of the variables in our
model is given in Fig. 4.

c  q2cqgc(c)AincreasingqAcqULU(qR,cR)LB(qL,cL)Kim et al.

Page 11 of 30

Figure 3: Dynamics of the oscillating PA-subsystem as a function of ﬁxed c.
(A) Maximum/minimum and period-averaged values of ACTH, a(t), as a function of
circulating CRH. (B) Maximum/minimum and period-averaged values of cortisol o(t).
Within physiological CRH levels, ACTH, GR (not shown), and cortisol oscillate. The
minima, maxima, and period-averaged cortisol levels typically increase with increasing
c. The plot was generated using dimensionless variables c, a, and o with parameter
values speciﬁed in [43] and td = 1.44, corresponding to a delay of Td = 15min.

Figure 4: Classiﬁcation of variables. Variables of the full ﬁve-dimensional model
are grouped according to their dynamical behavior. cs(τ ) is a slow variable, while
x(t) = (c, a, o, r) are fast variables. Of these, (a, o, r) form the typically oscillatory
PA-subsystem that is recapitulated by c. In the ε = 1/tc (cid:28) 1 limit, the variable cs(τ )
slowly relaxes towards a period-averaged value (cid:104)c∞(o(c))(cid:105). Therefore, the full model
can be accurately described by its projection onto the 2D (cs, c) phase space.

To analyze the evolution of the slow variable cs(τ ), we write our equations in

terms of τ = εt:

dcs
dτ
dx
dτ

ε

= (c∞(o) − cs),

= F(cs, x).

(23)

(24)

In the ε → 0 limit, the “outer solution” F(cs, x) ≈ 0 simply constrains the system to
be on the fast c-nullcline deﬁned by qgc(c) = q2c. The slow evolution of cs(τ ) along

010203040500123c  o∗(c)ho∗(c)iregimephysiologicalB010203040500123c  a∗(c)ha∗(c)iregimephysiologicalA010203040500123c  a∗(c)ha∗(c)iregimephysiologicalA****x(t)fast variablesc (  )τsc(t) a(t)     o(t)     r(t)(oscillating)slow variablePA subsystem2D system(non−oscillating)Kim et al.

Page 12 of 30

(cid:90) 2π

0

(cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105) ≡

(cid:90) 2π

0

the fast c-nullcline depends on the value of the fast variable o(t) through c∞(o). To
close the slow ﬂow subsystem for cs(τ ), we ﬁx c to its equilibrium value as deﬁned
by the fast subsystem and approximate c∞(o(c)) in Eq. 23 by its period-averaged
value

c∞(o∗(θ; c))

dθ
2π

= ¯c∞ +

e−bo∗(θ;c) dθ
2π

.

(25)

Since o∗ increases with c, (cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105) is a decreasing function of c under physiological
parameter regimes. This period-averaging approximation allows us to relate the
evolution of cs(τ ) in the slow subsystem directly to c. The evolution of the slow
subsystem is approximated by the closed (cs, c) system of equations

= (cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105) − cs,
dcs
dτ
0 = q0h(cs)I(t)gc(c) − q2c.

(26)

(27)

with (cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105) evaluated in Eq. 25. By self-consistently solving Eqs. 26 and 27, we
can estimate trajectories of the full model when they are near the c-nullcline in the
2D (cs, c)-subsystem. We will verify this in the following section.

Nullcline structure and projected dynamics
The separation of timescales results in a natural description of the fast c-nullcline in
terms of the parameter q (Fig. 2) and the slow cs-nullcline (deﬁned by the relation
cs = (cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105) relating cs to c) in terms of c. However, the c-nullcline is plotted
in the (q, c)-plane while the cs-nullcline is deﬁned in the (c, cs)-plane. To plot the
nullclines together, we relate the equilibrium value of cs, (cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105), to the q coordinate
through the monotonic relationship q(cs) = q0Ih((cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105)) = q0I(1 − e−k(cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105))
and transform the cs variable into the q parameter so that both nullclines can be
plotted together in the (q, c)-plane. These transformed cs-nullclines will be denoted
“q-nullclines.”

We assume a ﬁxed basal stress input I = 1 and plot the q-nullclines in Fig. 5A
for increasing values of k, the parameter governing the sensitivity of CRH release
to stored CRH. From the form h((cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105)) = (1− e−k(cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105)), both the position and
the steepness of the q-nullcline in (q, c)-space depend strongly on k. Fig. 5B shows a
fast c-nullcline and a slow q-nullcline (transformed cs-nullcline) intersecting at both
stable branches of the fast c-nullcline. Here, the ﬂow ﬁeld indicates that the 2D
projected trajectory is governed by fast ﬂow over most of the (q, c)-space.

How the fast and slow nullclines cross controls the long-term behavior of our model
in the small ε limit. In general, the number of allowable nullcline intersections will
depend on input level I and on parameters (q0, ..., p6, b, k, n, µc, td). Other parame-
ters such as q0, q1, and µc appear directly in the fast equation for c and thus most
strongly control the fast c-nullcline. Fig. 6A shows that for a basal stress input of
I = 1 and an intermediate value of k, the nullclines cross at both stable branches
of the fast subsystem. As expected, numerical simulations of our full model show

Kim et al.

Page 13 of 30

Figure 5: Slow and fast nullclines and overall ﬂow ﬁeld. (A) The nullcline of cs in
the ε → 0 limit is deﬁned by cs = (cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105). To plot these slow nullclines together with the
fast c-nullclines, we transform the variable cs and represent it by q through the relation
q = q0h(cs). These transformed nullclines then become a function of c and can be
plotted together with the fast c-nullclines. For each ﬁxed value of c, o(t; c) is computed
by employing a built-in DDE solver dde23 in MATLAB. The numerical solution is then
used to approximate (cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105) in Eq. 25 by Euler’s method. The q-nullcline shifts to the
right and gets steeper as k increases. (B) The fast c-nullcline deﬁned by qgc(c) = q2c
(black curve) is plotted together with the slow cs-nullcline plotted in the (q, c) plane
(“q-nullcline,” blue curve). Here, two intersections arise corresponding to a high-cortisol
normal (N) stable state and a low-cortisol diseased (D) stable state. The ﬂow vector
ﬁeld is predominantly aligned with the fast directions toward the c-nullcline.

the fast variables (a, o, r) quickly reaching their oscillating states deﬁned by the c-
nullcline while the slow variable q = q0Ih(cs) remains fairly constant. Independent
of initial conﬁgurations that are not near the c-nullcline in (q, c)-space, trajecto-
ries quickly jump to one of the stable branches of the c-nullcline with little motion
towards the q-nullcline, as indicated by ξf in Fig. 6A.
Once near the c-nullcline, say when |F(cs, x)| (cid:28) ε, the trajectories vary slowly
according to Eqs. 23. Here, the slow variable cs relaxes to its steady state value
while satisfying the constraint F(cs, x) ≈ 0. In (q, c)−space, the system slowly
slides along the c-nullcline towards the q-nullcline (the ξs paths in Fig. 6A). This
latter phase of the evolution continues until the system reaches an intersection of
the two nullclines, indicated by the ﬁlled dot, at which the reduced subsystem in cs
and c reaches equilibrium.

For certain values of k and if the fast variable c is bistable, the two nullclines
may intersect within each of the two stable branches of the c-nullcline and yield
the two distinct stable solutions shown in Fig. 6A. For large k, the two nullclines
may only intersect on one stable branch of the c-nullcline as shown in Fig. 6B.
Trajectories that start within the basin of attraction of the lower stable branch of
the c-nullcline (“initial state 2” in Fig. 6B) will stay on this branch for a long time
before eventually sliding oﬀ near the bifurcation point and jumping to the upper
stable branch. Thus, the long-term behavior of the full model can be described in
terms of the locations of the intersections of nullclines of the reduced system.

6264666810203040qcNDB6264666810203040qcAincreasingk6264666810203040qcAincreasingk6264666810203040qcNDBqKim et al.

Page 14 of 30

Figure 6: Equilibria at the intersections of nullclines. (A) For intermediate values
of k, there are three intersections, two of them representing stable equilibria. Solid red
lines are projections of two trajectories of the full model, with initial states indicated
by red dots and ﬁnal stable states shown by black dots. The full trajectories approach
the intersections of the q-nullcline (blue) and c-nullcline (black). (B) For large k there is
only one intersection at the upper branch of the c-nullcline. Two trajectories with initial
states near diﬀerent branches of the c-nullcline both approach the unique intersection
(black dot) on the upper branch. The scenario shown here corresponds to a Type I
nullcline structure as described in the Additional File.

Results and Discussion
The dual-nullcline structure and existence of multiple states discussed above results
from the separation of slow CRH synthesis process and fast CRH secretion process.
This natural physiological separation of time scales ultimately gives rise to slow
dynamics along the fast c-nullcline during stress. The extent of this slow dynamics
will ultimately determine whether a transition between stable states can be induced
by stress. In this section, we explore how external stress-driven transitions mediated
by the fast-slow negative feedback depend on system parameters.

Changes in parameters that accompany trauma can lead to shifts in the position
of the nullclines. For example, if the stored CRH release process is suﬃciently com-
promised by trauma (smaller k), the slow q-nullcline moves to the left, driving a
bistable or fully resistant organism into a stable diseased state. Interventions that
increase k would need to overcome hysteresis in order to restore normal HPA func-
tion. More permanent changes in parameters are likely to be caused by physical
rather than by psychological traumas since such changes would imply altered phys-
iology and biochemistry of the person. Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is an example
of where parameters can be changed permanently by physical trauma. The injury
may decrease the sensitivity of the pituitary to cortisol-GR complex, which can be
described by decreasing p2 in our model. Such change in parameter would lead to
a leftward shift of the q-nullcline and an increased likelihood of hypocortisolism.

In the remainders of this work, we focus on how external stress inputs can by them-
selves induce stable but reversible transitions in HPA dynamics without changes in
physiological parameters. Speciﬁcally, we consider only temporary changes in I(t)

626670152025303540qc  q-nullclinec-nullclinetrajectoryξfξfξsBξs626670152025303540qc  q-nullclinec-nullclinetrajectoryξsξfξfinitial state 1ξsAinitial state 2initial state 1initial state 1initial state 2initial state 2qqKim et al.

Page 15 of 30

and consider the time-autonomous problem. Since the majority of neural circuits
that project to the PVN are excitatory [44], we assume external stress stimulates
CRH neurons to release CRH above its unit basal rate and that I(t) = 1 + Iext(t)
(Ibase = 1) with Iext ≥ 0.
To be more concrete in our analysis, we now choose our nullclines by specifying
parameter values. We estimate the values of many of the dimensionless parameters
by using values from previous studies, as listed in Table S1 in the Additional File.
Of the four remaining parameters, µc, q0, q1, and k, we will study how our model
depends on k while ﬁxing µc, q0, and q1. Three possible nullcline conﬁgurations arise
according to the values of µc, q0, and q1 and are delineated in the Additional File.
We have also implicitly considered only parameter regimes that yield oscillations in
the PA subsystem at the stable states deﬁned by the nullcline intersections.

Given these considerations, we henceforth chose µc = 0.6, q1 = 0.04, and q0 = 77.8
for the rest of our analysis. This choice of parameters is motivated in the Additional
File and corresponds to a so-called “Type I” nullcline structure. In this case, three
possibilities arise: one intersection on the lower stable branch of the c-nullcline if
k < kL, two intersections if kL < k < kR (Fig. 6A), and one intersection on the
upper stable branch of the c-nullcline if k > kR (Fig. 6B). For our chosen set of
parameters and a basal stress input I = 1, the critical values kL = 2.5 < kR = 2.54
are given by Eq. A3 in the Additional File.

Normal stress response
Activation of the HPA axis by acute stress culminates in an increased secretion
of all three main hormones of the HPA axis. Persistent hypersecretion may lead
to numerous metabolic, aﬀective, and psychotic dysfunctions [45, 46]. Therefore,
recovery after stress-induced perturbation is essential to normal HPA function. We
explore the stability of the HPA axis by initiating the system in the upper of the two
stable points shown in Fig. 7A and then imposing a 120min external stress input
Iext = 0.1. The HPA axis responds with an increase in the peak level of cortisol
before relaxing back to its original state after the stress is terminated (Fig. 7B).
This transient process is depicted in the projected (q, c)-space in Fig. 7A.

Upon turning on stress, the lumped parameter q and the slow nullcline shift to the
right by 10% since q = q0(1+Iext)h((cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105)) (see Fig. 7A). The trajectory will then
move rapidly upward towards the new value of c on the c-nullcline; afterwards, it
moves very slowly along the c-nullcline towards the shifted q-nullcline. After 120min,
the system arrives at the “×” on the c-nullcline (Fig. 7A). Once the stress is shut
oﬀ the q-nullcline returns to its original position deﬁned by I = 1. The trajectory
also jumps back horizontally to near the initial q value and subsequently quickly
returns to the original upper-branch stable point.

External stress induces transition from normal to diseased state
We now discuss how transitions from a normal to a diseased state can be induced
by positive (excitatory) external stress of suﬃcient duration. In Fig. 8, we start the
system in the normal high-c state.

Upon stimulation of the CRH neurons through Iext > 0, both CRH and average
glucocorticoid levels are increased while the average value of c∞(o(t)) is decreased

Kim et al.

Page 16 of 30

Figure 7: Normal stress response. Numerical solution for the response to a 120min
external stress Iext = 0.1. (A) At the moment the external stress is turned on, the
value of (q, c) increases from its initial stable solution at (64.4, 27) to (71, 27) after
which the circulating CRH level c, quickly reaches the fast c-nullcline (black) before
slowly evolving along it towards the slow q-nullcline (blue). After short durations of
stress, the system returns to its starting point within the normal state basin. (B) The
peaks of the cortisol level are increased during stress (red) but return to their original
oscillating values after the stress is turned oﬀ.

since c∞(o) is a decreasing function of o. As cs(τ ) slowly decays towards the de-
creased target value of (cid:104)c∞(o(c))(cid:105), h(cs(τ )), and hence q(cs), also decrease. As shown
in Fig. 8A, much of this decrease occurs along the high-c stable branch of the c-
nullcline. Once the external stress is switched oﬀ, q will jump back down by a factor
of 1/(1 + Iext). If the net decrease in q is suﬃcient to bring it below the bifurcation
value qL ≈ 64 at the leftmost point of the upper knee, the system crosses the sep-
aratrix and approaches the alternate, diseased state. Thus, the normal-to-diseased
transition is more likely to occur if the external stress is maintained long enough to
cause a large net decrease in q, which includes the decrease in q incurred during the
slow relaxation phase, plus the drop in q associated with cessation of stress. The
minimum duration required for normal-to-diseased transition should also depend on
the magnitude of Iext. The relation between the stressor magnitude and duration
will be illustrated in the Additional Files.

A numerical solution of our model with a 30hr Iext = 0.2 was performed, and
the trajectory in (q, c)-space is shown in Fig. 8A. The corresponding cortisol level
along this trajectory is plotted in Fig. 8B, showing that indeed a stable transition
to the lower cortisol state occurred shortly after the cessation of stress. In addition
to a long-term external stress, the stable transition to a diseased state requires
2.5 < k < 2.54 and the existence of two stable points. On the other hand, when
k > kR = 2.54, the enhanced CRH release stimulates enough cortisol production to
drive the sole long term solution to the stable upper normal branch of the c-nullcline,
rendering the HPA system resistant to stress-induced transitions.

The response to chronic stress initially follows the same pattern as described above
for the two-stable-state case, as shown in Fig. 8C. However, the system will continue

6265687110203040cq  stressend∆q≈−∆qA02404807200123T(min)o(T)  stress,Iext=0.1BqKim et al.

Page 17 of 30

Figure 8: Stress-induced transitions into an oscillating low-cortisol diseased
state. An excitatory external stress Iext = 0.2 is applied for 30hrs. Here, the system
reaches the new stable point set by I = 1.2 before stress is terminated and the q-
nullcline reverts to its original position set by I = 1. (A) At intermediate values of
2.5 < k < 2.54, when two stable state arise, a transition from the normal high-cortisol
state into the diseased low-cortisol state can be induced by chronic external stress. (B)
Numerical solutions of cortisol level o(T ) plotted against the original time variable T
shows the transition to the low-cortisol diseased state shortly after cessation of stress.
(C) and (D) If k > kR = 2.54, only the normal stable state exists. The system will
recover and return to its original healthy state after a transient period of low cortisol.

to evolve along the lower branch towards the q-nullcline, eventually sliding oﬀ the
lower branch near the right bifurcation point (indicated in Fig. S2 by (qR, cR))
and returning to the single normal equilibrium state. Thus, when k is suﬃciently
high, the system may experience a transient period of lowered cortisol level after
chronic stress but will eventually recover and return to the normal cortisol state. The
corresponding cortisol level shown in Fig. 8D shows this recovery at T ≈ 3400min,
which occurs approximately 1500min after the cessation of stress.

Transition to diseased state depends on stress timing
We have shown how transitions between the oscillating normal and diseased states
depend on the duration of the external stress Iext. However, whether a transition
occurs also depends on the time – relative to the phase of the intrinsic ultradian
oscillations – at which a ﬁxed-duration external stress is initiated. To illustrate this

    0123o(T)  Iext=0.2B0  1440  2880  43200123T(min)o(T)  Iext=0.2D     10203040c  stressendA626670747810203040cq  stressendCstressstressqKim et al.

Page 18 of 30

Figure 9: Stress timing and transition to low-cortisol oscillating state. Cortisol
levels in response to Iext = 0.1 applied over 250min. (A) If stress is initiated at T =
150min, a transition to the low-cortisol diseased state is triggered. (B) If stress is
initiated at T = 120min, the system returns to its normal high-cortisol state. Note that
the ﬁrst peak (marked by “(cid:72)”) during the stress in (A) is higher than the ﬁrst peak in
(B). (C) If stress is initiated at T = 150min, stress cessation and the slow relaxation
along the c-nullcline during stress are suﬃcient to bring q just left of the separatrix,
inducing the transition. (D) For initiation time T = 120min, q remains to the right of
the separatrix, precluding the transition.

dependence on phase, we plot in Figs. 9A and B two solutions for o(T ) obtained with
a 250min Iext = 0.1 initiated at diﬀerent phases of the underlying cortisol oscillation.
If stress is initiated during the rising phase of the oscillations, a transition to the
low-cortisol diseased state occurs and is completed at approximately T = 1000min
(Fig. 9A,C). If, however, stress is initiated during the falling phase, the transition
does not occur and the system returns to the normal stable state (Fig. 9B,D). In
this case, a longer stress duration would be required to push the trajectory past the
low-q separatrix into the diseased state.

As discussed earlier, an increase in period-averaged cortisol level during stress
drives a normal-to-diseased state transition. We see that the period-averaged level
of cortisol under increased stress is diﬀerent for stress started at 120min from stress

62656871      stressendqD0  480   960   1440   T(min)  Bstress,Iext=0.162656871152025303540stressendcqC0   480   960   14400123T(min)o(T)  Astress,Iext=0.1Kim et al.

Page 19 of 30

started at 150min. As detailed in the Additional File, the amplitude of the ﬁrst
cortisol peak after the start of stress is signiﬁcantly lower when the applied stress
is started during the falling phase of the intrinsic cortisol oscillations. The diﬀer-
ence between initial responses in o(t) aﬀects the period-averaging in (cid:104)c∞(o)(cid:105) during
external stress, ultimately inﬂuencing cs and consequently determining whether or
not a transition occurs. Note that this phase dependence is appreciable only when
stress duration is near the threshold value that brings the system close to the sep-
aratrix between normal and diseased basins of attraction. Trajectories that pass
near separatrices are sensitive to small changes in the overall negative feedback of
cortisol on CRH synthesis, which depend on the start time of the stress signal.

Stress of intermediate duration can induce “reverse” transitions
We can now use our theory to study how positive stressors Iext may be used to
induce “reverse” transitions from the diseased to the normal state. Understanding
these reverse transitions may be very useful in the context of exposure therapy (ET),
where PTSD patients are subjected to stressors in a controlled and safe manner,
using for example, computer-simulated “virtual reality exposure.” Within our model
we can describe ET as external stress (Iext > 0) applied to a system in the stable
low-c diseased state. The resulting horizontal shift in q causes the system to move
rightward across the separatrix and suggests a transition to the high-c normal state
can occur upon termination of stress. As shown in Fig. 10A, if stressor of suﬃcient
duration is applied, the trajectory reaches a point above the unstable branch of the
c-nullcline upon termination leading to the normal, high-cortisol state (Fig. 10B).
Since the initial motion is governed by fast ﬂow, the minimum stress duration needed
to incite the diseased-to-normal transition is short, on the timescale of minutes.
However, if the stressor is applied for too long, a large reduction in q is experienced
along the upper stable branch. Cessation of stress might then lower q back into the
basin of attraction of the low-cortisol diseased state (Fig. 10C). Fig. 10D shows the
cortisol level transiently increasing to a normal level before reverting back to low
levels after approximately 1400min.

Within our dynamical model, stresses need to be of intermediate duration in order
to induce a stable transition from the diseased to the normal state. The occurrence
of a reverse transition may also depend on the phase (relative to the intrinsic os-
cillations of the fast PA subsystem) over which stress was applied, especially when
the stress duration is near its transition thresholds. For a reverse diseased-to-normal
transition to occur, the decrease in cs cannot be so large that it brings the trajec-
tory past the left separatrix, as shown in Fig. 10C. Therefore, near the maximum
duration, stress initiated over the falling phase of cortisol oscillation will be more
eﬀective at triggering the transition to a normal high-cortisol state. Overall, these
results imply that exposure therapy may be tuned to drive the dynamics of the HPA
axis to a normal state in patients with hypocortisolism-associated stress disorders.

Summary and Conclusions
We developed a theory of HPA dynamics that includes stored CRH, circulating
CRH, ACTH, cortisol and glucocorticoid receptor. Our model incorporates a fast
self-upregulation of CRH release, a slow negative feedback eﬀect of cortisol on CRH

Kim et al.

Page 20 of 30

Figure 10: Stress-induced transitions to high-cortisol oscillating state. (A)
Projected 2D system dynamics when a stressor of amplitude Iext = 0.1 is applied for
9min starting at T = 120min. c is increased just above the unstable branch (c ≈ 20)
to allow the unstressed system to cross the separatrix and transition to the normal
high-c stable state. (B) The plot of o(T ) shows the transition to the high-cortisol, high-
oscillation amplitude state shortly after the 9min stress. (C) A stressor turned oﬀ after
780min (13hrs) leaves the system in the basin of attraction of the diseased state. (D)
Cortisol levels are pushed up but after about 1400min relax back to levels of the original
diseased state.

synthesis, and a delay in ACTH-activated cortisol synthesis. These ingredients allow
our model to be separated into slow and fast components and projected on a 2D
subspace for analysis.

Depending on physiological parameter values, there may exist zero, one, or two
stable simultaneous solutions of both fast and slow variables. For small k, CRH
release is weak and only the low-CRH equilibrium point arises; an individual with
such k is trapped in the low-cortisol “diseased” state. For large k, only the high-CRH
normal state arises, rendering the individual resistant to acquiring the long-term,
low-cortisol side-eﬀect of certain stress disorders. When only one stable solution
arises, HPA dysregulation must depend on changes in parameters resulting from
permanent physiological modiﬁcations due to e.g., aging, physical trauma, or stress
itself [46, 47]. For example, it has been observed that older rats exhibit increased
CRH secretion while maintaining normal levels of CRH mRNA in the PVN [48].
Such a change could be interpreted as an age-dependent increase in k, which, in

             0123o(T)  Bstress,Iext=0.20   640   1280   19200123T(min)o(T)  DIext=0.2    10203040c  stressendA6266707410203040cq  stressendCstressstressKim et al.

Page 21 of 30

our model, implies that aging makes the organism more resistant to stress-induced
hypocortisolism. Indeed, it has been suggested that prevalence of PTSD declines
with age [49, 50].

Other regulatory systems that interacts with or regulate the HPA axis can also
aﬀect parameter values in our model. Gonadal steroids, which are regulated by
another neuroendocrine system called the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG)
axis, activate the preoptic area (POA) of the hypothalamus [51, 52], which in turn
attenuates the excitatory eﬀects of medial amygdala stimulation of the HPA axis
[53]. Thus, low testosterone levels associated hypogonadism would eﬀectively in-
crease I(t) within our model, shift the q-nullcline in the (q, c)-space, and in turn
increase cortisol levels. One might consider this as a possible explanation for chron-
ically elevated cortisol levels observed in major depressive disorder patients who
suﬀers from hypogonadism. Although it is beyond the scope of this paper, one
may further investigate role of gonadal hormones, or role of any other interacting
systems, in mediating stress response by considering which parameters would be
aﬀected in our model.

Within certain parameter regimes and for intermediate k, our theory can also
exhibit bistability. When two stable solutions arise, we identify the states with low
oscillating levels of cortisol as the diseased state associated with hypocortisolism.
Transitions between diﬀerent stable states can be induced by temporary external
stress inputs, implying that HPA dysregulation may develop without permanent
“structural” or physiological changes. Stresses that aﬀect secretion of CRH by the
PVN are shown to be capable of inducing transitions from normal to diseased states
provided they are of suﬃcient duration (Fig. 8).

Our model oﬀers a mechanistic explanation to the seemingly counter-intuitive
phenomenon of lower cortisol levels after stress-induced activation of cortisol pro-
duction. Solutions to our model demonstrate that the negative-feedback eﬀect of
a temporary increase in cortisol on the synthesis process of CRH can slowly accu-
mulate during the stress response and eventually shift the system into a diﬀerent
basin of attraction. Such a mechanism provides an alternative to the hypothesis that
hypocortisolism in PTSD patients results from permanent changes in physiological
parameters associated with negative-feedback of cortisol [54, 55].

We also ﬁnd that external stress can induce the “reverse” transition from a dis-
eased low-cortisol state to the normal high-cortisol state. Our results imply that
re-exposure to stresses of intermediate duration can drive the system back to nor-
mal HPA function, possibly “decoupling” stress disorders from hypocortisolism.

Interestingly, we show that the minimum durations required for either transition
depends on the time at which the stress is initiated relative to the phase of the in-
trinsic oscillations in (a, o, r). Due to subtle diﬀerences in cortisol levels immediately
following stress initiation at diﬀerent phases of the intrinsic cortisol oscillation, the
diﬀerent cumulative negative-feedback eﬀect on CRH can determine whether or not
a trajectory crosses a separatrix (Fig. 9). When the duration of external stress is
near its threshold, normal-to-diseased state transitions are easier to induce when
stress is initiated during the rising phase of cortisol oscillations. Reverse diseased-
to-normal transitions are more easily induced when stress is initiated during the
falling phase.

Kim et al.

Page 22 of 30

In summary, our theory provides a mechanistic picture that connects cortisol dys-
regulation with stress disorders and a mathematical framework one can use to study
the downstream eﬀects of therapies such as brief eclectic psychotherapy (BEP) and
exposure therapy (ET). Both therapies involve re-experiencing stressful situations
directly or through imagination, and have been consistently proven eﬀective as
ﬁrst-line treatments for PTSD symptoms [56–58]. Our results suggest that ET can
directly alter and “decouple” the expression of cortisol from an underlying upstream
disorder. Changes in neuronal wiring that typically occur over slower times scales is
also expected after ET [59]. In our model, such changes would lead to slow changes
in the basal input I(t). Thus, cortisol level may not be tightly correlated with PTSD,
particularly in the context of ET.

It is important to emphasize that we modeled neuroendocrine dynamics down-
stream of the stress input Iext. How the form of the stress function Iext depends
on the type of stress experienced requires a more detailed study of more upstream
processes, including how hormones might feedback to these higher-brain processes.
Since higher cortisol levels are found among female PTSD patients with a history
of childhood abuse [60] and among PTSD patients who have experienced a nuclear
accident [61], future studies of such divergent, experience-dependent dysregulation
will rely on more complex input functions Iext(t). For example, under periodic
driving, complex resonant behavior should arise depending on the amplitude and
frequency of the external stress Iext(t) and the nullcline structure of the speciﬁc
system. Moreover, eﬀects of other regulatory networks that interacts with the HPA
axis can be included in our model through appropriate forms of Iext(t). For exam-
ple, the eﬀects of gonadal steroids in the stress response mentioned above can be
further investigated by considering a form of Iext(t) that is dependent on gonadal
steroids level. Many other interesting properties, such as response to dexametha-
sone administration, can be readily investigated within our model under diﬀerent
system parameters.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Author’s contributions
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Army Research Oﬃce via grant W911NF-14-1-0472 and the NSF through grant
BCS-1348123. The authors also thank professors T. Minor and M. Wechselberger for insightful discussions.

Author details
1Dept. of Biomathematics, Univ of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, USA. 2 Department of Mathematics,
CalState-Northridge, Los Angeles, USA. 3Dept. of Biomathematics, Univ of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
USA.

References

1. Denver, R.: Structural and functional evolution of vertebrate neuroendocrine stress systems. Annals of the New

York Academy of Sciences 1163(1), 1–16 (2009)

2. Gold, P., Chrousos, G.: Organization of the stress system and its dysregulation in melancholic and atypical

depression: high vs low CRH/NE states. Molecular Psychiatry 7(3), 254–275 (2002)

3. Juruena, M., Cleare, A., Pariante, C.: The hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis, glucocorticoid receptor function

and relevance to depression. Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria 26(3), 189–201 (2004)

4. Rohleder, N., Joksimovic, L., Wolf, J., Kirschbaum, C.: Hypocortisolism and increased glucocorticoid sensitivity
of pro-inﬂammatory cytokine production in bosnian war refugees with posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological
Psychiatry 55(7), 745–751 (2004)

5. Giorgio, A.D., Hudson, M., Jerjes, W., Cleare, A.: 24-hour pituitary and adrenal hormone proﬁles in chronic

fatigue syndrome. Psychosomatic Medicine 67(3), 433–440 (2005)

6. Jerjesnd, W., Peters, T., Taylor, N., Wood, P., Wessely, S., Cleare, A.: Diurnal excretion of urinary cortisol,

cortisone, and cortisol metabolites in chronic fatigue syndrome. Journal of Psychosomatic Research 60(2),
145–153 (2006)

Kim et al.

Page 23 of 30

7. Croﬀord, L., Young, E., Cary, N.E.K., Korszun, A., Brucksch, C., McClure, L., Brown, M., Demitrack, M.:

Basal circadian and pulsatile ACTH and cortisol secretion in patients with ﬁbromyalgia and/or chronic fatigue
syndrome. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 18(4), 314–325 (2004)

8. Yehuda, R., Teicher, M., Levengood, R., Trestman, R., Siever, L.: Circadian regulation of basal cortisol levels in

posttraumatic stress disorder. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 746(1), 378–380 (1994)

9. Vinther, F., Andersen, M., Ottesen, J.T.: The minimal model of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.

Journal of Mathematical Biology 63, 663–690 (2011)

10. Jelic, S., Cupic, Z., Kolar-Anic, L.: Mathematical modeling of the hypothalmic-pituitary-adrenal system activity.

Mathematical Biosciences 197, 173–187 (2005)

11. Kyrylov, V., Severyanova, L., Vieira, A.: Modeling robust oscillatory behavior of the

hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 52(12), 1977–1983 (2005)

12. Savi´c, D., Kneˇzevi´c, G., Opaˇci´c, G.: A mathematical model of stress reaction: Individual diﬀerences in threshold

and duration. Psychobiology 28(4), 581–592 (2000)

13. Walker, J.J., Terry, J.R., Lightman, S.L.: Origin of ultradian pulsatility in the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal

axis. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 277(1688), 1627–1633 (2010)

14. Rankin, J., Walker, J., Windle, R., Lightman, S., Terry, J.: Characterizing dynamic interactions between

ultradian glucocorticoid rhythmicity and acute stress using the phase response curve. PloS One 7(2), 30978
(2012)

15. Bairagi, N., Chatterjee, S., Chattopadhyay, J.: Variability in the secretion of corticotropin-releasing hormone,

adrenocorticotropic hormone and cortisol and understandability of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
dynamics — a mathematical study based on clinical evidence. Mathematical Medicine and Biology (2008)

16. Sriram, K., Rodriguez-Fernandez, M., Doyle III, F.J.: Modeling cortisol dynamics in the neuro-endocrine axis
distinguishes normal, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in humans. PLoS Computational
Biology 8, 1002379 (2012)

17. Gupta, S., Aslakson, E., Gurbaxani, B.M., Vernon, S.D.: Inclusion of the glucocorticoid receptor in a

hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis model reveals bistability. Theoretical Biology and Medical Modelling 4, 8
(2007)

18. Windle, R., Wood, S., Lightman, S., Ingram, C.: The pulsatile characteristics of hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal
activity in female Lewis and Fischer 344 rats and its relationship to diﬀerential stress responses. Endocrinology
139(10), 4044–4052 (1998)

19. Chrousos, G.: Editorial: ultradian, circadian, and stress-related hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity — a

dynamic digital-to-analog modulation. Endocrinology 139(2), 437–440 (1998)

20. Conway-Campbell, B., Sarabdjitsingh, R., McKenna, M., Pooley, J., Kershaw, Y., Meijer, O., Kloet, E.D.,

Lightman, S.: Glucocorticoid ultradian rhythmicity directs cyclical gene pulsing of the clock gene period 1 in rat
hippocampus. Journal of Neuroendocrinology 22(10), 1093–1100 (2010)

21. Windle, R., Wood, S., Shanks, N., Lightman, S., Ingram, C.: Ultradian rhythm of basal corticosterone release in

the female rat: Dynamic interaction with the response to acute stress. Endocrinology 139(2), 443–450 (1998)

22. Watts, A.: Glucocorticoid regulation of peptide genes in neuroendocrine CRH neurons: a complexity beyond

negative feedback. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 26(3), 109–130 (2005)

23. Ono, N., Castro, J.D., McCann, S.: Ultrashort-loop positive feedback of corticotropin (ACTH)-releasing factor

to enhance ACTH release in stress. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 82(10), 3528–3531
(1985)

24. FitzHugh, R.: Mathematical models of threshold phenomena in the nerve membrane. The Bulletin of

Mathematical Biophysics 17(4), 257–278 (1955)

25. Silva, F.L.D., Blanes, W., Kalitzin, S., Parra, J., Suﬀczynski, P., Velis, D.: Epilepsies as dynamical diseases of

brain systems: basic models of the transition between normal and epileptic activity. Epilepsia 44(s12), 72–83
(2003)

26. Ben-Zvi, A., Vernon, S.D., Broderick, G.: Model-based therapeutic correction of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal

axis dysfunction. PLoS Computational Biology 5(1), 1000273 (2009)

27. Tsai, S.Y., Carlstedt-Duke, J., Weigel, N.L., Dahlman, K., Gustafsson, J., M.Tsai, O’Malley, B.W.: Molecular
interactions of steroid hormone receptor with its enhancer element: evidence for receptor dimer formation. Cell
55(2), 361–369 (1988)

28. Andersen, M., Vinther, F., Ottesen, J.: Mathematical modeling of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal gland

(HPA) axis, including hippocampal mechanisms. Mathematical Biosciences 246(1), 122–138 (2013)
29. Papaikonomou, E.: Rat adrenocortical dynamics. The Journal of Physiology 265(1), 119–131 (1977)
30. Engler, D., Pham, T., Liu, J., Fullerton, M., Clarke, I., Funder, J.: Studies of the regulation of the

hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in sheep with hypothalamic-pituitary disconnection. II. evidence for in vivo
ultradian hypersecretion of proopiomelanocortin peptides by the isolated anterior and intermediate pituitary.
Endocrinology 127(4), 1956–1966 (1990)

31. Weiser, M., Osterlund, C., Spencer, R.: Inhibitory eﬀects of corticosterone in the hypothalamic paraventricular

nucleus (pvn) on stress-induced adrenocorticotrophic hormone secretion and gene expression in the pvn and
anterior pituitary. Journal of Neuroendocrinology 23(12), 1231–1240 (2011)

32. Ma, X., Aguilera, G.: Diﬀerential regulation of corticotropin-releasing hormone and vasopressin transcription by

glucocorticoids. Endocrinology 140(12), 5642–5650 (1999)

33. Watts, A., Sanchez-Watts, G.: Region-speciﬁc regulation of neuropeptide mRNAs in rat limbic forebrain

neurones by aldosterone and corticosterone. The Journal of Physiology 484(3), 721–736 (1995)

34. Tasker, J., Di, S., Malcher-Lopes, R.: Rapid glucocorticoid signaling via membrane-associated receptors.

Endocrinology 147(12), 5549–5556 (2006)

35. Kasai, M., Yamashita, H.: Inhibition by cortisol of neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus

in adrenalectomized rats; an in vitro study. Neuroscience Letters 91(1), 59–64 (1988)

36. Kasai, M., Yamashita, H.: Cortisol suppresses noradrenaline-induced excitatory responses of neurons in the

paraventricular nucleus; an in vitro study. Neuroscience letters 91(1), 65–70 (1988)

Kim et al.

Page 24 of 30

37. Jones, M., Hillhouse, E., Burden, J.: Dynamics and mechanics of corticosteroid feedback at the hypothalamus

and anterior pituitary gland. Journal of Endocrinology 73(3), 405–417 (1977)

38. Ginsberg, A., Campeau, S., Day, H., Spencer, R.: Acute glucocorticoid pretreatment suppresses stress-induced

hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis hormone secretion and expression of corticotropin-releasing hormone
hnRNA but does not aﬀect c-fos mRNA or fos protein expression in the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus. Journal of Neuroendocrinology 15(11), 1075–1083 (2003)

39. Chen, Y., Hua, S., Wang, C., Wu, L., Gu, Q., Xing, B.: An electrophysiological study on the membrane

40.

receptor-mediated action of glucocorticoids in mammalian neurons. Neuroendocrinology 53(Suppl. 1), 25–30
(1991)
Imaki, T., Xiao-Quan, W., Shibasaki, T., Yamada, K., Harada, S., Chikada, N., Naruse, M., Demura, H.:
Stress-induced activation of neuronal activity and corticotropin-releasing factor gene expression in the
paraventricular nucleus is modulated by glucocorticoids in rats. Journal of Clinical Investigation 96(1), 231
(1995)

41. Papadimitriou, A., Priftis, K.: Regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Neuroimmunomodulation

16(5), 265 (2009)

42. Makino, S., Hashimoto, K., Gold, P.: Multiple feedback mechanisms activating corticotropin-releasing hormone

system in the brain during stress. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior 73(1), 147–158 (2002)

43. Lightman, S., Wiles, C., Atkinson, H., Henley, D., Russell, G., Leendertz, J., McKenna, M., Spiga, F., Wood,

S., Conway-Campbell, B.: The signiﬁcance of glucocorticoid pulsatility. European Journal of Pharmacology
583(2), 255–262 (2008)

44. Herman, J.P., Figueiredo, H., Mueller, N.K., Ulrich-Lai, Y., Ostrander, M., Choi, D.., Cullinan, W.: Central

mechanisms of stress integration: hierarchical circuitry controlling hypothalamopituitaryadrenocortical
responsiveness. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 24(3), 151–180 (2003)

45. McEwen, B.S., Stellar, E.: Stress and the individual: mechanisms leading to disease. Arch. Intern. Med. 153,

2093–2101 (1993)

46. McEwen, B.S.: Stress, adaptation, and disease: Allostasis and allostatic load. Annals of the New York Academy

of Sciences 840(1), 33–44 (1998)

47. Dince, S.M., Rome, R.D., McEwen, B.S., Tang, A.C.: Enhancing oﬀspring hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (hpa)

regulation via systematic novelty exposure: the inﬂuence of maternal HPA function. Frontiers in Behavioral
Neuroscience 8 (2014)

48. Hauger, R.L., Thrivikraman, K.V., Plotsky, P.M.: Age-related alterations of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis

function in male Fischer 344 rats. Endocrinology 134(3), 1528–1536 (1994)

49. Averill, P., Beck, J.: Posttraumatic stress disorder in older adults: a conceptual review. Journal of Anxiety

Disorders 14(2), 133–156 (2000)

50. Regier, D., Boyd, J., Burke, J., Rae, D., Myers, J., Kramer, M., Robins, L., George, L., Karno, M., Locke, B.:

One-month prevalence of mental disorders in the united states: based on ﬁve epidemiologic catchment area
sites. Archives of General Psychiatry 45(11), 977–986 (1988)

51. Simerly, R.B., Swanson, L.W., Chang, C., Muramatsu, M.: Distribution of androgen and estrogen receptor

mrna-containing cells in the rat brain: An in situ hybridization study. Journal of Comparative Neurology 294(1),
76–95 (1990)

52. Gr´eco, B., Allegretto, E., Tetel, M., Blaustein, J.: Coexpression of ERβ with ERα and progestin receptor

proteins in the female rat forebrain: eﬀects of estradiol treatment. Endocrinology 142(12), 5172–5181 (2001)

53. andN. Conforti, S.F., Saphier, D.: The preoptic area and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis are involved in the

eﬀects of the amygdala on adrenocortical secretion. Neuroscience 37(3), 775–779 (1990)

54. Yehuda, R., Teicher, M., Levengood, R., Trestman, R., Levengood, R., Siever, L.: Cortisol regulation in

posttraumatic stress disorder and major depression: a chronobiological analysis. Biological Psychiatry 40(2),
79–88 (1996)

55. Yehuda, R., LeDoux, J.: Response variation following trauma: a translational neuroscience approach to

understanding PTSD. Neuron 56, 19–32 (2007)

56. Olﬀ, M., de Vries, G., G¨uzelcan, Y., Assies, J., Gersons, B.: Changes in cortisol and DHEA plasma levels after

psychotherapy for PTSD. Psychoneuroendocrinology 32(6), 619–626 (2007)

57. Foa, E., Keane, T., Friedman, M., Cohen, J.: Eﬀective treatments for PTSD: practice guidelines from the

international society for traumatic stress studies (2008)

58. Rauch, S., Eftekhari, A., Ruzek, J.: Review of exposure therapy: a gold standard for PTSD treatment. The

Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development (49), 679–88 (2012)

59. Trouche, S., Sasaki, J., Tu, T., Reijmers, L.: Fear extinction causes target-speciﬁc remodeling of perisomatic

inhibitory synapses. Neuron 80(4), 1054–1065 (2013)

60. Lemieux, A., Coe, C.: Abuse-related posttraumatic stress disorder: evidence for chronic neuroendocrine

activation in women. Psychosomatic Medicine 57(2), 105–115 (1995)

61. Baum, A.: Implications of psychological research on stress and technological accidents. American Psychologist

48(6), 665 (1993)

62. Sch¨urmeyer, T.H., Avgerinos, P.C., Gold, P.W., Gallucci, W.T., Tomai, T.P., Jr, G.B.C., Loriaux, D.L.,

Chrousos, G.P.: Human corticotropin-releasing factor in man: pharmacokinetic properties and dose-response of
plasma adrenocorticotropin and cortisol secretion. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 59(6),
1103–1108 (1984)

Kim et al.

Page 25 of 30

Tables

Table S1: Dimensionless parameter values of our full model. Analogous parameters from the
literature are referenced.
Value

Source and Ref.

Parameter

n
¯c∞
b
k
µc
q0
q−1
1
q2
p−1
2
p3
p4
p5
p6
tc
td

5
0.2
0.56

undetermined
undetermined
undetermined
undetermined

1.8

0.067

7.2
0.05
0.11
2.9
69.3
1.44

assumed

estimated from [22]
estimated from [22]

·
·
·
·

estimated from [21]

p−1
[43]
2
p3 [43]
p4 [43]
p5 [43]
p6 [43]
assumed
“τ ” [43]

Description
Hill coeﬃcient in upregulation function gc(c)
baseline stored CRH level
relates cortisol to stored CRH level
relates stored CRH to CRH release rate
basal CRH release rate
maximum CRH release rate
circulating CRH for half-maximum self-upregulation
ratio of CRH and cortisol decay rates
(o r)-complex level for half-maximum feedback
ratio of ACTH and cortisol decay rates
(o r)-complex level for half-maximum upregulation
basal GR production rate by pituitary
ratio of GR and cortisol decay rates
CRH biosynthesis timescale
delay in ACTH-activated cortisol release

Kim et al.

Page 26 of 30

Additional Files
Nondimensionalization
Our equations are nondimensionalized in a manner similar to that used by Walker et al. [13]:

t = dOT,
a = µRpC d2

OA,

cs = Cs/ ¯Cs,

r = µRpC dOR,

c = µRpC dOC,
o = µRpC pApOd3

OO,

(A1)

Here, cs, c, a, r, o are the dimensionless versions of the original concentrations Cs, C, A, R, O, respectively. Cs is
normalized by ¯Cs, which denotes the typical maximum amount of releasable CRH in the physiological range. Upon
using these variables, the dimensionless forms of Eqs. 9-13 are expressed in Eqs. 14-18. The parameters qi, pi are
dimensionless combinations conveniently deﬁned to be analogous to those used by Walker et al. [13]:

tc = dOTC ,

q2 = dC /dO,
p4 = p4

C pApOd8

OK2

R/µR,

td = dOTd,
Rp2
p2 = µ2
p5 = 1/µR,

RpApO/(d4

OKA),

q0 = pC /(µRpR),

p3 = dA/dO,

(A2)

p6 = dR/dO.

Using these scalings, we arrive at the dimensionless Eqs. 14-19.

Parameter estimates
Many of the numerous physiological parameters in our model can be estimated or constructed from previous studies
on the HPA axis. For example, as shown in Fig. A1, the parameters forming the function c∞(o) are derived from
ﬁtting to data on adrenalectomized male rats [22]. From the ﬁtting, we estimate the baseline level ¯c∞ (cid:39) 0.2, and

Figure A1: Fitting c∞(o) to rat data. Nondimensionalized data taken from Watts [22]
and ﬁtted using the form for c∞(o) given in Eq. 19. Cortisol levels were arbitrarily rescaled
according to 125ng/ml = 3.

the decay rate b (cid:39) 0.6 [22]. Furthermore, the dimensionless parameters p2, . . . , p5 and td will be ﬁxed to those
used in Walker et al. [13]: p2 = 15, p3 = 7.2, p4 = 0.05, p5 = 0.11, p6 = 2.9 and td = 1.44 (Td = 15 min).
Although it is not possible to determine all of the remaining parameters from data, we will use reasonable estimates.
The half-life of cortisol was estimated to be about 7.2min [21] while the half-life of CRH has been estimated to be
−1
O ≈ 1.8. Of the remaining parameters (n, µc, q0, q1, k), the dependence
about 4min [62]. Therefore, q2 = dC d
on n will turn out to be quantitative so we henceforth set n = 5. These estimated parameters are listed in Table S1.
Even though one expects the values of these eﬀective parameters to be highly variable, we ﬁx them in order to
concretely investigate the mathematical structure and qualitative predictions of our model. The parameters µc, q0,
q1, and k remain undetermined; however, it is instructive to treat k as a control parameter and explore the nullcline
structure in µc, q0, q1 parameter space.

Parameter space and nullcline structure
To determine how the q-nullcline crosses the c-nullcline, we substitute cs by its equilibrium period-averaged value
(cid:104)c∞(c)(cid:105). If we assume a basal input level I = 1, the values of k that will position the basal q-nullcline to just pass
through the left and right bifurcation points (qL, cL) and (qR, cR) can be found by solving
qL,R = q0(1 − e

−k(cid:104)c∞(cL,R)(cid:105)

):

kL =

1

(cid:104)c∞(cL)(cid:105) ln

(cid:18)

1

1 − qL/q0

(cid:19)

, kR =

1

(cid:104)c∞(cR)(cid:105) ln

(cid:18)

1

1 − qR/q0

(cid:19)

.

(A3)

024600.20.40.60.811.2oc∞(o)Kim et al.

Page 27 of 30

Figure S2: The possible number of equilibria of the reduced (cs, c) system. (A) A Type
0 scenario in which kR < kL permits only one nullcline intersection, either one the lower
stable branch, the unstable branch, or the upper stable branch. (B) In this Type I parameter
regime, the c-nullcline is shaped and positioned such that kL < kR. Therefore, it is possible
for the model to exhibit two oscillating stable states provided kL < k < kR. For k < kL
(k > kR), the q-nullcline shifts to the left(right) and the intersection with the upper(lower)
branch of the c-nullcline disappears, leading to only one stable point. (C) A Type II c-
nullcline. For k < kL, there is only one intersection at the lower branch. For all k > kL
there are two intersections.

All possible ways in which the nullclines can cross each other as k is varied are illustrated in Fig. S2.

The speciﬁc locations of the bifurcation points, as well as kL and kR, are complicated functions of all parameters.
However, Eqs. A3 allows us to distinguish three qualitatively diﬀerent regimes. The ﬁrst possibility is kL > kR,
where there can be at most only one intersection between the slow and fast nullclines. We denote this as a Type 0
scenario (Fig. S2A) characterized by having at most a single stable state towards which the system will always
return upon cessation of external stress. In Type 0 situations with intermediate values of k, the intersection will
arise in the unstable branch of the c-nullcline. In this case, we expect the system to oscillate between the two stable
branches of the c-nullcline. Here, the fast variables a, o, and r will cycle periodically between two oscillating levels.

In order for the two nullclines to intersect three times (twice on stable branches of the c-nullcline), the q-nullcline
must “ﬁt” within the bistable region of the c-nullcline. As shown in Fig. S2, there are two separate subcases of
nullclines that intersect twice. If kL < kR, a value of kL < k < kR would imply that the q−nullcline can intersect
both stable branches of the c-nullcline, leading to two stable solutions. We refer to this case as Type I (Fig. S2B).

Another possibility is that the right bifurcation point is beyond the maximum value q = q0 dictated by the function
h((cid:104)c∞(cR)(cid:105)). As shown in Fig. S2C, the bistable c-nullclines exhibits only one bifurcation point within the domain
of q. The lower branch of the c-nullclines in this set extends across the entire range of physiological values of q,
ensuring that the q-nullcline will intersect with the lower branch for any value of k. Therefore, to determine if there
are two intersections we only need to check that kL ≤ k is satisﬁed. In this Type II case, the system is either
perpetually in the diseased low cortisol state, or is bistable between the diseased and normal states; the system will
always be at least susceptible to low-cortisol disease. Summarizing,

- Type 0: Exactly one solution (one nullcline intersection) exists for the reduced subsystem. Here, kR < kL

and the intersection may occur on the lower or upper stable branches, or on the unstable branch of the
c-nullcline. The system is either permanently diseased, permanently resistant, or oscillates between normal
and diseased states.

- Type I: At least one solution exists. A stable diseased solution exists if k < kL, two stable solutions

(diseased and normal) arise if kL ≤ k ≤ kR, and fully resistant state arises if k > kR.

- Type II: At least one solution exists. A stable diseased state arises if k < kL while both diseased and

normal solutions arise if k > kL. A fully disease-resistant state cannot arise.

With the parameters ﬁxed according to Table S1, we will treat k as a control parameter and exhaustively sweep the
three-dimensional parameter space (q0, q1, µc) to determine the regions which lead to each of the nullcline
structural types. In addition, we restrict the parameter domain to regions which admit oscillating solutions of the
full problem. In other words, parts of both stable branches of the c-nullclines must fall within values of c which
support oscillations in the PA-subsystem (Fig. 3). The regions in (µc, q0, q1) space that satisfy these conditions and
that yield each of the types of nullcline crossings are indicated in Fig. S3.

Based on measurements of self-upregulation of CRH secretion during stress [23], µc = 0.6 is chosen to set the
baseline level of the Hill function gc(c = 0) ≈ 0.4. q1 is approximated by setting the inﬂection point of gc(c) to
arise at c ≈ 25, the average value used by Walker et al. [13]. Assuming c ≈ 25 is a ﬁxed point of Eq. 15 when
I = 1 and cs ≈ (cid:104)c∞(25)(cid:105), q0 can be estimated as a root of the right-hand-side of Eq. 15. This choice for the
remaining parameters puts our nullcline system into the Type I category that can exhibit one or two stable states
with oscillating (a, o, r) subsystems. We restricted the analysis of our model to Type I systems.

687072    q  k>kLk<kLk=kLc-nullclineq-nullcline(qL,cL)C576063q  k>kRk=kLk=kRk<kLc-nullclineq-nullcline(qR,cR)(qL,cL)B8485868710203040qc  k>kLkR<k<kLk<kRc-nullclineq-nullclineAType 0Type IType IIKim et al.

Page 28 of 30

Figure S3: Phase diagram in (µc, q0, q1)-space. Regimes for each of the three types of
bistable c-nullclines shown in the parameter space (µc, q0, q1) and (µc, q1) with n = 5. The
uncolored regions correspond to systems that do not exhibit either bistability or oscillations.

Minimum duration and magnitude of stress
We plot the minimum duration required for normal-to-diseased transition against stress magnitude (Fig. S4). Higher
magnitude of Iext generally requires a shorter duration of stress, as expected. Note that the minimum duration is
also dependent on the phase of intrinsic oscillations of the system at stress onset.

Figure S4: Phase diagram of stress-induced transitions (A) Minimum duration
of stress required for normal-to-disease transition is plotted against stress magnitude. The
phase of intrinsic oscillations at stress onset is denoted as θ∗. (B) Four θ∗ values were
chosen and marked on the plot of o(T ) with diﬀerent colors assigned. The color of each
curve in plot (A) corresponds to the θ∗ of stressor onset shown in (B).

Timing of stress onset and transient response
Here, we show how the dynamics of the system changes after the onset and cessation of stress. In previous studies
[18, 21], changes in corticosterone levels in rats were measured in response to stress induced by noise applied at
diﬀerent phases of the animals oscillating cortisol cycle. It was observed that the timing of the stress onset relative
to the ultradian phase was crucial in determining the magnitude of corticosterone response. Increases in
corticosterone levels were markedly higher when noise was initiated during the rising phase than when initiated
during the falling phase.
We can frame these experimental observations mechanistically within our theory. Following the experimental
protocol [18, 21], we simulate the stress response using a brief stressor with a duration of 30min. As shown in
Fig. S5A, an external stress that is applied mostly over the falling phase of the cortisol oscillation results in a higher
subsequent nadir in o(t) than one that is applied predominantly during a rising phase. However, as shown in
Fig. S5B, stress applied mainly during the rising phase leads to a higher subsequent peak level. This observation is
consistent with the results of the experiment on rats and can be explained by the dynamics inherent in our model.
The immediate increase in q = q0Ih(cs) associated with the increase in I leads to a rapid increase in c, as shown
in Fig. 7. This higher level of circulating CRH shifts the stable limit cycle of the PA subsystem to a new one with
higher minimum and maximum values of ACTH and cortisol (as shown in Fig. 3). This new limit cycle is shown by

0.40.50.60.040.050.06507090 q1µc q0Type 0Type IType IIn= 50.550.60.650.70.75µc  Type 0Type IType IIq0=800.550.60.650.70.750.030.040.050.06µcq1  Type 0Type IType IIq0=7003060900123T(min)o(T)θ∗=0π/22π/3π2πTransitionNo transitionAB20030040050000.10.20.3Stress duration (min)Iextθ∗=0,2πθ∗=3π/2θ∗=π/2θ∗=πKim et al.

Page 29 of 30

Figure S5: Stress timing and cortisol response. (A) A stressor of duration of 30min
with magnitude Iext = 0.2 was applied mainly over the falling phase of the underlying
cortisol oscillation. The ﬁrst peak after the stress onset was almost unchanged, but the ﬁrst
nadir was elevated. (B) The same stressor used in (A) applied during the rising phase led
to a signiﬁcantly increased subsequent peak while the ﬁrst nadir was unaﬀected. (C) The
trajectory of the system (red) is projected onto the cortisol-ACTH plane. The new limit
cycle of the PA-subsystem corresponding to ﬁxed I(t) = 1.2 is indicated by the blue curve.
During stress, the trajectory of the system is attracted towards the new limit cycle. The
system recovers after making a smaller cycle within the normal limit cycle, reaching a higher
nadir. (D) The trajectory of the system deviates then recovers back through a trajectory
above the normal limit cycle, reaching a higher peak.

the blue curve in Figs. S5C,D. Under external stress, a trajectory of the system quickly deviates and approaches the
new limit cycle, but quickly returns to the original limit cycle after cessation of stress. Thus, depending on the
position of the trajectory relative to that of the new stressed limit cycle, the initial deviation may try to reach the
new limit cycle in the falling or rising cortisol phases as shown in Figs. S5C,D. Moreover, if the duration of the stress
is shorter than the period of the inherent oscillation, the trajectory will return to its original limit cycle before
completing a full cycle of the new limit cycle. These properties of the limit cycle dynamics explain the diﬀerence in
the level of subsequent peak following the stress onset depending on the timing of the stress onset.

Cortisol dependent Iext
As it has been shown that synaptic input of the PVN cells is modulated by cortisol for certain types of stressor, we
brieﬂy discuss how cortisol dependent Iext(T, O) may aﬀect the behavior of our model. Within our model,
modulation in synaptic input by glucocorticoids can be viewed as a cortisol dependent external input function:
Iext(T, O) = Itime(T ) + Icort(O). One possible form of Iext(T, O) is illustrated in Fig. S6 where Iext(T, O) is
assumed to be lower when cortisol levels are higher. Since it was shown that cortisol does not aﬀect the basal
release rate [37], the cortisol dependent component of the external input function, Icort(O), should be zero when
there is no stress. On the other hand, it was also shown that the inhibition eﬀect cannot decrease the release rate

0160320480    T(min)  stress,Iext=0.2B0123    a  stress startstress endnew limit cyclestressD01603204800123T(min)o(T)  Astress,Iext=0.201230123ao  stress endstress startstressnew limit cycleCKim et al.

Page 30 of 30

below the basal rate [37] so we can further assume that Iext(O, T ) ≥ 0. When these conditions are met, the
modiﬁcation in Iext(T, O) should not aﬀect the bistability of the system since I(T ) = Ibase = 1 is unchanged.
However, a cortisol dependent Iext(T, O) will make the timing of stress onset become more relevant in predicting
whether or not stressors can induce transitions between normal and diseased states. Driven by the intrinsic
oscillations in O(T ), Iext(T ) will also oscillate during stress, leading the q-nullcline to shift back and forth during
stress in the (q, c)-plane as shown in Fig. S6C. Oscillations in the q-nullcline aﬀect the net decrease in q during
stress, changing the position of the system on the (q, c)-plane relative to the separatrix between the normal and the
diseased basins of attraction at stress termination.

Figure S6: Cortisol dependent synaptic input of the PVN and its possible
eﬀects (A) Cortisol independent Iext(T ) used in our current model. (B) An example of
cortisol dependent Iext(T, O), where we assume the synaptic input of the PVN is attenuated
at higher levels of O(T ). (C) During stress, the q-nullcline shifts back and forth in the
(q, c)-plane due to oscillations in Iext(T, O) as driven by the intrinsic ultradian oscillations
in O(T ). In turn, theses shifts in q-nullcline will aﬀect the net decrease in q during stress.
Since transitions are sensitive to the position of q at stress termination, including a cortisol
dependent Iext(T, O) will make transitions more strongly dependent on the timing of stress
onset.

TIext(T)AO(T)TIext(T,O)BO(T)qc  c-nullclineq-nullclineC(cid:507)q(cid:507)qΔIstress