Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. hydroBetaPlane
March 11, 2016

c(cid:13) ESO 2016

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
0
1

.

 
 
]
P
E
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

2
v
4
9
7
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Shear–driven instabilities and shocks in the atmospheres of hot

Jupiters

S´ebastien Fromang1,2, Jeremy Leconte3,4 and Kevin Heng5

1 Laboratoire AIM, CEA/DSM-CNRS-Universit´e Paris 7, Irfu/Service d’Astrophysique, CEA-Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2 Institut dAstrophysique de Paris and UPMC, CNRS (UMR 7095) , 98 bis Boulevard Arago, 75014, Paris, France
3 Univ. Bordeaux, LAB, UMR 5804, F-33270, Floirac, France
4 CNRS, LAB, UMR 5804, F-33270, Floirac, France
5 University of Bern, Center for Space and Habitability, Sidlerstrasse 5, CH-3012, Bern, Switzerland

e-mail: sebastien.fromang@cea.fr

Accepted; Received; in original form;

ABSTRACT

Context. General circulation models of the atmosphere of hot Jupiter have shown the existence of a supersonic eastward equatorial jet.
Yet these results have been obtained using numerical schemes that ﬁlter out vertically propagating sound waves and assume vertical
hydrostatic equilibrium, or with fully compressive codes that use large dissipative coeﬃcients.
Aims. In this paper, we remove both limitations and investigate the eﬀects of compressibility on the atmospheric dynamics by solving
the standard Euler equations.
Methods. This is done by means of a series of simulations performed in the framework of the equatorial β–plane approximation using
the ﬁnite volume shock–capturing code RAMSES.
Results. At low resolution, we recover the classical results described in the literature: we ﬁnd a strong and steady supersonic equatorial
jet of a few km.s−1 that displays no signature of shocks. We next show that the jet zonal velocity depends signiﬁcantly on the grid
meridional resolution. When that resolution is ﬁne enough to properly resolve the jet, the latter is subject to a Kelvin-Helmholtz
instability. The jet zonal mean velocity displays regular oscillations with a typical timescale of few days and a signiﬁcant amplitude
of about 15% of the jet velocity. We also ﬁnd compelling evidence for the development of a vertical shear instability at pressure levels
of a few bars. It seems to be responsible for an increased downward kinetic energy ﬂux, signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the temperature of
the deep atmosphere, and appears to act as a form of drag on the equatorial jet. This instability also creates velocity ﬂuctuations that
propagate upward and steepen into weak shocks at pressure levels of a few mbars.
Conclusions. We conclude that hot Jupiter equatorial jets are potentially unstable to both a barotropic Kelvin-Helmholtz instability
and a vertical shear instability. Upon conﬁrmation using more realistic models, both instabilities could result in signiﬁcant time
variability of the atmospheric winds, may provide a small scale dissipation mechanism in the ﬂow, and might have consequences for
the internal evolution of hot Jupiters.

1. Introduction
In the last decade, hot Jupiters observations have evolved from
characterizing only the orbital (semi major axis, period, eccen-
tricity) and structural (mass and radius) properties of the newly
discovered planets to constraining also the physical properties
of the atmosphere such as the composition and the temperature–
pressure proﬁle (Madhusudhan et al. 2014; Heng & Showman
2015), as well as observables that are directly connected to the
dynamics such as 2D brightness maps (Knutson et al. 2007; de
Wit et al. 2012) and even (although maybe still tentatively) atmo-
spheric winds (Snellen et al. 2010). With new instruments such
as the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) soon available to
the community, future observations will become more and more
constraining. Their interpretation and understanding will require
elaborate and well understood models of the dynamical structure
of their upper atmosphere. Such a need explains the recent de-
velopment by several groups of numerical models describing the
atmospheric dynamics of hot Jupiters (among which Showman
& Guillot 2002; Menou et al. 2003; Cho et al. 2008; Showman
et al. 2008, 2009; Dobbs-Dixon & Lin 2008; Rauscher & Menou

2010; Heng et al. 2011b), a comprehensive review of which has
recently been published by Heng & Showman (2015). Taken as
a whole, these global circulation models (GCM) have produced
a few robust results that characterize the dynamics of hot Jupiter
atmospheres. Probably the most notable is the existence of an
equatorial jet with typical eastward gas velocity of the order of a
few kilometers per second as ﬁrst shown by Showman & Guillot
(2002). This is faster than the speed of sound by a factor of a
few (i.e. the Mach number of the jet, deﬁned as the ratio be-
tween the wind and the sound speed, is larger than unity). This
remarkable result comes from the fact that hot Jupiters are both
tidally locked and strongly irradiated by their central star as a
result of the small semi major axis of their orbit. It has been
given theoretical grounds by the semi–analytical calculations of
Showman & Polvani (2010, 2011) who could explain the origin
of the equatorial jet by the excitation of a stationary planetary
scale Rossby wave by stellar irradiation, a result recently con-
ﬁrmed and extended to include three dimensional eﬀects by Tsai
et al. (2014). One reason of the success of these models is that
they appear to be consistent with some of the observations of hot
Jupiter atmospheres, such as the eastward shift of the hot spot at

Send oﬀprint requests to: s.fromang

1

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

the photosphere (Knutson et al. 2007) or the day–night temper-
ature contrast measurements (Perez-Becker & Showman 2013).
Despite these signiﬁcant ﬁndings, several questions remain.
First, the supersonic nature of the equatorial jet have raised the
question of the existence of shocks in hot Jupiters atmospheres.
The presence of such structures could have important conse-
quences for the atmosphere time variability and act as an eﬃ-
cient drag mechanism on the ﬂow (Rauscher & Menou 2012).
This question is made even more accute because many of the
published results have been obtained using approaches borrowed
from the community studying the earth atmosphere climate and
use approximations that are well adapted to study the earth at-
mospheric dynamics. The most widely used is based on solv-
ing a reduced set of equations, the so–called primitive formu-
lation of the hydrodynamics equations, that ﬁlters out vertically
propagating sound waves and assumes that the gas is in hydro-
static equilibrium in the vertical direction. Such codes are only
able to capture hydraulic jumps as opposed to real shocks (see
Rauscher & Menou 2012, for a discussion of this issue). Using
such approaches, several groups have reported the existence of
regions where signiﬁcant compression occurs and take the form
of standing discontinuities (Showman et al. 2009; Rauscher &
Menou 2010), suggesting that shocks might indeed develop, in
agreement with theoretical arguments such as given by Heng
(2012). In addition to these models, a few papers have been pub-
lished and present simulations that do not rely of these standard
GCM approximations and thus do not suﬀer from these limi-
tations (Dobbs-Dixon & Lin 2008; Dobbs-Dixon et al. 2010;
Mayne et al. 2014a,b). These groups solved the Navier-Stokes
equations on the sphere and explicitly include some form of dis-
sipation to stabilize the scheme and/or to account for the eﬀect of
unresolved features of the ﬂow. Even though the issue of shocks
is not the main focus of either of these papers, Dobbs-Dixon
et al. (2010) report shock–like features in some of their models.
However, the use of high dissipation coeﬃcients in these partic-
ular simulations signiﬁcantly changes the mean ﬂow so that the
issue of shocks formation in hot Jupiter atmospheres remains
open.

In addition, it is possible that the equatorial jet is desta-
bilized by various hydrodynamic instabilities. For example, Li
& Goodman (2010) have recently shown using analytical ar-
guments coupled with idealized numerical simulations that fast
supersonic equatorial jets are vulnerable to a vertical shear in-
stability, a possibility ﬁrst mentionned by Showman & Guillot
(2002)1. As shown by Li & Goodman (2010), shocks might de-
velop during its nonlinear evolution and have signiﬁcant con-
sequences for the jet mean velocity. As explained by Li &
Goodman (2010), properly resolving this instability in a GCM
is a tremendous task because it requires that the numerical grid
is suﬃciently ﬁne to resolve the vertical pressure scale height of
the atmosphere in the horizontal direction. Given these diﬃcul-
ties and because of the very idealized nature of the numerical
setup used by Li & Goodman (2010), it is perhaps not surpris-
ing that the question of the possible development and potential
consequences of a vertical shear instability in hot Jupiter atmo-
spheres has never been addressed in any GCM so far.

In addition to their importance as possible drag mechanisms,
the questions of the existence of shocks and/or of the growth
of hydrodynamic instabilities such as described above may have
some potential observational consequences in terms of the ﬂow

1 It is worth reminding that such a vertical shear instability is by def-
inition absent in any simulation that rely on the standard primitive for-
mulation of hydrodynamics.

2

variability, but also to explain the origin of the inﬂated hot
Jupiters (Baraﬀe et al. 2010). Indeed, it has been suggested
that downward transport of kinetic energy possibly associated
with these instabilities (Showman & Guillot 2002; Guillot &
Showman 2002) along with turbulent mixing of heat (Youdin
& Mitchell 2010) might transport and deposit suﬃcient amount
of thermal energy in the deep layers of the atmosphere to ac-
count for such highly inﬂated radii (for a detailed discussion,
see Ginzburg & Sari 2015).

The purpose of this paper is to develop an idealized model in
order to investigate the issues described above. For that purpose,
we will solve the compressible Euler equations. Since we are in-
terested in shocks, we will use the ﬁnite volume shock capturing
scheme RAMSES (Teyssier 2002) that is based on the Godunov
method (Toro 1997, see also section 2.3). In addition to being
well adapted to resolving shocks in supersonic ﬂows such as en-
countered here, ﬁnite volume code like RAMSES conserve the
gas total energy, the sum of its kinetic and thermal energy, even
in the absence of explicit dissipation. This means in particular
that all the kinetic energy that might be numerically dissipated
(as would be the case, for example, in a turbulent ﬂow) goes
back into heat. As noted by Goodman (2009), this is of partic-
ular importance in the context of hot Jupiter atmospheres. Our
strategy in this ﬁrst paper is to keep the numerical setup as sim-
ple as possible while retaining the basics ingredients that drive
the ﬂow dynamics. We will thus make two important simpliﬁ-
cations regarding the thermodynamics and the geometry. While
most published results now use a complex but realistic treatment
of radiative transfer eﬀects, we will model these eﬀects with
a simple parametrized cooling function. For practical purpose,
we will use a form of the cooling function that is linear in the
temperature, also known as Newtonian cooling. This has proved
very useful in modelling atmospheric ﬂows in general and hot
Jupiter general circulation in particular (Showman et al. 2008;
Rauscher & Menou 2010; Heng et al. 2011b). Published simula-
tions using that approximation compares well with more realistic
models that include a detailed treatment of radiative transfer ef-
fects (Dobbs-Dixon & Lin 2008; Showman et al. 2009; Heng
et al. 2011a; Rauscher & Menou 2012). Our second approxi-
mation will be to solve the equations in a Cartesian geometry
using the equatorial beta plane model. This is a well–known
approximation in atmospheric dynamics and one that been suc-
cessfully used recently in the context of hot Jupiter atmospheric
ﬂow (Showman & Polvani 2010, 2011; Tsai et al. 2014; Heng
& Workman 2014). The idea is to focus on the equatorial region
of the planet and to expand the vertical projection of its angular
velocity linearly to the ﬁrst order in the distance y to the equator:

Ω =

1
2 βyez ,

(1)

where β is a constant and a free parameter of the model, while
ez stands for the unit vector in the vertical direction. For hot
Jupiter atmospheres, this is a particularly useful approximation
because of their slow rotation and since the dynamics develops
mainly at the vicinity of the equator. Using these simpliﬁcations
but including the eﬀect of compressibility, the goal of this paper
is to investigate such questions as the occurrence of shocks, the
stability of the equatorial jet and the origin of the ﬂow variability,
if any.

The plan of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we detail our
numerical setup and the parameters we use. The idea is to use a
set of numerical parameters as close as possible to the bench-
mark models presented by Heng et al. (2011b) and to investigate
the potential eﬀects induced by compressibility in this model. In

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

section 3, we present a low resolution model and show that we
recover many of the features described in the literature despite
our simplistic geometry. These results validate our approach and
our approximations. In section 4, we make a quick resolution
study before presenting a high resolution simulation in section 5.
As we shall see, the ﬂow features variability at diﬀerent spatial
and temporal scales that we relate to well known hydrodynamics
instabilities. We then conclude and discuss the limitations of our
work and the perspectives it opens in section 6.

2. Physical model and numerical implementation

2.1. Equations and notations

As explained in the introduction, we solve the hydrody-
namic equations in a Cartesian coordinate system denoted by
(ex, ey, ez), in a frame rotating with angular velocity Ω. We
consider a grid that extends over the ranges [−Lx/2, Lx/2],
[−Ly/2, Ly/2] and [0, Lz] in the x, y and z directions, respectively.
The x–direction should be thought of as representing longitudes
in traditional GCM models, y as a proxy for latitudes and z would
stand for the radial direction (aligned with the gravitational ac-
celeration). Since hydrostatic equilibrium is not built into the
equations, we do not use pressure coordinates in the vertical di-
rection as is common in atmospheric sciences when solving the
primitive formulation of hydrodynamics. The time evolution for
the gas density ρ, the velocity v and the total energy E writes:

+ ∇·(ρv) = 0 ,

∂ρ
∂t
∂ρv
+ ∇·(ρvv + P) = −ρgez − 2ρΩ×v ,
∂t
+ ∇· [(E + P)v)] = L .

∂E
∂t

(2)

(3)

(4)

where g is the constant vertical acceleration due to the planet
gravitational ﬁeld, L is the cooling function (see section 2.2)
and P denotes thermal pressure. It is related to the total energy
with the relation:

E =

1
2 ρv2 + ρe =

1
2 ρv2 +

P
γ − 1 .

(5)

In the above equation, we have introduced the adiabatic expo-
nent of the gas γ and have assumed an ideal equation of state in
writing the internal energy e as a function of thermal pressure. In
that case, P also relates directly to the gas temperature T through
the following equation:

P =

ρkT
µmH

= ρRT .

(6)

Here k is the Boltzmann constant, µ is the mean molecular
weight, mH the mass of the hydrogen atom and R is the spe-
ciﬁc gas constant. Throughout this paper, we will assume the
atmosphere is composed of a mixture of hydrogen and helium
and we will take for R the same numerical value as Heng et al.
(2011b): R = 3779 J.kg−1.m−1. We will also set γ = 1.4. Finally,
as explained in the introduction, we work in the framework of
the equatorial β–plane model, so that Ω is given by Eq. (1). In
the remainder of this paper, we will thus refer to the y = 0 plane
as “the equator”.

2.2. The cooling function L
L varies linearly with the departure from an equilibrium temper-
ature, a prescription that is also known as Newtonian cooling:

L =

ρR
γ − 1

T − Teq
τrad

,

(7)

where Teq and τrad are the radiative equilibrium temperature and
radiative cooling timescale, respectively. They both depend a
priori on the location in the atmosphere. L is meant to provide
a rough but computationally straightforward description of the
balance between heating due to stellar irradiation and radiative
cooling. Our choice for the spatial dependence of τrad is dis-
cussed in section 2.4 and appendix A. To calculate Teq, we fol-
lowed a procedure that is largely inspired by (but not identical
to, essentially because we use a diﬀerent coordinate system) the
benchmark calculation presented by Heng et al. (2011b). We de-
scribe it here brieﬂy for completeness. We started from a refer-
ence pressure–dependent temperature proﬁle T 0
P that is usually
computed from 1D radiative transfer calculations. We next de-
ﬁned:
Tday/night = T 0
(8)
where ∆T is a constant and a free parameter of the simulation.
For simplicity, we did not prescribe any pressure variation for
∆T, which is diﬀerent from papers published in the literature that
use Newtonian cooling to model radiative eﬀects. Because the
planet is tidally locked, the substellar point is ﬁxed in time. We
chose its horizontal coordinates to be (x, y) = (0, 0). Using these
deﬁnitions for Tday and Tnight, we calculated Teq as follows: on
the night side of the planet (|x| > Lx/4), we followed Heng et al.
(2011b) and set Teq = Tnight. On the planet day side (|x| < Lx/4),
we used the relation:
T 4
eq = T 4

P ± ∆T ,

night

(cid:32)2πx

(cid:33)

Lx

− y2

2L2
th

 .

+ (T 4

day − T 4

night) cos

exp

(9)

Note that this proﬁle is diﬀerent from the functional form of
Teq introduced by Heng et al. (2011b). While the sinusoidal x–
dependence is reminiscent of their longitudinal proﬁle, a similar
dependence would have little meaning in the y–direction. It is
more natural to use an exponential variation in that direction, as
done recently by Showman & Polvani (2011). The drawback of
this formulation is that it introduces an additional length scale
Lth in the problem that is another free parameter of the model.
The speciﬁc value we chose in this paper is discussed below in
section 2.4.

2.3. Numerical implementation
We solve the above equations using a uniform grid version
of the community code RAMSES (Teyssier 2002). RAMSES
uses a ﬁnite volume scheme based on the MUSCL-Hancock
Godunov method (Toro 1997). By systematically upwinding all
the waves that enter in the problem, ﬁnite volume codes are in-
trinsically stable (provided they satisfy the Courant–Friedrich–
Lax, or CFL, condition) and do not require using any explicit
dissipation. In fact, the algorithm is constructed to add the
minimum amount of dissipation that is necessary to stabilize
the numerical scheme. This is important for one of the prob-
lems we are interested in, namely the issue of shock formation.
However, a well–known diﬃculty of Godunov codes is their in-
ability to properly handle vertical hydrostatic equilibrium (see,

3

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

e.g. LeVeque 1998). This is because the latter results from a
balance between two terms that are treated diﬀerently by the nu-
merical algorithm, namely the pressure gradient (treated as a ﬂux
of momentum computed as part of the solution of a Riemann
problem) and gravity (treated as a source term by a simple split
Crank-Nicholson algorithm). Starting from a solution initially
in exact equilibrium balance, this situation immediately creates
a mass ﬂux at cell interfaces that rapidly leads to spurious ver-
tical velocities (even in 1D) and compromises the simulation.
Recently, K¨appeli & Mishra (2014) developed an algorithm for
the MUSCL–Hancock scheme that is especially designed to ﬁx
that problem. The idea is to suppose that the density and pressure
proﬁles within each cells are isentropic, and to use the extrapo-
lated values at cell faces as inputs for the Riemann problem. We
have implemented their solution in RAMSES and found that it
gives very satisfactory results, in the sense that the code is now
able to keep a stratiﬁed atmosphere in hydrostatic equilibrium
with almost vanishing deviations.

The boundary conditions (BC) we used are periodic in the
x–direction. Because the Coriolis force increases in amplitude
with y, the dynamics is conﬁned to the vicinity of the equator.
For this reason, the boundary conditions in the y–direction are
not critical provided the domain is chosen wide enough. In the
simulations presented in this paper, we set the horizontal velocity
to zero there and assumed zero–gradient for all other variables.
The vertical boundary conditions are more subtle to implement
and somewhat arbitrary. We empirically found that the follow-
ing produces good results, in the sense that artifacts introduced
by the boundaries could not be detected: we extrapolated both
density and pressure assuming an isentropic vertical proﬁle, im-
posed zero gradient horizontal velocity gradient and reﬂective
BC on the vertical momentum. In addition, we forced the mass,
momentum and energy ﬂuxes to vanishes at the vertical bound-
aries. We note that the two conditions (on the variables them-
selves and on the ﬂuxes) are not necessarily consistent with each
other, but did not lead to any problem in the simulations.

The numerical implementation described above was tested
by reproducing standard results of the literature. We present two
of them in the appendix of the paper, namely the growth of
a baroclinic wave in an adiabatic atmosphere as described by
Polichtchouk et al. (2014) in appendix B.1 and a shallow hot
Jupiter model such as presented by Menou & Rauscher (2009);
Heng et al. (2011b); Mayne et al. (2014a) in appendix B.2.
Although these tests do not have an analytical solution, the sim-
ilarity between our results and the published calculations, along
with the analysis of a low resolution deep model that we present
in section 3 give conﬁdence in our setup.

2.4. Model parameters

The physical model presented above contains several free pa-
rameters: g and β characterize the planet, while T 0
P, τrad, ∆T and
Lth describes the heating and cooling processes. Rather than pre-
senting a complete survey of the associated parameter space, the
idea of the present paper is to choose a unique set of parameters
that matches as closely as possible those of Heng et al. (2011b)
and to show that the ﬂow properties are similar to the results pre-
sented in that paper. We defer a detailed study of the inﬂuence
of these free parameters on the results to a future publication.

rotates with a frequency Ωp = 2.1 × 10−5 s−1. Expanding Ω =
Ωp sin(φ), where φ is the latitude, close to the equator, and using
Eq. (1), we thus have:

β =

2Ωp
ap

= 4.2 × 10−13 m−1.s−1 .

(10)

Newtonian cooling parameters: we next need to prescribe
the parameters entering in the deﬁnition of Teq and τrad. To do
so, we use an analytic relationship between T 0
P and P, as well
as between τrad and pressure. Both functions are given in ap-
pendix A and have numerical parameters chosen to give an ap-
proximate match to the proﬁles of Heng et al. (2011b). We also
set ∆T = 300 K in all our simulations. The curves so obtained
for Tnight and Tday are plotted on ﬁgure A.1 and are close to the
proﬁles used by Heng et al. (2011b, see their ﬁgure 7). It is worth
noting that τrad becomes inﬁnite below 10 bars. This choice cre-
ates an “inert layer” at location where P > 10 bars, in the sense
that gas cannot cool radiatively in that region. As we shall see,
this point turned out to have rather important consequences in
the simulations. Finally, the cooling function L depends on the
parameters Lth that governs its y–dependence. Apart from being
of order ap, there is no obvious way of choosing Lth and its inﬂu-
ence on the ﬂow properties deserves further investigations. After
a few tests at low resolution, we found a good agreement with
published results for Lth = 0.7ap. We will use this value in the
remainder of the paper.

Computational domain and initial conditions: we need to
specify the extend of the computational domain and the initial
conditions. We used Lx = 2πap in the x direction and found that
Ly = 2.5ap was wide enough for the lateral boundaries to have
no eﬀect on the ﬂow topology. As noted by Mayne et al. (2014a),
the vertical extent of the box has to be chosen carefully, because
hot gas of the planet day side is inﬂated and expands upward.
We thus followed these authors and used Lz = 9 × 106 meters.
Except for one model (see section 5), our calculations were all
initiated from an atmosphere at rest (v = 0 everywhere), with
a uniform temperature T = 1800 K and in vertical hydrostatic
equilibrium. We set the density in the bottom layer (i.e. at z = 0)
so that P = 220 bars. With these parameters, we typically found
that the pressure at the top of the domain ranges between 6×10−3
and 0.1 mbars, i.e. well below the typical pressures we will be
interested in in the remainder of the paper. We note that there is
a current debate in the literature regarding the sensitivity of the
ﬂow to the initial conditions (Thrastarson & Cho 2010; Liu &
Showman 2013), particularly when explicit dissipation is small
or vanishing as we consider here (Cho et al. 2015). Here, we
leave these questions aside and consider the same initial condi-
tions as used by Heng et al. (2011b).

Simulation post treatment: Unless otherwise stated, we typi-
cally produce snapshots of all the physical variables every planet
day during the simulation. To ease comparison with published
papers, we present all of our results interpolated in the vertical
direction on a pressure grid that extends from 200 bars at the
bottom to 1 mbars at the top using 48 levels uniformly spaced in
the logarithm of the pressure.

Planet parameters: we follow the shallow hot Jupiter model of
Heng et al. (2011b) and consider a planet with a radius ap = 108
meters (m) and for which g = 8 m.s−2. We assume the planet

Finally, we measure time in unit of one planet day, which
corresponds to 299200 seconds with our choice of parameters,
or about 3.5 Earth days. In the simulations we present below,

4

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Fig. 2: Spacetime diagram (i.e time evolution of the pressure pro-
ﬁle) of the zonally averaged zonal wind at the equator in the low
resolution model.

the timestep is always limited by sound waves propagating in
the vertical direction. It is typically of the order of 25 sec-
onds in model LowRes (section 3) and 15 seconds in model
HighRes (section 5). This should be contrasted with the typi-
cal timesteps of 120 seconds used by, for example, Heng et al.
(2011b). Although markedly larger when using the primitive set
of hydrodynamics equations, the diﬀerence with a fully com-
pressible set of equations is not large enough to be prohibitive
when performing hot Jupiter atmosphere simulations. This is be-
cause the typical pressure scale height H is large in this case
(typically 103 km) so that the ratio between H and the horizontal
scales involved in the problem is not as small as it would be for
an Earth–like simulation.

3. Low resolution model
In order to validate our numerical implementation and our choice
for the numerical parameters entering in the problem, we start
by presenting a low resolution model (labelled LowRes in the
following). The grid spatial resolution is set to (Nx, Ny, Nz) =
(64, 33, 48) in this section. This is smaller by about a factor of
two than the resolution used by the ﬁnite diﬀerence core of Heng
et al. (2011b). However, we did not used any explicit dissipation
here, so that a one to one correspondence is diﬃcult to establish
a priori. The model was integrated for 500 planet days, which
corresponds to about 1700 earth days for our choice of Ωp.

We now describe the climatology of the atmosphere. As pre-
viously documented in the literature, the ﬂow develops a strong
eastward jet around the planet equator (ﬁgure 1, left panel). In
about 200 days, it reaches a steady state at pressure level above
1 bar, while larger pressure levels gradually accelerate until the
end of the simulation (ﬁgure 2). Based on this result, we com-
puted the mean properties of the ﬂow by calculating time aver-
ages from t = 200 until the end of the simulation. The zonally
averaged jet velocity at the equator reaches about 6.6 km.s−1
at the top of the atmosphere (i.e. at a pressure level of about
1 mbar), which corresponds to a mean Mach number of about
2. As a result of the short radiative timescale in the atmosphere
(compared to the dynamical timescale), the temperature struc-
ture displays a structure that is close to the zonally averaged

Fig. 3: Time averaged temperature (color contour) and horizontal
wind (arrows) for the low resolution model at pressure level P =
1.66 mbars (top panel), P = 97 mbars (middle panel) and P =
4.4 bars (bottom panel). The time average is performed from
t = 200 days to t = 500 days using 300 snapshots.

radiative equilibrium temperature, except in the deep layers of
the atmosphere (at P = 10 bars and below) where a hot spot is
seen with T up to 2000 K. We ﬁnd very little velocity ﬂuctua-
tions in the ﬂow above 1 bar after 200 days which is consistent
with, for example, Showman et al. (2008). Even if we tend to
ﬁnd slightly faster equatorial jets, the zonally averaged structure
described above compares favorably with results published in
the literature that use a similar cooling function (Showman et al.
2008; Rauscher & Menou 2010; Heng et al. 2011b; Mayne et al.
2014a). One diﬀerence, though, is that we ﬁnd weaker westward
jets at high latitudes (with maximum westward winds of 100
m.s−1 compared to typical published values that are about one
order of magnitude larger). This diﬀerence is most likely due to
the fact that we are using a Cartesian coordinates system, as op-
posed to the spherical geometry that is commonly used. We have
checked that the total (i.e. volume integrated) angular momen-

5

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Fig. 1: Color contours of the time averaged zonal mean zonal velocity (left panel) and temperature (right panel) in the (y, P) plane
for the low resolution model. The time average is performed from t = 200 days to t = 500 days using 300 snapshots.

(cid:32)
tum is conserved in our calculations. In the equatorial β–plane
approximation, the latter takes the form
u − 1
2 βy2

M =

(11)

dτ ,

(cid:33)

(cid:36)

ρ

where the integral should be taken over the computational do-
main. We have found that M is conserved to within 2% in model
128x33 over the 500 days of integrations (with the small change
being associated with a small leakage through the meridional
boundaries of the domain). The weakness of westward jets in
our simulation is something to keep in mind when comparing
our results with previously published models.

The day/night heating contrast results in strong zonal asym-
metries in both the dynamical ﬁelds and the temperature. These
asymmetries are stronger in the atmosphere upper layers and
gradually decrease downward. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 3,
which shows the temperature and horizontal winds in the (x, y)
plane at the pressure levels 1.66 mbars, 100 mbars and 4.4 bars.
The ﬁrst two panels zonal asymmetries are large because of the
short radiative timescale at those locations. For example, at 1.66
mbar, the maximum (resp. minimum) velocity amounts to 7.1
km.s−1 (resp. 5.5 km.s−1) and temperatures range from about
700 K to 1400 K. By contrast, the equatorial jet is essentially
zonally symmetric at P = 4.4 bars, in agreement with previous
results. At 100 mbars, we recover the chevron shape structure
in the temperature reminiscent of previously published calcula-
tions. The structure of the ﬂow at 1.66 mbars is interesting, as it
illustrates one of the consequence of using the equatorial β plane
model: while simulations performed on the sphere typically dis-
play a planetary scale Hadley cell, with upward motions in the
substellar point and downward motions at the antistellar point,
such a ﬂow is impossible to obtain by deﬁnition in the frame-
work of the equatorial β–plane model. Instead, meridional ve-
locity are always deﬂected back to the equator since the Coriolis
force becomes gradually stronger as y increases.

To conclude on section 3, the good agreement between the
ﬂow structure in our simulation, as shown on ﬁgures 1 and 3,
with equivalent ﬁgures reported by Heng et al. (2011b), along
with the fact that these results broadly agree with several studies
of the same kind published in the literature, both validate our nu-
merical implementation and the choice of our model parameters.

6

Model

Nx

LowRes
128x33
128x65
128x109
128x195
256x65
512x65
1024x65
HighRes

64
128
128
128
128
256
512
1024
1024

Ny

33
33
65
109
195
65
65
65
195

50

50

-
1.1
18.6
66.8
124.3

U(cid:48)
Umean
m.s−1 m.s−1
6158
6117
7390
7703
7957
7371
7226
7511
7731

207.3

-
-
-

Table 1: Model properties. Col. 1 gives the model label. Col. 2
and 3 features the horizontal resolution. Col. 4 and col. 5 respec-
tively gives the zonally and time averaged zonal wind and zonal
wind ﬂuctuations at (see text for details on its calculation) 50
mbars. All the other parameters of the models are identical and
described in section 2. Data are averaged between t = 200 and
t = 400, except for the models having a Ny = 195 for which the
averaging is performed between t = 170 and t = 280.

4. Resolution study
We next investigate the sensitivity of the properties described
above to variations in the horizontal spatial resolution. All of the
other parameters of the simulations are kept ﬁxed. We vary Nx
from 64 to 1024 and Ny from 33 to 195. The simulations param-
eters and their outcomes are summarized in Table 1. All runs but
one are integrated for 400 days. Model HighRes, with a resolu-
tion of (Nx, Ny) = (1024, 195), is computationally demanding.
To reduce part of the burden, we restarted model 1024x65 at
t = 100, multiplying the number of cells in the y direction by a
factor of three. Integrations of the equations was then performed
for another 350 days.

4.1. Effect on the climatology
All models qualitatively display the same climatology as de-
scribed above. However, quantitative measures vary. As an ex-
ample, we report on Table 1 (forth column, see also ﬁg. 4) the

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Fig. 5: Spatial distribution of η at the pressure level P = 1.66
mbars in model 128x65 (color contours). The arrows show the
amplitude and direction of the hozizontal wind.

Fig. 4: Left axis: variations of the 50 mbars zonally and time av-
eraged zonal mean wind at the equator with Ny. The blue squares
corresponds to the models having a zonal resolution Nx = 128,
the red circle shows model LowRes and the black pluses shows
the results of the models having a meridional resolution Ny = 65
and varying number of cells in the zonal direction. Right axis
(green stars): variations of the amplitude of the high frequency
ﬂuctuations of the zonally averaged zonal wind ﬂuctuations (see
text for details on its calculation) with Ny for the series of models
having Nx = 128.

zonally and time averaged (between t = 200 and t = 400) zonal
wind at the equator at the pressure level P = 50 mbars. We note
that the equatorial jet is still being slightly accelerated over that
period and has not yet reached a perfect equilibrium. For exam-
ple, in model 128x65, the zonal wind at 50 mbars increases from
7.1 to 7.4 km.s−1 over that period (which represents less than 5%,
a rather small acceleration that justify the claim made above that
the ﬂow is close to a steady state). Taken as a whole, this resolu-
tion study shows a strong sensitivity to the meridional resolution
Ny (see the blue squares) but a very weak sensitivity to the zonal
resolution Nx (see the symbols that correspond to Ny = 65 and
varying Nx, all clustered at a mean zonal wind of about 7.2–7.3
km.s−1). This diﬀerence comes from the diﬀerent spatial scales
of the equatorial jet in the x and y directions, namely a sharp
meridional velocity gradient but a large scale longitudinal struc-
ture. In model LowRes, grid cells have a meridional extend of
dy = 107 meters which means that the jet is only resolved with a
handful of grid points (see the jet meridional size in ﬁgure 1) and
is severely aﬀected by numerical dissipation. Quite diﬀerently,
the zonal variations of the jet have a typical scale comparable to
the zonal computational domain itself (simply because thermal
forcing is modulated on that scale) and is easily resolved with a
few tens of cells in all of our models.

4.2. Shocks

As discussed in the introduction, it has been a long standing is-
sue to determine whether or not shocks exist in hot Jupiter atmo-
spheres. In our simulations, we have not found any signatures
of shocks that would be traced by a sudden decrease of the local
Mach number or a rapid increase of the density. As a more quan-
titative diagnostic, we have computed a dimensionless measure

of the ﬂow divergence, as done recently by Zhu et al. (2013):

(cid:32)

(cid:33)

η = max

0,− dx
cs

∇·v

,

(12)

where dx denotes the cell size in the radial direction. In shock
capturing scheme such as RAMSES, the numerical algorithm
is designed to spread shocks over only a handful of cells, so
we would expect η to reach at least a few tens of percent in
shocks and be independent of spatial resolution. In fact, Zhu
et al. (2013) argue that η > 0.2 is a good criterion for detect-
ing strong shocks in their simulation. Since shocks are spread
over a few cells in ﬁnite volume codes such as RAMSES, such
a threshold indeed corresponds to a velocity jump larger than
the sound speed across a discontinuity (or, using the Rankine-
Hugoniot conditions, to an upstream Mach number larger than
∼ 1.5).

In general, we have found that η only amounts to a few per-
cents at pressure larger than a few tens of mbars, and decreases
downward. For example, in model 128x65, its maximum value
reaches 0.045, 0.034 and 0.022 at pressure levels P = 50 mbars,
100 mbars and 1 bars, respectively. η only takes signiﬁcant val-
ues at pressure of a few mbars, as illustrated on ﬁgure 5. At
such a low pressure, three zones feature values of η in excess
of 10%. The ﬁrst two are symmetric around the equator and lo-
cated on the jet wings, for positive values of x. We note that
they also manifest themselves by an increased temperature (see
ﬁgure 3). It is likely that these two compressive regions are an
artefact of the equatorial β–plane model that prevents an hemi-
spheric Hadley cell from developing around the planet. The last
zone with a large η is located at x ∼ −0.8 around the equator
and corresponds to the region where the zonal wind is strongly
decelerated when entering the day side of the planet. η reaches
23% at that location in model 128x65. As emphasized by Heng
(2012), this is the location where shocks would most easily form.
However, here, it appears that this zone is only a region of large
compression, but not a shock. Indeed, we found that η gradu-
ally decreases when the zonal resolution is increased, reaching
12% in model 256x65 and only 6% in model 512x65. This grad-
ual decrease shows that the zonal wind decline when entering
the planet day side is smooth and converged upon increasing
the resolution, as opposed to a shock that would steepen and be
caracterized by a constant, large η value. We note that the two
symetric high η regions on ﬁgure 5 show the same trend with
resolution, which means that these two zones are also regions of

7

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

adiabatic compression. We conclude from this analysis that the
mean ﬂow in the atmosphere of hot Jupiters displays no shocks.

4.3. Time variability
We also computed an estimate of the high frequency rms ﬂuctu-
ations U(cid:48)
50 of the zonally averaged equatorial zonal wind at 50
mbars (see last column on table 1 and green symbols on ﬁgure 4
for the models with Nx = 128). To do so, we ﬁrst subtracted
the low frequency component of the wind by smoothing the raw
data with a Hamming function having a 20 days width. U(cid:48)
50 is
then simply the root mean square of that signal. While it is very
small when Ny = 33, we ﬁnd that U(cid:48)
50 increases steadily and
amounts to more than 100 m.s−1 for model 128x195 and about
twice that value for our highest resolution model HighRes (not
shown on ﬁgure 4). We now focus on this last model in order to
investigate the physical origin of that variability.

5. High resolution model
The nature of the zonally averaged zonal wind variability in
model HighRes is best illustrated by showing the time varia-
tion of the vertical proﬁle of the zonal wind at the equator Ueq
(ﬁgure 6, top panel). The diﬀerence with ﬁgure 2 is striking:
Ueq shows signiﬁcant variations during the entire duration of the
simulation. These variations takes the form of quasi–periodic
oscillations of the zonal wind, with a period of about 10 days,
during the ﬁrst half of the simulation (t < 300) and are less regu-
lar, but still signiﬁcant, at later times. The zonal wind variations
are in phase from the top of the planet atmosphere down to the
inert layer below 10 bars, which is most likely a result of the
fast communication timescale across the atmosphere provided
by sound waves. The time history of Ueq at P = 50 mbars is
shown on ﬁgure 6 (bottom panel). In fact, we can distinguish
three phases of the zonal wind evolution (indicated with labels
on the upper part of both panels): “Phase I” (t = 100 to t = 170)
is a spin–up phase during which the ﬂow adjusts to the sudden
change in meridional resolution. In agreement with the results
of section 4, the zonal wind rapidly increases by about 1 km.s−1
over a period of just a few days. We call “Phase II” the period
that extends between t = 170 and t = 270. The ﬂow appears
to have reach a “quasi–steady state” over that period (see also
the top panel of the same ﬁgure that suggests that this is the
case at all levels above a few bars) and the zonal wind displays
quasi–periodic oscillations around a well–deﬁned mean value.
At 50 mbars, the zonally averaged zonal wind ﬂuctuations are
signiﬁcant and amount to almost 1 km.s−1 between its largest
and smallest values. We investigate in detail the ﬂow properties
during “Phase II” in section 5.1. At time t ∼ 270, this quasi–
periodic evolution of the wind seems to come to an end and the
mean zonal wind decreases. This is what we call “Phase III” of
the ﬂow evolution. As shown by the solid contours on ﬁgure 6
(top panel), the beginning of that phase coincides with a signiﬁ-
cant decrease of the Richardson number Ri. The latter is deﬁned
by the relation

Ri =

N2

(∂U/∂z)2 ,

(13)

where N2 stands for the Brunt–Vaisala frequency and is calcu-
lated according to

(cid:34)(cid:32) d ln T

(cid:33)

d ln P

S

(cid:32) d ln T

(cid:33)(cid:35)

d ln P

−

,

(14)

N2 =

ρg2
P

8

Fig. 6: Top: evolution of the vertical proﬁle of the zonally av-
eraged zonal wind at the equator in a time-pressure plane for
model HighRes. The horizontal dashed line marks the 50 mbars
level. The solid lines are contours of the zonally averaged
Richardson number (see text). The contours are for 0.1 (interior
contour) and 0.25 (exterior contour). Bottom: time variations of
the zonally averaged zonal wind at the equator at the pressure
level P = 50 mbars for model HighRes (see text for a discussion
of the three phases displayed on both panels).

is which the ﬁrst term inside the square bracket denotes the isen-
tropic gradient. As discussed by Showman & Guillot (2002) in
the context of hot Jupiter atmospheres and later investigated in
more details by Li & Goodman (2010), sheared ﬂow in stratiﬁed
atmospheres are prone to a vertical shear instability when Ri is
smaller than a threshold value that depends on the gas thermo-
dynamics but is of order 1/4. In our simulation, the coincidence
between the end of Phase II and the appearance of zonally aver-
aged Richardson numbers smaller than 0.1 suggests that such an
instability develops at that time and starts perturbing the ﬂow. In
section 5.2, we will investigate “Phase III” in more details and
give compelling evidences that this is indeed the case.

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Fig. 7: Color contours showing the horizontal distribution of the
zonal wind at time t = 208 (top panel) and t = 213 (bottom
panel) in model HighRes at P = 10 mbars. The arrows display
the horizontal wind vectors. Note the clear meanders of the equa-
torial jet in the bottom panel as opposed to the more zonal struc-
ture of the equatorial jet in the top panel.

5.1. A barotropic Kelvin-Helmholtz instability (phase II)
5.1.1. Equatorial jet variability
During “phase II” of model HighRes, the equatorial jet period-
ically alternates between two states, during which it is either
almost perfectly zonal in the vicinity of the equator or display
meanders (ﬁgure 7). The jet velocity increases when the jet is
zonal and slows down when the meanders amplitude saturates
and decreases. To make further progress, we next decomposed
the horizontal velocity as the sum of a time averaged component
and a ﬂuctuating part:

v(x, y, t) = v(x, y) + v(cid:48)(x, y, t) ,

(15)
where the time averaged is performed using 100 dumps evenly
spaced between t = 170 and t = 270. In the following, we will
use the notations u (resp. v) and u(cid:48) (resp. v(cid:48)) to denote the x (resp.
y) component of these velocities. Using this decomposition, we
deﬁne the speciﬁc kinetic energy of the ﬂuctuations as

EK = u(cid:48)2 + v(cid:48)2 ,

(16)
and the meridional gradient of the total vorticity of the ﬂow (in-
cluding the planetary scale vorticity associated with Ωp):

ξy =

∂ξ
∂y

= β − ∂2u
∂y2 .

(17)

Taking advantage of the barotropic nature of the ﬂow (ﬁgure 6,
top panel), we now focus on its structure at the 50 mbars pressure
level until the end of this section.

Fig. 8: Top: color contours show the rms of the eddy speciﬁc ki-
netic energy (u(cid:48)2 +v(cid:48)2) spatial distribution in the horizontal plane
at pressure level P = 50 mbars for model HighRes (during phase
II of the evolution) while arrows display the steady component of
the wind over the same time interval. The thick solid line plots
the locus of the points where the meridional gradient of total
vorticity (planet+ﬂow) vanishes. Bottom: y–proﬁle of the time-
averaged zonal velocity (during Phase II) at the vicinity of the
equator and at pressure level P = 50 mbars for model HighRes
(blue crosses) compared with a Bickney jet proﬁle (red line –
see text for details). The two vertical arrows mark the location
of vanishing meridional gradient of total vorticity.

Figure 8 (top panel) shows that the time averaged value of
the rms of EK over “Phase II” reaches values of the order of a
few hundred m.s−1 at 50 mbars in the jet core, interior to the
region where ξy vanishes, and drops rapidly as one moves out-
ward of that region. It is a well–known result of hydrodynam-
ics that the presence of two extrema in the ﬂow vorticity proﬁle
(such as shown on ﬁgure 8) is a necessary condition to desta-
bilize a two–dimensional incompressible ﬂow (see for example
Vallis 2006). Here, the ﬂow is compressible, stratiﬁed and three
dimensional, and such a simple criterion does not apply, strictly
speaking. Nevertheless, we can still expect that it remains a good
guide for linear stability because the deviations from both com-
pressibility and two–dimensionality are small. The rapid drop of
EK outside of the two locations where ξy vanishes also argues
in favor of this interpretation and strongly suggest that the jet
is subject to a Kelvin-Helmholtz instability that originates from
the velocity meridional gradient and drives the oscillations seen
during Phase II.

9

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Fig. 10: Color contours showing the horizontal spatial distribution of the zonal wind at P = 50 mbars at times indicated with red
dots on ﬁgure 9, namely t = 223.3 (left panel) and t = 224.7 (right panel). Black contours plots the meridional velocity ﬂuctuations
v’. Contours are shown every 50 m.s−1 from −100 to 100 m.s−1 on the left hand side panel and every 100 m.s−1 from −400 to 400
m.s−1 on the right hand side panel. On both panels, positive (resp. negative) contours are shown with solid (resp. dashed) lines and
the zero contour is omitted.

Fig. 11: Left: Amplitude of the meridional velocity ﬂuctuations Fourier transform ˜v(cid:48)(kx, t) in the (kx-time) plane for model HighRes,
spatially averaged over the region |y| < 5 × 107 meters. Contours are for log( ˜v(cid:48)
max/16).
The region surrounding the maximum is ﬁlled in gray. Right: Same as the left panel, but showing the time evolution of particular
modes, namely: kx = 5 (thick solid line), kx = 7 (dashed line) and kx = 9 (dotted–dashed line). The straight dashed line represents
an exponential growth with a timescale of 1 day.

max/8) and log( ˜v(cid:48)

max/2), log( ˜v(cid:48)

max/4), log( ˜v(cid:48)

5.1.2. Linear instability properties

To investigate that possibility in more details, we next focus on a
single oscillation of the jet. It is highlighted as the region shaded
in light gray in ﬁgure 6 (bottom panel). In practice, the analy-
sis that follows was conducted by restarting model HighRes at
t = 220 for about 7 days, saving the simulation data every 4000
seconds in order to sample the ﬂuid evolution at high frequency.
Figure 9 shows that the rms ﬂuctuations of v(cid:48) at the equator (solid
blue curve), initially of the order of 20 m.s−1, grows during about
3 days until they reach an amplitude of ∼ 350 m.s−1 after which
they decay in roughly one day. The spatial structure of these
ﬂuctuations is further illustrated on ﬁgure 10 using two snap-
shots that illustrate the growing (left panel) and maximum (right
panel) phases of the evolution. During the growing part (here
plotted at t = 223.3), v(cid:48) clearly displays a regular and oscillat-
ing pattern at the equator, with a well–deﬁned spatial period of

10

1/5th of the domain size, suggestive of a linear modal growth.
The background jet structure is only weakly modiﬁed during that
phase. Note that the jet velocity reaches its maximum at that
point (black curve on ﬁgure 9). By time t = 224.7, the veloc-
ity ﬂuctuations have grown signiﬁcantly and show clear signs of
saturation, as evidenced by positive and negative contours col-
liding with each other. Before looking at this saturation phase in
more details in the next paragraph, we ﬁrst quantify the proper-
ties of the fastest growing mode of the instability by performing
a spectral analysis of the ﬂow properties. This was done by com-
puting the amplitude of the Fourier coeﬃcients of v(cid:48)(x, y, t) in the
zonal direction. We then spatially averaged those coeﬃcients in
the vicinity of the planet equator and show their variations as
a function of the normalized zonal wavenumber kx and time on

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

and the most unstable wavelength satisﬁes the relation kxL jet ∼ 1
(Drazin & Reid 1981). The core of the jet in our simulations (i.e.
within the region where the vorticity is maximum) can be well
ﬁtted by the Bickney jet meridional proﬁle (see ﬁgure 8, bottom
panel) for which L jet = 2×107 meters. Given the size of our com-
putational box and the above scaling, this is consistent with the
instability having a most unstable wavenumber kx = 5, as seen
in the simulations. However, in this case, the predicted growth
rate σth is of the order of kxUB, with  ∼ 0.15. This translates
into a growth rate that is more than an order of magnitude larger
than measured in the simulation. This large disagreement illus-
trates the limit of a naive 2D reasoning and suggests that three–
dimensional eﬀects, compressibility, or the ﬁnite resolution of
our simulations likely aﬀect the ﬂow. More work is needed to
clarify the properties of the instability, and, more importantly,
the conditions under which it develops.

5.1.3. Nonlinear saturation (due to shocks?)

As mentioned above, the background jet becomes signiﬁcantly
distorted when the amplitude of the perturbations reaches large
amplitudes (see right panel of ﬁgure 10). The nonlinear inter-
action that results quickly damps the ﬂow velocity ﬂuctuations,
the jet slows down (black curve on ﬁgure 9) and return to a more
zonal structure such as shown on ﬁgure 7 (top panel). We have
found temperature ﬂuctuations of a few hundred Kelvin during
that phase (ﬁgure 12, bottom panel). They tend to be associated
with the region of the jet that displays the largest meanders (ﬁg-
ure 12, top panel). In addition, sharp features in the zonal veloc-
ity (such as seen at the location x ∼ −0.2×108 and y ∼ −0.1×108
for example) are ubiquitous in snapshots of the ﬂow during the
nonlinear stage of the instability.

For these reasons, and because of the supersonic nature of
the jet velocity, it is natural to ask whether saturation occurs via
shocks. Detecting shocks in 3D non–steady ﬂows is known to be
extremely diﬃcult to achieve in a systematic manner. Here, we
only give a couple of simple arguments that suggest that shocks
play no role in the instability saturation. First, as in section 4.2,
we computed the distribution of η given by Eq. (12). We again
found that the maximum value of η never exceeds a few percents
at 50 mbars (and, in fact, at all pressure levels). The sharp gradi-
ents mentioned above in the zonal velocity are in fact compen-
sated by regions with signiﬁcant vertical downward ﬂow. This
suggests that the nonlinear saturation of the instability is not as-
sociated with large compressive events.

A second argument is that, in the frame where the shock
would be stationary, the ﬂow is actually just about sonic. This
can be seen by plotting the equatorial meridional velocity ﬂuc-
tuations in a spacetime diagram in the (x, t) plane, also known
as an Hovm¨oller plot (see ﬁgure 13). It shows that the eastward
velocity of the growing wave pattern amounts to about 6 km.s−1
(see solid black line)3. Because the ﬂow velocity in the frame ro-
tating with the planet reaches at most 8 km.s−1 (see upper panel
of ﬁgure 12), this means that the zonal wind velocity upstream
of a putative shock would be smaller than 2 km.s−1 in the frame
in which the ﬂow structures are stationary. This is comparable
to (and in fact, slightly smaller than) the sound speed, so that
the ﬂow Mach number is at best of order unity. If shocks ex-
ist, they are only weak shocks, with upstream Mach number of
order 1 at best. More work is needed to characterize the dynam-
ical mechanism responsible for the saturation and to investigate

Fig. 9: Time evolution of the root mean square of the meridional
velocity ﬂuctuations v(cid:48) (blue curve – see text for details) and
mean jet velocity (black curve) at the equator. The red circles
indicate the diﬀerent time at which the jet structure is plotted on
ﬁgure 10.

ﬁgure 11 (left panel)2. From t = 222 to t = 224, the ﬂow evo-
lution is dominated by the kx = 5 mode. Consistent with the
idea of a linear instability, that mode grows exponentially with a
typical timescale of about 1 day (ﬁg. 11, right panel). It reaches
its maximum amplitude at t ∼ 224, shortly after higher kx modes
amplitudes also start to grow, presumably as a result of nonlinear
interactions with the kx = 5 mode. This later growth of higher kx
modes is illustrated on the right panel of ﬁgure 11 for the partic-
ular cases of the modes kx = 7 and kx = 9. At t = 225, a large
range of spatial scales , with wavenumber kx up to 15 (see left
panel of ﬁgure 11), have reached a signiﬁcant amplitude. During
the entire duration of this additional simulation, we also ﬁnd that
larger scale modes (with kx ranging from 1 to 3) have signiﬁcant
amplitudes. Their evolution, however, is quite diﬀerent from the
modes with kx ≥ 5. They do not display any signature of an ex-
ponential growth and their amplitude is modulated by no more
than a factor of two during the simulation. It is likely that these
properties reﬂect the nonlinear feedback of the instability on the
large scale structure of the equatorial jet.

To summarize, we have determined the wavenumber of the
most unstable mode of the instability (kx = 5) and its growth rate
(σ = 1 day−1 = 3.5× 10−6 s−1). In principle, these properties (as
well as the mode phase velocity, see below) could be compared
to the result of a numerical linear instability analysis. However,
for a 3D compressible ﬂow, such an analysis is tedious and be-
yond the scope of this paper. Here, we only provide a very crude
estimate of these properties based on 2D incompressible ﬂows.
A useful and well studied example of such ﬂows is the so–called
Bickney jet, for which the jet proﬁle is given by

(cid:32) y

(cid:33)

LB

U(y) = UB sech2

,

(18)

where the parameters UB and LB caraterize the jet. The Bickney
jet is known to be unstable to the Kelvin-Helmoltz instability

2 The zonal wavenumber is deﬁned such that kx = 1 corresponds to a

wavelength equal to the size of the domain in the x–direction.

3 This velocity also corresponds to the phase velocity of the linear

instability discussed above

11

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Fig. 12: Zonal velocity (top panel) and temperature (bottom
panel) at time t = 224.7 in model HighRes (i.e. when velocity
ﬂuctuations reach their maximum value) at pressure level P = 50
mbars. Jet meanders upstream of the substellar point, located at
(x, y) = (0, 0), are clearly associated with temperature ﬂuctua-
tions.

Fig. 13: Hovm¨oller space–time diagram of the meridional veloc-
ity ﬂuctuations v(cid:48) at the equator in model HighRes at pressure
level P = 50 mbars. The thin black lines have a 6 km.s−1 slope.

whether that result holds across the entire parameter space, but
the present simulation seems to rule out the presence of shocks,
at least for the set of parameters we considered.

5.2. A vertical shear instability (phase III)
The nature of the ﬂow changes during phase III of the simu-
lation. A typical snapshot of the equatorial zonal wind in the
(x, P) plane during that phase is plotted on ﬁgure 14 (left panel,
here shown at t = 319). It demonstrates that the zonal wind at
the equator displays high frequency variations in the x–direction
that seem to extend over the entire atmosphere.

5.2.1. Identiﬁcation of the instability
By-eye measurement of the oscillations spatial period (ﬁgure 14,
right panel, see the black horizontal line) gives a typical value of
about 8000–10000 km. By comparison, the most unstable mode
of the vertical shear instability has a typical wavenumber kx that
satisﬁes the relation kxH ∼ 0.5 (Li & Goodman 2010). For tem-
perature of about 1800 K such as we use here, the associated
wavelength amounts to about 11000 km, remarkably close to
our measurement. As an additional diagnostic, we plot in ﬁg-
ure 15 a spacetime diagram of the high frequency component
of the zonal wind (hereafter noted δu). The latter is calculated
by applying a high–pass ﬁlter to individual snapshots such as
shown on ﬁgure 14. To do so, we use a Hamming function with
a half width of 30 zonal cells as a low pass ﬁlter, and subtract the

low–pass ﬁltered data to the raw data. The comparison with the
Richardson number (solid contours on ﬁgure 15) shows a clear
positive correlation: at the bottom of the atmosphere (P ∼ 1–10
bars), δu displays a local maximum at pressure depth for which
Ri drops below 1/4. In addition, that maximum is larger when
Ri is smaller (see the diﬀerence between phase II and phase III
of the simulation, or the increase of δu at t ∼ 150 that is coin-
cident with a period of smaller Ri values). Taken together, these
results are consistent with the analysis of Li & Goodman (2010)
and strongly suggest that the vertical shear instability operates
at pressure levels where the Richardson number reaches zonally
averaged values smaller than 1/4.

5.2.2. Formation of shocks in the upper atmosphere

Figure 15 also shows that δu increases strongly in the atmo-
sphere upper layers, reaching values of up to a few hundred
m.s−1 at pressure levels of a few mbars. It is also clear that these
velocity ﬂuctuations are connected to the atmospheric activity at
10 bars. Future work is needed to investigate their exact origin,
but it is plausible, as recently suggested by Cho et al. (2015) in
another context, that they are gravity waves triggered by the ver-
tical shear instability that propagate upward and amplify as the
density decreases.

Because these ﬂuctuations reach large amplitudes in the up-
per atmosphere, we have closely investigated whether or not they
eventually steepen into shocks. In agreement with the ﬁndings of

12

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Fig. 14: Zonal velocity at the equator in a (x, P) plane at time t = 319 in model HighRes (left panel). Note the high frequency
variations of the velocity (particularly easy to see in the atmosphere upper layers), superposed on the large scale zonal and vertical
variation of the equatorial jet velocity. The right panel shows an enlargement of the dashed box shown on the left panel. The
horizontal bar has a length of 10000 km.

the preceding sections, the ﬂow remains devoid of such shocks
at pressures larger than ∼ 10 mbars, with η being of the order
of a few percent at most. However, we have found signatures of
weak shocks in the top layers of the atmosphere. As an example,
we show on ﬁgure 16 that the zonal wind at P = 1.66 mbars
displays large and high frequency variations near the equator,
accross which the zonal velocity appears to decrease by a few
km.s−1. These ﬂuctuations are associated with values of η up
to 35% and also display signiﬁcant increase of the temperature
by a few hundreds Kelvin (see ﬁgure 17, left panel). Given the
short radiative timescale at this pressure (∼ 104 seconds), such
signiﬁcant temperature ﬂuctuations are indications of fast dy-
namics. We thus focused on one of these structure (marked as a
dashed line of the left panels of ﬁgure 17), and plotted the pro-
ﬁles of the zonal wind and of the temperature along that line
(ﬁgure 17, right panel). There is a clear discontinuity in both
proﬁles at x ∼ 1.72 × 108m that we identify as a shock. At that
location, the zonal velocity rapidly decreases from 7 km.s−1 to
4 km.s−1 within a handful of cells. Simultaneously, the temper-
ature increases from ∼ 800 K to about 1050 K. We measured
the shock front velocity Vsh by restarting the simulation for a
short amount of time, saving output data at a high frequency. We
found for Vsh a value of the order of 3.9 km.s−1 (not shown),
which, along with a typical sound speed of 2 km.s−1 at this loca-
tion, indicate that the shock upstream Mach number is roughly
M1 ∼ 1.5. The associated temperature discontinuity shown on
ﬁgure 17 (right panel) can then be compared with the prediction
of the Rankine-Hugoniot condition:

[(γ − 1)M2

T2
T1

=

1 − (γ − 1)]

1

+ 2][2γM2
(γ + 1)2M2
1

,

(19)

where T1 and T2 are the upstream and downstream gas temper-
atures, respectively. For the case considered here (M1 = 1.5 and
γ = 1.4), Eq. (19) gives T2/T1 = 1.32, in very good agreement
with the simulation (for which the ratio is about 1.35). This con-
ﬁrms that the numerous structures identiﬁed in ﬁgure 17 (left
panel) with the contours of η are indeed shocks. We have not
attempted to quantify the frequency, Mach number distribution

Fig. 16: Zonal velocity in model HighRes at t = 335 at the pres-
sure level P = 1.66 mbars. Arrows indicate velocity vectors and
the square marks the region studied in ﬁgure 17.

and preferred locations of these shocks. Besides being a diﬃ-
cult task on its own to be carried in a systematic manner, there
are also limitations and artifacts of the present setup (see below)
that have led us to postpone a detailed characterization of these
shocks to future work.

5.2.3. Dissipation in the deep atmosphere and implications

for the interior

Figure 15 also shows a signiﬁcant increase of the temperature at
P ∼ 10 bars (see the white dashed contours) up to a temperature
of about 2400 K (which should be compared to Teq = 1800 K
at that level). Again, there is a strong correlation between that
rise and the ﬂow activity, which suggests that the former is a
consequence of the latter. This is not surprising and only a result
of small scale kinetic energy being dissipated and transformed
into heat. In RAMSES, such a thermalization is naturally cap-
tured because we solve the total energy equation and does not

13

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Fig. 15: Spacetime (time-pressure) diagram of the zonally averaged high frequency component of the zonal wind (see text for details)
in color contours (note that the color table has been saturated at 50 m.s−1). Contours of Ri (solid lines) and T (dashed lines) are
overplotted. For Ri, contours are for Ri = 0.1 and 0.25. For the temperature, contours are for T = 1900, 2000, 2100 and 2200 K.

require using explicit dissipation coeﬃcient (in that sense, the
dissipation is solely numerical in origin). At 10 bars and below,
the radiative timescale τrad goes to inﬁnity and heated gas can-
not cool radiatively anymore : in other words, heat deposited
in the inert layer as a result of kinetic energy dissipation accu-
mulates and temperature rises. As shown on ﬁgure 15, such an
increase of the temperature at 10 bars also increases the vertical
temperature gradient (in absolute value) and helps decrease the
Richardson number through its dependence on the Brunt-Vaisala
frequency. This eﬀect can be quantiﬁed by measuring the kinetic
energy ﬂux in the vertical direction. To do so, we computed the
kinetic energy ﬂux per unit area according to the relation:

(cid:34)

FKE(P) =

1

LxLy

1
2 ρv2vzdxdy ,

(20)

where the integral is calculated at the pressure level P. In both
models LowRes and HighRes, ﬁgure 18 shows that we recover
a negative vertical ﬂux of kinetic energy, in quantitative agree-
ment with Showman & Guillot (2002) and with a similar value
of about −2000 to −3000 W/m2. Note that this agreement is
somewhat fortuitous and should not be taken too seriously: in
the equatorial β–plane model such as used here, motions gradu-

14

ally go to zero away from the equator, so that FKE depends on the
arbitrary location of the boundaries in the y–direction. However,
this qualitative agreement with Showman & Guillot (2002) sup-
ports the fact that the existence of this ﬂux is robust.
Figure 18 also shows that a larger negative ﬂux is present in
the deep atmosphere (P ∼ 5–10 bars) in model HighRes than in
model LowRes, precisely at the location where we see the tem-
perature increase during Phase III. This additional ﬂux is likely
associated with the vertical shear instability and illustrates the
idea of Showman & Guillot (2002) that downward kinetic en-
ergy transport can be associated with extra heating in the deep
layers of the atmosphere. In addition to the increased kinetic en-
ergy ﬂux suggested by ﬁgure 18, turbulence in stably stratiﬁed
atmosphere also transports heat downward (Youdin & Mitchell
2010) and is likely at play here as well.

As ﬁrst recognized by Guillot & Showman (2002), such
downward energy ﬂuxes are comparable to, and even greater
than, the internal cooling ﬂux of a typical inﬂated hot Jupiter.
This mechanism—conversion of stellar energy into kinetic en-
ergy to be transported and dissipated deep in the atmosphere—is
thus still a viable explanation to the problem of the large ra-
dius of highly irradiated giant planets. The main diﬃculty—a

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Fig. 17: Left: Color contours of the zonal wind (top panel) and temperature (bottom panel) at time t = 335 in the rectangle box
depicted in ﬁgure 16. The contours shows the distribution of η, as given by Eq. (12). Levels are for η = 0.1 and 0.2. Right: Proﬁles
of the zonal velocity (black curve) and temperature (red curve) along the dashed line shown on the left panels. For both curves, the
empty squares marks the locations of the cells centers.

diﬃculty faced by most proposed mechanisms—is that this en-
ergy must be deposited deep enough inside the planet to signiﬁ-
cantly aﬀect its thermal evolution (Ginzburg & Sari 2015), possi-
bly in the deep adiabat (Guillot & Showman 2002). Depending
on the precise planet and its age, Guillot & Showman (2002)
predict this level to be in the 100–1000 bar range. Although ﬁg-
ure 18 seems to imply that not much energy is deposited below
the 10–20 bar level, it should be clear that, in our model, this
barrier is most probably an artifact of the numerical setup. As
discussed above, the presence of an inert layer below 10 bars,
where τrad becomes inﬁnite, provides a strong positive feedback
on the wave activity and the heating at this level. If we had a
more realistic, gentler increase of the radiative timescale, the
level of maximum energy deposition would probably be pushed
deeper. Indeed, we remark that ﬁgure 15 displays clear evidence
of signiﬁcant small scale activity at pressure levels of a few
bars, i.e. largely above the inert layers, early in the simulation
(t < 300 days). This is suggestive evidence that an inﬁnite ra-
diative timescale is not needed to trigger the vertical shear in-
stability. But we cannot yet assess the maximum depth at which
energy deposition will occur.

Therefore, while our model illustrates the possibility that
vertical shear instability can develop in hot Jupiter atmospheres,
their long–term eﬀect on the ﬂow remains to be determined
with a more realistic treatment of the radiative properties of the
deep atmosphere. Only then will we be able to properly quantify
whether the mechanism ﬁrst proposed by Guillot & Showman
(2002) can realistically account for the inﬂated radius of strongly
irradiated giant planets.

Before ending this section, and with the above caveats in
mind, we stress that the eﬀect of the vertical shear instability
on the equatorial jet velocity is signiﬁcant. While its time av-
eraged value over phase II of the ﬂow evolution is about 7700
m.s−1 at 50 mbars, the equatorial wind goes down to 6700 m.s−1
when averaged between t = 400 and t = 450. We have check
that the spatial distribution of the temperature above 1 bar is al-
most identical during the two phases (not shown) and can not be
incriminated for the jet velocity decrease. Rather, it is likely that

Fig. 18: Vertical proﬁle of the kinetic energy ﬂux during Phase
III of model HighRes (green curve) and in model LowRes (blue
curve), calculated according to Eq. (20). The dashed line marks
the location of the top of the inert layer at 10 bars. Both curves
are time averaged between t = 350 and t = 450.

the small scale velocity ﬂuctuations associated with the verti-
cal shear instability act as a form of drag that slows down the
jet, possibly mediated by gravity waves (see Watkins & Cho
2010) and, as shown above, by shocks, both excited by the verti-
cal shear instability. Given the limitations of the numerical setup
used here, a detailed and quantitative investigation of that possi-
bility is beyond the scope of this paper but opens up the possi-
bility for developing a physically motivated subgrid scale model
for the dissipation in the atmosphere of hot Jupiter that could be
incorporated in traditional GCMs.

15

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

6. Discussion and conclusion

6.1. Main results

Using a series of high resolution idealized simulations of hot–
Jupiters atmospheres that solve the Euler equations with a ﬁnite
volume shock-capturing scheme, we have found the following
results:
• Numerical simulations performed in the framework of the
equatorial β–plane model are in good agreement with results
published in the literature using a wide range of models and
elaborate treatments of the radiative eﬀects.
• A supersonic, equatorial, eastward jet forms quickly in the
upper layers of the atmosphere. At P ∼ 50 mbars, its zonally
averaged velocity reaches about ∼ 7 km.s−1 and is found to be
sensitive to the meridional resolution (or, equivalently, to the
dissipation).
• At large enough spatial resolution (or low enough dissipa-
tion), the jet displays large velocity ﬂuctuations that can be
attributed to meanders upward of ∼ 1 bars and smaller scale
ﬂuctuations with an amplitude of a few tens of m.s−1 at pres-
sure levels P ∼ 1–10 bars.
• The meanders are clearly associated with a barotropic Kelvin-
Helmholtz instability that results in quasi–periodic modula-
tions of the jet velocity with a typical period of ∼ 10 days. The
properties of the ﬂow are broadly consistent with the expec-
tations of linear stability analysis. Temperature ﬂuctuations
of a few hundred Kelvins are found at the photosphere of the
planet at the peak of the instability, most likely a result of adia-
batic compression associated with the equatorial jet meanders.
Future work is needed to determine whether these variations
are compatible with the observed upper limit of 2.7% of the
dayside variability of HD189733b (Agol et al. 2010; Knutson
et al. 2012) and whether they could be observable with the
JWST using brightness mapping such as discussed by de Wit
et al. (2012).
• The smaller scales ﬂuctuations are likely associated with a
vertical shear instability. They correlate nicely with the loca-
tions where the Richardson number is smaller than 1/4. They
create zonal variations of the jet velocity with a spatial scale
of ∼ 104 km that is consistent with the most unstable mode
predicted by a linear analysis (Li & Goodman 2010).
• The dissipation of the kinetic energy associated to the ver-
tical shear instability results in a substantial increase of the
temperature at P ∼ 10 bars. This thus conﬁrms that the atmo-
sphere converts stellar energy into kinetic energy that is trans-
ported downward to be deposited at deeper levels (Showman
& Guillot 2002). A better treatment of the lower bound-
ary is needed to know whether the deposition level can be
deep enough to aﬀect the interior and help explain the radius
anomaly (Guillot & Showman 2002).
• We ﬁnd weak shocks in the upper layers of the atmosphere
(P < 10 mbars). They have typical upstream Mach numbers
between 1 and 2 and create temperature ﬂuctuations of a few
hundreds Kelvins. At larger pressure (P > 10 mbars), we ﬁnd
no shocks despite the supersonic nature of the equatorial jet.

6.2. Limitations and future work

These results should not hide the limitations of the work pre-
sented here that are as many avenues for progress. As noted in
section 2, the model depends on a number of free parameters.
The motivation of the present paper was to choose a unique set
of these parameters so that the ﬂow properties matches that of the

16

benchmark calculation described by Heng et al. (2011b). Even if
the dynamical mechanisms responsible for the instabilities high-
lighted here are fairly general, future work is needed to investi-
gate systematically the sensitivity of the results presented here
to each of these parameters and to make quantitative predictions
that would be valuable for more realistic atmospheres. For ex-
ample, we note that the zonal wind velocity we obtained tends
to be larger than commonly found by other authors. Is it because
we work in the framework of the equatorial β–plane model? Or
is it related to the form of the thermal forcing we use, and in
particular to the value of Lth? Another question is that of conver-
gence with spatial resolution: it is possible (and even likely!) that
numerical dissipation is still aﬀecting the instabilities described
in section 5.1 and 5.2. This may aﬀect their saturation properties
and their quantitave eﬀect of the mean ﬂow, and particularly on
the velocity of the jet. The present work shows that a proper con-
vergence study (systematically varying both the meridional and
the vertical resolution)—even though it is very computationally
demanding—is deﬁnitely needed.

Perhaps the most stringent limitation of the present work
comes from the presence of an “inert” layer below 10 bars where
the radiative timescale τrad goes to inﬁnity. The large tempera-
ture increase we see at this location is probably overestimated
because of the inability of the gas to cool radiatively. This prob-
lem may be somewhat mitigated upon noting that τrad is ex-
pected to increase rapidly in the deep layers of hot Jupiters atmo-
spheres (P ≤ 10–100 bars). For example, Showman et al. (2008)
use τrad = 108 seconds at 20 bars. This is more than 300 planet
days and much faster than the timescale of a few days that is as-
sociated with the vertical shear instability (see ﬁg. 15), so that the
eﬀect of choosing an inﬁnite value for τrad may not be as severe
as naively expected. Nevertheless, it is clear that a large temper-
ature increase such as found here acts as a positive feedback onto
the vertical shear instability by reducing the Richardson number
Ri. Whether or not it aﬀects the ﬁndings presented in this paper,
and how much, remains to be clariﬁed. One possibility to do so
is to replace the Newtonian relaxation scheme with a simpliﬁed
radiative transfer scheme (Heng et al. 2011a; Rauscher & Menou
2012). This may alleviate that problem in the deep atmosphere.
The need to strengthen these results is made even more im-
portant because standard GCM codes that use the primitive for-
mulation of the hydrodynamic equations are unable to account
for such vertical shear instabilities. By assuming hydrostatic
equilibrium in the vertical direction, they assume de facto that
such an instability does not exist. Instead, they rely on subgrid
scale modelling to include their eﬀect on the ﬂow. Future work is
therefore needed to validate these subgrid models and/or develop
more appropriate approaches if necessary. This is an important
step to validate the long–term use of such codes as the primary
tool to model hot Jupiter atmospheric ﬂows.

Appendix A: Equilibrium temperature and cooling

timescale

We give here for reference the pressure proﬁles of T 0
P and τrad
that we have used in this paper. They are a simpliﬁed version
of the proﬁles presented by Heng et al. (2011b). The thermal
timescale τrad is calculated with the following relation:

if P < P0
if P0 < P < P1
if P > P1

,

(A.1)

 τ0 (P0/P)α0

τ1 (P1/P)α1
+∞

τrad =

where P0 = 1 bar, P1 = 10 bars, τ0 = 105 and τ1 = 107.5
seconds. The dimensionless exponent α0 and α1 respectively

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Fig. B.1: Initial (i.e. at t = 0) zonally averaged zonal wind
used for the baroclinic instability simulations (colors and white
contours). The black contour show the zonally averaged zonal
wind at the end of the simulation for the model with resolu-
tion (Nx, Ny, Nz) = (256, 128, 32). Contours are drawn every 100
m.s−1 from 100 to 900 m.s−1.

Fig. B.2: Time evolution of the volume integrated eddy kinetic
energy (per unit area) in the baroclinic instability test. The
solid and dotted lines both share the resolution (Nx, Ny, Nz) =
(256, 128, 32) and corresponds to the model with and with-
out an initial temperature perturbation, respectively. The dashed
and dotted–dashed lines shows the results of the models with
resolution (Nx, Ny, Nz) = (128, 64, 32) and (Nx, Ny, Nz) =
(512, 256, 32), respectively.

accurately atmospheric ﬂows because it grows slowly from in-
ﬁnitesimal perturbations. This is even more so for ﬁnite volume
codes such as RAMSES that have problems handling hydro-
static equilibria, and we found that problem to be very help-
ful in assessing the robustness of our setup. In this appendix,
we thus qualitatively reproduce one of the model presented by
Polichtchouk & Cho (2012), namely their equatorial jet case,
since the base ﬂow is close to the jet conﬁguration studied in the
present paper. As noted by Polichtchouk et al. (2014), the de-
tailed evolution of the atmosphere is very sensitive to the exact

17

Fig. A.1: Pressure variations of the equilibrium temperature Teq
(top panel) and the Newtonian relaxation time τrad (bottom
panel) used to calculate the cooling function L in the deep hot
Jupiter model presented in this paper.

amounts to −0.41 and −2.5. Likewise, T 0
bination of linear functions of the logarithm of the pressure:

P is given as a com-

 T−2 − γ−2 log (P−2/P) if P < P−2

T1 − γ1 log (P1/P)
T2 − γ2 (P2/P)

if P−2 < P < P1
if P > P1

Tiro =

,

(A.2)

where P−2 = 10−2 bar and T−2, T1 and T2 are respectively set
to 1100, 1800 and 3000 K. The slopes of the linear relations
are given by γ−2 = 100 K, γ1 = 233 K and γ2 = 983 K. The
relation between τrad and P and between T 0
P and P are shown
in ﬁgure A.1 where we also display the variation of Tday and
Tnight such as deﬁned in section 2.2. All curves are meant to be
compared with, for example, ﬁgure 7 of Heng et al. (2011b) with
which they are in good agreement.

Appendix B: Numerical tests
B.1. Baroclinic instability in an adiabatic atmosphere
As argued by Polichtchouk et al. (2014), the growth of a baro-
clinic wave is a severe test for codes that pretend to describe

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

& Cho (2012):

u(x, y) =

(cid:114)

(cid:20)

sin

U0G(z)
(cid:34)

0 ,

π sin2

π
2

(cid:18)
(cid:32) z − zJ

∆zJ

(cid:19)(cid:21)

,

4y+Ly
2Ly

(cid:33)(cid:35)

(cid:32)

π

sin

|y| < Ly/4
otherwise
(cid:33)

z
Lz

.

where G is deﬁned as:

G(z) =

1 − tanh3

1
2

Fig. B.3: Relative vorticity (top panel) and temperature (bottom
panel) distribution in the horizontal plane at 930 mbars, at time
t = 32 showing the development of a baroclinic wave that grows
on top of a zonal equatorial jet. The parameters are chosen after
Polichtchouk & Cho (2012) and the resolution is (Nx, Ny, Nz) =
(256, 128, 32).

The previous relations depend on a number of free parameters.
In this appendix, we use zJ = 0.8Lz, ∆zJ = 0.2Lz, U0 = 1000
m.s−1 and Lz = 2 × 106 m.s−1. The initial structure of the jet is
shown on ﬁgure B.1 and resembles that shown on their ﬁgure
4 (right panel) by Polichtchouk & Cho (2012) . Next, a local-
ized temperature perturbation of amplitude δT0 is added at all
pressure levels in the atmosphere. It takes the form:
4y − Ly
2Ly

δT(x, y) = δT0 sech2

(cid:32)6πx

sech2

(B.1)

(cid:33)

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

π
3

Lx

,

so that it is localized initially at x = 0 and y = Ly/4, i.e. on the
jet northern ﬂank.

We ﬁrst present and contrast the results of two simulations
with resolution (Nx, Ny, Nz) = (256, 128, 32) and for which we
respectively set δT0 = 0 (control run) and 1 K (perturbed run).
We computed the volume integral of the speciﬁc eddy kinetic
energy (EKE) as a diagnostic of the baroclinic instability growth:

(cid:90)

(cid:104)

u(cid:48)2 + v(cid:48)2(cid:105)

EKE =

ρ

V

dV .

(B.2)

As described by Polichtchouk & Cho (2012), the speciﬁc EKE
grows after a few days in the perturbed case (see ﬁgure B.2) as
a result of a baroclinic wave but stays very small in the control
run during the entire simulation. In fact, the speciﬁc EKE re-
mains at the level of 10−10 J/m−2 (i.e. 17 orders of magnitude
smaller than the perturbed model after the growth of the baro-
clinic wave!), indicating that our numerical scheme accurately
conserves the symmetry of the ﬂow and the initial atmospheric
hydrostatic equilibrium (the maximum meridional velocity at the
end of that run at 975 mbars is only of the order of 8 cm.s−1!).
In the perturbed run, the speciﬁc EKE peaks between t = 30 and
t = 35. The ﬂow at 975 mbars shows ﬁve well deﬁned cyclones
that roll on both sides of the jet (see ﬁgure B.3), clearly corre-
lated with temperature ﬂuctuations. This is again in very good
qualitative agreement with the results of Polichtchouk & Cho
(2012). We note that the number of cyclones and the amplitude
of the vorticity perturbations they display is also in good quan-
titative agreement with those results. Finally, after a few tens of
days, the speciﬁc EKE saturates and decays. At the end of the
model evolution, the equatorial jet structure is modiﬁed and dis-
plays a vertical structure that is more barotropic (see ﬁgure B.1,
black contours), in agreement with the ﬁnding of Polichtchouk
& Cho (2012).

We have also performed a resolution study, keeping the num-
ber of vertical levels ﬁxed to Nz = 32, and gradually varying the
horizontal resolution from (Nx, Ny) = (128, 64) to (Nx, Ny) =
(512, 256), although the highest resolution simulation is only in-
tegrated to t = 45. The vorticity distribution at 975 mbars (see
ﬁgure B.4) shows that the minimum resolution required to cap-
ture the instability is (Nx, Ny) = (256, 128) and that the structure
of the ﬂow is qualitatively captured at that resolution, although
quantitatively, ﬁgure B.2 shows that the growth rate is not con-
verged yet. This resolution study gives a useful comparison with

Fig. B.4: Relative vorticity at 930 mbars at time t = 32 for the
baroclinic instability growth with resolution (Nx, Ny) = (128, 64)
(top panel) and (Nx, Ny) = (512, 128) (bottom panel).

structure of the jet and the initial perturbation, so that our goal
here is not to reproduce quantitatively the results of Polichtchouk
& Cho (2012), but rather to show that we obtain the same qual-
itative evolution of the ﬂow. Indeed, since we neither use the
same equations (Euler vs. primitive) nor the same geometry
(cartesian vs. spherical), a one to one quantitative comparison
is not possible.

The structure of the atmosphere at t = 0 is computed as-
suming thermal wind balance after having speciﬁed the jet zonal
velocity. The latter is computed using the following relation,
adapted to the equatorial β–plane geometry from Polichtchouk

18

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

Parameters

Symbol

Box vertical size (m)

Pressure at bottom boundary (Pa)

Day-night temperature diﬀerence (K)

Cooling time scale (sec)

Cut–oﬀ length of cooling function (m)
Temperature at bottom boundary (K)

Tropospheric lapse rate (K.m−1)

Tropopause temperature increment (K)

Tropopause pressure (Pa)

Lz
P0
∆T
τrad
Lth
Tsurf
Γtrop
δTstra
σstra

Value
3 × 106
105
300

1.5 × 105
3.5 × 107
1600
2 × 10−4
1.25 × 104

10

Table B.1: Parameters used for the shallow hot Jupiter model.

the analysis of Polichtchouk & Cho (2012) who used a spec-
tral numerical scheme and somewhat mitigate their claim that
ﬁnite diﬀerence shemes require resolution larger by an order of
magnitude to capture the growth of the baroclinic wave. Here, it
appears that a diﬀerence of about a factor of two is suﬃcient.

Overall, the results presented here are in good qualitative
agreement with the results of Polichtchouk & Cho (2012) and
Polichtchouk et al. (2014) and give credit to our implemantation.

B.2. A shallow hot Jupiter model
We next reproduce the benchmark simulation of a shallow hot
Jupiter, such as presented by Menou & Rauscher (2009), Heng
et al. (2011b), Bending et al. (2013) and Mayne et al. (2014a).
As for the case of the baroclinic instability presented above, we
have adapted the setup described by these authors to the equa-
torial β–plane. It diﬀers from the deep hot Jupiter model by the
depth of the atmosphere, which extends downward only to 1 bar,
and by the parameters entering in the cooling function L. More
speciﬁcally, τrad is a constant equal to half a planet day and Teq
is given by the function:

− y2

2L2
th

 ,

(cid:32)2πx
(cid:33)
(cid:19)

Lx

Teq = T perp + βtrop∆T cos

exp

(cid:18)

where T perp and βtrop depend on z according to
(cid:115)
T perp = Tsurf − Γtrop

z − zstra

zstra +

(cid:33)2

(cid:32) Γtrop
(cid:16) π

2

σ−σstra
1−σstra

2

2
[z − zstra]
(cid:17)

,

if z < zstra
otherwise.

+

and

δT 2
stra

+

sin

0 ,

βtrop =

(B.3)

Fig. B.5: Zonally averaged zonal wind (top panel) and tempera-
ture (bottom panel) in the shallow hot Jupiter model. The raw
simulation data are averaged over 200 planet days starting at
t = 100. See text and table B.1 for the model parameters.

(B.4)

(B.5)

The diﬀerent parameters of the problem are taken identical to
the original papers mentioned above and are recalled for com-
pletness in table B.1. In our case, we also need to specify the
location of the upper boundary of the domain, which we take
to be Lz = 3 × 106 meters, while we retain for Lx and Ly the
same values as for the deep model described in section 2.4. Lth
and β also take values identical to those of the main body of the
paper. We start our simulation with an atmosphere initially at
rest and in hydrostatic equilibrium with T = Tperp. We integrate
the hydrodynamics equations for 300 planet days, of which the
last 200 days are used to produce time averaged ﬁelds. The grid
resolution is chosen to be (Nx, Ny, Nz) = (64, 32, 24).

As for the deep hot Jupiter model described in section 3, we
ﬁnd that a fast equatorial wind develops with typical amplitude

Fig. B.6: Temperature (color contours) and wind velocities at the
750 mbars pressure level in the shallow hot Jupiter model, aver-
aged in time over 200 planet days starting at t = 100.

of 1000 m.s−1. Here, however, the ﬂow display signiﬁcant ﬂuc-
tuations with typical wind velocity ﬂuctuations of a few tens of
m.s−1 (not shown). These ﬂuctuations have also been reported by
previous authors and likely result from the interaction between
the atmosphere and the bottom domain boundary. The time aver-
aged spatial distributions of the zonally averaged zonal wind and
temperature are both in good agreement with the papers men-

19

S.Fromang et al.: Hot jupiter atmosphere variability

tionned above (see ﬁgure B.5). Likewise, the temperature distri-
bution at 750 mbars display the familiar chevron–like shape that
has been identiﬁed as the consequence of planetary scale waves
by Showman & Polvani (2010, 2011).

The good agreement of our results with previously published
simulations of shallow hot Jupiter atmospheres demonstrate that
the equatorial β plane model is appropriate for the study of
slowly rotating tidally locked gas giant planet.

Watkins, C. & Cho, J. Y.-K. 2010, ApJ, 714, 904
Youdin, A. N. & Mitchell, J. L. 2010, ApJ, 721, 1113
Zhu, Z., Stone, J. M., & Raﬁkov, R. R. 2013, ApJ, 768, 143

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
SF research is funded by the European Research Council
under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) / ERC Grant agreement n 258729. SF ac-
knowledges the hospitality of
for
Theoretical Physics, Santa Barbara, where some of this work
was completed during the program ”Wave–ﬂow interaction in
Geophysics, climate, astrophysics and plasmas” as well as en-
lightening discussions with Gwendal Rivi`ere.

Institute of

the Kavli

References
Agol, E., Cowan, N. B., Knutson, H. A., et al. 2010, ApJ, 721, 1861
Baraﬀe, I., Chabrier, G., & Barman, T. 2010, Reports on Progress in Physics, 73,

016901

Bending, V. L., Lewis, S. R., & Kolb, U. 2013, MNRAS, 428, 2874
Cho, J. Y.-K., Menou, K., Hansen, B. M. S., & Seager, S. 2008, ApJ, 675, 817
Cho, J. Y.-K., Polichtchouk, I., & Thrastarson, H. T. 2015, ArXiv e-prints
de Wit, J., Gillon, M., Demory, B.-O., & Seager, S. 2012, A&A, 548, A128
Dobbs-Dixon, I., Cumming, A., & Lin, D. N. C. 2010, ApJ, 710, 1395
Dobbs-Dixon, I. & Lin, D. N. C. 2008, ApJ, 673, 513
Drazin, P. G. & Reid, W. H. 1981, NASA STI/Recon Technical Report A, 82
Ginzburg, S. & Sari, R. 2015, ApJ, 803, 111
Goodman, J. 2009, ApJ, 693, 1645
Guillot, T. & Showman, A. P. 2002, A&A, 385, 156
Heng, K. 2012, ApJ, 761, L1
Heng, K., Frierson, D. M. W., & Phillipps, P. J. 2011a, MNRAS, 418, 2669
Heng, K., Menou, K., & Phillipps, P. J. 2011b, MNRAS, 413, 2380
Heng, K. & Showman, A. P. 2015, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary

Sciences, 43, 509

Heng, K. & Workman, J. 2014, ApJS, 213, 27
K¨appeli, R. & Mishra, S. 2014, Journal of Computational Physics, 259, 199
Knutson, H. A., Charbonneau, D., Allen, L. E., et al. 2007, Nature, 447, 183
Knutson, H. A., Lewis, N., Fortney, J. J., et al. 2012, ApJ, 754, 22
LeVeque, R. J. 1998, Journal of Computational Physics, 146, 346
Li, J. & Goodman, J. 2010, ApJ, 725, 1146
Liu, B. & Showman, A. P. 2013, ApJ, 770, 42
Madhusudhan, N., Knutson, H., Fortney, J. J., & Barman, T. 2014, Protostars

Mayne, N. J., Baraﬀe, I., Acreman, D. M., et al. 2014a, A&A, 561, A1
Mayne, N. J., Baraﬀe, I., Acreman, D. M., et al. 2014b, Geoscientiﬁc Model

and Planets VI, 739

Development, 7, 3059

Menou, K., Cho, J. Y.-K., Seager, S., & Hansen, B. M. S. 2003, ApJ, 587, L113
Menou, K. & Rauscher, E. 2009, ApJ, 700, 887
Perez-Becker, D. & Showman, A. P. 2013, ApJ, 776, 134
Polichtchouk, I. & Cho, J. Y.-K. 2012, MNRAS, 424, 1307
Polichtchouk, I., Cho, J. Y.-K., Watkins, C., et al. 2014, Icarus, 229, 355
Rauscher, E. & Menou, K. 2010, ApJ, 714, 1334
Rauscher, E. & Menou, K. 2012, ApJ, 750, 96
Showman, A. P., Cooper, C. S., Fortney, J. J., & Marley, M. S. 2008, ApJ, 682,

Showman, A. P., Fortney, J. J., Lian, Y., et al. 2009, ApJ, 699, 564
Showman, A. P. & Guillot, T. 2002, A&A, 385, 166
Showman, A. P. & Polvani, L. M. 2010, Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, 18811
Showman, A. P. & Polvani, L. M. 2011, ApJ, 738, 71
Snellen, I. A. G., de Kok, R. J., de Mooij, E. J. W., & Albrecht, S. 2010, Nature,

Teyssier, R. 2002, A&A, 385, 337
Thrastarson, H. T. & Cho, J. Y. 2010, ApJ, 716, 144
Toro, E. 1997, Riemann solvers and numerical methods for ﬂuid dynamics

559

465, 1049

(Springer)

20

Tsai, S.-M., Dobbs-Dixon, I., & Gu, P.-G. 2014, ApJ, 793, 141
Vallis, G. K. 2006, Atmospheric and Oceanic Fluid Dynamics

