Electromagnetic counterparts to gravitational waves from black hole mergers and

naked singularities

Daniele Malafarina∗

Department of Physics, Nazarbayev University, 010000 Astana, Kazakhstan

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Homi Bhabha Road, Colaba, Mumbai 400005, India

(Dated: March 10, 2016)

Pankaj S. Joshi†

We consider the question here whether the proposed electromagnetic counterpart of the gravitational wave
signals in binary black hole coalescence may be due to the appearance of a ‘short lived’ naked singularity during
the merger. We point out that the change in topology that the spacetime undergoes during the merger can cause
the appearance of a naked singularity. In case some matter, in the form of a small accretion disk, is present in the
surroundings of the black hole system then the emitted luminosity during the merger would allow to distinguish
the scenario where the naked singularity forms from the scenario where the horizon exists at all times. In fact
the emitted luminosity spectrum would be much higher in the case where a naked singularity forms as opposed
to the ‘pure’ black hole case. We suggest that the presence of such a transient naked singularity will explain the
high luminosity of an electromagnetic counterpart during the merger much more easily.

PACS numbers: 04.20.Dw, 04.20.Jb, 04.70.Bw

I.

INTRODUCTION

the original objects.

The recent claim by the LIGO collaboration of the detec-
tion of gravitational waves from a black hole binary merger
(GW150914) [1] was soon accompanied by the claim by the
FERMI collaboration of the detection of a possible electro-
magnetic counterpart [2].

However, if two black hole horizons were to merge in vac-
uum then no such emission of electromagnetic waves should
be allowed. One possible explanation of the electromagnetic
counterpart (if conﬁrmed) is given by the existence of an
accretion disk surrounding the binary system [3]. The pro-
posed mechanism here is very similar to the standard collap-
sar model. It was suggested by [4] how to possibly explain
the short duration of the observed gamma ray burst if little
amount of matter should be present in the disk.

In the present paper our purpose is to suggest another possi-
ble explanation for the existence of electromagnetic counter-
parts to gravitational waves detected from binary black hole
mergers. These may occur due to the change of topology of
the spacetime that accompanies the black hole merger, and
which results in the formation of a ‘short lived’ naked sin-
gularity. In fact, if the black hole merger and the topology
change that accompanies such an event gives rise to a naked
singularity, may be for limited but short time, then the ac-
cretion disk around the same could in principle emit electro-
magnetic radiation much more efﬁciently than the black hole
case, and would explain such high radiative powers. Also, the
strong negative pressures that could appear close to the naked
singularity, which is a quantum object that is classically de-
scribed by the spacetime singularity, which are due to quan-
tum effects, may allow for the ejection of part of the mass of

∗Electronic address: daniele.malafarina@nu.edu.kz
†Electronic address: psj@tifr.res.in

We note that any accretion disk surrounding a binary black
hole merger, such as the ones considered in [3] and [6], would
have an accretion power determined by the presence of the
horizon and the existence of an innermost stable circular or-
bit (ISCO). On the other hand, the appearance of a transient
naked singularity and any small accretion disk around the
same would give away a much higher luminosity more efﬁ-
ciently than the corresponding situation in which a black hole
horizon exists at all times. The measured luminosity spectrum
could then be used as a possible observational test to constrain
such hypothesis.

It was Wheeler who suggested that singularities in solutions
of Einstein’s equations may indicate a window on quantum-
gravitational effects [7]. It has been known for a long time
that topology changes in a spacetime manifold are linked to
causality violations and/or singularities [8], and that singular-
ities generically occur as a result of such topology changes
[9]. Furthermore it was shown in [10] that topology change
in a spacetime implies the occurrence of a naked singularity.
Therefore, if a singularity that is not covered by a horizon
should form during a process that leads to change in the topol-
ogy of the spacetime, then some quantum effects occurring in
its vicinity could in principle have a detectable observational
signature and implication. A binary black hole merger is a
typical situation in which such topology change would occur.
Then if a naked singularity forms for a limited time during the
merger, it is possible that quantum effects arising in the strong
ﬁeld region when the system is not covered behind a horizon,
may have observational consequences. Also, from an observa-
tional perspective, the comparison between the properties of
accretion disks around black holes and naked singularities was
studied in [11]. There it was seen that the emission spectra are
signiﬁcantly different for these objects, the naked singularity
accretion disk being much more effective radiator, and also
therefore they are in principle observationally distinguishable
from each other.

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
9

 

 
 
]
c
q
-
r
g
[
 
 

1
v
8
4
8
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The paper is organized as follows. In section II we review
the basic features of changes in topology of a spacetime in
connection with naked singularities and we discuss the im-
plications of such changes for the coalescence of two black
holes. In section III we outline how the emission of radia-
tion, when an accretion disk is present near a naked singularity
in the system can help explain the proposed electromagnetic
counterpart to GW150914. Finally comments and remarks are
presented in section IV.

II. TOPOLOGY CHANGE, NAKED SINGULARITIES AND

BLACK HOLE MERGERS

It was Geroch who showed that any spacetime containing
two spacelike hypersurfaces with different topologies must
have either closed timelike curves or singularities [8]. The
argument was reﬁned by Tipler who showed that by impos-
ing the weak energy condition it is possible to ensure that
there cannot be any topology change without the presence
of a spacetime singularity [9]. The visibility or otherwise of
such singularities was then investigated in connection with the
Cosmic Censorship Hypothesis, and one of us showed that
naked singularities in terms of past incomplete nonspacelike
geodesics do arise as a consequence of topology change [10].
There are several approaches that one can adopt in order
to interpret such singularities. For example, topology change
can be viewed as a purely classical phenomenon provided one
allows to extend general relativity to include degenerate met-
rics, and therefore the singularities associated with them can
be considered to be in some sense ‘mild’ [12]. On the other
hand, a very powerful and fruitful idea is to interpret the sin-
gularities that arise in classical GR as an indication of break-
down of the theory and therefore use them as milestones to-
wards a viable theory of quantum gravity. A fully quantum-
gravitational approach should take care of such singularities,
removing the undesired inﬁnities without breaking the causal
structure of the manifold. Nevertheless, even without a full
theory of quantum-gravity, one can use a semi-classical ap-
proach to quantum corrections to show how these would af-
fect the strong ﬁeld regime by using purely classical tools, i.e.
by solving the usual Einstein ﬁeld equations (see for example
[13]).

Then, if naked singularities can be viewed as a window on
quantum-gravity, the appearance of one in the merger of two
black holes may possibly produce a powerful explosive phe-
nomenon (such as a GRB) whose nature would be intrinsically
quantum-gravitational. Such an event would be a cosmic lab-
oratory where one could observe and test quantum-gravity.

The coalescence of two black holes is a typical situation in
which a topology change occurs. A binary black hole sys-
tem is characterized by an initial topology of two disjoint
event horizon hypersurfaces, and the ﬁnal topology (after the
merger) is a single null hypersurface which is the resultant
event horizon of the merged black hole. In the simplest case
of two Schwarzschild black holes merging, the initial topol-
ogy is that of two disjoint circles evolving, and ﬁnal topology
is given by S 2 × R. Then if a naked singularity were to form

2

during the merger event, a window would open on the ultra-
high density compact object located at the point of merger.
For example, overspinning of a Kerr solution could provide
a mechanism for the formation of a naked singularity. Note
that this process would seem to violate the black hole area
theorem. This is consistent with fact that the black hole area
theorem assumes that the spacetime is weakly asymptotically
simple and empty, which is cosmic censorship assumption,
that is violated at the time of the merger due to the topology
change. In other words, for the black hole area theorem to
hold one must assume that cosmic censorship is valid. On the
other hand a violation of cosmic censorship, as in the case il-
lustrated here, allows for the area theorem not to hold, at least
temporarily.

In this connection, a speciﬁc possibility that may occur is,
when two Kerr black holes of spin very close to unity collide
and merge, then at least momentarily a Kerr geometry with
a > 1 could develop (where a is the adimensional spin param-
eter given by a = J/M ). This would then eventually settle to
a Kerr black hole by radiating away a sufﬁcient amount of an-
gular momentum through a suitable mechanism. Such a sce-
nario would be entirely consistent with the topology change
theorems mentioned above.

Whether it is possible to create a Kerr solution with spin
parameter greater than one is one of the key unanswered ques-
tions of black hole physics today. Several astrophysical black
hole candidates are known with spin parameter close to unity.
Is it possible to add enough angular momentum to such ob-
jects in order to destroy the event horizon? In [14] it was sug-
gested that infalling test particles carrying angular momen-
tum can indeed overspin a nearly extremal Kerr black hole
and turn it into a naked singularity. On the other hand in [15]
it was shown that the inclusion of the gravitational self-force
could prevent the above scenario from happening. All these
examples involve test particles carrying angular momentum
and are restricted by simplifying assumptions on the initial
set up. A completely different scenario is that of the merger
of two black holes of comparable size, both carrying angu-
lar momentum and with an arbitrary initial conﬁguration. The
merger of two such black holes would have to carry away most
of the excess angular momentum for the ﬁnal conﬁguration to
settle to a Kerr solution with a < 1. Simulations have shown
that the merger of two black holes can carry away enough
angular momentum to respect the Kerr bound [16]. However,
there are several parameters that come into play when describ-
ing a merger in full and one cannot exclude at present that an
intermediate nakedly singular phase can form from some ini-
tial conﬁgurations (see Figure 1), as suggested by the topology
change considerations.

We should also recall here that the ringdown phase in the
detected GW150914 event should not be necessarily taken
as a strong indication of the formation of the event horizon
necessarily, as the same signal may be obtained by a small
ringed compact object (see [17]). Therefore it is worth ask-
ing the question whether a binary merger such as that asso-
ciated with GW150914 could produce a transient quantum-
gravitational phenomenon, in which the central object, classi-
cally described by a naked singularity, is not covered by the

horizon for a short ﬁnite time. Allowing for this possibility,
we are now interested in investigating what kind of electro-

magnetic signal could come from vicinity of such an object.

3

t4

t3

t2

t1

t

r

t4

t3

t2

t1

FIG. 1: Qualitative depiction of the merger of two black holes with formation of a transient naked singularity. On both panels, at the time
t = t1 the black holes are separated. Thick lines represent the horizons and dotted lines the central singularities. At the time t = t2 the two
horizons merged into a single horizon, the singularities are still separated. At the time t = t3 the singularities merge forming a temporary
overspinning Kerr spacetime. There is no horizon. After t = t3 the excess angular momentum is radiated away and the system settles to a
Kerr black hole, as at the time t = t4.

III. ACCRETION ONTO A NAKED SINGULARITY

as

In the observed GW150914 the merger carried away an es-
timate of three solar masses in gravitational waves.
In the
case where the singularities of the colliding black holes are
hidden behind the horizon at all times this amount of energy
cannot come from the irreducible mass of the black holes that
is possibly concentrated in the singularity. The energy radi-
ated away in gravitational waves must come from the bind-
ing energy of the system, loss of angular momentum and/or
from the matter in the accretion disk. Accretion disks around
black hole candidates are known for being not very massive,
typically of the order of 0.1M⊙, and therefore the amount of
energy that they could provide is not enough. Further to this,
for a binary system like the one that originated GW150914 the
surrounding medium is expected to be almost entirely devoid
of matter. On the other hand, as we shall see below, a naked
singularity is a much more efﬁcient engine to convert the grav-
itational energy of the infalling particles into radiation. The
repulsive forces that may occur near the singularity as a result
of quantum effects could also possibly strip some mass away
from the central object to eject it in the surrounding medium,
thus providing a source of matter for the accretion disk.

In [11] we studied the properties of accretion disks around
naked singularities. For steady state accretion, the luminosity
for an accretion disk around a compact source can be written

Lacc = ǫ ˙mc2,

(1)

where ˙m is the accretion rate of the mass in the disk and
ǫ = 1 − EISCO is the efﬁciency, which is related to the bind-
ing energy per unit mass of circular orbits evaluated at the
ISCO (EISCO) (see for example [18]). For a Schwarzschild
black hole the ISCO is located at 6M , a is equal to zero and
ǫ = 0.057. In the limiting case of a Kerr black hole with a
going to one the ISCO shrinks to rISCO = M and the efﬁ-
ciency reaches the maximum allowed value for a black hole
of ǫ = 0.42. As we can see, the efﬁciency depends on the
location of the ISCO. For a naked singularity the stable cir-
cular orbits could in principle extend all the way to the center
and the efﬁciency can be as high as one hundred percent. If
we interpret the singularity as a measure of our ignorance on
quantum gravity, we can assume that it must be replaced by
a ﬁnite sized exotic compact object of Planck size. Then the
ISCO would not be exactly zero and thus the emitted power
would be lower than a ‘pure’ naked singularity but still much
higher than that of a black hole. Similarly, the time interval
during which the source is not covered by the horizon depends
upon the speciﬁc nature of the central object. It may reduce
to an instant in the limit of a naked singularity in the collapse
frame but would appear longer and ﬁnite to faraway observer.
From these considerations we see that knowing the mass
of the ﬁnal conﬁguration and assuming a scenario such as the

one presented here we could use the measured luminosity to
constraint the size and ‘lifespan’ of the exotic central object.
Given a theoretical model for a compact source one can
evaluate Lacc in order to compare the observed spectrum with
the predicted one. For circular accretion disk the net luminos-
ity for the observer at inﬁnity is given by the integral over ln r
of

dL
d ln r

= 4πr√−gEF ,

(2)

where r is the radial coordinate in the equatorial plane, √−g

is the determinant of the three dimensional metric outside the
compact source (black hole or not) in the equatorial plane of
the disk, E is the energy of the test particle of the disk at a
distance r from the center and F is the radiative ﬂux emitted
by the disk at a distance r (see [11] and references therein).
The ﬂux is in turn given by

F = −

˙m

4π√−g

ω,r

(E − ωL)2 ,Z r

rISCO

(E − ωL)L,rdr

(3)

where ω and L are the angular velocity and angular momen-
tum of the test particle in the disk. For a general stationary
and axially symmetric metric of the form

ds2 = gttdt2 + 2gtφdtdφ + grrdr2 + gθθdθ2 + gφφdφ2, (4)

test particles in the accretion disk are conﬁned to the equato-
rial plane θ ≃ π/2 and their energy, angular momentum and
angular velocity can be written as

E = −

L =

gtt − gtφω

−gtt − 2gtφω − gφφω2 ,
−gtt − 2gtφω − gφφω2 ,

gtφ − gφφω

ω = −gtφ +p(gtφ,r)2 − gtt,rgφφ,r

gφφ,r

(5)

(6)

(7)

.

4

depending on the speciﬁc features of the accreting ﬂuid. Nev-
ertheless it is generally believed that the Eddington limit may
not be surpassed by much. In [4] it was pointed out how the
proposed electromagnetic counterpart to GW150914 detected
by FERMI, that lasted approximately one second, had a lumi-
nosity that exceeds by ten orders of magnitude than that ex-
pected for a 60M⊙ black hole. Therefore, while keeping the
assumption that the two detections were caused by the same
event, to make sense of this high luminosity one can either in-
voke an extremely high accretion rate on a black hole or one
can postulate a lower and more realistic accretion rate on an
exotic compact object.

Note that a transient naked singularity forming from the
merger would require an accretion rate of the order of
10−5M⊙/sec to produce a GRB of luminosity

L ≃ 1049 erg

sec

,

(9)

which is therefore much smaller than that of black hole. This
would allow or require for a much less massive accretion disk
to be present in the surrounding medium at the time of the
event to accomplish the electromagnetic signal. A naked sin-
gularity event of the duration of one second would allow the
compact source to emit the electromagnetic burst before set-
tling down to a ﬁnal black hole conﬁguration. The duration of
the GRB would then be related to the characteristic lifetime
of the naked singularity. This in turn would be given by the
time required by the horizon to collapse plus the time neces-
sary to shed away the excess angular momentum. The time
scale of the latter would then be related to the natural scale
of the underlying quantum-gravity theory. Then the measure-
ment of the duration of the burst could provide information
on the nature of the exotic compact object at the center of the
process.

IV. DISCUSSION

Then the location of the ISCO can easily be evaluated from
the second derivative of the effective potential for particles in
the disk

Veﬀ =

E 2gφφ + 2ELgtφ + L2gtt

g2
tφ − gttgφφ

− 1.

(8)

Note how the above quantities depend on the speciﬁc na-
ture of the spacetime metric coefﬁcients. Therefore the ISCO
is determined by the metric. By looking at equation (3) it is
not difﬁcult to see that for rISCO going to zero F diverges,
therefore suggesting that in a realistic scenario the singular-
ity must be replaced by a ﬁnite Planck sized exotic compact
object.

Every object in space has a maximum luminosity LEdd,
called the Eddington luminosity, beyond which radiation pres-
sure overcomes gravity. Once the accretion ﬂow reaches LEdd
the material outside the object stops falling inwards and gets
pushed away from it. It is possible for an accreting compact
object to have a luminosity that exceeds its Eddington limit

The detection of the gravitational wave signal GW150914
from the LIGO observatory has opened a new era in astro-
physics. The possibility of the existence of an electromagnetic
counterpart to the signal as detected by the FERMI observa-
tory has been suggested. If the existence of electromagnetic
counterparts to gravitational waves during binary black hole
merger was to be conﬁrmed that would raise a lot of questions
about the nature of the sources of gravitational waves. This
would be especially so if the measured luminosity of the event
would prove to be much higher than the Eddington luminosity
for the binary black hole system.

In the present paper we asked the question whether a tran-
sient naked singularity appearing during the merger could
be used as a source for the observed electromagnetic signal.
Given our ignorance on the quantum nature of the exotic com-
pact object that is classically described by the singularity we
cannot construct a full model describing the process. For ex-
ample we do not know if the matter in the accretion disk is
coming from the medium outside the original black holes or
if the repulsive pressures originating close to the singularity

can eject part of the mass of the original object and add it to
the accretion disk. On the other hand we have seen how the
measurement of the luminosity of these events could provide
observational constraints on the nature of the compact object
that forms during the merger. Therefore, while more obser-
vations are needed in order to better understand the nature of
the phenomenon, at present it is worth asking whether it is
possible to use such observations to conﬁrm or rule out the
possibility of the creation of a transient naked singularity dur-
ing the coalescence.

If hypothesis such as the one above were to be proven cor-
rect the study of these events would then provide a measurable
cosmic laboratory where to test and observe quantum-gravity
at work.

Acknowledgement: The authors thank Prashant Kocher-
lakota, Jun Qi Guo, Andrzej Krolak, Abraham Loeb, K. I.
Nakao, and Ramesh Narayan, for useful discussions on these
themes. DM would like to thank TIFR for support and hospi-
tality while this work was done. This article was supported by
the Nazarbayev University Social Policy grant.

5

[1] B. P. Abbot et al. Phys Rev Lett, 116, 061102 (2016).
[2] V. Connaughton et al. arXiv:1602.03920.
[3] A. Loeb, arXiv:1602.04735.
[4] M. Lyutikov, arXiv:1602.07352.
[5] X. Li et al. arXiv:1602.04460.
[6] K. Murase, K. Kashyama, P. Meszaros, I. Shoemaker and N.

Senno, arXiv:1602.06938.

[7] J. A. Wheeler, Ann. Phys. 2, 604, (1957).
[8] R. Geroch, J. Math. Phys. 8, 782 (1967).
[9] F. Tipler, Ann. Phys. 108, 1 (1977).
[10] P. S. Joshi and R. V. Saraykar, Phys. Lett. A 120, 111 (1987).
[11] P. S. Joshi, D. Malafarina and R. Narayan, Class. Quantum

Grav. 31 015002 (2014).

[12] G. T. Horowitz, Class. Quant. Grav. 8, 587 (1991).
[13] C. Bambi, D. Malafarina and L. Modesto, Phys Rev D 88,

044009 (2013).

[14] T. Jacobson and T. P. Sotiriou, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 141101

(2009).

[15] E. Barausse, V. Cardoso, and G. Khanna, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105,

261102 (2010).

[16] B. Giacomazzo, L. Rezzolla and N. Stergioulas, Phys. Rev. D

84, 024022 (2011).

[17] V. Cardoso, E. Franzin and P. Pani, arXiv:1602.07309.
[18] K. S. Thorne, Astrophys. Journ. 191, 507 (1974).

