Is the World Local or Nonlocal? Towards an Emergent Quantum

Mechanics in the 21st Century

Jan Walleczek1∗ and Gerhard Gr¨ossing2

1Phenoscience Laboratories, Novalisstrasse 11, 10115 Berlin, Germany and

2Austrian Institute for Nonlinear Studies,

Akademiehof, Friedrichstr. 10, 1010 Vienna, Austria

6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
9

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

1
v
2
6
8
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

What deﬁnes an emergent quantum mechanics (EmQM)? Can new insight be advanced into the

nature of quantum nonlocality by seeking new links between quantum and emergent phenomena

as described by self-organization, complexity, or emergence theory? Could the development of a

future EmQM lead to a uniﬁed, relational image of the cosmos? One key motivation for adopting

the concept of emergence in relation to quantum theory concerns the persistent failure in standard

physics to unify the two pillars in the foundations of physics: quantum theory and general relativity

theory (GRT). The total contradiction in the foundational, metaphysical assumptions that deﬁne

orthodox quantum theory versus GRT might render inter -theoretic uniﬁcation impossible. On

the one hand, indeterminism and non-causality deﬁne orthodox quantum mechanics, and, on the

other hand, GRT is governed by causality and determinism. How could these two metaphysically-

contradictory theories ever be reconciled? The present work argues that metaphysical contradiction

necessarily implies physical contradiction. The contradictions are essentially responsible also for the

measurement problem in quantum mechanics. A common foundation may be needed for overcoming

the contradictions between the two foundational theories. The concept of emergence, and the

development of an EmQM, might help advance a common foundation – physical and metaphysical –

as required for successful inter-theory uniﬁcation.

∗ Corresponding author: walleczek@phenoscience.com

1

1.

INTRODUCTION

The question “Is the world local or non-local?” has long guided work in quantum foun-

dations. At the latest, this started with the introduction, by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen

(EPR), of the ﬁrst precise metaphysical deﬁnitions in relation to nonlocality as a concept

(Einstein et al. [1]). 80 years on, that question – rather surprisingly – remains unanswered

still. On the one hand, there is no doubt any longer that EPR-type nonlocal correlations

can be observed in quantum experiments by observers who are separated at space-like dis-

tances. On the other hand, the ontological question remains wholly undecided of whether

these nonlocal observations might imply the actual existence of a “nonlocal reality” – not

merely in terms of an operational metaphor as in orthodox quantum theory. The prospect

of fundamentally “real nonlocality” was proposed, for example, by de Broglie–Bohm theory

(Bohm [2, 3]).

Inspired by both Bohm’s proposal (Bohm [2, 3]) and the EPR argument

(Einstein et al. [1]), John Bell succeeded in proving that no quantum theory based on the

joint assumptions of reality and locality could successfully reproduce the predictions that

are yielded by orthodox, i.e., operationalist quantum mechanics (Bell [4]).

The seminal proof of Bell’s theorem left open, however, the extraordinary possibility

that reality might be – ontologically-speaking – nonlocal in nature. That possibility, which

necessarily reaches beyond operationalist quantum theory, is pursued by what has become

known as the ontological, realist, approach to quantum mechanics (e.g., Bohm and Hiley [5]).

The project of developing an ‘emergent quantum mechanics’ (EmQM) is usually placed in

the context of realist approaches to quantum mechanics.

The implications of an EmQM are startling, however, when viewed through the lens of

the orthodox perspective: instead of ﬁnding – at reality’s deepest levels – absolute “quantum

randomness”, a future EmQM, including also de Broglie–Bohm theory, would ﬁnd “quantum

interconnectedness”, e.g., possibly in the form of instantaneous nonlocal inﬂuences across

the universe. For example, when John Bell was asked what the meaning was of nonlocality,

he answered that nonlocality “. . . means that what you do here has immediate consequences

in remote places” (Mann and Crease [6]). What might the phenomenon of ‘emergence’

oﬀer towards a new understanding of nonlocality in the deeper sense of Bell’s “immediate

consequences” – beyond the standard operationalism of orthodox theory?

2

2. WHY ‘EMERGENCE’ IN QUANTUM MECHANICS?

One key motivation for adopting the concept of (irreducible) emergence in relation to

quantum theory concerns the much-debated failure to unify the two pillars in the foundations

of physics: quantum theory and general relativity theory (GRT). Therefore, the long-term

project of inter-theory uniﬁcation might be injected with fresh thinking via the introduction

into quantum mechanics of the concept of emergence. Why might that be so?

On the one hand, orthodox quantum theory, as we understand it today, is an entirely

indeterministic and non-causal theory, which presumes the complete absence of any funda-

mental, ontological reality at the level of the quantum. “There is no quantum world.” Niels

Bohr explained, “There is only abstract quantum-mechanical description” (Petersen [7]).

On the other hand, relativity theory (GRT) represents an ontological theory of space-time

reality, in a decidely causal and deterministic manner. Fig. 2.1 illustrates the fact that the

metaphysical assumptions associated with the theories contradict each other: “indetermin-

ism” versus “determinism”, and “non-reality” versus “reality”. These contradictions are

responsible also, of course, for the so-called measurement problem in quantum mechanics.

Figure 2.1. Total contradiction of metaphysical assumptions between orthodox quantum theory

and general relativity theory (GRT). Metaphysical contradiction implies physical contradiction (see

Sect. 2.1). How is the reconciliation of metaphysical assumptions possible?

2.1. Why ‘metaphysics’ in quantum physics?

Why is there this emphasis on metaphysical assumptions? It is helpful to remember that

in the EPR argument already, which called for the incompleteness of orthodox quantum

3

mechanics (Einstein et al. [1]), it was the exact derivation and deﬁnition of metaphysi-

cal assumptions which allowed the EPR argument to have relevance to concrete problems

facing quantum physics: Is the world local or nonlocal? It was only through the considera-

tion of metaphysical notions like “locality”, “nonlocality”, “causality”, and “reality”, that

the breakthrough of Bell’s theorem was possible (Bell [4]). What is often lost in this pic-

ture is the following: metaphysical assumptions essentially constrain the application of any

mathematical theory to concrete physical situations. Importantly, “metaphysical” is neither

“mystical” nor “irrational”. A metaphysical analysis refers to the ﬁrst principles and the

foundational physical assumptions which inevitably underpin any scientiﬁc or mathematical

analysis of nature. Often, foundational assumptions represent the preferred world view of

the working scientist, including preconceived notions of what may, or may not, be possible in

reality. Thus, by adopting a new metaphysical position, a new vista might open up towards

the solution of a previously intractable scientiﬁc problem.

It appears likely that not any amount of mathematical or technical sophistication will

reconcile the two theories – quantum and relativity, unless the problem of their immediate

metaphysical opposition could be resolved also (compare Fig. 2.1). Similarly, any resolution

of the measurement problem is likely to depend on the “metaphysical reconciliation” – at the

macroscopic and microscopic levels – of any future physical explanations. Not suprisingly, it

was John Bell [8] again who suggested “. . . that a real synthesis of quantum and relativity

theories requires not just technical developments but radical conceptual renewal.”

3. TOWARDS AN EMERGENT QUANTUM MECHANICS

The research project of an EmQM follows the spirit of John Bell’s call for “radical con-

ceptual renewal” (Bell [8]), a call consistent with his well-documented realist expectations

about the future of quantum mechanics (e.g., Bell [9]). EmQM research seeks a common

foundation upon which might rest both quantum theory and GRT. Presently, the availabil-

ity of a common foundation is disputed or, at least, entirely unconﬁrmed. However, the

concept of ‘emergence’ from self-organization, chaos, or complexity, theory – once properly

adapted – might oﬀer a universal framework, both physically and metaphysically, for ﬁnally

promoting “. . . a real synthesis of quantum and relativity theories. . . ” (Bell [8]).

For some time now, the concept of emergence has found use already in gravitational theory

4

and in understanding the nature of space and time. Both the puzzles and the possibilities

of notions such as ‘emergent gravity’ and ‘emergent space-time’ have been well summarized,

for example, by David Gross [10]: “Many of us are convinced that space is an emergent, not

fundamental concept. We have many examples of interesting quantum mechanical states,

for which we can think of some (or all) of the spatial dimensions as emergent. Together

with emergent space, we have the emergent dynamics of space and thus emergent gravity.

But it is hard to imagine how time could be emergent? How would we formulate quantum

mechanics without time as a primary concept? Were time to be emergent, our understanding

of quantum mechanics would have to change.” See Fig. 3.1 for a sketch illustrating the

proposal that new understanding of quantum mechanics, based on emergence, could lessen,

or even lift, the inter-theoretic contradiction shown before in Fig. 2.1.

Figure 3.1. The concept of emergence may provide a common physical and metaphysical foundation

in eﬀorts to unify quantum and relativity theories (GRT). A common foundation will be needed

for overcoming the deep metaphysical contradictions – in the orthodox approach – which have thus

far prohibited success in inter-theory uniﬁcation (compare Fig. 2.1).

The key point is the following: once space-time and gravity are recast in terms of fun-

damentally emergent states or dynamics, this invites the new view of the quantum nature

of reality in terms of emergent dynamics as well. Thus, a common conceptual foundation

might be developed – based on emergence as a guiding principle – capable of bridging the

vast chasm between quantum and relativity theories. Maybe, then, there could be a new

way to look at the problem of inter-theory uniﬁcation. In the future, there might be theories

describing some kind of “emergent quantum gravity” as a result. For example, pioneering

work based upon a locally-deterministic form of an “emergent quantum mechanics” was

carried out by ’t Hooft [11] (2007).

5

4. WHAT IS EMERGENCE?

In a more general context, what is emergence? The concept of emergence is present

under the guise of many diﬀerent names and theories: complexity theory, chaos theory, self-

organization theory, non-linear dynamical systems theory, synergetics, cybernetics, fractal

sets, cellular automata, and so on. Emergent events are characterized by sensitive depen-

dencies on initial conditions in combination with evolving boundary conditions. Generally,

emergence accounts for the rise of global macroscopic order from local microscopic ran-

domness. Both, top-down and bottom-up causal ﬂows are implicated in the formation of an

emergent macroscopic structure (Fig. 4.1). These causal ﬂows are considered to be relational

because vastly diﬀerent levels in the hierarchy of organization are actively interconnecting

without exclusive priority of one level over another (see legend to Fig. 4.1).

Figure 4.1.

Illustration of self-referential, dynamical interactions across levels of organization –

microscopic and macroscopic (from Walleczek [12]). Both top-down and bottom-up causal ﬂows

are indicated in the formation of an emergent macroscopic structure. Emergence describes the

spontaneous synchronization of individual random motions into a uniﬁed collective motion. Emer-

gence accounts for the rise of global macroscopic order from local microscopic randomness. An

example is the emergent formation of spatio-temporal, long-range coherence.

6

4.1. Determination without pre-determination: “eﬀective indeterminism”

An important dimension in the development of an EmQM, i.e., for any theory which

connects (classical) emergence theory with quantum mechanics, is the question of the inher-

ently probabilistic nature of quantum phenomena. Crucially, in-principle unpredictability,

as well as uncontrollability, of individual microscopic (quantum) events must be ensured by

any kind of non-orthodox theory which claims success in reproducing the predictions that

are yielded by orthodox quantum mechanics. Otherwise, for example, the non-signalling

theorem of quantum mechanics would be instantly violated as we have discussed before at

great length (Walleczek and Gr¨ossing [13, 14]). Critical in this context is that emergent phe-

nomena are subject to unpredictability as a consequence of the intrinsically self-referential

nature of the governing dynamics as illustrated in Fig. 4.1 (e.g., compare also the halting

problem in computational theory). A well-known example is the phenomenon of determin-

istic chaos, which provides a vivid image of determination without predetermination, i.e.,

“eﬀective indeterminism”. Future work in EmQM foundations needs to clearly establish the

limits and conditions under which such scenarios apply in alternative models for quantum

phenomena, including for quantum nonlocality.

5. OUTLOOK: NEW APPROACHES IN REALIST QUANTUM MECHANICS

What are the prospects for an ‘Emergent Quantum Mechanics’ ? It is possible – in

principle – that the universe is deterministic, e.g., nonlocally causal in light of EPR-type

nonlocal correlations. Yet – at the same time – even a deterministic universe can have an

open future in the context of emergence theory, i.e., a future where both the free-choice

performances of an observer/agent, and other physical processes in the cosmos, are not pre-

determined by past events. As was explained in Sect. 4, emergent dynamical processes are

well-known for being governed by entirely deterministic relations, and yet these very same

processes can be without pre-determined outcomes in the future. As a consequence of the

intrinsically self-referential nature of emergent phenomena, the in-principle unpredictability

of individual microscopic events is granted. Whether such concepts might apply productively

in a future quantum mechanics remains for now a promising vision. However, the resurgence

of interest in ontological approaches to quantum mechanics, including those pioneered and

7

envisioned by David Bohm [2, 3] and John Bell [8, 9, 15, 16] may further increase interest

in the project of an EmQM (e.g., see also Bohm and Hiley [5]; Holland [17]).

In conclusion, a new wave of work has drawn attention to ontological, realist questions in

quantum mechanics: Does the concept of ‘nonlocality’ reﬂect the true nature of reality? Is

the quantum state real? Is the wave function ψ a reality? On the theoretical side, especially

work by Harrigan and Spekkens [18] has renewed interest in ontological theory, including

de Broglie–Bohm theory, by presenting the productive distinction between ψ-ontic and ψ-

epistemic approaches to quantum mechanics. In that context, our own recent work showed

that nonlocal quantum information transfers, which are inevitably associated with any ψ-

ontic quantum theory, including Bohm’s theory, need not violate the non-signalling theorem

(Walleczek and Gr¨ossing [14]). On the experimental side, the important work by Kocsis et

al. [19], Ringbauer et al. [20], and Mahler et al. [21], has advanced fresh insight into the non-

orthodox option of nonlocality as a reality, e.g., the reality of the wave function ψ. Finally,

the most recent available ﬁndings provide a “compelling visualization” – as the authors

put it – “of the nonlocality inherent in any realistic interpretation of quantum mechanics”

(Mahler et al. [21]).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Work by Jan Walleczek at Phenoscience Laboratories (Berlin) is partially funded by the

Fetzer Franklin Fund of the John E. Fetzer Memorial Trust. Work by Gerhard Gr¨ossing

at the Austrian Institute for Nonlinear Studies (Vienna) is also partially funded by the

Fetzer Franklin Fund of the John E. Fetzer Memorial Trust. The authors wish to thank

Siegfried Fussy, Johannes Mesa Pascasio, Herbert Schwabl and Nikolaus von Stillfried for

their excellent contributions.

[1] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, “Can quantum-mechanical description of physical

reality be considered complete?,” Phys. Rev. 47 (1935) 777–780.

[2] D. Bohm, “A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of ”hidden” variables.

I,” Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 166–179.

8

[3] D. Bohm, “A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of ”hidden” variables.

II,” Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 180–193.

[4] J. S. Bell, “On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox,” Physics 1 (1964) 195–200.

[5] D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, The Undivided Universe: An Ontological Interpretation of

Quantum Theory. Routledge, London, UK, 1993.

[6] C. Mann and R. Crease, “Interview: John Bell, particle physicist,” Omni 10 (1988) 84–92.

[7] A. Petersen, “The philosophy of Niels Bohr,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 19 (1963)

8–14.

[8] J. S. Bell, “Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics,” in Speakable and Unspeakable

in Quantum Mechanics, pp. 169–172. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1987.

[9] J. S. Bell, “La nouvelle cuisine,” in Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics,

pp. 232–248. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, revised ed., 2004.

[10] D. Gross, “A century of quantum mechanics,” in Quantum Theory: A Two-Time Success

Story, D. C. Struppa and J. M. Tollaksen, eds., pp. 3–8. Springer, Milano, 2014.

[11] G. ’t Hooft, “Emergent quantum mechanics and emergent symmetries,” AIP Conf. Proc.

957 (2007) 154–163, arXiv:0707.4568.

[12] J. Walleczek, ed., Self-Organized Biological Dynamics and Nonlinear Control. Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2000.

[13] J. Walleczek and G. Gr¨ossing, “The non-signalling theorem in generalizations of Bell’s

theorem,” J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 504 (2014) 012001, arXiv:1403.3588 [quant-ph].

[14] J. Walleczek and G. Gr¨ossing, “Nonlocal quantum information transfer without

superluminal signalling and communication,” Found. Phys. (2016) , arXiv:1501.07177

[quant-ph]. in press.

[15] J. S. Bell, “The theory of local beables,” Epistemol. Lett. 9 (3) (1976) . Repr. in Dialectica

39 (1985) 85-96.

[16] J. S. Bell, “Free variables and local causality,” Epistemol. Lett. 15 (2) (1977) . Repr. in

Dialectica 39 (1985) 103-106.

[17] P. R. Holland, The Quantum Theory of Motion. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,

UK, 1993.

[18] N. Harrigan and R. W. Spekkens, “Einstein, incompleteness, and the epistemic view of

quantum states,” Found. Phys. 40 (2010) 125–157.

9

[19] S. Kocsis, B. Braverman, S. Ravets, M. J. Stevens, R. P. Mirin, L. K. Shalm, and A. M.

Steinberg, “Observing the average trajectories of single photons in a two-slit interferometer,”

Science 332 (2011) 1170–1173.

[20] M. Ringbauer, B. Duﬀus, C. Branciard, E. G. Cavalcanti, A. G. White, and A. Fedrizzi,

“Measurements on the reality of the wavefunction,” Nature Phys. 11 (2015) 249–254,

arXiv:1412.6213 [quant-ph].

[21] D. H. Mahler, L. Rozema, K. Fisher, L. Vermeyden, K. J. Resch, H. M. Wiseman, and

A. Steinberg, “Experimental nonlocal and surreal Bohmian trajectories,” Science Advances 2

(2016) e1501466.

10

