6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
 
0
1

 
 
]
T
G
h
t
a
m

.

[
 
 

2
v
3
9
8
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON THE VIRTUAL RASMUSSEN INVARIANT

WILLIAM RUSHWORTH

Abstract. We produce chain-level generators of the virtual Lee complex Kh(cid:48)(V ) and
use them to convert the computable bounds on the Rasmussen invariant of classical knots
due to Kawamura and Lobb into bounds on the virtual Rasmussen invariant as deﬁned
by Dye, Kaestner, and Kauﬀman. We also exhibit a class of diagrams for which the
bounds are tight. In addition, we use the chain-level generators to show that the virtual
Rasmussen invariant is additive with respect to connect sum.

Keywords: virtual knot theory, Khovanov homology, Rasmussen invariant, knot con-
cordance

Mathematical subject classiﬁcation 2010: 57M25, 57M27

1. Introduction

1.1. The slice genus. The slice genus of a knot K ⊂ S3 ⊂ ∂B4, denoted g∗(K), is the
If g∗(K) = 0 we
least genus of all smoothly embedded surfaces in B4 which bound K.
say that K is slice. Rasmussen [17] used Lee’s degeneration of Khovanov homology [13] to
produce a knot invariant, speciﬁcally a homomorphism on the smooth concordance group
of knots

s : C → 2Z

which yields a lower bound on the slice genus i.e.

|s(K)| ≤ 2g∗(K).

In principle it is tough to compute s(K), however, as it is equivalent to the maximal
ﬁltration grading of all elements homologous to a certain generator of the Lee homology of
K.

Kawamura [12] and Lobb [14] independently deﬁned diagram-dependent upper bounds
on s(K), denoted U (D) (for D a diagram of K), which are easily computable by hand, along
with an error term, ∆(D), the vanishing of which implies that s(K) = U (D), in fact. More
precisely,

The bounds U (D) are henceforth referred to as the strong slice-Bennequin bounds.

U (D) − 2∆(D) ≤ s(K) ≤ U (D).

1.2. Virtual knot theory. Kauﬀman initated the study of virtual links [10] which are
• 4-valent planar graphs with three possible decorations of the vertices - the over-
and under-crossings of classical knot theory and a virtual crossing,
- up to
certain equivalences. Such equivalence classes of graphs are known as virtual
links.

or equivalently

• Embeddings of disjoint unions of S1 into thickened genus g surfaces up to self-

diﬀeomorphism and handle stabilisation of the surface.

1

2

WILLIAM RUSHWORTH

Figure 1. Diagrams of two inequivalent virtual knots which are connect
sums of the same initial pair of virtual knots. They are distinguished by
the virtual Alexander polynomial [18].

In the latter interpretation a classical link is as an embedding of(cid:70) S1 into a thickened S2.

There is a third interpretation of virtual links which we shall make use of below [4, 8].
Given a virtual link diagram we can algorithmically produce a closed curve on a surface
with boundary which deformation retracts onto the curve. Such a curve and surface pair is
known as an abstract link diagram. An abstract link is an equivalence class of abstract link
diagrams up to stable equivalence as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.2.

1.3. Virtual cobordism and the slice genus. In direct analogue to those of the classical
case we make the following deﬁnitions (see [6] and [11]). Two virtual knot diagrams V1
and V2 are cobordant if one can be obtained from the other by a ﬁnite sequence of births
and deaths of circles, oriented saddles, and virtual Reidemeister moves. Such a sequence
describes a compact, oriented surface, C, such that ∂C = V1 (cid:116) V2. If g(C) = 0 we say that
V1 and V2 are concordant. If V2 = U , the unknot, and V1 is concordant to U we say that V1
is slice. In general, we deﬁne the slice genus of a virtual knot V , denoted g∗, as

g∗(V ) = min{g(C) | C a compact, oriented, connected surface such that ∂C = V }

(here we have simply capped oﬀ the unknot in ∂C with a disc). Behind the scenes, the
cobordism surface C is embedded in a 4-manifold of the form M × [0, 1] where M is a
compact, oriented 3-manifold with ∂M = Σk (cid:116) Σl, where Σi denotes a surface of genus i.
The 3-manifold M is described in the standard way in terms of codimension 1 submanifolds
and critical points: starting from ∂M = Σk, codimension 1 submanifolds are Σk until we
pass a critical point, after which they are Σk±1. Critical points of M correspond to handle
stabilisation. A ﬁnite number of handle stabilisations are needed to reach Σl.

As detailed below, the Rasmussen invariant of classical knots can be extended to an
invariant of virtual knots. Thus, treating a classical knot K as a virtual knot without
× [0, 1]
virtual crossings, this yields a lower bound on the genus of surfaces C (cid:44)→
where ∂C = K (cid:44)→ S2 × [0, 1] and M is a closed, oriented 3-manifold. It is unknown whether
it is possible to lower the slice genus of a classical knot by treating it as a virtual knot,
but in light of the above observation it is clear that the Rasmussen invariant provides an
interval within which the virtual slice genus must lie. Precisely, for a classical knot K

(cid:0)M \ B3(cid:1)

for g∗

v(K), g∗

c (K) the virtual and classical slice genera, respectively.

1
2

s(K) ≤ g∗

v(K) ≤ g∗

c (K)

V1V2ON THE VIRTUAL RASMUSSEN INVARIANT

3

Unlike in the classical case of embeddings S1 (cid:44)→ S3 it is not immediately apparent
whether the set of concordance classes of virtual knots forms a group under the connect
sum. In fact, connect sum is not a well-deﬁned operation on virtual knots: one can connect
sum two virtual knots together in more than one inequivalent way. An example is given in
Fig. 1. The connect sum operation is well-deﬁned, however, on the set of based virtual knot
diagrams:

Deﬁnition 1.1. A based (virtual knot) diagram is an oriented (virtual knot) diagram with
a distinguished point on one of its arcs. This distinguished point is known as the basepoint.
Deﬁnition 1.2. Given two based diagrams V ∗
the diagram formed by connect summing V ∗
dictated by the basepoints. The basepoints are removed on V ∗
we denote by V ∗

2 the connect sum V ∗
2 is deﬁned as
2 together in the standard way at the site
2 . By an abuse of notation

2 both the diagram and the virtual equivalence class it represents.

1 and V ∗
1 and V ∗

1 #V ∗

1 #V ∗

1 #V ∗

In this manner the diagrams given in Fig. 1 are seen to be the connect sums of two distinct
pairs of based virtual diagrams which diﬀer only in placement of the distinguished point. It
is not known whether pairs of virtual knots such as these are concordant. In general, the
answer to the following question is not known:

if V ∗
1 , V ∗
3 are any two based diagrams of a virtual knot (that is, they are
based versions of (possibly diﬀerent) diagrams of the same virtual knot),
4 are any two based diagrams of another, are V ∗
2 , V ∗
and V ∗
3 #V ∗
concordant?

2 and V ∗

1 #V ∗

4

That they were would be suﬃcient to deﬁne a virtual concordance group. Until this is settled,
however, it is possible that the virtual Rasmussen invariant is not a homomorphism. We
show below, however, that it is at least additive.

1.4. Structure. Whilst Manturov [15] ﬁrst deﬁned Khovanov homology for virtual links
we shall work with the reformulation of his theory due to Dye, Kaestner, and Kauﬀman [6].
In [6] it is shown that virtual Khovanov homology is amenable to the construction of Lee
and a virtual Rasmussen invariant is deﬁned in essentially identical fashion to that of the
classical case. Our plan is to recreate the strong slice-Bennequin bounds in this setting.

In Section 2.1 we review important deﬁnitions of [6], before in Section 2.2 producing
(cid:48)
chain-level generators of Kh
(V ). In Section 3 we then show using these generators that the
virtual Rasmussen invariant is additive. Finally, in Section 4, we convert the strong slice-
Bennequin bounds to the virtual setting. We assume familiarity with virtual Khovanov
homology and the virtual Rasmussen invariant.

2. Chain-level canonical generators

In [6] generators of the Lee homology of a virtual knot are produced at a diagram level
but there is no clear way to push them to chains. In this section we describe a procedure
to do just that.

2.1. Review of [6]. We review the deﬁnitions of the virtual Khovanov complex and the
virtual Rasmussen invariant.

2.1.1. The virtual Khovanov complex. The fundamental obstruction to transferring Khovanov
homology to the virtual setting is the existence of the single-cycle smoothing depicted in
Fig. 2(A) (otherwise known as a one-to-one bifurcation). In order to preserve the quantum
grading the map associated to this smoothing, denoted η, must be identically zero. The
prototypical face is depicted in Fig. 2(B). Notice that the diﬀerential along the top and

4

WILLIAM RUSHWORTH

η

η

∆

η

m

(A) The single-cycle smoothing.

(B) The problem face.

Figure 2

Figure 3. The source-sink decoration.

right-hand edges is η ◦ η = 0, but along the left-hand and bottom edges it is m ◦ ∆ (cid:54)= 0 so
that d2 (cid:54)= 0.
Remark: Tubbenhauer [19] has constructed a virtual Khovanov homology theory in the
manner of Bar-Natan [2] using non-orientable cobordisms, but there are compatibility issues
with the theory presented in [6].

Let A = R[X]/(X 2 − t) for R a commutative ring and t ∈ R. In order to detect the
problem face a symmetry present in A (which corresponds to the two possible orientations
of S1) is exploited using the following automorphism:

Deﬁnition 2.1. The barring operator is the map

(1)

: A → A, X (cid:55)→ −X.

Applying the barring operator is referred to as conjugation.

Note that if R = R and t = −1 then A = C and the barring operator is just standard

complex conjugation. How the barring operator is applied within the Khovanov complex
is determined using an extra decoration on link diagrams, the source-sink decoration as
depicted in Fig. 3. A new diagram is formed by replacing the classical crossings with the
source-sink decoration, which induces an orientation on the incident arcs of a crossing. Arcs
of the diagram on which the induced orientations due to separate crossings disagree are
marked by a cut locus. We refer the reader to [6].

2.1.2. Lee’s degeneration and the virtual Rasmussen invariant. There is a degeneration of
Khovanov homology due to Lee [13]. There is such a degeneration of virtual Khovanov
homology also. Dye, Kaestner, and Kauﬀman use the methods of Bar-Natan and Morrison
[3] to show this. Speciﬁcally, they employ the Karoubi envelope of a category and the
interpretation of virtual links as abstract links [4, 8].

ON THE VIRTUAL RASMUSSEN INVARIANT

5

Figure 4. A two-crossing virtual knot diagram.

Figure 5. Component of the surface of an abstract link diagram about a
classical crossing.

Figure 6. Component of the surface of an abstract link diagram about a
virtual crossing.

As such diagrams are used extensively below, we describe the process given in [8] to obtain
a (representative of an) abstract link from a (representative of a) virtual link (examples are
given in Section 2.2). Let V be a diagram of a virtual link, as in Fig. 4, then

i) About the classical crossings place a disc as shown in Fig. 5.
ii) About the virtual crossings place two discs as shown in Fig. 6.
iii) Join up these discs with collars about the arcs of the diagram.

The result is a knot diagram on a surface which deformation retracts onto the underlying
curve of the knot diagram. We will denote abstract link diagrams by (F, D) for D a knot
diagram and F a compact, oriented surface (which deformation retracts on to the underlying
curve of D). We treat such diagrams up to stable equivalence, deﬁned below.

Deﬁnition 2.2. (Deﬁnition 3.2 of [4]) Let (F1, D1) and (F2, D2) be abstract link diagrams.
We say that (F1, D1) and (F2, D2) are equivalent, denoted (F1, D1) (cid:33) (F2, D2), if there
exists a closed, connected, oriented surface F3 and orientation-preserving embeddings f1 :
F1 → F3, f2 : F2 → F3 such that f1(D1) and f2(D2) are related by Reidemeister moves
on F3. We say that two abstract link diagrams (F, D) and (F (cid:48), D(cid:48)) are stably equivalent if

6

WILLIAM RUSHWORTH

Figure 7. Cross cuts on an abstract link diagram inherited from cut loci.

there is a chain of equivalences

(F, D) = (F0, D0) (cid:33) (F1, D1) (cid:33) ··· (cid:33) (Fn, Dn) = (F (cid:48), D(cid:48))

for n ∈ N.

Stable equivalence classes of abstract link diagrams are in bijective correspondence to

equivalence classes of virtual link diagrams [8].

Deﬁnition 2.3. A smoothing of an abstract link diagram (F, D) is a diagram formed by
smoothing the crossings of D into either their 0- or 1-resolution on F . The result is a
collection of disjoint copies of S1 on the surface F . A copy of S1 is called a cycle.

The diagram-level canonical generators of the Lee complex given in [6] are smoothings
of abstract link diagrams with extra information added. This extra information is needed
to keep track of the source-sink structure of the virtual knot. The information is in the
form of cross cuts which are added in the following way: before beginning the procedure
described above mark the virtual knot diagram with cut loci as inherited from the source-
sink orientation and preserve them on the abstract link diagram. Replace each cut locus
with a cross cut which bisects the surface as shown in Fig. 7. Henceforth by abstract link
diagram we mean an abstract link diagram with cross cuts.

Using the source-sink decoration we add yet more information to abstract link diagrams

in the form of a checkerboard colouring:

Deﬁnition 2.4. From an abstract link diagram (F, D) form its associated checkerboard col-
oured abstract link diagram from the surface and curve pair (F, S(D)) (where S(D) denotes
the source-sink diagram formed by replacing each crossing by the source-sink decoration) by
colouring the surface F using the recipe given in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. Notice that Fig. 8 al-

Figure 8. Checkerboard colouring at a crossing.

lows us to induce a checkerboard colouring of smoothings of abstract link diagrams by simply
joining the shaded or unshaded areas produced by smoothing the crossing.

From checkerboard coloured smoothings of abstract link diagrams we are able to produce
the tool used by Dye, Kaestner, and Kauﬀman to prove theorems analogous to those in [3].

Henceforth we set R = Q and t = −1.

ON THE VIRTUAL RASMUSSEN INVARIANT

7

Figure 9. Checkerboard colouring at a cut locus.

Deﬁnition 2.5. Let {r, g} be the basis for A where

“red” = r =

“green” = g =

1 + X

2

1 − X

2

.

On the level of diagrams, arcs of a smoothing are coloured red or green to denote which
generator they are labelled with.

Lemma 4.1 of [6] lists the properties of r and g. The most important for our purposes is

that r and g are conjugates with respect to the barring operator. That is

r = g and g = r.

Deﬁnition 2.6. (Analogue of Deﬁnition 1.1 of [3]) An alternately coloured smoothing of
an abstract link diagram is a smoothing for which the arcs have been coloured either red
or green such that the arcs passing through each small neighbourhood of a smoothing are
coloured diﬀerent colours. At a cut locus the colouring of an arc switches.

Using alternately coloured smoothings the following theorems are stated and proved:

Theorem 2.7. (Theorem 4.2 of [6]) Within the Karoubi envelope the Lee complex of a
virtual link V is homotopy equivalent to a complex with one generator for each alternately
coloured smoothing of K on an abstract link diagram with cross cuts and with vanishing
diﬀerentials.

Theorem 2.8. (Theorem 4.3 of [6]) A virtual link V with c-components has exactly 2c al-
ternately coloured smoothings on an abstract link diagram with cross cuts. These smoothings
are in bijective correspondence with the 2c orientations of V .

In Section 2.2 we describe the bijective correspondence of Theorem 2.8, but we conclude
this section by stating the deﬁnition of the virtual Rasmussen invariant and its properties.

(V ) the associated Lee
Deﬁnition 2.9. Let V be a virtual knot diagram, CKh
(cid:48)
complex and Lee homology, respectively. Let s be the grading on Kh
(V ) induced by j on
CKh

(V ). Deﬁne

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)
(V ) and Kh

(cid:48)
(V ), x (cid:54)= 0}
smin(V ) = min{s(x)|x ∈ Kh
(cid:48)
smax(V ) = max{s(x)|x ∈ Kh
(V ), x (cid:54)= 0}.

The virtual Rasmussen invariant of V is

s(V ) =

1
2

(smax + smin) .

Proposition 2.10. (Parts of Proposition 6.5 and Theorem 5.6 of [6]) The virtual Rasmussen
invariant satisﬁes the following

8

WILLIAM RUSHWORTH

Figure 10. A checkboard coloured abstract link diagram corresponding
to the virtual knot diagram of Fig. 4, with orientations o and o.

Figure 11. Two representatives of the stable equivalence class of smooth-
ings of the checkboard coloured abstract link diagram depicted in Fig. 10,
with orientations o and o.

(1) s(V ) = smax − 1 = smin + 1.
(2) s(V ) = −s(V ), for V the mirror image of V : the diagram formed by switching all
(3) |s(V )| ≤ 2g∗(V ), where g∗(V ) denotes the slice genus of V .

positive classical crossings to negative classical crossings and vice versa.

Notice that the virtual Rasmussen invariant lacks the out-of-the-box additivity of its
classical counterpart (another consequence of there being multiple ways to connect sum two
virtual knots together). In Section 3 we show, however, that the virtual s invariant is indeed
additive.

2.2. Chain-level generators. In [6] canonical generators are produced at a diagrammatic
level i.e. they are alternately coloured smoothings of (checkerboard-coloured) abstract link
diagrams. These generators are suﬃcient to prove Theorems 2.7 and 2.8. Below, we give
(cid:48)
(V ). Before doing so,
a method to produce the corresponding chain-level generators of Kh

ooooooON THE VIRTUAL RASMUSSEN INVARIANT

9

(A) The alternately coloured smoothing
associated to orientation o.

(B) The alternately coloured smoothing
associated to orientation o.

Figure 12. The alternately coloured smoothings on abstract link diagrams
corresponding to the two possible orientations of the virtual knot diagram.

(A) A smoothing stably equivalent to
that of Fig. 12(A).

(B) A smoothing stably equivalent to
that of Fig. 12(B).

Figure 13. Alternately coloured smoothings stably equivalent to those of
Fig. 12.

however, it is instructive to recall the bijection of Theorem 2.8 between orientations of a
virtual link and alternately coloured smoothings of the associated abstract link diagram as
given in [6]. We use Fig. 4 as an example.

(i) Given a virtual link diagram V construct the checkerboard coloured abstract
link diagram as in Deﬁnition 2.4. Note that for a virtual knot the checkerboard
colouring is independent of the orientation, a consequence of the invariance of
the source-sink decoration under 180◦ rotations. See Fig. 10.

(ii) For a given orientation o of V form the corresponding oriented smoothing on the

checkerboard coloured abstract link diagram as in Deﬁnition 2.3. See Fig. 11.

(iii) Place a clockwise orientation on the shaded regions of the oriented smoothing,
which in turn induces a new orientation on the arcs of the smoothing. On each
arc compare this orientation to that induced by o. If these two orientations agree
colour the arc red, if they disagree colour the arc green (as in Deﬁnition 2.5). See
Fig. 12.

oooo10

WILLIAM RUSHWORTH

At this stage we have produced alternately coloured smoothings on abstract link diagrams as
in Deﬁnition 2.6. We need a way of reading oﬀ from these diagrams elements of C 0Kh(cid:48)(V )
(as the oriented resolution is always at height 0), which will be the chain-level canonical
generators of Kh(cid:48)(V ). We are unable to do so at this point as the cycles of the alternately
coloured smoothings possess more than one colour. We now describe a process by which
single coloured smoothings can be produced, and hence chain-level generators of Kh(cid:48)(V ).
Firstly, we utilise the stable equivalence relation given in Deﬁnition 2.2 to work with
alternately coloured smoothings of abstract link diagrams for which the surface deformation
retracts onto the curve of the smoothing, for example the abstract link diagrams given in
Fig. 13. We can always do this as the curve of the smoothing is simply a disjoint union of
copies of S1. Note that the resulting smoothing (of a checkerboard coloured abstract link
diagram) may not be connected.

Next, we interpret the cross cuts as half-twists with the parity of the twist ignored. That

is,

=

or equivalently

.

Replacing cross cuts with appropriate half-twists we are able to view the surface of the
smoothing (of a checkerboard coloured abstract link diagram) as a two-sided surface such
that the curve of the smoothing appears on both sides. That cross cuts always come in
pairs ensures that the surface has two sides. Importantly, on each side of the surface the
curve of the smoothing is coloured exactly one colour. This is because passing a cross cut
causes the arc to change to change colour (c.f. Deﬁnition 2.6), and to pass a cut locus is to
pass onto the other side of the surface. (From this one can see that passing a cut locus, or
equivalently moving on to the other side of the surface, is replicated in A by applying the
barring operator.)
In summary, we view alternately coloured smoothings (of checkerboard coloured abstract
link diagrams) such as those in Fig. 13 as two sided surfaces such that the curve of the
smoothing is coloured exactly one colour on each side. At this point it is clear that in order
to read oﬀ generators of CKh0 from such alternately coloured smoothings we must make
a choice of side (or sides, if the surface of the smoothing is disconnected) of the surface to
read. Further, we must also ensure that this choice is the same for both the alternately
coloured smoothings associated to o and o. We must have this as they are both coloured
versions of the same smoothing of an abstract link diagram (the oriented smoothing) c.f.
the left hand smoothing of Fig. 11 with Fig. 12. In eﬀect we are making the choice on this
uncoloured smoothing, which the alternately coloured smoothings then inherit.

With all this in mind, let us make a choice: given a virtual knot diagram V with orient-
ations o and o, let A denote the oriented smoothing of the checkerboard coloured abstract
link diagram associated to V . On A cancel an arbitrary pair of adjacent cross cuts against
one another so that the strand they bound is removed. An example is given in Fig. 14. This
cancellation of cross cuts is simply ‘ﬂipping’ the segment of the surface they bound so that
the other side of the surface is shown. Continue cancelling available arbitrary pairs of cross
cuts until all have been removed. In our interpretation, that the smoothing has no cross
cuts means that we are looking at exactly one side of surface. Now return to part (iii) of

ON THE VIRTUAL RASMUSSEN INVARIANT

11

Figure 14. Removing a strand by cancelling cross-cuts.

Figure 15. The possible ways to cancel the alternately coloured smoothing
corresponding to orientation o of V .

Figure 16. The possible ways to cancel the alternately coloured smoothing
corresponding to orientation o of V .

the process given on page 9, and colour the cycles of the oriented smoothings associated to
o and o as dictated there. Denote by Ao and Ao the resulting alternately coloured abstract
link diagrams associated to o and o, respectively. That the cycles of Ao and Ao are col-
oured with opposite colours follows from the fact that their orientations are opposite but
the checkerboard colouring of Ao and Ao is the same.

Examples of such single coloured smoothings are given in Fig. 15 and Fig. 16. In this
case a choice of top and bottom is equivalent to picking either the two smoothings on the
left of the Figures, or the two on the right.

After all that we are left with smoothings of abstract link diagrams the cycles of which
are coloured with exactly one colour, either red or green. We form the canonical generators
(cid:48)
(V ), denoted so for o an orientation of V , by taking the appropriate tensor product of
of Kh
r and g as dictated by the colours of the cycles. In this way we obtain two distinct algebraic
generators.

We conclude by remarking that the s invariant is independent of this choice of which
side of the surface to read. Making another choice results in an application of the barring
operator to one or more tensor factors of so and so, because if a cycle is coloured green
on one side of the surface it must be coloured red on the other. But conjugation does not

12

WILLIAM RUSHWORTH

interact with the ﬁltration, that is

j(r) = j(g) and j(g) = j(r).

To conclude this section we prove a Lemma analogous to Lemma 3.5 of Rasmussen [17]

which we will use in both the following sections.

(V ) ∼= Kh

Lemma 2.11. (Lemma 3.5 of Rasmussen [17]) Let n be the number of components of
(cid:48)
(cid:48)
(cid:48)
(cid:48)
V . There is a direct sum decomposition Kh
e(V ), where Kh
o(V ) ⊕ Kh
o(V ) is
(cid:48)
generated by all states with q-grading conguent to 2 + n mod 4, and Kh
e(V ) is generated
by all states with q-grading congruent to n mod 4. If o is an orientation on V , then so + so
is contained in one of the two summands, and so − so is contained in the other.
Proof. The ﬁrst statement follows exactly as in the classical case. Regarding the second
(V ) be the map which acts by the
statement, following [17] let ι : CKh
(cid:48)
o(V ). We claim that ι(so) = ±so.
identity on CKh
To show this we deﬁne a new grading on A with respect to which X has grading 2 and 1
has grading 4. We have that X = −X and 1 = 1 so that r = g and g = r, and the map

(cid:48)
e(V ) and multiplication by −1 on CKh

(V ) → CKh

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

⊗n

⊗n → A

: A

⊗n

(which applies the barring operator to all tensor factors) acts as the identity on elements
with new grading congruent to 0 mod 4 and multiplication by −1 on elements with new
grading congruent to 2 mod 4. The new grading diﬀers from the q-grading by an overall
shift so that

as in the classical case.

ι(so) = ±so

⊗n = ±so

(cid:3)

A direct corollary of Lemma 2.11 is that so is not of top ﬁltered degree, that is:

(2)

s(so) = s(so) = smin(V ).

3. Additivity of the virtual Rasmussen invariant

(cid:48)
We can use the chain-level generators of Kh

(V ) to show that the virtual Rasmussen
invariant is additive with respect to connect sum, conﬁrming that the virtual invariant
behaves in the same way as its classical counterpart in this respect.
Theorem 3.1. For V ∗
Deﬁnition 1.1 and Deﬁnition 1.2)

2 the connect sum of based virtual knot diagrams V ∗

1 and V ∗

1 #V ∗

2 (c.f.

(3)

s(V ∗

1 #V ∗

2 ) = s(V1) + s(V2).

Proof. With the chain-level generators in place, along with Lemma 2.11, the proof follows
much the same path as that in [17]. For all connect sums V ∗

2 there exists the map

1 #V ∗

2 ) ∆(cid:48)

(V ∗

(cid:48)
Kh

1 #V ∗

(cid:48)
(cid:48)
(V1 (cid:116) V2) ∼= Kh
−→ Kh
(cid:48)
(V ∗
It sends a canonical generator so of Kh
(cid:48)
(cid:48)
(V2) of the form s1⊗ s2 where si is a generator of Kh
Kh
case, the map is of ﬁltered degree −1 and we obtain
(4)

1 #V ∗

smin(V ∗

s(so) − 1 ≤ s(s1 ⊗ s2) = s(s1) + s(s2)
1 #V ∗

2 ) ≤ smin(V1) + smin(V2), by Eq. (2).

(V1) ⊗ Kh

(cid:48)

(V2).

(cid:48)
2 ) to a canonical generator of Kh

(V1) ⊗
(Vi) for i = 1, 2. As in the classical

ON THE VIRTUAL RASMUSSEN INVARIANT

13

From this point the proof proceeds as in that of the analogous statement in [17]: utilising
the fact that smin(V ) = −smax(V ) we are able to obtain from Eq. (4) that

smin(V ∗
smax(V ∗

1 #V ∗
1 #V ∗

2 ) = smin(V1) + smin(V2) + 1
2 ) = smax(V1) + smax(V2) − 1

as required.

(cid:3)

As a result of Theorem 3.1, the Rasmussen invariant of the connect sum of two virtual
knots is independent of the choice of based diagrams used to conduct the connect sum. As
mentioned in Section 1.3 it is not known whether V ∗
4 for V ∗
1 ,
V ∗
3 any two based diagrams of a virtual knot and V ∗
4 any two based diagrams of another.
It is known, however, that neither the Jones polynomial [16] nor the Rasmussen invariant
can distinguish them. This leads one to posit whether Khovanov homology can, a question
the author intends to return to.

2 is concordant to V ∗

1 #V ∗
2 , V ∗

3 #V ∗

4. Bounds on the virtual Rasmussen invariant

Equipped with chain-level generators we are in a position to formulate the strong slice-
Bennequin bounds in the virtual setting. First we deﬁne the bounds themselves before
describing the case in which they are tight.

4.1. Formulation.

Deﬁnition 4.1. Given a virtual link diagram V denote by O(V ) the oriented smoothing of
V . The Seifert graph of V , denoted T (V ), is the signed graph with a vertex for each cycle of
O(V ) and an edge for each classical crossing of V , decorated with the sign of the crossing.
The edge associated to a crossing is between the node or nodes associated to the cycles
involved in the smoothing site of that crossing. The subgraph of T (V ) formed by removing

all the edges labelled with + (respectively −) is denoted T −(V ) (respectively T +(V )).
Deﬁnition 4.2. Given a virtual link diagram V the quantities U (V ), ∆(V ) ∈ Z are given

by

U (V ) = # nodes (T (V )) − 2# components (T −(V )) + wr(V ) + 1
∆(V ) = # nodes (T (V )) − # components (T +(V )) − # components (T −(V )) + 1.

The quantities U (V ) and ∆(V ) are dependent on the diagram V and are not invariants of
the virtual link.

Theorem 4.3. (Theorem 1.2 of Lobb [14]) For V a diagram of a virtual knot

Notice that the left hand side is a knot invariant whereas the right is diagram-dependent.

s(V ) ≤ U (V ).

To prove this we require Lemma 2.11, as we have canonical generators in terms of r and

g instead of a = 2r and b = −2g and the proof given in [17] relies on the sign of a and b.
Proof. (of Theorem 4.3) The proof is practically identical to that of the classical case in [14].
Form the diagram V − from V by smoothing all the positive classical crossings of V to their
oriented resolution, and suppose that V − is the disjoint union of l virtual link diagrams.
2 , . . . , V −
Label these diagrams V −
. Then the canonical generator so splits as a tensor
(cid:48)
(V −
product of canonical generators of Kh

1 , V −

l

r ) as

so = s1 ⊗ s2 ⊗ ··· ⊗ sl.

14

WILLIAM RUSHWORTH

(A) An alternating virtual knot dia-
gram which is not homogeneous. It is
virtual knot 3.7 in Green’s table [7].

(B) The Seifert graph of virtual knot
3.7.

Figure 17

Classically, sr can either be so(cid:48) or so(cid:48) where o(cid:48) denotes the induced orientation on V −
r , as
we are possibly altering the number of cycles separating others from inﬁnity. In the virtual
case, however, sr = so(cid:48) by construction as we use abstract link diagrams to produce the
canonical generators rather than the method due to Lee.

Where the proof given in [14] invokes Theorem 3.5 of [17] we invoke Lemma 2.11 as given
(cid:3)

above.

Theorem 4.4. (Theorem 1.10 of Lobb [14]) If ∆(V ) = 0 then s(V ) = U (V ). In fact

U (V ) − 2∆(V ) ≤ s(V ) ≤ U (V ).

The proof of Theorem 4.4 is identical to that of the classical case, owing to the identical
behaviour of the virtual and classical Rasmussen invariants with respect to the mirror image.

4.2. The case ∆(V ) = 0. Cromwell deﬁned homogeneous links using the Seifert graph [5].
Following this, we make the complementary deﬁnition for virtual links.

Deﬁnition 4.5. A cut vertex of a graph G is a vertex such that the graph obtained by
removing the vertex along with its boundary edges has more connected components than G .

Deﬁnition 4.6. A block of a graph G is a maximal connected subgraph of G containing no
cut vertices.

By signed graph we mean a graph with edges decorated with exactly one of two possible

signs, + and −.
Deﬁnition 4.7. A signed graph G is homogeneous if every block B of G is such that all
edges contained in B are decorated with the same sign.

Deﬁnition 4.8. A virtual link diagram V is homogeneous if T (V ) (the Seifert graph as
deﬁned in Deﬁnition 4.1) is homogeneous. A virtual link is homogeneous if there exists a
diagram of it which is homogeneous.

Positive and negative virtual knots are homogeneous trivially (as their Seirfert graphs
possess only one kind of decoration). In the classical case, alternating knots are also ho-
mogeneous [9]. In the virtual case, however, this no longer holds. For example, the virtual
knot diagram given in Fig. 17(A) is alternating but not homogeneous.

Abe showed that for a classical knot diagram D, ∆(D) = 0 if and only if D is homogeneous
[1]. As this result is obtained using the Seifert graph only, and by recalling that U (D) and

−−+ON THE VIRTUAL RASMUSSEN INVARIANT

15

∆(D) are deﬁned identically in the classical and virtual cases we are able to state the
following:

Theorem 4.9. (Virtual analogue of Theorem 3.4 of Abe [1]) A virtual knot diagram V is
homogeneous if and only if ∆(V ) = 0. Hence, for a homogeneous diagram V of a virtual
knot K

U (V ) = s(K).

References

[1] Tetsuya Abe. The Rasmussen invariant of a homogeneous knot. Proceedings of the American Mathem-

atical Society, 139(7):2647–2656, 2011.

[2] Dror Bar-Natan. Khovanov’s homology for tangles and cobordisms. Algebraic & Geometric Topology,

9:1443–1499, 2005.

[3] Dror Bar-Natan and Scott Morrison. The Karoubi envelope and Lee’s degeneration of Khovanov ho-

mology. Algebraic & Geometric Topology, 6:1459–1469, 2006.

[4] J Scott Carter, Seiichi Kamada, and Masahico Saito. Stable Equivalence of Knots on Surfaces and

Virtual Knot Cobordisms. Journal of Knot Theory and Its Ramiﬁcations, 11:311–322, 2002.

[5] Peter R. Cromwell. Homogeneous links. J. London Math. Soc., 39(2):535–552, 1989.
[6] Heather A Dye, Aaron Kaestner, and Louis H Kauﬀman. Khovanov Homology, Lee Homology and a

Rasmussen Invariant for Virtual Knots. arXiv:1409.5088, 2014.

[7] Jeremy Green. A Table of Virtual Knots.
[8] Seiichi Kamada and Naoko Kamada. Abstract Link Diagrams and Virtual Knots. Journal of Knot

Theory and Its Ramiﬁcations, 9:93–106, 2000.

[9] Louis H Kauﬀman. Formal Knot Theory. Princeton University Press, 1983.

[10] Louis H Kauﬀman. Virtual Knot Theory. European Journal of Combinatorics, 20:663–690, 1999.
[11] Louis H Kauﬀman. Virtual Knot Cobordism. arXiv:1409.0324, 2014.
[12] Tomomi Kawamura. An estimate of the Rasmussen invariant for links and the determination for certain

links. Topology and its Applications, 196:558–574, 2015.

[13] Eun Soo Lee. An endomorphism of the Khovanov invariant. Advances in Mathematics, 197:554–586,

2005.

[14] Andrew Lobb. Computable bounds for Rasmussen’s concordance invariant. Compositio Mathematica,

147:661–668, 2011.

[15] Vassily O Manturov. Khovanov homology for virtual links with arbitrary coeﬃcients. Journal of Knot

Theory and Its Ramiﬁcations Knot Theory Ramiﬁcations, 16:345–377, 2007.

[16] Vassily O Manturov and Denis P Ilyutko. Virtual Knots: The State of the Art. World Scientiﬁc, 2013.
[17] Jacob Rasmussen. Khovanov homology and the slice genus. Inventiones Mathematicae, 182:419–447,

2010.

[18] Daniel S Silver and Susan G Williams. Polynomial invariants of virtual links. Journal of Knot Theory

and Its Ramiﬁcations, 12:987–1000, 2003.

[19] Daniel Tubbenhauer. Virtual Khovanov homology using cobordisms. Journal of Knot Theory and Its

Ramiﬁcations, 23:1–91, 2014.

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Durham University
E-mail address: william.rushworth@durham.ac.uk

