6
1
0
2

 
r
a

M
9

 

 
 
]

M

I
.

h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[
 
 

1
v
8
9
8
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Submitted on Feb.3, 2016; Accepted on Mar.9, 2016
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11

FREQUENCY MODULATION OF DIRECTLY IMAGED EXOPLANETS: GEOMETRIC EFFECT AS A PROBE

OF PLANETARY OBLIQUITY

Hajime Kawahara1,2

Submitted on Feb.3, 2016; Accepted on Mar.9, 2016

ABSTRACT

We consider the time-frequency analysis of a scattered light curve by a directly imaged exoplanet. We
show that the geometric eﬀect due to planetary obliquity and orbital inclination induce the frequency
modulation of the apparent diurnal periodicity. We construct a model of the frequency modulation
and compare with the instantaneous frequency extracted from the pseudo-Wigner distribution of the
simulated light curves of a cloudless Earth. The model provides good agreement with the simulated
modulation factor even for the light curve with Gaussian noise comparable to the signal. Notably,
the shape of the instantaneous frequency is sensitive to the diﬀerence between prograde, retrograde,
and pole-on spin rotations. Whereas our technique requires the static property of the albedo map, it
does not need to solve the albedo map of the planet. The time-frequency analysis is complementary
to other methods which utilize the amplitude modulation. This paper demonstrates the importance
of the frequency domain of the photometric variability to the characterization of directly imaged
exoplanet in future.
Subject headings: astrobiology – Earth – scattering – techniques: photometric

1. INTRODUCTION

Photometric variability of scattered light has been
considered as an important probe to characterize
directly imaged exoplanets in near future.
In the
context of the habitable planet search, Ford et al.
(2001) demonstrated that inhomogeneous clouds and
surface components of Earth generate photometric
variability due to a spin rotation.
Inversion tech-
niques of the surface distribution have been extensively
studied (e.g. Cowan et al. 2009; Oakley & Cash 2009;
Fujii et al. 2010; Kawahara & Fujii 2010; Cowan et al.
2011;
2011;
Fujii & Kawahara 2012).

2011; Kawahara & Fujii

Fujii et al.

The inversion method using the diurnal and an-
nual variability, dubbed the spin-orbit tomography, re-
trieves not only the two-dimensional surface distribu-
tion but also the planet obliquity (Kawahara & Fujii
2010, 2011; Fujii & Kawahara 2012). The planet obliq-
uity (axial tilt) is the important parameter for ex-
oplanet’s environment (e.g. Williams & Kasting 1997;
Williams & Pollard 2003) and formation theory (e.g.
Agnor et al. 1999; Chambers 2001; Kokubo & Ida 2007)
but has not yet been measured.
Several observa-
tional
features, other than the photometric variabil-
ity, have been proposed as a probe of the obliq-
uity including the diﬀerence between the ingress and
egress shapes in a transit curve (Seager & Hui 2002;
Barnes & Fortney 2003; Carter & Winn 2010), the mod-
ulation of the planet’s radial velocity(Kawahara 2012),
the Rossiter-McLaurin eﬀect at planet’s occultation
(Nikolov & Sainsbury-Martinez 2015).

In the framework of the spin-orbit tomography, the
obliquity is simultaneously derived from the retrieval

Electronic address: kawahara@eps.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

1 Department of Earth and Planetary Science, The University

of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

2 Research Center for the Early Universe, School of Science,

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

of the surface map (Kawahara & Fujii 2010, 2011;
Fujii & Kawahara 2012). The generality of the obliquity
retrieval from the photometric variation has been studied
recently by Schwartz et al. (2015). They explained how
the obliquity aﬀected the shape and location of the ker-
nel of the scattered light. In essence, these methods use
information on the amplitude modulation to extract the
spin information. Hence, the albedo map of the planet
contributes nuisance parameters to the global light curve
ﬁt. In this paper, we focus on the frequency domain of
the photometric variability, rather than the amplitude
modulation. We utilize the frequency modulation as an
estimator of the obliquity, which is less sensitive to the
albedo distribution of the planet.

Regarding the photometric variability in the frequency
domain, Pall´e et al. (2008) presented a pioneering work
applying the autocorrelation function to the simulated
photometric variation. They showed that the photomet-
ric variation of the simulated Earth contains suﬃcient
information to measure the spin rotation period despite
variable weather pattern. Visser & van de Bult (2015)
studied the Fourier coeﬃcient of the photometric varia-
tion for various surface types of Earth-like planets and
several conﬁgurations (i.e. obliquity and inclination).
The Fourier analysis of the reﬂected light curve has also
been used in the ﬁeld of asteroids (e.g. Russell 1906;
Barucci et al. 1989). We extend the frequency analy-
sis of the photometric variability to the time-frequency
analysis to consider the frequency modulation. We show
that both the orientation of the spin axis and the orbital
inclination modulate the frequency of the apparent vari-
ability of the scattered light. In this paper, we concen-
trate on the geometric eﬀect of the frequency modulation
and restrict the scope of targets to the scattered light by
the static planetary surface.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we construct a simple model of the frequency modula-
tion due to the geometric eﬀect. In Section 3, we simulate

2

Kawahara

the photometric variability assuming the Lambert model
of the static albedo distribution. We extract the instan-
taneous frequency from the pseudo-Wigner distribution
of the simulated light curve. We discuss the other eﬀects
that cause the frequency modulation in Section 4. We
also compare our results with the spin-orbit tomography.
In Section 5, we summarize our ﬁndings.

2. APPARENT DIURNAL PERIODICITY

Let us ﬁrst consider a prograde rotation of an aligned
planet with a static surface distribution. The spin rota-
tion frequency is deﬁned by fspin = 1/Pspin, where Pspin is
the sidereal day of the planet (the spin rotation period).
The sidereal day is the period that it takes the planet to
make one rotation about the inertial reference frame of
the stellar system. The period of the photometric vari-
ation is identical to the so-called synodic day deﬁned as
the period that it takes to rotate once around the cen-
tral star. Then, the apparent diurnal periodicity derived
from the photometric variability is fobs = fspin − forb,
where forb = 1/Porb is the orbital frequency and Porb is
the orbital period. For the retrograde rotation (the obliq-
uity of 180◦), we obtain fobs = fspin + forb. The question
is how the obliquity changes the apparent diurnal peri-
odicity.

Figure 1 illustratively explains how the obliquity and
the orbital inclination induce the frequency modulation.
The Panel (a) displays prograde, retrograde, and pole-on
planets in a face-on orbit. The illuminated area painted
by white moves in the direction of the red arrow. Be-
cause the rotation axis of the illuminated area is aligned
with the spin axis, the photometric frequency of the pro-
grade and retrograde planets is stationarily shifted as
fobs = fspin± forb. For the case of the pole-on planets, the
rotation axis of the illuminated area is not aligned with
the spin axis. In the panel (b), the representative point
(the weighted center) of the illuminated area is indicated
by a ﬁlled cross. When the latitude of the weighted cen-
ter moves from the center (I) to left (II), the apparent
rotation speeds up. The shift of the weighted center to
right decelerates the apparent rotation (III). Thus, the
motion of the illuminated area modulates the frequency
of the apparent rotation.

The motion of the illuminated area due to the orbital
inclination also induces the frequency modulation by the
same principle. As shown in the panel (c), the shift of
the illuminated area around the inferior conjunction neg-
atively modulates the apparent rotation rate.
In gen-
eral, the frequency modulation due to the orbital incli-
nation is signiﬁcant near the inferior conjunction. We
call these types of the frequency modulation the geomet-
ric frequency modulation.

2.1. Maximum Weighted Longitude Approximation of

the Synodic Diurnal Modulation

The apparent periodicity depends on both the
spin vector and the albedo distribution. The inte-
grated light from the Lambert surface is expressed as
(Kawahara & Fujii 2010)

Ib ∝ZS

a(φ, θ)WV (φ, θ)WI (φ, θ) sin θdθdφ,

(1)

where a(φ, θ) is the albedo distribution on the planetary
surface of (φ, θ), S is the illuminated and visible area,

Figure 1. Schematic explanation of the geometric frequency mod-
ulation. The star mark indicates the position of a central star. The
black and white arrows are the spin axis vector of the planet and
the direction of the orbital motion. The red arrows indicate a di-
rection of the shift of the illuminated area painted by white. The
conﬁgurations for prograde, retrograde and the pole-on rotations
are shown in the panel (a). The panel (b) shows an enlarged view
of the pole-on case. The ﬁlled cross shows the weighted center of
scattered light. According to the orbital motion, the longitude of
the weighed center moves on a planet’s disk as indicated by the
green arrow. The apparent rotation is accelerated or decelerated
by the motion of the weighted center. The panel (c) explains the
frequency modulation induced by the orbital inclination. See the
text for the details.

WV (φ, θ) = eO· eR and WI (φ, θ) = eS· eR are the weight
functions of the visible and illuminated areas and eS, eO
and eR are the unit vectors of −→ps, −→po (p=the planet cen-
ter, s=the stellar center, and o=the observer) and, the
normal vector of the surface.

It is useful to exclude the inﬂuence of albedo distri-
bution from a model. Assuming that the surface at the
maximum weighted longitude mainly attributes the vari-
ability, we construct a model of photometric periodicity
by computing the phase shift of the maximum weighted
longitude, ˆφM. If the spin axis is aligned with the orbital
axis, i.e., the planetary obliquity ζ is zero, ˆφM moves ac-
cording to the spin rotation. Then we obtain ˆφM = −Φ,
where Φ is the diurnal phase of spin rotation deﬁned by
Φ = fspint/2π. The minus sign implies that the sun rises
from the east and sets in the west.

The orbital motion modulates ˆφM for the non-zero
obliquity. The instantaneous frequency of the periodicity

FM of directly imaged exoplanets

3

Figure 2. Examples of the modulation factor under the maximum weighted longitude approximation, ǫζ(Θ). We assume (i = 0◦, Θeq =
0◦), (i = 30◦, Θeq = 45◦), and (i = 60◦, Θeq = 270◦) from left to right. The singular points are marked by the green points.

at the maximum weighted longitude is given by

fobs =−

1
2π

∂ ˆφM
∂t

∂ ˆφM
∂Θ

= −

forb,

(2)

where Θ = forbt/2π is the orbital phase. Using the rela-
tion,

∂( ˆφM + Φ)

∂Θ

=

∂ ˆφM
∂Θ

+

∂Φ
∂Θ

=

∂ ˆφM
∂Θ

+

fspin
forb

we rewrite equation (2) as

fobs = fspin + ǫζ(Θ) forb,
where we deﬁne the modulation factor

∂( ˆφM + Φ)

ǫζ(Θ)≡−
κ(Θ)≡ tan ( ˆφM + Φ).

∂Θ

κ′(Θ)

1 + κ(Θ)2 ,

= −

(3)

(4)

(5)

To compute κ(Θ), we use the inertia coordinate system

described in Fujii & Kawahara (2012).

eS = (cos (Θ − Θeq), sin (Θ − Θeq), 0)T,
eO = (sin i cos Θeq, sin i sin Θeq, cos i)T,

(6)
(7)

where Θeq is the orbital phase at equinox. Because WI
and WV are the inner products, eO · eR and eS · eR, eR
has the maximum weight when eO · eR = eS · eR. Then,
we obtain the vector from the center to the maximum
weighted point as

eM =

eS + eO
|eS + eO|
L cos (Θ − Θeq) + cos Θeq sin i
sin (Θ − Θeq) − sin Θeq sin i
where L ≡ |eS + eO| = √2 + 2 cos Θ sin i.

cos i

=

1

(8)

(9)

! ,

We set the Cartesian coordinates ﬁxed on the plan-
etary surface e′
R(φ, θ) = (cos φ sin θ, sin φ sin θ, cos θ)T.
We call it the surface Cartesian coordinate. The spin
vector is e′
spin = (0, 0, 1)T in the surface Cartesian co-
ordinate. The conversion between the inertia coordinate
eR and the surface Cartesian coordinate e′
R is expressed
as

eR = R(ζ) ˆS(Φ) e

′
R(φ, θ)
′
R(φ + Φ, θ)

= R(ζ) e

= 

cos (φ + Φ) sin θ

cos ζ sin (φ + Φ) sin θ + sin ζ cos θ

sin ζ sin (φ + Φ) sin θ − cos ζ cos θ! ,

(10)

where R(ζ) is the rotation matrix for the clockwise rota-
tion around the x-axis and ˆS(Φ) is a rotation operator

′

of φ → φ + Φ. To describe eM in the surface Cartesian
coordinate ( ˆφM, ˆθM), we multiply R(−ζ) by eM,
ˆS (Φ) e

M ≡ R(−ζ) eM.
cos ζ[sin (Θ − Θeq) − sin i sin Θeq] − cos i sin ζ

cos i cos ζ + sin ζ(sin (Θ − Θeq) − sin i sin Θeq)! ,

cos (Θ − Θeq) + cos Θeq sin i

=

1

L 

(11)

(12)

Dividing the y-component by the x-component, we ob-
tain tangent of ˆφM + Φ,

tan ( ˆφM + Φ)
cos ζ[sin (Θ − Θeq) − sin Θeq sin i] − sin ζ cos i

cos (Θ − Θeq) + cos Θeq sin i

=

.(13)

M| = |e′

Substituting equation (13) and its derivative for κ(Θ)
and κ′(Θ) in equation(4), we obtain the analytic forms of
the modulation factor and the instantaneous frequency of
the photometric variation in equation (3). The explicit
form of equation (4) is given in Appendix A. Figure 2
displays several examples of a diﬀerent geometry of the
modulation factor of the maximum weighted longitude
approximation. The green points indicate the singular
points where the unit vector of the maximum weighted
point is aligned with the spin vector |e′
spin| (see
Appendix A for the derivation). On the singular point,
the kernel of the scattered light WI (φ, θ)WV (φ, θ) is over
the spin vector, corresponding to the maximum point
of the kernel width in Figure 3 (left) of Schwartz et al.
(2015).
We can classify the instantaneous frequency curve into
three domains; (A) ζ ≤ ˜ζI , (B) ˜ζI < ζ < ˜ζII , and (C)
ζ ≥ ˜ζII , where ˜ζI and ˜ζII (> ˜ζI ) are the obliquity of
the two singular points.
In the domains A, B, and C,
ǫ(Θ) has one negative peak, one negative+one positive
peaks, one positive peaks, respectively. For instance, we
obtain ˜ζI = π/4 and ˜ζII = 3π/4 for a face-on orbit.
Thus, the type of the geometric frequency modulation
is sensitive to the diﬀerence between the prograde, pole-
on, and retrograde spins, roughly corresponding to the
domain A, B, and C.

In Figure 2, we only show one example of Θeq for each
orbital inclination. However, the topological structure is
determined by the position of the singular points and the
null line (ǫ(Θ, ζ) = 0) which connects the singular points.
In the Appendix A, we explain the general properties of
the singular points and the null lines in detail. Using
these features, one can roughly reproduce the general
trend of the modulation factor for arbitrary parameters.

4

Kawahara

3. EXTRACTING THE INSTANTANEOUS FREQUENCY

FROM TIME-FREQUENCY REPRESENTATIONS

We compare equation (4) with the simulations of the
rotational light curve whose planetary surface is station-
ary. We use a static cloud-subtracted Earth model. The
static cloud-subtracted Earth is a toy model of the color-
diﬀerence map proposed by Kawahara & Fujii (2011). In
their paper, they showed that the spin-orbit tomography
inferences of the obliquity using the light curve of the
single band is poor because of the presence of clouds.
The obliquity can be well retrieved from the color dif-
ference of the light curve (for instance 0.85 - 0.45 µ
m) because the color diﬀerence of 0.85 - 0.45 µ m eﬃ-
ciently suppresses the eﬀect of clouds. The static cloud-
subtracted Earth model as shown in Figure 3 has a zero
albedo ocean and a constant albedo land after remov-
ing the cloud cover fraction. We use ISCCP D1 data
(the cloud map in 2008/6/30 21:00) as the cloud cover
fraction. The spherical pixelization is implemented using
HealPix (G´orski et al. 2005) with the total pixel number
of 3072.

Figure 3. Static cloud-subtracted Earth (static cloud-subtracted
Earth) model.

We set N =4096 grids with the equal time inter-
val (∼ 2.1 hour) during a year and compute the mock
photometric light curve using equations (1), (6), (7),
and, (10). We adopt Pspin = 23.9344699 hour and
Porb = 365.242190402 day corresponding to the synodic
day and a year of Earth. We add Gaussian noises with
the standard deviation σn = 0 and σs, (100% noise) to
the relative ﬂux, where σs is the standard deviation of
the photometric variation. Figure 4 shows examples of
the generated light curve for the geometric parameter
set, ζ = π/3, i = 0 (face-on), and Θeq = π.

We estimate the instantaneous frequency by extract-
ing the ridge of the time-frequency representation that
describes the signal in both time and frequency domains
(e.g. Cohen 1995). We use the pseudo-Wigner distribu-
tion3 as the time-frequency representation. In Appendix
B, we provide a detailed description of the pseudo-
Wigner distribution as an instantaneous frequency esti-
mator. We here provide a summary. The pseudo-Wigner

Figure 4. Simulated photometric variation with no noise (black),
and 100 % noise (gray).

distribution is expressed as

g(f , t) =Z ∞

−∞

h(τ )z(t + τ /2)z∗(t − τ /2)e−2πif τ dτ,

(14)
where z and z∗ are the analytic signal of the data and
its conjugate, and h(τ ) is the window. For the discrete
sequence, z[1], z[2], ...z[N ]

g(f , ti) = X|m|<N/2

h[m]z[i + m]z∗[i − m]e−2πif τ dτ,

(15)
where m = min(i − 1, N − i). Using equation (15), we
compute the time-frequency representation between fi =
0.96 to fj = 1.05 [1/day] around f = 1/Pspin. The ridge
line of the time-frequency representation is interpreted
as the instantaneous frequency,

ˆf (t) = argmax[fi ,fj ]g(f , t),

(16)

where [fi, fj] is the frequency range of interest.

We translated the MATLAB code for computing equa-
tion (15) in the Time-Frequency Toolbox 4 to Julia lan-
guage (Bezanson et al. 2014). The fact that f
is not
necessarily discrete is important for our purpose be-
cause the frequency modulation is small (of the order
of δf /f ≈ Pspin/Porb). Practically, the fast Fourier
transform (FFT) is ineﬃcient to explore the narrow
frequency range of interest. We replaced the FFT in
the original code by the non-uniform FFT algorithm
(Greengard & Lee 2004).
In Appendix C, we describe
the implementation of the non-uniform FFT into the
pseudo-Wigner distribution and the comparison of the
systems with the non-uniform FFT and the FFT. We
also test our code for known signals with a given instan-
taneous frequency in Appendices C and D. In practice,
the selection of the window width of h(τ ), w, is critical
for noisy data. We adopt the window width w = N/8 for
the 100 % noise. Our code used in the paper is publicly
available under the GNU General Public Licence 5.

The analytic signal z[1], z[2], ..., z[N ] in equation (15)
is generated by the following procedure. To remove the

3 The Wigner distribution whose variable is an analytic signal
of a real-valued signal is sometimes called the Wigner-Ville distri-
bution (Boashash 2015).

4 http://tftb.nongnu.org
5 https://github.com/HajimeKawahara/juwvid

FM of directly imaged exoplanets

5

amplitude modulation (detrending of the amplitude), we
compute interpolation function of the mock photometric
light curve of the mean and standard deviation for each
set of 64 adjacent data points (∼ six days). We subtract
the interpolated mean from the light curve and divide
them by the interpolated standard deviation. This pre-
processing enables us to exclude unnecessary amplitude
modulations from the frequency analysis and normalizes
the light curve. Then, we compute the analytic signal
of the normalized light curve using the DSP package of
Julia.

Figure 5. Time-frequency representation by the pseudo-Wigner
distribution of the light curve with the 100 % noise

Figure 6. Estimated instantaneous frequencies by the pseudo-
Wigner distribution (labeled as PWD) for the light curves with no
noise (black) and 100 % noise (green). The dashed curve (red) is
the theoretical prediction from the maximum weighted longitude
approximation (labeled as MWL)

Figure 5 shows an example of the time-frequency rep-
resentation of the 100 % noise case for ζ = 60◦, Θeq =
180◦, i = 0◦. Extracting the ridge line of the time-
frequency representation, we extract the extracted in-
stantaneous frequency shown by the green line in Fig-
ure 6. The black curve in Figure 6 is the extracted in-
stantaneous frequencies of the light curve with no noise
(w = N/16). The extracted instantaneous frequency of
the 100 % noise still exhibits same characteristic features
of the geometric eﬀect to that of the noiseless case. The
dashed line indicates the instantaneous frequency from
the maximum weighted longitude approximation. The
prediction curve from the maximum weighted longitude

approximation reproduces the general characteristics of
the instantaneous frequency of the simulations. However,
there remains some diﬀerence between the black and red
lines. Because the test given in Appendix C does not
exhibit such the diﬀerence (Figure 10), this diﬀerence
originates from the inﬂuence of the albedo distribution
we ignore in the maximum weighted longitude approxi-
mation.

We investigate other dozen parameter sets for ζ, Θeq.
We conﬁrmed that we can extract the instantaneous fre-
in
quency for the ∼ 100 % noise in most cases, but,
some conﬁgurations, we need to decrease the noise level
to ∼ 30% to extract the instantaneous frequency. We
also found the similar cases sometimes happen when
randomly rotating the albedo distribution for the ﬁdu-
cial parameter set. We found that these noise sensitive
cases are attributed to the particular conﬁgurations that
prevent enough amplitude of the photometric variation
depending on the albedo distribution and the geomet-
ric parameters. Because pursuing the optimization to
noise is beyond the scope of our paper, we do not try
to improve further to detect the instantaneous frequency
for these noise sensitive cases.
Instead, we point out
that numerous techniques in the high noise environment
have been proposed (see Stankovic et al. 2013; Boashash
2015). These techniques will potentially improve the de-
tectability for the noise-sensitive conﬁgurations.

3.1. Comparison with the maximum weighted longitude

model

Figure 7 displays the modulation factor of the simu-
lated light curve derived from the pseudo-Wigner dis-
tribution. We used the light curves with no noise,
adopted the pseudo-Wigner distribution with the win-
dow width w = N/16 to suppress the bias (see Appendix
D). Comparing with Figure 2, we ﬁnd that the maxi-
mum weighted longitude approximation provides a close
agreement with the simulated modulation factor in spite
of ignoring the dependence of the albedo distribution of
the frequency modulation. Thus, the frequency modula-
tion contains suﬃcient information on the obliquity.

For the highly inclined case (i & 60◦), the intensity
of the light curve signiﬁcantly decreases near the in-
ferior conjunction, and the gradient of the light curve
also increases. These disadvantages near the inferior
conjunction prevent accurate measurements of the fre-
quency modulation due to the orbital inclination. Even
for i = 60◦ (the right panel in Figure 7), one can see
the disturbance of the extracted instantaneous frequency
near the inferior conjunction Θ = π. However, the dif-
ﬁculty for highly inclined planets is less problematic for
our purpose because the direct imaging at inferior con-
junction for highly inclined planets is challenging in the
ﬁrst place.

To use the instantaneous frequency as an obliquity es-
timator, we ﬁt the extracted instantaneous frequency by
the maximum weighted longitude model. We generate
1000 realizations of the light curves with the noise for
each parameter set and extract the instantaneous fre-
quencies by the pseudo-Wigner distribution (w = N/8).
We ﬁt them by the maximum weighted longitude approx-
imation using the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (mp-
ﬁt Markwardt 2009). We regard Porb and i as known
parameters because the monitoring observation of the

6

Kawahara

Figure 7. Examples of the simulated modulation factor using the pseudo-Winger distribution, corresponding to the panels in Figure 2.

direct imaging provides them. Then, there remain the
there free parameters ζ, Θeq, and the spin rotation pe-
riod. To avoid the aliasing eﬀect, we exclude the most
left and most right ∼ 19 days of the extracted instanta-
neous frequency.
Figure 8 (top) shows the areas enclosing 68 and 95 %
of the best-ﬁt obliquity and phase. We assume a face-on
orbit and Θeq = 180◦ and test three diﬀerent obliquities,
A:ζ = 60◦, B:ζ = 23◦, and C:ζ = 157◦. For the case
A and B, we set the 100 % noise, but, we reduce the
noise to 30 % for the case C because the case C is the
noise-sensitive conﬁguration. The points mark the input
values. The estimated planetary obliquity and the esti-
mated phase are in good agreements with the input val-
ues for the cases A and B, although there are slight shifts
of the center from the input. For the case C, the bias is
much larger than the statistical uncertainty. This bias is
due to lack of the albedo information in the maximum
weighted longitude approximation. Although the maxi-
mum weighted longitude approximation (Fig 2) roughly
reproduces the simulated modulation factor (Fig 7), the
peak positions for a given ζ between Figures 2 and 7 of-
ten diﬀers several ten degree in Θeq. This diﬀerence also
impacts on the uncertainty of the obliquity. Considering
these facts, the conﬁdence region of the ﬁtting with the
maximum weighted longitude approximation is typically
∆ζ ∼ 20◦ and ∆Θeq ∼ 45◦, as shown by the yellow cross.
To further reduce the bias, one require the modeling of
the albedo distribution in the instantaneous frequency
model. We do not consider the albedo modeling in this
paper.

The uncertainty of the spin rotation frequency relies
on the determination of the oﬀset of the instantaneous
frequency. As shown in the bottom panel of Figure 8,
the best-ﬁt spin rotation frequency agrees with the input
one in ∼ 0.02 − 0.03 % accuracy, corresponding to a few
hours error during one year.

4. DISCUSSION

4.1. Light travel time eﬀect

The ﬁnite light-travel time eﬀect known as Rømer
The
delay also induces the frequency modulation.
light-travel time eﬀect provides direct information on
the length of the system. The light-travel time ef-
fect has been detected in the forms of the modula-
tion of the eclipse timing of the hierarchical triple-
star systems (Rappaport et al. 2013; Conroy et al. 2014;
Masuda et al. 2015; Borkovits et al. 2016) and the time
delay between a transit and a secondary eclipse of ex-
oplanets (Agol et al. 2010). Pulsating stars are also
used as a clock to measure the frequency modulation
(Shibahashi & Kurtz 2012). Here, we consider the light-

Figure 8. The areas enclosing 68 % and 90 % of the best-ﬁt ζ
and Θeq (top), and a histogram of the best-ﬁt spin rotation fre-
quency (bottom) for the sets of the 1000 realizations. We consider
three cases: A:ζ = 60◦ (red), B:ζ = 23◦ (blue), and C:ζ = 157◦
(green).
In the top panel, the input value is marked by the
points. The yellow cross indicates the typical bias discussed in
the text.
In the bottom panel, the vertical dashed line and the
dotted lines indicate the input value and the one-hour errors in
one year ∆fspin ∼ 1/(24 × 365) [1/day].

travel time eﬀect for a directly imaged planet in a circular
orbit. The time delay is ∆t = −a cos Θ sin i/c, where a
and c are the semimajor axis and the speed of light. The
phase of the diurnal periodicity is given by

ψ(t) = 2πfspin(t + ∆t) + const.

(17)

The instantaneous frequency is expressed as

fobs =

1
2π

∂ψ
∂t

= fspin + ǫLT (Θ)forb

ǫLT (Θ) = 2π(cid:18) fspina
= 0.036(cid:16) a

c (cid:19) sin i sin Θ
au(cid:17)(cid:18) fspin

day−1(cid:19) sin i sin Θ.

(18)

(19)

(20)

FM of directly imaged exoplanets

7

The amplitude of the frequency modulation by the light-
travel time eﬀect ∆f = |fobs − fspin| is of the order of
10−4 [1/day] for a = 1 au, fspin = 1 [1/day], forb = 1/365
[1/day]. Thus, the frequency modulation due to the
light-travel time eﬀect is two orders of magnitude smaller
than the geometric eﬀect for a = 1 au and a similar spin
rotation rate to Earth’s one. Because the thermal light
also has the light-travel time eﬀect, the light-travel time
eﬀect becomes important for the thermal emission from
a long-period planet with a > 10 au rather than the
scattered light.

4.2. Planetary Wind

The geometric eﬀect dominates the frequency modu-
lation for atmosphere-less planets. Indeed, atmosphere-
less planets can exhibit a signiﬁcant photometric vari-
ation (Fujii et al. 2014). For thin-atmosphere planets
like Earth, the dynamic eﬀect of clouds is important.
The static cloud-subtracted Earth model we used in this
paper implicitly assumes that the eﬀect of clouds can
be eﬃciently removed by the diﬀerence of two bands
(Kawahara & Fujii 2011). Principal component analy-
sis of the multi-band observation will help to make a
proper combination of the bands to eliminate clouds
(Cowan & Strait 2013). The validity of the assumption
of the static component is of particular importance to
discuss the feasibility because the seasonal changes of
global planetary winds can be a possible source of the
frequency modulation.

Analyzing realistic simulations of a single-band obser-
vation of a mock Earth, Pall´e et al. (2008) reported slight
shifts of the best-ﬁt rotational period to shorter periods.
They concluded that the variable cloud cover produced
the shifts. The order of the geometric frequency mod-
ulation for Earth is forb/fspin = 0.3 %, corresponding
to the wind speed of 1.3 m/s. The seasonal change or
the global diﬀerence of the wind velocity . 1 m/s can
be comparable to the geometric eﬀect. The possibility
of the detection of the planetary wind is an interesting
topic itself, and the model of the geometric frequency
modulation should be still critical to extracting the mod-
ulation of the planetary winds. To investigate the eﬀect
of the global planetary wind, detailed simulations of ra-
diative transfer with a suﬃciently ﬁne resolution of time
are required. We postpone the impact of the dynamic
planetary surface to a forthcoming paper using a global
climate model and satellite data (Kawahara and Kodama
in prep).

An application of our results to gas giants requires con-
sideration of the diﬀerential rotation. For, instance, the
zonal wind (v ∼ 100 km/s) in Jupiter reaches ∼ 1 % of
the spin rotation (Vasavada & Showman 2005), which is
one order of magnitude larger than forb/fspin even if as-
suming this Jupiter is located at 1 au. In this case, the
diﬀerential rotation signiﬁcantly aﬀects the modulation
factor. The assumption of the static surface is not valid
anymore.

4.3. Comparison with inversion techniques based on the

amplitude modulation

It is worth comparing our method with the traditional
inversion which uses the amplitude modulation (AM-
based method; Kawahara & Fujii 2010; Schwartz et al.

2015). Our method relies on the zonal inhomogeneity of
the planet because the change of the longitudinal location
generates the frequency modulation. As the AM-based
method, Schwartz et al. (2015) showed that the longitu-
dinal width (not the longitudinal location) and the dom-
inant colatitude constrain the obliquity. Although the
AM-based method and our techniques utilize diﬀerent
properties of the longitudinal kernel (i.e. width vs loca-
tion), a narrow longitudinal width of the kernel increases
both the amplitude and frequency modulation. In this
sense, two methods extract the same information on the
kernel position in the diﬀerent ways.

Our approach is complementary to the AM-based tech-
nique even for practical reasons. Schwartz et al. (2015)
showed that one could in principle identify the obliquity
of a planet with high-precision observations of a single ro-
tation at only two orbital phases. Our method requires
full-orbit observations, whereas it works for noisy data.
The amplitude modulation does not provide a map-
independent scheme for extracting planetary obliquity.
Therefore, the AM-based method suﬀers a severe albedo-
radius degeneracy. Our method does not require to solve
the albedo map of the planet. The frequency modulation
technique sidesteps this problem. However, our method
requires the static property of the albedo map, whereas
the AM-based method can in principle work for time-
variable maps (Schwartz et al. 2015). Kawahara & Fujii
(2011) and Fujii & Kawahara (2012) showed that the
spin-orbit tomography may constrain the obliquity for
the simulated Earth with cloud variability. Similarly,
further simulations including the cloud variability are re-
quired to validate the frequency modulation technique
for Earth-like planets.

The original spin-orbit tomography does not distin-
guish prograde rotation from retrograde one (i.e. ζ from
π − ζ; Kawahara & Fujii 2010). Schwartz et al. (2015)
suggested that the longitudinal location of the kernel over
an orbit might diﬀerentiate between the prograde and
retrograde rotation. The frequency modulation is very
sensitive to the diﬀerence between the prograde and ret-
rograde rotation even for a face-on orbit, as mentioned
at the end of Section 2.

Another advantage of using the frequency domain is
that the information on the normalization is not re-
quired. As is apparent from the procedure of the am-
plitude detrending, the long-term stability over a year
is not signiﬁcant. Moreover, the dependence of the geo-
metric parameters on the instantaneous frequency is in-
tuitively comprehensible. Regarding the statistical noise,
we showed the pseudo-Wigner distribution retrieved the
instantaneous frequency of the data with the 100% noise
compared to the standard deviation of the signal (for 2-
hours). Because the typical amplitude of the variation
of Earth is ∼ 10 %, it corresponds to S/N ∼ 10 for a
2-hour exposure. Fujii & Kawahara (2012) assumes the
S/N=20 for a 4.8-hour exposure for the spin-orbit to-
mography corresponding to the photon limit of a 5 m
telescope for a ten pc Earth. Our considered S/N is
comparable to theirs.

The full inversion by the spin-orbit tomography re-
quires a precise measurement of the spin rotation period.
For instance, one can recognize the frequency modula-
tion of the simulated light curves in the diurnal and or-
bital phase plane in Figure 6 of Kawahara & Fujii (2010),

8

Kawahara

which were used for the retrieval of the surface map and
obliquity. However, to obtain such images, we require the
precise value of the spin frequency with uncertainty be-
low ∼ 0.2Pspin/Porb (∼ 5 hours error in one year). It has
not been shown how to measure the spin rotation with
such precision. The time-frequency analysis can provide
the precise value with the uncertainty of the order of
0.1Pspin/Porb. which is critical even for the spin-orbit
tomography.

5. SUMMARY

In this paper, we found that the axial tilt and the
orbital inclination induce the frequency modulation of
the apparent periodicity of the scattered light. We
constructed the analytic model of the instantaneous

frequency which have three geometric parameters, the
obliquity, the seasonal phase, and the spin rotation pe-
riod. Fitting the instantaneous frequency extracted from
the pseudo-Wigner distribution of the simulated light
curve, we demonstrated that one can infer these param-
eters from the time-frequency analysis of the light curve
of directly imaged planets. The frequency modulation
provides the complementary technique to the inversion
based on the amplitude modulation.

H.K. is supported Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists
(B) from Japan Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS),
No. 25800106. We are grateful to the referee, Nick
Cowan, for many helpful suggestions, in particular, an
insightful consideration of the comparison with the AM-
based method.

APPENDIX

A. ANALYTIC EXPRESSIONS

The modulation factor on the maximum weighted longitude approximation is expressed as

ǫζ(Θ) =

cos2 ∆Θ + (− cos ζ sin ∆Θ + cos ζ sin Θeq sin i + sin ζ cos i)2 + 2 cos Θeq sin i cos ∆Θ + cos2 Θeq sin2 i

− cos ζ − sin ζ cos i sin ∆Θ + cos ζ cos Θ sin i

, (A1)

where ∆Θ ≡ Θ − Θeq.
The singular point satisﬁes that |e′
be zero. Then, we obtain the singular point (˜ζ, ˜Θ) for Θeq = ˜Θeq

M| = |e′

spin|. In other words, the x- and y- components of equation (12) should

cos ( ˜Θ − ˜Θeq) =− sin i cos ˜Θeq

(A2)

tan ˜ζ = tan i(− sin ˜Θeq ±qcsc2 i − cos2 ˜Θeq).

(A3)
The parameter set that satisﬁes the above equations corresponds to the singular point where ˆφM cannot be deﬁned.
The dependence of the singular points on Θeq is shown in Figure 9. As changing Θeq, the singular point primarily
runs parallel to Θ. However, when one of the singular points is passing through the inferior conjunction (denoted by
IC), the inclination eﬀect traps the singular point. Then, the interval between the pair of the singular points becomes
narrow. As increasing the orbital inclination, the trapping eﬀect becomes stronger. We also plot the null lines on
which the modulation factor is zero,

Thus, one can roughly imagine and understand the general feature of the modulation factor from the position of the
singular points and the null line.

tan ζnull =

1 + cos Θ sin i

cos i sin (Θ − Θeq)

.

(A4)

3.0

2.5

Qeq=90°

2.0

æ

Ζ

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0

1

i = 30°

IC

Qeq=0°

æ

Qeq=30°

æ

Qeq=60°

æ

Ζ

æ

2

æ

æ

æ

3
Q

4

5

6

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

i = 60°

IC

Qeq=0°

æ

Qeq=30°

æ

æ

Qeq=60°

Qeq=90°

æ

0

1

2

æ

æ

æ

æ

3
Q

4

5

6

Figure 9. The singular points (marked by ﬁlled circles) and the null line (ǫ(ζ, Θeq) = 0) as a function of Θeq (colors) for i = 30◦ and 60◦.
The black solid lines are trajectory of the singular point.

FM of directly imaged exoplanets

9

B. THE INSTANTANEOUS FREQUENCY EXTRACTION USING THE WIGNER DISTRIBUTION

Following Cohen (1995); Stankovic et al. (2013); Boashash (2015), we brieﬂy summarize the Wigner distribution
and the pseudo-Wigner distribution as the instantaneous frequency estimator. Let us consider the normalized analytic
signal z(t) = eiψ(t), where ψ(t) is the instantaneous phase. The instantaneous frequency is deﬁned by

∂t
The ideal time-frequency representation should be expressed as

f (t) =

.

(B1)

∂ψ(t)

1
2π

(B2)
where δD(x) is the delta function and ˆf (t) is the instantaneous frequency. The inverse fourier transform (f → τ ) is
(B3)

ρ(f , t) ∝ δD(f − ˆf (t)),

Approximating the derivative of the instantaneous phase by

∂ψ(t)

˜ρ(τ, t) = e2πiˆf (t)τ = exp(cid:18)iτ

∂t (cid:19).
ψ(t + τ /2) − ψ(t − τ /2)

,

∂ψ(t)
∂t ≈

τ

(B4)

(B9)

for a small time step τ , one obtains the Wigner distribution from the Fourier transform of the approximated ˆρ(f , τ ),

−∞

ρ(f , t) =Z ∞
≈Z ∞
=Z ∞

−∞

−∞

˜ρ(τ, t)e−2πf τ dτ

exp [iψ(t + τ /2) − iψ(t − τ /2)]e−2πf τ dτ
z(t + τ /2)z∗(t − τ /2)e−2πf τ dτ

(B5)

(B6)

(B7)

The pseudo-Wigner distribution is the windowed version of the Wigner distribution, which emphasizes the properties

near the time of interest t and suppresses the cross term of the noise (Cohen 1995),

g(f , t) =Z ∞

−∞

h(τ )z(t + τ /2)z∗(t − τ /2)e−2πif τ dτ.

(B8)

Because the pseudo-Wigner distribution can be expressed as the convolution of the Wigner distribution and the fourier
conjugate of the window,

g(f , t) = ˜h ∗ ρ(f , t),

the pseudo-Wigner distribution is the smoothed version of the Wigner distribution in the frequency domain
(Stankovic et al. 2013). The Hamming window is given by

h(τ ) = 0.54 + 0.46 cos(cid:16)2π

otherwise

= 0

τ

ω(cid:17) for |τ| ≤ ω/2

where ω is the window width.

C. TESTING THE PSEUDO-WIGNER DISTRIBUTION USING THE NON-UNIFORM FFT

The discrete pseudo distribution is expressed as

g(f , ti) = X|m|<N/2

h[m]z[i + m]z∗[i − m]e−2πif τ dτ,

(B10)
(B11)

(C1)

where N is the number of data. The ridge line of the pseudo-Wigner distribution is interpreted as the instantaneous
frequency,

where [fi, fj] is the frequency range of interest.

To test our code, we generate mock data sets for a given instantaneous frequency function of ˆf (t),

ˆf (t) = argmax[fi ,fj ]g(f , t),

We adopt N = 4096 and the model of the maximum weighted longitude approximation used in Figure 6 as ˆf (t).

yj = cos  tN

N

ˆf (ti)

2π !.

j

Xi=1

(C2)

(C3)

10

Kawahara

As is apparent from equation (C1), the frequency is an arbitrary value (not a discrete value) under the Nyquist
frequency. If using the FFT to solve equation (C1), the sampling rate of the frequency is 1/∆t. The gray line in Figure
10 displays an example of the extracted instantaneous frequency using the FFT. The coarse sampling rate is due to
the uniform grid. The non-uniform FFT enables us to increase the sampling rate eﬃciently in O(n log n) operations
(Greengard & Lee 2004). The other solid lines in Figure 10 indicate the extracted instantaneous frequency using the
non-uniform FFT with 4096 grids between f = 0.972 and 1.027 [1/day].The computational costs of the codes with the
FFT and the non-uniform FFT are on the same order.

Figure 10. Left: A test of the instantaneous frequency estimation from the pseudo-Wigner distribution. The gray line uses the FFT as
a Fourier-transform solver. The blue, green, and yellow curves use the non-uniform FFT with the window width of w = N/16, N/8, and
N/4. The dashed curve indicates the input instantaneous frequency. Right: the extracted instantaneous frequency for the data with the
50 % noise. The curves are same to the left panel.

D. DEPENDENCE OF THE WINDOW WIDTH ON THE BIAS FOR THE NONLINEAR INSTANTANEOUS FREQUENCY

AND THE NOISE SUPPRESSION

The selection of the window width aﬀects both the bias in the frequency direction and the suppression of the noise.
The blue, green, and yellow curves in the left panel of Figure 10 correspond to the extracted instantaneous frequency
using w = N/16, N/8 and N/4, where w = ωN/tN . In the left panel, we do not add any additional noise. As decreasing
the window size, the bias at a nonlinear instantaneous frequency point becomes smaller. However, there is the trade-oﬀ
relation between the frequency bias and the noise suppression (or frequency resolution). Figure 10 shows the extracted
instantaneous frequency using the same window sizes to the left panel for the data with additional noises (50 % of the
standard deviation of the signal). The extracted instantaneous frequency with a smaller window exhibits higher noises
(or poor resolution of the instantaneous frequency). Thus, the adequate size of the window depends on the noise level
of the data.

For the highly non-linear instantaneous frequency, the adaptive algorithm that determines the appropriate window
size as a function of time was proposed (Section 5 of Stankovic et al. 2013). We tried to use the adaptive algorithm
and found that the adaptive algorithm chooses smaller window at the peak of the instantaneous frequency. However,
there are other artifacts from the adaptive algorithm, and our data is not likely to be highly nonlinear. Therefore, we
decide to use a constant window size for simplicity in this paper.

REFERENCES

Agnor, C. B., Canup, R. M., & Levison, H. F. 1999, Icarus, 142, 219
Agol, E., Cowan, N. B., Knutson, H. A., et al. 2010, ApJ, 721, 1861
Barnes, J. W., & Fortney, J. J. 2003, ApJ, 588, 545
Barucci, M. A., Capria, M. T., Harris, A. W., & Fulchignoni, M. 1989, Icarus, 78, 311
Bezanson, J., Edelman, A., Karpinski, S., & Shah, V. B. 2014, ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1411.1607
Boashash, B. 2015, Time-Frequency Signal Analysis and Processing, 2nd Edition A Comprehensive Reference (Elsevier)
Borkovits, T., Hajdu, T., Sztakovics, J., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 455, 4136
Carter, J. A., & Winn, J. N. 2010, ApJ, 709, 1219
Chambers, J. E. 2001, Icarus, 152, 205
Cohen, L. 1995, Time Frequency Analysis: Theory and Applications, 1st Edition (Prentice hall)
Conroy, K. E., Prˇsa, A., Stassun, K. G., et al. 2014, AJ, 147, 45
Cowan, N. B., & Strait, T. E. 2013, ApJ, 765, L17
Cowan, N. B., Agol, E., Meadows, V. S., et al. 2009, ApJ, 700, 915
Cowan, N. B., Robinson, T., Livengood, T. A., et al. 2011, ApJ, 731, 76
Ford, E. B., Seager, S., & Turner, E. L. 2001, Nature, 412, 885
Fujii, Y., & Kawahara, H. 2012, ApJ, 755, 101
Fujii, Y., Kawahara, H., Suto, Y., et al. 2011, ApJ, 738, 184

FM of directly imaged exoplanets

11

—. 2010, ApJ, 715, 866
Fujii, Y., Kimura, J., Dohm, J., & Ohtake, M. 2014, Astrobiology, 14, 753
G´orski, K. M., Hivon, E., Banday, A. J., et al. 2005, ApJ, 622, 759
Greengard, L., & Lee, J.-Y. 2004, SIAM Review, 46, 443
Kawahara, H. 2012, ApJ, 760, L13
Kawahara, H., & Fujii, Y. 2010, ApJ, 720, 1333
—. 2011, ApJ, 739, L62
Kokubo, E., & Ida, S. 2007, ApJ, 671, 2082
Markwardt, C. B. 2009, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, Vol. 411, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and

Systems XVIII, ed. D. A. Bohlender, D. Durand, & P. Dowler, 251

Masuda, K., Uehara, S., & Kawahara, H. 2015, ApJ, 806, L37
Nikolov, N., & Sainsbury-Martinez, F. 2015, ApJ, 808, 57
Oakley, P. H. H., & Cash, W. 2009, ApJ, 700, 1428
Pall´e, E., Ford, E. B., Seager, S., Monta˜n´es-Rodr´ıguez, P., & Vazquez, M. 2008, ApJ, 676, 1319
Rappaport, S., Deck, K., Levine, A., et al. 2013, ApJ, 768, 33
Russell, H. N. 1906, ApJ, 24, 1
Schwartz, J. C., Sekowski, C., Haggard, H. M., Pall´e, E., & Cowan, N. B. 2015, ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1511.05152
Seager, S., & Hui, L. 2002, ApJ, 574, 1004
Shibahashi, H., & Kurtz, D. W. 2012, MNRAS, 422, 738
Stankovic, L., Dakovi´c, M., & Thayaparan, T. 2013, Time-frequency signal analysis with applications (Artech House)
Vasavada, A. R., & Showman, A. P. 2005, Reports on Progress in Physics, 68, 1935
Visser, P. M., & van de Bult, F. J. 2015, A&A, 579, A21
Williams, D. M., & Kasting, J. F. 1997, Icarus, 129, 254
Williams, D. M., & Pollard, D. 2003, International Journal of Astrobiology, 2, 1

