6
1
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
0
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[
 
 

2
v
7
1
9
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Controlling the Motion of a Nanoparticle Trapped in Vacuum

Jamie Vovrosh,1 Muddassar Rashid,1 David Hempston,1 James Bateman,1, 2 and Hendrik Ulbricht1, ∗

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom

2Department of Physics, College of Science, Swansea University, Swansea SA2 8PP, UK

(Dated: March 11, 2016)

We demonstrate a simple and robust geometry for optical trapping in vacuum of a single
nanoparticle based on a parabolic mirror and the optical gradient force, and we demonstrate rapid
parametric feedback cooling of all three motional degrees of freedom from room temperature to
a few mK. A single laser at 1550nm, and a single photodiode, are used for trapping, position
detection, and cooling for all three dimensions. Particles with diameters from 26nm to 160nm
are trapped without feedback to 10−5mbar and with feedback engaged the pressure is reduced to
10−6mbar. Modiﬁcations to the harmonic motion in the presence of noise and feedback are studied,
and an experimental mechanical quality factor > 4 × 107 is estimated.

Keywords: Nanoparticle detection, nanoparticle control, nanoparticle analysis, optical tweezers,
parametric feedback , Silica nanoparticles

Early experiments [1] showed the potential for opti-
cal manipulation of particles in high vacuum. Today,
levitated optomechanics, where light is used to trap a
single particle and manipulate its centre-of-mass motion,
holds promise for unprecedented precision in the control
of massive nanoparticles in vacuum [2]. Such precision
will be key for the development of applications in sensing
of magnetic spin resonance [3], investigating gravitational
eﬀects and detecting inertial forces. Background-free
spectroscopy experiments with single particles will ben-
eﬁt from such exquisite control. Moreover, new avenues
through which to test fundamental science will become
possible, such as interferometric and non-interferometric
tests of the linear quantum superposition principle [4]
as well as the test of the interplay between quantum the-
ory and gravity [5–8]. Recently the motion of single
nanoparticles has been optically detected and cooled by
parametric feedback [9, 10]. The motion of neutral par-
ticles has been cooled by cavity-assisted methods [11–
13]. For charged particles, the use of Paul traps has
led to temperatures below one Kelvin in high vacuum
((cid:39) 10−6mbar) [14]. Elsewhere, the rotation of nanos-
tructures has been studied and controlled [15, 16].

Here, we provide a substantial contribution to the race
towards the control of nanoparticles and complex nanos-
tructures by demonstrating a single-mirror trap geome-
try which has suﬃcient position resolution to approach
the ground state of the centre-of-mass motion of a mas-
sive nanoparticle by parametric feedback cooling alone.
Through this mechanism, we have been able to reduce the
amplitude of the motion of the centre-of-mass of the par-
ticle to energies corresponding to eﬀective temperatures
of just 1mK. Correspondingly, our trapped nanoparticle
is prepared in motional states thermally populated by
∼ 150 phonons, thus paving the way to the achievement
of the ground state of motion and thus the enablement
of quantum investigations.

The particle is trapped by the optical gradient force,

and detected by light scattered in the Rayleigh regime.
The reﬂective geometry allows for very tight focusing via
a large numerical aperture, which minimises the opti-
cal scattering force (radiation pressure) for sub-micron
particles.
In the limit where the particle is undergo-
ing small-amplitude oscillations, the trapping potential
is harmonic and the motion along the three spatial direc-
tions (here labelled as x, y, and z) is decoupled. Under
these conditions, motion along a given spatial direction

can be characterised by a trap frequency ω0 =(cid:112)k0/m,

which is deﬁned by the particle mass m and the opti-
cal spring constant k0 = 8αP /(cπ0w4
f ) (transverse) and
k0 = 2αP /(cπ0w6
f /λ2) (longitudinal) for a polarisable
particle that is dipole-trapped in a focused Gaussian laser
beam. Here P is the trapping laser power, α the po-
larisability of the particle, wf the waist of the trapping
laser beam at the focus, c the speed of light, λ is the
wavelength of the trapping laser and 0 the permittivity
of vacuum. For large amplitude oscillations, behaviour
is anharmonic and motional modes are coupled, as has
been observed at low vacuum and high vacuum [17].

We control particle motion by parametric feedback
to the trap stiﬀness via modulation of the laser power;
this provides a time-varying, non-conservative motional
damping resulting in small oscillation amplitudes. The
equation of motion for the trapped particle in the x-
direction is

¨x(t) + Γ0 ˙x(t) +

k0 + kf b(t)

m

x(t) =

Fth(t)

m

(1)

where Γ0 is the damping rate, here dominated by col-
lisional damping, ω0 is the undamped oscillation fre-
quency, Fth is a stochastic driving term arising from those
same sources which give damping Γ0, m is the mass of
the nanoparticle and kf b(t) is the variation in trap stiﬀ-
ness caused by parametric feedback. Similar equations
hold for the particles motion in y and z directions.

To achieve feedback, unlike previous experiments we
lock an external oscillator to the particle’s motion; for a

2

FIG. 1. Trapping and controlling the motion of the particle. a) Time trace of particle’s 3d motion in the trap, the total
signal measured by a single photo-diode detector. The particle’s (x,y,z) motion modulates the intensity of the backscattered
light re-collimated by the parabolic mirror. The modulated light is measured by a single photodiode and the position is
calculated from the ﬁt in Fig.1c) (see supplement S1 for details). No feedback is applied and the pressure is 7×10−2mbar. b)
Optical setup for parametric feedback cooling. The 3d position of a trapped nanoparticle is measured using a single photodiode.
The signal is frequency doubled and phase shifted using three lock-in ampliﬁers. The sum of these signals is used to modulate
the intensity of the trapping laser by an acousto optical modulator (AOM). The modulated signal is ampliﬁed in an optical
erbium doped ﬁbre ampliﬁer (EDFA), (see supplement S6 for more details). c) Power spectral density (PSD) of time trace
shown in a). The plot shows the zoom into the motion in z-direction. PSD is ﬁtted to Eqn.(2). The ﬁt is used to extract
information about the trapped particle and its motion (see supplement S1 for details). d) shows the incident and outgoing
light ﬁelds at the parabolic mirror. The detection of the position of the particle is using optical interferometry between the
light scattered oﬀ the particle Escat and the diverging reference Ediv. Here the position of the detector is chosen so that the
amplitudes of both ﬁelds are comparable, unlike the standard homodyne detection scheme. See supplement S2 for details on
position resolution of this interferometric scheme.

high-Q system with signiﬁcant measurement noise, this
permits more accurate tracking, and allows a less noise-
prone feedback signal to be derived.

Our system is driven by white noise, yet it can respond
only to that which falls within its bandwidth; for a high-
Q system, this is well approximated by a sinusoidal driv-
ing term of unknown phase. This phase can be extracted
from the externally locked oscillator, and we implement
parametric feedback with a controlled phase shift relative

to the particle motion, in close analogy with early work
on microcantilevers [18].

The corresponding form of the power spectral density
(PSD) of the oscillation is then straightforward to calcu-
late from equation 1, leading to the modiﬁed Lorentzian
response

Sx(ω) =

kBT0
πm

([ω0 + δω]2 − ω2)2 + ω2[Γ0 + δΓ]2 ,

Γ0

(2)

with kB the Boltzmann constant. The interpretation of

a) c) b) d) Vacuum1ChamberParabolicMirrorλ,2λ,431Lock1in1amplifiersXYZPhotodiode1550nmLaserAOMEDFAPosition1(nm)PSD1(V2,√Hz)ω,2π1(kHz)Time1(ms)Z1T1motionXzYzZ1T1motionZXY3

FIG. 2. Analysing cooling rate δΓ and collisional damping rate Γ0. a) Shows a PSD with x, y, z peaks at temperatures
Tcm taken simultaneously. The z-peak appears at a lower frequency than the x and y because of the diﬀerence in the optical
ﬁeld gradient as formed by the focusing parabolic mirror. Separation of x and y peaks can be controlled by the polarisation of
the trapping light and its alignment to the mirror. The red data represents a PSD without feedback at 300K at a pressure of
7×10−2mbar. The blue data is a PSD of a feedback cooled particle at 6×10−6mbar. x, y, z motion is cooled with independent
feedback parameters each. The grey data represents the noise ﬂoor. b) Shows a more detailed variation of the feedback cooling
of y at diﬀerent pressures. Feedback parameters are optimised to maximize the cooling eﬀect. We observe a frequency shift
for PSDs taken at diﬀerent motional temperature Tcm and background pressure p. c) Shows the motional temperature Tcm
for x, y, z motion vs pressure p. Data was taken for the same particle while it was cooled down at various pressures. The
lowest temperatures reached in this experiment were, Tx = 15mK, Ty = 17mK, Tz = 2.6mK at a pressure of 5×10−5mbar.
An extrapolation of the ﬁt through the cooling rate shows that for this data set the ground state temperature (intercept with
horizontal dashed lines) would be reached at pressure in the range of 10−9mbar. d) The gas collision damping rate Γ0 as
extracted from ﬁtting a Lorentzian to the PSD (see supplement S1 for details), here shown for motion for x, y, z, decreases
linearly with pressure p. This indicates that the damping is dominated by gas collisions for the parameter range of this
experiment and that therefore the motional noise ﬂoor in Fig.(2a) is dominated by gas collsions.

this result is then straightforward: by tuning the modu-
lation depth of the trap and the relative phase between
feedback signal and particle’s motion, we are able to
change the sign and amplitude of both δΓ and δω, thus
tuning the eﬀective dynamics of the particle from an un-
derdamped motion to an over damped one, and blue or
red-detuning its oscillation frequency with respect to that
of the trap. This is precisely the sort of control that we
aim to demonstrate in this work.

Assuming equilibration at the steady state of the mo-

tion, the equipartition theorem provides an eﬀective tem-
perature of the centre-of-mass motion given by Tcm =
m(ω0 + δω)2(cid:104)x2(t)(cid:105)/kB. As δω (cid:28) ω0 for all the exper-
imental conditions of our work, we can write, Tcm =
T0Γ0/(Γ0 + δΓ), where T0 is the equilibrium tempera-
ture in the absence of parametric feedback cooling, which
is here assumed to be 300K. We have experimentally
checked the motion of the particle for diﬀerent trapping
laser powers and observed no dependency on such pa-
rameter. We instead observe a constant motional tem-

d)#z"direc(on+x"direc(on+y"direc(on+d)#z"direc(on+x"direc(on+y"direc(on+gthecenterofmassmotionandanalysingparametriccoolingrateδΓvscollisionaldampingratePSDofxqyandzmotionalpeaksattemperaturesTcmtakensimultaneously8Thez1peakappearsatalowerthexandypeaksbecauseofthedi↵erenceintheopticalﬁeldgradientasformedbythefocusingmirror8Thehedirectionaltrapfrequenciesisdependingonthemirrorgeometryand188inourcase8Thexandypeaksaredjustingthepolarisationofthetrappinglight8VariationofthatpolarisationcanbeusedtoperfectlyoverlaptheCoolingoftheparticlemotionisdonesimultaneouslyaswellbyparametricfeedbackwithindividualloopsandd)#otionandanalysingparametriccoolingrateδΓvsconalpeaksattemperaturesTcmtakensimultaneouslyThezd)#z"direcx"direcy"direcssmotionandanalysingparametriccoolingrateδΓvscollisionotionalpeaksattemperaturesTcmtakensimultaneously8Thez1peakaecauseofthedi↵erenceintheopticalﬁeldgradientasformedbythefocequenciesisdependingonthemirrorgeometryand188inourcase8Theonofthetrappinglight8VariationofthatpolarisationcanbeusedtopeZgdirectionXgdirectionYgdirectionωj2πg,kHz.ωj2πg,kHz.PSDg,V2j√Hz.Pressureg,mbar.Pressureg,mbar.Tcmg,K.ΓCg,Hz.a)b)c)d)PSDg,V2j√Hz.perature, which veriﬁes our assumption that the motion
of the particle without active feedback is thermalised at
room temperature.

Experimental setup:– The optical trap is generated
with light from a stabilised ﬁbre laser (λ = 1550nm, NKT
Koheras Basik CI5, 40mW). The output of the laser is
intensity modulated by a AOM (PhotonLines, 80MHz)
according to a feedback signal (see supplement S6 for de-
tails). The light then seeds an erbium doped ﬁbre ampli-
ﬁer (EDFA, NuPhoton) to a maximum power of 1W. The
light is focused by a high numerical aperture (NA=0.995)
parabolic aluminium mirror which is mounted in a vac-
uum chamber. We trap silica (SiO2) nanoparticles at
vacuum as low as 1×10−6mbar and at trap frequency
ω0. This trap frequency can be controlled by varying
the laser power and hence the optical spring constant
to achieve a ω0 in the range 10kHz to 300kHz. The
particle is a driven dipole and hence radiates a ﬁeld, a
backwards propagating fraction of which is collected and
collimated by the same parabolic mirror.
Interference
between this back scattered ﬁeld Escat, and the highly
divergent ﬁeld which passes without interacting with the
particle through the focus Ediv (the local oscillator ref-
erence ﬁeld), provides interferometric position resolution
(see Fig. 1d)). By allowing the reference ﬁeld to diverge,
we make the reference ﬁeld amplitude comparable with
that scattered by the particle, giving a large modulation
visibility at the detector. This results in a high particle
position resolution.

Results:– Particles can be trapped at atmospheric pres-
sure and kept optically trapped without feedback down
to pressures on the order of 10−5mbar, see Fig.3c). This
indicates that using 1550nm trapping light and particles
with presumably low absorption cross section minimises
the eﬀects of internal heating and ionisation, which would
ultimately result in trap loss. With feedback the pressure
could be reduced to the limits of the present setup. We
trap particles of diameter ranging from 26nm to 160nm
at comparable trapping laser powers.

We evaluate the radius r and mass m of the parti-
cle from ﬁtting Eqn.(2) to experimental PSDs. For data
shown in Fig.1c) we get m=3.3(±0.7) × 10−19kg and
r = 32(±6)nm (see supplement S1 for details).The large
error bars result from a large uncertainty in the mea-
surement of the pressure in the vacuum chamber. To
circumvent such limitations and to perform a parameter
independent measurement we perform a further experi-
ment to directly measure the amplitude of particle mo-
tion by scanning the wavelength of the trapping laser to
modulate the relative amplitudes of the ﬁrst and second
harmonic PSD peaks of the z-motion of a trapped parti-
cle (see supplementary section S2 for more details). By
comparing the change in amplitude between the ﬁrst and
second harmonic we are able to measure the amplitude
of particle motion within the trap to be 119(±10)nm.
From equipartition theorem: m = kbTcm/ω2
0, with

0z2

4

Tcm = 300K we can obtain a pressure independent mea-
sure of the particles mass m = 3(±0.5) × 10−19kg and
thus a particle radius r=30(±2)nm. We evaluate the po-
√
Hz(±8%) for
sition resolution to be Sx,exp = 200f m/
the same 60nm diameter particle as used for the wave-
length scan.

The feedback compensates the thermalisation eﬀect by
gas collisions and stabilises the motion at a lower tem-
perature, see 2c). However, the minimum temperature
that can be reached is dependent on the pressure of the
system as shown in ﬁgure 2c). This is because the feed-
back cannot compensate fully for the heating by gas col-
lisions, even at optimised settings. Therefore, the motion
of the particle is dominated by the pressure damping rate
Γ0 even after optimising the feedback parameters. The
motion of the particle can be cooled and the lowest tem-
peratures Tcm achieved are on the order of 1mK for x,y
and z simultaneously at the lowest achieved pressure in
the vacuum chamber of 1×10−6mbar. The temperature
reached is not limited by the overall noise ﬂoor present
in the experiment, but is dominated by noise caused by
background gas collisions remaining at 1×10−6mbar. An
extrapolation of this pressure dependency indicates that
motional ground state can be achieved at a pressure on
the order of 10−9mbar, which is technical very feasible
although not implemented in our current setup.

The collisional damping rate Γ0 is analysed for diﬀer-
ent pressures in Fig.2d), and found to be dominating the
width of the PSD ∆ω and used to analyse the mechan-
ical factor as Qm = ω0/∆ω. Qm is expected to be ex-
ceptionally high for the motion of a trapped particle [17],
assuming the relation, Qm = ω0/Γ0, to hold and a lin-
ear decrease of Γ0 with decreasing pressure. Experimen-
tally we ﬁnd Qm =4.4×107 from the respective collisional
damping data at 1×10−6mbar, where the damping rate
is measured to be Γ0/(2π)=3.3mHz. Assuming that this
scaling can be extrapolated to ultra-high vacuum, we ﬁnd
a maximum Qm=1012 at 10−9mbar, in agreement with
previous studies [17].

Feedback dependent eﬀects:– Feedback cooling rates
achieved are on the order of 100Hz depending on the
feedback modulation depth η and phase φ. Parametric
feedback is by deﬁnition the modulation of the optical
spring constant ktrap at twice the trap frequency. Here
we report on a eﬀect of the phase of the feedback on the
temperature and frequency of the motion of the trapped
particle, see Figs.3a) and b). To study this eﬀect in more
detail we systematically change φ to switch between para-
metric cooling and parametric heating. We ﬁnd that
starting from the optimal cooling situation, that there
is heating in both directions when varying the phase, see
Fig.3a) for PSDs. The relationship between the phase φ
and motional temperature Tcm can be written as [18]:

5

FIG. 3. Feedback dependent eﬀects. a) Feedback phase scan for a 100nm diameter particle at 10−5mbar with diﬀerent
phase φ for feedback. PSD showing the dependence of the mechanical oscillator frequency ω0 when driven with a feedback signal
of diﬀering phases. b) Extracted temperature from PSDs in a) versus feedback phase φ. The dependence of the mechanical
oscillator frequency when driven with a feedback signal of diﬀering phases. Insert shows the linear increase in trap frequency
ω with increasing φ. c) PSD of a 100nm diameter particle at diﬀerent pressure without feedback. Particles could be trapped
for some hours without signiﬁcant changes to the PSD. For pressure below 5×10−6mbar the particle was always lost from the
trap if no feedback was applied. d) shows the cooling for diﬀerent feedback modulation depths η for a 150nm diameter particle
at 1×10−6mbar. All other parameters have been kept constant.

(cid:40)(cid:32)

(cid:33)2

(cid:32)

+

cos φ
1 + 

sin φ
1 − 

(cid:33)2(cid:41)

,

(3)

Tcm =

F0Qmω0

kB

where F0 is the amplitude of the force Fth,  =
Qmδk/2k0, and δk = mδω2 is the change in the spring
constant [and therefore the change of the trap frequency]
caused by the feedback cooling, which can be associated
to the δω term in Eqn.(2) (see supplement S7 for details).
We ﬁnd very good agreement between theory and exper-
iment, as shown in Fig.3b) where Eqn.(3) is ﬁtted to the
experimental data.

Increasing of the feedback modulation depth η shows
a decrease of the motional temperature in the experi-
ment to a point. Using δΓ = η/2 we can write Tcm =
T0Γ0/(Γ0 + η/2), which is shown ﬁtted to experimental
data in Fig.3d) and is in perfect agreement for modula-
tions of η < 1%. However at larger modulation depths

we ﬁnd the eﬀect of parametric feedback to cause heating
instead. (see supplement S8 for details).

With the current experimental setup we ﬁnd that the
main noise contribution that aﬀects the motion of the
trapped particle is random collisions with background
gas. Such collisions result in the observed noise ﬂoor,
which decreases with decreasing pressure. The feedback
as implemented does not induce systematic noise eﬀects
and no dominating random noise eﬀect on the motion of
the particle. We are not limited by shot noise of the laser
or photodetector (see supplement S6 for details).

Conclusion:– We have demonstrated a parabolic mir-
ror geometry for optically trapping of nanoparticles in
high vacuum and achieve parametric feedback cooling in
all three motional directions to a few mK. The dominat-
ing noise source was found to be collisions with the back-
ground gas. We ﬁnd a trap frequency modulation eﬀect,
which depends on the phase of the parametric feedback.
We don’t ﬁnd a fundamental limit which would prevent

ω/2π (kHz)Sz(ω) (V2/√Hz)Sz(ω) (V2/√Hz)ω/2π (kHz)a)c)b)d)Tcm (mK)Tcm (mK)η (%)η=0.44% 10mKη=0.55% 8mKη=0.83% 6mKSz(ω) V/√Hzω/2π(kHz)η=0.44% 10mKη=0.55% 8mKη=0.83% 6mKSz(ω) V/√Hzω/2π(kHz)Φ (o)Φ (o)the cooling of the motion of the particle further down.
Therefore we conclude that the implementation of ultra-
high vacuum will pave the way to reaching the motional
ground state of levitated optomechanics in this system.
We demonstrate feedback cooled nanoparticles that
can be utilized as point-like source for matterwave
interferometers [19–21]. Trapped nanoparticles hold
promise for testing CSL collapse models [5, 22] by non-
interferometric means [23–26]. The simple, robust and
easily vacuum compatible mirror trap might provide use-
ful technology for spectroscopy investigation of envi-
ronmental independent nanoparticles properties, exper-
iments in space [27], quantum superposition of living
organisms [28] and the detection of speculative parti-
√
cles [29, 30]. The high Qm value and the precise po-
Hz for a single particle of
sition detection of 200fm/
mass in excess of atomic scales holds a lot of promise for
various sensing application based on classical levitated
optomechanics
[31, 32]. Further experiments with lev-
itated optomechanics will aim to demonstrate quantum
control
[33] and to realise non-classical motional states
of the trapped particle [34–36].

Acknowledgements:– We thank for stimulating discus-
sions all participants of the OSA Incubator meeting on
Levitated Optomechanics. We thank Maximilian Bazzi
and Catalina Curceanu for providing low-noise electron-
ics for a quadrant photo diode detector from which one
channel was used for some of the experiments reported
here. We further thank Nathan Cooper and Christopher
Dawson for help with an earlier version of the mirror trap
experiment. We thank Phil Connell and Gareth Savage
for expert technical help during the realisation of the
experimental setup. We thank Mauro Paternostro for
discussions. We wish to thank the UK funding agency
EPSRC for support under grant (EP/J014664/1), the
Foundational Questions Institute (FQXi), and the John
F Templeton Foundation under grant (39530). We are
grateful to Jelena Trbovic and Marco Brunner of Zurich
Instruments for the extended loan of one of the precious
lock-in ampliﬁers and Prof Harvey Rutt for lending to us
the additional lock-in hardware.

∗ h.ulbricht@soton.ac.uk
[1] A. Ashkin and J. Dziedzic, Appl. Phys. Lett. 28, 333

(1976).

6

32, 165022 (2015).

[9] T. Li, S. Kheifets, and M. G. Raizen, Nat. Phys. 7, 527

(2011).

[10] J. Gieseler, B. Deutsch, R. Quidant, and L. Novotny,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 103603 (2012).

[11] P. Asenbaum, S. Kuhn, S. Nimmrichter, U. Sezer, and

M. Arndt, Nat. Commun. 4, 3743 (2013).

[12] N. Kiesel, F. Blaser, U. Deli´c, D. Grass, R. Kaltenbaek,

and M. Aspelmeyer, PNAS 110, 14180 (2013).

[13] D. E. Chang, C. A. Regal, S. B. Papp, D. J. Wilson,
J. Ye, O. Painter, H. J. Kimble, and P. Zoller, PNAS
107, 1005 (2010).

[14] J. Millen, P. Fonseca, T. Mavrogordatos, T. Monteiro,

and P. Barker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 123602 (2015).

[15] Y. Arita, M. Mazilu, and K. Dholakia, Nat. Commun.

4, 2374 (2013).

[16] S. Kuhn, P. Asenbaum, A. Kosloﬀ, M. Sclafani, B. A.
Stickler, S. Nimmrichter, K. Hornberger, O. Chesh-
novsky, F. Patolsky, and M. Arndt, Nano Lett. 15, 5604
(2015).

[17] J. Gieseler, L. Novotny, and R. Quidant, Nat. Phys. 9,

806 (2013).

[18] D. Rugar and P. Gr¨utter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 699 (1991).
[19] J. Bateman, S. Nimmrichter, K. Hornberger, and H. Ul-

bricht, Nat. Commun. 5, 4788 (2014).

[20] O. Romero-Isart, A. C. Pﬂanzer,

R. Kaltenbaek, N. Kiesel, M. Aspelmeyer,
J. I. Cirac, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 020405 (2011).

F. Blaser,
and

[21] M. Scala, M. Kim, G. Morley, P. Barker, and S. Bose,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 180403 (2013).

[22] A. Vinante, M. Bahrami, A. Bassi, O. Usenko, G. Wijts,
and T. H. Oosterkamp, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 090402
(2016).

[23] M. Bahrami, M. Paternostro, A. Bassi, and H. Ulbricht,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 210404 (2014).

[24] S. Nimmrichter, K. Hornberger,

and K. Hammerer,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 020405 (2014).

[25] L. Diosi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 050403 (2015).
[26] D. Goldwater, M. Paternostro,

and P. Barker, arXiv

preprint arXiv:1506.08782 (2015).

[27] R. Kaltenbaek, M. Arndt, M. Aspelmeyer, P. F. Barker,
A. Bassi, J. Bateman, K. Bongs, S. Bose, C. Braxmaier,
ˇC. Brukner, et al., arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02640
(2015).

[28] O. Romero-Isart, M. L. Juan, R. Quidant,

and J. I.

Cirac, New J. Phys. 12, 033015 (2010).

[29] J. Bateman, I. McHardy, A. Merle, T. R. Morris, and

H. Ulbricht, Sci. Rep. 5, 8058 (2015).

[30] C. J. Riedel, Phys. Rev. D 88, 116005 (2013).
[31] A. A. Geraci, S. B. Papp, and J. Kitching, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 105, 101101 (2010).

[32] J. Millen, T. Deesuwan, P. Barker, and J. Anders, Nat.

Nano. 9, 425 (2014).

[33] Z. Yin, T. Li, X. Zhang, and L. M. Duan, Phys. Rev. A

[2] M. Aspelmeyer, T. J. Kippenberg, and F. Marquardt,

88, 033614 (2013).

Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 1391 (2014).

[34] M. G. Genoni, J. Zhang, J. Millen, P. F. Barker, and

[3] L. P. Neukirch, E. v. Haartman, R. J. M, and A. N.

A. Seraﬁni, New J. Phys. 17, 073019 (2015).

Vamivakas, Nat. Photon. 9, 653657 (2015).

[35] H. M. Wiseman and G. J. Milburn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70,

[4] M. Arndt and K. Hornberger, Nat Phys 10, 271 (2014).
[5] A. Bassi, K. Lochan, S. Satin, T. P. Singh, and H. Ul-

bricht, Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 471 (2013).
[6] L. Diosi, Phys. Lett. A 105, 199 (1984).
[7] R. Penrose, Gen. Rel. Grav. 28, 581 (1996).
[8] C. Anastopoulos and B. L. Hu, Class. Quantum Grav.

548 (1993).

[36] H. Wiseman and G. Milburn, Quantum Measurement and

Control (Cambridge University Press, 2010).

[37] S. Beresnev, V. Chernyak, and G. Fomyagin, J. Fluid

Mech. 219, 405 (1990).

[38] P. Varga and P. T¨or¨ok, JOSA A 17, 2090 (2000).

[39] P. F. Cohadon, A. Heidmann, and M. Pinard, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 83, 3174 (1999).

7

8

Supplementary Material for “Controlling the Motion of a Nanoparticle Trapped in

Vacuum”

Abstract: Here we give more details about the technical and theoretical details for the particle trap. We describe
the interferometric method to detect the position of the particle and evaluate the resolution of this measurement.
We describe the method to extract particle and trap parameters from the ﬁtting to the theoretical model to the
experimental power spectral density (PSD) and from scanning the trapping laser wavelength. We give details about
the particle preparation, trapping and feedback cooling. We further show how to evaluate the numerical aperture
(NA) of the parabolic mirror as used in the experiment. We discuss the analysis of noise eﬀects in the trap and give
more details about the implementation of the parametric feedback.

S1 Extraction of parameters from ﬁt to power spectral density (PSD)

Here we describe how to extract nanoparticle parameters, such as mass m and radius r, and parameters about
the motion of the nanoparticle in the trap, such as damping of the particle motion Γ0, from ﬁtting to the measured
power spectral density. Experimental data is directly recorded from the photodiode signal, which means the particle
position is recorded in volts as function of time.

Equation of Motion: The time trace signal contains generally the motion of the particle in x, y and z degrees of

motion of the particle, which we simplify to one dimension x :

¨x(t) + Γ0 ˙x(t) +

k0 + kf b(t)

m

x(t) =

Fth(t)

m

(4)

Power spectral density (PSD) with gamma factor γ: We can write the PSD of the trapped nanosphere from the
above equation of motion. However, to be able to ﬁt to the experimental data it should be noted that the above is
measured in nm2/Hz. Whereas experimental PSD of the recorded time trace is in V2/Hz, therefore the experimental
PSD should look like as

Sx(ω) = γ2 kBT0
πm

([ω0 + δω]2 − ω2)2 + ω2[Γ0 + δΓ0]

Γ0

,

where γ is the conversion factor from volts to nanometers in units of V/m.

Fitting gives A, B, C parameters in the PSD model: We can simplify Eq. (5) as

Sexp

x =

A

(B2 − ω2)2 + ω2C 2 .

(5)

(6)

We ﬁt the experimental PSD with the simpliﬁed Lorentzian according to Eq. (6), where A := γ2kB T0Γ0
πm , B := ω0 + δω
and C := Γ0 + δΓ are free ﬁt parameters. To obtain the particles mass m we ﬁt to the PSD of a particle (δω = 0,
δΓ = 0) at thermal equilibrium at T0 =300K.

Obtaining radius r: Based on the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem the damping of the particle is Γ0 and thus can

be described as [37]

Γ0 =

6πξr

0.619

m

0.619 + Kn

(1 + ck),

(7)

where r is the radius of the trapped particle, ξ = 18.6µPa s is the viscosity of air, ck = (0.31Kn)/(0.785 + 1.152Kn +
Kn2) is a function of the Knudsen number

where l is the mean free path of the gas particles at the given pressure p. We Taylor expand Eq. (7) for small Kn-1
to ﬁrst order and rewrite for radius r,

Kn = l/p,

(8)

r = 0.619

9πξd2
√
m
2ρkBT0

p
Γ0

,

(9)

where dm is the diameter of air molecules and ρ is the density of the nanoparticle.

9

(cid:114) A

γ =

√

Calculating the maximal possible position resolution of the detection method used: Note that p and Γ0 are quantities
measured and extracted from parameter C of the Lorentzian ﬁt, respectively, thus are directly from experimental
data. From r it is easily enough possible to obtain the mass of the trapped particle. From having obtained the mass
of the particle we can go back to the PSD ﬁtting Eqn.(6), and rearrange to give the conversion factor,

πm
kBT0

(10)

C

The noise equivalent power (NEP) of a detector characterises the resolution of a detector. For the balanced
Hz. Equivalently, we can work out the position resolution of our

photodiode detectors used the N EPdet = 70nV /
setup

Sx,min =

N EPdet

γ

.

(11)

√
A typical value for Sx,min is 17fm/

The current experimental position resolution, Sx,exp = 0.53pm/

Hz, is limited by the noise ﬂoor which currently
Hz as analysed from experimental data as in Fig.2a). Parameters as extracted from the ﬁt to

√

is at N EPexp = 2µV /
the PSD shown in Fig.1c) are summarised in Tab.I.

Hz, which is the minimum achievable in our system.

√

Quantity

Pressure, p
Collisional Damping Rate, Γ0
Radius, r
Mass, m
Conversion Factor, γ
C.o.M Temperature, T0
Q factor,
Sx,min
Sx,exp

Value

Typical Units Error
(±%)
7 × 10−2 mbar 15
3

400 Hz
75 nm 18
3 × 10−18 kg
21
4 × 106 V/m 34
∼ 300 K
2 × 103
17 × 10−15 m
53 × 10−11 m

4
34
34

TABLE I. Table shows the parameters obtained via ﬁtting to a PSD of an uncooled 75nm radius nanosphere trapped at
7×10−2mbar. The values given here correspond to the experimental time and frequency domain traces shown in Fig.1a) and
Fig..

Evaluation of mechanical quality factor Qm: The PSD is ﬁtted by the Lorentzian according to Eqn.(2) and the
full width at half maximum ∆ω is compared to the mean frequency ω0 of the motion in the respective direction:
Qm = ω0/∆ω. Qm for the 300K peak in Fig.4 is given in Tab.I. Assuming the motion of the particle is dominated
by gas collisions, then the width of the PSD is determined by the collisional damping rate Γ0 and we can write:
Qm = ω0/Γ0. We apply this analysis to the lower graph in Fig.4 and ﬁnd Qm =5×107.

Evaluation of the temperature of the motion from Lorentzian ﬁts: We assume that the particle without feedback
is at thermal equilibrium with the surrounding gas at T0 = 300K, which is conﬁrmed by our experimental study for
various trapping laser powers. To extract the temperature from a measured PSD we ﬁt the Lorentzian according to
Eqn. 2, as shown in Fig.(4). We then extract the damping parameters Γ0 and δΓ from the ﬁtted PSD and obtain Tcm
by using

Tcm = T

Γ0

Γ0 + δΓ

.

(12)

S2 Evaluation of resolution of position detection from wavelength scan of trapping light:

Here we describe the detection of the particle position by analysing the optical interference pattern of the ﬁeld
which is Rayleigh scattered by the particle Escat, which is re-collimated by the parabolic mirror and the diverging
reference ﬁeld Ediv, which is diverging and therefore loosing intensity radiating away from the mirror.

10

FIG. 4. Temperature evaluation from ﬁts to PSD. The hollow points show the PSD for the z-motion with no feedback
applied. The temperature is therefore assumed to be 300K. The solid points show the PSD for the z-motion with feedback
turned on. The temperature of the z-motion is evaluated by ﬁtting a Lorentzian to the experimental data points and has been
evaluated to be 222mK. It can be seen that the peak approaches the noise ﬂoor, and a ﬁt is still possible.

Determining the particle position resolution: In our case the trapped nanoparticle modulates the trapping laser
ﬁeld as the back-scattered laser light from the particle accrues a position-dependent phase shift. Although in reality
stochastically driven, here for simplicity model the movement of the particle in the trap as z(t) = z0sin(ωt + α), with
α is the phase and z0 is the amplitude of the motion of the particle in the z-direction.

The scattered ﬁeld: The oscillating particle then Rayleigh scatters the trapping light in all directions, half of which
is then collected and collimated in the opposite direction of the trapping laser by the paraboloidal mirror. The
modulation of the scattered light depending the movement of the particle can be written as

(13)
where we can write β = z0∂zα. We work out the phase of the motion of the particle to be α = kz − arctan(z/zR),
with k is the spring constant and zR the Rayleigh distance of the optics. Therefore ∂α = k − 1/zR, assuming z/zR is
small, which results in

Escat = Escat,0eiβsin(ω0t),

β = kz0 − z0
zR

.

(14)

The diverging reference ﬁeld: We represent the reference ﬁeld as the diverging ﬁeld produced by the focussing of

the trapping laser by the paraboloidal mirror, represented as

Ediv = Ediv,0eiθ,

(15)

where θ = 2f k + π, where f is the focal length of the mirror, and π-term is introduced due to the Gouy phase shift.

Interference of both ﬁelds, homodyne detection: The combination of both the scattering ﬁeld and the reference ﬁeld

forms part of our homodyne detection scheme, which can be written as

11

I(t) ≈ |Escat + Ediv|2

div,0 + E2

≈ E2
2Ediv,0Escat,0[sin(θ)sin(βsin(ω0t)) + cos(θ)cos(βsin(ω0t))].

scat,0+

Using the Jacobi-Anger identity we can expand the Bessel functions to leading order

div,0 + E2

scat,0

I(t) ≈ E2

+ 2Ediv,0Escat,0[sin(θ) × J0(β) + sin(θ) × 2J1(β)sin(ω0t)
+ cos(θ) × 2J2(β)sin(2ω0t)],

(16)

(17)

where Jn(β) is a Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind, with n=(0,1,2. . . ). For the leading order in β, we can write J0(β) ≈1,
and J1(β) and J2(β) refer to the amplitude of ﬁrst and second trap frequencies of the particle in question. The ratio
of these two amplitudes gives us the a means by which we can extract z0. By expanding the Bessel functions to their
ﬁrst order we have

=

β2/8
β/2

,

r =

=

J2(β)
J1(β)
1
4

β.

(18)

The ratio of these amplitudes we obtain experimentally. We also know that the amplitudes of these terms depend on
the wavenumber k. By changing the wavelength we can make the amplitude of one harmonic more prominent than
the other, while the sum of the square of the two amplitudes should stay constant. Since we also know z0 in terms
of volts through our recorded signal we can then produce an alternative means to obtain γ, the conversion factor
from Eq. (10). We can then obtain mass m and radius r of the particle without any knowledge of the pressure p and
damping factor Γ0. The method is also transcend any assumption about the theoretical kinetic model being used.

Experimental implementation of wavelength scan: The parabolic mirror used has a focal distance of f = 3.1 mm.
By varying the trapping laser wavelength in the range 1545nm to 1555nm in steps of 5pm, with this we are able to
vary the phase θ by 5.2π in steps of 0.03π.

Results: Fig.3c), by comparing the change in amplitude of the ﬁrst and second order z motion peaks we calculate
the value for β in Eqn.(14). From this we extract the maximum position of particle motion in the z direction,
z0 = 119 ± 10nm. From equipartition theorem: m = kbTcm/ω2
0, with Tcm = 300K we can obtain a pressure
independent measure of the particles mass m= 3 ± 0.5 × 10−19kg. Assuming a spherical particle the particle has a
radius r= 30nm(±2)nm. Finally using γ = V /z0 where V is the voltage detected on our photodiode, and equation 12
√
it is possible to calculate the the position resolution of our set up to be Sx,exp = 200 ± 20f m/

0z2

Hz.

This wavelength scan method to evaluate the position resolution is more accurate than the method used in supple-
ment S1. Applying the methodology in S1 results in larger errors originating from large uncertainty in the measurement
of the pressure in the vacuum chamber, by circumventing pressure readings and exclusivity using the measurements
of the of the optical intensity measured by our detector.In Principle this method can be used to measure any spherical
particle without knowing its density.

S3 Particle preparation and trapping

Nanoparticle preparation and trap loading: Nanoparticles loaded into the optical trap at atmospheric pressure via
the use of an Omron micro-Air nebuliser. The nebuliser disperses droplets containing individual nanoparticles. The
trapping region was evacuated by a turbo-molecular pump (Pfeiﬀer, 70l/s) to as low as 1×10−6mbar with the particle
in the trap. The nebuliser is loaded with a suspension of aqueous liquid containing the nano-particles. The suspension
used is prepared by diluting a suspension of 26nm -160nm (diameter) silicon dioxide nano-particles in deionized water
using micro pipettes. The suspension is then sonicated for 15 minutes (37kHz, 300K in an ultrasound bath) before
being loaded into the nebuliser. A concentration of 76,000 particles per ml was found to work well experimentally
when the particles where dispersed into the vacuum chamber. Once a particle is trapped we begin to evacuate the
chamber. We tried particles from many diﬀerent suppliers and manufacturers, but had best trapping and pumping
results with particles from the companies micro-particles GmbH and Corpuscular. The trapping success was increased
signiﬁcantly by turning the feedback stabilisation on with previously known feedback parameters.

12

FIG. 5. Wavelength scan to measure relative amplitude change in the ﬁrst and second harmonic of the trap
frequency for the z-peak. The relative amplitude change depending on the wavelength of the trapping laser is used to
evaluate the resolution for the detection of the particle position. For a 60nm diameter silica particle, trapped at 1 × 10−2mbar
we can observe how the amplitude of the ﬁrst order peak (top panel) and second order peak (lower panel) changes as the
wavelength of the laser if varied to extract a parameter independent position resolution.

S4 The parabolic mirror and calculating its NA

The mirror has been precision machined directly from aluminium by the company Symonds Mirror Technology
with a surface tolerance of 15nm. There is no optical or protective coating attached to the aluminium surface. The
parabolic mirror as a reﬂective high NA optic is a cheap alternative to lens optics. The mirror is easy to implement
and to us at ultra-high vacuum, which is more diﬃcult for high NA objective lenses. Another advantage, the mirror
does not have chromatic eﬀects, which make the position of the focal point independent of the wavelength used. The
latter might be interesting for multi-wavelength spectroscopy and manipulation techniques.

Evaluation of the numerical aperture: The geometry of the mirror trap is illustrated in Fig.(6). The numerical
aperture (NA) is deﬁned as the light acceptance cone of the parabolic mirror. As the scattered light from a trapped
particle diverges from the focus, we consider the solid angle at the distance z0 as a fraction of the maximum angle of
acceptance 2π. Thus allowing us to write [38]:

(cid:90) θ

NA =

sin θ(cid:48)dθ(cid:48) = 1 − cos θ.

(19)

The general paraboloid function is z = r2/(4f ), where z is the height above the bottom of the mirror, r is the radius
of the paraboloid at z, and f is the focal length. For the paraboloid as shown in Fig.(6) at the maximum radius r0
and at the corresponding height z0, with z0 ≤ f , the angle θ between the optical axis and the edge of the paraboloid
is given by

0

tan(θ) =

r0

(f − z0)

=

r0
f − r2
0/(4f )

.

(20)

+ 1549.5nm+ 1549.5nmWavelength (nm)First HarmonicSecond Harmonic13

FIG. 6. Geometry of the parabolic mirror. The polarisable particle is trapped in the diﬀraction limited focal point
of the parabolic mirror. We have used a number of diﬀerent mirror designs though out the experiment, which diﬀer in the
working distance, the focal point with respect to the plane surface of the mirror and the numerical aperture NA. The more of
the paraboloid used for the mirror, the higher the NA. The NA can also be varied/reduced for a given mirror by modiﬁcation
of the waist of the laser light incident on the mirror: If the light spot is smaller than the machined paraboloid, the the NA is
less than the maximum. Typical mirrors, as used here, have a NA≈1.

We can thus deﬁne the NA of the parabolic mirror to be

(cid:18)

(cid:20)

r0
f − r2
0/(4f)

(cid:21)(cid:19)

.

(21)

NA = 1 − cos

arctan

The mirror used for the majority of experiments in this study, had a focal length of f =3.1mm and r0=12.7mm,

which gives a NA of 0.995.

S5 Evaluation of noises in the experiment by Allan deviation

We analyse the noise in the experiment using Allan variance evaluation of the frequency dependent noise in the
signal of the mechanical harmonic oscillator. The noise analysed contains information about ﬂuctuation of amplitude,
frequency and phase of the harmonically oscillating motion of the trapped particle.

Allan variance σ2

j can be depicted in the following steps.: 1) Take a long sequence of time domain data, z(t). We
choose z-direction of motion as this is the most sensitive in the experiment. 2) Chop signal in sequences according to
time parameter τ and average the signal within τ . 3) Repeat for various values of τ and plot according to:

(zi+1(τj) − zi(τj))2 .

(22)

(cid:88)

i

σ2
j =

1

2(n − 1)

We will use Allan deviation which is given by σj. We repeat the procedure for variation of accessible experimental
parameters: background pressure, feedback modulation depth η, and feedback phase. We ﬁnd [in agreement with
modelling] that the harmonic motion of the trapped particle is dominated by noise from collisions with background
gas. Laser noise amplitudes are small compared to the collisional noise.

Allan Deviation: Pressure Variation. Having created a means by which we can produce the Allan vari-
ance/deviation; we can start to compare at diﬀerent parameter variations. We are concerned speciﬁcally in our
trapping frequency range, namely 10 kHz to 300 kHz, indicated as grey area in the Allan deviation ﬁgures. It is
apparent from Fig.7 that by decreasing pressure the Allan deviation is decreasing and approaching the noise ﬂoor of
the experiment. The noise ﬂoor was taken with no particle in the trap, but with the laser system, detectors and de-
tection electronics in usual operation mode. It represents the minimum noise level possible at the given conﬁguration

z0fr0θ14

FIG. 7. Noise from pressure variation:Allan variance of 150nm particle as it is cooled with constant feedback parameters
but at diﬀerent background pressure in the vacuum chamber. The diﬀerent colour lines indicated Alan deviation at diﬀerent
pressures. The grey are indicated the frequency range of the mechanical oscillation of the trapped particle where the noise
couples directly to the motion. Noise at the frequencies of x, y, z-motion, at along the vertical dashed lines, will need to be
reduced as much as possible to realise a extreme high Q oscillator.

of the experiment. The clear trend in pressure dependency toward the noise ﬂoor indicates that random gas collisions
are the dominating noise source for the motion of the trapped particle. This is in agreement with the theoretical
modelling described in the main text.

Each data string used for this Allan deviation noise analysis was taken for the duration of one second, which is a
comparably short time. Therefore we do not expect to cancel [average out] any random noises in this measurements.
Data has not been taken at conditions and durations to perform a speciﬁcally low noise measurement. The Allan
noise plots are meant to illustrate the usual noise level in a typical experiment, where there is clearly a lot of room
for noise reduction procedures.

Allan Deviation: Feedback Modulation Depth Variation. Here we vary the feedback modulation depth η
while keeping all other parameters constant. We can see that there is no clear η-dependency from the noise levels (see
ﬁgure 8) and the magnitude of the variation within the data set is much less compared to the observed variation for
the pressure dependence.

To further cool the particle a naive attempt could be to increase η further. However we experimentally observe
that after a certain gain factor threshold at a relative modulation depth of a few percent, we are unable to cool the
motion of the trapped particle instead heating of the motion was observed.

One could speculate that this is due to noise being introduced by the feedback while increasing the modulation
depth. Instead this analysis, using Allan deviation, indicates that this is not the case, as there is no obvious trend
in the noise depending on η. Our analysis suggests that the reason for the non-trivial relation between η and cooling
temperature is within the parametric dynamics of the feedback itself.

Allan Deviation: Feedback Phase. As shown in Fig. 3a) in the main text that modulation of the feedback
phase φ aﬀects the temperature of the particle’s centre of mass motion in the trap. Once again the question we explore
here is if this eﬀect is related to noise introduced by the feedback. We plot Allan deviation as we change phase in
Fig.9 and ﬁnd no clear relation between the feedback phase and the noise. In the main body of the paper we explain
the observed heating and cooling eﬀect as depending on the phase by an optical spring eﬀect rather than related to
noise.

In summary, from Allan deviation of feedback modulation depth and of phase variation we conclude that no

15

FIG. 8. Noise from feedback gain variation: Allan deviation of the time-domain signal of the trapped particle motion in
z-direction as it is cooled with increased modulation depth η of the parametric feedback at constant pressure 5×10−6mbar and
feedback phase φ=70 degrees.

systematic noise eﬀects are introduced to the motion of the particle by feedback.

S6 Feedback implementation

Parametric feedback was ﬁrst demonstrated in a Cavity mirror set-up [39], The method of parametric feedback
presented here is basied of the same fundamental principles. Parametric feedback cooling takes advantage of parametric
excitation, that is to say when a parametric oscillator is driven at twice the natural frequency the particles oscillation
locks to the modulation phase resulting in ampliﬁcation. By adjusting the phase of the driving at twice the frequency
damping of the particles motion occurs. This means that to damp the motion of an optically trapped particle we
need to modulate our laser intensity at twice the trap frequency and with a phase shift relative to that of the particle
motion. The method used to achieve this experimentally can be seen in Fig.10.

To quantify the strength of the applied feedback we deﬁne the modulation depth η of the optical feedback signal as
η = If b/I0where I0 is the laser intensity without feedback and If b is the amplitude of the feedback modulation. By
adjusting the size of the modulation depth we can control the amount of damping we induce via feedback cooling and
thus raise or lower the temperature of our trapped nanoparticle as desired (See Fig.3b in the paper). This controlled
heating and cooling of an optically trapped particle is a useful tool for the manipulation and the preparation of
mechanical states of trapped nanoparticles.

S7 Derivation of the phase variation of the feedback signal

To create a parametric feedback cooling eﬀect observed in the main text, we modulate the spring constant of the
optical trap by altering the intensity of the trapping light I(t). With the form I(t) = I0 + If b cos(2ω0t). This Intensity
modulation is responsible for the time varying component of the trap stiﬀness. The time dependent spring constant
of our optical trap can be written as

k(t) = k0 + kf b(t),

(23)

16

FIG. 9. Noise from feeddback phase variation: Allan deviation for the backscattered light oﬀ a trapped 150nm particle.
Pressure is constant at 5×10−6mbar and the modulation depth is constant at η=0.39% . The phase of the feedback loop φ is
varied as indicated in the legend of the plot.

where k0 if the unperturbed spring constant and kf b(t) is the time varying component of the spring constant equal to

(24)
where (cid:52)k is the change in the spring constant caused by the feedback cooling. For the purposes of this section we
rewrite Eqn.(2) from the main text with a time varying spring constant and work in the domain where our oscillator
has high Q. This means we can write the equation of motion for our system as

kf b(t) = (cid:52)k sin(2ω0t),

¨x(t) +

ω0
Qm

˙x(t) +

(k0 + kf b(t))

m

x(t) =

Fth(t)

m

(25)

where x(t) is the particle displacement, m is the mass, Q is the Q factor, Fth(t) is the force that arises due to the
stochastically driven nature of our system. Our system is driven by white noise, yet it can respond only to that which
falls within its bandwidth which, for a high-Q system, is well approximated by a sinusoidal driving term of unknown
phase. We can therefore write Fth(t) as

Fth(t) = F0 cos(ωt + φ),

(26)

where F0 is the amplitude of the force introduced by stochastic driving. We use the normal mode approach and thus
introduce the transformations [18]:

and

With inverse transformations,

a = ˙x + iω∗

1x,
a∗ = ˙x + iω1x,

ω1 = ω0[(1 − 1/4Q2

m)1/2 + i/2Q].

x =

a − a∗
1 + ω1)

i(ω∗

,

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

17

FIG. 10. Feedback cooling scheme. The scattered light from the particle is collected by a single photodiode. The detected
signal can be considered a carrier wave containing three signals of diﬀering frequency’s corresponding to the trap frequency’s
of each spatial degree of freedom plus noise. This signal is then sent to three diﬀerent lock in ampliﬁers (ZI HF2LI Lock-in
Ampliﬁer), where the signals are extracted for each spatial degree of freedom. In each of the lock in ampliﬁers the frequency ω
and phase θ of the particle motion in one spatial degree of freedom is extracted. This information is then used to create a sine
wave with amplitude A, twice the frequency of the trap frequency and a phase shift δθ relative to its measured phase, resulting
in a feedback signal equivalent to x ˙x. These frequency doubled and phase shifted signals for each spatial degree of freedom are
added together before being sent to a AOM, to modulate the intensity of the laser beam.

˙x =

1a∗
ω1a + ω∗
ω1 + ω∗

1

.

(31)

By substituting Eqns.(30) and (31) into Eqn.(25) with algebraic manipulations and working in the limit of high Q we
can write a simpliﬁed equation of motion as

Looking for steady state solutions of the form

˙a = iω1a + i

kf b(t)

m

a − a∗
ω1 + ω∗

1

+

Fth(t)

m

.

a(t) = A exp(iω0t),

0 = eiω0t(cid:104)

where A is a complex constant. Substituting Eqns.(24), (26) and (33)

iA(ω1 − ω0) −
To ﬁrst order in 1/Qm, ω1 − ω0 (cid:39) iω0/2Q and ω1 + ω∗

A∗ +

Fth(t)

m

(cid:52)k
2m(ω∗
1) + ω1
1 (cid:39) 2ω0.
cos φ

A =

F0Qm
mω0

1 + Qm(cid:52)k/2k0

+

i sin φ

1 − Q(cid:52)k/2k0

.

.

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

eiφ(cid:105)
(cid:35)

(cid:34)

(cid:40)(cid:32)

Describing the particle motion as x(t) = X1 cos(ω0t) + X2 sin(ω0t) allows us to write X1 = Im(A/ω) and X2 =
Re(A/ω0). The motion of our particle is deﬁned as |x| = (X 2
2 )1/2. Thus using equipartition theorem we can
write

1 + X 2

(cid:33)2

(cid:32)

(cid:33)2(cid:41)

Tcm =

F0Qmω0

kb

cos φ

1 + Qm(cid:52)k/2k0

+

sin φ

1 − Qm(cid:52)k/2k0

.

(36)

This shows that the de-ampliﬁcation (cooling) of the particle motion depends on the phase of the applied feedback
signal as expected. With a minimum temperature occurring when the feedback phase φ = 0. In Fig.3 b) in the main
text the minimum occurs at φ=67 degrees. This phase oﬀset is due to the total delay in the electronic and optical
setup corresponding to about two nanoseconds.

ParabolicMirrorλ/2Yλ/4YAOMExtractsYsignalYforeachYspatialYdegreeYofYfreedomYXLockYinLockYinZLockYinYGenerationYofYYFeedbackYsignalAxsin(2ωx+θx+δθx)Azsin(2ωz+θz+δθz)Aysin(2ωy+θy+δθy)ΣS8 Derivation for connection of feedback modulation depth to underlying dynamics of the trapped particle

Equation 1 in the main text can be written in the following form

¨x(t) + Γ0 ˙x(t) + ω2

0x(t) =

(Fth(t) − kf b(t)x(t))

1
m

(37)

18

Over long time periods compared with that of the particle oscillation period, we can write kf b = ∆k/2. Therefore
equation of motion can be written as,

(cid:26)

(cid:27)

¨x(t) + Γ0 ˙x(t) + ω2
0

1 +

∆k
2mω2
0

x(t) =

1
m

Fth(t)

(38)

The modulation depth is deﬁned as η = ∆k/k0 = ∆k/mω2

0 allowing us to write our equation in terms of our

modulation depth.

¨x(t) + Γ0 ˙x(t) + ω2

0 {1 + η/2} x(t) =

1
m

Fth(t)

(39)

Taking the fourier transform of the function and rearranging yields the following Power Spectral Density, Sx(ω),

Sx(ω) =

2kbT0
πm

Γ0

(ω2

0 + ω2)2 + ω2(Γ0 + η/2)2

Knowing that the integral of a power spectral density can be written as

(cid:90) ∞

(cid:104)x2(cid:105) =

=

=

Sx(ω)dω

(cid:90) ∞

−∞

0
Γ0kbT0.

2πm

Γ0kbTc.m.

1

0 + ω2)2 + ω2(Γ0 + η/2)2 dω
(ω2
1

m

ω2

0(Γ0 + η/2)

Using the equipartition theroem we note,

mω2

0(cid:104)x2(cid:105)
Γ0kbT0

1
2

kbTc.m =

1
2
1
2
=⇒ Tc.m = T0

=

mω2
0

Γ0

Γ0 + η/2

1

m

ω2

0(Γ0 + η/2)

(40)

(41)

(42)

This shows an inverse relation to the modulation depth η of the feedback introduced to the system. From this we can
see that if η → ∞ then Tc.m → 0. This of course is something we do not observe experimentally. We ﬁnd that as η
increases there is plateau of the particles temperature and sometimes an increase in the temperature such that the
particle can be lost from the trap. This we infer to be due to the particle experiencing a greater impulse at higher
modulation depths and therefore, resulting in nonlinear response.

