6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
0
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
4
9
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Increasing interest and awareness about teaching in science

undergraduates

C. Singh, L. Moin, and C. Schunn

Department of Physics & Astronomy and Learning Research & Development Center, University of Pittsburgh,

Pittsburgh, PA, 15260

Abstract. We discuss the development, implementation, and assessment of a course for science undergraduates designed to
help them develop an awareness and a deeper appreciation of the intellectual demands of physics teaching. The course focused
on increasing student enthusiasm and conﬁdence in teaching by providing well supported teaching opportunities and exposure
to physics education research. The course assessment methods include 1) pre/post-tests measures of attitude and expectations
about science teaching, 2) self and peer evaluation of student teaching, 3) content-based pre/post-tests given to students who
received instruction from the student teachers, and 4) audio-taped focus group discussions in the absence of the instructor and
TA to evaluate student perspective on different aspects of the course and its impact.
Keywords: physics education research
PACS: 01.40Fk,01.40.gb,01.40G-,1.30.Rr

BACKGROUND

In the past four decades, the science and math K-12
teaching ﬁeld has witnessed a marked decline in recruit-
ment and the number of undergraduates pursuing math
and science teaching careers has dropped from 22% in
1966 to 5% in 1988 [1]. In the U.S., there is a serious
shortage of qualiﬁed math and science teachers [2–5].
Nationally, from 1993 to 1999, 39% of school districts
reported math and science teacher vacancies, and 19%
reported difﬁculty ﬁlling those vacancies [6]. Accord-
ing to a nationwide survey released by the National Sci-
ence Teachers Association in 2000, this trend continues
and 61% of high schools and 48% of middle schools
experienced difﬁculty locating qualiﬁed science teach-
ers to ﬁll vacancies. The situation is expected to worsen
given that over 30% of current teachers with varying
years experience report considering leaving the profes-
sion [7]. Nearly every region of the United States re-
ported considerable teacher shortages, with most promi-
nent need for mathematics teachers closely followed by
those in physics, chemistry, earth/physical science, and
biology [8]. The problem is so pronounced that since the
early 1990s, in-need districts across the nation have im-
ported thousands of international K-12 math and science
teachers [9].

Numerous remedies have been attempted to alleviate
this teaching shortage. Remedies range from national to
local policies and programs and include such approaches
as emergency certiﬁcation and out-of-ﬁeld assignment to
ﬁll vacancies; alternative certiﬁcation programs to hasten
licensing requirements and job placement; tapping non-
traditional candidate pools such as paraprofessionals, re-

tired military, or career changers; providing scholarships,
signing bonuses, or student loan forgiveness; and estab-
lishing partnerships between school districts and teacher
preparation institutions to meet stafﬁng needs coopera-
tively [3, 8, 10]. Each remedy has certain costs and some
degree of success. However, many remedies must resort
to back peddling to meet content knowledge qualiﬁca-
tions, calling back to the educational fold those who have
already left, or investing in populations who fail to com-
plete licensing requirement.

INTRODUCTION

One of the most accessible potential recruits are science
and engineering undergraduates who have not yet com-
pleted a degree. According to a longitudinal research
study conducted by Seymour and Hewitt [11], 20% of
SEM undergrads at one time consider careers in math
or science teaching, although less than 8% of them hold
to the career interest. We developed, implemented and
assessed a course called “Introduction to physics teach-
ing" for science and engineering undergraduates so that
they would consider K-12 teaching as a potential career
choice. The course was designed to increase awareness
and develop a deeper appreciation about the intellectual
demands of physics teaching. The course attempted to in-
crease student enthusiasm and conﬁdence in teaching by
giving them opportunity to design instructional modules
in pairs and teach in authentic college recitation classes
two times during the semester. We provided signiﬁcant
scaffolding support and guidance during the develop-
ment of the modules but gradually decreased the guid-

ance to ensure that students develop conﬁdence and self-
reliance. The course strived to improve students’ knowl-
edge of pedagogical issues, familiarize them with cog-
nitive research and its implication for teaching physics,
and included extensive discussions of physics education
research including topics related to active engagement,
effective curricula, student difﬁculties in learning differ-
ent physics content, epistemological and affective issues.
Special attention was paid to helping students see the rel-
evance of these discussions to actual classroom teaching.

COURSE DETAILS

The course has been taught twice with a total of 12 stu-
dents. A majority of students were science and engineer-
ing undergraduates (sophomores-seniors) with two mas-
ters students from the school of education. The cumula-
tive grade point average for the students was between 2.5
to 3.5. At least a B grade average in introductory physics
I and II was mandatory to enroll which was a requirement
imposed by the department of physics because each stu-
dent pair was required to conduct two college recitations.
An initial survey in the ﬁrst class period to the students
enrolled in the class suggests that a majority of students
had some kind of teaching experience. The most com-
mon teaching experience was tutoring in high school.
The survey responses suggest that students felt conﬁdent
in teaching the subject matter they tutored earlier. When
asked to rank-order the main reasons for having taught
in the past, the students cited “curiosity" followed by “a
sense of being good at it", followed by “a desire to work
with children", and “giving back to the community".

The class met for 3 hours per week for a semester and
students obtained 3 credits for it. Students were assigned
readings of one or two journal articles about teaching and
learning each week. They submitted answers to the ques-
tions assigned about the readings and discussed the arti-
cles in class each week. We used a ﬁeld-tested “Cogni-
tive Apprenticeship Model" [12] of teaching and learning
which has three major components: modeling, coaching,
and fading. Modeling in this context refers to the instruc-
tor demonstrating and exemplifying the criteria of good
performance. Coaching refers to giving students oppor-
tunity to practice the desired skills while providing guid-
ance and support and fading refers to weaning the sup-
port gradually so that students develop self-reliance. In
the modeling phase, students worked through and dis-
cussed modules from an exemplary curriculum, Physics
by Inquiry [13], in pairs. There was extensive discussion
of the aspects of the modules that make them effective
and the goals, objectives, and performance targets that
must have been outlined before those modules were de-
veloped. In the coaching and fading phases, the student
pairs developed, implemented and assessed two intro-

ductory physics tutorials and related pre-/post-tests with
scaffolding support from the instructor, teaching assis-
tant (TA) and peers.

Students were allowed to choose their partner and they
stayed with the same partner for both tutorial. All student
pairs designed the two tutorials on the same broad topics:
DC circuits and electromagnetic induction. Although all
student pairs employed the tutorial approach to teaching,
there was ﬂexibility in how to design the tutorial. For
example, one group successfully employed cartoons in
their tutorials. Also, students were free to choose the fo-
cus of their 25 minute long tutorial (10+15 minutes were
spent on the pre-test and post-test respectively). Each stu-
dent group determined the goals and performance tar-
gets for their tutorial which was then discussed during
the class. This class discussion was very useful in help-
ing students realize that they needed to sharpen their fo-
cus for a 25 minute tutorial instead of covering every
concept in DC circuits or electromagnetic induction. A
majority of the preliminary development of the tutorials
and the accompanying pre-/post-tests took place outside
of the class and students iterated versions of the tutori-
als with the instructor and TA. Then, each pair tested
their pre-/post-tests and tutorials on fellow classmates
and used the discussion and feedback to modify their tu-
torial. The peers were very conscientious about provid-
ing comments on both the strengths and weaknesses of
the tutorials.

COURSE EVALUATION

The content-based pre-/post-tests accompanying the tu-
torials were given to the introductory physics students
during the recitation. The typical pre-/post-test scores
were 40% and 90% respectively with a Hake normalized
gain of 0.8 [14]. We note that the pre-test refers to the
test given after traditional classroom instruction but be-
fore the tutorials.

We developed a teaching evaluation protocol which in-
cludes 15 questions on a Likert scale designed to evalu-
ate different aspects of teaching. The 15 questions in the
protocol were further divided into two parts: the ﬁrst 7
questions were related to content/lesson plans/class de-
sign and the other 8 questions dealt with the class activi-
ties during instruction. The following are some items:

• Class content was designed to elicit students’ prior
knowledge and preconceptions and build new con-
cepts from there.

• The lesson was designed to engage students as
members of a learning community: engaged in talk
that builds on each other’s ideas, that is based on
evidence and responds to logical thinking.

• Instructional strategy included useful representa-
tional tools (for example, symbols, charts, tables,
and diagrams).

• The activity actively engaged and motivated stu-
dents rather than having them be passive receivers.

Each student was required to observe and critique the
instruction of at least one other pair in each of the two
rounds in addition to evaluating their own performance.
All of the classroom teaching by the students were video-
taped. After each round, we discussed the teaching eval-
uations of each group in class to stress the aspects of
teaching that were good and those in need of improve-
ment. We found that the student evaluation of other pairs
were quite reliable and consistent with the instructor and
TA evaluation. Students did a good job evaluating the
positive and negative aspects of other group’s instruc-
tion. However, self-evaluations were not reliable and stu-
dents always rated themselves highly. Students were told
that their grades will depend only on the evaluation con-
ducted by the instructor and the TA and not on the self
and peer evaluations and that the self and peer evalua-
tions were to help them learn to critique various aspects
of instruction. The fact that students rated themselves
higher than others may be because they were worried that
the evaluation may factor into their course grade.

There was a clear difference between different stu-
dent pairs in terms of how effectively they helped the
introductory physics students work on the tutorials in
groups. There was a strong correlation between the ex-
tent to which group work was motivated and empha-
sized at the beginning of the recitation and its beneﬁts
explained and whether introductory students worked ef-
fectively in groups. There were discussions of these is-
sues with the student pairs and each student pair obtained
a copy of all of their evaluations. They were asked to pay
attention to the instructor/TA/peer critiques of their per-
formance. However, the second performance of each pair
was not signiﬁcantly different from the ﬁrst. For exam-
ple, pairs good at employing group work effectively the
ﬁrst time did it well the second time and those who had
difﬁculty the ﬁrst time had similar difﬁculties the second
time. More detailed guidance is needed for improving
students’ classroom delivery methods.

We also conducted an anonymous survey in the ab-
sence of course instructor at the end of the course. One of
the questions on the survey asked students to rate how the
course affected their interest in becoming a teacher. 56%
reported a signiﬁcant positive impact, 34% a positive im-
pact and 10% no impact. Students noted that they learned
about the intellectual rigor of instructional design from
moderate to great extent. On a scale of 1 to 5, students
were asked to rate different elements that contributed to

learning. They provided the following responses:

• Preparing tutorials and presentations: 4.8/5
• Instructor’s feedback on these: 4.5/5
• Class discussions: 4.3/5
• Rehearsals for their presentation: 4/5
• Instructor’s presentations: 4/5
• readings: 3.9/5

We also conducted an audio-taped focus group discus-
sion to obtain useful feedback to evaluate and improve
next offering of the course. The focus group was con-
ducted on the last day of class in the absence of the in-
structor and the TA. The facilitator asked students pre-
planned questions for one hour. The questions and some
typical responses are presented below:

Question 1: What is the take home message of this

course?

• S1: Teaching is more than teacher’s perception.
How much of a two way relation is necessary to
teach students.

• S2: Helped me understand that teachers have to

learn from students.

• S3: Instruction is more students. There are meth-
ods available to make instruction more suited to stu-
dents. There is a mountain of cognitive research that
is being developed as a resource for me as a future
teacher...that was my biggest fear when we started
talking about bringing instruction to student’s level.
• S4: Increased enthusiasm. You have to take into

account student’s level.

• S5: Increased appreciation of teaching. Opened my
eyes to the difﬁculty and different techniques for
teaching students with different prior knowledge.

• S6: Figuring out different ways of making students
active and structuring the lessons so that there is a
lot of activity by students to learn on a regular basis.

Question 2: Do you take a different perspective during
your own classes after you learned something about how
to teach?

• S1: I think now that teachers who don’t teach well
could be trained but before the course I just took
it for granted that there are good and there are bad
teachers and that’s all.

• S2: My college instructors ignore the work being

done in how people learn.

• S3: Slightly, because I know how difﬁcult it is. I

give more respect to good teachers.

• S4: It gives you an idea about how a teacher cares

about the students.

Question 3: What did you learn from your K-12 teach-
ing? How do you compare that to teaching at the college
level?
A common response was that
the students had not
thought about teaching issues in high school or till they
took this course.

• S1: When I was a student I just took teaching for

granted and did what they told me to.

• S2: I never thought about teaching when I was in

high school.

• S3: At school most were educators in college not.

Question 4: How did this course affect your interest in
teaching? Tell me about your plans for pursuing teach-
ing.
All students except two said they will teach. A majority
explicitly said they plan to teach in high school.

• S1: Reinforces my interest. Made me realize that
I don’t want to teach college because of the struc-
ture of college-lots of material, little support, under-
appreciated...I want to have more time to engage
students in the method learned in this course.

• S2: It helped me decide I want to go on to teaching

right after college.

• S3: I want to be a teacher. This course affected me

positively.

• S4: K-12. Good physics teacher in high school to

give good base at young age...early

Question 5: How could this course be improved to en-
thuse more people to teaching?
One common discouraging response was that students
felt they did not really get an opportunity to teach where
the word teaching referred to frontal teaching. Despite
the fact that the course attempted to bridge the gap be-
tween teaching and learning, students felt that moving
around the classroom helping students while they worked
on the tutorials was not teaching. Common suggestions
included a follow-up class with the following features:

• Observing, critiquing & delivering frontal teaching
• Observing and critiquing K-12 teaching
• Amount of reading per week can be reduced al-

though students appreciated the readings

SUMMARY

We developed, implemented and assessed a course for
science undergraduates to increase their interest and
awareness about teaching issues. In addition to extensive
discussions about issues related to teaching and learn-
ing, student pairs designed and implemented two tuto-
rials in college recitation classes. Assessment methods

include pre-/post-tests of expectation and attitude about
teaching, content-based pre-/post-tests before and after
tutorials designed by students, critiquing peer and self-
evaluation of teaching and focus group discussions.

REFERENCES

1. K. Green, Keynote address: A proﬁle of undergraduates in

the sciences. In An exploration of the nature and quality
of undergraduate education in science, mathematics and
engineering, National Advisory Group, Sigma Xi, the
Scientiﬁc Research Society. Racine, WI: Report of the
Wingspread Conference, 1989.

2. B. C. Clewell, and A.M. Villegas, Absence unexcused:

Ending teacher shortages in high-need areas.
Washington, DC: Urban Institute. Retrieved from
www.urgan.org/url.c f m?ID = 310379, 2001.

3. B. C. Clewell, and L.B. Forcier, Increasing the number of
math and science teachers: A review of teacher recruitment
programs. Teaching and Change, 8(4), 331-361, 2001.

4. L. Gafney and M. Weiner, Finding future teachers from

among undergraduate science and mathematics majors. Phi
Delta Kappan, 76, 637-641, 1995.

5. S. Shugart and P. Houshell, Subject matter competence and
the recruitment and retention of secondary science teachers.
J. Research Science Teach., 32, 63-70, 1995.

6. U.S. Department of Education, America’s teachers:

Proﬁle of a profession, 1993-94. NCES 97-
460, 1997. Washington, DC: National Center
for Education Statistics. Retrieved from htt p :
//nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsin f o.asp?pubid = 97460

7. National Science Teachers Association, NSTA releases

nationwide survey of science teacher credentials,
assignments, and job satisfaction. Arlington, VA, 2000:
N.S.T.A. Retrieved from http://www.nsta.org/survey3/
8. American Association for Employment in Education,

Inc., Educator Supply and Demand in the United
States. Columbus, OH: AAEE, 2000. Retrieved from
www.rnt.org/channels/clearinghouse/becometeacher/121−
teachershort.htm

9. K. Brulliard, New visa ceiling called threat
to teacher recruitment. The Washington Post,
p. A03, march 2004. Retrieved from htt p :
//www.washingtonpost.com/ac2/wp − dyn?pagename =
article&contentId = A38691 − 2004Mar7&notFound =
true6/18/04

10. U.S. Department of Education, Literature review on

teacher recruitment programs. Planning and Evaluation
Service. Ofﬁce of the Under Secretary. Washington, DC:
The Urban Institute, 2000.

11. E. Seymour and N. Hewitt, Talking about leaving: Why
undergraduates leave the sciences. Boulder, CO: Westview
Press, 1997.

12. A. Collins, J. S. Brown, and S. E. Newman, Cognitive

Apprenticeship in L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum., 453-494, 1989.

13. L. McDermott and PER group at university of Washington,

Physics by Inquiry Vol I and II, Wiley 1996.

14. R. R. Hake, Interactive-engagement versus traditional

methods, Am. J. Phys. 66, 64 (1998).

