6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
0
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
4
9
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Coupling Conceptual and Quantitative Problems to Develop

Expertise in Introductory Physics Students

Chandralekha Singh

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260

Abstract. We discuss the effect of administering conceptual and quantitative isomorphic problem pairs (CQIPP) back to back
vs. asking students to solve only one of the problems in the CQIPP in introductory physics courses. Students who answered
both questions in a CQIPP often performed better on the conceptual questions than those who answered the corresponding
conceptual questions only. Although students often took advantage of the quantitative counterpart to answer a conceptual
question of a CQIPP correctly, when only given the conceptual question, students seldom tried to convert it into a quantitative
question, solve it and then reason about the solution conceptually. Even in individual interviews, when students who were only
given conceptual questions had difﬁculty and the interviewer explicitly encouraged them to convert the conceptual question
into the corresponding quantitative problem by choosing appropriate variables, a majority of students were reluctant and
preferred to guess the answer to the conceptual question based upon their gut feeling.
Keywords: problem solving, introductory physics, conceptual learning, quantitative problems
PACS: 01.40Fk,01.40.gb,01.40G-,1.30.Rr

INTRODUCTION

We investigate whether introductory physics students
perform better when they answer a conceptual and quan-
titative isomorphic problem pair (CQIPP) as a set com-
pared to the case when they answer either the concep-
tual or the quantitative question of a CQIPP alone. We
call the paired problems isomorphic if they require the
same physics principle to solve them. Although it is difﬁ-
cult to categorize physics questions as exclusively quan-
titative or conceptual, CQIPPs had one question that re-
quired symbolic or numerical calculation while the other
question could be answered by conceptual reasoning
alone [1]. We also analyze the performance of students
on the CQIPPs from the perspective of “transfer" [2, 3].
We developed ﬁve CQIPPs in the multiple-choice for-
mat with different contexts in mechanics [1]. Below is an
example of the ﬁrst CQIPP (correct answers in italics):

(1) A tugboat pulls a ship of mass M into the harbor
with a constant tension force ~F in the horizontal tow
cable. Both the tugboat and the ship start from rest.
After the ship has been towed a distance d in time t, the
magnitude of its momentum will be
(a) Fd
(b) (1/2)(F/M)t2
(c) (F/M)t2/d
(d) (1/2)(F/M)dt2
(e) Ft

(2) Two identical tugboats pull other ships as shown
below, starting from rest. The Queen Mary is a much
more massive ship than the Minnow. Both tugboats pull

with the same horizontal force. Neglect other forces.
After both tugboats have been pulling for the same
amount of time, which one of the following is true about
the Queen Mary and the Minnow?

H.M.S. QUEEN MARY

S.S.  MINNOW

(a) The Queen Mary will have a greater magnitude of
momentum.
(b) The Minnow wil have a greater magnitude of mo-
mentum.
(c) Both ships will have the same magnitude of momen-
tum.
(d) Both ships will have the same kinetic energy.
(e) The Queen Mary will have a greater kinetic energy.

We made hypotheses H1 and H2 as described below:

• H1: Performance on quantitative questions of a
CQIPP will be better when both the quantitative and
conceptual questions are given than when only the
quantitative question is given.

• H2: Performance on conceptual questions of a
CQIPP will be better when both the quantitative and
conceptual questions are given than when only the
conceptual question is given.

Hypothesis H1 is based on the assumption that solv-
ing the conceptual question of a CQIPP may encourage

students to perform a qualitative analysis, streamline stu-
dents’ thinking, make it easier for them to narrow down
relevant concepts, and thus help them solve the quanti-
tative problem correctly. Prior studies show that intro-
ductory physics students are not systematic in using ef-
fective problem solving strategies, and often do not per-
form a conceptual analysis while solving a quantitative
problem. They often use a “plug and chug" approach to
solving quantitative problems, which may prevent them
from solving the problem correctly. The conceptual ques-
tions may provide an opportunity for reﬂecting upon the
quantitative problem and performing a qualitative anal-
ysis and planning. This can increase the probability of
solving the quantitative problem correctly. We note that
since the CQIPPs always had a quantitative question pre-
ceding the corresponding conceptual question, hypothe-
sis H1 assumes that students will go back to the quanti-
tative question if they got some insight from the corre-
sponding conceptual question.

Hypothesis H2 is inspired by prior studies that show
that introductory physics students often perform better
on quantitative problems compared to conceptual ques-
tions on the same topic [4]. Students often treat con-
ceptual questions as guessing tasks [4]. We hypothesized
that students who are able to solve the quantitative prob-
lem in a CQIPP may use its solution as a hint for answer-
ing the conceptual question correctly if they are able to
discern the similarity between the two questions. Since
quantitative and conceptual questions of a CQIPP were
given one after another, we hypothesized that students
would likely discern their underlying similarity at least
in cases where the contexts were similar. When reason-
ing without quantitative tools, it may be more difﬁcult
to create the correct chain of reasoning if a student is
“rusty" about a concept [5]. Equations can provide a
pivot point for constructing the reasoning chain. For ex-
ample, if a student has forgotten whether or not the maxi-
mum safe driving speed while making a turn on a curved
road depends on the mass of the vehicle, he/she will have
great difﬁculty determining which is correct without us-
ing equations to reason. Similarly, a student with evolv-
ing expertise who is comfortable reasoning with equa-
tions may need to write down Newton’s second law ex-
plicitly to conclude that the tension in the cable of an el-
evator accelerating upward is greater than its weight. An
expert can use the same law implicitly and conceptually
argue that the upward acceleration implies that the ten-
sion exceeds the weight without writing down Newton’s
second law explicitly. Being able to reason conceptually
without resorting to quantitative tools in a wide variety
of contexts may be a sign of adaptive expertise whereas
conceptual reasoning by resorting to quantitative tools
may be a sign of evolving expertise [5].

Students

calculus-based introductory
physics courses participated in the study. The questions

in college

were asked after instruction in relevant concepts and
after students had an opportunity to work on their
homework on related topics. When students were given
both questions of a CQIPP back to back, the quantitative
questions preceded the corresponding conceptual ques-
tion. However, students were free to go back and forth
between them if they wished and could change the an-
swer to the previous question if they acquired additional
insight for solving the previous question by answering a
latter question. Students who were given both questions
of a CQIPP were not told explicitly that the questions
given were isomorphic. They were given 2.5 minutes
on an average to answer each question. In some of the
courses, we discussed the responses individually with
several student volunteers.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Table 1 summarizes the numbers of students who were
given both or one question of a CQIPP, and students’
average performance. Table 1 also shows the results
of a Chi-square test with p values for comparison be-
tween cases when both questions of a CQIPP were
given vs. only one question was given. Students can
make appropriate connections between the questions in
a CQIPP only if they have a certain level of expertise
that helps them discern the connection between the iso-
morphic questions. Improved student performance when
both questions of a CQIPP were given vs. when only one
question was given was taken as one measure of transfer
of relevant knowledge from one problem to another.

Table 1 shows that, contrary to our hypothesis H1, stu-
dent performance on quantitative questions was not sig-
niﬁcantly different when both quantitative and concep-
tual questions were given back to back (with the quan-
titative question preceding the conceptual question) than
when only the corresponding quantitative question was
given. In some cases, the performance on the conceptual
question was better than the performance on the quantita-
tive question (problem pairs (9)-(10)), but students could
not leverage their conceptual knowledge for gain on the
corresponding quantitative problem. As noted earlier, the
two questions in a CQIPP were always given in the same
order, although students could go back and forth if they
wanted. It is possible that students did not go back to
the questions they had already answered, especially due
to the time constraint, even if the question that followed
provided a hint for it. Future research will evaluate the
effect of switching the order of the quantitative and con-
ceptual questions in a CQIPP when both are given.

On the other hand, in support of hypothesis H2, stu-
dents who worked on both questions of the IPPs involv-
ing a conceptual and a quantitative problem performed
better on the conceptual questions at least for three of the
ﬁve IPPs than when they were given only the conceptual

TABLE 1. For the CQIPP given, the ﬁrst col-
umn lists the problem numbers, the second col-
umn gives the percentage of students who chose
the correct answer when only one of the ques-
tions was given to them, and the third column
gives the percentage of students who chose the
correct answer when both questions were given.
The numbers in parentheses in the second and
third columns refer to the number of students
who answered the question. The last column for
all questions lists the p value for comparison of
student performance between cases when only
one of the questions in a CQIPP was given vs.
when both questions were given.

Problem #

only one

both

p value

1
2

3
4

5
6

7
8

9
10

59 (138)
31 (215)

34 (138)
23 (215)

81 (138)
55 (215)

52 (138)
44 (150)

49 (138)
53 (150)

54 (289)
58 (289)

38 (289)
30 (289)

76 (289)
80 (289)

56 (289)
51 (289)

49 (289)
71 (289)

0.40
0.00

0.45
0.07

0.26
0.00

0.47
0.19

1.00
0.00

questions. Table 1 shows that, for three of the IPPs, stu-
dents often performed better on the conceptual question
when both questions were given rather than the corre-
sponding conceptual question alone. The fact that many
students took advantage of the quantitative problem to
solve the conceptual question points to their evolving
expertise. For example, many students who were given
both questions (1) and (2) recognized that the ﬁnal mo-
menta of the ships are independent of their masses under
the given conditions by solving the quantitative prob-
lem. Written responses and individual discussions sug-
gest that some students who answered the conceptual
question (2) correctly were not completely sure about
whether the change in momentum in question (1) was
given by option (a) or (e). However, since the answer in
either case is independent of the mass of the object, these
students chose the correct option (c) for question (2). The
students who chose the incorrect option (a) for question
(1) but the correct option (c) for question (2) often as-
sumed that both ships in question (2) must have traveled
the same distance although that is not correct.

In the third CQIPP, question (5) asks students to cal-
culate (numerically) the speed of a person at the bot-
tom of a 5 m high slide if the person started from rest
on the top. Question (6) asks students to compare the
speeds of two people with different masses at the bot-

tom of the slide, who started from rest at the top of the
slide. In individual discussions, several students explic-
itly noted that the mass cancels out in question (5) so
the answer to question (6) cannot depend on mass. In
the last CQIPP pairing questions (9) and (10), question
(9) asks students to numerically calculate the ﬁnal speed
of a boat moving horizontally when Batman falls verti-
cally into it and comes to rest with respect to the boat.
Question (10) asks a conceptual question about the ﬁ-
nal speed of a cart moving horizontally when rain falls
vertically into the cart and comes to rest and also asks
students about the physics principle involved in arriving
at the solution. Discussions with individual students and
students’ written work suggest that solving the quanti-
tative question (9) helped many students formulate their
solution to question (10). Although some students were
not able to solve the quantitative question, e.g., due to al-
gebraic error or not realizing that when considering the
conservation of the horizontal component of momentum,
Batman’s vertical velocity should not be included, it was
easier for them to answer the conceptual question after
thinking about the quantitative one. Most realized that
the boat would slow down after Batman lands in it.

Previous research shows that answering conceptual
questions can sometimes be more challenging for stu-
dents than quantitative ones, if the quantitative prob-
lems can be solved algorithmically and students’ prepa-
ration is sufﬁcient to perform the mathematical manip-
ulations [4]. If a student knows which equations are in-
volved in solving a quantitative problem or how to ﬁnd
the equations, he or she can combine them in any or-
der to solve for the desired variables even without a
deep conceptual understanding of relevant concepts. On
the contrary, while reasoning without equations, the stu-
dent must usually proceed in a particular order in the
reasoning chain to arrive at the correct conclusion [4].
Therefore, the probability of deviating from the correct
reasoning chain increases rapidly as the chain becomes
long. We note however that our hypothesis H2 is not
about whether students will perform better on the quan-
titative or conceptual question of a CQIPP when the two
questions are given separately (especially because the
wording is not parallel for the quantitative and concep-
tual questions in a CQIPP). Rather, our hypothesis re-
lates to whether students will recognize the similarity of
the quantitative and conceptual questions in a CQIPP,
and take advantage of their solution to one question to
answer the corresponding paired question. Our ﬁnding
suggests that students can leverage their quantitative so-
lutions to correctly answer the corresponding conceptual
questions, at least in the questions given.

The fact that students often performed better on con-
ceptual questions when they were paired with quantita-
tive questions brings up the following issue. If students
could turn the conceptual questions into analogous quan-

titative problems themselves when only the conceptual
questions were given, they may have solved the quanti-
tative problem algorithmically if they were comfortable
with the level of mathematics needed, and then reasoned
qualitatively about their results to answer the original
conceptual question. Almost without exception, students
did not do this in the interview situation. One can hy-
pothesize that students have not thought seriously about
the fact that a conceptual question can be turned into a
quantitative problem, or that a mathematical solution can
provide a tool for reasoning conceptually. Without ex-
plicit guidance, students may not realize that this con-
version route may be more productive than carrying out
long conceptual reasoning without mathematical rela-
tions. However, we ﬁnd that students avoided turning
conceptual questions into quantitative ones, even when
explicitly encouraged to do so. In one-on-one interview
situations, when students were only given the concep-
tual questions, they also tried to guess the answer based
upon their gut feeling. More research is required to un-
derstand why students are reluctant to transform a con-
ceptual question into a quantitative problem even if the
mathematical manipulations required after such a con-
version and making correct conceptual inferences are not
too difﬁcult for them. One possible explanation for such
reluctance is that such a transformation from a concep-
tual to a quantitative problem is cognitively demanding
for a typical introductory physics student and may cause
a mental overload [6]. According to Simon’s theory of
bounded rationality, an individual’s rationality in a par-
ticular context is constrained by his/her expertise and ex-
perience, and an individual will only choose one of the
few options consistent with his/her expertise that does
not cause a cognitive overload. [7]

In the second CQIPP, problem (3) asks students to cal-
culate the speed of a hoop rolling down a ramp given
the various parameters for the hoop and the ramp. Prob-
lem (4) asks them to compare the speeds of two different
hoops with different masses and radii rolling down the
same ramp. For this CQIPP, the quantitative problem was
very challenging. Most interviewed students and those
who wrote something on their answer sheet did not use
conservation of energy correctly and forgot to take into
account both the rotational and translational kinetic ener-
gies in their analysis. Thus, it is not surprising that there
is no signiﬁcant difference between cases when only one
of the questions was given vs. when both were given.

CONCLUSIONS

While students often took advantage of the quantitative
problem to answer the corresponding conceptual ques-
tion of a CQIPP, those who were only given the corre-
sponding conceptual question did not automatically con-

vert it into a quantitative problem as an aid for rea-
soning correctly. Examination of students’ scratch work
suggests that they seldom attempted such conversion by
choosing appropriate variables. One-on-one discussions
suggest that students often used gut feeling to reason
about the conceptual questions. This tendency persisted
even when the interviewer explicitly encouraged students
to convert a conceptual question into a quantitative one.
It is possible that converting the conceptual questions to
quantitative ones was too cognitively demanding for stu-
dents and may have caused mental overload.

In this research, isomorphic problems were given
back-to-back, and the more quantitative question always
preceded the conceptual question in a CQIPP. It is possi-
ble that the order in which questions were asked and the
proximity of the paired questions in a CQIPP are major
factors in whether students will recognize their similar-
ity and transfer relevant knowledge from one problem to
another. In future research, one can explore the effect of
spacing the questions in a CQIPP and changing the or-
der in which questions are asked on students’ ability to
beneﬁt from having both questions of a CQIPP.

Presenting quantitative and conceptual

isomorphic
pairs helped students make conceptual inferences using
quantitative tools. Such problem pairs as part of instruc-
tion may help students go beyond the “plug and chug"
strategy for the quantitative problem solving and may
give them an opportunity to reﬂect upon their solution
and develop reasoning and meta-cognitive skills. Solving
these paired problems can force students to reﬂect upon
the problem solving process and improve their meta-
cognitive skills. Helping students develop meta-cognitive
skills can also improve transfer of relevant knowledge
from one problem to another.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank NSF for award DUE-0442087.

REFERENCES

1. C. Singh, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 4, 010105(1-10),

(2008).

2. R. Dufresne, J. Mestre, T. Thaden-Koch, W. Gerace and
W. Leonard, 155-215, in Transfer of learning from a
modern multidisciplinary perspective, J. P. Mestre (Ed.),
Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing, (2005).

3. D. Ozimek, P. Engelhardt, A. Bennett, N. Rebello, Proc.

Phys. Ed. Res. Conf., AIP, 173-176, (2004).

4. L. C. McDermott, Am. J. Phys. 69 (11), 1127-1137, (2001).
5. F. Reif, Am. J. Phys. 63, 17 (1995).
6. J. Sweller, Cognitive Science 12, 257, (1988).
7. Simon, Reason in human affairs, Basil Blackwell, (1983).

