6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
0
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
4
9
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Rethinking Tools for Training Teaching Assistants

Chandralekha Singh

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA

Abstract. The ability to categorize problems is a measure of expertise in a domain. In order to help students learn effectively,
instructors and teaching assistants (TAs) should have pedagogical content knowledge. They must be aware of the prior
knowledge of students they are teaching, consider the difﬁculty of the problems from students’ perspective and design
instruction that builds on what students already know. Here, we discuss the response of graduate students enrolled in a TA
training course to categorization tasks in which they were asked to group problems based upon similarity of solution ﬁrst from
their own perspective, and later from the perspective of introductory physics students. Many graduate students performed
an expert-like categorization of introductory physics problems. However, when asked to categorize the same problems from
the perspective of introductory students, many graduate students expressed dismay, claiming that the task was impossible,
pointless and had no relevance to their TA duties. We will discuss how categorization can be a useful tool for scaffolding and
improving pedagogical content knowledge of teaching assistants and instructors.
Keywords: physics education research
PACS: 01.40Fk,01.40.gb,01.40G-,1.30.Rr

INTRODUCTION

The content knowledge of instructors is not sufﬁcient to
help students learn effectively. Indeed, instructors should
possess pedagogical content knowledge and familiarize
themselves with students’ prior knowledge in order to
scaffold their learning with appropriate pedagogies and
instructional tools. Vygotsky’s notion of “zone of prox-
imal development" [1] (ZPD) refers to what a student
can do on his/her own vs. with the help of an instruc-
tor who is familiar with his/her prior knowledge and
skills. Scaffolding is at the heart of ZPD and can be used
to stretch a student’s learning far beyond his/her initial
knowledge by carefully crafted instruction which is de-
signed to ensure that the student makes desired progress
and gradually develops independence. With awareness
of students’ initial knowledge state, the instructor can
continuously target instruction a little bit above students’
current knowledge state to ensure that the students have
the opportunity and ability to connect new knowledge
with what they already know and build a robust knowl-
edge structure.

Piaget [2] emphasized “optimal mismatch" between
what the student knows and where the instruction should
be targeted in order for desired assimilation and ac-
commodation of knowledge to occur. Bransford and
Schwartz [3] also proposed a framework for scaffolding
student learning. They theorized that the preparation for
future learning (PFL) and transfer of knowledge from the
situation in which it was acquired to new situations is
optimal if instruction includes both the elements of inno-
vation and efﬁciency. In their model, efﬁciency and inno-
vation are two orthogonal coordinates. If instruction only

focuses on efﬁciency, the cognitive engagement and pro-
cessing by the students will be diminished and they will
not develop the ability to transfer the acquired knowl-
edge to new situations. Similarly, if the instruction is
solely focused on innovation, students may struggle to
connect what they are learning with their prior knowl-
edge so that learning and transfer will be inhibited. They
propose that the preparation for future learning and trans-
fer will be enhanced if the instruction focuses on moving
along a diagonal trajectory in the two dimensional space
of innovation and efﬁciency. One common element of all
of these seemingly different frameworks is their focus
on students’ prior knowledge in order to scaffold learn-
ing. Indeed, the instructor must be familiar with students’
prior knowledge in order for instruction to be in the zone
of proximal development and to provide optimal mis-
match to ensure adequate preparation for future learning.
A crucial difference between the problem solving
strategies used by experts in physics and beginning stu-
dents lies in the interplay between how their knowl-
edge is organized and how it is retrieved to solve prob-
lems [4, 5, 6]. In a classic study by Chi et al.[7], intro-
ductory physics students were asked to group mechanics
problems into categories based on the similarity of their
solutions. Unlike graduate students (experts) who cate-
gorize them based on the physical principles involved to
solve them, introductory students categorized problems
involving inclined planes in one category and pulleys in
a separate category [7].

Here, we will discuss the process and outcome of the
categorization of 25 introductory mechanics problems by
21 physics graduate students enrolled in a TA training
course at the end of the course [8]. Graduate students

ﬁrst performed the categorizations from their own per-
spective and later from the perspective of a typical in-
troductory student. We wanted to investigate if the grad-
uate students have an understanding of the differences
between their physics knowledge structure and those of
the introductory physics students. One surprising ﬁnd-
ing is the resistance of graduate students to categorizing
problems from a typical introductory physics student’s
perspective with the claim that such a task is “useless",
“impossible", and has “no bearing" on their teaching as-
sistant (TA) duties. Based on our ﬁnding, we suggest that
inclusion of such tasks can improve the effectiveness of
TA training courses and faculty development workshops
and help TAs and instructors focus on issues related to
teaching and learning.

RATING OF CATEGORIES

We were unable to obtain the questions in Ref. [7] other
than the few that have been published. We therefore
chose our own questions on sub-topics similar to those
chosen in Ref. [7]. The context of the 25 mechanics
problems varied and the topics included one- and two-
dimensional kinematics, dynamics, work-energy, and
impulse-momentum [8]. Many questions were adapted
from an earlier study [9, 10, 11] because their develop-
ment had gone through rigorous testing.

Although we had an idea about which categories cre-
ated by individuals should be considered good or poor,
we validated our assumptions with other experts. We ran-
domly selected the categorizations performed by twenty
introductory physics students and gave it to three physics
faculty who had taught introductory physics recently and
asked them to decide whether each of the categories cre-
ated by individual students should be considered good,
moderate, or poor. We asked them to mark each row
which had a category name created by a student and a
description of why it was the appropriate category for
the questions that were placed in that category. If a fac-
ulty member rated a category created by an introductory
student as good, we asked that he/she cross out the ques-
tions that did not belong to that category. The agreement
between the ratings of different faculty members was bet-
ter than 95%. We used their ratings as a guide to rate the
categories created by everybody as good, moderate, or
poor. A category was considered “good” only if it was
based on the underlying physics principles. We typically
rated both conservation of energy or conservation of me-
chanical energy as good categories. Kinetic energy as a
category name was considered a moderate category if
students did not explain that the questions placed in that
category can be solved using mechanical energy conser-
vation or the work energy theorem. We rated a category
such as energy as good if students explained the rationale
for placing a problem in that category. If a secondary cat-

egory such as friction or tension was the only category in
which a problem was placed and the description of the
category did not explain the primary physics principles
involved, it was considered a moderate category.

More than one principle or concept may be useful for
solving a problem. The instruction for the categoriza-
tions told students that they could place a problem in
more than one category. Because a given problem can
be solved using more than one approach, categorizations
based on different methods of solution that are appro-
priate was considered good. For some questions, con-
servation of mechanical energy may be more efﬁcient,
but the questions can also be solved using one- or two-
dimensional kinematics for constant acceleration. In this
paper, we will only discuss categories that were rated
good. If a graph shows that 60% of the questions were
placed in a good category by a particular group (intro-
ductory students, graduate students, or faculty), it means
that the other 40% of the questions were placed in mod-
erate or poor categories.

GRADUATE STUDENTS FROM THEIR

OWN PERSPECTIVE

A histogram of the percentage of questions placed in
good categories (not moderate or poor) is given in Fig. 1.
This ﬁgure compares the average performance of 21
graduate students at the end of a TA training course when
they were asked to categorize questions from their own
perspective with 7 physics faculty and 180 introductory
students who were given the same task. Although this
categorization by the graduate students is not on par
with the categorization by physics faculty, the gradu-
ate students displayed a higher level of expertise in in-
troductory mechanics than the introductory students and
were more likely to group the questions based on phys-
ical principles. Physics professors and sometimes grad-
uate students pointed out multiple methods for solving
a problem and speciﬁed multiple categories for a partic-
ular problem more often than the introductory students.
Introductory students mostly placed one question in only
one category. Professors (and sometimes graduate stu-
dents) created secondary categories in which they placed
a problem that were more like the introductory students’
primary categories. For example, in the questions involv-
ing tension in a rope or frictional force [8], many faculty
and some graduate students created these secondary cat-
egories called tension or friction, but also placed those
questions in a primary category, based on a fundamental
principle of physics. Introductory physics students were
much more likely to place questions in inappropriate cat-
egories than the faculty or graduate students, for exam-
ple, placing a problem that was based on the impulse-
momentum theorem or conservation of momentum in the
conservation of energy category. Many of the categories

diately following the discussion. The graduate students
often asserted that it is not their job to “get into their
students’ heads.” Other graduate students stated that the
task was “impossible” and “cannot be accomplished.”
They often noted that they did not see the utility of un-
derstanding the perspective of the students. Some grad-
uate students explicitly noted that the task was “silly”
because it required them to be able to read their students’
minds and had no bearing on their TA duties. Not a sin-
gle graduate student stated that they saw merit in the task
or said anything in favor of why the task may be relevant
for a TA training course. The discussions with graduate
students also suggest that many of them believed that
effective teaching merely involves knowing the content
well and delivering it lucidly. Many of them had never
thought about the importance of knowing what their stu-
dents think for teaching to be effective.

It is surprising that most graduate students enrolled in
the TA training course were so reluctant or opposed to at-
tempting the categorization task from a typical introduc-
tory student’s perspective. This resistance is intriguing
especially because the graduate students were given the
task at the end of a TA training course and most of them
were TAs for introductory physics all term. It is true that
it is very difﬁcult for the TAs (and instructors in general)
to imagine themselves as novices. However, it is possible
for TAs (and instructors) to familiarize themselves with
students’ level of expertise by giving them pre-tests at the
beginning of a course, listening to them carefully, and by
reading literature about student difﬁculties, for example,
as part of the TA training course.

After 15–20 minutes of discussion we made the task
more concrete and told graduate students that they could
consider categorizing from the perspective of a relative
whom they knew well after he/she took only one intro-
ductory mechanics course if that was the only exposure
to the material they had. We also told them that they had
to make a good faith effort even if they felt the task was
meaningless or impossible. Figure 2 shows the histogram
of how the graduate students categorized questions from
their own perspective and from the perspective of a typi-
cal introductory student/relative who has taken only one
physics course and also categorization by introductory
students. Figure 2 shows that the graduate students re-
categorized the questions in worse categories when per-
forming the categorization from the perspective of a typ-
ical introductory physics student. However, if we look
at questions placed in each category, for example, con-
servation of momentum, there are sometimes signiﬁcant
differences between the categorization by graduate stu-
dents from an introductory students’ perspective and by
introductory students from their own perspective. This
implies that while graduate students may have realized
that a typical introductory student/relative who has taken
only one physics course may not perform as well as a

FIGURE 1. Histogram of percentages of
introductory
physics students, graduate students, and physics faculty who
categorized various percentages of the 25 problems in “good"
categories when asked to categorize them based upon similarity
of solution from their own point of view (Self PoV).

generated by the three groups were the same, but there
was a major difference in the fraction of questions that
were placed in good categories by each group. There
were some categories such as ramps, and pulleys, that
were made by introductory physics students but not by
physics faculty or graduate students.

GRADUATE STUDENTS FROM INTRO.

STUDENTS’ PERSPECTIVE

After the graduate students had submitted their own cat-
egorizations, they were asked to categorize the same
questions from the perspective of a typical introductory
physics student. A majority of the graduate students had
not only served as TAs for recitations, grading, or lab-
oratories, but had also worked during their ofﬁce hours
with students one-on-one and in the Physics Resource
Room at the University of Pittsburgh. The goal of this
task was to assess whether the graduate students were
familiar with the level of expertise of the introductory
students whom they were teaching and whether they re-
alized that most introductory students do not necessar-
ily see the same underlying principles in the questions
that they do. The graduate students were told that they
were not expected to remember how they used to think
4–5 years ago when they were introductory students. We
wanted them to think about their experience as TAs in in-
troductory physics courses while grouping the questions
from an introductory students’ perspective. They were
also asked to specify whether they were recitation TAs,
graders, or laboratory TAs that semester.

The categorization of questions from the perspective
of an introductory physics student met with widespread
resistance. Many graduate students noted that the task
was useless or meaningless and had no relevance to their
TA duties. Although we did not tape record the discus-
sion with the graduate students, we took notes imme-

physics graduate student on the categorization task, over-
all they were not able to anticipate the frequency with
which introductory students categorized each problem in
the common less-expert-like categories.

FIGURE 2. Histogram of percentages of introductory stu-
dents and graduate students who categorized various percent-
ages of the 25 problems in “good” categories when asked to
categorize them based on similarity of solution. Graduate stu-
dents categorized from their own point of view and from the
perspective of a typical introductory physics student.

DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY

The reluctance of TAs to re-categorize the questions from
introductory students’ perspective raises the question of
what should the graduate students learn in a TA training
class. In a typical TA training class, a signiﬁcant amount
of time is devoted to emphasizing the importance of writ-
ing clearly on the blackboard, speaking clearly and look-
ing into students’ eyes, and grading students’ work fairly.
There is a lack of discussion about the fact that teaching
requires not only knowing the content but understanding
how students think and implementing strategies that are
commensurate with students’ prior knowledge.

After the graduate students had completed both sets
of categorization tasks, we discussed the pedagogical
aspects of perceiving and evaluating the difﬁculty of
the questions from the introductory students’ perspec-
tive. We discussed that pedagogical content knowledge,
which is critical for effective teaching, depends not only
on the content knowledge of the instructor, but also on
the knowledge of what the students are thinking. The dis-
cussions were useful and many students explicitly noted
that they had not pondered why accounting for the level
of expertise and thinking of their students was important
for devising strategies to facilitate learning. Some grad-
uate students noted that they will listen to their introduc-
tory students and read their responses carefully.

One graduate student noted that after this discussion
he felt that, similar to the difﬁculty of the introductory
students in categorizing the introductory physics ques-
tions, he has difﬁculty in categorizing questions in the
advanced courses he has been taking. He added that
when he is assigned homework/exam questions, for ex-
ample, in the graduate level electricity and magnetism
course in which they were using the classic book by

Jackson, he often does not know how the questions re-
late to the material discussed in the class even when he
carefully goes through his class notes. The student noted
that if he goes to his graduate course instructor for hints,
the instructor seems to have no difﬁculty making those
connections to the homework. The spontaneity of the in-
structor’s connection to the lecture material and the in-
sights into those questions suggested to the student that
the instructor can categorize those graduate-level ques-
tions and explain the method for solving them without
much effort. This facility is due in part because the in-
structor has already worked out the questions and hence
they have become an exercise. Other graduate students
agreed with his comments saying they too had similar ex-
periences and found it difﬁcult to ﬁgure out how the con-
cepts learned in the graduate courses were applicable to
homework problems assigned in the courses. These com-
ments are consistent with the fact that a graduate student
may be an expert in the introductory physics material re-
lated to electricity and magnetism but not necessarily an
expert in the material at the Jackson level course.

This study raises important issues regarding the con-
tent of TA training courses and faculty professional de-
velopment workshops and the extent to which these
courses should allocate time to help participants learn
about pedagogical content knowledge in addition to the
usual discussions of logistical issues related to teaching.
Asking the graduate students and faculty to categorize
questions from the perspective of students may be one
way to draw instructor’s attention to these important is-
sues in the TA training courses and faculty professional
development workshops.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank J. Brascher for help in data analysis and NSF
for awards NSF-PHY-0653129 and PHY-055434.

REFERENCES

1. L. Vygotsky, Harvard University Press, (1978).
2. H. Ginsberg, and S. Opper, Englewood cliffs, N.J., (1969).
3. J. Bransford and D. Schwartz, Review of Research in
Education, 24, 61-100, Washington DC: AERA, (1999).

4. F. Reif, Phys. Today 39 (11), 48–54 (1986).
5. P. Hardiman, R. Dufresne and J. Mestre, Memory and

Cognition 17, 627–638 (1989).

6. C. Singh, Am. J. Phys, 70 (11), 1103–1109 (2002).
7. M Chi, P. Feltovich, Glaser, Cog. Sci. 5, 121–152 (1981).
8. C. Singh, Am. J. Phys., 77(1), 73-80, (2009).
9. C. Singh and D. Rosengrant, Am. J. Phys. 71 (6), 607-617

(2003).

10. C. Singh, in AIP Conf. Proc. 720 177-180 (2004).
11. C. Singh, E. Yerushalmi, and Bat Sheva Eylon, in AIP

Conf. Proc. 951, 31–34 (2007).

