6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
0
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
4
9
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Assessing Expertise in Quantum Mechanics using

Categorization Task

Shih-Yin Lin and Chandralekha Singh

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA

Abstract. We discuss the categorization of 20 quantum mechanics problems by 6 physics professors and 22 undergraduate
students from two honors-level quantum mechanics courses. Professors and students were asked to categorize the problems
based upon similarity of solution. We also had individual discussions with professors who categorized the problems. Faculty
members’ categorizations were overall rated better than those of students by three faculty members who evaluated all of the
categorizations. But the categories created by faculty members were more diverse compared to the uniformity of the categories
they created when asked to categorize introductory mechanics problems.
Keywords: physics education research
PACS: 01.40Fk,01.40.gb,01.40G-,1.30.Rr

INTRODUCTION

A crucial difference between the problem solving strate-
gies used by experts in physics and beginning students
lies in the interplay between how the knowledge is orga-
nized and how it is retrieved to solve problems. Catego-
rizing or grouping together problems based upon simi-
larity of solution can give a glimpse of the “pattern" an
individual sees in a problem while contemplating how to
solve it [1, 2, 3]. In a classic study by Chi et al. [1], a cat-
egorization task was used to assess introductory physics
students’ level of expertise in physics. In Chi’s study [1],
eight introductory physics students were asked to group
introductory mechanics problems into categories based
upon similarity of solution. They found that, unlike ex-
perts (physics graduate students) who categorized them
based on the physical principles involved to solve them,
introductory students categorized problems involving in-
clined planes in one category and pulleys in a separate
category [1]. Previously, we conducted a categorization
study in which 21 physics graduate students and several
hundred introductory physics students were asked to cat-
egorize introductory physics problems [4]. We found that
there is a large overlap in the performance of graduate
students and introductory students in the calculus-based
courses on the categorization task [4].

Here, we discuss a study in which 22 physics juniors
and seniors (12 and 10 students in the two classes) in
two undergraduate quantum mechanics courses and six
physics faculty were asked to categorize 20 quantum me-
chanics problems based upon similarity of solution. We
also discussed issues related to categorization individu-
ally with faculty members. All but one faculty had taught
an upper-level undergraduate or graduate level quantum
mechanics course. The faculty who had not taught quan-

tum mechanics regularly teaches other physics graduate
“core" courses including E&M and statistical mechan-
ics. In each of the two classes, the categorization task
was given as a class quiz on the last day of the course
and students were given full quiz credit for their partici-
pation. They were given approximately 35-40 minutes to
complete the categorization task. The faculty members
completed the categorization task at a time convenient to
them. Except for the faculty member who had not taught
quantum mechanics (who took longer), all the other fac-
ulty members noted that it took them less than 30 minutes
to complete the categorization task.

The 20 problems to be categorized (given in the Ap-
pendix) were adapted from the problems found at the end
of the chapter exercises in commonly used upper-level
undergraduate quantum mechanics textbooks. All those
who performed the categorization were provided the in-
struction given at the beginning of the Appendix. The
sheet on which individuals were asked to perform the
categorization of problems had three columns. The ﬁrst
column asked them to come up with their own “category
name" for each category, the second column asked them
for a description of the category that explains why those
problems can be grouped together and the third column
asked them to list the problem numbers for the problems
that should be placed in that category.

The goal was to investigate the differences in catego-
rization by faculty members and students and whether
there are major differences in the ways in which individ-
uals in each group categorize quantum mechanics prob-
lems. This study was partly inspired by the fact that a
physics faculty who was teaching advanced undergradu-
ate quantum mechanics in a previous semester had given
a take-home exam in which one problem asked students
to ﬁnd the wave function of a free particle after a time t

given the initial wave function (which was a Gaussian).
Two students approached the faculty member complain-
ing that this material was not covered in the class. The
faculty member pointed out to them that he had discussed
in the class how to ﬁnd the wave function after a time t
given an initial wave function in the context of a prob-
lem involving an inﬁnite square well. But the students in-
sisted that, while the time-development of the wave func-
tion may have been discussed in the context of an inﬁnite
square well, it was not discussed in the context of a free
particle. It appears that the two students did not catego-
rize the time-development issues for the inﬁnite square
well and the free particle in the same category. They did
not realize that a solution procedure very similar to what
they had learned in the context of the time-development
of the wave function for an inﬁnite square well should be
applicable to the free particle case except they must use
the energy eigenstates and eigenvalues corresponding to
the free particle and replace the discrete sum over energy
levels for an inﬁnite square well by an integral since the
energy levels for a free particle are continuous.

SCORING OF CATEGORIZATION

We ﬁnd that the categorizations of a problem performed
by the students were diverse. But the faculty members
also categorized each problem in categories that were of-
ten different, unlike the uniform categorization by fac-
ulty members for introductory physics problems [4]. To
analyze the data quantitatively, we placed each category
created by each individual into a matrix which consisted
of problem numbers along the columns and categories
along the rows. A “1" was assigned if the problem ap-
peared in the given category and a “0" was assigned if the
opposite was true. Categories that were very similar were
combined, e.g., “time-dependence of wave function" and
"time-development of wave function" or “dynamics of
wave function" were combined into a single category. In
order to score the categorizations by students and fac-
ulty members, three faculty members (a subset of those
who had categorized the problems themselves) were re-
cruited. They were given the categorizations by students
and faculty in the matrix form we had created (without
identiﬁers and with the categorizations by the faculty and
students jumbled up). All the different categories created
by different individuals for problem (1) were placed one
after the other to aid faculty members who were scor-
ing the categorizations. For each question, faculty mem-
bers doing the scoring were advised to read the question,
think about how they would categorize it and then evalu-
ate and score everybody’s categorization. The three fac-
ulty members were asked to evaluate whether each of the
categories created by an individual should be considered
“good" (assigned a score of 2), “moderate" (assigned a
score of 1), or “poor" (assigned a score of zero). We note
that if all three faculty members scored a particular prob-

lem for an individual as “good", the score of that individ-
ual on that problem will be 6 (maximum possible). If one
faculty scored it as “good" but the other two scored it as
“medium", the score of that individual on that problem
will be 4.

RESULTS

Each of the 22 students and 6 faculty members catego-
rized 20 problems. Some of the categories for a problem
were common for more than one individual and some-
times an individual placed a problem in more than one
category. All the three faculty members noted that eval-
uating and scoring other people’s categorization was a
very challenging task and required intense focus. One
faculty member noted that it took him several hours to
complete the scoring. Moreover, two of the faculty mem-
bers who evaluated everybody’s categorization noted that
they would prefer not to use the terms “good" or “poor"
for judging the categories. The faculty members who
scored others’ categorizations also noted that sometimes
they liked the categorizations of a problem by others
much more than their own. Interestingly, in our earlier
studies with introductory physics categorization, we had
asked three faculty members to evaluate the categoriza-
tions of a subset of randomly selected individuals (in that
case we did not ask them to score all categorizations be-
cause the introductory physics classes had several hun-
dred students) [4]. In scoring introductory physics cat-
egorizations, faculty were not hesitant about calling the
categories good/poor and they did not say that the task
was challenging [4]. They also never said that they pre-
ferred others’ categorizations of a problem more than
their own perhaps because there was a great confor-
mity in faculty categorizations (which were based upon
physics principles such as the conservation of mechani-
cal energy, conservation of momentum, conservation of
angular momentum, Newton’s second law etc.) [4].

Figure 1 (a) shows a histogram of the percentage of
people (students or faculty) vs. percentage of problems
with a score of 50% of better (at least 3 out of 6) and
Figure 1 (b) shows a histogram of the percentage of peo-
ple vs. average score on the categorization task out of
a maximum of 6 (averaged over all problems). We note
that what one faculty member scored as “good" was of-
ten scored as “medium" by another. As examples, for
problem (2), “time-dependence of expectation value" or
“evolution of states" received a score of 6 each, “an-
gular momentum", “eigenvalue, eigenfunctions" or “sta-
tionary state" received a score of 4 out of 6 each. For
question (13), “effects of measurement", “energy and po-
sition measurement" or “collapsed wave function" re-
ceived a score of 5 each, and “scalar product", “wave-
functions and probability" or “eigenvalue" received a
score of 3 each. For question (14), “time evolution of
wave function" received a score of 6, “superposition" re-

FIGURE 1.
of people vs. Average score out of 6

(a) Percentage of people vs. percentage of problems with a score of 50% of better (at least 3 out of 6), (b) Percentage

ceived a score of 5, “stationary state" or “time depen-
dent Schroedinger equation" received a score of 4 each,
“hydrogen atom" or “time dependent vs. time indepen-
dent" received a score of 3 each. For question (15), “time
dependent expectation value", “expectation value of ob-
servable", “selection rules", “stationary state", “symme-
try (even/odd)" or “time dependency, evolution" received
a score of 4 each and “time evolution of wavefunction"
or “probability and expectation value" received a score
of 3 each. For question (20), “effects of measurement",
or “collapsed wavefunction" received a score of 6, “hy-
drogen atom" or “matrix element" received a score of 3.
Figure 1 shows that the categorizations by faculty were
rated higher overall than those by students, despite the di-
versity in faculty responses. Individual discussions with
faculty suggest that some felt that the structure of knowl-
edge in quantum mechanics is more complex than that in
introductory physics which may make it difﬁcult to fo-
cus on the same aspects of solution when asked to cate-
gorize. One possible implication is that the way concepts
are emphasized in a quantum mechanics course may dif-
fer based upon the “patterns" that appear to be most cen-
tral to the faculty member teaching the course. Another
common theme that emerged is that categorization of in-
troductory physics problems involves identifying funda-
mental principles relevant for problems, whereas in un-
dergraduate quantum mechanics it mainly involves iden-
tifying concepts and procedures, because problem solv-
ing is tied to conceptual and procedural knowledge.

The overall scores (by the three faculty members who
evaluated all of the categorizations) of concrete cate-
gories such as “hydrogen atom" or “harmonic oscillator"
were higher than other concrete categories such as “inﬁ-
nite square well" or “free particle", where four questions
out of 20 given in the categorization task belong to each
of these four systems. Discussions with individual fac-

ulty suggest that they have a notion of a canonical quan-
tum system that they use for thinking about concepts and
to help clarify ideas about quantum mechanics. “Hydro-
gen atom" and “harmonic oscillator" ﬁt their notion of
canonical quantum systems. One faculty member explic-
itly noted that the hydrogen atom and harmonic oscillator
are quintessential in quantum mechanics. He added that
the hydrogen atom embodies many essential features of
other complex quantum systems but is simple enough to
be analysed easily. Similarly, the harmonic oscillator is
used as a model to understand diverse quantum systems.
Such explanations about why the average score for “hy-
drogen atom" as a category was at least 50% (3 out of
6 including the scores of all the three faculty who eval-
uated the responses) for three of the four questions that
related to the hydrogen atom but was not 50% for any of
the four questions related to the inﬁnite square well shed
some light on why the faculty members do not view all
“concrete" categories on the same footing.

SUMMARY

The categorization task is useful in that it reﬂects the
salient points and patterns an individual sees in a problem
when contemplating how to solve it. Even in the context
of categorization of quantum mechanics problems, pro-
fessors overall performed better than students as evalu-
ated by three faculty members who scored everything
without the knowledge of which ones belonged to the
faculty or students. Another ﬁnding is that, unlike the cat-
egorization of introductory problems, in which profes-
sors’ categorizations are uniform, their categorizations
were more varied in the context of quantum mechanics.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank NSF for awards PHY-0653129 and 055434.

REFERENCES

1. M. Chi, P. Feltovich, and R. Glaser, Cog. Sci. 5, 121-152

(1981).

2. R. Dufresne, J. Mestre, T. Thaden-Koch, W. Gerace and
W. Leonard, J. Mestre (Ed.), 393 pages, Greenwich, CT:
Information Age Publishing, (2005).

3. P. Hardiman, R. Dufresne and J. Mestre, Memory and

Cognition, 17, 627-638, (1989).

4. C. Singh, Am. J. Phys., 77(1), 73-80, (2009).

Appendix: Categorization Questions

• Your task is to group the 20 problems below into vari-
ous groups based upon similarity of solution on the sheet
of paper provided. You can create as many categories as
you wish. The grouping of problems should NOT be in
terms of “easy problems", “medium difﬁculty problems"
and “difﬁcult problems" but rather it should be based
upon the features and characteristics of the problems
that make them similar. A problem can be placed in
more than one group created by you. Please provide a
brief explanation for why you placed a set of questions
in a particular group. You need NOT solve any problems.

The ﬁrst TWO questions refer to the following system:
An electron is in an external magnetic ﬁeld B which
is pointing in the z direction. The Hamiltonian for the
electron spin is given by ˆH = −g B ˆSz where g
is the
gyromagnetic ratio and ˆSz is the z component of the spin
angular momentum operator.

1. If the electron is initially in an eigenstate of ˆSx, does
the expectation value of ˆSx depend on time? Justify
your answer.

2. If the electron is initially in an eigenstate of ˆSz, does
the expectation value of ˆSx depend on time? Justify
your answer.

3. A free particle has the initial wave function Y

(x,t =
0) = Ae−ax2eik0x where A, a, and k0 are constants (a
and k0 are real and positive). Find |Y

(x,t)|2.

4. A particle in an inﬁnite square well (0 ≤ x ≤ a) has
the initial wave function y (x,0) = Ax(a − x). Find
the uncertainty in position and momentum.

5. In the ground state of the harmonic oscillator, what
are the expectation values of position, momentum
and energy? Do these expectation values depend on
time?

6. A particle is in the ﬁrst excited state of a harmonic
oscillator potential. Without any calculations, ex-
plain what the expectation value of momentum is
and whether it should depend on time.

7. A free particle has the initial wave function Y

(x,t =
0) = Aeik0x where A, and k0 are constants (k0 is real
and positive). Find |Y

(x,t)|2.

8. An electron is in the ground state of a hydrogen
atom. Find the uncertainty in the energy and the z
component of angular momentum.

9. Make a qualitative sketch of a Dirac delta function
d (x). Then, make a qualitative sketch of the abso-
lute value of the Fourier transform of d (x). Label
the axes appropriately for each plot.

10. A free particle has the initial wave function Y

(x,t =
0) = Ae−ax2eik0x where A, a, and k0 are constants
(a and k0 are real and positive). Find hxi, hpi, hx2i,
hp2i, s x = phx2i − hxi2, s p = php2i − hpi2.

11. An electron in a hydrogen atom is in a linear super-
position of the ﬁrst and third excited states. Does
the expectation value of its kinetic energy depend
on time?

12. Suppose that the measurement of the position of a
particle in an inﬁnite square well (0 ≤ x ≤ a) yields
the value x = a/2 at the center of the well. Show
that if energy is measured immediately after the
position measurement, it is equally probable to ﬁnd
the particle in any odd-energy stationary state.

13. An electron is in a linear combination of the ground
and fourth excited states in a harmonic oscillator
potential. A measurement of energy is performed
and then followed by a measurement of position.
What can you say about the possible results for the
energy and position measurements?

14. An electron in a hydrogen atom is in a linear super-
position of the ﬁrst and third excited states. Find the
wave function after time t.

15. A particle is in the third excited state of a harmonic
oscillator potential. Without any calculations, ex-
plain what the expectation value of momentum is
and whether it should depend on time.

16. A particle in an inﬁnite square well (0 ≤ x ≤ a) has
the initial wave function y (x,0) = Ax(a − x). With-
out normalizing the wave function, ﬁnd y (x,t).

17. A free particle has the initial wave function Y

(x,t =
0) = Aeik0x where A, and k0 are constants (k0 is
real and positive). Find hxi, hpi, hx2i, hp2i, s x =
phx2i − hxi2, s p = php2i − hpi2.

18. A particle is initially in a linear combination of the
ground state and the ﬁrst excited state of an inﬁ-
nite square well. Without any calculations, explain
whether the expectation value of position should de-
pend on time.

19. What is the commutation relation [ ˆSx, ˆSy]?
20. A hydrogen atom is in the ﬁrst excited state. You
measure the distance of the electron from the nu-
cleus ﬁrst and then measure energy. Describe the
possible values of energy you may measure.

