6
1
0
2

 

b
e
F
0
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
4
9
2
0

.

3
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Categorization of Quantum Mechanics Problems by

Professors and Students

Shih-Yin Lin and Chandralekha Singh,
Department of Physics and Astronomy,

University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260

Abstract

We discuss the categorization of 20 quantum mechanics problems by physics professors
and undergraduate students from two honors-level quantum mechanics courses. Professors
and students were asked to categorize the problems based upon similarity of solution. We also
had individual discussions with professors who categorized the problems. Faculty members’
categorizations were overall rated higher than those of students by three faculty members who
evaluated all of the categorizations. The categories created by faculty members were more
diverse compared to the categories they created for a set of introductory mechanics problems.
Some faculty members noted that the categorization of introductory physics problems often
involves identifying fundamental principles relevant for the problem, whereas in upper-level
undergraduate quantum mechanics problems, it mainly involves identifying concepts and
procedures required to solve the problem. Moreover, physics faculty members who evaluated
others’ categorizations expressed that the task was very challenging and they sometimes
found another person’s categorization to be better than their own. They also rated some
concrete categories such as “hydrogen atom” or “simple harmonic oscillator” higher than
other concrete categories such as “inﬁnite square well” or “free particle”.

1

Introduction

A crucial diﬀerence between the problem solving strategies used by experts in physics and be-
ginning students lies in the interplay between how their knowledge is organized and how it is
retrieved to solve problems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Categorizing or grouping together problems based
upon similarity of solution can give a glimpse of the “pattern” an individual sees in a problem while
contemplating how to solve it [1]. In a classic study by Chi et al. [1], a categorization task was
used to assess introductory physics students’ level of expertise in physics. In Chi’s study [1], eight
introductory physics students were asked to group together introductory mechanics problems into
categories based upon similarity of solution. They found that, unlike experts (physics graduate
students in their study) who categorized them based on the physical principles required to solve
them, introductory students categorized problems involving inclined planes in one category and
pulleys in a separate category [1]. Previously, we conducted a categorization study in which 7
professors, 21 physics graduate students and more than a hundred introductory physics students
in a classroom environment were asked to group together introductory physics problems based
upon similarity of solution [6]. We found that the professors signiﬁcantly outperformed both the
graduate students and introductory physics students in grouping together problems based upon
the physics principles involved rather than basing the grouping of the problems on the surface
features of the problems and they created very similar categories [6]. The graduate students per-
formed better than the introductory physics students in the categorization task. However, there is

1

a large overlap in the performance of graduate students and introductory students in the calculus-
based courses on the categorization of introductory physics problems into groups based upon the
fundamental principles of physics required to solve the problems [6].

While learning introductory physics is challenging, learning quantum mechanics is perhaps
even more so [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Unlike classical mechanics, we do
not have direct experience with the microscopic quantum world. Also, quantum mechanics has
an abstract theoretical framework in which the most fundamental equation, the Time-Dependent
Schroedinger Equation (TDSE), describes the time evolution of the wave function or the state of
a quantum system according to the Hamiltonian of the system. This wave function is in general
complex and does not directly represent a physical entity. However, the wave function at a given
time can be used to calculate the probability of measuring a particular value for a given physical
observable associated with the system. For example, the absolute square of the wave function in
position-space gives the probability density. Since the TDSE does not describe the evolution or
motion of a physical entity, unlike Newton’s second law, the modeling of the microscopic world
in quantum mechanics is generally more abstract than the modeling of the macroscopic world in
classical mechanics.

The conceptual framework of quantum mechanics is often counter-intuitive to our everyday
experiences. According to quantum theory, the position, momentum, energy and other observables
for a quantum mechanical entity are in general not well-deﬁned. We can only predict the probabil-
ity of measuring diﬀerent values based upon the wave function when a measurement is performed.
This probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics, which even Einstein found disconcerting,
is challenging for students. Moreover, according to the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum
mechanics, which is widely taught to students, measurement of a physical observable “collapses”
the wave function into an eigenstate of the operator corresponding to the observable measured.
Thus, the usual time evolution of the system according to the TDSE is treated diﬀerently from
measurement processes. Students often have diﬃculty with this notion of an instantaneous change
or “collapse” of the wave function during the measurement [13]. The proper way to interpret quan-
tum mechanics is still the subject of debate, making the subject even more challenging for physics
instructors.

Here, we discuss a study in which 22 physics juniors and seniors in two undergraduate quan-
tum mechanics courses and six physics faculty members (professors) were asked to categorize 20
quantum mechanics problems based upon similarity of solution. We also interviewed some faculty
members concerning issues related to categorization of quantum mechanics problems. All but
one faculty member had taught an upper-level undergraduate or graduate level quantum mechan-
ics course. The faculty member who had not taught quantum mechanics regularly teaches other
physics graduate “core” courses including electricity and magnetism and statistical mechanics. All
undergraduate students in the upper-level quantum mechanics classes (12 and 10 students in the
two classes who were present on the day the categorization task was given as a quiz) participated.
The students were given 35-40 minutes to perform the categorization. The faculty members per-
formed the categorization at a time convenient to them. Except for the faculty member who had
not taught quantum mechanics and took longer to categorize the problems, other professors noted
that it took them less than 30 minutes to perform the categorizations.

The 20 problems to be categorized (given in the Appendix) were adapted from the prob-
lems found among the end of the chapter exercises in commonly used upper-level undergraduate
quantum mechanics textbooks. All those who performed the categorization were provided the
instructions given at the beginning of the Appendix. The sheet on which individuals were asked
to perform the categorization of problems had three columns. In the ﬁrst column, they were asked
to place their own “category name” for each category (in other words, they had to come up with
their own category names), in the second column, they had to place a description of the category

2

that explains why those problems can be grouped together; in the third column, they had to list
the problem numbers for the problems that should be placed in that category. We note that for
solving a problem, more than one approach may be useful. The instruction for the categorization
explicitly noted that a problem could be placed in more than one category.

The goal was to investigate diﬀerences in categorization by faculty members and students
and whether there are major diﬀerences in the ways in which individuals in each group categorize
quantum mechanics problems. This study was partly inspired by the fact that a physics faculty
member who was teaching advanced undergraduate quantum mechanics in a previous semester
had given a take-home exam in which one problem asked students to ﬁnd the wave function
of a free particle after a time t given the initial wave function (which was a Gaussian). Two
students approached the faculty member complaining that this material was not covered in the
class. The faculty member pointed out to them that he had discussed in the class how to ﬁnd the
wave function after a time t given an initial wave function in the context of a problem involving
an inﬁnite square well. But the students insisted that, while the time-development of the wave
function may have been discussed in the context of an inﬁnite square well, it was not discussed
in the context of a free particle. It appears that the two students did not categorize the time-
development issues for the inﬁnite square well and the free particle in the same category. They
did not realize that a solution procedure very similar to what they had learned in the context of
the time-development of the wave function for an inﬁnite square well should be applicable to the
free particle case except they must use the energy eigenstates and eigenvalues corresponding to
the free particle and replace the discrete sum over energy levels for an inﬁnite square well by an
integral since the energy levels for a free particle are continuous. This diﬃculty in discerning that
the same concepts and procedures should be applicable in both contexts is similar to the diﬃculty
introductory students have in discerning that the same principle is applicable in two problems
that have diﬀerent contexts.

2 Scoring of Categorization

We note that each individual who categorized the problems had to come up with his/her own
category names and justify why each problem should be placed in a particular category. The
20 questions for categorization were such that the “context” in four of them was the hydrogen
atom, the harmonic oscillator, the inﬁnite square well, and the free particle (see the Appendix).
Three of the problems were related to the spin angular momentum and one was about the Dirac
delta function. Within these diﬀerent contexts, there were questions about the time evolution
of wave function, time dependence of expectation value, measurement of physical observables,
expectation value including uncertainty, commutation relation between diﬀerent components of
the spin angular momentum etc. As noted earlier, we wanted to investigate if the questions were
grouped together based upon the physics concepts and procedures required for solving them or the
“surface features” of the problems such as the contexts used. For problems related to the time-
dependence of wave function or time-dependence of expectation value, we wanted to investigate if
the faculty members and students categorized problems involving the stationary states diﬀerently
from those involving the non-stationary states.

We ﬁnd that the categorizations of a problem performed by the students were diverse and
they seldom placed a problem in more than one category although they were explicitly told they
could do so if they wish. Moreover, the faculty members often used a diverse set of categories
unlike the highly uniform categorization by faculty members for introductory physics problems [6].

To analyze the quality of categories created by the professors and the students quantitatively,
we placed each category created by each individual into a matrix which consisted of problem
numbers along the columns and categories along the rows. A “1” was assigned if the problem
appeared in the given category and a “0” was assigned if the opposite was true. Categories that

3

were very similar were combined, e.g., “time-dependence of wave function”, “time-development of
wave function” or “dynamics of wave function” were combined into a single category. In order
to score the categorizations by students and faculty members, three faculty members (a subset
of those who had categorized the problems themselves) were recruited. They were given the
categorizations by students and faculty in the matrix form we had created (without identiﬁers and
with the categorizations by the faculty and students jumbled up). For example, all the diﬀerent
categories created by diﬀerent individuals for problem (1) were placed one after the other to aid
faculty members who were scoring the categorizations.

For each question, the three faculty members doing the scoring were advised to read the
question, think about how they would categorize it and then evaluate and score everybody’s
categorization. They were asked to evaluate whether each of the categories created by an individual
should be considered “good” (assigned a score of 2), “moderate” (assigned a score of 1), or “poor”
(assigned a score of zero). We note that if all three faculty members scored a particular problem
for an individual as “good”, the score of that individual on that problem will be 6 (maximum
possible). If one faculty member scored it as “good” but the other two scored it as “medium”, the
score of that individual on that problem will be 4.

3 Results

Each of the 22 students and 6 faculty members categorized 20 problems. Faculty members often
placed a problem in more than one category. As noted earlier, some of the categories created for
a problem by more than one individual were the same or similar. Several categories that were
similar were combined into a single category. All the three faculty members noted that evaluating
and scoring other people’s categorization was a very challenging task and required intense focus.
One faculty member noted that it took him several hours to complete the scoring. Moreover, two
of the faculty members who evaluated everybody’s categorization noted that they would prefer not
to use the terms “good” or “poor” for judging the categories although some categories were better
than others. The faculty members who scored others’ categorizations also noted that sometimes
they liked the categorizations of a problem by others much more than their own. Interestingly, in
our earlier studies with introductory physics categorization, we had asked three faculty members
to evaluate the categorizations of a subset of randomly selected individuals (in that case we did not
ask them to score all categorizations because the introductory physics classes had several hundred
students) [6]. In scoring introductory physics categorizations, faculty members were not hesitant in
calling the categories good/poor and they did not say that the task was challenging [6]. They also
never said that they preferred other’s categorizations of a problem more than their own perhaps
because there was a great conformity in faculty categorizations (which were based upon physics
principles such as the conservation of mechanical energy, conservation of momentum, conservation
of angular momentum, Newton’s second law etc.) [6].

Table 1 shows examples of category names for each question divided into three groups with
a score of “5 or 6”, “3 or 4” or “less than 3”. With each category name, many faculty members
and students provided an explanation justifying why certain problems should be placed in that
category. Inspection of Table 1 shows that the categories that obtained a total score of less than
3 (out of 6) included both concrete and abstract categories. For example, “change in basis”
for problem (1), “commutation relation” for problem (12), “matrix element” for problem (17),
“rotation group” for problem (19) etc. are abstract categories that received a score of less than 3.
On the other hand, “inﬁnite square well” for problems (4), (12), (16) and (18) and “free particle”
for problems (3), (7) and (10) etc. are examples of concrete categories that received a score of less
than 3.

Figure 1 shows a histogram of the percentage of people (students or faculty) vs. percentage of

4

problems with a score of 50% of better (at least 3 out of 6) and Figure 2 shows a histogram of the
percentage of people vs. average score on the categorization task out of a maximum of 6 (averaged
over all problems). We note that what one faculty member scored as “good” was often scored as
“medium” by another. While three of the six faculty members who categorized the problems were
recruited to score all of the categories by all faculty members and students, the average score of
the three faculty members who scored all problems was lower than those of the other three faculty
members who did not score the categories. Also, faculty members who scored the categorizations
explicitly noted that they sometimes preferred others categorizations more than their own. Thus,
we do not believe that the faculty members who scored everybody’s categorizations were partial
to their own categories. It is interesting to note that the faculty member who had never taught
quantum mechanics (but had taught statistical mechanics and electricity and magnetism at the
graduate level) performed slightly better on average (though not statistically signiﬁcant) than
the faculty members who scored the categorizations. In fact, the faculty member who had never
taught quantum mechanics but performed the categorization commented that he would like to
teach quantum mechanics but was not assigned that course despite asking for it. He added that
the main reason was that many other faculty members wanted to teach quantum mechanics but
they did not want to teach the other graduate level courses that he was assigned.

Figure 1 shows that the categorizations by faculty members were rated higher overall than
those by students, despite the diversity in faculty responses. We ﬁnd that the faculty members
were more likely to categorize the problems based upon the procedures and concepts required to
solve the problems rather than the contexts involved. But Figure 2 shows that none of the fac-
ulty members had an average score of 5-6 on the categorization task implying none of the faculty
member placed all 20 problems in categories that were considered uniformly excellent (although
their categories were on average better than those of the students). Faculty members sometimes
categorized problems based upon the contexts used, e.g., hydrogen atom, simple harmonic oscilla-
tor, angular momentum etc. However, most of the time when they did such categorizations, they
also categorized the same problems in other categories which were based upon the procedures for
solving the problems. They were also more likely than students to make use of the nuances in
the questions to group problems, e.g., whether the system was in a stationary state in order to
categorize problems involving the time-dependence of wave function or the time-dependence of
expectation value.

The same category was sometimes assigned diﬀerent scores for diﬀerent questions depending
upon whether the faculty members who scored them felt they were appropriate categories for
those questions. For example, for question (15), the category “stationary state” obtained a score
of at least 3 because the faculty members felt that it was relevant for determining the expectation
value of momentum and for explaining whether it should depend on time. On the other hand, for
question (20), “stationary state” category obtained a score less than 3 (see the Appendix) because
it was not considered relevant for ﬁnding the possible values of energy after the measurement of
the distance of the electron from the nucleus.

Faculty members who scored the categories were careful to distinguish between the categories
“uncertainty” and “uncertainty principle” (or uncertainty relation). For example, in questions (10)
and (17), “expectation value and uncertainty” category obtained an average score of 5 or 6 whereas
“uncertainty principle” or “uncertainty relation” obtained a score of less than 3. Individual dis-
cussions with the faculty who scored the categorization suggests that they saw a clear distinction
between these categories. In particular, they asserted that calculating the standard deviation σx
was about calculating the uncertainty in position but it was not about “uncertainty principle”
or “uncertainty relation”. The question did not ask whether the product of the uncertainties in
position and momentum is greater than or equal to ¯h/2.

The overall scores (by the three faculty members who evaluated all of the categorizations)

5

on concrete or context-based categories such as “hydrogen atom” or “harmonic oscillator” were
higher than other concrete categories such as “inﬁnite square well” or “free particle”, (where
four questions out of 20 given in the categorization task belong to each of these four systems as
noted earlier). Discussions with individual faculty suggest that they have a notion of a canonical
quantum system that they use for thinking about concepts and to help clarify ideas about quantum
mechanics. “Hydrogen atom” and “harmonic oscillator” ﬁt their notion of canonical quantum
systems. One faculty member explicitly noted that the hydrogen atom and harmonic oscillator
are quintessential in quantum mechanics. He added that the hydrogen atom embodies many
essential features of other complex quantum systems but is exactly soluble and widely applicable.
Similarly, the harmonic oscillator is used as a model to understand diverse quantum systems such
as molecular excitations and quantum optics. Such explanations about why the average score for
“hydrogen atom” as a category was at least 50% (3 out of 6 including the scores of all the three
faculty members who evaluated the responses) for three of the four questions that related to the
hydrogen atom but was not 50% for any of the four questions related to the inﬁnite square well
shed some light on why the faculty do not view all “concrete” categories on the same footing.

As noted earlier, most of the time when faculty members placed problems in a category
involving context, such as “hydrogen atom” or “simple harmonic oscillator”, they also placed
the same problem in another category based on the procedure involved in solving the problem.
But sometimes they placed some of the problems only in concrete categories. For example, one
faculty member grouped some problems about hydrogen atom in “hydrogen atom” category or
in a category based upon the procedure for solving the problems, e.g., “measurement” or “time
evolution of wave function” or in both these types of categories. During individual discussions,
these faculty members were asked why their choices were more context-based in some of their
groupings and more focused on the procedures and concepts to solve the problems for creating other
categories. In response, some faculty members reasoned that they were perhaps using lenses with
diﬀerent “zoom factors” for categorizing diﬀerent problems. They noted that the categorization
task was challenging and they sometimes zoomed in and out while categorizing diﬀerent problems
focusing on the contexts or the procedures for solving them. Faculty members who scored the
categorizations also noted that while scoring others’ categorizations they realized that there were
many diﬀerent ways to categorize the problems and sometimes others’ categorizations were better
than their own.

The faculty members were reminded during the individual discussions that while categorizing
introductory physics problems, faculty always scored “inclined plane category”, “cliﬀ category” or
“spring category” as poor categories explaining that they were based on the “surface features” of
the problems rather than the “deep” features (fundamental principles of physics required to solve
them). They were asked to comment on whether making categories such as “angular momentum”
or “hydrogen atom” was also based on the “surface features” of the problems rather than the
procedures relevant for solving the problems.
In response to such questions, faculty members
often noted that while these categories were less directly related to the procedure for solving the
problems, they were hesitant to call them “poor” categories. They noted, e.g., that the knowledge
about the hydrogen atom is relevant for solving the problems involving hydrogen atom even though
that knowledge alone may not be the central component of how to set up the solution of the
problem. For example, questions (11) and (14) in the Appendix are about the hydrogen atom in
a linear superposition of stationary states. In question (11), the knowledge that the expectation
value of an operator corresponding to a physical observable which does not commute with the
Hamiltonian depends on time in a non-stationary state is relevant to solve the problem. Similarly,
in question (14), knowledge about the time-dependence of wave function in a non-stationary state
is relevant for solving the problem. Simply categorizing these problems in the “hydrogen atom
category” does not indicate whether the individual knows the procedure for solving the problem.
While the faculty members agreed that some of these concrete categories may not be the best way

6

to categorize the problems, they sometimes scored some of these context-based categories (even if
they did not give an indication of the procedures for solving the problems) as “1” instead of “0”
(but rarely gave it a score of “2”). As shown in Table 1, “angular momentum” for questions (1)
and (2), harmonic oscillator for questions (5) and (6), hydrogen atom for questions (8), (14) and
(20) are examples of such context-based categories that were judged favorably.

Individual discussions with faculty members suggest that some felt that the structure of
knowledge in quantum mechanics is more complex than that in introductory physics. Moreover, the
complexity of knowledge structure in quantum mechanics is due to both the requisite conceptual
and mathematical knowledge. This complexity may make it diﬃcult for everybody to focus on the
same aspects of solution when asked to categorize (although there are often underlying relations
in faculty categorizations). One possible implication is that the way concepts are emphasized in a
quantum mechanics course may diﬀer based upon the “patterns” that appear to be most central
to the faculty member teaching the course. For example, one faculty member may emphasize the
conceptual aspects while the other may emphasize the mathematical aspects.

During individual discussions, faculty members were asked if they were surprised that the
categories in which a problem was placed by diﬀerent faculty members were not always similar
and some faculty came up with categories that were more abstract than others. They were also
asked to comment on the fact that the faculty members who scored the categorizations gave low
scores not only to the concrete categories but also to some abstract categories. For example, as
noted earlier, “matrix element” for question (17) and “rotation group” for question (19) received a
cumulative score of less than 3. In response to these questions, faculty members asserted that they
were not very surprised about these because they felt that how one teaches quantum mechanics
and how abstractly or concretely one presents the material depends strongly on the instructor.
During discussions, several faculty members pointed out that if one takes a look at the quantum
mechanics textbooks, he/she will realize that the textbooks are laid out very diﬀerently and
emphasize diﬀerent things. Some faculty members mentioned that some undergraduate textbooks
do not emphasize the postulates of quantum mechanics. Also, the postulates in diﬀerent textbooks
are not identical (e.g., only some of the textbooks list the Time-dependent Schroedinger equation
as a postulate). Some textbooks are hesitant to mention the “collapse” of the wave function
during measurement while others discuss these issues in detail. They also mentioned that some
textbooks start with the inﬁnite dimensional vector space while others start with the quantum
mechanics of a spin-half particle. The proponents of the spin-half ﬁrst believe that it provides
a simple two dimensional vector space to teach the foundations of quantum mechanics whereas
those who discuss, e.g., the inﬁnite square well, ﬁrst believe that spin is too abstract and continuity
with the topics covered in the earlier courses is important. The extent to which symmetry ideas
are emphasized and the conservation laws derived from them also varies in the undergraduate
textbooks. Discussions suggest that most faculty members believed that if there is no agreement
on the basic issues about teaching undergraduate quantum mechanics, the diﬀerences in how the
faculty members categorize problems, teach their courses and what they emphasize is perhaps
expected.

Another common theme that emerged is that categorization of introductory physics problems
involves identifying fundamental principles relevant for the problems, whereas in the upper-level
undergraduate quantum mechanics problems, it mainly involves identifying concepts and proce-
dures, because problem solving in such a course is tied to conceptual and procedural knowledge.
Some faculty members asserted that the fundamental principles of physics such a conservation of
energy and conservation of momentum are important even for understanding quantum processes.
However, the application of fundamental principles to quantum processes is not typically the focus
of an upper-level undergraduate course. For example, one faculty member noted that for under-
standing the properties of a solid using neutron scattering, one will have to carefully account for

7

the conservation of energy and momentum but questions involving these topics are typically not
common in an undergraduate quantum mechanics course. He added that if such questions were
given in the categorization task, there may be more uniformity in the faculty responses.

4 Summary
The categorization of problems by students in a quantum mechanics course can be a useful tool for
understanding the patterns students see in a problem when contemplating how to solve it. Even
in the context of quantum mechanics problems, professors overall scored higher than students in
grouping together problems based on similarity of solutions.

However, unlike the categorization of introductory physics problems, in which professors’
categorizations are generally uniform, their categorizations were more varied in the context of
quantum mechanics. The diversity of categories created for quantum mechanics may partly be due
to the fact that the solution to a typical quantum mechanics problem in an upper-level quantum
mechanics course typically requires the knowledge of requisite concepts and procedures. On the
other hand, categorization in introductory physics is typically based on the fundamental principles
of physics. Faculty members noted that the fundamental principles, e.g., conservation laws, are
also important in understanding quantum processes but they are not the focus of an upper-
level undergraduate quantum mechanics course. Some faculty members created more abstract
categories than others. It will be useful to investigate how diﬀerent is the teaching emphasis of
faculty members in a quantum mechanics course depending upon the types of categories they
created.

5 Acknowledgments

We thank all faculty and students who participated in this study for their help. This work is
supported by the National Science Foundation (PHY-0653129 and 055434).

8

References

[1] M. Chi, P. Feltovich, and R. Glaser, Categorization and representation of physics knowledge

by experts and novices, Cog. Sci. 5, 121-152 (1981).

[2] P. Hardiman, R. Dufresne and J. Mestre, The relation between problem categorization and

problem solving among novices and experts, Memory and Cognition, 17, 627-638, (1989).

[3] J. H. Larkin, and F. Reif, Understanding and teaching problem solving in physics, Eur. J. Sci.

Ed. 1(2), 191-203, (1979).

[4] A. E. Tabor-Morris, K. A. Froriep, T. M. Briles and C. M. McGuire, City of physics-analogies

to increase cognitive coherence in physics learning Phys. Educ. 44(2), 195-198, (2009).

[5] F. Reif, Teaching problem solving-A scientiﬁc approach, The Phys. Teach. 33, 310, (1981).

[6] C. Singh, “Categorization of problems to assess and improve proﬁciency as teacher and

learner”, Am. J. Phys., 77(1), 73-80, (2009).

[7] C. Singh, M. Belloni, and W. Christian, “Improving student’s understanding of quantum

mechanics,” Phys. Today 59(8), 43–49 (2006).

[8] P. Jolly, D. Zollman, S. Rebello, A. Dimitrova, Visualizing potential energy diagrams, Am. J.

Phys., 66(1), 57, (1998).

[9] C. Singh, Student understanding of quantum mechanics, Am. J. Phys., 69 (8), 885-896, (2001).

[10] K. Mannila, I. T. Koponen and J. Niskanen, Building a picture of students’ conceptions of

wave- and particle-like properties of quantum entities, Eur. J. Phys. 23, 45-53, (2002).

[11] See for example, the theme issue of Am. J. Phys. 70(3), 2002 published in conjunction with

Gordon conference on teaching and research in quantum mechanics.

[12] A. Magalhaes and V. P. S. Vasconcelos, Particle in a Box: Software for computer-assisted
learning in introductory quantum mechanics courses, Eur. J. Phys. 27(6) 1425-1435, (2006).

[13] C. Singh, “Transfer of learning in quantum mechanics,” AIP Conf. Proc. 790, 23–26 (2005).

[14] C. Singh, “Improving student understanding of quantum mechanics,” AIP Conf. Proc. 818,

69-72, (2006).

[15] C. Singh, “Student diﬃculties with quantum mechanics formalism,” AIP Conf. Proc. 883,

185–188 (2007).

[16] C. Singh, “Interactive learning tutorials on quantum mechanics”, Am. J. Phys., 76(4), 400-

405, (2008).

[17] C. Singh, “Helping students learn quantum mechanics for quantum computing,” AIP Conf.

Proc. 883, 42–45 (2007).

[18] C. Singh, “Student understanding of quantum mechanics at the beginning of graduate in-

struction”, Am. J. Phys., 76(3), 277-287, (2008).

[19] G. Matteucci, A. Migliori, F. Medina and R. Castaneda, An experiment on the particle-wave

nature of electrons Eur. J. Phys. 30(1) 217-226, (2009).

9

Appendix: Categorization Questions

• Your task is to group the 20 problems below into various groups based upon similarity of solution
on the sheet of paper provided. You can create as many categories as you wish. The grouping of
problems should NOT be in terms of “easy problems”, “medium diﬃculty problems” and “diﬃ-
cult problems” but rather it should be based upon the features and characteristics of the problems
that make them similar. A problem can be placed in more than one group created by you. Please
provide a brief explanation for why you placed a set of questions in a particular group. You need
NOT solve any problems.

The ﬁrst TWO questions refer to the following system: An electron is in an external magnetic
ﬁeld B which is pointing in the z direction. The Hamiltonian for the electron spin is given by
ˆH = −γB ˆSz where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and ˆSz is the z component of the spin angular
momentum operator.

1. If the electron is initially in an eigenstate of ˆSx, does the expectation value of ˆSx depend on

time? Justify your answer.

2. If the electron is initially in an eigenstate of ˆSz, does the expectation value of ˆSx depend on

time? Justify your answer.

3. A free particle has the initial wave function Ψ(x, t = 0) = Ae−ax2

eik0x where A, a, and k0

are constants (a and k0 are real and positive). Find |Ψ(x, t)|2.

4. A particle in an inﬁnite square well (0 ≤ x ≤ a) has the initial wave function ψ(x, 0) =

Ax(a − x). Find the uncertainty in position and momentum.

5. In the ground state of the harmonic oscillator, what are the expectation values of position,

momentum and energy? Do these expectation values depend on time?

6. A particle is in the ﬁrst excited state of a harmonic oscillator potential. Without any
calculations, explain what the expectation value of momentum is and whether it should
depend on time.

7. A free particle has the initial wave function Ψ(x, t = 0) = Aeik0x where A, and k0 are

constants (k0 is real and positive). Find |Ψ(x, t)|2.

8. An electron is in the ground state of a hydrogen atom. Find the uncertainty in the energy

and the z component of angular momentum.

9. Make a qualitative sketch of a Dirac delta function δ(x). Then, make a qualitative sketch of
the absolute value of the Fourier transform of δ(x). Label the axes appropriately for each
plot.

10. A free particle has the initial wave function Ψ(x, t = 0) = Ae−ax2

eik0x where A, a, and k0
are constants (a and k0 are real and positive). Find hxi, hpi, hx2i, hp2i, σx = qhx2i − hxi2,
σp = qhp2i − hpi2.

11. An electron in a hydrogen atom is in a linear superposition of the ﬁrst and third excited

states. Does the expectation value of its kinetic energy depend on time?

10

12. Suppose that the measurement of the position of a particle in an inﬁnite square well (0 ≤
x ≤ a) yields the value x = a/2 at the center of the well. Show that if energy is measured
immediately after the position measurement, it is equally probable to ﬁnd the particle in
any odd-energy stationary state.

13. An electron is in a linear combination of the ground and fourth excited states in a harmonic
oscillator potential. A measurement of energy is performed and then followed by a measure-
ment of position. What can you say about the possible results for the energy and position
measurements?

14. An electron in a hydrogen atom is in a linear superposition of the ﬁrst and third excited

states. Find the wave function after time t.

15. A particle is in the third excited state of a harmonic oscillator potential. Without any
calculations, explain what the expectation value of momentum is and whether it should
depend on time.

16. A particle in an inﬁnite square well (0 ≤ x ≤ a) has the initial wave function ψ(x, 0) =

Ax(a − x). Without normalizing the wave function, ﬁnd ψ(x, t).

17. A free particle has the initial wave function Ψ(x, t = 0) = Aeik0x where A, and k0 are
constants (k0 is real and positive). Find hxi, hpi, hx2i, hp2i, σx = qhx2i − hxi2, σp =
qhp2i − hpi2.

18. A particle is initially in a linear combination of the ground state and the ﬁrst excited state
of an inﬁnite square well. Without any calculations, explain whether the expectation value
of position should depend on time.

19. What is the commutation relation [ ˆSx, ˆSy]?

20. A hydrogen atom is in the ﬁrst excited state. You measure the distance of the electron from
the nucleus ﬁrst and then measure energy. Describe the possible values of energy you may
measure.

11

Figure 1: Percentage of people vs. percentage of problems with a score of 50% of better (at least
3 out of 6)

12

Figure 2: Percentage of people vs. Average score out of 6

13

Q#

1/2

3
4

5

6

7
8

9
10

11

12

13

14
15

16

17

18
19
20

Scores of 5 or 6

Scores of 3 or 4

Scores less than 3

time dependence of EV/

stationary state

eigenvalue&function/angular
momentum/Larmor precession

Stern-Gerlach/change in basis/
charged particle in mag. ﬁeld

time evolution of wavefunction

EV/

EV and uncertainty

EV/eigenstate/

time dependence of EV
time dependence of EV/

symmetry argument

time evolution of wavefunction

EV/

time dependency, evolution
measurement, observables
and uncertainty relations
simple harmonic oscillator/
operator properties/Ψ(x, t)
simple harmonic oscillator/

eigenstates

-

hydrogen atom

EV and uncertainty

matrix element/eigenstates

FT/Dirac Delta function

EV/

EV and uncertainty

math

probability and

EV

superposition/free particle

inﬁnite square well/
Ψ(x, t) manipulations

math/

little concept

matrix element/Ψ(x, t)/

EV and uncertainty

free particle/math/FT
energy and momentum/

math/Ψ(x, t)

graphing

free particle/

uncertainty principle

time dependence of EV

superposition/time dependent

energy and time/

Schroedinger equation/EV

measurement/expansion

collapsed wavefunction/

in eigenfunctions

measurement/

collapsed wavefunction

scalar product/FT

scalar product/

eigenvalue

time evolution of wavefunction hydrogen atom/time dependence

-

EV/stationary state/selection
rules/symmetry (even/odd)

expansion in eigenfunctions/
time evolution of wavefunction

stationary state/

time dependent function

math/hydrogen atom
inﬁnite square well/
commutation relation

superposition/
stationary state

math/time

time/time dependent
Schroedinger equation
inﬁnite square well/

math

EV/

symmetry/

free particle/matrix element/

EV and uncertainty

time dependence of EV

probability and EV
EV/superposition

spin

commutation/uncertainty

collapsed wavefunction

hydrogen atom

uncertainty relation
inﬁnite square well
math/rotation group
stationary state/EV

Table 1: Examples of categories created for each question divided into three groups with a score
of “5 or 6”, “3 or 4” or “less than 3”. “EV” is an abbreviation for “expectation value” and “FT”
is an abbreviation for “Fourier Transform”.

14

